pɹeɪz fəɹ ðə wil ə taɪm bʊk θɹi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn "æn ɪksaɪɾɪŋ, wɛl-ɹɪɾən ædvɛntʃɝ. dʒɔɹɾən ɔfɝz dɪstɪŋktɪv hɪɹoʊz ən θimz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ən ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ lʊk ət ɹileɪʃənz bɪtwin ðə sɛksəz."

Praise for THE WHEEL OF TIME Book Three THE DRAGON REBORN "An exciting, well-written adventure. Jordan offers distinctive heroes and themes, including an interesting look at relations between the sexes."

 - mɪlwɔki sɛntənəl "dʒɔɹɾənz ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪz klɪɹ ən ɪz vɪʒən ɪz fæsəneɪɾɪŋ, əz ɑɹ ðə fəlɑsəfiz wɪtʃ ɹʌn ɪz kæɹɪktɝz. ən spikɪŋ ə kæɹɪktɝz, ə mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ bʌntʃ aɪ wəd bi hɑɹd pʊt tə neɪm. . . . ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɪl bi wʌn ə ðə bʊks tə ɹid ðɪs jɪɹ."

 - Milwaukee Sentinel "Jordan's writing is clear and his vision is fascinating, as are the philosophies which run his characters. And speaking of characters, a more interesting bunch I would be hard put to name. . . . The Dragon Reborn will be one of the books to read this year."

 - stivən sɔɪtski, saɪəns fɪkʃən ɹivju "dʒɔɹɾən əz kɹieɪɾəd ə wɝld wɛɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ fɪts təɡɛðɝ . . . hɪz kæɹɪktɝz fɑloʊ ðɛɹ oʊn pɝsənælɪɾiz ɹæðɝ ðən taɪps, ən ɪz sɛɾɪŋz ɑɹ pɹizɛntəd wɪð dɪteɪl ðət bɪlif ɪz izi."

 - Steven Sawicki, Science Fiction Review "Jordan has created a world where everything fits together . . . his characters follow their own personalities rather than types, and his settings are presented with detail that belief is easy."

 - lɛksɪŋtən hɛɹəld-liɾɝ "ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾənz leɪɾəst bʊk ɪz ə faɪn wʌn, fɪld wɪð ðə klɛvɝnəs, ɪmædʒəneɪʃən, ən wʌndɝfəli dʒɹɔn kæɹɪktɝz ɪkspɛktəd. . . . dʒɔɹɾənz skɪl əz ə ɹaɪɾɝ dʌbəlz ðə plɛʒɝ. . . . ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz ɑn ə fɑɹ haɪɝ pleɪn ðən moʊs fæntəsi nɑvəlz."

 - Lexington Herald-Leader "Robert Jordan's latest book is a fine one, filled with the cleverness, imagination, and wonderfully drawn characters expected. . . . Jordan's skill as a writer doubles the pleasure. . . . The Dragon Reborn is on a far higher plane than most fantasy novels."

 - ðə poʊst ən kɝiɝ (tʃɑɹlstən, saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə)

 - The Post and Courier (Charleston, South Carolina)

"[ðə wil ə taɪm] kəntɪnjuz tə ɪɡzɪbɪɾ ə fɹɛʃnəs ðət meɪks ɪɾ ə wɛlkəm ədɪʃən tə ɛni . . . fæntəsi kəlɛkʃən."

"[The Wheel of Time] continues to exhibit a freshness that makes it a welcome addition to any . . . fantasy collection."

 - laɪbɹɛɹi dʒɝnəl "ə kɑmplɛks tæpəstʃɹi ʌv fæsəneɪɾɪŋ kæɹɪktɝz, dɪskɹɪptɪv dɪteɪlz, ən ɪvɛns. aɪ haɪli ɹɛkəmɛn ðɪs sɪɹiz tə ɛniwʌn u lʌvz ɛpɪk fæntəsi."

 - Library Journal "A complex tapestry of fascinating characters, descriptive details, and events. I highly recommend this series to anyone who loves epic fantasy."

 - kæɹəl lɪn ʌkɑkɪs, ɡəlæktɪk dɪspætʃ ðə wil ə taɪm baɪ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝl ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ðə ʃædoʊ ɹaɪzɪŋ ðə faɪɝz ə hɛvən lɔɹɾ ə keɪɑs eɪ kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz ðə pæθ ə dæɡɝz wɪntɝz hɑɹt kɹɔsɹoʊdz ə twaɪlaɪt naɪf ə dʒɹimz baɪ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ən bɹændən sændɝsən ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ stɔɹm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən eɪ tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts bʊk nu jɔɹk ðɪs ɪz ə wɝk ə fɪkʃən. ɔl ə ðə kæɹɪktɝz, ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃənz, ən ɪvɛns pɔɹtʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ðɪs nɑvəl ɑɹ iðɝ pɹɑɾəkts ə ði ɔθɝz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən əɹ ɑɹ juz fɪktɪʃəsli.

 - Carol Lynn Ukockis, Galactic Dispatch THE WHEEL OF TIME by Robert Jordan The Eye of the World The Great Hunt The Dragon Reborn The Shadow Rising The Fires of Heaven Lord of Chaos A Crown of Swords The Path of Daggers Winter's Heart Crossroads of Twilight Knife of Dreams by Robert Jordan and Brandon Sanderson The Gathering Storm THE DRAGON REBORN ROBERT JORDAN A TOM DOHERTY ASSOCIATES BOOK NEW YORK This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in this novel are either products of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously.

ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn kɑpiɹaɪt  naɪntinnaɪntiwʌn baɪ ðə bændɝsnætʃ ɡɹup, ɪŋk.

THE DRAGON REBORN Copyright  1991 by The Bandersnatch Group, Inc.

ðə fɹeɪzəz "ðə wil ə taɪm" ən "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," ən ðə sneɪk-wil sɪmbəl, ɑɹ tʃɹeɪdmɑɹks ə ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən.

The phrases "The Wheel of Time" and "The Dragon Reborn," and the snake-wheel symbol, are trademarks of Robert Jordan.

ɔl ɹaɪts ɹɪzɝvd.

All rights reserved.

fɹʌntispis baɪ dənɑɾoʊ dʒɑŋkoʊlə mæps baɪ ɛlisə mɪtʃəl ɪntɪɹiɝ ɪləstʃɹeɪʃənz baɪ mæθju si nilsən ən ɛlisə mɪtʃəl eɪ tɔɹ bʊk pʌblɪʃt baɪ tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts,  wʌnhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntifaɪv fɪfθ ævənu nu jɔɹk, nujɔɹk wʌnzɪɹoʊzɪɹoʊwʌnzɪɹoʊ

Frontispiece by Donato Giancola Maps by Ellisa Mitchell Interior illustrations by Matthew C. Nielsen and Ellisa Mitchell A Tor Book Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC 175 Fifth Avenue New York, NY 10010

wwwtɔɹ-fɔɹdʒkɑm tɔɹ ɪz ə ɹɛdʒəstɝd tʃɹeɪdmɑɹk ə tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts, .

www.tor-forge.com Tor is a registered trademark of Tom Doherty Associates, LLC.

 naɪnsɛvəneɪt-wʌn-fɔɹθaʊzəntuhʌndʒɹədnaɪntinaɪn-sɪkszɪɹoʊwʌnsɪks-eɪt

ISBN 978-1-4299-6016-8

fɝst ədɪʃən: noʊvɛmbɝ naɪntinnaɪntiwʌn

First Edition: November 1991

fɝst i-bʊk ədɪʃən: dɪsɛmbɝ tuθaʊzəndnaɪn

First E-book Edition: December 2009

mænjəfæktʃɝɾ ɪn ðə junaɪɾəd steɪts ʌv əmɛɹəkə dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə dʒeɪmz ɑləvɝ ɹɪɡni, ɹ.

Manufactured in the United States of America Dedicated to James Oliver Rigney, Sr.

(naɪntinmɪljəntuhʌnʒɹədwʌnθaʊzəndnaɪnhʌndʒɹədeɪtieɪt)

(19201988)

hi tɔt mi ɔlweɪz tə fɑloʊ ðə dʒɹim, ən wən aɪ kɑɾ ɪt, tə lɪv ɪt.

He taught me always to follow the dream, and when I caught it, to live it.

kɑntɛns mæps pɹoʊlɑɡ: fɔɹtʃɹəs ə ðə laɪt wʌn

CONTENTS MAPS PROLOGUE: Fortress of the Light 1

weɪɾɪŋ tu

Waiting 2

seɪɾɪn θɹi

Saidin 3

nuz fɹəm ðə pleɪn fɔɹ

News from the Plain 4

ʃædoʊz slipɪŋ faɪv

Shadows Sleeping 5

naɪtmɛɹz wɔkɪŋ sɪks

Nightmares Walking 6

ðə hʌn bɪɡɪnz sɛvən

The Hunt Begins 7

ðə weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə maʊntənz eɪt

The Way Out of the Mountains 8

dʒɹə naɪn

Jarra 9

wʊlf dʒɹimz tɛn

Wolf Dreams 10

sikɹəts ɪlɛvən

Secrets 11

tɑɹ vəlɑn twɛlv

Tar Valon 12

ði æmɪɝlɪn sit θɝtin

The Amyrlin Seat 13

pʌnɪʃməns fɔɹtin

Punishments 14

ðə baɪɾ ə ðə θɔɹnz fɪftin

The Bite of the Thorns 15

ðə ɡɹeɪ mæn sɪkstin

The Gray Man 16

hʌntɝz θɹi sɛvəntin

Hunters Three 17

ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ eɪtin

The Red Sister 18

hilɪŋ naɪntin

Healing 19

əweɪkənɪŋ twɛnti

Awakening 20

vɪzəteɪʃənz twɛntiwʌn

Visitations 21

eɪ wɝld ə dʒɹimz twɛntiɾu

A World of Dreams 22

ðə pɹaɪs ə ðə ɹɪŋ twɛntiθɹi

The Price of the Ring 23

sil twɛntifɔɹ

Sealed 24

skaʊɾɪŋ ən dɪskʌvɝiz twɛntifaɪv

Scouting and Discoveries 25

kwɛstʃənz twɛntisɪks

Questions 26

bɪhaɪn ə lɑk twɛntisɛvən

Behind a Lock 27

tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd twɛntieɪt

Tel'aran'rhiod 28

eɪ weɪ aʊt twɛntinaɪn

A Way Out 29

eɪ tʃɹæp tə spɹɪŋ θɝɾi

A Trap to Spring 30

ðə fɝs tɔs θɝɾiwʌn

The First Toss 31

ðə wʊmən ə tæntʃəkoʊ θɝɾitu

The Woman of Tanchico 32

ðə fɝst ʃɪp θɝɾiθɹi

The First Ship 33

wɪðɪn ðə wiv θɝɾifɔɹ

Within the Weave 34

eɪ dɪfɹən dæns θɝɾifaɪv

A Different Dance 35

ðə fælkən θɝɾisɪks

The Falcon 36

dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪt θɝɾisɛvən

Daughter of the Night 37

faɪɝz ɪn kɛɹhin θɝɾieɪt

Fires in Cairhien 38

meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ θɝɾinaɪn

Maidens of the Spear 39

θɹɛdz ɪn ðə pæɾɝn fɔɹɾi

Threads in the Pattern 40

eɪ hɪɹoʊ ɪn ðə naɪt fɔɹɾiwʌn

A Hero in the Night 41

eɪ hʌntɝz oʊθ fɔɹɾitu

A Hunter's Oath 42

izɪŋ ðə bædʒɝ fɔɹɾiθɹi

Easing the Badger 43

ʃæɾoʊbɹəðɝz fɔɹɾifɔɹ

Shadowbrothers 44

hʌntəd fɔɹɾifaɪv

Hunted 45

keɪɛmlɪn fɔɹɾisɪks

Caemlyn 46

eɪ mɛsədʒ aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊ fɔɹɾisɛvən

A Message Out of the Shadow 47

tə ɹeɪs ðə ʃædoʊ fɔɹɾieɪt

To Race the Shadow 48

fɑloʊɪŋ ðə kɹæft fɔɹɾinaɪn

Following the Craft 49

eɪ stɔɹm ɪn tɛɹ fɪfti

A Storm in Tear 50

ðə hæmɝ fɪftiwʌn

The Hammer 51

beɪt fəɹ ðə nɛt fɪftiɾu

Bait for the Net 52

ɪn sɝtʃ ʌv ə ɹɛməɾi fɪftiθɹi

In Search of a Remedy 53

eɪ floʊ ʌv ðə spɪɹət fɪftifɔɹ

A Flow of the Spirit 54

ɪndə ðə stoʊn fɪftifaɪv

Into the Stone 55

wʌɾ ɪz ɹɪɾən ɪn pɹɑfəsi fɪftisɪks

What Is Written in Prophecy 56

pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɡlɔsɝi ən ɪz pæðz ʃæl bi mɛni, ən u ʃæl noʊ hɪz neɪm, fəɹ i ʃæl bi bɔɹn əmʌŋ əs mɛni taɪmz, ɪn mɛni ɡaɪzəz, əz hiz bɪn ən ɛvɝ wɪl bi, taɪm wɪθaʊɾ ɛnd. hɪz kʌmɪŋ ʃæl bi laɪk ðə ʃɑɹp ɛdʒ ə ðə plaʊ, tɝnɪŋ əɹ laɪvz ɪn fɝoʊz fɹəm aʊɾ ə ðə pleɪsəz wɛɹ wi laɪ ɪn əɹ saɪləns. ðə bɹeɪkɝ ə bɑnz; ðə fɔɹdʒɝ ə tʃeɪnz. ðə meɪkɝ ə fjutʃɝz; ði ənʃeɪpɝ ə dɛstəni.

People of the Dragon GLOSSARY And his paths shall be many, and who shall know his name, for he shall be born among us many times, in many guises, as he has been and ever will be, time without end. His coming shall be like the sharp edge of the plow, turning our lives in furrows from out of the places where we lie in our silence. The breaker of bonds; the forger of chains. The maker of futures; the unshaper of destiny.

 - fɹəm kɑməntɛɹiz ɑn ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, baɪ dʒʊɹɪθ dɔɹini, ɹaɪt hæn tə ðə kwin ʌv ɑlmɔɹən, sɛvənfɔɹɾu æb, ðə θɝɾ eɪdʒ 
 - from Commentaries on the Prophecies of the Dragon, by Jurith Dorine, Right Hand to the Queen of Almoren, 742 AB, the Third Age 
pɹoʊlɑɡ fɔɹtʃɹəs ə ðə laɪt



PROLOGUE Fortress of the Light

peɪdʒɹən naɪlz eɪdʒd ɡeɪz wɑndɝɾ əbaʊɾ ɪz pɹaɪvəɾ ɑɾiəns tʃeɪmbɝ, bʌt dɑɹk aɪz heɪzd wɪð θɔt sɔ nʌθɪŋ. tæɾɝd wɔl hæŋʒɪŋz, wʌns bæɾəl bænɝz ə ði ɛnəmiz ə hɪz juθ, feɪɾəd ɪndə dɑɹk wʊd pænəlɪŋ leɪɾ oʊvɝ stoʊn wɔlz, θɪk ivən hɪɹ ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs ə ðə laɪt. ðə sɪŋɡəl tʃɛɹ ɪn ðə ɹum - hɛvi, haɪ-bækt, ən ɔlmoʊst ə θɹoʊn - wɑz əz ɪnvɪzəbəl tə hɪm əz ðə fju skæɾɝd teɪbəlz ðət kəmpliɾəd ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz. ivən ðə waɪt-kloʊk mæn nilɪŋ wɪð bɛɹli ɹistʃɹeɪn iɡɝnəs ɑn ðə ɡɹeɪt sʌnbɝst sɛɾ ɪn ðə waɪd plæŋks ə ðə flɔɹ hæd vænɪʃt fɹəm naɪlz maɪn fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, ðoʊ fju wʊɾə dɪsmɪst ɪm soʊ laɪtli.

Pedron Niall's aged gaze wandered about his private audience chamber, but dark eyes hazed with thought saw nothing. Tattered wall hangings, once battle banners of the enemies of his youth, faded into dark wood paneling laid over stone walls, thick even here in the heart of the Fortress of the Light. The single chair in the room - heavy, high-backed, and almost a throne - was as invisible to him as the few scattered tables that completed the furnishings. Even the white-cloaked man kneeling with barely restrained eagerness on the great sunburst set in the wide planks of the floor had vanished from Niall's mind for the moment, though few would have dismissed him so lightly.

jɹət baɪɑɝ hæd bɪn ɡɪvən taɪm tə wɑʃ bɪfɔɹ biɪŋ bɹɔt tə naɪl, bʌt boʊθ ɪz hɛlməɾ ən ɪz bɹɛstpleɪt wɝ dʌl fɹəm tʃɹævəl ən bæɾɝd fɹəm jus. dɑɹk, dip-sɛɾ aɪz ʃoʊn wɪð ə fivɝɪʃ, ɝdʒən laɪɾ ɪn ə feɪs ðət sim tə hæv hæɾ ɛvɹi spɛɹ skɹæp ə flɛʃ bɔɪld əweɪ. hi wɔɹ noʊ sɔɹd - nʌn wɑz əlaʊɾ ɪn naɪlz pɹɛzəns - bʌɾ i sim pɔɪzd ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə vaɪələns, laɪk ə haʊn əweɪɾɪŋ ðə lusɪŋ ə ðə liʃ.

Jaret Byar had been given time to wash before being brought to Niall, but both his helmet and his breastplate were dulled from travel and battered from use. Dark, deep-set eyes shone with a feverish, urgent light in a face that seemed to have had every spare scrap of flesh boiled away. He wore no sword - none was allowed in Niall's presence - but he seemed poised on the edge of violence, like a hound awaiting the loosing of the leash.

twɪn faɪɝz ɑn lɔŋ hɑɹθs əɾ iðɝ ɛn ə ðə ɹum hɛld ɔf ðə leɪt wɪntɝ koʊld. ɪt wɑz ə pleɪn, soʊlʒɝz ɹum, ɹɪli, ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɛl meɪd bʌt nʌθɪŋ ɪkstʃɹævəɡənt - ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə sʌnbɝst. fɝnɪʃɪŋz keɪm tə ði ɑɾiəns tʃeɪmbɝ ə ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt wɪð ðə mæn u ɹoʊz tə ði ɔfəs; ðə flɛɹɪŋ sʌn ə kɔɪn ɡoʊl hæd bɪn wɔɹn smuð baɪ dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz ə pətɪʃənɝz, ɹipleɪst ən wɔɹn smuð əɡɛn. ɡoʊld ɪnʌf tə baɪ ɛni ɪsteɪɾ ɪn ɑmɑdɪʃiə, ən ðə pæɾənt ə noʊbɪləɾi tə ɡoʊ wɪð ɪt. fəɹ tɛn jɪɹz naɪl hæd wɔkt əkɹɔs ðət ɡoʊld ən nɛvɝ θɔɾ ʌv ɪt twaɪs, ɛni mɔɹ ðən i θɔɾ ə ðə sʌnbɝst ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə tʃɛst ə hɪz waɪt tunɪk. ɡoʊl hɛld lɪɾəl ɪntʃɹəs fəɹ peɪdʒɹən naɪl.

Twin fires on long hearths at either end of the room held off the late winter cold. It was a plain, soldier's room, really, everything well made but nothing extravagant - except for the sunburst. Furnishings came to the audience chamber of the Lord Captain Commander of the Children of the Light with the man who rose to the office; the flaring sun of coin gold had been worn smooth by generations of petitioners, replaced and worn smooth again. Gold enough to buy any estate in Amadicia, and the patent of nobility to go with it. For ten years Niall had walked across that gold and never thought of it twice, any more than he thought of the sunburst embroidered across the chest of his white tunic. Gold held little interest for Pedron Niall.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli hɪz aɪz wɛn bæk tə ðə teɪbəl nɛks tə hɪm, kʌvɝd wɪð mæps ən skæɾɝd lɛɾɝz ən ɹɪpɔɹts. θɹi lusli ɹoʊl dʒɹɔɪŋz leɪ əmʌŋ ðə dʒʌmbəl. hi tʊk wʌn ʌp ɹɪlʌktənli. ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ wɪtʃ; ɔl dɪpɪktəd ðə seɪm sin, ðoʊ baɪ dɪfɹən hænz.

Eventually his eyes went back to the table next to him, covered with maps and scattered letters and reports. Three loosely rolled drawings lay among the jumble. He took one up reluctantly. It did not matter which; all depicted the same scene, though by different hands.

naɪlz skɪn wɑz əz θɪn əz skɹeɪpt pɑɹtʃmənt, dʒɹɔn taɪt baɪ eɪdʒ oʊvɝ ə bɑɾi ðət simd ɔl boʊn ən sɪnu, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ə fɹeɪlti əbaʊt hɪm. noʊ mæn hɛl naɪlz ɔfəs bɪfɔɹ ɪz hɛɹ wɑz waɪt, nɔɹ dɪɾ ɛni mæn sɑftɝ ðən ðə stoʊnz ə ðə doʊm ə tʃɹuθ. stɪl, hi wɑz sʌɾənli əwɛɹ ə ðə tɛndən-ɹɪdʒ bæk ə ðə hæn hoʊldɪŋ ðə dʒɹɔɪŋ, əwɛɹ ə ðə nid fəɹ heɪst. taɪm wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ ʃɔɹt. hɪz taɪm wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ ʃɔɹt. ɪt hæd tə bi ɪnʌf. hi hæd tə meɪk ɪɾ ɪnʌf.

Niall's skin was as thin as scraped parchment, drawn tight by age over a body that seemed all bone and sinew, but there was nothing of frailty about him. No man held Niall's office before his hair was white, nor did any man softer than the stones of the Dome of Truth. Still, he was suddenly aware of the tendon-ridged back of the hand holding the drawing, aware of the need for haste. Time was growing short. His time was growing short. It had to be enough. He had to make it enough.

hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf ənɹoʊl ðə θɪk pɑɹtʃmən hæfweɪ, dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə si ðə feɪs ðəɾ ɪntʃɹəstəd hɪm. ðə tʃɔks wɝ ə lɪɾəl smʌdʒ fɹəm tʃɹævəl ɪn sæɾəlbæɡz, bʌt ðə feɪs wɑz klɪɹ. ə ɡɹeɪ-aɪd juθ wɪð ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ. hi lʊk tɔl, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə seɪ fəɹ sɝɾən. əsaɪd fɹəm ðə hɛɹ ən ði aɪz, hi cʊɾə bɪn sɛt daʊn ɪn ɛni taʊn wɪθaʊɾ ɪksaɪɾɪŋ kɑmɛnt.

He made himself unroll the thick parchment halfway, just enough to see the face that interested him. The chalks were a little smudged from travel in saddlebags, but the face was clear. A gray-eyed youth with reddish hair. He looked tall, but it was hard to say for certain. Aside from the hair and the eyes, he could have been set down in any town without exciting comment.

"ðɪs . . . ðɪs bɔɪ hæz pɹoʊkleɪm hɪmsɛlf ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn?" naɪl mʌɾɝd.

"This . . . this boy has proclaimed himself the Dragon Reborn?" Niall muttered.

ðə dʒɹæɡən. ðə neɪm meɪɾ ɪm fil ðə tʃɪlz ʌv wɪntɝ ən eɪdʒ. ðə neɪm bɔɹn baɪ luz θɝɪn tɛləmən wən i dumd ɛvɹi mæn u kəd tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ðən əɹ ɛvɝ æftɝ, tə ɪnsænəɾi ən dɛθ, hɪmsɛlf əmʌŋ ðɛm. ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz sɪns ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹaɪɾ ən ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ hæd bɹɔɾ ən ɛn tə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz, bʌt pɹɑfəsi ən lɛdʒən hɛlp mɛn ɹɪmɛmbɝ - ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt, ət list, ɪf ðə dɪteɪlz wɝ ɡɔn. luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ. ðə mæn u hæd bɪɡʌn ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, wən mædmən u kəd tæp ðə paʊɝ ðət dʒɹoʊv ðə junəvɝs lɛvəl maʊntənz ən sæŋk eɪntʃən lænz bɪniθ ðə siz, wən ðə hoʊl feɪs ə ði ɝθ hæd bɪn tʃeɪnʒd ən ɔl u sɝvaɪv flɛd laɪk bists bɪfɔɹ ə waɪldfaɪɝ. ɪt hæd nɑɾ ɛndəɾ əntɪl ðə læs meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ leɪ dɛd, ən ə skæɾɝd hjumən ɹeɪs kəd bɪɡɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹibɪl fɹəm ðə ɹʌbəl - wɛɹ ivən ɹʌbəl ɹɪmeɪnd. ɪt wɑz bɝn ɪndə mɛmɹi baɪ ðə stɔɹiz mʌðɝz toʊl tʃɪlʒɹən. ən pɹɑfəsi sɛd ðə dʒɹæɡən wəd bi bɔɹn əɡɛn.

The Dragon. The name made him feel the chills of winter and age. The name borne by Lews Therin Telamon when he doomed every man who could channel the One Power, then or ever after, to insanity and death, himself among them. It was more than three thousand years since Aes Sedai pride and the War of the Shadow had brought an end to the Age of Legends. Three thousand years, but prophecy and legend helped men remember - the heart of it, at least, if the details were gone. Lews Therin Kinslayer. The man who had begun the Breaking of the World, when madmen who could tap the power that drove the universe leveled mountains and sank ancient lands beneath the seas, when the whole face of the earth had been changed and all who survived fled like beasts before a wildfire. It had not ended until the last male Aes Sedai lay dead, and a scattered human race could begin trying to rebuild from the rubble - where even rubble remained. It was burned into memory by the stories mothers told children. And prophecy said the Dragon would be born again.

naɪl hæd nɑt ɹɪli mɛn ɪt fəɹ ə kwɛstʃən, bʌt baɪɑɝ tʊk ɪt fəɹ wʌn. "jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, hi hæz. ɪts ə wɝs mædnəs ðən ɛni fɔls dʒɹæɡən aɪv ɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv. θaʊzənz əv dɪklɛɹd fəɹ ɪm ɔlɹɛɾi. tæɹɑbən ən ɑɹæd dumən ɑɹ ɪn sɪvəl wɔɹ, əz wɛl əz ət wɔɹ wɪð itʃ ʌðɝ. ðəɹ ɪz faɪɾɪŋ ɔl əkɹɔs ɑlməθ pleɪn ən toʊmən hɛd, tæɹɑbənɝ əɡɛns dəmɑni əɡɛns dɑɹkfɹɛnz kɹaɪɪŋ fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən - əɹ ðəɹ wɑz faɪɾɪŋ əntɪl wɪntɝ tʃɪl moʊst ʌv ɪt. aɪv nɛvɝ sin ɪt spɹɛd soʊ kwɪkli, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. laɪk θɹoʊɪŋ ə læntɝn ɪndə ə heɪ bɑɹn. ðə snoʊ meɪ hæv dæmpt ɪt daʊn, bʌt kʌm spɹɪŋ, ðə fleɪmz wɪl bɝst aʊt hɑɾɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ."

Niall had not really meant it for a question, but Byar took it for one. "Yes, my Lord Captain Commander, he has. It is a worse madness than any false Dragon I've ever heard of. Thousands have declared for him already. Tarabon and Arad Doman are in civil war, as well as at war with each other. There is fighting all across Almoth Plain and Toman Head, Taraboner against Domani against Darkfriends crying for the Dragon - or there was fighting until winter chilled most of it. I've never seen it spread so quickly, my Lord Captain Commander. Like throwing a lantern into a hay barn. The snow may have damped it down, but come spring, the flames will burst out hotter than before."

naɪl kʌɾ ɪm ɔf wɪð ə ɹeɪz fɪŋɡɝ. twaɪs ɔlɹɛɾi naɪl hæd lɛɾ ɪm tɛl ɪz stɔɹi θɹu, hɪz vɔɪs bɝnɪŋ wɪð æŋɡɝ ən heɪt. pɑɹts ʌv ɪt naɪl nu fɹəm ʌðɝ sɔɹsəz, ən ɪn səm ɛɹiəz i nu mɔɹ ðən baɪɑɝ, bʌɾ itʃ taɪm i hɝɾ ɪt, ɪt ɡoʊɾɪd ɪm ənu. "dʒɛəfɹæm bɔɹnhəld ən ə θaʊzən ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən dɛd. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪɾ ɪt. juv noʊ daʊts, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ?"

Niall cut him off with a raised finger. Twice already Niall had let him tell his story through, his voice burning with anger and hate. Parts of it Niall knew from other sources, and in some areas he knew more than Byar, but each time he heard it, it goaded him anew. "Geofram Bornhald and a thousand of the Children dead. And Aes Sedai did it. You have no doubts, Child Byar?"

"nʌn, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. æftɝ ə skɝmɪʃ ɑn ðə weɪ tə fɑlm, aɪ sɔ tu ʌv ðə tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪtʃəz. ðeɪ kɑst əs mɔɹ ðən fɪfti dɛd bɪfɔɹ wi stʌk əm fʊl ʌv æɹoʊz."

"None, my Lord Captain Commander. After a skirmish on the way to Falme, I saw two of the Tar Valon witches. They cost us more than fifty dead before we stuck them full of arrows."

"ju ɑɹ ʃʊɹ - ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

"You are sure - sure they were Aes Sedai?"

"ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪɹʌptəɾ ʌndɝ əɹ fit." baɪɑɝz vɔɪs wɑz fɝm ən fʊl ə bɪlif. hi hæd lɪɾəl ɪmædʒəneɪʃən, dɪd jɹət baɪɑɝ; dɛθ wɑz pɑɹɾ ʌv ə soʊlʒɝz laɪf, haʊɛvɝ ɪt keɪm. "laɪtnɪŋz stʃɹʌk əɹ ɹæŋks aʊɾ ʌv ə klɪɹ skaɪ. maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, wʌɾ ɛls kəd ðeɪv bɪn?"

"The ground erupted under our feet." Byar's voice was firm and full of belief. He had little imagination, did Jaret Byar; death was part of a soldier's life, however it came. "Lightnings struck our ranks out of a clear sky. My Lord Captain Commander, what else could they have been?"

naɪl nɑɾəd ɡɹɪmli. ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, bʌt ðə wɪmən u stɪl kleɪm ðət taɪɾəl wɝ bæɾ ɪnʌf. ðeɪ pɹeɪɾɪd ə ðɛɹ θɹi oʊðz: tə spik noʊ wɝd ðət wɑz nɑt tʃɹu, tə meɪk noʊ wɛpən fəɹ wʌn mæn tə kɪl ənʌðɝ, tə juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən oʊnli əɡɛns dɑɹkfɹɛnz əɹ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. bʌt naʊ ðeɪ hæd ʃoʊd ðoʊz oʊðz fəɹ ðə laɪz ðeɪ wɝ. hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz noʊn noʊ wʌn kəd wɑn ðə paʊɝ ðeɪ wildɪɾ ɪksɛp tə tʃælənʒ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ, ən ðət mɛn tə sɝv ðə dɑɹk wʌn.

Niall nodded grimly. There had been no male Aes Sedai since the Breaking of the World, but the women who still claimed that title were bad enough. They prated of their Three Oaths: to speak no word that was not true, to make no weapon for one man to kill another, to use the One Power as a weapon only against Darkfriends or Shadowspawn. But now they had showed those oaths for the lies they were. He had always known no one could want the power they wielded except to challenge the Creator, and that meant to serve the Dark One.

"æn jə noʊ nʌθɪŋ ə ðoʊz u tʊk fɑlm ən kɪl hæf ʌv wʌn ə maɪ lidʒənz?"

"And you know nothing of those who took Falme and killed half of one of my legions?"

"lɔɹd kæptən bɔɹnhəl sɛd ðeɪ kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz sintʃæn, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," baɪɑɝ sɛd stɑlɪdli. "hi sɛd ðeɪ wɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ən ɪz tʃɑɹdʒ bɹoʊk ðɛm, ivən ɪf ðeɪ kɪl hɪm." hɪz vɔɪs ɡeɪn ɪntɛnsəɾi. "ðɛɹ wɝ mɛni ɹɛfjudʒiz fɹəm ðə sɪɾi. ɛvɹiwʌn aɪ spoʊk tə əɡɹid ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz hæd bɹoʊkən ən flɛd. lɔɹd kæptən bɔɹnhəl dɪd ðæt."

"Lord Captain Bornhald said they called themselves Seanchan, my Lord Captain Commander," Byar said stolidly. "He said they were Darkfriends. And his charge broke them, even if they killed him." His voice gained intensity. "There were many refugees from the city. Everyone I spoke to agreed the strangers had broken and fled. Lord Captain Bornhald did that."

naɪl saɪd sɔfli. ðeɪ wɝ ɔlmoʊs ðə seɪm wɝdz baɪɑɝ hæd juz ðə fɝs tu taɪmz əbaʊt ði ɑɹmi ðət hæd simɪŋli kʌm aʊɾ ə noʊwɛɹ tə teɪk fɑlm. ə ɡʊd soʊlʒɝ, naɪl θɔt, soʊ dʒɛəfɹæm bɔɹnhəld ɔlweɪz sɛd, bʌt nɑɾ ə mæn tə θɪŋk fəɹ hɪmsɛlf.

Niall sighed softly. They were almost the same words Byar had used the first two times about the army that had seemingly come out of nowhere to take Falme. A good soldier, Niall thought, so Geofram Bornhald always said, but not a man to think for himself.

"maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," baɪɑɝ sɛd sʌɾənli, "lɔɹd kæptən bɔɹnhəl dɪd kəmæn mi tə stæn əsaɪd fɹəm ðə bæɾəl. aɪ wɑz tə wɑtʃ, ən ɹipɔɹt tə ju. ən tɛl ɪz sʌn, lɔɹd deɪn, haʊ hi daɪd."

"My Lord Captain Commander," Byar said suddenly, "Lord Captain Bornhald did command me to stand aside from the battle. I was to watch, and report to you. And tell his son, Lord Dain, how he died."

"jɛs, jɛs," naɪl sɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli. fəɹ ə moʊmən i stʌɾid baɪɑɝz hɑloʊ-tʃik feɪs, ðən æɾəd, "noʊ wʌn daʊts jəɹ ɑnəsti əɹ kɝədʒ. ɪts ɪɡzækli ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ dʒɛəfɹæm bɔɹnhəld wəd du, feɪsɪŋ ə bæɾəl ɪn wɪtʃ i fɪɹɾ ɪz ɪntaɪɝ kəmæn maɪt daɪ." ən nɑt ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ juv ɪmædʒəneɪʃən ɪnʌf tə θɪŋk ʌp.

"Yes, yes," Niall said impatiently. For a moment he studied Byar's hollow-cheeked face, then added, "No one doubts your honesty or courage. It is exactly the sort of thing Geofram Bornhald would do, facing a battle in which he feared his entire command might die." And not the sort of thing you have imagination enough to think up.

ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ tə lɝn fɹəm ðə mæn. "ju hæv dʌn wɛl, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ. juv maɪ liv tə kæɹi wɝɾ ə dʒɛəfɹæm bɔɹnhəlz dɛθ tə hɪz sʌn. deɪn bɔɹnhəld ɪz wɪð imən vɑldə - nɪɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn ət læst ɹipɔɹt. jə meɪ dʒɔɪn ðɛm."

There was nothing more to learn from the man. "You have done well, Child Byar. You have my leave to carry word of Geofram Bornhald's death to his son. Dain Bornhald is with Eamon Valda - near Tar Valon at last report. You may join them."

"θæŋk ju, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. θæŋk ju." baɪɑɝ ɹoʊz tə hɪz fiɾ ən baʊd dipli. jɛɾ əz i stʃɹeɪɾənd, hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, wi wɝ bɪtʃɹeɪd." heɪtʃɹəd ɡeɪv ɪz vɔɪs ə sɔ-tuθt ɛdʒ.

"Thank you, my Lord Captain Commander. Thank you." Byar rose to his feet and bowed deeply. Yet as he straightened, he hesitated. "My Lord Captain Commander, we were betrayed." Hatred gave his voice a saw-toothed edge.

"baɪ ðɪs wʌn dɑɹkfɹɛn jə spoʊk ʌv, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ?" hi kəd nɑt kip ən ɛdʒ aʊɾ ə hɪz oʊn vɔɪs. ə jɪɹz plænɪŋ leɪ ɪn ɹuənz əmɪd ðə kɔɹpsəz ʌv ə θaʊzən ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, ən baɪɑɝ wɑntəd tə tɔk oʊnli ʌv ðɪs wʌn mæn. "ðɪs jʌŋ blæksmɪθ juv oʊnli sin twaɪs, ðɪs pɛɹɪn fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz?"

"By this one Darkfriend you spoke of, Child Byar?" He could not keep an edge out of his own voice. A year's planning lay in ruins amid the corpses of a thousand of the Children, and Byar wanted to talk only of this one man. "This young blacksmith you've only seen twice, this Perrin from the Two Rivers?"

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. aɪ də nɑt noʊ haʊ, bʌɾ aɪ noʊ hiz tə bleɪm. aɪ noʊ ɪt."

"Yes, my Lord Captain Commander. I do not know how, but I know he is to blame. I know it."

"aɪ wɪl si wʌt kən bi dʌn əbaʊt hɪm, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ." baɪɑɝ oʊpən ɪz maʊθ əɡɛn, bʌt naɪl ɹeɪzd ə θɪn hæn tə fɔɹstɔl hɪm. "ju meɪ liv mi naʊ." ðə ɡɔnt-feɪs mæn hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs bʌt tə baʊ əɡɛn ən liv.

"I will see what can be done about him, Child Byar." Byar opened his mouth again, but Niall raised a thin hand to forestall him. "You may leave me now." The gaunt-faced man had no choice but to bow again and leave.

əz ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn hɪm, naɪl loʊɝd hɪmsɛlf ɪndə hɪz haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹ. wʌt hæd bɹɔɾ ɑn baɪɑɝz heɪtʃɹəɾ ə ðɪs pɛɹɪn? ðəɹ wɝ fɑɹ tu mɛni dɑɹkfɹɛnz tə weɪst ɛnɝdʒi ɑn heɪɾɪŋ ɛni pɝtɪkjəlɝ wʌn. tu mɛni dɑɹkfɹɛnz, haɪ ən loʊ, haɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪnd ɡlɪb tʌŋz ən oʊpən smaɪlz, sɝvɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. stɪl, wʌn mɔɹ neɪm æɾəd tə ðə lɪsts wəd də noʊ hɑɹm.

As the door closed behind him, Niall lowered himself into his high-backed chair. What had brought on Byar's hatred of this Perrin? There were far too many Darkfriends to waste energy on hating any particular one. Too many Darkfriends, high and low, hiding behind glib tongues and open smiles, serving the Dark One. Still, one more name added to the lists would do no harm.

hi ʃɪftəɾ ɑn ðə hɑɹd tʃɛɹ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn kʌmfɝt fəɹ ɪz oʊl boʊnz. nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm i θɔt veɪɡli ðət pɝhæps ə kʊʃən wəd nɑt bi tu mʌtʃ lʌɡʒɝi. ən nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, hi pʊʃt ðə θɔɾ əweɪ. ðə wɝl tʌmbəl təwɔɹd keɪɑs, ən i hæd noʊ taɪm tə ɡɪv ɪn tə eɪdʒ.

He shifted on the hard chair, trying to find comfort for his old bones. Not for the first time he thought vaguely that perhaps a cushion would not be too much luxury. And not for the first time, he pushed the thought away. The world tumbled toward chaos, and he had no time to give in to age.

hi lɛɾ ɔl ðə saɪnz ðət fɔɹtoʊl dɪzæstɝ swɝl θɹu hɪz maɪnd. wɔɹ ɡɹɪp tæɹɑbən ən ɑɹæd dumən, sɪvəl wɔɹ ɹɪpt ət kɛɹhin, ən wɔɹ fivɝ wɑz ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn tiɹ ən ɪljən, oʊld ɛnəmiz əz ðeɪ wɝ. pɝhæps ðiz wɔɹz mɛnt nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðɛmsɛlvz - mɛn fɔt wɔɹz - bʌt ðeɪ juʒəwəli keɪm wʌn əɾ ə taɪm. ən əsaɪd fɹəm ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən sʌmwɛɹ ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn, ənʌðɝ tɔɹ ət sɑldɑiə, ən ə θɝd pleɪɡd tɛɹ. θɹi ət wʌns. ðeɪ mʌst ɔl bi fɔls dʒɹæɡənz. ðeɪ mʌs bi!

He let all the signs that foretold disaster swirl through his mind. War gripped Tarabon and Arad Doman, civil war ripped at Cairhien, and war fever was rising in Tear and Illian, old enemies as they were. Perhaps these wars meant nothing in themselves - men fought wars - but they usually came one at a time. And aside from the false Dragon somewhere on Almoth Plain, another tore at Saldaea, and a third plagued Tear. Three at once. They must all be false Dragons. They must be!

ə dʌzən smɔl θɪŋz bɪsaɪdz, səm pɝhæps oʊnli beɪsləs ɹumɝz, bʌt teɪkən təɡɛðɝ wɪð ðə ɹɛst. . . . saɪɾɪŋz ʌv il ɹipɔɹɾəd əz fɑɹ wɛst əz mʊɹændi, ən kændɝ. oʊnli tu əɹ θɹi ɪn wʌn pleɪs, bʌt wʌn əɹ ə θaʊzənd, il hæd kʌm aʊɾ ə ðə weɪs dʒʌst wʌns ɪn ɔl ðə jɪɹz sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ. oʊnli ɪn ði il wɔɹ hæd ðeɪ ɛvɝ lɛf ðət dɛsələt wɪldɝnəs. ði æθɑn maɪɹ, ðə si foʊk, wɝ sɛd tə bi ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ tʃɹeɪd tə sik saɪnz ən pɔɹtɛns - ʌv wʌt, ɪɡzækli, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt seɪ - seɪlɪŋ wɪð ʃɪps hæf fʊl əɹ ivən ɛmpti. ɪljən hæd kɔl ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɪn ɔlmoʊs fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, hæd sɛn aʊt ðə hʌntɝz tə sik ðə feɪbəl hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, wɪtʃ pɹɑfəsi sɛd wəd sʌmən dɛd hɪɹoʊz fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv tə faɪɾ ɪn tɑɹmən ɡdən, ðə læs bæɾəl əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ. ɹumɝ sɛd ði oʊɡiɝ, ɔlweɪz soʊ ɹɪklusɪv ðət moʊs kɑmən pipəl θɔɾ əm oʊnli lɛdʒənd, hæd kɔl miɾɪŋz bɪtwin ðɛɹ fɑɹ-flʌŋ stɛɾɪŋ.

A dozen small things besides, some perhaps only baseless rumors, but taken together with the rest. . . . Sightings of Aiel reported as far west as Murandy, and Kandor. Only two or three in one place, but one or a thousand, Aiel had come out of the Waste just once in all the years since the Breaking. Only in the Aiel War had they ever left that desolate wilderness. The Atha'an Miere, the Sea Folk, were said to be ignoring trade to seek signs and portents - of what, exactly, they did not say - sailing with ships half full or even empty. Illian had called the Great Hunt of the Horn for the first time in almost four hundred years, had sent out the Hunters to seek the fabled Horn of Valere, which prophecy said would summon dead heroes from the grave to fight in Tarmon Gai'don, the Last Battle against the Shadow. Rumor said the Ogier, always so reclusive that most common people thought them only legend, had called meetings between their far-flung stedding.

moʊs tɛlɪŋ ʌv ɔl, tə naɪl, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ əpɛɹənli kʌm ɪndə ði oʊpən. ɪt wɑz sɛd ðeɪ hæd sɛn səm ə ðɛɹ sɪstɝz tə sɑldɑiə tə kənfɹʌn ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən mæzɹim teɪm. ɹɛɹ əz ɪt wɑz ɪn mɛn, teɪm kəd tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ðət wɑz ə θɪŋ tə fɪɹ ən dɪspaɪz ɪn ɪtsɛlf, ən fju θɔɾ ə mæn laɪk ðət kəd bi dɪfiɾəd ɪksɛpt wɪð ði eɪɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. bɛɾɝ tə əlaʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ hɛlp ðən tə feɪs ði ɪnɛvəɾəbəl hɔɹɝz wən i wɛn mæd, əz sətʃ mɛn ɪnɛvəɾəbli dɪd. bʌt tɑɹ vəlɑn hæɾ əpɛɹənli sɛn ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə səpɔɹt ði ʌðɝ fɔls dʒɹæɡən ət fɑlm. nʌθɪŋ ɛls fɪt ðə fæks.

Most telling of all, to Niall, the Aes Sedai had apparently come into the open. It was said they had sent some of their sisters to Saldaea to confront the false Dragon Mazrim Taim. Rare as it was in men, Taim could channel the One Power. That was a thing to fear and despise in itself, and few thought a man like that could be defeated except with the aid of Aes Sedai. Better to allow Aes Sedai help than to face the inevitable horrors when he went mad, as such men inevitably did. But Tar Valon had apparently sent other Aes Sedai to support the other false Dragon at Falme. Nothing else fit the facts.

ðə pæɾɝn tʃɪl ðə mɛɹoʊ ɪn ɪz boʊnz. keɪɑs mʌltəplaɪd; wʌt wɑz ənhɝɾ ʌv, hæpənɪŋ əɡɛn ən əɡɛn. ðə hoʊl wɝl sim tə bi mɪlɪŋ, stɝɪŋ nɪɹ ðə bɔɪl. ɪt wɑz klɪɹ tə hɪm. ðə læs bæɾəl ɹɪli wɑz kʌmɪŋ.

The pattern chilled the marrow in his bones. Chaos multiplied; what was unheard of, happening again and again. The whole world seemed to be milling, stirring near the boil. It was clear to him. The Last Battle really was coming.

ɔl ɪz plænz wɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪd, ðə plænz ðət wʊɾə sɪkjʊɹɾ ɪz neɪm əmʌŋ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt fəɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz. bʌt tɝmɔɪl mɛn ɑpɝtunəɾi, ən i hæd nu plænz, wɪð nu əbdʒɛktɪvz. ɪf i kəd kip ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ən wɪl tə kæɹi ðɛm aʊt. laɪt, lemi hoʊld ɑn tə laɪf lɔŋ ɪnʌf.

All his plans were destroyed, the plans that would have secured his name among the Children of the Light for a hundred generations. But turmoil meant opportunity, and he had new plans, with new objectives. If he could keep the strength and will to carry them out. Light, let me hold on to life long enough.

ə dɛfɝɛntʃəl tæp ɑn ðə dɔɹ bɹɔɾ ɪm aʊɾ ə hɪz dɑɹk θɔts. "kʌm!" hi snæpt.

A deferential tap on the door brought him out of his dark thoughts. "Come!" he snapped.

ə sɝvən ɪn koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz ʌv waɪt-ænd-ɡoʊl baʊɾ ɪz weɪ ɪn. aɪz tə ðə flɔɹ, hi ənaʊns ðət dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn, ənɔɪntəɾ ə ðə laɪt, ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ ə ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt, keɪm ət ðə kəmæn ə ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. kæɹaɪɾɪn əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə mænz hilz, nɑt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ naɪl tə spik. naɪl dʒɛstʃɝd ðə sɝvən tə liv.

A servant in coat and breeches of white-and-gold bowed his way in. Eyes to the floor, he announced that Jaichim Carridin, Anointed of the Light, Inquisitor of the Hand of the Light, came at the command of the Lord Captain Commander. Carridin appeared on the man's heels, not waiting for Niall to speak. Niall gestured the servant to leave.

bɪfɔɹ ðə dɔɹ wɑz fʊli kloʊzd əɡɛn, kæɹaɪɾɪn dʒɹɑp tə wʌn ni wɪð ə flɝɪʃ ə hɪz snoʊi kloʊk. bɪhaɪn ðə sʌnbɝst ɑn ðə kloʊks bɹɛs leɪ ðə skɑɹlət ʃɛpɝdz kɹʊk ə ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt, kɔl ðə kwɛstʃənɝz baɪ mɛni, ðoʊ sɛldəm tə ðɛɹ feɪsəz. "æz juv kəmændəd maɪ pɹɛzəns, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə stʃɹɔŋ vɔɪs, "soʊ hæv aɪ ɹɪtɝn fɹəm tæɹɑbən."

Before the door was fully closed again, Carridin dropped to one knee with a flourish of his snowy cloak. Behind the sunburst on the cloak's breast lay the scarlet shepherd's crook of the Hand of the Light, called the Questioners by many, though seldom to their faces. "As you have commanded my presence, my Lord Captain Commander," he said in a strong voice, "so have I returned from Tarabon."

naɪl ɪɡzæmən ɪm fəɹ ə moʊmənt. kæɹaɪɾɪn wɑz tɔl, wɛl ɪndə hɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz, wɪð ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn ɪz hɛɹ, jɛt fɪɾ ən hɑɹd. hɪz dɑɹk, dip-sɛɾ aɪz hæɾ ə noʊɪŋ lʊk əbaʊt ðɛm, əz ɔlweɪz. ən i dɪd nɑt blɪŋk ʌndɝ ðə saɪlən stʌɾi ʌv ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. fju mɛn hæd kɑntʃɪnsɪz soʊ klɪɹ əɹ nɝvz soʊ stɛɾi. kæɹaɪɾɪn nɛl ðɛɹ, weɪɾɪŋ əz kɑmli əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ən ɛvɹideɪ mæɾɝ tə bi ɔɹɾɝd kɝtli tə liv ɪz kəmæn ən ɹɪtɝn tə æmədɔɹ wɪθaʊt dɪleɪ, noʊ ɹizənz ɡɪvən. bʌt ðɛn, ɪt wɑz sɛd dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn kəɾ aʊtweɪɾ ə stoʊn.

Niall examined him for a moment. Carridin was tall, well into his middle years, with a touch of gray in his hair, yet fit and hard. His dark, deep-set eyes had a knowing look about them, as always. And he did not blink under the silent study of the Lord Captain Commander. Few men had consciences so clear or nerves so steady. Carridin knelt there, waiting as calmly as if it were an everyday matter to be ordered curtly to leave his command and return to Amador without delay, no reasons given. But then, it was said Jaichim Carridin could outwait a stone.

"ɹaɪz, tʃaɪl kæɹaɪɾɪn." əz ði ʌðɝ mæn stʃɹeɪɾənd, naɪl æɾəd, "aɪ hæv hæd dɪstɝbɪŋ nuz fɹəm fɑlm."

"Rise, Child Carridin." As the other man straightened, Niall added, "I have had disturbing news from Falme."

kæɹaɪɾɪn stʃɹeɪɾənd ðə foʊlz ə hɪz kloʊk əz i ænsɝd. hɪz vɔɪs ɹoʊd ði ɛdʒ ə suɾəbəl ɹɪspɛkt, ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf i spoʊk tə ən ikwəl ɹæðɝ ðən tə ðə mæn i hæd swɔɹn tə oʊbeɪ tə ðə dɛθ. "maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ɹəfɝz tə ðə nuz bɹɔt baɪ tʃaɪl jɹət baɪɑɝ, leɪt sɛkən tə lɔɹd kæptən bɔɹnhəld."

Carridin straightened the folds of his cloak as he answered. His voice rode the edge of suitable respect, almost as if he spoke to an equal rather than to the man he had sworn to obey to the death. "My Lord Captain Commander refers to the news brought by Child Jaret Byar, late second to Lord Captain Bornhald."

ðə kɔɹnɝ ə naɪlz lɛft aɪ flʌɾɝd, ən oʊl pɹɛsɪdʒ ʌv æŋɡɝ. səpoʊzədli oʊnli θɹi mɛn nu baɪɑɝ wɑz ɪn æmədɔɹ, ən nʌn bɪsaɪdz naɪl nu fɹəm wɛɹ i keɪm. "du nɑt bi tu klɛvɝ, kæɹaɪɾɪn. jəɹ dɪzaɪɝ tə noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ meɪ wʌn deɪ lɛd jə ɪndə ðə hænz ə jəɹ oʊn kwɛstʃənɝz."

The corner of Niall's left eye fluttered, an old presage of anger. Supposedly only three men knew Byar was in Amador, and none besides Niall knew from where he came. "Do not be too clever, Carridin. Your desire to know everything may one day lead you into the hands of your own Questioners."

kæɹaɪɾɪn ʃoʊd noʊ ɹiækʃən bɪɑn ə slaɪt taɪɾənɪŋ ə hɪz maʊθ ət ðə neɪm. "maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, ðə hæn siks aʊt tʃɹuθ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, tə sɝv ðə laɪt."

Carridin showed no reaction beyond a slight tightening of his mouth at the name. "My Lord Captain Commander, the Hand seeks out truth everywhere, to serve the Light."

tə sɝv ðə laɪt. nɑt tə sɝv ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. ɔl ðə tʃɪlʒɹən sɝv ðə laɪt, bʌt peɪdʒɹən naɪl ɔfən wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðə kwɛstʃənɝz ɹɪli kənsɪɾɝd ðɛmsɛlvz pɑɹɾ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən əɾ ɔl. "ænd wʌt tʃɹuθ juv fəɹ mi əbaʊt wʌɾ əkɝɾ ɪn fɑlm?"

To serve the Light. Not to serve the Children of the Light. All the Children served the Light, but Pedron Niall often wondered if the Questioners really considered themselves part of the Children at all. "And what truth do you have for me about what occurred in Falme?"

"dɑɹkfɹɛnz, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ."

"Darkfriends, my Lord Captain Commander."

"dɑɹkfɹɛnz?" naɪlz tʃʌkəl hɛl noʊ əmjuzmənt. "ə fju wiks ɡɔn aɪ wɑz ɹəsivɪŋ ɹɪpɔɹts fɹəm jə ðət dʒɛəfɹæm bɔɹnhəld wɑz ə sɝvən ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn kəz i muv soʊlʒɝz ɑntu toʊmən hɛɾ əɡɛns jəɹ ɔɹɾɝz." hɪz vɔɪs bɪkeɪm deɪnʒɝəsli sɑft. "du jə naʊ min mi tə bɪliv ðət bɔɹnhəld, əz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, lɛɾ ə θaʊzən ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən tə ðɛɹ dɛθs faɪɾɪŋ ʌðɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz?"

"Darkfriends?" Niall's chuckle held no amusement. "A few weeks gone I was receiving reports from you that Geofram Bornhald was a servant of the Dark One because he moved soldiers onto Toman Head against your orders." His voice became dangerously soft. "Do you now mean me to believe that Bornhald, as a Darkfriend, led a thousand of the Children to their deaths fighting other Darkfriends?"

"wɛðɝ əɹ nɑɾ i wɑz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd wɪl nɛvɝ bi noʊn," kæɹaɪɾɪn sɛd blænli, "sɪns i daɪd bɪfɔɹ i kəd bi pʊt tə ðə kwɛstʃən. ðə ʃædoʊz plɑts ɑɹ mɝki, ən ɔfən sim mæd tə ðoʊz u wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt. bʌt ðət ðoʊz u siz fɑlm wɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, aɪ hæv noʊ daʊt. dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪn səpɔɹɾ ʌv ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. ɪt wɑz ðə wʌn paʊɝ ðət dɪstʃɹɔɪd bɔɹnhəld ən ɪz mɛn, ʌv ðəɾ aɪm ʃʊɹ, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, dʒʌst əz ɪt dɪstʃɹɔɪd ði ɑɹmiz ðət tæɹɑbən ən ɑɹæd dumən sɛn əɡɛns ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪn fɑlm."

"Whether or not he was a Darkfriend will never be known," Carridin said blandly, "since he died before he could be put to the question. The Shadow's plots are murky, and often seem mad to those who walk in the Light. But that those who seized Falme were Darkfriends, I have no doubt. Darkfriends and Aes Sedai, in support of a false Dragon. It was the One Power that destroyed Bornhald and his men, of that I am sure, my Lord Captain Commander, just as it destroyed the armies that Tarabon and Arad Doman sent against the Darkfriends in Falme."

"ænd wʌɾ ə ðə stɔɹiz ðət ðoʊz u tʊk fɑlm keɪm fɹəm əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən?"

"And what of the stories that those who took Falme came from across the Aryth Ocean?"

kæɹaɪɾɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, ðə pipəl ɑɹ fʊl ə ɹumɝz. səm kleɪm ðeɪ wɝ ði ɑɹmiz ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ sɛn əkɹɔs ði oʊʃən ə θaʊzən jɪɹz əɡoʊ, kʌm bæk tə kleɪm ðə lænd. waɪ, səm ivən kleɪm tə hæv sin hɔkwɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪn fɑlm. ən hæf ðə hɪɹoʊz ə lɛdʒən bɪsaɪdz. ðə wɛst ɪz bɔɪlɪŋ fɹəm tæɹɑbən tə sɑldɑiə, ən ə hʌnʒɹəd nu ɹumɝz bʌbəl tə ðə sɝfəs ɛvɹi deɪ, itʃ mɔɹ aʊtʃɹeɪdʒəs ðən ðə læst. ðiz soʊ-kɔl sintʃæn wɝ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ənʌðɝ ɹæbəl ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɡæðɝd tə səpɔɹɾ ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən, oʊnli ðɪs taɪm wɪð oʊpən ɛɛs sədaɪ səpɔɹt."

Carridin shook his head. "My Lord Captain Commander, the people are full of rumors. Some claim they were the armies Artur Hawkwing sent across the ocean a thousand years ago, come back to claim the land. Why, some even claim to have seen Hawkwing himself in Falme. And half the heroes of legend besides. The west is boiling from Tarabon to Saldaea, and a hundred new rumors bubble to the surface every day, each more outrageous than the last. These so-called Seanchan were no more than another rabble of Darkfriends gathered to support a false Dragon, only this time with open Aes Sedai support."

"wʌt pɹuf əv ju?" naɪl meɪɾ ɪz vɔɪs saʊn əz ɪf i daʊɾɪd ðə pɔɪnt. "ju hæv pɹɪznɝz?"

"What proof have you?" Niall made his voice sound as if he doubted the point. "You have prisoners?"

"noʊ, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. əz tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ noʊ daʊt toʊl ju, bɔɹnhəl mænədʒ tə hɝɾ əm bædli ɪnʌf ðət ðeɪ dɪspɝst. ən sɝɾənli noʊ wʌn wiv kwɛstʃənd wəɾ ədmɪt tə səpɔɹɾɪŋ ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. əz fəɹ pɹuf . . . ɪt laɪz ɪn tu pɑɹts. ɪf maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ wɪl pɝmɪt mi?"

"No, my Lord Captain Commander. As Child Byar no doubt told you, Bornhald managed to hurt them badly enough that they dispersed. And certainly no one we've questioned would admit to supporting a false Dragon. As for proof . . . it lies in two parts. If my Lord Captain Commander will permit me?"

naɪl dʒɛstʃɝɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli.

Niall gestured impatiently.

"ðə fɝs pɑɹɾ ɪz nɛɡəɾɪv. fju ʃɪps əv tʃɹaɪd tə kɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, ən moʊs nɛvɝ ɹɪtɝnd. ðoʊz ðət dɪd, tɝn bæk bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹæn aʊɾ ə fuɾ ən wɔɾɝ. ivən ðə si foʊk wɪl nɑt kɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ, ən ðeɪ seɪl wɛɹɛvɝ ðəɹ ɪz tʃɹeɪd, ivən tə ðə lænz bɪɑn ði il weɪst. maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ ɛni lænz əkɹɔs ði oʊʃən, ðeɪ ɑɹ tu fɑɹ tə ɹitʃ, ði oʊʃən tu waɪd. tə kæɹi ən ɑɹmi əkɹɔs ɪt wəd bi əz ɪmpɑsəbəl əz flaɪɪŋ."

"The first part is negative. Few ships have tried to cross the Aryth Ocean, and most never returned. Those that did, turned back before they ran out of food and water. Even the Sea Folk will not cross the Aryth, and they sail wherever there is trade, even to the lands beyond the Aiel Waste. My Lord Captain Commander, if there are any lands across the ocean, they are too far to reach, the ocean too wide. To carry an army across it would be as impossible as flying."

"pɝhæps," naɪl sɛd sloʊli. "ɪɾ ɪz sɝɾənli ɪndɪkəɾɪv. wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ sɛkən pɑɹt?"

"Perhaps," Niall said slowly. "It is certainly indicative. What is your second part?"

"maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, mɛni ʌv ðoʊz wi kwɛstʃən spoʊk ə mɑnstɝz faɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ən hɛl tə ðɛɹ kleɪmz ivən ʌndɝ ðə læs dɪɡɹi ʌv ðə kwɛstʃən. wʌt kəd ðeɪ bi bʌt tʃɹɑləks ən ʌðɝ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, ɪn səm weɪ bɹɔt daʊn fɹəm ðə blaɪt?" kæɹaɪɾɪn spɹɛɾ ɪz hænz əz ɪf ðət wɝ kənklusɪv. "moʊs pipəl θɪŋk tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ oʊnli tʃɹævəlɝz' teɪlz ən laɪz, ən moʊst ə ðə ɹɛs θɪŋk ðeɪ wɝ ɔl kɪld ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. wʌɾ ʌðɝ neɪm wəd ðeɪ pʊt tə ə tʃɹɑlɑk bʌt mɑnstɝ?"

"My Lord Captain Commander, many of those we questioned spoke of monsters fighting for the Darkfriends, and held to their claims even under the last degree of the question. What could they be but Trollocs and other Shadowspawn, in some way brought down from the Blight?" Carridin spread his hands as if that were conclusive. "Most people think Trollocs are only travelers' tales and lies, and most of the rest think they were all killed in the Trolloc Wars. What other name would they put to a Trolloc but monster?"

"jɛs. jɛs, jə meɪ bi ɹaɪt, tʃaɪl kæɹaɪɾɪn. meɪ bi, aɪ seɪ." hi wəd nɑt ɡɪv kæɹaɪɾɪn ðə sæɾəsfækʃən ə noʊɪŋ i əɡɹid. lɛɾ ɪm wɝk əwaɪl. "bʌt wʌɾ ə hɪm?" hi ɪndəkeɪɾəd ðə ɹoʊl dʒɹɔɪŋz. ɪf i nu kæɹaɪɾɪn, ði ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ hæd kɑpiz ɪn ɪz oʊn tʃeɪmbɝz. "haʊ deɪnʒɝəs ɪz hi? kən i tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ?"

"Yes. Yes, you may be right, Child Carridin. May be, I say." He would not give Carridin the satisfaction of knowing he agreed. Let him work awhile. "But what of him?" He indicated the rolled drawings. If he knew Carridin, the Inquisitor had copies in his own chambers. "How dangerous is he? Can he channel the One Power?"

ði ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ mɪɹli ʃɹʌɡd. "pɝhæps i kən tʃænəl, pɝhæps nɑt. ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd noʊ daʊt meɪk pipəl bɪliv ə kæt kəd tʃænəl, ɪf ðeɪ wɑntəd tə. əz tə haʊ deɪnʒɝəs i ɪz. . . . ɛni fɔls dʒɹæɡən ɪz deɪnʒɝəs əntɪl hiz pʊt daʊn, ən wʌn wɪð tɑɹ vəlɑn oʊpənli bɪhaɪn ɪm ɪz tɛn taɪmz deɪnʒɝəs. bʌt hiz lɛs deɪnʒɝəs naʊ ðən hɪl bi ɪn hæf ə jɪɹ, əntʃɛkt. ðə kæptɪvz aɪ kwɛstʃən hæd nɛvɝ sin hɪm, hæd noʊ aɪdiə wɛɹ hiz naʊ. hɪz fɔɹsɪz ɑɹ fɹæɡməntɪd. aɪ daʊt ðəɹ ɑɹ mɔɹ ðən tu hʌnʒɹəd ɡæðɝɾ ɪn ɛni wʌn pleɪs. ðə tæɹɑbənɝz əɹ ðə dəmɑni, iðɝ wʌn, kəd swip əm əweɪ ɪf ðeɪ wɝn soʊ bɪzi faɪɾɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ."

The Inquisitor merely shrugged. "Perhaps he can channel, perhaps not. Aes Sedai could no doubt make people believe a cat could channel, if they wanted to. As to how dangerous he is. . . . Any false Dragon is dangerous until he is put down, and one with Tar Valon openly behind him is ten times dangerous. But he is less dangerous now than he will be in half a year, unchecked. The captives I questioned had never seen him, had no idea where he is now. His forces are fragmented. I doubt there are more than two hundred gathered in any one place. The Taraboners or the Domani, either one, could sweep them away if they weren't so busy fighting each other."

"ivən ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən," naɪl sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "ɪz nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk əm fɝɡɛt fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ə skwɑbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ pəzɛʃən ʌv ɑlməθ pleɪn. əz ɪf iðɝ ə ðɛm ɛvɝ hæd ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ tə hoʊld ɪt." kæɹaɪɾɪnz feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, ən naɪl wʌndɝd haʊ hi kəd kip soʊ kɑm. jəl nɑt bi kɑm mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ, kwɛstʃənɝ.

"Even a false Dragon," Niall said dryly, "is not enough to make them forget four hundred years of squabbling over possession of Almoth Plain. As if either of them ever had the strength to hold it." Carridin's face did not change, and Niall wondered how he could keep so calm. You will not be calm much longer, Questioner.

"ɪɾ ɪz ə noʊ ɪmpɔɹt, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. wɪntɝ kips əm ɔl ɪn ðɛɹ kæmps, ɪksɛp fəɹ skæɾɝd skɝmɪʃɪz ən ɹeɪdz. wən ðə wɛðɝ wɔɹmz ɪnʌf fəɹ tʃɹups tə muv. . . . bɔɹnhəl tʊk oʊnli hæf ɪz lidʒən tə ðɛɹ dɛθs ɑn toʊmən hɛd. wɪð ði ʌðɝ hæf, əl hʌn ðɪs fɔls dʒɹæɡən tə hɪz dɛθ. ə kɔɹps ɪz nɑt deɪnʒɝəs tə ɛniwʌn."

"It is of no import, my Lord Captain Commander. Winter keeps them all in their camps, except for scattered skirmishes and raids. When the weather warms enough for troops to move. . . . Bornhald took only half his legion to their deaths on Toman Head. With the other half, I will hunt this false Dragon to his death. A corpse is not dangerous to anyone."

"æn ɪf jə feɪs wʌɾ ɪt simz bɔɹnhəl feɪst? ɛɛs sədaɪ tʃænəlɪŋ ðə paʊɝ tə kɪl?"

"And if you face what it seems Bornhald faced? Aes Sedai channeling the Power to kill?"

"ðɛɹ wɪtʃɝi dʌzn pɹətɛkt əm fɹəm æɹoʊz, əɹ ə naɪf ɪn ðə dɑɹk. ðeɪ daɪ əz kwɪkli əz ɛniwʌn ɛls." kæɹaɪɾɪn smaɪld. "aɪ pɹɑməs ju, əl bi səksɛsfəl bɪfɔɹ sʌmɝ."

"Their witchery doesn't protect them from arrows, or a knife in the dark. They die as quickly as anyone else." Carridin smiled. "I promise you, I will be successful before summer."

naɪl nɑɾəd. ðə mæn wɑz kɑnfəɾənt, naʊ. ʃʊɹ ðə deɪnʒɝəs kwɛstʃənz wəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæv kʌm, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ kʌmɪŋ. jə ʃəɾ əv ɹɪmɛmbɝd, kæɹaɪɾɪn, aɪ wɑz əkaʊntəɾ ə faɪn tæktɪʃən. "waɪ," hi sɛd kwaɪətli, "dɪd jə nɑt teɪk jəɹ oʊn fɔɹsɪz tə fɑlm? wɪð dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɑn toʊmən hɛd, ən ɑɹmi ʌv əm hoʊldɪŋ fɑlm, waɪ dɪd jə tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp bɔɹnhəld?"

Niall nodded. The man was confident, now. Sure the dangerous questions would already have come, if they were coming. You should have remembered, Carridin, I was accounted a fine tactician. "Why," he said quietly, "did you not take your own forces to Falme? With Darkfriends on Toman Head, an army of them holding Falme, why did you try to stop Bornhald?"

kæɹaɪɾɪn blɪŋkt, bʌɾ ɪz vɔɪs ɹɪmeɪn stɛɾi. "æt fɝs ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli ɹumɝz, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. ɹumɝz soʊ waɪld, noʊ wʌn kəd bɪliv. baɪ ðə taɪm aɪ lɝn ðə tʃɹuθ, bɔɹnhəl hæd dʒɔɪn bæɾəl. hi wɑz dɛd, ən ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz skæɾɝd. bɪsaɪdz, maɪ tæsk wɑz tə bɹɪŋ ðə laɪt tə ɑlməθ pleɪn. aɪ kəd nɑt dɪsəbeɪ maɪ ɔɹɾɝz tə tʃeɪs æftɝ ɹumɝz."

Carridin blinked, but his voice remained steady. "At first they were only rumors, my Lord Captain Commander. Rumors so wild, no one could believe. By the time I learned the truth, Bornhald had joined battle. He was dead, and the Darkfriends scattered. Besides, my task was to bring the Light to Almoth Plain. I could not disobey my orders to chase after rumors."

"jɔɹ tæsk?" naɪl sɛd, hɪz vɔɪs ɹaɪzɪŋ əz i stʊd. kæɹaɪɾɪn tɑpt ɪm baɪ ə hɛd, bʌt ði ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ stɛp bæk. "jɔɹ tæsk? jəɹ tæsk wɑz tə siz ɑlməθ pleɪn! ən ɛmpti bʌkət ðət noʊ wʌn hoʊlz ɪksɛp baɪ wɝdz ən kleɪmz, ən ɔl jə hæd tə də wɑz fɪl ɪt. ðə neɪʃən ʌv ɑlməθ wʊɾə lɪvd əɡɛn, ɹul baɪ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, wɪð noʊ nid tə peɪ lɪp sɝvəs tə ə ful ʌv ə kɪŋ. ɑmɑdɪʃiə ən ɑlməθ, ə vaɪs ɡɹɪpɪŋ tæɹɑbən. ɪn faɪv jɪɹz wi wʊɾə hɛl sweɪ ðəɹ əz mʌtʃ əz hɪɹ ɪn ɑmɑdɪʃiə. ən jə meɪɾ ə dɔɡz dɪnɝ ʌv ɪt!"

"Your task?" Niall said, his voice rising as he stood. Carridin topped him by a head, but the Inquisitor stepped back. "Your task? Your task was to seize Almoth Plain! An empty bucket that no one holds except by words and claims, and all you had to do was fill it. The nation of Almoth would have lived again, ruled by the Children of the Light, with no need to pay lip service to a fool of a king. Amadicia and Almoth, a vise gripping Tarabon. In five years we would have held sway there as much as here in Amadicia. And you made a dog's dinner of it!"

ðə smaɪl wɛn ət læst. "maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," kæɹaɪɾɪn pɹətɛstəd. "haʊ kəɾ aɪ fɔɹsi wʌt hæpənd? jɛɾ ənʌðɝ fɔls dʒɹæɡən. tæɹɑbən ən ɑɹæd dumən faɪnəli ɡoʊɪŋ tə wɔɹ æftɝ soʊ lɔŋ mɪɹli ɡɹoʊlɪŋ əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹɪvilɪŋ ðɛɹ tʃɹu sɛlvz æftɝ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz ə dɪsəmbəlɪŋ! ivən wɪð ðæt, ðoʊ, ɔl ɪz nɑt lɔst. aɪ kən faɪn ən dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðɪs fɔls dʒɹæɡən bɪfɔɹ ɪz fɑloʊɝz junaɪt. ən wʌns ðə tæɹɑbənɝz ən dəmɑni hæv wikən ðɛmsɛlvz, ðeɪ kən bi klɪɹd fɹəm ðə pleɪn wɪθaʊt - "

The smile went at last. "My Lord Captain Commander," Carridin protested. "How could I foresee what happened? Yet another false Dragon. Tarabon and Arad Doman finally going to war after so long merely growling at each other. And Aes Sedai revealing their true selves after three thousand years of dissembling! Even with that, though, all is not lost. I can find and destroy this false Dragon before his followers unite. And once the Taraboners and Domani have weakened themselves, they can be cleared from the plain without - "

"noʊ!" naɪl snæpt. "jɔɹ plænz ɑɹ dʌn wɪð, kæɹaɪɾɪn. pɝhæps aɪ ʃəd hæn jə oʊvɝ tə jəɹ oʊn kwɛstʃənɝz ɹaɪt naʊ. ðə haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ wəd nɑɾ əbdʒɛkt. hiz næʃɪŋ ɪz tiθ tə faɪn sʌmwʌn tə bleɪm fəɹ wʌt hæpənd. hi wəd nɛvɝ pʊt fɔɹwɝd wʌn ə hɪz oʊn, bʌɾ aɪ daʊt hid kwɪbəl ɪf aɪ neɪm ju. ə fju deɪz ʌndɝ ðə kwɛstʃən, ən jə wəd kənfɛs tə ɛniθɪŋ. neɪm jɝsɛlf dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ivən. jə wəd ɡoʊ ʌndɝ ðə hɛdzmənz æks ɪnsaɪɾ ə wik."

"No!" Niall snapped. "Your plans are done with, Carridin. Perhaps I should hand you over to your own Questioners right now. The High Inquisitor would not object. He is gnashing his teeth to find someone to blame for what happened. He would never put forward one of his own, but I doubt he'd quibble if I named you. A few days under the question, and you would confess to anything. Name yourself Darkfriend, even. You would go under the headsman's axe inside a week."

ðəɹ wɑz swɛt biɾɪŋ ɑn kæɹaɪɾɪnz fɔɹhɛd. "maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. . . ." hi stɑp tə swɑloʊ. "maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ simz tə bi seɪɪŋ ðəɹ ɪz ənʌðɝ weɪ. ɪf hɪl bʌt spik ɪt, aɪm swɔɹn tə oʊbeɪ."

There was sweat beading on Carridin's forehead. "My Lord Captain Commander. . . ." He stopped to swallow. "My Lord Captain Commander seems to be saying there is another way. If he will but speak it, I am sworn to obey."

naʊ, naɪl θɔt. naʊ tə tɔs ðə daɪs. pɹɪkəlz ɹæn əkɹɔs ɪz skɪn, əz ɪf i wɝ ɪn bæɾəl ən hæd sʌɾənli ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɛvɹi mæn fəɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz ɝaʊn ɪm wɑz ən ɛnəmi. lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝz dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ tə ðə hɛdzmən, bʌt mɔɹ ðən wʌn hæd bɪn noʊn tə daɪ sʌɾənli ən ʌnɪkspɛktɪdli, swɪfli mɔɹn ən swɪfli ɹipleɪs baɪ mɛn wɪð lɛs deɪnʒɝəs aɪdiəz.

Now, Niall thought. Now to toss the dice. Prickles ran across his skin, as if he were in battle and had suddenly realized that every man for a hundred paces around him was an enemy. Lord Captain Commanders did not go to the headsman, but more than one had been known to die suddenly and unexpectedly, swiftly mourned and swiftly replaced by men with less dangerous ideas.

"tʃaɪl kæɹaɪɾɪn," hi sɛd fɝmli, "ju wɪl meɪk sɝɾən ðət ðɪs fɔls dʒɹæɡən dʌz nɑt daɪ. ən ɪf ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ kʌm tə əpoʊz ɹæðɝ ðən səpɔɹt hɪm, jəl meɪk jus ə jəɹ 'naɪvz ɪn ðə dɑɹk.' "

"Child Carridin," he said firmly, "you will make certain that this false Dragon does not die. And if any Aes Sedai come to oppose rather than support him, you will make use of your 'knives in the dark.' "

ði ɪnkwɪzəɾɝz dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt. jɛɾ i ɹəkʌvɝd kwɪkli, aɪɪŋ naɪl ɪn ə spɛkjələɾɪv fæʃən. "tə kɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz ə duɾi, bʌt. . . . tə əlaʊ ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən tə ɹoʊm fɹi? ðət . . . ðət wəd bi . . . tʃɹizən. ən blæsfəmi."

The Inquisitor's jaw dropped. Yet he recovered quickly, eyeing Niall in a speculative fashion. "To kill Aes Sedai is a duty, but. . . . To allow a false Dragon to roam free? That . . . that would be . . . treason. And blasphemy."

naɪl dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. hi kəd sɛns ði ənsin naɪvz weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz. bʌɾ i wɑz kəmɪɾəd, naʊ. "ɪɾ ɪz noʊ tʃɹizən tə də wʌt mʌs bi dʌn. ən ivən blæsfəmi kən bi tɑlɝeɪɾəd fəɹ ə kɑz." ðoʊz tu sɛntənsəz əloʊn wɝ ɪnʌf tə kɪl hɪm. "du jə noʊ haʊ tə junaɪt pipəl bɪhaɪn ju, tʃaɪl kæɹaɪɾɪn? ðə kwɪkɪst weɪ? noʊ? lus ə laɪən - ə ɹæbɪd laɪən - ɪn ðə stʃɹits. ən wən pænɪk ɡɹɪps ðə pipəl, wʌns ɪts tɝn ðɛɹ baʊəlz tə wɔɾɝ, kɑmli tɛl əm jəl dil wɪð ɪt. ðən jə kɪl ɪt, ən ɔɹɾɝ əm tə hæŋ ðə kɑɹkəs ʌp wɛɹ ɛvɹiwʌn kən si. bɪfɔɹ ðeɪv taɪm tə θɪŋk, jə ɡɪv ənʌðɝ ɔɹɾɝ, ən ɪɾəl bi oʊbeɪd. ən ɪf jə kəntɪnju tə ɡɪv ɔɹɾɝz, ðəl kəntɪnju tə oʊbeɪ, fəɹ jəl bi ðə wʌn u seɪv ðɛm, ən u bɛɾɝ tə lid?"

Niall drew a deep breath. He could sense the unseen knives waiting in the shadows. But he was committed, now. "It is no treason to do what must be done. And even blasphemy can be tolerated for a cause." Those two sentences alone were enough to kill him. "Do you know how to unite people behind you, Child Carridin? The quickest way? No? Loose a lion - a rabid lion - in the streets. And when panic grips the people, once it has turned their bowels to water, calmly tell them you will deal with it. Then you kill it, and order them to hang the carcass up where everyone can see. Before they have time to think, you give another order, and it will be obeyed. And if you continue to give orders, they will continue to obey, for you will be the one who saved them, and who better to lead?"

kæɹaɪɾɪn muvd ɪz hɛɾ ənsɝteɪnli. "du jə min tə . . . teɪk ɪɾ ɔl, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ? nɑt dʒʌst ɑlməθ pleɪn, bʌt tæɹɑbən ən ɑɹæd dumən əz wɛl?"

Carridin moved his head uncertainly. "Do you mean to . . . take it all, my Lord Captain Commander? Not just Almoth Plain, but Tarabon and Arad Doman as well?"

"wʌɾ aɪ min ɪz fəɹ mi tə noʊ. ɪts fəɹ jə tə oʊbeɪ əz jə ɑɹ swɔɹn tə du. aɪ ɪkspɛk tə hɪɹ ə mɛsənʒɝz ɑn fæs hɔɹsəz livɪŋ fəɹ ðə pleɪn baɪ tənaɪt. aɪm sɝɾən jə noʊ haʊ tə wɝd ði ɔɹɾɝz soʊ noʊ wʌn sʌspɛks wʌt ðeɪ ʃəd nɑt. ɪf jə mʌs hɛɹi sʌmwʌn, lɛɾ ɪt bi ðə tæɹɑbənɝz ən dəmɑni. ɪt wəd nɑt də tə hæv əm kɪl maɪ laɪən. noʊ, ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, wi ʃæl fɔɹs pis bɪtwin ðɛm."

"What I mean is for me to know. It is for you to obey as you are sworn to do. I expect to hear of messengers on fast horses leaving for the plain by tonight. I am certain you know how to word the orders so no one suspects what they should not. If you must harry someone, let it be the Taraboners and Domani. It would not do to have them kill my lion. No, under the Light, we shall force peace between them."

"æz maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ kəmænz," kæɹaɪɾɪn sɛd smuðli. "aɪ hɪɹ ən oʊbeɪ." tu smuðli.

"As my Lord Captain Commander commands," Carridin said smoothly. "I hear and obey." Too smoothly.

naɪl smaɪld ə koʊl smaɪl. "ɪn keɪs jəɹ oʊθ ɪz nɑt stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf, noʊ ðɪs. ɪf ðɪs fɔls dʒɹæɡən daɪz bɪfɔɹ aɪ kəmæn ɪz dɛθ, əɹ ɪf hiz teɪkən baɪ ðə tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪtʃəz, jəl bi faʊnd wʌn mɔɹnɪŋ wɪð ə dæɡɝ ɪn jəɹ hɑɹt. ən ʃəɾ ɛni . . . æksəɾənt . . . bɪfɔl mi - ivən ɪf aɪ ʃəd daɪ ʌv oʊld eɪdʒ - jəl nɑt sɝvaɪv mi ðə mʌnθ."

Niall smiled a cold smile. "In case your oath is not strong enough, know this. If this false Dragon dies before I command his death, or if he is taken by the Tar Valon witches, you will be found one morning with a dagger in your heart. And should any . . . accident . . . befall me - even if I should die of old age - you will not survive me the month."

"maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, aɪ hæv swɔɹn tə oʊbeɪ - "

"My Lord Captain Commander, I have sworn to obey - "

"soʊ jə hæv." naɪl kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. "si ðət jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt. naʊ, ɡoʊ!"

"So you have." Niall cut him off. "See that you remember it. Now, go!"

"æz maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ kəmænz." ðɪs taɪm kæɹaɪɾɪnz vɔɪs wɑz nɑt soʊ stɛɾi.

"As my Lord Captain Commander commands." This time Carridin's voice was not so steady.

ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn ði ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ. naɪl ɹʌbd ɪz hænz təɡɛðɝ. hi fɛl koʊld. ðə daɪs wɝ spɪnɪŋ, wɪð noʊ weɪ ʌv tɛlɪŋ wʌt pɪps wəd ʃoʊ wən ðeɪ stɑpt. ðə læs bæɾəl tʃɹuli wɑz kʌmɪŋ. nɑt ðə tɑɹmən ɡdən ə lɛdʒənd, wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn bɹeɪkɪŋ fɹi tə bi feɪs baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. nɑt ðæt, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz maɪɾ əv meɪɾ ə hoʊl ɪn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən ət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, bʌt luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ ən ɪz hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz hæd sild ɪɾ ʌp əɡɛn. ðə kaʊntɝstʃɹoʊk hæd teɪntɪd ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs fɝɛvɝ ən dʒɹɪvən əm mæd, ən soʊ bɪɡʌn ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, bʌt wʌn ə ðoʊz eɪntʃən ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd də wʌt tɛn ə ðə tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪtʃəz ə tədeɪ kəd nɑt. ðə silz ðeɪ hæd meɪd wəd hoʊld.

The door closed behind the Inquisitor. Niall rubbed his hands together. He felt cold. The dice were spinning, with no way of telling what pips would show when they stopped. The Last Battle truly was coming. Not the Tarmon Gai'don of legend, with the Dark One breaking free to be faced by the Dragon Reborn. Not that, he was sure. The Aes Sedai of the Age of Legends might have made a hole in the Dark One's prison at Shayol Ghul, but Lews Therin Kinslayer and his Hundred Companions had sealed it up again. The counterstroke had tainted the male half of the True Source forever and driven them mad, and so begun the Breaking, but one of those ancient Aes Sedai could do what ten of the Tar Valon witches of today could not. The seals they had made would hold.

peɪdʒɹən naɪl wɑz ə mæn ə koʊld lɑdʒɪk, ən i hæd ɹizən aʊt haʊ tɑɹmən ɡdən wəd bi. bɛstʃəl tʃɹɑlɑk hɔɹdz ɹoʊlɪŋ saʊθ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪɾ əz ðeɪ hæɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, tu θaʊzən jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ, wɪð ðə mɹdʒɹɑl - ðə hæfmən - liɾɪŋ, ən pɝhæps ivən nu hjumən dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz fɹəm əmʌŋ ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz. hjumənkaɪnd, splɪɾ ɪndə neɪʃənz skwɑbəlɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, kəd nɑt stæn əɡɛns ðæt. bʌt hi, peɪdʒɹən naɪl, wəd junaɪt hjumənkaɪn bɪhaɪn ðə bænɝz ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. ðəɹ wəd bi nu lɛdʒənz, tə tɛl haʊ peɪdʒɹən naɪl hæd fɔt tɑɹmən ɡdən, ən wʌn.

Pedron Niall was a man of cold logic, and he had reasoned out how Tarmon Gai'don would be. Bestial Trolloc hordes rolling south out of the Great Blight as they had in the Trolloc Wars, two thousand years before, with the Myrddraal - the Halfmen - leading, and perhaps even new human Dreadlords from among the Darkfriends. Humankind, split into nations squabbling among themselves, could not stand against that. But he, Pedron Niall, would unite humankind behind the banners of the Children of the Light. There would be new legends, to tell how Pedron Niall had fought Tarmon Gai'don, and won.

"fɝst," hi mɝmɝd, "lus ə ɹæbɪd laɪən ɪn ðə stʃɹits."

"First," he murmured, "loose a rabid lion in the streets."

"ə ɹæbɪd laɪən?"

"A rabid lion?"

naɪl spʌn ɑn ɪz hil əz ə boʊni lɪɾəl mæn wɪð ə hjudʒ bik ʌv ə noʊz slɪp fɹəm bɪhaɪnd wʌn ə ðə hæŋɪŋ bænɝz. ðəɹ wɑz dʒʌst ə ɡlɪmps ʌv ə pænəl swɪŋɪŋ ʃʌɾ əz ðə bænɝ fɛl bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl.

Niall spun on his heel as a bony little man with a huge beak of a nose slipped from behind one of the hanging banners. There was just a glimpse of a panel swinging shut as the banner fell back against the wall.

"aɪ ʃoʊd jə ðət pæsədʒ, ɔɹdiθ," naɪl snæpt, "soʊ jə kəd kʌm wən aɪ sʌmən jə wɪθaʊt hæf ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs noʊɪŋ, nɑt soʊ jə kəd lɪsən tə maɪ pɹaɪvət kɑnvɝseɪʃən."

"I showed you that passage, Ordeith," Niall snapped, "so you could come when I summoned you without half the fortress knowing, not so you could listen to my private conversation."

ɔɹdiθ meɪɾ ə smuð baʊ əz i kɹɔs ðə ɹum. "lɪsən, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd? aɪ wəd nɛvɝ də sətʃ ə θɪŋ. aɪ oʊnli dʒʌst ɝaɪvd ən kəd nɑɾ əvɔɪd hɪɹɪŋ jəɹ faɪnəl wɝdz. noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðæt." hi wɔɹ ə hæf-mɑkɪŋ smaɪl, bʌɾ ɪt nɛvɝ lɛft ɪz feɪs ðət naɪl hæɾ ɛvɝ sin, ivən wən ðə fɛloʊ hæd noʊ ɹizən tə noʊ ɛniwʌn wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ.

Ordeith made a smooth bow as he crossed the room. "Listen, Great Lord? I would never do such a thing. I only just arrived and could not avoid hearing your final words. No more than that." He wore a half-mocking smile, but it never left his face that Niall had ever seen, even when the fellow had no reason to know anyone was watching.

ə mʌnθ bɪfɔɹ, ɪn ðə dɛɾ ʌv wɪntɝ, ðə ɡæŋli lɪɾəl mæn hæɾ ɝaɪvd ɪn ɑmɑdɪʃiə, ɹæɡəɾ ən hæf-fɹoʊzən, ən sʌmhaʊ mænədʒ tə tɔk ɪz weɪ θɹu ɔl ðə leɪɝz ʌv ɡɑɹdz tə peɪdʒɹən naɪl hɪmsɛlf. hi sim tə noʊ θɪŋz əbaʊɾ ɪvɛns ɑn toʊmən hɛd ðət wɝ nɑɾ ɪn kæɹaɪɾɪnz vəlumənəs ɪf əbskjʊɹ ɹɪpɔɹts, əɹ ɪn baɪɑɝz teɪl, əɹ ɪn ɛni ʌðɝ ɹipɔɹɾ əɹ ɹumɝ ðət hæd kʌm tə naɪl. hɪz neɪm wɑz ə laɪ, ʌv kɔɹs. ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, ɔɹdiθ mɛnt "wɝmwʊd." wən naɪl tʃælənʒd ɪm ɑn ɪt, ðoʊ, ɔl i sɛd wɑz, "hu wi wɝ ɪz lɔs tə ɔl mɛn, ən laɪf ɪz bɪɾɝ." bʌɾ i wɑz klɛvɝ. ɪt hæd bɪn i hu hɛlp naɪl si ðə pæɾɝn ɪmɝdʒɪŋ ɪn ɪvɛns.

A month before, in the dead of winter, the gangly little man had arrived in Amadicia, ragged and half-frozen, and somehow managed to talk his way through all the layers of guards to Pedron Niall himself. He seemed to know things about events on Toman Head that were not in Carridin's voluminous if obscure reports, or in Byar's tale, or in any other report or rumor that had come to Niall. His name was a lie, of course. In the Old Tongue, Ordeith meant "wormwood." When Niall challenged him on it, though, all he said was, "Who we were is lost to all men, and life is bitter." But he was clever. It had been he who helped Niall see the pattern emerging in events.

ɔɹdiθ muv tə ðə teɪbəl ən tʊk ʌp wʌn ə ðə dʒɹɔɪŋz. əz i ənɹoʊld ɪɾ ɪnʌf tə ɹɪvil ðə jʌŋ mænz feɪs, hɪz smaɪl dipən tə nɪɹli ə ɡɹɪmɑs.

Ordeith moved to the table and took up one of the drawings. As he unrolled it enough to reveal the young man's face, his smile deepened to nearly a grimace.

naɪl wɑz stɪl ɪɹəteɪɾəd ðət ðə mæn hæd kʌm ənsʌmənd. "ju faɪn ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən fʌni, ɔɹdiθ. əɹ dʌz i fɹaɪɾən ju?"

Niall was still irritated that the man had come unsummoned. "You find a false Dragon funny, Ordeith. Or does he frighten you?"

"ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən?" ɔɹdiθ sɛd sɔfli. "jɛs. jɛs, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪt mʌs bi. hu ɛls kəɾ ɪt bi." ən i bɑɹkt ə ʃɹɪl læf ðət ɡɹeɪɾɪd ɑn naɪlz nɝvz. səmtaɪmz naɪl θɔɾ ɔɹdiθ wɑz ət lis hæf-mæd.

"A false Dragon?" Ordeith said softly. "Yes. Yes, of course, it must be. Who else could it be." And he barked a shrill laugh that grated on Niall's nerves. Sometimes Niall thought Ordeith was at least half-mad.

bʌt hiz klɛvɝ, mæɾ əɹ nɑt. "wʌt dʒju min, ɔɹdiθ? jə saʊn əz ɪf jə noʊ hɪm."

But he is clever, mad or not. "What do you mean, Ordeith? You sound as if you know him."

ɔɹdiθ ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, əz ðoʊ hi hæd fɝɡɑɾən ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ wɑz ðɛɹ. "noʊ hɪm? oʊ, jɛs, aɪ noʊ hɪm. hɪz neɪm ɪz ɹænd ælθɹ. hi kʌmz fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ɪn ðə bækaʊntʃɹi ʌv ændɝ, ən hiz ə dɑɹkfɹɛn soʊ dip ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ ɪt wəd meɪk jəɹ soʊl kɹɪnʒ tə noʊ ðə hæf."

Ordeith gave a start, as though he had forgotten the Lord Captain Commander was there. "Know him? Oh, yes, I know him. His name is Rand al'Thor. He comes from the Two Rivers, in the backcountry of Andor, and he is a Darkfriend so deep in the Shadow it would make your soul cringe to know the half."

"ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," naɪl mjuzd. "sʌmwʌn ɛls mɛnʃən ənʌðɝ dɑɹkfɹɛn fɹəm ðɛɹ, ənʌðɝ juθ. stʃɹeɪnʒ tə θɪŋk ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ə pleɪs laɪk ðæt. bʌt tʃɹuli ðeɪ ɑɹ ɛvɹiwɛɹ."

"The Two Rivers," Niall mused. "Someone else mentioned another Darkfriend from there, another youth. Strange to think of Darkfriends coming from a place like that. But truly they are everywhere."

"ənʌðɝ, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd?" ɔɹdiθ sɛd. "fɹʌm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz? wəd ðət bi meɪtʃɹim kɔθən əɹ pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə? ðeɪ ɑɹ ʌv ən eɪdʒ wɪð hɪm, ən kloʊs bɪhaɪn ɪn ivəl."

"Another, Great Lord?" Ordeith said. "From the Two Rivers? Would that be Matrim Cauthon or Perrin Aybara? They are of an age with him, and close behind in evil."

"hɪz neɪm wɑz ɡɪvən əz pɛɹɪn," naɪl sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "θɹi ʌv ðɛm, jə seɪ? nʌθɪŋ kʌmz aʊɾ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz bʌt wʊl ən təbæk. aɪ daʊɾ ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ənʌðɝ pleɪs mɛn lɪv ðəɾ ɪz mɔɹ aɪsəleɪɾəd fɹəm ðə ɹɛst ə ðə wɝld."

"His name was given as Perrin," Niall said, frowning. "Three of them, you say? Nothing comes out of the Two Rivers but wool and tabac. I doubt if there is another place men live that is more isolated from the rest of the world."

"ɪn ə sɪɾi, dɑɹkfɹɛnz mʌs haɪd ðɛɹ neɪtʃɝ tə wʌn ɪkstɛn əɹ ənʌðɝ. ðeɪ mʌst əsoʊsieɪt wɪð ʌðɝz, wɪð stʃɹeɪnʒɝz kʌm fɹəm ʌðɝ pleɪsəz ən livɪŋ tə teɪk wɝɾ ʌv wʌt ðeɪv sin. bʌɾ ɪn kwaɪət vɪlədʒəz, kʌɾ ɔf fɹəm ðə wɝld, wɛɹ fju aʊtsaɪɾɝz ɛvɝ ɡoʊ. . . . wʌt bɛɾɝ pleɪsəz fəɹ ɔl tə bi dɑɹkfɹɛnz?"

"In a city, Darkfriends must hide their nature to one extent or another. They must associate with others, with strangers come from other places and leaving to take word of what they have seen. But in quiet villages, cut off from the world, where few outsiders ever go. . . . What better places for all to be Darkfriends?"

"haʊ ɪz ɪt jə noʊ ðə neɪmz ə θɹi dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ɔɹdiθ? θɹi dɑɹkfɹɛnz fɹəm ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə fɝɛvɝ. jə kip tu mɛni sikɹəts, wɝmwʊd, ən pʊl mɔɹ sɝpɹaɪzəz fɹəm jəɹ sliv ðən ə ɡlimən."

"How is it you know the names of three Darkfriends, Ordeith? Three Darkfriends from the far end of forever. You keep too many secrets, Wormwood, and pull more surprises from your sleeve than a gleeman."

"haʊ kən ɛni mæn tɛl ɔl ðəɾ i noʊz, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd," ðə lɪɾəl mæn sɛd smuðli. "ɪt wəd bi oʊnli pɹæɾəl, əntɪl ɪt bɪkʌmz jusfəl. əl tɛl jə ðɪs, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. ðɪs ɹænd ælθɹ, ðɪs dʒɹæɡən, hæz dip ɹuts ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

"How can any man tell all that he knows, Great Lord," the little man said smoothly. "It would be only prattle, until it becomes useful. I will tell you this, Great Lord. This Rand al'Thor, this Dragon, has deep roots in the Two Rivers."

"fɔls dʒɹæɡən!" naɪl sɛd ʃɑɹpli, ən ði ʌðɝ mæn baʊd.

"False Dragon!" Niall said sharply, and the other man bowed.

"ʌv kɔɹs, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. aɪ mɪsspoʊk maɪsɛlf."

"Of course, Great Lord. I misspoke myself."

sʌɾənli naɪl bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə ðə dʒɹɔɪŋ kɹʌmpəld ən tɔɹn ɪn ɔɹdiθs hænz. ivən waɪl ðə mænz feɪs ɹɪmeɪn smuð ɪksɛp fəɹ ðət sɑɹdɑnɪk smaɪl, hɪz hænz twɪtʃt kənvʌlsɪvli ɝaʊn ðə pɑɹtʃmənt.

Suddenly Niall became aware of the drawing crumpled and torn in Ordeith's hands. Even while the man's face remained smooth except for that sardonic smile, his hands twitched convulsively around the parchment.

"stɑp ðæt!" naɪl kəmændəd. hi snætʃt ðə dʒɹɔɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɔɹdiθ ən smuðd ɪɾ əz bɛst i kʊd. "aɪ də nɑɾ əv soʊ mɛni laɪknəsɪz ə ðɪs mæn ðəɾ aɪ kən əlaʊ ðɛm tə bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd." mʌtʃ ə ðə dʒɹɔɪŋ wɑz oʊnli ə smʌdʒ, ən ə ɹɪp ɹæn əkɹɔs ðə jʌŋ mænz bɹɛst, bʌt mɝækjələsli ðə feɪs wɑz əntʌtʃt.

"Stop that!" Niall commanded. He snatched the drawing away from Ordeith and smoothed it as best he could. "I do not have so many likenesses of this man that I can allow them to be destroyed." Much of the drawing was only a smudge, and a rip ran across the young man's breast, but miraculously the face was untouched.

"fɝɡɪv mi, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd." ɔɹdiθ meɪɾ ə dip baʊ, hɪz smaɪl nɛvɝ slɪpɪŋ. "aɪ heɪt dɑɹkfɹɛnz."

"Forgive me, Great Lord." Ordeith made a deep bow, his smile never slipping. "I hate Darkfriends."

naɪl stʌɾid ðə feɪs ɪn tʃɔks. ɹænd ælθɹ, ʌv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. "pɝhæps aɪ mʌs meɪk plænz fəɹ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. wən ðə snoʊz klɪɹ. pɝhæps."

Niall studied the face in chalks. Rand al'Thor, of the Two Rivers. "Perhaps I must make plans for the Two Rivers. When the snows clear. Perhaps."

"æz ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd wɪʃɪz," ɔɹdiθ sɛd blænli.

"As the Great Lord wishes," Ordeith said blandly.

ðə ɡɹɪmɑs ɑn kæɹaɪɾɪnz feɪs əz i stʃɹoʊd θɹu ðə hɔlz ə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs meɪɾ ʌðɝ mɛn əvɔɪd hɪm, ðoʊ ɪn tʃɹuθ fju sɔt ðə kʌmpəni ʌv kwɛstʃənɝz. sɝvəns, hɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ tæsks, tʃɹaɪd tə feɪɾ ɪndə ðə stoʊn wɔlz, ən ivən mɛn wɪð ɡoʊldən nɑts ə ɹæŋk ɑn ðɛɹ waɪt kloʊks tʊk saɪd kɔɹɪɾɝz wən ðeɪ sɔ hɪz feɪs.

The grimace on Carridin's face as he strode through the halls of the Fortress made other men avoid him, though in truth few sought the company of Questioners. Servants, hurrying about their tasks, tried to fade into the stone walls, and even men with golden knots of rank on their white cloaks took side corridors when they saw his face.

hi flʌŋ oʊpən ðə dɔɹ tə hɪz ɹumz ən slæmd ɪt bɪhaɪn hɪm, filɪŋ nʌn ə ðə juʒəwəl sæɾəsfækʃən ət ðə faɪn kɑɹpəts fɹəm tæɹɑbən ən tiɹ ɪn lʌʃ ɹɛdz ən ɡoʊlz ən bluz, ðə bɛvəl mɪɹɝz fɹəm ɪljən, ðə ɡoʊld-lif wɝk ɑn ðə lɔŋ, ɪntʃɹəkətli kɑɹv teɪbəl ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə flɔɹ. ə mæstɝ kɹæfsmən fɹəm luɡɹd hæd wɝk nɪɹli ə jɪɹ ɑn ðæt. ðɪs taɪm i bɛɹli sɔ ɪt.

He flung open the door to his rooms and slammed it behind him, feeling none of the usual satisfaction at the fine carpets from Tarabon and Tear in lush reds and golds and blues, the beveled mirrors from Illian, the gold-leaf work on the long, intricately carved table in the middle of the floor. A master craftsman from Lugard had worked nearly a year on that. This time he barely saw it.

"ʃɑɹbən!" fəɹ wʌns ɪz bɑɾi sɝvən dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ. ðə mæn wɑz səpoʊz tə bi ɹɛɾiɪŋ ðə ɹumz. "ðə laɪt bɝn ju, ʃɑɹbən! wɛɹ ɑɹ ju?"

"Sharbon!" For once his body servant did not appear. The man was supposed to be readying the rooms. "The Light burn you, Sharbon! Where are you?"

ə muvmən kɑt ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, ən i tɝn ɹɛɾi tə ʃɹɪvəl ʃɑɹbən wɪð ɪz kɝsɪz. ðə kɝsɪz ðɛmsɛlvz ʃɹɪvəld əz ə mɹdʒɹɑl tʊk ənʌðɝ stɛp təwɔɹɾ ɪm wɪð ðə sɪnwəs ɡɹeɪs ʌv ə sɝpənt.

A movement caught the corner of his eye, and he turned ready to shrivel Sharbon with his curses. The curses themselves shriveled as a Myrddraal took another step toward him with the sinuous grace of a serpent.

ɪt wɑz ə mæn ɪn fɔɹm, noʊ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən moʊst, bʌt ðəɹ ðə ɹɪzɛmbləns ɛndəd. dɛd blæk kloʊðz ən kloʊk, hɑɹdli simɪŋ tə stɝ əz ɪt muvd, meɪɾ ɪts mæɡət-waɪt skɪn əpɪɹ ɛvɝ pəlɝ. ən ɪt hæd noʊ aɪz. ðəɾ aɪləs ɡeɪz fɪl kæɹaɪɾɪn wɪð fɪɹ, əz ɪt hæd fɪl θaʊzənz bɪfɔɹ.

It was a man in form, no larger than most, but there the resemblance ended. Dead black clothes and cloak, hardly seeming to stir as it moved, made its maggot-white skin appear ever paler. And it had no eyes. That eyeless gaze filled Carridin with fear, as it had filled thousands before.

"wɑ. . . ." kæɹaɪɾɪn stɑp tə wɝk mɔɪstʃɝ bæk ɪndə hɪz maʊθ, tə tʃɹaɪ bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs bæk daʊn tə ɪts nɔɹməl ɹɛdʒɪstɝ. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ?" ɪt stɪl saʊndəd ʃɹɪl.

"Wha. . . ." Carridin stopped to work moisture back into his mouth, to try bringing his voice back down to its normal register. "What are you doing here?" It still sounded shrill.

ðə hæfmənz blʌdləs lɪps kwɝkt ɪn ə smaɪl. "wɛɹ ðəɹ ɪz ʃædoʊ, ðəɹ meɪ aɪ ɡoʊ." ɪts vɔɪs saʊndəd laɪk ə sneɪk ɹʌslɪŋ θɹu dɛd livz. "aɪ laɪk tə kip ə wɑtʃ ɑn ɔl ðoʊz u sɝv mi."

The Halfman's bloodless lips quirked in a smile. "Where there is shadow, there may I go." Its voice sounded like a snake rustling through dead leaves. "I like to keep a watch on all those who serve me."

"aɪ sɝ. . . ."

"I ser. . . ."

ɪt wɑz noʊ jus. wɪð ən ɛfɝt kæɹaɪɾɪn dʒɝkt ɪz aɪz əweɪ fɹəm ðət smuð ɪkspæns ə peɪl, peɪsti feɪs ən tɝn ɪz bæk. ə ʃɪvɝ ɹæn daʊn ɪz spaɪn, hævɪŋ ɪz bæk tə ə mɹdʒɹɑl. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz ʃɑɹp ɪn ðə mɪɹɝ ɑn ðə wɔl ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. ɛvɹiθɪŋ bʌt ðə hæfmən. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɑz ən ɪndɪstɪŋk blɝ. hɑɹdli suðɪŋ tə lʊk æt, bʌt bɛɾɝ ðən miɾɪŋ ðət stɛɹ. ə lɪɾəl stʃɹɛŋkθ ɹɪtɝn tə kæɹaɪɾɪnz vɔɪs.

It was no use. With an effort Carridin jerked his eyes away from that smooth expanse of pale, pasty face and turned his back. A shiver ran down his spine, having his back to a Myrddraal. Everything was sharp in the mirror on the wall in front of him. Everything but the Halfman. The Myrddraal was an indistinct blur. Hardly soothing to look at, but better than meeting that stare. A little strength returned to Carridin's voice.

"aɪ sɝv ðə. . . ." hi kʌɾ ɔf, sʌɾənli əwɛɹ ʌv wɛɹ i wɑz. ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs ə ðə laɪt. ðə ɹumɝ ʌv ə wɪspɝ ə ðə wɝdz i wɑz əbaʊt tə seɪ wəɾ əv ɪm ɡɪvən tə ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt. ðə loʊəst ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən wəd stʃɹaɪk ɪm daʊn ɑn ðə spɑɾ ɪf i hɝd. hi wɑz əloʊn ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl, ən pɝhæps ʃɑɹbən - wɛɹ ɪz ðət kɝs mæn? ɪt wəd bi ɡʊd tə hæv sʌmwʌn tə ʃɛɹ ðə hæfmənz stɛɹ, ivən ɪf ði ʌðɝ wəɾ əv tə bi dɪspoʊzd ʌv æftɝwɝdz - bʌt stɪl i loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs. "aɪ sɝv ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk, əz jə du. wi boʊθ sɝv."

"I serve the. . . ." He cut off, suddenly aware of where he was. In the heart of the Fortress of the Light. The rumor of a whisper of the words he was about to say would have him given to the Hand of the Light. The lowest of the Children would strike him down on the spot if he heard. He was alone except for the Myrddraal, and perhaps Sharbon - Where is that cursed man? It would be good to have someone to share the Halfman's stare, even if the other would have to be disposed of afterwards - but still he lowered his voice. "I serve the Great Lord of the Dark, as you do. We both serve."

"ɪf jə wɪʃ tə si ɪt soʊ." ðə mɹdʒɹɑl læft, ə saʊn ðət meɪd kæɹaɪɾɪnz boʊnz ʃɪvɝ. "stɪl, əl noʊ waɪ jə ɑɹ hɪɹ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn."

"If you wish to see it so." The Myrddraal laughed, a sound that made Carridin's bones shiver. "Still, I will know why you are here instead of on Almoth Plain."

"aɪ . . . aɪ wɑz kəmændəd hɪɹ baɪ wɝɾ ə ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ."

"I . . . I was commanded here by word of the Lord Captain Commander."

ðə mɹdʒɹɑl ɡɹeɪɾɪd, "jɔɹ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝz wɝdz ɑɹ dʌŋ! jə wɝ kəmændəd tə faɪn ðə hjumən kɔld ɹænd ælθɹ ən kɪl hɪm. ðət bɪfɔɹ ɔl ɛls. əbʌv ɔl ɛls! waɪ ɑɹ jə nɑɾ oʊbeɪɪŋ?"

The Myrddraal grated, "Your Lord Captain Commander's words are dung! You were commanded to find the human called Rand al'Thor and kill him. That before all else. Above all else! Why are you not obeying?"

kæɹaɪɾɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. ðət ɡeɪz ɑn ɪz bæk fɛlt laɪk ə naɪf bleɪd ɡɹeɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪz spaɪn. "θɪŋz . . . hæv tʃeɪnʒd. səm mæɾɝz ɑɹ nɑɾ əz mʌtʃ ɪn maɪ kəntʃɹoʊl əz ðeɪ wɝ." ə hɑɹʃ, skɹeɪpɪŋ nɔɪz dʒɝkt ɪz hɛɾ ɝaʊnd.

Carridin took a deep breath. That gaze on his back felt like a knife blade grating along his spine. "Things . . . have changed. Some matters are not as much in my control as they were." A harsh, scraping noise jerked his head around.

ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɑz dʒɹɔɪŋ ə hæn əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəltɑp, ən θɪn tɛnʒɹəlz ʌv wʊd kɝld əweɪ fɹəm ɪts fɪŋɡɝneɪlz. "nʌθɪŋ əz tʃeɪnʒd, hjumən. jə fɔɹswɔɹ jəɹ oʊðz tə ðə laɪɾ ən swɔɹ nu oʊðz, ən ðoʊz oʊðz jəl oʊbeɪ."

The Myrddraal was drawing a hand across the tabletop, and thin tendrils of wood curled away from its fingernails. "Nothing has changed, human. You forswore your oaths to the Light and swore new oaths, and those oaths you will obey."

kæɹaɪɾɪn stɑɹɾəd ət ðə ɡaʊudʒɪz mɑɹɪŋ ðə pɑlɪʃt wʊɾ ən swɑloʊd hɑɹd. "aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd. waɪ ɪz ɪt sʌɾənli soʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə kɪl hɪm? aɪ θɔt ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk mɛn tə juz hɪm."

Carridin started at the gouges marring the polished wood and swallowed hard. "I don't understand. Why is it suddenly so important to kill him? I thought the Great Lord of the Dark meant to use him."

"ju kwɛstʃən mi? aɪ ʃəd teɪk jəɹ tʌŋ. ɪts nɑt jəɹ pɑɹt tə kwɛstʃən. əɹ tə ʌndɝstænd. ɪts jəɹ pɑɹt tə oʊbeɪ! jəl ɡɪv dɑɡz lɛsənz ɪn oʊbiɾiəns. dʒju ʌndɝstæn ðæt? hil, dɔɡ, ən oʊbeɪ jəɹ mæstɝ."

"You question me? I should take your tongue. It is not your part to question. Or to understand. It is your part to obey! You will give dogs lessons in obedience. Do you understand that? Heel, dog, and obey your master."

æŋɡɝ wɝmd ɪts weɪ θɹu ðə fɪɹ, ən kæɹaɪɾɪnz hænd ɡɹoʊpd əɾ ɪz saɪd, bʌɾ ɪz sɔɹd wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ. ɪt leɪ ɪn ðə nɛkst ɹum naʊ, wɛɹ i hæd lɛft ɪɾ ɑn gɑnə ətɛn peɪdʒɹən naɪl.

Anger wormed its way through the fear, and Carridin's hand groped at his side, but his sword was not there. It lay in the next room now, where he had left it on going to attend Pedron Niall.

ðə mɹdʒɹɑl muv fæstɝ ðən ə stʃɹaɪkɪŋ vaɪpɝ. kæɹaɪɾɪn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə skɹim əz ɪts hæn kloʊzd ɑn ɪz ɹɪst ɪn ə kɹʌʃɪŋ ɡɹɪp; boʊnz ɡɹeɪɾɪd təɡɛðɝ, sɛndɪŋ dʒoʊls ʌv æɡəni ʌp ɪz ɑɹm. ðə skɹim nɛvɝ lɛft ɪz maʊθ, ðoʊ, fəɹ ðə hæfmənz ʌðɝ hænd ɡɹɪpt ɪz tʃɪn ən fɔɹst ɪz dʒɔz ʃʌt. hɪz hilz ɹoʊz ʌp, ən ðən ɪz toʊz lɛf ðə flɔɹ. ɡɹʌntɪŋ ən ɡɝɡəlɪŋ, hi dæŋɡəld ɪn ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz ɡɹæsp.

The Myrddraal moved faster than a striking viper. Carridin opened his mouth to scream as its hand closed on his wrist in a crushing grip; bones grated together, sending jolts of agony up his arm. The scream never left his mouth, though, for the Halfman's other hand gripped his chin and forced his jaws shut. His heels rose up, and then his toes left the floor. Grunting and gurgling, he dangled in the Myrddraal's grasp.

"hɪɹ mi, hjumən. jəl faɪn ðɪs juθ ən kɪl ɪm əz kwɪkli əz pɑsəbəl. də nɑt θɪŋk jə kən dɪsəmbəl. ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝz ə jəɹ tʃɪlʒɹən u wɪl tɛl mi ɪf jə tɝn əsaɪɾ ɪn jəɹ pɝpəs. bʌɾ əl ɡɪv jə ðɪs tə ɛnkɝɪdʒ ju. ɪf ðɪs ɹænd ælθɹ ɪz nɑt dɛɾ ɪn ə mʌnθ, əl teɪk wʌn ə jəɹ blʌd. ə sʌn, ə dɔɾɝ, ə sɪstɝ, ən ʌŋkəl. jəl nɑt noʊ hu əntɪl ðə tʃoʊzən əz daɪd skɹimɪŋ. ɪf i lɪvz ənʌðɝ mʌnθ, əl teɪk ənʌðɝ. ən ðən ənʌðɝ, ən ənʌðɝ. ən wən ðəɹ ɪz noʊ wʌn ə jəɹ blʌd lɪvɪŋ ɪksɛp jɝsɛlf, ɪf i stɪl laɪvz, əl teɪk jə tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl ɪtsɛlf." ɪt smaɪld. "ju wɪl bi jɪɹz ɪn ðə daɪɪŋ, hjumən. dʒju ʌndɝstæn mi, naʊ?"

"Hear me, human. You will find this youth and kill him as quickly as possible. Do not think you can dissemble. There are others of your children who will tell me if you turn aside in your purpose. But I will give you this to encourage you. If this Rand al'Thor is not dead in a month, I will take one of your blood. A son, a daughter, a sister, an uncle. You will not know who until the chosen has died screaming. If he lives another month, I will take another. And then another, and another. And when there is no one of your blood living except yourself, if he still lives, I will take you to Shayol Ghul itself." It smiled. "You will be years in the dying, human. Do you understand me, now?"

kæɹaɪɾɪn meɪɾ ə saʊnd, hæf ɡɹoʊn, hæf wɪmpɝ. hi θɔɾ ɪz nɛk wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə bɹeɪk.

Carridin made a sound, half groan, half whimper. He thought his neck was going to break.

wɪð ə snɑɹl, ðə mɹdʒɹɑl hɝld ɪm əkɹɔs ðə ɹum. kæɹaɪɾɪn slæmd əɡɛns ðə fɑɹ wɔl ən slɪd tə ðə ɹʌɡ, stʌnd. feɪsdaʊn, hi leɪ faɪɾɪŋ fəɹ bɹɛθ.

With a snarl, the Myrddraal hurled him across the room. Carridin slammed against the far wall and slid to the rug, stunned. Facedown, he lay fighting for breath.

"du jə ʌndɝstæn mi, hjumən?"

"Do you understand me, human?"

"aɪ . . . aɪ hɪɹ ən oʊbeɪ," kæɹaɪɾɪn mænədʒd ɪndə ðə kɑɹpət. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ænsɝ.

"I . . . I hear and obey," Carridin managed into the carpet. There was no answer.

hi tɝn ɪz hɛd, wɪnsɪŋ ət ðə peɪn ɪn ɪz nɛk. ðə ɹum wɑz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ hɪm. hæfmən ɹoʊd ʃædoʊz laɪk hɔɹsəz, soʊ ðə lɛdʒənz sɛd, ən wən ðeɪ tɝn saɪdweɪz, ðeɪ dɪsəpɪɹd. noʊ wɔl kəd kip əm aʊt. kæɹaɪɾɪn wɑntəd tə wip. hi lɛvɝd hɪmsɛlf ʌp, kɝsɪŋ ðə dʒoʊlt ə peɪn fɹəm ɪz ɹɪst.

He turned his head, wincing at the pain in his neck. The room was empty except for him. Halfmen rode shadows like horses, so the legends said, and when they turned sideways, they disappeared. No wall could keep them out. Carridin wanted to weep. He levered himself up, cursing the jolt of pain from his wrist.

ðə dɔɹ oʊpənd, ən ʃɑɹbən hɝiɾ ɪn, ə plʌmp mæn wɪð ə bæskəɾ ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz. hi stɑp tə stɛɹ ət kæɹaɪɾɪn. "mæstɝ, ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt? fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ nɑt biɪŋ hɪɹ, mæstɝ, bʌɾ aɪ wɛn tə baɪ fɹuts fəɹ jəɹ - "

The door opened, and Sharbon hurried in, a plump man with a basket in his arms. He stopped to stare at Carridin. "Master, are you all right? Forgive me for not being here, master, but I went to buy fruits for your - "

wɪð ɪz ɡʊd hæn kæɹaɪɾɪn stʃɹʌk ðə bæskət fɹəm ʃɑɹbənz hænz, sɛndɪŋ wɪðɝd wɪntɝ æpəlz ɹoʊlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə kɑɹpəts, ən bækhændəd ðə mæn əkɹɔs ðə feɪs.

With his good hand Carridin struck the basket from Sharbon's hands, sending withered winter apples rolling across the carpets, and backhanded the man across the face.

"fɝɡɪv mi, mæstɝ," ʃɑɹbən wɪspɝd.

"Forgive me, master," Sharbon whispered.

"fɛtʃ mi peɪpɝ ən pɛn ən ɪŋk," kæɹaɪɾɪn snɑɹəld. "hɝi, ful! aɪ mʌst sɛn ɔɹɾɝz." bʌt wɪtʃ? wɪtʃ? əz ʃɑɹbən skɝid tə oʊbeɪ, kæɹaɪɾɪn stɛɹɾ ət ðə ɡaʊudʒɪz ɪn ðə teɪbəltɑp ən ʃɪvɝd.

"Fetch me paper and pen and ink," Carridin snarled. "Hurry, fool! I must send orders." But which? Which? As Sharbon scurried to obey, Carridin stared at the gouges in the tabletop and shivered.


tʃæptɝ wʌn


CHAPTER 1

weɪɾɪŋ


Waiting

ðə wil ə taɪm tɝnz, ən eɪdʒəz kʌm ən pæs, livɪŋ mɛmɹiz ðət bɪkʌm lɛdʒənd. lɛdʒən feɪdz tə mɪθ, ən ivən mɪθ ɪz lɔŋ fɝɡɑɾən wən ði eɪdʒ ðət ɡeɪv ɪt bɝθ kʌmz əɡɛn. ɪn wʌn eɪdʒ, kɔl ðə θɝɾ eɪdʒ baɪ sʌm, ən eɪdʒ jɛt tə kʌm, ən eɪdʒ lɔŋ pæst, ə wɪn ɹoʊz ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst. ðə wɪnd wɑz nɑt ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ðəɹ ɑɹ niðɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋz nɔɹ ɛndɪŋz tə ðə tɝnɪŋ ə ðə wil ə taɪm. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə bɪɡɪnɪŋ.

The Wheel of Time turns, and Ages come and pass, leaving memories that become legend. Legend fades to myth, and even myth is long forgotten when the Age that gave it birth comes again. In one Age, called the Third Age by some, an Age yet to come, an Age long past, a wind rose in the Mountains of Mist. The wind was not the beginning. There are neither beginnings nor endings to the turning of the Wheel of Time. But it was a beginning.

daʊn lɔŋ væliz ðə wɪn swɛpt, væliz blu wɪð mɔɹnɪŋ mɪs hæŋɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, səm fɔɹəstəd wɪð ɛvɝɡɹinz, səm bɛɹ wɛɹ ɡɹæsəz ən waɪldflaʊɹz wəd sun spɹɪŋ ʌp. ɪt haʊld əkɹɔs hæf-bɛɹid ɹuənz ən bɹoʊkən mɑnjəməns, ɔl əz fɝɡɑɾən əz ðoʊz u hæd bɪl ðɛm. ɪt moʊn ɪn ðə pæsəz, wɛðɝwɹn kʌts bɪtwin piks kæpt wɪð snoʊ ðət nɛvɝ mɛltəd. θɪk klaʊdz klʌŋ tə ðə maʊnteɪntɑps soʊ ðət snoʊ ən waɪt bɪloʊz simd wʌn.

Down long valleys the wind swept, valleys blue with morning mist hanging in the air, some forested with evergreens, some bare where grasses and wildflowers would soon spring up. It howled across half-buried ruins and broken monuments, all as forgotten as those who had built them. It moaned in the passes, weatherworn cuts between peaks capped with snow that never melted. Thick clouds clung to the mountaintops so that snow and white billows seemed one.

ɪn ðə loʊlænz wɪntɝ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ əɹ ɡɔn, jɛt hɪɹ ɪn ðə haɪts ɪt hɛld əwaɪl, kwɪltɪŋ ðə maʊntənsaɪdz wɪð bɹɔd, waɪt pætʃəz. oʊnli ɛvɝɡɹinz klʌŋ tə lif əɹ niɾəl; ɔl ʌðɝ bɹæntʃəz stʊd bɛɹ, bɹaʊn əɹ ɡɹeɪ əɡɛns ðə ɹɑk ən nɑt jɛt kwɪkənd ɡɹaʊnd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saʊn bʌt ðə kɹɪsp ɹʌʃ ʌv wɪn oʊvɝ snoʊ ən stoʊn. ðə læn sim tə bi weɪɾɪŋ. weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə bɝst.

In the lowlands winter was going or gone, yet here in the heights it held awhile, quilting the mountainsides with broad, white patches. Only evergreens clung to leaf or needle; all other branches stood bare, brown or gray against the rock and not yet quickened ground. There was no sound but the crisp rush of wind over snow and stone. The land seemed to be waiting. Waiting for something to burst.

sɪɾɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs dʒʌst ɪnsaɪɾ ə θɪkɪɾ ə lɛðɝlif ən paɪn, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə ʃɪvɝɾ ən tʌɡd ɪz fɝ-laɪn kloʊk kloʊsɝ, əz kloʊs əz i kəd wɪð ə lɔŋboʊ ɪn wʌn hæn ən ə ɡɹeɪt, hæf-mun æks əɾ ɪz bɛlt. ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊɾ æks ə koʊl stil; pɛɹɪn hæd pʌmp ðə bɛloʊz ðə deɪ mæstɝ luhən hæd meɪɾ ɪt. ðə wɪn dʒɝkt əɾ ɪz kloʊk, pʊlɪŋ ðə hʊd bæk fɹəm ɪz ʃæɡi kɝlz, ən kʌt θɹu hɪz koʊt; hi wɪɡɡəld ɪz toʊz ɪn ɪz buts fəɹ wɔɹmθ ən ʃɪftəɾ ɑn ɪz haɪ-kæntəl sæɾəl, bʌɾ ɪz maɪnd wɑz nɑt ɹɪli ɑn ðə koʊld. aɪɪŋ ɪz faɪv kəmpænjənz, hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðeɪ, tu, fɛlt ɪt. nɑt ðə weɪɾɪŋ ðeɪ hæd bɪn sɛn ðəɹ fɔɹ, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ.

Sitting his horse just inside a thicket of leatherleaf and pine, Perrin Aybara shivered and tugged his fur-lined cloak closer, as close as he could with a longbow in one hand and a great, half-moon axe at his belt. It was a good axe of cold steel; Perrin had pumped the bellows the day master Luhhan had made it. The wind jerked at his cloak, pulling the hood back from his shaggy curls, and cut through his coat; he wiggled his toes in his boots for warmth and shifted on his high-cantled saddle, but his mind was not really on the cold. Eyeing his five companions, he wondered if they, too, felt it. Not the waiting they had been sent there for, but something more.

stɛpɝ, hɪz hɔɹs, ʃɪftəɾ ən tɔst ɪz hɛd. hi hæd neɪm ðə dʌn stæljən fəɹ ɪz kwɪk fit, bʌt naʊ stɛpɝ sim tə fil ɪz ɹaɪɾɝz ɪɹɪteɪʃən ən ɪmpeɪʃəns. aɪm taɪɝɾ ʌv ɔl ðɪs weɪɾɪŋ, ɔl ðɪs sɪɾɪŋ waɪl mɔɪɹeɪn hoʊlz əs əz taɪɾ əz tɑŋz. bɝn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ! wən wɪl ɪɾ ɛnd?

Stepper, his horse, shifted and tossed his head. He had named the dun stallion for his quick feet, but now Stepper seemed to feel his rider's irritation and impatience. I am tired of all this waiting, all this sitting while Moiraine holds us as tight as tongs. Burn the Aes Sedai! When will it end?

hi snɪf ðə wɪnd wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ. ðə smɛl ə hɔɹs pɹɪdɑməneɪɾɪd, ən ə mɛn ən mɛnz swɛt. ə ɹæbət hæd ɡɔn θɹu ðoʊz tʃɹiz nɑt lɔŋ sɪns, fɪɹ paʊɝɪŋ ɪts ɹʌn, bʌt ðə fɑks ɑn ɪts tʃɹeɪl hæd nɑt kɪl ðɛɹ. hi ɹilaɪzd wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ, ən stɑpt ɪt. jud θɪŋk aɪ wəd ɡɛɾ ə stʌf noʊz wɪð ɔl ðɪs wɪnd. hi ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt i dɪɾ əv wʌn. ən aɪ wʊdn lɛt mɔɪɹeɪn də ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt, iðɝ.

He sniffed the wind without thinking. The smell of horse predominated, and of men and men's sweat. A rabbit had gone through those trees not long since, fear powering its run, but the fox on its trail had not killed there. He realized what he was doing, and stopped it. You'd think I would get a stuffed nose with all this wind. He almost wished he did have one. And I wouldn't let Moiraine do anything about it, either.

sʌmθɪŋ tɪkəl ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪnd. hi ɹəfjuz tə æknɑlɪdʒ ɪt. hi dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ɪz filɪŋ tə hɪz kəmpænjənz.

Something tickled the back of his mind. He refused to acknowledge it. He did not mention his feeling to his companions.

ði ʌðɝ faɪv mɛn sæt ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, ʃɔɹt hɔɹsboʊz ət ðə ɹɛɾi, aɪz sɝtʃɪŋ ðə skaɪ əbʌv əz wɛl əz ðə θɪnli tʃɹid sloʊps bɪloʊ. ðeɪ simd ʌnpɝtɝbd baɪ ðə wɪn flɛɹɪŋ ðɛɹ kloʊks aʊt laɪk bænɝz. ə tu-hændəd sɔɹd hɪl stʌk ʌp əbʌv itʃ mænz ʃoʊldɝ θɹu ə slɪɾ ɪn ɪz kloʊk. ðə saɪɾ ə ðɛɹ bɛɹ hɛdz, ʃeɪvən ɪksɛp fəɹ tɑpnɑts, meɪd pɛɹɪn fil koʊldɝ. fəɹ ðɛm, ðɪs wɛðɝ wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi wɛl ɪndə spɹɪŋ. ɔl sɔfnəs hæd bɪn hæmɝɾ aʊɾ ə ðɛm əɾ ə hɑɹɾɝ fɔɹdʒ ðən i hæɾ ɛvɝ noʊn. ðeɪ wɝ ʃaɪnɝənz, fɹəm ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz ʌp əlɔŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, wɛɹ tʃɹɑlɑk ɹeɪdz kəd kʌm ɪn ɛni naɪt, ən ivən ə mɝtʃən əɹ ə fɑɹmɝ maɪt wɛl əv tə teɪk ʌp sɔɹɾ əɹ baʊ. ən ðiz mɛn wɝ noʊ fɑɹmɝz, bʌt soʊlʒɝz ɔlmoʊs fɹəm bɝθ.

The other five men sat their saddles, short horsebows at the ready, eyes searching the sky above as well as the thinly treed slopes below. They seemed unperturbed by the wind flaring their cloaks out like banners. A two-handed sword hilt stuck up above each man's shoulder through a slit in his cloak. The sight of their bare heads, shaven except for topknots, made Perrin feel colder. For them, this weather was already well into spring. All softness had been hammered out of them at a harder forge than he had ever known. They were Shienarans, from the Borderlands up along the Great Blight, where Trolloc raids could come in any night, and even a merchant or a farmer might well have to take up sword or bow. And these men were no farmers, but soldiers almost from birth.

hi səmtaɪmz wʌndɝɾ ət ðə weɪ ðeɪ dɪfɝd tə hɪm ən fɑloʊɾ ɪz lɛd. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ðeɪ θɔɾ i hæd səm spɛʃəl ɹaɪt, səm nɑlədʒ hɪɾən fɹəm ðɛm. əɹ meɪbi ɪts dʒʌs maɪ fɹɛnz, hi θɔt ɹaɪli. ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ əz tɔl əz hi, nɔɹ əz bɪɡ - jɪɹz əz ə blæksmɪθs əpɹɛntəs hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ɑɹmz ən ʃoʊldɝz tə meɪk tu ʌv moʊs mɛnz - bʌɾ i hæd bɪɡʌn ʃeɪvɪŋ ɛvɹi deɪ tə stɑp ðɛɹ dʒoʊks əbaʊɾ ɪz juθ. fɹɛnli dʒoʊks, bʌt stɪl dʒoʊks. hi wəd nɑɾ əv əm stɑɹɾ əɡɛn kəz i spoʊk ʌv ə filɪŋ.

He sometimes wondered at the way they deferred to him and followed his lead. It was as if they thought he had some special right, some knowledge hidden from them. Or maybe it's just my friends, he thought wryly. They were not as tall as he, nor as big - years as a blacksmith's apprentice had given him arms and shoulders to make two of most men's - but he had begun shaving every day to stop their jokes about his youth. Friendly jokes, but still jokes. He would not have them start again because he spoke of a feeling.

wɪð ə stɑɹt, pɛɹɪn ɹimaɪndəd hɪmsɛlf ðəɾ i wɑz səpoʊz tə bi kipɪŋ wɑtʃ, tu. tʃɛkɪŋ ði æɹoʊ nɑk tə hɪz lɔŋboʊ, hi pɪɹd daʊn ðə væli ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf tə ðə wɛst, waɪɾənɪŋ əz ɪt fɛl əweɪ, ðə ɡɹaʊn stʃɹikt wɪð bɹɔd, twɪstəd ɹɪbənz ə snoʊ, ɹɛmnəns ʌv wɪntɝ. moʊst ə ðə skæɾɝd tʃɹiz daʊn ðəɹ stɪl klɔd ðə skaɪ wɪð stɑɹk wɪntɝ bɹæntʃəz, bʌɾ ɪnʌf ɛvɝɡɹinz - paɪn ən lɛðɝlif, fɝ ən maʊntən hɑli, ivən ə fju taʊɝɪŋ ɡɹinwʊdz - stʊɾ ɑn ðə sloʊps ən ðə væli flɔɹ tə ɡɪv kʌvɝ fəɹ ɛniwʌn u nu haʊ tə juz ɪt. bʌt noʊ wʌn wəd bi ðəɹ wɪθaʊɾ ə spɛʃəl pɝpəs. ðə maɪnz wɝ ɔl fɑɹ tə ðə saʊθ əɹ ivən fɝðɝ nɔɹθ; moʊs pipəl θɔt ðəɹ wɑz ɪl lʌk ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst, ən fju ɛntɝɾ əm u kəɾ əvɔɪɾ ɪt. pɛɹɪnz aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd laɪk bɝnɪʃt ɡoʊld.

With a start, Perrin reminded himself that he was supposed to be keeping watch, too. Checking the arrow nocked to his longbow, he peered down the valley running off to the west, widening as it fell away, the ground streaked with broad, twisted ribbons of snow, remnants of winter. Most of the scattered trees down there still clawed the sky with stark winter branches, but enough evergreens - pine and leatherleaf, fir and mountain holly, even a few towering greenwoods - stood on the slopes and the valley floor to give cover for anyone who knew how to use it. But no one would be there without a special purpose. The mines were all far to the south or even further north; most people thought there was ill luck in the Mountains of Mist, and few entered them who could avoid it. Perrin's eyes glittered like burnished gold.

ðə tɪklɪŋ bɪkeɪm ən ɪtʃ. noʊ!

The tickling became an itch. No!

hi kəd pʊʃ ði ɪtʃ əsaɪd, bʌt ði ɛkspɛkteɪʃən wəd nɑt ɡoʊ. əz ɪf i tiɾɝd ɑn ə bɹɪŋk. əz ɪf ɛvɹiθɪŋ tiɾɝd. hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ sʌmθɪŋ ənplɛzən leɪ ɪn ðə maʊntənz ɝaʊn ðɛm. ðəɹ wɑz ə weɪ tə noʊ, pɝhæps. ɪn pleɪsəz laɪk ðɪs, wɛɹ mɛn sɛldəm keɪm, ðəɹ wɝ ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz wʊlvz. hi kɹʌʃt ðə θɔt bɪfɔɹ ɪt hæɾ ə tʃæns tə fɝm. bɛɾɝ tə wʌndɝ. bɛɾɝ ðən ðæt. ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz wɝ nɑt mɛni, bʌt ðeɪ hæd skaʊts. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛniθɪŋ aʊt ðɛɹ, ði aʊtʃɹaɪɾɝz wəd faɪn ɪt. ðɪs ɪz maɪ fɔɹdʒ; əl tɛn ɪt, ən lɛɾ əm tɛn ðɛɹz.

He could push the itch aside, but the expectation would not go. As if he teetered on a brink. As if everything teetered. He wondered whether something unpleasant lay in the mountains around them. There was a way to know, perhaps. In places like this, where men seldom came, there were almost always wolves. He crushed the thought before it had a chance to firm. Better to wonder. Better than that. Their numbers were not many, but they had scouts. If there was anything out there, the outriders would find it. This is my forge; I'll tend it, and let them tend theirs.

hi kəd si fɝðɝ ðən ði ʌðɝz, soʊ hi wɑz fɝs tə spɑt ðə ɹaɪɾɝ kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə dɝɛkʃən ə tæɹɑbən. ivən tə hɪm ðə ɹaɪɾɝ wɑz oʊnli ə spɑɾ ə bɹaɪt kʌlɝz ɑn hɔɹsbæk waɪndɪŋ ɪts weɪ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz ɪn ðə dɪstəns, naʊ sin, naʊ hɪɾən. ə paɪbɔl hɔɹs, hi θɔt. ən nɑt bɪfɔɹ taɪm! hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə ənaʊns əɹ - ɪt wəd bi ə wʊmən; itʃ ɹaɪɾɝ bɪfɔɹ hæd bɪn - wən mæsimə sʌɾənli mʌɾɝd, "ɹeɪvən!" laɪk ə kɝs.

He could see further than the others, so he was first to spot the rider coming from the direction of Tarabon. Even to him the rider was only a spot of bright colors on horseback winding its way through the trees in the distance, now seen, now hidden. A piebald horse, he thought. And not before time! He opened his mouth to announce her - it would be a woman; each rider before had been - when Masema suddenly muttered, "Raven!" like a curse.

pɛɹɪn dʒɝkt ɪz hɛɾ ʌp. ə bɪɡ blæk bɝd wɑz kɔɹɾɝɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə tʃɹitɑps noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əweɪ. ɪts kwɔɹi maɪɾ əv bɪn kɛɹiən dɛɾ ɪn ðə snoʊ əɹ səm smɔl ænəməl, jɛt pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt teɪk ðə tʃæns. ɪt dɪd nɑt sim tə hæv sin ðɛm, bʌt ði ɔnkʌmɪŋ ɹaɪɾɝ wəd sun bi ɪn ɪts saɪt. ivən əz i spɑɾəd ðə ɹeɪvən, hɪz baʊ keɪm ʌp, ən i dʒɹu - flɛtʃɪŋz tə tʃik, tə ɪɹ - ən lust, ɔl ɪn wʌn smuð moʊʃən. hi wɑz dɪmli əwɛɹ ə ðə slæp ə bɑstʃɹɪŋz bɪsaɪd hɪm, bʌɾ ɪz ətɛnʃən wɑz ɔl ɑn ðə blæk bɝd.

Perrin jerked his head up. A big black bird was quartering over the treetops no more than a hundred paces away. Its quarry might have been carrion dead in the snow or some small animal, yet Perrin could not take the chance. It did not seem to have seen them, but the oncoming rider would soon be in its sight. Even as he spotted the raven, his bow came up, and he drew - fletchings to cheek, to ear - and loosed, all in one smooth motion. He was dimly aware of the slap of bowstrings beside him, but his attention was all on the black bird.

ʌv ə sʌɾən ɪt kɑɹtwild ɪn ə ʃaʊɝ ə mɪdnaɪt fɛðɝz əz ɪz æɹoʊ faʊn ɪt, ən tʌmbəl fɹəm ðə skaɪ əz tu mɔɹ æɹoʊz stʃɹik θɹu ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ɪt hæd bɪn. baʊz hæf-dʒɹɔn, ði ʌðɝ ʃaɪnɝənz sɝtʃt ðə skaɪ tə si ɪf ɪt hæɾ ə kəmpænjən.

Of a sudden it cartwheeled in a shower of midnight feathers as his arrow found it, and tumbled from the sky as two more arrows streaked through the place where it had been. Bows half-drawn, the other Shienarans searched the sky to see if it had a companion.

"dʌz ɪɾ əv tə ɹipɔɹt," pɛɹɪn æsk sɔfli, "ɔɹ dʌz . . . hi . . . si wʌɾ ɪt siz?" hi hæd nɑt mɛn ɛniwʌn tə hɪɹ, bʌt ɹeɪɡən, ðə jʌŋɡəst ə ðə ʃaɪnɝənz, lɛs ðən tɛn jɪɹz ɪz ɛldɝ, ænsɝɾ əz i fɪɾəd ənʌðɝ æɹoʊ tə hɪz ʃɔɹt baʊ.

"Does it have to report," Perrin asked softly, "or does . . . he . . . see what it sees?" He had not meant anyone to hear, but Ragan, the youngest of the Shienarans, less than ten years his elder, answered as he fitted another arrow to his short bow.

"ɪɾ əz tə ɹipɔɹt. tə ə hæfmən, juʒəwəli." ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz ðəɹ wɑz ə baʊnti ɑn ɹeɪvənz; noʊ wʌn ðəɹ ɛvɝ dɛɹɾ əsum ɛni ɹeɪvən wɑz dʒʌst ə bɝd. "laɪt, ɪf hɑɹtsbeɪn sɔ wʌt ðə ɹeɪvənz sɔ, wi wəɾ ɔl əv bɪn dɛd bɪfɔɹ wi ɹitʃt ðə maʊntənz." ɹeɪɡənz vɔɪs wɑz izi; ɪt wɑz ə mæɾɝ ʌv ɛvɹi deɪ tə ə ʃaɪnɝən soʊlʒɝ.

"It has to report. To a Halfman, usually." In the Borderlands there was a bounty on ravens; no one there ever dared assume any raven was just a bird. "Light, if Heartsbane saw what the ravens saw, we would all have been dead before we reached the mountains." Ragan's voice was easy; it was a matter of every day to a Shienaran soldier.

pɛɹɪn ʃɪvɝd, nɑt fɹəm ðə koʊld, ən ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd sʌmθɪŋ snɑɹəld ə tʃælənʒ tə ðə dɛθ. hɑɹtsbeɪn. dɪfɹənt neɪmz ɪn dɪfɹən lænz - soʊlsbeɪn ən hɑɹtfæŋ, lɔɹɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪv ən lɔɹɾ ə ðə twaɪlaɪt - ən ɛvɹiwɛɹ fɑðɝ ə laɪz ən ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ɔl tə əvɔɪd ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm ɪz tʃɹu neɪm ən dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪz ətɛnʃən. ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɔfən juzd ɹeɪvənz ən kɹoʊz, ɹæts ɪn ðə sɪɾiz. pɛɹɪn dʒɹu ənʌðɝ bɹɔdhɛɾ æɹoʊ fɹəm ðə kwɪvɝ ɑn ɪz hɪp ðət bæləns ði æks ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd.

Perrin shivered, not from the cold, and in the back of his head something snarled a challenge to the death. Heartsbane. Different names in different lands - Soulsbane and Heartfang, Lord of the Grave and Lord of the Twilight - and everywhere Father of Lies and the Dark One, all to avoid giving him his true name and drawing his attention. The Dark One often used ravens and crows, rats in the cities. Perrin drew another broadhead arrow from the quiver on his hip that balanced the axe on the other side.

"ðæt meɪ bi əz bɪɡ əz ə klʌb," ɹeɪɡən sɛɾ ædmaɪɹɪŋli, wɪð ə ɡlæns ət pɛɹɪnz baʊ, "bʌɾ ɪt kən ʃut. aɪ wəd heɪt tə si wʌɾ ɪt kəd də tə ə mæn ɪn ɑɹmɝ." ðə ʃaɪnɝənz wɔɹ oʊnli laɪt meɪl, naʊ, ʌndɝ ðɛɹ pleɪn koʊts, bʌt juʒəwəli ðeɪ fɔɾ ɪn ɑɹmɝ, mæn ən hɔɹs əlaɪk.

"That may be as big as a club," Ragan said admiringly, with a glance at Perrin's bow, "but it can shoot. I would hate to see what it could do to a man in armor." The Shienarans wore only light mail, now, under their plain coats, but usually they fought in armor, man and horse alike.

"tu lɔŋ fəɹ hɔɹsbæk," mæsimə snɪɹd. ðə tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ skɑɹ ɑn ɪz dɑɹk tʃik twɪstəɾ ɪz kəntɛmptʃuəs ɡɹɪn ivən mɔɹ. "ə ɡʊd bɹɛstpleɪt wɪl stɑp ivən ə paɪl æɹoʊ ɪksɛpt ət kloʊs ɹeɪnʒ, ən ɪf jəɹ fɝst ʃɑt feɪlz, ðə mæn jəɹ ʃuɾɪŋ ət wɪl kɑɹv jəɹ ɡʌts aʊt."

"Too long for horseback," Masema sneered. The triangular scar on his dark cheek twisted his contemptuous grin even more. "A good breastplate will stop even a pile arrow except at close range, and if your first shot fails, the man you're shooting at will carve your guts out."

"ðæɾ ɪz dʒʌst ɪt, mæsimə." ɹeɪɡən ɹɪlækst ə bɪɾ əz ðə skaɪ ɹɪmeɪn ɛmpti. ðə ɹeɪvən mʌst əv bɪn əloʊn. "wɪð ðɪs tu ɹɪvɝz baʊ, əl weɪdʒɝ jə doʊn əv tə bi soʊ kloʊs." mæsimə oʊpən ɪz maʊθ.

"That is just it, Masema." Ragan relaxed a bit as the sky remained empty. The raven must have been alone. "With this Two Rivers bow, I'll wager you don't have to be so close." Masema opened his mouth.

"ju tu stɑp flæpɪŋ jəɹ blʌɾi tʌŋz!" ənoʊ snæpt. wɪð ə lɔŋ skɑɹ daʊn ðə lɛf saɪɾ ə hɪz feɪs ən ðəɾ aɪ ɡɔn, hɪz fitʃɝz wɝ hɑɹd, ivən fəɹ ə ʃaɪnɝən. hi hæɾ əkwaɪɝɾ ə peɪntəɾ aɪpætʃ ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ ɪndə ðə maʊntənz dʊɹɪŋ ði ɔɾəm; ə pɝmənənli fɹaʊnɪŋ aɪ ɪn ə faɪɝi ɹɛd dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə meɪk ɪz stɛɹ iziɝ tə feɪs. "ɪf jə kæn kip jəɹ blʌɾi maɪnz ɑn ðə blʌɾi tæsk ət hænd, əl si ɪf ɛkstʃɹə fleɪmɪŋ ɡɑɹd duɾi tənaɪt wɪl blʌɾi sɛɾəl ju." ɹeɪɡən ən mæsimə səbsaɪɾɪd ʌndɝ ɪz stɛɹ. hi ɡeɪv əm ə læst skaʊl ðət feɪɾəd əz i tɝn tə pɛɹɪn. "du jə si ɛniθɪŋ jɛt?" hɪz toʊn wɑz ə lɪɾəl ɡɹʌfɝ ðən i maɪɾ əv juzd wɪð ə kəmændɝ pʊɾ oʊvɝ ɪm baɪ ðə kɪŋ ə ʃaɪnɝ, əɹ ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ɪɾ ə ɹɛɾinəs tə də wʌtɛvɝ pɛɹɪn sədʒɛstəd.

"You two stop flapping your bloody tongues!" Uno snapped. With a long scar down the left side of his face and that eye gone, his features were hard, even for a Shienaran. He had acquired a painted eyepatch on their way into the mountains during the autumn; a permanently frowning eye in a fiery red did nothing to make his stare easier to face. "If you can't keep your bloody minds on the bloody task at hand, I'll see if extra flaming guard duty tonight will bloody settle you." Ragan and Masema subsided under his stare. He gave them a last scowl that faded as he turned to Perrin. "Do you see anything yet?" His tone was a little gruffer than he might have used with a commander put over him by the King of Shienar, or the Lord of Fal Dara, yet there was something in it of readiness to do whatever Perrin suggested.

ðə ʃaɪnɝənz nu haʊ fɑɹ i kəd si, bʌt ðeɪ sim tə teɪk ɪɾ əz ə mæɾɝ ə kɔɹs, ðəɾ ən ðə kʌlɝ ə hɪz aɪz, əz wɛl. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, nɑt baɪ hæf, bʌt ðeɪ æksɛptɪɾ ɪm əz i wɑz. əz ðeɪ θɔɾ i wɑz. ðeɪ sim tə æksɛpt ɛvɹiθɪŋ ən ɛniθɪŋ. ðə wɝld wɑz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ, ðeɪ sɛd. ɛvɹiθɪŋ spʌn ɑn ðə wilz ə tʃæns ən tʃeɪnʒ. ɪf ə mæn hæɾ aɪz ə kʌlɝ noʊ mænz aɪz hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn, wʌɾ ɪt mæɾɝ, naʊ?

The Shienarans knew how far he could see, but they seemed to take it as a matter of course, that and the color of his eyes, as well. They did not know everything, not by half, but they accepted him as he was. As they thought he was. They seemed to accept everything and anything. The world was changing, they said. Everything spun on the wheels of chance and change. If a man had eyes a color no man's eyes had ever been, what did it matter, now?

"ʃiz kʌmɪŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ju ʃəd dʒʌst si hɝ naʊ. ðɛɹ." hi pɔɪntəd, ən ənoʊ stʃɹeɪn fɔɹwɝd, hɪz wʌn ɹil aɪ skwɪntɪŋ, ðən faɪnəli nɑɾəd daʊtfəli.

"She's coming," Perrin said. "You should just see her now. There." He pointed, and Uno strained forward, his one real eye squinting, then finally nodded doubtfully.

"ðɛɹz blʌɾi sʌmθɪŋ muvɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ." səm ə ði ʌðɝz nɑɾəd ən mɝmɝd, tu. ənoʊ ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðɛm, ən ðeɪ wɛn bæk tə stʌɾiɪŋ ðə skaɪ ən ðə maʊntənz.

"There's bloody something moving down there." Some of the others nodded and murmured, too. Uno glared at them, and they went back to studying the sky and the mountains.

sʌɾənli pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd wʌt ðə bɹaɪt kʌlɝz ɑn ðə dɪstən ɹaɪɾɝ mɛnt. ə vɪvəd ɡɹin skɝt pikɪŋ aʊt bɪniθ ə bɹaɪt ɹɛd kloʊk. "ʃiz wʌn ə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl," hi sɛd, stɑɹɾəld. noʊ wʌn ɛls i hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝɾ ə dʒɹɛst ɪn sətʃ bɹɪljən kʌlɝz ən ɑd kɑmbəneɪʃənz, nɑt baɪ tʃɔɪs.

Suddenly Perrin realized what the bright colors on the distant rider meant. A vivid green skirt peeking out beneath a bright red cloak. "She's one of the Traveling People," he said, startled. No one else he had ever heard of dressed in such brilliant colors and odd combinations, not by choice.

ðə wɪmən ðeɪ hæd səmtaɪmz mɛɾ ən ɡaɪɾəd ivən dipɝ ɪndə ðə maʊntənz ɪnkluɾəd ɛvɹi sɔɹt: ə bɛɡɝ wʊmən ɪn ɹæɡz stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ əfʊt θɹu ə snoʊstɔɹm; ə mɝtʃən baɪ hɝsɛlf liɾɪŋ ə stʃɹɪŋ ə leɪɾən pækhɔɹsɪz; ə leɪɾi ɪn sɪlks ən faɪn fɝz, wɪð ɹɛd-tæsɛld ɹeɪnz ɑn əɹ pælfɹi ən ɡoʊld wɝkt ɑn əɹ sæɾəl. ðə bɛɡɝ dɪpɑɹɾəd wɪð ə pɝs ə sɪlvɝ - mɔɹ ðən pɛɹɪn θɔt ðeɪ kəɾ əfɔɹd tə ɡɪv, əntɪl ðə leɪɾi lɛft ən ivən fæɾɝ pɝs ʌv ɡoʊld. wɪmən fɹəm ɛvɹi steɪʃən ɪn laɪf, ɔl əloʊn, fɹəm tæɹɑbən, ən ɡildən, ən ivən ɑmɑdɪʃiə. bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə si wʌn ə ðə tuætɑn.

The women they had sometimes met and guided even deeper into the mountains included every sort: a beggar woman in rags struggling afoot through a snowstorm; a merchant by herself leading a string of laden packhorses; a lady in silks and fine furs, with red-tasseled reins on her palfrey and gold worked on her saddle. The beggar departed with a purse of silver - more than Perrin thought they could afford to give, until the lady left an even fatter purse of gold. Women from every station in life, all alone, from Tarabon, and Ghealdan, and even Amadicia. But he had never expected to see one of the Tuatha'an.

"ə blʌɾi tɪŋkɝ?" ənoʊ ɪkskleɪmd. ði ʌðɝz ɛkoʊɾ ɪz sɝpɹaɪz.

"A bloody Tinker?" Uno exclaimed. The others echoed his surprise.

ɹeɪɡənz tɑpnɑt weɪvd əz i ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "eɪ tɪŋkɝ wʊdn bi mɪkst ɪn ðɪs. iðɝ ʃiz nɑɾ ə tɪŋkɝ, əɹ ʃiz nɑt ðə wʌn wəɹ səpoʊz tə mit."

Ragan's topknot waved as he shook his head. "A Tinker wouldn't be mixed in this. Either she's not a Tinker, or she is not the one we are supposed to meet."

"tɪŋkɝz," mæsimə ɡɹaʊld. "jusləs kaʊɝdz."

"Tinkers," Masema growled. "Useless cowards."

ənoʊz aɪ nɛɹoʊɾ əntɪl ɪt lʊk laɪk ðə pɹɪtʃəl hoʊl ʌv ən ænvəl; wɪð ðə ɹɛd peɪntəɾ aɪ ɑn ɪz pætʃ, ɪt ɡeɪv ɪm ə vɪlənəs lʊk. "kaʊɝdz, mæsimə?" hi sɛd sɔfli. "ɪf jə wɝ ə wʊmən, wəd juv ðə fleɪmɪŋ nɝv tə ɹaɪɾ ʌp hɪɹ, əloʊn ən blʌɾi ənɑɹmd?" ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊt ʃi wəd bi ənɑɹmd ɪf ʃi wɑz ə ðə tuætɑn. mæsimə kɛpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt, bʌt ðə skɑɹ ɑn ɪz tʃik stʊɾ aʊt taɪɾ ən peɪl.

Uno's eye narrowed until it looked like the pritchel hole of an anvil; with the red painted eye on his patch, it gave him a villainous look. "Cowards, Masema?" he said softly. "If you were a woman, would you have the flaming nerve to ride up here, alone and bloody unarmed?" There was no doubt she would be unarmed if she was of the Tuatha'an. Masema kept his mouth shut, but the scar on his cheek stood out tight and pale.

"bɝn mi, ɪf aɪ wʊd," ɹeɪɡən sɛd. "æn bɝn mi ɪf jə wəɾ iðɝ, mæsimə." mæsimə hɪtʃt əɾ ɪz kloʊk ən ɑstənteɪʃəsli sɝtʃt ðə skaɪ.

"Burn me, if I would," Ragan said. "And burn me if you would either, Masema." Masema hitched at his cloak and ostentatiously searched the sky.

ənoʊ snɔɹɾɪd. "ðə laɪt sɛn ðət fleɪmɪŋ kɛɹiən iɾɝ wɑz fleɪmɪŋ əloʊn," hi mʌɾɝd.

Uno snorted. "The Light send that flaming carrion eater was flaming alone," he muttered.

sloʊli ðə ʃæɡi bɹaʊn-ænd-waɪt mɛɹ miændɝd kloʊsɝ, pɪkɪŋ ə weɪ əlɔŋ ðə klɪɹ ɡɹaʊn bɪtwin bɹɔd snoʊbæŋks. wʌns ðə bɹaɪtli klæd wʊmən stɑp tə pɪɹ ət sʌmθɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ðən tʌɡd ðə kaʊl ə hɝ kloʊk fɝðɝ oʊvɝ əɹ hɛɾ ən hild əɹ maʊn fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ə sloʊ wɔk. ðə ɹeɪvən, pɛɹɪn θɔt. stɑp lʊkɪŋ ət ðət bɝɾ ən kʌm ɑn, wʊmən. meɪbi juv bɹɔt ðə wɝd ðət faɪnəli teɪks əs aʊɾ ə hɪɹ. ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn minz tə lɛɾ əs liv bɪfɔɹ spɹɪŋ. bɝn hɝ! fəɹ ə moʊmən i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ i mɛn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, əɹ ðə tɪŋkɝ wʊmən u sim tə bi teɪkɪŋ əɹ oʊn taɪm.

Slowly the shaggy brown-and-white mare meandered closer, picking a way along the clear ground between broad snowbanks. Once the brightly clad woman stopped to peer at something on the ground, then tugged the cowl of her cloak further over her head and heeled her mount forward in a slow walk. The raven, Perrin thought. Stop looking at that bird and come on, woman. Maybe you've brought the word that finally takes us out of here. If Moiraine means to let us leave before spring. Burn her! For a moment he was not sure whether he meant the Aes Sedai, or the Tinker woman who seemed to be taking her own time.

ɪf ʃi kɛpt ɑn əz ʃi wɑz, ðə wʊmən wəd pæs ə ɡʊd θɝɾi peɪsɪz tə wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə θɪkɪt. wɪð əɹ aɪz fɪkst ɑn wɛɹ əɹ paɪbɔl stɛpt, ʃi ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ðət ʃi hæd sin əm əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz.

If she kept on as she was, the woman would pass a good thirty paces to one side of the thicket. With her eyes fixed on where her piebald stepped, she gave no sign that she had seen them among the trees.

pɛɹɪn nʌdʒ ðə stæljənz flæŋks wɪð ɪz hilz, ən ðə dʌn lɛpt əhɛd, sɛndɪŋ ʌp spɹeɪz ə snoʊ wɪð ɪz hʊvz. bɪhaɪn hɪm, ənoʊ kwaɪətli ɡeɪv ðə kəmænd, "fɔɹwɝd!"

Perrin nudged the stallion's flanks with his heels, and the dun leaped ahead, sending up sprays of snow with his hooves. Behind him, Uno quietly gave the command, "Forward!"

stɛpɝ wɑz hæfweɪ tə hɝ bɪfɔɹ ʃi sim tə bɪkʌm əwɛɹ ə ðɛm, ən ðən ʃi dʒɝkt əɹ mɛɹ tə ə hɔlt wɪð ə stɑɹt. ʃi wɑtʃt əz ðeɪ fɔɹmd ən ɑɹk sɛntɝɾ ɑn hɝ. ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ʌv aɪ-ɹɛntʃɪŋ blu, ɪn ðə pæɾɝn kɔld ə tɛɹən meɪz, meɪɾ əɹ ɹɛd kloʊk ivən mɔɹ ɡɛɹɪʃ. ʃi wɑz nɑt jʌŋ - ɡɹeɪ ʃoʊd θɪk ɪn əɹ hɛɹ wɛɹ ɪt wɑz nɑt hɪɾən baɪ hɝ kaʊl - bʌɾ əɹ feɪs hæd fju laɪnz, ʌðɝ ðən ðə dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ fɹaʊn ʃi ɹæn oʊvɝ ðɛɹ wɛpənz. ɪf ʃi wɑz əlɑɹmd ət miɾɪŋ ɑɹmd mɛn ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə maʊntən wɪldɝnəs, ðoʊ, ʃi ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn. hɝ hænz ɹɛstəɾ izəli ɑn ðə haɪ pɑməl ə hɝ wɔɹn bʌt wɛl-kɛp sæɾəl. ən ʃi dɪd nɑt smɛl əfɹeɪd.

Stepper was halfway to her before she seemed to become aware of them, and then she jerked her mare to a halt with a start. She watched as they formed an arc centered on her. Embroidery of eye-wrenching blue, in the pattern called a Tairen maze, made her red cloak even more garish. She was not young - gray showed thick in her hair where it was not hidden by her cowl - but her face had few lines, other than the disapproving frown she ran over their weapons. If she was alarmed at meeting armed men in the heart of mountain wilderness, though, she gave no sign. Her hands rested easily on the high pommel of her worn but well-kept saddle. And she did not smell afraid.

stɑp ðæt! pɛɹɪn toʊl hɪmsɛlf. hi meɪɾ ɪz vɔɪs sɑf soʊ əz nɑt tə fɹaɪɾən hɝ. "maɪ neɪm ɪz pɛɹɪn, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs. ɪf jə nid hɛlp, əl də wʌɾ aɪ kæn. ɪf nɑt, ɡoʊ wɪð ðə laɪt. bʌɾ ənlɛs ðə tuætɑn əv tʃeɪnʒd ðɛɹ weɪz, jə ɑɹ fɑɹ fɹəm jəɹ wæɡənz."

Stop that! Perrin told himself. He made his voice soft so as not to frighten her. "My name is Perrin, good mistress. If you need help, I will do what I can. If not, go with the Light. But unless the Tuatha'an have changed their ways, you are far from your wagons."

ʃi stʌɾid əm ə moʊmən mɔɹ bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz ə dʒɛntəlnəs ɪn əɹ dɑɹk aɪz, nɑt sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn wʌn ə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl. "aɪ sik ən . . . ə wʊmən."

She studied them a moment more before speaking. There was a gentleness in her dark eyes, not surprising in one of the Traveling People. "I seek an . . . a woman."

ðə skɪp wɑz smɔl, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ. ʃi sɔt nɑɾ ɛni wʊmən, bʌɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. "dʌz ʃi hæv ə neɪm, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs?" pɛɹɪn æskt. hi hæd dʌn ðɪs tu mɛni taɪmz ɪn ðə læs fju mʌnθs tə niɾ əɹ ɹɪplaɪ, bʌɾ aɪɝn wɑz spɔɪl fəɹ wɑn ə kɛɹ.

The skip was small, but it was there. She sought not any woman, but an Aes Sedai. "Does she have a name, good mistress?" Perrin asked. He had done this too many times in the last few months to need her reply, but iron was spoiled for want of care.

"ʃi ɪz kɔld. . . . səmtaɪmz, ʃiz kɔl mɔɪɹeɪn. maɪ neɪm ɪz leɪə."

"She is called. . . . Sometimes, she is called Moiraine. My name is Leya."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. "wi wɪl teɪk jə tə hɝ, mɪstʃɹəs leɪə. wɪv wɔɹm faɪɝz, ən wɪð lʌk sʌmθɪŋ hɑt tə it." bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt lɪft ɪz ɹeɪnz ɪmiɾiətli. "haʊ dɪd jə faɪn ʌs?" hi hæɾ æsk bɪfɔɹ, itʃ taɪm mɔɪɹeɪn sɛn ɪm aʊt tə weɪɾ əɾ ə spɑt ʃi neɪmd, fəɹ ə wʊmən ʃi nu wəd kʌm. ði ænsɝ wəd bi ðə seɪm əz ɪɾ ɔlweɪz wɑz, bʌɾ i hæd tə æsk.

Perrin nodded. "We will take you to her, Mistress Leya. We have warm fires, and with luck something hot to eat." But he did not lift his reins immediately. "How did you find us?" He had asked before, each time Moiraine sent him out to wait at a spot she named, for a woman she knew would come. The answer would be the same as it always was, but he had to ask.

leɪə ʃɹʌɡd ən ænsɝd hɛzɪɾəntli. "aɪ . . . nu ðəɾ ɪf aɪ keɪm ðɪs weɪ, sʌmwʌn wəd faɪn mi ən teɪk mi tə hɝ. aɪ . . . dʒʌst . . . nu. aɪ hæv nuz fəɹ hɝ."

Leya shrugged and answered hesitantly. "I . . . knew that if I came this way, someone would find me and take me to her. I . . . just . . . knew. I have news for her."

pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑɾ æsk wʌt nuz. ðə wɪmən ɡeɪv ði ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ðeɪ bɹɔɾ oʊnli tə mɔɪɹeɪn.

Perrin did not ask what news. The women gave the information they brought only to Moiraine.

ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tɛlz əs wʌt ʃi tʃuzəz. hi θɔt. ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛvɝ laɪd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz sɛd ðət ðə tʃɹuθ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ toʊl jə wɑz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz ðə tʃɹuθ jə θɔɾ ɪt wɑz. tu leɪt fəɹ kwɑmz, naʊ. ɪzən ɪt?

And the Aes Sedai tells us what she chooses. He thought. Aes Sedai never lied, but it was said that the truth an Aes Sedai told you was not always the truth you thought it was. Too late for qualms, now. Isn't it?

"ðɪs weɪ, mɪstʃɹəs leɪə," hi sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ ʌp ðə maʊntən. ðə ʃaɪnɝənz, wɪð ənoʊ ət ðɛɹ hɛd, fɛl ɪn bɪhaɪn pɛɹɪn ən leɪə əz ðeɪ bɪɡæn tə klaɪm. ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz stɪl stʌɾid ðə skaɪ əz mʌtʃ əz ðə lænd, ən ðə læs tu kɛpt ə spɛʃəl wɑtʃ ɑn ðɛɹ bæktʃɹeɪl.

"This way, Mistress Leya," he said, gesturing up the mountain. The Shienarans, with Uno at their head, fell in behind Perrin and Leya as they began to climb. The Borderlanders still studied the sky as much as the land, and the last two kept a special watch on their backtrail.

fəɹ ə taɪm ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɪn saɪləns ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə saʊnz ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz meɪd, səmtaɪmz kɹʌntʃɪŋ θɹu oʊl snoʊkɹʌst, səmtaɪmz sɛndɪŋ ɹɑks klæɾɝɪŋ əz ðeɪ kɹɔs bɛɹ stʃɹɛtʃəz. naʊ ən əɡɛn leɪə kæst ɡlænsɪz ət pɛɹɪn, əɾ ɪz baʊ, hɪz æks, hɪz feɪs, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt spik. hi ʃɪftəɾ ənkʌmftəbli ʌndɝ ðə skɹuɾəni, ən əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ. hi ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɪv stʃɹeɪnʒɝz əz lɪɾəl tʃæns tə noʊɾəs ɪz aɪz əz i kəd mænədʒ.

For a time they rode in silence except for the sounds the horses' hooves made, sometimes crunching through old snowcrust, sometimes sending rocks clattering as they crossed bare stretches. Now and again Leya cast glances at Perrin, at his bow, his axe, his face, but she did not speak. He shifted uncomfortably under the scrutiny, and avoided looking at her. He always tried to give strangers as little chance to notice his eyes as he could manage.

faɪnəli hi sɛd, "aɪ wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si wʌn ə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl, bɪlivɪŋ əz jə du."

Finally he said, "I was surprised to see one of the Traveling People, believing as you do."

"ɪɾ ɪz pɑsəbəl tə əpoʊz ivəl wɪθaʊt duɪŋ vaɪələns." hɝ vɔɪs hɛl ðə sɪmplɪsəɾi ʌv sʌmwʌn steɪɾɪŋ ən ɑbviəs tʃɹuθ.

"It is possible to oppose evil without doing violence." Her voice held the simplicity of someone stating an obvious truth.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪd saʊɝli, ðən ɪmiɾiətli mʌɾɝd ən əpɑlədʒi. "wʊɾ ɪt wɝ əz jə seɪ, mɪstʃɹəs leɪə."

Perrin grunted sourly, then immediately muttered an apology. "Would it were as you say, Mistress Leya."

"vaɪələns hɑɹmz ðə duɹ əz mʌtʃ əz ðə vɪktəm," leɪə sɛd plɑtʃədli. "ðæɾ ɪz waɪ wi fli ðoʊz u hɑɹm ʌs, tə seɪv əm fɹəm hɑɹm tə ðɛmsɛlvz əz mʌtʃ fəɹ əɹ oʊn seɪfti. ɪf wi də vaɪələns tə əpoʊz ivəl, sun wi wəd bi noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm wʌt wi stʃɹʌɡəl əɡɛnst. ɪts wɪð ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ʌv əɹ bɪlif ðət wi faɪt ðə ʃædoʊ."

"Violence harms the doer as much as the victim," Leya said placidly. "That is why we flee those who harm us, to save them from harm to themselves as much for our own safety. If we do violence to oppose evil, soon we would be no different from what we struggle against. It is with the strength of our belief that we fight the Shadow."

pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt hɛlp snɔɹɾɪŋ. "mɪstʃɹəs, aɪ hoʊp jə nɛvɝ əv tə feɪs tʃɹɑləks wɪð ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə jəɹ bɪlif. ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə ðɛɹ sɔɹdz wɪl kʌt jə daʊn wɛɹ jə stænd."

Perrin could not help snorting. "Mistress, I hope you never have to face Trollocs with the strength of your belief. The strength of their swords will cut you down where you stand."

"ɪɾ ɪz bɛɾɝ tə daɪ ðən tə - " ʃi bɪɡæn, bʌɾ æŋɡɝ meɪɾ ɪm spik ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝ hɝ. æŋɡɝ ðət ʃi dʒʌst wəd nɑt si. æŋɡɝ ðət ʃi ɹɪli wəd daɪ ɹæðɝ ðən hɑɹm ɛniwʌn, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ivəl.

"It is better to die than to - " she began, but anger made him speak right over her. Anger that she just would not see. Anger that she really would die rather than harm anyone, no matter how evil.

"ɪf jə ɹʌn, ðəl hʌn ju, ən kɪl ju, ən it jəɹ kɔɹps. əɹ ðeɪ maɪt nɑt weɪt tɪl ɪts ə kɔɹps. iðɝ weɪ, jə ɑɹ dɛd, ən ɪts ivəl ðəɾ əz wʌn. ən ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛn dʒʌst əz kɹuəl. dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən ʌðɝz. mɔɹ ʌðɝz ðən aɪ wʊɾə bɪlivd ivən ə jɪɹ əɡoʊ. lɛt ðə waɪt-kloʊks dɪsaɪd jə tɪŋkɝz doʊnt wɔk ɪn ðə laɪɾ ən si haʊ mɛni ʌv jə ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə jəɹ bɪlif kən kip əlaɪv."

"If you run, they will hunt you, and kill you, and eat your corpse. Or they might not wait till it is a corpse. Either way, you are dead, and it's evil that has won. And there are men just as cruel. Darkfriends and others. More others than I would have believed even a year ago. Let the White-cloaks decide you Tinkers don't walk in the Light and see how many of you the strength of your belief can keep alive."

ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə pɛnətʃɹeɪɾɪŋ lʊk. "æn jɛt jə ɑɹ nɑt hæpi wɪð jəɹ wɛpənz."

She gave him a penetrating look. "And yet you are not happy with your weapons."

haʊ dɪd ʃi noʊ ðæt? hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli, ʃæɡi hɛɹ sweɪɪŋ. "ðə kɹieɪɾɝ meɪd ðə wɝld," hi mʌɾɝd, "nɑɾ aɪ. aɪ mʌs lɪv ðə bɛst aɪ kən ɪn ðə wɝl ðə weɪ ɪɾ ɪz."

How did she know that? He shook his head irritably, shaggy hair swaying. "The Creator made the world," he muttered, "not I. I must live the best I can in the world the way it is."

"soʊ sæd fəɹ wʌn soʊ jʌŋ," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "waɪ soʊ sæd?"

"So sad for one so young," she said softly. "Why so sad?"

"aɪ ʃəd bi wɑtʃɪŋ, nɑt tɔkɪŋ," hi sɛd kɝtli. "ju woʊn θæŋk mi ɪf aɪ ɡɛt jə lɔst." hi hil stɛpɝ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪnʌf tə kʌɾ ɔf ɛni fɝðɝ kɑnvɝseɪʃən, bʌɾ i kəd fil əɹ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. sæd? aɪm nɑt sæd, dʒʌst. . . . laɪt, aɪ doʊnt noʊ. ðəɹ ɔt tə bi ə bɛɾɝ weɪ, ðæts ɔl. ði ɪtʃɪŋ tɪkəl keɪm əɡɛn ət ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd, bʌɾ əbzɔɹbd ɪn ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ leɪəz aɪz ɑn ɪz bæk, hi ɪɡnɔɹd ðæt, tu.

"I should be watching, not talking," he said curtly. "You won't thank me if I get you lost." He heeled Stepper forward enough to cut off any further conversation, but he could feel her looking at him. Sad? I'm not sad, just. . . . Light, I don't know. There ought to be a better way, that's all. The itching tickle came again at the back of his head, but absorbed in ignoring Leya's eyes on his back, he ignored that, too.

oʊvɝ ðə sloʊp ə ðə maʊntən ən daʊn ðeɪ ɹoʊd, əkɹɔs ə fɔɹəstəd væli wɪð ə bɹɔd stʃɹim ɹʌnɪŋ koʊld əlɔŋ ɪts bɑɾəm, ni-dip ɑn ðə hɔɹsəz. ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə maʊntən hæd bɪn kɑɹvd ɪndə ðə sɛmbləns ə tu taʊɝɪŋ fɔɹmz. ə mæn ən ə wʊmən, pɛɹɪn θɔt ðeɪ maɪt bi, ðoʊ wɪn ən ɹeɪn hæd lɔŋ sɪns meɪd ðəɾ ənsɝɾən. ivən mɔɪɹeɪn kleɪm tə bi ənʃʊɹ u ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə bi, əɹ wən ðə ɡɹænət hæd bɪn kʌt.

Over the slope of the mountain and down they rode, across a forested valley with a broad stream running cold along its bottom, knee-deep on the horses. In the distance, the side of a mountain had been carved into the semblance of two towering forms. A man and a woman, Perrin thought they might be, though wind and rain had long since made that uncertain. Even Moiraine claimed to be unsure who they were supposed to be, or when the granite had been cut.

pɹɪkəlbæks ən smɔl tʃɹaʊt dɑɹɾɪd əweɪ fɹəm ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz, sɪlvɝ flæʃɪz ɪn ðə klɪɹ wɔɾɝ. ə dɪɹ ɹeɪzd ɪts hɛd fɹəm bɹaʊzɪŋ, hɛzɪteɪɾɪd əz ðə pɑɹɾi ɹoʊɾ ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə stʃɹim, ðən baʊndəɾ ɔf ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz, ən ə lɑɹdʒ maʊntən kæt, ɡɹeɪ stʃɹaɪpt ən spɑɾəd wɪð blæk, sim tə ɹaɪz aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd ɪn ɪts stɔk. ɪɾ aɪd ðə hɔɹsəz ə moʊmənt, ən wɪð ə læʃ ʌv ɪts teɪl vænɪʃt æftɝ ðə dɪɹ. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl laɪf vɪzəbəl ɪn ðə maʊntənz jɛt. oʊnli ə hændfʊl ə bɝdz pɝtʃt ɑn lɪmz əɹ pɛkt ət ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɛɹ ðə snoʊ hæd mɛltəd. mɔɹ wəd ɹɪtɝn tə ðə haɪts ɪn ə fju wiks, bʌt nɑt jɛt. ðeɪ sɔ noʊ ʌðɝ ɹeɪvənz.

Pricklebacks and small trout darted away from the horses' hooves, silver flashes in the clear water. A deer raised its head from browsing, hesitated as the party rode up out of the stream, then bounded off into the trees, and a large mountain cat, gray striped and spotted with black, seemed to rise out of the ground, frustrated in its stalk. It eyed the horses a moment, and with a lash of its tail vanished after the deer. But there was little life visible in the mountains yet. Only a handful of birds perched on limbs or pecked at the ground where the snow had melted. More would return to the heights in a few weeks, but not yet. They saw no other ravens.

ɪt wɑz leɪɾ æftɝnun baɪ ðə taɪm pɛɹɪn lɛɾ əm bɪtwin tu stip-sləp maʊntənz, snoʊi piks əz ɛvɝ ɹæpt ɪn klaʊd, ən tɝn ʌp ə smɔlɝ stʃɹim ðət splæʃt daʊnwɝɾ oʊvɝ ɡɹeɪ stoʊnz ɪn ə sɪɹiz ə taɪni wɔɾɝfɔlz. ə bɝd kɔld ɪn ðə tʃɹiz, ən ənʌðɝ ænsɝɾ ɪt fɹəm əhɛd.

It was late afternoon by the time Perrin led them between two steep-sloped mountains, snowy peaks as ever wrapped in cloud, and turned up a smaller stream that splashed downward over gray stones in a series of tiny waterfalls. A bird called in the trees, and another answered it from ahead.

pɛɹɪn smaɪld. blufɪntʃ kɔlz. eɪ bɔɹɾɝlənd bɝd. noʊ wʌn ɹoʊd ðɪs weɪ wɪθaʊt biɪŋ sin. hi ɹʌbd ɪz noʊz, ən dɪd nɑt lʊk ət ðə tʃɹi ðə fɝst "bɝd" hæd kɔl fɹʌm.

Perrin smiled. Bluefinch calls. A Borderland bird. No one rode this way without being seen. He rubbed his nose, and did not look at the tree the first "bird" had called from.

ðɛɹ pæθ nɛɹoʊɾ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ʌp θɹu skɹʌbi lɛðɝlif ən ə fju nɑɹl maʊntən oʊks. ðə ɡɹaʊn lɛvəl ɪnʌf tə ɹaɪd bɪsaɪd ðə stʃɹim bɪkeɪm bɛɹli waɪɾɝ ðən ə mæn ɑn hɔɹsbæk, ən ðə stʃɹim ɪtsɛlf noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə tɔl mæn kəd stɛp əkɹɔs.

Their path narrowed as they rode up through scrubby leatherleaf and a few gnarled mountain oaks. The ground level enough to ride beside the stream became barely wider than a man on horseback, and the stream itself no more than a tall man could step across.

pɛɹɪn hɝd leɪə bɪhaɪn hɪm, mɝmɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. wən i lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ʃi wɑz kæstɪŋ wɝid ɡlænsɪz ʌp ðə stip sloʊps tə iðɝ saɪd. skæɾɝd tʃɹiz pɝtʃt pɹɪkɛɹiəsli əbʌv ðɛm. ɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl ðeɪ wəd nɑt fɔl. ðə ʃaɪnɝənz ɹoʊɾ izəli, ət læs bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ɹɪlæks.

Perrin heard Leya behind him, murmuring to herself. When he looked over his shoulder, she was casting worried glances up the steep slopes to either side. Scattered trees perched precariously above them. It appeared impossible they would not fall. The Shienarans rode easily, at last beginning to relax.

əbɹʌpli ə dip, oʊvəl boʊl bɪtwin ðə maʊntənz oʊpən aʊt bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, ɪts saɪdz stip bʌt nɑt nɪɹli soʊ pɹɪsɪpɪɾəs əz ðə nɛɹoʊ pæsədʒ. ðə stʃɹim ɹoʊz fɹəm ə smɔl spɹɪŋ əɾ ɪts fɑɹ ɛnd. pɛɹɪnz ʃɑɹp aɪz pɪkt aʊɾ ə mæn wɪð ðə tɑpnɑɾ ʌv ə ʃaɪnɝən, ʌp ɪn ðə lɪmz ʌv ən oʊk tə hɪz lɛft. hæɾ ə ɹɛdwɪŋɡd dʒeɪ kɔld ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə blufɪntʃ, hi wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn əloʊn, ən ðə weɪ ɪn wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn soʊ izi. ə hændfʊl ə mɛn kəd hoʊl ðət pæsədʒ əɡɛnst ən ɑɹmi. ɪf ən ɑɹmi keɪm, ə hændfʊl wəɾ əv tə.

Abruptly a deep, oval bowl between the mountains opened out before them, its sides steep but not nearly so precipitous as the narrow passage. The stream rose from a small spring at its far end. Perrin's sharp eyes picked out a man with the topknot of a Shienaran, up in the limbs of an oak to his left. Had a redwinged jay called instead of a bluefinch, he would not have been alone, and the way in would not have been so easy. A handful of men could hold that passage against an army. If an army came, a handful would have to.

əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz ɝaʊn ðə boʊl stʊd lɔɡ hʌts, nɑt ɹɛɾəli vɪzəbəl, soʊ ðət ðoʊz ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ðə kʊk faɪɝz ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə boʊl simd ət fɝs tə bi wɪθaʊt ʃɛltɝ. ðəɹ wɝ fjuɝ ðən ə dʌzən ɪn saɪt. ən nɑt mɛni mɔɹ aʊɾ ə saɪt, pɛɹɪn nu. moʊst ə ðɛm lʊkt ɝaʊn ət ðə saʊn ə hɔɹsəz, ən səm weɪvd. ðə boʊl sim fɪld wɪð ðə smɛlz ə mɛn ən hɔɹsəz, ʌv kʊkɪŋ ən bɝnɪŋ wʊd. ə lɔŋ waɪt bænɝ hʌŋ lɪmpli fɹəm ə tɔl poʊl nɪɹ ðɛm. wʌn fɔɹm, ət lis hæf əɡɛn əz tɔl əz ɛniwʌn ɛls, sæɾ ɑn ə lɔɡ ɪnɡɹoʊst ɪn ə bʊk ðət wɑz smɔl ɪn ɪz hjudʒ hænz. ðət wʌnz ətɛnʃən nɛvɝ weɪvɝd, ivən wən ði oʊnli ʌðɝ pɝsən wɪθaʊɾ ə tɑpnɑt ʃaʊɾəd, "soʊ jə faʊn hɝ, dɪd ju? aɪ θɔt jud bi ɡɔn ðə naɪt, ðɪs taɪm." ɪt wɑz ə jʌŋ wʊmənz vɔɪs, bʌt ʃi wɔɹ ə bɔɪz koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz ən hæɾ əɹ hɛɹ kʌt ʃɔɹt.

Among the trees around the bowl stood log huts, not readily visible, so that those gathered around the cook fires at the bottom of the bowl seemed at first to be without shelter. There were fewer than a dozen in sight. And not many more out of sight, Perrin knew. Most of them looked around at the sound of horses, and some waved. The bowl seemed filled with the smells of men and horses, of cooking and burning wood. A long white banner hung limply from a tall pole near them. One form, at least half again as tall as anyone else, sat on a log engrossed in a book that was small in his huge hands. That one's attention never wavered, even when the only other person without a topknot shouted, "So you found her, did you? I thought you'd be gone the night, this time." It was a young woman's voice, but she wore a boy's coat and breeches and had her hair cut short.

ə bɝst ʌv wɪn swɝld ɪndə ðə boʊl, meɪkɪŋ kloʊks flæp ən ɹɪpəlɪŋ ðə bænɝ aʊt tə ɪts fʊl lɛŋθ. fəɹ ə moʊmən ðə kɹitʃɝ ɑn ɪt sim tə ɹaɪd ðə wɪnd. ə fɔɹ-lɛɡəd sɝpən skeɪld ɪn ɡoʊld ən skɑɹlət, ɡoʊldən meɪn laɪk ə laɪən, ən ɪts fiɾ itʃ tɪpt wɪð faɪv ɡoʊldən klɔz. ə bænɝ ə lɛdʒənd. ə bænɝ moʊs mɛn wəd nɑt noʊ ɪf ðeɪ sɔ ɪt, bʌt wəd fɪɹ wən ðeɪ lɝn ɪts neɪm.

A burst of wind swirled into the bowl, making cloaks flap and rippling the banner out to its full length. For a moment the creature on it seemed to ride the wind. A four-legged serpent scaled in gold and scarlet, golden maned like a lion, and its feet each tipped with five golden claws. A banner of legend. A banner most men would not know if they saw it, but would fear when they learned its name.

pɛɹɪn weɪvd ə hæn ðət tʊk ɪɾ ɔl ɪn əz i lɛd ðə weɪ daʊn ɪndə ðə boʊl. "wɛlkəm tə ðə kæmp ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, leɪə."

Perrin waved a hand that took it all in as he led the way down into the bowl. "Welcome to the camp of the Dragon Reborn, Leya."


tʃæptɝ tu


CHAPTER 2

seɪɾɪn


Saidin

feɪs ɪkspɹɛʃənləs, ðə tuætɑn wʊmən stɛɹɾ ət ðə bænɝ əz ɪt dʒɹupt əɡɛn, ðən tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən tə ðoʊz ɝaʊn ðə faɪɝ. ɪspɛʃli ðə wʌn ɹiɾɪŋ, ðə wʌn hæf əɡɛn əz tɔl əz pɛɹɪn ən twaɪs əz bɪɡ. "ju hæv ən oʊɡiɝ wɪð ju. aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv θɔt. . . ."ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "wɛɹ ɪz mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ?" ɪt sim ðə dʒɹæɡən bænɝ maɪɾ əz wɛl nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst əz fɑɹ əz ʃi wɑz kənsɝnd.

Face expressionless, the Tuatha'an woman stared at the banner as it drooped again, then turned her attention to those around the fire. Especially the one reading, the one half again as tall as Perrin and twice as big. "You have an Ogier with you. I would not have thought. . . ."She shook her head. "Where is Moiraine Sedai?" It seemed the Dragon banner might as well not exist as far as she was concerned.

pɛɹɪn dʒɛstʃɝd təwɔɹd ðə ɹʌf hʌt ðət stʊd fɝθəst ʌp ðə sloʊp, ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə boʊl. wɪð wɔlz ən sloʊpɪŋ ɹuf ʌv ənpild lɔɡz, ɪt wɑz ðə lɑɹdʒəst, ðoʊ nɑt vɛɹi bɪɡ ət ðæt. pɝhæps dʒʌs bɛɹli lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə bi kɔld ə kæbən ɹæðɝ ðən ə hʌt. "ðæt wʌn ɪz hɝz. hɝz ən lænz. hiz əɹ wɔɹɾɝ. wən juv hæd sʌmθɪŋ hɑt tə dʒɹɪŋk - "

Perrin gestured toward the rough hut that stood furthest up the slope, at the far end of the bowl. With walls and sloping roof of unpeeled logs, it was the largest, though not very big at that. Perhaps just barely large enough to be called a cabin rather than a hut. "That one is hers. Hers and Lan's. He is her Warder. When you have had something hot to drink - "

"noʊ. aɪ mʌst spik tə mɔɪɹeɪn."

"No. I must speak to Moiraine."

hi wɑz nɑt sɝpɹaɪzd. ɔl ðə wɪmən u keɪm ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn spikɪŋ tə mɔɪɹeɪn ɪmiɾiətli, ən əloʊn. ðə nuz ðət mɔɪɹeɪn tʃoʊz tə ʃɛɹ wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz sim vɛɹi ɪmpɔɹɾənt, bʌt ðə wɪmən hɛl ði ɪntɛnsəɾi ʌv ə hʌntɝ stɔkɪŋ ðə læst ɹæbəɾ ɪn ðə wɝl fəɹ ɪz stɑɹvɪŋ fæmli. ðə hæf-fɹoʊzən oʊl bɛɡɝ wʊmən hæd ɹəfjuz blæŋkəts ən ə pleɪɾ ə hɑt stu ən tʃɹæmpt ʌp tə mɔɪɹeɪnz hʌt, bɛɹfʊɾ ɪn stɪl-fɔlɪŋ snoʊ.

He was not surprised. All the women who came insisted on speaking to Moiraine immediately, and alone. The news that Moiraine chose to share with the rest of them did not always seem very important, but the women held the intensity of a hunter stalking the last rabbit in the world for his starving family. The half-frozen old beggar woman had refused blankets and a plate of hot stew and tramped up to Moiraine's hut, barefoot in still-falling snow.

leɪə slɪd fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl ən hændəd ðə ɹeɪnz ʌp tə pɛɹɪn. "wɪl jə si ðət ʃiz fɛd?" ʃi pæɾəd ðə paɪbɔl mɛɹz noʊz. "paɪsə ɪz nɑt juz tə kæɹiɪŋ mi oʊvɝ sətʃ ɹʌɡəd kʌntʃɹi."

Leya slid from her saddle and handed the reins up to Perrin. "Will you see that she is fed?" She patted the piebald mare's nose. "Piesa is not used to carrying me over such rugged country."

"fɑɾɝ ɪz skɛɹs, stɪl," pɛɹɪn toʊl hɝ, "bʌt ʃɪl əv wʌt wi kən ɡɪv hɝ."

"Fodder is scarce, still," Perrin told her, "but she'll have what we can give her."

leɪə nɑɾəd, ən wɛn hɝiɪŋ əweɪ ʌp ðə sloʊp wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝd, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ bɹaɪt ɡɹin skɝts ʌp, ðə blu-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɹɛd kloʊk sweɪɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ.

Leya nodded, and went hurrying away up the slope without another word, holding her bright green skirts up, the blue-embroidered red cloak swaying behind her.

pɛɹɪn swʌŋ daʊn fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl, ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ ə fju wɝdz wɪð ðə mɛn u keɪm fɹəm ðə faɪɝz tə teɪk ðə hɔɹsəz. hi ɡeɪv ɪz baʊ tə ðə wʌn u tʊk stɛpɝ. noʊ, ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn ɹeɪvən, ðeɪ hæd sin nʌθɪŋ bʌt ðə maʊntənz ən ðə tuætɑn wʊmən. jɛs, ðə ɹeɪvən wɑz dɛd. noʊ, ʃi hæd toʊld əm nʌθɪŋ ʌv wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ aʊtsaɪd ðə maʊntənz. noʊ, hi hæd noʊ aɪdiə wɛðɝ ðeɪ wəd bi livɪŋ sun.

Perrin swung down from his saddle, exchanging a few words with the men who came from the fires to take the horses. He gave his bow to the one who took Stepper. No, except for one raven, they had seen nothing but the mountains and the Tuatha'an woman. Yes, the raven was dead. No, she had told them nothing of what was happening outside the mountains. No, he had no idea whether they would be leaving soon.

əɹ ɛvɝ, hi æɾəd tə hɪmsɛlf. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd kɛpt əm ðəɹ ɔl wɪntɝ. ðə ʃaɪnɝənz dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi ɡeɪv ði ɔɹɾɝz, nɑt hɪɹ, bʌt pɛɹɪn nu ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ sʌmhaʊ ɔlweɪz sim tə ɡɛt ðɛɹ weɪ. ɪspɛʃli mɔɪɹeɪn.

Or ever, he added to himself. Moiraine had kept them there all winter. The Shienarans did not think she gave the orders, not here, but Perrin knew that Aes Sedai somehow always seemed to get their way. Especially Moiraine.

wʌns ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ lɛɾ əweɪ tə ðə ɹud lɔɡ steɪbəl, ðə ɹaɪɾɝz wɛn tə wɔɹm ðɛmsɛlvz. pɛɹɪn tɔst ɪz kloʊk bæk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən hɛld ɪz hænz aʊt tə ðə fleɪmz ɡɹeɪtfəli. ðə bɪɡ kɛɾəl, bɛɹlən wɝk baɪ ðə lʊk ʌv ɪt, ɡeɪv ɔf smɛlz ðət hæd bɪn meɪkɪŋ ɪz maʊθ wɔɾɝ fəɹ səm taɪm ɔlɹɛɾi. sʌmwʌn hæd bɪn lʌki hʌntɪŋ tədeɪ, ɪt simd, ən lʌmpi ɹuts sɝkəld ənʌðɝ faɪɝ kloʊs baɪ, ɡɪvɪŋ ɔf ən ɝoʊmə feɪnli laɪk tɝnəps əz ðeɪ ɹoʊstəd. hi ɹɪŋkəld ɪz noʊz ən kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn ðə stu. mɔɹ ən mɔɹ i wɑntəd miɾ əbʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɛls.

Once the horses were led away to the rude log stable, the riders went to warm themselves. Perrin tossed his cloak back over his shoulders and held his hands out to the flames gratefully. The big kettle, Baerlon work by the look of it, gave off smells that had been making his mouth water for some time already. Someone had been lucky hunting today, it seemed, and lumpy roots circled another fire close by, giving off an aroma faintly like turnips as they roasted. He wrinkled his nose and concentrated on the stew. More and more he wanted meat above anything else.

ðə wʊmən ɪn mɛnz kloʊðz wɑz piɹɪŋ təwɔɹd leɪə, hu wɑz dʒʌs dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ ɪndə mɔɪɹeɪnz hʌt.

The woman in men's clothes was peering toward Leya, who was just disappearing into Moiraine's hut.

"wʌt dʒju si, mɪn?" hi æskt.

"What do you see, Min?" he asked.

ʃi keɪm tə stæn bɪsaɪd hɪm, hɝ dɑɹk aɪz tʃɹʌbəld. hi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ʃi ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn bɹitʃɪz ɪnstɛɾ ə skɝts. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz kəz i nu hɝ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt si haʊ ɛniwʌn kəd lʊk əɾ əɹ ən si ə tu-hænsəm juθ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə pɹɪɾi jʌŋ wʊmən.

She came to stand beside him, her dark eyes troubled. He did not understand why she insisted on breeches instead of skirts. Perhaps it was because he knew her, but he could not see how anyone could look at her and see a too-handsome youth instead of a pretty young woman.

"ðə tɪŋkɝ wʊmən ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ," ʃi sɛd sɔfli, aɪɪŋ ði ʌðɝz nɪɹ ðə faɪɝz. nʌn wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ.

"The Tinker woman is going to die," she said softly, eyeing the others near the fires. None was close enough to hear.

hi wɑz stɪl, θɪŋkɪŋ ə leɪəz dʒɛntəl feɪs. ɑ, laɪt! tɪŋkɝz nɛvɝ hɑɹm ɛniwʌn! hi fɛl koʊl dɪspaɪt ðə wɔɹmθ ə ðə faɪɝ. bɝn mi, aɪ wɪʃ aɪd nɛvɝ æskt. ivən ðə fju ɛɛs sədaɪ hu nu ʌv ɪt dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd wʌt mɪn dɪd. səmtaɪmz ʃi sɔ ɪmədʒəz ən ɔʊɹəz sɝaʊndɪŋ pipəl, ən səmtaɪmz ʃi ivən nu wʌt ðeɪ mɛnt.

He was still, thinking of Leya's gentle face. Ah, Light! Tinkers never harm anyone! He felt cold despite the warmth of the fire. Burn me, I wish I'd never asked. Even the few Aes Sedai who knew of it did not understand what Min did. Sometimes she saw images and auras surrounding people, and sometimes she even knew what they meant.

mɑsuɾoʊ keɪm tə stɝ ðə stu wɪð ə lɔŋ wʊd spun. ðə ʃaɪnɝən aɪd ðɛm, ðən leɪɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɪz lɔŋ noʊz ən ɡɹɪnd waɪdli bɪfɔɹ i lɛft.

Masuto came to stir the stew with a long wood spoon. The Shienaran eyed them, then laid a finger alongside his long nose and grinned widely before he left.

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz!" mɪn mʌɾɝd. "hiz pɹɑbli dɪsaɪɾɪd wəɹ swithɑɹts mɝmɝɪŋ tə itʃ ʌðɝ baɪ ðə faɪɝ."

"Blood and ashes!" Min muttered. "He's probably decided we are sweethearts murmuring to each other by the fire."

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ?" pɛɹɪn æskt. ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ aɪbɹaʊz ət hɪm, ən i heɪstəli æɾəd, "əbaʊt leɪə."

"Are you sure?" Perrin asked. She raised her eyebrows at him, and he hastily added, "About Leya."

"ɪz ðəɾ əɹ neɪm? aɪ wɪʃ aɪ dɪdnt noʊ. ɪɾ ɔlweɪz meɪks ɪt wɝs, noʊɪŋ ən nɑt biɪŋ eɪbəl tə. . . . pɛɹɪn, aɪ sɔ hɝ oʊn feɪs floʊɾɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, kʌvɝɾ ɪn blʌd, aɪz stɛɹɪŋ. ɪts nɛvɝ ɛni klɪɹɝ ðən ðæt." ʃi ʃɪvɝɾ ən ɹʌbd əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ bɹɪskli. "laɪt, bʌɾ aɪ wɪʃ aɪ sɔ mɔɹ hæpi θɪŋz. ɔl ðə hæpi θɪŋz sim tə hæv ɡɔn əweɪ."

"Is that her name? I wish I didn't know. It always makes it worse, knowing and not being able to. . . . Perrin, I saw her own face floating over her shoulder, covered in blood, eyes staring. It's never any clearer than that." She shivered and rubbed her hands together briskly. "Light, but I wish I saw more happy things. All the happy things seem to have gone away."

hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə sədʒɛst wɔɹnɪŋ leɪə, ðən kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn. ðəɹ wɑz nɛvɝ ɛni daʊɾ əbaʊt wʌt mɪn sɔ ən nu, fəɹ ɡʊɾ əɹ bæd. ɪf ʃi wɑz sɝɾən, ɪt hæpənd.

He opened his mouth to suggest warning Leya, then closed it again. There was never any doubt about what Min saw and knew, for good or bad. If she was certain, it happened.

"blʌɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs," hi mʌɾɝd. "dʌz ðət min ʃɪl daɪ baɪ vaɪələns?" hi wɪns ðəɾ i sɛɾ ɪt soʊ izəli. bʌt wʌt kən aɪ du? ɪf aɪ tɛl leɪə, ɪf aɪ meɪk əɹ bɪliv sʌmhaʊ, ʃɪl lɪv əɹ læs deɪz ɪn fɪɹ, ən ɪɾəl tʃeɪnʒ nʌθɪŋ.

"Blood on her face," he muttered. "Does that mean she'll die by violence?" He winced that he said it so easily. But what can I do? If I tell Leya, if I make her believe somehow, she'll live her last days in fear, and it will change nothing.

mɪn ɡeɪv ə ʃɔɹt nɑd.

Min gave a short nod.

ɪf ʃiz gɑnə daɪ baɪ vaɪələns, ɪt kəd min ən ətæk ɑn ðə kæmp. bʌt ðəɹ wɝ skaʊts aʊɾ ɛvɹi deɪ, ən ɡɑɹdz sɛt deɪ ən naɪt. ən mɔɪɹeɪn hæd ðə kæmp wɔɹɾɪd, soʊ ʃi sɛd; noʊ kɹitʃɝ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn wəd si ɪɾ ənlɛs i wɔkt ɹaɪɾ ɪndə ɪt. hi θɔɾ ə ðə wʊlvz. noʊ! ðə skaʊts wəd faɪn ɛniwʌn əɹ ɛniθɪŋ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əpɹoʊtʃ ðə kæmp. "ɪts ə lɔŋ weɪ bæk tə hɝ pipəl," hi sɛd hæf tə hɪmsɛlf. "tɪŋkɝz wʊdn əv bɹɔt ðɛɹ wæɡənz ɛni fɝðɝ ðən ðə fʊthɪlz. ɛniθɪŋ kəd hæpən bɪtwin hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ."

If she's going to die by violence, it could mean an attack on the camp. But there were scouts out every day, and guards set day and night. And Moiraine had the camp warded, so she said; no creature of the Dark One would see it unless he walked right into it. He thought of the wolves. No! The scouts would find anyone or anything trying to approach the camp. "It's a long way back to her people," he said half to himself. "Tinkers wouldn't have brought their wagons any further than the foothills. Anything could happen between here and there."

mɪn nɑɾəd sædli. "æn ðəɹ ɑɹən ɪnʌf ʌv əs tə spɛɹ ivən wʌn ɡɑɹd fəɹ hɝ. ivən ɪf ɪt wəd də ɛni ɡʊd."

Min nodded sadly. "And there aren't enough of us to spare even one guard for her. Even if it would do any good."

ʃi hæd toʊl hɪm; ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd wɔɹnɪŋ pipəl əbaʊt bæd θɪŋz wɛn, ət sɪks əɹ sɛvən, ʃi hæd fɝst ɹilaɪz nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn kəd si wʌt ʃi sɔ. ʃi wəd nɑt seɪ mɔɹ, bʌɾ i hæd ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ðəɾ əɹ wɔɹnɪŋz hæɾ oʊnli meɪd mæɾɝz wɝs, wən ðeɪ wɝ bɪlivd əɾ ɔl. ɪt tʊk səm duɪŋ tə bɪliv ɪn mɪnz vjuɪŋz əntɪl jə hæd pɹuf.

She had told him; she had tried warning people about bad things when, at six or seven, she had first realized not everyone could see what she saw. She would not say more, but he had the impression that her warnings had only made matters worse, when they were believed at all. It took some doing to believe in Min's viewings until you had proof.

"wɛn?" hi sɛd. ðə wɝd wɑz koʊld ɪn ɪz ɪɹz, ən hɑɹɾ əz tul stil. aɪ kæn də ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt leɪə, bʌt meɪbi aɪ kən fɪɡjɝ aʊt wɛðɝ wɝ gɑnə bi ətækt.

"When?" he said. The word was cold in his ears, and hard as tool steel. I can't do anything about Leya, but maybe I can figure out whether we're going to be attacked.

əz sun əz ðə wɝd wɑz aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ, ʃi θɹu ʌp əɹ hænz. ʃi kɛpt əɹ vɔɪs daʊn, ðoʊ. "ɪɾ ɪzən laɪk ðæt. aɪ kən nɛvɝ tɛl wən sʌmθɪŋ ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæpən. aɪ oʊnli noʊ ɪt wɪl, ɪf aɪ ivən noʊ wʌɾ aɪ si minz. jə doʊn ʌndɝstænd. ðə siɪŋ dʌzn kʌm wən aɪ wɑn ɪt tə, ən niðɝ dʌz noʊɪŋ. ɪt dʒʌs hæpənz, ən səmtaɪmz aɪ noʊ. sʌmθɪŋ. ə lɪɾəl bɪt. ɪt dʒʌs hæpənz." hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɛɾ ə suðɪŋ wɝɾ ɪn, bʌt ʃi wɑz lɛɾɪŋ ɪɾ ɔl aʊɾ ɪn ə flʌɾ i kəd nɑt stɛm. "aɪ kən si θɪŋz ɝaʊn ə mæn wʌn deɪ ən nɑt ðə nɛkst, əɹ ði ʌðɝ weɪ 'ɹaʊnd. moʊst ə ðə taɪm, aɪ doʊn si ɛniθɪŋ ɝaʊn ɛniwʌn. ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlweɪz əv ɪmədʒəz ɝaʊn ðɛm, ʌv kɔɹs, ən wɔɹɾɝz, ðoʊ ɪts ɔlweɪz hɑɹɾɝ tə seɪ wʌɾ ɪt minz wɪð əm ðən wɪð ɛniwʌn ɛls." ʃi ɡeɪv pɛɹɪn ə sɝtʃɪŋ lʊk, hæf skwɪntɪŋ. "ə fju ʌðɝz ɔlweɪz du, tu."

As soon as the word was out of his mouth, she threw up her hands. She kept her voice down, though. "It isn't like that. I can never tell when something is going to happen. I only know it will, if I even know what I see means. You don't understand. The seeing doesn't come when I want it to, and neither does knowing. It just happens, and sometimes I know. Something. A little bit. It just happens." He tried to get a soothing word in, but she was letting it all out in a flood he could not stem. "I can see things around a man one day and not the next, or the other way 'round. Most of the time, I don't see anything around anyone. Aes Sedai always have images around them, of course, and Warders, though it's always harder to say what it means with them than with anyone else." She gave Perrin a searching look, half squinting. "A few others always do, too."

"doʊn tɛl mi wʌt jə si wən jə lʊk ət mi," hi sɛd hɑɹʃli, ðən ʃɹʌɡd ɪz hɛvi ʃoʊldɝz. ivən əz ə tʃaɪld i hæd bɪn bɪɡɝ ðən moʊst ə ði ʌðɝz, ən i hæd kwɪkli lɝn haʊ izi ɪt wɑz tə hɝt pipəl baɪ æksəɾənt wən jə wɝ bɪɡɝ ðən ðeɪ. ɪt hæd meɪɾ ɪm kɔʃəs ən kɛɹfəl, ən ɹɪɡɹɛtfəl ə hɪz æŋɡɝ wən i lɛɾ ɪt ʃoʊ. "aɪ æm sɑɹi, mɪn. aɪ ʃʊdn əv snæpt ət ju. aɪ dɪd nɑt min tə hɝt ju."

"Don't tell me what you see when you look at me," he said harshly, then shrugged his heavy shoulders. Even as a child he had been bigger than most of the others, and he had quickly learned how easy it was to hurt people by accident when you were bigger than they. It had made him cautious and careful, and regretful of his anger when he let it show. "I am sorry, Min. I shouldn't have snapped at you. I did not mean to hurt you."

ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə sɝpɹaɪz lʊk. "ju dɪdn hɝt mi. blɛsɪd fju pipəl wɑnə noʊ wʌɾ aɪ si. ðə laɪt noʊz, aɪ wəd nɑt, ɪf ɪt wɝ sʌmwʌn ɛls u kəd də ɪt." ivən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn ɛls u hæɾ əɹ ɡɪft. "ɡɪft" wɑz haʊ ðeɪ sɔ ɪt, ivən ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt.

She gave him a surprised look. "You didn't hurt me. Blessed few people want to know what I see. The Light knows, I would not, if it were someone else who could do it." Even the Aes Sedai had never heard of anyone else who had her gift. "Gift" was how they saw it, even if she did not.

"ɪts dʒʌs ðəɾ aɪ wɪʃ ðəɹ wɝ sʌmθɪŋ aɪ kəd də əbaʊt leɪə. aɪ kʊdn stæn ɪt ðə weɪ jə du, noʊɪŋ ən nɑɾ eɪbəl tə də ɛniθɪŋ."

"It's just that I wish there were something I could do about Leya. I couldn't stand it the way you do, knowing and not able to do anything."

"stʃɹeɪnʒ," ʃi sɛd sɔfli, "haʊ jə sim tə kɛɹ soʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt ðə tuætɑn. ðeɪ ɑɹ ʌɾɝli pisfəl, ən aɪ ɔlweɪz si vaɪələns ɝaʊnd - "

"Strange," she said softly, "how you seem to care so much about the Tuatha'an. They are utterly peaceful, and I always see violence around - "

hi tɝn ɪz hɛɾ əweɪ, ən ʃi kʌɾ ɔf əbɹʌpli.

He turned his head away, and she cut off abruptly.

"tuætɑn?" keɪm ə ɹʌmbəlɪŋ vɔɪs, laɪk ə hjudʒ bʌmbəlɪbi. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ðə tuætɑn?" ði oʊɡiɝ keɪm tə dʒɔɪn əm ət ðə faɪɝ, mɑɹkɪŋ ɪz pleɪs ɪn ɪz bʊk wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ ðə saɪz ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ sɔsədʒ. ə θɪn stʃɹimɝ ə təbæk smoʊk ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə paɪp ɪn ɪz ʌðɝ hænd. hɪz haɪ-nɛkt koʊɾ ə dɑɹk bɹaʊn wʊl bʌɾənd ʌp tə ðə nɛk, ən flɛɹɾ ət ðə ni oʊvɝ tɝnd-daʊn but tɑps. pɛɹɪn stʊd hɑɹdli əz haɪ əz ɪz tʃɛst.

"Tuatha'an?" came a rumbling voice, like a huge bumblebee. "What about the Tuatha'an?" The Ogier came to join them at the fire, marking his place in his book with a finger the size of a large sausage. A thin streamer of tabac smoke rose from the pipe in his other hand. His high-necked coat of dark brown wool buttoned up to the neck, and flared at the knee over turned-down boot tops. Perrin stood hardly as high as his chest.

lɔɪəlz feɪs hæd fɹaɪɾənd mɔɹ ðən wʌn pɝsən, wɪð ɪz noʊz bɹɔɾ ɪnʌf ɔlmoʊs tə bi kɔld ə snaʊɾ ən ɪz tu-waɪd maʊð. hɪz aɪz wɝ ðə saɪz ə sɔsɝz, wɪð θɪk aɪbɹaʊz ðət dæŋɡəld laɪk mʌstæʃɪz ɔlmoʊs tə hɪz tʃiks, ən ɪz ɪɹz poʊkt ʌp θɹu lɔŋ hɛɹ ɪn tʌftəd pɔɪns. səm u hæd nɛvɝ sin ən oʊɡiɝ tʊk ɪm fəɹ ə tʃɹɑlɑk, ðoʊ tʃɹɑləks wɝ əz mʌtʃ lɛdʒən tə moʊst ə ðɛm əz oʊɡiɝ.

Loial's face had frightened more than one person, with his nose broad enough almost to be called a snout and his too-wide mouth. His eyes were the size of saucers, with thick eyebrows that dangled like mustaches almost to his cheeks, and his ears poked up through long hair in tufted points. Some who had never seen an Ogier took him for a Trolloc, though Trollocs were as much legend to most of them as Ogier.

lɔɪəlz waɪd smaɪl weɪvɝɾ ən ɪz aɪz blɪŋkt əz i bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə hævɪŋ ɪntɝʌptɪd ðɛm. pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd haʊ ɛniwʌn kəd bi fɹaɪɾənd ə ði oʊɡiɝ fəɹ lɔŋ. jɛt səm ə ði oʊl stɔɹiz kɔl əm fɪɹs, ən ɪmplækəbəl əz ɛnəmiz. hi kəd nɑt bɪliv ɪt. oʊɡiɝ wɝ ɛnəmiz tə noʊ wʌn.

Loial's wide smile wavered and his eyes blinked as he became aware of having interrupted them. Perrin wondered how anyone could be frightened of the Ogier for long. Yet some of the old stories call them fierce, and implacable as enemies. He could not believe it. Ogier were enemies to no one.

mɪn toʊld lɔɪəl ə leɪəz ɝaɪvəl, bʌt nɑɾ ʌv wʌt ʃi hæd sin. ʃi wɑz juʒəwəli kloʊsəməðd əbaʊt ðoʊz siɪŋz, ɪspɛʃli wən ðeɪ wɝ bæd. ɪnstɛd, ʃi æɾəd, "ju ʃəd noʊ haʊ aɪ fil, lɔɪəl, sʌɾənli kɑɾ ʌp baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðiz tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk."

Min told Loial of Leya's arrival, but not of what she had seen. She was usually closemouthed about those seeings, especially when they were bad. Instead, she added, "You should know how I feel, Loial, suddenly caught up by Aes Sedai and these Two Rivers folk."

lɔɪəl meɪɾ ə nɑnkəmɪɾəl saʊnd, bʌt mɪn sim tə teɪk ɪt fəɹ əɡɹimənt.

Loial made a noncommittal sound, but Min seemed to take it for agreement.

"jɛs," ʃi sɛɾ ɛmfæɾɪkli. "ðɛɹ aɪ wɑz, lɪvɪŋ maɪ laɪf ɪn bɛɹlən əz aɪ laɪkt ɪt, wən sʌɾənli aɪ wɑz ɡɹæbd ʌp baɪ ðə skɹʌf ə ðə nɛk ən dʒɝkt ɔf tə ðə laɪt noʊz wɛɹ. wɛl, aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn. maɪ laɪf əz nɑt bɪn maɪ oʊn sɪns aɪ mɛt mɔɪɹeɪn. ən ðiz tu ɹɪvɝz fɑɹmbɔɪz." ʃi ɹoʊld əɹ aɪz ət pɛɹɪn, ə ɹaɪ twɪs tə hɝ maʊð. "ɔl aɪ wɑntəd wɑz tə lɪv əz aɪ plizd, fɔl ɪn lʌv wɪð ə mæn aɪ tʃoʊz. . . ." hɝ tʃiks ɹɛɾənd sʌɾənli, ən ʃi klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt. "aɪ min tə seɪ, wʌɾ ɪz ɹɔŋ wɪð wɑntɪŋ tə lɪv jəɹ laɪf wɪθaʊɾ ɔl ðɪs əphivəl?"

"Yes," she said emphatically. "There I was, living my life in Baerlon as I liked it, when suddenly I was grabbed up by the scruff of the neck and jerked off to the Light knows where. Well, I might as well have been. My life has not been my own since I met Moiraine. And these Two Rivers farmboys." She rolled her eyes at Perrin, a wry twist to her mouth. "All I wanted was to live as I pleased, fall in love with a man I chose. . . ." Her cheeks reddened suddenly, and she cleared her throat. "I mean to say, what is wrong with wanting to live your life without all this upheaval?"

"tɑvɝən," lɔɪəl bɪɡæn. pɛɹɪn weɪvd əɾ ɪm tə stɑp, bʌt ði oʊɡiɝ kəd sɛldəm bi sloʊd, mʌtʃ lɛs stɑpt, wən wʌn ə hɪz ɪnθuziæzəmz hæɾ ɪm ɪn ɪts ɡɹɪp. hi wɑz əkaʊntəɾ ɪkstʃɹimli heɪsti, baɪ ði oʊɡiɝ weɪ ʌv lʊkɪŋ ət θɪŋz. lɔɪəl pʊʃt ɪz bʊk ɪndə ə koʊt pɑkəɾ ən wɛn ɑn, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ wɪð ɪz paɪp. "ɔl ʌv ʌs, ɔl ʌv əɹ lɪvz, əfɛk ðə laɪvz ʌv ʌðɝz, mɪn. əz ðə wil ə taɪm wivz əs ɪndə ðə pæɾɝn, ðə laɪf-θɹɛɾ ʌv itʃ ʌv əs pʊlz ən tʌɡz ət ðə laɪf-θɹɛdz ɝaʊn ʌs. tɑvɝən ɑɹ ðə seɪm, oʊnli mʌtʃ, mʌtʃ mɔɹ soʊ. ðeɪ tʌɡ ət ði ɪntaɪɝ pæɾɝn - fəɹ ə taɪm, ət list - fɔɹsɪŋ ɪt tə ʃeɪp ɝaʊn ðɛm. ðə kloʊsɝ jə ɑɹ tə ðɛm, ðə mɔɹ jə ɑɹ əfɛktəd pɝsənəli. ɪts sɛd ðəɾ ɪf jə wɝ ɪn ðə seɪm ɹum wɪð ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ, jə kəd fil ðə pæɾɝn ɹiɝeɪnʒɪŋ ɪtsɛlf. aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ tʃɹu ðəɾ ɪz, bʌɾ aɪv ɹɛd ðəɾ ɪt wɑz. bʌɾ ɪt dʌzn oʊnli wɝk wʌn weɪ. tɑvɝən ðɛmsɛlvz ɑɹ woʊvən tə ə taɪɾɝ laɪn ðən ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs, wɪð fjuɝ tʃɔɪsəz."

"Ta'veren," Loial began. Perrin waved at him to stop, but the Ogier could seldom be slowed, much less stopped, when one of his enthusiasms had him in its grip. He was accounted extremely hasty, by the Ogier way of looking at things. Loial pushed his book into a coat pocket and went on, gesturing with his pipe. "All of us, all of our lives, affect the lives of others, Min. As the Wheel of Time weaves us into the Pattern, the life-thread of each of us pulls and tugs at the life-threads around us. Ta'veren are the same, only much, much more so. They tug at the entire Pattern - for a time, at least - forcing it to shape around them. The closer you are to them, the more you are affected personally. It's said that if you were in the same room with Artur Hawkwing, you could feel the Pattern rearranging itself. I don't know how true that is, but I've read that it was. But it doesn't only work one way. Ta'veren themselves are woven to a tighter line than the rest of us, with fewer choices."

pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪməst. blʌɾi fju ʌv ðə wʌnz ðət mæɾɝ.

Perrin grimaced. Bloody few of the ones that matter.

mɪn tɔst əɹ hɛd. "aɪ dʒʌst wɪʃ ðeɪ dɪdn əv tə bi soʊ . . . soʊ blʌɾi tɑvɝən ɔl ðə taɪm. tɑvɝən tʌɡɪŋ ɑn wʌn saɪd, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ mɛɾəlɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ. wʌt tʃæns dʌz ə wʊmən hæv?"

Min tossed her head. "I just wish they didn't have to be so . . . so bloody ta'veren all the time. Ta'veren tugging on one side, and Aes Sedai meddling on the other. What chance does a woman have?"

lɔɪəl ʃɹʌɡd. "vɛɹi lɪɾəl, aɪ səpoʊz, əz lɔŋ əz ʃi steɪz kloʊs tə tɑvɝən."

Loial shrugged. "Very little, I suppose, as long as she stays close to ta'veren."

"æz ɪf aɪ hæɾ ə tʃɔɪs," mɪn ɡɹaʊld.

"As if I had a choice," Min growled.

"ɪt wɑz jəɹ ɡʊd fɔɹtʃən - əɹ mɪsfɔɹtʃən, ɪf jə si ɪt ðət weɪ - tə fɔl ɪn wɪð nɑt wʌn, bʌt θɹi tɑvɝən. ɹænd, mæt, ən pɛɹɪn. aɪ maɪsɛlf kaʊn ɪt vɛɹi ɡʊd fɔɹtʃən, ən wəɾ ivən ɪf ðeɪ wɝn maɪ fɹɛnz. aɪ θɪŋk aɪ maɪɾ ivən. . . ." ði oʊɡiɝ lʊkt ət ðɛm, sʌɾənli ʃaɪ, hɪz ɪɹz twɪtʃɪŋ. "pɹɑməs jəl nɑt læf? aɪ θɪŋk aɪ maɪt ɹaɪɾ ə bʊk əbaʊɾ ɪt. aɪ hæv bɪn teɪkɪŋ noʊts."

"It was your good fortune - or misfortune, if you see it that way - to fall in with not one, but three ta'veren. Rand, Mat, and Perrin. I myself count it very good fortune, and would even if they weren't my friends. I think I might even. . . ." The Ogier looked at them, suddenly shy, his ears twitching. "Promise you will not laugh? I think I might write a book about it. I have been taking notes."

mɪn smaɪld, ə fɹɛnli smaɪl, ən lɔɪəlz ɪɹz pɹɪk bæk ʌp əɡɛn. "ðæts wʌndɝfəl," ʃi toʊl hɪm. "bʌt səm ʌv əs fil əz ɪf wɝ biɪŋ dænst əbaʊt laɪk pʌpəts baɪ ðiz tɑvɝən."

Min smiled, a friendly smile, and Loial's ears pricked back up again. "That's wonderful," she told him. "But some of us feel as if we're being danced about like puppets by these ta'veren."

"aɪ dɪdn æsk fəɹ ɪt," pɛɹɪn bɝst aʊt. "aɪ dɪd nɑɾ æsk fəɹ ɪt."

"I didn't ask for it," Perrin burst out. "I did not ask for it."

ʃi ɪɡnɔɹd hɪm. "ɪz ðət wʌt hæpən tə ju, lɔɪəl? ɪz ðət waɪ jə tʃɹævəl wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn? aɪ noʊ jə oʊɡiɝ ɔlmoʊs nɛvɝ liv jəɹ stɛɾɪŋ. dɪd wʌn ə ðiz tɑvɝən tʌɡ jə əlɔŋ wɪð hɪm?"

She ignored him. "Is that what happened to you, Loial? Is that why you travel with Moiraine? I know you Ogier almost never leave your stedding. Did one of these ta'veren tug you along with him?"

lɔɪəl bɪkeɪm ɪnɡɹoʊst ɪn ə stʌɾi ʌv ɪz paɪp. "aɪ dʒʌst wɑntəd tə si ðə ɡɹoʊvz ði oʊɡiɝ plæntəd," hi mʌɾɝd. "dʒʌs tə si ðə ɡɹoʊvz." hi ɡlænst ət pɛɹɪn əz ɪf æskɪŋ fəɹ hɛlp, bʌt pɛɹɪn oʊnli ɡɹɪnd.

Loial became engrossed in a study of his pipe. "I just wanted to see the groves the Ogier planted," he muttered. "Just to see the groves." He glanced at Perrin as if asking for help, but Perrin only grinned.

lɛts si haʊ ðə ʃu neɪlz ɑntu jəɹ huf. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ ɔl ʌv ɪt, bʌɾ i dɪd noʊ lɔɪəl hæd ɹʌn əweɪ. hi wɑz naɪnti jɪɹz oʊld, bʌt nɑt jɛɾ oʊld ɪnʌf baɪ oʊɡiɝ stændɝdz tə liv ðə stɛɾɪŋ - ɡoʊɪŋ aʊtsaɪd, ðeɪ kɔld ɪt - wɪθaʊt ðə pɝmɪʃən ə ði ɛldɝz. oʊɡiɝ lɪvd ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm, əz hjumənz sɔ θɪŋz. lɔɪəl sɛd ði ɛldɝz wəd nɑt bi bɛs plizd wən ðeɪ pʊt ðɛɹ hænz ɑn ɪm əɡɛn. hi simd ɪntɛn ɑn pʊɾɪŋ ðət moʊmən ɔf əz lɔŋ əz pɑsəbəl.

Let's see how the shoe nails onto your hoof. He did not know all of it, but he did know Loial had run away. He was ninety years old, but not yet old enough by Ogier standards to leave the stedding - going Outside, they called it - without the permission of the Elders. Ogier lived a very long time, as humans saw things. Loial said the Elders would not be best pleased when they put their hands on him again. He seemed intent on putting that moment off as long as possible.

ðəɹ wɑz ə stɝ əmʌŋ ðə ʃaɪnɝənz, mɛn ɡɛɾɪŋ tə ðɛɹ fit. ɹænd wɑz kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə mɔɪɹeɪnz hʌt.

There was a stir among the Shienarans, men getting to their feet. Rand was coming out of Moiraine's hut.

ivən ət ðət dɪstəns pɛɹɪn kəd meɪk ɪm aʊt klɪɹli, ə jʌŋ mæn wɪð ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ ən ɡɹeɪ aɪz. hi wɑz ʌv ən eɪdʒ wɪð pɛɹɪn, ən wəd stæn hæf ə hɛd tɔlɝ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ saɪd baɪ saɪd, ðoʊ ɹænd wɑz mɔɹ slɛndɝ, ɪf stɪl bɹɔɾ əkɹɔs ðə ʃoʊldɝz. ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɡoʊldən θɔɹnz ɹæn ʌp ðə slivz ə hɪz haɪ-kɑlɝd, ɹɛd koʊt, ən ɑn ðə bɹɛst ə hɪz dɑɹk kloʊk stʊd ðə seɪm kɹitʃɝ əz ɑn ðə bænɝ, ðə fɔɹ-lɛɡəd sɝpənt wɪð ðə ɡoʊldən meɪn. ɹænd ən i hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp təɡɛðɝ əz fɹɛnz. ɑɹ wi stɪl fɹɛnz? kən wi bi? naʊ?

Even at that distance Perrin could make him out clearly, a young man with reddish hair and gray eyes. He was of an age with Perrin, and would stand half a head taller if they were side by side, though Rand was more slender, if still broad across the shoulders. Embroidered golden thorns ran up the sleeves of his high-collared, red coat, and on the breast of his dark cloak stood the same creature as on the banner, the four-legged serpent with the golden mane. Rand and he had grown up together as friends. Are we still friends? Can we be? Now?

ðə ʃaɪnɝənz baʊɾ əz wʌn, hɛdz hɛld ʌp bʌt hænz tə niz. "lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," ənoʊ kɔld, "wi stæn ɹɛɾi. ɑnɝ tə sɝv."

The Shienarans bowed as one, heads held up but hands to knees. "Lord Dragon," Uno called, "we stand ready. Honor to serve."

ənoʊ, hu kəd hɑɹdli seɪ ə sɛntəns wɪθaʊɾ ə kɝs, spoʊk naʊ wɪð ðə dipəst ɹɪspɛkt. ði ʌðɝz ɛkoʊd hɪm. "ɑnɝ tə sɝv." mæsimə, hu sɔ ɪl ɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ən huz aɪz naʊ ʃoʊn wɪð ʌɾɝ dɪvoʊʃən; ɹeɪɡən; ɔl ə ðɛm, əweɪɾɪŋ ə kəmæn ɪf ɪt wɝ ɹændz plɛʒɝ tə ɡɪv wʌn.

Uno, who could hardly say a sentence without a curse, spoke now with the deepest respect. The others echoed him. "Honor to serve." Masema, who saw ill in everything, and whose eyes now shone with utter devotion; Ragan; all of them, awaiting a command if it were Rand's pleasure to give one.

fɹəm ðə sloʊp ɹænd stɛɹd daʊn əɾ əm ə moʊmənt, ðən tɝn ən dɪsəpɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz.

From the slope Rand stared down at them a moment, then turned and disappeared into the trees.

"hi hæz bɪn ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn əɡɛn," mɪn sɛd kwaɪətli. "ɔl deɪ, ðɪs taɪm."

"He has been arguing with Moiraine again," Min said quietly. "All day, this time."

pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt sɝpɹaɪzd, jɛɾ i stɪl fɛlt ə smɔl ʃɑk. ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɔl ðə tʃaɪldhʊd teɪlz keɪm bæk tə hɪm. ɛɛs sədaɪ, hu meɪd θɹoʊnz ən neɪʃənz dæns tə ðɛɹ hɪɾən stʃɹɪŋz. ɛɛs sədaɪ, huz ɡɪft ɔlweɪz hæɾ ə hʊk ɪn ɪt, huz pɹaɪs wɑz ɔlweɪz smɔlɝ ðən jə kəd bɪliv, jɛɾ ɔlweɪz tɝn aʊt tə bi ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən jə kəɾ ɪmædʒən. ɛɛs sədaɪ, huz æŋɡɝ kəd bɹeɪk ðə ɡɹaʊn ən sʌmən laɪtnɪŋ. səm ə ðə stɔɹiz wɝ əntʃɹu, hi nu naʊ. ən ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt tɛl ðə hæf.

Perrin was not surprised, yet he still felt a small shock. Arguing with an Aes Sedai. All the childhood tales came back to him. Aes Sedai, who made thrones and nations dance to their hidden strings. Aes Sedai, whose gift always had a hook in it, whose price was always smaller than you could believe, yet always turned out to be greater than you could imagine. Aes Sedai, whose anger could break the ground and summon lightning. Some of the stories were untrue, he knew now. And at the same time, they did not tell the half.

"aɪ hæd bɛɾɝ ɡoʊ tə hɪm," hi sɛd. "æftɝ ðeɪ ɑɹɡju, hi ɔlweɪz nidz sʌmwʌn tə tɔk tə." ən əsaɪd fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn, ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli ðə θɹi ʌv əm - mɪn, lɔɪəl, ən ɪm - hu dɪd nɑt stɛɹ ət ɹænd əz ɪf i stʊɾ əbʌv kɪŋz. ən ə ðə θɹi oʊnli pɛɹɪn nu hɪm fɹəm bɪfɔɹ.

"I had better go to him," he said. "After they argue, he always needs someone to talk to." And aside from Moiraine and Lan, there were only the three of them - Min, Loial, and him - who did not stare at Rand as if he stood above kings. And of the three only Perrin knew him from before.

hi stʃɹoʊɾ ʌp ðə sloʊp, pɔzɪŋ oʊnli tə ɡlæns ət ðə kloʊz dɔɹ ə mɔɪɹeɪnz hʌt. leɪə wəd bi ɪn ðɛɹ, ən læn. ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛldəm lɛt hɪmsɛlf ɡɛt fɑɹ fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪz saɪd.

He strode up the slope, pausing only to glance at the closed door of Moiraine's hut. Leya would be in there, and Lan. The Warder seldom let himself get far from the Aes Sedai's side.

ɹændz mʌtʃ smɔlɝ hʌt wɑz ə lɪɾəl loʊɝ daʊn, wɛl hɪɾən ɪn ðə tʃɹiz, əweɪ fɹəm ɔl ðə ɹɛst. hi hæd tʃɹaɪd lɪvɪŋ daʊn əmʌŋ ði ʌðɝ mɛn, bʌt ðɛɹ kɑnstən ɑ dʒɹoʊv ɪm ɔf. hi kɛp tə hɪmsɛlf, naʊ. tu mʌtʃ tə hɪmsɛlf, tə pɛɹɪnz θɪŋkɪŋ. bʌɾ i nu ɹænd wɑz nɑt hɛɾəd tə hɪz hʌt naʊ.

Rand's much smaller hut was a little lower down, well hidden in the trees, away from all the rest. He had tried living down among the other men, but their constant awe drove him off. He kept to himself, now. Too much to himself, to Perrin's thinking. But he knew Rand was not headed to his hut now.

pɛɹɪn hɝiɾ ɑn tə wɛɹ wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə boʊl-ʃeɪp væli sʌɾənli bɪkeɪm ʃɪɹ klɪf, fɪfti peɪsɪz haɪ ən smuð ɪksɛp fəɹ tʌf bɹʌʃ klɪŋɪŋ təneɪʃəsli hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ. hi nu ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ə kɹæk ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ ɹɑk wɔl leɪ, ən oʊpənɪŋ hɑɹdli waɪɾɝ ðən ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. wɪð oʊnli ə ɹɪbən ə leɪt-æftɝnun laɪɾ oʊvɝhɛd, ɪt wɑz laɪk wɔkɪŋ daʊn ə tʌnəl.

Perrin hurried on to where one side of the bowl-shaped valley suddenly became sheer cliff, fifty paces high and smooth except for tough brush clinging tenaciously here and there. He knew exactly where a crack in the gray rock wall lay, an opening hardly wider than his shoulders. With only a ribbon of late-afternoon light overhead, it was like walking down a tunnel.

hæf ə maɪl ðə kɹæk ɹæn, əbɹʌpli oʊpənɪŋ aʊɾ ɪndə ə nɛɹoʊ veɪl, lɛs ðən ə maɪl lɔŋ, ɪts flɔɹ kʌvɝd wɪð ɹɑks ən boʊldɝz, ən ivən ðə stip sloʊps wɝ θɪkli fɔɹəstəd wɪð tɔl lɛðɝlif ən paɪn ən fɝ. lɔŋ ʃædoʊz stʃɹɛtʃt əweɪ fɹəm ðə sʌn sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə maʊnteɪntɑps. ðə wɔlz ə ðɪs pleɪs wɝ ənbɹoʊkən seɪv fəɹ ðə kɹæk, ən əz stip əz ɪf ə dʒaɪən æks hæd bɛɹiɾ ɪtsɛlf ɪn ðə maʊntənz. ɪt kəd bi ivən mɔɹ izəli dɪfɛndəd baɪ ə fju ðən ðə boʊl, bʌɾ ɪt hæd niðɝ stʃɹim nɔɹ spɹɪŋ. noʊ wʌn wɛn ðɛɹ. ɪksɛpt ɹænd, æftɝ i ɑɹɡjud wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn.

Half a mile the crack ran, abruptly opening out into a narrow vale, less than a mile long, its floor covered with rocks and boulders, and even the steep slopes were thickly forested with tall leatherleaf and pine and fir. Long shadows stretched away from the sun sitting on the mountaintops. The walls of this place were unbroken save for the crack, and as steep as if a giant axe had buried itself in the mountains. It could be even more easily defended by a few than the bowl, but it had neither stream nor spring. No one went there. Except Rand, after he argued with Moiraine.

ɹænd stʊd nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ði ɛntʃɹəns, linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə ɹʌf tʃɹʌŋk ʌv ə lɛðɝlif, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə pɑmz ə hɪz hænz. pɛɹɪn nu ðəɾ ɑn itʃ ðəɹ wɑz ə hɛɹən, bɹændɪɾ ɪndə ðə flɛʃ. ɹænd dɪd nɑt muv wən pɛɹɪnz but skɹeɪpt ɑn stoʊn.

Rand stood not far from the entrance, leaning against the rough trunk of a leatherleaf, staring at the palms of his hands. Perrin knew that on each there was a heron, branded into the flesh. Rand did not move when Perrin's boot scraped on stone.

sʌɾənli ɹænd bɪɡæn tə ɹəsaɪt sɔfli, nɛvɝ lʊkɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ɪz hænz.

Suddenly Rand began to recite softly, never looking up from his hands.

"twaɪs ən twaɪs ʃæl i bi mɑɹkt, twaɪs tə lɪv, ən twaɪs tə daɪ.

"Twice and twice shall he be marked, twice to live, and twice to die.

wʌns ðə hɛɹən, tə sɛɾ ɪz pæθ.

Once the heron, to set his path.

twaɪs ðə hɛɹən, tə neɪm ɪm tʃɹu.

Twice the heron, to name him true.

wʌns ðə dʒɹæɡən, fəɹ ɹimɛmbɹəns lɔst.

Once the Dragon, for remembrance lost.

twaɪs ðə dʒɹæɡən, fəɹ ðə pɹaɪs i mʌs peɪ."

Twice the Dragon, for the price he must pay."

wɪð ə ʃʌɾɝ i tʌkt ɪz hænz ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹmz. "bʌt noʊ dʒɹæɡənz, jɛt." hi tʃʌkəld ɹʌfli. "nɑt jɛt."

With a shudder he tucked his hands under his arms. "But no Dragons, yet." He chuckled roughly. "Not yet."

fəɹ ə moʊmən pɛɹɪn sɪmpli lʊkt ət hɪm. ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ə mæn dum tə ɡoʊ mæd fɹəm ðə teɪn ɑn seɪɾɪn, ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, ən sɝɾən tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪm ɪn ɪz mædnəs. ə mæn - ə θɪŋ! - ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz tɔt tə loʊð ən fɪɹ fɹəm tʃaɪldhʊd. oʊnli . . . ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə stɑp siɪŋ ðə bɔɪ hi hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp wɪð. haʊ dʒju dʒʌst stɑp biɪŋ sʌmbɑɾiz fɹɛnd? pɛɹɪn tʃoʊz ə smɔl boʊldɝ wɪð ə flæt tɑp, ən sæt, weɪɾɪŋ.

For a moment Perrin simply looked at him. A man who could channel the One Power. A man doomed to go mad from the taint on saidin, the male half of the True Source, and certain to destroy everything around him in his madness. A man - a thing! - everyone was taught to loathe and fear from childhood. Only . . . it was hard to stop seeing the boy he had grown up with. How do you just stop being somebody's friend? Perrin chose a small boulder with a flat top, and sat, waiting.

æftɝ ə waɪl ɹænd tɝn ɪz hɛd tə lʊk ət hɪm. "du jə θɪŋk mæt ɪz ɔl ɹaɪt? hi lʊk soʊ sɪk, ðə læst aɪ sɔ hɪm."

After a while Rand turned his head to look at him. "Do you think Mat is all right? He looked so sick, the last I saw him."

"hi mʌs bi ɔl ɹaɪt baɪ naʊ." hi ʃəd bi ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, baɪ naʊ. ðəl hil hɪm, ðɛɹ. ən nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin wɪl kip ɪm aʊɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl. ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv, ɹænd ən mæt ən pɛɹɪn. ɔl faɪv fɹəm ɛmənz fild ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. fju pipəl hæd kʌm ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz fɹəm aʊtsaɪd, ɪksɛp fəɹ əkeɪʒənəl pɛdlɝz, ən mɝtʃəns wʌns ə jɪɹ tə baɪ wʊl ən təbæk. ɔlmoʊs noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ lɛft. əntɪl ðə wil tʃoʊz aʊɾ ɪts tɑvɝən, ən faɪv sɪmpəl kʌntʃɹi foʊk kəd steɪ wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ. kəd bi wʌt ðeɪ hæd bɪn noʊ lɔŋɡɝ.

"He must be all right by now." He should be in Tar Valon, by now. They'll Heal him, there. And Nynaeve and Egwene will keep him out of trouble. Egwene and Nynaeve, Rand and Mat and Perrin. All five from Emond's Field in the Two Rivers. Few people had come into the Two Rivers from outside, except for occasional peddlers, and merchants once a year to buy wool and tabac. Almost no one had ever left. Until the Wheel chose out its ta'veren, and five simple country folk could stay where they were no longer. Could be what they had been no longer.

ɹænd nɑɾəd ən wɑz saɪlənt.

Rand nodded and was silent.

"leɪtli," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "aɪ faɪn maɪsɛlf wɪʃɪŋ aɪ wɑz stɪl ə blæksmɪθ. də ju. . . . dʒju wɪʃ jə wɝ stɪl dʒʌst ə ʃɛpɝd?"

"Lately," Perrin said, "I find myself wishing I was still a blacksmith. Do you. . . . Do you wish you were still just a shepherd?"

"duɾi," ɹænd mʌɾɝd. "dɛθ ɪz laɪɾɝ ðən ə fɛðɝ, duɾi hɛviɝ ðən ə maʊntən. ðæts wʌt ðeɪ seɪ ɪn ʃaɪnɝ. 'ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz stɝɪŋ. ðə læs bæɾəl ɪz kʌmɪŋ. ən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əz tə feɪs ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl, əɹ ðə ʃædoʊ wɪl kʌvɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ðə wil ə taɪm bɹoʊkən. ɛvɹi eɪdʒ ɹimeɪɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz ɪmədʒ.' ðɛɹz oʊnli mi." hi bɪɡæn tə læf mɝθləsli, hɪz ʃoʊldɝz ʃeɪkɪŋ. "aɪ hæv ðə duɾi, kəz ðəɹ ɪzən ɛnibəɾi ɛls, naʊ ɪz ðɛɹ?"

"Duty," Rand muttered. "Death is lighter than a feather, duty heavier than a mountain. That's what they say in Shienar. 'The Dark One is stirring. The Last Battle is coming. And the Dragon Reborn has to face the Dark One in the Last Battle, or the Shadow will cover everything. The Wheel of Time broken. Every Age remade in the Dark One's image.' There's only me." He began to laugh mirthlessly, his shoulders shaking. "I have the duty, because there isn't anybody else, now is there?"

pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli. ðə læftɝ hæɾ ə ɹɔ ɛdʒ ðət meɪɾ ɪz skɪn kɹɔl. "aɪ ʌndɝstæn jə wɝ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn əɡɛn. ðə seɪm θɪŋ?"

Perrin shifted uneasily. The laughter had a raw edge that made his skin crawl. "I understand you were arguing with Moiraine again. The same thing?"

ɹænd dʒɹu ə dip, ɹæɡəd bɹɛθ. "doʊnt wi ɔlweɪz ɑɹɡju əbaʊt ðə seɪm θɪŋ? ðəɹ daʊn ðɛɹ, ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn, ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn noʊz wɛɹ ɛls. hʌnʒɹədz ə ðɛm. θaʊzənz. ðeɪ dɪklɛɹd fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn kəz aɪ ɹeɪz ðət bænɝ. kəz aɪ lɛt maɪsɛlf bi kɔl ðə dʒɹæɡən. kəz aɪ kəd si noʊ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs. ən ðəɹ daɪɪŋ. faɪɾɪŋ, sɝtʃɪŋ, ən pɹeɪɪŋ fəɹ ðə mæn u ɪz səpoʊz tə lid ðɛm. daɪɪŋ. ən aɪ sɪt hɪɹ seɪf ɪn ðə maʊntənz ɔl wɪntɝ. aɪ . . . aɪ oʊ ðɛm . . . sʌmθɪŋ."

Rand drew a deep, ragged breath. "Don't we always argue about the same thing? They're down there, on Almoth Plain, and the Light alone knows where else. Hundreds of them. Thousands. They declared for the Dragon Reborn because I raised that banner. Because I let myself be called the Dragon. Because I could see no other choice. And they're dying. Fighting, searching, and praying for the man who is supposed to lead them. Dying. And I sit here safe in the mountains all winter. I . . . I owe them . . . something."

"ju θɪŋk aɪ laɪk ɪt?" pɛɹɪn swʌŋ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ɪɹɪteɪʃən.

"You think I like it?" Perrin swung his head in irritation.

"ju teɪk wʌtɛvɝ ʃi sɛz tə ju," ɹænd ɡɹeɪɾɪd. "ju nɛvɝ stæn ʌp tə hɝ."

"You take whatever she says to you," Rand grated. "You never stand up to her."

"mʌtʃ ɡʊɾ ɪts dʌn ju, stændɪŋ ʌp tə hɝ. juv ɑɹɡjuɾ ɔl wɪntɝ, ən wɪv sæt hɪɹ laɪk lʌmps ɔl wɪntɝ."

"Much good it has done you, standing up to her. You have argued all winter, and we have sat here like lumps all winter."

"bɪkɔz ʃiz ɹaɪt." ɹænd læft əɡɛn, ðət tʃɪlɪŋ læf. "ðə laɪt bɝn mi, ʃiz ɹaɪt. ðeɪ ɑɹ ɔl splɪɾ ʌp ɪndə lɪɾəl ɡɹups ɔl oʊvɝ ðə pleɪn, ɔl əkɹɔs tæɹɑbən ən ɑɹæd dumən. ɪf aɪ dʒɔɪn ɛni wʌn ə ðɛm, ðə waɪtkloʊks ən ðə dəmɑni ɑɹmi ən ðə tæɹɑbənɝz wɪl bi ɑn tɑp ə ðɛm laɪk ə dʌk ɑn ə biɾəl."

"Because she is right." Rand laughed again, that chilling laugh. "The Light burn me, she is right. They are all split up into little groups all over the plain, all across Tarabon and Arad Doman. If I join any one of them, the Whitecloaks and the Domani army and the Taraboners will be on top of them like a duck on a beetle."

pɛɹɪn ɔlmoʊs læf hɪmsɛlf, ɪn kənfjuʒən. "ɪf jə əɡɹi wɪð hɝ, waɪ ɪn ðə laɪt dʒju ɑɹɡju ɔl ðə taɪm?"

Perrin almost laughed himself, in confusion. "If you agree with her, why in the Light do you argue all the time?"

"bɪkɔz aɪ hæv tə də sʌmθɪŋ. əɹ əl . . . əl - bɝs laɪk ə ɹɑɾɪd mɛlən!"

"Because I have to do something. Or I'll . . . I'll - burst like a rotted melon!"

"du wʌt? ɪf jə lɪsən tə wʌt ʃi sɛz - "

"Do what? If you listen to what she says - "

ɹænd ɡeɪv ɪm noʊ tʃæns tə seɪ ðeɪ wəd sɪt ðəɹ fɝɛvɝ. "mɔɪɹeɪn sɛz! mɔɪɹeɪn sɛz!" ɹænd dʒɝkt ɪɹɛkt, skwizɪŋ ɪz hɛd bɪtwin ɪz hænz. "mɔɪɹeɪn əz sʌmθɪŋ tə seɪ əbaʊɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ! mɔɪɹeɪn sɛz aɪ mʌsnt ɡoʊ tə ðə mɛn u ɑɹ daɪɪŋ ɪn maɪ neɪm. mɔɪɹeɪn sɛz əl noʊ wʌt tə də nɛks kəz ðə pæɾɝn wɪl fɔɹs mi tə ɪt. mɔɪɹeɪn sɛz! bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ sɛz haʊ əl noʊ. oʊ, noʊ! ʃi dʌznt noʊ ðæt." hɪz hænz fɛl tə hɪz saɪdz, ən i tɝn təwɔɹd pɛɹɪn, hɛd tɪltəɾ ən aɪz nɛɹoʊd. "səmtaɪmz aɪ fil əz ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz pʊɾɪŋ mi θɹu maɪ peɪsɪz laɪk ə fænsi tɛɹən stæljən duɪŋ ɪz stɛps. dʒju ɛvɝ fil ðæt?"

Rand gave him no chance to say they would sit there forever. "Moiraine says! Moiraine says!" Rand jerked erect, squeezing his head between his hands. "Moiraine has something to say about everything! Moiraine says I mustn't go to the men who are dying in my name. Moiraine says I'll know what to do next because the Pattern will force me to it. Moiraine says! But she never says how I'll know. Oh, no! She doesn't know that." His hands fell to his sides, and he turned toward Perrin, head tilted and eyes narrowed. "Sometimes I feel as if Moiraine is putting me through my paces like a fancy Tairen stallion doing his steps. Do you ever feel that?"

pɛɹɪn skɹʌbd ə hæn θɹu hɪz ʃæɡi hɛɹ. "aɪ. . . . wʌtɛvɝ ɪz pʊʃɪŋ ʌs, əɹ pʊlɪŋ ʌs, aɪ noʊ hu ði ɛnəmi ɪz, ɹænd."

Perrin scrubbed a hand through his shaggy hair. "I. . . . Whatever is pushing us, or pulling us, I know who the enemy is, Rand."

"bælzəmən," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli. ən eɪntʃənt neɪm fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk tʌŋ, ɪt mɛn hɑɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk. "æn aɪ mʌs feɪs hɪm, pɛɹɪn." hɪz aɪz kloʊzd ɪn ə ɡɹɪmɑs, hæf smaɪl, hæf peɪn. "laɪt hɛlp mi, hæf ðə taɪm aɪ wɑn ɪt tə hæpən naʊ, tə bi oʊvɝ ən dʌn wɪð, ən ði ʌðɝ hæf. . . . haʊ mɛni taɪmz kən aɪ mænədʒ tə. . . . laɪt, ɪt pʊlz ət mi soʊ. wʌɾ ɪf aɪ kænt. . . . wʌɾ ɪf aɪ. . . ." ðə ɡɹaʊn tʃɹɛmbəld.

"Ba'alzamon," Rand said softly. An ancient name for the Dark One. In the Trolloc tongue, it meant Heart of the Dark. "And I must face him, Perrin." His eyes closed in a grimace, half smile, half pain. "Light help me, half the time I want it to happen now, to be over and done with, and the other half. . . . How many times can I manage to. . . . Light, it pulls at me so. What if I can't. . . . What if I. . . ." The ground trembled.

"ɹænd?" pɛɹɪn sɛd wɝidli.

"Rand?" Perrin said worriedly.

ɹænd ʃɪvɝd; dɪspaɪt ðə tʃɪl, ðəɹ wɑz swɛɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs. hɪz aɪz wɝ stɪl ʃʌt taɪt. "oʊ, laɪt," hi ɡɹoʊnd, "ɪt pʊlz soʊ."

Rand shivered; despite the chill, there was sweat on his face. His eyes were still shut tight. "Oh, Light," he groaned, "it pulls so."

sʌɾənli ðə ɡɹaʊn hiv bɪniθ pɛɹɪn, ən ðə væli ɛkoʊd wɪð ə væst ɹʌmbəl. ɪt simd əz ɪf ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɑz dʒɝkt aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz fit. hi fɛl - əɹ ði ɝθ lɛpt ʌp tə mit hɪm. ðə væli ʃʊk əz ðoʊ ə væs hæn hæd ɹitʃt daʊn fɹəm ðə skaɪ tə ɹɛntʃ ɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə lænd. hi klʌŋ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd waɪl ɪt tʃɹaɪd tə baʊns ɪm laɪk ə bɔl. pɛbəlz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz aɪz lɛpt ən tʌmbəld, ən dʌst ɹoʊz ɪn weɪvz.

Suddenly the ground heaved beneath Perrin, and the valley echoed with a vast rumble. It seemed as if the ground was jerked out from under his feet. He fell - or the earth leaped up to meet him. The valley shook as though a vast hand had reached down from the sky to wrench it out of the land. He clung to the ground while it tried to bounce him like a ball. Pebbles in front of his eyes leaped and tumbled, and dust rose in waves.

"ɹænd!" hɪz bɛloʊ wɑz lɔst ɪn ðə ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ ɹɔɹ.

"Rand!" His bellow was lost in the grumbling roar.

ɹænd stʊd wɪð ɪz hɛd θɹoʊn bæk, hɪz aɪz stɪl ʃʌt taɪt. hi dɪd nɑt sim tə fil ðə θɹæʃɪŋ ə ðə ɡɹaʊn ðət hæɾ ɪm naʊ ət wʌn æŋɡəl, naʊ əɾ ənʌðɝ. hɪz bæləns nɛvɝ ʃɪftəd, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ hi wɑz tɔst. pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt bi sɝɾən, biɪŋ ʃeɪkən əz i wɑz, bʌɾ i θɔt ɹænd wɔɹ ə sæd smaɪl. ðə tʃɹiz fleɪld əbaʊt, ən ðə lɛðɝlif sʌɾənli kɹækt ɪn tu, ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪts tʃɹʌŋk kɹæʃɪŋ daʊn nɑt θɹi peɪsɪz fɹəm ɹænd. hi noʊɾəst ɪt noʊ mɔɹ ðən i noʊɾəst ɛni ʌv ðə ɹɛst.

Rand stood with his head thrown back, his eyes still shut tight. He did not seem to feel the thrashing of the ground that had him now at one angle, now at another. His balance never shifted, no matter how he was tossed. Perrin could not be certain, being shaken as he was, but he thought Rand wore a sad smile. The trees flailed about, and the leatherleaf suddenly cracked in two, the greater part of its trunk crashing down not three paces from Rand. He noticed it no more than he noticed any of the rest.

pɛɹɪn stʃɹʌɡəl tə fɪl ɪz lʌŋz. "ɹænd! fəɹ ðə lʌv ə ðə laɪt, ɹænd! stɑp ɪt!"

Perrin struggled to fill his lungs. "Rand! For the love of the Light, Rand! Stop it!"

əz əbɹʌpli əz ɪt hæd bɪɡʌn, ɪt wɑz dʌn. ə wikən bɹæntʃ kɹækt ɔf ʌv ə stʌntɪɾ oʊk wɪð ə laʊd snæp. pɛɹɪn ɡɑt tə hɪz fit sloʊli, kɑfɪŋ. dʌs hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, spɑɹklɪŋ moʊts ɪn ðə ɹeɪz ə ðə sɛɾɪŋ sʌn.

As abruptly as it had begun, it was done. A weakened branch cracked off of a stunted oak with a loud snap. Perrin got to his feet slowly, coughing. Dust hung in the air, sparkling motes in the rays of the setting sun.

ɹænd wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ, naʊ, tʃɛs hivɪŋ əz ɪf i hæd ɹʌn tɛn maɪlz. ðɪs hæd nɛvɝ hæpən bɪfɔɹ, nɔɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɹimoʊtli laɪk ɪt.

Rand was staring at nothing, now, chest heaving as if he had run ten miles. This had never happened before, nor anything remotely like it.

"ɹænd," pɛɹɪn sɛd kɛɹfəli, "wʌt - ?"

"Rand," Perrin said carefully, "what - ?"

ɹænd stɪl sim tə bi lʊkɪŋ ɪndə ə fɑɹ dɪstəns. "ɪɾ ɪz ɔlweɪz ðɛɹ. kɔlɪŋ tə mi. pʊlɪŋ ət mi. seɪɾɪn. ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. səmtaɪmz aɪ kæn stɑp maɪsɛlf fɹəm ɹitʃɪŋ aʊt fəɹ ɪt." hi meɪɾ ə moʊʃən ə plʌkɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ, ən tʃɹænsfɝɾ ɪz stɛɹ tə hɪz kloʊz fɪst. "aɪ kən fil ðə teɪn ivən bɪfɔɹ aɪ tʌtʃ ɪt. ðə dɑɹk wʌnz teɪnt, laɪk ə θɪn koʊɾ ə vɪlnəs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪd ðə laɪt. ɪt tɝnz maɪ stʌmək, bʌɾ aɪ kænɑt hɛlp maɪsɛlf. aɪ kænɑt! oʊnli səmtaɪmz, aɪ ɹitʃ aʊt, ən ɪts laɪk tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kætʃ ɛɹ." hɪz ɛmpti hæn spɹæŋ oʊpən, ən i ɡeɪv ə bɪɾɝ læf. "wʌɾ ɪf ðət hæpənz wən ðə læs bæɾəl kʌmz? wʌɾ ɪf aɪ ɹitʃ aʊɾ ən kætʃ nʌθɪŋ?"

Rand still seemed to be looking into a far distance. "It is always there. Calling to me. Pulling at me. Saidin. The male half of the True Source. Sometimes I can't stop myself from reaching out for it." He made a motion of plucking something out of the air, and transferred his stare to his closed fist. "I can feel the taint even before I touch it. The Dark One's taint, like a thin coat of vileness trying to hide the Light. It turns my stomach, but I cannot help myself. I cannot! Only sometimes, I reach out, and it's like trying to catch air." His empty hand sprang open, and he gave a bitter laugh. "What if that happens when the Last Battle comes? What if I reach out and catch nothing?"

"wɛl, jə kɑt sʌmθɪŋ ðət taɪm," pɛɹɪn sɛd hɔɹsli. "wʌt wɝ jə duɪŋ?"

"Well, you caught something that time," Perrin said hoarsely. "What were you doing?"

ɹænd lʊkt ɝaʊn əz ɪf siɪŋ θɪŋz fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. ðə fɔlən lɛðɝlif, ən ðə bɹoʊkən bɹæntʃəz. ðəɹ wɑz, pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd, sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli lɪɾəl dæmədʒ. hi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd ɡeɪpɪŋ ɹɛns ɪn ði ɝθ. ðə wɔl ə tʃɹiz lʊkt ɔlmoʊs hoʊl.

Rand looked around as if seeing things for the first time. The fallen leatherleaf, and the broken branches. There was, Perrin realized, surprisingly little damage. He had expected gaping rents in the earth. The wall of trees looked almost whole.

"aɪ dɪd nɑt min tə də ðɪs. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə oʊpən ə tæp, ən ɪnstɛd pʊl ðə hoʊl tæp aʊɾ ə ðə bæɹəl. ɪt . . . fɪl mi. aɪ hæd tə sɛn ɪt sʌmwɛɹ bɪfɔɹ ɪt bɝn mi ʌp, bʌɾ aɪ . . . aɪ dɪd nɑt min ðɪs."

"I did not mean to do this. It was as if I tried to open a tap, and instead pulled the whole tap out of the barrel. It . . . filled me. I had to send it somewhere before it burned me up, but I . . . I did not mean this."

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. wʌt jus tə tɛl ɪm tə tʃɹaɪ nɑt tə də ɪɾ əɡɛn? hi bɛɹli noʊz mɔɹ əbaʊt wʌt hiz duɪŋ ðən aɪ du. hi kəntɛntəd hɪmsɛlf wɪð, "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ɪnʌf u wɑn jə dɛd - ən ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs - wɪθaʊt jə duɪŋ ðə dʒɑb fəɹ ðɛm." ɹænd dɪd nɑt sim tə bi lɪsnɪŋ. "wi hæd bɛst ɡɛɾ ɑn bæk tə ðə kæmp. ɪɾəl bi dɑɹk sun, ən aɪ doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt ju, bʌɾ aɪm hʌŋɡɹi."

Perrin shook his head. What use to tell him to try not to do it again? He barely knows more about what he's doing than I do. He contented himself with, "There are enough who want you dead - and the rest of us - without you doing the job for them." Rand did not seem to be listening. "We had best get on back to the camp. It will be dark soon, and I don't know about you, but I am hungry."

"wʌt? oʊ. jə ɡoʊ ɑn, pɛɹɪn. əl bi əlɔŋ. aɪ wɑnə bi əloʊn əɡɛn ə waɪl."

"What? Oh. You go on, Perrin. I will be along. I want to be alone again a while."

pɛɹɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən tɝn ɹɪlʌktənli təwɔɹd ðə kɹæk ɪn ðə væli wɔl. hi stɑpt wən ɹænd spoʊk əɡɛn.

Perrin hesitated, then turned reluctantly toward the crack in the valley wall. He stopped when Rand spoke again.

"du juv dʒɹimz wən jə slip? ɡʊd dʒɹimz?"

"Do you have dreams when you sleep? Good dreams?"

"səmtaɪmz," pɛɹɪn sɛd wɛɹəli. "aɪ doʊn ɹɪmɛmbɝ mʌtʃ ʌv wʌɾ aɪ dʒɹim." hi hæd lɝn tə sɛt ɡɑɹdz ɑn ɪz dʒɹimɪŋ.

"Sometimes," Perrin said warily. "I don't remember much of what I dream." He had learned to set guards on his dreaming.

"ðeɪɹ ɔlweɪz ðɛɹ, dʒɹimz," ɹænd sɛd, soʊ sɔfli pɛɹɪn bɛɹli hɝd. "meɪbi ðeɪ tɛl əs θɪŋz. tʃɹu θɪŋz." hi fɛl saɪlənt, bɹuɾɪŋ.

"They're always there, dreams," Rand said, so softly Perrin barely heard. "Maybe they tell us things. True things." He fell silent, brooding.

"sʌpɝz weɪɾɪŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, bʌt ɹænd wɑz dip ɪn ɪz oʊn θɔts. faɪnəli pɛɹɪn tɝn ən lɛft ɪm stændɪŋ ðɛɹ.

"Supper's waiting," Perrin said, but Rand was deep in his own thoughts. Finally Perrin turned and left him standing there.


tʃæptɝ θɹi


CHAPTER 3

nuz fɹəm ðə pleɪn


News from the Plain

dɑɹknəs ʃɹaʊɾɪd pɑɹɾ ə ðə kɹæk, fəɹ ɪn wʌn pleɪs ðə tʃɹɛmɝz hæd kəlæpst ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə wɔl əɡɛns ði ʌðɝ saɪd, haɪ ʌp. hi stɛɹɾ ʌp ət ðə blæknəs wɛɹəli bɪfɔɹ hɝiɪŋ ʌndɝniθ, bʌt ðə slæb ə stoʊn sim tə bi sɑlədli wɛdʒd ɪn pleɪs. ði ɪtʃ hæd ɹɪtɝn tə ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd, stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ. noʊ, bɝn mi! noʊ! ɪt wɛn əweɪ.

Darkness shrouded part of the crack, for in one place the tremors had collapsed a part of the wall against the other side, high up. He stared up at the blackness warily before hurrying underneath, but the slab of stone seemed to be solidly wedged in place. The itch had returned to the back of his head, stronger than before. No, burn me! No! It went away.

wən i keɪm aʊɾ əbʌv ðə kæmp, ðə boʊl wɑz fɪld wɪð ɑd ʃædoʊz fɹəm ðə sɪŋkɪŋ sʌn. mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz stændɪŋ aʊtsaɪɾ əɹ hʌt, piɹɪŋ ʌp ət ðə kɹæk. hi stɑpt ʃɔɹt. ʃi wɑz ə slɛndɝ, dɑɹk-hɛɹd wʊmən noʊ tɔlɝ ðən ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ən pɹɪɾi, wɪð ði eɪdʒləs kwɑləɾi ʌv ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæd wɝkt wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ fəɹ ə taɪm. hi kəd nɑt pʊɾ ɛni eɪdʒ əɾ ɔl tə hɝ, wɪð əɹ feɪs tu smuð fəɹ mɛni jɪɹz ən əɹ dɑɹk aɪz tu waɪz fəɹ juθ. hɝ dʒɹɛs ə dip blu sɪlk wɑz dɪsɹeɪɾ ən dʌsti, ən wɪsps stʌk aʊɾ ɪn əɹ juʒəwəli wɛl-ɔɹɾɝd hɛɹ. ə smʌdʒ ə dʌs leɪ əkɹɔs əɹ feɪs.

When he came out above the camp, the bowl was filled with odd shadows from the sinking sun. Moiraine was standing outside her hut, peering up at the crack. He stopped short. She was a slender, dark-haired woman no taller than his shoulder, and pretty, with the ageless quality of all Aes Sedai who had worked with the One Power for a time. He could not put any age at all to her, with her face too smooth for many years and her dark eyes too wise for youth. Her dress of deep blue silk was disarrayed and dusty, and wisps stuck out in her usually well-ordered hair. A smudge of dust lay across her face.

hi dʒɹɑpt ɪz aɪz. ʃi nu əbaʊɾ ɪm - ʃi ən læn əloʊn, ʌv ðoʊz ɪn ðə kæmp - ən i dɪd nɑt laɪk ðə noʊɪŋ ɪn əɹ feɪs wən ʃi lʊkt ɪndə hɪz aɪz. jɛloʊ aɪz. sʌmdeɪ, pɝhæps, hi kəd bɹɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə æsk əɹ wʌt ʃi nu. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ mʌs noʊ mɔɹ ʌv ɪt ðən i dɪd. bʌt ðɪs wɑz nɑt ðə taɪm. ðəɹ nɛvɝ sim tə bi ə taɪm. "hi. . . . hi dɪdn min. . . . ɪt wɑz ən æksəɾənt."

He dropped his eyes. She knew about him - she and Lan alone, of those in the camp - and he did not like the knowing in her face when she looked into his eyes. Yellow eyes. Someday, perhaps, he could bring himself to ask her what she knew. An Aes Sedai must know more of it than he did. But this was not the time. There never seemed to be a time. "He. . . . He didn't mean. . . . It was an accident."

"æn æksəɾənt," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs, ðən ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ən vænɪʃt bæk ɪnsaɪd ðə hʌt. ðə dɔɹ bæŋd ʃʌɾ ə lɪɾəl laʊdli.

"An accident," she said in a flat voice, then shook her head and vanished back inside the hut. The door banged shut a little loudly.

pɛɹɪn dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn daʊn təwɔɹd ðə kʊk faɪɝz. ðəɹ wəd bi ənʌðɝ ɑɹɡjəmən bɪtwin ɹænd ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ɪf nɑt tənaɪt.

Perrin drew a deep breath and continued on down toward the cook fires. There would be another argument between Rand and the Aes Sedai, in the morning if not tonight.

hæf ə dʌzən tʃɹiz leɪ tɑpəld ɑn ðə sloʊps ə ðə boʊl, ɹuts ɹɪpt aʊɾ ə ði ɝθ ɪn ɑɹks ə sɔɪl. ə tʃɹeɪl ə skɹeɪps ən tʃɝnd ɡɹaʊn lɛd daʊn tə ðə stʃɹimsaɪɾ ən ə boʊldɝ ðət hæd nɑt bɪn ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ. wʌn ə ðə hʌts ʌp ði ɑpəzət sloʊp hæd kəlæpst ɪn ðə tʃɹɛmɝz, ən moʊst ə ðə ʃaɪnɝənz wɝ ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ɪt, ɹibɪldɪŋ ɪt. lɔɪəl wɑz wɪð ðɛm. ði oʊɡiɝ kəd pɪk ʌp ə lɔɡ ɪt wəd teɪk fɔɹ mɛn tə lɪft. ənoʊz kɝsɪz əkeɪʒənəli dʒɹɪftəd daʊn.

Half a dozen trees lay toppled on the slopes of the bowl, roots ripped out of the earth in arcs of soil. A trail of scrapes and churned ground led down to the streamside and a boulder that had not been there before. One of the huts up the opposite slope had collapsed in the tremors, and most of the Shienarans were gathered around it, rebuilding it. Loial was with them. The Ogier could pick up a log it would take four men to lift. Uno's curses occasionally drifted down.

mɪn stʊd baɪ ðə faɪɝz, stɝɪŋ ə kɛɾəl wɪð ə dɪsɡɹʌntəld ɪkspɹɛʃən. ðəɹ wɑz ə smɔl bɹuz ɑn əɹ tʃik, ən ə feɪn smɛl ə bɝn stu hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. "aɪ heɪt kʊkɪŋ," ʃi ənaʊnst, ən pɪɹd daʊtfəli ɪndə ðə kɛɾəl. "ɪf sʌmθɪŋ ɡoʊz ɹɔŋ wɪð ɪt, ɪɾ ɪzən maɪ fɔlt. ɹænd spɪl hæf ʌv ɪɾ ɑn ðə faɪɝ wɪð hɪz. . . . wʌt ɹaɪt dʌz i hæv tə baʊns əs ɝaʊn laɪk sæks ʌv ɡɹeɪn?" ʃi ɹʌb ðə siɾ ə hɝ bɹitʃɪz ən wɪnst. "wɛn aɪ ɡɛt maɪ hænz ɑn hɪm, əl θʌmp ɪm soʊ hi nɛvɝ fɝɡɛts." ʃi weɪv ðə wʊɾən spun ət pɛɹɪn əz ɪf ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə stɑɹt ðə θʌmpɪŋ wɪð hɪm.

Min stood by the fires, stirring a kettle with a disgruntled expression. There was a small bruise on her cheek, and a faint smell of burned stew hung in the air. "I hate cooking," she announced, and peered doubtfully into the kettle. "If something goes wrong with it, it isn't my fault. Rand spilled half of it on the fire with his. . . . What right does he have to bounce us around like sacks of grain?" She rubbed the seat of her breeches and winced. "When I get my hands on him, I'll thump him so he never forgets." She waved the wooden spoon at Perrin as if she intended to start the thumping with him.

"wɑz ɛniwʌn hɝt?"

"Was anyone hurt?"

"oʊnli ɪf jə kaʊn bɹuzəz," mɪn sɛd ɡɹɪmli. "ðeɪ wɝ əpsɛt, ɔl ɹaɪt, ət fɝst. ðən ðeɪ sɔ mɔɪɹeɪn stɛɹɪŋ ɔf təwɔɹd ɹændz haɪɾi-hoʊl, ən dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt wɑz ɪz wɝk. ɪf ðə dʒɹæɡən wɑns tə ʃeɪk ðə maʊntən daʊn ɑn əɹ hɛdz, ðən ðə dʒɹæɡən mʌst əv ə ɡʊd ɹizən fəɹ ɪt. ɪf i dɪsaɪɾɪd tə meɪk əm teɪk ɔf ðɛɹ skɪnz ən dæns ɪn ðɛɹ boʊnz, ðeɪ wəd θɪŋk ɪɾ ɔl ɹaɪt." ʃi snɔɹɾɪd ən ɹæp ðə spun ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə kɛɾəl.

"Only if you count bruises," Min said grimly. "They were upset, all right, at first. Then they saw Moiraine staring off toward Rand's hidey-hole, and decided it was his work. If the Dragon wants to shake the mountain down on our heads, then the Dragon must have a good reason for it. If he decided to make them take off their skins and dance in their bones, they would think it all right." She snorted and rapped the spoon on the edge of the kettle.

hi lʊk bæk təwɔɹd mɔɪɹeɪnz hʌt. ɪf leɪə hæd bɪn hɝt - ɪf ʃi wɝ dɛd - ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd nɑt sɪmpli hæv ɡɔn bæk ɪnsaɪd. ðə sɛns ʌv weɪɾɪŋ wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ. wʌtɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz, ɪt hæzən hæpən jɛt. "mɪn, meɪbi jə hæd bɛɾɝ ɡoʊ. fɝs θɪŋ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. aɪ hæv səm sɪlvɝ aɪ kən lɛt jə hæv, ən aɪm ʃʊɹ mɔɪɹeɪn wəd ɡɪv jə ɪnʌf tə teɪk pæsədʒ wɪð ə mɝtʃəns tʃɹeɪn aʊɾ ʌv ɡildən. jə kəd bi bæk ɪn bɛɹlən bɪfɔɹ jə noʊ ɪt."

He looked back toward Moiraine's hut. If Leya had been hurt - if she were dead - the Aes Sedai would not simply have gone back inside. The sense of waiting was still there. Whatever it is, it hasn't happened yet. "Min, maybe you had better go. First thing in the morning. I have some silver I can let you have, and I'm sure Moiraine would give you enough to take passage with a merchant's train out of Ghealdan. You could be back in Baerlon before you know it."

ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɪm əntɪl i bɪɡæn tə wʌndɝ ɪf i hæd sɛd sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ. faɪnəli, ʃi sɛd, "ðæɾ ɪz vɛɹi swiɾ ə ju, pɛɹɪn. bʌt, noʊ."

She looked at him until he began to wonder if he had said something wrong. Finally, she said, "That is very sweet of you, Perrin. But, no."

"aɪ θɔt jə wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ. jəɹ ɔlweɪz kæɹiɪŋ ɑn əbaʊt hævɪŋ tə steɪ hɪɹ."

"I thought you wanted to go. You're always carrying on about having to stay here."

"aɪ nu ən oʊld ɪliɑnɝ wʊmən; wʌns," ʃi sɛd sloʊli. "wɛn ʃi wɑz jʌŋ, hɝ mʌðɝ ɝeɪnʒd ə mɛɹɪdʒ fəɹ əɹ wɪð ə mæn ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ivən mɛt. ðeɪ də ðət daʊn ɪn ɪljən, səmtaɪmz. ʃi sɛd ʃi spɛn ðə fɝs faɪv jɪɹz ɹeɪdʒɪŋ əɡɛns hɪm, ən ðə nɛks faɪv skimɪŋ tə meɪk ɪz laɪf mɪzɝəbəl wɪθaʊɾ ɪz noʊɪŋ u wɑz tə bleɪm. ɪt wɑz oʊnli jɪɹz leɪɾɝ, ʃi sɛd, wən i daɪd, ðət ʃi ɹilaɪzd i ɹɪli hæd bɪn ðə lʌv ə hɝ laɪf."

"I knew an old Illianer woman; once," she said slowly. "When she was young, her mother arranged a marriage for her with a man she had never even met. They do that down in Illian, sometimes. She said she spent the first five years raging against him, and the next five scheming to make his life miserable without his knowing who was to blame. It was only years later, she said, when he died, that she realized he really had been the love of her life."

"aɪ doʊn si wʌt ðəɾ əz tə də wɪð ðɪs."

"I don't see what that has to do with this."

hɝ lʊk sɛɾ i ɑbviəsli wɑz nɑt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʌndɝstænd, ən əɹ vɔɪs bɪkeɪm oʊvɝli peɪʃənt. "dʒʌs kəz feɪɾ əz tʃoʊzən sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ jə ɪnstɛɾ ə jə tʃuzɪŋ ɪt fəɹ jɝsɛlf dʌzn min ɪts tə bi bæd. ivən ɪf ɪts sʌmθɪŋ jə ɑɹ ʃʊɹ jə wəd nɛvɝ əv tʃoʊzən ɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. 'bɛɾɝ tɛn deɪz ə lʌv ðən jɪɹz ə ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ,' " ʃi kwoʊɾəd.

Her look said he obviously was not trying to understand, and her voice became overly patient. "Just because fate has chosen something for you instead of you choosing it for yourself doesn't mean it has to be bad. Even if it's something you are sure you would never have chosen in a hundred years. 'Better ten days of love than years of regretting,' " she quoted.

"aɪ ʌndɝstæn ðəɾ ivən lɛs," hi toʊl hɝ. "ju doʊn əv tə steɪ ɪf jə doʊnt wɑn tə."

"I understand that even less," he told her. "You don't have to stay if you don't want to."

ʃi hʌŋ ðə spun ɑn ə tɔl fɔɹk stɪk stʌk ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ðən sɝpɹaɪzd ɪm baɪ ɹaɪzɪŋ ɑn tɪptoʊ tə kɪs ɪz tʃik. "ju ɑɹ ə vɛɹi naɪs mæn, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. ivən ɪf jə doʊn ʌndɝstæn ɛniθɪŋ."

She hung the spoon on a tall forked stick stuck in the ground, then surprised him by rising on tiptoe to kiss his cheek. "You are a very nice man, Perrin Aybara. Even if you don't understand anything."

pɛɹɪn blɪŋkt əɾ əɹ ənsɝteɪnli. hi wɪʃt ðəɾ i kəd bi sɝɾən ɹænd wɑz ɪn ɪz ɹaɪt maɪnd, əɹ ðət mæt wɝ ðɛɹ. hi wɑz nɛvɝ ʃʊɹ ə hɪz ɡɹaʊnd wɪð ɡɝlz, bʌt ɹænd ɔlweɪz sim tə noʊ hɪz weɪ. soʊ dɪd mæt; moʊst ə ðə ɡɝlz bæk hoʊm ɪn ɛmənz fil hæd snɪf ðət mæt wəd nɛvɝ ɡɹoʊ ʌp, bʌɾ i hæd sim tə hæv ə weɪ wɪð ðɛm.

Perrin blinked at her uncertainly. He wished that he could be certain Rand was in his right mind, or that Mat were there. He was never sure of his ground with girls, but Rand always seemed to know his way. So did Mat; most of the girls back home in Emond's Field had sniffed that Mat would never grow up, but he had seemed to have a way with them.

"wʌɾ əbaʊt ju, pɛɹɪn? doʊn jə ɛvɝ wɑnə ɡoʊ hoʊm?"

"What about you, Perrin? Don't you ever want to go home?"

"ɔl ðə taɪm," hi sɛd fɝvənli. "bʌɾ aɪ . . . aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk aɪ kæn. nɑt jɛt." hi lʊkt ɔf təwɔɹd ɹændz veɪl. wəɹ taɪd təɡɛðɝ, ɪt simz, ɑɹənt wi, ɹænd? "meɪbi nɑɾ ɛvɝ." hi θɔɾ i hæd sɛd ðət tu sɔfli fəɹ əɹ tə hɪɹ, bʌt ðə lʊk ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm wɑz fʊl ə sɪmpəθi. ən əɡɹimənt.

"All the time," he said fervently. "But I . . . I do not think I can. Not yet." He looked off toward Rand's vale. We are tied together, it seems, aren't we, Rand? "Maybe not ever." He thought he had said that too softly for her to hear, but the look she gave him was full of sympathy. And agreement.

hɪz ɪɹz kɑt feɪn fʊtstɛps bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən i lʊk bæk ʌp təwɔɹd mɔɪɹeɪnz hʌt. tu ʃeɪps wɝ meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ daʊn θɹu ðə dipənɪŋ twaɪlaɪt, wʌn ə wʊmən, slɛndɝ ən ɡɹeɪsfəl ivən ɑn ðə ɹʌf, slæntɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd. ðə mæn, hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz tɔlɝ ðən ɪz kəmpænjən, tɝn ɔf təwɔɹd wɛɹ ðə ʃaɪnɝənz wɝ wɝkɪŋ. ivən tə pɛɹɪnz aɪz i wɑz ɪndɪstɪŋkt, səmtaɪmz simɪŋ tə vænɪʃ ɔltəɡɛðɝ, ðən ɹiəpɪɹ ɪn mɪdstʃɹaɪd, pɑɹts ə hɪm feɪɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə naɪɾ ən feɪɾɪŋ bæk əz ðə wɪnd ɡʌstɪd. oʊnli ə wɔɹɾɝz ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊk kəd də ðæt, wɪtʃ meɪd ðə lɑɹdʒɝ fɪɡjɝ læn, dʒʌst əz ðə smɔlɝ wɑz sɝɾənli mɔɪɹeɪn.

His ears caught faint footsteps behind him, and he looked back up toward Moiraine's hut. Two shapes were making their way down through the deepening twilight, one a woman, slender and graceful even on the rough, slanting ground. The man, head and shoulders taller than his companion, turned off toward where the Shienarans were working. Even to Perrin's eyes he was indistinct, sometimes seeming to vanish altogether, then reappear in midstride, parts of him fading into the night and fading back as the wind gusted. Only a Warder's shifting cloak could do that, which made the larger figure Lan, just as the smaller was certainly Moiraine.

wɛl bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ənʌðɝ ʃeɪp, ivən dɪmɝ, slɪp bɪtwin ðə tʃɹiz. ɹænd, pɛɹɪn θɔt, ɡoʊɪŋ bæk tə hɪz hʌt. ənʌðɝ naɪt wən i woʊn it kəz i kæn stæn ðə weɪ ɛvɹibɑɾi lʊks ət hɪm.

Well behind them, another shape, even dimmer, slipped between the trees. Rand, Perrin thought, going back to his hut. Another night when he won't eat because he can't stand the way everybody looks at him.

"ju mʌst əv aɪz ɪn ðə bæk ə jəɹ hɛd," mɪn sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ təwɔɹd ði əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ wʊmən. "ɔɹ ɛls ðə ʃɑɹpəst ɪɹz aɪ hæv ɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv. ɪz ðət mɔɪɹeɪn?"

"You must have eyes in the back of your head," Min said, frowning toward the approaching woman. "Or else the sharpest ears I have ever heard of. Is that Moiraine?"

kɛɹləs. hi hæd ɡɹoʊn soʊ juz tə ðə ʃaɪnɝənz noʊɪŋ haʊ wɛl i kəd si - ɪn deɪlaɪɾ ət list; ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ əbaʊt ðə naɪt - ðəɾ i wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə slɪp əbaʊɾ ʌðɝ θɪŋz. kɛɹləsnəs maɪt kɪl mi jɛt.

Careless. He had grown so used to the Shienarans knowing how well he could see - in daylight at least; they did not know about the night - that he was beginning to slip about other things. Carelessness might kill me yet.

"ɪz ðə tuætɑn wʊmən ɔl ɹaɪt?" mɪn æskt əz mɔɪɹeɪn keɪm tə ðə faɪɝ.

"Is the Tuatha'an woman all right?" Min asked as Moiraine came to the fire.

"ʃi ɪz ɹɛstɪŋ." ði ɛɛs sədaɪz loʊ vɔɪs hæɾ ɪts juʒəwəl mjuzɪkəl kwɑləɾi, əz ɪf spikɪŋ wɝ hæfweɪ tə sɪŋɪŋ, ən əɹ hɛɹ ən kloʊðz wɝ bæk ɪn pɝfəkt ɔɹɾɝ əɡɛn. ʃi ɹʌbd əɹ hænz oʊvɝ ðə faɪɝ. ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡoʊldən ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ lɛf hænd, ə sɝpən baɪɾɪŋ ɪts oʊn teɪl. ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpənt, ən ivən oʊldɝ sɪmbəl fəɹ ɪtɝnəɾi ðən ðə wil ə taɪm. ɛvɹi wʊmən tʃɹeɪn ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn wɔɹ sətʃ ə ɹɪŋ.

"She is resting." The Aes Sedai's low voice had its usual musical quality, as if speaking were halfway to singing, and her hair and clothes were back in perfect order again. She rubbed her hands over the fire. There was a golden ring on her left hand, a serpent biting its own tail. The Great Serpent, an even older symbol for eternity than the Wheel of Time. Every woman trained in Tar Valon wore such a ring.

fəɹ ə moʊmən mɔɪɹeɪnz ɡeɪz ɹɛstəɾ ɑn pɛɹɪn, ən sim tə pɛnətʃɹeɪt tu dipli. "ʃi fɛl ən splɪɾ əɹ skælp wən ɹænd. . . ." hɝ maʊθ taɪɾənd, bʌɾ ɪn ðə nɛkst ɪnstən əɹ feɪs wɑz ʌɾɝ kɑm əɡɛn. "aɪ hil hɝ, ən ʃiz slipɪŋ. ðəɹ ɪz ɔlweɪz ə ɡʊd dil ə blʌd wɪð ivən ə maɪnɝ skælp waʊnd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt sɪɹiəs. dɪd jə si ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt hɝ, mɪn?"

For a moment Moiraine's gaze rested on Perrin, and seemed to penetrate too deeply. "She fell and split her scalp when Rand. . . ." Her mouth tightened, but in the next instant her face was utter calm again. "I Healed her, and she is sleeping. There is always a good deal of blood with even a minor scalp wound, but it was not serious. Did you see anything about her, Min?"

mɪn lʊkt ənsɝɾən. "aɪ sɔ. . . . aɪ θɔɾ aɪ sɔ hɝ dɛθ. hɝ oʊn feɪs, ɔl oʊvɝ blʌd. aɪ wɑz ʃʊɹ aɪ nu wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi splɪɾ əɹ skælp. . . . ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ʃiz ɔl ɹaɪt?" ɪt wɑz ə mɛʒɝ ə hɝ dɪskʌmfɝt ðət ʃi æskt. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑt hil ən liv ɛniθɪŋ ɹɔŋ ðət kəd bi hild. ən mɔɪɹeɪnz tæləns wɝ pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðəɾ ɛɹiə.

Min looked uncertain. "I saw. . . . I thought I saw her death. Her own face, all over blood. I was sure I knew what it meant, but if she split her scalp. . . . Are you sure she is all right?" It was a measure of her discomfort that she asked. An Aes Sedai did not Heal and leave anything wrong that could be Healed. And Moiraine's Talents were particularly strong in that area.

mɪn saʊndəd soʊ tʃɹʌbəl ðət pɛɹɪn wɑz sɝpɹaɪz fəɹ ə moʊmənt. ðən i nɑɾəd tə hɪmsɛlf. ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli laɪk duɪŋ wʌt ʃi dɪd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə pɑɹɾ ə hɝ; ʃi θɔt ʃi nu haʊ ɪt wɝkt, əɹ səm ʌv ɪt, ət list. ɪf ʃi wɑz ɹɔŋ, ɪt wəɾ ɔlmoʊs bi laɪk faɪndɪŋ aʊt ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ tə juz əɹ oʊn hænz.

Min sounded so troubled that Perrin was surprised for a moment. Then he nodded to himself. She did not really like doing what she did, but it was a part of her; she thought she knew how it worked, or some of it, at least. If she was wrong, it would almost be like finding out she did not know how to use her own hands.

mɔɪɹeɪn kənsɪɾɝd əɹ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, sɝin ən dɪspæʃənət. "ju hæv nɛvɝ bɪn ɹɔŋ ɪn ɛni ɹɛɾɪŋ fəɹ mi, nɑt wʌn əbaʊt wɪtʃ aɪ hæɾ ɛni weɪ ʌv noʊɪŋ. pɝhæps ðɪs ɪz ðə fɝs taɪm."

Moiraine considered her for a moment, serene and dispassionate. "You have never been wrong in any reading for me, not one about which I had any way of knowing. Perhaps this is the first time."

"wɛn aɪ noʊ, aɪ noʊ," mɪn wɪspɝɾ ɑbstənətli. "laɪt hɛlp mi, aɪ du."

"When I know, I know," Min whispered obstinately. "Light help me, I do."

"ɔɹ pɝhæps ɪts jɛt tə kʌm. ʃiz ə lɔŋ weɪ jɛt tə tʃɹævəl, tə ɹɪtɝn tə hɝ wæɡənz, ən ʃi mʌst ɹaɪd θɹu ənsɛɾəld lænz."

"Or perhaps it is yet to come. She has a long way yet to travel, to return to her wagons, and she must ride through unsettled lands."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪz vɔɪs wɑz ə kul sɔŋ, ənkɛɹɪŋ. pɛɹɪn meɪɾ ən ɪnvɑləntɛɹi saʊn ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt. laɪt, dɪɾ aɪ saʊn laɪk ðæt? aɪ woʊn lɛɾ ə dɛθ mæɾɝ ðət lɪɾəl tə mi.

The Aes Sedai's voice was a cool song, uncaring. Perrin made an involuntary sound in his throat. Light, did I sound like that? I won't let a death matter that little to me.

əz ɪf i hæd spoʊkən əlaʊd, mɔɪɹeɪn lʊkt ət hɪm. "ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz, pɛɹɪn. aɪ toʊl jə lɔŋ əɡoʊ ðət wi wɝ ɪn ə wɔɹ. wi kænɑt stɑp dʒʌs kəz səm ʌv əs meɪ daɪ. ɛni ʌv əs meɪ daɪ bɪfɔɹ ɪts dʌn. leɪəz wɛpənz meɪ nɑt bi ðə seɪm əz jʊɹz, bʌt ʃi nu ðət wən ʃi bɪkeɪm pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt."

As if he had spoken aloud, Moiraine looked at him. "The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills, Perrin. I told you long ago that we were in a war. We cannot stop just because some of us may die. Any of us may die before it is done. Leya's weapons may not be the same as yours, but she knew that when she became part of it."

pɛɹɪn dʒɹɑpt ɪz aɪz. ðæts əz meɪ bi, ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ əl nɛvɝ æksɛpt ɪt ðə weɪ jə du.

Perrin dropped his eyes. That's as may be, Aes Sedai, but I will never accept it the way you do.

læn dʒɔɪn əm əkɹɔs ðə faɪɝ, wɪð ənoʊ ən lɔɪəl. ðə fleɪmz kæs flɪkɝɪŋ ʃædoʊz əkɹɔs ðə wɔɹɾɝz feɪs, meɪkɪŋ ɪt sim mɔɹ kɑɹv fɹəm stoʊn ivən ðən ɪt nɔɹməli dɪd, ɔl hɑɹd pleɪnz ən æŋɡəlz. hɪz kloʊk wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ iziɝ tə lʊk əɾ ɪn ðə faɪɹlaɪt. səmtaɪmz ɪt simd oʊnli ə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ kloʊk, əɹ blæk, bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪ ən blæk əpɪɹd tə kɹɔl ən tʃeɪnʒ ɪf jə lʊk tu kloʊsli, ʃeɪdz ən ʃædoʊz slaɪɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪt, soʊkɪŋ ɪndə ɪt. ʌðɝ taɪmz, ɪt lʊkt əz ɪf læn hæd sʌmhaʊ meɪɾ ə hoʊl ɪn ðə naɪɾ ən pʊl dɑɹknəs 'ɹaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ən izi θɪŋ tə wɑtʃ, ən nɑt meɪɾ ɛni iziɝ baɪ ðə mæn u wɔɹ ɪt.

Lan joined them across the fire, with Uno and Loial. The flames cast flickering shadows across the Warder's face, making it seem more carved from stone even than it normally did, all hard planes and angles. His cloak was not much easier to look at in the firelight. Sometimes it seemed only a dark gray cloak, or black, but the gray and black appeared to crawl and change if you looked too closely, shades and shadows sliding across it, soaking into it. Other times, it looked as if Lan had somehow made a hole in the night and pulled darkness 'round his shoulders. Not at all an easy thing to watch, and not made any easier by the man who wore it.

læn wɑz tɔl ən hɑɹd, bɹɔd-ʃoʊldɝd, wɪð blu aɪz laɪk fɹoʊzən maʊntən leɪks, ən i muvd wɪð ə dɛdli ɡɹeɪs ðət meɪd ðə sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz hɪp sim ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðəɾ i simd mɪɹli keɪpəbəl ə vaɪələns ən dɛθ; ðɪs mæn hæd teɪm vaɪələns ən dɛθ ən kɛpt əm ɪn ɪz pɑkət, ɹɛɾi tə bi lust ɪn ə hɑɹtbit, əɹ ɛmbɹeɪst, ʃəd mɔɪɹeɪn ɡɪv ðə wɝd. bɪsaɪd læn, ivən ənoʊ əpɪɹd lɛs deɪnʒɝəs. ðəɹ wɑz ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn ðə wɔɹɾɝz lɔŋ hɛɹ, hɛl bæk baɪ ə woʊvən lɛðɝ kɔɹɾ ɝaʊn ɪz fɔɹhɛd, bʌt jʌŋɡɝ mɛn stɛp bæk fɹəm kənfɹʌntɪŋ læn - ɪf ðeɪ wɝ waɪz.

Lan was tall and hard, broad-shouldered, with blue eyes like frozen mountain lakes, and he moved with a deadly grace that made the sword on his hip seem a part of him. It was not that he seemed merely capable of violence and death; this man had tamed violence and death and kept them in his pocket, ready to be loosed in a heartbeat, or embraced, should Moiraine give the word. Beside Lan, even Uno appeared less dangerous. There was a touch of gray in the Warder's long hair, held back by a woven leather cord around his forehead, but younger men stepped back from confronting Lan - if they were wise.

"mɪstʃɹəs leɪə hæz ðə juʒəwəl nuz fɹəm ɑlməθ pleɪn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ɛvɹiwʌn faɪɾɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. vɪlədʒəz bɝnd. pipəl fliɪŋ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən. ən hʌntɝz əv əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə pleɪn, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ." pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəd - ðə hɔɹn wɑz wɛɹ noʊ hʌntɝ ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn wəd faɪn ɪt; wɛɹ i hoʊp noʊ hʌntɝ ɛvɝ wəd faɪn ɪt - ən ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə kul lʊk bɪfɔɹ kəntɪnjuɪŋ. ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk ɛni ʌv əm tə spik ə ðə hɔɹn. ɪksɛpt wən ʃi tʃoʊz tə, ʌv kɔɹs.

"Mistress Leya has the usual news from Almoth Plain," Moiraine said. "Everyone fighting everyone else. Villages burned. People fleeing in every direction. And Hunters have appeared on the plain, searching for the Horn of Valere." Perrin shifted - the Horn was where no Hunter on Almoth Plain would find it; where he hoped no Hunter ever would find it - and she gave him a cool look before continuing. She did not like any of them to speak of the Horn. Except when she chose to, of course.

"ʃi bɹɔt dɪfɹənt nuz, əz wɛl. ðə waɪtkloʊks əv pɝhæps faɪv θaʊzən mɛn ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn."

"She brought different news, as well. The Whitecloaks have perhaps five thousand men on Almoth Plain."

ənoʊ ɡɹʌntɪd. "ðæts fləmən' - ʌ, pɑɹɾən, ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðət mʌs bi hæf ðɛɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ. ðeɪv nɛvɝ kəmɪɾəd soʊ mʌtʃ tə wʌn pleɪs bɪfɔɹ."

Uno grunted. "That's flamin' - uh, pardon, Aes Sedai. That must be half their strength. They've never committed so much to one place before."

"ðɛn aɪ səpoʊz ɔl ðoʊz u dɪklɛɹd fəɹ ɹænd ɑɹ dɛɾ əɹ skæɾɝd," pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd. "ɔɹ ðeɪ sun wɪl bi. jə wɝ ɹaɪt, mɔɪɹeɪn." hi dɪd nɑt laɪk ðə θɔɾ ʌv waɪtkloʊks. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ əɾ ɔl.

"Then I suppose all those who declared for Rand are dead or scattered," Perrin muttered. "Or they soon will be. You were right, Moiraine." He did not like the thought of Whitecloaks. He did not like the Children of the Light at all.

"ðæɾ ɪz wʌɾ ɪz ɑd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ɔɹ ðə fɝs pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən əv ənaʊns ðət ðɛɹ pɝpəs ɪz tə bɹɪŋ pis, wɪtʃ ɪz nɑɾ ənjuʒəwəl fəɹ ðɛm. wʌɾ ɪz ənjuʒəwəl ɪz ðət waɪl ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɔɹs ðə tæɹɑbənɝz ən ðə dəmɑni bæk əkɹɔs ðɛɹ ɹɪspɛktɪv bɔɹɾɝz, ðeɪv nɑt muvd ɪn ɛni fɔɹs əɡɛns ðoʊz u hæv dɪklɛɹd fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən."

"That is what is odd," Moiraine said. "Or the first part of it. The Children have announced that their purpose is to bring peace, which is not unusual for them. What is unusual is that while they are trying to force the Taraboners and the Domani back across their respective borders, they have not moved in any force against those who have declared for the Dragon."

mɪn ɡeɪv ən ɛkskləmeɪʃən ə sɝpɹaɪz. "ɪz ʃi sɝɾən? ðət dʌz nɑt saʊn laɪk ɛni waɪtkloʊks aɪ ɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv."

Min gave an exclamation of surprise. "Is she certain? That does not sound like any Whitecloaks I ever heard of."

"ðɛɹ kæn bi mɛni blʌd - ʌ - mɛni tɪŋkɝz lɛft ɑn ðə pleɪn," ənoʊ sɛd. hɪz vɔɪs kɹik fɹəm ðə stʃɹeɪn ʌv wɑtʃɪŋ ɪz læŋɡwədʒ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. hɪz ɹil aɪ mætʃt ðə fɹaʊn ə ðə peɪntəd wʌn. "ðeɪ doʊn laɪk tə steɪ wɛɹ ðɛɹz ɛni kaɪndə tʃɹʌbəl, ɪspɛʃli faɪɾɪŋ. ðəɹ kæn bi ɪnʌf ə ðɛm tə si ɛvɹiwɛɹ."

"There can't be many blood - uh - many Tinkers left on the plain," Uno said. His voice creaked from the strain of watching his language in front of an Aes Sedai. His real eye matched the frown of the painted one. "They don't like to stay where there's any kind of trouble, especially fighting. There can't be enough of them to see everywhere."

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ ɪnʌf fəɹ maɪ pɝpəsəz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd fɝmli. "moʊst əv ɡɔn, bʌt səm fju ɹɪmeɪn kəz aɪ æskt əm tə. ən leɪə ɪz kwaɪt sɝɾən. oʊ, ðə tʃɪlʒɹən əv snæpt ʌp səm ə ðə dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn, wɛɹ ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli ə hændfʊl ɡæðɝd. bʌt ðoʊ ðeɪ pɹoʊkleɪm ðəl bɹɪŋ daʊn ðɪs fɔls dʒɹæɡən, ðoʊ ðeɪv ə θaʊzən mɛn səpoʊzədli duɪŋ nʌθɪŋ bʌt hʌntɪŋ hɪm, ðeɪ əvɔɪd kɑntækt wɪð ɛni pɑɹɾi ʌv əz mɛni əz fɪfti dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn. nɑɾ oʊpənli, jə ʌndɝstænd, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz ɔlweɪz səm dɪleɪ, sʌmθɪŋ ðəɾ əlaʊz ðoʊz ðeɪ tʃeɪs tə slɪp əweɪ."

"There are enough for my purposes," Moiraine said firmly. "Most have gone, but some few remained because I asked them to. And Leya is quite certain. Oh, the Children have snapped up some of the Dragonsworn, where there were only a handful gathered. But though they proclaim they will bring down this false Dragon, though they have a thousand men supposedly doing nothing but hunting him, they avoid contact with any party of as many as fifty Dragonsworn. Not openly, you understand, but there is always some delay, something that allows those they chase to slip away."

"ðɛn ɹænd kən ɡoʊ daʊn tə ðɛm əz i wɑns." lɔɪəl blɪŋkt ənsɝteɪnli ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə hoʊl kæmp nu ʌv əɹ ɑɹɡjəməns wɪð ɹænd. "ðə wil wivz ə weɪ fəɹ hɪm."

"Then Rand can go down to them as he wants." Loial blinked uncertainly at the Aes Sedai. The whole camp knew of her arguments with Rand. "The Wheel weaves a way for him."

ənoʊ ən læn oʊpən ðɛɹ maʊðz ət ðə seɪm taɪm, bʌt ðə ʃaɪnɝən ɡeɪv weɪ wɪð ə smɔl baʊ. "mɔɹ laɪkli," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd, "ɪɾ ɪz səm waɪtkloʊk plɑt, ðoʊ ðə laɪt bɝn mi ɪf aɪ kən si wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz. bʌt wən ðə waɪtkloʊks ɡɪmi ə ɡɪft, aɪ sɝtʃ fəɹ ðə pɔɪzənd niɾəl hɪɾən ɪn ɪt." ənoʊ nɑɾəd ɡɹɪmli. "bɪsaɪdz wɪtʃ," læn æɾəd, "ðə dəmɑni ən ðə tæɹɑbənɝz ɑɹ stɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ əz hɑɹd tə kɪl ðə dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn əz ðeɪ ɑɹ tə kɪl itʃ ʌðɝ."

Uno and Lan opened their mouths at the same time, but the Shienaran gave way with a small bow. "More likely," the Warder said, "it is some Whitecloak plot, though the Light burn me if I can see what it is. But when the Whitecloaks give me a gift, I search for the poisoned needle hidden in it." Uno nodded grimly. "Besides which," Lan added, "the Domani and the Taraboners are still trying as hard to kill the Dragonsworn as they are to kill each other."

"æn ðəɹ ɪz ənʌðɝ θɪŋ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "θɹi jʌŋ mɛn əv daɪɾ ɪn vɪlədʒəz mɪstʃɹəs leɪəz wæɡənz pæs nɪɹ." pɛɹɪn noʊɾəst ə flɪkɝ ə lænz aɪləd; fəɹ ðə wɔɹɾɝ, ɪt wɑz əz mʌtʃ ə saɪn ə sɝpɹaɪz əz ə ʃaʊt fɹəm ənʌðɝ mæn. læn hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ tə tɛl ðɪs. mɔɪɹeɪn wɛn ɑn. "wʌn daɪd baɪ pɔɪzən, tu baɪ ðə naɪf. itʃ ɪn sɝkəmstænsəz wɛɹ noʊ wʌn ʃʊɾə bɪn eɪbəl tə kʌm kloʊs ənsin, bʌt ðəɾ ɪz haʊ ɪt hæpənd." ʃi pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə fleɪmz. "ɔl θɹi jʌŋ mɛn wɝ tɔlɝ ðən moʊst, ən hæd laɪt-kʌlɝɾ aɪz. laɪɾ aɪz ɑɹ ənkɑmən ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ɪts vɛɹi ənlʌki ɹaɪt naʊ tə bi ə tɔl jʌŋ mæn wɪð laɪɾ aɪz ðɛɹ."

"And there is another thing," Moiraine said. "Three young men have died in villages Mistress Leya's wagons passed near." Perrin noticed a flicker of Lan's eyelid; for the Warder, it was as much a sign of surprise as a shout from another man. Lan had not expected her to tell this. Moiraine went on. "One died by poison, two by the knife. Each in circumstances where no one should have been able to come close unseen, but that is how it happened." She peered into the flames. "All three young men were taller than most, and had light-colored eyes. Light eyes are uncommon on Almoth Plain, but I think it is very unlucky right now to be a tall young man with light eyes there."

"haʊ?" pɛɹɪn æskt. "haʊ kəd ðeɪ bi kɪld ɪf noʊ wʌn kəd ɡɛt kloʊs tə ðɛm?"

"How?" Perrin asked. "How could they be killed if no one could get close to them?"

"ðə dɑɹk wʌn əz kɪlɝz jə doʊnt noʊɾəs əntɪl ɪts tu leɪt," læn sɛd kwaɪətli.

"The Dark One has killers you don't notice until it is too late," Lan said quietly.

ənoʊ ɡeɪv ə ʃɪvɝ. "ðə soʊlləs. aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv wʌn saʊθ ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz bɪfɔɹ."

Uno gave a shiver. "The Soulless. I never heard of one south of the Borderlands before."

"ɪnʌf ə sətʃ tɔk," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd fɝmli.

"Enough of such talk," Moiraine said firmly.

pɛɹɪn hæd kwɛstʃənz - wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪɾ ɑɹ ðə soʊlləs? ɑɹ ðeɪ laɪk ə tʃɹɑlɑk, əɹ ə feɪd? wʌt? - bʌɾ i lɛft əm ʌnəskt. wən mɔɪɹeɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪnʌf hæd bɪn sɛɾ əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ, ʃi wəd nɑt tɔk ʌv ɪɾ ɛnimɔɹ. ən wən ʃi ʃʌɾ əɹ maʊθ, jə kəd nɑt pɹaɪ lænz oʊpən wɪð ən aɪɝn bɑɹ. ðə ʃaɪnɝənz fɑloʊɾ əɹ lɛd, tu. noʊ wʌn wɑntəd tə æŋɡɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Perrin had questions - What in the Light are the Soulless? Are they like a Trolloc, or a Fade? What? - but he left them unasked. When Moiraine decided enough had been said about something, she would not talk of it anymore. And when she shut her mouth, you could not pry Lan's open with an iron bar. The Shienarans followed her lead, too. No one wanted to anger an Aes Sedai.

"laɪt!" mɪn mʌɾɝd, ənizəli aɪɪŋ ðə dipənɪŋ dɑɹknəs ɝaʊn ðɛm. "ju doʊnt noʊɾəs ðɛm? laɪt!"

"Light!" Min muttered, uneasily eyeing the deepening darkness around them. "You don't notice them? Light!"

"soʊ nʌθɪŋ əz tʃeɪnʒd," pɛɹɪn sɛd ɡlʌmli. "nɑt ɹɪli. wi kænɑt ɡoʊ daʊn tə ðə pleɪn, ən ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑns əs dɛd."

"So nothing has changed," Perrin said glumly. "Not really. We cannot go down to the plain, and the Dark One wants us dead."

"ɛvɹiθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒəz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd kɑmli, "æn ðə pæɾɝn teɪks ɪɾ ɔl ɪn. wi mʌst ɹaɪɾ ɑn ðə pæɾɝn, nɑɾ ɑn ðə tʃeɪnʒəz ʌv ə moʊmənt." ʃi lʊkt əɾ əm itʃ ɪn tɝn, ðən sɛd, "ənoʊ, ɑɹ jə sɝɾən jəɹ skaʊts mɪs nʌθɪŋ səspɪʃəs? ivən sʌmθɪŋ smɔl?"

"Everything changes," Moiraine said calmly, "and the Pattern takes it all in. We must ride on the Pattern, not on the changes of a moment." She looked at them each in turn, then said, "Uno, are you certain your scouts missed nothing suspicious? Even something small?"

"ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡənz ɹibɝθ əz lus ðə bɑnz ə sɝɾənti, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ, ən ðəɹ ɪz nɛvɝ sɝɾənti ɪf jə faɪt mɹdʒɹɑl, bʌɾ əl steɪk maɪ laɪf ðət ðə skaʊts dɪɾ əz ɡʊɾ ə dʒɑb əz ɛni wɔɹɾɝ." ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðə lɔŋɡəst spitʃəz pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝɾ aʊɾ ʌv ənoʊ wɪθaʊɾ ɛni kɝsɪz. ðəɹ wɑz swɛɾ ɑn ðə mænz fɔɹhɛd fɹəm ði ɛfɝt.

"The Lord Dragon's Rebirth has loosed the bonds of certainty, Moiraine Sedai, and there is never certainty if you fight Myrddraal, but I will stake my life that the scouts did as good a job as any Warder." It was one of the longest speeches Perrin had ever heard out of Uno without any curses. There was sweat on the man's forehead from the effort.

"wi ɔl meɪ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "wʌt ɹænd dɪd maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ə faɪɝ ɑn ðə maʊntəntɑp fəɹ ɛni mɹdʒɹɑl wɪðɪn tɛn maɪlz."

"We all may," Moiraine said. "What Rand did might as well have been a fire on the mountaintop for any Myrddraal within ten miles."

"meɪbi . . ." mɪn bɪɡæn hɛzɪɾəntli. "meɪbi jə ɔt tə sɛt wɔɹdz ðət wɪl kip əm aʊt." læn ɡeɪv əɹ ə hɑɹd stɛɹ. hi səmtaɪmz kwɛstʃən mɔɪɹeɪnz dɪsɪʒənz hɪmsɛlf, ðoʊ hi sɛldəm dɪd soʊ wɛɹ ɛniwʌn kəɾ oʊvɝhɪɹ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑɾ əpɹuv ʌv ʌðɝz duɪŋ ðə seɪm. mɪn fɹaʊn ɹaɪt bæk ət hɪm. "wɛl, mɹdʒɹɑl ən tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ bæɾ ɪnʌf, bʌɾ ət list aɪ kən si ðɛm. aɪ doʊn laɪk ði aɪdiə ðət wʌn ə ðiz . . . ðiz soʊlləs maɪt snik ɪn hɪɹ ən slɪt maɪ θɹoʊt bɪfɔɹ aɪ ivən noʊɾəst hɪm."

"Maybe . . ." Min began hesitantly. "Maybe you ought to set wards that will keep them out." Lan gave her a hard stare. He sometimes questioned Moiraine's decisions himself, though he seldom did so where anyone could overhear, but he did not approve of others doing the same. Min frowned right back at him. "Well, Myrddraal and Trollocs are bad enough, but at least I can see them. I don't like the idea that one of these . . . these Soulless might sneak in here and slit my throat before I even noticed him."

"ðə wɔɹdz aɪ sɛt wɪl haɪɾ əs fɹəm ðə soʊlləs əz wɛl əz fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "wɛn jə ɑɹ wik, əz wi ɑɹ, ðə bɛs tʃɔɪs ɪz ɔfən tə haɪd. ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ə hæfmən kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hæv. . . . wɛl, tə sɛt wɔɹdz ðət wəd kɪl əm ɪf ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə ɛntɝ kæmp ɪz bɪɑn maɪ əbɪləɾiz, ən ivən ɪf aɪ kʊd, sətʃ ə wɔɹɾɪŋ wəɾ oʊnli pɛn əs hɪɹ. sɪns ɪts nɑt pɑsəbəl tə sɛt tu kaɪnz ʌv wɔɹɾɪŋ ət wʌns, aɪ liv ðə skaʊts ən ðə ɡɑɹdz - ən læn - tə dɪfɛn ʌs, ən juz ðə wʌn wɔɹɾɪŋ ðət meɪ də səm ɡʊd."

"The wards I set will hide us from the Soulless as well as from any other Shadowspawn," Moiraine said. "When you are weak, as we are, the best choice is often to hide. If there is a Halfman close enough to have. . . . Well, to set wards that would kill them if they tried to enter camp is beyond my abilities, and even if I could, such a warding would only pen us here. Since it is not possible to set two kinds of warding at once, I leave the scouts and the guards - and Lan - to defend us, and use the one warding that may do some good."

"aɪ kəd meɪk ə sɝkəɾ ɝaʊn ðə kæmp," læn sɛd. "ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ɛniθɪŋ aʊt ðəɹ ðət ðə skaʊts mɪst, əl faɪn ɪt." ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə boʊst, dʒʌst ə steɪtmən ə fækt. ənoʊ ivən nɑɾəd əɡɹimənt.

"I could make a circuit around the camp," Lan said. "If there is anything out there that the scouts missed, I will find it." It was not a boast, just a statement of fact. Uno even nodded agreement.

mɔɪɹeɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ɪf jə ɑɹ niɾəd tənaɪt, maɪ ɡeɪɾɪn, ɪɾəl bi hɪɹ." hɝ ɡeɪz ɹoʊz təwɔɹd ðə dɑɹk maʊntənz ɝaʊn ðɛm. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə filɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ."

Moiraine shook her head. "If you are needed tonight, my Gaidin, it will be here." Her gaze rose toward the dark mountains around them. "There is a feeling in the air."

"weɪɾɪŋ." ðə wɝd lɛf pɛɹɪnz tʌŋ bɪfɔɹ i kəd stɑp ɪt. wən mɔɪɹeɪn lʊkt əɾ ɪm - ɪndə hɪm - hi wɪʃt i hæɾ ɪt bæk.

"Waiting." The word left Perrin's tongue before he could stop it. When Moiraine looked at him - into him - he wished he had it back.

"jɛs," ʃi sɛd. "weɪɾɪŋ. meɪk ʃʊɹ jəɹ ɡɑɹdz ɑɹ ɪspɛʃli əlɝt tənaɪt, ənoʊ." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə sədʒɛs ðət ðə mɛn slip wɪð ðɛɹ wɛpənz kloʊs ət hænd; ʃaɪnɝənz ɔlweɪz dɪd ðæt. "slip wɛl," ʃi æɾəd tə ðɛm ɔl, əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ɛni tʃæns ə ðət naʊ, ən stɑɹɾəd bæk fəɹ əɹ hʌt. læn steɪd lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə spun ʌp θɹi dɪʃəz ə stu, ðən hɝiɾ æftɝ hɝ, kwɪkli swɑloʊd baɪ ðə naɪt.

"Yes," she said. "Waiting. Make sure your guards are especially alert tonight, Uno." There was no need to suggest that the men sleep with their weapons close at hand; Shienarans always did that. "Sleep well," she added to them all, as if there were any chance of that now, and started back for her hut. Lan stayed long enough to spoon up three dishes of stew, then hurried after her, quickly swallowed by the night.

pɛɹɪnz aɪz ʃoʊn ɡoʊldən əz ðeɪ fɑloʊd ðə wɔɹɾɝ θɹu ðə dɑɹknəs. "slip wɛl," hi mʌɾɝd. ðə smɛl ə kʊk mit sʌɾənli meɪɾ ɪm kwizi. "aɪ hæv ðə θɝd wɑtʃ, ənoʊ?" ðə ʃaɪnɝən nɑɾəd. "ðɛn əl tʃɹaɪ tə teɪk əɹ ædvaɪs." ʌðɝz wɝ kʌmɪŋ tə ðə faɪɝz, ən mɝmɝz ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən fɑloʊɾ ɪm ʌp ðə sloʊp.

Perrin's eyes shone golden as they followed the Warder through the darkness. "Sleep well," he muttered. The smell of cooked meat suddenly made him queasy. "I have the third watch, Uno?" The Shienaran nodded. "Then I will try to take her advice." Others were coming to the fires, and murmurs of conversation followed him up the slope.

hi hæɾ ə hʌt tə hɪmsɛlf, ə smɔl θɪŋ ə lɔɡz bɛɹli tɔl ɪnʌf tə stæn ɪn, ðə tʃɪŋks fɪld wɪð dʒɹaɪd mʌd. ə ɹʌf bɛd, pæɾəd wɪð paɪn baʊz bɪniθ ə blæŋkət, tʊk ʌp nɪɹli hæf ʌv ɪt. huɛvɝ hæɾ ənsæɾəld ɪz hɔɹs hæɾ ɔlsoʊ pɹɑpt ɪz baʊ dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə dɔɹ. hi hʌŋ ʌp ɪz bɛlt, wɪð æks ən kwɪvɝ, ɑn ə pɛɡ, ðən stʃɹɪp daʊn tə hɪz smɔlkloʊðz, ʃɪvɝɪŋ. ðə naɪts wɝ koʊl stɪl, bʌt koʊl kɛpt ɪm fɹəm slipɪŋ tu dipli. ɪn dip slip, dʒɹimz keɪm ðəɾ i kəd nɑt ʃeɪk ɔf.

He had a hut to himself, a small thing of logs barely tall enough to stand in, the chinks filled with dried mud. A rough bed, padded with pine boughs beneath a blanket, took up nearly half of it. Whoever had unsaddled his horse had also propped his bow just inside the door. He hung up his belt, with axe and quiver, on a peg, then stripped down to his smallclothes, shivering. The nights were cold still, but cold kept him from sleeping too deeply. In deep sleep, dreams came that he could not shake off.

fəɹ ə taɪm, wɪð ə sɪŋɡəl blæŋkəɾ oʊvɝ hɪm, hi leɪ stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə lɔɡ ɹuf, ʃɪvɝɪŋ. ðən slip keɪm, ən wɪð ɪt, dʒɹimz.

For a time, with a single blanket over him, he lay staring at the log roof, shivering. Then sleep came, and with it, dreams.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹ


CHAPTER 4

ʃædoʊz slipɪŋ


Shadows Sleeping

koʊl fɪl ðə kɑmən ɹum ə ði ɪn dɪspaɪt ðə faɪɝ bleɪzɪŋ ɑn ðə lɔŋ, stoʊn hɑɹθ. pɛɹɪn ɹʌbd ɪz hænz bɪfɔɹ ðə fleɪmz, bʌɾ i kəd ɡɛt noʊ wɔɹmθ ɪn ðɛm. ðəɹ wɑz ən ɑd kʌmfɝɾ ɪn ðə koʊld, ðoʊ, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə ʃild. ə ʃild əɡɛnst wʌt, hi kəd nɑt θɪŋk. sʌmθɪŋ mɝmɝɾ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪnd, ə dɪm saʊn oʊnli veɪɡli hɝd, skɹætʃɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ɪn.

Cold filled the common room of the inn despite the fire blazing on the long, stone hearth. Perrin rubbed his hands before the flames, but he could get no warmth in them. There was an odd comfort in the cold, though, as if it were a shield. A shield against what, he could not think. Something murmured in the back of his mind, a dim sound only vaguely heard, scratching to get in.

"soʊ jəl ɡɪv ɪɾ ʌp, ðɛn. ɪts ðə bɛs θɪŋ fəɹ ju. kʌm. sɪt, ən wɪl tɔk."

"So you will give it up, then. It is the best thing for you. Come. Sit, and we will talk."

pɛɹɪn tɝn tə lʊk ət ðə spikɝ. ðə ɹaʊn teɪbəlz skæɾɝd əbaʊt ðə ɹum wɝ ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə loʊn mæn siɾəd ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ, ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz. ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ɹum simd ɪn səm weɪ heɪzi, ɔlmoʊst ən ɪmpɹɛʃən ɹæðɝ ðən ə pleɪs, ɪspɛʃli ɛniθɪŋ i wɑz nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət dɝɛkli. hi ɡlæns bæk ət ðə faɪɝ; ɪt bɝn ɑn ə bɹɪk hɑɹθ, naʊ. sʌmhaʊ, nʌn ʌv ɪt bɑðɝd hɪm. ɪt ʃʊd. bʌɾ i kəd nɑɾ əv sɛd waɪ.

Perrin turned to look at the speaker. The round tables scattered about the room were empty except for the lone man seated in a corner, in the shadows. The rest of the room seemed in some way hazy, almost an impression rather than a place, especially anything he was not looking at directly. He glanced back at the fire; it burned on a brick hearth, now. Somehow, none of it bothered him. It should. But he could not have said why.

ðə mæn bɛkənd, ən pɛɹɪn wɔkt kloʊsɝ tə hɪz teɪbəl. ə skwɛɹ teɪbəl. ðə teɪbəlz wɝ skwɛɹ. fɹaʊnɪŋ, hi ɹitʃt aʊt tə fɪŋɡɝ ðə teɪbəltɑp, bʌt pʊld ɪz hæn bæk. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ læmps ɪn ðət kɔɹnɝ ə ðə ɹum, ən dɪspaɪt ðə laɪɾ ɛlswɛɹ, ðə mæn ən ɪz teɪbəl wɝ ɔlmoʊs hɪɾən, nɪɹli blɛndəd wɪð ðə dɪmnəs.

The man beckoned, and Perrin walked closer to his table. A square table. The tables were square. Frowning, he reached out to finger the tabletop, but pulled his hand back. There were no lamps in that corner of the room, and despite the light elsewhere, the man and his table were almost hidden, nearly blended with the dimness.

pɛɹɪn hæɾ ə filɪŋ ðəɾ i nu ðə mæn, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz əz veɪɡ əz wʌɾ i sɔ aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ. ðə fɛloʊ wɑz ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz, hænsəm ən tu wɛl dʒɹɛs fəɹ ə kʌntʃɹi ɪn, ɪn dɑɹk, nɪɹli blæk, vɛlvəts wɪð waɪt leɪs fɔlz əɾ ɪz kɑlɝ ən kʌfs. hi sæt stɪfli, səmtaɪmz pɹɛsɪŋ ə hæn tə hɪz tʃɛst, əz ɪf muvɪŋ hɝt hɪm. hɪz dɑɹk aɪz wɝ fɪkst ɑn pɛɹɪnz feɪs; ðeɪ əpɪɹd laɪk ɡlɪsnɪŋ pɔɪns ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz.

Perrin had a feeling that he knew the man, but it was as vague as what he saw out of the corner of his eye. The fellow was in his middle years, handsome and too well dressed for a country inn, in dark, nearly black, velvets with white lace falls at his collar and cuffs. He sat stiffly, sometimes pressing a hand to his chest, as if moving hurt him. His dark eyes were fixed on Perrin's face; they appeared like glistening points in the shadows.

"ɡɪv ʌp wʌt?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Give up what?" Perrin asked.

"ðæt, ʌv kɔɹs." ðə mæn nɑɾəd tə ði æks ət pɛɹɪnz weɪst. hi saʊndəd sɝpɹaɪzd, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən ðeɪ hæd hæd bɪfɔɹ, ən oʊld ɑɹɡjəmən teɪkən ʌp əɡɛn.

"That, of course." The man nodded to the axe at Perrin's waist. He sounded surprised, as if it were a conversation they had had before, an old argument taken up again.

pɛɹɪn hæd nɑt ɹilaɪz ði æks wɑz ðɛɹ, hæd nɑt fɛl ðə weɪɾ ʌv ɪt pʊlɪŋ əɾ ɪz bɛlt. hi ɹæn ə hæn oʊvɝ ðə hæf-mun bleɪɾ ən ðə θɪk spaɪk ðət bælənst ɪt. ðə stil fɛlt - sɑləd. mɔɹ sɑləd ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ðɛɹ. meɪbi ivən mɔɹ sɑləd ðən i wɑz hɪmsɛlf. hi kɛpt ɪz hæn ðɛɹ, tə hoʊld ɑntu sʌmθɪŋ ɹil.

Perrin had not realized the axe was there, had not felt the weight of it pulling at his belt. He ran a hand over the half-moon blade and the thick spike that balanced it. The steel felt - solid. More solid than anything else there. Maybe even more solid than he was himself. He kept his hand there, to hold onto something real.

"aɪ hæv θɔɾ ʌv ɪt," hi sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk aɪ kæn. nɑt jɛt." nɑt jɛt? ði ɪn sim tə flɪkɝ, ən ðə mɝmɝ saʊndəɾ əɡɛn ɪn ɪz hɛd. noʊ! ðə mɝmɝ feɪɾəd.

"I have thought of it," he said, "but I do not think I can. Not yet." Not yet? The inn seemed to flicker, and the murmur sounded again in his head. No! The murmur faded.

"noʊ?" ðə mæn smaɪld, ə koʊl smaɪl. "ju ɑɹ ə blæksmɪθ, bɔɪ. ən ə ɡʊd wʌn, fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ hɪɹ. jəɹ hænz wɝ meɪd fəɹ ə hæmɝ, nɑɾ ən æks. meɪd tə meɪk θɪŋz, nɑt tə kɪl. ɡoʊ bæk tə ðət bɪfɔɹ ɪts tu leɪt."

"No?" The man smiled, a cold smile. "You are a blacksmith, boy. And a good one, from what I hear. Your hands were made for a hammer, not an axe. Made to make things, not to kill. Go back to that before it is too late."

pɛɹɪn faʊn hɪmsɛlf nɑɾɪŋ. "jɛs. bʌɾ aɪm tɑvɝən." hi hæd nɛvɝ sɛd ðəɾ aʊt laʊd bɪfɔɹ. bʌɾ i noʊz ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ə ðæt, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑt seɪ waɪ.

Perrin found himself nodding. "Yes. But I'm ta'veren." He had never said that out loud before. But he knows it already. He was sure of that, though he could not say why.

fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðə mænz smaɪl bɪkeɪm ə ɡɹɪmɑs, bʌt ðən ɪt ɹɪtɝn ɪn mɔɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ ðən bɪfɔɹ. ə koʊl stʃɹɛŋkθ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ weɪz tə tʃeɪnʒ θɪŋz, bɔɪ. weɪz tə əvɔɪɾ ivən feɪt. sɪt, ən wɪl tɔk ə ðɛm." ðə ʃædoʊz əpɪɹd tə ʃɪft ən θɪkən, tə ɹitʃ aʊt.

For an instant the man's smile became a grimace, but then it returned in more strength than before. A cold strength. "There are ways to change things, boy. Ways to avoid even fate. Sit, and we will talk of them." The shadows appeared to shift and thicken, to reach out.

pɛɹɪn tʊk ə stɛp bæk, kipɪŋ wɛl ɪn ðə laɪt. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk soʊ."

Perrin took a step back, keeping well in the light. "I don't think so."

"æt list əv ə dʒɹɪŋk wɪð mi. tə jɪɹz pæst ən jɪɹz tə kʌm. hɪɹ, jəl si θɪŋz mɔɹ klɪɹli æftɝ." ðə kʌp ðə mæn pʊʃt əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl hæd nɑt bɪn ðəɹ ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ. ɪt ʃoʊn bɹaɪt sɪlvɝ, ən dɑɹk, blʌd-ɹɛd waɪn fɪld ɪt tə ðə bɹɪm.

"At least have a drink with me. To years past and years to come. Here, you will see things more clearly after." The cup the man pushed across the table had not been there a moment before. It shone bright silver, and dark, blood-red wine filled it to the brim.

pɛɹɪn pɪɹɾ ət ðə mænz feɪs. ivən tə hɪz ʃɑɹp aɪz, ðə ʃædoʊz sim tə ʃɹaʊd ði ʌðɝ mænz fitʃɝz laɪk ə wɔɹɾɝz kloʊk. dɑɹknəs moʊldəd ðə mæn laɪk ə kɝɛs. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə mænz aɪz, sʌmθɪŋ i θɔɾ i kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪf i tʃɹaɪd hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf. ðə mɝmɝ ɹɪtɝnd.

Perrin peered at the man's face. Even to his sharp eyes, the shadows seemed to shroud the other man's features like a Warder's cloak. Darkness molded the man like a caress. There was something about the man's eyes, something he thought he could remember if he tried hard enough. The murmur returned.

"noʊ," hi sɛd. hi spoʊk tə ðə sɑf saʊn ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd, bʌt wən ðə mænz maʊθ taɪɾənd ɪn æŋɡɝ, ə flæʃ ə ɹeɪdʒ səpɹɛst əz sun əz bɪɡʌn, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt wəd də fəɹ ðə waɪn əz wɛl. "aɪ æm nɑt θɝsti."

"No," he said. He spoke to the soft sound inside his head, but when the man's mouth tightened in anger, a flash of rage suppressed as soon as begun, he decided it would do for the wine as well. "I am not thirsty."

hi tɝn ən stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ. ðə faɪɝpleɪs wɑz ɹaʊndəd ɹɪvɝ stoʊnz; ə fju lɔŋ teɪbəlz laɪn baɪ bɛntʃɪz fɪl ðə ɹum. hi sʌɾənli wɑntəd tə bi aʊtsaɪd, ɛniwɛɹ əweɪ fɹəm ðɪs mæn.

He turned and started for the door. The fireplace was rounded river stones; a few long tables lined by benches filled the room. He suddenly wanted to be outside, anywhere away from this man.

"ju wɪl nɑɾ əv mɛni tʃænsəz," ðə mæn sɛd bɪhaɪn ɪm ɪn ə hɑɹd vɔɪs. "θɹi θɹɛdz woʊvən təɡɛðɝ ʃɛɹ wʌn ənʌðɝz dum. wən wʌn ɪz kʌt, ɔl ɑɹ. feɪt kən kɪl ju, ɪf ɪt dʌz nɑt də wɝs."

"You will not have many chances," the man said behind him in a hard voice. "Three threads woven together share one another's doom. When one is cut, all are. Fate can kill you, if it does not do worse."

pɛɹɪn fɛlt ə sʌɾən hiɾ əɡɛnst ɪz bæk, ɹaɪzɪŋ ðən feɪɾɪŋ dʒʌst əz kwɪkli, əz ɪf ðə dɔɹz ʌv ə hjudʒ smɛltɪŋ fɝnəs hæd swʌŋ oʊpən ən kloʊzd əɡɛn. stɑɹɾəld, hi tɝn bæk tə ðə ɹum. ɪt wɑz ɛmpti.

Perrin felt a sudden heat against his back, rising then fading just as quickly, as if the doors of a huge smelting furnace had swung open and closed again. Startled, he turned back to the room. It was empty.

oʊnli ə dʒɹim, hi θɔt, ʃɪvɝɪŋ fɹəm ðə koʊld, ən wɪð ðəɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃɪftəd.

Only a dream, he thought, shivering from the cold, and with that everything shifted.

hi stɛɹɾ ɪndə ðə mɪɹɝ, ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm nɑt kɑmpɹɪhɛndɪŋ wʌɾ i sɔ, ənʌðɝ pɑɹɾ æksɛptɪŋ. ə ɡɪldɪd hɛlmət, wɝk laɪk ə laɪənz hɛd, sæɾ ɑn ɪz hɛɾ əz ɪf ɪt bɪlɔŋ ðɛɹ. ɡoʊld lif kʌvɝɾ ɪz ɔɹnətli hæmɝd bɹɛstpleɪt, ən ɡoʊld-wɝk ɛmbɛlɪʃt ðə pleɪɾ ən meɪl ɑn ɪz ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz. oʊnli ði æks əɾ ɪz saɪd wɑz pleɪn. ə vɔɪs - hɪz oʊn - wɪspɝɾ ɪn ɪz maɪn ðəɾ i wəd teɪk ɪɾ oʊvɝ ɛni ʌðɝ wɛpən, hæd kæɹiɾ ɪɾ ə θaʊzən taɪmz, ɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd bæɾəlz. noʊ! hi wɑntəd tə teɪk ɪɾ ɔf, θɹoʊ ɪɾ əweɪ. aɪ kænt! ðəɹ wɑz ə saʊn ɪn ɪz hɛd, laʊɾɝ ðən ə mɝmɝ, ɔlmoʊst ət ðə lɛvəl ʌv ʌndɝstændɪŋ.

He stared into the mirror, a part of him not comprehending what he saw, another part accepting. A gilded helmet, worked like a lion's head, sat on his head as if it belonged there. Gold leaf covered his ornately hammered breastplate, and gold-work embellished the plate and mail on his arms and legs. Only the axe at his side was plain. A voice - his own - whispered in his mind that he would take it over any other weapon, had carried it a thousand times, in a hundred battles. No! He wanted to take it off, throw it away. I can't! There was a sound in his head, louder than a murmur, almost at the level of understanding.

"ə mæn dɛstɪn fəɹ ɡlɔɹi."

"A man destined for glory."

hi spʌn əweɪ fɹəm ðə mɪɹɝ ən faʊn hɪmsɛlf stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl wʊmən i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. hi noʊɾəst nʌθɪŋ ɛls əbaʊt ðə ɹum, kɛɹd tə si nʌθɪŋ bʌt hɝ. hɝ aɪz wɝ pulz ə mɪdnaɪt, hɝ skɪn kɹimi peɪl ən ʃʊɹli sɑftɝ, mɔɹ smuð ðən əɹ dʒɹɛs ʌv waɪt sɪlk. wən ʃi muv təwɔɹd hɪm, hɪz maʊθ wɛn dʒɹaɪ. hi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɛvɹi ʌðɝ wʊmən i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin wɑz klʌmzi ən ɪl-ʃeɪpt. hi ʃɪvɝd, ən wʌndɝd waɪ hi fɛl koʊld.

He spun away from the mirror and found himself staring at the most beautiful woman he had ever seen. He noticed nothing else about the room, cared to see nothing but her. Her eyes were pools of midnight, her skin creamy pale and surely softer, more smooth than her dress of white silk. When she moved toward him, his mouth went dry. He realized that every other woman he had ever seen was clumsy and ill-shaped. He shivered, and wondered why he felt cold.

"ə mæn ʃəd ɡɹæsp ɪz dɛstəni wɪð boʊθ hænz," ʃi sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɪnʌf tə wɔɹm hɪm, ðət smaɪl. ʃi wɑz tɔl, lɛs ðən ə hænd ʃɔɹɾ ə biɪŋ eɪbəl tə lʊk ɪm ɪn ði aɪz. sɪlvɝ koʊmz hɛl hɛɹ dɑɹkɝ ðən ə ɹeɪvənz wɪŋ. ə bɹɔd bɛlt ə sɪlvɝ lɪŋks bændɪɾ ə weɪst i cʊɾə ɪnsɝkəld wɪð ɪz hænz.

"A man should grasp his destiny with both hands," she said, smiling. It was almost enough to warm him, that smile. She was tall, less than a hand short of being able to look him in the eyes. Silver combs held hair darker than a raven's wing. A broad belt of silver links banded a waist he could have encircled with his hands.

"jɛs," hi wɪspɝd. ɪnsaɪd hɪm, stɑɹɾəlmənt fɔt wɪð æksɛptəns. hi hæd noʊ jus fəɹ ɡlɔɹi. bʌt wən ʃi sɛɾ ɪt, hi wɑntəd nʌθɪŋ ɛls. "aɪ min. . . ." ðə mɝmɝɪŋ saʊn dʌɡ əɾ ɪz skʌl. "noʊ!" ɪt wɑz ɡɔn, ən fəɹ ə moʊmənt, soʊ wɑz æksɛptəns. ɔlmoʊst. hi pʊɾ ə hæn tə hɪz hɛd, tʌtʃt ðə ɡoʊldən hɛlmət, tʊk ɪɾ ɔf. "aɪ . . . aɪ doʊn θɪŋk aɪ wɑn ðɪs. ɪts nɑt maɪn."

"Yes," he whispered. Inside him, startlement fought with acceptance. He had no use for glory. But when she said it, he wanted nothing else. "I mean. . . ." The murmuring sound dug at his skull. "No!" It was gone, and for a moment, so was acceptance. Almost. He put a hand to his head, touched the golden helmet, took it off. "I . . . I don't think I want this. It is not mine."

"doʊnt wɑn ɪt?" ʃi læft. "wʌt mæn wɪð blʌɾ ɪn ɪz veɪnz wəd nɑt wɑnt ɡlɔɹi? əz mʌtʃ ɡlɔɹi əz ɪf jə hæd saʊndəd ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ."

"Don't want it?" She laughed. "What man with blood in his veins would not want glory? As much glory as if you had sounded the Horn of Valere."

"aɪ doʊnt," hi sɛd, ðoʊ ə pis ə hɪm ʃaʊɾəd ðəɾ i laɪd. ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. ðə hɔɹn ɹæŋ aʊt, ən ðə waɪl tʃɑɹdʒ bɪɡæn. dɛθ ɹoʊɾ əɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ən jɛt ʃi weɪɾəd əhɛd, tu. hɪz lʌvɝ. hɪz dɪstʃɹɔɪɝ. "noʊ! aɪm ə blæksmɪθ."

"I don't," he said, though a piece of him shouted that he lied. The Horn of Valere. The Horn rang out, and the wild charge began. Death rode at his shoulder, and yet she waited ahead, too. His lover. His destroyer. "No! I am a blacksmith."

hɝ smaɪl wɑz pɪɾiɪŋ. "sʌtʃ ə lɪɾəl θɪŋ tə wɑnt. jə mʌs nɑt lɪsən tə ðoʊz u wəd tʃɹaɪ tə tɝn jə fɹəm jəɹ dɛstəni. ðeɪ wəd dɪmin ju, dəbeɪs ju. dɪstʃɹɔɪ ju. faɪɾɪŋ feɪt kən oʊnli bɹɪŋ peɪn. waɪ tʃuz peɪn, wən jə kən əv ɡlɔɹi? wən jəɹ neɪm kən bi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɔl ðə hɪɹoʊz ə lɛdʒənd?"

Her smile was pitying. "Such a little thing to want. You must not listen to those who would try to turn you from your destiny. They would demean you, debase you. Destroy you. Fighting fate can only bring pain. Why choose pain, when you can have glory? When your name can be remembered alongside all the heroes of legend?"

"aɪ æm noʊ hɪɹoʊ."

"I am no hero."

"ju doʊnt noʊ ðə hæf ʌv wʌt jə ɑɹ. ʌv wʌt jə kən bi. kʌm, ʃɛɹ ə kʌp wɪð mi, tə dɛstəni ən ɡlɔɹi." ðəɹ wɑz ə ʃaɪnɪŋ sɪlvɝ kʌp ɪn əɹ hænd, fɪld wɪð blʌd-ɹɛd waɪn. "dʒɹɪŋk."

"You don't know the half of what you are. Of what you can be. Come, share a cup with me, to destiny and glory." There was a shining silver cup in her hand, filled with blood-red wine. "Drink."

hi stɛɹɾ ət ðə kʌp, fɹaʊnɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ . . . fəmɪljɝ əbaʊɾ ɪt. ə ɡɹoʊlɪŋ tʃuɾ əɾ ɪz bɹeɪn. "noʊ!" hi fɔɾ əweɪ fɹəm ɪt, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə lɪsən. "noʊ!"

He stared at the cup, frowning. There was something . . . familiar about it. A growling chewed at his brain. "No!" He fought away from it, refusing to listen. "No!"

ʃi hɛld aʊt ðə ɡoʊldən kʌp tə hɪm. "dʒɹɪŋk."

She held out the golden cup to him. "Drink."

ɡoʊldən? aɪ θɔt ðə kʌp wɑz. . . . ɪt wɑz. . . . ðə ɹɛst ə ðə θɔt wəd nɑt kʌm. bʌɾ ɪn ɪz kənfjuʒən ðə saʊn keɪm əɡɛn, ɪnsaɪd, nɔɪŋ, dɪmændɪŋ tə bi hɝd. "noʊ," hi sɛd. "noʊ!" hi lʊkt ət ðə ɡoʊldən hɛlməɾ ɪn ɪz hænz ən θɹu ɪɾ əsaɪd. "aɪ æm ə blæksmɪθ. aɪ æm. . . ." ðə saʊnd wɪðɪn ɪz hɛd fɔt hɪm, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ təwɔɹd biɪŋ hɝd. hi ɹæpt ɪz ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd tə ʃʌɾ ɪɾ aʊt, ən oʊnli ʃʌɾ ɪɾ ɪn. "aɪ - æm - ə - mæn!" hi ʃaʊɾəd.

Golden? I thought the cup was. . . . It was. . . . The rest of the thought would not come. But in his confusion the sound came again, inside, gnawing, demanding to be heard. "No," he said. "No!" He looked at the golden helmet in his hands and threw it aside. "I am a blacksmith. I am. . . ." The sound within his head fought him, struggling toward being heard. He wrapped his arms around his head to shut it out, and only shut it in. "I - am - a - man!" he shouted.

dɑɹknəs ɛnfoʊldəd hɪm, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs fɑloʊd, wɪspɝɪŋ. "ðə naɪɾ ɪz ɔlweɪz ðɛɹ, ən dʒɹimz kʌm tə ɔl mɛn. ɪspɛʃli ju, maɪ waɪldlɪŋ. ən əl ɔlweɪz bi ɪn jəɹ dʒɹimz."

Darkness enfolded him, but her voice followed, whispering. "The night is always there, and dreams come to all men. Especially you, my wildling. And I will always be in your dreams."

stɪlnəs.

Stillness.

hi loʊɝɾ ɪz ɑɹmz. hi wɑz bæk ɪn ɪz oʊn koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz əɡɛn, stɝɾi ən wɛl meɪd, ɪf pleɪn. suɾəbəl ɡɑɹb fəɹ ə blæksmɪθ, əɹ ɛni kʌntʃɹi mæn. jɛɾ i bɛɹli noʊɾəst ðɛm.

He lowered his arms. He was back in his own coat and breeches again, sturdy and well made, if plain. Suitable garb for a blacksmith, or any country man. Yet he barely noticed them.

hi stʊɾ ɑn ə loʊ-ɹeɪl bɹɪdʒ ə stoʊn, ɑɹtʃɪŋ fɹəm wʌn waɪd, flæt-tɑp stoʊn spaɪɹ tə ənʌðɝ, spaɪɹz ðət ɹoʊz fɹəm dɛpθs tu fɑɹ fəɹ ivən ɪz aɪz tə pɛnətʃɹeɪt. ðə laɪt wʊɾə bɪn dɪm tə ɛni ʌðɝ aɪz, ən i kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt keɪm. ɪt dʒʌst wɑz. ɛvɹiwɛɹ i lʊkt, lɛft ən ɹaɪt, ʌp əɹ daʊn, wɝ mɔɹ bɹɪdʒəz, mɔɹ spaɪɹz, ən ɹeɪləs ɹæmps. ðəɹ sim noʊ ɛn tə ðɛm, noʊ pæɾɝn. wɝs, səm ə ðoʊz ɹæmps klaɪm tə spaɪɹ tɑps ðət hæd tə bi dɝɛkli əbʌv ðə wʌnz ðeɪ hæd lɛft. splæʃɪŋ wɔɾɝ ɛkoʊd, ðə saʊn simɪŋ tə kʌm fɹəm ɛvɹiwɛɹ ət wʌns. hi ʃɪvɝd wɪð koʊld.

He stood on a low-railed bridge of stone, arching from one wide, flat-topped stone spire to another, spires that rose from depths too far for even his eyes to penetrate. The light would have been dim to any other eyes, and he could not make out from where it came. It just was. Everywhere he looked, left and right, up or down, were more bridges, more spires, and railless ramps. There seemed no end to them, no pattern. Worse, some of those ramps climbed to spire tops that had to be directly above the ones they had left. Splashing water echoed, the sound seeming to come from everywhere at once. He shivered with cold.

sʌɾənli, fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, hi kɑɾ ə moʊʃən, ən wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, hi kɹaʊtʃt bɪhaɪn ðə stoʊn ɹeɪlɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz deɪnʒɝ ɪn biɪŋ sin. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ waɪ, bʌɾ i nu ɪt wɑz tʃɹu. hi dʒʌs nu.

Suddenly, from the corner of his eye, he caught a motion, and without thinking, he crouched behind the stone railing. There was danger in being seen. He did not know why, but he knew it was true. He just knew.

kɔʃəsli piɹɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə tɑp ə ðə ɹeɪl, hi sɔt wʌɾ i hæd sin muvɪŋ. ə flæʃ ʌv waɪt flɪkɝɾ ɑn ə dɪstən ɹæmp. ə wʊmən, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑt kwaɪt meɪk əɹ aʊt. ə wʊmən ɪn ə waɪt dʒɹɛs, hɝiɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ.

Cautiously peering over the top of the rail, he sought what he had seen moving. A flash of white flickered on a distant ramp. A woman, he was sure, though he could not quite make her out. A woman in a white dress, hurrying somewhere.

ɑn ə bɹɪdʒ slaɪtli bɪloʊ hɪm, ən mʌtʃ kloʊsɝ ðən ðə ɹæmp wɛɹ ðə wʊmən hæd bɪn, ə mæn sʌɾənli əpɪɹd, tɔl ən dɑɹk ən slɛndɝ, ðə sɪlvɝ ɪn ɪz blæk hɛɹ ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm ə dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt lʊk, hɪz dɑɹk ɡɹin koʊt θɪkli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð ɡoʊldən livz. ɡoʊld-wɝk kʌvɝɾ ɪz bɛlt ən paʊtʃ, ən dʒɛmz spɑɹkəld ɑn ɪz dæɡɝ ʃiθ, ən ɡoʊldən fɹɪnʒ ɪnsɝkəld ɪz but tɑps. wɛɹ hæɾ i kʌm fɹʌm?

On a bridge slightly below him, and much closer than the ramp where the woman had been, a man suddenly appeared, tall and dark and slender, the silver in his black hair giving him a distinguished look, his dark green coat thickly embroidered with golden leaves. Gold-work covered his belt and pouch, and gems sparkled on his dagger sheath, and golden fringe encircled his boot tops. Where had he come from?

ənʌðɝ mæn stɑɹɾəd əkɹɔs ðə bɹɪdʒ fɹəm ði ʌðɝ saɪd, hɪz əpɪɹəns əz sʌɾən əz ðə fɝs mænz. blæk stʃɹaɪps ɹæn daʊn ðə pʌfi slivz ə hɪz ɹɛd koʊt, ən peɪl leɪs hʌŋ θɪk əɾ ɪz kɑlɝ ən kʌfs. hɪz buts wɝ soʊ wɝkt wɪð sɪlvɝ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə si ðə lɛðɝ. hi wɑz ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ðə mæn i wɛn tə mit, mɔɹ stɑki, wɪð kloʊs-kɹɑp hɛɹ əz waɪɾ əz ɪz leɪs. eɪdʒ dɪd nɑt meɪk ɪm fɹeɪl, ðoʊ. hi stʃɹoʊd wɪð ðə seɪm ɛɹəɡən stʃɹɛŋkθ ði ʌðɝ mæn ʃoʊd.

Another man started across the bridge from the other side, his appearance as sudden as the first man's. Black stripes ran down the puffy sleeves of his red coat, and pale lace hung thick at his collar and cuffs. His boots were so worked with silver that it was hard to see the leather. He was shorter than the man he went to meet, more stocky, with close-cropped hair as white as his lace. Age did not make him frail, though. He strode with the same arrogant strength the other man showed.

ðə tu ʌv əm əpɹoʊtʃt itʃ ʌðɝ wɛɹəli. laɪk tu hɔɹs tʃɹeɪɾɝz u noʊ ði ʌðɝ fɛloʊ hæz ə speɪvən mɛɹ tə sɛl, pɛɹɪn θɔt.

The two of them approached each other warily. Like two horse traders who know the other fellow has a spavined mare to sell, Perrin thought.

ðə mɛn bɪɡæn tə tɔk. pɛɹɪn stʃɹeɪn ɪz ɪɹz, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt hɪɹ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə mɝmɝ əbʌv ðə splæʃɪŋ ɛkoʊz. fɹaʊnz, ən ɡlɛɹz, ən ʃɑɹp moʊʃənz əz ɪf hæf ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə stʃɹaɪkɪŋ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌst wʌn ənʌðɝ. hi θɔt ðeɪ maɪɾ ivən heɪɾ itʃ ʌðɝ.

The men began to talk. Perrin strained his ears, but he could not hear so much as a murmur above the splashing echoes. Frowns, and glares, and sharp motions as if half on the point of striking. They did not trust one another. He thought they might even hate each other.

hi ɡlænst ʌp, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə wʊmən, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɡɔn. wən i lʊk bæk daʊn, ənʌðɝ mæn hæd dʒɔɪn ðə fɝs tu. ən sʌmhaʊ, fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ, pɛɹɪn nu hɪm wɪð ðə veɪɡnɪs ʌv ən oʊl mɛmɹi. ə hænsəm mæn ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz, wɛɹɪŋ nɪɹli blæk vɛlvəɾ ən waɪt leɪs. ən ɪn, pɛɹɪn θɔt. ən sʌmθɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðæt. sʌmθɪŋ. . . . sʌmθɪŋ ə lɔŋ taɪm əɡoʊ, ɪt simd. bʌt ðə mɛmɹi wəd nɑt kʌm.

He glanced up, searching for the woman, but she was gone. When he looked back down, another man had joined the first two. And somehow, from somewhere, Perrin knew him with the vagueness of an old memory. A handsome man in his middle years, wearing nearly black velvet and white lace. An inn, Perrin thought. And something before that. Something. . . . Something a long time ago, it seemed. But the memory would not come.

ðə fɝs tu mɛn stʊd saɪd baɪ saɪd, naʊ, meɪɾ ənkʌmftəɹbəl ælaɪz baɪ ðə pɹɛzəns ə ðə nukʌmɝ. hi ʃaʊɾəd əɾ əm ən ʃʊk ɪz fɪst, waɪl ðeɪ ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə miɾ ɪz ɡlɛɹz. ɪf ðə tu heɪɾəd itʃ ʌðɝ, ðeɪ fɪɹɾ ɪm mɔɹ.

The first two men stood side by side, now, made uncomfortable allies by the presence of the newcomer. He shouted at them and shook his fist, while they shifted uneasily, refusing to meet his glares. If the two hated each other, they feared him more.

hɪz aɪz, pɛɹɪn θɔt. wʌɾ ɪz stʃɹeɪnʒ əbaʊɾ ɪz aɪz?

His eyes, Perrin thought. What is strange about his eyes?

ðə tɔl, dɑɹk mæn bɪɡæn tə ɑɹɡju bæk, sloʊli ət fɝst, ðən wɪð ɪnkɹisɪŋ fɝvɝ. ðə waɪt-hɛɹd mæn dʒɔɪn ɪn, ən sʌɾənli ðɛɹ tɛmpɝɛɹi əlaɪəns bɹoʊk. ɔl θɹi ʃaʊɾəd ət wʌns, itʃ ət boʊθ ə ði ʌðɝz ɪn tɝn. əbɹʌpli ðə mæn ɪn dɑɹk vɛlvəts θɹu hɪz ɑɹmz waɪd, əz ɪf dɪmændɪŋ ən ɛn tə ɪt. ən ən ɪkspændɪŋ bɔl ə faɪɝ ɛnvɛləp ðɛm, hɪd ðɛm, spɹɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ən aʊt.

The tall, dark man began to argue back, slowly at first, then with increasing fervor. The white-haired man joined in, and suddenly their temporary alliance broke. All three shouted at once, each at both of the others in turn. Abruptly the man in dark velvets threw his arms wide, as if demanding an end to it. And an expanding ball of fire enveloped them, hid them, spreading out and out.

pɛɹɪn θɹu hɪz ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ɪz hɛɾ ən dʒɹɑp bɪhaɪn ðə stoʊn ɹeɪlɪŋ, hʌɾəlɪŋ ðəɹ əz wɪn bəfeɪɾ ɪm ən tɔɹ əɾ ɪz kloʊðz, ə wɪn əz hɑɾ əz faɪɝ. ə wɪn ðət wɑz faɪɝ. ivən wɪð ɪz aɪz ʃʌt, hi kəd si ɪt, fleɪm bɪloʊɪŋ əkɹɔs ɛvɹiθɪŋ, fleɪm bloʊɪŋ θɹu ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ðə faɪɝi ɡeɪl ɹɔɹd θɹu hɪm, tu; hi kəd fil ɪt, bɝnɪŋ, tʌɡɪŋ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənsum ɪm ən skæɾɝ ði æʃəz. hi jɛld, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hæŋ ɑntu hɪmsɛlf, noʊɪŋ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf.

Perrin threw his arms around his head and dropped behind the stone railing, huddling there as wind buffeted him and tore at his clothes, a wind as hot as fire. A wind that was fire. Even with his eyes shut, he could see it, flame billowing across everything, flame blowing through everything. The fiery gale roared through him, too; he could feel it, burning, tugging, trying to consume him and scatter the ashes. He yelled, trying to hang onto himself, knowing it was not enough.

ən bɪtwin wʌn hɑɹtbiɾ ən ðə nɛkst, ðə wɪnd wɑz ɡɔn. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ dɪmɪnɪʃɪŋ. wʌn ɪnstən ə stɔɹm ə fleɪm pʌməl hɪm; ðə nɛkst, ʌɾɝ stɪlnəs. ði ɛkoʊz ə fɔlɪŋ wɔɾɝ wɝ ði oʊnli saʊnd.

And between one heartbeat and the next, the wind was gone. There was no diminishing. One instant a storm of flame pummeled him; the next, utter stillness. The echoes of falling water were the only sound.

sloʊli, pɛɹɪn sæɾ ʌp, ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ hɪmsɛlf. hɪz kloʊðz wɝ ənsɪnʒd ən hoʊl, hɪz ɪkspoʊz skɪn ənbɝnd. oʊnli ðə mɛmɹi ʌv hit meɪɾ ɪm bɪliv ɪt hæd hæpənd. ə mɛmɹi ɪn ðə maɪn əloʊn; hɪz bɑɾi fɛl noʊ mɛmɹi ʌv ɪt.

Slowly, Perrin sat up, examining himself. His clothes were unsinged and whole, his exposed skin unburned. Only the memory of heat made him believe it had happened. A memory in the mind alone; his body felt no memory of it.

kɔʃəsli hi pikt oʊvɝ ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ. oʊnli ə fju peɪsɪz ə hæf-mɛltəd fʊɾɪŋ əɾ iðɝ ɛn ɹɪmeɪn ə ðə bɹɪdʒ wɛɹ ðə mɛn hæd bɪn stændɪŋ. ʌv ðɛm, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn.

Cautiously he peeked over the railing. Only a few paces of half-melted footing at either end remained of the bridge where the men had been standing. Of them, there was no sign.

ə pɹɪklɪŋ ɪn ðə hɛɹ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk meɪɾ ɪm lʊk ʌp. ɑn ə ɹæmp əbʌv ɪm ən tə ðə ɹaɪt, ə ʃæɡi ɡɹeɪ wʊlf stʊd lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm.

A prickling in the hair on the back of his neck made him look up. On a ramp above him and to the right, a shaggy gray wolf stood looking at him.

"noʊ!" hi skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fiɾ ən ɹæn. "ðɪs ɪz ə dʒɹim! ə naɪtmɛɹ! aɪ wɑnə weɪk ʌp!" hi ɹæn, ən ɪz vɪʒən blɝd. ðə blɝz ʃɪftəd. ə bʌzɪŋ fɪld ɪz ɪɹz, ðən feɪɾəd, ən əz ɪt wɛnt, ðə ʃɪmɝɪŋ ɪn ɪz aɪz stɛɾid.

"No!" He scrambled to his feet and ran. "This is a dream! A nightmare! I want to wake up!" He ran, and his vision blurred. The blurs shifted. A buzzing filled his ears, then faded, and as it went, the shimmering in his eyes steadied.

hi ʃɪvɝd wɪð ðə koʊld ən nu ðɪs fəɹ ə dʒɹim, sɝɾən ən ʃʊɹ, fɹəm ðə fɝs moʊmənt. hi wɑz dɪmli əwɛɹ ə səm ʃæɾoʊi mɛmɹi ʌv dʒɹimz pɹisiɾɪŋ ðɪs, bʌt ðɪs wʌn i nu. hi hæd bɪn ɪn ðɪs pleɪs bɪfɔɹ, ɑn pɹiviəs naɪts, ən ɪf i ʌndɝstʊd nʌθɪŋ ʌv ɪt, hi stɪl nu ɪt fəɹ ə dʒɹim. fəɹ wʌns, noʊɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd nʌθɪŋ.

He shivered with the cold and knew this for a dream, certain and sure, from the first moment. He was dimly aware of some shadowy memory of dreams preceding this, but this one he knew. He had been in this place before, on previous nights, and if he understood nothing of it, he still knew it for a dream. For once, knowing changed nothing.

hjudʒ kɑləmz ə pɑlɪʃt ɹɛdstoʊn sɝaʊndəd ði oʊpən speɪs wɛɹ i stʊd, bɪniθ ə doʊm silɪŋ fɪfti peɪsɪz əɹ mɔɹ əbʌv ɪz hɛd. hi ən ənʌðɝ mæn əz bɪɡ kəd nɑɾ əv ɪnsɝkəld wʌn ə ðoʊz kɑləmz wɪð ðɛɹ ɑɹmz. ðə flɔɹ wɑz peɪvd wɪð ɡɹeɪt slæbz ə peɪl ɡɹeɪ stoʊn, hɑɹd jɛt wɔɹn baɪ kaʊnləs dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz ə fit.

Huge columns of polished redstone surrounded the open space where he stood, beneath a domed ceiling fifty paces or more above his head. He and another man as big could not have encircled one of those columns with their arms. The floor was paved with great slabs of pale gray stone, hard yet worn by countless generations of feet.

ən sɛntɝd bɪniθ ðə doʊm wɑz ðə ɹizən waɪ ɔl ðoʊz fit hæd kʌm tə ðɪs tʃeɪmbɝ. ə sɔɹd, hæŋɪŋ hɪl daʊn ɪn ði ɛɹ, əpɛɹənli wɪθaʊt səpɔɹt, simɪŋli wɛɹ ɛniwʌn kəd ɹitʃ aʊɾ ən teɪk ɪt. ɪt ɹivɑlv sloʊli, əz ɪf səm bɹɛθ ʌv ɛɹ kɑɾ ɪt. jɛɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹɪli ə sɔɹd. ɪt simd meɪɾ ʌv ɡlæs, əɹ pɝhæps kɹɪstəl, bleɪɾ ən hɪlt ən kɹɔsɡɑɹd, kætʃɪŋ sətʃ laɪɾ əz ðəɹ wɑz ən ʃæɾɝɪŋ ɪɾ ɪndə ə θaʊzənd ɡlɪɾɝz ən flæʃɪz.

And centered beneath the dome was the reason why all those feet had come to this chamber. A sword, hanging hilt down in the air, apparently without support, seemingly where anyone could reach out and take it. It revolved slowly, as if some breath of air caught it. Yet it was not really a sword. It seemed made of glass, or perhaps crystal, blade and hilt and crossguard, catching such light as there was and shattering it into a thousand glitters and flashes.

hi wɔk təwɔɹɾ ɪɾ ən pʊɾ aʊɾ ɪz hænd, əz i hæd dʌn itʃ taɪm bɪfɔɹ. hi klɪɹli ɹɪmɛmbɝd duɪŋ ɪt. ðə hɪl hʌŋ ðəɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz feɪs, wɪðɪn izi ɹitʃ. ə fʊt fɹəm ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ sɔɹd, hɪz hæn spleɪɾ aʊɾ əɡɛnst ɛmpti ɛɹ əz ɪf ɪt hæd tʌtʃt stoʊn. əz i hæd noʊn ɪt wʊd. hi pʊʃt hɑɹɾɝ, bʌɾ i maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ʃʌvɪŋ əɡɛnst ə wɔl. ðə sɔɹd tɝn ən spɑɹkəld, ə fʊɾ əweɪ ən əz fɑɹ aʊɾ ə ɹitʃ əz ɪf ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ʌv ən oʊʃən.

He walked toward it and put out his hand, as he had done each time before. He clearly remembered doing it. The hilt hung there in front of his face, within easy reach. A foot from the shining sword, his hand splayed out against empty air as if it had touched stone. As he had known it would. He pushed harder, but he might as well have been shoving against a wall. The sword turned and sparkled, a foot away and as far out of reach as if on the other side of an ocean.

kælændɝ. hi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən wɛðɝ ðə wɪspɝ keɪm ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛɾ əɹ aʊt; ɪt sim tə ɛkoʊ 'ɹaʊn ðə kɑləmz, əz sɑft əz ðə wɪnd, ɛvɹiwɛɹ ət wʌns, ɪnsɪstənt. kælændɝ. hu wilz mi wilz dɛstəni. teɪk mi, ən bɪɡɪn ðə faɪnəl dʒɝni.

Callandor. He was not certain whether the whisper came inside his head or out; it seemed to echo 'round the columns, as soft as the wind, everywhere at once, insistent. Callandor. Who wields me wields destiny. Take me, and begin the final journey.

hi tʊk ə stɛp bæk, sʌɾənli fɹaɪɾənd. ðət wɪspɝ hæd nɛvɝ kʌm bɪfɔɹ. fɔɹ taɪmz bɪfɔɹ i hæd hæd ðɪs dʒɹim - hi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðəɾ ivən naʊ; fɔɹ naɪts, wʌn æftɝ ði ʌðɝ - ən ðɪs wɑz ðə fɝs taɪm ɛniθɪŋ hæd tʃeɪnʒd ɪn ɪt.

He took a step back, suddenly frightened. That whisper had never come before. Four times before he had had this dream - he could remember that even now; four nights, one after the other - and this was the first time anything had changed in it.

ðə twɪstəd wʌnz kʌm.

The Twisted Ones come.

ɪt wɑz ə dɪfɹənt wɪspɝ, fɹəm ə sɔɹs i nu, ən i dʒʌmpt əz ɪf ə mɹdʒɹɑl hæd tʌtʃt hɪm. ə wʊlf stʊd ðəɹ əmʌŋ ðə kɑləmz, ə maʊntən wʊlf, ɔlmoʊst weɪst-haɪ ən ʃæɡi waɪɾ ən ɡɹeɪ. ɪt stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm ɪntɛnli wɪð aɪz əz jɛloʊ əz ɪz oʊn.

It was a different whisper, from a source he knew, and he jumped as if a Myrddraal had touched him. A wolf stood there among the columns, a mountain wolf, almost waist-high and shaggy white and gray. It stared at him intently with eyes as yellow as his own.

ðə twɪstəd wʌnz kʌm.

The Twisted Ones come.

"noʊ," pɛɹɪn ɹæspt. "noʊ! əl nɑt lɛt jə ɪn! aɪ - wɪl - nɑt!"

"No," Perrin rasped. "No! I will not let you in! I - will - not!"

hi klɔɾ ɪz weɪ əweɪk ən sæɾ ʌp ɪn ɪz hʌt, ʃeɪkɪŋ wɪð fɪɹ ən koʊld ən æŋɡɝ. "aɪ wɪl nɑt," hi wɪspɝd hɔɹsli.

He clawed his way awake and sat up in his hut, shaking with fear and cold and anger. "I will not," he whispered hoarsely.

ðə twɪstəd wʌnz kʌm.

The Twisted Ones come.

ðə θɔt wɑz klɪɹ ɪn ɪz hɛd, bʌt ðə θɔt wɑz nɑɾ ɪz oʊn.

The thought was clear in his head, but the thought was not his own.

ðə twɪstəd wʌnz kʌm, bɹʌðɝ.

The Twisted Ones come, brother.


tʃæptɝ faɪv


CHAPTER 5

naɪtmɛɹz wɔkɪŋ


Nightmares Walking

lipɪŋ fɹəm ɪz bɛd, pɛɹɪn snætʃt ɪz æks ən ɹæn aʊtsaɪd, bɛɹfʊɾ ən wɛɹɪŋ nʌθɪŋ bʌt θɪn lɪnən, hidləs ə ðə koʊld. ðə mun beɪðd ðə klaʊdz wɪð peɪl waɪt. mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf laɪt fəɹ ɪz aɪz, mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf tə si ðə ʃeɪps slɪpɪŋ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz fɹəm ɔl saɪdz, ʃeɪps ɔlmoʊst əz bɪɡ əz lɔɪəl, bʌt wɪð feɪsəz dɪstɔɹɾəd baɪ mʌzəlz ən biks, hæf-hjumən hɛdz wɛɹɪŋ hɔɹnz ən fɛðɝd kɹɛsts, stɛlθi fɔɹmz stɔkɪŋ ɑn hʊvz əɹ pɔz əz ɔfən əz buɾɪd fit.

Leaping from his bed, Perrin snatched his axe and ran outside, barefoot and wearing nothing but thin linen, heedless of the cold. The moon bathed the clouds with pale white. More than enough light for his eyes, more than enough to see the shapes slipping through the trees from all sides, shapes almost as big as Loial, but with faces distorted by muzzles and beaks, half-human heads wearing horns and feathered crests, stealthy forms stalking on hooves or paws as often as booted feet.

hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə ʃaʊt wɔɹnɪŋ, ən sʌɾənli ðə dɔɹ ə mɔɪɹeɪnz hʌt bɝst oʊpən ən læn dæʃt aʊt, sɔɹɾ ɪn hæn ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ, "tʃɹɑləks! weɪk, fəɹ jəɹ laɪvz! tʃɹɑləks!" ʃaʊts ænsɝɾ ɪm əz mɛn bɪɡæn tə tʌmbəl fɹəm ðɛɹ hʌts, ɡɑɹb fəɹ slip, wɪtʃ fəɹ moʊs mɛnt nɑɾ əɾ ɔl, bʌt wɪð sɔɹdz ɹɛɾi. wɪð ə bɛstʃəl ɹɔɹ, ðə tʃɹɑləks ɹʌʃt fɔɹwɝd tə bi mɛt wɪð stil ən kɹaɪz ʌv "ʃaɪnɝ!" ən "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn!"

He opened his mouth to shout warning, and suddenly the door of Moiraine's hut burst open and Lan dashed out, sword in hand and shouting, "Trollocs! Wake, for your lives! Trollocs!" Shouts answered him as men began to tumble from their huts, garbed for sleep, which for most meant not at all, but with swords ready. With a bestial roar, the Trollocs rushed forward to be met with steel and cries of "Shienar!" and "The Dragon Reborn!"

læn wɑz fʊli kloʊðd - pɛɹɪn wʊɾə bɛt ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd nɑt slɛpt - ən i flʌŋ hɪmsɛlf əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks əz ɪf ɪz wʊl wɝ ɑɹmɝ. hi sim tə dæns fɹəm wʌn tə ənʌðɝ, mæn ən sɔɹd floʊɪŋ laɪk wɔɾɝ əɹ wɪnd, ən wɛɹ ðə wɔɹɾɝ dænst, tʃɹɑləks skɹimd ən daɪd.

Lan was fully clothed - Perrin would have bet the Warder had not slept - and he flung himself among the Trollocs as if his wool were armor. He seemed to dance from one to another, man and sword flowing like water or wind, and where the Warder danced, Trollocs screamed and died.

mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz aʊɾ ɪn ðə naɪɾ əz wɛl, dænsɪŋ əɹ oʊn dæns əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks. hɝ oʊnli əpɛɹənt wɛpən wɑz ə swɪtʃ, bʌt wɛɹ ʃi slæʃt ə tʃɹɑlɑk, ə laɪn ə fleɪm ɡɹu ɑn ɪts flɛʃ. hɝ fɹi hæn θɹu faɪɝi bɔlz sʌmən fɹəm θɪn ɛɹ, ən tʃɹɑləks haʊld əz fleɪmz kənsum ðɛm, θɹæʃɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

Moiraine was out in the night as well, dancing her own dance among the Trollocs. Her only apparent weapon was a switch, but where she slashed a Trolloc, a line of flame grew on its flesh. Her free hand threw fiery balls summoned from thin air, and Trollocs howled as flames consumed them, thrashing on the ground.

ən ɪntaɪɝ tʃɹi bɝst ɪndə fleɪm fɹəm ɹut tə kɹaʊn, ðən ənʌðɝ, ən ənʌðɝ. tʃɹɑləks ʃɹikt ət ðə sʌɾən laɪt, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt stɑp swɪŋɪŋ ðɛɹ spaɪkt æksiz ən sɔɹdz kɝv laɪk saɪθz.

An entire tree burst into flame from root to crown, then another, and another. Trollocs shrieked at the sudden light, but they did not stop swinging their spiked axes and swords curved like scythes.

əbɹʌpli pɛɹɪn sɔ leɪə stɛp hɛzɪɾəntli aʊɾ ə mɔɪɹeɪnz kæbən, hæfweɪ ɝaʊn ðə boʊl fɹəm hɪm, ən ɔl θɔɾ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɛls lɛf hɪm. ðə tuætɑn wʊmən pɹɛst əɹ bæk əɡɛns ðə lɔɡ wɔl, ə hæn tə hɝ θɹoʊt. ðə laɪt fɹəm ðə bɝnɪŋ tʃɹiz ʃoʊɾ ɪm ðə peɪn ən hɔɹɝ, ðə loʊθɪŋ ɑn əɹ feɪs əz ʃi wɑtʃt ðə kɑɹnɪdʒ.

Abruptly Perrin saw Leya step hesitantly out of Moiraine's cabin, halfway around the bowl from him, and all thought of anything else left him. The Tuatha'an woman pressed her back against the log wall, a hand to her throat. The light from the burning trees showed him the pain and horror, the loathing on her face as she watched the carnage.

"haɪd!" pɛɹɪn ʃaʊɾəd ət hɝ. "ɡɛt bæk ɪnsaɪɾ ən haɪd!" ðə swɛlɪŋ ɹɔɹ ə faɪɾɪŋ ən daɪɪŋ swɑloʊɾ ɪz wɝdz. hi ɹæn təwɔɹd hɝ. "haɪd, leɪə! fəɹ ðə lʌv ə ðə laɪt, haɪd!"

"Hide!" Perrin shouted at her. "Get back inside and hide!" The swelling roar of fighting and dying swallowed his words. He ran toward her. "Hide, Leya! For the love of the Light, hide!"

eɪ tʃɹɑlɑk lumd ʌp oʊvɝ hɪm, ə kɹuli hʊk bik wɛɹ ɪts maʊθ ən noʊz ʃəɾ əv bɪn. blæk meɪl ən spaɪks kʌvɝɾ ɪt fɹəm ʃoʊldɝz tə niz, ən ɪt muvd ɑn ə hɔks təlɑnz əz ɪt swʌŋ wʌn ə ðoʊz stʃɹeɪnʒli kɝv sɔɹdz. ɪt smɛld ə swɛɾ ən dɝɾ ən blʌd.

A Trolloc loomed up over him, a cruelly hooked beak where its mouth and nose should have been. Black mail and spikes covered it from shoulders to knees, and it moved on a hawk's talons as it swung one of those strangely curved swords. It smelled of sweat and dirt and blood.

pɛɹɪn kɹaʊtʃt ʌndɝ ðə slæʃ, ʃaʊɾɪŋ wɝdləsli əz i stʃɹʌk aʊt wɪð ɪz æks. hi nu hi ʃʊɾə bɪn əfɹeɪd, bʌɾ ɝdʒənsi səpɹɛs fɪɹ. ɔl ðət mæɾɝd wɑz ðəɾ i hæd tə ɹitʃ leɪə, hæd tə ɡɛɾ əɹ tə seɪfti, ən ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɑz ɪn ðə weɪ.

Perrin crouched under the slash, shouting wordlessly as he struck out with his axe. He knew he should have been afraid, but urgency suppressed fear. All that mattered was that he had to reach Leya, had to get her to safety, and the Trolloc was in the way.

ðə tʃɹɑlɑk fɛl, ɹɔɹɪŋ ən kɪkɪŋ; pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛɹ i hæd hɪɾ ɪt, əɹ ɪf ɪt wɝ daɪɪŋ əɹ mɪɹli hɝt. hi lɛpt oʊvɝ ɪt, wɛɹ ɪt leɪ θɹæʃɪŋ, ən ɹæn skɹæmbəlɪŋ ʌp ðə sloʊp.

The Trolloc fell, roaring and kicking; Perrin did not know where he had hit it, or if it were dying or merely hurt. He leaped over it, where it lay thrashing, and ran scrambling up the slope.

bɝnɪŋ tʃɹiz kæs lʊɹəd ʃædoʊz əkɹɔs ðə smɔl væli. ə flɪkɝɪŋ ʃædoʊ bɪsaɪd mɔɪɹeɪnz hʌt sʌɾənli ɹizɑlvd ɪndə ə tʃɹɑlɑk, ɡoʊt-snaʊɾəd ən hɔɹnd. ɡɹɪpɪŋ ə waɪldli spaɪkt æks wɪð boʊθ hænz, ɪt simd ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə ɹʌʃɪŋ daʊn ɪndə ðə fɹeɪ wən ɪts aɪz fɛl ɑn leɪə.

Burning trees cast lurid shadows across the small valley. A flickering shadow beside Moiraine's hut suddenly resolved into a Trolloc, goat-snouted and horned. Gripping a wildly spiked axe with both hands, it seemed on the point of rushing down into the fray when its eyes fell on Leya.

"noʊ!" pɛɹɪn ʃaʊɾəd. "laɪt, noʊ!" ɹɑks skɪɾɝd əweɪ ʌndɝ ɪz bɛɹ fit; hi dɪd nɑt fil ðə bɹuzəz. ðə tʃɹɑlɑks æks ɹoʊz. "leɪɑəɑəəɑɑ!"

"No!" Perrin shouted. "Light, no!" Rocks skittered away under his bare feet; he did not feel the bruises. The Trolloc's axe rose. "Leyaaaaaaaa!"

ət ðə læst ɪnstən ðə tʃɹɑlɑk spʌn, æks flæʃɪŋ təwɔɹd pɛɹɪn. hi θɹu hɪmsɛlf daʊn, jɛlɪŋ əz stil skɔɹɾ ɪz bæk. dɛspɝətli hi flʌŋ aʊɾ ə hænd, kɑɾ ə ɡoʊt huf, ən pʊld wɪð ɔl ɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ. ðə tʃɹɑlɑks fit keɪm aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪt, ən ɪt fɛl wɪð ə kɹæʃ, bʌɾ əz ɪt slɪd daʊn ðə sloʊp, ɪt siz pɛɹɪn ɪn hænz bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə meɪk tu ʌv hɪz, pʊlɪŋ ɪm əlɔŋ tə ɹoʊl oʊvɝ ən oʊvɝ. ðə stɪŋk ʌv ɪt fɪld ɪz nɑstʃɹəlz, ɡoʊt-stɛntʃ ən saʊɝ mæn-swɛt. mæsɪv ɑɹmz sneɪkt ɝaʊn ɪz tʃɛst, skwizɪŋ ði ɛɹ aʊt; hɪz ɹɪbz kɹikt ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə bɹeɪkɪŋ. ðə tʃɹɑlɑks æks wɑz ɡɔn ɪn ðə fɔl, bʌt blʌnt ɡoʊt-tiθ sæŋk ɪndə pɛɹɪnz ʃoʊldɝ, paʊɝfəl dʒɔz tʃuɪŋ. hi ɡɹoʊn əz peɪn dʒoʊltɪd daʊn ɪz lɛft ɑɹm. hɪz lʌŋz leɪbɝd fəɹ bɹɛθ, ən blæknəs kɹɛpt ɪn ɑn ði ɛdʒəz ə hɪz vɪʒən, bʌt dɪmli hi wɑz əwɛɹ ðəɾ ɪz ʌðɝ ɑɹm wɑz fɹi, ðət sʌmhaʊ hi hæd hɛld ɑn tə hɪz oʊn æks. hi hɛld ɪt ʃɔɹɾ ɑn ðə hændəl, laɪk ə hæmɝ, wɪð ðə spaɪk fɔɹmoʊst. wɪð ə ɹɔɹ ðət tʊk ðə læst ə hɪz ɛɹ, hi dʒɹoʊv ðə spaɪk ɪndə ðə tʃɹɑlɑks tɛmpəl. saʊnləsli ɪt kənvʌlsd, lɪmz flɪŋɪŋ waɪd, hɝlɪŋ ɪm əweɪ. baɪ ɪnstɪŋkt əloʊn ɪz hæn taɪɾənd ɑn ði æks, ɹɪpɪŋ ɪt lus əz ðə tʃɹɑlɑk slɪd fɝðɝ daʊn ðə sloʊp, stɪl twɪtʃɪŋ.

At the last instant the Trolloc spun, axe flashing toward Perrin. He threw himself down, yelling as steel scored his back. Desperately he flung out a hand, caught a goat hoof, and pulled with all his strength. The Trolloc's feet came out from under it, and it fell with a crash, but as it slid down the slope, it seized Perrin in hands big enough to make two of his, pulling him along to roll over and over. The stink of it filled his nostrils, goat-stench and sour man-sweat. Massive arms snaked around his chest, squeezing the air out; his ribs creaked on the point of breaking. The Trolloc's axe was gone in the fall, but blunt goat-teeth sank into Perrin's shoulder, powerful jaws chewing. He groaned as pain jolted down his left arm. His lungs labored for breath, and blackness crept in on the edges of his vision, but dimly he was aware that his other arm was free, that somehow he had held on to his own axe. He held it short on the handle, like a hammer, with the spike foremost. With a roar that took the last of his air, he drove the spike into the Trolloc's temple. Soundlessly it convulsed, limbs flinging wide, hurling him away. By instinct alone his hand tightened on the axe, ripping it loose as the Trolloc slid further down the slope, still twitching.

fəɹ ə moʊmən pɛɹɪn leɪ ðɛɹ, faɪɾɪŋ fəɹ bɹɛθ. ðə ɡæʃ əkɹɔs ɪz bæk bɝnd, ən i fɛl ðə wɛtnəs ə blʌd. hɪz ʃoʊldɝ pɹətɛstəɾ əz i pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf ʌp. "leɪə?"

For a moment Perrin lay there, fighting for breath. The gash across his back burned, and he felt the wetness of blood. His shoulder protested as he pushed himself up. "Leya?"

ʃi wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, hʌɾəld ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə hʌt, nɑt mɔɹ ðən tɛn peɪsɪz ʌpsloʊp. ən wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm wɪð sətʃ ə lʊk ɑn əɹ feɪs ðəɾ i kəd bɛɹli miɾ əɹ aɪz.

She was still there, huddled in front of the hut, not more than ten paces upslope. And watching him with such a look on her face that he could barely meet her eyes.

"doʊn pɪɾi mi!" hi ɡɹaʊld ət hɝ. "doʊn jə - !"

"Don't pity me!" he growled at her. "Don't you - !"

ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz lip fɹəm ðə ɹuf ə ðə hʌt sim tə teɪk tu lɔŋ, ən ɪts dɛd blæk kloʊk hʌŋ dʊɹɪŋ ðə sloʊ fɔl əz ɪf ðə hæfmən wɝ stændɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ɔlɹɛɾi. ɪts aɪləs ɡeɪz wɑz fɪkst ɑn pɛɹɪn. ɪt smɛld laɪk dɛθ.

The Myrddraal's leap from the roof of the hut seemed to take too long, and its dead black cloak hung during the slow fall as if the Halfman were standing on the ground already. Its eyeless gaze was fixed on Perrin. It smelled like death.

koʊl sip θɹu pɛɹɪnz ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz əz ðə mɹdʒɹɑl stɛɹɾ ət hɪm. hɪz tʃɛs fɛlt laɪk ə lʌmp ʌv aɪs. "leɪə," hi wɪspɝd. ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də nɑt tə ɹʌn. "leɪə, pliz haɪd. pliz."

Cold seeped through Perrin's arms and legs as the Myrddraal stared at him. His chest felt like a lump of ice. "Leya," he whispered. It was all he could do not to run. "Leya, please hide. Please."

ðə hæfmən stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd hɪm, sloʊli, kɑnfəɾənt ðət fɪɹ hɛld ɪm ɪn ə snɛɹ. ɪt muv laɪk ə sneɪk, ənlɪmbɝɪŋ ə sɔɹd soʊ blæk oʊnli ðə bɝnɪŋ tʃɹiz meɪɾ ɪt vɪzəbəl. "kʌt wʌn lɛɡ ʌv ðə tʃɹaɪpɑd," ɪt sɛd sɔfli, "æn ɔl fɔl daʊn." ɪts vɔɪs saʊndəd laɪk dʒɹaɪ-ɹɑɾɪd lɛðɝ kɹʌmbəlɪŋ.

The Halfman started toward him, slowly, confident that fear held him in a snare. It moved like a snake, unlimbering a sword so black only the burning trees made it visible. "Cut one leg of the tripod," it said softly, "and all fall down." Its voice sounded like dry-rotted leather crumbling.

sʌɾənli leɪə muvd, θɹoʊɪŋ hɝsɛlf fɔɹwɝd, ətɛmptɪŋ tə ɹæp əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz lɛɡz. ɪt ɡeɪv ən ɔlmoʊs kæʒəwəl bækwɝdz swɪŋ ʌv ɪts dɑɹk sɔɹd, nɛvɝ ivən lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊnd, ən ʃi kɹʌmpəld.

Suddenly Leya moved, throwing herself forward, attempting to wrap her arms around the Myrddraal's legs. It gave an almost casual backwards swing of its dark sword, never even looking around, and she crumpled.

tɪɹz stɑɹɾəd ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝz ə pɛɹɪnz aɪz. aɪ ʃʊɾə hɛlpt əɹ . . . seɪv hɝ. aɪ ʃʊɾə dʌn . . . sʌmθɪŋ! bʌt soʊ lɔŋ əz ðə mɹdʒɹɑl stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm wɪð ɪts aɪləs ɡeɪz, ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝɾ ivən tə θɪŋk.

Tears started in the corners of Perrin's eyes. I should have helped her . . . saved her. I should have done . . . something! But so long as the Myrddraal stared at him with its eyeless gaze, it was an effort even to think.

wi kʌm, bɹʌðɝ. wi kʌm, jʌŋ bʊl.

We come, brother. We come, Young Bull.

ðə wɝdz ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz maɪn meɪɾ ɪz hɛd ɹɪŋ laɪk ə stʃɹʌk bɛl; ðə ɹɪvɝbɝeɪʃənz ʃɪvɝd θɹu hɪm. wɪð ðə wɝdz keɪm ðə wʊlvz, skɔɹz ə ðɛm, flʌɾɪŋ ɪndə hɪz maɪn əz i wɑz əwɛɹ ə ðɛm flʌɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə boʊl-ʃeɪp væli. maʊntən wʊlvz ɔlmoʊst əz tɔl əz ə mænz weɪst, ɔl waɪɾ ən ɡɹeɪ, kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə naɪɾ ət ðə ɹʌn, əwɛɹ ə ðə tu-lɛɡz' sɝpɹaɪz əz ðeɪ dɑɹɾɪd ɪn tə teɪk ɑn ðə twɪstəd wʌnz. wʊlvz fɪld ɪm tɪl i kəd bɛɹli ɹɪmɛmbɝ biɪŋ ə mæn. hɪz aɪz ɡæðɝd ðə laɪt, ʃaɪnɪŋ ɡoʊldən jɛloʊ. ən ðə hæfmən stɑpt ɪts ədvæns əz ɪf sʌɾənli ənsɝɾən.

The words inside his mind made his head ring like a struck bell; the reverberations shivered through him. With the words came the wolves, scores of them, flooding into his mind as he was aware of them flooding into the bowl-shaped valley. Mountain wolves almost as tall as a man's waist, all white and gray, coming out of the night at the run, aware of the two-legs' surprise as they darted in to take on the Twisted Ones. Wolves filled him till he could barely remember being a man. His eyes gathered the light, shining golden yellow. And the Halfman stopped its advance as if suddenly uncertain.

"feɪd," pɛɹɪn sɛd ɹʌfli, bʌt ðən ə dɪfɹənt neɪm keɪm tə hɪm, fɹəm ðə wʊlvz. tʃɹɑləks, ðə twɪstəd wʌnz, meɪd dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ fɹəm mɛldɪŋ mɛn ən ænəməlz, wɝ bæɾ ɪnʌf, bʌt ðə mɹdʒɹɑl - . "nɛvɝbɹn!" jʌŋ bʊl spæt. lɪp kɝlɪŋ bæk ɪn ə snɑɹl, hi θɹu hɪmsɛlf ət ðə mɹdʒɹɑl.

"Fade," Perrin said roughly, but then a different name came to him, from the wolves. Trollocs, the Twisted Ones, made during the War of the Shadow from melding men and animals, were bad enough, but the Myrddraal - . "Neverborn!" Young Bull spat. Lip curling back in a snarl, he threw himself at the Myrddraal.

ɪt muv laɪk ə vaɪpɝ, sɪnwəs ən dɛdli, blæk sɔɹd kwɪk əz laɪtnɪŋ, bʌɾ i wɑz jʌŋ bʊl. ðət wɑz wʌt ðə wʊlvz kɔl hɪm. jʌŋ bʊl, wɪð hɔɹnz ə stil ðəɾ i wildɪd wɪð ɪz hænz. hi wɑz wʌn wɪð ðə wʊlvz. hi wɑz ə wʊlf, ən ɛni wʊlf wəd daɪ ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz oʊvɝ tə si wʌn ə ðə nɛvɝbɹn ɡoʊ daʊn. ðə feɪd fɛl bæk bɪfɔɹ hɪm, ɪts dɑɹɾɪŋ bleɪd naʊ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪflɛkt ɪz slæʃɪz.

It moved like a viper, sinuous and deadly, black sword quick as lightning, but he was Young Bull. That was what the wolves called him. Young Bull, with horns of steel that he wielded with his hands. He was one with the wolves. He was a wolf, and any wolf would die a hundred times over to see one of the Neverborn go down. The Fade fell back before him, its darting blade now trying to deflect his slashes.

hæmstʃɹɪŋ ən θɹoʊt, ðət wɑz haʊ wʊlvz kɪld. jʌŋ bʊl sʌɾənli θɹu hɪmsɛlf tə wʌn saɪɾ ən dʒɹɑp tə ə ni, æks slaɪsɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə bæk ə ðə hæfmənz ni. ɪt skɹimd - ə boʊn-bɝoʊɪŋ saʊn tə ɹeɪz ɪz hɛɹ əɾ ɛni ʌðɝ taɪm - ən fɛl, kætʃɪŋ ɪtsɛlf wɪð wʌn hænd. ðə hæfmən - ðə nɛvɝbɹn - stɪl hɛld ɪts sɔɹd fɝmli, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ɪt kəd sɛɾ ɪtsɛlf, jʌŋ bʊlz æks stʃɹʌk əɡɛn. hæf sɛvɝd, ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz hɛd flɑpt oʊvɝ tə hæŋ daʊn ɪts bæk; jɛt stɪl linɪŋ ðəɹ ɑn wʌn hænd, ðə nɛvɝbɹn slæʃt waɪldli wɪð ɪts sɔɹd. nɛvɝbɹn wɝ ɔlweɪz lɔŋ ɪn daɪɪŋ.

Hamstring and throat, that was how wolves killed. Young Bull suddenly threw himself to one side and dropped to a knee, axe slicing across the back of the Halfman's knee. It screamed - a bone-burrowing sound to raise his hair at any other time - and fell, catching itself with one hand. The Halfman - the Neverborn - still held its sword firmly, but before it could set itself, Young Bull's axe struck again. Half severed, the Myrddraal's head flopped over to hang down its back; yet still leaning there on one hand, the Neverborn slashed wildly with its sword. Neverborn were always long in dying.

fɹəm ðə wʊlvz əz mʌtʃ əz ɪz oʊn aɪz jʌŋ bʊl ɹəsivd ɪmpɹɛʃənz ə tʃɹɑləks θɹæʃɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ʃɹikɪŋ, əntʌtʃt baɪ wʊlf əɹ mæn. ðoʊz wʊɾə bɪn lɪŋk tə ðɪs mɹdʒɹɑl, ən wəd daɪ wən ɪt dɪd - ɪf noʊ wʌn kɪld əm fɝst.

From the wolves as much as his own eyes Young Bull received impressions of Trollocs thrashing on the ground, shrieking, untouched by wolf or man. Those would have been linked to this Myrddraal, and would die when it did - if no one killed them first.

ði ɝdʒ tə ɹʌʃ daʊn ðə sloʊp ən dʒɔɪn ɪz bɹʌðɝz, dʒɔɪn ɪn kɪlɪŋ ðə twɪstəd wʌnz, ɪn hʌntɪŋ ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ nɛvɝbɹn, wɑz stʃɹɔŋ, bʌɾ ə bɛɹid fɹæɡmən ðət wɑz stɪl mæn ɹɪmɛmbɝd. leɪə.

The urge to rush down the slope and join his brothers, join in killing the Twisted Ones, in hunting the remaining Neverborn, was strong, but a buried fragment that was still man remembered. Leya.

hi dʒɹɑpt ɪz æks ən tɝn əɹ oʊvɝ dʒɛnli. blʌd kʌvɝɾ əɹ feɪs, ən əɹ aɪz stɛɹɾ ʌp ət hɪm, ɡleɪzd wɪð dɛθ. ən əkjuzɪŋ stɛɹ, ɪt sim tə hɪm. "aɪ tʃɹaɪd," hi toʊl hɝ. "aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə seɪv ju." hɝ stɛɹ dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ. "wʌɾ ɛls kəɾ aɪ hæv dʌn? ɪt wʊɾə kɪl jə ɪf aɪ hædn kɪld ɪt!"

He dropped his axe and turned her over gently. Blood covered her face, and her eyes stared up at him, glazed with death. An accusing stare, it seemed to him. "I tried," he told her. "I tried to save you." Her stare did not change. "What else could I have done? It would have killed you if I hadn't killed it!"

kʌm, jʌŋ bʊl. kʌm kɪl ðə twɪstəd wʌnz.

Come, Young Bull. Come kill the Twisted Ones.

wʊlf ɹoʊld oʊvɝ hɪm, ɛnvɛləp hɪm. lɛɾɪŋ leɪə bæk daʊn, pɛɹɪn tʊk ʌp ɪz æks, bleɪd ɡlimɪŋ wɛtli. hɪz aɪz ʃoʊn əz i ɹeɪs daʊn ðə ɹɑki sloʊp. hi wɑz jʌŋ bʊl.

Wolf rolled over him, enveloped him. Letting Leya back down, Perrin took up his axe, blade gleaming wetly. His eyes shone as he raced down the rocky slope. He was Young Bull.

tʃɹiz skæɾɝd ɝaʊn ðə boʊl-ʃeɪp væli bɝn laɪk tɔɹtʃɪz; ə tɔl paɪn flɛɹɾ ɪndə fleɪm əz jʌŋ bʊl dʒɔɪn ðə bæɾəl. ðə naɪɾ ɛɹ flæʃt æktɪnɪk blu, laɪk ʃit laɪtnɪŋ, əz læn ɛnɡeɪdʒd ənʌðɝ mɹdʒɹɑl, eɪntʃən ɛɛs sədmɑd stil miɾɪŋ blæk stil ɹɔɾ ɪn θɑkændɑɹ, ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. lɔɪəl wildɪɾ ə kɔɹɾɝstæf ðə saɪz ʌv ə fɛns ɹeɪl, ðə wɝlɪŋ tɪmbɝ mɑɹkɪŋ ə speɪs noʊ tʃɹɑlɑk ɛntɝd wɪθaʊt fɔlɪŋ. mɛn fɔt dɛspɝətli ɪn ðə dænsɪŋ ʃædoʊz, bʌt jʌŋ bʊl - pɛɹɪn - noʊɾəd ɪn ə dɪstənt weɪ ðət tu mɛni ʌv ðə ʃaɪnɝən tu-lɛɡz wɝ daʊn.

Trees scattered around the bowl-shaped valley burned like torches; a tall pine flared into flame as Young Bull joined the battle. The night air flashed actinic blue, like sheet lightning, as Lan engaged another Myrddraal, ancient Aes Sedaimade steel meeting black steel wrought in Thakan'dar, in the shadow of Shayol Ghul. Loial wielded a quarterstaff the size of a fence rail, the whirling timber marking a space no Trolloc entered without falling. Men fought desperately in the dancing shadows, but Young Bull - Perrin - noted in a distant way that too many of the Shienaran two-legs were down.

ðə bɹʌðɝz ən sɪstɝz fɔɾ ɪn smɔl pæks ə θɹi əɹ fɔɹ, dɑdʒɪŋ saɪð-laɪk sɔɹdz ən spaɪkt æksiz, dɑɹɾɪŋ ɪn wɪð slæʃɪŋ tiθ tə sɛvɝ hæmstʃɹɪŋz, lʌnʒɪŋ tə baɪɾ aʊt θɹoʊts əz ðɛɹ pɹeɪ fɛl. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɑnɝ ɪn ðə weɪ ðeɪ fɔt, noʊ ɡlɔɹi, noʊ mɝsi. ðeɪ hæd nɑt kʌm fəɹ bæɾəl, bʌt tə kɪl. jʌŋ bʊl dʒɔɪnd wʌn ə ðə smɔl pæks, ðə bleɪɾ ə hɪz æks sɝvɪŋ fəɹ tiθ.

The brothers and sisters fought in small packs of three or four, dodging scythe-like swords and spiked axes, darting in with slashing teeth to sever hamstrings, lunging to bite out throats as their prey fell. There was no honor in the way they fought, no glory, no mercy. They had not come for battle, but to kill. Young Bull joined one of the small packs, the blade of his axe serving for teeth.

hi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ θɔɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ bæɾəl. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə tʃɹɑlɑk i ən ðə wʊlvz - ðə bɹʌðɝz - kʌɾ ɔf fɹəm ðə ɹɛst ən bɹɔt daʊn. ðən ðəɹ wəd bi ənʌðɝ, ən ənʌðɝ, ən ənʌðɝ, əntɪl nʌn wɝ lɛft. nʌn hɪɹ, nʌn ɛniwɛɹ. hi fɛl ði ɝdʒ tə hɝl ði æks əsaɪɾ ən juz ɪz tiθ, tə ɹʌn ɑn ɔl fɔɹz əz ɪz bɹʌðɝz dɪd. ɹʌn θɹu ðə haɪ maʊntən pæsəz. ɹʌn bɛli-dip ɪn paʊɾɝi snoʊ pɝsuɪŋ dɪɹ. ɹʌn, wɪð ðə koʊld wɪn ɹʌfəlɪŋ ɪz fɝ. hi snɑɹəld wɪð ɪz bɹʌðɝz, ən tʃɹɑləks haʊld wɪð fɪɹ əɾ ɪz jɛloʊ-aɪd ɡeɪz ivən mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ dɪɾ ət ði ʌðɝ wʊlvz.

He no longer thought of the greater battle. There was only the Trolloc he and the wolves - the brothers - cut off from the rest and brought down. Then there would be another, and another, and another, until none were left. None here, none anywhere. He felt the urge to hurl the axe aside and use his teeth, to run on all fours as his brothers did. Run through the high mountain passes. Run belly-deep in powdery snow pursuing deer. Run, with the cold wind ruffling his fur. He snarled with his brothers, and Trollocs howled with fear at his yellow-eyed gaze even more than they did at the other wolves.

əbɹʌpli hi ɹilaɪz ðəɹ wɝ noʊ mɔɹ tʃɹɑləks stændɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ ɪn ðə boʊl, ðoʊ hi kəd fil ɪz bɹʌðɝz pɝsuɪŋ ʌðɝz əz ðeɪ flɛd. ə pæk ə sɛvən hæɾ ə dɪfɹən pɹeɪ, sʌmwɛɹ aʊt ðəɹ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. wʌn ə ðə nɛvɝbɹn ɹæn fəɹ ɪts hɑɹd-fʊɾɪd fɔɹ-lɛɡz - ɪts hɔɹs, ə dɪstən pɑɹɾ ə hɪm sɛd - ən ɪz bɹʌðɝz fɑloʊd, noʊzɪz fɪld wɪð ɪts sɛnt, ɪts ɛsəns ə dɛθ. ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd, hi wɑz wɪð ðɛm, siɪŋ wɪð ðɛɹ aɪz. əz ðeɪ kloʊzd ɪn, ðə nɛvɝbɹn tɝnd, kɝsɪŋ, blæk bleɪɾ ən blæk-klæd nɛvɝbɹn laɪk pɑɹɾ ə ðə naɪt. bʌt naɪt wɑz wɛɹ ɪz bɹʌðɝz ən sɪstɝz hʌntəd.

Abruptly he realized there were no more Trollocs standing anywhere in the bowl, though he could feel his brothers pursuing others as they fled. A pack of seven had a different prey, somewhere out there in the darkness. One of the Neverborn ran for its hard-footed four-legs - its horse, a distant part of him said - and his brothers followed, noses filled with its scent, its essence of death. Inside his head, he was with them, seeing with their eyes. As they closed in, the Neverborn turned, cursing, black blade and black-clad Neverborn like part of the night. But night was where his brothers and sisters hunted.

jʌŋ bʊl snɑɹəld əz ðə fɝs bɹʌðɝ daɪd, ɪts dɛθ peɪn lænsɪŋ hɪm, jɛt ði ʌðɝz kloʊzd ɪn ən mɔɹ bɹʌðɝz ən sɪstɝz daɪd, bʌt snæpɪŋ dʒɔz dʒɹæɡd ðə nɛvɝbɹn daʊn. ɪt fɔt bæk wɪð ɪts oʊn tiθ naʊ, ɹɪpɪŋ aʊt θɹoʊts, slæʃɪŋ wɪð fɪŋɡɝneɪlz ðət slaɪst skɪn ən flɛʃ laɪk ðə hɑɹd klɔz ðə tu-lɛɡz kæɹid, bʌt bɹʌðɝz sævɪdʒd ɪɾ ivən əz ðeɪ daɪd. faɪnəli ə loʊn sɪstɝ hiv hɝsɛlf aʊɾ ə ðə stɪl-twɪtʃɪŋ paɪl ən stæɡɝd tə wʌn saɪd. mɔɹnɪŋ mɪst, ʃi wɑz kɔld, bʌɾ əz wɪð ɔl ðɛɹ neɪmz, ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən ðæt: ə fɹɔsti mɔɹnɪŋ wɪð ðə baɪɾ ə snoʊz jɛt tə kʌm ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ði ɛɹ, ən ðə mɪs kɝlɪŋ θɪk əkɹɔs ðə væli, swɝlɪŋ wɪð ðə ʃɑɹp bɹiz ðət kæɹid ðə pɹɑməs ʌv ɡʊd hʌntɪŋ. ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ hɛd, mɔɹnɪŋ mɪs haʊl tə ðə klaʊd-hɪɾən mun, mɔɹnɪŋ əɹ dɛd.

Young Bull snarled as the first brother died, its death pain lancing him, yet the others closed in and more brothers and sisters died, but snapping jaws dragged the Neverborn down. It fought back with its own teeth now, ripping out throats, slashing with fingernails that sliced skin and flesh like the hard claws the two-legs carried, but brothers savaged it even as they died. Finally a lone sister heaved herself out of the still-twitching pile and staggered to one side. Morning Mist, she was called, but as with all their names, it was more than that: a frosty morning with the bite of snows yet to come already in the air, and the mist curling thick across the valley, swirling with the sharp breeze that carried the promise of good hunting. Raising her head, Morning Mist howled to the cloud-hidden moon, mourning her dead.

jʌŋ bʊl θɹu bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən haʊld wɪð hɝ, mɔɹnd wɪð hɝ.

Young Bull threw back his head and howled with her, mourned with her.

wən i loʊɝɾ ɪz hɛd, mɪn wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm. "ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt, pɛɹɪn?" ʃi æsk hɛzɪɾəntli. ðəɹ wɑz ə bɹuz ɑn əɹ tʃik, ən ə sliv hæf tɔɹn fɹəm əɹ koʊt. ʃi hæɾ ə kʌdʒəl ɪn wʌn hæn ən ə dæɡɝ ɪn ði ʌðɝ, ən ðəɹ wɑz blʌɾ ən hɛɹ ɑn boʊθ.

When he lowered his head, Min was staring at him. "Are you all right, Perrin?" she asked hesitantly. There was a bruise on her cheek, and a sleeve half torn from her coat. She had a cudgel in one hand and a dagger in the other, and there was blood and hair on both.

ðeɪ wɝ ɔl stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm, hi sɔ, ɔl ðoʊz u wɝ stɪl ɑn ðɛɹ fit. lɔɪəl, linɪŋ wɛɹəli ɑn ɪz tɔl stæf. ʃaɪnɝənz, hu hæd bɪn kæɹiɪŋ ðɛɹ fɔlən daʊn tə wɛɹ mɔɪɹeɪn kɹaʊtʃt oʊvɝ wʌn ə ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ wɪð læn stændɪŋ əɾ əɹ saɪd. ivən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz lʊkɪŋ ɪz weɪ. ðə bɝnɪŋ tʃɹiz, laɪk hjudʒ tɔɹtʃɪz, kæst ə weɪvɝɪŋ laɪt. dɛd tʃɹɑləks leɪ ɛvɹiwɛɹ. ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ ʃaɪnɝənz daʊn ðən stændɪŋ, ən ðə bɑɾiz ə hɪz bɹʌðɝz wɝ skæɾɝd əmʌŋ ðɛm. soʊ mɛni. . . .

They were all staring at him, he saw, all those who were still on their feet. Loial, leaning wearily on his tall staff. Shienarans, who had been carrying their fallen down to where Moiraine crouched over one of their number with Lan standing at her side. Even the Aes Sedai was looking his way. The burning trees, like huge torches, cast a wavering light. Dead Trollocs lay everywhere. There were more Shienarans down than standing, and the bodies of his brothers were scattered among them. So many. . . .

pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd i wɑntəd tə haʊl əɡɛn. fɹæntəkəli hi wɔl hɪmsɛlf ɔf fɹəm kɑntækt wɪð ðə wʊlvz. ɪmədʒəz sip θɹu, ɪmoʊʃənz, əz i tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp ðɛm. faɪnəli, ðoʊ, hi kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fil ðɛm, fil ðɛɹ peɪn, əɹ ðɛɹ æŋɡɝ, əɹ ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə hʌn ðə twɪstəd wʌnz, əɹ tə ɹʌn. . . . hi ɡeɪv hɪmsɛlf ə ʃeɪk. ðə waʊn ɑn ɪz bæk bɝn laɪk faɪɝ, ən ɪz tɔɹn ʃoʊldɝ fɛlt əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn hæmɝɾ ɑn ən ænvəl. hɪz bɛɹ fit, skɹeɪpt ən bɹuzd, θɹɑbd wɪð ɪz peɪn. ðə smɛl ə blʌd wɑz ɛvɹiwɛɹ. ðə smɛl ə tʃɹɑləks, ən dɛθ.

Perrin realized he wanted to howl again. Frantically he walled himself off from contact with the wolves. Images seeped through, emotions, as he tried to stop them. Finally, though, he could no longer feel them, feel their pain, or their anger, or the desire to hunt the Twisted Ones, or to run. . . . He gave himself a shake. The wound on his back burned like fire, and his torn shoulder felt as if it had been hammered on an anvil. His bare feet, scraped and bruised, throbbed with his pain. The smell of blood was everywhere. The smell of Trollocs, and death.

"aɪ. . . . ɪm ɔl ɹaɪt, mɪn."

"I. . . . I'm all right, Min."

"ju fɔt wɛl, blæksmɪθ," læn sɛd. ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɹeɪzd ɪz stɪl-blʌɾi sɔɹɾ əbʌv ɪz hɛd. "teɪʃɝ meɪnɛðɝən! teɪʃɝ ændɝ!" tʃɹu blʌɾ ə meɪnɛðɝən. tʃɹu blʌɾ ʌv ændɝ.

"You fought well, blacksmith," Lan said. The Warder raised his still-bloody sword above his head. "Tai'shar Manetheren! Tai'shar Andor!" True Blood of Manetheren. True Blood of Andor.

ðə ʃaɪnɝənz stɪl stændɪŋ - soʊ fju - lɪftəd ðɛɹ bleɪdz ən dʒɔɪn hɪm. "teɪʃɝ meɪnɛðɝən! teɪʃɝ ændɝ!"

The Shienarans still standing - so few - lifted their blades and joined him. "Tai'shar Manetheren! Tai'shar Andor!"

lɔɪəl nɑɾəd. "tɑvɝən," hi æɾəd.

Loial nodded. "Ta'veren," he added.

pɛɹɪn loʊɝɾ ɪz aɪz ɪn ɪmbɛɹəsmənt. læn hæd seɪvd ɪm fɹəm ðə kwɛstʃənz i dɪd nɑt wɑnə ænsɝ, bʌt hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ən ɑnɝ i dɪd nɑt dɪzɝv. ði ʌðɝz dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. hi wʌndɝd wʌt ðeɪ wəd seɪ ɪf ðeɪ nu ðə tʃɹuθ. mɪn muv kloʊsɝ, ən i mʌɾɝd, "leɪəz dɛd. aɪ kʊdnt. . . . aɪ ɔlmoʊst ɹitʃt əɹ ɪn taɪm."

Perrin lowered his eyes in embarrassment. Lan had saved him from the questions he did not want to answer, but had given him an honor he did not deserve. The others did not understand. He wondered what they would say if they knew the truth. Min moved closer, and he muttered, "Leya's dead. I couldn't. . . . I almost reached her in time."

"ɪt wʊdn əv meɪɾ ɛni dɪfɝəns," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "ju noʊ ðæt." ʃi lin tə lʊk əɾ ɪz bæk, ən wɪnst. "mɔɪɹeɪn wɪl teɪk kɛɹ ə ðət fəɹ ju. ʃiz hilɪŋ ðoʊz ʃi kæn."

"It wouldn't have made any difference," she said softly. "You know that." She leaned to look at his back, and winced. "Moiraine will take care of that for you. She's Healing those she can."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. hɪz bæk fɛl stɪki wɪð dʒɹaɪɪŋ blʌɾ ɔl ðə weɪ tə hɪz weɪst, bʌt dɪspaɪt ðə peɪn i hɑɹdli noʊɾəst ɪt. laɪt, aɪ ɔlmoʊs dɪdn kʌm bæk ðət taɪm. aɪ kæn lɛt ðət hæpən əɡɛn. aɪ woʊnt. nɛvɝ əɡɛn!

Perrin nodded. His back felt sticky with drying blood all the way to his waist, but despite the pain he hardly noticed it. Light, I almost didn't come back that time. I can't let that happen again. I won't. Never again!

bʌt wən i wɑz wɪð ðə wʊlvz, ɪt wɑz ɔl soʊ dɪfɹənt. hi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə wɝi əbaʊt stʃɹeɪnʒɝz biɪŋ əfɹeɪɾ ə hɪm dʒʌs kəz i wɑz bɪɡ, ðɛn. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn θɪŋkɪŋ i wɑz sloʊ-wɪɾɪd dʒʌs kəz i tʃɹaɪd tə bi kɛɹfəl. wʊlvz nu itʃ ʌðɝ ivən ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ mɛt bɪfɔɹ, ən wɪð əm i wɑz dʒʌst ənʌðɝ wʊlf.

But when he was with the wolves, it was all so different. He did not have to worry about strangers being afraid of him just because he was big, then. There was no one thinking he was slow-witted just because he tried to be careful. Wolves knew each other even if they had never met before, and with them he was just another wolf.

noʊ! hɪz hænz taɪɾənd ɑn ðə hæft ə hɪz æks. noʊ! hi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əz mæsimə sʌɾənli spoʊk ʌp.

No! His hands tightened on the haft of his axe. No! He gave a start as Masema suddenly spoke up.

"ɪt wɑz ə saɪn," ðə ʃaɪnɝən sɛd, tɝnɪŋ ɪn ə sɝkəl tə ædʒɹɛs ɛvɹiwʌn. ðəɹ wɑz blʌɾ ɑn ɪz ɑɹmz ən ɪz tʃɛst - hi hæd fɔɾ ɪn nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ɪz bɹitʃɪz - ən i muvd wɪð ə lɪmp, bʌt ðə laɪɾ ɪn ɪz aɪz wɑz əz fɝvən əz ɪt hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn. mɔɹ fɝvənt. "ə saɪn tə kənfɝm əɹ feɪθ. ivən wʊlvz keɪm tə faɪt fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl, ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən wɪl sʌmən ivən ðə bists ə ðə fɔɹəs tə faɪɾ əɾ əɹ saɪdz. ɪts ə saɪn fəɹ əs tə ɡoʊ fɔɹθ. oʊnli dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɪl feɪl tə dʒɔɪn ʌs." tu ʌv ðə ʃaɪnɝənz nɑɾəd.

"It was a sign," the Shienaran said, turning in a circle to address everyone. There was blood on his arms and his chest - he had fought in nothing but his breeches - and he moved with a limp, but the light in his eyes was as fervent as it had ever been. More fervent. "A sign to confirm our faith. Even wolves came to fight for the Dragon Reborn. In the Last Battle, the Lord Dragon will summon even the beasts of the forest to fight at our sides. It is a sign for us to go forth. Only Darkfriends will fail to join us." Two of the Shienarans nodded.

"ju ʃʌt jəɹ blʌɾi maʊθ, mæsimə!" ənoʊ snæpt. hi simd əntʌtʃt, bʌt ðən ənoʊ hæd bɪn faɪɾɪŋ tʃɹɑləks sɪns bɪfɔɹ pɛɹɪn wɑz bɔɹn. jɛɾ i sæɡd wɪð wɪɹinəs; oʊnli ðə peɪntəɾ aɪ ɑn ɪz aɪpætʃ sim fɹɛʃ. "wil fleɪmɪŋ ɡoʊ fɔɹθ wən ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən blʌɾi wɛl tɛlz ʌs, ən nɑt bɪfɔɹ! jə ʃip-hɛɾəd fɑɹmɝz fleɪmɪŋ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt!" ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn lʊkt ət ðə ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɹoʊ ʌv mɛn biɪŋ tɛndəd baɪ mɔɪɹeɪn - fju wɝ eɪbəl tə əz mʌtʃ əz sɪɾ ʌp, ivən æftɝ ʃi wɑz dʌn wɪð əm - ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "æt list wɪl əv plɛnti ʌv fleɪmɪŋ wʊlf haɪdz tə kip ðə wundəd wɔɹm."

"You shut your bloody mouth, Masema!" Uno snapped. He seemed untouched, but then Uno had been fighting Trollocs since before Perrin was born. Yet he sagged with weariness; only the painted eye on his eyepatch seemed fresh. "We'll flaming go forth when the Lord Dragon bloody well tells us, and not before! You sheep-headed farmers flaming remember that!" The one-eyed man looked at the growing row of men being tended by Moiraine - few were able to as much as sit up, even after she was done with them - and shook his head. "At least we'll have plenty of flaming wolf hides to keep the wounded warm."

"noʊ!" ðə ʃaɪnɝənz sim sɝpɹaɪzd ət ðə viəməns ɪn pɛɹɪnz vɔɪs. "ðeɪ fɔt fəɹ ʌs, ən wɪl bɛɹi ðɛm wɪð əɹ dɛd."

"No!" The Shienarans seemed surprised at the vehemence in Perrin's voice. "They fought for us, and we'll bury them with our dead."

ənoʊ fɹaʊnd, ən oʊpən ɪz maʊθ əz ɪf tə ɑɹɡju, bʌt pɛɹɪn fɪkst ɪm wɪð ə stɛɾi, jɛloʊ-aɪd stɛɹ. ɪt wɑz ðə ʃaɪnɝən u dʒɹɑpt ɪz ɡeɪz fɝst, ən nɑɾəd.

Uno frowned, and opened his mouth as if to argue, but Perrin fixed him with a steady, yellow-eyed stare. It was the Shienaran who dropped his gaze first, and nodded.

pɛɹɪn klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt, ɪmbɛɹəst ɔl oʊvɝ əɡɛn əz ənoʊ ɡeɪv ɔɹɾɝz fəɹ ðə ʃaɪnɝənz u wɝ fɪt tə ɡæðɝ ðə dɛd wʊlvz. mɪn wɑz skwɪntɪŋ əɾ ɪm ðə weɪ ʃi dɪd wən ʃi sɔ θɪŋz. "wɛɹz ɹænd?" hi æsk hɝ.

Perrin cleared his throat, embarrassed all over again as Uno gave orders for the Shienarans who were fit to gather the dead wolves. Min was squinting at him the way she did when she saw things. "Where's Rand?" he asked her.

"aʊt ðəɹ ɪn ðə dɑɹk," ʃi sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ ʌpsloʊp wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ əɹ aɪz ɔf hɪm. "hi wɪl nɑt tɔk tə ɛniwʌn. hi dʒʌst sɪts ðɛɹ, snæpɪŋ əɾ ɛniwʌn u kʌmz nɪɹ hɪm."

"Out there in the dark," she said, nodding upslope without taking her eyes off him. "He will not talk to anyone. He just sits there, snapping at anyone who comes near him."

"hi wɪl tɔk tə mi," pɛɹɪn sɛd. ʃi fɑloʊd hɪm, pɹətɛstɪŋ ɔl ðə waɪl ðəɾ i ɔt tə weɪɾ əntɪl mɔɪɹeɪn hæd sin tə hɪz ɪnʒɝiz. laɪt, wʌt dʌz ʃi si wən ʃi lʊks ət mi? aɪ doʊnt wɑnə noʊ.

"He will talk to me," Perrin said. She followed him, protesting all the while that he ought to wait until Moiraine had seen to his injuries. Light, what does she see when she looks at me? I don't want to know.

ɹænd wɑz siɾəd ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn dʒʌs bɪɑn ðə laɪɾ ə ðə bɝnɪŋ tʃɹiz, wɪð ɪz bæk əɡɛns ðə tʃɹʌŋk ʌv ə stʌntɪɾ oʊk. stɛɹɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ, hi hæɾ ɪz ɑɹmz ɹæpt ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf, hænz ʌndɝ ɪz ɹɛd koʊt, əz ɪf filɪŋ ðə koʊld. hi dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə noʊɾəs ðɛɹ əpɹoʊtʃ. mɪn sæt daʊn bɪsaɪd hɪm, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt muv ivən wən ʃi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm. ivən hɪɹ pɛɹɪn smɛl blʌd, ən nɑɾ oʊnli hɪz oʊn.

Rand was seated on the ground just beyond the light of the burning trees, with his back against the trunk of a stunted oak. Staring at nothing, he had his arms wrapped around himself, hands under his red coat, as if feeling the cold. He did not appear to notice their approach. Min sat down beside him, but he did not move even when she laid a hand on his arm. Even here Perrin smelled blood, and not only his own.

"ɹænd," pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn, bʌt ɹænd kʌɾ ɪm ɔf.

"Rand," Perrin began, but Rand cut him off.

"du jə noʊ wʌɾ aɪ dɪd dʊɹɪŋ ðə faɪt?" stɪl stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə dɪstəns, ɹænd ədʒɹɛs ðə naɪt. "nʌθɪŋ! nʌθɪŋ jusfəl. ət fɝst, wən aɪ ɹitʃt aʊt fəɹ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, aɪ kʊdn tʌtʃ ɪt, kʊdnt ɡɹæsp ɪt. ɪt kɛp slaɪɾɪŋ əweɪ. ðɛn, wən aɪ faɪnəli hæd hoʊld ʌv ɪt, aɪ wɑz gɑnə bɝn əm ɔl, bɝn ɔl ðə tʃɹɑləks ən feɪdz. ən ɔl aɪ kəd də wɑz sɛt faɪɝ tə səm tʃɹiz." hi ʃʊk wɪð saɪlən læftɝ, ðən stɑpt wɪð ə peɪnd ɡɹɪmɑs. "seɪɾɪn fɪl mi tɪl aɪ θɔɾ aɪɾ ɪksploʊd laɪk faɪɹwɝks. aɪ hæd tə tʃænəl ɪt sʌmwɛɹ, ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ʌv ɪt bɪfɔɹ ɪt bɝn mi ʌp, ən aɪ faʊn maɪsɛlf θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt pʊlɪŋ ðə maʊntən daʊn ən bɛɹiɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks. aɪ ɔlmoʊs tʃɹaɪd. ðət wɑz maɪ faɪt. nɑɾ əɡɛns ðə tʃɹɑləks. əɡɛns maɪsɛlf. tə kip fɹəm bɛɹiɪŋ əs ɔl ʌndɝ ðə maʊntən."

"Do you know what I did during the fight?" Still staring into the distance, Rand addressed the night. "Nothing! Nothing useful. At first, when I reached out for the True Source, I couldn't touch it, couldn't grasp it. It kept sliding away. Then, when I finally had hold of it, I was going to burn them all, burn all the Trollocs and Fades. And all I could do was set fire to some trees." He shook with silent laughter, then stopped with a pained grimace. "Saidin filled me till I thought I'd explode like fireworks. I had to channel it somewhere, get rid of it before it burned me up, and I found myself thinking about pulling the mountain down and burying the Trollocs. I almost tried. That was my fight. Not against the Trollocs. Against myself. To keep from burying us all under the mountain."

mɪn ɡeɪv pɛɹɪn ə peɪn lʊk, əz ɪf æskɪŋ fəɹ hɛlp.

Min gave Perrin a pained look, as if asking for help.

"wi . . . dɛlt wɪð ðɛm, ɹænd," pɛɹɪn sɛd. hi ʃɪvɝd, θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɔl ðə wundəd mɛn daʊn bɪloʊ. ən ðə dɛd. bɛɾɝ ðət ðən ðə maʊntən daʊn ɑn tɑp ʌv ʌs. "wi dɪdnt nid ju."

"We . . . dealt with them, Rand," Perrin said. He shivered, thinking of all the wounded men down below. And the dead. Better that than the mountain down on top of us. "We didn't need you."

ɹændz hɛd fɛl bæk əɡɛns ðə tʃɹi ən ɪz aɪz kloʊzd. "aɪ fɛlt əm kʌmɪŋ," hi sɛd, nɪɹli wɪspɝɪŋ. "aɪ dɪdnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz, ðoʊ. ðeɪ fil laɪk ðə teɪn ɑn seɪɾɪn. ən seɪɾɪn ɪz ɔlweɪz ðɛɹ, kɔlɪŋ tə mi, sɪŋɪŋ tə mi. baɪ ðə taɪm aɪ nu ðə dɪfɝəns, læn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɪz wɔɹnɪŋ. ɪf aɪ kəɾ oʊnli kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt, aɪ cʊɾə ɡɪvən wɔɹnɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ ivən kloʊz. bʌt hæf ðə taɪm wən aɪ æktʃəli  mænədʒ tə tʌtʃ seɪɾɪn, aɪ doʊnt noʊ aɪm æm duɪŋ əɾ ɔl. ðə floʊ ʌv ɪt dʒʌst swips mi əlɔŋ. cʊɾə əv ɡɪvən wɔɹnɪŋ, ðoʊ."

Rand's head fell back against the tree and his eyes closed. "I felt them coming," he said, nearly whispering. "I didn't know what it was, though. They feel like the taint on saidin. And saidin is always there, calling to me, singing to me. By the time I knew the difference, Lan was already shouting his warning. If I could only control it, I could have given warning before they were even close. But half the time when I actually manage to touch saidin, I don't know what I am doing at all. The flow of it just sweeps me along. I could have given warning, though."

pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ ɪz bɹuz fiɾ ənkʌmftəbli. "wi hæd wɔɹnɪŋ ɪnʌf." hi nu hi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɪns hɪmsɛlf. aɪ cʊɾə ɡɪvən wɔɹnɪŋ, tu, ɪf aɪd tɔkt wɪð ðə wʊlvz. ðeɪ nu ðəɹ wɝ tʃɹɑləks ən feɪdz ɪn ðə maʊntənz. ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɛl mi. bʌɾ i wʌndɝd: ɪf i dɪd nɑt kip ðə wʊlvz aʊɾ ə hɪz maɪnd, maɪɾ i nɑt bi ɹʌnɪŋ wɪð əm naʊ? ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə mæn, ɛlaɪəs mækɛɹə, hu ɔlsoʊ kəd tɔk tə wʊlvz. ɛlaɪəs ɹæn wɪð ðə wʊlvz ɔl ðə taɪm, jɛt simd eɪbəl tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ i wɑz ə mæn. bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ toʊl pɛɹɪn haʊ hi dɪɾ ɪt, ən pɛɹɪn hæd nɑt sin ɪm ɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm.

Perrin shifted his bruised feet uncomfortably. "We had warning enough." He knew he sounded as if he were trying to convince himself. I could have given warning, too, if I'd talked with the wolves. They knew there were Trollocs and Fades in the mountains. They were trying to tell me. But he wondered: If he did not keep the wolves out of his mind, might he not be running with them now? There had been a man, Elyas Machera, who also could talk to wolves. Elyas ran with the wolves all the time, yet seemed able to remember he was a man. But he had never told Perrin how he did it, and Perrin had not seen him in a long time.

ðə kɹʌntʃ ə buts ɑn ɹɑk ənaʊns tu pipəl kʌmɪŋ, ən ə swɝl ʌv ɛɹ kæɹid ðɛɹ sɛns tə pɛɹɪn. hi wɑz kɛɹfəl nɑt tə spik neɪmz, ðoʊ, əntɪl læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn wɝ kloʊs ɪnʌf fəɹ ivən ɔɹɾənɛɹi aɪz tə meɪk əm aʊt.

The crunch of boots on rock announced two people coming, and a swirl of air carried their scents to Perrin. He was careful not to speak names, though, until Lan and Moiraine were close enough for even ordinary eyes to make them out.

ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæɾ ə hæn ʌndɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ɑɹm, əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə səpɔɹɾ əɹ wɪθaʊt lɛɾɪŋ əɹ noʊ ɪt. mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪz wɝ hæɡɝd, ən ʃi kæɹiɾ ə smɔl, eɪdʒ-dɑɹk aɪvɝi kɑɹvɪŋ ʌv ə wʊmən ɪn wʌn hænd. pɛɹɪn nu ɪt fəɹ ən æŋɡɹil, ə ɹɛmnən fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ðəɾ əlaʊɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə seɪfli tʃænəl mɔɹ ə ðə paʊɝ ðən ʃi kəɾ əloʊn. ɪt wɑz ə mɛʒɝ ə hɝ taɪɹədnəs ðət ʃi wɑz juzɪŋ ɪt fəɹ hilɪŋ.

The Warder had a hand under the Aes Sedai's arm, as if trying to support her without letting her know it. Moiraine's eyes were haggard, and she carried a small, age-dark ivory carving of a woman in one hand. Perrin knew it for an angreal, a remnant from the Age of Legends that allowed an Aes Sedai to safely channel more of the Power than she could alone. It was a measure of her tiredness that she was using it for Healing.

mɪn ɡɑt tə hɝ fit tə hɛlp mɔɪɹeɪn, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ moʊʃən əɹ əweɪ. "ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ɪz sin tə," ʃi toʊl mɪn. "wɛn aɪm dʌn hɪɹ, aɪ kən ɹɛst." ʃi ʃʊk ɔf læn əz wɛl, ən ə lʊk ə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən əpɪɹɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs əz ʃi tʃɹeɪst ə kul hæn əkɹɔs pɛɹɪnz bliɾɪŋ ʃoʊldɝ, ðən əlɔŋ ðə waʊn ɑn ɪz bæk. hɝ tʌtʃ meɪɾ ɪz skɪn tɪŋɡəl. "ðɪs ɪz nɑt tu bæd," ʃi sɛd. "ðə bɹuzɪŋ ə jəɹ ʃoʊldɝ ɡoʊz dip, bʌt ðə ɡæʃəz ɑɹ ʃæloʊ. bɹeɪs jɝsɛlf. ðɪs wɪl nɑt hɝt, bʌt. . . ."

Min got to her feet to help Moiraine, but the Aes Sedai motioned her away. "Everyone else is seen to," she told Min. "When I am done here, I can rest." She shook off Lan as well, and a look of concentration appeared on her face as she traced a cool hand across Perrin's bleeding shoulder, then along the wound on his back. Her touch made his skin tingle. "This is not too bad," she said. "The bruising of your shoulder goes deep, but the gashes are shallow. Brace yourself. This will not hurt, but. . . ."

hi hæd nɛvɝ faʊn ɪɾ izi biɪŋ nɪɹ sʌmwʌn i nu wɑz tʃænəlɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ən stɪl lɛs ɪf ɪɾ æktʃəli  ɪnvɑlv hɪm. jɛt ðəɹ hæd bɪn wʌn əɹ tu ʌv ðoʊz taɪmz, ən i θɔɾ i hæd səm aɪdiə wʌt ðə tʃænəlɪŋ ɪnteɪld, bʌt ðoʊz hilɪŋz hæd bɪn maɪnɝ, sɪmpli wɑʃɪŋ əweɪ taɪɹədnəs wən mɔɪɹeɪn kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə hæv ɪm wɪɹi. ðeɪ hæd bɪn nʌθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs.

He had never found it easy being near someone he knew was channeling the One Power, and still less if it actually involved him. Yet there had been one or two of those times, and he thought he had some idea what the channeling entailed, but those Healings had been minor, simply washing away tiredness when Moiraine could not afford to have him weary. They had been nothing like this.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪz aɪz sʌɾənli sim tə bi siɪŋ ɪnsaɪd hɪm, siɪŋ θɹu hɪm. hi ɡæspt ən ɔlmoʊs dʒɹɑpt ɪz æks. hi kəd fil ðə skɪn ɑn ɪz bæk kɹɔlɪŋ, mʌsəlz ɹaɪðɪŋ əz ðeɪ nɪt bæk təɡɛðɝ. hɪz ʃoʊldɝ kwɪvɝɾ ʌnkəntʃɹoʊləbli, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ blɝd. koʊl sɪɹɾ ɪm tə ðə boʊn, ðən dipɝ stɪl. hi hæd ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ə muvɪŋ, fɔlɪŋ, flaɪɪŋ; hi kəd nɑt tɛl wɪtʃ, bʌɾ i fɛlt əz ɪf i wɝ ɹʌʃɪŋ - sʌmwɛɹ, sʌmhaʊ - ət ɡɹeɪt spid, fɝɛvɝ. æftɝ ən ɪtɝnəɾi ðə wɝl keɪm ɪndə foʊkəs əɡɛn. mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz stɛpɪŋ bæk, hæf stæɡɝɪŋ əntɪl læn kɑɾ əɹ ɑɹm.

The Aes Sedai's eyes suddenly seemed to be seeing inside him, seeing through him. He gasped and almost dropped his axe. He could feel the skin on his back crawling, muscles writhing as they knit back together. His shoulder quivered uncontrollably, and everything blurred. Cold seared him to the bone, then deeper still. He had the impression of moving, falling, flying; he could not tell which, but he felt as if he were rushing - somewhere, somehow - at great speed, forever. After an eternity the world came into focus again. Moiraine was stepping back, half staggering until Lan caught her arm.

ɡeɪpɪŋ, pɛɹɪn lʊk daʊn əɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ðə ɡæʃəz ən bɹuzəz wɝ ɡɔn; nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə twɪnʒ ɹɪmeɪnd. hi twɪstəd kɛɹfəli, bʌt ðə peɪn ɪn ɪz bæk hæd vænɪʃt əz wɛl. ən ɪz fit noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hɝt; hi dɪd nɑt nid tə lʊk tə noʊ ɔl ðə bɹuzəz ən skɹeɪps wɝ ɡɔn. hɪz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld laʊdli.

Gaping, Perrin looked down at his shoulder. The gashes and bruises were gone; not so much as a twinge remained. He twisted carefully, but the pain in his back had vanished as well. And his feet no longer hurt; he did not need to look to know all the bruises and scrapes were gone. His stomach rumbled loudly.

"ju ʃəɾ iɾ əz sun əz jə kæn," mɔɪɹeɪn toʊl hɪm. "ə ɡʊd bɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ fəɹ ðət keɪm fɹəm ju. jə nid tə ɹipleɪs ɪt."

"You should eat as soon as you can," Moiraine told him. "A good bit of the strength for that came from you. You need to replace it."

hʌŋɡɝ - ən ɪmədʒəz ə fud - wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi fɪlɪŋ pɛɹɪnz hɛd. blʌd ɹɛɹ bif, ən vɛnəsən, ən mʌɾən, ænd. . . . wɪð ən ɛfɝɾ i meɪd hɪmsɛlf stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ ə mit. hi wəd faɪn səm ə ðoʊz ɹuts ðət smɛld laɪk tɝnəps wən ðeɪ wɝ ɹoʊstəd. hɪz stʌmək ɡɹaʊld ɪn pɹoʊɾɛst.

Hunger - and images of food - were already filling Perrin's head. Blood rare beef, and venison, and mutton, and. . . . With an effort he made himself stop thinking of meat. He would find some of those roots that smelled like turnips when they were roasted. His stomach growled in protest.

"ðɛɹz bɛɹli ivən ə skɑɹ, blæksmɪθ," læn sɛd bɪhaɪn hɪm.

"There's barely even a scar, blacksmith," Lan said behind him.

"moʊst ə ðə wʊlvz u wɝ hɝt meɪd ðɛɹ oʊn weɪ tə ðə fɔɹəst," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, nʌklɪŋ əɹ bæk ən stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ, "bʌɾ aɪ hil ðoʊz aɪ kəd faɪnd." pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv əɹ ə ʃɑɹp lʊk, jɛt ʃi sim tə bi dʒʌs meɪkɪŋ kɑnvɝseɪʃən. "pɝhæps ðeɪ keɪm fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn ɹizənz, jɛt wi wəd laɪkli ɔl bi dɛd wɪθaʊt ðɛm." pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli ən dʒɹɑpt ɪz aɪz.

"Most of the wolves who were hurt made their own way to the forest," Moiraine said, knuckling her back and stretching, "but I Healed those I could find." Perrin gave her a sharp look, yet she seemed to be just making conversation. "Perhaps they came for their own reasons, yet we would likely all be dead without them." Perrin shifted uneasily and dropped his eyes.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹitʃt təwɔɹd ðə bɹuz ɑn mɪnz tʃik, bʌt mɪn stɛp bæk, seɪɪŋ, "aɪm nɑt ɹɪli hɝt, ən jəɹ taɪɝd. aɪv hæd wɝs fɔlɪŋ oʊvɝ maɪ oʊn fit."

The Aes Sedai reached toward the bruise on Min's cheek, but Min stepped back, saying, "I'm not really hurt, and you're tired. I've had worse falling over my own feet."

mɔɪɹeɪn smaɪld ən lɛɾ əɹ hæn fɔl. læn tʊk əɹ ɑɹm; ʃi sweɪɾ ɪn ɪz ɡɹɪp. "vɛɹi wɛl. ən wʌɾ ə ju, ɹænd? dɪd jə teɪk ɛni hɝt? ivən ə nɪk fɹəm ə mɹdʒɹɑlz bleɪd kən bi dɛdli, ən səm tʃɹɑlɑk bleɪdz ɑɹ ɔlmoʊst əz bæd."

Moiraine smiled and let her hand fall. Lan took her arm; she swayed in his grip. "Very well. And what of you, Rand? Did you take any hurt? Even a nick from a Myrddraal's blade can be deadly, and some Trolloc blades are almost as bad."

pɛɹɪn noʊɾəst sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. "ɹænd, jəɹ koʊɾ ɪz wɛt."

Perrin noticed something for the first time. "Rand, your coat is wet."

ɹænd pʊld ɪz ɹaɪt hæn fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt, ə hæn kʌvɝɾ ɪn blʌd. "nɑɾ ə mɹdʒɹɑl," hi sɛɾ æbsənli, piɹɪŋ əɾ ɪz hænd. "nɑɾ ivən ə tʃɹɑlɑk. ðə waʊn aɪ tʊk ət fɑlm bɹoʊk oʊpən."

Rand pulled his right hand from under his coat, a hand covered in blood. "Not a Myrddraal," he said absently, peering at his hand. "Not even a Trolloc. The wound I took at Falme broke open."

mɔɪɹeɪn hɪst ən dʒɝkt əɹ ɑɹm fɹi fɹəm læn, hæf fɛl tə hɝ niz bɪsaɪd ɹænd. pʊlɪŋ bæk ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz koʊt, ʃi stʌɾid ɪz waʊnd. pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt si ɪt, fəɹ əɹ hɛd wɑz ɪn ðə weɪ, bʌt ðə smɛl ə blʌd wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ, naʊ. mɔɪɹeɪnz hænz muvd, ən ɹænd ɡɹɪməst ɪn peɪn. " 'ðə blʌɾ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɑn ðə ɹɑks ə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl wɪl fɹi mænkaɪn fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊ.' ɪzən ðət wʌt ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən seɪ?"

Moiraine hissed and jerked her arm free from Lan, half fell to her knees beside Rand. Pulling back the side of his coat, she studied his wound. Perrin could not see it, for her head was in the way, but the smell of blood was stronger, now. Moiraine's hands moved, and Rand grimaced in pain. " 'The blood of the Dragon Reborn on the rocks of Shayol Ghul will free mankind from the Shadow.' Isn't that what the Prophecies of the Dragon say?"

"hu toʊl jə ðæt?" mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli.

"Who told you that?" Moiraine said sharply.

"ɪf jə kəd ɡɛt mi tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl naʊ," ɹænd sɛd dʒɹaʊsəli, "baɪ weɪɡeɪɾ əɹ pɔɹɾəl stoʊn, ðəɹ kəd bi ən ɛn tə ɪt. noʊ mɔɹ daɪɪŋ. noʊ mɔɹ dʒɹimz. noʊ mɔɹ."

"If you could get me to Shayol Ghul now," Rand said drowsily, "by Waygate or Portal Stone, there could be an end to it. No more dying. No more dreams. No more."

"ɪf ɪt wɝ əz sɪmpəl əz ðæt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ɡɹɪmli, "aɪ wʊd, wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ, bʌt nɑɾ ɔl ɪn ðə kæɹæəθən saɪkəl kən bi teɪkən əɾ ɪts feɪs. fəɹ ɛvɹi θɪŋ ɪt sɛz stʃɹeɪɾ aʊt, ðəɹ ɑɹ tɛn ðət kəd min ə hʌnʒɹəd dɪfɹən θɪŋz. də nɑt θɪŋk jə noʊ ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl ʌv wʌt mʌs bi, ivən ɪf sʌmwʌn əz toʊl jə ðə hoʊl ə ðə pɹɑfəsiz." ʃi pɔzd, əz ɪf ɡæðɝɪŋ stʃɹɛŋkθ. hɝ ɡɹɪp taɪɾənd ɑn ði æŋɡɹil, ən əɹ fɹi hæn slɪɾ əlɔŋ ɹændz saɪɾ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ nɑt kʌvɝɾ ɪn blʌd. "bɹeɪs jɝsɛlf."

"If it were as simple as that," Moiraine said grimly, "I would, one way or another, but not all in The Karaethon Cycle can be taken at its face. For every thing it says straight out, there are ten that could mean a hundred different things. Do not think you know anything at all of what must be, even if someone has told you the whole of the Prophecies." She paused, as if gathering strength. Her grip tightened on the angreal, and her free hand slid along Rand's side as if it were not covered in blood. "Brace yourself."

sʌɾənli ɹændz aɪz oʊpənd waɪd, ən i sæt stʃɹeɪɾ ʌp, ɡæspɪŋ ən stɛɹɪŋ ən ʃɪvɝɪŋ. pɛɹɪn hæd θɔt, wən ʃi hil hɪm, ðəɾ ɪt wɛn ɑn fɝɛvɝ, bʌɾ ɪn moʊməns ʃi wɑz izɪŋ ɹænd bæk əɡɛns ði oʊk.

Suddenly Rand's eyes opened wide, and he sat straight up, gasping and staring and shivering. Perrin had thought, when she Healed him, that it went on forever, but in moments she was easing Rand back against the oak.

"aɪ hæv . . . dʌn əz mʌtʃ əz aɪ kæn," ʃi sɛd feɪnli. "æz mʌtʃ əz aɪ kæn. jə mʌs bi kɛɹfəl. ɪt kəd bɹeɪk oʊpən əɡɛn ɪf. . . ." əz əɹ vɔɪs tʃɹeɪld ɔf, ʃi fɛl.

"I have . . . done as much as I can," she said faintly. "As much as I can. You must be careful. It could break open again if. . . ." As her voice trailed off, she fell.

ɹænd kɑt hɝ, bʌt læn wɑz ðəɹ ɪn ən ɪnstən tə skup əɹ ʌp. əz ðə wɔɹɾɝ dɪd soʊ, ə lʊk pæst əkɹɔs ɪz feɪs, ə lʊk əz kloʊs tə tɛndɝnəs əz pɛɹɪn ɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə si fɹəm læn.

Rand caught her, but Lan was there in an instant to scoop her up. As the Warder did so, a look passed across his face, a look as close to tenderness as Perrin ever expected to see from Lan.

"ɪɡzɔstəd," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd. "ʃi hæz kɛɹd fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, bʌt ðɛɹz noʊ wʌn tə teɪk əɹ fətiɡ. əl pʊɾ əɹ tə bɛd."

"Exhausted," the Warder said. "She has cared for everyone else, but there's no one to take her fatigue. I will put her to bed."

"ðɛɹz ɹænd," mɪn sɛd sloʊli, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

"There's Rand," Min said slowly, but the Warder shook his head.

"ɪɾ ɪzən ðəɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk jə wəd tʃɹaɪ, ʃifɝɾɝ," hi sɛd, "bʌt jə noʊ soʊ lɪɾəl jə maɪɾ əz sun kɪl əɹ əz hɛlp hɝ."

"It isn't that I do not think you would try, sheepherder," he said, "but you know so little you might as soon kill her as help her."

"ðæts ɹaɪt," ɹænd sɛd bɪɾɝli. "aɪm nɑt tə bi tʃɹʌstɪd. luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ kɪld ɛvɹiwʌn kloʊs tə hɪm. meɪbi əl də ðə seɪm bɪfɔɹ aɪm dʌn."

"That's right," Rand said bitterly. "I'm not to be trusted. Lews Therin Kinslayer killed everyone close to him. Maybe I'll do the same before I am done."

"pʊl jɝsɛlf təɡɛðɝ, ʃifɝɾɝ," læn sɛd hɑɹʃli. "ðə hoʊl wɝld ɹaɪdz ɑn jəɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ɹɪmɛmbɝ jəɹ ə mæn, ən də wʌt nidz tə bi dʌn."

"Pull yourself together, sheepherder," Lan said harshly. "The whole world rides on your shoulders. Remember you're a man, and do what needs to be done."

ɹænd lʊkt ʌp ət ðə wɔɹɾɝ, ən sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ɔl ə hɪz bɪɾɝnəs sim tə bi ɡɔn. "aɪ wɪl faɪt ðə bɛst aɪ kæn," hi sɛd. "bɪkɔz ðɛɹz noʊ wʌn ɛls, ən ɪts tə bi dʌn, ən ðə duɾi ɪz maɪn. əl faɪt, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑɾ əv tə laɪk wʌɾ aɪv bɪkʌm." hi kloʊzd ɪz aɪz əz ɪf ɡoʊɪŋ tə slip. "aɪ wɪl faɪt. dʒɹimz. . . ."

Rand looked up at the Warder, and surprisingly, all of his bitterness seemed to be gone. "I will fight the best I can," he said. "Because there's no one else, and it has to be done, and the duty is mine. I'll fight, but I do not have to like what I've become." He closed his eyes as if going to sleep. "I will fight. Dreams. . . ."

læn stɛɹd daʊn əɾ ɪm ə moʊmənt, ðən nɑɾəd. hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd tə lʊk əkɹɔs mɔɪɹeɪn ət pɛɹɪn ən mɪn. "ɡɛɾ ɪm tə hɪz bɛd, ðən si tə səm slip jʊɹsɛlvz. wɪv plænz tə meɪk, ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn noʊz wʌt hæpənz nɛkst."

Lan stared down at him a moment, then nodded. He raised his head to look across Moiraine at Perrin and Min. "Get him to his bed, then see to some sleep yourselves. We have plans to make, and the Light alone knows what happens next."


tʃæptɝ sɪks


CHAPTER 6

ðə hʌn bɪɡɪnz


The Hunt Begins

pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk tə slip, bʌɾ ə stʌmək stʌft wɪð koʊl stu - hɪz ɹizɑlv əbaʊt ðə ɹuts hæd læstəɾ əntɪl ðə smɛlz ə sʌpɝz lɛftoʊvɝz hɪɾ ɪz noʊz - ən boʊn wɪɹinəs pʊld ɪm daʊn ɑn ɪz bɛd. ɪf i dʒɹimd, hi dɪd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ. hi əwoʊk tə læn ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, dɔn θɹu ði oʊpən dɔɹ tɝnɪŋ ðə wɔɹɾɝ tə ə ʃædoʊ hæloʊd wɪð laɪt.

Perrin did not expect to sleep, but a stomach stuffed with cold stew - his resolve about the roots had lasted until the smells of supper's leftovers hit his nose - and bone weariness pulled him down on his bed. If he dreamed, he did not remember. He awoke to Lan shaking his shoulders, dawn through the open door turning the Warder to a shadow haloed with light.

"ɹæn ɪz ɡɔn," wɑz ɔl læn sɛd bɪfɔɹ i lɛft əɾ ə ɹʌn, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf.

"Rand is gone," was all Lan said before he left at a run, but it was more than enough.

pɛɹɪn dʒɹæɡd hɪmsɛlf ʌp jɔnɪŋ ən dʒɹɛs kwɪkli ɪn ði ɝli tʃɪl. aʊtsaɪd, oʊnli ə hændfʊl ə ʃaɪnɝənz wɝ ɪn saɪt, juzɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz tə dʒɹæɡ tʃɹɑlɑk bɑɾiz ɪndə ðə wʊdz, ən moʊst ə ðoʊz muvd əz ɪf ðeɪ ʃəd bi ɪn ə sɪkbd. ə bɑɾi tʊk taɪm tə bɪl bæk ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ðət biɪŋ hil tʊk.

Perrin dragged himself up yawning and dressed quickly in the early chill. Outside, only a handful of Shienarans were in sight, using their horses to drag Trolloc bodies into the woods, and most of those moved as if they should be in a sickbed. A body took time to build back the strength that being Healed took.

pɛɹɪnz stʌmək mʌɾɝd ət hɪm, ən ɪz noʊz tɛstəd ðə bɹiz ɪn ðə hoʊp ðət sʌmwʌn hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi stɑɹɾəd kʊkɪŋ. hi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə it ðoʊz tɝnəp-laɪk ɹuts, ɹɔ ɪf nid bi. ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli ðə lɪŋɡɝɪŋ stɛntʃ ə sleɪn mɹdʒɹɑl, ðə smɛlz ə dɛd tʃɹɑləks ən mɛn, əlaɪv ən dɛd, ʌv hɔɹsəz ən ðə tʃɹiz. ən dɛd wʊlvz.

Perrin's stomach muttered at him, and his nose tested the breeze in the hope that someone had already started cooking. He was ready to eat those turnip-like roots, raw if need be. There were only the lingering stench of slain Myrddraal, the smells of dead Trollocs and men, alive and dead, of horses and the trees. And dead wolves.

mɔɪɹeɪnz hʌt, haɪ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə boʊl, simd ə sɛntɝ ʌv æktɪvəɾi. mɪn hɝiɾ ɪnsaɪd, ən moʊməns leɪɾɝ mæsimə keɪm aʊt, ðən ənoʊ. əɾ ə tʃɹɑt ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz, təwɔɹd ðə ʃɪɹ ɹɑk wɔl bɪɑn ðə hʌt, waɪl ði ʌðɝ ʃaɪnɝən lɪmp daʊn ðə sloʊp.

Moiraine's hut, high on the other side of the bowl, seemed a center of activity. Min hurried inside, and moments later Masema came out, then Uno. At a trot the one-eyed man vanished into the trees, toward the sheer rock wall beyond the hut, while the other Shienaran limped down the slope.

pɛɹɪn stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ðə hʌt. əz i splæʃt əkɹɔs ðə ʃæloʊ stʃɹim, hi mɛt mæsimə. ðə ʃaɪnɝənz feɪs wɑz hæɡɝd, ðə skɑɹ ɑn ɪz tʃik pɹɑmənənt, ən ɪz aɪz ivən mɔɹ sʌŋkən ðən juʒəwəl. ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə stʃɹim, hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd sʌɾənli ən kɑt pɛɹɪnz koʊt sliv.

Perrin started toward the hut. As he splashed across the shallow stream, he met Masema. The Shienaran's face was haggard, the scar on his cheek prominent, and his eyes even more sunken than usual. In the middle of the stream, he raised his head suddenly and caught Perrin's coat sleeve.

"jɔɹ fɹəm ɪz vɪlədʒ," mæsimə sɛd hɔɹsli. "ju mʌs noʊ. waɪ dɪd ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən əbændən ʌs? wʌt sɪn dɪd wi kəmɪt?"

"You're from his village," Masema said hoarsely. "You must know. Why did the Lord Dragon abandon us? What sin did we commit?"

"sɪn? wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt? waɪɛvɝ ɹænd wɛnt, ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ jə dɪɾ əɹ dɪdn du." mæsimə dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ sæɾəsfaɪd; hi kɛpt ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn pɛɹɪnz sliv, piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɪz feɪs əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ænsɝz ðɛɹ. aɪsi wɔɾɝ bɪɡæn tə sip ɪndə pɛɹɪnz lɛf but. "mæsimə," hi sɛd kɛɹfəli, "wʌtɛvɝ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən dɪd, ɪt wɑz əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə hɪz plæn. ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən wəd nɑɾ əbændən ʌs." əɹ wəd hi? ɪf aɪ wɝ ɪn ɪz pleɪs, wəɾ aɪ?

"Sin? What are you talking about? Whyever Rand went, it was nothing you did or didn't do." Masema did not appear satisfied; he kept his grip on Perrin's sleeve, peering into his face as if there were answers there. Icy water began to seep into Perrin's left boot. "Masema," he said carefully, "whatever the Lord Dragon did, it was according to his plan. The Lord Dragon would not abandon us." Or would he? If I were in his place, would I?

mæsimə nɑɾəd sloʊli. "jɛs. jɛs, aɪ si ðæt, naʊ. hiz ɡɔn aʊɾ əloʊn tə spɹɛd ðə wɝɾ ə hɪz kʌmɪŋ. wi mʌst spɹɛd ðə wɝd, tu. jɛs." hi lɪmpt ɑn əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹim, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf.

Masema nodded slowly. "Yes. Yes, I see that, now. He has gone out alone to spread the word of his coming. We must spread the word, too. Yes." He limped on across the stream, muttering to himself.

skwɛltʃɪŋ əɾ ɛvɹi ʌðɝ stɛp, pɛɹɪn klaɪm tə mɔɪɹeɪnz hʌɾ ən nɑkt. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ænsɝ. hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ə moʊmənt, ðən wɛn ɪn.

Squelching at every other step, Perrin climbed to Moiraine's hut and knocked. There was no answer. He hesitated a moment, then went in.

ði aʊɾɝ ɹum, wɛɹ læn slɛpt, wɑz əz stɑɹk ən sɪmpəl əz pɛɹɪnz oʊn hʌt, wɪð ə ɹʌf bɛd bɪlt əɡɛnst wʌn wɔl, ə fju pɛɡz fəɹ hæŋɪŋ pəzɛʃənz, ən ə sɪŋɡəl ʃɛlf. nɑt mʌtʃ laɪɾ ɛntɝd θɹu ði oʊpən dɔɹ, ən ði oʊnli ʌðɝ ɪluməneɪʃən keɪm fɹəm kɹud læmps ɑn ðə ʃɛlf, slɪvɝz ʌv ɔɪli fæt-wʊd wɛdʒd ɪndə kɹæks ɪn pisəz ə ɹɑk. ðeɪ ɡeɪv ɔf θɪn stʃɹimɝz ə smoʊk ðət meɪɾ ə leɪɝ ə heɪz ʌndɝ ðə ɹuf. pɛɹɪnz noʊz ɹɪŋkəld ət ðə smɛl.

The outer room, where Lan slept, was as stark and simple as Perrin's own hut, with a rough bed built against one wall, a few pegs for hanging possessions, and a single shelf. Not much light entered through the open door, and the only other illumination came from crude lamps on the shelf, slivers of oily fat-wood wedged into cracks in pieces of rock. They gave off thin streamers of smoke that made a layer of haze under the roof. Perrin's nose wrinkled at the smell.

ðə loʊ ɹuf wɑz oʊnli ə lɪɾəl haɪɝ ðən ɪz hɛd. lɔɪəlz hɛɾ æktʃəli  bɹʌʃt ɪt, ivən siɾəd əz i wɑz ɑn wʌn ɛn ə lænz bɛd, wɪð ɪz niz dʒɹɔn ʌp tə meɪk hɪmsɛlf smɔl. ði oʊɡiɝz tʌftəɾ ɪɹz twɪtʃt ənizəli. mɪn sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə dɝt flɔɹ bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ ðət lɛd tə mɔɪɹeɪnz ɹum, waɪl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ peɪs bæk ən fɔɹθ ɪn θɔt. dɑɹk θɔts, ðeɪ mʌst əv bɪn. θɹi peɪsɪz itʃ weɪ wɑz ɔl ʃi hæd, bʌt ʃi meɪd vɪɡɝəs jus ə ðə speɪs, ðə kɑm ɑn əɹ feɪs bɪlaɪd baɪ ðə kwɪknəs ə hɝ stɛp.

The low roof was only a little higher than his head. Loial's head actually brushed it, even seated as he was on one end of Lan's bed, with his knees drawn up to make himself small. The Ogier's tufted ears twitched uneasily. Min sat cross-legged on the dirt floor beside the door that led to Moiraine's room, while the Aes Sedai paced back and forth in thought. Dark thoughts, they must have been. Three paces each way was all she had, but she made vigorous use of the space, the calm on her face belied by the quickness of her step.

"aɪ θɪŋk mæsimə ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ kɹeɪzi," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"I think Masema is going crazy," Perrin said.

mɪn snɪft. "wɪð hɪm, haʊ kən jə tɛl?"

Min sniffed. "With him, how can you tell?"

mɔɪɹeɪn ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn hɪm, ə taɪtnəs tə hɝ maʊð. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz sɑft. tu sɑft. "ɪz mæsimə ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ ɪn jəɹ maɪn ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə?"

Moiraine rounded on him, a tightness to her mouth. Her voice was soft. Too soft. "Is Masema the most important thing in your mind this morning, Perrin Aybara?"

"noʊ. aɪd laɪk tə noʊ wən ɹænd lɛft, ən waɪ. dɪɾ ɛniwʌn si hɪm ɡoʊ? dʌz ɛniwʌn noʊ wɛɹ i wɛnt?" hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf miɾ əɹ lʊk wɪð wʌn dʒʌst əz lɛvəl ən fɝm. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi. hi lumd oʊvɝ hɝ, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. "ɪz ðɪs ə jəɹ meɪkɪŋ, mɔɪɹeɪn? dɪd jə ɹeɪn ɪm ɪn əntɪl i wɑz soʊ ɪmpeɪʃən hid ɡoʊ ɛniwɛɹ, də ɛniθɪŋ, dʒʌs tə stɑp sɪɾɪŋ stɪl?" lɔɪəlz ɪɹz wɛn stɪf, ən i moʊʃən ə sɝəptɪʃəs wɔɹnɪŋ wɪð wʌn θɪk-fɪŋɡɝd hænd.

"No. I'd like to know when Rand left, and why. Did anyone see him go? Does anyone know where he went?" He made himself meet her look with one just as level and firm. It was not easy. He loomed over her, but she was Aes Sedai. "Is this of your making, Moiraine? Did you rein him in until he was so impatient he'd go anywhere, do anything, just to stop sitting still?" Loial's ears went stiff, and he motioned a surreptitious warning with one thick-fingered hand.

mɔɪɹeɪn stʌɾid pɛɹɪn wɪð əɹ hɛd tɪltəd tə wʌn saɪd, ən ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də nɑt tə dʒɹɑp ɪz aɪz. "ðɪs ɪz nʌn ə maɪ duɪŋ," ʃi sɛd. "hi lɛf sʌmtaɪm dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt. wən ən haʊ ən waɪ, aɪ jɛt hoʊp tə lɝn."

Moiraine studied Perrin with her head tilted to one side, and it was all he could do not to drop his eyes. "This is none of my doing," she said. "He left sometime during the night. When and how and why, I yet hope to learn."

lɔɪəlz ʃoʊldɝz hivd ɪn ə kwaɪət saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif. kwaɪət fəɹ ən oʊɡiɝ, ɪt saʊndəd laɪk stim ɹʌʃɪŋ aʊt fɹəm kwɛntʃɪŋ ɹɛd-hɑɾ aɪɝn. "nɛvɝ æŋɡɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə wɪspɝ ɑbviəsli mɛn dʒʌs fəɹ hɪmsɛlf, bʌɾ ɑɾəbəl tə ɛvɹiwʌn. " 'bɛɾɝ tə ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sʌn ðən tə æŋɡɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ.' "

Loial's shoulders heaved in a quiet sigh of relief. Quiet for an Ogier, it sounded like steam rushing out from quenching red-hot iron. "Never anger an Aes Sedai," he said in a whisper obviously meant just for himself, but audible to everyone. " 'Better to embrace the sun than to anger an Aes Sedai.' "

mɪn ɹitʃt ʌp ɪnʌf tə hæn pɛɹɪn ə foʊldəd pis ə peɪpɝ. "lɔɪəl wɛn tə si hɪm æftɝ wi ɡɑɾ ɪm tə bɛd læs naɪt, ən ɹænd æsk tə bɑɹoʊ pɛn ən peɪpɝ ən ɪŋk."

Min reached up enough to hand Perrin a folded piece of paper. "Loial went to see him after we got him to bed last night, and Rand asked to borrow pen and paper and ink."

ði oʊɡiɝz ɪɹz dʒɝkt, ən i fɹaʊnd wɝidli əntɪl ɪz lɔŋ aɪbɹaʊz hʌŋ daʊn ɑn ɪz tʃiks. "aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌɾ i wɑz plænɪŋ. aɪ dɪdnt."

The Ogier's ears jerked, and he frowned worriedly until his long eyebrows hung down on his cheeks. "I did not know what he was planning. I didn't."

"wi noʊ ðæt," mɪn sɛd. "noʊ wʌn ɪz əkjuzɪŋ jə ʌv ɛniθɪŋ, lɔɪəl."

"We know that," Min said. "No one is accusing you of anything, Loial."

mɔɪɹeɪn fɹaʊn ət ðə peɪpɝ, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp pɛɹɪn fɹəm ɹiɾɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ɪn ɹændz hænd.

Moiraine frowned at the paper, but she did not try to stop Perrin from reading. It was in Rand's hand.

wʌɾ aɪ du, aɪ də kəz ðəɹ ɪz noʊ ʌðɝ weɪ. hiz hʌntɪŋ mi əɡɛn, ən ðɪs taɪm wʌn ʌv əs əz tə daɪ, aɪ θɪŋk. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid fəɹ ðoʊz ɝaʊn mi tə daɪ, ɔlsoʊ. tu mɛni hæv daɪd fəɹ mi ɔlɹɛɾi. aɪ də nɑt wɑnə daɪ iðɝ, ən wɪl nɑt, ɪf aɪ kən mænədʒ ɪt. ðəɹ ɑɹ laɪz ɪn dʒɹimz, ən dɛθ, bʌt dʒɹimz hoʊl tʃɹuθ, tu.

What I do, I do because there is no other way. He is hunting me again, and this time one of us has to die, I think. There is no need for those around me to die, also. Too many have died for me already. I do not want to die either, and will not, if I can manage it. There are lies in dreams, and death, but dreams hold truth, too.

ðət wɑz ɔl, wɪð noʊ sɪɡnətʃɝ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ pɛɹɪn tə wʌndɝ u ɹænd mɛn baɪ "hi." fəɹ ɹænd, fəɹ ɔl ə ðɛm, ðəɹ kəd bi oʊnli wʌn. bælzəmən.

That was all, with no signature. There was no need for Perrin to wonder who Rand meant by "he." For Rand, for all of them, there could be only one. Ba'alzamon.

"hi lɛf ðət tʌkt ʌndɝ ðə dɔɹ ðɛɹ," mɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs. "hi tʊk səm oʊl kloʊðz ðə ʃaɪnɝənz hæd hæŋɪŋ aʊt tə dʒɹaɪ, ən ɪz flut, ən ə hɔɹs. nʌθɪŋ ɛls bʌɾ ə lɪɾəl fud, əz fɑɹ əz wi kən tɛl. nʌn ə ðə ɡɑɹdz sɔ hɪm ɡoʊ, ən læs naɪt ðeɪ wʊɾə sin ə maʊs kɹipɪŋ."

"He left that tucked under the door there," Min said in a tight voice. "He took some old clothes the Shienarans had hanging out to dry, and his flute, and a horse. Nothing else but a little food, as far as we can tell. None of the guards saw him go, and last night they would have seen a mouse creeping."

"ænd wəɾ ɪɾ əv dʌn ɛni ɡʊɾ ɪf ðeɪ hæd?" mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd kɑmli. "wʊɾ ɛni ʌv əm əv stɑp ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, əɹ ivən tʃælənʒd hɪm? səm ə ðɛm - mæsimə fəɹ wʌn - wəd slɪt ðɛɹ oʊn θɹoʊts ɪf ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən toʊld əm tə."

"And would it have done any good if they had?" Moiraine said calmly. "Would any of them have stopped the Lord Dragon, or even challenged him? Some of them - Masema for one - would slit their own throats if the Lord Dragon told them to."

ɪt wɑz pɛɹɪnz tɝn tə stʌɾi hɝ. "dɪd jə ɪkspɛkt ɛniθɪŋ ɛls? ðeɪ swɔɹ tə fɑloʊ hɪm. laɪt, mɔɪɹeɪn, hid nɛvɝ əv neɪm hɪmsɛlf dʒɹæɡən ɪf nɑt fəɹ ju. wʌd jə ɪkspɛkt ə ðɛm?" ʃi dɪd nɑt spik, ən i wɛn ɑn mɔɹ kwaɪətli. "du jə bɪliv, mɔɪɹeɪn? ðət hiz ɹɪli ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn? əɹ dʒju dʒʌs θɪŋk hiz sʌmwʌn jə kən juz bɪfɔɹ ðə wʌn paʊɝ kɪlz ɪm əɹ dʒɹaɪvz ɪm mæd?"

It was Perrin's turn to study her. "Did you expect anything else? They swore to follow him. Light, Moiraine, he'd never have named himself Dragon if not for you. What did you expect of them?" She did not speak, and he went on more quietly. "Do you believe, Moiraine? That he's really the Dragon Reborn? Or do you just think he's someone you can use before the One Power kills him or drives him mad?"

"ɡoʊ izi, pɛɹɪn," lɔɪəl sɛd. "nɑt soʊ æŋɡɹi."

"Go easy, Perrin," Loial said. "Not so angry."

"aɪl ɡoʊ izi wən ʃi ænsɝz mi. wɛl, mɔɪɹeɪn?"

"I'll go easy when she answers me. Well, Moiraine?"

"hi ɪz wʌɾ i ɪz," ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli.

"He is what he is," she said sharply.

"ju sɛd ðə pæɾɝn wəd fɔɹs ɪm tə ðə ɹaɪt pæθ ɪvɛntʃəwəli. ɪz ðət wʌt ðɪs ɪz, əɹ ɪz i dʒʌs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ju?" fəɹ ə moʊmən i θɔɾ i hæd ɡɔn tu fɑɹ - hɝ dɑɹk aɪz spɑɹkəld wɪð æŋɡɝ - bʌɾ i ɹəfjuz tə bæk daʊn. "wɛl?"

"You said the Pattern would force him to the right path eventually. Is that what this is, or is he just trying to get away from you?" For a moment he thought he had gone too far - her dark eyes sparkled with anger - but he refused to back down. "Well?"

mɔɪɹeɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "ðɪs meɪ wɛl bi wʌt ðə pæɾɝn əz tʃoʊzən, jɛɾ aɪ dɪd nɑt min fəɹ ɪm tə ɡoʊ ɔf əloʊn. fəɹ ɔl ɪz paʊɝ, hiz əz dɪfɛnsləs əz ə beɪb ɪn mɛni weɪz, ən əz ɪɡnɝən ə ðə wɝld. hi tʃænəlz, bʌt hiz noʊ kəntʃɹoʊl oʊvɝ wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ðə wʌn paʊɝ kʌmz wən i ɹitʃəz fəɹ ɪɾ ən ɔlmoʊst əz lɪɾəl oʊvɝ wʌɾ i dʌz wɪð ɪɾ ɪf ɪt dʌz kʌm. ðə paʊɝ ɪtsɛlf wɪl kɪl ɪm bɪfɔɹ hiz ə tʃæns tə ɡoʊ mæɾ ɪf i dʌz nɑt lɝn ðət kəntʃɹoʊl. ðəɹ ɪz soʊ mʌtʃ i mʌs lɝn, jɛt. hi wɑns tə ɹʌn bɪfɔɹ hiz lɝn tə wɔk."

Moiraine took a deep breath. "This may well be what the Pattern has chosen, yet I did not mean for him to go off alone. For all his power, he is as defenseless as a babe in many ways, and as ignorant of the world. He channels, but he has no control over whether or not the One Power comes when he reaches for it and almost as little over what he does with it if it does come. The power itself will kill him before he has a chance to go mad if he does not learn that control. There is so much he must learn, yet. He wants to run before he has learned to walk."

"ju splɪt hɛɹz ən leɪ fɔls tʃɹeɪlz, mɔɪɹeɪn." pɛɹɪn snɔɹɾɪd. "ɪf hiz wʌt jə seɪ hi ɪz, dɪɾ ɪt nɛvɝ əkɝ tə jə ðəɾ i maɪt noʊ wʌt hiz tə də bɛɾɝ ðən ju?"

"You split hairs and lay false trails, Moiraine." Perrin snorted. "If he is what you say he is, did it never occur to you that he might know what he has to do better than you?"

"hi ɪz wʌɾ i ɪz," ʃi ɹɪpiɾɪd fɝmli, "bʌɾ aɪ mʌs kip ɪm əlaɪv ɪf hiz tə də ɛniθɪŋ. hɪl fʊlfɪl noʊ pɹɑfəsiz dɛd, ən ivən ɪf i mænɪdʒɪz tə əvɔɪd dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, ðəɹ ɑɹ ə θaʊzən ʌðɝ hænz ɹɛɾi tə sleɪ hɪm. ɔl ɪɾəl teɪk ɪz ə hɪn ə ðə hʌnʒɹədθ pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌɾ i ɪz. jɛɾ ɪf ðət wɝ ɔl i maɪt feɪs, aɪ wəd nɑt wɝi hæf soʊ mʌtʃ əz aɪ du. ðəɹ ɑɹ ðə fɔɹseɪkən tə bi əkaʊntəd fɔɹ."

"He is what he is," she repeated firmly, "but I must keep him alive if he is to do anything. He will fulfill no prophecies dead, and even if he manages to avoid Darkfriends and Shadowspawn, there are a thousand other hands ready to slay him. All it will take is a hint of the hundredth part of what he is. Yet if that were all he might face, I would not worry half so much as I do. There are the Forsaken to be accounted for."

pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt; fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ, lɔɪəl moʊnd. " 'ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ɔl ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ baʊn ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl,' " pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn baɪ ɹoʊt, bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm noʊ taɪm tə fɪnɪʃ.

Perrin gave a start; from the corner, Loial moaned. " 'The Dark One and all the Forsaken are bound in Shayol Ghul,' " Perrin began by rote, but she gave him no time to finish.

"ðə silz ɑɹ wikənɪŋ, pɛɹɪn. səm ɑɹ bɹoʊkən, ðoʊ ðə wɝl dʌz nɑt noʊ ðæt. mʌs nɑt noʊ ðæt. ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz ɪz nɑt fɹi. jɛt. bʌɾ əz ðə silz wikən, mɔɹ ən mɔɹ, wɪtʃ ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən meɪ bi lust ɔlɹɛɾi? lænfɝ? sɑmaɪl? æzmɑɾiən, əɹ bɛləl, əɹ ɹævhɪn? ɪʃəml hɪmsɛlf, ðə bɪtʃɹeɪɝ ə hoʊp? ðeɪ wɝ θɝtin ɔltəɡɛðɝ, pɛɹɪn, ən baʊn ɪn ðə silɪŋ, nɑɾ ɪn ðə pɹɪzən ðət hoʊlz ðə dɑɹk wʌn. θɝtin ə ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ðə wikəst ə ðɛm stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ðə tɛn stʃɹɔŋɡəst ɛɛs sədaɪ lɪvɪŋ tədeɪ, ðə moʊst ɪɡnɝənt wɪð ɔl ðə nɑlədʒ ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ən ɛvɹi mæn ən wʊmən ə ðɛm ɡeɪv ʌp ðə laɪɾ ən dɛɾəkeɪtəd ðɛɹ soʊlz tə ðə ʃædoʊ. wʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ fɹi, ən aʊt ðəɹ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ hɪm? əl nɑt lɛɾ əm əv hɪm."

"The seals are weakening, Perrin. Some are broken, though the world does not know that. Must not know that. The Father of Lies is not free. Yet. But as the seals weaken, more and more, which of the Forsaken may be loosed already? Lanfear? Sammael? Asmodean, or Be'lal, or Ravhin? Ishamael himself, the Betrayer of Hope? They were thirteen altogether, Perrin, and bound in the sealing, not in the prison that holds the Dark One. Thirteen of the most powerful Aes Sedai of the Age of Legends, the weakest of them stronger than the ten strongest Aes Sedai living today, the most ignorant with all the knowledge of the Age of Legends. And every man and woman of them gave up the Light and dedicated their souls to the Shadow. What if they are free, and out there waiting for him? I will not let them have him."

pɛɹɪn ʃɪvɝd, pɑɹtli fɹəm ði aɪsi aɪɝn ɪn əɹ læst wɝdz, ən pɑɹtli fɹəm θɔɾ ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk ʌv ivən wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən lus ɪn ðə wɝld. hɪz mʌðɝ hæd fɹaɪɾənd ɪm wɪð ðoʊz neɪmz wən i wɑz lɪɾəl. ɪʃəml kʌmz fəɹ bɔɪz u də nɑt tɛl ðɛɹ mʌðɝz ðə tʃɹuθ. lænfɝ weɪts ɪn ðə naɪt fəɹ bɔɪz u də nɑt ɡoʊ tə bɛd wən ðeɪ ɑɹ səpoʊz tə. biɪŋ oʊldɝ dɪd nɑt hɛlp, nɑt wən i nu naʊ ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ɹil. nɑt wən mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ðeɪ maɪt bi fɹi.

Perrin shivered, partly from the icy iron in her last words, and partly from thought of the Forsaken. He did not want to think of even one of the Forsaken loose in the world. His mother had frightened him with those names when he was little. Ishamael comes for boys who do not tell their mothers the truth. Lanfear waits in the night for boys who do not go to bed when they are supposed to. Being older did not help, not when he knew now they were all real. Not when Moiraine said they might be free.

"baʊn ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl," hi wɪspɝd, ən wɪʃt i stɪl bɪlivd ɪt. tʃɹʌbəld, hi stʌɾid ɹændz lɛɾɝ əɡɛn. "dʒɹimz. hi wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt dʒɹimz jɛstɝdeɪ, tu."

"Bound in Shayol Ghul," he whispered, and wished he still believed it. Troubled, he studied Rand's letter again. "Dreams. He was talking about dreams yesterday, too."

mɔɪɹeɪn stɛp kloʊsɝ, ən pɪɹɾ ʌp ɪndə hɪz feɪs. "dʒɹimz?" læn ən ənoʊ keɪm ɪn, bʌt ʃi weɪvd əm tə saɪləns. ðə smɔl ɹum wɑz mɔɹ ðən kɹaʊɾəd naʊ, wɪð faɪv pipəl ɪn ɪt bɪsaɪdz ði oʊɡiɝ. "wʌt dʒɹimz əv jə hæd ðə læs fju deɪz, pɛɹɪn?" ʃi ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪz pɹoʊɾɛst ðət ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɹɔŋ wɪð ɪz dʒɹimz. "tɛl mi," ʃi ɪnsɪstəd. "wʌt dʒɹim əv jə hæd ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɔɹɾənɛɹi? tɛl mi." hɝ ɡeɪz sizd ɪm laɪk smɪθi tɑŋz, wɪlɪŋ ɪm tə spik.

Moiraine stepped closer, and peered up into his face. "Dreams?" Lan and Uno came in, but she waved them to silence. The small room was more than crowded now, with five people in it besides the Ogier. "What dreams have you had the last few days, Perrin?" She ignored his protest that there was nothing wrong with his dreams. "Tell me," she insisted. "What dream have you had that was not ordinary? Tell me." Her gaze seized him like smithy tongs, willing him to speak.

hi lʊkt ət ði ʌðɝz - ðeɪ wɝ ɔl wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm fɪksədli, ivən mɪn - ðən hɛzɪɾəntli toʊld ə ðə wʌn dʒɹim ðət simd ənjuʒəwəl tə hɪm, ðə dʒɹim ðət keɪm ɛvɹi naɪt. ðə dʒɹim ə ðə sɔɹɾ i kəd nɑt tʌtʃ. hi dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ðə wʊlf ðət hæɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə læst.

He looked at the others - they were all watching him fixedly, even Min - then hesitantly told of the one dream that seemed unusual to him, the dream that came every night. The dream of the sword he could not touch. He did not mention the wolf that had appeared in the last.

"kælændɝ," læn bɹiðd wən i wɑz dʌn. ɹɑk-hɑɹd feɪs əɹ noʊ, hi lʊk stʌnd.

"Callandor," Lan breathed when he was done. Rock-hard face or no, he looked stunned.

"jɛs," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "bʌt wi mʌs bi æbsəlutli sɝɾən. spik tə ði ʌðɝz." əz læn hɝiɾ aʊt, ʃi tɝn tə ənoʊ. "ænd wʌɾ ə jəɹ dʒɹimz? dɪd jə dʒɹim ʌv ə sɔɹd, tu?"

"Yes," Moiraine said, "but we must be absolutely certain. Speak to the others." As Lan hurried out, she turned to Uno. "And what of your dreams? Did you dream of a sword, too?"

ðə ʃaɪnɝən ʃɪftəɾ ɪz fit. ðə ɹɛɾ aɪ peɪntəɾ ɑn ɪz pætʃ stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ ət mɔɪɹeɪn, bʌɾ ɪz ɹil aɪ blɪŋkt ən weɪvɝd. "aɪ dʒɹim əbaʊt flæm - ʌ, əbaʊt sɔɹdz ɔl ðə taɪm, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ," hi sɛd stɪfli. "aɪ səpoʊz aɪv dʒɹimd əbaʊɾ ə sɔɹd ðə læs fju naɪts. aɪ doʊn ɹɪmɛmbɝ maɪ dʒɹimz ðə weɪ lɔɹd pɛɹɪn hɪɹ dʌz."

The Shienaran shifted his feet. The red eye painted on his patch stared straight at Moiraine, but his real eye blinked and wavered. "I dream about flam - uh, about swords all the time, Moiraine Sedai," he said stiffly. "I suppose I've dreamed about a sword the last few nights. I don't remember my dreams the way Lord Perrin here does."

mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "lɔɪəl?"

Moiraine said, "Loial?"

"maɪ dʒɹimz ɑɹ ɔlweɪz ðə seɪm, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ. ðə ɡɹoʊvz, ən ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz, ən ðə stɛɾɪŋ. wi oʊɡiɝ ɔlweɪz dʒɹim ə ðə stɛɾɪŋ wən wəɹ əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm."

"My dreams are always the same, Moiraine Sedai. The groves, and the Great Trees, and the stedding. We Ogier always dream of the stedding when we are away from them."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tɝn bæk tə pɛɹɪn.

The Aes Sedai turned back to Perrin.

"ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə dʒɹim," hi sɛd. "nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ə dʒɹim."

"It was just a dream," he said. "Nothing but a dream."

"aɪ daʊɾ ɪt," ʃi sɛd. "ju dɪskɹaɪb ðə hɔl kɔl ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn, ɪn ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs kɔl ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ, əz ɪf jə hæd stʊɾ ɪn ɪt. ən ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ sɔɹɾ ɪz kælændɝ, ðə sɔɹd ðəɾ ɪz nɑɾ ə sɔɹd, ðə sɔɹd ðət kænɑt bi tʌtʃt."

"I doubt it," she said. "You describe the hall called the Heart of the Stone, in the fortress called the Stone of Tear, as if you had stood in it. And the shining sword is Callandor, the Sword That Is Not a Sword, the Sword That Cannot Be Touched."

lɔɪəl sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt, bʌmpɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ɑn ðə ɹuf. hi dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs. "ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən seɪ ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ wɪl nɛvɝ fɔl tɪl kælændɝ ɪz wildɪd baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡənz hænd. ðə fɔl ə ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ wɪl bi wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst saɪnz ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz ɹibɝθ. ɪf ɹænd hoʊlz kælændɝ, ðə hoʊl wɝl mʌst æknɑlɪdʒ ɪm əz ðə dʒɹæɡən."

Loial sat up straight, bumping his head on the roof. He did not seem to notice. "The Prophecies of the Dragon say the Stone of Tear will never fall till Callandor is wielded by the Dragon's hand. The fall of the Stone of Tear will be one of the greatest signs of the Dragon's Rebirth. If Rand holds Callandor, the whole world must acknowledge him as the Dragon."

"pɝhæps." ðə wɝd floʊɾəd fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪz lɪps laɪk ə ʃɑɹɾ ʌv aɪs ɑn stɪl wɔɾɝ.

"Perhaps." The word floated from the Aes Sedai's lips like a shard of ice on still water.

"pɝhæps?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. "pɝhæps? aɪ θɔt ðət wɑz ðə faɪnəl saɪn, ðə læs θɪŋ tə fʊlfɪl jəɹ pɹɑfəsiz."

"Perhaps?" Perrin said. "Perhaps? I thought that was the final sign, the last thing to fulfill your Prophecies."

"niðɝ ðə fɝs nɔɹ ðə læst," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "kælændɝ wɪl bi bʌt wʌn fʊlfɪlmən ə ðə kæɹæəθən saɪkəl, əz ɪz bɝθ ɑn ðə sloʊps ə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt wɑz ðə fɝst. hiz jɛt tə bɹeɪk ðə neɪʃənz, əɹ ʃæɾɝ ðə wɝld. ivən skɑlɝz u hæv stʌɾid ðə pɹɑfəsiz fəɹ ðɛɹ ɪntaɪɝ laɪvz də nɑt noʊ haʊ tə ɪntɝpɹəɾ əm ɔl. wʌt dʌz ɪt min ðəɾ i 'ʃæl sleɪ hɪz pipəl wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ ə pis, ən dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðɛm wɪð ðə lif'? wʌt dʌz ɪt mɛn ðəɾ i 'ʃæl baɪn ðə naɪn munz tə sɝv hɪm'? jɛt ðiz ɑɹ ɡɪvən ikwəl weɪt wɪð kælændɝ ɪn ðə saɪkəl. ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝz. wʌt 'wunz ə mædnəs ən kʌɾɪŋ ə hoʊp' hæz i hild? wʌt tʃeɪnz əz i bɹoʊkən, ən u pʊɾ ɪndə tʃeɪnz? ən səm ɑɹ soʊ əbskjʊɹ ðəɾ i meɪ ɔlɹɛɾi hæv fʊlfɪl ðɛm, ɔlðoʊ aɪm nɑɾ əwɛɹ ʌv ɪt. bʌt, noʊ. kælændɝ ɪz fɑɹ fɹəm ði ɛn ʌv ɪt."

"Neither the first nor the last," Moiraine said. "Callandor will be but one fulfillment of The Karaethon Cycle, as his birth on the slopes of Dragonmount was the first. He has yet to break the nations, or shatter the world. Even scholars who have studied the Prophecies for their entire lives do not know how to interpret them all. What does it mean that he 'shall slay his people with the sword of peace, and destroy them with the leaf'? What does it meant that he 'shall bind the nine moons to serve him'? Yet these are given equal weight with Callandor in the Cycle. There are others. What 'wounds of madness and cutting of hope' has he healed? What chains has he broken, and who put into chains? And some are so obscure that he may already have fulfilled them, although I am not aware of it. But, no. Callandor is far from the end of it."

pɛɹɪn ʃɹʌɡd ənizəli. hi nu oʊnli bɪts ən pisəz ə ðə pɹɑfəsiz; hi hæd laɪk hɪɹɪŋ əm ivən lɛs sɪns ɹænd hæd lɛt mɔɪɹeɪn pʊt ðət bænɝ ɪn ɪz hænz. noʊ, ɪt hæd bɪn bɪfɔɹ ðæt, ivən. sɪns ə dʒɝni baɪ pɔɹɾəl stoʊn hæd kənvɪnst ɪm ɪz laɪf wɑz baʊn tə ɹænz.

Perrin shrugged uneasily. He knew only bits and pieces of the Prophecies; he had liked hearing them even less since Rand had let Moiraine put that banner in his hands. No, it had been before that, even. Since a journey by Portal Stone had convinced him his life was bound to Rand's.

mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz kəntɪnjuɪŋ. "ɪf jə θɪŋk hiz sɪmpli tə pʊɾ aʊɾ ɪz hænd, lɔɪəl sʌn ʌv ɑɹən sʌn ə hɑlən, jə ɑɹ ə ful, əz ɪz i ɪf i θɪŋks ɪt. ivən ɪf i laɪvz tə ɹitʃ tɛɹ, hi meɪ nɛvɝ əteɪn ðə stoʊn.

Moiraine was continuing. "If you think he has simply to put out his hand, Loial son of Arent son of Halan, you are a fool, as is he if he thinks it. Even if he lives to reach Tear, he may never attain the Stone.

"tɛɹənz əv noʊ lʌv fəɹ ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ən lɛs fəɹ ɛni mæn kleɪmɪŋ tə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən. tʃænəlɪŋ ɪz aʊtlɔd, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ tɑlɝeɪɾəd ət bɛst, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ də nɑt tʃænəl. tɛlɪŋ ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, əɹ ivən pəzɛsɪŋ ə kɑpi ʌv ðɛm, ɪz ɪnʌf tə pʊt jə ɪn pɹɪzən, ɪn tiɹ. ən noʊ wʌn ɛntɝz ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən ə ðə haɪ lɔɹdz; nʌn bʌt ðə haɪ lɔɹdz ðɛmsɛlvz ɛntɝ ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn. hiz nɑt ɹɛɾi fəɹ ðɪs. nɑt ɹɛɾi."

"Tairens have no love for the One Power, and less for any man claiming to be the Dragon. Channeling is outlawed, and Aes Sedai are tolerated at best, so long as they do not channel. Telling the Prophecies of the Dragon, or even possessing a copy of them, is enough to put you in prison, in Tear. And no one enters the Stone of Tear without permission of the High Lords; none but the High Lords themselves enter the Heart of the Stone. He is not ready for this. Not ready."

pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪd sɔfli. ðə stoʊn wəd nɛvɝ fɔl tɪl ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hɛl kælændɝ. haʊ ɪn ðə laɪɾ ɪz i səpoʊz tə ɹitʃ ɪt - ɪnsaɪɾ ə blʌɾi fɔɹtʃɹəs! - bɪfɔɹ ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs fɔlz? ɪts mædnəs!

Perrin grunted softly. The Stone would never fall till the Dragon Reborn held Callandor. How in the Light is he supposed to reach it - inside a bloody fortress! - before the fortress falls? It is madness!

"waɪ ɑɹ wi dʒʌst sɪɾɪŋ hɪɹ?" mɪn bɝst aʊt. "ɪf ɹænd ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɛɹ, waɪ ɑɹənt wi fɑloʊɪŋ hɪm? hi kəd bi kɪld, əɹ . . . ɔɹ. . . . waɪ ɑɹ wi sɪɾɪŋ hɪɹ?"

"Why are we just sitting here?" Min burst out. "If Rand is going to Tear, why aren't we following him? He could be killed, or . . . or. . . . Why are we sitting here?"

mɔɪɹeɪn pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn mɪnz hɛd. "bɪkɔz aɪ mʌs bi ʃʊɹ," ʃi sɛd dʒɛnli. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑt kʌmftəɹbəl biɪŋ tʃoʊzən baɪ ðə wil, tə bi ɡɹeɪɾ əɹ tə bi nɪɹ ɡɹeɪtnəs. ðə tʃoʊzən ə ðə wil kən oʊnli teɪk wʌt kʌmz."

Moiraine put a hand on Min's head. "Because I must be sure," she said gently. "It is not comfortable being chosen by the Wheel, to be great or to be near greatness. The chosen of the Wheel can only take what comes."

"aɪ æm taɪɝɾ ə teɪkɪŋ wʌt kʌmz." mɪn skɹʌbd ə hæn əkɹɔs əɹ aɪz. pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i sɔ tɪɹz. "ɹæn kəd bi daɪɪŋ waɪl wi weɪt." mɔɪɹeɪn smuð mɪnz hɛɹ; ðəɹ wɑz ə lʊk ɔlmoʊst ə pɪɾi ɑn ði ɛɛs sədaɪz feɪs.

"I am tired of taking what comes." Min scrubbed a hand across her eyes. Perrin thought he saw tears. "Rand could be dying while we wait." Moiraine smoothed Min's hair; there was a look almost of pity on the Aes Sedai's face.

pɛɹɪn sæt daʊn ɑn ði ɛn ə lænz bɛɾ ɑpəzət lɔɪəl. ðə smɛl ə pipəl wɑz θɪk ɪn ðə ɹum - pipəl ən wɝi ən fɪɹ; lɔɪəl smɛld ə bʊks ən tʃɹiz əz wɛl əz wɝi. ɪt fɛlt laɪk ə tʃɹæp, wɪð ðə wɔlz ɝaʊn ðɛm, ən ɔl soʊ kloʊz. ðə bɝnɪŋ slɪvɝz stæŋk. "haʊ kən maɪ dʒɹim tɛl wɛɹ ɹænd ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ?" hi æskt. "ɪt wɑz maɪ dʒɹim."

Perrin sat down on the end of Lan's bed opposite Loial. The smell of people was thick in the room - people and worry and fear; Loial smelled of books and trees as well as worry. It felt like a trap, with the walls around them, and all so close. The burning slivers stank. "How can my dream tell where Rand is going?" he asked. "It was my dream."

"ðoʊz u kən tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd kwaɪətli, "ðoʊz u ɑɹ pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli stʃɹɔŋ ɪn spɪɹət, kən səmtaɪmz fɔɹs ðɛɹ dʒɹimz ɑn ʌðɝz." ʃi dɪd nɑt stɑp əɹ suðɪŋ ə mɪn. "ɪspɛʃli ɑn ðoʊz u ɑɹ - səsɛptəbəl. aɪ də nɑt bɪliv ɹænd dɪɾ ɪɾ ɑn pɝpəs, bʌt ðə dʒɹimz ə ðoʊz tʌtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs kən bi paʊɝfəl. fəɹ wʌn əz stʃɹɔŋ əz hi, ðeɪ kəd pɑsəbli siz ən ɪntaɪɝ vɪlədʒ, əɹ pɝhæps ivən ə sɪɾi. hi noʊz lɪɾəl ʌv wʌɾ i dʌz, ən ivən lɛs ə haʊ tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt."

"Those who can channel the One Power," Moiraine said quietly, "those who are particularly strong in Spirit, can sometimes force their dreams on others." She did not stop her soothing of Min. "Especially on those who are - susceptible. I do not believe Rand did it on purpose, but the dreams of those touching the True Source can be powerful. For one as strong as he, they could possibly seize an entire village, or perhaps even a city. He knows little of what he does, and even less of how to control it."

"ðɛn waɪ dɪdn juv ɪt, tu?" hi dɪmændəd. "ɔɹ læn." ənoʊ stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, lʊkɪŋ əz ɪf i wəd ɹæðɝ bi ɛniwɛɹ ɛls, ən lɔɪəlz ɪɹz wɪltɪd. pɛɹɪn wɑz tu taɪɝɾ ən tu hʌŋɡɹi tə kɛɹ wɛðɝ i ʃoʊd pɹɑpɝ ɹɪspɛk fəɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən tu æŋɡɹi, əz wɛl, hi ɹilaɪzd. "waɪ?"

"Then why didn't you have it, too?" he demanded. "Or Lan." Uno stared straight ahead, looking as if he would rather be anywhere else, and Loial's ears wilted. Perrin was too tired and too hungry to care whether he showed proper respect for an Aes Sedai. And too angry, as well, he realized. "Why?"

mɔɪɹeɪn ænsɝd kɑmli. "ɛɛs sədaɪ lɝn tə ʃil ðɛɹ dʒɹimz. aɪ də ɪt wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, wən aɪ slip. wɔɹɾɝz ɑɹ ɡɪvən sʌmθɪŋ mʌtʃ ðə seɪm ɪn ðə bɑndɪŋ. ðə ɡeɪɾɪn kəd nɑt də wʌt ðeɪ mʌst ɪf ðə ʃædoʊ kəd stil ɪndə ðɛɹ dʒɹimz. wəɹ ɔl vʌlnɝəbəl wən wi slip, ən ðə ʃædoʊ ɪz stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə naɪt."

Moiraine answered calmly. "Aes Sedai learn to shield their dreams. I do it without thinking, when I sleep. Warders are given something much the same in the bonding. The Gaidin could not do what they must if the Shadow could steal into their dreams. We are all vulnerable when we sleep, and the Shadow is strong in the night."

"ðɛɹz ɔlweɪz sʌmθɪŋ nu fɹəm ju," pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld. "kæn jə tɛl əs wʌt tə ɪkspɛkt wʌns ɪn ə waɪl, ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɪkspleɪnɪŋ æftɝ ɪt hæpənz?" ənoʊ lʊkt əz ðoʊ hi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə θɪŋk ʌv ə ɹizən tə liv.

"There's always something new from you," Perrin growled. "Can't you tell us what to expect once in a while, instead of explaining after it happens?" Uno looked as though he was trying to think of a reason to leave.

mɔɪɹeɪn ɡeɪv pɛɹɪn ə flæt lʊk. "ju wɑn mi tə ʃɛɹ ə laɪftaɪm ə nɑlədʒ wɪð jə ɪn ə sɪŋɡəl æftɝnun? əɹ ivən ə sɪŋɡəl jɪɹ? əl tɛl jə ðɪs. bi wɛɹi ʌv dʒɹimz, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. bi vɛɹi wɛɹi ʌv dʒɹimz."

Moiraine gave Perrin a flat look. "You want me to share a lifetime of knowledge with you in a single afternoon? Or even a single year? I will tell you this. Be wary of dreams, Perrin Aybara. Be very wary of dreams."

hi pʊld ɪz aɪz əweɪ fɹəm hɝz. "aɪ æm," hi mɝmɝd. "aɪ æm."

He pulled his eyes away from hers. "I am," he murmured. "I am."

æftɝ ðæt, saɪləns, ən noʊ wʌn sim tə wɑnə bɹeɪk ɪt. mɪn sæt stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ kɹɔst æŋkəlz, bʌɾ əpɛɹənli teɪkɪŋ səm kʌmfɝt fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪnz pɹɛzəns. ənoʊ stʊɾ əɡɛns ðə wɔl, nɑt lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɛniwʌn. lɔɪəl fɝɡɑt hɪmsɛlf ɪnʌf tə pʊl ə bʊk fɹəm ɪz koʊt pɑkəɾ ən tʃɹaɪ tə ɹiɾ ɪn ðə dɪm laɪt. ðə weɪt wɑz lɔŋ, ən fɑɹ fɹəm izi fəɹ pɛɹɪn. ɪts nɑt ðə ʃædoʊ ɪn maɪ dʒɹimz aɪm əfɹeɪɾ ʌv. ɪts wʊlvz. əl nɑt lɛɾ əm ɪn. aɪ woʊnt!

After that, silence, and no one seemed to want to break it. Min sat staring at her crossed ankles, but apparently taking some comfort from Moiraine's presence. Uno stood against the wall, not looking at anyone. Loial forgot himself enough to pull a book from his coat pocket and try to read in the dim light. The wait was long, and far from easy for Perrin. It's not the Shadow in my dreams I'm afraid of. It's wolves. I will not let them in. I won't!

læn ɹɪtɝnd, ən mɔɪɹeɪn stʃɹeɪɾənd iɡɝli. ðə wɔɹɾɝ ænsɝd ðə kwɛstʃən ɪn əɹ aɪz. "hæf ə ðɛm ɹɪmɛmbɝ dʒɹimɪŋ ə sɔɹdz ðə læs fɔɹ naɪts ɹʌnɪŋ. səm ɹɪmɛmbɝ ə pleɪs wɪð ɡɹeɪt kɑləmz, ən faɪv seɪ ðə sɔɹd wɑz kɹɪstəl, əɹ ɡlæs. mæsimə sɛz i sɔ ɹænd hoʊldɪŋ ɪt læs naɪt."

Lan returned, and Moiraine straightened eagerly. The Warder answered the question in her eyes. "Half of them remember dreaming of swords the last four nights running. Some remember a place with great columns, and five say the sword was crystal, or glass. Masema says he saw Rand holding it last night."

"ðæt wʌn wʊd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. ʃi ɹʌbd əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ bɹɪskli; ʃi sim sʌɾənli fʊl ʌv ɛnɝdʒi. "naʊ aɪm sɝɾən. ðoʊ aɪ stɪl wɪʃ aɪ nu haʊ hi lɛf hɪɹ ənsin. ɪf hiz ɹiɾɪskʌvɝd səm tælən fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. . . ."

"That one would," Moiraine said. She rubbed her hands together briskly; she seemed suddenly full of energy. "Now I am certain. Though I still wish I knew how he left here unseen. If he has rediscovered some Talent from the Age of Legends. . . ."

læn lʊkt əɾ ənoʊ, ən ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn ʃɹʌɡd ɪn dɪsmeɪ. "aɪ blʌɾi fɝɡɑt, wɪð ɔl ðɪs fleɪmɪŋ tɔk əbaʊt blu - " hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt, ʃuɾɪŋ ə ɡlæns ət mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃi lʊk bæk ɪkspɛktənli, ən i wɛn ɑn. "aɪ min . . . ʌ . . . ðəɾ ɪz, aɪ fɑloʊd ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡənz tʃɹæks. ðɛɹz ənʌðɝ weɪ ɪndə ðət kloʊz væli, naʊ. ðə . . . ði ɝθkweɪk bɹɔt daʊn ðə fɑɹ wɔl. ɪts ə hɑɹd klaɪm, bʌt jə kən ɡɛɾ ə hɔɹs ʌp ɪt. aɪ faʊn mɔɹ tʃɹæks ət ðə tɑp, ən ðɛɹz ən izi weɪ fɹəm ðəɹ ɝaʊn ðə maʊntən." hi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ wən i wɑz dʌn.

Lan looked at Uno, and the one-eyed man shrugged in dismay. "I bloody forgot, with all this flaming talk about bloo - " He cleared his throat, shooting a glance at Moiraine. She looked back expectantly, and he went on. "I mean . . . uh . . . that is, I followed the Lord Dragon's tracks. There's another way into that closed valley, now. The . . . the earthquake brought down the far wall. It's a hard climb, but you can get a horse up it. I found more tracks at the top, and there's an easy way from there around the mountain." He let out a long breath when he was done.

"ɡʊd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "æt lis hiz nɑt ɹiɾɪskʌvɝd haʊ tə flaɪ, əɹ meɪk hɪmsɛlf ɪnvɪzəbəl, əɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls aʊɾ ə lɛdʒənd. wi mʌs fɑloʊ hɪm wɪθaʊt dɪleɪ. ənoʊ, əl ɡɪv jə ɪnʌf ɡoʊl tə teɪk jə ən ði ʌðɝz əz fɑɹ əz dʒəhænə, ən ðə neɪm ə sʌmwʌn ðəɹ u wɪl si ðət jə ɡɛt mɔɹ. ðə ɡildænɪn ɑɹ wɛɹi ʌv stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, bʌɾ ɪf jə kip tə jʊɹsɛlvz, ðeɪ ʃəd nɑt tʃɹʌbəl ju. weɪt ðəɹ əntɪl aɪ sɛnd wɝd."

"Good," Moiraine said. "At least he has not rediscovered how to fly, or make himself invisible, or something else out of legend. We must follow him without delay. Uno, I will give you enough gold to take you and the others as far as Jehannah, and the name of someone there who will see that you get more. The Ghealdanin are wary of strangers, but if you keep to yourselves, they should not trouble you. Wait there until I send word."

"bʌt wɪl ɡoʊ wɪð ju," hi pɹətɛstəd. "wi hæv ɔl swɔɹn tə fɑloʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. aɪ də nɑt si haʊ ðə fju ʌv əs kən teɪk ə fɔɹtʃɹəs ðəɾ əz nɛvɝ fɔlən, bʌt wɪð ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡənz eɪd, wɪl də wʌt mʌs bi dʌn."

"But we will go with you," he protested. "We have all sworn to follow the Dragon Reborn. I do not see how the few of us can take a fortress that has never fallen, but with the Lord Dragon's aid, we will do what must be done."

"soʊ wəɹ 'ðə pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən,' naʊ." pɛɹɪn læf mɝθləsli. " 'ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ wɪl nɛvɝ fɔl tɪl ðə pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən kʌm.' hæv jə ɡɪvən əs ə nu neɪm, mɔɪɹeɪn?"

"So we are 'the People of the Dragon,' now." Perrin laughed mirthlessly. " 'The Stone of Tear will never fall till the People of the Dragon come.' Have you given us a new name, Moiraine?"

"wɑtʃ jəɹ tʌŋ, blæksmɪθ," læn ɡɹaʊld, ɔl aɪs ən stoʊn.

"Watch your tongue, blacksmith," Lan growled, all ice and stone.

mɔɪɹeɪn ɡeɪv əm boʊθ ʃɑɹp lʊks, ən ðeɪ fɛl saɪlənt. "fɝɡɪv mi, ənoʊ," ʃi sɛd, "bʌt wi mʌs tʃɹævəl kwɪkli ɪf wəɹ tə hæv ə hoʊp ʌv oʊvɝteɪkɪŋ hɪm. jə ɑɹ ði oʊnli ʃaɪnɝən fɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə hɑɹd ɹaɪd, ən wi kænɑɾ əfɔɹd ðə deɪz ði ʌðɝz wɪl nid tə ɹɪɡeɪn fʊl stʃɹɛŋkθ. əl sɛn fəɹ jə wən aɪ kæn."

Moiraine gave them both sharp looks, and they fell silent. "Forgive me, Uno," she said, "but we must travel quickly if we are to have a hope of overtaking him. You are the only Shienaran fit enough for a hard ride, and we cannot afford the days the others will need to regain full strength. I will send for you when I can."

ənoʊ ɡɹɪməst, bʌɾ i baʊɾ ɪn ækwiɛsəns. əɾ əɹ dɪsmɪsəl, hi skwɛɹɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən lɛf tə tɛl ði ʌðɝz.

Uno grimaced, but he bowed in acquiescence. At her dismissal, he squared his shoulders and left to tell the others.

"wɛl, aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ əlɔŋ, wʌtɛvɝ jə seɪ," mɪn pʊɾ ɪn fɝmli.

"Well, I am going along, whatever you say," Min put in firmly.

"ju ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn," mɔɪɹeɪn toʊl hɝ.

"You are going to Tar Valon," Moiraine told her.

"aɪ æm noʊ sətʃ θɪŋ!"

"I am no such thing!"

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛn ɑn smuðli əz ɪf ði ʌðɝ wʊmən hæd nɑt spoʊkən. "ði æmɪɝlɪn sit mʌs bi toʊld wʌɾ əz hæpənd, ən aɪ kænɑt kaʊn ɑn faɪndɪŋ wʌn aɪ kən tʃɹʌst u hæz mɛsənʒɝ pɪdʒənz. əɹ ðət ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪl si ɛni mɛsədʒ aɪ sɛn baɪ pɪdʒən. ɪts ə lɔŋ dʒɝni, ən hɑɹd. aɪ wəd nɑt sɛn jə əloʊn ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ɛniwʌn tə sɛnd wɪð ju, bʌɾ əl si juv mʌni, ən lɛɾɝz tə ðoʊz u maɪt hɛlp jə ɑn jəɹ weɪ. jə mʌst ɹaɪd kwɪkli, ðoʊ. wən jəɹ hɔɹs taɪɝz, baɪ ənʌðɝ - əɹ stil wʌn, ɪf jə mʌst - bʌt ɹaɪd kwɪkli."

The Aes Sedai went on smoothly as if the other woman had not spoken. "The Amyrlin Seat must be told what has happened, and I cannot count on finding one I can trust who has messenger pigeons. Or that the Amyrlin will see any message I send by pigeon. It is a long journey, and hard. I would not send you alone if there were anyone to send with you, but I will see you have money, and letters to those who might help you on your way. You must ride quickly, though. When your horse tires, buy another - or steal one, if you must - but ride quickly."

"lɛɾ ənoʊ teɪk jəɹ mɛsədʒ. hiz fɪt; jə sɛd soʊ. aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ æftɝ ɹænd."

"Let Uno take your message. He's fit; you said so. I am going after Rand."

"ənoʊ hæz ɪz duɾiz, mɪn. ən dʒju θɪŋk ə mæn kəd sɪmpli wɔk ʌp tə ðə ɡeɪts ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən dɪmæn ən ɑɾiəns wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn sit? ivən ə kɪŋ wəd bi meɪd tə weɪt deɪz ɪf i ɝaɪvd ʌnənaʊnst, ən aɪ fɪɹ ɛni ʌv ðə ʃaɪnɝənz wəd bi lɛf kɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ hilz fəɹ wiks, ɪf nɑt fɝɛvɝ. nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðət sʌmθɪŋ soʊ ənjuʒəwəl wəd bi noʊn tə ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn bɪfɔɹ ðə fɝst sʌnsɛt. fju wɪmən sik ɑɾiənsəz wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn hɝsɛlf, bʌɾ ɪt dʌz hæpən, ən ɪt ʃəɾ əkeɪʒən noʊ ɡɹeɪt kɑmɛnt. noʊ wʌn mʌs lɝn ivən əz mʌtʃ əz ðət ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ əz ɹəsivd ə mɛsədʒ fɹəm mi. hɝ laɪf - ən aʊɝz - kəd dɪpɛn ɑn ɪt. jə ɑɹ ðə wʌn u mʌst ɡoʊ."

"Uno has his duties, Min. And do you think a man could simply walk up to the gates of the White Tower and demand an audience with the Amyrlin Seat? Even a king would be made to wait days if he arrived unannounced, and I fear any of the Shienarans would be left kicking their heels for weeks, if not forever. Not to mention that something so unusual would be known to everyone in Tar Valon before the first sunset. Few women seek audiences with the Amyrlin herself, but it does happen, and it should occasion no great comment. No one must learn even as much as that the Amyrlin Seat has received a message from me. Her life - and ours - could depend on it. You are the one who must go."

mɪn sæt ðəɹ oʊpənɪŋ ən kloʊzɪŋ əɹ maʊθ, ɑbviəsli sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ənʌðɝ ɑɹɡjəmənt, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɔn ɑn. "læn, aɪ vɛɹi mʌtʃ fɪɹ wɪl faɪn mɔɹ ɛvəɾəns ə hɪz pæsɪŋ ðən aɪ wəd laɪk, bʌɾ əl ɹɪlaɪ ɑn jəɹ tʃɹækɪŋ." ðə wɔɹɾɝ nɑɾəd. "pɛɹɪn? lɔɪəl? wɪl jə kʌm wɪð mi æftɝ ɹænd?" fɹəm əɹ pleɪs əɡɛns ðə wɔl, mɪn ɡeɪv ən ɪndɪɡnən skwɔk, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪt.

Min sat there opening and closing her mouth, obviously searching for another argument, but Moiraine had already gone on. "Lan, I very much fear we will find more evidence of his passing than I would like, but I will rely on your tracking." The Warder nodded. "Perrin? Loial? Will you come with me after Rand?" From her place against the wall, Min gave an indignant squawk, but the Aes Sedai ignored it.

"aɪ wɪl kʌm," lɔɪəl sɛd kwɪkli. "ɹæn ɪz maɪ fɹɛnd. ən əl ədmɪɾ ɪt; aɪ wəd nɑt mɪs ɛniθɪŋ. fəɹ maɪ bʊk, jə si."

"I will come," Loial said quickly. "Rand is my friend. And I will admit it; I would not miss anything. For my book, you see."

pɛɹɪn wɑz sloʊɝ tə ænsɝ. ɹænd wɑz ɪz fɹɛnd, wʌtɛvɝ i hæd bɪkʌm ɪn ðə fɔɹdʒɪŋ. ən ðəɹ wɑz ðət nɪɹ sɝɾənti ʌv ðɛɹ fjutʃɝz biɪŋ lɪŋkt, ðoʊ hi wʊɾə əvɔɪɾəd ðət pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪɾ ɪf i kʊd. "ɪɾ əz tə bi dʌn, dʌzn ɪt?" hi sɛd faɪnəli. "aɪ wɪl kʌm."

Perrin was slower to answer. Rand was his friend, whatever he had become in the forging. And there was that near certainty of their futures being linked, though he would have avoided that part of it if he could. "It has to be done, doesn't it?" he said finally. "I will come."

"ɡʊd." mɔɪɹeɪn ɹʌbd əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ əɡɛn, wɪð ði ɛɹ ə sʌmwʌn sɛɾəlɪŋ tə wɝk. "ju mʌst ɔl ɹɛɾi jʊɹsɛlvz ət wʌns. ɹænd əz aʊɝz ɑn ʌs. aɪ min tə bi wɛl əlɔŋ ɪz tʃɹeɪl bɪfɔɹ mɪddeɪ."

"Good." Moiraine rubbed her hands together again, with the air of someone settling to work. "You must all ready yourselves at once. Rand has hours on us. I mean to be well along his trail before midday."

slɛndɝ əz ʃi wɑz, ðə fɔɹs ə hɝ pɹɛzəns hɝɾɪd ɔl ə ðɛm bʌt læn təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ, lɔɪəl wɔkɪŋ stupt oʊvɝ əntɪl i wɑz θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ. pɛɹɪn θɔɾ ʌv ə ɡʊdwaɪf hɝɾɪŋ ɡis.

Slender as she was, the force of her presence herded all of them but Lan toward the door, Loial walking stooped over until he was through the doorway. Perrin thought of a goodwife herding geese.

wʌns aʊtsaɪd, mɪn hʌŋ bæk fəɹ ə moʊmən tə ædʒɹɛs læn wɪð ə tu-swit smaɪl. "æn ɪz ðəɹ ɛni mɛsədʒ jə wɑn kæɹid? tə nɪneɪiv, pɝhæps?"

Once outside, Min hung back for a moment to address Lan with a too-sweet smile. "And is there any message you want carried? To Nynaeve, perhaps?"

ðə wɔɹɾɝ blɪŋkt əz ɪf kɑɾ ɔf ɡɑɹd, laɪk ə hɔɹs ɑn θɹi lɛɡz. "dʌz ɛvɹiwʌn noʊ - ?" hi ɹiɡeɪn ɪz bæləns ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli. "ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ʃi nidz tə hɪɹ fɹəm mi, əl tɛl əɹ maɪsɛlf." hi kloʊz ðə dɔɹ nɪɹli ɪn əɹ feɪs.

The Warder blinked as if caught off guard, like a horse on three legs. "Does everyone know - ?" He regained his balance almost immediately. "If there is anything else she needs to hear from me, I will tell her myself." He closed the door nearly in her face.

"mɛn!" mɪn mʌɾɝd ət ðə dɔɹ. "tu blaɪn tə si wʌɾ ə stoʊn kəd si, ən tu stʌbɝn tə bi tʃɹʌstɪd tə θɪŋk fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz."

"Men!" Min muttered at the door. "Too blind to see what a stone could see, and too stubborn to be trusted to think for themselves."

pɛɹɪn ɪnheɪl dipli. feɪn smɛlz ə dɛθ stɪl hʌŋ ɪn ðə væli ɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən ðə kloʊsnɪs ɪnsaɪd. səm bɛɾɝ.

Perrin inhaled deeply. Faint smells of death still hung in the valley air, but it was better than the closeness inside. Some better.

"klin ɛɹ," lɔɪəl saɪd. "ðə smoʊk wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə bɑðɝ mi ə lɪɾəl."

"Clean air," Loial sighed. "The smoke was beginning to bother me a little."

ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd daʊn ðə sloʊp təɡɛðɝ. bɪsaɪd ðə stʃɹim bɪloʊ, ðə ʃaɪnɝənz u kəd stænd wɝ ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ənoʊ. fɹəm ɪz dʒɛstʃɝz ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn wɑz meɪkɪŋ ʌp fəɹ lɔs taɪm wɪð ɪz kɝsɪŋ.

They started down the slope together. Beside the stream below, the Shienarans who could stand were gathered around Uno. From his gestures the one-eyed man was making up for lost time with his cursing.

"haʊ dɪd jə tu bɪkʌm pɹɪvlədʒd?" mɪn dɪmændəɾ əbɹʌpli. "ʃi æsk ju. ʃi dɪdn də mi ðə kɝɾəsi ʌv æskɪŋ."

"How did you two become privileged?" Min demanded abruptly. "She asked you. She didn't do me the courtesy of asking."

lɔɪəl ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ θɪŋk ʃi æskt kəz ʃi nu wʌt wi wəɾ ænsɝ, mɪn. mɔɪɹeɪn simz eɪbəl tə ɹid pɛɹɪn ən mi; ʃi noʊz wʌt wɪl du. bʌt jə ɑɹ ə kloʊz bʊk tə hɝ."

Loial shook his head. "I think she asked because she knew what we would answer, Min. Moiraine seems able to read Perrin and me; she knows what we'll do. But you are a closed book to her."

mɪn əpɪɹɾ oʊnli ə lɪɾəl mɑləfaɪd. ʃi lʊkt ʌp ət ðɛm, pɛɹɪn hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz tɔlɝ ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ən lɔɪəl taʊɝɪŋ ivən haɪɝ ɑn ði ʌðɝ. "mʌtʃ ɡʊɾ ɪt dʌz mi. aɪm stɪl ɡoʊɪŋ wɛɹ ʃi wɑns əz izəli əz jə tu lɪɾəl læmz. jə wɝ duɪŋ wɛl fəɹ ə waɪl, pɛɹɪn. stændɪŋ ʌp tə hɝ laɪk ʃid soʊl jə ə koʊɾ ən ðə simz wɝ pɑpɪŋ oʊpən."

Min appeared only a little mollified. She looked up at them, Perrin head and shoulders taller on one side and Loial towering even higher on the other. "Much good it does me. I am still going where she wants as easily as you two little lambs. You were doing well for a while, Perrin. Standing up to her like she'd sold you a coat and the seams were popping open."

"aɪ dɪd stæn ʌp tə hɝ, dɪdn aɪ," pɛɹɪn sɛd wʌndɝɪŋli. hi hæd nɑt ɹɪli ɹilaɪzd i hæd dʌn ðæt. "ɪt wɑz nɑt soʊ bæɾ əz aɪɾ əv θɔɾ ɪt wəd bi."

"I did stand up to her, didn't I," Perrin said wonderingly. He had not really realized he had done that. "It was not so bad as I'd have thought it would be."

"ju wɝ lʌki," lɔɪəl ɹʌmbəld. " 'tə æŋɡɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz tə pʊt jəɹ hɛɾ ɪn ə hɔɹnɪts nɛst.' "

"You were lucky," Loial rumbled. " 'To anger an Aes Sedai is to put your head in a hornet's nest.' "

"lɔɪəl," mɪn sɛd, "aɪ nid tə spik tə pɛɹɪn. əloʊn. wəd jə maɪnd?"

"Loial," Min said, "I need to speak to Perrin. Alone. Would you mind?"

"oʊ. ʌv kɔɹs nɑt." hi lɛŋθən ɪz stʃɹaɪd tə ɪts nɔɹməl spæn ən kwɪkli muvd əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, pʊlɪŋ ɪz paɪp ən təbæk paʊtʃ fɹəm ə koʊt pɑkət.

"Oh. Of course not." He lengthened his stride to its normal span and quickly moved ahead of them, pulling his pipe and tabac pouch from a coat pocket.

pɛɹɪn aɪɾ əɹ wɛɹəli. ʃi wɑz baɪɾɪŋ əɹ lɪp, əz ɪf kənsɪɾɝɪŋ wʌt tə seɪ. "du jə ɛvɝ si θɪŋz əbaʊt hɪm?" hi æskt, nɑɾɪŋ æftɝ ði oʊɡiɝ.

Perrin eyed her warily. She was biting her lip, as if considering what to say. "Do you ever see things about him?" he asked, nodding after the Ogier.

ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "aɪ θɪŋk ɪɾ oʊnli wɝks wɪð hjumənz. bʌɾ aɪv sin θɪŋz ɝaʊn jə ðət jə ɔt tə noʊ əbaʊt."

She shook her head. "I think it only works with humans. But I've seen things around you that you ought to know about."

"aɪv toʊl jə - "

"I've told you - "

"doʊn bi mɔɹ θɪkhɛɾɪd ðən juv tə bi, pɛɹɪn. bæk ðɛɹ, ɹaɪɾ æftɝ jə sɛd jud ɡoʊ. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ. ðeɪ mʌst əv tə də wɪð ðɪs dʒɝni. əɹ ət list wɪð jə dəsaɪɾɪŋ tə ɡoʊ."

"Don't be more thickheaded than you have to be, Perrin. Back there, right after you said you'd go. They were not there before. They must have to do with this journey. Or at least with you deciding to go."

æftɝ ə moʊmən i sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli, "wʌt dɪd jə si?"

After a moment he said reluctantly, "What did you see?"

"æn ilmən ɪn ə keɪdʒ," ʃi sɛd pɹɑmpli. "eɪ tuætɑn wɪð ə sɔɹd. ə fælkən ən ə hɔk, pɝtʃɪŋ ɑn jəɹ ʃoʊldɝz. boʊθ fimeɪl, aɪ θɪŋk. ən ɔl ðə ɹɛst, ʌv kɔɹs. wʌɾ ɪz ɔlweɪz ðɛɹ. dɑɹknəs swɝlɪŋ 'ɹaʊn ju, ən - "

"An Aielman in a cage," she said promptly. "A Tuatha'an with a sword. A falcon and a hawk, perching on your shoulders. Both female, I think. And all the rest, of course. What is always there. Darkness swirling 'round you, and - "

"nʌn ə ðæt!" hi sɛd kwɪkli. wən i wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi hæd stɑpt, hi skɹætʃt ɪz hɛd, θɪŋkɪŋ. nʌn ʌv ɪt meɪɾ ɛni sɛns tə hɪm. "du juv ɛni aɪdiə wʌɾ ɪɾ ɔl minz? ðə nu θɪŋz, aɪ min."

"None of that!" he said quickly. When he was sure she had stopped, he scratched his head, thinking. None of it made any sense to him. "Do you have any idea what it all means? The new things, I mean."

"noʊ, bʌt ðəɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ðə θɪŋz aɪ si ɔlweɪz ɑɹ. tɝnɪŋ pɔɪns ɪn pipəlz laɪvz, əɹ wʌts feɪɾɪd. ɪts ɔlweɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɡlænsɪŋ ət hɪm. "wʌn mɔɹ θɪŋ," ʃi sɛd sloʊli. "ɪf jə miɾ ə wʊmən - ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl wʊmən juv ɛvɝ sin - ɹʌn!"

"No, but they're important. The things I see always are. Turning points in people's lives, or what's fated. It's always important." She hesitated for a moment, glancing at him. "One more thing," she said slowly. "If you meet a woman - the most beautiful woman you've ever seen - run!"

pɛɹɪn blɪŋkt. "ju sɔ ə bjuɾəfəl wʊmən? waɪ ʃəɾ aɪ ɹʌn fɹəm ə bjuɾəfəl wʊmən?"

Perrin blinked. "You saw a beautiful woman? Why should I run from a beautiful woman?"

"kæn jə dʒʌs teɪk ædvaɪs?" ʃi sɛɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. ʃi kɪkt əɾ ə stoʊn ən wɑtʃt ɪt ɹoʊl daʊn ðə sloʊp.

"Can't you just take advice?" she said irritably. She kicked at a stone and watched it roll down the slope.

pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt laɪk dʒʌmpɪŋ tə kənkluʒənz - ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðə ɹizənz səm pipəl θɔɾ ɪm sloʊ-wɪɾɪd - bʌɾ i toʊɾəld ʌp ə nʌmbɝ ə θɪŋz mɪn hæd sɛɾ ɪn ðə læs fju deɪz ən keɪm tə ə stɑɹtlɪŋ kənkluʒən. hi stɑp dɛd, hʌntɪŋ fəɹ wɝdz. "ʌ . . . mɪn, jə noʊ aɪ laɪk ju. aɪ laɪk ju, bʌt. . . . ʌ . . . jə sɔɹɾ ə ɹimaɪn mi ʌv maɪ sɪstɝz. aɪ min, ju. . . ." ðə floʊ stʌmbəl tə ə hɔlt əz ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd tə lʊk ət hɪm, aɪbɹaʊz ɑɹtʃt. ʃi wɔɹ ə smɔl smaɪl.

Perrin did not like jumping to conclusions - it was one of the reasons some people thought him slow-witted - but he totaled up a number of things Min had said in the last few days and came to a startling conclusion. He stopped dead, hunting for words. "Uh . . . Min, you know I like you. I like you, but. . . . Uh . . . you sort of remind me of my sisters. I mean, you. . . ." The flow stumbled to a halt as she raised her head to look at him, eyebrows arched. She wore a small smile.

"waɪ, pɛɹɪn, jə mʌs noʊ ðəɾ aɪ lʌv ju." ʃi stʊd ðɛɹ, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪz maʊθ wɝk, ðən spoʊk sloʊli ən kɛɹfəli. "laɪk ə bɹʌðɝ, jə ɡɹeɪt wʊɾən-hɛdəd lʌmɑks! ði ɛɹəɡəns ə mɛn nɛvɝ sisɪz tə əmeɪz mi. jə ɔl θɪŋk ɛvɹiθɪŋ əz tə də wɪð ju, ən ɛvɹi wʊmən əz tə dɪzaɪɝ ju."

"Why, Perrin, you must know that I love you." She stood there, watching his mouth work, then spoke slowly and carefully. "Like a brother, you great wooden-headed lummox! The arrogance of men never ceases to amaze me. You all think everything has to do with you, and every woman has to desire you."

pɛɹɪn fɛlt ɪz feɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ hɑt. "aɪ nɛvɝ. . . . aɪ dɪdnt. . . ." hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "wʌt dɪd jə si əbaʊɾ ə wʊmən?"

Perrin felt his face growing hot. "I never. . . . I didn't. . . ." He cleared his throat. "What did you see about a woman?"

"dʒʌs teɪk maɪ ædvaɪs," ʃi sɛd, ən stɑɹɾəd daʊn təwɔɹd ðə stʃɹim əɡɛn, wɔkɪŋ fæst. "ɪf jə fɝɡɛɾ ɔl ðə ɹɛst," ʃi kɔld oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, "hid ðæt!"

"Just take my advice," she said, and started down toward the stream again, walking fast. "If you forget all the rest," she called over her shoulder, "heed that!"

hi fɹaʊn æftɝ əɹ - fəɹ wʌns ɪz θɔts sim tə ɝeɪnʒ ðɛmsɛlvz kwɪkli - ðən kɑɾ ʌp ɪn tu stʃɹaɪdz. "ɪts ɹænd, ɪzən ɪt?"

He frowned after her - for once his thoughts seemed to arrange themselves quickly - then caught up in two strides. "It's Rand, isn't it?"

ʃi meɪɾ ə saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊɾ ən ɡeɪv ɪm ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk. ʃi dɪd nɑt sloʊ daʊn, ðoʊ. "meɪbi jə ɑɹən soʊ boʊnhɛɾɪd æftɝ ɔl," ʃi mʌɾɝd. æftɝ ə moʊmənt ʃi æɾəd, əz ɪf tə hɝsɛlf, "aɪm baʊn tə hɪm əz ʃʊɹli əz ə steɪv ɪz baʊn tə ðə bæɹəl. bʌɾ aɪ kæn si ɪf hɪl ɛvɝ lʌv mi ɪn ɹɪtɝn. ən aɪm nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn."

She made a sound in her throat and gave him a sidelong look. She did not slow down, though. "Maybe you aren't so boneheaded after all," she muttered. After a moment she added, as if to herself, "I'm bound to him as surely as a stave is bound to the barrel. But I can't see if he'll ever love me in return. And I am not the only one."

"dʌz ɛɡwin noʊ?" hi æskt. ɹænd ən ɛɡwin hæd bɪn ɔl bʌt pɹɑməst sɪns tʃaɪldhʊd. ɛvɹiθɪŋ bʌt nilɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl ə ðə vɪlədʒ tə spik ðə bɪtʃɹɑθɔl. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ fɑɹ ðeɪ hæd dʒɹɪftəd fɹəm ðæt, ɪf əɾ ɔl.

"Does Egwene know?" he asked. Rand and Egwene had been all but promised since childhood. Everything but kneeling in front of the Women's Circle of the village to speak the betrothal. He was not sure how far they had drifted from that, if at all.

"ʃi noʊz," mɪn sɛd kɝtli. "mʌtʃ ɡʊɾ ɪt dʌz iðɝ ʌv ʌs."

"She knows," Min said curtly. "Much good it does either of us."

"wʌɾ əbaʊt ɹænd? dʌz i noʊ?"

"What about Rand? Does he know?"

"oʊ, ʌv kɔɹs," ʃi sɛd bɪɾɝli. "aɪ toʊl hɪm, dɪdn aɪ? 'ɹænd, aɪ dɪɾ ə vjuɪŋ ə ju, ən ɪt simz aɪ hæv tə fɔl ɪn lʌv wɪð ju. aɪ hæv tə ʃɛɹ ju, tu, ən aɪ doʊn mʌtʃ laɪk ðæt, bʌt ðəɹ ɪɾ ɪz.' jəɹ ə wʊɾən-hɛdəd wʌndɝ æftɝ ɔl, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə." ʃi dæʃt ə hæn əkɹɔs əɹ aɪz æŋɡɹəli. "ɪf aɪ kəd bi wɪð hɪm, aɪ noʊ aɪ kəd hɛlp. sʌmhaʊ. laɪt, ɪf i daɪz, aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf aɪ kən stæn ɪt."

"Oh, of course," she said bitterly. "I told him, didn't I? 'Rand, I did a viewing of you, and it seems I have to fall in love with you. I have to share you, too, and I don't much like that, but there it is.' You're a wooden-headed wonder after all, Perrin Aybara." She dashed a hand across her eyes angrily. "If I could be with him, I know I could help. Somehow. Light, if he dies, I don't know if I can stand it."

pɛɹɪn ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli. "lɪsən, mɪn. əl də wʌɾ aɪ kən tə hɛlp hɪm." haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ðəɾ ɪz. "aɪ pɹɑməs jə ðæt. ɪt ɹɪli ɪz bɛs fəɹ jə tə ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. jəl bi seɪf ðɛɹ."

Perrin shrugged uncomfortably. "Listen, Min. I'll do what I can to help him." However much that is. "I promise you that. It really is best for you to go to Tar Valon. You'll be safe there."

"seɪf?" ʃi teɪstəd ðə wɝɾ əz ɪf wʌndɝɪŋ wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt. "ju θɪŋk tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪz seɪf?"

"Safe?" She tasted the word as if wondering what it meant. "You think Tar Valon is safe?"

"ɪf ðɛɹz noʊ seɪfti ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ðɛɹz noʊ seɪfti ɛniwɛɹ."

"If there's no safety in Tar Valon, there's no safety anywhere."

ʃi snɪf laʊdli, ən ɪn saɪləns ðeɪ wɛn tə dʒɔɪn ðoʊz pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə liv.

She sniffed loudly, and in silence they went to join those preparing to leave.


tʃæptɝ sɛvən


CHAPTER 7

ðə weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə maʊntənz


The Way Out of the Mountains

ðə weɪ daʊn aʊɾ ə ðə maʊntənz wɑz hɑɹd, bʌt ðə loʊɝ ðeɪ wɛnt, ðə lɛs pɛɹɪn niɾəd ɪz fɝ-laɪn kloʊk. aʊɝ baɪ aʊɝ, ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə teɪlɪŋz ʌv wɪntɝ ən ɪndə ðə fɝs deɪz ə spɹɪŋ. ðə læst ɹɛmnəns ə snoʊ vænɪʃt, ən ɡɹæsəz ən waɪldflaʊɹz - waɪt meɪɾənz hoʊp ən pɪŋk dʒʌmp ʌp - bɪɡæn tə kʌvɝ ðə haɪ mɛdoʊz ðeɪ kɹɔst. tʃɹiz əpɪɹd mɔɹ ɔfən, wɪð mɔɹ livz, ən ɡɹæslɑɹks ən ɹɑbənz sæŋ ɪn ðə bɹæntʃəz. ən ðəɹ wɝ wʊlvz. nɛvɝ ɪn saɪt - nɑɾ ivən læn mɛnʃən siɪŋ wʌn - bʌt pɛɹɪn nu. hi kɛpt ɪz maɪn fɝmli kloʊz tə ðɛm, jɛt naʊ ən əɡɛn ə fɛðɝ-laɪt tɪkəl ət ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪn ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ðeɪ wɝ ðɛɹ.

The way down out of the mountains was hard, but the lower they went, the less Perrin needed his fur-lined cloak. Hour by hour, they rode out of the tailings of winter and into the first days of spring. The last remnants of snow vanished, and grasses and wildflowers - white maiden's hope and pink jump up - began to cover the high meadows they crossed. Trees appeared more often, with more leaves, and grasslarks and robins sang in the branches. And there were wolves. Never in sight - not even Lan mentioned seeing one - but Perrin knew. He kept his mind firmly closed to them, yet now and again a feather-light tickle at the back of his mind reminded him they were there.

læn spɛn moʊst ə hɪz taɪm skaʊɾɪŋ ðɛɹ pæθ ɑn ɪz blæk wɔɹhɔɹs, mændɑɹb, fɑloʊɪŋ ɹændz tʃɹæks əz ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm fɑloʊd ðə saɪnz ðə wɔɹɾɝ lɛft fəɹ ðɛm. ən æɹoʊ ʌv stoʊnz leɪɾ aʊɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, əɹ wʌn laɪtli skɹætʃt ɪn ðə ɹɑk wɔl ʌv ə fɔɹkɪŋ pæs. tɝn ðɪs weɪ. kɹɔs ðət sæɾəlpæs. teɪk ðɪs swɪtʃbæk, ðɪs dɪɹ tʃɹeɪl, ðɪs weɪ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz ən daʊn əlɔŋ ə nɛɹoʊ stʃɹim, ivən ðoʊ ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ tə ɪndəkeɪɾ ɛniwʌn əz ɛvɝ ɡɔn ðət weɪ bɪfɔɹ. nʌθɪŋ bʌt lænz saɪnz. ə tʌft ʌv ɡɹæs əɹ widz taɪd wʌn weɪ tə seɪ bɛɹ lɛft, ənʌðɝ fəɹ bɛɹ ɹaɪt. ə bɛn bɹæntʃ. ə paɪl ə pɛbəlz fəɹ ə ɹʌf klaɪm əhɛd, tu livz kɑɾ ɑn ə θɔɹn fəɹ ə stip dɪsɛnt. ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd saɪnz, ɪt sim tə pɛɹɪn, ən mɔɪɹeɪn nu ðɛm ɔl. læn ɹɛɹli keɪm bæk ɪksɛpt wən ðeɪ meɪd kæmp, tə kənfɝ wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn kwaɪətli, əweɪ fɹəm ðə faɪɝ. wən ðə sʌn ɹoʊz, moʊst ɔfən i wɑz aʊɝz ɡɔn ɔlɹɛɾi.

Lan spent most of his time scouting their path on his black warhorse, Mandarb, following Rand's tracks as the rest of them followed the signs the Warder left for them. An arrow of stones laid out on the ground, or one lightly scratched in the rock wall of a forking pass. Turn this way. Cross that saddlepass. Take this switchback, this deer trail, this way through the trees and down along a narrow stream, even though there is nothing to indicate anyone has ever gone that way before. Nothing but Lan's signs. A tuft of grass or weeds tied one way to say bear left, another for bear right. A bent branch. A pile of pebbles for a rough climb ahead, two leaves caught on a thorn for a steep descent. The Warder had a hundred signs, it seemed to Perrin, and Moiraine knew them all. Lan rarely came back except when they made camp, to confer with Moiraine quietly, away from the fire. When the sun rose, most often he was hours gone already.

mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz ɔlweɪz fɝst ɪndə ðə sæɾəl æftɝ hɪm, waɪl ði istɝn skaɪ wɑz dʒʌs tɝnɪŋ pɪŋk. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd nɑɾ əv klaɪm daʊn fɹəm ɑldib, hɝ waɪt mɛɹ, əntɪl fʊl dɑɹk əɹ leɪɾɝ, ɪksɛp ðət læn ɹəfjuz tə tʃɹæk fɝðɝ wʌns ðə laɪt bɪɡæn tə feɪl.

Moiraine was always first into the saddle after him, while the eastern sky was just turning pink. The Aes Sedai would not have climbed down from Aldieb, her white mare, until full dark or later, except that Lan refused to track further once the light began to fail.

"wil ɡoʊ ivən sloʊɝ ɪf ə hɔɹs bɹeɪks ə lɛɡ," ðə wɔɹɾɝ wəd tɛl mɔɪɹeɪn wən ʃi kəmpleɪnd.

"We'll go even slower if a horse breaks a leg," the Warder would tell Moiraine when she complained.

hɝ ɹɪplaɪ wɑz ɔlweɪz vɛɹi mʌtʃ ðə seɪm. "ɪf jə kænɑt muv ɛni fæstɝ ðən ðɪs, pɝhæps aɪ ʃəd sɛn jə ɔf tə maɪɹɛl bɪfɔɹ jə ɡɛɾ ɛni oʊldɝ. wɛl, pɝhæps ðət kən weɪt, bʌt jə mʌs muv əs fæstɝ."

Her reply was always very much the same. "If you cannot move any faster than this, perhaps I should send you off to Myrelle before you get any older. Well, perhaps that can wait, but you must move us faster."

ʃi hæf saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ðə θɹɛt wɝ ɪɹəteɪɾəd tʃɹuθ, hæf əz ɪf ʃi wɝ meɪkɪŋ ə dʒoʊk. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə θɹɛɾ ɪn ɪt, əɹ meɪbi ə wɔɹnɪŋ, pɛɹɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ, fɹəm ðə weɪ lænz maʊθ taɪɾənd ivən wən ʃi smaɪld æftɝwɝdz ən ɹitʃt ʌp tə pæɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ suðɪŋli.

She half sounded as if the threat were irritated truth, half as if she were making a joke. There was something of a threat in it, or maybe a warning, Perrin was sure, from the way Lan's mouth tightened even when she smiled afterwards and reached up to pat his shoulder soothingly.

"hu ɪz maɪɹɛl?" pɛɹɪn æsk səspɪʃəsli, ðə fɝs taɪm ɪt hæpənd. lɔɪəl ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, mɝmɝɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ənplɛzən θɪŋz hæpənɪŋ tə ðoʊz u pɹaɪɾ ɪndə ɛɛs sədaɪ əfɛɹz. ði oʊɡiɝz hɛɹi-fɛtlɑk hɔɹs wɑz əz tɔl ən hɛvi əz ə dɝən stæljən, bʌt wɪð lɔɪəlz lɔŋ lɛɡz dæŋɡəlɪŋ tə iðɝ saɪd, ði ænəməl lʊkt ʌndɝsaɪzd, laɪk ə lɑɹdʒ poʊni.

"Who is Myrelle?" Perrin asked suspiciously, the first time it happened. Loial shook his head, murmuring something about unpleasant things happening to those who pried into Aes Sedai affairs. The Ogier's hairy-fetlocked horse was as tall and heavy as a Dhurran stallion, but with Loial's long legs dangling to either side, the animal looked undersized, like a large pony.

mɔɪɹeɪn ɡeɪv ən əmjuzd, sikɹəɾɪv smaɪl. "dʒʌst ə ɡɹin sɪstɝ. sʌmwʌn tə hum læn mʌst wʌn deɪ dɪlɪvɝ ə pækədʒ fəɹ seɪfkipɪŋ."

Moiraine gave an amused, secretive smile. "Just a Green sister. Someone to whom Lan must one day deliver a package for safekeeping."

"noʊ deɪ sun," læn sɛd, ən sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ðəɹ wɑz oʊpən æŋɡɝ ɪn ɪz vɔɪs. "nɛvɝ, ɪf aɪ kən hɛlp ɪt. jəl aʊtlɪv mi lɔŋ, mɔɪɹeɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ!"

"No day soon," Lan said, and surprisingly, there was open anger in his voice. "Never, if I can help it. You will outlive me long, Moiraine Aes Sedai!"

ʃiz tu mɛni sikɹəts, pɛɹɪn θɔt, bʌɾ æsk noʊ mɔɹ əbaʊɾ ə sʌbʒɪkt ðət kəd kɹæk ðə wɔɹɾɝz aɪɝn sɛlf-kəntʃɹoʊl.

She has too many secrets, Perrin thought, but asked no more about a subject that could crack the Warder's iron self-control.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ ə blæŋkət-ɹæp bʌndəl taɪd bɪhaɪn əɹ sæɾəl: ðə dʒɹæɡən bænɝ. pɛɹɪn wɑz ənizi əbaʊt hævɪŋ ɪt wɪð ðɛm, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn hæd niðɝ æskt ɪz əpɪnjən nɔɹ lɪsənd wən i ɔfɝɾ ɪt. nɑt ðəɾ ɛniwʌn wɑz laɪkli tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɪɾ ɪf i sɔ ɪt, jɛɾ i hoʊpt ʃi wɑz əz ɡʊɾ ət kipɪŋ sikɹəts fɹəm ʌðɝ pipəl əz ʃi wɑz ət kipɪŋ əm fɹəm hɪm.

The Aes Sedai had a blanket-wrapped bundle tied behind her saddle: the Dragon banner. Perrin was uneasy about having it with them, but Moiraine had neither asked his opinion nor listened when he offered it. Not that anyone was likely to recognize it if he saw it, yet he hoped she was as good at keeping secrets from other people as she was at keeping them from him.

ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, ət list, ɪt wɑz ə bɔɹɪŋ dʒɝni. wʌn klaʊd-kæp maʊntən wɑz vɛɹi mʌtʃ laɪk ənʌðɝ, wʌn pæs lɪɾəl dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə nɛkst. sʌpɝ wɑz juʒəwəli ɹæbət, dʒɹɑp baɪ stoʊnz fɹəm pɛɹɪnz slɪŋ. hi dɪd nɑɾ əv soʊ mɛni æɹoʊz əz tə ɹɪsk ʃuɾɪŋ ət ɹæbəts ɪn ðət ɹɑki kʌntʃɹi. bɹɛkfəst wɑz koʊld ɹæbət, mɔɹ ɔfən ðən nɑt, ən ðə mɪddeɪ mil ðə seɪm, iɾən ɪn ðə sæɾəl.

In the beginning, at least, it was a boring journey. One cloud-capped mountain was very much like another, one pass little different from the next. Supper was usually rabbit, dropped by stones from Perrin's sling. He did not have so many arrows as to risk shooting at rabbits in that rocky country. Breakfast was cold rabbit, more often than not, and the midday meal the same, eaten in the saddle.

səmtaɪmz wən ðeɪ kæmp nɪɹ ə stʃɹim ən ðəɹ wɑz stɪl laɪɾ ɪnʌf tə si, hi ən lɔɪəl kɑt maʊntən tʃɹaʊt, laɪɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ bɛliz, hænz ɛlboʊ-dip ɪn ðə koʊld wɔɾɝ, tɪklɪŋ ðə ɡɹin-bæk fɪʃ aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə ɹɑk lɛdʒɪz wɛɹ ðeɪ hɪd. lɔɪəlz fɪŋɡɝz, bɪɡ əz ðeɪ wɝ, wɝ ivən mɔɹ dɛft əɾ ɪt ðən pɛɹɪnz.

Sometimes when they camped near a stream and there was still light enough to see, he and Loial caught mountain trout, lying on their bellies, hands elbow-deep in the cold water, tickling the green-backed fish out from under the rock ledges where they hid. Loial's fingers, big as they were, were even more deft at it than Perrin's.

wʌns, θɹi deɪz æftɝ sɛɾɪŋ aʊt, mɔɪɹeɪn dʒɔɪn ðɛm, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ hɝsɛlf aʊɾ ɑn ðə stʃɹimsaɪɾ ən ənduɪŋ ɹoʊz ə pɝl bʌɾənz tə ɹoʊl ʌp əɹ slivz əz ʃi æsk haʊ ðə θɪŋ wɑz dʌn. pɛɹɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd sɝpɹaɪz lʊks wɪð lɔɪəl. ði oʊɡiɝ ʃɹʌɡd.

Once, three days after setting out, Moiraine joined them, stretching herself out on the streamside and undoing rows of pearl buttons to roll up her sleeves as she asked how the thing was done. Perrin exchanged surprised looks with Loial. The Ogier shrugged.

"ɪɾ ɪz nɑt ðət hɑɹd, ɹɪli," pɛɹɪn toʊl hɝ. "dʒʌs bɹɪŋ jəɹ hæn ʌp fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə fɪʃ, ən ʌndɝniθ, əz ɪf jəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɪkəl ɪts bɛli. ðən jə pʊl ɪɾ aʊt. ɪt teɪks pɹæktəs, ðoʊ. jə maɪt nɑt kætʃ ɛniθɪŋ ðə fɝs fju taɪmz jə tʃɹaɪ."

"It is not that hard, really," Perrin told her. "Just bring your hand up from behind the fish, and underneath, as if you're trying to tickle its belly. Then you pull it out. It takes practice, though. You might not catch anything the first few times you try."

"aɪ tʃɹaɪd fəɹ deɪz bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɛvɝ kɑɾ ɛniθɪŋ," lɔɪəl æɾəd. hi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi izɪŋ ɪz hjudʒ hænz ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝ, kɛɹfəl tə kip ɪz ʃædoʊ fɹəm skɛɹɪŋ ðə fɪʃ.

"I tried for days before I ever caught anything," Loial added. He was already easing his huge hands into the water, careful to keep his shadow from scaring the fish.

"æz dɪfəkəlt əz ðæt?" mɔɪɹeɪn mɝmɝd. hɝ hænz slɪpt ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝ - ən ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ keɪm aʊt wɪð ə splæʃ, hoʊldɪŋ ə fæt tʃɹaʊt ðət θɹæʃt ðə sɝfəs. ʃi læft wɪð dɪlaɪɾ əz ʃi tɔst ɪɾ ʌp ɑntu ðə bæŋk.

"As difficult as that?" Moiraine murmured. Her hands slipped into the water - and a moment later came out with a splash, holding a fat trout that thrashed the surface. She laughed with delight as she tossed it up onto the bank.

pɛɹɪn blɪŋkt ət ðə bɪɡ fɪʃ flɑpɪŋ ɪn ðə feɪɾɪŋ sʌnlaɪt. ɪt mʌst əv weɪɾ ət lis faɪv paʊnz. "ju wɝ vɛɹi lʌki," hi sɛd. "tʃɹaʊt ðət saɪz doʊn ɔfən ʃɛltɝ ʌndɝ ə lɛdʒ ðɪs smɔl. wɪl əv tə muv ʌpstʃɹim ə bɪt. ɪɾəl bi dɑɹk bɪfɔɹ ɛni ʌv əm sɛɾəl ʌndɝ ðɪs lɛdʒ əɡɛn."

Perrin blinked at the big fish flopping in the fading sunlight. It must have weighed at least five pounds. "You were very lucky," he said. "Trout that size don't often shelter under a ledge this small. We'll have to move upstream a bit. It will be dark before any of them settle under this ledge again."

"ɪz ðət soʊ?" mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ju tu ɡoʊ əhɛd. aɪ θɪŋk əl dʒʌs tʃɹaɪ hɪɹ əɡɛn."

"Is that so?" Moiraine said. "You two go ahead. I think I will just try here again."

pɛɹɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ muvɪŋ ʌp ðə bæŋk tə ənʌðɝ oʊvɝhæŋ. ʃi wɑz ʌp tə sʌmθɪŋ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən wʌt. ðət tʃɹʌbəl hɪm. bɛli daʊn, ən kɛɹfəl nɑt tə lɛɾ ɪz ʃædoʊ fɔl ɑn ðə wɔɾɝ, hi pɪɹɾ oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ. hæf ə dʌzən slɛndɝ ʃeɪps hʌŋ səspɛndəɾ ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ, bɛɹli muvɪŋ ə fɪn tə hoʊl ðɛɹ pleɪsəz. ɔl ə ðɛm təɡɛðɝ wəd nɑt weɪ əz mʌtʃ əz mɔɪɹeɪnz fɪʃ, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd wɪð ə saɪ. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ lʌki, hi ən lɔɪəl maɪt teɪk tu əpis, bʌt ðə ʃædoʊz ə tʃɹiz ɑn ðə fɑɹ bæŋk ɔlɹɛɾi stʃɹɛtʃt əkɹɔs ðə wɔɾɝ. wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ kɑt naʊ wəd bi ɪt, ən lɔɪəlz æpətaɪt wɑz bɪɡ ɪnʌf baɪ ɪtsɛlf tə swɑloʊ ðoʊz fɔɹ ən moʊst ə ðə bɪɡɝ fɪʃ, tu. lɔɪəlz hænz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi izɪŋ ʌp bɪhaɪnd wʌn ə ðə tʃɹaʊt.

Perrin hesitated a moment before moving up the bank to another overhang. She was up to something, but he could not imagine what. That troubled him. Belly down, and careful not to let his shadow fall on the water, he peered over the edge. Half a dozen slender shapes hung suspended in the water, barely moving a fin to hold their places. All of them together would not weigh as much as Moiraine's fish, he decided with a sigh. If they were lucky, he and Loial might take two apiece, but the shadows of trees on the far bank already stretched across the water. Whatever they caught now would be it, and Loial's appetite was big enough by itself to swallow those four and most of the bigger fish, too. Loial's hands were already easing up behind one of the trout.

bɪfɔɹ pɛɹɪn kəɾ ivən slaɪɾ ɪz hænz ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝ, mɔɪɹeɪn ɡeɪv ə ʃaʊt. "θɹi ʃəd bi ɪnʌf, aɪ θɪŋk. ðə læs tu ɑɹ bɪɡɝ ðən ðə fɝst."

Before Perrin could even slide his hands into the water, Moiraine gave a shout. "Three should be enough, I think. The last two are bigger than the first."

pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv lɔɪəl ə stɑɹɾəld lʊk. "ʃi kæn hæv!"

Perrin gave Loial a startled look. "She can't have!"

ði oʊɡiɝ stʃɹeɪɾənd, sɛndɪŋ ðə smɔl tʃɹaʊt skæɾɝɪŋ. "ʃi ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ," hi sɛd sɪmpli.

The Ogier straightened, sending the small trout scattering. "She is Aes Sedai," he said simply.

ʃʊɹ ɪnʌf, wən ðeɪ ɹɪtɝn tə mɔɪɹeɪn, θɹi bɪɡ tʃɹaʊt leɪ ɑn ðə bæŋk. ʃi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi bʌtoʊnɪŋ əɹ slivz ʌp əɡɛn.

Sure enough, when they returned to Moiraine, three big trout lay on the bank. She was already buttoning her sleeves up again.

pɛɹɪn θɔɾ əbaʊt ɹimaɪndɪŋ əɹ ðət huɛvɝ tʊk ðə fɪʃ wɑz səpoʊz tə klin ðɛm, tu, bʌt dʒʌst ət ðət moʊmənt ʃi kɑɾ ɪz aɪ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɝtɪkjəlɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn əɹ smuð feɪs, bʌɾ əɹ dɑɹk aɪz dɪd nɑt weɪvɝ, ən ðeɪ əpɪɹd tə noʊ wʌɾ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə seɪ, ən tə hæv dɪsmɪst ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hæn ɔlɹɛɾi. wən ʃi tɝn əweɪ, ɪt sim sʌmhaʊ tu leɪt tə seɪ ɛniθɪŋ.

Perrin thought about reminding her that whoever took the fish was supposed to clean them, too, but just at that moment she caught his eye. There was no particular expression on her smooth face, but her dark eyes did not waver, and they appeared to know what he was going to say, and to have dismissed it out of hand already. When she turned away, it seemed somehow too late to say anything.

mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, pɛɹɪn pʊld aʊɾ ɪz bɛlknaɪf ən sɛt tə ðə ɡʌɾɪŋ ən hɛɾɪŋ. "ɔl ʌv ə sʌɾən ʃiz fɝɡɑɾən əbaʊt ʃɛɹɪŋ ðə tʃɔɹz, ɪt simz. aɪ səpoʊz ʃɪl wɑn əs tə də ðə kʊkɪŋ, əz wɛl, ən ðə klinɪŋ ʌp æftɝ."

Muttering to himself, Perrin pulled out his beltknife and set to the gutting and heading. "All of a sudden she's forgotten about sharing the chores, it seems. I suppose she'll want us to do the cooking, as well, and the cleaning up after."

"noʊ daʊt ʃi wɪl," lɔɪəl sɛd wɪθaʊt pɔzɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə fɪʃ i wɑz wɝkɪŋ ɑn. "ʃi ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"No doubt she will," Loial said without pausing over the fish he was working on. "She is Aes Sedai."

"aɪ sim tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ hɪɹɪŋ ðət sʌmwɛɹ." pɛɹɪnz naɪf ɹɪpt ɪndə ðə fɪʃ. "ðə ʃaɪnɝənz maɪɾ əv bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə ɹʌn ɝaʊn fɛtʃɪŋ ən kæɹiɪŋ fəɹ hɝ, bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ oʊnli fɔɹ ʌv əs naʊ. wi ʃəd kip ɑn tɝn ən tɝn əbaʊt. ɪts oʊnli fɛɹ."

"I seem to remember hearing that somewhere." Perrin's knife ripped into the fish. "The Shienarans might have been willing to run around fetching and carrying for her, but there are only four of us now. We should keep on turn and turn about. It's only fair."

lɔɪəl ɡeɪv ə ɡɹeɪt snɔɹɾ ə læftɝ. "aɪ daʊt ʃi siz ɪt ðət weɪ. fɝst ʃi hæd tə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɹænd ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð əɹ ɔl ðə taɪm, ən naʊ jəɹ ɹɛɾi tə teɪk oʊvɝ fəɹ hɪm. əz ə ɹul, ɛɛs sədaɪ də nɑt lɛɾ ɛniwʌn ɑɹɡju wɪð ðɛm. aɪ ɪkspɛkt ʃi minz tə hæv əs bæk ɪn ðə hæbəɾ ə duɪŋ wʌt ʃi sɛz baɪ ðə taɪm wi ɹitʃ ðə fɝs vɪlədʒ."

Loial gave a great snort of laughter. "I doubt she sees it that way. First she had to put up with Rand arguing with her all the time, and now you're ready to take over for him. As a rule, Aes Sedai do not let anyone argue with them. I expect she means to have us back in the habit of doing what she says by the time we reach the first village."

"ə ɡʊd hæbət tə bi ɪn," læn sɛd, θɹoʊɪŋ bæk ɪz kloʊk. ɪn ðə feɪɾɪŋ laɪɾ i hæɾ əpɪɹɾ aʊɾ ə noʊwɛɹ.

"A good habit to be in," Lan said, throwing back his cloak. In the fading light he had appeared out of nowhere.

pɛɹɪn nɪɹli fɛl oʊvɝ fɹəm sɝpɹaɪz, ən lɔɪəlz ɪɹz wɛn stɪf wɪð ʃɑk. niðɝ ə ðɛm hæd hɝd ðə wɔɹɾɝz stɛp.

Perrin nearly fell over from surprise, and Loial's ears went stiff with shock. Neither of them had heard the Warder's step.

"ə hæbət jə ʃəd nɛvɝ əv lɔst," læn æɾəd, ðən stʃɹoʊɾ ɔf təwɔɹd mɔɪɹeɪn ən ðə hɔɹsəz. hɪz buts bɛɹli meɪɾ ə saʊnd, ivən ɑn ðət ɹɑki ɡɹaʊnd, ən wʌns i wɑz ə fju peɪsɪz əweɪ ðə kloʊk hæŋɪŋ daʊn ɪz bæk ɡeɪv ɪm ði ənizi əpɪɹəns ʌv ə dɪsɪbɑɾid hɛɾ ən ɑɹmz dʒɹɪftɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ðə stʃɹim.

"A habit you should never have lost," Lan added, then strode off toward Moiraine and the horses. His boots barely made a sound, even on that rocky ground, and once he was a few paces away the cloak hanging down his back gave him the uneasy appearance of a disembodied head and arms drifting up from the stream.

"wi niɾ əɹ tə faɪn ɹænd," pɛɹɪn sɛd sɔfli, "bʌɾ aɪm nɑt gɑnə lɛɾ əɹ ʃeɪp maɪ laɪf ɛnimɔɹ." hi wɛn bæk tə hɪz klinɪŋ vɪɡɝəsli.

"We need her to find Rand," Perrin said softly, "but I am not going to let her shape my life anymore." He went back to his cleaning vigorously.

hi mɛn tə kip ðət pɹɑməs - hi ɹɪli dɪd - bʌt dʊɹɪŋ ðə deɪz ðət fɑloʊd, ɪn səm weɪ hi dɪd nɑt kwaɪɾ ʌndɝstænd, hi faʊn ðəɾ i ən lɔɪəl wɝ duɪŋ ðə kʊkɪŋ, ən ðə klinɪŋ ʌp, ən ɛni ʌðɝ lɪɾəl tʃɔɹ ðət mɔɪɹeɪn θɔɾ ʌv. hi ivən dɪskʌvɝd ðət sʌmhaʊ əɹ ʌðɝ i hæd teɪkən oʊvɝ tɛndɪŋ ɑldib ɛvɹi naɪt, ənsæɾəlɪŋ ðə mɛɹ ən ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ daʊn waɪl mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾəld hɝsɛlf, əpɛɹənli dip ɪn θɔt.

He meant to keep that promise - he really did - but during the days that followed, in some way he did not quite understand, he found that he and Loial were doing the cooking, and the cleaning up, and any other little chore that Moiraine thought of. He even discovered that somehow or other he had taken over tending Aldieb every night, unsaddling the mare and rubbing her down while Moiraine settled herself, apparently deep in thought.

lɔɪəl ɡeɪv ɪn tə ɪɾ əz ɪnɛvəɾəbəl, bʌt nɑt pɛɹɪn. hi tʃɹaɪd ɹəfjuzɪŋ, ɹɪzɪstɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə ɹɪzɪst wən ʃi meɪɾ ə ɹizənəbəl sədʒɛstʃən, ən ə smɔl wʌn ət ðæt. oʊnli ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ənʌðɝ sədʒɛstʃən bɪhaɪn ɪt, əz ɹizənəbəl ən smɔl əz ðə fɝst, ən ðən ənʌðɝ. ðə sɪmpəl fɔɹs ə hɝ pɹɛzəns, ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə hɝ ɡeɪz, meɪɾ ɪt dɪfəkəl tə pɹoʊtɛst. hɝ dɑɹk aɪz wəd kætʃ ɪz ət ðə moʊmən i oʊpən ɪz maʊð. ə lɪft ə hɝ aɪbɹaʊ tə sədʒɛst i wɑz biɪŋ ɹud, ə sɝpɹaɪzd waɪɾənɪŋ ə hɝ aɪz ðəɾ i kəɾ əbdʒɛk tə soʊ smɔl ə ɹɪkwɛst, ə lɛvəl stɛɹ ðət hɛld ɪn ɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɔl ðiz θɪŋz kəd meɪk ɪm hɛzəteɪt, ən wʌns i hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ðəɹ wɑz nɛvɝ ɛni ɹəkʌvɝɪŋ lɔst ɡɹaʊnd. hi əkjuzd əɹ ə juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɑn hɪm, ðoʊ hi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli θɪŋk ðət wɑz ɪt, ən ʃi toʊld ɪm nɑt tə bi ə ful. hi bɪɡæn tə fil laɪk ə pis ʌv aɪɝn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɑp ə smɪθ fɹəm hæmɝɪŋ ɪɾ ɪndə ə saɪð.

Loial gave in to it as inevitable, but not Perrin. He tried refusing, resisting, but it was hard to resist when she made a reasonable suggestion, and a small one at that. Only there was always another suggestion behind it, as reasonable and small as the first, and then another. The simple force of her presence, the strength of her gaze, made it difficult to protest. Her dark eyes would catch his at the moment he opened his mouth. A lift of her eyebrow to suggest he was being rude, a surprised widening of her eyes that he could object to so small a request, a level stare that held in it everything that was Aes Sedai, all these things could make him hesitate, and once he hesitated there was never any recovering lost ground. He accused her of using the One Power on him, though he did not really think that was it, and she told him not to be a fool. He began to feel like a piece of iron trying to stop a smith from hammering it into a scythe.

ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst ɡeɪv weɪ əbɹʌpli tə ðə fɔɹəstəd fʊthɪlz ʌv ɡildən, tə læn ðət simd ɔl ʌp ən daʊn, bʌt nɛvɝ vɛɹi haɪ. dɪɹ, wɪtʃ ɪn ðə maʊntənz hæɾ ɔfən wɑtʃt əm wɛɹəli, əz ɪf ənsɝɾən wʌɾ ə mæn wɑz, bɪɡæn tə baʊn əweɪ, waɪt teɪlz flɪkɝɪŋ, ət ðə fɝst saɪɾ ə ðə hɔɹsəz. ivən pɛɹɪn naʊ kɑɾ oʊnli ðə feɪntəst ɡlɪmpsɪz ə ðə ɡɹeɪ-stʃɹaɪp maʊntən kæts ðət sim tə feɪɾ əweɪ laɪk smoʊk. ðeɪ wɝ kʌmɪŋ ɪndə ðə lænz ə mɛn.

The Mountains of Mist gave way abruptly to the forested foothills of Ghealdan, to land that seemed all up and down, but never very high. Deer, which in the mountains had often watched them warily, as if uncertain what a man was, began to bound away, white tails flickering, at the first sight of the horses. Even Perrin now caught only the faintest glimpses of the gray-striped mountain cats that seemed to fade away like smoke. They were coming into the lands of men.

læn stɑpt wɛɹɪŋ ɪz kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊk ən bɪɡæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ bæk tə ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm mɔɹ ɔfən, tɛlɪŋ əm wʌt leɪ əhɛd. ɪn mɛni pleɪsəz ðə tʃɹiz hæɾ ɔl bɪn kʌt daʊn. sun, filz ɪnsɝkəl baɪ ɹʌf stoʊn wɔlz ən fɑɹmɝz plaʊɪŋ 'ɹaʊn ðə saɪdz ə hɪlz wɝ kɑmən saɪts, ɪf nɑɾ ɪɡzækli fɹikwənt, əlɔŋ wɪð laɪnz ə pipəl muvɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə plaʊd ɡɹaʊnd, soʊɪŋ sid fɹəm sæks slʌŋ fɹəm ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. skæɾɝd fɑɹmhaʊsəz ən bɑɹnz ʌv ɡɹeɪ stoʊn sæɾ ɑn hɪltɑps ən ɹɪdʒəz.

Lan stopped wearing his color-shifting cloak and began riding back to the rest of them more often, telling them what lay ahead. In many places the trees had all been cut down. Soon, fields encircled by rough stone walls and farmers plowing 'round the sides of hills were common sights, if not exactly frequent, along with lines of people moving across the plowed ground, sowing seed from sacks slung from their shoulders. Scattered farmhouses and barns of gray stone sat on hilltops and ridges.

ðə wʊlvz ʃəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ðɛɹ. wʊlvz əvɔɪɾəd pleɪsəz wɛɹ mɛn wɝ, bʌt pɛɹɪn kəd stɪl sɛns ðɛm, ən ənsin skɹin ən ɛskɔɹt ɹɪŋɪŋ ðə maʊntəd pɑɹɾi. ɪmpeɪʃəns fɪl hɪm; ɪmpeɪʃəns tə ɹitʃ ə vɪlədʒ əɹ ə taʊn, ɛni pleɪs wɛɹ ðəɹ wɝ ɪnʌf mɛn tə meɪk ðə wʊlvz ɡoʊ əweɪ.

The wolves should not have been there. Wolves avoided places where men were, but Perrin could still sense them, an unseen screen and escort ringing the mounted party. Impatience filled him; impatience to reach a village or a town, any place where there were enough men to make the wolves go away.

ə deɪ æftɝ saɪɾɪŋ ðə fɝs fild, dʒʌst əz ðə sʌn tʌtʃt ðə hɝaɪzən bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ðeɪ keɪm tə ðə vɪlədʒ ə dʒɹə, nɑt fɑɹ nɔɹθ ə ðə bɔɹɾɝ wɪð ɑmɑdɪʃiə.

A day after sighting the first field, just as the sun touched the horizon behind them, they came to the village of Jarra, not far north of the border with Amadicia.


tʃæptɝ eɪt


CHAPTER 8

dʒɹə


Jarra

ɡɹeɪ stoʊn haʊsəz wɪð sleɪt ɹufs leɪ klʌstɝɾ əlɔŋ ðə fju nɛɹoʊ stʃɹits ə dʒɹə, klɪŋɪŋ tə ə hɪlsaɪɾ əbʌv ə lɪɾəl stʃɹim spæn baɪ ə loʊ wʊɾən bɹɪdʒ. ðə mʌɾi stʃɹits wɝ ɛmpti, ən soʊ wɑz ðə sloʊpɪŋ vɪlədʒ ɡɹin, ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn mæn swipɪŋ ðə stɛps ə ðə vɪlədʒəz oʊnli ɪn, stændɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪts stoʊn steɪbəl; bʌɾ ɪt lʊkt əz ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə ɡʊd mɛni pipəl ɑn ðə ɡɹin nɑt lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ. hæf ə dʌzən ɑɹtʃəz, woʊvən ʌv ɡɹin bɹæntʃəz ən dɑɾəd wɪð sətʃ fju flaʊɝz əz kəd bi faʊn ðɪs ɝli ɪn ðə jɪɹ, stʊɾ ɪn ə sɝkəl ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɡɹæs. ðə ɡɹaʊn hæɾ ə tʃɹæmpəld lʊk, ən ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝ saɪnz ʌv ə ɡæðɝɪŋ; ə wʊmənz ɹɛd skɑɹf laɪɪŋ tæŋɡəld ət ðə fʊɾ ʌv wʌn ə ði ɑɹtʃəz, ə tʃaɪlz nɪɾəd kæp, ə pjuɾɝ pɪtʃɝ tʌmbəld ɑn ɪts saɪd, ə fju hæf-iɾən skɹæps ə fud.

Gray stone houses with slate roofs lay clustered along the few narrow streets of Jarra, clinging to a hillside above a little stream spanned by a low wooden bridge. The muddy streets were empty, and so was the sloping village green, except for one man sweeping the steps of the village's only inn, standing beside its stone stable; but it looked as if there had been a good many people on the green not long before. Half a dozen arches, woven of green branches and dotted with such few flowers as could be found this early in the year, stood in a circle in the middle of the grass. The ground had a trampled look, and there were other signs of a gathering; a woman's red scarf lying tangled at the foot of one of the arches, a child's knitted cap, a pewter pitcher tumbled on its side, a few half-eaten scraps of food.

ði ɝoʊməz ə swit waɪn ən spaɪs keɪks klʌŋ əbaʊt ðə ɡɹin, mɪkst ɪn wɪð smoʊk fɹəm dʌzənz ə tʃɪmniz ən ivnɪŋ milz kʊkɪŋ. fəɹ ən ɪnstən pɛɹɪnz noʊz kɑɾ ənʌðɝ oʊɾɝ, wʌn i kəd nɑɾ aɪdɛntəfaɪ, ə feɪn tʃɹeɪl ðət ɹeɪz ðə hɛɹ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk wɪð ɪts vɪlnəs. ðən ɪt wɑz ɡɔn. bʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ sʌmθɪŋ hæd pæs ðət weɪ, sʌmθɪŋ - ɹɔŋ. hi skɹʌbd əɾ ɪz noʊz əz ɪf tə ɹʌb əweɪ ðə mɛmɹi ʌv ɪt. ðət kæn bi ɹænd. laɪt, ivən ɪf hiz ɡɔn mæd, ðət kæn bi hɪm. kən ɪt?

The aromas of sweet wine and spiced cakes clung about the green, mixed in with smoke from dozens of chimneys and evening meals cooking. For an instant Perrin's nose caught another odor, one he could not identify, a faint trail that raised the hair on the back of his neck with its vileness. Then it was gone. But he was sure something had passed that way, something - wrong. He scrubbed at his nose as if to rub away the memory of it. That can't be Rand. Light, even if he has gone mad, that can't be him. Can it?

ə peɪntəd saɪn hʌŋ əbʌv ði ɪn dɔɹ, ə mæn stændɪŋ ɑn wʌn fʊt wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz θɹoʊn ɪn ði ɛɹ: hɑɹɪlɪnz lip. əz ðeɪ dʒɹu ɹeɪn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə skwɛɹ stoʊn bɪldɪŋ, ðə swipɝ stʃɹeɪɾənd, jɔnɪŋ fɪɹsli. hi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ət pɛɹɪnz aɪz, bʌɾ ɪz oʊn ɔlɹɛɾi pɹoʊtʃɹuɾɪŋ aɪz wɛnt waɪd wən ðeɪ fɛl ɑn lɔɪəl. wɪð ɪz waɪd maʊθ ən noʊ tʃɪn tə spik ʌv, hi lʊk sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ə fɹɑɡ. ðəɹ wɑz ən oʊl smɛl ə saʊɝ waɪn əbaʊɾ ɪm - tə pɛɹɪn, ət list. ðə fɛloʊ hæd sɝɾənli bɪn pɑɹɾ ə ðə sɛləbɹeɪʃən.

A painted sign hung above the inn door, a man standing on one foot with his arms thrown in the air: Harilin's Leap. As they drew rein in front of the square stone building, the sweeper straightened, yawning fiercely. He gave a start at Perrin's eyes, but his own already protruding eyes went wide when they fell on Loial. With his wide mouth and no chin to speak of, he looked something like a frog. There was an old smell of sour wine about him - to Perrin, at least. The fellow had certainly been part of the celebration.

ðə mæn ɡeɪv hɪmsɛlf ə ʃeɪk, ən tɝn ɪɾ ɪndə ə baʊ wɪð wʌn hæn ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn ðə dʌbəl ɹoʊ ʌv wʊɾən bʌɾənz ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn ɪz koʊt. hɪz aɪz flɪkɝd fɹəm wʌn tə ənʌðɝ ə ðɛm, pɑpɪŋ ivən mɔɹ ɛvɹi taɪm ðeɪ ɹɛstəɾ ɑn lɔɪəl. "wɛlkəm, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs, ən ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin jəɹ weɪ. wɛlkəm, ɡʊd mæstɝz. jə wɪʃ fud, ɹumz, bæθz? ɔl tə bi hæd, hɪɹ ət ðə lip. mæstɝ hɛɹɑd, ði ɪnkipɝ, kips ə ɡʊd haʊs. aɪm kɔl sɪmiən. ɪf jə wɪʃ ɛniθɪŋ, æsk fəɹ sɪmiən, ən hɪl ɡɛɾ ɪt fəɹ ju." hi jɔn əɡɛn, kʌvɝɪŋ ɪz maʊθ ɪn ɪmbɛɹəsmən ən boʊɪŋ tə haɪɾ ɪt. "aɪ bɛɡ jəɹ pɑɹɾən, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs. juv kʌm fɑɹ? hæv jə wɝɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌnt? ðə hʌn fəɹ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ? əɹ ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən? ɪts sɛd ðɛɹz ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən ɪn tæɹɑbən. əɹ meɪbi ɑɹæd dumən."

The man gave himself a shake, and turned it into a bow with one hand resting on the double row of wooden buttons running down his coat. His eyes flickered from one to another of them, popping even more every time they rested on Loial. "Welcome, good mistress, and the Light illumine your way. Welcome, good masters. You wish food, rooms, baths? All to be had, here at the Leap. Master Harod, the innkeeper, keeps a good house. I am called Simion. If you wish anything, ask for Simion, and he will get it for you." He yawned again, covering his mouth in embarrassment and bowing to hide it. "I beg your pardon, good mistress. You have come far? Have you word of the Great Hunt? The Hunt for the Horn of Valere? Or the false Dragon? It's said there's a false Dragon in Tarabon. Or maybe Arad Doman."

"wi hæv nɑt kʌm ðət fɑɹ," læn sɛd, swɪŋɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl. "noʊ daʊt jə noʊ mɔɹ ðən aɪ." ðeɪ ɔl bɪɡæn dɪsmaʊntɪŋ.

"We have not come that far," Lan said, swinging down from his saddle. "No doubt you know more than I." They all began dismounting.

"ju hæv hæɾ ə wɛɾɪŋ hɪɹ?" mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd.

"You have had a wedding here?" Moiraine said.

"ə wɛɾɪŋ, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs? waɪ, wiv hæɾ ə laɪftaɪm ʌv wɛɾɪŋz. ə pleɪɡ ʌv ðɛm. ɔl ɪn ðə læs tu deɪz. ðəɹ ɪzən ə wʊmən oʊld ɪnʌf tə spik ðə bɪtʃɹɑθɔl ɹɪmeɪnz ənmɛɹid, nɑɾ ɪn ðə hoʊl vɪlədʒ, nɑt fəɹ ə maɪl ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən. waɪ, ivən wɪɾoʊ dʒɹəθ dʒɹæɡd oʊl bænəz θɹu ði ɑɹtʃəz, ən ðeɪd boʊθ swɔɹn ðeɪd nɛvɝ mɛɹi əɡɛn. ɪt wɑz laɪk ə wɝlwɪn dʒʌst snætʃt ɛvɹibɑɾi ʌp. ɹɪlɪθ, ðə wivɝz dɔɾɝ, ʃi stɑɹɾəd ɪt, æskɪŋ dʒɑn ðə blæksmɪθ tə mɛɹi hɝ, ən ɪm oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi hɝ fɑðɝ ən mɔɹ. ði oʊl ful dʒʌs tʊk ɔf ɪz eɪpɹən ən sɛd jɛs, ən ʃi dɪmændəd ði ɑɹtʃəz bi pʊɾ ʌp ɹaɪt ðən ən ðɛɹ. wʊdn hɪɹ ʌv ə pɹɑpɝ weɪt, ən ɔl ði ʌðɝ wɪmən saɪɾəd wɪð hɝ. sɪns ðən wiv hæd mɛɹɪdʒɪz deɪ ən naɪt. waɪ, noʊbɑdiz hæɾ ɛni slip əɾ ɔl hɑɹdli."

"A wedding, good mistress? Why, we've had a lifetime of weddings. A plague of them. All in the last two days. There isn't a woman old enough to speak the betrothal remains unmarried, not in the whole village, not for a mile in any direction. Why, even Widow Jorath dragged old Banas through the arches, and they'd both sworn they'd never marry again. It was like a whirlwind just snatched everybody up. Rilith, the weaver's daughter, she started it, asking Jon the blacksmith to marry her, and him old enough to be her father and more. The old fool just took off his apron and said yes, and she demanded the arches be put up right then and there. Wouldn't hear of a proper wait, and all the other women sided with her. Since then we've had marriages day and night. Why, nobody's had any sleep at all hardly."

"ðæts vɛɹi ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd wən sɪmiən pɔz tə jɔn əɡɛn, "bʌɾ əv jə sin ə jʌŋ - "

"That's very interesting," Perrin said when Simion paused to yawn again, "but have you seen a young - "

"ɪɾ ɪz vɛɹi ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, kʌɾɪŋ ɪm ɔf, "æn aɪ wəd hɪɹ mɔɹ ʌv ɪt leɪɾɝ, pɝhæps. fəɹ naʊ, wi wəd laɪk ɹumz, ən ə mil." læn meɪɾ ə smɔl dʒɛstʃɝ təwɔɹd pɛɹɪn, daʊn loʊ, əz ɪf tɛlɪŋ ɪm tə hoʊld ɪz tʌŋ.

"It is very interesting," Moiraine said, cutting him off, "and I would hear more of it later, perhaps. For now, we would like rooms, and a meal." Lan made a small gesture toward Perrin, down low, as if telling him to hold his tongue.

"ʌv kɔɹs, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs. ə mil. ɹumz." sɪmiən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, aɪɪŋ lɔɪəl. "wil əv tə pʊʃ tu bɛdz təɡɛðɝ fəɹ - " hi lin kloʊsɝ tə mɔɪɹeɪn ən dʒɹɑpt ɪz vɔɪs. "pɑɹɾən, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs, bʌt - ʌ - wʌɾ ɪɡzækli - ɪz hi? minɪŋ noʊ dɪsɹɪspɛkt," hi æɾəd heɪstəli.

"Of course, good mistress. A meal. Rooms." Simion hesitated, eyeing Loial. "We'll have to push two beds together for - " He leaned closer to Moiraine and dropped his voice. "Pardon, good mistress, but - uh - what exactly - is he? Meaning no disrespect," he added hastily.

hi hæd nɑt spoʊkən sɔfli ɪnʌf, fəɹ lɔɪəlz ɪɹz twɪtʃt ɪɹɪɾəbli. "aɪ æm ən oʊɡiɝ! wʌd jə θɪŋk aɪ wɑz? eɪ tʃɹɑlɑk?"

He had not spoken softly enough, for Loial's ears twitched irritably. "I am an Ogier! What did you think I was? A Trolloc?"

sɪmiən tʊk ə stɛp bæk ət ðə bumɪŋ vɔɪs. "tʃɹɑlɑk, ɡʊd - ʌ - mæstɝ? waɪ, ɪm ə ɡɹoʊn mæn. aɪ doʊn bɪliv ɪn tʃɪlʒɹənz teɪlz. ʌ, dɪd jə seɪ oʊɡiɝ? waɪ, oʊɡiɝ ɑɹ tʃɪldɝ - aɪ min . . . ðəɾ ɪz. . . ." ɪn dɛspɝeɪʃən, hi tɝn tə bɛloʊ təwɔɹd ðə steɪbəl nɛks tə ði ɪn. "nikoʊ! peɪtʃɹim! vɪzəɾɝz! kʌm si tə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz!" æftɝ ə moʊmən tu bɔɪz wɪð heɪ ɪn ðɛɹ hɛɹ tʌmbəld aʊɾ ə ðə steɪbəl, jɔnɪŋ ən ɹʌbɪŋ ðɛɹ aɪz. sɪmiən dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə stɛps, boʊɪŋ, əz ðə bɔɪz ɡæðɝd ɹeɪnz.

Simion took a step back at the booming voice. "Trolloc, good - uh - master? Why, I'm a grown man. I don't believe in children's tales. Uh, did you say Ogier? Why, Ogier are childr - I mean . . . that is. . . ." In desperation, he turned to bellow toward the stable next to the inn. "Nico! Patrim! Visitors! Come see to their horses!" After a moment two boys with hay in their hair tumbled out of the stable, yawning and rubbing their eyes. Simion gestured to the steps, bowing, as the boys gathered reins.

pɛɹɪn slʌŋ ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz ən blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ən kæɹiɾ ɪz baʊ əz i fɑloʊd mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn ɪnsaɪd, wɪð sɪmiən boʊɪŋ ən bɑbɪŋ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm. lɔɪəl hæd tə dʌk loʊ ʌndɝ ðə lɪntəl, ən ðə silɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ oʊnli klɪɹɾ ɪz hɛd baɪ ə fʊt. hi kɛpt ɹʌmbəlɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf əbaʊt nɑɾ ʌndɝstændɪŋ waɪ soʊ fju hjumənz ɹɪmɛmbɝd ði oʊɡiɝ. hɪz vɔɪs wɑz laɪk dɪstən θʌndɝ. ivən pɛɹɪn, ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, kəɾ oʊnli ʌndɝstæn hæf ə hɪz wɝdz.

Perrin slung his saddlebags and blanketroll over his shoulder and carried his bow as he followed Moiraine and Lan inside, with Simion bowing and bobbing ahead of them. Loial had to duck low under the lintel, and the ceiling inside only cleared his head by a foot. He kept rumbling to himself about not understanding why so few humans remembered the Ogier. His voice was like distant thunder. Even Perrin, right in front of him, could only understand half of his words.

ði ɪn smɛld ʌv eɪl ən waɪn, tʃiz ən wɪɹinəs, ən ði ɝoʊmə ʌv ɹoʊstɪŋ mʌɾən dʒɹɪftəd fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə bæk. ðə fju mɛn ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum sæɡd oʊvɝ ðɛɹ mʌɡz əz ɪf ðeɪ wəd ɹɪli laɪk tə laɪ daʊn ɑn ðə bɛntʃɪz ən ɡoʊ tə slip. wʌn plʌmp sɝvɪŋ wʊmən wɑz dʒɹɔɪŋ ə mʌɡ ʌv eɪl fɹəm wʌn ə ðə bæɹəlz ət ði ɛn ə ðə ɹum. ði ɪnkipɝ hɪmsɛlf, ɪn ə lɔŋ waɪɾ eɪpɹən, sæɾ ɑn ə tɔl stul ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ, linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl. əz ðə nukʌmɝz ɛntɝd, hi lɪftəɾ ɪz hɛd, blɪɹi-aɪd. hɪz dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt ət ðə saɪɾ ə lɔɪəl.

The inn smelled of ale and wine, cheese and weariness, and the aroma of roasting mutton drifted from somewhere in the back. The few men in the common room sagged over their mugs as if they would really like to lie down on the benches and go to sleep. One plump serving woman was drawing a mug of ale from one of the barrels at the end of the room. The innkeeper himself, in a long white apron, sat on a tall stool in the corner, leaning against the wall. As the newcomers entered, he lifted his head, bleary-eyed. His jaw dropped at the sight of Loial.

"vɪzəɾɝz, mæstɝ hɛɹɑd," sɪmiən ənaʊnst. "ðeɪ wɑn ɹumz. mæstɝ hɛɹɑd? hiz ən oʊɡiɝ, mæstɝ hɛɹɑd." ðə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən tɝn ən sɔ lɔɪəl, ən dʒɹɑp ðə mʌɡ wɪð ə klæɾɝ. nʌn ə ðə wɪɹi mɛn ət ðə teɪbəlz ivən lʊkt ʌp. wʌn hæd pʊɾ ɪz hɛd daʊn ɑn ðə teɪbəl ən wɑz snɔɹɪŋ.

"Visitors, Master Harod," Simion announced. "They want rooms. Master Harod? He's an Ogier, Master Harod." The serving woman turned and saw Loial, and dropped the mug with a clatter. None of the weary men at the tables even looked up. One had put his head down on the table and was snoring.

lɔɪəlz ɪɹz twɪtʃt vaɪələnli.

Loial's ears twitched violently.

mæstɝ hɛɹɑd ɡɑt tə hɪz fit sloʊli, aɪz fæsən ɑn lɔɪəl, smuðɪŋ ɪz eɪpɹən ɔl ðə waɪl. "æt list i ɪzən ə waɪtkloʊk," hi sɛɾ ət læst, ðən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əz ɪf sɝpɹaɪzd i hæd spoʊkən əlaʊd. "ðæɾ ɪz tə seɪ, wɛlkəm, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs. ɡʊd mæstɝz. fɝɡɪv maɪ læk ə mænɝz. aɪ kən oʊnli plid taɪɹədnəs, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs." hi dɑɹɾɪd ənʌðɝ ɡlæns ət lɔɪəl, ən maʊðd "oʊɡiɝ?" wɪð ə lʊk ə dɪsbɪlif.

Master Harod got to his feet slowly, eyes fastened on Loial, smoothing his apron all the while. "At least he isn't a Whitecloak," he said at last, then gave a start as if surprised he had spoken aloud. "That is to say, welcome, good mistress. Good masters. Forgive my lack of manners. I can only plead tiredness, good mistress." He darted another glance at Loial, and mouthed "Ogier?" with a look of disbelief.

lɔɪəl oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn fɔɹstɑl hɪm. "æz jəɹ mæn sɛd, ɡʊɾ ɪnkipɝ, aɪ wɪʃ ɹumz fəɹ maɪ pɑɹɾi fəɹ ðə naɪt, ən ə mil."

Loial opened his mouth, but Moiraine forestalled him. "As your man said, good innkeeper, I wish rooms for my party for the night, and a meal."

"oʊ! ʌv kɔɹs, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs. ʌv kɔɹs. sɪmiən, ʃoʊ ðiz ɡʊd pipəl tə maɪ bɛst ɹumz, soʊ ðeɪ kən pʊt daʊn ðɛɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz. əl əv ə faɪn mil leɪɾ aʊt fəɹ jə wən jə ɹɪtɝn, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs. ə faɪn mil."

"Oh! Of course, good mistress. Of course. Simion, show these good people to my best rooms, so they can put down their belongings. I'll have a fine meal laid out for you when you return, good mistress. A fine meal."

"ɪf ɪt plizɪz jə tə fɑloʊ mi, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs," sɪmiən sɛd. "ɡʊd mæstɝz." hi baʊd ðə weɪ tə stɛɹz ət wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə kɑmən ɹum.

"If it pleases you to follow me, good mistress," Simion said. "Good masters." He bowed the way to stairs at one side of the common room.

bɪhaɪn ðɛm, wʌn ə ðə mɛn ət ðə teɪbəlz sʌɾənli ɪkskleɪmd, "wʌɾ ɪn ðə neɪm ə ðə laɪɾ ɪz ðæt?" mæstɝ hɛɹɑd bɪɡæn ɪkspleɪnɪŋ əbaʊɾ oʊɡiɝ, meɪkɪŋ ɪt saʊn əz ɪf i wɝ kwaɪt fəmɪljɝ wɪð ðɛm. moʊst ʌv wʌt pɛɹɪn hɝd bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ lɛf ðə vɔɪsəz bɪhaɪnd wɑz ɹɔŋ. lɔɪəlz ɪɹz twɪtʃt wɪθaʊt stɑp.

Behind them, one of the men at the tables suddenly exclaimed, "What in the name of the Light is that?" Master Harod began explaining about Ogier, making it sound as if he were quite familiar with them. Most of what Perrin heard before they left the voices behind was wrong. Loial's ears twitched without stop.

ɑn ðə sɛkən flɔɹ, ði oʊɡiɝz hɛd keɪm nɪɹ tə bɹʌʃɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə silɪŋ. ðə nɛɹoʊ kɔɹəɾɝ wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ dɑɹk, wɪð oʊnli ðə ʃɑɹp laɪɾ ə sʌnsɛt θɹu ə wɪndoʊ nɛks tə ðə dɔɹ ət ðə fɑɹ ɛnd.

On the second floor, the Ogier's head came near to brushing along the ceiling. The narrow corridor was growing dark, with only the sharp light of sunset through a window next to the door at the far end.

"kændəlz ɪn ðə ɹumz, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs," sɪmiən sɛd. "aɪ ʃʊɾə bɹɔɾ ə læmp, bʌt maɪ hɛɾ ɪz stɪl spɪnɪŋ fɹəm ɔl ðoʊz wɛɾɪŋz. əl sɛn sʌmwʌn ʌp tə laɪt ðə faɪɝ, ɪf jə wɪʃ. ən jəl wɑnt wɑʃ wɔɾɝ, ʌv kɔɹs." hi pʊʃt oʊpən ə dɔɹ. "aʊɝ bɛst ɹum, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs. wi doʊn əv mɛni - nɑt mɛni stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, jə si - bʌt ðɪs ɪz əɹ bɛst."

"Candles in the rooms, good mistress," Simion said. "I should have brought a lamp, but my head is still spinning from all those weddings. I'll send someone up to light the fire, if you wish. And you'll want wash water, of course." He pushed open a door. "Our best room, good mistress. We don't have many - not many strangers, you see - but this is our best."

"aɪl teɪk ðə wʌn nɛks tə ɪt," læn sɛd. hi hæd mɔɪɹeɪnz blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl ən sæɾəlbæɡz ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əz wɛl əz ɪz oʊn, ən ðə bʌndəl kənteɪnɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən bænɝ, tu.

"I'll take the one next to it," Lan said. He had Moiraine's blanketroll and saddlebags on his shoulder as well as his own, and the bundle containing the Dragon banner, too.

"oʊ, ɡʊd mæstɝ, ðæts nɑɾ ə vɛɹi ɡʊd ɹum əɾ ɔl. nɛɹoʊ bɛd. kɹæmpt. mɛn fəɹ ə sɝvənt, aɪ səspɛkt, əz ɪf wiɾ ɛvɝ əv ɛnibəɾi hɪɹ u hæɾ ə sɝvənt. bɛɡɪŋ jəɹ pɑɹɾən, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs."

"Oh, good master, that's not a very good room at all. Narrow bed. Cramped. Meant for a servant, I suspect, as if we'd ever have anybody here who had a servant. Begging your pardon, good mistress."

"aɪ wɪl teɪk ɪɾ ɛniweɪ," læn sɛd fɝmli.

"I will take it anyway," Lan said firmly.

"sɪmiən," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "dʌz mæstɝ hɛɹɑd dɪslaɪk ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt?"

"Simion," Moiraine said, "does Master Harod dislike the Children of the Light?"

"wɛl, hi dʌz, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs. hi dɪdnt, bʌɾ i dʌz. ɪɾ ɪzənt ɡʊd pɑləsi, dɪsləkɪŋ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, nɑt soʊ kloʊs tə ðə bɔɹɾɝ əz wi ɑɹ. ðeɪ kʌm θɹu dʒɹə ɔl ðə taɪm, laɪk ðəɹ wɑzn ɛni bɔɹɾɝ əɾ ɔl. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz tʃɹʌbəl, jɛstɝdeɪ. ə fɪsfəl ə tʃɹʌbəl. ən wɪð ðə wɛɾɪŋz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn, ən ɔl."

"Well, he does, good mistress. He didn't, but he does. It isn't good policy, disliking the Children, not so close to the border as we are. They come through Jarra all the time, like there wasn't any border at all. But there was trouble, yesterday. A fistful of trouble. And with the weddings going on, and all."

"wʌt hæpənd, sɪmiən?"

"What happened, Simion?"

ðə mæn lʊkt əɾ əɹ ʃɑɹpli bɪfɔɹ ænsɝɪŋ. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɛniwʌn ɛls sɔ haʊ ʃɑɹpli, ɪn ðə dɪmnəs. "ðɛɹ wɑz əbaʊt twɛnti ʌv ðɛm, kʌm deɪ bɪfɔɹ jɛstɝdeɪ. noʊ tʃɹʌbəl ðɛn. bʌt jɛstɝdeɪ. . . . waɪ, θɹi ʌv əm ʌp ən ənaʊns ðeɪ wɝn tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ ɛnimɔɹ. ðeɪ tʊk ɔf ðɛɹ kloʊks ən dʒʌst ɹoʊɾ əweɪ."

The man looked at her sharply before answering. Perrin did not think anyone else saw how sharply, in the dimness. "There was about twenty of them, come day before yesterday. No trouble then. But yesterday. . . . Why, three of them up and announced they weren't Children of the Light anymore. They took off their cloaks and just rode away."

læn ɡɹʌntɪd. "waɪtkloʊks swɛɹ fəɹ laɪf. wʌd ðɛɹ kəmændɝ du?"

Lan grunted. "Whitecloaks swear for life. What did their commander do?"

"waɪ, hi wʊɾə dʌn sʌmθɪŋ, jə kən bi ʃʊɹ, ɡʊd mæstɝ, bʌɾ ənʌðɝ ə ðɛm ənaʊnst i wɑz ɔf tə faɪn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. ɛniweɪ, stɪl ənʌðɝ sɛd ðeɪ ʃəd bi hʌntɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən. ðət wʌn sɛɾ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə ɑlməθ pleɪn wən i lɛft. ðən səm ə ðɛm stɑɹɾəd seɪɪŋ θɪŋz tə wɪmən ɪn ðə stʃɹits, θɪŋz ðeɪ ʃʊdn hæv, ən ɡɹæbɪŋ ət ðɛm. ðə wɪmən wɝ skɹimɪŋ, ən tʃɪlʒɹən jɛlɪŋ ət ðə wʌnz bɑðɝɪŋ ðə wɪmən. aɪ nɛvɝ sɔ sətʃ kəmoʊʃən."

"Why, he would have done something, you can be sure, good master, but another of them announced he was off to find the Horn of Valere. Anyway, still another said they should be hunting the Dragon. That one said he was going to Almoth Plain when he left. Then some of them started saying things to women in the streets, things they shouldn't have, and grabbing at them. The women were screaming, and Children yelling at the ones bothering the women. I never saw such commotion."

"dɪdn ɛni ʌv jə tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp ðɛm?" pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Didn't any of you try to stop them?" Perrin said.

"ɡʊd mæstɝ, jə kæɹi ðəɾ æks laɪk jə noʊ haʊ tə juz ɪt, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɪzən soʊ izi tə feɪs ʌp tə mɛn wɪð sɔɹdz ən ɑɹmɝ ən ɔl, wən ɔl jə noʊ haʊ tə juz ɪz ə bɹum əɹ ə hoʊ. ðə ɹɛst ə ðə waɪtkloʊks, ðoʊz əz hædnt ɡɔn ɔf, pʊɾ ən ɛn tə ɪt. ɔlmoʊs keɪm tə dʒɹɔɪŋ sɔɹdz. ən ðət wɑzn ðə wɝst. tu mɔɹ dʒʌst wɛn mæd - ɪf ði ʌðɝz wɝnt. ðoʊz tu stɑɹɾəd ɹeɪvɪŋ ðət dʒɹə wɑz fʊl ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə bɝn ðə vɪlədʒ daʊn - sɛd ðeɪ wʊd! - bɪɡɪnɪŋ wɪð ðə lip. jə kən si ðə bɝn mɑɹks aʊt bæk, wɛɹ ðeɪ ɡɑɾ ɪt stɑɹɾəd. fɔt ði ʌðɝ waɪtkloʊks wən ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp ðɛm. ðə waɪtkloʊks ðət wɝ lɛft, ðeɪ hɛlpt əs pʊɾ ɪɾ aʊt, taɪd ðoʊz tu ʌp taɪt, ən ɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ, bæk təwɔɹɾ ɑmɑdɪʃiə. ɡʊd ɹɪɾəns, aɪ seɪ, ən ɪf ðeɪ nɛvɝ kʌm bæk, ɪɾəl bi tu sun."

"Good master, you carry that axe like you know how to use it, but it isn't so easy to face up to men with swords and armor and all, when all you know how to use is a broom or a hoe. The rest of the Whitecloaks, those as hadn't gone off, put an end to it. Almost came to drawing swords. And that wasn't the worst. Two more just went mad - if the others weren't. Those two started raving that Jarra was full of Darkfriends. They tried to burn the village down - said they would! - beginning with the Leap. You can see the burn marks out back, where they got it started. Fought the other Whitecloaks when they tried to stop them. The Whitecloaks that were left, they helped us put it out, tied those two up tight, and rode out of here, back toward Amadicia. Good riddance, I say, and if they never come back, it'll be too soon."

"ɹʌf bɪheɪvjɝ," læn sɛd, "ivən fəɹ waɪtkloʊks."

"Rough behavior," Lan said, "even for Whitecloaks."

sɪmiən bɑbd ɪz hɛɾ ɪn əɡɹimənt. "æz jə seɪ, ɡʊd mæstɝ. ðeɪ nɛvɝ æktəd laɪk ðət bɪfɔɹ. swæɡɝ ɝaʊnd, jɛs. lʊk ət jə laɪk jə wɝ dɝt, ən poʊk ðɛɹ noʊzɪz ɪn wɛɹ ðeɪ hædn ɛni bɪznəs. bʌt ðeɪ nɛvɝ kɑz tʃɹʌbəl bɪfɔɹ. nɑt laɪk ðæt, ɛniweɪ."

Simion bobbed his head in agreement. "As you say, good master. They never acted like that before. Swagger around, yes. Look at you like you were dirt, and poke their noses in where they hadn't any business. But they never caused trouble before. Not like that, anyway."

"ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡɔn naʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "æn tʃɹʌbəlz wɪð ðɛm. aɪm ʃʊɹ wɪl pæs ə kwaɪət naɪt."

"They are gone now," Moiraine said, "and troubles with them. I am sure we will pass a quiet night."

pɛɹɪn kɛpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt kwaɪəɾ ɪnsaɪd. ɔl ðiz wɛɾɪŋz ən waɪtkloʊks ɑɹ ɔl vɛɹi wɛl, bʌɾ aɪd sunɝ noʊ ɪf ɹænd stɑp hɪɹ, ən wɪtʃ weɪ hi wɛnt wən i lɛft. ðət smɛl kʊdn əv bɪn hɪm.

Perrin kept his mouth shut, but he was not quiet inside. All these weddings and Whitecloaks are all very well, but I'd sooner know if Rand stopped here, and which way he went when he left. That smell couldn't have been him.

hi lɛt sɪmiən ɡaɪɾ ɪm ɑn daʊn ðə hɔl tə ənʌðɝ ɹum, wɪð tu bɛdz ən ə wɑʃstænd, ə pɛɹ ə stulz ən nɑt mʌtʃ ɛls. lɔɪəl stup tə pʊɾ ɪz hɛd θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ. oʊnli ə lɪɾəl laɪt keɪm ɪn baɪ ðə nɛɹoʊ wɪndoʊz. ðə bɛdz wɝ bɪɡ ɪnʌf, wɪð blæŋkəts ən kʌmfɝɾɝz foʊldəɾ ət ðə fʊt, bʌt ðə mætʃɹəsəz lʊk lʌmpi. sɪmiən fʌmbəld ɑn ðə mæntəl əbʌv ðə faɪɝpleɪs əntɪl i faʊn ə kændəl, ən ə tɪndɝbɑks tə ɡɛɾ ɪɾ əlaɪt.

He let Simion guide him on down the hall to another room, with two beds and a washstand, a pair of stools and not much else. Loial stooped to put his head through the doorway. Only a little light came in by the narrow windows. The beds were big enough, with blankets and comforters folded at the foot, but the mattresses looked lumpy. Simion fumbled on the mantel above the fireplace until he found a candle, and a tinderbox to get it alight.

"aɪl si əbaʊt ɡɛɾɪŋ səm bɛdz pʊt təɡɛðɝ fəɹ ju, ɡʊd - ʌ - oʊɡiɝ. jɛs, dʒʌst ə moʊmənt, naʊ." hi ʃoʊd noʊ saɪn ə hɝi tə bi əbaʊɾ ɪt, ðoʊ, fʌsɪŋ wɪð ðə kændəlstɪk əz ɪf i hæd tə pleɪs ɪt dʒʌst ɹaɪt. pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i lʊkt ənizi.

"I'll see about getting some beds put together for you, good - uh - Ogier. Yes, just a moment, now." He showed no sign of hurry to be about it, though, fussing with the candlestick as if he had to place it just right. Perrin thought he looked uneasy.

wɛl, aɪd bi mɔɹ ðən ənizi ɪf waɪtkloʊks hæd bɪn æktɪŋ laɪk ðəɾ ɪn ɛmənz fild. "sɪmiən, hæz ənʌðɝ stʃɹeɪnʒɝ pæs θɹu hɪɹ ɪn ðə læs deɪ əɹ tu? ə jʌŋ mæn, tɔl, wɪð ɡɹeɪ aɪz ən ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ? hi maɪɾ əv pleɪd ðə flut fəɹ ə mil əɹ ə bɛd."

Well, I'd be more than uneasy if Whitecloaks had been acting like that in Emond's Field. "Simion, has another stranger passed through here in the last day or two? A young man, tall, with gray eyes and reddish hair? He might have played the flute for a meal or a bed."

"aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ hɪm, ɡʊd mæstɝ," sɪmiən sɛd, stɪl ʃɪftɪŋ ðə kændəlstɪk. "keɪm jɛstɝdeɪ mɔɹnɪŋ, ɝli. lʊk hʌŋɡɹi, hi dɪd. hi pleɪd ðə flut fəɹ ɔl ðə wɛɾɪŋz, jɛstɝdeɪ. ɡʊd-lʊkɪŋ jʌŋ fɛloʊ. səm ə ðə wɪmən aɪd hɪm, ət fɝst, bʌt. . . ." hi pɔzd, lʊkɪŋ ət pɛɹɪn saɪdweɪz. "ɪz i ə fɹɛn ə jʊɹz, ɡʊd mæstɝ?"

"I remember him, good master," Simion said, still shifting the candlestick. "Came yesterday morning, early. Looked hungry, he did. He played the flute for all the weddings, yesterday. Good-looking young fellow. Some of the women eyed him, at first, but. . . ." He paused, looking at Perrin sideways. "Is he a friend of yours, good master?"

"aɪ noʊ hɪm," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "waɪ?"

"I know him," Perrin said. "Why?"

sɪmiən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "noʊ ɹizən, ɡʊd mæstɝ. hi wɑz ən ɑd fɛloʊ, ðæts ɔl. hi tɔk tə hɪmsɛlf, səmtaɪmz, ən səmtaɪmz i læft wən noʊbɑdi hæd sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ. slɛpt ɪn ðɪs vɛɹi ɹum, læs naɪt, əɹ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. woʊk əs ɔl ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪt, jɛlɪŋ. ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə naɪtmɛɹ, bʌɾ i wʊdn steɪ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. mæstɝ hɛɹɑd dɪdn meɪk mʌtʃ ɛfɝt tə tɔk ɪm ɪndə ɪt, æftɝ ɔl ðət nɔɪz." sɪmiən pɔzd əɡɛn. "hi sɛd sʌmθɪŋ stʃɹeɪnʒ wən i lɛft."

Simion hesitated. "No reason, good master. He was an odd fellow, that's all. He talked to himself, sometimes, and sometimes he laughed when nobody had said anything. Slept in this very room, last night, or part of it. Woke us all in the middle of the night, yelling. It was just a nightmare, but he wouldn't stay any longer. Master Harod didn't make much effort to talk him into it, after all that noise." Simion paused again. "He said something strange when he left."

"wʌt?" pɛɹɪn dɪmændəd.

"What?" Perrin demanded.

"hi sɛd sʌmbɑɾi wɑz æftɝ hɪm. hi sɛd. . . ." ðə tʃɪnləs mæn swɑloʊɾ ən wɛn ɑn mɔɹ sloʊli. "sɛd ðeɪd kɪl ɪm ɪf i dɪdnt ɡoʊ. 'wʌn ʌv əs əz tə daɪ, ən aɪ min ɪt tə bi hɪm.' hɪz vɛɹi wɝdz."

"He said somebody was after him. He said. . . ." The chinless man swallowed and went on more slowly. "Said they'd kill him if he didn't go. 'One of us has to die, and I mean it to be him.' His very words."

"hi dɪd nɑt min ʌs," lɔɪəl ɹʌmbəld. "wi ɑɹ ɪz fɹɛnz."

"He did not mean us," Loial rumbled. "We are his friends."

"ʌv kɔɹs, ɡʊd - ʌ - ɡʊɾ oʊɡiɝ. ʌv kɔɹs, hi dɪdn min ju. aɪ - ʌ - aɪ doʊn min tə seɪ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ə fɹɛn ə jʊɹz, bʌɾ aɪ - ʌ - aɪ θɪŋk hiz sɪk. ɪn ðə hɛd, jə noʊ."

"Of course, good - uh - good Ogier. Of course, he didn't mean you. I - uh - I don't mean to say anything about a friend of yours, but I - uh - I think he's sick. In the head, you know."

"wi wɪl teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪm," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðæts waɪ wɝ fɑloʊɪŋ hɪm. wɪtʃ weɪ dɪɾ i ɡoʊ?"

"We will take care of him," Perrin said. "That's why we're following him. Which way did he go?"

"aɪ nu ɪt," sɪmiən sɛd, baʊnsɪŋ ɑn ɪz toʊz. "aɪ nu ʃi kəd hɛlp əz sun əz aɪ sɔ ju. wɪtʃ weɪ? ist, ɡʊd mæstɝ. ist, laɪk ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf wɑz ɑn ɪz hilz. dʒju θɪŋk ʃɪl hɛlp mi? hɛlp maɪ bɹʌðɝ, ðəɾ ɪz? noʊmz bæd sɪk, ən mʌðɝ ɹun sɛz ʃi kæn də ɛniθɪŋ."

"I knew it," Simion said, bouncing on his toes. "I knew she could help as soon as I saw you. Which way? East, good master. East, like the Dark One himself was on his heels. Do you think she'll help me? Help my brother, that is? Noam's bad sick, and Mother Roon says she can't do anything."

pɛɹɪn kɛpt ɪz feɪs ɪkspɹɛʃənləs, ən bɑɾ ə lɪɾəl taɪm tə θɪŋk baɪ pɹɑpɪŋ ɪz baʊ ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ ən sɛɾɪŋ ɪz blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl ən sæɾəlbæɡz ɑn wʌn ə ðə bɛdz. ðə pɹɑbləm wɑz ðət θɪŋkɪŋ dɪd nɑt hɛlp mʌtʃ. hi lʊkt ət lɔɪəl, bʌt faʊnd noʊ hɛlp ðɛɹ; kɑnstɝneɪʃən hæd ði oʊɡiɝz ɪɹz dʒɹupɪŋ ən ɪz lɔŋ aɪbɹaʊz hæŋɪŋ daʊn ɑn ɪz tʃiks. "wʌt meɪks jə θɪŋk ʃi kən hɛlp jəɹ bɹʌðɝ?" stupəd kwɛstʃən! ðə ɹaɪt kwɛstʃən ɪz, wʌt dʌz i min tə də əbaʊɾ ɪt?

Perrin kept his face expressionless, and bought a little time to think by propping his bow in the corner and setting his blanketroll and saddlebags on one of the beds. The problem was that thinking did not help much. He looked at Loial, but found no help there; consternation had the Ogier's ears drooping and his long eyebrows hanging down on his cheeks. "What makes you think she can help your brother?" Stupid question! The right question is, what does he mean to do about it?

"waɪ, aɪ tʃɹævəl tə dʒəhænə, wʌns, ɡʊd mæstɝ, ən aɪ sɔ tu . . . tu wɪmən laɪk hɝ. aɪ kʊdn mɪsteɪk əɹ æftɝ ðæt." hɪz vɔɪs dʒɹɑp tə ə wɪspɝ. "ɪts sɛd ðeɪ kən ɹeɪz ðə dɛd, ɡʊd mæstɝ."

"Why, I traveled to Jehannah, once, good master, and I saw two . . . two women like her. I couldn't mistake her after that." His voice dropped to a whisper. "It's said they can raise the dead, good master."

"hu ɛls noʊz ðɪs?" pɛɹɪn æskt ʃɑɹpli, ən ət ðə seɪm taɪm lɔɪəl sɛd, "ɪf jəɹ bɹʌðɝ ɪz dɛd, ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ ɛniwʌn kən du."

"Who else knows this?" Perrin asked sharply, and at the same time Loial said, "If your brother is dead, there is nothing anyone can do."

ðə fɹɑɡ-feɪs mæn lʊk fɹəm wʌn tə ði ʌðɝ ə ðɛm æŋkʃəsli, ən ɪz wɝdz keɪm ɪn ə bæbəl. "noʊ wʌn noʊz bʌt mi, ɡʊd mæstɝ. noʊm ɪzən dɛd, ɡʊɾ oʊɡiɝ, oʊnli sɪk. aɪ swɛɹ noʊbɑdi ɛls kəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɝ. ivən mæstɝ hɛɹɑdz nɛvɝ bɪn mɔɹ ðən twɛnti maɪlz fɹəm hɪɹ ɪn ɪz laɪf. hiz soʊ bæd sɪk. aɪɾ æsk əɹ maɪsɛlf, oʊnli maɪ nizəd bi ʃeɪkɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd ʃi kʊdn hɪɹ mi tɔk. wʌɾ ɪf ʃi tʊk əfɛns ən kɔl daʊn laɪtnɪŋ ɑn mi? ən wʌɾ ɪf aɪd bɪn ɹɔŋ? ɪɾ ɪzən ðə kaɪndə θɪŋ jə əkjuz ə wʊmən ʌv wɪθaʊt. . . . aɪ min . . . ʌ. . . ." hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hænz, hæf ɪn pliɾɪŋ, hæf əz ɪf tə dɪfɛn hɪmsɛlf.

The frog-faced man looked from one to the other of them anxiously, and his words came in a babble. "No one knows but me, good master. Noam isn't dead, good Ogier, only sick. I swear nobody else could recognize her. Even Master Harod's never been more than twenty miles from here in his life. He's so bad sick. I'd ask her myself, only my knees'd be shaking so hard she couldn't hear me talk. What if she took offense and called down lightning on me? And what if I'd been wrong? It isn't the kind of thing you accuse a woman of without. . . . I mean . . . uh. . . ." He raised his hands, half in pleading, half as if to defend himself.

"aɪ kən meɪk noʊ pɹɑməsəz," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "bʌɾ əl spik tə hɝ. lɔɪəl, waɪ doʊn jə kip sɪmiən kʌmpəni tɪl aɪv spoʊkən tə mɔɪɹeɪn?"

"I can make no promises," Perrin said, "but I'll speak to her. Loial, why don't you keep Simion company till I've spoken to Moiraine?"

"ʌv kɔɹs," ði oʊɡiɝ bumd. sɪmiən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt wən lɔɪəlz hæn swɑloʊɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "hi wɪl ʃoʊ mi maɪ ɹum, ən wɪl tɔk. tɛl mi, sɪmiən, wʌt dʒju noʊ ʌv tʃɹiz?"

"Of course," the Ogier boomed. Simion gave a start when Loial's hand swallowed his shoulder. "He will show me my room, and we will talk. Tell me, Simion, what do you know of trees?"

"ti-ti-tʃɹiz, dʒi-ɡʊɾ oʊɡiɝ?"

"T-t-trees, g-good Ogier?"

pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt weɪɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. hi hɝid bæk daʊn ðə dɑɹk hɔl ən nɑkt ɑn mɔɪɹeɪnz dɔɹ, bɛɹli weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ əɹ pɝɛmptɝi "kʌm!" bɪfɔɹ pʊʃɪŋ ɪn.

Perrin did not wait any longer. He hurried back down the dark hall and knocked on Moiraine's door, barely waiting for her peremptory "Come!" before pushing in.

hæf ə dʌzən kændəlz ʃoʊd ðət ðə lips bɛst ɹum wɑz nʌn tu ɡʊd, ðoʊ ðə wʌn bɛd hæd fɔɹ tɔl poʊsts səpɔɹɾɪŋ ə kænəpi, ən ðə mætʃɹəs lʊk lɛs fʊl ə lʌmps ðən pɛɹɪnz. ðəɹ wɑz ə skɹæp ə kɑɹpəɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ, ən tu kʊʃən tʃɛɹz ɪnstɛɾ ə stulz. ʌðɝ ðən ðæt, ɪt lʊk noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ɪz ɹum. mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn stʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə koʊl hɑɹθ əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn dɪskʌsɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑt lʊk plizd ət biɪŋ ɪntɝʌptɪd. ðə wɔɹɾɝz feɪs wɑz əz ɪmpɝɾɝbəbəl əz ə kɑɹvɪŋ.

Half a dozen candles showed that the Leap's best room was none too good, though the one bed had four tall posts supporting a canopy, and the mattress looked less full of lumps than Perrin's. There was a scrap of carpet on the floor, and two cushioned chairs instead of stools. Other than that, it looked no different from his room. Moiraine and Lan stood in front of the cold hearth as if they had been discussing something, and the Aes Sedai did not look pleased at being interrupted. The Warder's face was as imperturbable as a carving.

"ɹænz bɪn hɪɹ, ɔl ɹaɪt," pɛɹɪn stɑɹɾəd ɔf. "ðæt fɛloʊ sɪmiən ɹɪmɛmbɝz hɪm." mɔɪɹeɪn hɪs θɹu hɝ tiθ.

"Rand's been here, all right," Perrin started off. "That fellow Simion remembers him." Moiraine hissed through her teeth.

"ju wɝ toʊl tə kip jəɹ maʊθ ʃʌt," læn ɡɹaʊld.

"You were told to keep your mouth shut," Lan growled.

pɛɹɪn skwɛɹɾ ɪz fit tə feɪs ðə wɔɹɾɝ. ðət wɑz iziɝ ðən feɪsɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪnz ɡlɛɹ. "haʊ kəd wi faɪn aʊt wɛðɝ i hæd bɪn hɪɹ wɪθaʊɾ æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz? tɛl mi ðæt. hi lɛf læs naɪt, ɪf jə ɑɹ ɪntʃɹəstəd, hɛɾɪŋ ist. ən i wɑz kæɹiɪŋ ɑn əbaʊt sʌmbɑɾi fɑloʊɪŋ hɪm, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl hɪm."

Perrin squared his feet to face the Warder. That was easier than facing Moiraine's glare. "How could we find out whether he had been here without asking questions? Tell me that. He left last night, if you are interested, heading east. And he was carrying on about somebody following him, trying to kill him."

"ist." mɔɪɹeɪn nɑɾəd. ði ʌɾɝ kɑm ə hɝ vɔɪs wɑz əɾ ɑdz wɪð əɹ dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ aɪz. "ðæɾ ɪz ɡʊd tə noʊ, ðoʊ ɪt hæd tə bi soʊ ɪf hiz ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɛɹ. bʌɾ aɪ wɑz fɛɹli sɝɾən i hæd bɪn hɪɹ ivən bɪfɔɹ aɪ hɝɾ əbaʊt ðə waɪtkloʊks, ən ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪɾ ə sɝɾənti. ɹænd ɪz ɔlmoʊst ʃʊɹli ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt wʌn θɪŋ, pɛɹɪn. aɪ kænɑt bɪliv wəɹ ði oʊnli wʌnz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn hɪm. ən ɪf ðeɪ faɪn aʊɾ əbaʊɾ ʌs, ðeɪ meɪ wɛl tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp ʌs. wɪv ɪnʌf tə kəntɛnd wɪð tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kætʃ ʌp tə ɹænd wɪθaʊt ðæt. jə mʌs lɝn tə hoʊl jəɹ tʌŋ əntɪl aɪ tɛl jə tə spik."

"East." Moiraine nodded. The utter calm of her voice was at odds with her disapproving eyes. "That is good to know, though it had to be so if he is going to Tear. But I was fairly certain he had been here even before I heard about the Whitecloaks, and they made it a certainty. Rand is almost surely right about one thing, Perrin. I cannot believe we are the only ones trying to find him. And if they find out about us, they may well try to stop us. We have enough to contend with trying to catch up to Rand without that. You must learn to hold your tongue until I tell you to speak."

"ðə waɪtkloʊks?" pɛɹɪn sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. hoʊl maɪ tʌŋ? bɝn mi, ɪf aɪ wɪl! "haʊ kəd ðeɪ tɛl jə - ? ɹændz mædnəs. ɪts kætʃɪŋ?"

"The Whitecloaks?" Perrin said incredulously. Hold my tongue? Burn me, if I will! "How could they tell you - ? Rand's madness. It is catching?"

"nɑɾ ɪz mædnəs," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "ɪf hiz fɑɹ ɪnʌf ɡɔn jɛt tə bi kɔl mæd. pɛɹɪn, hiz mɔɹ stʃɹɔŋli tɑvɝən ðən ɛniwʌn sɪns ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. jɛstɝdeɪ, ɪn ðɪs vɪlədʒ, ðə pæɾɝn . . . muvd, ʃeɪpt ɪtsɛlf ɝaʊn ɪm laɪk kleɪ ʃeɪpt ɑn ə moʊld. ðə wɛɾɪŋz, ðə waɪtkloʊks, ðiz wɝ ɪnʌf tə seɪ ɹænd hæd bɪn hɪɹ, fəɹ ɛniwʌn u nu tə lɪsən."

"Not his madness," Moiraine said, "if he is far enough gone yet to be called mad. Perrin, he is more strongly ta'veren than anyone since the Age of Legends. Yesterday, in this village, the Pattern . . . moved, shaped itself around him like clay shaped on a mold. The weddings, the Whitecloaks, these were enough to say Rand had been here, for anyone who knew to listen."

pɛɹɪn dʒɹu ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ. "æn ðɪs ɪz wʌt wɪl faɪn ɛvɹiwɛɹ hiz bɪn? laɪt, ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn æftɝ hɪm, ðeɪ kən tʃɹæk ɪm əz izəli əz wi kæn."

Perrin drew a long breath. "And this is what we'll find everywhere he's been? Light, if there are Shadowspawn after him, they can track him as easily as we can."

"pɝhæps," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "pɝhæps nɑt. noʊ wʌn noʊz ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt tɑvɝən əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɹænd." fəɹ dʒʌst ə moʊmənt ʃi saʊndəd vɛkst ət nɑt noʊɪŋ. "ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ wɑz ðə moʊst stʃɹɔŋli tɑvɝən ə hum ɛni ɹaɪɾɪŋz ɹɪmeɪn. ən hɔkwɪŋ wɑz ɪn noʊ weɪ əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɹænd."

"Perhaps," Moiraine said. "Perhaps not. No one knows anything about ta'veren as strong as Rand." For just a moment she sounded vexed at not knowing. "Artur Hawkwing was the most strongly ta'veren of whom any writings remain. And Hawkwing was in no way as strong as Rand."

"ɪɾ ɪz sɛd," læn pʊɾ ɪn, "ðæt ðəɹ wɝ taɪmz wən pipəl ɪn ðə seɪm ɹum wɪð hɔkwɪŋ spoʊk tʃɹuθ wən ðeɪ mɛn tə laɪ, meɪd dɪsɪʒənz ðeɪ hæd nɑɾ ivən noʊn ðeɪ wɝ kɑntəmpleɪɾɪŋ. taɪmz wən ɛvɹi tɔs ə ðə daɪs, ɛvɹi tɝn ə ðə kɑɹdz, wɛn ɪz weɪ. bʌɾ oʊnli taɪmz."

"It is said," Lan put in, "that there were times when people in the same room with Hawkwing spoke truth when they meant to lie, made decisions they had not even known they were contemplating. Times when every toss of the dice, every turn of the cards, went his way. But only times."

"ju min jə doʊnt noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "hi kəd liv ə tʃɹeɪl ʌv wɛɾɪŋz ən waɪtkloʊks ɡɔn mæɾ ɔl ðə weɪ tə tɛɹ."

"You mean you don't know," Perrin said. "He could leave a trail of weddings and Whitecloaks gone mad all the way to Tear."

"aɪ min aɪ noʊ əz mʌtʃ əz ðəɹ ɪz tə noʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli. hɝ dɑɹk-aɪd ɡeɪz tʃæstaɪz pɛɹɪn laɪk ə wɪp. "ðə pæɾɝn wivz faɪnli ɝaʊn tɑvɝən, ən ʌðɝz kən fɑloʊ ðə ʃeɪp ə ðoʊz θɹɛdz ɪf ðeɪ noʊ wɛɹ tə lʊk. bi kɛɹfəl jəɹ tʌŋ dʌz nɑɾ ənɹævəl mɔɹ ðən jə kən noʊ."

"I mean I know as much as there is to know," Moiraine said sharply. Her dark-eyed gaze chastised Perrin like a whip. "The Pattern weaves finely around ta'veren, and others can follow the shape of those threads if they know where to look. Be careful your tongue does not unravel more than you can know."

ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf pɛɹɪn hʌntʃt ɪz ʃoʊldɝz əz ɪf ʃi wɝ dɪlɪvɝɪŋ ɹil bloʊz. "wɛl, jə hæd bɛɾɝ bi ɡlæɾ aɪ oʊpən maɪ maʊð ðɪs taɪm. sɪmiən noʊz jəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi wɑns jə tə hil ɪz bɹʌðɝ noʊm ə səm sɪknəs. ɪf aɪ hædn tɔk tə hɪm, hi wəd nɛvɝ əv wɝkt ʌp nɝv ɪnʌf tə æsk, bʌɾ i maɪɾ əv stɑɹɾəd tɔkɪŋ əmʌŋ ɪz fɹɛnz."

In spite of himself Perrin hunched his shoulders as if she were delivering real blows. "Well, you had better be glad I opened my mouth this time. Simion knows you're Aes Sedai. He wants you to Heal his brother Noam of some sickness. If I hadn't talked to him, he would never have worked up nerve enough to ask, but he might have started talking among his friends."

læn kɑt mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪ, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən ðeɪ stɛɹɾ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ. ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd ði ɛɹ əbaʊɾ ɪm ʌv ə wʊlf əbaʊt tə lip. faɪnəli, mɔɪɹeɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "noʊ," ʃi sɛd.

Lan caught Moiraine's eye, and for a moment they stared at one another. The Warder had the air about him of a wolf about to leap. Finally, Moiraine shook her head. "No," she said.

"æz jə wɪʃ. ɪts jəɹ dɪsɪʒən." læn saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i θɔt ʃi hæd meɪd ðə ɹɔŋ wʌn, bʌt ðə tɛnʃən lɛf hɪm.

"As you wish. It is your decision." Lan sounded as if he thought she had made the wrong one, but the tension left him.

pɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ ət ðɛm. "ju wɝ θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv. . . . sɪmiən kʊdn tɛl ɛniwʌn ɪf i wɝ dɛd, kəd hi?"

Perrin stared at them. "You were thinking of. . . . Simion couldn't tell anyone if he were dead, could he?"

"hi wɪl nɑt daɪ baɪ maɪ ækʃənz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ kænɑt, ən wɪl nɑt, pɹɑməs ðəɾ ɪɾəl ɔlweɪz bi soʊ. wi mʌs faɪn ɹænd, ən əl nɑt feɪl ɪn ðæt. ɪz ðət spoʊkən pleɪnli ɪnʌf fəɹ ju?" kɑɾ ɪn əɹ ɡeɪz, pɛɹɪn kəd meɪk noʊ ænsɝ. ʃi nɑɾəd əz ɪf ɪz saɪləns wɝ ænsɝ ɪnʌf. "naʊ teɪk mi tə sɪmiən."

"He will not die by my actions," Moiraine said. "But I cannot, and will not, promise that it will always be so. We must find Rand, and I will not fail in that. Is that spoken plainly enough for you?" Caught in her gaze, Perrin could make no answer. She nodded as if his silence were answer enough. "Now take me to Simion."

ðə dɔɹ tə lɔɪəlz ɹum stʊɾ oʊpən, spɪlɪŋ ə pul ə kændəllaɪɾ ɪndə ðə hɔl. ðə tu bɛdz ɪnsaɪd hæd bɪn pʊʃt təɡɛðɝ, ən lɔɪəl ən sɪmiən wɝ siɾəd ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv wʌn. ðə tʃɪnləs mæn wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət lɔɪəl wɪð ɪz maʊθ oʊpən ən ən ɪkspɹɛʃən ʌv wʌndɝ ɑn ɪz feɪs.

The door to Loial's room stood open, spilling a pool of candlelight into the hall. The two beds inside had been pushed together, and Loial and Simion were seated on the edge of one. The chinless man was staring up at Loial with his mouth open and an expression of wonder on his face.

"oʊ, jɛs, ðə stɛɾɪŋ ɑɹ wʌndɝfəl," lɔɪəl wɑz seɪɪŋ. "ðɛɹ ɪz sətʃ pis ðɛɹ, ʌndɝ ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz. jə hjumənz meɪ hæv jəɹ wɔɹz ən stʃɹaɪf, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ɛvɝ tʃɹʌbəlz ðə stɛɾɪŋ. wi tɛn ðə tʃɹiz ən lɪv ɪn hɑɹməni. . . ." hi tʃɹeɪld ɔf wən i sɔ mɔɪɹeɪn, wɪð læn ən pɛɹɪn bɪhaɪn hɝ.

"Oh, yes, the stedding are wonderful," Loial was saying. "There is such peace there, under the Great Trees. You humans may have your wars and strife, but nothing ever troubles the stedding. We tend the trees and live in harmony. . . ." He trailed off when he saw Moiraine, with Lan and Perrin behind her.

sɪmiən skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fit, boʊɪŋ ən bækɪŋ əweɪ əntɪl i keɪm ʌp əɡɛns ðə fɑɹ wɔl. "ʌ . . . ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs. . . . ʌ . . . ʌ. . . ." ivən ðɛn, hi kəntɪnjud bɑbɪŋ laɪk ə tɔɪ ɑn ə stʃɹɪŋ.

Simion scrambled to his feet, bowing and backing away until he came up against the far wall. "Uh . . . good mistress. . . . Uh . . . uh. . . ." Even then, he continued bobbing like a toy on a string.

"ʃoʊ mi tə jəɹ bɹʌðɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn kəmændəd, "æn əl də wʌɾ aɪ kæn. pɛɹɪn, jəl kʌm, tu, sɪns ðɪs ɡʊd mæn spoʊk tə jə fɝst." læn lɪftəɾ ən aɪbɹaʊ, ən ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ɪf wi ɔl ɡoʊ, wi maɪɾ ətʃɹækt ətɛnʃən. pɛɹɪn kən ɡɪmi wʌt pɹətɛkʃən aɪ nid."

"Show me to your brother," Moiraine commanded, "and I will do what I can. Perrin, you will come, too, since this good man spoke to you first." Lan lifted an eyebrow, and she shook her head. "If we all go, we might attract attention. Perrin can give me what protection I need."

læn nɑɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli, ðən ɡeɪv pɛɹɪn ə hɑɹd lʊk. "si ðət jə du, blæksmɪθ. ɪf ɛni hɑɹm bɪfɔlz hɝ. . . ." hɪz koʊl blu aɪz fɪnɪʃt ðə pɹɑməs.

Lan nodded reluctantly, then gave Perrin a hard look. "See that you do, blacksmith. If any harm befalls her. . . ." His cold blue eyes finished the promise.

sɪmiən snætʃt wʌn ə ðə kændəlz ən skɝiɾ ɪndə ðə hɔlweɪ, stɪl boʊɪŋ soʊ ðə kændəllaɪt meɪd ðɛɹ ʃædoʊz dæns. "ðɪs weɪ - ʌ - ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs. ðɪs weɪ."

Simion snatched one of the candles and scurried into the hallway, still bowing so the candlelight made their shadows dance. "This way - uh - good mistress. This way."

bɪɑn ðə dɔɹ ət ði ɛn ə ðə hɔl, aʊtsaɪd stɛɹz lɛd daʊn tə ə kɹæmpt æliweɪ, bɪtwin ɪn ən steɪbəl. naɪt ʃɹæŋk ðə kændəl tə ə flɪkɝɪŋ pɪnpɔɪnt. ðə hæf mun wɑz ʌp ɪn ə stɑɹ-flɛk skaɪ, ɡɪvɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf laɪt fəɹ pɛɹɪnz aɪz. hi wʌndɝd wən mɔɪɹeɪn wəd tɛl sɪmiən i dɪd nɑɾ əv tə kip boʊɪŋ, bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ dɪd. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡlaɪɾɪd əlɔŋ, klʌtʃɪŋ əɹ skɝts tə kip əm aʊɾ ə ðə mʌd, əz ðoʊ ðə dɑɹk pæsədʒ wɝ ə pæləs hɔl ən ʃi ə kwin. ði ɛɹ wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi kulɪŋ; naɪts stɪl kæɹiɾ ɛkoʊz ʌv wɪntɝ.

Beyond the door at the end of the hall, outside stairs led down to a cramped alleyway, between inn and stable. Night shrank the candle to a flickering pinpoint. The half moon was up in a star-flecked sky, giving more than enough light for Perrin's eyes. He wondered when Moiraine would tell Simion he did not have to keep bowing, but she never did. The Aes Sedai glided along, clutching her skirts to keep them out of the mud, as though the dark passage were a palace hall and she a queen. The air was already cooling; nights still carried echoes of winter.

"ðɪs weɪ." sɪmiən lɛɾ əm bæk tə ə smɔl ʃɛd bɪhaɪn ðə steɪbəl ən hɝidli ənbæɹɹd ðə dɔɹ. "ðɪs weɪ." sɪmiən pɔɪntəd. "ðɛɹ, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs. ðɛɹ. maɪ bɹʌðɝ. noʊm."

"This way." Simion led them back to a small shed behind the stable and hurriedly unbarred the door. "This way." Simion pointed. "There, good mistress. There. My brother. Noam."

ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə ʃɛd hæd bɪn bɑɹɾ ɔf wɪð slæts ʌv wʊd; heɪstəli, baɪ ðə ɹʌf lʊk ʌv ɪt. ə staʊɾ aɪɝn lɑk ɪn ə hæsp hɛld ʃʌɾ ə kɹud dɔɹ ʌv wʊɾən slæts. bɪhaɪn ðoʊz bɑɹz, ə mæn leɪ spɹɔld ɑn ɪz stʌmək ɑn ðə stʃɹɔ-kʌvɝd flɔɹ. hi wɑz bɛɹfʊt, hɪz ʃɝɾ ən bɹitʃɪz ɹɪpt əz ɪf i hæd tɔɹn əɾ əm wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ haʊ tə teɪk əm ɔf. ðəɹ wɑz ən oʊɾɝ ʌv ənwɑʃt flɛʃ ðət pɛɹɪn θɔɾ ivən sɪmiən ən mɔɪɹeɪn mʌst smɛl.

The far end of the shed had been barred off with slats of wood; hastily, by the rough look of it. A stout iron lock in a hasp held shut a crude door of wooden slats. Behind those bars, a man lay sprawled on his stomach on the straw-covered floor. He was barefoot, his shirt and breeches ripped as if he had torn at them without knowing how to take them off. There was an odor of unwashed flesh that Perrin thought even Simion and Moiraine must smell.

noʊm lɪftəɾ ɪz hɛɾ ən stɛɹɾ əɾ əm saɪlənli, wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl əbaʊɾ ɪm tə sədʒɛst i wɑz sɪmiənz bɹʌðɝ - hi hæɾ ə tʃɪn, fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ən i wɑz ə bɪɡ mæn, wɪð hɛvi ʃoʊldɝz - bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt wʌt stæɡɝd pɛɹɪn. noʊm stɛɹɾ əɾ əm wɪð bɝnɪʃt ɡoʊldən aɪz.

Noam lifted his head and stared at them silently, without expression. There was nothing at all about him to suggest he was Simion's brother - he had a chin, for one thing, and he was a big man, with heavy shoulders - but that was not what staggered Perrin. Noam stared at them with burnished golden eyes.

"hid bɪn tɔkɪŋ kɹeɪzi ɔlmoʊst ə jɪɹ, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs, seɪɪŋ i kəd . . . kəd tɔk wɪð wʊlvz. ən ɪz aɪz. . . ." sɪmiən dɑɹɾɪd ə ɡlæns ət pɛɹɪn. "wɛl, hid tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt wən hid dʒɹʌŋk tu mʌtʃ. ɛvɹibɑɾi læft ət hɪm. ðən ə mʌnθ əɹ soʊ əɡoʊ, hi dɪdn kʌm tə taʊn. aɪ wɛn aʊt tə si wʌt wɑz ðə mæɾɝ, ən aɪ faʊn ɪm - laɪk ðɪs."

"He'd been talking crazy almost a year, good mistress, saying he could . . . could talk with wolves. And his eyes. . . ." Simion darted a glance at Perrin. "Well, he'd talk about it when he'd drunk too much. Everybody laughed at him. Then a month or so ago, he didn't come to town. I went out to see what was the matter, and I found him - like this."

kɔʃəsli, ənwɪlɪŋli, pɛɹɪn ɹitʃt aʊt təwɔɹd noʊm əz i wəɾ əv təwɔɹɾ ə wʊlf. ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ðə wʊdz wɪð ðə koʊld wɪn ɪn ɪz noʊz. kwɪk dæʃ fɹəm kʌvɝ, tiθ snæpɪŋ ət hæmstʃɹɪŋz. teɪst ə blʌd, ɹɪtʃ ɑn ðə tʌŋ. kɪl. pɛɹɪn dʒɝk bæk əz i wəɾ əv fɹəm ə faɪɝ, sil hɪmsɛlf ɔf. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt θɔts əɾ ɔl, ɹɪli, dʒʌst ə keɪɑɾɪk dʒʌmbəl ə dɪzaɪɝz ən ɪmədʒəz, pɑɹt mɛmɹi, pɑɹt jɝnɪŋ. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ wʊlf ðəɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. hi pʊɾ ə hæn tə ðə wɔl tə stɛɾi hɪmsɛlf; hɪz niz fɛlt wik. laɪt hɛlp mi!

Cautiously, unwillingly, Perrin reached out toward Noam as he would have toward a wolf. Running through the woods with the cold wind in his nose. Quick dash from cover, teeth snapping at hamstrings. Taste of blood, rich on the tongue. Kill. Perrin jerked back as he would have from a fire, sealed himself off. They were not thoughts at all, really, just a chaotic jumble of desires and images, part memory, part yearning. But there was more wolf there than anything else. He put a hand to the wall to steady himself; his knees felt weak. Light help me!

mɔɪɹeɪn pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ðə lɑk.

Moiraine put a hand on the lock.

"mæstɝ hɛɹɑɾ əz ðə ki, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf hɪl - "

"Master Harod has the key, good mistress. I don't know if he'll - "

ʃi ɡeɪv ə tʌɡ, ən ðə lɑk spɹæŋ oʊpən. sɪmiən ɡeɪpt ət hɝ. ʃi lɪftəd ðə lɑk fɹi ʌv ðə hæsp, ən ðə tʃɪnləs mæn tɝn tə pɛɹɪn.

She gave a tug, and the lock sprang open. Simion gaped at her. She lifted the lock free of the hasp, and the chinless man turned to Perrin.

"ɪz ðət seɪf, ɡʊd mæstɝ? hiz maɪ bɹʌðɝ, bʌɾ i bɪt mʌðɝ ɹun wən ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə hɛlp, ən i . . . hi kɪld ə kaʊ. wɪð ɪz tiθ," hi fɪnɪʃt feɪnli.

"Is that safe, good master? He's my brother, but he bit Mother Roon when she tried to help, and he . . . he killed a cow. With his teeth," he finished faintly.

"mɔɪɹeɪn," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "ðə mæn ɪz deɪnʒɝəs."

"Moiraine," Perrin said, "the man is dangerous."

"ɔl mɛn ɑɹ deɪnʒɝəs," ʃi ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪn ə kul vɔɪs. "naʊ bi kwaɪət." ʃi oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ən wɛn ɪn. pɛɹɪn hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ.

"All men are dangerous," she replied in a cool voice. "Now be quiet." She opened the door and went in. Perrin held his breath.

əɾ əɹ fɝst stɛp, noʊmz lɪps pil bæk fɹəm ɪz tiθ, ən i bɪɡæn tə ɡɹaʊl, ə ɹʌmbəl ðət dipən tɪl ɪz hoʊl bɑɾi kwɪvɝd. mɔɪɹeɪn ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪt. stɪl ɡɹoʊlɪŋ, noʊm ɹɪəl bækwɝdz ɪn ðə stʃɹɔ əz ʃi keɪm kloʊsɝ tə hɪm, əntɪl i hæd bæk hɪmsɛlf ɪndə ə kɔɹnɝ. əɹ ʃi hæd bæk hɪm.

At her first step, Noam's lips peeled back from his teeth, and he began to growl, a rumble that deepened till his whole body quivered. Moiraine ignored it. Still growling, Noam wriggled backwards in the straw as she came closer to him, until he had backed himself into a corner. Or she had backed him.

sloʊli, kɑmli, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛlt ən tʊk ɪz hɛd bɪtwin əɹ hænz. noʊmz ɡɹaʊl haɪɾənd tə ə snɑɹl, ðən teɪld ɔf ɪn ə wɪmpɝ bɪfɔɹ pɛɹɪn kəd muv. fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmən mɔɪɹeɪn hɛl noʊmz hɛd, ðən dʒʌst əz kɑmli ɹilist ɪɾ ən ɹoʊz. pɛɹɪnz θɹoʊt taɪɾənd əz ʃi tɝn əɹ bæk ɑn noʊm ən wɔkt aʊɾ ə ðə keɪdʒ, bʌt ðə mæn oʊnli stɛɹɾ æftɝ hɝ. ʃi pʊʃt ðə slæɾɪd dɔɹ tə, slɪp ðə lɑk bæk θɹu ðə hæsp, nɑt bɑðɝɪŋ tə snæp ɪt ʃʌt - ən noʊm hɝl hɪmsɛlf snɑɹlɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wʊɾən bɑɹz. hi bɪɾ ət ðɛm, ən bæɾɝd əm wɪð ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, tʃɹaɪd tə fɔɹs ɪz hɛd bɪtwin ðɛm, ɔl ðə waɪl snɑɹlɪŋ ən snæpɪŋ.

Slowly, calmly, the Aes Sedai knelt and took his head between her hands. Noam's growl heightened to a snarl, then tailed off in a whimper before Perrin could move. For a long moment Moiraine held Noam's head, then just as calmly released it and rose. Perrin's throat tightened as she turned her back on Noam and walked out of the cage, but the man only stared after her. She pushed the slatted door to, slipped the lock back through the hasp, not bothering to snap it shut - and Noam hurled himself snarling against the wooden bars. He bit at them, and battered them with his shoulders, tried to force his head between them, all the while snarling and snapping.

mɔɪɹeɪn bɹʌʃt stʃɹɔ fɹəm əɹ skɝt wɪð ə stɛɾi hæn ən noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən.

Moiraine brushed straw from her skirt with a steady hand and no expression.

"ju də teɪk tʃænsəz," pɛɹɪn bɹiðd. ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɪm - ə stɛɾi, noʊɪŋ ɡeɪz - ən i dʒɹɑpt ɪz aɪz. hɪz jɛloʊ aɪz.

"You do take chances," Perrin breathed. She looked at him - a steady, knowing gaze - and he dropped his eyes. His yellow eyes.

sɪmiən wɑz stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪz bɹʌðɝ. "kæn jə hɛlp hɪm, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs?" hi æsk hɔɹsli.

Simion was staring at his brother. "Can you help him, good mistress?" he asked hoarsely.

"aɪ æm sɑɹi, sɪmiən," ʃi sɛd.

"I am sorry, Simion," she said.

"kæn jə də ɛniθɪŋ, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs? sʌmθɪŋ? wʌn ə ðoʊz" - hɪz vɔɪs fɛl tə ə wɪspɝ - "ɛɛs sədaɪ θɪŋz?"

"Can't you do anything, good mistress? Something? One of those" - his voice fell to a whisper - "Aes Sedai things?"

"hilɪŋ ɪz nɑɾ ə sɪmpəl mæɾɝ, sɪmiən, ən ɪt kʌmz fɹəm wɪðɪn əz mʌtʃ əz fɹəm ðə hilɝ. ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ hɪɹ ðət ɹɪmɛmbɝz biɪŋ noʊm, nʌθɪŋ ðət ɹɪmɛmbɝz biɪŋ ə mæn. ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ mæps ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ tə ʃoʊ hɪm ðə pæθ bæk, ən nʌθɪŋ lɛf tə teɪk ðət pæθ. noʊm ɪz ɡɔn, sɪmiən."

"Healing is not a simple matter, Simion, and it comes from within as much as from the Healer. There is nothing here that remembers being Noam, nothing that remembers being a man. There are no maps remaining to show him the path back, and nothing left to take that path. Noam is gone, Simion."

"hi - hi dʒʌs juz tə tɔk fʌni, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs, wən hid hæd tu mʌtʃ tə dʒɹɪŋk. hi dʒʌst. . . ." sɪmiən skɹʌbd ə hæn əkɹɔs ɪz aɪz ən blɪŋkt. "θæŋk ju, ɡʊd mɪstʃɹəs. aɪ noʊ juɾ əv dʌn sʌmθɪŋ ɪf jə kʊd." ʃi pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, mɝmɝd kʌmfɝɾɪŋ wɝdz, ən ðən ʃi wɑz ɡɔn fɹəm ðə ʃɛd.

"He - he just used to talk funny, good mistress, when he'd had too much to drink. He just. . . ." Simion scrubbed a hand across his eyes and blinked. "Thank you, good mistress. I know you'd have done something if you could." She put a hand on his shoulder, murmured comforting words, and then she was gone from the shed.

pɛɹɪn nu hi ʃəd fɑloʊ hɝ, bʌt ðə mæn - wʌt hæd wʌns bɪn ə mæn - snæpɪŋ ət ðə wʊɾən bɑɹz, hɛl hɪm. hi tʊk ə kwɪk stɛp ən sɝpɹaɪz hɪmsɛlf baɪ ɹimuvɪŋ ðə dæŋɡəlɪŋ lɑk fɹəm ðə hæsp. ðə lɑk wɑz ə ɡʊd wʌn, ðə wɝk ʌv ə mæstɝ smɪθ.

Perrin knew he should follow her, but the man - what had once been a man - snapping at the wooden bars, held him. He took a quick step and surprised himself by removing the dangling lock from the hasp. The lock was a good one, the work of a master smith.

"ɡʊd mæstɝ?"

"Good master?"

pɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ ət ðə lɑk ɪn ɪz hænd, ət ðə mæn bɪhaɪn ɪn ðə keɪdʒ. noʊm hæd stɑp baɪɾɪŋ ət ðə slæts; hi stɛɹd bæk ət pɛɹɪn wɛɹəli, pæntɪŋ. səm ə hɪz tiθ hæd bɹoʊkən ɔf dʒæədli.

Perrin stared at the lock in his hand, at the man behind in the cage. Noam had stopped biting at the slats; he stared back at Perrin warily, panting. Some of his teeth had broken off jaggedly.

"ju kən liv ɪm ɪn hɪɹ fɝɛvɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪ - aɪ doʊn θɪŋk hɪl ɛvɝ ɡɛɾ ɛni bɛɾɝ."

"You can leave him in here forever," Perrin said, "but I - I don't think he'll ever get any better."

"ɪf i ɡɛts aʊt, ɡʊd mæstɝ, hɪl daɪ!"

"If he gets out, good master, he'll die!"

"hi wɪl daɪ ɪn hɪɹ əɹ aʊt ðɛɹ, sɪmiən. aʊt ðɛɹ, ət lis hɪl bi fɹi, ən əz hæpi əz i kən bi. hiz nɑt jəɹ bɹʌðɝ ɛnimɔɹ, bʌt jəɹ ðə wʌn u hæz tə dɪsaɪd. jə kən liv ɪm ɪn hɪɹ fəɹ pipəl tə stɛɹ æt, liv ɪm tə stɛɹ ət ðə bɑɹz ə hɪz keɪdʒ əntɪl i paɪnz əweɪ. jə kænɑt keɪdʒ ə wʊlf, sɪmiən, nɑɾ ən ɪkspɛkt ɪt tə bi hæpi. əɹ lɪv lɔŋ."

"He will die in here or out there, Simion. Out there, at least he'll be free, and as happy as he can be. He is not your brother anymore, but you're the one who has to decide. You can leave him in here for people to stare at, leave him to stare at the bars of his cage until he pines away. You cannot cage a wolf, Simion, not and expect it to be happy. Or live long."

"jɛs," sɪmiən sɛd sloʊli. "jɛs, aɪ si." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən nɑɾəd, ən dʒɝkt ɪz hɛd təwɔɹd ðə ʃɛd dɔɹ.

"Yes," Simion said slowly. "Yes, I see." He hesitated, then nodded, and jerked his head toward the shed door.

ðət wɑz ɔl ði ænsɝ pɛɹɪn niɾəd. hi swʌŋ bæk ðə slæɾɪd dɔɹ ən stʊɾ əsaɪd.

That was all the answer Perrin needed. He swung back the slatted door and stood aside.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt noʊm stɛɹɾ ət ði oʊpənɪŋ. əbɹʌpli hi dɑɹɾɪd aʊɾ ə ðə keɪdʒ, ɹʌnɪŋ ɑn ɔl fɔɹz, bʌt wɪð sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ ədʒɪləɾi. aʊɾ ə ðə keɪdʒ, aʊɾ ə ðə ʃɛd, ən ɪndə ðə naɪt. ðə laɪt hɛlp əs boʊθ, pɛɹɪn θɔt.

For a moment Noam stared at the opening. Abruptly he darted out of the cage, running on all fours, but with surprising agility. Out of the cage, out of the shed, and into the night. The Light help us both, Perrin thought.

"aɪ səpoʊz ɪts bɛɾɝ fəɹ ɪm tə bi fɹi." sɪmiən ɡeɪv hɪmsɛlf ə ʃeɪk. "bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt mæstɝ hɛɹɑd wɪl seɪ wən i faɪnz ðət dɔɹ stændɪŋ oʊpən ən noʊm ɡɔn."

"I suppose it's better for him to be free." Simion gave himself a shake. "But I don't know what Master Harod will say when he finds that door standing open and Noam gone."

pɛɹɪn ʃʌt ðə keɪdʒ dɔɹ; ðə bɪɡ lɑk meɪɾ ə ʃɑɹp klɪk əz i ɹifæsən ɪt. "lɛɾ ɪm pʌzəl ðəɾ aʊt."

Perrin shut the cage door; the big lock made a sharp click as he refastened it. "Let him puzzle that out."

sɪmiən bɑɹkt ə kwɪk læf, əbɹʌpli kʌɾ ɔf. "hil meɪk sʌmθɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. ðeɪ ɔl wɪl. səm ə ðɛm seɪ noʊm tɝn ɪndə ə wʊlf - fɝ ən ɔl! - wən i bɪt mʌðɝ ɹun. ɪts nɑt tʃɹu, bʌt ðeɪ seɪ ɪt."

Simion barked a quick laugh, abruptly cut off. "He'll make something out of it. They all will. Some of them say Noam turned into a wolf - fur and all! - when he bit Mother Roon. It's not true, but they say it."

ʃɪvɝɪŋ, pɛɹɪn lin ɪz hɛɾ əɡɛns ðə keɪdʒ dɔɹ. hi meɪ nɑɾ əv fɝ, bʌt hiz ə wʊlf. hiz wʊlf, nɑt mæn. laɪt, hɛlp mi.

Shivering, Perrin leaned his head against the cage door. He may not have fur, but he's a wolf. He's wolf, not man. Light, help me.

"wi dɪdn kip ɪm hɪɹ ɔlweɪz," sɪmiən sɛd sʌɾənli. "hi wɑz ət mʌðɝ ɹunz haʊs, bʌt ʃi ən aɪ ɡɑt mæstɝ hɛɹɑd tə muv ɪm hɪɹ æftɝ ðə waɪtkloʊks keɪm. ðeɪ ɔlweɪz əv ə lɪst ə neɪmz, dɑɹkfɹɛnz ðəɹ lʊkɪŋ fɔɹ. ɪt wɑz noʊmz aɪz, jə si. wʌn ə ðə neɪmz ðə waɪtkloʊks hæd wɑz ə fɛloʊ neɪm pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə, ə blæksmɪθ. ðeɪ sɛd hiz jɛloʊ aɪz, ən ɹʌnz wɪð wʊlvz. jə kən si waɪ aɪ dɪdnt wɑn əm tə noʊ əbaʊt noʊm."

"We didn't keep him here always," Simion said suddenly. "He was at Mother Roon's house, but she and I got Master Harod to move him here after the Whitecloaks came. They always have a list of names, Darkfriends they're looking for. It was Noam's eyes, you see. One of the names the Whitecloaks had was a fellow named Perrin Aybara, a blacksmith. They said he has yellow eyes, and runs with wolves. You can see why I didn't want them to know about Noam."

pɛɹɪn tɝn ɪz hɛɾ ɪnʌf tə lʊk ət sɪmiən oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "du jə θɪŋk ðɪs pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə ɪz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd?"

Perrin turned his head enough to look at Simion over his shoulder. "Do you think this Perrin Aybara is a Darkfriend?"

"eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnd wʊdn kɛɹ ɪf maɪ bɹʌðɝ daɪɾ ɪn ə keɪdʒ. aɪ səpoʊz ʃi faʊn jə sun æftɝ ɪt hæpənd. ɪn taɪm tə hɛlp. aɪ wɪʃ ʃid kʌm tə dʒɹə ə fju mʌnθs əɡoʊ."

"A Darkfriend wouldn't care if my brother died in a cage. I suppose she found you soon after it happened. In time to help. I wish she'd come to Jarra a few months ago."

pɛɹɪn wɑz əʃeɪm ðəɾ i hæɾ ɛvɝ kəmpɛɹd ðə mæn tə ə fɹɑɡ. "æn aɪ wɪʃ ʃi cʊɾə dʌn sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ hɪm." bɝn mi, aɪ wɪʃ ʃi kʊd. sʌɾənli ɪt bɝst ɑn ɪm ðət ðə hoʊl vɪlədʒ mʌs noʊ əbaʊt noʊm. əbaʊɾ ɪz aɪz. "sɪmiən, wəd jə bɹɪŋ mi sʌmθɪŋ tə iɾ ɪn maɪ ɹum?" mæstɝ hɛɹɑɾ ən ðə ɹɛs maɪɾ əv bɪn tu teɪkən wɪð stɛɹɪŋ ət lɔɪəl tə noʊɾəs ɪz aɪz bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ðeɪ ʃʊɹli wəɾ ɪf i eɪɾ ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum.

Perrin was ashamed that he had ever compared the man to a frog. "And I wish she could have done something for him." Burn me, I wish she could. Suddenly it burst on him that the whole village must know about Noam. About his eyes. "Simion, would you bring me something to eat in my room?" Master Harod and the rest might have been too taken with staring at Loial to notice his eyes before, but they surely would if he ate in the common room.

"ʌv kɔɹs. ən ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, tu. jə doʊn əv tə kʌm daʊn əntɪl jə ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə ɡɛɾ ɑn jəɹ hɔɹs."

"Of course. And in the morning, too. You don't have to come down until you are ready to get on your horse."

"ju ɑɹ ə ɡʊd mæn, sɪmiən. ə ɡʊd mæn." sɪmiən lʊk soʊ pliz ðət pɛɹɪn fɛlt əʃeɪmd ɔl oʊvɝ əɡɛn.

"You are a good man, Simion. A good man." Simion looked so pleased that Perrin felt ashamed all over again.


tʃæptɝ naɪn


CHAPTER 9

wʊlf dʒɹimz


Wolf Dreams

pɛɹɪn ɹɪtɝn tə hɪz ɹum baɪ ðə bæk weɪ, ən æftɝ ə taɪm sɪmiən keɪm ʌp wɪð ə kʌvɝd tʃɹeɪ. ðə klɔθ dɪd nɑt hoʊld ɪn ðə smɛlz ə ɹoʊstəd mʌɾən, switbiənz, tɝnəps, ən fɹɛʃli beɪk bɹɛd, bʌt pɛɹɪn leɪ ɑn ɪz bɛd, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə waɪtwɑʃt silɪŋ, əntɪl ði ɝoʊməz ɡɹu koʊld. ɪmədʒəz ə noʊm ɹæn θɹu hɪz hɛɾ oʊvɝ ən oʊvɝ əɡɛn. noʊm tʃuɪŋ ət ðə wʊɾən slæts. noʊm ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs. hi tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk ə lɑk-meɪkɪŋ, ʌv ðə kɛɹfəl kwɛntʃɪŋ ən ʃeɪpɪŋ ə ðə stil, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt wɝk.

Perrin returned to his room by the back way, and after a time Simion came up with a covered tray. The cloth did not hold in the smells of roasted mutton, sweetbeans, turnips, and freshly baked bread, but Perrin lay on his bed, staring at the whitewashed ceiling, until the aromas grew cold. Images of Noam ran through his head over and over again. Noam chewing at the wooden slats. Noam running off into the darkness. He tried to think of lock-making, of the careful quenching and shaping of the steel, but it did not work.

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹeɪ, hi ɹoʊz ən meɪɾ ɪz weɪ daʊn ðə hɔl tə mɔɪɹeɪnz ɹum. ʃi ænsɝɾ ɪz ɹæp ɑn ðə dɔɹ wɪð, "kʌm ɪn, pɛɹɪn."

Ignoring the tray, he rose and made his way down the hall to Moiraine's room. She answered his rap on the door with, "Come in, Perrin."

fəɹ ən ɪnstən ɔl ði oʊl stɔɹiz əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ stɝɾ əɡɛn, bʌɾ i pʊʃt əm əsaɪɾ ən oʊpən ðə dɔɹ.

For an instant all the old stories about Aes Sedai stirred again, but he pushed them aside and opened the door.

mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz əloʊn - fəɹ wɪtʃ i wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl - sɪɾɪŋ wɪð ən ɪŋk bɑɾəl bælənst ɑn əɹ ni, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə smɔl, lɛðɝ-baʊn bʊk. ʃi kɔɹk ðə bɑɾəl ən waɪp ðə stil nɪb ə hɝ pɛn ɑn ə smɔl skɹæp ə pɑɹtʃmənt wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. ðəɹ wɑz ə faɪɝ ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪs.

Moiraine was alone - for which he was grateful - sitting with an ink bottle balanced on her knee, writing in a small, leather-bound book. She corked the bottle and wiped the steel nib of her pen on a small scrap of parchment without looking at him. There was a fire in the fireplace.

"aɪ hæv bɪn ɪkspɛktɪŋ jə fəɹ səm taɪm," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ hæv nɑt spoʊkən əbaʊt ðɪs bɪfɔɹ kəz ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs jə dɪd nɑt wɑn mi tə. æftɝ tənaɪt, ðoʊ. . . . wʌt dʒju wɑnə noʊ?"

"I have been expecting you for some time," she said. "I have not spoken about this before because it was obvious you did not want me to. After tonight, though. . . . What do you want to know?"

"ɪz ðət wʌɾ aɪ kən ɪkspɛkt?" hi æskt. "tə ɛn laɪk ðæt?"

"Is that what I can expect?" he asked. "To end like that?"

"pɝhæps."

"Perhaps."

hi weɪɾəd fəɹ mɔɹ, bʌt ʃi oʊnli pʊt pɛn ən ɪŋk əweɪ ɪn ðɛɹ smɔl keɪs ə pɑlɪʃt ɹoʊzwʊɾ ən blu ɑn əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ tə dʒɹaɪ ɪt. "ɪz ðəɾ ɔl? mɔɪɹeɪn, doʊnt ɡɪmi slɪpɝi ɛɛs sədaɪ ænsɝz. ɪf jə noʊ sʌmθɪŋ, tɛl mi. pliz."

He waited for more, but she only put pen and ink away in their small case of polished rosewood and blew on her writing to dry it. "Is that all? Moiraine, don't give me slippery Aes Sedai answers. If you know something, tell me. Please."

"aɪ noʊ vɛɹi lɪɾəl, pɛɹɪn. waɪl sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ʌðɝ ænsɝz əmʌŋ ðə bʊks ən mænjəskɹɪps tu fɹɛnz kip fəɹ ðɛɹ ɹisɝtʃɪz, aɪ faʊn ə kɑpid fɹæɡmən ʌv ə bʊk fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ɪt spoʊk ʌv . . . sɪtʃueɪʃənz laɪk jʊɹz. ðət meɪ bi ði oʊnli kɑpi ɛniwɛɹ ɪn ðə wɝld, ən ɪt dɪd nɑt tɛl mi mʌtʃ."

"I know very little, Perrin. While searching for other answers among the books and manuscripts two friends keep for their researches, I found a copied fragment of a book from the Age of Legends. It spoke of . . . situations like yours. That may be the only copy anywhere in the world, and it did not tell me much."

"wʌt dɪɾ ɪt tɛl ju? ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl ɪz mɔɹ ðən aɪ noʊ naʊ. bɝn mi, aɪv bɪn wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ɹænd ɡoʊɪŋ mæd, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ aɪ hæd tə wɝi əbaʊt maɪsɛlf!"

"What did it tell you? Anything at all is more than I know now. Burn me, I've been worrying about Rand going mad, but I never thought I had to worry about myself!"

"pɛɹɪn, ivən ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ðeɪ nu lɪɾəl ə ðɪs. huɛvɝ ɹoʊɾ ɪt simd ənsɝɾən wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz tʃɹuθ əɹ lɛdʒənd. ən aɪ oʊnli sɔ ə fɹæɡmənt, ɹɪmɛmbɝ. ʃi sɛd ðət səm u tɔk tə wʊlvz lɔs ðɛmsɛlvz, ðət wʌt wɑz hjumən wɑz swɑloʊɾ ʌp baɪ wʊlf. sʌm. wɛðɝ ʃi mɛnt wʌn ɪn tɛn, əɹ faɪv, əɹ naɪn, aɪ də nɑt noʊ."

"Perrin, even in the Age of Legends, they knew little of this. Whoever wrote it seemed uncertain whether it was truth or legend. And I only saw a fragment, remember. She said that some who talked to wolves lost themselves, that what was human was swallowed up by wolf. Some. Whether she meant one in ten, or five, or nine, I do not know."

"aɪ kən ʃʌɾ əm aʊt. aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ aɪ də ɪt, bʌɾ aɪ kən ɹəfjuz tə lɪsən tə ðɛm. aɪ kən ɹəfjuz tə hɪɹ ðɛm. wɪl ðət hɛlp?"

"I can shut them out. I don't know how I do it, but I can refuse to listen to them. I can refuse to hear them. Will that help?"

"ɪt meɪ." ʃi stʌɾid hɪm, simɪŋ tə tʃuz əɹ wɝdz kɛɹfəli. "moʊsli, ʃi ɹoʊɾ ə dʒɹimz. dʒɹimz kən bi deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ ju, pɛɹɪn."

"It may." She studied him, seeming to choose her words carefully. "Mostly, she wrote of dreams. Dreams can be dangerous for you, Perrin."

"ju sɛd ðət wʌns bɪfɔɹ. wʌt dʒju min?"

"You said that once before. What do you mean?"

"əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə hɝ, wʊlvz laɪv pɑɹtli ɪn ðɪs wɝld, ən pɑɹtli ɪn ə wɝld ə dʒɹimz."

"According to her, wolves live partly in this world, and partly in a world of dreams."

"ə wɝld ə dʒɹimz?" hi sɛd dɪsbɪlivɪŋli.

"A world of dreams?" he said disbelievingly.

mɔɪɹeɪn ɡeɪv ɪm ə ʃɑɹp lʊk. "ðæɾ ɪz wʌɾ aɪ sɛd, ən ðəɾ ɪz wʌt ʃi ɹoʊt. ðə weɪ wʊlvz tɔk tə wʌn ənʌðɝ, ðə weɪ ðeɪ tɔk tə ju, ɪz ɪn səm weɪ kənɛktəd tə ðɪs wɝld ə dʒɹimz. aɪ də nɑt kleɪm tə ʌndɝstæn haʊ." ʃi pɔzd, fɹaʊnɪŋ slaɪtli. "fɹʌm wʌɾ aɪ hæv ɹɛɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæd ðə tælən kɔl dʒɹimɪŋ, dʒɹimɝz səmtaɪmz spoʊk ʌv ɛnkaʊntɝɪŋ wʊlvz ɪn ðɛɹ dʒɹimz, ivən wʊlvz ðəɾ æktəɾ əz ɡaɪdz. aɪ fɪɹ jə mʌs lɝn tə bi əz kɛɹfəl slipɪŋ əz weɪkɪŋ, ɪf jə ɪntɛn tə əvɔɪd wʊlvz. ɪf ðəɾ ɪz wʌt jə dɪsaɪd tə du."

Moiraine gave him a sharp look. "That is what I said, and that is what she wrote. The way wolves talk to one another, the way they talk to you, is in some way connected to this world of dreams. I do not claim to understand how." She paused, frowning slightly. "From what I have read of Aes Sedai who had the Talent called Dreaming, Dreamers sometimes spoke of encountering wolves in their dreams, even wolves that acted as guides. I fear you must learn to be as careful sleeping as waking, if you intend to avoid wolves. If that is what you decide to do."

"ɪf ðəɾ ɪz wʌɾ aɪ dɪsaɪd? mɔɪɹeɪn, əl nɑɾ ɛn ʌp laɪk noʊm. aɪ woʊnt!"

"If that is what I decide? Moiraine, I will not end up like Noam. I won't!"

ʃi aɪɾ ɪm kwɪtsɪkli, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd sloʊli. "ju spik əz ɪf jə kən meɪk ɔl jəɹ oʊn tʃɔɪsəz, pɛɹɪn. jə ɑɹ tɑvɝən, ɹɪmɛmbɝ." hi tɝn ɪz bæk ɑn hɝ, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə naɪt-dɑɹk wɪndoʊz, bʌt ʃi kəntɪnjud: "pɝhæps, noʊɪŋ wʌt ɹænd ɪz, noʊɪŋ haʊ stʃɹɔŋli tɑvɝən i ɪz, aɪ hæv peɪd tu lɪɾəl ətɛnʃən tə ði ʌðɝ tu tɑvɝən aɪ faʊnd wɪð hɪm. θɹi tɑvɝən ɪn ðə seɪm vɪlədʒ, ɔl bɔɹn wɪðɪn wiks ʌv wʌn ənʌðɝ? ðəɾ ɪz ənhɝɾ ʌv. pɝhæps jə - ən mæt - hæv lɑɹdʒɝ pɝpəsəz ɪn ðə pæɾɝn ðən ju, əɹ aɪ, θɔt."

She eyed him quizzically, shaking her head slowly. "You speak as if you can make all your own choices, Perrin. You are ta'veren, remember." He turned his back on her, staring at the night-dark windows, but she continued: "Perhaps, knowing what Rand is, knowing how strongly ta'veren he is, I have paid too little attention to the other two ta'veren I found with him. Three ta'veren in the same village, all born within weeks of one another? That is unheard of. Perhaps you - and Mat - have larger purposes in the Pattern than you, or I, thought."

"aɪ də nɑt wɑn ɛni pɝpəs ɪn ðə pæɾɝn," pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd. "aɪ ʃʊɹli kæn əv wʌn ɪf aɪ fɝɡɛɾ aɪm ə mæn. wɪl jə hɛlp mi, mɔɪɹeɪn?" ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə seɪ ðæt. wʌɾ ɪf ɪt minz əɹ juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ? wəɾ aɪ ɹæðɝ fɝɡɛɾ ɪm ə mæn? "hɛlp mi kip fɹəm - luzɪŋ maɪsɛlf?"

"I do not want any purpose in the Pattern," Perrin muttered. "I surely can't have one if I forget I am a man. Will you help me, Moiraine?" It was hard to say that. What if it means her using the One Power? Would I rather forget I'm a man? "Help me keep from - losing myself?"

"ɪf aɪ kən kip jə hoʊl, aɪ wɪl. aɪ pɹɑməs jə ðæt, pɛɹɪn. bʌɾ əl nɑɾ ɛndeɪnʒɝ ðə stʃɹʌɡəl əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ. jə mʌs noʊ ðæt, tu."

"If I can keep you whole, I will. I promise you that, Perrin. But I will not endanger the struggle against the Shadow. You must know that, too."

wən i tɝn tə lʊk ət hɝ, ʃi wɑz ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɪm ənblɪŋkɪŋli. ən ɪf jəɹ stʃɹʌɡəl minz pʊɾɪŋ mi ɪn maɪ ɡɹeɪv təmɑɹoʊ, wɪl jə də ðæt, tu? hi wɑz aɪsɪli ʃʊɹ ðət ʃi wʊd. "wʌɾ əv jə nɑt toʊl mi?"

When he turned to look at her, she was regarding him unblinkingly. And if your struggle means putting me in my grave tomorrow, will you do that, too? He was icily sure that she would. "What have you not told me?"

"du nɑt pɹɪzum tu fɑɹ, pɛɹɪn," ʃi sɛd koʊldli. "du nɑt pɹɛs mi fɝðɝ ðən aɪ θɪŋk pɹɑpɝ."

"Do not presume too far, Perrin," she said coldly. "Do not press me further than I think proper."

hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ æskɪŋ ðə nɛks kwɛstʃən. "kæn jə də fəɹ mi wʌt jə dɪd fəɹ læn? kən jə ʃil maɪ dʒɹimz?"

He hesitated before asking the next question. "Can you do for me what you did for Lan? Can you shield my dreams?"

"aɪ ɔlɹɛɾi hæv ə wɔɹɾɝ, pɛɹɪn." hɝ lɪps kwɝkt ɔlmoʊst ɪndə ə smaɪl. "ænd wʌn ɪz ɔl əl hæv. aɪm ə ðə blu ədʒɑ, nɑt ðə ɡɹin."

"I already have a Warder, Perrin." Her lips quirked almost into a smile. "And one is all I will have. I am of the Blue Ajah, not the Green."

"ju noʊ wʌɾ aɪ min. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə bi ə wɔɹɾɝ." laɪt, baʊn tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ðə ɹɛst ə maɪ laɪf? ðæts əz bæɾ əz ðə wʊlvz.

"You know what I mean. I don't want to be a Warder." Light, bound to an Aes Sedai the rest of my life? That's as bad as the wolves.

"ɪt wəd nɑɾ eɪd ju, pɛɹɪn. ðə ʃildɪŋ ɪz fəɹ dʒɹimz fɹəm ði aʊtsaɪd. ðə deɪnʒɝ ɪn jəɹ dʒɹimz ɪz wɪðɪn ju." ʃi oʊpən ðə smɔl bʊk əɡɛn. "ju ʃəd slip," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn dɪsmɪsəl. "bi wɛɹi ʌv jəɹ dʒɹimz, bʌt jə mʌst slip sʌmtaɪm." ʃi tɝn ə peɪdʒ, ən i lɛft.

"It would not aid you, Perrin. The shielding is for dreams from the outside. The danger in your dreams is within you." She opened the small book again. "You should sleep," she said in dismissal. "Be wary of your dreams, but you must sleep sometime." She turned a page, and he left.

bæk ɪn ɪz oʊn ɹum, hi iz ðə hoʊld i kɛpt ɑn hɪmsɛlf, izd ɪt dʒʌst ə tʃɹaɪfəl, lɛɾ ɪz sɛnsɪz spɹɛd. ðə wʊlvz wɝ aʊt ðəɹ stɪl, bɪɑn ði ɛdʒəz ə ðə vɪlədʒ, ɹɪŋɪŋ dʒɹə. ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli hi snæp bæk tə ɹɪdʒəd sɛlf-kəntʃɹoʊl. "wʌɾ aɪ niɾ ɪz ə sɪɾi," hi mʌɾɝd. ðət wəd kip əm ət beɪ. æftɝ aɪ faɪn ɹænd. æftɝ aɪ fɪnɪʃ wʌtɛvɝ əz tə bi fɪnɪʃt wɪð hɪm. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ sɑɹi hi wɑz ðət mɔɪɹeɪn kəd nɑt ʃil hɪm. ðə wʌn paʊɝ əɹ ðə wʊlvz; ðət wɑz ə tʃɔɪs noʊ mæn ʃəɾ əv tə meɪk.

Back in his own room, he eased the hold he kept on himself, eased it just a trifle, let his senses spread. The wolves were out there still, beyond the edges of the village, ringing Jarra. Almost immediately he snapped back to rigid self-control. "What I need is a city," he muttered. That would keep them at bay. After I find Rand. After I finish whatever has to be finished with him. He was not sure how sorry he was that Moiraine could not shield him. The One Power or the wolves; that was a choice no man should have to make.

hi lɛf ðə faɪɝ leɪɾ ɑn ðə hɑɹθstoʊn ənlɪt, ən θɹu oʊpən boʊθ wɪndoʊz. koʊl naɪɾ ɛɹ ɹʌʃt ɪn. tɔsɪŋ blæŋkəts ən kʌmfɝɾɝ ɑn ðə flɔɹ, hi leɪ daʊn fʊli kloʊðd ɑn ðə lʌmpi bɛd, nɑt bɑðɝɪŋ tə tʃɹaɪ tə faɪn ə kʌmftəɹbəl pəzɪʃən. hɪz læs θɔt bɪfɔɹ slip keɪm wɑz ðəɾ ɪf ɛniθɪŋ wəd kip ɪm fɹəm dip slip ən deɪnʒɝəs dʒɹimz, ðət mætʃɹəs wʊd.

He left the fire laid on the hearthstone unlit, and threw open both windows. Cold night air rushed in. Tossing blankets and comforter on the floor, he lay down fully clothed on the lumpy bed, not bothering to try to find a comfortable position. His last thought before sleep came was that if anything would keep him from deep sleep and dangerous dreams, that mattress would.

hi wɑz ɪn ə lɔŋ hɔlweɪ, ɪts haɪ stoʊn silɪŋ ən wɔlz ɡlɪsnɪŋ wɪð dæmp ən stʃɹik baɪ ɑd ʃædoʊz. ðeɪ leɪ ɪn kəntɔɹɾəd stʃɹɪps, stɑpɪŋ əz əbɹʌpli əz ðeɪ bɪɡæn, tu dɑɹk fəɹ ðə laɪt bɪtwin ðɛm. hi hæd noʊ aɪdiə wɛɹ ðə laɪt keɪm fɹʌm.

He was in a long hallway, its high stone ceiling and walls glistening with damp and streaked by odd shadows. They lay in contorted strips, stopping as abruptly as they began, too dark for the light between them. He had no idea where the light came from.

"noʊ," hi sɛd, ðən laʊɾɝ, "noʊ! ðɪs ɪz ə dʒɹim. aɪ nid tə weɪk ʌp. weɪk ʌp!"

"No," he said, then louder, "No! This is a dream. I need to wake up. Wake up!"

ðə hɔlweɪ dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ.

The hallway did not change.

deɪnʒɝ. ɪt wɑz ə wʊlfs θɔt, feɪn ən dɪstənt.

Danger. It was a wolf's thought, faint and distant.

"aɪ wɪl weɪk ʌp. aɪ wɪl!" hi paʊndɪɾ ə fɪst əɡɛns ðə wɔl. ɪt hɝt, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt weɪk. hi θɔt wʌn ə ðə sɪnwəs ʃædoʊz ʃɪftəɾ əweɪ fɹəm ɪz bloʊ.

"I will wake up. I will!" He pounded a fist against the wall. It hurt, but he did not wake. He thought one of the sinuous shadows shifted away from his blow.

ɹʌn, bɹʌðɝ. ɹʌn.

Run, brother. Run.

"hɑpɝ?" hi sɛd wʌndɝɪŋli. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ i nu ðə wʊlf huz θɔts i hɝd. hɑpɝ, hu hæɾ ɛnvid ði iɡəlz. "hɑpɝ ɪz dɛd!"

"Hopper?" he said wonderingly. He was sure he knew the wolf whose thoughts he heard. Hopper, who had envied the eagles. "Hopper is dead!"

ɹʌn!

Run!

pɛɹɪn lɝtʃt ɪndə ə ɹʌn, wʌn hæn hoʊldɪŋ ɪz æks tə kip ðə hæft fɹəm bæŋɪŋ əɡɛnst ɪz lɛɡ. hi hæd noʊ aɪdiə wɛɹ i wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ, əɹ waɪ, bʌt ði ɝdʒənsi ʌv hɑpɝz sɛndɪŋ kəd nɑt bi ɪɡnɔɹd. hɑpɝz dɛd, hi θɔt. hiz dɛd! bʌt pɛɹɪn ɹæn.

Perrin lurched into a run, one hand holding his axe to keep the haft from banging against his leg. He had no idea where he was running, or why, but the urgency of Hopper's sending could not be ignored. Hopper's dead, he thought. He's dead! But Perrin ran.

ʌðɝ hɔlweɪz kɹɔs ðə wʌn i ɹæn əlɔŋ, əɾ ɑɾ æŋɡəlz, səmtaɪmz dɪsɛndɪŋ, səmtaɪmz klaɪmɪŋ. nʌn lʊkt ɛni dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə pæsədʒ i wɑz ɪn, ðoʊ. dæmp stoʊn wɔlz ənbɹoʊkən baɪ dɔɹz, ən stʃɹɪps ə dɑɹknəs.

Other hallways crossed the one he ran along, at odd angles, sometimes descending, sometimes climbing. None looked any different from the passage he was in, though. Damp stone walls unbroken by doors, and strips of darkness.

əz i keɪm ɑn wʌn ə ðoʊz kɹɔsɪŋ hɔlz, hi skɪɾəd tə ə hɔlt. ə mæn stʊd ðɛɹ, blɪŋkɪŋ əɾ ɪm ənsɝteɪnli, ɪn stʃɹeɪnʒli kʌt koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz, ðə koʊt flɛɹɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz hɪps əz ðə bɑɾəmz ə ðə bɹitʃɪz flɛɹɾ oʊvɝ ɪz buts. boʊθ wɝ bɹaɪt jɛloʊ, ən ɪz buts wɝ oʊnli ə lɪɾəl pəlɝ.

As he came on one of those crossing halls, he skidded to a halt. A man stood there, blinking at him uncertainly, in strangely cut coat and breeches, the coat flaring over his hips as the bottoms of the breeches flared over his boots. Both were bright yellow, and his boots were only a little paler.

"ðɪs ɪz mɔɹ ðən aɪ kən stænd," ðə mæn sɛd, tə hɪmsɛlf, nɑt pɛɹɪn. hi hæɾ ən ɑɾ æksɛnt, kwɪk ən ʃɑɹp. "nɑɾ oʊnli də aɪ dʒɹim ə pɛzəns, naʊ, bʌt fɔɹən pɛzəns, fɹəm ðoʊz kloʊðz. bɪɡɔn fɹəm maɪ dʒɹimz, fɛloʊ!"

"This is more than I can stand," the man said, to himself, not Perrin. He had an odd accent, quick and sharp. "Not only do I dream of peasants, now, but foreign peasants, from those clothes. Begone from my dreams, fellow!"

"hu ɑɹ ju?" pɛɹɪn æskt. ðə mænz aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz əz ɪf i wɝ əfɛndəd.

"Who are you?" Perrin asked. The man's eyebrows rose as if he were offended.

ðə stʃɹɪps ə ʃædoʊ ɝaʊn əm ɹɪθd. wʌn dɪtætʃt fɹəm ðə silɪŋ ət wʌn ɛn ən dʒɹɪftəd daʊn tə tʌtʃ ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ mænz hɛd. ɪɾ əpɪɹd tə tæŋɡəl ɪn ɪz hɛɹ. ðə mænz aɪz waɪɾənd, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ sim tə hæpən ət wʌns. ðə ʃædoʊ dʒɝk bæk tə ðə silɪŋ, tɛn fiɾ oʊvɝhɛd, tʃɹeɪlɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ peɪl. wɛt dʒɹɑps splæɾɝd pɛɹɪnz feɪs. ə boʊn-ɹætlɪŋ ʃɹik ʃæɾɝd ði ɛɹ.

The strips of shadow around them writhed. One detached from the ceiling at one end and drifted down to touch the strange man's head. It appeared to tangle in his hair. The man's eyes widened, and everything seemed to happen at once. The shadow jerked back to the ceiling, ten feet overhead, trailing something pale. Wet drops splattered Perrin's face. A bone-rattling shriek shattered the air.

fɹoʊzən, pɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ ət ðə blʌɾi ʃeɪp wɛɹɪŋ ðə mænz kloʊðz, skɹimɪŋ ən θɹæʃɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ənbɪddən, hɪz aɪz ɹoʊz tə ðə peɪl θɪŋ laɪk ən ɛmpti sæk ðət dæŋɡəl fɹəm ðə silɪŋ. pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi əbzɔɹbd baɪ ðə blæk stʃɹɪp, bʌɾ i hæd noʊ tʃɹʌbəl ɹɛkəɡnaɪzɪŋ ə hjumən skɪn, əpɛɹənli hoʊl ən ənbɹoʊkən.

Frozen, Perrin stared at the bloody shape wearing the man's clothes, screaming and thrashing on the floor. Unbidden, his eyes rose to the pale thing like an empty sack that dangled from the ceiling. Part of it was already absorbed by the black strip, but he had no trouble recognizing a human skin, apparently whole and unbroken.

ðə ʃædoʊz ɝaʊn ɪm dænst ɪn ædʒəteɪʃən, ən pɛɹɪn ɹæn, pɝsud baɪ daɪɪŋ skɹimz. ɹɪpəlz ɹæn əlɔŋ ðə ʃædoʊ stʃɹɪps, peɪsɪŋ hɪm.

The shadows around him danced in agitation, and Perrin ran, pursued by dying screams. Ripples ran along the shadow strips, pacing him.

"tʃeɪnʒ, bɝn ju!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. "aɪ noʊ ɪts ə dʒɹim! laɪt bɝn ju, tʃeɪnʒ!"

"Change, burn you!" he shouted. "I know it's a dream! Light burn you, change!"

kʌlɝfəl tæpəstʃɹiz hʌŋ əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz bɪtwin tɔl ɡoʊldən stænz hoʊldɪŋ dʌzənz ə kændəlz ðəɾ ɪluməneɪɾəd waɪt flɔɹ taɪlz ən ə silɪŋ peɪntəd wɪð flʌfi klaʊdz ən fænsɪfəl bɝdz ɪn flaɪt. nʌθɪŋ muv bʌt ðə flɪkɝɪŋ kændəl fleɪmz əlɔŋ ðə lɛŋθ ə ðət hɔl, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ əz fɑɹ əz i kəd si, əɹ ɪn ðə pɔɪntəɾ ɑɹtʃəz ʌv waɪt stoʊn ðəɾ əkeɪʒənəli bɹoʊk ðə wɔlz.

Colorful tapestries hung along the walls between tall golden stands holding dozens of candles that illuminated white floor tiles and a ceiling painted with fluffy clouds and fanciful birds in flight. Nothing moved but the flickering candle flames along the length of that hall, stretching as far as he could see, or in the pointed arches of white stone that occasionally broke the walls.

deɪnʒɝ. ðə sɛndɪŋ wɑz ivən feɪntɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ. ən mɔɹ ɝdʒənt, ɪf ðət wɝ pɑsəbəl.

Danger. The sending was even fainter than before. And more urgent, if that were possible.

æks ɪn hænd, pɛɹɪn stɑɹɾəd wɛɹəli daʊn ðə hɔl, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf. "weɪk ʌp. weɪk ʌp, pɛɹɪn. ɪf jə noʊ ɪts ə dʒɹim, ɪt tʃeɪnʒəz əɹ jə weɪk ʌp. weɪk ʌp, bɝn ju!" ðə hɔlweɪ steɪɾ əz sɑləɾ əz ɛni hi hæɾ ɛvɝ wɔkt.

Axe in hand, Perrin started warily down the hall, muttering to himself. "Wake up. Wake up, Perrin. If you know it's a dream, it changes or you wake up. Wake up, burn you!" The hallway stayed as solid as any he had ever walked.

hi keɪm əbɹɛst ə ðə fɝst ə ðə pɔɪntəd waɪɾ ɑɹtʃweɪz. ɪt lɛɾ ɪndə ə hjudʒ ɹum, əpɛɹənli wɪndoʊləs, bʌt fɝnɪʃt əz ɔɹnətli əz ɛni pæləs, ðə fɝnɪtʃɝ ɔl kɑɹvd ən ɡɪldɪɾ ən ɪnleɪd wɪð aɪvɝi. ə wʊmən stʊɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum, fɹaʊnɪŋ əɾ ə tæɾɝd mænjəskɹɪp laɪɪŋ oʊpən ɑn ə teɪbəl. ə blæk-hɛɹd, blæk-aɪd, bjuɾəfəl wʊmən kloʊðd ɪn waɪɾ ən sɪlvɝ.

He came abreast of the first of the pointed white archways. It let into a huge room, apparently windowless, but furnished as ornately as any palace, the furniture all carved and gilded and inlaid with ivory. A woman stood in the middle of the room, frowning at a tattered manuscript lying open on a table. A black-haired, black-eyed, beautiful woman clothed in white and silver.

ivən əz i ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɝ, ʃi lɪftəɾ əɹ hɛɾ ən lʊk stʃɹeɪɾ ət hɪm. hɝ aɪz waɪɾənd, ɪn ʃɑk, ɪn æŋɡɝ. "ju! wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ? haʊ dɪd jə - ? jəl ɹuən θɪŋz jə kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə ɪmædʒən!"

Even as he recognized her, she lifted her head and looked straight at him. Her eyes widened, in shock, in anger. "You! What are you doing here? How did you - ? You'll ruin things you could not begin to imagine!"

əbɹʌpli ðə speɪs sim tə flæɾən, əz ɪf i wɝ sʌɾənli stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ə pɪktʃɝ ʌv ə ɹum. ðə flæɾ ɪmədʒ əpɪɹd tə tɝn saɪdweɪz, bɪkʌm oʊnli ə bɹaɪt vɝɾɪkəl laɪn daʊn ðə mɪɾəl ə blæknəs. ðə laɪn flæʃt waɪt, ən wɑz ɡɔn, livɪŋ oʊnli ðə dɑɹk, blækɝ ðən blæk.

Abruptly the space seemed to flatten, as if he were suddenly staring at a picture of a room. The flat image appeared to turn sideways, become only a bright vertical line down the middle of blackness. The line flashed white, and was gone, leaving only the dark, blacker than black.

dʒʌst ɪn fɹʌn ə pɛɹɪnz buts, ðə flɔɹ taɪlz keɪm tə ən əbɹʌpt ɛnd. əz i wɑtʃt, ðə waɪɾ ɛdʒəz dɪzɑlvd ɪndə ðə blæk laɪk sænd wɑʃt əweɪ baɪ wɔɾɝ. hi stɛp bæk heɪstəli.

Just in front of Perrin's boots, the floor tiles came to an abrupt end. As he watched, the white edges dissolved into the black like sand washed away by water. He stepped back hastily.

ɹʌn.

Run.

pɛɹɪn tɝnd, ən hɑpɝ wɑz ðɛɹ, ə bɪɡ ɡɹeɪ wʊlf, ɡɹɪzəld ən skɑɹd. "ju ɑɹ dɛd. aɪ sɔ jə daɪ. aɪ fɛl jə daɪ!" ə sɛndɪŋ flʌɾəd pɛɹɪnz maɪnd.

Perrin turned, and Hopper was there, a big gray wolf, grizzled and scarred. "You are dead. I saw you die. I felt you die!" A sending flooded Perrin's mind.

ɹʌn naʊ! jə mʌs nɑt bi hɪɹ naʊ. deɪnʒɝ. ɡɹeɪt deɪnʒɝ. wɝs ðən ɔl ðə nɛvɝbɹn. jə mʌst ɡoʊ. ɡoʊ naʊ! naʊ!

Run now! You must not be here now. Danger. Great danger. Worse than all the Neverborn. You must go. Go now! Now!

"haʊ?" pɛɹɪn ʃaʊɾəd. "aɪ wɑnə ɡoʊ, bʌt haʊ?"

"How?" Perrin shouted. "I want to go, but how?"

ɡoʊ! tiθ bɛɹd, hɑpɝ lɛp fəɹ pɛɹɪnz θɹoʊt.

Go! Teeth bared, Hopper leaped for Perrin's throat.

wɪð ə stʃɹæŋɡəl kɹaɪ, pɛɹɪn sæɾ ʌp ɑn ðə bɛd, hænz ɡoʊɪŋ tə hɪz θɹoʊt tə hoʊld ɪn laɪfblʌd. ðeɪ mɛɾ ənbɹoʊkən skɪn. hi swɑloʊd wɪð ɹɪlif, bʌt ðə nɛks moʊmən ɪz fɪŋɡɝz tʌtʃt ə dæmp spɑt.

With a strangled cry, Perrin sat up on the bed, hands going to his throat to hold in lifeblood. They met unbroken skin. He swallowed with relief, but the next moment his fingers touched a damp spot.

ɔlmoʊs fɔlɪŋ ɪn ɪz heɪst, hi skɹæmbəld ɔf ðə bɛd, stʌmbəl tə ðə wɑʃstæn ən siz ðə pɪtʃɝ, splæʃt wɔɾɝ ɛvɹiwɛɹ əz i fɪl ðə beɪsən. ðə wɔɾɝ tɝn pɪŋk əz i wɑʃt ɪz feɪs. pɪŋk wɪð ðə blʌɾ ə ðət stʃɹeɪnʒli dʒɹɛs mæn.

Almost falling in his haste, he scrambled off the bed, stumbled to the washstand and seized the pitcher, splashed water everywhere as he filled the basin. The water turned pink as he washed his face. Pink with the blood of that strangely dressed man.

mɔɹ dɑɹk spɑts dɑɾəd ɪz koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz. hi tɔɹ əm ɔf ən tɔst əm ɪndə ðə fɝθəs kɔɹnɝ. hi mɛn tə liv əm ðɛɹ. sɪmiən kəd bɝn ðɛm.

More dark spots dotted his coat and breeches. He tore them off and tossed them into the furthest corner. He meant to leave them there. Simion could burn them.

ə ɡʌst ʌv wɪnd wɪpt ɪn ði oʊpən wɪndoʊ. ʃɪvɝɪŋ ɪn ʃɝɾ ən smɔlkloʊðz, hi sæɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ ən lin bæk əɡɛns ðə bɛd. ðɪs ʃəd bi ənkʌmftəɹbəl ɪnʌf. saʊɝnəs tɪŋd ɪz θɔts, ən wɝi, ən fɪɹ. ən dɪtɝməneɪʃən. aɪ woʊnt ɡɪv ɪn tə ðɪs. aɪ woʊnt!

A gust of wind whipped in the open window. Shivering in shirt and smallclothes, he sat on the floor and leaned back against the bed. This should be uncomfortable enough. Sourness tinged his thoughts, and worry, and fear. And determination. I won't give in to this. I won't!

hi wɑz stɪl ʃɪvɝɪŋ wən slip faɪnəli keɪm, ə ʃæloʊ hæf slip fɪld wɪð veɪɡ əwɛɹnəs ə ðə ɹum ɝaʊn ɪm ən θɔts ə ðə koʊld. bʌt ðə bæd dʒɹimz ðət keɪm wɝ bɛɾɝ ðən səm ʌðɝz.

He was still shivering when sleep finally came, a shallow half sleep filled with vague awareness of the room around him and thoughts of the cold. But the bad dreams that came were better than some others.

ɹænd hʌɾəld ʌndɝ ðə tʃɹiz ɪn ðə naɪt, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə hɛvi-ʃoʊldɝd blæk dɔɡ kʌm nɪɹɝ ɪz haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs. hɪz saɪɾ ætʃt, ðə waʊn mɔɪɹeɪn kəd nɑt kwaɪt hil, bʌɾ i ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪt. ðə mun ɡeɪv bɛɹli ɪnʌf laɪt fəɹ ɪm tə meɪk aʊt ðə dɔɡ, weɪst-haɪ, wɪð ɪts θɪk nɛk ən mæsɪv hɛd, ən ɪts tiθ ðət sim tə ʃaɪn laɪk wɛt sɪlvɝ ɪn ðə naɪt. ɪt snɪf ði ɛɹ ən tʃɹɑɾəd təwɔɹd hɪm.

Rand huddled under the trees in the night, watching the heavy-shouldered black dog come nearer his hiding place. His side ached, the wound Moiraine could not quite Heal, but he ignored it. The moon gave barely enough light for him to make out the dog, waist-high, with its thick neck and massive head, and its teeth that seemed to shine like wet silver in the night. It sniffed the air and trotted toward him.

kloʊsɝ, hi θɔt. kʌm kloʊsɝ. noʊ wɔɹnɪŋ fəɹ jəɹ mæstɝ ðɪs taɪm. kloʊsɝ. ðæts ɪt. ðə dɔɡ wɑz oʊnli tɛn peɪsɪz əweɪ, naʊ, ə dip ɡɹaʊl ɹʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn ɪts tʃɛst əz ɪt sʌɾənli baʊndəd fɔɹwɝd. stʃɹeɪɾ ət ɹænd.

Closer, he thought. Come closer. No warning for your master this time. Closer. That's it. The dog was only ten paces away, now, a deep growl rumbling in its chest as it suddenly bounded forward. Straight at Rand.

ðə paʊɝ fɪl hɪm. sʌmθɪŋ lɛp fɹəm ɪz aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt hænz; hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz. ə bɑɹ ʌv waɪt laɪt, sɑləɾ əz stil. lɪkwəd faɪɝ. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðət sʌmθɪŋ, ðə dɔɡ sim tə bɪkʌm tʃɹænspɛɹənt, ən ðən ɪt wɑz ɡɔn.

The Power filled him. Something leaped from his outstretched hands; he was not sure what it was. A bar of white light, solid as steel. Liquid fire. For an instant, in the middle of that something, the dog seemed to become transparent, and then it was gone.

ðə waɪt laɪt feɪɾəd ɪksɛp fəɹ ði æftɝɪmɪdʒ bɝn əkɹɔs ɹændz vɪʒən. hi sæɡd əɡɛns ðə nɪɹəs tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋk, ðə bɑɹk ɹʌf ɑn ɪz feɪs. ɹɪlif ən saɪlən læftɝ ʃʊk hɪm. ɪt wɝkt. laɪt seɪv mi, ɪt wɝk ðɪs taɪm. ɪt hæd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ʌðɝ dɑɡz ðɪs naɪt.

The white light faded except for the afterimage burned across Rand's vision. He sagged against the nearest tree trunk, the bark rough on his face. Relief and silent laughter shook him. It worked. Light save me, it worked this time. It had not always. There had been other dogs this night.

ðə wʌn paʊɝ pʌlsd ɪn hɪm, ən ɪz stʌmək twɪstəd wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌnz teɪn ɑn seɪɾɪn, wɑntəd tə ɛmpti ɪtsɛlf. swɛt biɾɪd ɑn ɪz feɪs dɪspaɪt ðə koʊl naɪt wɪnd, ən ɪz maʊθ teɪstəd fʊl ə sɪknəs. hi wɑntəd tə laɪ daʊn ən daɪ. hi wɑntəd nɪneɪiv tə ɡɪv ɪm səm ə hɝ mɛɾəsənz, əɹ mɔɪɹeɪn tə hil hɪm, ɔɹ. . . . sʌmθɪŋ, ɛniθɪŋ, tə stɑp ðə sɪk filɪŋ ðət wɑz sʌfəkeɪɾɪŋ hɪm.

The One Power pulsed in him, and his stomach twisted with the Dark One's taint on saidin, wanted to empty itself. Sweat beaded on his face despite the cold night wind, and his mouth tasted full of sickness. He wanted to lie down and die. He wanted Nynaeve to give him some of her medicines, or Moiraine to Heal him, or. . . . Something, anything, to stop the sick feeling that was suffocating him.

bʌt seɪɾɪn flʌɾəd ɪm wɪð laɪf, tu, laɪf ən ɛnɝdʒi ən əwɛɹnəs lɑɹɾɪd θɹu ði ɪlnəs. laɪf wɪθaʊt seɪɾɪn wɑz ə peɪl kɑpi. ɛniθɪŋ ɛls wɑz ə wɑn ɪməteɪʃən.

But saidin flooded him with life, too, life and energy and awareness larded through the illness. Life without saidin was a pale copy. Anything else was a wan imitation.

bʌt ðeɪ kən faɪn mi ɪf aɪ hoʊld ɑn. tʃɹæk mi, faɪn mi. aɪ hæv tə ɹitʃ tɛɹ. əl faɪn aʊt ðɛɹ. ɪf aɪm ðə dʒɹæɡən, ðɛɹəl bi ən ɛn tə ɪt. ən ɪf aɪm nɑt. . . . ɪf ɪts ɔl ə laɪ, ðəɹ wɪl bi ən ɛn tə ðæt, tu. ən ɛnd.

But they can find me if I hold on. Track me, find me. I have to reach Tear. I'll find out there. If I am the Dragon, there'll be an end to it. And if I am not. . . . If it's all a lie, there will be an end to that, too. An end.

ɹɪlʌktənli, wɪð ɪnfənət sloʊnəs, hi sɛvɝd kɑntækt wɪð seɪɾɪn, ɡeɪv ʌp ɪts ɛmbɹeɪs əz ɪf ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp laɪfs bɹɛθ. ðə naɪt sim dʒɹæb. ðə ʃædoʊz lɔs ðɛɹ ɪnfənət ʃɑɹp ʃeɪɾɪŋz ən wɑʃt təɡɛðɝ.

Reluctantly, with infinite slowness, he severed contact with saidin, gave up its embrace as if giving up life's breath. The night seemed drab. The shadows lost their infinite sharp shadings and washed together.

ɪn ðə dɪstəns, tə ðə wɛst, ə dɔɡ haʊld, ə ʃɪvɝɪŋ kɹaɪ ɪn ðə saɪlənt naɪt.

In the distance, to the west, a dog howled, a shivering cry in the silent night.

ɹændz hɛd keɪm ʌp. hi pɪɹɾ ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən əz ðoʊ hi kəd si ðə dɔɡ ɪf i tʃɹaɪd hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf.

Rand's head came up. He peered in that direction as though he could see the dog if he tried hard enough.

ə sɛkən dɔɡ ænsɝd ðə fɝst, ðən ənʌðɝ, ən tu mɔɹ təɡɛðɝ, ɔl spɹɛɾ aʊt sʌmwɛɹ wɛst ə hɪm.

A second dog answered the first, then another, and two more together, all spread out somewhere west of him.

"hʌn mi," ɹænd snɑɹəld. "hʌn mi ɪf jə wɪl. ɪm noʊ izi mit. noʊ mɔɹ!"

"Hunt me," Rand snarled. "Hunt me if you will. I'm no easy meat. No more!"

pʊʃɪŋ hɪmsɛlf əweɪ fɹəm ðə tʃɹi, hi weɪɾɪd ə ʃæloʊ, aɪsi stʃɹim, ðən sɛɾəld ɪndə ə stɛɾi tʃɹɑɾ istwɝd. koʊld wɔɾɝ fɪld ɪz buts, ən ɪz saɪd hɝt, bʌɾ i ɪɡnɔɹd boʊθ. ðə naɪt wɑz kwaɪəɾ əɡɛn bɪhaɪn hɪm, bʌɾ i ɪɡnɔɹd ðæt, tu. hʌn mi. aɪ kən hʌnt, tu. aɪm noʊ izi mit.

Pushing himself away from the tree, he waded a shallow, icy stream, then settled into a steady trot eastward. Cold water filled his boots, and his side hurt, but he ignored both. The night was quiet again behind him, but he ignored that, too. Hunt me. I can hunt, too. I am no easy meat.


tʃæptɝ tɛn


CHAPTER 10

sikɹəts


Secrets

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ əɹ kəmpænjənz fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ stʊɾ ɪn əɹ stɝəps hoʊpɪŋ fəɹ ə ɡlɪmps ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪn ðə dɪstəns, bʌɾ ɔl ʃi kəd si wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɪndɪstɪŋkt, ɡlimɪŋ waɪɾ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sʌnlaɪt. ɪt hæd tə bi ðə sɪɾi ɑn ði aɪlənd, ðoʊ. ðə loʊn, bɹoʊkən-tɑp maʊntən kɔl dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt, ɹaɪzɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹoʊlɪŋ pleɪn, hæd fɝst əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən leɪt ði æftɝnun bɪfɔɹ, ən ðət leɪ dʒʌs ðɪs saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɪt wɑz ə lændmɑɹk, ðət maʊntən - wʌn dʒæɡd fæŋ stɪkɪŋ ʌp aʊɾ ə ɹoʊlɪŋ flætlænz - izəli sin fəɹ mɛni maɪlz, izi tə əvɔɪd, əz ɔl dɪd, ivən ðoʊz u wɛn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn.

Ignoring her companions for a moment, Egwene al'Vere stood in her stirrups hoping for a glimpse of Tar Valon in the distance, but all she could see was something indistinct, gleaming white in the morning sunlight. It had to be the city on the island, though. The lone, broken-topped mountain called Dragonmount, rising out of the rolling plain, had first appeared on the horizon late the afternoon before, and that lay just this side of the River Erinin from Tar Valon. It was a landmark, that mountain - one jagged fang sticking up out of rolling flatlands - easily seen for many miles, easy to avoid, as all did, even those who went to Tar Valon.

dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt wɑz wɛɹ luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ hæd daɪd, soʊ ɪt wɑz sɛd; ən ʌðɝ wɝdz hæd bɪn spoʊkən ə ðə maʊntən, pɹɑfəsi ən wɔɹnɪŋ. ɹɪtʃ ɹizənz tə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm ɪts blæk sloʊps.

Dragonmount was where Lews Therin Kinslayer had died, so it was said; and other words had been spoken of the mountain, prophecy and warning. Rich reasons to stay away from its black slopes.

ʃi hæd ɹizən nɑt tə steɪ əweɪ, ən mɔɹ ðən wʌn. oʊnli ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn kəd ʃi faɪn ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ʃi niɾəd, ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ʃi hæd tə hæv. əl nɛvɝ bi kɑlɝɾ əɡɛn! ʃi pʊʃt ðə θɔɾ əweɪ, bʌɾ ɪt keɪm bæk tɝn ɛn əbaʊt. əl nɛvɝ luz maɪ fɹiɾəm əɡɛn! ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, æneɪjə wəd ɹɪzum tɛstɪŋ əɹ dʒɹimz; ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəɾ əv tə, ðoʊ ʃi hæd faʊnd noʊ ɹil ɛvəɾəns ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑz ə dʒɹimɝ, əz æneɪjə səspɛktəd. ɛɡwinz dʒɹimz hæd bɪn tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ sɪns livɪŋ ɑlməθ pleɪn. əsaɪd fɹəm dʒɹimz ə ðə sintʃæn - ən ðoʊz stɪl meɪɾ əɹ weɪk swɛɾɪŋ - ʃi dʒɹimd mɔɹ ən mɔɹ ə ɹænd. ɹænd ɹʌnɪŋ. ɹʌnɪŋ təwɔɹd sʌmθɪŋ, bʌt ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm sʌmθɪŋ, tu.

She had reason not to stay away, and more than one. Only in Tar Valon could she find the training she needed, the training she had to have. I will never be collared again! She pushed the thought away, but it came back turned end about. I will never lose my freedom again! In Tar Valon, Anaiya would resume testing her dreams; the Aes Sedai would have to, though she had found no real evidence that Egwene was a Dreamer, as Anaiya suspected. Egwene's dreams had been troubling since leaving Almoth Plain. Aside from dreams of the Seanchan - and those still made her wake sweating - she dreamed more and more of Rand. Rand running. Running toward something, but running away from something, too.

ʃi pɪɹd hɑɹɾɝ təwɔɹd tɑɹ vəlɑn. æneɪjə wəd bi ðɛɹ. ən ɡɑləd, tu, pɝhæps. ʃi blʌʃt ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf, ən bænɪʃt ɪm fɹəm əɹ maɪn ɪntaɪɝli. θɪŋk əbaʊt ðə wɛðɝ. θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. laɪt, bʌɾ ɪt filz wɔɹm.

She peered harder toward Tar Valon. Anaiya would be there. And Galad, too, perhaps. She blushed in spite of herself, and banished him from her mind entirely. Think about the weather. Think about anything else. Light, but it feels warm.

ðɪs ɝli ɪn ðə jɪɹ, wɪð wɪntɝ oʊnli jɛstɝdeɪz mɛmɹi, waɪt stɪl kæp dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt, bʌt hɪɹ bɪloʊ, ðə snoʊz wɝ mɛltəd. ɝli ʃuts poʊk θɹu ðə mæɾɪd bɹaʊn ə læs jɪɹz ɡɹæsəz, ən wɛɹ tʃɹiz tɑpt ə loʊ hɪl hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ, ðə fɝst ɹɛɾ ə nu ɡɹoʊθ wɑz ʃoʊɪŋ. æftɝ ə wɪntɝ spɛn tʃɹævlɪŋ, səmtaɪmz tʃɹæpt ɪn vɪlədʒ əɹ kæmp fəɹ deɪz baɪ stɔɹmz, səmtaɪmz kʌvɝɪŋ lɛs ɡɹaʊn bɪtwin sʌnɹaɪz ən sʌnsɛt, wɪð snoʊdʒɹɪfs bɛli-dip ɑn ðə hɔɹsəz, ðən ʃi cʊɾə wɔk baɪ nun ɪn bɛɾɝ wɛðɝ, ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə si saɪnz ə spɹɪŋ.

This early in the year, with winter only yesterday's memory, white still capped Dragonmount, but here below, the snows were melted. Early shoots poked through the matted brown of last year's grasses, and where trees topped a low hill here and there, the first red of new growth was showing. After a winter spent traveling, sometimes trapped in village or camp for days by storms, sometimes covering less ground between sunrise and sunset, with snowdrifts belly-deep on the horses, than she could have walked by noon in better weather, it was good to see signs of spring.

swipɪŋ əɹ θɪk wʊl kloʊk bæk aʊɾ ə hɝ weɪ, ɛɡwin lɛt hɝsɛlf dʒɹɑp daʊn ɪn ðə haɪ-kæntəl sæɾəl, ən smuðd əɹ skɝts ɪn ə dʒɛstʃɝ ʌv ɪmpeɪʃəns. hɝ dɑɹk aɪz fɪld wɪð dɪsteɪst. ʃi hæd wɔɹn ðə dʒɹɛs, dɪvaɪɾəd fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ baɪ hɝ oʊn skɪl wɪð ə niɾəl, fəɹ fɑɹ tu lɔŋ, bʌt ði oʊnli ʌðɝ ʃi hæd wɑz ivən mɔɹ ɡɹʌbi. ən ðə seɪm kʌlɝ, ðə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ ʌv ðə liʃt wʌnz. ðə tʃɔɪs ɔl ðoʊz wiks əɡoʊ, ɑn bɪɡɪnɪŋ ðɛɹ ɹaɪd tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, hæd bɪn dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ əɹ nʌθɪŋ.

Sweeping her thick wool cloak back out of her way, Egwene let herself drop down in the high-cantled saddle, and smoothed her skirts in a gesture of impatience. Her dark eyes filled with distaste. She had worn the dress, divided for riding by her own skill with a needle, for far too long, but the only other she had was even more grubby. And the same color, the dark gray of the Leashed Ones. The choice all those weeks ago, on beginning their ride to Tar Valon, had been dark gray or nothing.

"aɪ swɛɹ əl nɛvɝ wɛɹ ɡɹeɪ əɡɛn, bɛlə," ʃi toʊld əɹ ʃæɡi maʊnt, pæɾɪŋ ðə mɛɹz nɛk. nɑt ðəɾ əl əv mʌtʃ tʃɔɪs wʌns wɝ bæk ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ʃi θɔt. ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ɔl nɑvəsɪz wɔɹ waɪt.

"I swear I will never wear gray again, Bela," she told her shaggy mount, patting the mare's neck. Not that I'll have much choice once we're back in the White Tower, she thought. In the Tower, all novices wore white.

"ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ tə jɝsɛlf əɡɛn?" nɪneɪiv æskt, pʊlɪŋ əɹ beɪ ɡɛldɪŋ kloʊsɝ. ðə tu wɪmən wɝ ʌv ə haɪɾ əz wɛl əz dʒɹɛst əlaɪk, bʌt ðə dɪfɝəns ɪn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz pʊt ðə fɔɹmɝ wɪzdəm ʌv ɛmənz fild ə hɛd tɔlɝ. nɪneɪiv fɹaʊnd naʊ, ən tʌɡd ət ðə θɪk bɹeɪɾ ə dɑɹk hɛɹ hæŋɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ðə weɪ ʃi dɪd wən wɝiɾ əɹ tʃɹʌbəld, əɹ səmtaɪmz wən ʃi wɑz pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə bi pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli stʌbɝn ivən fəɹ hɝ. eɪ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝ mɑɹkt əɹ əz wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd, nɑt jɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ ə lɔŋ stɛp kloʊsɝ ðən ɛɡwin. "bɛɾɝ jə ʃəd bi kipɪŋ wɑtʃ."

"Are you talking to yourself again?" Nynaeve asked, pulling her bay gelding closer. The two women were of a height as well as dressed alike, but the difference in their horses put the former Wisdom of Emond's Field a head taller. Nynaeve frowned now, and tugged at the thick braid of dark hair hanging over her shoulder, the way she did when worried or troubled, or sometimes when she was preparing to be particularly stubborn even for her. A Great Serpent ring on her finger marked her as one of the Accepted, not yet Aes Sedai, but a long step closer than Egwene. "Better you should be keeping watch."

ɛɡwin hɛld əɹ tʌŋ ɑn ðə ɹitɔɹt ðət ʃi hæd bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn. dɪd ʃi θɪŋk aɪ wɑz stændɪŋ ɪn maɪ stɝəps kəz aɪ də nɑt laɪk maɪ sæɾəl? nɪneɪiv sim tə fɝɡɛt tu ɔfən ðət ʃi wɑz nɑt ðə wɪzdəm ʌv ɛmənz fild ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, ən ɛɡwin wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ə tʃaɪld. bʌt ʃi wɛɹz ðə ɹɪŋ ən aɪ də nɑt - jɛt! - ən fəɹ hɝ, ðət minz nʌθɪŋ əz tʃeɪnʒd!

Egwene held her tongue on the retort that she had been watching for Tar Valon. Did she think I was standing in my stirrups because I do not like my saddle? Nynaeve seemed to forget too often that she was not the Wisdom of Emond's Field any longer, and Egwene was no longer a child. But she wears the ring and I do not - yet! - and for her, that means nothing has changed!

"du jə wʌndɝ haʊ mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz tʃɹiɾɪŋ læn?" ʃi æsk switli, ən hæɾ ə moʊmən ə plɛʒɝ ət ðə ʃɑɹp dʒɝk nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv əɹ bɹeɪd. ðə plɛʒɝ feɪɾəd kwɪkli, ðoʊ. wundɪŋ ɹɪmɑɹks dɪd nɑt kʌm nætʃɹəli tə hɝ, ən ʃi nu nɪneɪivz ɪmoʊʃənz kənsɝnɪŋ ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɝ laɪk sknz ə jɑɹn æftɝ ə kɪɾən hæd ɡɑɾən ɪndə ðə nɪɾɪŋ bæskət. bʌt læn wɑz noʊ kɪɾən, ən nɪneɪiv wəɾ əv tə də sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə mæn bɪfɔɹ ɪz stʌbɝn-stupəd noʊbɪləɾi meɪɾ əɹ mæɾ ɪnʌf tə kɪl hɪm.

"Do you wonder how Moiraine is treating Lan?" she asked sweetly, and had a moment of pleasure at the sharp jerk Nynaeve gave her braid. The pleasure faded quickly, though. Wounding remarks did not come naturally to her, and she knew Nynaeve's emotions concerning the Warder were like skeins of yarn after a kitten had gotten into the knitting basket. But Lan was no kitten, and Nynaeve would have to do something about the man before his stubborn-stupid nobility made her mad enough to kill him.

ðeɪ wɝ sɪks ɔltəɡɛðɝ, ɔl pleɪnli dʒɹɛst ɪnʌf nɑt tə stæn aʊɾ ɪn ðə vɪlədʒəz ən smɔl taʊnz ðeɪ hæɾ ɪnkaʊntɝd, jɛt pɝhæps əz ɑɾ ə pɑɹɾi əz hæd kɹɔs ðə kæɹələn ɡɹæs ɛnitaɪm ɹisənli, fɔɹ ə ðɛm wɪmən, ən wʌn ə ðə mɛn ɪn ə lɪɾɝ slʌŋ bɪtwin tu hɔɹsəz. ðə lɪɾɝ hɔɹsəz kæɹid laɪt pæks, əz wɛl, wɪð səplaɪz fəɹ ðə lɔŋ stʃɹɛtʃəz bɪtwin vɪlədʒəz ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm.

They were six altogether, all plainly dressed enough not to stand out in the villages and small towns they had encountered, yet perhaps as odd a party as had crossed the Caralain Grass anytime recently, four of them women, and one of the men in a litter slung between two horses. The litter horses carried light packs, as well, with supplies for the long stretches between villages the way they had come.

sɪks pipəl, ɛɡwin θɔt, ən haʊ mɛni sikɹəts? ðeɪ ɔl ʃɛɹd mɔɹ ðən wʌn, sikɹəts ðət wəɾ əv tə bi kɛpt, pɝhæps, ivən ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. laɪf wɑz sɪmpəlɝ bæk hoʊm.

Six people, Egwene thought, and how many secrets? They all shared more than one, secrets that would have to be kept, perhaps, even in the White Tower. Life was simpler back home.

"nɪneɪiv, dʒju θɪŋk ɹænd ɪz ɔl ɹaɪt? ən pɛɹɪn?" ʃi æɾəd heɪstəli. ʃi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə pɹitɛn ɛni lɔŋɡɝ ðət wʌn deɪ ʃi wəd mɛɹi ɹænd; pɹitɛndɪŋ wəd bi ɔl ɪt wɑz, naʊ. ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk ðət - ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli ɹɛkənsaɪl tə ɪt - bʌt ʃi nu ɪt.

"Nynaeve, do you think Rand is all right? And Perrin?" she added hastily. She could not afford to pretend any longer that one day she would marry Rand; pretending would be all it was, now. She did not like that - she was not entirely reconciled to it - but she knew it.

"jɔɹ dʒɹimz? hæv ðeɪ bɪn tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ jə əɡɛn?" nɪneɪiv saʊndəd kənsɝnd, bʌɾ ɛɡwin wɑz ɪn noʊ mud tə æksɛp sɪmpəθi.

"Your dreams? Have they been troubling you again?" Nynaeve sounded concerned, but Egwene was in no mood to accept sympathy.

ʃi meɪɾ əɹ vɔɪs saʊn əz ɛvɹideɪ əz ʃi kəd mænədʒ. "fɹʌm ðə ɹumɝz wi hɝd, aɪ kæn tɛl wʌt maɪt bi ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. ðeɪv ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ noʊ əbaʊt soʊ twɪstəd, soʊ ɹɔŋ."

She made her voice sound as everyday as she could manage. "From the rumors we heard, I can't tell what might be going on. They have everything I know about so twisted, so wrong."

"ɛvɹiθɪŋ əz bɪn ɹɔŋ sɪns mɔɪɹeɪn keɪm ɪndə əɹ lɪvz," nɪneɪiv sɛd bɹʌskli. "pɛɹɪn ən ɹænd. . . ." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ. ɛɡwin θɔt nɪneɪiv bɪlivd ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət ɹænd hæd bɪkʌm wɑz mɔɪɹeɪnz duɪŋ. "ðeɪ wɪl əv tə teɪk kɛɹ ə ðɛmsɛlvz fəɹ naʊ. aɪm əfɹeɪd wɪv sʌmθɪŋ tə wɝi əbaʊɾ aʊɝsɛlvz. sʌmθɪŋ ɪz nɑt ɹaɪt. aɪ kən . . . fil ɪt."

"Everything has been wrong since Moiraine came into our lives," Nynaeve said brusquely. "Perrin and Rand. . . ." She hesitated, grimacing. Egwene thought Nynaeve believed everything that Rand had become was Moiraine's doing. "They will have to take care of themselves for now. I'm afraid we have something to worry about ourselves. Something is not right. I can . . . feel it."

"du jə noʊ wʌt?" ɛɡwin æskt.

"Do you know what?" Egwene asked.

"ɪt filz ɔlmoʊs laɪk ə stɔɹm." nɪneɪivz dɑɹk aɪz stʌɾid ðə mɔɹnɪŋ skaɪ, klɪɹ ən blu, wɪð oʊnli ə fju skæɾɝd waɪt klaʊdz, ən ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ əɡɛn. "laɪk ə stɔɹm kʌmɪŋ." nɪneɪiv hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn eɪbəl tə fɔɹtɛl ðə wɛðɝ. lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə wɪnd, ɪt wɑz kɔld, ən ðə wɪzdəm ʌv ɛvɹi vɪlədʒ wɑz ɪkspɛktəd tə də ɪt, ðoʊ mɛni ɹɪli kəd nɑt. jɛt sɪns livɪŋ ɛmənz fild, nɪneɪivz əbɪləɾi hæd ɡɹoʊn, əɹ tʃeɪnʒd. ðə stɔɹmz ʃi fɛl səmtaɪmz hæd tə də wɪð mɛn ɹæðɝ ðən wɪnd, naʊ.

"It feels almost like a storm." Nynaeve's dark eyes studied the morning sky, clear and blue, with only a few scattered white clouds, and she shook her head again. "Like a storm coming." Nynaeve had always been able to foretell the weather. Listening to the wind, it was called, and the Wisdom of every village was expected to do it, though many really could not. Yet since leaving Emond's Field, Nynaeve's ability had grown, or changed. The storms she felt sometimes had to do with men rather than wind, now.

ɛɡwin bɪɾ əɹ ʌndɝlɪp, θɪŋkɪŋ. ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə bi stɑpt əɹ sloʊd, nɑɾ æftɝ kʌmɪŋ soʊ fɑɹ, nɑt soʊ kloʊs tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. fəɹ mæts seɪk, ən fəɹ ɹizənz ðəɾ əɹ maɪn maɪt tɛl əɹ wɝ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ðə laɪf ʌv wʌn vɪlədʒ juθ, wʌn tʃaɪldhʊd fɹɛnd, bʌt ðəɾ əɹ hɑɹt kəd nɑt ɹeɪt soʊ haɪ. ʃi lʊkt ət ði ʌðɝz, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ɛni ʌv əm hæd noʊɾəst sʌmθɪŋ.

Egwene bit her underlip, thinking. They could not afford to be stopped or slowed, not after coming so far, not so close to Tar Valon. For Mat's sake, and for reasons that her mind might tell her were more important than the life of one village youth, one childhood friend, but that her heart could not rate so high. She looked at the others, wondering if any of them had noticed something.

vɛɹɪn sədaɪ, ʃɔɹɾ ən plʌmp ən ɔl ɪn ʃeɪdz ə bɹaʊn, ɹoʊɾ əpɛɹənli lɔst ɪn θɔt, ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk pʊl fɔɹwɝd tɪl ɪɾ ɔl bʌt hɪɾ əɹ feɪs, ɪn ðə lɛd bʌt lɛɾɪŋ əɹ hɔɹs æmbəl əɾ ɪts oʊn peɪs. ʃi wɑz ə ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ, ən ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝz juʒəwəli kɛɹd mɔɹ fəɹ sikɪŋ aʊt nɑlədʒ ðən fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld ɝaʊn ðɛm. ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt soʊ ʃʊɹ ə vɛɹɪnz dɪtætʃmənt, ðoʊ. vɛɹɪn hæd pʊt hɝsɛlf hɪp-dip ɪn ði əfɛɹz ə ðə wɝl baɪ biɪŋ wɪð ðɛm.

Verin Sedai, short and plump and all in shades of brown, rode apparently lost in thought, the hood of her cloak pulled forward till it all but hid her face, in the lead but letting her horse amble at its own pace. She was of the Brown Ajah, and the Brown sisters usually cared more for seeking out knowledge than for anything in the world around them. Egwene was not so sure of Verin's detachment, though. Verin had put herself hip-deep in the affairs of the world by being with them.

ɪleɪn, ʌv ən eɪdʒ wɪð ɛɡwin ən ɔlsoʊ ə nɑvəs, bʌt ɡoʊldən-hɛɹɾ ən blu-aɪd wɛɹ ɛɡwin wɑz dɑɹk, ɹoʊd bæk bɪsaɪd ðə lɪɾɝ wɛɹ mæt leɪ ʌnkɑnʃəs. ɪn ðə seɪm ɡɹeɪ əz ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv, ʃi wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm wɪð ðə wɝi ðeɪ ɔl fɛlt. mæt hæd nɑt ɹaʊzd ɪn θɹi deɪz, naʊ. ðə lin, lɔŋ-hɛɹd mæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə lɪɾɝ sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk ɛvɹiwɛɹ wɪθaʊɾ ɛniwʌn noʊɾɪsɪŋ, ən ðə laɪnz ə hɪz feɪs hæd dipən ɪn kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən.

Elayne, of an age with Egwene and also a novice, but golden-haired and blue-eyed where Egwene was dark, rode back beside the litter where Mat lay unconscious. In the same gray as Egwene and Nynaeve, she was watching him with the worry they all felt. Mat had not roused in three days, now. The lean, long-haired man riding on the other side of the litter seemed to be trying to look everywhere without anyone noticing, and the lines of his face had deepened in concentration.

"hʊɹɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd, ən nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd. ðeɪ sloʊd tə lɛt ðə lɪɾɝ kætʃ ʌp tə ðɛm. vɛɹɪn æmbəld ɑn əhɛd.

"Hurin," Egwene said, and Nynaeve nodded. They slowed to let the litter catch up to them. Verin ambled on ahead.

"du jə sɛns sʌmθɪŋ, hʊɹɪn?" nɪneɪiv æskt. ɪleɪn lɪftəɾ əɹ aɪz, sʌɾənli ɪntɛnt, fɹəm mæts lɪɾɝ.

"Do you sense something, Hurin?" Nynaeve asked. Elayne lifted her eyes, suddenly intent, from Mat's litter.

wɪð ðə θɹi ʌv əm lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ðə lin mæn ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl ən ɹʌb ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz lɔŋ noʊz. "tʃɹʌbəl," hi sɛd, kɝɾ ən ɹɪlʌktən ət ðə seɪm taɪm. "aɪ θɪŋk meɪbi . . . tʃɹʌbəl."

With the three of them looking at him, the lean man shifted in his saddle and rubbed the side of his long nose. "Trouble," he said, curt and reluctant at the same time. "I think maybe . . . trouble."

ə θif-teɪkɝ fəɹ ðə kɪŋ ə ʃaɪnɝ, hi dɪd nɑt wɛɹ ə ʃaɪnɝən wɔɹiɝz tɑpnɑt, jɛt ðə ʃɔɹt sɔɹɾ ən nɑtʃt sɔɹd-bɹeɪkɝ əɾ ɪz bɛlt wɝ wɔɹn wɪð jus. jɪɹz ʌv ɪkspɪɹiəns sim tə hæv ɡɪvən ɪm səm tælən ət snɪfɪŋ aʊt ɹɔŋduɝz, ɪspɛʃli ðoʊz u hæd dʌn vaɪələns.

A thief-taker for the King of Shienar, he did not wear a Shienaran warrior's topknot, yet the short sword and notched sword-breaker at his belt were worn with use. Years of experience seemed to have given him some talent at sniffing out wrongdoers, especially those who had done violence.

twaɪs ɑn ðə dʒɝni hi hæɾ ædvaɪzd əm tə liv ə vɪlədʒ æftɝ biɪŋ ðəɹ lɛs ðən ən aʊɝ. ðə fɝs taɪm, ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl ɹəfjuzd, seɪɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ tu taɪɝd, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ðə naɪt wɑz dʌn ði ɪnkipɝ ən tu ʌðɝ mɛn ə ðə vɪlədʒ hæd tʃɹaɪd tə mɝɾɝ əm ɪn ðɛɹ bɛdz. ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli sɪmpəl θivz, nɑt dɑɹkfɹɛnz, dʒʌst ɡɹiɾi fəɹ ðə hɔɹsəz ən wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ hæɾ ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlbæɡz ən bʌndəlz. bʌt ðə ɹɛst ə ðə vɪlədʒ nu ʌv ɪt, ən əpɛɹənli kənsɪɾɝd stʃɹeɪnʒɝz fɛɹ ɡlinɪŋz. ðeɪ hæd bɪn fɔɹs tə fli ə mɑb weɪvɪŋ æks hændəlz ən pɪtʃfɔɹks. ðə sɛkən taɪm, vɛɹɪn ɔɹɾɝd əm tə ɹaɪɾ ɑn əz sun əz hʊɹɪn spoʊk.

Twice on the journey he had advised them to leave a village after being there less than an hour. The first time, they had all refused, saying they were too tired, but before the night was done the innkeeper and two other men of the village had tried to murder them in their beds. They were only simple thieves, not Darkfriends, just greedy for the horses and whatever they had in their saddlebags and bundles. But the rest of the village knew of it, and apparently considered strangers fair gleanings. They had been forced to flee a mob waving axe handles and pitchforks. The second time, Verin ordered them to ride on as soon as Hurin spoke.

bʌt ðə θif-teɪkɝ wɑz ɔlweɪz wɛɹi wən tɔkɪŋ tə ɛni ʌv ɪz kəmpænjənz. ɪksɛp mæt, bæk wən mæt kəd tɔk; ðə tu ʌv əm hæd dʒoʊkt ən pleɪɾ ət daɪs, wən ðə wɪmən wɝ nɑt tu kloʊs ət hænd. ɛɡwin θɔɾ i maɪt bi ənizi ət biɪŋ əloʊn, fəɹ ɔl pɹæktəkəl pɝpəsəz, wɪð ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ən θɹi wɪmən ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ fəɹ sɪstɝhʊd. səm mɛn faʊn feɪsɪŋ ə faɪɾ iziɝ ðən feɪsɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

But the thief-taker was always wary when talking to any of his companions. Except Mat, back when Mat could talk; the two of them had joked and played at dice, when the women were not too close at hand. Egwene thought he might be uneasy at being alone, for all practical purposes, with an Aes Sedai and three women in training for sisterhood. Some men found facing a fight easier than facing Aes Sedai.

"wʌt kaɪndə tʃɹʌbəl?" ɪleɪn sɛd.

"What kind of trouble?" Elayne said.

ʃi spoʊk izəli, bʌt wɪð sətʃ ə klɪɹ noʊɾ ʌv ɪkspɛktɪŋ tə bi ænsɝd, ɪmiɾiətli ən ɪn dɪteɪl, ðət hʊɹɪn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ. "aɪ smɛl - " hi kʌt hɪmsɛlf ʃɔɹɾ ən blɪŋkt əz ɪf sɝpɹaɪzd, aɪz dɑɹɾɪŋ fɹəm wʌn wʊmən tə ənʌðɝ. "dʒʌst ə filɪŋ," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "ə . . . ə hʌntʃ. aɪv sin səm tʃɹæks, jɛstɝdeɪ, ən tədeɪ. ə lɑɾ ə hɔɹsəz. twɛnti əɹ θɝɾi ɡoʊɪŋ ðɪs weɪ, twɛnti əɹ θɝɾi ðæt. ɪt meɪks mi wʌndɝ. ðæts ɔl. ə filɪŋ. bʌɾ aɪ seɪ ɪts tʃɹʌbəl."

She spoke easily, but with such a clear note of expecting to be answered, immediately and in detail, that Hurin opened his mouth. "I smell - " He cut himself short and blinked as if surprised, eyes darting from one woman to another. "Just a feeling," he said finally. "A . . . a hunch. I've seen some tracks, yesterday, and today. A lot of horses. Twenty or thirty going this way, twenty or thirty that. It makes me wonder. That's all. A feeling. But I say it's trouble."

tʃɹæks? ɛɡwin hæd nɑt noʊɾəst ðɛm. nɪneɪiv sɛd ʃɑɹpli, "aɪ dɪd nɑt si ɛniθɪŋ wɝisəm ɪn ðɛm." nɪneɪiv pɹaɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf ɑn biɪŋ əz ɡʊɾ ə tʃɹækɝ əz ɛni mæn. "ðeɪ wɝ deɪz oʊld. wʌt meɪks jə θɪŋk ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹʌbəl?"

Tracks? Egwene had not noticed them. Nynaeve said sharply, "I did not see anything worrisome in them." Nynaeve prided herself on being as good a tracker as any man. "They were days old. What makes you think they are trouble?"

"aɪ dʒʌs θɪŋk ðeɪ ɑɹ," hʊɹɪn sɛd sloʊli, əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə seɪ mɔɹ. hi dʒɹɑpt ɪz aɪz, ɹʌbɪŋ əɾ ɪz noʊz ən ɪnheɪlɪŋ dipli. "ɪts bɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm sɪns wi sɔ ə vɪlədʒ," hi mʌɾɝd. "hu noʊz wʌt nuz fɹəm fɑlm əz kʌm bɪfɔɹ ʌs? wi maɪt nɑt faɪn soʊ ɡʊɾ ə wɛlkəm əz wi ɪkspɛkt. aɪm θɪŋkɪŋ ðiz mɛn kəd bi bɹɪɡænz, kɪlɝz. wi ʃəd bi wɛɹi, aɪm θɪŋkɪŋ. ɪf mæt wɑz ɑn ɪz fit, aɪd skaʊɾ əhɛd, bʌt meɪbi ɪts bɛst aɪ doʊn liv jə əloʊn."

"I just think they are," Hurin said slowly, as if he wanted to say more. He dropped his eyes, rubbing at his nose and inhaling deeply. "It's been a long time since we saw a village," he muttered. "Who knows what news from Falme has come before us? We might not find so good a welcome as we expect. I'm thinking these men could be brigands, killers. We should be wary, I'm thinking. If Mat was on his feet, I'd scout ahead, but maybe it's best I don't leave you alone."

nɪneɪivz aɪbɹaʊz lɪftəd. "du jə bɪliv wi kænɑt lʊk æftɝ aʊɝsɛlvz?"

Nynaeve's eyebrows lifted. "Do you believe we cannot look after ourselves?"

"ðə wʌn paʊɝ woʊn dʒju mʌtʃ ɡʊɾ ɪf sʌmbɑɾi kɪlz jə bɪfɔɹ jə kən juz ɪt," hʊɹɪn sɛd, ədʒɹɛsɪŋ ðə tɔl pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl. "bɛɡɪŋ jəɹ pɑɹɾən, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk aɪ. . . . əl dʒʌst ɹaɪɾ ʌp wɪð vɛɹɪn sədaɪ fəɹ ə taɪm." hi dʌɡ ɪn ɪz hilz ən ɡæləp fɔɹwɝd bɪfɔɹ ɛni ʌv əm kəd spik əɡɛn.

"The One Power won't do you much good if somebody kills you before you can use it," Hurin said, addressing the tall pommel of his saddle. "Begging your pardon, but I think I. . . . I'll just ride up with Verin Sedai for a time." He dug in his heels and galloped forward before any of them could speak again.

"naʊ ðəɾ ɪz ə sɝpɹaɪz," ɪleɪn sɛɾ əz hʊɹɪn sloʊɾ ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns fɹəm ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝ. vɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs ɪm ɛni mɔɹ ðən ʃi noʊɾəst ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, ən i əpɪɹd kɑntɛn tə liv ɪt soʊ. "hi hæz bɪn steɪɪŋ əz fɑɹ fɹəm vɛɹɪn əz i kəɾ ɛvɝ sɪns wi lɛf toʊmən hɛd. hi ɔlweɪz lʊks əɾ əɹ əz ɪf hiz əfɹeɪɾ ʌv wʌt ʃi maɪt seɪ."

"Now that is a surprise," Elayne said as Hurin slowed a little distance from the Brown sister. Verin did not seem to notice him any more than she noticed anything else, and he appeared content to leave it so. "He has been staying as far from Verin as he could ever since we left Toman Head. He always looks at her as if he's afraid of what she might say."

"ɹispɛktɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ dʌzn min hiz nɑɾ əfɹeɪɾ ə ðɛm," nɪneɪiv sɛd, ðən æɾəd, ɹɪlʌktənli, "ʌv ʌs."

"Respecting Aes Sedai doesn't mean he is not afraid of them," Nynaeve said, then added, reluctantly, "Of us."

"ɪf i θɪŋks ðəɹ maɪt bi tʃɹʌbəl, wi ɔt tə sɛn ɪm aʊt skaʊɾɪŋ." ɛɡwin tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən ɡeɪv ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən əz lɛvəl ə lʊk əz ʃi kəd mænədʒ. "ɪf ðəɹ ɪz tʃɹʌbəl, wi kən dɪfɛn aʊɝsɛlvz bɛɾɝ ðən i kəd wɪð ə hʌnʒɹəd soʊlʒɝz tə hɛlp hɪm."

"If he thinks there might be trouble, we ought to send him out scouting." Egwene took a deep breath and gave the other two women as level a look as she could manage. "If there is trouble, we can defend ourselves better than he could with a hundred soldiers to help him."

"hi dʌznt noʊ ðæt," nɪneɪiv sɛd flætli, "æn aɪm nɑɾ əbaʊt tə tɛl hɪm. əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls."

"He doesn't know that," Nynaeve said flatly, "and I am not about to tell him. Or anyone else."

"aɪ kən ɪmædʒən wʌt vɛɹɪn wəɾ əv tə seɪ əbaʊɾ ɪt." ɪleɪn saʊndəɾ æŋkʃəs. "aɪ wɪʃ aɪ hæd səm aɪdiə haʊ mʌtʃ ʃi dʌz noʊ. ɛɡwin, aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf maɪ mʌðɝ kəd hɛlp mi ɪf ði æmɪɝlɪn faʊn aʊt, mʌtʃ lɛs hɛlp ðə pɛɹ ə ju. əɹ ivən wɛðɝ ʃi wəd tʃɹaɪ." ɪleɪnz mʌðɝ wɑz kwin ʌv ændɝ. "ʃi wɑz oʊnli eɪbəl tə lɝn ə lɪɾəl ə ðə paʊɝ bɪfɔɹ ʃi lɛf ðə waɪt taʊɝ, fəɹ ɔl ʃiz lɪvd əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn ɹeɪz tə fʊl sɪstɝ."

"I can imagine what Verin would have to say about it." Elayne sounded anxious. "I wish I had some idea how much she does know. Egwene, I don't know if my mother could help me if the Amyrlin found out, much less help the pair of you. Or even whether she would try." Elayne's mother was Queen of Andor. "She was only able to learn a little of the Power before she left the White Tower, for all she has lived as if she had been raised to full sister."

"wi kænɑt hoʊp tə ɹɪlaɪ ɑn mɔɹɡeɪs," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ʃi ɪz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ən wɪl bi ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. noʊ, wi meɪ bi ɪn ɪnʌf tʃɹʌbəl ɔlɹɛɾi fəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɔf əz wi dɪd, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt wiv bɹɔt bæk. ɪɾəl bi bɛst ɪf wi steɪ loʊ, bɪheɪv hʌmbli, ən də nʌθɪŋ tə ətʃɹæk mɔɹ ətɛnʃən ðən wi ɔlɹɛɾi hæv."

"We cannot hope to rely on Morgase," Nynaeve said. "She is in Caemlyn, and we will be in Tar Valon. No, we may be in enough trouble already for going off as we did, no matter what we've brought back. It will be best if we stay low, behave humbly, and do nothing to attract more attention than we already have."

ənʌðɝ taɪm, ɛɡwin wʊɾə læft ət ði aɪdiə ʌv nɪneɪiv pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi hʌmbəl. ivən ɪleɪn mænədʒd ə bɛɾɝ dʒɑb ʌv ɪt. bʌɾ ət pɹɛzənt ʃi dɪd nɑt fil laɪk læfɪŋ. "æn ɪf hʊɹɪn ɪz ɹaɪt? ɪf wəɹ ətækt? hi kænɑt dɪfɛn əs əɡɛns twɛnti əɹ θɝɾi mɛn, ən wi maɪt bi dɛɾ ɪf wi weɪt fəɹ vɛɹɪn tə də sʌmθɪŋ. jə sɛd jə sɛns ə stɔɹm, nɪneɪiv."

Another time, Egwene would have laughed at the idea of Nynaeve pretending to be humble. Even Elayne managed a better job of it. But at present she did not feel like laughing. "And if Hurin is right? If we are attacked? He cannot defend us against twenty or thirty men, and we might be dead if we wait for Verin to do something. You said you sense a storm, Nynaeve."

"ju du?" ɪleɪn sɛd. ɹɛd-ɡoʊl kɝlz swʌŋ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "vɛɹɪn wɪl nɑt laɪk ɪɾ ɪf wi. . . ." ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf. "wʌtɛvɝ vɛɹɪn laɪks əɹ dʌzn laɪk, wi meɪ hæv tə."

"You do?" Elayne said. Red-gold curls swung as she shook her head. "Verin will not like it if we. . . ." She trailed off. "Whatever Verin likes or doesn't like, we may have to."

"aɪ wɪl də wʌt mʌs bi dʌn," nɪneɪiv sɛd ʃɑɹpli, "ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ɛniθɪŋ tə bi dʌn, ən jə tu wɪl ɹʌn, ɪf nid bi. ðə waɪt taʊɝ meɪ bi ɔl əbʌz wɪð jəɹ pətɛnʃəl, bʌt doʊn θɪŋk ðəl nɑt stɪl jə boʊθ ɪf ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ əɹ ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ dɪsaɪdz ɪts nɛsəsɛɹi."

"I will do what must be done," Nynaeve said sharply, "if there is anything to be done, and you two will run, if need be. The White Tower may be all abuzz with your potential, but don't think they will not still you both if the Amyrlin Seat or the Hall of the Tower decides it is necessary."

ɪleɪn swɑloʊd hɑɹd. "ɪf ðeɪ wəd stɪl əs fəɹ ɪt," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə feɪn vɔɪs, "ðeɪ wəd stɪl ju, tu. wi ʃəɾ ɔl ɹʌn təɡɛðɝ; əɹ æk təɡɛðɝ. hʊɹɪn əz bɪn ɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ. ɪf wi wɑnə lɪv tə bi ɪn tʃɹʌbəl ɪn ðə taʊɝ, wi meɪ hæv tə . . . tə də wʌt wi mʌst."

Elayne swallowed hard. "If they would still us for it," she said in a faint voice, "they would still you, too. We should all run together; or act together. Hurin has been right before. If we want to live to be in trouble in the Tower, we may have to . . . to do what we must."

ɛɡwin ʃɪvɝd. stɪld. kʌɾ ɔf fɹəm seɪaɪdɑɹ, ðə fimeɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. fju ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ ɛvɝ ɪnkɝd ðət pɛnəlti, jɛt ðəɹ wɝ didz fəɹ wɪtʃ ðə taʊɝ dɪmændəd stɪlɪŋ. nɑvəsɪz wɝ ɹikwaɪɝd tə lɝn ðə neɪmz ʌv ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn stɪld, ən ðɛɹ kɹaɪmz.

Egwene shivered. Stilled. Cut off from saidar, the female half of the True Source. Few Aes Sedai had ever incurred that penalty, yet there were deeds for which the Tower demanded stilling. Novices were required to learn the names of every Aes Sedai who had ever been stilled, and their crimes.

ʃi kəɾ ɔlweɪz fil ðə sɔɹs ðɛɹ, naʊ, dʒʌst aʊɾ ə saɪt, laɪk ðə sʌn ət nun oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ɪf ʃi ɔfən kɑt nʌθɪŋ wən ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə tʌtʃ seɪaɪdɑɹ, ʃi stɪl wɑntəd tə tʌtʃ ɪt. ðə mɔɹ ʃi tʌtʃt ɪt, ðə mɔɹ ʃi wɑntəd tə, ɔl ðə taɪm, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ, ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz, sɛɾ əbaʊt ðə deɪnʒɝz ʌv ɡɹoʊɪŋ tu fɑn ə ðə fil ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ. tə bi kʌɾ ɔf fɹəm ɪt; stɪl eɪbəl tə sɛns seɪaɪdɑɹ, bʌt nɛvɝ tə tʌtʃ ɪɾ əɡɛn. . . .

She could always feel the Source there, now, just out of sight, like the sun at noon over her shoulder. If she often caught nothing when she tried to touch saidar, she still wanted to touch it. The more she touched it, the more she wanted to, all the time, no matter what Sheriam Sedai, the Mistress of Novices, said about the dangers of growing too fond of the feel of the One Power. To be cut off from it; still able to sense saidar, but never to touch it again. . . .

niðɝ ə ði ʌðɝz sim tə wɑnə tɔk, iðɝ.

Neither of the others seemed to want to talk, either.

tə kʌvɝ əɹ ʃeɪkɪŋ, ʃi bɛn fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl tə ðə dʒɛnli sweɪɪŋ lɪɾɝ. mæts blæŋkəts hæd bɪkʌm dɪsɹeɪd, ɪkspoʊzɪŋ ə kɝv dæɡɝ ɪn ə ɡoʊldən ʃiθ klʌtʃt ɪn wʌn hænd, ə ɹubi ðə saɪz ʌv ə pɪdʒənz ɛɡ kæpɪŋ ðə hɪlt. kɛɹfəl nɑt tə tʌtʃ ðə dæɡɝ, ʃi iz ðə blæŋkəts bæk oʊvɝ ɪz hænd. hi wɑz oʊnli ə fju jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən ʃi, bʌt ɡɔn tʃiks ən sæloʊ skɪn hæɾ eɪdʒ hɪm. hɪz tʃɛs bɛɹli muvd əz i bɹið hɔɹsli. ə lʌmpi lɛðɝ sæk leɪ əɾ ɪz fit. ʃi ʃɪftəd ðə blæŋkət tə kʌvɝ ðæt, tu. wɪv tə ɡɛt mæt tə ðə taʊɝ, ʃi θɔt. ən ðə sæk.

To cover her shaking, she bent from her saddle to the gently swaying litter. Mat's blankets had become disarrayed, exposing a curved dagger in a golden sheath clutched in one hand, a ruby the size of a pigeon's egg capping the hilt. Careful not to touch the dagger, she eased the blankets back over his hand. He was only a few years older than she, but gaunt cheeks and sallow skin had aged him. His chest barely moved as he breathed hoarsely. A lumpy leather sack lay at his feet. She shifted the blanket to cover that, too. We have to get Mat to the Tower, she thought. And the sack.

nɪneɪiv lin daʊn əz wɛl, ən fɛl mæts fɔɹhɛd. "hɪz fivɝ ɪz wɝs." ʃi saʊndəd wɝid. "ɪf oʊnli aɪ hæd səm wɝɪnət ɹuɾ əɹ fivɝbeɪn."

Nynaeve leaned down as well, and felt Mat's forehead. "His fever is worse." She sounded worried. "If only I had some worrynot root or feverbane."

"pɝhæps ɪf vɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd hilɪŋ əɡɛn," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"Perhaps if Verin tried Healing again," Elayne said.

nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. ʃi smuð mæts hɛɹ bæk ən saɪd, ðən stʃɹeɪɾənd bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ. "ʃi sɛz ɪts ɔl ʃi kən də tə kip ɪm əlaɪv, naʊ, ən aɪ bɪliv hɝ. aɪ - aɪ tʃɹaɪd hilɪŋ læs naɪt maɪsɛlf, bʌt nʌθɪŋ hæpənd."

Nynaeve shook her head. She smoothed Mat's hair back and sighed, then straightened before speaking. "She says it is all she can do to keep him alive, now, and I believe her. I - I tried Healing last night myself, but nothing happened."

ɪleɪn ɡæspt. "ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ sɛz wi mʌsnt tʃɹaɪ tə hil əntɪl wiv bɪn ɡaɪɾəd stɛp baɪ stɛp ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz."

Elayne gasped. "Sheriam Sedai says we mustn't try to Heal until we've been guided step by step a hundred times."

"ju cʊɾə kɪl hɪm," ɛɡwin sɛd ʃɑɹpli.

"You could have killed him," Egwene said sharply.

nɪneɪiv snɪf laʊdli. "aɪ wɑz hilɪŋ bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɛvɝ θɔɾ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ivən ɪf aɪ dɪdnt noʊ aɪ wɑz. bʌɾ ɪt simz aɪ nid maɪ mɛɾəsənz tə meɪk ɪt wɝk fəɹ mi. ɪf aɪ oʊnli hæd səm fivɝbeɪn. aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk hiz mʌtʃ taɪm lɛft. aʊɝz, meɪbi."

Nynaeve sniffed loudly. "I was Healing before I ever thought of going to Tar Valon, even if I didn't know I was. But it seems I need my medicines to make it work for me. If I only had some feverbane. I do not think he has much time left. Hours, maybe."

ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi saʊndəɾ ɔlmoʊst əz ənhæpi əbaʊt noʊɪŋ, əbaʊt haʊ ʃi nu, əz ʃi dɪɾ əbaʊt mæt. ʃi wʌndɝɾ əɡɛn waɪ nɪneɪiv hæd tʃoʊzən tə ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn fəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ əɾ ɔl. ʃi hæd lɝn tə tʃænəl ənnoʊɪŋli, ivən ɪf ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz kəntʃɹoʊl ði ækt, ən hæd pæs ðə kɹaɪsəs ðət kɪl θɹi aʊɾ ə fɔɹ wɪmən u lɝnd wɪθaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡaɪɾəns. nɪneɪiv sɛd ʃi wɑntəd tə lɝn mɔɹ, bʌɾ ɔfən ʃi wɑz əz ɹɪlʌktən əbaʊɾ ɪɾ əz ə tʃaɪl biɪŋ doʊzd wɪð ʃipstɔŋ ɹut.

Egwene thought she sounded almost as unhappy about knowing, about how she knew, as she did about Mat. She wondered again why Nynaeve had chosen to go to Tar Valon for training at all. She had learned to channel unknowingly, even if she could not always control the act, and had passed the crisis that killed three out of four women who learned without Aes Sedai guidance. Nynaeve said she wanted to learn more, but often she was as reluctant about it as a child being dosed with sheepstongue root.

"wi wɪl əv ɪm ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ sun," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ðeɪ kən hil ɪm ðɛɹ. ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪl teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪm. ʃɪl teɪk kɛɹ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ." ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk ət wɛɹ mæts blæŋkət kʌvɝd ðə sæk əɾ ɪz fit. ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən wɝ stuɾiəsli nɑt lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪt, iðɝ. ðəɹ wɝ səm sikɹəts ðeɪ wəɾ ɔl bi ɹɪliv tə ʃɛd.

"We will have him in the White Tower soon," Egwene said. "They can Heal him there. The Amyrlin will take care of him. She will take care of everything." She did not look at where Mat's blanket covered the sack at his feet. The other two women were studiously not looking at it, either. There were some secrets they would all be relieved to shed.

"ɹaɪɾɝz," nɪneɪiv sɛd sʌɾənli, bʌɾ ɛɡwin hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sin ðɛm. tu dʌzən mɛn əpɪɹɪŋ oʊvɝ ə loʊ ɹaɪz əhɛd, waɪt kloʊks flæpɪŋ əz ðeɪ ɡæləpt, æŋɡlɪŋ təwɔɹd ðɛm.

"Riders," Nynaeve said suddenly, but Egwene had already seen them. Two dozen men appearing over a low rise ahead, white cloaks flapping as they galloped, angling toward them.

"tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd, laɪk ə kɝs. "aɪ θɪŋk wɪv faʊn jəɹ stɔɹm, ən hʊɹɪnz tʃɹʌbəl."

"Children of the Light," Elayne said, like a curse. "I think we have found your storm, and Hurin's trouble."

vɛɹɪn hæd pʊld ʌp, ə hæn ɑn hʊɹɪnz ɑɹm tə stɑp ɪm dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd. ɛɡwin tʌtʃt ðə lɛd lɪɾɝ hɔɹs tə stɑp ɪt dʒʌs bɪhaɪn ðə plʌmp ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Verin had pulled up, a hand on Hurin's arm to stop him drawing his sword. Egwene touched the lead litter horse to stop it just behind the plump Aes Sedai.

"lɛt mi də ɔl ðə tɔkɪŋ, tʃɪlʒɹən," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd plɑtʃədli, pʊʃɪŋ əɹ kaʊl bæk tə ɹɪvil ɡɹeɪ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ. ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ oʊl vɛɹɪn wɑz; ʃi θɔɾ oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi ə ɡɹændmʌðɝ, bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪ stʃɹiks wɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz oʊnli saɪnz ʌv eɪdʒ. "ænd wʌtɛvɝ jə du, də nɑɾ əlaʊ ðɛm tə meɪk jə æŋɡɹi."

"Let me do all the talking, children," the Aes Sedai said placidly, pushing her cowl back to reveal gray in her hair. Egwene was not sure how old Verin was; she thought old enough to be a grandmother, but the gray streaks were the Aes Sedai's only signs of age. "And whatever you do, do not allow them to make you angry."

vɛɹɪnz feɪs wɑz əz kɑm əz əɹ vɔɪs, bʌɾ ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi sɔ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ mɛʒɝɪŋ ðə dɪstəns tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðə tɑps ə ðə taʊɝz wɝ vɪzəbəl naʊ, ən ə haɪ bɹɪdʒ ɑɹtʃɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪvɝ tə ði aɪlənd, tɔl ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ʃɪps ðət plaɪd ðə ɹɪvɝ tə seɪl bɪniθ.

Verin's face was as calm as her voice, but Egwene thought she saw the Aes Sedai measuring the distance to Tar Valon. The tops of the towers were visible now, and a high bridge arching over the river to the island, tall enough for the trading ships that plied the river to sail beneath.

kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si, ɛɡwin θɔt, bʌt tu fɑɹ tə də ɛni ɡʊd.

Close enough to see, Egwene thought, but too far to do any good.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ði ɔnkʌmɪŋ waɪtkloʊks mɛn tə tʃɑɹdʒ ðɛm, bʌt ðɛɹ liɾɝ ɹeɪzd ə hæn ən ðeɪ əbɹʌpli dʒɹu ɹeɪn ə skæn fɔɹɾi peɪsɪz ɔf, skæɾɝɪŋ dʌst ən dɝɾ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm.

For a moment she was sure the oncoming Whitecloaks meant to charge them, but their leader raised a hand and they abruptly drew rein a scant forty paces off, scattering dust and dirt ahead of them.

nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd æŋɡɹəli ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, ən ɪleɪn sæt stʃɹeɪɾ ən fʊl ə pɹaɪd, əpɪɹɪŋ laɪkli tə bɪɹeɪt ðə waɪtkloʊks fəɹ ɪl mænɝz. hʊɹɪn stɪl hæɾ ə ɡɹɪp ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt; hi lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə pʊt hɪmsɛlf bɪtwin ðə wɪmən ən ðə waɪtkloʊks noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt vɛɹɪn sɛd. vɛɹɪn maɪldli weɪvd ə hæn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ feɪs tə dɪspɛl ðə dʌst. ðə waɪt-kloʊkt ɹaɪɾɝz spɹɛɾ aʊɾ ɪn ən ɑɹk, blɑkɪŋ ðə weɪ fɝmli.

Nynaeve muttered angrily under her breath, and Elayne sat straight and full of pride, appearing likely to berate the Whitecloaks for ill manners. Hurin still had a grip on his sword hilt; he looked ready to put himself between the women and the Whitecloaks no matter what Verin said. Verin mildly waved a hand in front of her face to dispel the dust. The white-cloaked riders spread out in an arc, blocking the way firmly.

ðɛɹ bɹɛstpleɪts ən kɑnɪkəl hɛlməts ʃoʊn fɹəm pɑlɪʃɪŋ, ən ivən ðə meɪl ɑn ðɛɹ ɑɹmz ɡlim bɹaɪtli. itʃ mæn hæd ðə flɛɹɪŋ, ɡoʊldən sʌn ɑn ɪz bɹɛst. səm fɪɾəd æɹoʊz tə baʊz, wɪtʃ ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ɹeɪz, bʌt hɛld ɹɛɾi. ðɛɹ liɾɝ wɑz ə jʌŋ mæn, jɛɾ i wɔɹ tu ɡoʊldən nɑts ə ɹæŋk bɪniθ ðə sʌnbɝst ɑn ɪz kloʊk.

Their breastplates and conical helmets shone from polishing, and even the mail on their arms gleamed brightly. Each man had the flaring, golden sun on his breast. Some fitted arrows to bows, which they did not raise, but held ready. Their leader was a young man, yet he wore two golden knots of rank beneath the sunburst on his cloak.

"tu tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪtʃəz, ənlɛs aɪ mɪs maɪ ɡɛs, jɛs?" hi sɛd wɪð ə taɪt smaɪl ðət pɪntʃt ɪz nɛɹoʊ feɪs. ɛɹəɡəns bɹaɪɾənd ɪz aɪz, əz ɪf i nu səm tʃɹuθ ʌðɝz wɝ tu stupəd tə si. "æn tu nɪts, ən ə pɛɹ ə læpdɔɡz, wʌn sɪk ən wʌn oʊld." hʊɹɪn bɹɪsəld, bʌt vɛɹɪnz hæn ɹistʃɹeɪn hɪm. "wɛɹ dʒju kʌm fɹʌm?" ðə waɪtkloʊk dɪmændəd.

"Two Tar Valon witches, unless I miss my guess, yes?" he said with a tight smile that pinched his narrow face. Arrogance brightened his eyes, as if he knew some truth others were too stupid to see. "And two nits, and a pair of lapdogs, one sick and one old." Hurin bristled, but Verin's hand restrained him. "Where do you come from?" the Whitecloak demanded.

"wi kʌm fɹəm ðə wɛst," vɛɹɪn sɛd plɑtʃədli. "muv aʊɾ ʌv əɹ weɪ, ən lɛɾ əs kəntɪnju. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ əv noʊ əθɔɹəɾi hɪɹ."

"We come from the west," Verin said placidly. "Move out of our way, and let us continue. The Children of the Light have no authority here."

"ðə tʃɪlʒɹən əv əθɔɹəɾi wɛɹɛvɝ ðə laɪɾ ɪz, wɪtʃ, ən wɛɹ ðə laɪɾ ɪz nɑt, wi bɹɪŋ ɪt. ænsɝ maɪ kwɛstʃənz! əɹ mʌst aɪ teɪk jə tə əɹ kæmp ən lɛt ðə kwɛstʃənɝz æsk?"

"The Children have authority wherever the Light is, witch, and where the Light is not, we bring it. Answer my questions! Or must I take you to our camp and let the Questioners ask?"

mæt kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹɾ ɛni mɔɹ dɪleɪ ɪn ɹitʃɪŋ hɛlp ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ən mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾəntli - ɛɡwin wɪns tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪt ðət weɪ - mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾəntli, ðeɪ kəd nɑt lɛt ðə kɑntɛns ə ðət sæk fɔl ɪndə waɪtkloʊk hænz.

Mat could not afford any more delay in reaching help in the White Tower. And more importantly - Egwene winced to think of it that way - more importantly, they could not let the contents of that sack fall into Whitecloak hands.

"aɪ hæv ænsɝd ju," vɛɹɪn sɛd, stɪl kɑm, "æn mɔɹ pəlaɪtli ðən jə dɪzɝv. dʒju ɹɪli bɪliv jə kən stɑp ʌs?" səm ə ðə waɪt-kloʊks ɹeɪz ðɛɹ baʊz əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ʌɾɝd ə θɹɛt, bʌt ʃi wɛn ɑn, hɝ vɔɪs nɛvɝ ɹaɪzɪŋ. "ɪn səm lænz jə meɪ hoʊl sweɪ baɪ jəɹ θɹɛts, bʌt nɑt hɪɹ, ɪn saɪɾ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. kən jə tʃɹuli bɪliv ðəɾ ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, jəl bi əlaʊd tə kæɹi ɔf ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

"I have answered you," Verin said, still calm, "and more politely than you deserve. Do you really believe you can stop us?" Some of the White-cloaks raised their bows as if she had uttered a threat, but she went on, her voice never rising. "In some lands you may hold sway by your threats, but not here, in sight of Tar Valon. Can you truly believe that in this place, you will be allowed to carry off Aes Sedai?"

ði ɔfəsɝ ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, əz ðoʊ sʌɾənli daʊɾɪŋ wɛðɝ i kəd bæk ʌp ɪz wɝdz. ðən i ɡlæns bæk əɾ ɪz mɛn - iðɝ tə ɹimaɪn hɪmsɛlf ə ðɛɹ səpɔɹɾ əɹ kəz i hæd ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðeɪ wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ - ən wɪð ðəɾ i tʊk hɪmsɛlf ɪn hænd. "aɪ hæv noʊ fɪɹ ə jəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnd weɪz, wɪtʃ. ænsɝ mi, əɹ ænsɝ ðə kwɛstʃənɝz." hi dɪd nɑt saʊn əz fɔɹsfəl əz i hæd.

The officer shifted uneasily in his saddle, as though suddenly doubting whether he could back up his words. Then he glanced back at his men - either to remind himself of their support or because he had remembered they were watching - and with that he took himself in hand. "I have no fear of your Darkfriend ways, witch. Answer me, or answer the Questioners." He did not sound as forceful as he had.

vɛɹɪn oʊpən əɹ maʊθ əz ɪf fəɹ aɪɾəl kɑnvɝseɪʃən, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd spik, ɪleɪn dʒʌmpt ɪn, vɔɪs ɹɪŋɪŋ wɪð kəmænd. "aɪ æm ɪleɪn, dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ. ɪf jə də nɑt muv əsaɪɾ ət wʌns, jəl əv kwin mɔɹɡeɪs tə ænsɝ tə, waɪtkloʊk!" vɛɹɪn hɪst wɪð vɛkseɪʃən.

Verin opened her mouth as if for idle conversation, but before she could speak, Elayne jumped in, voice ringing with command. "I am Elayne, Daughter-Heir of Andor. If you do not move aside at once, you will have Queen Morgase to answer to, Whitecloak!" Verin hissed with vexation.

ðə waɪtkloʊk lʊk teɪkən əbæk fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, bʌt ðən i læft. "ju θɪŋk ɪt soʊ, jɛs? pɝhæps jəl dɪskʌvɝ mɔɹɡeɪs noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əz soʊ mʌtʃ lʌv fəɹ wɪtʃəz, ɡɝl. ɪf aɪ teɪk jə fɹəm əm ən ɹɪtɝn jə tə hɝ saɪd, ʃɪl θæŋk mi fəɹ ɪt. lɔɹd kæptən imən vɑldə wəd laɪk vɛɹi mʌtʃ tə spik tə ju, dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ." hi ɹeɪzd ə hænd, wɛðɝ tə dʒɛstʃɝ əɹ sɪɡnəl ɪz mɛn, ɛɡwin kəd nɑt seɪ. səm ə ðə waɪt-kloʊks ɡæðɝd ðɛɹ ɹeɪnz.

The Whitecloak looked taken aback for an instant, but then he laughed. "You think it so, yes? Perhaps you will discover Morgase no longer has so much love for witches, girl. If I take you from them and return you to her side, she will thank me for it. Lord Captain Eamon Valda would like very much to speak to you, Daughter-Heir of Andor." He raised a hand, whether to gesture or signal his men, Egwene could not say. Some of the White-cloaks gathered their reins.

ðɛɹz noʊ mɔɹ taɪm tə weɪt, ɛɡwin θɔt. əl nɑt bi tʃeɪn əɡɛn! ʃi oʊpən hɝsɛlf tə ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ɪt wɑz ə sɪmpəl ɛksɝsaɪz, ən æftɝ lɔŋ pɹæktəs, ɪt wɛn mʌtʃ mɔɹ swɪfli ðən ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd. ɪn ə hɑɹtbiɾ əɹ maɪn ɛmptiɾ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɛvɹiθɪŋ bʌɾ ə sɪŋɡəl ɹoʊzbʌd, floʊɾɪŋ ɪn ɛmptinəs. ʃi wɑz ðə ɹoʊzbʌd, oʊpənɪŋ tə ðə laɪt, oʊpənɪŋ tə seɪaɪdɑɹ, ðə fimeɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. ðə paʊɝ flʌɾəd hɝ, θɹɛɾənɪŋ tə swip əɹ əweɪ. ɪt wɑz laɪk biɪŋ fɪld wɪð laɪt, wɪð ðə laɪt, laɪk biɪŋ wʌn wɪð ðə laɪt, ə ɡlɔɹiəs ɛkstəsi. ʃi fɔt tə kip fɹəm biɪŋ oʊvɝwɛlmd, ən foʊkəst ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə waɪtkloʊk ɔfəsɝz hɔɹs. ə smɔl pætʃ ʌv ɡɹaʊnd; ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə kɪl ɛniwʌn. jəl nɑt teɪk mi!

There's no more time to wait, Egwene thought. I will not be chained again! She opened herself to the One Power. It was a simple exercise, and after long practice, it went much more swiftly than the first time she had tried. In a heartbeat her mind emptied of everything, everything but a single rosebud, floating in emptiness. She was the rosebud, opening to the light, opening to saidar, the female half of the True Source. The Power flooded her, threatening to sweep her away. It was like being filled with light, with the Light, like being one with the Light, a glorious ecstasy. She fought to keep from being overwhelmed, and focused on the ground in front of the Whitecloak officer's horse. A small patch of ground; she did not want to kill anyone. You will not take me!

ðə mænz hænd wɑz stɪl ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp. wɪð ə ɹɔɹ ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm ɪɹʌptəɾ ɪn ə nɛɹoʊ faʊntən ə dɝɾ ən ɹɑks haɪɝ ðən ɪz hɛd. skɹimɪŋ, hɪz hɔɹs ɹɪɹd, ən i ɹoʊld aʊɾ ə hɪz sæɾəl laɪk ə sæk.

The man's hand was still going up. With a roar the ground in front of him erupted in a narrow fountain of dirt and rocks higher than his head. Screaming, his horse reared, and he rolled out of his saddle like a sack.

bɪfɔɹ i hɪt ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɛɡwin ʃɪftəɾ əɹ foʊkəs kloʊsɝ tə ði ʌðɝ waɪtkloʊks, ən ðə ɡɹaʊn θɹu ʌp ənʌðɝ smɔl ɪksploʊʒən. bɛlə dænst saɪdweɪz, bʌt ʃi kəntʃɹoʊl ðə mɛɹ wɪð ɹeɪnz ən niz wɪθaʊɾ ivən θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɪt. ɹæpt ɪnsaɪɾ ɛmptinəs, ʃi wɑz stɪl sɝpɹaɪzd əɾ ə θɝɾ ɪɹʌpʃən, nɑɾ ə hɝ meɪkɪŋ, ən ə fɔɹθ. dɪstənli, ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ ə nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn, boʊθ ɛnvɛləpt ɪn ðə ɡloʊ ðət sɛd ðeɪ, tu, hæɾ ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ, hæd bɪn ɛmbɹeɪs baɪ ɪt. ðəɾ ɔɹə wəd nɑt bi vɪzəbəl tə ɛni bʌɾ ənʌðɝ wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl, bʌt ðə ɹɪzʌls wɝ vɪzəbəl tə ɔl. ɪksploʊʒənz hɛɹid ðə waɪtkloʊks ɑn ɛvɹi saɪd, ʃaʊɝɪŋ əm wɪð dɝt, ʃeɪkɪŋ əm wɪð nɔɪz, sɛndɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz plʌnʒɪŋ waɪldli.

Before he hit the ground, Egwene shifted her focus closer to the other Whitecloaks, and the ground threw up another small explosion. Bela danced sideways, but she controlled the mare with reins and knees without even thinking of it. Wrapped inside emptiness, she was still surprised at a third eruption, not of her making, and a fourth. Distantly, she was aware of Nynaeve and Elayne, both enveloped in the glow that said they, too, had embraced saidar, had been embraced by it. That aura would not be visible to any but another woman who could channel, but the results were visible to all. Explosions harried the Whitecloaks on every side, showering them with dirt, shaking them with noise, sending their horses plunging wildly.

hʊɹɪn stɛɹɾ ɝaʊn hɪm, maʊθ oʊpən ən ɑbviəsli əz fɹaɪɾənd əz ðə waɪtkloʊks, əz i tʃɹaɪd tə kip ðə lɪɾɝ hɔɹsəz ən ɪz oʊn maʊn fɹəm boʊltɪŋ. vɛɹɪn wɑz waɪd-aɪd wɪð əstɑnɪʃmən ən æŋɡɝ. hɝ maʊθ wɝk fjʊɹiəsli, bʌt wʌtɛvɝ ʃi maɪt bi seɪɪŋ wɑz lɔst ɪn ðə θʌndɝ.

Hurin stared around him, mouth open and obviously as frightened as the Whitecloaks, as he tried to keep the litter horses and his own mount from bolting. Verin was wide-eyed with astonishment and anger. Her mouth worked furiously, but whatever she might be saying was lost in the thunder.

ən ðən ðə waɪtkloʊks wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ, səm dʒɹɑpɪŋ ðɛɹ baʊz ɪn pænɪk, ɡæləpɪŋ əz ɪf ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf wɝ ət ðɛɹ bæks. ɔl bʌt ðə jʌŋ ɔfəsɝ, hu wɑz pɪkɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ʌp ɔf ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ʃoʊldɝz hʌntʃt, hi stɛɹɾ ət vɛɹɪn, ðə waɪts ə hɪz aɪz ʃoʊɪŋ ɔl ðə weɪ 'ɹaʊnd. dʌst steɪn ɪz faɪn waɪt kloʊk, ən ɪz feɪs, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs. "kɪl mi, ðɛn, wɪtʃ," hi sɛd ʃɑkəli. "ɡoʊ əhɛd. kɪl mi, əz jə kɪl maɪ fɑðɝ!"

And then the Whitecloaks were running away, some dropping their bows in panic, galloping as if the Dark One himself were at their backs. All but the young officer, who was picking himself up off the ground. Shoulders hunched, he stared at Verin, the whites of his eyes showing all the way 'round. Dust stained his fine white cloak, and his face, but he did not seem to notice. "Kill me, then, witch," he said shakily. "Go ahead. Kill me, as you killed my father!"

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪɡnɔɹd hɪm. hɝ ətɛnʃən wɑz ɔl ɑn əɹ kəmpænjənz. əz ɪf ðeɪ, tu, hæd fɝɡɑɾən ðɛɹ ɔfəsɝ, ðə fliɪŋ waɪtkloʊks vænɪʃt oʊvɝ ðə seɪm ɹaɪz wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd fɝst əpɪɹd, ɔl ɪn ə bɑɾi ən nʌn lʊkɪŋ bæk. ði ɔfəsɝz hɔɹs ɹæn wɪð ðɛm.

The Aes Sedai ignored him. Her attention was all on her companions. As if they, too, had forgotten their officer, the fleeing Whitecloaks vanished over the same rise where they had first appeared, all in a body and none looking back. The officer's horse ran with them.

ʌndɝ vɛɹɪnz fjʊɹiəs ɡeɪz, ɛɡwin lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ, sloʊli, ənwɪlɪŋli. ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz hɑɹd, lɛɾɪŋ ɡoʊ. ivən mɔɹ sloʊli, ðə ɡloʊ ɝaʊnd nɪneɪiv vænɪʃt. nɪneɪiv wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ hɑɹɾ ət ðə pɪntʃ-feɪst waɪtkloʊk bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, əz ɪf i maɪt stɪl bi keɪpəbəl ə səm sɔɹɾ ə tʃɹɪkɝi. ɪleɪn lʊkt ʃɑk baɪ wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn.

Under Verin's furious gaze, Egwene let go of saidar, slowly, unwillingly. It was always hard, letting go. Even more slowly, the glow around Nynaeve vanished. Nynaeve was frowning hard at the pinch-faced Whitecloak before them, as if he might still be capable of some sort of trickery. Elayne looked shocked by what she had done.

"wʌt juv dʌn," vɛɹɪn bɪɡæn, ðən stɑp tə teɪk ə dip bɹɛθ. hɝ stɛɹ tʊk ɪn ɔl θɹi ʌv ðə jʌŋɡɝ wɪmən. "wʌt juv dʌn ɪz ən əbɑməneɪʃən. ən əbɑməneɪʃən! ən ɛɛs sədaɪ dʌz nɑt juz ðə paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən ɪksɛpt əɡɛnst ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, əɹ ɪn ðə læst ɪkstʃɹim tə dɪfɛn əɹ laɪf. ðə θɹi oʊðz - "

"What you have done," Verin began, then stopped to take a deep breath. Her stare took in all three of the younger women. "What you have done is an abomination. An abomination! An Aes Sedai does not use the Power as a weapon except against Shadowspawn, or in the last extreme to defend her life. The Three Oaths - "

"ðeɪ wɝ ɹɛɾi tə kɪl ʌs," nɪneɪiv bɹoʊk ɪn hiɾɪdli. "kɪl ʌs, əɹ kæɹi əs ɔf tə bi tɔɹtʃɝd. hi wɑz ɡɪvɪŋ ði ɔɹɾɝ."

"They were ready to kill us," Nynaeve broke in heatedly. "Kill us, or carry us off to be tortured. He was giving the order."

"ɪt . . . ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹɪli juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ." ɪleɪn hɛld əɹ tʃɪn haɪ, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs ʃʊk. "wi dɪd nɑt hɝɾ ɛniwʌn, əɹ ivən tʃɹaɪ tə hɝɾ ɛniwʌn. ʃʊɹli - "

"It . . . it was not really using the Power as a weapon, Verin Sedai." Elayne held her chin high, but her voice shook. "We did not hurt anyone, or even try to hurt anyone. Surely - "

"du nɑt splɪt hɛɹz wɪð mi!" vɛɹɪn snæpt. "wɛn jə bɪkʌm fʊl ɛɛs sədaɪ - ɪf jə ɛvɝ bɪkʌm fʊl ɛɛs sədaɪ! - jəl bi baʊn tə oʊbeɪ ðə θɹi oʊðz, bʌɾ ivən nɑvəsɪz ɑɹ ɪkspɛktəd tə də ðɛɹ bɛs tə lɪv əz ɪf ɔlɹɛɾi baʊnd."

"Do not split hairs with me!" Verin snapped. "When you become full Aes Sedai - if you ever become full Aes Sedai! - you will be bound to obey the Three Oaths, but even novices are expected to do their best to live as if already bound."

"wʌɾ əbaʊt hɪm?" nɪneɪiv dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə waɪtkloʊk ɔfəsɝ, stɪl stændɪŋ ðəɹ ən lʊkɪŋ stʌnd. hɝ feɪs wɑz əz taɪɾ əz ə dʒɹʌm; ʃi simd ɔlmoʊst əz æŋɡɹi əz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. "hi wɑz əbaʊt tə teɪk əs pɹɪznɝ. mæt wɪl daɪ ɪf i dʌzn ɹitʃ ðə taʊɝ sun, ən . . . ænd. . . ."

"What about him?" Nynaeve gestured to the Whitecloak officer, still standing there and looking stunned. Her face was as tight as a drum; she seemed almost as angry as the Aes Sedai. "He was about to take us prisoner. Mat will die if he doesn't reach the Tower soon, and . . . and. . . ."

ɛɡwin nu wʌt nɪneɪiv wɑz stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ nɑt tə seɪ əlaʊd. ən wi kæn lɛt ðət sæk fɔl ɪndə ɛni hænz bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪnz.

Egwene knew what Nynaeve was struggling not to say aloud. And we can't let that sack fall into any hands but the Amyrlin's.

vɛɹɪn ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ðə waɪtkloʊk wɛɹəli. "hi wɑz oʊnli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bʊli ʌs, tʃaɪld. hi nu vɛɹi wɛl i kəd nɑt meɪk əs ɡoʊ wɛɹ wi dɪd nɑt wɑnt, nɑt wɪθaʊt mɔɹ tʃɹʌbəl ðən i wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə æksɛpt. nɑt hɪɹ, nɑɾ ɪn saɪɾ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. aɪ cʊɾə tɔkt əs pæs hɪm, wɪð ə lɪɾəl taɪm ən ə lɪɾəl peɪʃəns. oʊ, hi maɪt wɛl əv tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl əs ɪf i cʊɾə dʌn ɪt fɹəm haɪɾɪŋ, bʌt noʊ waɪtkloʊk wɪð ðə bɹeɪnz ʌv ə ɡoʊt wɪl tʃɹaɪ hɑɹmɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu noʊz hiz ðɛɹ. si wʌt juv dʌn! wʌt stɔɹiz wɪl ðoʊz mɛn tɛl, ən wʌt hɑɹm wɪl ɪt du?"

Verin regarded the Whitecloak wearily. "He was only trying to bully us, child. He knew very well he could not make us go where we did not want, not without more trouble than he was willing to accept. Not here, not in sight of Tar Valon. I could have talked us past him, with a little time and a little patience. Oh, he might well have tried to kill us if he could have done it from hiding, but no Whitecloak with the brains of a goat will try harming an Aes Sedai who knows he is there. See what you have done! What stories will those men tell, and what harm will it do?"

ði ɔfəsɝz feɪs hæd ɹɛɾənd wən ʃi mɛnʃən haɪɾɪŋ. "ɪɾ ɪz noʊ kaʊɝɾəs nɑt tə tʃɑɹdʒ ðə paʊɝz ðət bɹoʊk ðə wɝld," hi bɝst aʊt. "ju wɪtʃəz wɑnə bɹeɪk ðə wɝld əɡɛn, ɪn ðə sɝvəs ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn!" vɛɹɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪn taɪɝd dɪsbɪlif.

The officer's face had reddened when she mentioned hiding. "It is no cowardice not to charge the powers that Broke the World," he burst out. "You witches want to Break the World again, in the service of the Dark One!" Verin shook her head in tired disbelief.

ɛɡwin wɪʃt ʃi kəd mɛn səm ə ðə dæmədʒ ʃi hæd dʌn. "aɪ æm vɛɹi sɑɹi fəɹ wʌɾ aɪ dɪd," ʃi toʊl ði ɔfəsɝ. ʃi wɑz ɡlæd ʃi wɑz nɑt baʊn tə spik noʊ wɝd ðət wɑz nɑt tʃɹu, əz fʊl ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ, kəz wʌt ʃi hæd sɛd wɑz oʊnli hæf tʃɹu ət bɛst. "aɪ ʃəd nɑt hæv, ən aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz. aɪm ʃʊɹ vɛɹɪn sədaɪ wɪl hil jəɹ bɹuzəz." hi stɛp bæk əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɔfɝd tə hæv ɪm skɪn əlaɪv, ən vɛɹɪn snɪf laʊdli. "wi hæv kʌm ə lɔŋ weɪ," ɛɡwin wɛn ɑn, "ɔl ðə weɪ fɹəm toʊmən hɛd, ən ɪf aɪ wɝn soʊ taɪɝd, aɪ wəd nɛvɝ əv - "

Egwene wished she could mend some of the damage she had done. "I am very sorry for what I did," she told the officer. She was glad she was not bound to speak no word that was not true, as full Aes Sedai were, because what she had said was only half true at best. "I should not have, and I apologize. I am sure Verin Sedai will Heal your bruises." He stepped back as if she had offered to have him skinned alive, and Verin sniffed loudly. "We have come a long way," Egwene went on, "all the way from Toman Head, and if I weren't so tired, I would never have - "

"bi kwaɪət, ɡɝl!" vɛɹɪn ʃaʊɾəd ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðə waɪtkloʊk snɑɹəld, "toʊmən hɛd? fɑlm! jə wɝ ət fɑlm!" hi stʌmbəl bæk ənʌðɝ stɛp ən hæf dʒɹu hɪz sɔɹd. fɹəm ðə lʊk ɑn ɪz feɪs, ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ i mɛn tə ətæk, əɹ tə dɪfɛn hɪmsɛlf. hʊɹɪn muvd ɪz hɔɹs kloʊsɝ tə ðə waɪtkloʊk, ə hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd-bɹeɪkɝ, bʌt ðə nɛɹoʊ-feɪs mæn wɛn ɑn ɪn ə ɹænt, spɪɾəl flaɪɪŋ wɪð ɪz fjʊɹi. "maɪ fɑðɝ daɪɾ ət fɑlm! baɪɑɝ toʊl mi! jə wɪtʃəz kɪld ɪm fəɹ jəɹ fɔls dʒɹæɡən! əl si jə dɛd fəɹ ɪt! əl si jə bɝn!"

"Be quiet, girl!" Verin shouted at the same time the Whitecloak snarled, "Toman Head? Falme! You were at Falme!" He stumbled back another step and half drew his sword. From the look on his face, Egwene did not know whether he meant to attack, or to defend himself. Hurin moved his horse closer to the Whitecloak, a hand on his sword-breaker, but the narrow-faced man went on in a rant, spittle flying with his fury. "My father died at Falme! Byar told me! You witches killed him for your false Dragon! I'll see you dead for it! I will see you burn!"

"ɪmpɛtʃwəs tʃɪlʒɹən," vɛɹɪn saɪd. "ɔlmoʊst əz bæɾ əz bɔɪz fəɹ lɛɾɪŋ jəɹ maʊðz ɹʌn əweɪ wɪð ju. ɡoʊ wɪð ðə laɪt, maɪ sʌn," ʃi toʊl ðə waɪtkloʊk.

"Impetuous children," Verin sighed. "Almost as bad as boys for letting your mouths run away with you. Go with the Light, my son," she told the Whitecloak.

wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝd, ʃi ɡaɪɾəd əm ɝaʊn ðə mæn, bʌɾ ɪz ʃaʊts fɑloʊɾ æftɝ. "maɪ neɪm ɪz deɪn bɔɹnhəld! ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt, dɑɹkfɹɛnz! əl meɪk jə fɪɹ maɪ neɪm! ɹɪmɛmbɝ maɪ neɪm!"

Without another word, she guided them around the man, but his shouts followed after. "My name is Dain Bornhald! Remember it, Darkfriends! I will make you fear my name! Remember my name!"

əz bɔɹnhəlz ʃaʊts feɪɾəd bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɪn saɪləns fəɹ ə taɪm. faɪnəli, ɛɡwin sɛd tə noʊ wʌn ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ, "aɪ wɑz oʊnli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk θɪŋz bɛɾɝ."

As Bornhald's shouts faded behind them, they rode in silence for a time. Finally, Egwene said to no one in particular, "I was only trying to make things better."

"bɛɾɝ!" vɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd. "ju mʌs lɝn ðəɹ ɪz ə taɪm tə spik ɔl ə ðə tʃɹuθ, ən ə taɪm tə ɡʌvɝn jəɹ tʌŋ. ðə list ə ðə lɛsənz jə mʌs lɝn, bʌɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ɪf jə min tə lɪv lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə wɛɹ ðə ʃɔl ʌv ə fʊl sɪstɝ. dɪɾ ɪt nɛvɝ əkɝ tə jə ðət wɝɾ ə fɑlm maɪɾ əv kʌm əhɛɾ ʌv ʌs?"

"Better!" Verin muttered. "You must learn there is a time to speak all of the truth, and a time to govern your tongue. The least of the lessons you must learn, but important, if you mean to live long enough to wear the shawl of a full sister. Did it never occur to you that word of Falme might have come ahead of us?"

"waɪ ʃəɾ ɪɾ əv əkɝd tə hɝ?" nɪneɪiv æskt. "noʊ wʌn wiv mɛt bɪfɔɹ ðɪs hæd hɝd mɔɹ ðən ɹumɝz, ɪf ðæt, ən wɪv aʊtʃɹʌn ivən ɹumɝ ɪn ðə læs mʌnθ."

"Why should it have occurred to her?" Nynaeve asked. "No one we've met before this had heard more than rumors, if that, and we have outrun even rumor in the last month."

"æn ɔl wɝɾ əz tə kʌm əlɔŋ ðə seɪm ɹoʊdz wi juzd?" vɛɹɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "wi hæv muv sloʊli. ɹumɝ teɪks wɪŋ əlɔŋ ə hʌnʒɹəd pæðz. ɔlweɪz plæn fəɹ ðə wɝst, tʃaɪld; ðət weɪ, ɔl jəɹ sɝpɹaɪzəz wɪl bi plɛzənt wʌnz."

"And all word has to come along the same roads we used?" Verin replied. "We have moved slowly. Rumor takes wing along a hundred paths. Always plan for the worst, child; that way, all your surprises will be pleasant ones."

"wʌt dɪɾ i min əbaʊt maɪ mʌðɝ?" ɪleɪn sɛd sʌɾənli. "hi mʌst əv bɪn laɪɪŋ. ʃi wəd nɛvɝ tɝn əɡɛns tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"What did he mean about my mother?" Elayne said suddenly. "He must have been lying. She would never turn against Tar Valon."

"ðə kwinz ʌv ændɝ əv ɔlweɪz bɪn fɹɛnz tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, bʌɾ ɔl θɪŋz tʃeɪnʒ." vɛɹɪnz feɪs wɑz kɑm əɡɛn, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz ə taɪtnəs ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. ʃi tɝn ɪn əɹ sæɾəl tə lʊk oʊvɝ ðɛm, ðə θɹi jʌŋ wɪmən, hʊɹɪn, mæt ɪn ðə lɪɾɝ. "ðə wɝld ɪz stʃɹeɪnʒ, ən ɔl θɪŋz tʃeɪnʒ." ðeɪ kæp ðə ɹɪdʒ; ə vɪlədʒ wɑz ɪn saɪɾ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm naʊ, jɛloʊ taɪl ɹufs klʌstɝɾ ɝaʊn ðə ɡɹeɪt bɹɪdʒ ðət lɛd tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. "naʊ jə mʌs tʃɹuli bi ɑn jəɹ ɡɑɹd," vɛɹɪn toʊl ðɛm. "naʊ ðə ɹil deɪnʒɝ bɪɡɪnz."

"The Queens of Andor have always been friends to Tar Valon, but all things change." Verin's face was calm again, yet there was a tightness in her voice. She turned in her saddle to look over them, the three young women, Hurin, Mat in the litter. "The world is strange, and all things change." They capped the ridge; a village was in sight ahead of them now, yellow tile roofs clustered around the great bridge that led to Tar Valon. "Now you must truly be on your guard," Verin told them. "Now the real danger begins."


tʃæptɝ ɪlɛvən


CHAPTER 11

tɑɹ vəlɑn


Tar Valon

ðə smɔl vɪlədʒ ə dɛɹn hæd leɪn bɪsaɪd ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn ɔlmoʊst əz lɔŋ əz tɑɹ vəlɑn hæɾ ɑkjəpaɪɾ ɪts aɪlənd. dɛɹnz smɔl, ɹɛɾ ən bɹaʊn bɹɪk haʊsəz ən ʃɑps, ɪts stoʊn-peɪv stʃɹits, ɡeɪv ə fil ə pɝmənəns, bʌt ðə vɪlədʒ hæd bɪn bɝn ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, sækt wən ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz bɪsidʒ tɑɹ vəlɑn, luɾəd mɔɹ ðən wʌns dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, ən pʊt tə ðə tɔɹtʃ əɡɛn ɪn ði il wɔɹ, nɑt kwaɪt twɛnti jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ. ən ənkwiət hɪstɝi fəɹ ə lɪɾəl vɪlədʒ, bʌt dɛɹnz pleɪs, ət ðə fʊɾ ʌv wʌn ə ðə bɹɪdʒəz liɾɪŋ aʊt tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɛnʃʊɹɾ ɪt wəɾ ɔlweɪz bi ɹibɪlt, haʊɛvɝ mɛni taɪmz ɪt wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪd. soʊ lɔŋ əz tɑɹ vəlɑn stʊd, ət list.

The small village of Darein had lain beside the River Erinin almost as long as Tar Valon had occupied its island. Darein's small, red and brown brick houses and shops, its stone-paved streets, gave a feel of permanence, but the village had been burned in the Trolloc Wars, sacked when Artur Hawkwing's armies besieged Tar Valon, looted more than once during the War of the Hundred Years, and put to the torch again in the Aiel War, not quite twenty years before. An unquiet history for a little village, but Darein's place, at the foot of one of the bridges leading out to Tar Valon, ensured it would always be rebuilt, however many times it was destroyed. So long as Tar Valon stood, at least.

ət fɝst ɪt sim tə ɛɡwin ðət dɛɹn wɑz ɪkspɛktɪŋ wɔɹ əɡɛn. ə skwɛɹ ə pɪkmɛn mɑɹtʃt əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹits, ɹæŋks ən faɪlz bɹɪsəlɪŋ laɪk ə kɑɹɾɪŋ koʊm, fɑloʊd baɪ boʊmən ɪn flæt, ɹɪm hɛlməts, wɪð fɪl kwɪvɝz ɹaɪɾɪŋ ət ðɛɹ hɪps ən baʊz slæntəɾ əkɹɔs ðɛɹ tʃɛsts. ə skwɑdʒɹən ʌv ɑɹmɝd hɔɹsmən, feɪsəz hɪɾən bɪhaɪn ðə stil bɑɹz ə ðɛɹ hɛlməts, ɡeɪv weɪ tə vɛɹɪn ən əɹ pɑɹɾi əɾ ə weɪv ə ðɛɹ ɔfəsɝz ɡɔntələɾəd hænd. ɔl wɔɹ ðə waɪt fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, laɪk ə snoʊi tɪɹdʒɹɑp, ɑn ðɛɹ bɹɛsts.

At first it seemed to Egwene that Darein was expecting war again. A square of pikemen marched along the streets, ranks and files bristling like a carding comb, followed by bowmen in flat, rimmed helmets, with filled quivers riding at their hips and bows slanted across their chests. A squadron of armored horsemen, faces hidden behind the steel bars of their helmets, gave way to Verin and her party at a wave of their officer's gauntleted hand. All wore the White Flame of Tar Valon, like a snowy teardrop, on their breasts.

jɛt taʊnzpipəl wɛn əbaʊt ðɛɹ bɪznəs wɪð əpɛɹən ʌnkənsɝn, ðə mɑɹkət θɹɔŋ dɪvaɪɾɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə soʊlʒɝz əz ɪf mɑɹtʃɪŋ mɛn wɝ ɑbstʃɹʌkʃənz ðeɪ wɝ lɔŋ juz tə. ə fju mɛn ən wɪmən kæɹiɪŋ tʃɹeɪz ə fɹut kɛpt peɪs wɪð ðə soʊlʒɝz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪntʃɹəst əm ɪn ɹɪŋkəld æpəlz ən pɛɹz pʊl fɹəm wɪntɝ sɛlɝz, bʌɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ðoʊz fju, ʃɑpkipɝz ən hɔkɝz əlaɪk peɪd ðə soʊlʒɝz noʊ maɪnd. vɛɹɪn simɪŋli ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm, tu, əz ʃi lɛɾ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz θɹu ðə vɪlədʒ tə ðə ɡɹeɪt bɹɪdʒ, ɑɹtʃɪŋ oʊvɝ hæf ə maɪl əɹ mɔɹ ʌv wɔɾɝ laɪk leɪs woʊvən fɹəm stoʊn.

Yet townspeople went about their business with apparent unconcern, the market throng dividing around the soldiers as if marching men were obstructions they were long used to. A few men and women carrying trays of fruit kept pace with the soldiers, trying to interest them in wrinkled apples and pears pulled from winter cellars, but aside from those few, shopkeepers and hawkers alike paid the soldiers no mind. Verin seemingly ignored them, too, as she led Egwene and the others through the village to the great bridge, arching over half a mile or more of water like lace woven from stone.

ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə bɹɪdʒ mɔɹ soʊlʒɝz stʊd ɡɑɹd, ə dʌzən pɪkmɛn ən hæf ðət mɛni ɑɹtʃɝz, tʃɛkɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn u wɑntəd tə kɹɔs. ðɛɹ ɔfəsɝ, ə bɔldɪŋ mæn wɪð ɪz hɛlmət hæŋɪŋ ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt, lʊk hɝæs baɪ ðə weɪɾɪŋ laɪn ə pipəl əfʊɾ ən ɑn hɔɹsbæk, pipəl wɪð kɑɹts dʒɹɔn baɪ ɑksən əɹ hɔɹsəz əɹ ði oʊnɝ. ðə laɪn wɑz oʊnli ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz lɔŋ, bʌɾ ɛvɹi taɪm wʌn wɑz lɛɾ ɑntu ðə bɹɪdʒ, ənʌðɝ dʒɔɪn ðə fɑɹ ɛnd. dʒʌs ðə seɪm, ðə bɔldɪŋ mæn sim tə bi teɪkɪŋ ɪz taɪm əbaʊt meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ itʃ wʌn hæɾ ə ɹaɪt tə ɛntɝ tɑɹ vəlɑn bɪfɔɹ i lɛɾ əm ɡoʊ.

At the foot of the bridge more soldiers stood guard, a dozen pikemen and half that many archers, checking everyone who wanted to cross. Their officer, a balding man with his helmet hanging on his sword hilt, looked harassed by the waiting line of people afoot and on horseback, people with carts drawn by oxen or horses or the owner. The line was only a hundred paces long, but every time one was let onto the bridge, another joined the far end. Just the same, the balding man seemed to be taking his time about making sure each one had a right to enter Tar Valon before he let them go.

hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ æŋɡɹəli wən vɛɹɪn lɛɾ əɹ pɑɹɾi tə ðə hɛɾ ə ðə laɪn, ðən kɑɾ ə ɡʊd lʊk əɾ əɹ feɪs ən hɝidli stʌft ɪz hɛlməɾ ɑntu hɪz hɛd. noʊ wʌn u ɹɪli nu ðɛm niɾəd ə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ tə aɪdɛntəfaɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ. "ɡʊd mɑɹoʊ tə ju, ɛɛs sədaɪ," hi sɛd, boʊɪŋ wɪð ə hæn tə hɪz hɑɹt. "ɡʊd mɑɹoʊ. ɡoʊ ɹaɪɾ əkɹɔs, ɪf ɪt pliz ju."

He opened his mouth angrily when Verin led her party to the head of the line, then caught a good look at her face and hurriedly stuffed his helmet onto his head. No one who really knew them needed a Great Serpent ring to identify Aes Sedai. "Good morrow to you, Aes Sedai," he said, bowing with a hand to his heart. "Good morrow. Go right across, if it please you."

vɛɹɪn ɹeɪn ɪn bɪsaɪd hɪm. ə mɝmɝ ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə weɪɾɪŋ laɪn, bʌt noʊ wʌn vɔɪst ə kəmpleɪn əlaʊd. "tʃɹʌbəl fɹəm ðə waɪtkloʊks, ɡɑɹdzmæn?"

Verin reined in beside him. A murmur rose from the waiting line, but no one voiced a complaint aloud. "Trouble from the Whitecloaks, guardsman?"

waɪ ɑɹ wi stɑpɪŋ? ɛɡwin wʌndɝɾ ɝdʒənli. "hæz ʃi fɝɡɑɾən əbaʊt mæt?"

Why are we stopping? Egwene wondered urgently. "Has she forgotten about Mat?"

"nɑt ɹɪli, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ði ɔfəsɝ sɛd. "noʊ faɪɾɪŋ. ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə muv ɪndə ɪldoʊn mɑɹkət, ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ, bʌt wi ʃoʊɾ əm bɛɾɝ. ði æmɪɝlɪn minz tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðeɪ doʊn tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn."

"Not really, Aes Sedai," the officer said. "No fighting. They tried to move into Eldone Market, the other side of the river, but we showed them better. The Amyrlin means to make sure they don't try again."

"vɛɹɪn sədaɪ," ɛɡwin bɪɡæn kɛɹfəli, "mæt - "

"Verin Sedai," Egwene began carefully, "Mat - "

"ɪn ə moʊmənt, tʃaɪld," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd, saʊndɪŋ oʊnli hæfweɪ æbsəntmaɪndɪd. "aɪ hæv nɑt fɝɡɑɾən hɪm." hɝ ətɛnʃən wɛn ɹaɪt bæk tə ði ɔfəsɝ. "æn ði aʊtlaɪɪŋ vɪlədʒəz?"

"In a moment, child," the Aes Sedai said, sounding only halfway absentminded. "I have not forgotten him." Her attention went right back to the officer. "And the outlying villages?"

ðə mæn ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli. "wi kæn kip ðə waɪtkloʊks aʊt, ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ðeɪ muv ɔf wən əɹ pətʃɹoʊlz ɹaɪɾ ɪn. ðeɪ sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡoʊɾ ʌs." vɛɹɪn nɑɾəd, ən wʊɾə ɹɪɾən ɑn, bʌt ði ɔfəsɝ spoʊk əɡɛn. "pɑɹɾən, ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt juv ɑbviəsli kʌm fɹəm ə dɪstəns. hæv jə ɛni nuz? fɹɛʃ ɹumɝz kʌm ʌpɹɪvɝ wɪð ɛvɹi tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ vɛsəl. ðeɪ seɪ ðɛɹz ə nu fɔls dʒɹæɡən aʊt wɛst sʌmwɛɹ. waɪ, ðeɪ ivən seɪ hiz ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz, bæk fɹəm ðə dɛd, fɑloʊɪŋ hɪm, ən ðəɾ i kɪld ə lɑɾ ʌv waɪtkloʊks ən dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ə sɪɾi - fɑlm, ðeɪ kɔl ɪt - ɪn tæɹɑbən, səm seɪ."

The man shrugged uncomfortably. "We can't keep the Whitecloaks out, Aes Sedai, but they move off when our patrols ride in. They seem to be trying to goad us." Verin nodded, and would have ridden on, but the officer spoke again. "Pardon, Aes Sedai, but you've obviously come from a distance. Have you any news? Fresh rumors come upriver with every trading vessel. They say there's a new false Dragon out west somewhere. Why, they even say he has Artur Hawkwing's armies, back from the dead, following him, and that he killed a lot of Whitecloaks and destroyed a city - Falme, they call it - in Tarabon, some say."

"ðeɪ seɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ hɛlp hɪm!" ə mænz vɔɪs ʃaʊɾəd fɹəm ðə weɪɾɪŋ laɪn. hʊɹɪn bɹið dipli, ən ʃɪftəd hɪmsɛlf əz ɪf i ɪkspɛktəd vaɪələns.

"They say Aes Sedai helped him!" a man's voice shouted from the waiting line. Hurin breathed deeply, and shifted himself as if he expected violence.

ɛɡwin lʊkt 'ɹaʊnd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ə huɛvɝ hæd ʃaʊɾəd. ɛvɹiwʌn əpɪɹd tə bi kənsɝn oʊnli wɪð weɪɾɪŋ, peɪʃənli əɹ ɪmpeɪʃənli, fəɹ ɪz tɝn tə kɹɔs. θɪŋz hæd tʃeɪnʒd, ən nɑt fəɹ ðə bɛɾɝ. wən ʃi hæd lɛf tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɛni mæn u spoʊk əɡɛnst ɛɛs sədaɪ wʊɾə bɪn lʌki tə ɪskeɪp wɪð ə pʌntʃ ɪn ðə noʊz fɹəm huɛvɝ oʊvɝhɝd. ɹɛɾ ɪn ðə feɪs, ði ɔfəsɝ wɑz ɡlɛɹɪŋ daʊn ðə laɪn.

Egwene looked 'round, but there was no sign of whoever had shouted. Everyone appeared to be concerned only with waiting, patiently or impatiently, for his turn to cross. Things had changed, and not for the better. When she had left Tar Valon, any man who spoke against Aes Sedai would have been lucky to escape with a punch in the nose from whoever overheard. Red in the face, the officer was glaring down the line.

"ɹumɝz ɑɹ sɛldəm tʃɹu," vɛɹɪn toʊl hɪm. "aɪ kən tɛl jə ðət fɑlm stɪl stænz. ɪɾ ɪzən ivən ɪn tæɹɑbən, ɡɑɹdzmæn. lɪsən lɛs tə ɹumɝ, ən mɔɹ tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ju." ʃi lɪftəɾ əɹ ɹeɪnz, ən i baʊɾ əz ʃi lɛd ði ʌðɝz pæs hɪm.

"Rumors are seldom true," Verin told him. "I can tell you that Falme still stands. It isn't even in Tarabon, guardsman. Listen less to rumor, and more to the Amyrlin Seat. The Light shine on you." She lifted her reins, and he bowed as she led the others past him.

ðə bɹɪdʒ stʃɹʌk ɛɡwin wɪð wʌndɝ, əz ðə bɹɪdʒəz ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɔlweɪz dɪd. ði oʊpənwɝk wɔlz lʊkt ɪntʃɹəkəɾ ɪnʌf tə tæks ðə bɛs kɹæftswʊmən əɾ əɹ leɪs-fɹeɪm. ɪt hɑɹdli sim ðət sətʃ cʊɾə bɪn dʌn wɪð stoʊn, əɹ ðəɾ ɪt kəd stæn ivən ɪts oʊn weɪt. ðə ɹɪvɝ ɹoʊld, stʃɹɔŋ ən stɛɾi, fɪfti peɪsɪz əɹ mɔɹ bɪloʊ, ən fəɹ ɔl ðət hæf maɪl ðə bɹɪdʒ floʊɾ ənsəpɔɹɾɪd fɹəm ɹɪvɝbæŋk tə aɪlənd.

The bridge struck Egwene with wonder, as the bridges of Tar Valon always did. The openwork walls looked intricate enough to tax the best craftswoman at her lace-frame. It hardly seemed that such could have been done with stone, or that it could stand even its own weight. The river rolled, strong and steady, fifty paces or more below, and for all that half mile the bridge flowed unsupported from riverbank to island.

ivən mɔɹ wʌnʒɹəs, ɪn ɪts oʊn weɪ, wɑz ðə filɪŋ ðət ðə bɹɪdʒ wɑz teɪkɪŋ əɹ hoʊm. mɔɹ wʌnʒɹəs, ən ʃɑkɪŋ. ɛmənz fild ɪz maɪ hoʊm. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn ðət ʃi wəd lɝn wʌt ʃi mʌs tə kip əɹ əlaɪv, tə kip əɹ fɹi. ɪt wɑz ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn ðət ʃi wəd lɝn - mʌs lɝn - waɪ hɝ dʒɹimz dɪstɝbd əɹ soʊ, ən waɪ ðeɪ səmtaɪmz sim tə hæv minɪŋz ʃi kəd nɑt pʌzəl aʊt. tɑɹ vəlɑn wɑz wɛɹ əɹ laɪf wɑz taɪd, naʊ. ɪf ʃi ɛvɝ ɹɪtɝn tə ɛmənz fild - ði "ɪf" hɝt, bʌt ʃi hæd tə bi ɑnəst - ɪf ʃi ɹɪtɝnd, ɪt wəd bi tə vɪzət, tə si hɝ pɛɹəns. ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɔn bɪɑn biɪŋ ən ɪnkipɝz dɔɾɝ. ðoʊz bɑnz wəd nɑt hoʊld əɹ əɡɛn, iðɝ, nɑt kəz ʃi heɪɾəd ðɛm, bʌt kəz ʃi hæɾ aʊtɡɹoʊn ðɛm.

Even more wondrous, in its own way, was the feeling that the bridge was taking her home. More wondrous, and shocking. Emond's Field is my home. But it was in Tar Valon that she would learn what she must to keep her alive, to keep her free. It was in Tar Valon that she would learn - must learn - why her dreams disturbed her so, and why they sometimes seemed to have meanings she could not puzzle out. Tar Valon was where her life was tied, now. If she ever returned to Emond's Field - the "if" hurt, but she had to be honest - if she returned, it would be to visit, to see her parents. She had already gone beyond being an innkeeper's daughter. Those bonds would not hold her again, either, not because she hated them, but because she had outgrown them.

ðə bɹɪdʒ wɑz oʊnli ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ɪɾ ɑɹtʃt stʃɹeɪt tə ðə wɔlz ðət sɝaʊndəd ði aɪlənd, haɪ wɔlz ʌv ɡlimɪŋ waɪt, sɪlvɝ-stʃɹik stoʊn, huz tɑps lʊk daʊn ɑn ðə bɹɪdʒəz haɪt. əɾ ɪntɝvəlz, ɡɑɹd taʊɝz ɪntɝʌptɪd ðə wɔlz, ʌv ðə seɪm waɪt stoʊn, ðɛɹ mæsɪv fʊɾɪŋz wɑʃt baɪ ðə ɹɪvɝ. bʌɾ əbʌv ðə wɔlz ən bɪɑn ɹoʊz ðə tʃɹu taʊɝz ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ðə taʊɝz ə stɔɹi, pɔɪntəd spaɪɹz ən fluts ən spaɪɹəlz, səm kənɛktəd baɪ ɛɹi bɹɪdʒəz ə ɡʊd hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əɹ mɔɹ əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ən stɪl oʊnli ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ.

The bridge was only the beginning. It arched straight to the walls that surrounded the island, high walls of gleaming white, silver-streaked stone, whose tops looked down on the bridge's height. At intervals, guard towers interrupted the walls, of the same white stone, their massive footings washed by the river. But above the walls and beyond rose the true towers of Tar Valon, the towers of story, pointed spires and flutes and spirals, some connected by airy bridges a good hundred paces or more above the ground. And still only the beginning.

ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɡɑɹdz ɑn ðə bɹɑnz-klæd ɡeɪts, ən ðeɪ stʊd waɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ twɛnti əbɹɛs tə ɹaɪd θɹu, oʊpənɪŋ ɑntu wʌn ə ðə bɹɔɾ ævənuz ðət kɹɪskɹɔs ði aɪlənd. spɹɪŋ maɪt bɛɹli hæv kʌm, bʌt ði ɛɹ ɔlɹɛɾi smɛld ə flaʊɝz ən pɝfjumz ən spaɪsəz.

There were no guards on the bronze-clad gates, and they stood wide enough for twenty abreast to ride through, opening onto one of the broad avenues that crisscrossed the island. Spring might barely have come, but the air already smelled of flowers and perfumes and spices.

ðə sɪɾi tʊk ɛɡwinz bɹɛθ əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin ɪt bɪfɔɹ. ɛvɹi skwɛɹ ən stʃɹit kɹɔsɪŋ hæɾ ɪts faʊntən, əɹ ɪts mɑnjəmən əɹ stætʃu, səm ətɑp ɡɹeɪt kɑləmz əz haɪ əz taʊɝz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə sɪɾi ɪtsɛlf ðət dæzəl ði aɪ. wʌt wɑz pleɪn ɪn fɔɹm maɪɾ əv soʊ mɛni ɔɹnəməns ən kɑɹvɪŋz ðəɾ ɪt simd ən ɔɹnəmən ɪtsɛlf, ɔɹ, lækɪŋ dɛkɝeɪʃən, juzd ɪts fɔɹm əloʊn fəɹ ɡɹænduɹ. ɡɹeɪt bɪldɪŋz ən smɔl, ɪn stoʊn ʌv ɛvɹi kʌlɝ, lʊkɪŋ laɪk ʃɛlz, əɹ weɪvz, əɹ wɪnd-skʌlptɪd klɪfs, floʊɪŋ ən fænsɪfəl, kæptʃɝd fɹəm neɪtʃɝ əɹ ðə flaɪts ə mɛnz maɪnz. ðə dwɛlɪŋz, ði ɪnz, ðə vɛɹi steɪbəlz - ivən ðə moʊst ɪnsɪɡnjɪfɪkən bɪldɪŋz ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn hæd bɪn meɪd fəɹ bjuɾi. oʊɡiɝ stoʊnmeɪsɑnz hæd bɪl moʊst ə ðə sɪɾi ɪn ðə lɔŋ jɪɹz æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ən ðeɪ meɪnteɪn ɪt hæd bɪn ðɛɹ faɪnəst wɝk.

The city took Egwene's breath as if she had never seen it before. Every square and street crossing had its fountain, or its monument or statue, some atop great columns as high as towers, but it was the city itself that dazzled the eye. What was plain in form might have so many ornaments and carvings that it seemed an ornament itself, or, lacking decoration, used its form alone for grandeur. Great buildings and small, in stone of every color, looking like shells, or waves, or wind-sculpted cliffs, flowing and fanciful, captured from nature or the flights of men's minds. The dwellings, the inns, the very stables - even the most insignificant buildings in Tar Valon had been made for beauty. Ogier stonemasons had built most of the city in the long years after the Breaking of the World, and they maintained it had been their finest work.

mɛn ən wɪmən ʌv ɛvɹi neɪʃən θɹɔŋ ðə stʃɹits. ðeɪ wɝ dɑɹk ə skɪn, ən peɪl, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn bɪtwin, ðɛɹ ɡɑɹməns ɪn bɹaɪt kʌlɝz ən pæɾɝnz, əɹ dʒɹæb, bʌt dɛkt wɪð fɹɪnʒɪz ən bɹeɪdz ən ʃaɪnɪŋ bʌɾənz, əɹ stɑɹk ən səvɪɹ; ʃoʊɪŋ mɔɹ skɪn ðən ɛɡwin θɔt pɹɑpɝ, əɹ ɹɪvilɪŋ nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ aɪz ən fɪŋɡɝtɪps. sɪdæn tʃɛɹz ən lɪɾɝz woʊv θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz, ðə tʃɹɑɾɪŋ bɛɹɝz kɹaɪɪŋ "ɡɪv weɪ!" kloʊz kæɹɪdʒɪz ɪntʃt əlɔŋ, lɪvɹid koʊtʃmən ʃaʊɾɪŋ "hiiə!" ən "hoʊ!" əz ɪf ðeɪ bɪliv ðeɪ maɪɾ ətʃiv mɔɹ ðən ə wɔk. stʃɹit mjuzɪʃənz pleɪd fluɾ əɹ hɑɹp əɹ paɪps, səmtaɪmz əkʌmpəniɪŋ ə dʒʌɡəlɝ əɹ ən ækɹəbæt, ɔlweɪz wɪð ə kæp sɛɾ aʊt fəɹ kɔɪnz. wɑndɝɪŋ hɔkɝz kɹaɪd ðɛɹ wɛɹz, ən ʃɑpkipɝz stændɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ ʃɑps ʃaʊɾəd ði ɛksələns ə ðɛɹ ɡʊdz. ə hʌm fɪl ðə sɪɾi laɪk ðə sɔŋ ʌv ə θɪŋ əlaɪv.

Men and women of every nation thronged the streets. They were dark of skin, and pale, and everything in between, their garments in bright colors and patterns, or drab, but decked with fringes and braids and shining buttons, or stark and severe; showing more skin than Egwene thought proper, or revealing nothing but eyes and fingertips. Sedan chairs and litters wove through the crowds, the trotting bearers crying "Give way!" Closed carriages inched along, liveried coachmen shouting "Hiya!" and "Ho!" as if they believed they might achieve more than a walk. Street musicians played flute or harp or pipes, sometimes accompanying a juggler or an acrobat, always with a cap set out for coins. Wandering hawkers cried their wares, and shopkeepers standing in front of their shops shouted the excellence of their goods. A hum filled the city like the song of a thing alive.

vɛɹɪn hæd pʊld əɹ kaʊl bæk ʌp, haɪɾɪŋ əɹ feɪs. noʊ wʌn sim tə bi peɪɪŋ əm ɛni maɪn ɪn ðiz kɹaʊdz, ɛɡwin θɔt. nɑɾ ivən mæt ɪn ɪz hɔɹs lɪɾɝ dʒɹu ə sɛkənd ɡlæns, ðoʊ səm foʊk dɪɾ ɛdʒ əweɪ fɹəm ɪɾ əz ðeɪ hɝid pæst. pipəl səmtaɪmz bɹɔt ðɛɹ sɪk tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ fəɹ hilɪŋ, ən wʌtɛvɝ i hæd maɪt bi kætʃɪŋ.

Verin had pulled her cowl back up, hiding her face. No one seemed to be paying them any mind in these crowds, Egwene thought. Not even Mat in his horse litter drew a second glance, though some folk did edge away from it as they hurried past. People sometimes brought their sick to the White Tower for Healing, and whatever he had might be catching.

ɛɡwin ɹoʊɾ ʌp bɪsaɪd vɛɹɪn ən lin kloʊs. "du jə ɹɪli ɪkspɛk tʃɹʌbəl naʊ? wəɹ ɪn ðə sɪɾi. wəɹ ɔlmoʊs ðɛɹ." ðə waɪt taʊɝ stʊɾ ɪn pleɪn saɪt naʊ, ðə ɡɹeɪt bɪldɪŋ ɡlimɪŋ bɹɔɾ ən tɔl əbʌv ðə ɹuftɑps.

Egwene rode up beside Verin and leaned close. "Do you really expect trouble now? We are in the city. We are almost there." The White Tower stood in plain sight now, the great building gleaming broad and tall above the rooftops.

"aɪ ɔlweɪz ɪkspɛk tʃɹʌbəl," vɛɹɪn ɹɪplaɪd plɑtʃədli, "æn soʊ ʃəd ju. ɪn ðə taʊɝ moʊst ʌv ɔl. jə mʌst ɔl ə jə bi mɔɹ kɛɹfəl ðən ɛvɝ, naʊ. jəɹ . . . tʃɹɪks" - hɝ maʊθ taɪɾənd fəɹ ən ɪnstən bɪfɔɹ sɝɛnəɾi ɹɪtɝnd - "fɹaɪɾənd əweɪ ðə waɪtkloʊks, bʌɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə taʊɝ ðeɪ meɪ wɛl bɹɪŋ jə dɛθ əɹ stɪlɪŋ."

"I always expect trouble," Verin replied placidly, "and so should you. In the Tower most of all. You must all of you be more careful than ever, now. Your . . . tricks" - her mouth tightened for an instant before serenity returned - "frightened away the Whitecloaks, but inside the Tower they may well bring you death or stilling."

"aɪ wəd nɑt də ðəɾ ɪn ðə taʊɝ," ɛɡwin pɹətɛstəd. "nʌn ʌv əs wʊd." nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn hæd dʒɔɪn ðɛm, livɪŋ hʊɹɪn tə maɪn ðə lɪɾɝ hɔɹsəz. ðeɪ nɑɾəd, ɪleɪn fɝvənli, ən nɪneɪiv, ɪt sim tə ɛɡwin, əz ɪf ʃi hæd ɹɛzɝveɪʃənz.

"I would not do that in the Tower," Egwene protested. "None of us would." Nynaeve and Elayne had joined them, leaving Hurin to mind the litter horses. They nodded, Elayne fervently, and Nynaeve, it seemed to Egwene, as if she had reservations.

"ju ʃəd nɑt də ɪɾ ɛvɝ əɡɛn, tʃaɪld. jə mʌs nɑt! ɛvɝ!" vɛɹɪn aɪɾ əm saɪdweɪz 'ɹaʊn ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ kaʊl, ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "æn aɪ tʃɹuli hoʊp juv lɝn ðə fɑli ʌv spikɪŋ wən jə ʃəd bi saɪlənt." ɪleɪnz feɪs wɛn kɹɪmzən, ən ɛɡwinz tʃiks ɡɹu hɑt. "wʌns wi ɛntɝ ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz, hoʊl jəɹ tʌŋz ən æksɛpt wʌtɛvɝ hæpənz. wʌtɛvɝ hæpənz! jə noʊ nʌθɪŋ ʌv wʌɾ əweɪts əs ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ən ɪf jə dɪd, jə wəd nɑt noʊ haʊ tə hændəl ɪt. soʊ bi saɪlənt."

"You should not do it ever again, child. You must not! Ever!" Verin eyed them sideways 'round the edge of her cowl, and shook her head. "And I truly hope you have learned the folly of speaking when you should be silent." Elayne's face went crimson, and Egwene's cheeks grew hot. "Once we enter the Tower grounds, hold your tongues and accept whatever happens. Whatever happens! You know nothing of what awaits us in the Tower, and if you did, you would not know how to handle it. So be silent."

"aɪ wɪl də əz jə seɪ, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd, ən ɪleɪn ɛkoʊd hɝ. nɪneɪiv snɪft. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, ən ʃi nɑɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli.

"I will do as you say, Verin Sedai," Egwene said, and Elayne echoed her. Nynaeve sniffed. The Aes Sedai stared at her, and she nodded reluctantly.

ðə stʃɹiɾ oʊpən ɪndə ə væst skwɛɹ, sɛntɝɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ən ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə skwɛɹ stʊd ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ʃaɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn, ɹaɪzɪŋ əntɪl ɪt sim tə tʌtʃ ðə skaɪ fɹəm ə pæləs ə doʊmz ən dɛləkət spaɪɹz ən ʌðɝ ʃeɪps sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz. ðəɹ wɝ sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli fju pipəl ɪn ðə skwɛɹ. noʊ wʌn ɪntʃɹuɾəd ɑn ðə taʊɝ ənlɛs i hæd bɪznəs ðɛɹ, ɛɡwin ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf ənizəli.

The street opened into a vast square, centered in the city, and in the middle of the square stood the White Tower, shining in the sun, rising until it seemed to touch the sky from a palace of domes and delicate spires and other shapes surrounded by the Tower grounds. There were surprisingly few people in the square. No one intruded on the Tower unless he had business there, Egwene reminded herself uneasily.

hʊɹɪn lɛd ðə hɔɹs lɪɾɝ fɔɹwɝɾ əz ðeɪ ɛntɝd ðə skwɛɹ. "vɛɹɪn sədaɪ, aɪ mʌs liv jə naʊ." hi aɪd ðə taʊɝ wʌns, ðən mænədʒ nɑt tə lʊk əɾ ɪɾ əɡɛn, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə lʊk əɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. hʊɹɪn keɪm fɹəm ə lænd wɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ɹɪspɛktɪd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz wʌn θɪŋ tə ɹɪspɛkt əm ən kwaɪɾ ənʌðɝ tə bi sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðɛm.

Hurin led the horse litter forward as they entered the square. "Verin Sedai, I must leave you now." He eyed the Tower once, then managed not to look at it again, though it was hard to look at anything else. Hurin came from a land where Aes Sedai were respected, but it was one thing to respect them and quite another to be surrounded by them.

"ju hæv bɪn ə ɡɹeɪt hɛlp ɑn əɹ dʒɝni, hʊɹɪn," vɛɹɪn toʊl hɪm, "æn ə lɔŋ dʒɝni ɪts bɪn. ðəɹ wɪl bi ə pleɪs ɪn ðə taʊɝ fəɹ jə tə ɹɛs bɪfɔɹ jə tʃɹævəl ɑn."

"You have been a great help on our journey, Hurin," Verin told him, "and a long journey it has been. There will be a place in the Tower for you to rest before you travel on."

hʊɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ɛmfæɾɪkli. "aɪ kænɑt weɪst ə deɪ, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ. nɑɾ ənʌðɝ aʊɝ. aɪ mʌst ɹɪtɝn tə ʃaɪnɝ, tə tɛl kɪŋ isɑɹ, ən lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ, ðə tʃɹuθ ʌv wʌt hæpən ət fɑlm. aɪ mʌs tɛl əm əbaʊt - " hi kʌɾ ɔf əbɹʌpli ən lʊkt ɝaʊnd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn kloʊs ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝhɪɹ, bʌɾ i stɪl loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs ən sɛɾ oʊnli, "əbaʊt ɹænd. ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪz ɹibɔɹn. ðəɹ mʌs bi tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ʃɪps hɛɾɪŋ ʌpɹɪvɝ, ən aɪ min tə bi ɑn ðə nɛks tə seɪl."

Hurin shook his head emphatically. "I cannot waste a day, Verin Sedai. Not another hour. I must return to Shienar, to tell King Easar, and Lord Agelmar, the truth of what happened at Falme. I must tell them about - " He cut off abruptly and looked around. There was no one close enough to overhear, but he still lowered his voice and said only, "About Rand. That the Dragon is Reborn. There must be trading ships heading upriver, and I mean to be on the next to sail."

"ɡoʊ ɪn ðə laɪt, ðɛn, hʊɹɪn ə ʃaɪnɝ," vɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Go in the Light, then, Hurin of Shienar," Verin said.

"ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ɔl ə ju," hi ɹɪplaɪd, ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪz ɹeɪnz. jɛɾ i hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ə moʊmənt, ðən æɾəd, "ɪf jə nid mi - ɛvɝ - sɛnd wɝd tə fæl dæɹə, ən əl faɪn ə weɪ tə kʌm." klɪɹɪŋ ɪz θɹoʊɾ əz ɪf ɪmbɛɹəst, hi tɝn ɪz hɔɹs ən tʃɹɑɾəd əweɪ, hɛɾɪŋ bɪɑn ðə taʊɝ. ɔl tu sun i wɑz lɔs tə saɪt.

"The Light illumine all of you," he replied, gathering his reins. Yet he hesitated a moment, then added, "If you need me - ever - send word to Fal Dara, and I'll find a way to come." Clearing his throat as if embarrassed, he turned his horse and trotted away, heading beyond the Tower. All too soon he was lost to sight.

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛd. "mɛn! ðeɪ ɔlweɪz seɪ tə sɛn fəɹ əm ɪf jə nid ðɛm, bʌt wən jə də nid wʌn, jə niɾ ɪm ɹaɪt ðɛn."

Nynaeve gave an exasperated shake of her head. "Men! They always say to send for them if you need them, but when you do need one, you need him right then."

"noʊ mæn kən hɛlp wɛɹ wəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ naʊ," vɛɹɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ. bi saɪlənt."

"No man can help where we are going now," Verin said dryly. "Remember. Be silent."

ɛɡwin fɛlt ə sɛns ə lɔs wɪð hʊɹɪnz ɡoʊɪŋ. hi wəd bɛɹli tɔk tə ɛni ʌv ðɛm, ɪksɛp mæt, ən vɛɹɪn wɑz ɹaɪt. hi wɑz oʊnli ə mæn, ən hɛlpləs əz ə beɪb wən ɪt keɪm tə feɪsɪŋ wʌtɛvɝ maɪɾ əweɪɾ əm ɪn ðə taʊɝ. jɛɾ ɪz livɪŋ meɪd ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ wʌn lɛs, ən ʃi kəd nɛvɝ hɛlp θɪŋkɪŋ ðəɾ ə mæn wɪð ə sɔɹd wɑz jusfəl tə hæv ɝaʊnd. ən i hæd bɪn ə lɪŋk tə ɹænd, ən pɛɹɪn. aɪ hæv maɪ oʊn tʃɹʌbəlz tə wɝi əbaʊt. ɹænd ən pɛɹɪn wəɾ əv tə meɪk də wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn tə lʊk æftɝ ðɛm. ən mɪn wɪl sɝɾənli lʊk æftɝ ɹænd, ʃi θɔt wɪð ə flæʃ ə dʒɛləsi ðət ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə səpɹɛs. ʃi ɔlmoʊst səksiɾəd.

Egwene felt a sense of loss with Hurin's going. He would barely talk to any of them, except Mat, and Verin was right. He was only a man, and helpless as a babe when it came to facing whatever might await them in the Tower. Yet his leaving made their number one less, and she could never help thinking that a man with a sword was useful to have around. And he had been a link to Rand, and Perrin. I have my own troubles to worry about. Rand and Perrin would have to make do with Moiraine to look after them. And Min will certainly look after Rand, she thought with a flash of jealousy that she tried to suppress. She almost succeeded.

wɪð ə saɪ, ʃi tʊk ʌp ðə lɛɾ ə ðə hɔɹs lɪɾɝ. mæt leɪ bʌndəl tə hɪz tʃɪn; hɪz bɹiðɪŋ wɑz ə dʒɹaɪ ɹæsp. sun, ʃi θɔt. jəl bi hil sun, naʊ. ən wɪl faɪn aʊt wʌts weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ʌs. ʃi wɪʃt vɛɹɪn wəd stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɹaɪɾən ðɛm. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk vɛɹɪn hæd ɹizən tə fɹaɪɾən ðɛm.

With a sigh, she took up the lead of the horse litter. Mat lay bundled to his chin; his breathing was a dry rasp. Soon, she thought. You'll be Healed soon, now. And we'll find out what's waiting for us. She wished Verin would stop trying to frighten them. She wished she did not think Verin had reason to frighten them.

vɛɹɪn tʊk əm ɝaʊn ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz tə ə smɔl saɪd ɡeɪt ðət stʊɾ oʊpən, wɪð tu ɡɑɹdz. pɔzɪŋ, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pʊʃt bæk əɹ kaʊl ən lin fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl tə spik sɔfli tə wʌn ə ðə mɛn. hi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, ən ə sɝpɹaɪz lʊk əɾ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz. wɪð ə kwɪk, "æz jə kəmænd, ɛɛs sədaɪ," hi tʊk ɔf ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊnz əɾ ə ɹʌn. vɛɹɪn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɹaɪɾɪŋ θɹu ðə ɡeɪts əz i spoʊk. ʃi ɹoʊɾ əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ noʊ hɝi.

Verin took them around the Tower grounds to a small side gate that stood open, with two guards. Pausing, the Aes Sedai pushed back her cowl and leaned from her saddle to speak softly to one of the men. He gave a start, and a surprised look at Egwene and the others. With a quick, "As you command, Aes Sedai," he took off into the grounds at a run. Verin was already riding through the gates as he spoke. She rode as if there were no hurry.

ɛɡwin fɑloʊd wɪð ðə lɪɾɝ, ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɡlænsɪz wɪð nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn, wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt vɛɹɪn hæd toʊl ðə mæn.

Egwene followed with the litter, exchanging glances with Nynaeve and Elayne, wondering what Verin had told the man.

ə ɡɹeɪ stoʊn ɡɑɹdhaʊs stʊd dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə ɡeɪt, ʃeɪp laɪk ə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ laɪɪŋ ɑn ɪts saɪd. ə smɔl nɑɾ ʌv ɡɑɹdz laʊnʒd ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ; ðeɪ lɛft ɔf tɔkɪŋ ən baʊɾ əz vɛɹɪn ɹoʊd pæst.

A gray stone guardhouse stood just inside the gate, shaped like a six-pointed star lying on its side. A small knot of guards lounged in the doorway; they left off talking and bowed as Verin rode past.

ðɪs pɑɹɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz cʊɾə bɪn səm lɔɹdz pɑɹk, wɪð tʃɹiz ən pɹund ʃɹʌbz ən waɪd ɡɹævəl pæðz. ʌðɝ bɪldɪŋz wɝ vɪzəbəl θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, ən ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf lumd oʊvɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ.

This part of the Tower grounds could have been some lord's park, with trees and pruned shrubs and wide graveled paths. Other buildings were visible through the trees, and the Tower itself loomed over everything.

ðə pæθ lɛɾ əm tə ə steɪbliɑɹɾ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, wɛɹ ɡɹumz ɪn lɛðɝ vɛsts keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ tə teɪk ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪz dɝɛkʃən, səm ə ðə ɡɹumz ənfæsən ðə lɪɾɝ ən sɛɾ ɪt dʒɛnli ɔf tə wʌn saɪd. əz ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ lɛɾ əweɪ ɪndə ðə steɪbəl, vɛɹɪn tʊk ðə lɛðɝ sæk fɹəm mæts fiɾ ən tʌkt ɪt kɛɹləsli ʌndɝ wʌn ɑɹm.

The path led them to a stableyard among the trees, where grooms in leather vests came running to take their horses. At the Aes Sedai's direction, some of the grooms unfastened the litter and set it gently off to one side. As the horses were led away into the stable, Verin took the leather sack from Mat's feet and tucked it carelessly under one arm.

nɪneɪiv pɔzd ɪn nʌklɪŋ əɹ bæk ən fɹaʊn ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. "ju sɛd hiz aʊɝz, pɝhæps. ɑɹ jə dʒʌst ɡoʊɪŋ tə - "

Nynaeve paused in knuckling her back and frowned at the Aes Sedai. "You said he has hours, perhaps. Are you just going to - "

vɛɹɪn hɛld ʌp ə hænd, bʌt wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz ðə dʒɛstʃɝ ðət stɑp nɪneɪiv əɹ ðə kɹʌntʃ ə fiɾ əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ɑn ɡɹævəl, ɛɡwin kəd nɑt seɪ.

Verin held up a hand, but whether it was the gesture that stopped Nynaeve or the crunch of feet approaching on gravel, Egwene could not say.

ɪn ə moʊmənt ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ əpɪɹd, fɑloʊd baɪ θɹi ʌv ði æksɛptɪd, ðɛɹ waɪt dʒɹɛsəz ɹɪŋd ət ðə hɛm wɪð ðə kʌlɝz ʌv ɔl sɛvən ədʒəz fɹəm blu tə ɹɛd, ən tu hʌski mɛn ɪn ɹʌf, leɪbɝɝz koʊts. ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz wɑz ə slaɪtli plʌmp wʊmən, wɪð ðə haɪ tʃikboʊnz ðət wɝ kɑmən ɪn sɑldɑiə. fleɪm-ɹɛd hɛɹ ən klɪɹ, tɪltəd ɡɹin aɪz meɪɾ əɹ smuð ɛɛs sədaɪ fitʃɝz stʃɹaɪkɪŋ. ʃi aɪɾ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz kɑmli, bʌɾ əɹ maʊθ wɑz taɪt.

In a moment Sheriam Sedai appeared, followed by three of the Accepted, their white dresses ringed at the hem with the colors of all seven Ajahs from Blue to Red, and two husky men in rough, laborer's coats. The Mistress of Novices was a slightly plump woman, with the high cheekbones that were common in Saldaea. Flame-red hair and clear, tilted green eyes made her smooth Aes Sedai features striking. She eyed Egwene and the others calmly, but her mouth was tight.

"soʊ juv bɹɔt bæk əɹ θɹi ɹʌnəweɪz, vɛɹɪn. wɪð ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət hæpənd, aɪ kəɾ ɔlmoʊst wɪʃ jə hæd nɑt."

"So you have brought back our three runaways, Verin. With everything that happened, I could almost wish you had not."

"wi dɪd nɑt - " ɛɡwin bɪɡæn, bʌt vɛɹɪn kʌɾ əɹ ɔf wɪð ə ʃɑɹp, "bi saɪlənt!" vɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ - əɾ itʃ ə ðə θɹi ʌv əm - əz ɪf ði ɪntɛnsəɾi ʌv əɹ lʊk kəd hoʊl ðɛɹ maʊðz ʃʌt.

"We did not - " Egwene began, but Verin cut her off with a sharp, "BE SILENT!" Verin stared at her - at each of the three of them - as if the intensity of her look could hold their mouths shut.

ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ ðæt, fəɹ əɹ pɑɹt, ɪt kʊd. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin vɛɹɪn æŋɡɹi bɪfɔɹ. nɪneɪiv kɹɔst əɹ ɑɹmz bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts ən mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, bʌt ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ. ðə θɹi æksɛptɪd bɪhaɪnd ʃɛɹiəm kɛp ðɛɹ saɪləns, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi kəd si ðɛɹ ɪɹz ɡɹoʊ fɹəm lɪsnɪŋ.

Egwene was sure that, for her part, it could. She had never seen Verin angry before. Nynaeve crossed her arms beneath her breasts and muttered under her breath, but she said nothing. The three Accepted behind Sheriam kept their silence, of course, but Egwene thought she could see their ears grow from listening.

wən ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz wəd ɹɪmeɪn stɪl, vɛɹɪn tɝn bæk tə ʃɛɹiəm. "ðə bɔɪ mʌs bi teɪkən sʌmwɛɹ əweɪ fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn. hiz ɪl, deɪnʒɝəsli soʊ. deɪnʒɝəs tə ʌðɝz əz wɛl əz tə hɪmsɛlf."

When she was certain Egwene and the others would remain still, Verin turned back to Sheriam. "The boy must be taken somewhere away from everyone. He is ill, dangerously so. Dangerous to others as well as to himself."

"aɪ wɑz toʊl jə hæɾ ə lɪɾɝ tə bi kæɹid." ʃɛɹiəm moʊʃən ðə tu mɛn tə ðə lɪɾɝ, spoʊk ə kwaɪət wɝd tə wʌn, ən əz kwɪkli əz ðət mæt wɑz wɪskt əweɪ.

"I was told you had a litter to be carried." Sheriam motioned the two men to the litter, spoke a quiet word to one, and as quickly as that Mat was whisked away.

ɛɡwin oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə seɪ hi niɾəd hɛlp naʊ, bʌɾ ət vɛɹɪnz stɛɹ, kwɪk ən fjʊɹiəs, ʃi kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn. nɪneɪiv wɑz tʌɡɪŋ əɹ bɹeɪd nɪɹli hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə pʊl ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd.

Egwene opened her mouth to say he needed help now, but at Verin's stare, quick and furious, she closed it again. Nynaeve was tugging her braid nearly hard enough to pull it out of her head.

"aɪ səpoʊz," vɛɹɪn sɛd, "ðæt ðə hoʊl taʊɝ noʊz wɪv ɹɪtɝn baɪ naʊ?"

"I suppose," Verin said, "that the whole Tower knows we have returned by now?"

"ðoʊz u də nɑt noʊ," ʃɛɹiəm toʊl hɝ, "wɪl noʊ bɪfɔɹ mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ. kʌmɪŋz ən ɡoʊɪŋz əv bɪkʌm ðə fɝs tɑpɪk ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən ən ɡɑsəp. ivən bɪfɔɹ fɑlm, ən fɑɹ əhɛɾ ə ðə wɔɹ ɪn kɛɹhin. dɪd jə θɪŋk tə kip ɪt sikɹət?"

"Those who do not know," Sheriam told her, "will know before much longer. Comings and goings have become the first topic of conversation and gossip. Even before Falme, and far ahead of the war in Cairhien. Did you think to keep it secret?"

vɛɹɪn ɡæðɝd ðə lɛðɝ sæk ɪn boʊθ ɑɹmz. "aɪ mʌst si ði æmɪɝlɪn. ɪmiɾiətli."

Verin gathered the leather sack in both arms. "I must see the Amyrlin. Immediately."

"ænd wʌɾ ə ðiz θɹi?"

"And what of these three?"

vɛɹɪn kənsɪɾɝd ɛɡwin ən əɹ fɹɛnz, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "ðeɪ mʌs bi kloʊsli hɛld əntɪl ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪʃɪz tə si ðɛm. ɪf ʃi dʌz wɪʃ tə. kloʊsli hɛld, maɪnd. ðɛɹ oʊn ɹumz wɪl du, aɪ θɪŋk. noʊ nid fəɹ sɛlz. nɑɾ ə wɝd tə ɛniwʌn."

Verin considered Egwene and her friends, frowning. "They must be closely held until the Amyrlin wishes to see them. If she does wish to. Closely held, mind. Their own rooms will do, I think. No need for cells. Not a word to anyone."

vɛɹɪn wɑz stɪl spikɪŋ tə ʃɛɹiəm, bʌɾ ɛɡwin nu ðə læs hæd bɪn mɛn əz ə ɹimaɪndɝ tə hɝ ən ði ʌðɝz. nɪneɪivz bɹaʊz wɝ dʒɹɔn daʊn, ən ʃi dʒɝkt əɾ əɹ bɹeɪɾ əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə hɪt sʌmθɪŋ. ɪleɪnz blu aɪz wɝ oʊpən waɪd, ən əɹ feɪs wɑz ivən pəlɝ ðən juʒəwəl. ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɪtʃ filɪŋz ʃi ʃɛɹd, æŋɡɝ əɹ fɪɹ əɹ wɝi. səm ʌv ɔl θɹi, ʃi θɔt.

Verin was still speaking to Sheriam, but Egwene knew the last had been meant as a reminder to her and the others. Nynaeve's brows were drawn down, and she jerked at her braid as if she wanted to hit something. Elayne's blue eyes were open wide, and her face was even paler than usual. Egwene was not sure which feelings she shared, anger or fear or worry. Some of all three, she thought.

wɪð ə læst, sɝtʃɪŋ ɡlæns əɾ əɹ θɹi tʃɹævlɪŋ kəmpænjənz, vɛɹɪn hɝiɾ ɔf, klʌtʃɪŋ ðə sæk tə hɝ tʃɛst, kloʊk flæpɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ. ʃɛɹiəm pʊɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps ən stʌɾid ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝ tu. fəɹ ə moʊmən ɛɡwin fɛlt ə lɛsənɪŋ ə tɛnʃən. ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz ɔlweɪz kɛpt ə stɛɾi tɛmpɝ ən ə sɪmpəθɛɾɪk sɛns ə hjumɝ ivən wən ʃi wɑz ɡɪvɪŋ jə ɛkstʃɹə tʃɔɹz fəɹ bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə ɹulz.

With a last, searching glance at her three traveling companions, Verin hurried off, clutching the sack to her chest, cloak flapping behind her. Sheriam put her fists on her hips and studied Egwene and the other two. For a moment Egwene felt a lessening of tension. The Mistress of Novices always kept a steady temper and a sympathetic sense of humor even when she was giving you extra chores for breaking the rules.

bʌt ʃɛɹiəmz vɔɪs wɑz ɡɹɪm wən ʃi spoʊk. "nɑɾ ə wɝd, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ sɛd, ən nɑɾ ə wɝd ʃæl ɪt bi. ɪf wʌn ə jə spiks - ɪksɛp tə ænsɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʌv kɔɹs - əl meɪk jə wɪʃ jə hæd nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ə swɪtʃɪŋ ən ə fju aʊɝz skɹʌbɪŋ flɔɹz tə wɝi əbaʊt. dʒju ʌndɝstæn mi?"

But Sheriam's voice was grim when she spoke. "Not a word, Verin Sedai said, and not a word shall it be. If one of you speaks - except to answer an Aes Sedai, of course - I'll make you wish you had nothing but a switching and a few hours scrubbing floors to worry about. Do you understand me?"

"jɛs, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd, ən hɝd ði ʌðɝ tu seɪ ðə seɪm, ɔlðoʊ nɪneɪiv pɹənaʊns ðə wɝdz laɪk ə tʃælənʒ.

"Yes, Aes Sedai," Egwene said, and heard the other two say the same, although Nynaeve pronounced the words like a challenge.

ʃɛɹiəm meɪɾ ə dɪsɡʌstəd saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt, ɔlmoʊst ə ɡɹaʊl. "fjuɝ ɡɝlz naʊ kʌm tə ðə taʊɝ tə bi tʃɹeɪn ðən wʌns dɪd, bʌt ðeɪ stɪl kʌm. moʊs liv nɛvɝ hævɪŋ lɝn tə sɛns ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, mʌtʃ lɛs tʌtʃ ɪt. ə fju lɝn ɪnʌf nɑt tə hɑɹm ðɛmsɛlvz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɡoʊ. ə bɛɹ hændfʊl kən əspaɪɹ tə bi ɹeɪz tə ði æksɛptɪd, ən fjuɝ stɪl tə wɛɹ ðə ʃɔl. ɪts ə hɑɹd laɪf, ə hɑɹd dɪsəplən, jɛɾ ɛvɹi nɑvəs faɪts tə hoʊld ɑn, tə əteɪn ðə ɹɪŋ ən ðə ʃɔl. ivən wən ðeɪ ɑɹ soʊ əfɹeɪd ðeɪ kɹaɪ ðɛmsɛlvz tə slip ɛvɹi naɪt, ðeɪ stʃɹʌɡəl tə hoʊld ɑn. ən jə θɹi, hu hæv mɔɹ əbɪləɾi bɔɹn ɪn jə ðən aɪ ɛvɝ hoʊp tə si ɪn maɪ laɪftaɪm, lɛf ðə taʊɝ wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən, ɹæn əweɪ nɑɾ ivən hæf-tʃɹeɪnd, laɪk ɪɹəspɑnsəbəl tʃɪlʒɹən, steɪɾ əweɪ fəɹ mʌnθs. ən naʊ jə ɹaɪd bæk ɪn əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ əz hæpənd, əz ɪf jə kən teɪk ʌp jəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ əɡɛn ɑn ðə mɑɹoʊ." ʃi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ əz ɪf ʃi maɪɾ ɪksploʊɾ ʌðɝwaɪz. "fɑoʊleɪn!"

Sheriam made a disgusted sound in her throat, almost a growl. "Fewer girls now come to the Tower to be trained than once did, but they still come. Most leave never having learned to sense the True Source, much less touch it. A few learn enough not to harm themselves before they go. A bare handful can aspire to be raised to the Accepted, and fewer still to wear the shawl. It is a hard life, a hard discipline, yet every novice fights to hold on, to attain the ring and the shawl. Even when they are so afraid they cry themselves to sleep every night, they struggle to hold on. And you three, who have more ability born in you than I ever hoped to see in my lifetime, left the Tower without permission, ran away not even half-trained, like irresponsible children, stayed away for months. And now you ride back in as if nothing has happened, as if you can take up your training again on the morrow." She let out a long breath as if she might explode otherwise. "Faolain!"

ðə θɹi æksɛptɪd dʒʌmpt əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn kɑɾ ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ, ən wʌn, ə dɑɹk, kɝli-hɛɹd wʊmən, stɛp fɔɹwɝd. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl jʌŋ wɪmən, bʌt stɪl oʊldɝ ðən nɪneɪiv. nɪneɪivz ɹæpəɾ æksɛptəns hæd bɪn ɪkstʃɹɔɹɾənɛɹi. ɪn ðə nɔɹməl kɔɹs ə θɪŋz, ɪt tʊk jɪɹz əz ə nɑvəs tə ɝn ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋz ðeɪ wɔɹ, ən wəd teɪk jɪɹz mɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd hoʊp tə bi ɹeɪz tə fʊl ɛɛs sədaɪ.

The three Accepted jumped as if they had been caught eavesdropping, and one, a dark, curly-haired woman, stepped forward. They were all young women, but still older than Nynaeve. Nynaeve's rapid Acceptance had been extraordinary. In the normal course of things, it took years as a novice to earn the Great Serpent rings they wore, and would take years more before they could hope to be raised to full Aes Sedai.

"teɪk əm tə ðɛɹ ɹumz," ʃɛɹiəm kəmændəd, "æn kip əm ðɛɹ. ðeɪ meɪ hæv bɹɛd, koʊl bɹɔθ, ən wɔɾɝ əntɪl ði æmɪɝlɪn sit sɛz ʌðɝwaɪz. ən ɪf wʌn ə ðɛm spiks ivən ə wɝd, jə meɪ teɪk əɹ tə ðə kɪtʃənz ən sɛɾ əɹ tə skɹʌbɪŋ pɑts." ʃi wɝld ən stɔkt əweɪ, ivən əɹ bæk ɪkspɹɛsɪŋ æŋɡɝ.

"Take them to their rooms," Sheriam commanded, "and keep them there. They may have bread, cold broth, and water until the Amyrlin Seat says otherwise. And if one of them speaks even a word, you may take her to the kitchens and set her to scrubbing pots." She whirled and stalked away, even her back expressing anger.

fɑoʊleɪn aɪɾ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz wɪð ɔlmoʊst ə hoʊpfəl ɛɹ, ɪspɛʃli nɪneɪiv, hu wɔɹ ə ɡlaʊɝ laɪk ə mæsk. fɑoʊleɪnz ɹaʊn feɪs hɛl noʊ lʌv fəɹ ðoʊz u bɹoʊk ðə ɹulz soʊ ɛkstʃɹævəɡənli, ən lɛs fəɹ wʌn laɪk nɪneɪiv, ə waɪldɝ u hæɾ ɝn əɹ ɹɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ ɛvɝ biɪŋ ə nɑvəs, hu hæd tʃænəl paʊɝ bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɛvɝ ɛntɝd tɑɹ vəlɑn. wən ɪt bɪkeɪm ɑbviəs ðət nɪneɪiv mɛn tə kip əɹ æŋɡɝ tə hɝsɛlf, fɑoʊleɪn ʃɹʌɡd. "wɛn ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛnz fəɹ ju, jəl pɹɑbli bi stɪld."

Faolain eyed Egwene and the others with almost a hopeful air, especially Nynaeve, who wore a glower like a mask. Faolain's round face held no love for those who broke the rules so extravagantly, and less for one like Nynaeve, a wilder who had earned her ring without ever being a novice, who had channeled power before she ever entered Tar Valon. When it became obvious that Nynaeve meant to keep her anger to herself, Faolain shrugged. "When the Amyrlin sends for you, you'll probably be stilled."

"ɡɪv oʊvɝ, fɑoʊleɪn," ənʌðɝ ə ði æksɛptɪd sɛd. ði oʊldəst ə ðə θɹi, ʃi hæɾ ə wɪləwi nɛk ən kɑpɝi skɪn, ən ə ɡɹeɪsfəl weɪ ʌv muvɪŋ. "aɪ wɪl teɪk ju," ʃi toʊl nɪneɪiv. "aɪ æm kɔl θiədʒɹɪn, ən aɪ, tu, æm ə waɪldɝ. əl hoʊl jə tə ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪz ɔɹɾɝ, bʌɾ əl nɑt beɪt ju. kʌm."

"Give over, Faolain," another of the Accepted said. The oldest of the three, she had a willowy neck and coppery skin, and a graceful way of moving. "I will take you," she told Nynaeve. "I am called Theodrin, and I, too, am a wilder. I will hold you to Sheriam Sedai's order, but I will not bait you. Come."

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn ə wɝid lʊk, ðən saɪɾ ən lɛt θiədʒɹɪn lɛɾ əɹ əweɪ.

Nynaeve gave Egwene and Elayne a worried look, then sighed and let Theodrin lead her away.

"waɪldɝz," fɑoʊleɪn mʌɾɝd. ɑn əɹ tʌŋ, ɪt saʊndəd laɪk ə kɝs. ʃi tɝn əɹ stɛɹ tə ɛɡwin.

"Wilders," Faolain muttered. On her tongue, it sounded like a curse. She turned her stare to Egwene.

ðə θɝɾ æksɛptɪd, ə pɹɪɾi, æpəl-tʃik jʌŋ wʊmən, steɪʃən hɝsɛlf bɪsaɪɾ ɪleɪn. hɝ maʊθ wɑz tɝn ʌp ət ðə kɔɹnɝz əz ɪf ʃi laɪk tə smaɪl, bʌt ðə stɝn lʊk ʃi ɡeɪv ɪleɪn sɛd ʃi wəd bɹʊk noʊ nɑnsɛns naʊ.

The third Accepted, a pretty, apple-cheeked young woman, stationed herself beside Elayne. Her mouth was turned up at the corners as if she liked to smile, but the stern look she gave Elayne said she would brook no nonsense now.

ɛɡwin ɹɪtɝn fɑoʊleɪnz stɛɹ wɪð əz mʌtʃ kɑm əz ʃi kəd mænədʒ, ænd, ʃi hoʊpt, ə mɛʒɝ ə ðə hɔɾi, saɪlən kəntɛmp ðəɾ ɪleɪn hæɾ ədɑptəd. ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ, ʃi θɔt. ðɪs wʌn wɪl dɛfənətli tʃuz ðə ɹɛdz. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹd nɑt tə θɪŋk ə hɝ oʊn tʃɹʌbəlz. laɪt, wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ gɑnə də tə ʌs? ʃi mɛn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə taʊɝ, nɑt ðiz wɪmən.

Egwene returned Faolain's stare with as much calm as she could manage, and, she hoped, a measure of the haughty, silent contempt that Elayne had adopted. Red Ajah, she thought. This one will definitely choose the Reds. But it was hard not to think of her own troubles. Light, what are they going to do to us? She meant the Aes Sedai, the Tower, not these women.

"wɛl, kʌm əlɔŋ," fɑoʊleɪn snæpt. "ɪts bæɾ ɪnʌf aɪ hæv tə stænd ɡɑɹɾ ɑn jəɹ dɔɹ wɪθaʊt stændɪŋ hɪɹ ɔl deɪ. kʌm əlɔŋ."

"Well, come along," Faolain snapped. "It's bad enough I have to stand guard on your door without standing here all day. Come along."

teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ɛɡwin ɡɹɪpt ɪleɪnz hæn ən fɑloʊd. laɪt, lɛɾ əm bi hilɪŋ mæt.

Taking a deep breath, Egwene gripped Elayne's hand and followed. Light, let them be Healing Mat.


tʃæptɝ twɛlv


CHAPTER 12

ði æmɪɝlɪn sit


The Amyrlin Seat

sɪuən sɑntʃ peɪs ðə lɛŋθ ə hɝ stʌɾi, pɔzɪŋ naʊ ən əɡɛn tə ɡlæns, wɪð ə blu-aɪd ɡeɪz ðət hæd meɪd ɹulɝz stæmɝ, əɾ ə kɑɹv naɪtwʊd bɑks ɑn ə lɔŋ teɪbəl sɛntɝɾ ɪn ðə ɹum. ʃi hoʊpt ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv tə juz ɛni ʌv ðə kɛɹfəli dʒɹɔn dɑkjəməns wɪðɪn ɪt. ðeɪ hæd bɪn pɹipɛɹɾ ən sild ɪn sikɹət, baɪ hɝ oʊn hænd, tə kʌvɝ ə dʌzən pɑsəbəl ivɛntʃəæləɾiz. ʃi hæd leɪɾ ə wɔɹɾɪŋ ɑn ðə bɑks soʊ ðəɾ ɪf ɛni hæn bʌt hɝz oʊpən ɪt, ðə kɑntɛns wəd flæʃ tə æʃ ɪn ən ɪnstənt; vɛɹi laɪkli ðə bɑks ɪtsɛlf wəd bɝst ɪndə fleɪm.

Siuan Sanche paced the length of her study, pausing now and again to glance, with a blue-eyed gaze that had made rulers stammer, at a carved nightwood box on a long table centered in the room. She hoped she would not have to use any of the carefully drawn documents within it. They had been prepared and sealed in secret, by her own hand, to cover a dozen possible eventualities. She had laid a warding on the box so that if any hand but hers opened it, the contents would flash to ash in an instant; very likely the box itself would burst into flame.

"æn bɝn ðə θivɪŋ fɪʃɝ-bɝd, huɛvɝ ʃi maɪt bi, soʊ ʃi nɛvɝ fɝɡɛts ɪt, aɪ hoʊp," ʃi mʌɾɝd. fəɹ ðə hʌnʒɹədθ taɪm sɪns biɪŋ toʊl ðət vɛɹɪn hæd ɹɪtɝnd, ʃi ɹiədʒʌstɪɾ əɹ stoʊl ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz wɪθaʊt ɹilaɪzɪŋ wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ. ɪt hʌŋ bɪloʊ hɝ weɪst, bɹɔɾ ən stʃɹaɪpt wɪð ðə kʌlɝz ə ðə sɛvən ədʒəz. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɑz ʌv ɔl ədʒəz ən ə nʌn, noʊ mæɾɝ fɹəm wɪtʃ ʃi hæd bɪn ɹeɪzd.

"And burn the thieving fisher-bird, whoever she might be, so she never forgets it, I hope," she muttered. For the hundredth time since being told that Verin had returned, she readjusted her stole on her shoulders without realizing what she was doing. It hung below her waist, broad and striped with the colors of the seven Ajahs. The Amyrlin Seat was of all Ajahs and of none, no matter from which she had been raised.

ðə ɹum wɑz ɔɹneɪt, fəɹ ɪt hæd bɪlɔŋ tə dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz ʌv wɪmən u hæd wɔɹn ðə stoʊl. ðə tɔl faɪɝpleɪs ən bɹɔd, koʊl hɑɹθ wɝ ɔl kɑɹvd ɡoʊldən mɑɹbəl fɹəm kændɝ, ən ðə daɪmənd-ʃeɪp flɔɹ taɪlz, pɑlɪʃt ɹɛdstoʊn fɹəm ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst. ðə wɔlz wɝ pænəlz ə səm peɪl stʃɹaɪpt wʊd, hɑɹɾ əz aɪɝn ən kɑɹvd ɪn fæntæstɪk bists ən bɝdz ʌv ʌnbəlivəbəl plumədʒ, pænəlz bɹɔt fɹəm ðə lænz bɪɑn ði il weɪs baɪ ðə si foʊk bɪfɔɹ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ wɑz bɔɹn. tɔl, ɑɹtʃt wɪndoʊz, oʊpən naʊ tə lɛɾ ɪn ðə nu, ɡɹin smɛlz, lɛɾ ɑntu ə bælkəni oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ əɹ smɔl pɹaɪvət ɡɑɹɾən, wɛɹ ʃi sɛldəm hæd taɪm tə wɔk.

The room was ornate, for it had belonged to generations of women who had worn the stole. The tall fireplace and broad, cold hearth were all carved golden marble from Kandor, and the diamond-shaped floor tiles, polished redstone from the Mountains of Mist. The walls were panels of some pale striped wood, hard as iron and carved in fantastic beasts and birds of unbelievable plumage, panels brought from the lands beyond the Aiel Waste by the Sea Folk before Artur Hawkwing was born. Tall, arched windows, open now to let in the new, green smells, let onto a balcony overlooking her small private garden, where she seldom had time to walk.

ɔl ðət ɡɹænduɹ wɑz ɪn stɑɹk kɑntʃɹæs tə ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz sɪuən sɑntʃ hæd bɹɔt tə ðə ɹum. ðə wʌn teɪbəl ən ðə staʊt tʃɛɹ bɪhaɪn ɪt wɝ pleɪn, ɪf wɛl pɑlɪʃt wɪð eɪdʒ ən biswæks, əz wɑz ði oʊnli ʌðɝ tʃɛɹ ɪn ðə ɹum. ðət stʊɾ ɔf tə wʌn saɪd, kloʊs ɪnʌf tə bi dʒɹɔn ʌp ɪf ʃi wɪʃt ə vɪzəɾɝ tə sɪt. ə smɔl tɛɹən ɹʌɡ leɪ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə teɪbəl, woʊvən ɪn sɪmpəl pæɾɝnz ə blu ən bɹaʊn ən ɡoʊld. ə sɪŋɡəl dʒɹɔɪŋ, taɪni fɪʃɪŋ boʊts əmʌŋ ɹidz, hʌŋ əbʌv ðə faɪɝpleɪs. hæf ə dʌzən stænz hɛld oʊpən bʊks əbaʊt ðə flɔɹ. ðət wɑz ɔl. ivən ðə læmps wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn aʊɾ ə pleɪs ɪn ə fɑɹmɝz haʊs.

All that grandeur was in stark contrast to the furnishings Siuan Sanche had brought to the room. The one table and the stout chair behind it were plain, if well polished with age and beeswax, as was the only other chair in the room. That stood off to one side, close enough to be drawn up if she wished a visitor to sit. A small Tairen rug lay in front of the table, woven in simple patterns of blue and brown and gold. A single drawing, tiny fishing boats among reeds, hung above the fireplace. Half a dozen stands held open books about the floor. That was all. Even the lamps would not have been out of place in a farmer's house.

sɪuən sɑntʃ hæd bɪn bɔɹn pʊɹ ɪn tiɹ, ən hæd wɝkt ɑn əɹ fɑðɝz fɪʃɪŋ boʊt, wʌn dʒʌs laɪk ðə boʊts ɪn ðə dʒɹɔɪŋ, ɪn ðə dɛltə kɔl ðə fɪŋɡɝz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, bɪfɔɹ ɛvɝ ʃi dʒɹimd ə kʌmɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ivən ðə nɪɹli tɛn jɪɹz sɪns ʃi hæd bɪn ɹeɪz tə ðə sit hæd nɑt meɪɾ əɹ kʌmftəɹbəl wɪð tu mʌtʃ lʌɡʒɝi. hɝ bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ wɑz mɔɹ sɪmpəl stɪl.

Siuan Sanche had been born poor in Tear, and had worked on her father's fishing boat, one just like the boats in the drawing, in the delta called the Fingers of the Dragon, before ever she dreamed of coming to Tar Valon. Even the nearly ten years since she had been raised to the Seat had not made her comfortable with too much luxury. Her bedchamber was more simple still.

tɛn jɪɹz wɪð ðə stoʊl, ʃi θɔt. nɪɹli twɛnti sɪns aɪ dɪsaɪɾɪd tə seɪl ðiz deɪnʒɝəs wɔɾɝz. ən ɪf aɪ slɪp naʊ, əl wɪʃ aɪ wɝ bæk hɔlɪŋ nɛts.

Ten years with the stole, she thought. Nearly twenty since I decided to sail these dangerous waters. And if I slip now, I'll wish I were back hauling nets.

ʃi spʌn əɾ ə saʊnd. ənʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd slɪpt ɪndə ðə ɹum, ə kɑpɝ-skɪnd wʊmən wɪð dɑɹk hɛɹ kʌt ʃɔɹt. ʃi kɑt hɝsɛlf ɪn taɪm tə kip əɹ vɔɪs stɛɾi ən seɪ oʊnli wʌt wɑz ɪkspɛktəd. "jɛs, lin?"

She spun at a sound. Another Aes Sedai had slipped into the room, a copper-skinned woman with dark hair cut short. She caught herself in time to keep her voice steady and say only what was expected. "Yes, Leane?"

ðə kipɝ ə ðə kɹɑnəkəlz baʊd, dʒʌst əz dipli əz ʃi wəd hæɾ ʌðɝz bɪn pɹizɛnt. ðə tɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ, əz tɔl əz moʊs mɛn, wɑz sɛkən oʊnli tə ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ðoʊ sɪuən hæd noʊn əɹ sɪns ðeɪ wɝ nɑvəsɪz təɡɛðɝ, səmtaɪmz linz ɪnsɪstəns ɑn əphoʊldɪŋ ðə dɪɡnəɾi ʌv ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk sɪuən wɑnə skɹim.

The Keeper of the Chronicles bowed, just as deeply as she would had others been present. The tall Aes Sedai, as tall as most men, was second only to the Amyrlin in the White Tower, and though Siuan had known her since they were novices together, sometimes Leane's insistence on upholding the dignity of the Amyrlin Seat was enough to make Siuan want to scream.

"vɛɹɪn ɪz hɪɹ, mʌðɝ, æskɪŋ liv tə spik wɪð ju. aɪ hæv toʊld əɹ jə ɑɹ bɪzi, bʌt ʃi æsks - "

"Verin is here, Mother, asking leave to speak with you. I have told her you are busy, but she asks - "

"nɑt tu bɪzi tə spik tə hɝ," sɪuən sɛd. tu kwɪkli, ʃi nu, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. "sɛn əɹ ɪn. ðɛɹz noʊ nid fəɹ jə tə ɹɪmeɪn, lin. əl spik tə hɝ əloʊn."

"Not too busy to speak to her," Siuan said. Too quickly, she knew, but she did not care. "Send her in. There's no need for you to remain, Leane. I will speak to her alone."

ə twɪtʃ ə hɝ aɪbɹaʊz wɑz ðə kipɝz oʊnli saɪn ə sɝpɹaɪz. ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛldəm sɔ ɛniwʌn, ivən ə kwin, wɪθaʊt ðə kipɝ pɹɛzənt. bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn. lin baʊɾ əɹ weɪ aʊt, ən ɪn moʊməns vɛɹɪn tʊk əɹ pleɪs, nilɪŋ tə kɪs ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn sɪuənz fɪŋɡɝ. ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝ hæɾ ə ɡʊd-saɪz lɛðɝ sæk ʌndɝ əɹ ɑɹm.

A twitch of her eyebrows was the Keeper's only sign of surprise. The Amyrlin seldom saw anyone, even a queen, without the Keeper present. But the Amyrlin was the Amyrlin. Leane bowed her way out, and in moments Verin took her place, kneeling to kiss the Great Serpent ring on Siuan's finger. The Brown sister had a good-sized leather sack under her arm.

"θæŋk jə fəɹ siɪŋ mi, mʌðɝ," vɛɹɪn sɛɾ əz ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd. "aɪ hæv ɝdʒənt nuz fɹəm fɑlm. ən mɔɹ. aɪ skɛɹsli noʊ wɛɹ tə bɪɡɪn."

"Thank you for seeing me, Mother," Verin said as she straightened. "I have urgent news from Falme. And more. I scarcely know where to begin."

"bɪɡɪn wɛɹ jə wɪl," sɪuən sɛd. "ðiz ɹumz ɑɹ wɔɹɾɪd, ɪn keɪs ɛniwʌn θɪŋks tə juz tʃaɪldhʊd tʃɹɪks ʌv ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ." vɛɹɪnz aɪbɹaʊz lɪftəɾ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn æɾəd, "mʌtʃ əz tʃeɪnʒd sɪns jə lɛft. spik."

"Begin where you will," Siuan said. "These rooms are warded, in case anyone thinks to use childhood tricks of eavesdropping." Verin's eyebrows lifted in surprise, and the Amyrlin added, "Much has changed since you left. Speak."

"moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾəntli, ðɛn, ɹænd ælθɹ əz pɹoʊkleɪm hɪmsɛlf ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

"Most importantly, then, Rand al'Thor has proclaimed himself the Dragon Reborn."

sɪuən fɛlt ə taɪtnəs lusən ɪn əɹ tʃɛst. "aɪ hoʊpt ɪt wɑz hi," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "aɪ hæv hæd ɹɪpɔɹts fɹəm wɪmən u kəɾ oʊnli tɛl wʌt ðeɪ hæd hɝd, ən ɹumɝz baɪ ðə skɔɹ kʌm wɪð ɛvɹi tʃɹeɪɾɝz boʊɾ ən mɝtʃəns wæɡən, bʌɾ aɪ kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ." ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "jɛɾ aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kən neɪm ðə deɪ ɪt hæpənd. dɪd jə noʊ ðə tu fɔls dʒɹæɡənz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ tʃɹʌbəl ðə wɝld?"

Siuan felt a tightness loosen in her chest. "I hoped it was he," she said softly. "I have had reports from women who could only tell what they had heard, and rumors by the score come with every trader's boat and merchant's wagon, but I could not be sure." She took a deep breath. "Yet I think I can name the day it happened. Did you know the two false Dragons no longer trouble the world?"

"aɪ hæd nɑt hɝd, mʌðɝ. ðəɾ ɪz ɡʊd nuz."

"I had not heard, Mother. That is good news."

"jɛs. mæzɹim teɪm ɪz ɪn ðə hænz ʌv əɹ sɪstɝz ɪn sɑldɑiə, ən ðə pʊɹ fɛloʊ ɪn hæɾən mɝk, ðə laɪɾ əv pɪɾi ɑn ɪz soʊl, wɑz teɪkən baɪ ðə tɛɹənz ən ɛksəkjuɾəd ɑn ðə spɑt. noʊ wʌn ivən simz tə noʊ wʌɾ ɪz neɪm wɑz. boʊθ wɝ teɪkən ɑn ðə seɪm deɪ ænd, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ɹumɝ, ʌndɝ ðə seɪm sɝkəmstænsəz. ðeɪ wɝ ɪn bæɾəl, ən wɪnɪŋ, wən sʌɾənli ə ɡɹeɪt laɪt flæʃt ɪn ðə skaɪ, ən ə vɪʒən əpɪɹd, dʒʌs fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. ðəɹ ɑɹ ə dʌzən dɪfɹən vɝʒənz ʌv wʌɾ ɪt wɑz, bʌɾ ɪn boʊθ keɪsəz ðə ɹɪzʌlt wɑz ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm. ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡənz hɔɹs ɹɪɹɾ ʌp ən θɹu hɪm. hi wɑz nɑkt ʌnkɑnʃəs, ən ɪz fɑloʊɝz kɹaɪɾ aʊt ðəɾ i wɑz dɛd, ən flɛd ðə fild, ən i wɑz teɪkən. səm ə maɪ ɹɪpɔɹts spik ə vɪʒənz ɪn ðə skaɪ ət fɑlm. əl weɪdʒɝ ə ɡoʊl mɑɹk tə ə wik-oʊl dɛltə pɝtʃ ðət wɑz ði ɪnstən ɹænd ælθɹ pɹoʊkleɪm hɪmsɛlf."

"Yes. Mazrim Taim is in the hands of our sisters in Saldaea, and the poor fellow in Haddon Mirk, the Light have pity on his soul, was taken by the Tairens and executed on the spot. No one even seems to know what his name was. Both were taken on the same day and, according to rumor, under the same circumstances. They were in battle, and winning, when suddenly a great light flashed in the sky, and a vision appeared, just for an instant. There are a dozen different versions of what it was, but in both cases the result was exactly the same. The false Dragon's horse reared up and threw him. He was knocked unconscious, and his followers cried out that he was dead, and fled the field, and he was taken. Some of my reports speak of visions in the sky at Falme. I'll wager a gold mark to a week-old delta perch that was the instant Rand al'Thor proclaimed himself."

"ðə tʃɹu dʒɹæɡən əz bɪn ɹibɔɹn," vɛɹɪn sɛɾ ɔlmoʊs tə hɝsɛlf, "æn soʊ ðə pæɾɝn əz noʊ ɹum fəɹ fɔls dʒɹæɡənz ɛnimɔɹ. wɪv lus ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɑn ðə wɝld. ðə laɪɾ əv mɝsi ɑn ʌs."

"The true Dragon has been Reborn," Verin said almost to herself, "and so the Pattern has no room for false Dragons anymore. We have loosed the Dragon Reborn on the world. The Light have mercy on us."

ði æmɪɝlɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. "wi hæv dʌn wʌt mʌs bi dʌn." ən ɪf ivən ðə nuəs nɑvəs lɝnz ʌv ɪt, əl bi stɪl bɪfɔɹ ðə nɛkst sʌnɹaɪz, ɪf aɪm nɑt tɔɹn tə pisəz fɝst. mi, ən mɔɪɹeɪn, ən vɛɹɪn, ən laɪkli ɛniwʌn θɔt tə bi ə fɹɛn ʌv aʊɝz, əz wɛl. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi tə kæɹi ɑn soʊ ɡɹeɪɾ ə kənspɪɹəsi wən oʊnli θɹi wɪmən nu ʌv ɪt, wən ivən ə kloʊs fɹɛnd wəd bɪtʃɹeɪ ðɛm ən kənsɪɾɝ ɪɾ ə duɾi wɛl dʌn. laɪt, bʌɾ aɪ wɪʃ aɪ kəd bi ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wəd nɑt bi ɹaɪt tə də ɪt. "æt lis hiz seɪfli ɪn mɔɪɹeɪnz hænz. ʃɪl ɡaɪd hɪm, ən də wʌt mʌs bi dʌn. wʌɾ ɛls əv jə tə tɛl mi, dɔɾɝ?"

The Amyrlin shook her head irritably. "We have done what must be done." And if even the newest novice learns of it, I will be stilled before the next sunrise, if I'm not torn to pieces first. Me, and Moiraine, and Verin, and likely anyone thought to be a friend of ours, as well. It was not easy to carry on so great a conspiracy when only three women knew of it, when even a close friend would betray them and consider it a duty well done. Light, but I wish I could be sure they would not be right to do it. "At least he is safely in Moiraine's hands. She will guide him, and do what must be done. What else have you to tell me, Daughter?"

fəɹ ænsɝ, vɛɹɪn pleɪs ðə lɛðɝ sæk ɑn ðə teɪbəl ən tʊk aʊɾ ə kɝld, ɡoʊl hɔɹn, wɪð sɪlvɝ skɹɪpt ɪnleɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪts flɛɹɪŋ bɛl maʊθ. ʃi leɪd ðə hɔɹn ɑn ðə teɪbəl, ðən lʊk tə ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪð kwaɪəɾ ɛkspɛkteɪʃən.

For answer, Verin placed the leather sack on the table and took out a curled, gold horn, with silver script inlaid around its flaring bell mouth. She laid the horn on the table, then looked to the Amyrlin with quiet expectation.

sɪuən dɪd nɑɾ əv tə bi kloʊs ɪnʌf tə ɹid ðə skɹɪp tə noʊ wʌɾ ɪt sɛd. tiə mi ɑveɪən mɔɹaɪɾɪn ɪeɪn veɪɾɪn. "ðə ɡɹeɪv ɪz noʊ bɑɹ tə maɪ kɔl." "ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ?" ʃi ɡæspt. "ju bɹɔt ðəɾ ɔl ðə weɪ hɪɹ, əkɹɔs hʌnʒɹədz ə liɡz, wɪð ðə hʌntɝz lʊkɪŋ ɛvɹiwɛɹ fəɹ ɪt? laɪt, wʊmən, ɪt wɑz tə bi lɛft wɪð ɹænd ælθɹ."

Siuan did not have to be close enough to read the script to know what it said. Tia mi aven Moridin isainde vadin. "The grave is no bar to my call." "The Horn of Valere?" she gasped. "You brought that all the way here, across hundreds of leagues, with the Hunters looking everywhere for it? Light, woman, it was to be left with Rand al'Thor."

"aɪ noʊ, mʌðɝ," vɛɹɪn sɛd kɑmli, "bʌt ðə hʌntɝz ɔl ɪkspɛk tə faɪn ðə hɔɹn ɪn səm ɡɹeɪɾ ædvɛntʃɝ, nɑɾ ɪn ə sæk wɪð fɔɹ wɪmən ɛskɔɹɾɪŋ ə sɪk juθ. ən ɪt wəd də ɹænd noʊ ɡʊd."

"I know, Mother," Verin said calmly, "but the Hunters all expect to find the Horn in some great adventure, not in a sack with four women escorting a sick youth. And it would do Rand no good."

"wʌt dʒju min? hiz tə faɪt tɑɹmən ɡdən. ðə hɔɹn ɪz tə sʌmən dɛd hɪɹoʊz fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv tə faɪɾ ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl. hæz mɔɪɹeɪn wʌns əɡɛn meɪd səm nu plæn wɪθaʊt kənsʌltɪŋ mi?"

"What do you mean? He is to fight Tarmon Gai'don. The Horn is to summon dead heroes from the grave to fight in the Last Battle. Has Moiraine once again made some new plan without consulting me?"

"ðɪs ɪz nʌn ə mɔɪɹeɪnz duɪŋ, mʌðɝ. wi plæn, bʌt ðə wil wivz ðə pæɾɝn əz ɪt wɪlz. ɹænd wɑz nɑt fɝs tə saʊn ðə hɔɹn. meɪtʃɹim kɔθən dɪd ðæt. ən mæt naʊ laɪz bɪloʊ, daɪɪŋ ə hɪz taɪz tə ðə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ dæɡɝ. ənlɛs i kən bi hil hɪɹ."

"This is none of Moiraine's doing, Mother. We plan, but the Wheel weaves the Pattern as it wills. Rand was not first to sound the Horn. Matrim Cauthon did that. And Mat now lies below, dying of his ties to the Shadar Logoth dagger. Unless he can be Healed here."

sɪuən ʃɪvɝd. ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, ðət dɛd sɪɾi soʊ teɪntɪd ðəɾ ivən tʃɹɑləks fɪɹd tə ɛntɝ, ən wɪð ɹizən. baɪ tʃæns, ə dæɡɝ fɹəm ðət pleɪs hæd kʌm ɪndə jʌŋ mæts hænz, twɪstɪŋ ən teɪntɪŋ ɪm wɪð ði ivəl ðət hæd kɪl ðə sɪɾi lɔŋ əɡoʊ. kɪlɪŋ hɪm. baɪ tʃæns? əɹ baɪ ðə pæɾɝn? hiz tɑvɝən, tu, æftɝ ɔl. bʌt . . . mæt saʊndəd ðə hɔɹn. ðən -  "soʊ lɔŋ əz mæt laɪvz," vɛɹɪn wɛn ɑn, "ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪz noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə hɔɹn tə ɛniwʌn ɛls. ɪf i daɪz, ʌv kɔɹs, ənʌðɝ kən saʊn ɪɾ ən fɔɹdʒ ə nu lɪŋk bɪtwin mæn ən hɔɹn." hɝ ɡeɪz wɑz stɛɾi ən əntʃɹʌbəl baɪ wʌt ʃi sim tə bi sədʒɛstɪŋ.

Siuan shivered. Shadar Logoth, that dead city so tainted that even Trollocs feared to enter, and with reason. By chance, a dagger from that place had come into young Mat's hands, twisting and tainting him with the evil that had killed the city long ago. Killing him. By chance? Or by the Pattern? He is ta'veren, too, after all. But . . . Mat sounded the Horn. Then -  "So long as Mat lives," Verin went on, "the Horn of Valere is no more than a horn to anyone else. If he dies, of course, another can sound it and forge a new link between man and Horn." Her gaze was steady and untroubled by what she seemed to be suggesting.

"mɛni wɪl daɪ bɪfɔɹ wəɹ dʌn, dɔɾɝ." ən u ɛls kəɾ aɪ jus tə saʊn ɪɾ əɡɛn? əl nɑt teɪk ðə ɹɪsk ə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɪtɝn ɪt tə mɔɪɹeɪn, naʊ. wʌn ə ðə ɡeɪɾɪn, pɝhæps. pɝhæps. "ðə pæɾɝn əz jɛt tə meɪk ɪz feɪt klɪɹ."

"Many will die before we are done, Daughter." And who else could I use to sound it again? I'll not take the risk of trying to return it to Moiraine, now. One of the Gaidin, perhaps. Perhaps. "The Pattern has yet to make his fate clear."

"jɛs, mʌðɝ. ən ðə hɔɹn?"

"Yes, Mother. And the Horn?"

"fɔɹ ðə moʊmənt," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd faɪnəli, "wi wɪl faɪn səm pleɪs tə haɪd ðɪs wɛɹ noʊ wʌn bʌt wi tu noʊ. əl kənsɪɾɝ wʌt tə də æftɝ ðæt."

"For the moment," the Amyrlin said finally, "we will find some place to hide this where no one but we two know. I will consider what to do after that."

vɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. "æz jə seɪ, mʌðɝ. ʌv kɔɹs, ə fju aʊɝz wɪl meɪk wʌn dɪsɪʒən fəɹ ju."

Verin nodded. "As you say, Mother. Of course, a few hours will make one decision for you."

"ɪz ðəɾ ɔl juv fəɹ mi?" sɪuən snæpt. "ɪf ɪɾ ɪz, aɪ hæv ðoʊz θɹi ɹʌnəweɪz tə dil wɪð."

"Is that all you have for me?" Siuan snapped. "If it is, I have those three runaways to deal with."

"ðɛɹ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ ə ðə sintʃæn, mʌðɝ."

"There is the matter of the Seanchan, Mother."

"wʌɾ ə ðɛm? ɔl maɪ ɹɪpɔɹts seɪ ðeɪv flɛd bæk əkɹɔs ði oʊʃən, əɹ tə wɛɹɛvɝ ðeɪ keɪm fɹʌm."

"What of them? All my reports say they have fled back across the ocean, or to wherever they came from."

"ɪt simz soʊ, mʌðɝ. bʌɾ aɪ fɪɹ wi meɪ hæv tə dil wɪð əm əɡɛn." vɛɹɪn pʊld ə smɔl lɛðɝ noʊtbʊk fɹəm bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt ən bɪɡæn lifɪŋ θɹu ɪt. "ðeɪ spoʊk ə ðɛmsɛlvz əz ðə fɔɹʌnɝz, əɹ ðoʊz u kʌm bɪfɔɹ, ən tɔkt ə ðə ɹɪtɝn, ən ə ɹikleɪmɪŋ ðɪs læn əz ðɛɹz. aɪv teɪkən noʊts ɑn ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ hɝɾ ə ðɛm. oʊnli fɹəm ðoʊz u æktʃəli  sɔ ðɛm, ʌv kɔɹs, əɹ hæd dilɪŋz wɪð ðɛm."

"It seems so, Mother. But I fear we may have to deal with them again." Verin pulled a small leather notebook from behind her belt and began leafing through it. "They spoke of themselves as the Forerunners, or Those Who Come Before, and talked of the Return, and of reclaiming this land as theirs. I've taken notes on everything I heard of them. Only from those who actually saw them, of course, or had dealings with them."

"vɛɹɪn, jə ɑɹ wɝiɪŋ əbaʊɾ ə laɪənfɪʃ aʊɾ ɪn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, waɪl hɪɹ ən naʊ ðə sɪlvɝpaɪk ɑɹ tʃuɪŋ əɹ nɛts tə ʃɹɛdz."

"Verin, you are worrying about a lionfish out in the Sea of Storms, while here and now the silverpike are chewing our nets to shreds."

ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝ kəntɪnjud tɝnɪŋ peɪdʒəz. "æn æp mɛɾəfɔɹ, mʌðɝ, ðə laɪənfɪʃ. wʌns aɪ sɔ ə lɑɹdʒ ʃɑɹk ðəɾ ə laɪənfɪʃ hæd tʃeɪst ɪndə ðə ʃæloʊz, wɛɹ ɪt daɪd." ʃi tæpt wʌn peɪdʒ wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ. "jɛs. ðɪs ɪz ðə wɝst. mʌðɝ, ðə sintʃæn juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪn bæɾəl. ðeɪ juz ɪɾ əz ə wɛpən."

The Brown sister continued turning pages. "An apt metaphor, Mother, the lionfish. Once I saw a large shark that a lionfish had chased into the shallows, where it died." She tapped one page with a finger. "Yes. This is the worst. Mother, the Seanchan use the One Power in battle. They use it as a weapon."

sɪuən klæspt əɹ hænz taɪtli əɾ əɹ weɪst. ðə ɹɪpɔɹts ðə pɪdʒənz hæd bɹɔt spoʊk ə ðæt, tu. moʊs hæɾ oʊnli sɛkəndhænd nɑlədʒ, bʌɾ ə fju wɪmən ɹoʊɾ ə siɪŋ fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz. ðə paʊɝ juzd əz ə wɛpən. ivən dʒɹaɪ ɪŋk ɑn peɪpɝ kæɹiɾ ən ɛdʒ ə hɪstɛɹiə wən ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ə ðæt. "ðæɾ ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi kɑzɪŋ əs tʃɹʌbəl, vɛɹɪn, ən wɪl kɑz mɔɹ əz ðə stɔɹiz spɹɛd, ən ɡɹoʊ wɪð ðə spɹɛɾɪŋ. bʌɾ aɪ kən də nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt ðæt. aɪm toʊl ðiz pipəl ɑɹ ɡɔn, dɔɾɝ. juv ɛni ɛvəɾəns ʌðɝwaɪz?"

Siuan clasped her hands tightly at her waist. The reports the pigeons had brought spoke of that, too. Most had only secondhand knowledge, but a few women wrote of seeing for themselves. The Power used as a weapon. Even dry ink on paper carried an edge of hysteria when they wrote of that. "That is already causing us trouble, Verin, and will cause more as the stories spread, and grow with the spreading. But I can do nothing about that. I am told these people are gone, Daughter. Do you have any evidence otherwise?"

"wɛl, noʊ, mʌðɝ, bʌt - "

"Well, no, Mother, but - "

"əntɪl jə du, lɛɾ əs dil wɪð ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə sɪlvɝpaɪk aʊɾ ʌv əɹ nɛts bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ stɑɹt tʃuɪŋ hoʊlz ɪn ðə boʊt, tu."

"Until you do, let us deal with getting the silverpike out of our nets before they start chewing holes in the boat, too."

wɪð ɹɪlʌktəns, vɛɹɪn kloʊz ðə noʊtbʊk ən tʌkt ɪt bæk bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt. "æz jə seɪ, mʌðɝ. ɪf aɪ maɪɾ æsk, wʌt dʒju ɪntɛn tə də tə nɪneɪiv ən ði ʌðɝ tu ɡɝlz?"

With reluctance, Verin closed the notebook and tucked it back behind her belt. "As you say, Mother. If I might ask, what do you intend to do to Nynaeve and the other two girls?"

ði æmɪɝlɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ. "bɪfɔɹ aɪm dʌn wɪð ðɛm, ðəl wɪʃ ðeɪ kəd ɡoʊ daʊn tə ðə ɹɪvɝ ən sɛl ðɛmsɛlvz fəɹ fɪʃbət." ɪt wɑz ðə sɪmpəl tʃɹuθ, bʌɾ ɪt kəd bi teɪkən ɪn mɔɹ ðən wʌn weɪ. "naʊ. sit jɝsɛlf, ən tɛl mi ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðoʊz θɹi hæv sɛɾ ən dʌn ɪn ðə taɪm ðeɪ wɝ wɪð ju. ɛvɹiθɪŋ."

The Amyrlin hesitated, considering. "Before I am done with them, they will wish they could go down to the river and sell themselves for fishbait." It was the simple truth, but it could be taken in more than one way. "Now. Seat yourself, and tell me everything those three have said and done in the time they were with you. Everything."


tʃæptɝ θɝtin


CHAPTER 13

pʌnɪʃməns


Punishments

laɪɪŋ ɑn əɹ nɛɹoʊ bɛd, ɛɡwin fɹaʊn ʌp ət ðə flɪkɝɪŋ ʃædoʊz kæst ɑn ðə silɪŋ baɪ hɝ sɪŋɡəl læmp. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd fɔɹm səm plæn ʌv ækʃən, əɹ ɹizən aʊt wʌt tə ɪkspɛk nɛkst. nʌθɪŋ keɪm. ðə ʃædoʊz hæd mɔɹ pæɾɝn ðən əɹ θɔts. ʃi kəd hɑɹdli ivən meɪk hɝsɛlf wɝi əbaʊt mæt, jɛt ðə ʃeɪm ʃi fɛlt ət ðət wɑz smɔl, kɹʌʃt baɪ ðə wɔlz ɝaʊn hɝ.

Lying on her narrow bed, Egwene frowned up at the flickering shadows cast on the ceiling by her single lamp. She wished she could form some plan of action, or reason out what to expect next. Nothing came. The shadows had more pattern than her thoughts. She could hardly even make herself worry about Mat, yet the shame she felt at that was small, crushed by the walls around her.

ɪt wɑz ə stɑɹk, wɪndoʊləs ɹum, laɪk ɔl ðoʊz ɪn ðə nɑvəsɪz' kɔɹɾɝz, smɔl ən skwɛɹ ən peɪntəd waɪt, wɪð pɛɡz ɑn wʌn wɔl fəɹ hæŋɪŋ əɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz, ðə bɛd bɪlt əɡɛnst ə sɛkənd, ən ə taɪni ʃɛlf ɑn ə θɝd, wɛɹ ɪn ʌðɝ deɪz ʃi hæd kɛpt ə fju bʊks bɑɹoʊd fɹəm ðə taʊɝ laɪbɹɛɹi. ə wɑʃstæn ən ə θɹi-lɛɡəd stul kəmpliɾəd ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz. ðə flɔɹbɔɹdz wɝ ɔlmoʊst waɪt fɹəm skɹʌbɪŋ. ʃi hæd dʌn ðət tæsk, ɑn hænz ən niz, ɛvɹi deɪ ʃi hæd lɪv ðɛɹ, ɪn ədɪʃən tə hɝ ʌðɝ tʃɔɹz ən lɛsənz. nɑvəsɪz lɪv sɪmpli, wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɝ ɪnkipɝz' dɔɾɝz əɹ ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ.

It was a stark, windowless room, like all those in the novices' quarters, small and square and painted white, with pegs on one wall for hanging her belongings, the bed built against a second, and a tiny shelf on a third, where in other days she had kept a few books borrowed from the Tower library. A washstand and a three-legged stool completed the furnishings. The floorboards were almost white from scrubbing. She had done that task, on hands and knees, every day she had lived there, in addition to her other chores and lessons. Novices lived simply, whether they were innkeepers' daughters or the Daughter-Heir of Andor.

ʃi wɔɹ ðə pleɪn waɪt dʒɹɛs ʌv ə nɑvəs əɡɛn - ivən əɹ bɛlt ən paʊtʃ wɝ waɪt - bʌt ʃi fɛl noʊ dʒɔɪ ət hævɪŋ ɹɪd hɝsɛlf ə ðə heɪɾəd ɡɹeɪ. hɝ ɹum hæd bɪkʌm tu mʌtʃ ʌv ə pɹɪzən sɛl. wʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ min tə kip mi hɪɹ. ɪn ðɪs ɹum. laɪk ə sɛl. laɪk ə kɑlɝ ænd. . . .

She wore the plain white dress of a novice again - even her belt and pouch were white - but she felt no joy at having rid herself of the hated gray. Her room had become too much of a prison cell. What if they mean to keep me here. In this room. Like a cell. Like a collar and. . . .

ʃi ɡlænst ət ðə dɔɹ - ðə dɑɹk æksɛptɪd wəd stɪl bi stændɪŋ ɡɑɹɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, ʃi nu - ən ɹoʊl kloʊs tə ðə waɪt plæstɝd wɔl. dʒʌst əbʌv ðə mætʃɹəs wɑz ə smɔl hoʊl, ɔlmoʊst ɪnvɪzəbəl ənlɛs jə nu wɛɹ tə lʊk, dʒɹɪl θɹu ɪndə ðə nɛkst ɹum baɪ nɑvəsɪz lɔŋ əɡoʊ. ɛɡwin kɛpt əɹ vɔɪs tə ə wɪspɝ.

She glanced at the door - the dark Accepted would still be standing guard on the other side, she knew - and rolled close to the white plastered wall. Just above the mattress was a small hole, almost invisible unless you knew where to look, drilled through into the next room by novices long ago. Egwene kept her voice to a whisper.

"ɪleɪn?" ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ænsɝ. "ɪleɪn? ɑɹ jə əslip?"

"Elayne?" There was no answer. "Elayne? Are you asleep?"

"haʊ kəɾ aɪ slip?" keɪm ɪleɪnz ɹɪplaɪ, ə ɹiɾi wɪspɝ θɹu ðə hoʊl. "aɪ θɔt wi maɪt bi ɪn səm tʃɹʌbəl, bʌɾ aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk ðɪs. ɛɡwin, wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ gɑnə də tə ʌs?"

"How could I sleep?" came Elayne's reply, a reedy whisper through the hole. "I thought we might be in some trouble, but I did not expect this. Egwene, what are they going to do to us?"

ɛɡwin hæd noʊ ænsɝ, ən əɹ ɡɛsəz wɝ nɑɾ ə ðə sɔɹt ʃi wɑntəd tə vɔɪs əlaʊd. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən wɑnə θɪŋk ə ðɛm. "aɪ æktʃəli  θɔt wi maɪt bi hɪɹoʊz, ɪleɪn. wi bɹɔt bæk ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ seɪfli. wi dɪskʌvɝd liɑnʒɹɪn ɪz blæk ədʒɑ." hɝ vɔɪs skɪpt ɑn ðæt. ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ ɔlweɪz dɪnaɪd ði ɛɡzɪstəns ʌv ə blæk ədʒɑ, ən ədʒɑ ðət sɝv ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ən wɝ noʊn tə bɪkʌm æŋɡɹi wɪð ɛniwʌn u ivən sədʒɛstəɾ ɪt wɑz ɹil. bʌt wi noʊ ɪts ɹil. "wi ʃəd bi hɪɹoʊz, ɪleɪn."

Egwene had no answer, and her guesses were not of the sort she wanted to voice aloud. She did not even want to think of them. "I actually thought we might be heroes, Elayne. We brought back the Horn of Valere safely. We discovered Liandrin is Black Ajah." Her voice skipped on that. Aes Sedai had always denied the existence of a Black Ajah, an Ajah that served the Dark One, and were known to become angry with anyone who even suggested it was real. But we know it's real. "We should be heroes, Elayne."

" 'ʃʊɾ ən wəd bɪl noʊ bɹɪdʒəz,' " ɪleɪn sɛd. "laɪt, aɪ juz tə heɪɾ ɪt wən mʌðɝ sɛd ðət tə mi, bʌɾ ɪts tʃɹu. vɛɹɪn sɛd wi mʌsnt spik ə ðə hɔɹn, əɹ liɑnʒɹɪn, tə ɛniwʌn bʌɾ əɹ əɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ɛni ʌv ðɪs wɪl wɝk aʊt ðə weɪ wi θɔt. ɪts nɑt fɛɹ. wiv bɪn θɹu soʊ mʌtʃ; juv bɪn θɹu soʊ mʌtʃ. ɪt dʒʌst ɪz nɑt fɛɹ."

" 'Should and would build no bridges,' " Elayne said. "Light, I used to hate it when Mother said that to me, but it's true. Verin said we mustn't speak of the Horn, or Liandrin, to anyone but her or the Amyrlin Seat. I do not think any of this will work out the way we thought. It is not fair. We've been through so much; you've been through so much. It just is not fair."

"vɛɹɪn sɛz. mɔɪɹeɪn sɛz. aɪ noʊ waɪ pipəl θɪŋk ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ pʌptmæstɝz. aɪ kən ɔlmoʊs fil ðə stʃɹɪŋz ɑn maɪ ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz. wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ du, ɪɾəl bi wʌt ðeɪ dɪsaɪɾ ɪz ɡʊd fəɹ ðə waɪt taʊɝ, nɑt wʌɾ ɪz ɡʊɾ əɹ fɛɹ fəɹ ʌs."

"Verin says. Moiraine says. I know why people think Aes Sedai are puppetmasters. I can almost feel the strings on my arms and legs. Whatever they do, it will be what they decide is good for the White Tower, not what is good or fair for us."

"bʌt jə stɪl wɑnə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. doʊn ju?"

"But you still want to be Aes Sedai. Don't you?"

ɛɡwin hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nɛvɝ ɛni ɹil kwɛstʃən əz tə hɝ ænsɝ. "jɛs," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ stɪl du. ɪts ði oʊnli weɪ wɪl ɛvɝ bi seɪf. bʌɾ əl tɛl jə ðɪs. əl nɑt lɛt maɪsɛlf bi stɪld." ðət wɑz ə nu θɔt, vɔɪst əz sun əz ɪt keɪm tə hɝ, bʌt ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə teɪk ɪt bæk. ɡɪv ʌp tʌtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs? ʃi kəd sɛns ɪt ðɛɹ, ivən naʊ, ðə ɡloʊ dʒʌst oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ dʒʌst aʊɾ ə saɪt. ʃi ɹɪzɪstɪd ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə ɹitʃ aʊt tə ɪt. ɡɪv ʌp biɪŋ fɪld wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, filɪŋ mɔɹ əlaɪv ðən aɪ ɛvɝ əv bɪfɔɹ? aɪ woʊnt! "nɑt wɪθaʊɾ ə faɪt."

Egwene hesitated, but there was never any real question as to her answer. "Yes," she said. "I still do. It is the only way we will ever be safe. But I will tell you this. I'll not let myself be stilled." That was a new thought, voiced as soon as it came to her, but she realized she did not want to take it back. Give up touching the True Source? She could sense it there, even now, the glow just over her shoulder, the shining just out of sight. She resisted the desire to reach out to it. Give up being filled with the One Power, feeling more alive than I ever have before? I won't! "Not without a fight."

ðəɹ wɑz ə lɔŋ saɪləns fɹəm ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl. "haʊ kəd jə stɑp ɪt? jə meɪ bi əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɛni ʌv ðɛm, naʊ, bʌt niðɝ wʌn ʌv əs noʊz ɪnʌf jɛt tə stɑp ivən wʌn ɛɛs sədaɪ fɹəm ʃildɪŋ əs fɹəm ðə sɔɹs, ən ðəɹ ɑɹ dʌzənz ə ðɛm hɪɹ."

There was a long silence from the other side of the wall. "How could you stop it? You may be as strong as any of them, now, but neither one of us knows enough yet to stop even one Aes Sedai from shielding us from the Source, and there are dozens of them here."

ɛɡwin kənsɪɾɝd. faɪnəli ʃi sɛd, "aɪ kəd ɹʌn əweɪ. ɹɪli ɹʌn əweɪ, ðɪs taɪm."

Egwene considered. Finally she said, "I could run away. Really run away, this time."

"ðeɪ wəd kʌm æftɝ ʌs, ɛɡwin. aɪm ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wʊd. wʌns jə ʃoʊ ɛni əbɪləɾi əɾ ɔl, ðeɪ doʊn lɛt jə ɡoʊ əntɪl juv lɝn ɪnʌf nɑt tə kɪl jɝsɛlf. əɹ dʒʌs daɪ fɹəm ɪt."

"They would come after us, Egwene. I'm sure they would. Once you show any ability at all, they don't let you go until you've learned enough not to kill yourself. Or just die from it."

"aɪ æm nɑɾ ə sɪmpəl vɪlədʒ ɡɝl ɛnimɔɹ. aɪ hæv sin sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. aɪ kən kip aʊɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ hænz ɪf aɪ wɑn tə." ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɪns hɝsɛlf əz mʌtʃ əz ɪleɪn. ən wʌɾ ɪf aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪnʌf, jɛt? ɪnʌf əbaʊt ðə wɝld, ɪnʌf əbaʊt ðə paʊɝ? wʌɾ ɪf dʒʌs tʃænəlɪŋ kən stɪl kɪl mi? ʃi ɹəfjuz tə θɪŋk ə ðæt. soʊ mʌtʃ aɪ hæv tə lɝn jɛt. aɪ woʊn lɛɾ əm stɑp mi.

"I am not a simple village girl anymore. I have seen something of the world. I can keep out of Aes Sedai hands if I want to." She was trying to convince herself as much as Elayne. And what if I don't know enough, yet? Enough about the world, enough about the Power? What if just channeling can still kill me? She refused to think of that. So much I have to learn yet. I won't let them stop me.

"maɪ mʌðɝ maɪt pɹətɛkt ʌs," ɪleɪn sɛd, "ɪf wʌt ðət waɪtkloʊk sɛɾ ɪz tʃɹu. aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ aɪ wəd hoʊp sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðət wɑz ðə tʃɹuθ. bʌɾ ɪf ɪɾ ɪzənt, mʌðɝ ɪz dʒʌst əz laɪkli tə sɛn əs boʊθ bæk ɪn tʃeɪnz. wɪl jə titʃ mi haʊ tə lɪv ɪn ə vɪlədʒ?"

"My mother might protect us," Elayne said, "if what that Whitecloak said is true. I never thought I would hope something like that was the truth. But if it isn't, Mother is just as likely to send us both back in chains. Will you teach me how to live in a village?"

ɛɡwin blɪŋkt ət ðə wɔl. "ju wɪl kʌm wɪð mi? ɪf ɪt kʌmz tə ðæt, aɪ min?"

Egwene blinked at the wall. "You will come with me? If it comes to that, I mean?"

ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ lɔŋ saɪləns, ðən ə feɪnt wɪspɝ. "aɪ də nɑt wɑnə bi stɪld, ɛɡwin. əl nɑt bi. əl nɑt bi!"

There was another long silence, then a faint whisper. "I do not want to be stilled, Egwene. I will not be. I will not be!"

ðə dɔɹ swʌŋ oʊpən, kɹæʃɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl, ən ɛɡwin sæɾ ʌp wɪð ə stɑɹt. ʃi hɝd ðə bæŋ ʌv ə dɔɹ fɹəm ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl. fɑoʊleɪn stɛpt ɪndə ɛɡwinz ɹum, smaɪlɪŋ əz əɹ aɪz wɛn tə ðə taɪni hoʊl. sɪməlɝ hoʊlz dʒɔɪn moʊst ə ðə nɑvəs ɹumz; ɛni wʊmən u hæd bɪn ə nɑvəs nu ʌv ðɛm.

The door swung open, crashing against the wall, and Egwene sat up with a start. She heard the bang of a door from the other side of the wall. Faolain stepped into Egwene's room, smiling as her eyes went to the tiny hole. Similar holes joined most of the novice rooms; any woman who had been a novice knew of them.

"wɪspɝɪŋ wɪð jəɹ fɹɛnd, ɛ?" ðə kɝli-hɛɹɾ æksɛptɪd sɛd wɪð sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ wɔɹmθ. "wɛl, ɪt ɡɹoʊz loʊnli, weɪɾɪŋ baɪ jɝsɛlf. dɪd juv ə naɪs tʃæt?"

"Whispering with your friend, eh?" the curly-haired Accepted said with surprising warmth. "Well, it grows lonely, waiting by yourself. Did you have a nice chat?"

ɛɡwin oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, ðən kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn heɪstəli. ʃi kəɾ ænsɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃɛɹiəm hæd sɛd. noʊ wʌn ɛls. ʃi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ði æksɛptɪd wɪð ə lɛvəl ɪkspɹɛʃən ən weɪɾəd.

Egwene opened her mouth, then closed it again hastily. She could answer Aes Sedai, Sheriam had said. No one else. She regarded the Accepted with a level expression and waited.

ðə fɔls sɪmpəθi slɪɾ ɔf fɑoʊleɪnz feɪs laɪk wɔɾɝ ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf ə ɹuf. "ɑn jəɹ fit. ði æmɪɝlɪnz nɑt tə bi kɛpt weɪɾɪŋ baɪ ðə laɪks ə ju. jə ɑɹ lʌki aɪ dɪd nɑt kʌm ɪn ɪn taɪm tə hɪɹ ju. muv!"

The false sympathy slid off Faolain's face like water running off a roof. "On your feet. The Amyrlin's not to be kept waiting by the likes of you. You are lucky I did not come in in time to hear you. Move!"

nɑvəsɪz wɝ səpoʊz tə oʊbeɪ ði æksɛptɪɾ ɔlmoʊst əz kwɪkli əz ðeɪ oʊbeɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ ɛɡwin ɡɑt tə hɝ fit sloʊli, ən tʊk əz mʌtʃ taɪm əz ʃi dɛɹɾ ɪn smuðɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛs. ʃi ɡeɪv fɑoʊleɪn ə smɔl kɝtsi ən ə taɪni smaɪl. ðə skaʊl ðət ɹoʊld əkɹɔs ði æksɛptɪdz feɪs meɪɾ ɛɡwinz smaɪl ɡɹoʊ bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd tə ɹeɪn ɪɾ ɪn; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn pʊʃɪŋ fɑoʊleɪn tu fɑɹ. hoʊldɪŋ hɝsɛlf stʃɹeɪt, pɹitɛndɪŋ əɹ niz wɝ nɑt ʃeɪkɪŋ, ʃi pɹɪsiɾɪd ði æksɛptɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum.

Novices were supposed to obey the Accepted almost as quickly as they obeyed Aes Sedai, but Egwene got to her feet slowly, and took as much time as she dared in smoothing her dress. She gave Faolain a small curtsy and a tiny smile. The scowl that rolled across the Accepted's face made Egwene's smile grow before she remembered to rein it in; there was no point in pushing Faolain too far. Holding herself straight, pretending her knees were not shaking, she preceded the Accepted out of the room.

ɪleɪn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi weɪɾɪŋ aʊtsaɪd wɪð ði æpəl-tʃikt æksɛptɪd, lʊkɪŋ fɪɹsli dɪtɝmən tə bi bɹeɪv. sʌmhaʊ, ʃi mænədʒ tə ɡɪv ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ðət ði æksɛptɪd wɑz ə hændmeɪd kæɹiɪŋ əɹ ɡlʌvz. ɛɡwin hoʊp ðət ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz duɪŋ hæf soʊ wɛl.

Elayne was already waiting outside with the apple-cheeked Accepted, looking fiercely determined to be brave. Somehow, she managed to give the impression that the Accepted was a handmaid carrying her gloves. Egwene hoped that she herself was doing half so well.

ðə ɹeɪld ɡælɝiz ə ðə nɑvəsɪz' kɔɹɾɝz ɹoʊz tiɹ ɑn tiɹ əbʌv, ɪn ə hɑloʊ kɑləm, ən fɛl əz mɛni bɪloʊ, tə ðə nɑvəsɪz' kɔɹt. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ʌðɝ wɪmən ɪn saɪt. ivən ɪf ɛvɹi nɑvəs ɪn ðə taʊɝ hæd bɪn ðɛɹ, ðoʊ, lɛs ðən ə kɔɹɾɝ ə ðə ɹumz wʊɾə bɪn fɪld. ðə fɔɹ ə ðɛm wɔkt 'ɹaʊn ði ɛmpti ɡælɝiz ən daʊn ðə spaɪɹəlɪŋ ɹæmps ɪn saɪləns; nʌn kəd bɛɹ tə hæv ðə saʊnz ə vɔɪsəz ɛmfəsaɪz ði ɛmptinəs.

The railed galleries of the novices' quarters rose tier on tier above, in a hollow column, and fell as many below, to the Novices' Court. There were no other women in sight. Even if every novice in the Tower had been there, though, less than a quarter of the rooms would have been filled. The four of them walked 'round the empty galleries and down the spiraling ramps in silence; none could bear to have the sounds of voices emphasize the emptiness.

ɛɡwin hæd nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ bɪn ɪndə ðə pɑɹɾ ə ðə taʊɝ wɛɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn hæɾ əɹ ɹumz. ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz ðəɹ wɝ waɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə wæɡən tə pæs daʊn izəli, ən tɔlɝ ðən ðeɪ wɝ waɪd. kʌlɝfəl tæpəstʃɹiz hʌŋ ɑn ðə wɔlz, tæpəstʃɹiz ɪn ə dʌzən staɪlz, ʌv flɔɹəl dɪzaɪnz ən fɔɹəst sinz, ʌv hɪɹoʊɪk didz ən ɪntʃɹəkət pæɾɝnz, səm soʊ oʊl ðeɪ lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ maɪt bɹeɪk ɪf hændəld. ðɛɹ ʃuz meɪd laʊd klɪks ɑn daɪmənd-ʃeɪp flɔɹ taɪlz ðət ɹɪpiɾɪd ðə kʌlɝz ə ðə sɛvən ədʒəz.

Egwene had never before been into the part of the Tower where the Amyrlin had her rooms. The corridors there were wide enough for a wagon to pass down easily, and taller than they were wide. Colorful tapestries hung on the walls, tapestries in a dozen styles, of floral designs and forest scenes, of heroic deeds and intricate patterns, some so old they looked as if they might break if handled. Their shoes made loud clicks on diamond-shaped floor tiles that repeated the colors of the seven Ajahs.

ðəɹ wɝ fju ʌðɝ wɪmən ɪn ɛvəɾəns - ən ɛɛs sədaɪ naʊ ən ðɛn, swipɪŋ mədʒɛstɪkəli əlɔŋ wɪð noʊ taɪm tə noʊɾəs æksɛptɪɾ əɹ nɑvəsɪz; faɪv əɹ sɪks æksɛptɪd hɝiɪŋ sɛlf-ɪmpɔɹɾəntli əbaʊt ðɛɹ tæsks əɹ stʌɾiz; ə spɹɪŋklɪŋ ə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən wɪð tʃɹeɪz, əɹ mɑps, əɹ ɑɹmfəlz ə ʃits əɹ taʊəlz; ə fju nɑvəsɪz muvɪŋ ɑn ɛɹənz ivən mɔɹ kwɪkli ðən ðə sɝvəns.

There were few other women in evidence - an Aes Sedai now and then, sweeping majestically along with no time to notice Accepted or novices; five or six Accepted hurrying self-importantly about their tasks or studies; a sprinkling of serving women with trays, or mops, or armfuls of sheets or towels; a few novices moving on errands even more quickly than the servants.

nɪneɪiv ən əɹ slɪm-nɛkt ɛskɔɹt, θiədʒɹɪn, dʒɔɪn ðɛm. niðɝ spoʊk. nɪneɪiv wɔɹ ən æksɛptɪdz dʒɹɛs, naʊ, waɪt wɪð ðə sɛvən kʌlɝd bænz ət ðə hɛm, bʌɾ əɹ bɛlt ən paʊtʃ wɝ əɹ oʊn. ʃi ɡeɪv ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn itʃ ə ɹiəʃʊɹɪŋ smaɪl ən ə hʌɡ - ɛɡwin wɑz soʊ ɹɪliv tə si ənʌðɝ fɹɛnli feɪs ðət ʃi ɹɪtɝn ðə hʌɡ wɪð bɛɹli ə θɔt ðət nɪneɪiv wɑz bɪheɪvɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ kʌmfɝɾɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən - bʌɾ əz ðeɪ wɔkt ɑn, nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv əɹ θɪk bɹeɪɾ ə ʃɑɹp tʌɡ fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm, tu.

Nynaeve and her slim-necked escort, Theodrin, joined them. Neither spoke. Nynaeve wore an Accepted's dress, now, white with the seven colored bands at the hem, but her belt and pouch were her own. She gave Egwene and Elayne each a reassuring smile and a hug - Egwene was so relieved to see another friendly face that she returned the hug with barely a thought that Nynaeve was behaving as if she were comforting children - but as they walked on, Nynaeve gave her thick braid a sharp tug from time to time, too.

vɛɹi fju mɛn keɪm ɪndə ðət pɑɹɾ ə ðə taʊɝ, ən ɛɡwin sɔ oʊnli tu: wɔɹɾɝz wɔkɪŋ saɪd baɪ saɪɾ ɪn kɑnvɝseɪʃən, wʌn wɪð ɪz sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz hɪp, ði ʌðɝ wɪð ɪz ɑn ɪz bæk. wʌn wɑz ʃɔɹɾ ən slɛndɝ, ivən slaɪt, ði ʌðɝ ɔlmoʊst əz waɪɾ əz i wɑz tɔl, jɛt boʊθ muvd wɪð ə deɪnʒɝəs ɡɹeɪs. ðə kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ wɔɹɾɝ kloʊks meɪɾ əm kwizi-meɪkɪŋ tə wɑtʃ fəɹ lɔŋ, pɑɹts ə ðɛm səmtaɪmz simɪŋ tə feɪɾ ɪndə ðə wɔlz bɪɑnd. ʃi sɔ nɪneɪiv lʊkɪŋ ət ðɛm, ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. ʃiz tə də sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt læn. ɪf ɛni ʌv əs kən də ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛniwʌn æftɝ tədeɪ.

Very few men came into that part of the Tower, and Egwene saw only two: Warders walking side by side in conversation, one with his sword on his hip, the other with his on his back. One was short and slender, even slight, the other almost as wide as he was tall, yet both moved with a dangerous grace. The color-shifting Warder cloaks made them queasy-making to watch for long, parts of them sometimes seeming to fade into the walls beyond. She saw Nynaeve looking at them, and shook her head. She has to do something about Lan. If any of us can do anything about anyone after today.

ði æntətʃæmbɝ ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sits stʌɾi wɑz ɡɹæn ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛni pæləs, ðoʊ ðə tʃɛɹz skæɾɝd əbaʊt fəɹ ðoʊz u maɪt weɪt wɝ pleɪn, bʌɾ ɛɡwin hæɾ aɪz oʊnli fəɹ lin sədaɪ. ðə kipɝ wɔɹ əɹ nɛɹoʊ stoʊl ʌv ɔfəs, blu tə ʃoʊ ʃi hæd bɪn ɹeɪz fɹəm ðə blu ədʒɑ, ən əɹ feɪs cʊɾə bɪn kɑɹv fɹəm smuð, bɹaʊnɪʃ stoʊn. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ɛls ðɛɹ.

The antechamber of the Amyrlin Seat's study was grand enough for any palace, though the chairs scattered about for those who might wait were plain, but Egwene had eyes only for Leane Sedai. The Keeper wore her narrow stole of office, blue to show she had been raised from the Blue Ajah, and her face could have been carved from smooth, brownish stone. There was no one else there.

"dɪd ðeɪ ɡɪv ɛni tʃɹʌbəl?" ðə kipɝz klɪpt weɪ ʌv tɔkɪŋ ɡeɪv noʊ hɪnt naʊ ʌv iðɝ æŋɡɝ əɹ sɪmpəθi.

"Did they give any trouble?" The Keeper's clipped way of talking gave no hint now of either anger or sympathy.

"noʊ, ɛɛs sədaɪ," θiədʒɹɪn ən ði æpəl-tʃikt æksɛptɪd sɛd təɡɛðɝ.

"No, Aes Sedai," Theodrin and the apple-cheeked Accepted said together.

"ðɪs wʌn hæd tə bi pʊl baɪ ðə skɹʌf ə hɝ nɛk, ɛɛs sədaɪ," fɑoʊleɪn sɛd, ɪndəkeɪɾɪŋ ɛɡwin. ði æksɛptɪd saʊndəɾ ɪndɪɡnənt. "ʃi bɔks əz ɪf ʃiz fɝɡɑɾən wʌt ðə dɪsəplən ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪz."

"This one had to be pulled by the scruff of her neck, Aes Sedai," Faolain said, indicating Egwene. The Accepted sounded indignant. "She balks as if she has forgotten what the discipline of the White Tower is."

"tə lɛd," lin sɛd, "ɪz niðɝ tə pʊʃ nɔɹ tə pʊl. ɡoʊ tə mæɹɪs sədaɪ, fɑoʊleɪn, ən æsk əɹ tə əlaʊ jə tə kɑntəmpleɪɾ ɑn ðɪs waɪl ɹeɪkɪŋ ðə pæðz ɪn ðə spɹɪŋ ɡɑɹɾən." ʃi dɪsmɪs fɑoʊleɪn ən ði ʌðɝ tu æksɛptɪd, ən ðeɪ dʒɹɑp dip kɝtsiz. fɹəm ðə dɛpθ ə hɝz, fɑoʊleɪn ʃɑɾ ə fjʊɹiəs lʊk əɾ ɛɡwin.

"To lead," Leane said, "is neither to push nor to pull. Go to Marris Sedai, Faolain, and ask her to allow you to contemplate on this while raking the paths in the Spring Garden." She dismissed Faolain and the other two Accepted, and they dropped deep curtsies. From the depth of hers, Faolain shot a furious look at Egwene.

ðə kipɝ peɪd noʊ ətɛnʃən tə ði æksɛptɪdz livɪŋ. ɪnstɛd, ʃi stʌɾid ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ wɪmən, tæpɪŋ ə fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ əɡɛnst əɹ lɪps, tɪl ɛɡwin hæd ðə filɪŋ ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl bɪn mɛʒɝd tə ði ɪntʃ ən weɪd tə ði aʊns. nɪneɪivz aɪz tʊk ɑn ə deɪnʒɝəs spɑɹkəl, ən ʃi hæɾ ə taɪt ɡɹɪp ɑn əɹ bɹeɪd.

The Keeper paid no attention to the Accepted's leaving. Instead, she studied the remaining women, tapping a forefinger against her lips, till Egwene had the feeling they had all been measured to the inch and weighed to the ounce. Nynaeve's eyes took on a dangerous sparkle, and she had a tight grip on her braid.

faɪnəli lin ɹeɪzd ə hæn təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹz tə ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi. ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən bɪɾ ɪts oʊn teɪl, ə peɪs əkɹɔs, ɑn ðə dɑɹk wʊɾ ʌv itʃ. "ɛntɝ," ʃi sɛd.

Finally Leane raised a hand toward the doors to the Amyrlin's study. The Great Serpent bit its own tail, a pace across, on the dark wood of each. "Enter," she said.

nɪneɪiv stɛp fɔɹwɝd pɹɑmpli ən oʊpənd wʌn ə ðə dɔɹz. ðət wɑz ɪnʌf tə ɡɛɾ ɛɡwin muvɪŋ. ɪleɪn hɛld əɹ hæn taɪtli, ən ʃi ɡɹɪpt ɪleɪnz dʒʌst əz hɑɹd. lin fɑloʊɾ əm ɪn ən tʊk ə pleɪs tə wʌn saɪd, hæfweɪ bɪtwin ðə θɹi ʌv əm ən ðə teɪbəl ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə ɹum.

Nynaeve stepped forward promptly and opened one of the doors. That was enough to get Egwene moving. Elayne held her hand tightly, and she gripped Elayne's just as hard. Leane followed them in and took a place to one side, halfway between the three of them and the table in the center of the room.

ði æmɪɝlɪn sit sæt bɪhaɪn ðə teɪbəl, ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ peɪpɝz. ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk ʌp. wʌns nɪneɪiv oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌt kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn, əɾ ə ʃɑɹp lʊk fɹəm ðə kipɝ. ðə θɹi ʌv əm stʊɾ ɪn ə laɪn ɪn fɹʌn ə ði æmɪɝlɪnz teɪbəl ən weɪɾəd. ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə fɪdʒɪt. lɔŋ mɪnəts wɛn baɪ - ɪt sim laɪk aʊɝz - bɪfɔɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd, bʌt wən ðoʊz blu aɪz fɪkst əm itʃ ɪn tɝn, ɛɡwin dɪsaɪɾɪd ʃi cʊɾə weɪɾəd lɔŋɡɝ. ði æmɪɝlɪnz ɡeɪz wɑz laɪk tu aɪsɪkəlz bɔɹɪŋ ɪndə hɝ hɑɹt. ðə ɹum wɑz kul, bʌɾ ə tʃɹɪkəl ə swɛt bɪɡæn tə ɹʌn daʊn əɹ bæk.

The Amyrlin Seat sat behind the table, examining papers. She did not look up. Once Nynaeve opened her mouth, but closed it again, at a sharp look from the Keeper. The three of them stood in a line in front of the Amyrlin's table and waited. Egwene tried not to fidget. Long minutes went by - it seemed like hours - before the Amyrlin raised her head, but when those blue eyes fixed them each in turn, Egwene decided she could have waited longer. The Amyrlin's gaze was like two icicles boring into her heart. The room was cool, but a trickle of sweat began to run down her back.

"soʊ!" ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd faɪnəli. "aʊɝ ɹʌnəweɪz ɹɪtɝn."

"So!" the Amyrlin said finally. "Our runaways return."

"wi dɪd nɑt ɹʌn əweɪ, mʌðɝ." nɪneɪiv wɑz ɑbviəsli stʃɹeɪnɪŋ fəɹ kɑm, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs ʃʊk wɪð ɪmoʊʃən. æŋɡɝ, ɛɡwin nu. ðət stʃɹɔŋ wɪl wɑz ɔl tu ɔfən əkʌmpənid baɪ æŋɡɝ. "liɑnʒɹɪn toʊld əs wi wɝ tə ɡoʊ wɪð hɝ, ən - " ðə laʊd kɹæk ə ði æmɪɝlɪnz hæn slæpɪŋ ðə teɪbəl kʌɾ əɹ ɔf.

"We did not run away, Mother." Nynaeve was obviously straining for calm, but her voice shook with emotion. Anger, Egwene knew. That strong will was all too often accompanied by anger. "Liandrin told us we were to go with her, and - " The loud crack of the Amyrlin's hand slapping the table cut her off.

"du nɑɾ ɪnvoʊk liɑnʒɹɪnz neɪm hɪɹ, tʃaɪld!" ði æmɪɝlɪn snæpt. lin wɑtʃt əm wɪð ə stɝn sɝɛnəɾi.

"Do not invoke Liandrin's name here, child!" the Amyrlin snapped. Leane watched them with a stern serenity.

"mʌðɝ, liɑnʒɹɪn ɪz blæk ədʒɑ," ɪleɪn bɝst aʊt.

"Mother, Liandrin is Black Ajah," Elayne burst out.

"ðæɾ ɪz noʊn, tʃaɪld. səspɛktəd, ət list, ən əz ɡʊɾ əz noʊn. liɑnʒɹɪn lɛf ðə taʊɝ səm mʌnθs əɡoʊ, ən twɛlv ʌðɝ - wɪmən - wɛnt wɪð hɝ. nʌn əz bɪn sin sɪns. bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ lɛft, ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə bɹeɪk ɪndə ðə stɔɹɹum wɛɹ ði æŋɡɹil ən sɑŋɡɹil ɑɹ kɛpt, ən dɪd mænədʒ tə ɛntɝ ðət wɛɹ ðə smɔlɝ tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɑɹ stɔɹd. ðeɪ stoʊl ə nʌmbɝ ə ðoʊz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ sɛvɹəl wi də nɑt noʊ ðə jus ʌv."

"That is known, child. Suspected, at least, and as good as known. Liandrin left the Tower some months ago, and twelve other - women - went with her. None has been seen since. Before they left, they tried to break into the storeroom where the angreal and sa'angreal are kept, and did manage to enter that where the smaller ter'angreal are stored. They stole a number of those, including several we do not know the use of."

nɪneɪiv stɛɹɾ ət ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪn hɔɹɝ, ən ɪleɪn sʌɾənli ɹʌbd əɹ ɑɹmz əz ɪf ʃi wɝ koʊld. ɛɡwin nu ʃi wɑz ʃɪvɝɪŋ, tu. mɛni taɪmz ʃi hæɾ ɪmædʒən ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə kənfɹʌn liɑnʒɹɪn ən əkjuz hɝ, tə si hɝ kəndɛm tə səm pʌnɪʃmənt - ɪksɛp ðət ʃi hæd nɛvɝ mænədʒ tə ɪmædʒən ɛni pʌnɪʃmən stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə sut ðət dɑl-feɪst ɛɛs sədaɪz kɹaɪmz. ʃi hæɾ ivən pɪktʃɝd ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə faɪn liɑnʒɹɪn ɔlɹɛɾi flɛd - ɪn tɛɹɝ ə hɝ ɹɪtɝn, ɪt wɑz juʒəwəli. bʌt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ɪmædʒən ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs. ɪf liɑnʒɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz - ʃi hæd nɑt ɹɪli wɑntəd tə bɪliv ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝz - hæd stoʊlən ðoʊz ɹɛmnəns ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tɛlɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ kəd də wɪð ðɛm. θæŋk ðə laɪt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ɡɛɾ ɛni sɑŋɡɹil, ʃi θɔt. ði ʌðɝ wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf.

Nynaeve stared at the Amyrlin in horror, and Elayne suddenly rubbed her arms as if she were cold. Egwene knew she was shivering, too. Many times she had imagined returning to confront Liandrin and accuse her, to see her condemned to some punishment - except that she had never managed to imagine any punishment strong enough to suit that doll-faced Aes Sedai's crimes. She had even pictured returning to find Liandrin already fled - in terror of her return, it was usually. But she had never imagined anything like this. If Liandrin and the others - she had not really wanted to believe there were others - had stolen those remnants of the Age of Legends, there was no telling what they could do with them. Thank the Light they did not get any sa'angreal, she thought. The other was bad enough.

sɑŋɡɹil wɝ laɪk æŋɡɹil, əlaʊɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə tʃænəl mɔɹ ə ðə paʊɝ ðən ʃi seɪfli kəɾ əneɪɾɪd, bʌt fɑɹ mɔɹ paʊɝfəl ðən æŋɡɹil, ən ɹɛɹ. tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɝ sʌmθɪŋ dɪfɹənt. ɪɡzɪstɪŋ ɪn ɡɹeɪɾɝ nʌmbɝz ðən iðɝ æŋɡɹil əɹ sɑŋɡɹil, ðoʊ stɪl nɑt kɑmən, ðeɪ juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɹæðɝ ðən hɛlpɪŋ tə tʃænəl ɪt, ən noʊ wʌn tʃɹuli ʌndɝstʊd ðɛm. mɛni wəd wɝk oʊnli fəɹ sʌmwʌn u kəd tʃænəl, niɾɪŋ ði æktʃəwəl tʃænəlɪŋ ə ðə paʊɝ, waɪl ʌðɝz dɪd wʌt ðeɪ dɪd fəɹ ɛniwʌn. wɛɹ ɔl ði æŋɡɹil ən sɑŋɡɹil ɛɡwin hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv wɝ smɔl, tɛɹæŋɡɹil kəd simɪŋli bi ɛni saɪz. itʃ hæɾ əpɛɹənli bɪn meɪd fəɹ ə spəsɪfɪk pɝpəs baɪ ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz əɡoʊ, tə də ə sɝɾən θɪŋ, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ sɪns hæd daɪd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɝn wʌt; daɪd, əɹ hæd ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl bɝn aʊɾ ə ðɛm. ðəɹ wɝ sɪstɝz ə ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ hu hæd meɪd tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðɛɹ laɪfs stʌɾi.

Sa'angreal were like angreal, allowing an Aes Sedai to channel more of the Power than she safely could unaided, but far more powerful than angreal, and rare. Ter'angreal were something different. Existing in greater numbers than either angreal or sa'angreal, though still not common, they used the One Power rather than helping to channel it, and no one truly understood them. Many would work only for someone who could channel, needing the actual channeling of the Power, while others did what they did for anyone. Where all the angreal and sa'angreal Egwene had ever heard of were small, ter'angreal could seemingly be any size. Each had apparently been made for a specific purpose by those Aes Sedai of three thousand years ago, to do a certain thing, and Aes Sedai since had died trying to learn what; died, or had the ability to channel burned out of them. There were sisters of the Brown Ajah who had made ter'angreal their life's study.

səm wɝ ɪn jus, ɪf laɪkli nɑt fəɹ ðə pɝpəsəz ðeɪ hæd bɪn meɪd. ðə staʊt waɪt ɹɑd ðət ði æksɛptɪd hɛld waɪl teɪkɪŋ ðə θɹi oʊðz ɑn biɪŋ ɹeɪz tə ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, baɪndɪŋ əm tə ði oʊðz əz ʃʊɹli əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn bɹɛɾ ɪn ðə boʊn. ənʌðɝ tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɑz ðə saɪɾ ə ðə faɪnəl tɛs bɪfɔɹ ə nɑvəs wɑz ɹeɪz tə ði æksɛptɪd. ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ mɛni noʊ wʌn kəd meɪk wɝk əɾ ɔl, ən mɛni ʌðɝz ðət sim tə hæv noʊ pɹæktəkəl jus.

Some were in use, if likely not for the purposes they had been made. The stout white rod that the Accepted held while taking the Three Oaths on being raised to Aes Sedai was a ter'angreal, binding them to the oaths as surely as if they had been bred in the bone. Another ter'angreal was the site of the final test before a novice was raised to the Accepted. There were others, including many no one could make work at all, and many others that seemed to have no practical use.

waɪ dɪd ðeɪ teɪk θɪŋz noʊ wʌn noʊz haʊ tə juz? ɛɡwin wʌndɝd. əɹ meɪbi ðə blæk ədʒɑ dʌz noʊ. ðət pɑsəbɪləɾi meɪɾ əɹ stʌmək tʃɝn. ðət maɪt bi əz bæɾ əz sɑŋɡɹil ɪn dɑɹkfɹɛn hænz.

Why did they take things no one knows how to use? Egwene wondered. Or maybe the Black Ajah does know. That possibility made her stomach churn. That might be as bad as sa'angreal in Darkfriend hands.

"θɛft," ði æmɪɝlɪn wɛn ɑn ɪn toʊnz əz koʊld əz əɹ aɪz, "wɑz ðə list ʌv wʌt ðeɪ dɪd. θɹi sɪstɝz daɪd ðət naɪt, əz wɛl əz tu wɔɹɾɝz, sɛvən ɡɑɹdz, ən naɪn ə ðə sɝvəns. mɝɾɝ, dʌn tə haɪd ðɛɹ θivɪŋ ən ðɛɹ flaɪt. ɪt meɪ nɑt bi pɹuf ðət ðeɪ wɝ - blæk ədʒɑ" - ðə wɝdz ɡɹeɪɾɪd fɹəm əɹ maʊθ - "bʌɾ aɪ kænɑt bɪliv ʌðɝwaɪz. wən ðəɹ ɑɹ fɪʃ hɛdz ən blʌɾ ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ, jə doʊnt nid tə si ðə sɪlvɝpaɪk tə noʊ ðeɪ ɑɹ ðɛɹ."

"Theft," the Amyrlin went on in tones as cold as her eyes, "was the least of what they did. Three sisters died that night, as well as two Warders, seven guards, and nine of the servants. Murder, done to hide their thieving and their flight. It may not be proof that they were - Black Ajah" - the words grated from her mouth - "but I cannot believe otherwise. When there are fish heads and blood in the water, you don't need to see the silverpike to know they are there."

"ðɛn waɪ ɑɹ wi biɪŋ tʃɹiɾəd əz kɹɪmənəlz?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. "wi wɝ tʃɹɪk baɪ ə wʊmən ə ði - ʌv ðə blæk ədʒɑ. ðət ʃəd bi ɪnʌf tə klɪɹ əs ʌv ɛni ɹɔŋduɪŋ."

"Then why are we being treated as criminals?" Nynaeve demanded. "We were tricked by a woman of the - of the Black Ajah. That should be enough to clear us of any wrongdoing."

ði æmɪɝlɪn bɑɹkt ə mɝθləs læf. "ju θɪŋk soʊ, də ju, tʃaɪld? ɪt meɪ bi jəɹ sælveɪʃən ðət noʊ wʌn ɪn ðə taʊɝ bʌt vɛɹɪn, lin, ən aɪ ivən sʌspɛks jə hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð liɑnʒɹɪn. ɪf ðət wɝ noʊn, mʌtʃ lɛs ðə lɪɾəl dɛmənstʃɹeɪʃən jə pʊɾ ɑn fəɹ ðə waɪtkloʊks - noʊ nid tə lʊk soʊ sɝpɹaɪzd; vɛɹɪn toʊl mi ɛvɹiθɪŋ - ɪf ɪt wɝ noʊn jə hæd ɡɔn ɔf wɪð liɑnʒɹɪn, ðə hɔl maɪt vɛɹi wɛl voʊt fəɹ stɪlɪŋ ðə θɹi ʌv jə bɪfɔɹ jə kəd teɪk ə bɹɛθ."

The Amyrlin barked a mirthless laugh. "You think so, do you, child? It may be your salvation that no one in the Tower but Verin, Leane, and I even suspects you had anything to do with Liandrin. If that were known, much less the little demonstration you put on for the Whitecloaks - no need to look so surprised; Verin told me everything - if it were known you had gone off with Liandrin, the Hall might very well vote for stilling the three of you before you could take a breath."

"ðæɾ ɪz nɑt fɛɹ!" nɪneɪiv sɛd. lin stɝd, bʌt nɪneɪiv wɛn ɑn. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑt ɹaɪt! ɪt - !"

"That is not fair!" Nynaeve said. Leane stirred, but Nynaeve went on. "It is not right! It - !"

ði æmɪɝlɪn stʊɾ ʌp. ðət wɑz ɔl, bʌɾ ɪt kʌt nɪneɪiv ʃɔɹt.

The Amyrlin stood up. That was all, but it cut Nynaeve short.

ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi wɑz waɪz tə kip kwaɪət. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪliv nɪneɪiv wɑz əz stʃɹɔŋ, əz stʃɹɔŋ-wɪld, əz ɛniwʌn kəd bi. əntɪl ʃi mɛt ðə wʊmən wɛɹɪŋ ðə stʃɹaɪp stoʊl. pliz kip jəɹ tɛmpɝ, nɪneɪiv. wi maɪɾ əz wɛl bi tʃɪlʒɹən - beɪbz - feɪsɪŋ əɹ mʌðɝ, ən ðɪs mʌðɝ kən də fɑɹ wɝs ðən biɾ ʌs.

Egwene thought she was wise to keep quiet. She had always believed Nynaeve was as strong, as strong-willed, as anyone could be. Until she met the woman wearing the striped stole. Please keep your temper, Nynaeve. We might as well be children - babes - facing our mother, and this Mother can do far worse than beat us.

ɪt sim tə hɝ ə weɪ aʊt wɑz biɪŋ ɔfɝɾ ɪn wʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd sɛd, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌt weɪ. "mʌðɝ, fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ spikɪŋ, bʌt wʌt dʒju ɪntɛn tə də tə ʌs?"

It seemed to her a way out was being offered in what the Amyrlin had said, but she was not sure what way. "Mother, forgive me for speaking, but what do you intend to do to us?"

"du tə ju, tʃaɪld? aɪ ɪntɛn tə pʌnɪʃ jə ən ɪleɪn fəɹ livɪŋ ðə taʊɝ wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən, ən nɪneɪiv fəɹ livɪŋ ðə sɪɾi wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən. fɝst, jəl itʃ bi kɔl tə ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪz stʌɾi, wɛɹ aɪv toʊld əɹ tə swɪtʃ jə tɪl jə wɪʃ jə hæɾ ə kʊʃən tə sɪɾ ɑn fəɹ ðə nɛkst wik. aɪ hæv ɔlɹɛɾi hæd ðɪs ənaʊns tə ðə nɑvəsɪz ən ði æksɛptɪd."

"Do to you, child? I intend to punish you and Elayne for leaving the Tower without permission, and Nynaeve for leaving the city without permission. First, you will each be called to Sheriam Sedai's study, where I've told her to switch you till you wish you had a cushion to sit on for the next week. I have already had this announced to the novices and the Accepted."

ɛɡwin blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. ɪleɪn ɡeɪv ən ɑɾəbəl ɡɹʌnt, stɪfən əɹ bæk, ən mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. nɪneɪiv wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn u sim tə teɪk ɪt wɪθaʊt ʃɑk. pʌnɪʃmənt, wɛðɝ ɛkstʃɹə leɪbɝz əɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, wɑz ɔlweɪz bɪtwin ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz ən huɛvɝ wɑz kɔl tə hɝ. ðoʊz wɝ juʒəwəli nɑvəsɪz, bʌɾ ɪnkluɾəd ði æksɛptɪɾ u stɛp fɑɹ ɪnʌf bɪɑn ðə baʊnz. ʃɛɹiəm ɔlweɪz kips ɪt bɪtwin jə ən hɝ, ɛɡwin θɔt blikli. ʃi kæn əv toʊld ɛvɹiwʌn. bʌt bɛɾɝ ðən biɪŋ ɪmpɹɪzənd. bɛɾɝ ðən biɪŋ stɪld.

Egwene blinked in surprise. Elayne gave an audible grunt, stiffened her back, and muttered something under her breath. Nynaeve was the only one who seemed to take it without shock. Punishment, whether extra labors or something else, was always between the Mistress of Novices and whoever was called to her. Those were usually novices, but included the Accepted who stepped far enough beyond the bounds. Sheriam always keeps it between you and her, Egwene thought bleakly. She can't have told everyone. But better than being imprisoned. Better than being stilled.

"ði ənaʊnsmən ɪz pɑɹɾ ə ðə pʌnɪʃmənt, ʌv kɔɹs," ði æmɪɝlɪn wɛn ɑn, əz ɪf ʃi hæd ɹɛɾ ɛɡwinz maɪnd. "aɪ hæv ɔlsoʊ hæɾ ɪɾ ənaʊns ðət jə ɑɹ ɔl θɹi əsaɪn tə ðə kɪtʃənz, tə wɝk wɪð ðə skʌljənz, əntɪl fɝðɝ noʊɾəs. ən aɪ hæv lɛɾ ɪt bi wɪspɝɾ əbaʊt ðət 'fɝðɝ noʊɾəs' maɪt dʒʌs min ðə ɹɛst ə jəɹ nætʃɹəl laɪvz. də aɪ hɪɹ əbdʒɛkʃənz tə ɛni ʌv ðɪs?"

"The announcement is part of the punishment, of course," the Amyrlin went on, as if she had read Egwene's mind. "I have also had it announced that you are all three assigned to the kitchens, to work with the scullions, until further notice. And I have let it be whispered about that 'further notice' might just mean the rest of your natural lives. Do I hear objections to any of this?"

"noʊ, mʌðɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd kwɪkli. nɪneɪiv wəd heɪt skɹʌbɪŋ pɑts ivən mɔɹ ðən ði ʌðɝ. ɪt kəd bi wɝs, nɪneɪiv. laɪt, ɪt kəd bi soʊ mʌtʃ wɝs. nɪneɪivz nɑstʃɹəlz hæd flɛɹd, bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv əɹ hɛɾ ə taɪt ʃeɪk.

"No, Mother," Egwene said quickly. Nynaeve would hate scrubbing pots even more than the other. It could be worse, Nynaeve. Light, it could be so much worse. Nynaeve's nostrils had flared, but she gave her head a tight shake.

"æn ju, ɪleɪn?" ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd. "ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ ɪz juz tə dʒɛnlɝ tʃɹitmənt."

"And you, Elayne?" the Amyrlin said. "The Daughter-Heir of Andor is used to gentler treatment."

"aɪ wɑnə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, mʌðɝ," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə fɝm vɔɪs.

"I want to be Aes Sedai, Mother," Elayne said in a firm voice.

ði æmɪɝlɪn fɪŋɡɝɾ ə peɪpɝ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ ɑn ðə teɪbəl ən sim tə stʌɾi ɪt fəɹ ə moʊmənt. wən ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd, hɝ smaɪl wɑz nɑɾ əɾ ɔl plɛzənt. "ɪf ɛni ʌv jə hæd bɪn sɪli ɪnʌf tə ænsɝ ʌðɝwaɪz, aɪ hæd sʌmθɪŋ tə æd tə jəɹ tæli ðət wʊɾə hæd jə kɝsɪŋ jəɹ mʌðɝ fəɹ ɛvɝ lɛɾɪŋ jəɹ fɑðɝ stil ðət fɝs kɪs. lɛɾɪŋ jʊɹsɛlvz bi wɪŋkəld aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ laɪk θɔtləs tʃɪlʒɹən. ivən ən ɪnfənt wəd nɛvɝ əv fɔlən ɪndə ðət tʃɹæp. əl titʃ jə tə θɪŋk bɪfɔɹ jə ækt, əɹ ɛls əl juz jə tə tʃɪŋk kɹæks ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ ɡeɪts!"

The Amyrlin fingered a paper in front of her on the table and seemed to study it for a moment. When she raised her head, her smile was not at all pleasant. "If any of you had been silly enough to answer otherwise, I had something to add to your tally that would have had you cursing your mother for ever letting your father steal that first kiss. Letting yourselves be winkled out of the Tower like thoughtless children. Even an infant would never have fallen into that trap. I will teach you to think before you act, or else I'll use you to chink cracks in the water gates!"

ɛɡwin faʊn hɝsɛlf ɔfɝɪŋ saɪlən θæŋks. ə pɹɪkəl ɹæn oʊvɝ əɹ skɪn əz ði æmɪɝlɪn kəntɪnjud.

Egwene found herself offering silent thanks. A prickle ran over her skin as the Amyrlin continued.

"naʊ, əz tə wʌɾ ɛls aɪ ɪntɛn tə də wɪð ju. ɪt simz juv ɔl ɪnkɹis jəɹ əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl ɹɪmɑɹkəbli sɪns jə lɛf ðə taʊɝ. juv lɝn mʌtʃ. ɪnkluɾɪŋ səm θɪŋz," ʃi æɾəd ʃɑɹpli, "ðæɾ aɪ ɪntɛn tə si jə ənlɝn!"

"Now, as to what else I intend to do with you. It seems you have all increased your ability to channel remarkably since you left the Tower. You have learned much. Including some things," she added sharply, "that I intend to see you unlearn!"

nɪneɪiv sɝpɹaɪzd ɛɡwin baɪ seɪɪŋ, "aɪ noʊ wɪv dʌn . . . θɪŋz . . . wi ʃəd nɑt hæv, mʌðɝ. aɪ əʃʊɹ ju, wɪl də əɹ bɛs tə lɪv əz ɪf wi hæd teɪkən ðə θɹi oʊðz."

Nynaeve surprised Egwene by saying, "I know we have done . . . things . . . we should not have, Mother. I assure you, we will do our best to live as if we had taken the Three Oaths."

ði æmɪɝlɪn ɡɹʌntɪd. "si ðət jə du," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "ɪf aɪ kʊd, aɪd pʊt ði oʊθ ɹɑɾ ɪn jəɹ hænz tənaɪt, bʌɾ əz ðəɾ ɪz ɹɪzɝv fəɹ biɪŋ ɹeɪz tə ɛɛs sədaɪ, aɪ mʌs tʃɹʌs tə jəɹ ɡʊd sɛns - ɪf juv ɛni - tə kip jə hoʊl. əz ɪɾ ɪz, ju, ɛɡwin, ən ju, ɪleɪn, ɑɹ tə bi ɹeɪz tə ði æksɛptɪd."

The Amyrlin grunted. "See that you do," she said dryly. "If I could, I'd put the Oath Rod in your hands tonight, but as that is reserved for being raised to Aes Sedai, I must trust to your good sense - if you have any - to keep you whole. As it is, you, Egwene, and you, Elayne, are to be raised to the Accepted."

ɪleɪn ɡæspt, ən ɛɡwin stæmɝɾ ə ʃɑkt, "θæŋk ju, mʌðɝ." lin ʃɪftəd wɛɹ ʃi stʊd. ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðə kipɝ lʊk bɛs plizd. nɑt sɝpɹaɪzd - ʃi hæɾ ɑbviəsli noʊn ɪt wɑz kʌmɪŋ - bʌt nɑt plizd, iðɝ.

Elayne gasped, and Egwene stammered a shocked, "Thank you, Mother." Leane shifted where she stood. Egwene did not think the Keeper looked best pleased. Not surprised - she had obviously known it was coming - but not pleased, either.

"du nɑt θæŋk mi. jəɹ əbɪləɾiz əv ɡɔn tu fɑɹ fəɹ jə tə ɹɪmeɪn nɑvəsɪz. səm wɪl θɪŋk jə ʃəd nɑɾ əv ðə ɹɪŋ, nɑɾ æftɝ wʌt juv dʌn, bʌt ðə saɪɾ ə jə ʌp tə jəɹ ɛlboʊz ɪn ɡɹisi pɑts ʃəd mjut ðə kɹɪɾɪsɪzəm. ən lɛs jə stɑɹt θɪŋkɪŋ ɪts səm sɔɹɾ ə ɹɪwɔɹd, ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət ðə fɝs fju wiks əz wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪɾ ɑɹ juz tə pɪk ðə ɹɑɾɪŋ fɪʃ aʊɾ ə ðə bæskəɾ ʌv ɡʊd wʌnz. jəɹ wɝs deɪ əz ə nɑvəs wɪl sim ə fɑn dʒɹim kəmpɛɹd tə ðə list ə jəɹ stʌɾiz oʊvɝ ðə nɛkst wiks. aɪ səspɛk ðət səm ə ðə sɪstɝz u titʃ jəl meɪk jəɹ tʃɹaɪəlz ivən wɝs ðən ðeɪ stʃɹɪkli mʌs bi, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn bɪliv jəl kəmpleɪn. wɪl ju?"

"Do not thank me. Your abilities have gone too far for you to remain novices. Some will think you should not have the ring, not after what you've done, but the sight of you up to your elbows in greasy pots should mute the criticism. And lest you start thinking it's some sort of reward, remember that the first few weeks as one of the Accepted are used to pick the rotting fish out of the basket of good ones. Your worst day as a novice will seem a fond dream compared to the least of your studies over the next weeks. I suspect that some of the sisters who teach you will make your trials even worse than they strictly must be, but I don't believe you will complain. Will you?"

aɪ kən lɝn, ɛɡwin θɔt. tʃuz maɪ oʊn stʌɾiz. aɪ kən lɝn əbaʊt ðə dʒɹimz, lɝn naʊ tə . . .

I can learn, Egwene thought. Choose my own studies. I can learn about the dreams, learn now to . . .

ði æmɪɝlɪnz smaɪl kʌɾ ɔf əɹ tʃɹeɪn ə θɔt. ðət smaɪl sɛd nʌθɪŋ ðə sɪstɝz kəd də tə ðɛm wəd bi wɝs ðən ɪt niɾəd tə bi, ɪf ɪt lɛft əm əlaɪv. nɪneɪivz feɪs wɑz ə mɪkstʃɝ ə dip sɪmpəθi ən hɔɹəfaɪd ɹimɛmbɹəns ə hɝ oʊn fɝst wiks əz wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd. ðə kɑmbəneɪʃən wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɛɡwin swɑloʊ hɑɹd. "noʊ, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd feɪnli. ɪleɪnz ɹɪplaɪ wɑz ə hɔɹs wɪspɝ.

The Amyrlin's smile cut off her train of thought. That smile said nothing the sisters could do to them would be worse than it needed to be, if it left them alive. Nynaeve's face was a mixture of deep sympathy and horrified remembrance of her own first weeks as one of the Accepted. The combination was enough to make Egwene swallow hard. "No, Mother," she said faintly. Elayne's reply was a hoarse whisper.

"ðɛn ðæts dʌn. jəɹ mʌðɝ wɑz nɑɾ əɾ ɔl pliz baɪ jəɹ dɪsəpɪɹəns, ɪleɪn."

"Then that's done. Your mother was not at all pleased by your disappearance, Elayne."

"ʃi noʊz?" ɪleɪn skwikt.

"She knows?" Elayne squeaked.

lin snɪft, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn ɑɹtʃt ən aɪbɹaʊ, seɪɪŋ, "aɪ kəd hɑɹdli kip ɪt fɹəm hɝ. jə mɪst əɹ baɪ lɛs ðən ə mʌnθ, wɪtʃ meɪ bi əz wɛl fəɹ ju. jə maɪt nɑɾ əv sɝvaɪv ðət miɾɪŋ. ʃi wɑz mæɾ ɪnʌf tə tʃu θɹu ən ɔɹ, ət ju, ət mi, ət ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

Leane sniffed, and the Amyrlin arched an eyebrow, saying, "I could hardly keep it from her. You missed her by less than a month, which may be as well for you. You might not have survived that meeting. She was mad enough to chew through an oar, at you, at me, at the White Tower."

"aɪ kən ɪmædʒən, mʌðɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd feɪnli.

"I can imagine, Mother," Elayne said faintly.

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk jə kæn, tʃaɪld. jə meɪ hæv ɛndəɾ ə tʃɹədɪʃən ðət bɪɡæn bɪfɔɹ ðəɹ wɑz ən ændɝ. ə kʌstəm stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən moʊs lɔz. mɔɹɡeɪs ɹəfjuz tə teɪk ɪleɪɾə bæk wɪð hɝ. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɛvɝ, ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ dʌz nɑɾ əv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ædvaɪzɝ. ʃi dɪmændəd jəɹ ɪmiɾiət ɹɪtɝn tə keɪɛmlɪn əz sun əz jə wɝ faʊnd. aɪ kənvɪnst əɹ ɪt wəd bi seɪfɝ fəɹ jə tə tʃɹeɪn hɪɹ ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ. ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə ɹimuv jəɹ tu bɹʌðɝz fɹəm ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ wɪð ðə wɔɹɾɝz, tu. ðeɪ tɔk ðɛɹ weɪ aʊɾ ə ðət ðɛmsɛlvz. aɪ stɪl də nɑt noʊ haʊ."

"I don't think you can, child. You may have ended a tradition that began before there was an Andor. A custom stronger than most laws. Morgase refused to take Elaida back with her. For the first time ever, the Queen of Andor does not have an Aes Sedai advisor. She demanded your immediate return to Caemlyn as soon as you were found. I convinced her it would be safer for you to train here a little longer. She was ready to remove your two brothers from their training with the Warders, too. They talked their way out of that themselves. I still do not know how."

ɪleɪn sim tə bi lʊkɪŋ ɪnwɝd, pɝhæps siɪŋ mɔɹɡeɪs ɪn ɔl əɹ æŋɡɝ. ʃi ʃɪvɝd. "ɡɔɪn ɪz maɪ bɹʌðɝ," ʃi sɛɾ æbsənli. "ɡɑləɾ ɪz nɑt."

Elayne seemed to be looking inward, perhaps seeing Morgase in all her anger. She shivered. "Gawyn is my brother," she said absently. "Galad is not."

"du nɑt bi tʃaɪldɪʃ," ði æmɪɝlɪn toʊl hɝ. "ʃɛɹɪŋ ðə seɪm fɑðɝ meɪks ɡɑləd jəɹ bɹʌðɝ, tu, wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt jə laɪk hɪm. əl nɑɾ əlaʊ tʃaɪldɪʃnəs aʊɾ ə ju, ɡɝl. ə mɛʒɝ ə stupɪɾɪti kən bi tɑlɝeɪɾəd ɪn ə nɑvəs; ɪts nɑɾ əlaʊɾ ɪn wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd."

"Do not be childish," the Amyrlin told her. "Sharing the same father makes Galad your brother, too, whether or not you like him. I will not allow childishness out of you, girl. A measure of stupidity can be tolerated in a novice; it is not allowed in one of the Accepted."

"jɛs, mʌðɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd ɡlʌmli.

"Yes, Mother," Elayne said glumly.

"ðə kwin lɛft ə lɛɾɝ fəɹ jə wɪð ʃɛɹiəm. əsaɪd fɹəm ɡɪvɪŋ jə ðə ɹʌf saɪɾ ə hɝ tʌŋ, aɪ bɪliv ʃi steɪts əɹ ɪntɛntʃən ə bɹɪŋɪŋ jə hoʊm əz sun əz ɪts seɪf fəɹ ju. ʃiz ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɪn ə fju mɔɹ mʌnθs ət moʊs jəl bi eɪbəl tə tʃænəl wɪθaʊt ɹɪskɪŋ kɪlɪŋ jɝsɛlf."

"The Queen left a letter for you with Sheriam. Aside from giving you the rough side of her tongue, I believe she states her intention of bringing you home as soon as it is safe for you. She is sure that in a few more months at most you will be able to channel without risking killing yourself."

"bʌɾ aɪ wɑnə lɝn, mʌðɝ." ði aɪɝn hæd ɹɪtɝn tə ɪleɪnz vɔɪs. "aɪ wɑnə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"But I want to learn, Mother." The iron had returned to Elayne's voice. "I want to be Aes Sedai."

ði æmɪɝlɪnz smaɪl wɑz ivən ɡɹɪmɝ ðən əɹ læst. "æz wɛl ðət jə du, tʃaɪld, kəz aɪ hæv noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə lɛɾɪŋ mɔɹɡeɪs əv ju. juv ðə pətɛnʃəl tə bi stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ə θaʊzən jɪɹz, ən əl nɑt lɛt jə ɡoʊ əntɪl jə ətʃiv ðə ʃɔl əz wɛl əz ðə ɹɪŋ. nɑɾ ɪf aɪ hæv tə ɡɹaɪn jə ɪndə sɔsədʒ tə də ɪt. əl nɑt lɛt jə ɡoʊ. də aɪ meɪk maɪsɛlf klɪɹ?"

The Amyrlin's smile was even grimmer than her last. "As well that you do, child, because I have no intention of letting Morgase have you. You have the potential to be stronger than any Aes Sedai in a thousand years, and I will not let you go until you achieve the shawl as well as the ring. Not if I have to grind you into sausage to do it. I will not let you go. Do I make myself clear?"

"jɛs, mʌðɝ." ɪleɪn saʊndəɾ ənizi, ən ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt bleɪm hɝ. kɑt bɪtwin mɔɹɡeɪs ən ðə waɪt taʊɝ laɪk ə taʊəl bɪtwin tu dɑɡz, kɑt bɪtwin ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ɪf ɛɡwin hæɾ ɛvɝ ɛnviɾ ɪleɪn əɹ wɛlθ ən ðə θɹoʊn ʃi wəd wʌn deɪ ɑkjəpaɪ, ət ðət moʊmənt ʃi ʃʊɹli dɪd nɑt.

"Yes, Mother." Elayne sounded uneasy, and Egwene did not blame her. Caught between Morgase and the White Tower like a towel between two dogs, caught between the Queen of Andor and the Amyrlin Seat. If Egwene had ever envied Elayne her wealth and the throne she would one day occupy, at that moment she surely did not.

ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd bɹɪskli, "lin, teɪk ɪleɪn daʊn tə ʃɛɹiəmz stʌɾi. aɪ hæv ə fju wɝdz jɛt tə seɪ tə ðiz ʌðɝ tu. wɝdz aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ðəl ɛndʒɔɪ hɪɹɪŋ."

The Amyrlin said briskly, "Leane, take Elayne down to Sheriam's study. I have a few words yet to say to these other two. Words I do not think they will enjoy hearing."

ɛɡwin ɪkstʃeɪnʒd stɑɹɾəld lʊks wɪð nɪneɪiv; fəɹ ə moʊmənt, wɝi dɪzɑlv ðə tɛnʃən bɪtwin ðɛm. wʌt dʌz ʃi hæv tə seɪ tə əs ən nɑt tə ɪleɪn? ʃi wʌndɝd. aɪ də nɑt kɛɹ, soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi dʌz nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp mi lɝnɪŋ. bʌt waɪ nɑɾ ɪleɪn, tu?

Egwene exchanged startled looks with Nynaeve; for a moment, worry dissolved the tension between them. What does she have to say to us and not to Elayne? she wondered. I do not care, so long as she does not try to stop me learning. But why not Elayne, too?

ɪleɪn ɡɹɪməst ət ðə mɛnʃən ə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪzəz stʌɾi, bʌt ʃi dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp əz lin keɪm tə hɝ saɪd. "æz jə kəmænd, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd fɔɹməli, loʊɝɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɪn ə pɝfəkt kɝtsi, skɝts swipɪŋ waɪd, "soʊ ʃæl aɪ oʊbeɪ." ʃi fɑloʊd lin aʊt wɪð əɹ hɛd hɛl haɪ.

Elayne grimaced at the mention of the Mistress of Novices's study, but she drew herself up as Leane came to her side. "As you command, Mother," she said formally, lowering herself in a perfect curtsy, skirts sweeping wide, "so shall I obey." She followed Leane out with her head held high.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹtin


CHAPTER 14

ðə baɪɾ ə ðə θɔɹnz


The Bite of the Thorns

ði æmɪɝlɪn sit dɪd nɑt spik ət wʌns - ʃi wɔk tə ðə tɔl, ɑɹtʃt wɪndoʊz ən lʊkt aʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə bælkəni ət ðə ɡɑɹɾən bɪloʊ, hænz klæsp taɪtli bɪhaɪn hɝ. mɪnəts wɛn baɪ bɪfɔɹ ʃi spoʊk, stɪl wɪð əɹ bæk tə ðə tu ʌv ðɛm.

The Amyrlin Seat did not speak at once - she walked to the tall, arched windows and looked out across the balcony at the garden below, hands clasped tightly behind her. Minutes went by before she spoke, still with her back to the two of them.

"aɪ hæv kɛp ðə wɝst ʌv ɪt fɹəm ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊt, bʌt haʊ lɔŋ wɪl ðət læst? ðə sɝvəns də nɑt noʊ ʌv ðə stoʊlən tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ən ðeɪ də nɑt kənɛk ðə dɛθs wɪð liɑnʒɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz livɪŋ. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi tə mænədʒ ðæt, ɡɑsəp biɪŋ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz. ðeɪ bɪliv ðə dɛθs wɝ ðə wɝk ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ən soʊ ðeɪ wɝ. ɹumɝz ɑɹ ɹitʃɪŋ ðə sɪɾi, tu. ðət dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɡɑɾ ɪndə ðə taʊɝ, ðət ðeɪ dɪd mɝɾɝ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə stɑp ðæt. ɪt dʌz əɹ ɹɛpjəteɪʃən noʊ ɡʊd, bʌɾ ət list ɪts bɛɾɝ ðən ðə tʃɹuθ. ət lis nʌn aʊtsaɪd ðə taʊɝ, ən fju ɪnsaɪd, noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ kɪld. dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. fɔ! aɪv spɛn maɪ laɪf dɪnaɪɪŋ ðæt. əl nɑt lɛɾ əm bi hɪɹ. əl hʊk ðɛm, ən ɡʌt ðɛm, ən hæŋ əm aʊɾ ɪn ðə sʌn tə dʒɹaɪ."

"I have kept the worst of it from getting out, but how long will that last? The servants do not know of the stolen ter'angreal, and they do not connect the deaths with Liandrin and the others leaving. It was not easy to manage that, gossip being what it is. They believe the deaths were the work of Darkfriends. And so they were. Rumors are reaching the city, too. That Darkfriends got into the Tower, that they did murder. There was no way to stop that. It does our reputation no good, but at least it is better than the truth. At least none outside the Tower, and few inside, know Aes Sedai were killed. Darkfriends in the White Tower. Faugh! I've spent my life denying that. I will not let them be here. I will hook them, and gut them, and hang them out in the sun to dry."

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ɛɡwin ən ənsɝɾən lʊk - hæf əz ənsɝɾən əz ɛɡwin fɛlt - ðən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "mʌðɝ, ɑɹ wi tə bi pʌnɪʃt mɔɹ? bɪɑnd wʌt juv ɔlɹɛɾi sɛntənst əs tə?"

Nynaeve gave Egwene an uncertain look - half as uncertain as Egwene felt - then took a deep breath. "Mother, are we to be punished more? Beyond what you've already sentenced us to?"

ði æmɪɝlɪn lʊkt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət ðɛm; hɝ aɪz wɝ lɔst ɪn ʃædoʊ. "pʌnɪʃt mɔɹ? jə maɪt wɛl seɪ ðæt. səm wɪl seɪ aɪv ɡɪvən jə ə ɡɪft, ɹeɪzɪŋ ju. naʊ fil ðə ɹil baɪɾ ə ðət ɹoʊzəz θɔɹnz." ʃi stʃɹoʊd bɹɪskli bæk tə hɝ tʃɛɹ ən sæt daʊn, ðən sim tə luz əɹ ɝdʒənsi əɡɛn. əɹ tə ɡeɪn ənsɝɾənti.

The Amyrlin looked over her shoulder at them; her eyes were lost in shadow. "Punished more? You might well say that. Some will say I've given you a gift, raising you. Now feel the real bite of that rose's thorns." She strode briskly back to her chair and sat down, then seemed to lose her urgency again. Or to gain uncertainty.

tə si ði æmɪɝlɪn lʊk ənsɝɾən meɪɾ ɛɡwinz stʌmək klɛntʃ. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɑz ɔlweɪz ʃʊɹ, ɔlweɪz sɝinəli sɛntɝɾ ɑn əɹ pæθ. ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz stʃɹɛŋkθ pɝsɑnəfaɪd. fəɹ ɔl əɹ oʊn ɹɔ paʊɝ, ðə wʊmən ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə teɪbəl hæd ðə nɑlədʒ ən ɪkspɪɹiəns tə waɪn əɹ ɝaʊn ə spɪndəl. tə si hɝ sʌɾənli weɪvɝɪŋ - laɪk ə ɡɝl u nu ʃi hæd tə daɪv hɛd fɝst ɪndə ə pɑnd wɪθaʊɾ ɛni aɪdiə ʌv haʊ dip ɪt wɑz əɹ wɛðɝ ðəɹ wɝ ɹɑks əɹ mʌɾ ɑn ðə bɑɾəm - tə si ðæt, tʃɪld ɛɡwin ɹaɪt tə hɝ kɔɹ. wʌt dʌz ʃi min, ðə ɹil baɪɾ ə ðə θɔɹnz? laɪt, wʌt dʌz ʃi min tə də tə ʌs?

To see the Amyrlin look uncertain made Egwene's stomach clench. The Amyrlin Seat was always sure, always serenely centered on her path. The Amyrlin was strength personified. For all her own raw power, the woman on the other side of the table had the knowledge and experience to wind her around a spindle. To see her suddenly wavering - like a girl who knew she had to dive head first into a pond without any idea of how deep it was or whether there were rocks or mud on the bottom - to see that, chilled Egwene right to her core. What does she mean, the real bite of the thorns? Light, what does she mean to do to us?

fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ə kɑɹv blæk bɑks ɑn ðə teɪbəl ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ði æmɪɝlɪn pɪɹɾ əɾ ɪɾ əz ɪf lʊkɪŋ ət sʌmθɪŋ bɪɑnd. "ɪɾ ɪz ə kwɛstʃən ə hu aɪ kən tʃɹʌst," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "aɪ ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə tʃɹʌs lin ən ʃɛɹiəm, ət list. bʌt də aɪ dɛɹ? vɛɹɪn?" hɝ ʃoʊldɝz ʃʊk wɪð ə kwɪk, saɪlən læf. "aɪ ɔlɹɛɾi tʃɹʌs vɛɹɪn wɪð mɔɹ ðən maɪ laɪf, bʌt haʊ fɑɹ kən aɪ teɪk ɪt? mɔɪɹeɪn?" ʃi wɑz saɪlən fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "aɪ hæv ɔlweɪz bɪlivd aɪ kəd tʃɹʌs mɔɪɹeɪn."

Fingering a carved black box on the table in front of her, the Amyrlin peered at it as if looking at something beyond. "It is a question of who I can trust," she said softly. "I should be able to trust Leane and Sheriam, at least. But do I dare? Verin?" Her shoulders shook with a quick, silent laugh. "I already trust Verin with more than my life, but how far can I take it? Moiraine?" She was silent for a moment. "I have always believed I could trust Moiraine."

ɛɡwin ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli. haʊ mʌtʃ dɪd ði æmɪɝlɪn noʊ? ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə kaɪndə θɪŋ ʃi kəɾ æsk, nɑɾ ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. dʒju noʊ ðəɾ ə jʌŋ mæn fɹəm maɪ vɪlədʒ, ə mæn aɪ juz tə θɪŋk aɪd mɛɹi wʌn deɪ, ɪz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn? dʒju noʊ tu ʌv jəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ hɛlpɪŋ hɪm? ət list ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ ʃi hæd dʒɹimd ə hɪm læs naɪt, ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃi θɔt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ. ʃi kɛp saɪlənt.

Egwene shifted uneasily. How much did the Amyrlin know? It was not the kind of thing she could ask, not of the Amyrlin Seat. Do you know that a young man from my village, a man I used to think I'd marry one day, is the Dragon Reborn? Do you know two of your Aes Sedai are helping him? At least she was sure the Amyrlin did not know she had dreamed of him last night, running from Moiraine. She thought she was sure. She kept silent.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. ði æmɪɝlɪn lʊkt ʌp ət hɝ, ən ʃi mɑɾɝeɪtɪd əɹ toʊn əz ʃi æɾəd, "fɝɡɪv mi, mʌðɝ, bʌɾ ɑɹ wi tə bi pʌnɪʃt mɔɹ? aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðɪs tɔk ə tʃɹʌst. ɪf jə wɑn maɪ əpɪnjən, mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz nɑt tə bi tʃɹʌstɪd."

"What are you talking about?" Nynaeve demanded. The Amyrlin looked up at her, and she moderated her tone as she added, "Forgive me, Mother, but are we to be punished more? I do not understand this talk of trust. If you want my opinion, Moiraine is not to be trusted."

"ðæɾ ɪz jəɹ əpɪnjən, ɪz ɪt?" ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd. "ə jɪɹ aʊɾ ə jəɹ vɪlədʒ, ən jə θɪŋk jə noʊ ɪnʌf ə ðə wɝl tə tʃuz wɪtʃ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə tʃɹʌst, ən wɪtʃ nɑt? ə mæstɝ seɪlɝ huz bɛɹli lɝn tə hɔɪst ə seɪl!"

"That is your opinion, is it?" the Amyrlin said. "A year out of your village, and you think you know enough of the world to choose which Aes Sedai to trust, and which not? A master sailor who's barely learned to hoist a sail!"

"ʃi dɪd nɑt min ɛniθɪŋ, mʌðɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd, bʌt ʃi nu nɪneɪiv mɛn ɪɡzækli wʌt ʃi hæd sɛd. ʃi ʃɑɾ ə wɔɹnɪŋ ɡlæns ət nɪneɪiv. nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv əɹ bɹeɪɾ ə ʃɑɹp tʌɡ, bʌt ʃi kɛpt əɹ maʊθ ʃʌt.

"She did not mean anything, Mother," Egwene said, but she knew Nynaeve meant exactly what she had said. She shot a warning glance at Nynaeve. Nynaeve gave her braid a sharp tug, but she kept her mouth shut.

"wɛl, hu ɪz tə seɪ," ði æmɪɝlɪn mjuzd. "tʃɹʌst ɪz əz slɪpɝi əz ə bæskəɾ ʌv ilz, səmtaɪmz. ðə pɔɪn ɪz, jə tu ɑɹ wʌɾ aɪ hæv tə wɝk wɪð, θɪn ɹidz ðoʊ jə meɪ bi."

"Well, who is to say," the Amyrlin mused. "Trust is as slippery as a basket of eels, sometimes. The point is, you two are what I have to work with, thin reeds though you may be."

nɪneɪivz maʊθ taɪɾənd, ðoʊ hɝ vɔɪs steɪd lɛvəl. "θɪn ɹidz, mʌðɝ?"

Nynaeve's mouth tightened, though her voice stayed level. "Thin reeds, Mother?"

ði æmɪɝlɪn wɛn ɑn əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt spoʊkən. "liɑnʒɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə stʌf jə hɛdfɝst ɪndə ə wiɹ, ən ɪt meɪ wɛl bi ʃi lɛf kəz ʃi lɝn jə wɝ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ, ən kəɾ ənmæsk hɝ, soʊ aɪ hæv tə bɪliv jə ɑɹənt - blæk ədʒɑ. aɪ wəd ɹæðɝ it skeɪlz ən ɛntʃɹəlz," ʃi mʌɾɝd, "bʌɾ aɪ səpoʊz əl əv tə ɡɛt juz tə seɪɪŋ ðət neɪm."

The Amyrlin went on as if she had not spoken. "Liandrin tried to stuff you headfirst into a weir, and it may well be she left because she learned you were returning, and could unmask her, so I have to believe you aren't - Black Ajah. I would rather eat scales and entrails," she muttered, "but I suppose I'll have to get used to saying that name."

ɛɡwin ɡeɪpt ɪn ʃɑk - blæk ədʒɑ? ʌs? laɪt! - bʌt nɪneɪiv bɑɹkt, "wi sɝɾənli ɑɹ nɑt! haʊ dɛɹ jə seɪ sətʃ ə θɪŋ? haʊ dɛɹ jə ivən sədʒɛst ɪt?"

Egwene gaped in shock - Black Ajah? Us? Light! - but Nynaeve barked, "We certainly are not! How dare you say such a thing? How dare you even suggest it?"

"ɪf jə daʊt mi, tʃaɪld, ɡoʊ əhɛd!" ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə hɑɹd vɔɪs. "ju meɪ hæv ən ɛɛs sədaɪz paʊɝ səmtaɪmz, bʌt jə ɑɹ nɑt jɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, nɑt baɪ maɪlz. wɛl? spik, ɪf juv mɔɹ tə seɪ. aɪ pɹɑməs tə liv jə wipɪŋ fəɹ fɝɡɪvnəs! 'θɪn ɹid'? əl bɹeɪk jə laɪk ə ɹid! aɪv noʊ peɪʃəns lɛft."

"If you doubt me, child, go ahead!" the Amyrlin said in a hard voice. "You may have an Aes Sedai's power sometimes, but you are not yet Aes Sedai, not by miles. Well? Speak, if you have more to say. I promise to leave you weeping for forgiveness! 'Thin reed'? I'll break you like a reed! I've no patience left."

nɪneɪivz maʊθ wɝkt. faɪnəli, ðoʊ, ʃi ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk, ən dʒɹu ə kɑmɪŋ bɹɛθ. wən ʃi spoʊk əɹ vɔɪs stɪl hæɾ ən ɛdʒ, bʌɾ ə smɔl wʌn. "fɝɡɪv mi, mʌðɝ. bʌt jə ʃəd nɑt - wəɹ nɑt - wi wəd nɑt də sətʃ ə θɪŋ."

Nynaeve's mouth worked. Finally, though, she gave herself a shake, and drew a calming breath. When she spoke her voice still had an edge, but a small one. "Forgive me, Mother. But you should not - We are not - We would not do such a thing."

wɪð ə kəmpɹɛst smaɪl, ði æmɪɝlɪn lin bæk ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ. "soʊ jə kən kip jəɹ tɛmpɝ, wən jə wɑn tə. aɪ hæd tə noʊ ðæt." ɛɡwin wʌndɝd haʊ mʌtʃ ʌv ɪt hæd bɪn ə tɛst; ðəɹ wɑz ə taɪtnəs ɝaʊn ði æmɪɝlɪnz aɪz ðət sədʒɛstəɾ əɹ peɪʃəns maɪt wɛl bi ɪɡzɔstəd. "aɪ wɪʃ aɪ cʊɾə faʊn ə weɪ tə ɹeɪz jə tə ðə ʃɔl, dɔɾɝ. vɛɹɪn sɛz jə ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɛni wʊmən ɪn ðə taʊɝ."

With a compressed smile, the Amyrlin leaned back in her chair. "So you can keep your temper, when you want to. I had to know that." Egwene wondered how much of it had been a test; there was a tightness around the Amyrlin's eyes that suggested her patience might well be exhausted. "I wish I could have found a way to raise you to the shawl, Daughter. Verin says you are already as strong as any woman in the Tower."

"ðə ʃɔl!" nɪneɪiv ɡæspt. "ɛɛs sədaɪ? meɪn?"

"The shawl!" Nynaeve gasped. "Aes Sedai? Me?"

ði æmɪɝlɪn dʒɛstʃɝd slaɪtli əz ɪf tɔsɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ əweɪ, bʌt ʃi lʊkt ɹɪɡɹɛtfəl tə luz ɪt. "noʊ pɔɪnt wɪʃɪŋ fəɹ wʌt kæn bi. aɪ kəd hɑɹdli ɹeɪz jə tə fʊl sɪstɝ ən sɛn jə tə skɹʌb pɑts ət ðə seɪm taɪm. ən vɛɹɪn ɔlsoʊ sɛz jə stɪl kænɑt tʃænəl kɑnʃəsli ənlɛs jə ɑɹ fjʊɹiəs. aɪ wɑz ɹɛɾi tə sɛvɝ jə fɹəm ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ɪf jə ivən lʊk laɪk ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ. ðə faɪnəl tɛsts fəɹ ðə ʃɔl ɹikwaɪɝ jə tə tʃænəl waɪl meɪnteɪnɪŋ ʌɾɝ kɑm ʌndɝ pɹɛʃɝ. ɪkstʃɹim pɹɛʃɝ. ivən aɪ kænɑt - ən wəd nɑt - sɛt ðət ɹɪkwaɪɹmən əsaɪd."

The Amyrlin gestured slightly as if tossing something away, but she looked regretful to lose it. "No point wishing for what can't be. I could hardly raise you to full sister and send you to scrub pots at the same time. And Verin also says you still cannot channel consciously unless you are furious. I was ready to sever you from the True Source if you even looked like embracing saidar. The final tests for the shawl require you to channel while maintaining utter calm under pressure. Extreme pressure. Even I cannot - and would not - set that requirement aside."

nɪneɪiv sim stʌnd. ʃi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪð əɹ maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən.

Nynaeve seemed stunned. She was staring at the Amyrlin with her mouth hanging open.

"aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd, mʌðɝ," ɛɡwin sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt.

"I don't understand, Mother," Egwene said after a moment.

"aɪ səpoʊz jə doʊnt, ət ðæt. jə ɑɹ ði oʊnli tu ɪn ðə taʊɝ aɪ kən bi æbsəlutli ʃʊɹ ɑɹ nɑt blæk ədʒɑ." ði æmɪɝlɪnz maʊθ stɪl twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn ðoʊz wɝdz. "liɑnʒɹɪn ən əɹ twɛlv wɛnt, bʌt dɪɾ ɔl ə ðɛm ɡoʊ? əɹ dɪd ðeɪ liv səm ə ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ bɪhaɪnd, laɪk ə stʌb ɪn ʃæloʊ wɔɾɝ ðət jə doʊn si tɪl ɪt pʊts ə hoʊl ɪn jəɹ boʊt? ɪt meɪ bi əl nɑt faɪn ðəɾ aʊɾ əntɪl ɪts tu leɪt, bʌɾ əl nɑt lɛt liɑnʒɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz ɡɛɾ əweɪ wɪð wʌt ðeɪ dɪd. nɑt ðə θɛft, ən ɪspɛʃli nɑt ðə mɝɾɝz. noʊ wʌn kɪlz maɪ pipəl ən wɔks əweɪ ənskeɪðd. ən əl nɑt lɛt θɝtin tʃɹeɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝv ðə ʃædoʊ. aɪ min tə faɪn ðɛm, ən stɪl ðɛm!"

"I suppose you don't, at that. You are the only two in the Tower I can be absolutely sure are not Black Ajah." The Amyrlin's mouth still twisted around those words. "Liandrin and her twelve went, but did all of them go? Or did they leave some of their number behind, like a stub in shallow water that you don't see till it puts a hole in your boat? It may be I'll not find that out until it is too late, but I will not let Liandrin and the others get away with what they did. Not the theft, and especially not the murders. No one kills my people and walks away unscathed. And I'll not let thirteen trained Aes Sedai serve the Shadow. I mean to find them, and still them!"

"aɪ doʊn si wʌt ðəɾ əz tə də wɪð ʌs," nɪneɪiv sɛd sloʊli. ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk əz ɪf ʃi laɪkt wʌt ʃi wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ.

"I don't see what that has to do with us," Nynaeve said slowly. She did not look as if she liked what she was thinking.

"dʒʌs ðɪs, tʃaɪld. jə tu ɑɹ tə bi maɪ haʊnz, hʌntɪŋ ðə blæk ədʒɑ. noʊ wʌn wɪl bɪliv ɪɾ ə ju, nɑɾ ə pɛɹ ə hæf-tʃɹeɪn æksɛptɪɾ aɪ hjumɪlieɪɾɪd pʌblɪkli."

"Just this, child. You two are to be my hounds, hunting the Black Ajah. No one will believe it of you, not a pair of half-trained Accepted I humiliated publicly."

"ðæɾ ɪz kɹeɪzi!" nɪneɪivz aɪz hæɾ oʊpənd waɪd baɪ ðə taɪm ði æmɪɝlɪn ɹitʃt ðə wɝdz "blæk ədʒɑ," ən əɹ nʌkəlz wɝ waɪt fɹəm əɹ ɡɹɪp ɑn əɹ bɹeɪd. ʃi bɪɾ əɹ wɝdz ɔf ən spæt ðɛm: "ðeɪ ɑɹ ɔl fʊl ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɛɡwin hæzən ivən bɪn ɹeɪz tə æksɛptɪd jɛt, ən jə noʊ aɪ kænɑt tʃænəl ɪnʌf tə laɪɾ ə kændəl ənlɛs aɪm æŋɡɹi, nɑɾ ə maɪ oʊn fɹi wɪl. wʌt tʃæns wəd wi hæv?"

"That is crazy!" Nynaeve's eyes had opened wide by the time the Amyrlin reached the words "Black Ajah," and her knuckles were white from her grip on her braid. She bit her words off and spat them: "They are all full Aes Sedai. Egwene hasn't even been raised to Accepted yet, and you know I cannot channel enough to light a candle unless I am angry, not of my own free will. What chance would we have?"

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd əɡɹimənt. hɝ tʌŋ hæd stʌk tə ðə ɹuf ə hɝ maʊθ. hʌn ðə blæk ədʒɑ? aɪd ɹæðɝ hʌn ə bɛɹ wɪð ə swɪtʃ! ʃiz dʒʌs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə skɛɹ ʌs, tə pʌnɪʃ əs mɔɹ. ʃiz tə bi! ɪf ðət wɑz wʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ, ʃi wɑz səksiɾɪŋ ɔl tu wɛl.

Egwene nodded agreement. Her tongue had stuck to the roof of her mouth. Hunt the Black Ajah? I'd rather hunt a bear with a switch! She's just trying to scare us, to punish us more. She has to be! If that was what the Amyrlin was trying, she was succeeding all too well.

ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz nɑɾɪŋ, tu. "ɛvɹi wɝd jə seɪ ɪz tʃɹu. bʌɾ itʃ ə jə ɪz mɔɹ ðən ə mætʃ fəɹ liɑnʒɹɪn ɪn ʃɪɹ paʊɝ, ən ʃiz ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ə ðɛm. jɛt ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹeɪnd, ən jə ɑɹ nɑt, ən ju, nɪneɪiv, də hæv lɪmɪteɪʃənz, əz jɛt. bʌt wən jə doʊn əv ən ɔɹ, tʃaɪld, ɛni plæŋk wɪl də tə pæɾəl ðə boʊɾ əʃɔɹ."

The Amyrlin was nodding, too. "Every word you say is true. But each of you is more than a match for Liandrin in sheer power, and she is the strongest of them. Yet they are trained, and you are not, and you, Nynaeve, do have limitations, as yet. But when you don't have an oar, child, any plank will do to paddle the boat ashore."

"bʌɾ aɪ wəd bi jusləs," ɛɡwin blɝɾɪd. hɝ vɔɪs keɪm aʊɾ əz ə skwik, bʌt ʃi wɑz tu əfɹeɪd tə bi əʃeɪmd. ʃi minz ɪt! oʊ, laɪt, ʃi minz ɪt! liɑnʒɹɪn ɡeɪv mi tə ðə sintʃæn, ən naʊ ʃi wɑns mi tə hʌn θɝtin laɪk hɝ? "maɪ stʌɾiz, maɪ lɛsənz, wɝkɪŋ ɪn ðə kɪtʃənz. æneɪjə sədaɪ wɪl ʃʊɹli wɑnə kəntɪnju tɛstɪŋ mi tə si ɪf aɪm ə dʒɹimɝ. əl bɛɹli hæv taɪm lɛft oʊvɝ tə slip ən it. haʊ kən aɪ hʌn ɛniθɪŋ?"

"But I would be useless," Egwene blurted. Her voice came out as a squeak, but she was too afraid to be ashamed. She means it! Oh, Light, she means it! Liandrin gave me to the Seanchan, and now she wants me to hunt thirteen like her? "My studies, my lessons, working in the kitchens. Anaiya Sedai will surely want to continue testing me to see if I am a Dreamer. I'll barely have time left over to sleep and eat. How can I hunt anything?"

"ju wɪl əv tə faɪn ðə taɪm," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd, kul ən sɝin wʌns mɔɹ, əz ɪf hʌntɪŋ ðə blæk ədʒɑ wɝ noʊ mɔɹ ðən swipɪŋ ə flɔɹ. "æz wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd, jə tʃuz jəɹ oʊn stʌɾiz, wɪðɪn lɪməts, ən ðə taɪmz fəɹ ðɛm. ən ðə ɹulz ɑɹ ə lɪɾəl iziɝ fəɹ æksɛptɪd. ə lɪɾəl iziɝ. ðeɪ mʌs bi faʊnd, tʃaɪld."

"You will have to find the time," the Amyrlin said, cool and serene once more, as if hunting the Black Ajah were no more than sweeping a floor. "As one of the Accepted, you choose your own studies, within limits, and the times for them. And the rules are a little easier for Accepted. A little easier. They must be found, child."

ɛɡwin lʊk tə nɪneɪiv, bʌt wʌt nɪneɪiv sɛd wɑz, "waɪ ɪz ɪleɪn nɑt pɑɹɾ ə ðɪs? ɪt kæn bi kəz jə θɪŋk ʃiz blæk ədʒɑ. ɪz ɪt kəz ʃiz dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ?"

Egwene looked to Nynaeve, but what Nynaeve said was, "Why is Elayne not part of this? It can't be because you think she is Black Ajah. Is it because she is Daughter-Heir of Andor?"

"ə fʊl nɛɾ ɑn ðə fɝs kæst, tʃaɪld. aɪ wəd meɪk əɹ wʌn ə jə ɪf aɪ kʊd, bʌɾ ət ðə moʊmən mɔɹɡeɪs ɡɪvz mi ɪnʌf pɹɑbləmz əz ɪɾ ɪz. wən aɪ hæv əɹ koʊmd ən kɝiɾ ən pɹɑɾɪd bæk ɑn ðə pɹɑpɝ pæθ, pɝhæps ɪleɪn wɪl dʒɔɪn ju. pɝhæps ðɛn."

"A full net on the first cast, child. I would make her one of you if I could, but at the moment Morgase gives me enough problems as it is. When I have her combed and curried and prodded back on the proper path, perhaps Elayne will join you. Perhaps then."

"ðɛn liv ɛɡwin aʊt, tu," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ʃi ɪz bɛɹli oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi ə wʊmən. əl də jəɹ hʌntɪŋ fəɹ ju." ɛɡwin meɪɾ ə saʊn ə pɹoʊɾɛst - aɪm ə wʊmən! - bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn spoʊk bɪfɔɹ hɝ.

"Then leave Egwene out, too," Nynaeve said. "She is barely old enough to be a woman. I will do your hunting for you." Egwene made a sound of protest - I am a woman! - but the Amyrlin spoke before her.

"aɪ æm nɑt sɛɾɪŋ jə aʊɾ əz beɪt, tʃaɪld. ɪf aɪ hæɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd ə ju, aɪ wəd stɪl nɑt bi hæpi, bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ oʊnli jə tu, soʊ tu əl hæv."

"I am not setting you out as bait, child. If I had a hundred of you, I would still not be happy, but there are only you two, so two I will have."

"nɪneɪiv," ɛɡwin sɛd, "aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ju. dʒju min jə wɑnə də ðɪs?"

"Nynaeve," Egwene said, "I do not understand you. Do you mean you want to do this?"

"ɪɾ ɪzən ðəɾ aɪ wɑn tə," nɪneɪiv sɛd wɛɹəli, "bʌɾ aɪd ɹæðɝ hʌn əm ðən sɪt wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ titʃɪŋ mi ɪz ɹɪli ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd. ən wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ ɑɹ ʌp tə, aɪ də nɑt wɑnə weɪɾ əntɪl ðəɹ ɹɛɾi tə faɪn aʊt wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz."

"It isn't that I want to," Nynaeve said wearily, "but I'd rather hunt them than sit wondering if the Aes Sedai teaching me is really a Darkfriend. And whatever they are up to, I do not want to wait until they're ready to find out what it is."

ðə dɪsɪʒən ɛɡwin keɪm tə twɪstəɾ əɹ stʌmək. "ðɛn əl də ɪt, tu. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə sɪt wʌndɝɪŋ ən weɪɾɪŋ ɛni mɔɹ ðən jə du." nɪneɪiv oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, ən ɛɡwin fɛlt ə flæʃ ʌv æŋɡɝ; ɪt wɑz sətʃ ə ɹɪlif æftɝ fɪɹ. "æn doʊn jə dɛɹ seɪ aɪm tu jʌŋ əɡɛn. ət list aɪ kən tʃænəl wən aɪ wɑn tə. moʊst ə ðə taɪm. aɪm nɑɾ ə lɪɾəl ɡɝl ɛnimɔɹ, nɪneɪiv."

The decision Egwene came to twisted her stomach. "Then I will do it, too. I don't want to sit wondering and waiting any more than you do." Nynaeve opened her mouth, and Egwene felt a flash of anger; it was such a relief after fear. "And don't you dare say I'm too young again. At least I can channel when I want to. Most of the time. I am not a little girl anymore, Nynaeve."

nɪneɪiv stʊd ðɛɹ, dʒɝkɪŋ ɑn əɹ bɹeɪɾ ən nɑt seɪɪŋ ə wɝd. faɪnəli ðə stɪfnəs dʒɹeɪn aʊɾ ə hɝ. "ju ɑɹ nɑt, ɑɹ ju? aɪ hæv sɛd maɪsɛlf jə ɑɹ ə wʊmən, bʌɾ aɪ səpoʊz aɪ dɪd nɑt ɹɪli bɪliv ɪt, ɪnsaɪd. ɡɝl, aɪ - noʊ, wʊmən. wʊmən, aɪ hoʊp jə ɹilaɪz juv klaɪmd ɪndə ə pɪklɪŋ kɑlʒɹən wɪð mi, ən ðə faɪɝ meɪ bi lɪt."

Nynaeve stood there, jerking on her braid and not saying a word. Finally the stiffness drained out of her. "You are not, are you? I have said myself you are a woman, but I suppose I did not really believe it, inside. Girl, I - No, woman. Woman, I hope you realize you've climbed into a pickling cauldron with me, and the fire may be lit."

"aɪ noʊ ɪt." ɛɡwin wɑz pɹaʊd ðəɾ əɹ vɔɪs hɑɹdli ʃʊk əɾ ɔl.

"I know it." Egwene was proud that her voice hardly shook at all.

ði æmɪɝlɪn smaɪld əz ɪf plizd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɪn əɹ blu aɪz ðət meɪɾ ɛɡwin səspɛkt ʃi hæd noʊn wʌt ðɛɹ dɪsɪʒənz wəd bi ɔl əlɔŋ. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ʃi fɛl ðoʊz pʌpətɪɹz stʃɹɪŋz ɑn əɹ ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz əɡɛn.

The Amyrlin smiled as if pleased, but there was something in her blue eyes that made Egwene suspect she had known what their decisions would be all along. For an instant, she felt those puppeteer's strings on her arms and legs again.

"vɛɹɪn. . . ." ði æmɪɝlɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən mʌɾɝd hæf tə hɝsɛlf. "ɪf aɪ mʌs tʃɹʌst sʌmwʌn, ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl bi hɝ. ʃi noʊz əz mʌtʃ əz aɪ ɔlɹɛɾi, ən meɪbi mɔɹ." hɝ vɔɪs stʃɹɛŋθənd. "vɛɹɪn wɪl ɡɪv jə ɔl ðəɾ ɪz noʊn ə liɑnʒɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz, ən ɔlsoʊ ə lɪst ə ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðət wɝ teɪkən, ən wʌt ðəl du. ðoʊz ðət wi noʊ. əz fəɹ ɛni ʌv ðə blæk ədʒɑ stɪl ɪn ðə taʊɝ. . . . lɪsən, wɑtʃ, ən bi kɛɹfəl ə jəɹ kwɛstʃənz. bi laɪk maɪs. ɪf juv ivən ə səspɪʃən, ɹipɔɹɾ ɪt tə mi. əl kip ən aɪ ɑn jə maɪsɛlf. noʊ wʌn wɪl θɪŋk ðət stʃɹeɪnʒ, ɡɪvən wʌt jəɹ biɪŋ pʌnɪʃt fɔɹ. jə kən meɪk jəɹ ɹɪpɔɹts wən aɪ lʊk ɪn ɑn ju. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ðeɪv kɪl bɪfɔɹ. ðeɪ kəɾ izəli kɪl əɡɛn."

"Verin. . . ." The Amyrlin hesitated, then muttered half to herself. "If I must trust someone, it might as well be her. She knows as much as I already, and maybe more." Her voice strengthened. "Verin will give you all that is known of Liandrin and the others, and also a list of the ter'angreal that were taken, and what they will do. Those that we know. As for any of the Black Ajah still in the Tower. . . . Listen, watch, and be careful of your questions. Be like mice. If you have even a suspicion, report it to me. I will keep an eye on you myself. No one will think that strange, given what you're being punished for. You can make your reports when I look in on you. Remember, they have killed before. They could easily kill again."

"ðæts ɔl vɛɹi wɛl," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "bʌt wɪl stɪl bi æksɛptɪd, ən ɪts ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ æftɝ. ɛni fʊl sɪstɝ kən tɛl əs tə ɡoʊ əbaʊɾ əɹ bɪznəs, əɹ sɛn əs ɔf tə də hɝ lɔnʒɹi, ən wɪl əv noʊ tʃɔɪs bʌt tə oʊbeɪ. ðəɹ ɑɹ pleɪsəz æksɛptɪɾ ɑɹ nɑt səpoʊz tə ɡoʊ, θɪŋz wɝ nɑt səpoʊz tə du. laɪt, ɪf wi wɝ ʃʊɹ ə sɪstɝ wɑz blæk ədʒɑ, ʃi kəd tɛl ðə ɡɑɹdz tə lɑk əs ɪn əɹ ɹumz ən kip əs ðɛɹ, ən ðeɪ wəd də ɪt. ðeɪ sɝɾənli wəd nɑt teɪk ðə wɝɾ ʌv ən æksɛptɪɾ oʊvɝ ðəɾ ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"That's all very well," Nynaeve said, "but we will still be Accepted, and it is Aes Sedai we're after. Any full sister can tell us to go about our business, or send us off to do her laundry, and we will have no choice but to obey. There are places Accepted are not supposed to go, things we're not supposed to do. Light, if we were sure a sister was Black Ajah, she could tell the guards to lock us in our rooms and keep us there, and they would do it. They certainly would not take the word of an Accepted over that of an Aes Sedai."

"fɔɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd, "ju mʌst wɝk wɪðɪn ðə lɪmɪteɪʃənz ə ði æksɛptɪd. ði aɪdiə ɪz fəɹ noʊ wʌn tə səspɛk ju. bʌt. . . ."ʃi oʊpən ðə blæk bɑks ɑn əɹ teɪbəl, hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ən lʊkt ət ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən əz ɪf stɪl ənʃʊɹ ʃi wɑntəd tə də ðɪs, ðən tʊk aʊɾ ə nʌmbɝ ə stɪf, foʊldəd peɪpɝz. sɔɹɾɪŋ θɹu ðɛm kɛɹfəli, ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd əɡɛn, ðən tʃoʊz aʊt tu. ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ ʃi ʃʌv bæk ɪndə ðə bɑks, ən hændəd ðoʊz tu tə ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv. "kip ðiz wɛl hɪɾən. ðeɪ ɑɹ fəɹ ən ɪmɝdʒənsi oʊnli."

"For the most part," the Amyrlin said, "you must work within the limitations of the Accepted. The idea is for no one to suspect you. But. . . ."She opened the black box on her table, hesitated and looked at the other two women as if still unsure she wanted to do this, then took out a number of stiff, folded papers. Sorting through them carefully, she hesitated again, then chose out two. The remainder she shoved back into the box, and handed those two to Egwene and Nynaeve. "Keep these well hidden. They are for an emergency only."

ɛɡwin ənfoʊldəɾ əɹ θɪk peɪpɝ. ɪt hɛld ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə nit, ɹaʊn hænd, ən wɑz sild ət ðə bɑɾəm wɪð ðə waɪt fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn.

Egwene unfolded her thick paper. It held writing in a neat, round hand, and was sealed at the bottom with the White Flame of Tar Valon.

wʌt ðə bɛɹɝ dʌz ɪz dʌn ət maɪ ɔɹɾɝ ən baɪ maɪ əθɔɹəɾi. oʊbeɪ, ən kip saɪlənt, ət maɪ kəmænd.

What the bearer does is done at my order and by my authority. Obey, and keep silent, at my command.

sɪuən sɑntʃ wɑtʃɝ ə ðə silz fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn sit "aɪ kəd də ɛniθɪŋ wɪð ðɪs," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ə wʌndɝɪŋ vɔɪs. "ɔɹɾɝ ðə ɡɑɹdz tə mɑɹtʃ. kəmæn ðə wɔɹɾɝz." ʃi ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl læf. "aɪ kəd meɪk ə wɔɹɾɝ dæns, wɪð ðɪs."

Siuan Sanche Watcher of the Seals Flame of Tar Valon The Amyrlin Seat "I could do anything with this," Nynaeve said in a wondering voice. "Order the guards to march. Command the Warders." She gave a little laugh. "I could make a Warder dance, with this."

"əntɪl aɪ faʊn aʊɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt," ði æmɪɝlɪn əɡɹid dʒɹaɪli. "ənlɛs jə hæɾ ə vɛɹi kənvɪnsɪŋ ɹizən, aɪd meɪk jə wɪʃ liɑnʒɹɪn hæd kɑt ju."

"Until I found out about it," the Amyrlin agreed dryly. "Unless you had a very convincing reason, I'd make you wish Liandrin had caught you."

"aɪ dɪdn min tə də ɛni ʌv ðæt," nɪneɪiv sɛd heɪstəli. "aɪ dʒʌs mɛn ðəɾ ɪt ɡɪvz mɔɹ əθɔɹəɾi ðən aɪ hæɾ ɪmædʒənd."

"I didn't mean to do any of that," Nynaeve said hastily. "I just meant that it gives more authority than I had imagined."

"ju meɪ niɾ ɛvɹi ʃɹɛɾ ʌv ɪt. bʌt dʒʌs jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ, tʃaɪld. eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnd woʊn hid ðəɾ ɛni mɔɹ ðən ə waɪtkloʊk wʊd. ðeɪ wəd boʊθ laɪkli kɪl jə dʒʌs fəɹ hævɪŋ ɪt. ɪf ðət peɪpɝ ɪz ə ʃild . . . wɛl, peɪpɝ ʃilz ɑɹ flɪmzi, ən ðɪs wʌn meɪ hæv ə tɑɹɡət peɪntəɾ ɑn ɪt."

"You may need every shred of it. But just you remember, child. A Darkfriend won't heed that any more than a Whitecloak would. They would both likely kill you just for having it. If that paper is a shield . . . well, paper shields are flimsy, and this one may have a target painted on it."

"jɛs, mʌðɝ," ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv sɛd təɡɛðɝ. ɛɡwin foʊldəɾ əɹ peɪpɝ ʌp ən tʌkt ɪɾ ɪndə hɝ bɛl paʊtʃ, ɹizɑlvɪŋ nɑt tə teɪk ɪɾ aʊɾ əɡɛn ənlɛs ʃi æbsəlutli hæd tə. ən haʊ wɪl aɪ noʊ wən ðəɾ ɪz?

"Yes, Mother," Egwene and Nynaeve said together. Egwene folded her paper up and tucked it into her belt pouch, resolving not to take it out again unless she absolutely had to. And how will I know when that is?

"wʌɾ əbaʊt mæt?" nɪneɪiv æskt. "hiz vɛɹi sɪk, mʌðɝ, ən i dʌz nɑɾ əv mʌtʃ taɪm lɛft."

"What about Mat?" Nynaeve asked. "He's very sick, Mother, and he does not have much time left."

"aɪ wɪl sɛnd wɝd tə ju," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd kɝtli.

"I will send word to you," the Amyrlin said curtly.

"bʌt, mʌðɝ - "

"But, Mother - "

"aɪ wɪl sɛnd wɝd tə ju! naʊ, ɔf wɪð ju, tʃɪlʒɹən. ðə hoʊp ə ðə taʊɝ ɹɛsts ɪn jəɹ hænz. ɡoʊ tə jəɹ ɹumz ən ɡɛt səm ɹɛst. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, juv əpɔɪnmənts wɪð ʃɛɹiəm, ən wɪð ðə pɑts."

"I will send word to you! Now, off with you, children. The hope of the Tower rests in your hands. Go to your rooms and get some rest. Remember, you have appointments with Sheriam, and with the pots."


tʃæptɝ fɪftin


CHAPTER 15

ðə ɡɹeɪ mæn


The Gray Man

aʊtsaɪd ði æmɪɝlɪn sits stʌɾi, ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv faʊn ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ən əkeɪʒənəl sɝvɪŋ wʊmən, hɝiɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ duɾiz ɑn sɑft-slɪpɝd fit. ɛɡwin wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ ðɛɹ pɹɛzəns. ðə hɔlz sʌɾənli sim laɪk kævɝnz, fəɹ ɔl ðə tæpəstʃɹiz ən stoʊnwɝk. deɪnʒɝəs kævɝnz.

Outside the Amyrlin Seat's study, Egwene and Nynaeve found the corridors empty except for an occasional serving woman, hurrying about her duties on soft-slippered feet. Egwene was grateful for their presence. The halls suddenly seemed like caverns, for all the tapestries and stonework. Dangerous caverns.

nɪneɪiv stʃɹoʊɾ əlɔŋ pɝpəsfəli, tʌɡɪŋ əɾ əɹ bɹeɪd fɪtfəli əɡɛn, ən ɛɡwin hɝid tə kip ʌp. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi lɛft əloʊn.

Nynaeve strode along purposefully, tugging at her braid fitfully again, and Egwene hurried to keep up. She did not want to be left alone.

"ɪf ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɪz stɪl hɪɹ, nɪneɪiv, ən ɪf ðeɪ ivən səspɛkt wʌt wɝ duɪŋ. . . . aɪ hoʊp jə dɪdn min wʌt jə sɛɾ əbaʊɾ æktɪŋ əz ɪf wəɹ ɔlɹɛɾi baʊn baɪ ðə θɹi oʊðz. aɪ doʊn ɪntɛn tə lɛɾ əm kɪl mi, nɑɾ ɪf aɪ kən stɑp ɪt baɪ tʃænəlɪŋ."

"If the Black Ajah is still here, Nynaeve, and if they even suspect what we're doing. . . . I hope you didn't mean what you said about acting as if we are already bound by the Three Oaths. I don't intend to let them kill me, not if I can stop it by channeling."

"ɪf ɛni ʌv əm ɑɹ stɪl hɪɹ, ɛɡwin, ðəl noʊ wʌt wəɹ duɪŋ əz sun əz ðeɪ si ʌs." dɪspaɪt wʌt ʃi wɑz seɪɪŋ, nɪneɪiv saʊndəd pɹiɑkjəpaɪd. "ɔɹ ət lis ðəl si əs əz ə θɹɛt, ən ðæts mʌtʃ ðə seɪm θɪŋ əz fɑɹ əz wʌt ðəl du."

"If any of them are still here, Egwene, they will know what we are doing as soon as they see us." Despite what she was saying, Nynaeve sounded preoccupied. "Or at least they will see us as a threat, and that's much the same thing as far as what they will do."

"haʊ wɪl ðeɪ si əs əz ə θɹɛt? noʊbɑdi ɪz θɹɛɾənd baɪ sʌmwʌn ðeɪ kən ɔɹɾɝ əbaʊt. noʊbɑdi ɪz θɹɛɾənd baɪ sʌmwʌn u hæz tə skɹʌb pɑts ən tɝn ðə spɪts θɹi taɪmz ə deɪ. ðæts waɪ ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪz pʊɾɪŋ əs tə wɝk ɪn ðə kɪtʃənz. pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɹizən, ɛniweɪ."

"How will they see us as a threat? Nobody is threatened by someone they can order about. Nobody is threatened by someone who has to scrub pots and turn the spits three times a day. That's why the Amyrlin is putting us to work in the kitchens. Part of the reason, anyway."

"pɝhæps ði æmɪɝlɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt θɹu," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ æbsənli. "ɔɹ pɝhæps ʃi dɪd, ən minz sʌmθɪŋ dɪfɹən fəɹ əs ðən wʌt ʃi kleɪmz. θɪŋk, ɛɡwin. liɑnʒɹɪn wəd nɑɾ əv tʃɹaɪd tə pʊɾ əs aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ənlɛs ʃi θɔt wi wɝ ə θɹɛt tə hɝ. aɪ kæn ɪmædʒən haʊ, əɹ tə wʌt, bʌɾ aɪ kænɑt si haʊ ɪt kəɾ əv tʃeɪnʒd, iðɝ. ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ ɛni blæk ədʒɑ stɪl hɪɹ, ðəl ʃʊɹli si əs ðə seɪm weɪ, wɛðɝ ðeɪ səspɛkt wʌt wɝ duɪŋ əɹ nɑt."

"Perhaps the Amyrlin did not think it through," Nynaeve said absently. "Or perhaps she did, and means something different for us than what she claims. Think, Egwene. Liandrin would not have tried to put us out of the way unless she thought we were a threat to her. I can't imagine how, or to what, but I cannot see how it could have changed, either. If there are any Black Ajah still here, they will surely see us the same way, whether they suspect what we're doing or not."

ɛɡwin swɑloʊd. "aɪ hædn θɔɾ ə ðæt. laɪt, aɪ wɪʃ aɪ wɝ ɪnvɪzəbəl. nɪneɪiv, ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ stɪl æftɝ ʌs, əl ɹɪsk biɪŋ stɪl bɪfɔɹ aɪ lɛt dɑɹkfɹɛnz kɪl mi, əɹ meɪbi wɝs. ən aɪ woʊn bɪliv jəl lɛɾ əm teɪk ju, iðɝ, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt jə toʊl ði æmɪɝlɪn."

Egwene swallowed. "I hadn't thought of that. Light, I wish I were invisible. Nynaeve, if they are still after us, I will risk being stilled before I let Darkfriends kill me, or maybe worse. And I won't believe you will let them take you, either, no matter what you told the Amyrlin."

"aɪ mɛn ɪt." fəɹ ə moʊmənt nɪneɪiv sim tə ɹaʊs fɹəm əɹ θɔts. hɝ stɛps sloʊd. ə peɪl-hɛɹd nɑvəs kæɹiɪŋ ə tʃɹeɪ ɹʌʃt pæst. "aɪ mɛn ɛvɹi wɝd, ɛɡwin." nɪneɪiv wɛn ɑn wən ðə nɑvəs wɑz aʊɾ ə hɪɹɪŋ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝ weɪz tə dɪfɛn aʊɝsɛlvz. ɪf ðəɹ wɝ nɑt, ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd bi kɪld ɛvɹi taɪm ðeɪ lɛf ðə taʊɝ. wi dʒʌst əv tə ɹizən ðoʊz weɪz aʊt, ən juz ðɛm."

"I meant it." For a moment Nynaeve seemed to rouse from her thoughts. Her steps slowed. A pale-haired novice carrying a tray rushed past. "I meant every word, Egwene." Nynaeve went on when the novice was out of hearing. "There are other ways to defend ourselves. If there were not, Aes Sedai would be killed every time they left the Tower. We just have to reason those ways out, and use them."

"aɪ noʊ sɛvɹəl weɪz ɔlɹɛɾi, ən soʊ də ju."

"I know several ways already, and so do you."

"ðeɪ ɑɹ deɪnʒɝəs." ɛɡwin oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə seɪ ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli deɪnʒɝəs tə huɛvɝ ətæk hɝ, bʌt nɪneɪiv plaʊɾ ɑn oʊvɝ hɝ. "ju kən kʌm tə laɪk əm tu mʌtʃ. wən aɪ lɛɾ aʊɾ ɔl maɪ æŋɡɝ ət ðoʊz waɪtkloʊks ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. . . . ɪt fɛl tu ɡʊd. ɪts tu deɪnʒɝəs." ʃi ʃɪvɝɾ ən kwɪkən əɹ peɪs əɡɛn, ən ɛɡwin hæd tə stɛp laɪvli tə kætʃ ʌp.

"They are dangerous." Egwene opened her mouth to say they were only dangerous to whoever attacked her, but Nynaeve plowed on over her. "You can come to like them too much. When I let out all my anger at those Whitecloaks this morning. . . . It felt too good. It is too dangerous." She shivered and quickened her pace again, and Egwene had to step lively to catch up.

"ju saʊn laɪk ʃɛɹiəm. jə nɛvɝ əv bɪfɔɹ. juv pʊʃt ɛvɹi lɪmət ðeɪv pʊɾ ɑn ju. waɪ wəd jə æksɛp lɪməts naʊ, wən wi maɪɾ əv tə ɪɡnɔɹ əm tə steɪ əlaɪv?"

"You sound like Sheriam. You never have before. You have pushed every limit they've put on you. Why would you accept limits now, when we might have to ignore them to stay alive?"

"wʌt ɡʊɾ ɪf ɪɾ ɛnz wɪð əs biɪŋ pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ? stɪld əɹ nɑt, wʌt ɡʊd ðɛn?" nɪneɪivz vɔɪs dʒɹɑpt əz ɪf ʃi wɝ spikɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. "aɪ kən də ɪt. aɪ mʌst, ɪf aɪm tə steɪ hɪɹ lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə lɝn, ən aɪ mʌs lɝn ɪf aɪm tə - " sʌɾənli ʃi sim tə ɹilaɪz ʃi wɑz spikɪŋ əlaʊd. ʃi ʃɑɾ ə hɑɹd lʊk əɾ ɛɡwin, ən əɹ vɔɪs fɝmd. "lɛt mi θɪŋk. pliz, bi kwaɪəɾ ən lemi θɪŋk."

"What good if it ends with us being put out of the Tower? Stilled or not, what good then?" Nynaeve's voice dropped as if she were speaking to herself. "I can do it. I must, if I'm to stay here long enough to learn, and I must learn if I'm to - " Suddenly she seemed to realize she was speaking aloud. She shot a hard look at Egwene, and her voice firmed. "Let me think. Please, be quiet and let me think."

ɛɡwin hɛld əɹ tʌŋ, bʌɾ ɪnsaɪd ʃi bʌbəld wɪð ʌnəskt kwɛstʃənz. wʌt spɛʃəl ɹizən dɪd nɪneɪiv əv fəɹ wɑntɪŋ tə lɝn mɔɹ ʌv wʌt ðə waɪt taʊɝ kəd titʃ? wʌt wɑz ɪt ʃi wɑntəd tə du? waɪ wɑz nɪneɪiv kipɪŋ ɪt sikɹət fɹəm hɝ? sikɹəts. wiv lɝn tə kip tu mɛni sikɹəts sɪns kʌmɪŋ tə ðə taʊɝ. ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪz kipɪŋ sikɹəts fɹəm ʌs, tu. laɪt, wʌɾ ɪz ʃi gɑnə də əbaʊt mæt?

Egwene held her tongue, but inside she bubbled with unasked questions. What special reason did Nynaeve have for wanting to learn more of what the White Tower could teach? What was it she wanted to do? Why was Nynaeve keeping it secret from her? Secrets. We've learned to keep too many secrets since coming to the Tower. The Amyrlin is keeping secrets from us, too. Light, what is she going to do about Mat?

nɪneɪiv əkʌmpəniɾ əɹ ɔl ðə weɪ bæk tə ðə nɑvəsɪz' kɔɹɾɝz, nɑt tɝnɪŋ əsaɪd tə ði æksɛptɪdz kɔɹɾɝz. ðə ɡælɝiz wɝ stɪl ɛmpti, ən ðeɪ mɛt noʊ wʌn əz ðeɪ klaɪm ðə spaɪɹəlɪŋ ɹæmps.

Nynaeve accompanied her all the way back to the novices' quarters, not turning aside to the Accepted's quarters. The galleries were still empty, and they met no one as they climbed the spiraling ramps.

əz ðeɪ keɪm ʌp ɑn ɪleɪnz ɹum, nɪneɪiv stɑpt, nɑkt wʌns, ən ɪmiɾiətli oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ən pʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ ɪnsaɪd. ðən ʃi wɑz lɛɾɪŋ ðə waɪt dɔɹ swɪŋ ʃʌɾ ən stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə nɛkst, ɛɡwinz ɹum. "ʃi ɪzən hɪɹ jɛt," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ nid tə tɔk tə boʊθ ə ju."

As they came up on Elayne's room, Nynaeve stopped, knocked once, and immediately opened the door and put her head inside. Then she was letting the white door swing shut and striding toward the next, Egwene's room. "She isn't here yet," she said. "I need to talk to both of you."

ɛɡwin kɑɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən pʊld əɹ tə ən əbɹʌp hɔlt. "wʌt - ?" sʌmθɪŋ tʌɡd əɾ əɹ hɛɹ, stʌŋ əɹ ɪɹ. ə blæk blɝ stʃɹikt ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ feɪs tə klæŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl, ən ɪn ðə nɛks bɹɛθ nɪneɪiv wɑz bɛɹɪŋ əɹ tə ðə ɡælɝi flɔɹ, bɪhaɪn ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ.

Egwene caught her shoulders and pulled her to an abrupt halt. "What - ?" Something tugged at her hair, stung her ear. A black blur streaked in front of her face to clang against the wall, and in the next breath Nynaeve was bearing her to the gallery floor, behind the railing.

waɪd-aɪɾ ən spɹɔlɪŋ, ɛɡwin stɛɹɾ ət wʌt leɪ ɑn ðə stoʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ dɔɹ, wɛɹ ɪt hæd fɔlən. ə boʊl fɹəm ə kɹɔsboʊ. ə fju dɑɹk stʃɹænz fɹəm əɹ hɛɹ wɝ tæŋɡəld ɪn ðə fɔɹ hɛvi pɹɔŋz, mɛn fəɹ pʌntʃɪŋ θɹu ɑɹmɝ. ʃi ɹeɪzd ə tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ hæn tə tʌtʃ əɹ ɪɹ, tə tʌtʃ ðə taɪniəs nɪk, dæmp wɪð ə biɾ ə blʌd. ɪf aɪ hæd nɑt stɑp dʒʌs ðɛn. . . . ɪf aɪ hædnt. . . . ðə kwɔɹəl wʊɾə ɡɔn ɹaɪt θɹu hɝ hɛd, ən wəd pɹɑbli hæv kɪl nɪneɪiv, tu. "blʌɾ ən æʃəz!" ʃi ɡæspt. "blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz!"

Wide-eyed and sprawling, Egwene stared at what lay on the stone in front of her door, where it had fallen. A bolt from a crossbow. A few dark strands from her hair were tangled in the four heavy prongs, meant for punching through armor. She raised a trembling hand to touch her ear, to touch the tiniest nick, damp with a bead of blood. If I had not stopped just then. . . . If I hadn't. . . . The quarrel would have gone right through her head, and would probably have killed Nynaeve, too. "Blood and ashes!" she gasped. "Blood and bloody ashes!"

"wɑtʃ jəɹ læŋɡwədʒ," nɪneɪiv ədmɑnɪʃt, bʌɾ əɹ hɑɹt wɑz nɑɾ ɪn ɪt. ʃi leɪ piɹɪŋ bɪtwin ðə waɪt stoʊn bələstɝz təwɔɹd ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə ɡælɝiz. ə ɡloʊ sɝaʊndəd hɝ, tə ɛɡwinz aɪz. ʃi hæɾ ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ.

"Watch your language," Nynaeve admonished, but her heart was not in it. She lay peering between the white stone balusters toward the far side of the galleries. A glow surrounded her, to Egwene's eyes. She had embraced saidar.

heɪstəli, ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd tə ɹitʃ aʊt fəɹ ðə wʌn paʊɝ, tu, bʌɾ ət fɝs heɪs dɪfiɾəd hɝ. heɪst, ən ɪmədʒəz ðət kɛpt ɪntʃɹuɾɪŋ ɑn ði ɛmptinəs, ɪmədʒəz ə hɝ hɛd biɪŋ ɹɪpt əpɑɹt laɪk ə ɹɑɾən mɛlən baɪ ə hɛvi kwɔɹəl ðət wɛn ɑn tə bɛɹi ɪtsɛlf ɪn nɪneɪiv. ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən tʃɹaɪɾ əɡɛn, ən faɪnəli ðə ɹoʊz floʊɾəd ɪn nʌθɪŋnəs, oʊpən tə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, ən ðə paʊɝ fɪl hɝ.

Hastily, Egwene tried to reach out for the One Power, too, but at first haste defeated her. Haste, and images that kept intruding on the emptiness, images of her head being ripped apart like a rotten melon by a heavy quarrel that went on to bury itself in Nynaeve. She took a deep breath and tried again, and finally the rose floated in nothingness, opened to the True Source, and the Power filled her.

ʃi ɹoʊld ɑntu hɝ stʌmək tə pɪɹ θɹu ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ bɪsaɪd nɪneɪiv. "du jə si ɛniθɪŋ? dʒju si hɪm? əl pʊɾ ə laɪtnɪŋ boʊl θɹu hɪm!" ʃi kəd fil ɪt bɪldɪŋ, pɹɛsɪŋ ɑn əɹ tə lus ɪt. "ɪɾ ɪz ə mæn, ɪzən ɪt?" ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən ə mæn kʌmɪŋ ɪndə ðə nɑvəsɪz' kɔɹɾɝz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl tə pɪktʃɝ ə wʊmən kæɹiɪŋ ə kɹɔsboʊ θɹu ðə taʊɝ.

She rolled onto her stomach to peer through the railing beside Nynaeve. "Do you see anything? Do you see him? I'll put a lightning bolt through him!" She could feel it building, pressing on her to loose it. "It is a man, isn't it?" She could not imagine a man coming into the novices' quarters, but it was impossible to picture a woman carrying a crossbow through the Tower.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ." kwaɪəɾ æŋɡɝ fɪl nɪneɪivz vɔɪs; hɝ æŋɡɝ wɑz ɔlweɪz əɾ ɪts wɝst wən ʃi ɡɹu kwaɪət wɪð ɪt. "aɪ θɔɾ aɪ sɔ - jɛs! ðɛɹ!" ɛɡwin fɛl ðə paʊɝ pʌls ɪn ði ʌðɝ wʊmən, ən ðən nɪneɪiv wɑz ənhɝidli ɡɛɾɪŋ tə hɝ fit, bɹʌʃɪŋ əɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ tə wɝi əbaʊt.

"I don't know." Quiet anger filled Nynaeve's voice; her anger was always at its worst when she grew quiet with it. "I thought I saw - Yes! There!" Egwene felt the Power pulse in the other woman, and then Nynaeve was unhurriedly getting to her feet, brushing at her dress as if there were nothing more to worry about.

ɛɡwin stɛɹɾ ət hɝ. "wʌt? wʌd jə du? nɪneɪiv?"

Egwene stared at her. "What? What did you do? Nynaeve?"

" 'ʌv ðə faɪv paʊɝz,' " nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ə lɛktʃɝɪŋ toʊn, feɪnli mɑkɪŋ, " 'ɛɹ, səmtaɪmz kɔld wɪnd, ɪz θɔt baɪ mɛni tə bi ʌv ðə lis juz. ðɪs ɪz fɑɹ fɹəm tʃɹu.' " ʃi fɪnɪʃt wɪð ə taɪt læf. "aɪ toʊl jə ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝ weɪz tə dɪfɛn aʊɝsɛlvz. aɪ juzd ɛɹ, tə hoʊld ɪm wɪð ɛɹ. ɪf ɪts ə hi; aɪ kəd nɑt si hɪm klɪɹli. ə tʃɹɪk ði æmɪɝlɪn ʃoʊd mi wʌns, ðoʊ aɪ daʊt ʃi ɪkspɛktəd mi tə si haʊ ɪt wɑz dʌn. wɛl, ɑɹ jə gɑnə laɪ ðəɹ ɔl deɪ?"

" 'Of the Five Powers,' " Nynaeve said in a lecturing tone, faintly mocking, " 'Air, sometimes called Wind, is thought by many to be of the least use. This is far from true.' " She finished with a tight laugh. "I told you there were other ways to defend ourselves. I used Air, to hold him with air. If it is a he; I could not see him clearly. A trick the Amyrlin showed me once, though I doubt she expected me to see how it was done. Well, are you going to lie there all day?"

ɛɡwin skɹæmbəld ʌp tə hɝi æftɝ əɹ ɝaʊn ðə ɡælɝi. bɪfɔɹ lɔŋ ə mæn dɪd kʌm ɪndə saɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə kɝv, dʒɹɛst ɪn pleɪn bɹaʊn bɹitʃɪz ən koʊt. hi stʊd feɪsɪŋ ði ʌðɝ weɪ, bælənst ɑn ðə bɔl ʌv wʌn fʊt, wɪð ði ʌðɝ hæŋɪŋ ɪn mɪdɛɹ əz ɪf i hæd bɪn kɑɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ɹʌnɪŋ. ðə mæn wəd fil əz ɪf i wɝ bɛɹiɾ ɪn θɪk dʒɛli, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ɛɹ stɪfən ɝaʊn hɪm. ɛɡwin ɹɪmɛmbɝd ði æmɪɝlɪnz tʃɹɪk, tu, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi kəd dupləkeɪɾ ɪt. nɪneɪiv oʊnli hæd tə si ə θɪŋ dʌn wʌns tə noʊ haʊ tə də ɪt hɝsɛlf. wən ʃi kəd mænədʒ tə tʃænəl əɾ ɔl, ʌv kɔɹs.

Egwene scrambled up to hurry after her around the gallery. Before long a man did come into sight around the curve, dressed in plain brown breeches and coat. He stood facing the other way, balanced on the ball of one foot, with the other hanging in midair as if he had been caught in the middle of running. The man would feel as if he were buried in thick jelly, yet it was nothing but air stiffened around him. Egwene remembered the Amyrlin's trick, too, but she did not think she could duplicate it. Nynaeve only had to see a thing done once to know how to do it herself. When she could manage to channel at all, of course.

ðeɪ keɪm kloʊsɝ, ən ɛɡwinz mɛldɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ vænɪʃt ɪn ʃɑk. ðə hɪlt ʌv ə dæɡɝ stʊɾ aʊt fɹəm ðə mænz tʃɛst. hɪz feɪs sæɡd, ən dɛθ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi fɪlmd ɪz hæf-kloʊzd aɪz. hi kɹʌmpəl tə ðə ɡælɝi flɔɹ əz nɪneɪiv lus ðə tʃɹæp ðət hæd hɛl hɪm.

They came closer, and Egwene's melding with the Power vanished in shock. The hilt of a dagger stood out from the man's chest. His face sagged, and death had already filmed his half-closed eyes. He crumpled to the gallery floor as Nynaeve loosed the trap that had held him.

hi wɑz ən ævɝɪdʒ-əpɪɹɪŋ mæn, ʌv ævɝɪdʒ haɪɾ ən ævɝɪdʒ bɪld, wɪð fitʃɝz soʊ ɔɹɾənɛɹi ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi wʊɾə noʊɾəst ɪm ɪn ə ɡɹup ə θɹi. ʃi oʊnli stʌɾid ɪm ə moʊmənt, ðoʊ, bɪfɔɹ ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðət sʌmθɪŋ wɑz mɪsɪŋ. ə kɹɔsboʊ.

He was an average-appearing man, of average height and average build, with features so ordinary Egwene did not think she would have noticed him in a group of three. She only studied him a moment, though, before realizing that something was missing. A crossbow.

ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən lʊkt əbaʊt waɪldli. "ðɛɹ hæd tə bi ənʌðɝ wʌn, nɪneɪiv. sʌmbɑɾi tʊk ðə kɹɔsboʊ. ən sʌmbɑɾi stæb hɪm. hi kəd bi aʊt ðəɹ ɹɛɾi tə ʃuɾ əɾ əs əɡɛn."

She gave a start and looked about wildly. "There had to be another one, Nynaeve. Somebody took the crossbow. And somebody stabbed him. He could be out there ready to shoot at us again."

"kɑm jɝsɛlf," nɪneɪiv sɛd, bʌt ʃi pɪɹd boʊθ weɪz əlɔŋ ðə ɡælɝi, dʒɝkɪŋ əɾ əɹ bɹeɪd. "dʒʌs bi kɑm, ən wɪl fɪɡjɝ aʊt wʌt tə - " hɝ wɝdz kʌɾ ɔf ət ðə saʊn ə stɛps ɑn ðə ɹæmp liɾɪŋ ʌp tə ðɛɹ lɛvəl.

"Calm yourself," Nynaeve said, but she peered both ways along the gallery, jerking at her braid. "Just be calm, and we will figure out what to - " Her words cut off at the sound of steps on the ramp leading up to their level.

ɛɡwinz hɑɹt paʊndɪd, simɪŋli ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt. aɪz fæsən ɑn ðə hɛɾ ə ðə ɹæmp, ʃi dɛspɝətli stʃɹoʊv tə tʌtʃ seɪaɪdɑɹ əɡɛn, bʌt fəɹ əɹ ðət ɹikwaɪɝd kɑm, ən əɹ hɑɹtbits ʃæɾɝd kɑm.

Egwene's heart pounded, seemingly in her throat. Eyes fastened on the head of the ramp, she desperately strove to touch saidar again, but for her that required calm, and her heartbeats shattered calm.

ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ stɑpt ət ðə tɑp ə ðə ɹæmp, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət wʌt ʃi sɔ. "wʌɾ ɪn ðə neɪm ə ðə laɪɾ əz hæpən hɪɹ?" ʃi hɝid fɔɹwɝd, hɝ sɝɛnəɾi ɡɔn fəɹ wʌns.

Sheriam Sedai stopped at the top of the ramp, frowning at what she saw. "What in the name of the Light has happened here?" She hurried forward, her serenity gone for once.

"wi faʊn hɪm," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ əz ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz nɛl bɪsaɪd ðə kɔɹps.

"We found him," Nynaeve said as the Mistress of Novices knelt beside the corpse.

ʃɛɹiəm pʊɾ ə hæn tə ðə mænz tʃɛst, ən dʒɝkt ɪt bæk twaɪs əz fæst, hɪsɪŋ. stilɪŋ hɝsɛlf vɪzəbli, ʃi tʌtʃt ɪm əɡɛn, ən meɪnteɪn ðə tʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ. "dɛd," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "æz dɛɾ əz ɪts pɑsəbəl tə bi, ən mɔɹ." wən ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd, ʃi pʊld ə hæŋkɝtʃɪf fɹəm əɹ sliv ən waɪpt əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. "ju faʊn hɪm? hɪɹ? laɪk ðɪs?"

Sheriam put a hand to the man's chest, and jerked it back twice as fast, hissing. Steeling herself visibly, she touched him again, and maintained the Touch longer. "Dead," she muttered. "As dead as it is possible to be, and more." When she straightened, she pulled a handkerchief from her sleeve and wiped her fingers. "You found him? Here? Like this?"

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd, ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɪf ʃi spoʊk, ʃɛɹiəm wəd hɪɹ ðə laɪ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs.

Egwene nodded, sure that if she spoke, Sheriam would hear the lie in her voice.

"wi dɪd," nɪneɪiv sɛd fɝmli.

"We did," Nynaeve said firmly.

ʃɛɹiəm ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ə mæn - ə dɛd mæn, ət ðæt! - ɪn ðə nɑvəsɪz' kɔɹɾɝz wəd bi skændəl ɪnʌf, bʌt ðɪs . . . !"

Sheriam shook her head. "A man - a dead man, at that! - in the novices' quarters would be scandal enough, but this . . . !"

"wʌt meɪks ɪm dɪfɹənt?" nɪneɪiv æskt. "æn haʊ kəɾ i bi mɔɹ ðən dɛd?"

"What makes him different?" Nynaeve asked. "And how could he be more than dead?"

ʃɛɹiəm tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ən ɡeɪv əm itʃ ə sɝtʃɪŋ lʊk. "hi ɪz wʌn ə ðə soʊlləs. eɪ ɡɹeɪ mæn." æbsənli, ʃi waɪpt əɹ fɪŋɡɝz əɡɛn, hɝ aɪz ɡoʊɪŋ bæk tə ðə bɑɾi. wɝiɾ aɪz.

Sheriam took a deep breath, and gave them each a searching look. "He is one of the Soulless. A Gray Man." Absently, she wiped her fingers again, her eyes going back to the body. Worried eyes.

"ðə soʊlləs?" ɛɡwin sɛd, ə tʃɹɛmɝ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðət nɪneɪiv sɛd, "eɪ ɡɹeɪ mæn?"

"The Soulless?" Egwene said, a tremor in her voice, at the same time that Nynaeve said, "A Gray Man?"

ʃɛɹiəm ɡlænst ət ðɛm, ə lʊk əz pɛnətʃɹeɪɾɪŋ əz ɪt wɑz bɹif. "nɑɾ ə pɑɹɾ ə jəɹ stʌɾiz, jɛt, bʌt jə sim tə hæv ɡɔn bɪɑn ðə ɹulz ɪn ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni weɪz. ən kənsɪɾɝɪŋ jə faʊn ðɪs. . . ." ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə kɔɹps. "ðə soʊlləs, ðə ɡɹeɪ mɛn, ɡɪv ʌp ðɛɹ soʊlz tə sɝv ðə dɑɹk wʌn əz əsæsənz. ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt ɹɪli əlaɪv, æftɝ ðæt. nɑt kwaɪt dɛd, bʌt nɑt tʃɹuli əlaɪv. ən dɪspaɪt ðə neɪm, səm ɡɹeɪ mɛn ɑɹ wɪmən. ə vɛɹi fju. ivən əmʌŋ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, oʊnli ə hændfʊl ʌv wɪmən ɑɹ stupəɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ðət sækɹəfaɪs. jə kən lʊk ɹaɪɾ əɾ əm ən hɑɹdli noʊɾəs ðɛm, əntɪl ɪts tu leɪt. hi wɑz əz mʌtʃ əz dɛd waɪl i wɔkt. naʊ, oʊnli maɪ aɪz tɛl mi ðət wʌɾ ɪz laɪɪŋ ðəɹ ɛvɝ lɪvd əɾ ɔl." ʃi ɡeɪv əm ənʌðɝ lɔŋ lʊk. "noʊ ɡɹeɪ mæn əz dɛɹɾ ɛntɝ tɑɹ vəlɑn sɪns ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz."

Sheriam glanced at them, a look as penetrating as it was brief. "Not a part of your studies, yet, but you seem to have gone beyond the rules in a great many ways. And considering you found this. . . ." She gestured to the corpse. "The Soulless, the Gray Men, give up their souls to serve the Dark One as assassins. They are not really alive, after that. Not quite dead, but not truly alive. And despite the name, some Gray Men are women. A very few. Even among Darkfriends, only a handful of women are stupid enough to make that sacrifice. You can look right at them and hardly notice them, until it is too late. He was as much as dead while he walked. Now, only my eyes tell me that what is lying there ever lived at all." She gave them another long look. "No Gray Man has dared enter Tar Valon since the Trolloc Wars."

"wʌt wɪl jə du?" ɛɡwin æskt. ʃɛɹiəmz bɹaʊz ɹoʊz, ən ʃi kwɪkli æɾəd, "ɪf aɪ meɪ æsk, ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ."

"What will you do?" Egwene asked. Sheriam's brows rose, and she quickly added, "If I may ask, Sheriam Sedai."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "aɪ səpoʊz jə meɪ, sɪns jə hæd ðə bæd lʌk tə faɪn hɪm. ɪɾəl bi ʌp tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, bʌt wɪð ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðəɾ əz hæpənd, aɪ bɪliv ʃɪl wɑnə kip ðɪs əz kwaɪəɾ əz ɪz pɑsəbəl. wi də nɑt nid mɔɹ ɹumɝz. jəl spik ə ðɪs tə nʌn bʌt mi, əɹ tə ði æmɪɝlɪn, ʃəd ʃi mɛnʃən ɪt fɝst."

The Aes Sedai hesitated. "I suppose you may, since you had the bad luck to find him. It will be up to the Amyrlin Seat, but with everything that has happened, I believe she will want to keep this as quiet as is possible. We do not need more rumors. You will speak of this to none but me, or to the Amyrlin, should she mention it first."

"jɛs, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd fɝvənli. nɪneɪivz vɔɪs wɑz kulɝ.

"Yes, Aes Sedai," Egwene said fervently. Nynaeve's voice was cooler.

ʃɛɹiəm əpɪɹd tə teɪk ðɛɹ oʊbiɾiəns fəɹ ɡɹæntəd. ʃi ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ə hævɪŋ hɝd ðɛm. hɝ ətɛnʃən wɑz ɔl ɑn ðə dɛd mæn. ðə ɡɹeɪ mæn. ðə soʊlləs. "ðɛɹ wɪl bi noʊ haɪɾɪŋ ðə fæk ðəɾ ə mæn wɑz kɪl hɪɹ." ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ðə wʌn paʊɝ sʌɾənli sɝaʊndəd hɝ, ən dʒʌst əz əbɹʌpli, ə lɔŋ, loʊ doʊm kʌvɝd ðə bɑɾi ɑn ðə flɔɹ, ɡɹeɪɪʃ ən soʊ oʊpeɪk ðəɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə si ðəɹ wɑz ə bɑɾi ʌndɝ ɪt. "bʌt ðɪs wɪl kip ɛniwʌn ɛls fɹəm tʌtʃɪŋ ɪm u kən dɪskʌvɝ ɪz neɪtʃɝ. aɪ mʌst əv ðɪs ɹimuv bɪfɔɹ ðə nɑvəsɪz kʌm bæk."

Sheriam appeared to take their obedience for granted. She gave no sign of having heard them. Her attention was all on the dead man. The Gray Man. The Soulless. "There will be no hiding the fact that a man was killed here." The glow of the One Power suddenly surrounded her, and just as abruptly, a long, low dome covered the body on the floor, grayish and so opaque that it was hard to see there was a body under it. "But this will keep anyone else from touching him who can discover his nature. I must have this removed before the novices come back."

hɝ tɪltəd ɡɹin aɪz ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əm əz ɪf ʃi hæd dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðɛɹ pɹɛzəns. "ju tu ɡoʊ, naʊ. tə jəɹ ɹum, aɪ θɪŋk, nɪneɪiv. kənsɪɾɝɪŋ wʌt jə ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi feɪsɪŋ, ɪf ɪt bɪkeɪm noʊn jə wɝ ɪnvɑlvd ɪn ðɪs, ivən ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv ɪt. . . . ɡoʊ."

Her tilted green eyes regarded them as if she had just remembered their presence. "You two go, now. To your room, I think, Nynaeve. Considering what you are already facing, if it became known you were involved in this, even on the edge of it. . . . Go."

ɛɡwin kɝtsid, ən tʌɡd ət nɪneɪivz sliv, bʌt nɪneɪiv sɛd, "waɪ dɪd jə kʌm ʌp hɪɹ, ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ?"

Egwene curtsied, and tugged at Nynaeve's sleeve, but Nynaeve said, "Why did you come up here, Sheriam Sedai?"

fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃɛɹiəm lʊk stɑɹɾəld, bʌɾ ɑn ði ɪnstənt ʃi fɹaʊnd. fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps, ʃi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd nɪneɪiv wɪð ɔl ðə fɝmnəs ə hɝ ɔfəs. "dʌz ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz naʊ niɾ ən ɪkskjus fəɹ kʌmɪŋ tə ðə nɑvəsɪz' kɔɹɾɝz, æksɛptɪd?" ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "du æksɛptɪd naʊ kwɛstʃən ɛɛs sədaɪ? ði æmɪɝlɪn minz tə meɪk sʌmθɪŋ ə jə tu, bʌt wɛðɝ ʃi dʌz əɹ nɑt, əl titʃ jə mænɝz, ət list. naʊ, ðə pɛɹ ə ju, ɡoʊ, bɪfɔɹ aɪ hɔl jə boʊθ daʊn tə maɪ stʌɾi, ən nɑt fəɹ ði əpɔɪnmənt ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ əz ɔlɹɛɾi sɛt fəɹ ju."

For a moment Sheriam looked startled, but on the instant she frowned. Fists on her hips, she regarded Nynaeve with all the firmness of her office. "Does the Mistress of Novices now need an excuse for coming to the novices' quarters, Accepted?" she said softly. "Do Accepted now question Aes Sedai? The Amyrlin means to make something of you two, but whether she does or not, I will teach you manners, at least. Now, the pair of you, go, before I haul you both down to my study, and not for the appointment the Amyrlin Seat has already set for you."

ə sʌɾən θɔt keɪm tə ɛɡwin. "fɝɡɪv mi, ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ," ʃi sɛd kwɪkli, "bʌɾ aɪ mʌs fɛtʃ maɪ kloʊk. aɪ fil koʊld." ʃi ɹʌʃt əweɪ, ɝaʊn ðə ɡælɝi bɪfɔɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd spik.

A sudden thought came to Egwene. "Forgive me, Sheriam Sedai," she said quickly, "but I must fetch my cloak. I feel cold." She rushed away, around the gallery before the Aes Sedai could speak.

ɪf ʃɛɹiəm faʊn ðət kɹɔsboʊ boʊlt ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ dɔɹ, ðəɹ wəd bi tu mɛni kwɛstʃənz. noʊ pɹitɛndɪŋ ðeɪ hæɾ oʊnli faʊn ðə mæn, ðəɾ i hæd noʊ kənɛkʃən tə hɝ, ðɛn. bʌt wən ʃi ɹitʃt ðə dɔɹ tə hɝ ɹum, ðə hɛvi boʊlt wɑz ɡɔn. oʊnli ðə dʒæɡd tʃɪp ɪn ðə stoʊn bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ sɛɾ ɪt hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn ðɛɹ.

If Sheriam found that crossbow bolt in front of her door, there would be too many questions. No pretending they had only found the man, that he had no connection to her, then. But when she reached the door to her room, the heavy bolt was gone. Only the jagged chip in the stone beside the door said it had ever been there.

ɛɡwinz skɪn kɹɔld. haʊ kəɾ ɛniwʌn teɪk ɪt wɪθaʊt wʌn ʌv əs siɪŋ. . . . ənʌðɝ ɡɹeɪ mæn! ʃi hæɾ ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi nu ɪt, oʊnli ðə swit floʊ ʌv ðə paʊɝ ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ tɛlɪŋ əɹ wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn. ivən soʊ, ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðə hɑɹɾəst θɪŋz ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ dʌn, oʊpənɪŋ ðət dɔɹ ən ɡoʊɪŋ ɪndə hɝ ɹum. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ðɛɹ. ʃi snætʃt ðə waɪt kloʊk ɔf ɪts pɛɡ ən ɹæn aʊt, ɛniweɪ, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹilis seɪaɪdɑɹ əntɪl ʃi wɑz hæfweɪ bæk tə ði ʌðɝz.

Egwene's skin crawled. How could anyone take it without one of us seeing. . . . Another Gray Man! She had embraced saidar before she knew it, only the sweet flow of the Power inside her telling her what she had done. Even so, it was one of the hardest things she had ever done, opening that door and going into her room. There was no one there. She snatched the white cloak off its peg and ran out, anyway, and she did not release saidar until she was halfway back to the others.

sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ hæd pæs bɪtwin ðə wɪmən waɪl ʃi wɑz ɡɔn. nɪneɪiv wɑz ətɛmptɪŋ tə əpɪɹ mik, ən səksiɾɪŋ oʊnli ɪn lʊkɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ə saʊɝ stʌmək. ʃɛɹiəm hæɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps ən wɑz tæpɪŋ əɹ fʊɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli, ən ðə stɛɹ ʃi wɑz ɡɪvɪŋ nɪneɪiv, laɪk ɡɹin mɪlstoʊnz ɹɛɾi tə stɑɹt ɡɹaɪndɪŋ bɑɹli flaʊɝ, tʊk ɪn ɛɡwin ikwəli.

Something more had passed between the women while she was gone. Nynaeve was attempting to appear meek, and succeeding only in looking as if she had a sour stomach. Sheriam had her fists on her hips and was tapping her foot irritably, and the stare she was giving Nynaeve, like green millstones ready to start grinding barley flour, took in Egwene equally.

"fɝɡɪv mi, ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ," ʃi sɛd heɪstəli, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ə kɝtsi ən sɛɾəlɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ət ðə seɪm taɪm. "ðɪs . . . faɪndɪŋ ə dɛd mæn - ə . . . ə ɡɹeɪ mæn! - ɪt meɪd mi koʊld. ɪf wi meɪ ɡoʊ naʊ?"

"Forgive me, Sheriam Sedai," she said hastily, dropping a curtsy and settling her cloak on her shoulders at the same time. "This . . . finding a dead man - a . . . a Gray Man! - it made me cold. If we may go now?"

ət ʃɛɹiəmz taɪt nɑɾ ə dɪsmɪsəl, nɪneɪiv meɪɾ ə bɛɹ kɝtsi. ɛɡwin sizd əɹ ɑɹm ən hʌsəld əɹ əweɪ.

At Sheriam's tight nod of dismissal, Nynaeve made a bare curtsy. Egwene seized her arm and hustled her away.

"ɑɹ jə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk mɔɹ tʃɹʌbəl fəɹ ʌs?" ʃi dɪmændəd wən ðeɪ wɝ tu lɛvəlz daʊn. ən seɪfli aʊɾ ʌv ɪɹʃɑɾ ə ʃɛɹiəm, ʃi hoʊpt. "wʌɾ ɛls dɪd jə seɪ tə hɝ, tə meɪk əɹ ɡlɛɹ laɪk ðæt? mɔɹ kwɛstʃənz, aɪ səpoʊz? aɪ hoʊp jə lɝn sʌmθɪŋ wɝθ meɪkɪŋ əɹ mæɾ əɾ ʌs."

"Are you trying to make more trouble for us?" she demanded when they were two levels down. And safely out of earshot of Sheriam, she hoped. "What else did you say to her, to make her glare like that? More questions, I suppose? I hope you learned something worth making her mad at us."

"ʃi wəd nɑt seɪ ɛniθɪŋ," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd. "wi mʌst æsk kwɛstʃənz ɪf wəɹ tə də ɛni ɡʊd, ɛɡwin. wɪl əv tə teɪk ə fju tʃænsəz, əɹ wɪl nɛvɝ lɝn ɛniθɪŋ."

"She would not say anything," Nynaeve muttered. "We must ask questions if we are to do any good, Egwene. We will have to take a few chances, or we'll never learn anything."

ɛɡwin saɪd. "wɛl, bi ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ sɝkəmspɛkt." fɹəm ðə sɛɾ ə nɪneɪivz feɪs, ði ʌðɝ wʊmən hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ izi əɹ əvɔɪɾɪŋ ɹɪsks. ɛɡwin saɪɾ əɡɛn. "ðə kɹɔsboʊ boʊlt wɑz ɡɔn, nɪneɪiv. ɪt mʌst əv bɪn ənʌðɝ ɡɹeɪ mæn u tʊk ɪt."

Egwene sighed. "Well, be a little more circumspect." From the set of Nynaeve's face, the other woman had no intention of going easy or avoiding risks. Egwene sighed again. "The crossbow bolt was gone, Nynaeve. It must have been another Gray Man who took it."

"soʊ ðəɾ ɪz waɪ ju. . . . laɪt!" nɪneɪiv fɹaʊn ən ɡeɪv ə ʃɑɹp tʌɡ tə hɝ bɹeɪd.

"So that is why you. . . . Light!" Nynaeve frowned and gave a sharp tug to her braid.

æftɝ ə taɪm ɛɡwin sɛd, "wʌt wɑz ðət ʃi dɪd tə kʌvɝ ðə . . . ðə bɑɾi?" ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk ʌv ɪɾ əz ə ɡɹeɪ mæn; ðət ɹimaɪndəɾ əɹ ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ wʌn aʊt ðɛɹ. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk ʌv ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl, ɹaɪt ðɛn.

After a time Egwene said, "What was that she did to cover the . . . the body?" She did not want to think of it as a Gray Man; that reminded her there was another one out there. She did not want to think of anything at all, right then.

"ɛɹ," nɪneɪiv ɹɪplaɪd. "ʃi juzd ɛɹ. ə nit tʃɹɪk, ən aɪ θɪŋk aɪ si haʊ tə meɪk sʌmθɪŋ jusfəl wɪð ɪt."

"Air," Nynaeve replied. "She used Air. A neat trick, and I think I see how to make something useful with it."

ðə jus ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɑz dɪvaɪɾəd ɪndə ðə faɪv paʊɝz: ɝθ, ɛɹ, faɪɝ, wɔɾɝ, ən spɪɹət. dɪfɹən tæləns ɹikwaɪɝd dɪfɹən kɑmbəneɪʃənz ə ðə faɪv paʊɝz. "aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn səm ə ðə weɪz ðə faɪv paʊɝz ɑɹ kəmbaɪnd. teɪk hilɪŋ. aɪ kən si waɪ ɪt ɹikwaɪɝz spɪɹət, ən meɪbi ɛɹ, bʌt waɪ wɔɾɝ?"

The use of the One Power was divided into the Five Powers: Earth, Air, Fire, Water, and Spirit. Different Talents required different combinations of the Five Powers. "I don't understand some of the ways the Five Powers are combined. Take Healing. I can see why it requires Spirit, and maybe Air, but why Water?"

nɪneɪiv ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn hɝ. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə bæbəlɪŋ əbaʊt? hæv jə fɝɡɑɾən wʌt wɝ duɪŋ?" ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊnd. ðeɪ hæd ɹitʃt ði æksɛptɪdz kɔɹɾɝz, ə stæk ʌv ɡælɝiz loʊɝ ðən ðə nɑvəsɪz' kɔɹɾɝz, sɝaʊndɪŋ ə ɡɑɹɾən ɹæðɝ ðən ə kɔɹt. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ɪn saɪɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ənʌðɝ æksɛptɪd, hɝiɪŋ əlɔŋ ɑn ənʌðɝ lɛvəl, bʌt ʃi loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs. "hæv jə fɝɡɑɾən ðə blæk ədʒɑ?"

Nynaeve rounded on her. "What are you babbling about? Have you forgotten what we're doing?" She looked around. They had reached the Accepted's quarters, a stack of galleries lower than the novices' quarters, surrounding a garden rather than a court. There was no one in sight except for another Accepted, hurrying along on another level, but she lowered her voice. "Have you forgotten the Black Ajah?"

"aɪ æm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɝɡɛɾ ɪt," ɛɡwin sɛd fɪɹsli. "fɔɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl, ɛniweɪ. aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɝɡɛt ðət wi dʒʌs lɛft ə dɛd mæn. aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɝɡɛt ðəɾ i ɔlmoʊs kɪl mi, ən ðət hiz ə kəmpænjən u maɪt tʃɹaɪ ɪɾ əɡɛn." ʃi tʌtʃt əɹ ɪɹ; ðə dʒɹɑp ə blʌd hæd dʒɹaɪd, bʌt ðə nɪk stɪl hɝt. "wi ɑɹ lʌki wi ɑɹən boʊθ dɛd ɹaɪt naʊ."

"I am trying to forget it," Egwene said fiercely. "For a little while, anyway. I am trying to forget that we just left a dead man. I'm trying to forget that he almost killed me, and that he has a companion who might try it again." She touched her ear; the drop of blood had dried, but the nick still hurt. "We are lucky we aren't both dead right now."

nɪneɪivz feɪs sɔfənd, bʌt wən ʃi spoʊk əɹ vɔɪs hɛl sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə taɪm wən ʃi hæd bɪn ðə wɪzdəm ʌv ɛmənz fild, seɪɪŋ wɝdz ðət hæd tə bi sɛd fəɹ sʌmwʌnz oʊn ɡʊd. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət bɑɾi, ɛɡwin. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðəɾ i tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl ju. kɪl ʌs. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə blæk ədʒɑ. ɹɪmɛmbɝ əm ɔl ðə taɪm. kəz ɪf jə fɝɡɛt, dʒʌst wʌns, ðə nɛks taɪm, ɪt meɪ bi jə laɪɪŋ dɛd."

Nynaeve's face softened, but when she spoke her voice held something of the time when she had been the Wisdom of Emond's Field, saying words that had to be said for someone's own good. "Remember that body, Egwene. Remember that he tried to kill you. Kill us. Remember the Black Ajah. Remember them all the time. Because if you forget, just once, the next time, it may be you lying dead."

"aɪ noʊ," ɛɡwin saɪd. "bʌɾ aɪ də nɑɾ əv tə laɪk ɪt."

"I know," Egwene sighed. "But I do not have to like it."

"dɪd jə noʊɾəs wʌt ʃɛɹiəm dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən?"

"Did you notice what Sheriam did not mention?"

"noʊ. wʌt?"

"No. What?"

"ʃi nɛvɝ wʌndɝɾ u stæb hɪm. naʊ, kʌm ɑn. maɪ ɹum ɪz dʒʌs daʊn hɪɹ, ən jə kən pʊt jəɹ fiɾ ʌp waɪl wi tɔk."

"She never wondered who stabbed him. Now, come on. My room is just down here, and you can put your feet up while we talk."


tʃæptɝ sɪkstin


CHAPTER 16

hʌntɝz θɹi


Hunters Three

nɪneɪivz ɹum wɑz kənsɪɾɝəbli lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ðə nɑvəs ɹumz. ʃi hæɾ ə ɹil bɛd, nɑt wʌn bɪlt ɪndə ðə wɔl, tu læɾɝ-bæk ɑɹmtʃɛɹz ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə stul, ən ə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb fəɹ əɹ kloʊðz. ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz wɝ ɔl pleɪn, suɾəbəl fəɹ ə mɪɾəlɪŋ səksɛsfəl fɑɹmɝz haʊs, bʌt kəmpɛɹd tə ðə nɑvəsɪz, ði æksɛptɪd lɪvd ɪn lʌɡʒɝi. ðəɹ wɑz ivən ə smɔl ɹʌɡ, woʊvən wɪð skɹoʊlz ə jɛloʊ ən ɹɛɾ ɑn blu. ðə ɹum wɑz nɑɾ ɛmpti wən ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv ɛntɝd.

Nynaeve's room was considerably larger than the novice rooms. She had a real bed, not one built into the wall, two ladder-back armchairs instead of a stool, and a wardrobe for her clothes. The furnishings were all plain, suitable for a middling successful farmer's house, but compared to the novices, the Accepted lived in luxury. There was even a small rug, woven with scrolls of yellow and red on blue. The room was not empty when Egwene and Nynaeve entered.

ɪleɪn stʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs, ɑɹmz kɹɔs bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts ən aɪz ɹɛɾ ət lis pɑɹtli fɹəm æŋɡɝ. tu tɔl jʌŋ mɛn spɹɔld ɪn ðə tʃɛɹz, ɔl ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz. wʌn, wɪð ɪz dɑɹk ɡɹin koʊɾ əndʌn tə ʃoʊ ə snoʊi ʃɝt, ʃɛɹɾ ɪleɪnz blu aɪz ən ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ, ən ɪz ɡɹɪnɪŋ feɪs mɑɹkt ɪm pleɪnli əz əɹ bɹʌðɝ. ði ʌðɝ, nɪneɪivz eɪdʒ ən wɪð ɪz ɡɹeɪ koʊt nitli bʌɾənd, wɑz slɛndɝ ən dɑɹk ə hɛɹ ən aɪ. hi ɹoʊz, ɔl ʃʊɹ kɑnfəɾəns ən laɪθli mʌsəld ɡɹeɪs, wən ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv keɪm ɪn. hi wɑz, ɛɡwin θɔt nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, ðə moʊs hænsəm mæn ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. hɪz neɪm wɑz ɡɑləd.

Elayne stood in front of the fireplace, arms crossed beneath her breasts and eyes red at least partly from anger. Two tall young men sprawled in the chairs, all arms and legs. One, with his dark green coat undone to show a snowy shirt, shared Elayne's blue eyes and red-gold hair, and his grinning face marked him plainly as her brother. The other, Nynaeve's age and with his gray coat neatly buttoned, was slender and dark of hair and eye. He rose, all sure confidence and lithely muscled grace, when Egwene and Nynaeve came in. He was, Egwene thought not for the first time, the most handsome man she had ever seen. His name was Galad.

"ɪɾ ɪz ɡʊd tə si jə əɡɛn," hi sɛd, teɪkɪŋ əɹ hænd. "aɪ hæv wɝid mʌtʃ oʊvɝ ju. wɪv wɝid mʌtʃ."

"It is good to see you again," he said, taking her hand. "I have worried much over you. We have worried much."

hɝ pʌls kwɪkənd, ən ʃi tʊk bæk əɹ hæn bɪfɔɹ i ʃəd fil ɪt. "θæŋk ju, ɡɑləd," ʃi mɝmɝd. laɪt, bʌt hiz bjuɾəfəl. ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf tə stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ ðət weɪ. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi. ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf smuðɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛs, wɪʃɪŋ i wɝ siɪŋ əɹ ɪn sɪlk ɪnstɛɾ ə ðɪs pleɪn waɪt wʊl, pɝhæps ivən wʌn ə ðoʊz dəmɑni dʒɹɛsəz mɪn hæd toʊld əɹ ʌv, ðə wʌnz ðət klʌŋ ən sim soʊ θɪn jə θɔt ðeɪ mʌs bi tʃɹænspɛɹən ivən ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ nɑt. ʃi flʌʃt fjʊɹiəsli ən bænɪʃt ði ɪmədʒ fɹəm əɹ maɪnd, wɪld ɪm tə lʊk əweɪ fɹəm əɹ feɪs. ɪt dɪd nɑt hɛlp ðət hæf ðə wɪmən ɪn ðə taʊɝ, fɹəm skʌlɝi meɪdz tə ɛɛs sədaɪ ðɛmsɛlvz, lʊkt əɾ ɪm əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd ðə seɪm θɔts. ɪt dɪd nɑt hɛlp ðəɾ ɪz smaɪl sim fəɹ əɹ əloʊn. ɪn fækt, hɪz smaɪl meɪɾ ɪt wɝs. laɪt, ɪf i ivən səspɛktəd wʌɾ aɪ wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ, aɪd daɪ!

Her pulse quickened, and she took back her hand before he should feel it. "Thank you, Galad," she murmured. Light, but he's beautiful. She told herself to stop thinking that way. It was not easy. She found herself smoothing her dress, wishing he were seeing her in silk instead of this plain white wool, perhaps even one of those Domani dresses Min had told her of, the ones that clung and seemed so thin you thought they must be transparent even though they were not. She flushed furiously and banished the image from her mind, willed him to look away from her face. It did not help that half the women in the Tower, from scullery maids to Aes Sedai themselves, looked at him as if they had the same thoughts. It did not help that his smile seemed for her alone. In fact, his smile made it worse. Light, if he even suspected what I was thinking, I'd die!

ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd jʌŋ mæn lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ. "ðə kwɛstʃən ɪz, wɛɹ əv jə bɪn? ɪleɪn dɑdʒɪz maɪ kwɛstʃənz əz ɪf ʃiz ə pɑkət fʊl ə fɪɡz ən dʌznt wɑn mi tə hæv ɛni."

The golden-haired young man leaned forward in his chair. "The question is, where have you been? Elayne dodges my questions as if she has a pocket full of figs and doesn't want me to have any."

"aɪ hæv toʊl ju, ɡɔɪn," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs, "ɪɾ ɪz nʌn ə jəɹ əfɛɹ. aɪ keɪm hɪɹ," ʃi æɾəd tə nɪneɪiv, "bɪkɔz aɪ dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi əloʊn. ðeɪ sɔ mi, ən fɑloʊd. ðeɪ wəd nɑt teɪk noʊ fəɹ ən ænsɝ."

"I have told you, Gawyn," Elayne said in a tight voice, "it is none of your affair. I came here," she added to Nynaeve, "because I did not want to be alone. They saw me, and followed. They would not take no for an answer."

"wʊdn ðeɪ," nɪneɪiv sɛd flætli.

"Wouldn't they," Nynaeve said flatly.

"bʌɾ ɪts əɹ əfɛɹ, sɪstɝ," ɡɑləd sɛd. "jɔɹ seɪfti ɪz vɛɹi mʌtʃ əɹ əfɛɹ." hi lʊkt əɾ ɛɡwin, ən ʃi fɛlt əɹ hɑɹt dʒʌmp. "ðə seɪfti ʌv ɔl ə jə ɪz vɛɹi ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə mi. tə ʌs."

"But it is our affair, sister," Galad said. "Your safety is very much our affair." He looked at Egwene, and she felt her heart jump. "The safety of all of you is very important to me. To us."

"aɪ æm nɑt jəɹ sɪstɝ," ɪleɪn snæpt.

"I am not your sister," Elayne snapped.

"ɪf jə wɑn kʌmpəni," ɡɔɪn toʊld ɪleɪn wɪð ə smaɪl, "wi kən də əz wɛl əz ɛni. ən æftɝ wʌt wi wɛn θɹu dʒʌs tə bi hɪɹ, wi dɪzɝv səm ɛkspləneɪʃən ʌv wɛɹ juv bɪn. aɪ wəd ɹæðɝ lɛt ɡɑləd θʌmp mi ɔl oʊvɝ ðə pɹæktəs jɑɹɾ ɔl deɪ ðən feɪs mʌðɝ əɡɛn fəɹ ə sɪŋɡəl mɪnət. aɪd ɹæðɝ əv kaʊulæn mæɾ ət mi." kaʊulæn wɑz mæstɝ ʌv ɑɹmz, ən kɛpt ə taɪt dɪsəplən əmʌŋ ðə jʌŋ mɛn u keɪm tə tʃɹeɪn ət ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɛðɝ ðeɪ əspaɪɹd tə bɪkʌm wɔɹɾɝz əɹ dʒʌs tə lɝn fɹəm ðɛm.

"If you want company," Gawyn told Elayne with a smile, "we can do as well as any. And after what we went through just to be here, we deserve some explanation of where you've been. I would rather let Galad thump me all over the practice yard all day than face Mother again for a single minute. I'd rather have Coulin mad at me." Coulin was Master of Arms, and kept a tight discipline among the young men who came to train at the White Tower whether they aspired to become Warders or just to learn from them.

"dɪnaɪ ðə kənɛkʃən ɪf jə wɪl," ɡɑləd toʊld ɪleɪn ɡɹeɪvli, "bʌɾ ɪts stɪl ðɛɹ. ən mʌðɝ pʊt jəɹ seɪfti ɪn əɹ hænz."

"Deny the connection if you will," Galad told Elayne gravely, "but it is still there. And Mother put your safety in our hands."

ɡɔɪn ɡɹɪməst. "ʃil əv əɹ haɪdz, ɪleɪn, ɪf ɛniθɪŋ hæpənz tə ju. wi hæd tə tɔk fæst, əɹ ʃiɾ əv hɔld əs bæk hoʊm wɪð hɝ. aɪ hæv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ə kwin sɛndɪŋ əɹ oʊn sʌnz tə ðə hɛdzmən, bʌt mʌðɝ saʊndəd ɹɛɾi tə meɪk ən ɪksɛpʃən ɪf wi doʊn bɹɪŋ jə hoʊm seɪfli."

Gawyn grimaced. "She'll have our hides, Elayne, if anything happens to you. We had to talk fast, or she'd have hauled us back home with her. I have never heard of a queen sending her own sons to the headsman, but Mother sounded ready to make an exception if we don't bring you home safely."

"aɪ æm ʃʊɹ," ɪleɪn sɛd, "ðæt jəɹ fæs tɔk wɑz ɔl fəɹ mi. nʌn ʌv ɪt wɑz mɛn tə lɛt jə steɪ hɪɹ stʌɾiɪŋ wɪð ðə wɔɹɾɝz." ɡɔɪnz feɪs ɹɛɾənd.

"I am sure," Elayne said, "that your fast talk was all for me. None of it was meant to let you stay here studying with the Warders." Gawyn's face reddened.

"jɔɹ seɪfti wɑz əɹ fɝs kənsɝn." ɡɑləd saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i mɛn ɪt, ən ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ i dɪd. "wi mænədʒ tə kənvɪns mʌðɝ ðəɾ ɪf jə dɪd ɹɪtɝn hɪɹ, jə wəd nid sʌmwʌn tə lʊk æftɝ ju."

"Your safety was our first concern." Galad sounded as if he meant it, and Egwene was sure he did. "We managed to convince Mother that if you did return here, you would need someone to look after you."

"lʊk æftɝ mi!" ɪleɪn ɪkskleɪmd, bʌt ɡɑləd wɛn ɑn smuðli.

"Look after me!" Elayne exclaimed, but Galad went on smoothly.

"ðə waɪt taʊɝ əz bɪkʌm ə deɪnʒɝəs pleɪs. ðəɹ əv bɪn dɛθs - mɝɾɝz - wɪð noʊ ɹil ɛkspləneɪʃənz. ivən səm ɛɛs sədaɪ hæv bɪn kɪld, ðoʊ ðeɪv tʃɹaɪd tə kip ðət kwaɪət. ən aɪ hæv hɝd ɹumɝz ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ, spoʊkən ɪn ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf. baɪ mʌðɝz kəmænd, wən ɪts seɪf fəɹ jə tə liv jəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, wəɹ tə ɹɪtɝn jə tə keɪɛmlɪn."

"The White Tower has become a dangerous place. There have been deaths - murders - with no real explanations. Even some Aes Sedai have been killed, though they have tried to keep that quiet. And I have heard rumors of the Black Ajah, spoken in the Tower itself. By Mother's command, when it is safe for you to leave your training, we are to return you to Caemlyn."

fəɹ ænsɝ, ɪleɪn lɪftəɾ əɹ tʃɪn ən hæf tɝn əweɪ fɹəm hɪm.

For answer, Elayne lifted her chin and half turned away from him.

ɡɔɪn ɹæn ə hæn θɹu hɪz hɛɹ ɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. "laɪt, nɪneɪiv, ɡɑləɾ ən aɪ ɑɹ nɑt vɪlənz. ɔl wi wɑnə də ɪz hɛlp. wi wəd də ɪɾ ɛniweɪ, bʌt mʌðɝ kəmændəɾ ɪt, soʊ ðɛɹz noʊ tʃæns ə jə tɔkɪŋ əs aʊɾ ʌv ɪt."

Gawyn ran a hand through his hair in frustration. "Light, Nynaeve, Galad and I are not villains. All we want to do is help. We would do it anyway, but Mother commanded it, so there's no chance of you talking us out of it."

"mɔɹɡeɪsəz kəmænz kæɹi noʊ weɪɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ə lɛvəl vɔɪs. "æz fəɹ jəɹ ɔfɝ ə hɛlp, əl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt. ʃəd wi nid hɛlp, jəl bi əmʌŋ ðə fɝs tə hɪɹ ʌv ɪt. fəɹ naʊ, aɪ wɪʃ jə tə liv." ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd pɔɪntɪdli tə ðə dɔɹ, bʌɾ i ɪɡnɔɹd hɝ.

"Morgase's commands carry no weight in Tar Valon," Nynaeve said in a level voice. "As for your offer of help, I will remember it. Should we need help, you will be among the first to hear of it. For now, I wish you to leave." She gestured pointedly to the door, but he ignored her.

"ðæɾ ɪz ɔl vɛɹi wɛl, bʌt mʌðɝ wɪl wɑnə noʊ ɪleɪn əz kʌm bæk. ən waɪ ʃi ɹæn ɔf wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd, ən wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ ðiz mʌnθs. laɪt, ɪleɪn! ðə hoʊl taʊɝ wɑz ɪn ə tɝmɔɪl. mʌðɝ wɑz hæf-kɹeɪzd wɪð fɪɹ. aɪ θɔt ʃid tɛɹ ðə taʊɝ daʊn wɪð əɹ bɛɹ hænz." ɪleɪnz feɪs tʊk ɑn ə mɛʒɝ ʌv ɡɪlt, ən ɡɔɪn pɹɛst ɪz ædvæntɪdʒ. "ju oʊ hɝ ðət mʌtʃ, ɪleɪn. jə oʊ mi ðət mʌtʃ. bɝn mi, jəɹ biɪŋ əz stʌbɝn əz stoʊn. juv bɪn ɡɔn fəɹ mʌnθs, ən ɔl aɪ noʊ əbaʊɾ ɪts ðət juv ɹʌn əfaʊl ə ʃɛɹiəm. ən ði oʊnli ɹizənz aɪ noʊ ðət mʌtʃ ɑɹ kəz juv bɪn kɹaɪɪŋ ən jə woʊn sɪt daʊn." ɪleɪnz ɪndɪɡnən stɛɹ sɛɾ i hæd skwɑndɝd wʌtɛvɝ moʊməntɛɹi ædvæntɪdʒ i maɪɾ əv hæd.

"That is all very well, but Mother will want to know Elayne has come back. And why she ran off without a word, and what she was doing these months. Light, Elayne! The whole Tower was in a turmoil. Mother was half-crazed with fear. I thought she'd tear the Tower down with her bare hands." Elayne's face took on a measure of guilt, and Gawyn pressed his advantage. "You owe her that much, Elayne. You owe me that much. Burn me, you're being as stubborn as stone. You've been gone for months, and all I know about it is that you've run afoul of Sheriam. And the only reasons I know that much are because you've been crying and you won't sit down." Elayne's indignant stare said he had squandered whatever momentary advantage he might have had.

"ɪnʌf," nɪneɪiv sɛd. ɡɑləɾ ən ɡɔɪn oʊpən ðɛɹ maʊðz. ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs. "aɪ sɛɾ ɪnʌf!" ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ əm əntɪl ɪt wɑz klɪɹ ðɛɹ saɪləns wəd hoʊld, ðən wɛn ɑn. "ɪleɪn oʊz ðə tu ʌv jə nʌθɪŋ. sɪns ʃi tʃuzəz tə tɛl jə nʌθɪŋ, ðəɾ ɪz ðæt. naʊ, ðɪs ɪz maɪ ɹum, nɑt ðə kɑmən ɹum ʌv ən ɪn, ən aɪ wɑn jə aʊɾ ʌv ɪt."

"Enough," Nynaeve said. Galad and Gawyn opened their mouths. She raised her voice. "I said enough!" She glared at them until it was clear their silence would hold, then went on. "Elayne owes the two of you nothing. Since she chooses to tell you nothing, that is that. Now, this is my room, not the common room of an inn, and I want you out of it."

"bʌt, ɪleɪn - " ɡɔɪn bɪɡæn ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðət ɡɑləd sɛd, "wi oʊnli wɑnt - "

"But, Elayne - " Gawyn began at the same time that Galad said, "We only want - "

nɪneɪiv spoʊk laʊdli ɪnʌf tə dʒɹaʊn əm aʊt. "aɪ daʊt jə æsk pɝmɪʃən tə ɛntɝ ði æksɛptɪdz kɔɹɾɝz." ðeɪ stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, lʊkɪŋ sɝpɹaɪzd. "aɪ θɔt nɑt. jəl bi aʊɾ ə maɪ ɹum, aʊɾ ə maɪ saɪt, bɪfɔɹ aɪ kaʊn θɹi, əɹ əl ɹaɪɾ ə noʊt tə ðə mæstɝ ʌv ɑɹmz əbaʊt ðɪs. kaʊulæn ɡeɪɾɪn əz ə mʌtʃ stʃɹɔŋɝ ɑɹm ðən ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ, ən jə meɪ bi əʃʊɹd ðəɾ əl bi ðəɹ tə si hi meɪks ə pɹɑpɝ dʒɑb ʌv ɪt."

Nynaeve spoke loudly enough to drown them out. "I doubt you asked permission to enter the Accepted's quarters." They stared at her, looking surprised. "I thought not. You will be out of my room, out of my sight, before I count three, or I will write a note to the Master of Arms about this. Coulin Gaidin has a much stronger arm than Sheriam Sedai, and you may be assured that I will be there to see he makes a proper job of it."

"nɪneɪiv, jə wʊdnt - " ɡɔɪn bɪɡæn wɝidli, bʌt ɡɑləd moʊʃən ɪm tə saɪləns ən stɛp kloʊsɝ tə nɪneɪiv.

"Nynaeve, you wouldn't - " Gawyn began worriedly, but Galad motioned him to silence and stepped closer to Nynaeve.

hɝ feɪs kɛpt ɪts stɝn ɪkspɹɛʃən, bʌt ʃi ʌnkɑnʃəsli smuðd ðə fɹʌn ə hɝ dʒɹɛs əz i smaɪl daʊn ət hɝ. ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt sɝpɹaɪzd. ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi hæd mɛɾ ə wʊmən aʊtsaɪd ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ hu wəd nɑt bi əfɛktəd baɪ ɡɑlədz smaɪl.

Her face kept its stern expression, but she unconsciously smoothed the front of her dress as he smiled down at her. Egwene was not surprised. She did not think she had met a woman outside the Red Ajah who would not be affected by Galad's smile.

"aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz, nɪneɪiv, fəɹ əɹ fɔɹsɪŋ aʊɝsɛlvz ɑn jə ənwɔntɪd," hi sɛd smuðli. "wi wɪl ɡoʊ, ʌv kɔɹs. bʌt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət wəɹ hɪɹ ɪf jə niɾ ʌs. ən wʌtɛvɝ kɑz jə tə ɹʌn əweɪ, wi kən hɛlp wɪð ðæt, əz wɛl."

"I apologize, Nynaeve, for our forcing ourselves on you unwanted," he said smoothly. "We will go, of course. But remember that we are here if you need us. And whatever caused you to run away, we can help with that, as well."

nɪneɪiv ɹɪtɝn ɪz smaɪl. "wʌn," ʃi sɛd.

Nynaeve returned his smile. "One," she said.

ɡɑləd blɪŋkt, hɪz smaɪl feɪɾɪŋ. kɑmli, hi tɝn tə ɛɡwin. ɡɔɪn ɡɑɾ ʌp ən stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ. "ɛɡwin," ɡɑləd sɛd, "ju noʊ ðət ju, ɪspɛʃli, kən kɔl ɑn mi əɾ ɛni taɪm, fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ. aɪ hoʊp jə noʊ ðæt."

Galad blinked, his smile fading. Calmly, he turned to Egwene. Gawyn got up and started for the door. "Egwene," Galad said, "you know that you, especially, can call on me at any time, for anything. I hope you know that."

"tu," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"Two," Nynaeve said.

ɡɑləd ɡeɪv əɹ ən ɪɹəteɪɾəd lʊk. "wi wɪl tɔk əɡɛn," hi toʊld ɛɡwin, boʊɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ hænd. wɪð ə læst smaɪl, hi tʊk ən ənhɝid stɛp təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ.

Galad gave her an irritated look. "We will talk again," he told Egwene, bowing over her hand. With a last smile, he took an unhurried step toward the door.

"ɹɹ" - ɡɔɪn dɑɹɾɪd θɹu ðə dɔɹ, ən ivən ɡɑlədz ɡɹeɪsfəl stʃɹaɪd kwɪkən mɑɹkədli - "ɹi," nɪneɪiv fɪnɪʃt əz ðə dɔɹ bæŋd ʃʌt bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

"Thrrrrrrrrr" - Gawyn darted through the door, and even Galad's graceful stride quickened markedly - "ree," Nynaeve finished as the door banged shut behind them.

ɪleɪn klæpt əɹ hænz dɪlaɪɾɪdli. "oʊ, wɛl dʌn," ʃi sɛd. "vɛɹi wɛl dʌn. aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ivən noʊ mɛn wɝ fɔɹbɪɾən ði æksɛptɪdz kɔɹɾɝz, tu."

Elayne clapped her hands delightedly. "Oh, well done," she said. "Very well done. I did not even know men were forbidden the Accepted's quarters, too."

"ðeɪ ɑɹənt," nɪneɪiv sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "bʌt ðoʊz laʊts dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪt, iðɝ." ɪleɪn klæpt əɹ hænz əɡɛn ən læft. "aɪɾ əv lɛɾ əm dʒʌs liv," nɪneɪiv æɾəd, "ɪf ɡɑləd hæd nɑt meɪd sətʃ ə ʃoʊ ʌv teɪkɪŋ ɪz taɪm əbaʊɾ ɪt. ðət jʌŋ mæn əz tu fɛɹ ə feɪs fəɹ ɪz oʊn ɡʊd." ɛɡwin ɔlmoʊs læft ət ðæt; ɡɑləd wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə jɪɹ jʌŋɡɝ ðət nɪneɪiv, ɪf ðæt, ən nɪneɪiv wɑz stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛs əɡɛn.

"They aren't," Nynaeve said dryly, "but those louts did not know it, either." Elayne clapped her hands again and laughed. "I'd have let them just leave," Nynaeve added, "if Galad had not made such a show of taking his time about it. That young man has too fair a face for his own good." Egwene almost laughed at that; Galad was no more than a year younger that Nynaeve, if that, and Nynaeve was straightening her dress again.

"ɡɑləd!" ɪleɪn snɪft. "hil bɑðɝ əs əɡɛn, ən aɪ də nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ jəɹ tʃɹɪk wɪl wɝk mɔɹ ðən wʌns. hi dʌz wʌɾ i siz əz ɹaɪt noʊ mæɾɝ u ɪt hɝts, ivən hɪmsɛlf."

"Galad!" Elayne sniffed. "He'll bother us again, and I do not know whether your trick will work more than once. He does what he sees as right no matter who it hurts, even himself."

"ðɛn əl θɪŋk ə sʌmθɪŋ ɛls," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "wi kæn əfɔɹd tə hæv əm lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ɔl ðə taɪm. ɪleɪn, ɪf jə wɪʃ, aɪ kən meɪk ə sɑv ðət wɪl suð ju."

"Then I will think of something else," Nynaeve said. "We can't afford to have them looking over our shoulders all the time. Elayne, if you wish, I can make a salve that will soothe you."

ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ðən leɪ daʊn əkɹɔs ðə bɛd wɪð əɹ tʃɪn ɪn əɹ hænz. "ɪf ʃɛɹiəm faʊn aʊt, wi wəd noʊ daʊt boʊθ əv jɛɾ ənʌðɝ vɪzət tə hɝ stʌɾi tə lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə. juv nɑt sɛd vɛɹi mʌtʃ, ɛɡwin. kæt kɑt jəɹ tʌŋ?" hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən bɪkeɪm ɡɹɪmɝ. "ɔɹ pɝhæps ɡɑləd hæz?"

Elayne shook her head, then lay down across the bed with her chin in her hands. "If Sheriam found out, we would no doubt both have yet another visit to her study to look forward to. You have not said very much, Egwene. Cat caught your tongue?" Her expression became grimmer. "Or perhaps Galad has?"

ɛɡwin blʌʃt ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf. "aɪ sɪmpli dɪd nɑt tʃuz tə ɑɹɡju wɪð ðɛm," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn əz dɪɡnəfaɪɾ ə toʊn əz ʃi kəd mænədʒ.

Egwene blushed in spite of herself. "I simply did not choose to argue with them," she said in as dignified a tone as she could manage.

"ʌv kɔɹs," ɪleɪn sɛd ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli. "aɪ wɪl ədmɪt ðət ɡɑləɾ ɪz ɡʊd-lʊkɪŋ. bʌt hiz hɔɹəd, tu. hi ɔlweɪz dʌz ɹaɪt, əz i siz ɪɾ aɪ noʊ ðət dʌz nɑt saʊn hɔɹəd, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz. hiz nɛvɝ dɪsoʊbeɪd mʌðɝ, nɑɾ ɪn ðə smɔləs θɪŋ ðəɾ aɪ noʊ ʌv. hɪl nɑt tɛl ə laɪ, ivən ə smɔl wʌn, əɹ bɹeɪk ə ɹul. ɪf i tɝnz jə ɪn fəɹ bɹeɪkɪŋ wʌn, ðəɹ ɪzən ðə slaɪɾəst spaɪɾ ɪn ɪt - hi simz sæd jə kəd nɑt lɪv ʌp tə hɪz stændɝdz, ɪf ɛniθɪŋ - bʌt ðət dʌzn tʃeɪnʒ ðə fæk ðət hɪl tɝn jə ɪn."

"Of course," Elayne said grudgingly. "I will admit that Galad is good-looking. But he is horrid, too. He always does right, as he sees it I know that does not sound horrid, but it is. He has never disobeyed Mother, not in the smallest thing that I know of. He will not tell a lie, even a small one, or break a rule. If he turns you in for breaking one, there isn't the slightest spite in it - he seems sad you could not live up to his standards, if anything - but that doesn't change the fact that he will turn you in."

"ðæt saʊnz - ənkʌmftəɹbəl," ɛɡwin sɛd kɛɹfəli, "bʌt nɑt hɔɹəd. aɪ kænɑɾ ɪmædʒən ɡɑləd duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ hɔɹəd."

"That sounds - uncomfortable," Egwene said carefully, "but not horrid. I cannot imagine Galad doing anything horrid."

ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, əz ɪf ɪn dɪsbɪlif ðəɾ ɛɡwin faʊn ɪt soʊ hɑɹd tə si wʌt wɑz klɪɹ tə hɝ. "ɪf jə wɑnə peɪ ətɛnʃən tə sʌmwʌn, tʃɹaɪ ɡɔɪn. hiz naɪs ɪnʌf - moʊst ə ðə taɪm - ən hiz bɛsɑɾɪd wɪð ju."

Elayne shook her head, as if in disbelief that Egwene found it so hard to see what was clear to her. "If you want to pay attention to someone, try Gawyn. He is nice enough - most of the time - and he's besotted with you."

"ɡɔɪn! hiz nɛvɝ lʊkt ət mi twaɪs."

"Gawyn! He has never looked at me twice."

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt, jə ful, ðə weɪ jə stɛɹ ət ɡɑləɾ əntɪl jəɹ aɪz lʊk ɹɛɾi tə fɔl aʊɾ ə jəɹ feɪs." ɛɡwinz tʃiks fɛl hɑt, bʌt ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪɾ ɪt maɪt wɛl bi tʃɹu. "ɡɑləd seɪvd ɪz laɪf wən ɡɔɪn wɑz ə tʃaɪld," ɪleɪn wɛn ɑn. "ɡɔɪn wɪl nɛvɝ ədmɪt hiz ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ə wʊmən ɪf ɡɑləɾ ɪz ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn hɝ, bʌɾ aɪ hæv hɝɾ ɪm tɔk əbaʊt ju, ən aɪ noʊ. hi nɛvɝ kəd haɪd θɪŋz fɹəm mi."

"Of course not, you fool, the way you stare at Galad until your eyes look ready to fall out of your face." Egwene's cheeks felt hot, but she was afraid it might well be true. "Galad saved his life when Gawyn was a child," Elayne went on. "Gawyn will never admit he is interested in a woman if Galad is interested in her, but I have heard him talk about you, and I know. He never could hide things from me."

"ðæɾ ɪz naɪs tə noʊ," ɛɡwin sɛd, ðən læft əɾ ɪleɪnz ɡɹɪn. "pɝhæps aɪ kən ɡɛɾ ɪm tə seɪ səm ə ðoʊz θɪŋz tə mi ɪnstɛɾ ə ju."

"That is nice to know," Egwene said, then laughed at Elayne's grin. "Perhaps I can get him to say some of those things to me instead of you."

"ju kəd tʃuz ɡɹin ədʒɑ, jə noʊ. ɡɹin sɪstɝz səmtaɪmz mɛɹi. ɡɔɪn tʃɹuli ɪz bɛsɑɾɪd, ən jə wəd bi ɡʊd fəɹ hɪm. bɪsaɪdz, aɪ wəd laɪk tə hæv jə fəɹ ə sɪstɝ."

"You could choose Green Ajah, you know. Green sisters sometimes marry. Gawyn truly is besotted, and you would be good for him. Besides, I would like to have you for a sister."

"ɪf jə tu ɑɹ fɪnɪʃt wɪð ɡɝlɪʃ tʃæɾɝ," nɪneɪiv kʌɾ ɪn, "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz tə tɔk əbaʊt."

"If you two are finished with girlish chatter," Nynaeve cut in, "there are important matters to talk about."

"jɛs," ɪleɪn sɛd, "sʌtʃ əz wʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hæd tə seɪ tə jə æftɝ aɪ lɛft."

"Yes," Elayne said, "such as what the Amyrlin Seat had to say to you after I left."

"aɪ wəd ɹæðɝ nɑt tɔk əbaʊt ðæt," ɛɡwin sɛɾ ɔkwɝdli. ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk laɪɪŋ tə ɪleɪn. "ʃi dɪd nɑt seɪ ɛniθɪŋ ðət wɑz plɛzənt."

"I would rather not talk about that," Egwene said awkwardly. She did not like lying to Elayne. "She did not say anything that was pleasant."

ɪleɪn ɡeɪv ə snɪf ə dɪsbɪlif. "moʊs pipəl θɪŋk aɪ ɡɛɾ ɔf iziɝ ðən ði ʌðɝz kəz aɪm dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ. ðə tʃɹuθ ɪz ðəɾ ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, aɪ kætʃ ɪt hɑɹɾɝ ðən ðə ɹɛs kəz aɪm dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ. niðɝ ə jə dɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ aɪ dɪd nɑt, ən ɪf ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd hɑɹʃ wɝdz fəɹ ju, ʃi wəɾ əv twaɪs əz hɑɹʃ fəɹ mi. naʊ, wʌd ʃi seɪ?"

Elayne gave a sniff of disbelief. "Most people think I get off easier than the others because I am Daughter-Heir of Andor. The truth is that if anything, I catch it harder than the rest because I'm Daughter-Heir. Neither of you did anything I did not, and if the Amyrlin had harsh words for you, she would have twice as harsh for me. Now, what did she say?"

"ju mʌs kip ðɪs dʒʌs bɪtwin əs θɹi," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ðə blæk ədʒɑ - "

"You must keep this just between us three," Nynaeve said. "The Black Ajah - "

"nɪneɪiv!" ɛɡwin ɪkskleɪmd. "ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛɾ ɪleɪn wɑz tə bi lɛft aʊɾ ʌv ɪt!"

"Nynaeve!" Egwene exclaimed. "The Amyrlin said Elayne was to be left out of it!"

"ðə blæk ədʒɑ!" ɪleɪn ɔlmoʊst ʃaʊɾəd, skɹæmbəlɪŋ ʌp tə nil ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə bɛd. "ju kænɑt liv mi aʊɾ æftɝ tɛlɪŋ mi ðɪs mʌtʃ. aɪ woʊn bi lɛft aʊt."

"The Black Ajah!" Elayne almost shouted, scrambling up to kneel in the middle of the bed. "You cannot leave me out after telling me this much. I won't be left out."

"aɪ nɛvɝ mɛn fəɹ jə tə bi," nɪneɪiv əʃʊɹd hɝ. ɛɡwin kəɾ oʊnli stɛɹ əɾ əɹ ɪn əmeɪzmənt. "ɛɡwin, ɪt wɑz jə ən aɪ hu liɑnʒɹɪn sɔ əz ə θɹɛt. ɪt wɑz jə ən aɪ hu wɝ dʒʌs nɪɹli kɪld - "

"I never meant for you to be," Nynaeve assured her. Egwene could only stare at her in amazement. "Egwene, it was you and I who Liandrin saw as a threat. It was you and I who were just nearly killed - "

"nɪɹli kɪld?" ɪleɪn wɪspɝd.

"Nearly killed?" Elayne whispered.

" - pɝhæps kəz wəɹ stɪl ə θɹɛt, ən pɝhæps kəz ðeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi noʊ ðət wi wɝ klɑzəɾɪd əloʊn wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn, ən ivən wʌt ʃi toʊld ʌs. wi nid sʌmwʌn wɪð əs u ðeɪ də nɑt noʊ əbaʊt, ən ɪf ʃi ɪzənt noʊn tə ði æmɪɝlɪn, iðɝ, soʊ mʌtʃ ðə bɛɾɝ. aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ wi kən tʃɹʌs ði æmɪɝlɪn mʌtʃ fɝðɝ ðən ðə blæk ədʒɑ. ʃi minz tə juz əs fəɹ əɹ oʊn ɛnz. aɪ min tə si ʃi dʌzn juz əs ʌp. kən jə ʌndɝstæn ðæt?"

" - perhaps because we are still a threat, and perhaps because they already know that we were closeted alone with the Amyrlin, and even what she told us. We need someone with us who they do not know about, and if she isn't known to the Amyrlin, either, so much the better. I am not sure we can trust the Amyrlin much further than the Black Ajah. She means to use us for her own ends. I mean to see she doesn't use us up. Can you understand that?"

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli. dʒʌs ðə seɪm, ʃi sɛd, "ɪt wɪl bi deɪnʒɝəs, ɪleɪn, əz deɪnʒɝəs əz ɛniθɪŋ wi feɪst ɪn fɑlm. meɪbi mɔɹ soʊ. jə də nɑɾ əv tə bi pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt, ðɪs taɪm."

Egwene nodded reluctantly. Just the same, she said, "It will be dangerous, Elayne, as dangerous as anything we faced in Falme. Maybe more so. You do not have to be part of it, this time."

"aɪ noʊ ðæt," ɪleɪn sɛd kwaɪətli. ʃi pɔzd, ðən wɛn ɑn. "wɛn ændɝ ɡoʊz tə wɔɹ, ðə fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹd kəmænz ði ɑɹmi, bʌt ðə kwin ɹaɪdz wɪð ðɛm, tu. sɛvən hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ət ðə bæɾəl ə kuɑlɪn dɛn, ði ændɝmən wɝ biɪŋ ɹuɾəd wən kwin mɑdʒɹɛlaɪn ɹoʊd, əloʊn ən ənɑɹmd, kæɹiɪŋ ðə laɪən bænɝ ɪndə ðə mɪdst ə ðə tɛɹən ɑɹmi. ði ændɝmən ɹæliɾ ən ətækt wʌns mɔɹ, tə seɪv hɝ, ən wʌn ðə bæɾəl. ðəɾ ɪz ðə kaɪndə kɝədʒ ɪkspɛktəɾ ə ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ. ɪf aɪ hæv nɑt lɝn tə kəntʃɹoʊl maɪ fɪɹ jɛt, aɪ mʌs bɪfɔɹ aɪ teɪk maɪ mʌðɝz pleɪs ɑn ðə laɪən θɹoʊn." sʌɾənli hɝ sɑmbɝ mud vænɪʃt ɪn ə ɡɪɡəl. "bɪsaɪdz, dʒju θɪŋk aɪ wəd pæs ʌp ən ædvɛntʃɝ soʊ aɪ kəd skɹʌb pɑts?"

"I know that," Elayne said quietly. She paused, then went on. "When Andor goes to war, the First Prince of the Sword commands the army, but the Queen rides with them, too. Seven hundred years ago, at the Battle of Cuallin Dhen, the Andormen were being routed when Queen Modrellein rode, alone and unarmed, carrying the Lion banner into the midst of the Tairen army. The Andormen rallied and attacked once more, to save her, and won the battle. That is the kind of courage expected of the Queen of Andor. If I have not learned to control my fear yet, I must before I take my mother's place on the Lion Throne." Suddenly her somber mood vanished in a giggle. "Besides, do you think I would pass up an adventure so I could scrub pots?"

"ju wɪl də ðəɾ ɛniweɪ," nɪneɪiv toʊl hɝ, "æn hoʊp ðəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn θɪŋks ðəɾ ɪz ɔl jə ɑɹ duɪŋ. naʊ lɪsən kɛɹfəli."

"You will do that anyway," Nynaeve told her, "and hope that everyone thinks that is all you are doing. Now listen carefully."

ɪleɪn lɪsənd, ən əɹ maʊθ sloʊli dʒɹɑpt oʊpən əz nɪneɪiv ənfoʊldəd wʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hæd toʊl ðɛm, ən ðə tæsk ʃi hæd leɪɾ ɑn ðɛm, ən ði ətɛmpt ɑn ðɛɹ lɪvz. ʃi ʃɪvɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə ɡɹeɪ mæn, ən ɹɛd ðə dɑkjəmɛn ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd ɡɪvən nɪneɪiv wɪð ə lʊk ʌv wʌndɝ, ðən ɹɪtɝn ɪt, mɝmɝɪŋ, "aɪ wɪʃ aɪ kəɾ əv ðət wən aɪ feɪs mʌðɝ nɛkst." baɪ ðə taɪm nɪneɪiv fɪnɪʃt, ðoʊ, hɝ feɪs wɑz ə pɪktʃɝ ʌv ɪndɪɡneɪʃən.

Elayne listened, and her mouth slowly dropped open as Nynaeve unfolded what the Amyrlin Seat had told them, and the task she had laid on them, and the attempt on their lives. She shivered over the Gray Man, and read the document the Amyrlin had given Nynaeve with a look of wonder, then returned it, murmuring, "I wish I could have that when I face Mother next." By the time Nynaeve finished, though, her face was a picture of indignation.

"waɪ, ðæts laɪk biɪŋ toʊl tə ɡoʊ ʌp ɪn ðə hɪlz ən faɪn laɪənz, oʊnli jə də nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ ðəɹ ɑɹ ɛni laɪənz, bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ, ðeɪ meɪ bi hʌntɪŋ ju, ən ðeɪ meɪ bi dɪsɡaɪzd əz bʊʃəz. oʊ, ən ɪf jə faɪn ɛni laɪənz, tʃɹaɪ nɑt tə lɛɾ əm it jə bɪfɔɹ jə kən tɛl wɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ."

"Why, that's like being told to go up in the hills and find lions, only you do not know whether there are any lions, but if there are, they may be hunting you, and they may be disguised as bushes. Oh, and if you find any lions, try not to let them eat you before you can tell where they are."

"ɪf jə ɑɹ əfɹeɪd," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "ju kən stɪl stæn əsaɪd. ɪɾəl bi tu leɪt, wʌns juv bɪɡʌn."

"If you are afraid," Nynaeve said, "you can still stand aside. It will be too late, once you've begun."

ɪleɪn tɔst əɹ hɛd bæk. "ʌv kɔɹs aɪm əfɹeɪd. aɪm nɑɾ ə ful. bʌt nɑɾ əfɹeɪɾ ɪnʌf tə kwɪt bɪfɔɹ aɪ hæv ivən stɑɹɾəd."

Elayne tossed her head back. "Of course I am afraid. I am not a fool. But not afraid enough to quit before I have even started."

"ðɛɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, tu," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "aɪ æm əfɹeɪd ði æmɪɝlɪn meɪ min tə lɛt mæt daɪ."

"There is something else, too," Nynaeve said. "I am afraid the Amyrlin may mean to let Mat die."

"bʌɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz səpoʊz tə hil ɛniwʌn u æsks." ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ sim kɑt bɪtwin ɪndɪɡneɪʃən ən dɪsbɪlif. "waɪ wəd ʃi lɛt mæt daɪ? aɪ kænɑt bɪliv ɪt! əl nɑt!"

"But an Aes Sedai is supposed to Heal anyone who asks." The Daughter-Heir seemed caught between indignation and disbelief. "Why would she let Mat die? I cannot believe it! I will not!"

"nɔɹ kən aɪ!" ɛɡwin ɡæspt. ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv mɛn ðæt! ði æmɪɝlɪn kʊdn lɛɾ ɪm daɪ! "ɔl ðə weɪ hɪɹ vɛɹɪn sɛd ðət ði æmɪɝlɪn wəd si hi wɑz hild."

"Nor can I!" Egwene gasped. She could not have meant that! The Amyrlin couldn't let him die! "All the way here Verin said that the Amyrlin would see he was Healed."

nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "vɛɹɪn sɛd ði æmɪɝlɪn wəd 'si tə hɪm.' ðəɾ ɪz nɑt ðə seɪm θɪŋ. ən ði æmɪɝlɪn əvɔɪɾəd seɪɪŋ jɛs əɹ noʊ wən aɪ æsk hɝ. meɪbi ʃiz nɑt meɪɾ əɹ maɪn ʌp."

Nynaeve shook her head. "Verin said the Amyrlin would 'see to him.' That is not the same thing. And the Amyrlin avoided saying yes or no when I asked her. Maybe she has not made her mind up."

"bʌt waɪ?" ɪleɪn æskt.

"But why?" Elayne asked.

"bɪkɔz ðə waɪt taʊɝ dʌz wʌɾ ɪt dʌz fəɹ ɪts oʊn ɹizənz." nɪneɪivz vɔɪs meɪɾ ɛɡwin ʃɪvɝ. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ waɪ. wɛðɝ ðeɪ hɛlp mæt lɪv əɹ lɛɾ ɪm daɪ dɪpɛnz ɑn wʌt sɝvz ðɛɹ ɛnz. nʌn ə ðə θɹi oʊðz sɛz ðeɪv tə hil hɪm. mæt ɪz dʒʌst ə tul, ɪn ði æmɪɝlɪnz aɪz. soʊ ɑɹ wi. ʃɪl juz əs tə hʌn ðə blæk ədʒɑ, bʌɾ ɪf jə bɹeɪk ə tul soʊ ɪt kænɑt bi fɪkst, jə doʊnt wip oʊvɝ ɪt. jə dʒʌst ɡɛɾ ənʌðɝ wʌn. boʊθ ə jə hæd bɛst ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt."

"Because the White Tower does what it does for its own reasons." Nynaeve's voice made Egwene shiver. "I do not know why. Whether they help Mat live or let him die depends on what serves their ends. None of the Three Oaths says they have to Heal him. Mat is just a tool, in the Amyrlin's eyes. So are we. She will use us to hunt the Black Ajah, but if you break a tool so it cannot be fixed, you don't weep over it. You just get another one. Both of you had best remember that."

"wʌɾ ɑɹ wi gɑnə də əbaʊt hɪm?" ɛɡwin æskt. "wʌt kən wi du?"

"What are we going to do about him?" Egwene asked. "What can we do?"

nɪneɪiv wɛn tə hɝ wɔɹdʒɹoʊb ən ɹʌmɪɡd ɪn ðə bæk ʌv ɪt. wən ʃi keɪm aʊt, ʃi hæɾ ə stʃɹaɪp klɔθ bæɡ ʌv ɝbz. "wɪð maɪ mɛɾəsənz - ən lʌk - pɝhæps aɪ kən hil ɪm maɪsɛlf."

Nynaeve went to her wardrobe and rummaged in the back of it. When she came out, she had a striped cloth bag of herbs. "With my medicines - and luck - perhaps I can Heal him myself."

"vɛɹɪn kəd nɑt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "mɔɪɹeɪn ən vɛɹɪn təɡɛðɝ kəd nɑt, ən mɔɪɹeɪn hæɾ ən æŋɡɹil. nɪneɪiv, ɪf jə dʒɹɔ tu mʌtʃ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, jə kəd bɝn jɝsɛlf tə ə sɪndɝ. əɹ dʒʌst stɪl jɝsɛlf, ɪf jə ɑɹ lʌki. ɪf jə kən kɔl ðət lʌk."

"Verin could not," Elayne said. "Moiraine and Verin together could not, and Moiraine had an angreal. Nynaeve, if you draw too much of the One Power, you could burn yourself to a cinder. Or just still yourself, if you are lucky. If you can call that luck."

nɪneɪiv ʃɹʌɡd. "ðeɪ kip tɛlɪŋ mi aɪ hæv ðə pətɛnʃəl tə bi ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ə θaʊzən jɪɹz. pɝhæps ɪts taɪm tə faɪn aʊt wɛðɝ ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹaɪt." ʃi ɡeɪv ə tʌɡ tə hɝ bɹeɪd.

Nynaeve shrugged. "They keep telling me I have the potential to be the most powerful Aes Sedai in a thousand years. Perhaps it is time to find out whether they are right." She gave a tug to her braid.

ɪt wɑz pleɪn ðət haʊɛvɝ bɹeɪv nɪneɪivz wɝdz, ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪd. bʌt ʃi woʊn lɛt mæt daɪ ivən ɪf ɪt minz ɹɪskɪŋ dɛθ hɝsɛlf. "ðeɪ kip seɪɪŋ wɝ ɔl θɹi soʊ paʊɝfəl - əɹ wɪl bi. meɪbi, ɪf wi ɔl tʃɹaɪ təɡɛðɝ, wi kən dɪvaɪd ðə floʊ əmʌŋ ʌs."

It was plain that however brave Nynaeve's words, she was afraid. But she won't let Mat die even if it means risking death herself. "They keep saying we're all three so powerful - or will be. Maybe, if we all try together, we can divide the flow among us."

"wi hæv nɛvɝ tʃɹaɪd wɝkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ," nɪneɪiv sɛd sloʊli. "aɪ æm nɑt ʃʊɹ aɪ noʊ haʊ tə kəmbaɪn əɹ əbɪləɾiz. tʃɹaɪɪŋ kəd bi ɔlmoʊst əz deɪnʒɝəs əz dʒɹɔɪŋ tu mʌtʃ ə ðə paʊɝ."

"We have never tried working together," Nynaeve said slowly. "I am not sure I know how to combine our abilities. Trying could be almost as dangerous as drawing too much of the Power."

"oʊ, ɪf wəɹ gɑnə də ɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd, klaɪmɪŋ ɔf ðə bɛd, "lɛts də ɪt. ðə lɔŋɡɝ wi tɔk ʌv ɪt, ðə mɔɹ fɹaɪɾənd əl bɪkʌm. mæt ɪz ɪn ðə ɡɛst ɹumz. aɪ də nɑt noʊ wɪtʃ wʌn, bʌt ʃɛɹiəm toʊl mi ðət mʌtʃ."

"Oh, if we are going to do it," Elayne said, climbing off the bed, "let's do it. The longer we talk of it, the more frightened I will become. Mat is in the guest rooms. I do not know which one, but Sheriam told me that much."

əz ɪf tə pʊt pɪɹiəd tə hɝ wɝdz, ðə dɔɹ bæŋd oʊpən, ən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛntɝɾ əz ðoʊ ɪt wɝ əɹ ɹum, ən ðeɪ ði ɪntɝloʊpɝz.

As if to put period to her words, the door banged open, and an Aes Sedai entered as though it were her room, and they the interlopers.

ɛɡwin meɪɾ əɹ kɝtsi dip, tə haɪd ðə dɪsmeɪ ɑn əɹ feɪs.

Egwene made her curtsy deep, to hide the dismay on her face.


tʃæptɝ sɛvəntin


CHAPTER 17

ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ


The Red Sister

ɪleɪɾə wɑz ə hænsəm wʊmən ɹæðɝ ðən bjuɾəfəl, ən ðə stɝnnəs ɑn əɹ feɪs æɾəd mətʃʊɹəɾi tə hɝ eɪdʒləs ɛɛs sədaɪ fitʃɝz. ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk oʊld, jɛɾ ɛɡwin kəd nɛvɝ ɪmædʒən ɪleɪɾə əz hævɪŋ bɪn jʌŋ. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə moʊs fɔɹməl əkeɪʒənz, fju ɛɛs sədaɪ wɔɹ ðə vaɪn-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ʃɔl wɪð ðə waɪt tɪɹdʒɹɑp fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn lɑɹdʒ ɑn ðə wɛɹɝz bæk, bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə wɔɹ hɝz, ðə lɔŋ ɹɛd fɹɪnʒ ənaʊnsɪŋ əɹ ədʒɑ. ɹɛd slæʃt əɹ dʒɹɛs ə kɹim-kʌlɝd sɪlk, tu, ən ɹɛd slɪpɝz pikt ʌndɝ ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ skɝts əz ʃi muvd ɪndə ðə ɹum. hɝ dɑɹk aɪz wɑtʃt əm əz ə bɝdz aɪz wɑtʃt wɝmz.

Elaida was a handsome woman rather than beautiful, and the sternness on her face added maturity to her ageless Aes Sedai features. She did not look old, yet Egwene could never imagine Elaida as having been young. Except for the most formal occasions, few Aes Sedai wore the vine-embroidered shawl with the white teardrop Flame of Tar Valon large on the wearer's back, but Elaida wore hers, the long red fringe announcing her Ajah. Red slashed her dress of cream-colored silk, too, and red slippers peeked under the edge of her skirts as she moved into the room. Her dark eyes watched them as a bird's eyes watched worms.

"soʊ ɔl ə jə ɑɹ təɡɛðɝ. sʌmhaʊ, ðət dʌz nɑt sɝpɹaɪz mi." hɝ vɔɪs meɪd noʊ mɔɹ pɹitɛns ðən əɹ bɛɹɪŋ dɪd; ʃi wɑz ə wʊmən ə paʊɝ, ən ɹɛɾi tə wild ɪɾ ɪf ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi, ə wʊmən u nu mɔɹ ðən ðoʊz ʃi spoʊk tə. ɪt wɑz mʌtʃ ðə seɪm fəɹ ə kwin əz fəɹ ə nɑvəs.

"So all of you are together. Somehow, that does not surprise me." Her voice made no more pretense than her bearing did; she was a woman of power, and ready to wield it if she decided it was necessary, a woman who knew more than those she spoke to. It was much the same for a queen as for a novice.

"fɝɡɪv mi, ɪleɪɾə sədaɪ," nɪneɪiv sɛd, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ənʌðɝ kɝtsi, "bʌɾ aɪ wɑz əbaʊt tə ɡoʊ aʊt. aɪ hæv mʌtʃ tə kætʃ ʌp ɪn maɪ stʌɾiz. ɪf jəl fɝɡɪv - "

"Forgive me, Elaida Sedai," Nynaeve said, dropping another curtsy, "but I was about to go out. I have much to catch up in my studies. If you will forgive - "

"jɔɹ stʌɾiz kən weɪt," ɪleɪɾə sɛd. "ðeɪ hæv weɪɾəd lɔŋ ɪnʌf ɔlɹɛɾi, æftɝ ɔl." ʃi plʌk ðə klɔθ bæɡ aʊɾ ə nɪneɪivz hænz ən əndɪd ðə stʃɹɪŋz, bʌɾ æftɝ wʌn ɡlæns ɪnsaɪd ʃi tɔst ɪɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. "ɝbz. jə ɑɹ nɑɾ ə vɪlədʒ wɪzdəm ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, tʃaɪld. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hoʊld ɑn tə ðə pæst wɪl oʊnli hoʊl jə bæk."

"Your studies can wait," Elaida said. "They have waited long enough already, after all." She plucked the cloth bag out of Nynaeve's hands and undid the strings, but after one glance inside she tossed it on the floor. "Herbs. You are not a village Wisdom any longer, child. Trying to hold on to the past will only hold you back."

"ɪleɪɾə sədaɪ," ɪleɪn sɛd, "aɪ - "

"Elaida Sedai," Elayne said, "I - "

"bi saɪlənt, nɑvəs." ɪleɪɾəz vɔɪs wɑz koʊld ən sɑft, əz sɪlk ɹæpt ɝaʊn stil ɪz sɑft. "ju meɪ hæv bɹoʊkən ə bɑn bɪtwin tɑɹ vəlɑn ən keɪɛmlɪn ðəɾ əz læstəɾ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz. jəl spik wən spoʊkən tə." ɪleɪnz aɪz ɪɡzæmən ðə flɔɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ toʊz. spɑts ə kʌlɝ bɝn ɪn əɹ tʃiks. ɡɪlt, əɹ æŋɡɝ? ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ.

"Be silent, novice." Elaida's voice was cold and soft, as silk wrapped around steel is soft. "You may have broken a bond between Tar Valon and Caemlyn that has lasted a thousand years. You will speak when spoken to." Elayne's eyes examined the floor in front of her toes. Spots of color burned in her cheeks. Guilt, or anger? Egwene was not sure.

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ əm ɔl, ɪleɪɾə sæt daʊn ɪn wʌn ə ðə tʃɛɹz, kɛɹfəli ɝeɪnʒɪŋ əɹ skɝts. ʃi meɪd noʊ dʒɛstʃɝ fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm tə sɪt. nɪneɪivz feɪs taɪɾənd, ən ʃi bɪɡæn ɡɪvɪŋ ʃɑɹp lɪɾəl tʌɡz tə hɝ bɹeɪd. ɛɡwin hoʊpt ʃi wəd kip əɹ tɛmpɝ wɛl ɪnʌf nɑt tə teɪk ði ʌðɝ tʃɛɹ wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən.

Ignoring them all, Elaida sat down in one of the chairs, carefully arranging her skirts. She made no gesture for the rest of them to sit. Nynaeve's face tightened, and she began giving sharp little tugs to her braid. Egwene hoped she would keep her temper well enough not to take the other chair without permission.

wən ɪleɪɾə hæd sɛɾəld hɝsɛlf tə hɝ oʊn sæɾəsfækʃən, ʃi stʌɾid əm fəɹ ə taɪm ɪn saɪləns, hɝ feɪs ənɹiɾəbəl. ət læst ʃi sɛd, "dɪd jə noʊ ðət wɪv ðə blæk ədʒɑ əmʌŋ ʌs?"

When Elaida had settled herself to her own satisfaction, she studied them for a time in silence, her face unreadable. At last she said, "Did you know that we have the Black Ajah among us?"

ɛɡwin ɪkstʃeɪnʒd stɑɹɾəld ɡlænsɪz wɪð nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn.

Egwene exchanged startled glances with Nynaeve and Elayne.

"wi wɝ toʊld," nɪneɪiv sɛd kɔʃəsli. "ɪleɪɾə sədaɪ," ʃi æɾəd æftɝ ə pɔz.

"We were told," Nynaeve said cautiously. "Elaida Sedai," she added after a pause.

ɪleɪɾə ɑɹtʃt ən aɪbɹaʊ. "jɛs. aɪ θɔt ðət jə maɪt noʊ ʌv ɪt." ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əɾ əɹ toʊn, ɪmplaɪɪŋ soʊ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən ɪt sɛd, ən nɪneɪiv oʊpən əɹ maʊθ æŋɡɹəli, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪz flæt stɛɹ stɪl tʌŋz. "ðə tu ʌv ju," ɪleɪɾə wɛn ɑn ɪn ə kæʒəwəl toʊn, "vænɪʃ, teɪkɪŋ wɪð jə ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ - ðə ɡɝl u meɪ bɪkʌm kwin ʌv ændɝ wʌn deɪ, ɪf aɪ də nɑt stʃɹɪp ɔf əɹ haɪɾ ən sɛl ɪt tə ə ɡlʌv meɪkɝ - vænɪʃ wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən, wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd, wɪθaʊɾ ə tʃɹeɪs."

Elaida arched an eyebrow. "Yes. I thought that you might know of it." Egwene gave a start at her tone, implying so much more than it said, and Nynaeve opened her mouth angrily, but the Aes Sedai's flat stare stilled tongues. "The two of you," Elaida went on in a casual tone, "vanish, taking with you the Daughter-Heir of Andor - the girl who may become Queen of Andor one day, if I do not strip off her hide and sell it to a glove maker - vanish without permission, without a word, without a trace."

"aɪ wɑz nɑt kæɹiɾ ɔf," ɪleɪn sɛd tə ðə flɔɹ. "aɪ wɛn ə maɪ oʊn wɪl."

"I was not carried off," Elayne said to the floor. "I went of my own will."

"wɪl jə oʊbeɪ mi, tʃaɪld?" ə ɡloʊ sɝaʊndəɾ ɪleɪɾə. ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ɡlɛɹ wɑz fɪkst ɑn ɪleɪn. "mʌst aɪ titʃ ju, hɪɹ ən naʊ?"

"Will you obey me, child?" A glow surrounded Elaida. The Aes Sedai's glare was fixed on Elayne. "Must I teach you, here and now?"

ɪleɪn ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɪsteɪkɪŋ wʌt wɑz ɪn əɹ feɪs. æŋɡɝ. fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt ʃi mɛɾ ɪleɪɾəz stɛɹ.

Elayne raised her head, and there was no mistaking what was in her face. Anger. For a long moment she met Elaida's stare.

ɛɡwinz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz dʌɡ ɪndə hɝ pɑmz. ɪt wɑz mæɾənɪŋ. ʃi, əɹ ɪleɪn, əɹ nɪneɪiv, kəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɪleɪɾə wɛɹ ʃi sæt. ɪf ðeɪ kɑɾ ɪleɪɾə baɪ sɝpɹaɪz, ət list; ʃi wɑz fʊli tʃɹeɪnd, æftɝ ɔl. ən ɪf wi də ɛniθɪŋ bʌt teɪk wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɑns tə fiɾ ʌs, wi θɹoʊ əweɪ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. doʊn θɹoʊ ɪɾ əweɪ naʊ, ɪleɪn.

Egwene's fingernails dug into her palms. It was maddening. She, or Elayne, or Nynaeve, could destroy Elaida where she sat. If they caught Elaida by surprise, at least; she was fully trained, after all. And if we do anything but take whatever she wants to feed us, we throw away everything. Don't throw it away now, Elayne.

ɪleɪnz hɛd dʒɹɑpt. "fɝɡɪv mi, ɪleɪɾə sədaɪ," ʃi mʌmbəld. "aɪ - fɝɡɑt maɪsɛlf."

Elayne's head dropped. "Forgive me, Elaida Sedai," she mumbled. "I - forgot myself."

ðə ɡloʊ wɪŋkt aʊɾ ʌv ɛɡzɪstəns, ən ɪleɪɾə snɪft ɑɾəbli. "ju hæv lɝn bæd hæbəts, wɛɹɛvɝ ðiz tu tʊk ju. jə kænɑɾ əfɔɹd bæd hæbəts, tʃaɪld. jəl bi ðə fɝs kwin ʌv ændɝ ɛvɝ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə fɝs kwin ɛniwɛɹ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn oʊvɝ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz. jəl bi wʌn ə ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ʌv əs sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, pɝhæps stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə bi ðə fɝst ɹulɝ sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ tə oʊpənli tɛl ðə wɝld ʃiz ɛɛs sədaɪ. də nɑt ɹɪsk ɔl ə ðæt, tʃaɪld, kəz jə kən stɪl luz ɪɾ ɔl. aɪ hæv ɪnvɛstəd tu mʌtʃ taɪm tə si ðæt. dʒju ʌndɝstæn mi?"

The glow winked out of existence, and Elaida sniffed audibly. "You have learned bad habits, wherever these two took you. You cannot afford bad habits, child. You will be the first Queen of Andor ever to be Aes Sedai. The first queen anywhere to be Aes Sedai in over a thousand years. You will be one of the strongest of us since the Breaking of the World, perhaps strong enough to be the first ruler since the Breaking to openly tell the world she is Aes Sedai. Do not risk all of that, child, because you can still lose it all. I have invested too much time to see that. Do you understand me?"

"aɪ θɪŋk soʊ, ɪleɪɾə sədaɪ," ɪleɪn sɛd. ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn əɾ ɔl. noʊ mɔɹ dɪɾ ɛɡwin.

"I think so, Elaida Sedai," Elayne said. She sounded as if she did not understand at all. No more did Egwene.

ɪleɪɾə əbændən ðə sʌbʒɪkt. "ju meɪ bi ɪn ɡɹeɪv deɪnʒɝ. ɔl θɹi ʌv ju. jə dɪsəpɪɹ ən ɹɪtɝn, ən ɪn ði ɪntɝvəl, liɑnʒɹɪn ən əɹ . . . kəmpænjənz liv ʌs. ðəɹ wɪl ɪnɛvəɾəbli bi kəmpɛɹəsənz. wəɹ ʃʊɹ liɑnʒɹɪn ən ðoʊz u wɛnt wɪð əɹ ɑɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. blæk ədʒɑ. aɪ wəd nɑt si ðə seɪm tʃɑɹdʒ lɛvəld əɾ ɪleɪn, ən tə pɹətɛk hɝ, ɪt simz aɪ mʌs pɹətɛkt ɔl ə ju. tɛl mi waɪ jə ɹæn əweɪ, ən wʌt juv bɪn duɪŋ ðiz mʌnθs, ən əl də wʌɾ aɪ kən fəɹ ju." hɝ aɪz fæsən ɑn ɛɡwin laɪk ɡɹæplɪŋ hʊks.

Elaida abandoned the subject. "You may be in grave danger. All three of you. You disappear and return, and in the interval, Liandrin and her . . . companions leave us. There will inevitably be comparisons. We are sure Liandrin and those who went with her are Darkfriends. Black Ajah. I would not see the same charge leveled at Elayne, and to protect her, it seems I must protect all of you. Tell me why you ran away, and what you have been doing these months, and I will do what I can for you." Her eyes fastened on Egwene like grappling hooks.

ɛɡwin flaʊndɝd fəɹ ən ænsɝ ðət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəɾ æksɛpt. ɪt wɑz sɛd ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə kəd hɪɹ ə laɪ, səmtaɪmz. "ɪt . . . ɪt wɑz mæt. hiz vɛɹi sɪk." ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə tʃuz əɹ wɝdz kɛɹfəli, tə seɪ nʌθɪŋ ðət wɑz nɑt tʃɹu, jɛt ɡɪv ən ɪmpɹɛʃən fɑɹ fɹəm tʃɹuθ. ɛɛs sədaɪ də ɪɾ ɔl ðə taɪm. "wi wɛn tə. . . . wi bɹɔɾ ɪm bæk tə bi hild. ɪf wi hædnt, hi wəd daɪ. ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ tə hil hɪm." aɪ hoʊp. ʃi meɪd hɝsɛlf kəntɪnju tə mit ðə ɹɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪz ɡeɪz, wɪl hɝsɛlf nɑt tə ʃɪft əɹ fit ɡɪltəli. fɹəm ɪleɪɾəz feɪs, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə tɛl wɛðɝ ʃi bɪlivd ə wɝd.

Egwene floundered for an answer that the Aes Sedai would accept. It was said that Elaida could hear a lie, sometimes. "It . . . it was Mat. He is very sick." She tried to choose her words carefully, to say nothing that was not true, yet give an impression far from truth. Aes Sedai do it all the time. "We went to. . . . We brought him back to be Healed. If we hadn't, he would die. The Amyrlin is going to Heal him." I hope. She made herself continue to meet the Red Aes Sedai's gaze, willed herself not to shift her feet guiltily. From Elaida's face, there was no way to tell whether she believed a word.

"ðæɾ ɪz ɪnʌf, ɛɡwin," nɪneɪiv sɛd. ɪleɪɾəz pɛnətʃɹeɪɾɪŋ lʊk ʃɪftəd tə hɝ, bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ə biɪŋ əfɛktəd baɪ ɪt. ʃi mɛt ði ɛɛs sədaɪz aɪz wɪθaʊt blɪŋkɪŋ. "fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ ɪntɝʌptɪŋ, ɪleɪɾə sədaɪ," ʃi sɛd smuðli, "bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn sit sɛɾ əɹ tʃɹænzɡɹɛʃənz wɝ tə bi pʊt bɪhaɪn əs ən fɝɡɑɾən. əz pɑɹɾ ə meɪkɪŋ ə nu bɪɡɪnɪŋ, wəɹ nɑɾ ivən tə spik ə ðɛm. ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛɾ ɪt ʃəd bi əz ɪf ðeɪ nɛvɝ hæpənd."

"That is enough, Egwene," Nynaeve said. Elaida's penetrating look shifted to her, but she gave no sign of being affected by it. She met the Aes Sedai's eyes without blinking. "Forgive me for interrupting, Elaida Sedai," she said smoothly, "but the Amyrlin Seat said our transgressions were to be put behind us and forgotten. As part of making a new beginning, we are not even to speak of them. The Amyrlin said it should be as if they never happened."

"ʃi sɛd ðæt, dɪd ʃi?" stɪl nʌθɪŋ ɪn ɪleɪɾəz vɔɪs əɹ ɑn əɹ feɪs toʊld wɛðɝ ʃi bɪlivd əɹ nɑt. "ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ. jə kən hɑɹdli fɝɡɛɾ ɪntaɪɝli wən jəɹ pʌnɪʃmən əz bɪn ənaʊns tə ði ɪntaɪɝ taʊɝ. ənpɹɛsɪdɛntɪd, ðæt. ənhɝɾ ʌv, fəɹ lɛs ðən stɪlɪŋ. aɪ kən si waɪ jə ɑɹ iɡɝ tə pʊɾ ɪɾ ɔl bɪhaɪn ju. aɪ ʌndɝstæn jə ɑɹ tə bi ɹeɪz tə ði æksɛptɪd, ɪleɪn. ən ɛɡwin. ðəɾ ɪz hɑɹdli pʌnɪʃmənt."

"She said that, did she?" Still nothing in Elaida's voice or on her face told whether she believed or not. "Interesting. You can hardly forget entirely when your punishment has been announced to the entire Tower. Unprecedented, that. Unheard of, for less than stilling. I can see why you are eager to put it all behind you. I understand you are to be raised to the Accepted, Elayne. And Egwene. That is hardly punishment."

ɪleɪn ɡlænst ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əz ðoʊ fəɹ pɝmɪʃən tə spik. "ðə mʌðɝ sɛd wi wɝ ɹɛɾi," ʃi sɛd. ə tʌtʃ ə dɪfaɪəns ɛntɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs. "aɪ hæv lɝnd, ɪleɪɾə sədaɪ, ən ɡɹoʊn. ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv neɪmd mi tə bi ɹeɪzd ɪf aɪ hæd nɑt."

Elayne glanced at the Aes Sedai as though for permission to speak. "The Mother said we were ready," she said. A touch of defiance entered her voice. "I have learned, Elaida Sedai, and grown. She would not have named me to be raised if I had not."

"lɝnd," ɪleɪɾə sɛd mjuzɪŋli. "ænd ɡɹoʊn. pɝhæps jə hæv." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hɪn ɪn əɹ toʊn wɛðɝ ʃi θɔt ðɪs wɑz ɡʊd. hɝ ɡeɪz ʃɪftəd bæk tə ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv, sɝtʃɪŋ. "ju ɹɪtɝnd wɪð ðɪs mæt, ə juθ fɹəm jəɹ vɪlədʒ. ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ jʌŋ mæn fɹəm jəɹ vɪlədʒ. ɹænd ælθɹ."

"Learned," Elaida said musingly. "And grown. Perhaps you have." There was no hint in her tone whether she thought this was good. Her gaze shifted back to Egwene and Nynaeve, searching. "You returned with this Mat, a youth from your village. There was another young man from your village. Rand al'Thor."

ɛɡwin fɛlt əz ɪf ən aɪsi hæn hæd sʌɾənli ɡɹɪpt əɹ stʌmək.

Egwene felt as if an icy hand had suddenly gripped her stomach.

"aɪ hoʊp hiz wɛl," nɪneɪiv sɛd lɛvəli, bʌɾ əɹ hænd wɑz ə fɪst ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ bɹeɪd. "wi hæv nɑt sin ɪm ɪn səm taɪm."

"I hope he is well," Nynaeve said levelly, but her hand was a fist gripping her braid. "We have not seen him in some time."

"æn ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ jʌŋ mæn." ɪleɪɾə stʌɾid əm əz ʃi spoʊk. "aɪ mɛɾ ɪm oʊnli wʌns, bʌɾ aɪ faʊn ɪm - moʊst ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ. aɪ bɪliv i mʌs bi tɑvɝən. jɛs. ði ænsɝz tə mɛni kwɛstʃənz meɪ ɹɛst ɪn hɪm. ðɪs ɛmənz fild ə jʊɹz mʌs bi ən ənjuʒəwəl pleɪs tə pɹədus ðə tu ʌv ju. ən ɹænd ælθɹ."

"An interesting young man." Elaida studied them as she spoke. "I met him only once, but I found him - most interesting. I believe he must be ta'veren. Yes. The answers to many questions may rest in him. This Emond's Field of yours must be an unusual place to produce the two of you. And Rand al'Thor."

"ɪɾ ɪz dʒʌst ə vɪlədʒ," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "dʒʌst ə vɪlədʒ laɪk ɛni ʌðɝ."

"It is just a village," Nynaeve said. "Just a village like any other."

"jɛs. ʌv kɔɹs." ɪleɪɾə smaɪld, ə koʊl kwɝk ə hɝ lɪps ðət twɪstəɾ ɛɡwinz stʌmək. "tɛl mi əbaʊt hɪm. ði æmɪɝlɪn əz nɑt kəmændəd jə tə bi saɪlən əbaʊɾ ɪm ɔlsoʊ, hæz ʃi?"

"Yes. Of course." Elaida smiled, a cold quirk of her lips that twisted Egwene's stomach. "Tell me about him. The Amyrlin has not commanded you to be silent about him also, has she?"

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv əɹ bɹeɪɾ ə tʌɡ. ɪleɪn stʌɾid ðə kɑɹpəɾ əz ɪf sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt wɝ hɪɾən ɪn ɪt, ən ɛɡwin ɹækt əɹ bɹeɪn fəɹ ən ænsɝ. ʃi kən hɪɹ laɪz, ðeɪ seɪ. laɪt, ɪf ʃi kən ɹɪli hɪɹ ə laɪ. . . . ðə moʊmən stʃɹɛtʃt ɑn, əntɪl faɪnəli nɪneɪiv oʊpən əɹ maʊθ.

Nynaeve gave her braid a tug. Elayne studied the carpet as if something important were hidden in it, and Egwene racked her brain for an answer. She can hear lies, they say. Light, if she can really hear a lie. . . . The moment stretched on, until finally Nynaeve opened her mouth.

ət ðəɾ ɪnstən ðə dɔɹ oʊpən əɡɛn. ʃɛɹiəm ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ðə ɹum wɪð ə mɛʒɝ ə sɝpɹaɪz. "ɪɾ ɪz wɛl aɪ faɪn jə hɪɹ, ɪleɪn. aɪ wɑn ɔl θɹi ʌv ju. aɪ hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəd ju, ɪleɪɾə."

At that instant the door opened again. Sheriam regarded the room with a measure of surprise. "It is well I find you here, Elayne. I want all three of you. I had not expected you, Elaida."

ɪleɪɾə stʊd, ɝeɪnʒɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl. "wi ɑɹ ɔl kjʊɹiəs əbaʊt ðiz ɡɝlz. waɪ ðeɪ ɹæn əweɪ. wʌɾ ædvɛntʃɝz ðeɪ hæd waɪl ɡɔn. ðeɪ seɪ ðə mʌðɝ əz kəmændəɾ əm nɑt tə spik ʌv ɪt."

Elaida stood, arranging her shawl. "We are all curious about these girls. Why they ran away. What adventures they had while gone. They say the Mother has commanded them not to speak of it."

"æz wɛl nɑt tə," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd. "ðeɪ ɑɹ tə bi pʌnɪʃt, ən ðət ʃəd bi ən ɛn tə ɪt. aɪ hæv ɔlweɪz fɛl ðət wən pʌnɪʃmən ɪz dʌn, ðə fɔl ðət kɑzd ɪt ʃəd bi ɪɹeɪst."

"As well not to," Sheriam said. "They are to be punished, and that should be an end to it. I have always felt that when punishment is done, the fault that caused it should be erased."

fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmən ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ stʊd lʊkɪŋ əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ, noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn iðɝ smuð feɪs. ðən ɪleɪɾə sɛd, "ʌv kɔɹs. pɝhæps əl spik tə ðɛm ənʌðɝ taɪm. əbaʊɾ ʌðɝ mæɾɝz." ðə lʊk ʃi ɡeɪv tə ðə θɹi wɪmən ɪn waɪt sim tə ɛɡwin tə kæɹi ə wɔɹnɪŋ, ən ðən ʃi wɑz slɪpɪŋ pæst ʃɛɹiəm.

For a long moment the two Aes Sedai stood looking at each other, no expression on either smooth face. Then Elaida said, "Of course. Perhaps I will speak to them another time. About other matters." The look she gave to the three women in white seemed to Egwene to carry a warning, and then she was slipping past Sheriam.

hoʊldɪŋ ðə dɔɹ oʊpən, ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz wɑtʃt ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡoʊ daʊn ðə ɡælɝi. hɝ feɪs wɑz stɪl ənɹiɾəbəl.

Holding the door open, the Mistress of Novices watched the other Aes Sedai go down the gallery. Her face was still unreadable.

ɛɡwin lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ, ən hɝɾ ɛkoʊz fɹəm nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn.

Egwene let out a long breath, and heard echoes from Nynaeve and Elayne.

"ʃi θɹɛɾənd mi," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli, ən hæf tə hɝsɛlf. "ʃi θɹɛɾənd mi wɪð stɪlɪŋ, ɪf aɪ doʊn stɑp biɪŋ - wɪlfəl!"

"She threatened me," Elayne said incredulously, and half to herself. "She threatened me with stilling, if I don't stop being - willful!"

"ju mɪstʊk hɝ," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd. "ɪf biɪŋ wɪlfəl wɝ ə stɪlɪŋ əfɛns, ðə lɪst ə ðə stɪld wəɾ əv mɔɹ neɪmz ɑn ɪt ðən jə kəd lɝn. fju mik wɪmən ɛvɝ ətʃiv ðə ɹɪŋ ən ðə ʃɔl. ðəɾ ɪz nɑt tə seɪ, ʌv kɔɹs, ðət jə mʌs nɑt lɝn tə æk mikli wən ɪts ɹikwaɪɝd."

"You mistook her," Sheriam said. "If being willful were a stilling offense, the list of the stilled would have more names on it than you could learn. Few meek women ever achieve the ring and the shawl. That is not to say, of course, that you must not learn to act meekly when it is required."

"jɛs, ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ," ðeɪ ɔl θɹi sɛɾ ɔlmoʊst əz wʌn, ən ʃɛɹiəm smaɪld.

"Yes, Sheriam Sedai," they all three said almost as one, and Sheriam smiled.

"ju si? jə kən ɡɪv ði əpɪɹəns ə miknəs, ət list. ən jəl əv plɛnti ʌv ɑpɝtunəɾi tə pɹæktəs bɪfɔɹ jə ɝn jəɹ weɪ bæk ɪndə ði æmɪɝlɪnz ɡʊd ɡɹeɪsɪz. ən maɪn. maɪn wɪl bi hɑɹɾɝ tə ətʃiv."

"You see? You can give the appearance of meekness, at least. And you will have plenty of opportunity to practice before you earn your way back into the Amyrlin's good graces. And mine. Mine will be harder to achieve."

"jɛs, ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd, bʌt ðɪs taɪm oʊnli ɪleɪn spoʊk wɪð hɝ.

"Yes, Sheriam Sedai," Egwene said, but this time only Elayne spoke with her.

nɪneɪiv sɛd, "wʌɾ ʌv . . . ðə bɑɾi, ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ? ðə . . . ðə soʊlləs? hæv jə dɪskʌvɝɾ u kɪl hɪm? əɹ waɪ hi ɛntɝd ðə taʊɝ?"

Nynaeve said, "What of . . . the body, Sheriam Sedai? The . . . the Soulless? Have you discovered who killed him? Or why he entered the Tower?"

ʃɛɹiəmz maʊθ taɪɾənd. "ju teɪk wʌn stɛp fɔɹwɝd, nɪneɪiv, ən ðən ə stɛp bæk. sɪns fɹəm ɪleɪnz læk ə sɝpɹaɪz, juv ɑbviəsli toʊld əɹ ʌv ɪt - æftɝ aɪ toʊl jə nɑt tə spik ə ðə mæɾɝ! - ðən ðəɹ ɑɹ ɪɡzækli sɛvən pipəl ɪn ðə taʊɝ u noʊ ə mæn wɑz kɪl tədeɪ ɪn ðə nɑvəsɪz' kɔɹɾɝz, ən tu ʌv əm ɑɹ mɛn u noʊ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðæt. ɪksɛp ðət ðeɪ ɑɹ tə kip ðɛɹ maʊðz ʃʌt. ɪf ən ɔɹɾɝ fɹəm ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz kæɹiz noʊ weɪt wɪð jə - ən ɪf ðəɾ ɪz soʊ, əl kɝɛk jə - pɝhæps jəl oʊbeɪ wʌn fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. jə ɑɹ tə spik ə ðɪs tə noʊ wʌn ɪksɛp ðə mʌðɝ əɹ mi. ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪl nɑɾ əv mɔɹ ɹumɝz paɪld ɑn ðoʊz wi mʌst ɔlɹɛɾi kəntɛnd wɪð. də aɪ meɪk maɪsɛlf klɪɹ?"

Sheriam's mouth tightened. "You take one step forward, Nynaeve, and then a step back. Since from Elayne's lack of surprise, you have obviously told her of it - after I told you not to speak of the matter! - then there are exactly seven people in the Tower who know a man was killed today in the novices' quarters, and two of them are men who know no more than that. Except that they are to keep their mouths shut. If an order from the Mistress of Novices carries no weight with you - and if that is so, I will correct you - perhaps you will obey one from the Amyrlin Seat. You are to speak of this to no one except the Mother or me. The Amyrlin will not have more rumors piled on those we must already contend with. Do I make myself clear?"

ðə fɝmnəs ə hɝ vɔɪs pɹədust ə kɔɹəs ʌv "jɛs, ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ" - bʌt nɪneɪiv ɹəfjuz tə stɑp ət ðæt. "sɛvən, jə sɛd, ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ. plʌs huɛvɝ kɪl hɪm. ən meɪbi ðeɪ hæd hɛlp ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə taʊɝ."

The firmness of her voice produced a chorus of "Yes, Sheriam Sedai" - but Nynaeve refused to stop at that. "Seven, you said, Sheriam Sedai. Plus whoever killed him. And maybe they had help getting into the Tower."

"ðæɾ ɪz noʊ kənsɝn ə jʊɹz." ʃɛɹiəmz lɛvəl ɡeɪz ɪnkluɾəd əm ɔl. "aɪ wɪl æsk wʌtɛvɝ kwɛstʃənz mʌs bi æskt əbaʊt ðɪs mæn. jəl fɝɡɛt jə noʊ ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl əbaʊɾ ə dɛd mæn. ɪf aɪ dɪskʌvɝ jə ɑɹ duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. . . . wɛl, ðəɹ ɑɹ wɝs θɪŋz ðən skɹʌbɪŋ pɑts tə ɑkjəpaɪ jəɹ ətɛnʃən. ən əl nɑɾ æksɛpt ɛni ɪkskjusɪz. də aɪ hɪɹ ɛni mɔɹ kwɛstʃənz?"

"That is no concern of yours." Sheriam's level gaze included them all. "I will ask whatever questions must be asked about this man. You will forget you know anything at all about a dead man. If I discover you are doing anything else. . . . Well, there are worse things than scrubbing pots to occupy your attention. And I will not accept any excuses. Do I hear any more questions?"

"noʊ, ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ." ðɪs taɪm, nɪneɪiv dʒɔɪn ɪn, tə ɛɡwinz ɹɪlif. nɑt ðət ʃi fɛl vɛɹi mʌtʃ ɹɪlif. ʃɛɹiəmz wɑtʃfəl aɪ wəd meɪk ɪt dʌbli hɑɹd tə kæɹi aʊɾ ə sɝtʃ fəɹ ðə blæk ədʒɑ. fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi fɛlt laɪk læfɪŋ hɪstɛɹɪkli. ɪf ðə blæk ədʒɑ dʌzn kætʃ ʌs, ʃɛɹiəm wɪl. ði ɝdʒ tə læf vænɪʃt. ɪf ʃɛɹiəm ɪzən blæk ədʒɑ hɝsɛlf. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd meɪk ðət θɔt ɡoʊ əweɪ.

"No, Sheriam Sedai." This time, Nynaeve joined in, to Egwene's relief. Not that she felt very much relief. Sheriam's watchful eye would make it doubly hard to carry out a search for the Black Ajah. For a moment she felt like laughing hysterically. If the Black Ajah doesn't catch us, Sheriam will. The urge to laugh vanished. If Sheriam isn't Black Ajah herself. She wished she could make that thought go away.

ʃɛɹiəm nɑɾəd. "vɛɹi wɛl, ðɛn. jəl kʌm wɪð mi."

Sheriam nodded. "Very well, then. You will come with me."

"tə wɛɹ?" nɪneɪiv æskt, ən æɾəd, "ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ," oʊnli ən ɪnstən bɪfɔɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz aɪz nɛɹoʊd.

"To where?" Nynaeve asked, and added, "Sheriam Sedai," only an instant before the Aes Sedai's eyes narrowed.

"hæv jə fɝɡɑɾən," ʃɛɹiəm sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs, "ðæɾ ɪn ðə taʊɝ, hilɪŋ ɪz ɔlweɪz dʌn ɪn ðə pɹɛzəns ə ðoʊz u bɹɪŋ ðɛɹ sɪk tə ʌs?"

"Have you forgotten," Sheriam said in a tight voice, "that in the Tower, Healing is always done in the presence of those who bring their sick to us?"

ɛɡwin θɔt ðət ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪzəz stɑk ə peɪʃəns wɪð əm wɑz əbaʊt juzd ʌp, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd stɑp hɝsɛlf, ʃi bɝst aʊt, "ðɛn ʃiz ɡoʊɪŋ tə hil hɪm!"

Egwene thought that the Mistress of Novices's stock of patience with them was about used up, but before she could stop herself, she burst out, "Then she is going to Heal him!"

"ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hɝsɛlf, əmʌŋ ʌðɝz, wɪl si tə hɪm." ʃɛɹiəmz feɪs hɛl noʊ mɔɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən ðən əɹ vɔɪs. "dɪd juv ɹizən tə daʊɾ ɪt?" ɛɡwin kəɾ oʊnli ʃeɪk əɹ hɛd. "ðɛn jə weɪs jəɹ fɹɛnz laɪf stændɪŋ hɪɹ. ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪz nɑt tə bi kɛpt weɪɾɪŋ." jɛt dɪspaɪɾ əɹ wɝdz, ɛɡwin hæd ðə filɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz ɪn noʊ hɝi əɾ ɔl.

"The Amyrlin Seat herself, among others, will see to him." Sheriam's face held no more expression than her voice. "Did you have reason to doubt it?" Egwene could only shake her head. "Then you waste your friend's life standing here. The Amyrlin Seat is not to be kept waiting." Yet despite her words, Egwene had the feeling the Aes Sedai was in no hurry at all.


tʃæptɝ eɪtin


CHAPTER 18

hilɪŋ


Healing

læmps ɑn aɪɝn wɔl bɹækəts lɪt ðə pæsədʒəz dip bɪniθ ðə taʊɝ, wɛɹ ʃɛɹiəm tʊk ðɛm. ðə fju dɔɹz ðeɪ pæst wɝ ʃʌt taɪt, səm lɑkt, səm soʊ kʌnɪŋli wɝk ðət ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪn ənsin əntɪl ɛɡwin wɑz ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə ðɛm. dɑɹk oʊpənɪŋz mɑɹk moʊst ə ðə kɹɔsɪŋ hɔlweɪz, waɪl daʊn ʌðɝz ʃi kəɾ oʊnli si ðə dɪm ɡloʊ ʌv dɪstən laɪts speɪs fɑɹ əpɑɹt. ʃi sɔ noʊ ʌðɝ pipəl. ðiz wɝ nɑt pleɪsəz ivən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔfən keɪm. ði ɛɹ wɑz niðɝ kul nɔɹ wɔɹm, bʌt ʃi ʃɪvɝɾ ɛniweɪ, ən ət ðə seɪm taɪm fɛl swɛt tʃɹɪklɪŋ daʊn əɹ bæk.

Lamps on iron wall brackets lit the passages deep beneath the Tower, where Sheriam took them. The few doors they passed were shut tight, some locked, some so cunningly worked that they remained unseen until Egwene was right on top of them. Dark openings marked most of the crossing hallways, while down others she could only see the dim glow of distant lights spaced far apart. She saw no other people. These were not places even Aes Sedai often came. The air was neither cool nor warm, but she shivered anyway, and at the same time felt sweat trickling down her back.

ɪt wɑz daʊn hɪɹ, ɪn ðə dɛpθs ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ðət nɑvəsɪz wɛn θɹu ðɛɹ læs tɛs bɪfɔɹ biɪŋ ɹeɪz tə æksɛptɪd. əɹ pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ, ɪf ðeɪ feɪld. daʊn hɪɹ, æksɛptɪd tʊk ðə θɹi oʊðz æftɝ pæsɪŋ ðɛɹ faɪnəl tɛst. noʊ wʌn, ʃi ɹilaɪzd, hæɾ ɛvɝ toʊld əɹ wʌt hæpən tə ən æksɛptɪɾ u feɪld. daʊn hɪɹ, sʌmwɛɹ, wɑz ðə ɹum wɛɹ ðə taʊɝz fju æŋɡɹil ən sɑŋɡɹil wɝ kɛpt, ən ðə pleɪsəz wɛɹ ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɝ stɔɹd. ðə blæk ədʒɑ hæd stʃɹʌk ət ðoʊz stɔɹɹumz. ən ɪf səm ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ wɝ laɪɪŋ ɪn weɪɾ ɪn wʌn ə ðoʊz dɑɹk saɪd kɔɹɪɾɝz, ɪf ʃɛɹiəm wɝ liɾɪŋ əm nɑt tə mæt, bʌt tə. . . .

It was down here, in the depths of the White Tower, that novices went through their last test before being raised to Accepted. Or put out of the Tower, if they failed. Down here, Accepted took the Three Oaths after passing their final test. No one, she realized, had ever told her what happened to an Accepted who failed. Down here, somewhere, was the room where the Tower's few angreal and sa'angreal were kept, and the places where the ter'angreal were stored. The Black Ajah had struck at those storerooms. And if some of the Black Ajah were lying in wait in one of those dark side corridors, if Sheriam were leading them not to Mat, but to. . . .

ʃi ɡeɪv ə skwik wən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stɑp sʌɾənli, ðən kʌlɝd wən ði ʌðɝz lʊkt əɾ əɹ kjʊɹiəsli. "aɪ wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə blæk ədʒɑ," ʃi sɛd wikli.

She gave a squeak when the Aes Sedai stopped suddenly, then colored when the others looked at her curiously. "I was thinking about the Black Ajah," she said weakly.

"du nɑt θɪŋk ʌv ɪt," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd, ən fəɹ wʌns ʃi saʊndəd laɪk ðə ʃɛɹiəm ʌv oʊld, kaɪnli ɪf fɝm. "ðə blæk ədʒɑ wɪl nɑt bi jəɹ wɝi fəɹ jɪɹz tə kʌm. juv wʌt ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs də nɑt: taɪm bɪfɔɹ jə mʌs dil wɪð ɪt. mʌtʃ taɪm, jɛt. wən wi ɛntɝ, steɪ əɡɛns ðə wɔl ən kip saɪlənt. jə ɑɹ əlaʊd hɪɹ əz ə bənɛvələns, tə ətɛnd, nɑt tə dɪstʃɹækt əɹ ɪntɝfɪɹ." ʃi oʊpən ə dɔɹ kʌvɝɾ ɪn ɡɹeɪ mɛɾəl wɝk tə lʊk laɪk stoʊn.

"Do not think of it," Sheriam said, and for once she sounded like the Sheriam of old, kindly if firm. "The Black Ajah will not be your worry for years to come. You have what the rest of us do not: time before you must deal with it. Much time, yet. When we enter, stay against the wall and keep silent. You are allowed here as a benevolence, to attend, not to distract or interfere." She opened a door covered in gray metal worked to look like stone.

ðə skwɛɹ ɹum wɪðɪn wɑz speɪʃəs, ɪts peɪl stoʊn wɔlz bɛɹ. ði oʊnli fɝnɪʃɪŋ wɑz ə lɔŋ stoʊn teɪbəl dʒɹeɪpt wɪð ə waɪt klɔθ, ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum. mæt leɪ ɑn ðət teɪbəl, fʊli kloʊð seɪv fəɹ koʊɾ ən buts, aɪz kloʊzd ən feɪs soʊ ɡɔn ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə kɹaɪ. hɪz leɪbɝd bɹiðɪŋ meɪɾ ə hɔɹs wɪsəl. ðə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ dæɡɝ hʌŋ ʃiðd əɾ ɪz bɛlt, ðə ɹubi kæpɪŋ ɪts hɪl simɪŋ tə ɡæðɝ laɪt, soʊ ɪt ɡloʊd laɪk səm fɪɹs ɹɛɾ aɪ dɪspaɪt ði ɪluməneɪʃən ʌv ə dʌzən læmps, mæɡnəfaɪd baɪ ðə peɪl wɔlz ən waɪt-taɪl flɔɹ.

The square room within was spacious, its pale stone walls bare. The only furnishing was a long stone table draped with a white cloth, in the middle of the room. Mat lay on that table, fully clothed save for coat and boots, eyes closed and face so gaunt that Egwene wanted to cry. His labored breathing made a hoarse whistle. The Shadar Logoth dagger hung sheathed at his belt, the ruby capping its hilt seeming to gather light, so it glowed like some fierce red eye despite the illumination of a dozen lamps, magnified by the pale walls and white-tiled floor.

ði æmɪɝlɪn sit stʊɾ ət mæts hɛd, ən lin əɾ ɪz fit. fɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ stʊd daʊn wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə teɪbəl, ən θɹi daʊn ði ʌðɝ. ʃɛɹiəm dʒɔɪn ðə θɹi. wʌn ə ðɛm wɑz vɛɹɪn. ɛɡwin ɹɛkəɡnaɪz sɹəfɛl, ənʌðɝ bɹaʊn sɪstɝ, ən ɑlɑnə mɑsvɑni, ʌv ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ, ən æneɪjə, ʌv ðə blu, wɪtʃ wɑz mɔɪɹeɪnz ədʒɑ.

The Amyrlin Seat stood at Mat's head, and Leane at his feet. Four Aes Sedai stood down one side of the table, and three down the other. Sheriam joined the three. One of them was Verin. Egwene recognized Serafelle, another Brown sister, and Alanna Mosvani, of the Green Ajah, and Anaiya, of the Blue, which was Moiraine's Ajah.

ɑlɑnə ən æneɪjə hæɾ itʃ tɔɾ əɹ səm ə hɝ lɛsənz ɪn oʊpənɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, ɪn haʊ tə sɝɛndɝ tə seɪaɪdɑɹ ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt. ən bɪtwin əɹ fɝst ɝaɪvəl ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən əɹ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ, æneɪjə mʌst əv tɛstəɾ əɹ fɪfti taɪmz tə si ɪf ʃi wɑz ə dʒɹimɝ. ðə tɛsts hæd ʃoʊn nʌθɪŋ wʌn weɪ əɹ ði ʌðɝ, bʌt pleɪn-feɪst, kaɪnli æneɪjə, wɪð ðət wɔɹm smaɪl ðət wɑz əɹ oʊnli bjuɾi, hæd kɛp kɔlɪŋ əɹ bæk fəɹ mɔɹ tɛsts, əz ɪmplækəbəl əz ə boʊldɝ ɹoʊlɪŋ daʊnhɪl.

Alanna and Anaiya had each taught her some of her lessons in opening herself to the True Source, in how to surrender to saidar in order to control it. And between her first arrival in the White Tower and her departure, Anaiya must have tested her fifty times to see if she was a Dreamer. The tests had shown nothing one way or the other, but plain-faced, kindly Anaiya, with that warm smile that was her only beauty, had kept calling her back for more tests, as implacable as a boulder rolling downhill.

ðə ɹɛst wɝ ənnoʊn tə hɝ, ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn kul-aɪd wʊmən ʃi θɔt wɑz ə waɪt. ði æmɪɝlɪn ən ðə kipɝ wɔɹ ðɛɹ stoʊlz, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt nʌn ə ði ʌðɝz hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə mɑɹk əm aʊɾ ɪksɛpt ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋz ən eɪdʒləs ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪsəz. nʌn ə ðɛm æknɑlɪdʒ ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝ tu baɪ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə ɡlæns.

The rest were unknown to her, except for one cool-eyed woman she thought was a White. The Amyrlin and the Keeper wore their stoles, of course, but none of the others had anything to mark them out except Great Serpent rings and ageless Aes Sedai faces. None of them acknowledged the presence of Egwene and the other two by so much as a glance.

dɪspaɪt ði aʊtwɝd kɑm ə ðə wɪmən ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl, ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi sɔ saɪnz ʌv ənsɝɾənti. ə taɪtnəs tə æneɪjəz maʊð. ə slaɪt fɹaʊn ɑn ɑlɑnəz dɑɹkli bjuɾəfəl feɪs. ðə kul-aɪd wʊmən kɛp smuðɪŋ əɹ peɪl blu dʒɹɛs oʊvɝ əɹ θaɪz wɪθaʊt simɪŋ tə ɹilaɪz wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ.

Despite the outward calm of the women around the table, Egwene thought she saw signs of uncertainty. A tightness to Anaiya's mouth. A slight frown on Alanna's darkly beautiful face. The cool-eyed woman kept smoothing her pale blue dress over her thighs without seeming to realize what she was doing.

ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt noʊ sɛɾ ə pleɪn, pɑlɪʃt wʊɾən bɑks, lɔŋ ən nɛɹoʊ, ɑn ðə teɪbəl ən oʊpən ɪt. fɹəm ɪts nɛst ɪn ðə ɹɛd sɪlk laɪnɪŋ, ði æmɪɝlɪn tʊk aʊɾ ə waɪt, fluɾəd wɑn ðə lɛŋθ ə hɝ fɔɹɑɹm. ɪt cʊɾə bɪn boʊn, əɹ aɪvɝi, bʌt wɑz niðɝ. noʊ wʌn əlaɪv nu wʌɾ ɪt wɑz meɪɾ ʌv.

An Aes Sedai Egwene did not know set a plain, polished wooden box, long and narrow, on the table and opened it. From its nest in the red silk lining, the Amyrlin took out a white, fluted wand the length of her forearm. It could have been bone, or ivory, but was neither. No one alive knew what it was made of.

ɛɡwin hæd nɛvɝ sin ðə wɑn bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɪt fɹəm ə lɛktʃɝ æneɪjə hæd ɡɪvən ðə nɑvəsɪz. wʌn ə ðə fju sɑŋɡɹil, ən pɝhæps ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl, ðət ðə taʊɝ pəzɛst. sɑŋɡɹil hæd noʊ paʊɝ ə ðɛɹ oʊn, ʌv kɔɹs - ðeɪ wɝ mɪɹli dɪvaɪsəz fəɹ foʊkəsɪŋ ən mæɡnəfaɪɪŋ wʌɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd tʃænəl - bʌt wɪð ðət wɑnd, ə stʃɹɔŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪt bi eɪbəl tə kɹʌmpəl ðə wɔlz ə tɑɹ vəlɑn.

Egwene had never seen the wand before, but she recognized it from a lecture Anaiya had given the novices. One of the few sa'angreal, and perhaps the most powerful, that the Tower possessed. Sa'angreal had no power of their own, of course - they were merely devices for focusing and magnifying what an Aes Sedai could channel - but with that wand, a strong Aes Sedai might be able to crumple the walls of Tar Valon.

ɛɡwin klʌtʃt nɪneɪivz hæn ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ən ɪleɪnz ɑn ði ʌðɝ. laɪt! ðəɹ nɑt ʃʊɹ ðeɪ kən hil hɪm, ivən wɪð ə sɑŋɡɹil - wɪð ðət sɑŋɡɹil! wʌt tʃæns wəd wɪv hæd? wid pɹɑbli hæv kɪl hɪm, ən aʊɝsɛlvz, tu. laɪt!

Egwene clutched Nynaeve's hand on one side and Elayne's on the other. Light! They're not sure they can Heal him, even with a sa'angreal - with that sa'angreal! What chance would we have had? We'd probably have killed him, and ourselves, too. Light!

"aɪ wɪl mɛl ðə floʊz," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd. "bi kɛɹfəl. ðə paʊɝ niɾəd tə bɹeɪk ðə bɑnd wɪð ðə dæɡɝ ən hil ɪts dæmədʒ ɪz vɛɹi kloʊz tə wʌt kəd kɪl hɪm. əl foʊkəs. ətɛnd." ʃi hɛl ðə wɑn stʃɹeɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ ɪn boʊθ hænz, əbʌv mæts feɪs. stɪl ʌnkɑnʃəs, hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ən taɪɾənd ə fɪst ɑn ðə dæɡɝz hɪlt, mʌɾɝɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ðət saʊndəd laɪk ə dɪnaɪəl.

"I will meld the flows," the Amyrlin said. "Be careful. The Power needed to break the bond with the dagger and Heal its damage is very close to what could kill him. I will focus. Attend." She held the wand straight out in front of her in both hands, above Mat's face. Still unconscious, he shook his head and tightened a fist on the dagger's hilt, muttering something that sounded like a denial.

ə ɡloʊ əpɪɹɾ ɝaʊn itʃ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðət sɑft, waɪt laɪt ðəɾ oʊnli ə wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl kəd si. sloʊli ðə laɪts spɹɛd, əntɪl ðət wɪtʃ sim tə ɛməneɪt fɹəm wʌn wʊmən tʌtʃt ðət wɪtʃ keɪm fɹəm ðə wʊmən bɪsaɪd hɝ, mɝdʒd wɪð ɪt, tɪl ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn laɪt, ə laɪt ðæt, tə ɛɡwinz aɪz, dɪmɪnɪʃt ðə læmps tə nʌθɪŋ. ən ɪn ðət bɹaɪtnəs wɑz ə stʃɹɔŋɝ laɪt stɪl. ə bɑɹ ə boʊn-waɪt faɪɝ. ðə sɑŋɡɹil.

A glow appeared around each Aes Sedai, that soft, white light that only a woman who could channel could see. Slowly the lights spread, until that which seemed to emanate from one woman touched that which came from the woman beside her, merged with it, till there was only one light, a light that, to Egwene's eyes, diminished the lamps to nothing. And in that brightness was a stronger light still. A bar of bone-white fire. The sa'angreal.

ɛɡwin fɔt ði ɝdʒ tə oʊpən hɝsɛlf tə seɪaɪdɑɹ ən æɾ əɹ floʊ tə ðə taɪd. ɪt wɑz ə pʊl soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə bi dʒɝkt ɔf əɹ fit. ɪleɪn taɪɾənd əɹ hoʊld ɑn əɹ hænd. nɪneɪiv tʊk ə stɛp təwɔɹd ðə teɪbəl, ðən stɑpt wɪð ən æŋɡɹi ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛd. laɪt, ɛɡwin θɔt, aɪ kəd də ɪt. bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ʃi kəd du. laɪt, ɪts soʊ stʃɹɔŋ. ɪts soʊ - wʌndɝfəl. ɪleɪnz hænd wɑz tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ.

Egwene fought the urge to open herself to saidar and add her flow to the tide. It was a pull so strong she was about to be jerked off her feet. Elayne tightened her hold on her hand. Nynaeve took a step toward the table, then stopped with an angry shake of her head. Light, Egwene thought, I could do it. But she did not know what it was she could do. Light, it's so strong. It's so - wonderful. Elayne's hand was trembling.

ɑn ðə teɪbəl, mæt θɹæʃt ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɡloʊ, dʒɝkɪŋ ðɪs weɪ, ðən ðæt, mʌɾɝɪŋ ɪnkɑmpɹihɛnsəbli. bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt lusən ɪz hoʊld ɑn ðə dæɡɝ, ən ɪz aɪz ɹɪmeɪn kloʊzd. sloʊli, ɛvɝ soʊ sloʊli, hi bɪɡæn tə ɑɹtʃ ɪz bæk, mʌsəlz stʃɹeɪnɪŋ tɪl i ʃʊk. stɪl i fɔɾ ən bʌkt, əntɪl faɪnəli oʊnli hɪz hilz ən ɪz ʃoʊldɝz tʌtʃt ðə teɪbəl. hɪz hæn ɑn ðə dæɡɝ spɹæŋ oʊpən ænd, kwɪvɝɪŋ, kɹɛp bæk fɹəm ðə hɪlt; wɑz fɔɹst, faɪɾɪŋ, fɹəm ðə hɪlt. hɪz lɪps skɪn əweɪ fɹəm ɪz tiθ ɪn ə snɑɹl, ə ɡɹɪmɑs ə peɪn, ən ɪz bɹɛθ keɪm ɪn fɔɹst ɡɹʌns.

On the table, Mat thrashed in the middle of the glow, jerking this way, then that, muttering incomprehensibly. But he did not loosen his hold on the dagger, and his eyes remained closed. Slowly, ever so slowly, he began to arch his back, muscles straining till he shook. Still he fought and bucked, until finally only his heels and his shoulders touched the table. His hand on the dagger sprang open and, quivering, crept back from the hilt; was forced, fighting, from the hilt. His lips skinned away from his teeth in a snarl, a grimace of pain, and his breath came in forced grunts.

"ðeɪ ɑɹ kɪlɪŋ hɪm," ɛɡwin wɪspɝd. "ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪz kɪlɪŋ hɪm! wɪv tə də sʌmθɪŋ."

"They are killing him," Egwene whispered. "The Amyrlin is killing him! We have to do something."

dʒʌst əz sɔfli, nɪneɪiv sɛd, "ɪf wi stɑp əm - ɪf wi kəd stɑp əm - hɪl daɪ. aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk aɪ kəd hændəl hæf ðət mʌtʃ ə ðə paʊɝ." ʃi pɔzd əz ɪf ʃi hæd dʒʌs hɝɾ əɹ oʊn wɝdz - ðət ʃi kəd tʃænəl hæf ʌv wʌt tɛn fʊl ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd wɪð ə sɑŋɡɹil - ən əɹ vɔɪs ɡɹu ivən feɪntɝ. "laɪt hɛlp mi, aɪ wɑn tə."

Just as softly, Nynaeve said, "If we stop them - if we could stop them - he'll die. I do not think I could handle half that much of the Power." She paused as if she had just heard her own words - that she could channel half of what ten full Aes Sedai did with a sa'angreal - and her voice grew even fainter. "Light help me, I want to."

ʃi fɛl saɪlən əbɹʌpli. dɪd ʃi min ðət ʃi wɑntəd tə hɛlp mæt, əɹ ðət ʃi wɑntəd tə tʃænəl ðət floʊ ʌv paʊɝ? ɛɡwin kəd fil ðəɾ ɝdʒ ɪn hɝsɛlf, laɪk ə sɔŋ ðət kəmpɛld əɹ tə dæns.

She fell silent abruptly. Did she mean that she wanted to help Mat, or that she wanted to channel that flow of Power? Egwene could feel that urge in herself, like a song that compelled her to dance.

"wi mʌs tʃɹʌs ðɛm," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ən ɪntɛns wɪspɝ, faɪnəli. "hi hæz noʊ ʌðɝ tʃæns."

"We must trust them," Nynaeve said in an intense whisper, finally. "He has no other chance."

sʌɾənli mæt ʃaʊɾəd, laʊɾ ən stʃɹɔŋ. "muɑdʒɹɪn tiə dɑɹ ɑjɛndeɪ kɑbɑdʒɹɪn ɹædim!" ɑɹtʃt ən stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ, aɪz skwizd ʃʌt, hi bɛloʊd ðə wɝdz klɪɹli. "loʊs vɑldɑɹ kwbɪjɑɹi! loʊs! kæɹɑi ən kɑldəzɑɹ! æl kɑldəzɑɹ!"

Suddenly Mat shouted, loud and strong. "Muad'drin tia dar allende caba'drin rhadiem!" Arched and struggling, eyes squeezed shut, he bellowed the words clearly. "Los Valdar Cuebiyari! Los! Carai an Caldazar! Al Caldazar!"

ɛɡwin fɹaʊnd. ʃi hæd lɝn ɪnʌf tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ði oʊl tʌŋ, ɪf nɑt tə ʌndɝstæn mɔɹ ðən ə fju wɝdz. kæɹɑi ən kɑldəzɑɹ! æl kɑldəzɑɹ! "fɔɹ ði ɑnɝ ə ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl! fəɹ ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl!" eɪntʃən bæɾəl kɹaɪz ə meɪnɛðɝən, ə neɪʃən ðət hæd vænɪʃt dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. ə neɪʃən ðət hæd stʊd wɛɹ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑz naʊ. ðət mʌtʃ, ʃi nu; bʌɾ ɪn səm weɪ ɪt sim fəɹ ə moʊmən ðət ʃi ʃəɾ ʌndɝstæn ðə ɹɛst, tu, əz ɪf ðə minɪŋ wɝ dʒʌst aʊɾ ə saɪt, ən ɔl ʃi hæd tə də wɑz tɝn əɹ hɛd tə noʊ.

Egwene frowned. She had learned enough to recognize the Old Tongue, if not to understand more than a few words. Carai an Caldazar! Al Caldazar! "For the honor of the Red Eagle! For the Red Eagle!" Ancient battle cries of Manetheren, a nation that had vanished during the Trolloc Wars. A nation that had stood where the Two Rivers was now. That much, she knew; but in some way it seemed for a moment that she should understand the rest, too, as if the meaning were just out of sight, and all she had to do was turn her head to know.

wɪð ə laʊd pɑp ə tɛɹɪŋ lɛðɝ, ðə ɡoʊldən-ʃið dæɡɝ ɹoʊz fɹəm mæts bɛlt, hʌŋ ə fʊɾ əbʌv ɪz stʃɹeɪnɪŋ bɑɾi. ðə ɹubi ɡlɪɾɝd, sim tə sɛn ɔf kɹɪmzən spɑɹks, əz ɪf ɪt, tu, fɔt ðə hilɪŋ.

With a loud pop of tearing leather, the golden-sheathed dagger rose from Mat's belt, hung a foot above his straining body. The ruby glittered, seemed to send off crimson sparks, as if it, too, fought the Healing.

mæts aɪz oʊpənd, ən i ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðə wɪmən stændɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm. "miə aɪɛnd, ɛɛs sədaɪ! kæbɔlaɪn mɪseɪn ji! ɪn muɑɡdh ɛɛs sədaɪ mɪseɪn ji! miə aɪɛnd!" ən i bɪɡæn tə skɹim, ə ɹɔɹ ə ɹeɪdʒ ðət wɛn ɑn ən ɑn, tɪl ɛɡwin wʌndɝd ðəɾ i hæd bɹɛθ lɛft ɪn hɪm.

Mat's eyes opened, and he glared at the women standing around him. "Mia ayende, Aes Sedai! Caballein misain ye! Inde muagdhe Aes Sedai misain ye! Mia ayende!" And he began to scream, a roar of rage that went on and on, till Egwene wondered that he had breath left in him.

hɝidli æneɪjə bɛn tə lɪft ə dɑɹk mɛɾəl bɑks fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə teɪbəl, muvɪŋ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ hɛvi. wən ʃi sɛɾ ɪt bɪsaɪd mæt ən oʊpən ðə lɪd, oʊnli ə smɔl speɪs wɑz ɹɪvild wɪðɪn saɪdz ət lis tu ɪntʃəz θɪk. æneɪjə bɛn əɡɛn fəɹ ə sɛɾ ə tɑŋz sətʃ əz ə ɡʊdwaɪf maɪt juz ɪn əɹ kɪtʃən, ən ɡɹæsp ðə floʊɾɪŋ dæɡɝ ɪn əm əz kɛɹfəli əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə pɔɪzənəs sneɪk.

Hurriedly Anaiya bent to lift a dark metal box from under the table, moving as if it were heavy. When she set it beside Mat and opened the lid, only a small space was revealed within sides at least two inches thick. Anaiya bent again for a set of tongs such as a goodwife might use in her kitchen, and grasped the floating dagger in them as carefully as if it were a poisonous snake.

mæts skɹim ɡɹu fɹæntɪk. ðə ɹubi ʃoʊn fjʊɹiəsli, flæʃɪŋ blʌd-ɹɛd.

Mat's scream grew frantic. The ruby shone furiously, flashing blood-red.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ θɹʌs ðə dæɡɝ ɪndə ðə bɑks ən snæp ðə lɪd daʊn, lɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə laʊd saɪ əz ɪt klɪkt ʃʌt. "ə fɪlθi θɪŋ," ʃi sɛd.

The Aes Sedai thrust the dagger into the box and snapped the lid down, letting out a loud sigh as it clicked shut. "A filthy thing," she said.

əz sun əz ðə dæɡɝ wɑz hɪɾən, mæts ʃɹik kʌɾ ɔf, ən i kəlæpst əz ɪf mʌsəl ən boʊn hæd tɝn tə wɔɾɝ. ən ɪnstən leɪɾɝ ðə ɡloʊ sɝaʊndɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən teɪbəl wɪŋkt aʊt.

As soon as the dagger was hidden, Mat's shriek cut off, and he collapsed as if muscle and bone had turned to water. An instant later the glow surrounding Aes Sedai and table winked out.

"dʌn," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd hɔɹsli, əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn ðə wʌn skɹimɪŋ. "ɪɾ ɪz dʌn."

"Done," the Amyrlin said hoarsely, as if she had been the one screaming. "It is done."

səm ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sæɡd vɪzəbli, ən swɛt biɾɪd ɑn mɔɹ ðən wʌn bɹaʊ. æneɪjə pʊld ə pleɪn lɪnən hæŋkɝtʃɪf fɹəm əɹ sliv ən waɪpt əɹ feɪs oʊpənli. ðə kul-aɪd waɪt dæbd ɔlmoʊst sɝəptɪʃəsli əɾ əɹ tʃiks wɪð ə bɪɾ ə luɡɹd leɪs.

Some of the Aes Sedai sagged visibly, and sweat beaded on more than one brow. Anaiya pulled a plain linen handkerchief from her sleeve and wiped her face openly. The cool-eyed White dabbed almost surreptitiously at her cheeks with a bit of Lugard lace.

"fæsəneɪɾɪŋ," vɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðæt ði oʊl blʌd kəd floʊ soʊ stʃɹɔŋli ɪn ɛniwʌn tədeɪ." ʃi ən sɹəfɛl pʊt ðɛɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ, tɔkɪŋ sɔfli, bʌt wɪð mɛni dʒɛstʃɝz.

"Fascinating," Verin said. "That the Old Blood could flow so strongly in anyone today." She and Serafelle put their heads together, talking softly, but with many gestures.

"ɪz i hild?" nɪneɪiv sɛd. "wɪl i . . . lɪv?"

"Is he Healed?" Nynaeve said. "Will he . . . live?"

mæt leɪ əz ɪf slipɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪz feɪs stɪl hæd ðət hɑloʊ-tʃikt ɡɔntnəs. ɛɡwin hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ə hilɪŋ ðət dɪd nɑt kjʊɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ənlɛs dʒʌst sɛpɝeɪɾɪŋ ɪm fɹəm ðə dæɡɝ tʊk ɔl ə ðə paʊɝ ðeɪ juzd. laɪt!

Mat lay as if sleeping, but his face still had that hollow-cheeked gauntness. Egwene had never heard of a Healing that did not cure everything. Unless just separating him from the dagger took all of the Power they used. Light!

"bɹɛndəz," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd, "wɪl jə si ðət hiz teɪkən bæk tə hɪz ɹum?"

"Brendas," the Amyrlin said, "will you see that he is taken back to his room?"

"æz jə kəmænd, mʌðɝ," ðə kul-aɪd wʊmən sɛd, hɝ kɝtsi əz ɪmoʊʃənləs əz ʃi hɝsɛlf simd. wən ʃi lɛf tə sʌmən bɛɹɝz, sɛvɹəl ə ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ lɛft, tu, ɪnkluɾɪŋ æneɪjə. vɛɹɪn ən sɹəfɛl fɑloʊd, stɪl tɔkɪŋ tə wʌn ənʌðɝ tu kwaɪətli fəɹ ɛɡwin tə meɪk aʊt wʌt ðeɪ sɛd.

"As you command, Mother," the cool-eyed woman said, her curtsy as emotionless as she herself seemed. When she left to summon bearers, several of the other Aes Sedai left, too, including Anaiya. Verin and Serafelle followed, still talking to one another too quietly for Egwene to make out what they said.

"ɪz mæt ɔl ɹaɪt?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. ʃɛɹiəm ɹeɪzd əɹ aɪbɹaʊz.

"Is Mat all right?" Nynaeve demanded. Sheriam raised her eyebrows.

ði æmɪɝlɪn sit tɝn təwɔɹd ðɛm. "hi ɪz əz wɛl əz i kən bi," ʃi sɛd koʊldli. "oʊnli taɪm wɪl tɛl. kæɹiɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ wɪð ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθs teɪn fəɹ soʊ lɔŋ . . . hu noʊz wʌɾ ɪfɛkt ɪɾəl əv ɑn hɪm? pɝhæps nʌn, pɝhæps mʌtʃ. wɪl si. bʌt ðə bɑnd wɪð ðə dæɡɝ ɪz bɹoʊkən. naʊ hi nidz ɹɛst, ən əz mʌtʃ fuɾ əz kən bi ɡɑɾən ɪndə hɪm. hi ʃəd lɪv."

The Amyrlin Seat turned toward them. "He is as well as he can be," she said coldly. "Only time will tell. Carrying something with Shadar Logoth's taint for so long . . . who knows what effect it will have on him? Perhaps none, perhaps much. We will see. But the bond with the dagger is broken. Now he needs rest, and as much food as can be gotten into him. He should live."

"wʌt wɑz ðəɾ i wɑz ʃaʊɾɪŋ, mʌðɝ?" ɪleɪn æskt, ðən heɪstəli æɾəd, "ɪf aɪ meɪ æsk."

"What was that he was shouting, Mother?" Elayne asked, then hastily added, "If I may ask."

"hi wɑz ɔɹɾɝɪŋ soʊlʒɝz." ði æmɪɝlɪn ɡeɪv ðə jʌŋ mæn laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə teɪbəl ə kwɪtsɪkəl lʊk. hi hæd nɑt muv sɪns kəlæpsɪŋ, bʌɾ ɛɡwin θɔɾ ɪz bɹiðɪŋ simd iziɝ, ðə ɹaɪz ən fɔl ə hɪz tʃɛs mɔɹ ɹɪðmɪk. "ɪn ə bæɾəl tu θaʊzən jɪɹz ɡɔn, aɪ wəd seɪ. ði oʊl blʌd kʌmz əɡɛn."

"He was ordering soldiers." The Amyrlin gave the young man lying on the table a quizzical look. He had not moved since collapsing, but Egwene thought his breathing seemed easier, the rise and fall of his chest more rhythmic. "In a battle two thousand years gone, I would say. The Old Blood comes again."

"ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɔl əbaʊɾ ə bæɾəl," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "aɪ hɝɾ ɪm seɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðət wɑz noʊ bæɾəl. mʌðɝ," ʃi æɾəd bɪleɪɾədli.

"It was not all about a battle," Nynaeve said. "I heard him say Aes Sedai. That was no battle. Mother," she added belatedly.

fəɹ ə moʊmən ði æmɪɝlɪn sim tə kənsɪɾɝ, pɝhæps wʌt tə seɪ, pɝhæps wɛðɝ tə seɪ ɛniθɪŋ. "fɔɹ ə taɪm," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli, "aɪ bɪliv ðə pæst ən ðə pɹɛzənt wɝ wʌn. hi wɑz ðɛɹ, ən i wɑz hɪɹ, ən i nu hu wi wɝ. hi kəmændəɾ əs tə ɹilis hɪm." ʃi pɔzd əɡɛn. " 'aɪ æm ə fɹi mæn, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪm noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ mit.' ðəɾ ɪz wʌɾ i sɛd."

For a moment the Amyrlin seemed to consider, perhaps what to say, perhaps whether to say anything. "For a time," she said finally, "I believe the past and the present were one. He was there, and he was here, and he knew who we were. He commanded us to release him." She paused again. " 'I am a free man, Aes Sedai. I am no Aes Sedai meat.' That is what he said."

lin snɪf laʊdli, ən səm ə ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ mʌɾɝd æŋɡɹəli ʌndɝ ðɛɹ bɹɛθ.

Leane sniffed loudly, and some of the other Aes Sedai muttered angrily under their breath.

"bʌt, mʌðɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd, "hi kəd nɑɾ əv mɛn ɪɾ əz ɪt saʊnz. meɪnɛðɝən wɑz əlaɪd wɪð tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"But, Mother," Egwene said, "he could not have meant it as it sounds. Manetheren was allied with Tar Valon."

"meɪnɛðɝən wɑz ən ælaɪ, tʃaɪld," ði æmɪɝlɪn toʊl hɝ, "bʌɾ u kən noʊ ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ə mæn? nɑɾ ivən i hɪmsɛlf, aɪ səspɛkt. ə mæn ɪz ði iziəst ænəməl tə pʊɾ ɑn ə liʃ, ən ðə hɑɹɾəst tə kip liʃt. ivən wən i tʃuzəz ɪt hɪmsɛlf."

"Manetheren was an ally, child," the Amyrlin told her, "but who can know the heart of a man? Not even he himself, I suspect. A man is the easiest animal to put on a leash, and the hardest to keep leashed. Even when he chooses it himself."

"mʌðɝ," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd, "ɪɾ ɪz leɪt. ðə kʊks wɪl bi weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðiz hɛlpɝz."

"Mother," Sheriam said, "it is late. The cooks will be waiting for these helpers."

"mʌðɝ," ɛɡwin æskt æŋkʃəsli, "kʊd wi nɑt steɪ wɪð mæt? ɪf i meɪ stɪl daɪ. . . ."

"Mother," Egwene asked anxiously, "could we not stay with Mat? If he may still die. . . ."

ði æmɪɝlɪnz lʊk wɑz lɛvəl, hɝ feɪs wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən. "ju hæv tʃɔɹz tə du, tʃaɪld."

The Amyrlin's look was level, her face without expression. "You have chores to do, child."

ɪt wɑz nɑt skɹʌbɪŋ pɑts ʃi mɛnt. ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ ə ðæt. "jɛs, mʌðɝ." ʃi kɝtsid, hɝ skɝts bɹʌʃɪŋ nɪneɪivz ən ɪleɪnz əz ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹz. wʌn læs taɪm ʃi lʊkt ət mæt, ðən fɑloʊd ʃɛɹiəm aʊt. mæt hæd stɪl nɑt muvd.

It was not scrubbing pots she meant. Egwene was sure of that. "Yes, Mother." She curtsied, her skirts brushing Nynaeve's and Elayne's as they made theirs. One last time she looked at Mat, then followed Sheriam out. Mat had still not moved.


tʃæptɝ naɪntin


CHAPTER 19

əweɪkənɪŋ


Awakening

mæt oʊpən ɪz aɪz sloʊli ən stɛɹɾ ʌp ət ðə waɪt plæstɝ silɪŋ, wʌndɝɪŋ wɛɹ i wɑz ən haʊ hi hæd kʌm ðɛɹ. ən ɪntʃɹəkət fɹɪnʒ ʌv ɡɪldɪd livz bɔɹɾɝd ðə silɪŋ, ən ðə mætʃɹəs ʌndɝ ɪz bæk fɛl plʌmp fʊl ə fɛðɝz. sʌmwɛɹ ɹɪtʃ, ðɛn. sʌmwɛɹ wɪð mʌni. bʌɾ ɪz hɛd wɑz ɛmpti ʌv ðə wɛɹ ən ðə haʊ, ən ə lɑt mɔɹ bɪsaɪdz.

Mat opened his eyes slowly and stared up at the white plaster ceiling, wondering where he was and how he had come there. An intricate fringe of gilded leaves bordered the ceiling, and the mattress under his back felt plumped full of feathers. Somewhere rich, then. Somewhere with money. But his head was empty of the where and the how, and a lot more besides.

hi hæd bɪn dʒɹimɪŋ, ən bɪts ə ðoʊz dʒɹimz stɪl tʌmbəl təɡɛðɝ wɪð mɛmɹiz ɪn ɪz hɛd. hi kəd nɑt sɛpɹət wʌn fɹəm ði ʌðɝ. waɪl flaɪts ən faɪts, stʃɹeɪnʒ pipəl fɹəm əkɹɔs ði oʊʃən, weɪz ən pɔɹɾəl stoʊnz ən pisəz ʌv ʌðɝ laɪvz, θɪŋz ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ʌv ə ɡlimənz teɪlz, ðiz hæd tə bi dʒɹimz. ət list, hi θɔt ðeɪ mʌs bi. bʌt lɔɪəl wɑz noʊ dʒɹim, ən i wɑz ən oʊɡiɝ. tʃʌŋks ə kɑnvɝseɪʃənz dʒɹɪftəɾ ɝaʊn ɪn ɪz θɔts, tɔks wɪð ɪz fɑðɝ, wɪð fɹɛnz, wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn, ən ə bjuɾəfəl wʊmən, ən ə ʃɪp kæptən, ən ə wɛl-dʒɹɛs mæn u spoʊk tə hɪm laɪk ə fɑðɝ ɡɪvɪŋ seɪdʒ ædvaɪs. ðoʊz wɝ pɹɑbli ɹil. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔl bɪts ən fɹæɡməns. dʒɹɪftɪŋ.

He had been dreaming, and bits of those dreams still tumbled together with memories in his head. He could not separate one from the other. Wild flights and fights, strange people from across the ocean, Ways and Portal Stones and pieces of other lives, things right out of a gleeman's tales, these had to be dreams. At least, he thought they must be. But Loial was no dream, and he was an Ogier. Chunks of conversations drifted around in his thoughts, talks with his father, with friends, with Moiraine, and a beautiful woman, and a ship captain, and a well-dressed man who spoke to him like a father giving sage advice. Those were probably real. But it was all bits and fragments. Drifting.

"muɑdʒɹɪn tiə dɑɹ ɑjɛndeɪ kɑbɑdʒɹɪn ɹædim," hi mɝmɝd. ðə wɝdz wɝ oʊnli saʊnz, jɛt ðeɪ spɑɹkt - sʌmθɪŋ.

"Muad'drin tia dar allende caba'drin rhadiem," he murmured. The words were only sounds, yet they sparked - something.

ðə pæk laɪnz ə spɹmən stʃɹɛtʃt ə maɪl əɹ mɔɹ tə iðɝ saɪd bɪloʊ hɪm, dɑɾəd wɪð ðə pɛnəns ən bænɝz ə taʊnz ən sɪɾiz ən maɪnɝ haʊzɪz. ðə ɹɪvɝ sɪkjʊɹɾ ɪz flæŋk ɑn ðə lɛft, ðə bɑɡz ən maɪɹz ɑn ðə ɹaɪt. fɹəm ðə hɪlsaɪɾ i wɑtʃt ðə spɹmən stʃɹʌɡəl əɡɛns ðə mæs ə tʃɹɑləks tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɹeɪk θɹu, tɛn taɪmz ðə hjumənz' nʌmbɝ. spɪɹz pɪɹs blæk tʃɹɑlɑk meɪl, ən spaɪkt æksiz kɑɹv blʌɾi ɡæps ɪn ðə hjumən ɹæŋks. skɹimz ən bɛloʊz hɛɹid ði ɛɹ. ðə sʌn bɝn hɑɾ oʊvɝhɛɾ ɪn ə klaʊdləs skaɪ, ən ʃɪmɝz ə hit ɹoʊz əbʌv ðə bæɾəl laɪn. æɹoʊz stɪl ɹeɪn daʊn fɹəm ði ɛnəmi, sleɪɪŋ tʃɹɑlɑk ən hjumən əlaɪk. hi hæd kɔld ɪz ɑɹtʃɝz bæk, bʌt ðə dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz dɪd nɑt kɛɹ soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ bɹoʊk ɪz laɪn. ɑn ðə ɹɪdʒ bɪhaɪn hɪm, ðə hɑɹt ɡɑɹɾ əweɪɾəd ɪz kəmænd, hɔɹsəz stæmpɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃənli. ɑɹmɝ ɑn mɛn ən hɔɹsəz əlaɪk ʃoʊn sɪlvɝ ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪt; niðɝ mɛn nɔɹ ænəməlz kəd stæn ðə hit mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ.

The packed lines of spearmen stretched a mile or more to either side below him, dotted with the pennants and banners of towns and cities and minor Houses. The river secured his flank on the left, the bogs and mires on the right. From the hillside he watched the spearmen struggle against the mass of Trollocs trying to break through, ten times the humans' number. Spears pierced black Trolloc mail, and spiked axes carved bloody gaps in the human ranks. Screams and bellows harried the air. The sun burned hot overhead in a cloudless sky, and shimmers of heat rose above the battle line. Arrows still rained down from the enemy, slaying Trolloc and human alike. He had called his archers back, but the Dreadlords did not care so long as they broke his line. On the ridge behind him, the Heart Guard awaited his command, horses stamping impatiently. Armor on men and horses alike shone silver in the sunlight; neither men nor animals could stand the heat much longer.

ðeɪ mʌst wɪn hɪɹ əɹ daɪ. hi wɑz noʊn əz ə ɡæmblɝ; ɪt wɑz taɪm tə tɔs ðə daɪs. ɪn ə vɔɪs ðət kæɹiɾ oʊvɝ ðə tuməl bɪloʊ, hi ɡeɪv ði ɔɹɾɝ əz i swʌŋ ʌp ɪndə hɪz sæɾəl. "fʊtmən pɹipɛɹ tə pæs kævəlɹi fɔɹwɝd!" hɪz bænɝmən ɹoʊd kloʊs bɪsaɪd hɪm, ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl bænɝ flæpɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd, əz ðə kəmænd wɑz ɹɪpiɾɪd ʌp ən daʊn ðə laɪn.

They must win here or die. He was known as a gambler; it was time to toss the dice. In a voice that carried over the tumult below, he gave the order as he swung up into his saddle. "Footmen prepare to pass cavalry forward!" His bannerman rode close beside him, the Red Eagle banner flapping over his head, as the command was repeated up and down the line.

bɪloʊ, ðə spɹmən sʌɾənli muvd, saɪdstɛpɪŋ wɪð ɡʊd dɪsəplən, nɛɹoʊɪŋ ðɛɹ fɔɹmeɪʃənz, oʊpənɪŋ waɪd ɡæps bɪtwin. ɡæps ɪndə wɪtʃ ðə tʃɹɑləks pɔɹd, ɹɔɹɪŋ bɛstʃəl kɹaɪz, laɪk ə blæk, uzɪŋ taɪɾ ə dɛθ.

Below, the spearmen suddenly moved, sidestepping with good discipline, narrowing their formations, opening wide gaps between. Gaps into which the Trollocs poured, roaring bestial cries, like a black, oozing tide of death.

hi dʒɹu hɪz sɔɹd, ɹeɪzd ɪt haɪ. "fɔɹwɝd ðə hɑɹt ɡɑɹd!" hi dʌɡ hɪz hilz ɪn, ən ɪz maʊn lɛp daʊn ðə sloʊp. bɪhaɪn hɪm, hʊvz θʌndɝɾ ɪn ðə tʃɑɹdʒ. "fɔɹwɝd!" hi wɑz fɝs tə stʃɹaɪk ɪndə ðə tʃɹɑləks, hɪz sɔɹd ɹaɪzɪŋ ən fɔlɪŋ, hɪz bænɝmən kloʊs bɪhaɪnd. "fɔɹ ði ɑnɝ ə ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl!" ðə hɑɹt ɡɑɹd paʊndɪɾ ɪndə ðə ɡæps bɪtwin ðə spɹmən, smæʃɪŋ ðə taɪd, hɝlɪŋ ɪt bæk. "ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl!" hæf-hjumən feɪsəz snɑɹəld ət hɪm, ɑdli kɝv sɔɹdz sɔt hɪm, bʌɾ i kʌɾ ɪz weɪ ɛvɝ dipɝ. wɪn əɹ daɪ. "meɪnɛðɝən!"

He drew his sword, raised it high. "Forward the Heart Guard!" He dug his heels in, and his mount leaped down the slope. Behind him, hooves thundered in the charge. "Forward!" He was first to strike into the Trollocs, his sword rising and falling, his bannerman close behind. "For the honor of the Red Eagle!" The Heart Guard pounded into the gaps between the spearmen, smashing the tide, hurling it back. "The Red Eagle!" Half-human faces snarled at him, oddly curved swords sought him, but he cut his way ever deeper. Win or die. "Manetheren!"

mæts hæn tʃɹɛmbəld əz i ɹeɪzd ɪt tə hɪz fɔɹhɛd. "loʊs vɑldɑɹ kwbɪjɑɹi," hi mʌɾɝd. hi wɑz ɔlmoʊst ʃʊɹ i nu wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt - "fɔɹwɝd ðə hɑɹt ɡɑɹd," əɹ meɪbi "ðə hɑɹt ɡɑɹd wɪl ədvæns" - bʌt ðət kəd nɑt bi. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd toʊld ɪm ə fju wɝdz ə ði oʊl tʌŋ, ən ðoʊz wɝ ɔl i nu ʌv ɪt. ðə ɹɛs maɪɾ əz wɛl bi mæɡpaɪ tʃæɾɝ.

Mat's hand trembled as he raised it to his forehead. "Los Valdar Cuebiyari," he muttered. He was almost sure he knew what it meant - "Forward the Heart Guard," or maybe "The Heart Guard will advance" - but that could not be. Moiraine had told him a few words of the Old Tongue, and those were all he knew of it. The rest might as well be magpie chatter.

"kɹeɪzi," hi sɛd ɹʌfli. "ɪt pɹɑbli ɪzən ivən ði oʊl tʌŋ əɾ ɔl. dʒʌst ɡɪbɝɪʃ. ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz kɹeɪzi. ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə dʒɹim."

"Crazy," he said roughly. "It probably isn't even the Old Tongue at all. Just gibberish. That Aes Sedai is crazy. It was only a dream."

ɛɛs sədaɪ. mɔɪɹeɪn. hi sʌɾənli bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə hɪz tu-θɪn ɹɪst ən boʊni hænd, ən lʊkt ət ðɛm. hi hæd bɪn sɪk. sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ə dæɡɝ. ə dæɡɝ wɪð ə ɹubi ɪn ðə hɪlt, ən ə lɔŋ-dɛd, teɪntɪd sɪɾi kɔld ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. ɪt wɑz ɔl fɑɡi ən dɪstənt, ən meɪd noʊ ɹil sɛns, bʌɾ i nu ɪt wɑz noʊ dʒɹim. ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn teɪkɪŋ ɪm tə tɑɹ vəlɑn tə bi hild. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət mʌtʃ.

Aes Sedai. Moiraine. He suddenly became aware of his too-thin wrist and bony hand, and looked at them. He had been sick. Something to do with a dagger. A dagger with a ruby in the hilt, and a long-dead, tainted city called Shadar Logoth. It was all foggy and distant, and made no real sense, but he knew it was no dream. Egwene and Nynaeve had been taking him to Tar Valon to be Healed. He remembered that much.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə sɪɾ ʌp, ən fɛl bæk, əz wik əz ə nubɔɹn læm. ləbɔɹiəsli, hi pʊl hɪmsɛlf ʌp ən ʃʌv ðə sɪŋɡəl wʊlən blæŋkəɾ əsaɪd. hɪz kloʊðz wɝ ɡɔn, pɝhæps ɪndə ðə vaɪn-kɑɹvd wɔɹdʒɹoʊb stændɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl. fəɹ ðə moʊmən i dɪd nɑt kɛɹ əbaʊt kloʊðz. hi stʃɹʌɡəl tə hɪz fit, tɑɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə flaʊɝd kɑɹpət tə klɪŋ tə ə haɪ-bækt ɑɹmtʃɛɹ, ən lɝtʃt fɹəm ðə tʃɛɹ tə ðə teɪbəl, ɡɪldɪd skɹoʊlz ɑn ɪts lɛɡz ən ɛdʒəz.

He tried to sit up, and fell back, as weak as a newborn lamb. Laboriously, he pulled himself up and shoved the single woolen blanket aside. His clothes were gone, perhaps into the vine-carved wardrobe standing against the wall. For the moment he did not care about clothes. He struggled to his feet, tottered across the flowered carpet to cling to a high-backed armchair, and lurched from the chair to the table, gilded scrolls on its legs and edges.

biswæks kændəlz, fɔɹ tə itʃ tɔl stæn ən smɔl mɪɹɝz bɪhaɪn ðə fleɪmz, lɪt ðə ɹum bɹaɪtli. ə lɑɹdʒɝ mɪɹɝ ɑn ðə wɔl əbʌv ðə haɪli pɑlɪʃt wɑʃstæn θɹu hɪz ɹəflɛkʃən bæk ət hɪm, ɡɔn ən weɪstəd, tʃiks hɑloʊ ən dɑɹk aɪz sʌŋkən, hɛɹ swɛt-mæɾɪd, bɛn laɪk ən oʊl mæn ən weɪvɝɪŋ laɪk pæstʃɝ ɡɹæs ɪn ə bɹiz. hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf stæn stʃɹeɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ ɪmpɹuvmənt.

Beeswax candles, four to each tall stand and small mirrors behind the flames, lit the room brightly. A larger mirror on the wall above the highly polished washstand threw his reflection back at him, gaunt and wasted, cheeks hollow and dark eyes sunken, hair sweat-matted, bent like an old man and wavering like pasture grass in a breeze. He made himself stand straight, but it was not much improvement.

ə lɑɹdʒ, kʌvɝd tʃɹeɪ sæɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz hænz, ən ɪz noʊz kɑt ðə smɛlz ə fud. hi twɪtʃt əsaɪd ðə klɔθ, ɹɪvilɪŋ tu lɑɹdʒ sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝz ən dɪʃəz ə θɪn ɡɹin pɔɹsələn. hi hæd hɝd ðət ðə si foʊk tʃɑɹdʒd ɪts weɪɾ ɪn sɪlvɝ fəɹ ðət pɔɹsələn. hi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd bif ti, əɹ switbɹɛdz, ðə kaɪnz ə θɪŋz ɪnvələdz hæd pʊʃt ɑn ðɛm. ɪnstɛd, wʌn pleɪt hɛl slaɪsəz ʌv ə bif ɹoʊs paɪl θɪkli, wɪð bɹaʊn mʌstɝɾ ən hɔɹsɹæɾɪʃ. ɑn ʌðɝz ðəɹ wɝ ɹoʊstəd pəteɪɾoʊz, switbiənz wɪð ʌnjənz, kæbədʒ, ən bʌɾɝpiz. pɪkəlz, ən ə wɛdʒ ə jɛloʊ tʃiz. θɪk slaɪsəz ə kɹʌsti bɹɛd, ən ə dɪʃ ə bʌɾɝ. wʌn pɪtʃɝ wɑz fɪld wɪð mɪlk ən stɪl biɾɪd wɪð kɑndənseɪʃən ɑn ði aʊtsaɪd, ði ʌðɝ wɪð wʌt smɛld laɪk spaɪst waɪn. ðəɹ wɑz ɪnʌf ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ fəɹ fɔɹ mɛn. hɪz maʊθ wɔɾɝd, ən ɪz stʌmək ɡɹaʊld ət hɪm.

A large, covered tray sat on the table in front of his hands, and his nose caught the smells of food. He twitched aside the cloth, revealing two large silver pitchers and dishes of thin green porcelain. He had heard that the Sea Folk charged its weight in silver for that porcelain. He had expected beef tea, or sweetbreads, the kinds of things invalids had pushed on them. Instead, one plate held slices of a beef roast piled thickly, with brown mustard and horseradish. On others there were roasted potatoes, sweetbeans with onions, cabbage, and butterpeas. Pickles, and a wedge of yellow cheese. Thick slices of crusty bread, and a dish of butter. One pitcher was filled with milk and still beaded with condensation on the outside, the other with what smelled like spiced wine. There was enough of everything for four men. His mouth watered, and his stomach growled at him.

fɝst aɪ faɪn aʊt wɛɹ aɪ æm. bʌɾ i ɹoʊld ʌp ə slaɪs ə bif ən dɪpt ɪɾ ɪn ðə mʌstɝd bɪfɔɹ pʊʃɪŋ hɪmsɛlf əweɪ fɹəm ðə teɪbəl təwɔɹd ðə θɹi tɔl, nɛɹoʊ wɪndoʊz.

First I find out where I am. But he rolled up a slice of beef and dipped it in the mustard before pushing himself away from the table toward the three tall, narrow windows.

wʊɾən ʃʌɾɝz kɑɹvd ɪn leɪsi pæɾɝnz kʌvɝd ðɛm, bʌt θɹu ðə hoʊlz i kəd si ðəɾ ɪt wɑz naɪɾ aʊtsaɪd. laɪts fɹəm ʌðɝ wɪndoʊz meɪd dɑts ɪn ðə blæknəs. fəɹ ə moʊmən i sæɡd əɡɛns ðə waɪt stoʊn wɪndaʊsəl ɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən, bʌt ðən i bɪɡæn tə θɪŋk.

Wooden shutters carved in lacy patterns covered them, but through the holes he could see that it was night outside. Lights from other windows made dots in the blackness. For a moment he sagged against the white stone windowsill in frustration, but then he began to think.

jə kən tɝn ðə wɝs ðət kʌmz tə jəɹ ædvæntɪdʒ ɪf jə oʊnli θɪŋk, hɪz fɑðɝ ɔlweɪz sɛd, ən sɝɾənli eɪbəl kɔθən wɑz ðə bɛs hɔɹs tʃɹeɪɾɝ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. wən ɪt sim sʌmbɑɾi hæd teɪkən ædvæntɪdʒ ə mæts fɑðɝ, ɪɾ ɔlweɪz tɝn aʊt ðeɪ hæd ɡɑɾən ðə ɡɹisi ɛn ə ðə stɪk. nɑt ðəɾ eɪbəl kɔθən ɛvɝ dɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ dɪsɑnəst, bʌɾ ivən tɛɹən fɛɹi foʊk nɛvɝ ɡɑt ðə bɛst ə hɪm, ən ɛvɹibɑɾi nu haʊ kloʊs tə ðə boʊn ðeɪ kʌt. ɔl kəz i θɔɾ əbaʊt θɪŋz fɹəm ɛvɹi saɪd ðət ðəɹ wɑz.

You can turn the worst that comes to your advantage if you only think, his father always said, and certainly Abell Cauthon was the best horse trader in the Two Rivers. When it seemed somebody had taken advantage of Mat's father, it always turned out they had gotten the greasy end of the stick. Not that Abell Cauthon ever did anything dishonest, but even Taren Ferry folk never got the best of him, and everybody knew how close to the bone they cut. All because he thought about things from every side that there was.

tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɪt hæd tə bi tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðɪs ɹum bɪlɔŋd ɪn ə pæləs. ðə flaʊɝd dəmɑni kɑɹpəɾ əloʊn pɹɑbli kɑst əz mʌtʃ əz ə fɑɹm. mɔɹ, hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i wɑz sɪk ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, ən fɹəm wʌɾ i hæd bɪn toʊld, tɑɹ vəlɑn wɑz ɪz oʊnli tʃæns tə ɡɛt wɛl. hi hæd nɛvɝ æktʃəli  fɛl sɪk, nɑt ðəɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd, nɑɾ ivən wən vɛɹɪn - ənʌðɝ neɪm swæm aʊɾ ə ðə heɪz - hæd toʊl sʌmwʌn nɪɹbaɪ ðəɾ i wɑz daɪɪŋ. naʊ hi fɛlt wik əz ə beɪb ən hʌŋɡɹi əz ə stɑɹvɪŋ wʊlf, bʌt sʌmhaʊ, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə hilɪŋ hæd bɪn dʌn. aɪ fil - hoʊl ən wɛl, ðæts ɔl. aɪv bɪn hild. hi ɡɹɪməst ət ðə ʃʌɾɝz.

Tar Valon. It had to be Tar Valon. This room belonged in a palace. The flowered Domani carpet alone probably cost as much as a farm. More, he did not think he was sick any longer, and from what he had been told, Tar Valon was his only chance to get well. He had never actually felt sick, not that he remembered, not even when Verin - another name swam out of the haze - had told someone nearby that he was dying. Now he felt weak as a babe and hungry as a starving wolf, but somehow, he was sure the Healing had been done. I feel - whole and well, that's all. I've been Healed. He grimaced at the shutters.

hild. ðət mɛn ðeɪ hæd juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɑn hɪm. ðə noʊʃən sɛnt ɡus bʌmps mɑɹtʃɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪz skɪn, bʌɾ i hæd noʊn ɪt wəd bi dʌn. "bɛɾɝ ðən daɪɪŋ," hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf. səm ə ðə stɔɹiz i hæd hɝɾ əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ keɪm bæk. "ɪɾ əz tə bi bɛɾɝ ðən daɪɪŋ. ivən nɪneɪiv θɔɾ aɪ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ. ɛniweɪ, ɪts dʌn, ən wɝiɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt naʊ woʊn hɛlp ɛniθɪŋ." hi ɹilaɪzd i hæd fɪnɪʃt ðə slaɪs ə bif ən wɑz lɪkɪŋ ɪts dʒus fɹəm ɪz fɪŋɡɝz.

Healed. That meant they had used the One Power on him. The notion sent goose bumps marching across his skin, but he had known it would be done. "Better than dying," he told himself. Some of the stories he had heard about Aes Sedai came back. "It has to be better than dying. Even Nynaeve thought I was going to die. Anyway, it's done, and worrying about it now won't help anything." He realized he had finished the slice of beef and was licking its juice from his fingers.

ənstɛɾəli, hi meɪɾ ɪz weɪ bæk tə ðə teɪbəl. ðəɹ wɑz ə stul ʌndɝniθ. hi pʊld ɪɾ aʊɾ ən sæt daʊn. nɑt bɑðɝɪŋ wɪð naɪf əɹ fɔɹk, hi meɪɾ ənʌðɝ ɹoʊl ə bif. haʊ kəɾ i tɝn biɪŋ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn - ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ɪts tə bi - tə hɪz ædvæntɪdʒ?

Unsteadily, he made his way back to the table. There was a stool underneath. He pulled it out and sat down. Not bothering with knife or fork, he made another roll of beef. How could he turn being in Tar Valon - In the White Tower. It has to be - to his advantage?

tɑɹ vəlɑn mɛn ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðət wɑz sɝɾənli noʊ ɹizən tə steɪ ivən ən aʊɝ. ɪɡzækli ði ɑpəzət. wʌɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ə hɪz taɪm wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn, ən leɪɾɝ wɪð vɛɹɪn, wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ tə ɡoʊ ɑn. hi kəd nɑt ɹikɔl iðɝ ə ðɛm duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ɹɪli tɛɹəbəl, bʌt ðən i kəd nɑt ɹikɔl ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə ðət taɪm əɾ ɔl. ɛniweɪ, wʌtɛvɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd, ðeɪ dɪd fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn ɹizənz.

Tar Valon meant Aes Sedai. That was certainly no reason to stay even an hour. Exactly the opposite. What he remembered of his time with Moiraine, and later with Verin, was not much to go on. He could not recall either of them doing anything really terrible, but then he could not recall a great deal of that time at all. Anyway, whatever Aes Sedai did, they did for their own reasons.

"æn ðoʊz ɑɹən ɔlweɪz ðə ɹizənz jə θɪŋk ðeɪ ɑɹ," hi mʌmbəld ɝaʊn ə maʊθfʊl ə pəteɪtoʊ, ðən swɑloʊd. "æn ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛvɝ laɪz, bʌt ðə tʃɹuθ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tɛlz jə ɪzən ɔlweɪz ðə tʃɹuθ jə θɪŋk ɪɾ ɪz. ðæts wʌn θɪŋ aɪ hæv tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ: aɪ kæn bi ʃʊɹ əbaʊɾ əm ivən wən aɪ θɪŋk aɪ noʊ." ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə tʃɪɹɪŋ kənkluʒən. hi fɪld ɪz maʊθ wɪð bʌɾɝpiz.

"And those aren't always the reasons you think they are," he mumbled around a mouthful of potato, then swallowed. "An Aes Sedai never lies, but the truth an Aes Sedai tells you isn't always the truth you think it is. That's one thing I have to remember: I can't be sure about them even when I think I know." It was not a cheering conclusion. He filled his mouth with butterpeas.

θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪɾ ɪm ɹɪmɛmbɝ ə lɪɾəl əbaʊt ðɛm. ðə sɛvən ədʒəz: blu, ɹɛd, bɹaʊn, ɡɹin, jɛloʊ, waɪt, ən ɡɹeɪ. ðə ɹɛdz wɝ ðə wɝst. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðət blæk ədʒɑ ðeɪ ɔl kleɪm dʌzn ɪɡzɪst. bʌt ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ ʃəd bi noʊ θɹɛt tə hɪm. ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn mɛn u kəd tʃænəl.

Thinking about Aes Sedai made him remember a little about them. The seven Ajahs: Blue, Red, Brown, Green, Yellow, White, and Gray. The Reds were the worst. Except for that Black Ajah they all claim doesn't exist. But the Red Ajah should be no threat to him. They were only interested in men who could channel.

ɹænd. bɝn mi, haʊ kəɾ aɪ fɝɡɛt ðæt? wɛɹ ɪz hi? ɪz i ɔl ɹaɪt? hi saɪd ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli, ən spɹɛd bʌɾɝ ɑn ə pis ə stɪl-wɔɹm bɹɛd. aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf hiz ɡɔn mæd jɛt.

Rand. Burn me, how could I forget that? Where is he? Is he all right? He sighed regretfully, and spread butter on a piece of still-warm bread. I wonder if he's gone mad yet.

ivən ɪf i nu ði ænsɝz, hi kəd də nʌθɪŋ tə hɛlp ɹænd. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i wəɾ ɪf i kʊd. ɹænd kəd tʃænəl, ən mæt hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp wɪð stɔɹiz ə mɛn tʃænəlɪŋ, stɔɹiz tə fɹaɪɾən tʃɪlʒɹən. stɔɹiz ðət fɹaɪɾənd ədʌls, tu, kəz səm ə ðɛm wɝ ɔl tu tʃɹu. dɪskʌvɝɪŋ wʌt ɹænd kəd də hæd bɪn laɪk faɪndɪŋ aʊɾ ɪz bɛs fɹɛn tɔɹtʃɝd smɔl ænəməlz ən kɪl beɪbiz. wʌns jə faɪnəli meɪd jɝsɛlf bɪliv ɪt, ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə kɔl ɪm ə fɹɛn ɛni lɔŋɡɝ.

Even if he knew the answers, he could do nothing to help Rand. He was not sure he would if he could. Rand could channel, and Mat had grown up with stories of men channeling, stories to frighten children. Stories that frightened adults, too, because some of them were all too true. Discovering what Rand could do had been like finding out his best friend tortured small animals and killed babies. Once you finally made yourself believe it, it was hard to call him a friend any longer.

"aɪ hæv tə lʊk aʊt fəɹ maɪsɛlf," hi sɛɾ æŋɡɹəli. hi ʌpɛndəd ðə waɪn pɪtʃɝ oʊvɝ ɪz sɪlvɝ kʌp ən wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ɪɾ ɛmpti. hi fɪl ðə kʌp wɪð mɪlk, ɪnstɛd. "ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv wɑnə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ." hi hæd nɑt ɹɪli ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðəɾ əntɪl i sɛɾ ɪɾ əlaʊd. "ɹæn ɪz fɑloʊɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn ɝaʊn ən kɔlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ðə laɪt noʊz wʌt pɛɹɪn ɪz ʌp tə. hiz bɪn æktɪŋ kɹeɪzi ɛvɝ sɪns ɪz aɪz tɝn fʌni. aɪ hæv tə lʊk aʊt fəɹ maɪsɛlf." bɝn mi, aɪ hæv tə! ɪm ðə læst wʌn ʌv əs huz stɪl seɪn. ðɛɹz oʊnli mi.

"I have to look out for myself," he said angrily. He upended the wine pitcher over his silver cup and was surprised to find it empty. He filled the cup with milk, instead. "Egwene and Nynaeve want to be Aes Sedai." He had not really remembered that until he said it aloud. "Rand is following Moiraine around and calling himself the Dragon Reborn. The Light knows what Perrin is up to. He's been acting crazy ever since his eyes turned funny. I have to look out for myself." Burn me, I have to! I'm the last one of us who's still sane. There's only me.

tɑɹ vəlɑn. wɛl, ɪt wɑz səpoʊz tə bi ðə wɛlθiəst sɪɾi ɪn ðə wɝld, ən ɪt wɑz ðə sɛntɝ ə tʃɹeɪd bɪtwin ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz ən ðə saʊθ, ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ paʊɝ. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i kəd ɡɛɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ɡæmbəl wɪð hɪm. əɹ tʃɹʌs ðə fɔl ə ðə daɪs əɹ ðə tɝn ə ðə kɑɹdz ɪf i dɪd. bʌt ðəɹ hæd tə bi mɝtʃəns, ən ʌðɝz wɪð sɪlvɝ ən ɡoʊld. ðə sɪɾi ɪtsɛlf wəd bi wɝθ ə fju deɪz. hi nu hi hæd tʃɹævəl fɑɹ sɪns livɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, bʌɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ə fju veɪɡ mɛmɹiz ə keɪɛmlɪn ən kɛɹhin, hi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ nʌθɪŋ ʌv ɛni ɡɹeɪt sɪɾiz. hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz wɑntəd tə si ə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾi.

Tar Valon. Well, it was supposed to be the wealthiest city in the world, and it was the center of trade between the Borderlands and the south, the center of Aes Sedai power. He did not think he could get an Aes Sedai to gamble with him. Or trust the fall of the dice or the turn of the cards if he did. But there had to be merchants, and others with silver and gold. The city itself would be worth a few days. He knew he had traveled far since leaving the Two Rivers, but aside from a few vague memories of Caemlyn and Cairhien, he could remember nothing of any great cities. He had always wanted to see a great city.

"bʌt nɑt wʌn fʊl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ," hi mʌɾɝd saʊɝli, skɹeɪpɪŋ ʌp ðə læst ə ðə bʌɾɝpiz. hi ɡʌlpt əm daʊn ən wɛn bæk fəɹ ənʌðɝ hɛlpɪŋ ə bif.

"But not one full of Aes Sedai," he muttered sourly, scraping up the last of the butterpeas. He gulped them down and went back for another helping of beef.

aɪdli, hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪt lɛɾ ɪm əv ðə ɹubi fɹəm ðə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ dæɡɝ. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə dæɡɝ ɪn oʊnli ðə fʌziɪst weɪ, bʌɾ ivən ðət wɑz laɪk ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ə tɛɹəbəl ɪnʒɝi. hɪz ɪnsaɪdz nɑɾɪd ʌp, ən ʃɑɹp peɪn dʌɡ əɾ ɪz tɛmpəlz. jɛt ðə ɹubi wɑz klɪɹ ɪn ɪz maɪnd, əz bɪɡ əz ɪz θʌmneɪl, dɑɹk əz ə dʒɹɑp ə blʌd, ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ laɪk səm kɹɪmzən aɪ. ʃʊɹli hi hæd mɔɹ kleɪm tə ɪt ðən ðeɪ dɪd, ən ɪt hæd tə bi wɝθ əz mʌtʃ əz ə dʌzən fɑɹmz bæk hoʊm.

Idly, he wondered if the Aes Sedai might let him have the ruby from the Shadar Logoth dagger. He remembered the dagger in only the fuzziest way, but even that was like remembering a terrible injury. His insides knotted up, and sharp pain dug at his temples. Yet the ruby was clear in his mind, as big as his thumbnail, dark as a drop of blood, glittering like some crimson eye. Surely he had more claim to it than they did, and it had to be worth as much as a dozen farms back home.

ðəl pɹɑbli seɪ ɪts teɪntɪd, tu. ən laɪkli ɪt wɑz. stɪl i spʌn ə lɪɾəl fænsi ʌv tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ðə ɹubi tə səm ə ðə kɑplɪnz fəɹ ðɛɹ bɛs lænd. moʊst ə ðət fæmli - tʃɹʌbəlmeɪkɝz fɹəm ðə kɹeɪɾəl, wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ nɑt θivz ən laɪɝz əz wɛl - dɪzɝvd wʌtɛvɝ hæpən tə ðɛm ən mɔɹ. bʌɾ i ɹɪli dɪd nɑt bɪliv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd ɡɪv ɪt bæk tə hɪm, dɪd nɑt ɹɛlɪʃ ðə noʊʃən ə kæɹiɪŋ ɪɾ əz fɑɹ əz ɛmənz fild ɪf ðeɪ dɪd. ən ðə θɔɾ ʌv oʊnɪŋ ðə lɑɹdʒəs fɑɹm ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əz ɪksaɪɾɪŋ əz ɪt wʌns hæd bɪn. wʌns ðət hæd bɪn ɪz bɪɡəst æmbɪʃən, ðæt, ən tə bi noʊn əz ɪz fɑðɝz ikwəl əz ə hɔɹs tʃɹeɪɾɝ. naʊ ɪt sim sətʃ ə smɔl θɪŋ tə wɑnt. ə kɹæmp θɪŋ, wɪð ðə hoʊl waɪd wɝl dʒʌst weɪɾɪŋ aʊt ðɛɹ.

They'll probably say it is tainted, too. And likely it was. Still he spun a little fancy of trading the ruby to some of the Coplins for their best land. Most of that family - troublemakers from the cradle, where they were not thieves and liars as well - deserved whatever happened to them and more. But he really did not believe the Aes Sedai would give it back to him, did not relish the notion of carrying it as far as Emond's Field if they did. And the thought of owning the largest farm in the Two Rivers was no longer as exciting as it once had been. Once that had been his biggest ambition, that, and to be known as his father's equal as a horse trader. Now it seemed such a small thing to want. A cramped thing, with the whole wide world just waiting out there.

fɝst ɔf, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd, hi wəd faɪn ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv. meɪbi ðeɪv kʌm tə ðɛɹ sɛnsɪz. meɪbi ðeɪv ɡɪvən ʌp ðɪs fulɪʃnəs əbaʊt bɪkʌmɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ wəd hæv, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt ɡoʊ wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ðɛm. hi wəd ɡoʊ; ðət wɑz ʃʊɹ. ə vɪzət wɪð ðɛm, ə deɪ tə si ðə sɪɾi, pɝhæps ə ɡeɪm wɪð ðə daɪs tə pæɾ aʊɾ ɪz pɝs, ən ðən i wəd bi ɔf fəɹ sʌmwɛɹ wɛɹ ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ. bɪfɔɹ i ɹɪtɝn hoʊm - əl ɡoʊ hoʊm wʌn deɪ. wʌn deɪ, əl - hi mɛn tə si sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ən wɪθaʊɾ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪkɪŋ ɪm dæns tə hɝ tun.

First off, he decided, he would find Egwene and Nynaeve. Maybe they've come to their senses. Maybe they've given up this foolishness about becoming Aes Sedai. He did not think they would have, but he could not go without seeing them. He would go; that was sure. A visit with them, a day to see the city, perhaps a game with the dice to pad out his purse, and then he would be off for somewhere where there were no Aes Sedai. Before he returned home - I will go home one day. One day, I will - he meant to see something of the world, and without any Aes Sedai making him dance to her tune.

ɹʌmɪdʒɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə tʃɹeɪ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ tə it, hi wɑz ʃɑk tə ɹilaɪz nʌθɪŋ wɑz lɛf bʌt smɪɹz ən ə fju kɹʌmz ə bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz. ðə pɪtʃɝz wɝ boʊθ ɛmpti. hi skwɪntɪd daʊn əɾ ɪz stʌmək ɪn wʌndɝ. hi ʃʊɾə bɪn stʌf tə ði ɪɹz wɪð ɔl ðəɾ ɪn hɪm, bʌɾ i fɛlt əz ɪf i hæd hɑɹdli iɾən əɾ ɔl. hi skɹeɪp ðə læs bɪts ə tʃiz təɡɛðɝ bɪtwin θʌm ən fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ. hæfweɪ tə hɪz maʊð, hɪz hæn fɹoʊz.

Rummaging around the tray for something more to eat, he was shocked to realize nothing was left but smears and a few crumbs of bread and cheese. The pitchers were both empty. He squinted down at his stomach in wonder. He should have been stuffed to the ears with all that in him, but he felt as if he had hardly eaten at all. He scraped the last bits of cheese together between thumb and forefinger. Halfway to his mouth, his hand froze.

aɪ blu ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. sɔfli hi wɪsəld ə bɪɾ ə tun, ðən kʌɾ ɪt ʃɔɹt wən ðə wɝdz keɪm tə hɪm:

I blew the Horn of Valere. Softly he whistled a bit of tune, then cut it short when the words came to him:

aɪm daʊn ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə wɛl.

I'm down at the bottom of the well.

ɪts naɪt, ən ðə ɹeɪn ɪz kʌmɪŋ daʊn.

It's night, and the rain is coming down.

ðə saɪdz ɑɹ fɔlɪŋ ɪn, ən ðɛɹz noʊ ɹoʊp tə klaɪm.

The sides are falling in, and there's no rope to climb.

aɪm daʊn ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə wɛl.

I'm down at the bottom of the well.

"ðɛɹ hæd bɛɾɝ bi ə blʌɾi ɹoʊp tə klaɪm," hi wɪspɝd. hi lɛt ðə tʃiz kɹʌmz fɔl ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ. fəɹ ðə moʊmən i fɛl sɪk əɡɛn. dətɝmənədli hi tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk, tʃɹaɪd tə pɛnətʃɹeɪt ðə fɑɡ ðət ʃɹaʊɾɪd ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd.

"There had better be a bloody rope to climb," he whispered. He let the cheese crumbs fall on the tray. For the moment he felt sick again. Determinedly he tried to think, tried to penetrate the fog that shrouded everything in his head.

vɛɹɪn hæd bɪn bɹɪŋɪŋ ðə hɔɹn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪf ʃi nu hi wɑz ðə wʌn u hæd bloʊn ɪt. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə meɪk ɪm θɪŋk soʊ. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ə ðæt. hi θɔɾ i wɑz. soʊ wʌɾ ɪf ʃi dʌz noʊ? wʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ ɔl du? ənlɛs vɛɹɪn dɪd sʌmθɪŋ wɪð ɪɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt, ðeɪv ðə hɔɹn. ðeɪ doʊnt nid mi. bʌɾ u kəd seɪ wʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ θɔt ðeɪ niɾəd?

Verin had been bringing the Horn to Tar Valon, but he could not remember if she knew he was the one who had blown it. She had never said anything to make him think so. He was sure of that. He thought he was. So what if she does know? What if they all do? Unless Verin did something with it I don't know about, they have the Horn. They don't need me. But who could say what Aes Sedai thought they needed?

"ɪf ðeɪ æsk," hi sɛd ɡɹɪmli, "aɪ nɛvɝ ivən tʌtʃt ɪt. ɪf ðeɪ noʊ. . . . ɪf ðeɪ noʊ, əl . . . əl hændəl ðət wən ɪt kʌmz. bɝn mi, ðeɪ kænt wɑn ɛniθɪŋ fɹəm mi. ðeɪ kænt!"

"If they ask," he said grimly, "I never even touched it. If they know. . . . If they know, I'll . . . I'll handle that when it comes. Burn me, they can't want anything from me. They can't!"

ə sɑf nɑk ɑn ðə dɔɹ bɹɔɾ ɪm sweɪɪŋ tə hɪz fit, ɹɛɾi tə ɹʌn. ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɛni pleɪs tə ɹʌn tə, ən ɪf i cʊɾə mænədʒ mɔɹ ðən θɹi stɛps. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nɑt, ən i kəd nɑt.

A soft knock on the door brought him swaying to his feet, ready to run. If there had been any place to run to, and if he could have managed more than three steps. But there was not, and he could not.

ðə dɔɹ oʊpənd.

The door opened.


tʃæptɝ twɛnti


CHAPTER 20

vɪzəteɪʃənz


Visitations

ðə wʊmən u keɪm ɪn, dʒɹɛst ɔl ɪn waɪt sɪlk ən sɪlvɝ, ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn əɹ ən lin bæk əɡɛnst ɪt tə stʌɾi hɪm wɪð ðə dɑɹkəst aɪz mæt hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. ʃi wɑz soʊ bjuɾəfəl i ɔlmoʊs fɝɡɑt tə bɹið, wɪð hɛɹ əz blæk əz naɪt hɛl baɪ ə faɪnli woʊvən sɪlvɝ bænd, ən əz ɡɹeɪsfəl ɪn ɹipoʊz əz ənʌðɝ wʊmən wəd bi dænsɪŋ. hi hæfweɪ θɔt ðəɾ i nu hɝ, bʌɾ i ɹɪdʒɛktɪd ði aɪdiə aʊɾ ə hænd. noʊ mæn kəɾ ɛvɝ fɝɡɛɾ ə wʊmən laɪk hɝ.

The woman who came in, dressed all in white silk and silver, shut the door behind her and leaned back against it to study him with the darkest eyes Mat had ever seen. She was so beautiful he almost forgot to breathe, with hair as black as night held by a finely woven silver band, and as graceful in repose as another woman would be dancing. He halfway thought that he knew her, but he rejected the idea out of hand. No man could ever forget a woman like her.

"ju meɪ bi pæsəbəl, aɪ səpoʊz, wʌns jə fɪl aʊɾ əɡɛn," ʃi sɛd, "bʌt fəɹ naʊ, pɝhæps jə kəd pʊɾ ɑn sʌmθɪŋ."

"You may be passable, I suppose, once you fill out again," she said, "but for now, perhaps you could put on something."

fəɹ ən ɪnstən mæt kəntɪnjud tə stɛɹ ət hɝ; ðən sʌɾənli hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz stændɪŋ ðəɹ neɪkəd. feɪs skɑɹlət, hi ʃæmbəl tə ðə bɛd, pʊl ðə blæŋkəɾ ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf laɪk ə kloʊk, ən mɔɹ fɛl ðən sæt daʊn ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə mætʃɹəs. "aɪm sɑɹi fəɹ . . . aɪ min, aɪ . . . ðəɾ ɪz, aɪ dɪdn ɪkspɛkt . . . aɪ . . . aɪ . . ." hi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz fəɹ jəɹ faɪndɪŋ mi ðɪs weɪ."

For an instant Mat continued to stare at her; then suddenly he realized he was standing there naked. Face scarlet, he shambled to the bed, pulled the blanket around himself like a cloak, and more fell than sat down on the edge of the mattress. "I'm sorry for . . . I mean, I . . . that is, I didn't expect . . . I . . . I . . ." He drew a deep breath. "I apologize for your finding me this way."

hi kəd stɪl fil ðə hiɾ ɪn ɪz tʃiks. fəɹ ə moʊmən i wɪʃt ðət ɹænd, wʌtɛvɝ i hæd bɪkʌm, əɹ ivən pɛɹɪn wɝ ðəɹ tə ædvaɪz hɪm. ðeɪ ɔlweɪz sim tə ɡɛɾ ɑn wɛl wɪð wɪmən. ivən ɡɝlz u nu ðət ɹænd wɑz ɔl bʌt pɹɑməs tə ɛɡwin juz tə stɛɹ ət hɪm, ən ðeɪ sim tə θɪŋk pɛɹɪnz sloʊ weɪz wɝ dʒɛntəl ən ətʃɹæktɪv. haʊɛvɝ hɑɹɾ i tʃɹaɪd, hi ɔlweɪz mænədʒ tə meɪk ə ful ə hɪmsɛlf ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɡɝlz. əz i hæd dʒʌs dʌn.

He could still feel the heat in his cheeks. For a moment he wished that Rand, whatever he had become, or even Perrin were there to advise him. They always seemed to get on well with women. Even girls who knew that Rand was all but promised to Egwene used to stare at him, and they seemed to think Perrin's slow ways were gentle and attractive. However hard he tried, he always managed to make a fool of himself in front of girls. As he had just done.

"aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv vɪzəɾəd jə ɪn ðɪs weɪ, mæt, ɪksɛp ðəɾ aɪ wɑz hɪɹ ɪn ði . . . ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ - " ʃi smaɪld əz ɪf ðə neɪm əmjuzd əɹ - "fɔɹ ənʌðɝ pɝpəs, ən aɪ wɑntəd tə si ɔl ə ju." mæts feɪs ɹɛɾənd əɡɛn, ən i tʌɡd ðə blæŋkəɾ ɝaʊn ɪm taɪɾɝ, bʌt ʃi sim nɑt tə hæv bɪn tizɪŋ hɪm. mɔɹ ɡɹeɪsfəl ðən ə swɑn, ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd tə ðə teɪbəl. "ju ɑɹ hʌŋɡɹi. ðæts tə bi ɪkspɛktəd, ðə weɪ ðeɪ də θɪŋz. meɪk ʃʊɹ jə iɾ ɔl ðeɪ ɡɪv ju. jəl bi sɝpɹaɪzd ət haʊ kwɪkli jə pʊt weɪt bæk ən ɹɪɡeɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ."

"I would not have visited you in this way, Mat, except that I was here in the . . . in the White Tower - " She smiled as if the name amused her - "for another purpose, and I wanted to see all of you." Mat's face reddened again, and he tugged the blanket around him tighter, but she seemed not to have been teasing him. More graceful than a swan, she glided to the table. "You are hungry. That's to be expected, the way they do things. Make sure you eat all they give you. You will be surprised at how quickly you put weight back and regain strength."

"pɑɹɾən," mæt sɛd dɪfəɾəntli, "bʌt də aɪ noʊ ju? minɪŋ noʊ əfɛns, bʌt jə sim . . . fəmɪljɝ." ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɪm əntɪl i bɪɡæn tə ʃɪft ənizəli. ə wʊmən laɪk əɹ wəɾ ɪkspɛk tə bi ɹɪmɛmbɝd.

"Pardon," Mat said diffidently, "but do I know you? Meaning no offense, but you seem . . . familiar." She looked at him until he began to shift uneasily. A woman like her would expect to be remembered.

"ju meɪ hæv sin mi," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "sʌmwɛɹ. kɔl mi səlin." hɝ hɛd tɪltəd slaɪtli; ʃi əpɪɹd tə bi weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə neɪm.

"You may have seen me," she said finally. "Somewhere. Call me Selene." Her head tilted slightly; she appeared to be waiting for him to recognize the name.

ɪt tʌɡd ət ði ɛdʒəz ə mɛmɹi. hi θɔɾ i mʌst əv hɝɾ ɪt bɪfɔɹ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt seɪ wən əɹ wɛɹ. "ɑɹ jə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, səlin?"

It tugged at the edges of memory. He thought he must have heard it before, but he could not say when or where. "Are you an Aes Sedai, Selene?"

"noʊ." ðə wɝd wɑz sɑf bʌt sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli ɛmfæɾɪk.

"No." The word was soft but surprisingly emphatic.

fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, hi stʌɾid hɝ, eɪbəl naʊ tə si mɔɹ ðən əɹ bjuɾi. ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz tɔl əz i wɑz, slɛndɝ ænd, hi səspɛktəd fɹəm ðə weɪ ʃi muvd, stʃɹɔŋ. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ə hɝ eɪdʒ - ə jɪɹ əɹ tu oʊldɝ ðən hi, əɹ meɪbi əz mʌtʃ əz tɛn - bʌɾ əɹ tʃiks wɝ smuð. hɝ nɛkləs ə smuð waɪt stoʊnz ən woʊvən sɪlvɝ mætʃt əɹ waɪd bɛlt, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt wɛɹ ə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ. ði æbsəns ʃəd nɑɾ əv sɝpɹaɪzd ɪm - noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ wəɾ ɛvɝ seɪ ɹaɪɾ aʊt ðət ʃi wɑz nɑt - jɛɾ ɪt dɪd. ðəɹ wɑz ən ɛɹ əbaʊɾ əɹ - ə sɛlf-kɑnfəɾəns, ə ʃʊɹəɾi ɪn əɹ oʊn paʊɝ tə mætʃ ɛni kwinz, ən sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ - ðəɾ i əsoʊsieɪɾəd wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ.

For the first time, he studied her, able now to see more than her beauty. She was almost as tall as he was, slender and, he suspected from the way she moved, strong. He was not sure of her age - a year or two older than he, or maybe as much as ten - but her cheeks were smooth. Her necklace of smooth white stones and woven silver matched her wide belt, but she did not wear a Great Serpent ring. The absence should not have surprised him - no Aes Sedai would ever say right out that she was not - yet it did. There was an air about her - a self-confidence, a surety in her own power to match any queen's, and something more - that he associated with Aes Sedai.

"ju ɑɹən baɪ ɛni tʃæns ə nɑvəs, ɑɹ ju?" hi hæd hɝd ðət nɑvəsɪz wɔɹ waɪt, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt ɹɪli bɪliv ɪɾ ə hɝ. ʃi meɪks ɪleɪn lʊk laɪk ə kɹɪŋɝ. ɪleɪn. ənʌðɝ neɪm dʒɹɪftɪŋ ɪndə hɪz hɛd.

"You aren't by any chance a novice, are you?" He had heard that novices wore white, but he could not really believe it of her. She makes Elayne look like a cringer. Elayne. Another name drifting into his head.

"hɑɹdli ðæt," səlin sɛd wɪð ə ɹaɪ twɪs tə hɝ maʊθ. "lɛɾ əs dʒʌst seɪ ðəɾ aɪm sʌmwʌn huz ɪntʃɹəsts koʊɪnsaɪd wɪð jʊɹz. ðiz . . . ɛɛs sədaɪ min tə juz ju, bʌt jəl laɪk ɪt, ɪn ðə meɪn, aɪ θɪŋk. ən æksɛpt ɪt. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə kənvɪns jə tə sik aʊt ɡlɔɹi."

"Hardly that," Selene said with a wry twist to her mouth. "Let us just say that I am someone whose interests coincide with yours. These . . . Aes Sedai mean to use you, but you will like it, in the main, I think. And accept it. There is no need to convince you to seek out glory."

"juz mi?" ðə mɛmɹi ɹɪtɝn tə hɪm ə θɪŋkɪŋ ðæt, bʌɾ əbaʊt ɹænd, ðət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ mɛn tə juz ɹænd, nɑt hɪm. ðeɪv noʊ blʌɾi jus fəɹ mi. laɪt, ðeɪ kæn hæv! "wʌt dʒju min? ɪm noʊ wʌn ɪmpɔɹɾənt. aɪm noʊ jus tə ɛniwʌn bʌt maɪsɛlf. wʌt kaɪndə ɡlɔɹi?"

"Use me?" The memory returned to him of thinking that, but about Rand, that the Aes Sedai meant to use Rand, not him. They've no bloody use for me. Light, they can't have! "What do you mean? I'm no one important. I am no use to anyone but myself. What kind of glory?"

"aɪ nu ðət wəd pʊl ju. ju, əbʌv ɔl."

"I knew that would pull you. You, above all."

hɝ smaɪl meɪɾ ɪz hɛd spɪn. hi skɹʌbd ə hæn θɹu hɪz hɛɹ. ðə blæŋkət slɪpt, ən i kɑɾ ɪt heɪstəli bɪfɔɹ ɪt kəd fɔl. "naʊ lɪsən, ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑɾ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn mi." wʌɾ əbaʊt mi saʊndɪŋ ðə hɔɹn? "aɪ æm dʒʌst ə fɑɹmɝ." meɪbi ðeɪ θɪŋk aɪm taɪd tə ɹænd ɪn səm weɪ. noʊ, vɛɹɪn sɛd. . . . hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌt vɛɹɪn hæd sɛd, əɹ mɔɪɹeɪn, bʌɾ i θɔt moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ nu nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl əbaʊt ɹænd. hi wɑntəd tə kip ɪt ðət weɪ, ət list əntɪl i wɑz ə lɔŋ weɪ ɡɔn. "dʒʌst ə sɪmpəl kʌntʃɹi mæn. aɪ oʊnli wɑnə si ə lɪɾəl ə ðə wɝld ən ɡoʊ bæk tə maɪ dɑz fɑɹm." wʌt dʌz ʃi min, ɡlɔɹi?

Her smile made his head spin. He scrubbed a hand through his hair. The blanket slipped, and he caught it hastily before it could fall. "Now listen, they are not interested in me." What about me sounding the Horn? "I am just a farmer." Maybe they think I'm tied to Rand in some way. No, Verin said. . . . He was not sure what Verin had said, or Moiraine, but he thought most Aes Sedai knew nothing at all about Rand. He wanted to keep it that way, at least until he was a long way gone. "Just a simple country man. I only want to see a little of the world and go back to my da's farm." What does she mean, glory?

səlin ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæd hɝɾ ɪz θɔts. "ju ɑɹ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən jə jɛt noʊ. sɝɾənli mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ðiz soʊ-kɔld ɛɛs sədaɪ noʊ. jə kən əv ɡlɔɹi, ɪf jə noʊ ɪnʌf nɑt tə tʃɹʌs ðɛm."

Selene shook her head as if she had heard his thoughts. "You are more important than you yet know. Certainly more important than these so-called Aes Sedai know. You can have glory, if you know enough not to trust them."

"ju sɝɾənli saʊn əz ɪf jə doʊn tʃɹʌs ðɛm." soʊ-kɔld? ə θɔt keɪm tə hɪm, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt mænədʒ tə seɪ ɪt. "ɑɹ jə ə . . . ? ɑɹ jə . . . ?" ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə kaɪndə θɪŋ jə əkjuz sʌmwʌn ʌv.

"You certainly sound as if you don't trust them." So-called? A thought came to him, but he could not manage to say it. "Are you a . . . ? Are you . . . ?" It was not the kind of thing you accused someone of.

"eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnd?" səlin sɛd mɑkəŋli. ʃi saʊndəɾ əmjuzd, nɑɾ æŋɡɝd. ʃi saʊndəd kəntɛmptʃuəs. "wʌn ə ðoʊz pəθɛɾɪk fɑloʊɝz ə bælzəmən u θɪŋk hɪl ɡɪv əm ɪmɔɹtælɪɾi ən paʊɝ? aɪ fɑloʊ noʊ wʌn. ðəɹ ɪz wʌn mæn aɪ kəd stæn bɪsaɪd, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt fɑloʊ."

"A Darkfriend?" Selene said mockingly. She sounded amused, not angered. She sounded contemptuous. "One of those pathetic followers of Ba'alzamon who think he will give them immortality and power? I follow no one. There is one man I could stand beside, but I do not follow."

mæt læf nɝvəsli. "ʌv kɔɹs nɑt." blʌɾ ən æʃəz, ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd wʊdnt neɪm hɝsɛlf dɑɹkfɹɛnd. pɹɑbli hæz ə pɔɪzənd naɪf, ɪf ʃi ɪz. hi hæɾ ə veɪɡ mɛmɹi ʌv ə wʊmən dʒɹɛst əz wʌn nɑbli bɔɹn, ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd wɪð ə dɛdli dæɡɝ ɪn əɹ slɛndɝ hænd. "ðæt wɑznt wʌɾ aɪ mɛn əɾ ɔl. jə lʊk. . . . jə lʊk laɪk ə kwin. ðæts wʌɾ aɪ mɛnt. ɑɹ jə ə leɪɾi?"

Mat laughed nervously. "Of course not." Blood and ashes, a Darkfriend wouldn't name herself Darkfriend. Probably has a poisoned knife, if she is. He had a vague memory of a woman dressed as one nobly born, a Darkfriend with a deadly dagger in her slender hand. "That wasn't what I meant at all. You look. . . . You look like a queen. That's what I meant. Are you a Lady?"

"mæt, mæt, jə mʌs lɝn tə tʃɹʌs mi. oʊ, əl juz ju, tu - juv tu səspɪʃəs ə neɪtʃɝ, ɪspɛʃli sɪns kæɹiɪŋ ðət dæɡɝ, fəɹ mi tə dɪnaɪ ɪt - bʌt maɪ jus wɪl ɡeɪn jə wɛlθ, ən paʊɝ, ən ɡlɔɹi. əl nɑt kəmpɛl ju. aɪ hæv ɔlweɪz bɪliv mɛn pɝfɔɹm bɛɾɝ ɪf kənvɪnst ɹæðɝ ðən fɔɹst. ðiz ɛɛs sədaɪ də nɑɾ ivən ɹilaɪz haʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt jə ɑɹ, ən hɪl tʃɹaɪ tə dɪsweɪɾ əɹ kɪl ju, bʌɾ aɪ kən ɡɪv jə wʌt jə dɪzaɪɝ."

"Mat, Mat, you must learn to trust me. Oh, I will use you, too - you have too suspicious a nature, especially since carrying that dagger, for me to deny it - but my use will gain you wealth, and power, and glory. I will not compel you. I have always believed men perform better if convinced rather than forced. These Aes Sedai do not even realize how important you are, and he will try to dissuade or kill you, but I can give you what you desire."

"hi?" mæt sɛd ʃɑɹpli. kɪl mi? laɪt, ɪts ɹænd ðeɪ wɝ æftɝ, nɑt mi. haʊ dʌz ʃi noʊ əbaʊt ðə dæɡɝ? aɪ səpoʊz ðə hoʊl taʊɝ noʊz. "hu wɑns tə kɪl mi?"

"He?" Mat said sharply. Kill me? Light, it's Rand they were after, not me. How does she know about the dagger? I suppose the whole Tower knows. "Who wants to kill me?"

səlinz maʊθ taɪɾənd əz ɪf ʃi hæd sɛd tu mʌtʃ. "ju noʊ wʌt jə wɑnt, mæt, ən aɪ noʊ ɪɾ ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz wɛl əz ju. jə mʌs tʃuz u jəl tʃɹʌs tə ɡeɪn ɪt fəɹ ju. aɪ ədmɪɾ əl juz ju. ðiz ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪl nɛvɝ də ðæt. əl lid jə tə wɛlθ ən ɡlɔɹi. ðəl kip jə taɪd tə ə liʃ əntɪl jə daɪ."

Selene's mouth tightened as if she had said too much. "You know what you want, Mat, and I know it every bit as well as you. You must choose who you will trust to gain it for you. I admit I will use you. These Aes Sedai will never do that. I will lead you to wealth and glory. They will keep you tied to a leash until you die."

"ju seɪ ə lɑt," mæt sɛd, "bʌt haʊ də aɪ noʊ ɛni ʌv ɪts tʃɹu? haʊ də aɪ noʊ aɪ kən tʃɹʌs jə ɛni mɔɹ ðən aɪ kən ðɛm?"

"You say a lot," Mat said, "but how do I know any of it is true? How do I know I can trust you any more than I can them?"

"baɪ lɪsnɪŋ tə wʌt ðeɪ tɛl ju, ən wʌt ðeɪ də nɑt. wɪl ðeɪ tɛl jə jəɹ fɑðɝ keɪm tə tɑɹ vəlɑn?"

"By listening to what they tell you, and what they do not. Will they tell you your father came to Tar Valon?"

"maɪ dɑ wɑz hɪɹ?"

"My da was here?"

"ə mæn neɪmd eɪbəl kɔθən, ən ənʌðɝ neɪm tæm ælθɹ. ðeɪ meɪd nusənsəz ə ðɛmsɛlvz əntɪl ðeɪ ɡeɪn ən ɑɾiəns, aɪ hæv hɝd, wɑntɪŋ tə noʊ wɛɹ jə ən jəɹ fɹɛnz wɝ. ən sɪuən sɑntʃ sɛn əm bæk tə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɪð ɛmpti hænz, nɑɾ ivən lɛɾɪŋ əm noʊ jə wɝ əlaɪv. wɪl ðeɪ tɛl jə ðæt, ənlɛs jə æsk? pɝhæps nɑɾ ivən ðɛn, fəɹ jə maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə ɹʌn əweɪ bæk hoʊm."

"A man named Abell Cauthon, and another named Tam al'Thor. They made nuisances of themselves until they gained an audience, I have heard, wanting to know where you and your friends were. And Siuan Sanche sent them back to the Two Rivers with empty hands, not even letting them know you were alive. Will they tell you that, unless you ask? Perhaps not even then, for you might try to run away back home."

"maɪ dɑ θɪŋks aɪm dɛd?" mæt sɛd sloʊli.

"My da thinks I am dead?" Mat said slowly.

"hi kən bi toʊl jə lɪv. aɪ kən si tə ɪt. θɪŋk ɑn u tə tʃɹʌst, mæt kɔθən. wɪl ðeɪ tɛl jə ðəɾ ivən naʊ ɹænd ælθɹ ɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪskeɪp, ən ðə wʌn kɔl mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz hʌntɪŋ hɪm? wɪl ðeɪ tɛl jə ðət ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɪnfɛsts ðɛɹ pɹɛʃəs waɪt taʊɝ? wɪl ðeɪ ivən tɛl jə haʊ ðeɪ min tə juz ju?"

"He can be told you live. I can see to it. Think on who to trust, Mat Cauthon. Will they tell you that even now Rand al'Thor is trying to escape, and the one called Moiraine is hunting him? Will they tell you that the Black Ajah infests their precious White Tower? Will they even tell you how they mean to use you?"

"ɹæn ɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪskeɪp? bʌt - " meɪbi ʃi nu ɹænd hæd pɹoʊkleɪm hɪmsɛlf ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən meɪbi ʃi dɪd nɑt, bʌɾ i wəd nɑt tɛl hɝ. ðə blæk ədʒɑ! blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz! "hu ɑɹ ju, səlin? ɪf jəɹ nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, wʌɾ ɑɹ ju?"

"Rand is trying to escape? But - " Maybe she knew Rand had proclaimed himself the Dragon Reborn, and maybe she did not, but he would not tell her. The Black Ajah! Blood and bloody ashes! "Who are you, Selene? If you're not Aes Sedai, what are you?"

hɝ smaɪl hɪd sikɹəts. "dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət ðəɹ ɪz ənʌðɝ tʃɔɪs. jə nid nɑt bi ə pʌpət fəɹ ðə waɪt taʊɝ əɹ pɹeɪ fəɹ bælzəmənz dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ðə wɝld ɪz mɔɹ kɑmplɛks ðən jə kən ɪmædʒən. də əz ðiz ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪʃ fəɹ ðə pɹɛzənt, bʌt ɹɪmɛmbɝ jəɹ tʃɔɪsəz. wɪl jə də ðæt?"

Her smile hid secrets. "Just remember that there is another choice. You need not be a puppet for the White Tower or prey for Ba'alzamon's Darkfriends. The world is more complex than you can imagine. Do as these Aes Sedai wish for the present, but remember your choices. Will you do that?"

"aɪ doʊn si ðəɾ aɪ hæv mʌtʃ tʃɔɪs əɾ ɔl," hi sɛd ɡlʌmli. "aɪ səpoʊz aɪ wɪl."

"I don't see that I have much choice at all," he said glumly. "I suppose I will."

səlinz lʊk ʃɑɹpənd. fɹɛnlinɪs slʌɾ ɔf əɹ vɔɪs laɪk ən oʊl sneɪk skɪn. "səpoʊz? aɪ dɪd nɑt kʌm tə jə laɪk ðɪs, tɔk ɪn ðɪs weɪ, fəɹ səpoʊz, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən." ʃi stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ə slɪm hænd.

Selene's look sharpened. Friendliness sloughed off her voice like an old snake skin. "Suppose? I did not come to you like this, talk in this way, for suppose, Matrim Cauthon." She stretched out a slim hand.

hɝ hænd wɑz ɛmpti, ən ʃi stʊd hæfweɪ əkɹɔs ðə ɹum, bʌɾ i lin bæk, əweɪ fɹəm əɹ hænd, əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə hɪm wɪð ə dæɡɝ. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ waɪ, ɹɪli, ɪksɛp ðət ðəɹ wɑz ə θɹɛɾ ɪn əɹ aɪz, ən i wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ɹil. hɪz skɪn bɪɡæn tə tɪŋɡəl, ən ɪz hɛdeɪk ɹɪtɝnd.

Her hand was empty, and she stood halfway across the room, but he leaned back, away from her hand, as if she were right on top of him with a dagger. He did not know why, really, except that there was a threat in her eyes, and he was sure it was real. His skin began to tingle, and his headache returned.

sʌɾənli tɪŋɡəl ən peɪn vænɪʃt təɡɛðɝ, ən səlinz hɛd wɪpt ɝaʊn əz ɪf lɪsnɪŋ tə sʌmθɪŋ bɪɑn ðə wɔlz. ə taɪni fɹaʊn əpɪɹɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs, ən ʃi loʊɝɾ əɹ hænd. ðə fɹaʊn vænɪʃt. "wi wɪl tɔk əɡɛn, mæt. aɪ hæv mʌtʃ tə seɪ tə ju. ɹɪmɛmbɝ jəɹ tʃɔɪsəz. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛni hænz ðət wəd kɪl ju. aɪ əloʊn ɡɛɹənti jə laɪf, ən ɔl jə sik, ɪf jə də əz aɪ seɪ." ʃi slɪpt aʊɾ ə ðə dɔɹ əz saɪlənli ən ɡɹeɪsfəli əz ʃi hæɾ ɛntɝd.

Suddenly tingle and pain vanished together, and Selene's head whipped around as if listening to something beyond the walls. A tiny frown appeared on her face, and she lowered her hand. The frown vanished. "We will talk again, Mat. I have much to say to you. Remember your choices. Remember that there are many hands that would kill you. I alone guarantee you life, and all you seek, if you do as I say." She slipped out of the door as silently and gracefully as she had entered.

mæt lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ. swɛt ɹæn daʊn ɪz feɪs. hu ɪn ðə laɪɾ ɪz ʃi? eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnd, pɝhæps. ɪksɛp ðət ʃi hæd saʊndəɾ əz kəntɛmptʃuəs ə bælzəmən əz ʃi wɑz ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. dɑɹkfɹɛnz spoʊk ə bælzəmən ðə weɪ ɛniwʌn ɛls maɪt spik ə ðə kɹieɪɾɝ. ən ʃi hæd nɑɾ æskt ɪm tə kənsil əɹ vɪzət fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Mat let out a long breath. Sweat ran down his face. Who in the Light is she? A Darkfriend, perhaps. Except that she had sounded as contemptuous of Ba'alzamon as she was of Aes Sedai. Darkfriends spoke of Ba'alzamon the way anyone else might speak of the Creator. And she had not asked him to conceal her visit from the Aes Sedai.

ɹaɪt, hi θɔt saʊɝli. pɑɹɾən mi, ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ðɪs wʊmən keɪm tə si mi. ʃi wɑzn ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk meɪbi ʃi stɑɹɾəd tə juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɑn mi, ən ʃi sɛd ʃi wɑzn ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, bʌt ʃi dɪd seɪ jə min tə juz mi, ən ðə blæk ədʒɑz ɪn jəɹ taʊɝ. oʊ, ən ʃi sɛɾ aɪm ɪmpɔɹɾənt. aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ. jə doʊn maɪn ɪf aɪ liv naʊ, də ju?

Right, he thought sourly. Pardon me, Aes Sedai, but this woman came to see me. She wasn't Aes Sedai, but I think maybe she started to use the One Power on me, and she said she wasn't a Darkfriend, but she did say you mean to use me, and the Black Ajah's in your Tower. Oh, and she said I'm important. I don't know how. You don't mind if I leave now, do you?

ɡoʊɪŋ wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə bi ə bɛɾɝ aɪdiə baɪ ðə mɪnət. hi slɪɾ ɔkwɝdli ɔf ðə bɛɾ ən meɪɾ ɪz weɪ ənstɛɾəli tə ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb, stɪl klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz blæŋkəɾ ɝaʊn hɪm. hɪz buts wɝ ɑn ðə flɔɹ ɪnsaɪd, ən ɪz kloʊk hʌŋ fɹəm ə pɛɡ, ʌndɝ ɪz bɛlt, wɪð paʊtʃ ən ʃið bɛl naɪf. ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə kʌntʃɹi naɪf, wɪð ə staʊt bleɪd, bʌɾ ɪt kəd də əz mʌtʃ əz ɛni faɪn dæɡɝ. ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz kloʊðz - tu stɝɾi wʊl koʊts, θɹi pɛɹz ə bɹitʃɪz, hæf ə dʌzən lɪnən ʃɝts ən smɔlkloʊðz - hæd bɪn bɹʌʃt əɹ wɑʃt əz ɹikwaɪɝd, ən nitli foʊldəɾ ɑn ðə ʃɛlvz ðət tʊk ʌp wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb. hi fɛl ðə paʊtʃ hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə bɛlt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɛmpti. ɪts kɑntɛns leɪ dʒʌmbəld ɑn ə ʃɛlf wɪð wʌt hæd bɪn ɛmptid fɹəm ɪz pɑkəts.

Going was beginning to be a better idea by the minute. He slid awkwardly off the bed and made his way unsteadily to the wardrobe, still clutching his blanket around him. His boots were on the floor inside, and his cloak hung from a peg, under his belt, with pouch and sheathed belt knife. It was just a country knife, with a stout blade, but it could do as much as any fine dagger. The rest of his clothes - two sturdy wool coats, three pairs of breeches, half a dozen linen shirts and smallclothes - had been brushed or washed as required, and neatly folded on the shelves that took up one side of the wardrobe. He felt the pouch hanging from the belt, but it was empty. Its contents lay jumbled on a shelf with what had been emptied from his pockets.

hi bɹʌʃt əsaɪɾ ə ɹɛdhɔks fɛðɝ, ə smuð, stʃɹaɪpt ɹɑk i hæd laɪk ðə kʌlɝz ʌv, hɪz ɹeɪzɝ, ən ɪz boʊn-hændəl pɑkɛtknaɪf, ən fɹiɾ ɪz wɑʃ-lɛðɝ pɝs fɹəm səm kɔɪlz ə spɛɹ bɑstʃɹɪŋ. wən i tʌɡd ɪɾ oʊpən, hi faʊn ɪz mɛmɹi hæd bɪn ɔl tu ɡʊɾ ɪn ðɪs ɪnstəns.

He brushed aside a redhawk's feather, a smooth, striped rock he had liked the colors of, his razor, and his bone-handled pocketknife, and freed his wash-leather purse from some coils of spare bowstring. When he tugged it open, he found his memory had been all too good in this instance.

"tu sɪlvɝ mɑɹks ən ə hændfʊl ə kɑpɝ," hi mʌɾɝd. "aɪ woʊnt ɡɛt fɑɹ ɑn ðæt." wʌns ɪt wʊɾə simd ə smɔl fɔɹtʃən tə hɪm, bʌt ðət hæd bɪn bɪfɔɹ i lɛft ɛmənz fild.

"Two silver marks and a handful of copper," he muttered. "I won't get far on that." Once it would have seemed a small fortune to him, but that had been before he left Emond's Field.

hi stup tə pɪɹ bæk ɪndə ðə ʃɛlf. wɛɹ ɑɹ ðeɪ? hi bɪɡæn tə bi əfɹeɪd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪɾ əv θɹoʊn əm aʊt, ðə weɪ hɪz mʌðɝ wəɾ ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ faʊn ðɛm. wɛɹ . . . ? hi fɛlt ə sɝdʒ ə ɹɪlif. weɪ ɪn ðə bæk, bɪhaɪn ɪz tɪndɝbɑks ən bɔl ə twaɪn fəɹ snɛɹz ən ðə laɪk, wɝ ɪz tu lɛðɝ daɪs kʌps.

He stooped to peer back into the shelf. Where are they? He began to be afraid the Aes Sedai might have thrown them out, the way his mother would if she had ever found them. Where . . . ? He felt a surge of relief. Way in the back, behind his tinderbox and ball of twine for snares and the like, were his two leather dice cups.

ðeɪ ɹæɾəld əz i pʊld əm aʊt, bʌɾ i stɪl pɑpt ɔf ðə taɪt-fɪɾɪŋ ɹaʊn kæps. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz əz ɪt ʃəd bi. faɪv daɪs kɑɹvd wɪð sɪmbəlz, fəɹ kɹaʊnz, ən faɪv mɑɹkt wɪð spɑts. ðə spɑɾəd daɪs wəd də fəɹ ə nʌmbɝ ʌv ɡeɪmz, bʌt mɔɹ mɛn sim tə pleɪ kɹaʊnz ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. wɪð ðiz, hɪz tu mɑɹks wəd bɪkʌm ɪnʌf tə teɪk ɪm fɑɹ əweɪ fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn. əweɪ fɹəm ɛɛs sədaɪ ən səlin, boʊθ.

They rattled as he pulled them out, but he still popped off the tight-fitting round caps. Everything was as it should be. Five dice carved with symbols, for crowns, and five marked with spots. The spotted dice would do for a number of games, but more men seemed to play crowns than anything else. With these, his two marks would become enough to take him far away from Tar Valon. Away from Aes Sedai and Selene, both.

ə pɝɛmptɝi nɑk wɑz fɑloʊɾ ɪmiɾiətli baɪ ðə dɔɹ oʊpənɪŋ. hi wɝld ɝaʊnd. ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ən ðə kipɝ ə ðə kɹɑnəkəlz wɝ ɛntɝɪŋ. hi wʊɾə ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd əm ivən wɪθaʊt ði æmɪɝlɪnz bɹɔd, stʃɹaɪp stoʊl, ən ðə kipɝz nɛɹoʊɝ blu stoʊl. hi hæd sin əm wʌns ən oʊnli wʌns, ə lɔŋ weɪ fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt fɝɡɛt ðə tu moʊs paʊɝfəl wɪmən əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

A peremptory knock was followed immediately by the door opening. He whirled around. The Amyrlin Seat and the Keeper of the Chronicles were entering. He would have recognized them even without the Amyrlin's broad, striped stole, and the Keeper's narrower blue stole. He had seen them once and only once, a long way from Tar Valon, but he could not forget the two most powerful women among the Aes Sedai.

ði æmɪɝlɪnz aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɪm stændɪŋ ðəɹ wɪð ðə blæŋkət hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən ɪz pɝs ən daɪs kʌps ɪn ɪz hænz. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk jəl nid ðoʊz fəɹ ə waɪl jɛt, maɪ sʌn," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "pʊɾ əm ʌp ən ɡɛt bæk tə bɛd bɪfɔɹ jə fɔl ɑn jəɹ feɪs."

The Amyrlin's eyebrows rose at the sight of him standing there with the blanket hanging from his shoulders and his purse and dice cups in his hands. "I don't think you will need those for a while yet, my son," she said dryly. "Put them up and get back to bed before you fall on your face."

hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, hɪz bæk stɪfənɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪz niz tʃoʊz ðət moʊmən tə wɑbəl, ən ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, dɑɹk aɪz ən blu əlaɪk əpɪɹɪŋ tə ɹiɾ ɪz ɛvɹi ɹɪbɛljəs θɔt. hi dɪɾ əz i wɑz toʊld, hoʊldɪŋ ðə blæŋkəɾ ɝaʊn ɪm wɪð boʊθ hænz. hi leɪ daʊn stʃɹeɪɾ əz ə bɔɹd, nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ ɛls i kəd du.

He hesitated, his back stiffening, but his knees chose that moment to wobble, and the two Aes Sedai were looking at him, dark eyes and blue alike appearing to read his every rebellious thought. He did as he was told, holding the blanket around him with both hands. He lay down straight as a board, not sure what else he could do.

"haʊ ɑɹ jə filɪŋ?" ði æmɪɝlɪn æsk bɹɪskli əz ʃi pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz hɛd. ɡus bʌmps kʌvɝɾ ɪz skɪn. hæd ʃi dʌn sʌmθɪŋ wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, əɹ wɑz ɪt biɪŋ tʌtʃt baɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ðət meɪɾ ɪm fil ə tʃɪl?

"How are you feeling?" the Amyrlin asked briskly as she put a hand on his head. Goose bumps covered his skin. Had she done something with the One Power, or was it being touched by an Aes Sedai that made him feel a chill?

"aɪm faɪn," hi toʊl hɝ. "waɪ, aɪm ɹɛɾi tə bi ɑn maɪ weɪ. dʒʌs lemi seɪ ɡʊdbaɪ tə ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv, ən əl bi aʊɾ ə jəɹ hɛɹ. aɪ min, əl ɡoʊ . . . ʌ, mʌðɝ." mɔɪɹeɪn ən vɛɹɪn hæd nɑt sim tə kɛɹ mʌtʃ haʊ hi tɔkt, bʌt ðɪs wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, æftɝ ɔl.

"I'm fine," he told her. "Why, I am ready to be on my way. Just let me say goodbye to Egwene and Nynaeve, and I'll be out of your hair. I mean, I will go . . . uh, Mother." Moiraine and Verin had not seemed to care much how he talked, but this was the Amyrlin Seat, after all.

"nɑnsɛns," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd. ʃi pʊl ðə haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹ ɝaʊnd, kloʊsɝ tə ðə bɛd, ən sæt, ədʒɹɛsɪŋ lin. "mɛn ɔlweɪz sim tə ɹəfjuz tə ədmɪt ðeɪ ɑɹ sɪk əntɪl ðəɹ sɪk ɪnʌf tə meɪk twaɪs əz mʌtʃ wɝk fəɹ wɪmən. ðən ðeɪ kleɪm ðəɹ wɛl tu sun, wɪð ðə seɪm ɹɪzʌlt."

"Nonsense," the Amyrlin said. She pulled the high-backed chair around, closer to the bed, and sat, addressing Leane. "Men always seem to refuse to admit they are sick until they're sick enough to make twice as much work for women. Then they claim they're well too soon, with the same result."

ðə kipɝ ɡlænst ət mæt ən nɑɾəd. "jɛs, mʌðɝ, jɛt ðɪs wʌn kænɑt kleɪm hiz wɛl wən i kən bɛɹli stæn ʌp. ət lis hiz iɾən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɑn ɪz tʃɹeɪ."

The Keeper glanced at Mat and nodded. "Yes, Mother, yet this one cannot claim he is well when he can barely stand up. At least he has eaten everything on his tray."

"aɪd bi sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf i hæd lɛft ɪnʌf kɹʌmz tə ɪntʃɹəst ə fɪntʃ. ən stɪl hʌŋɡɹi, ənlɛs aɪ mɪs maɪ ɡɛs."

"I'd be surprised if he had left enough crumbs to interest a finch. And still hungry, unless I miss my guess."

"aɪ kəɾ əv sʌmwʌn bɹɪŋ ɪm ə paɪ, mʌðɝ. əɹ səm keɪks."

"I could have someone bring him a pie, Mother. Or some cakes."

"noʊ, aɪ θɪŋk hiz hæɾ əz mʌtʃ əz i kən hoʊl fəɹ naʊ. ɪf i bɹɪŋz ɪɾ ɔl bæk ʌp, ɪt woʊn də hɪm ɛni ɡʊd."

"No, I think he has had as much as he can hold for now. If he brings it all back up, it won't do him any good."

mæt skaʊld. ɪt sim tə hɪm ðət wən jə ɡɑt sɪk, jə bɪkeɪm ɪnvɪzəbəl tə wɪmən ənlɛs ðeɪ wɝ æktʃəli  tɔkɪŋ tə ju. ən ðən ðeɪ tʊk ət lis tɛn jɪɹz ɔf jəɹ eɪdʒ. nɪneɪiv, hɪz mʌðɝ, hɪz sɪstɝz, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ðeɪ ɔl dɪɾ ɪt.

Mat scowled. It seemed to him that when you got sick, you became invisible to women unless they were actually talking to you. And then they took at least ten years off your age. Nynaeve, his mother, his sisters, the Amyrlin Seat, they all did it.

"aɪm nɑt hʌŋɡɹi əɾ ɔl," hi ənaʊnst. "aɪ æm faɪn. ɪf jəl lemi pʊt maɪ kloʊðz ɑn, əl ʃoʊ jə haʊ wɛl aɪ æm. əl bi aʊɾ ə hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ jə noʊ ɪt." ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, naʊ. hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "ʌ . . . mʌðɝ."

"I'm not hungry at all," he announced. "I am fine. If you will let me put my clothes on, I'll show you how well I am. I will be out of here before you know it." They were both looking at him, now. He cleared his throat. "Uh . . . Mother."

ði æmɪɝlɪn snɔɹɾɪd. "juv iɾən ə mil fəɹ faɪv, ən jəl it θɹi əɹ fɔɹ laɪk ɪɾ ɛvɹi deɪ fəɹ deɪz jɛt, əɹ ɛls jəl stɑɹv tə dɛθ. juv dʒʌs bɪn hil fɹəm ə lɪŋk tə ði ivəl ðət kɪld ɛvɹi mæn, wʊmən, ən tʃaɪld ɪn ɑɹɪdhɔl, ən noʊ lɛs stʃɹɔŋ fəɹ nɪɹ tu θaʊzən jɪɹz weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ jə tə pɪk ɪɾ ʌp. ɪt wɑz kɪlɪŋ jə dʒʌst əz ʃʊɹli əz ɪt kɪl ðɛm. ðəɾ ɪz nɑt laɪk hævɪŋ ə fɪʃ spaɪn stʌk ɪn jəɹ θʌm, bɔɪ. wi vɛɹi nɪɹli kɪl jə aʊɝsɛlvz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə seɪv ju."

The Amyrlin snorted. "You've eaten a meal for five, and you will eat three or four like it every day for days yet, or else you will starve to death. You've just been Healed from a link to the evil that killed every man, woman, and child in Aridhol, and no less strong for near two thousand years waiting for you to pick it up. It was killing you just as surely as it killed them. That is not like having a fish spine stuck in your thumb, boy. We very nearly killed you ourselves trying to save you."

"aɪ æm nɑt hʌŋɡɹi," hi meɪnteɪnd. hɪz stʌmək ɡɹaʊld laʊdli tə ɡɪv ɪm ðə laɪ.

"I am not hungry," he maintained. His stomach growled loudly to give him the lie.

"aɪ ɹɛd jə æɹaɪt ðə fɝs taɪm aɪ sɔ ju," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd. "aɪ nu ɹaɪt ðən jud boʊlt laɪk ə stɑɹɾəld fɪʃɝ-bɝɾ ɪf jə ɛvɝ θɔt sʌmwʌn wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hoʊl ju. əz wɛl aɪ tʊk pɹikɔʃənz."

"I read you aright the first time I saw you," the Amyrlin said. "I knew right then you'd bolt like a startled fisher-bird if you ever thought someone was trying to hold you. As well I took precautions."

hi aɪɾ əm wɛɹəli. "pɹikɔʃənz?" ðeɪ lʊk bæk, ɔl sɝɛnəɾi. hi fɛlt əz ɪf ðɛɹ aɪz wɝ pɪnɪŋ ɪm tə ðə bɛd.

He eyed them warily. "Precautions?" They looked back, all serenity. He felt as if their eyes were pinning him to the bed.

"jɔɹ neɪm ən dɪskɹɪpʃən ɑɹ ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə ðə bɹɪdʒ ɡɑɹdz," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd, "æn ðə dɑkmæstɝz. əl nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə hoʊl jə ɪnsaɪd ðə taʊɝ, bʌt jəl nɑt liv tɑɹ vəlɑn əntɪl jə ɑɹ wɛl. ʃəd jə tʃɹaɪ tə haɪɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi, hʌŋɡɝ wɪl dʒɹaɪv jə bæk hɪɹ ɪvɛntʃəwəli, əɹ ɪf ɪt dʌznt, wɪl faɪn jə bɪfɔɹ jə stɑɹv."

"Your name and description are on their way to the bridge guards," the Amyrlin said, "and the dockmasters. I'll not try to hold you inside the Tower, but you will not leave Tar Valon until you are well. Should you try to hide in the city, hunger will drive you back here eventually, or if it doesn't, we will find you before you starve."

"waɪ dʒju wɑnə kip mi hɪɹ soʊ bædli?" hi dɪmændəd. hi hɝd səlinz vɔɪs. ðeɪ wɑnə juz ju. "waɪ ʃəd jə kɛɹ wɛðɝ aɪ stɑɹv əɹ nɑt? aɪ kən fid maɪsɛlf."

"Why do you want to keep me here so badly?" he demanded. He heard Selene's voice. They want to use you. "Why should you care whether I starve or not? I can feed myself."

ði æmɪɝlɪn ɡeɪv ə smɔl læf wɪð lɪɾəl əmjuzmən ɪn ɪt. "wɪð tu sɪlvɝ mɑɹks ən ə hændfʊl ə kɑpɝ, maɪ sʌn? jəɹ daɪs wəd nid tə bi vɛɹi lʌki ɪndid tə baɪ ɔl ðə fud jəl niɾ ɪn ðə nɛks fju deɪz. wi də nɑt hil pipəl, ðən lɛɾ əm weɪst əɹ ɛfɝts baɪ daɪɪŋ waɪl ðeɪ stɪl nid kɛɹ. ɪn ədɪʃən tə wɪtʃ, jə meɪ jɛt nid mɔɹ hilɪŋ."

The Amyrlin gave a small laugh with little amusement in it. "With two silver marks and a handful of copper, my son? Your dice would need to be very lucky indeed to buy all the food you'll need in the next few days. We do not Heal people, then let them waste our efforts by dying while they still need care. In addition to which, you may yet need more Healing."

"mɔɹ? jə sɛd jə hæd hil mi. waɪ ʃəɾ aɪ nid mɔɹ?"

"More? You said you had Healed me. Why should I need more?"

"maɪ sʌn, jə kæɹid ðət dæɡɝ fəɹ mʌnθs. aɪ bɪliv wi dʌɡ ɛvɹi tʃɹeɪs ʌv ɪɾ aʊɾ ə ju, bʌɾ ɪf wi mɪst ivən ðə smɔləst spɛk, ɪt kəd stɪl bi feɪɾəl. ən u noʊz wʌɾ ɪfɛk jəɹ hævɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn jəɹ pəzɛʃən soʊ lɔŋ meɪ hæv? hæf ə jɪɹ fɹəm naʊ, ə jɪɹ, ən jə meɪ wɪʃ jə hæɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hæn tə hil jə əɡɛn."

"My son, you carried that dagger for months. I believe we dug every trace of it out of you, but if we missed even the smallest speck, it could still be fatal. And who knows what effect your having it in your possession so long may have? Half a year from now, a year, and you may wish you had an Aes Sedai to hand to Heal you again."

"ju wɑn mi tə steɪ hɪɹ ə jɪɹ?" hi sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli, ən laʊdli. lin ʃɪftəɾ əɹ fiɾ ən aɪɾ ɪm ʃɑɹpli, bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪnz kɑm fitʃɝz wɝ ənɹʌfəld.

"You want me to stay here a year?" he said incredulously, and loudly. Leane shifted her feet and eyed him sharply, but the Amyrlin's calm features were unruffled.

"pɝhæps nɑt soʊ lɔŋ əz ðæt, maɪ sʌn. lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə bi sɝɾən, ðoʊ. ʃʊɹli jə wɑn əz mʌtʃ. wəd jə sɛt seɪl ɪn ə boʊt wən jə dɪdnt noʊ wɛðɝ ðə kɔkɪŋ wəd hoʊld, əɹ wɛðɝ ə plæŋk maɪt bi ɹɑɾən?"

"Perhaps not so long as that, my son. Long enough to be certain, though. Surely you want as much. Would you set sail in a boat when you didn't know whether the caulking would hold, or whether a plank might be rotten?"

"aɪ nɛvɝ hæd mʌtʃ tə də wɪð boʊts," mæt mʌɾɝd. ɪt maɪt bi tʃɹu. ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛvɝ laɪd, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni maɪts ən meɪz ɪn ɪt fəɹ hɪm. "aɪv bɪn ɡɔn fɹəm hoʊm ə lɔŋ taɪm, mʌðɝ. maɪ dɑ ən maɪ mʌðɝ pɹɑbli θɪŋk aɪm dɛd."

"I never had much to do with boats," Mat muttered. It might be true. Aes Sedai never lied, but there were too many mights and mays in it for him. "I've been gone from home a long time, Mother. My da and my mother probably think I am dead."

"ɪf jə wɪʃ tə ɹaɪɾ ə lɛɾɝ tə ðɛm, əl si ðəɾ ɪts kæɹid tə ɛmənz fild."

"If you wish to write a letter to them, I will see that it is carried to Emond's Field."

mæt weɪɾəd fəɹ mɔɹ, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ keɪm. "θæŋk ju, mʌðɝ." hi ɛseɪɾ ə smɔl læf. "aɪm hæf sɝpɹaɪz maɪ dɑ dɪd nɑt kʌm lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mi. hiz ðə kaɪndə mæn u wʊd." hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ, bʌɾ i θɔt ðəɹ wɑz ə smɔl hɛzəteɪʃən bɪfɔɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn ænsɝd.

Mat waited for more, but no more came. "Thank you, Mother." He essayed a small laugh. "I'm half surprised my da did not come looking for me. He's the kind of man who would." He was not sure, but he thought there was a small hesitation before the Amyrlin answered.

"hi dɪd kʌm. lin spoʊk tə hɪm."

"He did come. Leane spoke to him."

ðə kipɝ tʊk ɪɾ ʌp ɪmiɾiətli. "wi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛɹ jə wɝ ðɛn, mæt. aɪ toʊld ɪm soʊ, ən i lɛf bɪfɔɹ ðə hɛvi snoʊz. aɪ ɡeɪv ɪm səm ɡoʊl tə meɪk ðə dʒɝni hoʊm iziɝ."

The Keeper took it up immediately. "We did not know where you were then, Mat. I told him so, and he left before the heavy snows. I gave him some gold to make the journey home easier."

"noʊ daʊt," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd, "hi wɪl bi pliz tə hɪɹ fɹəm ju. ən jəɹ mʌðɝ wɪl, sɝɾənli. ɡɪmi ðə lɛɾɝ wən juv ɹɪɾən ɪt, ən əl si tə ɪt."

"No doubt," the Amyrlin said, "he will be pleased to hear from you. And your mother will, certainly. Give me the letter when you have written it, and I will see to it."

ðeɪ hæd toʊl hɪm, bʌɾ i hæd hæd tə æsk. ən ðeɪ dɪdn mɛnʃən ɹændz dɑ. meɪbi kəz ðeɪ dɪdn θɪŋk aɪ wəd kɛɹ, ən meɪbi bɪkɔz. . . . bɝn mi, aɪ doʊnt noʊ. hu kən tɛl wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ? "aɪ wɑz tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð ə fɹɛnd, mʌðɝ. ɹænd ælθɹ. jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ hɪm. dʒju noʊ ɪf hiz ɔl ɹaɪt? əl bɛɾ ɪz dɑ ɪz wɝid, tu."

They had told him, but he had had to ask. And they didn't mention Rand's da. Maybe because they didn't think I would care, and maybe because. . . . Burn me, I don't know. Who can tell with Aes Sedai? "I was traveling with a friend, Mother. Rand al'Thor. You remember him. Do you know if he is all right? I'll bet his da is worried, too."

"æz fɑɹ əz aɪ noʊ," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd smuðli, "ðə bɔɪ ɪz wɛl ɪnʌf, bʌɾ u kən seɪ? aɪ hæv sin ɪm oʊnli wʌns, ðə taɪm aɪ sɔ ju, ɪn fæl dæɹə." ʃi tɝn tə ðə kipɝ. "pɝhæps i kəd də wɪð ə smɔl pis ə paɪ, lin. ən sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ ɪz θɹoʊt, ɪf hiz gɑnə də ɔl ðɪs tɔkɪŋ. wɪl jə si ðəɾ ɪts bɹɔt tə hɪm?"

"As far as I know," the Amyrlin said smoothly, "the boy is well enough, but who can say? I have seen him only once, the time I saw you, in Fal Dara." She turned to the Keeper. "Perhaps he could do with a small piece of pie, Leane. And something for his throat, if he is going to do all this talking. Will you see that it is brought to him?"

ðə tɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ lɛft wɪð ə mɝmɝd, "æz jə kəmænd, mʌðɝ."

The tall Aes Sedai left with a murmured, "As you command, Mother."

wən ði æmɪɝlɪn tɝn bæk tə mæt, ʃi wɑz smaɪlɪŋ, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz wɝ blu aɪs. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ θɪŋz ɪt wəd bi deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ jə tə tɔk əbaʊt, pɝhæps ivən ɪn fɹʌn ə lin. ə flæpɪŋ tʌŋ əz kɪl mɔɹ mɛn ðən sʌɾən stɔɹmz ɛvɝ dɪd."

When the Amyrlin turned back to Mat, she was smiling, but her eyes were blue ice. "There are things it would be dangerous for you to talk about, perhaps even in front of Leane. A flapping tongue has killed more men than sudden storms ever did."

"deɪnʒɝəs, mʌðɝ?" hɪz maʊθ fɛl sʌɾənli pɑɹtʃt, bʌɾ i ɹɪzɪstɪd ði ɝdʒ tə lɪk ɪz lɪps. laɪt, haʊ mʌtʃ dʌz ʃi noʊ əbaʊt ɹænd? ɪf oʊnli mɔɪɹeɪn dɪdn kip soʊ mɛni sikɹəts. "mʌðɝ, aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɛniθɪŋ deɪnʒɝəs. aɪ kən hɑɹdli ɹɪmɛmbɝ hæf ʌv wʌɾ aɪ də noʊ."

"Dangerous, Mother?" His mouth felt suddenly parched, but he resisted the urge to lick his lips. Light, how much does she know about Rand? If only Moiraine didn't keep so many secrets. "Mother, I don't know anything dangerous. I can hardly remember half of what I do know."

"du jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə hɔɹn?"

"Do you remember the Horn?"

"wʌt hɔɹn ɪz ðæt, mʌðɝ?"

"What horn is that, Mother?"

ʃi wɑz ɑn əɹ fiɾ ən lumɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪm soʊ fæst i hɑɹdli sɔ hɝ muv. "ju pleɪ ɡeɪmz wɪð mi, bɔɪ, ən əl meɪk jə wip fəɹ jəɹ mʌðɝ tə kʌm ɹʌnɪŋ. aɪ hæv noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɡeɪmz, ən niðɝ də ju. naʊ, də - jə - ɹɪmɛmbɝ?"

She was on her feet and looming over him so fast he hardly saw her move. "You play games with me, boy, and I will make you weep for your mother to come running. I have no time for games, and neither do you. Now, do - you - remember?"

klʌtʃɪŋ ðə blæŋkət taɪtli ɝaʊn hɪm, hi hæd tə swɑloʊ bɪfɔɹ i kəd seɪ, "aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ, mʌðɝ."

Clutching the blanket tightly around him, he had to swallow before he could say, "I remember, Mother."

ʃi sim tə ɹɪlæks, dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl, ən mæt ʃɹʌɡd ɪz ʃoʊldɝz kwizəli. hi fɛlt əz ɪf i hæd dʒʌs bɪn əlaʊd tə lɪft əm ɔf ə tʃɑpɪŋ blɑk.

She seemed to relax, just a little, and Mat shrugged his shoulders queasily. He felt as if he had just been allowed to lift them off a chopping block.

"ɡʊd. ðəɾ ɪz ɡʊd, mæt." ʃi sæt bæk daʊn sloʊli, stʌɾiɪŋ hɪm. "du jə noʊ ðət jə ɑɹ lɪŋk tə ðə hɔɹn?" hi maʊðd ðə wɝd "lɪŋkt" saɪlənli, ʃɑkt, ən ʃi nɑɾəd. "aɪ dɪd nɑt θɪŋk jə nu. jə wɝ fɝs tə bloʊ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ æftɝ ɪt wɑz faʊnd. fəɹ ju, ɪɾəl sʌmən dɛd hɪɹoʊz bæk fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv. fəɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls, ɪts oʊnli ə hɔɹn - soʊ lɔŋ əz jə lɪv."

"Good. That is good, Mat." She sat back down slowly, studying him. "Do you know that you are linked to the Horn?" He mouthed the word "linked" silently, shocked, and she nodded. "I did not think you knew. You were first to blow the Horn of Valere after it was found. For you, it will summon dead heroes back from the grave. For anyone else, it is only a horn - so long as you live."

hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "soʊ lɔŋ əz aɪ laɪv," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə dʌl vɔɪs, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn nɑɾəd. "ju cʊɾə lemi daɪ." ʃi nɑɾəd əɡɛn. "ðɛn jə cʊɾə hæɾ ɛniwʌn jə wɑn bloʊ ɪt, ən ɪt wʊɾə wɝk fəɹ ðɛm." ənʌðɝ nɑd. "blʌɾ ən æʃəz! jə min mi tə bloʊ ɪt fəɹ ju. wən ðə læs bæɾəl kʌmz, jə min mi tə kɔl hɪɹoʊz bæk fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv tə faɪt ðə dɑɹk wʌn fəɹ ju. blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz!"

He took a deep breath. "So long as I live," he said in a dull voice, and the Amyrlin nodded. "You could have let me die." She nodded again. "Then you could have had anyone you want blow it, and it would have worked for them." Another nod. "Blood and ashes! You mean me to blow it for you. When the Last Battle comes, you mean me to call heroes back from the grave to fight the Dark One for you. Blood and bloody ashes!"

ʃi pʊɾ ən ɛlboʊ ɑn ði ɑɹm ə ðə tʃɛɹ ən pɹɑpt əɹ tʃɪn ɑn əɹ hænd. hɝ aɪz nɛvɝ lɛf hɪm. "wʊd jə pɹəfɝ ði ɔltɝnəɾɪv?"

She put an elbow on the arm of the chair and propped her chin on her hand. Her eyes never left him. "Would you prefer the alternative?"

hi fɹaʊnd, ðən ɹɪmɛmbɝd wʌt ði ɔltɝnəɾɪv wɑz. ɪf sʌmwʌn ɛls hæd tə saʊn ðə hɔɹn. . . . "ju wɑn mi tə bloʊ ðə hɔɹn? ðən əl bloʊ ðə hɔɹn. aɪ nɛvɝ sɛɾ aɪ wəd nɑt, dɪɾ aɪ?"

He frowned, then remembered what the alternative was. If someone else had to sound the Horn. . . . "You want me to blow the Horn? Then I'll blow the Horn. I never said I would not, did I?"

ði æmɪɝlɪn ɡeɪv ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd saɪ. "ju ɹimaɪn mi ʌv maɪ ʌŋkəl hwɑn. noʊ wʌn kəɾ ɛvɝ pɪn ɪm daʊn. hi laɪk tə ɡæmbəl, tu, ən hid mʌtʃ ɹæðɝ əv fʌn ðən wɝk. hi daɪd pʊlɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən aʊɾ ʌv ə bɝnɪŋ haʊs. hi wʊdn stɑp ɡoʊɪŋ bæk əz lɔŋ əz ðəɹ wɑz wʌn lɛft ɪnsaɪd. ɑɹ jə laɪk hɪm, mæt? wɪl jə bi ðəɹ wən ðə fleɪmz ɑɹ haɪ?"

The Amyrlin gave an exasperated sigh. "You remind me of my uncle Huan. No one could ever pin him down. He liked to gamble, too, and he'd much rather have fun than work. He died pulling children out of a burning house. He wouldn't stop going back as long as there was one left inside. Are you like him, Mat? Will you be there when the flames are high?"

hi kəd nɑt miɾ əɹ aɪz. hi stʌɾid ɪz fɪŋɡɝz əz ðeɪ plʌkt ɪɹɪɾəbli əɾ ɪz blæŋkət. "ɪm noʊ hɪɹoʊ. aɪ də wʌɾ aɪ hæv tə du, bʌɾ aɪm noʊ hɪɹoʊ."

He could not meet her eyes. He studied his fingers as they plucked irritably at his blanket. "I'm no hero. I do what I have to do, but I am no hero."

"moʊst ə ðoʊz wi kɔl hɪɹoʊz oʊnli dɪd wʌt ðeɪ hæd tə du. aɪ səpoʊz ɪɾəl əv tə bi ɪnʌf. fəɹ naʊ. jə mʌs nɑt spik tə ɛniwʌn bʌt mi ʌv ðə hɔɹn, maɪ sʌn. əɹ ə jəɹ lɪŋk tə ɪt."

"Most of those we call heroes only did what they had to do. I suppose it will have to be enough. For now. You must not speak to anyone but me of the Horn, my son. Or of your link to it."

fəɹ naʊ? hi θɔt. ɪts ɔl jə ɑɹ gɑnə blʌɾi ɡɛt, naʊ əɹ ɛvɝ. "aɪ doʊn min tə blʌɾi tɛl ɛvɹiboʊ - " ʃi ɑɹtʃt ən aɪbɹaʊ, ən i meɪɾ ɪz vɔɪs smuð əɡɛn. "aɪ də nɑt wɑnə tɛl ɛniwʌn. aɪ wɪʃ noʊbɑdi nu. waɪ dʒju wɑnə kip ɪt sətʃ ə sikɹət? doʊn jə tʃɹʌs jəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

For now? he thought. It's all you are going to bloody get, now or ever. "I don't mean to bloody tell everybo - " She arched an eyebrow, and he made his voice smooth again. "I do not want to tell anyone. I wish nobody knew. Why do you want to keep it such a secret? Don't you trust your Aes Sedai?"

fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmən i θɔɾ i hæd ɡɔn tu fɑɹ. hɝ feɪs hɑɹɾənd, ən əɹ lʊk cʊɾə kɑɹvd æks hændəlz.

For a long moment he thought he had gone too far. Her face hardened, and her look could have carved axe handles.

"ɪf aɪ kəd meɪk ɪt soʊ ðəɾ oʊnli jə ən aɪ nu," ʃi sɛd koʊldli, "aɪ wʊd. ðə mɔɹ pipəl noʊ ə θɪŋ, ðə mɔɹ ðə nɑlədʒ spɹɛdz, ivən wɪð ðə bɛst wɪl. moʊst ə ðə wɝl bɪlivz ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪz oʊnli lɛdʒənd, ən ðoʊz u noʊ bɛɾɝ bɪliv wʌn ə ðə hʌntɝz əz jɛt tə faɪn ɪt. bʌt ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl noʊz ɪts bɪn faʊnd, ən ðət minz ət list səm dɑɹkfɹɛnz noʊ.

"If I could make it so that only you and I knew," she said coldly, "I would. The more people know a thing, the more the knowledge spreads, even with the best will. Most of the world believes the Horn of Valere is only legend, and those who know better believe one of the Hunters has yet to find it. But Shayol Ghul knows it has been found, and that means at least some Darkfriends know.

bʌt ðeɪ də nɑt noʊ wɛɹ ɪɾ ɪz, ænd, ɪf ðə laɪt ʃaɪnz ɑn ʌs, ðeɪ də nɑt noʊ jə saʊndəɾ ɪt. dʒju ɹɪli wɑn dɑɹkfɹɛnz kʌmɪŋ æftɝ ju? hæfmən, əɹ ʌðɝ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn? ðeɪ wɑn ðə hɔɹn. jə mʌs noʊ ðæt. ɪɾəl wɝk əz wɛl fəɹ ðə ʃædoʊ əz fəɹ ðə laɪt. bʌɾ ɪf ɪts tə wɝk fəɹ ðɛm, ðeɪ mʌs teɪk ju, əɹ kɪl ju. dʒju wɑnə ɹɪsk ðæt?"

But they do not know where it is, and, if the Light shines on us, they do not know you sounded it. Do you really want Darkfriends coming after you? Halfmen, or other Shadowspawn? They want the Horn. You must know that. It will work as well for the Shadow as for the Light. But if it is to work for them, they must take you, or kill you. Do you want to risk that?"

mæt wɪʃt i hæɾ ənʌðɝ blæŋkət, ən meɪbi ə ɡus-daʊn kʌmfɝɾɝ. ðə ɹum sʌɾənli fɛl vɛɹi koʊld. "ɑɹ jə tɛlɪŋ mi dɑɹkfɹɛnz kəd kʌm æftɝ mi hɪɹ? aɪ θɔt ðə waɪt taʊɝ kəd kip dɑɹkfɹɛnz aʊt." hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd wʌt səlin hæd sɛɾ əbaʊt ðə blæk ədʒɑ, ən wʌndɝd wʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn wəd seɪ tə ðæt.

Mat wished he had another blanket, and maybe a goose-down comforter. The room suddenly felt very cold. "Are you telling me Darkfriends could come after me here? I thought the White Tower could keep Darkfriends out." He remembered what Selene had said about the Black Ajah, and wondered what the Amyrlin would say to that.

"ə ɡʊd ɹizən tə steɪ, wʊdn jə seɪ?" ʃi ɡɑt tə hɝ fit, smuðɪŋ əɹ skɝts. "ɹɛst, maɪ sʌn. sun jəl fil mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ. ɹɛst." ʃi kloʊz ðə dɔɹ sɔfli bɪhaɪn hɝ.

"A good reason to stay, wouldn't you say?" She got to her feet, smoothing her skirts. "Rest, my son. Soon you will feel much better. Rest." She closed the door softly behind her.

fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm mæt leɪ stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət ðə silɪŋ. hi bɛɹli noʊɾəst wən ə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən keɪm wɪð ɪz pis ə paɪ ən ənʌðɝ pɪtʃɝ ə mɪlk, teɪkɪŋ ðə tʃɹeɪ ʌv ɛmpti dɪʃəz wən ʃi wɛnt. hɪz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld laʊdli ət ðə wɔɹm smɛl ʌv æpəlz ən spaɪsəz, bʌɾ i peɪd ðət noʊ maɪnd, iðɝ. ði æmɪɝlɪn θɔt ʃi hɛld ɪm laɪk ə ʃip ɪn ə pɛn. ən səlin. . . . hu ɪn ðə laɪɾ ɪz ʃi? wʌt dʌz ʃi wɑnt? səlin hæd bɪn ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt səm θɪŋz; bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd toʊld ɪm ʃi mɛn tə juz hɪm, ən haʊ. ɪn ə weɪ. ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni hoʊlz ɪn wʌt ʃi hæd sɛd tə sut hɪm, tu mɛni hoʊlz ʃi kəd slɪp sʌmθɪŋ dɛdli θɹu. ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑntəd sʌmθɪŋ, ən səlin wɑntəd sʌmθɪŋ, ən i wɑz ðə ɹoʊp ðeɪ wɝ tʌɡɪŋ bɪtwin ðɛm. hi θɔɾ i wəd ɹæðɝ feɪs tʃɹɑləks ðən bi kɑt bɪtwin ðoʊz tu.

For a long time Mat lay staring up at the ceiling. He barely noticed when a serving woman came with his piece of pie and another pitcher of milk, taking the tray of empty dishes when she went. His stomach rumbled loudly at the warm smell of apples and spices, but he paid that no mind, either. The Amyrlin thought she held him like a sheep in a pen. And Selene. . . . Who in the Light is she? What does she want? Selene had been right about some things; but the Amyrlin had told him she meant to use him, and how. In a way. There were too many holes in what she had said to suit him, too many holes she could slip something deadly through. The Amyrlin wanted something, and Selene wanted something, and he was the rope they were tugging between them. He thought he would rather face Trollocs than be caught between those two.

ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ aʊɾ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ə weɪ aʊɾ ə boʊθ ðɛɹ ɡɹæsps. wʌns i wɑz bɪɑn ðə ɹɪvɝ, hi kəd kip aʊɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ hænz, ən səlinz, ən dɑɹkfɹɛnz', tu. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt. ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ. ɔl i hæd tə də wɑz θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt fɹəm ɛvɹi æŋɡəl.

There had to be a way out of Tar Valon, a way out of both their grasps. Once he was beyond the river, he could keep out of Aes Sedai hands, and Selene's, and Darkfriends', too. He was sure of it. There had to be a way. All he had to do was think about it from every angle.

ðə paɪ ɡɹu koʊld ɑn ðə teɪbəl.

The pie grew cold on the table.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiwʌn


CHAPTER 21

eɪ wɝld ə dʒɹimz


A World of Dreams

ɛɡwin skɹʌbd əɹ hænz wɪð ə hæn taʊəl əz ʃi hɝid daʊn ðə dɪmli lɪt kɔɹəɾɝ. ʃi hæd wɑʃt əm twaɪs, bʌt ðeɪ stɪl fɛlt ɡɹisi. ʃi hæd nɑt θɔt ðəɹ kəd bi soʊ mɛni pɑts ɪn ðə wɝld. ən tədeɪ hæd bɪn beɪk deɪ, soʊ bʌkəts ʌv æʃəz hæd hæd tə bi hɔl fɹəm ði ʌvənz. ən ðə hɑɹθs klind. ən ðə teɪbəlz ɹʌbd boʊn-waɪt wɪð faɪn sænd, ən ðə flɔɹz skɹʌbd ɑn hænz ən niz. æʃ ən ɡɹis steɪn əɹ waɪt dʒɹɛs. hɝ bæk ætʃt, ən ʃi wɑntəd tə bi ɪn əɹ bɛd, bʌt vɛɹɪn hæd kʌm tə ðə kɪtʃənz, səpoʊzədli fəɹ ə mil tə iɾ ɪn əɹ ɹumz, ən wɪspɝɾ ə sʌmənz tə hɝ ɪn pæsɪŋ.

Egwene scrubbed her hands with a hand towel as she hurried down the dimly lit corridor. She had washed them twice, but they still felt greasy. She had not thought there could be so many pots in the world. And today had been bake day, so buckets of ashes had had to be hauled from the ovens. And the hearths cleaned. And the tables rubbed bone-white with fine sand, and the floors scrubbed on hands and knees. Ash and grease stained her white dress. Her back ached, and she wanted to be in her bed, but Verin had come to the kitchens, supposedly for a meal to eat in her rooms, and whispered a summons to her in passing.

vɛɹɪn hæɾ əɹ kɔɹɾɝz əbʌv ðə laɪbɹɛɹi, ɪn kɔɹɪɾɝz juzd oʊnli baɪ ə fju ʌðɝ bɹaʊn sɪstɝz. ðəɹ wɑz ə dʌsti ɛɹ tə ðə hɔlz ðɛɹ, əz ɪf ðə wɪmən u lɪvd əlɔŋ əm wɝ tu bɪzi wɪð ʌðɝ θɪŋz tə bɑðɝ hævɪŋ ðə sɝvəns klin vɛɹi ɔfən, ən ðə pæsədʒəz tʊk ɑd tɝnz ən twɪsts, səmtaɪmz dɪpɪŋ əɹ ɹaɪzɪŋ ʌnɪkspɛktɪdli. ðə tæpəstʃɹiz wɝ fju, ðɛɹ kʌlɝfəl wivɪŋz dʌld, əpɛɹənli klin əz sɛldəm əz ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls hɪɹ. mɛni ʌv ðə læmps wɝ ənlɪt, plʌnʒɪŋ mʌtʃ ə ðə hɔl ɪndə ɡlum. ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi hæɾ ɪt tə hɝsɛlf, ɪksɛp fəɹ ə flæʃ ʌv waɪɾ əhɛd, pɝhæps ə nɑvəs əɹ ə sɝvən skɝiɪŋ əbaʊt səm tæsk. hɝ ʃuz, klɪkɪŋ ɑn bɛɹ blæk ən waɪt flɔɹ taɪlz, meɪɾ ɛkoʊz. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə kʌmfɝɾɪŋ pleɪs fəɹ wʌn θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ.

Verin had her quarters above the library, in corridors used only by a few other Brown sisters. There was a dusty air to the halls there, as if the women who lived along them were too busy with other things to bother having the servants clean very often, and the passages took odd turns and twists, sometimes dipping or rising unexpectedly. The tapestries were few, their colorful weavings dulled, apparently cleaned as seldom as everything else here. Many of the lamps were unlit, plunging much of the hall into gloom. Egwene thought she had it to herself, except for a flash of white ahead, perhaps a novice or a servant scurrying about some task. Her shoes, clicking on bare black and white floor tiles, made echoes. It was not a comforting place for one thinking of the Black Ajah.

ʃi faʊnd wʌt vɛɹɪn hæd toʊld əɹ tə lʊk fɔɹ. ə dɑɹk pænəl dɔɹ ət ðə tɑp ʌv ə ɹaɪz, bɪsaɪɾ ə dʌsti tæpəstʃɹi ʌv ə kɪŋ ɑn hɔɹs bæk ɹəsivɪŋ ðə sɝɛndɝ ʌv ənʌðɝ kɪŋ. vɛɹɪn hæd neɪm ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm - mɛn dɛd hʌnʒɹədz ə jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ wɑz bɔɹn; vɛɹɪn ɔlweɪz sim tə noʊ sətʃ θɪŋz - bʌɾ ɛɡwin kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðɛɹ neɪmz, əɹ ðə lɔŋ-vænɪʃt kʌntʃɹiz ðeɪ hæd ɹuld. ɪt wɑz ði oʊnli wɔl hæŋɪŋ ʃi hæd sin ðət mætʃt vɛɹɪnz dɪskɹɪpʃən, ðoʊ.

She found what Verin had told her to look for. A dark paneled door at the top of a rise, beside a dusty tapestry of a king on horse back receiving the surrender of another king. Verin had named the pair of them - men dead hundreds of years before Artur Hawkwing was born; Verin always seemed to know such things - but Egwene could not remember their names, or the long-vanished countries they had ruled. It was the only wall hanging she had seen that matched Verin's description, though.

maɪnəs ðə saʊn ə hɝ oʊn fʊtstɛps, ðə hɔlweɪ simd ivən ɛmptiɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ, ən mɔɹ θɹɛɾənɪŋ. ʃi ɹæpt ɑn ðə dɔɹ, ən ɛntɝd hɝidli ɑn ðə hilz ʌv ən æbsəntmaɪndɪd "hu ɪz ɪt? kʌm ɪn."

Minus the sound of her own footsteps, the hallway seemed even emptier than before, and more threatening. She rapped on the door, and entered hurriedly on the heels of an absentminded "Who is it? Come in."

wʌn stɛp ɪndə ðə ɹum, ʃi stɑpt ən stɛɹd. ʃɛlvz laɪn ðə wɔlz, ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn dɔɹ ðət mʌs lɛd tə ɪnɝ ɹumz ən ɪksɛp fəɹ wɛɹ mæps hʌŋ, ɔfən ɪn leɪɝz, ən wʌt sim tə bi tʃɑɹts ə ðə naɪt skaɪ. ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə neɪmz ə səm kɑnstəleɪʃənz - ðə plaʊmən ən ðə heɪweɪn, ði ɑɹtʃɝ ən ðə faɪv sɪstɝz - bʌɾ ʌðɝz wɝ ʌnfəmɪljɝ. bʊks ən peɪpɝz ən skɹoʊlz kʌvɝd nɪɹli ɛvɹi flæt sɝfəs, wɪð ɔl sɔɹts ʌv ɑd θɪŋz ɪntɝspɝst əmʌŋ ðə paɪlz, ən səmtaɪmz ɑn tɑp ə ðɛm. stʃɹeɪnʒ ʃeɪps ʌv ɡlæs əɹ mɛɾəl, sfɪɹz ən tubz ɪntɝlɪŋkt, ən sɝkəlz hɛld ɪnsaɪd sɝkəlz, stʊɾ əmʌŋ boʊnz ən skʌlz ʌv ɛvɹi ʃeɪp ən dɪskɹɪpʃən. wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ə stʌf bɹaʊn aʊl, nɑt mʌtʃ bɪɡɝ ðən ɛɡwinz hænd, stʊɾ ɑn wʌt sim tə bi ə blitʃt waɪt lɪzɝdz skʌl, bʌt kəd nɑt bi, fəɹ ðə skʌl wɑz lɔŋɡɝ ðən əɹ ɑɹm ən hæd kɹʊkəd tiθ əz bɪɡ əz əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. kændəlstɪks hæd bɪn stʌk əbaʊɾ ɪn ə hæphæzɝd fæʃən, ɡɪvɪŋ ɡʊd laɪt hɪɹ ən ʃædoʊz ðɛɹ, ɔlðoʊ simɪŋ ɪn deɪnʒɝ ə sɛɾɪŋ faɪɝ tə peɪpɝz ɪn səm pleɪsəz. ði aʊl blɪŋkt ət hɝ, ən ʃi dʒʌmpt.

One step into the room, she stopped and stared. Shelves lined the walls, except for one door that must lead to inner rooms and except for where maps hung, often in layers, and what seemed to be charts of the night sky. She recognized the names of some constellations - the Plowman and the Haywain, the Archer and the Five Sisters - but others were unfamiliar. Books and papers and scrolls covered nearly every flat surface, with all sorts of odd things interspersed among the piles, and sometimes on top of them. Strange shapes of glass or metal, spheres and tubes interlinked, and circles held inside circles, stood among bones and skulls of every shape and description. What appeared to be a stuffed brown owl, not much bigger than Egwene's hand, stood on what seemed to be a bleached white lizard's skull, but could not be, for the skull was longer than her arm and had crooked teeth as big as her fingers. Candlesticks had been stuck about in a haphazard fashion, giving good light here and shadows there, although seeming in danger of setting fire to papers in some places. The owl blinked at her, and she jumped.

"ɑ, jɛs," vɛɹɪn sɛd. ʃi wɑz siɾəd bɪhaɪn ə teɪbəl əz klʌɾɝd əz ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls ɪn ðə ɹum, ə tɔɹn peɪdʒ hɛl kɛɹfəli ɪn əɹ hænz. "ɪɾ ɪz ju. jɛs." ʃi noʊɾəst ɛɡwinz saɪdweɪz ɡlæns ət ði aʊl, ən sɛɾ æbsənli, "hi kips daʊn maɪs. ðeɪ tʃu peɪpɝ." hɝ dʒɛstʃɝ tʊk ɪn ði ɪntaɪɝ ɹum, ən ɹimaɪndəɾ əɹ ə ðə peɪdʒ ʃi hɛld. "fæsəneɪɾɪŋ, ðɪs. ɹoʊzəl ʌv ɛsæm kleɪmd mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪdʒəz sɝvaɪv ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, ən ʃi ʃəɾ əv noʊn, sɪns ʃi ɹoʊt bɛɹli tu hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz æftɝwɝdz, bʌɾ oʊnli ðɪs wʌn pis stɪl ɪɡzɪsts, soʊ fɑɹ əz aɪ noʊ. pɝhæps oʊnli ðɪs vɛɹi kɑpi. ɹoʊzəl ɹoʊt ðəɾ ɪt hɛl sikɹəts ðə wɝl kəd nɑt feɪs, ən ʃi wəd nɑt spik ə ðɛm pleɪnli. aɪ hæv ɹɛd ðɪs peɪdʒ ə θaʊzən taɪmz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsaɪfɝ wʌt ʃi mɛnt."

"Ah, yes," Verin said. She was seated behind a table as cluttered as everything else in the room, a torn page held carefully in her hands. "It is you. Yes." She noticed Egwene's sideways glance at the owl, and said absently, "He keeps down mice. They chew paper." Her gesture took in the entire room, and reminded her of the page she held. "Fascinating, this. Rosel of Essam claimed more than a hundred pages survived the Breaking, and she should have known, since she wrote barely two hundred years afterwards, but only this one piece still exists, so far as I know. Perhaps only this very copy. Rosel wrote that it held secrets the world could not face, and she would not speak of them plainly. I have read this page a thousand times, trying to decipher what she meant."

ðə taɪni aʊl blɪŋkt əɾ ɛɡwin əɡɛn. ʃi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lʊk əɾ ɪt. "wʌt dʌz ɪt seɪ, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ?"

The tiny owl blinked at Egwene again. She tried not to look at it. "What does it say, Verin Sedai?"

vɛɹɪn blɪŋkt, vɛɹi mʌtʃ əz ði aʊl hæd. "wʌt dʌz ɪt seɪ? ɪts ə dɝɛk tʃɹænzleɪʃən, maɪnd, ən ɹidz ɔlmoʊs laɪk ə bɑɹd ɹisaɪɾɪŋ ɪn haɪ tʃænt. lɪsən. 'hɑɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk. bælzəmən. neɪm hɪɾən wɪðɪn neɪm ʃɹaʊɾɪd baɪ neɪm. sikɹət bɛɹid wɪðɪn sikɹət kloʊk baɪ sikɹət. bɪtʃɹeɪɝ ə hoʊp. ɪʃəml bɪtʃɹeɪz ɔl hoʊp. tʃɹuθ bɝnz ən sɪɹz. hoʊp feɪlz bɪfɔɹ tʃɹuθ. ə laɪ ɪz əɹ ʃild. hu kən stæn əɡɛns ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk? hu kən feɪs ðə bɪtʃɹeɪɝ ə hoʊp? soʊl ə ʃædoʊ, soʊl ə ðə ʃædoʊ, hiz - ' " ʃi stɑpt wɪð ə saɪ. "ɪɾ ɛnz ðɛɹ. wʌt dʒju meɪk ʌv ɪt?"

Verin blinked, very much as the owl had. "What does it say? It is a direct translation, mind, and reads almost like a bard reciting in High Chant. Listen. 'Heart of the Dark. Ba'alzamon. Name hidden within name shrouded by name. Secret buried within secret cloaked by secret. Betrayer of Hope. Ishamael betrays all hope. Truth burns and sears. Hope fails before truth. A lie is our shield. Who can stand against the Heart of the Dark? Who can face the Betrayer of Hope? Soul of shadow, Soul of the Shadow, he is - ' " She stopped with a sigh. "It ends there. What do you make of it?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪ də nɑt laɪk ɪt."

"I don't know," Egwene said. "I do not like it."

"wɛl, waɪ ʃəd ju, tʃaɪld? laɪk ɪt, əɹ ʌndɝstæn ɪt? aɪ hæv stʌɾid ɪt nɪɹli fɔɹɾi jɪɹz, ən aɪ də niðɝ." vɛɹɪn kɛɹfəli pleɪs ðə peɪdʒ ɪnsaɪɾ ə sɪlk-laɪn foʊldɝ ə stɪf lɛðɝ, ðən kæʒəwəli stʌf ðə foʊldɝ ɪndə ə stæk ə peɪpɝz. "bʌt jə dɪd nɑt kʌm fəɹ ðæt." ʃi ɹʌmɪɡd əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf, sɛvɹəl taɪmz bɛɹli kætʃɪŋ ə paɪl ə bʊks əɹ mænjəskɹɪps bɪfɔɹ ɪt tɑpəld. faɪnəli ʃi keɪm ʌp wɪð ə hændfʊl ə peɪdʒəz kʌvɝɾ ɪn ə θɪn, spaɪɾɝi hæn ən taɪd wɪð nʌbi stʃɹɪŋ. "hɪɹ, tʃaɪld. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðəɾ ɪz noʊn əbaʊt liɑnʒɹɪn ən ðə wɪmən u wɛnt wɪð hɝ. neɪmz, eɪdʒəz, ədʒəz, wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ bɔɹn. ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ kəd faɪn ɪn ðə ɹɛkɝdz. ivən haʊ ðeɪ pɝfɔɹmd ɪn ðɛɹ stʌɾiz. wʌt wi noʊ ʌv ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðeɪ tʊk, tu, wɪtʃ ɪzən mʌtʃ. oʊnli dɪskɹɪpʃənz, fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt. aɪ də nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ ɛni ʌv ðɪs wɪl hɛlp. aɪ sɔ nʌθɪŋ ʌv ɛni jus ɪn ðɪs."

"Well, why should you, child? Like it, or understand it? I have studied it nearly forty years, and I do neither." Verin carefully placed the page inside a silk-lined folder of stiff leather, then casually stuffed the folder into a stack of papers. "But you did not come for that." She rummaged across the table, muttering to herself, several times barely catching a pile of books or manuscripts before it toppled. Finally she came up with a handful of pages covered in a thin, spidery hand and tied with nubby string. "Here, child. Everything that is known about Liandrin and the women who went with her. Names, ages, Ajahs, where they were born. Everything I could find in the records. Even how they performed in their studies. What we know of the ter'angreal they took, too, which isn't much. Only descriptions, for the most part. I do not know whether any of this will help. I saw nothing of any use in this."

"pɝhæps wʌn ʌv əs wɪl si sʌmθɪŋ." ə sʌɾən weɪv ə səspɪʃən tʊk ɛɡwin baɪ sɝpɹaɪz. ɪf ʃi dɪdn liv sʌmθɪŋ aʊt. ði æmɪɝlɪn sim tə tʃɹʌs vɛɹɪn oʊnli kəz ʃi hæd tə. wʌɾ ɪf vɛɹɪn wɑz blæk ədʒɑ hɝsɛlf? ʃi ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk. ʃi hæd tʃɹævəld ɔl ðə weɪ fɹəm toʊmən hɛd tə tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪð vɛɹɪn, ən ʃi ɹəfjuz tə bɪliv ðɪs plʌmp skɑlɝ kəd bi ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd. "aɪ tʃɹʌs ju, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ." kən aɪ, ɹɪli?

"Perhaps one of us will see something." A sudden wave of suspicion took Egwene by surprise. If she didn't leave something out. The Amyrlin seemed to trust Verin only because she had to. What if Verin was Black Ajah herself? She gave herself a shake. She had traveled all the way from Toman Head to Tar Valon with Verin, and she refused to believe this plump scholar could be a Darkfriend. "I trust you, Verin Sedai." Can I, really?

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ blɪŋkt əɾ əɹ əɡɛn, ðən dɪsmɪst wʌtɛvɝ θɔt hæd kʌm tə hɝ wɪð ə ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛd. "ðæt lɪst aɪ ɡeɪv jə meɪ bi ɪmpɔɹɾənt, əɹ ɪt meɪ bi soʊ mʌtʃ weɪst ə peɪpɝ, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɪzən ði oʊnli ɹizən aɪ sʌmən ju." ʃi stɑɹɾəd muvɪŋ θɪŋz ɑn ðə teɪbəl, meɪkɪŋ səm ʃeɪki stæks tɔlɝ tə klɪɹ ə speɪs. "aɪ ʌndɝstæn fɹəm æneɪjə ðət jə maɪt bɪkʌm ə dʒɹimɝ. ðə læst wɑz kɔɹiənɪn nɪdil, fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd ən sɛvənti-θɹi jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ən fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ kən meɪk ə ðə ɹɛkɝdz, ʃi bɛɹli dɪzɝv ðə neɪm. ɪt wəd bi kwaɪɾ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ, ɪf jə du."

The Aes Sedai blinked at her again, then dismissed whatever thought had come to her with a shake of her head. "That list I gave you may be important, or it may be so much waste of paper, but it isn't the only reason I summoned you." She started moving things on the table, making some shaky stacks taller to clear a space. "I understand from Anaiya that you might become a Dreamer. The last was Corianin Nedeal, four hundred and seventy-three years ago, and from what I can make of the records, she barely deserved the name. It would be quite interesting, if you do."

"ʃi tɛstəd mi, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ, bʌt ʃi kʊdn bi ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɛni ʌv maɪ dʒɹimz fɔɹtoʊl ðə fjutʃɝ."

"She tested me, Verin Sedai, but she couldn't be sure that any of my dreams foretold the future."

"ðæɾ ɪz oʊnli pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌɾ ə dʒɹimɝ dʌz, tʃaɪld. pɝhæps ðə lis pɑɹt. æneɪjə bɪlivz ɪn bɹɪŋɪŋ ɡɝlz əlɔŋ tu sloʊli, ɪn maɪ əpɪnjən. lʊk hɪɹ." wɪð wʌn fɪŋɡɝ, vɛɹɪn dʒɹu ə nʌmbɝ ə pɛɹəlɛl laɪnz əkɹɔs ði ɛɹiə ʃi hæd klɪɹd, laɪnz klɪɹ ɪn dʌst ətɑp ði oʊl biswæks. "lɛt ðiz ɹɛpɹəzɛnt wɝlz ðət maɪɾ ɪɡzɪst ɪf dɪfɹən tʃɔɪsəz hæd bɪn meɪd, ɪf meɪdʒɝ tɝnɪŋ pɔɪns ɪn ðə pæɾɝn hæd ɡɔn ənʌðɝ weɪ."

"That is only part of what a Dreamer does, child. Perhaps the least part. Anaiya believes in bringing girls along too slowly, in my opinion. Look here." With one finger, Verin drew a number of parallel lines across the area she had cleared, lines clear in dust atop the old beeswax. "Let these represent worlds that might exist if different choices had been made, if major turning points in the Pattern had gone another way."

"ðə wɝlz ɹitʃt baɪ ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊnz," ɛɡwin sɛd, tə ʃoʊ ʃi hæd lɪsən tə vɛɹɪnz lɛktʃɝz ɑn ðə dʒɝni fɹəm toʊmən hɛd. wʌt kəd ðɪs pɑsəbli hæv tə də wɪð wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ʃi wɑz ə dʒɹimɝ?

"The worlds reached by the Portal Stones," Egwene said, to show she had listened to Verin's lectures on the journey from Toman Head. What could this possibly have to do with whether or not she was a Dreamer?

"vɛɹi ɡʊd. bʌt ðə pæɾɝn meɪ bi ivən mɔɹ kɑmplɛks ðən ðæt, tʃaɪld. ðə wil wivz əɹ laɪvz tə meɪk ðə pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ, bʌt ði eɪdʒəz ðɛmsɛlvz ɑɹ woʊvən ɪndə ði eɪdʒ leɪs, ðə ɡɹeɪt pæɾɝn. hu kən noʊ ɪf ðɪs ɪz ivən ðə tɛnθ pɑɹɾ ə ðə wivɪŋ, ðoʊ? səm ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz əpɛɹənli bɪliv ðət ðəɹ wɝ stɪl ʌðɝ wɝlz - ivən hɑɹɾɝ tə ɹitʃ ðən ðə wɝlz ə ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊnz, ɪf ðət kən bi bɪlivd - laɪɪŋ laɪk ðɪs." ʃi dʒɹu mɔɹ laɪnz, kɹɔs-hætʃɪŋ ðə fɝst sɛt. fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ðɛm. "ðə wɔɹp ən ðə wuf ə ðə wiv. pɝhæps ðə wil ə taɪm wivz ə stɪl ɡɹeɪɾɝ pæɾɝn fɹəm wɝlz." stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ, ʃi dʌstɪɾ əɹ hænz. "wɛl, ðəɾ ɪz niðɝ hɪɹ nɔɹ ðɛɹ. ɪn ɔl ə ðiz wɝlz, wʌtɛvɝ ðɛɹ ʌðɝ vɛɹieɪʃənz, ə fju θɪŋz ɑɹ kɑnstənt. wʌn ɪz ðət ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz ɪmpɹɪzən ɪn ɔl ə ðɛm."

"Very good. But the Pattern may be even more complex than that, child. The Wheel weaves our lives to make the Pattern of an Age, but the Ages themselves are woven into the Age Lace, the Great Pattern. Who can know if this is even the tenth part of the weaving, though? Some in the Age of Legends apparently believe that there were still other worlds - even harder to reach than the worlds of the Portal Stones, if that can be believed - lying like this." She drew more lines, cross-hatching the first set. For a moment she stared at them. "The warp and the woof of the weave. Perhaps the Wheel of Time weaves a still greater Pattern from worlds." Straightening, she dusted her hands. "Well, that is neither here nor there. In all of these worlds, whatever their other variations, a few things are constant. One is that the Dark One is imprisoned in all of them."

ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf, ɛɡwin stɛp kloʊsɝ tə pɪɹ ət ðə laɪnz vɛɹɪn hæd dʒɹɔn. "ɪn ɔl ə ðɛm? haʊ kən ðət bi? ɑɹ jə seɪɪŋ ðəɹ ɪz ə fɑðɝ ə laɪz fəɹ itʃ wɝld?" ðə θɔɾ ə soʊ mɛni dɑɹk wʌnz meɪɾ əɹ ʃɪvɝ.

In spite of herself, Egwene stepped closer to peer at the lines Verin had drawn. "In all of them? How can that be? Are you saying there is a Father of Lies for each world?" The thought of so many Dark Ones made her shiver.

"noʊ, tʃaɪld. ðəɹ ɪz wʌn kɹieɪɾɝ, hu ɪɡzɪsts ɛvɹiwɛɹ ət wʌns fəɹ ɔl ə ðiz wɝlz. ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ, ðəɹ ɪz oʊnli wʌn dɑɹk wʌn, hu ɔlsoʊ ɪɡzɪsts ɪn ɔl ə ðiz wɝlz ət wʌns. ɪf hiz fɹid fɹəm ðə pɹɪzən ðə kɹieɪɾɝ meɪɾ ɪn wʌn wɝld, hiz fɹiɾ ɑn ɔl. soʊ lɔŋ əz hiz kɛpt pɹɪznɝ ɪn wʌn, hi ɹɪmeɪnz ɪmpɹɪzən ɑn ɔl."

"No, child. There is one Creator, who exists everywhere at once for all of these worlds. In the same way, there is only one Dark One, who also exists in all of these worlds at once. If he is freed from the prison the Creator made in one world, he is freed on all. So long as he is kept prisoner in one, he remains imprisoned on all."

"ðæt dʌz nɑt sim tə meɪk sɛns," ɛɡwin pɹətɛstəd.

"That does not seem to make sense," Egwene protested.

"pɛɹədɑks, tʃaɪld. ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz ði ɛmbɑɾimənt ə pɛɹədɑks ən keɪɑs, ðə dɪstʃɹɔɪɝ ə ɹizən ən lɑdʒɪk, ðə bɹeɪkɝ ə bæləns, ði ʌn-meɪkɝ ʌv ɔɹɾɝ."

"Paradox, child. The Dark One is the embodiment of paradox and chaos, the destroyer of reason and logic, the breaker of balance, the un-maker of order."

ði aʊl sʌɾənli tʊk flaɪɾ ɑn saɪlənt wɪŋz, lændɪŋ ətɑp ə lɑɹdʒ waɪt skʌl ɑn ə ʃɛlf bɪhaɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪt pɪɹd daʊn ət ðə tu wɪmən, blɪŋkɪŋ. ɛɡwin hæd noʊɾəst ðə skʌl wən ʃi keɪm ɪn, wɪð ɪts kɝl hɔɹnz ən snaʊt, ən veɪɡli wʌndɝd wʌt sɔɹɾ ə ɹæm hæd soʊ bɪɡ ə hɛd. naʊ ʃi tʊk ɪn ðə ɹaʊndnəs ʌv ɪt, ðə haɪ fɔɹhɛd. nɑɾ ə ɹæmz skʌl. eɪ tʃɹɑlɑk.

The owl suddenly took flight on silent wings, landing atop a large white skull on a shelf behind the Aes Sedai. It peered down at the two women, blinking. Egwene had noticed the skull when she came in, with its curled horns and snout, and vaguely wondered what sort of ram had so big a head. Now she took in the roundness of it, the high forehead. Not a ram's skull. A Trolloc.

ʃi dʒɹu ə ʃʌɾɝɪŋ bɹɛθ. "vɛɹɪn sədaɪ, wʌt dʌz ðɪs əv tə də wɪð biɪŋ ə dʒɹimɝ? ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz baʊn ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, ən aɪ də nɑt wɑnə ivən θɪŋk ə hɪm ɪskeɪpɪŋ." bʌt ðə silz ɑn ɪz pɹɪzən ɑɹ wikənɪŋ. ivən nɑvəsɪz noʊ ðæt, naʊ.

She drew a shuddering breath. "Verin Sedai, what does this have to do with being a Dreamer? The Dark One is bound in Shayol Ghul, and I do not want to even think of him escaping." But the seals on his prison are weakening. Even novices know that, now.

"du wɪð biɪŋ ə dʒɹimɝ? waɪ, nʌθɪŋ, tʃaɪld. ɪksɛp ðət wi mʌst ɔl kənfɹʌn ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪn wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ. hiz pɹɪzənd naʊ, bʌt ðə pæɾɝn dɪd nɑt bɹɪŋ ɹænd ælθɹ ɪndə ðə wɝl fəɹ noʊ pɝpəs. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɪl feɪs ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪv; ðət mʌtʃ ɪz ʃʊɹ. ɪf ɹænd sɝvaɪvz ðət lɔŋ, ʌv kɔɹs. ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɪl tʃɹaɪ tə dɪstɔɹt ðə pæɾɝn, ɪf i kæn. wɛl, wɪv ɡɔn ɹæðɝ fɑɹ əfild, hævənt wi?"

"Do with being a Dreamer? Why, nothing, child. Except that we must all confront the Dark One in one way or another. He is prisoned now, but the Pattern did not bring Rand al'Thor into the world for no purpose. The Dragon Reborn will face the Lord of the Grave; that much is sure. If Rand survives that long, of course. The Dark One will try to distort the Pattern, if he can. Well, we have gone rather far afield, haven't we?"

"fɝɡɪv mi, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ, bʌɾ ɪf ðɪs" - ɛɡwin ɪndəkeɪɾəd ðə laɪnz dʒɹɔn ɪn ðə dʌst - "hæz nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð biɪŋ ə dʒɹimɝ, waɪ ɑɹ jə tɛlɪŋ mi əbaʊɾ ɪt?"

"Forgive me, Verin Sedai, but if this" - Egwene indicated the lines drawn in the dust - "has nothing to do with being a Dreamer, why are you telling me about it?"

vɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ dɪlɪbɝətli biɪŋ dɛns. "nʌθɪŋ? ʌv kɔɹs ɪts sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɪt, tʃaɪld. ðə pɔɪn ɪz ðət ðəɹ ɪz ə θɝd kɑnstən bɪsaɪdz ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ən ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ðəɹ ɪz ə wɝl ðət laɪz wɪðɪn itʃ ə ðiz ʌðɝz, ɪnsaɪɾ ɔl ə ðɛm ət ðə seɪm taɪm. əɹ pɝhæps sɝaʊndɪŋ ðɛm. ɹaɪɾɝz ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz kɔld ɪt tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, "ði ənsin wɝld." pɝhæps "ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz" ɪz ə bɛɾɝ tʃɹænzleɪʃən. mɛni pipəl - ɔɹɾənɛɹi foʊk u kəd nɑt θɪŋk ə tʃænəlɪŋ - səmtaɪmz ɡlɪmps tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ ɪn ðɛɹ dʒɹimz, ən ivən kætʃ ɡlɪmɝz ə ðiz ʌðɝ wɝlz θɹu ɪt. θɪŋk ə səm ə ðə pəkjuljɝ θɪŋz juv sin ɪn jəɹ dʒɹimz. bʌɾ ə dʒɹimɝ, tʃaɪld - ə tʃɹu dʒɹimɝ - kən ɛntɝ tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd."

Verin stared at her as if she were deliberately being dense. "Nothing? Of course it has something to do with it, child. The point is that there is a third constant besides the Creator and the Dark One. There is a world that lies within each of these others, inside all of them at the same time. Or perhaps surrounding them. Writers in the Age of Legends called it Tel'aran'rhiod, "the Unseen World." Perhaps "the World of Dreams" is a better translation. Many people - ordinary folk who could not think of channeling - sometimes glimpse Tel'aran'rhiod in their dreams, and even catch glimmers of these other worlds through it. Think of some of the peculiar things you have seen in your dreams. But a Dreamer, child - a true Dreamer - can enter Tel'aran'rhiod."

ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd tə swɑloʊ, bʌɾ ə lʌmp ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt stɑp hɝ. ɛntɝ ɪt? "aɪ . . . aɪ doʊn θɪŋk aɪm ə dʒɹimɝ, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ. æneɪjə sədaɪz tɛsts - "

Egwene tried to swallow, but a lump in her throat stopped her. Enter it? "I . . . I don't think I am a Dreamer, Verin Sedai. Anaiya Sedai's tests - "

vɛɹɪn kʌɾ əɹ ɔf. " - pɹuv nʌθɪŋ wʌn weɪ əɹ ði ʌðɝ. ən æneɪjə stɪl bɪlivz ðət jə meɪ vɛɹi wɛl bi wʌn."

Verin cut her off. " - prove nothing one way or the other. And Anaiya still believes that you may very well be one."

"aɪ səpoʊz əl lɝn wɛðɝ aɪm əɹ nɑɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli," ɛɡwin mʌmbəld. laɪt, aɪ wɑnə bi, doʊn aɪ? aɪ wɑnə lɝn! aɪ wɑn ɪɾ ɔl.

"I suppose I will learn whether I am or not eventually," Egwene mumbled. Light, I want to be, don't I? I want to learn! I want it all.

"ju hæv noʊ taɪm tə weɪt, tʃaɪld. ði æmɪɝlɪn əz ɛntʃɹʌstɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪt tæsk tə jə ən nɪneɪiv. jə mʌst ɹitʃ aʊt fəɹ ɛni tul jə maɪt bi eɪbəl tə juz." vɛɹɪn dʌɡ ə ɹɛd wʊɾən bɑks fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə wɛltɝ ɑn əɹ teɪbəl. ðə bɑks wɑz lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə hoʊld ʃits ə peɪpɝ, bʌt wən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ oʊpən ðə lɪɾ ə kɹæk, ɔl ʃi pʊld aʊt wɑz ə ɹɪŋ kɑɹv fɹəm stoʊn, ɔl flɛks ən stʃɹaɪps ə blu ən bɹaʊn ən ɹɛd, ən tu lɑɹdʒ tə bi ə fɪŋɡɝ ɹɪŋ. "hɪɹ, tʃaɪld."

"You have no time to wait, child. The Amyrlin has entrusted a great task to you and Nynaeve. You must reach out for any tool you might be able to use." Verin dug a red wooden box from under the welter on her table. The box was large enough to hold sheets of paper, but when the Aes Sedai opened the lid a crack, all she pulled out was a ring carved from stone, all flecks and stripes of blue and brown and red, and too large to be a finger ring. "Here, child."

ɛɡwin ʃɪftəd ðə peɪpɝz tə teɪk ɪt, ən əɹ aɪz waɪɾənd ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. ðə ɹɪŋ sɝɾənli lʊk laɪk stoʊn, bʌɾ ɪt fɛl hɑɹɾɝ ðən stil ən hɛviɝ ðən lɛd. ən ðə sɝkəl ʌv ɪt wɑz twɪstəd. ɪf ʃi ɹæn ə fɪŋɡɝ əlɔŋ wʌn ɛdʒ, ɪt wəd ɡoʊ ɝaʊn twaɪs, ɪnsaɪɾ əz wɛl əz aʊt; ɪɾ oʊnli hæd wʌn ɛdʒ. ʃi muvd əɹ fɪŋɡɝ əlɔŋ ðəɾ ɛdʒ twaɪs, dʒʌs tə kənvɪns hɝsɛlf.

Egwene shifted the papers to take it, and her eyes widened in surprise. The ring certainly looked like stone, but it felt harder than steel and heavier than lead. And the circle of it was twisted. If she ran a finger along one edge, it would go around twice, inside as well as out; it only had one edge. She moved her finger along that edge twice, just to convince herself.

"kɔɹiənɪn nɪdil," vɛɹɪn sɛd, "hæd ðət tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɪn əɹ pəzɛʃən fəɹ moʊst ə hɝ laɪf. jəl kip ɪt, naʊ."

"Corianin Nedeal," Verin said, "had that ter'angreal in her possession for most of her life. You will keep it, now."

ɛɡwin ɔlmoʊs dʒɹɑp ðə ɹɪŋ. ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil? aɪm tə kip ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil?

Egwene almost dropped the ring. A ter'angreal? I am to keep a ter'angreal?

vɛɹɪn sim nɑt tə noʊɾəs əɹ ʃɑk. "əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə hɝ, ɪɾ izɪz ðə pæsədʒ tə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ʃi kleɪmd ɪt wəd wɝk fəɹ ðoʊz wɪθaʊt tælən əz wɛl əz fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, soʊ lɔŋ əz jə ɑɹ tʌtʃɪŋ ɪt wən jə slip. ðəɹ ɑɹ deɪnʒɝz, ʌv kɔɹs. tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ ɪz nɑt laɪk ʌðɝ dʒɹimz. wʌt hæpənz ðəɹ ɪz ɹil; jə ɑɹ æktʃəli  ðəɹ ɪnstɛɾ ə dʒʌst ɡlɪmpsɪŋ ɪt." ʃi pʊʃt bæk ðə sliv ə hɝ dʒɹɛs, ɹɪvilɪŋ ə feɪɾəd skɑɹ ðə lɛŋθ ə hɝ fɔɹɑɹm. "aɪ tʃɹaɪɾ ɪt maɪsɛlf, wʌns, səm jɪɹz əɡoʊ. æneɪjəz hilɪŋ dɪd nɑt wɝk əz wɛl əz ɪt ʃəd hæv. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt." ði ɛɛs sədaɪ lɛɾ əɹ sliv kʌvɝ ðə skɑɹ əɡɛn.

Verin seemed not to notice her shock. "According to her, it eases the passage to Tel'aran'rhiod. She claimed it would work for those without Talent as well as for Aes Sedai, so long as you are touching it when you sleep. There are dangers, of course. Tel'aran'rhiod is not like other dreams. What happens there is real; you are actually there instead of just glimpsing it." She pushed back the sleeve of her dress, revealing a faded scar the length of her forearm. "I tried it myself, once, some years ago. Anaiya's Healing did not work as well as it should have. Remember that." The Aes Sedai let her sleeve cover the scar again.

"aɪ wɪl bi kɛɹfəl, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ." ɹil? maɪ dʒɹimz ɑɹ bæɾ ɪnʌf əz ðeɪ ɑɹ. aɪ wɑnt noʊ dʒɹimz ðət liv skɑɹz! əl pʊɾ ɪɾ ɪn ə sæk ən stɪk ɪɾ ɪn ə dɑɹk kɔɹnɝ ən liv ɪt ðɛɹ. əl -  bʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə lɝn. ʃi wɑntəd tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd bɪn ə dʒɹimɝ ɪn nɪɹli faɪv hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. "aɪl bi vɛɹi kɛɹfəl." ʃi slɪp ðə ɹɪŋ ɪndə hɝ paʊtʃ ən tʌɡd ðə dʒɹɔstʃɹɪŋz taɪt, ðən pɪkt ʌp ðə peɪpɝz vɛɹɪn hæd ɡɪvən hɝ.

"I will be careful, Verin Sedai." Real? My dreams are bad enough as they are. I want no dreams that leave scars! I'll put it in a sack and stick it in a dark corner and leave it there. I'll -  But she wanted to learn. She wanted to be Aes Sedai, and no Aes Sedai had been a Dreamer in nearly five hundred years. "I'll be very careful." She slipped the ring into her pouch and tugged the drawstrings tight, then picked up the papers Verin had given her.

"ɹɪmɛmbɝ tə kip ɪt hɪɾən, tʃaɪld. noʊ nɑvəs, əɹ ivən ən æksɛptɪd, ʃəɾ əv ə θɪŋ laɪk ðəɾ ɪn əɹ pəzɛʃən. bʌɾ ɪt meɪ pɹuv jusfəl tə ju. kip ɪt hɪɾən."

"Remember to keep it hidden, child. No novice, or even an Accepted, should have a thing like that in her possession. But it may prove useful to you. Keep it hidden."

"jɛs, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ." ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ vɛɹɪnz skɑɹ, ʃi ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt ənʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd kʌm əlɔŋ ən teɪk ɪt fɹəm əɹ ɹaɪt ðɛn.

"Yes, Verin Sedai." Remembering Verin's scar, she almost wished another Aes Sedai would come along and take it from her right then.

"ɡʊd, tʃaɪld. naʊ, ɔf wɪð ju. ɪt ɡɹoʊz leɪt, ən jə mʌs bi ʌp ɝli tə hɛlp wɪð bɹɛkfəst. slip wɛl."

"Good, child. Now, off with you. It grows late, and you must be up early to help with breakfast. Sleep well."

vɛɹɪn sæt lʊkɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ fəɹ ə taɪm æftɝ ɪt kloʊz bɪhaɪn ɛɡwin. ði aʊl huɾɪd sɔfli bɪhaɪn hɝ. pʊlɪŋ ðə ɹɛd bɑks tə hɝ, ʃi oʊpən ðə lɪɾ ɔl ðə weɪ ən fɹaʊn ət wʌt nɪɹli fɪl ðə speɪs.

Verin sat looking at the door for a time after it closed behind Egwene. The owl hooted softly behind her. Pulling the red box to her, she opened the lid all the way and frowned at what nearly filled the space.

peɪdʒ əpɑn peɪdʒ, kʌvɝd wɪð ə pɹɪsaɪs hænd, ðə blæk ɪŋk bɛɹli feɪɾəd æftɝ nɪɹli faɪv hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. kɔɹiənɪn nɪdilz noʊts, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi hæd lɝn ɪn fɪfti jɪɹz ə stʌɾiɪŋ ðət pəkjuljɝ tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ə sikɹəɾɪv wʊmən, kɔɹiənɪn. ʃi hæd kɛp baɪ fɑɹ ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ pɑɹɾ ə hɝ nɑlədʒ fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn, tʃɹʌstɪŋ ɪɾ oʊnli tə ðiz peɪdʒəz. oʊnli tʃæns ən ə hæbəɾ ə ɹʌmɪdʒɪŋ θɹu oʊl peɪpɝz ɪn ðə laɪbɹɛɹi hæd lɛd vɛɹɪn tə ðɛm. əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kəd dɪskʌvɝ, noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪsaɪdz hɝsɛlf nu ʌv ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil; kɔɹiənɪn hæd mænədʒ tə ɪɹeɪs ɪts ɛɡzɪstəns fɹəm ðə ɹɛkɝdz.

Page upon page, covered with a precise hand, the black ink barely faded after nearly five hundred years. Corianin Nedeal's notes, everything she had learned in fifty years of studying that peculiar ter'angreal. A secretive woman, Corianin. She had kept by far the greater part of her knowledge from everyone, trusting it only to these pages. Only chance and a habit of rummaging through old papers in the library had led Verin to them. As far as she could discover, no Aes Sedai besides herself knew of the ter'angreal; Corianin had managed to erase its existence from the records.

wʌns əɡɛn ʃi kənsɪɾɝd bɝnɪŋ ðə mænjəskɹɪpt, dʒʌst əz ʃi hæd kənsɪɾɝd ɡɪvɪŋ ɪt tə ɛɡwin. bʌt dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ nɑlədʒ, ɛni nɑlədʒ, wɑz ənæθəmə tə hɝ. ən fəɹ ði ʌðɝ. . . . noʊ. ɪts bɛs baɪ fɑɹ tə liv θɪŋz əz ðeɪ ɑɹ. wʌt wɪl hæpən, wɪl hæpən. ʃi lɛt ðə lɪd dʒɹɑp ʃʌt. naʊ wɛɹ dɪɾ aɪ pʊt ðət peɪdʒ?

Once again she considered burning the manuscript, just as she had considered giving it to Egwene. But destroying knowledge, any knowledge, was anathema to her. And for the other. . . . No. It is best by far to leave things as they are. What will happen, will happen. She let the lid drop shut. Now where did I put that page?

fɹaʊnɪŋ, ʃi bɪɡæn tə sɝtʃ ðə stæks ə bʊks ən peɪpɝz fəɹ ðə lɛðɝ foʊldɝ. ɛɡwin wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi aʊɾ ə hɝ maɪnd.

Frowning, she began to search the stacks of books and papers for the leather folder. Egwene was already out of her mind.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiɾu


CHAPTER 22

ðə pɹaɪs ə ðə ɹɪŋ


The Price of the Ring

ɛɡwin hæɾ oʊnli ɡɔn ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns fɹəm vɛɹɪnz ɹumz wən ʃɛɹiəm mɛt hɝ. ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz wɔɹ ə pɹiɑkjəpaɪd fɹaʊn.

Egwene had only gone a short distance from Verin's rooms when Sheriam met her. The Mistress of Novices wore a preoccupied frown.

"ɪf sʌmwʌn hædn ɹɪmɛmbɝd vɛɹɪn spikɪŋ tə ju, aɪ maɪt nɑɾ əv faʊn ju." ði ɛɛs sədaɪ saʊndəd maɪldli ɪɹəteɪɾəd. "kʌm əlɔŋ, tʃaɪld. jə ɑɹ hoʊldɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʌp! wʌɾ ɑɹ ðoʊz peɪpɝz?"

"If someone hadn't remembered Verin speaking to you, I might not have found you." The Aes Sedai sounded mildly irritated. "Come along, child. You are holding everything up! What are those papers?"

ɛɡwin klʌtʃt əm ə lɪɾəl taɪɾɝ. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk əɹ vɔɪs boʊθ mik ən ɹɪspɛkfəl. "vɛɹɪn sədaɪ θɪŋks aɪ ʃəd stʌɾi ðɛm, ɛɛs sədaɪ." wʌt wəd ʃi də ɪf ʃɛɹiəm æsk tə si ðɛm? wʌɾ ɪkskjus kəd ʃi ɡɪv fəɹ ɹəfjuzɪŋ, wʌɾ ɛkspləneɪʃən fəɹ peɪdʒəz tɛlɪŋ ɔl əbaʊt θɝtin wɪmən ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ ən ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðeɪ hæd stoʊlən?

Egwene clutched them a little tighter. She tried to make her voice both meek and respectful. "Verin Sedai thinks I should study them, Aes Sedai." What would she do if Sheriam asked to see them? What excuse could she give for refusing, what explanation for pages telling all about thirteen women of the Black Ajah and the ter'angreal they had stolen?

bʌt ʃɛɹiəm sim tə hæv dɪsmɪs ðə peɪpɝz fɹəm əɹ maɪn əz sun əz ʃi æskt. "nɛvɝ maɪn ðæt. jə ɑɹ wɑntəd, ən ɛvɹiwʌn ɪz weɪɾɪŋ." ʃi tʊk ɛɡwinz ɑɹm ən fɔɹst əɹ tə wɔk fæstɝ.

But Sheriam seemed to have dismissed the papers from her mind as soon as she asked. "Never mind that. You are wanted, and everyone is waiting." She took Egwene's arm and forced her to walk faster.

"wɑntəd, ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ? weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ wʌt?"

"Wanted, Sheriam Sedai? Waiting for what?"

ʃɛɹiəm ʃʊk əɹ hɛd wɪð ɛksæspɝeɪʃən. "dɪd jə fɝɡɛt ðət jə ɑɹ tə bi ɹeɪz tə ði æksɛptɪd? wən jə kʌm tə maɪ stʌɾi təmɑɹoʊ, jəl bi wɛɹɪŋ ðə ɹɪŋ, ðoʊ aɪ daʊɾ ɪɾəl suð jə vɛɹi mʌtʃ."

Sheriam shook her head with exasperation. "Did you forget that you are to be raised to the Accepted? When you come to my study tomorrow, you will be wearing the ring, though I doubt it will soothe you very much."

ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp ʃɔɹt, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hɝiɾ əɹ ɑn, teɪkɪŋ ə nɛɹoʊ sɛɾ ə stɛɹz ðət kɝl daʊn θɹu ðə laɪbɹɛɹi wɔlz. "tənaɪt? ɔlɹɛɾi? bʌɾ aɪm hæf-əslip, ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən dɝɾi, ænd. . . . aɪ θɔɾ aɪ wəɾ əv deɪz jɛt. tə ɡɛt ɹɛɾi. tə pɹipɛɹ."

Egwene tried to stop short, but the Aes Sedai hurried her on, taking a narrow set of stairs that curled down through the library walls. "Tonight? Already? But I am half-asleep, Aes Sedai, and dirty, and. . . . I thought I would have days yet. To get ready. To prepare."

"ði aʊɝ weɪts ɑn noʊ wʊmən," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd. "ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz, wən ðə wil wɪlz. bɪsaɪdz, haʊ wəd jə pɹipɛɹ? jə ɔlɹɛɾi noʊ ðə θɪŋz jə mʌst. mɔɹ ðən jəɹ fɹɛnd nɪneɪiv dɪd." ʃi pʊʃt ɛɡwin θɹu ə taɪni dɔɹ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə stɛɹz ən hɝiɾ əɹ əkɹɔs ənʌðɝ hɔl tə ə ɹæmp kɝvɪŋ daʊn ən daʊn.

"The hour waits on no woman," Sheriam said. "The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills, when the Wheel wills. Besides, how would you prepare? You already know the things you must. More than your friend Nynaeve did." She pushed Egwene through a tiny door at the foot of the stairs and hurried her across another hall to a ramp curving down and down.

"aɪ lɪsən tə ðə lɛktʃɝz," ɛɡwin pɹətɛstəd, "æn aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðɛm, bʌt . . . kæn aɪ hæv ə naɪts slip fɝst?" ðə waɪndɪŋ ɹæmp sim tə hæv noʊ ɛnd.

"I listened to the lectures," Egwene protested, "and I remember them, but . . . can't I have a night's sleep first?" The winding ramp seemed to have no end.

"ði æmɪɝlɪn sit dɪsaɪɾɪd ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn weɪɾɪŋ." ʃɛɹiəm ɡeɪv ɛɡwin ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ smaɪl. "hɝ ɪɡzækt wɝdz wɝ, 'wʌns jə dɪsaɪd tə ɡʌɾ ə fɪʃ, ðɛɹz noʊ jus weɪɾɪŋ tɪl ɪt ɹɑts.' ɪleɪn əz ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn θɹu ði ɑɹtʃəz baɪ ðɪs taɪm, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn minz jə tə ɡoʊ θɹu tənaɪɾ əz wɛl. nɑt ðəɾ aɪ kən si ðə pɔɪn ə sətʃ ə hɝi," ʃi æɾəd, hæf tə hɝsɛlf, "bʌt wən ði æmɪɝlɪn kəmænz, wi oʊbeɪ."

"The Amyrlin Seat decided there was no point in waiting." Sheriam gave Egwene a sidelong smile. "Her exact words were, 'Once you decide to gut a fish, there's no use waiting till it rots.' Elayne has already been through the arches by this time, and the Amyrlin means you to go through tonight as well. Not that I can see the point of such a hurry," she added, half to herself, "but when the Amyrlin commands, we obey."

ɛɡwin lɛt hɝsɛlf bi pʊl daʊn ðə ɹæmp ɪn saɪləns, ə nɑt fɔɹmɪŋ ɪn əɹ bɛli. nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn fɑɹ fɹəm fɔɹθkʌmɪŋ əbaʊt wʌt hæd hæpənd wən ʃi wɑz ɹeɪz tə ði æksɛptɪd. ʃi wəd nɑt spik ʌv ɪɾ əɾ ɔl, ɪksɛp fəɹ ə ɡɹɪməst 'aɪ heɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ!' ɛɡwin wɑz tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ baɪ ðə taɪm ðə ɹæmp faɪnəli ɛndəɾ əɾ ə bɹɔd hɔlweɪ, fɑɹ bɪloʊ ðə taʊɝ ɪn ðə ɹɑk ə ði aɪlənd.

Egwene let herself be pulled down the ramp in silence, a knot forming in her belly. Nynaeve had been far from forthcoming about what had happened when she was raised to the Accepted. She would not speak of it at all, except for a grimaced 'I hate Aes Sedai!' Egwene was trembling by the time the ramp finally ended at a broad hallway, far below the Tower in the rock of the island.

ðə hɔl wɑz pleɪn ən ʌndɪkɝeɪɾɪd, ðə peɪl ɹɑk θɹu wɪtʃ ɪt hæd bɪn hjun smuð bʌt lɛft ʌðɝwaɪz əntʌtʃt, ən ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn sɛɾ ə dɑɹk wʊɾən dɔɹz, əz tɔl ən waɪɾ əz fɔɹtʃɹəs ɡeɪts ən əz pleɪn, ɔlðoʊ ʌv smuðli fɪnɪʃt ən faɪnli fɪɾəd plæŋks, ət ðə vɛɹi ɛnd. ðoʊz ɡɹeɪt dɔɹz wɝ soʊ wɛl bælənst, ðoʊ, ðət ʃɛɹiəm izəli pʊʃt wʌn oʊpən, ən pʊld ɛɡwin θɹu æftɝ hɝ, ɪndə ə ɡɹeɪt, doʊm tʃeɪmbɝ.

The hall was plain and undecorated, the pale rock through which it had been hewn smoothed but left otherwise untouched, and there was only one set of dark wooden doors, as tall and wide as fortress gates and as plain, although of smoothly finished and finely fitted planks, at the very end. Those great doors were so well balanced, though, that Sheriam easily pushed one open, and pulled Egwene through after her, into a great, domed chamber.

"nɑt bɪfɔɹ taɪm!" ɪleɪɾə snæpt. ʃi stʊd tə wʌn saɪɾ ɪn əɹ ɹɛd-fɹɪnd ʃɔl, bɪsaɪɾ ə teɪbəl ɑn wɪtʃ sæt θɹi lɑɹdʒ sɪlvɝ tʃæləsəz.

"Not before time!" Elaida snapped. She stood to one side in her red-fringed shawl, beside a table on which sat three large silver chalices.

læmps ɑn tɔl stænz ɪlumən ðə tʃeɪmbɝ, ən wʌt sæt sɛntɝɾ ʌndɝ ðə doʊm. θɹi ɹaʊndəd, sɪlvɝ ɑɹtʃəz, dʒʌs tɔl ɪnʌf tə wɔk ʌndɝ, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə θɪk sɪlvɝ ɹɪŋ wɪð ðɛɹ ɛnz tʌtʃɪŋ wɛɹ ðeɪ dʒɔɪn ɪt. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə bɛɹ ɹɑk bɪfɔɹ itʃ ə ðə spɑts wɛɹ ɑɹtʃəz dʒɔɪn ɹɪŋ, ɔl θɹi wɛɹɪŋ ðɛɹ ʃɔlz. ɑlɑnə wɑz ðə sɪstɝ ə ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ ðə jɛloʊ sɪstɝ, əɹ ðə waɪt.

Lamps on tall stands illumined the chamber, and what sat centered under the dome. Three rounded, silver arches, just tall enough to walk under, sitting on a thick silver ring with their ends touching where they joined it. An Aes Sedai sat cross-legged on the bare rock before each of the spots where arches joined ring, all three wearing their shawls. Alanna was the sister of the Green Ajah, but she did not know the Yellow sister, or the White.

sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ ɛmbɹeɪst, ðə θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ stɛɹd fɪksədli ət ði ɑɹtʃəz, ən wɪðɪn ðə sɪlvɝ stʃɹʌktʃɝ ən ænsɝɪŋ ɡloʊ flɪkɝɾ ən ɡɹu. ðət stʃɹʌktʃɝ wɑz ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ən wʌtɛvɝ ɪt hæd bɪn meɪd fəɹ ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, naʊ nɑvəsɪz pæs θɹu ɪt tə bɪkʌm æksɛptɪd. ɪnsaɪɾ ɪt, ɛɡwin wəɾ əv tə feɪs əɹ fɪɹz. θɹi taɪmz. ðə waɪt laɪt wɪðɪn ði ɑɹtʃəz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ flɪkɝd; ɪt steɪd wɪðɪn əm əz ɪf kənfaɪnd, bʌɾ ɪt fɪl ðə speɪs, meɪɾ ɪɾ oʊpeɪk.

Surrounded by the glow of saidar embraced, the three Aes Sedai stared fixedly at the arches, and within the silver structure an answering glow flickered and grew. That structure was a ter'angreal, and whatever it had been made for in the Age of Legends, now novices passed through it to become Accepted. Inside it, Egwene would have to face her fears. Three times. The white light within the arches no longer flickered; it stayed within them as if confined, but it filled the space, made it opaque.

"bi izi, ɪleɪɾə," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd kɑmli. "wi wɪl bi dʌn sun." ʃi tɝn tə ɛɡwin. "nɑvəsɪz ɑɹ ɡɪvən θɹi tʃænsəz ət ðɪs. jə meɪ ɹəfjuz twaɪs tə ɛntɝ, bʌɾ ət ðə θɝd ɹəfjuzəl, jə ɑɹ sɛn əweɪ fɹəm ðə taʊɝ fɝɛvɝ. ðəɾ ɪz haʊ ɪts dʌn juʒəwəli, ən jə sɝɾənli hæv ðə ɹaɪt tə ɹəfjuz, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɪl bi plizd wɪð jə ɪf jə du."

"Be easy, Elaida," Sheriam said calmly. "We will be done soon." She turned to Egwene. "Novices are given three chances at this. You may refuse twice to enter, but at the third refusal, you are sent away from the Tower forever. That is how it is done usually, and you certainly have the right to refuse, but I do not think the Amyrlin Seat will be pleased with you if you do."

"ʃi ʃəd nɑt bi ɡɪvən ðɪs tʃæns." ðəɹ wɑz aɪɝn ɪn ɪleɪɾəz vɔɪs, ən əɹ feɪs wɑz skɛɹsli sɑftɝ. "aɪ də nɑt kɛɹ wʌɾ əɹ pətɛnʃəl ɪz. ʃi ʃəd bi pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ. əɹ feɪlɪŋ ðæt, sɛt tə skɹʌbɪŋ flɔɹz fəɹ ðə nɛks tɛn jɪɹz."

"She should not be given this chance." There was iron in Elaida's voice, and her face was scarcely softer. "I do not care what her potential is. She should be put out of the Tower. Or failing that, set to scrubbing floors for the next ten years."

ʃɛɹiəm ɡeɪv ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ ə ʃɑɹp lʊk. "ju wɝ nɑt soʊ æɾəmənt əbaʊɾ ɪleɪn. jə dɪmændəd tə bi pɑɹɾ ə ðɪs, ɪleɪɾə - pɝhæps kəz ʌv ɪleɪn - ən jəl də jəɹ pɑɹt fəɹ ðɪs ɡɝl əz wɛl, əz jə ɑɹ səpoʊz tə, əɹ jəl liv ən əl faɪn ənʌðɝ."

Sheriam gave the Red sister a sharp look. "You were not so adamant about Elayne. You demanded to be part of this, Elaida - perhaps because of Elayne - and you will do your part for this girl as well, as you are supposed to, or you will leave and I will find another."

ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ stɛɹɾ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ əntɪl ɛɡwin wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn sɝpɹaɪz tə si ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ðə wʌn paʊɝ sɝaʊn ðɛm. faɪnəli ɪleɪɾə ɡeɪv ə tɔs ə hɝ hɛɾ ən snɪf laʊdli.

The two Aes Sedai stared at one another until Egwene would not have been surprised to see the glow of the One Power surround them. Finally Elaida gave a toss of her head and sniffed loudly.

"ɪf ɪt mʌs bi dʌn, lɛɾ əs də ɪt. ɡɪv ðə mɪzɝəbəl ɡɝl əɹ tʃæns tə ɹəfjuz ən bi dʌn wɪð ɪt. ɪts leɪt."

"If it must be done, let us do it. Give the miserable girl her chance to refuse and be done with it. It is late."

"aɪ woʊn ɹɛfjus." ɛɡwinz vɔɪs kweɪvɝd, bʌt ʃi stɛɾid ɪɾ ən hɛld əɹ hɛd haɪ. "aɪ wɑnə ɡoʊ ɑn."

"I won't refuse." Egwene's voice quavered, but she steadied it and held her head high. "I want to go on."

"ɡʊd," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd. "ɡʊd. naʊ əl tɛl jə tu θɪŋz noʊ wʊmən hɪɹz əntɪl ʃi stænz wɛɹ jə du. wʌns jə bɪɡɪn, jə mʌst ɡoʊ ɑn tə ði ɛnd. ɹɛfjus əɾ ɛni pɔɪnt, ən jəl bi pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ dʒʌst əz ɪf jə hæd ɹəfjuz tə bɪɡɪn fəɹ ðə θɝd taɪm. sɛkənd. tə sik, tə stʃɹaɪv, ɪz tə noʊ deɪnʒɝ." ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæd sɛd ðɪs mɛni taɪmz. ðəɹ wɑz ə laɪɾ ə sɪmpəθi ɪn əɹ aɪz, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz stɝn əz ɪleɪɾəz. ðə sɪmpəθi fɹaɪɾənd ɛɡwin mɔɹ ðən ðə stɝnnəs. "sʌm wɪmən əv ɛntɝd, ən nɛvɝ kʌm aʊt. wən ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɑz əlaʊd tə ɡɹoʊ kwaɪət, ðeɪ - wɝ - nɑt - ðɛɹ. ən ðeɪ wɝ nɛvɝ sin əɡɛn. ɪf jəl sɝvaɪv, jə mʌs bi stɛdfæst. fɔltɝ, feɪl, ænd. . . ."ʃɛɹiəmz feɪs dʒɹoʊv ði ənspoʊkən wɝdz hoʊm; ɛɡwin ʃɪvɝd. "ðɪs ɪz jəɹ læs tʃæns. ɹɛfjus naʊ, ən ɪt kaʊns oʊnli əz ðə fɝst. jə meɪ stɪl tʃɹaɪ twaɪs mɔɹ. ɪf jə æksɛp naʊ, ðəɹ ɪz noʊ tɝnɪŋ bæk. ɪts noʊ ʃeɪm tə ɹəfjuz. aɪ kəd nɑt də ɪt, maɪ fɝs taɪm. tʃuz."

"Good," Sheriam said. "Good. Now I will tell you two things no woman hears until she stands where you do. Once you begin, you must go on to the end. Refuse at any point, and you will be put out of the Tower just as if you had refused to begin for the third time. Second. To seek, to strive, is to know danger." She sounded as if she had said this many times. There was a light of sympathy in her eyes, but her face was almost as stern as Elaida's. The sympathy frightened Egwene more than the sternness. "Some women have entered, and never come out. When the ter'angreal was allowed to grow quiet, they - were - not - there. And they were never seen again. If you will survive, you must be steadfast. Falter, fail, and. . . ."Sheriam's face drove the unspoken words home; Egwene shivered. "This is your last chance. Refuse now, and it counts only as the first. You may still try twice more. If you accept now, there is no turning back. It is no shame to refuse. I could not do it, my first time. Choose."

ðeɪ nɛvɝ keɪm aʊt? ɛɡwin swɑloʊd hɑɹd. aɪ wɑnə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən fɝst aɪ hæv tə bɪkʌm æksɛptɪd. "aɪ æksɛpt."

They never came out? Egwene swallowed hard. I want to be Aes Sedai. And first I have to become Accepted. "I accept."

ʃɛɹiəm nɑɾəd. "ðɛn ɹɛɾi jɝsɛlf."

Sheriam nodded. "Then ready yourself."

ɛɡwin blɪŋkt, ðən ɹɪmɛmbɝd. ʃi hæd tə ɛntɝ ənkloʊðd. ʃi bɛn tə sɛt daʊn ðə taɪd bʌndəl ə peɪpɝz vɛɹɪn hæd ɡɪvən əɹ - ən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ɪf ʃi lɛft əm ðɛɹ, ʃɛɹiəm əɹ ɪleɪɾə iðɝ wʌn kəd ɡoʊ θɹu ðɛm waɪl ʃi wɑz ɪnsaɪd ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ðeɪ kəd faɪn ðət smɔlɝ tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɪn əɹ paʊtʃ. ɪf ʃi ɹəfjuz tə ɡoʊ ɑn, ʃi kəd haɪɾ əm əweɪ, pɝhæps liv əm wɪð nɪneɪiv. hɝ bɹɛθ kɑt. aɪ kænɑt ɹɛfjus naʊ. aɪv ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡʌn.

Egwene blinked, then remembered. She had to enter unclothed. She bent to set down the tied bundle of papers Verin had given her - and hesitated. If she left them there, Sheriam or Elaida either one could go through them while she was inside the ter'angreal. They could find that smaller ter'angreal in her pouch. If she refused to go on, she could hide them away, perhaps leave them with Nynaeve. Her breath caught. I cannot refuse now. I've already begun.

"hæv jə ɔlɹɛɾi tʃoʊzən tə ɹəfjuz, tʃaɪld?" ʃɛɹiəm æskt, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "noʊɪŋ wʌt ðət wɪl min, naʊ?"

"Have you already chosen to refuse, child?" Sheriam asked, frowning. "Knowing what that will mean, now?"

"noʊ, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd kwɪkli. heɪstəli ʃi ənʒɹəst ən foʊldəɾ əɹ kloʊðz, ðən sɛɾ əm ɑn tɑp ə ðə paʊtʃ ən ðə peɪpɝz. ɪt wəɾ əv tə du.

"No, Aes Sedai," Egwene said quickly. Hastily she undressed and folded her clothes, then set them on top of the pouch and the papers. It would have to do.

bɪsaɪd ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ɑlɑnə sʌɾənli spoʊk. "ðɛɹ ɪz səm sɔɹɾ ʌv - ɹɛzənəns." ʃi nɛvɝ tʊk əɹ aɪz fɹəm ði ɑɹtʃəz. "æn ɛkoʊ, ɔlmoʊst. aɪ də nɑt noʊ fɹəm wɛɹ."

Beside the ter'angreal, Alanna suddenly spoke. "There is some sort of - resonance." She never took her eyes from the arches. "An echo, almost. I do not know from where."

"ɪz ðəɹ ə pɹɑbləm?" ʃɛɹiəm æskt ʃɑɹpli. ʃi saʊndəd sɝpɹaɪzd, tu. "aɪ wɪl nɑt sɛn ə wʊmən ɪn ðəɹ ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ɛni pɹɑbləm."

"Is there a problem?" Sheriam asked sharply. She sounded surprised, too. "I will not send a woman in there if there is any problem."

ɛɡwin lʊk jɝnɪŋli əɾ əɹ paɪl kloʊðz. pliz, jɛs, laɪt, ə pɹɑbləm. sʌmθɪŋ ðət wɪl lemi haɪd ðoʊz peɪpɝz wɪθaʊt ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə ɛntɝ.

Egwene looked yearningly at her piled clothes. Please, yes, Light, a problem. Something that will let me hide those papers without refusing to enter.

"noʊ," ɑlɑnə sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz laɪk hævɪŋ ə baɪtim bʌz 'ɹaʊn jəɹ hɛd wən jəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə θɪŋk, bʌɾ ɪt dʌz nɑɾ ɪntɝfɪɹ. aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv mɛnʃən ɪt, oʊnli ɪts nɛvɝ hæpən bɪfɔɹ ðəɾ aɪ ɛvɝ hɝd." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz ɡɔn naʊ."

"No," Alanna said. "It is like having a biteme buzz 'round your head when you're trying to think, but it does not interfere. I would not have mentioned it, only it has never happened before that I ever heard." She shook her head. "It is gone now."

"pɝhæps," ɪleɪɾə sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "ʌðɝz θɔt sətʃ ə smɔl θɪŋ wɑz nɑt wɝθ mɛnʃənɪŋ."

"Perhaps," Elaida said dryly, "others thought such a small thing was not worth mentioning."

"lɛɾ əs ɡoʊ ɑn." ʃɛɹiəmz toʊn wəd nɑt pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɛni mɔɹ dɪstʃɹækʃənz. "kʌm."

"Let us go on." Sheriam's tone would not put up with any more distractions. "Come."

wɪð ə læst ɡlæns əɾ əɹ kloʊðz ən ðə hɪɾən peɪpɝz, ɛɡwin fɑloʊɾ əɹ təwɔɹd ði ɑɹtʃəz. ðə stoʊn fɛlt laɪk aɪs ʌndɝ əɹ bɛɹ fit.

With a last glance at her clothes and the hidden papers, Egwene followed her toward the arches. The stone felt like ice under her bare feet.

"hum dʒju bɹɪŋ wɪð ju, sɪstɝ?" ɪleɪɾə ɪntoʊnd.

"Whom do you bring with you, Sister?" Elaida intoned.

kəntɪnjuɪŋ əɹ mɛʒɝd peɪs, ʃɛɹiəm ɹɪplaɪd, "wʌn u kʌmz əz ə kændəɾeɪt fəɹ æksɛptəns, sɪstɝ." ðə θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɝaʊn ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil dɪd nɑt muv.

Continuing her measured pace, Sheriam replied, "One who comes as a candidate for Acceptance, Sister." The three Aes Sedai around the ter'angreal did not move.

"ɪz ʃi ɹɛɾi?"

"Is she ready?"

"ʃi ɪz ɹɛɾi tə liv bɪhaɪnd wʌt ʃi wɑz, ænd, pæsɪŋ θɹu hɝ fɪɹz, ɡeɪn æksɛptəns."

"She is ready to leave behind what she was, and, passing through her fears, gain Acceptance."

"dʌz ʃi noʊ hɝ fɪɹz?"

"Does she know her fears?"

"ʃi hæz nɛvɝ feɪs ðɛm, bʌt naʊ ɪz wɪlɪŋ."

"She has never faced them, but now is willing."

"ðɛn lɛɾ əɹ feɪs wʌt ʃi fɪɹz." ivən ɪn ɪts fɔɹmæləɾi, ðəɹ wɑz ə noʊɾ ə sæɾəsfækʃən ɪn ɪleɪɾəz vɔɪs.

"Then let her face what she fears." Even in its formality, there was a note of satisfaction in Elaida's voice.

"ðə fɝs taɪm," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd, "ɪz fəɹ wʌt wɑz. ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst."

"The first time," Sheriam said, "is for what was. The way back will come but once. Be steadfast."

ɛɡwin tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən stɛp fɔɹwɝd, θɹu ði ɑɹtʃ ən ɪndə ðə ɡloʊ. laɪt swɑloʊɾ əɹ hoʊl.

Egwene took a deep breath and stepped forward, through the arch and into the glow. Light swallowed her whole.

"dʒeɪm dɔtʃɹi dʒɹɑp baɪ. ðɛɹz ɑd nuz daʊn fɹəm bɛɹlən wɪð ðə pɛdlɝ."

"Jaim Dawtry dropped by. There's odd news down from Baerlon with the peddler."

ɛɡwin ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd fɹəm ðə kɹeɪɾəl ʃi wɑz ɹɑkɪŋ. ɹænd wɑz stændɪŋ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ. fəɹ ən ɪnstən əɹ hɛd spʌn. ʃi lʊk fɹəm ɹænd - maɪ hʌzbənd - tə ðə tʃaɪld ɪn ðə kɹeɪɾəl - maɪ dɔɾɝ - ən bæk əɡɛn, ɪn wʌndɝ.

Egwene raised her head from the cradle she was rocking. Rand was standing in the doorway. For an instant her head spun. She looked from Rand - my husband - to the child in the cradle - my daughter - and back again, in wonder.

ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst.

The way back will come but once. Be steadfast.

ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əɹ oʊn θɔt, bʌɾ ə dɪsɪbɑɾid vɔɪs ðət cʊɾə bɪn ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ hɛɾ əɹ aʊt, meɪl əɹ fimeɪl, jɛɾ ɪmoʊʃənləs ən ənnoʊəbəl. sʌmhaʊ, ɪt dɪd nɑt sim stʃɹeɪnʒ tə hɝ.

It was not her own thought, but a disembodied voice that could have been inside her head or out, male or female, yet emotionless and unknowable. Somehow, it did not seem strange to her.

ðə moʊmən ʌv wʌndɝ pæst, ən ði oʊnli θɪŋ tə wʌndɝ əbaʊt wɑz waɪ ʃi hæd θɔɾ ɛniθɪŋ simd aʊɾ ə ɹaʊnd. ʌv kɔɹs ɹænd wɑz əɹ hʌzbənd - hɝ hænsəm, lʌvɪŋ hʌzbənd - ən dʒɔɪjə wɑz əɹ dɔɾɝ - ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl, swiɾəst lɪɾəl ɡɝl ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. tæm, ɹændz fɑðɝ, wɑz aʊt wɪð ðə ʃip, səpoʊzədli soʊ ɹænd kəd wɝk ɑn ðə bɑɹn bʌt ɹɪli soʊ hi kəɾ əv mɔɹ taɪm tə pleɪ wɪð dʒɔɪjə. ðɪs æftɝnun ɛɡwinz mʌðɝ ən fɑðɝ wəd kʌm aʊt fɹəm ðə vɪlədʒ. ən pɹɑbli nɪneɪiv, tə si ɪf mʌðɝhʊd wɑz ɪntɝfɪɹɪŋ wɪð ɛɡwinz stʌɾiz tə ɹipleɪs nɪneɪiv əz wɪzdəm wʌn deɪ.

The moment of wonder passed, and the only thing to wonder about was why she had thought anything seemed out of round. Of course Rand was her husband - her handsome, loving husband - and Joiya was her daughter - the most beautiful, sweetest little girl in the Two Rivers. Tam, Rand's father, was out with the sheep, supposedly so Rand could work on the barn but really so he could have more time to play with Joiya. This afternoon Egwene's mother and father would come out from the village. And probably Nynaeve, to see if motherhood was interfering with Egwene's studies to replace Nynaeve as Wisdom one day.

"wʌt kaɪndə nuz?" ʃi æskt. ʃi tʊk ʌp ɹɑkɪŋ ðə kɹeɪɾəl əɡɛn, ən ɹænd keɪm oʊvɝ tə ɡɹɪn daʊn ət ðə taɪni tʃaɪld ɹæpt ɪn swɑɾəlɪŋ kloʊðz. ɛɡwin læf sɔfli tə hɝsɛlf. hi wɑz soʊ teɪkən wɪð ɪz dɔɾɝ ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt hɪɹ wʌt pipəl sɛd tə hɪm hæf ðə taɪm. "ɹænd? wʌt kaɪndə nuz? ɹænd?"

"What kind of news?" she asked. She took up rocking the cradle again, and Rand came over to grin down at the tiny child wrapped in swaddling clothes. Egwene laughed softly to herself. He was so taken with his daughter that he did not hear what people said to him half the time. "Rand? What kind of news? Rand?"

"wʌt?" hɪz ɡɹɪn feɪɾəd. "stʃɹeɪnʒ nuz. wɔɹ. ðɛɹz səm bɪɡ wɔɹ, teɪkɪŋ ʌp moʊst ə ðə wɝld, soʊ dʒeɪm kleɪmz." ðət wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒ nuz; wɝɾ ʌv wɔɹz sɛldəm ɹitʃt ðə tu ɹɪvɝz tɪl ðə wɔɹz wɝ lɔŋ dʌn. "hi sɛz ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪz faɪɾɪŋ səm foʊk kɔl ðə ʃɔkɪn, əɹ ðə sɑntʃæn, əɹ sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðæt. aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə ðɛm."

"What?" His grin faded. "Strange news. War. There's some big war, taking up most of the world, so Jaim claims." That was strange news; word of wars seldom reached the Two Rivers till the wars were long done. "He says everybody is fighting some folk called the Shawkin, or the Sanchan, or something like that. I never heard of them."

ɛɡwin nu - ʃi θɔt ʃi nu - wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz, wɑz ɡɔn.

Egwene knew - she thought she knew - Whatever it was, was gone.

"ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt?" hi æskt. "ɪts nʌθɪŋ tə əpsɛɾ əs hɪɹ, maɪ hɑɹt. wɔɹz nɛvɝ tʌtʃ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. wəɹ tu fɑɹ fɹəm ɛvɹiwɛɹ fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə kɛɹ."

"Are you all right?" he asked. "It's nothing to upset us here, my heart. Wars never touch the Two Rivers. We are too far from everywhere for anyone to care."

"aɪm nɑɾ əpsɛt. dɪd dʒeɪm seɪ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls?"

"I'm not upset. Did Jaim say anything else?"

"nʌθɪŋ jə kən bɪliv. hi saʊndəd laɪk ə kɑplɪn. hi sɛd ðə pɛdlɝ toʊld ɪm ðiz pipəl juz ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn bæɾəl, bʌt ðən i kleɪm ðeɪ ɔfɝ ə θaʊzənd ɡoʊl mɑɹks tə ɛniwʌn u tɝnz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ oʊvɝ tə ðɛm. ən ðeɪ kɪl ɛnibəɾi hu haɪdz wʌn. ɪt meɪks noʊ sɛns. wɛl, ɪts nʌθɪŋ tə tʃɹʌbəl ʌs. ɪts ɔl ə lɔŋ weɪ fɹəm hɪɹ."

"Nothing you can believe. He sounded like a Coplin. He said the peddler told him these people use Aes Sedai in battle, but then he claimed they offer a thousand gold marks to anyone who turns an Aes Sedai over to them. And they kill anybody who hides one. It makes no sense. Well, it's nothing to trouble us. It is all a long way from here."

ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɛɡwin tʌtʃt əɹ hɛd. ðə weɪ bæk kʌmz bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst.

Aes Sedai. Egwene touched her head. The way back comes but once. Be steadfast.

ʃi noʊɾəst ɹænd hæɾ ə hæn tə hɪz oʊn hɛd. "ðə hɛdeɪks?" ʃi æskt.

She noticed Rand had a hand to his own head. "The headaches?" she asked.

hi nɑɾəd, hɪz aɪz sʌɾənli taɪt. "ðæt paʊɾɝ nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv mi dʌzn sim tə bi wɝkɪŋ ðə læs fju deɪz."

He nodded, his eyes suddenly tight. "That powder Nynaeve gave me doesn't seem to be working the last few days."

ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ðiz hɛdeɪks ə hɪz wɝid hɝ. ðeɪ ɡɹu wɝs ɛvɹi taɪm ðeɪ keɪm, naʊ. ən wɝst ʌv ɔl wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʃi hæd nɑt noʊɾəst ət fɝst, sʌmθɪŋ ʃi ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt ʃi nɛvɝ hæd noʊɾəst. wən ɹændz hɛd hɝt, stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz hæpən sun æftɝ. laɪtnɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə klɪɹ skaɪ, smæʃɪŋ tə bɪts ðət hjudʒ oʊk stʌmp i hæd bɪn wɝkɪŋ tu deɪz tə ɹuɾ aʊt wɛɹ i ən tæm wɝ klɪɹɪŋ nu fild. stɔɹmz ðət nɪneɪiv dɪd nɑt hɪɹ kʌmɪŋ wən ʃi lɪsən tə ðə wɪnd. waɪldfaɪɝz ɪn ðə fɔɹəst. ən ðə dipɝ ɪz peɪn ɡɹu, ðə wɝs wʌt fɑloʊd. noʊ wʌn ɛls hæd kənɛktəd ðiz θɪŋz tə ɹænd, nɑɾ ivən nɪneɪiv, ən ɛɡwin wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ ðæt. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt wʌɾ ɪt maɪt min.

She hesitated. These headaches of his worried her. They grew worse every time they came, now. And worst of all was something she had not noticed at first, something she almost wished she never had noticed. When Rand's head hurt, strange things happened soon after. Lightning out of a clear sky, smashing to bits that huge oak stump he had been working two days to root out where he and Tam were clearing new field. Storms that Nynaeve did not hear coming when she listened to the wind. Wildfires in the forest. And the deeper his pain grew, the worse what followed. No one else had connected these things to Rand, not even Nynaeve, and Egwene was grateful for that. She did not want to think about what it might mean.

ðəɾ ɪz pleɪn stupəd fulɪʃ, ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf. aɪ mʌs noʊ ɪf aɪm gɑnə hɛlp hɪm. kəz ʃi hæɾ ə sikɹəɾ ə hɝ oʊn, wʌn ðət fɹaɪɾənd əɹ ivən əz ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə pʌzəl aʊt wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt. nɪneɪiv wɑz titʃɪŋ əɹ ði ɝbz, titʃɪŋ ɛɡwin tə fɑloʊ hɝ əz wɪzdəm, wʌn deɪ. nɪneɪivz kjʊɹz ɔfən wɝkt ɪn nɪɹ mɝækjələs fæʃən, wunz hild wɪð bɛɹli ə skɑɹ, sɪk foʊk bɹɔt bæk fɹəm ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɡɹeɪv. bʌt θɹi taɪmz naʊ, ɛɡwin hæd kjʊɹd sʌmwʌn nɪneɪiv hæd ɡɪvən ʌp fəɹ dɛd. θɹi taɪmz ʃi hæd sæt tə hoʊld ə hæn θɹu ðə læst aʊɝ, ən sin ðə pɝsən ɡɛɾ ʌp fɹəm ə dɛθbɛd. nɪneɪiv hæd kwɛstʃən əɹ kloʊsli ɑn wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn, wʌɾ ɝbz ʃi hæd juzd, ɪn wʌt blɛndɪŋ. ðʌs fɑɹ, ʃi hæd nɑt faʊn ðə kɝədʒ tə ədmɪt ðət ʃi hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ. aɪ mʌst əv dʌn sʌmθɪŋ. wʌns maɪt bi tʃæns, bʌt θɹi taɪmz. . . . aɪ hæv tə fɪɡjɝ ɪɾ aʊt. aɪ hæv tə lɝn. ðət sɛɾ ɔf ə bʌz ɪn əɹ hɛd, əz ðoʊ ðə wɝdz wɝ ɛkoʊɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ skʌl. ɪf aɪ kəd də sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ ðɛm, aɪ kən hɛlp maɪ hʌzbənd.

That is plain stupid foolish, she told herself. I must know if I am going to help him. Because she had a secret of her own, one that frightened her even as she tried to puzzle out what it meant. Nynaeve was teaching her the herbs, teaching Egwene to follow her as Wisdom, one day. Nynaeve's cures often worked in near miraculous fashion, wounds healed with barely a scar, sick folk brought back from the edge of the grave. But three times now, Egwene had cured someone Nynaeve had given up for dead. Three times she had sat to hold a hand through the last hour, and seen the person get up from a deathbed. Nynaeve had questioned her closely on what she had done, what herbs she had used, in what blending. Thus far, she had not found the courage to admit that she had done nothing. I must have done something. Once might be chance, but three times. . . . I have to figure it out. I have to learn. That set off a buzz in her head, as though the words were echoing inside her skull. If I could do something for them, I can help my husband.

"lɛt mi tʃɹaɪ, ɹænd," ʃi sɛd. ən əz ʃi stʊd, θɹu ði oʊpən dɔɹ, ʃi sɔ ə sɪlvɝ ɑɹtʃ stændɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə haʊs, ən ɑɹtʃ fɪld wɪð waɪt laɪt. ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst. ʃi tʊk tu stɛps təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd stɑp hɝsɛlf.

"Let me try, Rand," she said. And as she stood, through the open door, she saw a silver arch standing in front of the house, an arch filled with white light. The way back will come but once. Be steadfast. She took two steps toward the door before she could stop herself.

ʃi hɔltəd, lʊk bæk ət dʒɔɪjə ɡɝɡəlɪŋ ɪn əɹ kɹeɪɾəl, ət ɹænd stɪl pɹɛsɪŋ hæn tə hɪz hɛɾ ən lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ əz ɪf wʌndɝɪŋ wɛɹ ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ. "noʊ," ʃi sɛd. "noʊ, ðɪs ɪz wʌɾ aɪ wɑnt. ðɪs ɪz wʌɾ aɪ wɑnt! waɪ kæn aɪ hæv ðɪs, tu?" ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn əɹ oʊn wɝdz. ʌv kɔɹs, ðɪs wɑz wʌt ʃi wɑntəd, ən ʃi hæɾ ɪt.

She halted, looked back at Joiya gurgling in her cradle, at Rand still pressing hand to his head and looking at her as if wondering where she was going. "No," she said. "No, this is what I want. This is what I want! Why can't I have this, too?" She did not understand her own words. Of course, this was what she wanted, and she had it.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə wɑnt, ɛɡwin?" ɹænd æskt. "ɪf ɪts ɛniθɪŋ aɪ kən ɡɛt, jə noʊ aɪ wɪl. ɪf aɪ kænt ɡɛɾ ɪt, əl meɪk ɪt."

"What is it you want, Egwene?" Rand asked. "If it's anything I can get, you know I will. If I can't get it, I'll make it."

ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst.

The way back will come but once. Be steadfast.

ʃi tʊk ənʌðɝ stɛp, ɪndə ðə dɔɹweɪ. ðə sɪlvɝ ɑɹtʃ bɛkən hɝ. sʌmθɪŋ weɪɾəd ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. sʌmθɪŋ ʃi wɑntəd mɔɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ɪn ðə wɝld. sʌmθɪŋ ʃi hæd tə du.

She took another step, into the doorway. The silver arch beckoned her. Something waited on the other side. Something she wanted more than anything else in the world. Something she had to do.

"ɛɡwin, aɪ - "

"Egwene, I - "

ðəɹ wɑz ə θʌmp bɪhaɪn hɝ. ʃi lʊkt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ tə si ɹænd ɑn ɪz niz, baʊɾ ən hɛd kɹæɾəld ɪn ɪz hænz. ðə peɪn hæd nɛvɝ hɪɾ ɪm soʊ hɑɹd. wʌt wɪl kʌm æftɝ ðɪs?

There was a thump behind her. She looked over her shoulder to see Rand on his knees, bowed and head cradled in his hands. The pain had never hit him so hard. What will come after this?

"ɑ, laɪt!" hi pæntɪd. "laɪt! hɝts! laɪt, ɪt hɝts wɝs ðən ɛvɝ! ɛɡwin?"

"Ah, Light!" he panted. "Light! Hurts! Light, it hurts worse than ever! Egwene?"

bi stɛdfæst.

Be steadfast.

ɪt wɑz weɪɾɪŋ. sʌmθɪŋ ʃi hæd tə du. hæd tə. ʃi tʊk ə stɛp. ɪt wɑz hɑɹd, hɑɹɾɝ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ dʌn ɪn əɹ laɪf. aʊtsaɪd, təwɔɹd ði ɑɹtʃ. bɪhaɪn hɝ, dʒɔɪjə wɑz læfɪŋ.

It was waiting. Something she had to do. Had to. She took a step. It was hard, harder than anything she had ever done in her life. Outside, toward the arch. Behind her, Joiya was laughing.

"ɛɡwin? ɛɡwin, aɪ kænt - " hi kʌɾ ɔf wɪð ə laʊd ɡɹoʊn.

"Egwene? Egwene, I can't - " He cut off with a loud groan.

stɛdfæst.

Steadfast.

ʃi stɪfən əɹ bæk ən kɛpt wɔkɪŋ, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt kip ðə tɪɹz fɹəm ɹoʊlɪŋ daʊn əɹ tʃiks. ɹændz ɡɹoʊnz bɪl tə ə skɹim, dʒɹaʊnɪŋ dʒɔɪjəz læftɝ. fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ, ɛɡwin sɔ tæm kʌmɪŋ, ɹʌnɪŋ əz hɑɹɾ əz i kʊd.

She stiffened her back and kept walking, but she could not keep the tears from rolling down her cheeks. Rand's groans built to a scream, drowning Joiya's laughter. From the corner of her eye, Egwene saw Tam coming, running as hard as he could.

hi kæn hɛlp, ʃi θɔt, ən tɪɹz bɪkeɪm ɹækɪŋ sɑbz. ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ i kən du. bʌɾ aɪ kʊd. aɪ kʊd.

He can't help, she thought, and tears became wracking sobs. There is nothing he can do. But I could. I could.

ʃi stɛpt ɪndə ðə laɪt, ən wɑz kənsumd.

She stepped into the light, and was consumed.

tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ ən sɑbɪŋ, ɛɡwin stɛpt aʊɾ ə ði ɑɹtʃ, ðə seɪm baɪ wɪtʃ ʃi hæɾ ɛntɝd, mɛmɹi kæskeɪɾɪŋ bæk wɪð ʃɛɹiəmz feɪs kənfɹʌntɪŋ hɝ. koʊl klɪɹ wɔɾɝ wɑʃt əweɪ hɝ tɪɹz əz ɪleɪɾə sloʊli ɛmptiɾ ə sɪlvɝ tʃælɪs oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd. hɝ wipɪŋ wɛn ɑn; ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt wəɾ ɛvɝ ɛnd.

Trembling and sobbing, Egwene stepped out of the arch, the same by which she had entered, memory cascading back with Sheriam's face confronting her. Cold clear water washed away her tears as Elaida slowly emptied a silver chalice over her head. Her weeping went on; she did not think it would ever end.

"ju ɑɹ wɑʃt klin," ɪleɪɾə pɹənaʊnst, "ʌv wʌt sɪn jə meɪ hæv dʌn, ən ə ðoʊz dʌn əɡɛns ju. jə ɑɹ wɑʃt klin ʌv wʌt kɹaɪm jə meɪ hæv kəmɪɾəd, ən ə ðoʊz kəmɪɾəd əɡɛns ju. jə kʌm tə əs wɑʃt klin ən pjʊɹ, ɪn hɑɹɾ ən soʊl."

"You are washed clean," Elaida pronounced, "of what sin you may have done, and of those done against you. You are washed clean of what crime you may have committed, and of those committed against you. You come to us washed clean and pure, in heart and soul."

laɪt, ɛɡwin θɔɾ əz ðə wɔɾɝ ɹæn daʊn əɹ bɑɾi, lɛɾ ɪt bi soʊ. kən wɔɾɝ wɑʃ əweɪ wʌɾ aɪ dɪd? "hɝ neɪm wɑz dʒɔɪjə," ʃi toʊld ʃɛɹiəm bɪtwin sɑbz. "dʒɔɪjə. nʌθɪŋ kən bi wɝθ wʌɾ aɪ dʒʌst . . . wʌɾ aɪ. . . ."

Light, Egwene thought as the water ran down her body, let it be so. Can water wash away what I did? "Her name was Joiya," she told Sheriam between sobs. "Joiya. Nothing can be worth what I just . . . what I. . . ."

"ðɛɹ ɪz ə pɹaɪs tə bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃɛɹiəm ɹɪplaɪd, bʌt ðə sɪmpəθi wɑz bæk ɪn əɹ aɪz, stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ. "ðɛɹ ɪz ɔlweɪz ə pɹaɪs."

"There is a price to become Aes Sedai," Sheriam replied, but the sympathy was back in her eyes, stronger than before. "There is always a price."

"wɑz ɪt ɹil? dɪɾ aɪ dʒɹim ɪt?" wipɪŋ swɑloʊd wʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə seɪ. dɪɾ aɪ liv ɪm tə daɪ? dɪɾ aɪ liv maɪ beɪbi?

"Was it real? Did I dream it?" Weeping swallowed what she wanted to say. Did I leave him to die? Did I leave my baby?

ʃɛɹiəm pʊɾ ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, bɪɡæn ɡaɪɾɪŋ əɹ ɝaʊn ðə sɝkəl ʌv ɑɹtʃəz. "ɛvɹi wʊmən aɪ hæv ɛvɝ wɑtʃt kʌm aʊɾ ə ðəɹ əz æsk ðət kwɛstʃən. ði ænsɝ ɪz, noʊ wʌn noʊz. ɪts bɪn spɛkjəleɪɾəd ðət pɝhæps səm ə ðoʊz u də nɑt kʌm bæk tʃoʊz tə steɪ kəz ðeɪ faʊn ə hæpiɝ pleɪs, ən lɪvd aʊt ðɛɹ lɪvz ðɛɹ." hɝ vɔɪs hɑɹɾənd. "ɪf ɪts ɹil, ən ðeɪ steɪd fɹəm tʃɔɪs, ðən aɪ hoʊp ðə laɪvz ðeɪ lɪv ɑɹ fɑɹ fɹəm hæpi. aɪ hæv noʊ sɪmpəθi fəɹ ɛni hu ɹʌn fɹəm ðɛɹ ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾiz." ði ɛdʒ ɑn əɹ toʊn sɔfən slaɪtli. "maɪsɛlf, aɪ bɪliv ɪts nɑt ɹil. bʌt ðə deɪnʒɝ ɪz. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt." ʃi stɑpt ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə nɛkst ɡloʊ-fɪld ɑɹtʃ. "ɑɹ jə ɹɛɾi?"

Sheriam put an arm around her shoulders, began guiding her around the circle of arches. "Every woman I have ever watched come out of there has asked that question. The answer is, no one knows. It has been speculated that perhaps some of those who do not come back chose to stay because they found a happier place, and lived out their lives there." Her voice hardened. "If it is real, and they stayed from choice, then I hope the lives they live are far from happy. I have no sympathy for any who run from their responsibilities." The edge on her tone softened slightly. "Myself, I believe it is not real. But the danger is. Remember that." She stopped in front of the next glow-filled arch. "Are you ready?"

ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ fit, ɛɡwin nɑɾəd, ən ʃɛɹiəm tʊk əɹ ɑɹm əweɪ.

Shifting her feet, Egwene nodded, and Sheriam took her arm away.

"ðə sɛkən taɪm ɪz fəɹ wʌɾ ɪz. ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst."

"The second time is for what is. The way back will come but once. Be steadfast."

ɛɡwin tʃɹɛmbəld. wʌtɛvɝ hæpənz, ɪt kænɑt bi wɝs ðən ðə læst. ɪt kænɑt bi. ʃi stɛpt ɪndə ðə ɡloʊ.

Egwene trembled. Whatever happens, it cannot be worse than the last. It cannot be. She stepped into the glow.

ʃi stɛɹd daʊn əɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs, blu sɪlk soʊn wɪð pɝlz, ɔl dʌsti ən tɔɹn. hɝ hɛd keɪm ʌp, ən ʃi tʊk ɪn ðə ɹuənz ʌv ə ɡɹeɪt pæləs ɝaʊn hɝ. ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ʌv ændɝ, ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ʃi nu ðæt, ən wɑntəd tə skɹim.

She stared down at her dress, blue silk sewn with pearls, all dusty and torn. Her head came up, and she took in the ruins of a great palace around her. The Royal Palace of Andor, in Caemlyn. She knew that, and wanted to scream.

ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst.

The way back will come but once. Be steadfast.

ðə wɝld wɑz nɑt ðə weɪ ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪt, noʊ weɪ ðət ʃi kəd θɪŋk ʌv wɪθaʊt wɑntɪŋ tə kɹaɪ, bʌɾ ɔl əɹ tɪɹz hæd bɪn kɹaɪɾ əweɪ lɔŋ əɡoʊ, ən ðə wɝld wɑz əz ɪt wɑz. ɹuən wɑz wʌt ʃi ɪkspɛktəd tə si.

The world was not the way she wanted it, no way that she could think of without wanting to cry, but all her tears had been cried away long ago, and the world was as it was. Ruin was what she expected to see.

kɛɹləs ə meɪkɪŋ mɔɹ ɹɪps ɪn əɹ dʒɹɛs bʌɾ əz kɛɹfəl ə saʊn əz ə maʊs, ʃi klaɪmd wʌn ə ðə paɪlz ə ɹʌbəl ən pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə kɝvɪŋ stʃɹits ə ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi. əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kəd si ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən leɪ ɹuən ən dɛsəleɪʃən, bɪldɪŋz ðət lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn tɔɹn əpɑɹt baɪ mædmən, θɪk plumz ə smoʊk ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə faɪɝz stɪl bɝnɪŋ. ðəɹ wɝ pipəl ɪn ðə stʃɹits, bænz ʌv ɑɹmd mɛn pɹaʊlɪŋ, sɝtʃɪŋ. ən tʃɹɑləks. ðə mɛn ʃaɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑləks, ən ðə tʃɹɑləks snɑɹəld əɾ əm ən læft, hɑɹʃ ɡʌɾɝəl læftɝ. bʌt ðeɪ nu itʃ ʌðɝ, wɝk təɡɛðɝ.

Careless of making more rips in her dress but as careful of sound as a mouse, she climbed one of the piles of rubble and peered into the curving streets of the Inner City. As far as she could see in every direction lay ruin and desolation, buildings that looked as if they had been torn apart by madmen, thick plumes of smoke rising from the fires still burning. There were people in the streets, bands of armed men prowling, searching. And Trollocs. The men shied away from the Trollocs, and the Trollocs snarled at them and laughed, harsh guttural laughter. But they knew each other, worked together.

eɪ mɹdʒɹɑl keɪm stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ daʊn ðə stʃɹit, ɪts blæk kloʊk sweɪɪŋ dʒɛnli wɪð ɪts stɛps ivən wən ðə wɪnd ɡʌstɪd tə dʒɹaɪv dʌst ən ɹʌbɪʃ pæst ɪt. mɛn ən tʃɹɑləks əlaɪk kaʊɝɾ ʌndɝ ɪts aɪləs stɛɹ. "hʌnt!" ɪts vɔɪs saʊndəd laɪk sʌmθɪŋ lɔŋ dɛd kɹʌmbəlɪŋ. "du nɑt stæn ðəɹ ʃɪvɝɪŋ! faɪn hɪm!"

A Myrddraal came striding down the street, its black cloak swaying gently with its steps even when the wind gusted to drive dust and rubbish past it. Men and Trollocs alike cowered under its eyeless stare. "Hunt!" Its voice sounded like something long dead crumbling. "Do not stand there shivering! Find him!"

ɛɡwin slɪp bæk daʊn ðə paɪl ə dʒʌmbəl stoʊnz əz saɪlənli əz ʃi kʊd.

Egwene slipped back down the pile of jumbled stones as silently as she could.

ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst.

The way back will come but once. Be steadfast.

ʃi stɑpt, əfɹeɪd ðə wɪspɝ hæd kʌm fɹəm ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. ɪn səm weɪ, ðoʊ, ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt hæd nɑt. ɡlænsɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, hæf fɪɹfəl ə siɪŋ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl stændɪŋ wɛɹ ʃi hæd dʒʌs bɪn, ʃi hɝiɾ ɔnwɝɾ ən ɪndə ðə ɹuən pæləs, klaɪmɪŋ oʊvɝ fɔlən tɪmbɝz, skwizɪŋ bɪtwin hɛvi blɑks ə kəlæps meɪsənɹi əz ʃi meɪɾ əɹ weɪ. wʌns ʃi stɛpt ɑn ə wʊmənz ɑɹm, stɪkɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ə maʊn ə plæstɝ ən bɹɪks ðət hæd bɪn ən ɪntɪɹiɝ wɔl ən pɝhæps pɑɹɾ ə ðə flɔɹ əbʌv. ʃi noʊɾəst ði ɑɹm əz lɪɾəl əz ʃi noʊɾəst ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn wʌn fɪŋɡɝ. ʃi hæd tʃɹeɪn hɝsɛlf nɑt tə si ðə dɛd bɛɹiɾ ɪn ðə ɹɛfjus hip tʃɹɑləks ən dɑɹkfɹɛnz hæd meɪɾ ə keɪɛmlɪn. ʃi kəd də nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ðə dɛd.

She stopped, afraid the whisper had come from Shadowspawn. In some way, though, she was sure it had not. Glancing back over her shoulder, half fearful of seeing the Myrddraal standing where she had just been, she hurried onward and into the ruined palace, climbing over fallen timbers, squeezing between heavy blocks of collapsed masonry as she made her way. Once she stepped on a woman's arm, sticking out from under a mound of plaster and bricks that had been an interior wall and perhaps part of the floor above. She noticed the arm as little as she noticed the Great Serpent ring on one finger. She had trained herself not to see the dead buried in the refuse heap Trollocs and Darkfriends had made of Caemlyn. She could do nothing for the dead.

fɔɹsɪŋ əɹ weɪ θɹu ə nɛɹoʊ ɡæp wɛɹ pɑɹɾ ə ðə silɪŋ hæd fɔlən, ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf ɪn ə ɹum hæf bɛɹiɾ ʌndɝ wʌt hæd stʊɾ əbʌv ɪt. ɹænd leɪ wɪð ə hɛvi bim pɪnɪŋ ɪm əkɹɔs ðə weɪst, hɪz lɛɡz hɪɾən bɪniθ ðə stoʊn blɑks ðət fɪl hæf ðə ɹum. dʌst ən swɛt koʊɾəd ɪz feɪs. hi oʊpən ɪz aɪz wən ʃi keɪm nɪɹ hɪm.

Forcing her way through a narrow gap where part of the ceiling had fallen, she found herself in a room half buried under what had stood above it. Rand lay with a heavy beam pinning him across the waist, his legs hidden beneath the stone blocks that filled half the room. Dust and sweat coated his face. He opened his eyes when she came near him.

"ju keɪm bæk." hi fɔɹs ðə wɝdz aʊɾ ɪn ə hɔɹs ɹæsp. "aɪ wɑz əfɹeɪd - noʊ mæɾɝ. juv tə hɛlp mi."

"You came back." He forced the words out in a hoarse rasp. "I was afraid - No matter. You have to help me."

ʃi sæŋk wɛɹəli tə ðə flɔɹ. "aɪ kəd lɪf ðət bim izəli wɪð ɛɹ, bʌɾ əz sun əz ɪt muvz, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls wɪl kʌm daʊn ɑn tɑp ə ju. ɑn tɑp ə boʊθ ʌv ʌs. aɪ kænɑt mænədʒ ɔl ʌv ɪt, ɹænd."

She sank wearily to the floor. "I could lift that beam easily with Air, but as soon as it moves, everything else will come down on top of you. On top of both of us. I cannot manage all of it, Rand."

hɪz læf wɑz bɪɾɝ ən peɪnfəl, ən kʌɾ ɔf ɔlmoʊst əz sun əz ɪt bɪɡæn. fɹɛʃ swɛt ɡlɪsən ɑn ɪz feɪs, ən i spoʊk wɪð ən ɛfɝt. "aɪ kəd ʃɪf ðə bim maɪsɛlf. jə noʊ ðæt. aɪ kəd ʃɪf ðəɾ ən ðə stoʊnz əbʌv, ɔl ə ðɛm. bʌɾ aɪ hæv tə lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv maɪsɛlf tə də ɪt, ən aɪ kæn tʃɹʌs ðæt. aɪ kænɑt tʃɹʌst - " hi stɑpt, wizɪŋ fəɹ bɹɛθ.

His laugh was bitter and painful, and cut off almost as soon as it began. Fresh sweat glistened on his face, and he spoke with an effort. "I could shift the beam myself. You know that. I could shift that and the stones above, all of them. But I have to let go of myself to do it, and I can't trust that. I cannot trust - " He stopped, wheezing for breath.

"aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd," ʃi sɛd sloʊli. "lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv jɝsɛlf? wʌt kæn jə tʃɹʌst?" ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst. ʃi ɹʌbd əɹ hænz ɹʌfli oʊvɝ əɹ ɪɹz.

"I do not understand," she said slowly. "Let go of yourself? What can't you trust?" The way back will come but once. Be steadfast. She rubbed her hands roughly over her ears.

"ðə mædnəs, ɛɡwin. aɪm - æktʃəli  - hoʊldɪŋ ɪt - ət beɪ." hɪz ɡæspɪŋ læf meɪɾ əɹ skɪn pɹɪkəl. "bʌɾ ɪt teɪks ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ hæv dʒʌs tə də ðæt. ɪf aɪ lɛt ɡoʊ, ivən ə lɪɾəl, ivən fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ðə mædnəs wɪl əv mi. aɪ woʊn kɛɹ wʌɾ aɪ də juv hæv tə hɛlp mi."

"The madness, Egwene. I am - actually - holding it - at bay." His gasping laugh made her skin prickle. "But it takes everything I have just to do that. If I let go, even a little, even for an instant, the madness will have me. I won't care what I do then. You have to help me."

"haʊ, ɹænd! aɪv tʃɹaɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ noʊ. tɛl mi haʊ, ən əl də ɪt."

"How, Rand! I've tried everything I know. Tell me how, and I will do it."

hɪz hæn flɑpt aʊt, fɛl dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə dæɡɝ laɪɪŋ ɪn ðə dʌs bɛɹ-bleɪɾɪd. "ðə dæɡɝ," hi wɪspɝd. hɪz hæn meɪɾ ə peɪnfəl dʒɝni bæk tə hɪz tʃɛst. "hɪɹ. ɪn ðə hɑɹt. kɪl mi."

His hand flopped out, fell just short of a dagger lying in the dust bare-bladed. "The dagger," he whispered. His hand made a painful journey back to his chest. "Here. In the heart. Kill me."

ʃi stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, ət ðə dæɡɝ, əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ pɔɪzənəs sɝpəns. "noʊ! ɹænd, əl nɑt. aɪ kænɑt! haʊ kəd jə æsk sətʃ ə θɪŋ?"

She stared at him, at the dagger, as if they were both poisonous serpents. "No! Rand, I will not. I cannot! How could you ask such a thing?"

sloʊli hɪz hæn kɹɛp bæk təwɔɹd ðə dæɡɝ. hɪz fɪŋɡɝz keɪm ʃɔɹɾ əɡɛn. hi stʃɹeɪnd, moʊnɪŋ, bɹʌʃt ɪt wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝɾɪp. bɪfɔɹ i kəd tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn, ʃi kɪkt ɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. hi kəlæpst wɪð ə sɑb.

Slowly his hand crept back toward the dagger. His fingers came short again. He strained, moaning, brushed it with a fingertip. Before he could try again, she kicked it away from him. He collapsed with a sob.

"tɛl mi waɪ," ʃi dɪmændəd. "waɪ wəd jə æsk mi tə - tə mɝɾɝ ju? əl hil ju, əl də ɛniθɪŋ tə ɡɛt jə aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ, bʌɾ aɪ kænɑt kɪl ju. waɪ?"

"Tell me why," she demanded. "Why would you ask me to - to murder you? I will Heal you, I will do anything to get you out of there, but I cannot kill you. Why?"

"ðeɪ kən tɝn mi, ɛɡwin." hɪz bɹiðɪŋ wɑz soʊ tɔɹtʃɝd, ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd wip. "ɪf ðeɪ teɪk mi - ðə mɹdʒɹɑl - ðə dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz - ðeɪ kən tɝn mi tə ðə ʃædoʊ. ɪf mædnəs əz mi, aɪ kænɑt faɪt ðɛm. aɪ woʊnt noʊ wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ duɪŋ tɪl ɪts tu leɪt. ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ivən ə spɑɹk ə laɪf lɛft wən ðeɪ faɪn mi, ðeɪ kən stɪl də ɪt. pliz, ɛɡwin. fəɹ ðə lʌv ə ðə laɪt. kɪl mi."

"They can turn me, Egwene." His breathing was so tortured, she wished she could weep. "If they take me - the Myrddraal - the Dreadlords - they can turn me to the Shadow. If madness has me, I cannot fight them. I won't know what they are doing till it is too late. If there is even a spark of life left when they find me, they can still do it. Please, Egwene. For the love of the Light. Kill me."

"aɪ - aɪ kænt, ɹænd. laɪt hɛlp mi, aɪ kænɑt!"

"I - I can't, Rand. Light help me, I cannot!"

ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst.

The way back will come but once. Be steadfast.

ʃi lʊkt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ən ə sɪlvɝ ɑɹtʃ fɪld wɪð waɪt laɪt tʊk ʌp moʊst ə ði oʊpən speɪs əmʌŋ ðə ɹʌbəl.

She looked over her shoulder, and a silver arch filled with white light took up most of the open space among the rubble.

"ɛɡwin, hɛlp mi."

"Egwene, help me."

bi stɛdfæst.

Be steadfast.

ʃi stʊɾ ən tʊk ə stɛp təwɔɹd ði ɑɹtʃ. ɪt wɑz ɹaɪt ðəɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. wʌn mɔɹ stɛp, ænd. . . .

She stood and took a step toward the arch. It was right there in front of her. One more step, and. . . .

"pliz, ɛɡwin. hɛlp mi. aɪ kæn ɹitʃ ɪt. fəɹ ðə lʌv ə ðə laɪt, ɛɡwin, hɛlp mi!"

"Please, Egwene. Help me. I can't reach it. For the love of the Light, Egwene, help me!"

"aɪ kænɑt kɪl ju," ʃi wɪspɝd.

"I cannot kill you," she whispered.

"aɪ kænt. fɝɡɪv mi." ʃi stɛp fɔɹwɝd.

"I can't. Forgive me." She stepped forward.

"hɛlp mi, ɛɡwin!"

"HELP ME, EGWENE!"

laɪt bɝn əɹ tə æʃ.

Light burned her to ash.

stæɡɝɪŋ, ʃi stɛpt aʊɾ ə ði ɑɹtʃ, niðɝ noʊɾɪsɪŋ əɹ neɪkədnəs nɔɹ kɛɹɪŋ. ə ʃʌɾɝ ɹæn θɹu hɝ, ən ʃi kʌvɝɾ əɹ maʊθ wɪð boʊθ hænz. "aɪ kʊdnt, ɹænd," ʃi wɪspɝd. "aɪ kʊdnt. pliz fɝɡɪv mi." laɪt hɛlp hɪm. pliz, laɪt hɛlp ɹænd.

Staggering, she stepped out of the arch, neither noticing her nakedness nor caring. A shudder ran through her, and she covered her mouth with both hands. "I couldn't, Rand," she whispered. "I couldn't. Please forgive me." Light help him. Please, Light help Rand.

koʊld wɔɾɝ pɔɹɾ oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd.

Cold water poured over her head.

"ju ɑɹ wɑʃt klin ə fɔls pɹaɪd," ɪleɪɾə ɪntoʊnd. "ju ɑɹ wɑʃt klin ə fɔls æmbɪʃən. jə kʌm tə əs wɑʃt klin, ɪn hɑɹɾ ən soʊl."

"You are washed clean of false pride," Elaida intoned. "You are washed clean of false ambition. You come to us washed clean, in heart and soul."

əz ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ tɝn əweɪ, ʃɛɹiəm dʒɛnli tʊk ɛɡwinz ʃoʊldɝz ən ɡaɪɾəd əɹ təwɔɹd ðə læst ɑɹtʃ. "wʌn mɔɹ, tʃaɪld. wʌn mɔɹ, ən ɪts dʌn."

As the Red sister turned away, Sheriam gently took Egwene's shoulders and guided her toward the last arch. "One more, child. One more, and it is done."

"hi sɛd ðeɪ kəd tɝn ɪm tə ðə ʃædoʊ," ɛɡwin mʌmbəld. "hi sɛd ðə mɹdʒɹɑl ən ðə dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz kəd fɔɹs hɪm."

"He said they could turn him to the Shadow," Egwene mumbled. "He said the Myrddraal and the Dreadlords could force him."

ʃɛɹiəm mɪst ə stɛp, ən lʊkt ɝaʊn kwɪkli. ɪleɪɾə wɑz ɔlmoʊs bæk tə ðə teɪbəl. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝaʊndɪŋ ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪt, simɪŋ lɔs tə ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. "æn ənplɛzən θɪŋ tə tɔk ʌv, tʃaɪld," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd faɪnəli, ən sɔfli. "kʌm. wʌn mɔɹ."

Sheriam missed a step, and looked around quickly. Elaida was almost back to the table. The Aes Sedai surrounding the ter'angreal stared at it, seeming lost to anything else. "An unpleasant thing to talk of, child," Sheriam said finally, and softly. "Come. One more."

"kæn ðeɪ?" ɛɡwin ɪnsɪstəd.

"Can they?" Egwene insisted.

"kʌstəm," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd, "ɪz nɑt tə spik ʌv wʌt hæpənz wɪðɪn ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ə wʊmənz fɪɹz ɑɹ əɹ oʊn."

"Custom," Sheriam said, "is not to speak of what happens within the ter'angreal. A woman's fears are her own."

"kæn ðeɪ?"

"Can they?"

ʃɛɹiəm saɪd, ɡlænst ət ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ əɡɛn, ðən dʒɹɑpt əɹ vɔɪs tə ə wɪspɝ ən spoʊk swɪfli. "ðɪs ɪz sʌmθɪŋ noʊn oʊnli tə ə fju, tʃaɪld, ivən ɪn ðə taʊɝ. jə ʃəd nɑt lɝn ɪt naʊ, ɪf ɛvɝ, bʌɾ əl tɛl ju. ðəɹ ɪz - ə wiknəs ɪn biɪŋ eɪbəl tə tʃænəl. ðət wi lɝn tə oʊpən aʊɝsɛlvz tə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs minz ðət wi kən bi - oʊpən tə ʌðɝ θɪŋz." ɛɡwin ʃʌɾɝəd. "kɑm jɝsɛlf, tʃaɪld. ɪts nɑt soʊ izəli dʌn. ɪts ə θɪŋ nɑt dʌn, soʊ fɑɹ əz aɪ noʊ - laɪt sɛn ɪts nɑt bɪn dʌn! - sɪns ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. ɪt tʊk θɝtin dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz - dɑɹkfɹɛnz u kəd tʃænəl - wivɪŋ ðə floʊz θɹu θɝtin mɹdʒɹɑl. jə si? nɑɾ izəli dʌn. ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz tədeɪ. ðɪs ɪz ə sikɹəɾ ə ðə taʊɝ, tʃaɪld. ɪf ʌðɝz nu, wi kəd nɛvɝ kənvɪns əm ðeɪ wɝ seɪf. oʊnli wʌn u kən tʃænəl kən bi tɝn ɪn ðɪs weɪ. ðə wiknəs ʌv əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ. ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ɪz əz seɪf əz ə fɔɹtʃɹəs; oʊnli ðɛɹ oʊn didz ən wɪl kən tɝn əm tə ðə ʃædoʊ."

Sheriam sighed, glanced at the other Aes Sedai again, then dropped her voice to a whisper and spoke swiftly. "This is something known only to a few, child, even in the Tower. You should not learn it now, if ever, but I will tell you. There is - a weakness in being able to channel. That we learn to open ourselves to the True Source means that we can be - opened to other things." Egwene shuddered. "Calm yourself, child. It is not so easily done. It is a thing not done, so far as I know - Light send it has not been done! - since the Trolloc Wars. It took thirteen Dreadlords - Darkfriends who could channel - weaving the flows through thirteen Myrddraal. You see? Not easily done. There are no Dreadlords today. This is a secret of the Tower, child. If others knew, we could never convince them they were safe. Only one who can channel can be turned in this way. The weakness of our strength. Everyone else is as safe as a fortress; only their own deeds and will can turn them to the Shadow."

"θɝtin," ɛɡwin sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪni vɔɪs. "ðə seɪm nʌmbɝ u lɛf ðə taʊɝ. liɑnʒɹɪn, ən twɛlv mɔɹ."

"Thirteen," Egwene said in a tiny voice. "The same number who left the Tower. Liandrin, and twelve more."

ʃɛɹiəmz feɪs hɑɹɾənd. "ðæɾ ɪz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ jə tə dwɛl ɑn. jəl fɝɡɛɾ ɪt." hɝ vɔɪs klaɪm tə ə nɔɹməl vɑljum. "ðə θɝd taɪm ɪz fəɹ wʌt wɪl bi. ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst."

Sheriam's face hardened. "That is nothing for you to dwell on. You will forget it." Her voice climbed to a normal volume. "The third time is for what will be. The way back will come but once. Be steadfast."

ɛɡwin stɛɹɾ ət ðə ɡloʊɪŋ ɑɹtʃ, stɛɹɾ ət səm fɑɹ dɪstəns bɪɑn ɪt. liɑnʒɹɪn ən twɛlv ʌðɝz. θɝtin dɑɹkfɹɛnz u kən tʃænəl. laɪt hɛlp əs ɔl. ʃi stɛpt ɪndə ðə laɪt. ɪt fɪl hɝ. ɪt ʃoʊn θɹu hɝ. ɪt bɝn əɹ tə ðə boʊn, sɪɹɾ əɹ tə ðə soʊl. ʃi flæʃt ɪnkəndɛsən ɪn ðə laɪt. laɪt hɛlp mi! ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ bʌt ðə laɪt. ən ðə peɪn.

Egwene stared at the glowing arch, stared at some far distance beyond it. Liandrin and twelve others. Thirteen Darkfriends who can channel. Light help us all. She stepped into the light. It filled her. It shone through her. It burned her to the bone, seared her to the soul. She flashed incandescent in the light. Light help me! There was nothing but the light. And the pain.

ɛɡwin stɛɹɾ ɪndə ðə stændɪŋ mɪɹɝ, ən wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz mɔɹ sɝpɹaɪz baɪ ði eɪdʒləs smuðnəs ə hɝ feɪs əɹ ðə stʃɹaɪp stoʊl ðət hʌŋ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk. ðə stoʊl ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit.

Egwene stared into the standing mirror, and was not sure whether she was more surprised by the ageless smoothness of her face or the striped stole that hung around her neck. The stole of the Amyrlin Seat.

ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst.

The way back will come but once. Be steadfast.

θɝtin.

Thirteen.

ʃi sweɪd, kɑɾ ət ðə mɪɹɝ ən ɔlmoʊs tɑpəld ɪɾ ən hɝsɛlf tə ðə blu-taɪl flɔɹ ə hɝ dʒɹɛsɪŋ tʃeɪmbɝ. sʌmθɪŋ ɪz ɹɔŋ, ʃi θɔt. ðə ɹɔŋɡnəs hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð əɹ sʌɾən dɪzinəs, əɹ ət lis ðət wɑz nɑt wʌt fɛlt ɹɔŋ. ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. bʌt ʃi hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌt.

She swayed, caught at the mirror and almost toppled it and herself to the blue-tiled floor of her dressing chamber. Something is wrong, she thought. The wrongness had nothing to do with her sudden dizziness, or at least that was not what felt wrong. It was something else. But she had no idea what.

ðəɹ wɑz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əɾ əɹ ɛlboʊ, ə wʊmən wɪð ʃɛɹiəmz haɪ tʃikboʊnz bʌt dɑɹk hɛɹ ən kənsɝn bɹaʊn aɪz, ən ðə hænd-waɪd stoʊl ə ðə kipɝ ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. nɑt ʃɛɹiəm, ðoʊ. ɛɡwin hæd nɛvɝ sin əɹ bɪfɔɹ; ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi nu hɝ əz wɛl əz ʃi nu hɝsɛlf. hɔltɪŋli, ʃi pʊɾ ə neɪm tə ðə wʊmən. bɛldaɪn.

There was an Aes Sedai at her elbow, a woman with Sheriam's high cheekbones but dark hair and concerned brown eyes, and the hand-wide stole of the Keeper on her shoulders. Not Sheriam, though. Egwene had never seen her before; she was sure she knew her as well as she knew herself. Haltingly, she put a name to the woman. Beldeine.

"ɑɹ jə ɪl, mʌðɝ?"

"Are you ill, Mother?"

hɝ stoʊl ɪz ɡɹin. ðət minz ʃi wɑz ɹeɪz fɹəm ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ. ðə kipɝ ɔlweɪz kʌmz fɹəm ðə seɪm ədʒɑ əz ði æmɪɝlɪn ʃi sɝvz. wɪtʃ minz ɪf ɪm ði æmɪɝlɪn - ɪf? - ðən aɪ wɑz ɡɹin ədʒɑ, tu. ðət θɔt ʃʊk hɝ. nɑt ðət ʃi hæd bɪn ɡɹin ədʒɑ, bʌt ðət ʃi hæd tə ɹizən ɪɾ aʊt. laɪt, sʌmθɪŋ ɪz ɹɔŋ wɪð mi.

Her stole is green. That means she was raised from the Green Ajah. The Keeper always comes from the same Ajah as the Amyrlin she serves. Which means if I'm the Amyrlin - if? - then I was Green Ajah, too. That thought shook her. Not that she had been Green Ajah, but that she had to reason it out. Light, something is wrong with me.

ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bu. . . . ðə vɔɪs ɪn əɹ hɛd tʃɹeɪld əweɪ tə fɪnɪʃ ɪn ə bʌz.

The way back will come bu. . . . The voice in her head trailed away to finish in a buzz.

θɝtin dɑɹkfɹɛnz.

Thirteen Darkfriends.

"aɪ æm wɛl, bɛldaɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd. ðə neɪm fɛl stʃɹeɪnʒ ɑn əɹ tʌŋ; ɪt fɛlt əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn seɪɪŋ ɪt fəɹ jɪɹz. "wi mʌsnt kip əm weɪɾɪŋ." kip u weɪɾɪŋ? ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ, ɪksɛp ðət ʃi fɛlt ɪnfənətli sæɾ əbaʊɾ ɛndɪŋ ðət weɪt, ɛnləsli ɹɪlʌktənt.

"I am well, Beldeine," Egwene said. The name felt strange on her tongue; it felt as if she had been saying it for years. "We mustn't keep them waiting." Keep who waiting? She did not know, except that she felt infinitely sad about ending that wait, endlessly reluctant.

"ðeɪ wɪl bi ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃənt, mʌðɝ." ðəɹ wɑz ə hɛzəteɪʃən ɪn bɛldaɪnz vɔɪs, əz ɪf ʃi fɛl ðə seɪm ɹɪlʌktəns əz ɛɡwin, bʌt fəɹ ə dɪfɹən ɹizən. ənlɛs ɛɡwin mɪst əɹ ɡɛs, bɪhaɪn ðəɾ aʊɾɝ kɑm, bɛldaɪn wɑz tɛɹəfaɪd.

"They will be growing impatient, Mother." There was a hesitation in Beldeine's voice, as if she felt the same reluctance as Egwene, but for a different reason. Unless Egwene missed her guess, behind that outer calm, Beldeine was terrified.

"ɪn ðət keɪs, wi hæd bɛs bi əbaʊɾ ɪt."

"In that case, we had best be about it."

bɛldaɪn nɑɾəd, ðən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ bɪfɔɹ kɹɔsɪŋ ðə kɑɹpət tə wɛɹ əɹ stæf ʌv ɔfəs, tɑpt wɪð ðə snoʊdʒɹɑp waɪt fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, stʊd pɹɑp bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ. "aɪ səpoʊz wi mʌst, mʌðɝ." ʃi tʊk ʌp ðə stæf ən oʊpən ðə dɔɹ fəɹ ɛɡwin, ðən hɝiɾ əhɛd soʊ ðət ðeɪ meɪɾ ə pɹəsɛʃən ə tu, kipɝ ə ðə kɹɑnəkəlz liɾɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit.

Beldeine nodded, then took a deep breath before crossing the carpet to where her staff of office, topped with the snowdrop White Flame of Tar Valon, stood propped beside the door. "I suppose we must, Mother." She took up the staff and opened the door for Egwene, then hurried ahead so that they made a procession of two, Keeper of the Chronicles leading the Amyrlin Seat.

ɛɡwin noʊɾəst lɪɾəl ə ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz ðeɪ tʊk. ɔl əɹ ətɛnʃən wɑz dɝɛktəɾ ɪnwɝd. wʌɾ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ wɪð mi? waɪ kæn aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ? waɪ ɪz soʊ mʌtʃ ʌv wʌɾ aɪ . . . ɔlmoʊst ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɹɔŋ? ʃi tʌtʃt ðə sɛvən-stʃɹaɪp stoʊl ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. waɪ æm aɪ hæf ʃʊɹ aɪm stɪl ə nɑvəs?

Egwene noticed little of the corridors they took. All her attention was directed inward. What is the matter with me? Why can't I remember? Why is so much of what I . . . almost remember wrong? She touched the seven-striped stole on her shoulders. Why am I half sure I'm still a novice?

ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌɾ ɑn - ðɪs taɪm ɪɾ ɛndəɾ əbɹʌpli.

The way back will come but on - This time it ended abruptly.

θɝtin ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ.

Thirteen of the Black Ajah.

ʃi stʌmbəld ət ðæt. ɪt wɑz ə fɹaɪɾənɪŋ θɔt, bʌɾ ɪt tʃɪld əɹ tə ðə mɛɹoʊ bɪɑn fɪɹ. ɪt fɛlt - pɝsənəl. ʃi wɑntəd tə skɹim, tə ɹʌn ən haɪd. ʃi fɛlt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ æftɝ hɝ. nɑnsɛns. ðə blæk ədʒɑ hæz bɪn dɪstʃɹɔɪd. ðət simd ən ɑd θɔt, tu. pɑɹɾ ə hɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝd sʌmθɪŋ kɔl ðə ɡɹeɪt pɝdʒ. pɑɹɾ ə hɝ wɑz ʃʊɹ noʊ sətʃ θɪŋ hæd hæpənd.

She stumbled at that. It was a frightening thought, but it chilled her to the marrow beyond fear. It felt - personal. She wanted to scream, to run and hide. She felt as if they were after her. Nonsense. The Black Ajah has been destroyed. That seemed an odd thought, too. Part of her remembered something called the Great Purge. Part of her was sure no such thing had happened.

aɪz fɪkst əhɛd, bɛldaɪn hæd nɑt noʊɾəst əɹ stʌmbəl. ɛɡwin hæd tə lɛŋθən əɹ stʃɹaɪd tə kætʃ ʌp. ðɪs wʊmən ɪz skɛɹd tə hɝ toʊneɪlz. wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪɾ ɪz ʃi teɪkɪŋ mi tə?

Eyes fixed ahead, Beldeine had not noticed her stumble. Egwene had to lengthen her stride to catch up. This woman is scared to her toenails. What in the Light is she taking me to?

bɛldaɪn stɑp bɪfɔɹ tɔl, pɛɹd dɔɹz, ðɛɹ dɑɹk wʊɾ itʃ ɪnleɪd wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ sɪlvɝ fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ʃi waɪpt əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛs, əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ sʌɾənli swɛɾi, bɪfɔɹ oʊpənɪŋ wʌn dɔɹ ən liɾɪŋ ɛɡwin ʌp ə stʃɹeɪt ɹæmp ə ðə seɪm sɪlvɝ-stʃɹikt waɪt stoʊn ðət meɪd tɑɹ vəlɑnz wɔlz. ivən hɪɹ ɪt sim tə ʃaɪn.

Beldeine stopped before tall, paired doors, their dark wood each inlaid with a large silver Flame of Tar Valon. She wiped her hands on her dress, as if they were suddenly sweaty, before opening one door and leading Egwene up a straight ramp of the same silver-streaked white stone that made Tar Valon's walls. Even here it seemed to shine.

ðə ɹæmp lɛɾ ɪndə ə lɑɹdʒ, sɝkjəlɝ ɹum ʌndɝ ə doʊm silɪŋ ət lis θɝɾi peɪsɪz haɪ. ə ɹeɪz plætfɔɹm ɹæn ɝaʊn ði aʊɾɝ ɛdʒ ə ðə ɹum, fɹʌntɪd baɪ stɛps ɪksɛpt wɛɹ ðɪs ɹæmp ən tu ʌðɝz keɪm aʊt, speɪst ikwəli ɝaʊn ðə sɝkəl. ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn leɪ sɛntɝɾ ɪn ðə flɔɹ, sɝaʊndəd baɪ waɪɾənɪŋ spaɪɹəlz ə kʌlɝ, ðə kʌlɝz ə ðə sɛvən ədʒəz. ət ði ɑpəzət saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum fɹəm wɛɹ ðə ɹæmp ɛntɝd, ə haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹ stʊd, hɛvi ən ɔɹnətli kɑɹvd ɪn vaɪnz ən livz, peɪntəɾ ɪn ðə kʌlɝz ʌv ɔl ði ədʒəz.

The ramp let into a large, circular room under a domed ceiling at least thirty paces high. A raised platform ran around the outer edge of the room, fronted by steps except where this ramp and two others came out, spaced equally around the circle. The Flame of Tar Valon lay centered in the floor, surrounded by widening spirals of color, the colors of the seven Ajahs. At the opposite side of the room from where the ramp entered, a high-backed chair stood, heavy and ornately carved in vines and leaves, painted in the colors of all the Ajahs.

bɛldaɪn ɹæpt əɹ stæf ʃɑɹpli ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ðəɹ wɑz ə tʃɹɛmɝ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. "ʃi kʌmz. ðə wɑtʃɝ ə ðə silz. ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ʃi kʌmz."

Beldeine rapped her staff sharply on the floor. There was a tremor in her voice. "She comes. The Watcher of the Seals. The Flame of Tar Valon. The Amyrlin Seat. She comes."

wɪð ə ɹʌsəl ə skɝts, ʃɔld wɪmən ɑn ðə plætfɔɹm ɡɑɾ ʌp fɹəm ðɛɹ tʃɛɹz. twɛnti-wʌn tʃɛɹz ɪn ɡɹupɪŋz ə θɹi, itʃ tʃɹaɪæd peɪntəɾ ən kʊʃən ɪn ðə seɪm kʌlɝ əz ðə fɹɪnʒ ɑn ðə ʃɔlz ə ðə wɪmən u stʊd bɪfɔɹ ðɛm.

With a rustle of skirts, shawled women on the platform got up from their chairs. Twenty-one chairs in groupings of three, each triad painted and cushioned in the same color as the fringe on the shawls of the women who stood before them.

ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, ɛɡwin θɔɾ əz ʃi kɹɔs ðə flɔɹ tə hɝ tʃɛɹ. ði æmɪɝlɪn sits tʃɛɹ. ðæts ɔl ɪɾ ɪz. ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, ən ðə sɪɾɝz fəɹ ði ədʒəz. aɪv bɪn hɪɹ θaʊzənz ə taɪmz. bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌn ə ðɛm. wʌɾ æm aɪ duɪŋ ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ? laɪt, ðəl skɪn mi əlaɪv wən ðeɪ si. . . . ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðeɪ wəd si, oʊnli ðət ʃi pɹeɪd ðeɪ dɪd nɑt.

The Hall of the Tower, Egwene thought as she crossed the floor to her chair. The Amyrlin Seat's chair. That's all it is. The Hall of the Tower, and the Sitters for the Ajahs. I've been here thousands of times. But she could not remember one of them. What am I doing in the Hall of the Tower? Light, they'll skin me alive when they see. . . . She was not sure what it was they would see, only that she prayed they did not.

ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt -  ðə weɪ bæk wɪl -  ðə weɪ -  ðə blæk ədʒɑ weɪts. ðæt, ət list, wɑz hoʊl. ɪt keɪm fɹəm ɛvɹiwɛɹ. waɪ dɪd noʊ wʌn ɛls sim tə hɪɹ ɪt?

The way back will come but -  The way back will -  The way -  The Black Ajah waits. That, at least, was whole. It came from everywhere. Why did no one else seem to hear it?

sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit - ðə tʃɛɹ ðət wɑz ɔlsoʊ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit - ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌt tə də nɛkst. ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd siɾəd ðɛmsɛlvz wən ʃi dɪd, ɔl bʌt bɛldaɪn, hu stʊd bɪsaɪɾ əɹ wɪð ðə stæf, swɑloʊɪŋ nɝvəsli. ðeɪ ɔl sim tə bi weɪɾɪŋ ɑn hɝ.

Settling in the chair of the Amyrlin Seat - the chair that was also the Amyrlin Seat - she realized she had no idea what to do next. The other Aes Sedai had seated themselves when she did, all but Beldeine, who stood beside her with the staff, swallowing nervously. They all seemed to be waiting on her.

"bɪɡɪn," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli.

"Begin," she said finally.

ɪt sim tə bi ɪnʌf. wʌn ə ðə ɹɛd sɪɾɝz stʊd. ɛɡwin wɑz ʃɑk tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɪleɪɾə. ət ðə seɪm taɪm ʃi nu ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə wɑz fɔɹmoʊst ə ðə sɪɾɝz fəɹ ðə ɹɛd, ən əɹ oʊn bɪɾɝəst ɛnəmi. ðə lʊk ɑn ɪleɪɾəz feɪs əz ʃi stɛɹɾ əkɹɔs ðə tʃeɪmbɝ meɪɾ ɛɡwin ʃɪvɝ ɪnsaɪd. ɪt wɑz stɝn ən koʊld - ən tʃɹaɪʌmfənt. ɪt pɹɑməs θɪŋz bɛs nɑt θɔɾ ʌv.

It seemed to be enough. One of the Red Sitters stood. Egwene was shocked to recognize Elaida. At the same time she knew that Elaida was foremost of the Sitters for the Red, and her own bitterest enemy. The look on Elaida's face as she stared across the chamber made Egwene shiver inside. It was stern and cold - and triumphant. It promised things best not thought of.

"bɹɪŋ ɪm ɪn," ɪleɪɾə sɛd laʊdli.

"Bring him in," Elaida said loudly.

fɹəm wʌn ə ðə ɹæmps - nɑt ðə wʌn ɛɡwin hæɾ ɛntɝd baɪ - keɪm ðə kɹʌntʃ ə buts ɑn stoʊn. pipəl əpɪɹd. ə dʌzən ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝaʊndɪŋ θɹi mɛn, tu ʌv əm bɝli ɡɑɹdz wɪð ðə waɪt tɪɹdʒɹɑps ə ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɑn ðɛɹ tʃɛsts, tʌɡɪŋ ðə tʃeɪnz ɪn wɪtʃ ðə θɝd stʌmbəld əz ɪf deɪzd.

From one of the ramps - not the one Egwene had entered by - came the crunch of boots on stone. People appeared. A dozen Aes Sedai surrounding three men, two of them burly guards with the white teardrops of the Flame of Tar Valon on their chests, tugging the chains in which the third stumbled as if dazed.

ɛɡwin dʒɝk fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ. ðə tʃeɪn mæn wɑz ɹænd. aɪz hæf-kloʊzd, hɛd sæɡɪŋ, hi sim nɪɹli əslip, muvɪŋ oʊnli əz ðə tʃeɪnz dɝɛktəd.

Egwene jerked forward in her chair. The chained man was Rand. Eyes half-closed, head sagging, he seemed nearly asleep, moving only as the chains directed.

"ðɪs mæn," ɪleɪɾə pɹoʊkleɪmd, "hæz neɪm hɪmsɛlf ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn." ðəɹ wɑz ə bʌz ə dɪsteɪst, nɑɾ əz ɪf ðə lɪsənɝz wɝ sɝpɹaɪzd, bʌɾ əz ðoʊ ɪt wɝ nɑt sʌmθɪŋ ðeɪ wɑntəd tə hɪɹ. "ðɪs mæn əz tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ." ðə bʌz wɑz laʊɾɝ naʊ, dɪsɡʌstəɾ ən tɪŋd wɪð fɪɹ. "ðɛɹ ɪz oʊnli wʌn pɛnəlti fəɹ ðɪs, noʊn ən ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɪn ɛvɹi neɪʃən, bʌt pɹənaʊnst oʊnli hɪɹ, ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ. aɪ kɔl ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn sit tə pɹənaʊns ðə sɛntəns ə dʒɛntəlɪŋ ɑn ðɪs mæn."

"This man," Elaida proclaimed, "has named himself the Dragon Reborn." There was a buzz of distaste, not as if the listeners were surprised, but as though it were not something they wanted to hear. "This man has channeled the One Power." The buzz was louder now, disgusted and tinged with fear. "There is only one penalty for this, known and recognized in every nation, but pronounced only here, in Tar Valon, in the Hall of the Tower. I call on the Amyrlin Seat to pronounce the sentence of gentling on this man."

ɪleɪɾəz aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd əɾ ɛɡwin. ɹænd. wʌt də aɪ du? laɪt, wʌt də aɪ du?

Elaida's eyes glittered at Egwene. Rand. What do I do? Light, what do I do?

"waɪ dʒju hɛzəteɪt?" ɪleɪɾə dɪmændəd. "ðə sɛntəns əz bɪn sɛt daʊn fəɹ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz. waɪ dʒju hɛzəteɪt, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ?"

"Why do you hesitate?" Elaida demanded. "The sentence has been set down for three thousand years. Why do you hesitate, Egwene al'Vere?"

wʌn ə ðə ɡɹin sɪɾɝz wɑz ɑn əɹ fit, æŋɡɝ bɹaɪt θɹu hɝ kɑm. "ʃeɪm, ɪleɪɾə! ʃoʊ ɹɪspɛk fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit! ʃoʊ ɹɪspɛk fəɹ ðə mʌðɝ!"

One of the Green Sitters was on her feet, anger bright through her calm. "Shame, Elaida! Show respect for the Amyrlin Seat! Show respect for the Mother!"

"ɹɪspɛkt," ɪleɪɾə ænsɝd koʊldli, "kæn bi lɔst əz wɛl əz wʌn. wɛl, ɛɡwin? kən ɪt bi jə ʃoʊ jəɹ wiknəs, jəɹ ənfətnəs fəɹ jəɹ ɔfəs, ət læst? kən ɪt bi jəl nɑt pɹənaʊns sɛntəns ɑn ðɪs mæn?"

"Respect," Elaida answered coldly, "can be lost as well as won. Well, Egwene? Can it be you show your weakness, your unfitness for your office, at last? Can it be you will not pronounce sentence on this man?"

ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə lɪft ɪz hɛɾ ən feɪld.

Rand tried to lift his head and failed.

ɛɡwin stʃɹʌɡəl tə hɝ fit, hɛd spɪnɪŋ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ʃi wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɪð ðə paʊɝ tə kəmæn ɔl ðiz wɪmən, skɹimɪŋ ðət ʃi wɑz ə nɑvəs, ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪlɔŋ hɪɹ, ðət sʌmθɪŋ wɑz dʒɹɛdfəli ɹɔŋ. "noʊ," ʃi sɛd ʃɑkəli. "noʊ, aɪ kænɑt! əl nɑt - "

Egwene struggled to her feet, head spinning, trying to remember she was the Amyrlin Seat with the power to command all these women, screaming that she was a novice, that she did not belong here, that something was dreadfully wrong. "No," she said shakily. "No, I cannot! I will not - "

"ʃi bɪtʃɹeɪz hɝsɛlf!" ɪleɪɾəz ʃaʊt dʒɹaʊn aʊɾ ɛɡwinz ətɛmp tə spik. "ʃi kəndɛmz hɝsɛlf aʊɾ ə hɝ oʊn maʊθ! teɪk hɝ!"

"She betrays herself!" Elaida's shout drowned out Egwene's attempt to speak. "She condemns herself out of her own mouth! Take her!"

əz ɛɡwin oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bɛldaɪn muv bɪsaɪd hɝ. ðən ðə kipɝz stæf stʃɹʌk əɹ hɛd.

As Egwene opened her mouth, Beldeine moved beside her. Then the Keeper's staff struck her head.

blæknəs.

Blackness.

fɝs ðəɹ wɑz peɪn ɪn əɹ hɛd. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ hɑɹɾ ʌndɝ əɹ bæk, ən koʊld. nɛks keɪm ðə vɔɪsəz. mɝmɝz.

First there was pain in her head. There was something hard under her back, and cold. Next came the voices. Murmurs.

"ɪz ʃi stɪl ʌnkɑnʃəs?" ɪt wɑz ə ɹæsp, ə faɪl ɑn boʊn.

"Is she still unconscious?" It was a rasp, a file on bone.

"du nɑt wɝi," ə wʊmən sɛd fɹəm fɑɹ, fɑɹ əweɪ. ʃi saʊndəɾ ənizi, əfɹeɪd, ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə ʃoʊ iðɝ. "ʃi wɪl bi dɛlt wɪð bɪfɔɹ ʃi noʊz wʌɾ ɪz hæpənɪŋ tə hɝ. ðən ʃiz aʊɝz, tə də wɪð əz wi wɪl. pɝhæps wɪl ɡɪv əɹ tə jə fəɹ spɔɹt."

"Do not worry," a woman said from far, far away. She sounded uneasy, afraid, and trying not to show either. "She will be dealt with before she knows what is happening to her. Then she is ours, to do with as we will. Perhaps we will give her to you for sport."

"æftɝ jə meɪk jəɹ oʊn jus ə hɝ."

"After you make your own use of her."

"ʌv kɔɹs."

"Of course."

ðə dɪstən vɔɪsəz muv fɝðɝ əweɪ.

The distant voices moved further away.

hɝ hæn bɹʌʃt əɡɛnst əɹ lɛɡ, tʌtʃt bɛɹ, pɛbəli flɛʃ. ʃi oʊpən əɹ aɪz ə kɹæk. ʃi wɑz neɪkəd, bɹuzd, laɪɪŋ ɑn ə ɹʌf wʊɾən teɪbəl, ɪn wʌt sim tə bi ə dɪsjuz stɔɹɹum. splɪntɝz stʌk əɹ bæk. ðəɹ wɑz ə mətælɪk teɪst ə blʌɾ ɪn əɹ maʊθ.

Her hand brushed against her leg, touched bare, pebbly flesh. She opened her eyes a crack. She was naked, bruised, lying on a rough wooden table, in what seemed to be a disused storeroom. Splinters stuck her back. There was a metallic taste of blood in her mouth.

ə klʌstɝ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ stʊd tə wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum, tɔkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, vɔɪsəz loʊ jɛɾ ɝdʒənt. ðə peɪn ɪn əɹ hɛd meɪd θɪŋkɪŋ dɪfəkəlt, bʌɾ ɪt simd ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə kaʊn ðɛm. θɝtin.

A cluster of Aes Sedai stood to one side of the room, talking among themselves, voices low yet urgent. The pain in her head made thinking difficult, but it seemed important to count them. Thirteen.

ənʌðɝ ɡɹup, blæk-kloʊkt ən hʊɾɪd mɛn, dʒɔɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, hu sim kɑt bɪtwin kaʊɝɪŋ ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɑməneɪt wɪð ðɛɹ pɹɛzəns. wʌn ə ðə mɛn tɝn ɪz hɛd tə lʊk təwɔɹd ðə teɪbəl. ðə dɛd waɪt feɪs wɪðɪn ðə hʊd hæd noʊ aɪz.

Another group, black-cloaked and hooded men, joined the Aes Sedai, who seemed caught between cowering and trying to dominate with their presence. One of the men turned his head to look toward the table. The dead white face within the hood had no eyes.

ɛɡwin hæd noʊ nid tə kaʊn ðə mɹdʒɹɑl. ʃi nu. θɝtin mɹdʒɹɑl, ən θɝtin ɛɛs sədaɪ. wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ θɔt, ʃi skɹimd ɪn pjʊɹ tɛɹɝ. jɛɾ ivən ɪn ðə mɪdst ə fɪɹ ðət tʃɹaɪd tə splɪɾ əɹ boʊnz, ʃi ɹitʃt aʊt fəɹ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, klɔd dɛspɝətli fəɹ seɪaɪdɑɹ.

Egwene had no need to count the Myrddraal. She knew. Thirteen Myrddraal, and thirteen Aes Sedai. Without another thought, she screamed in pure terror. Yet even in the midst of fear that tried to split her bones, she reached out for the True Source, clawed desperately for saidar.

"ʃiz əweɪk!"

"She's awake!"

"ʃi kænɑt bi! nɑt jɛt!"

"She cannot be! Not yet!"

"ʃil hɝ! kwɪkli! kwɪkli! kʌɾ əɹ ɔf fɹəm ðə sɔɹs!"

"Shield her! Quickly! Quickly! Cut her off from the Source!"

"ɪts tu leɪt! ʃiz tu stʃɹɔŋ!"

"It's too late! She is too strong!"

"siz hɝ! hɝi!"

"Seize her! Hurry!"

hænz ɹitʃt fəɹ əɹ ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz. peɪsti peɪl hænz laɪk slʌɡz ʌndɝ ɹɑks, ɔɹɾɝd baɪ maɪnz bɪhaɪn peɪl, aɪləs feɪsəz. ɪf ðoʊz hænz tʌtʃt əɹ flɛʃ, ʃi nu ʃi wəd ɡoʊ mæd. ðə paʊɝ fɪl hɝ.

Hands reached for her arms and legs. Pasty pale hands like slugs under rocks, ordered by minds behind pale, eyeless faces. If those hands touched her flesh, she knew she would go mad. The Power filled her.

fleɪmz bɝs fɹəm mɹdʒɹɑl skɪn, ɹɪpɪŋ θɹu blæk klɔθ əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ sɑləd dæɡɝz ə faɪɝ. ʃɹikɪŋ hæfmən kɹɪspt ən bɝn laɪk ɔɪl peɪpɝ. fɪst-saɪz tʃʌŋks ə stoʊn tɔɹ ðɛmsɛlvz fɹi ʌv ðə wɔlz ən wɪzd əkɹɔs ðə ɹum, pɹədusɪŋ ʃɹiks ən ɡɹʌns əz ðeɪ θʌddɪɾ ɪndə flɛʃ. ði ɛɹ stɝd, ʃɪftəd, haʊld ɪndə ə wɝlwɪnd.

Flames burst from Myrddraal skin, ripping through black cloth as if they were solid daggers of fire. Shrieking Halfmen crisped and burned like oiled paper. Fist-sized chunks of stone tore themselves free of the walls and whizzed across the room, producing shrieks and grunts as they thudded into flesh. The air stirred, shifted, howled into a whirlwind.

sloʊli, peɪnfəli, ɛɡwin pʊʃt hɝsɛlf ɔf ðə teɪbəl. ðə wɪnd wɪpt əɹ hɛɹ ən meɪɾ əɹ stæɡɝ, bʌt ʃi kəntɪnjud tə dʒɹaɪv ɪɾ əz ʃi stʌmbəl təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ lumd ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ə wʊmən bɹuzd ən bliɾɪŋ, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ðə paʊɝ. ə wʊmən wɪð dɛθ ɪn əɹ dɑɹk aɪz.

Slowly, painfully, Egwene pushed herself off the table. The wind whipped her hair and made her stagger, but she continued to drive it as she stumbled toward the door. An Aes Sedai loomed in front of her, a woman bruised and bleeding, surrounded by the glow of the Power. A woman with death in her dark eyes.

ɛɡwinz maɪn pʊɾ ə neɪm tə ðə feɪs. ɡɪldən. ɪleɪɾəz kloʊsəs kɑnfədænt, ɔlweɪz wɪspɝɪŋ təɡɛðɝ ɪn kɔɹnɝz, klɑsəɾɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn ðə naɪt. ɛɡwinz maʊθ taɪɾənd. dɪsdeɪnɪŋ stoʊnz ən wɪnd, ʃi bɔld ʌp əɹ fɪst ən pʌntʃt ɡɪldən bɪtwin ði aɪz əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kʊd. ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ - ðə blæk sɪstɝ - kɹʌmpəld əz ɪf əɹ boʊnz hæd mɛltəd.

Egwene's mind put a name to the face. Gyldan. Elaida's closest confidante, always whispering together in corners, closeting themselves in the night. Egwene's mouth tightened. Disdaining stones and wind, she balled up her fist and punched Gyldan between the eyes as hard as she could. The Red sister - the Black sister - crumpled as if her bones had melted.

ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ nʌkəlz, ɛɡwin stæɡɝɾ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə hɔl. θæŋk ju, pɛɹɪn, ʃi θɔt, fəɹ ʃoʊɪŋ mi haʊ tə də ðæt. bʌt jə dɪdn tɛl mi haʊ mʌtʃ ɪt hɝts wən jə du.

Rubbing her knuckles, Egwene staggered out into the hall. Thank you, Perrin, she thought, for showing me how to do that. But you didn't tell me how much it hurts when you do.

ʃʌvɪŋ ðə dɔɹ ʃʌɾ əɡɛns ðə wɪnd, ʃi tʃænəld. stoʊnz ɝaʊn ðə dɔɹweɪ ʃɪvɝd, kɹækt, sɛɾəld əɡɛns ðə wʊd. ɪt wəd nɑt hoʊld əm fəɹ lɔŋ, bʌɾ ɛniθɪŋ ðət sloʊd pɝsut fəɹ ivən ə mɪnət wɑz wɝθ duɪŋ. mɪnəts maɪt min laɪf. ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ, ʃi fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə bɹeɪk ɪndə ə ɹʌn. ɪt wɑbəld, bʌɾ ət list ɪt wɑz ə ɹʌn.

Shoving the door shut against the wind, she channeled. Stones around the doorway shivered, cracked, settled against the wood. It would not hold them for long, but anything that slowed pursuit for even a minute was worth doing. Minutes might mean life. Gathering her strength, she forced herself to break into a run. It wobbled, but at least it was a run.

ʃi mʌs faɪn səm kloʊðz, ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd. ə wʊmən kloʊð hæd mɔɹ əθɔɹəɾi ðən ðə seɪm wʊmən neɪkəd, ən ʃi wɑz gɑnə niɾ ɛvɹi bɪɾ ʌv əθɔɹəɾi. ðeɪ wəd lʊk fəɹ əɹ fɝst ɪn əɹ ɹumz, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ə spɛɹ dʒɹɛs ən ʃuz ɪn əɹ stʌɾi - ən ənʌðɝ stoʊl - ən ðət leɪ nɑt fɑɹ ɔf.

She must find some clothes, she decided. A woman clothed had more authority than the same woman naked, and she was going to need every bit of authority. They would look for her first in her rooms, but she had a spare dress and shoes in her study - and another stole - and that lay not far off.

ɪt wɑz ənɝvɪŋ, tʃɹɑɾɪŋ θɹu ɛmpti hɔlweɪz. ðə waɪt taʊɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hɛl ðə nʌmbɝz ɪt wʌns hæd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz juʒəwəli sʌmwʌn əbaʊt. ðə laʊɾəst saʊnd wɑz ðə slæp ə hɝ bɛɹ soʊlz ɑn ðə taɪlz.

It was unnerving, trotting through empty hallways. The White Tower no longer held the numbers it once had, but there was usually someone about. The loudest sound was the slap of her bare soles on the tiles.

ʃi hɝid θɹu ði æntətʃæmbɝ ə hɝ stʌɾi tə ði ɪnɝ ɹum, ən ət læst ʃi faʊn sʌmwʌn. bɛldaɪn wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ, hɛɾ ɪn əɹ hænz, wipɪŋ.

She hurried through the antechamber of her study to the inner room, and at last she found someone. Beldeine was sitting on the floor, head in her hands, weeping.

ɛɡwin stɑpt wɛɹəli, əz bɛldaɪn ɹeɪzd ɹɛɾənd aɪz tə mit hɝz. noʊ ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəd ðə kipɝ, bʌɾ ɛɡwin wɑz stɪl kɔʃəs. ən kɑnfəɾənt. ʃi kəd nɑt si hɝ oʊn ɡloʊ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðə paʊɝ - ðə paʊɝ - sɝdʒɪŋ θɹu hɝ wɑz ɪnʌf. ɪspɛʃli wən æɾəd tə hɝ sikɹət.

Egwene stopped warily, as Beldeine raised reddened eyes to meet hers. No glow of saidar surrounded the Keeper, but Egwene was still cautious. And confident. She could not see her own glow, of course, but the power - the Power - surging through her was enough. Especially when added to her secret.

bɛldaɪn skɹʌbd ə hæn əkɹɔs tɝsteɪn tʃiks. "aɪ hæd tə. jə mʌst ʌndɝstænd. aɪ hæd tə. ðeɪ. . . . ðeɪ. . . ." ʃi tʊk ə dip, ʃʌɾɝɪŋ bɹɛθ; ɪɾ ɔl keɪm aʊɾ ɪn ə ɹʌʃ. "θɹi naɪts əɡoʊ ðeɪ tʊk mi waɪl aɪ slɛpt ən stɪl mi." hɝ vɔɪs ɹoʊz tə ə nɪɹ ʃɹik. "ðeɪ stɪl mi! aɪ kænɑt tʃænəl ɛni lɔŋɡɝ!"

Beldeine scrubbed a hand across tearstained cheeks. "I had to. You must understand. I had to. They. . . . They. . . ." She took a deep, shuddering breath; it all came out in a rush. "Three nights ago they took me while I slept and stilled me." Her voice rose to a near shriek. "They stilled me! I cannot channel any longer!"

"laɪt," ɛɡwin bɹiðd. ðə ɹʌʃ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ kʊʃən əɹ əɡɛns ðə ʃɑk. "ðə laɪt hɛlp ən kʌmfɝt ju, maɪ dɔɾɝ. waɪ dɪdn jə tɛl mi? aɪ wəd hæv. . . ." ʃi lɛɾ ɪt tʃɹeɪl əweɪ, noʊɪŋ ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ʃi kəd du.

"Light," Egwene breathed. The rush of saidar cushioned her against the shock. "The Light help and comfort you, my daughter. Why didn't you tell me? I would have. . . ." She let it trail away, knowing there was nothing she could do.

"wʌt wəd juv dʌn? wʌt? nʌθɪŋ! ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ jə kən du. bʌt ðeɪ sɛd ðeɪ kəd ɡɪv ɪt bæk tə mi, wɪð ðə paʊɝ ʌv . . . ðə paʊɝ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn." hɝ aɪz skwizd ʃʌt, likɪŋ tɪɹz. "ðeɪ hɝt mi, mʌðɝ, ən ðeɪ meɪd mi. . . . oʊ, laɪt, ðeɪ hɝt mi! ɪleɪɾə toʊl mi ðeɪ wəd meɪk mi hoʊl əɡɛn, meɪk mi eɪbəl tə tʃænəl əɡɛn, ɪf aɪ oʊbeɪd. ðæts waɪ aɪ. . . . aɪ hæd tə!"

"What would you have done? What? Nothing! There's nothing you can do. But they said they could give it back to me, with the power of . . . the power of the Dark One." Her eyes squeezed shut, leaking tears. "They hurt me, Mother, and they made me. . . . Oh, Light, they hurt me! Elaida told me they would make me whole again, make me able to channel again, if I obeyed. That's why I. . . . I had to!"

"soʊ ɪleɪɾə ɪz blæk ədʒɑ," ɛɡwin sɛd ɡɹɪmli. ə nɛɹoʊ wɔɹdʒɹoʊb stʊɾ əɡɛns ðə wɔl, ən ɪn ɪt hʌŋ ə ɡɹin sɪlk dʒɹɛs, kɛp fəɹ wən ʃi hæd noʊ taɪm tə ɹɪtɝn tə hɝ ɹumz. ə stʃɹaɪp stoʊl hʌŋ bɪsaɪd ðə dʒɹɛs. ʃi bɪɡæn tə dʒɹɛs hɝsɛlf, kwɪkli. "wʌɾ əv ðeɪ dʌn wɪð ɹænd? wɛɹ əv ðeɪ teɪkən hɪm? ænsɝ mi, bɛldaɪn! wɛɹ ɪz ɹænd ælθɹ?"

"So Elaida is Black Ajah," Egwene said grimly. A narrow wardrobe stood against the wall, and in it hung a green silk dress, kept for when she had no time to return to her rooms. A striped stole hung beside the dress. She began to dress herself, quickly. "What have they done with Rand? Where have they taken him? Answer me, Beldeine! Where is Rand al'Thor?"

bɛldaɪn hʌɾəld, lɪps tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, aɪz tɝn blikli ɪnwɝd, bʌt faɪnəli ʃi ɹaʊz hɝsɛlf ɪnʌf tə seɪ, "ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝz kɔɹt, mʌðɝ. ðeɪ tʊk ɪm tə ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝz kɔɹt."

Beldeine huddled, lips trembling, eyes turned bleakly inward, but finally she roused herself enough to say, "The Traitor's Court, Mother. They took him to the Traitor's Court."

ʃɪvɝz əsɔltɪɾ ɛɡwin. ʃɪvɝz ə fɪɹ. ʃɪvɝz ə ɹeɪdʒ. ɪleɪɾə hæd nɑt weɪɾəd, nɑɾ ivən ən aʊɝ. ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝz kɔɹt wɑz juz fəɹ oʊnli θɹi pɝpəsəz: ɛksəkjuʃənz, ðə stɪlɪŋ ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, əɹ ðə dʒɛntəlɪŋ ʌv ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl. bʌɾ ɔl ə ðə θɹi tʊk ən ɔɹɾɝ fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. soʊ hu wɛɹz ðə stoʊl aʊt ðɛɹ? ɪleɪɾə, ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ. bʌt haʊ kəd ʃi meɪk əm æksɛpt əɹ soʊ kwɪkli, wɪð mi nɑt tʃɹaɪd, nɑt sɛntənst? ðəɹ kænɑt bi ənʌðɝ æmɪɝlɪn əntɪl aɪv bɪn stʃɹɪpt ə stoʊl ən stæf. ən ðəl nɑt faɪn ðəɾ izi tə du. laɪt! ɹænd! ʃi stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ.

Shivers assaulted Egwene. Shivers of fear. Shivers of rage. Elaida had not waited, not even an hour. The Traitor's Court was used for only three purposes: executions, the stilling of an Aes Sedai, or the gentling of a man who could channel. But all of the three took an order from the Amyrlin Seat. So who wears the stole out there? Elaida, she was sure. But how could she make them accept her so quickly, with me not tried, not sentenced? There cannot be another Amyrlin until I've been stripped of stole and staff. And they'll not find that easy to do. Light! Rand! She started for the door.

"wʌt kən jə du, mʌðɝ?" bɛldaɪn kɹaɪd. "wʌt kən jə du?" ɪt wɑz nɑt klɪɹ wɛðɝ ʃi mɛn fəɹ ɹænd əɹ fəɹ hɝsɛlf.

"What can you do, Mother?" Beldeine cried. "What can you do?" It was not clear whether she meant for Rand or for herself.

"mɔɹ ðən ɛniwʌn sʌspɛks," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪ nɛvɝ hɛl ði oʊθ ɹɑd, bɛldaɪn." bɛldaɪnz ɡæsp fɑloʊɾ əɹ fɹəm ðə ɹum.

"More than anyone suspects," Egwene said. "I never held the Oath Rod, Beldeine." Beldeine's gasp followed her from the room.

ɛɡwinz mɛmɹi stɪl pleɪd haɪd-ænd-sik wɪð hɝ. ʃi nu noʊ wʊmən kəɾ ətʃiv ðə ʃɔl ən ðə ɹɪŋ wɪθaʊt plɛdʒɪŋ ðə θɹi oʊðz wɪð ði oʊθ ɹɑd fɝmli ɪn hænd, ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil silɪŋ əɹ tə kip ðoʊz oʊðz əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɪnɡɹeɪvd ɑn əɹ boʊnz ət bɝθ. noʊ wʊmən bɪkeɪm ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪθaʊt biɪŋ baʊn tə ðɛm. jɛt ʃi nu ðət sʌmhaʊ, ɪn səm fæʃən ʃi kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə dʒɹɛdʒ ʌp, ʃi hæd dʌn dʒʌs ðæt.

Egwene's memory still played hide-and-seek with her. She knew no woman could achieve the shawl and the ring without pledging the Three Oaths with the Oath Rod firmly in hand, the ter'angreal sealing her to keep those oaths as if they had been engraved on her bones at birth. No woman became Aes Sedai without being bound to them. Yet she knew that somehow, in some fashion she could not begin to dredge up, she had done just that.

hɝ ʃuz klɪk swɪfli əz ʃi ɹæn. ət list ʃi nu naʊ waɪ ðə hɔlz wɝ ɛmpti. ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪksɛpt pɝhæps ðoʊz ʃi hæd lɛft ɪn ðə stɔɹɹum, ɛvɹi æksɛptɪd, ɛvɹi nɑvəs, ivən ɔl ðə sɝvəns, wəd bi ɡæðɝɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝz kɔɹt, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə kʌstəm, tə wɑtʃ ðə wɪl ə tɑɹ vəlɑn meɪd fækt.

Her shoes clicked swiftly as she ran. At least she knew now why the halls were empty. Every Aes Sedai, except perhaps those she had left in the storeroom, every Accepted, every novice, even all the servants, would be gathered in the Traitor's Court, according to custom, to watch the will of Tar Valon made fact.

ən ðə wɔɹɾɝz wəd bi ɹɪŋɪŋ ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹɾ əɡɛns ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðət sʌmwʌn maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə fɹi ðə mæn tə bi dʒɛntəld. ðə ɹɛmnəns ʌv ɡɛɹ əmɑlɑsənz ɑɹmiz hæɾ ətɛmptəɾ ɪt, ət ði ɛn ʌv wʌt səm kɔl ðə wɔɹ ə ðə sɛkən dʒɹæɡən, dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɹaɪz hæd ɡɪvən tɑɹ vəlɑn ʌðɝ θɪŋz tə wɝi ɪt, ən soʊ hæd ɹɑoʊlɪn dɑɹksbeɪnz fɑloʊɝz, lɔŋ jɪɹz ɝliɝ. wɛðɝ ɹænd hæɾ ɛni fɑloʊɝz əɹ nɑt, ʃi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ, bʌt wɔɹɾɝz ɹɪmɛmbɝd sətʃ θɪŋz, ən ɡɑɹɾəd əɡɛns ðɛm.

And the Warders would be ringing the courtyard against the possibility that someone might try to free the man to be gentled. The remnants of Guaire Amalasan's armies had attempted it, at the end of what some called the War of the Second Dragon, just before Artur Hawkwing's rise had given Tar Valon other things to worry it, and so had Raolin Darksbane's followers, long years earlier. Whether Rand had any followers or not, she could not remember, but Warders remembered such things, and guarded against them.

ɪf ɪleɪɾə, əɹ ənʌðɝ, tʃɹuli dɪd wɛɹ ðə stoʊl ə ði æmɪɝlɪn, ðə wɔɹɾɝz maɪt wɛl nɑɾ ədmɪɾ əɹ tə ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝz kɔɹt. ʃi nu ʃi kəd fɔɹs ə weɪ ɪn. ɪt wəd nid tə bi dʌn kwɪkli; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪf ɹænd wɑz dʒɛntəld waɪl ʃi wɑz stɪl ɹæpɪŋ wɔɹɾɝz ɪn ɛɹ. ivən wɔɹɾɝz wəd bɹeɪk ɪf ʃi lus ðə laɪtnɪŋz ɑn ðɛm, ən bɑlfaɪɝ, ən bɹoʊk ðə ɡɹaʊn ʌndɝ ðɛɹ fit. bɑlfaɪɝ? ʃi wʌndɝd. bʌɾ ɪt wəɾ ɔlsoʊ də noʊ ɡʊɾ ɪf ʃi bɹoʊk tɑɹ vəlɑnz paʊɝ tə seɪv ɹænd. ʃi hæd tə seɪv boʊθ.

If Elaida, or another, truly did wear the stole of the Amyrlin, the Warders might well not admit her to the Traitor's Court. She knew she could force a way in. It would need to be done quickly; there was no point if Rand was gentled while she was still wrapping Warders in Air. Even Warders would break if she loosed the lightnings on them, and balefire, and broke the ground under their feet. Balefire? she wondered. But it would also do no good if she broke Tar Valon's power to save Rand. She had to save both.

wɛl ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə weɪz ðət lɛd tə ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝz kɔɹt, ʃi tɝn əsaɪɾ ən klaɪmd, ʌp stɛɹz ən ɹæmps ðət ɡɹu nɛɹoʊɝ ən taɪɾɝ ðə haɪɝ ʃi wɛnt, əntɪl ʃi θɹʌst oʊpən ə tʃɹæpdɔɹ ən klaɪmd aʊɾ ɑntu ə sloʊpɪŋ taʊɝ tɑp, ə ɹuf ə nɪɹli waɪt taɪlz. fɹəm ðɛɹ, ʃi kəd si əkɹɔs ʌðɝ ɹufs, pæst ʌðɝ taʊɝz, ɪndə ðə bɹɔɾ oʊpən wɛl ə ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝz kɔɹt.

Well short of the ways that led to the Traitor's Court, she turned aside and climbed, up stairs and ramps that grew narrower and tighter the higher she went, until she thrust open a trapdoor and climbed out onto a sloping tower top, a roof of nearly white tiles. From there, she could see across other roofs, past other towers, into the broad open well of the Traitor's Court.

ðə kɔɹt wɑz kɹaʊɾəd ɪksɛp fəɹ ə klɪɹd speɪs ɪn ðə mɪɾəl. pipəl fɪl ðə wɪndoʊz oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ ɪt, kɹaʊɾəd ðə bælkəniz ən ivən ðə ɹuftɑps, bʌt ʃi kəd meɪk aʊt ðə loʊn mæn, smɔl ət ðət dɪstəns, sweɪɪŋ ɪn ɪz tʃeɪnz ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə klɪɹd speɪs. ɹænd. twɛlv ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝaʊndəd hɪm, ən ənʌðɝ - hu ɛɡwin nu hæd tə bi wɛɹɪŋ ə sɛvən-stʃɹaɪp stoʊl, ivən ðoʊ ʃi kəd nɑt dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃ ɪt - stʊd bɪfɔɹ ɹænd. ɪleɪɾə. ðə wɝdz ʃi mʌs bi seɪɪŋ kɹɛpt ɪndə ɛɡwinz hɛd.

The court was crowded except for a cleared space in the middle. People filled the windows overlooking it, crowded the balconies and even the rooftops, but she could make out the lone man, small at that distance, swaying in his chains in the center of the cleared space. Rand. Twelve Aes Sedai surrounded him, and another - who Egwene knew had to be wearing a seven-striped stole, even though she could not distinguish it - stood before Rand. Elaida. The words she must be saying crept into Egwene's head.

ðɪs mæn, əbændən ə ðə laɪt, hæz tʌtʃt seɪɾɪn, ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. ðʌs də wi hoʊl hɪm. moʊst əbɑmənəbli hæz ðɪs mæn tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ, noʊɪŋ ðət seɪɾɪn ɪz teɪntɪd baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn, teɪntɪd fəɹ mɛnz pɹaɪd, teɪntɪd fəɹ mɛnz sɪn. ðʌs də wi tʃeɪn hɪm.

This man, abandoned of the Light, has touched saidin, the male half of the True Source. Thus do we hold him. Most abominably has this man channeled the One Power, knowing that saidin is tainted by the Dark One, tainted for men's pride, tainted for men's sin. Thus do we chain him.

fɔɹsfəli, ɛɡwin pʊʃt ðə ɹɛst ʌv ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ θɔts. θɝtin ɛɛs sədaɪ. twɛlv sɪstɝz ən ði æmɪɝlɪn, ðə tʃɹədɪʃənəl nʌmbɝ fəɹ dʒɛntəlɪŋ. ðə seɪm nʌmbɝ əz fɔɹ. . . . ʃi ɹɪd hɝsɛlf ə ðæt, tu. ʃi hæd noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt wʌt ʃi wɑz ðəɹ tə du. ɪf ʃi kəɾ oʊnli mænədʒ tə ɹizən aʊt haʊ.

Forcefully, Egwene pushed the rest of it out of her thoughts. Thirteen Aes Sedai. Twelve sisters and the Amyrlin, the traditional number for gentling. The same number as for. . . . She rid herself of that, too. She had no time for anything but what she was there to do. If she could only manage to reason out how.

ət ðət dɪstəns, ʃi θɔt ʃi kəd mænədʒ tə lɪft ɪm wɪð ɛɹ. pɪk ɪm ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə sɝkəl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ən floʊɾ ɪm stʃɹeɪt tə hɝ. meɪbi. ivən ɪf ʃi kəd faɪn ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ, ivən ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt dʒɹɑp ɪm tə hɪz dɛθ hæfweɪ, ɪt wəd bi ə sloʊ pɹɑsɛs, wɪð ɪm ə hɛlpləs tɑɹɡət fəɹ ɑɹtʃɝz, ən ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ pɔɪntɪŋ aʊɾ əɹ oʊn pəzɪʃən fəɹ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ hu lʊkt. ɛni mɹdʒɹɑl, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ.

At that distance, she thought she could manage to lift him with Air. Pick him right out of the circle of Aes Sedai and float him straight to her. Maybe. Even if she could find the strength, even if she did not drop him to his death halfway, it would be a slow process, with him a helpless target for archers, and the glow of saidar pointing out her own position for any Aes Sedai who looked. Any Myrddraal, for that matter.

"laɪt," ʃi mʌɾɝd, "ðɛɹz noʊ ʌðɝ weɪ ʃɔɹɾ ə stɑɹɾɪŋ ə wɔɹ ɪnsaɪd ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ən aɪ meɪ də ðəɾ ɛniweɪ." ʃi ɡæðɝd ðə paʊɝ, sɛpɝeɪɾəd sknz, dɝɛktəd floʊz.

"Light," she muttered, "there's no other way short of starting a war inside the White Tower. And I may do that anyway." She gathered the Power, separated skeins, directed flows.

ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst.

The way back will come but once. Be steadfast.

ɪt hæd bɪn soʊ lɔŋ sɪns ʃi læs hɝd ðoʊz wɝdz ðət ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, slɪpt ɑn ðə smuð taɪlz, bɛɹli kɑt hɝsɛlf ʃɔɹɾ ə ði ɛdʒ. ðə ɡɹaʊn leɪ ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz daʊn. ʃi lʊkt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ.

It had been so long since she last heard those words that she gave a start, slipped on the smooth tiles, barely caught herself short of the edge. The ground lay a hundred paces down. She looked over her shoulder.

ðəɹ ɑn ðə taʊɝ tɑp, tɪltəd tə sɪt flæɾ əɡɛns ðə sloʊpɪŋ taɪlz, wɑz ə sɪlvɝ ɑɹtʃ fɪld wɪð ə ɡloʊɪŋ laɪt. ði ɑɹtʃ flɪkɝɾ ən weɪvɝd; stʃɹiks ʌv æŋɡɹi ɹɛɾ ən jɛloʊ dɑɹɾɪd θɹu ðə waɪt laɪt.

There on the tower top, tilted to sit flat against the sloping tiles, was a silver arch filled with a glowing light. The arch flickered and wavered; streaks of angry red and yellow darted through the white light.

ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst.

The way back will come but once. Be steadfast.

ði ɑɹtʃweɪ θɪn tə tʃɹænspɛɹənsi, ɡɹu sɑləɾ əɡɛn.

The archway thinned to transparency, grew solid again.

fɹæntɪk, ɛɡwin ɡeɪz təwɔɹd ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝz kɔɹt. ðəɹ hæd tə bi taɪm. ðəɹ hæd tə bi. ɔl ʃi niɾəd wɑz ə fju mɪnəts, pɝhæps tɛn, ən lʌk.

Frantic, Egwene gazed toward the Traitor's Court. There had to be time. There had to be. All she needed was a few minutes, perhaps ten, and luck.

vɔɪsəz bɔɹɾ ɪndə hɝ hɛd, nɑt ðə dɪsɪbɑɾid, ənnoʊəbəl vɔɪs ðət wɔɹn əɹ tə bi stɛdfæst, bʌt wɪmənz vɔɪsəz ʃi ɔlmoʊs bɪlivd ʃi nu.

Voices bored into her head, not the disembodied, unknowable voice that warned her to be steadfast, but women's voices she almost believed she knew.

 - kæn hoʊl mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ. ɪf ʃi dʌz nɑt kʌm aʊt naʊ -  hoʊld! hoʊld, bɝn ju, əɹ əl ɡʌt jə ɔl laɪk stɝdʒənz!

 - can't hold much longer. If she does not come out now -  Hold! Hold, burn you, or I'll gut you all like sturgeons!

 - ɡoʊɪŋ waɪld, mʌðɝ! wi kænt -  ðə vɔɪsəz feɪɾəd tə ə dʒɹoʊn, ðə dʒɹoʊn tə saɪləns, bʌt ði ənnoʊəbəl spoʊk əɡɛn.

 - going wild, Mother! We can't -  The voices faded to a drone, the drone to silence, but the unknowable spoke again.

ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst.

The way back will come but once. Be steadfast.

ðəɹ ɪz ə pɹaɪs tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ.

There is a price to be Aes Sedai.

ðə blæk ədʒɑ weɪts.

The Black Ajah waits.

wɪð ə skɹim ə ɹeɪdʒ, ʌv lɔs, ɛɡwin θɹu hɝsɛlf ət ði ɑɹtʃ əz ɪt ʃɪmɝd laɪk ə hit heɪz. ʃi ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt ʃi wəd mɪs ən plʌnʒ tə hɝ dɛθ.

With a scream of rage, of loss, Egwene threw herself at the arch as it shimmered like a heat haze. She almost wished she would miss and plunge to her death.

laɪt plʌkt əɹ əpɑɹt faɪbɝ baɪ faɪbɝ, slaɪs ðə faɪbɝz tə hɛɹz, splɪt ðə hɛɹz tə wɪsps ə nʌθɪŋ. ɔl dʒɹɪftəɾ əpɑɹɾ ɑn ðə laɪt. fɝɛvɝ.

Light plucked her apart fiber by fiber, sliced the fibers to hairs, split the hairs to wisps of nothing. All drifted apart on the light. Forever.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiθɹi


CHAPTER 23

sild


Sealed

laɪt pʊld əɹ əpɑɹt faɪbɝ baɪ faɪbɝ, slaɪs ðə faɪbɝz tə hɛɹz ðət dʒɹɪftəɾ əpɑɹt, bɝnɪŋ. dʒɹɪftɪŋ ən bɝnɪŋ, fɝɛvɝ. fɝɛvɝ.

Light pulled her apart fiber by fiber, sliced the fibers to hairs that drifted apart, burning. Drifting and burning, forever. Forever.

ɛɡwin stɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə sɪlvɝ ɑɹtʃ koʊld ən stɪf wɪð æŋɡɝ. ʃi wɑntəd ði aɪsaɪnəs ʌv æŋɡɝ tə kaʊntɝ ðə sɪɹɪŋ ə mɛmɹi. hɝ bɑɾi ɹɪmɛmbɝd bɝnɪŋ, bʌɾ ʌðɝ mɛmɹiz skɔɹɾ ən skɔɹtʃt mɔɹ dipli. æŋɡɝ koʊld əz dɛθ.

Egwene stepped out of the silver arch cold and stiff with anger. She wanted the iciness of anger to counter the searing of memory. Her body remembered burning, but other memories scored and scorched more deeply. Anger cold as death.

"ɪz ðəɾ ɔl ðəɹ ɪz fəɹ mi?" ʃi dɪmændəd. "tə əbændən ɪm əɡɛn ən əɡɛn. tə bɪtʃɹeɪ hɪm, feɪl hɪm, əɡɛn ən əɡɛn? ɪz ðət wʌt ðəɹ ɪz fəɹ mi?"

"Is that all there is for me?" she demanded. "To abandon him again and again. To betray him, fail him, again and again? Is that what there is for me?"

sʌɾənli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɔl wɑz nɑɾ əz ɪt ʃəd bi. ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz ðəɹ naʊ, əz ɛɡwin hæd bɪn tɔt ʃi wəd bi, ən ə ʃɔl sɪstɝ fɹəm itʃ ədʒɑ, bʌt ðeɪ ɔl stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ wɝidli. tu ɛɛs sədaɪ naʊ sæɾ əɾ itʃ pleɪs ɝaʊn ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, swɛt ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ feɪsəz. ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil hʌmd, ɔlmoʊs vaɪbɹeɪɾɪd, ən vaɪələn stʃɹiks ə kʌlɝ tɔɹ ðə waɪt laɪɾ ɪnsaɪd ði ɑɹtʃəz.

Suddenly she realized that all was not as it should be. The Amyrlin was there now, as Egwene had been taught she would be, and a shawled sister from each Ajah, but they all stared at her worriedly. Two Aes Sedai now sat at each place around the ter'angreal, sweat running down their faces. The ter'angreal hummed, almost vibrated, and violent streaks of color tore the white light inside the arches.

ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ bɹifli ɛnvɛləpt ʃɛɹiəm əz ʃi pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ɛɡwinz hɛd, sɛndɪŋ ə nu tʃɪl θɹu hɝ. "ʃi ɪz wɛl." ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz saʊndəd ɹɪlivd. "ʃi ɪz ənhɑɹmd." əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪt.

The glow of saidar briefly enveloped Sheriam as she put a hand on Egwene's head, sending a new chill through her. "She is well." The Mistress of Novices sounded relieved. "She is unharmed." As if she had not expected it.

tɛnʃən sim tə ɡoʊ aʊɾ ə ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪsɪŋ ɛɡwin. ɪleɪɾə lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ, ðən hɝiɾ əweɪ fəɹ ðə læs tʃælɪs. oʊnli ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɝaʊn ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil dɪd nɑt ɹɪlæks. ðə hʌm hæd lɛsənd, ən ðə laɪt bɪɡæn ðə flɪkɝɪŋ ðət sɪɡnəl ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɑz sɛɾəlɪŋ təwɔɹd kwaɪɛsəns, bʌt ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ faɪɾɪŋ ɪɾ ɛvɹi ɪntʃ ə ðə weɪ.

Tension seemed to go out of the other Aes Sedai facing Egwene. Elaida let out a long breath, then hurried away for the last chalice. Only the Aes Sedai around the ter'angreal did not relax. The hum had lessened, and the light began the flickering that signaled the ter'angreal was settling toward quiescence, but those Aes Sedai looked as if they were fighting it every inch of the way.

"wʌt . . . ? wʌt hæpənd?" ɛɡwin æskt.

"What . . . ? What happened?" Egwene asked.

"bi saɪlənt," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd, bʌt dʒɛnli. "fɔɹ naʊ, bi saɪlənt. jə ɑɹ wɛl - ðəɾ ɪz ðə meɪn θɪŋ - ən wi mʌs kəmplit ðə sɛɹəmoʊni." ɪleɪɾə keɪm, kloʊs tə ɹʌnɪŋ, ən hændəd ðə faɪnəl sɪlvɝ tʃælɪs tə ði æmɪɝlɪn.

"Be silent," Sheriam said, but gently. "For now, be silent. You are well - that is the main thing - and we must complete the ceremony." Elaida came, close to running, and handed the final silver chalice to the Amyrlin.

ɛɡwin hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ nilɪŋ. wʌt hæpənd?

Egwene hesitated only a moment before kneeling. What happened?

ði æmɪɝlɪn ɛmptid ðə tʃælɪs sloʊli oʊvɝ ɛɡwinz hɛd. "ju ɑɹ wɑʃt klin ʌv ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ fɹəm ɛmənz fild. jə ɑɹ wɑʃt klin ʌv ɔl taɪz ðət baɪn jə tə ðə wɝld. jə kʌm tə əs wɑʃt klin, ɪn hɑɹɾ ən soʊl. jə ɑɹ ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ, æksɛptɪɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ." ðə læs dʒɹɑp splæʃt ɑntu ɛɡwinz hɛɹ. "ju ɑɹ sil tə ʌs, naʊ."

The Amyrlin emptied the chalice slowly over Egwene's head. "You are washed clean of Egwene al'Vere from Emond's Field. You are washed clean of all ties that bind you to the world. You come to us washed clean, in heart and soul. You are Egwene al'Vere, Accepted of the White Tower." The last drop splashed onto Egwene's hair. "You are sealed to us, now."

ðə læst wɝdz sim tə hæv ə spɛʃəl minɪŋ, dʒʌs bɪtwin ɛɡwin ən ði æmɪɝlɪn. ði æmɪɝlɪn θɹʌs ðə tʃælɪs ət wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən pɹədust ə ɡoʊld ɹɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə sɝpən baɪɾɪŋ ɪts oʊn teɪl. dɪspaɪt hɝsɛlf, ɛɡwin tʃɹɛmbəld əz ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ lɛf hænd, tʃɹɛmbəld əɡɛn əz ði æmɪɝlɪn slɪp ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑntu ðə θɝd fɪŋɡɝ. wən ʃi bɪkeɪm ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃi kəd wɛɹ ðə ɹɪŋ ɑn ðə fɪŋɡɝ ʃi tʃoʊz, əɹ nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ɪf ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi tə haɪɾ u ʃi wɑz, bʌt ði æksɛptɪd wɔɹ ɪt ðɛɹ.

The last words seemed to have a special meaning, just between Egwene and the Amyrlin. The Amyrlin thrust the chalice at one of the other Aes Sedai and produced a gold ring in the shape of a serpent biting its own tail. Despite herself, Egwene trembled as she raised her left hand, trembled again as the Amyrlin slipped the Great Serpent ring onto the third finger. When she became Aes Sedai, she could wear the ring on the finger she chose, or not at all if it was necessary to hide who she was, but the Accepted wore it there.

ənsmaɪlɪŋ, ði æmɪɝlɪn pʊld əɹ tə hɝ fit. "wɛlkəm, dɔɾɝ," ʃi sɛd, kɪsɪŋ əɹ tʃik. ɛɡwin wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə fil ə θɹɪl. nɑt tʃaɪld, bʌt dɔɾɝ. ɔlweɪz bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd bɪn tʃaɪld. ði æmɪɝlɪn kɪst əɹ ʌðɝ tʃik. "wɛlkəm."

Unsmiling, the Amyrlin pulled her to her feet. "Welcome, Daughter," she said, kissing her cheek. Egwene was surprised to feel a thrill. Not child, but daughter. Always before she had been child. The Amyrlin kissed her other cheek. "Welcome."

stɛpɪŋ bæk, ði æmɪɝlɪn ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əɹ kɹɪɾɪkəli, bʌt spoʊk tə ʃɛɹiəm. "ɡɛɾ əɹ dʒɹaɪ ən ɪndə səm kloʊðz, ðən bi sɝɾən ʃiz wɛl. sɝɾən, jə ʌndɝstænd."

Stepping back, the Amyrlin regarded her critically, but spoke to Sheriam. "Get her dry and into some clothes, then be certain she is well. Certain, you understand."

"aɪ æm sɝɾən, mʌðɝ." ʃɛɹiəm saʊndəd sɝpɹaɪzd. "ju sɔ mi dɛlv hɝ."

"I am certain, Mother." Sheriam sounded surprised. "You saw me delve her."

ði æmɪɝlɪn ɡɹʌntɪd, ən əɹ aɪz ʃɪftəd tə ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. "aɪ min tə noʊ wʌt wɛn ɹɔŋ tənaɪt." ʃi stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ə hɝ ɡlɛɹ, skɝts sweɪɪŋ pɝpəsfəli. moʊst ə ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ dʒɔɪn əɹ ɝaʊn ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, naʊ oʊnli ə sɪlvɝ stʃɹʌktʃɝ ʌv ɑɹtʃəz ɑn ə ɹɪŋ.

The Amyrlin grunted, and her eyes shifted to the ter'angreal. "I mean to know what went wrong tonight." She strode away in the direction of her glare, skirts swaying purposefully. Most of the other Aes Sedai joined her around the ter'angreal, now only a silver structure of arches on a ring.

"ðə mʌðɝ ɪz wɝiɾ əbaʊt ju," ʃɛɹiəm sɛɾ əz ʃi dʒɹu ɛɡwin tə wʌn saɪd, tə wɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz ə θɪk taʊəl fəɹ əɹ hɛɹ, ən ənʌðɝ fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ.

"The Mother is worried about you," Sheriam said as she drew Egwene to one side, to where there was a thick towel for her hair, and another for the rest of her.

"haʊ mʌtʃ ɹizən dɪd ʃi hæv?" ɛɡwin æskt. ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑns nʌθɪŋ tə hæpən tə hɝ haʊn tɪl ðə dɪɹ ɪz pʊl daʊn.

"How much reason did she have?" Egwene asked. The Amyrlin wants nothing to happen to her hound till the deer is pulled down.

ʃɛɹiəm dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ. ʃi mɪɹli fɹaʊn slaɪtli, ðən weɪɾəd əntɪl ɛɡwin wɑz dʒɹaɪ bɪfɔɹ hændɪŋ əɹ ə waɪt dʒɹɛs bændɪɾ ət ðə bɑɾəm wɪð sɛvən ɹɪŋz.

Sheriam did not answer. She merely frowned slightly, then waited until Egwene was dry before handing her a white dress banded at the bottom with seven rings.

ʃi slɪpt ɪndə ðət dʒɹɛs wɪð ə flæʃ ə dɪsəpɔɪnmənt. ʃi wɑz wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd, wɪð ðə ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝ ən ðə bænz ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛs. waɪ doʊn aɪ fil ɛni dɪfɹənt?

She slipped into that dress with a flash of disappointment. She was one of the Accepted, with the ring on her finger and the bands on her dress. Why don't I feel any different?

ɪleɪɾə keɪm oʊvɝ, hɝ ɑɹmz fɪld wɪð ɛɡwinz nɑvəs dʒɹɛs ən ʃuz, hɝ bɛlt ən paʊtʃ. ən ðə peɪpɝz vɛɹɪn hæd ɡɪvən hɝ. ɪn ɪleɪɾəz hænz.

Elaida came over, her arms filled with Egwene's novice dress and shoes, her belt and pouch. And the papers Verin had given her. In Elaida's hands.

ɛɡwin meɪd hɝsɛlf weɪt fəɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hæn ðə bʌndəl tə hɝ ɹæðɝ ðən snætʃ əm əweɪ. "θæŋk ju, ɛɛs sədaɪ." ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə aɪ ðə peɪpɝz sɝəptɪʃəsli; ʃi kəd nɑt tɛl ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn dɪstɝbd. ðə stʃɹɪŋ wɑz stɪl taɪd. haʊ wəɾ aɪ noʊ ɪf ʃiz ɹɛɾ ɔl ə ðɛm? skwizɪŋ əɹ paʊtʃ ʌndɝ kʌvɝ ə ðə nɑvəs dʒɹɛs, ʃi fɛl ðə pəkjuljɝ ɹɪŋ, ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ɪnsaɪd. ət lis ðæts stɪl hɪɹ. laɪt, ʃi cʊɾə teɪkən ðæt, ən aɪ doʊnt noʊ ðəɾ aɪ wəɾ əv maɪndəd. jɛs, aɪ wʊd. aɪ θɪŋk aɪ wʊd.

Egwene made herself wait for the Aes Sedai to hand the bundle to her rather than snatch them away. "Thank you, Aes Sedai." She tried to eye the papers surreptitiously; she could not tell if they had been disturbed. The string was still tied. How would I know if she's read all of them? Squeezing her pouch under cover of the novice dress, she felt the peculiar ring, the ter'angreal, inside. At least that's still here. Light, she could have taken that, and I don't know that I would have minded. Yes, I would. I think I would.

ɪleɪɾəz feɪs wɑz əz koʊld əz əɹ vɔɪs. "aɪ dɪd nɑt wɑn jə tə bi bɹɔt fɔɹwɝd tənaɪt. nɑt kəz aɪ fɪɹd wʌt hæpənd; noʊ wʌn kəd fɔɹsi ðæt. bʌt kəz ʌv wʌt jə ɑɹ. ə waɪldɝ." ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd tə pɹoʊtɛst, bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə kɛpt ɑn, əz ɪmplækəbəl əz ə maʊntən ɡleɪʃɝ. "oʊ, aɪ noʊ jə lɝn tə tʃænəl ʌndɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ titʃɪŋ, bʌt jə ɑɹ stɪl ə waɪldɝ. ə waɪldɝ ɪn spɪɹət, ə waɪldɝ ɪn weɪz. juv væs pətɛnʃəl, ɛls jə wəd nɛvɝ əv sɝvaɪvd ɪn ðəɹ tənaɪt, bʌt pətɛnʃəl tʃeɪnʒəz nʌθɪŋ. aɪ də nɑt bɪliv jəl ɛvɝ bi pɑɹɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, nɑɾ ɪn ðə weɪ ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs ɑɹ, noʊ mæɾɝ ɑn wɪtʃ fɪŋɡɝ jə wɛɹ jəɹ ɹɪŋ. ɪt wʊɾə bɪn bɛɾɝ fəɹ jə hæd jə sɛɾəld fəɹ lɝnɪŋ ɪnʌf tə steɪ əlaɪv, ən ɡɔn bæk tə jəɹ slipi vɪlədʒ. fɑɹ bɛɾɝ." tɝnɪŋ ɑn əɹ hil, ʃi stɔkt əweɪ, aʊɾ ə ðə tʃeɪmbɝ.

Elaida's face was as cold as her voice. "I did not want you to be brought forward tonight. Not because I feared what happened; no one could foresee that. But because of what you are. A wilder." Egwene tried to protest, but Elaida kept on, as implacable as a mountain glacier. "Oh, I know you learned to channel under Aes Sedai teaching, but you are still a wilder. A wilder in spirit, a wilder in ways. You have vast potential, else you would never have survived in there tonight, but potential changes nothing. I do not believe you will ever be part of the White Tower, not in the way the rest of us are, no matter on which finger you wear your ring. It would have been better for you had you settled for learning enough to stay alive, and gone back to your sleepy village. Far better." Turning on her heel, she stalked away, out of the chamber.

ɪf ʃi ɪzən blæk ədʒɑ, ɛɡwin θɔt saʊɝli, ʃiz ðə nɛks θɪŋ tə ɪt. əlaʊd, ʃi mʌɾɝd tə ʃɛɹiəm, "ju cʊɾə sɛd sʌmθɪŋ. jə cʊɾə hɛlp mi."

If she isn't Black Ajah, Egwene thought sourly, she's the next thing to it. Aloud, she muttered to Sheriam, "You could have said something. You could have helped me."

"aɪ wʊɾə hɛlpt ə nɑvəs, tʃaɪld," ʃɛɹiəm ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli, ən ɛɡwin wɪnst. ʃi wɑz bæk tə "tʃaɪld" əɡɛn. "aɪ tʃɹaɪ tə pɹətɛk nɑvəsɪz wɛɹ ðeɪ niɾ ɪt, sɪns ðeɪ kænɑt pɹətɛk ðɛmsɛlvz. jə ɑɹ æksɛptɪd, naʊ. ɪts taɪm fəɹ jə tə lɝn tə pɹətɛk jɝsɛlf."

"I would have helped a novice, child," Sheriam replied calmly, and Egwene winced. She was back to "child" again. "I try to protect novices where they need it, since they cannot protect themselves. You are Accepted, now. It is time for you to learn to protect yourself."

ɛɡwin stʌɾid ʃɛɹiəmz aɪz, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɪmædʒən ən ɛmfəsəs ɑn ðət læst sɛntəns. ʃɛɹiəm hæd hæɾ əz mʌtʃ ɑpɝtunəɾi əz ɪleɪɾə tə ɹid ðə lɪst ə neɪmz, tə dɪsaɪd ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑz mɪkst ɪn wɪð ðə blæk ədʒɑ. laɪt, jəɹ bɪkʌmɪŋ səspɪʃəs ʌv ɛvɹibɑɾi. bɛɾɝ ðət ðən dɛd, əɹ kæptʃɝd baɪ θɝtin ə ðɛm ænd. . . . heɪstəli, ʃi stɑp ðət laɪn ə θɔt; ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn ɪɾ ɪn əɹ hɛd. "ʃɛɹiəm, wʌd hæpən tənaɪt?" ʃi æskt. "æn doʊn pʊt mi ɔf." ʃɛɹiəmz aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz ɔlmoʊs tə hɝ skælp, ɪt simd, ən ʃi heɪstəli əmɛndəɾ əɹ kwɛstʃən. "ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ, aɪ min. fɝɡɪv mi, ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ."

Egwene studied Sheriam's eyes, wondering if she had imagined an emphasis on that last sentence. Sheriam had had as much opportunity as Elaida to read the list of names, to decide that Egwene was mixed in with the Black Ajah. Light, you're becoming suspicious of everybody. Better that than dead, or captured by thirteen of them and. . . . Hastily, she stopped that line of thought; she did not want it in her head. "Sheriam, what did happen tonight?" she asked. "And don't put me off." Sheriam's eyebrows rose almost to her scalp, it seemed, and she hastily amended her question. "Sheriam Sedai, I mean. Forgive me, Sheriam Sedai."

"ɹɪmɛmbɝ jə ɑɹən ɛɛs sədaɪ jɛt, tʃaɪld." dɪspaɪt ðə stil ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, ə smaɪl tʌtʃt ʃɛɹiəmz lɪps, jɛɾ ɪt vænɪʃt əz ʃi wɛn ɑn. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ wʌt hæpənd. ɪksɛp ðəɾ aɪ vɛɹi mʌtʃ fɪɹ jə ɔlmoʊs daɪd."

"Remember you aren't Aes Sedai yet, child." Despite the steel in her voice, a smile touched Sheriam's lips, yet it vanished as she went on. "I do not know what happened. Except that I very much fear you almost died."

"hu noʊz wʌt hæpənz tə ðoʊz u də nɑt kʌm aʊɾ ʌv ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil?" ɑlɑnə sɛɾ əz ʃi dʒɔɪn ðɛm. ðə ɡɹin sɪstɝ wɑz noʊn fəɹ əɹ tɛmpɝ ən əɹ sɛns ə hjumɝ, ən səm sɛd ʃi kəd flæʃ fɹəm wʌn tə ði ʌðɝ ən bæk əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ jə kəd blɪŋk, bʌt ðə lʊk ʃi ɡeɪv ɛɡwin wɑz ɔlmoʊs dɪfəɾənt. "tʃaɪld, aɪ ʃʊɾə stɑp ðɪs wən aɪ hæd ðə tʃæns, wən aɪ fɝs noʊɾəst ðət - ɹivɝbɝeɪʃən. ɪt keɪm bæk. ðəɾ ɪz wʌt hæpənd. ɪt keɪm bæk ə θaʊzændfoʊld. tɛn θaʊzənd. ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɔlmoʊst sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʃʌɾ ɔf ðə floʊ fɹəm seɪaɪdɑɹ - əɹ mɛlt ɪtsɛlf θɹu ðə flɔɹ. juv maɪ əpɑlədʒiz, ðoʊ wɝdz ɑɹ nɑɾ ɪnʌf. nɑt fəɹ wʌɾ ɔlmoʊs hæpən tə ju. aɪ seɪ ðɪs, ən baɪ ðə fɝst oʊθ jə noʊ ɪts tʃɹu. tə ʃoʊ maɪ filɪŋz, əl æsk ðə mʌðɝ tə lemi ʃɛɹ jəɹ taɪm ɪn ðə kɪtʃənz. ænd, jɛs, jəɹ vɪzət tə ʃɛɹiəm, tu. hæɾ aɪ dʌn əz aɪ ʃʊd, jə wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ɪn deɪnʒɝ ə jəɹ laɪf, ən əl ətoʊn fəɹ ɪt."

"Who knows what happens to those who do not come out of a ter'angreal?" Alanna said as she joined them. The Green sister was known for her temper and her sense of humor, and some said she could flash from one to the other and back again before you could blink, but the look she gave Egwene was almost diffident. "Child, I should have stopped this when I had the chance, when I first noticed that - reverberation. It came back. That is what happened. It came back a thousandfold. Ten thousand. The ter'angreal almost seemed to be trying to shut off the flow from saidar - or melt itself through the floor. You have my apologies, though words are not enough. Not for what almost happened to you. I say this, and by the First Oath you know it is true. To show my feelings, I will ask the Mother to let me share your time in the kitchens. And, yes, your visit to Sheriam, too. Had I done as I should, you would not have been in danger of your life, and I will atone for it."

ʃɛɹiəmz læf wɑz skændəlaɪzd. "ʃi wɪl nɛvɝ əlaʊ ðæt, ɑlɑnə. ə sɪstɝ ɪn ðə kɪtʃənz, mʌtʃ lɛs. . . . ɪts ənhɝɾ ʌv. ɪts ɪmpɑsəbəl! jə dɪd wʌt jə bɪlivd ɹaɪt. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ fɔl tə ju."

Sheriam's laugh was scandalized. "She will never allow that, Alanna. A sister in the kitchens, much less. . . . It is unheard of. It's impossible! You did what you believed right. There is no fault to you."

"ɪt wɑz nɑt jəɹ fɔlt, ɑlɑnə sədaɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd. waɪ ɪz ɑlɑnə duɪŋ ðɪs? ənlɛs meɪbi tə kənvɪns mi ʃi dɪdn əv ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð wʌtɛvɝ wɛn ɹɔŋ. ən meɪbi soʊ ʃi kən kip ən aɪ ɑn mi ɔl ðə taɪm. ɪt wɑz ðəɾ ɪmədʒ, ə pɹaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌp tə hɝ ɛlboʊz ɪn ɡɹisi pɑts θɹi taɪmz ə deɪ dʒʌs tə wɑtʃ sʌmwʌn, ðət kənvɪnst əɹ ʃi wɑz lɛɾɪŋ əɹ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən ɹʌn əweɪ wɪð hɝ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔlsoʊ ənθɪŋkəbəl ðəɾ ɑlɑnə ʃəd də əz ʃi sɛd ʃi wʊd. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðə ɡɹin sɪstɝ sɝɾənli hæd hæd noʊ tʃæns tə si ðə lɪst ə neɪmz waɪl tɛndɪŋ ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. bʌɾ ɪf nɪneɪiv ɪz ɹaɪt, ʃi wʊdnt nid tə si ðoʊz neɪmz tə wɑnə kɪl mi ɪf ʃiz blæk ədʒɑ. stɑp ðæt! "ɹɪli, ɪt wɑznt."

"It was not your fault, Alanna Sedai," Egwene said. Why is Alanna doing this? Unless maybe to convince me she didn't have anything to do with whatever went wrong. And maybe so she can keep an eye on me all the time. It was that image, a proud Aes Sedai up to her elbows in greasy pots three times a day just to watch someone, that convinced her she was letting her imagination run away with her. But it was also unthinkable that Alanna should do as she said she would. In any case, the Green sister certainly had had no chance to see the list of names while tending the ter'angreal. But if Nynaeve is right, she wouldn't need to see those names to want to kill me if she is Black Ajah. Stop that! "Really, it wasn't."

"hæɾ aɪ dʌn əz aɪ ʃʊd," ɑlɑnə meɪnteɪnd, "ɪt wəd nɛvɝ əv hæpənd. ði oʊnli taɪm aɪ hæv ɛvɝ sin ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ɪt wɑz wʌns jɪɹz əɡoʊ wən wi tʃɹaɪd tə juz ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɪn ðə seɪm ɹum wɪð ənʌðɝ ðət meɪ hæv bɪn ɪn səm weɪ ɹɪleɪɾɪd tə ɪt. ɪts ɪkstʃɹimli ɹɛɹ tə faɪn tu sətʃ əz ðæt. ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm mɛltəd, ən ɛvɹi sɪstɝ wɪðɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz hæd sətʃ ə hɛdeɪk fəɹ ə wik ðət ʃi kʊdn tʃænəl ə spɑɹk. wʌts ðə mæɾɝ, tʃaɪld?"

"Had I done as I should," Alanna maintained, "it would never have happened. The only time I have ever seen anything like it was once years ago when we tried to use a ter'angreal in the same room with another that may have been in some way related to it. It is extremely rare to find two such as that. The pair of them melted, and every sister within a hundred paces had such a headache for a week that she couldn't channel a spark. What's the matter, child?"

ɛɡwinz hæn hæd taɪɾənd ɝaʊn əɹ paʊtʃ tɪl ðə twɪstəd stoʊn ɹɪŋ ɪmpɹɛst ɪtsɛlf ɑn əɹ pɑm θɹu ðə θɪk klɔθ. wɑz ɪt wɔɹm? laɪt, aɪ dɪɾ ɪt maɪsɛlf. "nʌθɪŋ, ɑlɑnə sədaɪ. ɛɛs sədaɪ, jə dɪd nʌθɪŋ ɹɔŋ. juv noʊ ɹizən tə ʃɛɹ maɪ pʌnɪʃməns. nʌn əɾ ɔl. nʌn!"

Egwene's hand had tightened around her pouch till the twisted stone ring impressed itself on her palm through the thick cloth. Was it warm? Light, I did it myself. "Nothing, Alanna Sedai. Aes Sedai, you did nothing wrong. You have no reason to share my punishments. None at all. None!"

"ə bɪt viəmənt," ʃɛɹiəm əbzɝvd, "bʌt tʃɹu." ɑlɑnə oʊnli ʃʊk əɹ hɛd.

"A bit vehement," Sheriam observed, "but true." Alanna only shook her head.

"ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd sloʊli, "wʌt dʌz ɪt min tə bi ɡɹin ədʒɑ?" ʃɛɹiəmz aɪz oʊpənd waɪɾɝ wɪð əmjuzmənt, ən ɑlɑnə ɡɹɪn oʊpənli.

"Aes Sedai," Egwene said slowly, "what does it mean to be Green Ajah?" Sheriam's eyes opened wider with amusement, and Alanna grinned openly.

"dʒʌst wɪð ðə ɹɪŋ ɑn jəɹ fɪŋɡɝ," ðə ɡɹin sɪstɝ sɛd, "æn ɔlɹɛɾi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsaɪd wɪtʃ ədʒɑ tə tʃuz? fɝst, jə mʌs lʌv mɛn. aɪ doʊn min bi ɪn lʌv wɪð ðɛm, bʌt lʌv ðɛm. nɑt laɪk ə blu, hu mɪɹli laɪks mɛn, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ ʃɛɹ əɹ kɑzəz ən də nɑt ɡɛɾ ɪn əɹ weɪ. ən sɝɾənli nɑt laɪk ə ɹɛd, hu dɪspaɪzɪz əm əz ɪf ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm wɝ ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ." ɑlviɛɝɪn, ðə waɪt sɪstɝ u hæd kʌm wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn, ɡeɪv əm ə kul lʊk ən muvd ɑn. "ænd nɑt laɪk ə waɪt," ɑlɑnə sɛd wɪð ə læf, "hu hæz noʊ ɹum ɪn əɹ laɪf fəɹ ɛni pæʃənz əɾ ɔl."

"Just with the ring on your finger," the Green sister said, "and already trying to decide which Ajah to choose? First, you must love men. I don't mean be in love with them, but love them. Not like a Blue, who merely likes men, so long as they share her causes and do not get in her way. And certainly not like a Red, who despises them as if every one of them were responsible for the Breaking." Alviarin, the White sister who had come with the Amyrlin, gave them a cool look and moved on. "And not like a White," Alanna said with a laugh, "who has no room in her life for any passions at all."

"ðæt wɑz nɑt wʌɾ aɪ mɛnt, ɑlɑnə sədaɪ. aɪ wɑnə noʊ wʌɾ ɪt minz tə bi ə ɡɹin sɪstɝ." ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɑlɑnə wəɾ ʌndɝstænd, kəz ʃi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən ʃi hɝsɛlf ʌndɝstʊd wʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə noʊ, bʌɾ ɑlɑnə nɑɾəd sloʊli əz ɪf ʃi dɪd.

"That was not what I meant, Alanna Sedai. I want to know what it means to be a Green sister." She was not sure Alanna would understand, because she was not certain she herself understood what she wanted to know, but Alanna nodded slowly as if she did.

"bɹaʊnz sik nɑlədʒ, bluz mɛɾəl ɪn kɑzəz, ən waɪts kənsɪɾɝ ðə kwɛstʃənz ə tʃɹuθ wɪð ɪmplækəbəl lɑdʒɪk. wi ɔl də səm ʌv ɪɾ ɔl, ʌv kɔɹs. bʌt tə bi ə ɡɹin minz tə stæn ɹɛɾi." ə noʊɾ ə pɹaɪɾ ɛntɝɾ ɑlɑnəz vɔɪs. "ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, wi wɝ ɔfən kɔl ðə bæɾəl ədʒɑ. ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ hɛlpt wɛɹ ən wən ðeɪ kʊd, bʌt ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ əloʊn wɑz ɔlweɪz wɪð ði ɑɹmiz, ɪn ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi bæɾəl. wi wɝ ðə kaʊntɝ tə ðə dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz. ðə bæɾəl ədʒɑ. ən naʊ wi stæn ɹɛɾi, fəɹ ðə tʃɹɑləks tə kʌm saʊθ əɡɛn, fəɹ tɑɹmən ɡdən, ðə læs bæɾəl. wɪl bi ðɛɹ. ðəɾ ɪz wʌɾ ɪt minz tə bi ə ɡɹin."

"Browns seek knowledge, Blues meddle in causes, and Whites consider the questions of truth with implacable logic. We all do some of it all, of course. But to be a Green means to stand ready." A note of pride entered Alanna's voice. "In the Trolloc Wars, we were often called the Battle Ajah. All Aes Sedai helped where and when they could, but the Green Ajah alone was always with the armies, in almost every battle. We were the counter to the Dreadlords. The Battle Ajah. And now we stand ready, for the Trollocs to come south again, for Tarmon Gai'don, the Last Battle. We will be there. That is what it means to be a Green."

"θæŋk ju, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd. ðəɾ ɪz wʌɾ aɪ wɑz? əɹ wʌɾ əl bi? laɪt, aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu ɪf ɪt wɑz ɹil, ɪf ɪt hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl tə də wɪð hɪɹ ən naʊ.

"Thank you, Aes Sedai," Egwene said. That is what I was? Or what I will be? Light, I wish I knew if it was real, if it had anything at all to do with here and now.

ði æmɪɝlɪn dʒɔɪn ðɛm, ən ðeɪ swɛp dip kɝtsiz tə hɝ. "ɑɹ jə wɛl, dɔɾɝ?" ʃi æskt ɛɡwin. hɝ aɪz flɪk tə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə peɪpɝz stɪkɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə nɑvəs dʒɹɛs ɪn ɛɡwinz hænz, ðən bæk tə ɛɡwinz feɪs ɪmiɾiətli. "aɪ wɪl noʊ ðə waɪ ʌv wʌɾ əkɝd tənaɪt bɪfɔɹ aɪm dʌn."

The Amyrlin joined them, and they swept deep curtsies to her. "Are you well, Daughter?" she asked Egwene. Her eyes flicked to the corner of the papers sticking out from under the novice dress in Egwene's hands, then back to Egwene's face immediately. "I will know the why of what occurred tonight before I am done."

ɛɡwinz tʃiks ɹɛɾənd. "aɪ æm wɛl, mʌðɝ."

Egwene's cheeks reddened. "I am well, Mother."

ɑlɑnə sɝpɹaɪzd əɹ baɪ æskɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪn dʒʌst wʌt ʃi hæd sɛd ʃi wʊd.

Alanna surprised her by asking the Amyrlin just what she had said she would.

"aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə sətʃ ə θɪŋ," ði æmɪɝlɪn bɑɹkt. "ði oʊnɝ dʌzn mʌk aʊt wɪð ðə bɪlʒ bɔɪz ivən ɪf hiz ɹʌn ðə boʊɾ ɑn ə mʌd-flæt." ʃi ɡlænst əɾ ɛɡwin, ən wɝi taɪɾənd əɹ aɪz. ən æŋɡɝ. "aɪ ʃɛɹ jəɹ kənsɝn, ɑlɑnə. wʌtɛvɝ ðɪs tʃaɪld əz dʌn, ɪt dɪd nɑt dɪzɝv ðæt. vɛɹi wɛl. ɪf ɪɾəl əsweɪdʒ jəɹ filɪŋz, jə meɪ vɪzət ʃɛɹiəm. bʌɾ ɪts tə bi stʃɹɪkli bɪtwin jə tu. əl nɑɾ əv ɛɛs sədaɪ hɛld ʌp tə ɹɪɾəkjul, ivən ɪnsaɪd ðə taʊɝ."

"I never heard of such a thing," the Amyrlin barked. "The owner doesn't muck out with the bilge boys even if he has run the boat on a mud-flat." She glanced at Egwene, and worry tightened her eyes. And anger. "I share your concern, Alanna. Whatever this child has done, it did not deserve that. Very well. If it will assuage your feelings, you may visit Sheriam. But it is to be strictly between you two. I'll not have Aes Sedai held up to ridicule, even inside the Tower."

ɛɡwin oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə kənfɛs ɔl ən lɛɾ əm teɪk ðə ɹɪŋ - aɪ doʊnt wɑn ðə blʌɾi θɪŋ, ɹɪli - bʌɾ ɑlɑnə fɔɹstɑl hɝ.

Egwene opened her mouth to confess all and let them take the ring - I don't want the bloody thing, really - but Alanna forestalled her.

"æn ði ʌðɝ, mʌðɝ?"

"And the other, Mother?"

"du nɑt bi ɹɪdɪkjələs, dɔɾɝ." ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz æŋɡɹi, ən saʊndəd mɔɹ soʊ baɪ ðə wɝd. "jud bi ə læfɪŋstɑk ɪnsaɪd ðə deɪ, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðoʊz u dɪsaɪɾɪd jə wɝ mæd. ən doʊn θɪŋk ɪt wəd nɑt fɑloʊ ju. teɪlz laɪk ðəɾ əv ə weɪ ʌv tʃɹævlɪŋ. jə wəd faɪn stɔɹiz toʊld ə ðə skʌljən ɛɛs sədaɪ fɹəm tiɹ tə mɛɹədɑn. ən ðət wəd ɹəflɛkt ɑn ɛvɹi sɪstɝ. noʊ. ɪf jə nid tə ɹɪd jɝsɛlf ə səm filɪŋ ʌv ɡɪlt ən kænɑt hændəl ɪɾ əz ə ɡɹoʊn wʊmən wʊd, vɛɹi wɛl. aɪ hæv toʊl jə ðət jə meɪ vɪzət ʃɛɹiəm. əkʌmpəni hɝ tənaɪt wən jə liv hɪɹ. ðət wɪl ɡɪv jə ðə ɹɛst ə ðə naɪt tə dɪsaɪɾ ɪf ɪt wɑz ʌv ɛni hɛlp. ən təmɑɹoʊ jə kən stɑɹt faɪndɪŋ aʊt wʌt wɛn ɹɔŋ hɪɹ tənaɪt!"

"Do not be ridiculous, Daughter." The Amyrlin was angry, and sounded more so by the word. "You'd be a laughingstock inside the day, except for those who decided you were mad. And don't think it would not follow you. Tales like that have a way of traveling. You would find stories told of the scullion Aes Sedai from Tear to Maradon. And that would reflect on every sister. No. If you need to rid yourself of some feeling of guilt and cannot handle it as a grown woman would, very well. I have told you that you may visit Sheriam. Accompany her tonight when you leave here. That will give you the rest of the night to decide if it was of any help. And tomorrow you can start finding out what went wrong here tonight!"

"jɛs, mʌðɝ." ɑlɑnəz vɔɪs wɑz pɝfəkli nutʃɹəl.

"Yes, Mother." Alanna's voice was perfectly neutral.

ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə kənfɛs hæd daɪɾ ɪn ɛɡwin. ɑlɑnə hæd ʃoʊn oʊnli wʌn bɹif flæʃ ə dɪsəpɔɪnmənt, wən ʃi ɹilaɪz ði æmɪɝlɪn wəd nɑɾ əlaʊ hɝ tə dʒɔɪn ɛɡwin ɪn ðə kɪtʃənz. ʃi dʌznt wɑnə bi pʌnɪʃt ɛni mɔɹ ðən ɛni sɛnsəbəl pɝsən dʌz. ʃi dɪd wɑn ən ɪkskjus tə bi ɪn maɪ kʌmpəni. laɪt, ʃi kʊdn əv dɪlɪbɝətli kɑz ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil tə ɡoʊ waɪld; aɪ dɪd ðæt. kən ʃi bi blæk ədʒɑ?

The desire to confess had died in Egwene. Alanna had shown only one brief flash of disappointment, when she realized the Amyrlin would not allow her to join Egwene in the kitchens. She doesn't want to be punished any more than any sensible person does. She did want an excuse to be in my company. Light, she couldn't have deliberately caused the ter'angreal to go wild; I did that. Can she be Black Ajah?

ɹæpt ɪn θɔt, ɛɡwin hɝɾ ə θɹoʊt klɪɹd, ðən əɡɛn, mɔɹ ɹʌfli. hɝ aɪz foʊkəst. ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ɹaɪɾ ɪndə hɝ, ən wən ʃi spoʊk, ʃi bɪɾ ɔf itʃ wɝd.

Wrapped in thought, Egwene heard a throat cleared, then again, more roughly. Her eyes focused. The Amyrlin was staring right into her, and when she spoke, she bit off each word.

"sɪns jə sim tə bi əslip stændɪŋ ʌp, tʃaɪld, aɪ sədʒɛs jə ɡoʊ tə bɛd." fəɹ wʌn ɪnstən əɹ ɡlæns flæʃt tə ðə nɪɹli kənsil peɪpɝz ɪn ɛɡwinz hænz. "ju hæv mʌtʃ wɝk tə də təmɑɹoʊ, ən fəɹ mɛni deɪz ðɛɹæftɝ." hɝ aɪz hɛld ɛɡwinz ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ, ən ðən ʃi wɑz stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ɛni ʌv əm kəd kɝtsi.

"Since you seem to be asleep standing up, child, I suggest you go to bed." For one instant her glance flashed to the nearly concealed papers in Egwene's hands. "You have much work to do tomorrow, and for many days thereafter." Her eyes held Egwene's a moment longer, and then she was striding away before any of them could curtsy.

ʃɛɹiəm ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ɑlɑnə əz sun əz ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz aʊɾ ʌv ɪɹʃɑt. ðə ɡɹin ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡlaʊɝɾ ən tʊk ɪɾ ɪn saɪləns. "ju ɑɹ mæd, ɑlɑnə! ə ful, ən dʌbli ə ful ɪf jə θɪŋk əl ɡoʊ laɪtli ɑn jə dʒʌs kəz wi wɝ nɑvəsɪz təɡɛðɝ. ɑɹ jə teɪkən baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən, tə - ?" sʌɾənli ʃɛɹiəm bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ʌv ɛɡwin, ən ðə tɑɹɡəɾ ə hɝ æŋɡɝ ʃɪftəd. "dɪɾ aɪ nɑt hɪɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɔɹɾɝ jə tə jəɹ bɛd, æksɛptɪd? ɪf jə bɹið ə wɝɾ ə ðɪs, jəl wɪʃ aɪ hæd bɛɹid jə ɪn ə fil tə mənʊɹ ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ən əl si jə ɪn maɪ stʌɾi ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, wən ðə bɛl ɹɪŋz fɝst ən nɑt wʌn bɹɛθ leɪɾɝ. naʊ, ɡoʊ!"

Sheriam rounded on Alanna as soon as the Amyrlin was out of earshot. The Green Aes Sedai glowered and took it in silence. "You are mad, Alanna! A fool, and doubly a fool if you think I will go lightly on you just because we were novices together. Are you taken by the Dragon, to - ?" Suddenly Sheriam became aware of Egwene, and the target of her anger shifted. "Did I not hear the Amyrlin Seat order you to your bed, Accepted? If you breathe a word of this, you will wish I had buried you in a field to manure the ground. And I will see you in my study in the morning, when the bell rings First and not one breath later. Now, go!"

ɛɡwin wɛnt, hɝ hɛd spɪnɪŋ. ɪz ðəɹ ɛnibəɾi aɪ kən tʃɹʌst? ði æmɪɝlɪn? ʃi sɛn əs ɔf tʃeɪsɪŋ θɝtin ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ ən fɝɡɑt tə mɛnʃən ðət θɝtin ɪz dʒʌs ðə nʌmbɝ niɾəd tə tɝn ə wʊmən u kən tʃænəl tə ðə ʃædoʊ əɡɛnst əɹ wɪl. hu kən aɪ tʃɹʌst?

Egwene went, her head spinning. Is there anybody I can trust? The Amyrlin? She sent us off chasing thirteen of the Black Ajah and forgot to mention that thirteen is just the number needed to turn a woman who can channel to the Shadow against her will. Who can I trust?

ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi əloʊn, kəd nɑt stæn ðə θɔɾ ʌv ɪt, ən soʊ ʃi hɝid tə ði æksɛptɪdz kɔɹɾɝz, θɪŋkɪŋ ðət təmɑɹoʊ ʃi wəd bi muvɪŋ ðəɹ hɝsɛlf, ən ɪmiɾiətli æftɝ nɑkɪŋ pʊʃt oʊpən nɪneɪivz dɔɹ. ʃi kəd tʃɹʌst əɹ wɪð ɛniθɪŋ. hɝ ən ɪleɪn.

She did not want to be alone, could not stand the thought of it, and so she hurried to the Accepted's quarters, thinking that tomorrow she would be moving there herself, and immediately after knocking pushed open Nynaeve's door. She could trust her with anything. Her and Elayne.

bʌt nɪneɪiv wɑz siɾəd ɪn wʌn ə ðə tu tʃɛɹz, wɪð ɪleɪnz hɛd bɛɹiɾ ɪn əɹ læp. ɪleɪnz ʃoʊldɝz ʃʊk tə ðə saʊn ʌv wipɪŋ, ðə sɑftɝ wipɪŋ ðət kʌmz æftɝ noʊ ɛnɝdʒi ɪz lɛft fəɹ dipɝ sɑbz bʌt ði ɪmoʊʃən stɪl bɝnz. dæmpnəs ʃoʊn ɑn nɪneɪivz tʃiks, tu. ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpənt ɡlimɪŋ ɑn əɹ hænd, smuðɪŋ ɪleɪnz hɛɹ, mætʃt ðə ɹɪŋ ɑn ðə hæn ɪleɪn juz tə klʌtʃ ət nɪneɪivz skɝt.

But Nynaeve was seated in one of the two chairs, with Elayne's head buried in her lap. Elayne's shoulders shook to the sound of weeping, the softer weeping that comes after no energy is left for deeper sobs but the emotion still burns. Dampness shone on Nynaeve's cheeks, too. The Great Serpent gleaming on her hand, smoothing Elayne's hair, matched the ring on the hand Elayne used to clutch at Nynaeve's skirt.

ɪleɪn lɪftəɾ ə feɪs ɹɛɾ ən swoʊlən fɹəm lɔŋ kɹaɪɪŋ, snɪfɪŋ θɹu hɝ sɑbz wən ʃi sɔ ɛɡwin. "aɪ kəd nɑt bi ðəɾ ɑfəl, ɛɡwin. aɪ dʒʌs kʊdnt!"

Elayne lifted a face red and swollen from long crying, sniffing through her sobs when she saw Egwene. "I could not be that awful, Egwene. I just couldn't!"

ði æksəɾənt wɪð ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ɛɡwinz fɪɹ ðət sʌmwʌn maɪɾ əv ɹɛd ðə peɪpɝz vɛɹɪn hæd ɡɪvən hɝ, hɝ səspɪʃənz ʌv ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðət tʃeɪmbɝ, ɔl ðiz hæd bɪn tɛɹəbəl, bʌt ðeɪ hæd bʌfɝɾ əɹ ɪn ə ɹʌf, ʌnʒəntəl weɪ fɹəm wʌt hæd hæpən ɪnsaɪd ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ðeɪ hæd kʌm fɹəm aʊtsaɪd; ði ʌðɝ wɑz ɪnsaɪd. ɪleɪnz wɝdz stʃɹɪp ðə bʌfɝ əweɪ, ən wʌt wɑz ɪnsaɪd hɪɾ ɛɡwin əz ɪf ðə silɪŋ hæd kəlæpst. ɹænd əɹ hʌzbənd, ən dʒɔɪjə hɝ beɪbi. ɹænd pɪn ən bɛɡɪŋ əɹ tə kɪl hɪm. ɹænd tʃeɪn tə bi dʒɛntəld.

The accident with the ter'angreal, Egwene's fear that someone might have read the papers Verin had given her, her suspicions of everyone in that chamber, all these had been terrible, but they had buffered her in a rough, ungentle way from what had happened inside the ter'angreal. They had come from outside; the other was inside. Elayne's words stripped the buffer away, and what was inside hit Egwene as if the ceiling had collapsed. Rand her husband, and Joiya her baby. Rand pinned and begging her to kill him. Rand chained to be gentled.

bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ ə muvɪŋ, ʃi wɑz ɑn əɹ niz bɪsaɪɾ ɪleɪn, ɔl ðə tɪɹz ðət ʃʊɾə fɔlən ɝliɝ kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ɪn ə flʌd. "aɪ kʊdn hɛlp hɪm, nɪneɪiv," ʃi sɑbd. "aɪ dʒʌs lɛft ɪm ðɛɹ."

Before she was aware of moving, she was on her knees beside Elayne, all the tears that should have fallen earlier coming out in a flood. "I couldn't help him, Nynaeve," she sobbed. "I just left him there."

nɪneɪiv flɪntʃt əz ɪf stʃɹʌk, bʌt ðə nɛks moʊmən əɹ ɑɹmz wɝ ɝaʊn boʊθ ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn, hʌɡɪŋ ðɛm, ɹɑkɪŋ ðɛm. "hʌʃ," ʃi kɹun sɔfli. "ɪɾ izɪz wɪð taɪm. ɪɾ izɪz, ə lɪɾəl. wʌn deɪ wɪl meɪk əm peɪ əɹ pɹaɪs. hʌʃ. hʌʃ."

Nynaeve flinched as if struck, but the next moment her arms were around both Egwene and Elayne, hugging them, rocking them. "Hush," she crooned softly. "It eases with time. It eases, a little. One day we will make them pay our price. Hush. Hush."


tʃæptɝ twɛntifɔɹ


CHAPTER 24

skaʊɾɪŋ ən dɪskʌvɝiz


Scouting and Discoveries

sʌnlaɪt θɹu ðə kɑɹvd ʃʌɾɝz, kɹipɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə bɛd, woʊk mæt. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, hi oʊnli leɪ ðɛɹ, fɹaʊnɪŋ. hi hæd nɑt ɹizən aʊɾ ɛni plæn fəɹ ɪskeɪpɪŋ fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn bɪfɔɹ slip hæɾ oʊvɝteɪkən hɪm, bʌt niðɝ hæɾ i ɡɪvən ʌp. tu mʌtʃ mɛmɹi stɪl leɪ kʌvɝd wɪð fɑɡ, bʌɾ i wəd nɑt ɡɪv ʌp.

Sunlight through the carved shutters, creeping across the bed, woke Mat. For a moment, he only lay there, frowning. He had not reasoned out any plan for escaping from Tar Valon before sleep had overtaken him, but neither had he given up. Too much memory still lay covered with fog, but he would not give up.

tu sɝvɪŋ wɪmən keɪm bʌsəlɪŋ wɪð hɑt wɔɾɝ ən ə tʃɹeɪ hɛvi wɪð fud, læfɪŋ ən tɛlɪŋ ɪm haʊ mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ i lʊkt ɔlɹɛɾi, ən haʊ sun i wəd bi bæk ɑn ɪz fiɾ ɪf i dɪd wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ toʊl hɪm. hi ænsɝɾ əm kɝtli, tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə saʊn bɪɾɝ. lɛɾ əm θɪŋk aɪ min tə ɡoʊ əlɔŋ. hɪz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld ət ðə smɛlz fɹəm ðə tʃɹeɪ.

Two serving women came bustling with hot water and a tray heavy with food, laughing and telling him how much better he looked already, and how soon he would be back on his feet if he did what the Aes Sedai told him. He answered them curtly, trying not to sound bitter. Let them think I mean to go along. His stomach rumbled at the smells from the tray.

wən ðeɪ lɛft, hi tɔst əsaɪɾ ɪz blæŋkəɾ ən hɑpt aʊɾ ə bɛd, pɔzɪŋ oʊnli tə stʌf hæf ə slaɪs ə hæm ɪndə hɪz maʊθ bɪfɔɹ pɔɹɪŋ aʊt wɔɾɝ tə wɑʃ ən ʃeɪv. stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə mɪɹɝ əbʌv ðə wɑʃstænd, hi pɔzd ɪn læðɝɪŋ ɪz feɪs. hi dɪd lʊk bɛɾɝ.

When they left, he tossed aside his blanket and hopped out of bed, pausing only to stuff half a slice of ham into his mouth before pouring out water to wash and shave. Staring into the mirror above the washstand, he paused in lathering his face. He did look better.

hɪz tʃiks wɝ stɪl hɑloʊ, bʌt nɑt kwaɪɾ əz hɑloʊ əz ðeɪ hæd bɪn. ðə dɑɹk sɝkəlz hæd vænɪʃt fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz aɪz, wɪtʃ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sim sɛt soʊ dip ɪn ɪz hɛd. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ɛvɹi baɪɾ i hæɾ iɾən ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ hæd ɡɔn ɪndə pʊɾɪŋ miɾ ɑn ɪz boʊnz. hi ivən fɛl stʃɹɔŋɝ.

His cheeks were still hollow, but not quite as hollow as they had been. The dark circles had vanished from under his eyes, which no longer seemed set so deep in his head. It was as if every bite he had eaten the night before had gone into putting meat on his bones. He even felt stronger.

"æt ðɪs ɹeɪt," hi mʌɾɝd, "aɪ wɪl bi ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ noʊ ɪt." bʌɾ i wɑz stɪl sɝpɹaɪzd wɛn, æftɝ ʃeɪvɪŋ, hi sæt daʊn ən kənsumd ɛvɹi skɹæp ə hæm, tɝnəp, ən pɛɹ ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ.

"At this rate," he muttered, "I will be gone before they know it." But he was still surprised when, after shaving, he sat down and consumed every scrap of ham, turnip, and pear on the tray.

hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪm tə klaɪm bæk ɪndə bɛd wʌns i hæɾ iɾən, bʌɾ ɪnstɛd, hi dʒɹɛst. stæmpɪŋ ɪz fit tə sɛɾəl əm ɪn ɪz buts, hi aɪɾ ɪz spɛɹ kloʊðz ən dɪsaɪɾɪd tə liv ðɛm, fəɹ naʊ. aɪ hæv tə noʊ wʌɾ aɪm duɪŋ, fɝst. ən ɪf aɪ hæv tə liv ðɛm. . . . hi tʌk ðə daɪs kʌps ɪndə hɪz paʊtʃ. wɪð ðoʊz, hi kəd ɡɛɾ ɔl ðə kloʊðz i niɾəd.

He was sure they expected him to climb back into bed once he had eaten, but instead, he dressed. Stamping his feet to settle them in his boots, he eyed his spare clothes and decided to leave them, for now. I have to know what I'm doing, first. And if I have to leave them. . . . He tucked the dice cups into his pouch. With those, he could get all the clothes he needed.

oʊpənɪŋ ðə dɔɹ, hi pikt aʊt. mɔɹ dɔɹz pænəld ɪn peɪl, ɡoʊldən wʊd laɪn ðə hɔl, wɪð kʌlɝfəl tæpəstʃɹiz bɪtwin, ən ə ɹʌnɝ ə blu kɑɹpət ɹæn daʊn ðə waɪt-taɪl flɔɹ. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn aʊt ðɛɹ. noʊ ɡɑɹd. hi tɔst ɪz kloʊk oʊvɝ wʌn ʃoʊldɝ ən hɝiɾ aʊt. naʊ tə faɪn ə weɪ aʊtsaɪd.

Opening the door, he peeked out. More doors paneled in pale, golden wood lined the hall, with colorful tapestries between, and a runner of blue carpet ran down the white-tiled floor. But there was no one out there. No guard. He tossed his cloak over one shoulder and hurried out. Now to find a way outside.

ɪt tʊk səm lɪɾəl wɑndɝɪŋ, daʊn stɛɹz ən əlɔŋ kɔɹɪɾɝz ən əkɹɔs oʊpən kɔɹts, bɪfɔɹ i faʊnd wʌɾ i wɑntəd, ə dɔɹweɪ tə ði aʊtsaɪd, ən i sɔ pipəl bɪfɔɹ ðɛn: sɝvɪŋ wɪmən ən waɪt-klæd nɑvəsɪz hɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ tʃɔɹz, ðə nɑvəsɪz ɹʌnɪŋ ivən hɑɹɾɝ ðən ðə sɝvəns; ə hændfʊl ə ɹʌfli dʒɹɛs meɪl sɝvəns kæɹiɪŋ lɑɹdʒ tʃɛsts ən ʌðɝ hɛvi loʊdz; æksɛptɪɾ ɪn ðɛɹ bændɪd dʒɹɛsəz. ivən ə fju ɛɛs sədaɪ.

It took some little wandering, down stairs and along corridors and across open courts, before he found what he wanted, a doorway to the outside, and he saw people before then: serving women and white-clad novices hurrying about their chores, the novices running even harder than the servants; a handful of roughly dressed male servants carrying large chests and other heavy loads; Accepted in their banded dresses. Even a few Aes Sedai.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs ɪm əz ðeɪ stʃɹoʊɾ əlɔŋ, ɪntɛn ɑn wʌtɛvɝ pɝpəs, əɹ ɛls ðeɪ ɡeɪv ɪm noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə pæsɪŋ ɡlæns. hɪz wɝ kʌntʃɹi kloʊðz, bʌt wɛl meɪd; hi dɪd nɑt lʊk ə væɡəbɑnd, ən ðə sɝvɪŋ mɛn ʃoʊd ðət mɛn wɝ əlaʊɾ ɪn ðɪs pɑɹɾ ə ðə taʊɝ. hi səspɛktəd ðeɪ maɪt teɪk ɪm fəɹ ənʌðɝ sɝvənt, ən ðət wɑz dʒʌst əz wɛl wɪð hɪm, soʊ lɔŋ əz noʊ wʌn æskt ɪm tə lɪft ɛniθɪŋ.

The Aes Sedai did not seem to notice him as they strode along, intent on whatever purpose, or else they gave him no more than a passing glance. His were country clothes, but well made; he did not look a vagabond, and the serving men showed that men were allowed in this part of the Tower. He suspected they might take him for another servant, and that was just as well with him, so long as no one asked him to lift anything.

hi dɪd fil səm ɹəɡɹɛt ðət nʌn ə ðə wɪmən i sɔ wɑz ɛɡwin əɹ nɪneɪiv, əɹ ivən ɪleɪn. ʃiz ə pɹɪɾi wʌn, ivən ɪf ʃi dʌz əv əɹ noʊz ɪn ði ɛɹ hæf ðə taɪm. ən ʃi kəd tɛl mi haʊ tə faɪn ɛɡwin ən ðə wɪzdəm. aɪ kænɑt ɡoʊ wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ ɡʊdbaɪ. laɪt, aɪ doʊn səpoʊz wʌn ə ðɛm wəd tɝn mi ɪn, dʒʌs kəz ðeɪ ɑɹ bɪkʌmɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ ðɛmsɛlvz? bɝn mi, fəɹ ə ful! ðeɪd nɛvɝ də ðæt. ɛniweɪ, əl ɹɪsk ɪt.

He did feel some regret that none of the women he saw was Egwene or Nynaeve, or even Elayne. She's a pretty one, even if she does have her nose in the air half the time. And she could tell me how to find Egwene and the Wisdom. I cannot go without saying goodbye. Light, I don't suppose one of them would turn me in, just because they are becoming Aes Sedai themselves? Burn me, for a fool! They'd never do that. Anyway, I will risk it.

bʌt wʌns aʊt-ʌv-dɔɹz, ʌndɝ ə bɹaɪt mɔɹnɪŋ skaɪ wɪð oʊnli ə fju dʒɹɪftɪŋ waɪt klaʊdz, hi pʊt ðə wɪmən fɹəm ɪz maɪn fəɹ ðə taɪm. hi wɑz lʊkɪŋ əkɹɔs ə waɪd, flæɡstoʊn jɑɹd wɪð ə pleɪn stoʊn faʊntən ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ən ə bæɹəks ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd ðət wɑz meɪɾ ʌv ɡɹeɪ stoʊn. ɪt lʊkt ɔlmoʊs laɪk ə hjudʒ boʊldɝ əmʌŋ ðə fju tʃɹiz ɡɹoʊɪŋ aʊɾ ə ɹɪm hoʊlz ɪn ðə flæɡstoʊnz kloʊs baɪ. ɡɑɹdzmɪn ɪn ðɛɹ ʃɝtslivz sæɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə lɔŋ, loʊ bɪldɪŋ, tɛndɪŋ wɛpənz ən ɑɹmɝ ən hɑɹnəs. ɡɑɹdzmɪn wɝ wʌɾ i wɑntəd, naʊ.

But once out-of-doors, under a bright morning sky with only a few drifting white clouds, he put the women from his mind for the time. He was looking across a wide, flagstoned yard with a plain stone fountain in the middle and a barracks on the other side that was made of gray stone. It looked almost like a huge boulder among the few trees growing out of rimmed holes in the flagstones close by. Guardsmen in their shirtsleeves sat in front of the long, low building, tending weapons and armor and harness. Guardsmen were what he wanted, now.

hi sɔntɝɾ əkɹɔs ðə jɑɹɾ ən wɑtʃt ðə soʊlʒɝz əz ɪf i hæd nʌθɪŋ bɛɾɝ tə du. əz ðeɪ wɝk ðeɪ tɔkt ən læft əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz laɪk mɛn æftɝ ðə hɑɹvəst. naʊ ən əɡɛn wʌn ə ðɛm lʊkt kjʊɹiəsli ət mæt əz i stʃɹoʊld əmʌŋ ðɛm, bʌt nʌn tʃælənʒd ɪz ɹaɪt tə bi ðɛɹ. fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm i æskt ə kæʒəwəl kwɛstʃən. ən faɪnəli hi ɡɑt ði ænsɝ i sɔt.

He sauntered across the yard and watched the soldiers as if he had nothing better to do. As they worked they talked and laughed among themselves like men after the harvest. Now and again one of them looked curiously at Mat as he strolled among them, but none challenged his right to be there. From time to time he asked a casual question. And finally he got the answer he sought.

"bɹɪdʒ ɡɑɹd?" sɛɾ ə stɑki, dɑɹk-hɛɹd mæn noʊ mɔɹ ðən faɪv jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən mæt. hɪz wɝdz hæɾ ə hɛvi ɪliɑnɝ æksɛnt. jʌŋ i maɪɾ əv bɪn, bʌɾ ə θɪn waɪt skɑɹ kɹɔst ɪz lɛf tʃik, ən ðə hænz ɔɪlɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd muvd wɪð fəmɪljɛɹəɾi ən kɑmpəɾəns. hi skwɪntɪɾ ʌp ət mæt bɪfɔɹ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə hɪz tæsk. "aɪ də bi ɑn ðə bɹɪdʒ ɡɑɹd, ən bæk ðəɹ əɡɛn ðɪs ivən. waɪ dʒju æsk?"

"Bridge guard?" said a stocky, dark-haired man no more than five years older than Mat. His words had a heavy Illianer accent. Young he might have been, but a thin white scar crossed his left cheek, and the hands oiling his sword moved with familiarity and competence. He squinted up at Mat before returning to his task. "I do be on the bridge guard, and back there again this even. Why do you ask?"

"aɪ wɑz dʒʌst wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt kəndɪʃənz wɝ laɪk ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ." aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl faɪn ðəɾ aʊt, tu. "ɡʊd fəɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ? ɪt kæn bi mʌɾi, ənlɛs juv hæd mɔɹ ɹeɪn ðən aɪ noʊ əbaʊt."

"I was just wondering what conditions were like on the other side of the river." I might as well find that out, too. "Good for traveling? It can't be muddy, unless you have had more rain than I know about."

"wɪtʃ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ?" ðə ɡɑɹdzmæn æsk plɑtʃədli. hɪz aɪz dɪd nɑt lɪft fɹəm ði ɔɪld ɹæɡ hi wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪz bleɪd.

"Which side of the river?" the guardsman asked placidly. His eyes did not lift from the oiled rag he was running along his blade.

"ʌ . . . ist. ði ist saɪd."

"Uh . . . east. The east side."

"noʊ mʌd. waɪtkloʊks." ðə mæn lin tə wʌn saɪd tə spɪt, bʌɾ ɪz vɔɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ. "waɪtkloʊks də bi poʊkɪŋ ðɛɹ noʊzɪz ɪndə ɛvɹi vɪlədʒ fəɹ tɛn maɪlz. ðeɪv noʊ hɝɾ ɛniwʌn jɛt, bʌɾ əm dʒʌs biɪŋ ðəɹ də əpsɛt ðə foʊk. fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi ɪf aɪ də noʊ θɪŋk ðeɪ wɪʃ tə pɹəvoʊk ʌs, fəɹ ðeɪ də lʊk əz ɪf ðeɪ wəɾ ətæk ɪf ðeɪ kʊd. noʊ ɡʊd fəɹ ɛniwʌn u də wɑnə tʃɹævəl."

"No mud. Whitecloaks." The man leaned to one side to spit, but his voice did not change. "Whitecloaks do be poking their noses into every village for ten miles. They have no hurt anyone yet, but them just being there do upset the folk. Fortune prick me if I do no think they wish to provoke us, for they do look as if they would attack if they could. No good for anyone who do want to travel."

"wʌɾ əbaʊt wɛst, ðɛn?"

"What about west, then?"

"ðə seɪm." ðə ɡɑɹdzmæn ɹeɪzd ɪz aɪz tə mæts. "bʌt jəl noʊ bi kɹɔsɪŋ, læd, ist əɹ wɛst. jəɹ neɪm də bi meɪtʃɹim kɔθən, əɹ fɔɹtʃən əbændən mi. læs naɪɾ ə sɪstɝ, hɝsɛlf ɪn pɝsən, dɪd kʌm tə ðə bɹɪdʒ wɛɹ aɪ dɪd stænd ɡɑɹd. ʃi dɪd dʒɹɪl jəɹ fitʃɝz əɾ əs tɪl itʃ kəd spik əm bæk tə hɝ. ə ɡɛst, ʃi dɪd seɪ, ən noʊ tə bi hɑɹmd. bʌt noʊ tə bi əlaʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi, iðɝ, ɪf jə mʌs bi taɪd hæn ən fʊt tə kip jə fɹəm ɪt." hɪz aɪz nɛɹoʊd. "ɪz ɪt ðət jə dɪd stil sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm ðɛm?" hi æsk daʊtfəli. "ju də noʊ hæv ðə lʊk ə ðoʊz ðə sɪstɝz də ɡɛst."

"The same." The guardsman raised his eyes to Mat's. "But you will no be crossing, lad, east or west. Your name do be Matrim Cauthon, or Fortune abandon me. Last night a sister, herself in person, did come to the bridge where I did stand guard. She did drill your features at us till each could speak them back to her. A guest, she did say, and no to be harmed. But no to be allowed out of the city, either, if you must be tied hand and foot to keep you from it." His eyes narrowed. "Is it that you did steal something from them?" he asked doubtfully. "You do no have the look of those the sisters do guest."

"aɪ dɪdn stil ɛniθɪŋ!" mæt sɛɾ ɪndɪɡnənli. bɝn mi, aɪ dɪdn ivən ɡɛɾ ə tʃæns tə wɝk ɝaʊn tə ɪɾ izi. ðeɪ mʌst ɔl noʊ mi. "ɪm noʊ θif!"

"I didn't steal anything!" Mat said indignantly. Burn me, I didn't even get a chance to work around to it easy. They must all know me. "I'm no thief!"

"noʊ, ɪts noʊ ðəɾ aɪ də si ɪn jəɹ feɪs. noʊ θivɝi. bʌt jə də hæv ðə lʊk ə ðə fɛloʊ hu dɪd tʃɹaɪ tə sɛl mi ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ θɹi deɪz ɡɔn. soʊ hi dɪd kleɪm ɪt dɪd bi, ɔl bɛn ən bæɾɝd əz ɪt dɪd bi. juv ə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ tə sɛl? əɹ meɪæp ɪt də bi ðə dʒɹæɡənz sɔɹd?"

"No, it is no that I do see in your face. No thievery. But you do have the look of the fellow who did try to sell me the Horn of Valere three days gone. So he did claim it did be, all bent and battered as it did be. Do you have a Horn of Valere to sell? Or mayhap it do be the Dragon's sword?"

mæt ɡeɪv ə dʒʌmp ət ðə mɛnʃən ə ðə hɔɹn, bʌɾ i mænədʒ tə kip ɪz vɔɪs lɛvəl. "aɪ wɑz sɪk." ʌðɝz ə ðə ɡɑɹdzmɪn wɝ lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm naʊ. laɪt, ðəl ɔl noʊ aɪm nɑt səpoʊz tə liv, naʊ. hi fɔɹst ə læf. "ðə sɪstɝz hil mi." səm ə ðə ɡɑɹdzmɪn fɹaʊn ət hɪm. pɝhæps ðeɪ θɔɾ ʌðɝ mɛn ʃəd ʃoʊ mɔɹ ɹɪspɛk ðən tə kɔl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɪstɝz. "aɪ ɡɛs ði ɛɛs sədaɪ doʊnt wɑn mi tə ɡoʊ bɪfɔɹ aɪ hæv ɔl maɪ stʃɹɛŋkθ bæk." hi tʃɹaɪd wɪlɪŋ ðə mɛn, ɔl ə ðoʊz wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm naʊ, tə æksɛp ðæt. dʒʌst ə mæn u wɑz hild. nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ. noʊ ɹizən tə tʃɹʌbəl jɝsɛlf əbaʊɾ ɪm ɛni fɝðɝ.

Mat gave a jump at the mention of the Horn, but he managed to keep his voice level. "I was sick." Others of the guardsmen were looking at him now. Light, they'll all know I am not supposed to leave, now. He forced a laugh. "The sisters Healed me." Some of the guardsmen frowned at him. Perhaps they thought other men should show more respect than to call the Aes Sedai sisters. "I guess the Aes Sedai don't want me to go before I have all my strength back." He tried willing the men, all of those watching him now, to accept that. Just a man who was Healed. Nothing more. No reason to trouble yourself about him any further.

ði ɪliɑnɝ nɑɾəd. "ju də hæv ðə lʊk ə sɪknəs ɪn jəɹ feɪs, tu. pɝhæps ðət də bi ðə ɹizən. bʌt nɛvɝ dɪɾ aɪ hɪɹ ə soʊ mʌtʃ ɛfɝt tə kip wʌn sɪk mæn ɪn ðə sɪɾi."

The Illianer nodded. "You do have the look of sickness in your face, too. Perhaps that do be the reason. But never did I hear of so much effort to keep one sick man in the city."

"ðæts ðə ɹizən," mæt sɛd fɝmli. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl stɪl lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. "wɛl, aɪ nid tə bi ɡoʊɪŋ. ðeɪ sɛɾ aɪ hæv tə teɪk wɔks. lɑts ə lɔŋ wɔks. tə bɪld ʌp stʃɹɛŋkθ, jə noʊ."

"That's the reason," Mat said firmly. They were all still looking at him. "Well, I need to be going. They said I have to take walks. Lots of long walks. To build up strength, you know."

hi fɛl ðɛɹ aɪz fɑloʊɪŋ ɪm əz i lɛft, ən i skaʊld. hi hæd sɪmpli mɛn tə faɪn aʊt haʊ wɛl ɪz dɪskɹɪpʃən hæd bɪn pæst ɝaʊnd. ɪf oʊnli ði ɔfəsɝz əmʌŋ ðə bɹɪdʒ ɡɑɹdz hæd hæɾ ɪt, hi maɪɾ əv bɪn eɪbəl tə slɪp baɪ. hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ɡʊɾ ət slɪpɪŋ ɪndə pleɪsəz ənsin. ən aʊt. ɪt wɑz ə tælən jə dɪvɛləpt wən jəɹ mʌðɝ ɔlweɪz səspɛktəd jə wɝ ʌp tə səm mɪstʃəf ən jə hæd tu sɪstɝz tə tɛl ɑn ju. ən naʊ aɪv meɪd ʃʊɹ hæf ə bæɹəks fʊl ʌv ɡɑɹdzmɪn wɪl noʊ mi. blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz!

He felt their eyes following him as he left, and he scowled. He had simply meant to find out how well his description had been passed around. If only the officers among the bridge guards had had it, he might have been able to slip by. He had always been good at slipping into places unseen. And out. It was a talent you developed when your mother always suspected you were up to some mischief and you had two sisters to tell on you. And now I've made sure half a barracks full of guardsmen will know me. Blood and bloody ashes!

mʌtʃ ə ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz wɝ ɡɑɹɾənz fʊl ə tʃɹiz, lɛðɝlif ən peɪpɝbɑɹk ən ɛlmz, ən i sun faʊn hɪmsɛlf wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋ ə waɪd, twɪstɪŋ ɡɹævəl pæθ. ɪt cʊɾə lɛd θɹu kʌntʃɹisaɪd, ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðə taʊɝz vɪzəbəl oʊvɝ ðə tʃɹitɑps. ən ðə waɪt bʌlk ə ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf, bɪhaɪn ɪm bʌt pɹɛsɪŋ ɑn ɪm əz ɪf i kæɹiɾ ɪɾ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. ɪf ðəɹ wɝ weɪz aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz ðət wɝ nɑt wɑtʃt, ðɪs sim ðə pleɪs tə faɪn ðɛm. ɪf ðeɪ ɪɡzɪstəd.

Much of the Tower grounds were gardens full of trees, leatherleaf and paperbark and elms, and he soon found himself walking along a wide, twisting graveled path. It could have led through countryside, if not for the towers visible over the treetops. And the white bulk of the Tower itself, behind him but pressing on him as if he carried it on his shoulders. If there were ways out of the Tower grounds that were not watched, this seemed the place to find them. If they existed.

ə ɡɝl ɪn nɑvəs waɪɾ əpɪɹɾ əhɛɾ ɑn ðə pæθ, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ pɝpəsfəli təwɔɹd hɪm. ɹæpt ɪn əɹ oʊn θɔts, ʃi dɪd nɑt si hɪm ət fɝst. wən ʃi keɪm kloʊs ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪm tə meɪk aʊɾ əɹ bɪɡ, dɑɹk aɪz ən ðə weɪ hɝ hɛɹ wɑz bɹeɪɾɪd, hi ɡɹɪn sʌɾənli. hi nu ðɪs ɡɝl - mɛmɹi dʒɹɪftɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ʃɹaʊɾɪd dɛpθs - ðoʊ hi wəd nɛvɝ əv ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn əɹ hɪɹ. hi hæd nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə si hɝ əɡɛn əɾ ɔl. hi ɡɹɪn tə hɪmsɛlf. ɡʊd lʌk tə bæləns bæd. əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd, ʃi hæd kwaɪɾ ən aɪ fəɹ ðə bɔɪz.

A girl in novice white appeared ahead on the path, striding purposefully toward him. Wrapped in her own thoughts, she did not see him at first. When she came close enough for him to make out her big, dark eyes and the way her hair was braided, he grinned suddenly. He knew this girl - memory drifting up from shrouded depths - though he would never have expected to find her here. He had never expected to see her again at all. He grinned to himself. Good luck to balance bad. As he remembered, she had quite an eye for the boys.

"ɛls," hi kɔl tə hɝ. "ɛls ɡɹɪnwɛl. jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ mi, doʊn ju? mæt kɔθən. ə fɹɛn ən aɪ vɪzəɾəd jəɹ fɑðɝz fɑɹm. ɹɪmɛmbɝ? hæv jə dɪsaɪɾɪd tə bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðɛn?"

"Else," he called to her. "Else Grinwell. You remember me, don't you? Mat Cauthon. A friend and I visited your father's farm. Remember? Have you decided to become Aes Sedai, then?"

ʃi stɑpt ʃɔɹt, stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ ʌp ən aʊt?" ʃi sɛd koʊldli.

She stopped short, staring at him. "What are you doing up and out?" she said coldly.

"ju noʊ əbaʊt ðæt, də ju?" hi muv kloʊsɝ tə hɝ, bʌt ʃi stɛp bæk, kipɪŋ əɹ dɪstəns. hi stɑpt. "ɪts nɑt kætʃɪŋ. aɪ wɑz hild, ɛls." ðoʊz lɑɹdʒ, dɑɹk aɪz simd mɔɹ noʊɪŋ ðən i ɹɪmɛmbɝd, ən nɑt nɪɹli soʊ wɔɹm, bʌɾ i səpoʊz stʌɾiɪŋ tə bi ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd də ðæt. "wʌɾ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ, ɛls? jə lʊk laɪk jə doʊnt noʊ mi."

"You know about that, do you?" He moved closer to her, but she stepped back, keeping her distance. He stopped. "It's not catching. I was Healed, Else." Those large, dark eyes seemed more knowing than he remembered, and not nearly so warm, but he supposed studying to be an Aes Sedai could do that. "What is the matter, Else? You look like you don't know me."

"aɪ noʊ ju," ʃi sɛd. hɝ mænɝ wɑz nɑɾ əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd, iðɝ; hi θɔt ʃi kəd ɡɪv ɪleɪn lɛsənz naʊ. "aɪ hæv . . . wɝk tə bi əbaʊt. lemi baɪ."

"I know you," she said. Her manner was not as he remembered, either; he thought she could give Elayne lessons now. "I have . . . work to be about. Let me by."

hi ɡɹɪməst. ðə pæθ wɑz bɹɔɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ sɪks tə wɔk əbɹɛst wɪθaʊt kɹaʊɾɪŋ. "aɪ toʊl jə ɪɾ ɪzən kætʃɪŋ."

He grimaced. The path was broad enough for six to walk abreast without crowding. "I told you it isn't catching."

"lɛt mi baɪ!"

"Let me by!"

mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, hi stɛp tə wʌn ɛdʒ ə ðə ɡɹævəl. ʃi wɛn pæst ɪm əlɔŋ ði ʌðɝ saɪd, wɑtʃɪŋ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ i dɪd nɑt kʌm kloʊsɝ. wʌns baɪ, ʃi kwɪkən əɹ stɛps, ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ əɾ ɪm əntɪl ʃi wɑz aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ɝaʊn ə bɛnd.

Muttering to himself, he stepped to one edge of the gravel. She went past him along the other side, watching to make sure he did not come closer. Once by, she quickened her steps, glancing over her shoulder at him until she was out of sight around a bend.

wɑntəd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ aɪ dɪdn fɑloʊ hɝ, hi θɔt saʊɝli. fɝs ðə ɡɑɹdzmɪn, ən naʊ ɛls. maɪ lʌk ɪz nɑɾ ɪn, tədeɪ.

Wanted to make sure I didn't follow her, he thought sourly. First the guardsmen, and now Else. My luck is not in, today.

hi stɑɹɾəd ɔf əɡɛn, ən sun hɝɾ ə fɝoʊʃəs klæɾɝ fɹəm wʌn saɪɾ əhɛd, laɪk dʌzənz ə stɪks biɪŋ bit təɡɛðɝ. kjʊɹiəs, hi tɝn ɔf təwɔɹɾ ɪt, ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz.

He started off again, and soon heard a ferocious clatter from one side ahead, like dozens of sticks being beat together. Curious, he turned off toward it, into the trees.

ə lɪɾəl weɪ bɹɔɾ ɪm tə ə lɑɹdʒ ɪkspæns ə bɛɹ ɡɹaʊnd, ði ɝθ biɾən hɑɹd, ət lis fɪfti peɪsɪz əkɹɔs ən nɪɹli twaɪs əz lɔŋ. əɾ ɪntɝvəlz ɝaʊn ɪɾ ʌndɝ ðə tʃɹiz stʊd wʊɾən stænz hoʊldɪŋ kɔɹɾɝstɑfs, ən pɹæktəs sɔɹdz meɪɾ ə stʃɹɪps ʌv wʊd baʊn lusli təɡɛðɝ, ən ə fju ɹil sɔɹdz ən æksiz ən spɪɹz.

A little way brought him to a large expanse of bare ground, the earth beaten hard, at least fifty paces across and nearly twice as long. At intervals around it under the trees stood wooden stands holding quarterstaffs, and practice swords made of strips of wood bound loosely together, and a few real swords and axes and spears.

speɪst əkɹɔs ði oʊpən ɡɹaʊnd, pɛɹz ə mɛn, moʊst stʃɹɪp tə ðə weɪst, fleɪld əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ wɪð mɔɹ pɹæktəs sɔɹdz. səm muv soʊ smuðli ɪɾ ɔlmoʊst sim ðeɪ dænst wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ, floʊɪŋ fɹəm stæns tə stæns, stʃɹoʊk tə kaʊntɝstʃɹoʊk ɪn kəntɪnjuəs moʊʃən. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ kwɪkli əpɛɹən əsaɪd fɹəm skɪl tə mɑɹk əm fɹəm ði ʌðɝz, bʌt mæt wɑz ʃʊɹ i wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ wɔɹɾɝz.

Spaced across the open ground, pairs of men, most stripped to the waist, flailed at each other with more practice swords. Some moved so smoothly it almost seemed they danced with one another, flowing from stance to stance, stroke to counterstroke in continuous motion. There was nothing quickly apparent aside from skill to mark them from the others, but Mat was sure he was watching Warders.

ðoʊz u dɪd nɑt muv soʊ smuðli wɝ ɔl jʌŋɡɝ, itʃ pɛɹ ʌndɝ ðə wɑtʃfəl aɪz ʌv ən oʊldɝ mæn u sim tə ɹeɪɾiət ə deɪnʒɝəs ɡɹeɪs ivən stændɪŋ stɪl. wɔɹɾɝz ən stuɾənts, mæt dɪsaɪɾɪd.

Those who did not move so smoothly were all younger, each pair under the watchful eyes of an older man who seemed to radiate a dangerous grace even standing still. Warders and students, Mat decided.

hi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli ɑɾiəns. nɑt tɛn peɪsɪz fɹəm hɪm, hæf ə dʌzən wɪmən wɪð eɪdʒləs ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪsəz ən əz mɛni mɔɹ ɪn ðə bændɪd waɪt dʒɹɛsəz ə ði æksɛptɪd stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ wʌn pɛɹ ə stuɾənts, bɛɹ tə ðə weɪst ən slɪk wɪð swɛt, ʌndɝ ðə ɡaɪɾəns ʌv ə wɔɹɾɝ ʃeɪp mʌtʃ laɪk ə blɑk ə stoʊn. ðə wɔɹɾɝ juzd ə ʃɔɹt-stɛm paɪp ɪn wʌn hænd, tʃɹeɪlɪŋ təbæk smoʊk, tə dɝɛkt ɪz pjupəlz.

He was not the only audience. Not ten paces from him, half a dozen women with ageless Aes Sedai faces and as many more in the banded white dresses of the Accepted stood watching one pair of students, bare to the waist and slick with sweat, under the guidance of a Warder shaped much like a block of stone. The Warder used a short-stemmed pipe in one hand, trailing tabac smoke, to direct his pupils.

sɪɾɪŋ daʊn kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ʌndɝ ə lɛðɝlif, mæt ɹuɾəd θɹi lɑɹdʒ pɛbəlz aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹaʊn ən bɪɡæn tə dʒʌɡəl əm aɪdli. hi dɪd nɑt fil wik, ɪɡzækli, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə sɪt. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ə weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz, ɪt wəd nɑt ɡoʊ əweɪ waɪl i tʊk ə ʃɔɹt ɹɛst.

Sitting down cross-legged under a leatherleaf, Mat rooted three large pebbles out of the ground and began to juggle them idly. He did not feel weak, exactly, but it was good to sit. If there was a way out of the Tower grounds, it would not go away while he took a short rest.

bɪfɔɹ i hæd bɪn ðəɹ faɪv mɪnəts i nu hu ɪt wɑz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən æksɛptɪd wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ. wʌn ə ðə blɑki wɔɹɾɝz pjupəlz wɑz ə tɔl, laɪð jʌŋ mæn u muv laɪk ə kæt. ən ɔlmoʊst əz pɹɪɾi əz ə ɡɝl, mæt θɔt ɹaɪli. ɛvɹi wʊmən wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə tɔl fɛloʊ wɪð spɑɹklɪŋ aɪz, ivən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Before he had been there five minutes he knew who it was the Aes Sedai and Accepted were watching. One of the blocky Warder's pupils was a tall, lithe young man who moved like a cat. And almost as pretty as a girl, Mat thought wryly. Every woman was staring at the tall fellow with sparkling eyes, even the Aes Sedai.

ðə tɔl mæn hændəld ɪz pɹæktəs sɔɹɾ ɔlmoʊst əz dɛfli əz ðə wɔɹɾɝz, naʊ ən ðən ɝnɪŋ ən əpɹuvɪŋ ɡɹævəli kɑmɛn fɹəm ɪz titʃɝ. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðəɾ ɪz əpoʊnənt, ə juθ mɔɹ mæts eɪdʒ, wɪð ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ, wɑz ənskɪld. fɑɹ fɹəm ɪt, əz mʌtʃ əz mæt kəd si, ðoʊ hi hæd nɛvɝ kleɪm tə noʊ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt sɔɹdz. ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd mæn mɛɾ ɛvɹi laɪtnɪŋ ətæk, tɝnɪŋ ɪɾ əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ðə baʊn stʃɹɪps kəd stʃɹaɪk hɪm, ən ivən lɔntʃt ən əkeɪʒənəl ətæk ə hɪz oʊn. bʌt ðə hænsəm fɛloʊ kaʊntɝd ðoʊz ətæks ən floʊd bæk ɪndə hɪz oʊn ɪn ðə speɪs ʌv ə hɑɹtbit.

The tall man handled his practice sword almost as deftly as the Warders, now and then earning an approving gravelly comment from his teacher. It was not that his opponent, a youth more Mat's age, with red-gold hair, was unskilled. Far from it, as much as Mat could see, though he had never claimed to know anything about swords. The golden-haired man met every lightning attack, turning it away before the bound strips could strike him, and even launched an occasional attack of his own. But the handsome fellow countered those attacks and flowed back into his own in the space of a heartbeat.

mæt ʃɪftəd ðə pɛbəlz tə wʌn hænd, bʌt kɛpt əm spɪnɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i wəd kɛɹ tə feɪs iðɝ ə ðɛm. sɝɾənli nɑt wɪð ə sɔɹd.

Mat shifted the pebbles to one hand, but kept them spinning in the air. He did not think he would care to face either of them. Certainly not with a sword.

"bɹeɪk!" ðə wɔɹɾɝz vɔɪs saʊndəd laɪk ɹɑks ɛmptiɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə bʌkət. tʃɛsts hivɪŋ, ðə tu mɛn lɛt ðɛɹ pɹæktəs sɔɹdz fɔl tə ðɛɹ saɪdz. swɛt mæɾɪd ðɛɹ hɛɹ. "ju kən ɹɛs tɪl aɪ fɪnɪʃ maɪ paɪp. bʌt ɹɛs fæst; aɪm ɔlmoʊst ɪn ðə dɑɾəl."

"Break!" The Warder's voice sounded like rocks emptying out of a bucket. Chests heaving, the two men let their practice swords fall to their sides. Sweat matted their hair. "You can rest till I finish my pipe. But rest fast; I am almost in the dottle."

naʊ ðət ðeɪ hæd stɑp dænsɪŋ əbaʊt, mæt ɡɑɾ ə ɡʊd lʊk ət ðə juθ wɪð ðə ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ ən lɛt ðə pɛbəlz dʒɹɑp. bɝn mi, əl bɛt maɪ hoʊl pɝs ðæts ɪleɪnz bɹʌðɝ. ən ði ʌðɝ wʌnz ɡɑləd, əɹ əl it maɪ buts. ɑn ðə dʒɝni fɹəm toʊmən hɛɾ ɪt hæd sim hæf ʌv ɪleɪnz kɑnvɝseɪʃən hæd bɪn ʌv ɡɔɪnz vɝtʃuz ən ɡɑlədz vaɪsəz. oʊ, ɡɔɪn hæd səm vaɪsəz əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ɪleɪn, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ smɔl; tə mæt ðeɪ saʊndəd laɪk ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋz noʊ wʌn bʌɾ ə sɪstɝ wəd kənsɪɾɝ vaɪsəz əɾ ɔl. əz fəɹ ɡɑləd, wʌns ɪleɪn wɑz pɪn daʊn, hi saʊndəd laɪk wʌɾ ɛvɹi mʌðɝ sɛd ʃi wɑntəɾ əɹ sʌn tə bi. mæt dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i wɑntəd tə spɛn mʌtʃ taɪm ɪn ɡɑlədz kʌmpəni. ɛɡwin blʌʃt wɛnɛvɝ ɡɑləd wɑz mɛnʃənd, ðoʊ ʃi sim tə θɪŋk noʊ wʌn noʊɾəst.

Now that they had stopped dancing about, Mat got a good look at the youth with the red-gold hair and let the pebbles drop. Burn me, I'll bet my whole purse that's Elayne's brother. And the other one's Galad, or I'll eat my boots. On the journey from Toman Head it had seemed half of Elayne's conversation had been of Gawyn's virtues and Galad's vices. Oh, Gawyn had some vices according to Elayne, but they were small; to Mat they sounded like the sort of things no one but a sister would consider vices at all. As for Galad, once Elayne was pinned down, he sounded like what every mother said she wanted her son to be. Mat did not think he wanted to spend much time in Galad's company. Egwene blushed whenever Galad was mentioned, though she seemed to think no one noticed.

ə ɹɪpəl sim tə pæs θɹu ðə wɑtʃɪŋ wɪmən wən ɡɔɪn ən ɡɑləd stɑpt, ən ðeɪ əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə stɛpɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ɔlmoʊst əz wʌn. bʌt ɡɔɪn kɑt saɪɾ ə mæt, sɛd sʌmθɪŋ kwaɪətli tə ɡɑləd, ən ðə tu ʌv əm wɔk baɪ ðə wɪmən. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən æksɛptɪd tɝn tə fɑloʊ wɪð ðɛɹ aɪz. mæt skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fiɾ əz ðə pɛɹ əpɹoʊtʃt.

A ripple seemed to pass through the watching women when Gawyn and Galad stopped, and they appeared on the point of stepping forward almost as one. But Gawyn caught sight of Mat, said something quietly to Galad, and the two of them walked by the women. The Aes Sedai and Accepted turned to follow with their eyes. Mat scrambled to his feet as the pair approached.

"ju ɑɹ mæt kɔθən, ɑɹ jə nɑt?" ɡɔɪn sɛd wɪð ə ɡɹɪn. "aɪ wɑz ʃʊɹ aɪ ɹɛkəɡnaɪz jə fɹəm ɛɡwinz dɪskɹɪpʃən. ən ɪleɪnz. aɪ ʌndɝstæn jə wɝ sɪk. ɑɹ jə bɛɾɝ naʊ?"

"You are Mat Cauthon, are you not?" Gawyn said with a grin. "I was sure I recognized you from Egwene's description. And Elayne's. I understand you were sick. Are you better now?"

"aɪm faɪn," mæt sɛd. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf i wɑz səpoʊz tə kɔl ɡɔɪn "maɪ lɔɹd" əɹ sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə sɔɹt. hi hæd ɹəfjuz tə kɔl ɪleɪn "maɪ leɪɾi" - nɑt ðət ʃi hæd dɪmændəɾ ɪt, æktʃəli  - ən i dɪsaɪɾɪd i wəd nɑt də hɝ bɹʌðɝ bɛɾɝ.

"I'm fine," Mat said. He wondered if he was supposed to call Gawyn "my Lord" or something of the sort. He had refused to call Elayne "my Lady" - not that she had demanded it, actually - and he decided he would not do her brother better.

"dɪd jə kʌm tə ðə pɹæktəs jɑɹd tə lɝn ðə sɔɹd?" ɡɑləɾ æskt.

"Did you come to the practice yard to learn the sword?" Galad asked.

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ wɑz oʊnli aʊt wɔkɪŋ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt sɔɹdz. aɪ θɪŋk əl pʊt maɪ tʃɹʌst ɪn ə ɡʊd baʊ, əɹ ə ɡʊd kɔɹɾɝstæf. aɪ noʊ haʊ tə juz ðoʊz."

Mat shook his head. "I was only out walking. I don't know much about swords. I think I'll put my trust in a good bow, or a good quarterstaff. I know how to use those."

"ɪf jə spɛn mʌtʃ taɪm ɝaʊnd nɪneɪiv," ɡɑləd sɛd, "jul nid baʊ, kɔɹɾɝstæf, ən sɔɹd tə pɹətɛk jɝsɛlf. ən aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛðɝ ðət wəd bi ɪnʌf."

"If you spend much time around Nynaeve," Galad said, "you'll need bow, quarterstaff, and sword to protect yourself. And I don't know whether that would be enough."

ɡɔɪn lʊkt əɾ ɪm wʌndɝɪŋli. "ɡɑləd, jə dʒʌs vɛɹi nɪɹli meɪɾ ə dʒoʊk."

Gawyn looked at him wonderingly. "Galad, you just very nearly made a joke."

"aɪ də hæv ə sɛns ə hjumɝ, ɡɔɪn," ɡɑləd sɛd wɪð ə fɹaʊn. "ju oʊnli θɪŋk aɪ də nɑt kəz aɪ də nɑt kɛɹ tə mɑk pipəl."

"I do have a sense of humor, Gawyn," Galad said with a frown. "You only think I do not because I do not care to mock people."

wɪð ə ʃeɪk ə hɪz hɛd, ɡɔɪn tɝn bæk tə mæt. "ju ʃəd lɝn sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə sɔɹd. ɛvɹiwʌn kən də wɪð ðət sɔɹɾ ə nɑlədʒ ðiz deɪz. jəɹ fɹɛnd - ɹænd ælθɹ - kæɹiɾ ə moʊst ənjuʒəwəl sɔɹd. wʌt dʒju hɪɹ ə hɪm?"

With a shake of his head, Gawyn turned back to Mat. "You should learn something of the sword. Everyone can do with that sort of knowledge these days. Your friend - Rand al'Thor - carried a most unusual sword. What do you hear of him?"

"aɪ hævən sin ɹænd ɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm," mæt sɛd kwɪkli. dʒʌs fəɹ ə moʊmənt, wən i hæd mɛnʃən ɹænd, ɡɔɪnz lʊk hæd ɡeɪn ɪntɛnsəɾi. laɪt, dʌz i noʊ əbaʊt ɹænd? hi kʊdnt. ɪf i dɪd, hid bi dɪnaʊnsɪŋ mi fəɹ ə dɑɹkfɹɛn dʒʌs fəɹ biɪŋ ɹændz fɹɛnd. bʌɾ i noʊz sʌmθɪŋ. "sɔɹdz ɑɹən ðə bi-ɔl ən ɛnd-ɔl, jə noʊ. aɪ kəd də fɛɹli wɛl əɡɛnst iðɝ ə ju, aɪ θɪŋk, ɪf jə hæɾ ə sɔɹɾ ən aɪ hæd maɪ kɔɹɾɝstæf."

"I haven't seen Rand in a long time," Mat said quickly. Just for a moment, when he had mentioned Rand, Gawyn's look had gained intensity. Light, does he know about Rand? He couldn't. If he did, he'd be denouncing me for a Darkfriend just for being Rand's friend. But he knows something. "Swords aren't the be-all and end-all, you know. I could do fairly well against either of you, I think, if you had a sword and I had my quarterstaff."

ɡɔɪnz kɑf wɑz ɑbviəsli mɛn tə swɑloʊ ə læf. mʌtʃ tu pəlaɪtli, hi sɛd, "ju mʌs bi vɛɹi ɡʊd." ɡɑlədz feɪs wɑz fɹæŋkli dɪsbɪlivɪŋ.

Gawyn's cough was obviously meant to swallow a laugh. Much too politely, he said, "You must be very good." Galad's face was frankly disbelieving.

pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ðət ðeɪ boʊθ klɪɹli θɔɾ i wɑz meɪkɪŋ ə waɪl boʊst. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz kəz i hæd mɪshændəl kwɛstʃənɪŋ ðə ɡɑɹdzmæn. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz kəz ɛls, hu hæd sətʃ ən aɪ fəɹ ðə bɔɪz, wɑntəd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð hɪm, ən ɔl ðoʊz wɪmən wɝ stɛɹɪŋ ət ɡɑləd laɪk kæts wɑtʃɪŋ ə dʒʌɡ ʌv kɹim. ɛɛs sədaɪ ən æksɛptɪɾ əɹ nɑt, ðeɪ wɝ stɪl wɪmən. ɔl ðiz ɛkspləneɪʃənz ɹæn θɹu mæts hɛd, bʌɾ i ɹɪdʒɛktɪɾ əm æŋɡɹəli, ɪspɛʃli ðə læst. hi wɑz gɑnə də ɪt kəz ɪt wəd bi fʌn. ən ɪt maɪɾ ɝn səm kɔɪn. hɪz lʌk wəd nɑɾ ivən əv tə bi bæk.

Perhaps it was that they both clearly thought he was making a wild boast. Perhaps it was because he had mishandled questioning the guardsman. Perhaps it was because Else, who had such an eye for the boys, wanted nothing to do with him, and all those women were staring at Galad like cats watching a jug of cream. Aes Sedai and Accepted or not, they were still women. All these explanations ran through Mat's head, but he rejected them angrily, especially the last. He was going to do it because it would be fun. And it might earn some coin. His luck would not even have to be back.

"aɪ wɪl weɪdʒɝ," hi sɛd, "tu sɪlvɝ mɑɹks tə tu fɹəm itʃ ə jə ðəɾ aɪ kən bit boʊθ ə jə ət wʌns, dʒʌs ðə weɪ aɪ sɛd. jə kæn əv fɛɹɝ ɑdz ðən ðæt. ðəɹ ɑɹ tu ʌv ju, ən wʌn ə mi, soʊ tu tə wʌn ɑɹ fɛɹ ɑdz." hi ɔlmoʊs læft əlaʊɾ ət ðə kɑnstɝneɪʃən ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz.

"I will wager," he said, "two silver marks to two from each of you that I can beat both of you at once, just the way I said. You can't have fairer odds than that. There are two of you, and one of me, so two to one are fair odds." He almost laughed aloud at the consternation on their faces.

"mæt," ɡɔɪn sɛd, "ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə meɪk weɪdʒɝz. juv bɪn sɪk. pɝhæps wɪl tʃɹaɪ ðɪs səm taɪm wən jə ɑɹ stʃɹɔŋɝ."

"Mat," Gawyn said, "there's no need to make wagers. You have been sick. Perhaps we will try this some time when you are stronger."

"ɪt wəd bi fɑɹ fɹəm ə fɛɹ weɪdʒɝ," ɡɑləd sɛd. "aɪl nɑt teɪk jəɹ weɪdʒɝ, naʊ əɹ leɪɾɝ. jə ɑɹ fɹəm ðə seɪm vɪlədʒ əz ɛɡwin, ɑɹ jə nɑt? aɪ . . . aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv əɹ æŋɡɹi wɪð mi."

"It would be far from a fair wager," Galad said. "I'll not take your wager, now or later. You are from the same village as Egwene, are you not? I . . . I would not have her angry with me."

"wʌt dʌz ʃi hæv tə də wɪð ɪt? θʌmp mi wʌns wɪð wʌn ə jəɹ sɔɹdz, ən əl hæn oʊvɝ ə sɪlvɝ mɑɹk tə itʃ ə ju. ɪf aɪ θʌmp jə tɪl jə kwɪt, jə ɡɪmi tu itʃ. doʊn jə θɪŋk jə kən də ɪt?"

"What does she have to do with it? Thump me once with one of your swords, and I will hand over a silver mark to each of you. If I thump you till you quit, you give me two each. Don't you think you can do it?"

"ðɪs ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs," ɡɑləd sɛd. "ju wəɾ əv noʊ tʃæns əɡɛnst wʌn tʃɹeɪn sɔɝdzmən, lɛɾ əloʊn tu. əl nɑt teɪk sətʃ ædvæntɪdʒ."

"This is ridiculous," Galad said. "You would have no chance against one trained swordsman, let alone two. I'll not take such advantage."

"du jə θɪŋk ðæt?" æskt ə ɡɹævəl vɔɪs. ðə blɑki wɔɹɾɝ dʒɔɪn ðɛm, θɪk blæk aɪbɹaʊz pʊl daʊn ɪn ə skaʊl. "ju θɪŋk jə tu ɑɹ ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf wɪð jəɹ sɔɹdz tə teɪk ə bɔɪ wɪð ə stɪk?"

"Do you think that?" asked a gravel voice. The blocky Warder joined them, thick black eyebrows pulled down in a scowl. "You think you two are good enough with your swords to take a boy with a stick?"

"ɪt wəd nɑt bi fɛɹ, hæmɝ ɡeɪɾɪn," ɡɑləd sɛd.

"It would not be fair, Hammar Gaidin," Galad said.

"hi hæz bɪn sɪk," ɡɔɪn æɾəd. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ nid fəɹ ðɪs."

"He has been sick," Gawyn added. "There is no need for this."

"tə ðə jɑɹd," hæmɝ ɡɹeɪɾɪd wɪð ə dʒɝk ə hɪz hɛd bæk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ɡɑləɾ ən ɡɔɪn ɡeɪv mæt ɹɪɡɹɛtfəl lʊks, ðən oʊbeɪd. ðə wɔɹɾɝ aɪd mæt ʌp ən daʊn daʊtfəli. "ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ jəɹ ʌp tə ðɪs, læd? naʊ aɪ teɪk ə kloʊs lʊk ət ju, jə ɔt tə bi ɪn ə sɪkbd."

"To the yard," Hammar grated with a jerk of his head back over his shoulder. Galad and Gawyn gave Mat regretful looks, then obeyed. The Warder eyed Mat up and down doubtfully. "Are you sure you're up to this, lad? Now I take a close look at you, you ought to be in a sickbed."

"aɪ æm ɔlɹɛɾi aʊɾ ʌv wʌn," mæt sɛd, "æn ɪm ʌp tə ɪt. aɪ hæv tə bi. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə luz maɪ tu mɑɹks."

"I am already out of one," Mat said, "and I'm up to it. I have to be. I don't want to lose my two marks."

hæmɝz hɛvi bɹaʊz ɹoʊz ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "ju min tə hoʊl tə ðət weɪdʒɝ, læd?"

Hammar's heavy brows rose in surprise. "You mean to hold to that wager, lad?"

"aɪ nid ðə mʌni." mæt læft.

"I need the money." Mat laughed.

hɪz læftɝ kʌɾ ɔf əbɹʌpli əz i tɝn təwɔɹd ðə nɪɹəst stæn ðət hɛl kɔɹɾɝstɑfs ən ɪz niz ɔlmoʊs bʌkəld. hi stɪfən əm soʊ kwɪkli hi θɔɾ ɛniwʌn u noʊɾəst wəd θɪŋk i hæd dʒʌst stʌmbəld. ət ðə stæn i tʊk ɪz taɪm tʃuzɪŋ aʊɾ ə stæf, nɪɹli tu ɪntʃəz θɪk ən ɔlmoʊst ə fʊt tɔlɝ ðən i wɑz. aɪ hæv tə wɪn ðɪs. aɪ oʊpən maɪ ful maʊθ, ən naʊ aɪ hæv tə wɪn. aɪ kæn əfɔɹd tə luz ðoʊz tu mɑɹks. wɪθaʊt ðoʊz tə bɪld ɑn, ɪɾəl teɪk fɝɛvɝ tə wɪn ðə mʌni aɪ nid.

His laughter cut off abruptly as he turned toward the nearest stand that held quarterstaffs and his knees almost buckled. He stiffened them so quickly he thought anyone who noticed would think he had just stumbled. At the stand he took his time choosing out a staff, nearly two inches thick and almost a foot taller than he was. I have to win this. I opened my fool mouth, and now I have to win. I can't afford to lose those two marks. Without those to build on, it will take forever to win the money I need.

wən i tɝn bæk, ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf ɪn boʊθ hænz bɪfɔɹ hɪm, ɡɔɪn ən ɡɑləd wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi weɪɾɪŋ aʊt wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn pɹæktəsɪŋ. aɪ hæv tə wɪn. "lʌk," hi mʌɾɝd. "taɪm tə tɔs ðə daɪs."

When he turned back, the quarterstaff in both hands before him, Gawyn and Galad were already waiting out where they had been practicing. I have to win. "Luck," he muttered. "Time to toss the dice."

hæmɝ ɡeɪv ɪm ən ɑd lʊk. "ju spik ði oʊl tʌŋ, læd?"

Hammar gave him an odd look. "You speak the Old Tongue, lad?"

mæt stɛɹd bæk əɾ ɪm fəɹ ə moʊmənt, nɑt spikɪŋ. hi fɛl koʊl tə ðə boʊn. wɪð ən ɛfɝt, hi meɪɾ ɪz fit stɑɹɾ aʊɾ ɑntu ðə pɹæktəs jɑɹd. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə weɪdʒɝ," hi sɛd laʊdli. "tu sɪlvɝ mɑɹks fɹəm itʃ ə jə əɡɛns tu fɹəm mi."

Mat stared back at him for a moment, not speaking. He felt cold to the bone. With an effort, he made his feet start out onto the practice yard. "Remember the wager," he said loudly. "Two silver marks from each of you against two from me."

ə bʌz ɹoʊz fɹəm ði æksɛptɪɾ əz ðeɪ ɹilaɪzd wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑtʃt ɪn saɪləns. dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ saɪləns.

A buzz rose from the Accepted as they realized what was happening. The Aes Sedai watched in silence. Disapproving silence.

ɡɔɪn ən ɡɑləd splɪɾ əpɑɹt, wʌn tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm, kipɪŋ ðɛɹ dɪstəns, niðɝ wɪð ɪz sɔɹd mɔɹ ðən hæf-ɹeɪzd.

Gawyn and Galad split apart, one to either side of him, keeping their distance, neither with his sword more than half-raised.

"noʊ weɪdʒɝ," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ðɛɹz noʊ weɪdʒɝ."

"No wager," Gawyn said. "There's no wager."

ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ɡɑləd sɛd, "aɪl nɑt teɪk jəɹ mʌni laɪk ðɪs."

At the same time, Galad said, "I'll not take your money like this."

"aɪ min tə teɪk jʊɹz," mæt sɛd.

"I mean to take yours," Mat said.

"dʌn!" hæmɝ ɹɔɹd. "ɪf ðeɪv nɑt ðə nɝv tə kʌvɝ jəɹ weɪdʒɝ, læd, əl peɪ ðə skɔɹ maɪsɛlf."

"Done!" Hammar roared. "If they have not the nerve to cover your wager, lad, I'll pay the score myself."

"vɛɹi wɛl," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ɪf jə ɪnsɪst ɑn ɪt - dʌn!"

"Very well," Gawyn said. "If you insist on it - done!"

ɡɑləd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ə moʊmən mɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ɡɹoʊlɪŋ, "dʌn, ðɛn. lɛɾ əs pʊɾ ən ɛn tə ðɪs fɑɹs."

Galad hesitated a moment more before growling, "Done, then. Let us put an end to this farce."

ðə moʊməns wɔɹnɪŋ wɑz ɔl mæt niɾəd. əz ɡɑləd ɹʌʃt ət hɪm, hi slɪɾ ɪz hænz əlɔŋ ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf ən pɪvəɾəd. ði ɛn ə ðə stæf θʌddɪɾ ɪndə ðə tɔl mænz ɹɪbz, bɹɪŋɪŋ ə ɡɹʌn ən ə stʌmbəl. mæt lɛt ðə stæf baʊns ɔf ɡɑləɾ ən spʌn, kæɹiɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn ɝaʊn dʒʌst əz ɡɔɪn keɪm wɪðɪn ɹeɪnʒ. ðə stæf dɪpt, dɑɹɾɪd ʌndɝ ɡɔɪnz pɹæktəs sɔɹd, ən klɪpt ɪz æŋkəl aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ hɪm. əz ɡɔɪn fɛl, mæt kəmpliɾəd ðə spɪn ɪn taɪm tə kætʃ ɡɑləɾ əkɹɔs ɪz əpɹeɪzd ɹɪst, sɛndɪŋ ɪz pɹæktəs sɔɹd flaɪɪŋ. əz ɪf ɪz ɹɪs dɪd nɑt peɪn ɪm əɾ ɔl, ɡɑləd θɹu hɪmsɛlf ɪndə ə smuð, ɹoʊlɪŋ daɪv ən keɪm ʌp wɪð ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪn boʊθ hænz.

The moment's warning was all Mat needed. As Galad rushed at him, he slid his hands along the quarterstaff and pivoted. The end of the staff thudded into the tall man's ribs, bringing a grunt and a stumble. Mat let the staff bounce off Galad and spun, carrying it on around just as Gawyn came within range. The staff dipped, darted under Gawyn's practice sword, and clipped his ankle out from under him. As Gawyn fell, Mat completed the spin in time to catch Galad across his upraised wrist, sending his practice sword flying. As if his wrist did not pain him at all, Galad threw himself into a smooth, rolling dive and came up with his sword in both hands.

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɪm fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, mæt hæf tɝnd, twɪstɪŋ ɪz ɹɪsts tə wɪp ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə stæf bæk bɪsaɪd hɪm. ɡɔɪn, dʒʌst stɑɹɾɪŋ tə ɹaɪz, tʊk ðə bloʊ ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz hɛd wɪð ə laʊd θʌmp oʊnli pɑɹtli sɔfən baɪ ðə pæɾɪŋ ə hɛɹ. hi wɛn daʊn ɪn ə hip.

Ignoring him for the moment, Mat half turned, twisting his wrists to whip the length of the staff back beside him. Gawyn, just starting to rise, took the blow on the side of his head with a loud thump only partly softened by the padding of hair. He went down in a heap.

mæt wɑz oʊnli veɪɡli əwɛɹ ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹʌʃɪŋ aʊt tə tɛn ɪleɪnz fɔlən bɹʌðɝ. aɪ hoʊp hiz ɔl ɹaɪt. hi ʃəd bi. aɪv hɪt maɪsɛlf hɑɹɾɝ ðən ðət fɔlɪŋ ɔf ə fɛns. hi stɪl hæd ɡɑləd tə dil wɪð, ən fɹəm ðə weɪ ɡɑləd wɑz pɔɪzd ɑn ðə bɔlz ə hɪz fit, sɔɹd ɹeɪz pɹɪsaɪsli, hi hæd bɪɡʌn tə teɪk mæt sɪɹiəsli.

Mat was only vaguely aware of an Aes Sedai rushing out to tend Elayne's fallen brother. I hope he's all right. He should be. I've hit myself harder than that falling off a fence. He still had Galad to deal with, and from the way Galad was poised on the balls of his feet, sword raised precisely, he had begun to take Mat seriously.

mæts lɛɡz tʃoʊz ðət moʊmən tə tʃɹɛmbəl. laɪt, aɪ kænt wikən naʊ. bʌɾ i kəd fil ɪt kɹipɪŋ bæk ɪn, ðə wɑbəli filɪŋ, ðə hʌŋɡɝ əz ɪf i hæd nɑɾ iɾən fəɹ deɪz. ɪf aɪ weɪt fəɹ ɪm tə kʌm tə mi, əl fɔl ɑn maɪ feɪs. ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə kip ɪz niz stʃɹeɪɾ əz i stɑɹɾəd fɔɹwɝd. lʌk, steɪ wɪð mi.

Mat's legs chose that moment to tremble. Light, I can't weaken now. But he could feel it creeping back in, the wobbly feeling, the hunger as if he had not eaten for days. If I wait for him to come to me, I'll fall on my face. It was hard to keep his knees straight as he started forward. Luck, stay with me.

fɹəm ðə fɝs bloʊ, hi nu ðət lʌk, əɹ skɪl, əɹ wʌtɛvɝ hæd bɹɔɾ ɪm ðɪs fɑɹ, wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ. ɡɑləd mænədʒ tə tɝn ðət wʌn wɪð ə ʃɑɹp klæk, ən ðə nɛkst, ən ðə nɛkst, ən ðə nɛkst, bʌt stʃɹeɪn stɪfən ɪz feɪs. ðət smuð sɔɝdzmən, ɔlmoʊst əz ɡʊɾ əz ðə wɔɹɾɝz, fɔt wɪð ɛvɹi aʊns ə hɪz skɪl tə kip mæts stæf fɹəm hɪm. hi dɪd nɑɾ ətæk; ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də tə dɪfɛnd. hi muv kəntɪnjuəli tə ðə saɪd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə bi fɔɹs bæk, ən mæt pɹɛs hɪm, stæf ə blɝ. ən ɡɑləd stɛp bæk, stɛp bæk əɡɛn, wʊɾən bleɪɾ ə θɪn ʃild əɡɛns ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf.

From the first blow, he knew that luck, or skill, or whatever had brought him this far, was still there. Galad managed to turn that one with a sharp clack, and the next, and the next, and the next, but strain stiffened his face. That smooth swordsman, almost as good as the Warders, fought with every ounce of his skill to keep Mat's staff from him. He did not attack; it was all he could do to defend. He moved continually to the side, trying not to be forced back, and Mat pressed him, staff a blur. And Galad stepped back, stepped back again, wooden blade a thin shield against the quarterstaff.

hʌŋɡɝ nɔɾ ət mæt əz ɪf i hæd swɑloʊd wizəlz. swɛt ɹoʊl daʊn ɪndə hɪz aɪz, ən ɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ bɪɡæn tə feɪɾ əz ɪf ɪt litʃt aʊt wɪð ðə swɛt. nɑt jɛt. aɪ kæn fɔl jɛt. aɪ hæv tə wɪn. naʊ. wɪð ə ɹɔɹ, hi θɹu ɔl ɪz ɹɪzɝvz ɪndə wʌn læst sɝdʒ.

Hunger gnawed at Mat as if he had swallowed weasels. Sweat rolled down into his eyes, and his strength began to fade as if it leached out with the sweat. Not yet. I can't fall yet. I have to win. Now. With a roar, he threw all his reserves into one last surge.

ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf flɪkɝd pæst ɡɑlədz sɔɹɾ ən ɪn kwɪk səksɛʃən stʃɹʌk ni, ɹɪst, ən ɹɪbz ən faɪnəli θɹʌst ɪndə ɡɑlədz stʌmək laɪk ə spɪɹ. wɪð ə ɡɹoʊn, ɡɑləd foʊldəɾ oʊvɝ, faɪɾɪŋ nɑt tə fɔl. ðə stæf kwɪvɝɾ ɪn mæts hænz, ɑn ðə pɔɪn ʌv ə faɪnəl kɹʌʃɪŋ θɹʌs tə ðə θɹoʊt. ɡɑləd sæŋk tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

The quarterstaff flickered past Galad's sword and in quick succession struck knee, wrist, and ribs and finally thrust into Galad's stomach like a spear. With a groan, Galad folded over, fighting not to fall. The staff quivered in Mat's hands, on the point of a final crushing thrust to the throat. Galad sank to the ground.

mæt ɔlmoʊs dʒɹɑp ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf wən i ɹilaɪzd wʌɾ i hæd bɪn əbaʊt tə du. wɪn, nɑt kɪl. laɪt, wʌt wɑz aɪ θɪŋkɪŋ? ɹiflɛksɪvli hi ɡɹaʊndɪd ðə bʌɾ ə ðə stæf, ən əz sun i dɪd, hi hæd tə klʌtʃ əɾ ɪt tə hoʊl hɪmsɛlf ɪɹɛkt. hʌŋɡɝ hɑloʊɾ ɪm laɪk ə naɪf ɹimɪŋ mɛɹoʊ fɹəm ə boʊn. sʌɾənli hi ɹilaɪz ðət nɑɾ oʊnli ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən æksɛptɪd wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ. ɔl pɹæktəs, ɔl lɝnɪŋ, hæd stɑpt. wɔɹɾɝz ən stuɾənts əlaɪk stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm.

Mat almost dropped the quarterstaff when he realized what he had been about to do. Win, not kill. Light, what was I thinking? Reflexively he grounded the butt of the staff, and as soon he did, he had to clutch at it to hold himself erect. Hunger hollowed him like a knife reaming marrow from a bone. Suddenly he realized that not only the Aes Sedai and Accepted were watching. All practice, all learning, had stopped. Warders and students alike stood watching him.

hæmɝ muv tə stæn bɪsaɪd ɡɑləd, stɪl ɡɹoʊnɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊʃ hɪmsɛlf ʌp. ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs tə ʃaʊt, "hu wɑz ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst bleɪdmæstɝ ʌv ɔl taɪm?"

Hammar moved to stand beside Galad, still groaning on the ground and trying to push himself up. The Warder raised his voice to shout, "Who was the greatest blademaster of all time?"

fɹəm ðə θɹoʊts ə dʌzənz ə stuɾənts keɪm ə mæs bɛloʊ. "dʒɪɹəm, ɡeɪɾɪn!"

From the throats of dozens of students came a massed bellow. "Jearom, Gaidin!"

"jɛs!" hæmɝ ʃaʊɾəd, tɝnɪŋ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ɔl hɝd. "dʊɹɪŋ ɪz laɪftaɪm, dʒɪɹəm fɔɾ oʊvɝ tɛn θaʊzən taɪmz, ɪn bæɾəl ən sɪŋɡəl kɑmbæt. hi wɑz dɪfiɾəd wʌns. baɪ ə fɑɹmɝ wɪð ə kɔɹɾɝstæf! ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt. ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt jə dʒʌst sɔ." hi loʊɝɾ ɪz aɪz tə ɡɑləd, ən loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs əz wɛl. "ɪf jə kænɑt ɡɛɾ ʌp baɪ naʊ, læd, ɪts fɪnɪʃt." hi ɹeɪzd ə hænd, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən æksɛptɪd ɹʌʃt tə sɝaʊnd ɡɑləd.

"Yes!" Hammar shouted, turning to make sure all heard. "During his lifetime, Jearom fought over ten thousand times, in battle and single combat. He was defeated once. By a farmer with a quarterstaff! Remember that. Remember what you just saw." He lowered his eyes to Galad, and lowered his voice as well. "If you cannot get up by now, lad, it is finished." He raised a hand, and the Aes Sedai and Accepted rushed to surround Galad.

mæt slɪd daʊn ðə stæf tə hɪz niz. nʌn ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ivən ɡlænst ɪz weɪ. wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd dɪd, ə plʌmp ɡɝl i maɪɾ əv laɪk tə æsk fəɹ ə dæns ɪf ʃi wɝ nɑt gɑnə bi ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi fɹaʊn ət hɪm, snɪft, ən tɝn bæk tə piɹɪŋ ət wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ duɪŋ ɝaʊnd ɡɑləd.

Mat slid down the staff to his knees. None of the Aes Sedai even glanced his way. One of the Accepted did, a plump girl he might have liked to ask for a dance if she were not going to be an Aes Sedai. She frowned at him, sniffed, and turned back to peering at what the Aes Sedai were doing around Galad.

ɡɔɪn wɑz ɑn ɪz fit, mæt noʊɾəd wɪð ɹɪlif. hi pʊl hɪmsɛlf ʌp əz ɡɔɪn keɪm oʊvɝ. mʌsnt lɛɾ əm noʊ. əl nɛvɝ ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ ɪf ðeɪ dɪsaɪd tə nɝs mi fɹəm sʌnʌp tə sʌnʌp. blʌd dɑɹkən ðə ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ ɑn ðə saɪɾ ʌv ɡɔɪnz hɛd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz niðɝ kʌt nɔɹ bɹuz əpɛɹənt.

Gawyn was on his feet, Mat noted with relief. He pulled himself up as Gawyn came over. Mustn't let them know. I'll never get out of here if they decide to nurse me from sunup to sunup. Blood darkened the red-gold hair on the side of Gawyn's head, but there was neither cut nor bruise apparent.

hi pʊʃt tu sɪlvɝ mɑɹks ɪndə mæts hænd wɪð ə dʒɹaɪ "aɪ θɪŋk əl lɪsən nɛks taɪm." hi noʊɾəst mæts ɡlæns, tʌtʃt ɪz hɛd. "ðeɪ hild ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt bæd. ɪleɪn əz ɡɪvən mi wɝs mɔɹ ðən wʌns. jə ɑɹ ɡʊd wɪð ðæt."

He pushed two silver marks into Mat's hand with a dry "I think I will listen next time." He noticed Mat's glance, touched his head. "They Healed it, but it was not bad. Elayne has given me worse more than once. You are good with that."

"nɑɾ əz ɡʊɾ əz maɪ dɑ. hiz wʌn ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf ət bɛl taɪn ɛvɹi jɪɹ əz lɔŋ əz aɪ kən ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ɪksɛpt wʌns əɹ twaɪs wən ɹændz dɑ dɪd." ðəɾ ɪntʃɹəstəd lʊk keɪm bæk ɪndə ɡɔɪnz aɪz, ən mæt wɪʃt i hæd nɛvɝ mɛnʃən tæm ælθɹ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ði æksɛptɪd wɝ ɔl stɪl klʌstɝɾ ɝaʊnd ɡɑləd. "aɪ . . . aɪ mʌst əv hɝɾ ɪm bædli. aɪ dɪd nɑt min tə də ðæt."

"Not as good as my da. He's won the quarterstaff at Bel Tine every year as long as I can remember, except once or twice when Rand's da did." That interested look came back into Gawyn's eyes, and Mat wished he had never mentioned Tam al'Thor. The Aes Sedai and the Accepted were all still clustered around Galad. "I . . . I must have hurt him badly. I did not mean to do that."

ɡɔɪn ɡlæns ðət weɪ - ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə bi sin bʌt tu ɹɪŋz ʌv wɪmənz bæks, æksɛptɪdz waɪt dʒɹɛsəz meɪkɪŋ ði aʊɾɝ ɹɪŋ əz ðeɪ pɪɹɾ oʊvɝ ðə ʃoʊldɝz ə kɹaʊtʃɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ - ən læft. "ju dɪd nɑt kɪl ɪm - aɪ hɝɾ ɪm ɡɹoʊnɪŋ - soʊ hi ʃəd bi ɑn ɪz fit baɪ naʊ, bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt gɑnə lɛt ðɪs tʃæns pæs, naʊ ðeɪv ðɛɹ hænz ɑn hɪm. laɪt, fɔɹ ə ðɛm ɑɹ ɡɹin ədʒɑ!" mæt ɡeɪv ɪm ə kənfjuz lʊk - ɡɹin ədʒɑ? wʌt dʌz ðəɾ əv tə də wɪð ɛniθɪŋ? - ən ɡɔɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ. dʒʌst ɹɛst əʃʊɹd ðət ðə wɝst ɡɑləɾ əz tə wɝi əbaʊɾ ɪz faɪndɪŋ hɪmsɛlf wɔɹɾɝ tə ə ɡɹin ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪfɔɹ ɪz hɛd klɪɹz." hi læft. "noʊ, ðeɪ wəd nɑt də ðæt. bʌɾ əl weɪdʒɝ jə ðoʊz tu mɑɹks ə maɪn ɪn jəɹ hæn ðət səm ə ðɛm wɪʃ ðeɪ kʊd."

Gawyn glanced that way - there was nothing to be seen but two rings of women's backs, Accepted's white dresses making the outer ring as they peered over the shoulders of crouching Aes Sedai - and laughed. "You did not kill him - I heard him groaning - so he should be on his feet by now, but they are not going to let this chance pass, now they have their hands on him. Light, four of them are Green Ajah!" Mat gave him a confused look - Green Ajah? What does that have to do with anything? - and Gawyn shook his head. "It doesn't matter. Just rest assured that the worst Galad has to worry about is finding himself Warder to a Green Aes Sedai before his head clears." He laughed. "No, they would not do that. But I will wager you those two marks of mine in your hand that some of them wish they could."

"nɑt jəɹ mɑɹks," mæt sɛd, ʃʌvɪŋ əm ɪn ɪz koʊt pɑkət, "maɪn." ði ɛkspləneɪʃən hæd meɪd lɪɾəl sɛns tə hɪm. ɪksɛp ðət ɡɑləd wɑz wɛl. ɔl i nu ʌv wʌt pæs bɪtwin wɔɹɾɝz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ðə pisəz i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ə læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn, ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ðəɹ laɪk wʌt ɡɔɪn sim tə bi sədʒɛstɪŋ. "du jə θɪŋk ðeɪd maɪn ɪf aɪ kəlɛktəd maɪ weɪdʒɝ fɹəm hɪm?"

"Not your marks," Mat said, shoving them in his coat pocket, "mine." The explanation had made little sense to him. Except that Galad was well. All he knew of what passed between Warders and Aes Sedai were the pieces he remembered of Lan and Moiraine, and there was nothing there like what Gawyn seemed to be suggesting. "Do you think they'd mind if I collected my wager from him?"

"ðeɪ vɛɹi laɪkli wʊd," hæmɝ sɛd dʒɹaɪli əz i dʒɔɪn ðɛm. "ju ɑɹ nɑt vɛɹi pɑpjəlɝ wɪð ðoʊz pɝtɪkjəlɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹaɪt naʊ." hi snɔɹɾɪd. "jud θɪŋk ivən ɡɹin ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd bi bɛɾɝ ðən ɡɝlz dʒʌs lus fɹəm ðɛɹ mʌðɝz eɪpɹən stʃɹɪŋz. hi ɪzən ðət ɡʊd-lʊkɪŋ."

"They very likely would," Hammar said dryly as he joined them. "You are not very popular with those particular Aes Sedai right now." He snorted. "You'd think even Green Aes Sedai would be better than girls just loose from their mother's apron strings. He isn't that good-looking."

"hi ɪz nɑt," mæt əɡɹid.

"He is not," Mat agreed.

ɡɔɪn ɡɹɪn ət boʊθ ə ðɛm, əntɪl hæmɝ ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm. "hɪɹ," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd, pʊʃɪŋ tu mɔɹ sɪlvɝ kɔɪnz ɪndə mæts hænd. "aɪ wɪl kəlɛk fɹəm ɡɑləd leɪɾɝ. wɛɹ ɑɹ jə fɹʌm, læd?"

Gawyn grinned at both of them, until Hammar glared at him. "Here," the Warder said, pushing two more silver coins into Mat's hand. "I will collect from Galad later. Where are you from, lad?"

"meɪnɛðɝən." mæt fɹoʊz wən i hɝd ðə neɪm kʌm aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ. "aɪ min, aɪm fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. aɪ hæv hɝd tu mɛni oʊl stɔɹiz." ðeɪ dʒʌs lʊkt əɾ ɪm wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ. "aɪ. . . . aɪ θɪŋk əl ɡoʊ bæk ən si ɪf aɪ kən faɪn sʌmθɪŋ tə it." nɑɾ ivən ðə mɪdmɔɹnɪŋ bɛl hæd ɹʌŋ jɛt, bʌt ðeɪ nɑɾəd əz ɪf ɪt meɪd sɛns.

"Manetheren." Mat froze when he heard the name come out of his mouth. "I mean, I'm from the Two Rivers. I have heard too many old stories." They just looked at him without saying anything. "I. . . . I think I will go back and see if I can find something to eat." Not even the Midmorning bell had rung yet, but they nodded as if it made sense.

hi kɛp ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf - noʊ wʌn hæd toʊld ɪm tə pʊɾ ɪt bæk - ən wɔk sloʊli əntɪl ðə tʃɹiz hɪɾ ɪm fɹəm ðə pɹæktəs jɑɹd. wən ðeɪ dɪd, hi lin ɑn ðə stæf əz ðoʊ ɪt wɝ ði oʊnli θɪŋ hoʊldɪŋ ɪm ʌp. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz nɑt.

He kept the quarterstaff - no one had told him to put it back - and walked slowly until the trees hid him from the practice yard. When they did, he leaned on the staff as though it were the only thing holding him up. He was not sure it was not.

hi θɔt ðəɾ ɪf i pɑɹɾəd ɪz koʊt, hi wəd si ə hoʊl wɛɹ ɪz stʌmək ʃəɾ əv bɪn, ə hoʊl ɡɹoʊɪŋ lɑɹdʒɝ əz ɪt pʊl ðə ɹɛst ə hɪm ɪn. bʌɾ i hɑɹdli θɔɾ ə hʌŋɡɝ. hi kɛp hɪɹɪŋ vɔɪsəz ɪn ɪz hɛd. jə spik ði oʊl tʌŋ, læd? meɪnɛðɝən. ɪt meɪɾ ɪm ʃɪvɝ. laɪt hɛlp mi, aɪ kip dɪɡɪŋ maɪsɛlf dipɝ. aɪ hæv tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ. bʌt haʊ? hi hɑbəl bæk təwɔɹd ðə taʊɝ pɹɑpɝ laɪk ən oʊld, oʊl mæn. haʊ?

He thought that if he parted his coat, he would see a hole where his stomach should have been, a hole growing larger as it pulled the rest of him in. But he hardly thought of hunger. He kept hearing voices in his head. You speak the Old Tongue, lad? Manetheren. It made him shiver. Light help me, I keep digging myself deeper. I have to get out of here. But how? He hobbled back toward the Tower proper like an old, old man. How?


tʃæptɝ twɛntifaɪv


CHAPTER 25

kwɛstʃənz


Questions

ɛɡwin leɪ əkɹɔs nɪneɪivz bɛd, tʃɪn ɪn əɹ hænz, wɑtʃɪŋ nɪneɪiv peɪs bæk ən fɔɹθ. ɪleɪn spɹɔld ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs, wɪtʃ wɑz stɪl fʊl ə ði æʃəz ə læs naɪts faɪɝ. jɛɾ əɡɛn ɪleɪn wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ ðə lɪst ə neɪmz vɛɹɪn hæd pɹədust, peɪʃənli ɹiɾɪŋ ɛvɹi wɝd wʌn mɔɹ taɪm. ði ʌðɝ peɪdʒəz, ðə lɪst ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, sæɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl; æftɝ wʌn ʃɑkt ɹiɾɪŋ ðeɪ hæd nɑt dɪskʌs ðət wʌn fɝðɝ, ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd tɔkt ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. ən ɑɹɡjud, tu.

Egwene lay across Nynaeve's bed, chin in her hands, watching Nynaeve pace back and forth. Elayne sprawled in front of the fireplace, which was still full of the ashes of last night's fire. Yet again Elayne was studying the list of names Verin had produced, patiently reading every word one more time. The other pages, the list of ter'angreal, sat on the table; after one shocked reading they had not discussed that one further, though they had talked of everything else. And argued, too.

ɛɡwin staɪfəld ə jɔn. ɪt wɑz oʊnli ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, bʌt nʌn ə ðɛm hæd ɡɑɾən mʌtʃ slip. ðeɪ hæd hæd tə bi ʌp ɝli. fəɹ ðə kɪtʃənz, ən bɹɛkfəst. fəɹ ʌðɝ θɪŋz ðət ʃi ɹəfjuz tə θɪŋk əbaʊt. ðə lɪɾəl slip ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd mænədʒ hæd bɪn fɪld wɪð ənplɛzən dʒɹimz. meɪbi æneɪjə kəd hɛlp mi ʌndɝstæn ðɛm, ðoʊz ðət niɾ ʌndɝstændɪŋ, bʌt. . . . bʌt wʌɾ ɪf ʃiz blæk ədʒɑ? æftɝ stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɛvɹi wʊmən ɪn ðət tʃeɪmbɝ læs naɪt, wʌndɝɪŋ wɪtʃ wɑz blæk ədʒɑ, ʃi wɑz faɪndɪŋ tʃɹʌs fəɹ ɛniwʌn bʌɾ əɹ tu kəmpænjənz hɑɹd tə kʌm baɪ. bʌt ʃi dɪd wɪʃ ʃi hæd səm weɪ ʌv ɪntɝpɹɛɾɪŋ ðoʊz dʒɹimz.

Egwene stifled a yawn. It was only the middle of the morning, but none of them had gotten much sleep. They had had to be up early. For the kitchens, and breakfast. For other things that she refused to think about. The little sleep she herself had managed had been filled with unpleasant dreams. Maybe Anaiya could help me understand them, those that need understanding, but. . . . But what if she is Black Ajah? After staring at every woman in that chamber last night, wondering which was Black Ajah, she was finding trust for anyone but her two companions hard to come by. But she did wish she had some way of interpreting those dreams.

ðə naɪtmɛɹz əbaʊt wʌt hæd hæpən ɪnsaɪd ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil læs naɪt wɝ izi ɪnʌf tə ʌndɝstænd, ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd meɪɾ əɹ weɪk ʌp wipɪŋ. ʃi hæd dʒɹimd ə ðə sintʃæn, tu, ʌv wɪmən ɪn dʒɹɛsəz wɪð laɪtnɪŋ boʊls woʊvən ɑn ðɛɹ bɹɛsts, kəlɹɪŋ ə lɔŋ laɪn ʌv wɪmən u wɔɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋz, fɔɹsɪŋ əm tə kɔl laɪtnɪŋ əɡɛns ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðət hæd stɑɹɾəd əɹ əweɪk ɪn ə koʊl swɛt, bʌt ðət hæd tə bi dʒʌst ə naɪtmɛɹ, tu. ən ðə dʒɹim əbaʊt waɪtkloʊks baɪndɪŋ əɹ fɑðɝz hænz. ə naɪtmɛɹ bɹɔɾ ɑn baɪ hoʊmsɪknəs, ʃi səpoʊzd. bʌt ði ʌðɝz. . . .

The nightmares about what had happened inside the ter'angreal last night were easy enough to understand, though they had made her wake up weeping. She had dreamed of the Seanchan, too, of women in dresses with lightning bolts woven on their breasts, collaring a long line of women who wore Great Serpent rings, forcing them to call lightning against the White Tower. That had started her awake in a cold sweat, but that had to be just a nightmare, too. And the dream about Whitecloaks binding her father's hands. A nightmare brought on by homesickness, she supposed. But the others. . . .

ʃi ɡlænst ət ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən əɡɛn. ɪleɪn wɑz stɪl ɹɛɾɪŋ. nɪneɪiv stɪl peɪst wɪð ðət stɛɾi tʃɹɛd.

She glanced at the other two women again. Elayne was still reading. Nynaeve still paced with that steady tread.

ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə dʒɹim ə ɹænd, ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ ə sɔɹd ðət sim tə bi meɪɾ ə kɹɪstəl, nɛvɝ siɪŋ ðə faɪn nɛt dʒɹɑpɪŋ oʊvɝ hɪm. ən wʌn ə hɪm nilɪŋ ɪn ə tʃeɪmbɝ wɛɹ ə pɑɹtʃt wɪn blu dʌst əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ, ən kɹitʃɝz laɪk ðə wʌn ɑn ðə dʒɹæɡən bænɝ, bʌt mʌtʃ smɔlɝ, floʊɾəd ɑn ðət wɪnd, ən sɛɾəld ɪndə hɪz skɪn. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə dʒɹim ə hɪm wɔkɪŋ daʊn ɪndə ə ɡɹeɪt hoʊl ɪn ə blæk maʊntən, ə hoʊl fɪld wɪð ə ɹɛɾɪʃ ɡlɛɹ əz fɹəm væs faɪɝz bɪloʊ, ən ivən ə dʒɹim ə hɪm kənfɹʌntɪŋ sintʃæn.

There had been a dream of Rand, reaching for a sword that seemed to be made of crystal, never seeing the fine net dropping over him. And one of him kneeling in a chamber where a parched wind blew dust across the floor, and creatures like the one on the Dragon banner, but much smaller, floated on that wind, and settled into his skin. There had been a dream of him walking down into a great hole in a black mountain, a hole filled with a reddish glare as from vast fires below, and even a dream of him confronting Seanchan.

əbaʊt ðət læst, ʃi wɑz ənsɝɾən, bʌt ʃi nu ði ʌðɝz hæd tə min sʌmθɪŋ. bæk wən ʃi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ʃi kəd tʃɹʌst æneɪjə, bæk bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd lɛf ðə taʊɝ, bɪfɔɹ ʃi lɝn ðə ɹiæləɾi ʌv ðə blæk ədʒɑ, ə lɪɾəl kɔʃəs kwɛstʃənɪŋ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ - dʌn, oʊ, soʊ kɛɹfəli, soʊ æneɪjə wəd θɪŋk ɪt noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðə kjʊɹiɑsəɾi ʃi ʃoʊɾ əbaʊɾ ʌðɝ θɪŋz - hæd ɹɪvil ðəɾ ə dʒɹimɝz dʒɹimz əbaʊt tɑvɝən wɝ ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz səɡnɪfɪkənt, ən ðə mɔɹ stʃɹɔŋli tɑvɝən, ðə mɔɹ "ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz" bɪkeɪm "sɝɾənli."

About that last, she was uncertain, but she knew the others had to mean something. Back when she had been sure she could trust Anaiya, back before she had left the Tower, before she learned the reality of the Black Ajah, a little cautious questioning of the Aes Sedai - done, oh, so carefully, so Anaiya would think it no more than the curiosity she showed about other things - had revealed that a Dreamer's dreams about ta'veren were almost always significant, and the more strongly ta'veren, the more "almost always" became "certainly."

bʌt mæt ən pɛɹɪn wɝ tɑvɝən, tu, ən ʃi hæɾ ɔlsoʊ dʒɹimd ə ðɛm. ɑd dʒɹimz, ivən mɔɹ dɪfəkəl tə ʌndɝstæn ðən ðə dʒɹimz ə ɹænd. pɛɹɪn wɪð ə fælkən ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ən pɛɹɪn wɪð ə hɔk. oʊnli ðə hɔk hɛld ə liʃ ɪn əɹ təlɑnz - ɛɡwin wɑz sʌmhaʊ kənvɪns boʊθ hɔk ən fælkən wɝ fimeɪl - ən ðə hɔk wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fæsən ɪɾ ɝaʊn pɛɹɪnz nɛk. ðət meɪɾ əɹ ʃɪvɝ ivən naʊ; ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk dʒɹimz əbaʊt liʃɪz. ən ðət dʒɹim ə pɛɹɪn - wɪð ə bɪɹd! - liɾɪŋ ə hjudʒ pæk ʌv wʊlvz ðət stʃɹɛtʃt əz fɑɹ əz ði aɪ kəd si. ðoʊz əbaʊt mæt hæd bɪn ivən næstiɝ. mæt, pleɪsɪŋ ɪz oʊn lɛft aɪ ɑn ə bæləns skeɪl. mæt, hæŋɪŋ baɪ hɪz nɛk fɹəm ə tʃɹi lɪm. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə dʒɹim ə mæt ən sintʃæn, tu, bʌt ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə dɪsmɪs ðəɾ əz ə naɪtmɛɹ. ɪt hæd tə hæv bɪn dʒʌst ə naɪtmɛɹ. dʒʌs laɪk ðə wʌn əbaʊt mæt spikɪŋ ði oʊl tʌŋ. ðət hæd tə kʌm fɹəm wʌt ʃi hæd hɝd dʊɹɪŋ ɪz hilɪŋ.

But Mat and Perrin were ta'veren, too, and she had also dreamed of them. Odd dreams, even more difficult to understand than the dreams of Rand. Perrin with a falcon on his shoulder, and Perrin with a hawk. Only the hawk held a leash in her talons - Egwene was somehow convinced both hawk and falcon were female - and the hawk was trying to fasten it around Perrin's neck. That made her shiver even now; she did not like dreams about leashes. And that dream of Perrin - with a beard! - leading a huge pack of wolves that stretched as far as the eye could see. Those about Mat had been even nastier. Mat, placing his own left eye on a balance scale. Mat, hanging by his neck from a tree limb. There had been a dream of Mat and Seanchan, too, but she was willing to dismiss that as a nightmare. It had to have been just a nightmare. Just like the one about Mat speaking the Old Tongue. That had to come from what she had heard during his Healing.

ʃi saɪd, ən ðə saɪ tɝn ɪndə ənʌðɝ jɔn. ʃi ən ði ʌðɝz hæd ɡɔn tə hɪz ɹum æftɝ bɹɛkfəs tə si haʊ hi wɑz, bʌɾ i hæd nɑt bɪn ðɛɹ.

She sighed, and the sigh turned into another yawn. She and the others had gone to his room after breakfast to see how he was, but he had not been there.

hiz pɹɑbli wɛl ɪnʌf tə ɡoʊ dænsɪŋ. laɪt, naʊ əl pɹɑbli dʒɹim əbaʊɾ ɪm dænsɪŋ wɪð sintʃæn! noʊ mɔɹ dʒɹimz, ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf fɝmli. nɑt naʊ. əl θɪŋk əbaʊɾ əm wən aɪm nɑt soʊ taɪɝd. ʃi θɔɾ ə ðə kɪtʃənz, ʌv ðə mɪddeɪ mil sun tə kʌm, ən ðən sʌpɝ, ən bɹɛkfəst əɡɛn təmɑɹoʊ, ən pɑts ən klinɪŋ ən skɹʌbɪŋ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn fɝɛvɝ. ɪf aɪm ɛvɝ nɑt taɪɝɾ əɡɛn. ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ pəzɪʃən ɑn ðə bɛd, ʃi lʊkt əɾ əɹ fɹɛnz əɡɛn. ɪleɪn stɪl hæɾ əɹ aɪz ɑn ðə lɪst ə neɪmz. nɪneɪivz stɛps hæd sloʊd. ɛni moʊmənt naʊ, nɪneɪiv wɪl seɪ ɪɾ əɡɛn. ɛni moʊmənt.

He is probably well enough to go dancing. Light, now I will probably dream about him dancing with Seanchan! No more dreams, she told herself firmly. Not now. I will think about them when I am not so tired. She thought of the kitchens, of the midday meal soon to come, and then supper, and breakfast again tomorrow, and pots and cleaning and scrubbing going on forever. If I am ever not tired again. Shifting her position on the bed, she looked at her friends again. Elayne still had her eyes on the list of names. Nynaeve's steps had slowed. Any moment now, Nynaeve will say it again. Any moment.

nɪneɪiv keɪm tə ə hɔlt, stɛɹɪŋ daʊn əɾ ɪleɪn. "pʊt ðoʊz əweɪ. wɪv bɪn oʊvɝ əm twɛnti taɪmz, ən ðəɹ ɪzən ə wɝd ðət hɛlps. vɛɹɪn ɡeɪv əs ɹʌbɪʃ. ðə kwɛstʃən ɪz, wɑz ɪɾ ɔl ʃi hæd, əɹ dɪd ʃi ɡɪv əs ɹʌbɪʃ ɑn pɝpəs?"

Nynaeve came to a halt, staring down at Elayne. "Put those away. We have been over them twenty times, and there isn't a word that helps. Verin gave us rubbish. The question is, was it all she had, or did she give us rubbish on purpose?"

əz ɪkspɛktəd. meɪbi hæf ən aʊɝ tɪl ʃi sɛz ɪɾ əɡɛn. ɛɡwin fɹaʊn daʊn əɾ əɹ hænz, ɡlæd ʃi kəd nɑt si ðɛm klɪɹli. ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ lʊkt - aʊɾ ə pleɪs - ɑn hænz ɔl ɹɪŋkəl fɹəm lɔŋ ɪmɝʒən ɪn hɑt, soʊpi wɔɾɝ.

As expected. Maybe half an hour till she says it again. Egwene frowned down at her hands, glad she could not see them clearly. The Great Serpent ring looked - out of place - on hands all wrinkled from long immersion in hot, soapy water.

"noʊɪŋ ðɛɹ neɪmz hɛlps," ɪleɪn sɛd, stɪl ɹiɾɪŋ. "noʊɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ lʊk laɪk hɛlps."

"Knowing their names helps," Elayne said, still reading. "Knowing what they look like helps."

"ju noʊ vɛɹi wɛl wʌɾ aɪ min," nɪneɪiv snæpt.

"You know very well what I mean," Nynaeve snapped.

ɛɡwin saɪɾ ən foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ɹɛstəɾ əɹ tʃɪn ɑn ðɛm. wən ʃi hæd kʌm aʊɾ ə ʃɛɹiəmz stʌɾi ðət mɔɹnɪŋ, wɪð ðə sʌn stɪl nɑɾ ivən ə ɡlɪn ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən, nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn weɪɾɪŋ wɪð ə kændəl ɪn ðə koʊld, dɑɹk hɔl. ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn siɪŋ vɛɹi klɪɹli, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ nɪneɪiv hæd lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə tʃu stoʊn. ən noʊɪŋ tʃuɪŋ stoʊnz wəd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ðə nɛks fju mɪnəts. ðət wɑz waɪ ʃi wɑz soʊ ɪɹəɾəbəl. ʃiz əz tʌtʃi əbaʊɾ əɹ pɹaɪɾ əz ɛni mæn aɪ ɛvɝ mɛt. bʌt ʃi ʃəd nɑt teɪk ɪɾ aʊɾ ɑn ɪleɪn ən mi. laɪt, ɪf ɪleɪn kən stæn ɪt, ʃi ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə. ʃi ɪzən ðə wɪzdəm ɛnimɔɹ.

Egwene sighed and folded her arms in front of her, rested her chin on them. When she had come out of Sheriam's study that morning, with the sun still not even a glint on the horizon, Nynaeve had been waiting with a candle in the cold, dark hall. She had not been seeing very clearly, but she was sure Nynaeve had looked ready to chew stone. And knowing chewing stones would not change anything in the next few minutes. That was why she was so irritable. She's as touchy about her pride as any man I ever met. But she should not take it out on Elayne and me. Light, if Elayne can stand it, she should be able to. She isn't the Wisdom anymore.

ɪleɪn hɑɹdli əpɪɹd tə noʊɾəs wɛðɝ nɪneɪiv wɑz ɪɹəɾəbəl əɹ nɑt. ʃi fɹaʊn ɪndə ðə dɪstəns θɔtfəli. "liɑnʒɹɪn wɑz ði oʊnli ɹɛd. ɔl ði ʌðɝ ədʒəz lɔs tu itʃ."

Elayne hardly appeared to notice whether Nynaeve was irritable or not. She frowned into the distance thoughtfully. "Liandrin was the only Red. All the other Ajahs lost two each."

"oʊ, də bi kwaɪət, tʃaɪld," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"Oh, do be quiet, child," Nynaeve said.

ɪleɪn wɪɡɡəld əɹ lɛf hæn tə dɪspleɪ hɝ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ, ɡeɪv nɪneɪiv ə minɪŋfəl lʊk, ən wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn. "noʊ tu wɝ bɔɹn ɪn ðə seɪm sɪɾi, ən noʊ mɔɹ ðən tu ɪn ɛni wʌn kʌntʃɹi. ɑmikoʊ nəɡɔɪən wɑz ðə jʌŋɡəst, səm fɪftin jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən ɛɡwin ən aɪ. dʒɔɪjə bɝ kəd bi əɹ ɡɹeɪt-ɡɹændmʌðɝz ɡɹeɪt-ɡɹændmʌðɝ."

Elayne wiggled her left hand to display her Great Serpent ring, gave Nynaeve a meaningful look, and went right on. "No two were born in the same city, and no more than two in any one country. Amico Nagoyin was the youngest, some fifteen years older than Egwene and I. Joiya Byir could be our great-grandmother's great-grandmother."

ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪt ðət wʌn ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ ʃɛɹɾ əɹ dɔɾɝz neɪm. ful ɡɝl! pipəl səmtaɪmz əv ðə seɪm neɪm, ən jə nɛvɝ hæɾ ə dɔɾɝ. ɪt wɑzn ɹil!

Egwene did not like it that one of the Black Ajah shared her daughter's name. Fool girl! People sometimes have the same name, and you never had a daughter. It wasn't real!

"ænd wʌt dʌz ðət tɛl ʌs?" nɪneɪivz vɔɪs wɑz tu kɑm; ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə ɪksploʊd laɪk ə wæɡən fʊl ə faɪɹwɝks. "wʌt sikɹəts əv jə faʊn ɪn ɪt ðəɾ aɪ mɪst? aɪm ɡɛɾɪŋ oʊld ən blaɪnd, æftɝ ɔl!"

"And what does that tell us?" Nynaeve's voice was too calm; she was ready to explode like a wagon full of fireworks. "What secrets have you found in it that I missed? I am getting old and blind, after all!"

"ɪt tɛlz əs ɪts ɔl tu nit," ɪleɪn sɛd kɑmli. "wʌt tʃæns ðət θɝtin wɪmən tʃoʊzən soʊlli kəz ðeɪ wɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz wəd bi soʊ nitli ɝeɪɾ əkɹɔs eɪdʒ, əkɹɔs neɪʃənz, əkɹɔs ədʒəz? ʃʊdn ðəɹ bi pɝhæps θɹi ɹɛdz, əɹ fɔɹ bɔɹn ɪn kɛɹhin, əɹ dʒʌs tu ðə seɪm eɪdʒ, ɪf ɪt wɑz ɔl tʃæns? ðeɪ hæd wɪmən tə tʃuz fɹəm əɹ ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əv tʃoʊzən soʊ ɹændəm ə pæɾɝn. ðəɹ ɑɹ stɪl blæk ədʒɑ ɪn ðə taʊɝ, əɹ ɛlswɛɹ wi doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt. ɪt mʌs min ðæt."

"It tells us it is all too neat," Elayne said calmly. "What chance that thirteen women chosen solely because they were Darkfriends would be so neatly arrayed across age, across nations, across Ajahs? Shouldn't there be perhaps three Reds, or four born in Cairhien, or just two the same age, if it was all chance? They had women to choose from or they could not have chosen so random a pattern. There are still Black Ajah in the Tower, or elsewhere we don't know about. It must mean that."

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv əɹ bɹeɪd wʌn fɝoʊʃəs tʌɡ. "laɪt! aɪ θɪŋk jə meɪ bi ɹaɪt. jə dɪd faɪn sikɹəts aɪ kʊdnt. laɪt, aɪ wɑz hoʊpɪŋ ðeɪ ɔl wɛnt wɪð liɑnʒɹɪn."

Nynaeve gave her braid one ferocious tug. "Light! I think you may be right. You did find secrets I couldn't. Light, I was hoping they all went with Liandrin."

"wi də nɑɾ ivən noʊ ðət ʃiz ðɛɹ liɾɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ʃi cʊɾə bɪn ɔɹɾɝd tə . . . tə dɪspoʊz ʌv ʌs." hɝ maʊθ twɪstəd. "aɪ æm əfɹeɪɾ aɪ kən oʊnli θɪŋk ʌv wʌn ɹizən fəɹ əm tə ɡoʊ tə sətʃ lɛŋθs tə spɹɛɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ aʊt soʊ, tə əvɔɪɾ ɛni pæɾɝn ɪksɛpt ə læk ə pæɾɝn. aɪ θɪŋk ɪt minz ðəɹ ɪz ə pæɾɝn ə səm kaɪn tə ðə blæk ədʒɑ."

"We do not even know that she is their leader," Elayne said. "She could have been ordered to . . . to dispose of us." Her mouth twisted. "I am afraid I can only think of one reason for them to go to such lengths to spread everything out so, to avoid any pattern except a lack of pattern. I think it means there is a pattern of some kind to the Black Ajah."

"ɪf ðɛɹz ə pæɾɝn," nɪneɪiv sɛd fɝmli, "wi wɪl faɪn ɪt. ɪleɪn, ɪf wɑtʃɪŋ jəɹ mʌðɝ ɹʌn əɹ kɔɹt tɔt jə tə θɪŋk laɪk ðɪs, aɪm ɡlæd jə wɑtʃt kloʊsli." ɪleɪnz ænsɝɪŋ smaɪl meɪɾ ə dɪmpəl ɪn əɹ tʃik.

"If there's a pattern," Nynaeve said firmly, "we will find it. Elayne, if watching your mother run her court taught you to think like this, I'm glad you watched closely." Elayne's answering smile made a dimple in her cheek.

ɛɡwin aɪd ði oʊldɝ wʊmən kɛɹfəli. ɪt sim nɪneɪiv wɑz faɪnəli ɹɛɾi tə stɑp biɪŋ ə bɛɹ wɪð ə sɔɹ tuθ. ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd. "ənlɛs ðeɪ wɑn əs tə θɪŋk ðəɹ haɪɾɪŋ ə pæɾɝn, soʊ wɪl weɪst əɹ taɪm hʌntɪŋ fəɹ ɪt wən ðəɹ ɪzənt wʌn. aɪm nɑt seɪɪŋ ðəɹ ɪzənt; aɪm oʊnli seɪɪŋ wi də nɑt noʊ jɛt. lɛts lʊk fəɹ ɪt, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk wi ɔt tə lʊk əɾ ʌðɝ θɪŋz, tu, doʊn ju?"

Egwene eyed the older woman carefully. It seemed Nynaeve was finally ready to stop being a bear with a sore tooth. She raised her head. "Unless they want us to think they're hiding a pattern, so we will waste our time hunting for it when there isn't one. I am not saying there isn't; I am only saying we do not know yet. Let's look for it, but I think we ought to look at other things, too, don't you?"

"soʊ jə faɪnəli dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɹaʊs," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "aɪ θɔt jə hæd ɡɔn tə slip." bʌt ʃi wɑz stɪl smaɪlɪŋ.

"So you finally decided to rouse," Nynaeve said. "I thought you had gone to sleep." But she was still smiling.

"ʃi ɪz ɹaɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd dɪsɡʌstɪdli. "aɪ hæv bɪlt ə bɹɪdʒ aʊɾ ə stʃɹɔ. wɝs ðən stʃɹɔ. wɪʃɪz. meɪbi jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt, tu, nɪneɪiv. wʌt jus ɪz ðɪs - ðɪs ɹʌbɪʃ?" ʃi snætʃt wʌn peɪpɝ aʊɾ ə ðə stæk ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. "ɹiɑnə hæz blæk hɛɹ wɪð ə waɪt stʃɹik əbʌv əɹ lɛft ɪɹ. ɪf aɪm kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si ðæt, ɪts kloʊsɝ ðən aɪ wɑnə bi." ʃi ɡɹæbd ənʌðɝ peɪdʒ. "tʃɛzməl ɛmɹi ɪz wʌn ə ðə moʊs tæləntəd hilɝz ɛniwʌn əz sin ɪn jɪɹz. laɪt, kəd jə ɪmædʒən biɪŋ hil baɪ wʌn ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ?" ə θɝd ʃit. "mɑɹilɪn ɡəmɑlfɪn ɪz fɑn ə kæts ən ɡoʊz aʊɾ ə hɝ weɪ tə hɛlp ɪnʒɝd ænəməlz. kæts! pɑ!" ʃi skɹæbəld ɔl ðə peɪdʒəz təɡɛðɝ, kɹʌmplɪŋ əm ɪn əɹ fɪsts. "ɪɾ ɪz jusləs ɹʌbɪʃ."

"She is right," Elayne said disgustedly. "I have built a bridge out of straw. Worse than straw. Wishes. Maybe you are right, too, Nynaeve. What use is this - this rubbish?" She snatched one paper out of the stack in front of her. "Rianna has black hair with a white streak above her left ear. If I am close enough to see that, it's closer than I want to be." She grabbed another page. "Chesmal Emry is one of the most talented Healers anyone has seen in years. Light, could you imagine being Healed by one of the Black Ajah?" A third sheet. "Marillin Gemalphin is fond of cats and goes out of her way to help injured animals. Cats! Paah!" She scrabbled all the pages together, crumpling them in her fists. "It is useless rubbish."

nɪneɪiv nɛl bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ən dʒɛnli pɹaɪɾ əɹ hænz fɹəm ɝaʊn ðə peɪpɝz. "pɝhæps, ən pɝhæps nɑt." ʃi smuðd ðə peɪdʒəz kɛɹfəli ɑn əɹ bɹɛst. "ju faʊn ɪn əm sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ əs tə lʊk fɔɹ. pɝhæps wɪl faɪn mɔɹ, ɪf wəɹ pɝsɪstənt. ən ðəɹ ɪz ði ʌðɝ lɪst." boʊθ əɹ aɪz ən ɪleɪnz dɑɹɾɪd tə ɛɡwin, bɹaʊn ən blu əlaɪk fɹaʊnɪŋ wɝidli.

Nynaeve knelt beside her and gently pried her hands from around the papers. "Perhaps, and perhaps not." She smoothed the pages carefully on her breast. "You found in them something for us to look for. Perhaps we will find more, if we are persistent. And there is the other list." Both her eyes and Elayne's darted to Egwene, brown and blue alike frowning worriedly.

ɛɡwin əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət ðə teɪbəl wɛɹ ði ʌðɝ ʃits leɪ. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðɛm, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑɾ əvɔɪɾ ɪt. ðə lɪst ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil hæɾ ɛtʃt ɪtsɛlf ɪndə hɝ maɪnd.

Egwene avoided looking at the table where the other sheets lay. She did not want to think about them, but she could not avoid it. The list of ter'angreal had etched itself into her mind.

aɪɾəm. ə ɹɑɾ ə klɪɹ kɹɪstəl, smuð ən pɝfəkli klɪɹ, wʌn fʊt lɔŋ ən wʌn ɪntʃ ɪn daɪæməɾɝ. jus ənnoʊn. læst stʌɾi meɪd baɪ kɔɹiənɪn nɪdil. aɪɾəm. ə fɪɡjɝin ʌv ən ənkloʊðd wʊmən ɪn æləbæstɝ, wʌn hæn tɔl. juz ənnoʊn. læst stʌɾi meɪd baɪ kɔɹiənɪn nɪdil. aɪɾəm. ə dɪsk, əpɛɹənli ʌv sɪmpəl aɪɝn jɛɾ əntʌtʃt baɪ ɹʌst, θɹi ɪntʃəz ɪn daɪæməɾɝ, faɪnli ɪnɡɹeɪvd ɑn boʊθ saɪdz wɪð ə taɪt spaɪɹəl. juz ənnoʊn. læst stʌɾi meɪd baɪ kɔɹiənɪn nɪdil. aɪɾəm. tu mɛni aɪɾəmz, ən mɔɹ ðən hæf ðə "jus ənoʊnz" læst stʌɾid baɪ kɔɹiənɪn nɪdil. θɝtin ə ðɛm, tə bi ɪɡzækt.

Item. A rod of clear crystal, smooth and perfectly clear, one foot long and one inch in diameter. Use unknown. Last study made by Corianin Nedeal. Item. A figurine of an unclothed woman in alabaster, one hand tall. Use unknown. Last study made by Corianin Nedeal. Item. A disc, apparently of simple iron yet untouched by rust, three inches in diameter, finely engraved on both sides with a tight spiral. Use unknown. Last study made by Corianin Nedeal. Item. Too many items, and more than half the "use unknowns" last studied by Corianin Nedeal. Thirteen of them, to be exact.

ɛɡwin ʃɪvɝd. ɪts ɡɛɾɪŋ soʊ aɪ də nɑɾ ivən laɪk tə θɪŋk ə ðət nʌmbɝ.

Egwene shivered. It's getting so I do not even like to think of that number.

ðə noʊnz ɑn ðə lɪst wɝ fjuɝ, nɑɾ ɔl ʌv ɛni əpɛɹən ɹil jus, bʌt hɑɹdli mɔɹ kʌmfɝɾɪŋ, əz ʃi sɔ ɪt. ə wʊɾən kɑɹvɪŋ ʌv ə hɛdʒhɑɡ, noʊ bɪɡɝ ðən ðə læs dʒɔɪn ʌv ə mænz θʌm. sətʃ ə sɪmpəl θɪŋ, ən ʃʊɹli hɑɹmləs. ɛni wʊmən u tʃɹaɪd tə tʃænəl θɹu ɪt wɛn tə slip. hæf ə deɪ ʌv pisfəl, dʒɹimləs slip, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tu kloʊs nɑt tə meɪk əɹ skɪn kɹɔl. θɹi mɔɹ hæd tə də wɪð slip ɪn səm weɪ. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst ə ɹɪlif tə ɹiɾ ʌv ə fluɾəd ɹɑɾ ə blæk stoʊn, ə fʊl peɪs ɪn lɛŋθ, ðət pɹədus bɑlfaɪɝ, wɪð ðə noʊteɪʃən deɪnʒɝəs ən ɔlmoʊst ɪmpɑsəbəl tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɹɪt soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ɪn vɛɹɪnz hæn ðəɾ ɪt tɔɹ ðə peɪpɝ ɪn tu pleɪsəz. ɛɡwin stɪl hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌt bɑlfaɪɝ wɑz, bʌt ðoʊ ɪt ʃʊɹli saʊndəd deɪnʒɝəs ɪf ɛniθɪŋ ɛvɝ dɪd, ɪt dʒʌst əz ʃʊɹli hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də kɔɹiənɪn nɪdil əɹ dʒɹimz.

The knowns on the list were fewer, not all of any apparent real use, but hardly more comforting, as she saw it. A wooden carving of a hedgehog, no bigger than the last joint of a man's thumb. Such a simple thing, and surely harmless. Any woman who tried to channel through it went to sleep. Half a day of peaceful, dreamless sleep, but it was too close not to make her skin crawl. Three more had to do with sleep in some way. It was almost a relief to read of a fluted rod of black stone, a full pace in length, that produced balefire, with the notation DANGEROUS AND ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE TO CONTROL writ so strong in Verin's hand that it tore the paper in two places. Egwene still had no idea what balefire was, but though it surely sounded dangerous if anything ever did, it just as surely had nothing to do Corianin Nedeal or dreams.

nɪneɪiv kæɹid ðə smuðd-aʊt peɪdʒəz tə ðə teɪbəl ən sɛɾ əm daʊn. ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ spɹɛɾɪŋ ði ʌðɝz aʊɾ ən ɹʌnɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝ daʊn wʌn peɪdʒ, ðən ðə nɛkst. "hɪɹz wʌn mæt wəɾ ɛndʒɔɪ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə vɔɪs mʌtʃ tu laɪɾ ən ɛɹi. "aɪɾəm. ə kɑɹv klʌstɝ ə sɪks spɑɾəd daɪs, dʒɔɪn ət ðə kɔɹnɝz, lɛs ðən tu ɪntʃəz əkɹɔs. juz ənnoʊn, seɪv ðət tʃænəlɪŋ θɹu ɪt simz tə səspɛn tʃæns ɪn səm weɪ, əɹ twɪst ɪt." ʃi bɪɡæn tə ɹiɾ əlaʊd. " 'tɔs kɔɪnz pɹizɛntəd ðə seɪm feɪs ɛvɹi taɪm, ən ɪn wʌn tɛs lændəd bælənst ɑn ɛdʒ wʌn hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz ɪn ə ɹoʊ. wʌn θaʊzən tɔsɪz ə ðə daɪs pɹədus faɪv kɹaʊnz wʌn θaʊzən taɪmz.' " ʃi ɡeɪv ə fɔɹs læf. "mæt wəd lʌv ðæt."

Nynaeve carried the smoothed-out pages to the table and set them down. She hesitated before spreading the others out and running her finger down one page, then the next. "Here's one Mat would enjoy," she said in a voice much too light and airy. "Item. A carved cluster of six spotted dice, joined at the corners, less than two inches across. Use unknown, save that channeling through it seems to suspend chance in some way, or twist it." She began to read aloud. " 'Tossed coins presented the same face every time, and in one test landed balanced on edge one hundred times in a row. One thousand tosses of the dice produced five crowns one thousand times.' " She gave a forced laugh. "Mat would love that."

ɛɡwin saɪɾ ən ɡɑt tə hɝ fit, wɔk stɪfli tə ðə faɪɝpleɪs. ɪleɪn skɹæmbəld ʌp, wɑtʃɪŋ əz saɪlənli əz nɪneɪiv. pʊʃɪŋ əɹ sliv əz fɑɹ ʌp əɹ ɑɹm əz ɪt wəd ɡoʊ, ɛɡwin ɹitʃt kɛɹfəli ʌp ðə tʃɪmni. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz tʌtʃt wʊl ɑn ðə smoʊk ʃɛlf, ən ʃi pʊld aʊɾ ə wɑɾəd, sɪŋʒd stɑkɪŋ wɪð ə hɑɹd lʌmp ɪn ðə toʊ. ʃi bɹʌʃt ə smɪɹ ə sʊt fɹəm əɹ ɑɹm, ðən tʊk ðə stɑkɪŋ tə ðə teɪbəl ən ʃʊk ɪɾ aʊt. ðə twɪstəd ɹɪŋ ə stʃɹaɪpt, flɛk stoʊn spʌn əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəltɑp ən fɛl flæɾ ətɑp ə peɪdʒ ə ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil lɪst. fəɹ ə fju moʊməns ðeɪ dʒʌst stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪt.

Egwene sighed and got to her feet, walked stiffly to the fireplace. Elayne scrambled up, watching as silently as Nynaeve. Pushing her sleeve as far up her arm as it would go, Egwene reached carefully up the chimney. Her fingers touched wool on the smoke shelf, and she pulled out a wadded, singed stocking with a hard lump in the toe. She brushed a smear of soot from her arm, then took the stocking to the table and shook it out. The twisted ring of striped, flecked stone spun across the tabletop and fell flat atop a page of the ter'angreal list. For a few moments they just stared at it.

"pɝhæps," nɪneɪiv sɛd faɪnəli, "vɛɹɪn sɪmpli mɪs ðə fæk ðət soʊ mɛni ʌv əm wɝ læst stʌɾid baɪ kɔɹiənɪn." ʃi dɪd nɑt saʊn əz ɪf ʃi ɹɪli bɪlivd ɪt.

"Perhaps," Nynaeve said finally, "Verin simply missed the fact that so many of them were last studied by Corianin." She did not sound as if she really believed it.

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd, bʌt daʊtfəli. "aɪ sɔ hɝ wɔkɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹeɪn wʌns, soʊkɪŋ wɛt, ən tʊk ə kloʊk tə hɝ. ʃi wɑz soʊ ɹæpt ʌp ɪn wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ, aɪ də nɑt bɪliv ʃi nu ɪt wɑz ɹeɪnɪŋ əntɪl aɪ pʊt ðə kloʊk ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ʃi cʊɾə mɪst ɪt."

Elayne nodded, but doubtfully. "I saw her walking in the rain once, soaking wet, and took a cloak to her. She was so wrapped up in whatever she was thinking, I do not believe she knew it was raining until I put the cloak around her shoulders. She could have missed it."

"meɪbi," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt, ʃi hæd tə noʊ aɪd noʊɾəs əz sun əz aɪ ɹɛd ðə lɪst. aɪ də nɑt noʊ. səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk vɛɹɪn noʊɾəsəz mɔɹ ðən ʃi lɛts ɑn. aɪ dʒʌs də nɑt noʊ."

"Maybe," Egwene said. "If she did not, she had to know I'd notice as soon as I read the list. I do not know. Sometimes I think Verin notices more than she lets on. I just do not know."

"soʊ ðɛɹz vɛɹɪn tə səspɛkt," ɪleɪn saɪd. "ɪf ʃiz blæk ədʒɑ, ðən ðeɪ noʊ ɪɡzækli wʌt wəɹ duɪŋ. ən ɑlɑnə." ʃi ɡeɪv ɛɡwin ən ənsɝɾən, saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk.

"So there's Verin to suspect," Elayne sighed. "If she is Black Ajah, then they know exactly what we are doing. And Alanna." She gave Egwene an uncertain, sidelong look.

ɛɡwin hæd toʊld əm ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ɪksɛpt wʌt hæpən ɪnsaɪd ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil dʊɹɪŋ əɹ tɛstɪŋ; ʃi kəd nɑt bɹɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə tɔk əbaʊt ðæt, ɛni mɔɹ ðən nɪneɪiv əɹ ɪleɪn kəd tɛl ə ðɛɹ tɛstɪŋz. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət hæpən ɪn ðə tɛstɪŋ tʃeɪmbɝ, wʌt ʃɛɹiəm hæd sɛɾ əbaʊt ðə tɛɹəbəl wiknəs kənfɝd baɪ ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl, ɛvɹi wɝd vɛɹɪn hæd sɛd, wɛðɝ ɪt simd ɪmpɔɹɾənt əɹ nɑt. ðə wʌn pɑɹt ðeɪ hæd hæd tʃɹʌbəl æksɛptɪŋ wɑz ɑlɑnə; ɛɛs sədaɪ dʒʌs dɪd nɑt də θɪŋz laɪk ðæt. noʊ wʌn ɪn əɹ ɹaɪt maɪn dɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðæt, bʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ list ʌv ɔl.

Egwene had told them everything. Except what happened inside the ter'angreal during her testing; she could not bring herself to talk about that, any more than Nynaeve or Elayne could tell of their testings. Everything that happened in the testing chamber, what Sheriam had said about the terrible weakness conferred by the ability to channel, every word Verin had said, whether it seemed important or not. The one part they had had trouble accepting was Alanna; Aes Sedai just did not do things like that. No one in her right mind did anything like that, but Aes Sedai least of all.

ɛɡwin ɡlaʊɝɾ ət ðɛm, ɔlmoʊs hɪɹɪŋ əm seɪ ɪt. "ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ nɑt səpoʊz tə laɪ, iðɝ, bʌt vɛɹɪn ən ðə mʌðɝ sim ɑfli kloʊs wɪð wʌt ðeɪ tɛl ʌs. ðəɹ ɑɹ nɑt səpoʊz tə bi blæk ədʒɑ."

Egwene glowered at them, almost hearing them say it. "Aes Sedai are not supposed to lie, either, but Verin and the Mother seem awfully close with what they tell us. There are not supposed to be Black Ajah."

"aɪ laɪk ɑlɑnə." nɪneɪiv tʌɡd əɹ bɹeɪd, ðən ʃɹʌɡd. "oʊ, vɛɹi wɛl. pɝhə - ðəɾ ɪz, ʃi dɪd bɪheɪv ɑdli."

"I like Alanna." Nynaeve tugged her braid, then shrugged. "Oh, very well. Perha - That is, she did behave oddly."

"θæŋk ju," ɛɡwin sɛd, ən nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv əɹ ən æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ nɑɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæd hɝd noʊ sɑɹkæzəm.

"Thank you," Egwene said, and Nynaeve gave her an acknowledging nod as if she had heard no sarcasm.

"ɪn ɛni keɪs, ði æmɪɝlɪn noʊz ʌv ɪt, ən ʃi kən kip ən aɪ ɑn ɑlɑnə fɑɹ mɔɹ izəli ðən wi kæn."

"In any case, the Amyrlin knows of it, and she can keep an eye on Alanna far more easily than we can."

"wʌɾ əbaʊɾ ɪleɪɾə ən ʃɛɹiəm?" ɛɡwin æskt.

"What about Elaida and Sheriam?" Egwene asked.

"aɪ hæv nɛvɝ bɪn eɪbəl tə laɪk ɪleɪɾə," ɪleɪn sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪ kænɑt tʃɹuli bɪliv ʃiz blæk ədʒɑ. ən ʃɛɹiəm? ɪts ɪmpɑsəbəl."

"I have never been able to like Elaida," Elayne said, "but I cannot truly believe she is Black Ajah. And Sheriam? It's impossible."

nɪneɪiv snɔɹɾɪd. "ɪt ʃəd bi ɪmpɑsəbəl fəɹ ɛni ʌv ðɛm. wən wi də faɪn ðɛm, ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ sɛz ðəl ɔl bi wɪmən wi də nɑt laɪk. bʌɾ aɪ doʊn min tə pʊt səspɪʃən - nɑt ðɪs kaɪndə səspɪʃən! - ɑn ɛni wʊmən. wi nid mɔɹ tə ɡoʊ ɑn ðən ðət ðeɪ maɪɾ əv sin sʌmθɪŋ ðeɪ ʃʊdnt." ɛɡwin nɑɾəd əɡɹimən əz kwɪkli əz ɪleɪn, ən nɪneɪiv wɛn ɑn: "wi wɪl tɛl ði æmɪɝlɪn ðət mʌtʃ, ən pʊt noʊ mɔɹ weɪt tə ɪt ðən ɪt dɪzɝvz. ɪf ʃi ɛvɝ lʊks ɪn ɑn əs əz ʃi sɛd ʃi wʊd. ɪf jə ɑɹ wɪð əs wən ʃi kʌmz, ɪleɪn, ɹɪmɛmbɝ ʃi dʌz nɑt noʊ əbaʊt ju."

Nynaeve snorted. "It should be impossible for any of them. When we do find them, there is nothing says they'll all be women we do not like. But I don't mean to put suspicion - not this kind of suspicion! - on any woman. We need more to go on than that they might have seen something they shouldn't." Egwene nodded agreement as quickly as Elayne, and Nynaeve went on: "We will tell the Amyrlin that much, and put no more weight to it than it deserves. If she ever looks in on us as she said she would. If you are with us when she comes, Elayne, remember she does not know about you."

"aɪ æm nɑt laɪkli tə fɝɡɛɾ ɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd fɝvənli. "bʌt wi ʃəɾ əv səm ʌðɝ weɪ tə ɡɛt wɝd tə hɝ. maɪ mʌðɝ wʊɾə plæn ɪt bɛɾɝ."

"I am not likely to forget it," Elayne said fervently. "But we should have some other way to get word to her. My mother would have planned it better."

"nɑɾ ɪf ʃi kəd nɑt tʃɹʌst əɹ mɛsənʒɝz," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "wi wɪl weɪt. ənlɛs jə tu θɪŋk wʌn ʌv əs ʃəɾ əv ə tɔk wɪð vɛɹɪn? noʊ wʌn wəd θɪŋk ðət ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl."

"Not if she could not trust her messengers," Nynaeve said. "We will wait. Unless you two think one of us should have a talk with Verin? No one would think that remarkable."

ɪleɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən ɡeɪv əɹ hɛɾ ə smɔl ʃeɪk. ɛɡwin wɑz kwɪkɝ ən mɔɹ vɪɡɝəs wɪð hɝz; slɪp ə ðə maɪn əɹ nɑt, vɛɹɪn hæd lɛft aʊt tu mʌtʃ tə bi tʃɹʌstɪd.

Elayne hesitated, then gave her head a small shake. Egwene was quicker and more vigorous with hers; slip of the mind or not, Verin had left out too much to be trusted.

"ɡʊd." nɪneɪiv saʊndəd mɔɹ ðən sæɾəsfaɪd. "aɪ æm dʒʌst əz plizd wi kænɑt tɔk tə ði æmɪɝlɪn wən wi tʃuz. ðɪs weɪ wi meɪk əɹ oʊn dɪsɪʒənz, ækt wən ən əz wi dɪsaɪd, wɪθaʊɾ əɹ dɝɛktɪŋ əɹ ɛvɹi stɛp." hɝ hæn ɹæn daʊn ðə peɪdʒəz lɪstɪŋ stoʊlən tɛɹæŋɡɹil əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ɹiɾɪŋ ɪɾ əɡɛn, ðən kloʊzd ɑn ðə stʃɹaɪp stoʊn ɹɪŋ. "æn ðə fɝs dɪsɪʒən kənsɝnz ðɪs. ɪts ðə fɝs θɪŋ wɪv sin ðəɾ əz ɛni ɹil kənɛkʃən tə liɑnʒɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz." ʃi fɹaʊn ət ðə ɹɪŋ, ðən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "aɪ æm gɑnə slip wɪð ɪt tənaɪt."

"Good." Nynaeve sounded more than satisfied. "I am just as pleased we cannot talk to the Amyrlin when we choose. This way we make our own decisions, act when and as we decide, without her directing our every step." Her hand ran down the pages listing stolen ter'angreal as if she were reading it again, then closed on the striped stone ring. "And the first decision concerns this. It's the first thing we have seen that has any real connection to Liandrin and the others." She frowned at the ring, then took a deep breath. "I am going to sleep with it tonight."

ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt hɛzəteɪt bɪfɔɹ teɪkɪŋ ðə ɹɪŋ aʊɾ ə nɪneɪivz hænd. ʃi wɑntəd tə hɛzəteɪt - ʃi wɑntəd tə kip əɹ hænz baɪ hɝ saɪdz - bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt, ən ʃi wɑz plizd. "aɪ æm ðə wʌn ðeɪ seɪ maɪt bi ə dʒɹimɝ. aɪ də nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ ðət ɡɪvz mi ɛni ædvæntɪdʒ, bʌt vɛɹɪn sɛɾ ɪts deɪnʒɝəs juzɪŋ ðɪs. wɪtʃɛvɝ ʌv əs juzɪz ɪt, ʃi nidz ɛni ædvæntɪdʒ ʃi kən faɪnd."

Egwene did not hesitate before taking the ring out of Nynaeve's hand. She wanted to hesitate - she wanted to keep her hands by her sides - but she did not, and she was pleased. "I am the one they say might be a Dreamer. I do not know whether that gives me any advantage, but Verin said it's dangerous using this. Whichever of us uses it, she needs any advantage she can find."

nɪneɪiv ɡɹɪpt əɹ bɹeɪɾ ən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ əz ɪf tə pɹoʊtɛst. wən ʃi faɪnəli spoʊk, ðoʊ, ɪt wɑz tə seɪ, "ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ, ɛɡwin? wi də nɑɾ ivən noʊ ɪf jə ɑɹ ə dʒɹimɝ, ən aɪ kən tʃænəl mɔɹ stʃɹɔŋli ðən ju. aɪ stɪl θɪŋk aɪ - " ɛɡwin kʌɾ əɹ ɔf.

Nynaeve gripped her braid and opened her mouth as if to protest. When she finally spoke, though, it was to say, "Are you sure, Egwene? We do not even know if you are a Dreamer, and I can channel more strongly than you. I still think I - " Egwene cut her off.

"ju kən tʃænəl mɔɹ stʃɹɔŋli ɪf jə ɑɹ æŋɡɹi. kən jə bi ʃʊɹ jəl bi æŋɡɹi ɪn ə dʒɹim? wɪl juv taɪm tə bɪkʌm æŋɡɹi bɪfɔɹ jə nid tə tʃænəl? laɪt, wi doʊn ivən noʊ ðəɾ ɛniwʌn kən tʃænəl ɪn ə dʒɹim. ɪf wʌn ʌv əs əz tə də ɪt - ən jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt; ɪts ði oʊnli kənɛkʃən wɪv - ɪt ʃəd bi mi. meɪbi aɪ ɹɪli æm ə dʒɹimɝ. bɪsaɪdz, vɛɹɪn dɪd ɡɪv ɪt tə mi."

"You can channel more strongly if you are angry. Can you be sure you'll be angry in a dream? Will you have time to become angry before you need to channel? Light, we don't even know that anyone can channel in a dream. If one of us has to do it - and you are right; it is the only connection we have - it should be me. Maybe I really am a Dreamer. Besides, Verin did give it to me."

nɪneɪiv lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə ɑɹɡju, bʌɾ ət læst ʃi ɡeɪv ə ɡɹʌdʒɪŋ nɑd. "vɛɹi wɛl. bʌɾ ɪleɪn ən əl bi ðɛɹ. aɪ də nɑt noʊ wʌt wi kən du, bʌɾ ɪf ɛniθɪŋ ɡoʊz ɹɔŋ, pɝhæps wi kən weɪk jə ʌp, ɔɹ. . . . wɪl bi ðɛɹ." ɪleɪn nɑɾəd, tu.

Nynaeve looked as if she wanted to argue, but at last she gave a grudging nod. "Very well. But Elayne and I will be there. I do not know what we can do, but if anything goes wrong, perhaps we can wake you up, or. . . . We will be there." Elayne nodded, too.

naʊ ðət ʃi hæd ðɛɹ əɡɹimənt, ɛɡwin fɛlt ə kwizinəs ɪn ðə pɪɾ ə hɝ stʌmək. aɪ tɔkt əm ɪndə ɪt. aɪ wɪʃ aɪ dɪd nɑt wɑn əm tə tɔk mi aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. ʃi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ʌv ə wʊmən stændɪŋ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, ə wʊmən ɪn nɑvəs waɪt, wɪð əɹ hɛɹ ɪn lɔŋ bɹeɪdz.

Now that she had their agreement, Egwene felt a queasiness in the pit of her stomach. I talked them into it. I wish I did not want them to talk me out of it. She became aware of a woman standing in the doorway, a woman in novice white, with her hair in long braids.

"dɪd noʊ wʌn ɛvɝ titʃ jə tə nɑk, ɛls?" nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"Did no one ever teach you to knock, Else?" Nynaeve said.

ɛɡwin hɪd ðə stoʊn ɹɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ fɪst. ʃi hæd ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɪst filɪŋ ðəɾ ɛls hæd bɪn stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪt.

Egwene hid the stone ring inside her fist. She had the strangest feeling that Else had been staring at it.

"aɪ hæv ə mɛsədʒ fəɹ ju," ɛls sɛd kɑmli. hɝ aɪz stʌɾid ðə teɪbəl, wɪð ɔl ðə peɪpɝz skæɾɝd ɑn ɪt, ðən ðə θɹi wɪmən ɝaʊn ɪt. "fɹʌm ði æmɪɝlɪn."

"I have a message for you," Else said calmly. Her eyes studied the table, with all the papers scattered on it, then the three women around it. "From the Amyrlin."

ɛɡwin ɪkstʃeɪnʒd wʌndɝɪŋ lʊks wɪð nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn.

Egwene exchanged wondering looks with Nynaeve and Elayne.

"wɛl, wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd.

"Well, what is it?" Nynaeve demanded.

ɛls ɑɹtʃt ən aɪbɹaʊ ɪn əmjuzmənt. "ðə bɪlɔŋɪŋz lɛf bɪhaɪn baɪ liɑnʒɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ pʊɾ ɪn ðə θɝd stɔɹɹum ɑn ðə ɹaɪt fɹəm ðə meɪn stɛɹz ɪn ðə sɛkən beɪsmən ʌndɝ ðə laɪbɹɛɹi." ʃi ɡlænst ət ðə peɪpɝz ɑn ðə teɪbəl əɡɛn ən lɛft, niðɝ hɝiɪŋ nɔɹ muvɪŋ sloʊli.

Else arched an eyebrow in amusement. "The belongings left behind by Liandrin and the others were put in the third storeroom on the right from the main stairs in the second basement under the library." She glanced at the papers on the table again and left, neither hurrying nor moving slowly.

ɛɡwin fɛlt əz ɪf ʃi kəd nɑt bɹið. wɝ əfɹeɪd tə tʃɹʌst ɛnibəɾi, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn dɪsaɪdz tə tʃɹʌst ɛls ɡɹɪnwɛl ʌv ɔl wɪmən?

Egwene felt as if she could not breathe. We're afraid to trust anybody, and the Amyrlin decides to trust Else Grinwell of all women?

"ðæt ful ɡɝl kænɑt bi tʃɹʌstɪd nɑt tə blæb tə ɛniwʌn hul lɪsən!" nɪneɪiv stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ.

"That fool girl cannot be trusted not to blab to anyone who'll listen!" Nynaeve started for the door.

ɛɡwin ɡɹæbd ʌp əɹ skɝts ən dɑɹɾɪd pæst əɹ əɾ ə ɹʌn. hɝ ʃuz skɪɾəd ɑn ðə taɪlz ə ðə ɡælɝi, bʌt ʃi kɑɾ ə ɡlɪmps ʌv waɪt vænɪʃɪŋ daʊn ðə nɪɹəst ɹæmp ən dæʃt æftɝ ɪt. ʃi mʌs bi ɹʌnɪŋ, tu, tə bi soʊ fɑɹ əhɛɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. waɪ ɪz ʃi ɹʌnɪŋ? ðə flæʃ ʌv waɪt wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ daʊn ənʌðɝ ɹæmp. ɛɡwin fɑloʊd.

Egwene grabbed up her skirts and darted past her at a run. Her shoes skidded on the tiles of the gallery, but she caught a glimpse of white vanishing down the nearest ramp and dashed after it. She must be running, too, to be so far ahead already. Why is she running? The flash of white was already disappearing down another ramp. Egwene followed.

ə wʊmən tɝn tə feɪs əɹ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə ɹæmp, ən ɛɡwin stɑpt ɪn kənfjuʒən. huɛvɝ ʃi wɑz, ðɪs wɑz sɝɾənli nɑɾ ɛls. ɔl ɪn sɪlvɝ ən waɪt sɪlk, ʃi spɑɹk filɪŋz ɛɡwin hæd nɛvɝ hæd bɪfɔɹ. ʃi wɑz tɔlɝ, mɔɹ bjuɾəfəl baɪ fɑɹ, ən ðə lʊk ɪn əɹ blæk aɪz meɪɾ ɛɡwin fil smɔl, skɹɔni, ən nʌn tu klin. ʃi kən pɹɑbli tʃænəl mɔɹ ə ðə paʊɝ ðən aɪ kæn, tu. laɪt, ʃiz pɹɑbli smɑɹɾɝ ðən ɔl θɹi ʌv əs pʊt təɡɛðɝ ɑn tɑp ʌv ɪt. ɪɾ ɪzən fɛɹ fəɹ wʌn wʊmən tə - əbɹʌpli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðə weɪ hɝ θɔts wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ. hɝ tʃiks ɹɛɾənd, ən ʃi ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ fɛlt - lɛs - ðən ɛni ʌðɝ wʊmən bɪfɔɹ, ən ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə stɑɹt naʊ.

A woman turned to face her at the foot of the ramp, and Egwene stopped in confusion. Whoever she was, this was certainly not Else. All in silver and white silk, she sparked feelings Egwene had never had before. She was taller, more beautiful by far, and the look in her black eyes made Egwene feel small, scrawny, and none too clean. She can probably channel more of the Power than I can, too. Light, she is probably smarter than all three of us put together on top of it. It isn't fair for one woman to - Abruptly she realized the way her thoughts were going. Her cheeks reddened, and she gave herself a shake. She had never felt - less - than any other woman before, and she was not about to start now.

"boʊld," ðə wʊmən sɛd. "ju ɑɹ boʊl tə ɡoʊ ɹʌnɪŋ əbaʊt soʊ, əloʊn, wɛɹ soʊ mɛni mɝɾɝz əv bɪn dʌn." ʃi saʊndəɾ ɔlmoʊs plizd.

"Bold," the woman said. "You are bold to go running about so, alone, where so many murders have been done." She sounded almost pleased.

ɛɡwin dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp ən stʃɹeɪɾənd əɹ dʒɹɛs hɝidli, hoʊpɪŋ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wəd nɑt noʊɾəs, noʊɪŋ ʃi dɪd, wɪʃɪŋ ðə wʊmən hæd nɑt sin əɹ ɹʌnɪŋ laɪk ə tʃaɪld. stɑp ðæt! "pɑɹɾən, bʌɾ aɪm lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ə nɑvəs u keɪm ðɪs weɪ, aɪ θɪŋk. ʃiz lɑɹdʒ, dɑɹk aɪz ən dɑɹk hɛɹ ɪn bɹeɪdz. ʃiz plʌmp, ən pɹɪɾi ɪn ə weɪ. dɪd jə si wɪtʃ weɪ ʃi wɛnt?"

Egwene drew herself up and straightened her dress hurriedly, hoping the other woman would not notice, knowing she did, wishing the woman had not seen her running like a child. Stop that! "Pardon, but I am looking for a novice who came this way, I think. She has large, dark eyes and dark hair in braids. She's plump, and pretty in a way. Did you see which way she went?"

ðə tɔl wʊmən lʊkt əɹ ʌp ən daʊn ɪn ən əmjuzd weɪ. ɛɡwin kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ, bʌt ʃi θɔt ðə wʊmən maɪɾ əv ɡlænst ə moʊmən ət ðə klɛntʃt fɪs baɪ hɝ saɪd, wɛɹ ʃi stɪl hɛl ðə stoʊn ɹɪŋ. "aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk jəl kætʃ ʌp tə hɝ. aɪ sɔ hɝ, ən ʃi wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ kwaɪt fæst. aɪ səspɛkt ʃiz fɑɹ əweɪ fɹəm hɪɹ baɪ naʊ."

The tall woman looked her up and down in an amused way. Egwene could not be sure, but she thought the woman might have glanced a moment at the clenched fist by her side, where she still held the stone ring. "I do not think you will catch up to her. I saw her, and she was running quite fast. I suspect she is far away from here by now."

"ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɛɡwin bɪɡæn, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɡɪvən noʊ tʃæns tə æsk wɪtʃ weɪ ɛls hæd ɡɔn. sʌmθɪŋ ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn æŋɡɝ, əɹ ənɔɪəns, flæʃt θɹu ðoʊz blæk aɪz.

"Aes Sedai," Egwene began, but she was given no chance to ask which way Else had gone. Something that might have been anger, or annoyance, flashed through those black eyes.

"aɪ hæv teɪkən ʌp ɪnʌf taɪm wɪð jə fəɹ naʊ. aɪ hæv mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz tə si tə. liv mi." ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd bæk ðə weɪ ɛɡwin hæd kʌm.

"I have taken up enough time with you for now. I have more important matters to see to. Leave me." She gestured back the way Egwene had come.

soʊ stʃɹɔŋ wɑz ðə kəmæn ɪn əɹ vɔɪs ðəɾ ɛɡwin tɝn ən wɑz θɹi stɛps ʌp ðə ɹæmp bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹilaɪzd wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ. bɹɪsəlɪŋ, ʃi spʌn bæk. ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ noʊ, aɪ -  ðə ɡælɝi wɑz ɛmpti.

So strong was the command in her voice that Egwene turned and was three steps up the ramp before she realized what she was doing. Bristling, she spun back. Aes Sedai or no, I -  The gallery was empty.

fɹaʊnɪŋ, ʃi dɪsmɪs ðə nɪɹəs dɔɹz - noʊ wʌn lɪvd ɪn ðoʊz ɹumz, ɪksɛpt pɑsəbli maɪs - ən ɹæn daʊn ðə ɹæmp, pɪɹd boʊθ weɪz, fɑloʊd ðə kɝv ə ðə ɡælɝi wɪð əɹ aɪz ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊnd. ʃi ivən pɪɹɾ oʊvɝ ðə ɹeɪl, daʊn ɪndə ðə smɔl ɡɑɹɾən ə ði æksɛptɪd, ən stʌɾid ði ʌðɝ ɡælɝiz, haɪɝ əz wɛl əz loʊɝ. ʃi sɔ tu æksɛptɪɾ ɪn ðɛɹ bændɪd dʒɹɛsəz, wʌn fɑoʊleɪn ən ði ʌðɝ ə wʊmən ʃi nu baɪ saɪɾ ɪf nɑt neɪm. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʊmən ɪn sɪlvɝ ən waɪɾ ɛniwɛɹ.

Frowning, she dismissed the nearest doors - no one lived in those rooms, except possibly mice - and ran down the ramp, peered both ways, followed the curve of the gallery with her eyes all the way around. She even peered over the rail, down into the small Garden of the Accepted, and studied the other galleries, higher as well as lower. She saw two Accepted in their banded dresses, one Faolain and the other a woman she knew by sight if not name. But there was no woman in silver and white anywhere.


tʃæptɝ twɛntisɪks


CHAPTER 26

bɪhaɪn ə lɑk


Behind a Lock

ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd, ɛɡwin wɔk bæk tə ðə dɔɹz ʃi hæd dɪsmɪst. ʃi hæd tə ɡoʊ sʌmwɛɹ. ɪnsaɪd ðə fɝst, ðə fju fɝnɪʃɪŋz wɝ ʃeɪpləs maʊnz ʌndɝ dʌsti klɔθs, ən ði ɛɹ sim steɪl, əz ɪf ðə dɔɹ hæd nɑt bɪn oʊpən ɪn səm taɪm. ʃi ɡɹɪməst; ðəɹ wɝ maʊs tʃɹæks ɪn ðə dʌst ɑn ðə flɔɹ. bʌt noʊ ʌðɝz. tu mɔɹ dɔɹz, oʊpən heɪstəli, ʃoʊd ðə seɪm θɪŋ. ɪt wɑz noʊ sɝpɹaɪz. ðəɹ wɝ mɛni mɔɹ ɛmpti ɹumz ðən ɑkjəpaɪɾ ɪn ði æksɛptɪdz ɡælɝiz.

Shaking her head, Egwene walked back to the doors she had dismissed. She had to go somewhere. Inside the first, the few furnishings were shapeless mounds under dusty cloths, and the air seemed stale, as if the door had not been opened in some time. She grimaced; there were mouse tracks in the dust on the floor. But no others. Two more doors, opened hastily, showed the same thing. It was no surprise. There were many more empty rooms than occupied in the Accepted's galleries.

wən ʃi pʊld əɹ hɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə θɝd ɹum, nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɝ kʌmɪŋ daʊn ðə ɹæmp bɪhaɪn əɹ wɪð noʊ pɝtɪkjəlɝ heɪst.

When she pulled her head out of the third room, Nynaeve and Elayne were coming down the ramp behind her with no particular haste.

"ɪz ʃi haɪɾɪŋ?" nɪneɪiv æskt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "ɪn ðɛɹ?"

"Is she hiding?" Nynaeve asked in surprise. "In there?"

"aɪ lɔs hɝ." ɛɡwin pɪɹd boʊθ weɪz əlɔŋ ðə kɝvɪŋ ɡælɝi əɡɛn. wɛɹ dɪd ʃi ɡoʊ? ʃi dɪd nɑt min ɛls.

"I lost her." Egwene peered both ways along the curving gallery again. Where did she go? She did not mean Else.

"ɪf aɪ hæd θɔɾ ɛls kəɾ aʊtʃɹʌn ju," ɪleɪn sɛd wɪð ə smaɪl, "aɪɾ əv tʃeɪs hɝ, tu, bʌt ʃiz ɔlweɪz lʊk tu plʌmp fəɹ ɹʌnɪŋ tə mi." hɝ smaɪl wɑz wɝid, ðoʊ.

"If I had thought Else could outrun you," Elayne said with a smile, "I'd have chased her, too, but she has always looked too plump for running to me." Her smile was worried, though.

"wi wɪl əv tə faɪn əɹ leɪɾɝ," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "æn meɪk ʃʊɹ ʃi noʊz tə kip əɹ maʊθ ʃʌt. haʊ kəd ði æmɪɝlɪn tʃɹʌs ðət ɡɝl?"

"We will have to find her later," Nynaeve said, "and make sure she knows to keep her mouth shut. How could the Amyrlin trust that girl?"

"aɪ θɔɾ aɪ wɑz ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə hɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd sloʊli, "bʌɾ ɪt wɑz sʌmwʌn ɛls. nɪneɪiv, aɪ tɝn maɪ bæk fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ən ʃi wɑz ɡɔn. nɑɾ ɛls - aɪ nɛvɝ ivən sɔ hɝ! - ðə wʊmən aɪ θɔt wɑz ɛls ət fɝst. ʃi wɑz dʒʌst - ɡɔn, ən aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛɹ."

"I thought I was right on top of her," Egwene said slowly, "but it was someone else. Nynaeve, I turned my back for a moment, and she was gone. Not Else - I never even saw her! - the woman I thought was Else at first. She was just - gone, and I don't know where."

ɪleɪnz bɹɛθ kɑt. "wʌn ə ðə soʊlləs?" ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊn heɪstəli, bʌt ðə ɡælɝi wɑz stɪl ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə θɹi ʌv ðɛm.

Elayne's breath caught. "One of the Soulless?" She looked around hastily, but the gallery was still empty except for the three of them.

"nɑt hɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd fɝmli. "ʃi - " aɪm nɑt gɑnə tɛl əm ʃi meɪd mi fil sɪks jɪɹz oʊld, wɪð ə tɔɹn dʒɹɛs, ə dɝɾi feɪs, ən ə ɹʌni noʊz. "ʃi wɑz noʊ ɡɹeɪ mæn. ʃi wɑz tɔl ən stʃɹaɪkɪŋ, wɪð blæk aɪz ən blæk hɛɹ. jud noʊɾəs əɹ ɪn ə kɹaʊɾ ʌv ə θaʊzənd. aɪ hæv nɛvɝ sin əɹ bɪfɔɹ, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ʃiz ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi mʌs bi."

"Not her," Egwene said firmly. "She - " I am not going to tell them she made me feel six years old, with a torn dress, a dirty face, and a runny nose. "She was no Gray Man. She was tall and striking, with black eyes and black hair. You'd notice her in a crowd of a thousand. I have never seen her before, but I think she is Aes Sedai. She must be."

nɪneɪiv weɪɾəd, əz ðoʊ fəɹ mɔɹ, ðən sɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli, "ɪf jə si hɝ əɡɛn, pɔɪn əɹ aʊt tə mi. ɪf jə θɪŋk ðɛɹz kɑz. wiv noʊ taɪm tə stæn hɪɹ tɔkɪŋ. aɪ min tə si wʌɾ ɪz ɪn ðət stɔɹɹum bɪfɔɹ ɛls əz ə tʃæns tə tɛl ðə ɹɔŋ pɝsən əbaʊɾ ɪt. meɪbi ðeɪ wɝ kɛɹləs. lɛts nɑt ɡɪv əm ə tʃæns tə kɝɛkt ɪt, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ."

Nynaeve waited, as though for more, then said impatiently, "If you see her again, point her out to me. If you think there's cause. We've no time to stand here talking. I mean to see what is in that storeroom before Else has a chance to tell the wrong person about it. Maybe they were careless. Let's not give them a chance to correct it, if they were."

əz ʃi fɛl ɪn bɪsaɪd nɪneɪiv, wɪð ɪleɪn ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, ɛɡwin ɹilaɪzd ʃi stɪl hæd ðə stoʊn ɹɪŋ - kɔɹiənɪn nɪdilz tɛɹæŋɡɹil - klʌtʃt ɪn əɹ fɪst. ɹɪlʌktənli, ʃi tʌkt ɪɾ ɪndə hɝ paʊtʃ ən pʊl ðə dʒɹɔstʃɹɪŋz taɪt. əz lɔŋ əz aɪ doʊnt ɡoʊ tə slip wɪð ðə blʌɾi - bʌt ðæts wʌɾ aɪm plænɪŋ, ɪzən ɪt?

As she fell in beside Nynaeve, with Elayne on the other side, Egwene realized she still had the stone ring - Corianin Nedeal's ter'angreal - clutched in her fist. Reluctantly, she tucked it into her pouch and pulled the drawstrings tight. As long as I don't go to sleep with the bloody - But that's what I am planning, isn't it?

bʌt ðət wɑz fəɹ tənaɪt, ən noʊ jus wɝiɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt naʊ. əz ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu ðə taʊɝ, ʃi kɛpt ən aɪ aʊt fəɹ ðə wʊmən ɪn sɪlvɝ ən waɪt. ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ waɪ ʃi wɑz ɹɪliv nɑt tə si hɝ. aɪm ə ɡɹoʊn wʊmən, ən kwaɪt keɪpəbəl, θæŋk ju. stɪl, ʃi wɑz dʒʌst əz ɡlæd ðət noʊ wʌn ðeɪ ɪnkaʊntɝd lʊkt ivən ɹimoʊtli laɪk hɝ. ðə mɔɹ ʃi θɔɾ ə ðə wʊmən, ðə mɔɹ ʃi fɛl ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ - ɹɔŋ - əbaʊt hɝ. laɪt, aɪm stɑɹɾɪŋ tə si ðə blæk ədʒɑ ʌndɝ maɪ bɛd. oʊnli, meɪbi ðeɪ ɑɹ ʌndɝ ðə bɛd.

But that was for tonight, and no use worrying about it now. As they made their way through the Tower, she kept an eye out for the woman in silver and white. She was not sure why she was relieved not to see her. I am a grown woman, and quite capable, thank you. Still, she was just as glad that no one they encountered looked even remotely like her. The more she thought of the woman, the more she felt there was something - wrong - about her. Light, I am starting to see the Black Ajah under my bed. Only, maybe they are under the bed.

ðə laɪbɹɛɹi stʊɾ ə lɪɾəl əpɑɹt fɹəm ðə tɔl, θɪk ʃæft ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ pɹɑpɝ, ɪts peɪl stoʊn hɛvəli stʃɹikt wɪð blu, ən ɪt lʊk mʌtʃ laɪk kɹæʃɪŋ weɪvz fɹoʊzən ət ðɛɹ klaɪmæks. ðoʊz weɪvz lumd əz lɑɹdʒ əz ə pæləs ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ laɪt, ən ɛɡwin nu ðeɪ sɝɾənli kənteɪn əz mɛni ɹumz əz wʌn, bʌɾ ɔl ðoʊz ɹumz - ðoʊz bɪloʊ ði ɑd kɔɹɪɾɝz ɪn ði ʌpɝ lɛvəlz, wɛɹ vɛɹɪn hæɾ əɹ tʃeɪmbɝz - wɝ fɪld wɪð ʃɛlvz, ən ðə ʃɛlvz fɪld wɪð bʊks, mænjəskɹɪps, peɪpɝz, skɹoʊlz, mæps, ən tʃɑɹts, kəlɛktəd fɹəm ɛvɹi neɪʃən oʊvɝ ðə kɔɹs ə θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz. nɑɾ ivən ðə ɡɹeɪt laɪbɹɛɹiz ɪn tiɹ ən kɛɹhin hɛl soʊ mɛni.

The library stood a little apart from the tall, thick shaft of the White Tower proper, its pale stone heavily streaked with blue, and it looked much like crashing waves frozen at their climax. Those waves loomed as large as a palace in the morning light, and Egwene knew they certainly contained as many rooms as one, but all those rooms - those below the odd corridors in the upper levels, where Verin had her chambers - were filled with shelves, and the shelves filled with books, manuscripts, papers, scrolls, maps, and charts, collected from every nation over the course of three thousand years. Not even the great libraries in Tear and Cairhien held so many.

ðə laɪbɹɛɹiənz - bɹaʊn sɪstɝz ɔl - ɡɑɹɾəd ðoʊz ʃɛlvz, ən ɡɑɹɾəd ðə dɔɹz əz kloʊsli, tə meɪk ʃʊɹ nɑɾ ə skɹæp ə peɪpɝ lɛft ənlɛs ðeɪ nu hu tʊk ɪɾ ən waɪ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt tə wʌn ə ðə ɡɑɹɾəd ɛntʃɹənsəz ðət nɪneɪiv lɛɾ ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn.

The librarians - Brown sisters all - guarded those shelves, and guarded the doors as closely, to make sure not a scrap of paper left unless they knew who took it and why. But it was not to one of the guarded entrances that Nynaeve led Egwene and Elayne.

ɝaʊn ðə faʊndeɪʃənz ə ðə laɪbɹɛɹi, laɪɪŋ flæt tə ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn ðə ʃeɪɾ ə tɔl pəkɑn tʃɹiz, wɝ ʌðɝ dɔɹz, boʊθ lɑɹdʒ ən smɔl. leɪbɝɝz səmtaɪmz niɾəd æksɛs tə ðə stɔɹɹumz bɪniθ, ən ðə laɪbɹɛɹiənz dɪd nɑɾ əpɹuv ə swɛɾɪŋ mɛn tʃɹækɪŋ θɹu ðɛɹ pɹəzɝv. nɪneɪiv pʊld ʌp wʌn ə ðoʊz, noʊ bɪɡɝ ðən ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ ʌv ə fɑɹmhaʊs, ən moʊʃən ði ʌðɝz daʊn ə stip flaɪɾ ə stɛɹz dɪsɛndɪŋ ɪndə dɑɹknəs. wən ʃi lɛɾ ɪt daʊn bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ɔl laɪt vænɪʃt.

Around the foundations of the library, lying flat to the ground in the shade of tall pecan trees, were other doors, both large and small. Laborers sometimes needed access to the storerooms beneath, and the librarians did not approve of sweating men tracking through their preserve. Nynaeve pulled up one of those, no bigger than the front door of a farmhouse, and motioned the others down a steep flight of stairs descending into darkness. When she let it down behind them, all light vanished.

ɛɡwin oʊpən hɝsɛlf tə seɪaɪdɑɹ - ɪt keɪm soʊ smuðli ðət ʃi bɛɹli ɹilaɪzd wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ - ən tʃænəld ə tʃɹɪkəl ə ðə paʊɝ ðət flʌɾəd θɹu hɝ. fəɹ ə moʊmən ðə mɪɹ fil ə ðət ɹʌʃ sɝdʒɪŋ wɪðɪn əɹ θɹɛɾənd tə oʊvɝwɛlm ʌðɝ sɛnseɪʃənz. ə smɔl bɔl ə bluɪʃ-waɪt laɪɾ əpɪɹd, bælənst ɪn ði ɛɹ əbʌv əɹ hænd. ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf ʌv waɪ ʃi wɑz wɔkɪŋ stɪfli. ɪt wɑz ə lɪŋk tə ðə ɹɛst ə ðə wɝld. ðə fil ə hɝ lɪnən ʃɪft əɡɛnst əɹ skɪn ɹɪtɝnd, ʌv wʊlən stɑkɪŋz, ən əɹ dʒɹɛs. wɪð ə smɔl pæŋ ə ɹəɡɹɛt, ʃi bænɪʃt ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə pʊl ɪn mɔɹ, tə lɛt seɪaɪdɑɹ əbzɔɹb hɝ.

Egwene opened herself to saidar - it came so smoothly that she barely realized what she was doing - and channeled a trickle of the Power that flooded through her. For a moment the mere feel of that rush surging within her threatened to overwhelm other sensations. A small ball of bluish-white light appeared, balanced in the air above her hand. She took a deep breath and reminded herself of why she was walking stiffly. It was a link to the rest of the world. The feel of her linen shift against her skin returned, of woolen stockings, and her dress. With a small pang of regret, she banished the desire to pull in more, to let saidar absorb her.

ɪleɪn meɪɾ ə ɡloʊɪŋ sfɪɹ fəɹ hɝsɛlf ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ən ðə pɛɹ pɹəvaɪɾəd mɔɹ laɪt ðən tu læntɝnz wəd hæv. "ɪt filz soʊ - wʌndɝfəl, dʌzn ɪt?" ʃi mɝmɝd.

Elayne made a glowing sphere for herself at the same time, and the pair provided more light than two lanterns would have. "It feels so - wonderful, doesn't it?" she murmured.

"bi kɛɹfəl," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"Be careful," Egwene said.

"aɪ æm." ɪleɪn saɪd. "ɪt dʒʌs filz. . . . əl bi kɛɹfəl."

"I am." Elayne sighed. "It just feels. . . . I will be careful."

"ðɪs weɪ," nɪneɪiv toʊld əm ʃɑɹpli ən bɹʌʃt baɪ tə liɾ əm daʊn. ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ tu fɑɹ əhɛd. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ æŋɡɹi, ən hæd tə juz ðə laɪt ði ʌðɝ tu pɹəvaɪɾəd.

"This way," Nynaeve told them sharply and brushed by to lead them down. She did not go too far ahead. She was not angry, and had to use the light the other two provided.

ðə dʌsti saɪd kɔɹəɾɝ baɪ wɪtʃ ðeɪ hæɾ ɛntɝd, laɪnd wɪð wʊɾən dɔɹz sɛɾ ɪn ɡɹeɪ stoʊn wɔlz, tʊk nɪɹli ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz tə ɹitʃ ðə mʌtʃ waɪɾɝ meɪn hɔl ðət ɹæn ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə laɪbɹɛɹi. ðɛɹ laɪts ʃoʊd fʊtpɹɪns oʊvɝleɪɪŋ fʊtpɹɪns ɪn ðə dʌst, moʊs fɹəm ðə lɑɹdʒ buts mɛn wəd wɛɹ ən moʊs ðɛmsɛlvz feɪɾəd baɪ dʌst. ðə silɪŋ wɑz haɪɝ hɪɹ, ən səm ə ðə dɔɹz nɪɹli lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə bɑɹn. ðə meɪn stɛɹz ət ði ɛnd, hæf ðə wɪdθ ə ðə hɔl, wɝ wɛɹ lɑɹdʒ θɪŋz wɝ bɹɔt daʊn. ənʌðɝ flaɪt bɪsaɪɾ əm lɛd dipɝ. nɪneɪiv tʊk ɪt wɪθaʊɾ ə pɔz.

The dusty side corridor by which they had entered, lined with wooden doors set in gray stone walls, took nearly a hundred paces to reach the much wider main hall that ran the length of the library. Their lights showed footprints overlaying footprints in the dust, most from the large boots men would wear and most themselves faded by dust. The ceiling was higher here, and some of the doors nearly large enough for a barn. The main stairs at the end, half the width of the hall, were where large things were brought down. Another flight beside them led deeper. Nynaeve took it without a pause.

ɛɡwin fɑloʊd kwɪkli. ðə bluɪʃ laɪt wɑʃt aʊɾ ɪleɪnz feɪs, bʌɾ ɛɡwin θɔɾ ɪt stɪl lʊk pəlɝ ðən ɪt ʃʊd. wi kəd skɹim əɹ lʌŋz aʊt daʊn hɪɹ, ən noʊ wʌn wəd hɪɹ ə wɪmpɝ.

Egwene followed quickly. The bluish light washed out Elayne's face, but Egwene thought it still looked paler than it should. We could scream our lungs out down here, and no one would hear a whimper.

ʃi fɛlt ə laɪtnɪŋ boʊl fɔɹm, əɹ ðə pətɛnʃəl fəɹ wʌn, ən nɪɹli stʌmbəld. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ tʃænəl tu floʊz ət wʌns; ɪt dɪd nɑt sim dɪfəkəlt əɾ ɔl.

She felt a lightning bolt form, or the potential for one, and nearly stumbled. She had never before channeled two flows at once; it did not seem difficult at all.

ðə meɪn hɔl ə ðə sɛkən beɪsmənt wɑz mʌtʃ laɪk ðə fɝs lɛvəl, waɪɾ ən dʌsti bʌt wɪð ə loʊɝ silɪŋ. nɪneɪiv hɝid tə ðə θɝd dɔɹ ɑn ðə ɹaɪɾ ən stɑpt.

The main hall of the second basement was much like the first level, wide and dusty but with a lower ceiling. Nynaeve hurried to the third door on the right and stopped.

ðə dɔɹ wɑz nɑt lɑɹdʒ, bʌɾ ɪts ɹʌf wʊɾən plæŋks sʌmhaʊ ɡeɪv ən ɪmpɹɛʃən ə θɪknəs. ə ɹaʊn aɪɝn lɑk hʌŋ fɹəm ə lɛŋθ ə staʊt tʃeɪn ðət wɑz dʒɹɔn taɪt θɹu tu θɪk steɪpəlz, wʌn ɪn ðə dɔɹ, ði ʌðɝ səmɛntəɾ ɪndə ðə wɔl. lɑk ən tʃeɪn əlaɪk hæd ðə lʊk ə nunəs; ðəɹ wɑz ɔlmoʊs noʊ dʌst ɑn ðɛm.

The door was not large, but its rough wooden planks somehow gave an impression of thickness. A round iron lock hung from a length of stout chain that was drawn tight through two thick staples, one in the door, the other cemented into the wall. Lock and chain alike had the look of newness; there was almost no dust on them.

"ə lɑk!" nɪneɪiv dʒɝkt əɾ ɪt; ðə tʃeɪn hæd noʊ ɡɪv, ən niðɝ dɪd ðə lɑk. "dɪɾ iðɝ ə jə si ə lɑk ɛniwɛɹ ɛls?" ʃi pʊld ɪɾ əɡɛn, ðən flʌŋ ɪɾ əɡɛns ðə dɔɹ hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə baʊns. ðə bæŋ ɛkoʊd daʊn ðə hɔl. "aɪ dɪd nɑt si wʌn ʌðɝ lɑk dɔɹ!" ʃi paʊndɪɾ ə fɪst ɑn ðə ɹʌf wʊd. "nɑt wʌn!"

"A lock!" Nynaeve jerked at it; the chain had no give, and neither did the lock. "Did either of you see a lock anywhere else?" She pulled it again, then flung it against the door hard enough to bounce. The bang echoed down the hall. "I did not see one other locked door!" She pounded a fist on the rough wood. "Not one!"

"kɑm jɝsɛlf," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə θɹoʊ ə tæntʃɹəm. aɪ kəɾ oʊpən ðə lɑk maɪsɛlf, ɪf aɪ kəd si haʊ ði ɪnsaɪɾ ʌv ɪt wɝks. wɪl oʊpən ɪt səm weɪ."

"Calm yourself," Elayne said. "There is no need to throw a tantrum. I could open the lock myself, if I could see how the inside of it works. We will open it some way."

"aɪ də nɑt wɑnə kɑm maɪsɛlf," nɪneɪiv snæpt. "aɪ wɑnə bi fjʊɹiəs! aɪ wɑnt . . . !"

"I do not want to calm myself," Nynaeve snapped. "I want to be furious! I want . . . !"

lɛɾɪŋ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə taɪɹeɪd feɪd fɹəm əɹ əwɛɹnəs, ɛɡwin tʌtʃt ðə tʃeɪn. ʃi hæd lɝn mɔɹ θɪŋz ðən haʊ tə meɪk laɪtnɪŋ boʊls sɪns livɪŋ tɑɹ vəlɑn. wʌn wɑz ən əfɪnəɾi fəɹ mɛɾəl. ðət keɪm fɹəm ɝθ, wʌn ə ðə faɪv paʊɝz fju wɪmən hæd mʌtʃ stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn - ði ʌðɝ wɑz faɪɝ - bʌt ʃi hæɾ ɪt, ən ʃi kəd fil ðə tʃeɪn, fil ɪnsaɪd ðə tʃeɪn, fil ðə taɪniəs bɪts ə ðə koʊl mɛɾəl, ðə pæɾɝnz ðeɪ meɪd. ðə paʊɝ wɪðɪn əɹ kwɪvɝɾ ɪn taɪm tə ðə vaɪbɹeɪʃənz ə ðoʊz pæɾɝnz.

Letting the rest of the tirade fade from her awareness, Egwene touched the chain. She had learned more things than how to make lightning bolts since leaving Tar Valon. One was an affinity for metal. That came from Earth, one of the Five Powers few women had much strength in - the other was Fire - but she had it, and she could feel the chain, feel inside the chain, feel the tiniest bits of the cold metal, the patterns they made. The Power within her quivered in time to the vibrations of those patterns.

"muv aʊɾ ə maɪ weɪ, ɛɡwin."

"Move out of my way, Egwene."

ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊn ən sɔ nɪneɪiv ɹæpt ɪn ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ ən hoʊldɪŋ ə pɹaɪbɑɹ soʊ kloʊs ɪn kʌlɝ tə ðə blu-waɪɾ ə ðə laɪt ðəɾ ɪt wɑz nɪɹli ɪnvɪzəbəl. nɪneɪiv fɹaʊn ət ðə tʃeɪn, mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt lɛvɝɪdʒ, ən ðə pɹaɪbɑɹ wɑz sʌɾənli twaɪs əz lɔŋ.

She looked around and saw Nynaeve wrapped in the glow of saidar and holding a prybar so close in color to the blue-white of the light that it was nearly invisible. Nynaeve frowned at the chain, muttered something about leverage, and the prybar was suddenly twice as long.

"muv, ɛɡwin."

"Move, Egwene."

ɛɡwin muvd.

Egwene moved.

θɹʌstɪŋ ði ɛn ə ðə pɹaɪbɑɹ θɹu ðə tʃeɪn, nɪneɪiv bɹeɪst ɪt, ðən hivd wɪð ɔl əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ. ðə tʃeɪn snæp laɪk θɹɛd, nɪneɪiv ɡæspt ən stʌmbəl hæfweɪ əkɹɔs ðə hɔl ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ən ðə pɹaɪbɑɹ klæɾɝd tə ðə flɔɹ. stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ, nɪneɪiv stɛɹd fɹəm ðə bɑɹ tə ðə tʃeɪn ɪn əmeɪzmənt. ðə pɹaɪbɑɹ vænɪʃt.

Thrusting the end of the prybar through the chain, Nynaeve braced it, then heaved with all her strength. The chain snapped like thread, Nynaeve gasped and stumbled halfway across the hall in surprise, and the prybar clattered to the floor. Straightening, Nynaeve stared from the bar to the chain in amazement. The prybar vanished.

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ dɪd sʌmθɪŋ tə ðə tʃeɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd. ən aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu wʌt.

"I think I did something to the chain," Egwene said. And I wish I knew what.

"ju cʊɾə sɛd sʌmθɪŋ," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd. ʃi pʊl ðə ɹɛst ə ðə tʃeɪn fɹəm ðə steɪpəlz ən θɹu oʊpən ðə dɔɹ. "wɛl? ɑɹ jə gɑnə stæn ðəɹ ɔl deɪ?"

"You could have said something," Nynaeve muttered. She pulled the rest of the chain from the staples and threw open the door. "Well? Are you going to stand there all day?"

ðə dʌsti ɹum ɪnsaɪd wɑz pɝhæps tɛn peɪsɪz skwɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪt hɛld oʊnli ə hip ə lɑɹdʒ bæɡz meɪɾ ə hɛvi bɹaʊn klɔθ, itʃ stʌft fʊl, tæɡd, ən sild wɪð ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɛɡwin dɪd nɑɾ əv tə kaʊn əm tə noʊ ðəɹ wɝ θɝtin.

The dusty room inside was perhaps ten paces square, but it held only a heap of large bags made of heavy brown cloth, each stuffed full, tagged, and sealed with the Flame of Tar Valon. Egwene did not have to count them to know there were thirteen.

ʃi muvd əɹ bɔl ə laɪt tə ðə wɔl ən fæsən ɪt ðɛɹ; ʃi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən haʊ ʃi dɪɾ ɪt, bʌt wən ʃi tʊk əɹ hæn əweɪ, ðə laɪt ɹɪmeɪnd. aɪ kip lɝnɪŋ haʊ tə də θɪŋz wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ, ʃi θɔt nɝvəsli.

She moved her ball of light to the wall and fastened it there; she was not certain how she did it, but when she took her hand away, the light remained. I keep learning how to do things without knowing what they are, she thought nervously.

ɪleɪn fɹaʊn əɾ əɹ əz ɪf kənsɪɾɝɪŋ, ðən hʌŋ əɹ laɪɾ ɑn ðə wɔl, tu. wɑtʃɪŋ, ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi sɔ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ʃi hæd dʌn. ʃi lɝn ɪt fɹəm mi, bʌɾ aɪ dʒʌs lɝn ɪt fɹəm hɝ. ʃi ʃɪvɝd.

Elayne frowned at her as if considering, then hung her light on the wall, too. Watching, Egwene thought she saw what it was she had done. She learned it from me, but I just learned it from her. She shivered.

nɪneɪiv wɛn stʃɹeɪt tə tʌmbəlɪŋ ðə bæɡz əpɑɹɾ ən ɹiɾɪŋ ðə tæɡz. "ɹiɑnə. dʒɔɪjə bɝ. ðiz ɑɹ wʌt wəɹ æftɝ." ʃi ɪɡzæmən ðə sil ɑn wʌn bæɡ, ðən bɹoʊk ðə wæks ən ənwaʊn ðə baɪndɪŋ kɔɹdz. "æt list wi noʊ noʊ wʌnz bɪn hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ ʌs."

Nynaeve went straight to tumbling the bags apart and reading the tags. "Rianna. Joiya Byir. These are what we are after." She examined the seal on one bag, then broke the wax and unwound the binding cords. "At least we know no one's been here before us."

ɛɡwin tʃoʊz ə bæɡ ən bɹoʊk ðə sil wɪθaʊt ɹiɾɪŋ ðə neɪm ɑn ðə tæɡ. ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli wɑnə noʊ huz pəzɛʃənz ʃi wɑz sɝtʃɪŋ. wən ʃi ʌpɛndəɾ əm ɑntu ðə dʌsti flɔɹ, ðeɪ pɹuv tə bi meɪnli oʊl kloʊðz ən ʃuz, wɪð ə fju ɹɪpt ən kɹʌmpəl peɪpɝz ə ðə sɔɹt ðət maɪt haɪɾ ʌndɝ ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb ʌv ə wʊmən u wɑz nɑt tu əsɪdwəs ɪn siɪŋ əɹ ɹumz klind. "aɪ doʊn si ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl hɪɹ. ə kloʊk ðət wəd nɑt də fəɹ ɹæɡz. ə tɔɹn hæf ʌv ə mæp ə səm sɪɾi. tɛɹ, ɪt sɛz ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ. θɹi stɑkɪŋz ðət nid dɑɹnɪŋ." ʃi stʌk əɹ fɪŋɡɝ θɹu ðə hoʊl ɪn ə vɛlvət slɪpɝ ðət hæd noʊ meɪɾ ən wæɡəld ɪɾ ət ði ʌðɝz. "ðɪs wʌn lɛf noʊ kluz bɪhaɪnd."

Egwene chose a bag and broke the seal without reading the name on the tag. She did not really want to know whose possessions she was searching. When she upended them onto the dusty floor, they proved to be mainly old clothes and shoes, with a few ripped and crumpled papers of the sort that might hide under the wardrobe of a woman who was not too assiduous in seeing her rooms cleaned. "I don't see anything useful here. A cloak that would not do for rags. A torn half of a map of some city. Tear, it says in the corner. Three stockings that need darning." She stuck her finger through the hole in a velvet slipper that had no mate and waggled it at the others. "This one left no clues behind."

"ɑmikoʊ dɪd nɑt liv ɛniθɪŋ, iðɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd ɡlʌmli, tɔsɪŋ kloʊðz əsaɪd wɪð boʊθ hænz. "ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl bi ɹæɡz. weɪt, hɪɹz ə bʊk. huɛvɝ bʌndəl ðiz ʌp mʌst əv bɪn ɪn ə hɝi tə tɔs ɪn ə bʊk. kʌstəmz ən sɛɹəmoʊniz ə ðə tɛɹən kɔɹt. ðə kʌvɝ ɪz tɔɹn ɔf, bʌt ðə laɪbɹɛɹiənz wɪl wɑn ɪɾ ɛniweɪ." ðə laɪbɹɛɹiənz sɝɾənli wʊd. noʊ wʌn θɹu əweɪ bʊks, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ bædli dæmədʒd.

"Amico did not leave anything, either," Elayne said glumly, tossing clothes aside with both hands. "It might as well be rags. Wait, here's a book. Whoever bundled these up must have been in a hurry to toss in a book. Customs and Ceremonies of the Tairen Court. The cover is torn off, but the librarians will want it anyway." The librarians certainly would. No one threw away books, no matter how badly damaged.

"tɛɹ," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs. nilɪŋ əmɪd ðə klʌɾɝ fɹəm ðə bæɡ ʃi wɑz sɝtʃɪŋ, ʃi ɹitʃɹivd ə skɹæp ə peɪpɝ ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi θɹoʊn əweɪ. "ə lɪst ə tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ʃɪps ɑn ði ɛɹɪnɪn, wɪð ðə deɪts ðeɪ seɪl fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn ən ðə deɪts ðeɪ wɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə ɝaɪv ɪn tiɹ."

"Tear," Nynaeve said in a flat voice. Kneeling amid the clutter from the bag she was searching, she retrieved a scrap of paper she had already thrown away. "A list of trading ships on the Erinin, with the dates they sailed from Tar Valon and the dates they were expected to arrive in Tear."

"ɪt kəd bi koʊɪnsɪɾəns," ɛɡwin sɛd sloʊli.

"It could be coincidence," Egwene said slowly.

"pɝhæps," nɪneɪiv sɛd. ʃi foʊldəd ðə peɪpɝ ən tʌkt ɪɾ ʌp əɹ sliv, ðən bɹoʊk ðə sil ɑn ənʌðɝ bæɡ.

"Perhaps," Nynaeve said. She folded the paper and tucked it up her sleeve, then broke the seal on another bag.

wən ðeɪ faɪnəli fɪnɪʃt, ɛvɹi bæɡ sɝtʃt twaɪs ən dɪskɑɹɾɪd ɹʌbɪʃ hipt ɝaʊn ði ɛdʒəz ə ðə ɹum, ɛɡwin sæt daʊn ɑn wʌn ə ði ɛmpti bæɡz, soʊ ɪnɡɹoʊs ðət ʃi bɛɹli noʊɾəst əɹ oʊn wɪns. dʒɹɔɪŋ ʌp əɹ niz, ʃi stʌɾid ðə lɪɾəl kəlɛkʃən ðeɪ hæd meɪd, ɔl leɪɾ ɪn ə ɹoʊ.

When they finally finished, every bag searched twice and discarded rubbish heaped around the edges of the room, Egwene sat down on one of the empty bags, so engrossed that she barely noticed her own wince. Drawing up her knees, she studied the little collection they had made, all laid in a row.

"ɪɾ ɪz tu mʌtʃ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɪz tu mʌtʃ ʌv ɪt."

"It is too much," Elayne said. "There is too much of it."

"tu mʌtʃ," nɪneɪiv əɡɹid.

"Too much," Nynaeve agreed.

ðəɹ wɑz ə sɛkən bʊk, ə tæɾɝd, lɛðɝ-baʊn vɑljum ɛntaɪɾəld ɑbzɝveɪʃənz ɑn ə vɪzət tə tɛɹ, wɪð hæf ɪts peɪdʒəz fɔlɪŋ aʊt. kɑɾ ɪn ðə laɪnɪŋ ʌv ə bædli tɔɹn kloʊk ɪn tʃɛzməl ɛmɹiz bæɡ, wɛɹ ɪt maɪɾ əv slɪp θɹu ə ɹɪp ɪn wʌn ə ðə pɑkəts ə ðə kloʊk, hæd bɪn ənʌðɝ lɪst ə tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ vɛsəlz. ɪt sɛd noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðə neɪmz, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ɑn ði ʌðɝ lɪst, tu, ən əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðæt, ðoʊz vɛsəlz ɔl hæd seɪld ɪn ði ɝli mɔɹnɪŋ æftɝ ðə naɪt liɑnʒɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz lɛf ðə taʊɝ. ðəɹ wɑz ə heɪstəli skɛtʃt plæn ə səm lɑɹdʒ bɪldɪŋ, wɪð wʌn ɹum feɪnli noʊɾəd əz "hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn," ən ə peɪdʒ wɪð ðə neɪmz ə faɪv ɪnz, ðə wɝd "tɛɹ" hɛɾɪŋ ðə peɪdʒ bædli smʌdʒ bʌt bɛɹli ɹiɾəbəl. ðəɹ wɑz. . . .

There was a second book, a tattered, leather-bound volume entitled Observations on a Visit to Tear, with half its pages falling out. Caught in the lining of a badly torn cloak in Chesmal Emry's bag, where it might have slipped through a rip in one of the pockets of the cloak, had been another list of trading vessels. It said no more than the names, but they were all on the other list, too, and according to that, those vessels all had sailed in the early morning after the night Liandrin and the others left the Tower. There was a hastily sketched plan of some large building, with one room faintly noted as "Heart of the Stone," and a page with the names of five inns, the word "Tear" heading the page badly smudged but barely readable. There was. . . .

"ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn," ɛɡwin mʌɾɝd. "ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm lɛf sʌmθɪŋ pɔɪntɪŋ tə ə dʒɝni tə tɛɹ. haʊ kəɾ ɛniwʌn mɪs siɪŋ ɪt, ɪf ðeɪ lʊkt? waɪ dɪd ði æmɪɝlɪn seɪ nʌθɪŋ ə ðɪs?"

"There's something from everyone," Egwene muttered. "Every one of them left something pointing to a journey to Tear. How could anyone miss seeing it, if they looked? Why did the Amyrlin say nothing of this?"

"ði æmɪɝlɪn," nɪneɪiv sɛd bɪɾɝli, "kips əɹ oʊn kaʊnsəl, ən wʌt mæɾɝ ɪf wi bɝn fəɹ ɪt!" ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, ən sniz fɹəm ðə dʌs ðeɪ hæd stɝɾ ʌp. "wʌt wɝiz mi ɪz ðəɾ aɪm lʊkɪŋ ət beɪt."

"The Amyrlin," Nynaeve said bitterly, "keeps her own counsel, and what matter if we burn for it!" She drew a deep breath, and sneezed from the dust they had stirred up. "What worries me is that I am looking at bait."

"beɪt?" ɛɡwin sɛd. bʌt ʃi sɔ ɪɾ əz sun əz ʃi spoʊk.

"Bait?" Egwene said. But she saw it as soon as she spoke.

nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd. "beɪt. ə tʃɹæp. əɹ meɪbi ə daɪvɝʒən. bʌt tʃɹæp əɹ daɪvɝʒən, ɪts soʊ ɑbviəs noʊ wʌn kəd bi teɪkən ɪn baɪ ɪt."

Nynaeve nodded. "Bait. A trap. Or maybe a diversion. But trap or diversion, it's so obvious no one could be taken in by it."

"ənlɛs ðeɪ də nɑt kɛɹ wɛðɝ huɛvɝ faʊn ðɪs sɔ ðə tʃɹæp əɹ nɑt." ənsɝɾənti tɪŋd ɪleɪnz vɔɪs. "ɔɹ pɝhæps ðeɪ mɛn ɪt tə bi soʊ ɑbviəs ðət huɛvɝ faʊn ɪt wəd dɪsmɪs tɛɹ ɪmiɾiətli."

"Unless they do not care whether whoever found this saw the trap or not." Uncertainty tinged Elayne's voice. "Or perhaps they meant it to be so obvious that whoever found it would dismiss Tear immediately."

ɛɡwin wɪʃt ʃi kəd nɑt bɪliv ðət ðə blæk ədʒɑ kəd bi əz ʃʊɹ ə ðɛmsɛlvz əz ðæt. ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ paʊtʃ ɪn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz, ɹʌnɪŋ əɹ θʌm əlɔŋ ðə twɪstəd kɝv ə ðə stoʊn ɹɪŋ ɪnsaɪd. "pɝhæps ðeɪ mɛn tə tɔn huɛvɝ faʊn ɪt," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "pɝhæps ðeɪ θɔt huɛvɝ faʊn ðɪs wəd ɹʌʃ hɛdlɔŋ æftɝ ðɛm, ɪn æŋɡɝ ən pɹaɪd." dɪd ðeɪ noʊ wi wəd faɪn ɪt? də ðeɪ si əs ðət weɪ?

Egwene wished she could not believe that the Black Ajah could be as sure of themselves as that. She realized she was gripping her pouch in her fingers, running her thumb along the twisted curve of the stone ring inside. "Perhaps they meant to taunt whoever found it," she said softly. "Perhaps they thought whoever found this would rush headlong after them, in anger and pride." Did they know we would find it? Do they see us that way?

"bɝn mi!" nɪneɪiv ɡɹaʊld. ɪt wɑz ə ʃɑk; nɪneɪiv nɛvɝ juz sətʃ læŋɡwədʒ.

"Burn me!" Nynaeve growled. It was a shock; Nynaeve never used such language.

fəɹ ə taɪm ðeɪ sɪmpli stɛɹɾ ɪn saɪləns ət ði ɝeɪ.

For a time they simply stared in silence at the array.

"wʌt də wi də naʊ?" ɪleɪn æsk faɪnəli.

"What do we do now?" Elayne asked finally.

ɛɡwin skwiz ðə ɹɪŋ hɑɹd. dʒɹimɪŋ wɑz kloʊsli lɪŋk tə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ; ðə fjutʃɝ, ən ɪvɛns ɪn ʌðɝ pleɪsəz, kəɾ əpɪɹ ɪn ə dʒɹimɝz dʒɹimz. "meɪbi wɪl noʊ æftɝ tənaɪt."

Egwene squeezed the ring hard. Dreaming was closely linked to Foretelling; the future, and events in other places, could appear in a Dreamer's dreams. "Maybe we will know after tonight."

nɪneɪiv lʊkt ət hɝ, saɪlən ən ɪkspɹɛʃənləs, ðən tʃoʊz aʊɾ ə dɑɹk skɝt ðət sim nɑt tə hæv tu mɛni hoʊlz ən ɹɪps, ən bɪɡæn bʌndəlɪŋ ɪn ɪt ðə θɪŋz ðeɪ hæd faʊnd. "fɔɹ naʊ," ʃi sɛd, "wi wɪl teɪk ðɪs bæk tə maɪ ɹum ən haɪɾ ɪt. aɪ θɪŋk wi dʒʌst əv taɪm, ɪf wi doʊnt wɑnə bi leɪt tə ðə kɪtʃənz."

Nynaeve looked at her, silent and expressionless, then chose out a dark skirt that seemed not to have too many holes and rips, and began bundling in it the things they had found. "For now," she said, "we will take this back to my room and hide it. I think we just have time, if we don't want to be late to the kitchens."

leɪt, ɛɡwin θɔt. ðə lɔŋɡɝ ʃi hɛl ðə ɹɪŋ θɹu hɝ paʊtʃ, ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ ði ɝdʒənsi ʃi fɛlt. wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ə stɛp bɪhaɪnd, bʌt meɪbi wi woʊn bi tu leɪt.

Late, Egwene thought. The longer she held the ring through her pouch, the greater the urgency she felt. We're already a step behind, but maybe we won't be too late.


tʃæptɝ twɛntisɛvən


CHAPTER 27

tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd


Tel'aran'rhiod

ðə ɹum ɛɡwin hæd bɪn ɡɪvən, ɑn ðə seɪm ɡælɝi wɪð nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn, wɑz lɪɾəl dɪfɹən fɹəm nɪneɪivz. hɝ bɛd wɑz ə tʃɹaɪfəl waɪɾɝ, hɝ teɪbəl ə lɪɾəl smɔlɝ. hɝ bɪɾ ə ɹʌɡ hæd flaʊɝz ɪnstɛɾ ə skɹoʊlz. ðət wɑz ɔl. æftɝ ðə nɑvəsɪz' kɔɹɾɝz, ɪt sim laɪk ə ɹum ɪn ə pæləs, bʌt wən ðə θɹi ʌv əm ɡæðɝd ðəɹ leɪt ðət naɪt, ɛɡwin wɪʃt ʃi wɝ bæk ɑn ðə nɑvəs ɡælɝiz, wɪð noʊ ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝ ən noʊ bænz ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛs. ði ʌðɝz lʊkt əz nɝvəs əz ʃi fɛlt.

The room Egwene had been given, on the same gallery with Nynaeve and Elayne, was little different from Nynaeve's. Her bed was a trifle wider, her table a little smaller. Her bit of rug had flowers instead of scrolls. That was all. After the novices' quarters, it seemed like a room in a palace, but when the three of them gathered there late that night, Egwene wished she were back on the novice galleries, with no ring on her finger and no bands on her dress. The others looked as nervous as she felt.

ðeɪ hæd wɝkt ɪn ðə kɪtʃənz fəɹ tu mɔɹ milz, ən ɪn bɪtwin tʃɹaɪd tə pʌzəl aʊt ðə minɪŋ ʌv wʌt ðeɪ hæd faʊn ɪn ðə stɔɹɹum. wɑz ɪɾ ə tʃɹæp, əɹ ən ətɛmp tə daɪvɝt ðə sɝtʃ? dɪd ði æmɪɝlɪn noʊ ʌv ðə θɪŋz, ən ɪf ʃi dɪd, waɪ hæd ʃi nɑt mɛnʃən ðɛm? tɔkɪŋ pɹəvaɪɾəd noʊ ænsɝz, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn nɛvɝ əpɪɹd soʊ ðeɪ kəɾ æsk hɝ.

They had worked in the kitchens for two more meals, and in between tried to puzzle out the meaning of what they had found in the storeroom. Was it a trap, or an attempt to divert the search? Did the Amyrlin know of the things, and if she did, why had she not mentioned them? Talking provided no answers, and the Amyrlin never appeared so they could ask her.

vɛɹɪn hæd kʌm ɪndə ðə kɪtʃənz æftɝ ðə mɪddeɪ mil, blɪŋkɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ nɑt ʃʊɹ waɪ ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ. wən ʃi sɔ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝ tu ɑn ðɛɹ niz əmʌŋ ðə kɔlʒɹənz ən kɛɾəlz, ʃi lʊk sɝpɹaɪz fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən wɔkt oʊvɝ ən æskt, laʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə hɪɹ, "hæv jə faʊn ɛniθɪŋ?"

Verin had come into the kitchens after the midday meal, blinking as if she were not sure why she was there. When she saw Egwene and the other two on their knees among the cauldrons and kettles, she looked surprised for a moment, then walked over and asked, loud enough for anyone to hear, "Have you found anything?"

ɪleɪn, wɪð əɹ hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz ɪnsaɪɾ ə hjudʒ sup kɛɾəl, bæŋd əɹ hɛɾ ɑn ðə ɹɪm bækɪŋ aʊt. hɝ blu aɪz sim tə teɪk ʌp əɹ ɪntaɪɝ feɪs.

Elayne, with her head and shoulders inside a huge soup kettle, banged her head on the rim backing out. Her blue eyes seemed to take up her entire face.

"nʌθɪŋ bʌt ɡɹis ən swɛt, ɛɛs sədaɪ," nɪneɪiv sɛd. ðə tʌɡ ʃi ɡeɪv əɹ bɹeɪd lɛft ə smɪɹ ʌv ɡɹisi soʊp sʌdz ɑn əɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ, ən ʃi ɡɹɪməst.

"Nothing but grease and sweat, Aes Sedai," Nynaeve said. The tug she gave her braid left a smear of greasy soap suds on her dark hair, and she grimaced.

vɛɹɪn nɑɾəd əz ɪf ðət wɝ ði ænsɝ ʃi hæd bɪn sikɪŋ. "wɛl, kip lʊkɪŋ." ʃi pɪɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə kɪtʃən əɡɛn, fɹaʊnɪŋ əz ðoʊ pʌzəl tə faɪn hɝsɛlf ðɛɹ, ən lɛft.

Verin nodded as if that were the answer she had been seeking. "Well, keep looking." She peered around the kitchen again, frowning as though puzzled to find herself there, and left.

ɑlɑnə keɪm tə ðə kɪtʃənz æftɝ mɪddeɪ, tu, kəlɛktɪŋ ə boʊl ə bɪɡ ɡɹin ɡusbɛɹiz ən ə pɪtʃɝ ʌv waɪn, ən ɪleɪɾə, ðən ʃɛɹiəm, əpɪɹɾ æftɝ sʌpɝ, ən æneɪjə, tu.

Alanna came to the kitchens after midday, too, collecting a bowl of big green gooseberries and a pitcher of wine, and Elaida, then Sheriam, appeared after supper, and Anaiya, too.

ɑlɑnə hæɾ æskt ɛɡwin ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə noʊ mɔɹ ə ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ, ɪnkwaɪɝd wən ðeɪ wɝ gɑnə ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð ðɛɹ stʌɾiz. dʒʌs kəz ði æksɛptɪd tʃoʊz ðɛɹ oʊn lɛsənz ən peɪs dɪd nɑt min ðeɪ wɝ nɑt səpoʊz tə də ɛni əɾ ɔl. ðə fɝs fju wiks wəd bi bæd, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðeɪ hæd tə tʃuz, əɹ ðə tʃuzɪŋ wəd bi dʌn fəɹ ðɛm.

Alanna had asked Egwene if she wanted to know more of the Green Ajah, inquired when they were going to get on with their studies. Just because the Accepted chose their own lessons and pace did not mean they were not supposed to do any at all. The first few weeks would be bad, of course, but they had to choose, or the choosing would be done for them.

ɪleɪɾə mɪɹli stʊd fəɹ ə taɪm, stɝn-feɪst ən stɛɹɪŋ ət ðɛm, hænz ɑn əɹ hɪps, ən ʃɛɹiəm dɪd ðə seɪm ɪn ɔlmoʊs ði aɪdɛntɪkəl poʊz. æneɪjə stʊd ðə seɪm weɪ, bʌɾ əɹ lʊk wɑz mɔɹ kənsɝnd. əntɪl ʃi sɔ ðɛm ɡlænsɪŋ ət hɝ. ðən əɹ feɪs bɪkeɪm ə mætʃ fəɹ ɪleɪɾəz ən ʃɛɹiəmz bɪfɔɹ hɝ.

Elaida merely stood for a time, stern-faced and staring at them, hands on her hips, and Sheriam did the same in almost the identical pose. Anaiya stood the same way, but her look was more concerned. Until she saw them glancing at her. Then her face became a match for Elaida's and Sheriam's before her.

nʌn ə ðoʊz vɪzəts mɛn ɛniθɪŋ ðəɾ ɛɡwin kəd si. ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz sɝɾənli hæd ɹizən tə tʃɛk ɑn ðɛm, əz wɛl əz ɑn ðə nɑvəsɪz wɝkɪŋ ɪn ðə kɪtʃənz, ən ɪleɪɾə hæd ɹizən tə kip ən aɪ ɑn ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ. ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ɹænd. əz fəɹ ɑlɑnə, ʃi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli ɛɛs sədaɪ hu keɪm fəɹ ə tʃɹeɪ tə teɪk bæk tə hɝ ɹumz ɹæðɝ ðən it wɪð ði ʌðɝz. hæf ðə sɪstɝz ɪn ðə taʊɝ wɝ tu bɪzi fəɹ milz, tu bɪzi tə teɪk ðə taɪm tə sʌmən ə sɝvən tə fɛtʃ ə tʃɹeɪ. ən æneɪjə . . . ? æneɪjə kəd wɛl bi kənsɝn fəɹ əɹ dʒɹimɝ. nɑt ðət ʃi wəd də ɛniθɪŋ tə iz ə pʌnɪʃmən sɛt baɪ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hɝsɛlf. ðət cʊɾə bɪn æneɪjəz ɹizən fəɹ kʌmɪŋ. ɪt kəɾ əv bɪn.

None of those visits meant anything that Egwene could see. The Mistress of Novices certainly had reason to check on them, as well as on the novices working in the kitchens, and Elaida had reason to keep an eye on the Daughter-Heir of Andor. Egwene tried not to think of the Aes Sedai's interest in Rand. As for Alanna, she was not the only Aes Sedai who came for a tray to take back to her rooms rather than eat with the others. Half the sisters in the Tower were too busy for meals, too busy to take the time to summon a servant to fetch a tray. And Anaiya . . . ? Anaiya could well be concerned for her Dreamer. Not that she would do anything to ease a punishment set by the Amyrlin Seat herself. That could have been Anaiya's reason for coming. It could have been.

hæŋɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛs ɪn ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb, ɛɡwin toʊl hɝsɛlf wʌns əɡɛn ðəɾ ivən vɛɹɪnz slɪp cʊɾə bɪn pɝfəkli ɔɹɾənɛɹi; ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝ wɑz ɔfən æbsəntmaɪndɪd. ɪf ɪt wɑz ə slɪp. sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ bɛd, ʃi pʊld ʌp əɹ ʃɪft ən bɪɡæn ɹoʊlɪŋ daʊn əɹ stɑkɪŋz. ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊs bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə dɪslaɪk waɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi dɪd ɡɹeɪ.

Hanging her dress in the wardrobe, Egwene told herself once again that even Verin's slip could have been perfectly ordinary; the Brown sister was often absentminded. If it was a slip. Sitting on the edge of her bed, she pulled up her shift and began rolling down her stockings. She was almost beginning to dislike white as much as she did gray.

nɪneɪiv stʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs wɪð ɛɡwinz paʊtʃ ɪn wʌn hænd, tʌɡɪŋ əɹ bɹeɪd. ɪleɪn sæt baɪ ðə teɪbəl, meɪkɪŋ nɝvəs kɑnvɝseɪʃən.

Nynaeve stood in front of the fireplace with Egwene's pouch in one hand, tugging her braid. Elayne sat by the table, making nervous conversation.

"ɡɹin ədʒɑ," ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən sɛd fəɹ wʌɾ ɛɡwin θɔt mʌs bi ðə twɛntiəθ taɪm sɪns mɪddeɪ. "aɪ maɪt tʃuz ɡɹin ədʒɑ maɪsɛlf, ɛɡwin. ðən aɪ kən əv θɹi əɹ fɔɹ wɔɹɾɝz, pɝhæps mɛɹi wʌn ə ðɛm. hu bɛɾɝ fəɹ pɹɪns kɑnsɔɹɾ ʌv ændɝ ðən ə wɔɹɾɝ? ənlɛs ɪɾ ɪz. . . ." ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf, blʌʃɪŋ.

"Green Ajah," the golden-haired woman said for what Egwene thought must be the twentieth time since midday. "I might choose Green Ajah myself, Egwene. Then I can have three or four Warders, perhaps marry one of them. Who better for Prince Consort of Andor than a Warder? Unless it is. . . ." She trailed off, blushing.

ɛɡwin fɛlt ə pæŋ ə dʒɛləsi ʃi θɔt ʃi hæd pʊt daʊn lɔŋ əɡoʊ, ən sɪmpəθi mɪkst wɪð ɪt. laɪt, haʊ kən aɪ bi dʒɛləs wən aɪ kænɑt lʊk ət ɡɑləd wɪθaʊt ʃɪvɝɪŋ ən filɪŋ əz ɪf aɪm mɛltɪŋ, boʊθ ət ðə seɪm taɪm? ɹænd wɑz maɪn, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ. aɪ wɪʃ aɪ kəd ɡɪv ɪm tə ju, ɪleɪn, bʌt hiz nɑt fəɹ iðɝ ʌv ʌs, aɪ θɪŋk. ɪt meɪ bi ɔl wɛl ən ɡʊd fəɹ ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ tə mɛɹi ə kɑmənɝ, əz lɔŋ əz hiz ən ændɔɝmən, bʌt nɑt tə mɛɹi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ʃi lɛt ðə stɑkɪŋz fɔl ɑn ðə flɔɹ, tɛlɪŋ hɝsɛlf ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋz tə wɝi əbaʊt tənaɪt ðən nitnəs. "aɪ æm ɹɛɾi, nɪneɪiv."

Egwene felt a pang of jealousy she thought she had put down long ago, and sympathy mixed with it. Light, how can I be jealous when I cannot look at Galad without shivering and feeling as if I am melting, both at the same time? Rand was mine, but no more. I wish I could give him to you, Elayne, but he is not for either of us, I think. It may be all well and good for the Daughter-Heir to marry a commoner, as long as he's an Andorman, but not to marry the Dragon Reborn. She let the stockings fall on the floor, telling herself there were more important things to worry about tonight than neatness. "I am ready, Nynaeve."

nɪneɪiv hændəɾ əɹ ðə paʊtʃ, ən ə lɔŋ, θɪn stʃɹɪp ə lɛðɝ. "pɝhæps ɪɾəl wɝk fəɹ mɔɹ ðən wʌn ət wʌns. aɪ kəd . . . ɡoʊ wɪð ju, pɝhæps."

Nynaeve handed her the pouch, and a long, thin strip of leather. "Perhaps it will work for more than one at once. I could . . . go with you, perhaps."

ɛmptiɪŋ ðə stoʊn ɹɪŋ ɑntu hɝ pɑm, ɛɡwin θɹɛɾəd ðə lɛðɝ stʃɹɪp θɹu ɪt, ðən taɪɾ ɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk. ðə stʃɹaɪps ən flɛks ə blu ən bɹaʊn ən ɹɛd simd mɔɹ vɪvəɾ əɡɛns ðə waɪɾ ə hɝ ʃɪft. "æn liv ɪleɪn tə wɑtʃ oʊvɝ ðə boʊθ ʌv əs əloʊn? wən ðə blæk ədʒɑ meɪ noʊ ʌs?"

Emptying the stone ring onto her palm, Egwene threaded the leather strip through it, then tied it around her neck. The stripes and flecks of blue and brown and red seemed more vivid against the white of her shift. "And leave Elayne to watch over the both of us alone? When the Black Ajah may know us?"

"aɪ kən də ɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd staʊtli. "ɔɹ lemi ɡoʊ wɪð ju, ən nɪneɪiv kən kip ɡɑɹd. ʃiz ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ʌv ʌs, wən ʃiz æŋɡɹi, ən ɪf ðəɹ ɪz nid fəɹ ə ɡɑɹd, jə kən bi ʃʊɹ ʃɪl bi."

"I can do it," Elayne said stoutly. "Or let me go with you, and Nynaeve can keep guard. She is the strongest of us, when she's angry, and if there is need for a guard, you can be sure she will be."

ɛɡwin ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "wʌɾ ɪf ɪt woʊnt wɝk fəɹ tu? wʌɾ ɪf tu ʌv əs tʃɹaɪɪŋ meɪks ɪt nɑt wɝk əɾ ɔl? wi wəd nɑɾ ivən noʊ tɪl wi woʊk ʌp, ən ðən wiv weɪstəd ðə naɪt. wi kænɑt weɪst ivən wʌn ɪf wəɹ tə kætʃ ʌp. wɝ tu fɑɹ bɪhaɪn əm ɔlɹɛɾi." ðeɪ wɝ væləd ɹizənz, ən ʃi bɪliv ðɛm, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ, kloʊsɝ tə hɝ hɑɹt. "bɪsaɪdz, əl fil bɛɾɝ noʊɪŋ boʊθ ə jə ɑɹ wɑtʃɪŋ oʊvɝ mi, ɪn keɪs. . . ."

Egwene shook her head. "What if it won't work for two? What if two of us trying makes it not work at all? We would not even know till we woke up, and then we've wasted the night. We cannot waste even one if we are to catch up. We're too far behind them already." They were valid reasons, and she believed them, but there was another, closer to her heart. "Besides, I'll feel better knowing both of you are watching over me, in case. . . ."

ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə seɪ ɪt. ɪn keɪs sʌmwʌn keɪm waɪl ʃi wɑz əslip. ðə ɡɹeɪ mɛn. ðə blæk ədʒɑ. ɛni wʌn ə ðə θɪŋz ðət hæd tɝn ðə waɪt taʊɝ fɹəm ə pleɪs ə seɪfti tə ə dɑɹk wʊdz fʊl ə pɪts ən snɛɹz. sʌmθɪŋ kʌmɪŋ ɪn waɪl ʃi leɪ ðəɹ hɛlpləs. ðɛɹ feɪsəz ʃoʊd ðeɪ ʌndɝstʊd.

She did not want to say it. In case someone came while she was asleep. The Gray Men. The Black Ajah. Any one of the things that had turned the White Tower from a place of safety to a dark woods full of pits and snares. Something coming in while she lay there helpless. Their faces showed they understood.

əz ʃi stʃɹɛtʃt hɝsɛlf aʊɾ ɑn ðə bɛɾ ən plʌmpt ə fɛðɝ pɪloʊ bɪhaɪn əɹ hɛd, ɪleɪn muv ðə tʃɛɹz, wʌn tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə bɛd. nɪneɪiv snʌf ðə kændəlz wʌn baɪ wʌn, ðɛn, ɪn ðə dɑɹk, sæɾ ɪn wʌn ə ðə tʃɛɹz. ɪleɪn tʊk ði ʌðɝ.

As she stretched herself out on the bed and plumped a feather pillow behind her head, Elayne moved the chairs, one to either side of the bed. Nynaeve snuffed the candles one by one, then, in the dark, sat in one of the chairs. Elayne took the other.

ɛɡwin kloʊzd əɹ aɪz ən tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk slipi θɔts, bʌt ʃi wɑz tu kɑnʃəs ə ðə θɪŋ laɪɪŋ bɪtwin əɹ bɹɛsts. fɑɹ mɔɹ kɑnʃəs ðən ʌv ɛni sɔɹnəs ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ fɹəm əɹ vɪzət tə ʃɛɹiəmz stʌɾi. ðə ɹɪŋ sim tə weɪ əz mʌtʃ əz ə bɹɪk, naʊ, ən θɔts ə hoʊm ən kwaɪət pulz ʌv wɔɾɝ ɔl slɪɾ əpɑɹt wɪð ɹimɛmbɹəns ʌv ɪt. ʌv tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ði ənsin wɝld. ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz. weɪɾɪŋ dʒʌs ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə slip.

Egwene closed her eyes and tried to think sleepy thoughts, but she was too conscious of the thing lying between her breasts. Far more conscious than of any soreness remaining from her visit to Sheriam's study. The ring seemed to weigh as much as a brick, now, and thoughts of home and quiet pools of water all slid apart with remembrance of it. Of Tel'aran'rhiod. The Unseen World. The World of Dreams. Waiting just the other side of sleep.

nɪneɪiv bɪɡæn tə hʌm sɔfli. ɛɡwin ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ə neɪmləs, wɝdləs tun əɹ mʌðɝ juz tə hʌm tə hɝ wən ʃi wɑz lɪɾəl. wən ʃi wɑz laɪɪŋ ɪn bɛd, ɪn əɹ oʊn ɹum, wɪð ə flʌfi pɪloʊ, ən wɔɹm blæŋkəts, ən ðə mɪŋɡəl smɛlz ə ɹoʊz ɔɪl ən beɪkɪŋ fɹəm əɹ mʌðɝ, ænd. . . . ɹænd, ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt? pɛɹɪn? hu wɑz ʃi? slip keɪm.

Nynaeve began to hum softly. Egwene recognized a nameless, wordless tune her mother used to hum to her when she was little. When she was lying in bed, in her own room, with a fluffy pillow, and warm blankets, and the mingled smells of rose oil and baking from her mother, and. . . . Rand, are you all right? Perrin? Who was she? Sleep came.

ʃi stʊɾ əmʌŋ ɹoʊlɪŋ hɪlz kwɪltɪd wɪð waɪldflaʊɹz ən dɑɾəd wɪð smɔl θɪkəts ə lifi tʃɹiz ɪn ðə hɑloʊz ən ɑn ðə kɹɛsts. bʌɾɝflaɪz floʊɾəd əbʌv ðə blɑsəmz, wɪŋz flæʃɪŋ jɛloʊ ən blu ən ɡɹin, ən tu lɑɹks sæŋ tə itʃ ʌðɝ nɪɹbaɪ. dʒʌst ɪnʌf flʌfi waɪt klaʊdz dʒɹɪftəɾ ɪn ə sɑf blu skaɪ, ən ðə bɹiz hɛl ðət dɛləkət bæləns bɪtwin kul ən wɔɹm ðət keɪm oʊnli ə fju spɛʃəl deɪz ɪn spɹɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ə deɪ tu pɝfək tə bi ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ ə dʒɹim.

She stood among rolling hills quilted with wildflowers and dotted with small thickets of leafy trees in the hollows and on the crests. Butterflies floated above the blossoms, wings flashing yellow and blue and green, and two larks sang to each other nearby. Just enough fluffy white clouds drifted in a soft blue sky, and the breeze held that delicate balance between cool and warm that came only a few special days in spring. It was a day too perfect to be anything but a dream.

ʃi lʊkt əɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs, ən læf dɪlaɪɾɪdli. ɪɡzækli hɝ feɪvɹɪt ʃeɪɾ ə skaɪ-blu sɪlk, slæʃt wɪð waɪɾ ɪn ðə skɝt - ðət tʃeɪnʒd tə ɡɹin əz ʃi fɹaʊn moʊməntɛɹəli - soʊn wɪð ɹoʊz ə taɪni pɝlz daʊn ðə slivz ən əkɹɔs ðə bʊzəm. ʃi stʌk aʊɾ ə fʊt dʒʌs tə pik ət ðə toʊ ʌv ə vɛlvət slɪpɝ. ði oʊnli dʒɑɹɪŋ noʊt wɑz ðə twɪstəd ɹɪŋ ə mʌltikʌlɝd stoʊn hæŋɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk ɑn ə lɛðɝ kɔɹd.

She looked at her dress, and laughed delightedly. Exactly her favorite shade of sky-blue silk, slashed with white in the skirt - that changed to green as she frowned momentarily - sewn with rows of tiny pearls down the sleeves and across the bosom. She stuck out a foot just to peek at the toe of a velvet slipper. The only jarring note was the twisted ring of multicolored stone hanging around her neck on a leather cord.

ʃi tʊk ðə ɹɪŋ ɪn əɹ hæn ən ɡæspt. ɪt fɛlt əz laɪɾ əz ə fɛðɝ. ɪf ʃi tɔst ɪɾ ʌp, ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wəd dʒɹɪft əweɪ laɪk θɪsldaʊn. sʌmhaʊ, ʃi dɪd nɑt fil əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɪɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ʃi tʌkt ɪɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə nɛk ə hɝ dʒɹɛs tə ɡɛɾ ɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ.

She took the ring in her hand and gasped. It felt as light as a feather. If she tossed it up, she was sure it would drift away like thistledown. Somehow, she did not feel afraid of it any longer. She tucked it inside the neck of her dress to get it out of the way.

"soʊ ðɪs ɪz vɛɹɪnz tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd," ʃi sɛd. "kɔɹiənɪn nɪdilz wɝld ə dʒɹimz. ɪt dʌz nɑt lʊk deɪnʒɝəs tə mi." bʌt vɛɹɪn hæd sɛɾ ɪt wɑz. blæk ədʒɑ əɹ nɑt, ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt si haʊ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd tɛl ə laɪ ɹaɪɾ aʊt. ʃi kəd bi mɪsteɪkən. bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv vɛɹɪn wɑz.

"So this is Verin's Tel'aran'rhiod," she said. "Corianin Nedeal's World of Dreams. It does not look dangerous to me." But Verin had said it was. Black Ajah or not, Egwene did not see how any Aes Sedai could tell a lie right out. She could be mistaken. But she did not believe Verin was.

dʒʌs tə si ɪf ʃi kʊd, ʃi oʊpən hɝsɛlf tə ðə wʌn paʊɝ. seɪaɪdɑɹ fɪl hɝ. ivən hɪɹ, ɪt wɑz pɹɛzənt. ʃi tʃænəl ðə floʊ laɪtli, dɛləkətli, dɝɛktəɾ ɪɾ ɪndə ðə bɹiz, swɝlɪŋ bʌɾɝflaɪz ɪndə flʌɾɝɪŋ spaɪɹəlz ə kʌlɝ, ɪndə sɝkəlz lɪŋkt wɪð sɝkəlz.

Just to see if she could, she opened herself to the One Power. Saidar filled her. Even here, it was present. She channeled the flow lightly, delicately, directed it into the breeze, swirling butterflies into fluttering spirals of color, into circles linked with circles.

əbɹʌpli ʃi lɛɾ ɪt ɡoʊ. ðə bʌɾɝflaɪz sɛɾəld bæk, ʌnkənsɝn baɪ ðɛɹ bɹif ædvɛntʃɝ. mɹdʒɹɑl ən səm ʌðɝ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn kəd sɛns sʌmwʌn tʃænəlɪŋ. lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊnd, ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən sətʃ θɪŋz ɪn ðət pleɪs, bʌt dʒʌs kəz ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən əm dɪd nɑt min ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ðɛɹ. ən ðə blæk ədʒɑ hæɾ ɔl ðoʊz tɛɹæŋɡɹil stʌɾid baɪ kɔɹiənɪn nɪdil. ɪt wɑz ə sɪkənɪŋ ɹimaɪndɝ ʌv waɪ ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ.

Abruptly she let it go. The butterflies settled back, unconcerned by their brief adventure. Myrddraal and some other Shadowspawn could sense someone channeling. Looking around, she could not imagine such things in that place, but just because she could not imagine them did not mean they were not there. And the Black Ajah had all those ter'angreal studied by Corianin Nedeal. It was a sickening reminder of why she was there.

"æt list aɪ noʊ aɪ kən tʃænəl," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "aɪm nɑt lɝnɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ stændɪŋ hɪɹ. pɝhæps ɪf aɪ lʊk ɝaʊnd. . . ." ʃi tʊk ə stɛp . . .

"At least I know I can channel," she muttered. "I'm not learning anything standing here. Perhaps if I look around. . . ." She took a step . . .

. . . ən wɑz stændɪŋ ɪn ðə dæŋk, dɑɹk hɔlweɪ ʌv ən ɪn. ʃi wɑz ən ɪnkipɝz dɔɾɝ; ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ən ɪn. ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə saʊnd, ən ɔl ðə dɔɹz əlɔŋ ðə hɔl wɝ ʃʌt taɪt. dʒʌst əz ʃi wʌndɝɾ u wɑz bɪhaɪn ðə pleɪn wʊɾən dɔɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ɪt swʌŋ saɪlənli oʊpən.

. . . and was standing in the dank, dark hallway of an inn. She was an innkeeper's daughter; she was sure it was an inn. There was not a sound, and all the doors along the hall were shut tight. Just as she wondered who was behind the plain wooden door in front of her, it swung silently open.

ðə ɹum wɪðɪn wɑz bɛɹ, ən koʊld wɪn moʊn θɹu oʊpən wɪndoʊz, stɝɪŋ oʊld æʃ ɑn ðə hɑɹθ. ə bɪɡ dɔɡ leɪ kɝld ʌp ɑn ðə flɔɹ, ʃæɡi teɪl əkɹɔs ɪts noʊz, bɪtwin ðə dɔɹ ən ə θɪk pɪlɝ ə ɹʌf-kʌt, blæk stoʊn ðət stʊɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə flɔɹ. ə lɑɹdʒ, ʃæɡi-hɛɹd jʌŋ mæn sæt linɪŋ bæk əɡɛns ðə pɪlɝ ɪn oʊnli hɪz smɔlkloʊðz, hɛd lɑlɪŋ əz ɪf əslip. ə mæsɪv blæk tʃeɪn ɹæn ɝaʊn ðə pɪlɝ ən əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst, ði ɛnz ɡɹɪpt ɪn ɪz klɛntʃt hænz. əslip əɹ nɑt, hɪz hɛvi mʌsəlz stʃɹeɪn tə hoʊl ðət tʃeɪn taɪt, tə pɹɪzən hɪmsɛlf əɡɛns ðə pɪlɝ.

The room within was bare, and cold wind moaned through open windows, stirring old ash on the hearth. A big dog lay curled up on the floor, shaggy tail across its nose, between the door and a thick pillar of rough-cut, black stone that stood in the middle of the floor. A large, shaggy-haired young man sat leaning back against the pillar in only his smallclothes, head lolling as if asleep. A massive black chain ran around the pillar and across his chest, the ends gripped in his clenched hands. Asleep or not, his heavy muscles strained to hold that chain tight, to prison himself against the pillar.

"pɛɹɪn?" ʃi sɛd wʌndɝɪŋli. ʃi stɛpt ɪndə ðə ɹum. "pɛɹɪn, wʌts ðə mæɾɝ wɪð ju? pɛɹɪn!" ðə dɔɡ ʌnkɝld ɪtsɛlf ən stʊd.

"Perrin?" she said wonderingly. She stepped into the room. "Perrin, what's the matter with you? Perrin!" The dog uncurled itself and stood.

ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə dɔɡ, bʌɾ ə wʊlf, ɔl blæk ən ɡɹeɪ, lɪps kɝlɪŋ bæk fɹəm ɡlɪsnɪŋ waɪt tiθ, jɛloʊ aɪz ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ əɹ əz ðeɪ maɪɾ əv ə maʊs. ə maʊs ɪt mɛn tə it.

It was not a dog, but a wolf, all black and gray, lips curling back from glistening white teeth, yellow eyes regarding her as they might have a mouse. A mouse it meant to eat.

ɛɡwin stɛp bæk heɪstəli ɪndə ðə hɔl ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf. "pɛɹɪn! weɪk ʌp! ðɛɹz ə wʊlf!" vɛɹɪn hæd sɛd wʌt hæpən hɪɹ wɑz ɹil, ən ʃoʊd ðə skɑɹ tə pɹuv ɪt. ðə wʊlfs tiθ lʊkt əz bɪɡ əz naɪvz. "pɛɹɪn, weɪk ʌp! tɛl ɪɾ ɪm ə fɹɛnd!" ʃi ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ. ðə wʊlf stɔk nɪɹɝ.

Egwene stepped back hastily into the hall in spite of herself. "Perrin! Wake up! There's a wolf!" Verin had said what happened here was real, and showed the scar to prove it. The wolf's teeth looked as big as knives. "Perrin, wake up! Tell it I'm a friend!" She embraced saidar. The wolf stalked nearer.

pɛɹɪnz hɛd keɪm ʌp; hɪz aɪz oʊpən dʒɹaʊsəli. tu sɛts ə jɛloʊ aɪz ɹəɡɑɹɾəd hɝ. ðə wʊlf ɡæðɝd hɪmsɛlf. "hɑpɝ," pɛɹɪn ʃaʊɾəd, "noʊ! ɛɡwin!"

Perrin's head came up; his eyes opened drowsily. Two sets of yellow eyes regarded her. The wolf gathered himself. "Hopper," Perrin shouted, "no! Egwene!"

ðə dɔɹ swʌŋ ʃʌt bɪfɔɹ əɹ feɪs, ən toʊɾəl dɑɹknəs ɛnvɛləp hɝ.

The door swung shut before her face, and total darkness enveloped her.

ʃi kəd nɑt si, bʌt ʃi fɛl swɛt biɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ fɔɹhɛd. nɑt fɹəm hit. laɪt, wɛɹ æm aɪ? aɪ doʊn laɪk ðɪs pleɪs. aɪ wɑnə weɪk ʌp!

She could not see, but she felt sweat beading on her forehead. Not from heat. Light, where am I? I don't like this place. I want to wake up!

ə wɝɪŋ saʊnd, ən ʃi dʒʌmp bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ə kɹɪkət. ə fɹɑɡ ɡeɪv ə bæs kɹoʊk ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, ən ə kɔɹəs ænsɝɾ ɪt. əz əɹ aɪz ədæptəd, ʃi dɪmli meɪɾ aʊt tʃɹiz ɔl ɝaʊn hɝ. klaʊdz blæŋkəɾɪd ðə stɑɹz, ən ðə mun wɑz ə θɪn slɪvɝ.

A whirring sound, and she jumped before she recognized a cricket. A frog gave a bass croak in the darkness, and a chorus answered it. As her eyes adapted, she dimly made out trees all around her. Clouds blanketed the stars, and the moon was a thin sliver.

ɔf tə hɝ ɹaɪt θɹu ðə wʊdz wɑz ənʌðɝ ɡloʊ, flɪkɝɪŋ. ə kæmpfaɪɝ.

Off to her right through the woods was another glow, flickering. A campfire.

ʃi kənsɪɾɝd ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ muvɪŋ. wɑntɪŋ tə weɪk ʌp hæd nɑt bɪn ɪnʌf tə teɪk əɹ weɪ fɹəm tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ən ʃi stɪl hæd nɑt faʊn aʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl. ən ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn hɝɾ ɪn ɛni weɪ. soʊ fɑɹ, ʃi θɔt, ʃɪvɝɪŋ. bʌt ʃi hæd noʊ aɪdiə hu - əɹ wʌt - wɑz ət ðət kæmpfaɪɝ. ɪt kəd bi mɹdʒɹɑl. bɪsaɪdz, aɪm nɑt dʒɹɛs fəɹ ɹʌnɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪn ðə fɔɹəst. ɪt wɑz ðə læs θɔt ðət dɪsaɪɾɪd hɝ; ʃi pɹaɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf ɑn noʊɪŋ wən ʃi wɑz biɪŋ fulɪʃ.

She considered a moment before moving. Wanting to wake up had not been enough to take her way from Tel'aran'rhiod, and she still had not found out anything useful. And she had not been hurt in any way. So far, she thought, shivering. But she had no idea who - or what - was at that campfire. It could be Myrddraal. Besides, I'm not dressed for running around in the forest. It was the last thought that decided her; she prided herself on knowing when she was being foolish.

teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ʃi ɡæðɝɾ ʌp əɹ sɪlkən skɝts ən kɹɛp kloʊsɝ. ʃi maɪt nɑɾ əv nɪneɪivz skɪl ət wʊdkɹæft, bʌt ʃi nu ɪnʌf tə əvɔɪd stɛpɪŋ ɑn dɛd twɪɡz. ət læst ʃi pɪɹd kɛɹfəli ɝaʊn ðə tʃɹʌŋk ʌv ən oʊld oʊk ət ðə kæmpfaɪɝ.

Taking a deep breath, she gathered up her silken skirts and crept closer. She might not have Nynaeve's skill at woodcraft, but she knew enough to avoid stepping on dead twigs. At last she peered carefully around the trunk of an old oak at the campfire.

ði oʊnli wʌn ðəɹ wɑz ə tɔl jʌŋ mæn, sɪɾɪŋ ən stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə fleɪmz. ɹænd. ðoʊz fleɪmz dɪd nɑt bɝn wʊd. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt bɝn ɛniθɪŋ ðət ʃi kəd si. ðə faɪɝ dænst əbʌv ə bɛɹ pætʃ ʌv ɡɹaʊnd. ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ ivən skɔɹtʃt ðə sɔɪl.

The only one there was a tall young man, sitting and staring into the flames. Rand. Those flames did not burn wood. They did not burn anything that she could see. The fire danced above a bare patch of ground. She did not think they even scorched the soil.

bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd muv, ɹænd ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd. ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si hi wɑz smoʊkɪŋ ə paɪp, ə θɪn ɹɪbən ə təbæk smoʊk lɪftɪŋ fɹəm ðə boʊl. hi lʊk taɪɝd, soʊ vɛɹi taɪɝd.

Before she could move, Rand raised his head. She was surprised to see he was smoking a pipe, a thin ribbon of tabac smoke lifting from the bowl. He looked tired, so very tired.

"huz aʊt ðɛɹ?" hi dɪmændəd laʊdli. "juv ɹʌsəld ɪnʌf livz tə weɪk ðə dɛd, soʊ jə maɪɾ əz wɛl ʃoʊ jɝsɛlf."

"Who's out there?" he demanded loudly. "You've rustled enough leaves to wake the dead, so you might as well show yourself."

ɛɡwinz lɪps kəmpɹɛst, bʌt ʃi stɛpt aʊt. aɪ dɪd nɑt! "ɪts mi, ɹænd. də nɑt bi əfɹeɪd. ɪts ə dʒɹim. aɪ mʌs bi ɪn jəɹ dʒɹimz."

Egwene's lips compressed, but she stepped out. I did not! "It's me, Rand. Do not be afraid. It is a dream. I must be in your dreams."

hi wɑz ɑn ɪz fit soʊ sʌɾənli ðət ʃi stɑp dɛd. hi simd ɪn səm weɪ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd. ən ə tʌtʃ deɪnʒɝəs. pɝhæps mɔɹ ðən ə tʌtʃ. hɪz blu-ɡɹeɪ aɪz sim tə bɝn laɪk fɹoʊzən faɪɝ.

He was on his feet so suddenly that she stopped dead. He seemed in some way larger than she remembered. And a touch dangerous. Perhaps more than a touch. His blue-gray eyes seemed to burn like frozen fire.

"du jə θɪŋk aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪts ə dʒɹim?" hi snɪɹd. "aɪ noʊ ðət meɪks ɪt noʊ lɛs ɹil." hi stɛɹɾ æŋɡɹəli aʊɾ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs əz ɪf lʊkɪŋ fəɹ sʌmwʌn. "haʊ lɔŋ wɪl jə tʃɹaɪ?" hi ʃaʊɾəd ət ðə naɪt. "haʊ mɛni feɪsəz wɪl jə sɛnd? maɪ mʌðɝ, maɪ fɑðɝ, naʊ hɝ! pɹɪɾi ɡɝlz woʊn tɛmp mi wɪð ə kɪs, nɑɾ ivən wʌn aɪ noʊ! aɪ dɪnaɪ ju, fɑðɝ ə laɪz! aɪ dɪnaɪ ju!"

"Do you think I don't know it is a dream?" he sneered. "I know that makes it no less real." He stared angrily out into the darkness as if looking for someone. "How long will you try?" he shouted at the night. "How many faces will you send? My mother, my father, now her! Pretty girls won't tempt me with a kiss, not even one I know! I deny you, Father of Lies! I deny you!"

"ɹænd," ʃi sɛɾ ənsɝteɪnli. "ɪts ɛɡwin. aɪm ɛɡwin."

"Rand," she said uncertainly. "It's Egwene. I am Egwene."

ðəɹ wɑz ə sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz hænz, sʌɾənli, aʊɾ ə noʊwɛɹ. ɪts bleɪd wɑz wɝkt aʊɾ ʌv ə sɪŋɡəl fleɪm, slaɪtli kɝvd ən ɡɹeɪvən wɪð ə hɛɹən. "maɪ mʌðɝ ɡeɪv mi hʌnikeɪk," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs, "wɪð ðə smɛl ə pɔɪzən ɹæŋk ɑn ɪt. maɪ fɑðɝ hæɾ ə naɪf fəɹ maɪ ɹɪbz. ʃi - ʃi ɔfɝd kɪsəz, ən mɔɹ." swɛt slɪkt ɪz feɪs; hɪz stɛɹ simd ɪnʌf tə sɛɾ əɹ əfaɪɹ. "wʌt dʒju bɹɪŋ?"

There was a sword in his hands, suddenly, out of nowhere. Its blade was worked out of a single flame, slightly curved and graven with a heron. "My mother gave me honeycake," he said in a tight voice, "with the smell of poison rank on it. My father had a knife for my ribs. She - she offered kisses, and more." Sweat slicked his face; his stare seemed enough to set her afire. "What do you bring?"

"ju ɑɹ gɑnə lɪsən tə mi, ɹænd ælθɹ, ɪf aɪ hæv tə sɪɾ ɑn ju." ʃi ɡæðɝd seɪaɪdɑɹ, tʃænəl ðə floʊz tə meɪk ði ɛɹ hoʊld ɪm ɪn ə nɛt.

"You are going to listen to me, Rand al'Thor, if I have to sit on you." She gathered saidar, channeled the flows to make the air hold him in a net.

ðə sɔɹd spʌn ɪn ɪz hænz, ɹɔɹɪŋ laɪk ən oʊpən fɝnəs.

The sword spun in his hands, roaring like an open furnace.

ʃi ɡɹʌntɪɾ ən stæɡɝd; ɪt fɛlt əz ɪf ə ɹoʊp stʃɹɛtʃt tu taɪt hæd bɹoʊkən ən snæp bæk ɪndə hɝ.

She grunted and staggered; it felt as if a rope stretched too tight had broken and snapped back into her.

ɹænd læft. "aɪ lɝn, jə si. wən ɪt wɝks. . . ." hi ɡɹɪməst ən stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd hɝ. "aɪ kəd stæn ɛni feɪs bʌt ðət wʌn. nɑɾ əɹ feɪs, bɝn ju!" ðə sɔɹd flæʃt aʊt.

Rand laughed. "I learn, you see. When it works. . . ." He grimaced and started toward her. "I could stand any face but that one. Not her face, burn you!" The sword flashed out.

ɛɡwin flɛd.

Egwene fled.

ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ʃi dɪd, əɹ haʊ, bʌt ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf bæk əmʌŋ ðə ɹoʊlɪŋ hɪlz ʌndɝ ə sʌni skaɪ, wɪð lɑɹks sɪŋɪŋ ən bʌɾɝflaɪz pleɪɪŋ. ʃi dʒɹu ə dip, ʃʌɾɝɪŋ bɹɛθ.

She was not sure what it was she did, or how, but she found herself back among the rolling hills under a sunny sky, with larks singing and butterflies playing. She drew a deep, shuddering breath.

aɪv lɝnd. . . . wʌt? ðət ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz stɪl æftɝ ɹænd? aɪ nu ðəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. ðət meɪbi ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑns tə kɪl hɪm? ðæts dɪfɹənt. ənlɛs meɪbi hiz ɡɔn mæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi, ən dʌz nɑt noʊ wʌt hiz seɪɪŋ. laɪt, waɪ kʊdn aɪ hɛlp hɪm? oʊ, laɪt, ɹænd!

I've learned. . . . What? That the Dark One is still after Rand? I knew that already. That maybe the Dark One wants to kill him? That's different. Unless maybe he's gone mad already, and does not know what he is saying. Light, why couldn't I help him? Oh, Light, Rand!

ʃi tʊk ənʌðɝ lɔŋ bɹɛθ tə kɑm hɝsɛlf. "ði oʊnli weɪ tə hɛlp ɪm ɪz tə dʒɛntəl hɪm," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "æz wɛl ɡoʊ əhɛɾ ən kɪl hɪm." hɝ stʌmək twɪstəɾ ən nɑɾɪd. "aɪl nɛvɝ də ðæt. nɛvɝ!"

She took another long breath to calm herself. "The only way to help him is to gentle him," she muttered. "As well go ahead and kill him." Her stomach twisted and knotted. "I'll never do that. Never!"

ə ɹɛdbɝd hæd pɝtʃt ɑn ə klaʊdbɛɹi bʊʃ nɪɹbaɪ, kɹɛs lɪftɪŋ əz ɪt tɪltəɾ ɪts hɛd tə wɑtʃ əɹ kɔʃəsli. ʃi ədʒɹɛs ðə bɝd. "wɛl, aɪm nɑt hɛlpɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ stændɪŋ hɪɹ tɔkɪŋ tə maɪsɛlf, æm aɪ? əɹ tɔkɪŋ tə ju, iðɝ."

A redbird had perched on a cloudberry bush nearby, crest lifting as it tilted its head to watch her cautiously. She addressed the bird. "Well, I am not helping anything standing here talking to myself, am I? Or talking to you, either."

ðə ɹɛdbɝd tʊk wɪŋ əz ʃi stɛp təwɔɹd ðə bʊʃ. ɪt wɑz stɪl ə flæʃ ə kɹɪmzən əz ʃi tʊk ðə nɛkst stɛp, vænɪʃt ɪndə ə θɪkɪɾ əz ʃi tʊk ə θɝd.

The redbird took wing as she stepped toward the bush. It was still a flash of crimson as she took the next step, vanished into a thicket as she took a third.

ʃi stɑpt ən fɪʃt ðə stoʊn ɹɪŋ ɑn ɪts kɔɹɾ aʊɾ ə ðə fɹʌn ə hɝ dʒɹɛs. waɪ wɑz ɪt nɑt tʃeɪnʒɪŋ? ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæd tʃeɪnʒd soʊ fæst ʌp tɪl naʊ ðət ʃi kəd hɑɹdli kætʃ əɹ bɹɛθ. waɪ nɑt naʊ? ənlɛs ðəɹ wɑz səm ænsɝ ɹaɪt hɪɹ? ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊn ənsɝteɪnli. ðə waɪldflaʊɹz tɔntɪd hɝ, ən ðə lɑɹksɔŋ mɑk hɝ. ðɪs pleɪs sim tu mʌtʃ ə hɝ oʊn meɪkɪŋ.

She stopped and fished the stone ring on its cord out of the front of her dress. Why was it not changing? Everything had changed so fast up till now that she could hardly catch her breath. Why not now? Unless there was some answer right here? She looked around uncertainly. The wildflowers taunted her, and the larksong mocked her. This place seemed too much of her own making.

dɪtɝmənd, ʃi taɪɾənd əɹ hæn ɝaʊn ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. "teɪk mi wɛɹ aɪ nid tə bi." ʃi ʃʌɾ əɹ aɪz ən kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn ðə ɹɪŋ. ɪt wɑz stoʊn, æftɝ ɔl; ɝθ ʃəd ɡɪv əɹ səm filɪŋ fəɹ ɪt. "du ɪt. teɪk mi wɛɹ aɪ nid tə bi." wʌns əɡɛn ʃi ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ, fɛɾ ə tʃɹɪkəl ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪndə ðə ɹɪŋ. ʃi nu ɪt dɪd nɑt niɾ ɛni floʊ ʌv paʊɝ dɝɛktəɾ əɾ ɪt tə wɝk, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə də ɛniθɪŋ tə ɪt. oʊnli tə ɡɪv ɪt mɔɹ ə ðə paʊɝ tə juz. "teɪk mi tə wɛɹ aɪ kən faɪn ən ænsɝ. aɪ nid tə noʊ wʌt ðə blæk ədʒɑ wɑns. teɪk mi tə ði ænsɝ."

Determined, she tightened her hand around the ter'angreal. "Take me where I need to be." She shut her eyes and concentrated on the ring. It was stone, after all; Earth should give her some feeling for it. "Do it. Take me where I need to be." Once again she embraced saidar, fed a trickle of the One Power into the ring. She knew it did not need any flow of Power directed at it to work, and she did not try to do anything to it. Only to give it more of the Power to use. "Take me to where I can find an answer. I need to know what the Black Ajah wants. Take me to the answer."

"wɛl, juv faʊn jəɹ weɪ ət læst, tʃaɪld. ɔl sɔɹts ʌv ænsɝz hɪɹ."

"Well, you've found your way at last, child. All sorts of answers here."

ɛɡwinz aɪz snæpt oʊpən. ʃi stʊɾ ɪn ə ɡɹeɪt hɔl, ɪts væs doʊm silɪŋ səpɔɹɾəd baɪ ə fɔɹəst ə mæsɪv ɹɛdstoʊn kɑləmz. ən hæŋɪŋ ɪn mɪdɛɹ wɑz ə sɔɹɾ ə kɹɪstəl, ɡlimɪŋ ən spɑɹklɪŋ əz ɪt sloʊli ɹivɑlvd. ʃi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən, bʌt ʃi θɔɾ ɪt maɪt bi ðə sɔɹd ɹænd hæd bɪn ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ ɪn ðət dʒɹim. ðəɾ ʌðɝ dʒɹim. ðɪs ɔl fɛl soʊ ɹil, ʃi hæd tə kip ɹimaɪndɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɪt wɑz ə dʒɹim, tu.

Egwene's eyes snapped open. She stood in a great hall, its vast domed ceiling supported by a forest of massive redstone columns. And hanging in midair was a sword of crystal, gleaming and sparkling as it slowly revolved. She was not certain, but she thought it might be the sword Rand had been reaching for in that dream. That other dream. This all felt so real, she had to keep reminding herself it was a dream, too.

ən oʊld wʊmən stɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊz ə ðə kɑləm, bɛn ən hɑbəlɪŋ wɪð ə stɪk. ʌɡli dɪd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə dɪskɹaɪb hɝ. ʃi hæɾ ə boʊni, pɔɪntəd tʃɪn, ən ivən boʊniɝ, ʃɑɹpɝ noʊz, ən ɪt sim ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ wɔɹts ɡɹoʊɪŋ hɛɹz ɑn əɹ feɪs ðən ðəɹ wɑz feɪs.

An old woman stepped out of the shadows of the column, bent and hobbling with a stick. Ugly did not begin to describe her. She had a bony, pointed chin, an even bonier, sharper nose, and it seemed there were more warts growing hairs on her face than there was face.

"hu ɑɹ ju?" ɛɡwin sɛd. ði oʊnli pipəl ʃi hæd sin soʊ fɑɹ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd wɝ ðoʊz ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi nu, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi cʊɾə fɝɡɑɾən ðɪs pʊɹ oʊld wʊmən.

"Who are you?" Egwene said. The only people she had seen so far in Tel'aran'rhiod were those she already knew, but she did not think she could have forgotten this poor old woman.

"dʒʌs pʊɹ oʊl sɪlvi, maɪ leɪɾi," ði oʊld wʊmən kækəld. ət ðə seɪm taɪm ʃi mænədʒd ə stup ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn mɛn fəɹ ə kɝtsi, əɹ pɑsəbli ə kɹɪnʒ. "ju noʊ pʊɹ oʊl sɪlvi, maɪ leɪɾi. sɝv jəɹ fæmli feɪθfəli ɔl ðiz jɪɹz. dʌz ðɪs oʊl feɪs stɪl fɹaɪɾən ju? doʊn lɛɾ ɪt, maɪ leɪɾi. ɪt sɝvz mi, wən aɪ niɾ ɪt, əz ɡʊɾ əz ə pɹɪɾiɝ."

"Just poor old Silvie, my Lady," the old woman cackled. At the same time she managed a stoop that might have been meant for a curtsy, or possibly a cringe. "You know poor old Silvie, my Lady. Served your family faithfully all these years. Does this old face still frighten you? Don't let it, my Lady. It serves me, when I need it, as good as a prettier."

"ʌv kɔɹs, ɪt dʌz," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɪts ə stʃɹɔŋ feɪs. ə ɡʊd feɪs." ʃi hoʊp ðə wʊmən bɪlivd ɪt. huɛvɝ ðɪs sɪlvi wɑz, ʃi sim tə θɪŋk ʃi nu ɛɡwin. pɝhæps ʃi nu ænsɝz, tu. "sɪlvi, jə sɛd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt faɪndɪŋ ænsɝz hɪɹ."

"Of course, it does," Egwene said. "It's a strong face. A good face." She hoped the woman believed it. Whoever this Silvie was, she seemed to think she knew Egwene. Perhaps she knew answers, too. "Silvie, you said something about finding answers here."

"oʊ, juv kʌm tə ðə ɹaɪt pleɪs fəɹ ænsɝz, maɪ leɪɾi. ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn ɪz fʊl ʌv ænsɝz. ən sikɹəts. ðə haɪ lɔɹdz wəd nɑt bi pliz tə si əs hɪɹ, maɪ leɪɾi. oʊ, noʊ. nʌn bʌt ðə haɪ lɔɹdz ɛntɝ hɪɹ. ən sɝvəns, ʌv kɔɹs." ʃi ɡeɪv ə slaɪ, skɹitʃɪŋ læf. "ðə haɪ lɔɹdz doʊn swip ən mɑp. bʌɾ u siz ə sɝvənt?"

"Oh, you've come to the right place for answers, my Lady. The Heart of the Stone is full of answers. And secrets. The High Lords would not be pleased to see us here, my Lady. Oh, no. None but the High Lords enter here. And servants, of course." She gave a sly, screeching laugh. "The High Lords don't sweep and mop. But who sees a servant?"

"wʌt kaɪndə sikɹəts?"

"What kind of secrets?"

bʌt sɪlvi wɑz hɑbəlɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə kɹɪstəl sɔɹd. "plɑts," ʃi sɛɾ əz ɪf tə hɝsɛlf. "ɔl ə ðɛm pɹitɛndɪŋ tə sɝv ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, ən ɔl ðə waɪl plɑɾɪŋ ən plænɪŋ tə ɹɪɡeɪn wʌt ðeɪ lɔst. itʃ wʌn θɪŋkɪŋ i əɹ ʃiz ði oʊnli wʌn plɑɾɪŋ. ɪʃəml ɪz ə ful!"

But Silvie was hobbling toward the crystal sword. "Plots," she said as if to herself. "All of them pretending to serve the Great Lord, and all the while plotting and planning to regain what they lost. Each one thinking he or she is the only one plotting. Ishamael is a fool!"

"wʌt?" ɛɡwin sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "wʌt dɪd jə seɪ əbaʊɾ ɪʃəml?"

"What?" Egwene said sharply. "What did you say about Ishamael?"

ði oʊld wʊmən tɝn tə pɹizɛn ə kɹʊkəd, ɪnɡɹeɪʃieɪɾɪŋ smaɪl. "dʒʌst ə θɪŋ pʊɹ foʊks seɪ, maɪ leɪɾi. ɪt tɝnz ðə fɔɹseɪkənz paʊɝ, kɔlɪŋ əm fulz. meɪks jə fil ɡʊd, ən seɪf. ivən ðə ʃædoʊ kæn teɪk biɪŋ kɔld ə ful. tʃɹaɪ ɪt, maɪ leɪɾi. seɪ, bælzəmən ɪz ə ful!"

The old woman turned to present a crooked, ingratiating smile. "Just a thing poor folks say, my Lady. It turns the Forsaken's power, calling them fools. Makes you feel good, and safe. Even the Shadow can't take being called a fool. Try it, my Lady. Say, Ba'alzamon is a fool!"

ɛɡwinz lɪps twɪtʃt ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə smaɪl. "bælzəmən ɪz ə ful! jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt, sɪlvi." ɪɾ æktʃəli  dɪd fil ɡʊd, læfɪŋ ət ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ði oʊld wʊmən tʃʌkəld. ðə sɔɹd ɹivɑlv dʒʌs bɪɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. "sɪlvi, wʌɾ ɪz ðæt?"

Egwene's lips twitched on the edge of a smile. "Ba'alzamon is a fool! You are right, Silvie." It actually did feel good, laughing at the Dark One. The old woman chuckled. The sword revolved just beyond her shoulder. "Silvie, what is that?"

"kælændɝ, maɪ leɪɾi. jə noʊ ðæt, doʊn ju? ðə sɔɹd ðət kænɑt bi tʌtʃt." əbɹʌpli ʃi swʌŋ əɹ stɪk bɪhaɪn hɝ; ə fʊt fɹəm ðə sɔɹd, ðə stɪk stɑpt wɪð ə dʌl θwæk ən baʊndəd bæk. sɪlvi ɡɹɪnd waɪɾɝ. "ðə sɔɹd ðəɾ ɪz nɑɾ ə sɔɹd, ðoʊ ðɛɹz pɹɛʃəs fju noʊz wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz. bʌt nʌn kən tʌtʃ ɪt seɪv wʌn. ðeɪ sɔ tə ðæt, hu pʊɾ ɪt hɪɹ. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɪl hoʊl kælændɝ wʌn deɪ, ən pɹuv tə ðə wɝl hiz ðə dʒɹæɡən baɪ duɪŋ ɪt. ðə fɝs pɹuf, ɛniweɪ. luz θɝɪn kʌm bæk fəɹ ɔl ðə wɝl tə si, ən ɡɹɑvəl bɪfɔɹ. ɑ, ðə haɪ lɔɹdz doʊn laɪk hævɪŋ ɪt hɪɹ. ðeɪ laɪk nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə paʊɝ. ðeɪd ɹɪd ðɛmsɛlvz ʌv ɪt, ɪf ðeɪ kʊd. ɪf ðeɪ kʊd. aɪ səpoʊz ðɛɹz ʌðɝz wəd teɪk ɪt, ɪf ðeɪ kʊd. wʌt wʊdnt wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɡɪv, tə hoʊl kælændɝ?"

"Callandor, my Lady. You know that, don't you? The Sword That Cannot Be Touched." Abruptly she swung her stick behind her; a foot from the sword, the stick stopped with a dull thwack and bounded back. Silvie grinned wider. "The Sword That Is Not a Sword, though there's precious few knows what it is. But none can touch it save one. They saw to that, who put it here. The Dragon Reborn will hold Callandor one day, and prove to the world he's the Dragon by doing it. The first proof, anyway. Lews Therin come back for all the world to see, and grovel before. Ah, the High Lords don't like having it here. They like nothing to do with the Power. They'd rid themselves of it, if they could. If they could. I suppose there's others would take it, if they could. What wouldn't one of the Forsaken give, to hold Callandor?"

ɛɡwin stɛɹɾ ət ðə spɑɹklɪŋ sɔɹd. ɪf ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən wɝ tʃɹu, ɪf ɹænd wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən əz mɔɪɹeɪn kleɪmd, hi wəd wild ɪt wʌn deɪ, ðoʊ fɹəm ðə ɹɛst ʌv wʌt ʃi nu ʌv ðə pɹɑfəsiz kənsɝnɪŋ kælændɝ, ʃi kəd nɑt si haʊ ɪt kəɾ ɛvɝ kʌm tə bi. bʌɾ ɪf ðɛɹz ə weɪ tə teɪk ɪt, meɪbi ðə blæk ədʒɑ noʊz haʊ. ɪf ðeɪ noʊ ɪt, aɪ kən fɪɡjɝ ɪɾ aʊt.

Egwene stared at the sparkling sword. If the Prophecies of the Dragon were true, if Rand was the Dragon as Moiraine claimed, he would wield it one day, though from the rest of what she knew of the Prophecies concerning Callandor, she could not see how it could ever come to be. But if there's a way to take it, maybe the Black Ajah knows how. If they know it, I can figure it out.

kɔʃəsli, ʃi ɹitʃt aʊt wɪð ðə paʊɝ, pɹoʊbɪŋ ət wʌtɛvɝ hɛld ən ʃildɪd ðə sɔɹd. hɝ pɹoʊb tʌtʃt - sʌmθɪŋ - ən stɑpt. ʃi kəd sɛns wɪtʃ ə ðə faɪv paʊɝz hæd bɪn juz hɪɹ. ɛɹ, ən faɪɝ, ən spɪɹət. ʃi kəd tʃɹeɪs ði ɪntʃɹəkət wiv meɪd baɪ seɪaɪdɑɹ, sɛt wɪð ə stʃɹɛŋkθ ðəɾ əmeɪz hɝ. ðəɹ wɝ ɡæps ɪn ðət wiv, speɪsəz wɛɹ əɹ pɹoʊb ʃəd slaɪd θɹu. wən ʃi tʃɹaɪd, ɪt wɑz laɪk faɪɾɪŋ ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəs pɑɹɾ ə ðə wiv hɛɾ ɑn. ɪt hɪɾ əɹ ðɛn, wʌt ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɔɹs ə weɪ θɹu, ən ʃi lɛɾ əɹ pɹoʊb vænɪʃ. hæf ðət wɔl hæd bɪn woʊvən juzɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ; ði ʌðɝ hæf, ðə pɑɹt ʃi kəd nɑt sɛns əɹ tʌtʃ, hæd bɪn meɪd wɪð seɪɾɪn. ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɪt, ɪɡzækli - ðə wɔl wɑz ɔl ʌv wʌn pis - bʌɾ ɪt wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf. ə stoʊn wɔl stɑps ə blaɪnd wʊmən əz ʃʊɹli əz wʌn u kən si ɪt.

Cautiously, she reached out with the Power, probing at whatever held and shielded the sword. Her probe touched - something - and stopped. She could sense which of the Five Powers had been used here. Air, and Fire, and Spirit. She could trace the intricate weave made by saidar, set with a strength that amazed her. There were gaps in that weave, spaces where her probe should slide through. When she tried, it was like fighting the strongest part of the weave head on. It hit her then, what she was trying to force a way through, and she let her probe vanish. Half that wall had been woven using saidar; the other half, the part she could not sense or touch, had been made with saidin. That was not it, exactly - the wall was all of one piece - but it was close enough. A stone wall stops a blind woman as surely as one who can see it.

fʊtstɛps ɛkoʊɾ ɪn ðə dɪstəns. buts.

Footsteps echoed in the distance. Boots.

ɛɡwin kəd nɑt tɛl haʊ mɛni ðəɹ wɝ, əɹ fɹəm wɪtʃ dɝɛkʃən ðeɪ wɝ kʌmɪŋ, bʌt sɪlvi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən ɪmiɾiətli stɛɹɾ ɔf əmʌŋ ðə kɑləmz. "hiz kʌmɪŋ tə stɛɹ əɾ ɪɾ əɡɛn," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "əweɪk əɹ əslip, hi wɑns. . . ." ʃi sim tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛɡwin, ən pʊɾ ɑn ə wɝid smaɪl. "ju mʌs liv, naʊ, maɪ leɪɾi. hi mʌsnt faɪn jə hɪɹ, əɹ ivən noʊ juv bɪn."

Egwene could not tell how many there were, or from which direction they were coming, but Silvie gave a start and immediately stared off among the columns. "He's coming to stare at it again," she muttered. "Awake or asleep, he wants. . . ." She seemed to remember Egwene, and put on a worried smile. "You must leave, now, my Lady. He mustn't find you here, or even know you've been."

ɛɡwin wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi bækɪŋ ɪn əmʌŋ ðə kɑləmz, ən sɪlvi fɑloʊd, flæpɪŋ əɹ hænz ən weɪvɪŋ əɹ stɪk. "aɪ æm ɡoʊɪŋ, sɪlvi. aɪ dʒʌst əv tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə weɪ." ʃi fɪŋɡɝd ðə stoʊn ɹɪŋ. "teɪk mi bæk tə ðə hɪlz." nʌθɪŋ hæpənd. ʃi tʃænəld ə hɛɹlaɪk floʊ tə ðə ɹɪŋ. "teɪk mi bæk tə ðə hɪlz." ðə ɹɛdstoʊn kɑləmz stɪl sɝaʊndəd hɝ. ðə buts wɝ kloʊsɝ, kloʊs ɪnʌf nɑt tə bi swɑloʊɾ ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn ɛkoʊz ɛnimɔɹ.

Egwene was already backing in among the columns, and Silvie followed, flapping her hands and waving her stick. "I am going, Silvie. I just have to remember the way." She fingered the stone ring. "Take me back to the hills." Nothing happened. She channeled a hairlike flow to the ring. "Take me back to the hills." The redstone columns still surrounded her. The boots were closer, close enough not to be swallowed in their own echoes anymore.

"ju doʊnt noʊ ðə weɪ aʊt," sɪlvi sɛd flætli, ðən wɛn ɑn ɪn ə nɪɹ wɪspɝ, ɪnɡɹeɪʃieɪɾɪŋ ən mɑkɪŋ ət wʌns, ən oʊld ɹɪteɪnɝ u fɛlt ʃi kəd teɪk lɪbɝɾiz. "oʊ, maɪ leɪɾi, ðɪs ɪz ə deɪnʒɝəs pleɪs tə kʌm ɪntu, ɪf jə doʊnt noʊ ðə weɪ aʊt. kʌm, lɛt pʊɹ oʊl sɪlvi teɪk jə aʊt. pʊɹ oʊl sɪlvi wɪl tʌk jə seɪf ɪn jəɹ bɛd, maɪ leɪɾi." ʃi ɹæp boʊθ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ɛɡwin, ɝdʒɪŋ əɹ fɝðɝ fɹəm ðə sɔɹd. nɑt ðəɾ ɛɡwin niɾəd mʌtʃ ɝdʒɪŋ. ðə buts hæd stɑpt; hi - huɛvɝ i wɑz - wɑz pɹɑbli ɡeɪzɪŋ ət kælændɝ.

"You don't know the way out," Sylvie said flatly, then went on in a near whisper, ingratiating and mocking at once, an old retainer who felt she could take liberties. "Oh, my Lady, this is a dangerous place to come into, if you don't know the way out. Come, let poor old Silvie take you out. Poor old Silvie will tuck you safe in your bed, my Lady." She wrapped both arms around Egwene, urging her further from the sword. Not that Egwene needed much urging. The boots had stopped; he - whoever he was - was probably gazing at Callandor.

"dʒʌst ʃoʊ mi ðə weɪ," ɛɡwin wɪspɝd bæk. "ɔɹ tɛl mi. ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə pʊʃ." ði oʊld wʊmənz fɪŋɡɝz hæd sʌmhaʊ ɡɑɾən tæŋɡəld ɝaʊn ðə stoʊn ɹɪŋ. "doʊn tʌtʃ ðæt, sɪlvi."

"Just show me the way," Egwene whispered back. "Or tell me. There's no need to push." The old woman's fingers had somehow gotten tangled around the stone ring. "Don't touch that, Silvie."

"seɪf ɪn jəɹ bɛd."

"Safe in your bed."

peɪn ənaɪəleɪɾɪd ðə wɝld.

Pain annihilated the world.

wɪð ə θɹoʊt-ɹɛntʃɪŋ ʃɹik, ɛɡwin sæɾ ʌp ɪn ðə dɑɹk, swɛt ɹoʊlɪŋ daʊn əɹ feɪs. fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi hæd noʊ aɪdiə wɛɹ ʃi wɑz, ən dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. "oʊ, laɪt," ʃi moʊnd, "ðæt hɝt. oʊ, laɪt, ðət hɝt!" ʃi ɹæn əɹ hænz oʊvɝ hɝsɛlf, ʃʊɹ əɹ skɪn mʌs bi skɔɹɾ əɹ wɛl tə meɪk sətʃ ə bɝnɪŋ, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt faɪn ə mɑɹk.

With a throat-wrenching shriek, Egwene sat up in the dark, sweat rolling down her face. For a moment she had no idea where she was, and did not care. "Oh, Light," she moaned, "that hurt. Oh, Light, that hurt!" She ran her hands over herself, sure her skin must be scored or wealed to make such a burning, but she could not find a mark.

"wi ɑɹ hɪɹ," nɪneɪivz vɔɪs sɛd fɹəm ðə dɑɹknəs. "wɝ hɪɹ, ɛɡwin."

"We are here," Nynaeve's voice said from the darkness. "We're here, Egwene."

ɛɡwin θɹu hɝsɛlf təwɔɹd ðə vɔɪs ən ɹæpt əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊnd nɪneɪivz nɛk ɪn ʃɪɹ ɹɪlif. "oʊ, laɪt, aɪm bæk. laɪt, aɪm bæk."

Egwene threw herself toward the voice and wrapped her arms around Nynaeve's neck in sheer relief. "Oh, Light, I'm back. Light, I'm back."

"ɪleɪn," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"Elayne," Nynaeve said.

ɪn ə fju moʊməns wʌn ə ðə kændəlz wɑz ɡɪvɪŋ ə smɔl laɪt. ɪleɪn pɔzd wɪð ðə kændəl ɪn hæn ən ðə spɪl ʃi hæd lɪt wɪð flɪn ən stil ɪn ði ʌðɝ. ðən ʃi smaɪld, ən ɛvɹi kændəl ɪn ðə ɹum bɝst ɪndə fleɪm. ʃi stɑpt ət ðə wɑʃstæn ən keɪm bæk tə ðə bɛd wɪð ə kul, dæmp klɔθ tə wɑʃ ɛɡwinz feɪs.

In a few moments one of the candles was giving a small light. Elayne paused with the candle in hand and the spill she had lit with flint and steel in the other. Then she smiled, and every candle in the room burst into flame. She stopped at the washstand and came back to the bed with a cool, damp cloth to wash Egwene's face.

"wɑz ɪt bæd?" ʃi æskt wɝidli. "ju nɛvɝ stɝd. jə nɛvɝ mʌmbəld. wi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ tə weɪk jə əɹ nɑt."

"Was it bad?" she asked worriedly. "You never stirred. You never mumbled. We did not know whether to wake you or not."

hɝidli, ɛɡwin fʌmbəl ðə lɛðɝ kɔɹd fɹəm ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk ən hɝld ɪɾ ən ðə stoʊn ɹɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɹum. "nɛks taɪm," ʃi pæntɪd, "wi dɪsaɪɾ ɑn ə taɪm, ən jə weɪk mi æftɝ ɪt. weɪk mi ɪf juv tə stɪk maɪ hɛɾ ɪn ə beɪsən ʌv wɔɾɝ!" ʃi hæd nɑt ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd ðəɹ wəd bi ə nɛks taɪm. wəd jə pʊt jəɹ hɛɾ ɪn ə bɛɹz maʊθ dʒʌs tə ʃoʊ jə wɝn əfɹeɪd? wəd jə də ɪt twaɪs dʒʌs kəz jud dʌn ɪt wʌns ən dɪdn daɪ?

Hurriedly, Egwene fumbled the leather cord from around her neck and hurled it and the stone ring across the room. "Next time," she panted, "we decide on a time, and you wake me after it. Wake me if you have to stick my head in a basin of water!" She had not realized that she had decided there would be a next time. Would you put your head in a bear's mouth just to show you weren't afraid? Would you do it twice just because you'd done it once and didn't die?

jɛɾ ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən ə mæɾɝ ə pɹuvɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf ðət ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪd. ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪd, ən nu ɪt. bʌt soʊ lɔŋ əz ðə blæk ədʒɑ hæd ðoʊz tɛɹæŋɡɹil kɔɹiənɪn hæd stʌɾid, ʃi wəɾ əv tə kip ɡoʊɪŋ bæk. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ði ænsɝ tə waɪ ðeɪ wɑntəɾ əm leɪ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ɪf ʃi kəd faɪn ænsɝz əbaʊt ðə blæk ədʒɑ ðəɹ - pɝhæps ʌðɝ ænsɝz, tu, ɪf hæf wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn toʊld əbaʊt dʒɹimɪŋ wɝ tʃɹu - ʃi hæd tə ɡoʊ bæk. "bʌt nɑt tənaɪt," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "nɑt jɛt."

Yet it was more than a matter of proving to herself that she was not afraid. She was afraid, and knew it. But so long as the Black Ajah had those ter'angreal Corianin had studied, she would have to keep going back. She was sure the answer to why they wanted them lay in Tel'aran'rhiod. If she could find answers about the Black Ajah there - perhaps other answers, too, if half what she had been told about Dreaming were true - she had to go back. "But not tonight," she said softly. "Not yet."

"wʌt hæpənd?" nɪneɪiv æskt. "wʌt dɪd jə . . . dʒɹim?"

"What happened?" Nynaeve asked. "What did you . . . dream?"

ɛɡwin leɪ bæk ɑn ðə bɛɾ ən toʊl ðɛm. ʌv ɪɾ ɔl, ði oʊnli θɪŋ ʃi lɛft aʊt wɑz əbaʊt pɛɹɪn tɔkɪŋ tə ðə wʊlf. ʃi lɛf ðə wʊlf aʊɾ ɔltəɡɛðɝ. ʃi fɛlt ə lɪɾəl ɡɪlti əbaʊt kipɪŋ sikɹəts fɹəm ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz pɛɹɪnz sikɹət tə tɛl, wən ən ɪf i tʃoʊz, nɑt hɝz. ðə ɹɛst ʃi ɡeɪv əm wɝd fəɹ wɝd, dɪskɹaɪbɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. wən ʃi wɑz dʌn, ʃi fɛlt ɛmptid.

Egwene lay back on the bed and told them. Of it all, the only thing she left out was about Perrin talking to the wolf. She left the wolf out altogether. She felt a little guilty about keeping secrets from Elayne and Nynaeve, but it was Perrin's secret to tell, when and if he chose, not hers. The rest she gave them word for word, describing everything. When she was done, she felt emptied.

"əsaɪd fɹəm biɪŋ taɪɝd," ɪleɪn sɛd, "dɪɾ i lʊk hɝt? ɛɡwin, aɪ kænɑt bɪliv i wəɾ ɛvɝ hɝt ju. aɪ kænɑt bɪliv i wʊd."

"Aside from being tired," Elayne said, "did he look hurt? Egwene, I cannot believe he would ever hurt you. I cannot believe he would."

"ɹænd," nɪneɪiv sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "wɪl əv tə lʊk æftɝ hɪmsɛlf əwaɪl lɔŋɡɝ." ɪleɪn blʌʃt; ʃi lʊk pɹɪɾi duɪŋ ɪt. ɛɡwin ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪleɪn lʊk pɹɪɾi duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ, ivən kɹaɪɪŋ, əɹ skɹʌbɪŋ pɑts. "kælændɝ," nɪneɪiv kəntɪnjud. "ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn. ðət wɑz mɑɹkt ɑn ðə plæn. aɪ θɪŋk wi noʊ wɛɹ ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɪz."

"Rand," Nynaeve said dryly, "will have to look after himself awhile longer." Elayne blushed; she looked pretty doing it. Egwene realized that Elayne looked pretty doing anything, even crying, or scrubbing pots. "Callandor," Nynaeve continued. "The Heart of the Stone. That was marked on the plan. I think we know where the Black Ajah is."

ɪleɪn hæd ɹiɡeɪn əɹ pɔɪz. "ɪt dʌz nɑt tʃeɪnʒ ðə tʃɹæp," ʃi sɛd. "ɪf ɪts nɑɾ ə daɪvɝʒən, ɪts ə tʃɹæp."

Elayne had regained her poise. "It does not change the trap," she said. "If it is not a diversion, it is a trap."

nɪneɪiv smaɪld ɡɹɪmli. "ðə bɛst weɪ tə kætʃ huɛvɝ sɛɾ ə tʃɹæp ɪz tə spɹɪŋ ɪɾ ən weɪt fəɹ ɪm tə kʌm. əɹ hɝ, ɪn ðɪs ɪnstəns."

Nynaeve smiled grimly. "The best way to catch whoever set a trap is to spring it and wait for him to come. Or her, in this instance."

"ju min ɡoʊ tə tɛɹ?" ɛɡwin sɛd, ən nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd.

"You mean go to Tear?" Egwene said, and Nynaeve nodded.

"ði æmɪɝlɪn əz kʌɾ əs lus, ɪt simz. wi meɪk əɹ oʊn dɪsɪʒənz, ɹɪmɛmbɝ? ət list wi noʊ ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɪz ɪn tiɹ, ən wi noʊ hu tə lʊk fəɹ ðɛɹ. hɪɹ, ɔl wi kən də ɪz sɪɾ ən stu ɪn əɹ oʊn səspɪʃənz ʌv ɛvɹibɑɾi, wʌndɝ ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ənʌðɝ ɡɹeɪ mæn aʊt ðɛɹ. aɪ wəd ɹæðɝ bi ðə haʊn ðən ðə ɹæbət."

"The Amyrlin has cut us loose, it seems. We make our own decisions, remember? At least we know the Black Ajah is in Tear, and we know who to look for there. Here, all we can do is sit and stew in our own suspicions of everybody, wonder if there is another Gray Man out there. I would rather be the hound than the rabbit."

"aɪ hæv tə ɹaɪt tə maɪ mʌðɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd. wən ʃi sɔ ðə lʊks ðeɪ ɡeɪv hɝ, hɝ vɔɪs bɪkeɪm dɪfɛnsɪv. "aɪ hæv ɔlɹɛɾi vænɪʃt wʌns wɪθaʊɾ əɹ noʊɪŋ wɛɹ aɪ wɑz. ɪf aɪ də ɪɾ əɡɛn. . . . jə də nɑt noʊ mʌðɝz tɛmpɝ. ʃi kəd sɛnd ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn ən ðə hoʊl ɑɹmi əɡɛns tɑɹ vəlɑn. əɹ hʌntɪŋ æftɝ ʌs."

"I have to write to my mother," Elayne said. When she saw the looks they gave her, her voice became defensive. "I have already vanished once without her knowing where I was. If I do it again. . . . You do not know Mother's temper. She could send Gareth Bryne and the whole army against Tar Valon. Or hunting after us."

"ju kəd steɪ hɪɹ," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"You could stay here," Egwene said.

"noʊ. əl nɑt lɛt jə tu ɡoʊ əloʊn. ən aɪ woʊn steɪ hɪɹ wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ðə sɪstɝ titʃɪŋ mi ɪz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, əɹ ɪf ðə nɛkst ɡɹeɪ mæn wɪl kʌm æftɝ mi." ʃi ɡeɪv ə smɔl læf. "aɪ wɪl nɑt wɝk ɪn ðə kɪtʃənz waɪl jə tu ɑɹ ɔf ædvɛntʊɹɪŋ, iðɝ. aɪ dʒʌst əv tə tɛl maɪ mʌðɝ ðən aɪm aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪnz ɔɹɾɝz, soʊ ʃi woʊn bɪkʌm fjʊɹiəs ɪf ʃi hɪɹz ɹumɝz. aɪ də nɑɾ əv tə tɛl əɹ wɛɹ wəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ, əɹ waɪ."

"No. I will not let you two go alone. And I won't stay here wondering if the sister teaching me is a Darkfriend, or if the next Gray Man will come after me." She gave a small laugh. "I will not work in the kitchens while you two are off adventuring, either. I just have to tell my mother than I am out of the Tower on the Amyrlin's orders, so she won't become furious if she hears rumors. I do not have to tell her where we are going, or why."

"ju ʃʊɹli hæd bɛɾɝ nɑt," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ʃi vɛɹi laɪkli wəd kʌm æftɝ jə ɪf ʃi nu əbaʊt ðə blæk ədʒɑ. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, jə kænt noʊ haʊ mɛni hænz jəɹ lɛɾɝ wɪl pæs θɹu bɪfɔɹ ɪt ɹitʃəz hɝ, əɹ wʌɾ aɪz maɪt ɹɛɾ ɪt. bɛs nɑt tə seɪ ɛniθɪŋ jə doʊn maɪn ɛniwʌn noʊɪŋ."

"You surely had better not," Nynaeve said. "She very likely would come after you if she knew about the Black Ajah. For that matter, you can't know how many hands your letter will pass through before it reaches her, or what eyes might read it. Best not to say anything you don't mind anyone knowing."

"ðæts ənʌðɝ θɪŋ." ɪleɪn saɪd. "ði æmɪɝlɪn dʌz nɑt noʊ aɪm wʌn ə ju. aɪ hæv tə faɪn səm weɪ tə sɛn ɪt wɪð noʊ tʃæns ə hɝ siɪŋ ɪt."

"That's another thing." Elayne sighed. "The Amyrlin does not know I am one of you. I have to find some way to send it with no chance of her seeing it."

"aɪ wɪl əv tə θɪŋk ɑn ðæt." nɪneɪivz bɹaʊz fɝoʊd. "pɝhæps wʌns wɝ ɑn əɹ weɪ. jə kəd liv ɪɾ əɾ ɑɹɪŋɡəl ɑn ðə weɪ daʊnɹɪvɝ, ɪf wɪv taɪm tə faɪn sʌmwʌn ðəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn. ə saɪɾ ʌv wʌn ə ðoʊz peɪpɝz ði æmɪɝlɪn ɡeɪv əs maɪt kənvɪns sʌmbɑɾi. wɪl əv tə hoʊp ðeɪ wɝk ɑn ʃɪp kæptənz, tu, ənlɛs wʌn ə jə hæz mɔɹ kɔɪn ðən aɪ hæv." ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd doʊlfəli.

"I will have to think on that." Nynaeve's brows furrowed. "Perhaps once we're on our way. You could leave it at Aringill on the way downriver, if we have time to find someone there going to Caemlyn. A sight of one of those papers the Amyrlin gave us might convince somebody. We will have to hope they work on ship captains, too, unless one of you has more coin than I have." Elayne shook her head dolefully.

ɛɡwin dɪd nɑɾ ivən bɑðɝ. wʌt mʌni ðeɪ hæd pəzɛs hæɾ ɔl ɡɔn ɑn ðə dʒɝni fɹəm toʊmən hɛd, ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju kɑpɝz itʃ. "wɛn. . . ." ʃi hæd tə stɑp ən klɪɹ əɹ θɹoʊt. "wɛn də wi liv? tənaɪt?"

Egwene did not even bother. What money they had possessed had all gone on the journey from Toman Head, except for a few coppers each. "When. . . ." She had to stop and clear her throat. "When do we leave? Tonight?"

nɪneɪiv lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wɝ kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ɪt fəɹ ə moʊmənt, bʌt ðən ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ju nid slip, æftɝ. . . ." hɝ dʒɛstʃɝ tʊk ɪn ðə stoʊn ɹɪŋ laɪɪŋ wɛɹ ɪt hæd baʊnst ɔf ðə wɔl. "wi wɪl ɡɪv ði æmɪɝlɪn wʌn mɔɹ tʃæns tə sik əs aʊt. wən wi fɪnɪʃ wɪð bɹɛkfəst, jə boʊθ pæk wʌt jə wɑnə teɪk, bʌt kip ɪt laɪt. wɪv tə liv ðə taʊɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɛniwʌn noʊɾɪsɪŋ, ɹɪmɛmbɝ. ɪf ði æmɪɝlɪn dʌzn ɹitʃ əs baɪ mɪddeɪ, aɪ min tə bi ɑn ə tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ʃɪp, ʃʌvɪŋ ðət peɪpɝ daʊn ðə kæptənz θɹoʊɾ ɪf nid bi, bɪfɔɹ pɹaɪm saʊnz. haʊ dʌz ðət saʊn tə jə tu?"

Nynaeve looked as if she were considering it for a moment, but then she shook her head. "You need sleep, after. . . ." Her gesture took in the stone ring lying where it had bounced off the wall. "We will give the Amyrlin one more chance to seek us out. When we finish with breakfast, you both pack what you want to take, but keep it light. We have to leave the Tower without anyone noticing, remember. If the Amyrlin doesn't reach us by midday, I mean to be on a trading ship, shoving that paper down the captain's throat if need be, before Prime sounds. How does that sound to you two?"

"ɪt saʊnz ɛksələnt," ɪleɪn sɛd fɝmli, ən ɛɡwin sɛd, "tənaɪɾ əɹ təmɑɹoʊ, ðə sunɝ ðə bɛɾɝ, əz fɑɹ əz aɪ kən si." ʃi wɪʃt ʃi saʊndəɾ əz kɑnfəɾənt əz ɪleɪn.

"It sounds excellent," Elayne said firmly, and Egwene said, "Tonight or tomorrow, the sooner the better, as far as I can see." She wished she sounded as confident as Elayne.

"ðɛn wi hæd bɛst ɡɛt səm slip."

"Then we had best get some sleep."

"nɪneɪiv," ɛɡwin sɛɾ ɪn ə smɔl vɔɪs, "aɪ. . . . aɪ doʊnt wɑnə bi əloʊn tənaɪt." ɪt peɪn əɹ tə meɪk ðəɾ ædmɪʃən.

"Nynaeve," Egwene said in a small voice, "I. . . . I don't want to be alone tonight." It pained her to make that admission.

"aɪ doʊnt, iðɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ kip θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə soʊlləs. aɪ də nɑt noʊ waɪ, bʌt ðeɪ fɹaɪɾən mi ivən mɔɹ ðən ðə blæk ədʒɑ."

"I don't, either," Elayne said. "I keep thinking about the Soulless. I do not know why, but they frighten me even more than the Black Ajah."

"aɪ səpoʊz," nɪneɪiv sɛd sloʊli, "aɪ doʊn ɹɪli wɑnə bi əloʊn, maɪsɛlf." ʃi aɪd ðə bɛd wɛɹ ɛɡwin leɪ. "ðæt lʊks bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ θɹi, ɪf ɛvɹibɑɾi kips əɹ ɛlboʊz tə hɝsɛlf."

"I suppose," Nynaeve said slowly, "I don't really want to be alone, myself." She eyed the bed where Egwene lay. "That looks big enough for three, if everybody keeps her elbows to herself."

leɪɾɝ, wən ðeɪ wɝ ʃɪftɪŋ əbaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ə weɪ tə laɪ ðət dɪd nɑt fil soʊ kɹaʊɾəd, nɪneɪiv sʌɾənli læft.

Later, when they were shifting about trying to find a way to lie that did not feel so crowded, Nynaeve suddenly laughed.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" ɛɡwin æskt. "ju ɑɹ nɑt ðət tɪkəlɪʃ."

"What is it?" Egwene asked. "You are not that ticklish."

"aɪ dʒʌs θɔɾ ə sʌmwʌn hud bi hæpi tə kæɹi ɪleɪnz lɛɾɝ fəɹ hɝ. hæpi tə liv tɑɹ vəlɑn, tu. ɪn fækt, aɪd bɛɾ ɑn ɪt."

"I just thought of someone who'd be happy to carry Elayne's letter for her. Happy to leave Tar Valon, too. In fact, I'd bet on it."


tʃæptɝ twɛntieɪt


CHAPTER 28

eɪ weɪ aʊt


A Way Out

klæɾ oʊnli ɪn ɪz bɹitʃɪz, mæt wɑz dʒʌs fɪnɪʃɪŋ ə snæk æftɝ bɹɛkfəst - səm hæm, θɹi æpəlz, bɹɛd, ən bʌɾɝ - wən ðə dɔɹ ə hɪz ɹum oʊpənd, ən nɪneɪiv, ɛɡwin, ən ɪleɪn faɪld ɪn, ɔl smaɪlɪŋ əɾ ɪm bɹaɪtli. hi ɡɑɾ ʌp fəɹ ə ʃɝt, ðən stʌbɝnli sæt daʊn əɡɛn. ðeɪ kəɾ ət list əv nɑkt. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə si ðɛɹ feɪsəz. ət fɝst, ɪt wɑz.

Clad only in his breeches, Mat was just finishing a snack after breakfast - some ham, three apples, bread, and butter - when the door of his room opened, and Nynaeve, Egwene, and Elayne filed in, all smiling at him brightly. He got up for a shirt, then stubbornly sat down again. They could at least have knocked. In any case, it was good to see their faces. At first, it was.

"wɛl, jə də lʊk bɛɾɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"Well, you do look better," Egwene said.

"æz ɪf jə hæd hæɾ ə mʌnθ ʌv ɡʊd fuɾ ən ɹɛst," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"As if you had had a month of good food and rest," Elayne said.

nɪneɪiv pɹɛst ə hæn tə hɪz fɔɹhɛd. hi flɪntʃt bɪfɔɹ i ɹɪkɔl ðət ʃi hæd dʌn mʌtʃ ðə seɪm fəɹ ət lis faɪv jɪɹz, bæk hoʊm. ʃi wɑz dʒʌs ðə wɪzdəm ðɛn, hi θɔt. ʃi wɑznt wɛɹɪŋ ðət ɹɪŋ.

Nynaeve pressed a hand to his forehead. He flinched before he recalled that she had done much the same for at least five years, back home. She was just the Wisdom then, he thought. She wasn't wearing that ring.

ʃi hæd noʊɾəst ɪz flɪntʃ. ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə taɪt smaɪl. "ju lʊk ɹɛɾi tə bi ʌp ən əbaʊt, tə mi. ɑɹ jə taɪɝɾ ə biɪŋ kupt ʌp, jɛt? jə nɛvɝ kəd stæn tu deɪz ɪn ə ɹoʊ ɪndɔɹz."

She had noticed his flinch. She gave him a tight smile. "You look ready to be up and about, to me. Are you tired of being cooped up, yet? You never could stand two days in a row indoors."

hi aɪd ðə læst æpəl kɔɹ ɹɪlʌktənli, ðən dʒɹɑpt ɪt bæk ɑn ðə pleɪt. ɔlmoʊst, hi stɑɹɾəd tə lɪk ðə dʒus ɔf ɪz fɪŋɡɝz, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɔl θɹi lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. ən stɪl smaɪlɪŋ. hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsaɪd wɪtʃ ə ðɛm wɑz pɹɪɾiəst, ən kəd nɑt. hæd ðeɪ bɪn ɛnibəɾi bʌɾ u - ən wʌt - ðeɪ wɝ, hi wʊɾə æskt ɛni ən ɔl ə ðɛm tə dæns ə dʒɪɡ əɹ ə ɹil. hi hæd dænst wɪð ɛɡwin ɔfən ɪnʌf, bæk hoʊm, ən ivən wʌns wɪð nɪneɪiv, bʌt ðət simd ə lɔŋ taɪm əɡoʊ.

He eyed the last apple core reluctantly, then dropped it back on the plate. Almost, he started to lick the juice off his fingers, but they were all three looking at him. And still smiling. He realized he was trying to decide which of them was prettiest, and could not. Had they been anybody but who - and what - they were, he would have asked any and all of them to dance a jig or a reel. He had danced with Egwene often enough, back home, and even once with Nynaeve, but that seemed a long time ago.

" 'wʌn pɹɪɾi wʊmən minz fʌn ət ðə dæns. tu pɹɪɾi wɪmən min tʃɹʌbəl ɪn ðə haʊs. θɹi pɹɪɾi wɪmən min ɹʌn fəɹ ðə hɪlz.' " hi ɡeɪv nɪneɪiv ən ivən taɪɾɝ smaɪl ðən əɹ oʊn. "maɪ dɑ juz tə seɪ ðæt. jəɹ ʌp tə sʌmθɪŋ, nɪneɪiv. jə ɑɹ ɔl smaɪlɪŋ laɪk kæts stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ə fɪntʃ kɑɾ ɪn ə θɔɹnbʊʃ, ən aɪ θɪŋk aɪm ðə fɪntʃ."

" 'One pretty woman means fun at the dance. Two pretty women mean trouble in the house. Three pretty women mean run for the hills.' " He gave Nynaeve an even tighter smile than her own. "My da used to say that. You're up to something, Nynaeve. You are all smiling like cats staring at a finch caught in a thornbush, and I think I am the finch."

ðə smaɪlz flɪkɝɾ ən vænɪʃt. hi noʊɾəst ðɛɹ hænz ən wʌndɝd waɪ ðeɪ ɔl lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn wɑʃɪŋ dɪʃəz. ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ ʃʊɹli nɛvɝ wɑʃt ə dɪʃ, ən i hæɾ əz hɑɹɾ ə taɪm ɪmædʒənɪŋ nɪneɪiv əɾ ɪt, ivən noʊɪŋ ʃi hæd dʌn əɹ oʊn bæk ɪn ɛmənz fild. ðeɪ ɔl θɹi wɔɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋz, naʊ. ðət wɑz nu. ən nɑɾ ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli plɛzən sɝpɹaɪz. laɪt, ɪt hæd tə hæpən sʌmtaɪm. ɪts nʌn ə maɪ bɪznəs, ən ðəɾ ɪz ɔl ðəɹ ɪz tə ɪt. nʌn ə maɪ bɪznəs. ɪt dʒʌst ɪzənt.

The smiles flickered and vanished. He noticed their hands and wondered why they all looked as if they had been washing dishes. The Daughter-Heir of Andor surely never washed a dish, and he had as hard a time imagining Nynaeve at it, even knowing she had done her own back in Emond's Field. They all three wore Great Serpent rings, now. That was new. And not a particularly pleasant surprise. Light, it had to happen sometime. It's none of my business, and that is all there is to it. None of my business. It just isn't.

ɛɡwin ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, bʌɾ ɪt simd əz mʌtʃ fəɹ ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən əz fəɹ hɪm. "aɪ toʊl jə wi ʃəɾ æsk ɪm stʃɹeɪɾ aʊt. hiz stʌbɝn əz ɛni mjul wən i wɑns tə bi, ən tʃɹɪksəm əz ə kæt. jə ɑɹ, mæt. jə noʊ ɪt, soʊ stɑp fɹaʊnɪŋ."

Egwene shook her head, but it seemed as much for the other two women as for him. "I told you we should ask him straight out. He's stubborn as any mule when he wants to be, and tricksome as a cat. You are, Mat. You know it, so stop frowning."

hi pʊɾ ɪz ɡɹɪn bæk kwɪkli.

He put his grin back quickly.

"hʌʃ, ɛɡwin," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "mæt, dʒʌs kəz wi wɑnə æsk jə ə feɪvɝ dʌz nɑt min wi doʊn kɛɹ haʊ jə fil. wi də kɛɹ, ən jə noʊ ðæt, ənlɛs jəɹ biɪŋ ivən mɔɹ wʊl-hɛɾəd ðən juʒəwəl. ɑɹ jə wɛl? jə lʊk ɹɪmɑɹkəbli wɛl kəmpɛɹd tə haʊ aɪ læst sɔ ju. ɪt ɹɪli dʌz lʊk mɔɹ laɪk ə mʌnθ ðən tu deɪz."

"Hush, Egwene," Nynaeve said. "Mat, just because we want to ask you a favor does not mean we don't care how you feel. We do care, and you know that, unless you're being even more wool-headed than usual. Are you well? You look remarkably well compared to how I last saw you. It really does look more like a month than two days."

"aɪm ɹɛɾi tə ɹʌn tɛn maɪlz ən dæns ə dʒɪɡ ət ði ɛn ʌv ɪt." hɪz stʌmək ɡɹaʊld, ɹimaɪndɪŋ ɪm haʊ lɔŋ ɪt wɑz tə mɪddeɪ jɛt, bʌɾ i ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪt, ən hoʊp ðeɪ hæd nɑt noʊɾəst. hi ɔlmoʊs dɪd fil əz ɪf i hæd hæɾ ə mʌnθ ə ɹɛst ən fud. ən hæd hæd wʌn mil ɪn ðə læs deɪ. "wʌt feɪvɝ?" hi æsk səspɪʃəsli. nɪneɪiv dɪd nɑɾ æsk feɪvɝz, ɪn ɪz ɹɛkəlɛkʃən; nɪneɪiv toʊl pipəl wʌt tə də ən ɪkspɛktəd tə si ɪt dʌn.

"I'm ready to run ten miles and dance a jig at the end of it." His stomach growled, reminding him how long it was to midday yet, but he ignored it, and hoped they had not noticed. He almost did feel as if he had had a month of rest and food. And had had one meal in the last day. "What favor?" he asked suspiciously. Nynaeve did not ask favors, in his recollection; Nynaeve told people what to do and expected to see it done.

"aɪ wɑn jə tə kæɹi ə lɛɾɝ fəɹ mi," ɪleɪn sɛd bɪfɔɹ nɪneɪiv kəd spik. "tə maɪ mʌðɝ, ɪn keɪɛmlɪn." ʃi smaɪld, meɪkɪŋ ə dɪmpəl ɪn əɹ tʃik. "aɪ wəɾ əpɹiʃieɪɾ ɪt soʊ vɛɹi mʌtʃ, mæt." ðə mɔɹnɪŋ laɪt θɹu ðə wɪndoʊz sim tə pɪk aʊt haɪlaɪts ɪn əɹ hɛɹ.

"I want you to carry a letter for me," Elayne said before Nynaeve could speak. "To my mother, in Caemlyn." She smiled, making a dimple in her cheek. "I would appreciate it so very much, Mat." The morning light through the windows seemed to pick out highlights in her hair.

aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf ʃi laɪks tə dæns. hi pʊʃt ðə θɔt ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd. "ðæt dʌz nɑt saʊn tu vɛɹi hɑɹd, bʌɾ ɪts ə lɔŋ tʃɹɪp. wʌt də aɪ ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt?" fɹəm ðə lʊk ɑn əɹ feɪs, hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðət dɪmpəl hæd feɪld əɹ vɛɹi ɔfən.

I wonder if she likes to dance. He pushed the thought right out of his head. "That does not sound too very hard, but it's a long trip. What do I get out of it?" From the look on her face, he did not think that dimple had failed her very often.

ʃi dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp, slɪm ən pɹaʊd. hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊst si ə θɹoʊn bɪhaɪn hɝ. "ɑɹ jə ə lɔɪəl sʌbʒɪkt ʌv ændɝ? dʒju nɑt wɪʃ tə sɝv ðə laɪən θɹoʊn, ən jəɹ dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ?"

She drew herself up, slim and proud. He could almost see a throne behind her. "Are you a loyal subject of Andor? Do you not wish to serve the Lion Throne, and your Daughter-Heir?"

mæt snɪkɝd.

Mat snickered.

"aɪ toʊl jə ðət wəd nɑt wɝk iðɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "nɑt wɪð hɪm."

"I told you that would not work either," Egwene said. "Not with him."

ɪleɪn hæɾ ə ɹaɪ twɪs tə hɝ maʊθ. "aɪ θɔɾ ɪt wɝθ ə tʃɹaɪ. ɪɾ ɔlweɪz wɝks ɑn ðə ɡɑɹdz, ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. jə sɛɾ ɪf aɪ smaɪld - " ʃi kʌɾ ɔf ʃɔɹt, vɛɹi ɑbviəsli nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm.

Elayne had a wry twist to her mouth. "I thought it worth a try. It always works on the Guards, in Caemlyn. You said if I smiled - " She cut off short, very obviously not looking at him.

wʌd jə seɪ, ɛɡwin, hi θɔt, fjʊɹiəs. ðəɾ ɪm ə ful fəɹ ɛni ɡɝl u smaɪlz ət mi? hi kɛpt ɪz aʊtwɝd kɑm, ðoʊ, ən mænədʒ tə meɪnteɪn ɪz ɡɹɪn.

What did you say, Egwene, he thought, furious. That I'm a fool for any girl who smiles at me? He kept his outward calm, though, and managed to maintain his grin.

"aɪ wɪʃ æskɪŋ wɝ ɪnʌf," ɛɡwin sɛd, "bʌt jə də nɑt də feɪvɝz, də ju, mæt? hæv jə ɛvɝ dʌn ɛniθɪŋ wɪθaʊt biɪŋ koʊkst, wiɾəld, əɹ bʊlid?"

"I wish asking were enough," Egwene said, "but you do not do favors, do you, Mat? Have you ever done anything without being coaxed, wheedled, or bullied?"

hi oʊnli smaɪld ət hɝ. "aɪ wɪl dæns wɪð boʊθ ə ju, ɛɡwin, bʌɾ aɪ woʊn ɹʌn ɛɹənz." fəɹ ən ɪnstən i θɔt ʃi wɑz gɑnə stɪk aʊɾ əɹ tʌŋ ət hɪm.

He only smiled at her. "I will dance with both of you, Egwene, but I won't run errands." For an instant he thought she was going to stick out her tongue at him.

"ɪf wi kən ɡoʊ bæk tə wʌt wi plæn ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ə tu-kɑm vɔɪs. ði ʌðɝ tu nɑɾəd, ən ʃi tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃənz ɑn hɪm. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm sɪns kʌmɪŋ ɪn, ʃi lʊk laɪk ðə wɪzdəm ʌv oʊld, wɪð ə stɛɹ ðət kəd pɪn jə ɪn jəɹ tʃɹæks ən əɹ bɹeɪd ɹɛɾi tə læʃ laɪk ə kæts teɪl.

"If we can go back to what we planned in the first place," Nynaeve said in a too-calm voice. The other two nodded, and she turned her attentions on him. For the first time since coming in, she looked like the Wisdom of old, with a stare that could pin you in your tracks and her braid ready to lash like a cat's tail.

"ju ɑɹ ivən ɹuɾɝ ðən aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝd, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən. wɪð jə sɪk soʊ lɔŋ - ən ɛɡwin, ən ɪleɪn, ən aɪ teɪkɪŋ kɛɹ ə jə laɪk ə beɪb ɪn swɑɾəlɪŋ - aɪ hæɾ ɔlmoʊs fɝɡɑɾən. ivən soʊ, aɪ wəd θɪŋk juɾ əv ə lɪɾəl ɡɹæɾətud ɪn ju. juv tɔkt əbaʊt siɪŋ ðə wɝld, siɪŋ ɡɹeɪt sɪɾiz. wɛl, wʌt bɛɾɝ sɪɾi ðən keɪɛmlɪn? də wʌt jə wɑnt, ʃoʊ jəɹ ɡɹæɾətud, ən hɛlp sʌmwʌn ɔl ət ðə seɪm taɪm." ʃi pɹədust ə foʊldəd pɑɹtʃmən fɹəm ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ kloʊk ən sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl. ɪt wɑz sild wɪð ə lɪli, ɪn ɡoʊldən jɛloʊ wæks. "ju kænɑɾ æsk fəɹ mɔɹ ðən ðæt."

"You are even ruder than I remembered, Matrim Cauthon. With you sick so long - and Egwene, and Elayne, and I taking care of you like a babe in swaddling - I had almost forgotten. Even so, I would think you'd have a little gratitude in you. You've talked about seeing the world, seeing great cities. Well, what better city than Caemlyn? Do what you want, show your gratitude, and help someone all at the same time." She produced a folded parchment from inside her cloak and set it on the table. It was sealed with a lily, in golden yellow wax. "You cannot ask for more than that."

hi aɪd ðə peɪpɝ ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli. hi bɛɹli ɹɪmɛmbɝd pæsɪŋ θɹu keɪɛmlɪn, wʌns, wɪð ɹænd. ɪt wɑz ə ʃeɪm tə stɑp əm naʊ, bʌɾ i θɔɾ ɪt bɛst. ɪf jə wɑn ðə fʌn ə ðə dʒɪɡ, juv tə peɪ ðə hɑɹpɝ sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ. ən ðə weɪ nɪneɪiv wɑz naʊ, ðə lɔŋɡɝ i kɛp fɹəm peɪɪŋ, ðə wɝs ɪt wəd bi. "nɪneɪiv, aɪ kænt."

He eyed the paper regretfully. He barely remembered passing through Caemlyn, once, with Rand. It was a shame to stop them now, but he thought it best. If you want the fun of the jig, you have to pay the harper sooner or later. And the way Nynaeve was now, the longer he kept from paying, the worse it would be. "Nynaeve, I can't."

"wʌt dʒju min, jə kænɑt? ɑɹ jə ə flaɪ ɑn ðə wɔl, əɹ ə mæn? ə tʃæns tə də ə feɪvɝ fəɹ ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ, tə si keɪɛmlɪn, tə mit kwin mɔɹɡeɪs hɝsɛlf ɪn ɔl pɹɑbəbɪləɾi, ən jə kænɑt? aɪ ɹɪli də nɑt noʊ wʌt mɔɹ jə kəd pɑsəbli wɑnt. doʊn jə skɪɾɝ əweɪ laɪk ɡɹis ɑn ə ɡɹɪɾəl ðɪs taɪm, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən! əɹ əz jəɹ hɑɹt tʃeɪnʒd soʊ jə laɪk siɪŋ ðiz ɔl ɝaʊn ju?" ʃi weɪvd əɹ lɛf hæn ɪn ɪz feɪs, pɹæktəkli hɪɾɪŋ ɪm ɪn ðə noʊz wɪð əɹ ɹɪŋ.

"What do you mean, you cannot? Are you a fly on the wall, or a man? A chance to do a favor for the Daughter-Heir of Andor, to see Caemlyn, to meet Queen Morgase herself in all probability, and you cannot? I really do not know what more you could possibly want. Don't you skitter away like grease on a griddle this time, Matrim Cauthon! Or has your heart changed so you like seeing these all around you?" She waved her left hand in his face, practically hitting him in the nose with her ring.

"pliz, mæt?" ɪleɪn sɛd, ən ɛɡwin wɑz stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm əz ɪf i hæd ɡɹoʊn hɔɹnz laɪk ə tʃɹɑlɑk.

"Please, Mat?" Elayne said, and Egwene was staring at him as if he had grown horns like a Trolloc.

hi skwɝmd ɑn ɪz tʃɛɹ. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑt ðəɾ aɪ doʊnt wɑn tə. aɪ kænɑt! ði æmɪɝlɪnz meɪɾ ɪt soʊ aɪ kænt ɡɛɾ ɔf ðə blu - ði aɪlənd. tʃeɪnʒ ðæt, ən əl kæɹi jəɹ lɛɾɝ ɪn maɪ tiθ, ɪleɪn."

He squirmed on his chair. "It is not that I don't want to. I cannot! The Amyrlin's made it so I can't get off the bloo - the island. Change that, and I will carry your letter in my teeth, Elayne."

lʊks pæs bɪtwin ðɛm. hi səmtaɪmz wʌndɝɾ ɪf wɪmən kəd ɹiɾ itʃ ʌðɝz maɪnz. ðeɪ sɝɾənli sim tə ɹiɾ ɪz wən i list wɑntəɾ ɪt. bʌt ðɪs taɪm, wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd saɪlənli əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, ðeɪ hæd nɑt ɹɛɾ ɪz θɔts.

Looks passed between them. He sometimes wondered if women could read each other's minds. They certainly seemed to read his when he least wanted it. But this time, whatever they had decided silently among themselves, they had not read his thoughts.

"ɪkspleɪn," nɪneɪiv sɛd kɝtli. "waɪ wəd ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑnə kip jə hɪɹ?"

"Explain," Nynaeve said curtly. "Why would the Amyrlin want to keep you here?"

hi ʃɹʌɡd, ən lʊkt əɹ stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ði aɪ, ən ɡeɪv əɹ ɪz bɛst ɹufəl ɡɹɪn. "ɪts kəz aɪ wɑz sɪk. kəz ɪt wɛn ɑn soʊ lɔŋ. ʃi sɛd ʃi wəd nɑt lemi ɡoʊ əntɪl ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ aɪ wʊdnt ɡoʊ ɔf sʌmwɛɹ ən daɪ. nɑt ðəɾ aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə, ʌv kɔɹs. daɪ, aɪ min."

He shrugged, and looked her straight in the eye, and gave her his best rueful grin. "It's because I was sick. Because it went on so long. She said she would not let me go until she was sure I wouldn't go off somewhere and die. Not that I'm going to, of course. Die, I mean."

nɪneɪiv fɹaʊnd, ən dʒɝkt əɹ bɹeɪd, ən sʌɾənli tʊk ɪz hɛd bɪtwin əɹ hænz; ə tʃɪl ɹæn θɹu hɪm. laɪt, ðə paʊɝ! bɪfɔɹ ðə θɔt wɑz dʌn, ʃi hæd ɹilis hɪm.

Nynaeve frowned, and jerked her braid, and suddenly took his head between her hands; a chill ran through him. Light, the Power! Before the thought was done, she had released him.

"wʌt . . . ? wʌd jə də tə mi, nɪneɪiv?"

"What . . . ? What did you do to me, Nynaeve?"

"nɑɾ ə tɛnθ pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt jə dɪzɝv, ɪn ɔl laɪklihʊd," ʃi sɛd. "ju ɑɹ əz hɛlθi əz ə bʊl. wikɝ ðən jə lʊk, bʌt hɛlθi."

"Not a tenth part of what you deserve, in all likelihood," she said. "You are as healthy as a bull. Weaker than you look, but healthy."

"aɪ toʊl jə aɪ wɑz," hi sɛɾ ənizəli. hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɛɾ ɪz ɡɹɪn bæk. "nɪneɪiv, ʃi lʊk laɪk ju. ði æmɪɝlɪn, aɪ min. mænɪdʒɪŋ tə lum ivən ɪf ʃiz ə fʊt tu ʃɔɹt fəɹ ɪt, ən bʊliɪŋ. . . ." ðə weɪ hɝ aɪbɹaʊz klaɪmd, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd ðət wɑz nɑɾ ə ɹoʊd tə ɡoʊ daʊn ɛni fɝðɝ. əz lɔŋ əz i kɛpt əm əweɪ fɹəm ðə hɔɹn. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðeɪ nu. "wɛl. ɛniweɪ, aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ wɑnə kip mi hɪɹ kəz ə ðət dæɡɝ. aɪ min, əntɪl ðeɪ fɪɡjɝ aʊɾ ɪɡzækli haʊ ɪt dɪd wʌɾ ɪt dɪd. jə noʊ haʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ." hi ɡeɪv ə smɔl læf. ðeɪ ɔl dʒʌs lʊkt ət hɪm. meɪbi aɪ ʃʊdn əv sɛd ðæt. bɝn mi! ðeɪ wɑnə bi blʌɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ. bɝn mi, aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn tu lɔŋ. aɪ wɪʃ nɪneɪiv wəd stɑp stɛɹɪŋ ət mi laɪk ðæt. kip ɪt ʃɔɹt. "ði æmɪɝlɪn meɪɾ ɪt soʊ aɪ kænɑt kɹɔs ə bɹɪdʒ əɹ bɔɹɾ ə ʃɪp wɪθaʊɾ ən ɔɹɾɝ fɹəm hɝ. jə si? ɪts nɑt ðəɾ aɪ də nɑt wɑnə hɛlp. aɪ dʒʌs kænt."

"I told you I was," he said uneasily. He tried to get his grin back. "Nynaeve, she looked like you. The Amyrlin, I mean. Managing to loom even if she is a foot too short for it, and bullying. . . ." The way her eyebrows climbed, he decided that was not a road to go down any further. As long as he kept them away from the Horn. He wondered if they knew. "Well. Anyway, I think they want to keep me here because of that dagger. I mean, until they figure out exactly how it did what it did. You know how Aes Sedai are." He gave a small laugh. They all just looked at him. Maybe I shouldn't have said that. Burn me! They want to be bloody Aes Sedai. Burn me, I'm going on too long. I wish Nynaeve would stop staring at me like that. Keep it short. "The Amyrlin made it so I cannot cross a bridge or board a ship without an order from her. You see? It's not that I do not want to help. I just can't."

"bʌt jəl ɪf wi kən ɡɛt jə aʊɾ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn?" nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪntɛnli.

"But you will if we can get you out of Tar Valon?" Nynaeve said intently.

"ju ɡɛt mi aʊɾ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən əl kæɹi ɪleɪn tə hɝ mʌðɝ ɑn maɪ bæk."

"You get me out of Tar Valon, and I'll carry Elayne to her mother on my back."

ɪleɪnz aɪbɹaʊz wɛn ʌp, ðɪs taɪm, ən ɛɡwin ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, maʊðɪŋ ɪz neɪm wɪð ə ʃɑɹp lʊk ɪn əɹ aɪz. wɪmən hæd noʊ sɛns ə hjumɝ, səmtaɪmz.

Elayne's eyebrows went up, this time, and Egwene shook her head, mouthing his name with a sharp look in her eyes. Women had no sense of humor, sometimes.

nɪneɪiv moʊʃən ðə tu ʌv əm tə fɑloʊ hɝ tə ðə wɪndoʊz, wɛɹ ðeɪ tɝn ðɛɹ bæks tə hɪm ən tɔk soʊ sɔfli hi kəd kætʃ oʊnli ə mɝmɝ. hi θɔɾ i hɝɾ ɛɡwin seɪ sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ oʊnli niɾɪŋ wʌn ɪf ðeɪ steɪd təɡɛðɝ. wɑtʃɪŋ, hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðeɪ ɹɪli θɔt ðeɪ kəd ɡɛɾ ɝaʊn ði æmɪɝlɪnz ɔɹɾɝ. ɪf ðeɪ kən də ðæt, əl kæɹi ðɛɹ blʌɾi lɛɾɝ. aɪ ɹɪli wɪl kæɹi ɪɾ ɪn maɪ tiθ.

Nynaeve motioned the two of them to follow her to the windows, where they turned their backs to him and talked so softly he could catch only a murmur. He thought he heard Egwene say something about only needing one if they stayed together. Watching, he wondered if they really thought they could get around the Amyrlin's order. If they can do that, I will carry their bloody letter. I really will carry it in my teeth.

wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, hi pɪkt ʌp ən æpəl kɔɹ ən bɪɾ ɔf ði ɛnd. wʌn tʃu, ən i heɪstəli spɪt ðə maʊθfʊl ə bɪɾɝ sidz bæk ɑntu ðə pleɪt.

Without thinking, he picked up an apple core and bit off the end. One chew, and he hastily spit the mouthful of bitter seeds back onto the plate.

wən ðeɪ keɪm bæk tə ðə teɪbəl, ɛɡwin hændəɾ ɪm ə θɪk, foʊldəd peɪpɝ. hi aɪɾ əm səspɪʃəsli bɪfɔɹ oʊpənɪŋ ɪɾ aʊt. əz i ɹɛd, hi bɪɡæn hʌmɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ ɪt.

When they came back to the table, Egwene handed him a thick, folded paper. He eyed them suspiciously before opening it out. As he read, he began humming to himself without knowing it.

wʌt ðə bɛɹɝ dʌz ɪz dʌn ət maɪ ɔɹɾɝ ən baɪ maɪ əθɔɹəɾi. oʊbeɪ, ən kip saɪlənt, ət maɪ kəmænd.

What the bearer does is done at my order and by my authority. Obey, and keep silent, at my command.

sɪuən sɑntʃ wɑtʃɝ ə ðə silz fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ən sild ət ðə bɑɾəm wɪð ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪn ə sɝkəl ʌv waɪt wæks əz hɑɹɾ əz stoʊn.

Siuan Sanche Watcher of the Seals Flame of Tar Valon The Amyrlin Seat And sealed at the bottom with the Flame of Tar Valon in a circle of white wax as hard as stone.

hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz hʌmɪŋ "eɪ pɑkət fʊl ʌv ɡoʊld" ən stɑpt. "ɪz ðɪs ɹil? jə dɪdnt . . . ? haʊ dɪd jə ɡɛt ðɪs?"

He realized he was humming "A Pocket Full of Gold" and stopped. "Is this real? You didn't . . . ? How did you get this?"

"ʃi dɪd nɑt fɔɹdʒ ɪt, ɪf ðəɾ ɪz wʌt jə min," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"She did not forge it, if that is what you mean," Elayne said.

"nɛvɝ jə maɪn haʊ wi ɡɑɾ ɪt," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz ɹil. ðəɾ ɪz ɔl ðət nid kənsɝn ju. aɪ wəd nɑt ʃoʊ ɪɾ ɝaʊnd, wɝ aɪ ju, əɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪl teɪk ɪt bæk, bʌɾ ɪɾəl ɡɛt jə pæs ðə ɡɑɹdz ən ɑntu ə ʃɪp. jə sɛd jud teɪk ðə lɛɾɝ, ɪf wi dɪd ðæt."

"Never you mind how we got it," Nynaeve said. "It is real. That is all that need concern you. I would not show it around, were I you, or the Amyrlin will take it back, but it will get you past the guards and onto a ship. You said you'd take the letter, if we did that."

"ju kən kənsɪɾɝ ɪɾ ɪn mɔɹɡeɪsəz hænz ɹaɪt naʊ." hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə stɑp ɹiɾɪŋ ðə peɪpɝ, bʌɾ i foʊldəɾ ɪt bæk ʌp ɛniweɪ, ən leɪɾ ɪɾ ɑn tɑp ʌv ɪleɪnz lɛɾɝ. "ju wʊdn hæpən tə hæv ə lɪɾəl kɔɪn tə ɡoʊ wɪð ðɪs, wəd ju? səm sɪlvɝ? ə ɡoʊl mɑɹk əɹ tu? aɪ hæv ɔlmoʊst ɪnʌf fəɹ maɪ pæsədʒ, bʌɾ aɪ hɪɹ θɪŋz ɑɹ ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɪkspɛnsɪv daʊnɹɪvɝ."

"You can consider it in Morgase's hands right now." He did not want to stop reading the paper, but he folded it back up anyway, and laid it on top of Elayne's letter. "You wouldn't happen to have a little coin to go with this, would you? Some silver? A gold mark or two? I have almost enough for my passage, but I hear things are growing expensive downriver."

nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "doʊn juv mʌni? jə ɡæmbəld wɪð hʊɹɪn ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi naɪɾ əntɪl jə ɡɹu tu sɪk tə hoʊl ðə daɪs. waɪ ʃəd θɪŋz bi mɔɹ ɪkspɛnsɪv daʊnɹɪvɝ?"

Nynaeve shook her head. "Don't you have money? You gambled with Hurin almost every night until you grew too sick to hold the dice. Why should things be more expensive downriver?"

"wi ɡæmbəl fəɹ kɑpɝz, nɪneɪiv, ən i wəd nɑɾ ivən də ðəɾ æftɝ ə waɪl. ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ. əl mænədʒ. doʊn jə lɪsən tə wʌt pipəl seɪ? ðɛɹz sɪvəl wɔɹ ɪn kɛɹhin, ən aɪ hɪɹ ɪts bæɾ ɪn tɛɹ, tu. aɪv hɝɾ ə ɹum əɾ ən ɪn ɪn ɑɹɪŋɡəl kɑsts mɔɹ ðən ə ɡʊd hɔɹs bæk hoʊm."

"We gambled for coppers, Nynaeve, and he would not even do that after a while. It doesn't matter. I will manage. Don't you listen to what people say? There's civil war in Cairhien, and I hear it is bad in Tear, too. I've heard a room at an inn in Aringill costs more than a good horse back home."

"wi hæv bɪn bɪzi," ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli, ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd wɝid lʊks wɪð ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn ðət sɛɾ ɪm wʌndɝɪŋ əɡɛn.

"We have been busy," she said sharply, and exchanged worried looks with Egwene and Elayne that set him wondering again.

"ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ. aɪ kən meɪk aʊt." ðəɹ hæd tə bi ɡeɪmɪŋ ɪn ði ɪnz nɪɹ ðə dɑks. ə naɪt wɪð ðə daɪs wəd pʊɾ ɪm əbɔɹɾ ə ʃɪp ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ wɪð ə fʊl pɝs.

"It doesn't matter. I can make out." There had to be gaming in the inns near the docks. A night with the dice would put him aboard a ship in the morning with a full purse.

"dʒʌs jə dɪlɪvɝ ðət lɛɾɝ tə kwin mɔɹɡeɪs, mæt," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "æn də nɑt lɛɾ ɛniwʌn noʊ juv ɪt."

"Just you deliver that letter to Queen Morgase, Mat," Nynaeve said. "And do not let anyone know you have it."

"aɪl teɪk ɪt tə hɝ. aɪ sɛɾ aɪ wʊd, dɪdn aɪ? jə wəd θɪŋk aɪ dɪdn kip maɪ pɹɑməsəz." ðə lʊks i ɡɑt fɹəm nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ʌv ə fju hi hæd nɑt kɛpt. "aɪ wɪl də ɪt. blʌɾ ən - əl də ɪt!"

"I'll take it to her. I said I would, didn't I? You would think I didn't keep my promises." The looks he got from Nynaeve and Egwene reminded him of a few he had not kept. "I will do it. Blood and - I will do it!"

ðeɪ steɪɾ əwaɪl lɔŋɡɝ, tɔkɪŋ ə hoʊm fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt. ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn sæɾ ɑn ðə bɛd, ən nɪneɪiv tʊk ði ɑɹmtʃɛɹ, waɪl i kɛpt ɪz stul. tɔk ʌv ɛmənz fil meɪɾ ɪm hoʊmsɪk, ən ɪt sim tə meɪk nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin sæd, əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ spikɪŋ ə sʌmθɪŋ ðeɪ wəd nɛvɝ si əɡɛn. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðɛɹ aɪz mɔɪsənd, bʌt wən i tʃɹaɪd tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə sʌbʒɪkt, ðeɪ bɹɔɾ ɪt bæk əɡɛn, tə pipəl ðeɪ nu, tə ðə fɛstəvəlz ə bɛl taɪn ən sʌndeɪ, tə hɑɹvəs dænsəz ən pɪknɪk ɡæðɝɪŋz fəɹ ðə ʃɪɹɪŋ.

They stayed awhile longer, talking of home for the most part. Egwene and Elayne sat on the bed, and Nynaeve took the armchair, while he kept his stool. Talk of Emond's Field made him homesick, and it seemed to make Nynaeve and Egwene sad, as if they were speaking of something they would never see again. He was sure their eyes moistened, but when he tried to change the subject, they brought it back again, to people they knew, to the festivals of Bel Tine and Sunday, to harvest dances and picnic gatherings for the shearing.

ɪleɪn tɔk tə hɪm ə keɪɛmlɪn, ʌv wʌt tə ɪkspɛkt ət ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ən u tə spik tə, ən ə lɪɾəl ə ðə sɪɾi. səmtaɪmz ʃi hɛl hɝsɛlf ɪn ə weɪ ðət meɪɾ ɪm ɔl bʌt si ə kɹaʊn ɑn əɹ hɛd. ə mæn wəɾ əv tə bi ə ful tə lɛt hɪmsɛlf ɡɛɾ ɪnvɑlvd wɪð ə wʊmən laɪk hɝ. wən ðeɪ ɹoʊz tə liv, hi wɑz sɑɹi tə si ðɛm ɡoʊ.

Elayne talked to him of Caemlyn, of what to expect at the Royal Palace and who to speak to, and a little of the city. Sometimes she held herself in a way that made him all but see a crown on her head. A man would have to be a fool to let himself get involved with a woman like her. When they rose to leave, he was sorry to see them go.

hi stʊd, sʌɾənli filɪŋ ɑkwɝd. "lʊk, juv dʌn mi ə feɪvɝ hɪɹ." hi tʌtʃt ði æmɪɝlɪnz peɪpɝ, ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "ə bɪɡ feɪvɝ. aɪ noʊ jəɹ ɔl gɑnə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ" - hi stʌmbəld ə lɪɾəl ɑn ðət - "æn jəl bi ə kwin wʌn deɪ, ɪleɪn, bʌɾ ɪf jə ɛvɝ nid hɛlp, ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ɛvɝ ɛniθɪŋ aɪ kən du, əl kʌm. jə kən kaʊn ɑn ɪt. dɪɾ aɪ seɪ sʌmθɪŋ fʌni?"

He stood, suddenly feeling awkward. "Look, you have done me a favor here." He touched the Amyrlin's paper, on the table. "A big favor. I know you're all going to be Aes Sedai" - he stumbled a little on that - "and you will be a queen one day, Elayne, but if you ever need help, if there is ever anything I can do, I will come. You can count on it. Did I say something funny?"

ɪleɪn hæɾ ə hæn oʊvɝ əɹ maʊθ, ən ɛɡwin wɑz stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ oʊpənli wɪð ə læf. "noʊ, mæt," nɪneɪiv sɛd smuðli, bʌɾ əɹ lɪps twɪtʃt. "dʒʌst sʌmθɪŋ aɪ hæv əbzɝvd əbaʊt mɛn."

Elayne had a hand over her mouth, and Egwene was struggling openly with a laugh. "No, Mat," Nynaeve said smoothly, but her lips twitched. "Just something I have observed about men."

"ju wəɾ əv tə bi ə wʊmən tə ʌndɝstænd," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"You would have to be a woman to understand," Elayne said.

"dʒɝni wɛl ən seɪfli, mæt," ɛɡwin sɛd. "æn ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ɪf ə wʊmən dʌz niɾ ə hɪɹoʊ, ʃi nidz ɪm tədeɪ, nɑt təmɑɹoʊ." ðə læftɝ bʌbəld aʊɾ ə hɝ.

"Journey well and safely, Mat," Egwene said. "And remember, if a woman does need a hero, she needs him today, not tomorrow." The laughter bubbled out of her.

hi stɛɹɾ ət ðə dɔɹ kloʊzɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛm. wɪmən, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd fəɹ ət lis ðə hʌnʒɹədθ taɪm, wɝ ɑd.

He stared at the door closing behind them. Women, he decided for at least the hundredth time, were odd.

ðən ɪz aɪ fɛl ɑn ɪleɪnz lɛɾɝ, ən ðə foʊldəd peɪpɝ laɪɪŋ ətɑp ɪt. ði æmɪɝlɪnz blɛsɪd, nɑt-tə-bi-ʌndɝstʊd, bʌt wɛlkəm-æz-ə-faɪɝ-ɪn-wɪntɝ peɪpɝ. hi dænst ə lɪɾəl keɪpɝ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə flaʊɝd kɑɹpət. keɪɛmlɪn tə si, ən ə kwin tə mit. jəɹ oʊn wɝdz wɪl fɹi mi ʌv ju, æmɪɝlɪn. ən ɡɛt mi əweɪ fɹəm səlin, tu.

Then his eye fell on Elayne's letter, and the folded paper lying atop it. The Amyrlin's blessed, not-to-be-understood, but welcome-as-a-fire-in-winter paper. He danced a little caper in the middle of the flowered carpet. Caemlyn to see, and a queen to meet. Your own words will free me of you, Amyrlin. And get me away from Selene, too.

"jul nɛvɝ kætʃ mi," hi læft, ən mɛn ɪt fəɹ boʊθ ə ðɛm. "jul nɛvɝ kætʃ mæt kɔθən."

"You'll never catch me," he laughed, and meant it for both of them. "You'll never catch Mat Cauthon."


tʃæptɝ twɛntinaɪn


CHAPTER 29

eɪ tʃɹæp tə spɹɪŋ


A Trap to Spring

ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ ðə spɪt dɔɡ wɑz laɪɪŋ əɾ ɪts iz. ɡlɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪt, nɪneɪiv mɑp swɛt fɹəm əɹ fɔɹhɛd wɪð əɹ hæn ən lin əɹ bæk ɪndə duɪŋ ðə wɝk i ʃəɾ əv dʌn. aɪd nɑɾ əv pʊɾ ɪt pæst əm tə ʃʌv mi ɪn ɪz wɪkɝ wil ɪnstɛɾ ə lɛɾɪŋ mi tɝn ðɪs laɪt-fɔɹseɪkən hændəl! ɛɛs sədaɪ! bɝn əm ɔl! ɪt wɑz ə mɛʒɝ ə hɝ əpsɛt ðət ʃi juz sətʃ læŋɡwədʒ, ən ənʌðɝ ðət ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən noʊɾəs ʃi hæd dʌn ɪt. ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðə faɪɝ ɪn ðə lɔŋ, ɡɹeɪ stoʊn faɪɝpleɪs wəd sim ɛni hɑɾɝ ɪf ʃi kɹɔld ɪndə ɪt. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə bɹɪndəl dɔɡ wɑz ɡɹɪnɪŋ ət hɝ.

In a corner the spit dog was lying at its ease. Glaring at it, Nynaeve mopped sweat from her forehead with her hand and leaned her back into doing the work he should have done. I'd not have put it past them to shove me in his wicker wheel instead of letting me turn this Light-forsaken handle! Aes Sedai! Burn them all! It was a measure of her upset that she used such language, and another that she did not even notice she had done it. She did not think the fire in the long, gray stone fireplace would seem any hotter if she crawled into it. She was sure the brindle dog was grinning at her.

ɪleɪn wɑz skɪmɪŋ ɡɹis aʊɾ ə ðə dʒɹɪpɪŋ pæn ʌndɝ ðə ɹoʊsts wɪð ə lɔŋ-hændəld wʊɾən spun, waɪl ɛɡwin juzd ɪts twɪn tə bæs ðə mit. ðə ɡɹeɪt kɪtʃən wɛn ɑn əbaʊɾ ɪts mɪddeɪ ɹutin ɝaʊn ðɛm. ivən ðə nɑvəsɪz hæd ɡɹoʊn soʊ juz tə siɪŋ æksɛptɪd ðəɹ ðət ðeɪ hɑɹdli ivən ɡlænst ət ðə θɹi wɪmən. nɑt ðət ðə kʊks əlaʊd ðə nɑvəsɪz tə dɔɾəl fəɹ ɡɔkɪŋ. wɝk bɪl kɛɹɪktɝ, soʊ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd, ən ðə kʊks sɔ tə ɪt ðət ðə nɑvəsɪz bɪl stʃɹɔŋ kɛɹɪktɝ. ən ðə θɹi æksɛptɪd, tu.

Elayne was skimming grease out of the dripping pan under the roasts with a long-handled wooden spoon, while Egwene used its twin to baste the meat. The great kitchen went on about its midday routine around them. Even the novices had grown so used to seeing Accepted there that they hardly even glanced at the three women. Not that the cooks allowed the novices to dawdle for gawking. Work built character, so the Aes Sedai said, and the cooks saw to it that the novices built strong character. And the three Accepted, too.

lɑɹəz, ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə kɪtʃənz - ʃi wɑz ɹɪli ðə tʃif kʊk, bʌt soʊ mɛni hæd juz ði ʌðɝ fəɹ soʊ lɔŋ ðəɾ ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn əɹ taɪɾəl - keɪm oʊvɝ tə ɪɡzæmɪn ðə ɹoʊsts. ən ðə wɪmən swɛɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛm. ʃi wɑz mɔɹ ðən mɪɹli staʊt, wɪð leɪɝz ə tʃɪnz, ən ə spɑtləs waɪɾ eɪpɹən ðət cʊɾə meɪd θɹi nɑvəs dʒɹɛsəz. ʃi kæɹiɾ əɹ oʊn lɔŋ-hændəld wʊɾən spun laɪk ə sɛptɝ. ɪt wɑz nɑt fəɹ stɝɪŋ, ðət spun. ɪt wɑz fəɹ dɝɛktɪŋ ðoʊz ʌndɝ hɝ, ən smækɪŋ ðoʊz u wɝ nɑt bɪldɪŋ kɛɹɪktɝ kwɪkli ɪnʌf tə sut hɝ. ʃi stʌɾid ðə ɹoʊsts, snɪf dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋli, ən tɝn əɹ fɹaʊn ɑn ðə θɹi æksɛptɪd.

Laras, the Mistress of the Kitchens - she was really the chief cook, but so many had used the other for so long that it might as well have been her title - came over to examine the roasts. And the women sweating over them. She was more than merely stout, with layers of chins, and a spotless white apron that could have made three novice dresses. She carried her own long-handled wooden spoon like a scepter. It was not for stirring, that spoon. It was for directing those under her, and smacking those who were not building character quickly enough to suit her. She studied the roasts, sniffed disparagingly, and turned her frown on the three Accepted.

nɪneɪiv mɛt lɑɹəz' lʊk wɪð ə lɛvəl lʊk ə hɝ oʊn ən kɛp tɝnɪŋ ðə spɪt. ðə mæsɪv wʊmənz feɪs nɛvɝ ɔltɝd. nɪneɪiv hæd tʃɹaɪd smaɪlɪŋ, bʌt ðət dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə tʃeɪnʒ lɑɹəz' ɪkspɹɛʃən. stɑpɪŋ wɝk tə spik tə hɝ, kwaɪt sɪvɪli, hæd bɪn ə dɪzæstɝ. ɪt wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf biɪŋ bʊliɾ ən tʃɪvid baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi hæd tə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ðæt, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ɪt ɹæŋkəld ən bɝnd, ɪf ʃi wɑz tə lɝn haʊ tə juz əɹ əbɪləɾiz. nɑt ðət ʃi laɪkt wʌt ʃi kəd də - ɪt wɑz wʌn θɪŋ tə noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ nɑt dɑɹkfɹɛnz fəɹ tʃænəlɪŋ ðə paʊɝ, bʌt kwaɪɾ ənʌðɝ tə noʊ ʃi hɝsɛlf kəd tʃænəl - jɛt ʃi hæd tə lɝn ɪf ʃi wɑz tə ɡɛt bæk ət mɔɪɹeɪn; heɪɾɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn fəɹ wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn tə ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝ ɛmənz fildɝz, pʊlɪŋ ðɛɹ lɪvz əpɑɹɾ ən mənɪpjəleɪɾɪŋ əm ɔl fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ pɝpəsəz, wɑz nɪɹli ɔl ðət kɛpt əɹ ɡoʊɪŋ. bʌt tə bi tʃɹiɾəd əz ə leɪzi, nʌn-tu-bɹaɪt tʃaɪl baɪ ðɪs lɑɹəz, tə bi fɔɹs tə kɝtsi ən skɝi fəɹ ðɪs wʊmən ʃi cʊɾə pʊɾ ɪn əɹ pleɪs wɪð ə fju wɛl-tʃoʊzən wɝdz bæk hoʊm - ðət meɪɾ əɹ ɡɹaɪn əɹ tiθ ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz dɪd ðə θɔɾ ə mɔɪɹeɪn. meɪbi ɪf aɪ dʒʌs də nɑt lʊk ət hɝ. . . . noʊ! əl bi bɝn ɪf əl dʒɹɑp maɪ aɪz bɪfɔɹ ðɪs . . . ðɪs kaʊ!

Nynaeve met Laras' look with a level look of her own and kept turning the spit. The massive woman's face never altered. Nynaeve had tried smiling, but that did nothing to change Laras' expression. Stopping work to speak to her, quite civilly, had been a disaster. It was bad enough being bullied and chivied by Aes Sedai. She had to put up with that, however much it rankled and burned, if she was to learn how to use her abilities. Not that she liked what she could do - it was one thing to know Aes Sedai were not Darkfriends for channeling the Power, but quite another to know she herself could channel - yet she had to learn if she was to get back at Moiraine; hating Moiraine for what she had done to Egwene and the other Emond's Fielders, pulling their lives apart and manipulating them all for Aes Sedai purposes, was nearly all that kept her going. But to be treated as a lazy, none-too-bright child by this Laras, to be forced to curtsy and scurry for this woman she could have put in her place with a few well-chosen words back home - that made her grind her teeth almost as much as did the thought of Moiraine. Maybe if I just do not look at her. . . . No! I will be burned if I'll drop my eyes before this . . . this cow!

lɑɹəz snɪf mɔɹ laʊdli ən wɔkt əweɪ. ʃi ɹoʊl fɹəm saɪd tə saɪɾ əz ʃi kɹɔs ðə fɹɛʃli mɑpt ɡɹeɪ taɪlz.

Laras sniffed more loudly and walked away. She rolled from side to side as she crossed the freshly mopped gray tiles.

stɪl bɛndɪŋ wɪð spun ən ɡɹispɑ, ɪleɪn ɡlaʊɝɾ æftɝ hɝ. "ɪf ðət wʊmən stʃɹaɪks mi bʌt wʌns mɔɹ, aɪ ʃæl əv ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn ɝɛst əɹ ən - "

Still bending with spoon and greasepot, Elayne glowered after her. "If that woman strikes me but once more, I shall have Gareth Bryne arrest her and - "

"bi kwaɪət," ɛɡwin wɪspɝd. ʃi dɪd nɑt stɑp bæstɪŋ ðə ɹoʊsts, ən ʃi nɛvɝ lʊkt əɾ ɪleɪn. "ʃi hæz ɪɹz laɪk ə - "

"Be quiet," Egwene whispered. She did not stop basting the roasts, and she never looked at Elayne. "She has ears like a - "

lɑɹəz tɝn bæk əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɪndid hɝd, hɝ fɹaʊn dipənɪŋ, ən əɹ maʊθ oʊpənd waɪd. bɪfɔɹ ə saʊn ɪmɝdʒd, ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɛntɝd ðə kɪtʃən laɪk ə wɝlwɪnd. ivən ðə stʃɹaɪp stoʊl ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz sim tə bɹɪsəl. fəɹ wʌns, lin wɑz noʊwɛɹ tə bi sin.

Laras turned back as if she had indeed heard, her frown deepening, and her mouth opened wide. Before a sound emerged, the Amyrlin Seat entered the kitchen like a whirlwind. Even the striped stole on her shoulders seemed to bristle. For once, Leane was nowhere to be seen.

ət læst, nɪneɪiv θɔt ɡɹɪmli. ən nɑt bɪfɹtaɪm, iðɝ!

At last, Nynaeve thought grimly. And not beforetime, either!

bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn dɪd nɑt ɡlæns əɹ weɪ. ði æmɪɝlɪn dɪd nɑt seɪ ə wɝd tə ɛniwʌn. ɹʌnɪŋ əɹ hæn əkɹɔs ə teɪbəltɑp skɹʌbd boʊn-waɪt, ʃi lʊkt əɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ən ɡɹɪməst əz ɪf ət fɪlθ. lɑɹəz wɑz əɾ əɹ saɪɾ ɪn ən ɪnstənt, ɔl smaɪlz, bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪnz flæt stɛɹ meɪɾ əɹ swɑloʊ ðɛm ɪn saɪləns.

But the Amyrlin did not glance her way. The Amyrlin did not say a word to anyone. Running her hand across a tabletop scrubbed bone-white, she looked at her fingers and grimaced as if at filth. Laras was at her side in an instant, all smiles, but the Amyrlin's flat stare made her swallow them in silence.

ði æmɪɝlɪn stɔkt əbaʊt ðə kɪtʃən. ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ðə wɪmən slaɪsɪŋ oʊtkeɪk. ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðə wɪmən pilɪŋ vɛdʒtəbəlz. ʃi snɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə sup kɛɾəlz, ðən ət ðə wɪmən tɛndɪŋ ðɛm; ðə wɪmən bɪkeɪm ɪnɡɹoʊst ɪn stʌɾiɪŋ ðə sɝfəs ə ðə sup. hɝ fɹaʊn sɛt ðə ɡɝlz kæɹiɪŋ pleɪts ən boʊlz aʊt tə ðə daɪnɪŋ hɔl tə ə ɹʌn. hɝ ɡlaʊɝ pʊt ðə nɑvəsɪz dɑɹɾɪŋ laɪk maɪs saɪɾɪŋ ə kæt. baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi hæd meɪɾ əɹ weɪ hæf ɝaʊn ðə kɪtʃən, ɛvɹi wʊmən ðəɹ wɑz wɝkɪŋ twaɪs əz fæst əz ʃi hæd bɪn. baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi kəmpliɾəd əɹ sɝkət, lɑɹəz wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn ivən dɛɹɪŋ tə ɡlæns ət hɝ.

The Amyrlin stalked about the kitchen. She stared at the women slicing oatcake. She glared at the women peeling vegetables. She sneered into the soup kettles, then at the women tending them; the women became engrossed in studying the surface of the soup. Her frown set the girls carrying plates and bowls out to the dining hall to a run. Her glower put the novices darting like mice sighting a cat. By the time she had made her way half around the kitchen, every woman there was working twice as fast as she had been. By the time she completed her circuit, Laras was the only one even daring to glance at her.

ði æmɪɝlɪn stɑpt ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɹoʊstɪŋ spɪt, fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps, ən lʊkt ət lɑɹəz. ʃi oʊnli lʊkt, ɪkspɹɛʃənləs, blu aɪz koʊld ən hɑɹd.

The Amyrlin stopped in front of the roasting spit, fists on her hips, and looked at Laras. She only looked, expressionless, blue eyes cold and hard.

ðə lɑɹdʒ wʊmən ɡʌlpt, ən əɹ tʃɪnz wɑbəld əz ʃi smuðd əɹ eɪpɹən. ði æmɪɝlɪn dɪd nɑt blɪŋk. lɑɹəz' aɪz dʒɹɑpt, ən ʃi ʃɪftəd hɛvəli fɹəm fʊt tə fʊt. "ɪf ðə mʌðɝ wɪl pɑɹɾən mi," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə feɪn vɔɪs. meɪkɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn mɛn fəɹ ə kɝtsi, ʃi ɹʌʃt əweɪ, soʊ fɝɡɛɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf ðət ʃi dʒɔɪn ðə wɪmən ət wʌn ə ðə sup kɛɾəlz ən bɪɡæn stɝɪŋ wɪð əɹ oʊn spun.

The large woman gulped, and her chins wobbled as she smoothed her apron. The Amyrlin did not blink. Laras' eyes dropped, and she shifted heavily from foot to foot. "If the Mother will pardon me," she said in a faint voice. Making something that might have been meant for a curtsy, she rushed away, so forgetting herself that she joined the women at one of the soup kettles and began stirring with her own spoon.

nɪneɪiv smaɪld, kipɪŋ əɹ hɛd daʊn tə haɪɾ ɪt. ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn kɛpt wɝkɪŋ, tu, bʌt ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ kɛpt ɡlænsɪŋ ət ði æmɪɝlɪn, stændɪŋ wɪð əɹ bæk tə ðɛm nɑt tu peɪsɪz əweɪ.

Nynaeve smiled, keeping her head down to hide it. Egwene and Elayne kept working, too, but they also kept glancing at the Amyrlin, standing with her back to them not two paces away.

ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz spɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ stɛɹ əkɹɔs ði ɪntaɪɝ kɪtʃən fɹəm wɛɹ ʃi stʊd. "ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ ðɪs izəli kaʊd," ʃi mʌɾɝd sɔfli, "pɝhæps ðeɪ ɹɪli hæv bɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ əweɪ wɪð tu mʌtʃ fəɹ tu lɔŋ."

The Amyrlin was spreading her stare across the entire kitchen from where she stood. "If they are this easily cowed," she muttered softly, "perhaps they really have been getting away with too much for too long."

izəli kaʊɾ ɪndid, nɪneɪiv θɔt. pɪɾəfəl ɪkskjusɪz fəɹ wɪmən. ɔl ʃi dɪd wɑz lʊk ət ðɛm! ði æmɪɝlɪn ɡlænst oʊvɝ ə stoʊl-kʌvɝd ʃoʊldɝ, kɑɾ əɹ aɪ fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. sʌɾənli nɪneɪiv ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz tɝnɪŋ ðə spɪt fæstɝ. ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf ʃi hæd tə pɹitɛn tə bi kaʊd laɪk ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls.

Easily cowed indeed, Nynaeve thought. Pitiful excuses for women. All she did was look at them! The Amyrlin glanced over a stole-covered shoulder, caught her eye for an instant. Suddenly Nynaeve realized she was turning the spit faster. She told herself she had to pretend to be cowed like everyone else.

ði æmɪɝlɪnz ɡeɪz fɛl ɑn ɪleɪn, ən əbɹʌpli ʃi spoʊk, nɪɹli laʊɾ ɪnʌf tə ɹæɾəl ðə kɑpɝ pɑts ən pænz hæŋɪŋ ɑn ðə wɔlz. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ səm wɝdz əl nɑt tɑlɝeɪɾ ɪn ə jʌŋ wʊmənz maʊθ, ɪleɪn ə haʊs tʃɹəkənd. ɪf jə lɛɾ əm ɪn, əl si ðɛm skɹʌbd aʊt!" ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə kɪtʃən dʒʌmpt.

The Amyrlin's gaze fell on Elayne, and abruptly she spoke, nearly loud enough to rattle the copper pots and pans hanging on the walls. "There are some words I will not tolerate in a young woman's mouth, Elayne of House Trakand. If you let them in, I will see them scrubbed out!" Everyone in the kitchen jumped.

ɪleɪn lʊkt kənfjuzd, ən ɪndɪɡneɪʃən kɹɛpt əkɹɔs ɛɡwinz feɪs.

Elayne looked confused, and indignation crept across Egwene's face.

nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, smɔl fɹæntɪk ʃeɪks. noʊ, ɡɝl! hoʊl jəɹ tʌŋ! doʊn jə si wʌt ʃiz duɪŋ?

Nynaeve shook her head, small frantic shakes. No, girl! Hold your tongue! Don't you see what she is doing?

bʌɾ ɛɡwin dɪɾ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, wɪð ə ɹɪspɛkfəl ɪf dɪtɝmənd, "mʌðɝ, ʃi dɪd nɑt - "

But Egwene did open her mouth, with a respectful if determined, "Mother, she did not - "

"saɪləns!" ði æmɪɝlɪnz ɹɔɹ pɹədust ənʌðɝ ɹɪpəl ə dʒʌmps. "lɑɹəz! kən jə faɪn sʌmθɪŋ tə titʃ tu ɡɝlz tə spik wən ðeɪ ʃəɾ ən seɪ wʌt ðeɪ ʃʊd, mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə kɪtʃənz? kən jə mænədʒ ðæt?"

"Silence!" The Amyrlin's roar produced another ripple of jumps. "Laras! Can you find something to teach two girls to speak when they should and say what they should, Mistress of the Kitchens? Can you manage that?"

lɑɹəz keɪm wɑɾəlɪŋ fæstɝ ðən nɪneɪiv hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ðə wʊmən muv bɪfɔɹ, dɑɹɾɪŋ əɾ ɪleɪn ən ɛɡwin tə siz ən ɪɹ ʌv itʃ, ɔl ðə waɪl ɹɪpiɾɪŋ, "jɛs, mʌðɝ. ɪmiɾiətli, mʌðɝ. əz jə kəmænd, mʌðɝ." ʃi hɝid ðə tu jʌŋ wɪmən aʊɾ ə ðə kɪtʃən əz ɪf iɡɝ tə ɪskeɪp ði æmɪɝlɪnz stɛɹ.

Laras came waddling faster than Nynaeve had ever seen the woman move before, darting at Elayne and Egwene to seize an ear of each, all the while repeating, "Yes, Mother. Immediately, Mother. As you command, Mother." She hurried the two young women out of the kitchen as if eager to escape the Amyrlin's stare.

ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz naʊ kloʊs ɪnʌf tə nɪneɪiv tə tʌtʃ hɝ, bʌt stɪl lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə kɪtʃən. ə jʌŋ kʊk, tɝnɪŋ wɪð ə mɪksɪŋ boʊl ɪn əɹ hænz, tʃæns tə kætʃ ði æmɪɝlɪnz aɪ. ʃi ɡeɪv ə ɡɹeɪt skwik əz ʃi skʌɾəld əweɪ əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ.

The Amyrlin was now close enough to Nynaeve to touch her, but still looking over the kitchen. A young cook, turning with a mixing bowl in her hands, chanced to catch the Amyrlin's eye. She gave a great squeak as she scuttled away across the floor.

"aɪ dɪd nɑt min fəɹ ɛɡwin tə bi kɑɾ ɪn ðæt." ði æmɪɝlɪn bɛɹli muvd əɹ lɪps. ɪt lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wɝ mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf, ən fɹəm ði ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs, noʊ wʌn ɪn ðə kɪtʃən wɑntəd tə hɪɹ wʌt ʃi wɑz seɪɪŋ. nɪneɪiv kəd dʒʌs meɪk aʊt ðə wɝdz. "bʌt pɝhæps ɪɾəl titʃ əɹ tə θɪŋk bɪfɔɹ ʃi spiks."

"I did not mean for Egwene to be caught in that." The Amyrlin barely moved her lips. It looked as if she were muttering to herself, and from the expression on her face, no one in the kitchen wanted to hear what she was saying. Nynaeve could just make out the words. "But perhaps it will teach her to think before she speaks."

nɪneɪiv tɝn ðə spɪɾ ən kɛpt əɹ hɛd daʊn, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ɔlsoʊ mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ ɪf ɛniwʌn lʊkt. "aɪ θɔt jə wɝ gɑnə kip ə kloʊs aɪ ɑn ʌs, mʌðɝ. soʊ wi kəd ɹipɔɹt wʌt wi faɪnd."

Nynaeve turned the spit and kept her head down, trying to look as if she were also muttering under her breath if anyone looked. "I thought you were going to keep a close eye on us, Mother. So we could report what we find."

"ɪf aɪ kʌm stɛɹ ət jə ɛvɹi deɪ, dɔɾɝ, səm wəd ɡɹoʊ səspɪʃəs." ði æmɪɝlɪn kɛpt ʌp əɹ stʌɾi ʌv ðə kɪtʃən. moʊst ə ðə wɪmən sim tə bi əvɔɪɾɪŋ ivən lʊkɪŋ ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən fəɹ fɪɹ ʌv ɪnkɝɪŋ əɹ ɹæθ. "aɪ plæn tə hæv jə bɹɔt tə maɪ stʌɾi æftɝ ðə mɪddeɪ mil. tə skoʊl jə fəɹ nɑt tʃuzɪŋ jəɹ stʌɾiz, soʊ aɪ ɪmplaɪd tə lin. bʌt ðəɹ ɪz nuz ðət kəd nɑt weɪt. ʃɛɹiəm faʊn ənʌðɝ ɡɹeɪ mæn. ə wʊmən. dɛɾ əz læst wiks fɪʃ, ən nɑɾ ə mɑɹk ɑn hɝ. ʃi wɑz leɪɾ aʊɾ əz ɪf ɹɛstɪŋ, ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ʃɛɹiəmz bɛd. nɑt vɛɹi plɛzən fəɹ ʃɛɹiəm."

"If I come stare at you every day, Daughter, some would grow suspicious." The Amyrlin kept up her study of the kitchen. Most of the women seemed to be avoiding even looking in her direction for fear of incurring her wrath. "I planned to have you brought to my study after the midday meal. To scold you for not choosing your studies, so I implied to Leane. But there is news that could not wait. Sheriam found another Gray Man. A woman. Dead as last week's fish, and not a mark on her. She was laid out as if resting, right in the middle of Sheriam's bed. Not very pleasant for Sheriam."

nɪneɪiv stɪfənd, ən ðə spɪt hɔltəd fəɹ ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ ʃi pʊɾ ɪt bæk tə ɹivɑlvɪŋ. "ʃɛɹiəm hæɾ ə tʃæns tə si ðə lɪsts vɛɹɪn ɡeɪv tə ɛɡwin. soʊ dɪɾ ɪleɪɾə. aɪ meɪk noʊ ækjəzeɪʃənz, bʌt ðeɪ hæd ðə tʃæns. ən ɛɡwin sɛɾ ɑlɑnə . . . bɪheɪvd ɑdli, tu."

Nynaeve stiffened, and the spit halted for a moment before she put it back to revolving. "Sheriam had a chance to see the lists Verin gave to Egwene. So did Elaida. I make no accusations, but they had the chance. And Egwene said Alanna . . . behaved oddly, too."

"ʃi toʊl jə ʌv ðæt, dɪd ʃi? ɑlɑnə ɪz ɝæfɛlɪn. ðeɪv stʃɹeɪnʒ aɪdiəz əbaʊɾ ɑnɝ ən dɛts ɪn ɝæfəl." ʃi ʃɹʌɡd dɪsmɪsɪvli, bʌt sɛd, "aɪ səpoʊz aɪ kən kip ən aɪ ɑn hɝ. hæv jə lɝn ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl jɛt, tʃaɪld?"

"She told you of that, did she? Alanna is Arafellin. They have strange ideas about honor and debts in Arafel." She shrugged dismissively, but said, "I suppose I can keep an eye on her. Have you learned anything useful yet, child?"

"sʌm," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd ɡɹɪmli. wʌɾ əbaʊt kipɪŋ ən aɪ ɑn ʃɛɹiəm? meɪbi ʃi dɪdn dʒʌs faɪn ðət ɡɹeɪ mæn. ði æmɪɝlɪn kəd wɑtʃ ɪleɪɾə, tu, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. soʊ ɑlɑnə ɹɪli dɪd. . . . "aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ jə tʃɹʌst ɛls ɡɹɪnwɛl, bʌt jəɹ mɛsədʒ wɑz hɛlpfəl."

"Some," Nynaeve muttered grimly. What about keeping an eye on Sheriam? Maybe she didn't just find that Gray Man. The Amyrlin could watch Elaida, too, for that matter. So Alanna really did. . . . "I do not understand why you trust Else Grinwell, but your message was helpful."

ɪn ʃɔɹt, kwɪk sɛntənsəz, nɪneɪiv toʊld ə ðə θɪŋz ðeɪ hæd faʊn ɪn ðə stɔɹɹum ʌndɝ ðə laɪbɹɛɹi, meɪkɪŋ ɪt sim oʊnli ʃi ən ɛɡwin hæd ɡɔn, ən æɾəd ðə kənkluʒənz ðeɪ hæd ɹitʃt kənsɝnɪŋ ðɛm. ʃi dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ɛɡwinz dʒɹim - əɹ wʌtɛvɝ ɪt hæd bɪn; ɛɡwin ɪnsɪstəɾ ɪt hæd bɪn ɹil - ʌv tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. nɔɹ dɪd ʃi spik ə ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil vɛɹɪn hæd ɡɪvən ɛɡwin. ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk hɝsɛlf ɪntaɪɝli tʃɹʌs ðə wʊmən wɛɹɪŋ ðə sɛvən-stʃɹaɪp stoʊl - əɹ ɛni wʊmən u kəd wɛɹ ðə ʃɔl, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ - ən ɪt sim bɛs tə kip səm θɪŋz ɪn ɹɪzɝv.

In short, quick sentences, Nynaeve told of the things they had found in the storeroom under the library, making it seem only she and Egwene had gone, and added the conclusions they had reached concerning them. She did not mention Egwene's dream - or whatever it had been; Egwene insisted it had been real - of Tel'aran'rhiod. Nor did she speak of the ter'angreal Verin had given Egwene. She could not make herself entirely trust the woman wearing the seven-striped stole - or any woman who could wear the shawl, for that matter - and it seemed best to keep some things in reserve.

wən ʃi wɑz dʌn, ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz saɪlən soʊ lɔŋ ðət nɪneɪiv bɪɡæn tə θɪŋk ðə wʊmən hæd nɑt hɝd. ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə ɹɪpit hɝsɛlf, ə lɪɾəl laʊɾɝ, wən ði æmɪɝlɪn faɪnəli spoʊk, stɪl hɑɹdli muvɪŋ əɹ lɪps.

When she was done, the Amyrlin was silent so long that Nynaeve began to think the woman had not heard. She was about to repeat herself, a little louder, when the Amyrlin finally spoke, still hardly moving her lips.

"aɪ sɛnt noʊ mɛsədʒ, dɔɾɝ. ðə θɪŋz liɑnʒɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz lɛft wɝ sɝtʃt θɝoʊli, ən bɝn æftɝ nʌθɪŋ wɑz faʊnd. noʊ wʌn wəd juz blæk ədʒɑ livɪŋz. əz fəɹ ɛls ɡɹɪnwɛl. . . . aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə ɡɝl. ʃi kəɾ əv lɝnd, hæd ʃi əplaɪd hɝsɛlf, bʌɾ ɔl ʃi wɑntəd wɑz tə smaɪl ət ðə mɛn ət ðə wɔɹɾɝz' pɹæktəs jɑɹd. ɛls ɡɹɪnwɛl wɑz pʊɾ ɑn ə tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ vɛsəl ən sɛn bæk tə hɝ mʌðɝ tɛn deɪz əɡoʊ."

"I sent no message, Daughter. The things Liandrin and the others left were searched thoroughly, and burned after nothing was found. No one would use Black Ajah leavings. As for Else Grinwell. . . . I remember the girl. She could have learned, had she applied herself, but all she wanted was to smile at the men at the Warders' practice yard. Else Grinwell was put on a trading vessel and sent back to her mother ten days ago."

nɪneɪiv tʃɹaɪd tə swɑloʊ ðə lʌmp ðət hæd fɔɹmd ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt. ði æmɪɝlɪnz wɝdz meɪɾ əɹ θɪŋk ə bʊliz tɔntɪŋ smɔlɝ tʃɪlʒɹən. ðə bʊliz wɝ ɔlweɪz soʊ kəntɛmptʃuəs ə ðə lɪɾəlɝ tʃɪlʒɹən, ɔlweɪz soʊ ʃʊɹ ðə smɔl wʌnz wɝ tu stupəd tə ɹilaɪz wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ, ðət ðeɪ meɪd lɪɾəl ɛfɝt tə dɪsɡaɪz ðɛɹ snɛɹz. ðət ðə blæk ədʒɑ wɑz soʊ kəntɛmptʃuəs ə hɝ meɪɾ əɹ blʌd bɔɪl. ðət ðeɪ kəd sɛt ðɪs snɛɹ fɪld əɹ stʌmək wɪð aɪs. laɪt, ɪf ɛls wɑz sɛn əweɪ. . . . laɪt, ɛnibəɾi aɪ tɔk tə kəd bi liɑnʒɹɪn, əɹ ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz. laɪt!

Nynaeve tried to swallow the lump that had formed in her throat. The Amyrlin's words made her think of bullies taunting smaller children. The bullies were always so contemptuous of the littler children, always so sure the small ones were too stupid to realize what was happening, that they made little effort to disguise their snares. That the Black Ajah was so contemptuous of her made her blood boil. That they could set this snare filled her stomach with ice. Light, if Else was sent away. . . . Light, anybody I talk to could be Liandrin, or any of the others. Light!

ðə spɪt hæd stɑpt. heɪstəli ʃi stɑɹɾəd dʒ tɝnɪŋ wʌns mɔɹ. noʊ wʌn sim tə hæv noʊɾəst, ðoʊ. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl stɪl duɪŋ ðɛɹ bɛs nɑt tə lʊk ət ði æmɪɝlɪn.

The spit had stopped. Hastily she started jt turning once more. No one seemed to have noticed, though. They were all still doing their best not to look at the Amyrlin.

"ænd wʌt dʒju min tə də əbaʊt ðɪs . . . soʊ-ɑbviəs tʃɹæp?" ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd sɔfli, stɪl stɛɹɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə kɪtʃən, əweɪ fɹəm nɪneɪiv. "du jə min tə fɔl ɪndə ðɪs wʌn, tu?"

"And what do you mean to do about this . . . so-obvious trap?" the Amyrlin said softly, still staring over the kitchen, away from Nynaeve. "Do you mean to fall into this one, too?"

nɪneɪivz feɪs ɹɛɾənd. "aɪ noʊ ðɪs tʃɹæp fəɹ ə tʃɹæp. mʌðɝ. ən ðə bɛst weɪ tə kætʃ huɛvɝ sɛɾ ə tʃɹæp ɪz tə spɹɪŋ ɪɾ ən weɪt fəɹ ɪm - əɹ əɹ - tə kʌm." ɪt saʊndəd wikɝ ðən ɪt hæd wən ʃi hæd sɛɾ ɪt tə ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn, æftɝ wʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd dʒʌs toʊl hɝ, bʌt ʃi stɪl mɛn ɪt.

Nynaeve's face reddened. "I know this trap for a trap. Mother. And the best way to catch whoever set a trap is to spring it and wait for him - or her - to come." It sounded weaker than it had when she had said it to Egwene and Elayne, after what the Amyrlin had just told her, but she still meant it.

"pɝhæps soʊ, tʃaɪld. pɝhæps ɪts ðə weɪ tə faɪn ðɛm. ɪf ðeɪ də nɑt kʌm ən faɪn jə hɛl taɪtli ɪn ðɛɹ nɛt." ʃi ɡeɪv ə vɛkst saɪ. "aɪ wɪl pʊt ɡoʊld ɪn jəɹ ɹum fəɹ ðə dʒɝni. ən əl lɛɾ ɪt bi wɪspɝɾ əbaʊt ðəɾ aɪ hæv sɛn jə aʊt tə ə fɑɹm tə hoʊ kæbɪdʒɪz. wɪl ɪleɪn bi ɡoʊɪŋ wɪð ju?"

"Perhaps so, child. Perhaps it is the way to find them. If they do not come and find you held tightly in their net." She gave a vexed sigh. "I will put gold in your room for the journey. And I will let it be whispered about that I have sent you out to a farm to hoe cabbages. Will Elayne be going with you?"

nɪneɪiv fɝɡɑt hɝsɛlf ɪnʌf tə stɛɹ ət ði æmɪɝlɪn, ðən hɝidli pʊɾ əɹ aɪz bæk ɑn əɹ hænz. hɝ nʌkəlz wɝ waɪɾ ɑn ðə spɪt hændəl. "ju skimɪŋ oʊld. . . . waɪ ɔl ðə pɹitɛns, ɪf jə nu? jəɹ slaɪ plɑts əv hæɾ əs skwɝmɪŋ nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ əz ðə blæk ədʒɑ hæz. waɪ?" ði æmɪɝlɪnz feɪs hæd taɪɾənd, ɪnʌf tə meɪk əɹ fɔɹs ə mɔɹ ɹɪspɛkfəl toʊn. "ɪf aɪ meɪ æsk, mʌðɝ."

Nynaeve forgot herself enough to stare at the Amyrlin, then hurriedly put her eyes back on her hands. Her knuckles were white on the spit handle. "You scheming old. . . . Why all the pretense, if you knew? Your sly plots have had us squirming nearly as much as the Black Ajah has. Why?" The Amyrlin's face had tightened, enough to make her force a more respectful tone. "If I may ask, Mother."

ði æmɪɝlɪn snɔɹɾɪd. "pʊɾɪŋ mɔɹɡeɪs bæk ɑn ðə pɹɑpɝ pæθ wɛðɝ ʃi wɑns tə ɡoʊ əɹ nɑt wɪl bi hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf wɪθaʊɾ əɹ θɪŋkɪŋ aɪv sɛn əɹ dɔɾɝ tə si ɪn ə liki skɪf. ðɪs weɪ aɪ kən seɪ stʃɹeɪɾ aʊt ðəɾ ɪt wɑz nʌn ə maɪ duɪŋ. ɪt meɪ bi ə bɪt hɑɹɾ ɑn ɪleɪn, wən ʃi faɪnəli hæz tə feɪs əɹ mʌðɝ, bʌɾ aɪ hæv θɹi haʊnz, naʊ, nɑt tu. aɪ toʊl jə aɪɾ əv ə hʌnʒɹəd ɪf aɪ kʊd." ʃi ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ stoʊl ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. "ðɪs əz ɡɔn ɑn lɔŋ ɪnʌf. ɪf aɪ steɪ ðɪs kloʊs tə ju, ɪt meɪ bi noʊɾəst. hæv jə ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ tə tɛl mi? əɹ tə æsk? meɪk ɪt kwɪk, dɔɾɝ."

The Amyrlin snorted. "Putting Morgase back on the proper path whether she wants to go or not will be hard enough without her thinking I've sent her daughter to sea in a leaky skiff. This way I can say straight out that it was none of my doing. It may be a bit hard on Elayne, when she finally has to face her mother, but I have three hounds, now, not two. I told you I'd have a hundred if I could." She adjusted her stole on her shoulders. "This has gone on long enough. If I stay this close to you, it may be noticed. Have you anything more to tell me? Or to ask? Make it quick, Daughter."

"wʌɾ ɪz kælændɝ, mʌðɝ?" nɪneɪiv æskt.

"What is Callandor, Mother?" Nynaeve asked.

ðɪs taɪm ɪt wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn u fɝɡɑt hɝsɛlf, hæf tɝnɪŋ təwɔɹd nɪneɪiv bɪfɔɹ dʒɝkɪŋ hɝsɛlf bæk. "ðeɪ kænɑt bi əlaʊd tə hæv ðæt." hɝ wɪspɝ wɑz bɛɹli ɑɾəbəl, əz ɪf mɛn fəɹ əɹ oʊn ɪɹz əloʊn. "ðeɪ kænɑt pɑsəbli teɪk ɪt, bʌt. . . ." ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ən əɹ sɑft wɝdz fɝmd ɪnʌf tə bi klɪɹ tə nɪneɪiv, ɪf tə noʊ wʌn tu peɪsɪz fɝðɝ əweɪ. "noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə dʌzən wɪmən ɪn ðə taʊɝ noʊ wʌt kælændɝ ɪz, ən pɝhæps əz mɛni aʊtsaɪd. ðə haɪ lɔɹdz ə tɛɹ noʊ, bʌt ðeɪ nɛvɝ spik ʌv ɪɾ ɪksɛpt wən ə lɔɹɾ ə ðə læn ɪz toʊld ɑn biɪŋ ɹeɪzd. ðə sɔɹd ðət kænɑt bi tʌtʃt ɪz ə sɑŋɡɹil, ɡɝl. oʊnli tu mɔɹ paʊɝfəl wɝ ɛvɝ meɪd, ən θæŋk ðə laɪt, niðɝ ə ðoʊz wɑz ɛvɝ juzd. wɪð kælændɝ ɪn jəɹ hænz, tʃaɪld, jə kəd lɛvəl ə sɪɾi ət wʌn bloʊ. ɪf jə daɪ kipɪŋ ðəɾ aʊɾ ə ðə blæk ədʒɑz hænz - ju, ən ɛɡwin, ən ɪleɪn, ɔl θɹi - jəl əv dʌn ə sɝvəs tə ðə hoʊl wɝld, ən tʃip ət ðə pɹaɪs."

This time it was the Amyrlin who forgot herself, half turning toward Nynaeve before jerking herself back. "They cannot be allowed to have that." Her whisper was barely audible, as if meant for her own ears alone. "They cannot possibly take it, but. . . ." She took a deep breath, and her soft words firmed enough to be clear to Nynaeve, if to no one two paces further away. "No more than a dozen women in the Tower know what Callandor is, and perhaps as many outside. The High Lords of Tear know, but they never speak of it except when a Lord of the Land is told on being raised. The Sword That Cannot Be Touched is a sa'angreal, girl. Only two more powerful were ever made, and thank the Light, neither of those was ever used. With Callandor in your hands, child, you could level a city at one blow. If you die keeping that out of the Black Ajah's hands - you, and Egwene, and Elayne, all three - you'll have done a service to the whole world, and cheap at the price."

"haʊ kəd ðeɪ teɪk ɪt?" nɪneɪiv æskt. "aɪ θɔɾ oʊnli ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn kəd tʌtʃ kælændɝ."

"How could they take it?" Nynaeve asked. "I thought only the Dragon Reborn could touch Callandor."

ði æmɪɝlɪn ɡeɪv əɹ ə saɪdweɪz lʊk ʃɑɹp ɪnʌf tə kɑɹv ðə ɹoʊsts ɑn ðə spɪt. "ðeɪ kəd bi æftɝ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls," ʃi sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt. "ðeɪ stoʊl tɛɹæŋɡɹil hɪɹ. ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ hoʊlz nɪɹli əz mɛni tɛɹæŋɡɹil əz ðə taʊɝ."

The Amyrlin gave her a sideways look sharp enough to carve the roasts on the spit. "They could be after something else," she said after a moment. "They stole ter'angreal here. The Stone of Tear holds nearly as many ter'angreal as the Tower."

"aɪ θɔt ðə haɪ lɔɹdz heɪɾəd ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ," nɪneɪiv wɪspɝɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli.

"I thought the High Lords hated anything to do with the One Power," Nynaeve whispered incredulously.

"oʊ, ðeɪ də heɪɾ ɪt, tʃaɪld. heɪɾ ɪt, ən fɪɹ ɪt. wən ðeɪ faɪn ə tɛɹən ɡɝl u kən tʃænəl, ðeɪ bʌndəl əɹ ɑntu ə ʃɪp fəɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn bɪfɔɹ ðə deɪ ɪz dʌn, wɪð hɑɹdli taɪm tə spik ɡʊdbaɪz tə hɝ fæmli." ði æmɪɝlɪnz mɝmɝ wɑz bɪɾɝ wɪð mɛmɹi. "jɛt ðeɪ hoʊld wʌn ə ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl foʊkəsɪz ə ðə paʊɝ ðə wɝld əz ɛvɝ sin, ɪnsaɪd ðɛɹ pɹɛʃəs stoʊn. ɪts maɪ bɪlif ðəɾ ɪz waɪ ðeɪv kəlɛktəd soʊ mɛni tɛɹæŋɡɹil - ən ɪndid, ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə paʊɝ - oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz, əz ɪf baɪ duɪŋ soʊ ðeɪ kən dɪmɪnɪʃ ði ɛɡzɪstəns ə ðə θɪŋ ðeɪ kænɑt ɹɪd ðɛmsɛlvz ʌv, ðə θɪŋ ðət ɹimaɪnz əm ə ðɛɹ oʊn dum ɛvɹi taɪm ðeɪ ɛntɝ ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn. ðɛɹ fɔɹtʃɹəs ðəɾ əz bɹoʊkən ə hʌnʒɹəd ɑɹmiz wɪl fɔl əz wʌn ə ðə saɪnz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪz ɹibɔɹn. nɑɾ ivən ði oʊnli saɪn; dʒʌst wʌn. haʊ ðət mʌst ɹæŋkəl ðɛɹ pɹaʊd hɑɹts. ðɛɹ daʊnfɔl wɪl nɑɾ ivən bi ðə wʌn ɡɹeɪt saɪn ə ðə wɝlz tʃeɪnʒ. ðeɪ kænɑɾ ivən ɪɡnɔɹ ɪt baɪ steɪɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə hɑɹt. ðəɾ ɪz wɛɹ lɔɹdz ə ðə læn ɑɹ ɹeɪz tə haɪ lɔɹdz, ən wɛɹ ðeɪ mʌs pɝfɔɹm wʌt ðeɪ kɔl ðə ɹaɪɾ ə ðə ɡɑɹɾɪŋ fɔɹ taɪmz ə jɪɹ, kleɪmɪŋ ðət ðeɪ ɡɑɹd ðə hoʊl wɝld əɡɛns ðə dʒɹæɡən baɪ hoʊldɪŋ kælændɝ. ɪt mʌs baɪɾ ət ðɛɹ soʊlz laɪk ə bɛlɪfəl ə laɪv sɪlvɝpaɪk, ən noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ dɪzɝv." ʃi ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk, əz ɪf ɹilaɪzɪŋ ʃi hæd sɛd fɑɹ mɔɹ ðən ʃi hæɾ ɪntɛndəd. "ɪz ðəɾ ɔl, tʃaɪld?"

"Oh, they do hate it, child. Hate it, and fear it. When they find a Tairen girl who can channel, they bundle her onto a ship for Tar Valon before the day is done, with hardly time to speak goodbyes to her family." The Amyrlin's murmur was bitter with memory. "Yet they hold one of the most powerful focuses of the Power the world has ever seen, inside their precious Stone. It is my belief that is why they have collected so many ter'angreal - and indeed, anything to do with the Power - over the years, as if by doing so they can diminish the existence of the thing they cannot rid themselves of, the thing that reminds them of their own doom every time they enter the Heart of the Stone. Their fortress that has broken a hundred armies will fall as one of the signs the Dragon is Reborn. Not even the only sign; just one. How that must rankle their proud hearts. Their downfall will not even be the one great sign of the world's change. They cannot even ignore it by staying out of the Heart. That is where Lords of the Land are raised to High Lords, and where they must perform what they call the Rite of the Guarding four times a year, claiming that they guard the whole world against the Dragon by holding Callandor. It must bite at their souls like a bellyful of live silverpike, and no more than they deserve." She gave herself a shake, as if realizing she had said far more than she had intended. "Is that all, child?"

"jɛs, mʌðɝ," nɪneɪiv sɛd. laɪt, ɪɾ ɔlweɪz kʌmz bæk tə ɹænd, dʌzn ɪt? ɔlweɪz bæk tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ɪt wɑz stɪl ən ɛfɝt tə θɪŋk ə hɪm ðət weɪ. "ðæts ɔl."

"Yes, Mother," Nynaeve said. Light, it always comes back to Rand, doesn't it? Always back to the Dragon Reborn. It was still an effort to think of him that way. "That's all."

ði æmɪɝlɪn ʃɪftəɾ əɹ stoʊl əɡɛn, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə fɹɛnzid skɝi ɪn ðə kɪtʃən. "aɪl əv tə sɛt ðɪs æɹaɪt. aɪ niɾəd tə spik tə jə wɪθaʊt dɪleɪ, bʌt lɑɹəz ɪz ə ɡʊd wʊmən, ən ʃi mænɪdʒɪz ðə kɪtʃən ən ðə lɑɹɾɝz wɛl."

The Amyrlin shifted her stole again, frowning at the frenzied scurry in the kitchen. "I'll have to set this aright. I needed to speak to you without delay, but Laras is a good woman, and she manages the kitchen and the larders well."

nɪneɪiv snɪft, ən ədʒɹɛst əɹ hænz ɑn ðə spɪt hændəl. "lɑɹəz ɪz ə saʊɝ lʌmp ə lɑɹd, ən tu hændi wɪð ðət spun baɪ hæf." ʃi θɔt ʃi hæd mʌɾɝd ɪɾ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, bʌt ʃi hɝd ði æmɪɝlɪn tʃʌkəl ɹaɪli.

Nynaeve sniffed, and addressed her hands on the spit handle. "Laras is a sour lump of lard, and too handy with that spoon by half." She thought she had muttered it under her breath, but she heard the Amyrlin chuckle wryly.

"ju ɑɹ ə faɪn dʒʌdʒ ə kɛɹɪktɝ, tʃaɪld. jə mʌst əv dʌn wɛl əz ðə wɪzdəm ə jəɹ vɪlədʒ. ɪt wɑz lɑɹəz u wɛn tə ʃɛɹiəm ən dɪmændəd tə noʊ haʊ lɔŋ jə θɹi ɑɹ tə bi kɛp tə ðə dɝɾiəst ən hɑɹɾəst wɝk, wɪθaʊɾ ə tɝn ət laɪɾɝ. ʃi sɛd ʃi wəd nɑt bi ə pɑɹɾi tə bɹeɪkɪŋ ɛni wʊmənz hɛlθ əɹ spɪɹət, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ aɪ sɛd. ə faɪn dʒʌdʒ ə kɛɹɪktɝ, tʃaɪld."

"You are a fine judge of character, child. You must have done well as the Wisdom of your village. It was Laras who went to Sheriam and demanded to know how long you three are to be kept to the dirtiest and hardest work, without a turn at lighter. She said she would not be a party to breaking any woman's health or spirit, no matter what I said. A fine judge of character, child."

lɑɹəz keɪm bæk ɪndə ðə kɪtʃən dɔɹweɪ ðɛn, hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ tə ɛntɝ əɹ oʊn doʊmeɪn. ði æmɪɝlɪn wɛn tə mit hɝ, smaɪlz ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ əɹ fɹaʊnz ən stɛɹz.

Laras came back into the kitchen doorway then, hesitating to enter her own domain. The Amyrlin went to meet her, smiles replacing her frowns and stares.

"ɪɾ ɔl lʊks vɛɹi wɛl tə mi, lɑɹəz." ði æmɪɝlɪnz wɝdz keɪm laʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ði ɪntaɪɝ kɪtʃən tə hɪɹ. "aɪ si nʌθɪŋ aʊɾ ə pleɪs, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ əz ɪt ʃəd bi. jə ɑɹ tə bi kəmɛndɪd. aɪ θɪŋk əl meɪk mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə kɪtʃənz ə fɔɹməl taɪɾəl."

"It all looks very well to me, Laras." The Amyrlin's words came loud enough for the entire kitchen to hear. "I see nothing out of place, and everything as it should be. You are to be commended. I think I will make Mistress of the Kitchens a formal title."

ðə staʊt wʊmənz feɪs flʌɾɝd fɹəm ʌnizinəs tə ʃɑk tə bimɪŋ plɛʒɝ. baɪ ðə taɪm ði æmɪɝlɪn swɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə kɪtʃən, lɑɹəz wɑz ɔl smaɪlz. hɝ fɹaʊn ɹɪtɝnd, ðoʊ, əz ʃi lʊk fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪnz dɪpɑɹɾɪŋ bæk tə hɝ wɝkɝz. ðə kɪtʃən sim tə lip ɪndə moʊʃən. lɑɹəz' ɡɹɪm stɛɹ sɛɾəld ɑn nɪneɪiv.

The stout woman's face fluttered from uneasiness to shock to beaming pleasure. By the time the Amyrlin swept out of the kitchen, Laras was all smiles. Her frown returned, though, as she looked from the Amyrlin's departing back to her workers. The kitchen seemed to leap into motion. Laras' grim stare settled on Nynaeve.

tɝnɪŋ ðə spɪɾ əɡɛn, nɪneɪiv tʃɹaɪd smaɪlɪŋ ət ðə bɪɡ wʊmən.

Turning the spit again, Nynaeve tried smiling at the big woman.

lɑɹəz' fɹaʊn dipənd, ən ʃi bɪɡæn tæpɪŋ əɹ spun ɑn əɹ θaɪ, əpɛɹənli fɝɡɛɾɪŋ ðət fəɹ wʌns ɪt hæd bɪn juz fəɹ ɪts ɪntɛndəd pɝpəs. ɪt lɛf smɪɹz ə sup ɑn ðə waɪɾ ə hɝ eɪpɹən.

Laras' frown deepened, and she began tapping her spoon on her thigh, apparently forgetting that for once it had been used for its intended purpose. It left smears of soup on the white of her apron.

əl smaɪl əɾ əɹ ɪf ɪf kɪlz mi, nɪneɪiv θɔt, ðoʊ ʃi hæd tə ɡɹɪɾ əɹ tiθ tə də ɪt.

I will smile at her if if kills me, Nynaeve thought, though she had to grit her teeth to do it.

ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn əpɪɹd, twɪstɪŋ ðɛɹ feɪsəz ən skɹʌbɪŋ ðɛɹ maʊðz wɪð ðɛɹ slivz. əɾ ə stɛɹ fɹəm lɑɹəz, ðeɪ dæʃt tə ðə spɪɾ ən ɹɪzum ðɛɹ leɪbɝz.

Egwene and Elayne appeared, twisting their faces and scrubbing their mouths with their sleeves. At a stare from Laras, they dashed to the spit and resumed their labors.

"soʊp," ɪleɪn mʌɾɝd θɪkli, "teɪsts hɔɹəd!"

"Soap," Elayne muttered thickly, "tastes horrid!"

ɛɡwin tʃɹɛmbəld əz ʃi spun dʒus fɹəm ðə dʒɹɪpɪŋ pæn oʊvɝ ðə ɹoʊsts. "nɪneɪiv, ɪf jə tɛl mi ði æmɪɝlɪn toʊld əs tə steɪ hɪɹ, əl skɹim. aɪ maɪt ɹʌn əweɪ fəɹ ɹil."

Egwene trembled as she spooned juice from the dripping pan over the roasts. "Nynaeve, if you tell me the Amyrlin told us to stay here, I will scream. I might run away for real."

"wi liv æftɝ ðə wɑʃɪŋ ʌp ɪz dʌn," ʃi toʊl ðɛm, "dʒʌst əz kwɪkli əz wi kən fɛtʃ əɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz fɹəm əɹ ɹumz." ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd ʃɛɹ ði iɡɝnəs ðət flæʃt ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz. laɪt sɛnd wi ɑɹənt wɔkɪŋ ɪndə ə tʃɹæp wi kænt ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ʌv. laɪt sɛn ɪt soʊ.

"We leave after the washing up is done," she told them, "just as quickly as we can fetch our belongings from our rooms." She wished she could share the eagerness that flashed in their eyes. Light send we aren't walking into a trap we can't get out of. Light send it so.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾi


CHAPTER 30

ðə fɝs tɔs


The First Toss

æftɝ nɪneɪiv ən ði ʌðɝz lɛf hɪm, mæt spɛn moʊst ə ðə deɪ ɪn ɪz ɹum, ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn bɹif ɪkskɝʒən. hi wɑz plænɪŋ. ən iɾɪŋ. hi eɪt nɪɹli ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən bɹɔt hɪm, ən æsk fəɹ mɔɹ. ðeɪ wɝ mɔɹ ðən hæpi tə əblaɪdʒ. ɪt wɑz bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz ən fɹuɾ i æsk fɔɹ, ən i paɪld wɪntɝ-ɹɪŋkəld æpəlz ən pɛɹz, wɛdʒəz ə tʃiz ən loʊvz ə bɹɛɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb, livɪŋ ɛmpti tʃɹeɪz fəɹ əm tə teɪk əweɪ.

After Nynaeve and the others left him, Mat spent most of the day in his room, except for one brief excursion. He was planning. And eating. He ate nearly everything the serving women brought him, and asked for more. They were more than happy to oblige. It was bread and cheese and fruit he asked for, and he piled winter-wrinkled apples and pears, wedges of cheese and loaves of bread inside the wardrobe, leaving empty trays for them to take away.

ət mɪddeɪ hi hæd tə ɛndʒjʊɹ ə vɪzət fɹəm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ - æneɪjə, hi sim tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ əɹ neɪm wɑz. ʃi pʊɾ əɹ hænz ɑn ɪz hɛɾ ən sɛn koʊl tʃɪlz θɹu hɪm. ɪt wɑz ðə wʌn paʊɝ, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd, nɑt sɪmpli biɪŋ tʌtʃt baɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi wɑz ə pleɪn wʊmən dɪspaɪɾ əɹ smuð tʃiks ən ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi.

At midday he had to endure a visit from an Aes Sedai - Anaiya, he seemed to remember her name was. She put her hands on his head and sent cold chills through him. It was the One Power, he decided, not simply being touched by an Aes Sedai. She was a plain woman despite her smooth cheeks and Aes Sedai serenity.

"ju sim mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ," ʃi toʊl hɪm, smaɪlɪŋ. hɝ smaɪl meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ə hɪz mʌðɝ. "ivən hʌŋɡɹiɝ ðən aɪ ɪkspɛktəd, soʊ aɪ hɪɹ, bʌt bɛɾɝ. aɪm ɪnfɔɹm jə ɑɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə it ðə lɑɹɾɝz bɛɹ. bɪliv mi wən aɪ seɪ wɪl si juv ɔl ðə fud jə nid. jə də nɑɾ əv tə wɝi ðət wɪl lɛt jə mɪs ə mil bɪfɔɹ jə ɑɹ fʊli wɛl əɡɛn."

"You seem much better," she told him, smiling. Her smile made him think of his mother. "Even hungrier than I expected, so I hear, but better. I am informed you are trying to eat the larders bare. Believe me when I say we will see you have all the food you need. You do not have to worry that we'll let you miss a meal before you are fully well again."

hi ɡeɪv ðə ɡɹɪn i juzd ɑn ɪz mʌðɝ wən i ɪspɛʃli wɑntəɾ əɹ tə bɪliv hɪm. "aɪ noʊ jə woʊnt. ən aɪ də fil bɛɾɝ. aɪ θɔɾ aɪ maɪt si səm ə ðə sɪɾi ðɪs æftɝnun. ɪf juv noʊ əbdʒɛkʃənz, ʌv kɔɹs. meɪbi vɪzəɾ ən ɪn tənaɪt. ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ laɪk ə naɪɾ ə kɑmən-ɹum tɔk tə pɪk wʌnz spɪɹəts ʌp."

He gave the grin he used on his mother when he especially wanted her to believe him. "I know you won't. And I do feel better. I thought I might see some of the city this afternoon. If you have no objections, of course. Maybe visit an inn tonight. There's nothing like a night of common-room talk to pick one's spirits up."

hi θɔɾ əɹ lɪps twɪtʃt ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə bɪɡɝ smaɪl. "noʊ wʌn wɪl tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp ju, mæt. bʌt də nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə liv ðə sɪɾi. ɪɾəl oʊnli əpsɛt ðə ɡɑɹdz, ən bɹɪŋ jə nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ə tʃɹɪp bæk hɪɹ ʌndɝ ɛskɔɹt."

He thought her lips twitched on the edge of a bigger smile. "No one will try to stop you, Mat. But do not try to leave the city. It will only upset the guards, and bring you nothing but a trip back here under escort."

"aɪ wəd nɑt də ðæt, ɛɛs sədaɪ. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit sɛɾ aɪd stɑɹv tə dɛθ ɪn ə fju deɪz ɪf aɪ lɛft."

"I would not do that, Aes Sedai. The Amyrlin Seat said I'd starve to death in a few days if I left."

ʃi nɑɾəd əz ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ə wɝɾ i sɛd. "ʌv kɔɹs." əz ʃi tɝn fɹəm hɪm, hɝ aɪz fɛl ɑn ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf i hæd bɹɔt fɹəm ðə pɹæktəs jɑɹd, pɹɑpt ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə ɹum. "ju də nɑt nid tə pɹətɛk jɝsɛlf fɹəm ʌs, mæt. jə ɑɹ əz seɪf hɪɹ əz jə kəd bi ɛniwɛɹ. ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli seɪfɝ."

She nodded as if she did not believe a word he said. "Of course." As she turned from him, her eyes fell on the quarterstaff he had brought from the practice yard, propped in the corner of the room. "You do not need to protect yourself from us, Mat. You are as safe here as you could be anywhere. Almost certainly safer."

"oʊ, aɪ noʊ ðæt, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ du." æftɝ ʃi lɛft i fɹaʊn ət ðə dɔɹ, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf i hæd mænədʒ tə kənvɪns əɹ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ.

"Oh, I know that, Aes Sedai. I do." After she left he frowned at the door, wondering if he had managed to convince her of anything.

ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ivnɪŋ ðən æftɝnun wən i lɛf ðə ɹum fəɹ wʌɾ i hoʊpt wɑz ðə faɪnəl taɪm. ðə skaɪ wɑz pɝpəlɪŋ, ən ðə sɛɾɪŋ sʌn peɪntəd klaʊdz tə ðə wɛst ɪn ʃeɪdz ə ɹɛd. wʌns i hæɾ ɪz kloʊk ɝaʊn hɪm, ən ðə bɪɡ lɛðɝ skɹɪp i hæd faʊn ɑn ɪz wʌn ɝliɝ fɔɹeɪ dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ən bʌlʒɪŋ wɪð ðə bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz ən fɹuɾ i hæd skwɝəld əweɪ, wʌn lʊk ɪn ðə mɪɹɝ toʊld ɪm ðəɹ wɑz noʊ haɪɾɪŋ wʌɾ i ɪntɛndəd. hi taɪd ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz kloʊðz ʌp ɪn ə ɹoʊl wɪð ðə blæŋkət fɹəm ðə bɛɾ ən slʌŋ ðəɾ əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, tu. ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf dɪd fəɹ ə wɔkɪŋ stæf. hi lɛf nʌθɪŋ bɪhaɪnd. hɪz koʊt pɑkəts hɛld ɔl ɪz smɔlɝ bɪlɔŋɪŋz, ən ɪz bɛl paʊtʃ hɛl ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ði æmɪɝlɪn sits peɪpɝ. ɪleɪnz lɛɾɝ. ən ɪz daɪs kʌps.

It was more evening than afternoon when he left the room for what he hoped was the final time. The sky was purpling, and the setting sun painted clouds to the west in shades of red. Once he had his cloak around him, and the big leather scrip he had found on his one earlier foray dangling from his shoulder and bulging with the bread and cheese and fruit he had squirreled away, one look in the mirror told him there was no hiding what he intended. He tied the rest of his clothes up in a roll with the blanket from the bed and slung that across his shoulders, too. The quarterstaff did for a walking staff. He left nothing behind. His coat pockets held all his smaller belongings, and his belt pouch held the most important. The Amyrlin Seat's paper. Elayne's letter. And his dice cups.

hi sɔ ɛɛs sədaɪ əz i meɪɾ ɪz weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ, ən səm ə ðɛm noʊɾəst hɪm, ðoʊ moʊs mɪɹli flɪkɝɾ ən aɪbɹaʊ, ən nʌn spoʊk tə hɪm. æneɪjə wɑz wʌn. ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ən əmjuz smaɪl ən ə ɹufəl ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛd. hi ɹɪtɝn ə ʃɹʌɡ ən ðə ɡɪltiəst ɡɹɪn i kəd mænədʒ, ən ʃi wɛn saɪlənli ɑn, stɪl ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd. ðə ɡɑɹdz ət ðə taʊɝ ɡeɪts sɪmpli lʊkt ət hɪm.

He saw Aes Sedai as he made his way out of the Tower, and some of them noticed him, though most merely flickered an eyebrow, and none spoke to him. Anaiya was one. She gave him an amused smile and a rueful shake of her head. He returned a shrug and the guiltiest grin he could manage, and she went silently on, still shaking her head. The guards at the Tower gates simply looked at him.

ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əntɪl i wɑz əkɹɔs ðə bɪɡ skwɛɹ ən ɪndə ðə stʃɹits ə ðə sɪɾi ðət ɹɪlif faɪnəli sɝdʒd ʌp ɪn hɪm. ən tʃɹaɪəmf. ɪf jə kæn haɪd wʌt jə ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə du, də ɪt soʊ ɛvɹibɑɾi θɪŋks jə ɑɹ ə ful. ðən ðeɪ stæn ɝaʊnd weɪɾɪŋ tə si jə fɔl ɑn jəɹ feɪs. ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪl bi weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə ɡɑɹdz tə bɹɪŋ mi bæk. wən aɪ də nɑt ɹɪtɝn baɪ mɔɹnɪŋ, ðən ðəl stɑɹɾ ə sɝtʃ. nɑt tu fɹæntɪk ət fɝst, kəz ðəl θɪŋk aɪ hæv ɡɔn tə ɡɹaʊn sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə sɪɾi. baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹilaɪz aɪ hævənt, ðɪs ɹæbət wɪl bi ə lɔŋ weɪ daʊnɹɪvɝ fɹəm ðə haʊnz.

It was not until he was across the big square and into the streets of the city that relief finally surged up in him. And triumph. If you can't hide what you are going to do, do it so everybody thinks you are a fool. Then they stand around waiting to see you fall on your face. Those Aes Sedai will be waiting for the guards to bring me back. When I do not return by morning, then they'll start a search. Not too frantic at first, because they'll think I have gone to ground somewhere in the city. By the time they realize I haven't, this rabbit will be a long way downriver from the hounds.

wɪð əz laɪɾ ə hɑɹɾ əz i kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ hævɪŋ ɪn jɪɹz, əɹ soʊ ɪt simd, hi bɪɡæn tə hʌm "wɝ oʊvɝ ðə bɔɹɾɝ əɡɛn," hɛɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə hɑɹbɝ wɛɹ vɛsəlz wəd bi seɪlɪŋ daʊn tə tɛɹ ən ɔl ðə vɪlədʒəz əlɔŋ ði ɛɹɪnɪn bɪtwin. hi wəd nɑt bi ɡoʊɪŋ soʊ fɑɹ əz ðæt, ʌv kɔɹs. ɑɹɪŋɡəl, wɛɹ i wəd teɪk tə læn əɡɛn fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə tʃɹɪp tə keɪɛmlɪn, wɑz oʊnli hæfweɪ daʊnɹɪvɝ.

With as light a heart as he could remember having in years, or so it seemed, he began to hum "We're Over the Border Again," heading toward the harbor where vessels would be sailing down to Tear and all the villages along the Erinin between. He would not be going so far as that, of course. Aringill, where he would take to land again for the rest of the trip to Caemlyn, was only halfway downriver.

əl dɪlɪvɝ jəɹ blʌɾi lɛɾɝ. ðə nɝv ə hɝ, θɪŋkɪŋ aɪd seɪ aɪ wʊd, ðən nɑt. əl dɪlɪvɝ ðə blʌɾi θɪŋ ɪf ɪt kɪlz mi.

I'll deliver your bloody letter. The nerve of her, thinking I'd say I would, then not. I will deliver the bloody thing if it kills me.

twaɪlaɪt wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə kʌvɝ tɑɹ vəlɑn, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ɪnʌf laɪt tə ɡɹeɪs ðə fæntæstɪkəl bɪldɪŋz, ən ði ɑdli ʃeɪp taʊɝz kənɛktəd baɪ haɪ bɹɪdʒəz spænɪŋ oʊpən ɛɹ oʊvɝ hʌnʒɹəd-peɪs dʒɹɑps. pipəl jɛt fɪl ðə stʃɹits, ɪn soʊ mɛni dɪfɹən kaɪnz ə kloʊðɪŋ ðəɾ i θɔɾ ɛvɹi neɪʃən mʌs bi ɹɛpɹəzɛntəd. əlɔŋ ðə meɪdʒɝ ævənuz, pɛɹz ə læmplaɪɾɝz juz ðɛɹ læɾɝz tə laɪt læntɝnz ətɑp tɔl poʊlz. bʌɾ ɪn ðə pɑɹɾ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn i sɔt, ði oʊnli laɪt wɑz wʌt spɪl fɹəm wɪndoʊz.

Twilight was beginning to cover Tar Valon, but there was still enough light to grace the fantastical buildings, and the oddly shaped towers connected by high bridges spanning open air over hundred-pace drops. People yet filled the streets, in so many different kinds of clothing that he thought every nation must be represented. Along the major avenues, pairs of lamplighters used their ladders to light lanterns atop tall poles. But in the part of Tar Valon he sought, the only light was what spilled from windows.

oʊɡiɝ hæd bɪl ðə ɡɹeɪt bɪldɪŋz ən taʊɝz ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, bʌɾ ʌðɝ, nuɝ pɑɹts hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌndɝ ðə hænz ə mɛn. nuɝ minɪŋ tu θaʊzən jɪɹz ɪn səm keɪsəz. daʊn nɪɹ saʊθ hɑɹbɝ, mɛnz hænz hæd tʃɹaɪd tə mætʃ, ɪf nɑt dupləkeɪt, ðə fænsɪfəl oʊɡiɝ wɝk. ɪnz wɛɹ ʃɪps' kɹuz kɛɹz bɔɹ ɪnʌf stoʊnwɝk fəɹ pæləsəz. stætʃuz ɪn nɪtʃɪz ən kʌpoʊləs ɑn ɹuftɑps, ɔɹnətli wɝkt kɔɹnɪsəz ən ɪntʃɹəkətli kɑɹv fɹizɪz, ɔl dɛkɝeɪɾəd tʃænlɝz' ʃɑps ən mɝtʃən haʊsəz. bɹɪdʒəz ɑɹtʃt əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹits hɪɹ, tu, bʌt ðə stʃɹits wɝ kɑbəlstoʊn, nɑt ɡɹeɪt peɪvɪŋ blɑks, ən mɛni ʌv ðə bɹɪdʒəz wɝ wʊɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə stoʊn, səmtaɪmz əz loʊ əz ðə sɛkən stɔɹiz ə ðə bɪldɪŋz ðeɪ dʒɔɪnd, ən nɛvɝ haɪɝ ðən fɔɹ.

Ogier had built the great buildings and towers of Tar Valon, but other, newer parts had grown under the hands of men. Newer meaning two thousand years in some cases. Down near South harbor, men's hands had tried to match, if not duplicate, the fanciful Ogier work. Inns where ships' crews caroused bore enough stonework for palaces. Statues in niches and cupolas on rooftops, ornately worked cornices and intricately carved friezes, all decorated chandlers' shops and merchant houses. Bridges arched across the streets here, too, but the streets were cobblestone, not great paving blocks, and many of the bridges were wood instead of stone, sometimes as low as the second stories of the buildings they joined, and never higher than four.

ðə dɑɹk stʃɹits hʌmd wɪð əz mʌtʃ laɪf əz ɛni ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. tʃɹeɪɾɝz ɔf ðɛɹ vɛsəlz ən ðoʊz u bɑt wʌt ðə vɛsəlz kæɹid, pipəl u tʃɹævəl ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn ən pipəl u wɝkt ɪt, ɔl fɪl ðə tævɝnz ən ðə kɑmən ɹumz ə ði ɪnz, ɪn kʌmpəni wɪð ðoʊz u sɔt ðə mʌni sətʃ foʊk kæɹid, baɪ fɛɹ minz əɹ mɝki. ɹɔkəs mjuzɪk fɪl ðə stʃɹits fɹəm bɪɾɝn ən flut, hɑɹp ən hæmɝd dʌlsɪmɝ. ðə fɝst ɪn mæt ɛntɝd hæd θɹi daɪs ɡeɪmz ɪn pɹɑɡɹɛs, mɛn kɹaʊtʃt ɪn sɝkəlz nɪɹ ðə kɑmən-ɹum wɔlz ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ ðə wɪnz ən lɔsəz.

The dark streets hummed with as much life as any in Tar Valon. Traders off their vessels and those who bought what the vessels carried, people who traveled the River Erinin and people who worked it, all filled the taverns and the common rooms of the inns, in company with those who sought the money such folk carried, by fair means or murky. Raucous music filled the streets from bittern and flute, harp and hammered dulcimer. The first inn Mat entered had three dice games in progress, men crouched in circles near the common-room walls and shouting the wins and losses.

hi oʊnli mɛn tə ɡæmbəl ən aʊɝ əɹ soʊ bɪfɔɹ faɪndɪŋ ə ʃɪp, dʒʌs lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə æɾ ə fju kɔɪnz tə hɪz pɝs, bʌɾ i wʌn. hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz wʌn mɔɹ ðən i lɔst, əz fɑɹ əz i kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ən ðəɹ hæd bɪn taɪmz wɪð hʊɹɪn, ən ɪn ʃaɪnɝ, wən sɪks əɹ eɪt tɔsɪz ɪn ə ɹoʊ wʌn fəɹ hɪm. tənaɪt, ɛvɹi tɔs wʌn. ɛvɹi tɔs.

He only meant to gamble an hour or so before finding a ship, just long enough to add a few coins to his purse, but he won. He had always won more than he lost, as far as he could remember, and there had been times with Hurin, and in Shienar, when six or eight tosses in a row won for him. Tonight, every toss won. Every toss.

fɹəm ðə lʊks səm ə ðə mɛn ɡeɪv hɪm, hi wɑz ɡlæɾ i hæd lɛft ɪz oʊn daɪs ɪn ɪz paʊtʃ. ðoʊz lʊks meɪɾ ɪm dɪsaɪd tə muv ɑn. wɪð sɝpɹaɪz i ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i hæd nɪɹli θɝɾi sɪlvɝ mɑɹks ɪn ɪz pɝs naʊ, bʌɾ i hæd nɑt wʌn soʊ mʌtʃ fɹəm ɛni wʌn mæn ðət ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ ɔl bi ɡlæd tə si hɪm ɡoʊ.

From the looks some of the men gave him, he was glad he had left his own dice in his pouch. Those looks made him decide to move on. With surprise he realized that he had nearly thirty silver marks in his purse now, but he had not won so much from any one man that they would not all be glad to see him go.

ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn dɑɹk seɪlɝ wɪð taɪt kɝlz - wʌn ə ðə si foʊk, sʌmwʌn hæd sɛd, ðoʊ mæt wʌndɝd wʌt wʌn ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɑz duɪŋ soʊ fɑɹ fɹəm ðə si - hu fɑloʊɾ ɪm daʊn ðə dɑɹkən stʃɹit, ɑɹɡjuɪŋ fəɹ ə tʃæns tə meɪk ɡʊɾ ɪz lɔsəz. hi wɑntəd tə ɹitʃ ðə dɑks - θɝɾi sɪlvɝ mɑɹks wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf - bʌt ðə seɪlɝ ɑɹɡjuɾ ɑn, ən i hæɾ oʊnli juz hæf ɪz aʊɝ, soʊ hi ɡeɪv ɪn, ən wɪð ðə mæn ɛntɝd ðə nɛks tævɝn ðeɪ pæst.

Except for one dark sailor with tight curls - one of the Sea Folk, someone had said, though Mat wondered what one of the Atha'an Miere was doing so far from the sea - who followed him down the darkened street, arguing for a chance to make good his losses. He wanted to reach the docks - thirty silver marks was more than enough - but the sailor argued on, and he had only used half his hour, so he gave in, and with the man entered the next tavern they passed.

hi wʌn əɡɛn, ən ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ə fivɝ ɡɹɪp hɪm. hi wʌn ɛvɹi θɹoʊ. fɹəm tævɝn tə ɪn tə tævɝn i wɛnt, nɛvɝ steɪɪŋ lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə æŋɡɝ ɛniwʌn wɪð ði əmaʊn ə hɪz wɪnɪŋz. ən i stɪl wʌn ɛvɹi tɔs. hi ɪkstʃeɪnʒd sɪlvɝ fəɹ ɡoʊld wɪð ə mʌni tʃeɪnɝ. hi pleɪɾ ət kɹaʊnz, ən faɪvz, ən meɪɾənz ɹuən. hi pleɪd ɡeɪmz wɪð faɪv daɪs, ən wɪð fɔɹ, ən θɹi, ən ivən oʊnli tu. hi pleɪd ɡeɪmz i dɪd nɑt noʊ bɪfɔɹ i skwɑɾɪd ɪn ðə sɝkəl, əɹ tʊk ə pleɪs ət ðə teɪbəl. ən i wʌn. sʌmwɛɹ dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt, ðə dɑɹk seɪlɝ - ɹɑb, hi hæd sɛɾ ɪz neɪm wɑz - stæɡɝɾ əweɪ, ɪɡzɔstəd bʌt wɪð ə fʊl pɝs; hi hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə pʊɾ ɪz weɪdʒɝz ɑn mæt. mæt vɪzəɾəd ənʌðɝ mʌni tʃeɪnɝ - əɹ pɝhæps tu; ðə fivɝ sim tə klaʊɾ ɪz bɹeɪn əz bædli əz ɪz mɛmɹiz ə ðə pæst wɝ klaʊɾəd - ən meɪɾ ɪz weɪ tə ənʌðɝ ɡeɪm. wɪnɪŋ.

He won again, and it was as if a fever gripped him. He won every throw. From tavern to inn to tavern he went, never staying long enough to anger anyone with the amount of his winnings. And he still won every toss. He exchanged silver for gold with a money changer. He played at crowns, and fives, and maiden's ruin. He played games with five dice, and with four, and three, and even only two. He played games he did not know before he squatted in the circle, or took a place at the table. And he won. Somewhere during the night, the dark sailor - Raab, he had said his name was - staggered away, exhausted but with a full purse; he had decided to put his wagers on Mat. Mat visited another money changer - or perhaps two; the fever seemed to cloud his brain as badly as his memories of the past were clouded - and made his way to another game. Winning.

ən soʊ hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf, hi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ mɛni aʊɝz leɪɾɝ, ɪn ə tævɝn fɪld wɪð təbæk smoʊk - ðə tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ splaɪs, hi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz kɔld - stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ət faɪv daɪs, itʃ ʃoʊɪŋ ə dipli kɑɹv kɹaʊn. moʊst ə ðə peɪtʃɹənz hɪɹ simd ɪntʃɹəstəɾ oʊnli ɪn dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ kʊd, bʌt ðə ɹæɾəl ə daɪs ən ʃaʊts ə pleɪɝz fɹəm ənʌðɝ ɡeɪm ɪn ðə fɑɹ kɔɹnɝ wɝ ɔlmoʊst səbmɝdʒ baɪ ə wʊmən sɪŋɪŋ tə ə kwɪk tun fɹəm ə hæmɝd dʌlsɪmɝ.

And so he found himself, he did not know how many hours later, in a tavern filled with tabac smoke - The Tremalking Splice, he thought it was called - staring down at five dice, each showing a deeply carved crown. Most of the patrons here seemed interested only in drinking as much as they could, but the rattle of dice and shouts of players from another game in the far corner were almost submerged by a woman singing to a quick tune from a hammered dulcimer.

"aɪl dæns wɪð ə ɡɝl wɪð aɪz ə bɹaʊn, əɹ ə ɡɝl wɪð aɪz ʌv ɡɹin, əl dæns wɪð ə ɡɝl wɪð ɛni kʌlɝ aɪz, bʌt jʊɹz ɑɹ ðə pɹɪɾiəst aɪv sin.

"I'll dance with a girl with eyes of brown, or a girl with eyes of green, I'll dance with a girl with any color eyes, but yours are the prettiest I've seen.

əl kɪs ə ɡɝl wɪð hɛɹ ə blæk, əɹ ə ɡɝl wɪð hɛɹ ʌv ɡoʊld, əl kɪs ə ɡɝl wɪð ɛni kʌlɝ hɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪts jə aɪ wɑnə hoʊld."

I'll kiss a girl with hair of black, or a girl with hair of gold, I'll kiss a girl with any color hair, but it's you I want to hold."

ðə sɪŋɝ hæd neɪm ðə sɔŋ əz "wʌɾ i sɛd tə mi." mæt ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə tun əz "wɪl jə dæns wɪð meɪn," wɪð dɪfɹənt wɝdz, bʌɾ ət ðət moʊmən ɔl i kəd θɪŋk ʌv wɝ ðoʊz daɪs.

The singer had named the song as "What He Said to Me." Mat remembered the tune as "Will You Dance With Me," with different words, but at that moment all he could think of were those dice.

"ðə kɪŋ əɡɛn," wʌn ə ðə mɛn skwɑɾɪŋ wɪð mæt mʌɾɝd. ɪt wɑz ðə fɪfθ taɪm ɪn ə ɹoʊ mæt hæd θɹoʊn ðə kɪŋ.

"The king again," one of the men squatting with Mat muttered. It was the fifth time in a row Mat had thrown the king.

hi hæd wʌn ðə bɛɾ ʌv ə ɡoʊl mɑɹk, nɑɾ ivən kɛɹɪŋ baɪ ðɪs taɪm ðəɾ ɪz ændɔɝən mɑɹk aʊtweɪd ði ʌðɝ mænz ɪliɑnɝ kɔɪn, bʌɾ i skup ðə daɪs ɪndə ðə lɛðɝ kʌp, ɹæɾəld ɪt hɑɹd, ən spʌn əm əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ əɡɛn. faɪv kɹaʊnz. laɪt, ɪt kæn bi. noʊbɑdi ɛvɝ θɹu ðə kɪŋ sɪks taɪmz ɹʌnɪŋ. noʊbɑdi.

He had won the bet of a gold mark, not even caring by this time that his Andoran mark outweighed the other man's Illianer coin, but he scooped the dice into the leather cup, rattled it hard, and spun them across the floor again. Five crowns. Light, it can't be. Nobody ever threw the king six times running. Nobody.

"ðə dɑɹk wʌnz oʊn lʌk," ənʌðɝ mæn ɡɹaʊld. hi wɑz ə bʌlki fɛloʊ, hɪz dɑɹk hɛɹ taɪɾ ət ðə neɪp ə hɪz nɛk wɪð ə blæk ɹɪbən, wɪð hɛvi ʃoʊldɝz, skɑɹz ɑn ɪz feɪs, ən ə noʊz ðət hæd bɪn bɹoʊkən mɔɹ ðən wʌns.

"The Dark One's own luck," another man growled. He was a bulky fellow, his dark hair tied at the nape of his neck with a black ribbon, with heavy shoulders, scars on his face, and a nose that had been broken more than once.

mæt wɑz skɛɹsli əwɛɹ ə muvɪŋ bɪfɔɹ i hæd ðə bʌlki mæn baɪ ðə kɑlɝ, hɔlɪŋ ɪm tə hɪz fit, slæmɪŋ ɪm bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl. "doʊn jə seɪ ðæt!" hi snɑɹəld. "doʊn jə ɛvɝ seɪ ðæt!" ðə mæn blɪŋk daʊn əɾ ɪm ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt; hi wɑz ə fʊl hɛd tɔlɝ ðən mæt.

Mat was scarcely aware of moving before he had the bulky man by the collar, hauling him to his feet, slamming him back against the wall. "Don't you say that!" he snarled. "Don't you ever say that!" The man blinked down at him in astonishment; he was a full head taller than Mat.

"dʒʌst ə seɪɪŋ," sʌmbɑɾi bɪhaɪn ɪm wɑz mʌɾɝɪŋ. "laɪt, ɪts dʒʌst ə seɪɪŋ."

"Just a saying," somebody behind him was muttering. "Light, it's just a saying."

mæt ɹilist ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə skɑɹ-feɪs mænz koʊɾ ən bækt əweɪ. "aɪ. . . . aɪ . . . aɪ doʊn laɪk ɛnibəɾi seɪɪŋ θɪŋz laɪk ðəɾ əbaʊt mi. ɪm noʊ dɑɹkfɹɛnd!" bɝn mi, nɑt ðə dɑɹk wʌnz lʌk. nɑt ðæt! oʊ, laɪt, dɪd ðət blʌɾi dæɡɝ ɹɪli də sʌmθɪŋ tə mi?

Mat released his grip on the scar-faced man's coat and backed away. "I. . . . I . . . I don't like anybody saying things like that about me. I'm no Darkfriend!" Burn me, not the Dark One's luck. Not that! Oh, Light, did that bloody dagger really do something to me?

"noʊbɑdi sɛd jə wɑz," ðə bɹoʊkən-noʊz mæn mʌɾɝd. hi sim tə bi ɡɛɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ tə bi æŋɡɹi.

"Nobody said you was," the broken-nosed man muttered. He seemed to be getting over his surprise, and trying to decide whether to be angry.

ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪz bɪlɔŋɪŋz fɹəm wɛɹ i hæd paɪld əm bɪhaɪn hɪm, mæt wɔkt aʊɾ ə ðə tævɝn, livɪŋ ðə kɔɪnz wɛɹ ðeɪ leɪ. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðəɾ i wɑz əfɹeɪɾ ə ðə bɪɡ mæn. hi hæd fɝɡɑɾən ðə mæn, ən ðə kɔɪnz, tu. ɔl i wɑntəd wɑz tə bi aʊtsaɪd, ɪn fɹɛʃ ɛɹ, wɛɹ i kəd θɪŋk.

Gathering his belongings from where he had piled them behind him, Mat walked out of the tavern, leaving the coins where they lay. It was not that he was afraid of the big man. He had forgotten the man, and the coins, too. All he wanted was to be outside, in fresh air, where he could think.

ɪn ðə stʃɹit, hi lin əɡɛns ðə wɔl ə ðə tævɝn nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðə dɔɹ, bɹiðɪŋ ðə kulnəs ɪn. ðə dɑɹk stʃɹits ə saʊθhɑɹbɝ wɝ ɔl bʌɾ ɛmpti, naʊ. mjuzɪk ən læftɝ stɪl floʊɾəd fɹəm ði ɪnz ən tævɝnz, bʌt fju pipəl meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu ðə naɪt. hoʊldɪŋ ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf əpɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm wɪð boʊθ hænz, hi loʊɝɾ ɪz hɛd tə hɪz fɪsts ən tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk ət ðə pʌzəl fɹəm ɛvɹi saɪd.

In the street, he leaned against the wall of the tavern not far from the door, breathing the coolness in. The dark streets of Southharbor were all but empty, now. Music and laughter still floated from the inns and taverns, but few people made their way through the night. Holding the quarterstaff upright in front of him with both hands, he lowered his head to his fists and tried to think at the puzzle from every side.

hi nu hi wɑz lʌki. hi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɔlweɪz biɪŋ lʌki. bʌt sʌmhaʊ, hɪz mɛmɹiz fɹəm ɛmənz fil dɪd nɑt ʃoʊ hɪm əz lʌki əz i hæd bɪn sɪns livɪŋ. sɝɾənli hi hæd ɡɑɾən əweɪ wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt dil, bʌɾ i kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɔlsoʊ biɪŋ kɑɾ ɪn pɹæŋks i hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ wəd səksid. hɪz mʌðɝ hæɾ ɔlweɪz sim tə noʊ wʌɾ i wɑz ʌp tə, ən nɪneɪiv eɪbəl tə si θɹu wʌtɛvɝ dɪfɛnsəz i pʊɾ ʌp. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt dʒʌst sɪns livɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ðəɾ i hæd bɪkʌm lʌki. ðə lʌk hæd kʌm wʌns i tʊk ðə dæɡɝ fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd pleɪɪŋ ət daɪs bæk hoʊm wɪð ə ʃɑɹp-aɪd, skɪni mæn u wɝk fəɹ ə mɝtʃən kʌm daʊn fɹəm bɛɹlən tə baɪ təbæk. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə stʃɹæpɪŋ ɪz fɑðɝ hæd ɡɪvən hɪm, tu, ɑn lɝnɪŋ mæt oʊd ðə mæn ə sɪlvɝ mɑɹk ən fɔɹ pɛns.

He knew he was lucky. He could remember always being lucky. But somehow, his memories from Emond's Field did not show him as lucky as he had been since leaving. Certainly he had gotten away with a great deal, but he could remember also being caught in pranks he had been sure would succeed. His mother had always seemed to know what he was up to, and Nynaeve able to see through whatever defenses he put up. But it was not just since leaving the Two Rivers that he had become lucky. The luck had come once he took the dagger from Shadar Logoth. He remembered playing at dice back home with a sharp-eyed, skinny man who worked for a merchant come down from Baerlon to buy tabac. He remembered the strapping his father had given him, too, on learning Mat owed the man a silver mark and four pence.

"bʌɾ aɪm fɹi ʌv ðə blʌɾi dæɡɝ," hi mʌmbəld. "ðoʊz blʌɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛɾ aɪ wɑz." hi wʌndɝd haʊ mʌtʃ i hæd wʌn tənaɪt.

"But I'm free of the bloody dagger," he mumbled. "Those bloody Aes Sedai said I was." He wondered how much he had won tonight.

wən i dʌɡ ɪndə hɪz koʊt pɑkəts, hi faʊn əm fɪld wɪð lus kɔɪnz, kɹaʊnz ən mɑɹks, boʊθ sɪlvɝ ən ɡoʊl ðət ɡlɪɾɝd ən ɡlɪntɪɾ ɪn ðə laɪt fɹəm nɪɹbaɪ wɪndoʊz. hi hæd tu pɝsɪz naʊ, ɪt simd, ən boʊθ fæt. hi əndɪd ðə stʃɹɪŋz, ən faʊn mɔɹ ɡoʊld. ən stɪl mɔɹ stʌft ɪndə hɪz bɛl paʊtʃ bɪtwin ən ɝaʊn ən ɑn tɑp ə hɪz daɪs kʌps, kɹʌmplɪŋ ɪleɪnz lɛɾɝ ən ði æmɪɝlɪnz peɪpɝ. hi hæɾ ə mɛmɹi ʌv tɔsɪŋ sɪlvɝ pɛns tə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz kəz ðeɪ hæd pɹɪɾi smaɪlz əɹ pɹɪɾi aɪz əɹ pɹɪɾi æŋkəlz, ən kəz sɪlvɝ pɛns wɝ nɑt wɝθ kipɪŋ.

When he dug into his coat pockets, he found them filled with loose coins, crowns and marks, both silver and gold that glittered and glinted in the light from nearby windows. He had two purses now, it seemed, and both fat. He undid the strings, and found more gold. And still more stuffed into his belt pouch between and around and on top of his dice cups, crumpling Elayne's letter and the Amyrlin's paper. He had a memory of tossing silver pence to serving girls because they had pretty smiles or pretty eyes or pretty ankles, and because silver pence were not worth keeping.

nɑt wɝθ kipɪŋ? meɪbi ðeɪ wɝnt. laɪt, aɪm ɹɪtʃ! aɪm blʌɾi ɹɪtʃ! meɪbi ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd. sʌmθɪŋ ðeɪ dɪd hilɪŋ mi. baɪ æksəɾənt, meɪbi. ðət kəd bi ɪt. bɛɾɝ ðət ði ʌðɝ. ðoʊz blʌɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ mʌst əv dʌn ɪt tə mi.

Not worth keeping? Maybe they weren't. Light, I'm rich! I am bloody rich! Maybe it was something the Aes Sedai did. Something they did Healing me. By accident, maybe. That could be it. Better that the other. Those bloody Aes Sedai must have done it to me.

ə bɪɡ mæn muvd aʊt fɹəm ðə tævɝn, ðə dɔɹ ɔlɹɛɾi swɪŋɪŋ ʃʌt tə kʌɾ ɔf ðə laɪt ðət maɪɾ əv ʃoʊn ɪz feɪs.

A big man moved out from the tavern, the door already swinging shut to cut off the light that might have shown his face.

mæt pɹɛst ɪz bæk kloʊs əɡɛns ðə wɔl, stʌf ðə pɝsɪz bæk ɪndə hɪz koʊt, ən fɝmd ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf. wɛɹɛvɝ ɪz lʌk tənaɪt hæd kʌm fɹʌm, hi dɪd nɑt min tə luz ɔl ðət ɡoʊl tə ə fʊtpæd.

Mat pressed his back close against the wall, stuffed the purses back into his coat, and firmed his grip on the quarterstaff. Wherever his luck tonight had come from, he did not mean to lose all that gold to a footpad.

ðə mæn tɝn təwɔɹd hɪm, pɪɹd, ðən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. "si-kul naɪt," hi sɛd dʒɹʌŋkənli. hi stæɡɝd kloʊsɝ, ən mæt sɔ ðət moʊst ə hɪz saɪz wɑz fæt. "aɪ hæv tə. . . . aɪ hæv tə. . . ." stʌmbəlɪŋ, ðə fæt mæn muvd ɑn ʌp ðə stʃɹit, tɔkɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf dɪsdʒɔɪntɪdli.

The man turned toward him, peered, then gave a start. "C-cool night," he said drunkenly. He staggered closer, and Mat saw that most of his size was fat. "I have to. . . . I have to. . . ." Stumbling, the fat man moved on up the street, talking to himself disjointedly.

"ful!" mæt mʌɾɝd, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ i mɛn ɪt fəɹ ðə fæt mæn əɹ fəɹ hɪmsɛlf. "taɪm tə faɪn ə ʃɪp tə teɪk mi əweɪ fɹəm hɪɹ." hi skwɪntɪɾ ət ðə blæk skaɪ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɛstəmeɪt haʊ lɔŋ tɪl dɔn. tu, meɪbi θɹi aʊɝz, hi θɔt. "pæs taɪm." hɪz stʌmək ɡɹaʊld ət hɪm; hi dɪmli ɹɪkɔld iɾɪŋ ɪn səm ə ði ɪnz, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt. ðə fivɝ ə ðə daɪs hæd hæɾ ɪm baɪ ðə θɹoʊt. ə hæn pʊʃt ɪndə ðə skɹɪp faʊn oʊnli kɹʌmz. "weɪ pæs taɪm. əɹ wʌn ə ðɛm wɪl kʌm pɪk mi ʌp wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ən stɪk mi ɪn əɹ paʊtʃ." hi pʊʃt əweɪ fɹəm ðə wɔl ən stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɑks, wɛɹ ðə ʃɪps wəd bi.

"Fool!" Mat muttered, but he was not sure whether he meant it for the fat man or for himself. "Time to find a ship to take me away from here." He squinted at the black sky, trying to estimate how long till dawn. Two, maybe three hours, he thought. "Past time." His stomach growled at him; he dimly recalled eating in some of the inns, but he did not remember what. The fever of the dice had had him by the throat. A hand pushed into the scrip found only crumbs. "Way past time. Or one of them will come pick me up with her fingers and stick me in her pouch." He pushed away from the wall and started for the docks, where the ships would be.

ət fɝst i θɔt ðə feɪn saʊnz bɪhaɪn ɪm wɝ ɛkoʊz ə hɪz buts ɑn ðə kɑbəlstoʊnz. ðən i ɹilaɪz sʌmwʌn wɑz fɑloʊɪŋ hɪm. ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bi stɛlθi. wɛl, ðiz ɑɹ fʊtpædz, fəɹ ʃʊɹ.

At first he thought the faint sounds behind him were echoes of his boots on the cobblestones. Then he realized someone was following him. And trying to be stealthy. Well, these are footpads, for sure.

hɛftɪŋ ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf, hi bɹifli kənsɪɾɝd tɝnɪŋ tə kənfɹʌn ðɛm. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz dɑɹk, ən ðə fʊɾɪŋ ɑn kɑbəlstoʊnz ənsɝɾən, ən i hæd noʊ aɪdiə haʊ mɛni ðəɹ wɝ. dʒʌs kəz jə dɪd wɛl əɡɛnst ɡɔɪn ən ɡɑləd dʌzn meɪk jə ə blʌɾi hɪɹoʊ aʊɾ ʌv ə stɔɹi.

Hefting the quarterstaff, he briefly considered turning to confront them. But it was dark, and the footing on cobblestones uncertain, and he had no idea how many there were. Just because you did well against Gawyn and Galad doesn't make you a bloody hero out of a story.

hi tɝn daʊn ə nɛɹoʊɝ, twɪstɪŋ saɪd stʃɹit, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɔk ɑn tɪptoʊ ən muv kwɪkli ət ðə seɪm taɪm. ɛvɹi wɪndoʊ wɑz dɑɹk hɪɹ, ən moʊst ʃʌɾɝd. hi wɑz ɔlmoʊs tə ði ɛnd wən i sɔ muvmən əhɛd, tu mɛn piɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə saɪd stʃɹit fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt lɛɾ aʊɾ ɑntu ənʌðɝ. ən i hɝd sloʊ fʊtstɛps bɪhaɪn hɪm, sɑf skɹeɪps ə but lɛðɝ ɑn stoʊn.

He turned down a narrower, twisting side street, trying to walk on tiptoe and move quickly at the same time. Every window was dark here, and most shuttered. He was almost to the end when he saw movement ahead, two men peering into the side street from where it let out onto another. And he heard slow footsteps behind him, soft scrapes of boot leather on stone.

ɪn ən ɪnstən i dʌkt ɪndə ðə ʃæɾoʊi kɔɹnɝ wɛɹ wʌn bɪldɪŋ stʌk aʊt fɝðɝ ðən ðə nɛkst. ɪt sim ðə bɛst i kəd də fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf nɝvəsli, hi weɪɾəd.

In an instant he ducked into the shadowy corner where one building stuck out further than the next. It seemed the best he could do for the moment. Gripping the quarterstaff nervously, he waited.

ə mæn əpɪɹd fɹəm bæk ðə weɪ hi hæd kʌm, kɹaʊtʃɪŋ əz i iz hɪmsɛlf əhɛd wʌn sloʊ stɛp əɾ ə taɪm, ən ðən ənʌðɝ mæn. itʃ kæɹiɾ ə naɪf ɪn ɪz hæn ən muvd əz ɪf stɔkɪŋ.

A man appeared from back the way he had come, crouching as he eased himself ahead one slow step at a time, and then another man. Each carried a knife in his hand and moved as if stalking.

mæt tɛnst. ɪf ðeɪ keɪm dʒʌst ə fju stɛps kloʊsɝ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ noʊɾəst ɪm haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə dipɝ ʃædoʊz ə ðə kɔɹnɝ, hi kəd teɪk əm baɪ sɝpɹaɪz. hi wɪʃt ɪz stʌmək wəd stɑp flʌɾɝɪŋ. ðoʊz naɪvz wɝ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ðə pɹæktəs sɔɹdz, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ stil, nɑt wʊd.

Mat tensed. If they came just a few steps closer before they noticed him hiding in the deeper shadows of the corner, he could take them by surprise. He wished his stomach would stop fluttering. Those knives were a great deal shorter than the practice swords, but they were steel, not wood.

wʌn ə ðə mɛn skwɪntɪd təwɔɹd ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə nɛɹoʊ stʃɹiɾ ən sʌɾənli stʃɹeɪɾənd, ʃaʊɾɪŋ, "dɪdn i kʌm jəɹ weɪ, ðɛn?"

One of the men squinted toward the far end of the narrow street and suddenly straightened, shouting, "Didn't he come your way, then?"

"aɪ hæv sin nʌθɪŋ bʌt ðə ʃædoʊz," keɪm ði ænsɝ ɪn ə hɛvi æksɛnt. "aɪ wɪʃ tə bi aʊɾ ə ðɪs. ðəɹ ɑɹ ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz muvɪŋ ðɪs naɪt."

"I have seen nothing but the shadows," came the answer in a heavy accent. "I wish to be out of this. There are the strange things moving this night."

nɑt fɔɹ peɪsɪz fɹəm mæt, ðə tu mɛn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks, ʃiðd ðɛɹ naɪvz, ən tʃɹɑɾəd bæk ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm.

Not four paces from Mat, the two men exchanged looks, sheathed their knives, and trotted back the way they had come.

hi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ, sloʊ bɹɛθ. lʌk. bɝn mi ɪf ɪts nɑt ɡʊd fəɹ mɔɹ ðən daɪs.

He let out a long, slow breath. Luck. Burn me if it's not good for more than dice.

hi kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ si ðə mɛn ət ðə maʊθ ə ðə stʃɹit, bʌɾ i nu ðeɪ wɝ stɪl aʊɾ ɑn ðə nɛkst stʃɹit sʌmwɛɹ. ən mɔɹ bɪhaɪn ɪm ði ʌðɝ weɪ.

He could no longer see the men at the mouth of the street, but he knew they were still out on the next street somewhere. And more behind him the other way.

wʌn ə ðə bɪldɪŋz i wɑz kɹaʊtʃt əɡɛnst stʊɾ oʊnli ə sɪŋɡəl stɔɹi haɪ hɪɹ, ən ðə ɹuf lʊk flæɾ ɪnʌf. ən ə waɪt stoʊn fɹiz kɑɹvd ɪn hjudʒ ɡɹeɪp livz ɹæn ʌp ðə dʒɔɪnɪŋ ə ðə tu bɪldɪŋz.

One of the buildings he was crouched against stood only a single story high here, and the roof looked flat enough. And a white stone frieze carved in huge grape leaves ran up the joining of the two buildings.

izɪŋ ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf ʌp tɪl wʌn ɛn ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɹuf, hi ɡeɪv ɪɾ ə hɑɹd ʃʌv. ɪt lændəd wɪð ə klæɾɝ ɑn ðə ɹuf taɪlz. nɑt weɪɾɪŋ tə si ɪf ɛniwʌn hæd hɝd, hi skɹæmbəld ʌp ðə fɹiz, ðə bɪɡ livz ɡɪvɪŋ izi toʊhoʊlz ivən fəɹ ə mæn ɪn buts. ɪn sɛkənz i hæd ðə stæf bæk ɪn hæn ən wɑz tʃɹɑɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɹuf, tʃɹʌstɪŋ tə lʌk fəɹ ɪz fʊɾɪŋ.

Easing his quarterstaff up till one end rested on the edge of the roof, he gave it a hard shove. It landed with a clatter on the roof tiles. Not waiting to see if anyone had heard, he scrambled up the frieze, the big leaves giving easy toeholds even for a man in boots. In seconds he had the staff back in hand and was trotting across the roof, trusting to luck for his footing.

θɹi mɔɹ taɪmz i klaɪmd, itʃ taɪm ɡeɪnɪŋ wʌn stɔɹi. ðə slaɪtli sloʊpɪŋ, taɪld ɹufs ɹæn səm dɪstəns ət ðət lɛvəl, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə bɹiz ət ðət haɪt, pɹɪklɪŋ ðə hɛɹ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk wɪð ɪts tʃɪl ən ɔlmoʊs meɪkɪŋ ɪm θɪŋk i wɑz biɪŋ fɑloʊd. stɑp ðæt, ful! ðəɹ θɹi stʃɹits əweɪ baɪ naʊ, lʊkɪŋ fəɹ sʌmbɑɾi ɛls wɪð ə fæt pɝs, ən bæd lʌk tə ðɛm.

Three more times he climbed, each time gaining one story. The slightly sloping, tiled roofs ran some distance at that level, and there was a breeze at that height, prickling the hair on the back of his neck with its chill and almost making him think he was being followed. Stop that, fool! They're three streets away by now, looking for somebody else with a fat purse, and bad luck to them.

hɪz buts slɪpt ɑn ðə taɪlz, ən i dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt maɪt bi ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə tə θɪŋk əbaʊt ɡɛɾɪŋ bæk daʊn ɪndə ðə stʃɹit hɪmsɛlf. kɔʃəsli, hi muv tə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɹuf ən pɪɹd daʊn. ən ɛmpti stʃɹit leɪ ə ɡʊd fɔɹɾi fiɾ əɹ mɔɹ bɪloʊ hɪm, wɪð θɹi tævɝnz ən ən ɪn spɪlɪŋ laɪɾ ən mjuzɪk ɑntu ðə kɑbəlstoʊnz. bʌɾ ɔf tə hɪz ɹaɪt wɑz ə stoʊn bɹɪdʒ ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ðə tɑp flɔɹ ə hɪz bɪldɪŋ tə ðə wʌn ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd.

His boots slipped on the tiles, and he decided it might be a good idea to think about getting back down into the street himself. Cautiously, he moved to the edge of the roof and peered down. An empty street lay a good forty feet or more below him, with three taverns and an inn spilling light and music onto the cobblestones. But off to his right was a stone bridge running from the top floor of his building to the one on the other side.

ðə bɹɪdʒ lʊkt ɑfli nɛɹoʊ, ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu dɑɹknəs əntʌtʃt baɪ ðə tævɝn laɪts, ɑɹsɪŋ oʊvɝ ə lɔŋ fɔl tə hɑɹd kɑbəlstoʊnz, bʌɾ i tɔs ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf daʊn ən meɪd hɪmsɛlf fɑloʊ bɪfɔɹ i kəd θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt tu mʌtʃ. hɪz buts θʌmpt ɑntu ðə bɹɪdʒ, ən i lɛt hɪmsɛlf ɹoʊl ðə weɪ hi hæɾ əz ə bɔɪ fɔlɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə tʃɹi. hi fɛtʃt ʌp əɡɛns ðə weɪst-haɪ ɹeɪlɪŋ.

The bridge looked awfully narrow, running through darkness untouched by the tavern lights, arcing over a long fall to hard cobblestones, but he tossed the quarterstaff down and made himself follow before he could think about it too much. His boots thumped onto the bridge, and he let himself roll the way he had as a boy falling out of a tree. He fetched up against the waist-high railing.

"bæd hæbəts peɪ ɔf ɪn ðə lɔŋ ɹʌn," hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf əz i ɡɑt tə hɪz fiɾ ən pɪkt ʌp ðə stæf.

"Bad habits pay off in the long run," he told himself as he got to his feet and picked up the staff.

ðə wɪndoʊ ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə ðə bɹɪdʒ wɑz taɪtli ʃʌɾɝd ən laɪtləs. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk huɛvɝ lɪvd ɪn ðəɹ wəɾ əpɹiʃieɪɾ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪt. hi kəd si lɑts ə stoʊnwɝk, bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz əz mʌtʃ əz ə fɪŋɡɝhoʊld ɪn ɹitʃ ə ðə bɹɪdʒ, ðə naɪt hɪɾ ɪt. wɛl, stʃɹeɪnʒɝ əɹ noʊ stʃɹeɪnʒɝ, ɪnsaɪɾ aɪ ɡoʊ.

The window at the other end of the bridge was tightly shuttered and lightless. He did not think whoever lived in there would appreciate a stranger appearing in the middle of the night. He could see lots of stonework, but if there was as much as a fingerhold in reach of the bridge, the night hid it. Well, stranger or no stranger, inside I go.

hi tɝn fɹəm ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ ən sʌɾənli bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ʌv ə mæn ʃɛɹɪŋ ðə bɹɪdʒ wɪð hɪm. ə mæn wɪð ə dæɡɝ ɪn ɪz hænd.

He turned from the railing and suddenly became aware of a man sharing the bridge with him. A man with a dagger in his hand.

mæt ɡɹæbd ət ðə hæn əz ðə naɪf dɑɹɾɪd təwɔɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. hi bɛɹli kɑt ðə fɛloʊz ɹɪst wɪð ɪz fɪŋɡɝz, ən ðən ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf bɪtwin əm tæŋɡəld ɪtsɛlf ɪn ɪz lɛɡz, tʃɹɪpɪŋ ɪm tə fɔl bæk əɡɛns ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ, tə fɔl hæf oʊvɝ ɪt pʊlɪŋ ði ʌðɝ mæn ɑn tɑp ə hɪm. bæləns ðəɹ ɑn ðə smɔl ə hɪz bæk, tiɾɝɪŋ wɪð ɪz əseɪləns bɛɹd tiθ ɪn ɪz feɪs, hi wɑz əz əwɛɹ ə ðə lɔŋ dʒɹɑp ʌndɝ ɪz hɛɾ əz i wɑz ə ðə bleɪd kætʃɪŋ feɪn munlaɪɾ əz ɪɾ ɛdʒ təwɔɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. hɪz fɪŋɡɝ ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə mænz ɹɪst wɑz slɪpɪŋ, ən ɪz ʌðɝ hænd wɑz kɑt wɪð ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf bɪtwin ðɛɹ bɑɾiz. oʊnli sɛkənz hæd pæst sɪns i fɝst sɔ ðə mæn, ən ɪn sɛkənz mɔɹ, hi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ daɪ wɪð ə naɪf ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt.

Mat grabbed at the hand as the knife darted toward his throat. He barely caught the fellow's wrist with his fingers, and then the quarterstaff between them tangled itself in his legs, tripping him to fall back against the railing, to fall half over it pulling the other man on top of him. Balanced there on the small of his back, teetering with his assailant's bared teeth in his face, he was as aware of the long drop under his head as he was of the blade catching faint moonlight as it edged toward his throat. His finger grip on the man's wrist was slipping, and his other hand was caught with the quarterstaff between their bodies. Only seconds had passed since he first saw the man, and in seconds more, he was going die with a knife in his throat.

"taɪm tə tɔs ðə daɪs," hi sɛd. hi θɔt ði ʌðɝ mæn lʊkt kənfjuz fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, bʌɾ ən ɪnstənt wɑz ɔl i hæd. wɪð ə hiv ə hɪz lɛɡz, mæt flɪpt əm boʊθ ɔf ɪndə ði ɛmpti ɛɹ.

"Time to toss the dice," he said. He thought the other man looked confused for an instant, but an instant was all he had. With a heave of his legs, Mat flipped them both off into the empty air.

fəɹ ə stʃɹɛtʃt-aʊt moʊmən i sim tə hæv noʊ weɪt. ɛɹ wɪsəl pæst ɪz ɪɹz ən ɹʌfəld ɪz hɛɹ. hi θɔɾ i hɝd ði ʌðɝ mæn skɹim, əɹ stɑɹt tə. ði ɪmpæk nɑkt ɔl ði ɛɹ aʊɾ ə hɪz lʌŋz ən meɪd sɪlvɝ-blæk flɛks dæns əkɹɔs ɪz blɝɪŋ vɪʒən.

For a stretched-out moment he seemed to have no weight. Air whistled past his ears and ruffled his hair. He thought he heard the other man scream, or start to. The impact knocked all the air out of his lungs and made silver-black flecks dance across his blurring vision.

wən i kəd bɹið əɡɛn - ən si - hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz laɪɪŋ ɑn tɑp ə ðə mæn u hæɾ ətæk hɪm, hɪz fɔl kʊʃən baɪ ði ʌðɝz bɑɾi. "lʌk," hi wɪspɝd. sloʊli hi klaɪm tə hɪz fit, kɝsɪŋ ðə bɹuz ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf hæd pʊɾ əkɹɔs ɪz ɹɪbz.

When he could breathe again - and see - he realized he was lying on top of the man who had attacked him, his fall cushioned by the other's body. "Luck," he whispered. Slowly he climbed to his feet, cursing the bruise the quarterstaff had put across his ribs.

hi ɪkspɛktəd ði ʌðɝ mæn tə bi dɛd - nɑt mɛni kəd sɝvaɪv ə θɝɾi-fʊt fɔl tə kɑbəlstoʊnz wɪð ənʌðɝz weɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə hɪm - bʌt wʌɾ i hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəd wɑz tə si ðə fɛloʊz dæɡɝ dʒɹɪvən tə ðə hɪlt ɪndə hɪz oʊn hɑɹt. sətʃ ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi-lʊkɪŋ mæn tə hæv tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl hɪm. mæt dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i wəɾ ivən əv noʊɾəst ɪm ɪn ə kɹaʊɾəd ɹum.

He expected the other man to be dead - not many could survive a thirty-foot fall to cobblestones with another's weight on top of him - but what he had not expected was to see the fellow's dagger driven to the hilt into his own heart. Such an ordinary-looking man to have tried to kill him. Mat did not think he would even have noticed him in a crowded room.

"ju hæd bæd lʌk, fɛloʊ," hi toʊl ðə kɔɹps ʃɑkəli.

"You had bad luck, fellow," he told the corpse shakily.

sʌɾənli, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət hæd hæpən ɹʌʃt bæk ɪn ɑn hɪm. ðə fʊtpædz ɪn ðə twɪstɪŋ stʃɹit. ðə skɹæmbəl oʊvɝ ðə ɹuftɑps. ðɪs fɛloʊ. ðə fɔl. hɪz aɪz ɹoʊz tə ðə bɹɪdʒ oʊvɝhɛd, ən ə fɪɾ ə tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ hɪt hɪm. aɪ mʌst əv bɪn kɹeɪzi. ə lɪɾəl ædvɛntʃɝ ɪz wʌn θɪŋ, bʌt ɹəɡoʊʃ iɡəl-aɪ wʊdn æsk fəɹ ðɪs.

Suddenly, everything that had happened rushed back in on him. The footpads in the twisting street. The scramble over the rooftops. This fellow. The fall. His eyes rose to the bridge overhead, and a fit of trembling hit him. I must have been crazy. A little adventure is one thing, but Rogosh Eagle-eye wouldn't ask for this.

hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz stændɪŋ oʊvɝ ə dɛd mæn wɪð ə dæɡɝ ɪn ɪz tʃɛst, dʒʌst weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ sʌmwʌn tə kʌm əlɔŋ ən ɹʌn ʃaʊɾɪŋ fəɹ sɪɾi ɡɑɹdz wɪð ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɑn ðɛɹ tʃɛsts. ði æmɪɝlɪnz peɪpɝ maɪt ɡɛɾ ɪm əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm, bʌt meɪbi nɑt bɪfɔɹ ʃi faʊn aʊt. hi kəd stɪl ɛn ʌp bæk ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, wɪθaʊt ðət peɪpɝ, ən pɑsəbli nɑɾ ivən əlaʊɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz.

He realized he was standing over a dead man with a dagger in his chest, just waiting for someone to come along and run shouting for city guards with the Flame of Tar Valon on their chests. The Amyrlin's paper might get him away from them, but maybe not before she found out. He could still end up back in the White Tower, without that paper, and possibly not even allowed outside the Tower grounds.

hi nu hi ʃəd bi ɑn ɪz weɪ tə ðə dɑks ɹaɪt ðɛn, ən ɑn ðə fɝs vɛsəl seɪlɪŋ ɪf ɪt wɑz ə ɹɑɾən tʌb fʊl ʌv oʊl fɪʃ, bʌɾ ɪz niz wɝ ʃeɪkɪŋ hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf ɪn ɹiækʃən ðəɾ i kəd hɑɹdli wɔk. wʌɾ i wɑntəd wɑz tə sɪt daʊn fəɹ dʒʌst ə mɪnət. dʒʌst ə mɪnət tə stɛɾi hɪz niz, ən ðən i wɑz hɛɾəd fəɹ ðə dɑks.

He knew he should be on his way to the docks right then, and on the first vessel sailing if it was a rotten tub full of old fish, but his knees were shaking hard enough in reaction that he could hardly walk. What he wanted was to sit down for just a minute. Just a minute to steady his knees, and then he was headed for the docks.

ðə tævɝnz wɝ kloʊsɝ, bʌɾ i stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ði ɪn. ðə kɑmən ɹum ʌv ən ɪn wɑz ə fɹɛnli pleɪs, wɛɹ ə mæn kəd ɹɛst ə mɪnəɾ ən nɑt wɝi əbaʊɾ u maɪt bi snikɪŋ ʌp bɪhaɪn hɪm. ɪnʌf laɪt keɪm aʊt θɹu ðə wɪndoʊz fəɹ ɪm tə meɪk aʊt ðə saɪn. ə wʊmən wɪð əɹ hɛɹ ɪn bɹeɪdz, hoʊldɪŋ wʌɾ i θɔt wɑz ən ɑləv bɹæntʃ, ən ðə wɝdz "ðə wʊmən ə tæntʃəkoʊ."

The taverns were closer, but he started toward the inn. The common room of an inn was a friendly place, where a man could rest a minute and not worry about who might be sneaking up behind him. Enough light came out through the windows for him to make out the sign. A woman with her hair in braids, holding what he thought was an olive branch, and the words "The Woman of Tanchico."


tʃæptɝ θɝɾiwʌn


CHAPTER 31

ðə wʊmən ə tæntʃəkoʊ


The Woman of Tanchico

ðə kɑmən ɹum ə ði ɪn wɑz bɹaɪtli lɪt, ðə teɪbəlz nɑt nɪɹ ə kɔɹɾɝ fʊl soʊ leɪt. ə fju waɪt-eɪpɹən sɝvɪŋ wɪmən wɪð mʌɡz ʌv eɪl əɹ waɪn pæst əmʌŋ ðə mɛn, ən ə loʊ mɝmɝ ə tɔk ɹæn ʌndɝ ðə saʊn ʌv ə hɑɹp biɪŋ stʃɹʌmd ən plʌkt. ðə peɪtʃɹənz, səm wɪð paɪps klɛntʃt ɪn ðɛɹ tiθ ən wʌn pɛɹ hʌntʃt oʊvɝ ə stoʊnz bɔɹd, hæd ðə lʊk ə ʃɪps ɔfəsɝz ən maɪnɝ mɝtʃəns fɹəm ðə smɔlɝ haʊzɪz, ðɛɹ koʊts wɛl kʌɾ ən ə faɪn wʊl, bʌt wɪð nʌn ə ðə ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ðət ɹɪtʃɝ mɛn maɪɾ əv hæd. ən fəɹ wʌns ðəɹ wɑz noʊ klæk ən ɹæɾəl ə daɪs tə bi hɝd. faɪɝz bleɪzd ɑn ðə lɔŋ hɑɹθs ət ði ɛnz ə ðə ɹum, bʌɾ ivən wɪθaʊt ðoʊz ðəɹ wʊɾə bɪn ə wɔɹm filɪŋ əbaʊt ðə pleɪs.

The common room of the inn was brightly lit, the tables not near a quarter full so late. A few white-aproned serving women with mugs of ale or wine passed among the men, and a low murmur of talk ran under the sound of a harp being strummed and plucked. The patrons, some with pipes clenched in their teeth and one pair hunched over a stones board, had the look of ship's officers and minor merchants from the smaller houses, their coats well cut and of fine wool, but with none of the gold or silver or embroidery that richer men might have had. And for once there was no clack and rattle of dice to be heard. Fires blazed on the long hearths at the ends of the room, but even without those there would have been a warm feeling about the place.

ðə hɑɹpɝ stʊɾ ɑn ə teɪbəltɑp, ɹisaɪɾɪŋ "mɑɹə ən ðə θɹi fulɪʃ kɪŋz," tə ðə mjuzɪk ə hɪz hɑɹp. hɪz ɪnstʃɹəmənt, ɔl wɝkt ɪn ɡoʊld ən sɪlvɝ, wɑz fɪt fəɹ ə pæləs. mæt nu hɪm. hi hæd seɪv mæts laɪf, wʌns.

The harper stood on a tabletop, reciting "Mara and the Three Foolish Kings," to the music of his harp. His instrument, all worked in gold and silver, was fit for a palace. Mat knew him. He had saved Mat's life, once.

ðə hɑɹpɝ wɑz ə lin mæn u wʊɾə bɪn tɔl ɪksɛp fəɹ ə stup, ən i muvd wɪð ə lɪmp wən i ʃɪftəɾ ɪz fʊɾɪŋ ɑn ðə teɪbəltɑp. ivən hɪɹ ɪnsaɪd, hi wɔɹ ɪz kloʊk, ɔl kʌvɝd wɪð flʌɾɝɪŋ pætʃəz ɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd kʌlɝz. hi ɔlweɪz wɑntəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn tə noʊ hi wɑz ə ɡlimən. hɪz lɔŋ mʌstæʃɪz ən bʊʃi aɪbɹaʊz wɝ əz snoʊ-waɪɾ əz ðə θɪk hɛɹ ɑn ɪz hɛd, ən ɪz blu aɪz hɛld ə lʊk ə sɑɹoʊ əz i ɹəsaɪɾəd. ðə lʊk wɑz əz ʌnɪkspɛktɪɾ əz ðə mæn. mæt hæd nɛvɝ noʊn tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn tə bi ə sɑɹoʊfəl mæn.

The harper was a lean man who would have been tall except for a stoop, and he moved with a limp when he shifted his footing on the tabletop. Even here inside, he wore his cloak, all covered with fluttering patches in a hundred colors. He always wanted everyone to know he was a gleeman. His long mustaches and bushy eyebrows were as snow-white as the thick hair on his head, and his blue eyes held a look of sorrow as he recited. The look was as unexpected as the man. Mat had never known Thom Merrilin to be a sorrowful man.

hi tʊk ə teɪbəl, sɛɾɪŋ ɪz θɪŋz ɑn ðə flɔɹ baɪ hɪz stul, ən ɔɹɾɝd tu mʌɡz. ðə pɹɪɾi jʌŋ sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz bɪɡ bɹaʊn aɪz twɪŋkəld ət hɪm.

He took a table, setting his things on the floor by his stool, and ordered two mugs. The pretty young serving girl's big brown eyes twinkled at him.

"tu, jʌŋ mæstɝ? jə də nɑt lʊk sətʃ ə hɑɹd-dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ mæn əz ðæt." hɝ vɔɪs hɛld ə mɪstʃəvəs ɛdʒ ə læftɝ.

"Two, young master? You do not look such a hard-drinking man as that." Her voice held a mischievous edge of laughter.

æftɝ ɹʌmɪdʒɪŋ ə bɪt, hi bɹɔɾ aʊt tu sɪlvɝ pɛniz fɹəm ɪz pɑkət. wʌn mɔɹ ðən peɪd fəɹ ðə waɪn, bʌɾ i slɪpt əɹ ənʌðɝ fəɹ əɹ aɪz. "maɪ fɹɛnd wɪl bi dʒɔɪnɪŋ mi."

After rummaging a bit, he brought out two silver pennies from his pocket. One more than paid for the wine, but he slipped her another for her eyes. "My friend will be joining me."

hi nu tɑm hæd sin hɪm. ði oʊld ɡlimən hæd nɪɹli stɑp ðə stɔɹi dɛd wən mæt keɪm ɪn. ðət wɑz nu, tu. fju θɪŋz stɑɹɾəld tɑm ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪm tə lɛɾ ɪt ʃoʊ, ən nʌθɪŋ ʃɔɹɾ ə tʃɹɑləks hæɾ ɛvɝ meɪɾ ɪm stɑp ə stɔɹi ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ðət mæt nu. wən ðə ɡɝl bɹɔt ðə waɪn ən ɪz kɑpɝz ɪn tʃeɪnʒ, hi lɛt ðə pjuɾɝ mʌɡz sɪɾ ən lɪsən tə ði ɛn ə ðə stɔɹi.

He knew Thom had seen him. The old gleeman had nearly stopped the story dead when Mat came in. That was new, too. Few things startled Thom enough for him to let it show, and nothing short of Trollocs had ever made him stop a story in the middle that Mat knew. When the girl brought the wine and his coppers in change, he let the pewter mugs sit and listened to the end of the story.

" 'ɪt wɑz əz wɪv sɛɾ ɪt ʃəd bi,' sɛd kɪŋ mæɾəl, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əntæŋɡəl ə fɪʃ fɹəm ɪz lɔŋ bɪɹd." tɑmz vɔɪs simd ɔlmoʊs tə ɛkoʊ ɪnsaɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪt hɔl, nɑɾ ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi kɑmən ɹum. hɪz plʌk hɑɹp saʊndəd ðə θɹi kɪŋz' faɪnəl fulɪʃnəs. " 'ɪt wɑz əz wi sɛɾ ɪt wəd bi,' ənaʊnst ɔɹəndɝ. ænd, fit slɪpɪŋ ɪn ðə mʌd, hi sæt daʊn wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt splæʃ. 'ɪt wɑz əz wi sɛɾ ɪt mʌs bi,' pɹoʊkleɪm kæɾɝ əz i sɝtʃt, ʌp tə hɪz ɛlboʊz ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ, fəɹ ɪz kɹaʊn. 'ðə wʊmən noʊz nɑt wɛɹɔf ʃi spiks. ʃiz ðə ful!' mæɾəl ən ɔɹəndɝ əɡɹid wɪð ɪm laʊdli. ən wɪð ðæt, mɑɹə hæd hæɾ ɪnʌf. 'aɪv ɡɪvən əm ɔl ðə tʃænsəz ðeɪ dɪzɝv ən mɔɹ,' ʃi mɝmɝd tə hɝsɛlf. slɪpɪŋ kæɾɝz kɹaʊn ɪndə hɝ bæɡ wɪð ðə fɝs tu, ʃi klaɪm bæk ɑntu hɝ kɑɹt, klʌk tə hɝ mɛɹ, ən dʒɹoʊv stʃɹeɪt bæk tə hɝ vɪlədʒ. ən wən mɑɹə hæd toʊld əm ɔl ðət hæpənd, ðə pipəl ə hip wəɾ əv noʊ kɪŋ əɾ ɔl." hi stʃɹʌm ðə meɪdʒɝ θim ə ðə kɪŋz' fulɪʃnəs wʌns mɔɹ, ðɪs taɪm slaɪɾɪŋ tə ə kɹɪʃɛndoʊ ðət saʊndəɾ ivən mɔɹ laɪk læftɝ, meɪɾ ə swipɪŋ baʊ, ən nɪɹli fɛl ɔf ðə teɪbəl.

" 'It was as we have said it should be,' said King Madel, trying to untangle a fish from his long beard." Thom's voice seemed almost to echo inside a great hall, not an ordinary common room. His plucked harp sounded the three kings' final foolishness. " 'It was as we said it would be,' announced Orander. And, feet slipping in the mud, he sat down with a great splash. 'It was as we said it must be,' proclaimed Kadar as he searched, up to his elbows in the river, for his crown. 'The woman knows not whereof she speaks. She is the fool!' Madel and Orander agreed with him loudly. And with that, Mara had had enough. 'I've given them all the chances they deserve and more,' she murmured to herself. Slipping Kadar's crown into her bag with the first two, she climbed back onto her cart, clucked to her mare, and drove straight back to her village. And when Mara had told them all that happened, the people of Heape would have no king at all." He strummed the major theme of the kings' foolishness once more, this time sliding to a crescendo that sounded even more like laughter, made a sweeping bow, and nearly fell off the table.

mɛn læft ən stæmp ðɛɹ fit, ðoʊ laɪkli ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm hæd hɝd ðə stɔɹi mɛni taɪmz bɪfɔɹ, ən kɔl fəɹ mɔɹ. ðə stɔɹi ʌv mɑɹə wɑz ɔlweɪz wɛl ɹəsivd, ɪksɛpt pɝhæps baɪ kɪŋz.

Men laughed and stamped their feet, though likely every one of them had heard the story many times before, and called for more. The story of Mara was always well received, except perhaps by kings.

tɑm nɪɹli fɛl əɡɛn klaɪmɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ðə teɪbəl, ən i wɑz mɔɹ ənstɛɾi ɪn ɪz wɔk ðən ə sʌmwʌt stɪf lɛɡ kəɾ əkaʊn fəɹ əz i keɪm tə wɛɹ mæt wɑz sɪɾɪŋ. kæʒəwəli pʊɾɪŋ ɪz hɑɹp ɑn ðə teɪbəl, hi dʒɹɑpt ɑntu ə stul ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə sɛkən mʌɡ ən ɡeɪv mæt ə flæt stɛɹ. hɪz aɪz hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ʃɑɹp əz ɔlz, bʌt ðeɪ sim tə bi hævɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl foʊkəsɪŋ.

Thom nearly fell again climbing down from the table, and he was more unsteady in his walk than a somewhat stiff leg could account for as he came to where Mat was sitting. Casually putting his harp on the table, he dropped onto a stool in front of the second mug and gave Mat a flat stare. His eyes had always been sharp as awls, but they seemed to be having trouble focusing.

"kɑmən," hi mʌɾɝd. hɪz vɔɪs wɑz stɪl dip, bʌɾ ɪt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sim tə ɹɪvɝbɝət. "ðə teɪl ɪz ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz bɛɾɝ ɪn pleɪn tʃænt, ən ə θaʊzən ɪn haɪ, bʌt ðeɪ wɑn kɑmən." wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝd, hi bɛɹiɾ ɪz feɪs ɪn ɪz waɪn.

"Common," he muttered. His voice was still deep, but it no longer seemed to reverberate. "The tale is a hundred times better in Plain Chant, and a thousand in High, but they want Common." Without another word, he buried his face in his wine.

mæt kəd nɑt ɹikɔl ɛvɝ siɪŋ tɑm fɪnɪʃ pleɪɪŋ ðət hɑɹp wɪθaʊɾ ɪmiɾiətli pʊɾɪŋ ɪɾ əweɪ ɪn ɪts hɑɹd lɛðɝ keɪs. hi hæd nɛvɝ sin ɪm ðə wɝs fəɹ dʒɹɪŋk. ɪt wɑz ə ɹɪlif tə hɪɹ ðə ɡlimən kəmpleɪnɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪz lɪsənɝz; tɑm nɛvɝ θɔt ðɛɹ stændɝdz wɝ əz haɪ əz hɪz. ət list sʌmθɪŋ ə hɪm hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd.

Mat could not recall ever seeing Thom finish playing that harp without immediately putting it away in its hard leather case. He had never seen him the worse for drink. It was a relief to hear the gleeman complaining about his listeners; Thom never thought their standards were as high as his. At least something of him had not changed.

ðə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl wɑz bæk, wɪð noʊ twɪŋkəl ɪn əɹ aɪz. "oʊ, tɑm," ʃi sɛd sɔfli, ðən ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn mæt. "ɪf aɪd noʊn i wɑz ðə fɹɛn jə əweɪɾəd, aɪd nɑɾ əv bɹɔt jə waɪn fəɹ ɪm ɪf jə ɡeɪv ə hʌnʒɹəd sɪlvɝ pɛns."

The serving girl was back, with no twinkle in her eyes. "Oh, Thom," she said softly, then rounded on Mat. "If I'd known he was the friend you awaited, I'd not have brought you wine for him if you gave a hundred silver pence."

"aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ hi wɑz dʒɹʌŋk," mæt pɹətɛstəd.

"I did not know he was drunk," Mat protested.

bʌɾ əɹ ətɛnʃən wɑz bæk ɑn tɑm, hɝ vɔɪs dʒɛntəl əɡɛn. "tɑm, jə nid səm ɹɛst. ðəl kip jə tɛlɪŋ stɔɹiz ɔl naɪɾ ən ɔl deɪ, ɪf jə lɛt ðɛm."

But her attention was back on Thom, her voice gentle again. "Thom, you need some rest. They'll keep you telling stories all night and all day, if you let them."

ənʌðɝ wʊmən əpɪɹɾ ɑn tɑmz ʌðɝ saɪd, lɪftɪŋ əɹ eɪpɹən ɔf oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd. ʃi wɑz oʊldɝ ðən ðə fɝst, bʌt noʊ lɛs pɹɪɾi. ðə tu maɪɾ əv bɪn sɪstɝz. "ə bjuɾəfəl stɔɹi, aɪv ɔlweɪz θɔt, tɑm, ən jə tɛl ɪt bjuɾəfli. kʌm, aɪv slɪpt ə wɔɹmɪŋ pæn ɪndə jəɹ bɛd, ən jə kən tɛl mi ɔl əbaʊt ðə kɔɹɾ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn."

Another woman appeared on Thom's other side, lifting her apron off over her head. She was older than the first, but no less pretty. The two might have been sisters. "A beautiful story, I've always thought, Thom, and you tell it beautifully. Come, I've slipped a warming pan into your bed, and you can tell me all about the court in Caemlyn."

tɑm pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə mʌɡ əz ɪf sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ɪɾ ɛmpti, ðən blu aʊɾ ɪz lɔŋ mʌstæʃɪz ən lʊk fɹəm wʌn wʊmən tə ði ʌðɝ. "pɹɪɾi mɑɾə. pɹɪɾi sɑl. dɪɾ aɪ ɛvɝ tɛl jə ðət tu pɹɪɾi wɪmən əv lʌv mi ɪn maɪ laɪf? ðəɾ ɪz mɔɹ ðən moʊs mɛn kən kleɪm."

Thom peered into the mug as if surprised to find it empty, then blew out his long mustaches and looked from one woman to the other. "Pretty Mada. Pretty Saal. Did I ever tell you that two pretty women have loved me in my life? That is more than most men can claim."

"juv toʊld əs ɔl əbaʊɾ ɪt, tɑm," ði oʊldɝ wʊmən sɛd sædli. ðə jʌŋɡɝ ɡlɛɹɾ ət mæt əz ɪf ðɪs wɝ ɔl ɪz fɔlt.

"You've told us all about it, Thom," the older woman said sadly. The younger glared at Mat as if this were all his fault.

"tu," tɑm mɝmɝd. "mɔɹɡeɪs hæɾ ə tɛmpɝ, bʌɾ aɪ θɔɾ aɪ kəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ ðæt, soʊ ɪɾ ɛndəd wɪð əɹ wɑntɪŋ tə kɪl mi. dinə, aɪ kɪld. əz ɡʊɾ æz. nɑt mʌtʃ dɪfɝəns. tu tʃænsəz aɪv hæd, mɔɹ ðən moʊst, ən aɪ θɹu ðɛm boʊθ əweɪ."

"Two," Thom murmured. "Morgase had a temper, but I thought I could ignore that, so it ended with her wanting to kill me. Dena, I killed. As good as. Not much difference. Two chances I've had, more than most, and I threw them both away."

"aɪ wɪl teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪm," mæt sɛd. mɑɾə ən sɑl wɝ boʊθ ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm, naʊ. hi ɡeɪv əm ɪz bɛst smaɪl, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt wɝk. hɪz stʌmək mʌɾɝd laʊdli. "doʊn aɪ smɛl tʃɪkən ɹoʊstɪŋ? bɹɪŋ mi θɹi əɹ fɔɹ." ðə tu wɪmən blɪŋkt ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd stɑɹɾəld lʊks wən i æɾəd, "du jə wɑn sʌmθɪŋ tə it, tu, tɑm?"

"I will take care of him," Mat said. Mada and Saal were both glaring at him, now. He gave them his best smile, but it did not work. His stomach muttered loudly. "Don't I smell chicken roasting? Bring me three or four." The two women blinked and exchanged startled looks when he added, "Do you want something to eat, too, Thom?"

"aɪ kəd də wɪð mɔɹ ə ðɪs faɪn ændɔɝən waɪn." ðə ɡlimən ɹeɪzd ɪz kʌp hoʊpfəli.

"I could do with more of this fine Andoran wine." The gleeman raised his cup hopefully.

"noʊ mɔɹ waɪn fəɹ jə tənaɪt, tɑm." ði oʊldɝ wʊmən wʊɾə teɪkən ɪz kʌp ɪf i hæd lɛt hɝ.

"No more wine for you tonight, Thom." The older woman would have taken his cup if he had let her.

ɔlmoʊst ɑn tɑp ə ðə fɝst wʊmən, ðə jʌŋɡɝ sɛd, ɪn ə mɪkstʃɝ ə fɝmnəs ən pliɾɪŋ, "jul əv səm tʃɪkən, tɑm. ɪts vɛɹi ɡʊd."

Almost on top of the first woman, the younger said, in a mixture of firmness and pleading, "You'll have some chicken, Thom. It is very good."

niðɝ wəd liv əntɪl ðə ɡlimən əɡɹid tə it sʌmθɪŋ, ən wən ðeɪ dɪd ɡoʊ, ðeɪ ɡeɪv mæt sətʃ ə kɑmbəneɪʃən ə stɛɹz ən snɪfs ðəɾ i kəɾ oʊnli ʃeɪk ɪz hɛd. bɝn mi, jə wəd θɪŋk aɪ wɑz ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋ ɪm tə dʒɹɪŋk mɔɹ! wɪmən! bʌt pɹɪɾi aɪz ɑn ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm.

Neither would leave until the gleeman agreed to eat something, and when they did go, they gave Mat such a combination of stares and sniffs that he could only shake his head. Burn me, you would think I was encouraging him to drink more! Women! But pretty eyes on the pair of them.

"ɹæn sɛd jə wɝ əlaɪv," hi toʊl tɑm wən mɑɾə ən sɑl wɝ aʊɾ ə hɪɹɪŋ. "mɔɪɹeɪn ɔlweɪz sɛd ʃi θɔt jə wɝ. bʌɾ aɪ hɝd jə wɝ ɪn kɛɹhin, ən minɪŋ tə ɡoʊ ɑn tə tɛɹ."

"Rand said you were alive," he told Thom when Mada and Saal were out of hearing. "Moiraine always said she thought you were. But I heard you were in Cairhien, and meaning to go on to Tear."

"ɹæn ɪz stɪl wɛl, ðɛn?" tɑmz aɪz ʃɑɹpən tə ɔlmoʊs ðə kinnəs mæt ɹɪmɛmbɝd. "aɪ æm nɑt ʃʊɹ aɪ ɪkspɛktəd ðæt. mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz stɪl wɪð hɪm, ɪz ʃi? ə faɪn-lʊkɪŋ wʊmən. ə faɪn wʊmən, ɪf ʃi wɝ nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. mɛɾəl wɪð ðət sɔɹt, ən jə ɡɛt mɔɹ ðən jəɹ fɪŋɡɝz bɝnd."

"Rand is still well, then?" Thom's eyes sharpened to almost the keenness Mat remembered. "I am not sure I expected that. Moiraine is still with him, is she? A fine-looking woman. A fine woman, if she were not Aes Sedai. Meddle with that sort, and you get more than your fingers burned."

"waɪ wʊdn jə ɪkspɛkt ɹænd tə bi ɔl ɹaɪt?" mæt æskt kɛɹfəli. "du jə noʊ ʌv sʌmθɪŋ ðət kəd hɑɹm hɪm?"

"Why wouldn't you expect Rand to be all right?" Mat asked carefully. "Do you know of something that could harm him?"

"noʊ? aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɛniθɪŋ, bɔɪ. aɪ səspɛk mɔɹ ðən ɪz hɛlθi fəɹ mi, bʌɾ aɪ noʊ nʌθɪŋ."

"Know? I don't know anything, boy. I suspect more than is healthy for me, but I know nothing."

mæt əbændən ðət laɪn ə tɔk. noʊ jus fɝmɪŋ ɪz səspɪʃənz. noʊ jus lɛɾɪŋ ɪm noʊ aɪ noʊ mɔɹ ðænz hɛlθi maɪsɛlf.

Mat abandoned that line of talk. No use firming his suspicions. No use letting him know I know more than's healthy myself.

ði oʊldɝ wʊmən - tɑm kɔld əɹ mɑɾə - keɪm bæk wɪð θɹi tʃɪkənz wɪð kɹɪsp, bɹaʊn skɪnz, ɡɪvɪŋ ðə waɪt-hɛɹd mæn ə wɝid lʊk, ən mæt ə wɔɹnɪŋ wʌn, bɪfɔɹ ʃi lɛft. mæt ɹɪpt ɔf ə lɛɡ ən sɛt tə əz i tɔkt. tɑm fɹaʊn ɪndə hɪz kʌp ən nɛvɝ lʊkt ət ðə bɝdz.

The older woman - Thom called her Mada - came back with three chickens with crisp, brown skins, giving the white-haired man a worried look, and Mat a warning one, before she left. Mat ripped off a leg and set to as he talked. Thom frowned into his cup and never looked at the birds.

"waɪ ɑɹ jə hɪɹ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, tɑm? ɪts ðə læs pleɪs aɪɾ əv ɪkspɛktəd tə si ju, ðə weɪ jə fil əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ hɝd jə wɝ kɔɪnɪŋ mʌni ɪn kɛɹhin."

"Why are you here in Tar Valon, Thom? It's the last place I'd have expected to see you, the way you feel about Aes Sedai. I heard you were coining money in Cairhien."

"kɛɹhin," ði oʊld ɡlimən mʌɾɝd, ðə ʃɑɹpnəs feɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ɪz aɪz əɡɛn. "sʌtʃ tʃɹʌbəl ɪt kɑzəz kɪlɪŋ ə mæn, ivən wən i dɪzɝvz kɪlɪŋ." hi meɪɾ ə flɝɪʃ wɪð wʌn hæn ən wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ə naɪf. tɑm ɔlweɪz hæd naɪvz səkɹiɾəd əbaʊt hɪm. dʒɹʌŋk i maɪɾ əv bɪn, bʌɾ i hɛl ðə bleɪd stɛɾi ɪnʌf. "kɪl ə mæn u nidz kɪlɪŋ, ən səmtaɪmz ʌðɝz peɪ fəɹ ɪt. ðə kwɛstʃən ɪz, wɑz ɪt wɝθ duɪŋ ɛniweɪ? ðɛɹz ɔlweɪz ə bæləns, jə noʊ. ɡʊɾ ən ivəl. laɪɾ ən ʃædoʊ. wi wəd nɑt bi hjumən ɪf ðəɹ wɑzn ə bæləns."

"Cairhien," the old gleeman muttered, the sharpness fading from his eyes again. "Such trouble it causes killing a man, even when he deserves killing." He made a flourish with one hand and was holding a knife. Thom always had knives secreted about him. Drunk he might have been, but he held the blade steady enough. "Kill a man who needs killing, and sometimes others pay for it. The question is, was it worth doing anyway? There's always a balance, you know. Good and evil. Light and Shadow. We would not be human if there wasn't a balance."

"pʊt ðəɾ əweɪ," mæt ɡɹaʊld ɝaʊn ə maʊθfʊl. "aɪ doʊnt wɑnə tɔk əbaʊt kɪlɪŋ." laɪt, ðət fɛloʊ ɪz stɪl laɪɪŋ ɹaɪɾ aʊt ðəɹ ɪn ðə stʃɹit. bɝn mi, aɪ ɔt tə bi ɑn ə ʃɪp baɪ naʊ. "aɪ dʒʌst æskt waɪ jəɹ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɪf jə hæd tə liv kɛɹhin kəz jə kɪl sʌmwʌn, aɪ də nɑt wɑnə noʊ əbaʊɾ ɪt. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, ɪf jə kæn pʊl jəɹ wɪts aʊɾ ə ðə waɪn ɪnʌf tə tɔk stʃɹeɪt, əl liv naʊ."

"Put that away," Mat growled around a mouthful. "I don't want to talk about killing." Light, that fellow is still lying right out there in the street. Burn me, I ought to be on a ship by now. "I just asked why you're in Tar Valon. If you had to leave Cairhien because you killed someone, I do not want to know about it. Blood and ashes, if you can't pull your wits out of the wine enough to talk straight, I'll leave now."

wɪð ə saʊɝ lʊk, tɑm meɪd ðə naɪf dɪsəpɪɹ. "waɪ æm aɪ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn? aɪm hɪɹ kəz ɪts ðə wɝs pleɪs aɪ kəd bi, ɪksɛp meɪbi keɪɛmlɪn. ɪts wʌɾ aɪ dɪzɝv, bɔɪ. səm ə ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ stɪl ɹɪmɛmbɝ mi. aɪ sɔ ɪleɪɾə ɪn ðə stʃɹit ði ʌðɝ deɪ. ɪf ʃi nu aɪ wɑz hɪɹ, ʃi wəd pil maɪ haɪɾ ɔf ɪn stʃɹɪps, ən ðən ʃi wəd stɑp biɪŋ plɛzənt."

With a sour look, Thom made the knife disappear. "Why am I in Tar Valon? I'm here because it is the worst place I could be, except maybe Caemlyn. It's what I deserve, boy. Some of the Red Ajah still remember me. I saw Elaida in the street the other day. If she knew I was here, she would peel my hide off in strips, and then she would stop being pleasant."

"aɪ nɛvɝ nu jə tə fil sɑɹi fəɹ jɝsɛlf," mæt sɛd dɪsɡʌstɪdli. "du jə min tə dʒɹaʊn jɝsɛlf ɪn waɪn?"

"I never knew you to feel sorry for yourself," Mat said disgustedly. "Do you mean to drown yourself in wine?"

"wʌt dʒju noʊ ʌv ɪt, bɔɪ?" tɑm snɑɹəld. "pʊɾ ə fju jɪɹz ɑn ju, si sʌmθɪŋ ə laɪf, meɪbi lʌv ə wʊmən əɹ tu, ən ðən jəl noʊ. pɝhæps jə wɪl, ɪf juv ðə bɹeɪnz tə lɝn. ɑə! jə wɑnə noʊ waɪ aɪm ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn? waɪ ɑɹ jə ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn? aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ jə ʃɪvɝɪŋ wən jə faʊn aʊt mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. jə nɪɹli sɔɪl jɝsɛlf ɛvɹi taɪm ɛnibəɾi ivən mɛnʃən ðə paʊɝ. wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑn ɛvɹi saɪd?"

"What do you know of it, boy?" Thom snarled. "Put a few years on you, see something of life, maybe love a woman or two, and then you'll know. Perhaps you will, if you have the brains to learn. Aaaah! You want to know why I'm in Tar Valon? Why are you in Tar Valon? I remember you shivering when you found out Moiraine was Aes Sedai. You nearly soiled yourself every time anybody even mentioned the Power. What are you doing in Tar Valon, with Aes Sedai on every side?"

"aɪ æm livɪŋ tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðæts wʌɾ aɪm duɪŋ hɪɹ. livɪŋ!" mæt ɡɹɪməst. ðə ɡlimən hæd seɪvd ɪz laɪf, ən meɪbi mɔɹ. eɪ feɪd hæd bɪn ɪnvɑlvd. ðət wɑz waɪ tɑmz ɹaɪt lɛɡ dɪd nɑt wɝk əz wɛl əz ɪt ʃʊd. ðəɹ kəd nɑt bi ɪnʌf waɪn ɑn ə ʃɪp tə kip ɪm ðɪs dʒɹʌŋk. "aɪ æm ɡoʊɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn, tɑm. ɪf jə nid tə ɹɪsk jəɹ ful laɪf fəɹ səm ɹizən, waɪ nɑt kʌm wɪð mi?"

"I am leaving Tar Valon. That's what I am doing here. Leaving!" Mat grimaced. The gleeman had saved his life, and maybe more. A Fade had been involved. That was why Thom's right leg did not work as well as it should. There could not be enough wine on a ship to keep him this drunk. "I am going to Caemlyn, Thom. If you need to risk your fool life for some reason, why not come with me?"

"keɪɛmlɪn?" tɑm sɛd mjuzɪŋli.

"Caemlyn?" Thom said musingly.

"keɪɛmlɪn, tɑm. ɪleɪɾə wɪl laɪkli bi ɡoʊɪŋ bæk ðəɹ sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, soʊ juɾ əv əɹ tə wɝi əbaʊt. ən fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ɪf mɔɹɡeɪs pʊts əɹ hænz ɑn ju, jəl wɪʃ ɪleɪɾə hæd ju."

"Caemlyn, Thom. Elaida will likely be going back there sooner or later, so you'd have her to worry about. And from what I remember, if Morgase puts her hands on you, you will wish Elaida had you."

"keɪɛmlɪn. jɛs. keɪɛmlɪn wəd fɪt maɪ mud laɪk ə ɡlʌv." ðə ɡlimən ɡlænst ət ðə tʃɪkən plæɾɝ ən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. "wʌt dɪd jə du, bɔɪ? stʌf əm ʌp jəɹ sliv?" ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ lɛft ə ðə θɹi bɝdz bʌt boʊnz ən kɑɹkəsɪz wɪð oʊnli ə fju stʃɹɪps ə flɛʃ ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ.

"Caemlyn. Yes. Caemlyn would fit my mood like a glove." The gleeman glanced at the chicken platter and gave a start. "What did you do, boy? Stuff them up your sleeve?" There was nothing left of the three birds but bones and carcasses with only a few strips of flesh remaining.

"səmtaɪmz aɪ ɡɛt hʌŋɡɹi," mæt mʌɾɝd. ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt nɑt tə lɪk ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. "ɑɹ jə kʌmɪŋ wɪð mi, əɹ nɑt?"

"Sometimes I get hungry," Mat muttered. It was an effort not to lick his fingers. "Are you coming with me, or not?"

"oʊ, əl kʌm, bɔɪ." əz tɑm pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf tə hɪz fit, hi dɪd nɑt sim əz ənstɛɾi əz i hæd bɪn. "ju weɪt hɪɹ - ən tʃɹaɪ nɑt tə it ðə teɪbəl - waɪl aɪ ɡɛt maɪ θɪŋz ən seɪ səm ɡʊdbaɪz." hi lɪmpt əweɪ, nɑt stæɡɝɪŋ wʌns.

"Oh, I will come, boy." As Thom pushed himself to his feet, he did not seem as unsteady as he had been. "You wait here - and try not to eat the table - while I get my things and say some goodbyes." He limped away, not staggering once.

mæt dʒɹæŋk ə lɪɾəl ə hɪz waɪn ən stʃɹɪpt ɔf ə fju ʃɹɛdz ðət wɝ lɛft ɑn ðə tʃɪkən kɑɹkəsɪz, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf i hæd taɪm tə ɔɹɾɝ ənʌðɝ, bʌt tɑm wɑz bæk kwɪkli. hɪz hɑɹp ən fluɾ ɪn ðɛɹ dɑɹk lɛðɝ keɪsəz hʌŋ ɑn ɪz bæk wɪð ə taɪd blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl. hi kæɹiɾ ə pleɪn wɔkɪŋ stæf əz tɔl əz i wɑz. ðə tu sɝvɪŋ wɪmən fɑloʊɾ ɑn iðɝ saɪd. mæt dɪsaɪɾɪd ðeɪ wɝ sɪstɝz. aɪdɛntɪkəl bɪɡ bɹaʊn aɪz lʊkt ʌp ət ðə ɡlimən wɪð aɪdɛntɪkəl ɪkspɹɛʃənz. tɑm wɑz kɪsɪŋ fɝst sɑl, ðən mɑɾə, ən pæɾɪŋ tʃiks əz i hɛɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ, dʒɝkɪŋ ɪz hɛd fəɹ mæt tə fɑloʊ. hi wɑz aʊtsaɪd bɪfɔɹ mæt kəd fɪnɪʃ kəlɛktɪŋ ɪz oʊn bɪlɔŋɪŋz ən pɪk ʌp ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf.

Mat drank a little of his wine and stripped off a few shreds that were left on the chicken carcasses, wondering if he had time to order another, but Thom was back quickly. His harp and flute in their dark leather cases hung on his back with a tied blanketroll. He carried a plain walking staff as tall as he was. The two serving women followed on either side. Mat decided they were sisters. Identical big brown eyes looked up at the gleeman with identical expressions. Thom was kissing first Saal, then Mada, and patting cheeks as he headed for the door, jerking his head for Mat to follow. He was outside before Mat could finish collecting his own belongings and pick up his quarterstaff.

ðə jʌŋɡɝ ə ðə tu wɪmən, sɑl, stɑp mæt əz i ɹitʃt ðə dɔɹ. "wʌtɛvɝ jə sɛd tə hɪm, aɪ fɝɡɪv jə fəɹ ðə waɪn, ivən ɪf ɪts teɪkɪŋ ɪm əweɪ. aɪv nɑt sin ɪm ðɪs əlaɪv ɪn wiks." ʃi pɹɛst sʌmθɪŋ ɪndə hɪz hænd, ən wən i ɡlænst əɾ ɪt, hɪz aɪz waɪɾənd ɪn kənfjuʒən. ʃi hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ə sɪlvɝ tɑɹ vəlɑn mɑɹk. "fɔɹ wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz jə sɛd. bɪsaɪdz, huɛvɝ ɪz fiɾɪŋ jə ɪz nɑt duɪŋ ə ɡʊd dʒɑb ʌv ɪt, bʌt jə stɪl əv pɹɪɾi aɪz." ʃi læft ət ði ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn ɪz feɪs.

The younger of the two women, Saal, stopped Mat as he reached the door. "Whatever you said to him, I forgive you for the wine, even if it is taking him away. I've not seen him this alive in weeks." She pressed something into his hand, and when he glanced at it, his eyes widened in confusion. She had given him a silver Tar Valon mark. "For whatever it was you said. Besides, whoever is feeding you is not doing a good job of it, but you still have pretty eyes." She laughed at the expression on his face.

mæt wɑz læfɪŋ, tu, ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf, əz i wɛn aʊɾ ɪndə ðə stʃɹit, ɹoʊlɪŋ ðə sɪlvɝ kɔɪn əkɹɔs ðə bæks ə hɪz fɪŋɡɝz. soʊ aɪ hæv pɹɪɾi aɪz, də aɪ? hɪz læftɝ ʃʌɾ ɔf laɪk ðə læs dʒɹɪp fɹəm ə waɪn bæɹəl: tɑm wɑz ðɛɹ, bʌt nɑt ðə kɔɹps. ðə wɪndoʊz ə ðə tævɝnz daʊn ðə stʃɹit pʊɾ ɪnʌf laɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə kɑbəlstoʊnz fəɹ ɪm tə bi ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt. ðə sɪɾi ɡɑɹd wəd nɑɾ əv kæɹiɾ ə dɛd mæn əweɪ wɪθaʊɾ æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz, ət ðoʊz tævɝnz ən ət ðə wʊmən ə tæntʃəkoʊ, tu.

Mat was laughing, too, in spite of himself, as he went out into the street, rolling the silver coin across the backs of his fingers. So I have pretty eyes, do I? His laughter shut off like the last drip from a wine barrel: Thom was there, but not the corpse. The windows of the taverns down the street put enough light across the cobblestones for him to be sure of it. The city guard would not have carried a dead man away without asking questions, at those taverns and at The Woman of Tanchico, too.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə stɛɹɪŋ æt, bɔɪ?" tɑm æskt. "noʊ tʃɹɑləks ɪn ðoʊz ʃædoʊz."

"What are you staring at, boy?" Thom asked. "No Trollocs in those shadows."

"fʊtpædz," mæt mʌɾɝd. "aɪ wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt fʊtpædz."

"Footpads," Mat muttered. "I was thinking about footpads."

"noʊ stʃɹit θivz əɹ stʃɹɔŋ-ɑɹmz ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, iðɝ, bɔɪ. wən ðə ɡɑɹdz teɪk ə fʊtpæd - nɑt ðət mɛni tʃɹaɪ ðət ɡeɪm hɪɹ; ðə wɝd spɹɛdz - bʌt wən ðeɪ du, ðeɪ hɔl ɪm tə ðə taʊɝ, ən wʌtɛvɝ ɪts ði ɛɛs sədaɪ də tə hɪm, ðə fɛloʊ livz tɑɹ vəlɑn ðə nɛks deɪ əz waɪd-aɪɾ əz ə ɡusd ɡɝl. aɪ ʌndɝstæn ðəɹ ivən hɑɹɾɝ ɑn wɪmən kɑt θivɪŋ. noʊ, ði oʊnli weɪ jəl əv jəɹ mʌni stoʊlən hɪɹ ɪz sʌmbɑɾi sɛlɪŋ jə pɑlɪʃt bɹæs fəɹ ɡoʊld əɹ juzɪŋ ʃeɪv daɪs. ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ fʊtpædz."

"No street thieves or strong-arms in Tar Valon, either, boy. When the guards take a footpad - not that many try that game here; the word spreads - but when they do, they haul him to the Tower, and whatever it is the Aes Sedai do to him, the fellow leaves Tar Valon the next day as wide-eyed as a goosed girl. I understand they're even harder on women caught thieving. No, the only way you'll have your money stolen here is somebody selling you polished brass for gold or using shaved dice. There are no footpads."

mæt tɝn ɑn ɪz hil ən stʃɹoʊd pæs tɑm, hɛɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə dɑks, kɔɹɾɝstæf θʌmpɪŋ ɔf ðə kɑbəlstoʊnz əz ɪf i kəd pʊʃ hɪmsɛlf əhɛd fæstɝ. "wɝ gɑnə bi ɑn ðə fɝst ʃɪp seɪlɪŋ, wʌtɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz. ðə fɝst, tɑm."

Mat turned on his heel and strode past Thom, heading toward the docks, quarterstaff thumping off the cobblestones as if he could push himself ahead faster. "We're going to be on the first ship sailing, whatever it is. The first, Thom."

tɑmz stɪk klɪk hɝidli æftɝ hɪm. "sloʊ daʊn, bɔɪ. wʌts jəɹ hɝi? ðəɹ ɑɹ plɛnti ʌv ʃɪps, seɪlɪŋ deɪ ən naɪt. sloʊ daʊn. ðəɹ ɑɹən ɛni fʊtpædz."

Thom's stick clicked hurriedly after him. "Slow down, boy. What's your hurry? There are plenty of ships, sailing day and night. Slow down. There aren't any footpads."

"ðə fɝs blʌɾi ʃɪp, tɑm! ɪf ɪts sɪŋkɪŋ, wɪl bi ɑn ɪt!" ɪf ðeɪ wɝn fʊtpædz, wʌt wɝ ðeɪ? ðeɪ hæd tə bi θivz. wʌɾ ɛls kəd ðeɪ bi?

"The first bloody ship, Thom! If it's sinking, we'll be on it!" If they weren't footpads, what were they? They had to be thieves. What else could they be?


tʃæptɝ θɝɾitu


CHAPTER 32

ðə fɝst ʃɪp


The First Ship

saʊθhɑɹbɝ ɪtsɛlf, ðə ɡɹeɪɾ oʊɡiɝ-meɪd beɪsən, wɑz hjudʒ ən ɹaʊnd, sɝaʊndəd baɪ haɪ wɔlz ə ðə seɪm sɪlvɝ-stʃɹikt waɪt stoʊn əz ðə ɹɛst ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. wʌn lɔŋ wɔɹf, moʊst ʌv ɪt ɹuft, ɹæn ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊnd, ɪksɛpt wɛɹ ðə waɪd wɔɾɝ ɡeɪts stʊɾ oʊpən tə ɡɪv æksɛs tə ðə ɹɪvɝ. vɛsəlz ʌv ɛvɹi saɪz laɪn ðə wɔɹf, moʊs mʊɹd baɪ ðə stɝn, ən dɪspaɪt ði aʊɝ dɑkmən ɪn kɔɹs, slivələs ʃɝts hɝiɾ əbaʊt loʊɾɪŋ ən ənloʊɾɪŋ beɪlz ən tʃɛsts, kɹeɪts ən bæɹəlz, wɪð ɹoʊps ən bumz, əɹ ɑn ðɛɹ bæks. læmps hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə ɹuf bimz lɪt ðə wɑɹfs ən meɪɾ ə bæn ə laɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə blæk wɔɾɝ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə hɑɹbɝ. smɔl oʊpən boʊts skʌɾəld θɹu ðə dɑɹknəs, ðə skwɛɹ læntɝnz ətɑp ðɛɹ tɔl stɝnpoʊsts meɪkɪŋ ɪt sim əz ɪf faɪɝəfliz skɪɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə hɑɹbɝ. ðeɪ wɝ smɔl oʊnli kəmpɛɹd tə ðə ʃɪps, ðoʊ; səm hæɾ əz mɛni əz sɪks pɛɹz ə lɔŋ ɔɹz.

Southharbor itself, the great Ogier-made basin, was huge and round, surrounded by high walls of the same silver-streaked white stone as the rest of Tar Valon. One long wharf, most of it roofed, ran all the way around, except where the wide water gates stood open to give access to the river. Vessels of every size lined the wharf, most moored by the stern, and despite the hour dockmen in coarse, sleeveless shirts hurried about loading and unloading bales and chests, crates and barrels, with ropes and booms, or on their backs. Lamps hanging from the roof beams lit the wharfs and made a band of light around the black water in the middle of the harbor. Small open boats scuttled through the darkness, the square lanterns atop their tall sternposts making it seem as if fireflies skittered across the harbor. They were small only compared to the ships, though; some had as many as six pairs of long oars.

wən mæt lɛɾ ə stɪl-mʌɾɝɪŋ tɑm ʌndɝ ən ɑɹtʃ ə pɑlɪʃt ɹɛdstoʊn ən daʊn bɹɔd stɛps tə ðə wɔɹf, kɹumɪn ɑn wʌn θɹi-mæstəd ʃɪp wɝ ənfæsənɪŋ ðə mʊɹɪŋ laɪnz nɑt twɛnti peɪsɪz əweɪ. ðə vɛsəl wɑz lɑɹdʒɝ ðən moʊs mæt kəd si, bɪtwin fɪftin ən twɛnti spænz fɹəm ʃɑɹp baʊ tə skwɛɹd stɝn, wɪð ə flæt, ɹeɪl dɛk ɔlmoʊs lɛvəl wɪð ðə wɔɹf. ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ wɑz ðəɾ ɪt wɑz kæstɪŋ ɔf. ðə fɝst ʃɪp ðət seɪlz.

When Mat led a still-muttering Thom under an arch of polished redstone and down broad steps to the wharf, crewmen on one three-masted ship were unfastening the mooring lines not twenty paces away. The vessel was larger than most Mat could see, between fifteen and twenty spans from sharp bow to squared stern, with a flat, railed deck almost level with the wharf. The important thing was that it was casting off. The first ship that sails.

ə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn keɪm ʌp ðə wɔɹf: θɹi laɪnz ə hɛmp ɹoʊp soʊn daʊn ðə slivz ə hɪz dɑɹk koʊt mɑɹkt ɪm əz ə dɑkmæstɝ. hɪz waɪd ʃoʊldɝz sədʒɛstəd ðəɾ i maɪɾ əv bɪɡʌn əz ə dɑkmən hɔlɪŋ ɹoʊp ɪnstɛɾ ʌv wɛɹɪŋ ɪt. hi ɡlæns kæʒəwəli ɪn mæts dɝɛkʃən, ən stɑpt, sɝpɹaɪz ɑn ɪz lɛðɝi feɪs. "jɔɹ bʌndəlz seɪ wʌt jəɹ plænɪŋ, læd, bʌt jə maɪɾ əz wɛl fɝɡɛɾ ɪt. ðə sɪstɝ ʃoʊd mi ə dʒɹɔɪŋ ə ju. jəl bɔɹd noʊ ʃɪp ɪn saʊθhɑɹbɝ, læd. ɡoʊ bæk ʌp ðoʊz stɛɹz soʊ aɪ doʊn əv tə tɛl ə mæn ɔf tə wɑtʃ ju."

A gray-haired man came up the wharf: three lines of hemp rope sewn down the sleeves of his dark coat marked him as a dockmaster. His wide shoulders suggested that he might have begun as a dockman hauling rope instead of wearing it. He glanced casually in Mat's direction, and stopped, surprise on his leathery face. "Your bundles say what you're planning, lad, but you might as well forget it. The sister showed me a drawing of you. You'll board no ship in Southharbor, lad. Go back up those stairs so I don't have to tell a man off to watch you."

"wʌɾ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt . . . ?" tɑm mɝmɝd.

"What under the Light . . . ?" Thom murmured.

"ðæts ɔl tʃeɪnʒd," mæt sɛd fɝmli. ðə ʃɪp wɑz kæstɪŋ ɔf ðə læs mʊɹɪŋ laɪn; ðə fɝl tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ seɪlz stɪl meɪd θɪk, peɪl bʌndəlz ɑn ðə lɔŋ, slæntəd bumz, bʌt mɛn wɝ ɹɛɾiɪŋ ðə swips. hi pʊl ði æmɪɝlɪnz peɪpɝ aʊɾ ə hɪz paʊtʃ ən θɹʌst ɪɾ ɪn ðə dɑkmæstɝz feɪs. "æz jə kən si, ɪm ɑn ðə bɪznəs ə ðə taʊɝ, ət ði ɔɹɾɝ ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hɝsɛlf. ən aɪ hæv tə liv ɑn ðət vɛɹi vɛsəl ðɛɹ."

"That's all changed," Mat said firmly. The ship was casting off the last mooring line; the furled triangular sails still made thick, pale bundles on the long, slanted booms, but men were readying the sweeps. He pulled the Amyrlin's paper out of his pouch and thrust it in the dockmaster's face. "As you can see, I'm on the business of the Tower, at the order of the Amyrlin Seat herself. And I have to leave on that very vessel there."

ðə dɑkmæstɝ ɹɛd ðə wɝdz, ðən ɹɛɾ əm əɡɛn. "aɪ nɛvɝ sɔ sətʃ ə θɪŋ ɪn maɪ laɪf. waɪ wəd ðə taʊɝ seɪ jə kʊdnt ɡoʊ, ðən ɡɪv jə . . . ðæt?"

The dockmaster read the words, then read them again. "I never saw such a thing in my life. Why would the Tower say you couldn't go, then give you . . . that?"

"æsk ði æmɪɝlɪn, ɪf jə wɑnt," mæt toʊld ɪm ɪn ə wɪɹi vɔɪs ðət sɛɾ i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɛniwʌn kəd pɑsəbli bi stupəɾ ɪnʌf tə də ðæt, "bʌt ʃɪl əv maɪ haɪd, ən jʊɹz, ɪf aɪ də nɑt seɪl ɑn ðət ʃɪp."

"Ask the Amyrlin, if you want," Mat told him in a weary voice that said he did not think anyone could possibly be stupid enough to do that, "but she'll have my hide, and yours, if I do not sail on that ship."

"jul nɛvɝ meɪk ɪt," ðə dɑkmæstɝ sɛd, bʌɾ i wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi kʌpɪŋ ɪz hænz tə hɪz maʊθ. "əbɔɹd ðə ɡɹeɪ ɡʌl ðɛɹ! stɑp! ðə laɪt bɝn ju, stɑp!"

"You'll never make it," the dockmaster said, but he was already cupping his hands to his mouth. "Aboard the Gray Gull there! Stop! The Light burn you, stop!"

ðə ʃɝtləs fɛloʊ ət ðə tɪlɝ lʊk bæk, ðən spoʊk tə ə tɔl kəmpænjən ɪn ə dɑɹk koʊt wɪð pʌfi slivz. ðə tɔl mæn nɛvɝ tʊk ɪz aɪz ɔf ðə kɹumɪn dʒʌs dɪpɪŋ ðə swips ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝ. "ɡɪv weɪ təɡɛðɝ," hi kɔld, ən swipbleɪdz kɝld ʌp fɹɔθ.

The shirtless fellow at the tiller looked back, then spoke to a tall companion in a dark coat with puffy sleeves. The tall man never took his eyes off the crewmen just dipping the sweeps into the water. "Give way together," he called, and sweepblades curled up froth.

"aɪl meɪk ɪt," mæt snæpt. ðə fɝst ʃɪp aɪ sɛd, ən ðə fɝst ʃɪp aɪ mɛnt! "kʌm ɑn, tɑm!"

"I'll make it," Mat snapped. The first ship I said, and the first ship I meant! "Come on, Thom!"

wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ tə si ɪf ðə ɡlimən fɑloʊd, hi ɹæn daʊn ðə wɔɹf, dɑdʒɪŋ ɝaʊn mɛn ən bæɹoʊz stækt wɪð kɑɹɡoʊ. ðə ɡæp bɪtwin ðə ɡɹeɪ ɡʌlz stɝn ən ðə wɔɹf waɪɾənd əz ðə swips bɪt dipɝ. hɛftɪŋ ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf, hi hɝld ɪɾ əhɛɾ ə hɪm təwɔɹd ðə ʃɪp laɪk ə spɪɹ, tʊk wʌn mɔɹ stɛp, ən dʒʌmpt əz hɑɹɾ əz i kʊd.

Without waiting to see if the gleeman followed, he ran down the wharf, dodging around men and barrows stacked with cargo. The gap between the Gray Gull's stern and the wharf widened as the sweeps bit deeper. Hefting his quarterstaff, he hurled it ahead of him toward the ship like a spear, took one more step, and jumped as hard as he could.

ðə dɑɹk wɔɾɝ pæsɪŋ bɪniθ ɪz fit lʊkt aɪsi, bʌɾ ɪn ə hɑɹtbiɾ i hæd klɪɹd ðə ʃɪps ɹeɪl ən wɑz ɹoʊlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə dɛk. əz i skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fit, hi hɝɾ ə ɡɹʌn ən ə kɝs bɪhaɪn hɪm.

The dark water passing beneath his feet looked icy, but in a heartbeat he had cleared the ship's rail and was rolling across the deck. As he scrambled to his feet, he heard a grunt and a curse behind him.

tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn hɔɪstəd hɪmsɛlf ʌp ɑn ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ wɪð ənʌðɝ kɝs, ən klaɪmd oʊvɝ ɑntu ðə dɛk. "aɪ lɔs maɪ stɪk," hi mʌɾɝd. "aɪl wɑn ənʌðɝ." ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz ɹaɪt lɛɡ, hi pɪɹd daʊn ət ðə stɪl waɪɾənɪŋ stʃɹɪp ʌv wɔɾɝ bɪhaɪn ðə vɛsəl ən ʃɪvɝd. "aɪ hæɾ ə bæθ tədeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi." ðə ʃɝtləs stɪɹsmən stɛɹd waɪd-aɪd fɹəm ɪm tə mæt ən bæk əɡɛn, klʌtʃɪŋ ðə tɪlɝ əz ɪf wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ i kəd juz ɪt tə dɪfɛn hɪmsɛlf fɹəm mædmən.

Thom Merrilin hoisted himself up on the railing with another curse, and climbed over onto the deck. "I lost my stick," he muttered. "I'll want another." Rubbing his right leg, he peered down at the still widening strip of water behind the vessel and shivered. "I had a bath today already." The shirtless steersman stared wide-eyed from him to Mat and back again, clutching the tiller as if wondering whether he could use it to defend himself from madmen.

ðə tɔl mæn sim nɪɹli əz stʌnd. hɪz peɪl blu aɪz bʌlʒd, ən ɪz maʊθ wɝk saʊnləsli fəɹ ə moʊmənt. hɪz dɑɹk bɪɹd, kʌt tə ə pɔɪnt, sim tə kwɪvɝ wɪð ɹeɪdʒ, ən ɪz nɛɹoʊ feɪs ɡɹu pɝpəl. "baɪ ðə stoʊn!" hi bɛloʊd faɪnəli. "wʌɾ ɪz ðə minɪŋ ə ðɪs? aɪv noʊ ɹum ɑn ðɪs vɛsəl fəɹ əz mʌtʃ əz ə ʃɪps kæt, ən aɪd nɑt teɪk væɡəbɑnz u lip ɑntu maɪ dɛks ɪf aɪ dɪd. seɪnɝ! vɑsə! hiv ðɪs ɹʌbɪʃ oʊvɝ ðə saɪd!" tu ɪkstʃɹimli lɑɹdʒ mɛn, bɛɹfʊɾ ən stʃɹɪp tə ðə weɪst, stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm kɔɪlɪŋ laɪnz ən stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ðə stɝn. ðə mɛn ət ðə swips kəntɪnjud ðɛɹ wɝk, bɛndɪŋ tə lɪf ðə bleɪdz, teɪkɪŋ θɹi lɔŋ stɛps əlɔŋ ðə dɛk, ðən stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ ən wɔkɪŋ bækwɝdz, hɔlɪŋ ðə ʃɪp əhɛɾ ɑn ðɛɹ bleɪdz.

The tall man seemed nearly as stunned. His pale blue eyes bulged, and his mouth worked soundlessly for a moment. His dark beard, cut to a point, seemed to quiver with rage, and his narrow face grew purple. "By the Stone!" he bellowed finally. "What is the meaning of this? I've no room on this vessel for as much as a ship's cat, and I'd not take vagabonds who leap onto my decks if I did. Sanor! Vasa! Heave this rubbish over the side!" Two extremely large men, barefoot and stripped to the waist, straightened from coiling lines and started toward the stern. The men at the sweeps continued their work, bending to lift the blades, taking three long steps along the deck, then straightening and walking backwards, hauling the ship ahead on their blades.

mæt weɪv ði æmɪɝlɪnz peɪpɝ təwɔɹd ðə bɪɹɾəd mæn - ðə kæptən, hi səpoʊzd - wɪð wʌn hænd, ən fɪʃt ə ɡoʊl kɹaʊn aʊɾ ə hɪz paʊtʃ wɪð ði ʌðɝ, teɪkɪŋ kɛɹ ivən ɪn ɪz heɪs ðət ðə fɛloʊ sɔ ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ wɛɹ ðət keɪm fɹʌm. tɔsɪŋ ðə hɛvi kɔɪn tə ðə mæn, hi spoʊk kwɪkli, stɪl weɪvɪŋ ðə peɪpɝ. "fɔɹ ði ɪnkənvinjəns ʌv əɹ bɔɹɾɪŋ əz wi dɪd, kæptən. mɔɹ tə kʌm fəɹ pæsədʒ. ɑn bɪznəs ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. pɝsənəl kəmæn ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ɪmpɛɹəɾɪv wi seɪl ɪmiɾiətli. tə ɑɹɪŋɡəl, ɪn ændɝ. ʌtmoʊst ɝdʒənsi. ðə blɛsɪŋz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɑn ɔl u eɪɾ ʌs; ðə taʊɝz ɹæθ ɑn ɛni hu ɪmpiɾ ʌs."

Mat waved the Amyrlin's paper toward the bearded man - the captain, he supposed - with one hand, and fished a gold crown out of his pouch with the other, taking care even in his haste that the fellow saw there were more where that came from. Tossing the heavy coin to the man, he spoke quickly, still waving the paper. "For the inconvenience of our boarding as we did, Captain. More to come for passage. On business of the White Tower. Personal command of the Amyrlin Seat. Imperative we sail immediately. To Aringill, in Andor. Utmost urgency. The blessings of the White Tower on all who aid us; the Tower's wrath on any who impede us."

sɝɾən ðə mæn hæd sin ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn sil baɪ ðət taɪm - ən lɪɾəl mɔɹ, mæt hoʊpt - hi foʊldəd ðə peɪpɝ əɡɛn ən θɹʌst ɪt bæk aʊɾ ə saɪt. aɪɪŋ ðə tu bɪɡ mɛn ənizəli əz ðeɪ keɪm ʌp ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə kæptən - bɝn mi, ðeɪ boʊθ əv ɑɹmz laɪk pɛɹɪnz! - hi wɪʃt i hæɾ ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf ɪn hænd. hi kəd si ɪt laɪɪŋ wɛɹ ɪt hæd lændəd, fɝðɝ daʊn ðə dɛk. hi tʃɹaɪd tə lʊk ʃʊɹ ən kɑnfəɾənt, ðə sɔɹɾ ə mæn ʌðɝz hæd bɛɾɝ nɑt tʃɹaɪfəl wɪð, ə mæn wɪð ðə paʊɝ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ bɪhaɪn hɪm. ə lɔŋ weɪ bɪhaɪn mi, aɪ hoʊp.

Certain the man had seen the Flame of Tar Valon seal by that time - and little more, Mat hoped - he folded the paper again and thrust it back out of sight. Eyeing the two big men uneasily as they came up on either side of the captain - Burn me, they both have arms like Perrin's! - he wished he had his quarterstaff in hand. He could see it lying where it had landed, further down the deck. He tried to look sure and confident, the sort of man others had better not trifle with, a man with the power of the White Tower behind him. A long way behind me, I hope.

ðə kæptən lʊkt ət mæt daʊtfəli, ən ivən mɔɹ soʊ ət tɑm ɪn ɪz ɡlimənz kloʊk ən nʌn tu stɛɾi əfʊt, bʌɾ i moʊʃən seɪnɝ ən vɑsə tə stɑp wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ. "aɪ wəd nɑɾ æŋɡɝ ðə taʊɝ. bɝn maɪ soʊl, fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ tʃɹeɪd teɪks mi fɹəm tiɹ tə ðɪs dɛn ʌv. . . . aɪ kʌm tu ɔfən tə æŋɡɝ . . . ɛniwʌn." ə taɪt smaɪl əpɪɹɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs. "bʌɾ aɪ spoʊk ðə tʃɹuθ. baɪ ðə stoʊn, aɪ dɪd! sɪks kæbənz aɪ hæv fəɹ pæsənʒɝz, ən ɔl fʊl. jə kən slip ɑn dɛk ən it wɪð ðə kɹu fəɹ ənʌðɝ ɡoʊl kɹaʊn. itʃ."

The captain looked at Mat doubtfully, and even more so at Thom in his gleeman's cloak and none too steady afoot, but he motioned Sanor and Vasa to stop where they were. "I would not anger the Tower. Burn my soul, for the time being the river trade takes me from Tear to this den of. . . . I come too often to anger . . . anyone." A tight smile appeared on his face. "But I spoke the truth. By the Stone, I did! Six cabins I have for passengers, and all full. You can sleep on deck and eat with the crew for another gold crown. Each."

"ðæɾ ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs!" tɑm snæpt. "aɪ doʊn kɛɹ wʌt ðə wɔɹ əz dʌn daʊnɹɪvɝ, ðəɾ ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs!" ðə tu lɑɹdʒ seɪlɝz ʃɪftəd ðɛɹ bɛɹ fit.

"That is ridiculous!" Thom snapped. "I don't care what the war has done downriver, that is ridiculous!" The two large sailors shifted their bare feet.

"ɪɾ ɪz ðə pɹaɪs," ðə kæptən sɛd fɝmli. "aɪ də nɑt wɑnə æŋɡɝ ɛniwʌn, bʌɾ aɪɾ əz sun nɑɾ əv ɛni bɪznəs jə kən bi ɑn əbɔɹd maɪ vɛsəl. laɪk lɛɾɪŋ ə mæn peɪ jə soʊ hi kən koʊt jə wɪð hɑt tɑɹ, mɪksɪŋ ɪn ðət bɪznəs. jə peɪ ðə pɹaɪs, əɹ jə ɡoʊ oʊvɝ ðə saɪd, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hɝsɛlf kən dʒɹaɪ jə ɔf. ən əl kip ðɪs fəɹ ðə tʃɹʌbəl juv ɡɪvən mi, θæŋk ju." hi stʌf ðə ɡoʊl kɹaʊn mæt əz tɔst ɪm ɪndə ə pɑkəɾ ə hɪz pʌfi-sliv koʊt.

"It is the price," the captain said firmly. "I do not want to anger anyone, but I'd as soon not have any business you can be on aboard my vessel. Like letting a man pay you so he can coat you with hot tar, mixing in that business. You pay the price, or you go over the side, and the Amyrlin Seat herself can dry you off. And I'll keep this for the trouble you've given me, thank you." He stuffed the gold crown Mat has tossed him into a pocket of his puffy-sleeved coat.

"haʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ wʌn ə ðə kæbənz?" mæt æskt. "tə aʊɝsɛlvz. jə kən pʊt huɛvɝ ɪz ɪn ɪt naʊ wɪð sʌmwʌn ɛls." hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə slip aʊɾ ɪn ðə koʊl naɪt. ən ɪf jə doʊn oʊvɝwɛlm ə fɛloʊ laɪk ðɪs, hɪl stil jəɹ bɹitʃɪz ən seɪ hiz duɪŋ jə ə feɪvɝ. hɪz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld laʊdli. "ænd wi it wʌt jə it, nɑt wɪð ðə kɹu. ən plɛnti ʌv ɪt!"

"How much for one of the cabins?" Mat asked. "To ourselves. You can put whoever is in it now with someone else." He did not want to sleep out in the cold night. And if you don't overwhelm a fellow like this, he'll steal your breeches and say he is doing you a favor. His stomach rumbled loudly. "And we eat what you eat, not with the crew. And plenty of it!"

"mæt," tɑm sɛd, "ɪm ðə wʌn u ɪz səpoʊz tə bi dʒɹʌŋk hɪɹ." hi tɝn tə ðə kæptən, flɝɪʃɪŋ ɪz pætʃ-kʌvɝd kloʊk əz wɛl əz i kəd wɪð blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl ən ɪnstʃɹəmən keɪsəz hʌŋ əbaʊt hɪm. "æz jə meɪ hæv noʊɾəst, kæptən, aɪm ə ɡlimən." ivən ɪn ði oʊpən ɛɹ, hɪz vɔɪs sʌɾənli sim tə ɛkoʊ. "fɔɹ ðə pɹaɪs ʌv əɹ pæsədʒəz, aɪ wəd bi mɔɹ ðən ɡlæd tə ɛntɝteɪn jəɹ pæsənʒɝz ən jəɹ kɹu - "

"Mat," Thom said, "I'm the one who is supposed to be drunk here." He turned to the captain, flourishing his patch-covered cloak as well as he could with blanketroll and instrument cases hung about him. "As you may have noticed, Captain, I am a gleeman." Even in the open air, his voice suddenly seemed to echo. "For the price of our passages, I would be more than glad to entertain your passengers and your crew - "

"maɪ kɹu ɪz əbɔɹd tə wɝk, ɡlimən, nɑt bi ɛntɝteɪnd." ðə kæptən stʃɹoʊkt ɪz pɔɪntəd bɪɹd; hɪz peɪl aɪz pɹaɪs mæts pleɪn koʊt tə ðə kɑpɝ. "soʊ jə wɑn ə kæbən, də ju?" hi bɑɹkt ə læf. "æn maɪ milz? wɛl, jə kən əv maɪ kæbən ən maɪ milz. fəɹ faɪv ɡoʊl kɹaʊnz fɹəm itʃ ə ju! ændɔɝən weɪt!" ðoʊz wɝ ðə hɛviəst. hi bɪɡæn tə læf soʊ hɑɹɾ ɪz wɝdz keɪm aʊɾ ɪn wizəz. flæŋkɪŋ hɪm, seɪnɝ ən vɑsə ɡɹɪnd waɪd ɡɹɪnz. "fɔɹ tɛn kɹaʊnz, jə kən teɪk maɪ kæbən, ən maɪ milz, ən əl muv ɪn wɪð ðə pæsənʒɝz ən it wɪð ðə kɹu. bɝn maɪ soʊl, aɪ wɪl! baɪ ðə stoʊn, aɪ swɛɹ ɪt! fəɹ tɛn ɡoʊl kɹaʊnz. . . ." læftɝ tʃoʊkt ɔf ɛniθɪŋ ɛls.

"My crew is aboard to work, gleeman, not be entertained." The captain stroked his pointed beard; his pale eyes priced Mat's plain coat to the copper. "So you want a cabin, do you?" He barked a laugh. "And my meals? Well, you can have my cabin and my meals. For five gold crowns from each of you! Andoran weight!" Those were the heaviest. He began to laugh so hard his words came out in wheezes. Flanking him, Sanor and Vasa grinned wide grins. "For ten crowns, you can take my cabin, and my meals, and I'll move in with the passengers and eat with the crew. Burn my soul, I will! By the Stone, I swear it! For ten gold crowns. . . ." Laughter choked off anything else.

hi wɑz stɪl læfɪŋ ən ɡæspɪŋ fəɹ bɹɛθ ən waɪpɪŋ tɪɹz fɹəm ɪz aɪz wən mæt pʊld aʊt wʌn ə hɪz tu pɝsɪz, bʌt læftɝ stɑp baɪ ðə taɪm mæt hæd kaʊntəd faɪv kɹaʊnz ɪndə hɪz hænz. ðə kæptən blɪŋkt ɪn dɪsbɪlif; ðə tu bɪɡ kɹumɪn lʊk pɑliækst.

He was still laughing and gasping for breath and wiping tears from his eyes when Mat pulled out one of his two purses, but laughter stopped by the time Mat had counted five crowns into his hands. The captain blinked in disbelief; the two big crewmen looked poleaxed.

"ændɔɝən weɪt, jə sɛd?" mæt æskt. ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə dʒʌdʒ wɪθaʊt skeɪlz, bʌɾ i leɪd sɛvən mɔɹ ɑn ðə paɪl. tu æktʃəli  wɝ ændɔɝən, ən i θɔt ði ʌðɝz meɪɾ ʌp ðə weɪt. kloʊs ɪnʌf, fəɹ ðɪs fɛloʊ. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, hi æɾəd ənʌðɝ tu ɡoʊl tɛɹən kɹaʊnz. "fɔɹ huɛvɝ jəl bi pʊʃɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə kæbən ðeɪ peɪd fɔɹ." hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðə pæsənʒɝz wəd si ə kɑpɝ ʌv ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt səmtaɪmz peɪd tə əpɪɹ dʒɛnɝəs. "ənlɛs jə min tə ʃɛɹ wɪð ðɛm? noʊ, ʌv kɔɹs nɑt. ðeɪ ɔt tə hæv sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ hævɪŋ tə kɹaʊɾ ɪn wɪð ʌðɝz. ðɛɹz noʊ nid fəɹ jə tə it wɪð jəɹ kɹu, kæptən. jə ɑɹ wɛlkəm tə ʃɛɹ tɑmz milz ən maɪn ɪn jəɹ kæbən." tɑm stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm əz hɑɹɾ əz ði ʌðɝz dɪd.

"Andoran weight, you said?" Mat asked. It was hard to judge without scales, but he laid seven more on the pile. Two actually were Andoran, and he thought the others made up the weight. Close enough, for this fellow. After a moment, he added another two gold Tairen crowns. "For whoever you'll be pushing out of the cabin they paid for." He did not think the passengers would see a copper of it, but it sometimes paid to appear generous. "Unless you mean to share with them? No, of course not. They ought to have something for having to crowd in with others. There's no need for you to eat with your crew, Captain. You are welcome to share Thom's meals and mine in your cabin." Thom stared at him as hard as the others did.

"ɑɹ jə . . . ?" ðə bɪɹɾəd mænz vɔɪs wɑz ə hɔɹs wɪspɝ. "ɑɹ jə . . . baɪ ɛni tʃæns . . . ə jʌŋ lɔɹɾ ɪn dɪsɡaɪz?"

"Are you . . . ?" The bearded man's voice was a hoarse whisper. "Are you . . . by any chance . . . a young lord in disguise?"

"aɪ æm noʊ lɔɹd." mæt læft. hi hæd ɹizən tə læf. ðə ɡɹeɪ ɡʌl wɑz wɛl aʊɾ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs ə ðə hɑɹbɝ, naʊ, wɪð ðə wɔɹf ə bæn ə laɪt pɔɪntɪŋ ʌp ðə blæk ɡæp, nɑt fɑɹ əhɛd naʊ, wɛɹ ðə wɔɾɝ ɡeɪts lɛɾ aʊɾ ɑntu ðə ɹɪvɝ. ðə swips dʒɹoʊv ðə vɛsəl təwɔɹd ðət ɡæp kwɪkli. mɛn wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi swɪŋɪŋ ðə lɔŋ, slæntɪŋ bumz ɝaʊn pɹɪpɛɹətɔɹi tə ənlæʃɪŋ ðə seɪlz. ən wɪð ɡoʊld ɪn ɪz hænz, ðə kæptən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ simd ɹɛɾi tə θɹoʊ ɛniwʌn oʊvɝbɔɹd. "ɪf jə doʊn maɪnd, kæptən, kəd wi si əɹ kæbən? jəɹ kæbən, aɪ min. ɪts leɪt, ən aɪ fəɹ wʌn wɑn ə fju aʊɝz' slip." hɪz stʌmək spoʊk tə hɪm. "æn sʌpɝ!"

"I am no lord." Mat laughed. He had reason to laugh. The Gray Gull was well out into the darkness of the harbor, now, with the wharf a band of light pointing up the black gap, not far ahead now, where the water gates let out onto the river. The sweeps drove the vessel toward that gap quickly. Men were already swinging the long, slanting booms around preparatory to unlashing the sails. And with gold in his hands, the captain no longer seemed ready to throw anyone overboard. "If you don't mind, Captain, could we see our cabin? Your cabin, I mean. It's late, and I for one want a few hours' sleep." His stomach spoke to him. "And supper!"

əz ðə vɛsəl pʊɾ ɪts baʊ ɪndə ðə blæknəs, ðə bɪɹɾəd mæn hɪmsɛlf lɛd ðə weɪ daʊn ə læɾɝ tə ə ʃɔɹt, nɛɹoʊ pæsədʒ laɪnd wɪð dɔɹz sɛt kloʊs təɡɛðɝ. waɪl ðə kæptən klɪɹɾ ɪz θɪŋz fɹəm ɪz kæbən - ɪt ɹæn ðə wɪdθ ə ðə stɝn, wɪð ɪts bɛɾ ən ɔl ʌv ɪts fɝnɪʃɪŋz bɪlt ɪndə ðə wɔlz ɪksɛp tu tʃɛɹz ən ə fju tʃɛsts - ən sɔ ðət mæt ən tɑm wɝ sɛɾəld, mæt lɝn ə ɡɹeɪt dil, bɪɡɪnɪŋ wɪð ðə fæk ðət ðə mæn wəd nɑt bi pʊʃɪŋ ɛni pæsənʒɝz aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ kɔɹɾɝz. hi hæd tu mʌtʃ ɹɪspɛk fəɹ ðə kɔɪn ðeɪ hæd peɪd, ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðɛm, tə əlaʊ ðæt. ðə kæptən wəd teɪk ɪz fɝsts kæbən, ən ðəɾ ɔfəsɝ wəd teɪk ðə sɛkənz bɛd, pʊʃɪŋ itʃ loʊɝ mæn daʊn tɪl ðə dɛkmæstɝ wəɾ ɛn slipɪŋ ʌp ɪn ðə baʊ wɪð ðə kɹu.

As the vessel put its bow into the blackness, the bearded man himself led the way down a ladder to a short, narrow passage lined with doors set close together. While the captain cleared his things from his cabin - it ran the width of the stern, with its bed and all of its furnishings built into the walls except two chairs and a few chests - and saw that Mat and Thom were settled, Mat learned a great deal, beginning with the fact that the man would not be pushing any passengers out of their quarters. He had too much respect for the coin they had paid, if not for them, to allow that. The captain would take his first's cabin, and that officer would take the second's bed, pushing each lower man down till the deckmaster would end sleeping up in the bow with the crew.

mæt dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðəɾ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən kəd bi vɛɹi jusfəl, bʌɾ i lɪsən tə ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðə mæn sɛd. ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz bɛs tə noʊ nɑɾ oʊnli wɛɹ jə wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ, bʌɾ u jə wɝ dilɪŋ wɪð, əɹ ðeɪ maɪt dʒʌs teɪk jəɹ koʊɾ ən buts ən liv jə tə wɔk hoʊm θɹu ðə ɹeɪn ɪn bɛɹ fit.

Mat did not think that information could be very useful, but he listened to everything the man said. It was always best to know not only where you were going, but who you were dealing with, or they might just take your coat and boots and leave you to walk home through the rain in bare feet.

ðə kæptən wɑz ə tɛɹən neɪm hwɑn mɑliə, ən i spoʊk wɪð ɡɹeɪt voʊlubɪlɪɾi wʌns i hæd wɝkt aʊt mæt ən tɑm tə hɪz oʊn sæɾəsfækʃən. hi wɑz nɑt nɑbli bɔɹn, hi sɛd, nɑt hɪm, bʌɾ i wəd nɑɾ əv ɛniwʌn θɪŋk i wɑz ə ful. ə jʌŋ mæn wɪð mɔɹ ɡoʊl ðən ɛni jʌŋ mæn ʃəɾ əv baɪ ɹaɪt maɪt bi ə θif, ɪf ɛvɹiwʌn dɪd nɑt noʊ θivz nɛvɝ ɪskeɪp tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪð ðɛɹ hɔl. ə jʌŋ mæn dʒɹɛs laɪk ə fɑɹmbɔɪ bʌt wɪð ði ɛɹ ən kɑnfəɾəns ə ðə lɔɹɾ i dɪnaɪd biɪŋ - "baɪ ðə stoʊn, əl nɑt seɪ jə ɑɹ, ɪf jə seɪ jə ɑɹ nɑt." mɑliə wɪŋkt ən tʃʌkəld ən tʌɡd ðə pɔɪn ə hɪz bɪɹd. ə jʌŋ mæn kæɹiɪŋ ə peɪpɝ bɛɹɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪn sits sil ən baʊn fəɹ ændɝ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ sikɹət ðət kwin mɔɹɡeɪs hæd vɪzəɾəd tɑɹ vəlɑn, ðoʊ hɝ ɹizən sɝɾənli wɑz. ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs tə mɑliə sʌmθɪŋ wɑz əfʊt bɪtwin keɪɛmlɪn ən tɑɹ vəlɑn. ən mæt ən tɑm wɝ mɛsənʒɝz - fəɹ mɔɹɡeɪs, hi θɔt, baɪ mæts æksɛnt. ɛniθɪŋ i kəd də tə hɛlp ɪn soʊ ɡɹeɪɾ ən ɛntɝpɹaɪz wəd bi hɪz plɛʒɝ, nɑt ðəɾ i mɛn tə poʊk wɛɹ i wɑz nɑt wɑntəd.

The captain was a Tairen named Huan Mallia, and he spoke with great volubility once he had worked out Mat and Thom to his own satisfaction. He was not nobly born, he said, not him, but he would not have anyone think he was a fool. A young man with more gold than any young man should have by right might be a thief, if everyone did not know thieves never escaped Tar Valon with their haul. A young man dressed like a farmboy but with the air and confidence of the lord he denied being - "By the Stone, I'll not say you are, if you say you are not." Mallia winked and chuckled and tugged the point of his beard. A young man carrying a paper bearing the Amyrlin Seat's seal and bound for Andor. There was no secret that Queen Morgase had visited Tar Valon, though her reason certainly was. It was obvious to Mallia something was afoot between Caemlyn and Tar Valon. And Mat and Thom were messengers - for Morgase, he thought, by Mat's accent. Anything he could do to help in so great an enterprise would be his pleasure, not that he meant to poke where he was not wanted.

mæt ɪkstʃeɪnʒd stɑɹɾəld lʊks wɪð tɑm, hu wɑz stoʊɪŋ ɪz ɪnstʃɹəmən keɪsəz ʌndɝ ə teɪbəl bɪlt aʊt fɹəm wʌn wɔl. ðə ɹum hæd tu smɔl wɪndoʊz ɑn iðɝ saɪd, ən ə pɛɹ ə læmps ɪn dʒɔɪntəd bɹækəts fəɹ laɪt. "ðæts nɑnsɛns," mæt sɛd.

Mat exchanged startled looks with Thom, who was stowing his instrument cases under a table built out from one wall. The room had two small windows on either side, and a pair of lamps in jointed brackets for light. "That's nonsense," Mat said.

"ʌv kɔɹs," mɑliə ɹɪplaɪd. hi stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm pʊlɪŋ kloʊðz aʊɾ ʌv ə tʃɛst ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə bɛɾ ən smaɪld. "ʌv kɔɹs." ə kʌbɝɾ ɪn ðə wɔl sim tə hoʊl tʃɑɹts ə ðə ɹɪvɝ i wəd nid. "aɪl seɪ noʊ mɔɹ."

"Of course," Mallia replied. He straightened from pulling clothes out of a chest at the foot of the bed and smiled. "Of course." A cupboard in the wall seemed to hold charts of the river he would need. "I'll say no more."

bʌɾ i dɪd min tə poʊk, ðoʊ hi ətɛmptəd tə dɪsɡaɪz ɪt, ən i ɹæmbəld waɪl i tʃɹaɪd tə pɹaɪ. mæt lɪsənd, ən ænsɝd ðə kwɛstʃənz wɪð ɡɹʌns əɹ ʃɹʌɡz əɹ ə wɝɾ əɹ tu, waɪl tɑm sɛd lɛs ðən ðæt. ðə ɡlimən kɛpt ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd waɪl ənbɝɾənɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ə hɪz pəzɛʃənz.

But he did mean to poke, though he attempted to disguise it, and he rambled while he tried to pry. Mat listened, and answered the questions with grunts or shrugs or a word or two, while Thom said less than that. The gleeman kept shaking his head while unburdening himself of his possessions.

mɑliə hæd bɪn ə ɹɪvɝ mæn ɔl ɪz laɪf, ðoʊ hi dʒɹimd ə seɪlɪŋ ɑn ðə si. hi hɑɹdli spoʊk ʌv ə kʌntʃɹi bɪsaɪd tiɹ wɪθaʊt kəntɛmpt; ændɝ wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn tə ɪskeɪp, ən ðə pɹeɪz i faɪnəli mænədʒd wɑz ɡɹʌdʒɪŋ dɪspaɪɾ ɪz ɑbviəs ɛfɝts. "ɡʊd hɔɹsəz ɪn ændɝ, aɪv hɝd. nɑt bæd. nɑɾ əz ɡʊɾ əz tɛɹən stɑk, bʌt ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf. jə meɪk ɡʊd stil, ən aɪɝn ɡʊdz, bɹɑnz ən kɑpɝ - aɪv tʃɹeɪɾɪd fəɹ əm ɔfən ɪnʌf, ðoʊ jə tʃɑɹdʒ ə weɪɾi pɹaɪs - bʌt ðən juv ðoʊz maɪnz ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst. ɡoʊl maɪnz, tu. wɪv tə ɝn əɹ ɡoʊld, ɪn tiɹ."

Mallia had been a river man all his life, though he dreamed of sailing on the sea. He hardly spoke of a country beside Tear without contempt; Andor was the only one to escape, and the praise he finally managed was grudging despite his obvious efforts. "Good horses in Andor, I've heard. Not bad. Not as good as Tairen stock, but good enough. You make good steel, and iron goods, bronze and copper - I've traded for them often enough, though you charge a weighty price - but then you have those mines in the Mountains of Mist. Gold mines, too. We have to earn our gold, in Tear."

min ɹəsivd ɪz ɡɹeɪɾəst kəntɛmpt. "ivən lɛs ə kʌntʃɹi ðən mʊɹændi ɪz. wʌn sɪɾi ən ə fju liɡz ə lænd. ðeɪ ʌndɝpɹaɪs ði ɔɪl fɹəm əɹ ɡʊd tɛɹən ɑlɪvz dʒʌs kəz ðɛɹ ʃɪps noʊ haʊ tə faɪn ði ɔɪlfɪʃ ʃoʊlz. ðeɪv noʊ ɹaɪt tə bi ə kʌntʃɹi əɾ ɔl."

Mayene received his greatest contempt. "Even less a country than Murandy is. One city and a few leagues of land. They underprice the oil from our good Tairen olives just because their ships know how to find the oilfish shoals. They've no right to be a country at all."

hi heɪɾəd ɪljən. "wʌn deɪ wɪl luɾ ɪljən bɛɹ, tiɹ daʊn ɛvɹi taʊn ən vɪlədʒ, ən saʊ ðɛɹ fɪlθi ɡɹaʊnd wɪð sɔlt." mɑliəz bɪɹɾ ɔlmoʊs bɹɪsəld wɪð aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ ət haʊ fɪlθi ði ɪljən lænd wɑz. "ivən ðɛɹ ɑlɪvz ɑɹ pjutʃɹɪd! wʌn deɪ wɪl kæɹi ɛvɹi læst ɪliɑnɝ pɪɡ ɔf ɪn tʃeɪnz! ðəɾ ɪz wʌt ðə haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən sɛz."

He hated Illian. "One day we'll loot Illian bare, tear down every town and village, and sow their filthy ground with salt." Mallia's beard almost bristled with outrage at how filthy the Illian land was. "Even their olives are putrid! One day we'll carry every last Illianer pig off in chains! That is what the High Lord Samon says."

mæt wʌndɝd wʌt ðə mæn θɔt tiɹ wəd də wɪð ɔl ðoʊz pipəl ɪf ðeɪ æktʃəli  fʊlfɪl ðɪs skim. ði ɪliɑnɝz wəɾ əv tə bi fɛd, ən ðeɪ wəd ʃʊɹli də noʊ wɝk ɪn tʃeɪnz. ɪt meɪd noʊ sɛns tə hɪm, bʌt mɑliəz aɪz ʃoʊn wən i spoʊk ʌv ɪt.

Mat wondered what the man thought Tear would do with all those people if they actually fulfilled this scheme. The Illianers would have to be fed, and they would surely do no work in chains. It made no sense to him, but Mallia's eyes shone when he spoke of it.

oʊnli fulz lɛt ðɛmsɛlvz bi ɹul baɪ ə kɪŋ əɹ ə kwin, baɪ wʌn mæn əɹ wʊmən. "ɪksɛp kwin mɔɹɡeɪs, ʌv kɔɹs," hi pʊɾ ɪn heɪstəli. "ʃi ɪz ə faɪn wʊmən, soʊ aɪv hɝd. bjuɾəfəl, aɪm toʊld." ɔl ðoʊz fulz boʊɪŋ tə wʌn ful. ðə haɪ lɔɹdz ɹul tɛɹ təɡɛðɝ, ɹitʃɪŋ dɪsɪʒənz ɪn kɑnsɝt, ən ðət wɑz haʊ θɪŋz ʃəd bi. ðə haɪ lɔɹdz nu wʌt wɑz ɹaɪɾ ən ɡʊɾ ən tʃɹu. ɪspɛʃli ðə haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən. noʊ mæn kəd ɡoʊ ɹɔŋ oʊbeɪɪŋ ðə haɪ lɔɹdz. ɪspɛʃli ðə haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən.

Only fools let themselves be ruled by a king or a queen, by one man or woman. "Except Queen Morgase, of course," he put in hastily. "She is a fine woman, so I've heard. Beautiful, I'm told." All those fools bowing to one fool. The High Lords ruled Tear together, reaching decisions in concert, and that was how things should be. The High Lords knew what was right and good and true. Especially the High Lord Samon. No man could go wrong obeying the High Lords. Especially the High Lord Samon.

bɪɑn kɪŋz ən kwinz, bɪɑn ivən ɪljən, leɪ ə bɪɡɝ heɪtʃɹəd mɑliə ətɛmptəd tə kip hɪɾən, bʌɾ i tɔk soʊ mʌtʃ ɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn aʊt wʌt ðeɪ wɝ ʌp tə, ən ɡɹu soʊ kæɹiɾ əweɪ baɪ ðə saʊn ə hɪz oʊn vɔɪs, ðəɾ i lɛt mɔɹ slɪp ðən i ɪntɛndəd.

Beyond kings and queens, beyond even Illian, lay a bigger hatred Mallia attempted to keep hidden, but he talked so much in trying to find out what they were up to, and grew so carried away by the sound of his own voice, that he let more slip than he intended.

ðeɪ mʌs tʃɹævəl ə ɡɹeɪt dil, sɝvɪŋ ə ɡɹeɪt kwin laɪk mɔɹɡeɪs. ðeɪ mʌst əv sin mɛni lænz. hi dʒɹimd ə ðə si kəz ðən i kəd si lænz i hæɾ oʊnli hɝɾ ʌv, kəz ðən i kəd faɪn ðə minɝ ɔɪlfɪʃ ʃoʊlz, kəɾ aʊt-tʃɹeɪd ðə si foʊk ən ðə fɪlθi ɪliɑnɝz. ən ðə si wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðeɪ mʌst ʌndɝstæn ðæt, fɔɹst əz ðeɪ wɝ tə tʃɹævəl əmʌŋ ɑd pleɪsəz ən pipəl, pleɪsəz ən pipəl ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əv stʌmɑtʃt ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑt sɝvɪŋ kwin mɔɹɡeɪs.

They must travel a great deal, serving a great Queen like Morgase. They must have seen many lands. He dreamed of the sea because then he could see lands he had only heard of, because then he could find the Mayener oilfish shoals, could out-trade the Sea Folk and the filthy Illianers. And the sea was far from Tar Valon. They must understand that, forced as they were to travel among odd places and people, places and people they could not have stomached if they were not serving Queen Morgase.

"aɪ nɛvɝ laɪk dɑkɪŋ ðɛɹ, nɛvɝ noʊɪŋ u maɪt bi juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ." hi ɔlmoʊst spæt ðə læst wɝd. sɪns i hæd hɝd ðə haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən spik, ðoʊ. . . . "bɝn maɪ soʊl, ɪt meɪks mi fil laɪk hʌlwɝmz ɑɹ bɝoʊɪŋ ɪndə maɪ bɛli dʒʌs lʊkɪŋ ət ðɛɹ waɪt taʊɝ, naʊ, noʊɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ plæn."

"I never liked docking there, never knowing who might be using the Power." He almost spat the last word. Since he had heard the High Lord Samon speak, though. . . . "Burn my soul, it makes me feel like hullworms are burrowing into my belly just looking at their White Tower, now, knowing what they plan."

ðə haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən sɛd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ mɛn tə ɹul ðə wɝld. sɑmən sɛd ðeɪ mɛn tə kɹʌʃ ɛvɹi neɪʃən, pʊt ðɛɹ fʊɾ ɑn ɛvɹi mænz θɹoʊt. sɑmən sɛd tiɹ kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hoʊl ðə paʊɝ aʊɾ ʌv ɪts oʊn lænz ən bɪliv ðət wɑz ɪnʌf. sɑmən sɛd tiɹ hæɾ ɪts ɹaɪtfəl deɪ ʌv ɡlɔɹi kʌmɪŋ, bʌt tɑɹ vəlɑn stʊd bɪtwin tiɹ ən ɡlɔɹi.

The High Lord Samon said the Aes Sedai meant to rule the world. Samon said they meant to crush every nation, put their foot on every man's throat. Samon said Tear could no longer hold the Power out of its own lands and believe that was enough. Samon said Tear had its rightful day of glory coming, but Tar Valon stood between Tear and glory.

"ðɛɹz noʊ hoʊp fəɹ ɪt. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ðəl əv tə bi hʌntəd daʊn ən kɪld, ɛvɹi læst ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən sɛz ði ʌðɝz maɪt bi seɪvd - ðə jʌŋ wʌnz, ðə nɑvəsɪz, ði æksɛptɪd - ɪf ðəɹ bɹɔt tə ðə stoʊn, bʌt ðə ɹɛs mʌs bi ɪɹæɾəkeɪtɪd. ðæts wʌt ðə haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən sɛz. ðə waɪt taʊɝ mʌs bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd."

"There's no hope for it. Sooner or later they will have to be hunted down and killed, every last Aes Sedai. The High Lord Samon says the others might be saved - the young ones, the novices, the Accepted - if they're brought to the Stone, but the rest must be eradicated. That's what the High Lord Samon says. The White Tower must be destroyed."

fəɹ ə moʊmən mɑliə stʊɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə hɪz kæbən, ɑɹmz fʊl ə kloʊðz ən bʊks ən ɹoʊl tʃɑɹts, hɛɹ ɔlmoʊs bɹʌʃɪŋ ðə dɛk bimz oʊvɝhɛd, stɛɹɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ wɪð peɪl blu aɪz waɪl ðə waɪt taʊɝ tʌmbəld ɪndə ɹuən. ðən i ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əz ɪf ɹilaɪzɪŋ wʌɾ i hæd dʒʌst sɛd. hɪz pɔɪntəd bɪɹd wæɡəld ənsɝteɪnli.

For a moment Mallia stood in the middle of his cabin, arms full of clothes and books and rolled charts, hair almost brushing the deck beams overhead, staring at nothing with pale blue eyes while the White Tower tumbled into ruin. Then he gave a start as if realizing what he had just said. His pointed beard waggled uncertainly.

"ðæɾ ɪz . . . ðæts wʌɾ i sɛz. aɪ . . . aɪ θɪŋk ðət meɪ bi ɡoʊɪŋ tu fɑɹ, maɪsɛlf. ðə haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən. . . . hi spiks soʊ ðəɾ i kæɹiz ə mæn bɪɑn ɪz oʊn bɪlifs. ɪf keɪɛmlɪn kən meɪk kʌvənəns wɪð ðə taʊɝ, waɪ, soʊ kən tɛɹ." hi ʃɪvɝɾ ən dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊ ɪt. "ðæɾ ɪz wʌɾ aɪ seɪ."

"That is . . . that's what he says. I . . . I think that may be going too far, myself. The High Lord Samon. . . . He speaks so that he carries a man beyond his own beliefs. If Caemlyn can make covenants with the Tower, why, so can Tear." He shivered and did not seem to know it. "That is what I say."

"æz jə seɪ," mæt toʊl hɪm, ən fɛl mɪstʃəf bʌbəl ɪnsaɪd. "aɪ θɪŋk jəɹ sədʒɛstʃən ɪz ðə ɹaɪt wʌn, kæptən. bʌt doʊn stɑp wɪð ə fju æksɛptɪd, ðoʊ. æsk ə dʌzən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə kʌm, əɹ tu. θɪŋk wʌt ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ wəd bi laɪk wɪð tu dʌzən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ɪt."

"As you say," Mat told him, and felt mischief bubble inside. "I think your suggestion is the right one, Captain. But don't stop with a few Accepted, though. Ask a dozen Aes Sedai to come, or two. Think what the Stone of Tear would be like with two dozen Aes Sedai in it."

mɑliə ʃʌɾɝəd. "aɪ wɪl sɛn ə mæn fəɹ maɪ mʌni tʃɛst," hi sɛd stɪfli, ən stɔkt aʊt.

Mallia shuddered. "I will send a man for my money chest," he said stiffly, and stalked out.

mæt fɹaʊn ət ðə kloʊz dɔɹ. "aɪ θɪŋk aɪ ʃʊdn əv sɛd ðæt."

Mat frowned at the closed door. "I think I shouldn't have said that."

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ jə maɪt θɪŋk ðæt," tɑm sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "nɛks jə kəd tʃɹaɪ tɛlɪŋ ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ə ðə waɪtkloʊks i ʃəd mɛɹi ði æmɪɝlɪn sit." hɪz bɹaʊz dʒɹu daʊn, laɪk waɪt kæɾəpɪlɝz. "haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən. aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɛni haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən."

"I don't know why you might think that," Thom said dryly. "Next you could try telling the Lord Captain Commander of the Whitecloaks he should marry the Amyrlin Seat." His brows drew down, like white caterpillars. "High Lord Samon. I never heard of any High Lord Samon."

ɪt wɑz mæts tɝn tə bi dʒɹaɪ. "wɛl, ivən jə kænɑt noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɔl ðə kɪŋz ən kwinz ən noʊbəlz ðəɹ ɑɹ, tɑm. wʌn əɹ tu maɪt dʒʌst əv ɪskeɪp jəɹ noʊɾəs."

It was Mat's turn to be dry. "Well, even you cannot know everything about all the kings and queens and nobles there are, Thom. One or two might just have escaped your notice."

"aɪ noʊ ðə neɪmz ə ðə kɪŋz ən kwinz, bɔɪ, ən ðə neɪmz ʌv ɔl ðə haɪ lɔɹdz ə tɛɹ, tu. aɪ səpoʊz ðeɪ cʊɾə ɹeɪzd ə lɔɹɾ ə ðə lænd, bʌɾ aɪd θɪŋk aɪ wəɾ əv hɝɾ ə ði oʊl haɪ lɔɹd daɪɪŋ. ɪf jə hæd sɛɾəld fəɹ buɾɪŋ səm pʊɹ fɛloʊz aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ kæbən ɪnstɛɾ ə teɪkɪŋ ðə kæptənz, wiɾ itʃ əv ə bɛd tə aʊɝsɛlvz, nɛɹoʊ ən hɑɹɾ əz ɪt maɪt bi. naʊ wɪv tə ʃɛɹ mɑliəz. aɪ hoʊp jə doʊn snɔɹ, bɔɪ. aɪ kænɑɾ əbaɪd snɔɹɪŋ."

"I know the names of the kings and queens, boy, and the names of all the High Lords of Tear, too. I suppose they could have raised a Lord of the Land, but I'd think I would have heard of the old High Lord dying. If you had settled for booting some poor fellows out of their cabin instead of taking the captain's, we'd each have a bed to ourselves, narrow and hard as it might be. Now we have to share Mallia's. I hope you don't snore, boy. I cannot abide snoring."

mæt ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ. əz i ɹɪkɔld, tɑm hæɾ ə snɔɹ laɪk ə wʊd-ɹæsp wɝkɪŋ ɑn ən oʊk nɑt. hi hæd fɝɡɑɾən ðæt.

Mat ground his teeth. As he recalled, Thom had a snore like a wood-rasp working on an oak knot. He had forgotten that.

ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðə tu lɑɹdʒ mɛn - seɪnɝ əɹ vɑsə; hi dɪd nɑt ɡɪv ɪz neɪm - hu keɪm tə pʊl ðə kæptənz aɪɝn-baʊn mʌni tʃɛs fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə bɛd. hi nɛvɝ sɛɾ ə wɝd, oʊnli meɪd skɛtʃi baʊz, ən fɹaʊn əɾ əm wən i θɔt ðeɪ wɝ nɑt lʊkɪŋ, ən lɛft.

It was one of the two large men - Sanor or Vasa; he did not give his name - who came to pull the captain's iron-bound money chest from under the bed. He never said a word, only made sketchy bows, and frowned at them when he thought they were not looking, and left.

mæt wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə wʌndɝ ɪf ðə lʌk ðət hæd bɪn wɪð ɪm ɔl naɪt hæd dɪzɝɾɪd ɪm ət læst. hi wɑz gɑnə hæv tə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð tɑmz snɔɹɪŋ, ən tʃɹuθ tə tɛl, ɪt maɪt nɑɾ əv bɪn ðə bɛs lʌk ɪn ðə wɝl tə dʒʌmp ɑntu ðɪs pɝtɪkjəlɝ ʃɪp weɪvɪŋ ə peɪpɝ saɪn baɪ ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ən sild wɪð ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɑn ɪmpəls i pʊld aʊt wʌn ə hɪz səlɪnʒɹɪkəl lɛðɝ daɪs kʌps, pɑpt ɔf ðə taɪt-fɪɾɪŋ lɪd, ən ʌpɛndəd ðə daɪs ɑntu ðə teɪbəl.

Mat was beginning to wonder if the luck that had been with him all night had deserted him at last. He was going to have to put up with Thom's snoring, and truth to tell, it might not have been the best luck in the world to jump onto this particular ship waving a paper signed by the Amyrlin Seat and sealed with the Flame of Tar Valon. On impulse he pulled out one of his cylindrical leather dice cups, popped off the tight-fitting lid, and upended the dice onto the table.

ðeɪ wɝ spɑɾəd daɪs, ən faɪv sɪŋɡəl pɪps stɛɹɾ ʌp ət hɪm. ðə dɑɹk wʌnz aɪz, ðət wɑz kɔld ɪn səm ɡeɪmz. ɪt wɑz ə luzɪŋ tɔs ɪn ðoʊz, ə wɪnɪŋ ɪn ʌðɝ ɡeɪmz. bʌt wʌt ɡeɪm æm aɪ pleɪɪŋ? hi skup ðə daɪs ʌp, tɔst əm əɡɛn. faɪv pɪps. ənʌðɝ tɔs, ən əɡɛn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz aɪz wɪŋkt ət hɪm.

They were spotted dice, and five single pips stared up at him. The Dark One's Eyes, that was called in some games. It was a losing toss in those, a winning in other games. But what game am I playing? He scooped the dice up, tossed them again. Five pips. Another toss, and again the Dark One's Eyes winked at him.

"ɪf jə juz ðoʊz daɪs tə wɪn ɔl ðət ɡoʊld," tɑm sɛd kwaɪətli, "noʊ wʌndɝ jə hæd tə liv baɪ ðə fɝst ʃɪp seɪlɪŋ." hi hæd stʃɹɪp daʊn tə hɪz ʃɝt, ən hæd ðət hæf oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd wən i spoʊk. hɪz niz wɝ nɑbi ən ɪz lɛɡz simd ɔl sɪnu ən stʃɹɪŋi mʌsəl, ðə ɹaɪɾ ə lɪɾəl ʃɹʌŋkən. "bɔɪ, ə twɛlv-jɪɹ-oʊld ɡɝl wəd kʌt jəɹ hɑɹɾ aʊɾ ɪf ʃi nu jə wɝ juzɪŋ daɪs laɪk ðəɾ əɡɛns hɝ."

"If you used those dice to win all that gold," Thom said quietly, "no wonder you had to leave by the first ship sailing." He had stripped down to his shirt, and had that half over his head when he spoke. His knees were knobby and his legs seemed all sinew and stringy muscle, the right a little shrunken. "Boy, a twelve-year-old girl would cut your heart out if she knew you were using dice like that against her."

"ɪɾ ɪzən ðə daɪs," mæt mʌɾɝd. "ɪts ðə lʌk." ɛɛs sədaɪ lʌk? əɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz lʌk? hi pʊʃt ðə daɪs bæk ɪndə ðə kʌp ən kæpt ɪt.

"It isn't the dice," Mat muttered. "It's the luck." Aes Sedai luck? Or the Dark One's luck? He pushed the dice back into the cup and capped it.

"aɪ səpoʊz," tɑm sɛd, klaɪmɪŋ ɪndə ðə bɛd, "ju ɑɹən gɑnə tɛl mi wɛɹ ɔl ðət ɡoʊl keɪm fɹʌm, ðɛn."

"I suppose," Thom said, climbing into the bed, "you aren't going to tell me where all that gold came from, then."

"aɪ wʌn ɪt. tənaɪt. wɪð ðɛɹ daɪs."

"I won it. Tonight. With their dice."

"ʌ-hʌ. ən aɪ səpoʊz jəɹ nɑt gɑnə ɪkspleɪn ðət peɪpɝ jə wɝ weɪvɪŋ ɝaʊnd - aɪ sɔ ðə sil, bɔɪ! - əɹ ɔl ðət tɔk əbaʊt waɪt taʊɝ bɪznəs, əɹ waɪ ðə dɑkmæstɝ hæd jəɹ dɪskɹɪpʃən fɹəm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, iðɝ."

"Uh-huh. And I suppose you're not going to explain that paper you were waving around - I saw the seal, boy! - or all that talk about White Tower business, or why the dockmaster had your description from an Aes Sedai, either."

"aɪ æm kæɹiɪŋ ə lɛɾɝ tə mɔɹɡeɪs fəɹ ɪleɪn, tɑm," mæt sɛɾ ə ɡʊd dil mɔɹ peɪʃənli ðən i fɛlt. "nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv mi ðə peɪpɝ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛɹ ʃi ɡɑɾ ɪt."

"I am carrying a letter to Morgase for Elayne, Thom," Mat said a good deal more patiently than he felt. "Nynaeve gave me the paper. I don't know where she got it."

"wɛl, ɪf jə ɑɹ nɑt gɑnə tɛl mi, aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə slip. bloʊ aʊt ðə læmps, wɪl ju?" tɑm ɹoʊld ɑn ɪz saɪɾ ən pʊld ə pɪloʊ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd.

"Well, if you are not going to tell me, I am going to sleep. Blow out the lamps, will you?" Thom rolled on his side and pulled a pillow over his head.

ivən æftɝ mæt hæd stʃɹɪpt ɔf daʊn tə hɪz smɔlkloʊðz ən kɹɔld ʌndɝ ðə blæŋkəts - æftɝ bloʊɪŋ aʊt ðə læmps - hi kəd nɑt slip, ðoʊ mɑliə hæd dʌn wɛl baɪ hɪmsɛlf wɪð ə ɡʊd fɛðɝ mætʃɹəs. hi hæd bɪn ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt tɑmz snɔɹɪŋ, ən ðət pɪloʊ mʌfəl nʌθɪŋ. ɪt saʊndəɾ əz ɪf tɑm wɝ kʌɾɪŋ wʊd kɹɔs-ɡɹeɪn wɪð ə ɹʌsti sɔ. ən i kəd nɑt stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ. haʊ hæd nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin, ən ɪleɪn, ɡɑɾən ðət peɪpɝ fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪn? ðeɪ hæd tə bi ɪnvɑlvd wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hɝsɛlf - ɪn səm plɑt, wʌn ə ðoʊz waɪt taʊɝ mækəneɪʃənz - bʌt naʊ ðəɾ i θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt, ðeɪ hæd tə bi hoʊldɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ bæk fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪn, tu.

Even after Mat had stripped off down to his smallclothes and crawled under the blankets - after blowing out the lamps - he could not sleep, though Mallia had done well by himself with a good feather mattress. He had been right about Thom's snoring, and that pillow muffled nothing. It sounded as if Thom were cutting wood cross-grain with a rusty saw. And he could not stop thinking. How had Nynaeve and Egwene, and Elayne, gotten that paper from the Amyrlin? They had to be involved with the Amyrlin Seat herself - in some plot, one of those White Tower machinations - but now that he thought about it, they had to be holding something back from the Amyrlin, too.

" 'pliz kæɹi ə lɛɾɝ tə maɪ mʌðɝ, mæt,' " hi sɛd sɔfli, ɪn ə haɪ-pɪtʃt, mɑkɪŋ vɔɪs. "ful! ði æmɪɝlɪn wʊɾə sɛn ə wɔɹɾɝ wɪð ɛni lɛɾɝ fɹəm ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ tə ðə kwin. blaɪn ful, wɑntɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ soʊ bæɾ aɪ kʊdn si ɪt." tɑmz snɔɹ sim tə tʃɹʌmpəɾ əɡɹimənt.

" 'Please carry a letter to my mother, Mat,' " he said softly, in a high-pitched, mocking voice. "Fool! The Amyrlin would have sent a Warder with any letter from the Daughter-Heir to the Queen. Blind fool, wanting to get out of the Tower so bad I couldn't see it." Thom's snore seemed to trumpet agreement.

moʊst ʌv ɔl, ðoʊ, hi θɔɾ əbaʊt lʌk, ən fʊtpædz.

Most of all, though, he thought about luck, and footpads.

ðə fɝs bʌmp ə sʌmθɪŋ əɡɛns ðə stɝn bɛɹli ɹɛdʒəstɝɾ ɑn hɪm. hi peɪd noʊ ətɛnʃən tə ə θʌmp ən skʌfəl fɹəm ðə dɛk oʊvɝhɛd, əɹ ðə tʃɹɛɾ ə buts. ðə vɛsəl ɪtsɛlf meɪɾ ɪnʌf nɔɪzɪz, ən ðəɹ hæd tə bi sʌmwʌn ɑn dɛk fəɹ ðə ʃɪp tə meɪk ɪts weɪ daʊnɹɪvɝ. bʌt stɛlθi fʊtstɛps ɪn ðə pæsədʒweɪ liɾɪŋ tə hɪz dɔɹ mɝdʒd wɪð θɔts ə fʊtpædz ən meɪɾ ɪz ɪɹz pɹɪk ʌp.

The first bump of something against the stern barely registered on him. He paid no attention to a thump and scuffle from the deck overhead, or the tread of boots. The vessel itself made enough noises, and there had to be someone on deck for the ship to make its way downriver. But stealthy footsteps in the passageway leading to his door merged with thoughts of footpads and made his ears prick up.

hi nʌdʒ tɑm ɪn ðə ɹɪbz wɪð ən ɛlboʊ. "weɪk ʌp," hi sɛd sɔfli. "ðɛɹz sʌmbɑɾi aʊtsaɪɾ ɪn ðə hɔl." hi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi izɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɔf ðə bɛd, hoʊpɪŋ ðə kæbən flɔɹ - dɛk, flɔɹ, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt blʌɾi ɪz! - wəd nɑt kɹik ʌndɝ ɪz fit. tɑm ɡɹʌntɪd, smækt ɪz lɪps, ən ɹɪzum snɔɹɪŋ.

He nudged Thom in the ribs with an elbow. "Wake up," he said softly. "There's somebody outside in the hall." He was already easing himself off the bed, hoping the cabin floor - Deck, floor, whatever it bloody is! - would not creak under his feet. Thom grunted, smacked his lips, and resumed snoring.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm tə wɝi əbaʊt tɑm. ðə fʊtstɛps wɝ ɹaɪɾ aʊtsaɪd. teɪkɪŋ ʌp ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf, mæt pleɪs hɪmsɛlf ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə dɔɹ ən weɪɾəd.

There was no time to worry about Thom. The footsteps were right outside. Taking up his quarterstaff, Mat placed himself in front of the door and waited.

ðə dɔɹ swʌŋ oʊpən sloʊli, ən tu kloʊk mɛn, wʌn bɪhaɪn ði ʌðɝ, wɝ feɪnli aʊtlaɪn baɪ dɪm munlaɪt θɹu ðə hætʃ ət ðə tɑp ə ðə læɾɝ ðeɪ hæd kɹɛp daʊn. ðə munlaɪt wɑz ɪnʌf tə ɡlɪn ɔf bɛɹ naɪf bleɪdz. boʊθ mɛn ɡæspt; ðeɪ ɑbviəsli hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn ɛniwʌn weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðɛm.

The door swung open slowly, and two cloaked men, one behind the other, were faintly outlined by dim moonlight through the hatch at the top of the ladder they had crept down. The moonlight was enough to glint off bare knife blades. Both men gasped; they obviously had not expected to find anyone waiting for them.

mæt θɹʌst wɪð ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf, kætʃɪŋ ðə fɝs mæn hɑɹd ɹaɪɾ ʌndɝ wɛɹ ɪz ɹɪbz dʒɔɪn təɡɛðɝ. hi hɝɾ ɪz fɑðɝz vɔɪs əz i stʃɹʌk. ɪts ə kɪlɪŋ bloʊ, mæt. doʊn ɛvɝ juz ɪɾ ənlɛs ɪts jəɹ laɪf. bʌt ðoʊz naɪvz meɪɾ ɪt fəɹ ɪz laɪf; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹum ɪn ðə kæbən fəɹ swɪŋɪŋ ə stæf.

Mat thrust with the quarterstaff, catching the first man hard right under where his ribs joined together. He heard his father's voice as he struck. It's a killing blow, Mat. Don't ever use it unless it's your life. But those knives made it for his life; there was no room in the cabin for swinging a staff.

ivən əz ðə mæn meɪɾ ə tʃoʊkɪŋ saʊn ən foʊldəd təwɔɹd ðə dɛk, faɪɾɪŋ veɪnli fəɹ bɹɛθ, mæt stɛp fɔɹwɝɾ ən dʒɹoʊv ði ɛn ə ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf oʊvɝ ɪm ɪndə ðə sɛkən mænz θɹoʊt wɪð ə laʊd kɹʌntʃ. ðət fɛloʊ dʒɹɑpt ɪz naɪf tə klʌtʃ əɾ ɪz θɹoʊt, ən fɛl ɑn tɑp ə hɪz kəmpænjən, boʊθ ə ðɛm skɹeɪpɪŋ ðɛɹ buts əkɹɔs ðə dɛk, dɛθ ɹæɾəlz ɔlɹɛɾi saʊndɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ θɹoʊts.

Even as the man made a choking sound and folded toward the deck, fighting vainly for breath, Mat stepped forward and drove the end of the quarterstaff over him into the second man's throat with a loud crunch. That fellow dropped his knife to clutch at his throat, and fell on top of his companion, both of them scraping their boots across the deck, death rattles already sounding in their throats.

mæt stʊd ðɛɹ, stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ət ðɛm. tu mɛn. noʊ, bɝn mi, θɹi! aɪ doʊn θɪŋk aɪ ɛvɝ hɝɾ ənʌðɝ hjumən biɪŋ bɪfɔɹ, ən naʊ aɪv kɪl θɹi mɛn ɪn wʌn naɪt. laɪt!

Mat stood there, staring down at them. Two men. No, burn me, three! I don't think I ever hurt another human being before, and now I've killed three men in one night. Light!

saɪləns fɪl ðə dɑɹk pæsədʒweɪ, ən i hɝd ðə θʌmp ə buts ɑn ðə dɛk oʊvɝhɛd. ðə kɹumɪn ɔl wɛn bɛɹfʊt.

Silence filled the dark passageway, and he heard the thump of boots on the deck overhead. The crewmen all went barefoot.

tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə θɪŋk əbaʊt wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ, mæt ɹɪp ðə kloʊk fɹəm wʌn ə ðə dɛd mɛn ən sɛɾəld ɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, haɪɾɪŋ ðə peɪl lɪnən ə hɪz smɔlkloʊðz. ɑn bɛɹ fiɾ i pæɾəd daʊn ðə pæsədʒ ən klaɪm ðə læɾɝ, bɛɹli stɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz əbʌv ðə hætʃ koʊpɪŋ.

Trying not to think about what he was doing, Mat ripped the cloak from one of the dead men and settled it around his shoulders, hiding the pale linen of his smallclothes. On bare feet he padded down the passage and climbed the ladder, barely sticking his eyes above the hatch coping.

peɪl munlaɪt ɹəflɛktəɾ ɔf ðə tɔt seɪlz, bʌt naɪt stɪl kʌvɝd ðə dɛk wɪð ʃædoʊz, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saʊn ɪksɛp ðə ɹʌʃ ʌv wɔɾɝ əlɔŋ ðə vɛsəlz saɪdz. oʊnli wʌn mæn ət ðə tɪlɝ, ðə hʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊk pʊld ʌp əɡɛns ðə tʃɪl, sim tə bi ɑn dɛk. ðə mæn ʃɪftəd, ən but lɛðɝ skʌft ɑn ðə dɛk plæŋks.

Pale moonlight reflected off the taut sails, but night still covered the deck with shadows, and there was no sound except the rush of water along the vessel's sides. Only one man at the tiller, the hood of his cloak pulled up against the chill, seemed to be on deck. The man shifted, and boot leather scuffed on the deck planks.

hoʊldɪŋ ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf loʊ ən hoʊpɪŋ ɪt wəd nɑt bi noʊɾəst, mæt klaɪmd ɑn ʌp. "hiz dɛd," hi mʌɾɝd ɪn ə loʊ, ɹʌf wɪspɝ.

Holding the quarterstaff low and hoping it would not be noticed, Mat climbed on up. "He's dead," he muttered in a low, rough whisper.

"aɪ hoʊp i skwild wən jə kʌɾ ɪz θɹoʊt." ðə hɛvəli æksɛntɪd vɔɪs wɑz wʌn mæt ɹɪmɛmbɝd kɔlɪŋ fɹəm ðə maʊθ ʌv ə twɪstɪŋ stʃɹiɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. "ðɪs bɔɪ, hi kɑzəz əs tu mʌtʃ ə ðə tʃɹʌbəl, weɪt! hu ɑɹ ju?"

"I hope he squealed when you cut his throat." The heavily accented voice was one Mat remembered calling from the mouth of a twisting street in Tar Valon. "This boy, he causes us too much of the trouble, Wait! Who are you?"

mæt swʌŋ ðə stæf wɪð ɔl ɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ. ðə θɪk wʊd smæʃt ɪndə ðə mænz hɛd, ðə hʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊk oʊnli pɑɹtli mʌfəlɪŋ ə saʊn laɪk ə mɛlən hɪɾɪŋ ðə flɔɹ.

Mat swung the staff with all his strength. The thick wood smashed into the man's head, the hood of his cloak only partly muffling a sound like a melon hitting the floor.

ðə mæn fɛl əkɹɔs ðə tɪlɝ, ʃʌvɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ, ən ðə vɛsəl lɝtʃt, stæɡɝɪŋ mæt. aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ hi sɔ ə ʃeɪp ɹaɪzɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊz baɪ ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ, ən ðə ɡlim ʌv ə bleɪd, ən i nu hi wəd nɛvɝ ɡɛɾ ɪz stæf ɝaʊn bɪfɔɹ ɪt stʃɹʌk hoʊm. sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ðət ʃoʊn stʃɹik θɹu ðə naɪɾ ən mɝdʒd wɪð ðə dɪm ʃeɪp wɪð ə dʌl θʌŋk. ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ moʊʃən bɪkeɪm ə fɔl, ən ə mæn spɹɔld ɔlmoʊst ət mæts fit.

The man fell across the tiller, shoving it over, and the vessel lurched, staggering Mat. Out of the corner of his eye he saw a shape rising out of the shadows by the railing, and the gleam of a blade, and he knew he would never get his staff around before it struck home. Something else that shone streaked through the night and merged with the dim shape with a dull thunk. The rising motion became a fall, and a man sprawled almost at Mat's feet.

ə bæbəl ə vɔɪsəz ɹoʊz bɛlaʊdɛks əz ðə ʃɪp swʌŋ əɡɛn, ðə tɪlɝ ʃɪftɪŋ wɪð ðə fɝs mænz weɪt.

A babble of voices rose belowdecks as the ship swung again, the tiller shifting with the first man's weight.

tɑm lɪmp fɹəm ðə hætʃ ɪn kloʊk ən smɔlkloʊðz, ɹeɪzɪŋ ðə ʃʌɾɝ ɑn ə bʊlz-aɪ læntɝn. "ju wɝ lʌki, bɔɪ. wʌn ə ðoʊz bɪloʊ hæd ðɪs læntɝn. cʊɾə sɛt ðə ʃɪp ɑn faɪɝ, laɪɪŋ ðɛɹ." ðə laɪt ʃoʊɾ ə naɪf hɪl stɪkɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ðə tʃɛst ʌv ə mæn wɪð dɛd, stɛɹɪŋ aɪz. mæt hæd nɛvɝ sin ɪm bɪfɔɹ; hi wɑz ʃʊɹ i wʊɾə ɹɪmɛmbɝd sʌmwʌn wɪð ðət mɛni skɑɹz ɑn ɪz feɪs. tɑm kɪkt ə dæɡɝ əweɪ fɹəm ðə dɛd mænz aʊtfləŋ hænd, ðən bɛn tə ɹɪtʃɹiv ɪz oʊn naɪf, waɪpɪŋ ðə bleɪɾ ɑn ðə kɔɹpsəz kloʊk. "vɛɹi lʌki, bɔɪ. vɛɹi lʌki ɪndid."

Thom limped from the hatch in cloak and smallclothes, raising the shutter on a bull's-eye lantern. "You were lucky, boy. One of those below had this lantern. Could have set the ship on fire, lying there." The light showed a knife hilt sticking up from the chest of a man with dead, staring eyes. Mat had never seen him before; he was sure he would have remembered someone with that many scars on his face. Thom kicked a dagger away from the dead man's outflung hand, then bent to retrieve his own knife, wiping the blade on the corpse's cloak. "Very lucky, boy. Very lucky indeed."

ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹoʊp taɪd tə ðə stɝn ɹeɪl. tɑm stɛpt oʊvɝ tə ɪt, ʃaɪnɪŋ ðə laɪt daʊn æstɝn, ən mæt dʒɔɪn hɪm. ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə ðə ɹoʊp wɑz wʌn ə ðə smɔl boʊts fɹəm saʊθhɑɹbɝ, ɪts skwɛɹ læntɝn ɪkstɪŋɡwɪʃt. tu mɔɹ mɛn stʊɾ əmʌŋ ðə pʊld-ɪn ɔɹz.

There was a rope tied to the stern rail. Thom stepped over to it, shining the light down astern, and Mat joined him. At the other end of the rope was one of the small boats from Southharbor, its square lantern extinguished. Two more men stood among the pulled-in oars.

"ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd teɪk mi, ɪts hɪm!" wʌn ə ðɛm ɡæspt. ði ʌðɝ dɑɹɾɪd fɔɹwɝd tə wɝk fɹæntəkəli ət ðə nɑt hoʊldɪŋ ðə ɹoʊp.

"The Great Lord take me, it's him!" one of them gasped. The other darted forward to work frantically at the knot holding the rope.

"ju wɑnə kɪl ðiz tu əz wɛl?" tɑm æskt, hɪz vɔɪs bumɪŋ əz ɪt dɪd wən i pɝfɔɹmd.

"You want to kill these two as well?" Thom asked, his voice booming as it did when he performed.

"noʊ, tɑm," mæt sɛd kwaɪətli. "noʊ."

"No, Thom," Mat said quietly. "No."

ðə mɛn ɪn ðə boʊt mʌst əv hɝd ðə kwɛstʃən ən nɑt ði ænsɝ, fəɹ ðeɪ əbændən ði ətɛmp tə fɹi ðɛɹ boʊɾ ən lɛpt oʊvɝ ðə saɪd wɪð ɡɹeɪt splæʃəz. ðə saʊn ə ðɛm θɹæʃɪŋ əweɪ əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ wɑz laʊd.

The men in the boat must have heard the question and not the answer, for they abandoned the attempt to free their boat and leaped over the side with great splashes. The sound of them thrashing away across the river was loud.

"fulz," tɑm mʌɾɝd. "ðə ɹɪvɝ nɛɹoʊz sʌmwʌɾ æftɝ tɑɹ vəlɑn, bʌɾ ɪt mʌst stɪl bi hæf ə maɪl əɹ mɔɹ waɪd hɪɹ. ðəl nɛvɝ meɪk ɪɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk."

"Fools," Thom muttered. "The river narrows somewhat after Tar Valon, but it must still be half a mile or more wide here. They'll never make it in the dark."

"baɪ ðə stoʊn!" keɪm ə ʃaʊt fɹəm ðə hætʃ. "wʌt hæpənz hɪɹ? ðəɹ ɑɹ dɛd mɛn ɪn ðə pæsədʒweɪ! wʌts vɑsə duɪŋ laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə tɪlɝ? hɪl ɹʌn əs ɑntu ə mʌdbæŋk!" neɪkəd seɪv fəɹ lɪnən ʌndɝbɹitʃɪz, mɑliə dæʃt tə ðə tɪlɝ, hɔlɪŋ ðə dɛd mæn ɔf ɹʌfli əz i pʊl ðə lɔŋ lɛvɝ tə pʊt ðə kɔɹs stʃɹeɪɾ əɡɛn. "ðæɾ ɪzən vɑsə! bɝn maɪ soʊl, hu ɑɹ ɔl ðiz dɛd mɛn?" ʌðɝz wɝ klæmbɝɪŋ ɑn dɛk naʊ, bɛɹfʊt kɹumɪn ən fɹaɪɾənd pæsənʒɝz ɹæpt ɪn kloʊks ən blæŋkəts.

"By the Stone!" came a shout from the hatch. "What happens here? There are dead men in the passageway! What's Vasa doing lying on the tiller? He'll run us onto a mudbank!" Naked save for linen underbreeches, Mallia dashed to the tiller, hauling the dead man off roughly as he pulled the long lever to put the course straight again. "That isn't Vasa! Burn my soul, who are all these dead men?" Others were clambering on deck now, barefoot crewmen and frightened passengers wrapped in cloaks and blankets.

ʃildɪŋ ɪz ækʃənz wɪð ɪz bɑɾi, tɑm slɪpt ɪz naɪf ʌndɝ ðə ɹoʊp ən sɛvɝɾ ɪɾ ɪn wʌn stʃɹoʊk. ðə smɔl boʊt bɪɡæn fɔlɪŋ bæk ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs. "ɹɪvɝ bɹɪɡænz, kæptən," hi sɛd. "jʌŋ mæt ən aɪ hæv seɪv jəɹ vɛsəl fɹəm ɹɪvɝ bɹɪɡænz. ðeɪ maɪɾ əv kʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌnz θɹoʊɾ ɪf nɑt fəɹ ʌs. pɝhæps jə ʃəd ɹikənsɪɾɝ jəɹ pæsədʒ fi."

Shielding his actions with his body, Thom slipped his knife under the rope and severed it in one stroke. The small boat began falling back into the darkness. "River brigands, Captain," he said. "Young Mat and I have saved your vessel from river brigands. They might have cut everyone's throat if not for us. Perhaps you should reconsider your passage fee."

"bɹɪɡænz!" mɑliə ɪkskleɪmd. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ plɛnti ʌv ðoʊz daʊn ɝaʊn kɛɹhin, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɪt ðɪs fɑɹ nɔɹθ!" ðə hʌɾəld pæsənʒɝz bɪɡæn tə mʌɾɝ əbaʊt bɹɪɡænz ən hævɪŋ ðɛɹ θɹoʊts kʌt.

"Brigands!" Mallia exclaimed. "There are plenty of those down around Cairhien, but I never heard of it this far north!" The huddled passengers began to mutter about brigands and having their throats cut.

mæt wɔk stɪfli tə ðə hætʃ. bɪhaɪn hɪm, hi hɝd mɑliə. "hiz ə koʊld wʌn. aɪ nɛvɝ hɝd ðəɾ ændɝ ɛmplɔɪɾ əsæsənz, bʌt bɝn maɪ soʊl, hiz ə koʊld wʌn."

Mat walked stiffly to the hatch. Behind him, he heard Mallia. "He's a cold one. I never heard that Andor employed assassins, but burn my soul, he is a cold one."

mæt stʌmbəl daʊn ðə læɾɝ, stɛpt oʊvɝ ðə tu bɑɾiz ɪn ðə pæsədʒ, ən slæm ðə dɔɹ ə ðə kæptənz kæbən bɪhaɪn hɪm. hi meɪɾ ɪt hæfweɪ tə ðə bɛd bɪfɔɹ ðə ʃeɪkɪŋ hɪt hɪm, ən ðən ɔl i kəd də wɑz sɪŋk daʊn ɑn ɪz niz. laɪt, wʌt ɡeɪm æm aɪ pleɪɪŋ ɪn? aɪ hæv tə noʊ ðə ɡeɪm ɪf aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə wɪn. laɪt, wʌt ɡeɪm?

Mat stumbled down the ladder, stepped over the two bodies in the passage, and slammed the door of the captain's cabin behind him. He made it halfway to the bed before the shaking hit him, and then all he could do was sink down on his knees. Light, what game am I playing in? I have to know the game if I'm going to win. Light, what game?

pleɪɪŋ "ɹoʊz ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ" sɔfli ɑn ɪz flut, ɹænd pɪɹɾ ɪndə hɪz kæmpfaɪɝ, wɛɹ ə ɹæbət wɑz ɹoʊstɪŋ ɑn ə stɪk slæntɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə fleɪmz. ə naɪt wɪn meɪd ðə fleɪmz flɪkɝ; hi bɛɹli noʊɾəst ðə smɛl ə ðə ɹæbət, ðoʊ ə veɪɡɹən θɔt dɪd kʌm ðəɾ i niɾəd tə faɪn mɔɹ sɔlt ɪn ðə nɛks vɪlədʒ əɹ taʊn. "ɹoʊz ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ" wɑz wʌn ə ðə tunz i hæd pleɪɾ ət ðoʊz wɛɾɪŋz.

Playing "Rose of the Morning" softly on his flute, Rand peered into his campfire, where a rabbit was roasting on a stick slanting over the flames. A night wind made the flames flicker; he barely noticed the smell of the rabbit, though a vagrant thought did come that he needed to find more salt in the next village or town. "Rose of the Morning" was one of the tunes he had played at those weddings.

haʊ mɛni deɪz əɡoʊ wɑz ðæt? wɝ ðəɹ ɹɪli soʊ mɛni, əɹ dɪɾ aɪ ɪmædʒən ɪt? ɛvɹi wʊmən ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ dəsaɪɾɪŋ tə mɛɹi ət wʌns? wʌt wɑz ɪts neɪm? æm aɪ ɡoʊɪŋ mæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi?

How many days ago was that? Were there really so many, or did I imagine it? Every woman in the village deciding to marry at once? What was its name? Am I going mad already?

swɛt biɾɪd ɑn ɪz feɪs, bʌɾ i pleɪɾ ɑn, bɛɹli laʊɾ ɪnʌf tə bi hɝd, stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə faɪɝ. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd toʊld ɪm i wɑz tɑvɝən. ɛvɹiwʌn sɛɾ i wɑz tɑvɝən. meɪbi hi ɹɪli wɑz. pipəl laɪk ðət - tʃeɪnʒd - θɪŋz ɝaʊn ðɛm. ə tɑvɝən maɪɾ əv kɑzd ɔl ðoʊz wɛɾɪŋz. bʌt ðət wɑz tu kloʊz tə sʌmθɪŋ i dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt.

Sweat beaded on his face, but he played on, barely loud enough to be heard, staring into the fire. Moiraine had told him he was ta'veren. Everyone said he was ta'veren. Maybe he really was. People like that - changed - things around them. A ta'veren might have caused all those weddings. But that was too close to something he did not want to think about.

ðeɪ seɪ ɪm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, tu. ðeɪ ɔl seɪ ɪt. ðə lɪvɪŋ seɪ ɪt, ən ðə dɛd. ðət dʌzn meɪk ɪt tʃɹu. aɪ hæd tə lɛɾ əm pɹoʊkleɪm mi. duɾi. aɪ hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs, bʌt ðət dʌz nɑt meɪk ɪt tʃɹu.

They say I'm the Dragon Reborn, too. They all say it. The living say it, and the dead. That doesn't make it true. I had to let them proclaim me. Duty. I had no choice, but that does not make it true.

hi kəd nɑt sim tə stɑp pleɪɪŋ ðət wʌn tun. ɪt meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ʌv ɛɡwin. hi hæd θɔt wʌns ðəɾ i wəd mɛɹi ɛɡwin. ə lɔŋ taɪm əɡoʊ, ðət simd. ðət wɑz ɡɔn, naʊ. ʃi hæd kʌm ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz, ðoʊ. ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn hɝ. hɝ feɪs. ɪt wɑz əɹ feɪs.

He could not seem to stop playing that one tune. It made him think of Egwene. He had thought once that he would marry Egwene. A long time ago, that seemed. That was gone, now. She had come in his dreams, though. It might have been her. Her face. It was her face.

oʊnli, ðəɹ hæd bɪn soʊ mɛni feɪsəz, feɪsəz i nu. tæm, ən ɪz mʌðɝ, ən mæt, ən pɛɹɪn. ɔl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl hɪm. ɪt hæd nɑt ɹɪli bɪn ðɛm, ʌv kɔɹs. oʊnli ðɛɹ feɪsəz, ɑn ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. hi θɔɾ ɪt hæd nɑt ɹɪli bɪn ðɛm. ivən ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz ɪt sim ðə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn wɔkt. wɝ ðeɪ oʊnli dʒɹimz? səm dʒɹimz wɝ ɹil, hi nu. ən ʌðɝz wɝ oʊnli dʒɹimz, naɪtmɛɹz, əɹ hoʊps. bʌt haʊ tə tɛl ðə dɪfɝəns? mɪn hæd wɔkt ɪz dʒɹimz wʌn naɪt - ən tʃɹaɪd tə plæn ə naɪf ɪn ɪz bæk. hi wɑz stɪl sɝpɹaɪzd ət haʊ mʌtʃ ðət hæd peɪn hɪm. hi hæd bɪn kɛɹləs, lɛɾ əɹ kʌm kloʊs, lɛt daʊn ɪz ɡɑɹd. ɝaʊn mɪn, hi hæd nɑt fɛlt ɛni nid tə bi ɑn ɪz ɡɑɹɾ ɪn soʊ lɔŋ, dɪspaɪt ðə θɪŋz ʃi sɔ wən ʃi lʊkt ət hɪm. biɪŋ wɪð əɹ hæd bɪn laɪk hævɪŋ bɑm suðd ɪndə hɪz wunz.

Only, there had been so many faces, faces he knew. Tam, and his mother, and Mat, and Perrin. All trying to kill him. It had not really been them, of course. Only their faces, on Shadowspawn. He thought it had not really been them. Even in his dreams it seemed the Shadowspawn walked. Were they only dreams? Some dreams were real, he knew. And others were only dreams, nightmares, or hopes. But how to tell the difference? Min had walked his dreams one night - and tried to plant a knife in his back. He was still surprised at how much that had pained him. He had been careless, let her come close, let down his guard. Around Min, he had not felt any need to be on his guard in so long, despite the things she saw when she looked at him. Being with her had been like having balm soothed into his wounds.

ən ðən ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl mi! ðə mjuzɪk ɹoʊz tə ə dɪskɔɹɾənt skɹitʃ, bʌɾ i pʊld ɪt bæk tə sɔfnəs. nɑt hɝ. ʃæɾoʊzpɔn wɪð əɹ feɪs. list ə ðɛm ɔl wəd mɪn hɝt mi. hi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ hi θɔt ðæt, bʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz tʃɹu.

And then she tried to kill me! The music rose to a discordant screech, but he pulled it back to softness. Not her. Shadowspawn with her face. Least of them all would Min hurt me. He could not understand why he thought that, but he was sure it was true.

soʊ mɛni feɪsəz ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz. səlin hæd kʌm, kul ən mɪstɪɹiəs ən soʊ lʌvli hɪz maʊθ wɛn dʒɹaɪ dʒʌs θɪŋkɪŋ ə hɝ, ɔfɝɪŋ ɪm ɡlɔɹi əz ʃi hæd - soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ, ɪt simd - bʌt naʊ ɪt wɑz ðə sɔɹd ʃi sɛɾ i hæd tə teɪk. ən wɪð ðə sɔɹd wəd kʌm səlin. kælændɝ. ðət wɑz ɔlweɪz ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz. ɔlweɪz. ən tɔntɪŋ feɪsəz. hænz, pʊʃɪŋ ɛɡwin, ən nɪneɪiv, ən ɪleɪn ɪndə keɪdʒɪz, snɛɹɪŋ əm ɪn nɛts, hɝɾɪŋ ðɛm. waɪ ʃəɾ i wip mɔɹ fəɹ ɪleɪn ðən fəɹ ði ʌðɝ tu?

So many faces in his dreams. Selene had come, cool and mysterious and so lovely his mouth went dry just thinking of her, offering him glory as she had - so long ago, it seemed - but now it was the sword she said he had to take. And with the sword would come Selene. Callandor. That was always in his dreams. Always. And taunting faces. Hands, pushing Egwene, and Nynaeve, and Elayne into cages, snaring them in nets, hurting them. Why should he weep more for Elayne than for the other two?

hɪz hɛd spʌn. hɪz hɛd hɝɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ɪz saɪd, ən swɛt ɹoʊl daʊn ɪz feɪs, ən i sɔfli pleɪd "ɹoʊz ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ" θɹu ðə naɪt, fɪɹɪŋ tə slip. fɪɹɪŋ tə dʒɹim.

His head spun. His head hurt as much as his side, and sweat rolled down his face, and he softly played "Rose of the Morning" through the night, fearing to sleep. Fearing to dream.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾiθɹi


CHAPTER 33

wɪðɪn ðə wiv


Within the Weave

fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl, pɛɹɪn fɹaʊn daʊn ət ðə flæt stoʊn hæf hɪɾən ɪn widz baɪ ðə ɹoʊdsaɪd. ðɪs ɹoʊɾ ə hɑɹd-pæk dɝt, ɔlɹɛɾi kɔl ðə luɡɹd ɹoʊd naʊ ðeɪ wɝ nɪɹ ðə meɪnɛðɹəndʒɹɛl ən ðə bɔɹɾɝ ə mʊɹændi, hæd bɪn peɪvd wʌns, lɔŋ ɪn ðə pæst, soʊ mɔɪɹeɪn hæd sɛd tu deɪz ɝliɝ, ən bɪts ə peɪvɪŋ stoʊn stɪl wɝk ðɛɹ weɪ tə ðə sɝfəs fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm. ðɪs wʌn hæɾ ən ɑd mɑɹkɪŋ ɑn ɪt.

From his saddle, Perrin frowned down at the flat stone half hidden in weeds by the roadside. This road of hard-packed dirt, already called the Lugard Road now they were near the Manetherendrelle and the border of Murandy, had been paved once, long in the past, so Moiraine had said two days earlier, and bits of paving stone still worked their way to the surface from time to time. This one had an odd marking on it.

ɪf dɑɡz hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə meɪk fʊtpɹɪns ɑn stoʊn, hi wʊɾə sɛɾ ɪt wɑz ðə pɹɪn ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ haʊnd. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ haʊnz fʊtpɹɪns ɪn ɛni ʌv ðə bɛɹ ɡɹaʊn i kəd si, wɛɹ sɑftɝ dɝɾ ɑn ðə vɝdʒ maɪt teɪk wʌn, ən noʊ smɛl ʌv ɛni dɔɡz tʃɹeɪl. dʒʌst ə feɪn tʃɹeɪs ɪn ði ɛɹ ə sʌmθɪŋ bɝnd, ɔlmoʊs ðə sʌlfɝəs smɛl lɛf baɪ sɛɾɪŋ ɔf faɪɹwɝks. ðəɹ wɑz ə taʊn əhɛd, wɛɹ ðə ɹoʊd stʃɹʌk ðə ɹɪvɝ; meɪbi səm tʃɪlʒɹən hæd snikt aʊt hɪɹ wɪð səm ə ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz' hændiwɝk.

If dogs had been able to make footprints on stone, he would have said it was the print of a large hound. There were no hound's footprints in any of the bare ground he could see, where softer dirt on the verge might take one, and no smell of any dog's trail. Just a faint trace in the air of something burned, almost the sulphurous smell left by setting off fireworks. There was a town ahead, where the road struck the river; maybe some children had sneaked out here with some of the Illuminators' handiwork.

ə lɔŋ weɪ jɛt fəɹ tʃɪlʒɹən tə snik. bʌɾ i hæd sin fɑɹmz. ɪt cʊɾə bɪn fɑɹm tʃɪlʒɹən. wʌtɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz, ɪts nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðət mɑɹkɪŋ. hɔɹsəz doʊn flaɪ, ən dɑɡz doʊn meɪk fʊtpɹɪns ɑn stoʊn. aɪm ɡɛɾɪŋ tu taɪɝd tə θɪŋk stʃɹeɪt.

A long way yet for children to sneak. But he had seen farms. It could have been farm children. Whatever it is, it has nothing to do with that marking. Horses don't fly, and dogs don't make footprints on stone. I'm getting too tired to think straight.

jɔnɪŋ, hi dʌɡ hɪz hilz ɪndə stɛpɝz ɹɪbz, ən ðə dʌn bɹoʊk ɪndə ə ɡæləp æftɝ ði ʌðɝz. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd bɪn pʊʃɪŋ əm hɑɹd sɪns livɪŋ dʒɹə, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɛniwʌn u stɑp fəɹ ivən ə moʊmənt. wən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pʊɾ əɹ maɪn ɑn sʌmθɪŋ, ʃi wɑz əz hɑɹɾ əz koʊl hæmɝɾ aɪɝn. lɔɪəl hæd ɡɪvən ʌp ɹɛɾɪŋ əz i ɹoʊd sɪks deɪz ɝliɝ, æftɝ lʊkɪŋ ʌp tə faɪn hɪmsɛlf lɛft ə maɪl bɪhaɪn ən ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ɔlmoʊst aʊɾ ə saɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə nɛks hɪl.

Yawning, he dug his heels into Stepper's ribs, and the dun broke into a gallop after the others. Moiraine had been pushing them hard since leaving Jarra, and there was no waiting for anyone who stopped for even a moment. When the Aes Sedai put her mind on something, she was as hard as cold hammered iron. Loial had given up reading as he rode six days earlier, after looking up to find himself left a mile behind and everyone else almost out of sight over the next hill.

pɛɹɪn sloʊd stɛpɝ əlɔŋsaɪd ði oʊɡiɝz bɪɡ hɔɹs, bɪhaɪn mɔɪɹeɪnz waɪt mɛɹ, ən jɔn əɡɛn. læn wɑz ʌp əhɛd sʌmwɛɹ, skaʊɾɪŋ. ðə sʌn bɪhaɪn əm stʊd noʊ mɔɹ ðən ən aʊɝ əbʌv ðə tʃɹitɑps, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd sɛd ðeɪ wəd ɹitʃ ə taʊn kɔld ɹɛmən, ɑn ðə meɪnɛðɹəndʒɹɛl, bɪfɔɹ dɑɹk. pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i wɑntəd tə si wʌɾ əweɪɾəd əm ðɛɹ. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt maɪt bi, bʌt ðə deɪz sɪns dʒɹə hæd meɪɾ ɪm wɛɹi.

Perrin slowed Stepper alongside the Ogier's big horse, behind Moiraine's white mare, and yawned again. Lan was up ahead somewhere, scouting. The sun behind them stood no more than an hour above the treetops, but the Warder had said they would reach a town called Remen, on the Manetherendrelle, before dark. Perrin was not sure he wanted to see what awaited them there. He did not know what it might be, but the days since Jarra had made him wary.

"aɪ doʊn si waɪ jə kæn slip," lɔɪəl toʊl hɪm. "aɪ æm soʊ taɪɝd baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi lɛts əs hɔl fəɹ ðə naɪt, aɪ fɔl əslip bɪfɔɹ aɪ kən laɪ daʊn."

"I don't see why you can't sleep," Loial told him. "I am so tired by the time she lets us halt for the night, I fall asleep before I can lie down."

pɛɹɪn oʊnli ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə ɪkspleɪn tə lɔɪəl ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt dɛɹ slip saʊnli, ðəɾ ivən ɪz laɪɾəst slip wɑz fʊl ə tʃɹʌbəl dʒɹimz. laɪk ðəɾ ɑd wʌn wɪð ɛɡwin ən hɑpɝ ɪn ɪt. wɛl, noʊ wʌndɝ aɪ dʒɹim əbaʊt hɝ. laɪt, aɪ wʌndɝ haʊ ʃi ɪz. seɪf ɪn ðə taʊɝ baɪ naʊ, ən lɝnɪŋ haʊ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. vɛɹɪn wɪl lʊk æftɝ hɝ, ən æftɝ mæt, tu. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɛniwʌn niɾəd tə lʊk æftɝ nɪneɪiv; ɝaʊnd nɪneɪiv, tə hɪz maɪnd, ʌðɝ pipəl niɾəd sʌmwʌn tə lʊk æftɝ ðɛm.

Perrin only shook his head. There was no way to explain to Loial that he did not dare sleep soundly, that even his lightest sleep was full of troubled dreams. Like that odd one with Egwene and Hopper in it. Well, no wonder I dream about her. Light, I wonder how she is. Safe in the Tower by now, and learning how to be Aes Sedai. Verin will look after her, and after Mat, too. He did not think anyone needed to look after Nynaeve; around Nynaeve, to his mind, other people needed someone to look after them.

hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt hɑpɝ. hi wɑz səksiɾɪŋ ɪn kipɪŋ laɪv wʊlvz aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd, ɔlðoʊ ət ðə pɹaɪs ə filɪŋ əz ɪf i hæd bɪn hæmɝd-ænd-dʒɹɔn baɪ ə heɪsti hænd; hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk ə dɛd wʊlf maɪt bi kɹipɪŋ ɪn. hi ʃʊk hɪmsɛlf ən fɔɹst ɪz aɪz waɪɾ oʊpən. nɑɾ ivən hɑpɝ.

He did not want to think about Hopper. He was succeeding in keeping live wolves out of his head, although at the price of feeling as if he had been hammered-and-drawn by a hasty hand; he did not want to think a dead wolf might be creeping in. He shook himself and forced his eyes wide open. Not even Hopper.

ðəɹ hæd bɪn mɔɹ ɹizənz ðən bæd dʒɹimz nɑt tə slip wɛl. ðeɪ hæd faʊn ʌðɝ saɪnz lɛf baɪ ɹændz pæsədʒ. bɪtwin dʒɹə ən ðə ɹɪvɝ bɔɝn ðəɹ hæd bɪn nʌn pɛɹɪn kəd si, bʌt wən ðeɪ kɹɔs ðə bɔɝn baɪ ə stoʊn bɹɪdʒ ɑɹtʃɪŋ fɹəm wʌn fɪfti-fʊt ɹɪvɝ klɪf tə ənʌðɝ, ðeɪ hæd lɛf bɪhaɪn ə taʊn kɔl saɪɾən ɔl ɪn æʃəz. ɛvɹi bɪldɪŋ. oʊnli ə fju stoʊn wɔlz ən tʃɪmniz stɪl stʊɾ əmʌŋ ðə ɹuənz.

There had been more reasons than bad dreams not to sleep well. They had found other signs left by Rand's passage. Between Jarra and the River Boern there had been none Perrin could see, but when they crossed the Boern by a stone bridge arching from one fifty-foot river cliff to another, they had left behind a town called Sidon all in ashes. Every building. Only a few stone walls and chimneys still stood among the ruins.

bɪdʒɹæɡəl taʊnzpipəl sɛɾ ə læntɝn dʒɹɑpt ɪn ə bɑɹn hæd stɑɹɾəd ɪt, ən ðən ðə faɪɝ sim tə ɹʌn waɪld, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɛn ɹɔŋ. hæf ðə bʌkəts ðət kəd bi faʊn hæd hoʊlz ɪn ðɛm. ɛvɹi læs bɝnɪŋ wɔl hæd fɔlən aʊtwɝɾ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɪn, sɛɾɪŋ haʊsəz tə iðɝ saɪɾ əlaɪt. fleɪmɪŋ tɪmbɝz fɹəm ði ɪn hæd sʌmhaʊ tʌmbəld əz fɑɹ əz ðə meɪn wɛl ɪn ðə skwɛɹ, soʊ noʊ wʌn kəd dʒɹɔ mɔɹ wɔɾɝ fɹəm ɪt tə faɪt ðə faɪɝz, ən haʊsəz hæd fɔlən ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə θɹi ʌðɝ wɛlz. ivən ðə wɪn hæd sim tə ʃɪft, fænɪŋ ðə fleɪmz ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən.

Bedraggled townspeople said a lantern dropped in a barn had started it, and then the fire seemed to run wild, and everything went wrong. Half the buckets that could be found had holes in them. Every last burning wall had fallen outward instead of in, setting houses to either side alight. Flaming timbers from the inn had somehow tumbled as far as the main well in the square, so no one could draw more water from it to fight the fires, and houses had fallen right on top of three other wells. Even the wind had seemed to shift, fanning the flames in every direction.

ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ nid tə æsk mɔɪɹeɪn ɪf ɹændz pɹɛzəns hæd kɑzd ɪt; hɝ feɪs, laɪk koʊld aɪɝn, wɑz ænsɝ ɪnʌf. ðə pæɾɝn ʃeɪpt ɪtsɛlf ɝaʊn ɹænd, ən tʃæns ɹæn waɪld.

There had been no need to ask Moiraine if Rand's presence had caused it; her face, like cold iron, was answer enough. The Pattern shaped itself around Rand, and chance ran wild.

bɪɑn saɪɾən ðeɪ hæd ɹɪɾən θɹu fɔɹ smɔl taʊnz wɛɹ oʊnli lænz tʃɹækɪŋ toʊld əm ɹænd wɑz stɪl əhɛd. ɹænd wɑz əfʊt, naʊ, ən hæd bɪn fəɹ səm taɪm. ðeɪ hæd faʊn ɪz hɔɹs bæk bɪɑn dʒɹə, dɛd, lʊkɪŋ əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn mɔl baɪ wʊlvz, əɹ dɑɡz ɹʌn waɪld. ɪt hæd bɪn hɑɹd fəɹ pɛɹɪn nɑt tə ɹitʃ aʊt, ðɛn, ɪspɛʃli wən mɔɪɹeɪn lʊkt ʌp fɹəm ðə hɔɹs tə fɹaʊn ət hɪm. lʌkəli, læn hæd faʊn ðə tʃɹæks ə ɹændz buts, ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm wɛɹ ðə dɛd hɔɹs leɪ. wʌn but hil hæɾ ə θɹi-kɔɹnɝd ɡaʊdʒ fɹəm ə ɹɑk; ɪt meɪɾ ɪz pɹɪns pleɪn. bʌɾ əfʊɾ əɹ maʊntəd, hi sim tə bi steɪɪŋ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm.

Beyond Sidon they had ridden through four small towns where only Lan's tracking told them Rand was still ahead. Rand was afoot, now, and had been for some time. They had found his horse back beyond Jarra, dead, looking as if it had been mauled by wolves, or dogs run wild. It had been hard for Perrin not to reach out, then, especially when Moiraine looked up from the horse to frown at him. Luckily, Lan had found the tracks of Rand's boots, running from where the dead horse lay. One boot heel had a three-cornered gouge from a rock; it made his prints plain. But afoot or mounted, he seemed to be staying ahead of them.

ɪn ðə fɔɹ vɪlədʒəz æftɝ saɪɾən, ðə bɪɡəst ɪksaɪtmən ɛniwʌn kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ wɑz siɪŋ lɔɪəl ɹaɪɾ ɪn, ən dɪskʌvɝɪŋ ðəɾ i wɑz ən oʊɡiɝ, fəɹ ɹil ən fəɹ tʃɹu. ðeɪ wɝ soʊ kɑɾ ʌp wɪð ðæt, ðət ðeɪ bɛɹli ivən noʊɾəst pɛɹɪnz aɪz, ən wən ðeɪ dɪd. . . . wɛl, ɪf oʊɡiɝ wɝ ɹil, ðən mɛn kəd vɛɹi wɛl əv ɛni kʌlɝ aɪz əɾ ɔl.

In the four villages after Sidon, the biggest excitement anyone could remember was seeing Loial ride in, and discovering that he was an Ogier, for real and for true. They were so caught up with that, that they barely even noticed Perrin's eyes, and when they did. . . . Well, if Ogier were real, then men could very well have any color eyes at all.

bʌɾ æftɝ ðoʊz keɪm ə lɪɾəl pleɪs neɪmd wɪlɝ, ən ɪt wɑz sɛləbɹeɪɾɪŋ. ðə spɹɪŋ ɑn ðə vɪlədʒ kɑmən wɑz floʊɪŋ əɡɛn, æftɝ ə jɪɹ ə hɔlɪŋ wɔɾɝ ə maɪl fɹəm ə stʃɹim wən ɔl ɛfɝts ət dɪɡɪŋ wɛlz hæd feɪld ən hæf ðə pipəl hæd muvd əweɪ. wɪlɝ wəd nɑt daɪ æftɝ ɔl. θɹi mɔɹ əntʌtʃt vɪlədʒəz hæd bɪn fɑloʊɾ ɪn kwɪk səksɛʃən, ɔl ɪn wʌn deɪ, baɪ sæməhə, wɛɹ ɛvɹi wɛl ɪn taʊn hæd ɡɔn dʒɹaɪ dʒʌs ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ, ən pipəl wɝ mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt ðə dɑɹk wʌn; ðən tɑlən, wɛɹ ɔl ði oʊld ɑɹɡjəməns ðə vɪlədʒ hæɾ ɛvɝ noʊn hæd bʌbəl tə ðə sɝfəs laɪk oʊvɝfloʊɪŋ sɛspɪts ə mɔɹnɪŋ ɝliɝ, ən ɪt hæd teɪkən θɹi mɝɾɝz tə ʃɑk ɛvɹiwʌn bæk tə hɪz sɛnsɪz; ən faɪnəli faɪəl, wɛɹ ðə kɹɑps ðɪs spɹɪŋ lʊk tə bi ðə pʊɹɪst ɛniwʌn kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ, bʌt ðə meɪɝ, dɪɡɪŋ ə nu pɹɪvi bɪhaɪn ɪz haʊs, hæd faʊn ɹɑɾɪd lɛðɝ sæks fʊl ʌv ɡoʊld, soʊ nʌn wəd ɡoʊ hʌŋɡɹi. noʊ wʌn ɪn faɪəl ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə fæt kɔɪnz, wɪð ə wʊmənz feɪs ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ən ən iɡəl ɑn ði ʌðɝ; mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ðeɪ hæd bɪn mɪntɪɾ ɪn meɪnɛðɝən.

But after those came a little place named Willar, and it was celebrating. The spring on the village common was flowing again, after a year of hauling water a mile from a stream when all efforts at digging wells had failed and half the people had moved away. Willar would not die after all. Three more untouched villages had been followed in quick succession, all in one day, by Samaha, where every well in town had gone dry just the night before, and people were muttering about the Dark One; then Tallan, where all the old arguments the village had ever known had bubbled to the surface like overflowing cesspits a morning earlier, and it had taken three murders to shock everyone back to his senses; and finally Fyall, where the crops this spring looked to be the poorest anyone could remember, but the Mayor, digging a new privy behind his house, had found rotted leather sacks full of gold, so none would go hungry. No one in Fyall recognized the fat coins, with a woman's face on one side and an eagle on the other; Moiraine said they had been minted in Manetheren.

pɛɹɪn hæd faɪnəli æskt əɹ əbaʊɾ ɪt, əz ðeɪ sæɾ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ kæmpfaɪɝ wʌn naɪt. "æftɝ dʒɹə, aɪ θɔt. . . . ðeɪ wɝ ɔl soʊ hæpi, wɪð ðɛɹ wɛɾɪŋz. ivən ðə waɪtkloʊks wɝ oʊnli meɪd tə lʊk laɪk fulz. faɪəl wɑz ɔl ɹaɪt - ɹænd kʊdn əv hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðɛɹ kɹɑps; ðeɪ wɝ feɪlɪŋ bɪfɔɹ i ɛvɝ keɪm, ən ðət ɡoʊld wɑz ʃʊɹli ɡʊd, wɪð ðɛɹ nid - bʌɾ ɔl ðɪs ʌðɝ. . . . ðət taʊn bɝnɪŋ, ən ðə wɛlz feɪlɪŋ, ænd. . . . ðəɾ ɪz ivəl, mɔɪɹeɪn. aɪ kæn bɪliv ɹænd ɪz ivəl. ðə pæɾɝn meɪ bi ʃeɪpɪŋ ɪtsɛlf ɝaʊn hɪm, bʌt haʊ kən ðə pæɾɝn bi ðəɾ ivəl? ɪt meɪks noʊ sɛns, ən θɪŋz əv tə meɪk sɛns. ɪf jə meɪk ə tul wɪð noʊ sɛns tə ɪt, ɪts weɪstəd mɛɾəl. ðə pæɾɝn wʊdn meɪk weɪst."

Perrin had finally asked her about it, as they sat around their campfire one night. "After Jarra, I thought. . . . They were all so happy, with their weddings. Even the Whitecloaks were only made to look like fools. Fyall was all right - Rand couldn't have had anything to do with their crops; they were failing before he ever came, and that gold was surely good, with their need - but all this other. . . . That town burning, and the wells failing, and. . . . That is evil, Moiraine. I can't believe Rand is evil. The Pattern may be shaping itself around him, but how can the Pattern be that evil? It makes no sense, and things have to make sense. If you make a tool with no sense to it, it's wasted metal. The Pattern wouldn't make waste."

læn ɡeɪv ɪm ə ɹaɪ lʊk, ən vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs tə meɪk ə sɝkəɾ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ kæmpsaɪt. lɔɪəl, ɔlɹɛɾi stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɪn ɪz blæŋkəts, lɪftəɾ ɪz hɛd tə lɪsən, ɪɹz pɹɪkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd.

Lan gave him a wry look, and vanished into the darkness to make a circuit around their campsite. Loial, already stretched out in his blankets, lifted his head to listen, ears pricking forward.

mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz saɪlən fəɹ ə taɪm, wɔɹmɪŋ əɹ hænz. faɪnəli ʃi spoʊk waɪl stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə fleɪmz. "ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ɪz ɡʊd, pɛɹɪn. ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz ɪz ivəl. ðə pæɾɝn ʌv eɪdʒ, ði eɪdʒ leɪs ɪtsɛlf, ɪz niðɝ. ðə pæɾɝn ɪz wʌɾ ɪz. ðə wil ə taɪm wivz ɔl laɪvz ɪndə ðə pæɾɝn, ɔl ækʃənz. ə pæɾɝn ðəɾ ɪz ɔl wʌn kʌlɝ ɪz noʊ pæɾɝn. fəɹ ðə pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ, ɡʊɾ ən ɪl ɑɹ ðə wɔɹp ən ðə wuf."

Moiraine was silent for a time, warming her hands. Finally she spoke while staring into the flames. "The Creator is good, Perrin. The Father of Lies is evil. The Pattern of Age, the Age Lace itself, is neither. The Pattern is what is. The Wheel of Time weaves all lives into the Pattern, all actions. A pattern that is all one color is no pattern. For the Pattern of an Age, good and ill are the warp and the woof."

ivən ɹaɪɾɪŋ θɹu leɪt-æftɝnun sʌnʃaɪn θɹi deɪz leɪɾɝ, pɛɹɪn fɛl ðə tʃɪl i hæd hæɾ ɑn fɝs hɪɹɪŋ əɹ seɪ ðoʊz wɝdz. hi wɑntəd tə bɪliv ðə pæɾɝn wɑz ɡʊd. hi wɑntəd tə bɪliv ðət wən mɛn dɪɾ ivəl θɪŋz, ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ əɡɛns ðə pæɾɝn, dɪstɔɹɾɪŋ ɪt. tə hɪm ðə pæɾɝn wɑz ə faɪn ən ɪntʃɹəkət kɹieɪʃən meɪd baɪ ə mæstɝ smɪθ. ðəɾ ɪt mɪks pɑt mɛɾəl ən wɝs ɪn wɪð ɡʊd stil wɪð nɛvɝ ə kɛɹ wɑz ə koʊl θɔt.

Even riding through late-afternoon sunshine three days later, Perrin felt the chill he had had on first hearing her say those words. He wanted to believe the Pattern was good. He wanted to believe that when men did evil things, they were going against the Pattern, distorting it. To him the Pattern was a fine and intricate creation made by a master smith. That it mixed pot metal and worse in with good steel with never a care was a cold thought.

"aɪ kɛɹ," hi mʌɾɝd sɔfli. "laɪt, aɪ də kɛɹ." mɔɪɹeɪn ɡlæns bæk ət hɪm, ən i fɛl saɪlənt. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kɛɹɾ əbaʊt, bɪɑn ɹænd.

"I care," he muttered softly. "Light, I do care." Moiraine glanced back at him, and he fell silent. He was not sure what the Aes Sedai cared about, beyond Rand.

ə fju mɪnəts leɪɾɝ læn əpɪɹd fɹəm əhɛɾ ən swʌŋ ɪz blæk wɔɹ hɔɹs ɪn bɪsaɪd mɔɪɹeɪnz mɛɹ. "ɹɛmən laɪz dʒʌst oʊvɝ ðə nɛks hɪl," hi sɛd. "ðeɪ hæv hæɾ ən ɪvɛnfəl deɪ əɹ tu, ɪt simz."

A few minutes later Lan appeared from ahead and swung his black war horse in beside Moiraine's mare. "Remen lies just over the next hill," he said. "They have had an eventful day or two, it seems."

lɔɪəlz ɪɹz twɪtʃt wʌns. "ɹænd?"

Loial's ears twitched once. "Rand?"

ðə wɔɹɾɝ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ. pɝhæps mɔɪɹeɪn kən seɪ, wən ʃi siz." ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪv ɪm ə sɝtʃɪŋ lʊk, ðən hild əɹ waɪt mɛɹ tə ə kwɪkɝ stɛp.

The Warder shook his head. "I do not know. Perhaps Moiraine can say, when she sees." The Aes Sedai gave him a searching look, then heeled her white mare to a quicker step.

ðeɪ tɑp ðə hɪl, ən ɹɛmən leɪ spɹɛɾ aʊt bɪloʊ ðɛm, hɑɹɾ əɡɛns ðə ɹɪvɝ. ðə meɪnɛðɹəndʒɹɛl stʃɹɛtʃt mɔɹ ðən hæf ə maɪl waɪd hɪɹ, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ bɹɪdʒ, ðoʊ tu kɹaʊɾəd, bɑɹdʒ laɪk fɛɹiz kɹɛpt əkɹɔs, pɹəpɛl baɪ lɔŋ ɔɹz, ən wʌn nɪɹli ɛmpti wɑz ɹɪtɝnɪŋ. θɹi mɔɹ ʃɛɹd lɔŋ stoʊn dɑks wɪð nɪɹli ə dʌzən ɹɪvɝ tʃɹeɪɾɝz' vɛsəlz, səm wɪð wʌn mæst, səm wɪð tu. ə fju bʌlki ɡɹeɪ stoʊn wɛɹhaʊzɪz sɛpɝeɪɾəd ðə dɑks fɹəm ðə taʊn ɪtsɛlf, wɛɹ ðə bɪldɪŋz simd moʊsli ʌv stoʊn, əz wɛl, ðoʊ ɹuft ɪn taɪlz ʌv ɛvɹi kʌlɝ fɹəm jɛloʊ tə ɹɛd tə pɝpəl, ən ðə stʃɹits ɹæn ɛvɹi wɪtʃ weɪ ɝaʊn ə sɛntʃɹəl skwɛɹ.

They topped the hill, and Remen lay spread out below them, hard against the river. The Manetherendrelle stretched more than half a mile wide here, and there was no bridge, though two crowded, barge like ferries crept across, propelled by long oars, and one nearly empty was returning. Three more shared long stone docks with nearly a dozen river traders' vessels, some with one mast, some with two. A few bulky gray stone warehouses separated the docks from the town itself, where the buildings seemed mostly of stone, as well, though roofed in tiles of every color from yellow to red to purple, and the streets ran every which way around a central square.

mɔɪɹeɪn pʊld ʌp ðə dip hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk tə haɪɾ əɹ feɪs bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹoʊd daʊn.

Moiraine pulled up the deep hood of her cloak to hide her face before they rode down.

əz juʒəwəl, ðə pipəl ɪn ðə stʃɹits stɛɹɾ ət lɔɪəl, bʌt ðɪs taɪm pɛɹɪn hɝɾ ɔd mɝmɝz ʌv "oʊɡiɝ." lɔɪəl sæt stʃɹeɪɾɝ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl ðən i hæɾ ɪn səm taɪm, ən ɪz ɪɹz stʊd stʃɹeɪt, ən ə smaɪl dʒʌs kɝl ði ɛnz ə hɪz waɪd maʊθ. hi wɑz ɑbviəsli tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə lɛɾ ɑn ðəɾ i wɑz plizd, bʌɾ i lʊk laɪk ə kæt hævɪŋ ɪts ɪɹz skɹætʃt.

As usual, the people in the streets stared at Loial, but this time Perrin heard awed murmurs of "Ogier." Loial sat straighter in his saddle than he had in some time, and his ears stood straight, and a smile just curled the ends of his wide mouth. He was obviously trying not to let on that he was pleased, but he looked like a cat having its ears scratched.

ɹɛmən lʊk laɪk ɛni ʌv ə dʌzən taʊnz tə pɛɹɪn - ɪt wɑz fʊl ə mæn-meɪɾ ɝoʊməz ən mæn smɛl; wɪð ə stʃɹɔŋ smɛl ə ðə ɹɪvɝ, ʌv kɔɹs - ən i wɑz wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt læn cʊɾə mɛnt wən ðə hɛɹ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk stɝɾ əz i sɛntɪd sʌmθɪŋ - ɹɔŋ. əz sun əz ɪz noʊz tʊk ɪɾ ɪn, ɪt wɑz ɡɔn laɪk ə hɔɹs hɛɹ dʒɹɑpt ɑntu hɑt koʊlz, bʌɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪt. hi hæd smɛl ðə seɪm smɛl ət dʒɹə, ən ɪt hæd vænɪʃt ðə seɪm weɪ, ðɛn. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə twɪstəd wʌn əɹ ə nɛvɝbɹn - tʃɹɑlɑk, bɝn mi, nɑɾ ə twɪstəd wʌn! nɑɾ ə nɛvɝbɹn! eɪ mɹdʒɹɑl, ə feɪd, ə hæfmən, ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ ə nɛvɝbɹn! - nɑɾ ə tʃɹɑlɑk əɹ ə feɪd, jɛt ðə stɛntʃ hæd bɪn ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz ʃɑɹp, ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz vaɪl. bʌt wʌtɛvɝ ɡeɪv ɔf ðət sɛn lɛf noʊ læstɪŋ tʃɹeɪl, ɪt simd.

Remen looked like any of a dozen towns to Perrin - it was full of man-made aromas and man smell; with a strong smell of the river, of course - and he was wondering what Lan could have meant when the hair on the back of his neck stirred as he scented something - wrong. As soon as his nose took it in, it was gone like a horse hair dropped onto hot coals, but he remembered it. He had smelled the same smell at Jarra, and it had vanished the same way, then. It was not a Twisted One or a Neverborn - Trolloc, burn me, not a Twisted One! Not a Neverborn! A Myrddraal, a Fade, a Halfman, anything but a Neverborn! - not a Trolloc or a Fade, yet the stench had been every bit as sharp, every bit as vile. But whatever gave off that scent left no lasting trail, it seemed.

ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə taʊn skwɛɹ. wʌn ə ðə bɪɡ peɪvɪŋ blɑks hæd bɪn pɹaɪɾ ʌp, ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə skwɛɹ, soʊ ə ɡɪbət kəd bi ɪɹɛktəd. ə sɪŋɡəl θɪk tɪmbɝ ɹoʊz aʊɾ ə ðə dɝt, səpɔɹɾɪŋ ə bɹeɪs kɹɔspis fɹəm wɪtʃ hʌŋ ən aɪɝn keɪdʒ, ðə bɑɾəm ʌv ɪt fɔɹ peɪsɪz haɪ. ə tɔl mæn dʒɹɛst ɔl ɪn ɡɹeɪz ən bɹaʊnz sæɾ ɪn ðə keɪdʒ, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz niz ʌndɝ ɪz tʃɪn. hi hæd noʊ ɹum tə də ʌðɝwaɪz. θɹi smɔl bɔɪz wɝ pɪtʃɪŋ stoʊnz ət hɪm. ðə mæn lʊk stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, nɑt flɪntʃɪŋ wən ə stoʊn meɪɾ ɪt bɪtwin ðə bɑɹz. mɔɹ ðən wʌn tʃɹɪkəl ə blʌd steɪn ɪz feɪs. ðə taʊnzpipəl wɔkɪŋ baɪ peɪd noʊ mɔɹ maɪn tə wʌt ðə bɔɪz wɝ duɪŋ ðən ðə mæn dɪd, ðoʊ ɛvɹi læst wʌn ə ðɛm lʊkt ət ðə keɪdʒ, moʊst ə ðɛm wɪð əpɹuvəl, ən səm wɪð fɪɹ.

They rode into the town square. One of the big paving blocks had been pried up, right in the middle of the square, so a gibbet could be erected. A single thick timber rose out of the dirt, supporting a braced crosspiece from which hung an iron cage, the bottom of it four paces high. A tall man dressed all in grays and browns sat in the cage, holding his knees under his chin. He had no room to do otherwise. Three small boys were pitching stones at him. The man looked straight ahead, not flinching when a stone made it between the bars. More than one trickle of blood stained his face. The townspeople walking by paid no more mind to what the boys were doing than the man did, though every last one of them looked at the cage, most of them with approval, and some with fear.

mɔɪɹeɪn meɪɾ ə saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn dɪsɡʌst.

Moiraine made a sound in her throat that might have been disgust.

"ðɛɹ ɪz mɔɹ," læn sɛd. "kʌm. aɪv ɔlɹɛɾi ɝeɪnʒd ɹumz əɾ ən ɪn. aɪ θɪŋk jəl faɪn ɪɾ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ."

"There is more," Lan said. "Come. I've already arranged rooms at an inn. I think you will find it interesting."

pɛɹɪn lʊk bæk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ət ðə keɪdʒ mæn əz i ɹoʊɾ æftɝ ðɛm. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ fəmɪljɝ əbaʊt ðə mæn, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt pleɪs ɪt.

Perrin looked back over his shoulder at the caged man as he rode after them. There was something familiar about the man, but he could not place it.

"ðeɪ ʃʊdn də ðæt." lɔɪəlz ɹʌmbəl saʊndəd hæfweɪ tə ə snɑɹl. "ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, aɪ min. ðə ɡɹoʊn-ʌps ʃəd stɑp ðɛm."

"They shouldn't do that." Loial's rumble sounded halfway to a snarl. "The children, I mean. The grown-ups should stop them."

"ðeɪ ʃʊd," pɛɹɪn əɡɹid, bɛɹli peɪɪŋ ətɛnʃən. waɪ ɪz i fəmɪljɝ?

"They should," Perrin agreed, barely paying attention. Why is he familiar?

ðə saɪn oʊvɝ ðə dɔɹ ə ði ɪn læn lɛɾ əm tə, nɪɹɝ ðə ɹɪvɝ, ɹɛd weɪlənz fɔɹdʒ, wɪtʃ pɛɹɪn tʊk fəɹ ə ɡʊɾ oʊmən, ðoʊ ðəɹ sim tə bi nʌθɪŋ ə ðə smɪθi əbaʊt ðə pleɪs ɪksɛp ðə lɛðɝ-eɪpɹən mæn wɪð ə hæmɝ peɪntəɾ ɑn ðə saɪn. ɪt wɑz ə lɑɹdʒ, pɝpəl-ɹuft, θɹi-stɔɹi bɪldɪŋ ə skwɛɹɾ ən pɑlɪʃt ɡɹeɪ stoʊnz, wɪð lɑɹdʒ wɪndoʊz ən skɹoʊl-kɑɹv dɔɹz, ən ɪt hæɾ ə pɹɑspɝəs lʊk. steɪbəlmən keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ tə teɪk ðə hɔɹsəz, boʊɪŋ ivən mɔɹ dipli æftɝ læn tɔst əm kɔɪnz.

The sign over the door of the inn Lan led them to, nearer the river, read Wayland's Forge, which Perrin took for a good omen, though there seemed to be nothing of the smithy about the place except the leather-aproned man with a hammer painted on the sign. It was a large, purple-roofed, three-story building of squared and polished gray stones, with large windows and scroll-carved doors, and it had a prosperous look. Stablemen came running to take the horses, bowing even more deeply after Lan tossed them coins.

ɪnsaɪd, pɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ ət ðə pipəl. ðə mɛn ən wɪmən ət ðə teɪbəlz wɝ ɔl dʒɹɛst ɪn ðɛɹ fistdeɪ kloʊðz, ɪt sim tə hɪm, wɪð mɔɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd koʊts, mɔɹ leɪs ɑn dʒɹɛsəz, mɔɹ kʌlɝd ɹɪbənz ən fɹɪn skɑɹvz, ðən i hæd sin ɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm. oʊnli fɔɹ mɛn sɪɾɪŋ ət wʌn teɪbəl wɔɹ pleɪn koʊts, ən ðeɪ wɝ ði oʊnli wʌnz u dɪd nɑt lʊk ʌp ɪkspɛktənli wən pɛɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz wɔkt ɪn. ðə fɔɹ mɛn kɛpt ɑn tɔkɪŋ sɔfli. hi kəd meɪk aʊɾ ə lɪɾəl ʌv wʌt ðeɪ wɝ seɪɪŋ, əbaʊt ðə vɝtʃuz ʌv aɪs pɛpɝz oʊvɝ fɝz əz kɑɹɡoʊ ən wʌt ðə tʃɹʌbəlz ɪn sɑldɑiə maɪɾ əv dʌn tə pɹaɪsəz. kæptənz ə tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ʃɪps, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd. ði ʌðɝz sim tə bi loʊkəl foʊk. ivən ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən əpɪɹd tə bi wɛɹɪŋ ðɛɹ bɛst, ðɛɹ lɔŋ eɪpɹənz kʌvɝɪŋ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd dʒɹɛsəz wɪð bɪts ə leɪs ət ðə nɛk.

Inside, Perrin stared at the people. The men and women at the tables were all dressed in their feastday clothes, it seemed to him, with more embroidered coats, more lace on dresses, more colored ribbons and fringed scarves, than he had seen in a long time. Only four men sitting at one table wore plain coats, and they were the only ones who did not look up expectantly when Perrin and the others walked in. The four men kept on talking softly. He could make out a little of what they were saying, about the virtues of ice peppers over furs as cargo and what the troubles in Saldaea might have done to prices. Captains of trading ships, he decided. The others seemed to be local folk. Even the serving women appeared to be wearing their best, their long aprons covering embroidered dresses with bits of lace at the neck.

ðə kɪtʃən wɑz wɝkɪŋ hɛvəli; hi kəd smɛl mʌɾən, læm, tʃɪkən, ən bif, əz wɛl əz səm sɔɹɾ ə vɛdʒtəbəlz. ən ə spaɪsi keɪk ðət meɪɾ ɪm fɝɡɛt mit fəɹ ə moʊmənt.

The kitchen was working heavily; he could smell mutton, lamb, chicken, and beef, as well as some sort of vegetables. And a spicy cake that made him forget meat for a moment.

ði ɪnkipɝ hɪmsɛlf mɛɾ əm dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd, ə plʌmp, bɔld-hɛɾəd mæn wɪð ʃaɪnɪŋ bɹaʊn aɪz ɪn ə smuð pɪŋk feɪs, boʊɪŋ ən dʒɹaɪ-wɑʃɪŋ ɪz hænz. ɪf i hæd nɑt kʌm tə ðɛm, pɛɹɪn wəd nɛvɝ əv teɪkən ɪm fəɹ ðə lændlɔɹd, fəɹ ɪnstɛɾ ə ði ɪkspɛktəd waɪɾ eɪpɹən, hi wɔɹ ə koʊt laɪk ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, ɔl waɪt-ænd-ɡɹin ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ɑn staʊt blu wʊl ðət hæd ðə mæn swɛɾɪŋ wɪð ɪts weɪt.

The innkeeper himself met them just inside, a plump, bald-headed man with shining brown eyes in a smooth pink face, bowing and dry-washing his hands. If he had not come to them, Perrin would never have taken him for the landlord, for instead of the expected white apron, he wore a coat like everyone else, all white-and-green embroidery on stout blue wool that had the man sweating with its weight.

waɪ ɑɹ ðeɪ ɔl wɛɹɪŋ kloʊðz fəɹ fɛstəvəl? pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd.

Why are they all wearing clothes for festival? Perrin wondered.

"ɑ, mæstɝ ænʒɹə," ði ɪnkipɝ sɛd, ədʒɹɛsɪŋ læn. "æn ən oʊɡiɝ, dʒʌst əz jə sɛd. nɑt ðəɾ aɪ daʊɾɪd, ʌv kɔɹs. nɑt wɪð ɔl ðæts hæpənd, ən nɛvɝ jəɹ wɝd, mæstɝ. waɪ nɑɾ ən oʊɡiɝ? ɑ, fɹɛn oʊɡiɝ, tə bi hævɪŋ jə ɪn ðə haʊs ɡɪvz mi mɔɹ plɛʒɝ ðən jə kən bi noʊɪŋ. 'tiz ə faɪn θɪŋ, ən ə fɪɾɪŋ kæp tə ɪɾ ɔl. ɑ, ən mɪstʃɹəs. . . ." hɪz aɪz tʊk ɪn ðə dip blu sɪlk ə hɝ dʒɹɛs ən ðə ɹɪtʃ wʊl ə hɝ kloʊk, dʌsti fɹəm tʃɹævəl bʌt stɪl faɪn. "fɝɡɪv mi, leɪɾi, pliz." hɪz baʊ bɛn ɪm laɪk ə hɔɹsʃu. "mæstɝ ænʒɹə dɪd nɑt meɪk jəɹ steɪʃən klɪɹ, leɪɾi. aɪ mɛnt noʊ dɪsɹɪspɛkt. jə ɑɹ ivən mɔɹ wɛlkəm ðən fɹɛn oʊɡiɝ hɪɹ, ʌv kɔɹs, leɪɾi. pliz, teɪk noʊ əfɛns ət ɡeɪnɝ fɝlənz pʊɹ tʌŋ."

"Ah, Master Andra," the innkeeper said, addressing Lan. "And an Ogier, just as you said. Not that I doubted, of course. Not with all that's happened, and never your word, master. Why not an Ogier? Ah, friend Ogier, to be having you in the house gives me more pleasure than you can be knowing. 'Tis a fine thing, and a fitting cap to it all. Ah, and mistress. . . ." His eyes took in the deep blue silk of her dress and the rich wool of her cloak, dusty from travel but still fine. "Forgive me, Lady, please." His bow bent him like a horseshoe. "Master Andra did not make your station clear, Lady. I meant no disrespect. You are even more welcome than friend Ogier here, of course, Lady. Please, take no offense at Gainor Furlan's poor tongue."

"aɪ teɪk nʌn." mɔɪɹeɪnz vɔɪs kɑmli æksɛptɪd ðə taɪɾəl fɝlən ɡeɪv hɝ. ɪt wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm ðə fɝs taɪm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd ɡɔn ʌndɝ ənʌðɝ neɪm, əɹ pɹitɛndəd tə bi sʌmθɪŋ ʃi wɑz nɑt. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə fɝs pɛɹɪn hæd hɝd læn neɪm hɪmsɛlf ænʒɹə, iðɝ. ðə dip hʊd stɪl hɪd mɔɪɹeɪnz smuð ɛɛs sədaɪ fitʃɝz, ən ʃi hɛld əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn əɹ wɪð wʌn hæn əz ɪf teɪkən wɪð ə tʃɪl. nɑt ðə hæn ɑn wɪtʃ ʃi wɔɹ əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ. "ju hæv hæd stʃɹeɪnʒ əkɝənsɪz ɪn ðə taʊn, ɪnkipɝ, soʊ aɪ ʌndɝstænd. nʌθɪŋ tə tʃɹʌbəl tʃɹævəlɝz, aɪ tʃɹʌst."

"I take none." Moiraine's voice calmly accepted the title Furlan gave her. It was far from the first time the Aes Sedai had gone under another name, or pretended to be something she was not. It was not the first Perrin had heard Lan name himself Andra, either. The deep hood still hid Moiraine's smooth Aes Sedai features, and she held her cloak around her with one hand as if taken with a chill. Not the hand on which she wore her Great Serpent ring. "You have had strange occurrences in the town, innkeeper, so I understand. Nothing to trouble travelers, I trust."

"ɑ, leɪɾi, jə maɪt bi kɔlɪŋ əm stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪndid. jəɹ oʊn ɹeɪɾiənt pɹɛzəns ɪz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf tə ɑnɝ ðɪs hʌmbəl haʊs, leɪɾi, ən bɹɪŋɪŋ ən oʊɡiɝ wɪð ju, bʌt wɪv hʌntɝz ɪn ɹɛmən, tu. ɹaɪt hɪɹ ɪn weɪlənz fɔɹdʒ, ðeɪ ɑɹ. hʌntɝz fəɹ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, sɛɾ aʊt fɹəm ɪljən fəɹ ædvɛntʃɝ. ən ædvɛntʃɝ ðeɪ faʊnd, leɪɾi, hɪɹ ɪn ɹɛmən, əɹ dʒʌst ə maɪl əɹ tu ʌpɹɪvɝ, faɪɾɪŋ waɪld ilmɛn, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz. kən jə ɪmædʒən blæk-veɪld il sævədʒəz ɪn ɔltɑɹə, leɪɾi?"

"Ah, Lady, you might be calling them strange indeed. Your own radiant presence is more than enough to honor this humble house, Lady, and bringing an Ogier with you, but we have Hunters in Remen, too. Right here in Wayland's Forge, they are. Hunters for the Horn of Valere, set out from Illian for adventure. And adventure they found, Lady, here in Remen, or just a mile or two upriver, fighting wild Aielmen, of all things. Can you imagine black-veiled Aiel savages in Altara, Lady?"

il. naʊ pɛɹɪn nu wʌt wɑz fəmɪljɝ əbaʊt ðə mæn ɪn ðə keɪdʒ. hi hæd sin ən il, wʌns, wʌn ə ðoʊz fɪɹs, nɪɹli lɛdʒəndɛɹi dɛnəzənz ə ðə hɑɹʃ læn kɔl ðə weɪst. ðə mæn hæd lʊkt ə ɡʊd dil laɪk ɹænd, tɔlɝ ðən moʊst, wɪð ɡɹeɪ aɪz ən ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ, ən i hæd bɪn dʒɹɛs laɪk ðə mæn ɪn ðə keɪdʒ, ɔl ɪn bɹaʊnz ən ɡɹeɪz ðət wəd feɪɾ ɪndə ɹɑk əɹ bɹʌʃ, wɪð sɑf buts leɪs tə hɪz niz. pɛɹɪn kəɾ ɔlmoʊs hɪɹ mɪnz vɔɪs əɡɛn. ən ilmən ɪn ə keɪdʒ. ə tɝnɪŋ pɔɪn ɪn jəɹ laɪf, əɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðət wɪl hæpən.

Aiel. Now Perrin knew what was familiar about the man in the cage. He had seen an Aiel, once, one of those fierce, nearly legendary denizens of the harsh land called the Waste. The man had looked a good deal like Rand, taller than most, with gray eyes and reddish hair, and he had been dressed like the man in the cage, all in browns and grays that would fade into rock or brush, with soft boots laced to his knees. Perrin could almost hear Min's voice again. An Aielman in a cage. A turning point in your life, or something important that will happen.

"waɪ juv . . . ?" hi stɑp tə klɪɹ ɪz θɹoʊt soʊ hi wəd nɑt saʊn soʊ hɔɹs. "haʊ dɪɾ ən il kʌm tə bi keɪdʒd ɪn jəɹ taʊn skwɛɹ?"

"Why do you have . . . ?" He stopped to clear his throat so he would not sound so hoarse. "How did an Aiel come to be caged in your town square?"

"ɑ, jʌŋ mæstɝ, ðəɾ ɪz ə stɔɹi tə. . . ." fɝlən tʃɹeɪld ɔf, aɪɪŋ ɪm ʌp ən daʊn, teɪkɪŋ ɪn ɪz pleɪn kʌntʃɹi kloʊðz ən ðə lɔŋboʊ ɪn ɪz hænz, pɔzɪŋ oʊvɝ ði æks əɾ ɪz bɛlt ɑpəzəɾ ɪz kwɪvɝ. ðə plʌmp mæn ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt wən ɪz stʌɾi ɹitʃt pɛɹɪnz feɪs, əz ɪf, wɪð ə leɪɾi ən ən oʊɡiɝ pɹɛzənt, hi hæd dʒʌs naʊ noʊɾəst pɛɹɪnz jɛloʊ aɪz. "hi wəd bi jəɹ sɝvənt, mæstɝ ænʒɹə?" hi æskt kɔʃəsli.

"Ah, young master, that is a story to. . . ." Furlan trailed off, eyeing him up and down, taking in his plain country clothes and the longbow in his hands, pausing over the axe at his belt opposite his quiver. The plump man gave a start when his study reached Perrin's face, as if, with a Lady and an Ogier present, he had just now noticed Perrin's yellow eyes. "He would be your servant, Master Andra?" he asked cautiously.

"ænsɝ hɪm," wɑz ɔl læn sɛd.

"Answer him," was all Lan said.

"ɑ. ɑ, ʌv kɔɹs, mæstɝ ænʒɹə. bʌt hɪɹz u kən tɛl ɪt bɛɾɝ ðən maɪsɛlf. 'tiz lɔɹɾ ɔɹbən, hɪmsɛlf. 'tiz i wɪv ɡæðɝd tə hɪɹ."

"Ah. Ah, of course, Master Andra. But here's who can tell it better than myself. 'Tis Lord Orban, himself. 'Tis he we have gathered to hear."

ə dɑɹk-hɛɹd, jʌnʒɪʃ mæn ɪn ə ɹɛd koʊt, wɪð ə bændɪdʒ waʊn ɝaʊn ɪz tɛmpəlz, wɑz meɪkɪŋ ɪz weɪ daʊn ðə stɛɹz ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə kɑmən ɹum juzɪŋ pæɾəd kɹʌtʃɪz, ðə lɛf lɛɡ ʌv ɪz bɹitʃɪz kʌɾ əweɪ soʊ mɔɹ bændədʒəz kəd stʃɹæp ɪz kæf fɹəm æŋkəl tə ni. ðə taʊnzpipəl mɝmɝɾ əz ɪf siɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ wʌnʒɹəs. ðə ʃɪp kæptənz wɛn ɑn wɪð ðɛɹ kwaɪət tɔkɪŋ; ðeɪ hæd kʌm 'ɹaʊn tə fɝz. fɝlən maɪɾ əv θɔt ðə mæn ɪn ðə ɹɛd koʊt kəd tɛl ðə stɔɹi bɛɾɝ, bʌɾ i wɛn əhɛd hɪmsɛlf. "lɔɹɾ ɔɹbən ən lɔɹd ɡæn feɪs twɛnti waɪld ilmɛn wɪð oʊnli tɛn ɹɪteɪnɝz. ɑ, fɪɹs wɑz ðə faɪɾɪŋ ən hɑɹd, wɪð mɛni wunz ɡɪvən ən ɹəsivd. sɪks ɡʊd ɹɪteɪnɝz daɪd, ən ɛvɹi mæn tʊk hɝts, lɔɹɾ ɔɹbən ən lɔɹd ɡæn wɝst ʌv ɔl, bʌɾ ɛvɹi il ðeɪ slu, seɪv ðoʊz u flɛd, ən wʌn ðeɪ tʊk pɹɪznɝ. 'tiz ðət wʌn jə si aʊt ðəɹ ɪn ðə skwɛɹ, wɛɹ hɪl nɑt bi tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪɾ ɛnimɔɹ wɪð ɪz sævədʒ weɪz, noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðə dɛd wʌnz wɪl."

A dark-haired, youngish man in a red coat, with a bandage wound around his temples, was making his way down the stairs at the side of the common room using padded crutches, the left leg of his breeches cut away so more bandages could strap his calf from ankle to knee. The townspeople murmured as if seeing something wondrous. The ship captains went on with their quiet talking; they had come 'round to furs. Furlan might have thought the man in the red coat could tell the story better, but he went ahead himself. "Lord Orban and Lord Gann faced twenty wild Aielmen with only ten retainers. Ah, fierce was the fighting and hard, with many wounds given and received. Six good retainers died, and every man took hurts, Lord Orban and Lord Gann worst of all, but every Aiel they slew, save those who fled, and one they took prisoner. 'Tis that one you see out there in the square, where he'll not be troubling the countryside anymore with his savage ways, no more than the dead ones will."

"ju hæv hæd tʃɹʌbəl fɹəm il ɪn ðɪs dɪstʃɹɪkt?" mɔɪɹeɪn æskt.

"You have had trouble from Aiel in this district?" Moiraine asked.

pɛɹɪn wɑz wʌndɝɪŋ ðə seɪm θɪŋ, wɪð noʊ lɪɾəl kɑnstɝneɪʃən. ɪf səm pipəl stɪl əkeɪʒənəli juzd "blæk-veɪld il" əz ə tɝm fəɹ sʌmwʌn vaɪələnt, ɪt wɑz tɛstəmoʊni tə ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ði il wɔɹ hæd lɛft, bʌt ðət wɑz twɛnti jɪɹz ɪn ðə pæst, naʊ, ən ði il hæd nɛvɝ kʌm aʊɾ ə ðə weɪs bɪfɔɹ əɹ sɪns. bʌɾ aɪ sɔ wʌn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld, ən naʊ aɪv sin tu.

Perrin was wondering the same thing, with no little consternation. If some people still occasionally used "black-veiled Aiel" as a term for someone violent, it was testimony to the impression the Aiel War had left, but that was twenty years in the past, now, and the Aiel had never come out of the Waste before or since. But I saw one this side of the Spine of the World, and now I've seen two.

ði ɪnkipɝ ɹʌbd əɾ ɪz bɔl hɛd. "ɑ. ɑ, noʊ, leɪɾi, nɑɾ ɪɡzækli. bʌt wi wəɾ əv hæd, jə kən bi ʃʊɹ, wɪð twɛnti sævədʒəz lus. waɪ, ɛvɹiwʌn ɹɪmɛmbɝz haʊ ðeɪ kɪld ən luɾəd ən bɝn ðɛɹ weɪ əkɹɔs kɛɹhin. mɛn fɹəm ðɪs vɛɹi vɪlədʒ mɑɹtʃt tə ðə bæɾəl ə ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz, wən ðə neɪʃənz ɡæðɝd tə θɹoʊ ðɛm bæk. aɪ maɪsɛlf sʌfɝd fɹəm ə twɪstəd bæk ət ðə taɪm ən soʊ kəd nɑt ɡoʊ, bʌɾ aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ wɛl, əz wi ɔl du. haʊ ðeɪ keɪm hɪɹ, soʊ fɑɹ fɹəm ðɛɹ oʊn lænd, əɹ waɪ, aɪ də nɑt noʊ, bʌt lɔɹɾ ɔɹbən ən lɔɹd ɡæn seɪvd əs fɹəm ðɛm." ðəɹ wɑz ə mɝmɝ ʌv əɡɹimən fɹəm ðə foʊk ɪn fistdeɪ kloʊðz.

The innkeeper rubbed at his bald head. "Ah. Ah, no, Lady, not exactly. But we would have had, you can be sure, with twenty savages loose. Why, everyone remembers how they killed and looted and burned their way across Cairhien. Men from this very village marched to the Battle of the Shining Walls, when the nations gathered to throw them back. I myself suffered from a twisted back at the time and so could not go, but I remember well, as we all do. How they came here, so far from their own land, or why, I do not know, but Lord Orban and Lord Gann saved us from them." There was a murmur of agreement from the folk in feastday clothes.

ɔɹbən hɪmsɛlf keɪm stʌmpɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə kɑmən ɹum, nɑt simɪŋ tə si ɛniwʌn bʌt ði ɪnkipɝ. pɛɹɪn kəd smɛl steɪl waɪn bɪfɔɹ i wɑz ivən kloʊz. "wɛɹz ðəɾ oʊld wʊmən teɪkən hɝsɛlf ɔf tə wɪð əɹ ɝbz, fɝlən?" ɔɹbən dɪmændəd ɹʌfli. "ɡænz wunz ɑɹ peɪnɪŋ hɪm, ən maɪ hɛd filz əbaʊt tə splɪɾ oʊpən."

Orban himself came stumping across the common room, not seeming to see anyone but the innkeeper. Perrin could smell stale wine before he was even close. "Where's that old woman taken herself off to with her herbs, Furlan?" Orban demanded roughly. "Gann's wounds are paining him, and my head feels about to split open."

fɝlən ɔlmoʊs bɛn ɪz hɛd tə ðə flɔɹ. "ɑ, mʌðɝ laɪk wɪl bi bæk ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, lɔɹɾ ɔɹbən. ə bɝθɪŋ, lɔɹd. bʌt ʃi sɛd ʃid stɪtʃt ən poʊltəs jəɹ wunz, ən lɔɹd ɡænz, soʊ ðɛɹəd bi noʊ wɝiɪŋ. ɑ, lɔɹɾ ɔɹbən, aɪm ʃʊɹ ʃɪl bi siɪŋ tə jə fɝs θɪŋ ɑn ðə mɑɹoʊ."

Furlan almost bent his head to the floor. "Ah, Mother Leich will be back in the morning, Lord Orban. A birthing, Lord. But she said she'd stitched and poulticed your wounds, and Lord Gann's, so there'd be no worrying. Ah, Lord Orban, I'm sure she'll be seeing to you first thing on the morrow."

ðə bændədʒ mæn mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ - ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ tə ɛni ɪɹz bʌt pɛɹɪnz - əbaʊt weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə fɑɹmwaɪf "θɹoʊɪŋ əɹ lɪɾɝ" ən sʌmθɪŋ ɛls əbaʊt biɪŋ "soʊn ʌp laɪk ə sæk ə mil." hi ʃɪftəd sʌlən, æŋɡɹi aɪz, ən fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm əpɪɹd tə si ðə nukʌmɝz. pɛɹɪn, hi dɪsmɪst ɪmiɾiətli, wɪtʃ dɪd nɑt sɝpɹaɪz pɛɹɪn əɾ ɔl. hɪz aɪz waɪɾənd ə lɪɾəl ət lɔɪəl - hiz sin oʊɡiɝ, pɛɹɪn θɔt, bʌɾ i nɛvɝ θɔt tə si wʌn hɪɹ - nɛɹoʊɾ ə bɪɾ ət læn - hi noʊz ə faɪɾɪŋ mæn wən i siz wʌn, ən i dʌz nɑt laɪk siɪŋ wʌn - ən bɹaɪɾənd əz i stup tə pɪɹ ɪnsaɪd mɔɪɹeɪnz hʊd, ðoʊ hi wɑz nɑt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si hɝ feɪs.

The bandaged man muttered something under his breath - under his breath to any ears but Perrin's - about waiting on a farmwife "throwing her litter" and something else about being "sewn up like a sack of meal." He shifted sullen, angry eyes, and for the first time appeared to see the newcomers. Perrin, he dismissed immediately, which did not surprise Perrin at all. His eyes widened a little at Loial - He's seen Ogier, Perrin thought, but he never thought to see one here - narrowed a bit at Lan - He knows a fighting man when he sees one, and he does not like seeing one - and brightened as he stooped to peer inside Moiraine's hood, though he was not close enough to see her face.

pɛɹɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl əbaʊt ðæt, nɑt kənsɝnɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən i hoʊp niðɝ mɔɪɹeɪn nɔɹ læn θɔɾ ɛniθɪŋ ʌv ɪt, iðɝ. ə laɪɾ ɪn ðə wɔɹɾɝz aɪz toʊld ɪm i hæd mɪst ɑn ðət hoʊp, ət list.

Perrin decided not to think anything at all about that, not concerning an Aes Sedai, and he hoped neither Moiraine nor Lan thought anything of it, either. A light in the Warder's eyes told him he had missed on that hope, at least.

"twɛlv ə jə fɔt twɛnti il?" læn æskt ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs.

"Twelve of you fought twenty Aiel?" Lan asked in a flat voice.

ɔɹbən stʃɹeɪɾənd, wɪnsɪŋ. ɪn ən ɪlæbɹətli kæʒəwəl toʊn, hi sɛd, "aɪ, jə mʌst ɪkspɛk θɪŋz sətʃ əz ðət wən jə sik ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə fɝst sətʃ ɪnkaʊntɝ fəɹ ɡæn ən mi, nɔɹ wɪl ɪt bi ðə læs bɪfɔɹ wi faɪn ðə hɔɹn. ɪf ðə laɪt ʃaɪnz ɑn ʌs." hi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ðə laɪt kəd nɑt pɑsəbli də ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. "nɑɾ ɔl əɹ faɪts əv bɪn wɪð il, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz ðoʊz u wəd stɑp hʌntɝz, ɪf ðeɪ kʊd. ɡæn ən aɪ, wi də nɑt stɑp izəli." ənʌðɝ əpɹuvɪŋ mɝmɝ keɪm fɹəm ðə taʊnzpipəl. ɔɹbən stʊɾ ə lɪɾəl stʃɹeɪɾɝ.

Orban straightened, wincing. In an elaborately casual tone, he said, "Aye, you must expect things such as that when you seek the Horn of Valere. It was not the first such encounter for Gann and me, nor will it be the last before we find the Horn. If the Light shines on us." He sounded as if the Light could not possibly do anything else. "Not all our fights have been with Aiel, of course, but there are always those who would stop Hunters, if they could. Gann and I, we do not stop easily." Another approving murmur came from the townspeople. Orban stood a little straighter.

"ju lɔst sɪks, ən tʊk wʌn pɹɪznɝ." fɹəm lænz vɔɪs, ɪt wɑz nɑt klɪɹ ɪf ðət wɑz ə ɡʊɾ ɪkstʃeɪnʒ əɹ ə pʊɹ wʌn.

"You lost six, and took one prisoner." From Lan's voice, it was not clear if that was a good exchange or a poor one.

"aɪ," ɔɹbən sɛd, "wi slu ðə ɹɛst, seɪv ðoʊz u ɹæn. noʊ daʊt ðəɹ haɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ dɛd naʊ; aɪv hɝd ðeɪ də ðæt. ðə waɪtkloʊks ɑɹ aʊt sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ðɛm, bʌt ðəl nɛvɝ faɪn ðɛm."

"Aye," Orban said, "we slew the rest, save those who ran. No doubt they're hiding their dead now; I've heard they do that. The Whitecloaks are out searching for them, but they'll never find them."

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ waɪtkloʊks hɪɹ?" pɛɹɪn æskt ʃɑɹpli.

"There are Whitecloaks here?" Perrin asked sharply.

ɔɹbən ɡlænst ət hɪm, ən dɪsmɪst ɪm wʌns mɔɹ. ðə mæn ədʒɹɛs læn əɡɛn. "waɪtkloʊks ɔlweɪz pʊt ðɛɹ noʊzɪz ɪn wɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt wɑntəɾ əɹ niɾəd. ɪnkɑmpəɾənt laʊts, ɔl ə ðɛm. aɪ, ðəl ɹaɪɾ ɔl oʊvɝ ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd fəɹ deɪz, bʌɾ aɪ daʊt ðəl faɪn əz mʌtʃ əz ðɛɹ oʊn ʃædoʊz."

Orban glanced at him, and dismissed him once more. The man addressed Lan again. "Whitecloaks always put their noses in where they are not wanted or needed. Incompetent louts, all of them. Aye, they'll ride all over the countryside for days, but I doubt they'll find as much as their own shadows."

"aɪ səpoʊz ðeɪ woʊnt," læn sɛd.

"I suppose they won't," Lan said.

ðə bændədʒ mæn fɹaʊn əz ɪf ənʃʊɹ ɪɡzækli wʌt læn mɛnt, ðən ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ði ɪnkipɝ əɡɛn. "ju faɪn ðəɾ oʊld wʊmən, hɪɹ! maɪ hɛɾ ɪz splɪɾɪŋ." wɪð ə læst ɡlæns ət læn, hi hɑbəld əweɪ, klaɪmɪŋ bæk ʌp ðə stɛɹz wʌn əɾ ə taɪm, fɑloʊd baɪ mɝmɝz ʌv ædmɝeɪʃən fəɹ ə hʌntɝ ə ðə hɔɹn u hæd sleɪn ilmɛn.

The bandaged man frowned as if unsure exactly what Lan meant, then rounded on the innkeeper again. "You find that old woman, hear! My head is splitting." With a last glance at Lan, he hobbled away, climbing back up the stairs one at a time, followed by murmurs of admiration for a Hunter of the Horn who had slain Aielmen.

"ðɪs ɪz ən ɪvɛnfəl taʊn." lɔɪəlz dip vɔɪs dʒɹu ɛvɹi aɪ tə hɪm. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə ʃɪp kæptənz, hu sim tə bi dɪskʌsɪŋ ɹoʊp, əz nɪɹ əz pɛɹɪn kəd meɪk aʊt. "ɛvɹiwɛɹ aɪ ɡoʊ, jə hjumənz ɑɹ duɪŋ θɪŋz, hɝiɪŋ ən skɝiɪŋ, hævɪŋ θɪŋz hæpən tə ju. haʊ kən jə stæn soʊ mʌtʃ ɪksaɪtmənt?"

"This is an eventful town." Loial's deep voice drew every eye to him. Except for the ship captains, who seemed to be discussing rope, as near as Perrin could make out. "Everywhere I go, you humans are doing things, hurrying and scurrying, having things happen to you. How can you stand so much excitement?"

"ɑ, fɹɛn oʊɡiɝ," fɝlən sɛd, " 'tiz ðə weɪ ʌv əs hjumənz tə wɑn ɪksaɪtmənt. haʊ mʌtʃ aɪ ɹəɡɹɛt nɑt biɪŋ eɪbəl tə mɑɹtʃ tə ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz. waɪ, lemi tɛl jə - "

"Ah, friend Ogier," Furlan said, " 'tis the way of us humans to want excitement. How much I regret not being able to march to the Shining Walls. Why, let me tell you - "

"aʊɝ ɹumz." mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd nɑt ɹeɪz əɹ vɔɪs, bʌɾ əɹ wɝdz kʌt ði ɪnkipɝ ʃɔɹt laɪk ə ʃɑɹp naɪf. "ænʒɹə dɪɾ ɝeɪnʒ ɹumz, dɪɾ i nɑt?"

"Our rooms." Moiraine did not raise her voice, but her words cut the innkeeper short like a sharp knife. "Andra did arrange rooms, did he not?"

"ɑ, leɪɾi, fɝɡɪv mi. jɛs, mæstɝ ænʒɹə dɪɾ ɪndid haɪɝ ɹumz. fɝɡɪv mi, pliz. 'tiz ɔl ði ɪksaɪtmənt, meɪks maɪ hɛɾ ɛmpti ɪtsɛlf. pliz fɝɡɪv mi, leɪɾi. ðɪs weɪ, ɪf jə pliz. ɪf jəl pliz tə fɑloʊ mi." boʊɪŋ ən skɹeɪpɪŋ, əpɑlədʒaɪzɪŋ ən bæbəlɪŋ wɪθaʊt pɔz, fɝlən lɛɾ əm ʌp ðə stɛɹz.

"Ah, Lady, forgive me. Yes, Master Andra did indeed hire rooms. Forgive me, please. 'Tis all the excitement, makes my head empty itself. Please forgive me, Lady. This way, if you please. If you'll please to follow me." Bowing and scraping, apologizing and babbling without pause, Furlan led them up the stairs.

ət ðə tɑp, pɛɹɪn pɔz tə lʊk bæk. hi hɝd ðə mɝmɝz ʌv "leɪɾi" ən "oʊɡiɝ" daʊn ðɛɹ, kəd fil ɔl ðoʊz aɪz, bʌɾ ɪt sim tə hɪm ðəɾ i fɛlt wʌn pɛɹ ʌv aɪz ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ, sʌmwʌn stɛɹɪŋ nɑɾ ət mɔɪɹeɪn ən lɔɪəl, bʌɾ ət hɪm.

At the top, Perrin paused to look back. He heard the murmurs of "Lady" and "Ogier" down there, could feel all those eyes, but it seemed to him that he felt one pair of eyes in particular, someone staring not at Moiraine and Loial, but at him.

hi pɪkt əɹ aʊɾ ɪmiɾiətli. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ʃi stʊɾ əpɑɹt fɹəm ði ʌðɝz, ən fəɹ ənʌðɝ ʃi wɑz ði oʊnli wʊmən ɪn ðə ɹum nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ət list ə lɪɾəl leɪs. hɝ dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ, ɔlmoʊs blæk, dʒɹɛs wɑz əz pleɪn əz ðə ʃɪp kæptənz' kloʊðz, wɪð waɪd slivz ən nɛɹoʊ skɝts, ən nɛvɝ ə fɹɪl əɹ stɪtʃ ə fænsi-wɝk. ðə dʒɹɛs wɑz dɪvaɪɾəd fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ, hi sɔ wən ʃi muvd, ən ʃi wɔɹ sɑf buts ðət pikt aʊɾ ʌndɝ ðə hɛm. ʃi wɑz jʌŋ - noʊ oʊldɝ ðən i wɑz, pɝhæps - ən tɔl fəɹ ə wʊmən, wɪð blæk hɛɹ tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz. ə noʊz ðət dʒʌs mɪs biɪŋ tu lɑɹdʒ ən tu boʊld, ə dʒɛnɝəs maʊθ, haɪ tʃikboʊnz, ən dɑɹk, slaɪtli tɪltəɾ aɪz. hi kəd nɑt kwaɪt dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz bjuɾəfəl əɹ nɑt.

He picked her out immediately. For one thing, she stood apart from the others, and for another she was the only woman in the room not wearing at least a little lace. Her dark gray, almost black, dress was as plain as the ship captains' clothes, with wide sleeves and narrow skirts, and never a frill or stitch of fancy-work. The dress was divided for riding, he saw when she moved, and she wore soft boots that peeked out under the hem. She was young - no older than he was, perhaps - and tall for a woman, with black hair to her shoulders. A nose that just missed being too large and too bold, a generous mouth, high cheekbones, and dark, slightly tilted eyes. He could not quite decide whether she was beautiful or not.

əz sun əz i lʊk daʊn, ʃi tɝn tə ædʒɹɛs wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən ən dɪd nɑt ɡlæns ət ðə stɛɹz əɡɛn, bʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ i hæd bɪn ɹaɪt. ʃi hæd bɪn stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm.

As soon as he looked down, she turned to address one of the serving women and did not glance at the stairs again, but he was sure he had been right. She had been staring at him.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾifɔɹ


CHAPTER 34

eɪ dɪfɹən dæns


A Different Dance

fɝlən bɝbəld ɑn əz i ʃoʊɾ əm tə ðɛɹ ɹumz, ðoʊ pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt ɹɪli lɪsən. hi wɑz tu bɪzi wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ðə blæk-hɛɹd ɡɝl nu wʌt jɛloʊ aɪz mɛnt. bɝn mi, ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət mi. ðən i hɝd ði ɪnkipɝ seɪ ðə wɝdz "pɹoʊkleɪmɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪn ɡildən," ən i θɔɾ ɪz ɪɹz wəd ɡoʊ tə ʃɑɹp pɔɪns laɪk lɔɪəlz.

Furlan burbled on as he showed them to their rooms, though Perrin did not really listen. He was too busy wondering if the black-haired girl knew what yellow eyes meant. Burn me, she was looking at me. Then he heard the innkeeper say the words "proclaiming the Dragon in Ghealdan," and he thought his ears would go to sharp points like Loial's.

mɔɪɹeɪn stɑp dɛɾ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ tə hɝ ɹum. "ðɛɹ ɪz ənʌðɝ fɔls dʒɹæɡən, ɪnkipɝ? ɪn ɡildən?" ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk stɪl hɪɾ əɹ feɪs, bʌt ʃi saʊndəd ʃeɪkən tə hɝ toʊz. ivən lɪsnɪŋ fəɹ ðə mænz ɹɪplaɪ, pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt hɛlp stɛɹɪŋ ət hɝ; hi smɛl sʌmθɪŋ kloʊs tə fɪɹ.

Moiraine stopped dead in the doorway to her room. "There is another false Dragon, innkeeper? In Ghealdan?" The hood of her cloak still hid her face, but she sounded shaken to her toes. Even listening for the man's reply, Perrin could not help staring at her; he smelled something close to fear.

"ɑ, leɪɾi, nɛvɝ jə fɪɹ. 'tiz ə hʌnʒɹəd liɡz tə ɡildən, ən nʌn wɪl tʃɹʌbəl jə hɪɹ, nɑt wɪð mæstɝ ænʒɹə əbaʊt, ən lɔɹɾ ɔɹbən ən lɔɹd ɡæn. waɪ - "

"Ah, Lady, never you fear. 'Tis a hundred leagues to Ghealdan, and none will trouble you here, not with Master Andra about, and Lord Orban and Lord Gann. Why - "

"ænsɝ hɝ!" læn sɛd hɑɹʃli. "ɪz ðəɹ ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən ɪn ɡildən?"

"Answer her!" Lan said harshly. "Is there a false Dragon in Ghealdan?"

"ɑ. ɑ, noʊ, mæstɝ ænʒɹə, nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli. aɪ sɛd ðɛɹz ə mæn pɹoʊkleɪmɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪn ɡildən, soʊ wi hɝɾ ə fju deɪz ɡɔn. pɹitʃɪŋ ɪz kʌmɪŋ, jə maɪt seɪ. tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðət fɛloʊ oʊvɝ ɪn tæɹɑbən wiv hɝɾ əbaʊt. ðoʊ səm də seɪ 'tiz ɑɹæd dumən, nɑt tæɹɑbən. ə lɔŋ weɪ fɹəm hɪɹ, ɪn ɛni keɪs. waɪ, ɛni ʌðɝ deɪ, aɪ ɪkspɛkt wid tɔk mɔɹ ə ðət ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, ɪksɛp meɪbi ðə waɪl teɪlz əbaʊt hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmi kʌm bæk - " lænz koʊld aɪz maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn naɪf bleɪdz fɹəm ðə weɪ fɝlən swɑloʊɾ ən skɹʌbd ɪz hænz fæstɝ. "aɪ oʊnli noʊ wʌɾ aɪ hɪɹ, mæstɝ ænʒɹə. 'tiz sɛd ðə fɛloʊ hæz ə stɛɹ kən pɪn jə wɛɹ jə stænd, ən i tɔks ɔl sɔɹts ə ɹʌbɪʃ əbaʊt ðə dʒɹæɡən kʌmɪŋ tə seɪv ʌs, ən wi ɔl əv tə fɑloʊ, ən ivən ðə bists wɪl faɪt fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛðɝ ðeɪv ɝɛstəɾ ɪm jɛɾ əɹ nɑt. 'tiz laɪkli; ðə ɡildænɪn wəd nɑt pʊɾ ʌp lɔŋ wɪð ðət kaɪndə tɔk."

"Ah. Ah, no, Master Andra, not precisely. I said there's a man proclaiming the Dragon in Ghealdan, so we heard a few days gone. Preaching his coming, you might say. Talking about that fellow over in Tarabon we've heard about. Though some do say 'tis Arad Doman, not Tarabon. A long way from here, in any case. Why, any other day, I expect we'd talk more of that than anything else, except maybe the wild tales about Hawkwing's army come back - " Lan's cold eyes might as well have been knife blades from the way Furlan swallowed and scrubbed his hands faster. "I only know what I hear, Master Andra. 'Tis said the fellow has a stare can pin you where you stand, and he talks all sorts of rubbish about the Dragon coming to save us, and we all have to follow, and even the beasts will fight for the Dragon. I don't know whether they've arrested him yet or not. 'Tis likely; the Ghealdanin would not put up long with that kind of talk."

mæsimə, pɛɹɪn θɔt wʌndɝɪŋli. ɪts blʌɾi mæsimə.

Masema, Perrin thought wonderingly. It's bloody Masema.

"ju ɑɹ ɹaɪt, ɪnkipɝ," læn sɛd. "ðɪs fɛloʊ ɪzən laɪkli tə tʃɹʌbəl əs hɪɹ. aɪ nu ə fɛloʊ wʌns u laɪk tə meɪk waɪl spitʃəz. jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ hɪm, leɪɾi æliz, doʊn ju? mæsimə?"

"You are right, innkeeper," Lan said. "This fellow isn't likely to trouble us here. I knew a fellow once who liked to make wild speeches. You remember him, Lady Alys, don't you? Masema?"

mɔɪɹeɪn ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. "mæsimə. jɛs. ʌv kɔɹs. aɪ hæd pʊɾ ɪm aʊɾ ə maɪ maɪnd." hɝ vɔɪs fɝmd. "wɛn nɛkst aɪ si mæsimə, hɪl wɪʃ sʌmwʌn hæd pild ɪz haɪd tə meɪk buts." ʃi slæm ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn əɹ soʊ hɑɹd ðət ðə kɹæʃ ɛkoʊd daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ.

Moiraine gave a start. "Masema. Yes. Of course. I had put him out of my mind." Her voice firmed. "When next I see Masema, he will wish someone had peeled his hide to make boots." She slammed the door behind her so hard that the crash echoed down the hallway.

"kip ə kwaɪət!" keɪm ə mʌfəld ʃaʊt fɹəm ðə fɑɹ ɛnd. "maɪ hɛɾ ɪz splɪɾɪŋ!"

"Keep a quiet!" came a muffled shout from the far end. "My head is splitting!"

"ɑ." fɝlən wɑʃt ɪz hænz ɪn wʌn dɝɛkʃən, ðən ɹʌbd əm ɪn ði ʌðɝ. "ɑ. fɝɡɪv mi, mæstɝ ænʒɹə, bʌt leɪɾi æliz ɪz ə fɪɹs-saʊndɪŋ wʊmən."

"Ah." Furlan washed his hands in one direction, then rubbed them in the other. "Ah. Forgive me, Master Andra, but Lady Alys is a fierce-sounding woman."

"oʊnli wɪð ðoʊz u dɪspliz hɝ," læn sɛd blænli. "hɝ baɪɾ ɪz fɑɹ wɝs ðən əɹ bɑɹk."

"Only with those who displease her," Lan said blandly. "Her bite is far worse than her bark."

"ɑ. ɑ. ɑ. jəɹ ɹumz ɑɹ ðɪs weɪ. ɑ, fɹɛn oʊɡiɝ, wən mæstɝ ænʒɹə toʊl mi jə wɝ kʌmɪŋ, aɪ hæɾ ən oʊld oʊɡiɝ bɛd bɹɔt fɹəm ði æɾɪk wɛɹ ɪts bɪn ɡæðɝɪŋ dʌs ðiz θɹi hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɹ mɔɹ. waɪ, 'tiz. . . ."

"Ah. Ah. Ah. Your rooms are this way. Ah, friend Ogier, when Master Andra told me you were coming, I had an old Ogier bed brought from the attic where it has been gathering dust these three hundred years or more. Why, 'tis. . . ."

pɛɹɪn lɛt ðə wɝdz wɑʃ oʊvɝ hɪm, hɪɹɪŋ əm noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə ɹɪvɝ ɹɑk hɪɹz ðə wɔɾɝ. ðə blæk-hɛɹd jʌŋ wʊmən wɝid hɪm. ən ðə keɪdʒd il.

Perrin let the words wash over him, hearing them no more than a river rock hears the water. The black-haired young woman worried him. And the caged Aiel.

wʌns ɪn ɪz oʊn ɹum - ə smɔl wʌn ɪn ðə bæk; læn hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ tə dɪsɑbjus ði ɪnkipɝ ə ðə noʊʃən ðət pɛɹɪn wɑz ə sɝvənt - hi muv məkænɪkli, stɪl ɹæpt ɪn θɔt. hi ənstʃɹʌŋ ɪz baʊ ən pɹɑpt ɪɾ ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ - kipɪŋ ɪt stʃɹʌŋ tu lɔŋ ɹuən baʊ ən stʃɹɪŋ əlaɪk - sɛt daʊn ɪz blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl ən sæɾəlbæɡz bɪsaɪd ðə wɑʃ-stæn ən θɹu hɪz kloʊk əkɹɔs ðɛm. hi hʌŋ ɪz bɛls wɪð kwɪvɝ ən æks fɹəm pɛɡz ɑn ðə wɔl, ən nɪɹli leɪ daʊn ɑn ðə bɛd bɪfɔɹ ə dʒɔ-kɹækɪŋ jɔn ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm haʊ deɪnʒɝəs ðət maɪt bi. ðə bɛd wɑz nɛɹoʊ, ən ðə mætʃɹəs əpɪɹd tə bi ɔl lʌmps; ɪt lʊk mɔɹ ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ ðən ɛni bɛɾ i kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ. hi sæɾ ɑn ðə θɹi-lɛɡəd stul, ɪnstɛd, ən θɔt. ɔlweɪz i laɪk tə θɪŋk θɪŋz θɹu.

Once in his own room - a small one in the back; Lan had done nothing to disabuse the innkeeper of the notion that Perrin was a servant - he moved mechanically, still wrapped in thought. He unstrung his bow and propped it in the corner - keeping it strung too long ruined bow and string alike - set down his blanketroll and saddlebags beside the wash-stand and threw his cloak across them. He hung his belts with quiver and axe from pegs on the wall, and nearly lay down on the bed before a jaw-cracking yawn reminded him how dangerous that might be. The bed was narrow, and the mattress appeared to be all lumps; it looked more inviting than any bed he could remember. He sat on the three-legged stool, instead, and thought. Always he liked to think things through.

æftɝ ə taɪm, lɔɪəl ɹæpt ɑn ðə dɔɹ ən pʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn. ði oʊɡiɝz ɪɹz pɹæktəkli kwɪvɝd wɪð ɪksaɪtmənt, ən ɪz ɡɹɪn vɛɹi nɪɹli splɪɾ ɪz bɹɔd feɪs ɪn tu. "pɛɹɪn, jəl nɑt bɪliv ɪt! maɪ bɛɾ ɪz sʌŋ wʊd! waɪ, ɪt mʌs bi wɛl oʊvɝ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz oʊld. noʊ tʃɹisɪŋʒɝ əz sʌŋ ə pis soʊ lɑɹdʒ ɪn ət lis ðət lɔŋ. aɪ maɪsɛlf wəd nɑt kɛɹ tə tʃɹaɪ ɪt, ən aɪ hæv ðə tælən mɔɹ stʃɹɔŋli ðən moʊst, naʊ. wɛl, tə bi tʃɹuθfəl, ðəɹ ɑɹ nɑt mɛni ʌv əs wɪð ðə tælən əɾ ɔl, ɛnimɔɹ. bʌɾ aɪm əmʌŋ ðə bɛst ə ðoʊz u kən sɪŋ wʊd."

After a time, Loial rapped on the door and put his head in. The Ogier's ears practically quivered with excitement, and his grin very nearly split his broad face in two. "Perrin, you will not believe it! My bed is sung wood! Why, it must be well over a thousand years old. No Treesinger has sung a piece so large in at least that long. I myself would not care to try it, and I have the talent more strongly than most, now. Well, to be truthful, there are not many of us with the talent at all, anymore. But I am among the best of those who can sing wood."

"ðæɾ ɪz vɛɹi ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. ən il ɪn ə keɪdʒ. ðəɾ ɪz wʌt mɪn sɛd. waɪ wɑz ðət ɡɝl stɛɹɪŋ ət mi?

"That is very interesting," Perrin said. An Aiel in a cage. That is what Min said. Why was that girl staring at me?

"aɪ θɔɾ ɪt wɑz." lɔɪəl saʊndəɾ ə lɪɾəl pʊɾ aʊt ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt ʃɛɹ ði oʊɡiɝz ɪksaɪtmənt, bʌɾ ɔl pɛɹɪn wɑntəd tə də wɑz θɪŋk. "sʌpɝ ɪz ɹɛɾi bɪloʊ, pɛɹɪn. ðeɪv pɹipɛɹd ðɛɹ faɪnəst ɪn keɪs ðə hʌntɝz wɑn ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt wi kən əv sʌm."

"I thought it was." Loial sounded a little put out that he did not share the Ogier's excitement, but all Perrin wanted to do was think. "Supper is ready below, Perrin. They have prepared their finest in case the Hunters want anything, but we can have some."

"ju ɡoʊ ɑn, lɔɪəl. aɪm nɑt hʌŋɡɹi." ðə smɛlz ə kʊkɪŋ mit floʊɾɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ðə kɪtʃən dɪd nɑɾ ɪntʃɹəs hɪm. hi hɑɹdli noʊɾəst lɔɪəl ɡoʊɪŋ.

"You go on, Loial. I'm not hungry." The smells of cooking meat floating up from the kitchen did not interest him. He hardly noticed Loial going.

hænz ɑn ɪz niz, jɔnɪŋ naʊ ən əɡɛn, hi tʃɹaɪd tə wɝk ɪɾ aʊt. ɪt sim laɪk wʌn ə ðoʊz pʌzəlz mæstɝ luhən meɪd, ðə mɛɾəl pisəz əpɪɹɪŋ tə bi lɪŋkt ɪnɛkstʃɹɪkəbli. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ə tʃɹɪk tə meɪk ði aɪɝn lups ən wɝlz kʌm əpɑɹt, ən ðəɹ hæd tə bi hɪɹ, tu.

Hands on his knees, yawning now and again, he tried to work it out. It seemed like one of those puzzles Master Luhhan made, the metal pieces appearing to be linked inextricably. But there was always a trick to make the iron loops and whirls come apart, and there had to be here, too.

ðə ɡɝl hæd bɪn lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. hɪz aɪz maɪɾ ɪkspleɪn ðæt, ɪksɛp ðət ði ɪnkipɝ hæɾ ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm, ən noʊ wʌn ɛls hæɾ ivən noʊɾəst. ðeɪ hæɾ ən oʊɡiɝ tə lʊk æt, ən hʌntɝz ə ðə hɔɹn ɪn ðə haʊs, ən ə leɪɾi vɪzəɾɪŋ, ən ən il keɪdʒd ɪn ðə skwɛɹ. nʌθɪŋ əz smɔl əz ðə kʌlɝ ʌv ə mænz aɪz kəd siz ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən; nʌθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ə sɝvən kəd kəmpit wɪð ðə ɹɛst. soʊ waɪ dɪd ʃi pɪk mi tə stɛɹ æt?

The girl had been looking at him. His eyes might explain that, except that the innkeeper had ignored them, and no one else had even noticed. They had an Ogier to look at, and Hunters of the Horn in the house, and a Lady visiting, and an Aiel caged in the square. Nothing as small as the color of a man's eyes could seize their attention; nothing about a servant could compete with the rest. So why did she pick me to stare at?

ən ði il ɪn ðə keɪdʒ. wʌt mɪn sɔ wɑz ɔlweɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. bʌt haʊ? wʌt wɑz i səpoʊz tə du? aɪ cʊɾə stɑp ðoʊz tʃɪlʒɹən θɹoʊɪŋ ɹɑks. aɪ ʃəd hæv. ɪt wɑz noʊ jus tɛlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ði ədʌls wəd sɝɾənli hæv toʊld ɪm tə ɡoʊ ɑn əbaʊɾ ɪz bɪznəs, ðəɾ i wɑz ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ ɪn ɹɛmən ən ði il wɑz nʌn ə hɪz kənsɝn. aɪ ʃəɾ əv tʃɹaɪd.

And the Aiel in the cage. What Min saw was always important. But how? What was he supposed to do? I could have stopped those children throwing rocks. I should have. It was no use telling himself the adults would certainly have told him to go on about his business, that he was a stranger in Remen and the Aiel was none of his concern. I should have tried.

noʊ ænsɝz keɪm tə hɪm, soʊ hi wɛn bæk tə ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ən peɪʃənli wɝk θɹu ɪt wʌns mɔɹ, ðən əɡɛn, ən əɡɛn. stɪl i faʊnd nʌθɪŋ ɪksɛpt ɹəɡɹɛt fəɹ wʌɾ i hæd nɑt dʌn.

No answers came to him, so he went back to the beginning and patiently worked through it once more, then again, and again. Still he found nothing except regret for what he had not done.

ɪt keɪm tə hɪm æftɝ ə taɪm ðət naɪt hæd faɪnəli fɔlən. ðə ɹum wɑz dɑɹk ɪksɛp fəɹ ə lɪɾəl munlaɪt θɹu ðə loʊn wɪndoʊ. hi θɔɾ əbaʊt ðə tæloʊ kændəl ən ðə tɪndɝbɑks i hæd sin ɑn ðə mæntəl oʊvɝ ðə nɛɹoʊ faɪɝpleɪs, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf laɪt fəɹ ɪz aɪz. aɪ hæv tə də sʌmθɪŋ, doʊn aɪ?

It came to him after a time that night had finally fallen. The room was dark except for a little moonlight through the lone window. He thought about the tallow candle and the tinderbox he had seen on the mantel over the narrow fireplace, but there was more than enough light for his eyes. I have to do something, don't I?

hi bʌkəld ɑn ɪz æks, ðən pɔzd. hi hæd dʌn ɪt wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ; wɛɹɪŋ ðə θɪŋ hæd bɪkʌm əz nætʃɹəl əz bɹiðɪŋ. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk ðæt. bʌɾ i lɛf ðə bɛlt ɝaʊn ɪz weɪst, ən wɛn aʊt.

He buckled on his axe, then paused. He had done it without thinking; wearing the thing had become as natural as breathing. He did not like that. But he left the belt around his waist, and went out.

laɪt fɹəm ðə stɛɹz meɪd ðə hɔlweɪ sim ɔlmoʊs bɹaɪɾ æftɝ ɪz ɹum. tɔk ən læftɝ dʒɹɪftəɾ ʌp fɹəm ðə kɑmən ɹum, ən kʊkɪŋ smɛlz fɹəm ðə kɪtʃən. hi stʃɹoʊd təwɔɹd ðə fɹʌn ə ði ɪn, tə mɔɪɹeɪnz ɹum, nɑkt wʌns, ən wɛn ɪn. ən stɑpt, hɪz feɪs bɝnɪŋ.

Light from the stairs made the hallway seem almost bright after his room. Talk and laughter drifted up from the common room, and cooking smells from the kitchen. He strode toward the front of the inn, to Moiraine's room, knocked once, and went in. And stopped, his face burning.

mɔɪɹeɪn pʊl ðə peɪl blu ɹoʊb ðət hʌŋ fɹəm əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf. "ju wɪʃ sʌmθɪŋ?" ʃi æskt kuli. ʃi hæɾ ə sɪlvɝ-bæk hɛɹbɹʌʃ ɪn wʌn hænd, ən əɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ, spɪlɪŋ daʊn əɹ nɛk ɪn dɑɹk weɪvz, ɡlɪsən əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn bɹʌʃɪŋ ɪt. hɝ ɹum wɑz fɑɹ faɪnɝ ðən hɪz, wɪð pɑlɪʃt wʊɾən pænəlɪŋ ɑn ðə wɔlz ən sɪlvɝ-tʃeɪs læmps ən ə wɔɹm faɪɝ ɑn ðə waɪd bɹɪk hɑɹθ. ði ɛɹ smɛld ə ɹoʊz-sɛntɪd soʊp.

Moiraine pulled the pale blue robe that hung from her shoulders around herself. "You wish something?" she asked coolly. She had a silver-backed hairbrush in one hand, and her dark hair, spilling down her neck in dark waves, glistened as if she had been brushing it. Her room was far finer than his, with polished wooden paneling on the walls and silver-chased lamps and a warm fire on the wide brick hearth. The air smelled of rose-scented soap.

"aɪ. . . . aɪ θɔt læn wɑz hɪɹ," hi mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ aʊt. "ju tu ɔlweɪz əv jəɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ, ən aɪ θɔt hid. . . . aɪ θɔt. . . ."

"I. . . . I thought Lan was here," he managed to get out. "You two always have your heads together, and I thought he'd. . . . I thought. . . ."

"wʌt dʒju wɑnt, pɛɹɪn?"

"What do you want, Perrin?"

hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "ɪz ðɪs ɹændz duɪŋ? aɪ noʊ læn fɑloʊɾ ɪm hɪɹ, ən ɪɾ ɔl simz ɑd - ðə hʌntɝz, ən il - bʌt dɪɾ i də ɪt?"

He took a deep breath. "Is this Rand's doing? I know Lan followed him here, and it all seems odd - the Hunters, and Aiel - but did he do it?"

"aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk soʊ. əl noʊ mɔɹ wən læn tɛlz mi wʌɾ i dɪskʌvɝz tənaɪt. wɪð lʌk, wʌɾ i faɪnz wɪl hɛlp wɪð ðə tʃɔɪs aɪ mʌs meɪk."

"I do not think so. I will know more when Lan tells me what he discovers tonight. With luck, what he finds will help with the choice I must make."

"ə tʃɔɪs?"

"A choice?"

"ɹænd cʊɾə kɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ ən bi ɑn ɪz weɪ tə tɛɹ kɹɔs-kʌntʃɹi. əɹ i cʊɾə teɪkən ʃɪp daʊnɹɪvɝ tə ɪljən, minɪŋ tə bɔɹɾ ənʌðɝ ðəɹ fəɹ tɛɹ. ðə dʒɝni ɪz liɡz lɔŋɡɝ ðət weɪ, bʌt deɪz fæstɝ."

"Rand could have crossed the river and be on his way to Tear cross-country. Or he could have taken ship downriver to Illian, meaning to board another there for Tear. The journey is leagues longer that way, but days faster."

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk wəɹ gɑnə kætʃ hɪm, mɔɪɹeɪn. aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ hiz duɪŋ ɪt, bʌɾ ivən əfʊt hiz steɪɪŋ əhɛɾ ʌv ʌs. ɪf læn ɪz ɹaɪt, hiz stɪl hæf ə deɪ əhɛd."

"I don't think we are going to catch him, Moiraine. I don't know how he's doing it, but even afoot he is staying ahead of us. If Lan is right, he is still half a day ahead."

"aɪ kəɾ ɔlmoʊst səspɛkt i hæd lɝn tə tʃɹævəl," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd wɪð ə smɔl fɹaʊn, "ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪf i hæd, hi wʊɾə ɡɔn stʃɹeɪt tə tɛɹ. noʊ, hiz ðə blʌɾ ə lɔŋ wɔkɝz ən stʃɹɔŋ ɹʌnɝz ɪn hɪm. bʌt wi meɪ teɪk ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛniweɪ. ɪf aɪ kænɑt kætʃ hɪm, əl bi ɪn tɛɹ kloʊs bɪhaɪn hɪm. əɹ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ hɪm."

"I could almost suspect he had learned to Travel," Moiraine said with a small frown, "except that if he had, he would have gone straight to Tear. No, he has the blood of long walkers and strong runners in him. But we may take the river anyway. If I cannot catch him, I will be in Tear close behind him. Or waiting for him."

pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ ɪz fiɾ ənizəli; ðəɹ wɑz koʊl pɹɑməs ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. "ju toʊl mi wʌns ðət jə kəd sɛns ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, wʌn u wɑz fɑɹ ɡɔn ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊ, ət list. læn, tu. hæv jə sɛnst ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðət hɪɹ?"

Perrin shifted his feet uneasily; there was cold promise in her voice. "You told me once that you could sense a Darkfriend, one who was far gone into the Shadow, at least. Lan, too. Have you sensed anything like that here?"

ʃi ɡeɪv ə laʊd snɪf ən tɝn bæk tə ə tɔl stændɪŋ mɪɹɝ wɪð faɪnli meɪd sɪlvɝ-wɝk sɛɾ ɪn ðə lɛɡz. hoʊldɪŋ əɹ ɹoʊb kloʊzd wɪð wʌn hænd, ʃi ɹæn ðə bɹʌʃ θɹu hɝ hɛɹ wɪð ði ʌðɝ. "vɛɹi fju hjumənz ɑɹ soʊ fɑɹ ɡɔn əz ðæt, pɛɹɪn, ivən əmʌŋ ðə wɝs dɑɹkfɹɛnz." ðə bɹʌʃ hɔltəɾ ɪn mɪdstʃɹoʊk. "waɪ dʒju æsk?"

She gave a loud sniff and turned back to a tall standing mirror with finely made silver-work set in the legs. Holding her robe closed with one hand, she ran the brush through her hair with the other. "Very few humans are so far gone as that, Perrin, even among the worst Darkfriends." The brush halted in midstroke. "Why do you ask?"

"ðɛɹ wɑz ə ɡɝl daʊn ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum stɛɹɪŋ ət mi. nɑɾ ət jə ən lɔɪəl, laɪk ɛvɹibɑɾi ɛls. ət mi."

"There was a girl down in the common room staring at me. Not at you and Loial, like everybody else. At me."

ðə bɹʌʃ ɹɪzumd moʊʃən, ən ə smaɪl bɹifli tʌtʃt mɔɪɹeɪnz lɪps. "ju səmtaɪmz fɝɡɛt, pɛɹɪn, ðət jə ɑɹ ə ɡʊd-lʊkɪŋ jʌŋ mæn. səm ɡɝlz ædmaɪɹ ə pɛɹ ə ʃoʊldɝz." hi ɡɹʌntɪɾ ən ʃʌfəld ɪz fit. "wɑz ðəɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, pɛɹɪn?"

The brush resumed motion, and a smile briefly touched Moiraine's lips. "You sometimes forget, Perrin, that you are a good-looking young man. Some girls admire a pair of shoulders." He grunted and shuffled his feet. "Was there something else, Perrin?"

"ʌ . . . noʊ." ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp wɪð mɪnz vjuɪŋ, nɑt bɪɑn tɛlɪŋ ɪm wʌɾ i ɔlɹɛɾi nu, ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ən i dɪd nɑt wɑnə tɛl əɹ wʌt mɪn hæd sin. əɹ ðət mɪn hæd sin ɛniθɪŋ, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ.

"Uh . . . no." She could not help with Min's viewing, not beyond telling him what he already knew, that it was important. And he did not want to tell her what Min had seen. Or that Min had seen anything, for that matter.

bæk aʊɾ ɪn ðə hɔl wɪð ðə dɔɹ kloʊzd, hi lin əɡɛns ðə wɔl fəɹ ə moʊmənt. laɪt, dʒʌst wɔkɪŋ ɪn ɑn əɹ laɪk ðæt, ən hɝ. . . . ʃi wɑz ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən. ən laɪkli oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi maɪ mʌðɝ, əɹ mɔɹ. hi θɔt mæt wəd pɹɑbli hæv æskt əɹ daʊn tə ðə kɑmən ɹum tə dæns. noʊ, hi wʊdnt. ivən mæt ɪzən ful ɪnʌf tə tʃɹaɪ tʃɑɹmɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd dæns. hi hæd dænst wɪð əɹ wʌns hɪmsɛlf. ən nɪɹli fɔlən oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn fit wɪð ɛvɹi ʌðɝ stɛp. stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ laɪk ə vɪlədʒ ɡɝl dʒʌs kəz jə sɔ. . . . ʃiz blʌɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ! juv ðəɾ il tə wɝi əbaʊt. hi ɡeɪv hɪmsɛlf ə ʃeɪk ən wɛn daʊnstɛɹz.

Back out in the hall with the door closed, he leaned against the wall for a moment. Light, just walking in on her like that, and her. . . . She was a pretty woman. And likely old enough to be my mother, or more. He thought Mat would probably have asked her down to the common room to dance. No, he wouldn't. Even Mat isn't fool enough to try charming an Aes Sedai. Moiraine did dance. He had danced with her once himself. And nearly fallen over his own feet with every other step. Stop thinking about her like a village girl just because you saw. . . . She's bloody Aes Sedai! You have that Aiel to worry about. He gave himself a shake and went downstairs.

ðə kɑmən ɹum wɑz fʊl əz ɪt kəd bi, wɪð ɛvɹi tʃɛɹ teɪkən, ən stulz ən bɛntʃɪz bɹɔɾ ɪn, ən ðoʊz u hæd noʊwɛɹ tə sɪt stændɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz. hi dɪd nɑt si ðə blæk-hɛɹd ɡɝl, ən noʊ wʌn ɛls lʊkt əɾ ɪm twaɪs əz i hɝidli kɹɔs ðə ɹum.

The common room was full as it could be, with every chair taken, and stools and benches brought in, and those who had nowhere to sit standing along the walls. He did not see the black-haired girl, and no one else looked at him twice as he hurriedly crossed the room.

ɔɹbən ɑkjəpaɪɾ ə teɪbəl tə hɪmsɛlf, hɪz bændədʒ lɛɡ pɹɑpt ʌp ɑn ə tʃɛɹ wɪð ə kʊʃən, wɪð ə sɑf slɪpɝ ɑn ðət fʊt, ə sɪlvɝ ɡɑbləɾ ɪn ɪz hænd, ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən kipɪŋ ɪt fɪld wɪð waɪn. "aɪ," hi wɑz seɪɪŋ tə ðə hoʊl ɹum, "wi nu ði il fəɹ fɪɹs faɪɾɝz, ɡæn ən aɪ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm tə hɛzəteɪt. aɪ dʒɹu maɪ sɔɹd, ən dʌɡ maɪ hilz ɪndə laɪənz ɹɪbz. . . ."

Orban occupied a table to himself, his bandaged leg propped up on a chair with a cushion, with a soft slipper on that foot, a silver goblet in his hand, the serving women keeping it filled with wine. "Aye," he was saying to the whole room, "we knew the Aiel for fierce fighters, Gann and I, but there was no time to hesitate. I drew my sword, and dug my heels into Lion's ribs. . . ."

pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt bɪfɔɹ i ɹilaɪz ðə mæn mɛn ɪz hɔɹs wɑz neɪm laɪən. wʊdn pʊɾ ɪt pæst ɪm tə seɪ hi wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə laɪən. hi fɛlt ə lɪɾəl əʃeɪmd; dʒʌs kəz i dɪd nɑt laɪk ðə mæn wɑz noʊ ɹizən tə səpoʊz ðə hʌntɝ wəd teɪk ɪz boʊstɪŋ ðət fɑɹ. hi hɝiɾ ɑn aʊtsaɪd wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ bæk.

Perrin gave a start before he realized the man meant his horse was named Lion. Wouldn't put it past him to say he was riding a lion. He felt a little ashamed; just because he did not like the man was no reason to suppose the Hunter would take his boasting that far. He hurried on outside without looking back.

ðə stʃɹiɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ɪn wɑz əz kɹaʊɾəd əz ɪnsaɪd, wɪð pipəl u kəd nɑt faɪn ə pleɪs ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum piɹɪŋ ɪn θɹu ðə wɪndoʊz, ən twaɪs əz mɛni hʌɾəlɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə dɔɹz tə lɪsən tə ɔɹbənz teɪl. noʊ wʌn ɡlænst ət pɛɹɪn twaɪs, ðoʊ hɪz pæsədʒ bɹɔt mʌɾɝd kəmpleɪns fɹəm ðoʊz dʒɑsəld ə lɪɾəl fɝðɝ fɹəm ðə dɔɹ.

The street in front of the inn was as crowded as inside, with people who could not find a place in the common room peering in through the windows, and twice as many huddling around the doors to listen to Orban's tale. No one glanced at Perrin twice, though his passage brought muttered complaints from those jostled a little further from the door.

ɛvɹiwʌn u wɑz aʊɾ ɪn ðə naɪt mʌst əv bɪn ət ði ɪn, fəɹ i sɔ noʊ wʌn əz i wɔk tə ðə skwɛɹ. səmtaɪmz ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ə pɝsən muvd əkɹɔs ə laɪɾəd wɪndoʊ, bʌt ðət wɑz ɔl. hi hæd ðə fil ə biɪŋ wɑtʃt, ðoʊ, ən lʊkt ɝaʊn ənizəli. nʌθɪŋ bʌt naɪt-kloʊk stʃɹits dɑɾəd wɪð ɡloʊɪŋ wɪndoʊz. ɝaʊn ðə skwɛɹ, moʊst ə ðə wɪndoʊz wɝ dɑɹk ɪksɛpt ə fju ɑn ʌpɝ flɔɹz.

Everyone who was out in the night must have been at the inn, for he saw no one as he walked to the square. Sometimes the shadow of a person moved across a lighted window, but that was all. He had the feel of being watched, though, and looked around uneasily. Nothing but night-cloaked streets dotted with glowing windows. Around the square, most of the windows were dark except a few on upper floors.

ðə ɡɪbət stʊɾ əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd, ðə mæn - ði il - stɪl ɪn ðə keɪdʒ, hæŋɪŋ haɪɝ ðən i kəd ɹitʃ. ði il sim tə bi əweɪk - ət list ɪz hɛd wɑz ʌp - bʌɾ i nɛvɝ lʊk daʊn ət pɛɹɪn. ðə stoʊnz ðə tʃɪlʒɹən hæd bɪn θɹoʊɪŋ wɝ skæɾɝd bɪniθ ðə keɪdʒ.

The gibbet stood as he remembered, the man - the Aiel - still in the cage, hanging higher than he could reach. The Aiel seemed to be awake - at least his head was up - but he never looked down at Perrin. The stones the children had been throwing were scattered beneath the cage.

ðə keɪdʒ hʌŋ fɹəm ə θɪk ɹoʊp taɪd tə ə ɹɪŋ ɑn wʌn ə ði ʌpɝ bɑɹz ən ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ə hɛvi pʊli ɑn ðə kɹɔspis daʊn tə ə pɛɹ ə stʌbz, weɪst-haɪ fɹəm ðə bɑɾəm ə ði əpɹaɪɾ ɑn iðɝ saɪd. ði ɛksɛs ɹoʊp leɪ ɪn ə kɛɹləs tæŋɡəl ə kɔɪlz ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə ɡɪbət.

The cage hung from a thick rope tied to a ring on one of the upper bars and running through a heavy pulley on the crosspiece down to a pair of stubs, waist-high from the bottom of the upright on either side. The excess rope lay in a careless tangle of coils at the foot of the gibbet.

pɛɹɪn lʊkt ɝaʊn əɡɛn, sɝtʃɪŋ ðə dɑɹk skwɛɹ. hi stɪl hæd ðə fil ə biɪŋ wɑtʃt, bʌɾ i stɪl sɔ nʌθɪŋ. hi lɪsənd, ən hɝd nʌθɪŋ. hi smɛl tʃɪmni smoʊk ən kʊkɪŋ fɹəm ðə haʊsəz, ən mæn-swɛɾ ən oʊl blʌd fɹəm ðə mæn ɪn ðə keɪdʒ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ fɪɹ sɛn fɹəm hɪm.

Perrin looked around again, searching the dark square. He still had the feel of being watched, but he still saw nothing. He listened, and heard nothing. He smelled chimney smoke and cooking from the houses, and man-sweat and old blood from the man in the cage. There was no fear scent from him.

hɪz weɪt, ən ðən ðɛɹz ðə keɪdʒ, hi θɔɾ əz i muv kloʊsɝ tə ðə ɡɪbət. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wən i hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə də ðɪs, əɹ ivən ɪf i ɹɪli hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd, bʌɾ i nu hi wɑz gɑnə də ɪt.

His weight, and then there's the cage, he thought as he moved closer to the gibbet. He did not know when he had decided to do this, or even if he really had decided, but he knew he was going to do it.

hʊkɪŋ ə lɛɡ ɝaʊn ðə hɛvi əpɹaɪt, hi hivd ɑn ðə ɹoʊp, hɔɪstɪŋ ðə keɪdʒ ɪnʌf tə ɡeɪn ə lɪɾəl slæk. ðə weɪ ðə ɹoʊp dʒɝk toʊld ɪm ðə mæn ɪn ðə keɪdʒ hæd faɪnəli muvd, bʌɾ i wɑz ɪn tu mʌtʃ ʌv ə hɝi tə stɑp ən tɛl ɪm wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ. ðə slæk lɛɾ ɪm ənwaɪn ðə ɹoʊp fɹəm ɝaʊn ðə stʌbz. stɪl bɹeɪsɪŋ hɪmsɛlf wɪð ɪz lɛɡ ɝaʊn ði əpɹaɪt, hi kwɪkli loʊɝd ðə keɪdʒ hæn oʊvɝ hæn tə ðə peɪvɪŋ blɑks.

Hooking a leg around the heavy upright, he heaved on the rope, hoisting the cage enough to gain a little slack. The way the rope jerked told him the man in the cage had finally moved, but he was in too much of a hurry to stop and tell him what he was doing. The slack let him unwind the rope from around the stubs. Still bracing himself with his leg around the upright, he quickly lowered the cage hand over hand to the paving blocks.

ði il wɑz lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm naʊ, stʌɾiɪŋ ɪm saɪlənli. pɛɹɪn sɛd nʌθɪŋ. wən i ɡɑɾ ə ɡʊd lʊk ət ðə keɪdʒ, hɪz maʊθ taɪɾənd. ɪf ə θɪŋ wɑz meɪd, ivən ə θɪŋ laɪk ðɪs, ɪt ʃəd bi meɪd wɛl. ði ɪntaɪɝ fɹʌn ə ðə keɪdʒ wɑz ə dɔɹ, ɑn ɹud hɪnʒɪz meɪd baɪ ə heɪsti hænd, hɛl baɪ ə ɡʊɾ aɪɝn lɑk ɑn ə tʃeɪn əz bædli ɹɔɾ əz ðə keɪdʒ. hi fʌmbəl ðə tʃeɪn ɝaʊn əntɪl i faʊn ðə wɝs lɪŋk, ðən dʒæm ðə θɪk spaɪk ɑn ɪz æks θɹu ɪt. ə ʃɑɹp twɪst ə hɪz ɹɪs fɔɹs ðə lɪŋk oʊpən. ɪn sɛkənz i sɛpɝeɪɾəd ðə tʃeɪn, ɹæɾəld ɪt fɹi, ən swʌŋ oʊpən ðə fɹʌn ə ðə keɪdʒ.

The Aiel was looking at him now, studying him silently. Perrin said nothing. When he got a good look at the cage, his mouth tightened. If a thing was made, even a thing like this, it should be made well. The entire front of the cage was a door, on rude hinges made by a hasty hand, held by a good iron lock on a chain as badly wrought as the cage. He fumbled the chain around until he found the worst link, then jammed the thick spike on his axe through it. A sharp twist of his wrist forced the link open. In seconds he separated the chain, rattled it free, and swung open the front of the cage.

ði il sæt ðɛɹ, niz jɛɾ ʌndɝ ɪz tʃɪn, stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm.

The Aiel sat there, knees yet under his chin, staring at him.

"wɛl?" pɛɹɪn wɪspɝd hɔɹsli. "aɪ oʊpən ɪt, bʌɾ aɪm nɑt gɑnə blʌɾi kæɹi ju." hi lʊk heɪstəli ɝaʊn ðə naɪt-dɑɹk skwɛɹ. stɪl nʌθɪŋ muvd, bʌɾ i stɪl hæd ðə fil ʌv aɪz wɑtʃɪŋ.

"Well?" Perrin whispered hoarsely. "I opened it, but I'm not going to bloody carry you." He looked hastily around the night-dark square. Still nothing moved, but he still had the feel of eyes watching.

"ju ɑɹ stʃɹɔŋ, wɛtləndɝ." ði il dɪd nɑt muv bɪɑnd wɝkɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. "ɪt tʊk θɹi mɛn tə hɔɪs mi ʌp ðɛɹ. ən naʊ jə bɹɪŋ mi daʊn. waɪ?"

"You are strong, wetlander." The Aiel did not move beyond working his shoulders. "It took three men to hoist me up there. And now you bring me down. Why?"

"aɪ doʊn laɪk siɪŋ pipəl ɪn keɪdʒɪz," pɛɹɪn wɪspɝd. hi wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ. ðə keɪdʒ wɑz oʊpən, ən ðoʊz aɪz wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ. bʌt ði il wɑz nɑt muvɪŋ. ɪf jə də ə θɪŋ, də ɪt ɹaɪt. "wɪl jə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ sʌmbɑɾi kʌmz?"

"I don't like seeing people in cages," Perrin whispered. He wanted to go. The cage was open, and those eyes were watching. But the Aiel was not moving. If you do a thing, do it right. "Will you get out of there before somebody comes?"

ði il ɡɹæsp ðə fɹʌntmoʊst oʊvɝhɛd bɑɹ ə ðə keɪdʒ, hiv hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ən tə hɪz fiɾ ɪn wʌn moʊʃən, ðən hæf hʌŋ ðɛɹ, səpɔɹɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf wɪð ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə bɑɹ. hi wʊɾə bɪn nɪɹli ə hɛd tɔlɝ ðən pɛɹɪn, stændɪŋ stʃɹeɪt. hi ɡlænst ət pɛɹɪnz aɪz - pɛɹɪn nu haʊ ðeɪ mʌst ʃaɪn, bɝnɪʃt ɡoʊld ɪn ðə munlaɪt - bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ðɛm. "aɪ hæv bɪn ɪn ðəɹ sɪns jɛstɝdeɪ, wɛtləndɝ." hi saʊndəd laɪk læn. nɑt ðət ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz əɹ æksɛns wɝ ɛniθɪŋ əlaɪk, bʌt ði il hæd ðət seɪm ənɹʌfəl kulnəs, ðət seɪm kɑm ʃʊɹnəs. "ɪt wɪl teɪk ə moʊmən fəɹ maɪ lɛɡz tə wɝk. aɪm ɡɔl, ʌv ði ɪmɹən sɛpt ə ðə ʃɝəɾ il, wɛtləndɝ. aɪm ʃeɪin tɑl, ə stoʊn dɔɡ. maɪ wɔɾɝ ɪz jʊɹz."

The Aiel grasped the frontmost overhead bar of the cage, heaved himself out and to his feet in one motion, then half hung there, supporting himself with his grip on the bar. He would have been nearly a head taller than Perrin, standing straight. He glanced at Perrin's eyes - Perrin knew how they must shine, burnished gold in the moonlight - but he did not mention them. "I have been in there since yesterday, wetlander." He sounded like Lan. Not that their voices or accents were anything alike, but the Aiel had that same unruffled coolness, that same calm sureness. "It will take a moment for my legs to work. I am Gaul, of the Imran sept of the Shaarad Aiel, wetlander. I am Shae'en M'taal, a Stone Dog. My water is yours."

"wɛl, aɪm pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. ʌv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ɪm ə blæksmɪθ." ðə mæn wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə keɪdʒ; hi kəd ɡoʊ naʊ. oʊnli, ɪf ɛniwʌn keɪm əlɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ɡɔl kəd wɔk, hi wəd bi ɹaɪt bæk ɪndə ðə keɪdʒ ənlɛs ðeɪ kɪl hɪm, ən iðɝ weɪ wəd weɪs pɛɹɪnz wɝk. "ɪf aɪ hæd θɔt, aɪɾ əv bɹɔɾ ə wɔɾɝbətəl, əɹ ə skɪn. waɪ dʒju kɔl mi 'wɛtləndɝ'?"

"Well, I am Perrin Aybara. Of the Two Rivers. I'm a blacksmith." The man was out of the cage; he could go now. Only, if anyone came along before Gaul could walk, he would be right back into the cage unless they killed him, and either way would waste Perrin's work. "If I had thought, I'd have brought a waterbottle, or a skin. Why do you call me 'wetlander'?"

ɡɔl dʒɛstʃɝd təwɔɹd ðə ɹɪvɝ; ivən pɛɹɪnz aɪz kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ ɪn ðə munlaɪt, bʌɾ i θɔt ði il lʊkt ənizi fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. "θɹi deɪz əɡoʊ, aɪ wɑtʃt ə ɡɝl spɔɹɾɪŋ ɪn ə hjudʒ pul ʌv wɔɾɝ. ɪt mʌst əv bɪn twɛnti peɪsɪz əkɹɔs. ʃi . . . pʊl hɝsɛlf aʊɾ ɪndə ɪt." hi meɪɾ ən ɑkwɝd swɪmɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝ wɪð wʌn hænd. "ə bɹeɪv ɡɝl. kɹɔsɪŋ ðiz . . . ɹɪvɝz . . . hæz nɪɹli ənmæn mi. aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt ðəɹ kəd bi sətʃ ə θɪŋ əz tu mʌtʃ wɔɾɝ, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt ðəɹ wɑz soʊ mʌtʃ wɔɾɝ ɪn ðə wɝld əz jə wɛtləndɝz hæv."

Gaul gestured toward the river; even Perrin's eyes could not be sure in the moonlight, but he thought the Aiel looked uneasy for the first time. "Three days ago, I watched a girl sporting in a huge pool of water. It must have been twenty paces across. She . . . pulled herself out into it." He made an awkward swimming gesture with one hand. "A brave girl. Crossing these . . . rivers . . . has nearly unmanned me. I never thought there could be such a thing as too much water, but I never thought there was so much water in the world as you wetlanders have."

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi nu ði il weɪs hɛld lɪɾəl wɔɾɝ - ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju θɪŋz i nu əbaʊt ðə weɪst əɹ ði il - bʌɾ i hæd nɑt θɔɾ ɪt kəd bi skɛɹs ɪnʌf tə kɑz ðɪs ɹiækʃən. "jɔɹ ə lɔŋ weɪ fɹəm hoʊm, ɡɔl. waɪ ɑɹ jə hɪɹ?"

Perrin shook his head. He knew the Aiel Waste held little water - it was one of the few things he knew about the Waste or the Aiel - but he had not thought it could be scarce enough to cause this reaction. "You're a long way from home, Gaul. Why are you here?"

"wi sɝtʃ," ɡɔl sɛd sloʊli. "wi lʊk fəɹ i hu kʌmz wɪð ðə dɔn."

"We search," Gaul said slowly. "We look for He Who Comes With the Dawn."

pɛɹɪn hæd hɝd ðət neɪm bɪfɔɹ, ʌndɝ sɝkəmstænsəz ðət meɪɾ ɪm ʃʊɹ u ɪt mɛnt. laɪt, ɪɾ ɔlweɪz kʌmz bæk tə ɹænd. aɪm taɪd tə hɪm laɪk ə min hɔɹs fəɹ ʃuɪŋ. "ju ɑɹ lʊkɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ dɝɛkʃən, ɡɔl. aɪm lʊkɪŋ fəɹ hɪm, tu, ən hiz ɑn ɪz weɪ tə tɛɹ."

Perrin had heard that name before, under circumstances that made him sure who it meant. Light, it always comes back to Rand. I am tied to him like a mean horse for shoeing. "You are looking in the wrong direction, Gaul. I'm looking for him, too, and he is on his way to Tear."

"tɛɹ?" ði il saʊndəd sɝpɹaɪzd. "waɪ . . . ? bʌɾ ɪt mʌs bi. pɹɑfəsi sɛz wən ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ fɔlz, wɪl liv ðə θɹi-foʊld læn ət læst." ðət wɑz ði il neɪm fəɹ ðə weɪst. "ɪt sɛz wɪl bi tʃeɪnʒd, ən faɪn əɡɛn wʌt wɑz aʊɝz, ən wɑz lɔst."

"Tear?" The Aiel sounded surprised. "Why . . . ? But it must be. Prophecy says when the Stone of Tear falls, we will leave the Three-fold Land at last." That was the Aiel name for the Waste. "It says we will be changed, and find again what was ours, and was lost."

"ðæt meɪ bi. aɪ doʊnt noʊ jəɹ pɹɑfəsiz, ɡɔl. ɑɹ jə əbaʊt ɹɛɾi tə liv? sʌmbɑɾi kəd kʌm ɛni mɪnət."

"That may be. I don't know your prophecies, Gaul. Are you about ready to leave? Somebody could come any minute."

"ɪɾ ɪz tu leɪt tə ɹʌn," ɡɔl sɛd, ən ə dip vɔɪs ʃaʊɾəd, "ðə sævədʒ ɪz luz!" tɛn əɹ ə dʌzən waɪt-kloʊk mɛn keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə skwɛɹ, dʒɹɔɪŋ sɔɹdz, ðɛɹ kɑnɪkəl hɛlməts ʃaɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə munlaɪt. tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

"It is too late to run," Gaul said, and a deep voice shouted, "The savage is lose!" Ten or a dozen white-cloaked men came running across the square, drawing swords, their conical helmets shining in the moonlight. Children of the Light.

əz ɪf i hæɾ ɔl ðə taɪm ɪn ðə wɝld, ɡɔl kɑmli lɪftəɾ ə dɑɹk klɔθ fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən ɹæpt ɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd, fɪnɪʃɪŋ wɪð ə θɪk blæk veɪl ðət hɪɾ ɪz feɪs ɪksɛp fəɹ ɪz aɪz. "du jə laɪk tə dæns, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə?" hi æskt. wɪð ðæt, hi dɑɹɾɪd əweɪ fɹəm ðə keɪdʒ. stʃɹeɪɾ ət ði ɔnkʌmɪŋ waɪtkloʊks.

As if he had all the time in the world, Gaul calmly lifted a dark cloth from his shoulders and wrapped it around his head, finishing with a thick black veil that hid his face except for his eyes. "Do you like to dance, Perrin Aybara?" he asked. With that, he darted away from the cage. Straight at the oncoming Whitecloaks.

fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðeɪ wɝ kɑt baɪ sɝpɹaɪz, bʌɾ ən ɪnstənt wɑz əpɛɹənli ɔl ði il niɾəd. hi kɪk ðə sɔɹɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹɪp ə ðə fɝs tə ɹitʃ hɪm, ðən ɪz stɪfən hæn stʃɹʌk laɪk ə dæɡɝ ət ðə waɪtkloʊks θɹoʊt, ən i slɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə soʊlʒɝ əz i fɛl. ðə nɛks mænz ɑɹm meɪɾ ə laʊd snæp əz ɡɔl bɹoʊk ɪt. hi pʊʃt ðət mæn ʌndɝ ðə fiɾ ʌv ə θɝd, ən kɪkt ə fɔɹθ ɪn ðə feɪs. ɪt wɑz laɪk ə dæns, fɹəm wʌn tə ðə nɛkst wɪθaʊt stɑpɪŋ əɹ sloʊɪŋ, ðoʊ ðə tʃɹɪp fɛloʊ wɑz klaɪmɪŋ bæk tə hɪz fit, ən ðə wʌn wɪð ðə bɹoʊkən ɑɹm hæd ʃɪftəɾ ɪz sɔɹd. ɡɔl dænst ɑn ɪn ðə mɪdst ə ðɛm.

For an instant they were caught by surprise, but an instant was apparently all the Aiel needed. He kicked the sword out of the grip of the first to reach him, then his stiffened hand struck like a dagger at the Whitecloak's throat, and he slid around the soldier as he fell. The next man's arm made a loud snap as Gaul broke it. He pushed that man under the feet of a third, and kicked a fourth in the face. It was like a dance, from one to the next without stopping or slowing, though the tripped fellow was climbing back to his feet, and the one with the broken arm had shifted his sword. Gaul danced on in the midst of them.

pɛɹɪn hæɾ oʊnli ən əmeɪz moʊmən hɪmsɛlf, fəɹ nɑɾ ɔl ðə waɪtkloʊks hæd pʊt ðɛɹ ətɛnʃənz ɑn ði il. bɛɹli ɪn taɪm, hi ɡɹɪp ði æks hæft wɪð boʊθ hænz tə blɑk ə sɔɹd θɹʌst, swʌŋ . . . ən wɑntəd tə kɹaɪ aʊɾ əz ðə hæf-mun bleɪd tɔɹ ðə mænz θɹoʊt. bʌɾ i hæd noʊ taɪm fəɹ kɹaɪɪŋ aʊt, nʌn fəɹ ɹɪɡɹɛts; mɔɹ waɪtkloʊks fɑloʊd bɪfɔɹ ðə fɝs fɛl. hi heɪɾəd ðə ɡeɪpɪŋ wunz ði æks meɪd, heɪɾəd ðə weɪ ɪt tʃɑp θɹu meɪl tə ɹɛn flɛʃ bɪniθ, splɪt hɛlməɾ ən skʌl wɪð ɔlmoʊst ikwəl iz. hi heɪɾəd ɪɾ ɔl. bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt wɑnə daɪ.

Perrin had only an amazed moment himself, for not all the Whitecloaks had put their attentions on the Aiel. Barely in time, he gripped the axe haft with both hands to block a sword thrust, swung . . . and wanted to cry out as the half-moon blade tore the man's throat. But he had no time for crying out, none for regrets; more Whitecloaks followed before the first fell. He hated the gaping wounds the axe made, hated the way it chopped through mail to rend flesh beneath, split helmet and skull with almost equal ease. He hated it all. But he did not want to die.

taɪm sim tə kəmpɹɛs ən stʃɹɛtʃ aʊt, boʊθ ət wʌns. hɪz bɑɾi fɛlt əz ɪf i fɔt fəɹ aʊɝz, ən bɹɛθ ɹæspt ɹɔ ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt. mɛn sim tə muv əz ðoʊ floʊɾɪŋ θɹu dʒɛli. ðeɪ sim tə lip ɪn ən ɪnstən fɹəm wɛɹ ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd tə wɛɹ ðeɪ fɛl. swɛt ɹoʊl daʊn ɪz feɪs, jɛɾ i fɛlt əz koʊld əz kwɛntʃɪŋ wɔɾɝ. hi fɔt fəɹ ɪz laɪf, ən i kəd nɑɾ əv sɛd wɛðɝ ɪt læstəd sɛkənz əɹ ɔl naɪt.

Time seemed to compress and stretch out, both at once. His body felt as if he fought for hours, and breath rasped raw in his throat. Men seemed to move as though floating through jelly. They seemed to leap in an instant from where they started to where they fell. Sweat rolled down his face, yet he felt as cold as quenching water. He fought for his life, and he could not have said whether it lasted seconds or all night.

wən i faɪnəli stʊd, pæntɪŋ ən nɪɹli stʌnd, lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə dʌzən waɪt-kloʊk mɛn laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ blɑks ə ðə skwɛɹ, ðə mun əpɪɹd nɑt tə hæv muvd əɾ ɔl. səm ə ðə mɛn ɡɹoʊnd; ʌðɝz leɪ saɪlən ən stɪl. ɡɔl stʊɾ əmʌŋ ðɛm, stɪl veɪld, stɪl ɛmpti-hændəd. moʊst ə ðə mɛn daʊn wɝ ɪz wɝk. pɛɹɪn wɪʃt ðeɪ ɔl wɝ, ən fɛlt əʃeɪmd. ðə smɛl ə blʌɾ ən dɛθ wɑz ʃɑɹp ən bɪɾɝ.

When he finally stood, panting and nearly stunned, looking at a dozen white-cloaked men lying on the paving blocks of the square, the moon appeared not to have moved at all. Some of the men groaned; others lay silent and still. Gaul stood among them, still veiled, still empty-handed. Most of the men down were his work. Perrin wished they all were, and felt ashamed. The smell of blood and death was sharp and bitter.

"ju də nɑt dæns ðə spɪɹz bædli, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə."

"You do not dance the spears badly, Perrin Aybara."

hɛd spɪnɪŋ, pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd, "aɪ doʊn si haʊ twɛlv mɛn fɔt twɛnti ʌv jə ən wʌn, ivən ɪf tu ʌv əm ɑɹ hʌntɝz."

Head spinning, Perrin muttered, "I don't see how twelve men fought twenty of you and won, even if two of them are Hunters."

"ɪz ðət wʌt ðeɪ seɪ?" ɡɔl læf sɔfli. "sɑɹin ən aɪ wɝ kɛɹləs, biɪŋ soʊ lɔŋ ɪn ðiz sɑf lænz, ən ðə wɪnd wɑz fɹəm ðə ɹɔŋ dɝɛkʃən, soʊ wi smɛl nʌθɪŋ. wi wɔkt ɪndə ðɛm bɪfɔɹ wi nu ɪt. wɛl, sɑɹin ɪz dɛd, ən aɪ wɑz keɪdʒ laɪk ə ful, soʊ pɝhæps wi peɪɾ ɪnʌf. ɪts taɪm fəɹ ɹʌnɪŋ naʊ, wɛtləndɝ. tɛɹ; əl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt." ət læst i loʊɝd ðə blæk veɪl. "meɪ jə ɔlweɪz faɪnd wɔɾɝ ən ʃeɪd, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə." tɝnɪŋ, hi ɹæn ɪndə ðə naɪt.

"Is that what they say?" Gaul laughed softly. "Sarien and I were careless, being so long in these soft lands, and the wind was from the wrong direction, so we smelled nothing. We walked into them before we knew it. Well, Sarien is dead, and I was caged like a fool, so perhaps we paid enough. It is time for running now, wetlander. Tear; I will remember it." At last he lowered the black veil. "May you always find water and shade, Perrin Aybara." Turning, he ran into the night.

pɛɹɪn stɑɹɾəd tə ɹʌn, tu, ðən ɹilaɪzd i hæɾ ə blʌɾi æks ɪn ɪz hænz. heɪstəli hi waɪp ðə kɝv bleɪɾ ɑn ə dɛd mænz kloʊk. hiz dɛd, bɝn mi, ən ðɛɹz blʌɾ ɑn ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf pʊt ðə hæf bæk θɹu ðə lup ɑn ɪz bɛl bɪfɔɹ i bɹoʊk ɪndə ə tʃɹɑt.

Perrin started to run, too, then realized he had a bloody axe in his hands. Hastily he wiped the curved blade on a dead man's cloak. He's dead, burn me, and there's blood on it already. He made himself put the haft back through the loop on his belt before he broke into a trot.

əɾ ɪz sɛkən stɛp i sɔ hɝ, ə slɪm ʃeɪp ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə skwɛɹ, ɪn dɑɹk, nɛɹoʊ skɝts. ʃi tɝn tə ɹʌn; hi kəd si ðeɪ wɝ dɪvaɪɾəd fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ. ʃi dɑɹɾɪd bæk ɪndə ðə stʃɹiɾ ən vænɪʃt.

At his second step he saw her, a slim shape at the edge of the square, in dark, narrow skirts. She turned to run; he could see they were divided for riding. She darted back into the street and vanished.

læn mɛɾ ɪm bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ʃi hæd bɪn stændɪŋ. ðə wɔɹɾɝ tʊk ɪn ðə keɪdʒ sɪɾɪŋ ɛmpti bɪniθ ðə ɡɪbət, ðə ʃæɾoʊd waɪt maʊnz ðət kɑt ðə munlaɪt, ən i tɔst ɪz hɛɾ əz ɪf i wɝ əbaʊt tə ɪɹʌpt. ɪn ə vɔɪs əz taɪɾ ən hɑɹɾ əz ə nu wil ɹɪm, hi sɛd, "ɪz ðɪs jəɹ wɝk, blæksmɪθ? ðə laɪt bɝn mi! ɪz ðəɹ ɛniwʌn u kən kənɛkt ɪt tə ju?"

Lan met him before he reached the place where she had been standing. The Warder took in the cage sitting empty beneath the gibbet, the shadowed white mounds that caught the moonlight, and he tossed his head as if he were about to erupt. In a voice as tight and hard as a new wheel rim, he said, "Is this your work, blacksmith? The Light burn me! Is there anyone who can connect it to you?"

"ə ɡɝl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ θɪŋk ʃi sɔ. aɪ doʊnt wɑn jə tə hɝt hɝ, læn! plɛnti ʌv ʌðɝz kəɾ əv sin, tu. ðəɹ ɑɹ laɪɾəd wɪndoʊz ɔl ɝaʊnd."

"A girl," Perrin said. "I think she saw. I don't want you to hurt her, Lan! Plenty of others could have seen, too. There are lighted windows all around."

ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɡɹæb pɛɹɪnz koʊt sliv ən ɡeɪv ɪm ə pʊʃ təwɔɹd ði ɪn. "aɪ sɔ ə ɡɝl ɹʌnɪŋ, bʌɾ aɪ θɔt. . . . noʊ mæɾɝ. jə dɪɡ ði oʊɡiɝ aʊɾ ən hɔl ɪm daʊn tə ðə steɪbəl. æftɝ ðɪs, wi nid tə ɡɛɾ əɹ hɔɹsəz tə ðə dɑks əz kwɪkli əz pɑsəbəl. ðə laɪɾ əloʊn noʊz ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ə ʃɪp seɪlɪŋ tənaɪt, əɹ wʌɾ əl əv tə peɪ tə haɪɝ wʌn ɪf ðəɹ ɪzənt. doʊn æsk kwɛstʃənz, blæksmɪθ! də ɪt! ɹʌn!"

The Warder grabbed Perrin's coat sleeve and gave him a push toward the inn. "I saw a girl running, but I thought. . . . No matter. You dig the Ogier out and haul him down to the stable. After this, we need to get our horses to the docks as quickly as possible. The Light alone knows if there is a ship sailing tonight, or what I'll have to pay to hire one if there isn't. Don't ask questions, blacksmith! Do it! Run!"


tʃæptɝ θɝɾifaɪv


CHAPTER 35

ðə fælkən


The Falcon

ðə wɔɹɾɝz lɔŋ lɛɡz aʊtdɪstəns pɛɹɪnz, ən baɪ ðə taɪm i pʊʃt θɹu ðə θɹɔŋ aʊtsaɪd ði ɪn dɔɹz, læn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ʌp ðə stɛɹz, nɑt simɪŋ ɪn ɛni pɝtɪkjəlɝ hɝi. pɛɹɪn meɪd hɪmsɛlf wɔk əz sloʊli. fɹəm ðə dɔɹweɪ bɪhaɪn ɪm keɪm ɡɹʌmbəlz əbaʊt pipəl pʊʃɪŋ əhɛɾ ʌv ʌðɝ pipəl.

The Warder's long legs outdistanced Perrin's, and by the time he pushed through the throng outside the inn doors, Lan was already striding up the stairs, not seeming in any particular hurry. Perrin made himself walk as slowly. From the doorway behind him came grumbles about people pushing ahead of other people.

"əɡɛn?" ɔɹbən wɑz seɪɪŋ, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz sɪlvɝ kʌp ʌp tə bi ɹifɪld. "aɪ, vɛɹi wɛl. ðeɪ leɪ ɪn æmbʊʃ kloʊs bɪsaɪd ðə ɹoʊd wi tʃɹævəld, ən ən æmbʊʃ aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk soʊ kloʊs tə ɹɛmən. skɹimɪŋ, ðeɪ ɹʌʃt əpɑn əs fɹəm ðə kɹaʊɾɪŋ bɹʌʃ. ɪn ə bɹɛθ ðeɪ wɝ ɪn əɹ mɪdst, ðɛɹ spɪɹz stæbɪŋ, sleɪɪŋ tu ʌv maɪ bɛs mɛn ən wʌn ʌv ɡænz ɪmiɾiətli. aɪ, aɪ nu il wən aɪ sɔ ðɛm, ænd. . . ."

"Again?" Orban was saying, holding his silver cup up to be refilled. "Aye, very well. They lay in ambush close beside the road we traveled, and an ambush I did not expect so close to Remen. Screaming, they rushed upon us from the crowding brush. In a breath they were in our midst, their spears stabbing, slaying two of my best men and one of Gann's immediately. Aye, I knew Aiel when I saw them, and. . . ."

pɛɹɪn hɝiɾ ʌp ðə stɛɹz. wɛl, ɔɹbən noʊz əm naʊ.

Perrin hurried up the stairs. Well, Orban knows them now.

vɔɪsəz keɪm fɹəm bɪhaɪn mɔɪɹeɪnz dɔɹ. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə hɪɹ wʌt ʃi hæd tə seɪ əbaʊt ðɪs. hi hɝid pæs tə stɪk ɪz hɛɾ ɪndə lɔɪəlz ɹum.

Voices came from behind Moiraine's door. He did not want to hear what she had to say about this. He hurried past to stick his head into Loial's room.

ði oʊɡiɝ bɛd wɑz ə loʊ, mæsɪv θɪŋ, twaɪs əz lɔŋ ən hæf əz waɪɾ əz ɛni hjumən bɛd pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. ɪt tʊk ʌp mʌtʃ ə ðə ɹum, ən ðət wɑz əz lɑɹdʒ ən əz faɪn əz mɔɪɹeɪnz. pɛɹɪn veɪɡli ɹɪmɛmbɝd lɔɪəl seɪɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt biɪŋ sʌŋ wʊd, ən əɾ ɛni ʌðɝ taɪm i maɪɾ əv stɑp tə ædmaɪɹ ðoʊz floʊɪŋ kɝvz ðət meɪɾ ɪt sim əz ɪf ðə bɛd hæd sʌmhaʊ ɡɹoʊn wɛɹ ɪt stʊd. oʊɡiɝ ɹɪli mʌst əv stɑpt ɪn ɹɛmən ət səm taɪm ɪn ðə pæst, fəɹ ði ɪnkipɝ hæɾ ɔlsoʊ faʊn ə wʊɾən ɑɹmtʃɛɹ ðət fɪt lɔɪəl, ən fɪld ɪt wɪð kʊʃənz. ði oʊɡiɝ wɑz kʌmfɝɾəbli sɪɾɪŋ ɑn əm ɪn ɪz ʃɝɾ ən bɹitʃɪz, aɪdli skɹætʃɪŋ ə bɛɹ æŋkəl wɪð ə toʊəneɪl əz i ɹoʊɾ ɪn ə lɑɹdʒ, klɔθ-baʊn bʊk ɑn ən ɑɹm ə ðə tʃɛɹ.

The Ogier bed was a low, massive thing, twice as long and half as wide as any human bed Perrin had ever seen. It took up much of the room, and that was as large and as fine as Moiraine's. Perrin vaguely remembered Loial saying something about it being sung wood, and at any other time he might have stopped to admire those flowing curves that made it seem as if the bed had somehow grown where it stood. Ogier really must have stopped in Remen at some time in the past, for the innkeeper had also found a wooden armchair that fit Loial, and filled it with cushions. The Ogier was comfortably sitting on them in his shirt and breeches, idly scratching a bare ankle with a toenail as he wrote in a large, cloth-bound book on an arm of the chair.

"wɝ livɪŋ!" pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"We're leaving!" Perrin said.

lɔɪəl ɡeɪv ə dʒʌmp, nɪɹli əpsɛɾɪŋ ɪz ɪŋk bɑɾəl ən ɔlmoʊs dʒɹɑpɪŋ ðə bʊk. "livɪŋ? wi oʊnli dʒʌst ɝaɪvd," hi ɹʌmbəld.

Loial gave a jump, nearly upsetting his ink bottle and almost dropping the book. "Leaving? We only just arrived," he rumbled.

"jɛs, livɪŋ. miɾ əs ət ðə steɪbəl əz kwɪkli əz jə kæn. ən doʊn lɛɾ ɛniwʌn si jə ɡoʊ. aɪ θɪŋk ðɛɹz ə bæk stɛɹ ðət ɹʌnz daʊn baɪ ðə kɪtʃən." ðə smɛl ə fuɾ əɾ ɪz ɛn ə ðə hɔl hæd bɪn tu stʃɹɔŋ fəɹ ðəɹ nɑt tə bi.

"Yes, leaving. Meet us at the stable as quickly as you can. And don't let anyone see you go. I think there's a back stair that runs down by the kitchen." The smell of food at his end of the hall had been too strong for there not to be.

ði oʊɡiɝ ɡeɪv wʌn ɹɪɡɹɛtfəl lʊk ət ðə bɛd, ðən stɑɹɾəd tʌɡɪŋ ɑn ɪz haɪ buts. "bʌt waɪ?"

The Ogier gave one regretful look at the bed, then started tugging on his high boots. "But why?"

"ðə waɪtkloʊks," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪl tɛl jə mɔɹ leɪɾɝ." hi dʌk bæk aʊt bɪfɔɹ lɔɪəl kəɾ æsk ɛni mɔɹ.

"The Whitecloaks," Perrin said. "I'll tell you more later." He ducked back out before Loial could ask any more.

hi hæd nɑɾ ənpækt. wʌns i hæd bɛltəɾ ɑn ɪz kwɪvɝ, slʌŋ ɪz kloʊk ɝaʊn hɪm, tɔs blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl ən sæɾəlbæɡz ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ən pɪkt ʌp ɪz baʊ, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn i hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn ðɛɹ. nɑɾ ə ɹɪŋkəl ɪn ðə foʊldəd blæŋkəts ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə bɛd, nɑɾ ə splæʃ ʌv wɔɾɝ ɪn ðə kɹæk beɪsən ɑn ðə wɑʃstænd. ivən ðə tæloʊ kændəl stɪl hæɾ ə fɹɛʃ wɪk, hi ɹilaɪzd. aɪ mʌst əv noʊn aɪ wəd nɑt bi steɪɪŋ. aɪ doʊn sim tə liv ɛni mɑɹk bɪhaɪn mi, ʌv leɪt.

He had not unpacked. Once he had belted on his quiver, slung his cloak around him, tossed blanketroll and saddlebags on his shoulder, and picked up his bow, there was no sign he had ever been there. Not a wrinkle in the folded blankets at the foot of the bed, not a splash of water in the cracked basin on the washstand. Even the tallow candle still had a fresh wick, he realized. I must have known I would not be staying. I don't seem to leave any mark behind me, of late.

əz hiz səspɛktəd, ə nɛɹoʊ stɛɹ ət ðə bæk lɛd daʊn tə ə hɔl ðət ɹæn aʊt pæs ðə kɪtʃən. hi pɪɹd kɔʃəsli ɪndə ðə kɪtʃən. ə spɪt dɔɡ tʃɹɑɾəd ɪn ɪz bɪɡ wɪkɝ wil, tɝnɪŋ ə lɔŋ spɪt ðət hɛld ə hɔntʃ ə læm, ə lɑɹdʒ pis ə bif, faɪv tʃɪkənz, ən ə ɡus. fɹeɪɡɹən stim ɹoʊz fɹəm ə sup kɑlʒɹən hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ə stɝɾi kɹeɪn oʊvɝ ə sɛkən hɑɹθ. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə kʊk tə bi sin, nɔɹ ɛni lɪvɪŋ soʊl ɪksɛp ðə dɔɡ. θæŋkfəl fəɹ ɔɹbənz laɪz, hi hɝiɾ ɑn ɪndə ðə naɪt.

As he has suspected, a narrow stair at the back led down to a hall that ran out past the kitchen. He peered cautiously into the kitchen. A spit dog trotted in his big wicker wheel, turning a long spit that held a haunch of lamb, a large piece of beef, five chickens, and a goose. Fragrant steam rose from a soup cauldron hanging from a sturdy crane over a second hearth. But there was not a cook to be seen, nor any living soul except the dog. Thankful for Orban's lies, he hurried on into the night.

ðə steɪbəl wɑz ə lɑɹdʒ stʃɹʌktʃɝ ə ðə seɪm stoʊn əz ði ɪn, ðoʊ oʊnli ðə stoʊn feɪsəz ɝaʊn ðə bɪɡ dɔɹz hæd bɪn pɑlɪʃt. ə sɪŋɡəl læntɝn hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ə stɔlpoʊst ɡeɪv ə dɪm laɪt. stɛpɝ ən ði ʌðɝ hɔɹsəz stʊɾ ɪn stɔlz nɪɹ ðə dɔɹz; lɔɪəlz bɪɡ maʊnt nɪɹli fɪl hɪz. ðə smɛl ə heɪ ən hɔɹsəz wɑz fəmɪljɝ ən kʌmfɝɾɪŋ. pɛɹɪn wɑz ðə fɝs tə ɝaɪv.

The stable was a large structure of the same stone as the inn, though only the stone faces around the big doors had been polished. A single lantern hanging from a stallpost gave a dim light. Stepper and the other horses stood in stalls near the doors; Loial's big mount nearly filled his. The smell of hay and horses was familiar and comforting. Perrin was the first to arrive.

ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn steɪbəlmən ɑn duɾi, ə nɛɹoʊ-feɪs fɛloʊ ɪn ə dɝɾi ʃɝt, wɪð læŋki ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ, hu dɪmændəd tə noʊ hu pɛɹɪn wɑz tə ɔɹɾɝ fɔɹ hɔɹsəz sæɾəld, ən u wɑz ɪz mæstɝ, ən wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ ɔl bʌndəld ʌp tə tʃɹævəl ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪt, ən dɪd mæstɝ fɝlən noʊ hi wɑz snikɪŋ ɔf laɪk ðɪs, ən wʌɾ i hæv hɪɾən ɪn ðoʊz sæɾəlbæɡz, ən wʌt wɑz ɹɔŋ wɪð ɪz aɪz, wɑz i sɪk?

There was only one stableman on duty, a narrow-faced fellow in a dirty shirt, with lanky gray hair, who demanded to know who Perrin was to order four horses saddled, and who was his master, and what he was doing all bundled up to travel in the middle of the night, and did Master Furlan know he was sneaking off like this, and what did he have hidden in those saddlebags, and what was wrong with his eyes, was he sick?

ə kɔɪn flɪp θɹu ði ɛɹ fɹəm bɪhaɪn pɛɹɪn, ɡlɪntɪŋ ɡoʊld ɪn ðə læntɝn laɪt. ðə steɪbəlmən snæɡd ɪt wɪð wʌn hæn ən bɪɾ ɪt.

A coin flipped through the air from behind Perrin, glinting gold in the lantern light. The stableman snagged it with one hand and bit it.

"sæɾəl ðɛm," læn sɛd. hɪz vɔɪs wɑz sɑft, əz koʊld aɪɝn ɪz sɑft, ən ðə steɪbəlmən bɑbd ə baʊ ən skɝid tə meɪk ðə hɔɹsəz ɹɛɾi.

"Saddle them," Lan said. His voice was soft, as cold iron is soft, and the stableman bobbed a bow and scurried to make the horses ready.

mɔɪɹeɪn ən lɔɪəl keɪm ɪndə ðə steɪbəl dʒʌst əz ðeɪ kəd teɪk ʌp ðɛɹ ɹeɪnz, ən ðən ðeɪ wɝ ɔl liɾɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz bɪhaɪn læn, ɔf daʊn ə stʃɹit ðət ɹæn bɪhaɪn ðə steɪbəl təwɔɹd ðə ɹɪvɝ. ðə sɑf klɑp ə ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ blɑks ətʃɹæktəɾ oʊnli ə slæt-ɹɪb dɔɡ ðət bɑɹkt wʌns ən ɹæn əweɪ əz ðeɪ wɛn baɪ.

Moiraine and Loial came into the stable just as they could take up their reins, and then they were all leading their horses behind Lan, off down a street that ran behind the stable toward the river. The soft clop of the horses' hooves on the paving blocks attracted only a slat-ribbed dog that barked once and ran away as they went by.

"ðɪs bɹɪŋz bæk mɛmɹiz, dʌzn ɪt, pɛɹɪn?" lɔɪəl sɛd, kwaɪətli fəɹ hɪm.

"This brings back memories, doesn't it, Perrin?" Loial said, quietly for him.

"kip jəɹ vɔɪs daʊn," pɛɹɪn wɪspɝd. "wʌt mɛmɹiz?"

"Keep your voice down," Perrin whispered. "What memories?"

"waɪ, ɪts laɪk oʊl taɪmz." ði oʊɡiɝ hæd mænədʒ tə mjuɾ ɪz vɔɪs; hi saʊndəd laɪk ə bʌmbəlɪbi oʊnli ðə saɪz ʌv ə dɔɡ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə hɔɹs. "snikɪŋ əweɪ ɪn ðə naɪt, wɪð ɛnəmiz bɪhaɪn ʌs, ən meɪbi ɛnəmiz əhɛd, ən deɪnʒɝ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ən ðə koʊl tæŋ ʌv ædvɛntʃɝ."

"Why, it is like old times." The Ogier had managed to mute his voice; he sounded like a bumblebee only the size of a dog instead of a horse. "Sneaking away in the night, with enemies behind us, and maybe enemies ahead, and danger in the air, and the cold tang of adventure."

pɛɹɪn fɹaʊn ət lɔɪəl oʊvɝ stɛpɝz sæɾəl. ɪt wɑz izi ɪnʌf; hɪz aɪz klɪɹd ðə sæɾəl, ən lɔɪəl stʊd hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz ən tʃɛst əbʌv ɪɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt? aɪ bɪliv jə ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ tə laɪk deɪnʒɝ! lɔɪəl, jə mʌs bi kɹeɪzi!"

Perrin frowned at Loial over Stepper's saddle. It was easy enough; his eyes cleared the saddle, and Loial stood head and shoulders and chest above it on the other side. "What are you talking about? I believe you are coming to like danger! Loial, you must be crazy!"

"aɪ æm oʊnli fɪksɪŋ ðə muɾ ɪn maɪ hɛd," lɔɪəl sɛd, saʊndɪŋ fɔɹməl. əɹ pɝhæps dɪfɛnsɪv. "fɔɹ maɪ bʊk. aɪ hæv tə pʊɾ ɪɾ ɔl ɪn. aɪ bɪliv aɪm kʌmɪŋ tə laɪk ɪt. ædvɛntʊɹɪŋ. ʌv kɔɹs, aɪ æm." hɪz ɪɹz ɡeɪv tu vaɪələn twɪtʃɪz. "aɪ hæv tə laɪk ɪɾ ɪf aɪ wɪʃ tə ɹaɪɾ ʌv ɪt."

"I am only fixing the mood in my head," Loial said, sounding formal. Or perhaps defensive. "For my book. I have to put it all in. I believe I am coming to like it. Adventuring. Of course, I am." His ears gave two violent twitches. "I have to like it if I wish to write of it."

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

Perrin shook his head.

ət ðə stoʊn wɑɹvz ðə bɑɹdʒ laɪk fɛɹiz leɪ snʌɡd fəɹ ðə naɪt, stɪl ən dɑɹk, əz dɪd moʊst ə ðə ʃɪps. læntɝn laɪts ən pipəl muvd ɝaʊn ɑn ðə dɑk əlɔŋsaɪɾ ə tu-mæstəd vɛsəl, ðoʊ, ən ɑn ðə dɛk əz wɛl. ðə meɪn smɛlz wɝ tɑɹ ən ɹoʊp, wɪð stʃɹɔŋ hɪns ə fɪʃ, ðoʊ sʌmθɪŋ bæk ɪn ðə nɪɹəst wɛɹhaʊs ɡeɪv ɔf ʃɑɹp, spaɪsi ɝoʊməz ðət ði ʌðɝz nɪɹli səbmɝdʒd.

At the stone wharves the barge like ferries lay snugged for the night, still and dark, as did most of the ships. Lantern lights and people moved around on the dock alongside a two-masted vessel, though, and on the deck as well. The main smells were tar and rope, with strong hints of fish, though something back in the nearest warehouse gave off sharp, spicy aromas that the others nearly submerged.

læn loʊkeɪɾəd ðə kæptən, ə ʃɔɹt, slaɪt mæn wɪð ən ɑd weɪ ʌv hoʊldɪŋ ɪz hɛd tɪltəd tə wʌn saɪd waɪl i lɪsənd. ðə bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ wɑz oʊvɝ sun ɪnʌf, ən bumz ən slɪŋ ɹɪɡd tə hɔɪs ðə hɔɹsəz əbɔɹd. pɛɹɪn kɛpt ə kloʊs aɪ ɑn ðə hɔɹsəz, tɔkɪŋ tə ðɛm; hɔɹsəz hæd lɪɾəl tɑlɝəns fəɹ ði ənjuʒəwəl, sətʃ əz biɪŋ lɪftəɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ, bʌɾ ivən ðə wɔɹɾɝz stæljən sim suð baɪ hɪz mɝmɝz.

Lan located the captain, a short, slight man with an odd way of holding his head tilted to one side while he listened. The bargaining was over soon enough, and booms and sling rigged to hoist the horses aboard. Perrin kept a close eye on the horses, talking to them; horses had little tolerance for the unusual, such as being lifted into the air, but even the Warder's stallion seemed soothed by his murmurs.

læn ɡeɪv ɡoʊl tə ðə kæptən, ən sɪlvɝ tə tu seɪlɝz u ɹæn bɛɹfʊt tə ə wɛɹhaʊs fəɹ sæks ʌv oʊts. mɔɹ kɹumɪn tɛðɝd ðə hɔɹsəz bɪtwin ðə mæsts ɪn ə sɔɹɾ ə smɔl pɛn meɪɾ ə ɹoʊp, ɔl ðə waɪl mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt ðə mɛs ðeɪ wəɾ əv tə klin. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɛniwʌn wɑz səpoʊz tə oʊvɝhɪɹ, bʌɾ ɪz ɪɹz kɑt ðə wɝdz. ðə mɛn wɝ dʒʌs nɑt juz tə hɔɹsəz.

Lan gave gold to the captain, and silver to two sailors who ran barefoot to a warehouse for sacks of oats. More crewmen tethered the horses between the masts in a sort of small pen made of rope, all the while muttering about the mess they would have to clean. Perrin did not think anyone was supposed to overhear, but his ears caught the words. The men were just not used to horses.

ɪn ʃɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ ðə snoʊ ɡus wɑz ɹɛɾi tə seɪl, oʊnli ə lɪɾəl əhɛɾ ʌv wʌt ðə kæptən - hɪz neɪm wɑz dʒeɪm ədʒɹə - hæɾ ɪntɛndəd. læn lɛd mɔɪɹeɪn bɪloʊ əz ðə laɪnz wɝ kæst ɔf, ən lɔɪəl fɑloʊd jɔnɪŋ. pɛɹɪn steɪɾ ət ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ nɪɹ ðə baʊ, ðoʊ ði oʊɡiɝz ɛvɹi jɔn hæd sʌmənd wʌn ə hɪz oʊn. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðə snoʊ ɡus kəɾ aʊtʃɹʌn wʊlvz daʊn ðə ɹɪvɝ, aʊtʃɹʌn dʒɹimz. mɛn bɪɡæn ɹɛɾiɪŋ ðə swips tə pʊʃ ðə vɛsəl əweɪ fɹəm ðə wɔɹf.

In short order the Snow Goose was ready to sail, only a little ahead of what the captain - his name was Jaim Adarra - had intended. Lan led Moiraine below as the lines were cast off, and Loial followed yawning. Perrin stayed at the railing near the bow, though the Ogier's every yawn had summoned one of his own. He wondered if the Snow Goose could outrun wolves down the river, outrun dreams. Men began readying the sweeps to push the vessel away from the wharf.

əz ðə læs laɪn wɑz tɔst əʃɔɹ ən siz baɪ ə dɑkmən, ə ɡɝl ɪn nɛɹoʊ, dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts bɝst aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊz bɪtwin tu wɛɹhaʊzɪz, ə bʌndəl ɪn əɹ ɑɹmz ən ə dɑɹk kloʊk stʃɹimɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ. ʃi lɛpt ɑntu ðə dɛk dʒʌst əz ðə mɛn ət ðə swips bɪɡæn pʊʃɪŋ ɔf.

As the last line was tossed ashore and seized by a dockman, a girl in narrow, divided skirts burst out of the shadows between two warehouses, a bundle in her arms and a dark cloak streaming behind her. She leaped onto the deck just as the men at the sweeps began pushing off.

ədʒɹə bʌsəl fɹəm ɪz pleɪs baɪ ðə tɪlɝ, bʌt ʃi kɑmli sɛt daʊn əɹ bʌndəl ən sɛd bɹɪskli, "aɪ wɪl teɪk pæsədʒ daʊnɹɪvɝ . . . oʊ . . . seɪ, əz fɑɹ əz hiz ɡoʊɪŋ." ʃi nɑɾəd təwɔɹd pɛɹɪn wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. "aɪv noʊ əbdʒɛkʃənz tə slipɪŋ ɑn dɛk. koʊld ən wɛt də nɑt bɑðɝ mi."

Adarra bustled from his place by the tiller, but she calmly set down her bundle and said briskly, "I will take passage downriver . . . oh . . . say, as far as he is going." She nodded toward Perrin without looking at him. "I've no objections to sleeping on deck. Cold and wet do not bother me."

ə fju mɪnəts ə bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ fɑloʊd. ʃi pæst oʊvɝ θɹi sɪlvɝ mɑɹks, fɹaʊn ət ðə kɑpɝz ʃi ɡɑt bæk, ðən stʌft əm ɪndə hɝ pɝs ən keɪm fɔɹwɝd tə stæn bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪn.

A few minutes of bargaining followed. She passed over three silver marks, frowned at the coppers she got back, then stuffed them into her purse and came forward to stand beside Perrin.

ʃi hæɾ ən ɝbəl sɛn tə hɝ, laɪɾ ən fɹɛʃ ən klin. ðoʊz dɑɹk, tɪltəɾ aɪz ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɪm oʊvɝ haɪ tʃikboʊnz, ðən tɝn tə lʊk bæk təwɔɹd ʃɔɹ. ʃi wɑz əbaʊɾ ɪz oʊn eɪdʒ, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd; hi kəd nɑt dɪsaɪɾ ɪf əɹ noʊz fɪɾ əɹ feɪs, əɹ dɑməneɪɾəd ɪt. jə ɑɹ ə ful, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. waɪ kɛɹ wʌt ʃi lʊks laɪk?

She had an herbal scent to her, light and fresh and clean. Those dark, tilted eyes regarded him over high cheekbones, then turned to look back toward shore. She was about his own age, he decided; he could not decide if her nose fit her face, or dominated it. You are a fool, Perrin Aybara. Why care what she looks like?

ðə ɡæp tə ðə wɔɹf wɑz ə ɡʊd twɛnti peɪsɪz, naʊ; ðə swips dʌɡ ɪn, kʌɾɪŋ waɪt fɝoʊz ɪn blæk wɔɾɝ. fəɹ ə moʊmən i kənsɪɾɝd tɔsɪŋ əɹ oʊvɝ ðə saɪd.

The gap to the wharf was a good twenty paces, now; the sweeps dug in, cutting white furrows in black water. For a moment he considered tossing her over the side.

"wɛl," ʃi sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt, "aɪ nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd maɪ tʃɹævəlz tə teɪk mi bæk tə ɪljən soʊ sun əz ðɪs." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz haɪ, ən ʃi hæɾ ə flæt weɪ ʌv spikɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ənplɛzənt. "ju ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ɪljən, ɑɹ jə nɑt?" hi taɪɾənd ɪz maʊθ. "doʊn sʌlk," ʃi sɛd. "ju lɛf kwaɪɾ ə mɛs bæk ðɛɹ, jə ən ðəɾ ilmən bɪtwin ju. ði ʌpɹɔɹ wɑz dʒʌs bɪɡɪnɪŋ wən aɪ lɛft."

"Well," she said after a moment, "I never expected my travels to take me back to Illian so soon as this." Her voice was high, and she had a flat way of speaking, but it was not unpleasant. "You are going to Illian, are you not?" He tightened his mouth. "Don't sulk," she said. "You left quite a mess back there, you and that Aielman between you. The uproar was just beginning when I left."

"ju dɪd nɑt tɛl ðɛm?" hi sɛɾ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz.

"You did not tell them?" he said in surprise.

"ðə taʊnzfoʊk θɪŋk ði ilmən tʃud θɹu ðə tʃeɪn, əɹ bɹoʊk ɪt wɪð ɪz bɛɹ hænz. ðeɪ hæd nɑt dɪsaɪɾɪd wɪtʃ wən aɪ lɛft." ʃi meɪɾ ə saʊn səspɪʃəsli laɪk ə ɡɪɡəl. "ɔɹbən wɑz kwaɪt laʊɾ ɪn ɪz dɪsɡʌs ðəɾ ɪz wunz wəd kip ɪm fɹəm hʌntɪŋ daʊn ði ilmən pɝsənəli."

"The townsfolk think the Aielman chewed through the chain, or broke it with his bare hands. They had not decided which when I left." She made a sound suspiciously like a giggle. "Orban was quite loud in his disgust that his wounds would keep him from hunting down the Aielman personally."

pɛɹɪn snɔɹɾɪd. "ɪf i ɛvɝ siz ən il əɡɛn, hɪl blʌɾi sɔɪl hɪmsɛlf." hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən mʌɾɝd, "sɑɹi."

Perrin snorted. "If he ever sees an Aiel again, he'll bloody soil himself." He cleared his throat and muttered, "Sorry."

"aɪ də nɑt noʊ əbaʊt ðæt," ʃi sɛd, əz ɪf ɪz ɹɪmɑɹk hæd bɪn nʌθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ. "aɪ sɔ hɪm ɪn dʒəhænə dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɪntɝ. hi fɔt fɔɹ mɛn təɡɛðɝ, kɪl tu ən meɪd ði ʌðɝ tu jild. ʌv kɔɹs, hi stɑɹɾəd ðə faɪt, soʊ ðət teɪks sʌmθɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɪt, bʌt ðeɪ nu wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ. hi dɪd nɑt pɪk ə faɪt wɪð mɛn u kəd nɑt dɪfɛn ðɛmsɛlvz. stɪl, hiz ə ful. hiz ðiz pəkjuljɝ aɪdiəz əbaʊt ðə ɡɹeɪt blækwʊd. wʌt səm kɔl ðə fɔɹəst ə ʃædoʊz. hæv jə ɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɪt?"

"I do not know about that," she said, as if his remark had been nothing out of the way. "I saw him in Jehannah during the winter. He fought four men together, killed two and made the other two yield. Of course, he started the fight, so that takes something away from it, but they knew what they were doing. He did not pick a fight with men who could not defend themselves. Still, he is a fool. He has these peculiar ideas about the Great Blackwood. What some call the Forest of Shadows. Have you ever heard of it?"

hi aɪɾ əɹ saɪdweɪz. ʃi spoʊk ə faɪɾɪŋ ən kɪlɪŋ əz kɑmli əz ənʌðɝ wʊmən maɪt spik ə beɪkɪŋ. hi hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɛni ɡɹeɪt blækwʊd, bʌt ðə fɔɹəst ə ʃædoʊz leɪ dʒʌst saʊθ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. "ɑɹ jə fɑloʊɪŋ mi? jə wɝ stɛɹɪŋ ət mi, bæk ət ði ɪn. waɪ? ən waɪ dɪdn jə tɛl əm wʌt jə sɔ?"

He eyed her sideways. She spoke of fighting and killing as calmly as another woman might speak of baking. He had never heard of any Great Blackwood, but the Forest of Shadows lay just south of the Two Rivers. "Are you following me? You were staring at me, back at the inn. Why? And why didn't you tell them what you saw?"

"æn oʊɡiɝ," ʃi sɛd, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ɹɪvɝ, "ɪz ɑbviəsli ən oʊɡiɝ, ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ nɑt mʌtʃ mɔɹ dɪfəkəl tə fɪɡjɝ aʊt. aɪ mænədʒd ə mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ lʊk ɪnsaɪd leɪɾi ælizəz hʊd ðən ɔɹbən dɪd, ən əɹ feɪs meɪks ðət stoʊn-feɪs fɛloʊ ə wɔɹɾɝ. ðə laɪt bɝn mi ɪf aɪd wɑn ðət wʌn æŋɡɹi wɪð mi. dʌz i ɔlweɪz lʊk laɪk ðæt, əɹ dɪɾ i iɾ ə ɹɑk fəɹ ɪz læs mil? ɛniweɪ, ðət lɛft oʊnli ju. aɪ də nɑt laɪk θɪŋz aɪ kænɑɾ əkaʊn fɔɹ."

"An Ogier," she said, staring at the river, "is obviously an Ogier, and the others were not much more difficult to figure out. I managed a much better look inside Lady Alys's hood than Orban did, and her face makes that stone-faced fellow a Warder. The Light burn me if I'd want that one angry with me. Does he always look like that, or did he eat a rock for his last meal? Anyway, that left only you. I do not like things I cannot account for."

wʌns əɡɛn i kənsɪɾɝd tɔsɪŋ əɹ oʊvɝ ðə saɪd. sɪɹiəsli, ðɪs taɪm. bʌt ɹɛmən wɑz naʊ oʊnli ə blɑtʃ ə laɪt wɛl bɪhaɪn əm ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, ən noʊ tɛlɪŋ haʊ fɑɹ ɪt wɑz tə ʃɔɹ.

Once again he considered tossing her over the side. Seriously, this time. But Remen was now only a blotch of light well behind them in the darkness, and no telling how far it was to shore.

ʃi sim tə teɪk ɪz saɪləns əz ən ɝdʒɪŋ tə ɡoʊ ɑn. "soʊ ðəɹ aɪ hæv æn" - ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊnd, ðən dʒɹɑpt əɹ vɔɪs, ðoʊ ðə kloʊsəs kɹumən wɑz wɝkɪŋ ə swip tɛn fiɾ əweɪ - "æn ɛɛs sədaɪ, ə wɔɹɾɝ, ən oʊɡiɝ - ən ju. ə kʌntʃɹimən, baɪ fɝs lʊk ət ju." hɝ tɪltəɾ aɪz ɹoʊz tə stʌɾi hɪz jɛloʊ wʌnz ɪntɛnli - hi ɹəfjuz tə lʊk əweɪ - ən ʃi smaɪld. "oʊnli jə fɹi ə keɪdʒd ilmən, hoʊld ə lɔŋ tɔk wɪð hɪm, ðən hɛlp ɪm tʃɑp ə dʌzən waɪtkloʊks ɪndə sɔsədʒ. aɪ əsum jə də ðɪs ɹɛɡjəlɝli; jə sɝɾənli lʊkt əz ɪf ɪt wɝ nʌθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi fəɹ ju. aɪ sɛn sʌmθɪŋ stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪn ə pɑɹɾi ʌv tʃɹævəlɝz sətʃ əz jʊɹz, ən stʃɹeɪnʒ tʃɹeɪlz ɑɹ wʌt hʌntɝz lʊk fɔɹ."

She seemed to take his silence as an urging to go on. "So there I have an" - she looked around, then dropped her voice, though the closest crewman was working a sweep ten feet away - "an Aes Sedai, a Warder, an Ogier - and you. A countryman, by first look at you." Her tilted eyes rose to study his yellow ones intently - he refused to look away - and she smiled. "Only you free a caged Aielman, hold a long talk with him, then help him chop a dozen Whitecloaks into sausage. I assume you do this regularly; you certainly looked as if it were nothing out of the ordinary for you. I scent something strange in a party of travelers such as yours, and strange trails are what Hunters look for."

hi blɪŋkt; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɪsteɪkɪŋ ðəɾ ɛmfəsəs. "eɪ hʌntɝ? ju? jə kænɑt bi ə hʌntɝ. jəɹ ə ɡɝl."

He blinked; there was no mistaking that emphasis. "A Hunter? You? You cannot be a Hunter. You're a girl."

hɝ smaɪl bɪkeɪm soʊ ɪnəsən ðəɾ i ɔlmoʊst wɔkt əweɪ fɹəm hɝ. ʃi stɛp bæk, meɪɾ ə flɝɪʃ wɪð itʃ hænd, ən wɑz hoʊldɪŋ tu naɪvz əz nitli əz oʊl tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn cʊɾə dʌn ɪt. wʌn ə ðə mɛn ət ðə swips meɪɾ ə tʃoʊkɪŋ saʊnd, ən tu ʌðɝz stʌmbəld; swips θɹæʃt ən tæŋɡəld, ən ðə snoʊ ɡus lɝtʃt ə lɪɾəl bɪfɔɹ ðə kæptənz ʃaʊts sɛt θɪŋz ɹaɪt. baɪ ðət taɪm, ðə blæk-hɛɹd ɡɝl hæd meɪd ðə naɪvz dɪsəpɪɹ əɡɛn.

Her smile became so innocent that he almost walked away from her. She stepped back, made a flourish with each hand, and was holding two knives as neatly as old Thom Merrilin could have done it. One of the men at the sweeps made a choking sound, and two others stumbled; sweeps thrashed and tangled, and the Snow Goose lurched a little before the captain's shouts set things right. By that time, the black-haired girl had made the knives disappear again.

"nɪmbəl fɪŋɡɝz ən nɪmbəl wɪts wɪl teɪk jə ə ɡʊd dil fɝðɝ ðən ə sɔɹɾ ən mʌsəlz. ʃɑɹp aɪz hɛlp, əz wɛl, bʌt fɔɹtʃənətli, aɪ hæv ðiz θɪŋz."

"Nimble fingers and nimble wits will take you a good deal further than a sword and muscles. Sharp eyes help, as well, but fortunately, I have these things."

"æn mɑɾəsti, əz wɛl," pɛɹɪn mɝmɝd. ʃi dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs.

"And modesty, as well," Perrin murmured. She did not seem to notice.

"aɪ tʊk ði oʊθ ən ɹəsiv ðə blɛsɪŋ ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt skwɛɹ ə tæməz, ɪn ɪljən. pɝhæps aɪ wɑz ðə jʌŋɡəst, bʌɾ ɪn ðət kɹaʊd, wɪð ɔl ðə tʃɹʌmpəts ən dʒɹʌmz ən sɪmbəlz ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ. . . . ə sɪks-jɪɹ-oʊld cʊɾə teɪkən ði oʊθ, ən nʌn wəɾ əv noʊɾəst. ðəɹ wɝ oʊvɝ ə θaʊzən ʌv ʌs, pɝhæps tu, ən ɛvɹi wʌn wɪð ən aɪdiə ʌv wɛɹ tə faɪn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. aɪ hæv maɪn - ɪt stɪl meɪ bi ðə ɹaɪt wʌn - bʌt noʊ hʌntɝ kən əfɔɹd tə pæs ʌp ə stʃɹeɪnʒ tʃɹeɪl. ðə hɔɹn wɪl sɝɾənli laɪ ət ði ɛn ʌv ə stʃɹeɪnʒ tʃɹeɪl, ən aɪ hæv nɛvɝ sin wʌn ɛni stʃɹeɪnʒɝ ðən ðə tʃɹeɪl jə fɔɹ meɪk. wɛɹ ɑɹ jə baʊnd? ɪljən? sʌmwɛɹ ɛls?"

"I took the oath and received the blessing in the Great Square of Tammaz, in Illian. Perhaps I was the youngest, but in that crowd, with all the trumpets and drums and cymbals and shouting. . . . A six-year-old could have taken the oath, and none would have noticed. There were over a thousand of us, perhaps two, and every one with an idea of where to find the Horn of Valere. I have mine - it still may be the right one - but no Hunter can afford to pass up a strange trail. The Horn will certainly lie at the end of a strange trail, and I have never seen one any stranger than the trail you four make. Where are you bound? Illian? Somewhere else?"

"wʌt wɑz jəɹ aɪdiə?" hi æskt. "əbaʊt wɛɹ ðə hɔɹn ɪz?" seɪf ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, aɪ hoʊp, ən ðə laɪt sɛn aɪ nɛvɝ si ɪɾ əɡɛn. "ju θɪŋk ɪts ɪn ɡildən?"

"What was your idea?" he asked. "About where the Horn is?" Safe in Tar Valon, I hope, and the Light send I never see it again. "You think it's in Ghealdan?"

ʃi fɹaʊn əɾ ɪm - hi hæd ðə filɪŋ ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡɪv ʌp ə sɛnt wʌns ʃi hæd ɹeɪzd ɪt, bʌɾ i wɑz ɹɛɾi tə ɔfɝ əɹ əz mɛni saɪd tʃɹeɪlz əz ʃi wəd teɪk - ðən sɛd, "hæv jə ɛvɝ hɝɾ ə meɪnɛðɝən?"

She frowned at him - he had the feeling she did not give up a scent once she had raised it, but he was ready to offer her as many side trails as she would take - then said, "Have you ever heard of Manetheren?"

hi nɪɹli tʃoʊkt. "aɪ hæv hɝɾ ʌv ɪt," hi sɛd kɔʃəsli.

He nearly choked. "I have heard of it," he said cautiously.

"ɛvɹi kwin ə meɪnɛðɝən wɑz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðə kɪŋ ðə wɔɹɾɝ baʊn tə hɝ. aɪ kæn ɪmædʒən ə pleɪs laɪk ðæt, bʌt ðəɾ ɪz wʌt ðə bʊks seɪ. ɪt wɑz ə lɑɹdʒ lænd - moʊst ʌv ændɝ ən ɡildən ən mɔɹ bɪsaɪdz - bʌt ðə kæpəɾəl, ðə sɪɾi ɪtsɛlf, wɑz ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst. ðəɾ ɪz wɛɹ aɪ θɪŋk ðə hɔɹn ɪz. ənlɛs jə fɔɹ lɛd mi tə ɪt."

"Every queen of Manetheren was an Aes Sedai, and the king the Warder bound to her. I can't imagine a place like that, but that is what the books say. It was a large land - most of Andor and Ghealdan and more besides - but the capital, the city itself, was in the Mountains of Mist. That is where I think the Horn is. Unless you four lead me to it."

hɪz hækəlz stɝd. ʃi wɑz lɛktʃɝɪŋ ɪm əz ɪf i wɝ ən əntɔt vɪlədʒ laʊt. "jul nɑt faɪn ðə hɔɹn əɹ meɪnɛðɝən. ðə sɪɾi wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪd dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, wən ðə læs kwin dʒɹu tu mʌtʃ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz u hæd kɪld əɹ hʌzbənd." mɔɪɹeɪn hæd toʊld ɪm ðə neɪmz ə ðət kɪŋ ən kwin, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðɛm.

His hackles stirred. She was lecturing him as if he were an untaught village lout. "You'll not find the Horn or Manetheren. The city was destroyed during the Trolloc Wars, when the last queen drew too much of the One Power to destroy the Dreadlords who had killed her husband." Moiraine had told him the names of that king and queen, but he did not remember them.

"nɑɾ ɪn meɪnɛðɝən, fɑɹmbɔɪ," ʃi sɛd kɑmli, "ðoʊ ə læn sətʃ əz ðət wəd meɪk ə ɡʊd haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs. bʌt ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝ neɪʃənz, ʌðɝ sɪɾiz, ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst, soʊ oʊl ðət nɑɾ ivən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðɛm. ən θɪŋk ʌv ɔl ðoʊz stɔɹiz əbaʊɾ ɪt biɪŋ bæd lʌk tə ɛntɝ ðə maʊntənz. wʌt bɛɾɝ pleɪs fəɹ ðə hɔɹn tə bi hɪɾən ðən ɪn wʌn ə ðoʊz fɝɡɑɾən sɪɾiz."

"Not in Manetheren, farmboy," she said calmly, "though a land such as that would make a good hiding place. But there were other nations, other cities, in the Mountains of Mist, so old that not even Aes Sedai remember them. And think of all those stories about it being bad luck to enter the mountains. What better place for the Horn to be hidden than in one of those forgotten cities."

"aɪ hæv hɝd stɔɹiz ə sʌmθɪŋ biɪŋ hɪɾən ɪn ðə maʊntənz." wəd ʃi bɪliv hɪm? hi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ɡʊɾ ət laɪɪŋ. "ðə stɔɹiz dɪd nɑt seɪ wʌt, bʌɾ ɪts səpoʊz tə bi ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst tʃɹɛʒɝ ɪn ðə wɝld, soʊ meɪbi ɪts ðə hɔɹn. bʌt ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst stʃɹɛtʃ fəɹ hʌnʒɹədz ə liɡz. ɪf jə ɑɹ gɑnə faɪn ɪt, jə ʃəd nɑt weɪs taɪm fɑloʊɪŋ ʌs. jəl niɾ ɪɾ ɔl tə faɪn ðə hɔɹn bɪfɔɹ ɔɹbən ən ɡæn."

"I have heard stories of something being hidden in the mountains." Would she believe him? He had never been good at lying. "The stories did not say what, but it's supposed to be the greatest treasure in the world, so maybe it is the Horn. But the Mountains of Mist stretch for hundreds of leagues. If you are going to find it, you should not waste time following us. You'll need it all to find the Horn before Orban and Gann."

"aɪ toʊl ju, ðoʊz tu hæv səm stʃɹeɪnʒ aɪdiə ðə hɔɹn ɪz hɪɾən ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt blækwʊd." ʃi smaɪld ʌp ət hɪm. hɝ maʊθ wɑz nɑt tu bɪɡ əɾ ɔl, wən ʃi smaɪld. "æn aɪ toʊl jə ə hʌntɝ əz tə fɑloʊ stʃɹeɪnʒ tʃɹeɪlz. jə ɑɹ lʌki ɔɹbən ən ɡæn wɝ ɪnʒɝd faɪɾɪŋ ɔl ðoʊz ilmɛn, əɹ ðeɪ maɪt wɛl bi əbɔɹd, tu. ət list əl nɑt ɡɛɾ ɪn jəɹ weɪ, əɹ tʃɹaɪ tə teɪk oʊvɝ, əɹ pɪk ə faɪt wɪð ðə wɔɹɾɝ."

"I told you, those two have some strange idea the Horn is hidden in the Great Blackwood." She smiled up at him. Her mouth was not too big at all, when she smiled. "And I told you a Hunter has to follow strange trails. You are lucky Orban and Gann were injured fighting all those Aielmen, or they might well be aboard, too. At least I will not get in your way, or try to take over, or pick a fight with the Warder."

hi ɡɹaʊl dɪsɡʌstɪdli. "wi ɑɹ dʒʌs tʃɹævəlɝz ɑn əɹ weɪ tə ɪljən, ɡɝl. wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ neɪm? ɪf aɪ hæv tə ʃɛɹ ðɪs ʃɪp wɪð jə fəɹ deɪz jɛt, aɪ kæn kip kɔlɪŋ jə ɡɝl."

He growled disgustedly. "We are just travelers on our way to Illian, girl. What is your name? If I have to share this ship with you for days yet, I can't keep calling you girl."

"aɪ kɔl maɪsɛlf mændɑɹb." hi kəd nɑt stɑp ðə ɡʌfɔ ðət bɝst aʊɾ ə hɪm. ðoʊz tɪltəɾ aɪz ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɪm wɪð hit. "aɪ wɪl titʃ jə sʌmθɪŋ, fɑɹmbɔɪ." hɝ vɔɪs ɹɪmeɪn lɛvəl. bɛɹli. "ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, mændɑɹb minz 'bleɪd.' ɪts ə neɪm wɝði ʌv ə hʌntɝ ə ðə hɔɹn!"

"I call myself Mandarb." He could not stop the guffaw that burst out of him. Those tilted eyes regarded him with heat. "I will teach you something, farmboy." Her voice remained level. Barely. "In the Old Tongue, Mandarb means 'blade.' It is a name worthy of a Hunter of the Horn!"

hi mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ ɪz læftɝ ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl, ən hɑɹdli wizd əɾ ɔl əz i pɔɪntəd tə ðə ɹoʊp pɛn bɪtwin ðə mæsts. "ju si ðət blæk stæljən? hɪz neɪm ɪz mændɑɹb."

He managed to get his laughter under control, and hardly wheezed at all as he pointed to the rope pen between the masts. "You see that black stallion? His name is Mandarb."

ðə hit wɛn aʊɾ ə hɝ aɪz, ən spɑts ə kʌlɝ blumd ɑn əɹ tʃiks. "oʊ. aɪ wɑz bɔɹn zɑɹin bæʃɪɹ, bʌt zɑɹin ɪz noʊ neɪm fəɹ ə hʌntɝ. ɪn ðə stɔɹiz, hʌntɝz əv neɪmz laɪk ɹəɡoʊʃ iɡəl-aɪ."

The heat went out of her eyes, and spots of color bloomed on her cheeks. "Oh. I was born Zarine Bashere, but Zarine is no name for a Hunter. In the stories, Hunters have names like Rogosh Eagle-eye."

ʃi lʊk soʊ kɹɛstfɔlən ðəɾ i heɪsən tə seɪ, "aɪ laɪk ðə neɪm zɑɹin. ɪt suts ju." ðə hit flæʃt bæk ɪndə hɝ aɪz, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən i θɔt ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə pɹədus wʌn ə hɝ naɪvz əɡɛn. "ɪɾ ɪz leɪt, zɑɹin. aɪ wɑn səm slip."

She looked so crestfallen that he hastened to say, "I like the name Zarine. It suits you." The heat flashed back into her eyes, and for a moment he thought she was about to produce one of her knives again. "It is late, Zarine. I want some sleep."

hi tɝn ɪz bæk tə stɑɹt fəɹ ðə hætʃ ðət lɛd bɛlaʊdɛk, pɹɪkəlz ɹʌnɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. kɹumɪn stɪl pæɾəd ʌp ðə dɛk ən bæk, wɝkɪŋ ðə swips. ful. ə ɡɝl wəd nɑt stɪk ə naɪf ɪn mi. nɑt wɪð ɔl ðiz pipəl wɑtʃɪŋ. wəd ʃi? dʒʌst əz i ɹitʃt ðə hætʃ, ʃi kɔl tə hɪm.

He turned his back to start for the hatch that led belowdeck, prickles running across his shoulders. Crewmen still padded up the deck and back, working the sweeps. Fool. A girl would not stick a knife in me. Not with all these people watching. Would she? Just as he reached the hatch, she called to him.

"fɑɹmbɔɪ! pɝhæps əl kɔl maɪsɛlf feɪl. maɪ fɑðɝ juz tə kɔl mi ðæt, wən aɪ wɑz lɪɾəl. ɪt minz 'fælkən.' "

"Farmboy! Perhaps I will call myself Faile. My father used to call me that, when I was little. It means 'falcon.' "

hi stɪfən ən ɔlmoʊs mɪs ðə fɝst stɛp ə ðə læɾɝ. koʊɪnsɪɾəns. hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf ɡoʊ daʊn wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ bæk təwɔɹd hɝ. ɪts tə bi. ðə pæsədʒweɪ wɑz dɑɹk, bʌɾ ɪnʌf munlaɪt fɪltɝd daʊn bɪhaɪn ɪm fəɹ ɪm tə meɪk ɪz weɪ. sʌmwʌn wɑz snɔɹɪŋ laʊdli ɪn wʌn ə ðə kæbənz. mɪn, waɪ dɪd juv tə ɡoʊ siɪŋ θɪŋz?

He stiffened and almost missed the first step of the ladder. Coincidence. He made himself go down without looking back toward her. It has to be. The passageway was dark, but enough moonlight filtered down behind him for him to make his way. Someone was snoring loudly in one of the cabins. Min, why did you have to go seeing things?


tʃæptɝ θɝɾisɪks


CHAPTER 36

dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪt


Daughter of the Night

ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðəɾ i hæd noʊ weɪ ʌv noʊɪŋ wɪtʃ kæbən wɑz səpoʊz tə bi hɪz, hi pʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪndə sɛvɹəl. ðeɪ wɝ dɑɹk, ən ɔl ə ðɛm hæd tu mɛn əslip ɪn ðə nɛɹoʊ bɛdz bɪlt əɡɛnst itʃ saɪd, ɔl bʌt wʌn, wɪtʃ hɛld lɔɪəl, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ bɪtwin ðə bɛdz - ən bɛɹli fɪɾɪŋ - skɹɪbəlɪŋ ɪn ɪz klɔθ-baʊn bʊk ə noʊts baɪ ðə laɪɾ ʌv ə ɡɪmbɔld læntɝn. ði oʊɡiɝ wɑntəd tə tɔk əbaʊt ði ɪvɛns ə ðə deɪ, bʌt pɛɹɪn, dʒɔz kɹikɪŋ wɪð ði ɛfɝɾ ə hoʊldɪŋ ɪz jɔnz ɪn, θɔt ðə ʃɪp mʌst əv ɹʌn fɑɹ ɪnʌf daʊnɹɪvɝ baɪ naʊ tə meɪk ɪt seɪf tə slip. seɪf tə dʒɹim. ivən ɪf ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd, wʊlvz kəd nɑt lɔŋ kip peɪs wɪð ðə swips ən ðə kɝənt.

Realizing that he had no way of knowing which cabin was supposed to be his, he put his head into several. They were dark, and all of them had two men asleep in the narrow beds built against each side, all but one, which held Loial, sitting on the floor between the beds - and barely fitting - scribbling in his cloth-bound book of notes by the light of a gimballed lantern. The Ogier wanted to talk about the events of the day, but Perrin, jaws creaking with the effort of holding his yawns in, thought the ship must have run far enough downriver by now to make it safe to sleep. Safe to dream. Even if they tried, wolves could not long keep pace with the sweeps and the current.

faɪnəli hi faʊn ə wɪndoʊləs kæbən wɪð noʊ wʌn ɪn ɪɾ əɾ ɔl, wɪtʃ suɾəd ɪm dʒʌst əz wɛl. hi wɑntəd tə bi əloʊn. ə koʊɪnsɪɾəns ɪn ðə neɪm, ðæts ɔl, hi θɔɾ əz i lɪt ðə læntɝn maʊntəɾ ɑn ðə wɔl. ɛniweɪ, hɝ ɹil neɪm ɪz zɑɹin. bʌt ðə ɡɝl wɪð ðə haɪ tʃikboʊnz ən dɑɹk, tɪltəɾ aɪz wɑz nɑɾ ʌpɝmoʊst ɪn ɪz θɔts. hi pʊɾ ɪz baʊ ən ʌðɝ bɪlɔŋɪŋz ɑn wʌn kɹæmp bɛd, tɔst ɪz kloʊk oʊvɝ ðɛm, ən sæɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ tə tʌɡ ɔf ɪz buts.

Finally he found a windowless cabin with no one in it at all, which suited him just as well. He wanted to be alone. A coincidence in the name, that's all, he thought as he lit the lantern mounted on the wall. Anyway, her real name is Zarine. But the girl with the high cheekbones and dark, tilted eyes was not uppermost in his thoughts. He put his bow and other belongings on one cramped bed, tossed his cloak over them, and sat on the other to tug off his boots.

ɛlaɪəs mækɛɹə hæd faʊn ə weɪ tə lɪv wɪð wʌɾ i wɑz, ə mæn sʌmhaʊ lɪŋkt wɪð wʊlvz, ən i hæd nɑt ɡɔn mæd. θɪŋkɪŋ bæk, pɛɹɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ ɛlaɪəs hæd bɪn lɪvɪŋ ðət weɪ fəɹ jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ i ɛvɝ mɛt ðə mæn. hi wɑns tə bi ðət weɪ. hi æksɛps ɪt, ɛniweɪ. ðət wɑz noʊ səluʃən. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt wɑnə lɪv ðət weɪ, dɪd nɑt wɑnə æksɛpt. bʌɾ ɪf juv ðə bɑɹ stɑk tə meɪk ə naɪf, jə æksɛpt ɪɾ ən meɪk ə naɪf, ivən ɪf jud laɪk ə wʊdeɪks. noʊ! maɪ laɪf ɪz mɔɹ ðən aɪɝn tə bi hæmɝɾ ɪndə ʃeɪp.

Elyas Machera had found a way to live with what he was, a man somehow linked with wolves, and he had not gone mad. Thinking back, Perrin was sure Elyas had been living that way for years before he ever met the man. He wants to be that way. He accepts it, anyway. That was no solution. Perrin did not want to live that way, did not want to accept. But if you have the bar stock to make a knife, you accept it and make a knife, even if you'd like a woodaxe. No! My life is more than iron to be hammered into shape.

kɔʃəsli, hi ɹitʃt aʊt wɪð ɪz maɪnd, filɪŋ fəɹ wʊlvz, ən faʊnd - nʌθɪŋ. oʊ, ðəɹ wɑz ə dɪm ɪmpɹɛʃən ʌv wʊlvz sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə dɪstəns, bʌɾ ɪt feɪɾəd ivən əz i tʌtʃt ɪt. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɪn soʊ lɔŋ, hi wɑz əloʊn. blɛsədli əloʊn.

Cautiously, he reached out with his mind, feeling for wolves, and found - nothing. Oh, there was a dim impression of wolves somewhere in the distance, but it faded even as he touched it. For the first time in so long, he was alone. Blessedly alone.

bloʊɪŋ aʊt ðə læntɝn, hi leɪ daʊn, fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɪn deɪz. haʊ ɪn ðə laɪt wɪl lɔɪəl mænədʒ ɪn wʌn ə ðiz? ðoʊz ɔl bʌt slipləs naɪts ɹoʊld oʊvɝ hɪm, ɪɡzɔstʃən slækɪŋ ɪz mʌsəlz. ɪt keɪm tə hɪm ðəɾ i hæd mænədʒ tə pʊt ði il aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd. ən ðə waɪtkloʊks. laɪt-fɔɹseɪkən æks! bɝn mi, aɪ wɪʃ aɪ hæd nɛvɝ sin ɪt, wɑz ɪz læs θɔt bɪfɔɹ slip.

Blowing out the lantern, he lay down, for the first time in days. How in the Light will Loial manage in one of these? Those all but sleepless nights rolled over him, exhaustion slacking his muscles. It came to him that he had managed to put the Aiel out of his head. And the Whitecloaks. Light-forsaken axe! Burn me, I wish I had never seen it, was his last thought before sleep.

θɪk ɡɹeɪ fɑɡ sɝaʊndəd hɪm, dɛns ɪnʌf loʊ daʊn ðəɾ i kəd nɑt si hɪz oʊn buts, ən soʊ hɛvi ɑn ɛvɹi saɪd ðəɾ i kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ tɛn peɪsɪz əweɪ. ðəɹ wɑz ʃʊɹli nʌθɪŋ nɪɹɝ. ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl maɪt laɪ wɪðɪn ɪt. ðə mɪs dɪd nɑt fil ɹaɪt; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ dæmpnəs tə ɪt. hi pʊɾ ə hæn tə hɪz bɛlt, sikɪŋ ðə kʌmfɝɾ ə noʊɪŋ i kəd dɪfɛn hɪmsɛlf, ən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. hɪz æks wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ.

Thick gray fog surrounded him, dense enough low down that he could not see his own boots, and so heavy on every side that he could not make out anything ten paces away. There was surely nothing nearer. Anything at all might lie within it. The mist did not feel right; there was no dampness to it. He put a hand to his belt, seeking the comfort of knowing he could defend himself, and gave a start. His axe was not there.

sʌmθɪŋ muvd ɪn ðə fɑɡ, ə swɝlɪŋ ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪnəs. sʌmθɪŋ kʌmɪŋ ɪz weɪ.

Something moved in the fog, a swirling in the grayness. Something coming his way.

hi tɛnst, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ tə ɹʌn əɹ stæn ən faɪt wɪð ɪz bɛɹ hænz, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛniθɪŋ tə faɪt.

He tensed, wondering if it was better to run or stand and fight with his bare hands, wondering if there was anything to fight.

ðə bɪloʊɪŋ fɝoʊ bɔɹɪŋ θɹu ðə fɑɡ ɹizɑlvd ɪtsɛlf ɪndə ə wʊlf, ɪts ʃæɡi fɔɹm ɔlmoʊst wʌn wɪð ðə hɛvi mɪst.

The billowing furrow boring through the fog resolved itself into a wolf, its shaggy form almost one with the heavy mist.

hɑpɝ?

Hopper?

ðə wʊlf hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən keɪm tə stæn bɪsaɪd hɪm. ɪt wɑz hɑpɝ - hi wɑz sɝɾən - bʌt sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə wʊlfs stæns, sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə jɛloʊ aɪz ðət lʊkt ʌp bɹifli tə mit hɪz, dɪmændəd saɪləns, ɪn maɪn əz wɛl əz bɑɾi. ðoʊz aɪz dɪmændəd ðəɾ i fɑloʊ, tu.

The wolf hesitated, then came to stand beside him. It was Hopper - he was certain - but something about the wolf's stance, something in the yellow eyes that looked up briefly to meet his, demanded silence, in mind as well as body. Those eyes demanded that he follow, too.

hi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn ðə wʊlfs bæk, ən əz i dɪd, hɑpɝ stɑɹɾəd fɔɹwɝd. hi lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi lɛd. ðə fɝ ʌndɝ ɪz hænd wɑz θɪk ən ʃæɡi. ɪt fɛlt ɹil.

He laid a hand on the wolf's back, and as he did, Hopper started forward. He let himself be led. The fur under his hand was thick and shaggy. It felt real.

ðə fɑɡ bɪɡæn tə θɪkən, əntɪl oʊnli hɪz hæn toʊld ɪm hɑpɝ wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, əntɪl ə ɡlæns daʊn dɪd nɑɾ ivən ʃoʊ hɪm ɪz oʊn tʃɛst. dʒʌst ɡɹeɪ mɪst. hi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ɹæpt ɪn nu-ʃɪɹd wʊl fəɹ ɔl i kəd si. ɪt stʃɹʌk ɪm ðəɾ i hæd hɝd nʌθɪŋ, iðɝ. nɑɾ ivən ðə saʊn ə hɪz oʊn fʊtstɛps. hi wɪɡɡəld ɪz toʊz, ən wɑz ɹɪliv tə fil ðə buts ɑn ɪz fit.

The fog began to thicken, until only his hand told him Hopper was still there, until a glance down did not even show him his own chest. Just gray mist. He might as well have been wrapped in new-sheared wool for all he could see. It struck him that he had heard nothing, either. Not even the sound of his own footsteps. He wiggled his toes, and was relieved to feel the boots on his feet.

ðə ɡɹeɪ bɪkeɪm dɑɹkɝ, ən i ən ðə wʊlf wɔk θɹu pɪtʃ-blæknəs. hi kəd nɑt si hɪz hænd wən i tʌtʃt ɪz noʊz. hi kəd nɑt si hɪz noʊz, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. hi tʃɹaɪd kloʊzɪŋ ɪz aɪz fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ən kəd nɑt tɛl ɛni dɪfɝəns. ðəɹ wɑz stɪl noʊ saʊnd. hɪz hæn fɛl ðə ɹʌf hɛɹ ə hɑpɝz bæk, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i kəd fil ɛniθɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz buts.

The gray became darker, and he and the wolf walked through pitch-blackness. He could not see his hand when he touched his nose. He could not see his nose, for that matter. He tried closing his eyes for a moment, and could not tell any difference. There was still no sound. His hand felt the rough hair of Hopper's back, but he was not sure he could feel anything under his boots.

sʌɾənli hɑpɝ stɑpt, fɔɹsɪŋ ɪm tə hɔlt, tu. hi lʊkt ɝaʊnd . . . ən snæpt ɪz aɪz ʃʌt. hi kəd tɛl ə dɪfɝəns, naʊ. ən fil sʌmθɪŋ, tu, ə kwizi twɪstɪŋ ə hɪz stʌmək. hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf oʊpən ɪz aɪz ən lʊk daʊn.

Suddenly Hopper stopped, forcing him to halt, too. He looked around . . . and snapped his eyes shut. He could tell a difference, now. And feel something, too, a queasy twisting of his stomach. He made himself open his eyes and look down.

wʌɾ i sɔ kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ðɛɹ, nɑɾ ənlɛs i ən hɑpɝ wɝ stændɪŋ ɪn mɪdɛɹ. hi kəd si nʌθɪŋ ə ðə wʊlf əɹ hɪmsɛlf, əz ɪf niðɝ hæd bɑɾiz əɾ ɔl - ðət θɔt nɪɹli taɪɾ ɪz stʌmək ɪndə nɑts - bʌt bɪloʊ hɪm, əz klɪɹ əz ɪf lɪt baɪ ə θaʊzən læmps, stʃɹɛtʃt ə væst ɝeɪ ʌv mɪɹɝz, simɪŋli hæŋɪŋ ɪn blæknəs ðoʊ əz lɛvəl əz ɪf ðeɪ stʊɾ ɑn ə væs flɔɹ. ðeɪ stʃɹɛtʃt əz fɑɹ əz i kəd si ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, bʌt ɹaɪt bɪniθ ɪz fit, ðəɹ wɑz ə klɪɹ speɪs. ən pipəl ɪn ɪt. sʌɾənli hi kəd hɪɹ ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz əz wɛl əz ɪf i hæd bɪn stændɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛm.

What he saw could not have been there, not unless he and Hopper were standing in midair. He could see nothing of the wolf or himself, as if neither had bodies at all - that thought nearly tied his stomach into knots - but below him, as clear as if lit by a thousand lamps, stretched a vast array of mirrors, seemingly hanging in blackness though as level as if they stood on a vast floor. They stretched as far as he could see in every direction, but right beneath his feet, there was a clear space. And people in it. Suddenly he could hear their voices as well as if he had been standing among them.

"ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd," wʌn ə ðə mɛn mʌɾɝd, "wɛɹ ɪz ðɪs pleɪs?" hi lʊkt ɝaʊnd wʌns, flɪntʃɪŋ əɾ ɪz ɪmədʒ kæs bæk əɾ ɪm mɛni θaʊzændfoʊld, ən hɛld ɪz aɪz fɔɹwɝɾ æftɝ ðæt. ði ʌðɝz hʌɾəld ɝaʊn ɪm simd ivən mɔɹ əfɹeɪd. "aɪ wɑz əslip ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. aɪm əslip ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn! wɛɹ ɪz ðɪs pleɪs? hæv aɪ ɡɔn mæd?"

"Great Lord," one of the men muttered, "where is this place?" He looked around once, flinching at his image cast back at him many thousandfold, and held his eyes forward after that. The others huddled around him seemed even more afraid. "I was asleep in Tar Valon, Great Lord. I am asleep in Tar Valon! Where is this place? Have I gone mad?"

səm ə ðə mɛn ɝaʊn ɪm wɔɹ ɔɹneɪt koʊts fʊl ʌv ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, ʌðɝz pleɪnɝ ɡɑɹb, waɪl səm sim tə bi neɪkəd, əɹ ɪn ðɛɹ smɔlkloʊðz.

Some of the men around him wore ornate coats full of embroidery, others plainer garb, while some seemed to be naked, or in their smallclothes.

"aɪ, tu, slip," ə neɪkəd mæn nɪɹli skɹimd. "ɪn tɛɹ. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ laɪɪŋ daʊn wɪð maɪ waɪf!"

"I, too, sleep," a naked man nearly screamed. "In Tear. I remember lying down with my wife!"

"æn aɪ də slip ɪn ɪljən," ə mæn ɪn ɹɛɾ ən ɡoʊl sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ʃeɪkən. "aɪ noʊ ðəɾ aɪ də slip, bʌt ðət kænɑt bi. aɪ noʊ ðəɾ aɪ də dʒɹim, bʌt ðət dʌz bi ɪmpɑsəbəl. wɛɹ dʌz ðɪs bi, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd? ɑɹ jə ɹɪli kʌm tə mi?"

"And I do sleep in Illian," a man in red and gold said, sounding shaken. "I know that I do sleep, but that cannot be. I know that I do dream, but that does be impossible. Where does this be, Great Lord? Are you really come to me?"

ðə dɑɹk-hɛɹd mæn u feɪst əm wɑz ɡɑɹbd ɪn blæk, wɪð sɪlvɝ leɪs əɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən ɹɪsts. naʊ ən əɡɛn i pʊɾ ə hæn tə hɪz tʃɛst, əz ɪf ɪt hɝt hɪm. ðəɹ wɑz laɪɾ ɛvɹiwɛɹ daʊn ðɛɹ, kʌmɪŋ fɹəm noʊwɛɹ, bʌt ðɪs mæn bɪloʊ pɛɹɪn sim kloʊkt ɪn ʃædoʊ. dɑɹknəs ɹoʊld ɝaʊn hɪm, kɝɛs hɪm.

The dark-haired man who faced them was garbed in black, with silver lace at his throat and wrists. Now and again he put a hand to his chest, as if it hurt him. There was light everywhere down there, coming from nowhere, but this man below Perrin seemed cloaked in shadow. Darkness rolled around him, caressed him.

"saɪləns!" ðə blæk-kloʊð mæn dɪd nɑt spik laʊdli, bʌɾ i hæd noʊ nid tə. fəɹ ðə speɪs ə ðət wɝd, hi hæd ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd; hɪz aɪz ən maʊθ wɝ hoʊlz bɔɹɪŋ ɪndə ə ɹeɪdʒɪŋ fɔɹdʒ-faɪɝ, ɔl fleɪm ən faɪɝi ɡloʊ.

"Silence!" The black-clothed man did not speak loudly, but he had no need to. For the space of that word, he had raised his head; his eyes and mouth were holes boring into a raging forge-fire, all flame and fiery glow.

pɛɹɪn nu hɪm, ðɛn. bælzəmən. hi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ət bælzəmən hɪmsɛlf. fɪɹ stʃɹʌk θɹu hɪm laɪk hæmɝd spaɪks. hi wəɾ əv ɹʌn, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt fil ɪz fit.

Perrin knew him, then. Ba'alzamon. He was staring down at Ba'alzamon himself. Fear struck through him like hammered spikes. He would have run, but he could not feel his feet.

hɑpɝ ʃɪftəd. hi fɛl ðə θɪk fɝ ʌndɝ ɪz hæn ən ɡɹɪpt ɪt hɑɹd. sʌmθɪŋ ɹil. sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ ɹil, hi hoʊpt, ðən wʌɾ i sɔ. bʌɾ i nu ðət boʊθ wɝ ɹil.

Hopper shifted. He felt the thick fur under his hand and gripped it hard. Something real. Something more real, he hoped, than what he saw. But he knew that both were real.

ðə mɛn hʌɾəlɪŋ təɡɛðɝ kaʊɝd.

The men huddling together cowered.

"ju hæv bɪn ɡɪvən tæsks," bælzəmən sɛd. "sʌm ə ðiz tæsks juv kæɹiɾ aʊt. əɾ ʌðɝz, juv feɪld." naʊ ən əɡɛn ɪz aɪz ən maʊθ vænɪʃt ɪn fleɪm əɡɛn, ən ðə mɪɹɝz flæʃt wɪð ɹəflɛktəd faɪɝ. "ðoʊz u hæv bɪn mɑɹk fəɹ dɛθ mʌs daɪ. ðoʊz u hæv bɪn mɑɹk fəɹ teɪkɪŋ mʌs baʊ tə mi. tə feɪl ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk kænɑt bi fɝɡɪvən." faɪɝ ʃoʊn θɹu hɪz aɪz, ən ðə dɑɹknəs ɝaʊn ɪm ɹɔɪld ən spʌn. "ju." hɪz fɪŋɡɝ pɔɪntəɾ aʊt ðə mæn u hæd spoʊkən ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ə fɛloʊ dʒɹɛs laɪk ə mɝtʃənt, ɪn pleɪnli kʌt kloʊðz ə ðə faɪnəs klɔθ. ði ʌðɝz ʃaɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ɪm əz ɪf i hæd blækbəl fivɝ, livɪŋ ɪm tə kaʊɝ əloʊn. "ju əlaʊd ðə bɔɪ tə ɪskeɪp tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"You have been given tasks," Ba'alzamon said. "Some of these tasks you have carried out. At others, you have failed." Now and again his eyes and mouth vanished in flame again, and the mirrors flashed with reflected fire. "Those who have been marked for death must die. Those who have been marked for taking must bow to me. To fail the Great Lord of the Dark cannot be forgiven." Fire shone through his eyes, and the darkness around him roiled and spun. "You." His finger pointed out the man who had spoken of Tar Valon, a fellow dressed like a merchant, in plainly cut clothes of the finest cloth. The others shied away from him as if he had blackbile fever, leaving him to cower alone. "You allowed the boy to escape Tar Valon."

ðə mæn skɹimd, ən bɪɡæn tə kwɪvɝ laɪk ə faɪl stʃɹʌk əɡɛnst ən ænvəl. hi sim tə bɪkʌm lɛs sɑləd, ən ɪz skɹim θɪnd wɪð hɪm.

The man screamed, and began to quiver like a file struck against an anvil. He seemed to become less solid, and his scream thinned with him.

"ju ɔl dʒɹim," bælzəmən sɛd, "bʌt wʌt hæpənz ɪn ðɪs dʒɹim ɪz ɹil." ðə ʃɹikɪŋ mæn wɑz oʊnli ə bʌndəl ə mɪst ʃeɪp laɪk ə mæn, hɪz skɹim fɑɹ dɪstənt, ən ðən ivən ðə mɪst wɑz ɡɔn. "aɪ fɪɹ hɪl nɛvɝ weɪk." hi læft, ən ɪz maʊθ ɹɔɹd fleɪm. "ðə ɹɛst ə jəl nɑt feɪl mi əɡɛn. bɪɡɔn! weɪk, ən oʊbeɪ!" ði ʌðɝ mɛn vænɪʃt.

"You all dream," Ba'alzamon said, "but what happens in this dream is real." The shrieking man was only a bundle of mist shaped like a man, his scream far distant, and then even the mist was gone. "I fear he will never wake." He laughed, and his mouth roared flame. "The rest of you will not fail me again. Begone! Wake, and obey!" The other men vanished.

fəɹ ə moʊmən bælzəmən stʊɾ əloʊn, ðən sʌɾənli ðəɹ wɑz ə wʊmən wɪð hɪm, klæɾ ɔl ɪn waɪɾ ən sɪlvɝ.

For a moment Ba'alzamon stood alone, then suddenly there was a woman with him, clad all in white and silver.

ʃɑk hɪt pɛɹɪn. hi kəd nɛvɝ fɝɡɛɾ ə wʊmən soʊ bjuɾəfəl. ʃi wɑz ðə wʊmən fɹəm ɪz dʒɹim, ðə wʌn u hæɾ ɝdʒd ɪm tə ɡlɔɹi.

Shock hit Perrin. He could never forget a woman so beautiful. She was the woman from his dream, the one who had urged him to glory.

ən ɔɹneɪt sɪlvɝ θɹoʊn əpɪɹd bɪhaɪn hɝ, ən ʃi sæt, kɛɹfəli ɝeɪnʒɪŋ əɹ sɪlkən skɝts. "ju meɪk fɹi jus ə maɪ doʊmeɪn," ʃi sɛd.

An ornate silver throne appeared behind her, and she sat, carefully arranging her silken skirts. "You make free use of my domain," she said.

"jɔɹ doʊmeɪn?" bælzəmən sɛd. "ju kleɪm ɪt jʊɹz, ðɛn? dʒju noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sɝv ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk?" ðə dɑɹknəs ɝaʊn ɪm θɪkən fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, sim tə bɔɪl.

"Your domain?" Ba'alzamon said. "You claim it yours, then? Do you no longer serve the Great Lord of the Dark?" The darkness around him thickened for an instant, seemed to boil.

"aɪ sɝv," ʃi sɛd kwɪkli. "aɪ hæv sɝv ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə twaɪlaɪt lɔŋ. lɔŋ dɪɾ aɪ laɪ ɪmpɹɪzən fəɹ maɪ sɝvəs, ɪn ən ɛnləs, dʒɹimləs slip. oʊnli ɡɹeɪ mɛn ən mɹdʒɹɑl ɑɹ dɪnaɪd dʒɹimz. ivən tʃɹɑləks kən dʒɹim. dʒɹimz wɝ ɔlweɪz maɪn, tə juz ən wɔk. naʊ aɪm fɹi əɡɛn, ən əl juz wʌɾ ɪz maɪn."

"I serve," she said quickly. "I have served the Lord of the Twilight long. Long did I lie imprisoned for my service, in an endless, dreamless sleep. Only Gray Men and Myrddraal are denied dreams. Even Trollocs can dream. Dreams were always mine, to use and walk. Now I am free again, and I will use what is mine."

"wʌɾ ɪz jʊɹz," bælzəmən sɛd. ðə blæknəs swɝlɪŋ 'ɹaʊn ɪm simd mɝθfəl. "ju ɔlweɪz θɔt jɝsɛlf ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən jə wɝ, lænfɝ."

"What is yours," Ba'alzamon said. The blackness swirling 'round him seemed mirthful. "You always thought yourself greater than you were, Lanfear."

ðə neɪm kʌɾ ət pɛɹɪn laɪk ə nuli hoʊnd naɪf. wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən hæd bɪn ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd bɪn ɹaɪt. səm ə ðɛm wɝ fɹi.

The name cut at Perrin like a newly honed knife. One of the Forsaken had been in his dreams. Moiraine had been right. Some of them were free.

ðə wʊmən ɪn waɪt wɑz ɑn əɹ fit, ðə θɹoʊn ɡɔn. "aɪ æm əz ɡɹeɪɾ əz aɪ æm. wʌɾ əv jəɹ plænz kʌm tə? θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz ən mɔɹ ʌv wɪspɝɪŋ ɪn ɪɹz ən pʊlɪŋ ðə stʃɹɪŋz ə θɹoʊn pʌpəts laɪk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ!" hɝ vɔɪs ɪnvɛstəd ðə neɪm wɪð ɔl skɔɹn. "θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz, ən jɛt luz θɝɪn wɔks ðə wɝld əɡɛn, ən ðiz ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔl bʌɾ əv ɪm liʃt. kən jə kəntʃɹoʊl hɪm? kən jə tɝn hɪm? hi wɑz maɪn bɪfɔɹ ɛvɝ ðət stʃɹɔ-hɛɹd tʃɪɾ aɪlaɪɛnə sɔ hɪm! hɪl bi maɪn əɡɛn!"

The woman in white was on her feet, the throne gone. "I am as great as I am. What have your plans come to? Three thousand years and more of whispering in ears and pulling the strings of throned puppets like an Aes Sedai!" Her voice invested the name with all scorn. "Three thousand years, and yet Lews Therin walks the world again, and these Aes Sedai all but have him leashed. Can you control him? Can you turn him? He was mine before ever that straw-haired chit Ilyena saw him! He will be mine again!"

"du jə sɝv jɝsɛlf naʊ, lænfɝ?" bælzəmənz vɔɪs wɑz sɑft, bʌt fleɪm ɹeɪdʒ kəntɪnjuəsli ɪn ɪz aɪz ən maʊθ. "hæv jə əbændən jəɹ oʊðz tə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk?" fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðə dɑɹknəs nɪɹli əblɪɾɝeɪtɪd hɪm, oʊnli ðə ɡloʊɪŋ faɪɝz ʃoʊɪŋ θɹu. "ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt soʊ izəli bɹoʊkən əz ði oʊðz tə ðə laɪt jə fɔɹsʊk, pɹoʊkleɪmɪŋ jəɹ nu mæstɝ ɪn ðə vɛɹi hɔl ə ðə sɝvəns. jəɹ mæstɝ kleɪmz jə fɝɛvɝ, lænfɝ. wɪl jə sɝv, əɹ dʒju tʃuz ən ɪtɝnəɾi ʌv peɪn, ʌv ɛnləs daɪɪŋ wɪθaʊt ɹilis?"

"Do you serve yourself now, Lanfear?" Ba'alzamon's voice was soft, but flame raged continuously in his eyes and mouth. "Have you abandoned your oaths to the Great Lord of the Dark?" For an instant the darkness nearly obliterated him, only the glowing fires showing through. "They are not so easily broken as the oaths to the Light you forsook, proclaiming your new master in the very Hall of the Servants. Your master claims you forever, Lanfear. Will you serve, or do you choose an eternity of pain, of endless dying without release?"

"aɪ sɝv." dɪspaɪɾ əɹ wɝdz, ʃi stʊd tɔl ən dɪfaɪənt. "aɪ sɝv ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk ən nʌn ʌðɝ. fɝɛvɝ!"

"I serve." Despite her words, she stood tall and defiant. "I serve the Great Lord of the Dark and none other. Forever!"

ðə væst ɝeɪ ʌv mɪɹɝ bɪɡæn tə vænɪʃ əz ɪf blæk weɪvz ɹoʊld ɪn oʊvɝ ɪt, ɛvɝ kloʊsɝ tə ðə sɛntɝ. ðə taɪd ɹoʊld oʊvɝ bælzəmən ən lænfɝ. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli blæknəs.

The vast array of mirror began to vanish as if black waves rolled in over it, ever closer to the center. The tide rolled over Ba'alzamon and Lanfear. There was only blackness.

pɛɹɪn fɛl hɑpɝ muv, ən i wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɡlæd tə fɑloʊ, ɡaɪɾəd oʊnli baɪ ðə fil ə fɝ ʌndɝ ɪz hænd. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əntɪl i wɑz muvɪŋ ðəɾ i ɹilaɪzd i kʊd. hi tʃɹaɪd tə pʌzəl aʊt wʌɾ i hæd sin, wɪθaʊɾ ɛni səksɛs. bælzəmən ən lænfɝ. hɪz tʌŋ stʌk tə ðə ɹuf ə hɪz maʊθ. fəɹ səm ɹizən, lænfɝ fɹaɪɾənd ɪm mɔɹ ðən bælzəmən dɪd. pɝhæps kəz ʃi hæd bɪn ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz ɪn ðə maʊntənz. laɪt! wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɪn maɪ dʒɹimz! laɪt! ən ənlɛs i hæd mɪst sʌmθɪŋ, ʃi hæd dɪfaɪd ðə dɑɹk wʌn. hi hæd bɪn toʊld ən tɔt ðət ðə ʃædoʊ kəɾ əv noʊ paʊɝ oʊvɝ jə ɪf jə dɪnaɪɾ ɪt; bʌt haʊ kəɾ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd - nɑt dʒʌst ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd; wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən! - dɪfaɪ ðə ʃædoʊ? aɪ mʌs bi mæd, laɪk sɪmiənz bɹʌðɝ. ðiz dʒɹimz əv dʒɹɪvən mi mæd!

Perrin felt Hopper move, and he was more than glad to follow, guided only by the feel of fur under his hand. It was not until he was moving that he realized he could. He tried to puzzle out what he had seen, without any success. Ba'alzamon and Lanfear. His tongue stuck to the roof of his mouth. For some reason, Lanfear frightened him more than Ba'alzamon did. Perhaps because she had been in his dreams in the mountains. Light! One of the Forsaken in my dreams! Light! And unless he had missed something, she had defied the Dark One. He had been told and taught that the Shadow could have no power over you if you denied it; but how could a Darkfriend - not just a Darkfriend; one of the Forsaken! - defy the Shadow? I must be mad, like Simion's brother. These dreams have driven me mad!

sloʊli ðə blæknəs bɪkeɪm fɑɡ əɡɛn, ən ðə fɑɡ ɡɹædʒuəli θɪn əntɪl i wɔkt aʊɾ ʌv ɪt wɪð hɑpɝ ɑntu ə ɡɹæsi hɪlsaɪd bɹaɪt wɪð deɪlaɪt. bɝdz bɪɡæn tə sɪŋ fɹəm ə θɪkɪɾ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə hɪl. hi lʊk bæk. ə hɪli pleɪn dɑɾəd wɪð klʌmps ə tʃɹiz stʃɹɛtʃt tə ðə hɝaɪzən. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ə fɑɡ ɛniwɛɹ. ðə bɪɡ, ɡɹɪzəld wʊlf stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm.

Slowly the blackness became fog again, and the fog gradually thinned until he walked out of it with Hopper onto a grassy hillside bright with daylight. Birds began to sing from a thicket at the foot of the hill. He looked back. A hilly plain dotted with clumps of trees stretched to the horizon. There was no sign of fog anywhere. The big, grizzled wolf stood watching him.

"wʌt wɑz ðæt?" hi dɪmændəd, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ ɪn ɪz maɪn tə tɝn ðə kwɛstʃən tə θɔts ðə wʊlf kəɾ ʌndɝstænd. "waɪ dɪd jə ʃoʊ ɪt tə mi? wʌt wɑz ɪt?"

"What was that?" he demanded, struggling in his mind to turn the question to thoughts the wolf could understand. "Why did you show it to me? What was it?"

ɪmoʊʃənz ən ɪmədʒəz flʌɾəd ɪz θɔts, ən ɪz maɪn pʊt wɝdz tə ðɛm. wʌt jə mʌst si. bi kɛɹfəl, jʌŋ bʊl. ðɪs pleɪs ɪz deɪnʒɝəs. bi wɛɹi əz ə kʌb hʌntɪŋ pɔɹkjəpaɪn. ðət keɪm əz sʌmθɪŋ kloʊsɝ tə smɔl θɔɹni bæk, bʌɾ ɪz maɪnd neɪm ði ænəməl ðə weɪ hi nu ɪɾ əz ə mæn. jə ɑɹ tu jʌŋ, tu nu.

Emotions and images flooded his thoughts, and his mind put words to them. What you must see. Be careful, Young Bull. This place is dangerous. Be wary as a cub hunting porcupine. That came as something closer to Small Thorny Back, but his mind named the animal the way he knew it as a man. You are too young, too new.

"wɑz ɪt ɹil?"

"Was it real?"

ɔl ɪz ɹil, wʌɾ ɪz sin, ən wʌɾ ɪz nɑt sin. ðət sim tə bi ɔl ði ænsɝ hɑpɝ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə ɡɪv.

All is real, what is seen, and what is not seen. That seemed to be all the answer Hopper was going to give.

"hɑpɝ, haʊ ɑɹ jə hɪɹ? aɪ sɔ jə daɪ. aɪ fɛl jə daɪ!"

"Hopper, how are you here? I saw you die. I felt you die!"

ɔl ɑɹ hɪɹ. ɔl bɹʌðɝz ən sɪstɝz ðəɾ ɑɹ, ɔl ðət wɝ, ɔl ðət wɪl bi. pɛɹɪn nu ðət wʊlvz dɪd nɑt smaɪl, nɑt ðə weɪ hjumənz dɪd, bʌt fəɹ ən ɪnstən i hæd ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ðət hɑpɝ wɑz ɡɹɪnɪŋ. hɪɹ, aɪ sɔɹ laɪk ði iɡəl. ðə wʊlf ɡæðɝd hɪmsɛlf ən lɛpt, ʌp ɪndə ði ɛɹ. ʌp ən ʌp ɪt kæɹid hɪm, əntɪl i dwɪndəl tə ə spɛk ɪn ðə skaɪ, ən ə læs θɔt keɪm. tə sɔɹ.

All are here. All brothers and sisters that are, all that were, all that will be. Perrin knew that wolves did not smile, not the way humans did, but for an instant he had the impression that Hopper was grinning. Here, I soar like the eagle. The wolf gathered himself and leaped, up into the air. Up and up it carried him, until he dwindled to a speck in the sky, and a last thought came. To soar.

pɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ æftɝ ɪm wɪð ɪz maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən. hi dɪɾ ɪt. hɪz aɪz bɝn sʌɾənli, ən i klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən skɹʌbd əɾ ɪz noʊz. əl bi kɹaɪɪŋ laɪk ə ɡɝl, nɛkst. wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, hi lʊkt ɝaʊn tə si ɪf ɛniwʌn hæd sin hɪm, ən ðət kwɪkli ɛvɹiθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd.

Perrin stared after him with his mouth hanging open. He did it. His eyes burned suddenly, and he cleared his throat and scrubbed at his nose. I will be crying like a girl, next. Without thinking, he looked around to see if anyone had seen him, and that quickly everything changed.

hi wɑz stændɪŋ ɑn ə ɹaɪz, wɪð ʃæɾoʊi, ɪndɪstɪŋk dɪps ən swɛlz ɔl ɝaʊn hɪm. ðeɪ sim tə feɪɾ ɪndə ðə dɪstəns tu sun. ɹænd stʊd bɪloʊ hɪm. ɹænd, ən ə ɹæɡəd sɝkəl ə mɹdʒɹɑl ən mɛn ən wɪmən ɪz aɪz sim tə slaɪd ɹaɪt pæst. dɑɡz haʊl sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ən pɛɹɪn nu ðeɪ wɝ hʌntɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. mɹdʒɹɑl sɛn ən ðə stɪŋk ə bɝn sʌlfɝ fɪl ði ɛɹ. pɛɹɪnz hækəlz ɹoʊz.

He was standing on a rise, with shadowy, indistinct dips and swells all around him. They seemed to fade into the distance too soon. Rand stood below him. Rand, and a ragged circle of Myrddraal and men and women his eyes seemed to slide right past. Dogs howled somewhere in the distance, and Perrin knew they were hunting something. Myrddraal scent and the stink of burned sulphur filled the air. Perrin's hackles rose.

ðə sɝkəl ə mɹdʒɹɑl ən pipəl keɪm kloʊsɝ tə ɹænd, ɔl wɔkɪŋ əz ɪf əslip. ən ɹænd bɪɡæn tə kɪl ðɛm. bɔlz ə faɪɝ flu fɹəm ɪz hænz ən kənsum tu. laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt fɹəm əbʌv tə ʃɹɪvəl ʌðɝz. bɑɹz ə laɪt laɪk waɪt-hɑt stil flu fɹəm ɪz fɪsts tə mɔɹ. ən ðə sɝvaɪvɝz kəntɪnjud tə wɔk sloʊli kloʊsɝ, əz ɪf nʌn ə ðɛm sɔ wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ. wʌn baɪ wʌn ðeɪ daɪd, əntɪl nʌn wɝ lɛft, ən ɹænd sæŋk daʊn ɑn ɪz niz, pæntɪŋ. pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ i wɑz læfɪŋ əɹ kɹaɪɪŋ; ɪt sim tə bi səm ʌv itʃ.

The circle of Myrddraal and people came closer to Rand, all walking as if asleep. And Rand began to kill them. Balls of fire flew from his hands and consumed two. Lightning flashed from above to shrivel others. Bars of light like white-hot steel flew from his fists to more. And the survivors continued to walk slowly closer, as if none of them saw what was happening. One by one they died, until none were left, and Rand sank down on his knees, panting. Perrin was not sure whether he was laughing or crying; it seemed to be some of each.

ʃeɪps əpɪɹɾ oʊvɝ ðə ɹaɪzəz, mɔɹ pipəl kʌmɪŋ, mɔɹ mɹdʒɹɑl, ɔl ɪntɛn ɑn ɹænd.

Shapes appeared over the rises, more people coming, more Myrddraal, all intent on Rand.

pɛɹɪn kʌpt ɪz hænz tə hɪz maʊθ. "ɹænd! ɹænd, ðəɹ ɑɹ mɔɹ kʌmɪŋ!"

Perrin cupped his hands to his mouth. "Rand! Rand, there are more coming!"

ɹænd lʊkt ʌp əɾ ɪm fɹəm ɪz kɹaʊtʃ, snɑɹlɪŋ, swɛt slɪkɪŋ ɪz feɪs.

Rand looked up at him from his crouch, snarling, sweat slicking his face.

"ɹænd, ðəɹ - !"

"Rand, they're - !"

"bɝn ju!" ɹænd haʊld.

"Burn you!" Rand howled.

laɪt bɝn pɛɹɪnz aɪz, ən peɪn sɪɹɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ.

Light burned Perrin's eyes, and pain seared everything.

ɡɹoʊnɪŋ, hi ɹoʊld ɪndə ə bɔl ɑn ðə nɛɹoʊ bɛd, ðə laɪt stɪl bɝnɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz aɪlɪdz. hɪz tʃɛs hɝt. hi ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə ɪɾ ən wɪnst wən i fɛlt ə bɝn ʌndɝ ɪz ʃɝt, ə spɑt noʊ bɪɡɝ ðən ə sɪlvɝ pɛni.

Groaning, he rolled into a ball on the narrow bed, the light still burning behind his eyelids. His chest hurt. He raised a hand to it and winced when he felt a burn under his shirt, a spot no bigger than a silver penny.

bɪt baɪ bɪɾ i fɔɹst ɪz nɑɾɪd mʌsəlz tə lɛɾ ɪm stʃɹeɪɾən ɪz lɛɡz ən laɪ flæɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk kæbən. mɔɪɹeɪn. aɪ hæv tə tɛl mɔɪɹeɪn ðɪs taɪm. dʒʌst əv tə weɪt tɪl ðə peɪn ɡoʊz əweɪ.

Bit by bit he forced his knotted muscles to let him straighten his legs and lie flat in the dark cabin. Moiraine. I have to tell Moiraine this time. Just have to wait till the pain goes away.

bʌɾ əz ðə peɪn bɪɡæn tə feɪd, ɪɡzɔstʃən tʊk hɪm. hi bɛɹli hæɾ ə θɔt ðəɾ i mʌst ɡɛɾ ʌp bɪfɔɹ slip pʊld ɪm daʊn əɡɛn.

But as the pain began to fade, exhaustion took him. He barely had a thought that he must get up before sleep pulled him down again.

wən i oʊpən ɪz aɪz əɡɛn, hi leɪ stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə bimz oʊvɝhɛd. laɪɾ ət ðə tɑp ən bɑɾəm ə ðə dɔɹ toʊld ɪm mɔɹnɪŋ hæd kʌm. hi pʊɾ ə hæn tə hɪz tʃɛs tə kənvɪns hɪmsɛlf i hæɾ ɪmædʒən ɪt, ɪmædʒən ɪt soʊ wɛl ðəɾ i hæɾ æktʃəli  fɛlt ə bɝn. . . .

When he opened his eyes again, he lay staring at the beams overhead. Light at the top and bottom of the door told him morning had come. He put a hand to his chest to convince himself he had imagined it, imagined it so well that he had actually felt a burn. . . .

hɪz fɪŋɡɝz faʊn ðə bɝn. aɪ dɪdn ɪmædʒən ɪt, ðɛn. hi hæd dɪm mɛmɹiz ʌv ə fju ʌðɝ dʒɹimz, feɪɾɪŋ ivən əz i ɹɪkɔl ðɛm. ɔɹɾənɛɹi dʒɹimz. hi ivən fɛlt əz ɪf i hæd hæɾ ə ɡʊd naɪts slip. ən kəd juz ənʌðɝ wʌn ɹaɪt naʊ. bʌɾ ɪt mɛn i kəd slip. əz lɔŋ əz ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ wʊlvz ɝaʊnd, ɛniweɪ.

His fingers found the burn. I didn't imagine it, then. He had dim memories of a few other dreams, fading even as he recalled them. Ordinary dreams. He even felt as if he had had a good night's sleep. And could use another one right now. But it meant he could sleep. As long as there are no wolves around, anyway.

hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd meɪkɪŋ ə dɪsɪʒən ɪn ðət bɹif weɪkɪŋ æftɝ ðə dʒɹim wɪð hɑpɝ, ən æftɝ ə moʊmən i dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt hæd bɪn ə ɡʊd wʌn.

He remembered making a decision in that brief waking after the dream with Hopper, and after a moment he decided it had been a good one.

ɪt tʊk nɑkɪŋ ɑn faɪv dɔɹz ən biɪŋ kɝst ət twaɪs - ði ɪnhæbəɾənts ə tu kæbənz hæd ɡɔn ɑn dɛk - bɪfɔɹ i faʊn mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃi wɑz fʊli dʒɹɛst, bʌt sɪɾɪŋ ɑn wʌn ə ðə nɛɹoʊ bɛdz kɹɔs-lɛɡəd, ɹɛɾɪŋ ɪn əɹ bʊk ə noʊts baɪ læntɝn laɪt. bæk nɪɹ ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, hi sɔ, noʊts ðət mʌst əv bɪn meɪɾ ivən bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd kʌm tə ɛmənz fild. lænz θɪŋz wɝ nitli pleɪst ɑn ði ʌðɝ bɛd.

It took knocking on five doors and being cursed at twice - the inhabitants of two cabins had gone on deck - before he found Moiraine. She was fully dressed, but sitting on one of the narrow beds cross-legged, reading in her book of notes by lantern light. Back near the beginning, he saw, notes that must have been made even before she had come to Emond's Field. Lan's things were neatly placed on the other bed.

"aɪ hæɾ ə dʒɹim," hi toʊl hɝ, ən pɹəsiɾəd tə tɛl əɹ ʌv ɪt. ɔl ʌv ɪt. hi ivən pʊld ʌp ɪz ʃɝt tə ʃoʊ hɝ ðə smɔl sɝkəl ɑn ɪz tʃɛst, ɹɛd, wɪð weɪvi ɹɛd laɪnz ɹeɪɾieɪtɪŋ fɹəm ɪt. hi hæd kɛp θɪŋz fɹəm əɹ bɪfɔɹ, ən i səspɛktəɾ i wəɾ əɡɛn, bʌt ðɪs maɪt bi tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə hoʊl bæk. ðə pɪn wɑz ðə smɔləs pɑɹɾ ʌv ə pɛɹ ə sɪzɝz, ən ði iziəs meɪd, bʌt wɪθaʊɾ ɪt, ðə sɪzɝz kʌt noʊ klɔθ. wən i wɑz dʌn, hi stʊd ðəɹ weɪɾɪŋ.

"I had a dream," he told her, and proceeded to tell her of it. All of it. He even pulled up his shirt to show her the small circle on his chest, red, with wavy red lines radiating from it. He had kept things from her before, and he suspected he would again, but this might be too important to hold back. The pin was the smallest part of a pair of scissors, and the easiest made, but without it, the scissors cut no cloth. When he was done, he stood there waiting.

ʃi hæd wɑtʃt ɪm wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən, ɪksɛp ðət ðoʊz dɑɹk aɪz hæɾ ɪɡzæmən ɛvɹi wɝɾ əz ɪt keɪm aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ, weɪɾ ɪt, mɛʒɝɾ ɪt, hɛld ɪɾ ʌp tə ðə laɪt. naʊ ʃi sæt ðə seɪm weɪ, oʊnli ɪt wɑz i hu wɑz ɪɡzæmənd, weɪd, ən hɛld ʌp tə ðə laɪt.

She had watched him without expression, except that those dark eyes had examined every word as it came out of his mouth, weighed it, measured it, held it up to the light. Now she sat the same way, only it was he who was examined, weighed, and held up to the light.

"wɛl, ɪz ɪɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt?" hi dɪmændəd faɪnəli. "aɪ θɪŋk ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz wʊlf dʒɹimz jə toʊl mi əbaʊt - aɪm ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz; ɪt mʌst əv bɪn! - bʌt ðət dʌzn meɪk wʌɾ aɪ sɔ ɹil. oʊnli, jə sɛd meɪbi səm ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ fɹi, ən i kɔld əɹ lænfɝ, ænd. . . . ɪz ɪɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, əɹ æm aɪ stændɪŋ hɪɹ meɪkɪŋ ə ful aʊɾ ə maɪsɛlf?"

"Well, is it important?" he demanded finally. "I think it was one of those wolf dreams you told me about - I'm sure it was; it must have been! - but that doesn't make what I saw real. Only, you said maybe some of the Forsaken are free, and he called her Lanfear, and. . . . Is it important, or am I standing here making a fool out of myself?"

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ wɪmən," ʃi sɛd sloʊli, "hu wəd də ðɛɹ bɛs tə dʒɛntəl jə ɪf ðeɪ hɝd wʌɾ aɪ dʒʌs dɪd." hɪz lʌŋz sim tə fɹiz; hi kəd nɑt bɹið. "aɪ æm nɑɾ əkjuzɪŋ jə ʌv biɪŋ eɪbəl tə tʃænəl," ʃi wɛn ɑn, ən ði aɪs ɪnsaɪɾ ɪm mɛltəd, "ɔɹ ivən ə biɪŋ eɪbəl tə lɝn. ən ətɛmpt ət dʒɛntəlɪŋ wəd nɑt hɑɹm ju, bɪɑn ðə ɹʌf tʃɹitmən ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ wəd ɡɪv jə bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹilaɪz ðɛɹ ɛɹɝ. sətʃ mɛn ɑɹ soʊ ɹɛɹ, ivən ðə ɹɛdz wɪð ɔl ðɛɹ hʌntɪŋ əv nɑt faʊn mɔɹ ðən θɹi ɪn ðə læs tɛn jɪɹz. bɪfɔɹ ði aʊtbɹeɪk ə fɔls dʒɹæɡənz, ət list. wʌɾ aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk klɪɹ tə jə ɪz ðəɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk jəl sʌɾənli bɪɡɪn wildɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. jə də nɑɾ əv tə bi əfɹeɪɾ ə ðæt."

"There are women," she said slowly, "who would do their best to gentle you if they heard what I just did." His lungs seemed to freeze; he could not breathe. "I am not accusing you of being able to channel," she went on, and the ice inside him melted, "or even of being able to learn. An attempt at gentling would not harm you, beyond the rough treatment the Red Ajah would give you before they realized their error. Such men are so rare, even the Reds with all their hunting have not found more than three in the last ten years. Before the outbreak of false Dragons, at least. What I am trying to make clear to you is that I do not think you will suddenly begin wielding the Power. You do not have to be afraid of that."

"wɛl, θæŋk jə vɛɹi mʌtʃ fəɹ ðæt," hi sɛd bɪɾɝli. "ju dɪd nɑɾ əv tə skɛɹ mi tə dɛθ dʒʌst soʊ jə kəd tɛl mi ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə bi fɹaɪɾənd!"

"Well, thank you very much for that," he said bitterly. "You did not have to scare me to death just so you could tell me there was no need to be frightened!"

"oʊ, jə də hæv ɹizən tə bi fɹaɪɾənd. əɹ ət lis kɛɹfəl, əz ðə wʊlf sədʒɛstəd. ɹɛd sɪstɝz, əɹ ʌðɝz, maɪt kɪl jə bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ dɪskʌvɝd ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə dʒɛntəl ɪn ju."

"Oh, you do have reason to be frightened. Or at least careful, as the wolf suggested. Red sisters, or others, might kill you before they discovered there was nothing to gentle in you."

"laɪt! laɪt bɝn mi!" hi stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ wɪð ə fɹaʊn. "jɔɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lid mi ɝaʊn baɪ ðə noʊz, mɔɪɹeɪn, bʌɾ aɪm noʊ kæf, ən ðɛɹz noʊ ɹɪŋ ɪn maɪ noʊz. ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ əɹ ɛni ʌðɝ wəd nɑt θɪŋk ə dʒɛntəlɪŋ ənlɛs ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɹil ɪn wʌɾ aɪ dʒɹimd. dʌz ɪt min ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ lus?"

"Light! Light burn me!" He stared at her with a frown. "You're trying to lead me around by the nose, Moiraine, but I am no calf, and there's no ring in my nose. The Red Ajah or any other would not think of gentling unless there was something real in what I dreamed. Does it mean the Forsaken are loose?"

"aɪ toʊl jə bɪfɔɹ ðət ðeɪ maɪt bi. səm ə ðɛm. jəɹ . . . dʒɹimz ɑɹ nʌθɪŋ aɪ ɪkspɛktəd, pɛɹɪn. dʒɹimɝz əv ɹɪɾən ʌv wʊlvz, bʌɾ aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk ðɪs."

"I told you before that they might be. Some of them. Your . . . dreams are nothing I expected, Perrin. Dreamers have written of wolves, but I did not expect this."

"wɛl, aɪ θɪŋk ɪt wɑz ɹil. aɪ θɪŋk aɪ sɔ sʌmθɪŋ ðət ɹɪli hæpənd, sʌmθɪŋ aɪ wɑzn səpoʊz tə si." wʌt jə mʌst si. "aɪ θɪŋk lænfɝ ɪz lus ət ðə vɛɹi list. wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ tə du?"

"Well, I think it was real. I think I saw something that really happened, something I wasn't supposed to see." What you must see. "I think Lanfear is loose at the very least. What are you going to do?"

"aɪ æm ɡoʊɪŋ tə ɪljən. ən ðən əl ɡoʊ tə tɛɹ, ən hoʊp tə ɹitʃ ɪt bɪfɔɹ ɹænd. wi hæd nid tə liv ɹɛmən tu kwɪkli fəɹ læn tə lɝn wɛðɝ i kɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ əɹ wɛn daʊn ɪt. wi ʃəd noʊ bɪfɔɹ wi ɹitʃ ɪljən, ðoʊ. wɪl faɪn saɪn ɪf hiz ɡɔn ðɪs weɪ." ʃi ɡlænst əɾ əɹ bʊk əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə ɹɪzum əɹ ɹɛɾɪŋ.

"I am going to Illian. And then I will go to Tear, and hope to reach it before Rand. We had need to leave Remen too quickly for Lan to learn whether he crossed the river or went down it. We should know before we reach Illian, though. We will find sign if he has gone this way." She glanced at her book as if she wanted to resume her reading.

"ɪz ðəɾ ɔl jə ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə du? wɪð lænfɝ lus, ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn noʊz haʊ mɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz?"

"Is that all you are going to do? With Lanfear loose, and the Light alone knows how many of the others?"

"du nɑt kwɛstʃən mi," ʃi sɛd koʊldli. "ju də nɑt noʊ wɪtʃ kwɛstʃənz tə æsk, ən jə wəd kɑmpɹihɛn lɛs ðən hæf ði ænsɝz ɪf aɪ ɡeɪv ðɛm. wɪtʃ əl nɑt."

"Do not question me," she said coldly. "You do not know which questions to ask, and you would comprehend less than half the answers if I gave them. Which I will not."

hi ʃɪftəɾ ɪz fiɾ ʌndɝ əɹ ɡeɪz əntɪl ɪt bɪkeɪm klɪɹ ʃi wəd seɪ noʊ mɔɹ ɑn ðə mæɾɝ. hɪz ʃɝt ɹʌb peɪnfəli ət ðə bɝn ɑn ɪz tʃɛst. ɪt dɪd nɑt sim ə bæd hɝt - nɑt fəɹ biɪŋ stʃɹʌk baɪ laɪtnɪŋ ɪt dʌznt! - bʌt haʊ hi hæd kʌm baɪ ɪt wɑz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ. "ʌ. . . . wɪl jə hil ðɪs?"

He shifted his feet under her gaze until it became clear she would say no more on the matter. His shirt rubbed painfully at the burn on his chest. It did not seem a bad hurt - Not for being struck by lightning it doesn't! - but how he had come by it was another matter. "Uh. . . . Will you Heal this?"

"ɑɹ jə noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ənizi əbaʊt ðə wʌn paʊɝ biɪŋ juzd ɑn ju, ðɛn, pɛɹɪn? noʊ, əl nɑt hil ɪt. ɪts nɑt sɪɹiəs, ən ɪɾəl ɹimaɪn jə ʌv ðə nid tə bi kɛɹfəl." kɛɹfəl əbaʊt pɹɛsɪŋ hɝ, hi nu, əz wɛl əz əbaʊt dʒɹimz əɹ lɛɾɪŋ ʌðɝz noʊ ʌv ðɛm. "ɪf ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ ɛls, pɛɹɪn?"

"Are you no longer uneasy about the One Power being used on you, then, Perrin? No, I will not Heal it. It is not serious, and it will remind you of the need to be careful." Careful about pressing her, he knew, as well as about dreams or letting others know of them. "If there is nothing else, Perrin?"

hi stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ, ðən stɑpt. "ðɛɹ ɪz wʌn θɪŋ. ɪf jə nu ə wʊmənz neɪm wɑz zɑɹin, wəd jə θɪŋk ɪt mɛn ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt hɝ?"

He started for the door, then stopped. "There is one thing. If you knew a woman's name was Zarine, would you think it meant anything about her?"

"waɪ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt dʒju æsk ðɪs kwɛstʃən?"

"Why under the Light do you ask this question?"

"ə ɡɝl," hi sɛɾ ɔkwɝdli. "ə jʌŋ wʊmən. aɪ mɛɾ əɹ læs naɪt. ʃiz wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ pæsənʒɝz." hi wəd lɛɾ əɹ dɪskʌvɝ fəɹ hɝsɛlf ðət zɑɹin nu ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən sim tə θɪŋk fɑloʊɪŋ əm wəd lɛɾ əɹ tə ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. hi wəd nɑt kip bæk ɛniθɪŋ i θɔt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, bʌɾ ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn kəd bi sikɹəɾɪv, soʊ kəd hi.

"A girl," he said awkwardly. "A young woman. I met her last night. She's one of the other passengers." He would let her discover for herself that Zarine knew she was Aes Sedai. And seemed to think following them would lead her to the Horn of Valere. He would not keep back anything he thought was important, but if Moiraine could be secretive, so could he.

"zɑɹin. ɪts ə sɑldəiən neɪm. noʊ wʊmən wəd neɪm əɹ dɔɾɝ ðəɾ ənlɛs ʃi ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ tə bi ə ɡɹeɪt bjuɾi. ən ə hɑɹtbɹeɪkɝ. wʌn tə laɪ ɑn kʊʃənz ɪn pæləsəz, sɝaʊndəd baɪ sɝvəns ən suɾɝz." ʃi smaɪld, bɹifli bʌt wɪð ɡɹeɪɾ əmjuzmənt. "pɝhæps juv ənʌðɝ ɹizən tə bi kɛɹfəl, pɛɹɪn, ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ə zɑɹin əz ə pæsənʒɝ wɪð ʌs."

"Zarine. It is a Saldaean name. No woman would name her daughter that unless she expected her to be a great beauty. And a heartbreaker. One to lie on cushions in palaces, surrounded by servants and suitors." She smiled, briefly but with great amusement. "Perhaps you have another reason to be careful, Perrin, if there is a Zarine as a passenger with us."

"aɪ ɪntɛn tə bi kɛɹfəl," hi toʊl hɝ. ət list i nu waɪ zɑɹin dɪd nɑt laɪk əɹ neɪm. hɑɹdli fɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ə hʌntɝ ə ðə hɔɹn. əz lɔŋ əz ʃi dʌzn kɔl hɝsɛlf "fælkən."

"I intend to be careful," he told her. At least he knew why Zarine did not like her name. Hardly fitting for a Hunter of the Horn. As long as she doesn't call herself "falcon."

wən i wɛn ɑn dɛk, læn wɑz ðɛɹ, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ mændɑɹb. ən zɑɹin wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə kɔɪl ə ɹoʊp nɪɹ ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ, ʃɑɹpənɪŋ wʌn ə hɝ naɪvz ən wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm. ðə bɪɡ, tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ seɪlz wɝ sɛɾ ən tɔt, ən ðə snoʊ ɡus flu daʊnɹɪvɝ.

When he went on deck, Lan was there, looking over Mandarb. And Zarine was sitting on a coil of rope near the railing, sharpening one of her knives and watching him. The big, triangular sails were set and taut, and the Snow Goose flew downriver.

zɑɹinz aɪz fɑloʊd pɛɹɪn əz i wɔk baɪ hɝ tə stæn ɪn ðə baʊ. ðə wɔɾɝ kɝl tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə pɹaʊ laɪk ɝθ tɝnɪŋ ɝaʊn ə ɡʊd plaʊ. hi wʌndɝɾ əbaʊt dʒɹimz ən ilmɛn, mɪnz vjuɪŋz ən fælkənz. hɪz tʃɛs hɝt. laɪf hæd nɛvɝ bɪn əz tæŋɡəld əz ðɪs.

Zarine's eyes followed Perrin as he walked by her to stand in the bow. The water curled to either side of the prow like earth turning around a good plow. He wondered about dreams and Aielmen, Min's viewings and falcons. His chest hurt. Life had never been as tangled as this.

ɹænd sæɾ ʌp aʊɾ ə hɪz ɪɡzɔstəd slip, ɡæspɪŋ, ðə kloʊk i hæd juzd əz ə blæŋkət fɔlɪŋ əweɪ. hɪz saɪɾ ætʃt, ði oʊld waʊn fɹəm fɑlm θɹɑbɪŋ. hɪz faɪɝ hæd bɝn daʊn tə koʊlz wɪð oʊnli ə fju weɪvɝɪŋ fleɪmz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl ɪnʌf tə meɪk ðə ʃædoʊz muv. ðət wɑz pɛɹɪn. ɪt wɑz! ɪt wɑz hɪm, nɑɾ ə dʒɹim. sʌmhaʊ. aɪ ɔlmoʊs kɪl hɪm! laɪt, aɪ hæv tə bi kɛɹfəl!

Rand sat up out of his exhausted sleep, gasping, the cloak he had used as a blanket falling away. His side ached, the old wound from Falme throbbing. His fire had burned down to coals with only a few wavering flames, but it was still enough to make the shadows move. That was Perrin. It was! It was him, not a dream. Somehow. I almost killed him! Light, I have to be careful!

ʃɪvɝɪŋ, hi pɪkt ʌp ə lɛŋθ ʌv oʊk bɹæntʃ ən stɑɹɾəd tə ʃʌv ɪɾ ɪndə ðə koʊlz. ðə tʃɹiz wɝ skæɾɝd ɪn ðiz mʊɹændiən hɪlz, stɪl kloʊs tə ðə meɪnɛðɹəndʒɹɛl, bʌɾ i hæd faʊn dʒʌst ɪnʌf fɔlən bɹæntʃəz fəɹ ɪz faɪɝ, ðə wʊd dʒʌst oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi pɹɑpɝli kjʊɹd bʌt nɑt ɹɑɾən. bɪfɔɹ ðə wʊd tʌtʃt ðə koʊlz, hi stɑpt. ðəɹ wɝ hɔɹsəz kʌmɪŋ, tɛn əɹ ə dʌzən ə ðɛm, wɔkɪŋ sloʊli. aɪ hæv tə bi kɛɹfəl. aɪ kænɑt meɪk ənʌðɝ mɪsteɪk.

Shivering, he picked up a length of oak branch and started to shove it into the coals. The trees were scattered in these Murandian hills, still close to the Manetherendrelle, but he had found just enough fallen branches for his fire, the wood just old enough to be properly cured but not rotten. Before the wood touched the coals, he stopped. There were horses coming, ten or a dozen of them, walking slowly. I have to be careful. I cannot make another mistake.

ðə hɔɹsəz swʌŋ təwɔɹɾ ɪz feɪlɪŋ faɪɝ, ɛntɝd ðə dɪm laɪt, ən stɑpt. ðə ʃædoʊz əbskjʊɹd ðɛɹ ɹaɪɾɝz, bʌt moʊst sim tə bi ɹʌf-feɪs mɛn wɛɹɪŋ ɹaʊn hɛlməts ən lɔŋ lɛðɝ dʒɝkɪnz soʊn ɔl oʊvɝ wɪð mɛɾəl dɪsks laɪk fɪʃ skeɪlz. wʌn wɑz ə wʊmən wɪð ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ ən ə noʊ-nɑnsɛns lʊk ɑn əɹ feɪs. hɝ dɑɹk dʒɹɛs wɑz pleɪn wʊl, bʌt ðə faɪnəst wiv, ən ədɔɹnd wɪð ə sɪlvɝ pɪn ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə laɪən. ə mɝtʃənt, ʃi sim tə hɪm; hi hæd sin əɹ sɔɹɾ əmʌŋ ðoʊz u keɪm tə baɪ təbæk ən wʊl ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ə mɝtʃən ən əɹ ɡɑɹdz.

The horses swung toward his failing fire, entered the dim light, and stopped. The shadows obscured their riders, but most seemed to be rough-faced men wearing round helmets and long leather jerkins sewn all over with metal discs like fish scales. One was a woman with graying hair and a no-nonsense look on her face. Her dark dress was plain wool, but the finest weave, and adorned with a silver pin in the shape of a lion. A merchant, she seemed to him; he had seen her sort among those who came to buy tabac and wool in the Two Rivers. A merchant and her guards.

aɪ hæv tə bi kɛɹfəl, hi θɔɾ əz i stʊd. noʊ mɪsteɪks.

I have to be careful, he thought as he stood. No mistakes.

"ju hæv tʃoʊzən ə ɡʊd kæmpsaɪt, jʌŋ mæn," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ hæv ɔfən juzd ɪɾ ɑn maɪ weɪ tə ɹɛmən. ðəɹ ɪz ə smɔl spɹɪŋ nɪɹbaɪ. aɪ tʃɹʌs juv noʊ əbdʒɛkʃən tə maɪ ʃɛɹɪŋ ɪt?" hɝ ɡɑɹdz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi dɪsmaʊntɪŋ, hɪtʃɪŋ ət ðɛɹ sɔɹd bɛls ən lusənɪŋ sæɾəl ɡɝθs.

"You have chosen a good campsite, young man," she said. "I have often used it on my way to Remen. There is a small spring nearby. I trust you have no objection to my sharing it?" Her guards were already dismounting, hitching at their sword belts and loosening saddle girths.

"nʌn," ɹænd toʊl hɝ. kɛɹfəl. tu stɛps bɹɔɾ ɪm kloʊs ɪnʌf, ən i lɛpt ɪndə ði ɛɹ, spɪnɪŋ - θɪsldaʊn floʊts ɑn ðə wɝlwɪnd - hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd kɑɹv fɹəm faɪɝ kʌmɪŋ ɪndə hɪz hænz tə teɪk əɹ hɛɾ ɔf bɪfɔɹ sɝpɹaɪz kəɾ ivən fɔɹm ɑn əɹ feɪs. ʃi wɑz ðə moʊs deɪnʒɝəs.

"None," Rand told her. Careful. Two steps brought him close enough, and he leaped into the air, spinning - Thistledown Floats on the Whirlwind - heron-mark blade carved from fire coming into his hands to take her head off before surprise could even form on her face. She was the most dangerous.

hi əlaɪɾɪd əz ðə wʊmənz hɛd ɹoʊl fɹəm ðə kɹʌpɝ ə hɝ hɔɹs. ðə ɡɑɹdz jɛld ən klɔd fəɹ ðɛɹ sɔɹdz, skɹimd əz ðeɪ ɹilaɪzd ɪz bleɪd bɝnd. hi dænst əmʌŋ əm ɪn ðə fɔɹmz læn hæd tɔt hɪm, ən nu hi cʊɾə kɪld ɔl tɛn wɪð ɔɹɾənɛɹi stil, bʌt ðə bleɪɾ i wildɪd wɑz pɑɹɾ ə hɪm. ðə læs mæn fɛl, ən ɪt hæd bɪn soʊ laɪk pɹæktəsɪŋ ðə fɔɹmz ðəɾ i hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡʌn ðə ʃiðɪŋ kɔl foʊldɪŋ ðə fæn bɪfɔɹ i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ i wɔɹ noʊ skæbɝɾ ən ðɪs bleɪd wʊɾə tɝn ɪt tə æʃ əɾ ə tʌtʃ ɪf i hæd.

He alighted as the woman's head rolled from the crupper of her horse. The guards yelled and clawed for their swords, screamed as they realized his blade burned. He danced among them in the forms Lan had taught him, and knew he could have killed all ten with ordinary steel, but the blade he wielded was part of him. The last man fell, and it had been so like practicing the forms that he had already begun the sheathing called Folding the Fan before he remembered he wore no scabbard and this blade would have turned it to ash at a touch if he had.

lɛɾɪŋ ðə sɔɹd vænɪʃ, hi tɝn tə ɪɡzæmɪn ðə hɔɹsəz. moʊs hæd ɹʌn əweɪ, bʌt səm nɑt fɑɹ, ən ðə wʊmənz tɔl ɡɛldɪŋ stʊd wɪð ɹoʊlɪŋ aɪz, wɪkɝɪŋ ənizəli. hɝ hɛdləs kɔɹps, laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, hæd meɪnteɪn ɪts ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz, ən hɛl ði ænəməlz hɛd daʊn.

Letting the sword vanish, he turned to examine the horses. Most had run away, but some not far, and the woman's tall gelding stood with rolling eyes, whickering uneasily. Her headless corpse, lying on the ground, had maintained its grip on the reins, and held the animal's head down.

ɹænd pʊld əm fɹi, pɔzɪŋ oʊnli tə ɡæðɝ ɪz fju bɪlɔŋɪŋz bɪfɔɹ swɪŋɪŋ ɪndə ðə sæɾəl. aɪ hæv tə bi kɛɹfəl, hi θɔɾ əz i lʊkt oʊvɝ ðə dɛd. noʊ mɪsteɪks.

Rand pulled them free, pausing only to gather his few belongings before swinging into the saddle. I have to be careful, he thought as he looked over the dead. No mistakes.

ðə paʊɝ stɪl fɪl hɪm, ðə floʊ fɹəm seɪɾɪn swiɾɝ ðən hʌni, ɹæŋkɝ ðən ɹɑɾɪd mit. əbɹʌpli hi tʃænəld - nɑt ɹɪli ʌndɝstændɪŋ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz i dɪd, əɹ haʊ, oʊnli ðəɾ ɪt simd ɹaɪt; ən ɪt wɝkt, lɪftɪŋ ðə kɔɹpsəz. hi sɛɾ əm ɪn ə laɪn, feɪsɪŋ hɪm, nilɪŋ, feɪsəz ɪn ðə dɝt. fəɹ ðoʊz u hæd feɪsəz lɛft. nilɪŋ tə hɪm.

The Power still filled him, the flow from saidin sweeter than honey, ranker than rotted meat. Abruptly he channeled - not really understanding what it was he did, or how, only that it seemed right; and it worked, lifting the corpses. He set them in a line, facing him, kneeling, faces in the dirt. For those who had faces left. Kneeling to him.

"ɪf aɪm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," hi toʊl ðɛm, "ðæɾ ɪz ðə weɪ ɪts səpoʊz tə bi, ɪzən ɪt?" lɛɾɪŋ ɡoʊ ʌv seɪɾɪn wɑz hɑɹd, bʌɾ i dɪɾ ɪt. ɪf aɪ hoʊld ɪt tu mʌtʃ, haʊ wɪl aɪ kip ðə mædnəs əweɪ? hi læf bɪɾɝli. əɹ ɪz ɪt tu leɪt fəɹ ðæt?

"If I am the Dragon Reborn," he told them, "that is the way it is supposed to be, isn't it?" Letting go of saidin was hard, but he did it. If I hold it too much, how will I keep the madness away? He laughed bitterly. Or is it too late for that?

fɹaʊnɪŋ, hi pɪɹɾ ət ðə laɪn. hi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli tɛn mɛn, bʌɾ ɪlɛvən mɛn nɛlt ɪn ðət laɪn, wʌn ə ðɛm wɪθaʊɾ ɑɹmɝ ʌv ɛni sɔɹt bʌt wɪð ə dæɡɝ stɪl ɡɹɪpt ɪn ɪz hænd.

Frowning, he peered at the line. He had been sure there were only ten men, but eleven men knelt in that line, one of them without armor of any sort but with a dagger still gripped in his hand.

"ju tʃoʊz ðə ɹɔŋ kʌmpəni," ɹænd toʊl ðət mæn.

"You chose the wrong company," Rand told that man.

wilɪŋ ðə ɡɛldɪŋ, hi dʌɡ ɪn ɪz hilz ən sɛt ði ænəməl tə ə dɛd ɡæləp ɪndə ðə naɪt. ɪt wɑz ə lɔŋ weɪ tə tɛɹ, jɛt, bʌɾ i mɛn tə ɡɛt ðəɹ baɪ ðə stʃɹeɪɾəst weɪ, ɪf i hæd tə kɪl hɔɹsəz əɹ stil ðɛm. əl pʊɾ ən ɛn tə ɪt. ðə tɔntɪŋ. ðə beɪɾɪŋ. əl ɛn ɪt! kælændɝ. ɪt kɔl tə hɪm.

Wheeling the gelding, he dug in his heels and set the animal to a dead gallop into the night. It was a long way to Tear, yet, but he meant to get there by the straightest way, if he had to kill horses or steal them. I will put an end to it. The taunting. The baiting. I will end it! Callandor. It called to him.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾisɛvən


CHAPTER 37

faɪɝz ɪn kɛɹhin


Fires in Cairhien

ɛɡwin ɹɪtɝn ə ɡɹeɪsfəl nɑd tə ðə ɹɪspɛkfəl baʊ ʌv ðə ʃɪps kɹumən u pæɾəd pæs hɝ, bɛɹfʊt, ɑn ɪz weɪ tə pʊl ə ɹoʊp ðəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sim tɔt, pɑsəbli ʃɪftɪŋ ə tʃɹaɪfəl ðə weɪ wʌn ə ðə bɪɡ skwɛɹ seɪlz sɛt. əz i tʃɹɑɾəd bæk təwɔɹd wɛɹ ðə ɹaʊnd-feɪs kæptən stʊd baɪ ðə tɪlɝmən, hi baʊɾ əɡɛn, ən ʃi nɑɾəd wʌns mɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ əɹ ətɛnʃənz tə ðə fɔɹəstəd kɛɹhin ʃɔɹ, sɛpɝeɪɾəd fɹəm ðə blu kɹeɪn baɪ lɛs ðən twɛnti spænz ʌv wɔɾɝ.

Egwene returned a graceful nod to the respectful bow of the ship's crewman who padded past her, barefoot, on his way to pull a rope that already seemed taut, possibly shifting a trifle the way one of the big square sails set. As he trotted back toward where the round-faced captain stood by the tillerman, he bowed again, and she nodded once more before returning her attentions to the forested Cairhien shore, separated from the Blue Crane by less than twenty spans of water.

ə vɪlədʒ wɑz slaɪɾɪŋ pæst, əɹ wʌt hæd bɪn ə vɪlədʒ wʌns. hæf ðə haʊsəz wɝ oʊnli smoʊldɝɪŋ paɪlz ə ɹʌbəl wɪð tʃɪmniz stɪkɪŋ stɑɹkli aʊɾ ə ðə ɹuənz. ɑn ði ʌðɝ haʊsəz, dɔɹz swʌŋ wɪð ðə wɪnd, ən pisəz ə fɝnɪtʃɝ, bɪts ə kloʊðɪŋ ən haʊs wɛɹ lɪɾɝd ðə dɝt stʃɹit, tʌmbəld əbaʊɾ əz ɪf θɹoʊn. nʌθɪŋ lɪvɪŋ muvd ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn hæf-stɑɹv dɔɡ ðəɾ ɪɡnɔɹd ðə pæsɪŋ ʃɪp əz ɪt tʃɹɑɾəd aʊɾ ə saɪt bɪhaɪn ðə tɑpəld wɔlz ʌv wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə hæv bɪn ən ɪn. ʃi kəd nɛvɝ si sətʃ ə saɪt wɪθaʊɾ ə kwizinəs sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪn əɹ bɛli, bʌt ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪnteɪn ðə dɪspæʃənət sɝɛnəɾi ʃi θɔɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪt hæv. ɪt dɪd nɑt hɛlp mʌtʃ. bɪɑn ðə vɪlədʒ, ə θɪk plum ə smoʊk wɑz ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪndə ðə skaɪ. θɹi əɹ fɔɹ maɪlz ɔf, ʃi ɛstəmeɪɾəd.

A village was sliding past, or what had been a village once. Half the houses were only smoldering piles of rubble with chimneys sticking starkly out of the ruins. On the other houses, doors swung with the wind, and pieces of furniture, bits of clothing and house ware littered the dirt street, tumbled about as if thrown. Nothing living moved in the village except for one half-starved dog that ignored the passing ship as it trotted out of sight behind the toppled walls of what appeared to have been an inn. She could never see such a sight without a queasiness settling in her belly, but she tried to maintain the dispassionate serenity she thought an Aes Sedai might have. It did not help much. Beyond the village, a thick plume of smoke was rising into the sky. Three or four miles off, she estimated.

ðɪs wɑz nɑt ðə fɝst sətʃ plum ə smoʊk ʃi hæd sin sɪns ði ɛɹɪnɪn bɪɡæn tə floʊ əlɔŋ ðə bɔɹɾɝ ə kɛɹhin, nɔɹ ðə fɝst sətʃ vɪlədʒ. ət lis ðɪs taɪm ðəɹ wɝ noʊ bɑɾiz ɪn saɪt. kæptən ɛlɪsɝ səmtaɪmz hæd tə seɪl kloʊs tə ðə kɛɹhinɪn ʃɔɹ kəz ə mʌdflæts - hi sɛd ðeɪ ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ðɪs pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ - bʌt haʊɛvɝ kloʊs i keɪm, ʃi hæd nɑt sin ə sɪŋɡəl lɪvɪŋ pɝsən.

This was not the first such plume of smoke she had seen since the Erinin began to flow along the border of Cairhien, nor the first such village. At least this time there were no bodies in sight. Captain Ellisor sometimes had to sail close to the Cairhienin shore because of mudflats - he said they shifted in this part of the river - but however close he came, she had not seen a single living person.

ðə vɪlədʒ ən ðə smoʊk plum slɪpt əweɪ bɪhaɪn ðə ʃɪp, bʌɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ənʌðɝ kɑləm ə smoʊk wɑz kʌmɪŋ ɪndə vju əhɛd, fɝðɝ fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ. ðə fɔɹəst wɑz θɪnɪŋ, æʃ ən lɛðɝlif ən blæk ɛldɝ ɡɪvɪŋ weɪ tə wɪloʊ ən waɪtwʊɾ ən wɔɾɝoʊk, ən səm ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz.

The village and the smoke plume slipped away behind the ship, but already another column of smoke was coming into view ahead, further from the river. The forest was thinning, ash and leatherleaf and black elder giving way to willow and whitewood and wateroak, and some she did not recognize.

ðə wɪn kɑɾ əɹ kloʊk, bʌt ʃi lɛɾ ɪt stʃɹim, filɪŋ ðə koʊl klinnəs ə ði ɛɹ, filɪŋ ðə fɹiɾəm ʌv wɛɹɪŋ bɹaʊn ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɛni sɔɹɾ ʌv waɪt, ðoʊ ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn əɹ fɝs tʃɔɪs. jɛt dʒɹɛs ən kloʊk wɝ ə ðə bɛst wʊl, wɛl kʌɾ ən wɛl soʊn.

The wind caught her cloak, but she let it stream, feeling the cold cleanness of the air, feeling the freedom of wearing brown instead of any sort of white, though it had not been her first choice. Yet dress and cloak were of the best wool, well cut and well sewn.

ənʌðɝ seɪlɝ tʃɹɑɾəd baɪ, boʊɪŋ əz i wɛnt. ʃi vaʊd tə lɝn ət list səm ʌv wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ; ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk filɪŋ ɪɡnɝənt. wɛɹɪŋ əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ ɹaɪt hæn meɪd fəɹ ə ɡʊd dil ə boʊɪŋ wɪð ə kæptən ən kɹu bɔɹn meɪnli ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn.

Another sailor trotted by, bowing as he went. She vowed to learn at least some of what it was they were doing; she did not like feeling ignorant. Wearing her Great Serpent ring on her right hand made for a good deal of bowing with a captain and crew born mainly in Tar Valon.

ʃi hæd wʌn ðəɾ ɑɹɡjəmənt wɪð nɪneɪiv, ðoʊ nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn ə ðə θɹi ʌv əm oʊld ɪnʌf fəɹ pipəl tə bɪliv ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. bʌt nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn ɹɔŋ. ɛɡwin wɑz ɹɛɾi tə ədmɪt ðət boʊθ ʃi ən ɪleɪn hæd ɹəsiv stɑɹɾəld lʊks ɑn bɔɹɾɪŋ ðə blu kɹeɪn ðəɾ æftɝnun ət saʊθhɑɹbɝ, ən kæptən ɛlɪsɝz aɪbɹaʊz hæd klaɪmd ɔlmoʊs tə wɛɹ ɪz hɛɹ wʊɾə bɪɡʌn hæɾ i hæɾ ɛni, bʌɾ i hæd bɪn ɔl smaɪlz ən baʊz.

She had won that argument with Nynaeve, though Nynaeve had been sure she herself was the only one of the three of them old enough for people to believe she was Aes Sedai. But Nynaeve had been wrong. Egwene was ready to admit that both she and Elayne had received startled looks on boarding the Blue Crane that afternoon at Southharbor, and Captain Ellisor's eyebrows had climbed almost to where his hair would have begun had he had any, but he had been all smiles and bows.

"æn ɑnɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ. θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ tə tʃɹævəl ɑn maɪ vɛsəl? ən ɑnɝ ɪndid. aɪ pɹɑməs jə ə kwɪk dʒɝni əz fɑɹ əz jə wɪʃ. ən noʊ tʃɹʌbəl wɪð kɛɹhinɪn bɹɪɡænz. aɪ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ pʊɾ ɪn ɑn ðət saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ. ənlɛs jə wɪʃ ɪt, ʌv kɔɹs, ɛɛs sədaɪ. ændɔɝən soʊlʒɝz də hoʊld ə fju taʊnz ɑn ðə kɛɹhinɪn saɪd. ən ɑnɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"An honor, Aes Sedai. Three Aes Sedai to travel on my vessel? An honor indeed. I promise you a quick journey as far as you wish. And no trouble with Cairhienin brigands. I no longer put in on that side of the river. Unless you wish it, of course, Aes Sedai. Andoran soldiers do hold a few towns on the Cairhienin side. An honor, Aes Sedai."

hɪz aɪbɹaʊz hæd ʃɑɾ ʌp əɡɛn wən ðeɪ æsk fəɹ dʒʌst wʌn kæbən əmʌŋ əm - nɑɾ ivən nɪneɪiv wɑntəd tə bi əloʊn ət naɪɾ ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə bi. itʃ kəɾ əv ə kæbən tə hɝsɛlf ət noʊ ɛkstʃɹə tʃɑɹdʒ, hi toʊl ðɛm; hi hæd noʊ ʌðɝ pæsənʒɝz, hɪz kɑɹɡoʊ wɑz əbɔɹd, ən ɪf ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ ɝdʒən bɪznəs daʊnɹɪvɝ, hi wəd nɑt weɪɾ ivən ən aʊɝ fəɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls u maɪt wɑn pæsədʒ. ðeɪ sɛɾ əɡɛn ðət wʌn kæbən wəd bi səfɪʃənt.

His eyebrows had shot up again when they asked for just one cabin among them - not even Nynaeve wanted to be alone at night if she did not have to be. Each could have a cabin to herself at no extra charge, he told them; he had no other passengers, his cargo was aboard, and if Aes Sedai had urgent business downriver, he would not wait even an hour for anyone else who might want passage. They said again that one cabin would be sufficient.

hi wɑz stɑɹɾəld, ən ɪt hæd bɪn pleɪn fɹəm ɪz feɪs ðəɾ i dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, bʌt tʃɪn ɛlɪsɝ, bɔɹn ən bɹɛɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, wɑz nɑt wʌn tə kwɛstʃən ɛɛs sədaɪ wʌns ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ ɪntɛntʃənz klɪɹ. ɪf tu ʌv əm sim vɛɹi jʌŋ, wɛl, səm ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ jʌŋ.

He was startled, and it had been plain from his face that he did not understand, but Chin Ellisor, born and bred in Tar Valon, was not one to question Aes Sedai once they made their intentions clear. If two of them seemed very young, well, some Aes Sedai were young.

ði əbændən ɹuənz vænɪʃt bɪhaɪn ɛɡwin. ðə kɑləm ə smoʊk dʒɹu kloʊsɝ, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə hɪn ʌv ənʌðɝ mʌtʃ fɝðɝ stɪl fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk. ðə fɔɹəst wɑz tɝnɪŋ tə loʊ, ɡɹæsi hɪlz dɑɾəd wɪð θɪkəts. tʃɹiz ðət meɪd flaʊɝz ɪn ðə spɹɪŋ hæd ðɛm, taɪni waɪt blɑsəmz ɑn snoʊbɛɹi ən bɹaɪt ɹɛd ʃʊɡɑɝbɛɹi. wʌn tʃɹi ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɑz kʌvɝɾ ɪn ɹaʊnd waɪt flaʊɝz bɪɡɝ ðən əɹ tu hænz təɡɛðɝ. əkeɪʒənəli ə klaɪmɪŋ waɪld-ɹoʊz pʊt swɑθs ə jɛloʊ əɹ waɪt θɹu bɹæntʃəz θɪk wɪð ðə ɡɹin ə livz ən ðə ɹɛɾ ə nu ɡɹoʊθ. ɪt wɑz ɔl tu ʃɑɹp ə kɑntʃɹæs tə ði æʃəz ən ɹʌbəl tə bi ɪntaɪɝli plɛzənt.

The abandoned ruins vanished behind Egwene. The column of smoke drew closer, and there was a hint of another much further still from the riverbank. The forest was turning to low, grassy hills dotted with thickets. Trees that made flowers in the spring had them, tiny white blossoms on snowberry and bright red sugarberry. One tree she did not know was covered in round white flowers bigger than her two hands together. Occasionally a climbing wild-rose put swaths of yellow or white through branches thick with the green of leaves and the red of new growth. It was all too sharp a contrast to the ashes and rubble to be entirely pleasant.

ɛɡwin wɪʃt ʃi hæɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə kwɛstʃən hɝsɛlf ɹaɪt ðɛn. wʌn ʃi kəd tʃɹʌst. bɹʌʃɪŋ əɹ paʊtʃ wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz, ʃi kəd bɛɹli fil ðə twɪstəd stoʊn ɹɪŋ ə ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɪnsaɪd.

Egwene wished she had an Aes Sedai to question herself right then. One she could trust. Brushing her pouch with her fingers, she could barely feel the twisted stone ring of the ter'angreal inside.

ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪɾ ɪɾ ɛvɹi naɪt bʌt tu sɪns livɪŋ tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ɪt hæd nɑt wɝk ðə seɪm weɪ twaɪs. oʊ, ʃi ɔlweɪz faʊn hɝsɛlf ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, bʌt ði oʊnli θɪŋ ʃi sɔ ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn ɛni jus wɑz ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn əɡɛn, itʃ taɪm wɪθaʊt sɪlvi tə tɛl əɹ θɪŋz. ðəɹ wɑz sɝɾənli nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə blæk ədʒɑ.

She had tried it every night but two since leaving Tar Valon, and it had not worked the same way twice. Oh, she always found herself in Tel'aran'rhiod, but the only thing she saw that might have been any use was the Heart of the Stone again, each time without Silvie to tell her things. There was certainly nothing about the Black Ajah.

hɝ oʊn dʒɹimz, wɪθaʊt ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, hæd bɪn fɪld wɪð ɪmədʒəz ðət simd ɔlmoʊs laɪk ɡlɪmpsɪz ə ði ənsin wɝld. ɹænd hoʊldɪŋ ə sɔɹd ðət bleɪz laɪk ðə sʌn, tɪl ʃi kəd hɑɹdli si ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə sɔɹd, kəd hɑɹdli meɪk aʊt ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ɪm əɾ ɔl. ɹænd θɹɛɾənd ɪn ə dʌzən weɪz, nʌn ə ðɛm ðə lis bɪt ɹil. ɪn wʌn dʒɹim i hæd bɪn ɑn ə hjudʒ stoʊnz bɔɹd, ðə blæk ən waɪt stoʊnz əz bɪɡ əz boʊldɝz, ən ɪm dɑdʒɪŋ ðə mɑnstʃɹəs hænz ðət muvd əm ən sim tə tʃɹaɪ tə kɹʌʃ ɪm ʌndɝ ðɛm. ɪt cʊɾə mɛn sʌmθɪŋ. ɪt vɛɹi pɹɑbli dɪd, bʌt bɪɑn ðə fæk ðət ɹænd wɑz ɪn deɪnʒɝ fɹəm sʌmwʌn, əɹ tu sʌmoʊnz - ʃi θɔt ðət mʌtʃ wɑz klɪɹ - bɪɑn ðæt, ʃi sɪmpli dɪd nɑt noʊ. aɪ kænɑt hɛlp hɪm, naʊ. aɪ hæv maɪ oʊn duɾi. aɪ doʊn ivən noʊ wɛɹ i ɪz, ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪts pɹɑbli faɪv hʌnʒɹəd liɡz fɹəm hɪɹ.

Her own dreams, without the ter'angreal, had been filled with images that seemed almost like glimpses of the Unseen World. Rand holding a sword that blazed like the sun, till she could hardly see that it was a sword, could hardly make out that it was him at all. Rand threatened in a dozen ways, none of them the least bit real. In one dream he had been on a huge stones board, the black and white stones as big as boulders, and him dodging the monstrous hands that moved them and seemed to try to crush him under them. It could have meant something. It very probably did, but beyond the fact that Rand was in danger from someone, or two someones - she thought that much was clear - beyond that, she simply did not know. I cannot help him, now. I have my own duty. I don't even know where he is, except that it is probably five hundred leagues from here.

ʃi hæd dʒɹimd ə pɛɹɪn wɪð ə wʊlf, ən wɪð ə fælkən, ən ə hɔk - ən ðə fælkən ən ðə hɔk faɪɾɪŋ - ʌv pɛɹɪn ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm sʌmwʌn dɛdli, ən pɛɹɪn stɛpɪŋ wɪlɪŋli oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə taʊɝɪŋ klɪf waɪl seɪɪŋ, "ɪt mʌs bi dʌn. aɪ mʌs lɝn tə flaɪ bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɹitʃ ðə bɑɾəm." ðəɹ hæd bɪn wʌn dʒɹim ʌv ən il, ən ʃi θɔt ðət hæd tə də wɪð pɛɹɪn, tu, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ. ən ə dʒɹim ə mɪn, spɹɪŋɪŋ ə stil tʃɹæp bʌt sʌmhaʊ wɔkɪŋ θɹu ɪt wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz siɪŋ ɪt. ðəɹ hæd bɪn dʒɹimz ə mæt, tu. ʌv mæt wɪð daɪs spɪnɪŋ 'ɹaʊn ɪm - ʃi fɛlt ʃi nu wɛɹ ðət wʌn keɪm fɹəm - ʌv mæt biɪŋ fɑloʊd baɪ ə mæn u wɑz nɑt ðəɹ - ʃi stɪl dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðæt; ðəɹ wɑz ə mæn fɑloʊɪŋ, əɹ meɪbi mɔɹ ðən wʌn, bʌɾ ɪn səm weɪ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ðəɹ - ʌv mæt ɹaɪɾɪŋ dɛspɝətli təwɔɹd sʌmθɪŋ ənsin ɪn ðə dɪstəns ðəɾ i hæd tə ɹitʃ, ən mæt wɪð ə wʊmən u sim tə bi tɔsɪŋ faɪɹwɝks əbaʊt. ən ɪluməneɪɾɝ, ʃi əsumd, bʌt ðət meɪd noʊ mɔɹ sɛns ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls.

She had dreamed of Perrin with a wolf, and with a falcon, and a hawk - and the falcon and the hawk fighting - of Perrin running from someone deadly, and Perrin stepping willingly over the edge of a towering cliff while saying, "It must be done. I must learn to fly before I reach the bottom." There had been one dream of an Aiel, and she thought that had to do with Perrin, too, but she was not sure. And a dream of Min, springing a steel trap but somehow walking through it without so much as seeing it. There had been dreams of Mat, too. Of Mat with dice spinning 'round him - she felt she knew where that one came from - of Mat being followed by a man who was not there - she still did not understand that; there was a man following, or maybe more than one, but in some way there was no one there - of Mat riding desperately toward something unseen in the distance that he had to reach, and Mat with a woman who seemed to be tossing fireworks about. An Illuminator, she assumed, but that made no more sense than anything else.

ʃi hæd hæd soʊ mɛni dʒɹimz ðət ʃi wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə daʊɾ əm ɔl. meɪbi ɪt hæd tə də wɪð juzɪŋ ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil soʊ ɔfən, əɹ meɪbi wɪð dʒʌs kæɹiɪŋ ɪt. meɪbi ʃi wɑz faɪnəli lɝnɪŋ wʌɾ ə dʒɹimɝ dɪd. fɹæntɪk dʒɹimz, hɛktɪk dʒɹimz. mɛn ən wɪmən bɹeɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə keɪdʒ, ðən pʊɾɪŋ ɑn kɹaʊnz. ə wʊmən pleɪɪŋ wɪð pʌpəts, ən ənʌðɝ dʒɹim wɛɹ ðə stʃɹɪŋz ɑn pʌpəts lɛd tə ðə hænz ə lɑɹdʒɝ pʌpəts, ən ðɛɹ stʃɹɪŋz lɛd tə stɪl ɡɹeɪɾɝ pʌpəts, ɑn ən ɑn əntɪl ðə læst stʃɹɪŋz vænɪʃt ɪndə ʌnɪmædʒɪnəbəl haɪts. kɪŋz daɪɪŋ, kwinz wipɪŋ, bæɾəlz ɹeɪdʒɪŋ. waɪtkloʊks ɹævɪdʒɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ʃi hæɾ ivən dʒɹimd ə ðə sintʃæn əɡɛn. mɔɹ ðən wʌns. ðoʊz ʃi ʃʌɾ əweɪ ɪn ə dɑɹk kɔɹnɝ; ʃi wəd nɑt lɛt hɝsɛlf θɪŋk ə ðɛm. hɝ mʌðɝ ən fɑðɝ, ɛvɹi naɪt.

She had had so many dreams that she was beginning to doubt them all. Maybe it had to do with using the ter'angreal so often, or maybe with just carrying it. Maybe she was finally learning what a Dreamer did. Frantic dreams, hectic dreams. Men and women breaking out of a cage, then putting on crowns. A woman playing with puppets, and another dream where the strings on puppets led to the hands of larger puppets, and their strings led to still greater puppets, on and on until the last strings vanished into unimaginable heights. Kings dying, queens weeping, battles raging. Whitecloaks ravaging the Two Rivers. She had even dreamed of the Seanchan again. More than once. Those she shut away in a dark corner; she would not let herself think of them. Her mother and father, every night.

ʃi wɑz sɝɾən wʌt ðət mɛnt, ət list, əɹ θɔt ʃi wɑz. ɪt minz aɪm ɔf hʌntɪŋ ðə blæk ədʒɑ, ən aɪ də nɑt noʊ wʌt maɪ dʒɹimz min əɹ haʊ tə meɪk ðə ful tɛɹæŋɡɹil də wʌɾ ɪt ʃʊd, ən aɪm fɹaɪɾənd, ænd. . . . ən hoʊmsɪk. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt ʃi θɔt haʊ ɡʊɾ ɪt wəd bi tə hæv əɹ mʌðɝ sɛn əɹ ʌp tə bɛd noʊɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ wəd bi bɛɾɝ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. oʊnli mʌðɝ kæn sɑlv maɪ pɹɑbləmz fəɹ mi ɛnimɔɹ, ən fɑðɝ kæn pɹɑməs tə tʃeɪs əweɪ mɑnstɝz ən meɪk mi bɪliv ɪt. aɪ hæv tə də ɪt maɪsɛlf naʊ.

She was certain what that meant, at least, or thought she was. It means I'm off hunting the Black Ajah, and I do not know what my dreams mean or how to make the fool ter'angreal do what it should, and I'm frightened, and. . . . And homesick. For an instant she thought how good it would be to have her mother send her up to bed knowing everything would be better in the morning. Only mother can't solve my problems for me anymore, and father can't promise to chase away monsters and make me believe it. I have to do it myself now.

haʊ fɑɹ ɪn ðə pæst ɔl ðət wɑz, naʊ. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn ɪt bæk, nɑt ɹɪli, bʌɾ ɪt hæd bɪn ə wɔɹm taɪm, ən ɪt sim soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ. ɪt wəd bi wʌndɝfəl dʒʌs tə si ðɛm əɡɛn, tə hɪɹ ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz. wən aɪ wɛɹ ðɪs ɹɪŋ ɑn ðə fɪŋɡɝ aɪ tʃuz baɪ ɹaɪt.

How far in the past all that was, now. She did not want it back, not really, but it had been a warm time, and it seemed so long ago. It would be wonderful just to see them again, to hear their voices. When I wear this ring on the finger I choose by right.

ʃi hæd faɪnəli lɛt nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn itʃ tʃɹaɪ slipɪŋ wʌn naɪt wɪð ðə stoʊn ɹɪŋ - sɝpɹaɪzd ət haʊ ɹɪlʌktənt ʃi hæd bɪn tə lɛɾ ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ oʊn hænz - ən ðeɪ hæɾ əweɪkən tə spik ʌv wʌt wɑz ʃʊɹli tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, bʌt niðɝ hæd sin mɔɹ ðən ə ɡlɪmps ə ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn, nʌθɪŋ ðət wɑz ʌv ɛni jus.

She had finally let Nynaeve and Elayne each try sleeping one night with the stone ring - surprised at how reluctant she had been to let it out of her own hands - and they had awakened to speak of what was surely Tel'aran'rhiod, but neither had seen more than a glimpse of the Heart of the Stone, nothing that was of any use.

ðə θɪk kɑləm ə smoʊk naʊ leɪ əbɹɛst ə ðə blu kɹeɪn. pɝhæps faɪv əɹ sɪks maɪlz fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ, ʃi θɔt. ði ʌðɝ wɑz oʊnli ə smʌdʒ ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən. ɪt kəɾ ɔlmoʊst əv bɪn ə klaʊd, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz nɑt. smɔl θɪkəts ɡɹu taɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk ɪn səm pleɪsəz, ən bɪtwin əm ðə ɡɹæs keɪm ɹaɪt daʊn tə ðə wɔɾɝ ɪksɛpt wɛɹ ən ʌndɝkʌt bæŋk hæd fɔlən ɪn.

The thick column of smoke now lay abreast of the Blue Crane. Perhaps five or six miles from the river, she thought. The other was only a smudge on the horizon. It could almost have been a cloud, but she was sure it was not. Small thickets grew tight along the riverbank in some places, and between them the grass came right down to the water except where an undercut bank had fallen in.

ɪleɪn keɪm ɑn dɛk ən dʒɔɪn əɹ ət ðə ɹeɪl, ðə wɪnd wɪpɪŋ əɹ dɑɹk kloʊk əz wɛl. ʃi wɔɹ stɝɾi wʊl, tu. ðət hæd bɪn wʌn ɑɹɡjəmənt nɪneɪiv wʌn. ðɛɹ kloʊðz. ɛɡwin hæd meɪnteɪn ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlweɪz wɔɹ ðə bɛst, ivən wən ðeɪ tʃɹævəld - ʃi hæd bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə sɪlks ʃi wɔɹ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd - bʌt nɪneɪiv pɔɪntəɾ aʊt ðəɾ ivən wɪð əz mʌtʃ ɡoʊld əz ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd lɛft ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ wɔɹdʒɹoʊb, ən ɪt wɑz ə fæt pɝs, ðeɪ stɪl hæd noʊ aɪdiə haʊ mʌtʃ θɪŋz wəd kɑs daʊnɹɪvɝ. ðə sɝvəns sɛd mæt hæd bɪn ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt ðə sɪvəl wɔɹ ɪn kɛɹhin, ən wʌɾ ɪt hæd dʌn tə pɹaɪsəz. tə ɛɡwinz sɝpɹaɪz, ɪleɪn hæd pɔɪntəɾ aʊt ðət bɹaʊn sɪstɝz wɔɹ wʊl mɔɹ ɔfən ðən sɪlk. ɪleɪn hæd bɪn soʊ iɡɝ tə bi əweɪ fɹəm ðə kɪtʃən, ɛɡwin θɔt, ʃi wʊɾə wɔɹn ɹæɡz.

Elayne came on deck and joined her at the rail, the wind whipping her dark cloak as well. She wore sturdy wool, too. That had been one argument Nynaeve won. Their clothes. Egwene had maintained that Aes Sedai always wore the best, even when they traveled - she had been thinking of the silks she wore in Tel'aran'rhiod - but Nynaeve pointed out that even with as much gold as the Amyrlin had left in the back of her wardrobe, and it was a fat purse, they still had no idea how much things would cost downriver. The servants said Mat had been right about the civil war in Cairhien, and what it had done to prices. To Egwene's surprise, Elayne had pointed out that Brown sisters wore wool more often than silk. Elayne had been so eager to be away from the kitchen, Egwene thought, she would have worn rags.

aɪ wʌndɝ haʊ mæt ɪz duɪŋ? noʊ daʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə daɪs wɪð ðə kæptən fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ ʃɪp hiz tʃɹævlɪŋ ɑn.

I wonder how Mat is doing? No doubt trying to dice with the captain for whatever ship he's traveling on.

"tɛɹəbəl," ɪleɪn mɝmɝd. "ɪɾ ɪz soʊ tɛɹəbəl."

"Terrible," Elayne murmured. "It is so terrible."

"wʌɾ ɪz?" ɛɡwin sɛɾ æbsənli. aɪ hoʊp i ɪzənt ʃoʊɪŋ ðət peɪpɝ wi ɡeɪv ɪm ɝaʊn tu fɹili.

"What is?" Egwene said absently. I hope he isn't showing that paper we gave him around too freely.

ɪleɪn ɡeɪv əɹ ə stɑɹɾəld lʊk, ən ðən ə fɹaʊn. "ðæt!" ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd təwɔɹd ðə dɪstən smoʊk. "haʊ kən jə ɪɡnɔɹ ɪt?"

Elayne gave her a startled look, and then a frown. "That!" She gestured toward the distant smoke. "How can you ignore it?"

"aɪ kən ɪɡnɔɹ ɪt kəz aɪ də nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk ʌv wʌt ðə pipəl ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ θɹu, kəz aɪ kænɑt də ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt, ən kəz wɪv tə ɹitʃ tiɹ. kəz wʌt wɝ hʌntɪŋ ɪz ɪn tɛɹ." ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd əɾ əɹ oʊn viəməns. aɪ kæn də ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt. ən ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɪz ɪn tiɹ.

"I can ignore it because I do not want to think of what the people are going through, because I cannot do anything about it, and because we have to reach Tear. Because what we're hunting is in Tear." She was surprised at her own vehemence. I can't do anything about it. And the Black Ajah is in Tear.

ðə mɔɹ ʃi θɔɾ ʌv ɪt, ðə mɔɹ sɝɾən ʃi bɪkeɪm ðət ðeɪ wəɾ əv tə faɪn ə weɪ ɪndə ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn. pɝhæps noʊ wʌn bʌt ðə haɪ lɔɹdz ə tiɹ wɝ əlaʊɾ ɪndə ɪt, bʌt ʃi wɑz bɪkʌmɪŋ kənvɪns ðət ðə ki tə spɹɪŋɪŋ ðə blæk ədʒɑz tʃɹæp ən θwɔɹɾɪŋ əm leɪ ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn.

The more she thought of it, the more certain she became that they would have to find a way into the Heart of the Stone. Perhaps no one but the High Lords of Tear were allowed into it, but she was becoming convinced that the key to springing the Black Ajah's trap and thwarting them lay in the Heart of the Stone.

"aɪ noʊ ɔl ə ðæt, ɛɡwin, bʌɾ ɪt dʌz nɑt stɑp mi filɪŋ fəɹ ðə kɛɹhinɪn."

"I know all of that, Egwene, but it does not stop me feeling for the Cairhienin."

"aɪ hæv hɝd lɛktʃɝz əbaʊt ðə wɔɹz ændɝ fɔt wɪð kɛɹhin," ɛɡwin sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "bɛn sədaɪ sɛz jə ən kɛɹhin əv fɔt mɔɹ ɔfən ðən ɛni tu neɪʃənz ɪksɛp tiɹ ən ɪljən."

"I have heard lectures about the wars Andor fought with Cairhien," Egwene said dryly. "Bennae Sedai says you and Cairhien have fought more often than any two nations except Tear and Illian."

ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ɡeɪv əɹ ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk. ɪleɪn hæd nɛvɝ ɡɑɾən juz tə ɛɡwinz ɹəfjuzəl tə ədmɪt ʃi wɑz ændɔɝən hɝsɛlf. ət list, laɪnz ɑn mæps sɛd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑz pɑɹɾ ʌv ændɝ, ən ɪleɪn bɪliv ðə mæps.

The other woman gave her a sidelong look. Elayne had never gotten used to Egwene's refusal to admit she was Andoran herself. At least, lines on maps said the Two Rivers was part of Andor, and Elayne believed the maps.

"wi hæv fɔt wɔɹz əɡɛns ðɛm, ɛɡwin, bʌt sɪns ðə dæmədʒ ðeɪ sʌfɝɾ ɪn ði il wɔɹ, ændɝ əz soʊld əm nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ ɡɹeɪn əz tiɹ hæz. ðə tʃɹeɪɾ əz stɑpt, naʊ. wɪð ɛvɹi kɛɹhinɪn haʊs faɪɾɪŋ ɛvɹi ʌðɝ fəɹ ðə sʌn θɹoʊn, hu wəd baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪn, əɹ si ɪt dɪstʃɹɪbjəɾəd tə ðə pipəl? ɪf ðə faɪɾɪŋ ɪz əz bæɾ əz wʌt wiv sin ɑn ðə bæŋks. . . . wɛl. jə kænɑt fiɾ ə pipəl fəɹ twɛnti jɪɹz ən fil nʌθɪŋ fəɹ əm wən ðeɪ mʌs bi stɑɹvɪŋ."

"We have fought wars against them, Egwene, but since the damage they suffered in the Aiel War, Andor has sold them nearly as much grain as Tear has. The trade has stopped, now. With every Cairhienin House fighting every other for the Sun Throne, who would buy the grain, or see it distributed to the people? If the fighting is as bad as what we've seen on the banks. . . . Well. You cannot feed a people for twenty years and feel nothing for them when they must be starving."

"eɪ ɡɹeɪ mæn," ɛɡwin sɛd, ən ɪleɪn dʒʌmpt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən ət wʌns. ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəd hɝ.

"A Gray Man," Egwene said, and Elayne jumped, trying to look in every direction at once. The glow of saidar surrounded her.

"wɛɹ?"

"Where?"

ɛɡwin tʊk ə sloʊɝ lʊk ɝaʊn ðə dɛks, bʌt tə meɪk ʃʊɹ noʊ wʌn wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝhɪɹ. kæptən ɛlɪsɝ stɪl stʊɾ ɪn ðə stɝn, baɪ ðə ʃɝtləs mæn hoʊldɪŋ ðə lɔŋ tɪlɝ. ənʌðɝ seɪlɝ wɑz ʌp ɪn ðə vɛɹi baʊ, skænɪŋ ðə wɔɾɝz əhɛd fəɹ saɪnz ə səbmɝdʒ mʌdbæŋks, ən tu mɔɹ pæɾəd əbaʊt ðə dɛk, naʊ ən əɡɛn ədʒʌstɪŋ ə ɹoʊp tə ðə seɪlz. ðə ɹɛst ə ðə kɹu wɝ ɔl bɪloʊ. wʌn ə ðə pɛɹ stɑp tə tʃɛk ðə læʃɪŋz ɑn ðə ɹoʊboʊt taɪɾ ʌpsaɪd daʊn ɑn ðə dɛk; ʃi weɪɾəd fəɹ ɪm tə ɡoʊ ɑn bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ.

Egwene took a slower look around the decks, but to make sure no one was close enough to overhear. Captain Ellisor still stood in the stern, by the shirtless man holding the long tiller. Another sailor was up in the very bow, scanning the waters ahead for signs of submerged mudbanks, and two more padded about the deck, now and again adjusting a rope to the sails. The rest of the crew were all below. One of the pair stopped to check the lashings on the rowboat tied upside down on the deck; she waited for him to go on before speaking.

"ful!" ʃi mʌɾɝd sɔfli. "mi, ɪleɪn, nɑt ju, soʊ doʊnt ɡlaʊɝ ət mi laɪk ðæt." ʃi kəntɪnjuɾ ɪn ə wɪspɝ. "eɪ ɡɹeɪ mæn ɪz æftɝ mæt, ɪleɪn. ðət mʌs bi wʌt ðət dʒɹim mɛnt, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ sɔ ɪt. aɪm ə ful!"

"Fool!" she muttered softly. "Me, Elayne, not you, so don't glower at me like that." She continued in a whisper. "A Gray Man is after Mat, Elayne. That must be what that dream meant, but I never saw it. I am a fool!"

ðə ɡloʊ ɝaʊn ɪleɪn vænɪʃt. "du nɑt bi soʊ hɑɹɾ ɑn jɝsɛlf," ʃi wɪspɝd bæk. "pɝhæps ɪt dʌz min ðæt, bʌɾ aɪ dɪd nɑt si ɪt, ən niðɝ dɪd nɪneɪiv." ʃi pɔzd; ɹɛd-ɡoʊl kɝlz swʌŋ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "bʌɾ ɪt dʌzn meɪk sɛns, ɛɡwin. waɪ wəɾ ə ɡɹeɪ mæn bi æftɝ mæt? ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ ɪn maɪ lɛɾɝ tə maɪ mʌðɝ ðət kəd hɑɹm əs ɪn ðə slaɪɾəst."

The glow around Elayne vanished. "Do not be so hard on yourself," she whispered back. "Perhaps it does mean that, but I did not see it, and neither did Nynaeve." She paused; red-gold curls swung as she shook her head. "But it doesn't make sense, Egwene. Why would a Gray Man be after Mat? There is nothing in my letter to my mother that could harm us in the slightest."

"aɪ də nɑt noʊ waɪ." ɛɡwin fɹaʊnd. "ðɛɹ əz tə bi ə ɹizən. aɪm ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɪz wʌt ðət dʒɹim minz."

"I do not know why." Egwene frowned. "There has to be a reason. I am sure that is what that dream means."

"ivən ɪf jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt, ɛɡwin, ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ jə kən də əbaʊɾ ɪt."

"Even if you are right, Egwene, there is nothing you can do about it."

"aɪ noʊ ðæt," ɛɡwin sɛd bɪɾɝli. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən noʊ wɛðɝ i wɑz əhɛɾ ə ðɛm əɹ bɪhaɪnd. əhɛd, ʃi səspɛktəd; mæt wʊɾə lɛft wɪθaʊɾ ɛni dɪleɪ. "iðɝ weɪ," ʃi mʌɾɝd tə hɝsɛlf, "ɪt dʌz noʊ ɡʊd. aɪ faɪnəli noʊ wʌt wʌn ə maɪ dʒɹimz minz, ən ɪt dʌzn hɛlp ə hɛmstɪtʃ wɝθ!"

"I know that," Egwene said bitterly. She did not even know whether he was ahead of them or behind. Ahead, she suspected; Mat would have left without any delay. "Either way," she muttered to herself, "it does no good. I finally know what one of my dreams means, and it doesn't help a hemstitch worth!"

"bʌɾ ɪf jə noʊ wʌn minɪŋ," ɪleɪn toʊl hɝ, "pɝhæps naʊ jəl noʊ ʌðɝz. ɪf wi sɪt daʊn ən tɔk əm oʊvɝ, pɝhæps - "

"But if you know one meaning," Elayne told her, "perhaps now you will know others. If we sit down and talk them over, perhaps - "

ðə blu kɹeɪn ɡeɪv ə ʃʌɾɝɪŋ lɝtʃ, θɹoʊɪŋ ɪleɪn tə ðə dɛk ən ɛɡwin ɑn tɑp ə hɝ. wən ɛɡwin stʃɹʌɡəl tə hɝ fit, ðə ʃɔɹlaɪn noʊ lɔŋɡɝ slɪd baɪ. ðə vɛsəl hæd hɔltəd, wɪð ðə baʊ ɹeɪzd ən ðə dɛk kæntɪd tə wʌn saɪd. ðə seɪlz flæp nɔɪzəli ɪn ðə wɪnd.

The Blue Crane gave a shuddering lurch, throwing Elayne to the deck and Egwene on top of her. When Egwene struggled to her feet, the shoreline no longer slid by. The vessel had halted, with the bow raised and the deck canted to one side. The sails flapped noisily in the wind.

tʃɪn ɛlɪsɝ pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf tə hɪz fiɾ ən ɹæn fəɹ ðə baʊ, livɪŋ ðə tɪlɝmən tə ɹaɪz ɑn ɪz oʊn. "ju blaɪnd wɝm ʌv ə fɑɹmɝ!" hi ɹɔɹd təwɔɹd ðə mæn ɪn ðə baʊ, hu wɑz klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə ɹeɪl tə kip fɹəm fɔlɪŋ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ oʊvɝ. "ju dɝt-ɡɹʌbɪŋ ɡɛɾ ʌv ə ɡoʊt! hævən jə bɪn ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝ lɔŋ ɪnʌf jɛt tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz haʊ ðə wɔɾɝ ɹʌfəlz oʊvɝ ə mʌdflæt?" hi siz ðə mæn ɑn ðə ɹeɪl baɪ ðə ʃoʊldɝz ən pʊld ɪm bæk ɑntu ðə dɛk, bʌɾ oʊnli tə ʃʌv ɪm aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ soʊ hi kəd pɪɹ daʊn oʊvɝ ðə baʊ hɪmsɛlf. "ɪf juv pʊɾ ə hoʊl ɪn maɪ hʌl, əl juz jəɹ ɡʌts fəɹ kɔkɪŋ!"

Chin Ellisor pushed himself to his feet and ran for the bow, leaving the tillerman to rise on his own. "You blind worm of a farmer!" he roared toward the man in the bow, who was clinging to the rail to keep from falling the rest of the way over. "You dirt-grubbing get of a goat! Haven't you been on the river long enough yet to recognize how the water ruffles over a mudflat?" He seized the man on the rail by the shoulders and pulled him back onto the deck, but only to shove him out of the way so he could peer down over the bow himself. "If you've put a hole in my hull, I will use your guts for caulking!"

ði ʌðɝ kɹumɪn wɝ klæmbɝɪŋ tə ðɛɹ fit, naʊ, ən mɔɹ keɪm skɹæmbəlɪŋ ʌp fɹəm bɪloʊ. ðeɪ ɔl ɹæn tə klʌstɝ ɝaʊn ðə kæptən.

The other crewmen were clambering to their feet, now, and more came scrambling up from below. They all ran to cluster around the captain.

nɪneɪiv əpɪɹɾ ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə læɾɝ ðət lɛd daʊn tə ðə pæsənʒɝ kæbənz, stɪl stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ əɹ skɝts. wɪð ə ʃɑɹp tʌɡ əɾ əɹ bɹeɪd, ʃi fɹaʊn ət ðə nɑɾ ə mɛn ɪn ðə baʊ, ðən stʃɹoʊd tə ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn. "hi ɹæn əs ɑntu sʌmθɪŋ, dɪd hi? æftɝ ɔl ɪz tɔk ə noʊɪŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ əz wɛl əz i noʊz ɪz waɪf. ðə wʊmən pɹɑbli nɛvɝ ɹəsivz əz mʌtʃ əz ə smaɪl fɹəm hɪm." ʃi dʒɝk ðə θɪk bɹeɪɾ əɡɛn ən wɛn fɔɹwɝd, pʊʃɪŋ əɹ weɪ θɹu ðə seɪlɝz tə ɹitʃ ðə kæptən. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ɪntɛn ɑn ðə wɔɾɝ bɪloʊ.

Nynaeve appeared at the head of the ladder that led down to the passenger cabins, still straightening her skirts. With a sharp tug at her braid, she frowned at the knot of men in the bow, then strode to Egwene and Elayne. "He ran us onto something, did he? After all his talk of knowing the river as well as he knows his wife. The woman probably never receives as much as a smile from him." She jerked the thick braid again and went forward, pushing her way through the sailors to reach the captain. They were all intent on the water below.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn dʒɔɪnɪŋ hɝ. hɪl əv əs ɔf fæstɝ ɪf hiz lɛf tə ɪt. nɪneɪiv wɑz pɹɑbli tɛlɪŋ ɪm haʊ tə də ðə wɝk. ɪleɪn sim tə fil ðə seɪm weɪ, fɹəm ðə ɹufəl ʃeɪk ə ðə hɛd ʃi ɡeɪv əz ʃi wɑtʃt ðə kæptən ən kɹumɪn ɔl tɝn ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən ɹɪspɛkfəli fɹəm wʌtɛvɝ wɑz ʌndɝ ðə baʊ tə nɪneɪiv.

There was no point in joining her. He will have us off faster if he's left to it. Nynaeve was probably telling him how to do the work. Elayne seemed to feel the same way, from the rueful shake of the head she gave as she watched the captain and crewmen all turn their attention respectfully from whatever was under the bow to Nynaeve.

ə ɹɪpəl ʌv ædʒəteɪʃən ɹæn θɹu ðə mɛn, ən ɡɹu stʃɹɔŋɝ. fəɹ ə moʊmən ðə kæptənz hænz kəd bi sin, weɪvɪŋ ɪn pɹoʊɾɛst oʊvɝ ði ʌðɝ mɛnz hɛdz, ən ðən nɪneɪiv wɑz stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm əm - ðeɪ meɪd weɪ, boʊɪŋ naʊ - wɪð ɛlɪsɝ hɝiɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ən mɑpɪŋ ɪz ɹaʊn feɪs wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ ɹɛd hæŋkɝtʃɪf. hɪz æŋkʃəs vɔɪs bɪkeɪm ɑɾəbəl əz ðeɪ dʒɹu nɪɹ.

A ripple of agitation ran through the men, and grew stronger. For a moment the captain's hands could be seen, waving in protest over the other men's heads, and then Nynaeve was striding away from them - they made way, bowing now - with Ellisor hurrying beside her and mopping his round face with a large red handkerchief. His anxious voice became audible as they drew near.

". . . ə ɡʊd fɪftin maɪlz tə ðə nɛks vɪlədʒ ɑn ði ændɝ saɪd, ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ət lis faɪv əɹ sɪks maɪlz daʊnɹɪvɝ ɑn ðə kɛɹhin saɪd! ændɔɝən soʊlʒɝz hoʊld ɪt, ɪts tʃɹu, bʌt ðeɪ də nɑt hoʊl ðə maɪlz fɹəm hɪɹ tə ðɛɹ!" hi waɪpt əɾ ɪz feɪs əz ɪf i wɝ dʒɹɪpɪŋ swɛt.

". . . a good fifteen miles to the next village on the Andor side, Aes Sedai, and at least five or six miles downriver on the Cairhien side! Andoran soldiers hold it, it is true, but they do not hold the miles from here to there!" He wiped at his face as if he were dripping sweat.

"ə sʌŋkən ʃɪp," nɪneɪiv toʊl ðə ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən. "ðə wɝk ə ɹɪvɝ bɹɪɡænz, ðə kæptən θɪŋks. hi minz tə tʃɹaɪ bækɪŋ ɔf ɪt wɪð ðə swips, bʌɾ i dʌz nɑt sim tə θɪŋk ðət wɪl wɝk."

"A sunken ship," Nynaeve told the the other two women. "The work of river brigands, the captain thinks. He means to try backing off it with the sweeps, but he does not seem to think that will work."

"wi wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ fæst wən wi hɪt, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ wɑntəd tə meɪk ɡʊd spid fəɹ ju." ɛlɪsɝ ɹʌbd ivən hɑɹɾɝ əɾ ɪz feɪs. hi wɑz əfɹeɪd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd bleɪm hɪm, ɛɡwin ɹilaɪzd. "wi ɑɹ stʌk hɑɹd. bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk wəɹ teɪkɪŋ wɔɾɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə wɝi. ənʌðɝ ʃɪp wɪl bi əlɔŋ. tu sɛts ə swips wɪl ʃʊɹli ɡɛɾ əs fɹi. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid fəɹ jə tə bi pʊɾ əʃɔɹ, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ də swɛɹ ɪt, baɪ ðə laɪt."

"We were running fast when we hit, Aes Sedai. I wanted to make good speed for you." Ellisor rubbed even harder at his face. He was afraid the Aes Sedai would blame him, Egwene realized. "We are stuck hard. But I do not think we are taking water, Aes Sedai. There is no need to worry. Another ship will be along. Two sets of sweeps will surely get us free. There is no need for you to be put ashore, Aes Sedai. I do swear it, by the Light."

"ju wɝ θɪŋkɪŋ ə livɪŋ ðə ʃɪp?" ɛɡwin æskt. "du jə θɪŋk ðəɾ ɪz waɪz?"

"You were thinking of leaving the ship?" Egwene asked. "Do you think that is wise?"

"ʌv kɔɹs, ɪts - !" nɪneɪiv stɑpt ən fɹaʊn ət hɝ. ɛɡwin ɹɪtɝn ðə fɹaʊn wɪð ə lɛvəl stɛɹ. nɪneɪiv wɛn ɑn ɪn ə kɑmɝ toʊn, ɪf stɪl ə taɪt wʌn. "ðə kæptən sɛz ɪt meɪ bi ən aʊɝ bɪfɔɹ ənʌðɝ ʃɪp kʌmz əlɔŋ. wʌn wɪð ɪnʌf swips tə meɪk ə dɪfɝəns. əɹ ə deɪ. əɹ tu, meɪbi. aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk wi kən əfɔɹd tə weɪst ə deɪ əɹ tu weɪɾɪŋ. wi kən bi ɪn ðɪs vɪlədʒ - wʌd jə kɔl ɪt, kæptən? dʒʊɹin? - wi kən wɔk tə dʒʊɹin ɪn tu aʊɝz əɹ lɛs. ɪf kæptən ɛlɪsɝ fɹiz ɪz vɛsəl əz kwɪkli əz i hoʊps, wi kən ɹɪbɔɹd ðɛn. hi sɛz hɪl stɑp tə si ɪf wəɹ ðɛɹ. ɪf i dʌz nɑt ɡɛt fɹi, ðoʊ, wi kən teɪk ʃɪp fɹəm dʒʊɹin. wi meɪ ivən faɪn ə vɛsəl weɪɾɪŋ. ðə kæptən sɛz tʃɹeɪɾɝz də stɑp ðɛɹ, kəz ə ði ændɔɝən soʊlʒɝz." ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs ɡɹu taɪɾɝ. "hæv aɪ ɪkspleɪn maɪ ɹizənɪŋ fʊli ɪnʌf? dʒju nid mɔɹ?"

"Of course, it's - !" Nynaeve stopped and frowned at her. Egwene returned the frown with a level stare. Nynaeve went on in a calmer tone, if still a tight one. "The captain says it may be an hour before another ship comes along. One with enough sweeps to make a difference. Or a day. Or two, maybe. I do not think we can afford to waste a day or two waiting. We can be in this village - what did you call it, Captain? Jurene? - we can walk to Jurene in two hours or less. If Captain Ellisor frees his vessel as quickly as he hopes, we can reboard then. He says he will stop to see if we are there. If he does not get free, though, we can take ship from Jurene. We may even find a vessel waiting. The captain says traders do stop there, because of the Andoran soldiers." She drew a deep breath, but her voice grew tighter. "Have I explained my reasoning fully enough? Do you need more?"

"ɪɾ ɪz klɪɹ tə mi," ɪleɪn pʊɾ ɪn kwɪkli bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwin kəd spik. "æn ɪt saʊnz ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə. jə θɪŋk ɪts ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə, tu, doʊn ju, ɛɡwin?"

"It is clear to me," Elayne put in quickly before Egwene could speak. "And it sounds a good idea. You think it is a good idea, too, don't you, Egwene?"

ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ə ɡɹʌdʒɪŋ nɑd. "aɪ səpoʊz ɪɾ ɪz."

Egwene gave a grudging nod. "I suppose it is."

"bʌt, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɛlɪsɝ pɹətɛstəd, "æt list ɡoʊ tə ði ændɝ bæŋk. ðə wɔɹ, ɛɛs sədaɪ. bɹɪɡænz, ən ɛvɹi sɔɹɾ ə ɹʌfaɪən, ən ðə soʊlʒɝz nɑt mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ. ðə vɛɹi ɹɛk ʌndɝ əɹ baʊ ʃoʊz ðə sɔɹɾ ə mɛn ðeɪ ɑɹ."

"But, Aes Sedai," Ellisor protested, "at least go to the Andor bank. The war, Aes Sedai. Brigands, and every sort of ruffian, and the soldiers not much better. The very wreck under our bow shows the sort of men they are."

"wi hæv nɑt sin ə lɪvɪŋ soʊl ɑn ðə kɛɹhin saɪd," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "æn ɪn ɛni keɪs, wəɹ fɑɹ fɹəm dɪfɛnsləs, kæptən. ən əl nɑt wɔk fɪftin maɪlz wən aɪ kən wɔk sɪks."

"We have not seen a living soul on the Cairhien side," Nynaeve said, "and in any case, we are far from defenseless, Captain. And I will not walk fifteen miles when I can walk six."

"ʌv kɔɹs, ɛɛs sədaɪ." ɛlɪsɝ ɹɪli wɑz swɛɾɪŋ, naʊ. "aɪ dɪd nɑt min tə sədʒɛst. . . . ʌv kɔɹs jə ɑɹ nɑt dɪfɛnsləs, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ dɪd nɑt min tə sədʒɛst ɪt." hi waɪpt ɪz feɪs fjʊɹiəsli, bʌɾ ɪt stɪl ɡlɪsənd.

"Of course, Aes Sedai." Ellisor really was sweating, now. "I did not mean to suggest. . . . Of course you are not defenseless, Aes Sedai. I did not mean to suggest it." He wiped his face furiously, but it still glistened.

nɪneɪiv oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, ɡlænst əɾ ɛɡwin, ən sim tə tʃeɪnʒ wʌt ʃi hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə seɪ. "aɪ æm ɡoʊɪŋ bɪloʊ fəɹ maɪ θɪŋz," ʃi toʊl ði ɛɹ hæfweɪ bɪtwin ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn, ðən tɝn ɑn ɛlɪsɝ. "kæptən, meɪk jəɹ ɹoʊboʊt ɹɛɾi." hi baʊɾ ən skɝiɾ əweɪ ivən bɪfɔɹ ʃi tɝn fəɹ ðə hætʃ, ən wɑz ʃaʊɾɪŋ fəɹ mɛn tə pʊt ðə boʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə saɪd bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz bɪloʊ.

Nynaeve opened her mouth, glanced at Egwene, and seemed to change what she had intended to say. "I am going below for my things," she told the air halfway between Egwene and Elayne, then turned on Ellisor. "Captain, make your rowboat ready." He bowed and scurried away even before she turned for the hatch, and was shouting for men to put the boat over the side before she was below.

"ɪf wʌn ə jə sɛz 'ʌp,' " ɪleɪn mɝmɝd, "ði ʌðɝ sɛz 'daʊn.' ɪf jə də nɑt stɑp ɪt, wi meɪ nɑt ɹitʃ tiɹ."

"If one of you says 'up,' " Elayne murmured, "the other says 'down.' If you do not stop it, we may not reach Tear."

"wi wɪl ɹitʃ tɛɹ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "æn sunɝ wʌns nɪneɪiv ɹiəlaɪzɪz ʃiz nɑt ðə wɪzdəm ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. wəɹ ɔl" - ʃi dɪd nɑt seɪ æksɛptɪd; ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni mɛn hɝiɪŋ əbaʊt - "ɑn ðə seɪm lɛvəl, naʊ." ɪleɪn saɪd.

"We will reach Tear," Egwene said. "And sooner once Nynaeve realizes she is not the Wisdom any longer. We are all" - she did not say Accepted; there were two many men hurrying about - "on the same level, now." Elayne sighed.

ɪn ʃɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ ðə ɹoʊboʊt hæd fɛɹiɾ əm əʃɔɹ, ən ðeɪ wɝ stændɪŋ ɑn ðə bæŋk wɪð wɔkɪŋ stæfs ɪn hænd, ðɛɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz ɪn bʌndəlz ɑn ðɛɹ bæks, ən hʌŋ əbaʊɾ əm ɪn paʊtʃəz ən skɹɪps. ɹoʊlɪŋ ɡɹæslæn ən skæɾɝd kɑpsɪz sɝaʊndəd ðɛm, ðoʊ ðə hɪlz wɝ fɔɹəstəɾ ə fju maɪlz ɪn fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ. ðə swips ɑn ðə blu kɹeɪn wɝ kʌɾɪŋ ʌp fɹɔθ, bʌt feɪlɪŋ tə bʌdʒ ðə vɛsəl. ɛɡwin tɝn ən stɑɹɾəd saʊθ wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ ɡlæns. ən bɪfɔɹ nɪneɪiv kəd teɪk ðə lɛd.

In short order the rowboat had ferried them ashore, and they were standing on the bank with walking staffs in hand, their belongings in bundles on their backs, and hung about them in pouches and scripts. Rolling grassland and scattered copses surrounded them, though the hills were forested a few miles in from the river. The sweeps on the Blue Crane were cutting up froth, but failing to budge the vessel. Egwene turned and started south without another glance. And before Nynaeve could take the lead.

wən ði ʌðɝz kɑɾ ʌp tə hɝ, ɪleɪn ɡeɪv əɹ ə ɹipɹoʊvɪŋ lʊk. nɪneɪiv wɔk stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd. ɪleɪn toʊl nɪneɪiv wʌɾ ɛɡwin hæd sɛɾ əbaʊt mæt ən ə ɡɹeɪ mæn, bʌt ði oʊldɝ wʊmən lɪsən ɪn saɪləns ən oʊnli sɛd, "hil əv tə lʊk æftɝ hɪmsɛlf," wɪθaʊt pɔzɪŋ ɪn əɹ stʃɹaɪd. æftɝ ə taɪm, ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ɡeɪv ʌp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ði ʌðɝ tu tɔk, ən ðeɪ ɔl wɔkt ɪn saɪləns.

When the others caught up to her, Elayne gave her a reproving look. Nynaeve walked staring straight ahead. Elayne told Nynaeve what Egwene had said about Mat and a Gray Man, but the older woman listened in silence and only said, "He'll have to look after himself," without pausing in her stride. After a time, the Daughter-Heir gave up trying to make the other two talk, and they all walked in silence.

klʌmps ə tʃɹiz kloʊs əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk sun hɪd ðə blu kɹeɪn, θɪk ɡɹoʊθs ʌv wɔɾɝoʊk ən wɪloʊ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ θɹu ðə kɑpsɪz, smɔl əz ðeɪ wɝ, fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl maɪt bi haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz ʌndɝ ðɛɹ bɹæntʃəz. ə fju loʊ bʊʃəz ɡɹu skæɾɝd bɪtwin ðə θɪkəts hɪɹ kloʊs tə ðə ɹɪvɝ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ tu spɑɹs tə haɪɾ ə tʃaɪl mʌtʃ lɛs ə bɹɪɡənd, ən ðeɪ wɝ waɪdli speɪst.

Clumps of trees close along the riverbank soon hid the Blue Crane, thick growths of wateroak and willow. They did not go through the copses, small as they were, for anything at all might be hiding in the shadows under their branches. A few low bushes grew scattered between the thickets here close to the river, but they were too sparse to hide a child much less a brigand, and they were widely spaced.

"ɪf wi də si bɹɪɡænz," ɛɡwin ənaʊnst, "aɪ æm gɑnə dɪfɛn maɪsɛlf. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ æmɪɝlɪn lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz hɪɹ."

"If we do see brigands," Egwene announced, "I am going to defend myself. There is no Amyrlin looking over our shoulders here."

nɪneɪivz maʊθ θɪnd. "ɪf nid bi," ʃi toʊl ði ɛɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, "wi kən fɹaɪɾən ɔf ɛni bɹɪɡænz ðə weɪ wi dɪd ðoʊz waɪtkloʊks. ɪf wi kən faɪnd noʊ ʌðɝ weɪ."

Nynaeve's mouth thinned. "If need be," she told the air in front of her, "we can frighten off any brigands the way we did those Whitecloaks. If we can find no other way."

"aɪ wɪʃ jə wəd nɑt tɔk ə bɹɪɡænz," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ wəd laɪk tə ɹitʃ ðɪs vɪlədʒ wɪθaʊt - "

"I wish you would not talk of brigands," Elayne said. "I would like to reach this village without - "

ə fɪɡjɝ ɪn bɹaʊn ən ɡɹeɪ ɹoʊz fɹəm bɪhaɪn ə bʊʃ stændɪŋ baɪ ɪtsɛlf ɔlmoʊst ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm.

A figure in brown and gray rose from behind a bush standing by itself almost in front of them.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾieɪt


CHAPTER 38

meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ


Maidens of the Spear

ɛɡwin ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ bɪfɔɹ ðə skɹim wɑz wɛl aʊɾ ə hɝ maʊθ, ən ʃi sɔ ðə ɡloʊ ɝaʊn ɪleɪn, tu. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt ʃi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ɛlɪsɝ hæd hɝd ðɛɹ skɹimz ən wəd sɛn hɛlp; ðə blu kɹeɪn kəd nɑt bi mɔɹ ðən ə maɪl ʌpɹɪvɝ. ðən ʃi wɑz dɪsmɪsɪŋ ðə nid fəɹ hɛlp, ɔlɹɛɾi wivɪŋ floʊz ʌv ɛɹ ən faɪɝ ɪndə laɪtnɪŋ. ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊst stɪl hɪɹ ðɛɹ jɛlɪŋ.

Egwene embraced saidar before the scream was well out of her mouth, and she saw the glow around Elayne, too. For an instant she wondered if Ellisor had heard their screams and would send help; the Blue Crane could not be more than a mile upriver. Then she was dismissing the need for help, already weaving flows of Air and Fire into lightning. She could almost still hear their yelling.

nɪneɪiv wɑz sɪmpli stændɪŋ ðəɹ wɪð əɹ ɑɹmz kɹɔs bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts ən ə fɝm ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs, bʌɾ ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ ðət wɑz kəz ʃi wɑz nɑɾ æŋɡɹi ɪnʌf tə tʌtʃ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, əɹ kəz ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sin wʌɾ ɛɡwin wɑz dʒʌs naʊ siɪŋ. ðə pɝsən feɪsɪŋ əm wɑz ə wʊmən noʊ oʊldɝ ðən ɛɡwin hɝsɛlf, ɪf sʌmwʌt tɔlɝ.

Nynaeve was simply standing there with her arms crossed beneath her breasts and a firm expression on her face, but Egwene was not sure whether that was because she was not angry enough to touch the True Source, or because she had already seen what Egwene was just now seeing. The person facing them was a woman no older than Egwene herself, if somewhat taller.

ʃi dɪd nɑt lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ. mɛn wɝ səmtaɪmz sɪli ɪnʌf tə θɪŋk ə wʊmən wɑz hɑɹmləs mɪɹli kəz ʃi wɑz ə wʊmən; ɛɡwin hæd noʊ sətʃ ɪluʒənz. ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ maɪnd ʃi noʊɾəd ðəɾ ɪleɪn wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə ɡloʊ. ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ mʌst stɪl hɑɹbɝ fulɪʃ noʊʃənz. ʃi wɑz nɛvɝ ə sintʃæn pɹɪznɝ.

She did not let go of saidar. Men were sometimes silly enough to think a woman was harmless merely because she was a woman; Egwene had no such illusions. In a corner of her mind she noted that Elayne was no longer surrounded by the glow. The Daughter-Heir must still harbor foolish notions. She was never a Seanchan prisoner.

ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt θɪŋk mɛni mɛn wəd bi stupəɾ ɪnʌf tə θɪŋk ðə wʊmən ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm wɑz nɑt deɪnʒɝəs, ivən ðoʊ hɝ hænz wɝ ɛmpti ən ʃi wɔɹ noʊ vɪzəbəl wɛpən. blu-ɡɹin aɪz ən ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ kʌt ʃɔɹɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ə nɛɹoʊ teɪl ðət hʌŋ tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz; sɑft, leɪs ni-buts ən kloʊs-fɪɾɪŋ koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz ɔl ɪn ðə ʃeɪdz ə ɝθ ən ɹɑk. sətʃ kʌlɝɪŋ ən kloʊðɪŋ hæd bɪn dɪskɹaɪb tə hɝ wʌns; ðɪs wʊmən wɑz il.

Egwene did not think many men would be stupid enough to think the woman in front of them was not dangerous, even though her hands were empty and she wore no visible weapon. Blue-green eyes and reddish hair cut short except for a narrow tail that hung to her shoulders; soft, laced knee-boots and close-fitting coat and breeches all in the shades of earth and rock. Such coloring and clothing had been described to her once; this woman was Aiel.

lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ, ɛɡwin fɛlt ə sʌɾən ɑɾ əfɪnəɾi fəɹ ðə wʊmən. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪt. ʃi lʊks laɪk ɹændz kʌzən, ðæts waɪ. jɛɾ ivən ðət filɪŋ - ɔlmoʊst ə kɪnʃɪp - kəd nɑt staɪfəl əɹ kjʊɹiɑsəɾi. wʌɾ ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ ɑɹ il duɪŋ hɪɹ? ðeɪ nɛvɝ liv ðə weɪst; nɑt sɪns ði il wɔɹ. ʃi hæd hɝɾ ɔl ə hɝ laɪf haʊ dɛdli il wɝ - ðiz meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ noʊ lɛs ðən ðə mɛmbɝz ə ðə meɪl wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz - bʌt ʃi fɛl noʊ pɝtɪkjəlɝ fɪɹ ænd, ɪndid, səm ɪɹɪteɪʃən ət hævɪŋ bɪn əfɹeɪd. wɪð seɪaɪdɑɹ fiɾɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪndə hɝ, ʃi hæd noʊ nid tə fɪɹ ɛniwʌn. ɪksɛp meɪbi ə fʊli tʃɹeɪn sɪstɝ, ʃi ədmɪɾəd. bʌt sɝɾənli nɑt wʌn wʊmən, ivən ɪf ʃiz il.

Looking at her, Egwene felt a sudden odd affinity for the woman. She could not understand it. She looks like Rand's cousin, that's why. Yet even that feeling - almost of kinship - could not stifle her curiosity. What under the Light are Aiel doing here? They never leave the Waste; not since the Aiel War. She had heard all of her life how deadly Aiel were - these Maidens of the Spear no less than the members of the male warrior societies - but she felt no particular fear and, indeed, some irritation at having been afraid. With saidar feeding the One Power into her, she had no need to fear anyone. Except maybe a fully trained sister, she admitted. But certainly not one woman, even if she is Aiel.

"maɪ neɪm ɪz eɪvinhə," ði il wʊmən sɛd, "ʌv ðə naɪn væliz sɛpt ə ðə tɑɹdæɾ il." hɝ feɪs wɑz əz flæɾ ən ɪkspɹɛʃənləs əz əɹ vɔɪs. "aɪ æm fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ, ə meɪɾən ə ðə spɪɹ." ʃi pɔzd ə moʊmənt, stʌɾiɪŋ ðɛm. "ju hæv nɑt ðə lʊk ɪn jəɹ feɪsəz, bʌt wi sɔ ðə ɹɪŋz. ɪn jəɹ lænz, juv wɪmən mʌtʃ laɪk əɹ waɪz wʌnz, ðə wɪmən kɔld ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɑɹ jə wɪmən ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, əɹ nɑt?"

"My name is Aviendha," the Aiel woman said, "of the Nine Valleys sept of the Taardad Aiel." Her face was as flat and expressionless as her voice. "I am Far Dareis Mai, a Maiden of the Spear." She paused a moment, studying them. "You have not the look in your faces, but we saw the rings. In your lands, you have women much like our Wise Ones, the women called Aes Sedai. Are you women of the White Tower, or not?"

fəɹ ə moʊmən ɛɡwin dɪd fil əniz. wi? ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊn əm kɛɹfəli, bʌt sɔ noʊ wʌn bɪhaɪn ɛni bʊʃ wɪðɪn twɛnti peɪsɪz.

For a moment Egwene did feel unease. We? She looked around them carefully, but saw no one behind any bush within twenty paces.

ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝz, ðeɪ hæd tə bi ɪn ðə nɛks θɪkɪt, mɔɹ ðən tu hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əhɛd, əɹ ɪn ðə læst wʌn, twaɪs ðət dɪstəns bɪhaɪnd. tu fɑɹ tə θɹɛɾən. ənlɛs ðeɪv baʊz. bʌt ðeɪ wəɾ əv tə bi ɡʊd wɪð ðɛm. bæk hoʊm, ɪn ðə kɑmpətɪʃənz ət bɛl taɪn ən sʌndeɪ, oʊnli ðə bɛs boʊmən ʃɑɾ əɾ ɛni dɪstəns mʌtʃ bɪɑn tu hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz.

If there were others, they had to be in the next thicket, more than two hundred paces ahead, or in the last one, twice that distance behind. Too far to threaten. Unless they have bows. But they would have to be good with them. Back home, in the competitions at Bel Tine and Sunday, only the best bowmen shot at any distance much beyond two hundred paces.

bʌt ʃi stɪl fɛl bɛɾɝ noʊɪŋ ʃi kəd hɝl ə laɪtnɪŋ boʊlt əɾ ɛniwʌn u tʃɹaɪd sətʃ ə ʃɑt.

But she still felt better knowing she could hurl a lightning bolt at anyone who tried such a shot.

"wi ɑɹ wɪmən ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ," nɪneɪiv sɛd kɑmli. ʃi wɑz vɛɹi ɑbviəs ɪn nɑt lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn fəɹ ʌðɝ il. ivən ɪleɪn wɑz piɹɪŋ əbaʊt. "wɛðɝ jə wəd kənsɪɾɝ ɛni ʌv əs waɪz ɪz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ," nɪneɪiv wɛn ɑn. "wʌt dʒju wɑn ʌv ʌs?"

"We are women of the White Tower," Nynaeve said calmly. She was very obvious in not looking around for other Aiel. Even Elayne was peering about. "Whether you would consider any of us wise is another matter," Nynaeve went on. "What do you want of us?"

eɪvinhə smaɪld. ʃi wɑz ɹɪli kwaɪt lʌvli, ɛɡwin ɹilaɪzd; ðə ɡɹɪm ɪkspɹɛʃən hæd mæskt ɪt. "ju tɔk əz ðə waɪz wʌnz du. tə ðə pɔɪnt, ən smɔl sʌfɝɪŋ ə fulz." hɝ smaɪl feɪɾəd, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs ɹɪmeɪn kɑm. "wʌn ʌv əs laɪz ɡɹeɪvli hɝt, pɝhæps daɪɪŋ. ðə waɪz wʌnz ɔfən hil ðoʊz u wəd ʃʊɹli daɪ wɪθaʊt ðɛm, ən aɪ hæv hɝɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kən də mɔɹ. wɪl jə eɪd hɝ?"

Aviendha smiled. She was really quite lovely, Egwene realized; the grim expression had masked it. "You talk as the Wise Ones do. To the point, and small suffering of fools." Her smile faded, but her voice remained calm. "One of us lies gravely hurt, perhaps dying. The Wise Ones often heal those who would surely die without them, and I have heard Aes Sedai can do more. Will you aid her?"

ɛɡwin ɔlmoʊst ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪn kənfjuʒən. ə fɹɛn ə hɝz ɪz daɪɪŋ? ʃi saʊnz əz ɪf ʃiz æskɪŋ ɪf wɪl lɛn əɹ ə kʌp ə bɑɹli flaʊɝ!

Egwene almost shook her head in confusion. A friend of hers is dying? She sounds as if she is asking if we'll lend her a cup of barley flour!

"aɪ wɪl hɛlp əɹ ɪf aɪ kæn," nɪneɪiv sɛd sloʊli. "aɪ kænɑt meɪk pɹɑməsəz, eɪvinhə. ʃi meɪ daɪ dɪspaɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ aɪ kən du."

"I will help her if I can," Nynaeve said slowly. "I cannot make promises, Aviendha. She may die despite anything I can do."

"dɛθ kʌmz fəɹ əs ɔl," ði il sɛd. "wi kən oʊnli tʃuz haʊ tə feɪs ɪt wən ɪt kʌmz. əl teɪk jə tə hɝ."

"Death comes for us all," the Aiel said. "We can only choose how to face it when it comes. I will take you to her."

tu wɪmən ɪn il ɡɑɹb stʊɾ ʌp noʊ mɔɹ ðən tɛn peɪsɪz əweɪ, wʌn aʊɾ ʌv ə lɪɾəl foʊld ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊn ðəɾ ɛɡwin wəd nɑɾ əv səpoʊz kəd haɪɾ ə dɔɡ, ən ði ʌðɝ ɪn ɡɹæs ðət ɹitʃt oʊnli hæfweɪ tə hɝ niz. ðeɪ loʊɝd ðɛɹ blæk veɪlz əz ðeɪ stʊd - ðət ɡeɪv əɹ ənʌðɝ dʒoʊlt; ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪleɪn hæd toʊld əɹ ði il oʊnli hɪd ðɛɹ feɪsəz wən ðeɪ maɪɾ əv tə də kɪlɪŋ - ən sɛɾəld ðə klɔθ ðət hæd ɹæp ðɛɹ hɛdz əbaʊt ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. wʌn hæd ðə seɪm ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ əz eɪvinhə, wɪð ɡɹeɪ aɪz, ði ʌðɝ dɑɹk blu aɪz ən hɛɹ laɪk faɪɝ. niðɝ wɑz ɛni oʊldɝ ðən ɛɡwin əɹ ɪleɪn, ən boʊθ lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə juz ðə ʃɔɹt spɪɹz ɪn ðɛɹ hænz.

Two women in Aiel garb stood up no more than ten paces away, one out of a little fold in the ground that Egwene would not have supposed could hide a dog, and the other in grass that reached only halfway to her knees. They lowered their black veils as they stood - that gave her another jolt; she was sure Elayne had told her the Aiel only hid their faces when they might have to do killing - and settled the cloth that had wrapped their heads about their shoulders. One had the same reddish hair as Aviendha, with gray eyes, the other dark blue eyes and hair like fire. Neither was any older than Egwene or Elayne, and both looked ready to use the short spears in their hands.

ðə wʊmən wɪð faɪɝi hɛɹ hændəɾ eɪvinhə wɛpənz; ə lɔŋ, hɛvi-bleɪɾɪd naɪf tə bɛlt əɾ əɹ weɪst, ən ə bɹɪsəlɪŋ kwɪvɝ fəɹ ði ʌðɝ saɪd; ə dɑɹk, kɝv baʊ ðət hæd ðə dʌl ʃaɪn ə hɔɹn, ɪn ə keɪs tə fæsən ɑn əɹ bæk; ən fɔɹ ʃɔɹt spɪɹz wɪð lɔŋ pɔɪns tə ɡɹɪp ɪn əɹ lɛf hæn əlɔŋ wɪð ə smɔl, ɹaʊn haɪd bʌkəlɝ. eɪvinhə wɔɹ əm əz nætʃɹəli əz ə wʊmən ɪn ɛmənz fild wəd wɛɹ ə skɑɹf, dʒʌst əz əɹ kəmpænjənz dɪd. "kʌm," ʃi sɛd, ən stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə θɪkɪt ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi pæst.

The woman with fiery hair handed Aviendha weapons; a long, heavy-bladed knife to belt at her waist, and a bristling quiver for the other side; a dark, curved bow that had the dull shine of horn, in a case to fasten on her back; and four short spears with long points to grip in her left hand along with a small, round hide buckler. Aviendha wore them as naturally as a woman in Emond's Field would wear a scarf, just as her companions did. "Come," she said, and started for the thicket they had already passed.

ɛɡwin faɪnəli ɹilist seɪaɪdɑɹ. ʃi səspɛktəɾ ɔl θɹi ʌv ði il kəd stæb əɹ wɪð ðoʊz spɪɹz bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd də ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt, ɪf ðət wɑz wʌt ðeɪ wɑntəd, bʌt ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ wɛɹi, ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ wʊd. ən wʌɾ ɪf nɪneɪiv kæn hil ðɛɹ fɹɛnd? aɪ wɪʃ ʃi wəɾ æsk bɪfɔɹ ʃi meɪks ðiz dɪsɪʒənz ðəɾ ɪnvɑlv ɔl ʌv ʌs!

Egwene finally released saidar. She suspected all three of the Aiel could stab her with those spears before she could do anything about it, if that was what they wanted, but though they were wary, she did not think they would. And what if Nynaeve can't Heal their friend? I wish she would ask before she makes these decisions that involve all of us!

əz ðeɪ hɛɾəd fəɹ ðə tʃɹiz, ði il skæn ðə læn ɝaʊn əm əz ɪf ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəd ði ɛmpti lændskeɪp tə hoʊld ɛnəmiz əz ədɛpt ət haɪɾɪŋ əz ðɛmsɛlvz. eɪvinhə stʃɹoʊɾ əhɛd, ən nɪneɪiv kɛpt ʌp wɪð hɝ.

As they headed for the trees, the Aiel scanned the land around them as if they expected the empty landscape to hold enemies as adept at hiding as themselves. Aviendha strode ahead, and Nynaeve kept up with her.

"aɪ æm ɪleɪn ə haʊs tʃɹəkənd," ɛɡwinz fɹɛn sɛɾ əz ɪf meɪkɪŋ kɑnvɝseɪʃən, "dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ tə mɔɹɡeɪs, kwin ʌv ændɝ."

"I am Elayne of House Trakand," Egwene's friend said as if making conversation, "Daughter-Heir to Morgase, Queen of Andor."

ɛɡwin stʌmbəld. laɪt, ɪz ʃi mæd? aɪ noʊ ændɝ fɔɾ əm ɪn ði il wɔɹ. ɪt maɪt bi twɛnti jɪɹz, bʌt ðeɪ seɪ il əv lɔŋ mɛmɹiz.

Egwene stumbled. Light, is she mad? I know Andor fought them in the Aiel War. It might be twenty years, but they say Aiel have long memories.

bʌt ðə fleɪm-hɛɹɾ il kloʊsəs tə hɝ oʊnli sɛd, "aɪ æm beɪn, ʌv ðə blæk ɹɑk sɛpt ə ðə ʃɝəɾ il."

But the flame-haired Aiel closest to her only said, "I am Bain, of the Black Rock sept of the Shaarad Aiel."

"aɪ æm kiæd," ðə ʃɔɹɾɝ, blɑndɝ wʊmən ɑn əɹ ʌðɝ saɪd sɛd, "ʌv ðə stoʊnz ɹɪvɝ sɛpt ə ðə ɡoʊʃin il."

"I am Chiad," the shorter, blonder woman on her other side said, "of the Stones River sept of the Goshien Aiel."

beɪn ən kiæd ɡlænst əɾ ɛɡwin; ðɛɹ ɪkspɹɛʃənz dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, bʌt ʃi hæd ðə filɪŋ ðeɪ θɔt ʃi wɑz ʃoʊɪŋ bæd mænɝz.

Bain and Chiad glanced at Egwene; their expressions did not change, but she had the feeling they thought she was showing bad manners.

"aɪ æm ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ," ʃi toʊl ðɛm. ðeɪ sim tə ɪkspɛk mɔɹ, soʊ ʃi æɾəd, "dɔɾɝ ə mɛɹɪn ælvɪɹ, ʌv ɛmənz fild, ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz." ðət sim tə sæɾəsfaɪ ðɛm, ɪn ə weɪ, bʌt ʃi wəɾ əv bɛt ðeɪ ʌndɝstʊɾ ɪt noʊ mɔɹ ðən ʃi dɪɾ ɔl ðiz sɛps ən klænz. ɪt mʌs min fæmliz, ɪn səm weɪ.

"I am Egwene al'Vere," she told them. They seemed to expect more, so she added, "Daughter of Marin al'Vere, of Emond's Field, in the Two Rivers." That seemed to satisfy them, in a way, but she would have bet they understood it no more than she did all these septs and clans. It must mean families, in some way.

"ju ɑɹ fɝst-sɪstɝz?" beɪn sim tə bi teɪkɪŋ ɪn ɔl θɹi ʌv ðɛm.

"You are first-sisters?" Bain seemed to be taking in all three of them.

ɛɡwin θɔt ðeɪ mʌs min sɪstɝz əz ɪt wɑz juz fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən sɛd "jɛs," dʒʌst əz ɪleɪn sɛd "noʊ."

Egwene thought they must mean sisters as it was used for Aes Sedai, and said "Yes," just as Elayne said "No."

kiæɾ ən beɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə vɛɹi kwɪk lʊk ðət sədʒɛstəd ðeɪ wɝ tɔkɪŋ tə wɪmən u maɪt nɑt bi kəmplitli hoʊl ɪn ðɛɹ maɪnz.

Chiad and Bain exchanged a very quick look that suggested they were talking to women who might not be completely whole in their minds.

"fɝst-sɪstɝ," ɪleɪn toʊld ɛɡwin əz ɪf ʃi wɝ lɛktʃɝɪŋ, "minz wɪmən u hæv ðə seɪm mʌðɝ. sɛkənd-sɪstɝ minz ðɛɹ mʌðɝz ɑɹ sɪstɝz." ʃi tɝn əɹ wɝdz tə ði il. "wi niðɝ ʌv əs noʊ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə jəɹ pipəl. aɪ æsk jə tə ɪkskjuz əɹ ɪɡnɝəns. aɪ səmtaɪmz θɪŋk ʌv ɛɡwin əz ə fɝst-sɪstɝ, bʌt wəɹ nɑt blʌd kɪn."

"First-sister," Elayne told Egwene as if she were lecturing, "means women who have the same mother. Second-sister means their mothers are sisters." She turned her words to the Aiel. "We neither of us know a great deal of your people. I ask you to excuse our ignorance. I sometimes think of Egwene as a first-sister, but we are not blood kin."

"ðɛn waɪ dʒju nɑt spik ðə wɝdz bɪfɔɹ jəɹ waɪz wʌnz?" kiæɾ æskt. "beɪn ən aɪ bɪkeɪm fɝst-sɪstɝz."

"Then why do you not speak the words before your Wise Ones?" Chiad asked. "Bain and I became first-sisters."

ɛɡwin blɪŋkt. "haʊ kən jə bɪkʌm fɝst-sɪstɝz? iðɝ juv ðə seɪm mʌðɝ, əɹ jə də nɑt. aɪ də nɑt min tə əfɛnd. moʊst ʌv wʌɾ aɪ noʊ əbaʊt ðə meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ kʌmz fɹəm ðə lɪɾəl ɪleɪn əz toʊl mi. aɪ noʊ jə faɪɾ ɪn bæɾəl ən doʊn kɛɹ fəɹ mɛn, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðæt." ɪleɪn nɑɾəd; ðə weɪ ʃi hæd dɪskɹaɪb ðə meɪɾənz tə ɛɡwin hæd saʊndəd mʌtʃ laɪk ə kɹɔs bɪtwin fimeɪl wɔɹɾɝz ən ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ.

Egwene blinked. "How can you become first-sisters? Either you have the same mother, or you do not. I do not mean to offend. Most of what I know about the Maidens of the Spear comes from the little Elayne has told me. I know you fight in battle and don't care for men, but no more than that." Elayne nodded; the way she had described the Maidens to Egwene had sounded much like a cross between female Warders and the Red Ajah.

ðət lʊk flæʃt bæk əkɹɔs ði ilz feɪsəz, əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑt sɝɾən haʊ mʌtʃ sɛns ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn hæd.

That look flashed back across the Aiel's faces, as if they were not certain how much sense Egwene and Elayne had.

"wi də nɑt kɛɹ fəɹ mɛn?" kiæd mɝmɝɾ əz ɪf pʌzəld.

"We do not care for men?" Chiad murmured as if puzzled.

beɪn nɑɾɪd əɹ bɹaʊ ɪn θɔt. "wʌt jə seɪ kʌmz nɪɹ tʃɹuθ, jɛt mɪsəz ɪt kəmplitli. wən wi wɛd ðə spɪɹ, wi plɛdʒ tə bi baʊn tə noʊ mæn əɹ tʃaɪld. səm də ɡɪv ʌp ðə spɪɹ, fəɹ ə mæn əɹ ə tʃaɪld" - hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən sɛd ʃi hɝsɛlf dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðɪs - "bʌt wʌns ɡɪvən ʌp, ðə spɪɹ kænɑt bi teɪkən bæk."

Bain knotted her brow in thought. "What you say comes near truth, yet misses it completely. When we wed the spear, we pledge to be bound to no man or child. Some do give up the spear, for a man or a child" - her expression said she herself did not understand this - "but once given up, the spear cannot be taken back."

"ɔɹ ɪf ʃiz tʃoʊzən tə ɡoʊ tə ɹɪɾiən," kiæd pʊɾ ɪn. "eɪ waɪz wʌn kænɑt bi wɛɾəd tə ðə spɪɹ."

"Or if she is chosen to go to Rhuidean," Chiad put in. "A Wise One cannot be wedded to the spear."

beɪn lʊkt əɾ əɹ əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ənaʊns ðə skaɪ wɑz blu, əɹ ðət ɹeɪn fɛl fɹəm klaʊdz. ðə ɡlæns ʃi ɡeɪv ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn sɛd pɝhæps ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ ðiz θɪŋz. "jɛs, ðəɾ ɪz tʃɹu. ðoʊ səm tʃɹaɪ tə stʃɹʌɡəl əɡɛnst ɪt."

Bain looked at her as if she had announced the sky was blue, or that rain fell from clouds. The glance she gave Egwene and Elayne said perhaps they did not know these things. "Yes, that is true. Though some try to struggle against it."

"jɛs, ðeɪ du." kiæd saʊndəɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi ən beɪn wɝ ʃɛɹɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ bɪtwin ðɛm.

"Yes, they do." Chiad sounded as though she and Bain were sharing something between them.

"bʌɾ aɪ hæv ɡɔn fɑɹ fɹəm ðə tʃɹeɪl ə maɪ ɛkspləneɪʃən," beɪn wɛn ɑn. "ðə meɪɾənz də nɑt dæns ðə spɪɹz wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ ivən wən əɹ klænz du, bʌt ðə ʃɝəɾ il ən ðə ɡoʊʃin il əv hɛl blʌd fjud bɪtwin əm oʊvɝ fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, soʊ kiæɾ ən aɪ fɛlt əɹ wɛɾɪŋ plɛdʒ wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf. wi wɛn tə spik ðə wɝdz bɪfɔɹ ðə waɪz wʌnz ʌv əɹ klænz - ʃi ɹɪskɪŋ əɹ laɪf ɪn maɪ hoʊld, ən aɪ ɪn hɝz - tə bɑn əs əz fɝst-sɪstɝz. əz ɪz pɹɑpɝ fəɹ fɝst-sɪstɝz u ɑɹ meɪɾənz, wi ɡɑɹɾ itʃ ʌðɝz bæks, ən niðɝ wɪl lɛɾ ə mæn kʌm tə hɝ wɪθaʊt ði ʌðɝ. aɪ wəd nɑt seɪ wi də nɑt kɛɹ fəɹ mɛn." kiæd nɑɾəd, wɪð dʒʌs ðə hɪn ʌv ə smaɪl. "hæv aɪ meɪd ðə tʃɹuθ klɪɹ tə ju, ɛɡwin?"

"But I have gone far from the trail of my explanation," Bain went on. "The Maidens do not dance the spears with one another even when our clans do, but the Shaarad Aiel and the Goshien Aiel have held blood feud between them over four hundred years, so Chiad and I felt our wedding pledge was not enough. We went to speak the words before the Wise Ones of our clans - she risking her life in my hold, and I in hers - to bond us as first-sisters. As is proper for first-sisters who are Maidens, we guard each other's backs, and neither will let a man come to her without the other. I would not say we do not care for men." Chiad nodded, with just the hint of a smile. "Have I made the truth clear to you, Egwene?"

"jɛs," ɛɡwin sɛd feɪnli. ʃi ɡlænst əɾ ɪleɪn ən sɔ ðə bɪwɪldɝmən ɪn əɹ blu aɪz ʃi nu mʌs bi ɪn əɹ oʊn. nɑt ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ. ɡɹin, meɪbi. ə kɹɔs bɪtwin wɔɹɾɝz ən ɡɹin ədʒɑ, ən aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ənʌðɝ θɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðæt. "ðə tʃɹuθ ɪz kwaɪt klɪɹ tə mi, naʊ, beɪn. θæŋk ju."

"Yes," Egwene said faintly. She glanced at Elayne and saw the bewilderment in her blue eyes she knew must be in her own. Not Red Ajah. Green, maybe. A cross between Warders and Green Ajah, and I do not understand another thing out of that. "The truth is quite clear to me, now, Bain. Thank you."

"ɪf ðə tu ʌv jə fil jə ɑɹ fɝst-sɪstɝz," kiæd sɛd, "ju ʃəd ɡoʊ tə jəɹ waɪz wʌnz ən spik ðə wɝdz. bʌt jə ɑɹ waɪz wʌnz, ðoʊ jʌŋ. aɪ də nɑt noʊ haʊ ɪt wəd bi dʌn ɪn ðət keɪs."

"If the two of you feel you are first-sisters," Chiad said, "you should go to your Wise Ones and speak the words. But you are Wise Ones, though young. I do not know how it would be done in that case."

ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ tə læf əɹ blʌʃ. ʃi kɛp hævɪŋ ən ɪmədʒ ə hɝ ən ɪleɪn ʃɛɹɪŋ ðə seɪm mæn. noʊ, ðəɾ ɪz oʊnli fəɹ fɝst-sɪstɝz u ɑɹ meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ. ɪzən ɪt? ɪleɪn dɪɾ əv spɑts ə kʌlɝ ɪn əɹ tʃiks, ən ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ ə ɹænd. bʌt wi də nɑt ʃɛɹ hɪm, ɪleɪn. wi kən niðɝ ʌv əs əv hɪm.

Egwene did not know whether to laugh or blush. She kept having an image of her and Elayne sharing the same man. No, that is only for first-sisters who are Maidens of the Spear. Isn't it? Elayne did have spots of color in her cheeks, and Egwene was sure she was thinking of Rand. But we do not share him, Elayne. We can neither of us have him.

ɪleɪn klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt. "aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ðəɹ ɪz ə nid fəɹ ðæt, kiæd. ɛɡwin ən aɪ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɑɹɾ itʃ ʌðɝz bæks."

Elayne cleared her throat. "I do not think there is a need for that, Chiad. Egwene and I already guard each other's backs."

"haʊ kən ðət bi?" kiæɾ æsk sloʊli. "ju ɑɹ nɑt wɛɾəd tə ðə spɪɹ. ən jə ɑɹ waɪz wʌnz. hu wəd lɪft ə hæn əɡɛnst ə waɪz wʌn? ðɪs kənfjuzɪz mi. wʌt niɾ əv jə fəɹ ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ə bæks?"

"How can that be?" Chiad asked slowly. "You are not wedded to the spear. And you are Wise Ones. Who would lift a hand against a Wise One? This confuses me. What need have you for guarding of backs?"

ɛɡwin wɑz spɛɹd hævɪŋ tə kʌm ʌp wɪð ən ænsɝ baɪ ðɛɹ ɝaɪvəl ət ðə kɑps. ðəɹ wɝ tu mɔɹ il ʌndɝ ðə tʃɹiz, dip ɪndə ðə θɪkɪt, bʌt nɛks tə ðə ɹɪvɝ. dʒoʊliən, ʌv ðə sɔl flæt sɛpt ə ðə nɑkɑi il, ə blu-aɪd wʊmən wɪð ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ nɪɹli ðə kʌlɝ ʌv ɪleɪnz, wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ oʊvɝ deɪlɪn, ʌv eɪvinhəz sɛpt ən klæn. swɛt mæɾɪd deɪlɪnz hɛɹ, meɪkɪŋ ɪɾ ə dɑɹkɝ ɹɛd, ən ʃi oʊnli oʊpən əɹ ɡɹeɪ aɪz wʌns, wən ðeɪ fɝs keɪm nɪɹ, ðən kloʊzd əm əɡɛn. hɝ koʊɾ ən ʃɝt leɪ bɪsaɪd hɝ, ən ɹɛd steɪn ðə bændədʒəz ɹæpt ɝaʊn əɹ mɪɾəl.

Egwene was spared having to come up with an answer by their arrival at the copse. There were two more Aiel under the trees, deep into the thicket, but next to the river. Jolien, of the Salt Flat sept of the Nakai Aiel, a blue-eyed woman with red-gold hair nearly the color of Elayne's, was watching over Dailin, of Aviendha's sept and clan. Sweat matted Dailin's hair, making it a darker red, and she only opened her gray eyes once, when they first came near, then closed them again. Her coat and shirt lay beside her, and red stained the bandages wrapped around her middle.

"ʃi tʊk ə sɔɹd," eɪvinhə sɛd. "sʌm ə ðoʊz fulz ðət ði oʊθ-bɹeɪkɪŋ tʃɹikɪlɝz kɔl soʊlʒɝz θɔt wi wɝ ənʌðɝ hændfʊl ə ðə bændəts u ənfɛs ðɪs lænd. wi hæd tə kɪl əm tə kənvɪns əm ʌðɝwaɪz, bʌt deɪlɪn. . . . kən jə hil hɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

"She took a sword," Aviendha said. "Some of those fools that the oath-breaking treekillers call soldiers thought we were another handful of the bandits who infest this land. We had to kill them to convince them otherwise, but Dailin. . . . Can you heal her, Aes Sedai?"

nɪneɪiv wɛn tə hɝ niz bɪsaɪd ði ɪnʒɝd wʊmən ən lɪftəd ðə bændədʒəz ɪnʌf tə pɪɹ ʌndɝ ðɛm. ʃi wɪnst ət wʌt ʃi sɔ. "hæv jə muvd əɹ sɪns ʃi wɑz hɝt? ðəɹ ɪz skæbɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪts bɪn bɹoʊkən."

Nynaeve went to her knees beside the injured woman and lifted the bandages enough to peer under them. She winced at what she saw. "Have you moved her since she was hurt? There is scabbing, but it has been broken."

"ʃi wɑntəd tə daɪ nɪɹ wɔɾɝ," eɪvinhə sɛd. ʃi ɡlænst wʌns ət ðə ɹɪvɝ, ðən kwɪkli əweɪ əɡɛn. ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi maɪɾ əv ʃɪvɝd, tu.

"She wanted to die near water," Aviendha said. She glanced once at the river, then quickly away again. Egwene thought she might have shivered, too.

"fulz!" nɪneɪiv bɪɡæn ɹʌmɪdʒɪŋ ɪn əɹ paʊtʃ ə ɝbz. "ju cʊɾə kɪld əɹ muvɪŋ əɹ wɪð ən ɪnʒɝi laɪk ðæt. ʃi wɑntəd tə daɪ nɪɹ wɔɾɝ!" ʃi sɛd dɪsɡʌstɪdli. "dʒʌs kəz jə kæɹi wɛpənz laɪk mɛn dʌzn min juv tə θɪŋk laɪk ðɛm." ʃi pʊld ə dip wʊɾən kʌp aʊɾ ə ðə bæɡ ən pʊʃt ɪɾ ət kiæd. "fɪl ðæt. aɪ nid wɔɾɝ tə mɪks ðiz soʊ ʃi kən dʒɹɪŋk ðɛm."

"Fools!" Nynaeve began rummaging in her pouch of herbs. "You could have killed her moving her with an injury like that. She wanted to die near water!" she said disgustedly. "Just because you carry weapons like men doesn't mean you have to think like them." She pulled a deep wooden cup out of the bag and pushed it at Chiad. "Fill that. I need water to mix these so she can drink them."

kiæɾ ən beɪn stɛp tə ðə ɹɪvɝz ɛdʒ ən ɹɪtɝn təɡɛðɝ. ðɛɹ feɪsəz nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd, bʌɾ ɛɡwin θɔt ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlmoʊst ɪkspɛktəd ðə ɹɪvɝ tə ɹitʃ ʌp ən ɡɹæb ðɛm.

Chiad and Bain stepped to the river's edge and returned together. Their faces never changed, but Egwene thought they had almost expected the river to reach up and grab them.

"ɪf wi hæd nɑt bɹɔɾ əɹ hɪɹ tə ðə . . . ɹɪvɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ," eɪvinhə sɛd, "wi wəd nɛvɝ əv faʊn ju, ən ʃi wʊɾə daɪɾ ɛniweɪ."

"If we had not brought her here to the . . . river, Aes Sedai," Aviendha said, "we would never have found you, and she would have died anyway."

nɪneɪiv snɔɹɾɪd ən bɪɡæn sɪftɪŋ paʊɾɝd ɝbz ɪndə ðə kʌp ʌv wɔɾɝ, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. "kɔɝənɹut hɛlps meɪk blʌd, ən dɔɡwɝt fəɹ nɪɾɪŋ flɛʃ, ən hilɔl, ʌv kɔɹs, ænd. . . ." hɝ mʌɾɝz tʃɹeɪld ɔf ɪndə wɪspɝz tu loʊ tə hɪɹ. eɪvinhə wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ ət hɝ.

Nynaeve snorted and began sifting powdered herbs into the cup of water, muttering to herself. "Corenroot helps make blood, and dogwort for knitting flesh, and healall, of course, and. . . ." Her mutters trailed off into whispers too low to hear. Aviendha was frowning at her.

"ðə waɪz wʌnz juz ɝbz, ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ aɪ hæd nɑt hɝd ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ juz ðɛm."

"The Wise Ones use herbs, Aes Sedai, but I had not heard that Aes Sedai used them."

"aɪ jus wʌɾ aɪ juz!" nɪneɪiv snæpt ən wɛn bæk tə sɔɹɾɪŋ θɹu hɝ paʊɾɝz ən wɪspɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf.

"I use what I use!" Nynaeve snapped and went back to sorting through her powders and whispering to herself.

"ʃi tʃɹuli dʌz saʊn laɪk ə waɪz wʌn," kiæd toʊl beɪn sɔfli, ən ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ɡeɪv ə taɪt nɑd.

"She truly does sound like a Wise One," Chiad told Bain softly, and the other woman gave a tight nod.

deɪlɪn wɑz ði oʊnli il wɪθaʊɾ əɹ wɛpənz ɪn hænd, ən ðeɪ ɔl lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə juz əm ɪn ə hɑɹtbit. nɪneɪiv ʃʊɹli ɪzən suðɪŋ ɛniwʌn, ɛɡwin θɔt. ɡɛɾ əm tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ. ɛniθɪŋ. noʊbɑdi filz laɪk faɪɾɪŋ ɪf ðəɹ tɔkɪŋ ə sʌmθɪŋ pisfəl.

Dailin was the only Aiel without her weapons in hand, and they all looked ready to use them in a heartbeat. Nynaeve surely isn't soothing anyone, Egwene thought. Get them talking about something. Anything. Nobody feels like fighting if they're talking of something peaceful.

"du nɑt bi əfɛndəd," ʃi sɛd kɛɹfəli, "bʌɾ aɪ noʊɾəs jə ɑɹ ɔl ənizi əbaʊt ðə ɹɪvɝ. ɪt dʌz nɑt ɡɹoʊ vaɪələn ənlɛs ðəɹ ɪz ə stɔɹm. jə kəd swɪm ɪn ɪɾ ɪf jə wɑntəd, ðoʊ ðə kɝən ɪz stʃɹɔŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə bæŋks." ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd.

"Do not be offended," she said carefully, "but I notice you are all uneasy about the river. It does not grow violent unless there is a storm. You could swim in it if you wanted, though the current is strong away from the banks." Elayne shook her head.

ði il lʊk blæŋk; eɪvinhə sɛd, "aɪ sɔ ə mæn - ə ʃaɪnɝən - də ðɪs swɪmɪŋ . . . wʌns."

The Aiel looked blank; Aviendha said, "I saw a man - a Shienaran - do this swimming . . . once."

"aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪ noʊ ðəɹ ɪzən mʌtʃ wɔɾɝ ɪn ðə weɪst, bʌt jə sɛd jə wɝ 'stoʊnz ɹɪvɝ sɛpt,' dʒoʊliən. ʃʊɹli juv swʌm ɪn ðə stoʊnz ɹɪvɝ?" ɪleɪn lʊkt əɾ əɹ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ mæd.

"I don't understand," Egwene said. "I know there isn't much water in the Waste, but you said you were 'Stones River sept,' Jolien. Surely you have swum in the Stones River?" Elayne looked at her as if she were mad.

"swɪm," dʒoʊliən sɛɾ ɔkwɝdli. "ɪt minz . . . tə ɡɛɾ ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ? ɔl ðət wɔɾɝ? wɪð nʌθɪŋ tə hoʊld ɑn tə." ʃi ʃʌɾɝəd. "ɛɛs sədaɪ, bɪfɔɹ aɪ kɹɔs ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl, aɪ hæd nɛvɝ sin floʊɪŋ wɔɾɝ aɪ kəd nɑt stɛp əkɹɔs. ðə stoʊnz ɹɪvɝ. . . . səm kleɪm ɪt hæd wɔɾɝ ɪn ɪt wʌns, bʌt ðəɾ ɪz oʊnli boʊstɪŋ. ðəɹ ɑɹ oʊnli ðə stoʊnz. ði oʊldəst ɹɛkɝdz ə ðə waɪz wʌnz ən ðə klæn tʃif seɪ ðəɹ wɑz nɛvɝ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt stoʊnz sɪns ðə fɝs deɪ əɹ sɛp bɹoʊk ɔf fɹəm ðə haɪ pleɪn sɛpt ən kleɪm ðət lænd. swɪm!" ʃi ɡɹɪpt əɹ spɪɹz əz ɪf tə faɪt ðə vɛɹi wɝd. kiæɾ ən beɪn muvd ə peɪs fɝðɝ fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk.

"Swim," Jolien said awkwardly. "It means . . . to get in the water? All that water? With nothing to hold on to." She shuddered. "Aes Sedai, before I crossed the Dragonwall, I had never seen flowing water I could not step across. The Stones River. . . . Some claim it had water in it once, but that is only boasting. There are only the stones. The oldest records of the Wise Ones and the clan chief say there was never anything but stones since the first day our sept broke off from the High Plain sept and claimed that land. Swim!" She gripped her spears as if to fight the very word. Chiad and Bain moved a pace further from the riverbank.

ɛɡwin saɪd. ən kʌlɝd wən ʃi mɛɾ ɪleɪnz aɪ. wɛl, aɪm nɑɾ ə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ, tə noʊ ɔl ðiz θɪŋz. əl lɝn ðɛm, ðoʊ. əz ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊn ət ði il wɪmən, ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət fɑɹ fɹəm suðɪŋ ðɛm, ʃi hæd pʊɾ əm ivən mɔɹ ɑn ɛdʒ. ɪf ðeɪ tʃɹaɪ ɛniθɪŋ, əl hoʊld əm wɪð ɛɹ. ʃi hæd noʊ aɪdiə wɛðɝ ʃi kəd siz fɔɹ pipəl ət wʌns, bʌt ʃi oʊpən hɝsɛlf tə seɪaɪdɑɹ, woʊv ðə floʊz ɪn ɛɹ ən hɛld əm ɹɛɾi. ðə paʊɝ pʌlsd ɪn əɹ wɪð iɡɝnəs tə bi juzd. noʊ ɡloʊ sɝaʊndəɾ ɪleɪn, ən ʃi wʌndɝd waɪ. ɪleɪn lʊkt ɹaɪɾ əɾ əɹ ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd.

Egwene sighed. And colored when she met Elayne's eye. Well, I am not a Daughter-Heir, to know all these things. I will learn them, though. As she looked around at the Aiel women, she realized that far from soothing them, she had put them even more on edge. If they try anything, I will hold them with Air. She had no idea whether she could seize four people at once, but she opened herself to saidar, wove the flows in Air and held them ready. The Power pulsed in her with eagerness to be used. No glow surrounded Elayne, and she wondered why. Elayne looked right at her and shook her head.

"aɪ wəd nɛvɝ hɑɹm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ," eɪvinhə sɛɾ əbɹʌpli. "aɪ wəɾ əv jə noʊ ðæt. wɛðɝ deɪlɪn laɪvz əɹ daɪz, ɪt meɪks noʊ dɪfɝəns ɪn ðæt. aɪ wəd nɛvɝ juz ðɪs" - ʃi lɪftəd wʌn ʃɔɹt spɪɹ ə tʃɹaɪfəl - "əɡɛnst ɛni wʊmən. ən jə ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ." ɛɡwin hæd ðə sʌɾən filɪŋ ðət ðə wʊmən wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə suð ðɛm.

"I would never harm an Aes Sedai," Aviendha said abruptly. "I would have you know that. Whether Dailin lives or dies, it makes no difference in that. I would never use this" - she lifted one short spear a trifle - "against any woman. And you are Aes Sedai." Egwene had the sudden feeling that the woman was trying to soothe them.

"aɪ nu ðæt," ɪleɪn sɛd, əz ɪf tɔkɪŋ tə eɪvinhə, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz toʊld ɛɡwin ðə wɝdz wɝ fəɹ hɝ. "noʊ wʌn noʊz mʌtʃ ə jəɹ pipəl, bʌɾ aɪ wɑz tɔt ðəɾ il nɛvɝ hɑɹm wɪmən ənlɛs ðeɪ ɑɹ - wʌd jə kɔl ɪt? - wɛɾəd tə ðə spɪɹ."

"I knew that," Elayne said, as if talking to Aviendha, but her eyes told Egwene the words were for her. "No one knows much of your people, but I was taught that Aiel never harm women unless they are - what did you call it? - wedded to the spear."

beɪn sim tə θɪŋk ɪleɪn wɑz feɪlɪŋ tə si tʃɹuθ klɪɹli əɡɛn. "ðæɾ ɪz nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ðə weɪ ʌv ɪt, ɪleɪn. ɪf ə wʊmən nɑt wɛɾəd keɪm ət mi wɪð wɛpənz, aɪ wəd dʒɹʌb əɹ əntɪl ʃi nu bɛɾɝ ʌv ɪt. ə mæn. . . . ə mæn maɪt θɪŋk ə wʊmən ə jəɹ lænz wɑz wɛɾəd ɪf ʃi bɔɹ wɛpənz; aɪ də nɑt noʊ. mɛn kən bi stʃɹeɪnʒ."

Bain seemed to think Elayne was failing to see truth clearly again. "That is not exactly the way of it, Elayne. If a woman not wedded came at me with weapons, I would drub her until she knew better of it. A man. . . . A man might think a woman of your lands was wedded if she bore weapons; I do not know. Men can be strange."

"ʌv kɔɹs," ɪleɪn sɛd. "bʌt soʊ lɔŋ əz wi də nɑɾ ətæk jə wɪð wɛpənz, jəl nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə hɑɹm ʌs." ɔl fɔɹ il lʊkt ʃɑkt, ən ʃi ɡeɪv ɛɡwin ə kwɪk səɡnɪfɪkən lʊk.

"Of course," Elayne said. "But so long as we do not attack you with weapons, you will not try to harm us." All four Aiel looked shocked, and she gave Egwene a quick significant look.

ɛɡwin hɛld ɑn tə seɪaɪdɑɹ ɛniweɪ. dʒʌs kəz ɪleɪn hæd bɪn tɔt sʌmθɪŋ dɪd nɑt min ɪt wɑz tʃɹu, ivən ɪf ði il sɛd ðə seɪm θɪŋ. ən seɪaɪdɑɹ fɛlt . . . ɡʊɾ ɪn hɝ.

Egwene held on to saidar anyway. Just because Elayne had been taught something did not mean it was true, even if the Aiel said the same thing. And saidar felt . . . good in her.

nɪneɪiv lɪftəɾ ʌp deɪlɪnz hɛɾ ən bɪɡæn pɔɹɪŋ əɹ mɪkstʃɝ ɪndə ðə wʊmənz maʊθ. "dʒɹɪŋk," ʃi sɛd fɝmli. "aɪ noʊ ɪt teɪsts bæd, bʌt dʒɹɪŋk ɪɾ ɔl." deɪlɪn swɑloʊd, tʃoʊkt, ən swɑloʊɾ əɡɛn.

Nynaeve lifted up Dailin's head and began pouring her mixture into the woman's mouth. "Drink," she said firmly. "I know it tastes bad, but drink it all." Dailin swallowed, choked, and swallowed again.

"nɑɾ ivən ðɛn, ɛɛs sədaɪ," eɪvinhə toʊld ɪleɪn. ʃi kɛpt əɹ aɪz ɑn deɪlɪn ən nɪneɪiv, ðoʊ. "ɪɾ ɪz sɛd ðət wʌns, bɪfɔɹ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, wi sɝv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðoʊ noʊ stɔɹi sɛz haʊ. wi feɪld ɪn ðət sɝvəs. pɝhæps ðəɾ ɪz ðə sɪn ðət sɛn əs tə ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd; aɪ də nɑt noʊ. noʊ wʌn noʊz wʌt ðə sɪn wɑz, ɪksɛp meɪbi ðə waɪz wʌnz, əɹ ðə klæn tʃifs, ən ðeɪ də nɑt seɪ. ɪts sɛɾ ɪf wi feɪl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əɡɛn, ðəl dɪstʃɹɔɪ ʌs."

"Not even then, Aes Sedai," Aviendha told Elayne. She kept her eyes on Dailin and Nynaeve, though. "It is said that once, before the Breaking of the World, we served the Aes Sedai, though no story says how. We failed in that service. Perhaps that is the sin that sent us to the Three-fold Land; I do not know. No one knows what the sin was, except maybe the Wise Ones, or the clan chiefs, and they do not say. It is said if we fail the Aes Sedai again, they will destroy us."

"dʒɹɪŋk ɪɾ ɔl," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd. "sɔɹdz! sɔɹdz ən mʌsəlz ən noʊ bɹeɪnz!"

"Drink it all," Nynaeve muttered. "Swords! Swords and muscles and no brains!"

"wi ɑɹ nɑt gɑnə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ju," ɪleɪn sɛd fɝmli, ən eɪvinhə nɑɾəd.

"We are not going to destroy you," Elayne said firmly, and Aviendha nodded.

"æz jə seɪ, ɛɛs sədaɪ. bʌt ði oʊl stɔɹiz ɑɹ ɔl klɪɹ ɑn wʌn pɔɪnt. wi mʌs nɛvɝ faɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪf jə bɹɪŋ jəɹ laɪtnɪŋz ən jəɹ bɑlfaɪɝ əɡɛns mi, əl dæns wɪð ðɛm, bʌɾ əl nɑt hɑɹm ju."

"As you say, Aes Sedai. But the old stories are all clear on one point. We must never fight Aes Sedai. If you bring your lightnings and your balefire against me, I will dance with them, but I will not harm you."

"stæbɪŋ pipəl," nɪneɪiv ɡɹaʊld. ʃi loʊɝd deɪlɪnz hɛd, ən leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn ðə wʊmənz bɹaʊ. deɪlɪnz aɪz hæd kloʊzd əɡɛn. "stæbɪŋ wɪmən!" eɪvinhə ʃɪftəɾ əɹ fiɾ ən fɹaʊn əɡɛn, ən ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn əmʌŋ ði il.

"Stabbing people," Nynaeve growled. She lowered Dailin's head, and laid a hand on the woman's brow. Dailin's eyes had closed again. "Stabbing women!" Aviendha shifted her feet and frowned again, and she was not alone among the Aiel.

"bɑlfaɪɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "eɪvinhə, wʌɾ ɪz bɑlfaɪɝ?"

"Balefire," Egwene said. "Aviendha, what is balefire?"

ði il wʊmən tɝn əɹ fɹaʊn ɑn hɝ. "du jə nɑt noʊ, ɛɛs sədaɪ? ɪn ði oʊl stɔɹiz, ɛɛs sədaɪ wildɪɾ ɪt. ðə stɔɹiz meɪk ɪɾ ə fɪɹsəm θɪŋ, bʌɾ aɪ noʊ noʊ mɔɹ. ɪts sɛd wɪv fɝɡɑɾən mʌtʃ ðət wi wʌns nu."

The Aiel woman turned her frown on her. "Do you not know, Aes Sedai? In the old stories, Aes Sedai wielded it. The stories make it a fearsome thing, but I know no more. It is said we have forgotten much that we once knew."

"pɝhæps ðə waɪt taʊɝ əz fɝɡɑɾən mʌtʃ, tu," ɛɡwin sɛd. aɪ nu ʌv ɪɾ ɪn ðət . . . dʒɹim, əɹ wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz. ɪt wɑz əz ɹil əz tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. aɪd ɡæmbəl wɪð mæt ɑn ðæt.

"Perhaps the White Tower has forgotten much, too," Egwene said. I knew of it in that . . . dream, or whatever it was. It was as real as Tel'aran'rhiod. I'd gamble with Mat on that.

"noʊ ɹaɪt!" nɪneɪiv snæpt. "noʊ wʌn əz ə ɹaɪt tə tɛɹ bɑɾiz soʊ! ɪts nɑt ɹaɪt!"

"No right!" Nynaeve snapped. "No one has a right to tear bodies so! It is not right!"

"ɪz ʃi æŋɡɹi?" eɪvinhə æskt ənizəli. kiæɾ ən beɪn ən dʒoʊliən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd wɝid lʊks.

"Is she angry?" Aviendha asked uneasily. Chiad and Bain and Jolien exchanged worried looks.

"ɪɾ ɪz ɔl ɹaɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"It is all right," Elayne said.

"ɪɾ ɪz bɛɾɝ ðən ɔl ɹaɪt," ɛɡwin æɾəd. "ʃi ɪz ɡɛɾɪŋ æŋɡɹi, ən ɪts mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ðən ɔl ɹaɪt."

"It is better than all right," Egwene added. "She is getting angry, and it is much better than all right."

ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəd nɪneɪiv sʌɾənli - ɛɡwin lin fɔɹwɝd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə si, ən soʊ dɪɾ ɪleɪn - ən deɪlɪn stɑɹɾəd ʌp wɪð ə skɹim, aɪz waɪɾ oʊpən. ɪn ən ɪnstənt, nɪneɪiv wɑz izɪŋ əɹ bæk daʊn, ən ðə ɡloʊ feɪɾəd. deɪlɪnz aɪz slɪd ʃʌt, ən ʃi leɪ ðəɹ pæntɪŋ.

The glow of saidar surrounded Nynaeve suddenly - Egwene leaned forward, trying to see, and so did Elayne - and Dailin started up with a scream, eyes wide open. In an instant, Nynaeve was easing her back down, and the glow faded. Dailin's eyes slid shut, and she lay there panting.

aɪ sɔ ɪt, ɛɡwin θɔt. aɪ . . . θɪŋk aɪ dɪd. ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi hæɾ ivən bɪn eɪbəl tə meɪk aʊɾ ɔl ðə mɛni floʊz, mʌtʃ lɛs ðə weɪ nɪneɪiv hæd woʊvən əm təɡɛðɝ. wʌt nɪneɪiv hæd dʌn ɪn ðoʊz fju sɛkənz hæd sim laɪk wivɪŋ fɔɹ kɑɹpəts ət wʌns waɪl blaɪndfoʊldɪd.

I saw it, Egwene thought. I . . . think I did. She was not sure she had even been able to make out all the many flows, much less the way Nynaeve had woven them together. What Nynaeve had done in those few seconds had seemed like weaving four carpets at once while blindfolded.

nɪneɪiv juz ðə blʌɾi bændədʒəz tə waɪp deɪlɪnz stʌmək, smɪɹɪŋ əweɪ bɹaɪt ɹɛd nu blʌɾ ən blæk kɹʌsts ə dʒɹaɪɾ oʊld. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ waʊnd, noʊ skɑɹ, oʊnli hɛlθi skɪn kənsɪɾɝəbli pəlɝ ðən deɪlɪnz feɪs.

Nynaeve used the bloody bandages to wipe Dailin's stomach, smearing away bright red new blood and black crusts of dried old. There was no wound, no scar, only healthy skin considerably paler than Dailin's face.

wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs, nɪneɪiv tʊk ðə blʌɾi klɔθs, stʊɾ ʌp, ən θɹu ðɛm ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ. "wɑʃ ðə ɹɛst ə ðəɾ ɔf ə hɝ," ʃi sɛd, "æn pʊt səm kloʊðz bæk ɑn hɝ. ʃiz koʊld. ən bi ɹɛɾi tə fid hɝ. ʃɪl bi hʌŋɡɹi." ʃi nɛl baɪ ðə wɔɾɝ tə wɑʃ əɹ hænz.

With a grimace, Nynaeve took the bloody cloths, stood up, and threw them into the river. "Wash the rest of that off of her," she said, "and put some clothes back on her. She's cold. And be ready to feed her. She will be hungry." She knelt by the water to wash her hands.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾinaɪn


CHAPTER 39

θɹɛdz ɪn ðə pæɾɝn


Threads in the Pattern

dʒoʊliən pʊɾ ən ənstɛɾi hæn tə wɛɹ ðə waʊn hæd bɪn ɪn deɪlɪnz mɪɾəl; wən ʃi tʌtʃt smuð skɪn, ʃi ɡæspt əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt bɪlivd əɹ oʊn aɪz.

Jolien put an unsteady hand to where the wound had been in Dailin's middle; when she touched smooth skin, she gasped as if she had not believed her own eyes.

nɪneɪiv stʃɹeɪɾənd, dʒɹaɪɪŋ əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ kloʊk. ɛɡwin hæd tə ədmɪt ðət ɡʊd wʊl dɪd bɛɾɝ fəɹ ə taʊəl ðən sɪlk əɹ vɛlvət. "aɪ sɛd wɑʃ əɹ ən ɡɛt səm kloʊðz ɑn hɝ," nɪneɪiv snæpt.

Nynaeve straightened, drying her hands on her cloak. Egwene had to admit that good wool did better for a towel than silk or velvet. "I said wash her and get some clothes on her," Nynaeve snapped.

"jɛs, waɪz wʌn," dʒoʊliən sɛd kwɪkli, ən ʃi, kiæd, ən beɪn ɔl lɛp tə oʊbeɪ.

"Yes, Wise One," Jolien said quickly, and she, Chiad, and Bain all leaped to obey.

ə ʃɔɹt læf bɝs fɹəm eɪvinhə, ə læf ɔlmoʊst ət ði ɛdʒ ə tɪɹz. "aɪ hæv hɝd ðəɾ ə waɪz wʌn ɪn ðə dʒæɡd spaɪɹ sɛpt ɪz sɛd tə bi eɪbəl tə də ðɪs, ən wʌn ɪn ðə fɔɹ hoʊlz sɛpt, bʌɾ aɪ ɔlweɪz θɔɾ ɪt wɑz boʊstɪŋ." ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, ɹɪɡeɪnɪŋ əɹ kəmpoʊʒɝ. "ɛɛs sədaɪ, aɪ oʊ jə ə dɛt. maɪ wɔɾɝ ɪz jʊɹz, ən ðə ʃeɪɾ ə maɪ sɛpθoʊld wɪl wɛlkəm ju. deɪlɪn ɪz maɪ sɛkənd-sɪstɝ." ʃi sɔ nɪneɪivz ʌnkɑmpɹihɛndɪŋ lʊk ən æɾəd, "ʃi ɪz maɪ mʌðɝz sɪstɝz dɔɾɝ. kloʊs blʌd, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ oʊ ə blʌd dɛt."

A short laugh burst from Aviendha, a laugh almost at the edge of tears. "I have heard that a Wise One in the Jagged Spire sept is said to be able to do this, and one in the Four Holes sept, but I always thought it was boasting." She drew a deep breath, regaining her composure. "Aes Sedai, I owe you a debt. My water is yours, and the shade of my septhold will welcome you. Dailin is my second-sister." She saw Nynaeve's uncomprehending look and added, "She is my mother's sister's daughter. Close blood, Aes Sedai. I owe a blood debt."

"ɪf aɪ hæv ɛni blʌd tə spɪl," nɪneɪiv sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "aɪ wɪl spɪl ɪt maɪsɛlf. ɪf jə wɪʃ tə ɹipeɪ mi, tɛl mi ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ə ʃɪp ət dʒʊɹin. ðə nɛks vɪlədʒ saʊθ ə hɪɹ?"

"If I have any blood to spill," Nynaeve said dryly, "I will spill it myself. If you wish to repay me, tell me if there is a ship at Jurene. The next village south of here?"

"ðə vɪlədʒ wɛɹ ðə soʊlʒɝz flaɪ ðə waɪt laɪən bænɝ?" eɪvinhə sɛd. "ðɛɹ wɑz ə ʃɪp ðəɹ wən aɪ skaʊɾəd jɛstɝdeɪ. ði oʊl stɔɹiz mɛnʃən ʃɪps, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒ tə si wʌn."

"The village where the soldiers fly the White Lion banner?" Aviendha said. "There was a ship there when I scouted yesterday. The old stories mention ships, but it was strange to see one."

"ðə laɪt sɛn ɪts stɪl ðɛɹ." nɪneɪiv bɪɡæn pʊɾɪŋ əweɪ hɝ foʊldəd peɪpɝz ə paʊɾɝd ɝbz. "aɪ hæv dʌn wʌɾ aɪ kən fəɹ ðə ɡɝl, eɪvinhə, ən wi mʌst ɡoʊ ɑn. ɔl ðət ʃi nidz naʊ ɪz fuɾ ən ɹɛst. ən tʃɹaɪ nɑt tə lɛt pipəl stɪk sɔɹdz ɪn hɝ."

"The Light send it is still there." Nynaeve began putting away her folded papers of powdered herbs. "I have done what I can for the girl, Aviendha, and we must go on. All that she needs now is food and rest. And try not to let people stick swords in her."

"wʌt kʌmz, kʌmz, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ði il wʊmən ɹɪplaɪd.

"What comes, comes, Aes Sedai," the Aiel woman replied.

"eɪvinhə," ɛɡwin sɛd, "filɪŋ əz jə də əbaʊt ɹɪvɝz, haʊ dʒju kɹɔs ðɛm? aɪm ʃʊɹ ðəɹ ɪz ət list wʌn ɹɪvɝ nɪɹli əz bɪɡ əz ði ɛɹɪnɪn bɪtwin hɪɹ ən ðə weɪst."

"Aviendha," Egwene said, "feeling as you do about rivers, how do you cross them? I am sure there is at least one river nearly as big as the Erinin between here and the Waste."

"ði ɑlɡnjə," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ənlɛs jə wɛn ɝaʊn ɪt."

"The Alguenya," Elayne said. "Unless you went around it."

"ju hæv mɛni ɹɪvɝz, bʌt səm əv θɪŋz kɔl bɹɪdʒəz wɛɹ wi hæd nid tə kɹɔs, ən ʌðɝz wi kəd weɪd. fəɹ ðə ɹɛst, dʒoʊliən ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət wʊd floʊts." ʃi slæp ðə tʃɹʌŋk ʌv ə tɔl waɪtwʊd. "ðiz ɑɹ bɪɡ, bʌt ðeɪ floʊɾ əz wɛl əz ə bɹæntʃ. wi faʊn dɛd wʌnz ən meɪɾ aʊɝsɛlvz ə . . . ʃɪp . . . ə lɪɾəl ʃɪp, ʌv tu əɹ θɹi læʃt təɡɛðɝ tə kɹɔs ðə bɪɡ ɹɪvɝ." ʃi sɛɾ ɪt mæɾɝ-ʌv-fæktli.

"You have many rivers, but some have things called bridges where we had need to cross, and others we could wade. For the rest, Jolien remembered that wood floats." She slapped the trunk of a tall whitewood. "These are big, but they float as well as a branch. We found dead ones and made ourselves a . . . ship . . . a little ship, of two or three lashed together to cross the big river." She said it matter-of-factly.

ɛɡwin stɛɹɾ ɪn wʌndɝ. ɪf ʃi wɝ əz əfɹeɪɾ ə sʌmθɪŋ əz ði il ɑbviəsli wɝ ə ɹɪvɝz, kəd ʃi meɪk hɝsɛlf feɪs ɪt ðə weɪ ðeɪ dɪd? ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk soʊ. wʌɾ əbaʊt ðə blæk ədʒɑ, ə smɔl vɔɪs æskt. hæv jə stɑp biɪŋ əfɹeɪɾ ə ðɛm? ðəɾ ɪz dɪfɹənt, ʃi toʊld ɪt. ðɛɹz noʊ bɹeɪvɝi ɪn ðæt. aɪ iðɝ hʌn ðɛm, əɹ ɛls aɪ sɪt laɪk ə ɹæbət weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ə hɔk. ʃi kwoʊɾəd ði oʊl seɪɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. "ɪɾ ɪz bɛɾɝ tə bi ðə hæmɝ ðən ðə neɪl."

Egwene stared in wonder. If she were as afraid of something as the Aiel obviously were of rivers, could she make herself face it the way they did? She did not think so. What about the Black Ajah, a small voice asked. Have you stopped being afraid of them? That is different, she told it. There's no bravery in that. I either hunt them, or else I sit like a rabbit waiting for a hawk. She quoted the old saying to herself. "It is better to be the hammer than the nail."

"wi hæd bɛs bi ɑn əɹ weɪ," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"We had best be on our way," Nynaeve said.

"ɪn ə moʊmənt," ɪleɪn toʊl hɝ. "eɪvinhə, waɪ hæv jə kʌm ɔl ðɪs weɪ ən pʊɾ ʌp wɪð sətʃ hɑɹdʃɪp?"

"In a moment," Elayne told her. "Aviendha, why have you come all this way and put up with such hardship?"

eɪvinhə ʃʊk əɹ hɛd dɪsɡʌstɪdli. "wi hæv nɑt kʌm fɑɹ əɾ ɔl; wi wɝ əmʌŋ ðə læs tə sɛɾ aʊt. ðə waɪz wʌnz nɪpt ət mi laɪk waɪl dɑɡz sɝkəlɪŋ ə kæf, seɪɪŋ aɪ hæɾ ʌðɝ duɾiz." sʌɾənli ʃi ɡɹɪnd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ tə ði ʌðɝ il. "ðiz steɪd bæk tə tɔn mi ɪn maɪ mɪzɝi, soʊ ðeɪ sɛd, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ðə waɪz wʌnz wʊɾə lemi ɡoʊ ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn ðəɹ tə kəmpænjən mi."

Aviendha shook her head disgustedly. "We have not come far at all; we were among the last to set out. The Wise Ones nipped at me like wild dogs circling a calf, saying I had other duties." Suddenly she grinned, gesturing to the other Aiel. "These stayed back to taunt me in my misery, so they said, but I do not think the Wise Ones would have let me go if they had not been there to companion me."

"wi sik ðə wʌn fɔɹtoʊld," beɪn sɛd. ʃi wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ə slipɪŋ deɪlɪn soʊ kiæd kəd slɪp ə ʃɝɾ ə bɹaʊn lɪnən ɑntu hɝ. "hi hu kʌmz wɪð ðə dɔn."

"We seek the one foretold," Bain said. She was holding a sleeping Dailin so Chiad could slip a shirt of brown linen onto her. "He Who Comes With the Dawn."

"hi wɪl liɾ əs aʊɾ ə ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd," kiæɾ æɾəd. "ðə pɹɑfəsiz seɪ hi wɑz bɔɹn ə fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ."

"He will lead us out of the Three-fold Land," Chiad added. "The prophecies say he was born of Far Dareis Mai."

ɪleɪn lʊk stɑɹɾəld. "aɪ θɔt jə sɛd ðə meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ wɝ nɑɾ əlaʊd tə hæv tʃɪlʒɹən. aɪm ʃʊɹ aɪ wɑz tɔt ðæt." beɪn ən kiæɾ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ðoʊz lʊks əɡɛn, əz ɪf ɪleɪn hæd kʌm nɪɹ tʃɹuθ ən jɛt mɪst ɪt wʌns mɔɹ.

Elayne looked startled. "I thought you said the Maidens of the Spear were not allowed to have children. I am sure I was taught that." Bain and Chiad exchanged those looks again, as if Elayne had come near truth and yet missed it once more.

"ɪf ə meɪɾən bɛɹz ə tʃaɪld," eɪvinhə ɪkspleɪn kɛɹfəli, "ʃi ɡɪvz ðə tʃaɪl tə ðə waɪz wʌnz ə hɝ sɛpt, ən ðeɪ pæs ðə tʃaɪl tə ənʌðɝ wʊmən ɪn sətʃ ə weɪ ðət nʌn noʊz huz tʃaɪld ɪɾ ɪz." ʃi, tu, saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ɪkspleɪnɪŋ ðət stoʊn ɪz hɑɹd. "ɛvɹi wʊmən wɑns tə fɑstɝ sətʃ ə tʃaɪld ɪn ðə hoʊp ʃi meɪ ɹeɪz i hu kʌmz wɪð ðə dɔn."

"If a Maiden bears a child," Aviendha explained carefully, "she gives the child to the Wise Ones of her sept, and they pass the child to another woman in such a way that none knows whose child it is." She, too, sounded as if she were explaining that stone is hard. "Every woman wants to foster such a child in the hope she may raise He Who Comes With the Dawn."

"ɔɹ ʃi meɪ ɡɪv ʌp ðə spɪɹ ən wɛd ðə mæn," kiæd sɛd, ən beɪn æɾəd, "ðɛɹ ɑɹ səmtaɪmz ɹizənz wʌn mʌst ɡɪv ʌp ðə spɪɹ."

"Or she may give up the spear and wed the man," Chiad said, and Bain added, "There are sometimes reasons one must give up the spear."

eɪvinhə ɡeɪv əm ə lɛvəl lʊk, bʌt kəntɪnjuɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑt spoʊkən. "ɪksɛp ðət naʊ ðə waɪz wʌnz seɪ hiz tə bi faʊn hɪɹ, bɪɑn ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl. 'blʌɾ ʌv əɹ blʌd mɪkst wɪð ði oʊl blʌd, ɹeɪz baɪ ən eɪntʃən blʌd nɑɾ aʊɝz.' aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪt, bʌt ðə waɪz wʌnz spoʊk ɪn sətʃ ə weɪ əz tə liv noʊ daʊts." ʃi pɔzd, ɑbviəsli tʃuzɪŋ əɹ wɝdz. "ju hæv æsk mɛni kwɛstʃənz, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ wɪʃ tə æsk wʌn. jə mʌst ʌndɝstæn ðət wi lʊk fəɹ oʊmənz ən saɪnz. waɪ də θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ wɔk ə lænd wɛɹ ði oʊnli hænd wɪθaʊɾ ə naɪf ɪn ɪts ə hæn tu wik wɪð hʌŋɡɝ tə ɡɹæsp ðə hɪlt? wɛɹ dʒju ɡoʊ?"

Aviendha gave them a level look, but continued as if they had not spoken. "Except that now the Wise Ones say he is to be found here, beyond the Dragonwall. 'Blood of our blood mixed with the old blood, raised by an ancient blood not ours.' I do not understand it, but the Wise Ones spoke in such a way as to leave no doubts." She paused, obviously choosing her words. "You have asked many questions, Aes Sedai. I wish to ask one. You must understand that we look for omens and signs. Why do three Aes Sedai walk a land where the only hand without a knife in it is a hand too weak with hunger to grasp the hilt? Where do you go?"

"tɛɹ," nɪneɪiv sɛd bɹɪskli, "ənlɛs wi steɪ hɪɹ tɔkɪŋ əntɪl ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn kɹʌmbəlz tə dʌst." ɪleɪn bɪɡæn ədʒʌstɪŋ ðə kɔɹɾ ə hɝ bʌndəl ən ðə stʃɹæp ə hɝ skɹɪp fəɹ wɔkɪŋ, ən æftɝ ə moʊmən ɛɡwin dɪd ðə seɪm.

"Tear," Nynaeve said briskly, "unless we stay here talking until the Heart of the Stone crumbles to dust." Elayne began adjusting the cord of her bundle and the strap of her scrip for walking, and after a moment Egwene did the same.

ði il wɪmən wɝ lʊkɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ, dʒoʊliən fɹoʊzən ɪn ði ækt ə kloʊzɪŋ deɪlɪnz ɡɹeɪ-bɹaʊn koʊt. "tɛɹ?" eɪvinhə sɛɾ ɪn ə kɔʃəs toʊn. "θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ wɔkɪŋ θɹu ə tʃɹʌbəld læn ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə tɛɹ. ðɪs ɪz ə stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋ. waɪ dʒju ɡoʊ tə tɛɹ, ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

The Aiel women were looking at one another, Jolien frozen in the act of closing Dailin's gray-brown coat. "Tear?" Aviendha said in a cautious tone. "Three Aes Sedai walking through a troubled land on their way to Tear. This is a strange thing. Why do you go to Tear, Aes Sedai?"

ɛɡwin ɡlænst ət nɪneɪiv. laɪt, ə moʊmən əɡoʊ ðeɪ wɝ læfɪŋ, ən naʊ ðəɹ əz tɛns əz ðeɪ ɛvɝ wɝ.

Egwene glanced at Nynaeve. Light, a moment ago they were laughing, and now they're as tense as they ever were.

"wi hʌn səm ivəl wɪmən," nɪneɪiv sɛd kɛɹfəli. "dɑɹk fɹɛnz."

"We hunt some evil women," Nynaeve said carefully. "Dark friends."

"ʃæɾoʊɹʌnɝz." dʒoʊliən twɪstəɾ əɹ maʊθ ɝaʊn ðə wɝɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪɾən ɪndə ə ɹɑɾən æpəl.

"Shadowrunners." Jolien twisted her mouth around the word as if she had bitten into a rotten apple.

"ʃæɾoʊɹʌnɝz ɪn tɛɹ," beɪn sɛd, ən əz ɪf pɑɹɾ ə ðə seɪm sɛntəns kiæɾ æɾəd, "æn θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ sikɪŋ ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn."

"Shadowrunners in Tear," Bain said, and as if part of the same sentence Chiad added, "And three Aes Sedai seeking the Heart of the Stone."

"aɪ dɪd nɑt seɪ wi wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn," nɪneɪiv sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "aɪ mɪɹli sɛɾ aɪ dɪd nɑt wɑnə steɪ hɪɹ tɪl ɪt fɔlz tə dʌst. ɛɡwin, ɪleɪn, ɑɹ jə ɹɛɾi?" ʃi stɑɹɾəd aʊɾ ə ðə θɪkɪt wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ən ænsɝ, wɔkɪŋ stæf θʌmpɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊn ən lɔŋ stʃɹaɪdz kæɹiɪŋ əɹ saʊθ.

"I did not say we were going to the Heart of the Stone," Nynaeve said sharply. "I merely said I did not want to stay here till it falls to dust. Egwene, Elayne, are you ready?" She started out of the thicket without waiting for an answer, walking staff thumping the ground and long strides carrying her south.

ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn meɪd heɪsti ɡʊdbaɪz bɪfɔɹ fɑloʊɪŋ æftɝ hɝ. ðə fɔɹ il ɑn ðɛɹ fit stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ əm ɡoʊ.

Egwene and Elayne made hasty goodbyes before following after her. The four Aiel on their feet stood watching them go.

wən ðə tu ʌv əm wɝ ə lɪɾəl weɪ bɪɑn ðə tʃɹiz, ɛɡwin sɛd, "maɪ hɑɹɾ ɔlmoʊst stɑpt wən jə neɪm jɝsɛlf. wɝn jə əfɹeɪd ðeɪ maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə kɪl ju, əɹ tə teɪk jə pɹɪznɝ? ði il wɔɹ wɑz nɑt ðət lɔŋ əɡoʊ, ən wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ sɛɾ əbaʊt nɑt hɑɹmɪŋ wɪmən u doʊn kæɹi spɪɹz, ðeɪ lʊkt ɹɛɾi ɪnʌf tə juz ðoʊz spɪɹz ɑn ɛniθɪŋ, tə mi."

When the two of them were a little way beyond the trees, Egwene said, "My heart almost stopped when you named yourself. Weren't you afraid they might try to kill you, or to take you prisoner? The Aiel War was not that long ago, and whatever they said about not harming women who don't carry spears, they looked ready enough to use those spears on anything, to me."

ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd ɹufəli. "aɪ hæv dʒʌs lɝn haʊ mʌtʃ aɪ də nɑt noʊ əbaʊt ði il, bʌɾ aɪ wɑz tɔt ðət ðeɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ə ði il wɔɹ əz ə wɔɹ əɾ ɔl. fɹəm ðə weɪ ðeɪ bɪheɪv təwɔɹd mi, aɪ θɪŋk meɪbi ðət mʌtʃ ʌv wʌɾ aɪ lɝn ɪz tʃɹuθ. əɹ meɪbi ɪt wɑz kəz ðeɪ θɪŋk aɪm ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Elayne shook her head ruefully. "I have just learned how much I do not know about the Aiel, but I was taught that they do not think of the Aiel War as a war at all. From the way they behaved toward me, I think maybe that much of what I learned is truth. Or maybe it was because they think I am Aes Sedai."

"aɪ noʊ ðeɪ ɑɹ stʃɹeɪnʒ, ɪleɪn, bʌt noʊ wʌn kən kɔl θɹi jɪɹz ə bæɾəlz ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ ə wɔɹ. aɪ də nɑt kɛɹ haʊ mʌtʃ ðeɪ faɪɾ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, ə wɔɹ ɪz ə wɔɹ."

"I know they are strange, Elayne, but no one can call three years of battles anything but a war. I do not care how much they fight among themselves, a war is a war."

"nɑt tə ðɛm. θaʊzənz ʌv il kɹɔs ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld, bʌɾ əpɛɹənli ðeɪ sɔ ðɛmsɛlvz mɔɹ laɪk θif-teɪkɝz, əɹ hɛdzmɪn, kʌm æftɝ kɪŋ leɪmən ə kɛɹhin fəɹ ðə kɹaɪm ə kʌɾɪŋ daʊn ɑvɛndɔɹɑldɛɹə. tə ði il, ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə wɔɹ; ɪt wɑz ən ɛksəkjuʃən."

"Not to them. Thousands of Aiel crossed the Spine of the World, but apparently they saw themselves more like thief-takers, or headsmen, come after King Laman of Cairhien for the crime of cutting down Avendoraldera. To the Aiel, it was not a war; it was an execution."

ɑvɛndɔɹɑldɛɹə, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə wʌn ə vɛɹɪnz lɛktʃɝz, hæd bɪn ən ɔfʃuɾ ə ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf ɪtsɛlf, bɹɔt tə kɛɹhin səm faɪv hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɡoʊ əz ən ənpɹɛsɪdɛntɪɾ ɔfɝ ə pis fɹəm ði il, ɡɪvən əlɔŋ wɪð ðə ɹaɪt tə kɹɔs ðə weɪst, ə ɹaɪɾ ʌðɝwaɪz ɡɪvən tə nʌn bʌt pɛdlɝz, ɡlimən, ən ðə tuætɑn. mʌtʃ ə kɛɹhinz wɛlθ hæd bɪn bɪlt ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪɾ ɪn aɪvɝi ən pɝfjumz ən spaɪsəz ænd, moʊst ʌv ɔl, sɪlk, fɹəm ðə lænz bɪɑn ðə weɪst. nɑɾ ivən vɛɹɪn hæɾ ɛni aɪdiə ʌv haʊ ði il hæd kʌm baɪ ə sæpəlɪŋ ʌv ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə - fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ði oʊl bʊks wɝ klɪɹ ðəɾ ɪt meɪd noʊ sid; fəɹ ənʌðɝ, noʊ wʌn nu wɛɹ ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf wɑz, ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju stɔɹiz ðət wɝ klɪɹli ɹɔŋ, bʌt ʃʊɹli ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf kəɾ əv nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ði il - əɹ ʌv waɪ ði il hæd kɔl ðə kɛɹhinɪn ðə wɔɾɝʃɛɹɝz, əɹ ɪnsɪstəd ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪnz ə mɝtʃənt wæɡənz flaɪ ə bænɝ bɛɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɛfɔɪl lif ʌv ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə.

Avendoraldera, according to one of Verin's lectures, had been an offshoot of the Tree of Life itself, brought to Cairhien some five hundred years ago as an unprecedented offer of peace from the Aiel, given along with the right to cross the Waste, a right otherwise given to none but peddlers, gleemen, and the Tuatha'an. Much of Cairhien's wealth had been built on the trade in ivory and perfumes and spices and, most of all, silk, from the lands beyond the Waste. Not even Verin had any idea of how the Aiel had come by a sapling of Avendesora - for one thing, the old books were clear that it made no seed; for another, no one knew where the Tree of Life was, except for a few stories that were clearly wrong, but surely the Tree of Life could have nothing to do with the Aiel - or of why the Aiel had called the Cairhienin the Watersharers, or insisted their trains of merchant wagons fly a banner bearing the trefoil leaf of Avendesora.

ɛɡwin səpoʊzd, ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli, ðət ʃi kəɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ðeɪ hæd stɑɹɾəd ə wɔɹ - ivən ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt wɑz wʌn - æftɝ kɪŋ leɪmən kʌt daʊn ðɛɹ ɡɪf tə meɪk ə θɹoʊn ənlaɪk ɛni ʌðɝ ɪn ðə wɝld. leɪmənz sɪn, ʃi hæd hɝɾ ɪt kɔld. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə vɛɹɪn, nɑɾ oʊnli hæd kɛɹhinz tʃɹeɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə weɪst ɛndəd wɪð ðə wɔɹ, bʌt ðoʊz kɛɹhinɪn u vɛntʃɝɾ ɪndə ðə weɪs naʊ vænɪʃt. vɛɹɪn kleɪm ðeɪ wɝ sɛd tə bi "soʊld əz ænəməlz" ɪn ðə lænz bɪɑn ðə weɪst, bʌt nɑɾ ivən ʃi ʌndɝstʊd haʊ ə mæn əɹ ə wʊmən kəd bi soʊld.

Egwene supposed, grudgingly, that she could understand why they had started a war - even if they did not think it was one - after King Laman cut down their gift to make a throne unlike any other in the world. Laman's Sin, she had heard it called. According to Verin, not only had Cairhien's trade across the Waste ended with the war, but those Cairhienin who ventured into the Waste now vanished. Verin claimed they were said to be "sold as animals" in the lands beyond the Waste, but not even she understood how a man or a woman could be sold.

"ɛɡwin," ɪleɪn sɛd, "ju noʊ hu hi hu kʌmz wɪð ðə dɔn mʌs bi, doʊn ju?"

"Egwene," Elayne said, "you know who He Who Comes With the Dawn must be, don't you?"

stɛɹɪŋ ət nɪneɪivz bæk stɪl wɛl əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, ɛɡwin ʃʊk əɹ hɛd - dʌz ʃi min tə ɹeɪs əs tə dʒʊɹin? - ðən ɔlmoʊst stɑpt wɔkɪŋ. "ju də nɑt min - ?"

Staring at Nynaeve's back still well ahead of them, Egwene shook her head - Does she mean to race us to Jurene? - then almost stopped walking. "You do not mean - ?"

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd. "aɪ θɪŋk soʊ. aɪ də nɑt noʊ mʌtʃ ə ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, bʌɾ aɪ hæv hɝɾ ə fju laɪnz. wʌn aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪz, 'ɑn ðə sloʊps ə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt ʃæl i bi bɔɹn, bɔɹn ʌv ə meɪɾən wɛɾəd tə noʊ mæn.' ɛɡwin, ɹænd dʌz lʊk laɪk ən il. wɛl, hi lʊks laɪk ðə pɪktʃɝz aɪ hæv sin ə tɪɡɹeɪn, tu, bʌt ʃi vænɪʃt bɪfɔɹ i wɑz bɔɹn, ən aɪ hɑɹdli θɪŋk ʃi cʊɾə bɪn ɪz mʌðɝ ɛniweɪ. aɪ θɪŋk ɹændz mʌðɝ wɑz ə meɪɾən ə ðə spɪɹ."

Elayne nodded. "I think so. I do not know much of the Prophecies of the Dragon, but I have heard a few lines. One I remember is, 'On the slopes of Dragonmount shall he be born, born of a maiden wedded to no man.' Egwene, Rand does look like an Aiel. Well, he looks like the pictures I have seen of Tigraine, too, but she vanished before he was born, and I hardly think she could have been his mother anyway. I think Rand's mother was a Maiden of the Spear."

ɛɡwin fɹaʊn ɪn θɔɾ əz ʃi hɝiɾ əlɔŋ, ɹʌnɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi nu ʌv ɹændz bɝθ θɹu hɝ hɛd. hi hæd bɪn ɹeɪz baɪ tæm ælθɹ æftɝ kɛɹi ælθɹ daɪd, bʌɾ ɪf wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd wɑz tʃɹu, ðeɪ kəd nɑt bi hɪz ɹil mʌðɝ ən fɑðɝ. nɪneɪiv hæd səmtaɪmz sim tə noʊ səm sikɹəɾ əbaʊt ɹændz bɝθ. bʌɾ əl bɛɾ aɪ kʊdn pɹaɪ ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ wɪð ə fɔɹk!

Egwene frowned in thought as she hurried along, running everything she knew of Rand's birth through her head. He had been raised by Tam al'Thor after Kari al'Thor died, but if what Moiraine said was true, they could not be his real mother and father. Nynaeve had sometimes seemed to know some secret about Rand's birth. But I will bet I couldn't pry it out of her with a fork!

ðeɪ kɑɾ ʌp tə nɪneɪiv, ɛɡwin ɡlaʊɝɪŋ əz ʃi θɔt, nɪneɪiv stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd təwɔɹd dʒʊɹin ən ðət ʃɪp, ən ɪleɪn fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ tu tʃɪlʒɹən sʌlkɪŋ oʊvɝ u ʃəɾ əv ðə lɑɹdʒɝ pis ə keɪk.

They caught up to Nynaeve, Egwene glowering as she thought, Nynaeve staring straight ahead toward Jurene and that ship, and Elayne frowning at the pair of them as if they were two children sulking over who should have the larger piece of cake.

æftɝ ə taɪm ə saɪlən stʃɹaɪdz, ɪleɪn sɛd, "ju hændəl ðət vɛɹi wɛl, nɪneɪiv. ðə hilɪŋ, ən ðə ɹɛst, tu. aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ ɛvɝ daʊɾɪd jə wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. əɹ ðət wi ɔl wɝ, kəz ə ðə weɪ jə bɔɹ jɝsɛlf."

After a time of silent strides, Elayne said, "You handled that very well, Nynaeve. The Healing, and the rest, too. I do not think they ever doubted you were Aes Sedai. Or that we all were, because of the way you bore yourself."

"ju dɪd də ə ɡʊd dʒɑb," ɛɡwin sɛɾ æftɝ ə mɪnət. "ðæt wɑz ðə fɝs taɪm aɪ hæv ɛvɝ ɹɪli wɑtʃt wʌɾ ɪz dʌn dʊɹɪŋ ə hilɪŋ. ɪt meɪks meɪkɪŋ laɪtnɪŋ lʊk laɪk mɪksɪŋ oʊtkeɪk."

"You did do a good job," Egwene said after a minute. "That was the first time I have ever really watched what is done during a Healing. It makes making lightning look like mixing oatcake."

ə sɝpɹaɪz smaɪl əpɪɹɾ ɑn nɪneɪivz feɪs. "θæŋk ju," ʃi mɝmɝd, ən ɹitʃt oʊvɝ tə ɡɪv ɛɡwinz hɛɹ ə lɪɾəl tʌɡ ðə weɪ ʃi hæd wən ɛɡwin wɑz ə lɪɾəl ɡɝl.

A surprised smile appeared on Nynaeve's face. "Thank you," she murmured, and reached over to give Egwene's hair a little tug the way she had when Egwene was a little girl.

aɪm nɑɾ ə lɪɾəl ɡɝl ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ðə moʊmən pæst əz kwɪkli əz ɪt hæd kʌm, ən ðeɪ wɛn ɑn ɪn saɪləns wʌns mɔɹ. ɪleɪn saɪd laʊdli.

I am not a little girl any longer. The moment passed as quickly as it had come, and they went on in silence once more. Elayne sighed loudly.

ðeɪ kʌvɝɾ ənʌðɝ maɪl, əɹ ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ, swɪfli, dɪspaɪt swɪŋɪŋ ɪn fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ tə ɡoʊ ɝaʊn ðə θɪkəts əlɔŋ ðə bæŋk. nɪneɪiv ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn steɪɪŋ wɛl klɪɹ ə ðə tʃɹiz. ɛɡwin θɔɾ ɪt wɑz sɪli tə θɪŋk mɔɹ il wəd bi haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə kɑpsɪz, bʌt ðə swɪŋ ɪnlæn dɪd nɑɾ æd mʌtʃ dɪstəns tə wʌt ðeɪ hæd tə kʌvɝ; nʌn ə ðə ɡɹoʊθs wɝ vɛɹi bɪɡ.

They covered another mile, or a little more, swiftly, despite swinging in from the river to go around the thickets along the bank. Nynaeve insisted on staying well clear of the trees. Egwene thought it was silly to think more Aiel would be hiding in the copses, but the swing inland did not add much distance to what they had to cover; none of the growths were very big.

ɪleɪn wɑtʃt ðə tʃɹiz, ðoʊ, ən ʃi wɑz ðə wʌn u sʌɾənli skɹimd, "lʊk aʊt!"

Elayne watched the trees, though, and she was the one who suddenly screamed, "Look out!"

ɛɡwin dʒɝkt əɹ hɛɾ ɝaʊnd; mɛn wɝ stɛpɪŋ aʊt fɹəm əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, slɪŋz wɝlɪŋ 'ɹaʊn ðɛɹ hɛdz. ʃi ɹitʃt fəɹ seɪaɪdɑɹ, ən sʌmθɪŋ stʃɹʌk əɹ hɛd, ən dɑɹknəs dʒɹæŋk ɛvɹiθɪŋ.

Egwene jerked her head around; men were stepping out from among the trees, slings whirling 'round their heads. She reached for saidar, and something struck her head, and darkness drank everything.

ɛɡwin kəd fil hɝsɛlf sweɪɪŋ, fil sʌmθɪŋ muvɪŋ ʌndɝ hɝ. hɝ hɛd sim tə bi nʌθɪŋ bʌt peɪn. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹeɪz ə hæn tə hɝ tɛmpəlz, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ dʌɡ ɪndə hɝ ɹɪsts, ən əɹ hænz dɪd nɑt muv.

Egwene could feel herself swaying, feel something moving under her. Her head seemed to be nothing but pain. She tried to raise a hand to her temples, but something dug into her wrists, and her hands did not move.

" - bɛɾɝ ðən laɪɪŋ ðəɹ ɔl deɪ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ dɑɹk," ə mænz ɹʌf vɔɪs sɛd. "hu noʊz ɪf ənʌðɝ ʃɪp wəd kʌm baɪ kloʊs ɪn? ən aɪ doʊn tʃɹʌs ðət boʊt. ɪt liks."

" - better than lying there all day waiting for dark," a man's rough voice said. "Who knows if another ship would come by close in? And I don't trust that boat. It leaks."

"ju də bɛɾɝ hoʊp æɾən dʌz bɪliv jə dɪd si ðoʊz ɹɪŋz bɪfɔɹ jə dɪd dɪsaɪd," ənʌðɝ mæn sɛd. "hi dʌz wɑn fæt kɑɹɡoʊz, nɑt wɪmən, aɪ θɪŋk." ðə fɝs mæn mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ kɔɹs əbaʊt wʌɾ æɾən kəd də wɪð ɪz liki boʊt, ən ðə kɑɹɡoʊz, tu.

"You do better hope Adden does believe you did see those rings before you did decide," another man said. "He does want fat cargoes, not women, I think." the first man muttered something coarse about what Adden could do with his leaky boat, and the cargoes, too.

hɝ aɪz oʊpənd. sɪlvɝ-flɛk spɑts dænst əkɹɔs əɹ vɪʒən; ʃi θɔt ʃi maɪt bi gɑnə θɹoʊ ʌp ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn sweɪɪŋ pæst ʌndɝ əɹ hɛd. ʃi wɑz taɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə bæk ʌv ə hɔɹs, hɝ ɹɪsts ən æŋkəlz dʒɔɪn baɪ ə ɹoʊp ɹʌnɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪts bɛli, hɝ hɛɹ hæŋɪŋ daʊn.

Her eyes opened. Silver-flecked spots danced across her vision; she thought she might be going to throw up on the ground swaying past under her head. She was tied across the back of a horse, her wrists and ankles joined by a rope running under its belly, her hair hanging down.

ɪt wɑz stɪl deɪlaɪt. ʃi kɹeɪn əɹ nɛk tə lʊk ɝaʊnd. soʊ mɛni ɹʌf-dʒɹɛs mɛn ɑn hɔɹsəz sɝaʊndəɾ əɹ ðət ʃi kəd nɑt si wɛðɝ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn hæd bɪn kæptʃɝd, əz wɛl. səm ə ðə mɛn wɔɹ bɪts ʌv ɑɹmɝ - ə bæɾɝd hɛlmət, əɹ ə dɛntɪd bɹɛstpleɪt, əɹ ə dʒɝkɪn soʊn ɔl oʊvɝ wɪð mɛɾəl skeɪlz - bʌt moʊst wɔɹ oʊnli koʊts ðət hæd nɑt bɪn klin ɪn mʌnθs, ɪf ɛvɝ. fɹəm ðə smɛl, ðə mɛn hæd nɑt klin ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn mʌnθs, iðɝ. ðeɪ ɔl wɔɹ sɔɹdz, ət ðɛɹ weɪsts əɹ ɑn ðɛɹ bæks.

It was still daylight. She craned her neck to look around. So many rough-dressed men on horses surrounded her that she could not see whether Nynaeve and Elayne had been captured, as well. Some of the men wore bits of armor - a battered helmet, or a dented breastplate, or a jerkin sewn all over with metal scales - but most wore only coats that had not been cleaned in months, if ever. From the smell, the men had not cleaned themselves in months, either. They all wore swords, at their waists or on their backs.

ɹeɪdʒ hɪt hɝ, ən fɪɹ, bʌt moʊst ʌv ɔl waɪt-hɑɾ æŋɡɝ. aɪ woʊn bi ə pɹɪznɝ. aɪ woʊn bi baʊnd! aɪ woʊnt! ʃi ɹitʃt fəɹ seɪaɪdɑɹ ən ðə peɪn nɪɹli lɪftəd ðə tɑp ə hɝ hɛd; ʃi bɛɹli staɪfəld ə moʊn.

Rage hit her, and fear, but most of all white-hot anger. I won't be a prisoner. I won't be bound! I won't! She reached for saidar and the pain nearly lifted the top of her head; she barely stifled a moan.

ðə hɔɹs pɔz fəɹ ə moʊmən ə ʃaʊts ən ðə kɹik ə ɹʌsti hɪnʒɪz, ðən wɛn əhɛɾ ə lɪɾəl fɝðɝ, ən ðə mɛn bɪɡæn tə dɪsmaʊnt. əz ðeɪ muvd əpɑɹt, ʃi kəd si sʌmθɪŋ ʌv wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ. ə lɔɡ pælɪsɑd sɝaʊndəd ðɛm, bɪlt ətɑp ə lɑɹdʒ, ɹaʊn ɝθən maʊnd, ən mɛn wɪð baʊz stʊd ɡɑɹɾ ɑn ə wʊɾən wɔk bɪl dʒʌs haɪ ɪnʌf fəɹ əm tə si oʊvɝ ðə ɹʌf-hjun ɛnz ə ðə lɔɡz. wʌn loʊ, wɪndoʊləs lɔɡ haʊs sim tə bi bɪlt ɪndə ðə maʊndɪd dɝɾ ʌndɝ ðə wɔl. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ʌðɝ stʃɹʌktʃɝ bɪɑn ə fju lin-tə ʃɛdz. əsaɪd fɹəm ðə mɛn ən hɔɹsəz ðət hæd dʒʌst ɛntɝd, ðə ɹɛst ə ði oʊpən speɪs wɑz fɪld wɪð kʊk faɪɝz, ən tɛðɝd hɔɹsəz, ən mɔɹ ənwɑʃt mɛn. ðəɹ mʌst əv bɪn ət list ə hʌnʒɹəd. keɪdʒd ɡoʊts ən pɪɡz ən tʃɪkənz fɪl ði ɛɹ wɪð skwilz ən ɡɹʌns ən klʌks ðət blɛndəd wɪð kɔɹs ʃaʊts ən læftɝ tə meɪk ə dɪn ðət pɪɹst əɹ hɛd.

The horse paused for a moment of shouts and the creak of rusty hinges, then went ahead a little further, and the men began to dismount. As they moved apart, she could see something of where they were. A log palisade surrounded them, built atop a large, round earthen mound, and men with bows stood guard on a wooden walk built just high enough for them to see over the rough-hewn ends of the logs. One low, windowless log house seemed to be built into the mounded dirt under the wall. There was no other structure beyond a few lean-to sheds. Aside from the men and horses that had just entered, the rest of the open space was filled with cook fires, and tethered horses, and more unwashed men. There must have been at least a hundred. Caged goats and pigs and chickens filled the air with squeals and grunts and clucks that blended with coarse shouts and laughter to make a din that pierced her head.

hɝ aɪz faʊnd nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn, baʊn hɛd daʊn əkɹɔs sæɾəlləs hɔɹsəz əz ʃi wɑz. niðɝ sim tə bi stɝɪŋ; ðə vɛɹi ɛn ə nɪneɪivz bɹeɪd dʒɹæɡd əkɹɔs ðə dɝɾ əz əɹ hɔɹs stɝd. ə smɔl hoʊp feɪɾəd; ðət wʌn ə ðɛm maɪt bi fɹi, tə hɛlp huɛvɝ wɑz hɛld ɪskeɪp. laɪt, aɪ kænɑt stæn tə bi ə pɹɪznɝ əɡɛn. nɑɾ əɡɛn. dʒɪnʒɝli, ʃi tʃɹaɪd ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ seɪaɪdɑɹ əɡɛn. ðə peɪn wɑz nɑt soʊ bæd ðɪs taɪm - mɪɹli əz ɪf sʌmwʌn hæd dʒɹɑpt ə ɹɑk ɑn əɹ hɛd - bʌɾ ɪt ʃæɾɝd ði ɛmptinəs bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəɾ ivən θɪŋk ʌv ə ɹoʊz.

Her eyes found Nynaeve and Elayne, bound head down across saddleless horses as she was. Neither seemed to be stirring; the very end of Nynaeve's braid dragged across the dirt as her horse stirred. A small hope faded; that one of them might be free, to help whoever was held escape. Light, I cannot stand to be a prisoner again. Not again. Gingerly, she tried reaching for saidar again. The pain was not so bad this time - merely as if someone had dropped a rock on her head - but it shattered the emptiness before she could even think of a rose.

"wʌn ə ðɛmz əweɪk!" ə mænz pænɪk vɔɪs ʃaʊɾəd.

"One of them's awake!" a man's panicked voice shouted.

ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd tə hæŋ lɪmp ən lʊk ənθɹɛɾənɪŋ. haʊ ɪn ðə laɪt kəɾ aɪ lʊk θɹɛɾənɪŋ taɪɾ ʌp laɪk ə sæk ə mil! bɝn mi, aɪ hæv tə baɪ taɪm. aɪ hæv tə! "aɪ wɪl nɑt hɑɹm ju," ʃi toʊl ðə swɛɾi-feɪst fɛloʊ hu keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ təwɔɹd hɝ. əɹ ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə tɛl hɪm. ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ mʌtʃ ʃi hæɾ æktʃəli  sɛd bɪfɔɹ sʌmθɪŋ kɹæʃt ɪndə hɝ hɛɾ əɡɛn ən dɑɹknəs ɹoʊld oʊvɝ əɹ ɪn ə weɪv ə nɔziə.

Egwene tried to hang limp and look unthreatening. How in the Light could I look threatening tied up like a sack of meal! Burn me, I have to buy time. I have to! "I will not harm you," she told the sweaty-faced fellow who came running toward her. Or she tried to tell him. She was not sure how much she had actually said before something crashed into her head again and darkness rolled over her in a wave of nausea.

weɪkɪŋ wɑz iziɝ ðə nɛks taɪm. hɝ hɛd stɪl hɝt, bʌt nɑɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ɪt hæd, ðoʊ hɝ θɔts dɪd sim tə spɪn dɪtsəli. ət lis maɪ stʌmək ɪzənt. . . . laɪt, aɪd bɛɾɝ nɑt θɪŋk ə ðæt. ðəɹ wɑz ə teɪst ə saʊɝ waɪn ən sʌmθɪŋ bɪɾɝ ɪn əɹ maʊθ. stʃɹɪps ə læmplaɪt ʃoʊd θɹu hɔɹəzɑntəl kɹæks ɪn ə kɹudli meɪd wɔl, bʌt ʃi leɪ ɪn dɑɹknəs, ɑn əɹ bæk. ɑn dɝt, ʃi θɔt. ðə dɔɹ dɪd nɑt sim tə fɪt wɛl iðɝ, bʌɾ ɪt lʊkt ɔl tu stɝɾi.

Waking was easier the next time. Her head still hurt, but not as much as it had, though her thoughts did seem to spin dizzily. At least my stomach isn't. . . . Light, I'd better not think of that. There was a taste of sour wine and something bitter in her mouth. Strips of lamplight showed through horizontal cracks in a crudely made wall, but she lay in darkness, on her back. On dirt, she thought. The door did not seem to fit well either, but it looked all too sturdy.

ʃi pʊʃt hɝsɛlf tə hɝ hænz ən niz, ən wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪnd ʃi wɑz nɑt taɪɾ ɪn ɛni weɪ. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðət wʌn wɔl ʌv ənpild lɔɡz, ði ʌðɝz ɔl sim tə bi ʌv ɹʌf stoʊn. ðə laɪt θɹu ðə kɹæks wɑz ɪnʌf tə ʃoʊ hɝ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn laɪɪŋ spɹɔld ɑn ðə dɝt. ðəɹ wɑz blʌɾ ɑn ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹz feɪs. niðɝ ə ðɛm muvd ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə ɹaɪz ən fɔl ə ðɛɹ tʃɛsts əz ðeɪ bɹiðd. ɛɡwin hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪtwin tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə weɪk əm ɪmiɾiətli ən siɪŋ wʌt leɪ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðət wɔl. dʒʌst ə pik, ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf. aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl si wʌt wɪv ɡɑɹɾɪŋ əs bɪfɔɹ aɪ weɪk ðɛm.

She pushed herself to her hands and knees, and was surprised to find she was not tied in any way. Except for that one wall of unpeeled logs, the others all seemed to be of rough stone. The light through the cracks was enough to show her Nynaeve and Elayne lying sprawled on the dirt. There was blood on the Daughter-Heir's face. Neither of them moved except for the rise and fall of their chests as they breathed. Egwene hesitated between trying to wake them immediately and seeing what lay on the other side of that wall. Just a peek, she told herself. I might as well see what we have guarding us before I wake them.

ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf ɪt wɑz nɑt kəz ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪd ʃi maɪt bi əneɪbəl tə weɪkən ðɛm. əz ʃi pʊɾ əɹ aɪ tə wʌn ə ðə kɹæks nɪɹ ðə dɔɹ, ʃi θɔɾ ə ðə blʌɾ ɑn ɪleɪnz feɪs ən tʃɹaɪd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪɡzækli wʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɪneɪiv hæd dʌn fəɹ deɪlɪn.

She told herself it was not because she was afraid she might be unable to waken them. As she put her eye to one of the cracks near the door, she thought of the blood on Elayne's face and tried to remember exactly what it was Nynaeve had done for Dailin.

ðə nɛkst ɹum wɑz lɑɹdʒ - ɪt hæd tə bi ɔl ðə ɹɛst ə ðə lɔɡ bɪldɪŋ ʃi hæd sin - ən wɪndoʊləs, bʌt bɹaɪtli lɪt wɪð ɡoʊld ən sɪlvɝ læmps hæŋɪŋ fɹəm spaɪks dʒɹɪvən ɪndə ðə wɔlz ən ðə lɔɡz ðət meɪd ðə haɪ silɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ faɪɝpleɪs. ɑn ðə pæk dɝt flɔɹ fɑɹmhaʊs teɪbəlz ən tʃɛɹz mɪŋɡəld wɪð tʃɛsts kʌvɝɾ ɪn ɡɪlt-wɝk ən ɪnleɪd wɪð aɪvɝi. ə kɑɹpət woʊvən ɪn pikɑks leɪ bɪsaɪɾ ə hjudʒ kænəpid bɛd, paɪl dip wɪð fɪlθi blæŋkəts ən kʌmfɝɾɝz, wɪð ɪlæbɹətli kɑɹvd ən ɡɪldɪd poʊsts.

The next room was large - it had to be all the rest of the log building she had seen - and windowless, but brightly lit with gold and silver lamps hanging from spikes driven into the walls and the logs that made the high ceiling. There was no fireplace. On the packed dirt floor farmhouse tables and chairs mingled with chests covered in gilt-work and inlaid with ivory. A carpet woven in peacocks lay beside a huge canopied bed, piled deep with filthy blankets and comforters, with elaborately carved and gilded posts.

ə dʌzən mɛn stʊɾ əɹ sæɾ ɝaʊn ðə ɹum, bʌɾ ɔl aɪz wɝ ɑn wʌn lɑɹdʒ, fɛɹ-hɛɹd mæn u maɪɾ əv bɪn hænsəm ɪf ɪz feɪs wɝ klinɝ. hi stʊd stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ət ðə tɑp ʌv ə teɪbəl wɪð fluɾəd lɛɡz ən ɡɪldɪd skɹɑlwɝk, wʌn hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt, ə fɪŋɡɝ ə ði ʌðɝ pʊʃɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ ɪn smɔl sɝkəlz ɑn ðə teɪbəltɑp.

A dozen men stood or sat around the room, but all eyes were on one large, fair-haired man who might have been handsome if his face were cleaner. He stood staring down at the top of a table with fluted legs and gilded scrollwork, one hand on his sword hilt, a finger of the other pushing something she could not make out in small circles on the tabletop.

ði aʊɾɝ dɔɹ oʊpənd, ɹɪvilɪŋ naɪɾ aʊtsaɪd, ən ə læŋki mæn wɪð ɪz lɛft ɪɹ ɡɔn keɪm ɪn. "hi hæz noʊ kʌm, jɛt," hi sɛd ɹʌfli. hi wɑz mɪsɪŋ tu fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ɪz lɛf hænd, tu. "aɪ də noʊ laɪk dilɪŋ wɪð ðət kaɪnd."

The outer door opened, revealing night outside, and a lanky man with his left ear gone came in. "He has no come, yet," he said roughly. He was missing two fingers on his left hand, too. "I do no like dealing with that kind."

ðə bɪɡ, fɛɹ-hɛɹd mæn peɪɾ ɪm noʊ maɪnd, oʊnli kɛp muvɪŋ wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ," hi mɝmɝd, ðən læft. "ɡʊd pɹaɪsəz fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪf juv ðə bɛli tə dil wɪð ðə ɹaɪt baɪɝ. ɪf jəɹ ɹɛɾi tə ɹɪsk hævɪŋ jəɹ bɛli ɹɪpt aʊt θɹu jəɹ maʊθ ʃəd jə tʃɹaɪ sɛlɪŋ ɪm ə pɪɡ ɪn ə sæk. nɑt soʊ seɪf əz slɪɾɪŋ ðə kɹuz θɹoʊts ɑn ə tʃɹeɪɾɝz ʃɪp, ɛ, koʊk? nɑt soʊ izi, wʊdn jə seɪ?"

The big, fair-haired man paid him no mind, only kept moving whatever it was on the table. "Three Aes Sedai," he murmured, then laughed. "Good prices for Aes Sedai, if you have the belly to deal with the right buyer. If you're ready to risk having your belly ripped out through your mouth should you try selling him a pig in a sack. Not so safe as slitting the crew's throats on a trader's ship, eh, Coke? Not so easy, wouldn't you say?"

ðəɹ wɑz ə nɝvəs stɝ əmʌŋ ði ʌðɝ mɛn, ən ðə wʌn ədʒɹɛst, ə stɑki fɛloʊ wɪð ʃɪfti aɪz, lin fɔɹwɝɾ æŋkʃəsli. "ðeɪ ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, æɾən." ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðət vɔɪs; ðə mæn u hæd meɪd ðə kɔɹs sədʒɛstʃənz. "ðeɪ mʌs bi, æɾən. ðə ɹɪŋz pɹuv ɪt, aɪ tɛl ju!" æɾən pɪkt ʌp sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm ðə teɪbəl, ə smɔl sɝkəl ðət ɡlɪntɪd ɡoʊld ɪn ðə læmplaɪt.

There was a nervous stir among the other men, and the one addressed, a stocky fellow with shifty eyes, leaned forward anxiously. "They are Aes Sedai, Adden." She recognized that voice; the man who had made the coarse suggestions. "They must be, Adden. The rings prove it, I tell you!" Adden picked up something from the table, a small circle that glinted gold in the lamplight.

ɛɡwin ɡæspt ən fɛlt əɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ðeɪ tʊk maɪ ɹɪŋ!

Egwene gasped and felt at her fingers. They took my ring!

"aɪ də noʊ laɪk ɪt," mʌɾɝd ðə læŋki mæn wɪð ðə mɪsɪŋ ɪɹ. "ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɛni wʌn ə ðɛm kəd kɪl əs ɔl. fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi! jə də bi ə stoʊn-kɑɹv ful, koʊk, ən aɪ ɔt tə kɑɹv jəɹ θɹoʊt. wʌɾ ɪf wʌn ə ðɛm də weɪk bɪfɔɹ i dʌz kʌm?"

"I do no like it," muttered the lanky man with the missing ear. "Aes Sedai. Any one of them could kill us all. Fortune prick me! You do be a stone-carved fool, Coke, and I ought to carve your throat. What if one of them do wake before he does come?"

"ðeɪl nɑt weɪk fəɹ aʊɝz." ðət wɑz ə fæt mæn wɪð ə hɔɹs vɔɪs ən ə ɡæp-tuθ snɪɹ. "maɪ ɡɹæni tɔt mi ʌv ðət stʌf wi fɛd ðɛm. ðəl slip tɪl sʌnɹaɪz, ən hɪl kʌm lɔŋ əfɔɹ ðɛn."

"They'll not wake for hours." That was a fat man with a hoarse voice and a gap-toothed sneer. "My granny taught me of that stuff we fed them. They'll sleep till sunrise, and he'll come long afore then."

ɛɡwin wɝkt əɹ maʊθ ɝaʊn ðə saʊɝ waɪn teɪst ən ðə bɪɾɝnəs. wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz, jəɹ ɡɹæni laɪd tə ju. ʃi ʃʊɾə stʃɹæŋɡəl jə ɪn jəɹ kɹeɪɾəl! bɪfɔɹ ðɪs "hi" keɪm, ðɪs mæn u θɔɾ i kəd baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ - laɪk ə blʌɾi sintʃæn! - ʃi wəɾ əv nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn ɑn ðɛɹ fit. ʃi kɹɔl tə nɪneɪiv.

Egwene worked her mouth around the sour wine taste and the bitterness. Whatever it was, your granny lied to you. She should have strangled you in your cradle! Before this "he" came, this man who thought he could buy Aes Sedai - like a bloody Seanchan! - she would have Nynaeve and Elayne on their feet. She crawled to Nynaeve.

əz nɪɹ əz ʃi kəd tɛl, nɪneɪiv sim tə bi slipɪŋ, soʊ ʃi bɪɡæn wɪð ðə sɪmpəl ɪkspiɾiənt ə ʃeɪkɪŋ hɝ. tə hɝ sɝpɹaɪz, nɪneɪivz aɪz ʃɑɾ oʊpən.

As near as she could tell, Nynaeve seemed to be sleeping, so she began with the simple expedient of shaking her. To her surprise, Nynaeve's eyes shot open.

"wɑ - ?"

"Wha - ?"

ʃi ɡɑɾ ə hæn oʊvɝ nɪneɪivz maʊθ ɪn taɪm tə stɑp ðə wɝd. "wi ɑɹ biɪŋ hɛl pɹɪznɝ," ʃi wɪspɝd. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ə dʌzən mɛn ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðət wɔl, ən mɔɹ aʊtsaɪd. ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni mɔɹ. ðeɪ ɡeɪv əs sʌmθɪŋ tə meɪk əs slip, bʌɾ ɪt wɑzn vɛɹi səksɛsfəl. dʒju ɹɪmɛmbɝ, jɛt?"

She got a hand over Nynaeve's mouth in time to stop the word. "We are being held prisoner," she whispered. "There are a dozen men on the other side of that wall, and more outside. A great many more. They gave us something to make us sleep, but it wasn't very successful. Do you remember, yet?"

nɪneɪiv pʊld ɛɡwinz hæn əsaɪd. "aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz sɑft ən ɡɹɪm. ʃi ɡɹɪməst ən twɪstəɾ əɹ maʊθ, ðən sʌɾənli bɑɹkt ə nɪɹli saɪlən læf. "slipwɛl ɹut. ðə fulz ɡeɪv əs slipwɛl ɹut mɪkst ɪn waɪn. waɪn nɪɹ ɡɔn tə vɪnəɡɝ, ɪt teɪsts laɪk. kwɪk, dʒju ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛniθɪŋ ʌv wʌɾ aɪ tɔt ju? wʌt dʌz slipwɛl ɹut du?"

Nynaeve pulled Egwene's hand aside. "I remember." Her voice was soft and grim. She grimaced and twisted her mouth, then suddenly barked a nearly silent laugh. "Sleepwell root. The fools gave us sleepwell root mixed in wine. Wine near gone to vinegar, it tastes like. Quick, do you remember anything of what I taught you? What does sleepwell root do?"

"ɪt klɪɹz hɛdeɪks soʊ jə kən slip," ɛɡwin sɛd dʒʌst əz sɔfli. ən nɪɹli əz ɡɹɪmli, əntɪl ʃi hɝd wʌt ʃi wɑz seɪɪŋ. "ɪt meɪks jə ə lɪɾəl dʒɹaʊzi, bʌt ðəɾ ɪz ɔl." ðə fæt mæn hæd nɑt lɪsənd wɛl tə wʌɾ ɪz ɡɹæni toʊl hɪm. "ɔl ðeɪ dɪd wɑz hɛlp klɪɹ ðə peɪn ə biɪŋ hɪɾ ɪn ðə hɛd."

"It clears headaches so you can sleep," Egwene said just as softly. And nearly as grimly, until she heard what she was saying. "It makes you a little drowsy, but that is all." The fat man had not listened well to what his granny told him. "All they did was help clear the pain of being hit in the head."

"ɪɡzækli," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ænd wʌns wi weɪk ɪleɪn, wɪl ɡɪv əm ə θæŋkɪŋ ðeɪ woʊn fɝɡɛt." ʃi ɹoʊz, oʊnli tə kɹaʊtʃ bɪsaɪd ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən.

"Exactly," Nynaeve said. "And once we wake Elayne, we'll give them a thanking they won't forget." She rose, only to crouch beside the golden-haired woman.

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ sɔ mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd ə ðɛm aʊtsaɪd wən ðeɪ bɹɔɾ əs ɪn," ɛɡwin wɪspɝd tə nɪneɪivz bæk. "aɪ æm ʃʊɹ jə woʊn maɪn ɪf aɪ juz ðə paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən ðɪs taɪm. ən sʌmwʌn ɪz əpɛɹənli kʌmɪŋ tə baɪ ʌs. aɪ min tə də sʌmθɪŋ tə ðət fɛloʊ ðət wɪl meɪk ɪm wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt tɪl ðə deɪ hi daɪz!" nɪneɪiv wɑz stɪl kɹaʊtʃt oʊvɝ ɪleɪn, bʌt niðɝ ə ðɛm wɑz muvɪŋ. "wʌɾ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ?"

"I think I saw more than a hundred of them outside when they brought us in," Egwene whispered to Nynaeve's back. "I am sure you won't mind if I use the Power as a weapon this time. And someone is apparently coming to buy us. I mean to do something to that fellow that will make him walk in the Light till the day he dies!" Nynaeve was still crouched over Elayne, but neither of them was moving. "What is the matter?"

"ʃi ɪz hɝt bædli, ɛɡwin. aɪ θɪŋk əɹ skʌl ɪz bɹoʊkən, ən ʃiz bɛɹli bɹiðɪŋ. ɛɡwin, ʃiz daɪɪŋ əz ʃʊɹli əz deɪlɪn wɑz."

"She is hurt badly, Egwene. I think her skull is broken, and she is barely breathing. Egwene, she is dying as surely as Dailin was."

"kæn jə də sʌmθɪŋ?" ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɔl ðə floʊz nɪneɪiv hæd woʊvən tə hil ði il wʊmən, bʌt ʃi kəd ɹikɔl noʊ mɔɹ ðən ɛvɹi θɝd θɹɛd. "ju hæv tə!"

"Can't you do something?" Egwene tried to remember all the flows Nynaeve had woven to Heal the Aiel woman, but she could recall no more than every third thread. "You have to!"

"ðeɪ tʊk maɪ ɝbz," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd fɪɹsli, hɝ vɔɪs tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. "aɪ kænt! nɑt wɪθaʊt ði ɝbz!" ɛɡwin wɑz ʃɑk tə ɹilaɪz nɪneɪiv wɑz ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə tɪɹz. "bɝn əm ɔl, aɪ kæn də ɪt wɪθaʊt - !" sʌɾənli ʃi sizd ɪleɪnz ʃoʊldɝz əz ɪf ʃi mɛn tə lɪf ði ʌnkɑnʃəs wʊmən ən ʃeɪk hɝ. "bɝn ju, ɡɝl," ʃi ɹæspt, "aɪ dɪd nɑt bɹɪŋ jə ɔl ðɪs weɪ tə daɪ! aɪ ʃʊɾə lɛf jə skɹʌbɪŋ pɑts! aɪ ʃʊɾə taɪd jə ʌp ɪn ə sæk fəɹ mæt tə kæɹi tə jəɹ mʌðɝ! əl nɑt lɛt jə daɪ ɑn mi! dʒju hɪɹ mi? aɪ woʊn əlaʊ ɪt!" seɪaɪdɑɹ sʌɾənli ʃoʊn ɝaʊn hɝ, ən ɪleɪnz aɪz ən maʊθ oʊpənd waɪd təɡɛðɝ.

"They took my herbs," Nynaeve muttered fiercely, her voice trembling. "I can't! Not without the herbs!" Egwene was shocked to realize Nynaeve was on the point of tears. "Burn them all, I can't do it without - !" Suddenly she seized Elayne's shoulders as if she meant to lift the unconscious woman and shake her. "Burn you, girl," she rasped, "I did not bring you all this way to die! I should have left you scrubbing pots! I should have tied you up in a sack for Mat to carry to your mother! I will not let you die on me! Do you hear me? I won't allow it!" Saidar suddenly shone around her, and Elayne's eyes and mouth opened wide together.

ɛɡwin ɡɑɾ əɹ hænz oʊvɝ ɪleɪnz maʊθ dʒʌst ɪn taɪm tə mʌfəl ɛni saʊnd, ʃi θɔt, bʌɾ əz ʃi tʌtʃt hɝ, ði ɛɾiz ə nɪneɪivz hilɪŋ kɑɾ əɹ laɪk ə stʃɹɔ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə wɝl pul. koʊl fɹoʊz əɹ tə ðə boʊn, miɾɪŋ hit ðət sɪɹɾ aʊtwɝɾ əz ɪf ɪt mɛn tə kɹɪsp əɹ flɛʃ; ðə wɝl vænɪʃt ɪn ə sɛnseɪʃən ə ɹʌʃɪŋ, fɔlɪŋ, flaɪɪŋ, spɪnɪŋ.

Egwene got her hands over Elayne's mouth just in time to muffle any sound, she thought, but as she touched her, the eddies of Nynaeve's Healing caught her like a straw on the edge of a whirl pool. Cold froze her to the bone, meeting heat that seared outward as if it meant to crisp her flesh; the world vanished in a sensation of rushing, falling, flying, spinning.

wən ɪt faɪnəli ɛndəd, ʃi wɑz bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹɾ ən stɛɹɪŋ daʊn əɾ ɪleɪn, hu stɛɹd bæk oʊvɝ ðə hænz ʃi stɪl hæd pɹɛst oʊvɝ əɹ wʊmənz maʊð. ðə læst ʌv ɛɡwinz hɛdeɪk wɑz ɡɔn. ivən ðə bækwɑʃ ʌv wʌt nɪneɪiv hæd dʌn hæɾ əpɛɹənli bɪn ɪnʌf fəɹ ðæt. ðə mɝmɝ ə vɔɪsəz fɹəm ði ʌðɝ ɹum wɑz noʊ laʊɾɝ; ɪf ɪleɪn hæd meɪɾ ɛni nɔɪz - əɹ ɪf ʃi hæd - æɾən ən ði ʌðɝz hæd nɑt noʊɾəst.

When it finally ended, she was breathing hard and staring down at Elayne, who stared back over the hands she still had pressed over her woman's mouth. The last of Egwene's headache was gone. Even the backwash of what Nynaeve had done had apparently been enough for that. The murmur of voices from the other room was no louder; if Elayne had made any noise - or if she had - Adden and the others had not noticed.

nɪneɪiv wɑz ɑn əɹ hænz ən niz, hɛd daʊn ən ʃeɪkɪŋ. "laɪt!" ʃi mʌɾɝd. "duɪŋ ɪt ðət weɪ . . . wɑz laɪk pilɪŋ ɔf . . . maɪ oʊn skɪn. oʊ, laɪt!" ʃi pɪɹɾ əɾ ɪleɪn. "haʊ dʒju fil, ɡɝl?" ɛɡwin pʊld əɹ hænz əweɪ.

Nynaeve was on her hands and knees, head down and shaking. "Light!" she muttered. "Doing it that way . . . was like peeling off . . . my own skin. Oh, Light!" She peered at Elayne. "How do you feel, girl?" Egwene pulled her hands away.

"taɪɝd," ɪleɪn mɝmɝd. "æn hʌŋɡɹi. wɛɹ ɑɹ wi? ðəɹ wɝ səm mɛn wɪð slɪŋz. . . ."

"Tired," Elayne murmured. "And hungry. Where are we? There were some men with slings. . . ."

heɪstəli ɛɡwin toʊld əɹ wʌt hæd hæpənd. ɪleɪnz feɪs bɪɡæn tə dɑɹkən ə lɔŋ weɪ bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz dʌn.

Hastily Egwene told her what had happened. Elayne's face began to darken a long way before she was done.

"ænd naʊ," nɪneɪiv æɾəd ɪn ə vɔɪs laɪk aɪɝn, "wi ɑɹ gɑnə ʃoʊ ðiz laʊts wʌɾ ɪt minz tə mɛɾəl wɪð ʌs." seɪaɪdɑɹ ʃoʊn ɝaʊn əɹ wʌns mɔɹ.

"And now," Nynaeve added in a voice like iron, "we are going to show these louts what it means to meddle with us." Saidar shone around her once more.

ɪleɪn wɑz ənstɛɾi ɡɛɾɪŋ tə hɝ fit, bʌt ðə ɡloʊ sɝaʊndəd hɝ, əz wɛl. ɛɡwin ɹitʃt aʊt tə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ɔlmoʊst ɡlifəli.

Elayne was unsteady getting to her feet, but the glow surrounded her, as well. Egwene reached out to the True Source almost gleefully.

wən ðeɪ lʊk θɹu ðə kɹæks əɡɛn, tə si ɪɡzækli wʌt ðeɪ hæd tə dil wɪð, ðəɹ wɝ θɹi mɹdʒɹɑl ɪn ðə ɹum.

When they looked through the cracks again, to see exactly what they had to deal with, there were three Myrddraal in the room.

dɛd-blæk ɡɑɹb hæŋɪŋ ənnətʃɝəli stɪl, ðeɪ stʊd baɪ ðə teɪbəl, ən ɛvɹi mæn bʌɾ æɾən hæd muvd əz fɑɹ fɹəm əm əz i kʊd, tɪl ðeɪ ɔl hæd ðɛɹ bæks əɡɛns ðə wɔlz ən ðɛɹ aɪz ɑn ðə dɝt flɔɹ. əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl fɹəm ðə mɹdʒɹɑl, æɾən feɪs ðoʊz aɪləs stɛɹz, bʌt swɛt meɪd ɹʌnəlz ɪn ðə dɝɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs.

Dead-black garb hanging unnaturally still, they stood by the table, and every man but Adden had moved as far from them as he could, till they all had their backs against the walls and their eyes on the dirt floor. Across the table from the Myrddraal, Adden faced those eyeless stares, but sweat made runnels in the dirt on his face.

ðə feɪd pɪkt ʌp ə ɹɪŋ fɹəm ðə teɪbəl. ɛɡwin sɔ naʊ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə mʌtʃ hɛviɝ sɝkəl ʌv ɡoʊl ðən ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋz.

The Fade picked up a ring from the table. Egwene saw now that it was a much heavier circle of gold than the Great Serpent rings.

feɪs pɹɛst əɡɛns ðə kɹæk bɪtwin tu lɔɡz, nɪneɪiv ɡæsp sɔfli ən fʌmbəld ət ðə nɛk ə hɝ dʒɹɛs.

Face pressed against the crack between two logs, Nynaeve gasped softly and fumbled at the neck of her dress.

"θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ," ðə hæfmən hɪst, ɪts əmjuzmən saʊndɪŋ laɪk dɛd θɪŋz paʊɾɝɪŋ tə dʌst, "ænd wʌn kæɹid ðɪs." ðə ɹɪŋ meɪɾ ə hɛvi θʌɾ əz ðə mɹdʒɹɑl tɔst ɪt bæk ɑn ðə teɪbəl.

"Three Aes Sedai," the Halfman hissed, its amusement sounding like dead things powdering to dust, "and one carried this." The ring made a heavy thud as the Myrddraal tossed it back on the table.

"ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə wʌnz aɪ sik," ənʌðɝ ə ðɛm ɹæspt. "ju wɪl bi wɛl ɹɪwɔɹɾɪd, hjumən."

"They are the ones I seek," another of them rasped. "You will be well rewarded, human."

"wi mʌs teɪk əm baɪ sɝpɹaɪz," nɪneɪiv sɛd sɔfli. "wʌt kaɪndə lɑk hoʊlz ðɪs dɔɹ?"

"We must take them by surprise," Nynaeve said softly. "What kind of lock holds this door?"

ɛɡwin kəd dʒʌst si ðə lɑk ɑn ði aʊtsaɪɾ ə ðə dɔɹ, ən aɪɝn θɪŋ ɑn ə tʃeɪn hɛvi ɪnʌf tə hoʊld ən ɛnɹeɪdʒ bʊl. "bi ɹɛɾi," ʃi sɛd.

Egwene could just see the lock on the outside of the door, an iron thing on a chain heavy enough to hold an enraged bull. "Be ready," she said.

ʃi θɪnd wʌn floʊ ʌv ɝθ tə faɪnɝ ðən ə hɛɹ, hoʊpɪŋ ðə hæfmən kəd nɑt sɛns soʊ smɔl ə tʃænəlɪŋ, ən woʊv ɪɾ ɪndə ði aɪɝn tʃeɪn, ɪndə ðə taɪniəs bɪts ʌv ɪt.

She thinned one flow of Earth to finer than a hair, hoping the Halfmen could not sense so small a channeling, and wove it into the iron chain, into the tiniest bits of it.

wʌn ə ðə mɹdʒɹɑl lɪftəɾ ɪts hɛd. ənʌðɝ lin əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl təwɔɹɾ æɾən. "aɪ ɪtʃ, hjumən. ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ðeɪ slip?" æɾən swɑloʊd hɑɹɾ ən nɑɾəd ɪz hɛd.

One of the Myrddraal lifted its head. Another leaned across the table toward Adden. "I itch, human. Are you sure they sleep?" Adden swallowed hard and nodded his head.

ðə θɝd mɹdʒɹɑl tɝn tə stɛɹ ət ðə dɔɹ tə ðə ɹum wɛɹ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz kɹaʊtʃt.

The third Myrddraal turned to stare at the door to the room where Egwene and the others crouched.

ðə tʃeɪn fɛl tə ðə flɔɹ, ðə mɹdʒɹɑl stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪt snɑɹəld, ən ði aʊɾɝ dɔɹ swʌŋ oʊpən, blæk-veɪl dɛθ floʊɪŋ ɪn fɹəm ðə naɪt.

The chain fell to the floor, the Myrddraal staring at it snarled, and the outer door swung open, black-veiled death flowing in from the night.

ðə ɹum ɪɹʌptəɾ ɪn skɹimz ən ʃaʊts əz mɛn klɔd fəɹ ðɛɹ sɔɹdz tə faɪt stæbɪŋ il spɪɹz. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl dʒɹu bleɪdz blækɝ ðən ðɛɹ ɡɑɹb ən fɔt fəɹ ðɛɹ lɪvz, tu. ɛɡwin hæd wʌns sin sɪks kæts ɔl faɪɾɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ; ðɪs wɑz ðəɾ ə hʌndʒɹɛdfoʊld. ən jɛɾ ɪn sɛkənz, saɪləns ɹeɪnd. əɹ ɔlmoʊst saɪləns.

The room erupted in screams and shouts as men clawed for their swords to fight stabbing Aiel spears. The Myrddraal drew blades blacker than their garb and fought for their lives, too. Egwene had once seen six cats all fighting each other; this was that a hundredfold. And yet in seconds, silence reigned. Or almost silence.

ɛvɹi hjumən nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ə blæk veɪl leɪ dɛd wɪð ə spɪɹ θɹu hɪm; wʌn pɪn æɾən tə ðə wɔl. tu il leɪ stɪl, əz wɛl, əmɪd ðə dʒʌmbəl ʌv oʊvɝtɝn fɝnɪtʃɝ ən dɛd. ðə θɹi mɹdʒɹɑl stʊd bæk-tə-bæk ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə ɹum, blæk sɔɹdz ɪn ðɛɹ hænz. wʌn wɑz klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz saɪɾ əz ɪf wundəd, ðoʊ hi ɡeɪv noʊ ʌðɝ saɪn ʌv ɪt. ənʌðɝ hæɾ ə lɔŋ ɡæʃ daʊn ɪts peɪl feɪs; ɪt dɪd nɑt blid. ɝaʊn əm sɝkəl ðə faɪv veɪld il stɪl əlaɪv, kɹaʊtʃɪŋ. fɹəm aʊtsaɪd keɪm skɹimz ən klæʃɪz ə mɛɾəl ðət sɛd mɔɹ il stɪl fɔɾ ɪn ðə naɪt, bʌɾ ɪn ðə ɹum wɑz ə sɑftɝ saʊnd.

Every human not wearing a black veil lay dead with a spear through him; one pinned Adden to the wall. Two Aiel lay still, as well, amid the jumble of overturned furniture and dead. The three Myrddraal stood back-to-back in the center of the room, black swords in their hands. One was clutching his side as if wounded, though he gave no other sign of it. Another had a long gash down its pale face; it did not bleed. Around them circled the five veiled Aiel still alive, crouching. From outside came screams and clashes of metal that said more Aiel still fought in the night, but in the room was a softer sound.

əz ðeɪ sɝkəld, ði il dʒɹʌm ðɛɹ spɪɹz əɡɛns ðɛɹ smɔl haɪd bʌklɝz. θɹəm-θɹəm-θɹəm-θɹəm . . . θɹəm-θɹəm-θɹʌmθɹəm . . . θɹəm-θɹəm-θɹəm-θɹəm. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl tɝnd wɪð ðɛm, ən ðɛɹ aɪləs feɪsəz simd ənsɝɾən, ənizi ðət ðə fɪɹ ðɛɹ ɡeɪz stʃɹʌk ɪndə ɛvɹi hjumən hɑɹt dɪd nɑt sim tə tʌtʃ ðiz.

As they circled, the Aiel drummed their spears against their small hide bucklers. Thrum-thrum-THRUM-thrum . . . thrum-thrum-THRUMthrum . . . thrum-thrum-THRUM-thrum. The Myrddraal turned with them, and their eyeless faces seemed uncertain, uneasy that the fear their gaze struck into every human heart did not seem to touch these.

"dæns wɪð mi, ʃæɾoʊmən," wʌn ə ði il kɔl sʌɾənli, tɔntɪŋli. hi saʊndəd laɪk ə jʌŋ mæn.

"Dance with me, Shadowman," one of the Aiel called suddenly, tauntingly. He sounded like a young man.

"dæns wɪð mi, aɪləs." ðət wɑz ə wʊmən.

"Dance with me, Eyeless." That was a woman.

"dæns wɪð mi."

"Dance with me."

"dæns wɪð mi."

"Dance with me."

"aɪ θɪŋk," nɪneɪiv sɛd, stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ, "ðæɾ ɪts taɪm." ʃi θɹu oʊpən ðə dɔɹ, ən ðə θɹi wɪmən ɹæpt ɪn ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ stɛpt aʊt.

"I think," Nynaeve said, straightening, "that it is time." She threw open the door, and the three women wrapped in the glow of saidar stepped out.

ɪt simd əz ðoʊ, fəɹ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl, ði il hæd sis tə ɪɡzɪst, ən fəɹ ði il, ðə mɹdʒɹɑl. ði il stɛɹɾ əɾ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz əbʌv ðɛɹ veɪlz əz ɪf nɑt kwaɪt ʃʊɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ siɪŋ; ʃi hɝd wʌn ə ðə wɪmən ɡæsp laʊdli. ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz aɪləs stɛɹ wɑz dɪfɹənt. ɛɡwin kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil ðə hæfmənz nɑlədʒ ə ðɛɹ oʊn dɛθs ɪn ɪt; hæfmən nu wɪmən ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs wən ðeɪ sɔ ðɛm. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi kəd fil ə dɪzaɪɝ fəɹ əɹ dɛθ, tu, ɪf ðɛɹz kəd baɪ hɝz, ən ən ivən stʃɹɔŋɝ dɪzaɪɝ tə stʃɹɪp ðə soʊl aʊɾ ə hɝ flɛʃ ən meɪk boʊθ pleɪθɪŋz fəɹ ðə ʃædoʊ, ə dɪzaɪɝ tə. . . .

It seemed as though, for the Myrddraal, the Aiel had ceased to exist, and for the Aiel, the Myrddraal. The Aiel stared at Egwene and the others above their veils as if not quite sure what they were seeing; she heard one of the women gasp loudly. The Myrddraal's eyeless stare was different. Egwene could almost feel the Halfmen's knowledge of their own deaths in it; Halfmen knew women embracing the True Source when they saw them. She was sure she could feel a desire for her death, too, if theirs could buy hers, and an even stronger desire to strip the soul out of her flesh and make both playthings for the Shadow, a desire to. . . .

ʃi hæd dʒʌst stɛpt ɪndə ðə ɹum, jɛɾ ɪt simd ʃi hæd bɪn miɾɪŋ ðət stɛɹ fəɹ aʊɝz. "aɪl teɪk noʊ mɔɹ ə ðɪs," ʃi ɡɹaʊld, ən ənliʃt ə floʊ ʌv faɪɝ.

She had just stepped into the room, yet it seemed she had been meeting that stare for hours. "I'll take no more of this," she growled, and unleashed a flow of Fire.

fleɪmz bɝst aʊɾ ʌv ɔl θɹi mɹdʒɹɑl, spɹaʊɾɪŋ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, ən ðeɪ ʃɹik laɪk splɪntɝd boʊnz dʒæmɪŋ ə mit-ɡɹaɪndɝ. jɛt ʃi hæd fɝɡɑɾən ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn, ðəɾ ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv wɝ wɪð hɝ. ivən əz ðə fleɪmz kənsum ðə hæfmən, ðə vɛɹi ɛɹ sim sʌɾənli tə pʊʃ əm təɡɛðɝ ɪn mɪdɛɹ, kɹʌʃɪŋ əm ɪndə ə bɔl ə faɪɝ ən blæknəs ðət ɡɹu smɔlɝ ən smɔlɝ. ðɛɹ skɹimz dʌɡ əɾ ɛɡwinz spaɪn, ən sʌmθɪŋ ʃɑɾ aʊt fɹəm nɪneɪivz hænz - ə θɪn bɑɹ ʌv waɪt laɪt ðət meɪd nundeɪ sʌn sim dɑɹk, ə bɑɹ ə faɪɝ ðət meɪd moʊltən mɛɾəl sim koʊld, kənɛktɪŋ əɹ hænz tə ðə mɹdʒɹɑl. ən ðeɪ sis tə ɪɡzɪst əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ bɪn. nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾəld dʒʌmp, ən ðə ɡloʊ ɝaʊn əɹ vænɪʃt.

Flames burst out of all three Myrddraal, sprouting in every direction, and they shrieked like splintered bones jamming a meat-grinder. Yet she had forgotten she was not alone, that Elayne and Nynaeve were with her. Even as the flames consumed the Halfmen, the very air seemed suddenly to push them together in midair, crushing them into a ball of fire and blackness that grew smaller and smaller. Their screams dug at Egwene's spine, and something shot out from Nynaeve's hands - a thin bar of white light that made noonday sun seem dark, a bar of fire that made molten metal seem cold, connecting her hands to the Myrddraal. And they ceased to exist as if they had never been. Nynaeve gave a startled jump, and the glow around her vanished.

"wʌt . . . wʌt wɑz ðæt?" ɪleɪn æskt.

"What . . . what was that?" Elayne asked.

nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd; ʃi lʊkt əz stʌn əz ɪleɪn saʊndəd. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ. aɪ . . . aɪ wɑz soʊ æŋɡɹi, soʊ əfɹeɪd, ət wʌt ðeɪ wɑntəd tə. . . . aɪ də nɑt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz."

Nynaeve shook her head; she looked as stunned as Elayne sounded. "I don't know. I . . . I was so angry, so afraid, at what they wanted to. . . . I do not know what it was."

bɑlfaɪɝ, ɛɡwin θɔt. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ ʃi nu, bʌt ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ʌv ɪt. ɹɪlʌktənli, ʃi meɪd hɝsɛlf ɹilis seɪaɪdɑɹ; meɪɾ ɪt ɹilis hɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɪtʃ wɑz hɑɹɾɝ. ən aɪ dɪd nɑt si ə θɪŋ ʌv wʌt ʃi dɪd!

Balefire, Egwene thought. She did not know how she knew, but she was certain of it. Reluctantly, she made herself release saidar; made it release her. She did not know which was harder. And I did not see a thing of what she did!

ði il ənveɪl ðɛmsɛlvz, ðɛn. ə tʃɹaɪfəl heɪstəli, ɛɡwin θɔt, əz ɪf tə tɛl əɹ ən ði ʌðɝ tu ðeɪ wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɹɛɾi tə faɪt. θɹi ʌv ði il wɝ meɪl, wʌn ən oʊldɝ mæn wɪð mɔɹ ðən tʌtʃəz ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn ɪz dɑɹk ɹɛd hɛɹ. ðeɪ wɝ tɔl, ðiz ilmɛn, ən jʌŋ əɹ oʊld, ðeɪ hæd ðət kɑm ʃʊɹnəs ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz, ðət deɪnʒɝəs ɡɹeɪs ə moʊʃən ɛɡwin əsoʊsieɪɾəd wɪð wɔɹɾɝz; dɛθ ɹoʊɾ ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ən ðeɪ nu ɪt wɑz ðəɹ ən wɝ nɑɾ əfɹeɪd. wʌn ə ðə wɪmən wɑz eɪvinhə. ðə skɹimz ən ʃaʊts aʊtsaɪd wɝ daɪɪŋ əweɪ.

The Aiel unveiled themselves, then. A trifle hastily, Egwene thought, as if to tell her and the other two they were no longer ready to fight. Three of the Aiel were male, one an older man with more than touches of gray in his dark red hair. They were tall, these Aielmen, and young or old, they had that calm sureness in their eyes, that dangerous grace of motion Egwene associated with Warders; death rode on their shoulders, and they knew it was there and were not afraid. One of the women was Aviendha. The screams and shouts outside were dying away.

nɪneɪiv stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ðə fɔlən il.

Nynaeve started toward the fallen Aiel.

"ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ nid, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ði oʊldɝ mæn sɛd. "ðeɪ tʊk ʃæɾoʊmən stil."

"There is no need, Aes Sedai," the older man said. "They took Shadowman steel."

nɪneɪiv stɪl bɛn tə tʃɛk itʃ, pʊlɪŋ ðɛɹ veɪlz əweɪ soʊ ʃi kəd pil bæk aɪlɪdz ən fil θɹoʊts fəɹ ə pʌls. wən ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm ðə sɛkənd, hɝ feɪs wɑz waɪt. ɪt wɑz deɪlɪn. "bɝn ju! bɝn ju!" ɪt wɑz nɑt klɪɹ wɛðɝ ʃi mɛn deɪlɪn, əɹ ðə mæn wɪð ɡɹeɪ ɪn ɪz hɛɹ, əɹ eɪvinhə, əɹ ɔl il. "aɪ dɪd nɑt hil əɹ soʊ ʃi kəd daɪ laɪk ðɪs!"

Nynaeve still bent to check each, pulling their veils away so she could peel back eyelids and feel throats for a pulse. When she straightened from the second, her face was white. It was Dailin. "Burn you! Burn you!" It was not clear whether she meant Dailin, or the man with gray in his hair, or Aviendha, or all Aiel. "I did not Heal her so she could die like this!"

"dɛθ kʌmz tə əs ɔl," eɪvinhə bɪɡæn, bʌt wən nɪneɪiv ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn hɝ, ʃi fɛl saɪlənt. ði il ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz, əz ɪf nɑt sɝɾən wɛðɝ nɪneɪiv maɪt də tə ðɛm wʌt hæd bɪn dʌn tə ðə mɹdʒɹɑl. ɪt wɑz nɑt fɪɹ ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz, oʊnli əwɛɹnəs.

"Death comes to us all," Aviendha began, but when Nynaeve rounded on her, she fell silent. The Aiel exchanged glances, as if not certain whether Nynaeve might do to them what had been done to the Myrddraal. It was not fear in their eyes, only awareness.

"ʃæɾoʊmən stil kɪlz," eɪvinhə sɛd, "ɪt dʌz nɑt waʊnd." ði oʊldɝ mæn lʊkt ət hɝ, ə slaɪt sɝpɹaɪz ɪn ɪz aɪz - ɛɡwin dɪsaɪɾɪd ðæt, laɪk læn, fəɹ ðɪs mæn ðət flɪkɝ ə ði aɪlɪdz wɑz ði ɪkwɪvələn ʌv ənʌðɝ mænz oʊpən əstɑnɪʃmənt - ən eɪvinhə sɛd, "ðeɪ noʊ lɪɾəl ə səm θɪŋz, ɹəɑɹk."

"Shadowman steel kills," Aviendha said, "it does not wound." The older man looked at her, a slight surprise in his eyes - Egwene decided that, like Lan, for this man that flicker of the eyelids was the equivalent of another man's open astonishment - and Aviendha said, "They know little of some things, Rhuarc."

"aɪ æm sɑɹi," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə klɪɹ vɔɪs, "ðæt wi ɪntɝʌptɪd jəɹ . . . dæns. pɝhæps wi ʃəd nɑɾ əv ɪntɝfɪɹd."

"I am sorry," Elayne said in a clear voice, "that we interrupted your . . . dance. Perhaps we should not have interfered."

ɛɡwin ɡeɪv əɹ ə stɑɹɾəld lʊk, ðən sɔ wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ. pʊɾ əm əɾ iz, ən ɡɪv nɪneɪiv ə tʃæns tə kul daʊn. "ju wɝ hænlɪŋ θɪŋz kwaɪt wɛl," ʃi sɛd. "pɝhæps wi əfɛndəd baɪ pʊɾɪŋ əɹ noʊzɪz ɪn."

Egwene gave her a startled look, then saw what she was doing. Put them at ease, and give Nynaeve a chance to cool down. "You were handling things quite well," she said. "Perhaps we offended by putting our noses in."

ðə ɡɹeɪɪŋ mæn - ɹəɑɹk - ɡeɪv ə dip tʃʌkəl. "ɛɛs sədaɪ, aɪ fəɹ wʌn æm ɡlæɾ ʌv . . . wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz jə dɪd." fəɹ ə moʊmən i lʊk nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli ʃʊɹ ə ðæt, bʌɾ ɪn ðə nɛkst i hæɾ ɪz ɡʊd tɛmpɝ bæk. hi hæɾ ə ɡʊd smaɪl, ən ə stʃɹɔŋ, skwɛɹ feɪs; hi wɑz hænsəm, ɪf ə lɪɾəl oʊld. "wi cʊɾə kɪl ðɛm, bʌt θɹi ʃæɾoʊmən. . . . ðeɪ wʊɾə kɪl tu əɹ θɹi ʌv ʌs, sɝɾənli, pɝhæps ɔl, ən aɪ kænɑt seɪ wi wʊɾə fɪnɪʃt əm ɔl. fəɹ ðə jʌŋ, dɛθ ɪz ən ɛnəmi ðeɪ wɪʃ tə tʃɹaɪ ðɛɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ əɡɛnst. fəɹ ðoʊz ʌv əs ə lɪɾəl oʊldɝ, ʃiz ən oʊl fɹɛnd, ən oʊld lʌvɝ, bʌt wʌn wəɹ nɑɾ iɡɝ tə miɾ əɡɛn sun."

The graying man - Rhuarc - gave a deep chuckle. "Aes Sedai, I for one am glad of . . . whatever it was you did." For a moment he looked not entirely sure of that, but in the next he had his good temper back. He had a good smile, and a strong, square face; he was handsome, if a little old. "We could have killed them, but three Shadowmen. . . . They would have killed two or three of us, certainly, perhaps all, and I cannot say we would have finished them all. For the young, death is an enemy they wish to try their strength against. For those of us a little older, she is an old friend, an old lover, but one we are not eager to meet again soon."

nɪneɪiv sim tə ɹɪlæks wɪð ɪz spitʃ, əz ɪf miɾɪŋ ən il u dɪd nɑt sim æŋkʃəs tə daɪ hæd litʃt ðə tɛnʃən aʊɾ ə hɝ. "aɪ ʃəd θæŋk ju," ʃi sɛd, "æn aɪ du. əl ədmɪɾ aɪm sɝpɹaɪz tə si ju, ðoʊ. eɪvinhə, dɪd jə ɪkspɛk tə faɪn əs hɪɹ? haʊ?"

Nynaeve seemed to relax with his speech, as if meeting an Aiel who did not seem anxious to die had leached the tension out of her. "I should thank you," she said, "and I do. I will admit I am surprised to see you, though. Aviendha, did you expect to find us here? How?"

"aɪ fɑloʊd ju." ði il wʊmən simd ʌnɪmbɛɹəst. "tə si wʌt jə wəd du. aɪ sɔ ðə mɛn teɪk ju, bʌɾ aɪ wɑz tu fɑɹ bæk tə hɛlp. aɪ wɑz ʃʊɹ jə mʌst si mi ɪf aɪ keɪm tu kloʊs, soʊ aɪ steɪɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz bɪhaɪnd. baɪ ðə taɪm aɪ sɔ jə kəd nɑt hɛlp jʊɹsɛlvz, ɪt wɑz tu leɪt tə tʃɹaɪ əloʊn."

"I followed you." The Aiel woman seemed unembarrassed. "To see what you would do. I saw the men take you, but I was too far back to help. I was sure you must see me if I came too close, so I stayed a hundred paces behind. By the time I saw you could not help yourselves, it was too late to try alone."

"aɪ æm ʃʊɹ jə dɪd wʌt jə kʊd," ɛɡwin sɛd feɪnli. ʃi wɑz dʒʌst ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz bɪhaɪn ʌs? laɪt, ðə bɹɪɡænz nɛvɝ sɔ ɛniθɪŋ.

"I am sure you did what you could," Egwene said faintly. She was just a hundred paces behind us? Light, the brigands never saw anything.

eɪvinhə tʊk əɹ wɝdz əz ɝdʒɪŋ tə tɛl mɔɹ. "aɪ nu wɛɹ kɔɹæm mʌs bi, ən i nu wɛɹ dl ən lʌeɪn wɝ, ən ðeɪ nu. . . ." ʃi pɔzd, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ði oʊldɝ mæn. "aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk tə faɪn ɛni klæn tʃif, mʌtʃ lɛs maɪ oʊn, əmʌŋ ðoʊz u keɪm. hu lidz ðə tɑɹdæɾ il, ɹəɑɹk, wɪð jə hɪɹ?"

Aviendha took her words as urging to tell more. "I knew where Coram must be, and he knew where Dhael and Luaine were, and they knew. . . ." She paused, frowning at the older man. "I did not expect to find any clan chief, much less my own, among those who came. Who leads the Taardad Aiel, Rhuarc, with you here?"

ɹəɑɹk ʃɹʌɡd əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə noʊ əkaʊnt. "ðə sɛp tʃifs wɪl teɪk ðɛɹ tɝnz, ən tʃɹaɪ tə dɪsaɪɾ ɪf ðeɪ tʃɹuli wɪʃ tə ɡoʊ tə ɹɪɾiən wən aɪ daɪ. aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv kʌm, ɪksɛp ðəɾ æmɪz ən bɛɹ ən məleɪn ən sinə stɔk mi laɪk ɹɪdʒɛkæts æftɝ ə waɪld ɡoʊt. ðə dʒɹimz sɛɾ aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ. ðeɪ æskt ɪf aɪ tʃɹuli wɑntəd tə daɪ oʊld ən fæɾ ɪn ə bɛd."

Rhuarc shrugged as if it were of no account. "The sept chiefs will take their turns, and try to decide if they truly wish to go to Rhuidean when I die. I would not have come, except that Amys and Bair and Melaine and Seana stalked me like ridgecats after a wild goat. The dreams said I must go. They asked if I truly wanted to die old and fat in a bed."

eɪvinhə læft əz ɪf əɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dʒoʊk. "aɪ hæv hɝɾ ɪt sɛd ðəɾ ə mæn kɑt bɪtwin ɪz waɪf ən ə waɪz wʌn ɔfən wɪʃɪz fəɹ ə dʌzən oʊld ɛnəmiz tə faɪɾ ɪnstɛd. ə mæn kɑt bɪtwin ə waɪf ən θɹi waɪz wʌnz, ən ðə waɪf ə waɪz wʌn hɝsɛlf, mʌs kənsɪɾɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə sleɪ saɪtblɪndɝ."

Aviendha laughed as if at a great joke. "I have heard it said that a man caught between his wife and a Wise One often wishes for a dozen old enemies to fight instead. A man caught between a wife and three Wise Ones, and the wife a Wise One herself, must consider trying to slay Sightblinder."

"ðə θɔt keɪm tə mi." hi fɹaʊn daʊn ət sʌmθɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ; θɹi ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋz, ɛɡwin sɔ, ən ə mʌtʃ hɛviɝ ɡoʊldən ɹɪŋ meɪd fəɹ ə mænz lɑɹdʒ fɪŋɡɝ. "ɪt stɪl dʌz. ɔl θɪŋz mʌs tʃeɪnʒ, bʌɾ aɪ wəd nɑt bi ə pɑɹɾ ə ðət tʃeɪnʒ ɪf aɪ kəd sɛt maɪsɛlf əsaɪd fɹəm ɪt. θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ, tʃɹævlɪŋ tə tɛɹ." ði ʌðɝ il ɡlænst ət wʌn ənʌðɝ əz ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt wɑn ɛɡwin ən əɹ kəmpænjənz tə noʊɾəs.

"The thought came to me." He frowned down at something on the floor; three Great Serpent rings, Egwene saw, and a much heavier golden ring made for a man's large finger. "It still does. All things must change, but I would not be a part of that change if I could set myself aside from it. Three Aes Sedai, traveling to Tear." The other Aiel glanced at one another as if they did not want Egwene and her companions to notice.

"ju spoʊk ə dʒɹimz," ɛɡwin sɛd. "du jəɹ waɪz wʌnz noʊ wʌt ðɛɹ dʒɹimz min?"

"You spoke of dreams," Egwene said. "Do your Wise Ones know what their dreams mean?"

"sʌm du. ɪf jə wəd noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðæt, jə mʌst spik tə ðɛm. pɝhæps ðəl tɛl ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðeɪ də nɑt tɛl mɛn, ɪksɛpt wʌt ðə dʒɹimz seɪ wi mʌs du." hi saʊndəd taɪɝd, sʌɾənli. "æn ðəɾ ɪz juʒəwəli wʌt wi wəɾ əvɔɪd, ɪf wi kʊd."

"Some do. If you would know more than that, you must speak to them. Perhaps they will tell an Aes Sedai. They do not tell men, except what the dreams say we must do." He sounded tired, suddenly. "And that is usually what we would avoid, if we could."

hi stup tə pɪk ʌp ðə mænz ɹɪŋ. ɑn ɪt, ə kɹeɪn flu əbʌv ə læns ən kɹaʊn; ɛɡwin nu ɪt naʊ. ʃi hæd sin ɪɾ ɔfən bɪfɔɹ, dæŋɡəlɪŋ əbaʊt nɪneɪivz nɛk ɑn ə lɛðɝ kɔɹd. nɪneɪiv stɛpt ɑn ði ʌðɝ ɹɪŋz tə snætʃ ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz hænd; hɝ feɪs wɑz flʌʃt, wɪð æŋɡɝ ən tu mɛni ʌðɝ ɪmoʊʃənz fəɹ ɛɡwin tə ɹid. ɹəɑɹk meɪd noʊ muv tə teɪk ɪt bæk, bʌt wɛn ɑn ɪn ðə seɪm wɪɹi toʊn.

He stooped to pick up the man's ring. On it, a crane flew above a lance and crown; Egwene knew it now. She had seen it often before, dangling about Nynaeve's neck on a leather cord. Nynaeve stepped on the other rings to snatch it out of his hand; her face was flushed, with anger and too many other emotions for Egwene to read. Rhuarc made no move to take it back, but went on in the same weary tone.

"ænd wʌn ə ðɛm kæɹiz ə ɹɪŋ aɪ hæv hɝɾ ʌv əz ə bɔɪ. ðə ɹɪŋ ə mɔlkɪɹi kɪŋz. ðeɪ ɹoʊd wɪð ðə ʃaɪnɝənz əɡɛns ði il ɪn maɪ fɑðɝz taɪm. ðeɪ wɝ ɡʊɾ ɪn ðə dæns ə ðə spɪɹz. bʌt mɔlkiɝ fɛl tə ðə blaɪt. ɪts sɛɾ oʊnli ə tʃaɪl kɪŋ sɝvaɪvd, ən i kɔɹts ðə dɛθ ðət tʊk ɪz læn əz ʌðɝ mɛn kɔɹt bjuɾəfəl wɪmən. tʃɹuli, ðɪs ɪz ə stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋ, ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʌv ɔl ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ saɪts aɪ θɔɾ aɪ maɪt si wən məleɪn hɛɹid mi aʊɾ ə maɪ oʊn hoʊld ən oʊvɝ ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl, nʌn əz bɪn soʊ stʃɹeɪnʒ əz ðɪs. ðə pæθ jə sɛt mi ɪz wʌn aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt maɪ fit wəd fɑloʊ."

"And one of them carries a ring I have heard of as a boy. The ring of Malkieri kings. They rode with the Shienarans against the Aiel in my father's time. They were good in the dance of the spears. But Malkier fell to the Blight. It is said only a child king survived, and he courts the death that took his land as other men court beautiful women. Truly, this is a strange thing, Aes Sedai. Of all the strange sights I thought I might see when Melaine harried me out of my own hold and over the Dragonwall, none has been so strange as this. The path you set me is one I never thought my feet would follow."

"aɪ sɛt noʊ pæðz fəɹ ju," nɪneɪiv sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "ɔl aɪ wɑn ɪz tə kəntɪnju maɪ dʒɝni. ðiz mɛn hæd hɔɹsəz. wɪl teɪk θɹi ʌv əm ən bi ɑn əɹ weɪ."

"I set no paths for you," Nynaeve said sharply. "All I want is to continue my journey. These men had horses. We will take three of them and be on our way."

"ɪn ðə naɪt, ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ɹəɑɹk sɛd. "ɪz jəɹ dʒɝni soʊ ɝdʒən ðət jə wəd tʃɹævəl ðiz deɪnʒɝəs lænz ɪn ðə dɑɹk?"

"In the night, Aes Sedai?" Rhuarc said. "Is your journey so urgent that you would travel these dangerous lands in the dark?"

nɪneɪiv stʃɹʌɡəl vɪzəbli bɪfɔɹ seɪɪŋ, "noʊ." ɪn ə fɝmɝ toʊn ʃi æɾəd, "bʌɾ aɪ min tə liv wɪð ðə sʌnɹaɪz."

Nynaeve struggled visibly before saying, "No." In a firmer tone she added, "But I mean to leave with the sunrise."

ði il kæɹid ðə dɛɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə pælɪsɑd, bʌt niðɝ ɛɡwin nɔɹ əɹ kəmpænjənz wɑntəd tə juz ðə fɪlθi bɛɾ æɾən hæd slɛpt ɪn. ðeɪ pɪkt ʌp ðɛɹ ɹɪŋz ən slɛpt ʌndɝ ðə skaɪ ɪn ðɛɹ kloʊks ən ðə blæŋkəts ði il ɡeɪv ðɛm.

The Aiel carried the dead outside the palisade, but neither Egwene nor her companions wanted to use the filthy bed Adden had slept in. They picked up their rings and slept under the sky in their cloaks and the blankets the Aiel gave them.

wən dɔn pɝl ðə skaɪ tə ði ist, ði il pɹədust ə bɹɛkfəst ə tʌf, dʒɹaɪd mit - ɛɡwin hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊvɝ ðəɾ əntɪl eɪvinhə toʊld əɹ ɪt wɑz ɡoʊt - flætbɹɛd ðət wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz dɪfəkəl tə tʃu əz ðə stʃɹɪŋi mit, ən ə blu-veɪnd waɪt tʃiz ðət hæɾ ə tɑɹt teɪst ən wɑz hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪleɪn mɝmɝ ðət ði il mʌs pɹæktəs baɪ tʃuɪŋ ɹɑks. bʌt ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ eɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv təɡɛðɝ. ði il tɝn ðə hɔɹsəz lus - ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ɹaɪɾ ənlɛs ðeɪ hæd tə, eɪvinhə ɪkspleɪnd, saʊndɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi hɝsɛlf wəɾ əz sun ɹʌn ɑn blɪstɝd fit - æftɝ tʃuzɪŋ aʊt ðə θɹi bɛs fəɹ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl tɔl ən nɪɹli əz bɪɡ əz wɔɹhɔɹsɪz, wɪð pɹaʊd nɛks ən fɪɹs aɪz. ə blæk stæljən fəɹ nɪneɪiv, ə ɹoʊn mɛɹ fəɹ ɪleɪn, ən ə ɡɹeɪ mɛɹ fəɹ ɛɡwin.

When dawn pearled the sky to the east, the Aiel produced a breakfast of tough, dried meat - Egwene hesitated over that until Aviendha told her it was goat - flatbread that was almost as difficult to chew as the stringy meat, and a blue-veined white cheese that had a tart taste and was hard enough to make Elayne murmur that the Aiel must practice by chewing rocks. But the Daughter-Heir ate as much as Egwene and Nynaeve together. The Aiel turned the horses loose - they did not ride unless they had to, Aviendha explained, sounding as if she herself would as soon run on blistered feet - after choosing out the three best for Egwene and the others. They were all tall and nearly as big as warhorses, with proud necks and fierce eyes. A black stallion for Nynaeve, a roan mare for Elayne, and a gray mare for Egwene.

ʃi tʃoʊz tə kɔl ðə ɡɹeɪ mɪst, ɪn ðə hoʊp ðəɾ ə dʒɛntəl neɪm maɪt suð hɝ, ən ɪndid, mɪs dɪd sim tə stɛp laɪtli əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd saʊθ, dʒʌst əz ðə sʌn lɪftəɾ ə ɹɛd ɹɪm əbʌv ðə hɝaɪzən.

She chose to call the gray Mist, in the hope that a gentle name might soothe her, and indeed, Mist did seem to step lightly as they rode south, just as the sun lifted a red rim above the horizon.

ði il əkʌmpəniɾ əm əfʊt, ɔl ðoʊz u hæd sɝvaɪv ðə faɪt. θɹi mɔɹ hæd daɪɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ðə tu ðə mɹdʒɹɑl kɪld. ðeɪ wɝ naɪntin, ɔltəɡɛðɝ, naʊ. ðeɪ loʊpt əlɔŋ izəli əlɔŋsaɪd ðə hɔɹsəz. ət fɝst, ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd hoʊldɪŋ mɪs tə ə sloʊ wɔk, bʌt ði il θɔt ðɪs vɛɹi fʌni.

The Aiel accompanied them afoot, all those who had survived the fight. Three more had died aside from the two the Myrddraal killed. They were nineteen, altogether, now. They loped along easily alongside the horses. At first, Egwene tried holding Mist to a slow walk, but the Aiel thought this very funny.

"aɪ wɪl ɹeɪs jə tɛn maɪlz," eɪvinhə sɛd, "ænd wi ʃæl si hu wɪnz, jəɹ hɔɹs əɹ aɪ."

"I will race you ten miles," Aviendha said, "and we shall see who wins, your horse or I."

"aɪ wɪl ɹeɪs jə twɛnti!" ɹəɑɹk kɔld, læfɪŋ.

"I will race you twenty!" Rhuarc called, laughing.

ɛɡwin θɔt ðeɪ maɪɾ æktʃəli  bi sɪɹiəs, ən wən ʃi ən ði ʌðɝz lɛt ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz wɔk əɾ ə kwɪkɝ peɪs, ði il sɝɾənli ʃoʊd noʊ saɪn ə fɔlɪŋ bæk.

Egwene thought they might actually be serious, and when she and the others let their horses walk at a quicker pace, the Aiel certainly showed no sign of falling back.

wən ðə θætʃt ɹuftɑps ə dʒʊɹin keɪm ɪn saɪt, ɹəɑɹk sɛd, "fɛɹ jə wɛl, ɛɛs sədaɪ. meɪ jə ɔlweɪz faɪnd wɔɾɝ ən ʃeɪd. pɝhæps wɪl miɾ əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃeɪnʒ kʌmz." hi saʊndəd ɡɹɪm. əz ði il kɝvd əweɪ tə ðə saʊθ, eɪvinhə ən kiæɾ ən beɪn itʃ ɹeɪzd ə hæn ɪn fɛɹwɛl. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sim tə bi sloʊɪŋ daʊn naʊ ðət ðeɪ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɹæn wɪð ðə hɔɹsəz; ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ðeɪ ɹæn ə lɪɾəl fæstɝ. ɛɡwin hæɾ ə səspɪʃən ðeɪ mɛn tə meɪnteɪn ðət peɪs əntɪl ðeɪ ɹitʃt wɛɹɛvɝ ɪt wɑz ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ.

When the thatched rooftops of Jurene came in sight, Rhuarc said, "Fare you well, Aes Sedai. May you always find water and shade. Perhaps we will meet again before the change comes." He sounded grim. As the Aiel curved away to the south, Aviendha and Chiad and Bain each raised a hand in farewell. They did not seem to be slowing down now that they no longer ran with the horses; if anything, they ran a little faster. Egwene had a suspicion they meant to maintain that pace until they reached wherever it was they were going.

"wʌt dɪɾ i min baɪ ðæt?" ʃi æskt. " 'pɝhæps wɪl miɾ əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃeɪnʒ'?" ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd.

"What did he mean by that?" she asked. " 'Perhaps we will meet again before the change'?" Elayne shook her head.

"ɪt dʌz nɑt mæɾɝ wʌɾ i mɛnt," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "aɪ æm dʒʌst əz ɡlæd ðeɪ keɪm læs naɪt, bʌɾ aɪm ɡlæd tə hæv əm ɡɔn, tu. aɪ hoʊp ðəɹ ɪz ə ʃɪp hɪɹ."

"It does not matter what he meant," Nynaeve said. "I am just as glad they came last night, but I am glad to have them gone, too. I hope there is a ship here."

dʒʊɹin ɪtsɛlf wɑz ə smɔl pleɪs, ɔl wʊɾən haʊsəz ən nʌn mɔɹ ðən ə sɪŋɡəl stɔɹi, bʌt ðə waɪt laɪən bænɝ ʌv ændɝ flu oʊvɝ ɪɾ ɑn ə tɔl stæf, ən fɪfti ʌv ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz hɛld ɪt, ɪn ɹɛd koʊts wɪð lɔŋ waɪt kɑlɝz bɪniθ ʃaɪnɪŋ bɹɛstpleɪts. ðeɪ hæd bɪn pleɪs ðɛɹ, ðɛɹ kæptən sɛd, tə meɪk ə seɪf heɪvən fəɹ ɹɛfjudʒiz u wɪʃt tə fli tə ændɝ, bʌt fjuɝ sətʃ keɪm ɛvɹi deɪ. moʊst wɛn tə vɪlədʒəz fɝðɝ daʊnɹɪvɝ, naʊ, nɪɹɝ ɑɹɪŋɡəl. ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd θɪŋ ðə θɹi wɪmən hæd kʌm wən ðeɪ dɪd, əz i ɪkspɛktəd tə ɹəsiv ɔɹɾɝz ɹɪtɝnɪŋ ɪz kʌmpəni tə ændɝ ɛni deɪ. ðə fju ɪnhæbəɾənts ə dʒʊɹin wəd laɪkli ɡoʊ wɪð ðɛm, livɪŋ wʌt ɹɪmeɪn fəɹ bɹɪɡænz ən ðə kɛɹhinɪn soʊlʒɝz ʌv wɔɹɪŋ haʊsəz.

Jurene itself was a small place, all wooden houses and none more than a single story, but the White Lion banner of Andor flew over it on a tall staff, and fifty of the Queen's Guards held it, in red coats with long white collars beneath shining breastplates. They had been placed there, their captain said, to make a safe haven for refugees who wished to flee to Andor, but fewer such came every day. Most went to villages further downriver, now, nearer Aringill. It was a good thing the three women had come when they did, as he expected to receive orders returning his company to Andor any day. The few inhabitants of Jurene would likely go with them, leaving what remained for brigands and the Cairhienin soldiers of warring Houses.

ɪleɪn kɛpt əɹ feɪs hɪɾən ɪn ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ stɝɾi wʊl kloʊk, bʌt nʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz sim tə əsoʊsieɪt ðə ɡɝl wɪð ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ wɪð ðɛɹ dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ. səm æskt əɹ tə steɪ; ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ ɪleɪn wɑz plizd əɹ ʃɑkt. ʃi hɝsɛlf toʊl ðə mɛn u æskt əɹ ðət ʃi hæd noʊ taɪm fəɹ ðɛm. ɪt wɑz naɪs, ɪn ən ɑd weɪ, tə bi æskt; ʃi sɝɾənli hæd noʊ wɪʃ tə kɪs ɛni ʌv ðiz fɛloʊz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz plɛzən tə bi ɹimaɪndəd ðət səm mɛn, ət list, θɔt ʃi wɑz əz pɹɪɾi əz ɪleɪn. nɪneɪiv slæpt wʌn mænz feɪs. ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs meɪɾ ɛɡwin læf, ən ɪleɪn smaɪld oʊpənli; ɛɡwin θɔt nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn pɪntʃt, ən dɪspaɪt ðə ɡlɛɹ ɑn əɹ feɪs, ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk ɪntaɪɝli dɪsplizd, iðɝ.

Elayne kept her face hidden in the hood of her sturdy wool cloak, but none of the soldiers seemed to associate the girl with red-gold hair with their Daughter-Heir. Some asked her to stay; Egwene was not sure whether Elayne was pleased or shocked. She herself told the men who asked her that she had no time for them. It was nice, in an odd way, to be asked; she certainly had no wish to kiss any of these fellows, but it was pleasant to be reminded that some men, at least, thought she was as pretty as Elayne. Nynaeve slapped one man's face. That almost made Egwene laugh, and Elayne smiled openly; Egwene thought Nynaeve had been pinched, and despite the glare on her face, she did not look entirely displeased, either.

ðeɪ wɝ nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ðɛɹ ɹɪŋz. ɪt hæd nɑt teɪkən mʌtʃ ɛfɝɾ ɑn nɪneɪivz pɑɹt tə kənvɪns əm ðət wʌn pleɪs ðeɪ dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi teɪkən fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz tɛɹ, ɪspɛʃli ɪf ðə blæk ədʒɑ wɑz ðɛɹ. ɛɡwin hæd hɝz ɪn əɹ paʊtʃ wɪð ðə stoʊn tɛɹæŋɡɹil; ʃi tʌtʃt ɪɾ ɔfən tə ɹimaɪn hɝsɛlf ðeɪ wɝ stɪl ðɛɹ. nɪneɪiv wɔɹ hɝz ɑn ðə kɔɹd ðət hɛld lænz hɛvi ɹɪŋ bɪtwin əɹ bɹɛsts.

They were not wearing their rings. It had not taken much effort on Nynaeve's part to convince them that one place they did not want to be taken for Aes Sedai was Tear, especially if the Black Ajah was there. Egwene had hers in her pouch with the stone ter'angreal; she touched it often to remind herself they were still there. Nynaeve wore hers on the cord that held Lan's heavy ring between her breasts.

ðəɹ wɑz ə ʃɪp ɪn dʒʊɹin, taɪd tə ðə sɪŋɡəl stoʊn dɑk stɪkɪŋ ɪndə ði ɛɹɪnɪn. nɑt ðə ʃɪp eɪvinhə hæd sin, ɪt simd, bʌt stɪl ə ʃɪp. ɛɡwin wɑz dɪsmeɪd wən ʃi sɔ ɪt. twaɪs əz waɪɾ əz ðə blu kɹeɪn, ðə dɑɹɾɝ bɪlaɪɾ ɪts neɪm wɪð ə blʌf baʊ əz ɹaʊn əz ɪts kæptən.

There was a ship in Jurene, tied to the single stone dock sticking into the Erinin. Not the ship Aviendha had seen, it seemed, but still a ship. Egwene was dismayed when she saw it. Twice as wide as the Blue Crane, the Darter belied its name with a bluff bow as round as its captain.

ðət wɝði fɛloʊ blɪŋkt ət nɪneɪiv ən skɹætʃt ɪz ɪɹ wən ʃi æskt ɪf ɪz vɛsəl wɑz fæst. "fæst? aɪm fʊl ə fænsi wʊd fɹəm ʃaɪnɝ ən ɹʌɡz fɹəm kændɝ. wʌt nid tə bi fæst wɪð ə kɑɹɡoʊ laɪk ðæt? pɹaɪsəz oʊnli ɡoʊ ʌp. jɛs, aɪ səpoʊz ðəɹ ɑɹ fæstɝ ʃɪps bɪhaɪn mi, bʌt ðəl nɑt pʊɾ ɪn hɪɹ. aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv stɑp maɪsɛlf ɪf aɪ hædn faʊnd wɝmz ɪn ðə mit. ful noʊʃən ðət ðeɪɾ əv mit tə sɛl ɪn kɛɹhin. ðə blu kɹeɪn? aɪ, aɪ sɔ ɛlɪsɝ hʌŋ ʌp ɑn sʌmθɪŋ ʌpɹɪvɝ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. hɪl nɑt ɡɛɾ ɔf sun, aɪm θɪŋkɪŋ. ðæts wʌɾ ə fæst ʃɪp bɹɪŋz ju."

That worthy fellow blinked at Nynaeve and scratched his ear when she asked if his vessel was fast. "Fast? I am full of fancy wood from Shienar and rugs from Kandor. What need to be fast with a cargo like that? Prices only go up. Yes, I suppose there are faster ships behind me, but they'll not put in here. I would not have stopped myself if I hadn't found worms in the meat. Fool notion that they'd have meat to sell in Cairhien. The Blue Crane? Aye, I saw Ellisor hung up on something upriver this morning. He'll not get off soon, I'm thinking. That's what a fast ship brings you."

nɪnɑv peɪd ðɛɹ fɛɹz - ən twaɪs əz mʌtʃ əɡɛn fəɹ ðə hɔɹsəz - wɪð sətʃ ə lʊk ɑn əɹ feɪs ðət niðɝ ɛɡwin nɔɹ ɪleɪn spoʊk tə hɝ əntɪl lɔŋ æftɝ ðə dɑɹɾɝ hæd wɑloʊɾ əweɪ fɹəm dʒʊɹin.

Nynave paid their fares - and twice as much again for the horses - with such a look on her face that neither Egwene nor Elayne spoke to her until long after the Darter had wallowed away from Jurene.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾi


CHAPTER 40

eɪ hɪɹoʊ ɪn ðə naɪt


A Hero in the Night

linɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹeɪl, mæt wɑtʃt ðə wɔl taʊn ʌv ɑɹɪŋɡəl kʌm kloʊsɝ əz ðə swips wɝk ðə ɡɹeɪ ɡʌl ɪn təwɔɹd ðə lɔŋ, tɑɹd-tɪmbɝ dɑks. pɹətɛktəd baɪ haɪ stoʊn wɪŋ-wɔlz ðət θɹʌst aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ, ðoʊz dɑks swɔɹmd wɪð pipəl, ən mɔɹ wɝ livɪŋ ðə ʃɪps ə vɛɹiəs saɪzəz ðət leɪ taɪɾ ɔl əlɔŋ ðɛm. səm ə ðə pipəl pʊʃt bæɹoʊz, əɹ pʊl slɛdʒɪz əɹ tɔl-wil kɑɹts, ɔl paɪl haɪ wɪð fɝnɪtʃɝ ən tʃɛsts læʃt ɪn pleɪs, bʌt moʊs kæɹid bʌndəlz ɑn ðɛɹ bæks, ɪf ðæt. nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn bʌsəld. mɛni mɛn ən wɪmən hʌɾəld təɡɛðɝ ənsɝteɪnli, ən tʃɪlʒɹən klʌŋ kɹaɪɪŋ tə ðɛɹ lɛɡz. soʊlʒɝz ɪn ɹɛd koʊts ən ʃaɪni bɹɛstpleɪts kɛp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk əm muv ɔf ðə dɑks ɪndə ðə taʊn, bʌt moʊst sim tu fɹaɪɾənd tə muv.

Leaning on the rail, Mat watched the walled town of Aringill come closer as the sweeps worked the Gray Gull in toward the long, tarred-timber docks. Protected by high stone wing-walls that thrust out into the river, those docks swarmed with people, and more were leaving the ships of various sizes that lay tied all along them. Some of the people pushed barrows, or pulled sledges or tall-wheeled carts, all piled high with furniture and chests lashed in place, but most carried bundles on their backs, if that. Not everyone bustled. Many men and women huddled together uncertainly, and children clung crying to their legs. Soldiers in red coats and shiny breastplates kept trying to make them move off the docks into the town, but most seemed too frightened to move.

mæt tɝn ən ʃeɪɾɪd ɪz aɪz tə pɪɹ ət ðə ɹɪvɝ ðeɪ wɝ livɪŋ. ði ɛɹɪnɪn wɑz bɪziɝ hɪɹ ðən i hæd sin ɪt saʊθ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, wɪð nɪɹli ə dʌzən vɛsəlz ʌndɝ weɪ ɪn saɪt, ɹeɪnʒɪŋ fɹəm ə lɔŋ, ʃɑɹp-pɹaʊd splɪntɝ dɑɹɾɪŋ ʌpɹɪvɝ əɡɛns ðə kɝənt, pʊʃt baɪ tu tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ seɪlz, tə ə waɪd, blʌf-baʊd ʃɪp wɪð skwɛɹ seɪlz, stɪl wɑloʊɪŋ əlɔŋ wɛl tə ðə nɔɹθ.

Mat turned and shaded his eyes to peer at the river they were leaving. The Erinin was busier here than he had seen it south of Tar Valon, with nearly a dozen vessels under way in sight, ranging from a long, sharp-prowed splinter darting upriver against the current, pushed by two triangular sails, to a wide, bluff-bowed ship with square sails, still wallowing along well to the north.

nɪɹli hæf ðə ʃɪps i kəd si hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə ɹɪvɝ tʃɹeɪd, ðoʊ. tu bɹɔd-bim kɹæft wɪð ɛmpti dɛks wɝ lʌmbɝɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ, təwɔɹɾ ə smɔlɝ taʊn ɑn ðə fɑɹ bæŋk, waɪl θɹi ʌðɝz leɪbɝd bæk təwɔɹɾ ɑɹɪŋɡəl, ðɛɹ dɛks pækt wɪð pipəl laɪk bæɹəlz ə fɪʃ. ðə sɛɾɪŋ sʌn, stɪl ɪts oʊn haɪɾ əbʌv ðə hɝaɪzən, ʃæɾoʊd ə bænɝ flaɪɪŋ oʊvɝ ðəɾ ʌðɝ taʊn. ðət ʃɔɹ wɑz kɛɹhin, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt nid tə si ðə bænɝ tə noʊ ɪt wɑz ðə waɪt laɪən ʌv ændɝ. ðəɹ hæd bɪn tɔk ɪnʌf ɪn ðə fju ændɔɝən vɪlədʒəz wɛɹ ðə ɡɹeɪ ɡʌl hæd stɑp bɹifli.

Nearly half the ships he could see had nothing to do with the river trade, though. Two broad-beamed craft with empty decks were lumbering across the river, toward a smaller town on the far bank, while three others labored back toward Aringill, their decks packed with people like barrels of fish. The setting sun, still its own height above the horizon, shadowed a banner flying over that other town. That shore was Cairhien, but he did not need to see the banner to know it was the White Lion of Andor. There had been talk enough in the few Andoran villages where the Gray Gull had stopped briefly.

hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. pɑlətɪks dɪd nɑɾ ɪntʃɹəs hɪm. əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ doʊn tʃɹaɪ tɛlɪŋ mi əɡɛn ɪm ən ændɔɝmən dʒʌs kəz ə səm mæp. bɝn mi, ðeɪ maɪɾ ivən tʃɹaɪ tə meɪk mi faɪɾ ɪn ðɛɹ blʌɾi ɑɹmi, ɪf ðɪs kɛɹhin bɪznəs spɹɛdz. fɑloʊɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz. laɪt! wɪð ə ʃɪvɝ, hi tɝn bæk tə ɑɹɪŋɡəl. bɛɹfʊt mɛn ɑn ðə ɡɹeɪ ɡʌl wɝ ɹɛɾiɪŋ ɹoʊps tə tɔs tə ʌðɝz ɑn ðə dɑks.

He shook his head. Politics did not interest him. As long as they don't try telling me again I'm an Andorman just because of some map. Burn me, they might even try to make me fight in their bloody army, if this Cairhien business spreads. Following orders. Light! With a shiver, he turned back to Aringill. Barefoot men on the Gray Gull were readying ropes to toss to others on the docks.

kæptən mɑliə wɑz aɪɪŋ ɪm fɹəm bæk baɪ ðə tɪlɝ. ðə fɛloʊ hæd nɛvɝ ɡɪvən ʌp ɪz ɛfɝts tə ɪnɡɹeɪʃieɪt hɪmsɛlf wɪð ðɛm, hɪz ətɛmps tə lɝn wʌt ðɛɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt mɪʃən wɑz. mæt hæd faɪnəli ʃoʊn ɪm ðə sild lɛɾɝ ən toʊld ɪm ðəɾ i wɑz kæɹiɪŋ ɪt fɹəm ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ tə ðə kwin. ə pɝsənəl mɛsədʒ fɹəm ə dɔɾɝ tə hɝ mʌðɝ; noʊ mɔɹ. mɑliə hæɾ oʊnli sim tə hɪɹ ðə wɝdz "kwin mɔɹɡeɪs."

Captain Mallia was eyeing him from back by the tiller. The fellow had never given up his efforts to ingratiate himself with them, his attempts to learn what their important mission was. Mat had finally shown him the sealed letter and told him that he was carrying it from the Daughter-Heir to the Queen. A personal message from a daughter to her mother; no more. Mallia had only seemed to hear the words "Queen Morgase."

mæt ɡɹɪn tə hɪmsɛlf. ə dip koʊt pɑkət hɛl tu pɝsɪz fæɾɝ ðən wən i hæd bɔɹɾəd ðə vɛsəl; hi hæɾ ɪnʌf lus kɔɪn tə mɔɹ ðən fɪl ənʌðɝ tu. hɪz lʌk hæd nɑt bɪn kwaɪt soʊ ɡʊɾ əz ɑn ðət fɝst, stʃɹeɪnʒ naɪt wən ðə daɪs ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls hæd sim tə ɡoʊ kɹeɪzi, bʌt stɪl ɪt wɑz ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf. æftɝ ðə θɝd naɪt, mɑliə hæd ɡɪvən ʌp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʃoʊ hɪz fɹɛnlinɪs baɪ ɡæmbəlɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪz mʌni tʃɛst wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi laɪɾɝ baɪ ðɛn. ɪt wəd bi laɪɾɝ stɪl æftɝ ɑɹɪŋɡəl. mɑliə hæd nid tə ɹistɑk ɪz fud - mæt ɡlænst ət ðə pipəl mɪlɪŋ ɑn ðə dɑks - ɪf i kʊd, hɪɹ, əɾ ɛni pɹaɪs.

Mat grinned to himself. A deep coat pocket held two purses fatter than when he had boarded the vessel; he had enough loose coin to more than fill another two. His luck had not been quite so good as on that first, strange night when the dice and everything else had seemed to go crazy, but still it was good enough. After the third night, Mallia had given up trying to show his friendliness by gambling, but his money chest was already lighter by then. It would be lighter still after Aringill. Mallia had need to restock his food - Mat glanced at the people milling on the docks - if he could, here, at any price.

ðə ɡɹɪn feɪɾəd əz ɪz θɔts wɛn bæk tə ðə lɛɾɝ. ə lɪɾəl wɝk wɪð ə hɑt naɪf bleɪd, ən ðə ɡoʊldən lɪli sil hæd bɪn lɪftəd. hi hæd faʊnd nʌθɪŋ: ɪleɪn wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ hɑɹɾ ən meɪkɪŋ pɹɑɡɹɛs ən iɡɝ tə lɝn. ʃi wɑz ə duɾifəl dɔɾɝ, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hæd pʌnɪʃt əɹ fəɹ ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ ən toʊld əɹ nɛvɝ tə spik ʌv ɪɾ əɡɛn, soʊ hɝ mʌðɝ wəɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ʃi kəd nɑt seɪ mɔɹ. ʃi sɛd ʃi hæd bɪn ɹeɪz tə ði æksɛptɪd, ən wɑz ðət nɑt wʌndɝfəl, soʊ sun, ən ʃi wɑz biɪŋ tʃɹʌstɪd wɪð ɡɹeɪɾɝ duɾiz naʊ, ən wəɾ əv tə liv tɑɹ vəlɑn fəɹ dʒʌst ə ʃɔɹt taɪm ɑn ðə sɝvəs ə ði æmɪɝlɪn hɝsɛlf. hɝ mʌðɝ wɑz nɑt tə wɝi.

The grin faded as his thoughts went back to the letter. A little work with a hot knife blade, and the golden lily seal had been lifted. He had found nothing: Elayne was studying hard and making progress and eager to learn. She was a dutiful daughter, and the Amyrlin Seat had punished her for running away and told her never to speak of it again, so her mother would understand why she could not say more. She said she had been raised to the Accepted, and was that not wonderful, so soon, and she was being trusted with greater duties now, and would have to leave Tar Valon for just a short time on the service of the Amyrlin herself. Her mother was not to worry.

ɪt wɑz ɔl vɛɹi wɛl fəɹ əɹ tə tɛl mɔɹɡeɪs nɑt tə wɝi. ɪt wɑz ɪm ʃi hæd lændəɾ ɪn ðə sup kɛɾəl. ðɪs sɪli lɛɾɝ hæd tə bi ðə ɹizən ðoʊz mɛn hæd kʌm æftɝ hɪm, bʌɾ ivən tɑm hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə meɪk nʌθɪŋ ʌv ɪt, ðoʊ hi mʌɾɝd əbaʊt "sɪfɝz" ən "koʊdz" ən "ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz."

It was all very well for her to tell Morgase not to worry. It was him she had landed in the soup kettle. This silly letter had to be the reason those men had come after him, but even Thom had been able to make nothing of it, though he muttered about "ciphers" and "codes" and "the Game of Houses."

mæt hæd ðə lɛɾɝ seɪf ɪn ðə laɪnɪŋ ə hɪz koʊt, naʊ, ɪts sil ɹipleɪst, ən i wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə bɛt noʊ wʌn wəɾ ɛvɝ noʊ. ɪf sʌmwʌn wɑntəɾ ɪt bædli ɪnʌf tə kɪl ɪm fəɹ ɪt, ðeɪ maɪt tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn. aɪ toʊl jə aɪd dɪlɪvɝ ɪt, nɪneɪiv, ən aɪ blʌɾi wɪl, noʊ mæɾɝ u tʃɹaɪz tə stɑp mi. ivən soʊ, hi wəɾ əv wɝdz tə seɪ ðə nɛks taɪm i sɔ ðoʊz θɹi ɪɹəteɪɾɪŋ wɪmən - ɪf aɪ ɛvɝ du. laɪt, aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ ə ðət - wɝdz i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ wəɾ ɛndʒɔɪ hɪɹɪŋ.

Mat had the letter safe in the lining of his coat, now, its seal replaced, and he was willing to bet no one would ever know. If someone wanted it badly enough to kill him for it, they might try again. I told you I'd deliver it, Nynaeve, and I bloody will, no matter who tries to stop me. Even so, he would have words to say the next time he saw those three irritating women - If I ever do. Light, I never thought of that - words he did not think they would enjoy hearing.

əz ðə kɹumɪn hɝl ðɛɹ laɪnz ɑntu ðə dɑk, tɑm keɪm ɑn dɛk, hɪz ɪnstʃɹəmən keɪsəz ɑn ɪz bæk ən ɪz bʌndəl ɪn wʌn hænd. ivən wɪð ə lɪmp i stʃɹʌɾɪd tə ðə ɹeɪl, ɡɪvɪŋ ðə teɪl ə hɪz kloʊk lɪɾəl flɝɪʃəz tə meɪk ðə kʌlɝd pætʃəz flʌɾɝ, ən bloʊɪŋ aʊɾ ɪz lɔŋ, waɪt mʌstæʃɪz ɪmpɔɹɾəntli.

As the crewmen hurled their lines onto the dock, Thom came on deck, his instrument cases on his back and his bundle in one hand. Even with a limp he strutted to the rail, giving the tail of his cloak little flourishes to make the colored patches flutter, and blowing out his long, white mustaches importantly.

"noʊbɑdi ɪz wɑtʃɪŋ, tɑm," mæt sɛd. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðeɪ wəɾ ivən si ə ɡlimən ənlɛs i hæd fuɾ ɪn ɪz hænz."

"Nobody is watching, Thom," Mat said. "I don't think they would even see a gleeman unless he had food in his hands."

tɑm stɛɹɾ ət ðə dɑks. "laɪt! aɪ hæd hɝɾ ɪt wɑz bæd, bʌɾ aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk ðɪs! pʊɹ fulz. hæf ə ðɛm lʊk əz ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ stɑɹvɪŋ. ɪt meɪ kɑst əs wʌn ə jəɹ pɝsɪz fəɹ ə ɹum tənaɪt. ən ði ʌðɝ fəɹ ə mil, ɪf jə ɪntɛn tə kip ɑn ðə weɪ juv bɪn ɡoʊɪŋ. nɪɹli meɪd mi ɪl tə wɑtʃ ju. jə tʃɹaɪ iɾɪŋ ðət weɪ wɛɹ ðoʊz pipəl daʊn ðəɹ kən si ju, ən jə meɪ hæv jəɹ bɹeɪnz bæɾɝd aʊt."

Thom stared at the docks. "Light! I had heard it was bad, but I did not expect this! Poor fools. Half of them look as if they are starving. It may cost us one of your purses for a room tonight. And the other for a meal, if you intend to keep on the way you've been going. Nearly made me ill to watch you. You try eating that way where those people down there can see you, and you may have your brains battered out."

mæt oʊnli smaɪld ət hɪm.

Mat only smiled at him.

mɑliə keɪm stʌmpɪŋ daʊn ðə dɛk, tʌɡɪŋ ðə pɔɪn ə hɪz bɪɹd, əz ðə ɡɹeɪ ɡʌl wɑz wɔɹpt ɪndə hɝ bɝθ. kɹumɪn ɹæn tə sɛɾ ə ɡæŋplæŋk, ən seɪnɝ stʊd ɡɑɹɾ ɑn ɪt, hɛvi ɑɹmz foʊldəɾ əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst, ɪn keɪs ðə θɹɔŋ ɑn ðə dɑks tʃɹaɪd tə bɔɹd. nʌn ə ðɛm dɪd.

Mallia came stumping down the deck, tugging the point of his beard, as the Gray Gull was warped into her berth. Crewmen ran to set a gangplank, and Sanor stood guard on it, heavy arms folded across his chest, in case the throng on the docks tried to board. None of them did.

"soʊ jəl bi livɪŋ mi hɪɹ," mɑliə toʊl mæt. ðə kæptənz smaɪl wɑz nɑɾ əz ɹɛɾi əz ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn. "ɑɹ jə sɝɾən ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ aɪ kən də tə hɛlp fɝðɝ? bɝn maɪ soʊl, aɪ nɛvɝ sɔ sətʃ ə ɹæbəl! ðoʊz soʊlʒɝz ɔt tə klɪɹ ðə dɑks - wɪð ðə sɔɹd, ɪf nid bi! - soʊ disən tʃɹeɪɾɝz kən də bɪznəs. pɝhæps seɪnɝ kən meɪk ə pæθ θɹu ðɪs skʌm tə jəɹ ɪn fəɹ ju."

"So you will be leaving me here," Mallia told Mat. The captain's smile was not as ready as it might have been. "Are you certain there is nothing I can do to help further? Burn my soul, I never saw such a rabble! Those soldiers ought to clear the docks - with the sword, if need be! - so decent traders can do business. Perhaps Sanor can make a path through this scum to your inn for you."

soʊ jəl noʊ wɛɹ wəɹ steɪɪŋ? nɑt blʌɾi laɪkli. "aɪ hæd θɔɾ ʌv iɾɪŋ bɪfɔɹ aɪ wɛn əʃɔɹ, ən meɪbi ə ɡeɪm ə daɪs tə pæs ðə taɪm." mɑliəz feɪs wɛnt waɪt. "bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk aɪ wəd laɪk ə stɛɾi flɔɹ ʌndɝ mi fəɹ maɪ nɛks mil. soʊ wɪl liv jə naʊ, kæptən. ɪts bɪn ən ɛndʒɔɪəbəl vɔɪədʒ."

So you'll know where we are staying? Not bloody likely. "I had thought of eating before I went ashore, and maybe a game of dice to pass the time." Mallia's face went white. "But I think I would like a steady floor under me for my next meal. So we will leave you now, Captain. It has been an enjoyable voyage."

waɪl ɹɪlif stɪl bæɾəld kɑnstɝneɪʃən ɑn ðə kæptənz feɪs, mæt pɪkt ʌp ɪz θɪŋz fɹəm ðə dɛk ænd, juzɪŋ ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf əz ə wɔkɪŋ stɪk, meɪɾ ɪz weɪ tə ðə ɡæŋplæŋk wɪð tɑm. mɑliə fɑloʊɾ əz fɑɹ əz ðə hɛɾ ə ðə plæŋk, mɝmɝɪŋ ɹɪɡɹɛts ət ðɛɹ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ ðət dʒʌmp fɹəm ɹil tə ɪnsɪnsɪɹ ən bæk əɡɛn. mæt wɑz sɝɾən ðə mæn heɪɾəd luzɪŋ ə tʃæns tə ɪnɡɹeɪʃieɪt hɪmsɛlf wɪð ɪz haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən baɪ lɝnɪŋ dɪteɪlz ʌv ə pæk bɪtwin ændɝ ən tɑɹ vəlɑn.

While relief still battled consternation on the captain's face, Mat picked up his things from the deck and, using the quarterstaff as a walking stick, made his way to the gangplank with Thom. Mallia followed as far as the head of the plank, murmuring regrets at their departure that jumped from real to insincere and back again. Mat was certain the man hated losing a chance to ingratiate himself with his High Lord Samon by learning details of a pact between Andor and Tar Valon.

əz mæt ən ðə ɡlimən pʊʃt θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz, tɑm mʌɾɝd, "aɪ noʊ ðə mæn ɪz fɑɹ fɹəm laɪkəbəl, bʌt waɪ juv tə kip tɔntɪŋ hɪm? wɑzn ɪɾ ɪnʌf ðət jə eɪɾ ɛvɹi skɹæp ʌv wʌɾ i θɔt wəd fiɾ ɪm ɔl ðə weɪ tə tɛɹ?"

As Mat and the gleeman pushed through the crowds, Thom muttered, "I know the man is far from likable, but why do you have to keep taunting him? Wasn't it enough that you ate every scrap of what he thought would feed him all the way to Tear?"

"aɪ hæv nɑt bɪn iɾɪŋ ɪɾ ɔl fəɹ nɪɹli tu deɪz." ðə hʌŋɡɝ hæd sɪmpli bɪn ɡɔn wʌn mɔɹnɪŋ, tə hɪz ɡɹeɪt ɹɪlif. ɪt hæd bɪn əz ɪf tɑɹ vəlɑn hæd lust ɪts læs hoʊld ɑn hɪm. "aɪv bɪn θɹoʊɪŋ moʊst ʌv ɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə saɪd, ən ə hɑɹd dʒɑb ɪt wɑz meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ noʊbɑdi sɔ." əmʌŋ ðiz dʒɹɔn feɪsəz, mɛni ʌv əm tʃɪlʒɹənz, ɪt dɪd nɑt sim soʊ fʌni ɛnimɔɹ. "mɑliə dɪzɝv tɔntɪŋ. wʌɾ əbaʊt ðət ʃɪp, jɛstɝdeɪ? ðə wʌn ðət wɑz stʌk ɑn ə mʌdbæŋk əɹ sʌmθɪŋ. hi cʊɾə stɑp tə hɛlp, bʌɾ i wəd nɑt ɡoʊ nɪɹ ɪt haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ðeɪ ʃaʊɾəd." ðəɹ wɑz ə wʊmən wɪð lɔŋ, dɑɹk hɛɹ əhɛɾ u maɪɾ əv bɪn pɹɪɾi ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt lʊk soʊ boʊn wɪɹi, piɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə feɪs ʌv ɛvɹi mæn u pæst əɹ əz ɪf lʊkɪŋ fəɹ sʌmwʌn; ə bɔɪ lɪɾəl tɔlɝ ðən əɹ weɪst ən tu ɡɝlz ʃɔɹɾɝ klʌŋ tə hɝ, ɔl kɹaɪɪŋ. "ɔl ðət tɔk əbaʊt ɹɪvɝ bɹɪɡænz ən tʃɹæps. ɪt dɪdn lʊk laɪk ɛni tʃɹæp tə mi."

"I have not been eating it all for nearly two days." The hunger had simply been gone one morning, to his great relief. It had been as if Tar Valon had loosed its last hold on him. "I've been throwing most of it over the side, and a hard job it was making sure nobody saw." Among these drawn faces, many of them children's, it did not seem so funny anymore. "Mallia deserved taunting. What about that ship, yesterday? The one that was stuck on a mudbank or something. He could have stopped to help, but he would not go near it however much they shouted." There was a woman with long, dark hair ahead who might have been pretty if she had not looked so bone weary, peering into the face of every man who passed her as if looking for someone; a boy little taller than her waist and two girls shorter clung to her, all crying. "All that talk about river brigands and traps. It didn't look like any trap to me."

tɑm dɑdʒd ɝaʊn ə haɪ-wil kɑɹt - ə keɪdʒ hoʊldɪŋ tu skwilɪŋ pɪɡz wɑz læʃt ətɑp ðə kænvəs-kʌvɝd maʊnd - ən nɪɹli tʃɹɪpt oʊvɝ ə slɛdʒ biɪŋ pʊld, baɪ ə mæn ən ə wʊmən. "æn jə ɡoʊ aʊɾ ə jəɹ weɪ tə hɛlp pipəl, də ju? stʃɹeɪnʒ haʊ ðəɾ əz ɪskeɪp maɪ aɪ."

Thom dodged around a high-wheeled cart - a cage holding two squealing pigs was lashed atop the canvas-covered mound - and nearly tripped over a sledge being pulled, by a man and a woman. "And you go out of your way to help people, do you? Strange how that has escaped my eye."

"aɪl hɛlp ɛniwʌn u kən peɪ," mæt sɛd fɝmli. "oʊnli fulz ɪn stɔɹiz də sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ nʌθɪŋ."

"I'll help anyone who can pay," Mat said firmly. "Only fools in stories do something for nothing."

ðə tu ɡɝlz sɑbd ɪndə ðɛɹ mʌðɝz skɝts waɪl ðə bɔɪ fɔɾ ɪz tɛɹz. ðə wʊmənz dip-sɛɾ aɪz ɹɛstəɾ ɑn mæt fəɹ ə moʊmənt, stʌɾiɪŋ ɪz feɪs, bɪfɔɹ dʒɹɪftɪŋ ɑn; ðeɪ lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd wip, tu. ɑn ɪmpəls i dʌɡ ə fɪsfəl ə lus kɔɪnz aʊɾ ə hɪz pɑkət wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ tə si wʌt ðeɪ wɝ ən pɹɛst əm ɪndə hɝ hænd. ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ə sɝpɹaɪz, stɛɹɾ ət ðə ɡoʊld ən sɪlvɝ ɪn əɹ hænd wɪð ɪnkɑmpɹihɛnʃən ðət kwɪkli tɝn tə ə smaɪl, ən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, tɪɹz ʌv ɡɹæɾətud fɪlɪŋ əɹ aɪz.

The two girls sobbed into their mother's skirts while the boy fought his tears. The woman's deep-set eyes rested on Mat for a moment, studying his face, before drifting on; they looked as if she wished she could weep, too. On impulse he dug a fistful of loose coins out of his pocket without looking to see what they were and pressed them into her hand. She gave a start of surprise, stared at the gold and silver in her hand with incomprehension that quickly turned to a smile, and opened her mouth, tears of gratitude filling her eyes.

"baɪ ðɛm sʌmθɪŋ tə it," hi sɛd kwɪkli, ən hɝiɾ ɑn bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd spik. hi noʊɾəst tɑm lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ɡɔkɪŋ æt? kɔɪn kʌmz izəli əz lɔŋ əz aɪ kən faɪn sʌmbɑɾi hu laɪks tə daɪs." tɑm nɑɾəd sloʊli, bʌt mæt wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i hæd ɡɑɾən ɪz pɔɪn əkɹɔs. blʌɾi tʃɪlʒɹənz kɹaɪɪŋ wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ ɑn maɪ nɝvz, ðæts ɔl. ful ɡlimən wɪl pɹɑbli ɪkspɛk mi tə ɡɪv ɡoʊld əweɪ tə ɛvɹi weɪf ðət kʌmz əlɔŋ, naʊ. ful! fəɹ ən ənkʌmftəɹbəl moʊmənt, hi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən wɛðɝ ðə læs hæd bɪn mɛn fəɹ tɑm əɹ hɪmsɛlf.

"Buy them something to eat," he said quickly, and hurried on before she could speak. He noticed Thom looking at him. "What are you gawking at? Coin comes easily as long as I can find somebody who likes to dice." Thom nodded slowly, but Mat was not sure he had gotten his point across. Bloody children's crying was getting on my nerves, that's all. Fool gleeman will probably expect me to give gold away to every waif that comes along, now. Fool! For an uncomfortable moment, he was not certain whether the last had been meant for Thom or himself.

teɪkɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪn hænd, hi əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɛni feɪs lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɹɪli si ɪɾ əntɪl i faʊn ðə wʌn i wɑntəd, ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə dɑk. ðə hɛlmɔɪtləs soʊlʒɝ ɪn ɹɛd koʊɾ ən bɹɛstpleɪt, ɝdʒɪŋ pipəl ɪndə ðə taʊn, hæd ðə ɡɹɪzəld lʊk ʌv ə skwɑdmən, ən ɪkspɪɹiəns liɾɝ ə tɛn əɹ soʊ. skwɪntɪŋ ɪndə ðə sɛɾɪŋ sʌn, hi ɹimaɪndəd mæt ʌv ənoʊ, ðoʊ hi hæd boʊθ ɪz aɪz. hi lʊkt ɔlmoʊst əz taɪɝɾ əz ðə pipəl i wɑz tʃɪviɪŋ. "muv əlɔŋ," hi wɑz ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɪn ə hɔɹs vɔɪs. "ju kæn blʌɾi steɪ hɪɹ. muv əlɔŋ. ɪndə ðə taʊn wɪð ju."

Taking himself in hand, he avoided looking at any face long enough to really see it until he found the one he wanted, at the foot of the dock. The helmetless soldier in red coat and breastplate, urging people into the town, had the grizzled look of a squadman, an experienced leader of ten or so. Squinting into the setting sun, he reminded Mat of Uno, though he had both his eyes. He looked almost as tired as the people he was chivying. "Move along," he was shouting in a hoarse voice. "You can't bloody stay here. Move along. Into the town with you."

mæt steɪʃən hɪmsɛlf skwɛɹli ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝ ən pʊɾ ɑn ə smaɪl. "jɔɹ pɑɹɾən, kæptən, bʌt kən jə tɛl mi wɛɹ aɪ maɪt faɪn ə disən ɪn? ən ə steɪbəl wɪð ɡʊd hɔɹsəz tə sɛl. wɪv ə lɔŋ weɪ tə ɡoʊ, kʌm mɔɹnɪŋ."

Mat stationed himself squarely in front of the soldier and put on a smile. "Your pardon, Captain, but can you tell me where I might find a decent inn? And a stable with good horses to sell. We have a long way to go, come morning."

ðə soʊlʒɝ aɪɾ ɪm ʌp ən daʊn, ɪɡzæmən tɑm ən ɪz ɡlimənz kloʊk, ðən ʃɪftəd bæk tə mæt. "kæptən, ɪz ɪt? wɛl, bɔɪ, jəl əv ðə dɑɹk wʌnz oʊn lʌk ɪf jə faɪn ə steɪbəl tə slip ɪn. moʊst ə ðɪs lɑɾ ɑɹ slipɪŋ ʌndɝ hɛdʒɪz. ən ɪf jə faɪn ə hɔɹs ðət hæzən bɪn slɔɾɝd fəɹ kʊkɪŋ, jəl laɪkli hæv tə faɪt ðə mæn u oʊnz ɪt tə meɪk ɪm sɛl."

The soldier eyed him up and down, examined Thom and his gleeman's cloak, then shifted back to Mat. "Captain, is it? Well, boy, you'll have the Dark One's own luck if you find a stable to sleep in. Most of this lot are sleeping under hedges. And if you find a horse that hasn't been slaughtered for cooking, you'll likely have to fight the man who owns it to make him sell."

"iɾɪŋ hɔɹs!" tɑm mʌɾɝd dɪsɡʌstɪdli. "hæz ɪt ɹɪli bɪkʌm ðət bæɾ ɑn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ? ɪzən ðə kwin sɛndɪŋ fud?"

"Eating horse!" Thom muttered disgustedly. "Has it really become that bad on this side of the river? Isn't the Queen sending food?"

"ɪɾ ɪz bæd, ɡlimən." ðə soʊlʒɝ lʊkt əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə spɪt. "ðeɪɹ kɹɔsɪŋ oʊvɝ fæstɝ ðən ðə mɪlz kən ɡɹaɪn flaʊɝ, əɹ wæɡənz kæɹi fudstʌfs fɹəm ðə fɑɹmz. wɛl, ɪɾəl nɑt læs mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ. ði ɔɹɾɝ əz kʌm daʊn. təmɑɹoʊ, wi stɑp lɛɾɪŋ ɛniwʌn əkɹɔs, ən ɪf ðeɪ tʃɹaɪ, wi sɛn əm bæk." hi skaʊld ət ðə pipəl mɪlɪŋ ɑn ðə dɑk əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ɔl ðɛɹ fɔlt, ðən bɹɔt ðə seɪm hɑɹd lʊk tə bɛɹ ɑn mæt. "ju ɑɹ teɪkɪŋ ʌp speɪs, tʃɹævəlɝ. muv əlɔŋ." hɪz vɔɪs ɹoʊz tə ə ʃaʊɾ əɡɛn, dɝɛktəɾ əɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wɪðɪn hɪɹɪŋ. "muv əlɔŋ! jə kænɑt blʌɾi steɪ hɪɹ! muv əlɔŋ!"

"It is bad, gleeman." The soldier looked as if he wanted to spit. "They're crossing over faster than the mills can grind flour, or wagons carry foodstuffs from the farms. Well, it will not last much longer. The order has come down. Tomorrow, we stop letting anyone across, and if they try, we send them back." He scowled at the people milling on the dock as if it were all their fault, then brought the same hard look to bear on Mat. "You are taking up space, traveler. Move along." His voice rose to a shout again, directed at everyone within hearing. "Move along! You cannot bloody stay here! Move along!"

mæt ən tɑm dʒɔɪn ðə θɪn stʃɹim ə pipəl, kɑɹts, ən slɛdʒɪz floʊɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɡeɪts ɪn ðə taʊn wɔl, ən ɪndə ɑɹɪŋɡəl.

Mat and Thom joined the thin stream of people, carts, and sledges flowing toward the gates in the town wall, and into Aringill.

ðə meɪn stʃɹits wɝ peɪvd wɪð flæt ɡɹeɪ stoʊnz, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ kɹaʊɾəd wɪð soʊ mɛni pipəl ðəɾ ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl tə si ðə stoʊnz ʌndɝ jəɹ oʊn buts. moʊst əpɪɹd tə bi muvɪŋ eɪmləsli, wɪð noʊwɛɹ tə ɡoʊ, ən ðoʊz u hæd ɡɪvən ʌp skwɑɾɪd dɪdʒɛktɪdli əlɔŋ ðə saɪdz ə ðə stʃɹit, ðə lʌki wʌnz wɪð bʌndəl bɪlɔŋɪŋz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm əɹ səm tʃɛɹɪʃt pəzɛʃən klʌtʃt ɪn ðɛɹ ɑɹmz. mæt sɔ θɹi mɛn hoʊldɪŋ klɑks, ən ə dʌzən əɹ mɔɹ wɪð sɪlvɝ ɡoʊbləts əɹ plæɾɝz. ðə wɪmən hɛl tʃɪlʒɹən tə ðɛɹ bɹɛsts, meɪnli. ə bæbəl fɪl ði ɛɹ, ə loʊ, wɝdləs hʌm ʌv wɝi. hi pʊʃt θɹu ðə kɹaʊd wɪð ə fɹaʊn ɑn ɪz feɪs, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə saɪn ðət wəd mɑɹk ən ɪn. ðə bɪldɪŋz wɝ ɛvɹi sɔɹt, wʊɾ ən bɹɪk ən stoʊn ɔl tʃik baɪ dʒaʊl, wɪð ɹufs ə taɪl, əɹ sleɪt, əɹ θætʃ.

The main streets were paved with flat gray stones, but they were crowded with so many people that it was difficult to see the stones under your own boots. Most appeared to be moving aimlessly, with nowhere to go, and those who had given up squatted dejectedly along the sides of the street, the lucky ones with bundled belongings in front of them or some cherished possession clutched in their arms. Mat saw three men holding clocks, and a dozen or more with silver goblets or platters. The women held children to their breasts, mainly. A babble filled the air, a low, wordless hum of worry. He pushed through the crowd with a frown on his face, searching for the sign that would mark an inn. The buildings were every sort, wood and brick and stone all cheek by jowl, with roofs of tile, or slate, or thatch.

"ɪt dʌz nɑt saʊn laɪk mɔɹɡeɪs," tɑm sɛɾ æftɝ ə taɪm, hæf tə hɪmsɛlf. hɪz bʊʃi aɪbɹaʊz wɝ pʊl daʊn laɪk ə waɪɾ æɹoʊ pɔɪntɪŋ tə hɪz noʊz.

"It does not sound like Morgase," Thom said after a time, half to himself. His bushy eyebrows were pulled down like a white arrow pointing to his nose.

"wʌt dʌz nɑt saʊn laɪk hɝ?" mæt æskt æbsənli.

"What does not sound like her?" Mat asked absently.

"stɑpɪŋ ðə kɹɔsɪŋz. sɛndɪŋ pipəl bæk. ʃi ɔlweɪz hæɾ ə tɛmpɝ laɪk laɪtnɪŋ, bʌt ʃi ɔlweɪz hæɾ ə sɑf hɑɹt, tu, fəɹ ɛniwʌn pʊɹ əɹ hʌŋɡɹi." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

"Stopping the crossings. Sending people back. She always had a temper like lightning, but she always had a soft heart, too, for anyone poor or hungry." He shook his head.

mæt sɔ ə saɪn, ðən - ðə ɹɪvɝmən, ɪt sɛd, ən ʃoʊɾ ə bɛɹfʊt, ʃɝtləs fɛloʊ duɪŋ ə dʒɪɡ - ən tɝn ðət weɪ, fɔɹsɪŋ ən æŋɡəl əkɹɔs ðə floʊ wɪð ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf. "wɛl, ɪt hæd tə bi hɝ. hu ɛls kəɾ ɪt bi? fɝɡɛt mɔɹɡeɪs, tɑm. wiv ə lɔŋ weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn, jɛt. fɝs lɛɾ əs si haʊ mʌtʃ ɡoʊld ɪt teɪks tə baɪ ə bɛd fəɹ ðə naɪt."

Mat saw a sign, then - The Riverman, it said, and showed a barefoot, shirtless fellow doing a jig - and turned that way, forcing an angle across the flow with the quarterstaff. "Well, it had to be her. Who else could it be? Forget Morgase, Thom. We've a long way to Caemlyn, yet. First let us see how much gold it takes to buy a bed for the night."

ðə kɑmən ɹum ə ðə ɹɪvɝmən lʊkt əz kɹaʊɾəd əz ðə stʃɹiɾ aʊtsaɪd, ən wən ði ɪnkipɝ hɝd wʌt mæt wɑntəd, hi læf tɪl ɪz tʃɪnz ʃʊk. "aɪ æm slipɪŋ fɔɹ tə ə bɛd, naʊ. ɪf maɪ oʊn mʌðɝ keɪm tə mi, aɪ kəd nɑt ɡɪv əɹ ə blæŋkət baɪ ðə faɪɝ."

The common room of The Riverman looked as crowded as the street outside, and when the innkeeper heard what Mat wanted, he laughed till his chins shook. "I am sleeping four to a bed, now. If my own mother came to me, I could not give her a blanket by the fire."

"æz jə mʌst əv noʊɾəst," tɑm sɛd, hɪz vɔɪs teɪkɪŋ ɑn ðəɾ ɛkoʊɪŋ kwɑləɾi, "aɪ æm ə ɡlimən. ʃʊɹli jə kən faɪn ət lis pæləts ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ ɪn ɹɪtɝn fəɹ mi ɛntɝteɪnɪŋ jəɹ peɪtʃɹənz wɪð stɔɹiz ən dʒʌɡəlɪŋ, iɾɪŋ ə faɪɝ, ən slaɪɾ ə hænd." ði ɪnkipɝ læft ɪn ɪz feɪs.

"As you must have noticed," Thom said, his voice taking on that echoing quality, "I am a gleeman. Surely you can find at least pallets in a corner in return for me entertaining your patrons with stories and juggling, eating of fire, and sleight of hand." The innkeeper laughed in his face.

əz mæt pʊld ɪm bæk ɪndə ðə stʃɹit, tɑm ɡɹaʊld ɪn ɪz nɔɹməl vɔɪs, "ju nɛvɝ ɡeɪv mi ə tʃæns tə æsk æftɝ ɪz steɪbəl. ʃʊɹli aɪ cʊɾə ɡɑɾən əs ə pleɪs ɪn ðə heɪlɔft, ət list."

As Mat pulled him back into the street, Thom growled in his normal voice, "You never gave me a chance to ask after his stable. Surely I could have gotten us a place in the hayloft, at least."

"aɪ hæv slɛpt ɪn ɪnʌf steɪbəlz ən bɑɹnz sɪns livɪŋ ɛmənz fild," mæt toʊl hɪm, "æn ʌndɝ ɪnʌf bʊʃəz, tu. aɪ wɑn ə bɛd."

"I have slept in enough stables and barns since leaving Emond's Field," Mat told him, "and under enough bushes, too. I want a bed."

bʌɾ ət ðə nɛks fɔɹ ɪnz i faʊnd, ði ɪnkipɝ ɡeɪv ɪm ðə seɪm ænsɝ əz ðə fɝst; ðə læs tu ɔlmoʊs θɹu hɪm aʊt bɑɾəli wən i ɔfɝd tə daɪs fəɹ ə bɛd. ən wən ði oʊnɝ ə ðə fɪfθ toʊld ɪm i kəd nɑt ɡɪv ə pælət tə ðə kwin hɝsɛlf - ðɪs əɾ ə pleɪs kɔl ðə ɡʊd kwin - hi saɪɾ ən æskt, "wʌɾ əbaʊt jəɹ steɪbəl, ðɛn? ʃʊɹli wi kən bɛd daʊn ɪn ðə heɪlɔft fəɹ ə pɹaɪs."

But at the next four inns he found, the innkeeper gave him the same answer as the first; the last two almost threw him out bodily when he offered to dice for a bed. And when the owner of the fifth told him he could not give a pallet to the Queen herself - this at a place called The Good Queen - he sighed and asked, "What about your stable, then? Surely we can bed down in the hayloft for a price."

"maɪ steɪbəl ɪz fəɹ hɔɹsəz," ðə ɹaʊnd-feɪs mæn sɛd, "nɑt ðət mɛni ɑɹ lɛft ɪn ðə sɪɾi." hi hæd bɪn pɑlɪʃɪŋ ə sɪlvɝ kʌp; naʊ hi oʊpənd wʌn dɔɹ ʌv ə ʃæloʊ kʌbɝd stændɪŋ ɑn tɑp ʌv ə dip, dʒɹɔɝd tʃɛst ən pleɪst ɪɾ ɪnsaɪd wɪð ʌðɝz; nʌn ə ðɛm mætʃt. ə tuld-lɛðɝ daɪs kʌp sæɾ ətɑp ðə tʃɛst, dʒʌs bɪɑn ði ɑɹk ə ðə kʌbɝdz dɔɹz. "aɪ də nɑt pʊt pipəl ɪn ðəɹ tə fɹaɪɾən ðə hɔɹsəz, ən pɝhæps meɪk ɔf wɪð ðɛm. ðoʊz u peɪ mi fəɹ stɑbəlɪŋ ðɛɹ ænəməlz wɑn əm wɛl tɛndəd, ən aɪv tu ʌv maɪ oʊn ɪn ðɛɹ, bɪsaɪdz. ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ bɛdz ɪn maɪ steɪbəl fəɹ ju."

"My stable is for horses," the round-faced man said, "not that many are left in the city." He had been polishing a silver cup; now he opened one door of a shallow cupboard standing on top of a deep, drawered chest and placed it inside with others; none of them matched. A tooled-leather dice cup sat atop the chest, just beyond the arc of the cupboard's doors. "I do not put people in there to frighten the horses, and perhaps make off with them. Those who pay me for stabling their animals want them well tended, and I've two of my own in there, besides. There are no beds in my stable for you."

mæt aɪd ðə daɪs kʌp θɔtfəli. hi pʊld ə ɡoʊld ændɔɝən kɹaʊn aʊɾ ə hɪz pɑkəɾ ən sɛɾ ɪɾ ətɑp ðə tʃɛst. ðə nɛks kɔɪn wɑz ə sɪlvɝ tɑɹ vəlɑn mɑɹk, ðən ə ɡoʊld wʌn, ən ə ɡoʊl tɛɹən kɹaʊn. ði ɪnkipɝ lʊkt ət ðə kɔɪnz ən lɪkt ɪz plʌmp lɪps. mæt æɾəd tu sɪlvɝ ɪliɑnɝ mɑɹks ən ənʌðɝ ɡoʊld ændɔɝən kɹaʊn, ən lʊkt ət ðə ɹaʊnd-feɪs mæn. ði ɪnkipɝ hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. mæt ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə kɔɪnz. ði ɪnkipɝz hæn ɹitʃt əm fɝst.

Mat eyed the dice cup thoughtfully. He pulled a gold Andoran crown out of his pocket and set it atop the chest. The next coin was a silver Tar Valon mark, then a gold one, and a gold Tairen crown. The innkeeper looked at the coins and licked his plump lips. Mat added two silver Illianer marks and another gold Andoran crown, and looked at the round-faced man. The innkeeper hesitated. Mat reached for the coins. The innkeeper's hand reached them first.

"pɝhæps dʒʌs ðə tu ʌv jə wəd nɑt dɪstɝb ðə hɔɹsəz tu ɡɹeɪtli."

"Perhaps just the two of you would not disturb the horses too greatly."

mæt smaɪld ət hɪm. "spikɪŋ ə hɔɹsəz, wʌt pɹaɪs fəɹ ðoʊz tu ʌv jʊɹz? wɪð sæɾəlz ən bɹaɪɾəlz, ʌv kɔɹs."

Mat smiled at him. "Speaking of horses, what price for those two of yours? With saddles and bridles, of course."

"aɪ wɪl nɑt sɛl maɪ hɔɹsəz," ðə mæn sɛd, klʌtʃɪŋ ðə kɔɪnz tə hɪz tʃɛst.

"I will not sell my horses," the man said, clutching the coins to his chest.

mæt pɪkt ʌp ðə daɪs kʌp ən ɹæɾəld ɪt. "twaɪs əz mʌtʃ əɡɛn əɡɛns ðə hɔɹsəz, sæɾəlz, ən bɹaɪɾəlz." hi ʃʊk ɪz koʊt pɑkət tə meɪk ðə lus kɔɪnz ɹæɾəl, tu, tə ʃoʊ hi hæd mɔɹ tə kʌvɝ ðə weɪdʒɝ. "maɪ wʌn tɔs əɡɛns ðə bɛst ə jəɹ tu." hi ɔlmoʊs læft əz ɡɹid lɪt ði ɪnkipɝz ɪntaɪɝ feɪs.

Mat picked up the dice cup and rattled it. "Twice as much again against the horses, saddles, and bridles." He shook his coat pocket to make the loose coins rattle, too, to show he had more to cover the wager. "My one toss against the best of your two." He almost laughed as greed lit the innkeeper's entire face.

wən mæt wɔkt ɪndə ðə steɪbəl, ðə fɝs θɪŋ i dɪd wɑz tʃɛk əlɔŋ ðə hæf-dʌzən stɔlz wɪð hɔɹsəz ɪn əm fəɹ ə pɛɹ ə bɹaʊn ɡɛldɪŋz. ðeɪ wɝ nɑndɪskɹɪpt ænəməlz, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ hɪz. ðeɪ niɾəd kʌɝiɪŋ bædli, bʌɾ ʌðɝwaɪz ðeɪ simd ɪn ɡʊd kəndɪʃən, ɪspɛʃli kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðəɾ ɔl ðə steɪbəlmən bʌt wʌn hæd ɹʌn ɔf. ði ɪnkipɝ hæd bɪn ɪkstʃɹimli dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋ ə ðɛɹ kəmpleɪns ðət ðeɪ kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ lɪv ɑn wʌɾ i peɪd ðɛm, ən i sim tə θɪŋk ɪɾ ə kɹaɪm ðət ðə wʌn mæn u ɹɪmeɪn hæɾ æktʃəli  hæd ði ɑdæsəɾi tə seɪ hi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ hoʊm tə bɛd dʒʌs kəz i wɑz taɪɝd fɹəm duɪŋ θɹi mɛnz wɝk.

When Mat walked into the stable, the first thing he did was check along the half-dozen stalls with horses in them for a pair of brown geldings. They were nondescript animals, but they were his. They needed currying badly, but otherwise they seemed in good condition, especially considering that all the stablemen but one had run off. The innkeeper had been extremely disparaging of their complaints that they could no longer live on what he paid them, and he seemed to think it a crime that the one man who remained had actually had the audacity to say he was going home to bed just because he was tired from doing three men's work.

"faɪv sɪksɪz," tɑm mʌɾɝd bɪhaɪn hɪm. ðə lʊks i kæst ɝaʊn ðə steɪbəl dɪd nɑt sim əz ɛnθɹɔld əz ðeɪ maɪt, siɪŋ ðəɾ i hæd sədʒɛstəɾ ɪɾ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. dʌs moʊts ʃoʊn ɪn ðə læs laɪɾ ə ðə sɛɾɪŋ sʌn kʌmɪŋ θɹu ðə bɪɡ dɔɹz, ən ðə ɹoʊps juz tə hɔɪs heɪ beɪlz hʌŋ laɪk vaɪnz fɹəm pʊliz ɪn ðə ɹuf bimz. ðə heɪlɔft wɑz dɪm ɪn ðə ɡlum əbʌv. "wɛn i θɹu fɔɹ sɪksɪz ən ə faɪv ɑn ɪz sɛkən tɔs, hi θɔt jud lɔs fəɹ ʃʊɹ, ən soʊ dɪɾ aɪ. juv nɑt bɪn wɪnɪŋ ɛvɹi tɔs ə leɪt."

"Five sixes," Thom muttered behind him. The looks he cast around the stable did not seem as enthralled as they might, seeing that he had suggested it in the first place. Dust motes shone in the last light of the setting sun coming through the big doors, and the ropes used to hoist hay bales hung like vines from pulleys in the roof beams. The hayloft was dim in the gloom above. "When he threw four sixes and a five on his second toss, he thought you'd lost for sure, and so did I. You have not been winning every toss of late."

"aɪ wɪn ɪnʌf." mæt wɑz dʒʌst əz ɹɪliv nɑt tə bi wɪnɪŋ ɛvɹi θɹoʊ. lʌk wɑz wʌn θɪŋ, bʌt ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðət naɪt stɪl sɛnt ʃɪvɝz daʊn ɪz bæk. stɪl, fəɹ wʌn moʊmən əz i ʃʊk ðət daɪs kʌp, hi hæɾ ɔl bʌt noʊn wʌt ðə pɪps wəd bi. əz i tɔs ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf ʌp ɪndə ðə lɔft, θʌndɝ kɹæʃt ɪn ðə skaɪ. hi skɹæmbəld ʌp ðə læɾɝ, kɔlɪŋ bæk tə tɑm. "ðɪs wɑz ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə. aɪd θɪŋk jə wəd bi hæpi tə bi ɪn aʊɾ ə ðə ɹeɪn tənaɪt."

"I win enough." Mat was just as relieved not to be winning every throw. Luck was one thing, but remembering that night still sent shivers down his back. Still, for one moment as he shook that dice cup, he had all but known what the pips would be. As he tossed the quarterstaff up into the loft, thunder crashed in the sky. He scrambled up the ladder, calling back to Thom. "This was a good idea. I'd think you would be happy to be in out of the rain tonight."

moʊst ə ðə heɪ wɑz ɪn beɪlz stækt əɡɛns ði aʊɾɝ wɔlz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf lus fəɹ ɪm tə meɪk ə bɛd wɪð ɪz kloʊk oʊvɝ ɪt. tɑm əpɪɹɾ ət ðə tɑp ə ðə læɾɝ əz i wɑz pʊlɪŋ tu loʊvz ə bɹɛɾ ən ə wɛdʒ ʌv ɡɹin-veɪn tʃiz fɹəm ɪz lɛðɝ skɹɪp. ði ɪnkipɝ - hɪz neɪm wɑz dʒɛɹəl flɔɹi - hæd pɑɹɾəd wɪð ðə fud fəɹ mɪɹli ɪnʌf kɔɪn tə hæv bɑt wʌn ə ðoʊz hɔɹsəz ɪn mɔɹ pisfəl deɪz. ðeɪ eɪt waɪl ɹeɪn bɪɡæn dʒɹʌmɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹuf, wɑʃɪŋ ðə fud daʊn wɪð wɔɾɝ fɹəm ðɛɹ wɔɾɝbətəlz - flɔɹi hæd hæd noʊ waɪn əɾ ɛni pɹaɪs - ən wən ðeɪ wɝ dʌn, tɑm dʌɡ aʊɾ ɪz tɪndɝbɑks ən θʌmd ɪz lɔŋ-stɛm paɪp fʊl ə təbæk ən sɛɾəld bæk fəɹ ə smoʊk.

Most of the hay was in bales stacked against the outer walls, but there was more than enough loose for him to make a bed with his cloak over it. Thom appeared at the top of the ladder as he was pulling two loaves of bread and a wedge of green-veined cheese from his leather scrip. The innkeeper - his name was Jeral Florry - had parted with the food for merely enough coin to have bought one of those horses in more peaceful days. They ate while rain began drumming on the roof, washing the food down with water from their waterbottles - Florry had had no wine at any price - and when they were done, Thom dug out his tinderbox and thumbed his long-stemmed pipe full of tabac and settled back for a smoke.

mæt wɑz laɪɪŋ ɑn ɪz bæk, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ʃæɾoʊd ɹuf ən wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ðə ɹeɪn wəd bɹeɪk bɪfɔɹ mɔɹnɪŋ - hi wɑntəd ðət lɛɾɝ aʊɾ ə hɪz hænz əz kwɪkli əz pɑsəbəl - wən i hɝɾ ən æksəl kɹik ɪndə ðə steɪbəl. ɹoʊlɪŋ tə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə lɔft, hi pɪɹd daʊn. ðəɹ wɑz ɪnʌf dʌsk lɛft fəɹ ɪm tə si.

Mat was lying on his back, staring at the shadowed roof and wondering if the rain would break before morning - he wanted that letter out of his hands as quickly as possible - when he heard an axle creak into the stable. Rolling to the edge of the loft, he peered down. There was enough dusk left for him to see.

ə slɛndɝ wʊmən wɑz stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ fɹəm ðə ʃæfs ə ðə haɪ-wil kɑɹt ʃi hæd dʒʌs dʒɹæɡd ɪn aʊɾ ə ðə ɹeɪn, pʊlɪŋ ɔf əɹ kloʊk ən mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf əz ʃi ʃʊk ðə wɛt fɹəm ɪt. hɝ hɛɹ wɑz pleɪɾəd ɪn ə mʌltətuɾ ə smɔl bɹeɪdz, ən əɹ sɪlk dʒɹɛs - hi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ə peɪl ɡɹin - wɑz ɪlæbɹətli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd əkɹɔs əɹ bɹɛsts. ðə dʒɹɛs hæd bɪn faɪn, wʌns, bʌt naʊ ɪt wɑz tæɾɝd ən steɪnd. ʃi nʌkəld əɹ bæk, stɪl tɔkɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs, ən hɝid tə ðə steɪbəl dɔɹz tə pɪɹ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹeɪn. dʒʌst əz hɝidli, ʃi dʌkt aʊt tə pʊl ðə bɪɡ dɔɹz ʃʌt, ɛnkloʊzɪŋ ðə steɪbəl ɪn dɑɹknəs. ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹʌslɪŋ bɪloʊ, ə klɪŋk ən ə slɑʃ, ən sʌɾənli ə smɔl flɛɹ ə laɪt blumd ɪndə ə læntɝn ɪn əɹ hænz. ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊnd, faʊn ə hʊk ɑn ə stɔl poʊst, hʌŋ ðə læntɝn, ən wɛn tə dɪɡ ʌndɝ ðə ɹoʊp kænvəs kʌvɝɪŋ əɹ kɑɹt.

A slender woman was straightening from the shafts of the high-wheeled cart she had just dragged in out of the rain, pulling off her cloak and muttering to herself as she shook the wet from it. Her hair was plaited in a multitude of small braids, and her silk dress - he thought it was a pale green - was elaborately embroidered across her breasts. The dress had been fine, once, but now it was tattered and stained. She knuckled her back, still talking to herself in a low voice, and hurried to the stable doors to peer out into the rain. Just as hurriedly, she ducked out to pull the big doors shut, enclosing the stable in darkness. There was a rustling below, a clink and a slosh, and suddenly a small flare of light bloomed into a lantern in her hands. She looked around, found a hook on a stall post, hung the lantern, and went to dig under the roped canvas covering her cart.

"ʃi dɪd ðət kwɪkli," tɑm sɛd sɔfli ɝaʊn ɪz paɪp. "ʃi cʊɾə sɛt faɪɝ tə ðə steɪbəl stʃɹaɪkɪŋ flɪn ən stil ɪn ðə dɑɹk laɪk ðæt."

"She did that quickly," Thom said softly around his pipe. "She could have set fire to the stable striking flint and steel in the dark like that."

ðə wʊmən keɪm aʊt wɪð ði ɛn ʌv ə loʊf ə bɹɛd, wɪtʃ ʃi nɔɾ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ hɑɹɾ ən əɹ hʌŋɡɝ dɪd nɑt kɛɹ.

The woman came out with the end of a loaf of bread, which she gnawed as if it were hard and her hunger did not care.

"ɪz ðəɹ ɛni ʌv ðət tʃiz lɛft?" mæt wɪspɝd. tɑm ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

"Is there any of that cheese left?" Mat whispered. Thom shook his head.

ðə wʊmən bɪɡæn snɪfɪŋ ət ði ɛɹ, ən mæt ɹilaɪzd ʃi pɹɑbli smɛl tɑmz təbæk smoʊk. hi wɑz əbaʊt tə stæn ən ənaʊns ðɛɹ pɹɛzəns wən wʌn ə ðə steɪbəl dɔɹz oʊpən əɡɛn.

The woman began sniffing at the air, and Mat realized she probably smelled Thom's tabac smoke. He was about to stand and announce their presence when one of the stable doors opened again.

ðə wʊmən kɹaʊtʃt, ɹɛɾi tə ɹʌn, əz fɔɹ mɛn wɔkt ɪn aʊɾ ə ðə ɹeɪn, dɔfɪŋ ðɛɹ wɛt kloʊks tə ɹɪvil peɪl koʊts wɪð waɪd slivz ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi əkɹɔs ðə tʃɛst, ən bæɡi bɹitʃɪz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd daʊn ðə lɛɡz. ðɛɹ kloʊðz maɪt bi fænsi, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɔl bɪɡ mɛn, ən ðɛɹ feɪsəz wɝ ɡɹɪm.

The woman crouched, ready to run, as four men walked in out of the rain, doffing their wet cloaks to reveal pale coats with wide sleeves and embroidery across the chest, and baggy breeches embroidered down the legs. Their clothes might be fancy, but they were all big men, and their faces were grim.

"soʊ, ɑlʌdʒɹə," ə mæn ɪn ə jɛloʊ koʊt sɛd, "ju dɪd nɑt ɹʌn soʊ fæst əz jə θɔt tə, ɛ?" hi hæɾ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ æksɛnt, tə mæts ɪɹ.

"So, Aludra," a man in a yellow coat said, "you did not run so fast as you thought to, eh?" He had a strange accent, to Mat's ear.

"tɑmuz," ðə wʊmən sɛɾ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə kɝs. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑɾ ɪnʌf ðət jə kɑz mi tə bi kæst aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɪld wɪð jəɹ blʌndɝɪŋ, jə ɡɹeɪɾ ɑks-bɹeɪn ju, bʌt naʊ jə tʃeɪs æftɝ mi əz wɛl." ʃi hæd ðə seɪm ɑd weɪ ʌv spikɪŋ əz ðə mæn. "du jə θɪŋk ðəɾ aɪm ɡlæd tə si ju?"

"Tammuz," the woman said as if it were a curse. "It is not enough that you cause me to be cast out of the Guild with your blundering, you great ox-brain you, but now you chase after me as well." She had the same odd way of speaking as the man. "Do you think that I am glad to see you?"

ðə wʌn kɔl tɑmuz læft. "ju ɑɹ ə vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ ful, ɑlʌdʒɹə, wɪtʃ aɪ ɔlweɪz nu. hæd jə mɪɹli ɡɔn əweɪ, jə cʊɾə lɪvd ə lɔŋ laɪf ɪn səm kwaɪət pleɪs. bʌt jə kəd nɑt fɝɡɛt ðə sikɹəts ɪn jəɹ hɛd, ɛ? dɪd jə bɪliv wi wəd nɑt hɪɹ ðət jə tʃɹaɪ tə ɝn jəɹ weɪ meɪkɪŋ wʌɾ ɪts ðə ɹaɪɾ ə ðə ɡɪld əloʊn tə meɪk?" sʌɾənli ðəɹ wɑz ə naɪf ɪn ɪz hænd. "ɪt wɪl bi ə ɡɹeɪt plɛʒɝ tə kʌt jəɹ θɹoʊt, ɑlʌdʒɹə."

The one called Tammuz laughed. "You are a very large fool, Aludra, which I always knew. Had you merely gone away, you could have lived a long life in some quiet place. But you could not forget the secrets in your head, eh? Did you believe we would not hear that you try to earn your way making what it is the right of the Guild alone to make?" Suddenly there was a knife in his hand. "It will be a great pleasure to cut your throat, Aludra."

mæt wɑz nɑɾ ivən əwɛɹ ðəɾ i hæd stʊɾ ʌp əntɪl wʌn ə ðə dʌbəld ɹoʊps dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm ðə silɪŋ wɑz ɪn ɪz hænz ən i hæd lɔntʃt hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ə ðə lɔft. bɝn mi fəɹ ə blʌɾi ful!

Mat was not even aware that he had stood up until one of the doubled ropes dangling from the ceiling was in his hands and he had launched himself out of the loft. Burn me for a bloody fool!

hi oʊnli hæd taɪm fəɹ ðət wʌn fɹæntɪk θɔt, ən ðən i wɑz plaʊɪŋ θɹu ðə kloʊk mɛn, sɛndɪŋ əm tɑpəlɪŋ laɪk pɪnz ɪn ə ɡeɪm ə boʊlz. ðə ɹoʊps slɪp θɹu hɪz hænz, ən i fɛl, tʌmbəlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹɔ-kʌvɝd flɔɹ hɪmsɛlf, kɔɪnz spɪlɪŋ fɹəm ɪz pɑkəts, tə ɛn ʌp əɡɛnst ə stɔl. wən i skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fit, ðə fɔɹ mɛn wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɹaɪzɪŋ, tu. ən ðeɪ ɔl hæd naɪvz ɪn ðɛɹ hænz, naʊ. laɪt-blaɪn ful! bɝn mi! bɝn mi!

He only had time for that one frantic thought, and then he was plowing through the cloaked men, sending them toppling like pins in a game of bowls. The ropes slipped through his hands, and he fell, tumbling across the straw-covered floor himself, coins spilling from his pockets, to end up against a stall. When he scrambled to his feet, the four men were already rising, too. And they all had knives in their hands, now. Light-blind fool! Burn me! Burn me!

"mæt!"

"Mat!"

hi lʊkt ʌp, ən tɑm tɔst ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf daʊn tə hɪm. hi snæɡd ɪɾ aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ dʒʌst ɪn taɪm tə nɑk ðə bleɪɾ aʊɾ ə tɑmuzəz fɪst ən θʌmp ɪm ə ʃɑɹp kɹæk ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə hɛd. ðə mæn kɹʌmpəld, bʌt ði ʌðɝ θɹi wɝ ɹaɪt bɪhaɪnd, ən fəɹ ə hɛktɪk moʊmən mæt hæɾ ɔl i kəd də wɪð ə wɝlɪŋ stæf tə kip naɪf bleɪdz əweɪ fɹəm hɪm, ɹæpɪŋ niz ən æŋkəlz ən ɹɪbz əntɪl i kəd læn ə ɡʊd bloʊ ɑn ə hɛd. wən ðə læs mæn fɛl, hi stɛɹɾ əɾ əm ə moʊmənt, ðən ɹeɪzd ɪz ɡlɛɹ tə ðə wʊmən. "dɪd juv tə tʃuz ðɪs steɪbəl tə bi mɝɾɝd ɪn?"

He looked up, and Thom tossed his quarterstaff down to him. He snagged it out of the air just in time to knock the blade out of Tammuz's fist and thump him a sharp crack on the side of the head. The man crumpled, but the other three were right behind, and for a hectic moment Mat had all he could do with a whirling staff to keep knife blades away from him, rapping knees and ankles and ribs until he could land a good blow on a head. When the last man fell, he stared at them a moment, then raised his glare to the woman. "Did you have to choose this stable to be murdered in?"

ʃi slɪpt ə slɪm-bleɪɾɪd dæɡɝ bæk ɪndə ə ʃiθ əɾ əɹ bɛlt. "aɪ wʊɾə hɛlp ju, bʌɾ aɪ fɪɹd ðət jə maɪt mɪsteɪk mi fəɹ wʌn ə ðiz ɡɹeɪt bʌfunz ɪf aɪ keɪm nɪɹ wɪð stil ɪn maɪ hænd. ən aɪ tʃoʊz ðɪs steɪbəl kəz ðə ɹeɪn ɪz wɛɾ ən soʊ æm aɪ, ən noʊ wʌn wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ðɪs pleɪs."

She slipped a slim-bladed dagger back into a sheath at her belt. "I would have helped you, but I feared that you might mistake me for one of these great buffoons if I came near with steel in my hand. And I chose this stable because the rain is wet and so am I, and no one was watching this place."

ʃi wɑz oʊldɝ ðən i hæd θɔt, ət lis tɛn əɹ fɪftin jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən hi, bʌt pɹɪɾi stɪl, wɪð lɑɹdʒ, dɑɹk aɪz ən ə smɔl, fʊl maʊθ ðət simd ɑn ðə pɔɪn ʌv ə paʊt. əɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ ɹɛɾi fəɹ ə kɪs. hi ɡeɪv ə smɔl læf ən lin ɑn ɪz stæf. "wɛl, wʌɾ ɪz dʌn ɪz dʌn. aɪ səpoʊz jə wɝ nɑt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɹɪŋ əs tʃɹʌbəl."

She was older than he had thought, at least ten or fifteen years older than he, but pretty still, with large, dark eyes and a small, full mouth that seemed on the point of a pout. Or getting ready for a kiss. He gave a small laugh and leaned on his staff. "Well, what is done is done. I suppose you were not trying to bring us trouble."

tɑm wɑz klaɪmɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ðə lɔft, ɔkwɝdli kəz ə hɪz lɛɡ, ən ɑlʌdʒɹə lʊk fɹəm ɪm tə mæt. ðə ɡlimən hæd pʊɾ ɪz kloʊk bæk ɑn; hi sɛldəm lɛɾ ɛniwʌn si hɪm wɪθaʊɾ ɪt, ɪspɛʃli fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. "ðɪs ɪz laɪk ə stɔɹi," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ æm ɹɛskjud baɪ ə ɡlimən ən ə jʌŋ hɪɹoʊ" - ʃi fɹaʊn ət ðə mɛn spɹɔld ɑn ðə steɪbəl flɔɹ - "fɹʌm ðiz huz mʌðɝz wɝ pɪɡz!"

Thom was climbing down from the loft, awkwardly because of his leg, and Aludra looked from him to Mat. The gleeman had put his cloak back on; he seldom let anyone see him without it, especially for the first time. "This is like a story," she said. "I am rescued by a gleeman and a young hero" - she frowned at the men sprawled on the stable floor - "from these whose mothers were pigs!"

"waɪ dɪd ðeɪ wɑnə kɪl ju?" mæt æskt. "hi sɛd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt sikɹəts."

"Why did they want to kill you?" Mat asked. "He said something about secrets."

"ðə sikɹəts," tɑm sɛɾ ɪn vɛɹi nɪɹli hɪz pɝfɔɹmɪŋ vɔɪs, "ʌv meɪkɪŋ faɪɹwɝks, ənlɛs aɪ mɪs maɪ ɡɛs. jə ɑɹ ən ɪluməneɪɾɝ, ɑɹ jə nɑt?" hi meɪɾ ə kɔɹtli baʊ wɪð ən ɪlæbɹət swɝl ə hɪz kloʊk. "aɪ æm tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn, ə ɡlimən, əz juv sin." ɔlmoʊst əz ən æftɝθɑt, hi æɾəd, "æn ðɪs ɪz mæt, ə jʌŋ mæn wɪð ə næk fəɹ faɪndɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl."

"The secrets," Thom said in very nearly his performing voice, "of making fireworks, unless I miss my guess. You are an Illuminator, are you not?" He made a courtly bow with an elaborate swirl of his cloak. "I am Thom Merrilin, a gleeman, as you have seen." Almost as an afterthought, he added, "And this is Mat, a young man with a knack for finding trouble."

"aɪ wɑz ən ɪluməneɪɾɝ," ɑlʌdʒɹə sɛd stɪfli, "bʌt ðɪs ɡɹeɪt pɪɡ tɑmuz, hi ɹuən ə pɝfɔɹməns fəɹ ðə kɪŋ ə kɛɹhin, ən nɪɹli hi dɪstʃɹɔɪd ðə tʃæptɝ haʊs, tu. bʌt mi, aɪ wɑz mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə tʃæptɝ haʊs, soʊ ɪt wɑz mi ðət ðə ɡɪl hɛld ɹispɑnsəbəl." hɝ vɔɪs bɪkeɪm dɪfɛnsɪv. "aɪ də nɑt tɛl ðə sikɹəts ə ðə ɡɪld, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ðət tɑmuz sɛz, bʌɾ əl nɑt lɛt maɪsɛlf stɑɹv waɪl aɪ kən meɪk faɪɹwɝks. aɪm noʊ mɔɹ ɪn ðə ɡɪld, soʊ ðə lɔz ə ðə ɡɪld, ðeɪ də nɑɾ əplaɪ tə mi naʊ."

"I was an Illuminator," Aludra said stiffly, "but this great pig Tammuz, he ruined a performance for the King of Cairhien, and nearly he destroyed the chapter house, too. But me, I was Mistress of the Chapter House, so it was me that the Guild held responsible." Her voice became defensive. "I do not tell the secrets of the Guild, no matter what that Tammuz says, but I will not let myself starve while I can make fireworks. I am no more in the Guild, so the laws of the Guild, they do not apply to me now."

"ɡɔlʒɹiən," tɑm sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ɔlmoʊst əz wʊɾən əz ʃi hæd. "wɛl, hiz ə dɛd kɪŋ naʊ, ən hɪl si noʊ mɔɹ faɪɹwɝks."

"Galldrian," Thom said, sounding almost as wooden as she had. "Well, he is a dead king now, and he'll see no more fireworks."

"ðə ɡɪld," ʃi sɛd, saʊndɪŋ taɪɝd, "ðeɪ ɔl bʌt bleɪm mi fəɹ ðɪs wɔɹ ɪn kɛɹhin, əz ɪf ðət wʌn naɪɾ ə dɪzæstɝ, ɪt meɪd ɡɔlʒɹiən daɪ." tɑm ɡɹɪməst. "ɪt simz aɪ kən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ," ʃi wɛn ɑn. "tɑmuz ən ðiz ʌðɝ ɑksən, ðəl weɪk sun. pɝhæps ðɪs taɪm ðəl tɛl ðə soʊlʒɝz ðəɾ aɪ stoʊl wʌɾ aɪ hæv meɪd." ʃi aɪd tɑm ən ðən mæt, fɹaʊnɪŋ ɪn θɔt, ən sim tə ɹitʃ ə dɪsɪʒən. "aɪ mʌst ɹɪwɔɹd ju, bʌɾ aɪ hæv noʊ mʌni. haʊɛvɝ, aɪ hæv sʌmθɪŋ ðəɾ ɪz pɝhæps əz ɡʊɾ əz ɡoʊld. meɪbi bɛɾɝ. wi ʃæl si wʌt jə θɪŋk."

"The Guild," she said, sounding tired, "they all but blame me for this war in Cairhien, as if that one night of disaster, it made Galldrian die." Thom grimaced. "It seems I can no longer remain here," she went on. "Tammuz and these other oxen, they will wake soon. Perhaps this time they will tell the soldiers that I stole what I have made." She eyed Thom and then Mat, frowning in thought, and seemed to reach a decision. "I must reward you, but I have no money. However, I have something that is perhaps as good as gold. Maybe better. We shall see what you think."

mæt ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz wɪð tɑm əz ʃi wɛn tə ɹuɾ ʌndɝ ðə kænvəs kʌvɝɪŋ əɹ kɑɹt. əl hɛlp ɛniwʌn u kən peɪ. hi θɔɾ ə spɛkjələɾɪv laɪt hæɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn tɑmz blu aɪz.

Mat exchanged glances with Thom as she went to root under the canvas covering her cart. I'll help anyone who can pay. He thought a speculative light had appeared in Thom's blue eyes.

ɑlʌdʒɹə sɛpɝeɪɾəd wʌn bʌndəl fɹəm ə nʌmbɝ laɪk ɪt, ə ʃɔɹt ɹoʊl ə hɛvi, ɔɪl klɔθ ɔlmoʊst əz fæɾ əz əɹ ɑɹmz wəd ɡoʊ ɝaʊnd. sɛɾɪŋ ɪt daʊn ɑn ðə stʃɹɔ, ʃi əndɪd ðə baɪndɪŋ kɔɹdz ən ənɹoʊl ðə klɔθ əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ. fɔɹ ɹoʊz ə pɑkəts ɹæn əlɔŋ ðə lɛŋθ ʌv ɪt, ðə pɑkəts ɪn itʃ ɹoʊ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ðoʊz ɪn ðə wʌn bɪfɔɹ. itʃ pɑkət hɛld ə wæks-koʊɾəd sɪləndɝ ə peɪpɝ dʒʌs lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪts ɛnd, tʃɹeɪlɪŋ ə dɑɹk kɔɹd, tə stɪk aʊt.

Aludra separated one bundle from a number like it, a short roll of heavy, oiled cloth almost as fat as her arms would go around. Setting it down on the straw, she undid the binding cords and unrolled the cloth across the floor. Four rows of pockets ran along the length of it, the pockets in each row larger than those in the one before. Each pocket held a wax-coated cylinder of paper just large enough for its end, trailing a dark cord, to stick out.

"faɪɹwɝks," tɑm sɛd. "aɪ nu ɪt. ɑlʌdʒɹə, jə mʌs nɑt də ðɪs. jə kən sɛl ðoʊz fəɹ ɪnʌf tə lɪv tɛn deɪz əɹ mɔɹ əɾ ə ɡʊɾ ɪn, ən it wɛl ɛvɹi deɪ. wɛl, ɛniwɛɹ bʌt hɪɹ ɪn ɑɹɪŋɡəl."

"Fireworks," Thom said. "I knew it. Aludra, you must not do this. You can sell those for enough to live ten days or more at a good inn, and eat well every day. Well, anywhere but here in Aringill."

nilɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə lɔŋ stʃɹɪp ʌv ɔɪl klɔθ, ʃi snɪft ət hɪm. "bi kwaɪət, jə oʊld wʌn ju." ʃi meɪɾ ɪt saʊnd nɑɾ əŋkinli. "aɪ æm nɑɾ əlaʊd tə ʃoʊ ɡɹæɾətud? jə θɪŋk aɪ wəd ɡɪv jə ðɪs ɪf aɪ hæd noʊ mɔɹ fəɹ sɛlɪŋ? ətɛn mi kloʊsli."

Kneeling beside the long strip of oiled cloth, she sniffed at him. "Be quiet, you old one you." She made it sound not unkindly. "I am not allowed to show gratitude? You think I would give you this if I had no more for selling? Attend me closely."

mæt skwɑɾɪd bɪsaɪd hɝ, fæsəneɪɾəd. hi hæd sin faɪɹwɝks twaɪs ɪn ɪz laɪf. pɛdlɝz hæd bɹɔɾ əm tə ɛmənz fild, ət ɡɹeɪɾ ɪkspɛns tə ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl. wən i wɑz tɛn, hi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kʌt wʌn oʊpən tə si wʌt wɑz ɪnsaɪd, ən hæd kɑzd ən ʌpɹɔɹ. bɹæn ælvɪɹ, ðə meɪɝ, hæd kʌf hɪm; dɔɹæl bæɹən, hu hæd bɪn ðə wɪzdəm ðɛn, hæd swɪtʃt hɪm; ən ɪz fɑðɝ hæd stʃɹæpt ɪm wən i ɡɑt hoʊm. noʊbɑdi ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ wəd tɔk tə hɪm fəɹ ə mʌnθ, ɪksɛp fəɹ ɹænd ən pɛɹɪn, ən ðeɪ moʊsli toʊld ɪm wʌɾ ə ful i hæd bɪn. hi ɹitʃt aʊt tə tʌtʃ wʌn ə ðə sɪləndɝz. ɑlʌdʒɹə slæpt ɪz hæn əweɪ.

Mat squatted beside her, fascinated. He had seen fireworks twice in his life. Peddlers had brought them to Emond's Field, at great expense to the Village Council. When he was ten, he had tried to cut one open to see what was inside, and had caused an uproar. Bran al'Vere, the Mayor, had cuffed him; Doral Barran, who had been the Wisdom then, had switched him; and his father had strapped him when he got home. Nobody in the village would talk to him for a month, except for Rand and Perrin, and they mostly told him what a fool he had been. He reached out to touch one of the cylinders. Aludra slapped his hand away.

"ətɛn mi fɝst, aɪ seɪ! ðiz smɔləst, ðəl meɪk ə laʊd bæŋ, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ." ðeɪ wɝ ðə saɪz ə hɪz lɪɾəl fɪŋɡɝ. "ðiz nɛkst, ðeɪ meɪk ə bæŋ ən ə bɹaɪt laɪt. ðə nɛkst, ðeɪ meɪk ðə bæŋ, ən ðə laɪt, ən mɛni spɑɹkəlz. ðə læst" - ðiz wɝ fæɾɝ ðən ɪz θʌm - "meɪk ɔl ə ðoʊz θɪŋz, bʌt ðə spɑɹkəlz, ðeɪ ɑɹ mɛni kʌlɝz. ɔlmoʊs laɪk ə naɪt-flaʊɝ, bʌt nɑɾ ʌp ɪn ðə skaɪ."

"Attend me first, I say! These smallest, they will make a loud bang, but no more." They were the size of his little finger. "These next, they make a bang and a bright light. The next, they make the bang, and the light, and many sparkles. The last" - these were fatter than his thumb - "make all of those things, but the sparkles, they are many colors. Almost like a night-flower, but not up in the sky."

naɪtfloʊɝ? mæt θɔt.

Nightflower? Mat thought.

"ju mʌs bi ɪspɛʃli kɛɹfəl ə ðiz. jə si, ðə fjuz, ɪts vɛɹi lɔŋ." ʃi sɔ hɪz blæŋk lʊk, ən wæɡəld wʌn ə ðə lɔŋ, dɑɹk kɔɹdz ət hɪm. "ðɪs, ðɪs!"

"You must be especially careful of these. You see, the fuse, it is very long." She saw his blank look, and waggled one of the long, dark cords at him. "This, this!"

"wɛɹ jə pʊt ðə faɪɝ," hi mʌɾɝd. "aɪ noʊ ðæt." tɑm meɪɾ ə saʊn ɪn ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən stʃɹoʊkt ɪz mʌstæʃɪz wɪð ə nʌkəl əz ɪf kʌvɝɪŋ ə smaɪl.

"Where you put the fire," he muttered. "I know that." Thom made a sound in his throat and stroked his mustaches with a knuckle as if covering a smile.

ɑlʌdʒɹə ɡɹʌntɪd. "wɛɹ jə pʊt ðə faɪɝ. jɛs. də nɑt steɪ kloʊs tə ɛni ʌv ðɛm, bʌt ðiz lɑɹdʒəst, jə ɹʌn əweɪ fɹəm wən jə laɪt ðə fjuz. jə kɑmpɹihɛn mi?" ʃi bɹɪskli ɹoʊld ʌp ðə lɔŋ klɔθ. "ju meɪ sɛl ðiz ɪf jə wɪʃ, əɹ juz ðɛm. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, jə mʌs nɛvɝ pʊt ðɪs kloʊs tə faɪɝ. faɪɝ wɪl meɪk əm ɔl ɪksploʊd. soʊ mɛni əz ðɪs ət wʌns, ɪt kəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ə haʊs, meɪbi." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊvɝ ɹɛɾiɪŋ ðə kɔɹdz, ðən æɾəd, "æn ðəɹ ɪz wʌn læs θɪŋ, wɪtʃ jə meɪ hæv hɝd. də nɑt kʌɾ oʊpən ɛni ʌv ðiz, əz səm ɡɹeɪt fulz də tə si wʌɾ ɪz ɪnsaɪd. səmtaɪmz wən wʌɾ ɪz ɪnsaɪd tʌtʃəz ɛɹ, ɪɾəl ɪksploʊd wɪθaʊt ðə niɾ ə faɪɝ. jə kən luz fɪŋɡɝz, əɹ ivən ə hænd."

Aludra grunted. "Where you put the fire. Yes. Do not stay close to any of them, but these largest, you run away from when you light the fuse. You comprehend me?" She briskly rolled up the long cloth. "You may sell these if you wish, or use them. Remember, you must never put this close to fire. Fire will make them all explode. So many as this at once, it could destroy a house, maybe." She hesitated over retying the cords, then added, "And there is one last thing, which you may have heard. Do not cut open any of these, as some great fools do to see what is inside. Sometimes when what is inside touches air, it will explode without the need of fire. You can lose fingers, or even a hand."

"aɪv hɝd ðæt," mæt sɛd dʒɹaɪli.

"I've heard that," Mat said dryly.

ʃi fɹaʊn əɾ ɪm əz ɪf wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ i mɛn tə də ɪɾ ɛniweɪ, ðən faɪnəli pʊʃt ðə ɹoʊl bʌndəl təwɔɹd hɪm. "hɪɹ. aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ naʊ, bɪfɔɹ ðiz sʌnz ʌv ɡoʊts əweɪkən." ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðə stɪl oʊpən dɔɹ, ən ðə ɹeɪn fɔlɪŋ ɪn ðə naɪt bɪɑnd, ʃi saɪd. "pɝhæps əl faɪn sʌmwɛɹ ɛls dʒɹaɪ. aɪ θɪŋk əl ɡoʊ təwɔɹd luɡɹd, təmɑɹoʊ. ðiz pɪɡz, ðəl ɪkspɛk mi tə ɡoʊ tə keɪɛmlɪn, jɛs?"

She frowned at him as if wondering whether he meant to do it anyway, then finally pushed the rolled bundle toward him. "Here. I must go now, before these sons of goats awaken." Glancing at the still open door, and the rain falling in the night beyond, she sighed. "Perhaps I will find somewhere else dry. I think I will go toward Lugard, tomorrow. These pigs, they will expect me to go to Caemlyn, yes?"

ɪt wɑz ivən fɝðɝ tə luɡɹd ðən tə keɪɛmlɪn, ən mæt sʌɾənli ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət hɑɹɾ ɛn ə bɹɛd. ən ʃi hæd sɛd ʃi hæd noʊ mʌni. ðə faɪɹwɝks wəd baɪ noʊ milz əntɪl ʃi faʊn sʌmwʌn u kəɾ əfɔɹd ðɛm. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ivən lʊkt ət ðə ɡoʊld ən sɪlvɝ ðət hæd spɪl fɹəm ɪz pɑkəts wən i fɛl; ɪt ɡlɪɾɝd ən spɑɹkəld əmʌŋ ðə stʃɹɔ ɪn ðə læntɝn laɪt. ɑ, laɪt, aɪ kænɑt lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ hʌŋɡɹi, aɪ səpoʊz. hi skupt ʌp əz mʌtʃ əz i kəd ɹitʃ kwɪkli.

It was even further to Lugard than to Caemlyn, and Mat suddenly remembered that hard end of bread. And she had said she had no money. The fireworks would buy no meals until she found someone who could afford them. She had never even looked at the gold and silver that had spilled from his pockets when he fell; it glittered and sparkled among the straw in the lantern light. Ah, Light, I cannot let her go hungry, I suppose. He scooped up as much as he could reach quickly.

"ʌ . . . ɑlʌdʒɹə? aɪ hæv plɛnti, jə kən si. aɪ θɔt pɝhæps. . . ." hi hɛld aʊt ðə kɔɪnz təwɔɹd hɝ. "aɪ kən ɔlweɪz wɪn mɔɹ."

"Uh . . . Aludra? I have plenty, you can see. I thought perhaps. . . ." He held out the coins toward her. "I can always win more."

ʃi pɔzd wɪð əɹ kloʊk hæf ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ðən smaɪld ət tɑm əz ʃi swɛpt ɪt ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ ɑn. "hi ɪz jʌŋ jɛt, ɛ?"

She paused with her cloak half around her shoulders, then smiled at Thom as she swept it the rest of the way on. "He is young yet, eh?"

"hi ɪz jʌŋ," tɑm əɡɹid. "ænd nɑt hæf soʊ bæɾ əz i wəd laɪk tə θɪŋk hɪmsɛlf. səmtaɪmz hiz nɑt."

"He is young," Thom agreed. "And not half so bad as he would like to think himself. Sometimes he is not."

mæt ɡlaʊɝɾ ət boʊθ ə ðɛm ən loʊɝɾ ɪz hænd.

Mat glowered at both of them and lowered his hand.

lɪftɪŋ ðə ʃæfs ə hɝ kɑɹt, ɑlʌdʒɹə ɡɑɾ ɪt tɝn ɝaʊn ən stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ, ɡɪvɪŋ tɑmuz ə kɪk ɪn ðə ɹɪbz əz ʃi pæst. hi ɡɹoʊnd ɡɹɑdʒəli.

Lifting the shafts of her cart, Aludra got it turned around and started for the door, giving Tammuz a kick in the ribs as she passed. He groaned groggily.

"aɪ wəd laɪk tə noʊ sʌmθɪŋ, ɑlʌdʒɹə," tɑm sɛd. "haʊ dɪd jə laɪt ðət læntɝn soʊ kwɪkli ɪn ðə dɑɹk?"

"I would like to know something, Aludra," Thom said. "How did you light that lantern so quickly in the dark?"

stɑpɪŋ ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə dɔɹ, ʃi smaɪld oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət hɪm. "ju wɪʃ mi tə tɛl jə ɔl ə maɪ sikɹəts? aɪm ɡɹeɪtfəl, bʌɾ aɪm nɑɾ ɪn lʌv. ðət sikɹət, nɑɾ ivən ðə ɡɪl noʊz, fəɹ ɪts maɪ dɪskʌvɝi əloʊn. əl tɛl jə ðɪs mʌtʃ. wən aɪ noʊ haʊ tə meɪk ɪt wɝk pɹɑpɝli, ən wɝk oʊnli wən aɪ wɑn ɪt tə, stɪks wɪl meɪk maɪ fɔɹtʃən fəɹ mi." θɹoʊɪŋ əɹ weɪɾ əɡɛns ðə ʃæfs, ʃi pʊl ðə kɑɹɾ ɪndə ðə ɹeɪn, ən ðə naɪt swɑloʊd hɝ.

Stopping short of the door, she smiled over her shoulder at him. "You wish me to tell you all of my secrets? I am grateful, but I am not in love. That secret, not even the Guild knows, for it is my discovery alone. I will tell you this much. When I know how to make it work properly, and work only when I want it to, sticks will make my fortune for me." Throwing her weight against the shafts, she pulled the cart into the rain, and the night swallowed her.

"stɪks?" mæt sɛd. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ʃi maɪt nɑt bi ə lɪɾəl stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪn ðə hɛd.

"Sticks?" Mat said. He wondered if she might not be a little strange in the head.

tɑmuz ɡɹoʊn əɡɛn.

Tammuz groaned again.

"bɛst wi də ðə seɪm əz ʃi, bɔɪ," tɑm sɛd. "ɛls ɪts ə tʃɔɪs bɪtwin slɪɾɪŋ fɔɹ θɹoʊts ən meɪbi spɛndɪŋ ðə nɛks fju deɪz ɪkspleɪnɪŋ aʊɝsɛlvz tə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz. ðiz lʊk ðə sɔɹt hud sɛɾ əm ɑn əs aʊɾ ə spaɪt. ən ðeɪv ɪnʌf tə bi spaɪtfəl fɔɹ, aɪ səpoʊz." wʌn ə tɑmuzəz kəmpænjənz twɪtʃt əz ɪf kʌmɪŋ tə, ən mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ɪŋkɑmpɹəhɛnsɪbəl.

"Best we do the same as she, boy," Thom said. "Else it's a choice between slitting four throats and maybe spending the next few days explaining ourselves to the Queen's Guards. These look the sort who'd set them on us out of spite. And they have enough to be spiteful for, I suppose." One of Tammuz's companions twitched as if coming to, and muttered something incomprehensible.

baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ hæd ɡæðɝɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ən sæɾəld ðə hɔɹsəz, tɑmuz wɑz ʌp ɑn ɪz hænz ən niz wɪð ɪz hɛd hæŋɪŋ, ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ stɝɪŋ ən ɡɹoʊnɪŋ, tu.

By the time they had gathered everything and saddled the horses, Tammuz was up on his hands and knees with his head hanging, and the others were stirring and groaning, too.

swɪŋɪŋ ɪndə hɪz sæɾəl, mæt stɛɹɾ ət ðə ɹeɪn aʊtsaɪd ði oʊpən dɔɹ, fɔlɪŋ hɑɹɾɝ ðən ɛvɝ. "ə blʌɾi hɪɹoʊ," hi sɛd. "tɑm, ɪf aɪ ɛvɝ lʊk laɪk æktɪŋ ðə hɪɹoʊ əɡɛn, jə kɪk mi."

Swinging into his saddle, Mat stared at the rain outside the open door, falling harder than ever. "A bloody hero," he said. "Thom, if I ever look like acting the hero again, you kick me."

"ænd wʌt wəd juv dʌn dɪfɹənli?"

"And what would you have done differently?"

mæt skaʊld ət hɪm, ðən pʊld ʌp ɪz hʊɾ ən spɹɛd ðə teɪl ə hɪz kloʊk oʊvɝ ðə fæt ɹoʊl taɪd bɪhaɪn ðə haɪ kæntəl ə hɪz sæɾəl. ivən wɪð ɔɪl klɔθ, ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ pɹətɛkʃən fɹəm ðə ɹeɪn kəd nɑt hɝt. "dʒʌs kɪk mi!" hi buɾɪd ɪz hɔɹs ɪn ðə ɹɪbz ən ɡæləpt ɪndə ðə ɹeɪni naɪt.

Mat scowled at him, then pulled up his hood and spread the tail of his cloak over the fat roll tied behind the high cantle of his saddle. Even with oiled cloth, a little more protection from the rain could not hurt. "Just kick me!" He booted his horse in the ribs and galloped into the rainy night.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾiwʌn


CHAPTER 41

eɪ hʌntɝz oʊθ


A Hunter's Oath

əz ðə snoʊ ɡus muv təwɔɹd ðə lɔŋ stoʊn dɑks ʌv ɪljən, seɪlz fɝld ən pɹəpɛl baɪ ɪts swips, pɛɹɪn stʊd nɪɹ ðə stɝn wɑtʃɪŋ ɡɹeɪt nʌmbɝz ə lɔŋ-lɛɡəd bɝdz weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə tɔl mɑɹʃ ɡɹæs ðəɾ ɔl bʌɾ ɪnsɝkəl ðə ɡɹeɪt hɑɹbɝ. hi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə smɔl waɪt kɹeɪnz, ən kəd ɡɛs ət ðɛɹ mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ blu bɹʌðɝz, bʌt mɛni ʌv ðə kɹɛstəd bɝdz - ɹɛd-fɛðɝɾ əɹ ɹoʊzi, səm wɪð flæt bɪlz bɹɔɾɝ ðən ə dʌks - hi dɪd nɑt noʊ əɾ ɔl. ə dʌzən sɔɹts ʌv ɡʌlz swupt ən sɔɹɾ əbʌv ðə hɑɹbɝ ɪtsɛlf, ən ə blæk bɝd wɪð ə lɔŋ, ʃɑɹp bik skɪm dʒʌst əbʌv ðə wɔɾɝ, ɪts ʌndɝbik kʌɾɪŋ ə fɝoʊ. ʃɪps θɹi ən fɔɹ taɪmz əz lɔŋ əz ðə snoʊ ɡus leɪ æŋkɝɾ əkɹɔs ði ɪkspæns ə ðə hɑɹbɝ, weɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ tɝnz ət ðə dɑks, əɹ fəɹ ðə taɪdz tə ʃɪf soʊ ðeɪ kəd seɪl bɪɑn ðə lɔŋ bɹeɪkwɔɾɝ. smɔl fɪʃɪŋ boʊts wɝkt kloʊs tə ðə mɑɹʃ, ən ɪn ðə kɹiks waɪndɪŋ θɹu ɪt, tu əɹ θɹi mɛn ɪn itʃ dʒɹæɡɪŋ nɛts ɑn lɔŋ poʊlz swʌŋ aʊt fɹəm iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə boʊt.

As the Snow Goose moved toward the long stone docks of Illian, sails furled and propelled by its sweeps, Perrin stood near the stern watching great numbers of long-legged birds wading in the tall marsh grass that all but encircled the great harbor. He recognized the small white cranes, and could guess at their much larger blue brothers, but many of the crested birds - red-feathered or rosy, some with flat bills broader than a duck's - he did not know at all. A dozen sorts of gulls swooped and soared above the harbor itself, and a black bird with a long, sharp beak skimmed just above the water, its underbeak cutting a furrow. Ships three and four times as long as the Snow Goose lay anchored across the expanse of the harbor, waiting their turns at the docks, or for the tides to shift so they could sail beyond the long breakwater. Small fishing boats worked close to the marsh, and in the creeks winding through it, two or three men in each dragging nets on long poles swung out from either side of the boat.

ðə wɪn kæɹiɾ ə ʃɑɹp sɛn ə sɔlt, ən dɪd lɪɾəl tə bɹeɪk ðə hit. ðə sʌn stʊd wɛl oʊvɝ hæfweɪ daʊn tə ðə hɝaɪzən, bʌɾ ɪt sim laɪk nun. ði ɛɹ fɛl dæmp; ɪt wɑz ði oʊnli weɪ hi kəd θɪŋk ʌv ɪt. dæmp. hɪz noʊz kɑt ðə smɛl ə fɹɛʃ fɪʃ fɹəm ðə boʊts, ʌv oʊl fɪʃ ən mʌd fɹəm ðə mɑɹʃ, ən ðə saʊɝ stɪŋk ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ tænɪŋ jɑɹd ðət leɪ ɑn ə tʃɹiləs aɪlən ɪn ðə mɑɹʃ ɡɹæs.

The wind carried a sharp scent of salt, and did little to break the heat. The sun stood well over halfway down to the horizon, but it seemed like noon. The air felt damp; it was the only way he could think of it. Damp. His nose caught the smell of fresh fish from the boats, of old fish and mud from the marsh, and the sour stink of a large tanning yard that lay on a treeless island in the marsh grass.

kæptən ədʒɹə mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ sɔfli bɪhaɪn hɪm, ðə tɪlɝ kɹikt, ən ðə snoʊ ɡus tʃeɪnʒd ɪts kɔɹs ə tʃɹaɪfəl. bɛɹfʊt mɛn ət ðə swips muvd əz ɪf nɑt wɑntɪŋ tə meɪk ə saʊnd. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt ɡlæns əɾ əm bɪɑn ə flɪkɝ ə hɪz aɪ.

Captain Adarra muttered something softly behind him, the tiller creaked, and the Snow Goose changed its course a trifle. Barefoot men at the sweeps moved as if not wanting to make a sound. Perrin did not glance at them beyond a flicker of his eye.

hi pɪɹɾ ət ðə tænɝi, ɪnstɛd, wɑtʃɪŋ mɛn skɹeɪp haɪdz stʃɹɛtʃt ɑn ɹoʊz ʌv wʊɾən fɹeɪmz, ən ʌðɝ mɛn lɪf haɪdz aʊɾ ə hjudʒ, sʌŋkən væts wɪð lɔŋ stɪks. səmtaɪmz ðeɪ stæk ðə haɪdz ɑn bæɹoʊz, wilɪŋ əm ɪndə ðə lɔŋ, loʊ bɪldɪŋ ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə jɑɹd; səmtaɪmz ðə haɪdz wɛn bæk ɪndə ðə væts, wɪð ən ədɪʃən ə lɪkwədz pɔɹd fɹəm lɑɹdʒ stoʊn kɹɑks. ðeɪ pɹɑbli meɪd mɔɹ lɛðɝ ɪn ə deɪ ðən wɑz meɪɾ ɪn ɛmənz fild ɪn mʌnθs, ən i kəd si ənʌðɝ tænɝi ɑn ənʌðɝ aɪlən bɪɑn ðə fɝst.

He peered at the tannery, instead, watching men scrape hides stretched on rows of wooden frames, and other men lift hides out of huge, sunken vats with long sticks. Sometimes they stacked the hides on barrows, wheeling them into the long, low building at the edge of the yard; sometimes the hides went back into the vats, with an addition of liquids poured from large stone crocks. They probably made more leather in a day than was made in Emond's Field in months, and he could see another tannery on another island beyond the first.

ɪt wɑz nɑt ðəɾ i hæɾ ɛni ɹil ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ʃɪps əɹ fɪʃɪŋ boʊts əɹ tænɪŋ jɑɹdz, əɹ ivən vɛɹi mʌtʃ ɪn ðə bɝdz - ðoʊ hi dɪd wʌndɝ wʌt ðoʊz peɪl ɹɛd wʌnz kəd bi fɪʃɪŋ fəɹ wɪð ðɛɹ flæt bɪlz, ən səm ə ðɛm lʊkt ɡʊd tə iɾ ənlɛs i wɑtʃt hɪmsɛlf - bʌɾ ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən wɑtʃɪŋ ðə sin bɪhaɪn ɪm ɑn ðə dɛk ə ðə snoʊ ɡus. ði æks əɾ ɪz bɛlt wɑz noʊ dɪfɛns əɡɛns ðæt. ə stoʊn wɔl wʊdn bi dɪfɛns ɪnʌf, hi θɔt.

It was not that he had any real interest in ships or fishing boats or tanning yards, or even very much in the birds - though he did wonder what those pale red ones could be fishing for with their flat bills, and some of them looked good to eat unless he watched himself - but anything at all was better than watching the scene behind him on the deck of the Snow Goose. The axe at his belt was no defense against that. A stone wall wouldn't be defense enough, he thought.

mɔɪɹeɪn hæd bɪn niðɝ pliz nɔɹ dɪspliz tə dɪskʌvɝ ðət zɑɹin - əl nɑt kɔl əɹ feɪl, wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɑns tə neɪm hɝsɛlf! ʃiz noʊ fælkən! - nu ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðoʊ ʃi hæd bɪn pɝhæps ə lɪɾəl əpsɛt wɪð ɪm fəɹ nɑt tɛlɪŋ hɝ. ə lɪɾəl ʌpsɛt. ʃi kɔl mi ə ful, bʌt ðət wɑz ɔl. ðɛn. mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd nɑt sim tə kɛɹ wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ əbaʊt zɑɹin biɪŋ ə hʌntɝ ə ðə hɔɹn. bʌt wʌns ʃi lɝn ðə ɡɝl θɔt ðeɪ wəd lɛɾ əɹ tə ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, wʌns ʃi lɝn i hæd noʊn ðæt, tu, ən nɑt toʊld əɹ - zɑɹin hæd bɪn mɔɹ ðən fɔɹθkʌmɪŋ əbaʊt boʊθ sʌbʒɪkts wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn, tə hɪz maɪnd - ðən əɹ koʊl dɑɹk stɛɹ hæd teɪkən ɑn ə kwɑləɾi ðət meɪɾ ɪm fil əz ɪf i hæd bɪn pækt ɪn ə bæɹəl ə snoʊ ɪn ðə dɛɾ ʌv wɪntɝ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd nʌθɪŋ, bʌt ʃi stɛɹd tu ɔfən ən tu hɑɹd fəɹ ɛni kʌmfɝt.

Moiraine had been neither pleased nor displeased to discover that Zarine - I'll not call her Faile, whatever she wants to name herself! She is no falcon! - knew she was Aes Sedai, though she had been perhaps a little upset with him for not telling her. A little upset. She called me a fool, but that was all. Then. Moiraine did not seem to care one way or another about Zarine being a Hunter of the Horn. But once she learned the girl thought they would lead her to the Horn of Valere, once she learned he had known that, too, and not told her - Zarine had been more than forthcoming about both subjects with Moiraine, to his mind - then her cold dark stare had taken on a quality that made him feel as if he had been packed in a barrel of snow in the dead of winter. The Aes Sedai said nothing, but she stared too often and too hard for any comfort.

hi lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ən kwɪkli ɹɪtɝn tə stʌɾiɪŋ ðə ʃɔɹlaɪn. zɑɹin wɑz sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə dɛk nɪɹ ðə hɔɹsəz tɛðɝd bɪtwin ðə mæsts, hɝ bʌndəl ən dɑɹk kloʊk bɪsaɪd hɝ, hɝ nɛɹoʊ, dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts nitli ɝeɪd, pɹitɛndɪŋ tə stʌɾi ðə ɹuftɑps ən taʊɝz ə ði ɔnkʌmɪŋ sɪɾi. mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ ɪljən, tu, fɹəm dʒʌst əhɛɾ ə ðə mɛn wɝkɪŋ ðə swips, bʌt naʊ ən ðən ʃi ʃɑɾ ə hɑɹd lʊk ət ðə ɡɝl fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə dip hʊɾ ə hɝ faɪn ɡɹeɪ wʊl kloʊk. haʊ kən ʃi stænd wɛɹɪŋ ðæt? hɪz oʊn koʊt wɑz ənbʌɾənd ən ɪz ʃɝɾ ənleɪst ət ðə nɛk.

He looked over his shoulder and quickly returned to studying the shoreline. Zarine was sitting cross-legged on the deck near the horses tethered between the masts, her bundle and dark cloak beside her, her narrow, divided skirts neatly arrayed, pretending to study the rooftops and towers of the oncoming city. Moiraine was studying Illian, too, from just ahead of the men working the sweeps, but now and then she shot a hard look at the girl from under the deep hood of her fine gray wool cloak. How can she stand wearing that? His own coat was unbuttoned and his shirt unlaced at the neck.

zɑɹin mɛɾ itʃ ɛɛs sədaɪ lʊk wɪð ə smaɪl, bʌɾ ɛvɹi taɪm mɔɪɹeɪn tɝn əweɪ, ʃi swɑloʊɾ ən waɪpt əɹ fɔɹhɛd.

Zarine met each Aes Sedai look with a smile, but every time Moiraine turned away, she swallowed and wiped her forehead.

pɛɹɪn ɹæðɝ ədmaɪɝɾ əɹ fəɹ mænɪdʒɪŋ ðət smaɪl wən mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd dil mɔɹ ðən i kəd du. hi hæd nɛvɝ sin ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tʃɹuli luz əɹ tɛmpɝ, bʌɾ i hɪmsɛlf wɑz ət ðə pɔɪn ʌv wɪʃɪŋ ʃi wəd ʃaʊt, əɹ ɹeɪdʒ, əɹ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt stɛɹ ət hɪm. laɪt, meɪbi nɑɾ ɛniθɪŋ! meɪbi ðə stɛɹ wɑz bɛɹəbəl.

Perrin rather admired her for managing that smile when Moiraine was watching. It was a good deal more than he could do. He had never seen the Aes Sedai truly lose her temper, but he himself was at the point of wishing she would shout, or rage, or anything but stare at him. Light, maybe not anything! Maybe the stare was bearable.

læn sæt fɝðɝ təwɔɹd ðə baʊ ðən mɔɪɹeɪn - hɪz kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊk wɑz stɪl ɪn ðə sæɾəlbæɡz əɾ ɪz fit - aʊtwɝdli əbzɔɹbd ɪn ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd bleɪd, bʌt meɪkɪŋ lɪɾəl ɛfɝt tə haɪɾ ɪz əmjuzmənt. səmtaɪmz ɪz lɪps əpɪɹd tə kwɝk vɛɹi kloʊs tə ə smaɪl. pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt sɝɾən; ət taɪmz i θɔɾ ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə ʃædoʊ. ʃædoʊz kəd meɪk ə hæmɝ sim tə smaɪl. itʃ wʊmən ɑbviəsli θɔt ʃi wɑz ði əbdʒɛkt ə ðəɾ əmjuzmənt, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə maɪn ðə taɪt-lɪp fɹaʊnz i ɹəsiv fɹəm boʊθ ə ðɛm.

Lan sat further toward the bow than Moiraine - his color-shifting cloak was still in the saddlebags at his feet - outwardly absorbed in examining his sword blade, but making little effort to hide his amusement. Sometimes his lips appeared to quirk very close to a smile. Perrin was not certain; at times he thought it was only a shadow. Shadows could make a hammer seem to smile. Each woman obviously thought she was the object of that amusement, but the Warder did not appear to mind the tight-lipped frowns he received from both of them.

ə fju deɪz ɝliɝ pɛɹɪn hæd hɝd mɔɪɹeɪn æsk læn, ɪn ə vɔɪs laɪk aɪs, wɛðɝ i sɔ sʌmθɪŋ tə læf æt. "aɪ wəd nɛvɝ læf ət ju, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ," hi hæd ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli, "bʌɾ ɪf jə tʃɹuli ɪntɛn tə sɛn mi tə maɪɹɛl, aɪ mʌs bɪkʌm juz tə smaɪlɪŋ. aɪ hɪɹ ðət maɪɹɛl tɛlz əɹ wɔɹɾɝz dʒoʊks. ɡeɪɾɪn mʌst smaɪl ət ðɛɹ bɑn hoʊldɝz kwɪps; juv ɔfən ɡɪvən mi kwɪps tə læf æt, hæv jə nɑt? pɝhæps jə wəd ɹæðɝ aɪ steɪ wɪð jə æftɝ ɔl." ʃi hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ə lʊk ðət wʊɾə neɪld ɛni ʌðɝ mæn tə ðə mæst, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ nɛvɝ blɪŋkt. læn meɪd koʊl stil sim laɪk tɪn.

A few days earlier Perrin had heard Moiraine ask Lan, in a voice like ice, whether he saw something to laugh at. "I would never laugh at you, Moiraine Sedai," he had replied calmly, "but if you truly intend to send me to Myrelle, I must become used to smiling. I hear that Myrelle tells her Warders jokes. Gaidin must smile at their bond holder's quips; you have often given me quips to laugh at, have you not? Perhaps you would rather I stay with you after all." She had given him a look that would have nailed any other man to the mast, but the Warder never blinked. Lan made cold steel seem like tin.

ðə kɹu hæd teɪkən tə pæɾɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ wɝk ɪn ʌɾɝ saɪləns wən mɔɪɹeɪn ən zɑɹin wɝ ɑn dɛk təɡɛðɝ. kæptən ədʒɹə hɛld ɪz hɛd tɪltəd, ən lʊkt əz ɪf i wɝ lɪsnɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ i dɪd nɑt wɑnə hɪɹ. hi pæst ɪz ɔɹɾɝz ɪn wɪspɝz, ɪnstɛɾ ə ðə ʃaʊts i hæd juzd ət fɝst. ɛvɹiwʌn nu mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, naʊ, ən ɛvɹiwʌn nu ʃi wɑz dɪsplizd. pɛɹɪn hæd lɛt hɪmsɛlf ɡɛɾ ɪndə wʌn ʃaʊɾɪŋ mætʃ wɪð zɑɹin, ən i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɪtʃ ə ðɛm hæd sɛd ðə wɝdz "ɛɛs sədaɪ," bʌt ðə hoʊl kɹu nu. blʌɾi wʊmən! hi wɑz ənsɝɾən wɛðɝ i mɛn mɔɪɹeɪn əɹ zɑɹin. ɪf ʃiz ðə fælkən, wʌɾ ɪz ðə hɔk səpoʊz tə bi? æm aɪ gɑnə bi stʌk wɪð tu wɪmən laɪk hɝ? laɪt! noʊ! ʃiz nɑɾ ə fælkən, ən ðəɾ ɪz ən ɛn tə ɪt! ði oʊnli ɡʊd θɪŋ i kəd faɪn ɪn ɔl ðɪs wɑz ðət wɪð ən æŋɡɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ tə wɝi əbaʊt, nʌn ə ðə kɹu lʊk twaɪs əɾ ɪz aɪz.

The crew had taken to padding about their work in utter silence when Moiraine and Zarine were on deck together. Captain Adarra held his head tilted, and looked as if he were listening for something he did not want to hear. He passed his orders in whispers, instead of the shouts he had used at first. Everyone knew Moiraine was Aes Sedai, now, and everyone knew she was displeased. Perrin had let himself get into one shouting match with Zarine, and he was not sure which of them had said the words "Aes Sedai," but the whole crew knew. Bloody woman! He was uncertain whether he meant Moiraine or Zarine. If she is the falcon, what is the hawk supposed to be? Am I going to be stuck with two women like her? Light! No! She is not a falcon, and that is an end to it! The only good thing he could find in all this was that with an angry Aes Sedai to worry about, none of the crew looked twice at his eyes.

lɔɪəl wɑz noʊwɛɹ ɪn saɪt, ət ðə moʊmənt. ði oʊɡiɝ steɪɾ ɪn ɪz staɪflɪŋ kæbən wɛnɛvɝ mɔɪɹeɪn ən zɑɹin wɝ tɑpsaɪd təɡɛðɝ - wɝkɪŋ ɑn ɪz noʊts, hi sɛd. hi oʊnli keɪm ɑn dɛk ət naɪt, tə smoʊk ɪz paɪp. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt si haʊ hi kəd teɪk ðə hit; ivən mɔɪɹeɪn ən zɑɹin wɝ bɛɾɝ ðən biɪŋ bɛlaʊdɛks.

Loial was nowhere in sight, at the moment. The Ogier stayed in his stifling cabin whenever Moiraine and Zarine were topside together - working on his notes, he said. He only came on deck at night, to smoke his pipe. Perrin did not see how he could take the heat; even Moiraine and Zarine were better than being belowdecks.

hi saɪɾ ən kɛpt ɪz aɪz ɑn ɪljən. ðə sɪɾi ðə ʃɪp wɑz əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ wɑz lɑɹdʒ - əz bɪɡ əz kɛɹhin əɹ keɪɛmlɪn, ði oʊnli tu ɡɹeɪt sɪɾiz i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin - ən ɪt ɹɪɹɾ aʊɾ ʌv ə hjudʒ mɑɹʃ ðət stʃɹɛtʃt fəɹ maɪlz laɪk ə pleɪn ʌv weɪvɪŋ ɡɹæs. ɪljən hæd noʊ wɔlz əɾ ɔl, bʌɾ ɪt sim tə bi ɔl taʊɝz ən pæləsəz. ðə bɪldɪŋz wɝ ɔl peɪl stoʊn, ɪksɛp fəɹ səm ðəɾ əpɪɹd kʌvɝd wɪð waɪt plæstɝ, bʌt ðə stoʊn wɑz waɪɾ ən ɡɹeɪ ən ɹɛɾɪʃ ən ivən feɪnt ʃeɪdz ʌv ɡɹin. ɹuftɑps ə taɪl spɑɹkəld ʌndɝ ðə sʌn wɪð ə hʌnʒɹəd dɪfɹən hjuz. ðə lɔŋ dɑks hɛl mɛni ʃɪps, moʊs dwɔɹfɪŋ ðə snoʊ ɡus, ən bʌsəld wɪð ðə loʊɾɪŋ ən ənloʊɾɪŋ ə kɑɹɡoʊ. ðəɹ wɝ ʃɪpjɑɹdz ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə sɪɾi, wɛɹ ɡɹeɪt ʃɪps stʊɾ ɪn ɛvɹi steɪdʒ fɹəm skɛləɾənz ə θɪk wʊɾən ɹɪbz tə nɪɹli ɹɛɾi tə slaɪɾ ɪndə ðə hɑɹbɝ.

He sighed and kept his eyes on Illian. The city the ship was approaching was large - as big as Cairhien or Caemlyn, the only two great cities he had ever seen - and it reared out of a huge marsh that stretched for miles like a plain of waving grass. Illian had no walls at all, but it seemed to be all towers and palaces. The buildings were all pale stone, except for some that appeared covered with white plaster, but the stone was white and gray and reddish and even faint shades of green. Rooftops of tile sparkled under the sun with a hundred different hues. The long docks held many ships, most dwarfing the Snow Goose, and bustled with the loading and unloading of cargo. There were shipyards at the far end of the city, where great ships stood in every stage from skeletons of thick wooden ribs to nearly ready to slide into the harbor.

pɝhæps ɪljən wɑz lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə kip wʊlvz ət beɪ. ðeɪ ʃʊɹli wəd nɑt hʌn ɪn ðoʊz mɑɹʃəz. ðə snoʊ ɡus hæɾ aʊtʃɹʌn ðə wʊlvz ðət hæd fɑloʊɾ ɪm fɹəm ðə maʊntənz. hi ɹitʃt aʊt fəɹ əm dʒɪnʒɝli, naʊ, ən fɛlt - nʌθɪŋ. ə kjʊɹiəsli ɛmpti filɪŋ, ɡɪvən ðəɾ ɪt wɑz wʌɾ i wɑntəd. hɪz dʒɹimz hæd bɪn ɪz oʊn - fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt - sɪns ðət fɝs naɪt. mɔɪɹeɪn hæɾ æskt əbaʊɾ əm ɪn ə koʊl vɔɪs, ən i hæd toʊl ðə tʃɹuθ. twaɪs i hæd faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðəɾ ɑd sɔɹɾ ʌv wʊlf dʒɹim, ən boʊθ taɪmz hɑpɝ hæɾ əpɪɹd, tʃeɪsɪŋ ɪm əweɪ, tɛlɪŋ ɪm i wɑz tu jʌŋ jɛt, tu nu. wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn meɪɾ ə ðæt, hi hæd noʊ aɪdiə; ʃi toʊld ɪm nʌθɪŋ, ɪksɛp tə seɪ hi hæd bɛs bi wɛɹi.

Perhaps Illian was large enough to keep wolves at bay. They surely would not hunt in those marshes. The Snow Goose had outrun the wolves that had followed him from the mountains. He reached out for them gingerly, now, and felt - nothing. A curiously empty feeling, given that it was what he wanted. His dreams had been his own - for the most part - since that first night. Moiraine had asked about them in a cold voice, and he had told the truth. Twice he had found himself in that odd sort of wolf dream, and both times Hopper had appeared, chasing him away, telling him he was too young yet, too new. What Moiraine made of that, he had no idea; she told him nothing, except to say he had best be wary.

"ðæts əz wɛl baɪ mi," hi ɡɹaʊld. hi wɑz ɔlmoʊs bɪkʌmɪŋ juz tə hɑpɝ biɪŋ dɛd bʌt nɑt dɛd, ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹimz, ət list. bɪhaɪn hɪm, hi hɝd kæptən ədʒɹə skʌf ɪz buts ɑn ðə dɛk ən mʌɾɝ sʌmθɪŋ, stɑɹɾəld ðəɾ ɛniwʌn wəd spik əlaʊd.

"That's as well by me," he growled. He was almost becoming used to Hopper being dead but not dead, in the wolf dreams, at least. Behind him, he heard Captain Adarra scuff his boots on the deck and mutter something, startled that anyone would speak aloud.

laɪnz wɝ hɝld əʃɔɹ fɹəm ðə ʃɪp. waɪl ðeɪ wɝ stɪl biɪŋ meɪd fæs tə stoʊn poʊsts əlɔŋ ðə dɑks, ðə slaɪtli bɪl kæptən lɛpt ɪndə moʊʃən, wɪspɝɪŋ fɪɹsli tə hɪz kɹu. hi hæd bumz ɹɪɡd tə lɪf ðə hɔɹsəz ɑntu ðə wɔɹf ɔlmoʊst əz kwɪkli əz ðə ɡæŋplæŋk wɑz leɪɾ ɪn pleɪs. lænz blæk wɔɹ hɔɹs kɪkt ən nɪɹli bɹoʊk ðə bum hɔɪstɪŋ hɪm. lɔɪəlz hjudʒ, hɛɹi-fɛtlɑk maʊnt niɾəd tu.

Lines were hurled ashore from the ship. While they were still being made fast to stone posts along the docks, the slightly built captain leaped into motion, whispering fiercely to his crew. He had booms rigged to lift the horses onto the wharf almost as quickly as the gangplank was laid in place. Lan's black war horse kicked and nearly broke the boom hoisting him. Loial's huge, hairy-fetlocked mount needed two.

"æn ɑnɝ," ədʒɹə wɪspɝd tə mɔɪɹeɪn wɪð ə baʊ əz ʃi stɛpt ɑntu ðə waɪd plæŋk liɾɪŋ tə ðə dɑk. "æn ɑnɝ tə hæv sɝv ju, ɛɛs sədaɪ." ʃi stʃɹoʊɾ əʃɔɹ wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, hɝ feɪs hɪɾən ɪn əɹ dip hʊd.

"An honor," Adarra whispered to Moiraine with a bow as she stepped onto the wide plank leading to the dock. "An honor to have served you, Aes Sedai." She strode ashore without looking at him, her face hidden in her deep hood.

lɔɪəl dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ əntɪl ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls wɑz ɑn ðə dɑk, ən ðə hɔɹsəz, tu. ði oʊɡiɝ keɪm θʌmpɪŋ ʌp ðə ɡæŋplæŋk tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɑn ɪz lɔŋ koʊt waɪl kæɹiɪŋ ɪz bɪɡ sæɾəlbæɡz ən stʃɹaɪp blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl, ən ɪz kloʊk oʊvɝ wʌn ɑɹm. "aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ wi hæɾ ɝaɪvd," hi ɹʌmbəl bɹɛθləsli. "aɪ wɑz ɹiɹiɾɪŋ maɪ. . . ." hi tʃɹeɪld ɔf wɪð ə ɡlæns ət mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃi əpɪɹd tə bi əbzɔɹbd ɪn wɑtʃɪŋ læn sæɾəl ɑldib, bʌt ði oʊɡiɝz ɪɹz flɪkɝd laɪk ə nɝvəs kæts.

Loial did not appear until everyone else was on the dock, and the horses, too. The Ogier came thumping up the gangplank trying to don his long coat while carrying his big saddlebags and striped blanketroll, and his cloak over one arm. "I did not know we had arrived," he rumbled breathlessly. "I was rereading my. . . ." He trailed off with a glance at Moiraine. She appeared to be absorbed in watching Lan saddle Aldieb, but the Ogier's ears flickered like a nervous cat's.

hɪz noʊts, pɛɹɪn θɔt. wʌn ə ðiz deɪz aɪ hæv tə si wʌt hiz seɪɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɔl ðɪs. sʌmθɪŋ tɪkəl ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk, ən i dʒʌmpt ə fʊt bɪfɔɹ i ɹilaɪzd i wɑz smɛlɪŋ ə klin, ɝbəl sɛn θɹu ðə spaɪsəz ən tɑɹ ən stɪŋks ə ðə dɑks.

His notes, Perrin thought. One of these days I have to see what he is saying about all this. Something tickled the back of his neck, and he jumped a foot before he realized he was smelling a clean, herbal scent through the spices and tar and stinks of the docks.

zɑɹin wɪɡɡəld əɹ fɪŋɡɝz, smaɪlɪŋ ət ðɛm. "ɪf aɪ kən də ðət wɪð dʒʌst ə bɹʌʃ ə maɪ fɪŋɡɝz, fɑɹmbɔɪ, aɪ wʌndɝ haʊ haɪ jə wəd dʒʌmp ɪf aɪ - ?"

Zarine wiggled her fingers, smiling at them. "If I can do that with just a brush of my fingers, farmboy, I wonder how high you would jump if I - ?"

hi wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ ə lɪɾəl taɪɝɾ ə kənsɪɾɝɪŋ lʊks fɹəm ðoʊz dɑɹk, tɪltəɾ aɪz. ʃi meɪ bi pɹɪɾi, bʌt ʃi lʊks ət mi ðə weɪ aɪd lʊk əɾ ə tul aɪd nɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʌzəl aʊt haʊ ɪt wɑz meɪd, ən wʌɾ ɪts səpoʊz tə bi juz fɔɹ.

He was growing a little tired of considering looks from those dark, tilted eyes. She may be pretty, but she looks at me the way I'd look at a tool I'd never seen before, trying to puzzle out how it was made, and what it is supposed to be used for.

"zɑɹin." mɔɪɹeɪnz vɔɪs wɑz kul bʌɾ ənɹʌfəld.

"Zarine." Moiraine's voice was cool but unruffled.

"aɪ æm kɔl feɪl," zɑɹin sɛd fɝmli, ən fəɹ ə moʊmənt, wɪð əɹ boʊl noʊz, ʃi dɪd lʊk laɪk ə fælkən.

"I am called Faile," Zarine said firmly, and for a moment, with her bold nose, she did look like a falcon.

"zɑɹin," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd fɝmli, "ɪɾ ɪz taɪm fəɹ əɹ weɪz tə pɑɹt. jəl faɪn bɛɾɝ hʌntɪŋ ɛlswɛɹ, ən seɪfɝ."

"Zarine," Moiraine said firmly, "it is time for our ways to part. You will find better Hunting elsewhere, and safer."

"aɪ θɪŋk nɑt," zɑɹin sɛd dʒʌst əz fɝmli. "eɪ hʌntɝ mʌs fɑloʊ ðə tʃɹeɪl ʃi siz, ən noʊ hʌntɝ wəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ ðə tʃɹeɪl jə fɔɹ liv. ən aɪm feɪl." ʃi spɔɪld ɪɾ ə bɪt baɪ swɑloʊɪŋ, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt blɪŋk əz ʃi mɛt mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪz.

"I think not," Zarine said just as firmly. "A Hunter must follow the trail she sees, and no Hunter would ignore the trail you four leave. And I am Faile." She spoiled it a bit by swallowing, but she did not blink as she met Moiraine's eyes.

"ɑɹ jə sɝɾən?" mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sɔfli. "ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ jəl nɑt tʃeɪnʒ jəɹ maɪnd . . . fælkən?"

"Are you certain?" Moiraine said softly. "Are you sure you will not change your mind . . . Falcon?"

"aɪ wɪl nɑt. ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ jə əɹ jəɹ stoʊn-feɪst wɔɹɾɝ kən də tə stɑp mi." zɑɹin hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən æɾəd sloʊli, əz ɪf ʃi hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə bi ɪntaɪɝli tʃɹuθfəl, "æt list, ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ ðət jəl də ðət kən stɑp mi. aɪ noʊ ə lɪɾəl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ; aɪ noʊ, fəɹ ɔl ðə stɔɹiz, ðət ðəɹ ɑɹ θɪŋz jəl nɑt du. ən aɪ də nɑt bɪliv stoʊn-feɪs wəd də wʌɾ i mʌs tə meɪk mi ɡɪv oʊvɝ."

"I will not. There is nothing you or your stone-faced Warder can do to stop me." Zarine hesitated, then added slowly, as if she had decided to be entirely truthful, "At least, there is nothing that you will do that can stop me. I know a little of Aes Sedai; I know, for all the stories, that there are things you will not do. And I do not believe stone-face would do what he must to make me give over."

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ɪnʌf ə ðət tə ɹɪsk ɪt?" læn spoʊk kwaɪətli, ən ɪz feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, bʌt zɑɹin swɑloʊɾ əɡɛn.

"Are you sure enough of that to risk it?" Lan spoke quietly, and his face did not change, but Zarine swallowed again.

"ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə θɹɛɾən hɝ, læn," pɛɹɪn sɛd. hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə ɹilaɪz i wɑz ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət ðə wɔɹɾɝ.

"There is no need to threaten her, Lan," Perrin said. He was surprised to realize he was glaring at the Warder.

mɔɪɹeɪnz ɡlæns saɪlənst ɪm ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ boʊθ. "ju bɪliv jə noʊ wʌɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪl nɑt du, də ju?" ʃi sɛd mɔɹ sɔfli ðən bɪfɔɹ. hɝ smaɪl wɑz nɑt plɛzənt. "ɪf jə wɪʃ tə ɡoʊ wɪð ʌs, ðɪs ɪz wʌt jə mʌs du." lænz aɪlɪdz flɪkɝɾ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz; ðə tu wɪmən stɛɹɾ əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ laɪk fælkən ən maʊs, bʌt zɑɹin wɑz nɑt ðə fælkən, naʊ. "ju wɪl swɛɹ baɪ jəɹ hʌntɝz oʊθ tə də əz aɪ seɪ, tə hid mi, ən nɑt tə liv ʌs. wʌns jə noʊ mɔɹ ðən jə ʃəɾ ʌv wʌt wi du, əl nɑɾ əlaʊ jə tə fɔl ɪndə ðə ɹɔŋ hænz. noʊ ðət fəɹ tʃɹuθ, ɡɝl. jəl swɛɹ tə ækt əz wʌn ʌv ʌs, ən də nʌθɪŋ ðət wɪl ɛndeɪnʒɝ əɹ pɝpəs. jəl æsk noʊ kwɛstʃənz ʌv wɛɹ wi ɡoʊ əɹ waɪ: jəl bi sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð wʌɾ aɪ tʃuz tə tɛl ju. ɔl ə ðɪs jəl swɛɹ, əɹ jəl ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ ɪn ɪljən. ən jəl nɑt liv ðɪs mɑɹʃ əntɪl aɪ ɹɪtɝn tə ɹilis ju, ɪf ɪt teɪks ðə ɹɛst ə jəɹ laɪf. ðəɾ aɪ swɛɹ."

Moiraine's glance silenced him and the Warder both. "You believe you know what an Aes Sedai will not do, do you?" she said more softly than before. Her smile was not pleasant. "If you wish to go with us, this is what you must do." Lan's eyelids flickered in surprise; the two women stared at each other like falcon and mouse, but Zarine was not the falcon, now. "You will swear by your Hunter's oath to do as I say, to heed me, and not to leave us. Once you know more than you should of what we do, I will not allow you to fall into the wrong hands. Know that for truth, girl. You will swear to act as one of us, and do nothing that will endanger our purpose. You will ask no questions of where we go or why: you will be satisfied with what I choose to tell you. All of this you will swear, or you will remain here in Illian. And you will not leave this marsh until I return to release you, if it takes the rest of your life. That I swear."

zɑɹin tɝn əɹ hɛɾ ənizəli, wɑtʃɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn aʊɾ ʌv wʌn aɪ. "aɪ meɪ əkʌmpəni jə ɪf aɪ swɛɹ?" ði ɛɛs sədaɪ nɑɾəd. "aɪ wɪl bi wʌn ə ju, ðə seɪm əz lɔɪəl əɹ stoʊn-feɪs. bʌɾ aɪ kən æsk noʊ kwɛstʃənz. ɑɹ ðeɪ əlaʊd tə æsk kwɛstʃənz?" mɔɪɹeɪnz feɪs lɔst ə lɪɾəl ʌv ɪts peɪʃəns. zɑɹin stʊɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾɝ ən hɛld əɹ hɛd haɪ. "vɛɹi wɛl, ðɛn. aɪ swɛɹ, baɪ ði oʊθ aɪ tʊk əz ə hʌntɝ. ɪf aɪ bɹeɪk wʌn, əl əv bɹoʊkən boʊθ. aɪ swɛɹ ɪt!"

Zarine turned her head uneasily, watching Moiraine out of one eye. "I may accompany you if I swear?" The Aes Sedai nodded. "I will be one of you, the same as Loial or stone-face. But I can ask no questions. Are they allowed to ask questions?" Moiraine's face lost a little of its patience. Zarine stood up straighter and held her head high. "Very well, then. I swear, by the oath I took as a Hunter. If I break one, I will have broken both. I swear it!"

"dʌn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, tʌtʃɪŋ ðə jʌŋɡɝ wʊmənz fɔɹhɛd; zɑɹin ʃɪvɝd. "sɪns jə bɹɔɾ əɹ tə ʌs, pɛɹɪn, ʃiz jəɹ ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi."

"Done," Moiraine said, touching the younger woman's forehead; Zarine shivered. "Since you brought her to us, Perrin, she is your responsibility."

"maɪn!" hi jɛlpt.

"Mine!" he yelped.

"aɪ æm noʊ wʌnz ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi bʌt maɪ oʊn!" zɑɹin nɪɹli ʃaʊɾəd.

"I am no one's responsibility but my own!" Zarine nearly shouted.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛn sɝinəli ɑn əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ oʊpən ðɛɹ maʊðz. "ɪt simz juv faʊn mɪnz fælkən, tɑvɝən. aɪ hæv tʃɹaɪd tə dɪskɝɪdʒ hɝ, bʌɾ ɪɾ əpɪɹz ʃɪl pɝtʃ ɑn jəɹ ʃoʊldɝ wʌtɛvɝ aɪ du. ðə pæɾɝn wivz ə fjutʃɝ fəɹ ju, ɪt simz. jɛt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðɪs. ɪf aɪ mʌst, əl snɪp jəɹ θɹɛd fɹəm ðə pæɾɝn. ən ɪf ðə ɡɝl ɛndeɪnʒɝz wʌt mʌs bi, jəl ʃɛɹ əɹ feɪt."

The Aes Sedai went serenely on as if they had never opened their mouths. "It seems you have found Min's falcon, ta'veren. I have tried to discourage her, but it appears she will perch on your shoulder whatever I do. The Pattern weaves a future for you, it seems. Yet remember this. If I must, I will snip your thread from the Pattern. And if the girl endangers what must be, you will share her fate."

"aɪ dɪd nɑɾ æsk fəɹ əɹ tə kʌm əlɔŋ!" pɛɹɪn pɹətɛstəd. mɔɪɹeɪn kɑmli maʊntəɾ ɑldib, ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ kloʊk oʊvɝ ðə waɪt mɛɹz sæɾəl. "aɪ dɪd nɑɾ æsk fəɹ hɝ!" lɔɪəl ʃɹʌɡd əɾ ɪm ən saɪlənli maʊð sʌmθɪŋ. noʊ daʊɾ ə seɪɪŋ əbaʊt ðə deɪnʒɝz ʌv æŋɡɝɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

"I did not ask for her to come along!" Perrin protested. Moiraine calmly mounted Aldieb, adjusting her cloak over the white mare's saddle. "I did not ask for her!" Loial shrugged at him and silently mouthed something. No doubt a saying about the dangers of angering Aes Sedai.

"ju ɑɹ tɑvɝən?" zɑɹin sɛd dɪsbɪlivɪŋli. hɝ ɡeɪz ɹæn oʊvɝ ɪz stɝɾi kʌntʃɹi kloʊðz ən sɛɾəld ɑn ɪz jɛloʊ aɪz. "wɛl, pɝhæps. wʌtɛvɝ jə ɑɹ, ʃi θɹɛɾənz jə əz izəli əz ʃi dʌz mi. hu ɪz mɪn? wʌt dʌz ʃi min, əl pɝtʃ ɑn jəɹ ʃoʊldɝ?" hɝ feɪs taɪɾənd. "ɪf jə tʃɹaɪ meɪkɪŋ mi jəɹ ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi, əl kɑɹv jəɹ ɪɹz. dʒju hɪɹ mi?"

"You are ta'veren?" Zarine said disbelievingly. Her gaze ran over his sturdy country clothes and settled on his yellow eyes. "Well, perhaps. Whatever you are, she threatens you as easily as she does me. Who is Min? What does she mean, I will perch on your shoulder?" Her face tightened. "If you try making me your responsibility, I will carve your ears. Do you hear me?"

ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ, hi slɪpt ɪz ənstʃɹʌŋ baʊ ʌndɝ ðə sæɾəl ɡɝθs əlɔŋ stɛpɝz flæŋk, ən klaɪmd ɪndə ðə sæɾəl. ɹɛstɪv æftɝ deɪz ɑn ðə ʃɪp, ðə dʌn lɪvd ʌp tə hɪz neɪm əntɪl pɛɹɪn kɑmd ɪm wɪð ə fɝm hæn ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz ən pæts tə hɪz nɛk.

Grimacing, he slipped his unstrung bow under the saddle girths along Stepper's flank, and climbed into the saddle. Restive after days on the ship, the dun lived up to his name until Perrin calmed him with a firm hand on the reins and pats to his neck.

"nʌn ə ðət dɪzɝvz ən ænsɝ," hi ɡɹaʊld. mɪn blʌɾi toʊl hɝ! bɝn ju, mɪn! bɝn ju, tu, mɔɪɹeɪn! ən zɑɹin! hi kəd nɛvɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɹænd əɹ mæt biɪŋ bʊlid baɪ wɪmən ɑn ɛvɹi saɪd. əɹ hɪmsɛlf, bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ ɛmənz fild. nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn ði oʊnli wʌn. ən mɪstʃɹəs luhən, ʌv kɔɹs; ʃi ɹæn ɪm ən mæstɝ luhən boʊθ, ɛvɹiwɛɹ bʌɾ ɪn ðə smɪθi. ən ɛɡwin hæd hæɾ ə weɪ əbaʊt hɝ, ðoʊ moʊsli wɪð ɹænd. mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ, ɛɡwinz mʌðɝ, ɔlweɪz hæɾ ə smaɪl, bʌt θɪŋz sim tə ɛn ʌp biɪŋ dʌn əz ʃi wɑntəd, tu. ən ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl hæd lʊkt oʊvɝ ɛvɹibɑɾiz ʃoʊldɝ.

"None of that deserves an answer," he growled. Min bloody told her! Burn you, Min! Burn you, too, Moiraine! And Zarine! He could never remember Rand or Mat being bullied by women on every side. Or himself, before leaving Emond's Field. Nynaeve had been the only one. And Mistress Luhhan, of course; she ran him and Master Luhhan both, everywhere but in the smithy. And Egwene had had a way about her, though mostly with Rand. Mistress al'Vere, Egwene's mother, always had a smile, but things seemed to end up being done as she wanted, too. And the Women's Circle had looked over everybody's shoulder.

ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, hi ɹitʃt daʊn ən tʊk zɑɹin baɪ ən ɑɹm; ʃi ɡeɪv ə skwɔk ən nɪɹli dʒɹɑpt əɹ bʌndəl əz i hɔɪstəɾ əɹ ʌp bɪhaɪn ɪz sæɾəl. ðoʊz dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts ə hɝz meɪɾ ɪɾ izi fəɹ əɹ tə stʃɹæɾəl stɛpɝ. "mɔɪɹeɪn wɪl əv tə baɪ jə ə hɔɹs," hi mʌɾɝd. "ju kænɑt wɔk ðə hoʊl weɪ."

Grumbling to himself, he reached down and took Zarine by an arm; she gave a squawk and nearly dropped her bundle as he hoisted her up behind his saddle. Those divided skirts of hers made it easy for her to straddle Stepper. "Moiraine will have to buy you a horse," he muttered. "You cannot walk the whole way."

"ju ɑɹ stʃɹɔŋ, blæksmɪθ," zɑɹin sɛd, ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ ɑɹm, "bʌɾ aɪm nɑɾ ə pis ʌv aɪɝn." ʃi ʃɪftəɾ ɝaʊnd, stʌfɪŋ əɹ bʌndəl ən əɹ kloʊk bɪtwin ðɛm. "aɪ kən baɪ maɪ oʊn hɔɹs, ɪf aɪ nid wʌn. ðə hoʊl weɪ wɛɹ?"

"You are strong, blacksmith," Zarine said, rubbing her arm, "but I am not a piece of iron." She shifted around, stuffing her bundle and her cloak between them. "I can buy my own horse, if I need one. The whole way where?"

læn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɔf ðə dɑk ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn ən lɔɪəl bɪhaɪn hɪm. ði oʊɡiɝ lʊk bæk ət pɛɹɪn.

Lan was already riding off the dock into the city, with Moiraine and Loial behind him. The Ogier looked back at Perrin.

"noʊ kwɛstʃənz, ɹɪmɛmbɝ? ən maɪ neɪm ɪz pɛɹɪn, zɑɹin. nɑt 'bɪɡ mæn,' əɹ 'blæksmɪθ,' əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. pɛɹɪn. pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə."

"No questions, remember? And my name is Perrin, Zarine. Not 'big man,' or 'blacksmith,' or anything else. Perrin. Perrin Aybara."

"æn maɪn ɪz feɪl, ʃæɡi-hɛɹ."

"And mine is Faile, shaggy-hair."

wɪð sʌmθɪŋ kloʊs tə ə snɑɹl, hi buɾɪd stɛpɝ æftɝ ði ʌðɝz. zɑɹin hæd tə θɹoʊ hɝ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ɪz weɪs tə kip fɹəm biɪŋ tɔst oʊvɝ ðə dʌnz kɹʌpɝ. hi θɔt ʃi wɑz læfɪŋ.

With something close to a snarl, he booted Stepper after the others. Zarine had to throw her arms around his waist to keep from being tossed over the dun's crupper. He thought she was laughing.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾitu


CHAPTER 42

izɪŋ ðə bædʒɝ


Easing the Badger

ðə hʌbəb ə ðə sɪɾi kwɪkli səbmɝdʒ zɑɹinz læftɝ - ɪf ðət wɑz wʌɾ ɪt wɑz - bɪniθ ɔl ðə klæmɝ ðət pɛɹɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝd fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn ən kɛɹhin. ðə saʊnz wɝ dɪfɹən hɪɹ, sloʊɝ, ən pɪtʃt dɪfɹənli, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ðə seɪm, tu. buts ən wilz ən hʊvz ɑn ɹʌf, ənivən peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz, kɑɹɾ ən wæɡən æksəlz skwilɪŋ, mjuzɪk ən sɔŋ ən læftɝ dʒɹɪftɪŋ fɹəm ɪnz ən tævɝnz. vɔɪsəz. ə hʌm ə vɔɪsəz laɪk pʊɾɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ɪndə ə dʒaɪən bihaɪv. ə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾi, lɪvɪŋ.

The hubbub of the city quickly submerged Zarine's laughter - if that was what it was - beneath all the clamor that Perrin remembered from Caemlyn and Cairhien. The sounds were different here, slower, and pitched differently, but they were the same, too. Boots and wheels and hooves on rough, uneven paving stones, cart and wagon axles squealing, music and song and laughter drifting from inns and taverns. Voices. A hum of voices like putting his head into a giant beehive. A great city, living.

fɹəm daʊn ə saɪd stʃɹiɾ i hɝd ðə klæŋ ə hæmɝ ɑn ænvəl, ən ʃɪftəɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ʌnkɑnʃəsli. hi mɪs ðə hæmɝ ən tɑŋz ɪn ɪz hænz, ðə waɪt-hɑt mɛɾəl ɡɪvɪŋ ɔf spɑɹks əz ɪz bloʊz ʃeɪpt ɪt. ðə smɪθi saʊnz feɪɾəd bɪhaɪnd, bɛɹiɾ ʌndɝ ðə ɹʌmbəl ə kɑɹts ən wæɡənz, ən ðə bæbəl ə ʃɑpkipɝz ən pipəl ɪn ðə stʃɹits. ʌndɝ ɔl ðə smɛlz ə pipəl ən hɔɹsəz, kʊkɪŋ ən beɪkɪŋ, ən ə hʌnʒɹəd sɛns i hæd faʊn pəkjuljɝ tə sɪɾiz leɪ ðə smɛl ə mɑɹʃ ən sɔlt wɔɾɝ.

From down a side street he heard the clang of hammer on anvil, and shifted his shoulders unconsciously. He missed the hammer and tongs in his hands, the white-hot metal giving off sparks as his blows shaped it. The smithy sounds faded behind, buried under the rumble of carts and wagons, and the babble of shopkeepers and people in the streets. Under all the smells of people and horses, cooking and baking, and a hundred scents he had found peculiar to cities lay the smell of marsh and salt water.

hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz ðə fɝs taɪm ðeɪ keɪm tə ə bɹɪdʒ ɪnsaɪd ðə sɪɾi - ə loʊ ɑɹtʃ ə stoʊn oʊvɝ ə wɔɾɝweɪ noʊ mɔɹ ðən θɝɾi peɪsɪz əkɹɔs - bʌt baɪ ðə θɝd sətʃ bɹɪdʒ, hi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪljən wɑz kɹɪskɹɔs baɪ əz mɛni kənælz əz stʃɹits, wɪð mɛn poʊlɪŋ leɪɾən bɑɹdʒəz əz ɔfən əz plaɪɪŋ wɪps tə muv hɛvi wæɡənz. sɪdæn tʃɛɹz woʊv θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz ɪn ðə stʃɹits, ən əkeɪʒənəli ðə lækɝd koʊtʃ ə səm wɛlθi mɝtʃən əɹ ə noʊbəl, wɪð kɹɛst əɹ haʊs saɪn peɪntəd lɑɹdʒ ɑn ðə dɔɹz. mɛni ʌv ðə mɛn wɔɹ pəkjuljɝ bɪɹdz ðət lɛf ðɛɹ ʌpɝ lɪp bɛɹ, waɪl ðə wɪmən sim tə feɪvɝ hæts wɪð waɪd bɹɪmz ən ətætʃt skɑɹvz ðət ðeɪ waʊn ɝaʊn ðɛɹ nɛks.

He was surprised the first time they came to a bridge inside the city - a low arch of stone over a waterway no more than thirty paces across - but by the third such bridge, he realized that Illian was crisscrossed by as many canals as streets, with men poling laden barges as often as plying whips to move heavy wagons. Sedan chairs wove through the crowds in the streets, and occasionally the lacquered coach of some wealthy merchant or a noble, with crest or House sign painted large on the doors. Many of the men wore peculiar beards that left their upper lip bare, while the women seemed to favor hats with wide brims and attached scarves that they wound around their necks.

wʌns ðeɪ kɹɔst ə ɡɹeɪt skwɛɹ, mɛni haɪdz ɪn ɪkstɛnt, sɝaʊndəd baɪ hjudʒ kɑləmz ʌv waɪt mɑɹbəl ət lis fɪftin spænz tɔl ən tu spænz θɪk, səpɔɹɾɪŋ nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ə ɹiθ ə kɑɹvd ɑləv bɹæntʃəz ət ðə tɑp ʌv itʃ. ə hjudʒ, waɪt pæləs stʊɾ əɾ iðɝ ɛn ə ðə skwɛɹ, itʃ ɔl kɑləmd wɔks ən ɛɹi bælkəniz, slɛndɝ taʊɝz ən pɝpəl ɹufs. itʃ ɹəflɛktəd ði ʌðɝ ɪɡzækli, ət fɝst ɡlæns, bʌt ðən pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪz ðət wʌn wɑz dʒʌst ə fɹækʃən smɔlɝ ɪn itʃ dɪmɛnʃən, ɪts taʊɝz pɝhæps lɛs ðən ə peɪs ʃɔɹɾɝ.

Once they crossed a great square, many hides in extent, surrounded by huge columns of white marble at least fifteen spans tall and two spans thick, supporting nothing but a wreath of carved olive branches at the top of each. A huge, white palace stood at either end of the square, each all columned walks and airy balconies, slender towers and purple roofs. Each reflected the other exactly, at first glance, but then Perrin realized that one was just a fraction smaller in each dimension, its towers perhaps less than a pace shorter.

"ðə kɪŋz pæləs," zɑɹin sɛɾ əɡɛnst ɪz bæk, "æn ðə ɡɹeɪt hɔl ə ðə kaʊnsəl. ɪts sɛd ðə fɝs kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən sɛd ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn kəɾ əv ɛni pæləs ðeɪ wɪʃt, dʒʌst əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə bɪld wʌn lɑɹdʒɝ ðən hɪz. soʊ ðə kaʊnsəl kɑpid ðə kɪŋz pæləs ɪɡzækli, bʌt tu fit smɔlɝ ɪn ɛvɹi mɛʒɝmənt. ðəɾ əz bɪn ðə weɪ ʌv ɪljən ɛvɝ sɪns. ðə kɪŋ ən ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn duəl wɪð itʃ ʌðɝ, ən ði əsɛmblədʒ stʃɹʌɡəlz wɪð boʊθ, ən soʊ waɪl ðeɪ kæɹi ɑn ðɛɹ bæɾəlz, ðə pipəl laɪv mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ wɪʃ, wɪð nʌn tə lʊk oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz tu mʌtʃ. ɪts nɑɾ ə bæd weɪ tə lɪv, ɪf jə mʌs bi taɪd tə wʌn sɪɾi. jə wəɾ ɔlsoʊ laɪk tə noʊ, aɪ θɪŋk, blæksmɪθ, ðət ðɪs ɪz ðə skwɛɹ ə tæməz, wɛɹ aɪ tʊk ðə hʌntɝz oʊθ. aɪ θɪŋk əl ɛn ʌp titʃɪŋ jə soʊ mʌtʃ, noʊ wʌn wɪl noʊɾəs ðə heɪ ɪn jəɹ hɛɹ."

"The King's Palace," Zarine said against his back, "and the Great Hall of the Council. It is said the first King of Illian said the Council of Nine could have any palace they wished, just as long as they did not try to build one larger than his. So the Council copied the King's palace exactly, but two feet smaller in every measurement. That has been the way of Illian ever since. The King and the Council of Nine duel with each other, and the Assemblage struggles with both, and so while they carry on their battles, the people live much as they wish, with none to look over their shoulders too much. It is not a bad way to live, if you must be tied to one city. You would also like to know, I think, blacksmith, that this is the Square of Tammaz, where I took the Hunter's Oath. I think I will end up teaching you so much, no one will notice the hay in your hair."

pɛɹɪn hɛld ɪz tʌŋ wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ɹizɑlvɪŋ nɑt tə stɛɹ soʊ oʊpənli əɡɛn.

Perrin held his tongue with an effort, resolving not to stare so openly again.

noʊ wʌn sim tə teɪk lɔɪəl əz ɛniθɪŋ mʌtʃ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi. ə fju pipəl lʊkt əɾ ɪm twaɪs, ən səm smɔl tʃɪlʒɹən skæmpɝɾ əlɔŋ ɪn ðɛɹ weɪk fəɹ ə taɪm, bʌɾ ɪɾ əpɪɹd ðəɾ oʊɡiɝ wɝ nɑɾ ənnoʊn ɪn ɪljən. nʌn ə ðə foʊk sim tə noʊɾəs ðə hiɾ əɹ ðə dæmp, iðɝ.

No one seemed to take Loial as anything much out of the ordinary. A few people looked at him twice, and some small children scampered along in their wake for a time, but it appeared that Ogier were not unknown in Illian. None of the folk seemed to notice the heat or the damp, either.

fəɹ wʌns, lɔɪəl dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ plizd wɪð ðə pipəlz æksɛptəns. hɪz lɔŋ aɪbɹaʊz dʒɹup daʊn ɑn ɪz tʃiks, ən ɪz ɪɹz hæd wɪltɪd, ðoʊ pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ðət wɑz nɑt dʒʌs ði ɛɹ. hɪz oʊn ʃɝt klʌŋ tə hɪm wɪð ə mɪkstʃɝ ə swɛɾ ən ðə dæmp ɛɹ.

For once, Loial did not appear pleased with the people's acceptance. His long eyebrows drooped down on his cheeks, and his ears had wilted, though Perrin was not sure that was not just the air. His own shirt clung to him with a mixture of sweat and the damp air.

"ɑɹ jə əfɹeɪd jəl faɪn ʌðɝ oʊɡiɝ hɪɹ, lɔɪəl?" hi æskt. hi fɛl zɑɹin stɝ əɡɛnst ɪz bæk ən kɝst ɪz tʌŋ. hi mɛn tə lɛt ðə wʊmən noʊ ivən lɛs ðən mɔɪɹeɪn əpɛɹənli mɛn tə tɛl hɝ. ðət weɪ, pɝhæps, ʃi wəd ɡɹoʊ bɔɹɾ ɪnʌf tə liv. ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn wɪl lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ, naʊ. bɝn mi, aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɛni blʌɾi fælkən pɝtʃt ɑn maɪ ʃoʊldɝ, ivən ɪf ʃiz pɹɪɾi.

"Are you afraid you'll find other Ogier here, Loial?" he asked. He felt Zarine stir against his back and cursed his tongue. He meant to let the woman know even less than Moiraine apparently meant to tell her. That way, perhaps, she would grow bored enough to leave. If Moiraine will let her go, now. Burn me, I don't want any bloody falcon perched on my shoulder, even if she is pretty.

lɔɪəl nɑɾəd. "aʊɝ stoʊnmeɪsɑnz səmtaɪmz kʌm hɪɹ." hi spoʊk ɪn ə wɪspɝ nɑɾ oʊnli fəɹ ən oʊɡiɝ, bʌt fəɹ ɛniwʌn. ivən pɛɹɪn kəd bɛɹli hɪɹ. "fɹʌm stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ, aɪ min. ɪt wɑz meɪsənz fɹəm əɹ stɛɾɪŋ u bɪl pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪljən - ðə pæləs ə ði əsɛmblədʒ, ðə ɡɹeɪt hɔl ə ðə kaʊnsəl, səm ə ði ʌðɝz - ən ðeɪ ɔlweɪz sɛn tə əs wən ɹɪpɛɹz nid tə bi dʌn. pɛɹɪn, ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ oʊɡiɝ hɪɹ, ðəl meɪk mi ɡoʊ bæk tə ðə stɛɾɪŋ. aɪ ʃʊɾə θɔɾ ʌv ɪt bɪfɔɹ naʊ. ðɪs pleɪs meɪks mi ənizi, pɛɹɪn." hɪz ɪɹz ʃɪftəd nɝvəsli.

Loial nodded. "Our stonemasons sometimes come here." He spoke in a whisper not only for an Ogier, but for anyone. Even Perrin could barely hear. "From Stedding Shangtai, I mean. It was masons from our stedding who built part of Illian - the Palace of the Assemblage, the Great Hall of the Council, some of the others - and they always send to us when repairs need to be done. Perrin, if there are Ogier here, they will make me go back to the stedding. I should have thought of it before now. This place makes me uneasy, Perrin." His ears shifted nervously.

pɛɹɪn muv stɛpɝ kloʊsɝ ən ɹitʃt ʌp tə pæt lɔɪəlz ʃoʊldɝ. ɪt wɑz ə lɔŋ ɹitʃ, əbʌv ɪz hɛd. kɑnʃəs ə zɑɹin əɾ ɪz bæk, hi tʃoʊz ɪz wɝdz kɛɹfəli. "lɔɪəl, aɪ də nɑt bɪliv mɔɪɹeɪn wəd lɛɾ əm teɪk ju. juv bɪn wɪð əs ə lɔŋ taɪm, ən ʃi simz tə wɑn jə wɪð ʌs. ʃɪl nɑt lɛɾ əm teɪk ju, lɔɪəl." waɪ nɑt? hi wʌndɝd sʌɾənli. ʃi kips mi kəz ʃi θɪŋks aɪ meɪ bi ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə ɹænd, ən meɪbi kəz ʃi dʌznt wɑn mi tɛlɪŋ wʌɾ aɪ noʊ tə ɛniwʌn. meɪbi ðæts waɪ ʃi wɑns ɪm tə steɪ.

Perrin moved Stepper closer and reached up to pat Loial's shoulder. It was a long reach, above his head. Conscious of Zarine at his back, he chose his words carefully. "Loial, I do not believe Moiraine would let them take you. You have been with us a long time, and she seems to want you with us. She will not let them take you, Loial." Why not? he wondered suddenly. She keeps me because she thinks I may be important to Rand, and maybe because she doesn't want me telling what I know to anyone. Maybe that's why she wants him to stay.

"ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi wəd nɑt," lɔɪəl sɛɾ ɪn ə slaɪtli stʃɹɔŋɝ vɔɪs, ən ɪz ɪɹz pɝkt ʌp. "aɪ æm vɛɹi jusfəl, æftɝ ɔl. ʃi meɪ nid tə tʃɹævəl ðə weɪz əɡɛn, ən ʃi kəd nɑt wɪθaʊt mi." zɑɹin ʃɪftəɾ əɡɛns pɛɹɪnz bæk, ən i ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kætʃ lɔɪəlz aɪ. bʌt lɔɪəl wɑz nɑt lʊkɪŋ. hi sim tə hæv dʒʌs hɝd wʌɾ i hæd sɛd, ən ðə tʌfs ɑn ɪz ɪɹz hæd fɔlən ə lɪɾəl. "aɪ də hoʊp ɪts nɑt ðæt, pɛɹɪn." ði oʊɡiɝ lʊkt ət ðə sɪɾi ɝaʊn ðɛm, ən ɪz ɪɹz wɛn ɔl ðə weɪ bæk daʊn. "aɪ də nɑt laɪk ðɪs pleɪs, pɛɹɪn."

"Of course, she would not," Loial said in a slightly stronger voice, and his ears perked up. "I am very useful, after all. She may need to travel the Ways again, and she could not without me." Zarine shifted against Perrin's back, and he shook his head, trying to catch Loial's eye. But Loial was not looking. He seemed to have just heard what he had said, and the tufts on his ears had fallen a little. "I do hope it's not that, Perrin." The Ogier looked at the city around them, and his ears went all the way back down. "I do not like this place, Perrin."

mɔɪɹeɪn ɹoʊd kloʊsɝ tə læn ən spoʊk sɔfli, bʌt pɛɹɪn mænədʒ tə kætʃ əɹ wɝdz. "sʌmθɪŋ ɪz ɹɔŋ ɪn ðɪs sɪɾi." ðə wɔɹɾɝ nɑɾəd.

Moiraine rode closer to Lan and spoke softly, but Perrin managed to catch her words. "Something is wrong in this city." The Warder nodded.

pɛɹɪn fɛlt ən ɪtʃ bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd saʊndəd ɡɹɪm. fɝs lɔɪəl, ən naʊ hɝ. wʌt doʊn aɪ si? ðə sʌn ʃoʊn daʊn ɑn ðə spɑɹklɪŋ ɹuf taɪlz, meɪd ɹɪflɛkʃənz fɹəm peɪl stoʊn wɔlz. ðoʊz bɪldɪŋz lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ maɪt bi kul, ɪnsaɪd. ðə bɪldɪŋz wɝ klin ən bɹaɪt, ən soʊ wɝ ðə pipəl. ðə pipəl.

Perrin felt an itch between his shoulders. The Aes Sedai had sounded grim. First Loial, and now her. What don't I see? The sun shone down on the sparkling roof tiles, made reflections from pale stone walls. Those buildings looked as if they might be cool, inside. The buildings were clean and bright, and so were the people. The people.

ət fɝst i sɔ nʌθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi. mɛn ən wɪmən muvɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ bɪznəs, pɝpəsfəl, bʌt sloʊɝ ðən i wɑz juz tə fɝðɝ nɔɹθ. hi θɔɾ ɪt maɪt bi ðə hit, ən ðə bɹaɪt sʌn. ðən i spɑɾəd ə beɪkɝz læd tʃɹɑɾɪŋ daʊn ðə stʃɹit wɪð ə bɪɡ tʃɹeɪ ʌv fɹɛʃ loʊvz bælənst ɑn ɪz hɛd; ðə jʌŋ fɛloʊ wɔɹ ə ɡɹɪmɑs ɑn ɪz feɪs ðət wɑz nɪɹli ə snɑɹl. ə wʊmən ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə wivɝz ʃɑp lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi maɪt baɪt ðə mæn hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ðə bɹaɪt-kʌlɝd boʊls fəɹ əɹ ɪnspɛkʃən. ə dʒʌɡəlɝ ɑn ə kɔɹnɝ ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ ən stɛɹɾ ət ðə foʊk u tɔs kɔɪnz ɪndə ðə kæp laɪɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm əz ɪf i heɪɾəd ðɛm. nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn lʊk soʊ, bʌɾ ɪt sim tə hɪm ðəɾ ət list wʌn feɪs ɪn faɪv wɔɹ æŋɡɝ ən heɪtʃɹəd. ən i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ wɝ ivən əwɛɹ ʌv ɪt.

At first he saw nothing out of the ordinary. Men and women moving about their business, purposeful, but slower than he was used to further north. He thought it might be the heat, and the bright sun. Then he spotted a baker's lad trotting down the street with a big tray of fresh loaves balanced on his head; the young fellow wore a grimace on his face that was nearly a snarl. A woman in front of a weaver's shop looked as if she might bite the man holding up the bright-colored bolts for her inspection. A juggler on a corner ground his teeth and stared at the folk who tossed coins into the cap lying in front of him as if he hated them. Not everyone looked so, but it seemed to him that at least one face in five wore anger and hatred. And he did not think they were even aware of it.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ?" zɑɹin æskt. "ju ɑɹ tɛnsɪŋ. ɪts laɪk hoʊldɪŋ ɑn tə ə ɹɑk."

"What is the matter?" Zarine asked. "You are tensing. It is like holding on to a rock."

"sʌmθɪŋ ɪz ɹɔŋ," hi toʊl hɝ. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ wʌt, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ ɪz ɹɔŋ." lɔɪəl nɑɾəd sædli, ən mɝmɝɾ əbaʊt haʊ ðeɪ wəd meɪk ɪm ɡoʊ bæk.

"Something is wrong," he told her. "I do not know what, but something is wrong." Loial nodded sadly, and murmured about how they would make him go back.

ðə bɪldɪŋz ɝaʊn əm bɪɡæn tə tʃeɪnʒ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd, kɹɔsɪŋ mɔɹ bɹɪdʒəz əz ðeɪ kɹɔst ɪljən tə ɪts ʌðɝ saɪd. ðə peɪl stoʊn wɑz əz ɔfən ənʒɹəst əz pɑlɪʃt, naʊ. ðə taʊɝz ən pæləsəz vænɪʃt, tə bi ɹipleɪs baɪ ɪnz ən wɛɹhaʊzɪz. mɛni ʌv ðə mɛn ɪn ðə stʃɹits, ən səm ə ðə wɪmən, hæɾ ən ɑdli ɹoʊlɪŋ ɡeɪt; ðeɪ ɔl hæd ðə bɛɹ fiɾ i əsoʊsieɪɾəd wɪð seɪlɝz. ðə smɛlz ə pɪtʃ ən hɛmp wɝ stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ən ðə sɛn ʌv wʊd, boʊθ fɹɛʃli kʌɾ ən kjʊɹd, wɪð saʊɝ mʌɾ oʊvɝlaɪɪŋ boʊθ. ðə kənælz' oʊɾɝz tʃeɪnʒd, tu, meɪkɪŋ ɪz noʊz ɹɪŋkəl. tʃeɪmbɝ pɑts, hi θɔt. tʃeɪmbɝ pɑts ən oʊl pɹaɪviz. ɪt meɪɾ ɪm fil kwizi.

The buildings around them began to change as they rode, crossing more bridges as they crossed Illian to its other side. The pale stone was as often undressed as polished, now. The towers and palaces vanished, to be replaced by inns and warehouses. Many of the men in the streets, and some of the women, had an oddly rolling gait; they all had the bare feet he associated with sailors. The smells of pitch and hemp were strong in the air, and the scent of wood, both freshly cut and cured, with sour mud overlying both. The canals' odors changed, too, making his nose wrinkle. Chamber pots, he thought. Chamber pots and old privies. It made him feel queasy.

"ðə bɹɪdʒ ə flaʊɝz," læn ənaʊnst əz ðeɪ kɹɔs jɛɾ ənʌðɝ loʊ bɹɪdʒ. hi ɪnheɪl dipli. "ænd naʊ wəɹ ɪn ðə pɝfjum kɔɹɾɝ. ði ɪliɑnɝz ɑɹ ə poʊɛɾɪk pipəl."

"The Bridge of Flowers," Lan announced as they crossed yet another low bridge. He inhaled deeply. "And now we are in the Perfumed Quarter. The Illianers are a poetic people."

zɑɹin staɪfəld ə læf əɡɛns pɛɹɪnz bæk.

Zarine stifled a laugh against Perrin's back.

əz ɪf i wɝ sʌɾənli ɪmpeɪʃənt wɪð ðə sloʊ peɪs ʌv ɪljən, ðə wɔɹɾɝ lɛɾ əm kwɪkli θɹu ðə stʃɹits tə ən ɪn, tu stɔɹiz ə ɹʌf, ɡɹin-veɪn stoʊn tɑpt wɪð peɪl ɡɹin taɪlz. ivnɪŋ wɑz kʌmɪŋ ɑn, ðə laɪt ɡɹoʊɪŋ sɑftɝ əz ðə sʌn sɛɾəld. ɪt ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl ɹɪlif fɹəm ðə hit, bʌt nɑt mʌtʃ. bɔɪz siɾəd ɑn maʊntɪŋ blɑks ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ɪn hɑpt ʌp tə teɪk ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. wʌn blæk-hɛɹd læɾ əbaʊt tɛn æsk lɔɪəl ɪf i wɝ ən oʊɡiɝ, ən wən lɔɪəl sɛɾ i wɑz, ðə bɔɪ sɛd, "aɪ dɪd θɪŋk jə dɪd bi," wɪð ə sɛlf-sæɾəsfaɪd nɑd. hi lɛd lɔɪəlz bɪɡ hɔɹs əweɪ, tɔsɪŋ ðə kɑpɝ lɔɪəl hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ɪndə ði ɛɹ ən kætʃɪŋ ɪt.

As if he were suddenly impatient with the slow pace of Illian, the Warder led them quickly through the streets to an inn, two stories of rough, green-veined stone topped with pale green tiles. Evening was coming on, the light growing softer as the sun settled. It gave a little relief from the heat, but not much. Boys seated on mounting blocks in front of the inn hopped up to take their horses. One black-haired lad about ten asked Loial if he were an Ogier, and when Loial said he was, the boy said, "I did think you did be," with a self-satisfied nod. He led Loial's big horse away, tossing the copper Loial had given him into the air and catching it.

pɛɹɪn fɹaʊn ʌp ət ði ɪn saɪn fəɹ ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ fɑloʊɪŋ ði ʌðɝz ɪn. ə waɪt-stʃɹaɪp bædʒɝ dænst ɑn ɪts haɪn lɛɡz wɪð ə mæn kæɹiɪŋ wʌt sim tə bi ə sɪlvɝ ʃʌvəl. izɪŋ ðə bædʒɝ, ɪt ɹɛd. ɪt mʌs bi səm stɔɹi aɪ nɛvɝ hɝd.

Perrin frowned up at the inn sign for a moment before following the others in. A white-striped badger danced on its hind legs with a man carrying what seemed to be a silver shovel. Easing the Badger, it read. It must be some story I never heard.

ðə kɑmən ɹum hæd sɔdʌst ɑn ðə flɔɹ, ən təbæk smoʊk fɪl ði ɛɹ. ɪɾ ɔlsoʊ smɛld ʌv waɪn, ən fɪʃ kʊkɪŋ ɪn ðə kɪtʃən, ən ə hɛvi, flaʊɝd pɝfjum. ði ɪkspoʊz bimz ə ðə haɪ silɪŋ wɝ ɹʌf-hjun ən eɪdʒ-dɑɹk. ðɪs ɝli ɪn ði ivnɪŋ, noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə kɔɹɾɝ ə ðə stulz ən bɛntʃɪz wɝ fɪld, baɪ mɛn ɪn wɝkmɪnz pleɪn koʊts ən vɛsts, səm wɪð ðə bɛɹ fiɾ ə seɪlɝz. ɔl ə ðɛm sæt klʌstɝɾ əz kloʊs əz ðeɪ kəd mænədʒ ɝaʊnd wʌn teɪbəl wɛɹ ə pɹɪɾi, dɑɹk-aɪd ɡɝl, ðə wɛɹɝ ə ðə pɝfjum, sæŋ tə ðə stʃɹʌmɪŋ ʌv ə twɛlv-stʃɹɪŋ bɪɾɝn ən dænst ɑn ðə teɪbəltɑp wɪð swɝlz ə hɝ skɝt. hɝ lus, waɪt blaʊs hæɾ ən ɪkstʃɹimli loʊ nɛk. pɛɹɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə tun - "ðə dænsɪŋ læs" - bʌt ðə wɝdz ðə ɡɝl sæŋ wɝ dɪfɹən fɹəm wʌɾ i nu.

The common room had sawdust on the floor, and tabac smoke filled the air. It also smelled of wine, and fish cooking in the kitchen, and a heavy, flowered perfume. The exposed beams of the high ceiling were rough-hewn and age-dark. This early in the evening, no more than a quarter of the stools and benches were filled, by men in workmen's plain coats and vests, some with the bare feet of sailors. All of them sat clustered as close as they could manage around one table where a pretty, dark-eyed girl, the wearer of the perfume, sang to the strumming of a twelve-string bittern and danced on the tabletop with swirls of her skirt. Her loose, white blouse had an extremely low neck. Perrin recognized the tune - "The Dancing Lass" - but the words the girl sang were different from what he knew.

"eɪ luɡɹd ɡɝl, ʃi keɪm tə taʊn, tə si wʌt ʃi kəd si.

"A Lugard girl, she came to town, to see what she could see.

wɪð ə wɪŋk ə hɝ aɪ, ən ə smaɪl ɑn əɹ lɪp, ʃi snæɡd ə bɔɪ əɹ θɹi, əɹ θɹi.

With a wink of her eye, and a smile on her lip, she snagged a boy or three, or three.

wɪð ən æŋkəl slɪm, ən skɪn soʊ peɪl, ʃi kɑt ði oʊnɝ ʌv ə ʃɪp, ə ʃɪp.

With an ankle slim, and skin so pale, she caught the owner of a ship, a ship.

wɪð ə sɑf lɪɾəl saɪ, ən ə ɡeɪ lɪɾəl læf, ʃi meɪɾ əɹ weɪ soʊ fɹi. soʊ fɹi."

With a soft little sigh, and a gay little laugh, she made her way so free. So free."

ʃi lɔntʃt ɪndə ənʌðɝ vɝs, ən wən pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd wʌt ʃi wɑz sɪŋɪŋ, hɪz feɪs ɡɹu hɑt. hi hæd θɔt nʌθɪŋ kəd ʃɑk ɪm æftɝ siɪŋ tɪŋkɝ ɡɝlz dæns, bʌt ðət hæɾ oʊnli hɪntəɾ ət θɪŋz. ðɪs ɡɝl wɑz sɪŋɪŋ əm ɹaɪɾ aʊt.

She launched into another verse, and when Perrin realized what she was singing, his face grew hot. He had thought nothing could shock him after seeing Tinker girls dance, but that had only hinted at things. This girl was singing them right out.

zɑɹin wɑz nɑɾɪŋ ɪn taɪm tə ðə mjuzɪk ən ɡɹɪnɪŋ. hɝ ɡɹɪn waɪɾənd wən ʃi lʊkt ət hɪm. "waɪ, fɑɹmbɔɪ, aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk aɪ ɛvɝ nu ə mæn jəɹ eɪdʒ u kəd stɪl blʌʃ."

Zarine was nodding in time to the music and grinning. Her grin widened when she looked at him. "Why, farmboy, I do not think I ever knew a man your age who could still blush."

hi ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ ən bɛɹli stɑp hɪmsɛlf fɹəm seɪɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ i nu wəd bi stupəd. ðɪs blʌɾi wʊmən əz mi dʒʌmpɪŋ bɪfɔɹ aɪ kən θɪŋk. laɪt, əl weɪdʒɝ ʃi θɪŋks aɪ nɛvɝ ivən kɪst ə ɡɝl! hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lɪsən tə ɛni mɔɹ ʌv wʌt ðə ɡɝl wɑz sɪŋɪŋ. ɪf i kəd nɑt ɡɛt ðə ɹɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz feɪs, zɑɹin wɑz ʃʊɹ tə meɪk mɔɹ ʌv ɪt.

He glared at her and barely stopped himself from saying something he knew would be stupid. This bloody woman has me jumping before I can think. Light, I'll wager she thinks I never even kissed a girl! He tried not to listen to any more of what the girl was singing. If he could not get the red out of his face, Zarine was sure to make more of it.

ə flæʃ ə stɑɹɾəlmənt hæd pæst əkɹɔs ðə feɪs ə ðə pɹəpɹaɪətʃɹəs wən ðeɪ ɛntɝd. ə lɑɹdʒ, ɹaʊnd wʊmən wɪð əɹ hɛɹ ɪn ə θɪk ɹoʊl ət ðə bæk ə hɝ nɛk ən ə smɛl ə stʃɹɔŋ soʊp əbaʊt hɝ, ʃi səpɹɛst əɹ sɝpɹaɪz kwɪkli, ðoʊ, ən hɝid tə mɔɪɹeɪn.

A flash of startlement had passed across the face of the proprietress when they entered. A large, round woman with her hair in a thick roll at the back of her neck and a smell of strong soap about her, she suppressed her surprise quickly, though, and hurried to Moiraine.

"mɪstʃɹəs mɑɹi," ʃi sɛd, "aɪ dɪd nɛvɝ θɪŋk tə si jə hɪɹ tədeɪ." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, aɪɪŋ pɛɹɪn ən zɑɹin, ɡlænst wʌns ət lɔɪəl, bʌt nɑɾ ɪn ðə sɝtʃɪŋ weɪ ʃi lʊkt ət ðɛm. hɝ aɪz æktʃəli  bɹaɪɾənd ət ðə saɪɾ ə ði oʊɡiɝ, bʌɾ əɹ ɹil ətɛnʃən wɑz ɔl ɑn "mɪstʃɹəs mɑɹi." ʃi loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs, "hæv maɪ pɪdʒənz noʊ ɝaɪv seɪfli?" læn, ʃi sim tə æksɛpt əz ə pɑɹɾ ə mɔɪɹeɪn.

"Mistress Mari," she said, "I did never think to see you here today." She hesitated, eyeing Perrin and Zarine, glanced once at Loial, but not in the searching way she looked at them. Her eyes actually brightened at the sight of the Ogier, but her real attention was all on "Mistress Mari." She lowered her voice, "Have my pigeons no arrived safely?" Lan, she seemed to accept as a part of Moiraine.

"aɪ æm ʃʊɹ ðeɪ hæv, niɾə," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "aɪ hæv bɪn əweɪ, bʌɾ aɪm ʃʊɹ ɑdini hæz noʊɾəd daʊn ɛvɹiθɪŋ jə ɹipɔɹɾəd." ʃi aɪd ðə ɡɝl sɪŋɪŋ ɑn ðə teɪbəl wɪð noʊ aʊtwɝd dɪsəpɹuvəl, nɔɹ ɛni ʌðɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən. "ðə bædʒɝ wɑz kənsɪɾɝəbli kwaɪəɾɝ wən læst aɪ wɑz hɪɹ."

"I am sure they have, Nieda," Moiraine said. "I have been away, but I am sure Adine has noted down everything you reported." She eyed the girl singing on the table with no outward disapproval, nor any other expression. "The Badger was considerably quieter when last I was here."

"aɪ, mɪstʃɹəs mɑɹi, ɪt dɪd bi ðæt. bʌt ðə laʊts əv noʊ ɡɑɾən oʊvɝ ðə wɪntɝ jɛt, ɪt dʌz sim. aɪ hæv noʊ hæɾ ə faɪɾ ɪn ðə bædʒɝ ɪn tɛn jɪɹz, tɪl ðə teɪl ə ðɪs wɪntɝ ɡɔn." ʃi nɑɾəd təwɔɹd ðə wʌn mæn nɑt sɪɾɪŋ nɪɹ ðə sɪŋɝ, ə fɛloʊ ivən bɪɡɝ ðən pɛɹɪn, stændɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl wɪð ɪz θɪk ɑɹmz foʊldəd, tæpɪŋ ɪz fʊt tə ðə mjuzɪk. "ivən bili dɪɾ əv ə hɑɹd taɪm kipɪŋ əm daʊn, soʊ aɪ dɪd haɪɝ ðə ɡɝl tə teɪk ðɛɹ maɪnz fɹəm æŋɡɝ. fɹəm səm pleɪs ɪn ɔltɑɹə, ʃi dʌz kʌm." ʃi tɪltəɾ əɹ hɛd, lɪsnɪŋ fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "ə fɛɹ vɔɪs, bʌɾ aɪ dɪd sɪŋ ɪt bɛɾɝ - aɪ, ən dæns bɛɾɝ, tu - wən aɪ dɪd bi hɝ eɪdʒ."

"Aye, Mistress Mari, it did be that. But the louts have no gotten over the winter yet, it does seem. I have no had a fight in the Badger in ten years, till the tail of this winter gone." She nodded toward the one man not sitting near the singer, a fellow even bigger than Perrin, standing against the wall with his thick arms folded, tapping his foot to the music. "Even Bili did have a hard time keeping them down, so I did hire the girl to take their minds from anger. From some place in Altara, she does come." She tilted her head, listening for a moment. "A fair voice, but I did sing it better - aye, and dance better, too - when I did be her age."

pɛɹɪn ɡeɪpt ət ðə θɔɾ ə ðɪs hjudʒ wʊmən keɪpɝɪŋ ɑn ə teɪbəl, sɪŋɪŋ ðət sɔŋ - ə bɪɾ ʌv ɪt keɪm θɹu; "aɪl wɛɹ noʊ ʃɪft əɾ ɔl. əɾ ɔl" - əntɪl zɑɹin fɪstɪɾ ɪm hɑɹɾ ɪn ðə ʃɔɹt ɹɪbz. hi ɡɹʌntɪd.

Perrin gaped at the thought of this huge woman capering on a table, singing that song - a bit of it came through; "I'll wear no shift at all. At all" - until Zarine fisted him hard in the short ribs. He grunted.

niɾə lʊkt ɪz weɪ. "aɪl mɪks jə səm hʌni ən sʌlfɝ, læd, fəɹ ðət θɹoʊt. jəl noʊ wɑnə teɪk ə tʃɪl bɪfɔɹ ðə wɛðɝ wɔɹmz, noʊ wɪð ə pɹɪɾi ɡɝl laɪk ðət wʌn ɑn jəɹ ɑɹm."

Nieda looked his way. "I'll mix you some honey and sulphur, lad, for that throat. You'll no want to take a chill before the weather warms, no with a pretty girl like that one on your arm."

mɔɪɹeɪn ɡeɪv ɪm ə lʊk ðət sɛɾ i wɑz ɪntɝfɪɹɪŋ wɪð hɝ. "stʃɹeɪnʒ ðət jə ʃəd sʌfɝ faɪts," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ wɛl ɹɪmɛmbɝ haʊ jəɹ nɛfju stɑps sʌtʃ. hæz sʌmθɪŋ əkɝd tə meɪk pipəl mɔɹ ɪɹəɾəbəl?"

Moiraine gave him a look that said he was interfering with her. "Strange that you should suffer fights," she said. "I well remember how your nephew stops such. Has something occurred to make people more irritable?"

niɾə mjuz fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "pɝhæps. ɪt də bi hɑɹd tə seɪ. ðə jʌŋ lɔɹɾəlɪŋz də ɔlweɪz kʌm daʊn tə ðə dɑks fəɹ ðə wɛnkɪŋ ən kəɹaʊzəŋ ðeɪ kən noʊ ɡɛɾ əweɪ wɪð wɛɹ ði ɛɹ dʌz smɛl fɹɛʃɝ. pɝhæps ðeɪ də kʌm mɔɹ ɔfən, naʊ, sɪns ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə wɪntɝ. pɝhæps. ən ʌðɝz də snæp əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ mɔɹ, tu. ɪt dɪd bi ə hɑɹd wɪntɝ. ðət dʌz meɪk mɛn æŋɡɹiɝ, ən wɪmən əz wɛl. ɔl ðət ɹeɪn, ən koʊld. waɪ, aɪ dɪd weɪk tu mɔɹnɪŋz tə faɪn aɪs ɪn maɪ wɑʃbeɪsən. noʊ soʊ hɑɹɾ əz ðə læst wɪntɝ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðət dɪd bi ə wɪntɝ fəɹ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz. ɔlmoʊst ɪnʌf tə meɪk mi bɪliv ðoʊz tʃɹævəlɝz' teɪlz ə fɹoʊzən wɔɾɝ fɔlɪŋ fɹəm ðə skaɪ." ʃi ɡɪɡəl tə ʃoʊ haʊ lɪɾəl ʃi bɪliv ðæt. ɪt wɑz ən ɑd saʊn fɹəm sətʃ ə lɑɹdʒ wʊmən.

Nieda mused for a moment. "Perhaps. It do be hard to say. The young lordlings do always come down to the docks for the wenching and carousing they can no get away with where the air does smell fresher. Perhaps they do come more often, now, since the hard of the winter. Perhaps. And others do snap at each other more, too. It did be a hard winter. That does make men angrier, and women as well. All that rain, and cold. Why, I did wake two mornings to find ice in my washbasin. No so hard as the last winter, of course, but that did be a winter for a thousand years. Almost enough to make me believe those travelers' tales of frozen water falling from the sky." She giggled to show how little she believed that. It was an odd sound from such a large woman.

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. ʃi dʌzn bɪliv ɪn snoʊ? bʌɾ ɪf ʃi θɔt ðɪs wɛðɝ wɑz kul, hi kəd bɪliv ɪɾ ə hɝ.

Perrin shook his head. She doesn't believe in snow? But if she thought this weather was cool, he could believe it of her.

mɔɪɹeɪn bɛn əɹ hɛɾ ɪn θɔt, hɝ hʊd ʃæɾoʊɪŋ əɹ feɪs.

Moiraine bent her head in thought, her hood shadowing her face.

ðə ɡɝl ɑn ðə teɪbəl wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə nu vɝs, ən pɛɹɪn faʊn hɪmsɛlf lɪsnɪŋ ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf. hi hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɛni wʊmən duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ɹimoʊtli laɪk wʌt ðə ɡɝl wɑz sɪŋɪŋ əbaʊt, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd saʊn ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ. hi noʊɾəst zɑɹin wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm lɪsən, ən tʃɹaɪd tə pɹitɛn i hæd nɑt bɪn.

The girl on the table was beginning a new verse, and Perrin found himself listening in spite of himself. He had never heard of any woman doing anything remotely like what the girl was singing about, but it did sound interesting. He noticed Zarine watching him listen, and tried to pretend he had not been.

"wʌɾ əz əkɝɾ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi ɪn ɪljən ə leɪt?" mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd faɪnəli.

"What has occurred out of the ordinary in Illian of late?" Moiraine said finally.

"aɪ də səpoʊz jə kəd kɔl lɔɹd bɹɛnz əsɛnʃən tə ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn ənjuʒəwəl," niɾə sɛd. "fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi, aɪ kən noʊ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛvɝ hɪɹɪŋ ɪz neɪm bɪfɔɹ ðə wɪntɝ, bʌɾ i dɪd kʌm tə ðə sɪɾi - fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ nɪɹ ðə mʊɹændiən bɔɹɾɝ, ɪt bi ɹumɝd - ən dɪd bi ɹeɪzd ɪnsaɪɾ ə wik. ɪt də bi sɛɾ i bi ə ɡʊd mæn, ən stʃɹɔŋɡəst ə ðə naɪn - ðeɪ ɔl də fɑloʊ hɪz lɛd, ɪt bi sɛd, ðoʊ hi bi nuəst ən ənnoʊn - bʌt səmtaɪmz aɪ də hæv stʃɹeɪnʒ dʒɹimz ə hɪm."

"I do suppose you could call Lord Brend's ascension to the Council of Nine unusual," Nieda said. "Fortune prick me, I can no remember ever hearing his name before the winter, but he did come to the city - from somewhere near the Murandian border, it be rumored - and did be raised inside a week. It do be said he be a good man, and strongest of the Nine - they all do follow his lead, it be said, though he be newest and unknown - but sometimes I do have strange dreams of him."

mɔɪɹeɪn hæɾ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ - tə tɛl niɾə ʃi hæd mɛn ɪn ðə læs fju naɪts, pɛɹɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ - bʌt ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ən ɪnstɛd sɛd, "wʌt sɔɹɾ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ dʒɹimz, niɾə?"

Moiraine had opened her mouth - to tell Nieda she had meant in the last few nights, Perrin was sure - but she hesitated, and instead said, "What sort of strange dreams, Nieda?"

"oʊ, fulɪʃnəs, mɪstʃɹəs mɑɹi. dʒʌs fulɪʃnəs. jə də tʃɹuli wɪʃ tə hɪɹ ɪt? dʒɹimz ə lɔɹd bɹɛn ɪn stʃɹeɪnʒ pleɪsəz, ən wɔkɪŋ bɹɪdʒəz hæŋɪŋ ɪn ɛɹ. ɔl fɑɡd, ðiz dʒɹimz də bi, bʌt nɪɹ ɛvɹi naɪt ðeɪ də kʌm. dɪd jə ɛvɝ hɪɹ ə sʌtʃ? fulɪʃnəs, fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi! jɛt, ɪt də bi ɑd. bili dʌz seɪ hi dʌz dʒɹim ðə seɪm dʒɹimz. aɪ də θɪŋk i dʌz hɪɹ maɪ dʒɹimz ən kɑpi ðɛm. bili də bi nʌn tu bɹaɪt, səmtaɪmz, aɪ də θɪŋk."

"Oh, foolishness, Mistress Mari. Just foolishness. You do truly wish to hear it? Dreams of Lord Brend in strange places, and walking bridges hanging in air. All fogged, these dreams do be, but near every night they do come. Did you ever hear of such? Foolishness, Fortune prick me! Yet, it do be odd. Bili does say he does dream the same dreams. I do think he does hear my dreams and copy them. Bili do be none too bright, sometimes, I do think."

"ju meɪ də hɪm ən ɪndʒʌstɪs," mɔɪɹeɪn bɹiðd.

"You may do him an injustice," Moiraine breathed.

pɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ dɑɹk hʊd. ʃi hæd saʊndəd ʃeɪkən, ivən mɔɹ ʃeɪkən ðən wən ʃi θɔɾ ə nu fɔls dʒɹæɡən hæd ɹɪzən ɪn ɡildən. hi kəd nɑt smɛl fɪɹ, bʌt. . . . mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz fɹaɪɾənd. ɪt wɑz ə fɑɹ mɔɹ tɛɹəfaɪɪŋ θɔt ðən mɔɪɹeɪn æŋɡɹi. hi kəɾ ɪmædʒən əɹ æŋɡɹi; hi kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə kənsiv ə hɝ əfɹeɪd.

Perrin stared at her dark hood. She had sounded shaken, even more shaken than when she thought a new false Dragon had risen in Ghealdan. He could not smell fear, but. . . . Moiraine was frightened. It was a far more terrifying thought than Moiraine angry. He could imagine her angry; he could not begin to conceive of her afraid.

"haʊ aɪ də mɔndɝ ɑn," niɾə sɛd, pæɾɪŋ ðə ɹoʊl hɛɹ ət ðə bæk ə hɝ nɛk. "æz ɪf maɪ fulɪʃ dʒɹimz də bi ɪmpɔɹɾənt." ʃi ɡɪɡəld əɡɛn. ə kwɪk ɡɪɡəl; ðɪs wɑz nɑɾ əz fulɪʃ əz bɪlivɪŋ ɪn snoʊ. "ju də saʊn taɪɝd, mɪstʃɹəs mɑɹi. əl ʃoʊ jə tə jəɹ ɹumz. ən ðən ə ɡʊd mil ə fɹɛʃ-kɑt ɹɛd-stʃɹaɪp."

"How I do maunder on," Nieda said, patting the rolled hair at the back of her neck. "As if my foolish dreams do be important." She giggled again. A quick giggle; this was not as foolish as believing in snow. "You do sound tired, Mistress Mari. I will show you to your rooms. And then a good meal of fresh-caught red-stripe."

ɹɛd-stʃɹaɪp? ə fɪʃ, hi θɔɾ ɪt mʌs bi; hi kəd smɛl fɪʃ kʊkɪŋ.

Red-stripe? A fish, he thought it must be; he could smell fish cooking.

"ɹumz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "jɛs. wɪl teɪk ɹumz. ðə mil kən weɪt. ʃɪps. niɾə, wʌt ʃɪps seɪl fəɹ tɛɹ? ɝli ɑn ðə mɑɹoʊ. aɪ hæv ðət wɪtʃ aɪ mʌs də tənaɪt." læn ɡlænst ət hɝ, fɹaʊnɪŋ.

"Rooms," Moiraine said. "Yes. We will take rooms. The meal can wait. Ships. Nieda, what ships sail for Tear? Early on the morrow. I have that which I must do tonight." Lan glanced at her, frowning.

"fɔɹ tɛɹ, mɪstʃɹəs mɑɹi?" niɾə læft. "waɪ, nʌn fəɹ tɛɹ. ðə naɪn dɪd fɝbɪɾ ɛni ʃɪp tə seɪl fəɹ tɛɹ ə mʌnθ ɡɔn naʊ, nɔɹ ɛni fɹəm tiɹ tə kɔl hɪɹ, ðoʊ aɪ də θɪŋk ðə si foʊk peɪ ɪt noʊ maɪnd. bʌt ðəɹ də bi noʊ si foʊk ʃɪp ɪn ðə hɑɹbɝ. ɪt də bi ɑd, ðæt. ði ɔɹɾɝ ə ðə naɪn, aɪ də min, ən ðə kɪŋ saɪlən ɑn ɪt, wən i dʌz ɔlweɪz ɹeɪz ɪz vɔɪs ɪf ðeɪ bʌt teɪk ə stɛp wɪθaʊɾ ɪz lɛd. əɹ pɝhæps ɪt bi noʊ ðæt, ɪɡzækli. ɔl tɔk də bi ʌv wɔɹ wɪð tiɹ, bʌt ðə boʊtmən ən wæɡənɪɹz u də kæɹi səplaɪz tə ði ɑɹmi də seɪ ðə soʊlʒɝz də ɔl lʊk nɔɹθ, tə mʊɹændi."

"For Tear, Mistress Mari?" Nieda laughed. "Why, none for Tear. The Nine did forbid any ship to sail for Tear a month gone now, nor any from Tear to call here, though I do think the Sea Folk pay it no mind. But there do be no Sea Folk ship in the harbor. It do be odd, that. The order of the Nine, I do mean, and the King silent on it, when he does always raise his voice if they but take a step without his lead. Or perhaps it be no that, exactly. All talk do be of war with Tear, but the boatmen and wagoneers who do carry supplies to the army do say the soldiers do all look north, to Murandy."

"ðə pæðz ə ðə ʃædoʊ ɑɹ tæŋɡəld," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs. "wi wɪl də wʌt wi mʌst. ðə ɹumz, niɾə. ən ðən wɪl it ðət mil."

"The paths of the Shadow are tangled," Moiraine said in a tight voice. "We will do what we must. The rooms, Nieda. And then we will eat that meal."

pɛɹɪnz ɹum wɑz mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl ðən i ɪkspɛktəd, ɡɪvən ðə lʊk ə ðə ɹɛst ə ðə bædʒɝ. ðə bɛd wɑz waɪd, ðə mætʃɹəs sɑft. ðə dɔɹ wɑz meɪɾ ə tɪltəd slæts, ən wən i oʊpən ðə wɪndoʊz, ə bɹiz kɹɔs ðə ɹum kæɹiɪŋ ðə smɛlz ə ðə hɑɹbɝ. ən sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə kənælz, tu, bʌɾ ət list ɪt wɑz kulɪŋ. hi hʌŋ ɪz kloʊk ɑn ə pɛɡ əlɔŋ wɪð ɪz kwɪvɝ ən æks, ən pɹɑpt ɪz baʊ ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls i lɛft ɪn ðə sæɾəlbæɡz ən blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl. ðə naɪt maɪt nɑt bi ɹɛsfəl.

Perrin's room was more comfortable than he expected, given the look of the rest of the Badger. The bed was wide, the mattress soft. The door was made of tilted slats, and when he opened the windows, a breeze crossed the room carrying the smells of the harbor. And something of the canals, too, but at least it was cooling. He hung his cloak on a peg along with his quiver and axe, and propped his bow in the corner. Everything else he left in the saddlebags and blanketroll. The night might not be restful.

ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn hæd saʊndəɾ əfɹeɪd bɪfɔɹ, ɪt hæd bɪn nʌθɪŋ tə wən ʃi sɛd ðət sʌmθɪŋ mʌs bi dʌn tənaɪt. fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðɛn, fɪɹ sɛn hæd stim fɹəm əɹ əz fɹəm ə wʊmən ənaʊnsɪŋ ðət ʃi wɑz gɑnə stɪk əɹ hæn ɪn ə hɔɹnəts' nɛst ən kɹʌʃ əm wɪð əɹ bɛɹ fɪŋɡɝz. wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪɾ ɪz ʃi ʌp tə? ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz fɹaɪɾənd, aɪ ʃəd bi tɛɹəfaɪd.

If Moiraine had sounded afraid before, it had been nothing to when she said that something must be done tonight. For an instant then, fear scent had steamed from her as from a woman announcing that she was going to stick her hand in a hornets' nest and crush them with her bare fingers. What in the Light is she up to? If Moiraine is frightened, I should be terrified.

hi wɑz nɑt, hi ɹilaɪzd. nɑt tɛɹəfaɪd, əɹ ivən fɹaɪɾənd. hi fɛlt . . . ɪksaɪɾəd. ɹɛɾi fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə hæpən, ɔlmoʊst iɡɝ. dɪtɝmənd. hi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə filɪŋz. ðeɪ wɝ wʌt wʊlvz fɛl dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ fɔt. bɝn mi, aɪd ɹæðɝ bi əfɹeɪd!

He was not, he realized. Not terrified, or even frightened. He felt . . . excited. Ready for something to happen, almost eager. Determined. He recognized the feelings. They were what wolves felt just before they fought. Burn me, I'd rather be afraid!

hi wɑz fɝs bæk daʊn tə ðə kɑmən ɪksɛp fəɹ lɔɪəl. niɾə hæɾ ɝeɪnʒd ə lɑɹdʒ teɪbəl fəɹ ðɛm, wɪð læɾɝ-bæk tʃɛɹz ɪnstɛɾ ə bɛntʃɪz. ʃi hæɾ ivən faʊn ə tʃɛɹ bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ lɔɪəl. ðə ɡɝl əkɹɔs ðə ɹum wɑz sɪŋɪŋ ə sɔŋ əbaʊɾ ə ɹɪtʃ mɝtʃən hu, hævɪŋ dʒʌs lɔst ɪz tim ə hɔɹsəz ɪn ən ɪmpɹɑbəbəl weɪ, hæd fəɹ səm ɹizən dɪsaɪɾɪd tə pʊl ɪz kæɹɪdʒ hɪmsɛlf. ðə mɛn lɪsnɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ ɹɔɹd wɪð læftɝ. ðə wɪndoʊz ʃoʊd dɑɹknəs kʌmɪŋ ɑn mɔɹ kwɪkli ðən i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd; ði ɛɹ smɛld əz ɪf ɪt maɪt bi meɪkɪŋ ʌp tə ɹeɪn.

He was first back down to the common except for Loial. Nieda had arranged a large table for them, with ladder-back chairs instead of benches. She had even found a chair big enough for Loial. The girl across the room was singing a song about a rich merchant who, having just lost his team of horses in an improbable way, had for some reason decided to pull his carriage himself. The men listening around her roared with laughter. The windows showed darkness coming on more quickly than he had expected; the air smelled as if it might be making up to rain.

"ðɪs ɪn əz ən oʊɡiɝ ɹum," lɔɪəl sɛɾ əz pɛɹɪn sæt daʊn. "əpɛɹənli, ɛvɹi ɪn ɪn ɪljən əz wʌn, ɪn hoʊps ʌv ɡeɪnɪŋ oʊɡiɝ kʌstəm wən ðə stoʊnmeɪsɑnz kʌm. niɾə kleɪmz ɪts lʌki, hævɪŋ ən oʊɡiɝ ʌndɝ ðə ɹuf. aɪ kænɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ ɡɛt mɛni. ðə meɪsənz ɔlweɪz steɪ təɡɛðɝ wən ðeɪ ɡoʊ aʊtsaɪd tə wɝk. hjumənz ɑɹ soʊ heɪsti, ən ði ɛldɝz ɑɹ ɔlweɪz əfɹeɪd tɛmpɝz wɪl flɛɹ ən sʌmwʌn wɪl pʊɾ ə lɔŋ hændəl ɑn ɪz æks." hi aɪd ðə mɛn ɝaʊn ðə sɪŋɝ əz ɪf i səspɛktəɾ əm ʌv ɪt. hɪz ɪɹz wɝ dʒɹupɪŋ əɡɛn.

"This inn has an Ogier room," Loial said as Perrin sat down. "Apparently, every inn in Illian has one, in hopes of gaining Ogier custom when the stonemasons come. Nieda claims it is lucky, having an Ogier under the roof. I cannot think they get many. The masons always stay together when they go Outside to work. Humans are so hasty, and the Elders are always afraid tempers will flare and someone will put a long handle on his axe." He eyed the men around the singer as if he suspected them of it. His ears were drooping again.

ðə ɹɪtʃ mɝtʃənt wɑz ɪn ðə pɹɑsɛs ə luzɪŋ ɪz kæɹɪdʒ, tə mɔɹ læftɝ. "dɪd jə faɪn aʊt wɛðɝ ɛni oʊɡiɝ fɹəm stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ ɑɹ ɪn ɪljən?"

The rich merchant was in the process of losing his carriage, to more laughter. "Did you find out whether any Ogier from Stedding Shangtai are in Illian?"

"ðɛɹ wɝ, bʌt niɾə sɛd ðeɪ lɛf dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɪntɝ. ʃi sɛd ðeɪ hæd nɑt fɪnɪʃt ðɛɹ wɝk. aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪt. ðə meɪsənz wəd nɑɾ əv lɛft wɝk əndʌn ənlɛs ðeɪ wɝ nɑt peɪd, ən niɾə sɛɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt ðæt. wʌn mɔɹnɪŋ, ðeɪ wɝ dʒʌst ɡɔn, ðoʊ sʌmwʌn sɔ ðɛm wɔkɪŋ daʊn ðə mɑɹeɪɾoʊ kɑzweɪ ɪn ðə naɪt. pɛɹɪn, aɪ də nɑt laɪk ðɪs sɪɾi. aɪ də nɑt noʊ waɪ, bʌɾ ɪt meɪks mi . . . ənizi."

"There were, but Nieda said they left during the winter. She said they had not finished their work. I do not understand it. The masons would not have left work undone unless they were not paid, and Nieda said it was not that. One morning, they were just gone, though someone saw them walking down the Maredo Causeway in the night. Perrin, I do not like this city. I do not know why, but it makes me . . . uneasy."

"oʊɡiɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "ɑɹ sɛnsəɾɪv tə səm θɪŋz." ʃi stɪl hæɾ əɹ feɪs hɪɾən, bʌt niɾə hæɾ əpɛɹənli sɛn sʌmwʌn tə baɪ hɝ ə laɪt kloʊk ə dɑɹk blu lɪnən. ðə fɪɹ smɛl wɑz ɡɔn fɹəm hɝ, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs saʊndəɾ ʌndɝ taɪt kəntʃɹoʊl. læn hɛld əɹ tʃɛɹ fəɹ hɝ; hɪz aɪz lʊkt wɝid.

"Ogier," Moiraine said, "are sensitive to some things." She still had her face hidden, but Nieda had apparently sent someone to buy her a light cloak of dark blue linen. The fear smell was gone from her, but her voice sounded under tight control. Lan held her chair for her; his eyes looked worried.

zɑɹin wɑz ðə læs daʊn, ɹʌnɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz θɹu dʒʌst-wɑʃt hɛɹ. ði ɝbəl sɛnt wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ ɝaʊn əɹ ðən bɪfɔɹ. ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ðə plæɾɝ niɾə pleɪst ɑn ðə teɪbəl ən mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. "aɪ heɪt fɪʃ."

Zarine was the last down, running her fingers through just-washed hair. The herbal scent was stronger around her than before. She stared at the platter Nieda placed on the table and muttered under her breath. "I hate fish."

ðə staʊt wʊmən hæd bɹɔɾ ɔl ðə fuɾ ɑn ə smɔl kɑɹt wɪð ʃɛlvz; ɪt wɑz dʌsti ɪn pleɪsəz, əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn heɪstəli bɹɔɾ aʊt fɹəm ðə stɔɹɹum ɪn mɔɪɹeɪnz ɑnɝ. ðə dɪʃəz wɝ si foʊk pɔɹsələn, tu, ɪf tʃɪpt.

The stout woman had brought all the food on a small cart with shelves; it was dusty in places, as if it had been hastily brought out from the storeroom in Moiraine's honor. The dishes were Sea Folk porcelain, too, if chipped.

"it," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, lʊkɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ət zɑɹin. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðəɾ ɛni mil kən bi jəɹ læst. jə tʃoʊz tə tʃɹævəl wɪð ʌs, soʊ tənaɪt jəl it fɪʃ. təmɑɹoʊ, jə meɪ daɪ."

"Eat," Moiraine said, looking straight at Zarine. "Remember that any meal can be your last. You chose to travel with us, so tonight you will eat fish. Tomorrow, you may die."

pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə nɪɹli ɹaʊnd waɪt fɪʃ wɪð ɹɛd stʃɹaɪps, bʌt ðeɪ smɛld ɡʊd. hi lɪftəd tu ɑntu hɪz pleɪt wɪð ðə sɝvɪŋ fɔɹk, ən ɡɹɪn ət zɑɹin ɝaʊn ə maʊθfʊl. ðeɪ teɪstəd ɡʊd, tu, laɪtli spaɪst. it jəɹ næsti fɪʃ, fælkən, hi θɔt. hi ɔlsoʊ θɔt ðət zɑɹin lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi maɪt baɪt hɪm.

Perrin did not recognize the nearly round white fish with red stripes, but they smelled good. He lifted two onto his plate with the serving fork, and grinned at Zarine around a mouthful. They tasted good, too, lightly spiced. Eat your nasty fish, falcon, he thought. He also thought that Zarine looked as if she might bite him.

"du jə wɪʃ mi tə stɑp ðə ɡɝl sɪŋɪŋ, mɪstʃɹəs mɑɹi?" niɾə æskt. ʃi wɑz sɛɾɪŋ boʊlz ə piz ən səm sɔɹɾ ə stɪf jɛloʊ mʌʃ ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "soʊ jə kən iɾ ɪn kwaɪət?"

"Do you wish me to stop the girl singing, Mistress Mari?" Nieda asked. She was setting bowls of peas and some sort of stiff yellow mush on the table. "So you can eat in quiet?"

stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ pleɪt, mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd nɑt sim tə hɪɹ.

Staring at her plate, Moiraine did not seem to hear.

læn lɪsən ə moʊmənt - ðə mɝtʃən hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi lɔst, ɪn səksɛʃən, hɪz kæɹɪdʒ, hɪz kloʊk, hɪz buts, hɪz ɡoʊld, ən ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz kloʊðz, ən wɑz naʊ ɹədus tə ɹɛslɪŋ ə pɪɡ fəɹ ɪts dɪnɝ - ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ʃi wɪl nɑt bɑðɝ ʌs." hi lʊkt kloʊs tə smaɪlɪŋ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, bɪfɔɹ i ɡlænst ət mɔɪɹeɪn. ðən ðə wɝi ɹɪtɝn tə hɪz aɪz.

Lan listened a moment - the merchant had already lost, in succession, his carriage, his cloak, his boots, his gold, and the rest of his clothes, and was now reduced to wrestling a pig for its dinner - and shook his head. "She will not bother us." He looked close to smiling for a moment, before he glanced at Moiraine. Then the worry returned to his eyes.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɹɔŋ?" zɑɹin sɛd. ʃi wɑz ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə fɪʃ. "aɪ noʊ sʌmθɪŋ ɪz. aɪ hæv nɑt si ðət mʌtʃ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn ju, stoʊn-feɪs, sɪns aɪ mɛt ju."

"What is wrong?" Zarine said. She was ignoring the fish. "I know something is. I have not see that much expression on you, stone-face, since I met you."

"noʊ kwɛstʃənz!" mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "ju wɪl noʊ wʌɾ aɪ tɛl jə ən noʊ mɔɹ!"

"No questions!" Moiraine said sharply. "You will know what I tell you and no more!"

"wʌt wɪl jə tɛl mi?" zɑɹin dɪmændəd.

"What will you tell me?" Zarine demanded.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ smaɪld. "it jəɹ fɪʃ."

The Aes Sedai smiled. "Eat your fish."

ðə mil wɛn ɑn ɪn nɪɹ saɪləns æftɝ ðæt, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə sɔŋz dʒɹɪftɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɹum. ðəɹ wɑz wʌn əbaʊɾ ə ɹɪtʃ mæn huz waɪf ən dɔɾɝz meɪɾ ə ful ə hɪm taɪm ən əɡɛn wɪθaʊɾ ɛvɝ dɪfleɪɾɪŋ ɪz sɛlf-ɪmpɔɹɾəns, ənʌðɝ ðət kənsɝn ə jʌŋ wʊmən u dɪsaɪɾɪd tə teɪk ə wɔk wɪθaʊɾ ɛni kloʊðz, ən wʌn ðət toʊld ʌv ə blæksmɪθ u mænədʒ tə ʃu hɪmsɛlf ɪnstɛɾ ə ðə hɔɹs. zɑɹin nɪɹli tʃoʊk læfɪŋ ət ðət wʌn, fɝɡɑt hɝsɛlf ɪnʌf tə teɪk ə baɪɾ ə fɪʃ, ən sʌɾənli ɡɹɪməst əz ɪf ʃi hæd pʊt mʌɾ ɪn əɹ maʊθ.

The meal went on in near silence after that, except for the songs drifting across the room. There was one about a rich man whose wife and daughters made a fool of him time and again without ever deflating his self-importance, another that concerned a young woman who decided to take a walk without any clothes, and one that told of a blacksmith who managed to shoe himself instead of the horse. Zarine nearly choked laughing at that one, forgot herself enough to take a bite of fish, and suddenly grimaced as if she had put mud in her mouth.

aɪ woʊn læf ət hɝ, pɛɹɪn toʊl hɪmsɛlf. haʊɛvɝ fulɪʃ ʃi lʊks, əl ʃoʊ hɝ wʌt mænɝz ɑɹ. "ðeɪ teɪst ɡʊd, doʊn ðeɪ," hi sɛd. zɑɹin ɡeɪv ɪm ə bɪɾɝ lʊk, ən mɔɪɹeɪn ə fɹaʊn fəɹ ɪntɝʌptɪŋ əɹ θɔts, ən ðət wɑz ɔl ðə tɔk ðəɹ wɑz.

I won't laugh at her, Perrin told himself. However foolish she looks, I'll show her what manners are. "They taste good, don't they," he said. Zarine gave him a bitter look, and Moiraine a frown for interrupting her thoughts, and that was all the talk there was.

niɾə wɑz klɪɹɪŋ əweɪ ðə dɪʃəz ən sɛɾɪŋ ən ɝeɪ ʌv tʃizɪz ɑn ðə teɪbəl wən ə stɪŋk ə sʌmθɪŋ vaɪl lɪftəd ðə hækəlz ɑn ðə bæk ə pɛɹɪnz nɛk. ɪt wɑz ə smɛl ə sʌmθɪŋ ðət ʃəd nɑt bi, ən i hæd smɛld ɪt twaɪs bɪfɔɹ. hi pɪɹɾ əbaʊt ðə kɑmən ɹum ənizəli.

Nieda was clearing away the dishes and setting an array of cheeses on the table when a stink of something vile lifted the hackles on the back of Perrin's neck. It was a smell of something that should not be, and he had smelled it twice before. He peered about the common room uneasily.

ðə ɡɝl stɪl sæŋ tə ðə nɑɾ ə lɪsənɝz, səm mɛn wɝ stʃɹoʊlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ fɹəm ðə dɔɹ, ən bili stɪl lin ɑn ðə wɔl tæpɪŋ ɪz fʊt tə ðə saʊnz ə ðə bɪɾɝn. niɾə pæɾəd əɹ ɹoʊl hɛɹ, ɡeɪv ðə ɹum ə kwɪk ɡlæns, ən tɝn tə pʊʃ ðə kɑɹɾ əweɪ.

The girl still sang to the knot of listeners, some men were strolling across the floor from the door, and Bili still leaned on the wall tapping his foot to the sounds of the bittern. Nieda patted her rolled hair, gave the room a quick glance, and turned to push the cart away.

hi lʊkt əɾ ɪz kəmpænjənz. lɔɪəl, ʌnsɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, hæd pʊld ə bʊk fɹəm ɪz koʊt pɑkəɾ ən sim tə hæv fɝɡɑɾən wɛɹ i wɑz. zɑɹin, æbsənli ɹoʊlɪŋ ə pis ʌv waɪt tʃiz ɪndə ə bɔl, wɑz aɪɪŋ fɝs pɛɹɪn, ðən mɔɪɹeɪn, ðən ɪm əɡɛn, waɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹitɛnd ʃi wɑz nɑt. ɪt wɑz læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn i wɑz ɹɪli ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn, ðoʊ. ðeɪ kəd sɛns ə mɹdʒɹɑl, əɹ ə tʃɹɑlɑk, əɹ ɛni ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, bɪfɔɹ ɪt keɪm kloʊsɝ ðən ə fju hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz stɛɹɪŋ dɪstənli ət ðə teɪbəl ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz kʌɾɪŋ ə tʃʌŋk ə jɛloʊ tʃiz ən wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ. jɛt ðə smɛl ə ɹɔŋɡnəs wɑz ðɛɹ, əz ət dʒɹə ən ði ɛdʒ ə ɹɛmən, ən ðɪs taɪm ɪt wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ əweɪ. ɪt sim tə bi kʌmɪŋ fɹəm sʌmθɪŋ wɪðɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum.

He looked at his companions. Loial, unsurprisingly, had pulled a book from his coat pocket and seemed to have forgotten where he was. Zarine, absently rolling a piece of white cheese into a ball, was eyeing first Perrin, then Moiraine, then him again, while trying to pretend she was not. It was Lan and Moiraine he was really interested in, though. They could sense a Myrddraal, or a Trolloc, or any Shadowspawn, before it came closer than a few hundred paces, but the Aes Sedai was staring distantly at the table in front of her, and the Warder was cutting a chunk of yellow cheese and watching her. Yet the smell of wrongness was there, as at Jarra and the edge of Remen, and this time it was not going away. It seemed to be coming from something within the common room.

hi stʌɾid ðə ɹum əɡɛn. bili əɡɛns ðə wɔl, səm mɛn kɹɔsɪŋ ðə flɔɹ, ðə ɡɝl sɪŋɪŋ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, ɔl ðə læfɪŋ mɛn sɪɾɪŋ ɝaʊn hɝ. mɛn kɹɔsɪŋ ðə flɔɹ? hi fɹaʊn ət ðɛm. sɪks mɛn wɪð ɔɹɾənɛɹi feɪsəz, wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹd wɛɹ i wɑz sɪɾɪŋ. vɛɹi ɔɹɾənɛɹi feɪsəz. hi wɑz dʒʌst stɑɹɾɪŋ tə ɹiaɪnspɛk ðə mɛn lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə ɡɝl wən sʌɾənli ɪt keɪm tə hɪm ðət ðə stɪŋk ə ɹɔŋɡnəs wɑz ɹoʊlɪŋ fɹəm ðə sɪks. əbɹʌpli ðeɪ hæd dæɡɝz ɪn ðɛɹ hænz, əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd ɹilaɪzd i hæd sin ðɛm.

He studied the room again. Bili against the wall, some men crossing the floor, the girl singing on the table, all the laughing men sitting around her. Men crossing the floor? He frowned at them. Six men with ordinary faces, walking toward where he was sitting. Very ordinary faces. He was just starting to reinspect the men listening to the girl when suddenly it came to him that the stink of wrongness was rolling from the six. Abruptly they had daggers in their hands, as if they had realized he had seen them.

"ðeɪ hæv naɪvz!" hi ɹɔɹd, ən θɹu ðə tʃiz plæɾɝ ət ðɛm.

"They have knives!" he roared, and threw the cheese platter at them.

ðə kɑmən ɪɹʌptəɾ ɪndə kənfjuʒən, mɛn ʃaʊɾɪŋ, ðə sɪŋɝ skɹimɪŋ, niɾə ʃaʊɾɪŋ fəɹ bili, ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæpənɪŋ ət wʌns. læn lɛp tə hɪz fit, ən ə bɔl ə faɪɝ dɑɹɾɪd fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪnz hænd, ən lɔɪəl snætʃt ʌp ɪz tʃɛɹ laɪk ə klʌb, ən zɑɹin dæns tə wʌn saɪd, kɝsɪŋ. ʃi hæɾ ə naɪf ɪn əɹ hænd, tu, bʌt pɛɹɪn wɑz tu bɪzi tə noʊɾəs mʌtʃ ʌv wʌɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls dɪd. ðoʊz mɛn sim tə bi lʊkɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ət hɪm, ən ɪz æks wɑz hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ə pɛɡ ʌp ɪn ɪz ɹum.

The common erupted into confusion, men shouting, the singer screaming, Nieda shouting for Bili, everything happening at once. Lan leaped to his feet, and a ball of fire darted from Moiraine's hand, and Loial snatched up his chair like a club, and Zarine danced to one side, cursing. She had a knife in her hand, too, but Perrin was too busy to notice much of what anyone else did. Those men seemed to be looking straight at him, and his axe was hanging from a peg up in his room.

sizɪŋ ə tʃɛɹ, hi ɹɪpt ɔf ə θɪk tʃɛɹ lɛɡ ðət ɹæn ʌp tə meɪk wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə læɾɝ-bæk, hɝl ðə ɹɛst ə ðə tʃɛɹ ət ðə mɛn, ən sɛɾ əbaʊɾ ɪm wɪð ɪz lɔŋ blʌdʒən. ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹitʃ ɪm wɪð ðɛɹ neɪkəd stil, əz ɪf læn ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ oʊnli ɑbstəkəlz ɪn ðɛɹ weɪ. ɪt wɑz ə taɪt tæŋɡəl wɛɹ ɔl i kəd mænədʒ wɑz tə nɑk bleɪdz əweɪ fɹəm hɪm, ən ɪz waɪldɝ swɪŋz θɹɛɾənd læn ən lɔɪəl ən zɑɹin əz mʌtʃ əz ɛni ʌv ɪz sɪks ətækɝz. fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ hi sɔ mɔɪɹeɪn stændɪŋ tə wʌn saɪd, fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs; ðeɪ wɝ ɔl soʊ mɪks təɡɛðɝ ðət ʃi kəd də nʌθɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ ɛndeɪnʒɝɪŋ fɹɛn əz wɛl əz foʊ. nʌn ə ðə naɪf wildɝz əz mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst ət hɝ; ʃi wɑz nɑt bɪtwin əm ən pɛɹɪn.

Seizing a chair, he ripped off a thick chair leg that ran up to make one side of the ladder-back, hurled the rest of the chair at the men, and set about him with his long bludgeon. They were trying to reach him with their naked steel, as if Lan and the others were only obstacles in their way. It was a tight tangle where all he could manage was to knock blades away from him, and his wilder swings threatened Lan and Loial and Zarine as much as any of his six attackers. From the corner of his eye he saw Moiraine standing to one side, frustration on her face; they were all so mixed together that she could do nothing without endangering friend as well as foe. None of the knife wielders as much as glanced at her; she was not between them and Perrin.

pæntɪŋ, hi mænədʒ tə kɹæk wʌn ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi-lʊkɪŋ mɛn əkɹɔs ðə hɛd soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ i hɝd boʊn splɪntɝ, ən əbɹʌpli ɹilaɪz ðeɪ wɝ ɔl daʊn. ɪɾ ɔl sim tə hɪm tə hæv ɡɔn ɑn fəɹ ə kɔɹɾɝ ʌv ə aʊɝ əɹ mɔɹ, bʌɾ i sɔ ðət bili wɑz dʒʌs hɔltɪŋ, hɪz lɑɹdʒ hænz wɝkɪŋ əz i stɛɹɾ ət ðə sɪks mɛn spɹɔl dɛɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. bili hæd nɑɾ ivən hæd taɪm tə ɹitʃ ðə faɪt bɪfɔɹ ɪt wɑz dʌn.

Panting, he managed to crack one of the ordinary-looking men across the head so hard that he heard bone splinter, and abruptly realized they were all down. It all seemed to him to have gone on for a quarter of a hour or more, but he saw that Bili was just halting, his large hands working as he stared at the six men sprawled dead on the floor. Bili had not even had time to reach the fight before it was done.

læn wɔɹ ə feɪs ivən ɡɹɪmɝ ðən juʒəwəl; hi bɪɡæn sɝtʃɪŋ ðə bɑɾiz, θɝoʊli, bʌt wɪð ə kwɪknəs ðət spoʊk ə dɪsteɪst. lɔɪəl stɪl hæɾ ɪz tʃɛɹ ɹeɪz tə swɪŋ; hi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən sɛɾ ɪt daʊn wɪð ən ɪmbɛɹəst ɡɹɪn. mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət pɛɹɪn, ən soʊ wɑz zɑɹin əz ʃi ɹitʃɹivd əɹ naɪf fɹəm ðə tʃɛst ʌv wʌn ə ðə dɛd mɛn. ðət stɛntʃ ə ɹɔŋɡnəs wɑz ɡɔn, əz ɪf ɪt hæd daɪd wɪð ðɛm.

Lan wore a face even grimmer than usual; he began searching the bodies, thoroughly, but with a quickness that spoke of distaste. Loial still had his chair raised to swing; he gave a start and set it down with an embarrassed grin. Moiraine was staring at Perrin, and so was Zarine as she retrieved her knife from the chest of one of the dead men. That stench of wrongness was gone, as if it had died with them.

"ɡɹeɪ mɛn," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd sɔfli, "æn æftɝ ju."

"Gray Men," the Aes Sedai said softly, "and after you."

"ɡɹeɪ mɛn?" niɾə læft, boʊθ laʊɾ ən nɝvəsli. "waɪ, mɪstʃɹəs mɑɹi, nɛks jəl seɪ jə də bɪliv ɪn bɑɡəlz ən bʌɡbɛɹz ən fɛtʃɪz, ən oʊld ɡɹɪm ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɪð ðə blæk dɑɡz ɪn ðə waɪl hʌnt." səm ə ðə mɛn u hæd bɪn lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə sɔŋz læft, tu, ðoʊ ðeɪ lʊkt əz ənizəli ət mɔɪɹeɪn əz ət ðə dɛd mɛn. ðə sɪŋɝ stɛɹɾ ət mɔɪɹeɪn, əz wɛl, hɝ aɪz waɪd. pɛɹɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət wʌn bɔl ə faɪɝ, bɪfɔɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɡɹu tu dʒʌmbəld. wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪ mɛn hæɾ ə sʌmwʌt tʃɑɹd lʊk əbaʊt hɪm, ən ɡeɪv ɔf ə sɪkli swit bɝn smɛl.

"Gray Men?" Nieda laughed, both loud and nervously. "Why, Mistress Mari, next you'll say you do believe in boggles and bugbears and Fetches, and Old Grim riding with the black dogs in the Wild Hunt." Some of the men who had been listening to the songs laughed, too, though they looked as uneasily at Moiraine as at the dead men. The singer stared at Moiraine, as well, her eyes wide. Perrin remembered that one ball of fire, before everything grew too jumbled. One of the Gray Men had a somewhat charred look about him, and gave off a sickly sweet burned smell.

mɔɪɹeɪn tɝn fɹəm pɛɹɪn tə ðə staʊt wʊmən. "ə mæn meɪ wɔk ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd kɑmli, "wɪθaʊt biɪŋ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn."

Moiraine turned from Perrin to the stout woman. "A man may walk in the Shadow," the Aes Sedai said calmly, "without being Shadowspawn."

"oʊ, aɪ, dɑɹkfɹɛnz." niɾə pʊɾ əɹ hænz ɑn dʒɛnɝəs hɪps ən fɹaʊn ət ðə kɔɹpsəz. læn hæd fɪnɪʃt ɪz sɝtʃɪŋ; hi ɡlænst ət mɔɪɹeɪn ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ əz ɪf i hæd nɑt ɹɪli ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn ɛniθɪŋ. "mɔɹ laɪkli θivz, ðoʊ aɪ dɪd nɛvɝ hɪɹ ə θivz boʊld ɪnʌf tə kʌm ɹaɪɾ ɪndə ən ɪn. aɪ dɪd nɛvɝ əv ivən wʌn kɪlɪŋ ɪn ðə bædʒɝ bɪfɔɹ. bili! klɪɹ ðiz aʊt, ɪndə ə kənæl, ən pʊt daʊn fɹɛʃ sɔdʌst. ðə bæk weɪ, maɪnd. aɪ də noʊ wɑn ðə wɑtʃ pʊɾɪŋ ðɛɹ lɔŋ noʊzɪz ɪndə ðə bædʒɝ." bili nɑɾəd əz ɪf iɡɝ tə bi jusfəl æftɝ feɪlɪŋ tə teɪk ə hæn ɝliɝ. hi ɡɹæbd ə dɛd mæn baɪ ðə bɛlt ɪn iðɝ hæn ən kæɹiɾ əm bæk təwɔɹd ðə kɪtʃən.

"Oh, aye, Darkfriends." Nieda put her hands on generous hips and frowned at the corpses. Lan had finished his searching; he glanced at Moiraine and shook his head as if he had not really expected to find anything. "More likely thieves, though I did never hear of thieves bold enough to come right into an inn. I did never have even one killing in the Badger before. Bili! Clear these out, into a canal, and put down fresh sawdust. The back way, mind. I do no want the Watch putting their long noses into the Badger." Bili nodded as if eager to be useful after failing to take a hand earlier. He grabbed a dead man by the belt in either hand and carried them back toward the kitchen.

"ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ðə dɑɹk-aɪd sɪŋɝ sɛd. "aɪ dɪd nɑt min tə əfɛnd wɪð maɪ kɑmən sɔŋz." ʃi wɑz kʌvɝɪŋ ði ɪkspoʊz pɑɹɾ ə hɝ bʊzəm, wɪtʃ wɑz moʊst ʌv ɪt, wɪð əɹ hænz. "aɪ kən sɪŋ ʌðɝz, ɪf jə wəd soʊ laɪk."

"Aes Sedai?" the dark-eyed singer said. "I did not mean to offend with my common songs." She was covering the exposed part of her bosom, which was most of it, with her hands. "I can sing others, if you would so like."

"sɪŋ wʌtɛvɝ jə wɪʃ, ɡɝl," mɔɪɹeɪn toʊl hɝ. "ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪz nɑt soʊ aɪsəleɪɾəd fɹəm ðə wɝld əz jə sim tə θɪŋk, ən aɪ hæv hɝd ɹʌfɝ sɔŋz ðən jə wəd sɪŋ." ivən soʊ, ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk pliz ðət ðə kɑmən naʊ nu ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi ɡlænst ət læn, ɡæðɝd ðə lɪnən kloʊk ɝaʊn hɝ, ən stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ.

"Sing whatever you wish, girl," Moiraine told her. "The White Tower is not so isolated from the world as you seem to think, and I have heard rougher songs than you would sing." Even so, she did not look pleased that the common now knew she was Aes Sedai. She glanced at Lan, gathered the linen cloak around her, and started for the door.

ðə wɔɹɾɝ muv kwɪkli tə ɪntɝsɛp hɝ, ən ðeɪ spoʊk kwaɪətli ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə dɔɹ, bʌt pɛɹɪn kəd hɪɹ əz wɛl əz ɪf ðeɪ wɪspɝd ɹaɪt nɛks tə hɪm.

The Warder moved quickly to intercept her, and they spoke quietly in front of the door, but Perrin could hear as well as if they whispered right next to him.

"du jə min tə ɡoʊ wɪθaʊt mi?" læn sɛd. "aɪ plɛdʒ tə kip jə hoʊl, mɔɪɹeɪn, wən aɪ tʊk jəɹ bɑnd."

"Do you mean to go without me?" Lan said. "I pledged to keep you whole, Moiraine, when I took your bond."

"ju hæv ɔlweɪz noʊn ðəɹ wɝ səm deɪnʒɝz jə ɑɹ nɑɾ ɪkwɪp tə hændəl, maɪ ɡeɪɾɪn. aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ əloʊn."

"You have always known there were some dangers you are not equipped to handle, my Gaidin. I must go alone."

"mɔɪɹeɪn - "

"Moiraine - "

ʃi kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. "hid mi, læn. ʃəɾ aɪ feɪl, jəl noʊ ɪt, ən jəl bi kəmpɛl tə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. aɪ wəd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ ðəɾ ivən ɪf aɪ hæd taɪm. aɪ də nɑt min jə tə daɪ ɪn ə veɪn ətɛmp tə əvɛnʒ mi. teɪk pɛɹɪn wɪð ju. ɪt simz ðə ʃædoʊ hæz meɪɾ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾəns ɪn ðə pæɾɝn noʊn tə mi, ɪf nɑt klɪɹ. aɪ wɑz ə ful. ɹænd ɪz soʊ stʃɹɔŋli tɑvɝən ðəɾ aɪ ɪɡnɔɹd wʌɾ ɪt mʌs min ðəɾ i hæd tu ʌðɝz kloʊs baɪ hɪm. wɪð pɛɹɪn ən mæt, ði æmɪɝlɪn meɪ stɪl bi eɪbəl tə əfɛk ðə kɔɹs ʌv ɪvɛns. wɪð ɹænd lus, ʃɪl əv tə. tɛl əɹ wʌɾ əz hæpənd, maɪ ɡeɪɾɪn."

She cut him off. "Heed me, Lan. Should I fail, you will know it, and you will be compelled to return to the White Tower. I would not change that even if I had time. I do not mean you to die in a vain attempt to avenge me. Take Perrin with you. It seems the Shadow has made his importance in the Pattern known to me, if not clear. I was a fool. Rand is so strongly ta'veren that I ignored what it must mean that he had two others close by him. With Perrin and Mat, the Amyrlin may still be able to affect the course of events. With Rand loose, she will have to. Tell her what has happened, my Gaidin."

"ju spik əz ɪf jə ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi dɛd," læn sɛd ɹʌfli.

"You speak as if you are already dead," Lan said roughly.

"ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz, ən ðə ʃædoʊ dɑɹkənz ðə wɝld. hid mi, læn, ən oʊbeɪ, əz jə swɔɹ tə." wɪð ðæt, ʃi wɑz ɡɔn.

"The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills, and the Shadow darkens the world. Heed me, Lan, and obey, as you swore to." With that, she was gone.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾiθɹi


CHAPTER 43

ʃæɾoʊbɹəðɝz


Shadowbrothers

ðə dɑɹk-aɪd ɡɝl klaɪm bæk ɑn əɹ teɪbəl ən stɑɹɾəd sɪŋɪŋ əɡɛn, ɪn ən ənstɛɾi vɔɪs. ðə tun wɑz wʌn pɛɹɪn nu əz "mɪstʃɹəs eɪnɹəz ɹustɝ," ən ðoʊ ðə wɝdz wɝ dɪfɹənt wʌns mɔɹ, tə hɪz dɪsəpɔɪnmənt - ən ɪmbɛɹəsmən ðəɾ i wɑz dɪsəpɔɪntɪd - ɪɾ æktʃəli  wɑz əbaʊɾ ə ɹustɝ. mɪstʃɹəs luhən hɝsɛlf wəd nɑɾ əv dɪsəpɹuvd. laɪt, aɪm ɡɛɾɪŋ əz bæɾ əz mæt.

The dark-eyed girl climbed back on her table and started singing again, in an unsteady voice. The tune was one Perrin knew as "Mistress Aynora's Rooster," and though the words were different once more, to his disappointment - and embarrassment that he was disappointed - it actually was about a rooster. Mistress Luhhan herself would not have disapproved. Light, I'm getting as bad as Mat.

nʌn ə ðə lɪsənɝz kəmpleɪnd; səm ə ðə mɛn dɪd lʊk ə bɪt dɪsɡɹʌntəld, bʌt ðeɪ sim tə bi əz æŋkʃəs əbaʊt wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn maɪɾ əpɹuv əz ðə sɪŋɝ wɑz. noʊ wʌn wɪʃt tə əfɛn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ivən wɪð əɹ ɡɔn. bili keɪm bæk ən hɔɪstəd tu mɔɹ ɡɹeɪ mɛn; ə fju ʌv ðə mɛn lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə sɔŋ ɡlænst ət ðə kɔɹpsəz ən ʃʊk ðɛɹ hɛdz. wʌn ə ðɛm spæɾ ɑn ðə sɔdʌst.

None of the listeners complained; some of the men did look a bit disgruntled, but they seemed to be as anxious about what Moiraine might approve as the singer was. No one wished to offend an Aes Sedai, even with her gone. Bili came back and hoisted two more Gray Men; a few of the men listening to the song glanced at the corpses and shook their heads. One of them spat on the sawdust.

læn keɪm tə stæn ɪn fɹʌn ə pɛɹɪn. "haʊ dɪd jə noʊ ðɛm, blæksmɪθ?" hi æskt kwaɪətli. "ðɛɹ teɪn ʌv ivəl ɪz nɑt stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ mɔɪɹeɪn əɹ mi tə sɛns. ɡɹeɪ mɛn əv wɔk pæst ə hʌnʒɹəd ɡɑɹdz wɪθaʊt biɪŋ noʊɾəst, ən wɔɹɾɝz əmʌŋ ðɛm."

Lan came to stand in front of Perrin. "How did you know them, blacksmith?" he asked quietly. "Their taint of evil is not strong enough for Moiraine or me to sense. Gray Men have walked past a hundred guards without being noticed, and Warders among them."

vɛɹi kɑnʃəs ə zɑɹinz aɪz ɑn hɪm, pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɪz vɔɪs ivən sɑftɝ ðən lænz. "aɪ . . . aɪ smɛl ðɛm. aɪv smɛld əm bɪfɔɹ, ət dʒɹə ən ət ɹɛmən, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɔlweɪz vænɪʃt. ðeɪ wɝ ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ wi ɡɑt ðɛɹ, boʊθ taɪmz." hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ zɑɹin hæɾ oʊvɝhɝɾ əɹ nɑt; ʃi wɑz linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɪsən, ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əpɪɹ nɑt tə ət ðə seɪm taɪm.

Very conscious of Zarine's eyes on him, Perrin tried to make his voice even softer than Lan's. "I . . . I smelled them. I've smelled them before, at Jarra and at Remen, but it always vanished. They were gone before we got there, both times." He was not sure whether Zarine had overheard or not; she was leaning forward trying to listen, and trying to appear not to at the same time.

"fɑloʊɪŋ ɹænd, ðɛn. fɑloʊɪŋ ju, naʊ, blæksmɪθ." ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɡeɪv noʊ vɪzəbəl saɪn ə sɝpɹaɪz. hi ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs tə ə mɔɹ nɔɹməl lɛvəl. "aɪ æm gɑnə lʊk ɝaʊn aʊtsaɪd, blæksmɪθ. jəɹ aɪz maɪt si sʌmθɪŋ aɪ mɪs." pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd; ɪt wɑz ə mɛʒɝ ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz wɝi ðəɾ i æsk fəɹ hɛlp. "oʊɡiɝ, jəɹ foʊk si bɛɾɝ ðən moʊst, tu."

"Following Rand, then. Following you, now, blacksmith." The Warder gave no visible sign of surprise. He raised his voice to a more normal level. "I am going to look around outside, blacksmith. Your eyes might see something I miss." Perrin nodded; it was a measure of the Warder's worry that he asked for help. "Ogier, your folk see better than most, too."

"oʊ, ɑ," lɔɪəl sɛd. "wɛl, aɪ səpoʊz aɪ kəd teɪk ə lʊk, tu." hɪz bɪɡ, ɹaʊn aɪz ɹoʊl saɪdweɪz təwɔɹd ðə tu ɡɹeɪ mɛn stɪl ɑn ðə flɔɹ. "aɪ wəd nɑt θɪŋk ɛni mɔɹ ə ðɛm wɝ aʊt ðɛɹ. wəd ju?"

"Oh, ah," Loial said. "Well, I suppose I could take a look, too." His big, round eyes rolled sideways toward the two Gray Men still on the floor. "I would not think any more of them were out there. Would you?"

"wʌɾ ɑɹ wi lʊkɪŋ fɔɹ, stoʊn-feɪs?" zɑɹin sɛd.

"What are we looking for, stone-face?" Zarine said.

læn aɪɾ əɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ əz ɪf i hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd nɑt tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ. "wʌtɛvɝ wi faɪnd, ɡɝl. əl noʊ ɪt wən aɪ si ɪt."

Lan eyed her a moment, then shook his head as if he had decided not to say something. "Whatever we find, girl. I will know it when I see it."

pɛɹɪn θɔɾ əbaʊt ɡoʊɪŋ əpstɛɹz fəɹ ɪz æks, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ meɪd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ, ən i wɑz nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd. hi hɑɹdli nidz ɪt, pɛɹɪn θɔt ɡɹʌmpəli. hiz ɔlmoʊst əz deɪnʒɝəs wɪθaʊɾ ɪɾ əz wɪð. hi hɛld ɑn tə ðə tʃɛɹ lɛɡ əz i fɑloʊd. ɪt wɑz ə ɹɪlif tə si ðət zɑɹin stɪl hæɾ əɹ naɪf ɪn əɹ hænd.

Perrin thought about going upstairs for his axe, but the Warder made for the door, and he was not wearing his sword. He hardly needs it, Perrin thought grumpily. He is almost as dangerous without it as with. He held on to the chair leg as he followed. It was a relief to see that Zarine still had her knife in her hand.

θɪk blæk klaʊdz wɝ ɹɔɪlɪŋ oʊvɝhɛd. ðə stʃɹit wɑz əz dɑɹk əz leɪt twaɪlaɪt, ən ɛmpti ʌv pipəl u hæɾ əpɛɹənli nɑt weɪɾəd tə bi kɑɾ ɪn ðə ɹeɪn. wʌn fɛloʊ wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ əkɹɔs ə bɹɪdʒ daʊn ðə stʃɹit; hi wɑz ði oʊnli pɝsən pɛɹɪn sɔ ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən. ðə wɪnd wɑz pɪkɪŋ ʌp, bloʊɪŋ ə ɹæɡ əlɔŋ ði ənivən peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz; ənʌðɝ, kɑɾ ʌndɝ ði ɛdʒ ʌv wʌn ə ðə maʊntɪŋ blɑks, flæpt wɪð ə smɔl snæpɪŋ saʊnd. θʌndɝ ɡɹʌmbəld ən ɹoʊld.

Thick black clouds were roiling overhead. The street was as dark as late twilight, and empty of people who had apparently not waited to be caught in the rain. One fellow was running across a bridge down the street; he was the only person Perrin saw in any direction. The wind was picking up, blowing a rag along the uneven paving stones; another, caught under the edge of one of the mounting blocks, flapped with a small snapping sound. Thunder grumbled and rolled.

pɛɹɪn ɹɪŋkəld ɪz noʊz. ðəɹ wɑz ə smɛl ə faɪɹwɝks ɑn ðət waɪnd. noʊ, nɑt faɪɹwɝks, ɪɡzækli. ɪt wɑz ə bɝn sʌlfɝ sɔɹɾ ə smɛl. ɔlmoʊst.

Perrin wrinkled his nose. There was a smell of fireworks on that wind. No, not fireworks, exactly. It was a burned sulphur sort of smell. Almost.

zɑɹin tæp ðə tʃɛɹ lɛɡ ɪn ɪz hænz wɪð əɹ naɪf bleɪd. "ju ɹɪli ɑɹ stʃɹɔŋ, bɪɡ mæn. jə tɔɹ ðət tʃɛɹ əpɑɹɾ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ meɪɾ ə twɪɡz."

Zarine tapped the chair leg in his hands with her knife blade. "You really are strong, big man. You tore that chair apart as if it were made of twigs."

pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪd. hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz stændɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾɝ, ən dɪlɪbɝətli meɪd hɪmsɛlf slaʊtʃ. ful ɡɝl! zɑɹin læf sɔfli, ən sʌɾənli hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ tə stʃɹeɪɾən əɹ steɪ əz i wɑz. ful! ðɪs taɪm i mɛn ɪt fəɹ hɪmsɛlf. jəɹ səpoʊz tə bi lʊkɪŋ. fəɹ wʌt? hi dɪd nɑt si ɛniθɪŋ bʌt ðə stʃɹit, dɪd nɑt smɛl ɛniθɪŋ bʌt ði ɔlmoʊs bɝn sʌlfɝ sɛnt. ən zɑɹin, ʌv kɔɹs.

Perrin grunted. He realized he was standing straighter, and deliberately made himself slouch. Fool girl! Zarine laughed softly, and suddenly he did not know whether to straighten or stay as he was. Fool! This time he meant it for himself. You're supposed to be looking. For what? He did not see anything but the street, did not smell anything but the almost burned sulphur scent. And Zarine, of course.

lɔɪəl əpɪɹd tə bi wʌndɝɪŋ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz i wɑz lʊkɪŋ fɔɹ, tu. hi skɹætʃt ə tʌftəɾ ɪɹ, pɪɹd wʌn weɪ daʊn ðə stʃɹit, ðən ði ʌðɝ, ðən skɹætʃt ði ʌðɝ ɪɹ. ðən i stɛɹɾ ʌp ət ðə ɹuf ə ði ɪn.

Loial appeared to be wondering what it was he was looking for, too. He scratched a tufted ear, peered one way down the street, then the other, then scratched the other ear. Then he stared up at the roof of the inn.

læn əpɪɹd fɹəm ði æliweɪ bɪsaɪd ði ɪn ən muvd aʊɾ ɪndə ðə stʃɹit, aɪz stʌɾiɪŋ ðə dɑɹkɝ ʃædoʊz əlɔŋ ðə bɪldɪŋz.

Lan appeared from the alleyway beside the inn and moved out into the street, eyes studying the darker shadows along the buildings.

"meɪbi hi mɪst siɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ," pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd, ðoʊ hi faʊn ɪt hɑɹd tə bɪliv, ən tɝn təwɔɹd ði æli. aɪm səpoʊz tə bi lʊkɪŋ, soʊ əl lʊk. meɪbi hi dɪd mɪs sʌmθɪŋ.

"Maybe he missed seeing something," Perrin muttered, though he found it hard to believe, and turned toward the alley. I am supposed to be looking, so I'll look. Maybe he did miss something.

læn hæd stɑpt ə lɪɾəl weɪ daʊn ðə stʃɹit, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz fit. ðə wɔɹɾɝ stɑɹɾəd bæk təwɔɹd ði ɪn, wɔkɪŋ kwɪkli, bʌt piɹɪŋ ət ðə stʃɹiɾ əhɛɾ ə hɪm əz ɪf fɑloʊɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz lɛd stʃɹeɪt tə wʌn ə ðə maʊntɪŋ blɑks, ɔlmoʊs bɪsaɪd ði ɪn dɔɹ. hi stɑp ðɛɹ, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə tɑp ə ðə ɡɹeɪ stoʊn blɑk.

Lan had stopped a little way down the street, staring at the paving stones in front of his feet. The Warder started back toward the inn, walking quickly, but peering at the street ahead of him as if following something. Whatever it was led straight to one of the mounting blocks, almost beside the inn door. He stopped there, staring at the top of the gray stone block.

pɛɹɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd tə əbændən ɡoʊɪŋ daʊn ði æli - ɪt stæŋk əz mʌtʃ əz ðə kənælz ɪn ðɪs pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪljən, fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ - ən wɔkt oʊvɝ tə læn, ɪnstɛd. hi sɔ wʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ɹaɪɾ əweɪ. pɹɛst ɪndə ðə tɑp ə ðə stoʊn maʊntɪŋ blɑk wɝ tu pɹɪns, əz ɪf ə hjudʒ haʊn hæd ɹɛstəɾ ɪts fɹpɔz ðɛɹ. ðə smɛl ðət wɑz ɔlmoʊs bɝn sʌlfɝ wɑz stʃɹɔŋɡəs hɪɹ. dɑɡz doʊn meɪk fʊtpɹɪns ɪn stoʊn. laɪt, ðeɪ doʊnt! hi kəd meɪk aʊt ðə tʃɹeɪl læn hæd fɑloʊd, tu. ðə haʊn hæd tʃɹɑɾəd ʌp ðə stʃɹiɾ əz fɑɹ əz ðə maʊntɪŋ blɑk, ðən tɝn ən ɡɔn bæk ðə weɪ ɪt hæd kʌm. livɪŋ tʃɹæks ɪn ðə stoʊn əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn ə plaʊd fild. ðeɪ dʒʌs doʊnt!

Perrin decided to abandon going down the alley - it stank as much as the canals in this part of Illian, for one thing - and walked over to Lan, instead. He saw what the Warder was staring at right away. Pressed into the top of the stone mounting block were two prints, as if a huge hound had rested its forepaws there. The smell that was almost burned sulphur was strongest here. Dogs don't make footprints in stone. Light, they don't! He could make out the trail Lan had followed, too. The hound had trotted up the street as far as the mounting block, then turned and gone back the way it had come. Leaving tracks in the stone as if they had been a plowed field. They just don't!

"dɑɹkhaʊnd," læn sɛd, ən zɑɹin ɡæspt. lɔɪəl moʊn sɔfli. fəɹ ən oʊɡiɝ. "eɪ dɑɹkhaʊn livz noʊ mɑɹk ɑn dɝt, blæksmɪθ, nɑɾ ivən ɑn mʌd, bʌt stoʊn ɪz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ. ðəɹ hæzən bɪn ə dɑɹkhaʊn sin saʊθ ə ðə maʊntənz ə dum sɪns ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. ðɪs wʌn wɑz hʌntɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ, aɪd seɪ. ən naʊ ðəɾ ɪts faʊn ɪt, ɪts ɡɔn tə tɛl ɪts mæstɝ."

"Darkhound," Lan said, and Zarine gasped. Loial moaned softly. For an Ogier. "A Darkhound leaves no mark on dirt, blacksmith, not even on mud, but stone is another matter. There hasn't been a Darkhound seen south of the Mountains of Dhoom since the Trolloc Wars. This one was hunting for something, I'd say. And now that it has found it, it has gone to tell its master."

mi? pɛɹɪn θɔt. ɡɹeɪ mɛn ən dɑɹkhaʊnz hʌntɪŋ mi? ðɪs ɪz kɹeɪzi!

Me? Perrin thought. Gray Men and Darkhounds hunting me? This is crazy!

"ɑɹ jə tɛlɪŋ mi niɾə wɑz ɹaɪt?" zɑɹin dɪmændəɾ ɪn ə ʃeɪki vɔɪs. "oʊld ɡɹɪm ɪz ɹɪli ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɪð ðə waɪl hʌnt? laɪt! aɪ ɔlweɪz θɔɾ ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə stɔɹi."

"Are you telling me Nieda was right?" Zarine demanded in a shaky voice. "Old Grim is really riding with the Wild Hunt? Light! I always thought it was just a story."

"doʊn bi ə kəmplit ful, ɡɝl," læn sɛd hɑɹʃli. "ɪf ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɝ fɹi, wiɾ ɔl bi wɝs ðən dɛd baɪ naʊ." hi pɪɹɾ ɔf daʊn ðə stʃɹit, ðə weɪ ðə tʃɹæks wɛnt. "bʌt dɑɹkhaʊnz ɑɹ ɹil ɪnʌf. ɔlmoʊst əz deɪnʒɝəs əz mɹdʒɹɑl, ən hɑɹɾɝ tə kɪl."

"Don't be a complete fool, girl," Lan said harshly. "If the Dark One were free, we'd all be worse than dead by now." He peered off down the street, the way the tracks went. "But Darkhounds are real enough. Almost as dangerous as Myrddraal, and harder to kill."

"naʊ jə bɹɪŋ fɛtʃɪz ɪndə ɪt," zɑɹin mʌɾɝd. "ɡɹeɪ mɛn. fɛtʃɪz. dɑɹkhaʊnz. jə hæd bɛɾɝ lɛd mi tə ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, fɑɹmbɔɪ. wʌɾ ʌðɝ sɝpɹaɪzəz juv weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ mi?"

"Now you bring Fetches into it," Zarine muttered. "Gray Men. Fetches. Darkhounds. You had better lead me to the Horn of Valere, farmboy. What other surprises do you have waiting for me?"

"noʊ kwɛstʃənz," læn toʊl hɝ. "ju stɪl noʊ lɪɾəl ɪnʌf ðət mɔɪɹeɪn wɪl ɹilis jə fɹəm jəɹ oʊθ, ɪf jə swɛɹ nɑt tə fɑloʊ. əl teɪk ðəɾ oʊθ maɪsɛlf, ən jə kən ɡoʊ naʊ. jə wəd bi waɪz tə ɡɪv ɪt."

"No questions," Lan told her. "You still know little enough that Moiraine will release you from your oath, if you swear not to follow. I'll take that oath myself, and you can go now. You would be wise to give it."

"ju wɪl nɑt fɹaɪɾən mi əweɪ, stoʊn-feɪs," zɑɹin sɛd. "aɪ də nɑt fɹaɪɾən izəli." bʌt ʃi saʊndəd fɹaɪɾənd. ən smɛld ɪt, tu.

"You will not frighten me away, stone-face," Zarine said. "I do not frighten easily." But she sounded frightened. And smelled it, too.

"aɪ hæv ə kwɛstʃən," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "æn aɪ wɑn ən ænsɝ. jə dɪdn sɛns ðɪs dɑɹkhaʊnd, læn, ən niðɝ dɪd mɔɪɹeɪn. waɪ nɑt?"

"I have a question," Perrin said, "and I want an answer. You didn't sense this Darkhound, Lan, and neither did Moiraine. Why not?"

ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz saɪlən fəɹ ə taɪm. "ði ænsɝ tə ðæt, blæksmɪθ," hi sɛd ɡɹɪmli ət læst, "meɪ bi mɔɹ ðən jə əɹ aɪ, iðɝ wʌn, wɑnə noʊ. aɪ hoʊp ði ænsɝ dʌz nɑt kɪl əs ɔl. jə θɹi ɡɛt wʌt slip jə kæn. aɪ daʊt wɪl steɪ ðə naɪɾ ɪn ɪljən, ən aɪ fɪɹ wɪv hɑɹd ɹaɪɾɪŋ əhɛd."

The Warder was silent for a time. "The answer to that, blacksmith," he said grimly at last, "may be more than you or I, either one, want to know. I hope the answer does not kill us all. You three get what sleep you can. I doubt we will stay the night in Illian, and I fear we have hard riding ahead."

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ tə du?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"What are you going to do?" Perrin asked.

"aɪ æm ɡoʊɪŋ æftɝ mɔɪɹeɪn. tə tɛl əɹ əbaʊt ðə dɑɹkhaʊnd. ʃi kæn bi æŋɡɹi wɪð mi fəɹ fɑloʊɪŋ fəɹ ðæt, nɑt wən ʃi wəd nɑt noʊ ɪt wɑz ðəɹ əntɪl ɪt tʊk əɹ θɹoʊt."

"I am going after Moiraine. To tell her about the Darkhound. She can't be angry with me for following for that, not when she would not know it was there until it took her throat."

ðə fɝs bɪɡ dʒɹɑps ə ɹeɪn splɑɾɪd ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz əz ðeɪ wɛn bæk ɪnsaɪd. bili hæd ɹimuv ðə læst ə ðə dɛd ɡɹeɪ mɛn ən wɑz swipɪŋ ʌp ðə sɔdʌst wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd blɛd. ðə dɑɹk-aɪd ɡɝl wɑz sɪŋɪŋ ə sæd sɔŋ əbaʊɾ ə bɔɪ livɪŋ ɪz lʌv. mɪstʃɹəs luhən wʊɾə ɛndʒɔɪɾ ɪt ɡɹeɪtli.

The first big drops of rain splatted on the paving stones as they went back inside. Bili had removed the last of the dead Gray Men and was sweeping up the sawdust where they had bled. The dark-eyed girl was singing a sad song about a boy leaving his love. Mistress Luhhan would have enjoyed it greatly.

læn ɹæn əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, əkɹɔs ðə kɑmən ɹum ən ʌp ðə stɛɹz, ən baɪ ðə taɪm pɛɹɪn ɹitʃt ðə sɛkən flɔɹ, ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi stɑɹɾɪŋ bæk daʊn, bʌklɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt ɑn, kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊk hæŋɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ɑɹm əz ɪf i hɑɹdli kɛɹɾ u sɔ ɪt.

Lan ran ahead of them, across the common room and up the stairs, and by the time Perrin reached the second floor, the Warder was already starting back down, buckling his sword belt on, color-shifting cloak hanging over his arm as if he hardly cared who saw it.

"ɪf hiz wɛɹɪŋ ðəɾ ɪn ə sɪɾi. . . ." lɔɪəlz ʃæɡi hɛɹ ɔlmoʊs bɹʌʃt ðə silɪŋ əz i ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ ɪf aɪ kən slip, bʌɾ əl tʃɹaɪ. dʒɹimz wɪl bi mɔɹ plɛzən ðən steɪɪŋ əweɪk."

"If he is wearing that in a city. . . ." Loial's shaggy hair almost brushed the ceiling as he shook his head. "I do not know if I can sleep, but I will try. Dreams will be more pleasant than staying awake."

nɑɾ ɔlweɪz, lɔɪəl, pɛɹɪn θɔɾ əz ði oʊɡiɝ wɛn ɑn daʊn ðə hɔl.

Not always, Loial, Perrin thought as the Ogier went on down the hall.

zɑɹin sim tə wɑnə steɪ wɪð hɪm, bʌɾ i toʊld əɹ tə ɡoʊ tə slip ən fɝmli ʃʌt ðə slæɾɪd dɔɹ ɪn əɹ feɪs. hi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪz oʊn bɛd ɹɪlʌktənli əz i stʃɹɪp daʊn tə hɪz ʌndɝbɹitʃɪz.

Zarine seemed to want to stay with him, but he told her to go to sleep and firmly shut the slatted door in her face. He stared at his own bed reluctantly as he stripped down to his underbreeches.

"aɪ hæv tə faɪn aʊt," hi saɪd, ən kɹɔld ɑntu ðə bɛd. ɹeɪn dʒɹʌm daʊn aʊtsaɪd, ən θʌndɝ bumd. ðə bɹiz əkɹɔs ɪz bɛd kæɹid səm ə ðə ɹeɪnz kulnəs, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i wəd niɾ ɛni ʌv ðə blæŋkəts ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə mætʃɹəs. hɪz læs θɔt bɪfɔɹ slip kleɪmd ɪm wɑz ðəɾ i hæd fɝɡɑɾən tə laɪɾ ə kændəl əɡɛn, ðoʊ ðə ɹum wɑz dɑɹk. kɛɹləs. mʌsnt bi kɛɹləs. kɛɹləsnəs ɹuənz ðə wɝk.

"I have to find out," he sighed, and crawled onto the bed. Rain drummed down outside, and thunder boomed. The breeze across his bed carried some of the rain's coolness, but he did not think he would need any of the blankets at the foot of the mattress. His last thought before sleep claimed him was that he had forgotten to light a candle again, though the room was dark. Careless. Mustn't be careless. Carelessness ruins the work.

dʒɹimz tʌmbəl θɹu hɪz hɛd. dɑɹkhaʊnz tʃeɪsɪŋ hɪm; hi nɛvɝ sɔ ðɛm, bʌɾ i kəd hɪɹ ðɛɹ haʊlɪŋ. feɪdz, ən ɡɹeɪ mɛn. ə tɔl, slɛndɝ mæn flæʃt ɪndə ðɛm əɡɛn ən əɡɛn, ɪn ɹɪtʃli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd koʊɾ ən buts wɪð ɡoʊl fɹɪnʒ; moʊst ə ðə taɪm i hɛld wʌt sim tə bi ə sɔɹd, ʃaɪnɪŋ laɪk ðə sʌn, ən læf tʃɹaɪʌmfənli. səmtaɪmz ðə mæn sæɾ ɑn ə θɹoʊn, ən kɪŋz ən kwinz ɡɹoʊvəl bɪfɔɹ hɪm. ðiz fɛl stʃɹeɪnʒ, əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ɹɪli hɪz dʒɹimz əɾ ɔl.

Dreams tumbled through his head. Darkhounds chasing him; he never saw them, but he could hear their howling. Fades, and Gray Men. A tall, slender man flashed into them again and again, in richly embroidered coat and boots with gold fringe; most of the time he held what seemed to be a sword, shining like the sun, and laughed triumphantly. Sometimes the man sat on a throne, and kings and queens groveled before him. These felt strange, as if they were not really his dreams at all.

ðən ðə dʒɹimz tʃeɪnʒd, ən i nu hi wɑz ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim i sɔt. ðɪs taɪm i hæd hoʊp fəɹ ɪt.

Then the dreams changed, and he knew he was in the wolf dream he sought. This time he had hoped for it.

hi stʊɾ ətɑp ə haɪ, flæt-tɑp stoʊn spaɪɹ, ðə wɪn ɹʌfəlɪŋ ɪz hɛɹ, bɹɪŋɪŋ ə θaʊzən dʒɹaɪ sɛns ən ə feɪn hɪn ʌv wɔɾɝ hɪɾən ɪn ðə fɑɹ dɪstəns. fəɹ ən ɪnstən i θɔɾ i hæd ðə fɔɹm ʌv ə wʊlf, ən fʌmbəld əɾ ɪz oʊn bɑɾi tə meɪk ʃʊɹ wʌɾ i sɔ wɑz ɹɪli hɪm. hi wɔɹ ɪz oʊn koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz ən buts; hi hɛld ɪz baʊ, ən ɪz kwɪvɝ hʌŋ əɾ ɪz saɪd. ði æks wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ.

He stood atop a high, flat-topped stone spire, the wind ruffling his hair, bringing a thousand dry scents and a faint hint of water hidden in the far distance. For an instant he thought he had the form of a wolf, and fumbled at his own body to make sure what he saw was really him. He wore his own coat and breeches and boots; he held his bow, and his quiver hung at his side. The axe was not there.

"hɑpɝ! hɑpɝ, wɛɹ ɑɹ ju?" ðə wʊlf dɪd nɑt kʌm.

"Hopper! Hopper, where are you?" The wolf did not come.

ɹʌɡəd maʊntənz sɝaʊndəd hɪm, ən ʌðɝ tɔl spaɪɹz sɛpɝeɪɾəd baɪ æɹəd flæts ən dʒʌmbəld ɹɪdʒəz, ən səmtaɪmz ə lɑɹdʒ plætoʊ ɹaɪzɪŋ wɪð ʃɪɹ saɪdz. θɪŋz ɡɹu, bʌt nʌθɪŋ lʌʃ. tʌf, ʃɔɹt ɡɹæs. bʊʃəz wɪɹi ən kʌvɝd wɪð θɔɹn, ən ʌðɝ θɪŋz ðəɾ ivən sim tə hæv θɔɹnz ɑn ðɛɹ fæt livz. skæɾɝd, stʌntɪd tʃɹiz, twɪstəd baɪ ðə wɪnd. jɛt wʊlvz kəd faɪn hʌntɪŋ ivən ɪn ðɪs lænd.

Rugged mountains surrounded him, and other tall spires separated by arid flats and jumbled ridges, and sometimes a large plateau rising with sheer sides. Things grew, but nothing lush. Tough, short grass. Bushes wiry and covered with thorn, and other things that even seemed to have thorns on their fat leaves. Scattered, stunted trees, twisted by the wind. Yet wolves could find hunting even in this land.

əz i pɪɹɾ ət ðɪs ɹʌf lænd, ə sɝkəl ə dɑɹknəs sʌɾənli blæŋkt aʊɾ ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə maʊntənz; hi kəd nɑɾ əv sɛd wɛðɝ ðə dɑɹknəs wɑz ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz feɪs əɹ hæfweɪ tə ðə maʊntənz, bʌɾ i sim tə bi siɪŋ θɹu ɪt, ən bɪɑnd. mæt, ɹætlɪŋ ə daɪs kʌp. hɪz əpoʊnən stɛɹɾ ət mæt wɪð aɪz ə faɪɝ. mæt dɪd nɑt sim tə si ðə mæn, bʌt pɛɹɪn nu hɪm.

As he peered at this rough land, a circle of darkness suddenly blanked out a part of the mountains; he could not have said whether the darkness was right in front of his face or halfway to the mountains, but he seemed to be seeing through it, and beyond. Mat, rattling a dice cup. His opponent stared at Mat with eyes of fire. Mat did not seem to see the man, but Perrin knew him.

"mæt!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. "ɪts bælzəmən! laɪt, mæt, jəɹ dɪsɪŋ wɪð bælzəmən!"

"Mat!" he shouted. "It's Ba'alzamon! Light, Mat, you're dicing with Ba'alzamon!"

mæt meɪɾ ɪz tɔs, ən əz ðə daɪs spʌn, ðə vɪʒən feɪɾəd, ən ðə dɑɹk pleɪs wɑz dʒɹaɪ maʊntənz əɡɛn.

Mat made his toss, and as the dice spun, the vision faded, and the dark place was dry mountains again.

"hɑpɝ!" pɛɹɪn tɝn sloʊli, lʊkɪŋ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən. hi ivən lʊkt ʌp ɪn ðə skaɪ - hi kən flaɪ, naʊ - wɛɹ klaʊdz pɹɑməst ə ɹeɪn ðə ɡɹaʊn fɑɹ bɪloʊ ðə spaɪɹ tɑp wəd dʒɹɪŋk ʌp əz sun əz ɪt fɛl. "hɑpɝ!"

"Hopper!" Perrin turned slowly, looking in every direction. He even looked up in the sky - He can fly, now - where clouds promised a rain the ground far below the spire top would drink up as soon as it fell. "Hopper!"

ə dɑɹknəs fɔɹmd əmʌŋ ðə klaʊdz, ə hoʊl ɪndə sʌmwɛɹ ɛls. ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn stʊd lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə hjudʒ mɛɾəl keɪdʒ, wɪð ə ɹeɪz dɔɹ hɛld ɑn ə hɛvi spɹɪŋ. ðeɪ stɛpt ɪn ən ɹitʃt ʌp təɡɛðɝ tə lus ðə kætʃ. ðə bɑɹd dɔɹ snæp daʊn bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ə wʊmən wɪð əɹ hɛɹ ɔl ɪn bɹeɪdz læft ət ðɛm, ən ənʌðɝ wʊmən ɔl ɪn waɪt læft ət hɝ. ðə hoʊl ɪn ðə skaɪ kloʊzd, ən ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli klaʊdz.

A darkness formed among the clouds, a hole into somewhere else. Egwene and Nynaeve and Elayne stood looking at a huge metal cage, with a raised door held on a heavy spring. They stepped in and reached up together to loose the catch. The barred door snapped down behind them. A woman with her hair all in braids laughed at them, and another woman all in white laughed at her. The hole in the sky closed, and there were only clouds.

"hɑpɝ, wɛɹ ɑɹ ju?" hi kɔld. "aɪ nid ju! hɑpɝ!"

"Hopper, where are you?" he called. "I need you! Hopper!"

ən ðə ɡɹɪzəld wʊlf wɑz ðɛɹ, əlaɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə spaɪɹ tɑp əz ɪf i hæd lɛp fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ haɪɝ.

And the grizzled wolf was there, alighting on the spire top as if he had leaped from somewhere higher.

deɪnʒɝəs. juv bɪn wɔɹnd, jʌŋ bʊl. tu jʌŋ. tu nu jɛt.

Dangerous. You have been warned, Young Bull. Too young. Too new yet.

"aɪ nid tə noʊ, hɑpɝ. jə sɛd ðəɹ wɝ θɪŋz aɪ mʌst si. aɪ nid tə si mɔɹ, noʊ mɔɹ." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, θɪŋkɪŋ ə mæt, ʌv ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn. "ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz aɪ si hɪɹ. ɑɹ ðeɪ ɹil?" hɑpɝz sɛndɪŋ sim sloʊ, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ soʊ sɪmpəl ðə wʊlf kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðə nid tə ɪkspleɪn ɪt, əɹ haʊ tə. faɪnəli, ðoʊ, sʌmθɪŋ keɪm.

"I need to know, Hopper. You said there were things I must see. I need to see more, know more." He hesitated, thinking of Mat, of Egwene and Nynaeve and Elayne. "The strange things I see here. Are they real?" Hopper's sending seemed slow, as if it were so simple the wolf could not understand the need to explain it, or how to. Finally, though, something came.

wʌɾ ɪz ɹil ɪz nɑt ɹil. wʌɾ ɪz nɑt ɹil ɪz ɹil. flɛʃ ɪz ə dʒɹim, ən dʒɹimz əv flɛʃ.

What is real is not real. What is not real is real. Flesh is a dream, and dreams have flesh.

"ðæt dʌzn tɛl mi ɛniθɪŋ, hɑpɝ. aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd." ðə wʊlf lʊkt ət hɪm, əz ɪf i hæd sɛɾ i dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðət wɔɾɝ wɑz wɛt. "ju sɛɾ aɪ hæd tə si sʌmθɪŋ, ən jə ʃoʊd mi bælzəmən, ən lænfɝ."

"That doesn't tell me anything, Hopper. I do not understand." The wolf looked at him, as if he had said he did not understand that water was wet. "You said I had to see something, and you showed me Ba'alzamon, and Lanfear."

hɑɹtfæŋ. munhʌntɝ.

Heartfang. Moonhunter.

"waɪ dɪd jə ʃoʊ mi, hɑpɝ? waɪ dɪɾ aɪ hæv tə si ðɛm?"

"Why did you show me, Hopper? Why did I have to see them?"

ðə læs hʌn kʌmz. sædnəs fɪl ðə sɛndɪŋ, ən ə sɛns ʌv ɪnɛvɪɾəbɪlɪti. wʌt wɪl bi mʌs bi.

The Last Hunt comes. Sadness filled the sending, and a sense of inevitability. What will be must be.

"aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd! ðə læs hʌnt? wʌt læs hʌnt? hɑpɝ, ɡɹeɪ mɛn keɪm tə kɪl mi tənaɪt."

"I do not understand! The Last Hunt? What Last Hunt? Hopper, Gray Men came to kill me tonight."

ðə nɑtdɛd hʌn ju?

The Notdead hunt you?

"jɛs! ɡɹeɪ mɛn! æftɝ mi! ən ə dɑɹkhaʊnd wɑz ɹaɪɾ aʊtsaɪd ði ɪn! aɪ wɑnə noʊ waɪ ðəɹ æftɝ mi."

"Yes! Gray Men! After me! And a Darkhound was right outside the inn! I want to know why they're after me."

ʃæɾoʊbɹəðɝz! hɑpɝ kɹaʊtʃt, lʊkɪŋ tə iðɝ saɪɾ əz ɪf i ɔlmoʊst ɪkspɛktəɾ ən ətæk. lɔŋ sɪns wɪv sin ðə ʃæɾoʊbɹəðɝz. jə mʌst ɡoʊ, jʌŋ bʊl. ɡɹeɪt deɪnʒɝ! fli ðə ʃæɾoʊbɹəðɝz!

Shadowbrothers! Hopper crouched, looking to either side as if he almost expected an attack. Long since we have seen the Shadowbrothers. You must go, Young Bull. Great danger! Flee the Shadowbrothers!

"waɪ ɑɹ ðeɪ æftɝ mi, hɑpɝ? jə də noʊ. aɪ noʊ jə du!"

"Why are they after me, Hopper? You do know. I know you do!"

fli, jʌŋ bʊl. hɑpɝ lɛpt, fɹpɔz hɪɾɪŋ pɛɹɪnz tʃɛst, nɑkɪŋ ɪm bæk, oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ. fli ðə ʃæɾoʊbɹəðɝz.

Flee, Young Bull. Hopper leaped, forepaws hitting Perrin's chest, knocking him back, over the edge. Flee the Shadowbrothers.

ðə wɪn ɹʌʃt ɪn ɪz ɪɹz əz i fɛl. hɑpɝ ən ði ɛdʒ ə ðə spaɪɹ tɑp dwɪndəld əbʌv hɪm. "waɪ, hɑpɝ?" hi ʃaʊɾəd. "aɪ hæv tə noʊ waɪ!"

The wind rushed in his ears as he fell. Hopper and the edge of the spire top dwindled above him. "Why, Hopper?" he shouted. "I have to know why!"

ðə læs hʌn kʌmz.

The Last Hunt comes.

hi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə hɪt. hi nu ɪt. ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪloʊ ɹʌʃt ʌp ət hɪm, ən i tɛnst əɡɛns ðə kɹʌʃɪŋ ɪmpæk ðæt. . . .

He was going to hit. He knew it. The ground below rushed up at him, and he tensed against the crushing impact that. . . .

hi stɑɹɾəd əweɪk, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə kændəl flɪkɝɪŋ ɑn ðə smɔl teɪbəl bɪsaɪd ðə bɛd. laɪtnɪŋ flæʃɪz lɪt ðə wɪndoʊ, ən θʌndɝ ɹæɾəld ɪt. "wʌt dɪɾ i min, ðə læs hʌnt?" hi mʌmbəld. aɪ dɪd nɑt laɪɾ ɛni kændəl.

He started awake, staring at the candle flickering on the small table beside the bed. Lightning flashes lit the window, and thunder rattled it. "What did he mean, the Last Hunt?" he mumbled. I did not light any candle.

"ju tɔk tə jɝsɛlf. ən θɹæʃ ɪn jəɹ slip."

"You talk to yourself. And thrash in your sleep."

hi dʒʌmpt, ən kɝs hɪmsɛlf fəɹ nɑt hævɪŋ noʊɾəst ði ɝbəl sɛn ɪn ði ɛɹ. zɑɹin sæɾ ɑn ə stul ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə kændəllaɪt, ɛlboʊ ɑn əɹ ni, tʃɪn ɑn əɹ fɪst, wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm.

He jumped, and cursed himself for not having noticed the herbal scent in the air. Zarine sat on a stool at the edge of the candlelight, elbow on her knee, chin on her fist, watching him.

"ju ɑɹ tɑvɝən," ʃi sɛɾ əz ɪf tɪkɪŋ ɔf ə pɔɪnt. "stoʊn-feɪs θɪŋks ðoʊz ɑɾ aɪz ə jʊɹz kən si θɪŋz ɪz kænt. ɡɹeɪ mɛn wɑnə kɪl ju. jə tʃɹævəl wɪð ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ə wɔɹɾɝ, ən ən oʊɡiɝ. jə fɹi keɪdʒd il ən kɪl waɪtkloʊks. hu ɑɹ ju, fɑɹmbɔɪ, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn?" hɝ vɔɪs sɛd ðət wɑz ðə moʊst ɹɪdɪkjələs θɪŋ ʃi kəd θɪŋk ʌv, bʌɾ i stɪl ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli. "huɛvɝ jə ɑɹ, bɪɡ mæn," ʃi æɾəd, "ju kəd də wɪð ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ hɛɹ ɑn jəɹ tʃɛst."

"You are ta'veren," she said as if ticking off a point. "Stone-face thinks those odd eyes of yours can see things his can't. Gray Men want to kill you. You travel with an Aes Sedai, a Warder, and an Ogier. You free caged Aiel and kill Whitecloaks. Who are you, farmboy, the Dragon Reborn?" Her voice said that was the most ridiculous thing she could think of, but he still shifted uneasily. "Whoever you are, big man," she added, "you could do with a little more hair on your chest."

hi twɪstəɾ ɝaʊnd, kɝsɪŋ, ən skɹæbəld wʌn ə ðə blæŋkəts oʊvɝ ɪm tə hɪz nɛk. laɪt, ʃi kips meɪkɪŋ mi dʒʌmp laɪk ə fɹɑɡ ɑn ə hɑt ɹɑk. zɑɹinz feɪs wɑz ət ði ɛdʒ ə ʃædoʊz. hi kəd nɑt si hɝ klɪɹli ɪksɛpt wən laɪtnɪŋ ʃoʊn θɹu ðə wɪndoʊ, ðə hɑɹʃ ɪluməneɪʃən kæstɪŋ ɪts oʊn ʃædoʊz əkɹɔs əɹ stʃɹɔŋ noʊz ən haɪ tʃikboʊnz. sʌɾənli hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd mɪn seɪɪŋ i ʃəd ɹʌn fɹəm ə bjuɾəfəl wʊmən. wʌns i hæd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz lænfɝ ɪn ðət wʊlf dʒɹim, hi hæd θɔt mɪn mʌs min əɹ - hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl fəɹ ə wʊmən tə bi ɛni mɔɹ bjuɾəfəl ðən lænfɝ - bʌt ʃi wɑz dʒʌst ɪn ə dʒɹim. zɑɹin wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm wɪð ðoʊz dɑɹk, tɪltəɾ aɪz, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ, weɪɪŋ.

He twisted around, cursing, and scrabbled one of the blankets over him to his neck. Light, she keeps making me jump like a frog on a hot rock. Zarine's face was at the edge of shadows. He could not see her clearly except when lightning shone through the window, the harsh illumination casting its own shadows across her strong nose and high cheekbones. Suddenly he remembered Min saying he should run from a beautiful woman. Once he had recognized Lanfear in that wolf dream, he had thought Min must mean her - he did not think it was possible for a woman to be any more beautiful than Lanfear - but she was just in a dream. Zarine was sitting there staring at him with those dark, tilted eyes, considering, weighing.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ?" hi dɪmændəd. "wʌt dʒju wɑnt? hu ɑɹ ju?"

"What are you doing here?" he demanded. "What do you want? Who are you?"

ʃi θɹu bæk əɹ hɛɾ ən læft. "aɪ æm feɪl, fɑɹmbɔɪ, ə hʌntɝ ə ðə hɔɹn. hu dʒju θɪŋk aɪ æm, ðə wʊmən ə jəɹ dʒɹimz? waɪ dɪd jə dʒʌmp ðət weɪ? jə wəd θɪŋk aɪ hæd ɡus ju."

She threw back her head and laughed. "I am Faile, farmboy, a Hunter of the Horn. Who do you think I am, the woman of your dreams? Why did you jump that way? You would think I had goosed you."

bɪfɔɹ i kəd faɪnd wɝdz, ðə dɔɹ kɹæʃt bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl, ən mɔɪɹeɪn stʊɾ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, hɝ feɪs əz peɪl ən ɡɹɪm əz dɛθ. "jɔɹ wʊlf dʒɹimz tɛl əz tʃɹuli əz ə dʒɹimɝz, pɛɹɪn. ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ lus, ən wʌn ə ðɛm ɹulz ɪn ɪljən."

Before he could find words, the door crashed back against the wall, and Moiraine stood in the doorway, her face as pale and grim as death. "Your wolf dreams tell as truly as a Dreamer's, Perrin. The Forsaken are loose, and one of them rules in Illian."


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾifɔɹ


CHAPTER 44

hʌntəd


Hunted

pɛɹɪn klaɪmd ɔf ðə bɛɾ ən stɑɹɾəd dʒɹɛsɪŋ, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ wɛðɝ zɑɹin wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ nɑt. hi nu wʌɾ i ɪntɛndəd tə du, bʌɾ i æsk mɔɪɹeɪn ɛniweɪ. "du wi liv?"

Perrin climbed off the bed and started dressing, not caring whether Zarine was watching or not. He knew what he intended to do, but he asked Moiraine anyway. "Do we leave?"

"ənlɛs jə wɑnə meɪk kloʊsɝ əkweɪntəns wɪð sɑmaɪl," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli. θʌndɝ kɹæʃt oʊvɝhɛɾ əz ɪf tə pʌŋktʃueɪɾ əɹ sɛntəns, ən laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ bɛɹli ɡlænst ət zɑɹin.

"Unless you want to make closer acquaintance with Sammael," she said dryly. Thunder crashed overhead as if to punctuate her sentence, and lightning flashed. The Aes Sedai barely glanced at Zarine.

stʌfɪŋ ɪz ʃɝteɪl ɪndə hɪz bɹitʃɪz, hi sʌɾənli wɪʃt i hæɾ ɪz koʊɾ ən kloʊk ɑn. neɪmɪŋ wɪtʃ wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɪt wɑz meɪd ðə ɹum sim koʊld. bælzəmən ɪzən bæɾ ɪnʌf; wɪv tə hæv ðə fɔɹseɪkən lus, tu. laɪt, dʌz ɪɾ ivən mæɾɝ ɪf wi faɪn ɹænd, naʊ? ɪz ɪt tu leɪt? bʌɾ i kɛp dʒɹɛsɪŋ, stæmpɪŋ ɪz fiɾ ɪndə hɪz buts. ɪt wɑz ðəɾ əɹ ɡɪv ʌp, ən tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk wɝ nɑt noʊn fəɹ ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp.

Stuffing his shirttail into his breeches, he suddenly wished he had his coat and cloak on. Naming which one of the Forsaken it was made the room seem cold. Ba'alzamon isn't bad enough; we have to have the Forsaken loose, too. Light, does it even matter if we find Rand, now? Is it too late? But he kept dressing, stamping his feet into his boots. It was that or give up, and Two Rivers folk were not known for giving up.

"sɑmaɪl?" zɑɹin sɛd feɪnli. "wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɹulz . . . ? laɪt!"

"Sammael?" Zarine said faintly. "One of the Forsaken rules . . . ? Light!"

"du jə stɪl wɪʃ tə fɑloʊ?" mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sɔfli. "aɪ wəd nɑt meɪk jə steɪ hɪɹ, nɑt naʊ, bʌɾ əl ɡɪv jə wʌn læs tʃæns tə swɛɹ tə ɡoʊ ənʌðɝ weɪ ðən aɪ."

"Do you still wish to follow?" Moiraine said softly. "I would not make you stay here, not now, but I will give you one last chance to swear to go another way than I."

zɑɹin hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ən pɛɹɪn pɔzd wɪð ɪz koʊt hæf ɑn. ʃʊɹli noʊ wʌn wəd tʃuz tə ɡoʊ wɪð pipəl u hæɾ ɪnkɝd ðə ɹæθ ʌv wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. nɑt naʊ ðət ʃi nu sʌmθɪŋ ʌv wʌt ðeɪ feɪst. nɑɾ ənlɛs ʃiz ə vɛɹi ɡʊd ɹizən. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ɛniwʌn u hɝd wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɑz lus ʃəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bi ɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ ə si foʊk ʃɪp ən æskɪŋ pæsədʒ tə ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ði il weɪst, nɑt sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ θɪŋkɪŋ.

Zarine hesitated, and Perrin paused with his coat half on. Surely no one would choose to go with people who had incurred the wrath of one of the Forsaken. Not now that she knew something of what they faced. Not unless she has a very good reason. For that matter, anyone who heard one of the Forsaken was loose should already be running for a Sea Folk ship and asking passage to the other side of the Aiel Waste, not sitting there thinking.

"noʊ," zɑɹin sɛd faɪnəli, ən i bɪɡæn tə ɹɪlæks. "noʊ, əl nɑt swɛɹ tə ɡoʊ ənʌðɝ weɪ. wɛðɝ jə lɛd mi tə ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ əɹ nɑt, nɑɾ ivən huɛvɝ dʌz faɪn ðə hɔɹn wɪl əv ə stɔɹi sətʃ əz ðɪs. aɪ θɪŋk ðɪs stɔɹi wɪl bi toʊl fəɹ ði eɪdʒəz, ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən əl bi pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt."

"No," Zarine said finally, and he began to relax. "No, I will not swear to go another way. Whether you lead me to the Horn of Valere or not, not even whoever does find the Horn will have a story such as this. I think this story will be told for the ages, Aes Sedai, and I will be part of it."

"noʊ!" pɛɹɪn snæpt. "ðæɾ ɪz nɑt ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf. wʌt dʒju wɑnt?"

"No!" Perrin snapped. "That is not good enough. What do you want?"

"aɪ hæv noʊ taɪm fəɹ ðɪs bɪkɝɪŋ," mɔɪɹeɪn bɹoʊk ɪn. "ɛni moʊmən lɔɹd bɹɛn meɪ lɝn ðət wʌn ə hɪz dɑɹkhaʊnz ɪz dɛd. jə kən bi ʃʊɹ hɪl noʊ ðət minz ə wɔɹɾɝ, ən hɪl kʌm lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ðə ɡeɪɾɪnz ɛɛs sədaɪ. dʒju min tə sɪt hɪɹ əntɪl i dɪskʌvɝz wɛɹ jə ɑɹ? muv, jə fulɪʃ tʃɪlʒɹən! muv!" ʃi vænɪʃt daʊn ðə hɔl bɪfɔɹ i kəɾ oʊpən ɪz maʊθ.

"I have no time for this bickering," Moiraine broke in. "Any moment Lord Brend may learn that one of his Darkhounds is dead. You can be sure he will know that means a Warder, and he will come looking for the Gaidin's Aes Sedai. Do you mean to sit here until he discovers where you are? Move, you foolish children! Move!" She vanished down the hall before he could open his mouth.

zɑɹin dɪd nɑt weɪt, iðɝ, ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ðə ɹum wɪθaʊɾ əɹ kændəl. pɛɹɪn heɪstəli ɡæðɝɾ ɪz θɪŋz ən dæʃt fəɹ ðə bæk stɛɹz stɪl bʌklɪŋ ɪz æks bɛlt ɝaʊn ɪz weɪst. hi kɑɾ ʌp tə lɔɪəl ɡoʊɪŋ daʊn, ði oʊɡiɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stʌf ə wʊd-baʊn bʊk ɪndə hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz ən pʊɾ ɑn ɪz kloʊk ət ðə seɪm taɪm. pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ɪm ə hænd wɪð ðə kloʊk waɪl ðeɪ boʊθ ɹæn daʊn ðə stɛɹz, ən zɑɹin kɑt ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd dæʃ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə pɔɹɪŋ ɹeɪn.

Zarine did not wait, either, running from the room without her candle. Perrin hastily gathered his things and dashed for the back stairs still buckling his axe belt around his waist. He caught up to Loial going down, the Ogier trying to stuff a wood-bound book into his saddlebags and put on his cloak at the same time. Perrin gave him a hand with the cloak while they both ran down the stairs, and Zarine caught the pair of them before they could dash out into the pouring rain.

pɛɹɪn hʌntʃt ɪz ʃoʊldɝz əɡɛns ðə wɛɾ ən ɹæn fəɹ ðə steɪbəl əkɹɔs ðə stɔɹm-dɑɹkən jɑɹd wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ tə pʊl ʌp ðə hʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊk. ʃiz tə hæv ə ɹizən. biɪŋ ɪn ə blʌɾi stɔɹi ɪzən ɹizən ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛni bʌɾ ə mædwʊmən! ðə ɹeɪn soʊkt ɪz ʃæɡi kɝlz, leɪɪŋ əm flæɾ ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd, bɪfɔɹ i dɑɹɾɪd θɹu ðə steɪbəl dɔɹ.

Perrin hunched his shoulders against the wet and ran for the stable across the storm-darkened yard without waiting to pull up the hood of his cloak. She has to have a reason. Being in a bloody story isn't reason enough for any but a madwoman! The rain soaked his shaggy curls, laying them flat around his head, before he darted through the stable door.

mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, ɪn ən ɔɪl kloʊk stɪl biɾɪd wɪð ɹeɪn, ən niɾə hoʊldɪŋ ə læntɝn fəɹ læn tə fɪnɪʃ sæɾəlɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz. ðəɹ wɑz ən ɛkstʃɹə, ə beɪ ɡɛldɪŋ wɪð ən ivən stʃɹɔŋɝ noʊz ðən zɑɹinz.

Moiraine was there before them, in an oiled cloak still beaded with rain, and Nieda holding a lantern for Lan to finish saddling the horses. There was an extra, a bay gelding with an even stronger nose than Zarine's.

"aɪ wɪl sɛn pɪdʒənz ɛvɹi deɪ," ðə staʊt wʊmən wɑz seɪɪŋ. "noʊ wʌn wɪl səspɛk mi. fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi! ivən waɪtkloʊks də spik wɛl ə mi."

"I will send pigeons every day," the stout woman was saying. "No one will suspect me. Fortune prick me! Even Whitecloaks do speak well of me."

"lɪsən tə mi, wʊmən!" mɔɪɹeɪn snæpt. "ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ ə waɪtkloʊk əɹ ə dɑɹkfɹɛn aɪ spik ʌv. jəl fli ðɪs sɪɾi, ən meɪk ɛniwʌn jə kɛɹ fəɹ fli wɪð ju. fəɹ ə dʌzən jɪɹz juv oʊbeɪd mi. oʊbeɪ mi naʊ!" niɾə nɑɾəd, bʌt ɹɪlʌktənli, ən mɔɪɹeɪn ɡɹaʊld wɪð ɛksæspɝeɪʃən.

"Listen to me, woman!" Moiraine snapped. "This is not a Whitecloak or a Darkfriend I speak of. You will flee this city, and make anyone you care for flee with you. For a dozen years you have obeyed me. Obey me now!" Nieda nodded, but reluctantly, and Moiraine growled with exasperation.

"ðə beɪ ɪz jʊɹz, ɡɝl," læn sɛd tə zɑɹin. "ɡɛɾ ɑn ɪz bæk. ɪf jə də nɑt noʊ haʊ tə ɹaɪd, jə mʌs lɝn baɪ duɪŋ, əɹ teɪk maɪ ɔfɝ."

"The bay is yours, girl," Lan said to Zarine. "Get on his back. If you do not know how to ride, you must learn by doing, or take my offer."

pʊɾɪŋ wʌn hæn ɑn ðə haɪ pɑməl, ʃi vɔltəɾ izəli ɪndə ðə sæɾəl. "aɪ wɑz ɑn ə hɔɹs wʌns, stoʊn-feɪs, naʊ ðəɾ aɪ θɪŋk ʌv ɪt." ʃi twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn tə taɪ hɝ bʌndəl bɪhaɪn hɝ.

Putting one hand on the high pommel, she vaulted easily into the saddle. "I was on a horse once, stone-face, now that I think of it." She twisted around to tie her bundle behind her.

"wʌt dɪd jə min, mɔɪɹeɪn?" pɛɹɪn dɪmændəɾ əz i tɔst ɪz sæɾəlbæɡ əkɹɔs stɛpɝz bæk. "ju sɛɾ i wəd faɪn aʊt wɛɹ aɪ æm. hi noʊz. ðə ɡɹeɪ mɛn!" niɾə ɡɪɡəld, ən i wʌndɝɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli haʊ mʌtʃ ʃi ɹɪli nu əɹ bɪlivd əmʌŋ ðə θɪŋz ʃi sɛd ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪn.

"What did you mean, Moiraine?" Perrin demanded as he tossed his saddlebag across Stepper's back. "You said he would find out where I am. He knows. The Gray Men!" Nieda giggled, and he wondered irritably how much she really knew or believed among the things she said she did not believe in.

"sɑmaɪl dɪd nɑt sɛn ðə ɡɹeɪ mɛn." mɔɪɹeɪn maʊntəɾ ɑldib wɪð ə kul, stʃɹeɪt-bæk pɹisɪʒən, ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ noʊ hɝi. "ðə dɑɹkhaʊnd wɑz hɪz, haʊɛvɝ. aɪ bɪliv ɪt fɑloʊd maɪ tʃɹeɪl. hi wəd nɑɾ əv sɛn boʊθ. sʌmwʌn wɑns ju, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk sɑmaɪl ivən noʊz jə ɪɡzɪst. jɛt." pɛɹɪn stɑpt wɪð wʌn fʊɾ ɪn ðə stɝəp, stɛɹɪŋ ət hɝ, bʌt ʃi simd mɔɹ kənsɝnd wɪð pæɾɪŋ əɹ mɛɹz ɑɹtʃɪŋ nɛk ðən wɪð ðə kwɛstʃənz ɑn ɪz feɪs.

"Sammael did not send the Gray Men." Moiraine mounted Aldieb with a cool, straight-backed precision, almost as if there were no hurry. "The Darkhound was his, however. I believe it followed my trail. He would not have sent both. Someone wants you, but I do not think Sammael even knows you exist. Yet." Perrin stopped with one foot in the stirrup, staring at her, but she seemed more concerned with patting her mare's arching neck than with the questions on his face.

"æz wɛl aɪ wɛn æftɝ ju," læn sɛd, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ snɪf laʊdli.

"As well I went after you," Lan said, and the Aes Sedai sniffed loudly.

"aɪ kəd wɪʃ jə wɝ ə wʊmən, ɡeɪɾɪn. aɪ wəd sɛn jə tə ðə taʊɝ əz ə nɑvəs tə lɝn tə oʊbeɪ!" hi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ən tʌtʃt ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd, ðən swʌŋ ɪndə hɪz sæɾəl, ən ʃi saɪd. "pɝhæps ɪts əz wɛl jə ɑɹ dɪsəbiɾiənt. səmtaɪmz ɪts wɛl. bɪsaɪdz, aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ʃɛɹiəm ən sɪuən sɑntʃ təɡɛðɝ kəd titʃ jə oʊbiɾiəns."

"I could wish you were a woman, Gaidin. I would send you to the Tower as a novice to learn to obey!" He raised an eyebrow and touched the hilt of his sword, then swung into his saddle, and she sighed. "Perhaps it is as well you are disobedient. Sometimes it is well. Besides, I do not think Sheriam and Siuan Sanche together could teach you obedience."

"aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd," pɛɹɪn sɛd. aɪ sim tə bi seɪɪŋ ðəɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil, ən aɪm taɪɝɾ ʌv ɪt. aɪ wɑn səm ænsɝz aɪ kən ʌndɝstænd. hi pʊl hɪmsɛlf ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ ʌp soʊ mɔɪɹeɪn wəd nɑt bi lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət hɪm; ʃi hæɾ ɪnʌf ædvæntɪdʒ wɪθaʊt ðæt. "ɪf i dɪd nɑt sɛn ðə ɡɹeɪ mɛn, hu dɪd? ɪf ə mɹdʒɹɑl, əɹ ənʌðɝ fɔɹseɪkən. . . ." hi stɑp tə swɑloʊ. ənʌðɝ fɔɹseɪkən! laɪt! "ɪf sʌmbɑɾi ɛls sɛn ðɛm, waɪ dɪd ðeɪ nɑt tɛl hɪm? ðəɹ ɔl dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ɑɹən ðeɪ? ən waɪ mi, mɔɪɹeɪn? waɪ mi? ɹænd ɪz ðə blʌɾi dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn!"

"I do not understand," Perrin said. I seem to be saying that a great deal, and I'm tired of it. I want some answers I can understand. He pulled himself the rest of the way up so Moiraine would not be looking down at him; she had enough advantage without that. "If he did not send the Gray Men, who did? If a Myrddraal, or another Forsaken. . . ." He stopped to swallow. ANOTHER Forsaken! Light! "If somebody else sent them, why did they not tell him? They're all Darkfriends, aren't they? And why me, Moiraine? Why me? Rand is the bloody Dragon Reborn!"

hi hɝd ðə ɡæsps fɹəm zɑɹin ən niɾə, ən oʊnli ðən ɹilaɪzd wʌɾ i hæd sɛd. mɔɪɹeɪnz stɛɹ sim tə skɪn ɪm laɪk ðə ʃɑɹpəst stil. heɪsti blʌɾi tʌŋ. wən dɪɾ aɪ stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ bɪfɔɹ aɪ spik? ɪt sim tə hɪm ɪt hæd hæpənd wən i fɝs fɛl zɑɹinz aɪz wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm. ʃi wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm naʊ, wɪð əɹ maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən.

He heard the gasps from Zarine and Nieda, and only then realized what he had said. Moiraine's stare seemed to skin him like the sharpest steel. Hasty bloody tongue. When did I stop thinking before I speak? It seemed to him it had happened when he first felt Zarine's eyes watching him. She was watching him now, with her mouth hanging open.

"ju ɑɹ sil tə ʌs, naʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn toʊl ðə boʊld-feɪst wʊmən. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ tɝnɪŋ bæk fəɹ ju. ɛvɝ." zɑɹin lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ ən wɑz əfɹeɪd tə, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən ɛlswɛɹ. "niɾə, fli ɪljən tənaɪt. ɪn ðɪs aʊɝ! ən hoʊl jəɹ tʌŋ ivən bɛɾɝ ðən juv hɛld ɪɾ ɔl ðiz jɪɹz. ðəɹ ɑɹ ðoʊz u wəd kʌɾ ɪɾ aʊt fəɹ wʌt jə kəd seɪ, bɪfɔɹ aɪ kəɾ ivən faɪn ju." hɝ hɑɹd toʊn lɛf daʊts əz tə ɪɡzækli haʊ ʃi mɛn ðæt, ən niɾə nɑɾəd vɪɡɝəsli əz ɪf ʃi hæd hɝɾ ɪt boʊθ weɪz.

"You are sealed to us, now," Moiraine told the bold-faced woman. "There is no turning back for you. Ever." Zarine looked as if she wanted to say something and was afraid to, but the Aes Sedai had already turned her attention elsewhere. "Nieda, flee Illian tonight. In this hour! And hold your tongue even better than you have held it all these years. There are those who would cut it out for what you could say, before I could even find you." Her hard tone left doubts as to exactly how she meant that, and Nieda nodded vigorously as if she had heard it both ways.

"æz fəɹ ju, pɛɹɪn." ðə waɪt mɛɹ muv kloʊsɝ, ən i lin bæk fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪspaɪɾ ɔl i kəd du. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ mɛni θɹɛdz woʊvən ɪn ðə pæɾɝn, ən səm ɑɹ əz blæk əz ðə ʃædoʊ ɪtsɛlf. teɪk kɛɹ wʌn ə ðɛm dʌz nɑt stʃɹæŋɡəl ju." hɝ hilz tʌtʃt ɑldibz flæŋks, ən ðə mɛɹ dɑɹɾɪd ɪndə ðə ɹeɪn, mændɑɹb fɑloʊɪŋ kloʊs bɪhaɪnd.

"As for you, Perrin." The white mare moved closer, and he leaned back from the Aes Sedai despite all he could do. "There are many threads woven in the Pattern, and some are as black as the Shadow itself. Take care one of them does not strangle you." Her heels touched Aldieb's flanks, and the mare darted into the rain, Mandarb following close behind.

bɝn ju, mɔɪɹeɪn, pɛɹɪn θɔɾ əz i ɹoʊɾ æftɝ ðɛm. səmtaɪmz aɪ də nɑt noʊ wɪtʃ saɪd jə ɑɹ ɑn. hi ɡlænst ət zɑɹin, ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪm əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn bɔɹn ɪn ə sæɾəl. ən huz saɪɾ ɑɹ jə ɑn?

Burn you, Moiraine, Perrin thought as he rode after them. Sometimes I do not know which side you are on. He glanced at Zarine, riding beside him as if she had been born in a saddle. And whose side are you on?

ɹeɪn kɛpt pipəl ɔf ðə stʃɹits ən kənælz, soʊ noʊ vɪzəbəl aɪz wɑtʃt əm ɡoʊ, bʌɾ ɪt meɪd ðə fʊɾɪŋ ənsɝɾən fəɹ ðə hɔɹsəz ɑn ði ənivən peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz. baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə mɑɹeɪɾoʊ kɑzweɪ, ə waɪd ɹoʊɾ ə pæk dɝt stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ nɔɹθ θɹu ðə mɑɹʃ, ðə daʊnpɔɹ hæd bɪɡʌn tə slækən. θʌndɝ stɪl bumd, bʌt ðə laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt fɑɹ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, pɝhæps aʊt tə si.

Rain kept people off the streets and canals, so no visible eyes watched them go, but it made the footing uncertain for the horses on the uneven paving stones. By the time they reached the Maredo Causeway, a wide road of packed dirt stretching north through the marsh, the downpour had begun to slacken. Thunder still boomed, but the lightning flashed far behind them, perhaps out to sea.

pɛɹɪn fɛlt ə bɪɾ ə lʌk wɑz kʌmɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ. ðə ɹeɪn hæd steɪd lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə haɪd ðɛɹ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ, bʌt naʊ ɪt sim ðeɪ wəɾ əv ə klɪɹ naɪt fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ. hi sɛɾ əz mʌtʃ, bʌt læn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

Perrin felt a bit of luck was coming their way. The rain had stayed long enough to hide their departure, but now it seemed they would have a clear night for riding. He said as much, but Lan shook his head.

"dɑɹkhaʊnz laɪk klɪɹ, munlɪt naɪts bɛst, blæksmɪθ, ɹeɪn ðə list. ə ɡʊd θʌndɝstɔɹm kən kip əm əweɪ kəmplitli." əz ɪf ɪz wɝdz hæd bɪɾən ɪt, ðə ɹeɪn feɪɾəd tə ə feɪn dʒɹɪzəl. pɛɹɪn hɝd lɔɪəl ɡɹoʊn bɪhaɪn hɪm.

"Darkhounds like clear, moonlit nights best, blacksmith, rain the least. A good thunderstorm can keep them away completely." As if his words had bidden it, the rain faded to a faint drizzle. Perrin heard Loial groan behind him.

kɑzweɪ ən mɑɹʃ ɛndəd təɡɛðɝ, səm tu maɪlz əɹ soʊ fɹəm ðə sɪɾi, bʌt ðə ɹoʊd kɛpt ɑn, sloʊli bɛɹɪŋ ə lɪɾəl istwɝd. klaʊd-dɑɹk ivnɪŋ feɪɾəd ɪndə naɪt, ən ðə mɪstɪŋ ɹeɪn kəntɪnjud. mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn kɛpt ə stɛɾi, ɡɹaʊnd-iɾɪŋ peɪs. ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz splæʃt θɹu pʌɾəlz ɑn ðə hɑɹd-pæk dɝt. ðə mun ʃoʊn θɹu ɡæps ɪn ðə klaʊdz. loʊ hɪlz bɪɡæn tə ɹaɪz ɝaʊn ðɛm, ən tʃɹiz tə əpɪɹ mɔɹ ən mɔɹ ɔfən. pɛɹɪn θɔt ðəɹ mʌs bi fɔɹəst əhɛd, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ hi laɪk ði aɪdiə. wʊdz kəd haɪɾ əm fɹəm pɝsut; wʊdz kəd lɛt pɝsut kʌm kloʊs bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ sɔ.

Causeway and marsh ended together, some two miles or so from the city, but the road kept on, slowly bearing a little eastward. Cloud-dark evening faded into night, and the misting rain continued. Moiraine and Lan kept a steady, ground-eating pace. The horses' hooves splashed through puddles on the hard-packed dirt. The moon shone through gaps in the clouds. Low hills began to rise around them, and trees to appear more and more often. Perrin thought there must be forest ahead, but he was not sure how he liked the idea. Woods could hide them from pursuit; woods could let pursuit come close before they saw.

ə θɪn haʊl ɹoʊz fɑɹ bɪhaɪn ðɛm. fəɹ ə moʊmən i θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ə wʊlf; hi sɝpɹaɪz hɪmsɛlf baɪ nɪɹli ɹitʃɪŋ aʊt tə ðə wʊlf bɪfɔɹ i kəd stɑp. ðə kɹaɪ keɪm əɡɛn, ən i nu ɪt wɑz noʊ wʊlf. ʌðɝz ænsɝɾ ɪt, ɔl maɪlz bɪhaɪnd, ɪɹi weɪlz hoʊldɪŋ blʌɾ ən dɛθ, kɹaɪz ðət spoʊk ə naɪtmɛɹz. tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn sloʊd, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stʌɾiɪŋ ðə hɪlz ɝaʊn əm ɪn ðə naɪt.

A thin howl rose far behind them. For a moment he thought it was a wolf; he surprised himself by nearly reaching out to the wolf before he could stop. The cry came again, and he knew it was no wolf. Others answered it, all miles behind, eerie wails holding blood and death, cries that spoke of nightmares. To his surprise, Lan and Moiraine slowed, the Aes Sedai studying the hills around them in the night.

"ðeɪ ɑɹ ə lɔŋ weɪ," hi sɛd. "ðeɪl nɑt kætʃ əs ɪf wi kip ɑn."

"They are a long way," he said. "They'll not catch us if we keep on."

"ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz?" zɑɹin mʌɾɝd. "ðoʊz ɑɹ ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz? ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ɪɾ ɪzən ðə waɪl hʌnt, ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

"The Darkhounds?" Zarine muttered. "Those are the Darkhounds? Are you sure it isn't the Wild Hunt, Aes Sedai?"

"bʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "ɪɾ ɪz."

"But it is," Moiraine replied. "It is."

"ju kən nɛvɝ aʊtʃɹʌn ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz, blæksmɪθ," læn sɛd, "nɑɾ ɑn ðə fæstəs hɔɹs. ɔlweɪz, jə mʌs feɪs əm ən dɪfit ðɛm, əɹ ðəl pʊl jə daʊn."

"You can never outrun the Darkhounds, blacksmith," Lan said, "not on the fastest horse. Always, you must face them and defeat them, or they will pull you down."

"aɪ cʊɾə steɪɾ ɪn ðə stɛɾɪŋ, jə noʊ," lɔɪəl sɛd. "maɪ mʌðɝ wʊɾə hæd mi mɛɹid baɪ naʊ, bʌɾ ɪt wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ə bæd laɪf. plɛnti ʌv bʊks. aɪ dɪd nɑɾ əv tə kʌm aʊtsaɪd."

"I could have stayed in the stedding, you know," Loial said. "My mother would have had me married by now, but it would not have been a bad life. Plenty of books. I did not have to come Outside."

"ðɛɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ tə ə tɔl, tʃɹiləs maʊnd wɛl ɔf tə ðɛɹ ɹaɪt. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ tʃɹiz ðət pɛɹɪn kəd si fəɹ tu hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əɹ mɔɹ ɝaʊn ɪt, iðɝ, ən ðeɪ wɝ stɪl spɑɹs bɪɑn ðæt. "wi mʌst si ðɛm kʌmɪŋ tə hæv ə tʃæns."

"There," Moiraine said, pointing to a tall, treeless mound well off to their right. There were no trees that Perrin could see for two hundred paces or more around it, either, and they were still sparse beyond that. "We must see them coming to have a chance."

ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz' daɪɹ kɹaɪz ɹoʊz əɡɛn, kloʊsɝ, jɛt stɪl fɑɹ.

The Darkhounds' dire cries rose again, closer, yet still far.

læn kwɪkən mændɑɹbz peɪs ə lɪɾəl, naʊ ðət mɔɪɹeɪn hæd tʃoʊzən ðɛɹ ɡɹaʊnd. əz ðeɪ klaɪmd, ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz klæɾɝd ɑn ɹɑks hæf-bɛɹiɾ ɪn ðə dɝɾ ən slɪk baɪ ðə dʒɹɪzəl. tə pɛɹɪnz aɪz, moʊst ə ðɛm hæd tu mɛni skwɛɹd kɔɹnɝz tə bi nætʃɹəl. ət ðə tɑp, ðeɪ dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ɝaʊnd wʌt sim tə bi ə loʊ, ɹaʊndəd boʊldɝ. ðə mun əpɪɹd θɹu ə ɡæp ɪn ðə klaʊdz, ən i faʊn hɪmsɛlf lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə wɛðɝd stoʊn feɪs tu peɪsɪz lɔŋ. ə wʊmənz feɪs, hi θɔt fɹəm ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə hɛɹ. ðə ɹeɪn meɪɾ əɹ sim tə bi wipɪŋ.

Lan quickened Mandarb's pace a little, now that Moiraine had chosen their ground. As they climbed, the horses' hooves clattered on rocks half-buried in the dirt and slicked by the drizzle. To Perrin's eyes, most of them had too many squared corners to be natural. At the top, they dismounted around what seemed to be a low, rounded boulder. The moon appeared through a gap in the clouds, and he found himself looking at a weathered stone face two paces long. A woman's face, he thought from the length of the hair. The rain made her seem to be weeping.

mɔɪɹeɪn dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən stʊd lʊkɪŋ ɔf ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə haʊlz. ʃi wɑz ə ʃæɾoʊd, hʊɾɪd ʃeɪp, ɹeɪn kætʃɪŋ munlaɪɾ əz ɪt ɹoʊl daʊn əɹ ɔɪl kloʊk.

Moiraine dismounted and stood looking off in the direction of the howls. She was a shadowed, hooded shape, rain catching moonlight as it rolled down her oiled cloak.

lɔɪəl lɛɾ ɪz hɔɹs oʊvɝ tə pɪɹ ət ðə kɑɹvɪŋ, ðən bɛn kloʊsɝ ən fɛl ðə fitʃɝz. "aɪ θɪŋk ʃi wɑz ən oʊɡiɝ," hi sɛɾ ət læst. "bʌt ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ ən oʊl stɛɾɪŋ; aɪ wəd fil ɪt. wi ɔl wʊd. ən wi wəd bi seɪf fɹəm ʃæɾoʊzpɔn."

Loial led his horse over to peer at the carving, then bent closer and felt the features. "I think she was an Ogier," he said at last. "But this is not an old stedding; I would feel it. We all would. And we would be safe from Shadowspawn."

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tu stɛɹɪŋ æt?" zɑɹin skwɪntɪɾ ət ðə ɹɑk. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt? hɝ? hu?"

"What are you two staring at?" Zarine squinted at the rock. "What is it? Her? Who?"

"mɛni neɪʃənz əv ɹɪzən ən fɔlən sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd wɪθaʊt tɝnɪŋ, "sʌm livɪŋ noʊ mɔɹ ðən neɪmz ɑn ə jɛloʊd peɪdʒ, əɹ laɪnz ɑn ə tæɾɝd mæp. wɪl wi liv əz mʌtʃ bɪhaɪnd?" ðə blʌd-dʒɹɛntʃt haʊlz ɹoʊz əɡɛn, stɪl kloʊsɝ. pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə kælkjəleɪt ðɛɹ peɪs, ən θɔt læn hæd bɪn ɹaɪt; ðə hɔɹsəz kəd nɑɾ əv aʊtʃɹʌn ðɛm, æftɝ ɔl. ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv lɔŋ tə weɪt.

"Many nations have risen and fallen since the Breaking," Moiraine said without turning, "some leaving no more than names on a yellowed page, or lines on a tattered map. Will we leave as much behind?" The blood-drenched howls rose again, still closer. Perrin tried to calculate their pace, and thought Lan had been right; the horses could not have outrun them, after all. They would not have long to wait.

"oʊɡiɝ," læn sɛd, "ju ən ðə ɡɝl hoʊl ðə hɔɹsəz." zɑɹin pɹətɛstəd, bʌɾ i ɹoʊd stʃɹeɪɾ oʊvɝ tə hɝ. "jɔɹ naɪvz wɪl nɑt də mʌtʃ ɡʊd hɪɹ, ɡɝl." hɪz sɔɹd bleɪd ɡlimd ɪn ðə munlaɪɾ əz i dʒɹu ɪt. "ivən ðɪs ɪz ə læst ɹɪzɔɹt. ɪt saʊnz laɪk tɛn aʊt ðɛɹ, nɑt wʌn. jəɹ wɝk ɪz tə kip ðə hɔɹsəz fɹəm ɹʌnɪŋ wən ðeɪ smɛl ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz. ivən mændɑɹb dʌz nɑt laɪk ðət smɛl."

"Ogier," Lan said, "you and the girl hold the horses." Zarine protested, but he rode straight over to her. "Your knives will not do much good here, girl." His sword blade gleamed in the moonlight as he drew it. "Even this is a last resort. It sounds like ten out there, not one. Your work is to keep the horses from running when they smell the Darkhounds. Even Mandarb does not like that smell."

ɪf ðə wɔɹɾɝz sɔɹd wɑz noʊ ɡʊd, ðən niðɝ wɑz ði æks. pɛɹɪn fɛl sʌmθɪŋ nɪɹ tə ɹɪlif ət ðæt, ivən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn; hi wəd nɑɾ əv tə juz ði æks. hi dʒɹu ðə lɛŋθ ə hɪz ənstʃɹʌŋ baʊ fɹəm ʌndɝ stɛpɝz sæɾəl ɡɝθs. "meɪbi ðɪs wɪl də səm ɡʊd."

If the Warder's sword was no good, then neither was the axe. Perrin felt something near to relief at that, even if they were Shadowspawn; he would not have to use the axe. He drew the length of his unstrung bow from under Stepper's saddle girths. "Maybe this will do some good."

"tʃɹaɪ ɪf jə wɪʃ, blæksmɪθ," læn sɛd. "ðeɪ də nɑt daɪ izəli. pɝhæps jəl kɪl wʌn."

"Try if you wish, blacksmith," Lan said. "They do not die easily. Perhaps you will kill one."

pɛɹɪn dʒɹu ə fɹɛʃ bɑstʃɹɪŋ fɹəm ɪz paʊtʃ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʃild ɪt fɹəm ðə sɑft ɹeɪn. ðə biswæks koʊɾɪŋ wɑz θɪn, ən nɑt mʌtʃ pɹətɛkʃən əɡɛns pɹəlɔŋ dæmp. sɛɾɪŋ ðə baʊ slæntwaɪz bɪtwin ɪz lɛɡz, hi bɛn ɪɾ izəli, fɪksɪŋ ðə lups ə ðə bɑstʃɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə hɔɹn nɑks ət ði ɛnz ə ðə baʊ. wən i stʃɹeɪɾənd, hi kəd si ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz.

Perrin drew a fresh bowstring from his pouch, trying to shield it from the soft rain. The beeswax coating was thin, and not much protection against prolonged damp. Setting the bow slantwise between his legs, he bent it easily, fixing the loops of the bowstring into the horn nocks at the ends of the bow. When he straightened, he could see the Darkhounds.

ðeɪ ɹæn laɪk hɔɹsəz əɾ ə ɡæləp, ən əz i kɑt saɪɾ ə ðɛm, ðeɪ ɡæðɝd spid. ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli tɛn lɑɹdʒ ʃeɪps ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn ðə naɪt, swipɪŋ θɹu ðə skæɾɝd tʃɹiz, jɛɾ i pʊld ə bɹɔdhɛɾ æɹoʊ fɹəm ɪz kwɪvɝ, nɑkt ɪt bʌt dɪd nɑt dʒɹɔ. hi hæd bɪn fɑɹ fɹəm ðə bɛs boʊmən ɪn ɛmənz fild, bʌɾ əmʌŋ ðə jʌŋɡɝ mɛn, oʊnli ɹænd hæd bɪn bɛɾɝ.

They ran like horses at a gallop, and as he caught sight of them, they gathered speed. They were only ten large shapes running in the night, sweeping through the scattered trees, yet he pulled a broadhead arrow from his quiver, nocked it but did not draw. He had been far from the best bowman in Emond's Field, but among the younger men, only Rand had been better.

ət θɹi hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz i wəd ʃut, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd. ful! juɾ əv ə hɑɹd taɪm hɪɾɪŋ ə tɑɹɡət stændɪŋ stɪl ət ðət dɪstəns. bʌɾ ɪf aɪ weɪt, ðə weɪ ðeɪ ɑɹ muvɪŋ. . . . stɛpɪŋ ʌp bɪsaɪd mɔɪɹeɪn, hi ɹeɪzd ɪz baʊ - aɪ dʒʌst əv tə ɪmædʒən ðət muvɪŋ ʃædoʊ ɪz ə bɪɡ dɔɡ - dʒɹu ðə ɡus-fɛðɝ flɛtʃɪŋz tə hɪz ɪɹ, ən lust. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə ʃæf mɝdʒd wɪð ðə nɪɹəst ʃædoʊ, bʌt ði oʊnli ɹɪzʌlt wɑz ə snɑɹl. ɪts nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ tə wɝk. ðəɹ kʌmɪŋ tu fæst! hi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi dʒɹɔɪŋ ənʌðɝ æɹoʊ. waɪ ɑɹən jə duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ, mɔɪɹeɪn? hi kəd si ðɛɹ aɪz, ʃaɪnɪŋ laɪk sɪlvɝ, ðɛɹ tiθ ɡlimɪŋ laɪk bɝnɪʃt stil. blæk əz ðə naɪɾ ɪtsɛlf ən əz bɪɡ əz smɔl poʊniz, ðeɪ spɛd təwɔɹd hɪm, saɪlənt naʊ, sikɪŋ ðə kɪl. ðə wɪn kæɹiɾ ə stɪŋk nɪɹ tə bɝn sʌlfɝ; ðə hɔɹsəz wɪkɝd fɪɹfəli, ivən lænz wɔɹhɔɹs. bɝn ju, ɛɛs sədaɪ, də sʌmθɪŋ! hi lust əɡɛn; ðə fɹʌntmoʊs dɑɹkhaʊn fɔltɝɾ ən keɪm ɑn. ðeɪ kən daɪ! hi ʃɑt wʌns mɔɹ, ən ðə lɛd dɑɹkhaʊn tʌmbəld, stæɡɝd tə ɪts fit, ðən fɛl, jɛɾ ivən əz ɪt dɪɾ i nu ə moʊmən ə dɪspɛɹ. wʌn daʊn, ən ði ʌðɝ naɪn hæd kʌvɝd tu θɝdz ə ðə dɪstəns ɔlɹɛɾi; ðeɪ sim tə bi ɹʌnɪŋ ivən fæstɝ, laɪk ʃædoʊz floʊɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹaʊnd. wʌn mɔɹ æɹoʊ. taɪm fəɹ wʌn mɔɹ, meɪbi, ən ðən ɪts ði æks. bɝn ju, ɛɛs sədaɪ! hi dʒɹu əɡɛn.

At three hundred paces he would shoot, he decided. Fool! You'd have a hard time hitting a target standing still at that distance. But if I wait, the way they are moving. . . . Stepping up beside Moiraine, he raised his bow - I just have to imagine that moving shadow is a big dog - drew the goose-feather fletchings to his ear, and loosed. He was sure the shaft merged with the nearest shadow, but the only result was a snarl. It is not going to work. They're coming too fast! He was already drawing another arrow. Why aren't you doing something, Moiraine? He could see their eyes, shining like silver, their teeth gleaming like burnished steel. Black as the night itself and as big as small ponies, they sped toward him, silent now, seeking the kill. The wind carried a stink near to burned sulphur; the horses whickered fearfully, even Lan's warhorse. Burn you, Aes Sedai, do something! He loosed again; the frontmost Darkhound faltered and came on. They can die! He shot once more, and the lead Darkhound tumbled, staggered to its feet, then fell, yet even as it did he knew a moment of despair. One down, and the other nine had covered two thirds of the distance already; they seemed to be running even faster, like shadows flowing across the ground. One more arrow. Time for one more, maybe, and then it's the axe. Burn you, Aes Sedai! He drew again.

"naʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ əz ɪz æɹoʊ lɛf ðə baʊ. ði ɛɹ bɪtwin əɹ hænz kɑt faɪɝ ən stʃɹik təwɔɹd ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz, vænkwɪʃɪŋ naɪt. ðə hɔɹsəz skwild ən lɛpt əɡɛns biɪŋ hɛld.

"Now," Moiraine said as his arrow left the bow. The air between her hands caught fire and streaked toward the Darkhounds, vanquishing night. The horses squealed and leaped against being held.

pɛɹɪn θɹu ən ɑɹm əkɹɔs ɪz aɪz tə ʃild əm fɹəm ə waɪt-hɑt ɡlɛɹ laɪk bɝnɪŋ, hit laɪk ə fɔɹdʒ kɹækɪŋ oʊpən; sʌɾən nun flɛɹɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, ən wɑz ɡɔn. wən i ənkʌvɝɾ ɪz aɪz, spɑts flɪkɝɾ əkɹɔs ɪz vɪʒən, ən ðə feɪnt, feɪɾɪŋ ɪmədʒ ə ðət laɪn ə faɪɝ. wɛɹ ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz hæd bɪn wɑz nʌθɪŋ bʌt naɪt-kʌvɝd ɡɹaʊn ən ðə sɑft ɹeɪn; ði oʊnli ʃædoʊz ðət muvd wɝ kæs baɪ klaʊdz kɹɔsɪŋ ðə mun.

Perrin threw an arm across his eyes to shield them from a white-hot glare like burning, heat like a forge cracking open; sudden noon flared in the darkness, and was gone. When he uncovered his eyes, spots flickered across his vision, and the faint, fading image of that line of fire. Where the Darkhounds had been was nothing but night-covered ground and the soft rain; the only shadows that moved were cast by clouds crossing the moon.

aɪ θɔt ʃid θɹoʊ faɪɝ ət ðɛm, əɹ kɔl laɪtnɪŋ, bʌt ðɪs. . . . "wʌt wɑz ðæt?" hi æsk hɔɹsli.

I thought she'd throw fire at them, or call lightning, but this. . . . "What was that?" he asked hoarsely.

mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz piɹɪŋ ɔf təwɔɹɾ ɪljən əɡɛn, əz ɪf ʃi kəd si θɹu ɔl ðoʊz maɪlz ə dɑɹknəs. "pɝhæps i dɪd nɑt si," ʃi sɛd, ɔlmoʊs tə hɝsɛlf. "ɪɾ ɪz fɑɹ, ən ɪf i wɑz nɑt wɑtʃɪŋ, pɝhæps i dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs."

Moiraine was peering off toward Illian again, as if she could see through all those miles of darkness. "Perhaps he did not see," she said, almost to herself. "It is far, and if he was not watching, perhaps he did not notice."

"hu?" zɑɹin dɪmændəd. "sɑmaɪl?" hɝ vɔɪs ʃʊk ə lɪɾəl. "ju sɛɾ i wɑz ɪn ɪljən. haʊ kəɾ i si ɛniθɪŋ hɪɹ? wʌd jə du?"

"Who?" Zarine demanded. "Sammael?" Her voice shook a little. "You said he was in Illian. How could he see anything here? What did you do?"

"sʌmθɪŋ fɔɹbɪɾən," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd kuli. "fɔɹbɪɾən baɪ vaʊz ɔlmoʊst əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ðə θɹi oʊðz." ʃi tʊk ɑldibz ɹeɪnz fɹəm ðə ɡɝl, ən pæɾəd ðə mɛɹz nɛk, kɑmɪŋ hɝ. "sʌmθɪŋ nɑt juzd ɪn nɪɹli tu θaʊzən jɪɹz. sʌmθɪŋ aɪ maɪt bi stɪl dʒʌs fəɹ noʊɪŋ."

"Something forbidden," Moiraine said coolly. "Forbidden by vows almost as strong as the Three Oaths." She took Aldieb's reins from the girl, and patted the mare's neck, calming her. "Something not used in nearly two thousand years. Something I might be stilled just for knowing."

"pɝhæps . . . ?" lɔɪəlz vɔɪs wɑz ə feɪn bum. "pɝhæps wi ʃəd bi ɡoʊɪŋ? ðəɹ kəd bi mɔɹ."

"Perhaps . . . ?" Loial's voice was a faint boom. "Perhaps we should be going? There could be more."

"aɪ θɪŋk nɑt," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd, maʊntɪŋ. "hi wəd nɑt lus tu pæks ət wʌns, ivən ɪf hiz tu; ðeɪ wəd tɝn ɑn itʃ ʌðɝ ɪnstɛɾ ə ðɛɹ pɹeɪ. ən aɪ θɪŋk wəɹ nɑɾ ɪz meɪn kwɔɹi, əɹ i wʊɾə kʌm hɪmsɛlf. wi wɝ . . . ən ənɔɪəns, aɪ θɪŋk" - hɝ toʊn wɑz kɑm, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz klɪɹ ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk biɪŋ ɹəɡɑɹɾəd soʊ laɪtli - "æn pɝhæps ə lɪɾəl sʌmθɪŋ ɛkstʃɹə tə slɪp ɪndə hɪz ɡɑmbæɡ, ɪf wi wɝ nɑt tu mʌtʃ tʃɹʌbəl. stɪl, ðəɹ ɪz smɔl ɡʊɾ ɪn ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ ɛni nɪɹɝ ɪm ðən wi mʌst."

"I think not," the Aes Sedai said, mounting. "He would not loose two packs at once, even if he has two; they would turn on each other instead of their prey. And I think we are not his main quarry, or he would have come himself. We were . . . an annoyance, I think" - her tone was calm, but it was clear she did not like being regarded so lightly - "and perhaps a little something extra to slip into his gamebag, if we were not too much trouble. Still, there is small good in remaining any nearer him than we must."

"ɹænd?" pɛɹɪn æskt. hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil zɑɹin linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə lɪsən. "ɪf wəɹ nɑt wʌɾ i hʌns, ɪz ɪt ɹænd?"

"Rand?" Perrin asked. He could almost feel Zarine leaning forward to listen. "If we are not what he hunts, is it Rand?"

"pɝhæps," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ɔɹ pɝhæps mæt. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət hiz tɑvɝən ɔlsoʊ, ən i blu ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ."

"Perhaps," Moiraine said. "Or perhaps Mat. Remember that he is ta'veren also, and he blew the Horn of Valere."

zɑɹin meɪɾ ə stʃɹæŋɡəl saʊnd. "hi blu ɪt? sʌmwʌn əz faʊn ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi?"

Zarine made a strangled sound. "He blew it? Someone has found it already?"

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪɡnɔɹd hɝ, linɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ sæɾəl tə stɛɹ kloʊsli ɪndə pɛɹɪnz aɪz, dɑɹk ɡlimɪŋ ɪndə bɝnɪʃt ɡoʊld. "wʌns əɡɛn ɪvɛns aʊtpeɪs mi. aɪ də nɑt laɪk ðæt. ən niðɝ ʃəd ju. ɪf ɪvɛns aʊtʃɹʌn mi, ðeɪ meɪ wɛl tʃɹæmpəl ju, ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə wɝld wɪð ju."

The Aes Sedai ignored her, leaning out of her saddle to stare closely into Perrin's eyes, dark gleaming into burnished gold. "Once again events outpace me. I do not like that. And neither should you. If events outrun me, they may well trample you, and the rest of the world with you."

"wi hæv mɛni liɡz tə tɛɹ jɛt," læn sɛd. "ði oʊɡiɝz sədʒɛstʃən ɪz ə ɡʊd wʌn." hi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ɪz sæɾəl.

"We have many leagues to Tear yet," Lan said. "The Ogier's suggestion is a good one." He was already in his saddle.

æftɝ ə moʊmən mɔɪɹeɪn stʃɹeɪɾənd ən tʌtʃt ðə mɛɹz ɹɪbz wɪð əɹ hilz. ʃi wɑz hæfweɪ daʊn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə maʊn bɪfɔɹ i kəd ɡɛɾ ɪz baʊ ənstʃɹʌŋ ən teɪk stɛpɝz ɹeɪnz fɹəm lɔɪəl. bɝn ju, mɔɪɹeɪn! əl faɪn səm ænsɝz sʌmwɛɹ!

After a moment Moiraine straightened and touched the mare's ribs with her heels. She was halfway down the side of the mound before he could get his bow unstrung and take Stepper's reins from Loial. Burn you, Moiraine! I'll find some answers somewhere!

linɪŋ bæk əɡɛnst ə fɔlən lɔɡ, mæt ɛndʒɔɪd ðə wɔɹmθ ə ðə kæmpfaɪɝ - ðə ɹeɪnz hæd dʒɹɪftəd saʊθ θɹi deɪz ɝliɝ, bʌɾ i stɪl fɛl dæmp - jɛt ɹaɪɾ ət ðət moʊmənt, hi wɑz hɑɹdli əwɛɹ ə ðə dænsɪŋ fleɪmz. hi pɪɹd θɔtfəli ət ðə smɔl, wæks-kʌvɝd sɪləndɝ ɪn ɪz hænd. tɑm wɑz ɪnɡɹoʊst ɪn tunɪŋ ɪz hɑɹp, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf ə ɹeɪn ən wɛt, nɛvɝ ɡlænsɪŋ mæts weɪ. kɹɪkəts tʃɝpt ɪn ðə dɑɹk θɪkɪɾ ɝaʊn ðɛm. kɑt bɪtwin vɪlədʒəz baɪ sʌnsɛt, ðeɪ hæd tʃoʊzən ðɪs kɑps əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹoʊd. tu naɪts ðeɪ hæd tʃɹaɪd tə baɪ ə ɹum fəɹ ðə naɪt; twaɪs ə fɑɹmɝ hæd lust ɪz dɑɡz ɑn ðɛm.

Leaning back against a fallen log, Mat enjoyed the warmth of the campfire - the rains had drifted south three days earlier, but he still felt damp - yet right at that moment, he was hardly aware of the dancing flames. He peered thoughtfully at the small, wax-covered cylinder in his hand. Thom was engrossed in tuning his harp, muttering to himself of rain and wet, never glancing Mat's way. Crickets chirped in the dark thicket around them. Caught between villages by sunset, they had chosen this copse away from the road. Two nights they had tried to buy a room for the night; twice a farmer had loosed his dogs on them.

mæt ənʃiðd ɪz bɛl naɪf, ən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. lʌk. ɪɾ oʊnli ɪksploʊdz səmtaɪmz, ʃi sɛd. lʌk. əz kɛɹfəli əz i kʊd, hi slɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə tub. ɪt wɑz ə tub, ən ə peɪpɝ, əz i hæd θɔt - hi hæd faʊn bɪts ə peɪpɝ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn æftɝ faɪɹwɝks wɝ sɛɾ ɔf, bæk hoʊm - leɪɝz ə peɪpɝ, bʌɾ ɔl ðət fɪl ði ɪnsaɪd wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ðət lʊk laɪk dɝt, əɹ meɪbi taɪni ɡɹeɪ-blæk pɛbəlz ən dʌst. hi stɝɾ əm ɑn ɪz pɑm wɪð wʌn fɪŋɡɝ. haʊ ɪn ðə laɪt kəd pɛbəlz ɪksploʊd?

Mat unsheathed his belt knife, and hesitated. Luck. It only explodes sometimes, she said. Luck. As carefully as he could, he slit along the length of the tube. It was a tube, and of paper, as he had thought - he had found bits of paper on the ground after fireworks were set off, back home - layers of paper, but all that filled the inside was something that looked like dirt, or maybe tiny gray-black pebbles and dust. He stirred them on his palm with one finger. How in the Light could pebbles explode?

"ðə laɪt bɝn mi!" tɑm ɹɔɹd. hi θɹʌst ɪz hɑɹp ɪndə ɪts keɪs əz ɪf tə pɹətɛkt ɪt fɹəm wʌt wɑz ɪn mæts hænd. "ɑɹ jə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl ʌs, bɔɪ? hævən jə ɛvɝ hɝd ðoʊz θɪŋz ɪksploʊd tɛn taɪmz əz hɑɹd fəɹ ɛɹ əz fəɹ faɪɝ? faɪɹwɝks ɑɹ ðə nɛks θɪŋ tə ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝk, bɔɪ."

"The Light burn me!" Thom roared. He thrust his harp into its case as if to protect it from what was in Mat's hand. "Are you trying to kill us, boy? Haven't you ever heard those things explode ten times as hard for air as for fire? Fireworks are the next thing to Aes Sedai work, boy."

"meɪbi," mæt sɛd, "bʌɾ ɑlʌdʒɹə dɪd nɑt lʊk laɪk ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ tə mi. aɪ juz tə θɪŋk ðəɾ əbaʊt mæstɝ ælvɪɹz klɑk - ðəɾ ɪt hæd tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝk - bʌt wʌns aɪ ɡɑt ðə bæk ə ðə kæbənəɾ oʊpən, aɪ sɔ ɪt wɑz fʊl ə lɪɾəl pisəz ə mɛɾəl." hi ʃɪftəɾ ənkʌmftəbli ət ðə mɛmɹi. mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ hæd bɪn ðə fɝs tə ɹitʃ ɪm ðət taɪm, wɪð ðə wɪzdəm ən ɪz fɑðɝ ən ðə meɪɝ ɔl ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn hɝ, ən nʌn bɪlivɪŋ i dʒʌs mɛn tə lʊk. aɪ cʊɾə pʊɾ əm ɔl bæk təɡɛðɝ. "aɪ θɪŋk pɛɹɪn kəd meɪk wʌn, ɪf i sɔ ðoʊz lɪɾəl wilz ən spɹɪŋz ən aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɔl."

"Maybe," Mat said, "but Aludra did not look like any Aes Sedai to me. I used to think that about Master al'Vere's clock - that it had to be Aes Sedai work - but once I got the back of the cabinet open, I saw it was full of little pieces of metal." He shifted uncomfortably at the memory. Mistress al'Vere had been the first to reach him that time, with the Wisdom and his father and the Mayor all right behind her, and none believing he just meant to look. I could have put them all back together. "I think Perrin could make one, if he saw those little wheels and springs and I don't know what all."

"ju wəd bi sɝpɹaɪzd, bɔɪ," tɑm sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "ivən ə bæd klɑkmeɪkɝ ɪz ə fɛɹli ɹɪtʃ mæn, ən ðeɪ ɝn ɪt. bʌɾ ə klɑk dʌz nɑɾ ɪksploʊɾ ɪn jəɹ feɪs!"

"You would be surprised, boy," Thom said dryly. "Even a bad clockmaker is a fairly rich man, and they earn it. But a clock does not explode in your face!"

"niðɝ dɪd ðɪs. wɛl, ɪts jusləs, naʊ." hi tɔs ðə hændfʊl ə peɪpɝ ən lɪɾəl pɛbəlz ɪndə ðə faɪɝ tə ə skɹitʃ fɹəm tɑm; ðə pɛbəlz spɑɹkt ən meɪd taɪni flæʃɪz, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə smɛl ʌv ækɹɪd smoʊk.

"Neither did this. Well, it is useless, now." He tossed the handful of paper and little pebbles into the fire to a screech from Thom; the pebbles sparked and made tiny flashes, and there was a smell of acrid smoke.

"ju ɑɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl ʌs." tɑmz vɔɪs wɑz ənstɛɾi, ən ɪt ɹoʊz ɪn ɪntɛnsəɾi ən pɪtʃ əz i spoʊk. "ɪf aɪ dɪsaɪɾ aɪ wɑnə daɪ, əl ɡoʊ tə ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs wən wi ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn, ən əl pɪntʃ mɔɹɡeɪs!" hɪz lɔŋ mʌstæʃɪz fleɪld. "du nɑt də ðəɾ əɡɛn!"

"You are trying to kill us." Thom's voice was unsteady, and it rose in intensity and pitch as he spoke. "If I decide I want to die, I will go to the Royal Palace when we reach Caemlyn, and I'll pinch Morgase!" His long mustaches flailed. "Do not do that again!"

"ɪt dɪd nɑɾ ɪksploʊd," mæt sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə faɪɝ. hi fɪʃt ɪndə ði ɔɪld-klɔθ ɹoʊl ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə lɔɡ ən pʊld aʊɾ ə faɪɝwɝk ə ðə nɛks lɑɹdʒɝ saɪz. "aɪ wʌndɝ waɪ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ bæŋ."

"It did not explode," Mat said, frowning at the fire. He fished into the oiled-cloth roll on the other side of the log and pulled out a firework of the next larger size. "I wonder why there was no bang."

"aɪ də nɑt kɛɹ waɪ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ bæŋ! də nɑt də ɪɾ əɡɛn!"

"I do not care why there was no bang! Do not do it again!"

mæt ɡlænst əɾ ɪm ən læft. "stɑp ʃeɪkɪŋ, tɑm. ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə bi əfɹeɪd. aɪ noʊ wʌɾ ɪz ɪnsaɪd ðɛm, naʊ. ət list, aɪ noʊ wʌɾ ɪt lʊks laɪk, bʌt. . . . doʊn seɪ ɪt. əl nɑt bi kʌɾɪŋ ɛni mɔɹ oʊpən, tɑm. ɪts mɔɹ fʌn tə sɛɾ əm ɔf, ɛniweɪ."

Mat glanced at him and laughed. "Stop shaking, Thom. There's no need to be afraid. I know what is inside them, now. At least, I know what it looks like, but. . . . Don't say it. I will not be cutting any more open, Thom. It is more fun to set them off, anyway."

"aɪ æm nɑɾ əfɹeɪd, jə mʌd-fʊɾɪd swɪnhɝd," tɑm sɛd wɪð ɪlæbɹət dɪɡnəɾi. "aɪ æm ʃeɪkɪŋ wɪð ɹeɪdʒ kəz aɪm tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð ə ɡoʊt-bɹeɪn laʊɾ u maɪt kɪl ðə pɛɹ ʌv əs kəz i kænɑt θɪŋk pæst ɪz oʊn - "

"I am not afraid, you mud-footed swineherd," Thom said with elaborate dignity. "I am shaking with rage because I'm traveling with a goat-brained lout who might kill the pair of us because he cannot think past his own - "

"hoʊ, ðə faɪɝ!"

"Ho, the fire!"

mæt ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz wɪð tɑm əz hɔɹsəz' hʊvz əpɹoʊtʃt. ɪt wɑz leɪt fəɹ ɛniwʌn ɑnəs tə bi tʃɹævlɪŋ. bʌt ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz kɛp ðə ɹoʊdz seɪf ðɪs kloʊs tə keɪɛmlɪn, ən ðə fɔɹ u ɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə faɪɹlaɪt sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt lʊk laɪk ɹɑbɝz. wʌn wɑz ə wʊmən. ðə mɛn ɔl wɔɹ lɔŋ kloʊks ən sim tə bi hɝ ɹɪteɪnɝz, waɪl ʃi wɑz pɹɪɾi ən blu-aɪd, ɪn ɡoʊl nɛkləs ən ə ɡɹeɪ sɪlk dʒɹɛs ən ə vɛlvət kloʊk wɪð ə waɪd hʊd. ðə mɛn dɪsmaʊntɪd. wʌn hɛld əɹ ɹeɪnz ən ənʌðɝ əɹ stɝəp, ən ʃi smaɪld ət mæt, dɔfɪŋ əɹ ɡlʌvz əz ʃi keɪm nɪɹ ðə faɪɝ.

Mat exchanged glances with Thom as horses' hooves approached. It was late for anyone honest to be traveling. But the Queen's Guards kept the roads safe this close to Caemlyn, and the four who rode into the firelight certainly did not look like robbers. One was a woman. The men all wore long cloaks and seemed to be her retainers, while she was pretty and blue-eyed, in gold necklace and a gray silk dress and a velvet cloak with a wide hood. The men dismounted. One held her reins and another her stirrup, and she smiled at Mat, doffing her gloves as she came near the fire.

"aɪ fɪɹ wəɹ kɑɾ aʊt leɪt, jʌŋ mæstɝ," ʃi sɛd, "æn aɪ wəd tʃɹʌbəl jə fəɹ dɝɛkʃənz tə ən ɪn, ɪf jə noʊ wʌn."

"I fear we are caught out late, young master," she said, "and I would trouble you for directions to an inn, if you know one."

hi ɡɹɪn ən stɑɹɾəd tə ɹaɪz. hi hæd meɪɾ ɪɾ əz fɑɹ əz ə kɹaʊtʃ wən i hɝd wʌn ə ðə mɛn mʌɾɝ sʌmθɪŋ, ən ənʌðɝ pɹədust ə kɹɔsboʊ fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz kloʊk, ɔlɹɛɾi dʒɹɔn, wɪð ə klɪp hoʊldɪŋ ðə boʊlt.

He grinned and started to rise. He had made it as far as a crouch when he heard one of the men mutter something, and another produced a crossbow from under his cloak, already drawn, with a clip holding the bolt.

"kɪl hɪm, ful!" ðə wʊmən ʃaʊɾəd, ən mæt tɔs ðə faɪɝwɝk ɪndə ðə fleɪmz ən θɹu hɪmsɛlf təwɔɹɾ ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf. ðəɹ wɑz ə laʊd bæŋ ən ə flæʃ ə laɪt - "ɛɛs sədaɪ!" ə mæn kɹaɪd. "faɪɹwɝks, ful!" ðə wʊmən ʃaʊɾəd - ən i ɹoʊl tə hɪz fit wɪð ðə stæf ɪn ɪz hæn tə si ðə kɹɔsboʊ boʊl stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə fɔlən lɔɡ ɔlmoʊst wɛɹ i hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ, ən ðə kɹɔsbaʊmən fɔlɪŋ wɪð ðə hɪlt ʌv wʌn ə tɑmz naɪvz ədɔɹnɪŋ ɪz tʃɛst.

"Kill him, fool!" the woman shouted, and Mat tossed the firework into the flames and threw himself toward his quarterstaff. There was a loud bang and a flash of light - "Aes Sedai!" a man cried. "Fireworks, fool!" the woman shouted - and he rolled to his feet with the staff in his hand to see the crossbow bolt sticking out of the fallen log almost where he had been sitting, and the crossbowman falling with the hilt of one of Thom's knives adorning his chest.

ɪt wɑz ɔl i hæd taɪm tə si, fəɹ ði ʌðɝ tu mɛn dɑɹɾɪd pæs ðə faɪɝ ət hɪm, dʒɹɔɪŋ sɔɹdz. wʌn ə ðɛm sʌɾənli stʌmbəl tə hɪz niz, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd tə klɔ ət ðə naɪf ɪn ɪz bæk əz i fɛl feɪsdaʊn. ðə læs mæn dɪd nɑt si hɪz kəmpænjən fɔl; hi ɑbviəsli ɪkspɛktəd tə bi wʌn ʌv ə pɛɹ, dɪvaɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ əpoʊnəns ətɛnʃən, əz i θɹʌst ɪz bleɪɾ ət mæts mɪɾəl. filɪŋ ɔlmoʊs kəntɛmptʃuəs, mæt kɹæk ðə fɛloʊz ɹɪst wɪð wʌn ɛn ə hɪz stæf, sɛndɪŋ ðə sɔɹd flaɪɪŋ, ən kɹækt ɪz fɔɹhɛd wɪð ði ʌðɝ. ðə mænz aɪz ɹoʊld ʌp ɪn ɪz hɛɾ əz i kəlæpst.

It was all he had time to see, for the other two men darted past the fire at him, drawing swords. One of them suddenly stumbled to his knees, dropping his sword to claw at the knife in his back as he fell facedown. The last man did not see his companion fall; he obviously expected to be one of a pair, dividing their opponent's attention, as he thrust his blade at Mat's middle. Feeling almost contemptuous, Mat cracked the fellow's wrist with one end of his staff, sending the sword flying, and cracked his forehead with the other. The man's eyes rolled up in his head as he collapsed.

fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, mæt sɔ ðə wʊmən wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹd hɪm, ən i stʌk ə fɪŋɡɝ əɾ əɹ laɪk ə naɪf. "faɪn kloʊðz jə wɛɹ fəɹ ə θif, wʊmən! jə sɪt daʊn tɪl aɪ dɪsaɪd wʌt tə də wɪð ju, əɹ əl - "

From the corner of his eye, Mat saw the woman walking toward him, and he stuck a finger at her like a knife. "Fine clothes you wear for a thief, woman! You sit down till I decide what to do with you, or I'll - "

ʃi lʊkt əz sɝpɹaɪzd əz mæt ət ðə naɪf ðət sʌɾənli blumd ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt, ə ɹɛd flaʊɝ ə spɹɛɾɪŋ blʌd. hi tʊk ə hæf stɛp əz ɪf tə kætʃ əɹ əz ʃi fɛl, noʊɪŋ ɪt wɑz noʊ ɡʊd. hɝ lɔŋ kloʊk sɛɾəld oʊvɝ hɝ, kʌvɝɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ bʌɾ əɹ feɪs, ən ðə hɪlt ə tɑmz naɪf.

She looked as surprised as Mat at the knife that suddenly bloomed in her throat, a red flower of spreading blood. He took a half step as if to catch her as she fell, knowing it was no good. Her long cloak settled over her, covering everything but her face, and the hilt of Thom's knife.

"bɝn ju," mæt mʌɾɝd. "bɝn ju, tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn! ə wʊmən! laɪt, wi cʊɾə taɪɾ əɹ ʌp, ɡɪvən əɹ tə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz təmɑɹoʊ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. laɪt, aɪ maɪɾ ivən əv lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ. ʃid ɹɑb noʊbɑdi wɪθaʊt ðiz θɹi, ən ði oʊnli wʌn ðət laɪvz wɪl bi deɪz bɪfɔɹ i kən si stʃɹeɪɾ ən mʌnθs bɪfɔɹ i kən hoʊld ə sɔɹd. bɝn ju, tɑm, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə kɪl hɝ!"

"Burn you," Mat muttered. "Burn you, Thom Merrilin! A woman! Light, we could have tied her up, given her to the Queen's Guards tomorrow in Caemlyn. Light, I might even have let her go. She'd rob nobody without these three, and the only one that lives will be days before he can see straight and months before he can hold a sword. Burn you, Thom, there was no need to kill her!"

ðə ɡlimən lɪmp tə wɛɹ ðə wʊmən leɪ, ən kɪk bæk əɹ kloʊk. ðə dæɡɝ hæd hæf fɔlən fɹəm əɹ hænd, ɪts bleɪɾ əz waɪɾ əz mæts θʌm ən tu hænz lɔŋ. "wʊd jə ɹæðɝ aɪ hæd weɪɾəd tɪl ʃi nɛstəd ðəɾ ɪn jəɹ ɹɪbz, bɔɪ?" hi ɹitʃɹivd ɪz oʊn naɪf, waɪpɪŋ ðə bleɪɾ ɑn əɹ kloʊk.

The gleeman limped to where the woman lay, and kicked back her cloak. The dagger had half fallen from her hand, its blade as wide as Mat's thumb and two hands long. "Would you rather I had waited till she nested that in your ribs, boy?" He retrieved his own knife, wiping the blade on her cloak.

mæt ɹilaɪzd i wɑz hʌmɪŋ "ʃi wɔɹ ə mæsk ðət hɪɾ əɹ feɪs," ən stɑpt ɪt. hi bɛn daʊn ən hɪd hɝz wɪð ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk. "bɛst wi muv ɑn," hi sɛd kwaɪətli. "aɪ də nɑt wɑnə hæv tə ɪkspleɪn ðɪs ɪf ə pətʃɹoʊl ə ðə ɡɑɹdz hæpənz baɪ."

Mat realized he was humming "She Wore a Mask That Hid Her Face," and stopped it. He bent down and hid hers with the hood of her cloak. "Best we move on," he said quietly. "I do not want to have to explain this if a patrol of the Guards happens by."

"wɪð əɹ ɪn ðoʊz kloʊðz?" tɑm sɛd. "aɪ ʃəd seɪ nɑt! ðeɪ mʌst əv ɹɑbd ə mɝtʃəns waɪf, əɹ səm noʊbəlwʊmənz kæɹɪdʒ." hɪz vɔɪs bɪkeɪm dʒɛnlɝ. "ɪf wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ, bɔɪ, jə hæd bɛst si tə sæɾəlɪŋ jəɹ hɔɹs."

"With her in those clothes?" Thom said. "I should say not! They must have robbed a merchant's wife, or some noblewoman's carriage." His voice became gentler. "If we're going, boy, you had best see to saddling your horse."

mæt ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən pʊld ɪz aɪz fɹəm ðə dɛd wʊmən. "jɛs, aɪ hæd bɛɾɝ, hædn aɪ?" hi dɪd nɑt lʊk əɾ əɹ əɡɛn.

Mat gave a start and pulled his eyes from the dead woman. "Yes, I had better, hadn't I?" He did not look at her again.

hi hæd noʊ sətʃ kəmpʌŋkʃən əbaʊt ðə mɛn. əz fɑɹ əz i wɑz kənsɝnd, ə mæn u dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɹɑb ən kɪl dɪzɝvd wʌɾ i ɡɑt wən i lɔs ðə ɡeɪm. hi dɪd nɑt dwɛl ɑn ðɛm, bʌt niðɝ dɪɾ i dʒɝk ɪz aɪz əweɪ ɪf ðeɪ fɛl ɑn wʌn ə ðə ɹɑbɝz. ɪt wɑz æftɝ i hæd sæɾəld ɪz ɡɛldɪŋ ən taɪɾ ɪz θɪŋz ɑn bɪhaɪnd, waɪl i wɑz kɪkɪŋ dɝɾ ɑntu ðə faɪɝ, ðəɾ i faʊn hɪmsɛlf lʊkɪŋ ət ðə mæn u hæd ʃɑt ðə kɹɔsboʊ. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ fəmɪljɝ əbaʊt ðoʊz fitʃɝz, əbaʊt ðə weɪ ðə smʌðɝɪŋ faɪɝ meɪd ʃædoʊz əkɹɔs ðɛm. lʌk, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf. ɔlweɪz ðə lʌk.

He had no such compunction about the men. As far as he was concerned, a man who decided to rob and kill deserved what he got when he lost the game. He did not dwell on them, but neither did he jerk his eyes away if they fell on one of the robbers. It was after he had saddled his gelding and tied his things on behind, while he was kicking dirt onto the fire, that he found himself looking at the man who had shot the crossbow. There was something familiar about those features, about the way the smothering fire made shadows across them. Luck, he told himself. Always the luck.

"ðə kɹɔsbaʊmən wɑz ə ɡʊd swɪmɝ, tɑm," hi sɛɾ əz i klaɪmd ɪndə ðə sæɾəl.

"The crossbowman was a good swimmer, Thom," he said as he climbed into the saddle.

"wʌt fulɝi ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ, naʊ?" ðə ɡlimən wɑz ɑn ɪz hɔɹs, tu, ən fɑɹ mɔɹ kənsɝnd wɪð haʊ hɪz ɪnstʃɹəmən keɪsəz ɹoʊd bɪhaɪn ɪz sæɾəl ðən i wɑz wɪð ðə dɛd. "haʊ kəd jə noʊ wɛðɝ i kəɾ ivən swɪm əɾ ɔl?"

"What foolery are you talking, now?" The gleeman was on his horse, too, and far more concerned with how his instrument cases rode behind his saddle than he was with the dead. "How could you know whether he could even swim at all?"

"hi meɪɾ ɪɾ əʃɔɹ fɹəm ə smɔl boʊɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ði ɛɹɪnɪn ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪt. aɪ ɡɛs ðət juzd ʌp ɔl ɪz lʌk." hi tʃɛk ðə læʃɪŋz ɑn ðə ɹoʊl ə faɪɹwɝks əɡɛn. ɪf ðət ful θɔt wʌn ə ðiz wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, aɪ wʌndɝ wʌt hiɾ əv θɔɾ ɪf ðeɪ ɔl wɛn ɔf.

"He made it ashore from a small boat in the middle of the Erinin in the middle of the night. I guess that used up all his luck." He checked the lashings on the roll of fireworks again. If that fool thought one of these was Aes Sedai, I wonder what he'd have thought if they all went off.

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ, bɔɪ? ðə tʃænsəz ʌv ɪt biɪŋ ðə seɪm mæn. . . . waɪ, ivən jə wʊdn leɪ ə weɪdʒɝ əɡɛns ðoʊz ɑdz."

"Are you sure, boy? The chances of it being the same man. . . . Why, even you wouldn't lay a wager against those odds."

"aɪ æm ʃʊɹ, tɑm." ɪleɪn, əl ɹɪŋ jəɹ nɛk wən aɪ pʊt maɪ hænz ɑn ju. ən ɛɡwinz ən nɪneɪivz, tu. "æn aɪm ʃʊɹ aɪ ɪntɛn tə hæv ðɪs blʌɾi lɛɾɝ aʊɾ ə maɪ hænz ən aʊɝ æftɝ wi ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn."

"I am sure, Thom." Elayne, I will wring your neck when I put my hands on you. And Egwene's and Nynaeve's, too. "And I am sure I intend to have this bloody letter out of my hands an hour after we reach Caemlyn."

"aɪ tɛl ju, ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðət lɛɾɝ, bɔɪ. aɪ pleɪd deɪz deɪmɑɹ wən aɪ wɑz jʌŋɡɝ ðən ju, ən aɪ kən ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ə koʊɾ əɹ ə saɪfɝ ivən wən aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt sɛz."

"I tell you, there is nothing in that letter, boy. I played Daes Dae'mar when I was younger than you, and I can recognize a code or a cipher even when I don't know what it says."

"wɛl, aɪ nɛvɝ pleɪd jəɹ ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm, tɑm, jəɹ blʌɾi ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz, bʌɾ aɪ noʊ wən sʌmwʌn ɪz tʃeɪsɪŋ mi, ən ðeɪd nɑt bi tʃeɪsɪŋ ðɪs hɑɹɾ əɹ ðɪs fɑɹ fəɹ ðə ɡoʊld ɪn maɪ pɑkəts, nɑt fəɹ lɛs ðən ə tʃɛs fʊl ʌv ɡoʊld. ɪts tə bi ðə lɛɾɝ." bɝn mi, pɹɪɾi ɡɝlz ɔlweɪz ɡɛt mi ɪn tʃɹʌbəl. "du jə fil laɪk slipɪŋ tənaɪt, æftɝ ðɪs?"

"Well, I never played your Great Game, Thom, your bloody Game of Houses, but I know when someone is chasing me, and they'd not be chasing this hard or this far for the gold in my pockets, not for less than a chest full of gold. It has to be the letter." Burn me, pretty girls always get me in trouble. "Do you feel like sleeping tonight, after this?"

"wɪð ðə slip ʌv ən ɪnəsən beɪb, bɔɪ. bʌɾ ɪf jə wɑnə ɹaɪd, əl ɹaɪd."

"With the sleep of an innocent babe, boy. But if you want to ride, I'll ride."

ðə feɪs ʌv ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən floʊɾəd ɪndə mæts hɛd, wɪð ə dæɡɝ ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt. jə hæd noʊ lʌk, pɹɪɾi wʊmən. "ðɛn lɛts ɹaɪd!" hi sɛd sævɪdʒli.

The face of a pretty woman floated into Mat's head, with a dagger in her throat. You had no luck, pretty woman. "Then let's ride!" he said savagely.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾifaɪv


CHAPTER 45

keɪɛmlɪn


Caemlyn

mæt hæd veɪɡ mɛmɹiz ə keɪɛmlɪn, bʌt wən ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt ɪɾ ɪn ði ɝli aʊɝz æftɝ sʌnɹaɪz, ɪt simd əz ɪf i hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ. ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn əloʊn ɑn ðə ɹoʊd sɪns fɝs laɪt, ən ʌðɝ ɹaɪɾɝz sɝaʊndəɾ əm naʊ, ən tʃɹeɪnz ə mɝtʃəns' wæɡənz ən foʊk əfʊt, ɔl stʃɹimɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾi.

Mat had vague memories of Caemlyn, but when they approached it in the early hours after sunrise, it seemed as if he had never been there before. They had not been alone on the road since first light, and other riders surrounded them now, and trains of merchants' wagons and folk afoot, all streaming toward the great city.

bɪlt ɑn ɹaɪzɪŋ hɪlz, ɪt wɑz ʃʊɹli əz lɑɹdʒ əz tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən aʊtsaɪd ðə hjudʒ wɔlz - ə fɪfti-fʊt haɪɾ ə peɪl, ɡɹeɪɪʃ stoʊn stʃɹikt wɪð waɪɾ ən sɪlvɝ spɑɹklɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn, speɪst wɪð tɔl, ɹaʊn taʊɝz wɪð ðə laɪən bænɝ ʌv ændɝ weɪvɪŋ ətɑp ðɛm, waɪɾ ɑn ɹɛd - aʊtsaɪd ðoʊz wɔlz, ɪt simd əz ɪf ənʌðɝ ɡɹeɪt sɪɾi hæd bɪn pleɪst, ɹæpɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə wɔl sɪɾi, ɔl ɹɛd bɹɪk ən ɡɹeɪ stoʊn ən waɪt plæstɝd wɔlz, ɪnz pʊʃt ɪn ɑn haʊsəz ə θɹi ən fɔɹ stɔɹiz soʊ faɪn ðeɪ mʌs bɪlɔŋ tə wɛlθi mɝtʃəns, ʃɑps wɪð ɡʊdz dɪspleɪɾ ɑn teɪbəlz ʌndɝ ɔnɪŋz kɹaʊɾɪŋ əɡɛnst waɪd, wɪndoʊləs wɛɹhaʊzɪz. oʊpən mɑɹkəts ʌndɝ ɹɛɾ ən pɝpəl ɹuf taɪlz laɪn ðə ɹoʊɾ ɑn boʊθ saɪdz, mɛn ən wɪmən ɔlɹɛɾi kɹaɪɪŋ ðɛɹ wɛɹz, bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ ət ðə tɑp ə ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz, waɪl pɛn kævz ən ʃip ən ɡoʊts ən pɪɡz, keɪdʒd ɡis ən tʃɪkənz ən dʌks, æɾəd tə ðə dɪn. hi sim tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ θɪŋkɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn wɑz tu nɔɪzi wən i wɑz hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ; naʊ ɪt saʊndəd laɪk ə hɑɹtbit, pʌmpɪŋ wɛlθ.

Built on rising hills, it was surely as large as Tar Valon, and outside the huge walls - a fifty-foot height of pale, grayish stone streaked with white and silver sparkling in the sun, spaced with tall, round towers with the Lion Banner of Andor waving atop them, white on red - outside those walls, it seemed as if another great city had been placed, wrapping around the walled city, all red brick and gray stone and white plastered walls, inns pushed in on houses of three and four stories so fine they must belong to wealthy merchants, shops with goods displayed on tables under awnings crowding against wide, windowless warehouses. Open markets under red and purple roof tiles lined the road on both sides, men and women already crying their wares, bargaining at the top of their voices, while penned calves and sheep and goats and pigs, caged geese and chickens and ducks, added to the din. He seemed to remember thinking Caemlyn was too noisy when he was here before; now it sounded like a heartbeat, pumping wealth.

ðə ɹoʊd lɛd tə ɑɹtʃt ɡeɪts twɛnti fit haɪ, stændɪŋ oʊpən ʌndɝ ðə wɑtʃfəl aɪ ʌv ɹɛd-koʊɾəd kwinz ɡɑɹdz ɪn ðɛɹ ʃaɪnɪŋ bɹɛstpleɪts - ðeɪ aɪd tɑm ən ɪm noʊ mɔɹ ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls, nɑɾ ivən ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf slæntəɾ əkɹɔs ɪz sæɾəl ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm; ɔl ðeɪ kɛɹd wɑz ðət pipəl kip muvɪŋ, ɪt simd - ən ðən ðeɪ wɝ wɪðɪn. slɛndɝ taʊɝz hɪɹ ɹoʊz ivən tɔlɝ ðən ðoʊz əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz, ən ɡlimɪŋ doʊmz ʃoʊn waɪɾ ən ɡoʊld əbʌv stʃɹits timɪŋ wɪð pipəl. dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə ɡeɪts ðə ɹoʊd splɪɾ ɪndə tu pɛɹəlɛl stʃɹits, sɛpɝeɪɾəd baɪ ə waɪd stʃɹɪp ʌv ɡɹæs ən tʃɹiz. ðə hɪlz ə ðə sɪɾi ɹoʊz laɪk stɛps təwɔɹɾ ə pik, wɪtʃ wɑz sɝaʊndəd baɪ ənʌðɝ wɔl, ʃaɪnɪŋ əz waɪɾ əz tɑɹ vəlɑnz, wɪð stɪl mɔɹ doʊmz ən taʊɝz wɪðɪn. ðət wɑz ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi, mæt ɹɪkɔld, ən ətɑp ðoʊz haɪəs hɪlz stʊd ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs.

The road led to arched gates twenty feet high, standing open under the watchful eye of red-coated Queen's Guards in their shining breastplates - they eyed Thom and him no more than anyone else, not even the quarterstaff slanted across his saddle in front of him; all they cared was that people keep moving, it seemed - and then they were within. Slender towers here rose even taller than those along the walls, and gleaming domes shone white and gold above streets teeming with people. Just inside the gates the road split into two parallel streets, separated by a wide strip of grass and trees. The hills of the city rose like steps toward a peak, which was surrounded by another wall, shining as white as Tar Valon's, with still more domes and towers within. That was the Inner City, Mat recalled, and atop those highest hills stood the Royal Palace.

"noʊ pɔɪnt weɪɾɪŋ," hi toʊl tɑm. "aɪl teɪk ðə lɛɾɝ stʃɹeɪɾ ɑn." hi lʊkt ət ðə sɪdæn tʃɛɹz ən kæɹɪdʒɪz meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz, ðə ʃɑps wɪð ɔl ðɛɹ ɡʊdz dɪspleɪd. "ə mæn kəɾ ɝn səm ɡoʊld ɪn ðɪs sɪɾi, tɑm, wʌns i faʊn ə ɡeɪm ə daɪs, əɹ kɑɹdz." hi wɑz nɑt kwaɪt soʊ lʌki ət kɑɹdz əz ət daɪs, bʌt fju ɪksɛp noʊbəlz ən ðə wɛlθi pleɪd ðoʊz ɡeɪmz ɛniweɪ. naʊ ðæts u aɪ ʃəd faɪn ə ɡeɪm wɪð.

"No point waiting," he told Thom. "I'll take the letter straight on." He looked at the sedan chairs and carriages making their way through the crowds, the shops with all their goods displayed. "A man could earn some gold in this city, Thom, once he found a game of dice, or cards." He was not quite so lucky at cards as at dice, but few except nobles and the wealthy played those games anyway. Now that's who I should find a game with.

tɑm jɔn əɾ ɪm ən hɪtʃt əɾ ɪz ɡlimənz kloʊk əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə blæŋkət. "wi hæv ɹɪɾən ɔl naɪt, bɔɪ. lɛts ət lis faɪn sʌmθɪŋ tə it, fɝst. ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ əz ɡʊd milz." hi jɔn əɡɛn. "ænd ɡʊd bɛdz."

Thom yawned at him and hitched at his gleeman's cloak as if it were a blanket. "We have ridden all night, boy. Let's at least find something to eat, first. The Queen's Blessing has good meals." He yawned again. "And good beds."

"aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt," mæt sɛd sloʊli. hi dɪd, ɪn ə weɪ. ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz ə fæt mæn wɪð ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ, mæstɝ ɡɪl. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd kɑɾ ʌp tə ɹænd ən ɪm ðɛɹ, wən i hæd θɔt ðeɪ wɝ faɪnəli fɹi ʌv hɝ. ʃiz ɔf pleɪɪŋ əɹ ɡeɪm wɪð ɹænd, naʊ. nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð mi. nɑɾ ɛnimɔɹ. "aɪ wɪl mit jə ðɛɹ, tɑm. aɪ sɛɾ aɪɾ əv ðɪs lɛɾɝ aʊɾ ə maɪ hænz ən aʊɝ æftɝ aɪ ɝaɪvd, ən aɪ min tə. jə ɡoʊ ɑn."

"I remember that," Mat said slowly. He did, in a way. The innkeeper was a fat man with graying hair, Master Gill. Moiraine had caught up to Rand and him there, when he had thought they were finally free of her. She's off playing her game with Rand, now. Nothing to do with me. Not anymore. "I will meet you there, Thom. I said I'd have this letter out of my hands an hour after I arrived, and I mean to. You go on."

tɑm nɑɾəd ən tɝn ɪz hɔɹs əsaɪd, kɔlɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ θɹu ə jɔn. "du nɑt bɪkʌm lɔst, bɔɪ. ɪts ə bɪɡ sɪɾi, keɪɛmlɪn."

Thom nodded and turned his horse aside, calling over his shoulder through a yawn. "Do not become lost, boy. It's a big city, Caemlyn."

ən ə ɹɪtʃ wʌn. mæt hild ɪz maʊn ɑn ʌp ðə kɹaʊɾəd stʃɹit. lɔst! aɪ kən faɪn maɪ blʌɾi weɪ. ðə sɪknəs əpɪɹd tə hæv ɪɹeɪs pɑɹts ə hɪz mɛmɹi. hi kəd lʊk əɾ ən ɪn, ɪts ʌpɝ flɔɹz stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə ɡɹaʊn flɔɹ ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊn ən ɪts saɪn kɹikɪŋ ɪn ðə bɹiz, ən ɹɪmɛmbɝ siɪŋ ɪt bɪfɔɹ, jɛt nɑt ɹikɔl ənʌðɝ θɪŋ i kəd si fɹəm ðət spɑt. ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz ə stʃɹit maɪɾ əbɹʌpli spɑɹk ɪn ɪz mɛmɹi, waɪl ðə pɑɹts bɪfɔɹ ən æftɝ ɹɪmeɪn əz mɪstɪɹiəs əz daɪs stɪl ɪn ðə kʌp.

And a rich one. Mat heeled his mount on up the crowded street. Lost! I can find my bloody way. The sickness appeared to have erased parts of his memory. He could look at an inn, its upper floors sticking out over the ground floor all the way around and its sign creaking in the breeze, and remember seeing it before, yet not recall another thing he could see from that spot. A hundred paces of street might abruptly spark in his memory, while the parts before and after remained as mysterious as dice still in the cup.

ivən wɪð ðə hoʊlz ɪn ɪz mɛmɹi hi wɑz ʃʊɹ i hæd nɛvɝ bɪn tə ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi əɹ ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs - aɪ kʊdn fɝɡɛt ðæt! - jɛɾ i dɪd nɑt nid tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə weɪ. ðə stʃɹits ə ðə nu sɪɾi - hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət neɪm sʌɾənli; ɪt wɑz ðə pɑɹɾ ə keɪɛmlɪn lɛs ðən tu θaʊzən jɪɹz oʊld - ɹæn ɛvɹi wɪtʃ weɪ, bʌt ðə meɪn bʊləvɑɹdz ɔl lɛd tə ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi. ðə ɡɑɹdz ət ðə ɡeɪts meɪd noʊ ɛfɝt tə stɑp ɛniwʌn.

Even with the holes in his memory he was sure he had never been to the Inner City or the Royal Palace - I couldn't forget that! - yet he did not need to remember the way. The streets of the New City - he remembered that name suddenly; it was the part of Caemlyn less than two thousand years old - ran every which way, but the main boulevards all led to the Inner City. The Guards at the gates made no effort to stop anyone.

wɪðɪn ðoʊz waɪt wɔlz wɝ bɪldɪŋz ðət kəɾ ɔlmoʊst əv fɪɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðə kɝvɪŋ stʃɹits tɑp hɪlz tə ɹɪvil θɪn taʊɝz, ðɛɹ taɪld wɔlz spɑɹklɪŋ wɪð ə hʌnʒɹəd kʌlɝz ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪt, əɹ tə lʊk daʊn ɑn pɑɹks leɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn pæɾɝnz meɪd tə bi vjud fɹəm əbʌv, əɹ tə ʃoʊ swipɪŋ vɪstəz əkɹɔs ði ɪntaɪɝ sɪɾi tə ðə ɹoʊlɪŋ pleɪnz ən fɔɹəsts bɪɑnd. ɪt dɪd nɑt ɹɪli mæɾɝ wɪtʃ stʃɹits i tʊk hɪɹ. ðeɪ ɔl spaɪɹəld ɪn ɑn wʌɾ i sɔt, ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ʌv ændɝ.

Within those white walls were buildings that could almost have fit in Tar Valon. The curving streets topped hills to reveal thin towers, their tiled walls sparkling with a hundred colors in the sunlight, or to look down on parks laid out in patterns made to be viewed from above, or to show sweeping vistas across the entire city to the rolling plains and forests beyond. It did not really matter which streets he took here. They all spiraled in on what he sought, the Royal Palace of Andor.

ɪn noʊ taɪm, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf kɹɔsɪŋ ðə hjudʒ oʊvəl plɑzə bɪfɔɹ ðə pæləs, ɹaɪɾɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ɪts tɔl, ɡɪldɪd ɡeɪts. ðə pjʊɹ waɪt pæləs ʌv ændɝ wəd sɝɾənli nɑɾ əv bɪn aʊɾ ə pleɪs əmʌŋ tɑɹ vəlɑnz wʌndɝz, wɪð ɪts slɛndɝ taʊɝz ən ɡoʊldən doʊmz ʃaɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn, ɪts haɪ bælkəniz ən ɪntʃɹəkət stoʊnwɝk. ðə ɡoʊld lif ɑn wʌn ə ðoʊz doʊmz cʊɾə kɛpt ɪm ɪn lʌɡʒɝi fəɹ ə jɪɹ.

In no time, he found himself crossing the huge oval plaza before the Palace, riding toward its tall, gilded gates. The pure white Palace of Andor would certainly not have been out of place among Tar Valon's wonders, with its slender towers and golden domes shining in the sun, its high balconies and intricate stonework. The gold leaf on one of those domes could have kept him in luxury for a year.

ðəɹ wɝ fjuɝ pipəl ɪn ðə plɑzə ðən ɛlswɛɹ, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ɹɪzɝv fəɹ ɡɹeɪɾ əkeɪʒənz. ə dʌzən ə ðə ɡɑɹdz stʊd bɪfɔɹ ðə kloʊzd ɡeɪts, baʊz slæntəd, ɔl əɾ ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm æŋɡəl, əkɹɔs ðɛɹ ɡlimɪŋ bɹɛstpleɪts, feɪsəz hɪɾən baɪ ðə stil bɑɹz ə ðɛɹ bɝnɪʃt hɛlməts' feɪs-ɡɑɹdz. ə hɛvisɛɾ ɔfəsɝ, wɪð ɪz ɹɛd kloʊk θɹoʊn bæk tə ɹɪvil ə nɑɾ ʌv ɡoʊl bɹeɪɾ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, wɑz wɔkɪŋ ʌp ən daʊn ðə laɪn, aɪɪŋ itʃ mæn əz ɪf i θɔɾ i maɪt faɪn ɹʌst əɹ dʌst.

There were fewer people in the plaza than elsewhere, as if it were reserved for great occasions. A dozen of the Guards stood before the closed gates, bows slanted, all at exactly the same angle, across their gleaming breastplates, faces hidden by the steel bars of their burnished helmets' face-guards. A heavyset officer, with his red cloak thrown back to reveal a knot of gold braid on his shoulder, was walking up and down the line, eyeing each man as if he thought he might find rust or dust.

mæt dʒɹu ɹeɪn ən pʊɾ ɑn ə smaɪl. "ɡʊd mɔɹnɪŋ tə ju, kæptən."

Mat drew rein and put on a smile. "Good morning to you, Captain."

ði ɔfəsɝ tɝnd, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm θɹu ðə bɑɹz ə hɪz feɪs-ɡɑɹd wɪð dip, biɾi aɪz, laɪk ə pʌdʒi ɹæɾ ɪn ə keɪdʒ. ðə mæn wɑz oʊldɝ ðən i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd - ʃʊɹli oʊld ɪnʌf tə hæv mɔɹ ðən wʌn nɑɾ ə ɹæŋk - ən fæt ɹæðɝ ðən stɑki. "wʌt dʒju wɑnt, fɑɹmɝ?" hi dɪmændəd ɹʌfli.

The officer turned, staring at him through the bars of his face-guard with deep, beady eyes, like a pudgy rat in a cage. The man was older than he had expected - surely old enough to have more than one knot of rank - and fat rather than stocky. "What do you want, farmer?" he demanded roughly.

mæt dʒɹu ə bɹɛθ. meɪk ɪt ɡʊd. ɪmpɹɛs ðɪs ful soʊ hi dʌzn kip mi weɪɾɪŋ ɔl deɪ. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə hæv tə flæʃ ði æmɪɝlɪnz peɪpɝ ɝaʊn tə kip fɹəm kɪkɪŋ maɪ hilz. "aɪ kʌm fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn, fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bɛɹɪŋ ə lɛɾɝ fɹəm - "

Mat drew a breath. Make it good. Impress this fool so he doesn't keep me waiting all day. I don't want to have to flash the Amyrlin's paper around to keep from kicking my heels. "I come from Tar Valon, from the White Tower, bearing a letter from - "

"ju kʌm fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn, fɑɹmɝ?" ðə fæɾ ɔfəsɝz stʌmək ʃʊk əz i læft, bʌt ðən ɪz læftɝ kʌɾ ɔf əz ɪf sɛvɝd wɪð ə naɪf, ən i ɡlɛɹd. "wi wɑnt noʊ lɛɾɝz fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɹoʊɡ, ɪf juv sətʃ ə θɪŋ! əɹ ɡʊd kwin - meɪ ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin hɝ! - wɪl teɪk noʊ wɝd fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ əntɪl ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ɪz ɹɪtɝn tə hɝ. aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɛni mɛsənʒɝ fɹəm ðə taʊɝ wɛɹɪŋ ə kʌntʃɹimənz koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz. ɪts pleɪn tə mi jə ɑɹ ʌp tə səm tʃɹɪk, pɝhæps θɪŋkɪŋ jəl faɪn ə fju kɔɪnz ɪf jə kʌm kleɪmɪŋ tə kæɹi lɛɾɝz, bʌt jəl bi lʌki ɪf jə doʊn ɛn ɪn ə pɹɪzən sɛl! ɪf jə də kʌm fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɡoʊ bæk ən tɛl ðə taʊɝ tə ɹɪtɝn ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ bɪfɔɹ wi kʌm ən teɪk hɝ! ɪf jəɹ ə tʃɹɪkstɝ æftɝ sɪlvɝ, ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə maɪ saɪt bɪfɔɹ aɪ hæv jə biɾən wɪðɪn ən ɪntʃ ə jəɹ laɪf! iðɝ weɪ, jə hæf-wɪt lubi, bi ɡɔn!"

"You come from Tar Valon, farmer?" The fat officer's stomach shook as he laughed, but then his laughter cut off as if severed with a knife, and he glared. "We want no letters from Tar Valon, rogue, if you have such a thing! Our good Queen - may the Light illumine her! - will take no word from the White Tower until the Daughter-Heir is returned to her. I never heard of any messenger from the Tower wearing a countryman's coat and breeches. It is plain to me you are up to some trick, perhaps thinking you'll find a few coins if you come claiming to carry letters, but you will be lucky if you don't end in a prison cell! If you do come from Tar Valon, go back and tell the Tower to return the Daughter-Heir before we come and take her! If you're a trickster after silver, get out of my sight before I have you beaten within an inch of your life! Either way, you half-wit looby, be gone!"

mæt hæd bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɛdʒ ə wɝɾ ɪn fɹəm ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə ðə mænz spitʃ. hi sɛd kwɪkli, "ðə lɛɾɝ ɪz fɹəm hɝ, mæn. ɪts fɹəm - "

Mat had been trying to edge a word in from the beginning of the man's speech. He said quickly, "The letter is from her, man. It is from - "

"dɪɾ aɪ nɑt tɛl jə tə bi ɡɔn, ɹʌfaɪən?" ðə fæt mæn bɛloʊd. hɪz feɪs wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ nɪɹli əz ɹɛɾ əz ɪz koʊt. "teɪk jɝsɛlf aʊɾ ə maɪ saɪt, jə ɡʌɾɝ skʌm! ɪf jə ɑɹ nɑt ɡɔn baɪ ðə taɪm aɪ kaʊn tɛn, əl ɝɛs jə fəɹ lɪɾɝɪŋ ðə plɑzə wɪð jəɹ pɹɛzəns! wʌn! tu!"

"Did I not tell you to be gone, ruffian?" the fat man bellowed. His face was growing nearly as red as his coat. "Take yourself out of my sight, you gutter scum! If you are not gone by the time I count ten, I will arrest you for littering the plaza with your presence! One! Two!"

"kæn jə kaʊn soʊ haɪ, jə fæt ful?" mæt snæpt. "aɪ tɛl ju, ɪleɪn sɛnt - "

"Can you count so high, you fat fool?" Mat snapped. "I tell you, Elayne sent - "

"ɡɑɹdz!" ði ɔfəsɝz feɪs wɑz pɝpəl naʊ. "siz ðɪs mæn fəɹ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd!"

"Guards!" The officer's face was purple now. "Seize this man for a Darkfriend!"

mæt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ə moʊmənt, ʃʊɹ noʊ wʌn kəd teɪk sətʃ ə tʃɑɹdʒ sɪɹiəsli, bʌt ðə ɹɛd-koʊɾəd ɡɑɹdz dæʃt təwɔɹd hɪm, ɔl dʌzən mɛn ɪn bɹɛstpleɪts ən hɛlməts, ən i wild ɪz hɔɹs ən ɡæləpt əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, fɑloʊd baɪ ðə fæt mænz ʃaʊts. ðə ɡɛldɪŋ wɑz noʊ ɹeɪsɝ, bʌɾ ɪɾ aʊtdɪstəns mɛn əfʊɾ izəli ɪnʌf. pipəl dɑdʒd aʊɾ ə hɪz weɪ əlɔŋ ðə kɝvɪŋ stʃɹits, ʃeɪkɪŋ fɪsts æftɝ ɪm ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ əz mɛni kɝsɪz əz ði ɔfəsɝ hæd.

Mat hesitated a moment, sure no one could take such a charge seriously, but the red-coated Guards dashed toward him, all dozen men in breastplates and helmets, and he wheeled his horse and galloped ahead of them, followed by the fat man's shouts. The gelding was no racer, but it outdistanced men afoot easily enough. People dodged out of his way along the curving streets, shaking fists after him and shouting as many curses as the officer had.

ful, hi θɔt, minɪŋ ðə fæɾ ɔfəsɝ, ðən æɾəd ənʌðɝ fəɹ hɪmsɛlf. ɔl aɪ hæd tə də wɑz seɪ hɝ blʌɾi neɪm ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. "ɪleɪn, ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ, sɛnz ðɪs lɛɾɝ tə hɝ mʌðɝ, kwin mɔɹɡeɪs." laɪt, hu cʊɾə θɔt ðeɪd θɪŋk ðət weɪ əbaʊt tɑɹ vəlɑn. fɹəm wʌɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ə hɪz læs vɪzət, ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæd bɪn kloʊs bɪhaɪn kwin mɔɹɡeɪs ɪn ðə ɡɑɹdz' əfɛkʃənz. bɝn hɝ, ɪleɪn cʊɾə toʊl mi. ɹɪlʌktənli, hi æɾəd, aɪ cʊɾə æskt kwɛstʃənz, tu.

Fool, he thought, meaning the fat officer, then added another for himself. All I had to do was say her bloody name in the beginning. "Elayne, the Daughter-Heir of Andor, sends this letter to her mother, Queen Morgase." Light, who could have thought they'd think that way about Tar Valon. From what he remembered of his last visit, Aes Sedai and the White Tower had been close behind Queen Morgase in the Guards' affections. Burn her, Elayne could have told me. Reluctantly, he added, I could have asked questions, too.

bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ði ɑɹtʃt ɡeɪts ðət lɛɾ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə nu sɪɾi, hi sloʊd tə ə wɔk. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðə ɡɑɹdz fɹəm ðə pæləs kəd stɪl bi tʃeɪsɪŋ hɪm, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn ətʃɹæktɪŋ ði aɪz ə ðoʊz ət ðə ɡeɪt baɪ ɡæləpɪŋ θɹu, bʌt ðeɪ lʊkt əɾ ɪm noʊ mɔɹ naʊ ðən wən i hæd fɝst ɛntɝd.

Before he reached the arched gates that let out into the New City, he slowed to a walk. He did not think the Guards from the Palace could still be chasing him, and there was no point in attracting the eyes of those at the gate by galloping through, but they looked at him no more now than when he had first entered.

əz i ɹoʊɾ ʌndɝ ðə bɹɔɾ ɑɹtʃ, hi smaɪld ən ɔlmoʊs tɝn bæk. hi hæd sʌɾənli ɹɪmɛmbɝd sʌmθɪŋ, ən hæɾ ən aɪdiə ðəɾ əpil tə hɪm ə ɡʊd dil mɔɹ ðən wɔkɪŋ θɹu ðə pæləs ɡeɪts. ivən ɪf ðət fæɾ ɔfəsɝ hæd nɑt bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ ðə ɡeɪts, hi θɔɾ i wəd laɪk ɪt bɛɾɝ.

As he rode under the broad arch, he smiled and almost turned back. He had suddenly remembered something, and had an idea that appealed to him a good deal more than walking through the Palace gates. Even if that fat officer had not been watching the gates, he thought he would like it better.

hi bɪkeɪm lɔs twaɪs waɪl sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ, bʌɾ ət læst i faʊn ðə saɪn wɪð ə mæn nilɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ə wʊmən wɪð ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ ən ə kɹaʊn ʌv ɡoʊldən ɹoʊzɪz, hɝ hæn ɑn ɪz hɛd. ɪt wɑz ə bɹɔd stoʊn bɪldɪŋ ə θɹi stɔɹiz, wɪð tɔl wɪndoʊz ivən ʌp ʌndɝ ðə ɹɛd ɹuf taɪlz. hi ɹoʊɾ ɝaʊn bæk tə ðə steɪbliɑɹd, wɛɹ ə hɔɹs-feɪs fɛloʊ, ɪn ə lɛðɝ vɛs ðət kəd hɑɹdli bi ɛni tʌfɝ ðən ɪz skɪn, tʊk ɪz hɔɹsəz ɹeɪnz. hi θɔɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə fɛloʊ. jɛs. ɹæmi.

He became lost twice while searching for The Queen's Blessing, but at last he found the sign with a man kneeling before a woman with red-gold hair and a crown of golden roses, her hand on his head. It was a broad stone building of three stories, with tall windows even up under the red roof tiles. He rode around back to the stableyard, where a horse-faced fellow, in a leather vest that could hardly be any tougher than his skin, took his horse's reins. He thought he remembered the fellow. Yes. Ramey.

"ɪɾ əz bɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm, ɹæmi." mæt tɔst ɪm ə sɪlvɝ mɑɹk. "ju ɹɪmɛmbɝ mi, doʊn ju?"

"It has been a long time, Ramey." Mat tossed him a silver mark. "You remember me, don't you?"

"kæn seɪ əz aɪ . . ." ɹæmi bɪɡæn, ðən kɑt ðə ʃaɪn ə sɪlvɝ wɛɹ i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd kɑpɝ; hi kɔft, ən ɪz ʃɔɹt nɑd tɝn ɪndə sʌmθɪŋ ðət kəmbaɪn ə nʌkəl fɔɹhɛd wɪð ə dʒɝki baʊ. "waɪ, ʌv kɔɹs aɪ du, jʌŋ mæstɝ. fɝɡɪv mi. slɪp maɪ maɪnd. maɪnd noʊ ɡʊd fəɹ pipəl. ɡʊd fəɹ hɔɹsəz. aɪ noʊ hɔɹsəz, aɪ du. ə faɪn ænəməl, jʌŋ mæstɝ. əl teɪk ɡʊd kɛɹ ə hɪm, jə kən bi ʃʊɹ." hi dɪlɪvɝɾ ɪɾ ɔl kwɪkli, wɪð noʊ ɹum fəɹ mæt tə seɪ ə wɝd, ðən hɝid ðə ɡɛldɪŋ ɪndə ðə steɪbəl bɪfɔɹ i maɪɾ əv tə kʌm ʌp wɪð mæts neɪm.

"Can't say as I . . ." Ramey began, then caught the shine of silver where he had expected copper; he coughed, and his short nod turned into something that combined a knuckled forehead with a jerky bow. "Why, of course I do, young master. Forgive me. Slipped my mind. Mind no good for people. Good for horses. I know horses, I do. A fine animal, young master. I'll take good care of him, you can be sure." He delivered it all quickly, with no room for Mat to say a word, then hurried the gelding into the stable before he might have to come up with Mat's name.

wɪð ə saʊɝ ɡɹɪmɑs, mæt pʊt ðə fæt ɹoʊl ə faɪɹwɝks ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm ən ʃoʊldɝd ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz bɪlɔŋɪŋz. fɛloʊ kʊdn tɛl mi fɹəm hɔkwɪŋz toʊneɪlz. ə bʌlki, mʌskjəlɝ mæn wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ən ʌptɝn bæɹəl bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ tə ðə kɪtʃən, dʒɛnli skɹætʃɪŋ ði ɪɹ ʌv ə blæk-ænd-waɪt kæt kɹaʊtʃt ɑn ɪz ni. ðə mæn stʌɾid mæt wɪð hɛvi-lɪɾɪd aɪz, ɪspɛʃli ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, bʌɾ i nɛvɝ stɑpt ɪz skɹætʃɪŋ. mæt θɔɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd hɪm, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt bɹɪŋ ʌp ə neɪm. hi sɛd nʌθɪŋ əz i wɛn θɹu ðə dɔɹ, ən niðɝ dɪd ðə mæn. noʊ ɹizən ðeɪ ʃəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ mi. pɹɑbli hæv blʌɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ kʌmɪŋ fəɹ pipəl ɛvɹi deɪ.

With a sour grimace, Mat put the fat roll of fireworks under his arm and shouldered the rest of his belongings. Fellow couldn't tell me from Hawkwing's toenails. A bulky, muscular man was sitting on an upturned barrel beside the door to the kitchen, gently scratching the ear of a black-and-white cat crouched on his knee. The man studied Mat with heavy-lidded eyes, especially the quarterstaff across his shoulder, but he never stopped his scratching. Mat thought he remembered him, but he could not bring up a name. He said nothing as he went through the door, and neither did the man. No reason they should remember me. Probably have bloody Aes Sedai coming for people every day.

ɪn ðə kɪtʃən, tu ʌndɝkʊks ən θɹi skʌljənz wɝ dɑɹɾɪŋ bɪtwin stoʊvz ən ɹoʊstɪŋ spɪts ʌndɝ ðə dɝɛkʃən ʌv ə ɹaʊnd wʊmən wɪð əɹ hɛɹ ɪn ə bʌn ən ə lɔŋ wʊɾən spun ðət ʃi juz tə pɔɪn aʊt wʌt ʃi wɑntəd dʌn. mæt wɑz ʃʊɹ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə ɹaʊnd wʊmən. koʊlini, ən wʌɾ ə neɪm fəɹ ə wʊmən ðət waɪd, bʌɾ ɛvɹibɑɾi kɔld əɹ kʊk.

In the kitchen, two undercooks and three scullions were darting between stoves and roasting spits under the direction of a round woman with her hair in a bun and a long wooden spoon that she used to point out what she wanted done. Mat was sure he remembered the round woman. Coline, and what a name for a woman that wide, but everybody called her Cook.

"wɛl, kʊk," hi ənaʊnst, "aɪ æm bæk, ən nɑɾ ə jɪɹ sɪns aɪ lɛft."

"Well, Cook," he announced, "I am back, and not a year since I left."

ʃi pɪɹɾ əɾ ɪm ə moʊmənt, ðən nɑɾəd. "aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ju." hi bɪɡæn tə ɡɹɪn. "ju wɝ wɪð ðət jʌŋ pɹɪns, wɝn ju?" ʃi wɛn ɑn. "ðə wʌn u lʊk soʊ laɪk tɪɡɹeɪn, ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin əɹ mɛmɹi. jəɹ ɪz sɝvɪŋ mæn, ɑɹən ju? ɪz i kʌmɪŋ bæk, ðɛn, ðə jʌŋ pɹɪns?"

She peered at him a moment, then nodded. "I remember you." He began to grin. "You were with that young prince, weren't you?" she went on. "The one who looked so like Tigraine, the Light illumine her memory. You're his serving man, aren't you? Is he coming back, then, the young prince?"

"noʊ," hi sɛd kɝtli. ə pɹɪns! laɪt! "aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk hɪl bi ɛnitaɪm sun, ən aɪ doʊn θɪŋk jə wəd laɪk ɪɾ ɪf i dɪd." ʃi pɹətɛstəd, seɪɪŋ wʌɾ ə faɪn, hænsəm jʌŋ mæn ðə pɹɪns wɑz - bɝn mi, ɪz ðəɹ ə wʊmən ɛniwɛɹ u dʌzn mun oʊvɝ ɹænd ən meɪk kæf-aɪz ɪf jə mɛnʃən ɪz blʌɾi neɪm? ʃid blʌɾi skɹim ɪf ʃi nu wʌt hiz duɪŋ naʊ - bʌɾ i ɹəfjuz tə lɛɾ əɹ ɡɛɾ ɪɾ aʊt. "ɪz mæstɝ ɡɪl əbaʊt? ən tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn?"

"No," he said curtly. A prince! Light! "I do not think he will be anytime soon, and I don't think you would like it if he did." She protested, saying what a fine, handsome young man the prince was - Burn me, is there a woman anywhere who doesn't moon over Rand and make calf-eyes if you mention his bloody name? She'd bloody scream if she knew what he is doing now - but he refused to let her get it out. "Is Master Gill about? And Thom Merrilin?"

"ɪn ðə laɪbɹɛɹi," ʃi sɛd wɪð ə taɪt snɪf. "ju tɛl bɑzəl ɡɪl wən jə si hɪm ðəɾ aɪ sɛd ðoʊz dʒɹeɪnz nid klinɪŋ. tədeɪ, maɪnd." ʃi kɑt saɪɾ ə sʌmθɪŋ wʌn ə ði ʌndɝkʊks wɑz duɪŋ tə ə bif ɹoʊst ən wɑɾəld oʊvɝ tə hɝ. "nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ, tʃaɪld. jəl meɪk ðə mit tu swiɾ ɪf jə pʊt soʊ mʌtʃ ɹəθ ɑn ɪt." ʃi sim tə hæv fɝɡɑɾən mæt ɔlɹɛɾi.

"In the library," she said with a tight sniff. "You tell Basel Gill when you see him that I said those drains need cleaning. Today, mind." She caught sight of something one of the undercooks was doing to a beef roast and waddled over to her. "Not so much, child. You will make the meat too sweet if you put so much arrath on it." She seemed to have forgotten Mat already.

hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ əz i wɛn ɪn sɝtʃ ə ðɪs laɪbɹɛɹi hi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ. hi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət koʊlini wɑz mɛɹid tə mæstɝ ɡɪl, iðɝ, bʌɾ ɪf i hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝɾ ə ɡʊdwaɪf sɛn ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz tə hɝ hʌzbənd, ðət hæd bɪn ɪt. ə pɹɪɾi sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl wɪð bɪɡ aɪz ɡɪɡəld ən dɝɛktəɾ ɪm daʊn ə hɔl bɪsaɪd ðə kɑmən ɹum.

He shook his head as he went in search of this library he could not remember. He could not remember that Coline was married to Master Gill, either, but if he had ever heard a goodwife send instructions to her husband, that had been it. A pretty serving girl with big eyes giggled and directed him down a hall beside the common room.

wən i stɛpt ɪndə ðə laɪbɹɛɹi, hi stɑpt ən stɛɹd. ðəɹ hæd tə bi mɔɹ ðən θɹi hʌnʒɹəd bʊks ɑn ðə ʃɛlvz bɪlt ɑn ðə wɔlz, ən mɔɹ laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə teɪbəlz; hi hæd nɛvɝ sin soʊ mɛni bʊks ɪn wʌn pleɪs ɪn ɪz laɪf. hi noʊɾəst ə lɛðɝ-baʊn kɑpi ʌv ðə tʃɹævəlz ə dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ ɑn ə teɪbəl nɪɹ ðə dɔɹ. hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz mɛn tə ɹid ðət - ɹænd ən pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn tɛlɪŋ ɪm θɪŋz aʊɾ ʌv ɪt - bʌɾ i nɛvɝ dɪd sim tə ɡɛɾ ɝaʊn tə ɹiɾɪŋ ðə bʊks i mɛn tə ɹid.

When he stepped into the library, he stopped and stared. There had to be more than three hundred books on the shelves built on the walls, and more lying on the tables; he had never seen so many books in one place in his life. He noticed a leather-bound copy of The Travels of Jain Farstrider on a table near the door. He had always meant to read that - Rand and Perrin had always been telling him things out of it - but he never did seem to get around to reading the books he meant to read.

pɪŋk-feɪs bɑzəl ɡɪl ən tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn wɝ siɾəd ət wʌn ə ðə teɪbəlz, feɪsɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ əkɹɔs ə stoʊnz bɔɹd, paɪps ɪn ðɛɹ tiθ tʃɹeɪlɪŋ θɪn blu stʃɹimɝz ə təbæk smoʊk. ə kæləkoʊ kæt sæɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl bɪsaɪɾ ə wʊɾən daɪs kʌp, hɝ teɪl kɝld oʊvɝ əɹ fit, wɑtʃɪŋ əm pleɪ. ðə ɡlimənz kloʊk wɑz noʊwɛɹ ɪn saɪt, soʊ mæt səpoʊzd i hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɑɾən ə ɹum.

Pink-faced Basel Gill and Thom Merrilin were seated at one of the tables, facing each other across a stones board, pipes in their teeth trailing thin blue streamers of tabac smoke. A calico cat sat on the table beside a wooden dice cup, her tail curled over her feet, watching them play. The gleeman's cloak was nowhere in sight, so Mat supposed he had already gotten a room.

"jɔɹ dʌn sunɝ ðən aɪ ɪkspɛktəd, bɔɪ," tɑm sɛɾ ɝaʊn ɪz paɪpɛstəm. hi tʌɡd wʌn lɔŋ, waɪt mʌstæʃ əz i kənsɪɾɝd wɛɹ tə pleɪs ɪz nɛkst stoʊn ɑn ðə bɔɹdz kɹɔs-hætʃɪŋz. "bɑzəl, jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ mæt kɔθən."

"You're done sooner than I expected, boy," Thom said around his pipestem. He tugged one long, white mustache as he considered where to place his next stone on the board's cross-hatchings. "Basel, you remember Mat Cauthon."

"aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ," ðə fæɾ ɪnkipɝ sɛd, piɹɪŋ ət ðə bɔɹd. "sɪkli, ðə læs taɪm jə wɝ hɪɹ, aɪ ɹikɔl. aɪ hoʊp jə ɑɹ bɛɾɝ naʊ, læd."

"I remember," the fat innkeeper said, peering at the board. "Sickly, the last time you were here, I recall. I hope you are better now, lad."

"aɪ æm bɛɾɝ," mæt sɛd. "ɪz ðəɾ ɔl jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ? ðəɾ aɪ wɑz sɪk?"

"I am better," Mat said. "Is that all you remember? That I was sick?"

mæstɝ ɡɪl wɪnst ət tɑmz muv ən tʊk ɪz paɪp aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ. "kənsɪɾɝɪŋ u jə lɛft wɪð, læd, ən kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðə weɪ θɪŋz ɑɹ naʊ, meɪbi ɪts bɛst aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðæt."

Master Gill winced at Thom's move and took his pipe out of his mouth. "Considering who you left with, lad, and considering the way things are now, maybe it's best I remember no more than that."

"ɛɛs sədaɪ nɑɾ ɪn sətʃ ɡʊɾ oʊɾɝ naʊ, ɑɹ ðeɪ?" mæt sɛɾ ɪz θɪŋz ɪn wʌn bɪɡ ɑɹmtʃɛɹ, ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf pɹɑpt əɡɛns ðə bæk, ən hɪmsɛlf ɪn ənʌðɝ wɪð wʌn lɛɡ swɪŋɪŋ oʊvɝ ði ɑɹm. "ðə ɡɑɹdz ət ðə pæləs sim tə θɪŋk ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæd stoʊlən ɪleɪn." tɑm aɪd ðə ɹoʊl ə faɪɹwɝks ənizəli, lʊkt əɾ ɪz smoʊkɪŋ paɪp, ən mʌɾɝd tə hɪmsɛlf bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ bæk tə hɪz stʌɾi ʌv ðə bɔɹd.

"Aes Sedai not in such good odor now, are they?" Mat set his things in one big armchair, the quarterstaff propped against the back, and himself in another with one leg swinging over the arm. "The Guards at the Palace seemed to think the White Tower had stolen Elayne." Thom eyed the roll of fireworks uneasily, looked at his smoking pipe, and muttered to himself before going back to his study of the board.

"hɑɹdli ðæt," ɡɪl sɛd, "bʌt ðə hoʊl sɪɾi noʊz ʃi dɪsəpɪɹd fɹəm ðə taʊɝ. tɑm sɛz ʃiz ɹɪtɝnd, bʌt wiv hɝd nʌn ə ðət hɪɹ. pɝhæps mɔɹɡeɪs noʊz, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn daʊn tə ə steɪbəlbɔɪ ɪz stɛpɪŋ laɪtli soʊ ʃi dʌzn snæp ɔf ɪz hɛd. lɔɹd ɡeɪbɹəl əz kɛpt əɹ fɹəm æktʃəli  sɛndɪŋ ɛniwʌn tə ðə hɛdzmən, bʌɾ aɪd nɑt seɪ ʃi wəd nɑt də ɪt. hiz hæz sɝɾənli nɑt suðd əɹ tɛmpɝ təwɔɹd tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, aɪ hiz hæz meɪɾ ɪt wɝs."

"Hardly that," Gill said, "but the whole city knows she disappeared from the Tower. Thom says she's returned, but we've heard none of that here. Perhaps Morgase knows, but everyone down to a stableboy is stepping lightly so she doesn't snap off his head. Lord Gaebril has kept her from actually sending anyone to the headsman, but I'd not say she would not do it. And he has certainly not soothed her temper toward Tar Valon. If anything, I think he has made it worse."

"mɔɹɡeɪs əz ə nu ædvaɪzɝ," tɑm sɛɾ ɪn ə dʒɹaɪ vɔɪs. "ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn dɪd nɑt laɪk hɪm, soʊ bɹaɪn əz bɪn ɹɪtaɪɹd tə hɪz ɪsteɪt tə wɑtʃ ɪz ʃip ɡɹoʊ wʊl. bɑzəl, ɑɹ jə gɑnə pleɪs ə stoʊn əɹ nɑt?"

"Morgase has a new advisor," Thom said in a dry voice. "Gareth Bryne did not like him, so Bryne has been retired to his estate to watch his sheep grow wool. Basel, are you going to place a stone or not?"

"ɪn ə moʊmənt, tɑm. ɪn ə moʊmənt. aɪ wɑnə sɛɾ ɪt ɹaɪt." ɡɪl klæmpt ɪz tiθ ɝaʊn ɪz paɪpɛstəm ən fɹaʊn ət ðə bɔɹd, pʌfɪŋ ʌp smoʊk.

"In a moment, Thom. In a moment. I want to set it right." Gill clamped his teeth around his pipestem and frowned at the board, puffing up smoke.

"soʊ ðə kwin əz ən ædvaɪzɝ u dʌzn laɪk tɑɹ vəlɑn," mæt sɛd. "wɛl, ðəɾ ɪkspleɪnz ðə weɪ ðə ɡɑɹdz æktəd wən aɪ sɛɾ aɪ keɪm fɹəm ðɛɹ."

"So the Queen has an advisor who doesn't like Tar Valon," Mat said. "Well, that explains the way the Guards acted when I said I came from there."

"ɪf jə toʊld əm ðæt," ɡɪl sɛd, "ju maɪt bi lʌki jə ɪskeɪpt wɪθaʊɾ ɛni bɹoʊkən boʊnz. ɪf ɪt wɑz ɛni ʌv ðə nu mɛn, ət list. ɡeɪbɹəl əz ɹipleɪs hæf ðə ɡɑɹdz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn wɪð mɛn ə hɪz tʃuzɪŋ, ən ðəɾ ɪz noʊ min fit kənsɪɾɝɪŋ haʊ ʃɔɹɾ ə taɪm hiz bɪn hɪɹ. səm seɪ mɔɹɡeɪs meɪ mɛɹi hɪm." hi stɑɹɾəd tə pʊɾ ə stoʊn ɑn ðə bɔɹd, ðən tʊk ɪt bæk wɪð ə ʃeɪk ə hɪz hɛd. "taɪmz tʃeɪnʒ. pipəl tʃeɪnʒ. tu mʌtʃ tʃeɪnʒ fəɹ mi. aɪ səpoʊz aɪm ɡɹoʊɪŋ oʊld."

"If you told them that," Gill said, "you might be lucky you escaped without any broken bones. If it was any of the new men, at least. Gaebril has replaced half the Guards in Caemlyn with men of his choosing, and that is no mean feat considering how short a time he has been here. Some say Morgase may marry him." He started to put a stone on the board, then took it back with a shake of his head. "Times change. People change. Too much change for me. I suppose I am growing old."

"ju sim tə min əs boʊθ tə ɡɹoʊ oʊl bɪfɔɹ jə pleɪs ə stoʊn," tɑm mʌɾɝd. ðə kæt stʃɹɛtʃt ən slɪŋkt əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl fəɹ ɪm tə stʃɹoʊk əɹ bæk. "tɔkɪŋ ɔl deɪ wɪl nɑt lɛt jə faɪn ə ɡʊd muv. waɪ doʊn jə dʒʌst ədmɪt dɪfit, bɑzəl?"

"You seem to mean us both to grow old before you place a stone," Thom muttered. The cat stretched and slinked across the table for him to stroke her back. "Talking all day will not let you find a good move. Why don't you just admit defeat, Basel?"

"aɪ nɛvɝ ədmɪt dɪfit," ɡɪl sɛd staʊtli. "aɪl bit jə jɛt, tɑm." hi sɛɾ ə waɪt stoʊn ɑn ði ɪntɝsɛkʃən ə tu laɪnz. "ju wɪl si." tɑm snɔɹɾɪd.

"I never admit defeat," Gill said stoutly. "I'll beat you yet, Thom." He set a white stone on the intersection of two lines. "You will see." Thom snorted.

fɹəm wʌt mæt kəd si ʌv ðə bɔɹd, hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɡɪl hæd mʌtʃ tʃæns. "aɪ wɪl dʒʌst əv tə əvɔɪd ðə ɡɑɹdz ən pʊɾ ɪleɪnz lɛɾɝ ɹaɪɾ ɪndə mɔɹɡeɪsəz hænz." ɪspɛʃli ɪf ðəɹ ɔl laɪk ðət fæt ful. laɪt, aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf hiz toʊld əm ɔl aɪm ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd?

From what Mat could see of the board, he did not think Gill had much chance. "I will just have to avoid the Guards and put Elayne's letter right into Morgase's hands." Especially if they're all like that fat fool. Light, I wonder if he's told them all I'm a Darkfriend?

"ju dɪd nɑt dɪlɪvɝ ɪt?" tɑm bɑɹkt. "aɪ θɔt jə wɝ æŋkʃəs tə bi ɹɪɾ ə ðə θɪŋ."

"You did not deliver it?" Thom barked. "I thought you were anxious to be rid of the thing."

"ju hæv ə lɛɾɝ fɹəm ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ?" ɡɪl ɪkskleɪmd. "tɑm, waɪ dɪd jə nɑt tɛl mi?"

"You have a letter from the Daughter-Heir?" Gill exclaimed. "Thom, why did you not tell me?"

"aɪ æm sɑɹi, bɑzəl," ðə ɡlimən mʌɾɝd. hi ɡlɛɹɾ ət mæt fɹəm ʌndɝ ðoʊz bʊʃi aɪbɹaʊz ən blu aʊɾ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz. "ðə bɔɪ θɪŋks sʌmwʌn ɪz aʊt tə kɪl ɪm oʊvɝ ɪt, soʊ aɪ θɔɾ aɪd lɛɾ ɪm seɪ wʌɾ i wɑntəɾ ən noʊ mɔɹ. simz i dʌz nɑt kɛɹ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ."

"I am sorry, Basel," the gleeman muttered. He glared at Mat from under those bushy eyebrows and blew out his mustaches. "The boy thinks someone is out to kill him over it, so I thought I'd let him say what he wanted and no more. Seems he does not care any longer."

"wʌt kaɪndə lɛɾɝ?" ɡɪl æskt. "ɪz ʃi kʌmɪŋ hoʊm? ən lɔɹd ɡɔɪn? aɪ hoʊp ðeɪ ɑɹ. aɪv æktʃəli  hɝd tɔk ʌv wɔɹ wɪð tɑɹ vəlɑn, əz ɪf ɛniwʌn kəd bi ful ɪnʌf tə ɡoʊ tə wɔɹ wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪf jə æsk ɪts ɪz ɔl wʌn wɪð ðoʊz mæd ɹumɝz wiv hɝɾ əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ səpɔɹɾɪŋ ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə wɛst, ən juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən. nɑt ðəɾ aɪ kən si waɪ ðət wəd meɪk wɑnə tə ɡoʊ tə wɔɹ wɪð ðɛm; dʒʌs ði ɑpəzət."

"What kind of letter?" Gill asked. "Is she coming home? And Lord Gawyn? I hope they are. I've actually heard talk of war with Tar Valon, as if anyone could be fool enough to go to war with Aes Sedai. If you ask me, it is all one with those mad rumors we've heard about Aes Sedai supporting a false Dragon somewhere in the west, and using the Power as a weapon. Not that I can see why that would make anyone want to go to war with them; just the opposite."

"ɑɹ jə mɛɹid tə koʊlini?" mæt æskt, ən mæstɝ ɡɪl ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt.

"Are you married to Coline?" Mat asked, and Master Gill gave a start.

"ðə laɪt pɹəzɝv mi fɹəm ðæt! jə wəd θɪŋk ði ɪn wɑz hɝz naʊ. ɪf ʃi wɑz maɪ waɪf . . . ! wʌt dʌz ðəɾ əv tə də wɪð ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹz lɛɾɝ?"

"The Light preserve me from that! You would think the inn was hers now. If she was my wife . . . ! What does that have to do with the Daughter-Heir's letter?"

"nʌθɪŋ," mæt sɛd, "bʌt jə wɛn ɑn soʊ lɔŋ, aɪ θɔt jə mʌst əv fɝɡɑɾən jəɹ oʊn kwɛstʃənz." ɡɪl meɪɾ ə tʃoʊkɪŋ saʊnd, ən tɑm bɑɹkt ə læf. mæt hɝiɾ ɑn bɪfɔɹ ði ɪnkipɝ kəd spik. "ðə lɛɾɝ ɪz sild; ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt tɛl mi wʌɾ ɪt sɛz." tɑm wɑz aɪɪŋ ɪm saɪdweɪz ən stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz. dʌz i θɪŋk əl ədmɪt wi oʊpən ðə θɪŋ? "bʌɾ aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ʃiz kʌmɪŋ hoʊm. ʃi minz tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪf jə æsk mi." hi toʊld əm əbaʊɾ ɪz ətɛmp tə dɪlɪvɝ ðə lɛɾɝ, smuðɪŋ oʊvɝ ə fju ɛdʒəz ðeɪ hæd noʊ nid tə noʊ əbaʊt.

"Nothing," Mat said, "but you went on so long, I thought you must have forgotten your own questions." Gill made a choking sound, and Thom barked a laugh. Mat hurried on before the innkeeper could speak. "The letter is sealed; Elayne did not tell me what it says." Thom was eyeing him sideways and stroking his mustaches. Does he think I'll admit we opened the thing? "But I don't think she is coming home. She means to be Aes Sedai, if you ask me." He told them about his attempt to deliver the letter, smoothing over a few edges they had no need to know about.

"ðə nu mɛn," ɡɪl sɛd. "ðæɾ ɔfəsɝ saʊnz ɪt, ət list. əl weɪdʒɝ ɑn ɪt. noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən bɹɪɡænz, moʊst ə ðɛm, ɪksɛp ðə wʌnz wɪð ə slaɪ aɪ. jə weɪɾ əntɪl ðɪs æftɝnun, læd, wən ðə ɡɑɹdz ɑn ðə ɡeɪt wɪl əv tʃeɪnʒd. seɪ ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹz neɪm ɹaɪɾ aʊt, ən dʒʌst ɪn keɪs ðə nu fɛloʊ ɪz wʌn ʌv ɡeɪbɹəlz mɛn, tu, dʌk jəɹ hɛɾ ə lɪɾəl. ə nʌkəl tə jəɹ fɔɹhɛd, ən jəl əv noʊ tʃɹʌbəl."

"The new men," Gill said. "That officer sounds it, at least. I'll wager on it. No better than brigands, most of them, except the ones with a sly eye. You wait until this afternoon, lad, when the Guards on the gate will have changed. Say the Daughter-Heir's name right out, and just in case the new fellow is one of Gaebril's men, too, duck your head a little. A knuckle to your forehead, and you'll have no trouble."

"bɝn mi ɪf aɪ wɪl. aɪ pʊl wʊl ən skɹætʃ ɡɹævəl fəɹ noʊbɑdi. nɑt tə mɔɹɡeɪs hɝsɛlf. ðɪs taɪm, əl nɑt ɡoʊ nɪɹ ðə ɡɑɹdz əɾ ɔl." aɪ wəd dʒʌst əz sun nɑt noʊ wʌt wɝd ðət fæt fɛloʊ hæz spɹɛd. ðeɪ stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm əz ɪf i wɝ mæd.

"Burn me if I will. I pull wool and scratch gravel for nobody. Not to Morgase herself. This time, I'll not go near the Guards at all." I would just as soon not know what word that fat fellow has spread. They stared at him as if he were mad.

"haʊ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt," ɡɪl sɛd, "du jə min tə ɛntɝ ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs wɪθaʊt pæsɪŋ ðə ɡɑɹdz?" hɪz aɪz waɪɾənd əz ɪf i wɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. "laɪt, jə doʊn min tə. . . . læd, jud nid ðə dɑɹk wʌnz oʊn lʌk tə ɪskeɪp wɪð jəɹ laɪf!"

"How under the Light," Gill said, "do you mean to enter the Royal Palace without passing the Guards?" His eyes widened as if he were remembering something. "Light, you don't mean to. . . . Lad, you'd need the Dark One's own luck to escape with your life!"

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn əbaʊt naʊ, bɑzəl? mæt, wʌt ful θɪŋ dʒju ɪntɛn tə tʃɹaɪ?"

"What are you going on about now, Basel? Mat, what fool thing do you intend to try?"

"aɪ æm lʌki, mæstɝ ɡɪl," mæt sɛd. "ju dʒʌst əv ə ɡʊd mil weɪɾɪŋ wən aɪ kʌm bæk." əz i stʊd, hi pɪkt ʌp ðə daɪs kʌp ən spʌn ðə daɪs aʊt bɪsaɪd ðə stoʊnz bɔɹd fəɹ lʌk. ðə kæləkoʊ kæt lɛp daʊn, hɪsɪŋ əɾ ɪm wɪð əɹ bæk ɑɹtʃt. ðə faɪv spɑɾəd daɪs keɪm tə ɹɛst, itʃ ʃoʊɪŋ ə sɪŋɡəl pɪp. ðə dɑɹk wʌnz aɪz.

"I am lucky, Master Gill," Mat said. "You just have a good meal waiting when I come back." As he stood, he picked up the dice cup and spun the dice out beside the stones board for luck. The calico cat leaped down, hissing at him with her back arched. The five spotted dice came to rest, each showing a single pip. The Dark One's Eyes.

"ðæts ðə bɛs tɔs əɹ ðə wɝst," ɡɪl sɛd. "ɪt dɪpɛnz ɑn ðə ɡeɪm jə ɑɹ pleɪɪŋ, dʌzn ɪt. læd, aɪ θɪŋk jə min tə pleɪ ə deɪnʒɝəs ɡeɪm. waɪ doʊn jə teɪk ðət kʌp aʊɾ ɪndə ðə kɑmən ɹum ən luz ə fju kɑpɝz? jə lʊk tə mi laɪk ə fɛloʊ hu maɪt laɪk ə lɪɾəl ɡæmbəl. əl si ðə lɛɾɝ ɡɛts tə ðə pæləs seɪfli."

"That's the best toss or the worst," Gill said. "It depends on the game you are playing, doesn't it. Lad, I think you mean to play a dangerous game. Why don't you take that cup out into the common room and lose a few coppers? You look to me like a fellow who might like a little gamble. I will see the letter gets to the Palace safely."

"koʊlini wɑns jə tə klin ðə dʒɹeɪnz," mæt toʊl hɪm, ən tɝn tə tɑm waɪl ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz stɪl blɪŋkɪŋ ən mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf. "ɪt dʌzn sim tə meɪk ɛni ɑdz wɛðɝ aɪ ɡɛɾ ən æɹoʊ ɪn mi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪlɪvɝ ðət lɛɾɝ əɹ ə naɪf ɪn maɪ bæk weɪɾɪŋ. ɪts sɪks ʌp, ən ə hæf dʌzən daʊn. dʒʌs juv ðət mil weɪɾɪŋ, tɑm." hi tɔst ə ɡoʊl mɑɹk ɑn ðə teɪbəl ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɡɪl. "hæv maɪ θɪŋz pʊɾ ɪn ə ɹum, ɪnkipɝ. ɪf ɪt teɪks mɔɹ kɔɪn, jəl əv ɪt. bi kɛɹfəl ə ðə bɪɡ ɹoʊl; ɪt fɹaɪɾənz tɑm sʌmθɪŋ ɑfəl."

"Coline wants you to clean the drains," Mat told him, and turned to Thom while the innkeeper was still blinking and muttering to himself. "It doesn't seem to make any odds whether I get an arrow in me trying to deliver that letter or a knife in my back waiting. It's six up, and a half dozen down. Just you have that meal waiting, Thom." He tossed a gold mark on the table in front of Gill. "Have my things put in a room, innkeeper. If it takes more coin, you will have it. Be careful of the big roll; it frightens Thom something awful."

əz i stɔkt aʊt, hi hɝd ɡɪl seɪ tə tɑm, "aɪ ɔlweɪz θɔt ðət læd wɑz ə ɹæskəl. haʊ dʌz i kʌm baɪ ɡoʊld?"

As he stalked out, he heard Gill say to Thom, "I always thought that lad was a rascal. How does he come by gold?"

aɪ ɔlweɪz wɪn, ðæts haʊ, hi θɔt ɡɹɪmli. aɪ dʒʌst əv tə wɪn wʌns mɔɹ, ən aɪm dʌn wɪð ɪleɪn, ən ðæts ðə læst ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ fəɹ mi. dʒʌst wʌns mɔɹ.

I always win, that's how, he thought grimly. I just have to win once more, and I'm done with Elayne, and that's the last of the White Tower for me. Just once more.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾisɪks


CHAPTER 46

eɪ mɛsədʒ aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊ


A Message Out of the Shadow

ivən əz i ɹɪtɝn tə ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi ɑn fʊt, mæt wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm sɝɾən ðət wʌɾ i ɪntɛndəd wəɾ æktʃəli  wɝk. ɪt wʊd, ɪf wʌɾ i hæd bɪn toʊld wɑz tʃɹu, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə tʃɹuθ ə ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʌv. hi əvɔɪɾəd ði oʊvəl plɑzə ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə pæləs, bʌt wɑndɝɾ ɝaʊn ðə saɪdz ə ðə hjudʒ stʃɹʌktʃɝ ən ɪts ɡɹaʊnz, əlɔŋ stʃɹits ðət kɝvd wɪð ðə kɑntʊɹz ə ðə hɪlz. ðə ɡoʊldən doʊmz ə ðə pæləs ɡlɪɾɝd, mɑkəŋli aʊɾ ə ɹitʃ. hi hæd meɪɾ ɪz weɪ ɔlmoʊst ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊnd, nɪɹli bæk tə ðə plɑzə, wən i sɔ ɪt. ə stip sloʊp θɪk wɪð loʊ flaʊɝz, ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə stʃɹit tə ə waɪt wɔl ə ɹʌf stoʊn. sɛvɹəl lifi tʃɹi lɪmz stʌk oʊvɝ ðə tɑp ə ðə wɔl, ən i kəd si ðə tɑps ʌv ʌðɝz bɪɑnd, ɪn ə ɡɑɹɾən ə ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs.

Even as he returned to the Inner City on foot, Mat was far from certain that what he intended would actually work. It would, if what he had been told was true, but it was the truth of that he was not sure of. He avoided the oval plaza in front of the Palace, but wandered around the sides of the huge structure and its grounds, along streets that curved with the contours of the hills. The golden domes of the Palace glittered, mockingly out of reach. He had made his way almost all the way around, nearly back to the plaza, when he saw it. A steep slope thick with low flowers, rising from the street to a white wall of rough stone. Several leafy tree limbs stuck over the top of the wall, and he could see the tops of others beyond, in a garden of the Royal Palace.

ə wɔl meɪd tə lʊk laɪk ə klɪf, hi θɔt, ən ə ɡɑɹɾən ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. meɪbi ɹænd wɑz tɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ.

A wall made to look like a cliff, he thought, and a garden on the other side. Maybe Rand was telling the truth.

ə kæʒəwəl lʊk boʊθ weɪz ʃoʊɾ ɪm i hæd ðə kɝvɪŋ stʃɹit tə hɪmsɛlf fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. hi wəɾ əv tə hɝi; ðə kɝvz dɪd nɑɾ əlaʊ hɪm tə si vɛɹi fɑɹ; sʌmwʌn kəd kʌm əlɔŋ ɛni moʊmənt. hi skɹæmbəld ʌp ðə sloʊp ɑn ɔl fɔɹz, kɛɹləs ə haʊ hɪz buts ɹɪp hoʊlz ɪn ðə bæŋks ə ɹɛɾ ən waɪt blɑsəmz. ðə ɹʌf stoʊn ə ðə wɔl ɡeɪv plɛnti ʌv fɪŋɡɝhoʊlz, ən ɹɪdʒəz ən nɑbz pɹəvaɪɾəd toʊhoʊlz ivən fəɹ ə mæn ɪn buts.

A casual look both ways showed him he had the curving street to himself for the moment. He would have to hurry; the curves did not allow him to see very far; someone could come along any moment. He scrambled up the slope on all fours, careless of how his boots ripped holes in the banks of red and white blossoms. The rough stone of the wall gave plenty of fingerholds, and ridges and knobs provided toeholds even for a man in boots.

kɛɹləs ə ðɛm tə meɪk ɪt soʊ izi, hi θɔɾ əz i klaɪmd. fəɹ ə moʊmən ðə klaɪmɪŋ tʊk ɪm bæk hoʊm wɪð ɹænd ən pɛɹɪn, tə ə dʒɝni ðeɪ hæd meɪd bɪɑn ðə sæn hɪlz, ɪndə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst. wən ðeɪ ɹɪtɝn tə ɛmənz fild, ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl kɑt ðə fjʊɹi fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn u kəd leɪ hænz ɑn əm - hɪm wɝst ʌv ɔl; ɛvɹiwʌn əsumd ɪt hæd bɪn ɪz aɪdiə - bʌt fəɹ θɹi deɪz ðeɪ hæd klaɪm ðə klɪfs, ən slɛpt ʌndɝ ðə skaɪ, ən iɾən ɛɡz fɪltʃt fɹəm ɹɛdkɹəsts' nɛsts, ən plʌmp, ɡɹeɪ-wɪŋd ɡɹaʊs fɛtʃt wɪð ən æɹoʊ, əɹ ə stoʊn fɹəm ə slɪŋ, ən ɹæbəts kɑt wɪð snɛɹz, ɔl ðə waɪl læfɪŋ əbaʊt haʊ ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ əfɹeɪɾ ə ðə maʊntənz' bæd lʌk ən haʊ ðeɪ maɪt faɪn ə tʃɹɛʒɝ. hi hæd bɹɔt hoʊm ən ɑd ɹɑk fɹəm ðəɾ ɛkspədɪʃən, wɪð ðə skʌl ʌv ə ɡʊd-saɪz fɪʃ sʌmhaʊ pɹɛst ɪndə ɪt, ən ə lɔŋ, waɪt teɪl fɛðɝ dʒɹɑp baɪ ə snoʊ iɡəl, ən ə pis ʌv waɪt stoʊn əz bɪɡ əz ɪz hæn ðət lʊkt ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn kɑɹvd ɪndə ə mænz ɪɹ. hi θɔɾ ɪt lʊk laɪk ən ɪɹ, ivən ɪf ɹænd ən pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt, ən tæm ælθɹ hæd sɛɾ ɪt maɪt bi.

Careless of them to make it so easy, he thought as he climbed. For a moment the climbing took him back home with Rand and Perrin, to a journey they had made beyond the Sand Hills, into the edge of the Mountains of Mist. When they returned to Emond's Field, they had all caught the fury from everyone who could lay hands on them - him worst of all; everyone assumed it had been his idea - but for three days they had climbed the cliffs, and slept under the sky, and eaten eggs filched from redcrests' nests, and plump, gray-winged grouse fetched with an arrow, or a stone from a sling, and rabbits caught with snares, all the while laughing about how they were not afraid of the mountains' bad luck and how they might find a treasure. He had brought home an odd rock from that expedition, with the skull of a good-sized fish somehow pressed into it, and a long, white tail feather dropped by a snow eagle, and a piece of white stone as big as his hand that looked almost as if it had been carved into a man's ear. He thought it looked like an ear, even if Rand and Perrin did not, and Tam al'Thor had said it might be.

hɪz fɪŋɡɝz slɪpt aʊɾ ʌv ə ʃæloʊ ɡɹuv, hɪz bæləns ʃɪftəɾ ən i lɔs ðə toʊhoʊld ʌndɝ ɪz lɛft fʊt. wɪð ə ɡæsp, hi bɛɹli kɑt hoʊld ə ðə tɑp ə ðə wɔl, ən pʊl hɪmsɛlf ʌp ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ. fəɹ ə moʊmən i leɪ ðɛɹ, bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹd. ɪt wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ðət lɔŋ ə fɔl, bʌɾ ɪnʌf tə bɹeɪk ɪz hɛd. ful, lɛɾɪŋ maɪ maɪnd wɑndɝ laɪk ðæt. nɪɹli kɪl maɪsɛlf ɑn ðoʊz klɪfs ðət weɪ. ðət wɑz ɔl ə lɔŋ taɪm əɡoʊ. hɪz mʌðɝ hæd laɪkli θɹoʊn ɔl ðoʊz θɪŋz aʊɾ ɔlɹɛɾi, ɛniweɪ. wɪð wʌn læs lʊk itʃ weɪ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ noʊ wʌn hæd sin ɪm - ðə kɝvɪŋ lɛŋθ ə stʃɹit bɪloʊ wɑz stɪl ɛmpti - hi dʒɹɑpt ɪnsaɪd ðə pæləs ɡɹaʊnz.

His fingers slipped out of a shallow groove, his balance shifted and he lost the toehold under his left foot. With a gasp, he barely caught hold of the top of the wall, and pulled himself up the rest of the way. For a moment he lay there, breathing hard. It would not have been that long a fall, but enough to break his head. Fool, letting my mind wander like that. Nearly killed myself on those cliffs that way. That was all a long time ago. His mother had likely thrown all those things out already, anyway. With one last look each way to make sure no one had seen him - the curving length of street below was still empty - he dropped inside the Palace grounds.

ɪt wɑz ə lɑɹdʒ ɡɑɹɾən, wɪð flæɡstoʊnd wɔks θɹu ɪkspænsɪz ʌv ɡɹæs əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, ən ɡɹeɪpvaɪnz θɪk ɑn ɑɹbɝz oʊvɝ ðə wɔks. ən ɛvɹiwɛɹ, flaʊɝz. waɪt blɑsəmz kʌvɝɪŋ ðə pɛɹ tʃɹiz, ən waɪɾ ən pɪŋk dɑɾɪŋ ði æpəl tʃɹiz. ɹoʊzɪz ɪn ɛvɹi kʌlɝ, ən bɹaɪt ɡoʊldən sʌnbɝst, ən pɝpəl ɛmənz ɡlɔɹi, ən mɛni hi kəd nɑɾ aɪdɛntəfaɪ. səm i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ kəd bi ɹil. wʌn hæɾ ɑd blɑsəmz ɪn skɑɹləɾ ən ɡoʊl ðət lʊkt ɔlmoʊs laɪk bɝdz, ən ənʌðɝ sim noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ə sʌnflaʊɝ ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪts jɛloʊ flaʊɝz wɝ tu fiɾ ən mɔɹ əkɹɔs ən stʊɾ ɑn stɔks əz tɔl əz ən oʊɡiɝ.

It was a large garden, with flagstoned walks through expanses of grass among the trees, and grapevines thick on arbors over the walks. And everywhere, flowers. White blossoms covering the pear trees, and white and pink dotting the apple trees. Roses in every color, and bright golden sunburst, and purple Emond's Glory, and many he could not identify. Some he was not sure could be real. One had odd blossoms in scarlet and gold that looked almost like birds, and another seemed no different from a sunflower except that its yellow flowers were two feet and more across and stood on stalks as tall as an Ogier.

buts kɹʌntʃt ɑn flæɡstoʊn, ən i kɹaʊtʃt loʊ bɪhaɪn ə bʊʃ əɡɛns ðə wɔl əz tu ɡɑɹdzmɪn mɑɹtʃt pæst, ðɛɹ lɔŋ, waɪt kɑlɝz hæŋɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ bɹɛstpleɪts. ðeɪ nɛvɝ ɡlænst ɪz weɪ, ən i ɡɹɪn tə hɪmsɛlf. lʌk. wɪð dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl lʌk, ðəl nɛvɝ si mi tɪl aɪ hæn ðə blʌɾi θɪŋ tə mɔɹɡeɪs.

Boots crunched on flagstone, and he crouched low behind a bush against the wall as two guardsmen marched past, their long, white collars hanging over their breastplates. They never glanced his way, and he grinned to himself. Luck. With just a little luck, they'll never see me till I hand the bloody thing to Morgase.

hi slɪp θɹu ðə ɡɑɹɾən laɪk ə ʃædoʊ, əz ɪf stɔkɪŋ ɹæbəts, fɹizɪŋ baɪ ə bʊʃ əɹ hɑɹɾ əɡɛnst ə tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋk wən i hɝd buts. tu mɔɹ pɛɹz ə soʊlʒɝz stʃɹoʊd baɪ əlɔŋ ðə pæðz, ðə sɛkən kloʊs ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪm tə hæv teɪkən tu stɛps ən ɡus ðɛm. əz ðeɪ vænɪʃt əmʌŋ ðə flaʊɝz ən tʃɹiz, hi plʌkt ə dip ɹɛd stɑɹbleɪz ən stʌk ðə weɪvi-pɛɾəld flaʊɝ ɪn ɪz hɛɹ wɪð ə ɡɹɪn. ðɪs wɑz əz mʌtʃ fʌn əz stilɪŋ æpəlkeɪks ət sʌndeɪ, ən iziɝ. wɪmən ɔlweɪz kɛpt ə ʃɑɹp wɑtʃ ɑn ðɛɹ beɪkɪŋ; ðə ful soʊlʒɝz nɛvɝ tʊk ðɛɹ aɪz ɔf ðə flæɡstoʊnz.

He slipped through the garden like a shadow, as if stalking rabbits, freezing by a bush or hard against a tree trunk when he heard boots. Two more pairs of soldiers strode by along the paths, the second close enough for him to have taken two steps and goosed them. As they vanished among the flowers and trees, he plucked a deep red starblaze and stuck the wavy-petaled flower in his hair with a grin. This was as much fun as stealing applecakes at Sunday, and easier. Women always kept a sharp watch on their baking; the fool soldiers never took their eyes off the flagstones.

ɪt wɑz nɑt lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ i faʊn hɪmsɛlf əɡɛns ðə waɪt wɔl ə ðə pæləs ɪtsɛlf, ən bɪɡæn slaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪt bɪhaɪn ə ɹoʊ ʌv flaʊɝɪŋ waɪt ɹoʊzɪz ɑn slæɾɪd fɹeɪmz, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ə dɔɹ. ðəɹ wɝ plɛnti ʌv waɪd, ɑɹtʃt wɪndoʊz dʒʌst oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd, bʌɾ i θɔɾ ɪt maɪt bi ə bɪt hɑɹɾɝ tə ɪkspleɪn biɪŋ faʊn klaɪmɪŋ ɪn θɹu ə wɪndoʊ ðən wɔkɪŋ daʊn ə hɔl. tu mɔɹ soʊlʒɝz əpɪɹd, ən i fɹoʊz; ðeɪ wəd pæs wɪðɪn θɹi peɪsɪz ə hɪm. hi kəd hɪɹ vɔɪsəz fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd, tu mɛn, dʒʌs laʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪm tə meɪk aʊt ðə wɝdz.

It was not long before he found himself against the white wall of the Palace itself, and began sliding along it behind a row of flowering white roses on slatted frames, searching for a door. There were plenty of wide, arched windows just over his head, but he thought it might be a bit harder to explain being found climbing in through a window than walking down a hall. Two more soldiers appeared, and he froze; they would pass within three paces of him. He could hear voices from the window over his head, two men, just loud enough for him to make out the words.

" - ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə tɛɹ, ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ." ðə mæn saʊndəd fɹaɪɾənd ən əbsikwiəs.

" - on their way to Tear, Great Master." The man sounded frightened and obsequious.

"lɛɾ əm ɹuən ɪz plænz, ɪf ðeɪ kæn." ðɪs vɔɪs wɑz dipɝ ən stʃɹɔŋɝ, ə mæn juz tə kəmænd. "ɪt wɪl sɝv ɪm ɹaɪɾ ɪf θɹi əntʃɹeɪnd ɡɝlz kən fɔɪl hɪm. hi wɑz ɔlweɪz ə ful, ən hiz stɪl ə ful. ɪz ðəɹ ɛni wɝɾ ə ðə bɔɪ? hiz ðə wʌn u kən dɪstʃɹɔɪ əs ɔl."

"Let them ruin his plans, if they can." This voice was deeper and stronger, a man used to command. "It will serve him right if three untrained girls can foil him. He was always a fool, and he is still a fool. Is there any word of the boy? He is the one who can destroy us all."

"noʊ, ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ. hiz vænɪʃt. bʌt, ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ, wʌn ə ðə ɡɝlz ɪz mɔɹɡeɪsəz nɪt."

"No, Great Master. He has vanished. But, Great Master, one of the girls is Morgase's nit."

mæt hæf tɝnd, ðən kɑt hɪmsɛlf. ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ kʌmɪŋ kloʊsɝ; ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə hæv sin ɪz stɑɹt θɹu ðə θɪkli woʊvən ɹoʊz stɛmz. muv, jə fulz! ɡɛt baɪ soʊ aɪ kən si hu ðɪs mæn blʌɾi ɪz! hi hæd lɔst səm ə ðə kɑnvɝseɪʃən.

Mat half turned, then caught himself. The soldiers were coming closer; they did not appear to have seen his start through the thickly woven rose stems. Move, you fools! Get by so I can see who this man bloody is! He had lost some of the conversation.

" - hæz bɪn fɑɹ tu ɪmpeɪʃən sɪns ɹɪɡeɪnɪŋ ɪz fɹiɾəm," ðə dip vɔɪs wɑz seɪɪŋ. "hi nɛvɝ ɹilaɪz ðə bɛs plænz teɪk taɪm tə mətʃʊɹ. hi wɑns ðə wɝld ɪn ə deɪ, ən kælændɝ bɪsaɪdz. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd teɪk hɪm! hi meɪ siz ðə ɡɝl ən tʃɹaɪ tə meɪk səm jus ə hɝ. ən ðət maɪt stʃɹeɪn maɪ oʊn plænz."

" - has been far too impatient since regaining his freedom," the deep voice was saying. "He never realized the best plans take time to mature. He wants the world in a day, and Callandor besides. The Great Lord take him! He may seize the girl and try to make some use of her. And that might strain my own plans."

"æz jə seɪ, ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ. ʃæl aɪ ɔɹɾɝ əɹ bɹɔɾ aʊɾ ə tiɹ?"

"As you say, Great Master. Shall I order her brought out of Tear?"

"noʊ. ðə ful wəd teɪk ɪɾ əz ə muv əɡɛns hɪm, ɪf i nu. ən u kən seɪ wʌɾ i tʃuzəz tə wɑtʃ əsaɪd fɹəm ðə sɔɹd? si ðət ʃi daɪz kwaɪətli, koʊmɹ. lɛɾ əɹ dɛθ ətʃɹæk noʊ noʊɾəs əɾ ɔl." hɪz læftɝ wɑz ə ɹɪtʃ ɹʌmbəl. "ðoʊz ɪɡnɝən slæɾɝnz ɪn ðɛɹ taʊɝ wɪl əv ə dɪfəkəl taɪm pɹədusɪŋ əɹ æftɝ ðɪs dɪsəpɪɹəns. ðɪs meɪ ɔl bi dʒʌst əz wɛl. lɛɾ ɪt bi dʌn kwɪkli. kwɪkli, bɪfɔɹ hiz taɪm tə teɪk əɹ hɪmsɛlf."

"No. The fool would take it as a move against him, if he knew. And who can say what he chooses to watch aside from the sword? See that she dies quietly, Comar. Let her death attract no notice at all." His laughter was a rich rumble. "Those ignorant slatterns in their Tower will have a difficult time producing her after this disappearance. This may all be just as well. Let it be done quickly. Quickly, before he has time to take her himself."

ðə tu soʊlʒɝz wɝ ɔlmoʊst əbɹɛst ə hɪm; mæt tʃɹaɪd tə wɪl ðɛɹ fit tə muv fæstɝ.

The two soldiers were almost abreast of him; Mat tried to will their feet to move faster.

"ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ," ði ʌðɝ mæn sɛɾ ənsɝteɪnli, "ðæt meɪ bi dɪfəkəlt. wi noʊ ʃiz ɑn əɹ weɪ tə tɛɹ, bʌt ðə vɛsəl ʃi tʃɹævəld ɑn wɑz faʊn əɾ ɑɹɪŋɡəl, ən ɔl θɹi ʌv əm hæd lɛft ɪɾ ɝliɝ. wi də nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ ʃiz teɪkən ənʌðɝ ʃɪp, əɹ ɪz ɹaɪɾɪŋ saʊθ. ən ɪt meɪ nɑt bi izi tə faɪn əɹ wʌns ʃi ɹitʃəz tɛɹ, ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ. pɝhæps ɪf jə - "

"Great Master," the other man said uncertainly, "that may be difficult. We know she is on her way to Tear, but the vessel she traveled on was found at Aringill, and all three of them had left it earlier. We do not know whether she has taken another ship, or is riding south. And it may not be easy to find her once she reaches Tear, Great Master. Perhaps if you - "

"ɑɹ ðəɹ nʌn bʌt fulz ɪn ðə wɝld, naʊ?" ðə dip vɔɪs sɛd hɑɹʃli. "du jə θɪŋk aɪ kəd muv ɪn tiɹ wɪθaʊɾ ɪm noʊɪŋ? aɪ də nɑt min tə faɪt hɪm, nɑt naʊ, nɑt jɛt. bɹɪŋ mi ðə ɡɝlz hɛd, koʊmɹ. bɹɪŋ mi ɔl θɹi hɛdz, əɹ jəl pɹeɪ fəɹ mi tə teɪk jʊɹz!"

"Are there none but fools in the world, now?" the deep voice said harshly. "Do you think I could move in Tear without him knowing? I do not mean to fight him, not now, not yet. Bring me the girl's head, Comar. Bring me all three heads, or you will pray for me to take yours!"

"jɛs, ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ. ɪt ʃæl bi əz jə seɪ. jɛs. jɛs."

"Yes, Great Master. It shall be as you say. Yes. Yes."

ðə soʊlʒɝz kɹʌntʃt pæst, nɛvɝ lʊkɪŋ tə iðɝ saɪd. mæt oʊnli weɪɾəd fəɹ ðɛɹ bæks tə pæs bɪfɔɹ lipɪŋ ʌp tə kætʃ ðə bɹɔd stoʊn wɪndaʊsəl ən pʊl hɪmsɛlf haɪ ɪnʌf tə si θɹu ðə wɪndoʊ.

The soldiers crunched past, never looking to either side. Mat only waited for their backs to pass before leaping up to catch the broad stone windowsill and pull himself high enough to see through the window.

hi bɛɹli noʊɾəst ðə fɹɪn tæɹɑbən kɑɹpəɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ, wɝθ ə fæt pɝs ə sɪlvɝ. wʌn ə ðə bɹɔd, kɑɹv dɔɹz wɑz swɪŋɪŋ ʃʌt. ə tɔl mæn, wɪð waɪd ʃoʊldɝz ən ə dip tʃɛst stʃɹeɪnɪŋ ðə ɡɹin sɪlk ə hɪz sɪlvɝ-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd koʊt, wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ wɪð dɑɹk blu aɪz. hɪz blæk bɪɹd wɑz kloʊs kʌt, wɪð ə stʃɹik ʌv waɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪz tʃɪn. ɔl ɪn ɔl, hi lʊkt ə hɑɹd mæn, ən wʌn juz tə ɡɪvɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz.

He barely noticed the fringed Tarabon carpet on the floor, worth a fat purse of silver. One of the broad, carved doors was swinging shut. A tall man, with wide shoulders and a deep chest straining the green silk of his silver-embroidered coat, was staring at the door with dark blue eyes. His black beard was close cut, with a streak of white over his chin. All in all, he looked a hard man, and one used to giving orders.

"jɛs, ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ," hi sɛd sʌɾənli, ən mæt ɔlmoʊs lɔst ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə sɪl. hi hæd θɔt ðɪs mʌs bi ðə mæn wɪð ðə dip vɔɪs, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə kɹɪŋɪŋ vɔɪs i hɝd. nɑt kɹɪŋɪŋ naʊ, bʌt stɪl ðə seɪm. "ɪt ʃæl bi əz jə seɪ, ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ," ðə mæn sɛd bɪɾɝli. "aɪ wɪl kʌt ðə θɹi wɛntʃɪz' hɛdz ɔf maɪsɛlf. əz sun əz aɪ kən faɪn ðɛm!" hi stʃɹoʊd θɹu ðə dɔɹ, ən mæt lɛt hɪmsɛlf bæk daʊn.

"Yes, Great Master," he said suddenly, and Mat almost lost his grip on the sill. He had thought this must be the man with the deep voice, but it was the cringing voice he heard. Not cringing now, but still the same. "It shall be as you say, Great Master," the man said bitterly. "I will cut the three wenches' heads off myself. As soon as I can find them!" He strode through the door, and Mat let himself back down.

fəɹ ə moʊmən i kɹaʊtʃt ðəɹ bɪhaɪn ðə ɹoʊz fɹeɪmz. sʌmwʌn ɪn ðə pæləs wɑntəɾ ɪleɪn dɛd, ən hæd θɹoʊn ɪn ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv əz æftɝtɑts. wʌɾ ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ duɪŋ, ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɛɹ? ɪt hæd tə bi ðɛm.

For a moment he crouched there behind the rose frames. Someone in the Palace wanted Elayne dead, and had thrown in Egwene and Nynaeve as afterthoughts. What under the Light are they doing, going to Tear? It had to be them.

hi pʊl ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹz lɛɾɝ aʊɾ ə ðə laɪnɪŋ ə hɪz koʊɾ ən fɹaʊn əɾ ɪt. meɪbi, wɪð ðɪs ɪn ɪz hænd, mɔɹɡeɪs wəd bɪliv hɪm. hi kəd dɪskɹaɪb wʌn ə ðə mɛn. bʌt ðə taɪm fəɹ skʌlkɪŋ wɑz pæst; ðə bɪɡ fɛloʊ kəd bi ɔf tə tɛɹ bɪfɔɹ i ivən faʊn mɔɹɡeɪs, ən wʌtɛvɝ ʃi dɪd ðɛn, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɡɛɹənti ɪt kəd stɑp hɪm.

He pulled the Daughter-Heir's letter out of the lining of his coat and frowned at it. Maybe, with this in his hand, Morgase would believe him. He could describe one of the men. But the time for skulking was past; the big fellow could be off to Tear before he even found Morgase, and whatever she did then, there was no guarantee it could stop him.

teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, mæt wɪɡɡəl bɪtwin tu ʌv ðə ɹoʊz fɹeɪmz ət ðə kɑst ʌv oʊnli ə fju pɹɪks ən snæɡz fɹəm ðə θɔɹnz, ən stɑɹɾəd daʊn ðə flæɡstoʊn pæθ æftɝ ðə soʊlʒɝz. hi hɛld ɪleɪnz lɛɾɝ aʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm soʊ ðə ɡoʊldən lɪli sil wɑz pleɪnli vɪzəbəl, ən wɛn oʊvɝ ɪn ɪz maɪn ɪɡzækli wʌɾ i mɛn tə seɪ. wən i hæd bɪn snikɪŋ əbaʊt, ɡɑɹdzmɪn kɛpt pɑpɪŋ ʌp laɪk mʌʃɹumz æftɝ ɹeɪn, bʌt naʊ hi wɔkt ɔlmoʊs ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə ɡɑɹɾən wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ivən wʌn. hi pæst sɛvɹəl dɔɹz. ɪt wəd nɑt bi soʊ ɡʊd tə ɛntɝ ðə pæləs wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən - ðə ɡɑɹdz maɪt də næsti θɪŋz fɝst ən lɪsən æftɝ - bʌɾ i wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə θɪŋk əbaʊt ɡoʊɪŋ θɹu ə dɔɹ wən ɪɾ oʊpən ən ə hɛlmɔɪtləs jʌŋ ɔfəsɝ wɪð wʌn ɡoʊldən nɑɾ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ stʃɹoʊɾ aʊt.

Taking a deep breath, Mat wiggled between two of the rose frames at the cost of only a few pricks and snags from the thorns, and started down the flagstone path after the soldiers. He held Elayne's letter out in front of him so the golden lily seal was plainly visible, and went over in his mind exactly what he meant to say. When he had been sneaking about, guardsmen kept popping up like mushrooms after rain, but now he walked almost the length of the garden without seeing even one. He passed several doors. It would not be so good to enter the Palace without permission - the Guards might do nasty things first and listen after - but he was beginning to think about going through a door when it opened and a helmetless young officer with one golden knot on his shoulder strode out.

ðə mænz hæn ɪmiɾiətli wɛn tə hɪz sɔɹd hɪlt, ən i hæɾ ə fʊɾ ə stil bɛɹd bɪfɔɹ mæt kəd pʊʃ ðə lɛɾɝ təwɔɹd hɪm. "ɪleɪn, ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ, sɛnz ðɪs lɛɾɝ tə hɝ mʌðɝ, kwin mɔɹɡeɪs, kæptən." hi hɛl ðə lɛɾɝ soʊ ðə lɪli sil wɑz pɹɑmənənt.

The man's hand immediately went to his sword hilt, and he had a foot of steel bared before Mat could push the letter toward him. "Elayne, the Daughter-Heir, sends this letter to her mother, Queen Morgase, Captain." He held the letter so the lily seal was prominent.

ði ɔfəsɝz dɑɹk aɪz flɪkɝd tə iðɝ saɪd, əz ɪf sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ʌðɝ pipəl, wɪθaʊt ɹɪli ɛvɝ livɪŋ mæt. "haʊ dɪd jə kʌm ɪndə ðɪs ɡɑɹɾən?" hi dɪd nɑt dʒɹɔ hɪz sɔɹd fɝðɝ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt ʃiθ ɪt, iðɝ. "ɛlbɝ ɪz ɑn ðə meɪn ɡeɪts. hiz ə ful, bʌɾ i wəd nɛvɝ lɛɾ ɛniwʌn wɑndɝ lus ɪndə ðə pæləs."

The officer's dark eyes flickered to either side, as if searching for other people, without really ever leaving Mat. "How did you come into this garden?" He did not draw his sword further, but he did not sheath it, either. "Elber is on the main gates. He's a fool, but he would never let anyone wander loose into the Palace."

"ə fæt mæn wɪð aɪz laɪk ə ɹæt?" mæt kɝst ɪz tʌŋ, bʌt ði ɔfəsɝ ɡeɪv ə ʃɑɹp nɑd; hi ɔlmoʊst smaɪld, tu, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt sim tə lɛsən ɪz vɪdʒələns, əɹ ɪz səspɪʃən. "hi ɡɹu æŋɡɹi wən i lɝn aɪ hæd kʌm fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən i wʊdn ivən ɡɪmi ə tʃæns tə ʃoʊ ðə lɛɾɝ əɹ mɛnʃən ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹz neɪm. hi sɛɾ i wəɾ ɝɛs mi ɪf aɪ dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ, soʊ aɪ klaɪm ðə wɔl. aɪ pɹɑməst aɪ wəd dɪlɪvɝ ðɪs tə kwin mɔɹɡeɪs hɝsɛlf, jə si, kæptən. aɪ pɹɑməst ɪt, ən aɪ ɔlweɪz kip maɪ pɹɑməsəz. jə si ðə sil?"

"A fat man with eyes like a rat?" Mat cursed his tongue, but the officer gave a sharp nod; he almost smiled, too, but it did not seem to lessen his vigilance, or his suspicion. "He grew angry when he learned I had come from Tar Valon, and he wouldn't even give me a chance to show the letter or mention the Daughter-Heir's name. He said he would arrest me if I did not go, so I climbed the wall. I promised I would deliver this to Queen Morgase herself, you see, Captain. I promised it, and I always keep my promises. You see the seal?"

"ðæt blʌɾi ɡɑɹɾən wɔl əɡɛn," ði ɔfəsɝ mʌɾɝd. "ɪt ʃəd bi bɪl θɹi taɪmz soʊ haɪ." hi aɪd mæt. "ɡɑɹdzmæn-lutɛnənt, nɑt kæptən. aɪm ɡɑɹdzmæn-lutɛnən tɑlænvɝ. aɪ ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹz sil." hɪz sɔɹd faɪnəli slɪɾ ɔl ðə weɪ bæk ɪndə ðə ʃiθ. hi stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ə hænd; nɑɾ ɪz sɔɹd hænd. "ɡɪv mi ðə lɛɾɝ, ən əl teɪk ɪt tə ðə kwin. æftɝ ðəfɝst ʃoʊ jə aʊt. səm wəd nɑt bi soʊ dʒɛntəl ət faɪndɪŋ jə wɔkɪŋ əbaʊt lus."

"That bloody garden wall again," the officer muttered. "It should be built three times so high." He eyed Mat. "Guardsman-lieutenant, not captain. I am Guardsman-lieutenant Tallanvor. I recognize the Daughter-Heir's seal." His sword finally slid all the way back into the sheath. He stretched out a hand; not his sword hand. "Give me the letter, and I will take it to the Queen. After I show you out. Some would not be so gentle at finding you walking about loose."

"aɪ pɹɑməs tə pʊɾ ɪɾ ɪn əɹ hænz maɪsɛlf," mæt sɛd. laɪt, aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt ðeɪ maɪt nɑt lemi ɡɪv ɪt tə hɝ. "aɪ dɪd pɹɑməs. tə ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ."

"I promised to put it in her hands myself," Mat said. Light, I never thought they might not let me give it to her. "I did promise. To the Daughter-Heir."

mæt hɑɹdli ɹilaɪz tɑlænvɝz hænd wɑz muvɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ði ɔfəsɝz sɔɹd wɑz ɹɛstɪŋ əɡɛnst ɪz nɛk. "aɪ wɪl teɪk jə tə ðə kwin, kʌntʃɹimən," tɑlænvɝ sɛd sɔfli. "bʌt noʊ ðəɾ aɪ kən teɪk jəɹ hɛd bɪfɔɹ jə blɪŋk ɪf jə soʊ mʌtʃ əz θɪŋk ə hɑɹmɪŋ hɝ."

Mat hardly realized Tallanvor's hand was moving before the officer's sword was resting against his neck. "I will take you to the Queen, countryman," Tallanvor said softly. "But know that I can take your head before you blink if you so much as think of harming her."

mæt pʊɾ ɑn ɪz bɛst ɡɹɪn. ðət slaɪtli kɝv bleɪd fɛlt ʃɑɹp ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz nɛk. "aɪ æm ə lɔɪəl ændɔɝmən," hi sɛd, "æn ə feɪθfəl sʌbʒɪkt ə ðə kwin, ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin hɝ. waɪ, ɪf aɪ hæd bɪn hɪɹ dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɪntɝ, aɪɾ əv fɑloʊd lɔɹd ɡeɪbɹəl fəɹ ʃʊɹ."

Mat put on his best grin. That slightly curved blade felt sharp on the side of his neck. "I am a loyal Andorman," he said, "and a faithful subject of the Queen, the Light illumine her. Why, if I had been here during the winter, I'd have followed Lord Gaebril for sure."

tɑlænvɝ ɡeɪv ɪm ə taɪt-maʊð stɛɹ, ðən faɪnəli tʊk ɪz sɔɹɾ əweɪ. mæt swɑloʊɾ ən stɑp hɪmsɛlf fɹəm tʌtʃɪŋ ɪz θɹoʊt tə si ɪf i hæd bɪn kʌt.

Tallanvor gave him a tight-mouthed stare, then finally took his sword away. Mat swallowed and stopped himself from touching his throat to see if he had been cut.

"teɪk ðə flaʊɝ aʊɾ ə jəɹ hɛɹ," tɑlænvɝ sɛɾ əz i ʃiðd ɪz bleɪd. "du jə θɪŋk jə keɪm hɪɹ kɔɹɾɪŋ?"

"Take the flower out of your hair," Tallanvor said as he sheathed his blade. "Do you think you came here courting?"

mæt snætʃt ðə stɑɹbleɪz blɑsəm aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛɹ ən fɑloʊd ði ɔfəsɝ. blʌɾi ful, pʊɾɪŋ ə flaʊɝ ɪn maɪ hɛɹ. aɪ hæv tə stɑp pleɪɪŋ ðə ful, naʊ.

Mat snatched the starblaze blossom out of his hair and followed the officer. Bloody fool, putting a flower in my hair. I have to stop playing the fool, now.

ɪt wɑz nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ fɑloʊɪŋ, ɹɪli, fəɹ tɑlænvɝ kɛpt ən aɪ ɑn ɪm ivən waɪl i lɛd ðə weɪ. ðə ɹɪzʌlt wɑz ən ɑd sɔɹɾ ə pɹəsɛʃən, wɪð ði ɔfəsɝ tə wʌn saɪɾ ə hɪm ən əhɛd, bʌt hæf tɝn ɪn keɪs mæt tʃɹaɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ. fəɹ ɪz pɑɹt, mæt ətɛmptəd tə lʊk əz ɪnəsən əz ə beɪb splæʃɪŋ ɪn ɪz bæθwɔɾɝ.

It was not so much following, really, for Tallanvor kept an eye on him even while he led the way. The result was an odd sort of procession, with the officer to one side of him and ahead, but half turned in case Mat tried anything. For his part, Mat attempted to look as innocent as a babe splashing in his bathwater.

ðə kʌlɝfəl tæpəstʃɹiz ɑn ðə wɔlz hæɾ ɝn ðɛɹ wivɝz sɪlvɝ, ən soʊ hæd ðə ɹʌɡz ɑn ðə waɪt taɪl flɔɹz, ivən hɪɹ ɪn ðə hɔlz. ɡoʊld ən sɪlvɝ stʊɾ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, pleɪts ən plæɾɝz, boʊlz ən kʌps, ɑn tʃɛsts ən loʊ kæbənəts ə pɑlɪʃt wʊd, əz faɪn əz ɛniθɪŋ i hæd sin ɪn ðə taʊɝ. sɝvəns dɑɹɾɪd ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ɪn ɹɛd lɪvɝi wɪð waɪt kɑlɝz ən kʌfs ən ðə waɪt laɪən ʌv ændɝ ɑn ðɛɹ bɹɛsts. hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf mɔɹɡeɪs pleɪɾ ət daɪs. wʊl-hɛɾəd θɔt. kwinz doʊn tɔs daɪs. bʌt wən aɪ ɡɪv əɹ ðɪs lɛɾɝ ən tɛl əɹ sʌmbɑɾi ɪn əɹ pæləs minz tə kɪl ɪleɪn, əl weɪdʒɝ ʃi ɡɪvz mi ə fæt pɝs. hi ɪndʌlʒd hɪmsɛlf ɪn ə smɔl fænsi ʌv biɪŋ meɪɾ ə lɔɹd; ʃʊɹli ðə mæn u ɹɪvild ə plɑt tə mɝɾɝ ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ kəɾ ɪkspɛk səm sətʃ ɹɪwɔɹd.

The colorful tapestries on the walls had earned their weavers silver, and so had the rugs on the white tile floors, even here in the halls. Gold and silver stood everywhere, plates and platters, bowls and cups, on chests and low cabinets of polished wood, as fine as anything he had seen in the Tower. Servants darted everywhere, in red livery with white collars and cuffs and the White Lion of Andor on their breasts. He found himself wondering if Morgase played at dice. Wool-headed thought. Queens don't toss dice. But when I give her this letter and tell her somebody in her Palace means to kill Elayne, I'll wager she gives me a fat purse. He indulged himself in a small fancy of being made a lord; surely the man who revealed a plot to murder the Daughter-Heir could expect some such reward.

tɑlænvɝ lɛɾ ɪm daʊn soʊ mɛni kɔɹɪɾɝz ən əkɹɔs soʊ mɛni kɔɹtʃjɑɹdz ðəɾ i wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə wʌndɝ ɪf i kəd faɪn ɪz weɪ aʊɾ əɡɛn wɪθaʊt hɛlp, wən sʌɾənli wʌn ə ðə kɔɹts hæd mɔɹ ðən sɝvəns ɪn ɪt. ə kɑləmd wɔk sɝaʊndəd ðə kɔɹt, wɪð ə ɹaʊn pul ɪn ðə mɪɾəl wɪð waɪɾ ən jɛloʊ fɪʃ swɪmɪŋ bɪniθ lɪli pædz ən floʊɾɪŋ waɪt wɔɾɝ lɪliz. mɛn ɪn kʌlɝfəl koʊts ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ, wɪmən wɪð waɪd dʒɹɛsəz wɝkt ivən mɔɹ ɪlæbɹətli, stʊɾ ətɛndəns ɑn ə wʊmən wɪð ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ u sæɾ ɑn ðə ɹeɪzd ɹɪm ə ðə pul, tʃɹeɪlɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ ən stɛɹɪŋ sædli ət ðə fɪʃ ðət ɹoʊz tə hɝ fɪŋɡɝtɪps ɪn hoʊps ə fud. eɪ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɪnsɝkəl ðə θɝd fɪŋɡɝ ə hɝ lɛf hænd. ə tɔl, dɑɹk mæn stʊɾ əɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ðə ɹɛd sɪlk ə hɪz koʊɾ ɔlmoʊs hɪɾən baɪ ðə ɡoʊld livz ən skɹoʊlz wɝkt ɑn ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə wʊmən u hɛl mæts aɪ.

Tallanvor led him down so many corridors and across so many courtyards that he was beginning to wonder if he could find his way out again without help, when suddenly one of the courts had more than servants in it. A columned walk surrounded the court, with a round pool in the middle with white and yellow fish swimming beneath lily pads and floating white water lilies. Men in colorful coats embroidered in gold or silver, women with wide dresses worked even more elaborately, stood attendance on a woman with red-gold hair who sat on the raised rim of the pool, trailing her fingers in the water and staring sadly at the fish that rose to her fingertips in hopes of food. A Great Serpent ring encircled the third finger of her left hand. A tall, dark man stood at her shoulder, the red silk of his coat almost hidden by the gold leaves and scrolls worked on it, but it was the woman who held Mat's eye.

hi dɪd nɑt nid ðə ɹiθ ə faɪnli meɪd ɡoʊldən ɹoʊzɪz ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, əɹ ðə stoʊl hæŋɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ dʒɹɛs ʌv waɪt slæʃt wɪð ɹɛd, ðə ɹɛd lɛŋθ ə ðə stoʊl ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð ðə laɪənz ʌv ændɝ, tə noʊ hi wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət mɔɹɡeɪs, baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪs ə ðə laɪt, kwin ʌv ændɝ, dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə ɹɛlm, pɹətɛktɝ ə ðə pipəl, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs tʃɹəkənd. ʃi hæɾ ɪleɪnz feɪs ən bjuɾi, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz wʌɾ ɪleɪn wəɾ əv wən ʃi hæd ɹaɪpənd. ɛvɹi ʌðɝ wʊmən ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd feɪɾəd ɪndə ðə bækɡɹaʊn baɪ hɝ vɛɹi pɹɛzəns.

He did not need the wreath of finely made golden roses in her hair, or the stole hanging over her dress of white slashed with red, the red length of the stole embroidered with the Lions of Andor, to know he was looking at Morgase, by the Grace of the Light, Queen of Andor, Defender of the Realm, Protector of the People, High Seat of House Trakand. She had Elayne's face and beauty, but it was what Elayne would have when she had ripened. Every other woman in the courtyard faded into the background by her very presence.

aɪd dæns ə dʒɪɡ wɪð hɝ, ən stil ə kɪs ɪn ðə munlaɪt, tu, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ oʊld ʃi ɪz. hi ʃʊk hɪmsɛlf. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪɡzækli hu ʃi ɪz!

I'd dance a jig with her, and steal a kiss in the moonlight, too, no matter how old she is. He shook himself. Remember exactly who she is!

tɑlænvɝ wɛn tə wʌn ni, ə fɪs pɹɛs tə ðə waɪt stoʊn ə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. "maɪ kwin, aɪ bɹɪŋ ə mɛsənʒɝ u bɛɹz ə lɛɾɝ fɹəm ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn."

Tallanvor went to one knee, a fist pressed to the white stone of the courtyard. "My Queen, I bring a messenger who bears a letter from the Lady Elayne."

mæt aɪd ðə mænz pɑstʃɝ, ðən kəntɛntəd hɪmsɛlf wɪð ə dip baʊ. "fɹʌm ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ . . . ʌ . . . maɪ kwin." hi hɛld aʊt ðə lɛɾɝ əz i baʊd, soʊ ðə ɡoʊldən jɛloʊ wæks ə ðə sil wɑz vɪzəbəl. wʌns ʃi ɹidz ɪt, ən noʊz ɪleɪn ɪz ɔl ɹaɪt, əl tɛl hɝ. mɔɹɡeɪs tɝn əɹ dip blu aɪz ɑn hɪm. laɪt! əz sun əz ʃiz ɪn ə ɡʊd mud.

Mat eyed the man's posture, then contented himself with a deep bow. "From the Daughter-Heir . . . uh . . . my Queen." He held out the letter as he bowed, so the golden yellow wax of the seal was visible. Once she reads it, and knows Elayne is all right, I will tell her. Morgase turned her deep blue eyes on him. Light! As soon as she's in a good mood.

"ju bɹɪŋ ə lɛɾɝ fɹəm maɪ skeɪpɛɡɹɑs tʃaɪld?" hɝ vɔɪs wɑz koʊld, bʌt wɪð ən ɛdʒ ðət spoʊk ə hit ɹɛɾi tə ɹaɪz. "ðæt mʌs min ʃiz əlaɪv, ət list! wɛɹ ɪz ʃi?"

"You bring a letter from my scapegrace child?" Her voice was cold, but with an edge that spoke of heat ready to rise. "That must mean she is alive, at least! Where is she?"

"ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, maɪ kwin," hi mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ aʊt. laɪt, wʊdn aɪ laɪk tə si ə stɛɹɪŋ mætʃ bɪtwin əɹ ən ði æmɪɝlɪn. ɑn sɛkən θɔt, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd i wəd ɹæðɝ nɑt. "æt list, ʃi wɑz wən aɪ lɛft."

"In Tar Valon, my Queen," he managed to get out. Light, wouldn't I like to see a staring match between her and the Amyrlin. On second thought, he decided he would rather not. "At least, she was when I left."

mɔɹɡeɪs weɪvd ə hæn ɪmpeɪʃənli, ən tɑlænvɝ ɹoʊz tə teɪk ðə lɛɾɝ fɹəm mæt ən hæn ɪt tə hɝ. fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi fɹaʊn ət ðə lɪli sil, ðən bɹoʊk ɪt wɪð ə ʃɑɹp twɪst ə hɝ ɹɪsts. ʃi mɝmɝd tə hɝsɛlf əz ʃi ɹɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ əɾ ɛvɹi ʌðɝ laɪn. "ʃi kən seɪ noʊ mɔɹ, kən ʃi?" ʃi mʌɾɝd. "wi ʃæl si wɛðɝ ʃi hoʊlz tə ðæt. . . ."əbɹʌpli hɝ feɪs bɹaɪɾənd. "ɡeɪbɹəl, ʃiz bɪn ɹeɪz tə ði æksɛptɪd. lɛs ðən ə jɪɹ ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ən ɹeɪzd ɔlɹɛɾi." ðə smaɪl wɛn əz sʌɾənli əz ɪt hæd kʌm, ən əɹ maʊθ taɪɾənd. "wɛn aɪ pʊt maɪ hænz ɑn ðə ɹɛtʃɪd tʃaɪld, ʃɪl wɪʃ ʃi wɝ stɪl ə nɑvəs."

Morgase waved a hand impatiently, and Tallanvor rose to take the letter from Mat and hand it to her. For a moment she frowned at the lily seal, then broke it with a sharp twist of her wrists. She murmured to herself as she read, shaking her head at every other line. "She can say no more, can she?" she muttered. "We shall see whether she holds to that. . . ."Abruptly her face brightened. "Gaebril, she has been raised to the Accepted. Less than a year in the Tower, and raised already." The smile went as suddenly as it had come, and her mouth tightened. "When I put my hands on the wretched child, she will wish she were still a novice."

laɪt, mæt θɔt, wɪl nʌθɪŋ pʊɾ əɹ ɪn ə ɡʊd mud? hi dɪsaɪɾɪd i wɑz dʒʌs gɑnə hæv tə seɪ ɪɾ aʊt, bʌɾ i wɪʃt ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk əz ɪf ʃi mɛn tə kʌt sʌmwʌnz hɛɾ ɔf. "maɪ kwin, baɪ tʃæns aɪ oʊvɝhɝd - "

Light, Mat thought, will nothing put her in a good mood? He decided he was just going to have to say it out, but he wished she did not look as if she meant to cut someone's head off. "My Queen, by chance I overheard - "

"bi saɪlənt, bɔɪ," ðə dɑɹk mæn ɪn ðə ɡoʊld-ɛnkɹʌstɪd koʊt sɛd kɑmli. hi wɑz ə hænsəm mæn, ɔlmoʊst əz ɡʊd-lʊkɪŋ əz ɡɑləɾ ən nɪɹli əz juθfəl-simɪŋ, dɪspaɪt ðə waɪt stʃɹikɪŋ ɪz tɛmpəlz, bʌt bɪlt ɑn ə bɪɡɝ skeɪl, wɪð mɔɹ ðən ɹændz haɪɾ ən vɛɹi nɪɹli pɛɹɪnz ʃoʊldɝz. "wi wɪl hɪɹ wʌt juv tə seɪ ɪn ə moʊmənt." hi ɹitʃt oʊvɝ mɔɹɡeɪsəz ʃoʊldɝ ən plʌk ðə lɛɾɝ aʊɾ ə hɝ hænd. hɝ ɡlɛɹ tɝn ɑn ɪm - mæt kəd si hɝ tɛmpɝ hiɾɪŋ - bʌt ðə dɑɹk mæn leɪɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ hæn ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, nɛvɝ teɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz ɔf wʌɾ i wɑz ɹiɾɪŋ, ən mɔɹɡeɪsəz æŋɡɝ mɛltəd. "ɪt simz ʃiz lɛf ðə taʊɝ əɡɛn," hi sɛd. "ɑn ðə sɝvəs ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ðə wʊmən oʊvɝstɛps hɝsɛlf əɡɛn, mɔɹɡeɪs."

"Be silent, boy," the dark man in the gold-encrusted coat said calmly. He was a handsome man, almost as good-looking as Galad and nearly as youthful-seeming, despite the white streaking his temples, but built on a bigger scale, with more than Rand's height and very nearly Perrin's shoulders. "We will hear what you have to say in a moment." He reached over Morgase's shoulder and plucked the letter out of her hand. Her glare turned on him - Mat could see her temper heating - but the dark man laid a strong hand on her shoulder, never taking his eyes off what he was reading, and Morgase's anger melted. "It seems she has left the Tower again," he said. "On the service of the Amyrlin Seat. The woman oversteps herself again, Morgase."

mæt hæd noʊ tʃɹʌbəl hoʊldɪŋ ɪz tʌŋ. lʌk. ɪt wɑz stʌk tə ðə ɹuf ə hɪz maʊθ. səmtaɪmz aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf ɪts ɡʊɾ əɹ bæd. ðə dɑɹk mæn wɑz ði oʊnɝ ə ðə dip vɔɪs, ðə "ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ" hu wɑntəɾ ɪleɪnz hɛd. ʃi kɔld ɪm ɡeɪbɹəl. hɝ ædvaɪzɝ wɑns tə mɝɾɝ ɪleɪn? laɪt! ən mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ʌp əɾ ɪm laɪk ən ədɔɹɪŋ dɔɡ wɪð əɹ mæstɝz hæn ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ.

Mat had no trouble holding his tongue. Luck. It was stuck to the roof of his mouth. Sometimes I don't know if it's good or bad. The dark man was the owner of the deep voice, the "Great Master" who wanted Elayne's head. She called him Gaebril. Her advisor wants to murder Elayne? Light! And Morgase was staring up at him like an adoring dog with her master's hand on her shoulder.

ɡeɪbɹəl tɝnd nɪɹli blæk aɪz ɑn mæt. ðə mæn hæɾ ə fɔɹsfəl ɡeɪz, ən ə lʊk ə noʊɪŋ. "wʌt kən jə tɛl əs ə ðɪs, bɔɪ?"

Gaebril turned nearly black eyes on Mat. The man had a forceful gaze, and a look of knowing. "What can you tell us of this, boy?"

"nʌθɪŋ . . . ʌ . . . maɪ lɔɹd." mæt klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt; ðə mænz stɛɹ wɑz wɝs ðən ði æmɪɝlɪnz. "aɪ wɛn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn tə si maɪ sɪstɝ. ʃiz ə nɑvəs. ɛls ɡɹɪnwɛl. aɪm tɑm ɡɹɪnwɛl, maɪ lɔɹd. ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn lɝn aɪ wɑz minɪŋ tə si keɪɛmlɪn ɑn maɪ weɪ bæk hoʊm - aɪm fɹəm kʌmfɹi, maɪ lɔɹd; ə lɪɾəl vɪlədʒ nɔɹθ ə bɛɹlən; aɪd nɛvɝ sin ɛni pleɪs bɪɡɝ ðən bɛɹlən bɪfɔɹ aɪ wɛn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn - ən ʃi - ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn, aɪ min - ɡeɪv mi ðət lɛɾɝ tə bɹɪŋ." hi θɔt mɔɹɡeɪs hæd ɡlænst əɾ ɪm wən i sɛɾ i keɪm fɹəm nɔɹθ ə bɛɹlən, bʌɾ i nu ðəɹ wɑz ə vɪlədʒ kɔl kʌmfɹi ðɛɹ; hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd hɪɹɪŋ ɪt mɛnʃənd.

"Nothing . . . uh . . . my Lord." Mat cleared his throat; the man's stare was worse than the Amyrlin's. "I went to Tar Valon to see my sister. She's a novice. Else Grinwell. I'm Thom Grinwell, my Lord. The Lady Elayne learned I was meaning to see Caemlyn on my way back home - I'm from Comfrey, my Lord; a little village north of Baerlon; I'd never seen any place bigger than Baerlon before I went to Tar Valon - and she - the Lady Elayne, I mean - gave me that letter to bring." He thought Morgase had glanced at him when he said he came from north of Baerlon, but he knew there was a village called Comfrey there; he remembered hearing it mentioned.

ɡeɪbɹəl nɑɾəd, bʌɾ i sɛd, "du jə noʊ wɛɹ ɪleɪn wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ, bɔɪ? əɹ ɑn wʌt bɪznəs? spik ðə tʃɹuθ, ən juv nʌθɪŋ tə fɪɹ. laɪ, ən jəl bi pʊt tə ðə kwɛstʃən."

Gaebril nodded, but he said, "Do you know where Elayne was going, boy? Or on what business? Speak the truth, and you have nothing to fear. Lie, and you will be put to the question."

mæt dɪd nɑɾ əv tə pɹitɛn ə wɝid fɹaʊn. "maɪ lɔɹd, aɪ oʊnli sɔ ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ðə wʌns. ʃi ɡeɪv mi ðə lɛɾɝ - ən ə ɡoʊl mɑɹk! - ən toʊl mi tə bɹɪŋ ɪt tə ðə kwin. aɪ noʊ noʊ mɔɹ ʌv wʌɾ ɪz ɪn ɪt ðən aɪv hɝd hɪɹ." ɡeɪbɹəl əpɪɹd tə kənsɪɾɝ ɪt, wɪð noʊ saɪn ɑn ðət dɑɹk feɪs ʌv wɛðɝ i bɪlivd ə wɝɾ əɹ nɑt.

Mat did not have to pretend a worried frown. "My Lord, I only saw the Daughter-Heir the once. She gave me the letter - and a gold mark! - and told me to bring it to the Queen. I know no more of what is in it than I've heard here." Gaebril appeared to consider it, with no sign on that dark face of whether he believed a word or not.

"noʊ, ɡeɪbɹəl," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd sʌɾənli. "tu mɛni hæv bɪn pʊt tə ðə kwɛstʃən. aɪ kən si ðə niɾ əz juv ʃoʊn ɪt tə mi, bʌt nɑt fəɹ ðɪs. nɑɾ ə bɔɪ hu oʊnli bɹɔɾ ə lɛɾɝ huz kɑntɛns i dʌz nɑt noʊ."

"No, Gaebril," Morgase said suddenly. "Too many have been put to the question. I can see the need as you have shown it to me, but not for this. Not a boy who only brought a letter whose contents he does not know."

"æz maɪ kwin kəmænz, soʊ ʃæl ɪt bi," ðə dɑɹk mæn sɛd. ðə toʊn wɑz ɹɪspɛkfəl, bʌɾ i tʌtʃt əɹ tʃik ɪn ə weɪ ðət meɪd kʌlɝ kʌm tə hɝ feɪs ən əɹ lɪps pɑɹɾ əz ɪf ʃi ɪkspɛktəɾ ə kɪs.

"As my Queen commands, so shall it be," the dark man said. The tone was respectful, but he touched her cheek in a way that made color come to her face and her lips part as if she expected a kiss.

mɔɹɡeɪs dʒɹu ən ənstɛɾi bɹɛθ. "tɛl mi, tɑm ɡɹɪnwɛl, dɪd maɪ dɔɾɝ lʊk wɛl wən jə sɔ hɝ?"

Morgase drew an unsteady breath. "Tell me, Thom Grinwell, did my daughter look well when you saw her?"

"jɛs, maɪ kwin. ʃi smaɪld, ən læft, ən ʃoʊɾ ə sɔsi tʌŋ - aɪ min. . . ."

"Yes, my Queen. She smiled, and laughed, and showed a saucy tongue - I mean. . . ."

mɔɹɡeɪs læf sɔfli ət ðə lʊk ɑn ɪz feɪs. "du nɑt bi əfɹeɪd, jʌŋ mæn. ɪleɪn dʌz əv ə sɔsi tʌŋ, fɑɹ tu ɔfən fəɹ əɹ oʊn ɡʊd. aɪm hæpi ʃiz wɛl." ðoʊz blu aɪz stʌɾid ɪm dipli. "ə jʌŋ mæn u hæz lɛft ɪz smɔl vɪlədʒ ɔfən faɪnz ɪt dɪfəkəl tə ɹɪtɝn tə ɪt. aɪ θɪŋk jəl tʃɹævəl fɑɹ bɪfɔɹ jə si kʌmfɹi əɡɛn. pɝhæps jəl ivən ɹɪtɝn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɪf jə du, ən ɪf jə si maɪ dɔɾɝ, tɛl əɹ ðət wʌɾ ɪz sɛɾ ɪn æŋɡɝ ɪz ɔfən ɹɪpɛntɪd. əl nɑt ɹimuv əɹ fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ bɪfɔɹ taɪm. tɛl əɹ ðəɾ aɪ ɔfən θɪŋk ə maɪ oʊn taɪm ðɛɹ, ən mɪs ðə kwaɪət tɔks wɪð ʃɛɹiəm ɪn əɹ stʌɾi. tɛl əɹ ðəɾ aɪ sɛd ðæt, tɑm ɡɹɪnwɛl."

Morgase laughed softly at the look on his face. "Do not be afraid, young man. Elayne does have a saucy tongue, far too often for her own good. I am happy she is well." Those blue eyes studied him deeply. "A young man who has left his small village often finds it difficult to return to it. I think you will travel far before you see Comfrey again. Perhaps you will even return to Tar Valon. If you do, and if you see my daughter, tell her that what is said in anger is often repented. I will not remove her from the White Tower before time. Tell her that I often think of my own time there, and miss the quiet talks with Sheriam in her study. Tell her that I said that, Thom Grinwell."

mæt ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli. "jɛs, maɪ kwin. bʌt . . . ʌ . . . aɪ də nɑt min tə ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn əɡɛn. wʌns ɪn ɛni mænz laɪf ɪz ɪnʌf. maɪ dɑ nidz mi tə hɛlp wɝk ðə fɑɹm. maɪ sɪstɝz wɪl bi stʌk wɪð ðə mɪlkɪŋ, wɪð mi ɡɔn."

Mat shrugged uncomfortably. "Yes, my Queen. But . . . uh . . . I do not mean to go to Tar Valon again. Once in any man's life is enough. My da needs me to help work the farm. My sisters will be stuck with the milking, with me gone."

ɡeɪbɹəl læft, ə dip ɹʌmbəl ʌv əmjuzmənt. "ɑɹ jə æŋkʃəs ðən tə mɪlk kaʊz, bɔɪ? pɝhæps jə ʃəd si sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə wɝl bɪfɔɹ ɪt tʃeɪnʒəz. hɪɹ!" hi pɹədust ə pɝs ən tɔst ɪt; mæt fɛl kɔɪnz θɹu ðə wɑʃ-lɛðɝ wən i kɑɾ ɪt. "ɪf ɪleɪn kən ɡɪv jə ə ɡoʊl mɑɹk fəɹ kæɹiɪŋ əɹ lɛɾɝ, əl ɡɪv jə tɛn fəɹ bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪt seɪfli. si ðə wɝl bɪfɔɹ jə ɡoʊ bæk tə jəɹ kaʊz."

Gaebril laughed, a deep rumble of amusement. "Are you anxious then to milk cows, boy? Perhaps you should see something of the world before it changes. Here!" He produced a purse and tossed it; Mat felt coins through the wash-leather when he caught it. "If Elayne can give you a gold mark for carrying her letter, I will give you ten for bringing it safely. See the world before you go back to your cows."

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd." mæt lɪftəd ðə pɝs ən mænədʒd ə wik ɡɹɪn. "θæŋk ju, maɪ lɔɹd."

"Yes, my Lord." Mat lifted the purse and managed a weak grin. "Thank you, my Lord."

bʌt ðə dɑɹk mæn hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi weɪvd ɪm əweɪ ən tɝn tə mɔɹɡeɪs wɪð ɪz fɪsts ɑn ɪz hɪps. "aɪ θɪŋk ðə taɪm əz kʌm, mɔɹɡeɪs, tə læns ðət fɛstɝɪŋ sɔɹ ɑn ðə bɔɹɾɝ ʌv ændɝ. baɪ jəɹ mɛɹɪdʒ tə tɑɹɪŋɡeɪl dəmədʒɹd, juv ə kleɪm tə ðə sʌn θɹoʊn. ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz kən meɪk ðət kleɪm əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɛni. pɝhæps aɪ kən ivən eɪd ðɛm, ɪn səm smɔl weɪ. hɪɹ mi."

But the dark man had already waved him away and turned to Morgase with his fists on his hips. "I think the time has come, Morgase, to lance that festering sore on the border of Andor. By your marriage to Taringail Damodred, you have a claim to the Sun Throne. The Queen's Guards can make that claim as strong as any. Perhaps I can even aid them, in some small way. Hear me."

tɑlænvɝ tʌtʃt mæt ɑn ði ɑɹm, ən ðeɪ bækt əweɪ, boʊɪŋ. mæt dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɛniwʌn noʊɾəst. ɡeɪbɹəl wɑz stɪl spikɪŋ, ən ɛvɹi lɔɹɾ ən leɪɾi sim tə hæŋ ɑn ɪz wɝdz. mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ əz ʃi lɪsənd, jɛt ʃi nɑɾəd əz mʌtʃ əz ɛni ʌðɝ.

Tallanvor touched Mat on the arm, and they backed away, bowing. Mat did not think anyone noticed. Gaebril was still speaking, and every lord and lady seemed to hang on his words. Morgase was frowning as she listened, yet she nodded as much as any other.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾisɛvən


CHAPTER 47

tə ɹeɪs ðə ʃædoʊ


To Race the Shadow

fɹəm ðə smɔl kɔɹtʃjɑɹd wɪð ɪts pul ə fɪʃ, tɑlænvɝ lɛd mæt swɪfli tə ðə ɡɹeɪt kɔɹɾ ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə pæləs, bɪhaɪn ðə tɔl, ɡɪldɪd ɡeɪts ɡlimɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn. ɪt wəd bi mɪddeɪ, sun. mæt fɛlt ən ɝdʒ tə bi ɡɔn, ə nid tə hɝi. ɪt wɑz hɑɹd kipɪŋ ɪz peɪs tə ðə jʌŋ ɔfəsɝz. sʌmwʌn maɪt wʌndɝ, ɪf i stɑɹɾəd ɹʌnɪŋ, ən meɪbi - dʒʌs meɪbi - θɪŋz hæd ɹɪli bɪn ðə weɪ ðeɪ sim bæk ðɛɹ. meɪbi ɡeɪbɹəl ɹɪli dɪd nɑt səspɛk ðəɾ i nu. meɪbi. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðoʊz nɪɹli blæk aɪz, sizɪŋ ən hoʊldɪŋ laɪk ə pɛɹ ə pɪtʃfɔɹk taɪnz θɹu hɪz hɛd. laɪt, meɪbi. hi fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə wɔk əz ɪf i hæɾ ɔl ðə taɪm ɪn ðə wɝld - dʒʌst ə heɪbɹeɪn kʌntʃɹi laʊt stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ɹʌɡz ən ðə ɡoʊld. dʒʌst ə mʌdfʊt hud nɛvɝ θɪŋk ɛniwʌn maɪt pʊɾ ə naɪf ɪn ɪz bæk - əntɪl tɑlænvɝ lɛɾ ɪm θɹu ə sælipɔɹɾ ɪn wʌn ə ðə ɡeɪts, ən fɑloʊɾ ɪm aʊt.

From the small courtyard with its pool of fish, Tallanvor led Mat swiftly to the great court at the front of the Palace, behind the tall, gilded gates gleaming in the sun. It would be midday, soon. Mat felt an urge to be gone, a need to hurry. It was hard keeping his pace to the young officer's. Someone might wonder, if he started running, and maybe - just maybe - things had really been the way they seemed back there. Maybe Gaebril really did not suspect that he knew. Maybe. He remembered those nearly black eyes, seizing and holding like a pair of pitchfork tines through his head. Light, maybe. He forced himself to walk as if he had all the time in the world - Just a haybrain country lout staring at the rugs and the gold. Just a mudfoot who'd never think anyone might put a knife in his back - until Tallanvor let him through a sallyport in one of the gates, and followed him out.

ðə fæɾ ɔfəsɝ wɪð ðə ɹæts aɪz wɑz stɪl ðəɹ wɪð ðə ɡɑɹdz, ən wən i sɔ mæt ɪz feɪs wɛn ɹɛɾ əɡɛn. bɪfɔɹ i kəɾ oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ðoʊ, tɑlænvɝ spoʊk. "hi hæz dɪlɪvɝɾ ə lɛɾɝ tə ðə kwin fɹəm ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ. bi ɡlæd, ɛlbɝ, ðət niðɝ mɔɹɡeɪs nɔɹ ɡeɪbɹəl noʊz jə tʃɹaɪd tə kip ɪt fɹəm ðɛm. lɔɹd ɡeɪbɹəl wɑz moʊst ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪnz mɪsɪv."

The fat officer with the rat's eyes was still there with the Guards, and when he saw Mat his face went red again. Before he could open his mouth, though, Tallanvor spoke. "He has delivered a letter to the Queen from the Daughter-Heir. Be glad, Elber, that neither Morgase nor Gaebril knows you tried to keep it from them. Lord Gaebril was most interested in the Lady Elayne's missive."

ɛlbɝz feɪs wɛn fɹəm ɹɛd tə əz waɪɾ əz ɪz kɑlɝ. hi ɡlɛɹd wʌns ət mæt, ən skʌɾəld bæk əlɔŋ ðə laɪn ʌv ɡɑɹdzmɪn, hɪz biɾi aɪz piɹɪŋ θɹu ðə bɑɹz ə ðɛɹ feɪs-ɡɑɹdz əz ɪf tə dətɝmən wɛðɝ ɛni ʌv əm hæd sin ɪz fɪɹ.

Elber's face went from red to as white as his collar. He glared once at Mat, and scuttled back along the line of guardsmen, his beady eyes peering through the bars of their face-guards as if to determine whether any of them had seen his fear.

"θæŋk ju," mæt toʊl tɑlænvɝ, ən mɛn ɪt. hi hæd fɝɡɑɾən ɔl əbaʊt ðə fæt mæn əntɪl i wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ɪm ɪn ðə feɪs əɡɛn. "fɛɹ jə wɛl, tɑlænvɝ."

"Thank you," Mat told Tallanvor, and meant it. He had forgotten all about the fat man until he was staring him in the face again. "Fare you well, Tallanvor."

hi stɑɹɾəd əkɹɔs ði oʊvəl plɑzə, tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə wɔk tu fæst, ən wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd wən tɑlænvɝ wɔkt əlɔŋ. laɪt, ɪz i ɡeɪbɹəlz mæn, əɹ mɔɹɡeɪsəz? hi wɑz dʒʌs bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə fil ən ɪtʃ bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz, əz ɪf ə naɪf maɪt bi əbaʊt tə ɡoʊ ɪn - hi dʌznt noʊ, bɝn mi! ɡeɪbɹəl dʌzn səspɛkt aɪ noʊ! - wən ðə jʌŋ ɔfəsɝ faɪnəli spoʊk.

He started across the oval plaza, trying not to walk too fast, and was surprised when Tallanvor walked along. Light, is he Gaebril's man, or Morgase's? He was just beginning to feel an itch between his shoulder blades, as if a knife might be about to go in - He doesn't know, burn me! Gaebril doesn't suspect I know! - when the young officer finally spoke.

"dɪd jə spɛn lɔŋ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn? ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ? lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə lɝn ɛniθɪŋ ʌv ɪt?"

"Did you spend long in Tar Valon? In the White Tower? Long enough to learn anything of it?"

"aɪ wɑz oʊnli ðəɹ θɹi deɪz," mæt sɛd kɔʃəsli. hi wʊɾə meɪd ðə taɪm lɛs - ɪf i cʊɾə dɪlɪvɝd ðə lɛɾɝ wɪθaʊɾ ædmɪɾɪŋ ɛvɝ biɪŋ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, hi wəɾ əv - bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðə mæn wəd bɪliv i hæd ɡɔn ɔl ðət weɪ tə si hɪz sɪstɝ ən lɛf ðə seɪm deɪ. wʌɾ ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ ɪz i æftɝ? "aɪ lɝnd wʌɾ aɪ sɔ ɪn ðət taɪm. nʌθɪŋ ʌv ɛni ɪmpɔɹɾəns. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ɡaɪd mi ɝaʊn ən tɛl mi θɪŋz. aɪ wɑz oʊnli ðəɹ tə si ɛls."

"I was only there three days," Mat said cautiously. He would have made the time less - if he could have delivered the letter without admitting ever being in Tar Valon, he would have - but he did not think the man would believe he had gone all that way to see his sister and left the same day. What under the Light is he after? "I learned what I saw in that time. Nothing of any importance. They did not guide me around and tell me things. I was only there to see Else."

"ju mʌst əv hɝd sʌmθɪŋ, mæn. hu ɪz ʃɛɹiəm? dʌz tɔkɪŋ tə hɝ ɪn əɹ stʌɾi min ɛniθɪŋ?"

"You must have heard something, man. Who is Sheriam? Does talking to her in her study mean anything?"

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd vɪɡɝəsli tə kip ɹɪlif fɹəm ʃoʊɪŋ ɑn ɪz feɪs. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ hu ʃi ɪz," hi sɛd tʃɹuθfəli. pɝhæps i hæd hɝɾ ɛɡwin, əɹ pɝhæps nɪneɪiv, mɛnʃən ðə neɪm. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, meɪbi? "waɪ ʃəɾ ɪt min ɛniθɪŋ?"

Mat shook his head vigorously to keep relief from showing on his face. "I don't know who she is," he said truthfully. Perhaps he had heard Egwene, or perhaps Nynaeve, mention the name. An Aes Sedai, maybe? "Why should it mean anything?"

"aɪ də nɑt noʊ," tɑlænvɝ sɛd sɔfli. "ðɛɹ ɪz tu mʌtʃ aɪ də nɑt noʊ. səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk ʃiz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ. . . ." hi ɡeɪv mæt ə ʃɑɹp lʊk. "ɑɹ jə ə lɔɪəl ændɔɝmən, tɑm ɡɹɪnwɛl?"

"I do not know," Tallanvor said softly. "There is too much I do not know. Sometimes I think she is trying to say something. . . ." He gave Mat a sharp look. "Are you a loyal Andorman, Thom Grinwell?"

"ʌv kɔɹs aɪ æm." laɪt, ɪf aɪ seɪ ðət mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɔfən, aɪ meɪ stɑɹt bɪlivɪŋ ɪt. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ju? dʒju sɝv mɔɹɡeɪs ən ɡeɪbɹəl lɔɪəli?"

"Of course I am." Light, if I say that much more often, I may start believing it. "What about you? Do you serve Morgase and Gaebril loyally?"

tɑlænvɝ ɡeɪv ɪm ə lʊk əz hɑɹɾ əz ðə daɪsəz mɝsi. "aɪ sɝv mɔɹɡeɪs, tɑm ɡɹɪnwɛl. hɝ, aɪ sɝv tə ðə dɛθ. fɛɹ jə wɛl!" hi tɝn ən stʃɹoʊd bæk təwɔɹd ðə pæləs wɪð ə hænd ɡɹɪpɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt.

Tallanvor gave him a look as hard as the dice's mercy. "I serve Morgase, Thom Grinwell. Her, I serve to the death. Fare you well!" He turned and strode back toward the Palace with a hand gripping his sword hilt.

wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm ɡoʊ, mæt mʌɾɝd tə hɪmsɛlf. "aɪ wɪl weɪdʒɝ ðɪs" - hi ɡeɪv ɡeɪbɹəlz wɑʃ-lɛðɝ pɝs ə tɔs - "ðæt ɡeɪbɹəl sɛz ðə seɪm." wʌtɛvɝ ɡeɪmz ðeɪ pleɪɾ ɪn ðə pæləs, hi wɑntəd noʊ pleɪs ɪn ɛni ʌv ðɛm. ən i mɛn tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ aʊɾ ə ðɛm, tu. ful wɪmən! naʊ aɪ hæv tə kip ðɛɹ beɪkən fɹəm bɝnɪŋ ɪnstɛɾ ə lʊkɪŋ æftɝ maɪ oʊn! hi dɪd nɑt stɑɹt tə ɹʌn əntɪl ðə stʃɹits hɪɾ ɪm fɹəm ðə pæləs.

Watching him go, Mat muttered to himself. "I will wager this" - he gave Gaebril's wash-leather purse a toss - "that Gaebril says the same." Whatever games they played in the Palace, he wanted no place in any of them. And he meant to make sure Egwene and the others were out of them, too. Fool women! Now I have to keep their bacon from burning instead of looking after my own! He did not start to run until the streets hid him from the Palace.

wən i keɪm dæʃɪŋ ɪndə ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ, nʌθɪŋ vɛɹi mʌtʃ hæd tʃeɪnʒd ɪn ðə laɪbɹɛɹi. tɑm ən ði ɪnkipɝ stɪl sæɾ oʊvɝ ðə stoʊnz bɔɹd - ə dɪfɹənt ɡeɪm, hi sɔ fɹəm ðə pəzɪʃənz ə ðə stoʊnz, bʌt noʊ bɛɾɝ fəɹ ɡɪl - ən ðə kæləkoʊ kæt wɑz bæk ɑn ðə teɪbəl, wɑʃɪŋ hɝsɛlf. ə tʃɹeɪ hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ ənlɪt paɪps ən ðə ɹɪmeɪnz ʌv ə mil fəɹ tu sæt nɪɹ ðə kæt, ən ɪz bɪlɔŋɪŋz wɝ ɡɔn fɹəm ði ɑɹmtʃɛɹ. itʃ mæn hæɾ ə waɪn kʌp əɾ ɪz ɛlboʊ.

When he came dashing into The Queen's Blessing, nothing very much had changed in the library. Thom and the innkeeper still sat over the stones board - a different game, he saw from the positions of the stones, but no better for Gill - and the calico cat was back on the table, washing herself. A tray holding their unlit pipes and the remains of a meal for two sat near the cat, and his belongings were gone from the armchair. Each man had a wine cup at his elbow.

"aɪ wɪl bi livɪŋ, mæstɝ ɡɪl," hi sɛd. "ju kən kip ðə kɔɪn ən teɪk ə mil aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. əl steɪ lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə it, bʌt ðən aɪm ɑn ðə ɹoʊd tə tɛɹ."

"I will be leaving, Master Gill," he said. "You can keep the coin and take a meal out of it. I'll stay long enough to eat, but then I am on the road to Tear."

"wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ hɝi, bɔɪ?" tɑm sim tə bi wɑtʃɪŋ ðə kæt mɔɹ ðən ðə bɔɹd. "wi oʊnli dʒʌst ɝaɪv hɪɹ."

"What is your hurry, boy?" Thom seemed to be watching the cat more than the board. "We only just arrived here."

"ju dɪlɪvɝd ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪnz lɛɾɝ, ðɛn?" ði ɪnkipɝ sɛɾ iɡɝli. "æn kɛp jəɹ skɪn hoʊl, ɪt simz. dɪd jə ɹɪli klaɪm oʊvɝ ðət wɔl laɪk ði ʌðɝ jʌŋ mæn? noʊ, ðət dʌz nɑt mæɾɝ. dɪd ðə lɛɾɝ suð mɔɹɡeɪs? də wi stɪl əv tə kip tɪptoʊɪŋ ɑn ɛɡz, mæn?"

"You delivered the Lady Elayne's letter, then?" the innkeeper said eagerly. "And kept your skin whole, it seems. Did you really climb over that wall like the other young man? No, that does not matter. Did the letter soothe Morgase? Do we still have to keep tiptoeing on eggs, man?"

"aɪ səpoʊz ɪt suð hɝ," mæt sɛd. "aɪ θɪŋk ɪt dɪd." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ə moʊmənt, baʊnsɪŋ ɡeɪbɹəlz pɝs ɑn ɪz hænd. ɪt meɪɾ ə klɪŋkɪŋ saʊnd. hi hæd nɑt lʊk tə si ɪf ɪt ɹɪli hɛl tɛn ɡoʊl mɑɹks; ðə weɪt wɑz əbaʊt ɹaɪt. "mæstɝ ɡɪl, wʌt kən jə tɛl mi ʌv ɡeɪbɹəl? əsaɪd fɹəm ðə fæk ðəɾ i dʌz nɑt laɪk ɛɛs sədaɪ. jə sɛɾ i hæd nɑt bɪn ɪn keɪɛmlɪn lɔŋ?"

"I suppose it soothed her," Mat said. "I think it did." He hesitated a moment, bouncing Gaebril's purse on his hand. It made a clinking sound. He had not looked to see if it really held ten gold marks; the weight was about right. "Master Gill, what can you tell me of Gaebril? Aside from the fact that he does not like Aes Sedai. You said he had not been in Caemlyn long?"

"waɪ dʒju wɑnə noʊ əbaʊt hɪm?" tɑm æskt. "bɑzəl, ɑɹ jə gɑnə pleɪs ə stoʊn əɹ nɑt?" ði ɪnkipɝ saɪɾ ən stʌk ə blæk stoʊn ɑn ðə bɔɹd, ən ðə ɡlimən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

"Why do you want to know about him?" Thom asked. "Basel, are you going to place a stone or not?" The innkeeper sighed and stuck a black stone on the board, and the gleeman shook his head.

"wɛl, læd," ɡɪl sɛd, "ðɛɹ ɪz nɑt mʌtʃ tə tɛl. hi keɪm aʊɾ ə ðə wɛs dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɪntɝ. sʌmwɛɹ aʊt jəɹ weɪ, aɪ θɪŋk. meɪbi ɪt wɑz ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. aɪv hɝd ðə maʊntənz mɛnʃənd."

"Well, lad," Gill said, "there is not much to tell. He came out of the west during the winter. Somewhere out your way, I think. Maybe it was the Two Rivers. I've heard the mountains mentioned."

"wi hæv noʊ lɔɹdz ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," mæt sɛd. "meɪbi ðəɹ ɑɹ səm ʌp ɝaʊn bɛɹlən. aɪ də nɑt noʊ."

"We have no lords in the Two Rivers," Mat said. "Maybe there are some up around Baerlon. I do not know."

"ðæt kəd bi ɪt, læd. aɪ hæd nɛvɝ ivən hɝɾ ə hɪm bɪfɔɹ, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt kip ʌp wɪð ðə kʌntʃɹi lɔɹdz. keɪm waɪl mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz stɪl ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, hi dɪd, ən hæf ðə sɪɾi wɑz əfɹeɪd ðə taʊɝ wɑz gɑnə meɪk əɹ dɪsəpɪɹ, tu. ði ʌðɝ hæf dɪd nɑt wɑn əɹ bæk. ðə ɹaɪəts stɑɹɾəd ʌp əɡɛn, ðə weɪ ðeɪ dɪd læs jɪɹ ət ðə teɪl ʌv wɪntɝ."

"That could be it, lad. I had never even heard of him before, but I do not keep up with the country lords. Came while Morgase was still in Tar Valon, he did, and half the city was afraid the Tower was going to make her disappear, too. The other half did not want her back. The riots started up again, the way they did last year at the tail of winter."

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ də nɑt kɛɹ əbaʊt pɑlətɪks, mæstɝ ɡɪl. ɪts ɡeɪbɹəl aɪ wɑnə noʊ əbaʊt." tɑm fɹaʊn ət hɪm, ən bɪɡæn klinɪŋ ðə dɑɾəl fɹəm ɪz lɔŋ-stɛm paɪp wɪð ə stʃɹɔ.

Mat shook his head. "I do not care about politics, Master Gill. It's Gaebril I want to know about." Thom frowned at him, and began cleaning the dottle from his long-stemmed pipe with a straw.

"ɪɾ ɪz ɡeɪbɹəl aɪm tɛlɪŋ jə əbaʊt, læd," ɡɪl sɛd. "dʊɹɪŋ ðə ɹaɪəts, hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf liɾɝ ə ðə fækʃən səpɔɹɾɪŋ mɔɹɡeɪs - ɡɑt hɪmsɛlf wundəɾ ɪn ðə faɪɾɪŋ, aɪ hɪɹ - ən baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi ɹɪtɝnd, hi hæɾ ɪɾ ɔl səpɹɛst. ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn dɪdn laɪk ɡeɪbɹəlz mɛθədz - hi kən bi ə vɛɹi hɑɹd mæn - bʌt mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz soʊ pliz tə faɪn ɔɹɾɝ ɹɪstɔɹd ðət ʃi neɪmd ɪm tə ðə poʊst ɪleɪɾə juz tə hoʊld."

"It is Gaebril I am telling you about, lad," Gill said. "During the riots, he made himself leader of the faction supporting Morgase - got himself wounded in the fighting, I hear - and by the time she returned, he had it all suppressed. Gareth Bryne didn't like Gaebril's methods - he can be a very hard man - but Morgase was so pleased to find order restored that she named him to the post Elaida used to hold."

ði ɪnkipɝ stɑpt. mæt weɪɾəd fəɹ ɪm tə ɡoʊ ɑn, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt. tɑm θʌmd ɪz paɪp fʊl ə təbæk ən wɔkt oʊvɝ tə laɪɾ ə spɪl əɾ ə smɔl læmp kɛp fəɹ ðə pɝpəs ɑn ðə mæntəl əbʌv ðə faɪɝpleɪs.

The innkeeper stopped. Mat waited for him to go on, but he did not. Thom thumbed his pipe full of tabac and walked over to light a spill at a small lamp kept for the purpose on the mantel above the fireplace.

"wʌɾ ɛls?" mæt æskt. "ðə mæn əz tə hæv ə ɹizən fəɹ wʌɾ i dʌz. ɪf i mɛɹiz mɔɹɡeɪs, wəɾ i bi kɪŋ wən ʃi daɪz? ɪf ɪleɪn wɝ dɛd, tu, aɪ min?"

"What else?" Mat asked. "The man has to have a reason for what he does. If he marries Morgase, would he be king when she dies? If Elayne were dead, too, I mean?"

tɑm tʃoʊk laɪɾɪŋ ɪz paɪp, ən ɡɪl læft. "ændɝ əz ə kwin, læd. ɔlweɪz ə kwin. ɪf mɔɹɡeɪs ən ɪleɪn boʊθ daɪd - ðə laɪt sɛn ɪt nɑt soʊ! - ðən mɔɹɡeɪsəz nɪɹəs fimeɪl ɹɛləɾɪv wəd teɪk ðə θɹoʊn. ət lis ðɛɹz noʊ kwɛstʃən ə hu ðəɾ ɪz ðɪs taɪm - ə kʌzən, ðə leɪɾi daɪɛlɪn - nɑt laɪk ðə səksɛʃən, æftɝ tɪɡɹeɪn vænɪʃt. ɪt tʊk tu jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ mɔɹɡeɪs sæɾ ɑn ðə laɪən θɹoʊn, ðɛn. daɪɛlɪn kəd kip ɡeɪbɹəl əz əɹ ædvaɪzɝ, əɹ mɛɹi hɪm tə səmɛn ðə laɪn - ðoʊ ʃi wəd nɑt laɪkli də ðəɾ ənlɛs mɔɹɡeɪs hæd hæɾ ə tʃaɪl baɪ hɪm - bʌɾ i wəd bi ðə pɹɪns kɑnsɔɹɾ ivən ðɛn. noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðæt. θæŋk ðə laɪt, mɔɹɡeɪs ɪz ə jʌŋ wʊmən, jɛt. ən ɪleɪn ɪz hɛlθi. laɪt! ðə lɛɾɝ dɪd nɑt seɪ ʃiz ɪl, dɪɾ ɪt?"

Thom choked lighting his pipe, and Gill laughed. "Andor has a queen, lad. Always a queen. If Morgase and Elayne both died - the Light send it not so! - then Morgase's nearest female relative would take the throne. At least there's no question of who that is this time - a cousin, the Lady Dyelin - not like the Succession, after Tigraine vanished. It took two years before Morgase sat on the Lion Throne, then. Dyelin could keep Gaebril as her advisor, or marry him to cement the line - though she would not likely do that unless Morgase had had a child by him - but he would be the Prince Consort even then. No more than that. Thank the Light, Morgase is a young woman, yet. And Elayne is healthy. Light! The letter did not say she is ill, did it?"

"ʃi ɪz wɛl." fəɹ naʊ, ət list. "ɪzən ðəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls jə kən tɛl mi əbaʊt hɪm? jə də nɑt sim tə laɪk hɪm. waɪ?"

"She is well." For now, at least. "Isn't there anything else you can tell me about him? You do not seem to like him. Why?"

ði ɪnkipɝ fɹaʊn ɪn θɔt, ən skɹætʃt ɪz tʃɪn, ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ səpoʊz aɪ wəd nɑt laɪk ɪm mɛɹiɪŋ mɔɹɡeɪs, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt tʃɹuli noʊ waɪ. hiz sɛd tə bi ə faɪn mæn; ðə noʊbəlz ɔl lʊk tə hɪm. aɪ də nɑt laɪk moʊst ə ðə mɛn hiz bɹɔɾ ɪndə ðə ɡɑɹdz. tu mʌtʃ əz tʃeɪnʒd sɪns i keɪm, bʌɾ aɪ kænɑt leɪ ɪɾ ɔl əɾ ɪz dɔɹ. ðəɹ dʒʌst sim tə bi tu mɛni pipəl mʌɾɝɪŋ ɪn kɔɹnɝz sɪns i keɪm. jə wəd θɪŋk wi wɝ ɔl kɛɹhinɪn, ðə weɪ ðeɪ wɝ bɪfɔɹ ðɪs sɪvəl wɔɹ, ɔl plɑɾɪŋ ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ædvæntɪdʒ. aɪ kip hævɪŋ bæd dʒɹimz sɪns ɡeɪbɹəl keɪm, ən aɪm nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn. ful θɪŋ tə wɝi əbaʊt, dʒɹimz. ɪts pɹɑbli oʊnli wɝi əbaʊɾ ɪleɪn, ən wʌt mɔɹɡeɪs minz tə də kənsɝnɪŋ ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən pipəl æktɪŋ laɪk kɛɹhinɪn. aɪ dʒʌs də nɑt noʊ. waɪ ɑɹ jə æskɪŋ ɔl ðiz kwɛstʃənz əbaʊt lɔɹd ɡeɪbɹəl?"

The innkeeper frowned in thought, and scratched his chin, and shook his head. "I suppose I would not like him marrying Morgase, but I do not truly know why. He's said to be a fine man; the nobles all look to him. I do not like most of the men he's brought into the Guards. Too much has changed since he came, but I cannot lay it all at his door. There just seem to be too many people muttering in corners since he came. You would think we were all Cairhienin, the way they were before this civil war, all plotting and trying to find advantage. I keep having bad dreams since Gaebril came, and I am not the only one. Fool thing to worry about, dreams. It is probably only worry about Elayne, and what Morgase means to do concerning the White Tower, and people acting like Cairhienin. I just do not know. Why are you asking all these questions about Lord Gaebril?"

"bɪkɔz i wɑns tə kɪl ɪleɪn," mæt sɛd, "æn ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv wɪð hɝ." ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ jusfəl ɪn wʌt ɡɪl hæd toʊld ɪm ðəɾ i kəd si. bɝn mi, aɪ doʊn əv tə noʊ waɪ hi wɑns əm dɛd. aɪ dʒʌst əv tə stɑp ɪt. boʊθ mɛn wɝ stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm əɡɛn. əz ɪf i wɝ mæd. əɡɛn.

"Because he wants to kill Elayne," Mat said, "and Egwene and Nynaeve with her." There was nothing useful in what Gill had told him that he could see. Burn me, I don't have to know why he wants them dead. I just have to stop it. Both men were staring at him again. As if he were mad. Again.

"ɑɹ jə kʌmɪŋ daʊn sɪk əɡɛn?" ɡɪl sɛd səspɪʃəsli. "aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ jə stɛɹɪŋ kɹɔsweɪz əɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ðə læs taɪm. ɪts iðɝ ðæt, əɹ ɛls jə θɪŋk ðɪs ɪz səm sɔɹɾ ə pɹæŋk. juv ðə lʊk ʌv ə pɹæŋkstɝ tə mi. ɪf ðəɾ ɪz ɪt, ɪts ə næsti wʌn!"

"Are you coming down sick again?" Gill said suspiciously. "I remember you staring crossways at everyone the last time. It's either that, or else you think this is some sort of prank. You have the look of a prankster to me. If that is it, it's a nasty one!"

mæt ɡɹɪməst. "ɪɾ ɪz noʊ blʌɾi pɹæŋk. aɪ oʊvɝhɝɾ ɪm tɛlɪŋ səm mæn kɔl koʊmɹ tə kʌɾ ɪleɪnz hɛɾ ɔf. ən ɛɡwinz ən nɪneɪivz waɪl i wɑz əbaʊɾ ɪt. ə bɪɡ mæn, wɪð ə waɪt stʃɹaɪp ɪn ɪz bɪɹd."

Mat grimaced. "It is no bloody prank. I overheard him telling some man called Comar to cut Elayne's head off. And Egwene's and Nynaeve's while he was about it. A big man, with a white stripe in his beard."

"ðæt dʌz saʊn laɪk lɔɹd koʊmɹ," ɡɪl sɛd sloʊli. "hi wɑz ə faɪn soʊlʒɝ, bʌɾ ɪts sɛɾ i lɛf ðə ɡɑɹɾ oʊvɝ səm mæɾɝ ʌv weɪɾɪd daɪs. nɑt ðəɾ ɛniwʌn sɛz ɪt tə hɪz feɪs; koʊmɹ wɑz wʌn ə ðə bɛs bleɪdz ɪn ðə ɡɑɹdz. jə ɹɪli min ɪt, doʊn ju?"

"That does sound like Lord Comar," Gill said slowly. "He was a fine soldier, but it is said he left the Guard over some matter of weighted dice. Not that anyone says it to his face; Comar was one of the best blades in the Guards. You really mean it, don't you?"

"aɪ θɪŋk i dʌz, bɑzəl," tɑm sɛd. "aɪ vɛɹi mʌtʃ θɪŋk i dʌz."

"I think he does, Basel," Thom said. "I very much think he does."

"ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ʌs! wʌd mɔɹɡeɪs seɪ? jə dɪd tɛl hɝ, dɪdn ju? ðə laɪt bɝn ju, jə dɪd tɛl hɝ!"

"The Light shine on us! What did Morgase say? You did tell her, didn't you? The Light burn you, you did tell her!"

"ʌv kɔɹs, aɪ dɪd," mæt sɛd bɪɾɝli. "wɪð ɡeɪbɹəl stændɪŋ ɹaɪt ðɛɹ, ən əɹ ɡeɪzɪŋ əɾ ɪm laɪk ə lʌvisɪk læpdɔɡ! aɪ sɛd, 'aɪ meɪ bi ə sɪmpəl vɪlədʒ mæn u dʒʌs klaɪmd oʊvɝ jəɹ wɔl hæf ən aʊɝ pæst, bʌɾ aɪ ɔlɹɛɾi hæpən tə noʊ jəɹ tʃɹʌstɪɾ ædvaɪzɝ ðɛɹ, ðə wʌn jə sim tə bi ɪn lʌv wɪð, ɪntɛnz tə mɝɾɝ jəɹ dɔɾɝ.' laɪt, mæn, ʃiɾ əv kʌt maɪ hɛɾ ɔf!"

"Of course, I did," Mat said bitterly. "With Gaebril standing right there, and her gazing at him like a lovesick lapdog! I said, 'I may be a simple village man who just climbed over your wall half an hour past, but I already happen to know your trusted advisor there, the one you seem to be in love with, intends to murder your daughter.' Light, man, she'd have cut my head off!"

"ʃi maɪɾ əv ət ðæt." tɑm stɛɹɾ ɪndə ði ɪlæbɹət kɑɹvɪŋz ɑn ðə boʊl ə hɪz paɪp ən tʌɡd wʌn mʌstæʃ. "hɝ tɛmpɝ wɑz ɛvɝ əz sʌɾən əz laɪtnɪŋ, ən twaɪs əz deɪnʒɝəs."

"She might have at that." Thom stared into the elaborate carvings on the bowl of his pipe and tugged one mustache. "Her temper was ever as sudden as lightning, and twice as dangerous."

"ju noʊ ɪt bɛɾɝ ðən moʊst, tɑm," ɡɪl sɛɾ æbsənli. stɛɹɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ, hi skɹʌbd boʊθ hænz θɹu hɪz ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ. "ðɛɹ əz tə bi sʌmθɪŋ aɪ kən du. aɪ hævən hɛld ə sɔɹd sɪns ði il wɔɹ, bʌt. . . . wɛl, ðət wəd də noʊ ɡʊd. ɡɛt maɪsɛlf kɪld ən də nʌθɪŋ baɪ ɪt. bʌɾ aɪ mʌs də sʌmθɪŋ!"

"You know it better than most, Thom," Gill said absently. Staring at nothing, he scrubbed both hands through his graying hair. "There has to be something I can do. I haven't held a sword since the Aiel War, but. . . . Well, that would do no good. Get myself killed and do nothing by it. But I must do something!"

"ɹumɝ." tɑm ɹʌb ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz noʊz; hi sim tə bi stʌɾiɪŋ ðə stoʊnz bɔɹɾ ən tɔkɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf. "noʊ wʌn kən kip ɹumɝz fɹəm ɹitʃɪŋ mɔɹɡeɪsəz ɪɹz, ən ɪf ʃi hɪɹz ɪt stʃɹɔŋli ɪnʌf, ʃɪl stɑɹt tə wʌndɝ. ɹumɝ ɪz ðə vɔɪs ə ðə pipəl, ən ðə vɔɪs ə ðə pipəl ɔfən spiks tʃɹuθ. mɔɹɡeɪs noʊz ðæt. ðəɹ ɪz nɑɾ ə mæn əlaɪv aɪ wəd bæk əɡɛnst əɹ ɪn ðə ɡeɪm. lʌv əɹ noʊ lʌv, wʌns mɔɹɡeɪs stɑɹts ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ɡeɪbɹəl kloʊsli, hɪl nɑt bi eɪbəl tə haɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ɪz tʃaɪldhʊd skɑɹz fɹəm hɝ. ən ɪf ʃi lɝnz i minz hɑɹm tə ɪleɪn" - hi pleɪst ə stoʊn ɑn ðə bɔɹd; ɪt simd ən ɑd pleɪsmən ət fɝst ɡlæns, bʌt mæt sɔ ðəɾ ɪn θɹi mɔɹ muvz, ə θɝɾ ʌv ɡɪlz stoʊnz wəd bi tʃɹæpt - "lɔɹd ɡeɪbɹəl wɪl əv ə moʊst ɪlæbɹət fjunɝəl."

"Rumor." Thom rubbed the side of his nose; he seemed to be studying the stones board and talking to himself. "No one can keep rumors from reaching Morgase's ears, and if she hears it strongly enough, she will start to wonder. Rumor is the voice of the people, and the voice of the people often speaks truth. Morgase knows that. There is not a man alive I would back against her in the Game. Love or no love, once Morgase starts examining Gaebril closely, he'll not be able to hide as much as his childhood scars from her. And if she learns he means harm to Elayne" - he placed a stone on the board; it seemed an odd placement at first glance, but Mat saw that in three more moves, a third of Gill's stones would be trapped - "Lord Gaebril will have a most elaborate funeral."

"ju ən jəɹ ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz," ɡɪl mʌɾɝd. "stɪl, ɪt maɪt wɝk." ə sʌɾən smaɪl əpɪɹɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs. "aɪ ivən noʊ hu tə tɛl tə stɑɹɾ ɪt. ɔl aɪ nid də ɪz mɛnʃən tə ɡɪldə ðəɾ aɪ dʒɹimd ɪt, ən ɪn θɹi deɪz ʃɪl əv toʊl sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz ɪn hæf ðə nu sɪɾi ðəɾ ɪts ə fækt. ʃiz ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst ɡɑsəp ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ɛvɝ meɪd."

"You and your Game of Houses," Gill muttered. "Still, it might work." A sudden smile appeared on his face. "I even know who to tell to start it. All I need do is mention to Gilda that I dreamed it, and in three days she'll have told serving girls in half the New City that it is a fact. She is the greatest gossip the Creator ever made."

"dʒʌs bi sɝɾən ɪt kænɑt bi tʃɹeɪs bæk tə ju, bɑzəl."

"Just be certain it cannot be traced back to you, Basel."

"noʊ fɪɹ ə ðæt, tɑm. waɪ ə wik əɡoʊ, ə mæn toʊl mi wʌn ə maɪ oʊn bæd dʒɹimz əz ə θɪŋ hid hɝd fɹəm sʌmbɑɾi hud hæɾ ɪt fɹəm sʌmwʌn ɛls. ɡɪldə mʌst əv ivzdʒɹɑpt ɑn mi tɛlɪŋ ɪt tə koʊlini, bʌt wən aɪ æskt, hi ɡeɪv mi ə stʃɹɪŋ ə neɪmz ðət lɛɾ ɔl ðə weɪ tə ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə keɪɛmlɪn ən vænɪʃt. waɪ, aɪ æktʃəli  wɛn oʊvɝ ðəɹ ən faʊn ðə læs mæn, dʒʌst aʊɾ ə kjʊɹiɑsəɾi tə si haʊ mɛni maʊðz hæd pæst ɪt, ən i kleɪmd ɪt wɑz ɪz vɛɹi oʊn dʒɹim. noʊ fɪɹ, tɑm."

"No fear of that, Thom. Why a week ago, a man told me one of my own bad dreams as a thing he'd heard from somebody who'd had it from someone else. Gilda must have eavesdropped on me telling it to Coline, but when I asked, he gave me a string of names that led all the way to the other side of Caemlyn and vanished. Why, I actually went over there and found the last man, just out of curiosity to see how many mouths had passed it, and he claimed it was his very own dream. No fear, Thom."

mæt dɪd nɑt ɹɪli kɛɹ wʌt ðeɪ dɪd wɪð ðɛɹ ɹumɝz - noʊ ɹumɝz wəd hɛlp ɛɡwin əɹ ði ʌðɝz - bʌt wʌn θɪŋ pʌzəl hɪm. "tɑm, jə sim tə bi teɪkɪŋ ðɪs ɔl vɛɹi kɑmli. aɪ θɔt mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz ðə ɡɹeɪt lʌv ə jəɹ laɪf."

Mat did not really care what they did with their rumors - no rumors would help Egwene or the others - but one thing puzzled him. "Thom, you seem to be taking this all very calmly. I thought Morgase was the great love of your life."

ðə ɡlimən stɛɹɾ ɪndə ðə boʊl ə hɪz paɪp əɡɛn. "mæt, ə vɛɹi waɪz wʊmən wʌns toʊl mi ðət taɪm wəd hil maɪ wunz, ðət taɪm smuðd ɛvɹiθɪŋ oʊvɝ. aɪ dɪdn bɪliv hɝ. oʊnli ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt."

The gleeman stared into the bowl of his pipe again. "Mat, a very wise woman once told me that time would heal my wounds, that time smoothed everything over. I didn't believe her. Only she was right."

"ju min jə də nɑt lʌv mɔɹɡeɪs ɛnimɔɹ."

"You mean you do not love Morgase anymore."

"bɔɪ, ɪts bɪn fɪftin jɪɹz sɪns aɪ lɛf keɪɛmlɪn ə hæf stɛp əhɛɾ ə ðə hɛdzmənz æks, wɪð ði ɪŋk ə mɔɹɡeɪsəz sɪɡnətʃɝ stɪl wɛɾ ɑn ðə wɔɹənt. sɪɾɪŋ hɪɹ lɪsnɪŋ tə bɑzəl næɾɝ ɑn" - ɡɪl pɹətɛstəd, ən tɑm ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs - "næɾɝ ɑn, aɪ seɪ, əbaʊt mɔɹɡeɪs ən ɡeɪbɹəl, ən haʊ ðeɪ maɪt mɛɹi, aɪ ɹilaɪz ðə pæʃən feɪɾəd ə lɔŋ taɪm ɡɔn. oʊ, aɪ səpoʊz aɪm stɪl fɑn ə hɝ, pɝhæps aɪ ivən lʌv əɹ ə lɪɾəl, bʌɾ ɪts nɑɾ ə ɡɹæn pæʃən ɛnimɔɹ."

"Boy, it has been fifteen years since I left Caemlyn a half step ahead of the headsman's axe, with the ink of Morgase's signature still wet on the warrant. Sitting here listening to Basel natter on" - Gill protested, and Thom raised his voice - "natter on, I say, about Morgase and Gaebril, and how they might marry, I realized the passion faded a long time gone. Oh, I suppose I am still fond of her, perhaps I even love her a little, but it is not a grand passion anymore."

"æn hɪɹ aɪ hæf θɔt jud ɡoʊ ɹʌnɪŋ ʌp tə ðə pæləs tə wɔɹn hɝ." hi læft, ən wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd wən tɑm dʒɔɪn hɪm.

"And here I half thought you'd go running up to the Palace to warn her." He laughed, and was surprised when Thom joined him.

"aɪ æm nɑt soʊ bɪɡ ə ful əz ðæt, bɔɪ. ɛni ful noʊz mɛn ən wɪmən θɪŋk dɪfɹənli ət taɪmz, bʌt ðə bɪɡəs dɪfɝəns ɪz ðɪs. mɛn fɝɡɛt, bʌt nɛvɝ fɝɡɪv; wɪmən fɝɡɪv, bʌt nɛvɝ fɝɡɛt. mɔɹɡeɪs maɪt kɪs maɪ tʃik ən ɡɪmi ə kʌp ʌv waɪn ən seɪ haʊ ʃiz mɪs mi. ən ðən ʃi maɪt dʒʌs lɛt ðə ɡɑɹdz hɔl mi ɔf tə pɹɪzən ən ðə hɛdzmən. noʊ. mɔɹɡeɪs ɪz wʌn ə ðə moʊs keɪpəbəl wɪmən aɪv ɛvɝ noʊn, ən ðəɾ ɪz seɪɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. aɪ kəɾ ɔlmoʊs pɪɾi ɡeɪbɹəl wʌns ʃi lɝnz wʌt hiz ʌp tə. tɛɹ, jə seɪ? ɪz ðəɹ ɛni tʃæns ə jə weɪɾɪŋ əntɪl təmɑɹoʊ tə liv? aɪ kəd juz ə naɪts slip."

"I am not so big a fool as that, boy. Any fool knows men and women think differently at times, but the biggest difference is this. Men forget, but never forgive; women forgive, but never forget. Morgase might kiss my cheek and give me a cup of wine and say how she has missed me. And then she might just let the Guards haul me off to prison and the headsman. No. Morgase is one of the most capable women I've ever known, and that is saying something. I could almost pity Gaebril once she learns what he is up to. Tear, you say? Is there any chance of you waiting until tomorrow to leave? I could use a night's sleep."

"aɪ min tə bi əz fɑɹ təwɔɹd tiɹ əz aɪ kən bɪfɔɹ naɪtfɔl." mæt blɪŋkt. "du jə min tə kʌm wɪð mi? aɪ θɔt jə mɛn tə steɪ hɪɹ."

"I mean to be as far toward Tear as I can before nightfall." Mat blinked. "Do you mean to come with me? I thought you meant to stay here."

"dɪd jə nɑt dʒʌs hɪɹ mi seɪ aɪ hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd nɑt tə hæv maɪ hɛd kʌɾ ɔf? tɛɹ saʊnz ə seɪfɝ pleɪs tə mi ðən keɪɛmlɪn, ən sʌɾənli ðət dʌz nɑt sim soʊ bæd. bɪsaɪdz, aɪ laɪk ðoʊz ɡɝlz." ə naɪf əpɪɹɾ ɪn ɪz hæn ən wɑz əz sʌɾənli ɡɔn əɡɛn. "aɪd nɑt laɪk ɛniθɪŋ tə hæpən tə ðɛm. bʌɾ ɪf jə min tə ɹitʃ tɛɹ kwɪkli, ɪts ɑɹɪŋɡəl jə wɑnt. ə fæs boʊt wɪl əv əs ðəɹ deɪz sunɝ ðən hɔɹsəz, ivən ɪf wi ɹoʊɾ əm tə dɛθ. ən aɪ doʊn seɪ ɪt dʒʌs kəz maɪ bɑɾəm əz ɔlɹɛɾi teɪkən ɑn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə sæɾəl."

"Did you not just hear me say I had decided not to have my head cut off? Tear sounds a safer place to me than Caemlyn, and suddenly that does not seem so bad. Besides, I like those girls." A knife appeared in his hand and was as suddenly gone again. "I'd not like anything to happen to them. But if you mean to reach Tear quickly, it's Aringill you want. A fast boat will have us there days sooner than horses, even if we rode them to death. And I don't say it just because my bottom has already taken on the shape of a saddle."

"ɑɹɪŋɡəl, ðɛn. əz lɔŋ əz ɪts fæst."

"Aringill, then. As long as it's fast."

"wɛl," ɡɪl sɛd, "aɪ səpoʊz ɪf jə ɑɹ livɪŋ, læd, aɪ hæd bɛɾɝ si əbaʊt ɡɛɾɪŋ jə ðət mil." hi pʊʃt bæk ɪz tʃɛɹ ən stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ.

"Well," Gill said, "I suppose if you are leaving, lad, I had better see about getting you that meal." He pushed back his chair and started for the door.

"hoʊl ðɪs fəɹ mi, mæstɝ ɡɪl," mæt sɛd, ən tɔst ɪm ðə wɑʃ-lɛðɝ pɝs.

"Hold this for me, Master Gill," Mat said, and tossed him the wash-leather purse.

"wʌts ðɪs, læd? kɔɪn?"

"What's this, lad? Coin?"

"steɪks. ɡeɪbɹəl dʌznt noʊ ɪt, bʌɾ i ən aɪ hæv ə weɪdʒɝ." ðə kæt dʒʌmp daʊn əz mæt pɪkt ʌp ðə wʊɾən daɪs kʌp ən spʌn ðə daɪs aʊɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl. faɪv sɪksɪz. "æn aɪ ɔlweɪz wɪn."

"Stakes. Gaebril doesn't know it, but he and I have a wager." The cat jumped down as Mat picked up the wooden dice cup and spun the dice out on the table. Five sixes. "And I always win."


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾieɪt


CHAPTER 48

fɑloʊɪŋ ðə kɹæft


Following the Craft

əz ðə dɑɹɾɝ wɑloʊd təwɔɹd ðə dɑks ə tiɹ, ɑn ðə wɛs bæŋk ə ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn, ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt si ɛniθɪŋ ə ði ɔnkʌmɪŋ sɪɾi. slʌmp hɛd daʊn ət ðə ɹeɪl, ʃi stɛɹd daʊn ət ðə wɔɾɝz ə ði ɛɹɪnɪn ɹoʊlɪŋ pæs ðə ʃɪps fæt hʌl, ən ðə fɹʌntmoʊst swip ɑn əɹ saɪɾ əz ɪt swʌŋ ɪndə hɝ vɪʒən ən bæk əɡɛn, kʌɾɪŋ waɪt fɝoʊz ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ. ɪt meɪɾ əɹ kwizi, bʌt ʃi nu ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ hɛd wəɾ oʊnli meɪk ðə sɪknəs wɝs. lʊkɪŋ ət ðə ʃɔɹ wəɾ oʊnli meɪk ðə sloʊ, kɔɹkskɹu moʊʃən ə ðə dɑɹɾɝ mɔɹ əpɛɹənt.

As the Darter wallowed toward the docks of Tear, on the west bank of the River Erinin, Egwene did not see anything of the oncoming city. Slumped head down at the rail, she stared down at the waters of the Erinin rolling past the ship's fat hull, and the frontmost sweep on her side as it swung into her vision and back again, cutting white furrows in the river. It made her queasy, but she knew raising her head would only make the sickness worse. Looking at the shore would only make the slow, corkscrew motion of the Darter more apparent.

ðə vɛsəl hæd muvd ɪn ðət twɪstɪŋ ɹoʊl ɛvɝ sɪns dʒʊɹin. ʃi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ haʊ ɪt hæd seɪl bɪfɔɹ ðɛn; ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf wɪʃɪŋ ðə dɑɹɾɝ hæd sʌŋk bɪfɔɹ ɹitʃɪŋ dʒʊɹin. ʃi wɪʃt ðeɪ hæd meɪd ðə kæptən pʊɾ ɪn əɾ ɑɹɪŋɡəl soʊ ðeɪ kəd faɪn ənʌðɝ ʃɪp. ʃi wɪʃt ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ ɡɔn nɪɹ ə ʃɪp. ʃi wɪʃt ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni θɪŋz, moʊst ə ðɛm dʒʌs tə teɪk əɹ maɪn ɔf wɛɹ ʃi wɑz.

The vessel had moved in that twisting roll ever since Jurene. She did not care how it had sailed before then; she found herself wishing the Darter had sunk before reaching Jurene. She wished they had made the captain put in at Aringill so they could find another ship. She wished they had never gone near a ship. She wished a great many things, most of them just to take her mind off where she was.

ðə twɪstɪŋ wɑz lɛs naʊ, ʌndɝ swips, ðən ɪt hæd bɪn ʌndɝ seɪl, bʌɾ ɪt hæd ɡɔn ɑn tu mɛni deɪz naʊ fəɹ ðə tʃeɪnʒ tə meɪk mʌtʃ dɪfɝəns tə hɝ. hɝ stʌmək sim tə bi slɑʃɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ laɪk mɪlk ɪn ə stoʊn dʒʌɡ. ʃi ɡʌlpt ən tʃɹaɪd tə fɝɡɛt ðəɾ ɪmədʒ.

The twisting was less now, under sweeps, than it had been under sail, but it had gone on too many days now for the change to make much difference to her. Her stomach seemed to be sloshing about inside her like milk in a stone jug. She gulped and tried to forget that image.

ðeɪ hæd nɑt dʌn mʌtʃ ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv plænɪŋ ɑn ðə dɑɹɾɝ, ʃi ən ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv. nɪneɪiv kəd sɛldəm ɡoʊ tɛn mɪnəts wɪθaʊt vɑməɾɪŋ, ən siɪŋ ðəɾ ɔlweɪz meɪɾ ɛɡwin luz wʌtɛvɝ fud ʃi hæd mænədʒ tə ɡɛt daʊn. ði ɪnkɹisɪŋ wɔɹmθ əz ðeɪ wɛn fɝðɝ daʊnɹɪvɝ dɪd nɑt hɛlp. nɪneɪiv wɑz bɪloʊ naʊ, noʊ daʊt wɪð ɪleɪn hoʊldɪŋ ə beɪsən fəɹ əɹ əɡɛn.

They had not done much in the way of planning on the Darter, she and Elayne and Nynaeve. Nynaeve could seldom go ten minutes without vomiting, and seeing that always made Egwene lose whatever food she had managed to get down. The increasing warmth as they went further downriver did not help. Nynaeve was below now, no doubt with Elayne holding a basin for her again.

oʊ, laɪt, noʊ! doʊn θɪŋk əbaʊt ðæt! ɡɹin filz. mɛdoʊz. laɪt, mɛdoʊz də nɑt hiv laɪk ðæt. hʌmɪŋbɝdz. noʊ, nɑt hʌmɪŋbɝdz! lɑɹks. lɑɹks sɪŋɪŋ.

Oh, Light, no! Don't think about that! Green fields. Meadows. Light, meadows do not heave like that. Hummingbirds. No, not hummingbirds! Larks. Larks singing.

"mɪstʃɹəs dʒɔslɪn? mɪstʃɹəs dʒɔslɪn!"

"Mistress Joslyn? Mistress Joslyn!"

ɪt tʊk əɹ ə moʊmən tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə neɪm ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən tə ɡɪv kæptən keɪnɪn, ən ðə kæptənz vɔɪs. ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd sloʊli ən fɪkst əɹ aɪz ɑn ɪz lɔŋ feɪs.

It took her a moment to recognize the name she had chosen to give Captain Canin, and the captain's voice. She raised her head slowly and fixed her eyes on his long face.

"wi ɑɹ dɑkɪŋ, mɪstʃɹəs dʒɔslɪn. juv kɛp seɪɪŋ haʊ iɡɝ jə wɝ tə bi əʃɔɹ. wɛl, wɝ ðɛɹ." hɪz vɔɪs dɪd nɑt haɪɾ ɪz iɡɝnəs tə bi ɹɪɾ ə hɪz θɹi pæsənʒɝz, tu ʌv hum dɪd lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən sɪk ʌp, əz i kɔld ɪt, ən moʊn ɔl naɪt.

"We are docking, Mistress Joslyn. You've kept saying how eager you were to be ashore. Well, we're there." His voice did not hide his eagerness to be rid of his three passengers, two of whom did little more than sick up, as he called it, and moan all night.

bɛɹfʊt, ʃɝtləs seɪlɝz wɝ tɔsɪŋ laɪnz tə mɛn ɑn ðə stoʊn dɑk ðət θɹʌst aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ; ðə dɑkmən sim tə bi wɛɹɪŋ lɔŋ lɛðɝ vɛsts ɪn pleɪs ə ʃɝts. ðə swips hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn dʒɹɔn ɪn, ɪksɛp fəɹ ə pɛɹ fɛndɪŋ ðə ʃɪp ɔf fɹəm kʌmɪŋ əɡɛns ðə dɑk tu hɑɹd. ðə flæt stoʊnz ə ðə dɑk wɝ wɛt; ði ɛɹ hæɾ ə fil ə ɹeɪn nɑt lɔŋ ɡɔn, ən ðət wɑz ə lɪɾəl suðɪŋ. ðə twɪstɪŋ moʊʃən hæd sist səm taɪm sɪns, ʃi ɹilaɪzd, bʌɾ əɹ stʌmək ɹɪmɛmbɝd. ðə sʌn wɑz fɔlɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə wɛst. ʃi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk ə sʌpɝ.

Barefoot, shirtless sailors were tossing lines to men on the stone dock that thrust out into the river; the dockmen seemed to be wearing long leather vests in place of shirts. The sweeps had already been drawn in, except for a pair fending the ship off from coming against the dock too hard. The flat stones of the dock were wet; the air had a feel of rain not long gone, and that was a little soothing. The twisting motion had ceased some time since, she realized, but her stomach remembered. The sun was falling toward the west. She tried not to think of supper.

"vɛɹi ɡʊd, kæptən keɪnɪn," ʃi sɛd wɪð ɔl ðə dɪɡnəɾi ʃi kəd sʌmən. hid nɑt saʊn laɪk ðəɾ ɪf aɪ wɝ wɛɹɪŋ maɪ ɹɪŋ, nɑɾ ivən ɪf aɪ wɝ sɪk ɑn ɪz buts. ʃi ʃʌɾɝəd ət ðə pɪktʃɝ ɪn əɹ maɪnd.

"Very good, Captain Canin," she said with all the dignity she could summon. He'd not sound like that if I were wearing my ring, not even if I were sick on his boots. She shuddered at the picture in her mind.

hɝ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ən ðə twɪstəd ɹɪŋ ə ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil hʌŋ ɑn ə lɛðɝ kɔɹɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ nɛk, naʊ. ðə stoʊn ɹɪŋ fɛl kul əɡɛnst əɹ skɪn - ɔlmoʊst ɪnʌf tə kaʊntɝæk ðə dæmp wɔɹmθ ə ði ɛɹ - bʌɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ðæt, ʃi hæd faʊn ðət ðə mɔɹ ʃi juz ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ðə mɔɹ ʃi wɑntəd tə tʌtʃ ɪt, wɪθaʊt paʊtʃ əɹ klɔθ bɪtwin ɪɾ ən hɝ.

Her Great Serpent ring and the twisted ring of the ter'angreal hung on a leather cord about her neck, now. The stone ring felt cool against her skin - almost enough to counteract the damp warmth of the air - but aside from that, she had found that the more she used the ter'angreal, the more she wanted to touch it, without pouch or cloth between it and her.

tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd stɪl ʃoʊɾ əɹ lɪɾəl ʌv ɪmiɾiət jus. səmtaɪmz ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɡlɪmpsɪz ə ɹænd, əɹ mæt, əɹ pɛɹɪn, ən mɔɹ ɪn əɹ oʊn dʒɹimz wɪθaʊt ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ʌv wɪtʃ ʃi kəd meɪk ɛni sɛns. ðə sintʃæn, hu ʃi ɹəfjuz tə θɪŋk əbaʊt. naɪtmɛɹz ʌv ə waɪt-kloʊk pʊɾɪŋ mæstɝ luhən ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə hjudʒ, tuθ tʃɹæp fəɹ beɪt. waɪ ʃəd pɛɹɪn əv ə fælkən ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ən wʌt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt əbaʊɾ ɪm tʃuzɪŋ bɪtwin ðəɾ æks i wɔɹ naʊ ən ə blæksmɪθs hæmɝ? wʌɾ ɪt min ðət mæt wɑz dɪsɪŋ wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ən waɪ dɪɾ i kip ʃaʊɾɪŋ, "aɪ æm kʌmɪŋ!" ən waɪ dɪd ʃi θɪŋk ɪn ðə dʒɹim ðəɾ i wɑz ʃaʊɾɪŋ ət hɝ? ən ɹænd. hi hæd bɪn snikɪŋ θɹu ʌɾɝ dɑɹknəs təwɔɹd kælændɝ, waɪl ɔl ɝaʊn ɪm sɪks mɛn ən faɪv wɪmən wɔkt, səm hʌntɪŋ ɪm ən səm ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ hɪm, səm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡaɪɾ ɪm təwɔɹd ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ kɹɪstəl sɔɹɾ ən səm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɑp ɪm fɹəm ɹitʃɪŋ ɪt, əpɪɹɪŋ nɑt tə noʊ wɛɹ i wɑz, əɹ oʊnli tə si hɪm ɪn flæʃɪz. wʌn ə ðə mɛn hæɾ aɪz ə fleɪm, ən i wɑntəd ɹænd dɛd wɪð ə dɛspɝeɪʃən ʃi kəd nɪɹli teɪst. ʃi θɔt ʃi nu hɪm. bælzəmən. bʌɾ u wɝ ði ʌðɝz? ɹænd ɪn ðət dʒɹaɪ, dʌsti tʃeɪmbɝ əɡɛn, wɪð ðoʊz smɔl kɹitʃɝz sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪndə hɪz skɪn. ɹænd kənfɹʌntɪŋ ə hɔɹɾ ə sintʃæn. ɹænd kənfɹʌntɪŋ hɝ, ən ðə wɪmən wɪð hɝ, ən wʌn ə ðɛm wɑz ə sintʃæn. ɪt wɑz ɔl tu kənfjuzɪŋ. ʃi hæd tə stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz ən pʊɾ əɹ maɪn tə wʌt wɑz ɹaɪɾ əhɛɾ ə hɝ. wʌɾ ɪz ðə blæk ədʒɑ ʌp tə? waɪ doʊn aɪ dʒɹim sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛm? laɪt, waɪ kæn aɪ lɝn tə meɪk ɪt də wʌɾ aɪ wɑnt?

Tel'aran'rhiod still showed her little of immediate use. Sometimes there had been glimpses of Rand, or Mat, or Perrin, and more in her own dreams without the ter'angreal, but nothing of which she could make any sense. The Seanchan, who she refused to think about. Nightmares of a White-cloak putting Master Luhhan in the middle of a huge, toothed trap for bait. Why should Perrin have a falcon on his shoulder, and what was important about him choosing between that axe he wore now and a blacksmith's hammer? What did it mean that Mat was dicing with the Dark One, and why did he keep shouting, "I am coming!" and why did she think in the dream that he was shouting at her? And Rand. He had been sneaking through utter darkness toward Callandor, while all around him six men and five women walked, some hunting him and some ignoring him, some trying to guide him toward the shining crystal sword and some trying to stop him from reaching it, appearing not to know where he was, or only to see him in flashes. One of the men had eyes of flame, and he wanted Rand dead with a desperation she could nearly taste. She thought she knew him. Ba'alzamon. But who were the others? Rand in that dry, dusty chamber again, with those small creatures settling into his skin. Rand confronting a horde of Seanchan. Rand confronting her, and the women with her, and one of them was a Seanchan. It was all too confusing. She had to stop thinking about Rand and the others and put her mind to what was right ahead of her. What is the Black Ajah up to? Why don't I dream something about them? Light, why can't I learn to make it do what I want?

"hæv ðə hɔɹsəz pʊɾ əʃɔɹ, kæptən," ʃi toʊl keɪnɪn. "aɪ wɪl tɛl mɪstʃɹəs mɛɹiɪm ən mɪstʃɹəs kɛɹɪlə." ðət wɑz nɪneɪiv - mɛɹiɪm - ən ɪleɪn - kɛɹɪlə.

"Have the horses put ashore, Captain," she told Canin. "I will tell Mistress Maryim and Mistress Caryla." That was Nynaeve - Maryim - and Elayne - Caryla.

"aɪ hæv sɛn ə mæn tə tɛl ðɛm, mɪstʃɹəs dʒɔslɪn. ən jəɹ ænəməlz wɪl bi ɑn ðə dɑk əz sun əz maɪ mɛn kən ɹɪɡ ə bum."

"I have sent a man to tell them, Mistress Joslyn. And your animals will be on the dock as soon as my men can rig a boom."

hi saʊndəd vɛɹi pliz tə bi ɹɪɾ ə ðɛm. ʃi θɔɾ əbaʊt tɛlɪŋ ɪm nɑt tə hɝi, bʌt ɹɪdʒɛktɪɾ ɪɾ ɪmiɾiətli. ðə dɑɹɾɝz kɔɹkskɹuɪŋ maɪɾ əv stɑpt, bʌt ʃi wɑntəd dʒɹaɪ læn ʌndɝ əɹ fiɾ əɡɛn. naʊ. stɪl, ʃi stɑp tə pæt mɪsts noʊz ən lɛt ðə ɡɹeɪ mɛɹ nʌzəl əɹ pɑm, tə lɛt keɪnɪn si ʃi wɑz ɪn noʊ ɡɹeɪt ɹʌʃ.

He sounded very pleased to be rid of them. She thought about telling him not to hurry, but rejected it immediately. The Darter's corkscrewing might have stopped, but she wanted dry land under her feet again. Now. Still, she stopped to pat Mist's nose and let the gray mare nuzzle her palm, to let Canin see she was in no great rush.

nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn əpɪɹɾ ət ðə læɾɝ fɹəm ðə kæbənz, leɪɾən wɪð ðɛɹ bʌndəlz ən sæɾəlbæɡz, ən ɪleɪn ɔlmoʊst əz leɪɾən wɪð nɪneɪiv. wən nɪneɪiv sɔ ɛɡwin wɑtʃɪŋ, ʃi pʊʃt hɝsɛlf əweɪ fɹəm ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ən wɔkt əneɪɾɪd ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ tə wɛɹ mɛn wɝ sɛɾɪŋ ə nɛɹoʊ ɡæŋplæŋk tə ðə dɑk. tu kɹumɪn keɪm tə fæsən ə waɪd kænvəs slɪŋ ʌndɝ mɪsts bɛli, ən ɛɡwin hɝid bɪloʊ fəɹ əɹ oʊn θɪŋz. wən ʃi keɪm bæk ʌp, hɝ mɛɹ wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn ðə dɑk ən ɪleɪnz ɹoʊn dæŋɡəld ɪn ðə kænvəs slɪŋ hæfweɪ ðɛɹ.

Nynaeve and Elayne appeared at the ladder from the cabins, laden with their bundles and saddlebags, and Elayne almost as laden with Nynaeve. When Nynaeve saw Egwene watching, she pushed herself away from the Daughter-Heir and walked unaided the rest of the way to where men were setting a narrow gangplank to the dock. Two crewmen came to fasten a wide canvas sling under Mist's belly, and Egwene hurried below for her own things. When she came back up, her mare was already on the dock and Elayne's roan dangled in the canvas sling halfway there.

fəɹ ə moʊmən æftɝ əɹ fit wɝ ɑn ðə dɑk, ɔl ʃi fɛlt wɑz ɹɪlif. ðɪs wəd nɑt pɪtʃ ən ɹoʊl. ðən ʃi bɪɡæn tə lʊk ət ðɪs sɪɾi huz ɹitʃɪŋ hæd kɑzd əm sətʃ peɪnz.

For a moment after her feet were on the dock, all she felt was relief. This would not pitch and roll. Then she began to look at this city whose reaching had caused them such pains.

stoʊn wɛɹhaʊzɪz bæk ðə lɔŋ dɑks ðɛmsɛlvz, ən ðəɹ sim tə bi ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni ʃɪps, lɑɹdʒ ən smɔl, əlɔŋsaɪd ðə dɑks əɹ æŋkɝɾ ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ. heɪstəli ʃi əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət ðə ʃɪps. tiɹ hæd bɪn bɪlt ɑn flæt lænd, wɪð bɛɹli ə bʌmp. daʊn mʌɾi dɝt stʃɹits bɪtwin ðə wɛɹhaʊzɪz, ʃi kəd si haʊzɪz ən ɪnz ən tævɝnz ʌv wʊɾ ən stoʊn. ðɛɹ ɹufs ə sleɪɾ əɹ taɪl hæɾ ɑdli ʃɑɹp kɔɹnɝz, ən səm ɹoʊz tə ə pɔɪnt. bɪɑn ðiz, ʃi kəd meɪk aʊɾ ə haɪ wɔl ə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ stoʊn, ən bɪhaɪn ɪt ðə tɑps ə taʊɝz wɪð bælkəniz haɪ ɝaʊn əm ən waɪt-doʊm pæləsəz. ðə doʊmz hæɾ ə skwɛɹd ʃeɪp tə ðɛm, ən ðə taʊɝ tɑps lʊk pɔɪntəd, laɪk səm ə ðə ɹufs aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔl. ɔl ɪn ɔl, tiɹ wɑz izəli əz bɪɡ əz keɪɛmlɪn əɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ɪf nɑt soʊ bjuɾəfəl əz iðɝ, ɪt wɑz stɪl wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾiz. jɛt ʃi faʊn ɪt hɑɹd tə lʊk əɾ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ.

Stone warehouses backed the long docks themselves, and there seemed to be a great many ships, large and small, alongside the docks or anchored in the river. Hastily she avoided looking at the ships. Tear had been built on flat land, with barely a bump. Down muddy dirt streets between the warehouses, she could see houses and inns and taverns of wood and stone. Their roofs of slate or tile had oddly sharp corners, and some rose to a point. Beyond these, she could make out a high wall of dark gray stone, and behind it the tops of towers with balconies high around them and white-domed palaces. The domes had a squared shape to them, and the tower tops looked pointed, like some of the roofs outside the wall. All in all, Tear was easily as big as Caemlyn or Tar Valon, and if not so beautiful as either, it was still one of the great cities. Yet she found it hard to look at anything but the Stone of Tear.

ʃi hæd hɝɾ ʌv ɪɾ ɪn stɔɹiz, hɝd ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst fɔɹtʃɹəs ɪn ðə wɝld ən ði oʊldəst, ðə fɝs bɪlt æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, jɛt nʌθɪŋ hæd pɹipɛɹɾ əɹ fəɹ ðɪs saɪt. ət fɝst ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ə hjudʒ, ɡɹeɪ stoʊn hɪl əɹ ə smɔl, bæɹən maʊntən kʌvɝɪŋ hʌnʒɹədz ə haɪdz, ɪts lɛŋθ stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ fɹəm ði ɛɹɪnɪn wɛs θɹu ðə wɔl ən ɪndə ðə sɪɾi. ivən æftɝ ʃi sɔ ðə hjudʒ bænɝ flæpɪŋ fɹəm ɪts ɡɹeɪɾəst haɪt - θɹi waɪt kɹɛsən munz slæntɪŋ əkɹɔs ə fil hæf ɹɛd, hæf ɡoʊld; ə bænɝ weɪvɪŋ ət lis θɹi hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əbʌv ðə ɹɪvɝ, jɛt lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə bi klɪɹli sin ət ðət haɪt - ivən æftɝ ʃi meɪɾ aʊt bæɾəlmənts ən taʊɝz, ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl tə bɪliv ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ hæd bɪn bɪlt ɹæðɝ ðən kɑɹvd aʊɾ ʌv ə maʊntən ɔlɹɛɾi ðɛɹ.

She had heard of it in stories, heard that it was the greatest fortress in the world and the oldest, the first built after the Breaking of the World, yet nothing had prepared her for this sight. At first she thought it was a huge, gray stone hill or a small, barren mountain covering hundreds of hides, its length stretching from the Erinin west through the wall and into the city. Even after she saw the huge banner flapping from its greatest height - three white crescent moons slanting across a field half red, half gold; a banner waving at least three hundred paces above the river, yet large enough to be clearly seen at that height - even after she made out battlements and towers, it was difficult to believe the Stone of Tear had been built rather than carved out of a mountain already there.

"meɪd wɪð ðə paʊɝ," ɪleɪn mɝmɝd. ʃi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə stoʊn, tu. "floʊz ə ɝθ woʊvən tə dʒɹɔ stoʊn fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɛɹ tə bɹɪŋ ɪt fɹəm ɛvɹi kɔɹnɝ ə ðə wɝld, ən ɝθ ən faɪɝ tə meɪk ɪɾ ɔl ɪn wʌn pis, wɪθaʊt sim əɹ dʒɔɪn əɹ mɔɹɾɝ. əɾəən sədaɪ sɛz ðə taʊɝ kəd nɑt də ɪt, tədeɪ. stʃɹeɪnʒ, ɡɪvən haʊ ðə haɪ lɔɹdz fil kənsɝnɪŋ ðə paʊɝ naʊ."

"Made with the Power," Elayne murmured. She was staring at the Stone, too. "Flows of Earth woven to draw stone from the ground, Air to bring it from every corner of the world, and Earth and Fire to make it all in one piece, without seam or joint or mortar. Atuan Sedai says the Tower could not do it, today. Strange, given how the High Lords feel concerning the Power now."

"aɪ θɪŋk," nɪneɪiv sɛd sɔfli, aɪɪŋ ðə dɑkmən muvɪŋ ɝaʊn ðɛm, "ðæt ɡɪvən ðət vɛɹi θɪŋ, wi ʃəd nɑt mɛnʃən sɝɾən ʌðɝ θɪŋz əlaʊd." ɪleɪn əpɪɹd tɔɹn bɪtwin ɪndɪɡneɪʃən - ʃi hæd spoʊkən vɛɹi sɔfli - ən əɡɹimənt; ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ əɡɹid wɪð nɪneɪiv tu ɔfən ən tu ɹɛɾəli tə suɾ ɛɡwin.

"I think," Nynaeve said softly, eyeing the dockmen moving around them, "that given that very thing, we should not mention certain other things aloud." Elayne appeared torn between indignation - she had spoken very softly - and agreement; the Daughter-Heir agreed with Nynaeve too often and too readily to suit Egwene.

oʊnli wən nɪneɪiv ɪz ɹaɪt, ʃi ədmɪɾəd tə hɝsɛlf ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli. ə wʊmən u wɔɹ ðə ɹɪŋ, əɹ wɑz ivən əsoʊsieɪɾəd wɪð tɑɹ vəlɑn, wəd bi wɑtʃt hɪɹ. ðə bɛɹfʊt, lɛðɝ-vɛstəd dɑkmən wɝ nɑt peɪɪŋ ðə θɹi ʌv əm ɛni maɪn əz ðeɪ hɝiɾ əbaʊt, kæɹiɪŋ beɪlz əɹ kɹeɪts ɑn ðɛɹ bæks əz ɔfən əz ɑn bæɹoʊz. ə stʃɹɔŋ oʊɾɝ ə fɪʃ hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ; ðə nɛks θɹi dɑks hæd dʌzənz ə smɔl fɪʃɪŋ boʊts klʌstɝɾ ɝaʊn ðɛm, dʒʌs laɪk ðoʊz ɪn ðə dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪn ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi. ʃɝtləs mɛn ən bɛɹfʊt wɪmən wɝ hɔɪstɪŋ bæskəts ə fɪʃ aʊɾ ə ðə boʊts, maʊnz ə sɪlvɝ ən bɹɑnz ən ɡɹin, ən kʌlɝz ʃi hæd nɛvɝ səspɛktəd fɪʃ maɪt bi, sətʃ əz bɹaɪt ɹɛd, ən dip blu, ən bɹɪljən jɛloʊ, səm wɪð stʃɹaɪps əɹ splətʃəz ʌv waɪɾ ən ʌðɝ kʌlɝz.

Only when Nynaeve is right, she admitted to herself grudgingly. A woman who wore the ring, or was even associated with Tar Valon, would be watched here. The barefoot, leather-vested dockmen were not paying the three of them any mind as they hurried about, carrying bales or crates on their backs as often as on barrows. A strong odor of fish hung in the air; the next three docks had dozens of small fishing boats clustered around them, just like those in the drawing in the Amyrlin's study. Shirtless men and barefoot women were hoisting baskets of fish out of the boats, mounds of silver and bronze and green, and colors she had never suspected fish might be, such as bright red, and deep blue, and brilliant yellow, some with stripes or splotches of white and other colors.

ʃi loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs fəɹ ɪleɪnz ɪɹ əloʊn. "ʃi ɪz ɹaɪt, kɛɹɪlə. ɹɪmɛmbɝ waɪ jə ɑɹ kɛɹɪlə." ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnt nɪneɪiv tə hɪɹ sətʃ ædmɪʃənz. hɝ feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ wən ʃi hɝd, bʌɾ ɛɡwin kəd fil sæɾəsfækʃən ɹeɪɾieɪtɪŋ fɹəm əɹ laɪk hit fɹəm ə kʊk stoʊv.

She lowered her voice for Elayne's ear alone. "She is right, Caryla. Remember why you are Caryla." She did not want Nynaeve to hear such admissions. Her face did not change when she heard, but Egwene could feel satisfaction radiating from her like heat from a cook stove.

nɪneɪivz blæk stæljən wɑz dʒʌs biɪŋ loʊɝd tə ðə dɑk; seɪlɝz hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi kæɹid ðɛɹ tæk ɔf ðə ʃɪp ən sɪmpli dʌmpt ɪɾ ɑn ðə wɛt stoʊnz ə ðə dɑk. nɪneɪiv ɡlænst ət ðə hɔɹsəz ən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ - ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz tə tɛl əm tə sæɾəl ðɛɹ ænəməlz - ðən kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn, taɪt-lɪpt, əz ɪf ɪt hæd kɑst əɹ ən ɛfɝt. ʃi ɡeɪv əɹ bɹeɪd wʌn hɑɹd tʌɡ. bɪfɔɹ ðə slɪŋ wɑz wɛl aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ, nɪneɪiv tɔs ðə blu-stʃɹaɪp sæɾəl blæŋkəɾ əkɹɔs ðə blæks bæk ən hɔɪstəɾ əɹ haɪ-kæntəl sæɾəl ətɑp ɪt. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən lʊk ət ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən.

Nynaeve's black stallion was just being lowered to the dock; sailors had already carried their tack off the ship and simply dumped it on the wet stones of the dock. Nynaeve glanced at the horses and opened her mouth - Egwene was sure it was to tell them to saddle their animals - then closed it again, tight-lipped, as if it had cost her an effort. She gave her braid one hard tug. Before the sling was well out of the way, Nynaeve tossed the blue-striped saddle blanket across the black's back and hoisted her high-cantled saddle atop it. She did not even look at the other two women.

ɛɡwin wɑz nɑɾ æŋkʃəs tə ɹaɪɾ ət ðət moʊmənt - ðə moʊʃən ʌv ə hɔɹs maɪt bi tu kloʊz tə ðə moʊʃən ə ðə dɑɹɾɝ fəɹ əɹ stʌmək - bʌɾ ənʌðɝ lʊk ət ðoʊz mʌɾi stʃɹits kənvɪns hɝ. hɝ ʃuz wɝ stɝɾi, bʌt ʃi wəd nɑɾ ɛndʒɔɪ hævɪŋ tə klin mʌɾ ɔf ðɛm, əɹ hævɪŋ tə hoʊld əɹ skɝts ʌp əz ʃi wɔkt, iðɝ. ʃi sæɾəld mɪs kwɪkli ən klaɪmd ɑntu hɝ bæk, sɛɾəlɪŋ əɹ skɝts, bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd dɪsaɪd ðə mʌd maɪt nɑt bi soʊ bæɾ æftɝ ɔl. ə lɪɾəl niɾəlwɝk ɑn ðə dɑɹɾɝ - ɪleɪn hæd dʌn ɪɾ ɔl, ðɪs taɪm; ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ soʊɾ ə vɛɹi faɪn stɪtʃ - hæd dɪvaɪɾəd ɔl ðɛɹ dʒɹɛsəz naɪsli fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ əstʃɹaɪd.

Egwene was not anxious to ride at that moment - the motion of a horse might be too close to the motion of the Darter for her stomach - but another look at those muddy streets convinced her. Her shoes were sturdy, but she would not enjoy having to clean mud off them, or having to hold her skirts up as she walked, either. She saddled Mist quickly and climbed onto her back, settling her skirts, before she could decide the mud might not be so bad after all. A little needlework on the Darter - Elayne had done it all, this time; the Daughter-Heir sewed a very fine stitch - had divided all their dresses nicely for riding astride.

nɪneɪivz feɪs peɪl fəɹ ə moʊmənt wən ʃi swʌŋ ɪndə hɝ sæɾəl ən ðə stæljən dɪsaɪɾɪd tə fɹɪsk. ʃi kɛpt ə taɪt-maʊðd ɡɹɪp ɑn hɝsɛlf ən ə fɝm hæn ɑn əɹ ɹeɪnz ən sun hæɾ ɪm ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl. baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ hæd ɹɪɾən sloʊli pæs ðə wɛɹhaʊzɪz, ʃi kəd spik. "wi nid tə loʊkeɪt liɑnʒɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz wɪθaʊɾ əm lɝnɪŋ wəɹ æskɪŋ æftɝ ðɛm. ðeɪ ʃʊɹli noʊ wəɹ kʌmɪŋ - ðət sʌmwʌn ɪz, ət list - bʌɾ aɪ wəd laɪk əm nɑt tə noʊ wəɹ hɪɹ əntɪl ɪts tu leɪt fəɹ ðɛm." ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "aɪ kənfɛs aɪ hæv nɑt θɔɾ ʌv ɛni weɪ tə də ðɪs. jɛt. də iðɝ ə juv ɛni sədʒɛstʃənz?"

Nynaeve's face paled for a moment when she swung into her saddle and the stallion decided to frisk. She kept a tight-mouthed grip on herself and a firm hand on her reins and soon had him under control. By the time they had ridden slowly past the warehouses, she could speak. "We need to locate Liandrin and the others without them learning we are asking after them. They surely know we are coming - that someone is, at least - but I would like them not to know we are here until it is too late for them." She drew a deep breath. "I confess I have not thought of any way to do this. Yet. Do either of you have any suggestions?"

"ə θif-teɪkɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd wɪθaʊt hɛzəteɪʃən. nɪneɪiv fɹaʊn ət hɝ.

"A thief-taker," Elayne said without hesitation. Nynaeve frowned at her.

"ju min laɪk hʊɹɪn?" ɛɡwin sɛd. "bʌt hʊɹɪn wɑz ɪn ðə sɝvəs ə hɪz kɪŋ. wʊdn ɛni θif-teɪkɝ hɪɹ sɝv ðə haɪ lɔɹdz?"

"You mean like Hurin?" Egwene said. "But Hurin was in the service of his king. Wouldn't any thief-taker here serve the High Lords?"

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən ɛɡwin ɛnvid ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ əɹ stʌmək. "jɛs, ðeɪ wʊd. bʌt θif-teɪkɝz ɑɹ nɑt laɪk ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz, əɹ ðə tɛɹən dɪfɛndɝz ə ðə stoʊn. ðeɪ sɝv ðə ɹulɝ, bʌt pipəl u hæv bɪn ɹɑb səmtaɪmz peɪ ðɛm tə ɹɪtʃɹiv wʌt wɑz stoʊlən. ən ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ səmtaɪmz teɪk mʌni tə faɪn pipəl. ət list, ðeɪ də ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. aɪ kænɑt θɪŋk ɪts dɪfɹən hɪɹ ɪn tiɹ."

Elayne nodded, and for a moment Egwene envied the Daughter-Heir her stomach. "Yes, they would. But thief-takers are not like the Queen's Guards, or the Tairen Defenders of the Stone. They serve the ruler, but people who have been robbed sometimes pay them to retrieve what was stolen. And they also sometimes take money to find people. At least, they do in Caemlyn. I cannot think it is different here in Tear."

"ðɛn wi teɪk ɹumz əɾ ən ɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd, "æn æsk ði ɪnkipɝ tə faɪn əs ə θif-teɪkɝ."

"Then we take rooms at an inn," Egwene said, "and ask the innkeeper to find us a thief-taker."

"nɑɾ ən ɪn," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ əz fɝmli əz ʃi ɡaɪɾəd ðə stæljən; ʃi nɛvɝ sim tə lɛt ði ænəməl ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ kəntʃɹoʊl. æftɝ ə moʊmənt ʃi mɑɾɝeɪtɪd əɹ toʊn ə lɪɾəl. "liɑnʒɹɪn, ət list, noʊz ʌs, ən wɪv tə əsum ði ʌðɝz du, tu. ðəl ʃʊɹli bi wɑtʃɪŋ ði ɪnz fəɹ huɛvɝ fɑloʊd ðə tʃɹeɪl ðeɪ spɹɪŋkəl bɪhaɪn ðɛm. aɪ min tə spɹɪŋ ðɛɹ tʃɹæp ɪn ðɛɹ feɪsəz, bʌt nɑt wɪð əs ɪnsaɪd. wɪl nɑt steɪ əɾ ən ɪn."

"Not an inn," Nynaeve said as firmly as she guided the stallion; she never seemed to let the animal get out of her control. After a moment she moderated her tone a little. "Liandrin, at least, knows us, and we have to assume the others do, too. They will surely be watching the inns for whoever followed the trail they sprinkled behind them. I mean to spring their trap in their faces, but not with us inside. We'll not stay at an inn."

ɛɡwin ɹəfjuz tə ɡɪv əɹ ðə sæɾəsfækʃən ʌv æskɪŋ.

Egwene refused to give her the satisfaction of asking.

"wɛɹ ðɛn?" ɪleɪnz bɹaʊ fɝoʊd. "ɪf aɪ meɪd maɪsɛlf noʊn - ən kəd meɪk ɛniwʌn bɪliv ɪt, ɪn ðiz kloʊðz ən wɪð noʊ ɛskɔɹt - wi wəd bi wɛlkəm baɪ moʊst ə ðə noʊbəl haʊsəz, ən vɛɹi laɪkli ɪn ðə stoʊn ɪtsɛlf - ðəɹ ɑɹ ɡʊd ɹileɪʃənz bɪtwin keɪɛmlɪn ən tiɹ - bʌt ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ kipɪŋ ɪt kwaɪət. ði ɪntaɪɝ sɪɾi wəd noʊ bɪfɔɹ naɪtfɔl. aɪ kænɑt θɪŋk ʌv ɛniwɛɹ ɛls ɪksɛpt ən ɪn, nɪneɪiv. ənlɛs jə min tə ɡoʊ aʊt tə ə fɑɹm ɪn ðə kʌntʃɹi, bʌt wɪl nɛvɝ faɪn əm fɹəm ðə kʌntʃɹi."

"Where then?" Elayne's brow furrowed. "If I made myself known - and could make anyone believe it, in these clothes and with no escort - we would be welcomed by most of the noble Houses, and very likely in the Stone itself - there are good relations between Caemlyn and Tear - but there would be no keeping it quiet. The entire city would know before nightfall. I cannot think of anywhere else except an inn, Nynaeve. Unless you mean to go out to a farm in the country, but we will never find them from the country."

nɪneɪiv ɡlænst əɾ ɛɡwin. "aɪ wɪl noʊ wən aɪ si ɪt. lemi lʊk."

Nynaeve glanced at Egwene. "I will know when I see it. Let me look."

ɪleɪnz fɹaʊn swɛp fɹəm nɪneɪiv tə ɛɡwin ən bæk əɡɛn. " 'du nɑt kʌɾ ɔf jəɹ ɪɹz kəz jə də nɑt laɪk jəɹ ɪɹɪŋz,' " ʃi mʌɾɝd.

Elayne's frown swept from Nynaeve to Egwene and back again. " 'Do not cut off your ears because you do not like your earrings,' " she muttered.

ɛɡwin pʊɾ əɹ ətɛnʃən fɝmli ɑn ðə stʃɹit ðeɪ wɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ. əl bi bɝn ɪf əl lɛɾ əɹ θɪŋk aɪm ivən wʌndɝɪŋ!

Egwene put her attention firmly on the street they were riding along. I will be burned if I'll let her think I am even wondering!

ðəɹ wɝ nɑɾ ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni pipəl aʊt, nɑt kəmpɛɹd tə ðə stʃɹits ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. pɝhæps ðə θɪk mʌɾ ɪn ðə stʃɹit dɪskɝədʒ ðɛm. kɑɹts ən wæɡənz lɝtʃt pæst, moʊs pʊl baɪ ɑksən wɪð waɪd hɔɹnz, ðə kɑɹɾɝ əɹ wæɡənɪɹ wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪd wɪð ə lɔŋ ɡoʊɾ ə səm peɪl, ɹɪdʒd wʊd. noʊ kæɹɪdʒɪz əɹ sɪdæn tʃɛɹz juz ðiz stʃɹits. ði oʊɾɝ ə fɪʃ hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ hɪɹ, tu, ən noʊ fju ʌv ðə mɛn u hɝid pæs kæɹid hjudʒ bæskəts fʊl ə fɪʃ ɑn ðɛɹ bæks. ðə ʃɑps dɪd nɑt lʊk pɹɑspɝəs; nʌn dɪspleɪd wɛɹz aʊtsaɪd, ən ɛɡwin sɛldəm sɔ ɛniwʌn ɡoʊ ɪn. ðə ʃɑps hæd saɪnz - ðə teɪlɝz niɾəl ən boʊlt ə klɔθ, ðə kʌtlɝz naɪf ən sɪzɝz, ðə wivɝz lum, ən ðə laɪk - bʌt ðə peɪn ɑn moʊst ə ðɛm wɑz pilɪŋ. ðə fju ɪnz hæd saɪnz ɪn əz bæɾ ə steɪt, ən lʊk noʊ bɪziɝ. ðə smɔl haʊsəz kɹaʊɾəd bɪtwin ɪnz ən ʃɑps ɔfən hæd taɪlz əɹ sleɪts mɪsɪŋ fɹəm ðɛɹ ɹufs. ðɪs pɑɹɾ ə tiɹ, ət list, wɑz pʊɹ. ən fɹəm wʌt ʃi sɔ ɑn ðə feɪsəz, fju ʌv ðə pipəl hɪɹ kɛɹd tə tʃɹaɪ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ðeɪ wɝ muvɪŋ, wɝkɪŋ, bʌt moʊst ə ðɛm hæd ɡɪvən ʌp. fju əz mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst ət θɹi wɪmən ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɛɹ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls wɔkt.

There were not a great many people out, not compared to the streets of Tar Valon. Perhaps the thick mud in the street discouraged them. Carts and wagons lurched past, most pulled by oxen with wide horns, the carter or wagoneer walking alongside with a long goad of some pale, ridged wood. No carriages or sedan chairs used these streets. The odor of fish hung in the air here, too, and no few of the men who hurried past carried huge baskets full of fish on their backs. The shops did not look prosperous; none displayed wares outside, and Egwene seldom saw anyone go in. The shops had signs - the tailor's needle and bolt of cloth, the cutler's knife and scissors, the weaver's loom, and the like - but the paint on most of them was peeling. The few inns had signs in as bad a state, and looked no busier. The small houses crowded between inns and shops often had tiles or slates missing from their roofs. This part of Tear, at least, was poor. And from what she saw on the faces, few of the people here cared to try any longer. They were moving, working, but most of them had given up. Few as much as glanced at three women riding where everyone else walked.

ðə mɛn wɔɹ bæɡi bɹitʃɪz, juʒəwəli taɪɾ ət ði æŋkəl. oʊnli ə hændfʊl wɔɹ koʊts, lɔŋ, dɑɹk ɡɑɹməns ðət fɪɾ ɑɹmz ən tʃɛs taɪtli, ðən bɪkeɪm lusɝ bɪloʊ ðə weɪst. ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ mɛn ɪn loʊ ʃuz ðən ɪn buts, bʌt moʊst wɛn bɛɹfʊɾ ɪn ðə mʌd. ə ɡʊd mɛni wɔɹ noʊ koʊɾ əɹ ʃɝɾ əɾ ɔl, ən hæd ðɛɹ bɹitʃɪz hɛld ʌp baɪ ə bɹɔd sæʃ, səmtaɪmz kʌlɝɾ ən ɔfən dɝɾi. səm hæd waɪd, kɑnɪkəl stʃɹɔ hæts ɑn ðɛɹ hɛdz, ən ə fju, klɔθ kæps ðət sæɡd daʊn wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə feɪs. ðə wɪmənz dʒɹɛsəz hæd haɪ nɛks, ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ðɛɹ tʃɪnz, ən hɛmz ðət stɑpt ət ði æŋkəl. mɛni hæd ʃɔɹɾ eɪpɹənz ɪn peɪl kʌlɝz, səmtaɪmz tu əɹ θɹi, itʃ smɔlɝ ðən ðə wʌn bɪniθ ɪt, ən moʊst wɔɹ ðə seɪm stʃɹɔ hæts əz ðə mɛn, bʌt daɪd tə kɑmpləmən ði eɪpɹənz.

The men wore baggy breeches, usually tied at the ankle. Only a handful wore coats, long, dark garments that fit arms and chest tightly, then became looser below the waist. There were more men in low shoes than in boots, but most went barefoot in the mud. A good many wore no coat or shirt at all, and had their breeches held up by a broad sash, sometimes colored and often dirty. Some had wide, conical straw hats on their heads, and a few, cloth caps that sagged down one side of the face. The women's dresses had high necks, right up to their chins, and hems that stopped at the ankle. Many had short aprons in pale colors, sometimes two or three, each smaller than the one beneath it, and most wore the same straw hats as the men, but dyed to complement the aprons.

ɪt wɑz ɑn ə wʊmən ðət ʃi fɝst sɔ haʊ ðoʊz u wɔɹ ʃuz dɛlt wɪð ðə mʌd. ðə wʊmən hæd smɔl wʊɾən plætfɔɹmz taɪd tə ðə soʊlz ə hɝ ʃuz, lɪftɪŋ əm tu hænz aʊɾ ə ðə mʌd; ʃi wɔkt əlɔŋ əz ɪf əɹ fit wɝ plæntəd fɝmli ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ɛɡwin sɔ ʌðɝz wɛɹɪŋ ðə plætfɔɹmz æftɝ ðæt, mɛn əz wɛl əz wɪmən. səm ə ðə wɪmən wɛn bɛɹfʊt, bʌt nɑɾ əz mɛni əz ðə mɛn.

It was on a woman that she first saw how those who wore shoes dealt with the mud. The woman had small wooden platforms tied to the soles of her shoes, lifting them two hands out of the mud; she walked along as if her feet were planted firmly on the ground. Egwene saw others wearing the platforms after that, men as well as women. Some of the women went barefoot, but not as many as the men.

ʃi wɑz wʌndɝɪŋ wɪtʃ ʃɑp maɪt sɛl ðoʊz plætfɔɹmz, wən nɪneɪiv sʌɾənli tɝn əɹ blæk daʊn ən æliweɪ bɪtwin ə lɔŋ, nɛɹoʊ tu-stɔɹi haʊs ən ə stoʊn-wɔl pɑɾɝz ʃɑp. ɛɡwin ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz wɪð ɪleɪn - ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʃɹʌɡd - ən ðən ðeɪ fɑloʊd. ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛɹ nɪneɪiv wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ əɹ waɪ - ən ʃi mɛn tə hæv wɝdz wɪð əɹ əbaʊɾ ɪt - bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt min tə bɪkʌm sɛpɝeɪɾəd, iðɝ.

She was wondering which shop might sell those platforms, when Nynaeve suddenly turned her black down an alleyway between a long, narrow two-story house and a stone-walled potter's shop. Egwene exchanged glances with Elayne - the Daughter-Heir shrugged - and then they followed. Egwene did not know where Nynaeve was going or why - and she meant to have words with her about it - but she did not mean to become separated, either.

ði æli sʌɾənli lɛɾ ɪndə ə smɔl jɑɹd bɪhaɪn ðə haʊs, fɛnst ɪn baɪ ðə bɪldɪŋz ɝaʊn ɪt. nɪneɪiv hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən taɪɾ əɹ ɹeɪnz tə ə fɪɡ tʃɹi, wɛɹ ðə stæljən kəd nɑt ɹitʃ ðə ɡɹin θɪŋz spɹaʊɾɪŋ ɪn ə vɛdʒtəbəl pætʃ ðət tʊk ʌp hæf ðə jɑɹd. ə laɪn ə stoʊnz hæd bɪn leɪd tə meɪk ə pæθ tə ðə bæk dɔɹ. nɪneɪiv stʃɹoʊd tə ðə dɔɹ ən nɑkt.

The alley suddenly let into a small yard behind the house, fenced in by the buildings around it. Nynaeve had already dismounted and tied her reins to a fig tree, where the stallion could not reach the green things sprouting in a vegetable patch that took up half the yard. A line of stones had been laid to make a path to the back door. Nynaeve strode to the door and knocked.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" ɛɡwin dɪmændəɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf. "waɪ ɑɹ wi stɑpɪŋ hɪɹ?"

"What is it?" Egwene demanded in spite of herself. "Why are we stopping here?"

"dɪd jə nɑt si ði ɝbz ɪn ðə fɹʌnt wɪndoʊz?" nɪneɪiv nɑkt əɡɛn.

"Did you not see the herbs in the front windows?" Nynaeve knocked again.

"ɝbz?" ɪleɪn sɛd.

"Herbs?" Elayne said.

"eɪ wɪzdəm," ɛɡwin toʊld əɹ əz ʃi ɡɑt daʊn fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl ən taɪd mɪst əlɔŋsaɪd ðə blæk. ɡeɪɾɪn ɪz noʊ ɡʊd neɪm fəɹ ə hɔɹs. dʌz ʃi θɪŋk aɪ doʊnt noʊ hu ʃi minz ɪt fɔɹ? "nɪneɪiv əz faʊn hɝsɛlf ə wɪzdəm, əɹ sikɝ, əɹ wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ kɔl əɹ hɪɹ."

"A Wisdom," Egwene told her as she got down from her saddle and tied Mist alongside the black. Gaidin is no good name for a horse. Does she think I don't know who she means it for? "Nynaeve has found herself a Wisdom, or Seeker, or whatever they call her here."

ə wʊmən oʊpən ðə dɔɹ dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə lʊk aʊt səspɪʃəsli. ət fɝst ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi wɑz staʊt, bʌt ðən ðə wʊmən oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ. ʃi wɑz sɝɾənli wɛl pæɾəd, bʌt ðə weɪ ʃi muv spoʊk ə mʌsəl ʌndɝniθ. ʃi lʊkt əz stʃɹɔŋ əz mɪstʃɹəs luhən, ən səm ɪn ɛmənz fil kleɪmd ælsbɛt luhən wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz stʃɹɔŋ əz əɹ hʌzbənd. ɪt wɑz nɑt tʃɹu, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt fɑɹ ɹɔŋ.

A woman opened the door just enough to look out suspiciously. At first Egwene thought she was stout, but then the woman opened the door the rest of the way. She was certainly well padded, but the way she moved spoke of muscle underneath. She looked as strong as Mistress Luhhan, and some in Emond's Field claimed Alsbet Luhhan was almost as strong as her husband. It was not true, but it was not far wrong.

"haʊ kən aɪ hɛlp ju?" ðə wʊmən sɛɾ ɪn ən æksɛn laɪk ði æmɪɝlɪnz. hɝ ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ wɑz ɝeɪnʒd ɪn θɪk kɝlz ðət hʌŋ daʊn ðə saɪdz ə hɝ hɛd, ən əɹ θɹi eɪpɹənz wɝ ɪn ʃeɪdz ʌv ɡɹin, itʃ slaɪtli dɑɹkɝ ðən ðə wʌn bɪloʊ, bʌɾ ivən ðə tɑpmoʊs peɪl. "wɪtʃ wʌn ə jə nidz mi?"

"How can I help you?" the woman said in an accent like the Amyrlin's. Her gray hair was arranged in thick curls that hung down the sides of her head, and her three aprons were in shades of green, each slightly darker than the one below, but even the topmost pale. "Which one of you needs me?"

"aɪ du," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "aɪ nid sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ ə kwizi stʌmək. ən pɝhæps wʌn ə maɪ kəmpænjənz dʌz, tu. ðəɾ ɪz, ɪf wiv kʌm tə ðə ɹaɪt pleɪs?"

"I do," Nynaeve said. "I need something for a queasy stomach. And perhaps one of my companions does, too. That is, if we've come to the right place?"

"jɔɹ nɑt tɛɹən," ðə wʊmən sɛd. "aɪ ʃʊɾə noʊn ðət baɪ jəɹ kloʊðz, bɪfɔɹ jə spoʊk. aɪm kɔl mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə. aɪm kɔld ə waɪz wʊmən, tu, bʌɾ aɪm oʊld ɪnʌf nɑt tə tʃɹʌs ðət tə kɑk ə sim. jə kʌm, ən əl ɡɪv jə sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ jəɹ stʌmək."

"You're not Tairen," the woman said. "I should have known that by your clothes, before you spoke. I'm called Mother Guenna. I am called a Wise Woman, too, but I'm old enough not to trust that to caulk a seam. You come, and I will give you something for your stomach."

ɪt wɑz ə nit kɪtʃən, ðoʊ nɑt lɑɹdʒ, wɪð kɑpɝ pɑts hæŋɪŋ ɑn ðə wɔl, ən dʒɹaɪɾ ɝbz ən sɔsɪdʒɪz fɹəm ðə silɪŋ. sɛvɹəl tɔl kʌbɝdz ə peɪl wʊd hæd dɔɹz kɑɹvd wɪð səm sɔɹɾ ə tɔl ɡɹæs. ðə teɪbəl hæd bɪn skɹʌbd ɔlmoʊst waɪt, ən ðə bæks ə ðə tʃɛɹz wɝ kɑɹvd wɪð flaʊɝz. ə pɑɾ ə fɪʃi-smɛlɪŋ sup wɑz sɪmɝɪŋ ətɑp ðə stoʊn stoʊv, ən ə kɛɾəl wɪð ə spaʊt, dʒʌs bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə stim. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ faɪɝ ɑn ðə stoʊn hɑɹθ, fəɹ wɪtʃ ɛɡwin wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɡɹeɪtfəl; ðə stoʊv æɾəd ɪnʌf tə ðə hit, ðoʊ mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə sim nɑt tə noʊɾəs ɪɾ əɾ ɔl. dɪʃəz laɪn ðə mæntəl, ən mɔɹ wɝ stæk nitli ɑn ʃɛlvz tə iðɝ saɪd. ðə flɔɹ lʊkt əz ɪf ɪt hæd dʒʌs bɪn swɛpt.

It was a neat kitchen, though not large, with copper pots hanging on the wall, and dried herbs and sausages from the ceiling. Several tall cupboards of pale wood had doors carved with some sort of tall grass. The table had been scrubbed almost white, and the backs of the chairs were carved with flowers. A pot of fishy-smelling soup was simmering atop the stone stove, and a kettle with a spout, just beginning to steam. There was no fire on the stone hearth, for which Egwene was more than grateful; the stove added enough to the heat, though Mother Guenna seemed not to notice it at all. Dishes lined the mantel, and more were stacked neatly on shelves to either side. The floor looked as if it had just been swept.

mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə kloʊz ðə dɔɹ æftɝ ðɛm, ən əz ʃi wɑz kɹɔsɪŋ ðə kɪtʃən tə hɝ kʌbɝdz, nɪneɪiv sɛd, "wɪtʃ ti wɪl jə ɡɪv mi? tʃeɪnlif? əɹ bluwɝt?"

Mother Guenna closed the door after them, and as she was crossing the kitchen to her cupboards, Nynaeve said, "Which tea will you give me? Chainleaf? Or bluewort?"

"aɪ wəɾ ɪf aɪ hæɾ ɛni ʌv iðɝ." mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə ɹuɾəd ɪn ðə ʃɛlvz ə moʊmən ən keɪm aʊt wɪð ə stoʊn dʒɑɹ. "sɪns aɪv hæd noʊ taɪm tə ɡlin ə leɪt, əl ɡɪv jə ə bɹu ʌv mɑɹʃwaɪt livz."

"I would if I had any of either." Mother Guenna rooted in the shelves a moment and came out with a stone jar. "Since I've had no time to glean of late, I will give you a brew of marshwhite leaves."

"aɪ æm nɑt fəmɪljɝ wɪð ðæt," nɪneɪiv sɛd sloʊli.

"I am not familiar with that," Nynaeve said slowly.

"ɪt wɝks əz wɛl əz tʃeɪnlif, bʌɾ ɪts ə baɪt tə ðə teɪst səm doʊn kɛɹ fɔɹ." ðə bɪɡ wʊmən spɹɪŋkəl dʒɹaɪɾ ən bɹoʊkən livz ɪndə ə blu tipɑɾ ən kæɹiɾ ɪɾ oʊvɝ tə ðə faɪɝpleɪs tə æd hɑt wɔɾɝ. "du jə fɑloʊ ðə kɹæft, ðɛn? sɪt." ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə teɪbəl wɪð ə hæn hoʊldɪŋ tu blu-ɡleɪz kʌps ʃi hæd teɪkən fɹəm ðə mæntəl. "sɪt, ən wɪl tɔk. wɪtʃ wʌn ə jə hæz ði ʌðɝ stʌmək?"

"It works as well as chainleaf, but it has a bite to the taste some don't care for." The big woman sprinkled dried and broken leaves into a blue teapot and carried it over to the fireplace to add hot water. "Do you follow the craft, then? Sit." She gestured to the table with a hand holding two blue-glazed cups she had taken from the mantel. "Sit, and we'll talk. Which one of you has the other stomach?"

"aɪ æm faɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd kæʒəwəli əz ʃi tʊk ə tʃɛɹ. "ɑɹ jə kwizi, kɛɹɪlə?" ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʃʊk əɹ hɛd wɪð pɝhæps ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɛksæspɝeɪʃən.

"I am fine," Egwene said casually as she took a chair. "Are you queasy, Caryla?" The Daughter-Heir shook her head with perhaps a touch of exasperation.

"noʊ mæɾɝ." ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən pɔɹɾ aʊɾ ə kʌp ə dɑɹk lɪkwəd fəɹ nɪneɪiv, ðən sæɾ əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl fɹəm hɝ. "aɪ meɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ tu, bʌt mɑɹʃwaɪt ti kips lɔŋɡɝ ðən sɔltəd fɪʃ. ɪt wɝks bɛɾɝ ðə lɔŋɡɝ ɪt sɪts, tu, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɔlsoʊ ɡɹoʊz mɔɹ bɪɾɝ. meɪks ə ɹeɪs bɪtwin haʊ mʌtʃ jə nid jəɹ stʌmək sɛɾəld ən wʌt jəɹ tʌŋ kən stænd. dʒɹɪŋk, ɡɝl." æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃi fɪl ðə sɛkən kʌp ən tʊk ə sɪp. "ju si? ɪɾəl nɑt hɝt ju."

"No matter." The gray-haired woman poured out a cup of dark liquid for Nynaeve, then sat across the table from her. "I made enough for two, but marshwhite tea keeps longer than salted fish. It works better the longer it sits, too, but it also grows more bitter. Makes a race between how much you need your stomach settled and what your tongue can stand. Drink, girl." After a moment, she filled the second cup and took a sip. "You see? It will not hurt you."

nɪneɪiv ɹeɪzd əɹ oʊn kʌp, meɪkɪŋ ə smɔl saʊn ə dɪsplɛʒɝ ət ðə fɝs teɪst. wən ʃi loʊɝd ðə kʌp əɡɛn, ðoʊ, hɝ feɪs wɑz smuð. "ɪɾ ɪz dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl bɪɾɝ pɝhæps. tɛl mi, mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə, wɪl wɪv tə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ðɪs ɹeɪn ən mʌd mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ?"

Nynaeve raised her own cup, making a small sound of displeasure at the first taste. When she lowered the cup again, though, her face was smooth. "It is just a little bitter perhaps. Tell me, Mother Guenna, will we have to put up with this rain and mud much longer?"

ði oʊldɝ wʊmən fɹaʊnd, pɑɹsəlɪŋ dɪsplɛʒɝ əmʌŋ ðə θɹi ʌv əm bɪfɔɹ ʃi sɛɾəld ɑn nɪneɪiv. "aɪ æm nɑɾ ə si foʊk wɪndfɪndɝ, ɡɝl," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. "ɪf aɪ kəd tɛl ðə wɛðɝ, aɪd sunɝ stɪk lɪv sɪlvɝpaɪk daʊn maɪ dʒɹɛs ðən ədmɪɾ ɪt. ðə dɪfɛndɝz teɪk ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ fəɹ nɛks tə ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝk. naʊ, dʒju fɑloʊ ðə kɹæft əɹ nɑt? jə lʊk əz ɪf juv bɪn tʃɹævlɪŋ. wʌɾ ɪz ɡʊd fəɹ fətiɡ?" ʃi bɑɹk sʌɾənli.

The older woman frowned, parceling displeasure among the three of them before she settled on Nynaeve. "I am not a Sea Folk Windfinder, girl," she said quietly. "If I could tell the weather, I'd sooner stick live silverpike down my dress than admit it. The Defenders take that sort of thing for next to Aes Sedai work. Now, do you follow the craft or not? You look as if you have been traveling. What is good for fatigue?" she barked suddenly.

"flætwɝt ti," nɪneɪiv sɛd kɑmli, "ɔɹ ændɪleɪ ɹut. sɪns jə æsk kwɛstʃənz, wʌt wəd jə də tə iz bɝθɪŋ?"

"Flatwort tea," Nynaeve said calmly, "or andilay root. Since you ask questions, what would you do to ease birthing?"

mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə snɔɹɾɪd. "əplaɪ wɔɹm taʊəlz, tʃaɪld, ən pɝhæps ɡɪv əɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪɾəfɛnəl ɪf ɪt wɑz ən ɪspɛʃli hɑɹd bɝθ. ə wʊmən nidz noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðæt, ən ə suðɪŋ hænd. kæn jə θɪŋk ʌv ə kwɛstʃən ɛni kʌntʃɹi fɑɹmwaɪf kəd nɑɾ ænsɝ? wʌt dʒju ɡɪv fəɹ peɪnz ɪn ðə hɑɹt? ðə kɪlɪŋ kaɪnd."

Mother Guenna snorted. "Apply warm towels, child, and perhaps give her a little whitefennel if it was an especially hard birth. A woman needs no more than that, and a soothing hand. Can't you think of a question any country farmwife could not answer? What do you give for pains in the heart? The killing kind."

"paʊɾɝd ɡindɪn blɑsəm ɑn ðə tʌŋ," nɪneɪiv sɛd kɹɪspli. "ɪf ə wʊmən əz baɪɾɪŋ peɪnz ɪn əɹ bɛli ən spɪts ʌp blʌd, wʌt dʒju du?"

"Powdered gheandin blossom on the tongue," Nynaeve said crisply. "If a woman has biting pains in her belly and spits up blood, what do you do?"

ðeɪ sɛɾəld daʊn əz ɪf tɛstɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ, tɔsɪŋ kwɛstʃənz ən ænsɝz bæk ən fɔɹθ fæstɝ ən fæstɝ. səmtaɪmz ðə kwɛstʃənɪŋ læɡd ə moʊmənt wən wʌn spoʊk ʌv ə plæn ði ʌðɝ nu oʊnli baɪ ənʌðɝ neɪm, bʌt ðeɪ pɪkt ʌp spiɾ əɡɛn, ɑɹɡjuɪŋ ðə mɛɹəts ə tɪŋktʃɝz əɡɛns tiz, sɑvz əɡɛns poʊltəsəz, ən wən wʌn wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən ənʌðɝ. sloʊli, ɔl ðə kwɪk kwɛstʃənz bɪɡæn ʃɪftɪŋ təwɔɹd ði ɝbz ən ɹuts wʌn nu ðət ði ʌðɝ dɪd nɑt, dɪɡɪŋ fəɹ nɑlədʒ. ɛɡwin bɪɡæn tə ɡɹoʊ ɪɹəɾəbəl lɪsnɪŋ.

They settled down as if testing each other, tossing questions and answers back and forth faster and faster. Sometimes the questioning lagged a moment when one spoke of a plant the other knew only by another name, but they picked up speed again, arguing the merits of tinctures against teas, salves against poultices, and when one was better than another. Slowly, all the quick questions began shifting toward the herbs and roots one knew that the other did not, digging for knowledge. Egwene began to grow irritable listening.

"æftɝ jə ɡɪv ɪm ðə boʊnknɪt," mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə wɑz seɪɪŋ, "ju ɹæp ðə bɹoʊkən lɪm ɪn taʊəlɪŋ soʊkt ɪn wɔɾɝ wɛɹ juv bɔɪl blu ɡoʊtfloʊɝz - oʊnli ðə blu, maɪnd!" - nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd ɪmpeɪʃənli - "æn əz hɑɾ əz i kən stæn ɪt. wʌn pɑɹt blu ɡoʊtfloʊɝz tə tɛn ʌv wɔɾɝ, noʊ wikɝ. ɹipleɪs ðə taʊəlz əz sun əz ðeɪ stɑp stimɪŋ, ən kip ɪɾ ʌp ɔl deɪ. ðə boʊn wɪl nɪt twaɪs əz fæst əz wɪð boʊnknɪɾ əloʊn, ən twaɪs əz stʃɹɔŋ."

"After you give him the boneknit," Mother Guenna was saying, "you wrap the broken limb in toweling soaked in water where you've boiled blue goatflowers - only the blue, mind!" - Nynaeve nodded impatiently - "and as hot as he can stand it. One part blue goatflowers to ten of water, no weaker. Replace the towels as soon as they stop steaming, and keep it up all day. The bone will knit twice as fast as with boneknit alone, and twice as strong."

"aɪ wɪl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ju mɛnʃən juzɪŋ ʃipstɔŋ ɹut fəɹ aɪ peɪn. aɪv nɛvɝ hɝd - "

"I will remember that," Nynaeve said. "You mentioned using sheepstongue root for eye pain. I've never heard - "

ɛɡwin kəd stæn ɪt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ. "mɛɹiɪm," ʃi bɹoʊk ɪn, "du jə ɹɪli bɪliv jəl ɛvɝ nid tə noʊ ðiz θɪŋz əɡɛn? jə ɑɹ nɑɾ ə wɪzdəm ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, əɹ əv jə fɝɡɑɾən?"

Egwene could stand it no longer. "Maryim," she broke in, "do you really believe you'll ever need to know these things again? You are not a Wisdom any longer, or have you forgotten?"

"aɪ hæv nɑt fɝɡɑɾən ɛniθɪŋ," nɪneɪiv sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ə taɪm wən jə wɝ əz iɡɝ tə lɝn nu θɪŋz əz aɪ æm."

"I have not forgotten anything," Nynaeve said sharply. "I remember a time when you were as eager to learn new things as I am."

"mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə," ɪleɪn sɛd blænli, "wʌt dʒju də fəɹ tu wɪmən u kænɑt stɑp ɑɹɡjuɪŋ?"

"Mother Guenna," Elayne said blandly, "what do you do for two women who cannot stop arguing?"

ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən pɝst əɹ lɪps ən fɹaʊn ət ðə teɪbəl. "juʒəwəli, mɛn əɹ wɪmən, aɪ tɛl əm tə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm itʃ ʌðɝ. ðəɾ ɪz ðə bɛs θɪŋ, ən ði iziəst."

The gray-haired woman pursed her lips and frowned at the table. "Usually, men or women, I tell them to stay away from each other. That is the best thing, and the easiest."

"juʒəwəli?" ɪleɪn sɛd. "wʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ə ɹizən ðeɪ kænɑt steɪ əpɑɹt. seɪ ðeɪ ɑɹ sɪstɝz."

"Usually?" Elayne said. "What if there is a reason they cannot stay apart. Say they are sisters."

"aɪ də hæv ə weɪ tə meɪk ən ɑɹɡɝ stɑp," ðə bɪɡ wʊmən sɛd sloʊli. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑt sʌmθɪŋ aɪ ɝdʒ ɛniwʌn tə tʃɹaɪ, bʌt səm də kʌm tə mi." ɛɡwin θɔt ðəɹ wɑz ə səspɪʃən ʌv ə smaɪl ət ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ maʊθ. "aɪ tʃɑɹdʒ ə sɪlvɝ mɑɹk itʃ fəɹ wɪmən. tu fəɹ mɛn, kəz mɛn meɪk mɔɹ fʌs. ðəɹ ɑɹ səm wɪl baɪ ɛniθɪŋ, ɪf ɪt kɑsts ɪnʌf."

"I do have a way to make an arguer stop," the big woman said slowly. "It is not something I urge anyone to try, but some do come to me." Egwene thought there was a suspicion of a smile at the corners of her mouth. "I charge a silver mark each for women. Two for men, because men make more fuss. There are some will buy anything, if it costs enough."

"bʌt wʌɾ ɪz ðə kjʊɹ?" ɪleɪn æskt.

"But what is the cure?" Elayne asked.

"aɪ tɛl əm ðeɪv tə bɹɪŋ ði ʌðɝ wʌn hɪɹ wɪð ðɛm, ðə wʌn ðeɪ ɑɹɡju wɪð. boʊθ ɪkspɛk mi tə kwaɪət ði ʌðɝz tʌŋ." dɪspaɪt hɝsɛlf, ɛɡwin wɑz lɪsnɪŋ. ʃi noʊɾəst nɪneɪiv sim tə bi peɪɪŋ ʃɑɹp ətɛnʃən, əz wɛl. "wɛn ðeɪv peɪd mi," mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə kəntɪnjud, flɛksɪŋ wʌn hɛfti ɑɹm, "aɪ teɪk əm aʊt bæk ən stɪk ðɛɹ hɛdz ɪn maɪ ɹeɪn bæɹəl tɪl ðeɪ əɡɹi tə stɑp ðɛɹ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ."

"I tell them they have to bring the other one here with them, the one they argue with. Both expect me to quiet the other's tongue." Despite herself, Egwene was listening. She noticed Nynaeve seemed to be paying sharp attention, as well. "When they have paid me," Mother Guenna continued, flexing one hefty arm, "I take them out back and stick their heads in my rain barrel till they agree to stop their arguing."

ɪleɪn bɝst aʊt læfɪŋ.

Elayne burst out laughing.

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ meɪ hæv dʌn sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi laɪk ðət maɪsɛlf," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ə vɔɪs ðət wɑz mʌtʃ tu laɪt. ɛɡwin hoʊpt əɹ oʊn ɪkspɹɛʃən lʊk nʌθɪŋ laɪk nɪneɪivz.

"I think I may have done something very like that myself," Nynaeve said in a voice that was much too light. Egwene hoped her own expression looked nothing like Nynaeve's.

"aɪd nɑt bi sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf jə hæv." mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə wɑz ɡɹɪnɪŋ oʊpənli naʊ. "aɪ tɛl əm ðə nɛks taɪm aɪ hɪɹ ðeɪv bɪn ɑɹɡjuɪŋ, əl də ɪt fəɹ fɹi, bʌɾ əl juz ðə ɹɪvɝ. ɪts ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl haʊ ɔfən ðə kjʊɹ wɝks, fəɹ mɛn ɪspɛʃli. ən ɪts ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl wʌɾ ɪts dʌn fəɹ maɪ ɹɛpjəteɪʃən. fəɹ səm ɹizən, nʌn ə ðə pipəl aɪ kjʊɹ ðɪs weɪ ɛvɝ tɛlz ɛniwʌn ɛls ðə dɪteɪlz, soʊ sʌmwʌn æsks fəɹ ðə kjʊɹ ɛvɹi fju mʌnθs. ɪf juv bɪn ful ɪnʌf tə it mədfɪʃ, jə də nɑt ɡoʊ ɝaʊn tɛlɪŋ pipəl. aɪ tʃɹʌs nʌn ə juv ɛni wɪʃ tə spɛn ə sɪlvɝ mɑɹk."

"I'd not be surprised if you have." Mother Guenna was grinning openly now. "I tell them the next time I hear they've been arguing, I will do it for free, but I'll use the river. It is remarkable how often the cure works, for men especially. And it is remarkable what it has done for my reputation. For some reason, none of the people I cure this way ever tells anyone else the details, so someone asks for the cure every few months. If you've been fool enough to eat mudfish, you do not go around telling people. I trust none of you have any wish to spend a silver mark."

"aɪ θɪŋk nɑt," ɛɡwin sɛd, ən ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɪleɪn wən ʃi wɛn ɔf ɪn pilz ə læftɝ əɡɛn.

"I think not," Egwene said, and glared at Elayne when she went off in peals of laughter again.

"ɡʊd," ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən sɛd. "ðoʊz aɪ kjʊɹ ʌv ɑɹɡjuɪŋ əv ə tɛndənsi tə əvɔɪd mi laɪk stɪŋwid kɑɾ ɪn ðɛɹ nɛts, ənlɛs ðeɪ æktʃəli  teɪk sɪk, aɪm æm ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ jəɹ kʌmpəni. moʊst ə ðoʊz u kʌm ət pɹɛzənt wɑn sʌmθɪŋ tə teɪk əweɪ bæd dʒɹimz, ən ðeɪ ɡɹoʊ saʊɝ wən aɪ hæv nʌθɪŋ tə ɡɪv ðɛm." fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi slɪpt ɪndə ə fɹaʊn, ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ tɛmpəlz. "ɪɾ ɪz ɡʊd tə si θɹi feɪsəz ðət də nɑt lʊk əz ɪf ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ lɛf bʌt tə dʒʌmp oʊvɝ ðə saɪɾ ən dʒɹaʊn. ɪf jə ɑɹ steɪɪŋ lɔŋ ɪn tɛɹ, jə mʌs kʌm si mi əɡɛn. ðə ɡɝl kɔl jə aɪm æm eɪlhuɪn. ðə nɛks taɪm, wɪl tɔk oʊvɝ səm ɡʊd si foʊk ti ɪnstɛɾ ə sʌmθɪŋ ðət kɝɾəlz jəɹ tʌŋ. laɪt, bʌɾ aɪ heɪt ðə teɪst ə mɑɹʃwaɪt; mədfɪʃ wəd teɪst swiɾɝ. ɪn fækt, juv hæv taɪm tə steɪ naʊ, əl bɹu ə pɑɾ ə tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ blæk. nɑt lɔŋ tɪl sʌpɝ, iðɝ. ɪts dʒʌs bɹɛɾ ən sup ən tʃiz, bʌt jə ɑɹ wɛlkəm."

"Good," the gray-haired woman said. "Those I cure of arguing have a tendency to avoid me like stingweed caught in their nets, unless they actually take sick, and I am enjoying your company. Most of those who come at present want something to take away bad dreams, and they grow sour when I have nothing to give them." For a moment she slipped into a frown, rubbing her temples. "It is good to see three faces that do not look as if there is nothing left but to jump over the side and drown. If you are staying long in Tear, you must come see me again. The girl called you Maryim? I am Ailhuin. The next time, we'll talk over some good Sea Folk tea instead of something that curdles your tongue. Light, but I hate the taste of marshwhite; mudfish would taste sweeter. In fact, if you have time to stay now, I'll brew a pot of Tremalking black. Not long till supper, either. It's just bread and soup and cheese, but you are welcome."

"ðæt wəd bi vɛɹi naɪs, eɪlhuɪn," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "æktʃəli . . . . eɪlhuɪn, juv hæv ə spɛɹ bɛdʒɹum, aɪd laɪk tə haɪɝ ɪt fəɹ ðə θɹi ʌv ʌs."

"That would be very nice, Ailhuin," Nynaeve said. "Actually. . . . Ailhuin, if you have a spare bedroom, I'd like to hire it for the three of us."

ðə bɪɡ wʊmən lʊkt əɾ itʃ ə ðɛm wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ. ɡɛɾɪŋ tə hɝ fit, ʃi tʌk ðə pɑɾ ə mɑɹʃwaɪt ti əweɪ ɪn ði ɝb kʌbɝd, ðən fɛtʃt ə ɹɛd tipɑɾ ən ə paʊtʃ fɹəm ənʌðɝ. oʊnli wən ʃi hæd bɹuɾ ə pɑɾ ə tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ blæk, pʊt fɔɹ klin kʌps ən ə boʊl ə hʌnikoʊm ɑn ðə teɪbəl əlɔŋ wɪð pjuɾɝ spunz, ən ɹikleɪmd əɹ tʃɛɹ dɪd ʃi spik.

The big woman looked at each of them without saying anything. Getting to her feet, she tucked the pot of marshwhite tea away in the herb cupboard, then fetched a red teapot and a pouch from another. Only when she had brewed a pot of Tremalking black, put four clean cups and a bowl of honeycomb on the table along with pewter spoons, and reclaimed her chair did she speak.

"aɪv θɹi ɛmpti bɛdʒɹumz əpstɛɹz, naʊ maɪ dɔɾɝz ɑɹ ɔl mɛɹid. maɪ hʌzbənd, ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn hɪm, wɑz lɔst ɪn ə stɔɹm ɪn ðə fɪŋɡɝz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən nɪɹ twɛnti jɪɹz əɡoʊ. ðəɹ nid bi noʊ tɔk ə haɪɹɪŋ, ɪf aɪ dɪsaɪd tə lɛt juv ðə ɹumz. ɪf, mɛɹiɪm." stɝɪŋ hʌni ɪndə hɝ ti, ʃi stʌɾid əm əɡɛn.

"I've three empty bedrooms upstairs, now my daughters are all married. My husband, the Light shine on him, was lost in a storm in the Fingers of the Dragon near twenty years ago. There need be no talk of hiring, if I decide to let you have the rooms. If, Maryim." Stirring honey into her tea, she studied them again.

"wʌt wɪl meɪk jə dɪsaɪd?" nɪneɪiv æskt kwaɪətli.

"What will make you decide?" Nynaeve asked quietly.

eɪlhuɪn kəntɪnjud tə stɝ, əz ɪf ʃi hæd fɝɡɑɾən tə dʒɹɪŋk. "θɹi jʌŋ wɪmən, ɹaɪɾɪŋ faɪn hɔɹsəz. aɪ doʊnt noʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt hɔɹsəz, bʌt ðoʊz lʊk əz faɪn əz wʌt ðə lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz ɹaɪd, tə mi. ju, mɛɹiɪm, noʊ ɪnʌf ə ðə kɹæf ðət jə ɔt tə hæv hʌŋ ɝbz ɪn jəɹ wɪndoʊ ɔlɹɛɾi, əɹ ʃəd bi tʃuzɪŋ wɛɹ tə də ɪt. aɪv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ə wʊmən pɹæktəsɪŋ ðə kɹæf tu fɑɹ fɹəm wɛɹ ʃi wɑz bɔɹn, bʌt baɪ jəɹ tʌŋ, jə ɑɹ ə lɔŋ weɪ." ʃi ɡlænst əɾ ɪleɪn. "nɑt mɛni pleɪsəz wɪð hɛɹ ðət kʌlɝ. ændɝ, aɪd seɪ, baɪ jəɹ spitʃ. ful mɛn ɑɹ ɔlweɪz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt faɪndɪŋ ə jɛloʊ-hɛɹɾ ændɝ ɡɝl. wʌɾ aɪ wɑnə noʊ ɪz waɪ? ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm sʌmθɪŋ? əɹ ɹʌnɪŋ æftɝ sʌmθɪŋ? oʊnli, jə doʊn lʊk laɪk θivz tə mi, ən aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə θɹi wɪmən tʃeɪsɪŋ æftɝ ə mæn təɡɛðɝ. soʊ tɛl mi waɪ, ən ɪf aɪ laɪk ɪt, ðə ɹumz ɑɹ jʊɹz. ɪf jə wɑnə peɪ sʌmθɪŋ, jə baɪ ə bɪɾ ə mit naʊ ən ðɛn. miɾ ɪz dɪɹ sɪns ðə tʃɹeɪɾ ʌp tə kɛɹhin fɛl əweɪ. bʌt fɝs ðə waɪ, mɛɹiɪm."

Ailhuin continued to stir, as if she had forgotten to drink. "Three young women, riding fine horses. I don't know much about horses, but those look as fine as what the lords and ladies ride, to me. You, Maryim, know enough of the craft that you ought to have hung herbs in your window already, or should be choosing where to do it. I've never heard of a woman practicing the craft too far from where she was born, but by your tongue, you are a long way." She glanced at Elayne. "Not many places with hair that color. Andor, I'd say, by your speech. Fool men are always talking about finding a yellow-haired Andor girl. What I want to know is why? Running away from something? Or running after something? Only, you don't look like thieves to me, and I never heard of three women chasing after a man together. So tell me why, and if I like it, the rooms are yours. If you want to pay something, you buy a bit of meat now and then. Meat is dear since the trade up to Cairhien fell away. But first the why, Maryim."

"wi ɑɹ tʃeɪsɪŋ æftɝ sʌmθɪŋ, eɪlhuɪn," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ɔɹ ɹæðɝ, æftɝ səm pipəl." ɛɡwin skul hɝsɛlf tə stɪlnəs ən hoʊpt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ əz wɛl əz ɪleɪn, hu wɑz sɪpɪŋ əɹ ti əz ɪf ʃi wɝ lɪsnɪŋ tə tɔk əbaʊt dʒɹɛsəz. ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt bɪliv eɪlhuɪn ɡeɪnəz dɑɹk aɪz mɪst ə ɡɹeɪt dil. "ðeɪ stoʊl səm θɪŋz, eɪlhuɪn," nɪneɪiv wɛn ɑn. "fɹʌm maɪ mʌðɝ. ən ðeɪ dɪd mɝɾɝ. wəɹ hɪɹ tə si dʒʌstəs dʌn."

"We are chasing after something, Ailhuin," Nynaeve said. "Or rather, after some people." Egwene schooled herself to stillness and hoped she was doing as well as Elayne, who was sipping her tea as if she were listening to talk about dresses. Egwene did not believe Ailhuin Guenna's dark eyes missed a great deal. "They stole some things, Ailhuin," Nynaeve went on. "From my mother. And they did murder. We are here to see justice done."

"bɝn maɪ soʊl," ðə lɑɹdʒ wʊmən sɛd, "hæv jə noʊ mɛnfoʊk? mɛn ɑɹ nɑt ɡʊd fəɹ mʌtʃ bɪɑn hɛvi hɔlɪŋ ən ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪn ðə weɪ, moʊst ə ðə taɪm - ən kɪsɪŋ ən sətʃ - bʌɾ ɪf ðɛɹz ə bæɾəl tə bi fɔɾ əɹ ə θif tə kætʃ, aɪ seɪ lɛɾ əm də ɪt. ændɝ ɪz əz sɪvəlaɪzd əz tɛɹ. jə ɑɹ nɑɾ il."

"Burn my soul," the large woman said, "have you no menfolk? Men are not good for much beyond heavy hauling and getting in the way, most of the time - and kissing and such - but if there's a battle to be fought or a thief to catch, I say let them do it. Andor is as civilized as Tear. You are not Aiel."

"ðɛɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ɛls bʌɾ ʌs," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ðoʊz u maɪɾ əv kʌm ɪn əɹ pleɪs wɝ kɪld."

"There was no one else but us," Nynaeve said. "Those who might have come in our place were killed."

ðə θɹi mɝɾɝd ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɛɡwin θɔt. ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn blæk ədʒɑ. bʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn kɪld, ði æmɪɝlɪn wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn eɪbəl tə tʃɹʌs ðɛm. ʃiz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip tə ðə blʌɾi θɹi oʊðz, bʌt ʃiz skɝɾɪŋ ɪt kloʊs.

The three murdered Aes Sedai, Egwene thought. They could not have been Black Ajah. But if they had not been killed, the Amyrlin would not have been able to trust them. She's trying to keep to the bloody Three Oaths, but she is skirting it close.

"ɑ," eɪlhuɪn sɛd sædli. "ðeɪ kɪl jəɹ mɛn? bɹʌðɝz, əɹ hʌzbənz, əɹ fɑðɝz?" spɑts ə kʌlɝ blumd ɪn nɪneɪivz tʃiks, ən ði oʊldɝ wʊmən mɪstʊk ði ɪmoʊʃən. "noʊ, doʊn tɛl mi, ɡɝl. əl nɑt pʊl ʌp oʊld ɡɹif. lɛɾ ɪt laɪ ɑn ðə bɑɾəm tɪl ɪt mɛls əweɪ. ðɛɹ, ðɛɹ, jə kɑm jɝsɛlf." ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt fəɹ ɛɡwin nɑt tə ɡɹaʊl wɪð dɪsɡʌst.

"Aaah," Ailhuin said sadly. "They killed your men? Brothers, or husbands, or fathers?" Spots of color bloomed in Nynaeve's cheeks, and the older woman mistook the emotion. "No, don't tell me, girl. I'll not pull up old grief. Let it lie on the bottom till it melts away. There, there, you calm yourself." It was an effort for Egwene not to growl with disgust.

"aɪ mʌs tɛl jə ðɪs," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ə stɪf vɔɪs. ðə ɹɛd stɪl kʌlɝɾ əɹ feɪs. "ðiz mɝɾɝɝz ən θivz ɑɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ðeɪ ɑɹ wɪmən, bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ əz deɪnʒɝəs əz ɛni sɔɝdzmən, eɪlhuɪn. ɪf jə wʌndɝd waɪ wi dɪd nɑt sik ən ɪn, ðəɾ ɪz waɪ. ðeɪ meɪ noʊ wi fɑloʊ, ən ðeɪ meɪ bi wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ ʌs."

"I must tell you this," Nynaeve said in a stiff voice. The red still colored her face. "These murderers and thieves are Darkfriends. They are women, but they are as dangerous as any swordsman, Ailhuin. If you wondered why we did not seek an inn, that is why. They may know we follow, and they may be watching for us."

eɪlhuɪn weɪvd ɪɾ ɔl əweɪ wɪð ə snɪf. "ʌv ðə fɔɹ moʊs deɪnʒɝəs foʊk aɪ noʊ, tu ɑɹ wɪmən u nɛvɝ kæɹi əz mʌtʃ əz ə naɪf, ən oʊnli wʌn ə ðə mɛn ɪz ə sɔɝdzmən. əz fəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. . . . mɛɹiɪm, wən jə ɑɹ əz oʊld əz aɪ, jəl lɝn ðət fɔls dʒɹæɡənz ɑɹ deɪnʒɝəs, laɪənfɪʃ ɑɹ deɪnʒɝəs, ʃɑɹks ɑɹ deɪnʒɝəs, ən sʌɾən stɔɹmz aʊɾ ə ðə saʊθ; bʌt dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɑɹ fulz. fɪlθi fulz, bʌt fulz. ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz lɑkt ʌp wɛɹ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ pʊt hɪm, ən noʊ fɛtʃɪz əɹ fæŋfɪʃ tə skɛɹ tʃɪlʒɹən wɪl ɡɛɾ ɪm aʊt. fulz doʊn fɹaɪɾən mi ənlɛs ðəɹ wɝkɪŋ ðə boʊɾ aɪm ɹaɪɾɪŋ. aɪ səpoʊz jə doʊn əv ɛni pɹuf jə kəd teɪk tə ðə dɪfɛndɝz ə ðə stoʊn? ɪt wəd bi dʒʌs jəɹ wɝɾ əɡɛns ðɛɹz?"

Ailhuin waved it all away with a sniff. "Of the four most dangerous folk I know, two are women who never carry as much as a knife, and only one of the men is a swordsman. As for Darkfriends. . . . Maryim, when you are as old as I, you'll learn that false Dragons are dangerous, lionfish are dangerous, sharks are dangerous, and sudden storms out of the south; but Darkfriends are fools. Filthy fools, but fools. The Dark One is locked up where the Creator put him, and no Fetches or fangfish to scare children will get him out. Fools don't frighten me unless they're working the boat I'm riding. I suppose you don't have any proof you could take to the Defenders of the Stone? It would be just your word against theirs?"

wʌɾ ɪz ə "fɛtʃ"? ɛɡwin wʌndɝd. əɹ ə "fæŋfɪʃ," fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ.

What is a "Fetch"? Egwene wondered. Or a "fangfish," for that matter.

"wi wɪl əv pɹuf wən wi faɪn ðɛm," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ðeɪ wɪl əv ðə θɪŋz ðeɪ stoʊl, ən wi kən dɪskɹaɪb ðɛm. ðeɪ ɑɹ oʊl θɪŋz, ən ə lɪɾəl vælju tə ɛniwʌn bʌɾ ʌs, ən əɹ fɹɛnz."

"We will have proof when we find them," Nynaeve said. "They will have the things they stole, and we can describe them. They are old things, and of little value to anyone but us, and our friends."

"ju wəd bi sɝpɹaɪzd wʌɾ oʊl θɪŋz kən bi wɝθ," eɪlhuɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "oʊld luiz mjulən pʊld ʌp θɹi hɑɹtstoʊn boʊlz ən ə kʌp ɪn ɪz nɛts læs jɪɹ, daʊn ɪn ðə fɪŋɡɝz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən. naʊ, ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə fɪʃɪŋ smæk, hi oʊnz ə ʃɪp tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹɪvɝ. oʊl ful dɪd nɑɾ ivən noʊ wʌɾ i hæd tɪl aɪ toʊl hɪm. vɛɹi laɪkli ðɛɹz mɔɹ ɹaɪt wɛɹ ðoʊz keɪm fɹʌm, bʌt luiz kʊdn ivən ɹɪmɛmbɝ ði ɪɡzæk spɑt. aɪ də nɑt noʊ haʊ hi ɛvɝ mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ ə fɪʃ ɪndə hɪz nɛt. hæf ðə fɪʃɪŋ boʊts ɪn tiɹ wɝ daʊn ðəɹ fəɹ mʌnθs æftɝwɝdz, dʒɹæɡɪŋ fəɹ kwəndɪlɝ, nɑt ɡɹʌns əɹ flætfɪʃ, ən səm hæd lɔɹdz seɪɪŋ wɛɹ tə pʊl ðə nɛts. ðæts wʌɾ oʊl θɪŋz kən bi wɝθ, ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ oʊld ɪnʌf. naʊ, aɪv dɪsaɪɾɪd jə də niɾ ə mæn ɪn ðɪs, ən aɪ noʊ dʒʌs ðə wʌn."

"You would be surprised what old things can be worth," Ailhuin said dryly. "Old Leuese Mulan pulled up three heartstone bowls and a cup in his nets last year, down in the Fingers of the Dragon. Now, instead of a fishing smack, he owns a ship trading up the river. Old fool did not even know what he had till I told him. Very likely there's more right where those came from, but Leuese couldn't even remember the exact spot. I do not know how he ever managed to get a fish into his net. Half the fishing boats in Tear were down there for months afterwards, dragging for cuendillar, not grunts or flatfish, and some had lords saying where to pull the nets. That's what old things can be worth, if they are old enough. Now, I've decided you do need a man in this, and I know just the one."

"hu?" nɪneɪiv sɛd kwɪkli. "ɪf jə min ə lɔɹd, wʌn ə ðə haɪ lɔɹdz, ɹɪmɛmbɝ wɪv noʊ pɹuf tə ɔfɝ tɪl wi faɪn ðɛm."

"Who?" Nynaeve said quickly. "If you mean a lord, one of the High Lords, remember we have no proof to offer till we find them."

eɪlhuɪn læft əntɪl ʃi wizd. "ɡɝl, noʊbɑdi fɹəm ðə mɔl noʊz ə haɪ lɔɹd, əɹ ɛni kaɪndə lɔɹd. mədfɪʃ doʊn skul wɪð sɪlvɝsaɪdz. əl bɹɪŋ jə ðə deɪnʒɝəs mæn aɪ noʊ hu ɪzən ə sɔɝdzmən, ən ðə mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ə ðə tu, ət ðæt. dʒulɪn sændɑɹ ɪz ə θif-kætʃɝ. ðə bɛst ə ðɛm. aɪ də nɑt noʊ haʊ ɪts ɪn ændɝ, bʌt hɪɹ ə θif-kætʃɝ wɪl wɝk fəɹ jə əɹ mi əz sun əz fəɹ ə lɔɹɾ əɹ ə mɝtʃənt, ən tʃɑɹdʒ lɛs ət ðæt. dʒulɪn kən faɪn ðiz wɪmən fəɹ jə ɪf ðeɪ kən bi faʊnd, ən bɹɪŋ jəɹ θɪŋz bæk wɪθaʊt jə hævɪŋ tə ɡoʊ nɪɹ ðiz dɑɹkfɹɛnz."

Ailhuin laughed until she wheezed. "Girl, nobody from the Maule knows a High Lord, or any kind of lord. Mudfish don't school with silversides. I will bring you the dangerous man I know who isn't a swordsman, and the more dangerous of the two, at that. Juilin Sandar is a thief-catcher. The best of them. I do not know how it is in Andor, but here a thief-catcher will work for you or me as soon as for a lord or a merchant, and charge less at that. Juilin can find these women for you if they can be found, and bring your things back without you having to go near these Darkfriends."

nɪneɪiv əɡɹiɾ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ stɪl nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli ʃʊɹ, ən eɪlhuɪn taɪd ðoʊz plætfɔɹmz tə hɝ ʃuz - klɑɡz, ʃi kɔld əm - ən hɝiɾ aʊt. ɛɡwin wɑtʃt əɹ ɡoʊ, θɹu wʌn ə ðə kɪtʃən wɪndoʊz, pæs ðə hɔɹsəz ən ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ ʌp ði æli.

Nynaeve agreed as if she were still not entirely sure, and Ailhuin tied those platforms to her shoes - clogs, she called them - and hurried out. Egwene watched her go, through one of the kitchen windows, past the horses and around the corner up the alley.

"ju ɑɹ lɝnɪŋ haʊ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, mɛɹiɪm," ʃi sɛɾ əz ʃi tɝn fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ. "ju mənɪpjəleɪt pipəl əz wɛl əz mɔɪɹeɪn." nɪneɪivz feɪs wɛnt waɪt.

"You are learning how to be Aes Sedai, Maryim," she said as she turned from the window. "You manipulate people as well as Moiraine." Nynaeve's face went white.

ɪleɪn stɔkt əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ ən slæpt ɛɡwinz feɪs. ɛɡwin wɑz soʊ ʃɑkt ʃi kəɾ oʊnli stɛɹ. "ju ɡoʊ tu fɑɹ," ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "tu fɑɹ. wi mʌs lɪv təɡɛðɝ, əɹ wɪl ʃʊɹli daɪ təɡɛðɝ! dɪd jə ɡɪv eɪlhuɪn jəɹ tʃɹu neɪm? nɪneɪiv toʊld əɹ wʌt wi kʊd, ðət wi sik dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ən ðət wɑz ɹɪsk ɪnʌf, lɪŋkɪŋ əs wɪð dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ʃi toʊld əɹ ðeɪ wɝ deɪnʒɝəs, mɝɾɝɝz. wəd juv hæɾ əɹ seɪ ðeɪ ɑɹ blæk ədʒɑ? ɪn tiɹ? wəd jə ɹɪsk ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɑn wɛðɝ eɪlhuɪn wəd kip ðət tə hɝsɛlf?"

Elayne stalked across the floor and slapped Egwene's face. Egwene was so shocked she could only stare. "You go too far," the golden-haired woman said sharply. "Too far. We must live together, or we will surely die together! Did you give Ailhuin your true name? Nynaeve told her what we could, that we seek Darkfriends, and that was risk enough, linking us with Darkfriends. She told her they were dangerous, murderers. Would you have had her say they are Black Ajah? In Tear? Would you risk everything on whether Ailhuin would keep that to herself?"

ɛɡwin ɹʌbd əɹ tʃik dʒɪnʒɝli. ɪleɪn hæɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ ɑɹm. "aɪ də nɑɾ əv tə laɪk duɪŋ ɪt."

Egwene rubbed her cheek gingerly. Elayne had a strong arm. "I do not have to like doing it."

"aɪ noʊ," ɪleɪn saɪd. "niðɝ də aɪ. bʌt wi də hæv tə."

"I know," Elayne sighed. "Neither do I. But we do have to."

ɛɡwin tɝn bæk tə piɹɪŋ θɹu ðə wɪndoʊ ət ðə hɔɹsəz. aɪ noʊ wi du. bʌɾ aɪ də nɑɾ əv tə laɪk ɪt.

Egwene turned back to peering through the window at the horses. I know we do. But I do not have to like it.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾinaɪn


CHAPTER 49

eɪ stɔɹm ɪn tiɹ


A Storm in Tear

ɛɡwin faɪnəli ɹɪtɝn tə ðə teɪbəl ən əɹ ti. ʃi θɔt pɝhæps ɪleɪn wɑz ɹaɪt, ðət ʃi hæd ɡɔn tu fɑɹ, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt bɹɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə əpɑlədʒaɪz, ən ðeɪ sæɾ ɪn saɪləns.

Egwene finally returned to the table and her tea. She thought perhaps Elayne was right, that she had gone too far, but she could not bring herself to apologize, and they sat in silence.

wən eɪlhuɪn ɹɪtɝnd, ʃi hæɾ ə mæn wɪð hɝ, ə lin fɛloʊ ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz u lʊkt əz ɪf i hæd bɪn kɑɹv fɹəm eɪdʒd wʊd. dʒulɪn sændɑɹ tʊk ɔf ɪz klɑɡz baɪ ðə dɔɹ ən hʌŋ ɪz flæt, kɑnɪkəl stʃɹɔ hæɾ ɑn ə pɛɡ. ə sɔɹd-bɹeɪkɝ, mʌtʃ laɪk hʊɹɪnz bʌt wɪð ʃɔɹt slɑts tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə lɔŋ wʌn, hʌŋ fɹəm ə bɛlt oʊvɝ ɪz bɹaʊn koʊt, ən i kæɹiɾ ə stæf ɪɡzækli əz tɔl əz i wɑz, bʌt nɑt mʌtʃ θɪkɝ ðən ɪz θʌm ən meɪɾ ə ðət peɪl wʊd, laɪk ɹɪdʒ dʒɔɪns, ðət ði ɑks-dʒɹaɪvɝz juz fəɹ ðɛɹ ɡoʊdz. hɪz ʃɔɹt-kʌt blæk hɛɹ leɪ flæɾ ɑn ɪz hɛd, ən ɪz kwɪk, dɑɹk aɪz sim tə noʊɾ ən ɹəkɔɹɾ ɛvɹi dɪteɪl ə ðə ɹum. ən ʌv ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ɪt. ɛɡwin wəɾ əv bɛɾ i ɪɡzæmənd nɪneɪiv twaɪs, ən tə hɝ, ət list, nɪneɪivz læk ə ɹiækʃən wɑz bleɪɾənt; ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs ʃi nu ɪt, tu.

When Ailhuin returned, she had a man with her, a lean fellow in his middle years who looked as if he had been carved from aged wood. Juilin Sandar took off his clogs by the door and hung his flat, conical straw hat on a peg. A sword-breaker, much like Hurin's but with short slots to either side of the long one, hung from a belt over his brown coat, and he carried a staff exactly as tall as he was, but not much thicker than his thumb and made of that pale wood, like ridged joints, that the ox-drivers used for their goads. His short-cut black hair lay flat on his head, and his quick, dark eyes seemed to note and record every detail of the room. And of everyone in it. Egwene would have bet he examined Nynaeve twice, and to her, at least, Nynaeve's lack of reaction was blatant; it was obvious she knew it, too.

eɪlhuɪn moʊʃən ɪm tə ə pleɪs ət ðə teɪbəl, wɛɹ i tɝn bæk ðə kʌfs ə hɪz koʊt slivz, baʊd tə itʃ ə ðɛm ɪn tɝn, ən sæt wɪð ɪz stæf pɹɑpt əɡɛnst ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, nɑt spikɪŋ əntɪl ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən hæd meɪɾ ə fɹɛʃ pɑɾ ə ti ən ɛvɹiwʌn hæd sɪp fɹəm ðɛɹ kʌps.

Ailhuin motioned him to a place at the table, where he turned back the cuffs of his coat sleeves, bowed to each of them in turn, and sat with his staff propped against his shoulder, not speaking until the gray-haired woman had made a fresh pot of tea and everyone had sipped from their cups.

"mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə hæz toʊl mi ʌv jəɹ pɹɑbləm," hi sɛd kwaɪətli əz i sɛɾ ɪz kʌp daʊn. "aɪ wɪl hɛlp jə ɪf aɪ kæn, bʌt ðə haɪ lɔɹdz meɪ hæv ðɛɹ oʊn bɪznəs tə pʊt mi tə, sun."

"Mother Guenna has told me of your problem," he said quietly as he set his cup down. "I will help you if I can, but the High Lords may have their own business to put me to, soon."

ðə bɪɡ wʊmən snɔɹɾɪd. "dʒulɪn, wən dɪd jə bɪɡɪn hæɡəlɪŋ laɪk ə ʃɑpkipɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃɑɹdʒ sɪlk pɹaɪsəz fəɹ lɪnən? də nɑt kleɪm jə noʊ wən ðə haɪ lɔɹdz wɪl sʌmən jə bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ du."

The big woman snorted. "Juilin, when did you begin haggling like a shopkeeper trying to charge silk prices for linen? Do not claim you know when the High Lords will summon you before they do."

"aɪ woʊn kleɪm ɪt," sændɑɹ toʊld əɹ wɪð ə smaɪl, "bʌɾ aɪ noʊ wən aɪv sin mɛn ɑn ðə ɹuftɑps ɪn ðə naɪt. dʒʌst aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə maɪ aɪ - ðeɪ kən haɪd laɪk paɪpfɪʃ ɪn ɹidz - bʌɾ aɪ hæv sin ðə muvmənt. noʊ wʌn əz ɹipɔɹɾəd ə θɛf jɛt, bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ θivz wɝkɪŋ ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz, ən jə kən baɪ jəɹ sʌpɝ wɪð ðæt. mɑɹk mi. bɪfɔɹ ənʌðɝ wik, əl bi sʌmən tə ðə stoʊn kəz ə bæn ə θivz ɪz bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪndə mɝtʃəns' haʊsəz, əɹ ivən lɔɹdz' mænɝz. ðə dɪfɛndɝz meɪ ɡɑɹd ðə stʃɹits, bʌt wən θivz nid tʃɹækɪŋ ðeɪ sɛn fəɹ ə θif-kætʃɝ, ən mi bɪfɔɹ ɛni ʌðɝ. aɪm nɑt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dʒɹaɪv ʌp maɪ pɹaɪs, bʌt wʌtɛvɝ aɪ də fəɹ ðiz pɹɪɾi wɪmən, aɪ mʌs də sun."

"I won't claim it," Sandar told her with a smile, "but I know when I've seen men on the rooftops in the night. Just out of the corner of my eye - they can hide like pipefish in reeds - but I have seen the movement. No one has reported a theft yet, but there are thieves working inside the walls, and you can buy your supper with that. Mark me. Before another week, I'll be summoned to the Stone because a band of thieves is breaking into merchants' houses, or even lords' manors. The Defenders may guard the streets, but when thieves need tracking they send for a thief-catcher, and me before any other. I am not trying to drive up my price, but whatever I do for these pretty women, I must do soon."

"aɪ bɪliv i spiks ðə tʃɹuθ," eɪlhuɪn sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli. "hil tɛl jə ðə mun ɪz ɡɹin ən wɔɾɝ waɪɾ ɪf i θɪŋks ɪɾəl bɹɪŋ ɪm ə kɪs, bʌɾ i laɪz lɛs ðən moʊs mɛn əbaʊɾ ʌðɝ θɪŋz. hi meɪ bi ðə moʊst ɑnəs mæn ɛvɝ bɔɹn ɪn ðə mɔl." ɪleɪn pʊɾ ə hæn oʊvɝ əɹ maʊθ, ən ɛɡwin stʃɹʌɡəl nɑt tə læf. nɪneɪiv sæɾ ənmuvd ən ɑbviəsli ɪmpeɪʃənt.

"I believe he speaks the truth," Ailhuin said reluctantly. "He'll tell you the moon is green and water white if he thinks it will bring him a kiss, but he lies less than most men about other things. He may be the most honest man ever born in the Maule." Elayne put a hand over her mouth, and Egwene struggled not to laugh. Nynaeve sat unmoved and obviously impatient.

sændɑɹ ɡɹɪməst ət ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən, ðən əpɛɹənli dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ wʌt ʃi hæd sɛd. hi smaɪld ət nɪneɪiv. "aɪ wɪl ədmɪt ðəɾ aɪm kjʊɹiəs əbaʊt ðiz θivz. aɪv noʊn wɪmən θivz, ən bænz ə θivz, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ə bæn ʌv wɪmən θivz bɪfɔɹ. ən aɪ oʊ mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə feɪvɝz." hɪz aɪz sim tə ɹəkɔɹd nɪneɪiv ɔl oʊvɝ əɡɛn.

Sandar grimaced at the gray-haired woman, then apparently decided to ignore what she had said. He smiled at Nynaeve. "I will admit that I'm curious about these thieves. I've known women thieves, and bands of thieves, but I never heard of a band of women thieves before. And I owe Mother Guenna favors." His eyes seemed to record Nynaeve all over again.

"wʌt dʒju tʃɑɹdʒ?" ʃi æskt ʃɑɹpli.

"What do you charge?" she asked sharply.

"tə ɹɪkʌvɝ stoʊlən ɡʊdz," hi sɛd bɹɪskli, "aɪ æsk ðə tɛnθ pɑɹɾ ə ðə vælju ʌv wʌɾ aɪ ɹɪkʌvɝ. fəɹ faɪndɪŋ sʌmwʌn, aɪ æsk ə sɪlvɝ mɑɹk fəɹ itʃ pɝsən. mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə sɛz ðə θɪŋz stoʊlən əv lɪɾəl vælju ɪksɛp tə ju, mɪstʃɹəs, soʊ aɪ sədʒɛs jə teɪk ðət tʃɔɪs." hi smaɪld əɡɛn; hi hæd vɛɹi waɪt tiθ. "aɪ wəd nɑt teɪk mʌni fɹəm jə əɾ ɔl, ɪksɛp ðət ðə bɹʌðɝhʊd wəd fɹaʊn ɑn ɪt, bʌɾ əl teɪk əz lɪɾəl əz aɪ kæn. ə kɑpɝ əɹ tu, noʊ mɔɹ."

"To recover stolen goods," he said briskly, "I ask the tenth part of the value of what I recover. For finding someone, I ask a silver mark for each person. Mother Guenna says the things stolen have little value except to you, mistress, so I suggest you take that choice." He smiled again; he had very white teeth. "I would not take money from you at all, except that the brotherhood would frown on it, but I will take as little as I can. A copper or two, no more."

"aɪ noʊ ə θif-teɪkɝ," ɪleɪn toʊl hɪm. "fɹʌm ʃaɪnɝ. ə vɛɹi ɹɪspɛkfəl mæn. hi kæɹiz ə sɔɹɾ əz wɛl əz ə sɔɹd-bɹeɪkɝ. waɪ dʒju nɑt?"

"I know a thief-taker," Elayne told him. "From Shienar. A very respectful man. He carries a sword as well as a sword-breaker. Why do you not?"

sændɑɹ lʊk stɑɹɾəld fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ən ðən əpsɛt wɪð hɪmsɛlf fəɹ biɪŋ stɑɹɾəld. hi hæd nɑt kɑɾ əɹ hɪnt, əɹ ɛls hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɪt. "ju ɑɹ nɑt tɛɹən. aɪ hæv hɝɾ ə ʃaɪnɝ, mɪstʃɹəs, teɪlz ə tʃɹɑləks, ən ɛvɹi mæn ə wɔɹiɝ." hɪz smaɪl sɛd ðiz wɝ teɪlz fəɹ tʃɪlʒɹən.

Sandar looked startled for a moment, and then upset with himself for being startled. He had not caught her hint, or else had decided to ignore it. "You are not Tairen. I have heard of Shienar, mistress, tales of Trollocs, and every man a warrior." His smile said these were tales for children.

"tʃɹu stɔɹiz," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɔɹ tʃɹu ɪnʌf. aɪ hæv bɪn tə ʃaɪnɝ."

"True stories," Egwene said. "Or true enough. I have been to Shienar."

hi blɪŋkt ət hɝ, ən wɛn ɑn. "aɪ æm nɑɾ ə lɔɹd, nɔɹ ə wɛlθi mɝtʃənt, nɔɹ ivən ə soʊlʒɝ. ðə dɪfɛndɝz də nɑt tʃɹʌbəl fɔɹənɝz mʌtʃ fəɹ kæɹiɪŋ sɔɹdz - ənlɛs ðeɪ min tə steɪ lɔŋ, ʌv kɔɹs - bʌɾ aɪ wəd bi θɹʌst ɪndə ə sɛl ʌndɝ ðə stoʊn. ðəɹ ɑɹ lɔz, mɪstʃɹəs." hɪz hæn ɹʌbd əlɔŋ ɪz stæf, əz ɪf ʌnkɑnʃəsli. "aɪ də əz wɛl əz meɪ bi, wɪθaʊɾ ə sɔɹd." hi foʊkəst ɪz smaɪl ɑn nɪneɪiv wʌns mɔɹ. "naʊ, ɪf jəl dɪskɹaɪb ðiz θɪŋz - "

He blinked at her, and went on. "I am not a lord, nor a wealthy merchant, nor even a soldier. The Defenders do not trouble foreigners much for carrying swords - unless they mean to stay long, of course - but I would be thrust into a cell under the Stone. There are laws, mistress." His hand rubbed along his staff, as if unconsciously. "I do as well as may be, without a sword." He focused his smile on Nynaeve once more. "Now, if you will describe these things - "

hi stɑpt əz ʃi sɛɾ əɹ pɝs ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə teɪbəl ən kaʊntəɾ aʊt θɝtin sɪlvɝ mɑɹks. ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən ðə laɪɾəst kɔɪnz; moʊst wɝ tɛɹən, oʊnli wʌn ændɔɝən. ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd ɡɪvən əm ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv ɡoʊld, bʌɾ ivən ðət wəd nɑt læs fɝɛvɝ.

He stopped as she set her purse on the edge of the table and counted out thirteen silver marks. Egwene thought she had chosen the lightest coins; most were Tairen, only one Andoran. The Amyrlin had given them a great deal of gold, but even that would not last forever.

nɪneɪiv lʊkt ɪndə ðə pɝs θɔtfəli bɪfɔɹ taɪɾənɪŋ ðə stʃɹɪŋz ən pʊɾɪŋ ɪt bæk ɪndə hɝ paʊtʃ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ θɝtin wɪmən fəɹ jə tə faɪnd, mæstɝ sændɑɹ, wɪð əz mʌtʃ sɪlvɝ əɡɛn wən jə du. faɪn ðɛm, ən wɪl ɹɪkʌvɝ əɹ pɹɑpɝɾi aʊɝsɛlvz."

Nynaeve looked into the purse thoughtfully before tightening the strings and putting it back into her pouch. "There are thirteen women for you to find, Master Sandar, with as much silver again when you do. Find them, and we will recover our property ourselves."

"aɪ wɪl də ðət maɪsɛlf fəɹ lɛs ðən ðɪs," hi pɹətɛstəd. "æn ðɛɹz noʊ nid fəɹ ɛkstʃɹə ɹɪwɔɹdz. aɪ tʃɑɹdʒ wʌɾ aɪ tʃɑɹdʒ. hæv noʊ fɪɹ əl teɪk ə bɹaɪb."

"I will do that myself for less than this," he protested. "And there's no need for extra rewards. I charge what I charge. Have no fear I'll take a bribe."

"ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ fɪɹ ə ðæt," eɪlhuɪn əɡɹid. "aɪ sɛd hiz ɑnəst. dʒʌs də nɑt bɪliv ɪm ɪf i sɛz i lʌvz ju." sændɑɹ ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɝ.

"There is no fear of that," Ailhuin agreed. "I said he is honest. Just do not believe him if he says he loves you." Sandar glared at her.

"aɪ peɪ ðə kɔɪn, mæstɝ sændɑɹ," nɪneɪiv sɛd fɝmli, "soʊ aɪ tʃuz wʌɾ aɪm baɪɪŋ. wɪl jə faɪn ðiz wɪmən, ən noʊ mɔɹ?" ʃi weɪɾəd fəɹ ɪm tə nɑd, ɹɪlʌktənli, bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. "ðeɪ meɪ bi təɡɛðɝ, əɹ nɑt. ðə fɝst ɪz ə tæɹɑbənɝ. ʃiz ə lɪɾəl tɔlɝ ðən aɪ, wɪð dɑɹk aɪz ən peɪl, hʌni-kʌlɝd hɛɹ ðət ʃi wɛɹz ɪn mɛni smɔl bɹeɪdz æftɝ ðə tæɹɑbən fæʃən. səm mɛn maɪt θɪŋk əɹ pɹɪɾi, bʌt ʃi wəd nɑt kənsɪɾɝ ɪɾ ə kɑmpləmənt. ʃiz ə min, sʌlki maʊð. ðə sɛkən ɪz kændɔɹi. ʃiz lɔŋ blæk hɛɹ wɪð ə waɪt stʃɹik əbʌv əɹ lɛft ɪɹ, ænd. . . ."

"I pay the coin, Master Sandar," Nynaeve said firmly, "so I choose what I am buying. Will you find these women, and no more?" She waited for him to nod, reluctantly, before going on. "They may be together, or not. The first is a Taraboner. She is a little taller than I, with dark eyes and pale, honey-colored hair that she wears in many small braids after the Tarabon fashion. Some men might think her pretty, but she would not consider it a compliment. She has a mean, sulky mouth. The second is Kandori. She has long black hair with a white streak above her left ear, and. . . ."

ʃi ɡeɪv noʊ neɪmz, ən sændɑɹ æsk fəɹ nʌn. neɪmz wɝ soʊ izəli tʃeɪnʒd. hɪz smaɪl wɑz ɡɔn naʊ ðət ðə bɪznəs wɑz ət hænd. θɝtin wɪmən ʃi dɪskɹaɪbd əz i lɪsən ɪntɛnli, ən wən ʃi wɑz dʌn, ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ i cʊɾə ɹəsaɪɾəd əm bæk wɝd fəɹ wɝd.

She gave no names, and Sandar asked for none. Names were so easily changed. His smile was gone now that the business was at hand. Thirteen women she described as he listened intently, and when she was done, Egwene was sure he could have recited them back word for word.

"mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə meɪ hæv toʊl jə ðɪs," nɪneɪiv fɪnɪʃt, "bʌɾ əl ɹɪpiɾ ɪt. ðiz wɪmən ɑɹ mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən jə kən bɪliv. oʊvɝ ə dʌzən əv daɪɾ ət ðɛɹ hænz ɔlɹɛɾi, ðəɾ aɪ noʊ ʌv, ən aɪ wəd nɑt bi sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf ðət wɑz oʊnli ə dʒɹɑp ə ðə blʌɾ ɑn ðɛɹ hænz." sændɑɹ ən eɪlhuɪn boʊθ blɪŋkt ət ðæt. "ɪf ðeɪ dɪskʌvɝ jə ɑɹ æskɪŋ æftɝ ðɛm, jəl daɪ. ɪf ðeɪ teɪk ju, ðəl meɪk jə tɛl wɛɹ wi ɑɹ, ən mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə wɪl pɹɑbli daɪ wɪð ʌs." ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən lʊk dɪsbɪlivɪŋ. "bɪliv ɪt!" nɪneɪivz stɛɹ dɪmændəɾ əɡɹimənt. "bɪliv ɪt, əɹ əl teɪk bæk ðə sɪlvɝ ən faɪn ənʌðɝ wɪð mɔɹ bɹeɪnz!"

"Mother Guenna may have told you this," Nynaeve finished, "but I will repeat it. These women are more dangerous than you can believe. Over a dozen have died at their hands already, that I know of, and I would not be surprised if that was only a drop of the blood on their hands." Sandar and Ailhuin both blinked at that. "If they discover you are asking after them, you will die. If they take you, they will make you tell where we are, and Mother Guenna will probably die with us." The gray-haired woman looked disbelieving. "Believe it!" Nynaeve's stare demanded agreement. "Believe it, or I'll take back the silver and find another with more brains!"

"wɛn aɪ wɑz jʌŋ," sændɑɹ sɛd, vɔɪs sɪɹiəs, "ə kʌtpɝs pʊɾ əɹ naɪf ɪn maɪ ɹɪbz kəz aɪ θɔɾ ə pɹɪɾi jʌŋ ɡɝl wʊdn bi əz kwɪk tə stæb əz ə mæn. aɪ də nɑt meɪk ðət mɪsteɪk ɛnimɔɹ. əl bɪheɪv əz ɪf ðiz wɪmən ɑɹ ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən blæk ədʒɑ." ɛɡwin ɔlmoʊs tʃoʊkt, ən i ɡeɪv əɹ ə ɹufəl ɡɹɪn əz i skup ðə kɔɪnz ɪndə hɪz oʊn pɝs ən stʌk ɪt bɪhaɪn ɪz sæʃ. "aɪ dɪd nɑt min tə fɹaɪɾən ju, mɪstʃɹəs. ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn tɛɹ. ɪt meɪ teɪk ə fju deɪz, ənlɛs ðeɪ ɑɹ təɡɛðɝ. θɝtin wɪmən təɡɛðɝ wɪl bi izi tə faɪnd; əpɑɹt, ðəl bi hɑɹɾɝ. bʌɾ iðɝ weɪ, əl faɪn ðɛm. ən əl nɑt fɹaɪɾən əm əweɪ bɪfɔɹ jə lɝn wɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ."

"When I was young," Sandar said, voice serious, "a cutpurse put her knife in my ribs because I thought a pretty young girl wouldn't be as quick to stab as a man. I do not make that mistake anymore. I will behave as if these women are all Aes Sedai, and Black Ajah." Egwene almost choked, and he gave her a rueful grin as he scooped the coins into his own purse and stuck it behind his sash. "I did not mean to frighten you, mistress. There are no Aes Sedai in Tear. It may take a few days, unless they are together. Thirteen women together will be easy to find; apart, they will be harder. But either way, I will find them. And I will not frighten them away before you learn where they are."

wən i hæd dɑn ɪz stʃɹɔ hæɾ ən klɑɡz ən dɪpɑɹɾəd baɪ ðə bæk dɔɹ, ɪleɪn sɛd, "aɪ hoʊp hiz nɑɾ oʊvɝkɑnfɪɾənt. eɪlhuɪn, aɪ hɝd wʌɾ i sɛd bʌt. . . . hi dʌz ʌndɝstæn ðət ðeɪ ɑɹ deɪnʒɝəs, dʌz i nɑt?"

When he had donned his straw hat and clogs and departed by the back door, Elayne said, "I hope he is not overconfident. Ailhuin, I heard what he said but. . . . He does understand that they are dangerous, does he not?"

"hi hæz nɛvɝ bɪn ə ful ɪksɛp fəɹ ə pɛɹ ʌv aɪz əɹ ə pɹɪɾi æŋkəl," ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən sɛd, "æn ðəɾ ɪz ə feɪlɪŋ ʌv ɛvɹi mæn. hiz ðə bɛs θif-kætʃɝ ɪn tiɹ. hæv noʊ wɝi. hɪl faɪn ðiz dɑɹkfɹɛnz ə jʊɹz."

"He has never been a fool except for a pair of eyes or a pretty ankle," the gray-haired woman said, "and that is a failing of every man. He is the best thief-catcher in Tear. Have no worry. He will find these Darkfriends of yours."

"ɪt wɪl ɹeɪn əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ mɔɹnɪŋ." nɪneɪiv ʃɪvɝd, dɪspaɪt ðə wɔɹmθ ə ðə ɹum. "aɪ fil ə stɔɹm ɡæðɝɪŋ." eɪlhuɪn oʊnli ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ən sɛɾ əbaʊt fɪlɪŋ boʊlz wɪð fɪʃ sup fəɹ sʌpɝ.

"It will rain again before morning." Nynaeve shivered, despite the warmth of the room. "I feel a storm gathering." Ailhuin only shook her head and set about filling bowls with fish soup for supper.

æftɝ ðeɪ eɪɾ ən klin ʌp, nɪneɪiv ən eɪlhuɪn sæɾ ət ðə teɪbəl tɔkɪŋ ə ɝbz ən kjʊɹz. ɪleɪn wɝkt ɑn ə smɔl pætʃ ʌv ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ ə hɝ kloʊk, taɪni blu ən waɪt flaʊɝz, ðən ɹɛɾ ɪn ə kɑpi ʌv ði ɛseɪz ʌv wɪlɪm ə meɪnɪtʃɪz ðəɾ eɪlhuɪn hæɾ ɑn əɹ smɔl ʃɛlf ə bʊks. ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd ɹɛɾɪŋ, bʌt niðɝ ði ɛseɪz, nɔɹ ðə tʃɹævəlz ə dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ, nɔɹ ðə hjumɝəs teɪlz ʌv əliɹiə ɛlfɪn kəd hoʊld əɹ ɪntʃɹəs fəɹ mɔɹ ðən ə fju peɪdʒəz. ʃi fɪŋɡɝd ðə stoʊn tɛɹæŋɡɹil θɹu ðə bʊzəm ə hɝ dʒɹɛs. wɛɹ ɑɹ ðeɪ? wʌt də ðeɪ wɑn ɪn ðə hɑɹt? nʌn bʌt ðə dʒɹæɡən - nʌn bʌt ɹænd - kən tʌtʃ kælændɝ, soʊ wʌt də ðeɪ wɑnt? wʌt? wʌt?

After they ate and cleaned up, Nynaeve and Ailhuin sat at the table talking of herbs and cures. Elayne worked on a small patch of embroidery she had begun on the shoulder of her cloak, tiny blue and white flowers, then read in a copy of The Essays of Willim of Maneches that Ailhuin had on her small shelf of books. Egwene tried reading, but neither the essays, nor The Travels of Jain Farstrider, nor the humorous tales of Aleria Elffin could hold her interest for more than a few pages. She fingered the stone ter'angreal through the bosom of her dress. Where are they? What do they want in the Heart? None but the Dragon - none but Rand - can touch Callandor, so what do they want? What? What?

əz naɪt dipənd, eɪlhuɪn ʃoʊɾ əm itʃ tə ə bɛdʒɹum ɑn ðə sɛkən flɔɹ, bʌɾ æftɝ ʃi hæd ɡɔn tə hɝ oʊn, ðeɪ ɡæðɝɾ ɪn ɛɡwinz baɪ ðə laɪɾ ʌv ə sɪŋɡəl læmp. ɛɡwin hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ənʒɹəst tə hɝ ʃɪft; ðə kɔɹd hʌŋ 'ɹaʊn əɹ nɛk wɪð ðə tu ɹɪŋz. ðə stʃɹaɪp stoʊn fɛl fɑɹ hɛviɝ ðən ðə ɡoʊld. ðɪs wɑz wʌt ðeɪ hæd dʌn ɛvɹi naɪt sɪns livɪŋ tɑɹ vəlɑn, wɪð ðə soʊl ɪksɛpʃən ə ðət naɪt wɪð ði il.

As night deepened, Ailhuin showed them each to a bedroom on the second floor, but after she had gone to her own, they gathered in Egwene's by the light of a single lamp. Egwene had already undressed to her shift; the cord hung 'round her neck with the two rings. The striped stone felt far heavier than the gold. This was what they had done every night since leaving Tar Valon, with the sole exception of that night with the Aiel.

"weɪk mi æftɝ ən aʊɝ," ʃi toʊl ðɛm.

"Wake me after an hour," she told them.

ɪleɪn fɹaʊnd. "soʊ ʃɔɹt, ðɪs taɪm?"

Elayne frowned. "So short, this time?"

"du jə fil ənizi?" nɪneɪiv sɛd. "pɝhæps jə ɑɹ juzɪŋ ɪt tu ɔfən."

"Do you feel uneasy?" Nynaeve said. "Perhaps you are using it too often."

"wi wəd stɪl bi ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn skɹʌbɪŋ pɑts ən hoʊpɪŋ tə faɪn ə blæk sɪstɝ bɪfɔɹ ə ɡɹeɪ mæn faʊn əs ɪf aɪ hæd nɑt," ɛɡwin sɛd ʃɑɹpli. laɪt, ɪleɪnz ɹaɪt. aɪm snæpɪŋ laɪk ə sʌlki tʃaɪld. ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "pɝhæps aɪm ənizi. meɪbi ɪts kəz wəɹ soʊ kloʊz tə ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn, naʊ. soʊ kloʊs tə kælændɝ. soʊ kloʊs tə ðə tʃɹæp, wʌtɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz."

"We would still be in Tar Valon scrubbing pots and hoping to find a Black sister before a Gray Man found us if I had not," Egwene said sharply. Light, Elayne's right. I am snapping like a sulky child. She took a deep breath. "Perhaps I am uneasy. Maybe it is because we are so close to the Heart of the Stone, now. So close to Callandor. So close to the trap, whatever it is."

"bi kɛɹfəl," ɪleɪn sɛd, ən nɪneɪiv sɛd, mɔɹ kwaɪətli, "bi vɛɹi kɛɹfəl, ɛɡwin. pliz." ʃi wɑz tʌɡɪŋ əɹ bɹeɪɾ ɪn ʃɔɹt dʒɝks.

"Be careful," Elayne said, and Nynaeve said, more quietly, "Be very careful, Egwene. Please." She was tugging her braid in short jerks.

əz ɛɡwin leɪ daʊn ɑn ðə loʊ-poʊstɪd bɛd, wɪð əm ɑn stulz tə iðɝ saɪd, θʌndɝ ɹoʊld əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ. slip keɪm sloʊli.

As Egwene lay down on the low-posted bed, with them on stools to either side, thunder rolled across the sky. Sleep came slowly.

ɪt wɑz ðə ɹoʊlɪŋ hɪlz əɡɛn, əz ɔlweɪz ət fɝst, flaʊɝz ən bʌɾɝflaɪz ʌndɝ spɹɪŋ sʌnʃaɪn, sɑf bɹizɪz ən bɝdz sɪŋɪŋ. ʃi wɔɹ ɡɹin sɪlk, ðɪs taɪm, wɪð ɡoʊldən bɝdz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd oʊvɝ əɹ bɹɛsts, ən ɡɹin vɛlvət slɪpɝz. ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil sim laɪɾ ɪnʌf tə dʒɹɪft ʌp aʊɾ ə hɝ dʒɹɛs ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə weɪɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ hoʊldɪŋ ɪt daʊn.

It was the rolling hills again, as always at first, flowers and butterflies under spring sunshine, soft breezes and birds singing. She wore green silk, this time, with golden birds embroidered over her breasts, and green velvet slippers. The ter'angreal seemed light enough to drift up out of her dress except for the weight of the Great Serpent ring holding it down.

baɪ sɪmpəl tʃɹaɪəl ən ɛɹɝ ʃi hæd lɝn ə lɪɾəl ə ðə ɹulz ə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd - ivən ðɪs wɝld ə dʒɹimz, ðɪs ənsin wɝld, hæɾ ɪts ɹulz, ɪf ɑd wʌnz; ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ ə tɛnθ ə ðɛm - ən wʌn weɪ tə meɪk hɝsɛlf ɡoʊ wɛɹ ʃi wɑntəd. kloʊzɪŋ əɹ aɪz, ʃi ɛmptiɾ əɹ maɪn əz ʃi wəɾ əv tə ɛmbɹeɪs seɪaɪdɑɹ. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz izi, kəz ðə ɹoʊzbʌd kɛp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɔɹm, ən ʃi kɛp sɛnsɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, kɛpt eɪkɪŋ tə ɛmbɹeɪs ɪt, bʌt ʃi hæd tə fɪl ði ɛmptinəs wɪð sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. ʃi pɪktʃɝd ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn, əz ʃi hæd sin ɪɾ ɪn ðiz dʒɹimz, fɔɹmd ɪɾ ɪn ɛvɹi dɪteɪl, pɝfəkt wɪðɪn ðə vɔɪd. ðə hjudʒ, pɑlɪʃt ɹɛdstoʊn kɑləmz. ði eɪdʒ-wɔɹn stoʊnz ə ðə flɔɹ. ðə doʊm, fɑɹ oʊvɝhɛd. ðə kɹɪstəl sɔɹd, əntʌtʃəbəl, sloʊli ɹivɑlvɪŋ hɪlt-daʊn ɪn mɪdɛɹ. wən ɪt wɑz soʊ ɹil ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi kəd ɹitʃ aʊɾ ən tʌtʃ ɪt, ʃi oʊpən əɹ aɪz, ən ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ, ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn. əɹ ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn əz ɪɾ ɪɡzɪstəɾ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd.

By simple trial and error she had learned a little of the rules of Tel'aran'rhiod - even this World of Dreams, this Unseen World, had its rules, if odd ones; she was sure she did not know a tenth of them - and one way to make herself go where she wanted. Closing her eyes, she emptied her mind as she would have to embrace saidar. It was not as easy, because the rosebud kept trying to form, and she kept sensing the True Source, kept aching to embrace it, but she had to fill the emptiness with something else. She pictured the Heart of the Stone, as she had seen it in these dreams, formed it in every detail, perfect within the void. The huge, polished redstone columns. The age-worn stones of the floor. The dome, far overhead. The crystal sword, untouchable, slowly revolving hilt-down in midair. When it was so real she was sure she could reach out and touch it, she opened her eyes, and she was there, in the Heart of the Stone. Or the Heart of the Stone as it existed in Tel'aran'rhiod.

ðə kɑləmz wɝ ðɛɹ, ən kælændɝ. ən ɝaʊn ðə spɑɹklɪŋ sɔɹd, ɔlmoʊst əz dɪm ən ɪnsəbstæntʃəl əz ʃædoʊz, θɝtin wɪmən sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəd, stɛɹɪŋ ət kælændɝ əz ɪt ɹivɑlvd. hʌni-hɛɹd liɑnʒɹɪn tɝn əɹ hɛd, lʊkɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əɾ ɛɡwin wɪð ðoʊz bɪɡ, dɑɹk aɪz, ən əɹ ɹoʊzbʌd maʊθ smaɪld.

The columns were there, and Callandor. And around the sparkling sword, almost as dim and insubstantial as shadows, thirteen women sat cross-legged, staring at Callandor as it revolved. Honey-haired Liandrin turned her head, looking straight at Egwene with those big, dark eyes, and her rosebud mouth smiled.

ɡæspɪŋ, ɛɡwin sæɾ ʌp ɪn bɛd soʊ fæst ʃi ɔlmoʊs fɛl ɔf ðə saɪd.

Gasping, Egwene sat up in bed so fast she almost fell off the side.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ?" ɪleɪn dɪmændəd. "wʌt hæpənd? jə lʊk fɹaɪɾənd."

"What is the matter?" Elayne demanded. "What happened? You look frightened."

"ju oʊnli dʒʌs kloʊz jəɹ aɪz," nɪneɪiv sɛd sɔfli. "ðɪs ɪz ðə fɝs taɪm sɪns ðə vɛɹi bɪɡɪnɪŋ ðət juv kʌm bæk wɪθaʊɾ əs weɪkɪŋ ju. sʌmθɪŋ dɪd hæpən, dɪdn ɪt?" ʃi tʌɡd əɹ bɹeɪd ʃɑɹpli. "ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt?"

"You only just closed your eyes," Nynaeve said softly. "This is the first time since the very beginning that you've come back without us waking you. Something did happen, didn't it?" She tugged her braid sharply. "Are you all right?"

haʊ dɪɾ aɪ ɡɛt bæk? ɛɡwin wʌndɝd. laɪt, aɪ də nɑɾ ivən noʊ wʌɾ aɪ dɪd. ʃi nu ʃi wɑz oʊnli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊɾ ɔf wʌt ʃi hæd tə seɪ. ənfæsənɪŋ ðə kɔɹɾ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk, ʃi hɛl ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ən ðə lɑɹdʒɝ, twɪstəd tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɑn əɹ pɑm. "ðeɪ ɑɹ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ʌs," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə seɪ hu. "æn aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ noʊ wəɹ ɪn tiɹ."

How did I get back? Egwene wondered. Light, I do not even know what I did. She knew she was only trying to put off what she had to say. Unfastening the cord around her neck, she held the Great Serpent ring and the larger, twisted ter'angreal on her palm. "They are waiting for us," she said finally. There was no need to say who. "And I think they know we are in Tear."

aʊtsaɪd, ðə stɔɹm bɹoʊk oʊvɝ ðə sɪɾi.

Outside, the storm broke over the city.

ɹeɪn dʒɹʌmɪŋ ɑn ðə dɛk oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd, mæt stɛɹɾ ət ðə stoʊnz bɔɹɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl bɪtwin ɪm ən tɑm, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt ɹɪli kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ðə ɡeɪm, ivən wɪð ən ændɔɝən sɪlvɝ mɑɹk ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɑn ði aʊtkʌm. θʌndɝ kɹæʃt, ən laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt ɪn ðə smɔl wɪndoʊz. fɔɹ læmps lɪt ðə kæptənz kæbən ə ðə swɪft. blʌɾi ʃɪp meɪ bi əz slik əz ðə bɝd, bʌɾ ɪts stɪl teɪkɪŋ tu blʌɾi lɔŋ. ðə vɛsəl ɡeɪv ə smɔl dʒoʊlt, ðən ənʌðɝ; ðə moʊʃən sim tə tʃeɪnʒ. hi hæd bɛɾɝ nɑt ɹʌn əs ɪndə ðə blʌɾi mʌd! ɪf hiz nɑt meɪkɪŋ ðə bɛs taɪm i kən ɹɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðɪs bʌɾɝtʌb, əl stʌf ðət ɡoʊl daʊn ɪz θɹoʊt! jɔnɪŋ - hi hæd nɑt slɛpt wɛl sɪns livɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn; hi kəd nɑt stɑp wɝiɪŋ ɪnʌf tə slip wɛl - jɔnɪŋ, hi sɛɾ ə waɪt stoʊn ɑn ði ɪntɝsɛkʃən ə tu laɪnz; ɪn θɹi muvz, hi wəd kæptʃɝ nɪɹli ə fɪfθ ə tɑmz blæk stoʊnz.

Rain drumming on the deck over his head, Mat stared at the stones board on the table between him and Thom, but he could not really concentrate on the game, even with an Andoran silver mark riding on the outcome. Thunder crashed, and lightning flashed in the small windows. Four lamps lit the captain's cabin of the Swift. Bloody ship may be as sleek as the bird, but it's still taking too bloody long. The vessel gave a small jolt, then another; the motion seemed to change. He had better not run us into the bloody mud! If he is not making the best time he can wring out of this buttertub, I will stuff that gold down his throat! Yawning - he had not slept well since leaving Caemlyn; he could not stop worrying enough to sleep well - yawning, he set a white stone on the intersection of two lines; in three moves, he would capture nearly a fifth of Thom's black stones.

"ju kəd bi ə ɡʊd pleɪɝ, bɔɪ," ðə ɡlimən sɛɾ ɝaʊn ɪz paɪp, pleɪsɪŋ ɪz nɛkst stoʊn, "ɪf jə pʊt jəɹ maɪn tə ɪt." hɪz təbæk smɛld laɪk livz ən nʌts.

"You could be a good player, boy," the gleeman said around his pipe, placing his next stone, "if you put your mind to it." His tabac smelled like leaves and nuts.

mæt ɹitʃt fəɹ ənʌðɝ stoʊn fɹəm ðə paɪl əɾ ɪz ɛlboʊ, ðən blɪŋkt ən lɛɾ ɪt laɪ. ɪn ðə seɪm θɹi muvz, tɑmz stoʊnz wəd sɝaʊn oʊvɝ ə θɝɾ ə hɪz. hi hæd nɑt sin ɪt kʌmɪŋ, ən i kəd si noʊ ɪskeɪp. "du jə ɛvɝ luz ə ɡeɪm? hæv jə ɛvɝ lɔst ə ɡeɪm?"

Mat reached for another stone from the pile at his elbow, then blinked and let it lie. In the same three moves, Thom's stones would surround over a third of his. He had not seen it coming, and he could see no escape. "Do you ever lose a game? Have you ever lost a game?"

tɑm ɹimuvd ɪz paɪp ən nʌkəld ɪz mʌstæʃɪz. "nɑɾ ɪn ə lɔŋ waɪl. mɔɹɡeɪs juz tə bit mi əbaʊt hæf ðə taɪm. ɪts sɛd ɡʊd kəmændɝz ə soʊlʒɝz ən ɡʊd pleɪɝz ə ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm ɑɹ ɡʊɾ ət stoʊnz, əz wɛl. ʃiz ðə wʌn, ən aɪv noʊ daʊt ʃi kəd kəmæn ə bæɾəl, tu."

Thom removed his pipe and knuckled his mustaches. "Not in a long while. Morgase used to beat me about half the time. It is said good commanders of soldiers and good players of the Great Game are good at stones, as well. She is the one, and I've no doubt she could command a battle, too."

"wʊdn jə ɹæðɝ daɪs səm mɔɹ? stoʊnz teɪk tu mʌtʃ taɪm."

"Wouldn't you rather dice some more? Stones take too much time."

"aɪ laɪk ə tʃæns tə wɪn mɔɹ ðən wʌn tɔs ɪn naɪn əɹ tɛn," ðə waɪt-hɛɹd mæn sɛd dʒɹaɪli.

"I like a chance to win more than one toss in nine or ten," the white-haired man said dryly.

mæt baʊndəd tə hɪz fiɾ əz ðə dɔɹ bæŋd oʊpən tə ədmɪt kæptən dɝn. ðə skwɛɹ-feɪs mæn wɪpt ɪz kloʊk fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ʃeɪkɪŋ ðə ɹeɪn ɔf ən mʌɾɝɪŋ kɝsɪz tə hɪmsɛlf. "ðə laɪt sɪɹ maɪ boʊnz, aɪ də nɑt noʊ waɪ aɪ ɛvɝ lɛt jə haɪɝ swɪft. ju, dɪmændɪŋ mɔɹ fleɪmɪŋ spiɾ ɪn ðə blækəs naɪɾ əɹ ðə hɛviəst ɹeɪn. mɔɹ spid. ɔlweɪz mɔɹ blʌɾi spid! cʊɾə ɹʌn ɑn ə blʌɾi mʌdflæɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz oʊvɝ baɪ naʊ!"

Mat bounded to his feet as the door banged open to admit Captain Derne. The square-faced man whipped his cloak from his shoulders, shaking the rain off and muttering curses to himself. "The Light sear my bones, I do not know why I ever let you hire Swift. You, demanding more flaming speed in the blackest night or the heaviest rain. More speed. Always more bloody speed! Could have run on a bloody mudflat a hundred times over by now!"

"ju wɑntəd ðə ɡoʊld," mæt sɛd hɑɹʃli. "ju sɛd ðɪs hip ʌv oʊl bɔɹdz wɑz fæst, dɝn. wən də wi ɹitʃ tiɹ?"

"You wanted the gold," Mat said harshly. "You said this heap of old boards was fast, Derne. When do we reach Tear?"

ðə kæptən smaɪld ə taɪt smaɪl. "wi ɑɹ taɪɪŋ ɔf tə ðə dɑk, naʊ. ən bɝn mi fəɹ ə blʌɾi fɑɹmɝ ɪf aɪ kæɹi ɛniθɪŋ ðət kən fleɪmɪŋ tɔk ɛvɝ əɡɛn! naʊ, wɛɹ ɪz ðə ɹɛst ə maɪ ɡoʊld?"

The captain smiled a tight smile. "We are tying off to the dock, now. And burn me for a bloody farmer if I carry anything that can flaming talk ever again! Now, where is the rest of my gold?"

mæt hɝid tə wʌn ə ðə smɔl wɪndoʊz ən pɪɹɾ aʊt. ɪn ðə hɑɹʃ ɡlɛɹ ə laɪtnɪŋ flæʃɪz i kəd si ə wɛt stoʊn dɑk, ɪf nɑt mʌtʃ ɛls. hi fɪʃt ðə sɛkən pɝs ʌv ɡoʊl fɹəm ɪz pɑkəɾ ən tɔst ɪt tə dɝn. huɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ə ɹɪvɝmən u dɪdn daɪs! "əbaʊt taɪm," hi ɡɹaʊld. laɪt sɛn aɪm nɑt tu leɪt.

Mat hurried to one of the small windows and peered out. In the harsh glare of lightning flashes he could see a wet stone dock, if not much else. He fished the second purse of gold from his pocket and tossed it to Derne. Whoever heard of a riverman who didn't dice! "About time," he growled. Light send I'm not too late.

hi hæd stʌft ɔl ə hɪz spɛɹ kloʊðz ən ɪz blæŋkəts ɪndə ðə lɛðɝ skɹɪp, ən i hʌŋ ðəɾ ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ə hɪm ən ðə ɹoʊl ə faɪɹwɝks ɑn ði ʌðɝ, fɹəm ðə kɔɹɾ i taɪd tə ɪt. hɪz kloʊk kʌvɝɾ ɪɾ ɔl, bʌt ɡæpt ə lɪɾəl ɪn ðə fɹʌnt. bɛɾɝ i ɡɑt wɛt ðən ðə faɪɹwɝks. hi kəd dʒɹaɪ aʊɾ ən bi əz ɡʊɾ əz nu; ə tɛst wɪð ə bʌkət hæd ʃoʊn faɪɹwɝks kəd nɑt. aɪ ɡɛs ɹændz dɑ wɑz ɹaɪt. mæt hæɾ ɔlweɪz θɔt ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl wəd nɑt sɛɾ əm ɔf ɪn ðə ɹeɪn kəz ðeɪ meɪɾ ə bɛɾɝ ʃoʊ ɑn klɪɹ naɪts.

He had stuffed all of his spare clothes and his blankets into the leather scrip, and he hung that on one side of him and the roll of fireworks on the other, from the cord he tied to it. His cloak covered it all, but gapped a little in the front. Better he got wet than the fireworks. He could dry out and be as good as new; a test with a bucket had shown fireworks could not. I guess Rand's da was right. Mat had always thought the Village Council would not set them off in the rain because they made a better show on clear nights.

"ɑɹən jə əbaʊt ɹɛɾi tə sɛl ðoʊz θɪŋz?" tɑm wɑz sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪz ɡlimənz kloʊk ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. ɪt kʌvɝɾ ɪz lɛðɝ-keɪs hɑɹp ən flut, bʌɾ ɪz bʌndəl ə kloʊðz ən blæŋkəts i slʌŋ ɑn ɪz bæk aʊtsaɪd ðə pætʃ-kʌvɝd kloʊk.

"Aren't you about ready to sell those things?" Thom was settling his gleeman's cloak on his shoulders. It covered his leather-cased harp and flute, but his bundle of clothes and blankets he slung on his back outside the patch-covered cloak.

"nɑɾ əntɪl aɪ fɪɡjɝ aʊt haʊ ðeɪ wɝk, tɑm. bɪsaɪdz, θɪŋk wʌt fʌn ɪɾəl bi wən aɪ sɛɾ əm ɔl ɔf."

"Not until I figure out how they work, Thom. Besides, think what fun it will be when I set them all off."

ðə ɡlimən ʃʌɾɝəd. "æz lɔŋ əz jə doʊn də ɪɾ ɔl ət wʌns, bɔɪ. əz lɔŋ əz jə doʊn θɹoʊ ðɛm ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪs ət sʌpɝ. aɪd nɑt pʊɾ ɪt pæs ju, ðə weɪ juv bɪn bɪheɪvɪŋ wɪð ðɛm. jəɹ lʌki ðə kæptən hɪɹ dɪd nɑt θɹoʊ əs ɔf ðə ʃɪp tu deɪz əɡoʊ."

The gleeman shuddered. "As long as you don't do it all at once, boy. As long as you don't throw them in the fireplace at supper. I'd not put it past you, the way you've been behaving with them. You're lucky the captain here did not throw us off the ship two days ago."

"hi wʊdnt." mæt læft. "nɑt waɪl ðət pɝs wɑz ɪn ði ɔfɪŋ. ɛ, dɝn?"

"He wouldn't." Mat laughed. "Not while that purse was in the offing. Eh, Derne?"

dɝn wɑz tɔsɪŋ ðə pɝs ʌv ɡoʊld ɪn ɪz hænd. "aɪ hæv nɑɾ æsk bɪfɔɹ ðɪs, bʌt juv ɡɪvən mi ðə ɡoʊld, naʊ, ən jəl nɑt teɪk ɪt bæk. wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs ɔl əbaʊt? ɔl ðɪs fleɪmɪŋ spid."

Derne was tossing the purse of gold in his hand. "I have not asked before this, but you've given me the gold, now, and you'll not take it back. What is this all about? All this flaming speed."

"ə weɪdʒɝ, dɝn." jɔnɪŋ, mæt pɪkt ʌp ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf, ɹɛɾi tə ɡoʊ. "ə weɪdʒɝ."

"A wager, Derne." Yawning, Mat picked up his quarterstaff, ready to go. "A wager."

"ə weɪdʒɝ!" dɝn stɛɹɾ ət ðə hɛvi pɝs. ði ʌðɝ dʒʌs laɪk ɪt wɑz lɑkt ɪn ɪz mʌni tʃɛst. "ðɛɹ mʌs bi ə fleɪmɪŋ kɪŋdəm ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪt!"

"A wager!" Derne stared at the heavy purse. The other just like it was locked in his money chest. "There must be a flaming kingdom riding on it!"

"mɔɹ ðən ðæt," mæt sɛd.

"More than that," Mat said.

ɹeɪn bʌkəɾɪd daʊn ɑn ðə dɛk soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ i kəd nɑt si ðə ɡæŋplæŋk ɪksɛpt wən laɪtnɪŋ kɹækəld əbʌv ðə sɪɾi; ðə ɹɔɹ ə ðə daʊnpɔɹ bɛɹli lɛɾ ɪm hɪɹ hɪmsɛlf θɪŋk. hi kəd si laɪts ɪn wɪndoʊz ʌp ə stʃɹit, ðoʊ. ðəɹ wəd bi ɪnz, ʌp ðɛɹ. ðə kæptən hæd nɑt kʌm ɑn dɛk tə si ðɛm əʃɔɹ, ən nʌn ə ðə kɹu hæd steɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn ðə ɹeɪn, iðɝ. mæt ən tɑm meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ tə ðə stoʊn dɑk əloʊn.

Rain bucketed down on the deck so hard that he could not see the gangplank except when lightning crackled above the city; the roar of the downpour barely let him hear himself think. He could see lights in windows up a street, though. There would be inns, up there. The captain had not come on deck to see them ashore, and none of the crew had stayed out in the rain, either. Mat and Thom made their way to the stone dock alone.

mæt kɝst wən ɪz buts sæŋk ɪndə ðə mʌɾ ə ðə stʃɹit, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪt, soʊ hi kɛpt ɑn, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ əz fæst əz i kəd wɪð ɪz buts ən ðə bʌɾ ə hɪz stæf stɪkɪŋ əɾ ɛvɹi stɛp. ði ɛɹ smɛld ə fɪʃ, ɹæŋk ivən wɪð ðə ɹeɪn. "wil faɪn ən ɪn," hi sɛd, laʊdli, soʊ hi kəd bi hɝd, "æn ðən əl ɡoʊ aʊt lʊkɪŋ."

Mat cursed when his boots sank into the mud of the street, but there was nothing for it, so he kept on, striding along as fast as he could with his boots and the butt of his staff sticking at every step. The air smelled of fish, rank even with the rain. "We'll find an inn," he said, loudly, so he could be heard, "and then I will go out looking."

"ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ?" tɑm ʃaʊɾəd bæk. ɹeɪn wɑz ɹoʊlɪŋ daʊn ɪz feɪs, bʌɾ i wɑz mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn kipɪŋ ɪz ɪnstʃɹəməns kʌvɝd ðən ɪz feɪs.

"In this weather?" Thom shouted back. Rain was rolling down his face, but he was more interested in keeping his instruments covered than his face.

"koʊmɹ cʊɾə lɛf keɪɛmlɪn bɪfɔɹ ʌs. ɪf i hæɾ ə ɡʊd hɔɹs ɪnstɛɾ ə ðə kɹoʊbeɪts wi wɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ, hi cʊɾə sɛɾ aʊt daʊnɹɪvɝ fɹəm ɑɹɪŋɡəl meɪbi ə fʊl deɪ əhɛɾ ʌv ʌs, ən aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ mʌtʃ ə ðət wi kɑɾ ʌp wɪð ðəɾ ɪɾiət dɝn."

"Comar could have left Caemlyn before us. If he had a good horse instead of the crowbaits we were riding, he could have set out downriver from Aringill maybe a full day ahead of us, and I don't know how much of that we caught up with that idiot Derne."

"ɪt wɑz ə kwɪk pæsədʒ," tɑm əlaʊd. "swɪf dɪzɝvz ɪts neɪm."

"It was a quick passage," Thom allowed. "Swift deserves its name."

"bi ðəɾ əz ɪt meɪ, tɑm, ɹeɪn əɹ noʊ ɹeɪn, aɪ hæv tə faɪn ɪm bɪfɔɹ i faɪnz ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv, ən ɪleɪn."

"Be that as it may, Thom, rain or no rain, I have to find him before he finds Egwene and Nynaeve, and Elayne."

"ə fju mɔɹ aʊɝz woʊn meɪk mʌtʃ dɪfɝəns, bɔɪ. ðəɹ ɑɹ hʌnʒɹədz ʌv ɪnz ɪn ə sɪɾi ðə saɪz ə tɛɹ. ðəɹ meɪ bi hʌnʒɹədz mɔɹ aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔlz, səm ə ðɛm lɪɾəl pleɪsəz wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə dʌzən ɹumz tə lɛt, soʊ taɪni jə kəd wɔk ɹaɪt baɪ ðɛm ən nɛvɝ noʊ ðeɪ wɝ ðɛɹ." ðə ɡlimən hɪtʃt ðə hʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊk ʌp mɔɹ, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf. "ɪt wɪl teɪk wiks tə sɝtʃ əm ɔl. bʌɾ ɪɾəl teɪk koʊmɹ ðə seɪm wiks. wi kən spɛn ðə naɪɾ ɪn aʊɾ ə ðə ɹeɪn. jə kən weɪdʒɝ wʌtɛvɝ kɔɪn juv lɛf ðət koʊmɹ woʊn bi aʊɾ ɪn ɪt."

"A few more hours won't make much difference, boy. There are hundreds of inns in a city the size of Tear. There may be hundreds more outside the walls, some of them little places with no more than a dozen rooms to let, so tiny you could walk right by them and never know they were there." The gleeman hitched the hood of his cloak up more, muttering to himself. "It will take weeks to search them all. But it will take Comar the same weeks. We can spend the night in out of the rain. You can wager whatever coin you have left that Comar won't be out in it."

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. ə taɪni ɪn wɪð ə dʌzən ɹumz. bɪfɔɹ i lɛft ɛmənz fild, ðə bɪɡəs bɪldɪŋ i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin wɑz ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn. hi daʊɾɪd ɪf bɹæn ælvɪɹ hæɾ ɛni mɔɹ ðən ə dʌzən ɹumz tə lɛt. ɛɡwin hæd lɪvd wɪð əɹ pɛɹəns ən əɹ sɪstɝz ɪn ðə ɹumz ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə sɛkən flɔɹ. bɝn mi, səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk wi ʃəd nɛvɝ ɛni ʌv əs əv lɛft ɛmənz fild. bʌt ɹænd ʃʊɹli hæd hæd tə, ən ɛɡwin wəd pɹɑbli hæv daɪɾ ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt ɡɔn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. naʊ ʃi maɪt daɪ kəz ʃi dɪd ɡoʊ. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i kəd sɛɾəl fəɹ ðə fɑɹm əɡɛn; ðə kaʊz ən ðə ʃip sɝɾənli wəd nɑt pleɪ daɪs. bʌt pɛɹɪn stɪl hæɾ ə tʃæns tə ɡoʊ hoʊm. ɡoʊ hoʊm, pɛɹɪn, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf θɪŋkɪŋ. ɡoʊ hoʊm waɪl jə stɪl kæn. hi ɡeɪv hɪmsɛlf ə ʃeɪk. ful! waɪ wəɾ i wɑn tə? hi θɔɾ ə bɛd, bʌt pʊʃt ɪɾ əweɪ. nɑt jɛt.

Mat shook his head. A tiny inn with a dozen rooms. Before he left Emond's Field, the biggest building he had ever seen was the Winespring Inn. He doubted if Bran al'Vere had any more than a dozen rooms to let. Egwene had lived with her parents and her sisters in the rooms at the front of the second floor. Burn me, sometimes I think we should never any of us have left Emond's Field. But Rand surely had had to, and Egwene would probably have died if she had not gone to Tar Valon. Now she might die because she did go. He did not think he could settle for the farm again; the cows and the sheep certainly would not play dice. But Perrin still had a chance to go home. Go home, Perrin, he found himself thinking. Go home while you still can. He gave himself a shake. Fool! Why would he want to? He thought of bed, but pushed it away. Not yet.

laɪtnɪŋ stʃɹikt əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ, θɹi dʒæɡd boʊls təɡɛðɝ, kæstɪŋ ə stɑɹk laɪɾ oʊvɝ ə nɛɹoʊ haʊs ðət sim tə hæv bʌntʃəz ə ɝbz hæŋɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz, ən ə ʃɑp, ʃʌɾ ʌp taɪt, bʌɾ ə pɑɾɝz fɹəm ðə saɪn wɪð ɪts boʊlz ən pleɪts. jɔnɪŋ, hi hʌntʃt ɪz ʃoʊldɝz əɡɛns ðə dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ɹeɪn ən tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl ɪz buts aʊɾ ə ðə klɪŋɪŋ mʌd mɔɹ kwɪkli.

Lightning streaked across the sky, three jagged bolts together, casting a stark light over a narrow house that seemed to have bunches of herbs hanging in the windows, and a shop, shut up tight, but a potter's from the sign with its bowls and plates. Yawning, he hunched his shoulders against the driving rain and tried to pull his boots out of the clinging mud more quickly.

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kən fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊt ðɪs pɑɹɾ ə ðə sɪɾi, tɑm," hi ʃaʊɾəd. "ɔl ðɪs mʌd, ən ðət stɪŋk ə fɪʃ. kən jə si nɪneɪiv əɹ ɛɡwin - əɹ ɪleɪn! - tʃuzɪŋ tə steɪ hɪɹ? wɪmən laɪk θɪŋz niɾ ən taɪɾi, tɑm, ən smɛlɪŋ ɡʊd."

"I think I can forget about this part of the city, Thom," he shouted. "All this mud, and that stink of fish. Can you see Nynaeve or Egwene - or Elayne! - choosing to stay here? Women like things neat and tidy, Thom, and smelling good."

"meɪ bi, bɔɪ," tɑm mʌɾɝd, ðən kɔft. "ju wəd bi sɝpɹaɪzd wʌt wɪmən wɪl pʊɾ ʌp wɪð. bʌɾ ɪt meɪ bi."

"May be, boy," Thom muttered, then coughed. "You would be surprised what women will put up with. But it may be."

hoʊldɪŋ ɪz kloʊk tə kip ðə ɹoʊl ə faɪɹwɝks kʌvɝd, mæt lɛŋθən ɪz stʃɹaɪd. "kʌm ɑn, tɑm. aɪ wɑnə faɪn koʊmɹ əɹ ðə ɡɝlz tənaɪt, wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ."

Holding his cloak to keep the roll of fireworks covered, Mat lengthened his stride. "Come on, Thom. I want to find Comar or the girls tonight, one or the other."

tɑm lɪmpt æftɝ hɪm, kɑfɪŋ naʊ ən əɡɛn.

Thom limped after him, coughing now and again.

ðeɪ stʃɹoʊd θɹu ðə waɪd ɡeɪts ɪn ðə sɪɾi - ənɡɑɹɾɪd, ɪn ðə ɹeɪn - ən mæt wɑz ɹɪliv tə fil peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ʌndɝ ɪz fiɾ əɡɛn. ən nɑt mɔɹ ðən fɪfti peɪsɪz ʌp ðə stʃɹit wɑz ən ɪn, ðə wɪndoʊz ə ðə kɑmən ɹum spɪlɪŋ laɪɾ ɑntu ðə stʃɹit, mjuzɪk dʒɹɪftɪŋ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə naɪt. ivən tɑm kʌvɝd ðət læs fɪfti peɪsɪz θɹu ðə ɹeɪn kwɪkli, lɪmp əɹ noʊ lɪmp.

They strode through the wide gates in the city - unguarded, in the rain - and Mat was relieved to feel paving stones under his feet again. And not more than fifty paces up the street was an inn, the windows of the common room spilling light onto the street, music drifting out into the night. Even Thom covered that last fifty paces through the rain quickly, limp or no limp.

ðə waɪt kɹɛsən hæɾ ə lændlɔɹd huz ɡɝθ meɪɾ ɪz lɔŋ blu koʊt fɪt snʌɡli bɪloʊ ðə weɪst əz wɛl əz əbʌv, ənlaɪk ðoʊz ə moʊst ə ðə mɛn ɪn ðə loʊ-bæk tʃɛɹz ət ðə teɪbəlz. mæt θɔt ðə lændlɔɹdz bæɡi bɹitʃɪz, taɪɾ ət ði æŋkəl əbʌv loʊ ʃuz, hæd tə bi bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ tu ɔɹɾənɛɹi mɛn tə fɪɾ ɪnsaɪd, wʌn ɪn itʃ lɛɡ. ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən wɔɹ dɑɹk, haɪ-nɛk dʒɹɛsəz ən ʃɔɹt waɪɾ eɪpɹənz. ðəɹ wɑz ə fɛloʊ pleɪɪŋ ə hæmɝd dʌlsɪmɝ bɪtwin ðə tu stoʊn faɪɝpleɪsəz. tɑm aɪd ðə fɛloʊ kɹɪɾɪkəli ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. ðə ɹoʊtʌn ɪnkipɝ, keɪvən loʊpɝ baɪ neɪm, wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɡlæd tə ɡɪv əm ɹumz. hi fɹaʊn ət ðɛɹ mʌɾi buts, bʌt sɪlvɝ fɹəm mæts pɑkət - ðə ɡoʊld wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ loʊ - ən tɑmz pætʃ-kʌvɝd kloʊk smuðd ɪz fæt fɔɹhɛd. wən tɑm sɛɾ i wəd pɝfɔɹm fəɹ ə smɔl fi səm naɪts, loʊpɝz tʃɪnz wæɡəld wɪð plɛʒɝ. ʌv ə bɪɡ mæn wɪð ə waɪt stʃɹik ɪn ɪz bɪɹd, hi nu nʌθɪŋ, nɔɹ ə θɹi wɪmən miɾɪŋ ðə dɪskɹɪpʃənz mæt ɡeɪv. mæt lɛft ɛvɹiθɪŋ bʌɾ ɪz kloʊk ən ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf ɪn ɪz ɹum, bɛɹli lʊkɪŋ tə si ðəɾ ɪt hæɾ ə bɛd - slip wɑz ɛntaɪsɪŋ, bʌɾ i ɹəfjuz tə lɛt hɪmsɛlf θɪŋk ʌv ɪt - ðən wʊlf daʊn ə spaɪsi fɪʃ stu ən ɹʌʃt bæk aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹeɪn. hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz ðət tɑm keɪm wɪð hɪm.

The White Crescent had a landlord whose girth made his long blue coat fit snugly below the waist as well as above, unlike those of most of the men in the low-backed chairs at the tables. Mat thought the landlord's baggy breeches, tied at the ankle above low shoes, had to be big enough for two ordinary men to fit inside, one in each leg. The serving women wore dark, high-necked dresses and short white aprons. There was a fellow playing a hammered dulcimer between the two stone fireplaces. Thom eyed the fellow critically and shook his head. The rotund innkeeper, Cavan Lopar by name, was more than glad to give them rooms. He frowned at their muddy boots, but silver from Mat's pocket - the gold was running low - and Thom's patch-covered cloak smoothed his fat forehead. When Thom said he would perform for a small fee some nights, Lopar's chins waggled with pleasure. Of a big man with a white streak in his beard, he knew nothing, nor of three women meeting the descriptions Mat gave. Mat left everything but his cloak and his quarterstaff in his room, barely looking to see that it had a bed - sleep was enticing, but he refused to let himself think of it - then wolfed down a spicy fish stew and rushed back out into the rain. He was surprised that Thom came with him.

"aɪ θɔt jə wɑntəd tə bi ɪn wɛɹ ɪts dʒɹaɪ, tɑm."

"I thought you wanted to be in where it's dry, Thom."

ðə ɡlimən pæɾəd ðə flut keɪs i stɪl hæɾ ʌndɝ ɪz kloʊk. ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz θɪŋz wɝ ʌp ɪn ɪz ɹum. "pipəl tɔk tə ə ɡlimən, bɔɪ. aɪ meɪ lɝn sʌmθɪŋ jə wəd nɑt. aɪd nɑt laɪk tə si ðoʊz ɡɝlz hɑɹmd ɛni mɔɹ ðən ju."

The gleeman patted the flute case he still had under his cloak. The rest of his things were up in his room. "People talk to a gleeman, boy. I may learn something you would not. I'd not like to see those girls harmed any more than you."

ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ ɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz daʊn ðə ɹeɪn-fɪl stʃɹiɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, ən ənʌðɝ tu hʌnʒɹəd bɪɑn ðæt, ən ðən mɔɹ. mæt tʊk əm əz i keɪm tə ðɛm, dʌkɪŋ ɪn lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ tɑm tə flɝɪʃ ɪz kloʊk ən tɛl ə stɔɹi, ðən lɛt sʌmwʌn baɪ hɪm ə kʌp ʌv waɪn æftɝwɝdz waɪl mæt æskt ɝaʊn æftɝ ə tɔl mæn wɪð ə waɪt stʃɹik ɪn ɪz kloʊs-kʌt blæk bɪɹɾ ən θɹi wɪmən. hi wʌn ə fju kɔɪnz ət daɪs, bʌɾ i lɝnd nʌθɪŋ, ən niðɝ dɪd tɑm. hi wɑz dʒʌst ɡlæd ðə ɡlimən sim tə bi teɪkɪŋ oʊnli ə fju sɪps ʌv waɪn əɾ itʃ ɪn; tɑm hæd bɪn kloʊz tə əbstimiəs ɑn ðə boʊt, bʌt mæt hæd nɑt bɪn sɝɾən i wəd nɑt daɪv bæk ɪndə ðə waɪn wʌns ðeɪ ɹitʃt tiɹ. baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ hæd vɪzəɾəd tu dʌzən kɑmən ɹumz, mæt fɛlt əz ɪf ɪz aɪlɪdz hæd weɪts. ðə ɹeɪn hæd lɛsən ə bɪt, bʌɾ ɪt stɪl fɛl stɛɾəli ɪn bɪɡ dʒɹɑps, ən əz ðə ɹeɪn fɛl ɔf ðə wɪn hæd fɹɛʃənd. ðə skaɪ hæd ðə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ lʊk ə kʌmɪŋ dɔn.

There was another inn a hundred paces down the rain-filled street on the other side, and another two hundred beyond that, and then more. Mat took them as he came to them, ducking in long enough for Thom to flourish his cloak and tell a story, then let someone buy him a cup of wine afterwards while Mat asked around after a tall man with a white streak in his close-cut black beard and three women. He won a few coins at dice, but he learned nothing, and neither did Thom. He was just glad the gleeman seemed to be taking only a few sips of wine at each inn; Thom had been close to abstemious on the boat, but Mat had not been certain he would not dive back into the wine once they reached Tear. By the time they had visited two dozen common rooms, Mat felt as if his eyelids had weights. The rain had lessened a bit, but it still fell steadily in big drops, and as the rain fell off the wind had freshened. The sky had the dark gray look of coming dawn.

"bɔɪ," tɑm mʌɾɝd, "ɪf wi doʊnt ɡoʊ bæk tə ðə waɪt kɹɛsənt, aɪm gɑnə ɡoʊ tə slip hɪɹ ɪn ðə ɹeɪn." hi stɑp tə kɑf. "du jə ɹilaɪz juv mɑɹtʃt ɹaɪt pæs θɹi ɪnz? laɪt, aɪm soʊ taɪɝɾ aɪ kæn θɪŋk. juv ə skim ʌv wɛɹ tə ɡoʊ ðət juv nɑt toʊl mi?"

"Boy," Thom muttered, "if we don't go back to The White Crescent, I am going to go to sleep here in the rain." He stopped to cough. "Do you realize you've marched right past three inns? Light, I am so tired I can't think. Do you have a scheme of where to go that you have not told me?"

mæt stɛɹd blɝəli ʌp ðə stʃɹiɾ əɾ ə tɔl mæn ɪn ə kloʊk hɝiɪŋ ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ. laɪt, aɪm taɪɝd. ɹænd ɪz faɪv hʌnʒɹəd liɡz fɹəm hɪɹ, pleɪɪŋ ət biɪŋ ðə blʌɾi dʒɹæɡən. "wʌt? θɹi ɪnz?" ðeɪ wɝ stændɪŋ ɔlmoʊst ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ənʌðɝ, ðə ɡoʊldən kʌp əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə saɪn kɹikɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd. ɪt lʊk nʌθɪŋ laɪk ə daɪs kʌp, bʌɾ i dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɡɪv ɪɾ ə tʃɹaɪ ɛniweɪ. "wʌn mɔɹ, tɑm. ɪf wi doʊn faɪn əm hɪɹ, wɪl ɡoʊ bæk ən ɡoʊ tə bɛd." bɛd saʊndəd bɛɾɝ ðən ə daɪs ɡeɪm wɪð ə hʌnʒɹəd ɡoʊl mɑɹks ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə tɔs, bʌɾ i meɪd hɪmsɛlf ɡoʊ ɪn.

Mat stared blearily up the street at a tall man in a cloak hurrying around a corner. Light, I am tired. Rand is five hundred leagues from here, playing at being the bloody Dragon. "What? Three inns?" They were standing almost in front of another, The Golden Cup according to the sign creaking in the wind. It looked nothing like a dice cup, but he decided to give it a try anyway. "One more, Thom. If we don't find them here, we'll go back and go to bed." Bed sounded better than a dice game with a hundred gold marks riding on the toss, but he made himself go in.

tu stɛps ɪndə ðə kɑmən ɹum mæt sɔ hɪm. ðə bɪɡ mæn wɔɹ ə ɡɹin koʊt wɪð blu stʃɹaɪps daʊn pʌfi slivz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz koʊmɹ, kloʊs-kʌt blæk bɪɹd wɪð ə waɪt stʃɹik oʊvɝ ɪz tʃɪn ən ɔl. hi sæɾ ɪn wʌn ə ðə stʃɹeɪnʒli loʊ-bæk tʃɛɹz, əɾ ə teɪbəl ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum, ɹætlɪŋ ə lɛðɝ daɪs kʌp ən smaɪlɪŋ ət ðə mæn əkɹɔs fɹəm hɪm. ðət fɛloʊ wɔɹ ə lɔŋ koʊɾ ən bæɡi bɹitʃɪz, ən i wɑz nɑt smaɪlɪŋ. hi stɛɹɾ ət ðə kɔɪnz ɑn ðə teɪbəl əz ɪf wɪʃɪŋ i hæɾ əm bæk ɪn ɪz pɝs. ənʌðɝ daɪs kʌp sæɾ ət koʊmɹz ɛlboʊ.

Two steps into the common room Mat saw him. The big man wore a green coat with blue stripes down puffy sleeves, but it was Comar, close-cut black beard with a white streak over his chin and all. He sat in one of the strangely low-backed chairs, at a table on the far side of the room, rattling a leather dice cup and smiling at the man across from him. That fellow wore a long coat and baggy breeches, and he was not smiling. He stared at the coins on the table as if wishing he had them back in his purse. Another dice cup sat at Comar's elbow.

koʊmɹ ʌpɛndəd ðə lɛðɝ kʌp ɪn ɪz hænd, ən bɪɡæn læfɪŋ ɔlmoʊs bɪfɔɹ ðə daɪs stɑp spɪnɪŋ. "hu ɪz nɛkst?" hi kɔld laʊdli, pʊlɪŋ ðə weɪdʒɝ tə hɪz saɪɾ ə ðə teɪbəl. ðəɹ wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl paɪl ə sɪlvɝ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. hi skup ðə daɪs ɪndə ðə kʌp ən ɹæɾəld ðɛm. "ʃʊɹli sʌmwʌn ɛls wɑns tə tʃɹaɪ hɪz lʌk?" ɪt sim ðət noʊ wʌn dɪd, bʌɾ i kɛpt ɹætlɪŋ ðə kʌp ən læfɪŋ.

Comar upended the leather cup in his hand, and began laughing almost before the dice stopped spinning. "Who is next?" he called loudly, pulling the wager to his side of the table. There was already a considerable pile of silver in front of him. He scooped the dice into the cup and rattled them. "Surely someone else wants to try his luck?" It seemed that no one did, but he kept rattling the cup and laughing.

ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz izi tə pɪk aʊt, ðoʊ ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sim tə wɛɹ eɪpɹənz ɪn tɛɹ. hɪz koʊt wɑz ðə seɪm ʃeɪɾ ə dip blu əz ðəɾ ʌv ɛvɹi ʌðɝ ɪnkipɝ mæt hæd spoʊkən tə. ə plʌmp mæn, ðoʊ lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən hæf ðə saɪz ə loʊpɝ ən wɪð hæf ðət fɛloʊz nʌmbɝ ə tʃɪnz, hi wɑz sɪɾɪŋ əɾ ə teɪbəl baɪ hɪmsɛlf, pɑlɪʃɪŋ ə pjuɾɝ mʌɡ fjʊɹiəsli ən ɡlɛɹɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɹum təwɔɹd koʊmɹ, ðoʊ nɑt wən koʊmɹ wɑz lʊkɪŋ. səm ə ði ʌðɝ mɛn ɡeɪv ðə bɪɹɾəd mæn saɪɾɛlɔŋ fɹaʊnz, tu. bʌt nɑt wən i wɑz lʊkɪŋ.

The innkeeper was easy to pick out, though they did not seem to wear aprons in Tear. His coat was the same shade of deep blue as that of every other innkeeper Mat had spoken to. A plump man, though little more than half the size of Lopar and with half that fellow's number of chins, he was sitting at a table by himself, polishing a pewter mug furiously and glaring across the room toward Comar, though not when Comar was looking. Some of the other men gave the bearded man sidelong frowns, too. But not when he was looking.

mæt səpɹɛst ɪz fɝst ɝdʒ, wɪtʃ wɑz tə ɹʌʃ oʊvɝ tə koʊmɹ, dʒɹʌb ɪm oʊvɝ ðə hɛd wɪð ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf, ən dɪmæn tə noʊ wɛɹ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ. sʌmθɪŋ wɑz ɹɔŋ hɪɹ. koʊmɹ wɑz ðə fɝs mæn i hæd sin wɛɹɪŋ ə sɔɹd, bʌt ðə weɪ ðə mɛn lʊkt əɾ ɪm wɑz mɔɹ ðən fɪɹ ʌv ə sɔɝdzmən. ivən ðə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən u bɹɔt koʊmɹ ə fɹɛʃ kʌp ʌv waɪn - ən wɑz pɪntʃt fəɹ əɹ tʃɹʌbəl - hæɾ ə nɝvəs læf fəɹ hɪm.

Mat suppressed his first urge, which was to rush over to Comar, drub him over the head with his quarterstaff, and demand to know where Egwene and the others were. Something was wrong here. Comar was the first man he had seen wearing a sword, but the way the men looked at him was more than fear of a swordsman. Even the serving woman who brought Comar a fresh cup of wine - and was pinched for her trouble - had a nervous laugh for him.

lʊk əɾ ɪt fɹəm ɛvɹi saɪd, mæt θɔt wɛɹəli. hæf ðə tʃɹʌbəl aɪ ɡɛɾ ɪndə ɪz fɹəm nɑt duɪŋ ðæt. aɪ hæv tə θɪŋk. taɪɹədnəs sim tə hæv stʌft ɪz hɛd wɪð wʊl. hi moʊʃən tə tɑm, ən ðeɪ stʃɹoʊld oʊvɝ tə ði ɪnkipɝ, hu aɪɾ əm səspɪʃəsli wən ðeɪ sæt daʊn. "hu ɪz ðə mæn wɪð ðə stʃɹaɪp ɪn ɪz bɪɹd?" mæt æskt.

Look at it from every side, Mat thought wearily. Half the trouble I get into is from not doing that. I have to think. Tiredness seemed to have stuffed his head with wool. He motioned to Thom, and they strolled over to the innkeeper, who eyed them suspiciously when they sat down. "Who is the man with the stripe in his beard?" Mat asked.

"nɑt fɹəm ðə sɪɾi, ɑɹ ju?" ði ɪnkipɝ sɛd. "hi ɪz ə fɔɹənɝ, tu. aɪv nɛvɝ sin ɪm bɪfɔɹ tənaɪt, bʌɾ aɪ noʊ wʌɾ i ɪz. səm aʊtləndɝ u hæz kʌm hɪɹ ən meɪɾ ɪz fɔɹtʃən ɪn tʃɹeɪd. ə mɝtʃən ɹɪtʃ ɪnʌf tə wɛɹ ə sɔɹd. ðəɾ ɪz noʊ ɹizən fəɹ ɪm tə tʃɹiɾ əs laɪk ðɪs."

"Not from the city, are you?" the innkeeper said. "He is a foreigner, too. I've never seen him before tonight, but I know what he is. Some outlander who has come here and made his fortune in trade. A merchant rich enough to wear a sword. That is no reason for him to treat us like this."

"ɪf juv nɛvɝ sin ɪm bɪfɔɹ," mæt sɛd, "haʊ dʒju noʊ hiz ə mɝtʃənt?"

"If you have never seen him before," Mat said, "how do you know he is a merchant?"

ði ɪnkipɝ lʊkt əɾ ɪm əz ɪf i wɝ stupəd. "hɪz koʊt, mæn, ən ɪz sɔɹd. hi kænɑt bi ə lɔɹɾ əɹ ə soʊlʒɝ ɪf hiz fɹəm ɔf, soʊ hiz tə bi ə ɹɪtʃ mɝtʃənt." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd fəɹ ðə stupɪɾɪti ʌv fɔɹənɝz. "ðeɪ kʌm tə əɹ pleɪsəz, tə lʊk daʊn ðɛɹ noʊzɪz əɾ ʌs, ən fɑndəl ðə ɡɝlz ʌndɝ əɹ vɛɹi aɪz, bʌt hiz noʊ kɔl tə də ðɪs. ɪf aɪ ɡoʊ tə ðə mɔl, aɪ doʊnt ɡæmbəl fəɹ səm fɪʃɝmænz kɔɪnz. ɪf aɪ ɡoʊ tə ðə tɑvɑɹ, aɪ də nɑt daɪs wɪð ðə fɑɹmɝz kʌm tə sɛl ðɛɹ kɹɑps." hɪz pɑlɪʃɪŋ ɡeɪn ɪn fɝɑsəɾi. "sʌtʃ lʌk, ðə mæn hæz. ɪt mʌs bi haʊ hi meɪɾ ɪz fɔɹtʃən."

The innkeeper looked at him as if he were stupid. "His coat, man, and his sword. He cannot be a lord or a soldier if he's from off, so he has to be a rich merchant." He shook his head for the stupidity of foreigners. "They come to our places, to look down their noses at us, and fondle the girls under our very eyes, but he has no call to do this. If I go to the Maule, I don't gamble for some fisherman's coins. If I go to the Tavar, I do not dice with the farmers come to sell their crops." His polishing gained in ferocity. "Such luck, the man has. It must be how he made his fortune."

"hi wɪnz, dʌz hi?" jɔnɪŋ, mæt wʌndɝd haʊ hi wəd də dɪsɪŋ wɪð ənʌðɝ mæn u hæd lʌk.

"He wins, does he?" Yawning, Mat wondered how he would do dicing with another man who had luck.

"səmtaɪmz i luzəz," ði ɪnkipɝ mʌɾɝd, "wɛn ðə steɪk ɪz ə fju sɪlvɝ pɛniz. səmtaɪmz. bʌt lɛɾ ɪt ɹitʃ ə sɪlvɝ mɑɹk. . . . noʊ lɛs ðən ə dʌzən taɪmz tənaɪt, aɪ hæv sin ɪm wɪn ət kɹaʊnz wɪð θɹi kɹaʊnz ən tu ɹoʊzɪz. ən hæf əɡɛn əz ɔfən, ət tɑp, ɪts bɪn θɹi sɪksɪz ən tu faɪvz. hi tɔsɪz nʌθɪŋ bʌt sɪksɪz ət θɹiz, ən θɹi sɪksɪz ən ə faɪv ɛvɹi θɹoʊ ət kʌmpəs. ɪf hiz sətʃ lʌk, aɪ seɪ ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn hɪm, ən wɛl tə hɪm, bʌt lɛɾ ɪm juz ɪt wɪð ʌðɝ mɝtʃəns, əz ɪz pɹɑpɝ. haʊ kən ə mæn əv sətʃ lʌk?"

"Sometimes he loses," the innkeeper muttered, "when the stake is a few silver pennies. Sometimes. But let it reach a silver mark. . . . No less than a dozen times tonight, I have seen him win at Crowns with three crowns and two roses. And half again as often, at Top, it has been three sixes and two fives. He tosses nothing but sixes at Threes, and three sixes and a five every throw at Compass. If he has such luck, I say the Light shine on him, and well to him, but let him use it with other merchants, as is proper. How can a man have such luck?"

"weɪɾɪd daɪs," tɑm sɛd, ðən kɔft. "wɛn i wɑns tə bi ʃʊɹ ʌv wɪnɪŋ, hi juzɪz daɪs ðəɾ ɔlweɪz ʃoʊ ðə seɪm feɪs. hiz smɑɹɾ ɪnʌf nɑt tə hæv meɪɾ ɪt ðə haɪəs tɔs - foʊk bɪkʌm səspɪʃəs ɪf jə ɔlweɪz θɹoʊ ðə kɪŋ" - hi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət mæt - "dʒʌst wʌn ðæts ɔl bʌɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl tə bit, bʌɾ i kænɑt tʃeɪnʒ ðət ðeɪ ɔlweɪz ʃoʊ ðə seɪm feɪs."

"Weighted dice," Thom said, then coughed. "When he wants to be sure of winning, he uses dice that always show the same face. He is smart enough not to have made it the highest toss - folk become suspicious if you always throw the king" - he raised an eyebrow at Mat - "just one that's all but impossible to beat, but he cannot change that they always show the same face."

"aɪ hæv hɝɾ ə sʌtʃ," ði ɪnkipɝ sɛd sloʊli. "ɪliɑnɝz juz ðɛm, aɪ hɪɹ." ðən i ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "bʌt boʊθ mɛn juz ðə seɪm kʌp ən daɪs. ɪt kænɑt bi."

"I have heard of such," the innkeeper said slowly. "Illianers use them, I hear." Then he shook his head. "But both men use the same cup and dice. It cannot be."

"bɹɪŋ mi tu daɪs kʌps," tɑm sɛd, "æn tu sɛts ə daɪs. kɹaʊnz əɹ spɑts, ɪt meɪks noʊ dɪfɝəns, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə seɪm."

"Bring me two dice cups," Thom said, "and two sets of dice. Crowns or spots, it makes no difference, so long as they are the same."

ði ɪnkipɝ fɹaʊn ət hɪm, bʌt lɛft - pɹuɾəntli teɪkɪŋ ðə pjuɾɝ kʌp wɪð ɪm - ən keɪm bæk wɪð tu lɛðɝ kʌps. tɑm ɹoʊl ðə faɪv boʊn kjubz fɹəm wʌn ɑntu ðə teɪbəl ɪn fɹʌn ə mæt. wɛðɝ wɪð spɑts əɹ sɪmbəlz, ɛvɹi sɛɾ ə daɪs mæt hæɾ ɛvɝ sin hæd bɪn iðɝ boʊn əɹ wʊd. ðiz hæd spɑts. hi pɪkt əm ʌp, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət tɑm. "æm aɪ səpoʊz tə si sʌmθɪŋ?"

The innkeeper frowned at him, but left - prudently taking the pewter cup with him - and came back with two leather cups. Thom rolled the five bone cubes from one onto the table in front of Mat. Whether with spots or symbols, every set of dice Mat had ever seen had been either bone or wood. These had spots. He picked them up, frowning at Thom. "Am I supposed to see something?"

tɑm dʌmp ðə daɪs fɹəm ði ʌðɝ kʌp ɪndə hɪz hænd, ðɛn, ɔlmoʊs tu kwɪkli tə fɑloʊ, dʒɹɑpt əm bæk ɪn ən twɪstəd ðə kʌp oʊvɝ tə ɹɛst ʌpsaɪd daʊn ɑn ðə teɪbəl bɪfɔɹ ðə daɪs kəd fɔl aʊt. hi kɛpt ɪz hæn ɑn tɑp ə ðə kʌp. "pʊɾ ə mɑɹk ɑn itʃ ə ðɛm, bɔɪ. sʌmθɪŋ smɔl, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ jəl noʊ fəɹ jəɹ mɑɹk."

Thom dumped the dice from the other cup into his hand, then, almost too quickly to follow, dropped them back in and twisted the cup over to rest upside down on the table before the dice could fall out. He kept his hand on top of the cup. "Put a mark on each of them, boy. Something small, but something you'll know for your mark."

mæt faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ pʌzəld ɡlænsɪz wɪð ði ɪnkipɝ. ðən ðeɪ boʊθ lʊkt ət ðə kʌp ʌpsaɪd daʊn ʌndɝ tɑmz hænd. hi nu tɑm wɑz ʌp tə sʌmθɪŋ tʃɹɪki - ɡlimən wɝ ɔlweɪz duɪŋ θɪŋz ðət wɝ ɪmpɑsəbəl, laɪk iɾɪŋ faɪɝ ən pʊlɪŋ sɪlk aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ - bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt si haʊ tɑm kəd də ɛniθɪŋ wɪð ɪm wɑtʃɪŋ kloʊs. hi ənʃiðd ɪz bɛl naɪf ən meɪɾ ə smɔl skɹætʃ ɑn itʃ daɪ, ɹaɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə sɝkəl ə sɪks spɑts.

Mat found himself exchanging puzzled glances with the innkeeper. Then they both looked at the cup upside down under Thom's hand. He knew Thom was up to something tricky - gleemen were always doing things that were impossible, like eating fire and pulling silk out of the air - but he did not see how Thom could do anything with him watching close. He unsheathed his belt knife and made a small scratch on each die, right across the circle of six spots.

"ɔl ɹaɪt," hi sɛd, sɛɾɪŋ əm bæk ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "ʃoʊ mi jəɹ tʃɹɪk."

"All right," he said, setting them back on the table. "Show me your trick."

tɑm ɹitʃt oʊvɝ ən pɪkt ʌp ðə daɪs, ðən sɛɾ əm daʊn əɡɛn ə fʊɾ əweɪ. "lʊk fəɹ jəɹ mɑɹks, bɔɪ."

Thom reached over and picked up the dice, then set them down again a foot away. "Look for your marks, boy."

mæt fɹaʊnd. tɑmz hænd wɑz stɪl ɑn ði ʌpɛndəd lɛðɝ kʌp; ðə ɡlimən hæd nɑt muvd ɪɾ əɹ teɪkən mæts daɪs ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ ɪt. hi pɪkt ʌp ðə daɪs . . . ən blɪŋkt. ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə skɹætʃ ɑn ðɛm. ði ɪn-kipɝ ɡæspt.

Mat frowned. Thom's hand was still on the upended leather cup; the gleeman had not moved it or taken Mat's dice anywhere near it. He picked up the dice . . . and blinked. There was not a scratch on them. The inn-keeper gasped.

tɑm tɝn ɪz fɹi hæn oʊvɝ, ɹɪvilɪŋ faɪv daɪs. "jɔɹ mɑɹks ɑɹ ɑn ðiz. ðəɾ ɪz wʌt koʊmɹ ɪz duɪŋ. ɪts ə tʃaɪlz tʃɹɪk, sɪmpəl, ðoʊ aɪd nɛvɝ əv θɔɾ i hæd ðə fɪŋɡɝz fəɹ ɪt."

Thom turned his free hand over, revealing five dice. "Your marks are on these. That is what Comar is doing. It is a child's trick, simple, though I'd never have thought he had the fingers for it."

"aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk aɪ wɑnə pleɪ daɪs wɪð jə æftɝ ɔl," mæt sɛd sloʊli. ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə daɪs, bʌt nɑɾ əz ɪf i sɔ ɛni səluʃən. "kɔl ðə wɑtʃ, əɹ wʌtɛvɝ jə kɔl ɪt hɪɹ," mæt toʊl hɪm. "hæv ɪm ɝɛstəd." hɪl kɪl noʊbɑdi ɪn ə pɹɪzən sɛl. jɛt wʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi dɛd? hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lɪsən, bʌt ðə θɔt pɝsɪstəd. ðən əl si hɪm dɛd, ən ɡeɪbɹəl, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt teɪks! bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹənt, bɝn mi! ðeɪ kæn bi!

"I do not think I want to play dice with you after all," Mat said slowly. The innkeeper was staring at the dice, but not as if he saw any solution. "Call the Watch, or whatever you call it here," Mat told him. "Have him arrested." He'll kill nobody in a prison cell. Yet what if they are already dead? He tried not to listen, but the thought persisted. Then I'll see him dead, and Gaebril, whatever it takes! But they aren't, burn me! They can't be!

ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "mi? mi, dɪnaʊns ə mɝtʃən tə ðə dɪfɛndɝz? ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ ivən lʊk əɾ ɪz daɪs. hi kəd seɪ wʌn wɝd, ən aɪ wəd bi ɪn tʃeɪnz wɝkɪŋ ðə tʃænɛldʒɹɛdʒɪz ɪn ðə fɪŋɡɝz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən. hi kəd kʌt mi daʊn wɛɹ aɪ stʊd, ən ðə dɪfɛndɝz wəd seɪ aɪ hæɾ ɝn ɪt. pɝhæps hɪl ɡoʊ əweɪ æftɝ ə waɪl."

The innkeeper was shaking his head. "Me? Me, denounce a merchant to the Defenders? They would not even look at his dice. He could say one word, and I would be in chains working the channeldredges in the Fingers of the Dragon. He could cut me down where I stood, and the Defenders would say I had earned it. Perhaps he will go away after a while."

mæt ɡeɪv ɪm ə ɹaɪ ɡɹɪmɑs. "ɪf aɪ ɪkspoʊz hɪm, wɪl ðət bi ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf? wɪl jə kɔl ðə wɑtʃ, əɹ ðə dɪfɛndɝz əɹ huɛvɝ, ðɛn?"

Mat gave him a wry grimace. "If I expose him, will that be good enough? Will you call the Watch, or the Defenders or whoever, then?"

"ju də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. jə ɑɹ ə fɔɹənɝ. ivən ɪf hiz fɹəm ɔf, hiz ə wɛlθi mæn, ɪmpɔɹɾənt."

"You do not understand. You are a foreigner. Even if he is from off, he is a wealthy man, important."

"weɪt hɪɹ," mæt toʊl tɑm. "aɪ də nɑt min tə lɛɾ ɪm ɹitʃ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt teɪks." hi jɔn əz i skɹeɪp bæk ɪz tʃɛɹ.

"Wait here," Mat told Thom. "I do not mean to let him reach Egwene and the others, whatever it takes." He yawned as he scraped back his chair.

"weɪt, bɔɪ," tɑm kɔld æftɝ hɪm, sɑf jɛɾ ɝdʒənt. ðə ɡlimən pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf ʌp aʊɾ ə hɪz tʃɛɹ. "bɝn ju, jə doʊnt noʊ wʌt jəɹ pʊɾɪŋ jəɹ fʊɾ ɪntu!"

"Wait, boy," Thom called after him, soft yet urgent. The gleeman pushed himself up out of his chair. "Burn you, you don't know what you're putting your foot into!"

mæt weɪv fəɹ ɪm tə steɪ ðəɹ ən wɔkt oʊvɝ tə koʊmɹ. noʊ wʌn ɛls hæd teɪkən ʌp ðə bɪɹɾəd mænz tʃælənʒ, ən i aɪd mæt wɪð ɪntʃɹəst əz mæt lin ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf əɡɛns ðə teɪbəl ən sæt daʊn.

Mat waved for him to stay there and walked over to Comar. No one else had taken up the bearded man's challenge, and he eyed Mat with interest as Mat leaned his quarterstaff against the table and sat down.

koʊmɹ stʌɾid mæts koʊɾ ən ɡɹɪnd næstəli. "ju wɑnə weɪdʒɝ kɑpɝz, fɑɹmɝ? aɪ də nɑt weɪs maɪ taɪm wɪð - " hi kʌɾ ɔf əz mæt sɛɾ ən ændɔɝən ɡoʊl kɹaʊn ɑn ðə teɪbəl ən jɔn ət hɪm, meɪkɪŋ noʊ ɛfɝt tə kʌvɝ ɪz maʊθ. "ju seɪ lɪɾəl, fɑɹmɝ, ðoʊ jəɹ mænɝz kəd juz ɪmpɹuvɪŋ, bʌt ɡoʊld əz ə vɔɪs ʌv ɪts oʊn ən noʊ niɾ ə mænɝz." hi ʃʊk ðə lɛðɝ kʌp ɪn ɪz hæn ən spɪl ðə daɪs aʊt. hi wɑz tʃʌklɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ keɪm tə ɹɛst, ʃoʊɪŋ θɹi kɹaʊnz ən tu ɹoʊzɪz. "jul nɑt bit ðæt, fɑɹmɝ. pɝhæps juv mɔɹ ɡoʊl hɪɾən ɪn ðoʊz ɹæɡz ðət jə wɑnə luz? wʌd jə du? ɹɑb jəɹ mæstɝ?"

Comar studied Mat's coat and grinned nastily. "You want to wager coppers, farmer? I do not waste my time with - " He cut off as Mat set an Andoran gold crown on the table and yawned at him, making no effort to cover his mouth. "You say little, farmer, though your manners could use improving, but gold has a voice of its own and no need of manners." He shook the leather cup in his hand and spilled the dice out. He was chuckling before they came to rest, showing three crowns and two roses. "You'll not beat that, farmer. Perhaps you have more gold hidden in those rags that you want to lose? What did you do? Rob your master?"

hi ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə daɪs, bʌt mæt skupt əm ʌp əhɛɾ ə hɪm. koʊmɹ ɡlɛɹd, bʌt lɛɾ ɪm əv ðə kʌp. ɪf boʊθ tɔsɪz wɝ ðə seɪm, ðeɪ wəd θɹoʊ əɡɛn əntɪl wʌn mæn wʌn. mæt smaɪld əz i ɹæɾəld ðə daɪs. hi dɪd nɑt min tə ɡɪv koʊmɹ ə tʃæns tə tʃeɪnʒ ðɛm. ɪf ðeɪ θɹu ðə seɪm tɔs θɹi əɹ fɔɹ taɪmz ɪn ə ɹoʊ - ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm, ɛvɹi taɪm - ivən ðiz dɪfɛndɝz wəd lɪsən. ðə hoʊl kɑmən ɹum wəd si; ðeɪ wəɾ əv tə bæk ɪz wɝd.

He reached for the dice, but Mat scooped them up ahead of him. Comar glared, but let him have the cup. If both tosses were the same, they would throw again until one man won. Mat smiled as he rattled the dice. He did not mean to give Comar a chance to change them. If they threw the same toss three or four times in a row - exactly the same, every time - even these Defenders would listen. The whole common room would see; they would have to back his word.

hi spɪl ðə daɪs ɑntu ðə teɪbəltɑp. ðeɪ baʊnst ɑdli. hi fɛlt - sʌmθɪŋ - ʃɪftɪŋ. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ɪz lʌk hæd ɡɔn waɪld. ðə ɹum sim tə bi ɹaɪðɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm, tʌɡɪŋ ət ðə daɪs wɪð θɹɛdz. fəɹ səm ɹizən i wɑntəd tə lʊk ət ðə dɔɹ, bʌɾ i kɛpt ɪz aɪz ɑn ðə daɪs. ðeɪ keɪm tə ɹɛst. faɪv kɹaʊnz. koʊmɹz aɪz lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə pɑp aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd.

He spilled the dice onto the tabletop. They bounced oddly. He felt - something - shifting. It was as if his luck had gone wild. The room seemed to be writhing around him, tugging at the dice with threads. For some reason he wanted to look at the door, but he kept his eyes on the dice. They came to rest. Five crowns. Comar's eyes looked ready to pop out of his head.

"ju luz," mæt sɛd sɔfli. ɪf ɪz lʌk wɑz ɪn tə ðɪs ɪkstɛnt, pɝhæps ɪt wɑz taɪm tə pʊʃ ɪt. ə vɔɪs ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd toʊld ɪm tə θɪŋk, bʌɾ i wɑz tu taɪɝd tə lɪsən. "aɪ θɪŋk jəɹ lʌk ɪz əbaʊt juzd ʌp, koʊmɹ. ɪf juv hɑɹm ðoʊz ɡɝlz, ɪts ɔl ɡɔn."

"You lose," Mat said softly. If his luck was in to this extent, perhaps it was time to push it. A voice in the back of his head told him to think, but he was too tired to listen. "I think your luck is about used up, Comar. If you've harmed those girls, it's all gone."

"aɪ hæv nɑɾ ivən faʊnd . . ." koʊmɹ bɪɡæn, stɪl stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə daɪs, ðən dʒɝkt ɪz hɛɾ ʌp. hɪz feɪs hæd ɡɔn waɪt. "haʊ dʒju noʊ maɪ neɪm?"

"I have not even found . . ." Comar began, still staring at the dice, then jerked his head up. His face had gone white. "How do you know my name?"

hi hæd nɑt faʊn ðɛm, jɛt. lʌk, swit lʌk, steɪ wɪð mi. "ɡoʊ bæk tə keɪɛmlɪn, koʊmɹ. tɛl ɡeɪbɹəl jə kəd nɑt faɪn ðɛm. tɛl ɪm ðeɪ ɑɹ dɛd. tɛl ɪm ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt liv tɛɹ tənaɪt. ɪf aɪ si jə əɡɛn, əl kɪl ju."

He had not found them, yet. Luck, sweet luck, stay with me. "Go back to Caemlyn, Comar. Tell Gaebril you could not find them. Tell him they are dead. Tell him anything, but leave Tear tonight. If I see you again, I'll kill you."

"hu ɑɹ ju?" ðə bɪɡ mæn sɛɾ ənstɛɾəli. "hu - ?" ðə nɛkst ɪnstən ɪz sɔɹd wɑz aʊɾ ən i wɑz ɑn ɪz fit.

"Who are you?" the big man said unsteadily. "Who - ?" The next instant his sword was out and he was on his feet.

mæt ʃʌv ðə teɪbəl ət hɪm, oʊvɝtɝnɪŋ ɪt, ən ɡɹæb fəɹ ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf. hi hæd fɝɡɑɾən haʊ bɪɡ koʊmɹ wɑz. ðə bɪɹɾəd mæn pʊʃt ðə teɪbəl ɹaɪt bæk ət hɪm. mæt fɛl oʊvɝ wɪð ɪz tʃɛɹ, hoʊldɪŋ ə bɛɹ ɡɹæsp ɑn ɪz stæf, əz koʊmɹ hiv ðə teɪbəl aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ən stæbd ət hɪm. mæt θɹu hɪz fiɾ əɡɛns ðə mænz mɪɾəl tə stɑp ɪz ɹʌʃ, swʌŋ ðə stæf ɔkwɝdli, dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə dɪflɛk ðə sɔɹd. bʌt ðə bloʊ nɑk ðə stæf fɹəm ɪz fɪŋɡɝz, ən i faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɡɹɪpɪŋ koʊmɹz ɹɪst, ɪnstɛd, wɪð ðə mænz bleɪɾ ə hæn fɹəm ɪz feɪs. wɪð ə ɡɹʌn i ɹoʊl bækwɝdz, hivɪŋ əz hɑɹɾ əz i kəd wɪð ɪz lɛɡz. koʊmɹz aɪz waɪɾənd əz i seɪld oʊvɝ mæt tə kɹæʃ ɑntu ə teɪbəl, feɪs ʌp. mæt skɹæmbəl fəɹ ɪz stæf, bʌt wən i hæɾ ɪt, koʊmɹ hæd nɑt muvd.

Mat shoved the table at him, overturning it, and grabbed for his quarterstaff. He had forgotten how big Comar was. The bearded man pushed the table right back at him. Mat fell over with his chair, holding a bare grasp on his staff, as Comar heaved the table out of the way and stabbed at him. Mat threw his feet against the man's middle to stop his rush, swung the staff awkwardly, just enough to deflect the sword. But the blow knocked the staff from his fingers, and he found himself gripping Comar's wrist, instead, with the man's blade a hand from his face. With a grunt he rolled backwards, heaving as hard as he could with his legs. Comar's eyes widened as he sailed over Mat to crash onto a table, face up. Mat scrambled for his staff, but when he had it, Comar had not moved.

ðə bɪɡ mæn leɪ wɪð ɪz hɪps ən lɛɡz spɹɔld əkɹɔs ðə tɑp ə ðə teɪbəl, ðə ɹɛst ə hɪm hæŋɪŋ daʊn wɪð ɪz hɛɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ðə mɛn u hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ ət ðə teɪbəl wɝ ɑn ðɛɹ fiɾ ə seɪf dɪstəns əweɪ, ɹɪŋɪŋ ðɛɹ hænz ən aɪɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ nɝvəsli. ə loʊ, wɝid bʌz fɪl ðə kɑmən ɹum, nɑt ðə nɔɪz mæt ɪkspɛktəd.

The big man lay with his hips and legs sprawled across the top of the table, the rest of him hanging down with his head on the floor. The men who had been sitting at the table were on their feet a safe distance away, wringing their hands and eyeing each other nervously. A low, worried buzz filled the common room, not the noise Mat expected.

koʊmɹz sɔɹd leɪ wɪðɪn izi ɹitʃ ə hɪz hænd. bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt muv. hi stɛɹɾ ət mæt, ðoʊ, əz mæt kɪk ðə sɔɹɾ əweɪ ən wɛn tə wʌn ni bɪsaɪd hɪm. laɪt! aɪ θɪŋk ɪz bæk ɪz bɹoʊkən! "aɪ toʊl jə jə ʃəɾ əv ɡɔn, koʊmɹ. jəɹ lʌk ɪz ɔl juzd ʌp."

Comar's sword lay within easy reach of his hand. But he did not move. He stared at Mat, though, as Mat kicked the sword away and went to one knee beside him. Light! I think his back is broken! "I told you you should have gone, Comar. Your luck is all used up."

"ful," ðə bɪɡ mæn bɹiðd. "du jə . . . θɪŋk aɪ . . . wɑz ði oʊnli . . . wʌn hʌntɪŋ ðɛm? ðeɪ woʊnt . . . lɪv tɪl. . . ." hɪz aɪz stɛɹɾ ət mæt, ən ɪz maʊθ wɑz oʊpən, bʌɾ i sɛd noʊ mɔɹ. nɔɹ ɛvɝ wəɾ əɡɛn.

"Fool," the big man breathed. "Do you . . . think I . . . was the only . . . one hunting them? They won't . . . live till. . . ." His eyes stared at Mat, and his mouth was open, but he said no more. Nor ever would again.

mæt mɛt ðə ɡleɪzɪŋ stɛɹ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɪl mɔɹ wɝdz aʊɾ ə ðə dɛd mæn. hu ɛls, bɝn ju? hu? wɛɹ ɑɹ ðeɪ? maɪ lʌk. bɝn mi, wʌt hæpən tə maɪ lʌk? hi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə ði ɪnkipɝ pʊlɪŋ fɹæntəkəli əɾ ɪz ɑɹm.

Mat met the glazing stare, trying to will more words out of the dead man. Who else, burn you? Who? Where are they? My luck. Burn me, what happened to my luck? He became aware of the innkeeper pulling frantically at his arm.

"ju mʌst ɡoʊ. jə mʌst. bɪfɔɹ ðə dɪfɛndɝz kʌm. əl ʃoʊ ðɛm ðə daɪs. əl tɛl əm ɪt wɑz ən aʊtləndɝ, bʌɾ ə tɔl mæn. wɪð ɹɛd-kʌlɝd hɛɹ, ən ɡɹeɪ aɪz. noʊ wʌn wɪl sʌfɝ. ə mæn aɪ dʒɹimd ə læs naɪt. noʊ wʌn ɹil. noʊ wʌn wɪl kɑntʃɹədɪk mi. hi tʊk kɔɪn fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn wɪð ɪz daɪs. bʌt jə mʌst ɡoʊ. jə mʌst!" ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ɪn ðə ɹum wɑz stuɾiəsli lʊkɪŋ ənʌðɝ weɪ.

"You must go. You must. Before the Defenders come. I will show them the dice. I will tell them it was an outlander, but a tall man. With red-colored hair, and gray eyes. No one will suffer. A man I dreamed of last night. No one real. No one will contradict me. He took coin from everyone with his dice. But you must go. You must!" Everyone else in the room was studiously looking another way.

mæt lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi hɔld əweɪ fɹəm ðə dɛd mæn ən pʊʃt aʊtsaɪd. tɑm wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹeɪn. hi siz mæts ɑɹm ən lɪmp daʊn ðə stʃɹit hɝidli, pʊlɪŋ mæt stʌmbəlɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm. mæts hʊd hʌŋ daʊn ɪz bæk; ðə ɹeɪn soʊkt ɪz hɛɹ ən pɔɹd daʊn ɪz feɪs, daʊn ɪz nɛk, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs. ðə ɡlimən kɛp lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, sɝtʃɪŋ ðə stʃɹit bɪɑn mæt.

Mat let himself be hauled away from the dead man and pushed outside. Thom was already waiting in the rain. He seized Mat's arm and limped down the street hurriedly, pulling Mat stumbling behind him. Mat's hood hung down his back; the rain soaked his hair and poured down his face, down his neck, but he did not notice. The gleeman kept looking over his shoulder, searching the street beyond Mat.

"ɑɹ jə əslip, bɔɪ? jə dɪd nɑt lʊk əslip bæk ðɛɹ. kʌm ɑn, bɔɪ. ðə dɪfɛndɝz wɪl ɝɛst ɛni aʊtləndɝ wɪðɪn tu stʃɹits, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt dɪskɹɪpʃən ðəɾ ɪnkipɝ ɡɪvz."

"Are you asleep, boy? You did not look asleep back there. Come on, boy. The Defenders will arrest any outlander within two streets, no matter what description that innkeeper gives."

"ɪts ðə lʌk," mæt mʌmbəld. "aɪv fɪɡjɝɾ ɪɾ aʊt. ðə daɪs. maɪ lʌk wɝks bɛst wən θɪŋz ɑɹ . . . ɹændəm. laɪk daɪs. nɑt mʌtʃ ɡʊd fəɹ kɑɹdz. noʊ ɡʊɾ ət stoʊnz. tu mʌtʃ pæɾɝn. ɪts tə bi ɹændəm. ivən faɪndɪŋ koʊmɹ. aɪd stɑp vɪzəɾɪŋ ɛvɹi ɪn. aɪ wɔkt ɪndə ðət wʌn baɪ tʃæns. tɑm, ɪf aɪm gɑnə faɪn ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz ɪn taɪm, aɪ hæv tə lʊk wɪθaʊɾ ɛni pæɾɝn."

"It's the luck," Mat mumbled. "I've figured it out. The dice. My luck works best when things are . . . random. Like dice. Not much good for cards. No good at stones. Too much pattern. It has to be random. Even finding Comar. I'd stopped visiting every inn. I walked into that one by chance. Thom, if I am going to find Egwene and the others in time, I have to look without any pattern."

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt? ðə mæn ɪz dɛd. ɪf i ɔlɹɛɾi kɪl ðɛm. . . . wɛl, juv əvɛnʒd ðɛm. ɪf i hæzənt, jə seɪv ðɛm. naʊ wɪl jə blʌɾi wɔk fæstɝ? ðə dɪfɛndɝz woʊn bi lɔŋ kʌmɪŋ, ən ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt soʊ dʒɛntəl əz ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz."

"What are you talking about? The man is dead. If he already killed them. . . . Well, you've avenged them. If he hasn't, you saved them. Now will you bloody walk faster? The Defenders won't be long coming, and they are not so gentle as the Queen's Guards."

mæt ʃʊk ɪz ɑɹm fɹi ən pɪkt ʌp ɪz peɪs ənstɛɾəli, dʒɹæɡɪŋ ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf. "hi lɛɾ ɪt slɪp ðəɾ i hædn loʊkeɪɾəd ðɛm, jɛt. bʌɾ i sɛɾ i wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn. tɑm, aɪ bɪliv hɪm. aɪ wɑz lʊkɪŋ ɪm ɪn ði aɪ, ən i wɑz tɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ. aɪ stɪl əv tə faɪn ðɛm, tɑm. ən naʊ aɪ doʊn ivən noʊ hu ɪz æftɝ ðɛm. aɪ hæv tə faɪn ðɛm."

Mat shook his arm free and picked up his pace unsteadily, dragging the quarterstaff. "He let it slip that he hadn't located them, yet. But he said he was not the only one. Thom, I believe him. I was looking him in the eye, and he was telling the truth. I still have to find them, Thom. And now I don't even know who is after them. I have to find them."

staɪflɪŋ ə hjudʒ jɔn wɪð ɪz fɪst, tɑm pʊl mæts hʊɾ ʌp əɡɛns ðə ɹeɪn. "nɑt tənaɪt, bɔɪ. aɪ nid slip, ən soʊ də ju."

Stifling a huge yawn with his fist, Thom pulled Mat's hood up against the rain. "Not tonight, boy. I need sleep, and so do you."

wɛt. maɪ hɛɹz dʒɹɪpɪŋ ɪn maɪ feɪs. hɪz hɛd sim fʌzi. wɪð ə nid fəɹ slip, hi ɹilaɪzd æftɝ ə moʊmənt. ən i ɹilaɪz haʊ taɪɝɾ i wɑz, ɪf i hæd tə θɪŋk dʒʌs tə noʊ ɪt. "ɔl ɹaɪt, tɑm. bʌɾ aɪm gɑnə lʊk əɡɛn əz sun əz ɪts laɪt." tɑm nɑɾəd ən kɔft, ən ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ bæk tə ðə waɪt kɹɛsən θɹu ðə ɹeɪn.

Wet. My hair's dripping in my face. His head seemed fuzzy. With a need for sleep, he realized after a moment. And he realized how tired he was, if he had to think just to know it. "All right, Thom. But I am going to look again as soon as it's light." Thom nodded and coughed, and they made their way back to The White Crescent through the rain.

dɔn wɑz nɑt lɔŋ ɪn kʌmɪŋ, bʌt mæt ɹstɪd hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ə bɛd, ən i ən tɑm sɛɾ ɔf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə sɝtʃ ɛvɹi ɪn ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz ə tɛɹ. mæt lɛt hɪmsɛlf wɑndɝ wɛɹɛvɝ ðə muɾ ən ðə nɛks tɝnɪŋ tʊk hɪm, nɑt lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɪnz əɾ ɔl, ən tɔsɪŋ ə kɔɪn tə dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ tə ɡoʊ ɪn. fəɹ θɹi deɪz ən naɪts i dɪd ðɪs, ən fəɹ θɹi deɪz ən naɪts ɪt ɹeɪnd wɪθaʊt stɑpɪŋ, səmtaɪmz θʌndɝɪŋ, səmtaɪmz kwaɪət, bʌɾ ɔlweɪz pɔɹɪŋ daʊn.

Dawn was not long in coming, but Mat rousted himself out of bed, and he and Thom set off trying to search every inn inside the walls of Tear. Mat let himself wander wherever the mood and the next turning took him, not looking for inns at all, and tossing a coin to decide whether to go in. For three days and nights he did this, and for three days and nights it rained without stopping, sometimes thundering, sometimes quiet, but always pouring down.

tɑmz kɑf ɡɹu wɝs, soʊ hi hæd tə stɑp pleɪɪŋ ðə fluɾ ən tɛlɪŋ stɔɹiz, ən i wəd nɑt kæɹi hɪz hɑɹp aʊɾ ɪn ðət wɛðɝ; hi ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn ɡoʊɪŋ əlɔŋ, haʊɛvɝ, ən mɛn stɪl tɔk tə ə ɡlimən. mæts lʌk wɪð ðə daɪs simd ivən bɛɾɝ sɪns i hæd bɪɡʌn ðɪs ɹændəm wɑndɝ, ðoʊ hi nɛvɝ steɪɾ ɪn wʌn ɪn əɹ tævɝn lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə wɪn mɔɹ ðən ə fju kɔɪnz. niðɝ ə ðɛm hɝɾ ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl. ɹumɝz ʌv wɔɹ wɪð ɪljən. ɹumɝz ʌv ɪnveɪɾɪŋ min. ɹumɝz ʌv ɪnveɪʒən fɹəm ændɝ, ʌv ðə si foʊk ʃʌɾɪŋ ɔf tʃɹeɪd, ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz ɹɪtɝnɪŋ fɹəm ðə dɛd. ɹumɝz ðə dʒɹæɡən wɑz kʌmɪŋ. ðə mɛn mæt ɡæmbəld wɪð wɝ əz ɡlumi əbaʊt wʌn ɹumɝ əz ðə nɛkst; ðeɪ sim tə hɪm tə hʌn fəɹ ðə dɑɹkəst ɹumɝz ðeɪ kəd faɪn ən hæf bɪliv əm ɔl. bʌɾ i hɝd nɑɾ ə wɪspɝ ðət maɪt lɛɾ ɪm tə ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz. nɑt wʌn ɪnkipɝ hæd sin wɪmən mætʃɪŋ ðɛɹ dɪskɹɪpʃənz.

Thom's cough grew worse, so he had to stop playing the flute and telling stories, and he would not carry his harp out in that weather; he insisted on going along, however, and men still talked to a gleeman. Mat's luck with the dice seemed even better since he had begun this random wander, though he never stayed in one inn or tavern long enough to win more than a few coins. Neither of them heard anything useful. Rumors of war with Illian. Rumors of invading Mayene. Rumors of invasion from Andor, of the Sea Folk shutting off trade, of Artur Hawkwing's armies returning from the dead. Rumors the Dragon was coming. The men Mat gambled with were as gloomy about one rumor as the next; they seemed to him to hunt for the darkest rumors they could find and half believe them all. But he heard not a whisper that might lead him to Egwene and the others. Not one innkeeper had seen women matching their descriptions.

hi bɪɡæn tə hæv bæd dʒɹimz, noʊ daʊt fɹəm ɔl ɪz wɝiɪŋ. ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn, ən səm fɛloʊ wɪð kloʊs-kɹɑpt waɪt hɛɹ, wɛɹɪŋ ə koʊt wɪð pʌfi, stʃɹaɪp slivz laɪk koʊmɹz, læfɪŋ ən wivɪŋ ə nɛɾ ɝaʊn ðɛm. oʊnli səmtaɪmz ɪt wɑz mɔɪɹeɪn i wɑz wivɪŋ ðə nɛt fɔɹ, ən səmtaɪmz i hɛld ə kɹɪstəl sɔɹɾ ɪnstɛd, ə sɔɹd ðət bleɪz laɪk ðə sʌn əz sun əz i tʌtʃt ɪt. səmtaɪmz ɪt wɑz ɹænd u hɛl ðə sɔɹd. fəɹ səm ɹizən, hi dʒɹimd ə ɹænd ə ɡʊd dil.

He began to have bad dreams, no doubt from all his worrying. Egwene and Nynaeve and Elayne, and some fellow with close-cropped white hair, wearing a coat with puffy, striped sleeves like Comar's, laughing and weaving a net around them. Only sometimes it was Moiraine he was weaving the net for, and sometimes he held a crystal sword instead, a sword that blazed like the sun as soon as he touched it. Sometimes it was Rand who held the sword. For some reason, he dreamed of Rand a good deal.

mæt wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ɔl kəz i wɑz nɑt ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪnʌf slip, nɑɾ iɾɪŋ ɪksɛpt wən i hæpən tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ, bʌɾ i wəd nɑt stɑp. hi hæɾ ə weɪdʒɝ tə wɪn, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf, ən i mɛn tə wɪn ðɪs wʌn ɪf ɪt kɪl hɪm.

Mat was sure it was all because he was not getting enough sleep, not eating except when he happened to remember, but he would not stop. He had a wager to win, he told himself, and he meant to win this one if it killed him.


tʃæptɝ fɪfti


CHAPTER 50

ðə hæmɝ


The Hammer

ði æftɝnun sʌn wɑz hɑɾ əz ðə fɛɹi dɑkt ɪn tɛɹ; pʌɾəlz stʊɾ ɑn ðə stimɪŋ stoʊnz ə ðə dɑk, ən ði ɛɹ simd ɔlmoʊst əz dæmp tə pɛɹɪn əz ɪljənz hæd. ði ɛɹ smɛld ə pɪtʃ ən wʊɾ ən ɹoʊp - hi kəd si ʃɪpjɑɹdz fɝðɝ saʊθ əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ - ʌv spaɪsəz ən aɪɝn ən bɑɹli, ʌv pɝfjumz ən waɪnz ən ə hʌnʒɹəd dɪfɹən ɝoʊməz i kəd nɑt sɪŋɡəl aʊt fɹəm ðə mɛlæŋ, moʊs kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə wɛɹhaʊzɪz bɪhaɪn ðə dɑks. wən ðə wɪn swɝl moʊməntɛɹəli aʊɾ ə ðə nɔɹθ, hi kɑt ðə sɛns ə fɪʃ, tu, bʌt ðoʊz feɪɾəd əz ðə wɪn swʌŋ bæk. noʊ smɛlz ʌv ɛniθɪŋ tə hʌnt. hɪz maɪn ɹitʃt aʊt tə fil fəɹ wʊlvz bɪfɔɹ i ɹilaɪzd wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ ən snæpt ɪz ɡɑɹdz ʃʌt. hi hæd dʌn ðət tu ɔfən ə leɪt. ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ wʊlvz, ʌv kɔɹs. nɑɾ ɪn ə sɪɾi laɪk ðɪs. hi wɪʃt ɪt dɪd nɑt fil soʊ - əloʊn.

The afternoon sun was hot as the ferry docked in Tear; puddles stood on the steaming stones of the dock, and the air seemed almost as damp to Perrin as Illian's had. The air smelled of pitch and wood and rope - he could see shipyards further south along the river - of spices and iron and barley, of perfumes and wines and a hundred different aromas he could not single out from the melange, most coming from the warehouses behind the docks. When the wind swirled momentarily out of the north, he caught the scents of fish, too, but those faded as the wind swung back. No smells of anything to hunt. His mind reached out to feel for wolves before he realized what he was doing and snapped his guards shut. He had done that too often of late. There had been no wolves, of course. Not in a city like this. He wished it did not feel so - alone.

əz sun əz ðə ɹæmp ət ði ɛn ə ðə bɑɹdʒ wɑz loʊɝd, hi lɛd stɛpɝ ʌp tə ðə dɑk æftɝ mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn. ðə hjudʒ ʃeɪp ə ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ leɪ ɔf tə ðɛɹ lɛft, ʃæɾoʊd soʊ ðəɾ ɪt lʊk laɪk ə maʊntən dɪspaɪt ðə ɡɹeɪt bænɝ əɾ ɪts haɪəs pɔɪnt. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə lʊk ət ðə stoʊn, bʌɾ ɪt simd ɪmpɑsəbəl tə lʊk ət ðə sɪɾi wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ɪt. ɪz i hɪɹ jɛt? laɪt, ɪf hiz ɔlɹɛɾi tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɛɾ ɪndə ðæt, hi kəd bi dɛɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. ən ðən ɪt wəɾ ɔl bi fəɹ nʌθɪŋ.

As soon as the ramp at the end of the barge was lowered, he led Stepper up to the dock after Moiraine and Lan. The huge shape of the Stone of Tear lay off to their left, shadowed so that it looked like a mountain despite the great banner at its highest point. He did not want to look at the Stone, but it seemed impossible to look at the city without seeing it. Is he here yet? Light, if he has already tried to get into that, he could be dead already. And then it would all be for nothing.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ wi mɛn tə faɪn hɪɹ?" zɑɹin æsk bɪhaɪn hɪm. ʃi hæd nɑt stɑpt æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz; ʃi dʒʌs dɪd nɑɾ æsk əm ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ ðə wɔɹɾɝ. "ɪljən ʃoʊɾ əs ɡɹeɪ mɛn ən ðə waɪl hʌnt. wʌt dʌz tɛɹ hoʊl ðət - ðət sʌmwʌn wɑns tə kip jə fɹəm soʊ bædli?"

"What are we meant to find here?" Zarine asked behind him. She had not stopped asking questions; she just did not ask them of the Aes Sedai or the Warder. "Illian showed us Gray Men and the Wild Hunt. What does Tear hold that - that someone wants to keep you from so badly?"

pɛɹɪn ɡlænst ɝaʊnd; nʌn ə ðə dɑkmən ʃʌɾəlɪŋ kɑɹɡoʊ əbaʊt sim tə hæv hɝd. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ i wʊɾə smɛl fɪɹ ɪf ðeɪ hæd. hi bɪt bæk ðə ʃɑɹp ɹɪmɑɹk ðət hʌŋ ɑn ði ɛn ə hɪz tʌŋ. ʃi hæɾ ə kwɪkɝ tʌŋ, ən ə ʃɑɹpɝ.

Perrin glanced around; none of the dockmen shuttling cargo about seemed to have heard. He was sure he would have smelled fear if they had. He bit back the sharp remark that hung on the end of his tongue. She had a quicker tongue, and a sharper.

"aɪ wɪʃ jə dɪd nɑt saʊn soʊ iɡɝ," lɔɪəl ɹʌmbəld. "ju sim tə θɪŋk ɪɾəl ɔl bi əz izi əz ɪljən, feɪl."

"I wish you did not sound so eager," Loial rumbled. "You seem to think it will all be as easy as Illian, Faile."

"izi?" zɑɹin mʌɾɝd. "izi! lɔɪəl, wi wɝ nɪɹli kɪl twaɪs ɪn wʌn naɪt. ɪljən wɑz ɪnʌf fəɹ ə hʌntɝz sɔŋ ɪn ɪtsɛlf. wʌt meɪks jə kɔl ɪɾ izi?"

"Easy?" Zarine muttered. "Easy! Loial, we were nearly killed twice in one night. Illian was enough for a Hunter's song in itself. What makes you call it easy?"

pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪməst. hi wɪʃt lɔɪəl hæd nɑt dɪsaɪɾɪd tə kɔl zɑɹin baɪ ðət neɪm ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən; ɪt wɑz ə kɑnstən ɹimaɪndɝ ðət mɔɪɹeɪn θɔt ʃi wɑz mɪnz fælkən. ən ɪt dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə stɑp pɛɹɪn wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ʃi wɑz ðə bjuɾəfəl wʊmən mɪn hæd wɔɹn ɪm əɡɛnst, tu. ət list aɪv nɑt ɹʌn ʌp əɡɛns ðə hɔk. əɹ ə tuætɑn wɪð ə sɔɹd! naʊ ðət wəd ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɪst ʌv ɔl, əɹ aɪm ə wʊl mɝtʃənt!

Perrin grimaced. He wished Loial had not decided to call Zarine by that name she had chosen; it was a constant reminder that Moiraine thought she was Min's falcon. And it did nothing to stop Perrin wondering if she was the beautiful woman Min had warned him against, too. At least I've not run up against the hawk. Or a Tuatha'an with a sword! Now that would the strangest of all, or I am a wool merchant!

"stɑp æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz, zɑɹin," hi sɛɾ əz i swʌŋ ʌp ɪndə stɛpɝz sæɾəl. "ju wɪl faɪn aʊt waɪ wəɹ hɪɹ wən mɔɪɹeɪn dɪsaɪdz tə tɛl ju." hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lʊk ət ðə stoʊn.

"Stop asking questions, Zarine," he said as he swung up into Stepper's saddle. "You will find out why we are here when Moiraine decides to tell you." He tried not to look at the Stone.

ʃi tɝn ðoʊz dɑɹk, tɪltəɾ aɪz ɑn hɪm. "aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk jə noʊ waɪ, blæksmɪθ. aɪ θɪŋk ðəɾ ɪz waɪ jəl nɑt tɛl mi, kəz jə kænɑt. ədmɪɾ ɪt, fɑɹmbɔɪ."

She turned those dark, tilted eyes on him. "I do not think you know why, blacksmith. I think that is why you will not tell me, because you cannot. Admit it, farmboy."

wɪð ə smɔl saɪ, hi ɹoʊɾ ɔf ðə dɑks æftɝ mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn. zɑɹin dɪd nɑt dɪɡ ət lɔɪəl ɪn ðət kʌɾɪŋ weɪ wən ði oʊɡiɝ ɹəfjuz tə ænsɝ əɹ kwɛstʃənz. hi θɔt ʃi mʌs bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɹaʊbiɾ ɪm ɪndə juzɪŋ ðət neɪm. hi wəd nɑt.

With a small sigh, he rode off the docks after Moiraine and Lan. Zarine did not dig at Loial in that cutting way when the Ogier refused to answer her questions. He thought she must be trying to browbeat him into using that name. He would not.

mɔɪɹeɪn hæd taɪd ði ɔɪl kloʊk bɪhaɪn əɹ sæɾəl, ətɑp ði ɪnɑkjuəs-lʊkɪŋ bʌndəl ðət hɛl ðə dʒɹæɡən bænɝ, ən dɪspaɪt ðə hit hæd dɑn ðə blu lɪnən kloʊk fɹəm ɪljən. ɪts dip, waɪd hʊd hɪɾ əɹ feɪs. hɝ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ wɑz ɑn ə kɔɹɾ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk. tɛɹ, ʃi hæd sɛd, dɪd nɑt fɝbɪd ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ, oʊnli tʃænəlɪŋ, bʌt ðə dɪfɛndɝz ə ðə stoʊn kɛpt ə kloʊs aɪ ɑn ɛni wʊmən u wɔɹ ðə ɹɪŋ. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi wɑtʃt ɑn ðɪs vɪzət tə tɛɹ.

Moiraine had tied the oiled cloak behind her saddle, atop the innocuous-looking bundle that held the Dragon banner, and despite the heat had donned the blue linen cloak from Illian. Its deep, wide hood hid her face. Her Great Serpent ring was on a cord around her neck. Tear, she had said, did not forbid the presence of Aes Sedai, only channeling, but the Defenders of the Stone kept a close eye on any woman who wore the ring. She did not want to be watched on this visit to Tear.

læn hæd stʌft ɪz kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊk ɪndə hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz tu deɪz ɝliɝ, wən ɪt hæd bɪkʌm əpɛɹən ðət huɛvɝ hæd sɛn ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz - sɑmaɪl, pɛɹɪn θɔt wɪð ə ʃɪvɝ, ən tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk ə ðə neɪm əɾ ɔl - huɛvɝ hæd sɛn əm hæd nɑt sɛn ɛni mɔɹ pɝsut. ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd meɪd noʊ kənsɛʃənz tə ðə hiɾ ʌv ɪljən, ən i meɪd nʌn tə ðə lɛsɝ hiɾ ə tɛɹ. hɪz ɡɹeɪ-ɡɹin koʊt wɑz bʌɾənd ʌp ɔl ðə weɪ.

Lan had stuffed his color-shifting cloak into his saddlebags two days earlier, when it had become apparent that whoever had sent the Darkhounds - Sammael, Perrin thought with a shiver, and tried not to think of the name at all - whoever had sent them had not sent any more pursuit. The Warder had made no concessions to the heat of Illian, and he made none to the lesser heat of Tear. His gray-green coat was buttoned up all the way.

pɛɹɪn wɔɹ ɪz koʊt hæf əndʌn, ən ðə nɛk ə hɪz ʃɝɾ əntaɪd. tiɹ maɪt bi ə lɪɾəl kulɝ ðən ɪljən, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl əz hɑɾ əz sʌmɝ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ən əz ɔlweɪz æftɝ ɹeɪn, ðə dæmpnəs ə ði ɛɹ meɪd ðə hit sim wɝs. hɪz æks bɛl hʌŋ lupt ɝaʊn ðə tɔl pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl. ɪt wɑz hændi ðɛɹ, ɪf i niɾəd ɪt, ən i fɛl bɛɾɝ nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ɪt.

Perrin wore his coat half undone, and the neck of his shirt untied. Tear might be a little cooler than Illian, but it was still as hot as summer in the Two Rivers, and as always after rain, the dampness of the air made the heat seem worse. His axe belt hung looped around the tall pommel of his saddle. It was handy there, if he needed it, and he felt better not wearing it.

hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd ət ðə mʌɾ ɪn ðə fɝst stʃɹits ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ əlɔŋ. oʊnli vɪlədʒəz ən smɔlɝ taʊnz hæd dɝt stʃɹits, ðəɾ i hæd sin, ən tiɹ wɑz wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾiz. bʌt ðə pipəl dɪd nɑt sim tə maɪnd, mɛni ɡoʊɪŋ bɛɹfʊt. ə wʊmən wɔkɪŋ ɑn lɪɾəl wʊɾən plætfɔɹmz kɑɾ ɪz ətɛnʃən fəɹ ə taɪm, ən i wʌndɝd waɪ ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɔl wɛɹ ðɛm. ðoʊz bæɡi bɹitʃɪz ɑn ðə mɛn lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ maɪt bi kulɝ ðən ðə snʌɡ wʌnz i wɔɹ, bʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ i wəd fil ə ful ɪf i tʃɹaɪd ðɛm. hi meɪɾ ə pɪktʃɝ ɪn ɪz hɛɾ ə hɪmsɛlf wɛɹɪŋ ðoʊz bɹitʃɪz ən wʌn ə ðoʊz ɹaʊn stʃɹɔ hæts, ən tʃʌkəld əɾ ɪt.

He was surprised at the mud in the first streets they rode along. Only villages and smaller towns had dirt streets, that he had seen, and Tear was one of the great cities. But the people did not seem to mind, many going barefoot. A woman walking on little wooden platforms caught his attention for a time, and he wondered why they did not all wear them. Those baggy breeches on the men looked as if they might be cooler than the snug ones he wore, but he was sure he would feel a fool if he tried them. He made a picture in his head of himself wearing those breeches and one of those round straw hats, and chuckled at it.

"wʌt dʒju faɪn fʌni, pɛɹɪn?" lɔɪəl æskt. hɪz ɪɹz wɝ dʒɹupɪŋ tɪl ðɛɹ tʌfs wɝ hɪɾən ɪn ɪz hɛɹ, ən i lʊkt ət ðə pipəl ɪn ðə stʃɹit wɝidli. "ðiz foʊk lʊk . . . dɪfiɾəd, pɛɹɪn. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt lʊk ðɪs weɪ wən aɪ wɑz hɪɹ læst. ivən pipəl u lɛt ðɛɹ ɡɹoʊv bi kʌt daʊn də nɑt dɪzɝv tə lʊk laɪk ðɪs."

"What do you find funny, Perrin?" Loial asked. His ears were drooping till their tufts were hidden in his hair, and he looked at the people in the street worriedly. "These folk look . . . defeated, Perrin. They did not look this way when I was here last. Even people who let their grove be cut down do not deserve to look like this."

əz pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn tə stʌɾi feɪsəz ɪnstɛɾ ə dʒʌs lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ət wʌns, hi sɔ ðət lɔɪəl wɑz ɹaɪt. sʌmθɪŋ hæd ɡɔn aʊɾ ə tu mɛni ʌv ðoʊz feɪsəz. hoʊp, meɪbi. kjʊɹiɑsəɾi. ðeɪ bɛɹli ɡlænst ət ðə pɑɹɾi ɹaɪɾɪŋ baɪ, ɪksɛp tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ʌv ðə hɔɹsəz. ði oʊɡiɝ, maʊntəɾ ɑn ən ænəməl əz bɪɡ əz ə dʒɹæf hɔɹs, maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn læn, əɹ pɛɹɪn.

As Perrin began to study faces instead of just looking at everything at once, he saw that Loial was right. Something had gone out of too many of those faces. Hope, maybe. Curiosity. They barely glanced at the party riding by, except to get out of the way of the horses. The Ogier, mounted on an animal as big as a draft horse, might as well have been Lan, or Perrin.

ðə stʃɹits tʃeɪnʒd, ɡeɪnɪŋ waɪd stoʊn peɪvɪŋ, æftɝ ðeɪ pæst ɪnsaɪd ðə ɡeɪts ə ðə haɪ, ɡɹeɪ sɪɾi wɔl, pæs ðə hɑɹd, dɑɹk aɪz ə soʊlʒɝz ɪn bɹɛstpleɪts oʊvɝ ɹɛd koʊts wɪð waɪd slivz ɛndɪŋ ɪn nɛɹoʊ waɪt kʌfs, ən ɹɪmd, ɹaʊn hɛlməts wɪð ə ɹɪdʒ oʊvɝ ðə tɑp. ɪnstɛɾ ə ðə bæɡi bɹitʃɪz ʌðɝ mɛn wɔɹ, ðɛɹz wɝ taɪt, ən tʌkt ɪndə ni-haɪ buts. ðə soʊlʒɝz fɹaʊn ət lænz sɔɹɾ ən fɪŋɡɝd ðɛɹ oʊn, stɛɹd ʃɑɹpli ət pɛɹɪnz æks ən ɪz baʊ, bʌɾ ɪn ə weɪ, dɪspaɪt ðɛɹ fɹaʊnz ən ʃɑɹp lʊks, ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ biɾən ɪn ðɛɹ feɪsəz, tu, əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ wɝ ɹɪli wɝθ ði ɛfɝɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ.

The streets changed, gaining wide stone paving, after they passed inside the gates of the high, gray city wall, past the hard, dark eyes of soldiers in breastplates over red coats with wide sleeves ending in narrow white cuffs, and rimmed, round helmets with a ridge over the top. Instead of the baggy breeches other men wore, theirs were tight, and tucked into knee-high boots. The soldiers frowned at Lan's sword and fingered their own, stared sharply at Perrin's axe and his bow, but in a way, despite their frowns and sharp looks, there was something beaten in their faces, too, as if nothing were really worth the effort any longer.

ðə bɪldɪŋz wɝ lɑɹdʒɝ ən tɔlɝ ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz, ðoʊ moʊst wɝ meɪd noʊ dɪfɹənli fɹəm ðoʊz aʊtsaɪd. ðə ɹufs lʊkt ə bɪɾ ɑd tə pɛɹɪn, ɪspɛʃli ðoʊz ðət keɪm tə pɔɪns, bʌɾ i hæd sin soʊ mɛni dɪfɹən kaɪnz ə ɹuf sɪns livɪŋ hoʊm ðəɾ i oʊnli wʌndɝd wʌt kaɪndə neɪlz ðeɪ juzd wɪð ðɛɹ taɪlz. ɪn səm pleɪsəz, ðə pipəl dɪd nɑt juz neɪlz ɑn ðɛɹ ɹuf taɪlz əɾ ɔl.

The buildings were larger and taller inside the walls, though most were made no differently from those outside. The roofs looked a bit odd to Perrin, especially those that came to points, but he had seen so many different kinds of roof since leaving home that he only wondered what kind of nails they used with their tiles. In some places, the people did not use nails on their roof tiles at all.

pæləsəz ən ɡɹeɪt bɪldɪŋz stʊɾ əmʌŋ ðə smɔlɝ ən mɔɹ ɔɹɾənɛɹi, simɪŋli pleɪs hæfəzɝdli; ə stʃɹʌktʃɝ ə taʊɝz ən skwɛɹɪʃ, waɪt doʊmz, sɝaʊndəɾ ɑn ɔl saɪdz baɪ waɪd stʃɹits, maɪɾ əv ʃɑps ən ɪnz ən haʊsəz ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪdz ə ðoʊz stʃɹits. ə hjudʒ hɔl fɹʌntɪd baɪ skwɛɹd kɑləmz ə mɑɹbəl fɔɹ peɪsɪz ɑn ə saɪd, wɪð fɪfti stɛps tə klaɪm tə ɹitʃ bɹɑnz dɔɹz faɪv spænz haɪ, hæɾ ə beɪkɝi wʌn saɪɾ ən ə teɪlɝ ɑn ði ʌðɝ.

Palaces and great buildings stood among the smaller and more ordinary, seemingly placed haphazardly; a structure of towers and squarish, white domes, surrounded on all sides by wide streets, might have shops and inns and houses on the other sides of those streets. A huge hall fronted by squared columns of marble four paces on a side, with fifty steps to climb to reach bronze doors five spans high, had a bakery one side and a tailor on the other.

mɔɹ mɛn wɔɹ koʊts ən bɹitʃɪz laɪk ðə soʊlʒɝz' hɪɹ, ðoʊ ɪn bɹaɪɾɝ kʌlɝz ən wɪθaʊɾ ɑɹmɝ, ən səm ivən wɔɹ sɔɹdz. nʌn ə ðɛm wɛn bɛɹfʊt, nɑɾ ivən ðoʊz ɪn bæɡi bɹitʃɪz. ðə wɪmənz dʒɹɛsəz wɝ ɔfən lɔŋɡɝ, ðɛɹ nɛklinz loʊɝ tə bɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən ivən bʊzəm, ðə klɔθ əz laɪkli tə bi sɪlk əz wʊl. ðə si foʊk tʃɹeɪɾɪd ə ɡʊd dil ə sɪlk θɹu tiɹ. əz mɛni sɪdæn tʃɛɹz ən kæɹɪdʒɪz dʒɹɔn baɪ timz ə hɔɹsəz muv θɹu ðə stʃɹits əz ɑks-kɑɹts ən wæɡənz. jɛt tu mɛni ʌv ðə feɪsəz hæd ðət seɪm lʊk ə hævɪŋ ɡɪvən ʌp.

More men wore coats and breeches like the soldiers' here, though in brighter colors and without armor, and some even wore swords. None of them went barefoot, not even those in baggy breeches. The women's dresses were often longer, their necklines lower to bare shoulders and even bosom, the cloth as likely to be silk as wool. The Sea Folk traded a good deal of silk through Tear. As many sedan chairs and carriages drawn by teams of horses moved through the streets as ox-carts and wagons. Yet too many of the faces had that same look of having given up.

ði ɪn læn tʃoʊz, ðə stɑɹ, hæɾ ə wivɝz ʃɑp ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ən ə smɪθi ɑn ði ʌðɝ, wɪð nɛɹoʊ æliweɪz bɪtwin. ðə smɪθi wɑz ʌv ənʒɹəst ɡɹeɪ stoʊn, ðə wivɝz ən ði ɪn ʌv wʊd, ðoʊ ðə stɑɹ stʊd fɔɹ stɔɹiz tɔl ən hæd smɔl wɪndoʊz ɪn ɪts ɹuf əz wɛl. ðə ɹæɾəl ə lumz wɑz hɑɹd-pɹɛs tə kəmpit wɪð ðə klæŋ ə ðə smɪθs hæmɝ. ðeɪ hændəd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz oʊvɝ tə steɪbəlmən, tə bi teɪkən ɝaʊn bæk, ən wɛn ɪnsaɪd ði ɪn. ðəɹ wɝ fɪʃ smɛlz fɹəm ðə kɪtʃən, beɪkɪŋ ən pɝhæps stuɪŋ, ən ðə sɛn ə ɹoʊs mʌɾən. ðə mɛn ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum ɔl wɔɹ ðə taɪt koʊts ən lus bɹitʃɪz; pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɹɪtʃɝ mɛn - sʌmhaʊ hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə mɛn ɪn kʌlɝfəl koʊts wɪð pʌfi slivz ən ðə bɛɹ-ʃoʊldɝd wɪmən ɪn bɹaɪt sɪlk wɝ ɔl ɹɪtʃ, əɹ noʊbəlz - ðoʊz foʊk wəd nɑt pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ðə nɔɪz. pɝhæps ðət wɑz waɪ læn hæd tʃoʊzən ɪt.

The inn Lan chose, the Star, had a weaver's shop on one side and a smithy on the other, with narrow alleyways between. The smithy was of undressed gray stone, the weaver's and the inn of wood, though the Star stood four stories tall and had small windows in its roof as well. The rattle of looms was hard-pressed to compete with the clang of the smith's hammer. They handed their horses over to stablemen, to be taken around back, and went inside the inn. There were fish smells from the kitchen, baking and perhaps stewing, and the scent of roast mutton. The men in the common room all wore the tight coats and loose breeches; Perrin did not think richer men - somehow he was sure the men in colorful coats with puffy sleeves and the bare-shouldered women in bright silk were all rich, or nobles - those folk would not put up with the noise. Perhaps that was why Lan had chosen it.

"haʊ ɑɹ wi səpoʊz tə slip wɪð ðɪs ɹækəɾɪŋ?" zɑɹin mʌɾɝd.

"How are we supposed to sleep with this racketing?" Zarine muttered.

"noʊ kwɛstʃənz?" hi sɛd wɪð ə smaɪl. fəɹ ə moʊmən i θɔt ʃi wɑz gɑnə stɪk aʊɾ əɹ tʌŋ ət hɪm.

"No questions?" he said with a smile. For a moment he thought she was going to stick out her tongue at him.

ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz ə ɹaʊnd-feɪst, bɔldɪŋ mæn ɪn ə lɔŋ, dip blu koʊɾ ən ðoʊz lus bɹitʃɪz, hu baʊɾ oʊvɝ hænz klæspt əkɹɔs ɪz staʊt bɛli. hɪz feɪs hæd ðət lʊk, ə wɪɹi ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən. "ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ju, mɪstʃɹəsəz, ən wɛlkəm," hi saɪd. "ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ju, mæstɝz, ən wɛlkəm." hi ɡeɪv ə smɔl stɑɹɾ ət pɛɹɪnz jɛloʊ aɪz, ðən pæst wɛɹəli ɑn tə lɔɪəl. "ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ju, fɹɛn oʊɡiɝ, ən wɛlkəm. ɪts ə jɪɹ əɹ mɔɹ sɪns aɪ hæv sin wʌn ə jəɹ kaɪn ɪn tɛɹ. səm wɝk əɹ ʌðɝ ət ðə stoʊn. ðeɪ steɪɾ ɪn ðə stoʊn, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ aɪ sɔ ðɛm ɪn ðə stʃɹit wʌn deɪ." hi fɪnɪʃt wɪð ənʌðɝ saɪ, simɪŋli əneɪbəl tə sʌmən ɛni kjʊɹiɑsəɾi əz tə waɪ ənʌðɝ oʊɡiɝ hæd kʌm tə tɛɹ, əɹ waɪ ɛni ʌv əm hæd kʌm, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ.

The innkeeper was a round-faced, balding man in a long, deep blue coat and those loose breeches, who bowed over hands clasped across his stout belly. His face had that look, a weary resignation. "The Light shine on you, mistresses, and welcome," he sighed. "The Light shine on you, masters, and welcome." He gave a small start at Perrin's yellow eyes, then passed wearily on to Loial. "The Light shine on you, friend Ogier, and welcome. It is a year or more since I have seen one of your kind in Tear. Some work or other at the Stone. They stayed in the Stone, of course, but I saw them in the street one day." He finished with another sigh, seemingly unable to summon any curiosity as to why another Ogier had come to Tear, or why any of them had come, for that matter.

ðə bɔldɪŋ mæn, huz neɪm wɑz dʒʊɹə hɛɹət, ʃoʊɾ əm tə ðɛɹ ɹumz hɪmsɛlf. əpɛɹənli mɔɪɹeɪnz sɪlk dʒɹɛs ən ðə weɪ ʃi kɛpt əɹ feɪs hɪɾən, teɪkən wɪð lænz hɑɹd feɪs ən sɔɹd, meɪɾ əm ə leɪɾi ən əɹ ɡɑɹɾ ɪn ɪz aɪz, ən soʊ wɝði ʌv ɪz pɝsənəl ətɛnʃən. pɛɹɪn i ɑbviəsli tʊk əz səm kaɪndə ɹɪteɪnɝ, ən zɑɹin i wɑz pleɪnli ənʃʊɹ ʌv - tə hɝ vɪzəbəl dɪsɡʌst - ən lɔɪəl wɑz, æftɝ ɔl, ən oʊɡiɝ. hi kɔl mɛn tə pʊʃ bɛdz təɡɛðɝ fəɹ lɔɪəl, ən ɔfɝd mɔɪɹeɪn ə pɹaɪvət ɹum fəɹ əɹ milz ɪf ʃi wɪʃt. ʃi æksɛptɪd ɡɹeɪʃəsli.

The balding man, whose name was Jurah Haret, showed them to their rooms himself. Apparently Moiraine's silk dress and the way she kept her face hidden, taken with Lan's hard face and sword, made them a lady and her guard in his eyes, and so worthy of his personal attention. Perrin he obviously took as some kind of retainer, and Zarine he was plainly unsure of - to her visible disgust - and Loial was, after all, an Ogier. He called men to push beds together for Loial, and offered Moiraine a private room for her meals if she wished. She accepted graciously.

ðeɪ kɛp təɡɛðɝ θɹu ɪɾ ɔl, meɪkɪŋ ə smɔl pɹəsɛʃən θɹu ði ʌpɝ hɔlz əntɪl hɛɹət baʊɾ ən saɪɾ ɪz weɪ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ pɹɛzəns, livɪŋ əm ɔl wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪɡʌn, aʊtsaɪd mɔɪɹeɪnz ɹum. ðə wɔlz wɝ waɪt plæstɝ, ən lɔɪəlz hɛd bɹʌʃt ðə hɔl silɪŋ.

They kept together through it all, making a small procession through the upper halls until Haret bowed and sighed his way out of their presence, leaving them all where they had begun, outside Moiraine's room. The walls were white plaster, and Loial's head brushed the hall ceiling.

"oʊɾiəs fɛloʊ," zɑɹin mʌɾɝd, bɹʌʃɪŋ fjʊɹiəsli ət ðə dʌst ɑn əɹ nɛɹoʊ skɝts wɪð boʊθ hænz. "aɪ bɪliv i tʊk mi fəɹ jəɹ hændmeɪd, ɛɛs sədaɪ. əl nɑt stæn fəɹ ðæt!"

"Odious fellow," Zarine muttered, brushing furiously at the dust on her narrow skirts with both hands. "I believe he took me for your handmaid, Aes Sedai. I will not stand for that!"

"wɑtʃ jəɹ tʌŋ," læn sɛd sɔfli. "ɪf jə jus ðət neɪm wɛɹ foʊk kən hɪɹ, jəl ɹəɡɹɛɾ ɪt, ɡɝl." ʃi lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ɑɹɡju, bʌɾ ɪz aɪsi blu aɪz stɪld əɹ tʌŋ ðɪs taɪm, ɪf ɪt dɪd nɑt kul əɹ ɡlɛɹ.

"Watch your tongue," Lan said softly. "If you use that name where folk can hear, you will regret it, girl." She looked as if she were going to argue, but his icy blue eyes stilled her tongue this time, if it did not cool her glare.

mɔɪɹeɪn ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm. stɛɹɪŋ ɔf ət nʌθɪŋ, ʃi wɝkt əɹ kloʊk ɪn əɹ hænz ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf waɪpɪŋ ðɛm. ʌnəwɛɹ wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, ɪn pɛɹɪnz əpɪnjən.

Moiraine ignored them. Staring off at nothing, she worked her cloak in her hands almost as if wiping them. Unaware what she was doing, in Perrin's opinion.

"haʊ də wi ɡoʊ əbaʊt faɪndɪŋ ɹænd?" hi æskt, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə hɪɹ hɪm. "mɔɪɹeɪn?"

"How do we go about finding Rand?" he asked, but she did not appear to hear him. "Moiraine?"

"ɹɪmeɪn kloʊs tə ði ɪn," ʃi sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt. "tiɹ kən bi ə deɪnʒɝəs sɪɾi fəɹ ðoʊz u də nɑt noʊ ɪts weɪz. ðə pæɾɝn kən bi tɔɹn, hɪɹ." ðət læst wɑz sɑft, əz ɪf tə hɝsɛlf. ɪn ə stʃɹɔŋɝ vɔɪs ʃi sɛd, "læn, lɛɾ əs si wʌt wi kən dɪskʌvɝ wɪθaʊɾ ətʃɹæktɪŋ ətɛnʃən. ðə ɹɛst ə ju, steɪ kloʊs tə ði ɪn!"

"Remain close to the inn," she said after a moment. "Tear can be a dangerous city for those who do not know its ways. The Pattern can be torn, here." That last was soft, as if to herself. In a stronger voice she said, "Lan, let us see what we can discover without attracting attention. The rest of you, stay close to the inn!"

" 'steɪ kloʊs tə ði ɪn,' " zɑɹin mɪmɪkt əz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ dɪsəpɪɹd daʊn ðə stɛɹz. bʌt ʃi sɛɾ ɪt kwaɪətli ɪnʌf ðət ðeɪ wəd nɑt hɪɹ. "ðɪs ɹænd. hiz ðə wʌn jə kɔl ðə. . . ." ɪf ʃi lʊk laɪk ə fælkən ɹaɪt ðɛn, ɪt wɑz ə vɛɹi ənizi fælkən. "ænd wəɹ ɪn tiɹ, wɛɹ ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn hoʊlz. . . . ən ðə pɹɑfəsiz seɪ. . . . ðə laɪt bɝn mi, tɑvɝən, ɪz ðɪs ə stɔɹi aɪ wɑnə bi ɪn?"

" 'Stay close to the inn,' " Zarine mimicked as the Aes Sedai and the Warder disappeared down the stairs. But she said it quietly enough that they would not hear. "This Rand. He is the one you called the. . . ." If she looked like a falcon right then, it was a very uneasy falcon. "And we are in Tear, where the Heart of the Stone holds. . . . And the Prophecies say. . . . The Light burn me, ta'veren, is this a story I want to be in?"

"ɪɾ ɪz nɑɾ ə stɔɹi, zɑɹin." fəɹ ə moʊmən pɛɹɪn fɛlt ɔlmoʊst əz hoʊpləs əz ði ɪnkipɝ hæd saʊndəd. "ðə wil wivz əs ɪndə ðə pæɾɝn. jə tʃoʊz tə tæŋɡəl jəɹ θɹɛd wɪð aʊɝz; ɪts tu leɪt tə əntæŋɡəl ɪt, naʊ."

"It is not a story, Zarine." For a moment Perrin felt almost as hopeless as the innkeeper had sounded. "The Wheel weaves us into the Pattern. You chose to tangle your thread with ours; it's too late to untangle it, now."

"laɪt!" ʃi ɡɹaʊld. "naʊ jə saʊn laɪk hɝ!"

"Light!" she growled. "Now you sound like her!"

hi lɛft əɹ ðəɹ wɪð lɔɪəl ən wɛn tə pʊɾ ɪz θɪŋz ɪn ɪz ɹum - ɪt hæɾ ə loʊ bɛd, kʌmftəɹbəl bʌt smɔl, əz sɪɾi pipəl sim tə θɪŋk bɪfɪɾɪd ə sɝvənt, ə wɑʃstænd, ə stul, ən ə fju pɛɡz ɑn ðə kɹæk plæstɝ wɔl - ən wən i keɪm aʊt, ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ ɡɔn. ðə ɹɪŋ ə hæmɝ ɑn ænvəl kɔl tə hɪm.

He left her there with Loial and went to put his things in his room - it had a low bed, comfortable but small, as city people seemed to think befitted a servant, a washstand, a stool, and a few pegs on the cracked plaster wall - and when he came out, they were both gone. The ring of hammer on anvil called to him.

soʊ mʌtʃ ɪn tɛɹ lʊkt ɑd ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə ɹɪlif tə wɔk ɪndə ðə smɪθi. ðə ɡɹaʊn flɔɹ wɑz ɔl wʌn lɑɹdʒ ɹum wɪð noʊ bæk wɔl ɪksɛp fəɹ tu lɔŋ dɔɹz ðət stʊɾ oʊpən ɑn ə jɑɹd fəɹ ʃuɪŋ hɔɹsəz ən ɑksən, kəmplit wɪð ən ɑks slɪŋ. hæmɝz stʊɾ ɪn ðɛɹ stænz, tɑŋz ə vɛɹiəs kaɪnz ən saɪzəz hʌŋ ɑn ði ɪkspoʊz dʒɔɪsts ə ðə wɔlz, bʌtʃɹəsəz ən huf naɪvz ən ʌðɝ fɛɹiɝz tulz leɪ nitli ɝeɪnʒd ɑn wʊɾən bɛntʃɪz wɪð tʃɪzəlz ən bik aɪɝnz ən swædʒəz ən ɔl ði ɪmpləməns ə ðə blæksmɪθs kɹæft. bɪnz hɛld lɛŋθs ʌv aɪɝn ən stil ɪn vɛɹiəs θɪknəsəz. faɪv ɡɹaɪndɪŋ wilz ə dɪfɹən ɹʌnəs stʊɾ əbaʊt ðə hɑɹd dɝt flɔɹ, sɪks ænvəlz, ən θɹi stoʊn-saɪɾəd fɔɹdʒɪz wɪð ðɛɹ bɛloʊz, ðoʊ oʊnli wʌn hɛld ɡloʊɪŋ koʊlz. kwɛntʃɪŋ bæɹəlz stʊd ɹɛɾi tə hænd.

So much in Tear looked odd that it was a relief to walk into the smithy. The ground floor was all one large room with no back wall except for two long doors that stood open on a yard for shoeing horses and oxen, complete with an ox sling. Hammers stood in their stands, tongs of various kinds and sizes hung on the exposed joists of the walls, buttresses and hoof knives and other farrier's tools lay neatly arranged on wooden benches with chisels and beak irons and swages and all the implements of the blacksmith's craft. Bins held lengths of iron and steel in various thicknesses. Five grinding wheels of different roughness stood about the hard dirt floor, six anvils, and three stone-sided forges with their bellows, though only one held glowing coals. Quenching barrels stood ready to hand.

ðə smɪθ wɑz plaɪɪŋ ɪz hæmɝ ɑn jɛloʊ-hɑɾ aɪɝn ɡɹɪpt ɪn hɛvi tɑŋz. hi wɔɹ bæɡi bɹitʃɪz ən hæd peɪl blu aɪz, bʌt ðə lɔŋ lɛðɝ vɛst oʊvɝ ɪz bɛɹ tʃɛst ən eɪpɹən wɝ nɑt mʌtʃ dɪfɹən fɹəm ðoʊz pɛɹɪn ən mæstɝ luhən hæd wɔɹn bæk ɪn ɛmənz fild, ən ɪz θɪk ɑɹmz ən ʃoʊldɝz spoʊk ə jɪɹz wɝkɪŋ mɛɾəl. hɪz dɑɹk hɛɹ hæɾ ɔlmoʊs ðə seɪm əmaʊn ʌv ɡɹeɪ ðət pɛɹɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪn mæstɝ luhənz. mɔɹ vɛsts ən eɪpɹənz hʌŋ ɑn ðə wɔl, əz ɪf ðə mæn hæɾ əpɹɛntəsɪz, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɪn ɛvəɾəns naʊ. ðə fɔɹdʒ-faɪɝ smɛld laɪk hoʊm. ðə hɑɾ aɪɝn smɛld laɪk hoʊm.

The smith was plying his hammer on yellow-hot iron gripped in heavy tongs. He wore baggy breeches and had pale blue eyes, but the long leather vest over his bare chest and apron were not much different from those Perrin and Master Luhhan had worn back in Emond's Field, and his thick arms and shoulders spoke of years working metal. His dark hair had almost the same amount of gray that Perrin remembered in Master Luhhan's. More vests and aprons hung on the wall, as if the man had apprentices, but they were not in evidence now. The forge-fire smelled like home. The hot iron smelled like home.

ðə smɪθ tɝn tə θɹʌs ðə pis i wɑz wɝkɪŋ bæk ɪndə ðə koʊlz, ən pɛɹɪn stɛpt oʊvɝ tə wɝk ðə bɛloʊz fəɹ hɪm. ðə mæn ɡlænst ət hɪm, bʌt sɛd nʌθɪŋ. pɛɹɪn pʊl ðə bɛloʊz hændəl ʌp ən daʊn wɪð sloʊ, stɛɾi, ivən stʃɹoʊks, kipɪŋ ðə koʊlz ət ðə ɹaɪt hit. ðə smɪθ wɛn bæk tə wɝkɪŋ ðə hɑɾ aɪɝn, ɑn ðə ɹaʊndəd hɔɹn ə ði ænvəl, ðɪs taɪm. pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i maɪt bi meɪkɪŋ ə bæɹəl skɹeɪp. ðə hæmɝ ɹæŋ wɪð ʃɑɹp, kwɪk bloʊz.

The smith turned to thrust the piece he was working back into the coals, and Perrin stepped over to work the bellows for him. The man glanced at him, but said nothing. Perrin pulled the bellows handle up and down with slow, steady, even strokes, keeping the coals at the right heat. The smith went back to working the hot iron, on the rounded horn of the anvil, this time. Perrin thought he might be making a barrel scrape. The hammer rang with sharp, quick blows.

ðə mæn spoʊk wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ɪz wɝk. "əpɹɛntəs?" wɑz ɔl i sɛd.

The man spoke without looking up from his work. "Apprentice?" was all he said.

"jɛs," pɛɹɪn ɹɪplaɪd dʒʌst əz sɪmpli.

"Yes," Perrin replied just as simply.

ðə smɪθ wɝkt ɑn fəɹ ə taɪm. ɪt wɑz ə bæɹəl skɹeɪp, fəɹ klinɪŋ ði ɪnsaɪdz ʌv wʊɾən bæɹəlz. naʊ ən əɡɛn i aɪd pɛɹɪn kənsɪɾɝɪŋli. sɛɾɪŋ ɪz hæmɝ daʊn, dʒʌs fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðə smɪθ pɪkt ʌp ə ʃɔɹt lɛŋθ ə θɪk, skwɛɹ stɑk ən pʊʃt ɪɾ ɪndə pɛɹɪnz hænd, ðən pɪkt ʌp ɪz hæmɝ əɡɛn ən ɹɪzumd wɝk. "si wʌt jə kən də wɪð ðæt," hi sɛd.

The smith worked on for a time. It was a barrel scrape, for cleaning the insides of wooden barrels. Now and again he eyed Perrin consideringly. Setting his hammer down, just for a moment, the smith picked up a short length of thick, square stock and pushed it into Perrin's hand, then picked up his hammer again and resumed work. "See what you can do with that," he said.

wɪθaʊɾ ivən θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt, pɛɹɪn stɛpt oʊvɝ tə ən ænvəl ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə fɔɹdʒ ən tæp ðə stɑk əɡɛnst ɪts ɛdʒ. ɪt meɪɾ ə naɪs ɹɪŋ. ðə stil hæd nɑt bɪn lɛf lɔŋ ɪnʌf ɪn ðə sloʊfɝnəs tə pɪk ʌp ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə kɑɹbən fɹəm ðə koʊl. hi pʊʃt ɪɾ ɪndə ðə hɑt koʊlz fəɹ ɔlmoʊst ɪts ɪntaɪɝ lɛŋθ, teɪstəd ðə tu wɔɾɝ bæɹəlz tə si wɪtʃ hæd bɪn sɔltəd - ðə θɝd wɑz ɑləv ɔɪl - ðən tʊk ɔf ɪz koʊɾ ən ʃɝɾ ən tʃoʊz ə lɛðɝ vɛs ðət wəd fɪɾ ɪz tʃɛst. moʊst ə ðiz tɛɹən fɛloʊz wɝ nɑɾ əz lɑɹdʒ əz hi, bʌɾ i faʊnd wʌn ðət wəd du. faɪndɪŋ ən eɪpɹən wɑz iziɝ.

Without even thinking about it, Perrin stepped over to an anvil on the other side of the forge and tapped the stock against its edge. It made a nice ring. The steel had not been left long enough in the slowfurnace to pick up a great deal of carbon from the coal. He pushed it into the hot coals for almost its entire length, tasted the two water barrels to see which had been salted - the third was olive oil - then took off his coat and shirt and chose a leather vest that would fit his chest. Most of these Tairen fellows were not as large as he, but he found one that would do. Finding an apron was easier.

wən i tɝn ɝaʊnd, hi sɔ ðə smɪθ, stɪl wɪð ɪz hɛd daʊn oʊvɝ ɪz wɝk, nɑɾɪŋ ən smaɪlɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf. bʌt dʒʌs kəz i nu hɪz weɪ ɝaʊn ə smɪθi dɪd nɑt min i hæɾ ɛni skɪl ət smɪθɪŋ. ðət wɑz jɛt tə bi ʃoʊn.

When he turned around, he saw the smith, still with his head down over his work, nodding and smiling to himself. But just because he knew his way around a smithy did not mean he had any skill at smithing. That was yet to be shown.

wən i keɪm bæk tə ði ænvəl wɪð tu hæmɝz, ə sɛɾ ə lɔŋ-hændəl flæt-tɑŋz, ən ə ʃɑɹp-tɑp hɑɹɾi, ðə stil bɑɹ hæd hiɾəd tə ə dɑɹk ɹɛɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ə smɔl bɪɾ ʌv wʌɾ i hæd lɛft aʊɾ ə ðə koʊlz. hi wɝk ðə bɛloʊz, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə kʌlɝ ə ðə mɛɾəl laɪɾən, əntɪl ɪt ɹitʃt ə jɛloʊ dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ʌv waɪt. ðən i pʊld ɪɾ aʊt wɪð ðə tɑŋz, leɪɾ ɪɾ ɑn ði ænvəl, ən pɪkt ʌp ðə hɛviɝ ə ðə tu hæmɝz. əbaʊt tɛn paʊnz, hi ɛstəmeɪɾəd, ən wɪð ə lɔŋɡɝ hændəl ðən moʊs pipəl, hu dɪd nɑt noʊ mɛɾəl wɝkɪŋ, θɔt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi. hi hɛld ɪt nɪɹ ði ɛnd; hɑt mɛɾəl ɡeɪv ɔf spɑɹks, səmtaɪmz, ən i hæd sin ðə skɑɹz ɑn ðə hænz ə ðə smɪθ fɹəm ʌp ət ɹaʊndɪl, ə kɛɹləs fɛloʊ.

When he came back to the anvil with two hammers, a set of long-handled flat-tongs, and a sharp-topped hardy, the steel bar had heated to a dark red except for a small bit of what he had left out of the coals. He worked the bellows, watching the color of the metal lighten, until it reached a yellow just short of white. Then he pulled it out with the tongs, laid it on the anvil, and picked up the heavier of the two hammers. About ten pounds, he estimated, and with a longer handle than most people, who did not know metal working, thought was necessary. He held it near the end; hot metal gave off sparks, sometimes, and he had seen the scars on the hands of the smith from up at Roundhill, a careless fellow.

hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə meɪk ɛniθɪŋ ɪlæbɹəɾ əɹ fænsi. sɪmpəl θɪŋz sim bɛst ət ðə moʊmənt. hi bɪɡæn baɪ ɹaʊndɪŋ ði ɛdʒəz ə ðə bɑɹ, ðən hæmɝd ðə mɪɾəl aʊɾ ɪndə ə bɹɔd bleɪd, ɔlmoʊst əz θɪk əz ði ɝɪdʒənəl ət ðə bʌt, bʌɾ ə ɡʊd hæn ən ə hæf lɔŋ. fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm i ɹɪtɝn ðə mɛɾəl tə ðə koʊlz, tə kip ɪɾ ət ðə peɪl jɛloʊ, ən æftɝ ə taɪm i ʃɪftəd tə ðə laɪɾɝ hæmɝ, hæf ðə weɪɾ ə ðə fɝst. ðə pis bɪɑn ðə bleɪd, hi θɪn daʊn, ðən bɛn ɪɾ oʊvɝ ði ænvəl hɔɹn ɪn ə kɝv daʊn bɪsaɪd ðə bleɪd. ə wʊɾən hændəl kəd bi fɪkst ɑntu ðæt, ɪvɛntʃəwəli. sɛɾɪŋ ðə ʃɑɹp-tʃɪzəl hɑɹɾi ɪn ði ænvəlz hɑɹɾi-hoʊl, hi leɪd ðə ɡloʊɪŋ mɛɾəl ətɑp ɪt. wʌn ʃɑɹp bloʊ ʌv ðə hæmɝ kʌɾ ɔf ðə tul i hæd meɪd. əɹ ɔlmoʊs meɪd. ɪt wəd bi ə tʃæmfɝ naɪf, fəɹ smuðɪŋ ən lɛvəlɪŋ ðə tɑps ə bæɹəl steɪvz æftɝ ðeɪ wɝ hɑp təɡɛðɝ, əmʌŋ ʌðɝ θɪŋz. wən i wɑz dʌn. ði ʌðɝ mænz bæɹəl skɹeɪp hæd meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ʌv ɪt.

He did not want to make anything elaborate or fancy. Simple things seemed best at the moment. He began by rounding the edges of the bar, then hammered the middle out into a broad blade, almost as thick as the original at the butt, but a good hand and a half long. From time to time he returned the metal to the coals, to keep it at the pale yellow, and after a time he shifted to the lighter hammer, half the weight of the first. The piece beyond the blade, he thinned down, then bent it over the anvil horn in a curve down beside the blade. A wooden handle could be fixed onto that, eventually. Setting the sharp-chisel hardy in the anvil's hardy-hole, he laid the glowing metal atop it. One sharp blow of the hammer cut off the tool he had made. Or almost made. It would be a chamfer knife, for smoothing and leveling the tops of barrel staves after they were hopped together, among other things. When he was done. The other man's barrel scrape had made him think of it.

əz sun əz i hæd meɪd ðə hɑt-kʌt, hi tɔs ðə ɡloʊɪŋ mɛɾəl ɪndə ðə sɔltəd kwɛntʃɪŋ bæɹəl. ənsɑltəd ɡeɪv ə hɑɹɾɝ kwɛntʃ, fəɹ ðə hɑɹɾəst mɛɾəl, waɪl ði ɔɪl ɡeɪv ðə sɔftəst, fəɹ ɡʊd naɪvz. ən sɔɹdz, hi hæd hɝd, bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ hæɾ ɛni pɑɹɾ ɪn meɪkɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðæt.

As soon as he had made the hot-cut, he tossed the glowing metal into the salted quenching barrel. Unsalted gave a harder quench, for the hardest metal, while the oil gave the softest, for good knives. And swords, he had heard, but he had never had any part in making anything like that.

wən ðə mɛɾəl hæd kuld ɪnʌf, tə ə dʌl ɡɹeɪ, hi ɹimuvd ɪt fɹəm ðə wɔɾɝ ən tʊk ɪt tə ðə ɡɹaɪndɪŋ wilz. ə lɪɾəl sloʊ wɝk wɪð ðə fʊtpəɾəlz ɡɹaʊn ə pɑlɪʃ ɑntu ðə bleɪd. kɛɹfəli, hi hiɾəd ðə bleɪd pɔɹʃən əɡɛn. ðɪs taɪm ðə kʌlɝz dipənd, tə stʃɹɔ, tə bɹɑnz. wən ðə bɹɑnz kʌlɝ bɪɡæn tə ɹʌn ʌp ðə bleɪɾ ɪn weɪvz, hi sɛɾ ɪɾ əsaɪd tə kul. ðə faɪnəl ɛdʒ kəd bi ʃɑɹpən ðɛn. kwɛntʃɪŋ əɡɛn wəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə tɛmpɝɪŋ i hæd dʒʌs dʌn.

When the metal had cooled enough, to a dull gray, he removed it from the water and took it to the grinding wheels. A little slow work with the footpedals ground a polish onto the blade. Carefully, he heated the blade portion again. This time the colors deepened, to straw, to bronze. When the bronze color began to run up the blade in waves, he set it aside to cool. The final edge could be sharpened then. Quenching again would destroy the tempering he had just done.

"ə vɛɹi nit bɪɾ ʌv wɝk," ðə smɪθ sɛd. "noʊ weɪstəd moʊʃən. jə lʊkɪŋ fəɹ wɝk? maɪ əpɹɛntəsɪz dʒʌst wɔkt əweɪ, ɔl θɹi ʌv ðɛm, ðə wɝθləs fulz, ən aɪv plɛnti jə kəd du."

"A very neat bit of work," the smith said. "No wasted motion. You looking for work? My apprentices just walked away, all three of them, the worthless fools, and I've plenty you could do."

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ haʊ lɔŋ əl bi ɪn tɛɹ. aɪd laɪk tə wɝk ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ, ɪf jə də nɑt maɪnd. ɪts bɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm, ən aɪ mɪs ɪt. meɪbi aɪ kəd də səm ə ðə wɝk jəɹ əpɹɛntəsɪz wəɾ əv dʌn."

Perrin shook his head. "I do not know how long I will be in Tear. I'd like to work a little longer, if you do not mind. It has been a long time, and I miss it. Maybe I could do some of the work your apprentices would have done."

ðə smɪθ snɔɹɾɪd laʊdli. "jɔɹ ə dil bɛɾɝ ðən ɛni ʌv ðoʊz laʊts, moʊpɪŋ ɝaʊn ən stɛɹɪŋ, mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ naɪtmɛɹz. əz ɪf ɛvɹiwʌn dʌzn əv naɪtmɛɹz, səmtaɪmz. jɛs, jə kən wɝk hɪɹ, əz lɔŋ əz jə wɑnt. laɪt, aɪv ɔɹɾɝz fəɹ ə dʌzən dʒɹɔknaɪvz ən θɹi kupɝz ædʒɪz, ən ə kɑɹpəntɝ daʊn ðə stʃɹit nidz ə mɔɹtaɪz hæmɝ, ænd. . . . tu mʌtʃ tə lɪst ɪt. stɑɹt wɪð ðə dʒɹɔknaɪvz, ən wɪl si haʊ fɑɹ wi ɡɛt bɪfɔɹ naɪt."

The smith snorted loudly. "You're a deal better than any of those louts, moping around and staring, muttering about their nightmares. As if everyone doesn't have nightmares, sometimes. Yes, you can work here, as long as you want. Light, I've orders for a dozen drawknives and three cooper's adzes, and a carpenter down the street needs a mortise hammer, and. . . . Too much to list it. Start with the drawknives, and we will see how far we get before night."

pɛɹɪn lɔs hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðə wɝk, fəɹ ə taɪm fɝɡɛɾɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ bʌt ðə hiɾ ə ðə mɛɾəl, ðə ɹɪŋ ə hɪz hæmɝ, ən ðə smɛl ə ðə fɔɹdʒ, bʌt ðəɹ keɪm ə taɪm wən i lʊkt ʌp ən faʊn ðə smɪθ - dɝməɾ ɑjɑlə, hi hæd sɛɾ ɪz neɪm wɑz - teɪkɪŋ ɔf ɪz vɛst, ən ðə ʃuɪŋ jɑɹd dɑɹk. ɔl ðə laɪt keɪm fɹəm ðə fɔɹdʒ ən ə pɛɹ ə læmps. ən zɑɹin wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ən ænvəl baɪ wʌn ə ðə koʊl fɔɹdʒɪz, wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm.

Perrin lost himself in the work, for a time forgetting everything but the heat of the metal, the ring of his hammer, and the smell of the forge, but there came a time when he looked up and found the smith - Dermid Ajala, he had said his name was - taking off his vest, and the shoeing yard dark. All the light came from the forge and a pair of lamps. And Zarine was sitting on an anvil by one of the cold forges, watching him.

"soʊ jə ɹɪli ɑɹ ə blæksmɪθ, blæksmɪθ," ʃi sɛd.

"So you really are a blacksmith, blacksmith," she said.

"hi ɪz ðæt, mɪstʃɹəs," ɑjɑlə sɛd. "əpɹɛntəs, hi sɛz, bʌt ðə wɝk i dɪd tədeɪ əmaʊns tə hɪz mæstɝz pis əz fɑɹ əz aɪm kənsɝnd. faɪn stʃɹoʊkɪŋ, ən bɛɾɝ ðən stɛɾi." pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ ɪz fiɾ ət ðə kɑmpləməns, ən ðə smɪθ ɡɹɪn ət hɪm. zɑɹin stɛɹɾ ət boʊθ ə ðɛm wɪð ə læk ə kɑmpɹihɛnʃən.

"He is that, mistress," Ajala said. "Apprentice, he says, but the work he did today amounts to his master's piece as far as I am concerned. Fine stroking, and better than steady." Perrin shifted his feet at the compliments, and the smith grinned at him. Zarine stared at both of them with a lack of comprehension.

pɛɹɪn wɛn tə ɹipleɪs ðə vɛst ən eɪpɹən ɑn ðɛɹ pɛɡ, bʌt wʌns i hæɾ əm ɔf, hi wɑz sʌɾənli kɑnʃəs ə zɑɹinz aɪz ɑn ɪz bæk. ɪt wɑz ɪf ʃi wɝ tʌtʃɪŋ hɪm; fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ði ɝbəl sɛn ə hɝ simd oʊvɝwɛlmɪŋ. hi kwɪkli pʊld ɪz ʃɝɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd, stʌft ɪt ɹæədli ɪndə hɪz bɹitʃɪz, ən dʒɝkt ɑn ɪz koʊt. wən i tɝn ɝaʊnd, zɑɹin wɔɹ wʌn ə ðoʊz smɔl, sikɹəɾɪv smaɪlz ðət hæɾ ɔlweɪz meɪɾ ɪm nɝvəs.

Perrin went to replace the vest and apron on their peg, but once he had them off, he was suddenly conscious of Zarine's eyes on his back. It was if she were touching him; for a moment, the herbal scent of her seemed overwhelming. He quickly pulled his shirt over his head, stuffed it raggedly into his breeches, and jerked on his coat. When he turned around, Zarine wore one of those small, secretive smiles that had always made him nervous.

"ɪz ðɪs wʌt jə min tə du, ðɛn?" ʃi æskt. "dɪd jə kʌm ɔl ðɪs weɪ tə bi ə blæksmɪθ əɡɛn?" ɑjɑlə pɔzd ɪn ði ækt ə pʊlɪŋ ðə jɑɹd dɔɹz kloʊzd ən lɪsənd.

"Is this what you mean to do, then?" she asked. "Did you come all this way to be a blacksmith again?" Ajala paused in the act of pulling the yard doors closed and listened.

pɛɹɪn pɪkt ʌp ðə hɛvi hæmɝ i hæd juzd, ə tɛn-paʊn hɛd wɪð ə hændəl əz lɔŋ əz ɪz fɔɹɑɹm. ɪt fɛlt ɡʊɾ ɪn ɪz hænz. ɪt fɛlt ɹaɪt. ðə smɪθ hæd ɡlænst əɾ ɪz aɪz wʌns ən nɛvɝ ivən blɪŋkt; ɪt wɑz ðə wɝk ðət wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ðə skɪl wɪð mɛɾəl, nɑt ðə kʌlɝ ʌv ə mænz aɪz. "noʊ," hi sɛd sædli. "wʌn deɪ, aɪ hoʊp. bʌt nɑt jɛt." hi stɑɹɾəd tə hæŋ ðə hæmɝ bæk ɑn ðə wɔl.

Perrin picked up the heavy hammer he had used, a ten-pound head with a handle as long as his forearm. It felt good in his hands. It felt right. The smith had glanced at his eyes once and never even blinked; it was the work that was important, the skill with metal, not the color of a man's eyes. "No," he said sadly. "One day, I hope. But not yet." He started to hang the hammer back on the wall.

"teɪk ɪt." ɑjɑlə klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "aɪ də nɑt juʒəwəli ɡɪv əweɪ ɡʊd hæmɝz, bʌt. . . . ðə wɝk juv dʌn tədeɪ ɪz wɝθ mɔɹ ðən ðə pɹaɪs ə ðət hæmɝ baɪ fɑɹ, ən meɪbi ɪɾəl hɛlp jə tə ðət 'wʌn deɪ.' mæn, ɪf aɪ hæv ɛvɝ sin ɛniwʌn meɪd tə hoʊld ə smɪθs hæmɝ, ɪts ju. soʊ teɪk ɪt. kip ɪt."

"Take it." Ajala cleared his throat. "I do not usually give away good hammers, but. . . . The work you've done today is worth more than the price of that hammer by far, and maybe it will help you to that 'one day.' Man, if I have ever seen anyone made to hold a smith's hammer, it is you. So take it. Keep it."

pɛɹɪn kloʊzd ɪz hæn ɝaʊn ðə hæft. ɪt dɪd fil ɹaɪt. "θæŋk ju," hi sɛd. "aɪ kænɑt seɪ wʌt ðɪs minz tə mi."

Perrin closed his hand around the haft. It did feel right. "Thank you," he said. "I cannot say what this means to me."

"dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə 'wʌn deɪ,' mæn. dʒʌs jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt."

"Just remember the 'one day,' man. Just you remember it."

əz ðeɪ lɛft, zɑɹin lʊkt ʌp əɾ ɪm ən sɛd, "du juv ɛni aɪdiə haʊ stʃɹeɪnʒ mɛn ɑɹ, blæksmɪθ? noʊ. aɪ dɪd nɑt θɪŋk jə dɪd." ʃi dɑɹɾɪd əhɛd, livɪŋ ɪm hoʊldɪŋ ðə hæmɝ ɪn wʌn hæn ən skɹætʃɪŋ ɪz hɛd wɪð ði ʌðɝ.

As they left, Zarine looked up at him and said, "Do you have any idea how strange men are, blacksmith? No. I did not think you did." She darted ahead, leaving him holding the hammer in one hand and scratching his head with the other.

noʊ wʌn ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum lʊkt əɾ ɪm twaɪs, ə ɡoʊldən-aɪd mæn kæɹiɪŋ ə smɪθs hæmɝ. hi wɛn ʌp tə hɪz ɹum, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ fəɹ wʌns tə laɪɾ ə tæloʊ kændəl. hɪz kwɪvɝ ən ði æks hʌŋ fɹəm ðə seɪm pɛɡ ɑn ðə plæstɝ wɔl. hi hɛftəd ði æks ɪn wʌn hænd, ðə hæmɝ ɪn ði ʌðɝ. baɪ weɪɾ ə mɛɾəl, ði æks, wɪð ɪts hæf-mun bleɪɾ ən θɪk spaɪk, wɑz ə ɡʊd faɪv əɹ sɪks paʊnz laɪɾɝ ðən ðə hæmɝ, bʌɾ ɪt fɛl tɛn taɪmz hɛviɝ. ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ ði æks ɪn ðə lup ɑn ɪts bɛlt, hi sɛt ðə hæmɝ ɑn ðə flɔɹ bɪniθ ðə pɛɡ, hændəl əɡɛns ðə wɔl. æks hæft ən hæmɝ hæft ɔlmoʊs tʌtʃt, tu pisəz ʌv wʊɾ ikwəli θɪk. tu pisəz ə mɛɾəl, nɪɹ ɪnʌf ðə seɪm weɪt. fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm i sæɾ ɑn ðə stul stɛɹɪŋ ət ðɛm. hi wɑz stɪl stɛɹɪŋ wən læn pʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum.

No one in the common room looked at him twice, a golden-eyed man carrying a smith's hammer. He went up to his room, remembering for once to light a tallow candle. His quiver and the axe hung from the same peg on the plaster wall. He hefted the axe in one hand, the hammer in the other. By weight of metal, the axe, with its half-moon blade and thick spike, was a good five or six pounds lighter than the hammer, but it felt ten times heavier. Replacing the axe in the loop on its belt, he set the hammer on the floor beneath the peg, handle against the wall. Axe haft and hammer haft almost touched, two pieces of wood equally thick. Two pieces of metal, near enough the same weight. For a long time he sat on the stool staring at them. He was still staring when Lan put his head into the room.

"kʌm, blæksmɪθ. wɪv θɪŋz tə tɔk oʊvɝ."

"Come, blacksmith. We have things to talk over."

"aɪ æm ə blæksmɪθ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ fɹaʊn ət hɪm.

"I am a blacksmith," Perrin said, and the Warder frowned at him.

"doʊnt ɡoʊ wɪntɝ-kɹeɪzi ɑn mi naʊ, blæksmɪθ. ɪf jə kænɑt kæɹi jəɹ weɪɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, jə meɪ dʒɹæɡ əs ɔl daʊn ðə maʊntən."

"Don't go winter-crazy on me now, blacksmith. If you cannot carry your weight any longer, you may drag us all down the mountain."

"aɪl kæɹi maɪ weɪt," pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld. "aɪ wɪl də wʌɾ əz tə bi dʌn. wʌt dʒju wɑnt?"

"I'll carry my weight," Perrin growled. "I will do what has to be done. What do you want?"

"ju, blæksmɪθ. doʊn jə lɪsən? kʌm ɑn, fɑɹmbɔɪ."

"You, blacksmith. Don't you listen? Come on, farmboy."

ðət neɪm ðət zɑɹin soʊ ɔfən kɔld ɪm pʊld ɪm tə hɪz fiɾ æŋɡɹəli, naʊ, bʌt læn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi tɝnɪŋ əweɪ. pɛɹɪn hɝiɾ ɪndə ðə hɔl ən fɑloʊɾ ɪm təwɔɹd ðə fɹʌn ə ði ɪn, minɪŋ tə tɛl ðə wɔɹɾɝ i hæd hæɾ ɪnʌf ə ðɪs "blæksmɪθ" ən "fɑɹmbɔɪ," hɪz neɪm wɑz pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. ðə wɔɹɾɝ dʌkt ɪndə ði ɪnz oʊnli pɹaɪvət daɪnɪŋ ɹum, oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ ðə stʃɹit.

That name that Zarine so often called him pulled him to his feet angrily, now, but Lan was already turning away. Perrin hurried into the hall and followed him toward the front of the inn, meaning to tell the Warder he had had enough of this "blacksmith" and "farmboy," his name was Perrin Aybara. The Warder ducked into the inn's only private dining room, overlooking the street.

pɛɹɪn fɑloʊd hɪm. "naʊ lɪsən, wɔɹɾɝ, aɪ - "

Perrin followed him. "Now listen, Warder, I - "

"ju lɪsən, pɛɹɪn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "bi kwaɪəɾ ən lɪsən." hɝ feɪs wɑz smuð, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz lʊkt əz ɡɹɪm əz əɹ vɔɪs saʊndəd.

"You listen, Perrin," Moiraine said. "Be quiet and listen." Her face was smooth, but her eyes looked as grim as her voice sounded.

pɛɹɪn hæd nɑt ɹilaɪzd ɛniwʌn wɑz ɪn ðə ɹum ɪksɛp fəɹ hɪmsɛlf ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ, stændɪŋ wɪð wʌn ɑɹm ʌp ɑn ðə mæntəl ə ði ənlɪt faɪɝpleɪs. mɔɪɹeɪn sæɾ ət ðə teɪbəl ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə flɔɹ, ə sɪmpəl pis, ʌv blæk oʊk. nʌn ə ði ʌðɝ tʃɛɹz wɪð ðɛɹ haɪ, kɑɹv bæks wɝ ɑkjəpaɪd. zɑɹin wɑz linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə ðə ɹum fɹəm læn, skaʊlɪŋ, ən lɔɪəl hæd tʃoʊzən tə sɪɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ sɪns nʌn ə ðə tʃɛɹz ɹɪli fɪt hɪm.

Perrin had not realized anyone was in the room except for himself and the Warder, standing with one arm up on the mantel of the unlit fireplace. Moiraine sat at the table in the middle of the floor, a simple piece, of black oak. None of the other chairs with their high, carved backs were occupied. Zarine was leaning against the wall at the other end of the room from Lan, scowling, and Loial had chosen to sit on the floor since none of the chairs really fit him.

"aɪm ɡlæd jə dɪsaɪɾɪd tə dʒɔɪn ʌs, fɑɹmbɔɪ," zɑɹin sɛd sɑɹkæstɪkli. "mɔɪɹeɪn wəd nɑt seɪ ɛniθɪŋ tɪl jə keɪm. ʃi dʒʌs lʊks əɾ əs əz ɪf ʃiz dəsaɪɾɪŋ wɪtʃ ʌv əs ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ. aɪ - "

"I'm glad you decided to join us, farmboy," Zarine said sarcastically. "Moiraine would not say anything till you came. She just looks at us as if she is deciding which of us is going to die. I - "

"bi kwaɪət," mɔɪɹeɪn toʊld əɹ ʃɑɹpli. "wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɪz ɪn tɛɹ. ðə haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən ɪz bɛləl." pɛɹɪn ʃɪvɝd.

"Be quiet," Moiraine told her sharply. "One of the Forsaken is in Tear. The High Lord Samon is Be'lal." Perrin shivered.

lɔɪəl skwizd ɪz aɪz ʃʌɾ ən ɡɹoʊnd. "aɪ cʊɾə ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə stɛɾɪŋ. aɪ wəd pɹɑbli hæv bɪn vɛɹi hæpi, mɛɹid, huɛvɝ maɪ mʌðɝ tʃoʊz. ʃiz ə faɪn wʊmən, maɪ mʌðɝ, ən ʃi wəd nɑt ɡɪmi tə ə bæd waɪf." hɪz ɪɹz sim tə hæv hɪɾən ðɛmsɛlvz kəmplitli ɪn ɪz ʃæɡi hɛɹ.

Loial squeezed his eyes shut and groaned. "I could have remained in the stedding. I would probably have been very happy, married, whoever my mother chose. She is a fine woman, my mother, and she would not give me to a bad wife." His ears seemed to have hidden themselves completely in his shaggy hair.

"ju kən ɡoʊ bæk tə stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "liv naʊ, ɪf jə wɪʃ. əl nɑt stɑp ju."

"You can go back to Stedding Shangtai," Moiraine said. "Leave now, if you wish. I will not stop you."

lɔɪəl oʊpənd wʌn aɪ. "aɪ kən ɡoʊ?"

Loial opened one eye. "I can go?"

"ɪf jə wɪʃ," ʃi sɛd.

"If you wish," she said.

"oʊ." hi oʊpən ði ʌðɝ aɪ, ən skɹætʃt ɪz tʃik wɪð blʌn fɪŋɡɝz ðə saɪz ə sɔsɪdʒɪz. "aɪ səpoʊz. . . . aɪ səpoʊz . . . ɪf aɪ hæv ə tʃɔɪs . . . ðəɾ əl steɪ wɪð ɔl ə ju. aɪ hæv teɪkən ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni noʊts, bʌt nɑt nɪɹli ɪnʌf tə kəmplit maɪ bʊk, ən aɪ wəd nɑt laɪk tə liv pɛɹɪn, ən ɹænd - "

"Oh." He opened the other eye, and scratched his cheek with blunt fingers the size of sausages. "I suppose. . . . I suppose . . . if I have a choice . . . that I will stay with all of you. I have taken a great many notes, but not nearly enough to complete my book, and I would not like to leave Perrin, and Rand - "

mɔɪɹeɪn kʌɾ ɪm ɔf ɪn ə koʊl vɔɪs. "ɡʊd, lɔɪəl. aɪm ɡlæd ðət jə ɑɹ steɪɪŋ. əl bi ɡlæd tə juz ɛni nɑlədʒ jə hæv. bʌɾ əntɪl ðɪs ɪz dʌn, aɪ hæv noʊ taɪm tə lɪsən tə jəɹ kəmpleɪns!"

Moiraine cut him off in a cold voice. "Good, Loial. I am glad that you are staying. I will be glad to use any knowledge you have. But until this is done, I have no time to listen to your complaints!"

"aɪ səpoʊz," zɑɹin sɛɾ ɪn ən ənstɛɾi vɔɪs, "ðæt ðəɹ ɪz noʊ tʃæns ə mi livɪŋ?" ʃi lʊkt ət mɔɪɹeɪn, ən ʃɪvɝd. "aɪ θɔt nɑt. blæksmɪθ, ɪf aɪ lɪv θɹu ðɪs, əl meɪk jə peɪ."

"I suppose," Zarine said in an unsteady voice, "that there is no chance of me leaving?" She looked at Moiraine, and shivered. "I thought not. Blacksmith, if I live through this, I will make you pay."

pɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ ət hɝ. mi! ðə ful wʊmən θɪŋks ɪt maɪ fɔlt? dɪɾ aɪ æsk əɹ tə kʌm? hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, sɔ ðə lʊk ɪn mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪz, ən kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn kwɪkli. æftɝ ə moʊmən i sɛd, "ɪz i æftɝ ɹænd? tə stɑp hɪm, əɹ kɪl hɪm?"

Perrin stared at her. Me! The fool woman thinks it my fault? Did I ask her to come? He opened his mouth, saw the look in Moiraine's eyes, and closed it again quickly. After a moment he said, "Is he after Rand? To stop him, or kill him?"

"aɪ θɪŋk nɑt," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz laɪk koʊl stil. "aɪ fɪɹ i minz tə lɛt ɹænd ɛntɝ ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn ən teɪk kælændɝ, ðən teɪk ɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. aɪ fɪɹ i minz tə kɪl ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɪð ðə vɛɹi wɛpən ðəɾ ɪz mɛn tə hɛɹəl hɪm."

"I think not," she said quietly. Her voice was like cold steel. "I fear he means to let Rand enter the Heart of the Stone and take Callandor, then take it away from him. I fear he means to kill the Dragon Reborn with the very weapon that is meant to herald him."

"du wi ɹʌn əɡɛn?" zɑɹin sɛd. "laɪk ɪljən? aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt tə ɹʌn, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt tə faɪn ðə fɔɹseɪkən wən aɪ tʊk ðə hʌntɝz oʊθ."

"Do we run again?" Zarine said. "Like Illian? I never thought to run, but I never thought to find the Forsaken when I took the Hunter's oath."

"ðɪs taɪm," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "wi də nɑt ɹʌn. wi dɛɹ nɑt ɹʌn. wɝlz ən taɪm ɹɛst ɑn ɹænd, ɑn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ðɪs taɪm, wi faɪt."

"This time," Moiraine said, "we do not run. We dare not run. Worlds and time rest on Rand, on the Dragon Reborn. This time, we fight."

pɛɹɪn tʊk ə tʃɛɹ ənizəli. "mɔɪɹeɪn, jə ɑɹ seɪɪŋ ə lɑɾ ə θɪŋz ɹaɪɾ aʊt ðət jə toʊld əs wi mʌs nɑɾ ivən θɪŋk əbaʊt. jə də hæv ðɪs ɹum wɔɹɾɪd əɡɛns lɪsnɪŋ, doʊn ju?" wən ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, hi ɡɹɪp ði ɛdʒ ə ðə teɪbəl hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ðə dɑɹk oʊk kɹik.

Perrin took a chair uneasily. "Moiraine, you are saying a lot of things right out that you told us we must not even think about. You do have this room warded against listening, don't you?" When she shook her head, he gripped the edge of the table hard enough to make the dark oak creak.

"aɪ də nɑt spik ʌv ə mɹdʒɹɑl, pɛɹɪn. noʊ wʌn noʊz ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪʃəml ən lænfɝ wɝ ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst, bʌt ðə wikəst ə ðɛm kəd sɛns ɛni wɔɹɾɪŋ aɪ maɪt sɛt fɹəm ə maɪl əɹ mɔɹ əweɪ. ən ɹɪp ɔl ʌv əs tə ʃɹɛdz ɪn sɛkənz. pɑsəbli wɪθaʊt stɝɪŋ fɹəm wɛɹ i stʊd."

"I do not speak of a Myrddraal, Perrin. No one knows the strength of the Forsaken, except that Ishamael and Lanfear were the strongest, but the weakest of them could sense any warding I might set from a mile or more away. And rip all of us to shreds in seconds. Possibly without stirring from where he stood."

"jɔɹ seɪɪŋ i kən taɪ jə ɪn nɑts," pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd. "laɪt! wʌɾ ɑɹ wi səpoʊz tə du? haʊ kən wi də ɛniθɪŋ?"

"You're saying he can tie you in knots," Perrin muttered. "Light! What are we supposed to do? How can we do anything?"

"ivən ðə fɔɹseɪkən kænɑt stæn ʌp tə bɑlfaɪɝ," ʃi sɛd. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðət wɑz wʌt ʃi hæd juzd ɑn ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz; ɪt stɪl meɪɾ ɪm ənizi, wʌɾ i hæd sin, ən wʌt ʃi hæd sɛd ðɛn. "aɪ hæv lɝn θɪŋz ɪn ðə læs jɪɹ, pɛɹɪn. aɪm . . . mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən wən aɪ keɪm tə ɛmənz fild. ɪf aɪ kən kʌm kloʊs ɪnʌf tə bɛləl, aɪ kən dɪstʃɹɔɪ hɪm. bʌɾ ɪf i siz mi fɝst, hi kən dɪstʃɹɔɪ əs ɔl, lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ aɪ hæv ə tʃæns." ʃi tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən tə lɔɪəl. "wʌt kən jə tɛl mi ʌv bɛləl?"

"Even the Forsaken cannot stand up to balefire," she said. He wondered if that was what she had used on the Darkhounds; it still made him uneasy, what he had seen, and what she had said then. "I have learned things in the last year, Perrin. I am . . . more dangerous than when I came to Emond's Field. If I can come close enough to Be'lal, I can destroy him. But if he sees me first, he can destroy us all, long before I have a chance." She turned her attention to Loial. "What can you tell me of Be'lal?"

pɛɹɪn blɪŋkt ɪn kənfjuʒən. lɔɪəl?

Perrin blinked in confusion. Loial?

"waɪ ɑɹ jə æskɪŋ hɪm?" zɑɹin bɝst aʊɾ æŋɡɹəli. "fɝs jə tɛl ðə blæksmɪθ jə min əs tə faɪt wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən! - hu kən kɪl əs ɔl bɪfɔɹ wi kən ivən θɪŋk! - ən naʊ jə æsk lɔɪəl əbaʊt hɪm?" lɔɪəl mɝmɝɾ ɝdʒənli, ðət neɪm ʃi juzd - "feɪl! feɪl!" - bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən sloʊ. "aɪ θɔɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ nu ɛvɹiθɪŋ. laɪt, ət list aɪm smɑɹɾ ɪnʌf nɑt tə seɪ əl faɪt sʌmwʌn ənlɛs aɪ noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ kən ə hɪm! ju. . . ." ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf ʌndɝ mɔɪɹeɪnz stɛɹ, mʌɾɝɪŋ.

"Why are you asking him?" Zarine burst out angrily. "First you tell the blacksmith you mean us to fight one of the Forsaken! - who can kill us all before we can even think! - and now you ask Loial about him?" Loial murmured urgently, that name she used - "Faile! Faile!" - but she did not even slow. "I thought Aes Sedai knew everything. Light, at least I am smart enough not to say I will fight someone unless I know everything I can of him! You. . . ." She trailed off under Moiraine's stare, muttering.

"oʊɡiɝ," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd kuli, "hæv lɔŋ mɛmɹiz, ɡɝl. ɪts bɪn wɛl oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ fəɹ hjumənz, bʌt lɛs ðən θɝɾi fəɹ oʊɡiɝ. wi stɪl lɝn θɪŋz fɹəm ðɛɹ stɔɹiz ðət wi dɪd nɑt noʊ. naʊ tɛl mi, lɔɪəl. wʌt dʒju noʊ ʌv bɛləl. ən bɹifli, fəɹ wʌns. aɪ wɑn jəɹ lɔŋ mɛmɹi, nɑt jəɹ lɔŋ wɪnd."

"Ogier," the Aes Sedai said coolly, "have long memories, girl. It has been well over a hundred generations since the Breaking for humans, but less than thirty for Ogier. We still learn things from their stories that we did not know. Now tell me, Loial. What do you know of Be'lal. And briefly, for once. I want your long memory, not your long wind."

lɔɪəl klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt, ə saʊn mʌtʃ laɪk faɪɝwʊd tʌmbəlɪŋ daʊn ə ʃut. "bɛləl." hɪz ɪɹz flɪkɝɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛɹ laɪk hʌmɪŋbɝd wɪŋz, ðən snæp daʊn əɡɛn. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ wʌt kən bi ɪn ðə stɔɹiz əbaʊɾ ɪm jə də nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi noʊ. hiz nɑt mʌtʃ mɛnʃənd, ɪksɛpt ɪn ðə ɹeɪzɪŋ ə ðə hɔl ə ðə sɝvəns dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ ən ðə hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz sild ɪm ʌp wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn. dʒɑlændə sʌn ʌv ɛɹaɪd sʌn ə kɔɪəm ɹoʊt ðəɾ i wɑz kɔl ði ɛnviəs, ðəɾ i fɔɹsʊk ðə laɪt kəz i ɛnvid luz θɝɪn, ən ðəɾ i ɛnviɾ ɪʃəml ən lænfɝ, tu. ɪn eɪ stʌɾi ʌv ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ, mɔɪlɪn dɔɾɝ ə hɑmɑɾə dɔɾɝ ə dʒwɛndæn kɔl bɛləl ðə nɛtwivɝ, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt noʊ waɪ. ʃi mɛnʃən ɪm pleɪɪŋ ə ɡeɪm ə stoʊnz wɪð luz θɝɪn ən wɪnɪŋ, ən ðəɾ i ɔlweɪz boʊstəɾ ʌv ɪt." hi ɡlænst ət mɔɪɹeɪn ən ɹʌmbəld, "aɪ æm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bi bɹif. aɪ də nɑt noʊ ɛniθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt əbaʊt hɪm. sɛvɹəl ɹaɪɾɝz seɪ bɛləl ən sɑmaɪl wɝ boʊθ liɾɝz ɪn ðə faɪɾ əɡɛns ðə dɑɹk wʌn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ fɔɹsʊk ðə laɪt, ən boʊθ wɝ mæstɝz ə ðə sɔɹd. ðəɾ ɪz tʃɹuli ɔl aɪ noʊ. hi meɪ bi mɛnʃən ɪn ʌðɝ bʊks, ʌðɝ stɔɹiz, bʌɾ aɪ hæv nɑt ɹɛd ðɛm. bɛləl ɪz dʒʌs nɑt spoʊkən ə vɛɹi ɔfən. aɪm sɑɹi aɪ kəd nɑt tɛl jə ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl."

Loial cleared his throat, a sound much like firewood tumbling down a chute. "Be'lal." His ears flickered out of his hair like hummingbird wings, then snapped down again. "I do not know what can be in the stories about him you do not already know. He is not much mentioned, except in the razing of the Hall of the Servants just before Lews Therin Kinslayer and the Hundred Companions sealed him up with the Dark One. Jalanda son of Aried son of Coiam wrote that he was called the Envious, that he forsook the Light because he envied Lews Therin, and that he envied Ishamael and Lanfear, too. In A Study of the War of the Shadow, Moilin daughter of Hamada daughter of Juendan called Be'lal the Netweaver, but I do not know why. She mentioned him playing a game of stones with Lews Therin and winning, and that he always boasted of it." He glanced at Moiraine and rumbled, "I am trying to be brief. I do not know anything important about him. Several writers say Be'lal and Sammael were both leaders in the fight against the Dark One before they forsook the Light, and both were masters of the sword. That is truly all I know. He may be mentioned in other books, other stories, but I have not read them. Be'lal is just not spoken of very often. I am sorry I could not tell you anything useful."

"pɝhæps jə hæv," mɔɪɹeɪn toʊl hɪm. "aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ ʌv ðə neɪm, ðə nɛtwivɝ. əɹ ðəɾ i ɛnvid ðə dʒɹæɡən əz wɛl əz ɪz kəmpænjənz ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ. ðət stʃɹɛŋθənz maɪ bɪlif ðəɾ i wɑns kælændɝ. ðət mʌs bi ðə ɹizən hiz tʃoʊzən tə meɪk hɪmsɛlf ə haɪ lɔɹɾ ə tiɹ. ən ðə nɛtwivɝ - ə neɪm fəɹ ə skimɝ, ə peɪʃən ən kʌnɪŋ plænɝ. juv dʌn wɛl, lɔɪəl." fəɹ ə moʊmən ði oʊɡiɝz waɪd maʊθ kɝvd ʌp ɪn ə pliz smaɪl, bʌt ðən ɪt kɝv daʊn əɡɛn.

"Perhaps you have," Moiraine told him. "I did not know of the name, the Netweaver. Or that he envied the Dragon as well as his companions in the Shadow. That strengthens my belief that he wants Callandor. That must be the reason he has chosen to make himself a High Lord of Tear. And the Netweaver - a name for a schemer, a patient and cunning planner. You have done well, Loial." For a moment the Ogier's wide mouth curved up in a pleased smile, but then it curved down again.

"aɪ wɪl nɑt pɹitɛn aɪm nɑɾ əfɹeɪd," zɑɹin sɛd sʌɾənli. "oʊnli ə ful wəd nɑt bi əfɹeɪɾ ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. bʌɾ aɪ swɔɹ aɪ wəd bi wʌn ə ju, ən aɪ wɪl. ðəɾ ɪz ɔl ðəɾ aɪ wɑntəd tə seɪ."

"I will not pretend I am not afraid," Zarine said suddenly. "Only a fool would not be afraid of the Forsaken. But I swore I would be one of you, and I will. That is all that I wanted to say."

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. ʃi mʌs bi kɹeɪzi. aɪ kəd wɪʃ aɪ wɝ nɑt wʌn ə ðɪs pɑɹɾi. aɪ kəd wɪʃ aɪ wɝ bæk hoʊm wɝkɪŋ mæstɝ luhənz fɔɹdʒ. əlaʊd, hi sɛd, "ɪf hiz ɪnsaɪd ðə stoʊn, ɪf hiz weɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ fəɹ ɹænd, wi mʌst ɡoʊ ɪnsaɪd tə ɹitʃ hɪm. haʊ də wi də ðæt? ɛvɹiwʌn kips seɪɪŋ noʊ wʌn ɛntɝz ðə stoʊn wɪθaʊt ðə pɝmɪʃən ə ðə haɪ lɔɹdz, ən lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪt, aɪ doʊn si ɛni weɪ bʌt θɹu ðə ɡeɪts."

Perrin shook his head. She must be crazy. I could wish I were not one of this party. I could wish I were back home working Master Luhhan's forge. Aloud, he said, "If he is inside the Stone, if he is waiting there for Rand, we must go inside to reach him. How do we do that? Everyone keeps saying no one enters the Stone without the permission of the High Lords, and looking at it, I don't see any way but through the gates."

"ju də nɑt ɡoʊ ɪn," læn sɛd. "mɔɪɹeɪn ən əl bi ði oʊnli wʌnz tə ɛntɝ. ðə mɔɹ u ɡoʊ, ðə hɑɹɾɝ ɪɾəl bi. wʌtɛvɝ weɪ ɪn aɪ faɪnd, aɪ kænɑt bɪliv ɪɾəl bi izi ivən fəɹ oʊnli tu."

"You do not go in," Lan said. "Moiraine and I will be the only ones to enter. The more who go, the harder it will be. Whatever way in I find, I cannot believe it will be easy even for only two."

"ɡeɪɾɪn," mɔɪɹeɪn bɪɡæn ɪn ə fɝm vɔɪs, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ kʌɾ əɹ ɔf wɪð wʌn dʒʌst əz fɝm.

"Gaidin," Moiraine began in a firm voice, but the Warder cut her off with one just as firm.

"wi ɡoʊ təɡɛðɝ, mɔɪɹeɪn. əl nɑt stæn əsaɪd ðɪs taɪm." æftɝ ə moʊmənt ʃi nɑɾəd. pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i sɔ læn ɹɪlæks. "ðə ɹɛst ə jə hæd bɛɾɝ ɡɛt səm slip," ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɛn ɑn. "aɪ hæv tə bi aʊt stʌɾiɪŋ ðə stoʊn." hi pɔzd. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə θɪŋ ðət jəɹ nuz dʒɹoʊv aʊɾ ə maɪ hɛd, mɔɪɹeɪn. ə smɔl θɪŋ, ən aɪ kænɑt si wʌɾ ɪt maɪt min. ðəɹ ɑɹ il ɪn tiɹ."

"We go together, Moiraine. I will not stand aside this time." After a moment she nodded. Perrin thought he saw Lan relax. "The rest of you had better get some sleep," the Warder went on. "I have to be out studying the Stone." He paused. "There is a thing that your news drove out of my head, Moiraine. A small thing, and I cannot see what it might mean. There are Aiel in Tear."

"il!" lɔɪəl ɪkskleɪmd. "ɪmpɑsəbəl! ði ɪntaɪɝ sɪɾi wəd bi ɪn ə pænɪk ɪf wʌn il keɪm θɹu ðə ɡeɪts."

"Aiel!" Loial exclaimed. "Impossible! The entire city would be in a panic if one Aiel came through the gates."

"aɪ dɪd nɑt seɪ ðeɪ wɝ wɔkɪŋ ðə stʃɹits, oʊɡiɝ. ðə ɹuftɑps ən tʃɪmniz ə ðə sɪɾi meɪk əz ɡʊd haɪɾɪŋ əz ðə weɪst. aɪ sɔ noʊ lɛs ðən θɹi, ðoʊ əpɛɹənli noʊ wʌn ɛls ɪn tiɹ əz sin ɛni ʌv ðɛm. ən ɪf aɪ sɔ θɹi, jə kən bi ʃʊɹ ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛni taɪmz ðəɾ aɪ dɪd nɑt si."

"I did not say they were walking the streets, Ogier. The rooftops and chimneys of the city make as good hiding as the Waste. I saw no less than three, though apparently no one else in Tear has seen any of them. And if I saw three, you can be sure there are many times that I did not see."

"ɪt minz nʌθɪŋ tə mi," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sloʊli. "pɛɹɪn, waɪ ɑɹ jə fɹaʊnɪŋ ɪn ðət weɪ?"

"It means nothing to me," Moiraine said slowly. "Perrin, why are you frowning in that way?"

hi hæd nɑt noʊn ðəɾ i wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ. "aɪ wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðəɾ il ɪn ɹɛmən. hi sɛd ðət wən ðə stoʊn fɔlz, ði il wɪl liv ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd. ðæts ðə weɪst, ɪzən ɪt? hi sɛɾ ɪt wɑz ə pɹɑfəsi."

He had not known that he was frowning. "I was thinking about that Aiel in Remen. He said that when the Stone falls, the Aiel will leave the Three-fold Land. That's the Waste, isn't it? He said it was a prophecy."

"aɪ hæv ɹɛɾ ɛvɹi wɝɾ ə ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sɔfli, "ɪn ɛvɹi tʃɹænzleɪʃən, ən ðəɹ ɪz noʊ mɛnʃən ə ði il. wi stæɡɝ blaɪnli waɪl bɛləl wivz ɪz nɛts, ən ðə wil wivz ðə pæɾɝn ɝaʊn ʌs. bʌɾ ɑɹ ði il ðə wilz wivɪŋ, əɹ bɛləlz? læn, jə mʌs faɪn mi ðə weɪ ɪndə ðə stoʊn kwɪkli. ʌs. faɪn əs ə weɪ ɪn kwɪkli."

"I have read every word of the Prophecies of the Dragon," Moiraine said softly, "in every translation, and there is no mention of the Aiel. We stagger blindly while Be'lal weaves his nets, and the Wheel weaves the Pattern around us. But are the Aiel the Wheel's weaving, or Be'lal's? Lan, you must find me the way into the Stone quickly. Us. Find us a way in quickly."

"æz jə kəmænd, ɛɛs sədaɪ," hi sɛd, bʌɾ ɪz toʊn wɑz mɔɹ wɔɹm ðən fɔɹməl. hi vænɪʃt θɹu ðə dɔɹ. mɔɪɹeɪn fɹaʊn ət ðə teɪbəl, aɪz klaʊɾəd ɪn θɔt.

"As you command, Aes Sedai," he said, but his tone was more warm than formal. He vanished through the door. Moiraine frowned at the table, eyes clouded in thought.

zɑɹin keɪm oʊvɝ tə lʊk daʊn ət pɛɹɪn, hɝ hɛd tɪltəd tə wʌn saɪd. "ænd wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ tə du, blæksmɪθ? ɪt simz ðeɪ min əs tə weɪɾ ən wɑtʃ waɪl ðeɪ ɡoʊ ædvɛntʊɹɪŋ. nɑt ðəɾ əl kəmpleɪn."

Zarine came over to look down at Perrin, her head tilted to one side. "And what are you going to do, blacksmith? It seems they mean us to wait and watch while they go adventuring. Not that I will complain."

hi daʊɾɪd ðət læst. "fɝst," hi toʊl hɝ, "aɪ æm gɑnə hæv sʌmθɪŋ tə it. ən ðən aɪm gɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ə hæmɝ." ən tʃɹaɪ tə pʌzəl aʊt haʊ aɪ fil əbaʊt ju. fælkən.

He doubted that last. "First," he told her, "I am going to have something to eat. And then I am going to think about a hammer." And try to puzzle out how I feel about you. Falcon.


tʃæptɝ fɪftiwʌn


CHAPTER 51

beɪt fəɹ ðə nɛt


Bait for the Net

fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ, nɪneɪiv θɔt ʃi ɡlɪmpst ə tɔl mæn wɪð ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ, ɪn ə swɝlɪŋ bɹaʊn kloʊk, wɛl daʊn ðə sʌnlɪt stʃɹit, bʌɾ əz ʃi tɝn tə pɪɹ fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə waɪd bɹɪm ə ðə blu stʃɹɔ hæɾ eɪlhuɪn hæd ɡɪvən hɝ, ən ɑks-dʒɹɔn wæɡən wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi lʌmbɝɪŋ bɪtwin ðɛm. wən ɪt lɝtʃt ɑn, ðə mæn wɑz noʊwɛɹ tə bi sin. ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊst sɝɾən ðət hæd bɪn ə wʊɾən flut keɪs ɑn ɪz bæk, ən ɪz kloʊðz wɝ sɝɾənli nɑt tɛɹən. ɪt kʊdn bi ɹænd. dʒʌs kəz aɪ kip dʒɹimɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪm dʌz nɑt min hiz gɑnə kʌm ɔl ðə weɪ fɹəm ɑlməθ pleɪn.

From the corner of her eye, Nynaeve thought she glimpsed a tall man with reddish hair, in a swirling brown cloak, well down the sunlit street, but as she turned to peer from under the wide brim of the blue straw hat Ailhuin had given her, an ox-drawn wagon was already lumbering between them. When it lurched on, the man was nowhere to be seen. She was almost certain that had been a wooden flute case on his back, and his clothes were certainly not Tairen. It couldn't be Rand. Just because I keep dreaming about him does not mean he is going to come all the way from Almoth Plain.

wʌn ə ðə bɛɹfʊt mɛn hɝiɪŋ pæst, wɪð ðə sɪkəl-ʃeɪp teɪlz ʌv ə dʌzən lɑɹdʒ fɪʃ stɪkɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ðə bæskəɾ ɑn ɪz bæk, sʌɾənli tʃɹɪpt, kæɾəpʌltɪŋ sɪlvɝ-skeɪl fɪʃ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛɾ əz i fɛl. hi lændəɾ ɑn hænz ən niz ɪn ðə mʌd, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə fɪʃ ðət hæd kʌm aʊɾ ə hɪz bæskət. ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðə lɔŋ, slik ʃeɪps stʊɾ əpɹaɪt, stʌk noʊz daʊn ɪn ðə mʌd, fɔɹmɪŋ ə nit sɝkəl. ivən ə fju pæsɝzbi ɡeɪpt ət ðæt. sloʊli ðə mæn ɡɑt tə hɪz fit, əpɛɹənli ʌnəwɛɹ ə ðə mʌɾ ɑn hɪm. ənslɪŋɪŋ ɪz bæskət, hi bɪɡæn ɡæðɝɪŋ ðə fɪʃ bæk ɪndə ɪt, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ən mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf.

One of the barefoot men hurrying past, with the sickle-shaped tails of a dozen large fish sticking up from the basket on his back, suddenly tripped, catapulting silver-scaled fish over his head as he fell. He landed on hands and knees in the mud, staring at the fish that had come out of his basket. Every one of the long, sleek shapes stood upright, stuck nose down in the mud, forming a neat circle. Even a few passersby gaped at that. Slowly the man got to his feet, apparently unaware of the mud on him. Unslinging his basket, he began gathering the fish back into it, shaking his head and muttering to himself.

nɪneɪiv blɪŋkt, bʌɾ əɹ bɪznəs wɑz wɪð ðɪs kaʊ-feɪs bɹɪɡənd, feɪsɪŋ əɹ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ ʌv ɪz ʃɑp wɪð blʌɾi kʌts ə mit hæŋɪŋ fɹəm hʊks bɪhaɪn hɪm. ʃi ɡeɪv əɹ bɹeɪɾ ə tʌɡ ən fɪks ðə fɛloʊ wɪð əɹ aɪ.

Nynaeve blinked, but her business was with this cow-faced brigand, facing her in the doorway of his shop with bloody cuts of meat hanging from hooks behind him. She gave her braid a tug and fixed the fellow with her eye.

"vɛɹi wɛl," ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli, "aɪ wɪl teɪk ɪt, bʌɾ ɪf ðɪs ɪz wʌt jə tʃɑɹdʒ fəɹ soʊ pʊɹ ə kʌt, jəl nɑɾ əv mɔɹ bɪznəs fɹəm mi."

"Very well," she said sharply, "I will take it, but if this is what you charge for so poor a cut, you'll not have more business from me."

hi ʃɹʌɡd plɑtʃədli əz i tʊk əɹ kɔɪnz, ðən ɹæp ðə fæɾi mʌɾən ɹoʊst ɪn ə klɔθ ʃi pɹədus fɹəm ðə bæskəɾ ɑn əɹ ɑɹm. ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm əz ʃi pʊt ðə ɹæp miɾ ɪndə ðə bæskət, bʌt ðət dɪd nɑɾ əfɛk hɪm.

He shrugged placidly as he took her coins, then wrapped the fatty mutton roast in a cloth she produced from the basket on her arm. She glared at him as she put the wrapped meat into the basket, but that did not affect him.

ʃi wɝl tə stɔk əweɪ - ən nɪɹli fɛl. ʃi wɑz stɪl nɑt juz tə ðiz klɑɡz; ðeɪ kɛp stɪkɪŋ ɪn ðə mʌd, ən ʃi kəd nɑt si haʊ ðə foʊk u wɔɹ əm mænədʒd. ʃi hoʊp ðɪs sʌnʃaɪn dʒɹaɪd ðə ɡɹaʊn sun, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ə filɪŋ ðət ðə mʌd wɑz mɔɹ əɹ lɛs pɝmənən ɪn ðə mɔl.

She whirled to stalk away - and nearly fell. She was still not used to these clogs; they kept sticking in the mud, and she could not see how the folk who wore them managed. She hoped this sunshine dried the ground soon, but she had a feeling that the mud was more or less permanent in the Maule.

stɛpɪŋ dʒɪnʒɝli, ʃi stɑɹɾəd bæk təwɔɹɾ eɪlhuɪnz haʊs, mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. ðə pɹaɪsəz wɝ aʊtʃɹeɪdʒəs fəɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ðə kwɑləɾi ɪnɛvəɾəbli pʊɹ, ən ɔlmoʊs noʊ wʌn sim tə kɛɹ, nɑt ðə pipəl baɪɪŋ əɹ ðoʊz sɛlɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ə ɹɪlif tə pæs ə wʊmən ʃaʊɾɪŋ əɾ ə ʃɑpkipɝ, weɪvɪŋ ə bɹuzd ɹɛɾɪʃ-jɛloʊ fɹut - nɪneɪiv dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt; ðeɪ hæɾ ə ɡʊd mɛni fɹuts ən vɛdʒtəbəlz ʃi hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv, hɪɹ - ɪn itʃ hæn ən kɔlɪŋ fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn tə si wʌt ɹəfjuz ðə mæn soʊld, bʌt ðə ʃɑpkipɝ oʊnli stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ wɛɹəli, nɑɾ ivən bɑðɝɪŋ tə ɑɹɡju bæk.

Stepping gingerly, she started back toward Ailhuin's house, muttering under her breath. The prices were outrageous for everything, the quality inevitably poor, and almost no one seemed to care, not the people buying or those selling. It was a relief to pass a woman shouting at a shopkeeper, waving a bruised reddish-yellow fruit - Nynaeve did not know what; they had a good many fruits and vegetables she had never heard of, here - in each hand and calling for everyone to see what refuse the man sold, but the shopkeeper only stared at her wearily, not even bothering to argue back.

ðəɹ wɑz səm ɪkskjus fəɹ ðə pɹaɪsəz, ʃi nu - ɪleɪn hæɾ ɪkspleɪn ɔl əbaʊt ðə ɡɹeɪn biɪŋ iɾən baɪ ɹæts ɪn ðə ɡɹænɛɝiz kəz noʊ wʌn ɪn kɛɹhin kəd baɪ, ən haʊ bɪɡ ðə kɛɹhinɪn ɡɹeɪn tʃɹeɪd hæd bɪkʌm sɪns ði il wɔɹ - bʌt nʌθɪŋ ɪkskjuz ðə weɪ ɛvɹiwʌn simd ɹɛɾi tə laɪ daʊn ən daɪ. ʃi hæd sin heɪl ɹuən fud kɹɑps ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ən ɡɹæshɑpɝz iɾ əm ən blæktɔŋ kɪl ðə ʃip ən ɹɛdspɑt wɪðɝ ðə təbæk soʊ ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə sɛl wən ðə mɝtʃəns keɪm daʊn fɹəm bɛɹlən. ʃi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ tu jɪɹz ɪn ə ɹoʊ wən ðəɹ hæd bɪn lɪɾəl tə iɾ ɪksɛp tɝnəp sup ən oʊl bɑɹli, ən hʌntɝz hæd bɪn lʌki tə bɹɪŋ hoʊm ə skɹɔni ɹæbət, bʌt tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk pɪk ðɛmsɛlvz ʌp wən ðeɪ wɝ nɑk daʊn ən wɛn bæk tə wɝk. ðiz pipəl hæd hæɾ oʊnli wʌn bæd jɪɹ, ən ðɛɹ fɪʃɝiz ən ðɛɹ ʌðɝ tʃɹeɪd sim tə bi flɝɪʃɪŋ. ʃi hæd noʊ peɪʃəns wɪð ðɛm. ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɑz, ʃi nu ʃi ʃəɾ əv ə lɪɾəl peɪʃəns. ðeɪ wɝ ɑd pipəl wɪð ɑd weɪz, ən θɪŋz ʃi tʊk fəɹ kɹɪŋɪŋ, ðeɪ sim tə si əz ə mæɾɝ ə kɔɹs, ivən eɪlhuɪn ən sændɑɹ. ʃi ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə sʌmən ʌp dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl peɪʃəns.

There was some excuse for the prices, she knew - Elayne had explained all about the grain being eaten by rats in the granaries because no one in Cairhien could buy, and how big the Cairhienin grain trade had become since the Aiel War - but nothing excused the way everyone seemed ready to lie down and die. She had seen hail ruin food crops in the Two Rivers, and grasshoppers eat them and blacktongue kill the sheep and redspot wither the tabac so there was nothing to sell when the merchants came down from Baerlon. She could remember two years in a row when there had been little to eat except turnip soup and old barley, and hunters had been lucky to bring home a scrawny rabbit, but Two Rivers folk picked themselves up when they were knocked down and went back to work. These people had had only one bad year, and their fisheries and their other trade seemed to be flourishing. She had no patience with them. The trouble was, she knew she should have a little patience. They were odd people with odd ways, and things she took for cringing, they seemed to see as a matter of course, even Ailhuin and Sandar. She should be able to summon up just a little patience.

ɪf fəɹ ðɛm, waɪ nɑt fəɹ ɛɡwin? ʃi pʊt ðəɾ əsaɪd. ðə tʃaɪl bɪheɪvd ɹɛtʃɪdli, snæpɪŋ ət ðə moʊst ɑbviəs sədʒɛstʃənz, əbdʒɛktɪŋ tə ðə moʊst sɛnsəbəl θɪŋz. ivən wən ɪt wɑz pleɪn wʌt ðeɪ ʃəd du, ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə bi kənvɪnst. nɪneɪiv wɑz nɑt juz tə hævɪŋ tə kənvɪns pipəl, ɪspɛʃli nɑt pipəl ʃi hæd tʃeɪnʒd swɑɾəlɪŋ kloʊðz fɔɹ. ðə fæk ðət ʃi wɑz oʊnli ə mæɾɝ ə sɛvən jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən ɛɡwin wɑz ə noʊ əkaʊnt.

If for them, why not for Egwene? She put that aside. The child behaved wretchedly, snapping at the most obvious suggestions, objecting to the most sensible things. Even when it was plain what they should do, Egwene wanted to be convinced. Nynaeve was not used to having to convince people, especially not people she had changed swaddling clothes for. The fact that she was only a matter of seven years older than Egwene was of no account.

ɪts ɔl ðoʊz bæd dʒɹimz, ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf. aɪ kænɑɾ ʌndɝstænd wʌt ðeɪ min, ən naʊ ɪleɪn ən aɪ ɑɹ hævɪŋ ðɛm, tu, ən aɪ də nɑt noʊ wʌt ðət minz iðɝ, ən sændɑɹ woʊn seɪ ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðət hiz stɪl lʊkɪŋ, ən aɪm soʊ fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd aɪ . . . aɪ kəd dʒʌst spɪt! ʃi dʒɝkt əɹ bɹeɪd soʊ hɑɹɾ ɪt hɝt. ət list ʃi hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə kənvɪns ɛɡwin nɑt tə juz ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil əɡɛn, tə pʊt ðə θɪŋ bæk ɪn əɹ paʊtʃ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv wɛɹɪŋ ɪt nɛks tə hɝ skɪn ɔlweɪz. ɪf ðə blæk ədʒɑ wɑz ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. . . . ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðət pɑsəbɪləɾi. wɪl faɪn ðɛm!

It is all those bad dreams, she told herself. I cannot understand what they mean, and now Elayne and I are having them, too, and I do not know what that means either, and Sandar won't say anything except that he is still looking, and I am so frustrated I . . . I could just spit! She jerked her braid so hard it hurt. At least she had been able to convince Egwene not to use the ter'angreal again, to put the thing back in her pouch instead of wearing it next to her skin always. If the Black Ajah was in Tel'aran'rhiod. . . . She did not want to think about that possibility. We will find them!

"aɪ wɪl bɹɪŋ əm daʊn," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə sɛl mi laɪk ə ʃip! hʌntɪŋ mi laɪk ən ænəməl! aɪm ðə hʌntɝ ðɪs taɪm, nɑt ðə ɹæbət! ðət mɔɪɹeɪn! ɪf ʃi hæd nɛvɝ kʌm tə ɛmənz fild, aɪ cʊɾə tɔɾ ɛɡwin ɪnʌf. ən ɹænd. . . . aɪ kəɾ əv . . . aɪ cʊɾə dʌn sʌmθɪŋ." ðət ʃi nu niðɝ wɑz tʃɹu dɪd nɑt hɛlp; ɪt meɪɾ ɪt wɝs. ʃi heɪɾəd mɔɪɹeɪn ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi heɪɾəd liɑnʒɹɪn ən ðə blæk ədʒɑ, meɪbi əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi heɪɾəd ðə sintʃæn.

"I will bring them down," she muttered. "Trying to sell me like a sheep! Hunting me like an animal! I am the hunter this time, not the rabbit! That Moiraine! If she had never come to Emond's Field, I could have taught Egwene enough. And Rand. . . . I could have . . . I could have done something." That she knew neither was true did not help; it made it worse. She hated Moiraine almost as much as she hated Liandrin and the Black Ajah, maybe as much as she hated the Seanchan.

ʃi ɹaʊndəɾ ə kɔɹnɝ, ən dʒulɪn sændɑɹ hæd tə lip aʊɾ ə hɝ weɪ tə kip fɹəm biɪŋ tʃɹæmpəld. ivən juz tə ðɛm əz i wɑz, hi nɪɹli tʃɹɪpt oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn klɑɡz, oʊnli hɪz stæf seɪvɪŋ ɪm fɹəm fɔlɪŋ ɑn ɪz feɪs ɪn ðə mʌd. ðət peɪl, ɹɪdʒd wʊd wɑz kɔl bæmbu, ʃi hæd lɝnd, ən ɪt wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɪt lʊkt.

She rounded a corner, and Juilin Sandar had to leap out of her way to keep from being trampled. Even used to them as he was, he nearly tripped over his own clogs, only his staff saving him from falling on his face in the mud. That pale, ridged wood was called bamboo, she had learned, and it was stronger than it looked.

"mɪstʃɹəs - ʌ - mɪstʃɹəs mɛɹiɪm," sændɑɹ sɛd, ɹɪɡeɪnɪŋ ɪz bæləns. "aɪ wɑz . . . lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ju." hi flæʃt əɹ ə nɝvəs smaɪl. "ɑɹ jə æŋɡɹi? waɪ ɑɹ jə fɹaʊnɪŋ ət mi ðət weɪ?"

"Mistress - uh - Mistress Maryim," Sandar said, regaining his balance. "I was . . . looking for you." He flashed her a nervous smile. "Are you angry? Why are you frowning at me that way?"

ʃi smuðd əɹ fɔɹhɛd. "aɪ wɑz nɑt fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ju, mæstɝ sændɑɹ. ðə bʊtʃɝ. . . . ɪt dʌz nɑt mæɾɝ. waɪ ɑɹ jə lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mi?" hɝ bɹɛθ kɑt. "hæv jə faʊn ðɛm?"

She smoothed her forehead. "I was not frowning at you, Master Sandar. The butcher. . . . It does not matter. Why are you looking for me?" Her breath caught. "Have you found them?"

hi lʊkt ɝaʊn əz ɪf i səspɛktəd ðə pæsɝzbi ʌv tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɪsən. "jɛs. jɛs, jə mʌs kʌm bæk wɪð mi. ði ʌðɝz ɑɹ weɪɾɪŋ. ði ʌðɝz. ən mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə."

He looked around as if he suspected the passersby of trying to listen. "Yes. Yes, you must come back with me. The others are waiting. The others. And Mother Guenna."

"waɪ ɑɹ jə soʊ nɝvəs? jə dɪd nɑt lɛɾ əm dɪskʌvɝ jəɹ ɪntʃɹəst?" ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "wʌɾ əz fɹaɪɾənd ju?"

"Why are you so nervous? You did not let them discover your interest?" she said sharply. "What has frightened you?"

"noʊ! noʊ, mɪstʃɹəs. aɪ - aɪ dɪd nɑt ɹɪvil maɪsɛlf." hɪz aɪz dɑɹɾɪd əɡɛn, ən i stɛp kloʊsɝ, hɪz vɔɪs dʒɹɑpɪŋ tə ə bɹɛθi, ɝdʒənt wɪspɝ. "ðiz wɪmən jə sik, ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪn ðə stoʊn! ɡɛsts ʌv ə haɪ lɔɹd! ðə haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən! waɪ dɪd jə kɔl əm θivz? ðə haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən!" hi ɔlmoʊst skwikt. ðəɹ wɑz swɛɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs.

"No! No, mistress. I - I did not reveal myself." His eyes darted again, and he stepped closer, his voice dropping to a breathy, urgent whisper. "These women you seek, they are in the Stone! Guests of a High Lord! The High Lord Samon! Why did you call them thieves? The High Lord Samon!" he almost squeaked. There was sweat on his face.

ɪnsaɪd ðə stoʊn! wɪð ə haɪ lɔɹd! laɪt, haʊ də wi ɹitʃ əm naʊ? ʃi səpɹɛst əɹ ɪmpeɪʃəns wɪð ən ɛfɝt. "bi izi," ʃi sɛd suðɪŋli. "bi əɾ iz, mæstɝ sændɑɹ. wi kən ɪkspleɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ tə jəɹ sæɾəsfækʃən." aɪ hoʊp wi kæn. laɪt, ɪf i ɡoʊz ɹʌnɪŋ tə ðə stoʊn tə tɛl ðɪs haɪ lɔɹd wəɹ sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ðɛm. . . . "kʌm wɪð mi tə mʌðɝ ɡeɪnəz haʊs. dʒɔslɪn, kɛɹɪlə, ən əl ɪkspleɪn ɪɾ ɔl tə ju. tʃɹuli. kʌm."

Inside the Stone! With a High Lord! Light, how do we reach them now? She suppressed her impatience with an effort. "Be easy," she said soothingly. "Be at ease, Master Sandar. We can explain everything to your satisfaction." I hope we can. Light, if he goes running to the Stone to tell this High Lord we are searching for them. . . . "Come with me to Mother Guenna's house. Joslyn, Caryla, and I will explain it all to you. Truly. Come."

hi ɡeɪv ə ʃɔɹt, ənizi nɑd, ən wɔkt əlɔŋsaɪd hɝ, kipɪŋ ɪz peɪs tə wʌt ʃi kəd mænədʒ wɪð ðə klɑɡz. hi lʊkt əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə ɹʌn.

He gave a short, uneasy nod, and walked alongside her, keeping his pace to what she could manage with the clogs. He looked as if he wanted to run.

ət ðə waɪz wʊmənz haʊs, ʃi hɝiɾ ɝaʊn tə ðə bæk. noʊ wʌn ɛvɝ juz ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ, ðət ʃi hæd sin, nɑɾ ivən mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə hɝsɛlf. ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ taɪd tə ə bæmbu hɪtʃɪŋ ɹeɪl, naʊ - wɛl əweɪ fɹəm eɪlhuɪnz nu fɪɡz əz wɛl əz əɹ vɛdʒtəbəlz - wɪð ðɛɹ sæɾəlz ən bɹaɪɾəlz stɔɹɾ ɪnsaɪd. fəɹ wʌns ʃi dɪd nɑt stɑp tə pæt ɡeɪɾɪnz noʊz ən tɛl ɪm i wɑz ə ɡʊd bɔɪ, ən mɔɹ sɛnsəbəl ðən ɪz neɪmseɪk. sændɑɹ hɔltəd tə skɹeɪp mʌd fɹəm ɪz klɑɡz wɪð ðə bʌɾ ə hɪz stæf, bʌt ʃi hɝiɾ ɪnsaɪd.

At the Wise Woman's house, she hurried around to the back. No one ever used the front door, that she had seen, not even Mother Guenna herself. The horses were tied to a bamboo hitching rail, now - well away from Ailhuin's new figs as well as her vegetables - with their saddles and bridles stored inside. For once she did not stop to pat Gaidin's nose and tell him he was a good boy, and more sensible than his namesake. Sandar halted to scrape mud from his clogs with the butt of his staff, but she hurried inside.

eɪlhuɪn ɡeɪnə wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɪn wʌn ə hɝ haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹz pʊld aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum, hɝ ɑɹmz əɾ əɹ saɪdz. ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmənz aɪz wɝ bʌlʒɪŋ wɪð æŋɡɝ ən fɪɹ, ən ʃi stʃɹʌɡəl fjʊɹiəsli wɪθaʊt muvɪŋ ə mʌsəl. nɪneɪiv dɪd nɑt nid tə sɛns ðə sʌɾəl wivɪŋ ʌv ɛɹ tə noʊ wʌt hæd hæpənd. laɪt, ðeɪv faʊn ʌs! bɝn ju, sændɑɹ!

Ailhuin Guenna was sitting in one of her high-backed chairs pulled out into the room, her arms at her sides. The gray-haired woman's eyes were bulging with anger and fear, and she struggled furiously without moving a muscle. Nynaeve did not need to sense the subtle weaving of Air to know what had happened. Light, they've found us! Burn you, Sandar!

ɹeɪdʒ flʌɾəd hɝ, wɑʃt əweɪ ðə wɔlz ɪnsaɪd ðət juʒəwəli kɛpt əɹ fɹəm ðə paʊɝ, ən əz ðə bæskət fɛl fɹəm əɹ hænz, ʃi wɑz ə waɪt blɑsəm ɑn ə blækθɝn bʊʃ, oʊpənɪŋ tə ɛmbɹeɪs seɪaɪdɑɹ, oʊpənɪŋ. . . . ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ʃi hæd ɹʌn ɪndə ənʌðɝ wɔl, ə wɔl ə klɪɹ ɡlæs; ʃi kəd fil ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, bʌt ðə wɔl stɑpt ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪksɛp ði eɪk tə bi fɪld wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ.

Rage flooded her, washed away the walls inside that usually kept her from the Power, and as the basket fell from her hands, she was a white blossom on a blackthorn bush, opening to embrace saidar, opening. . . . It was as if she had run into another wall, a wall of clear glass; she could feel the True Source, but the wall stopped everything except the ache to be filled with the One Power.

ðə bæskət hɪt ðə flɔɹ, ən əz ɪt baʊnst, ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn əɹ oʊpən ən liɑnʒɹɪn stɛpt ɪn, fɑloʊd baɪ ə blæk-hɛɹd wʊmən wɪð ə waɪt stʃɹik əbʌv əɹ lɛft ɪɹ. ðeɪ wɔɹ lɔŋ, kʌlɝfəl sɪlk dʒɹɛsəz kʌt tə bɛɹ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ən ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəd ðɛm.

The basket hit the floor, and as it bounced, the door behind her opened and Liandrin stepped in, followed by a black-haired woman with a white streak above her left ear. They wore long, colorful silk dresses cut to bare their shoulders, and the glow of saidar surrounded them.

liɑnʒɹɪn smuðd əɹ ɹɛd dʒɹɛs ən smaɪld wɪð ðət paʊɾɪŋ ɹoʊzbʌd maʊð. hɝ dɑlz feɪs wɑz fɪld wɪð əmjuzmənt. "ju si, dʒju nɑt, waɪldɝ," ʃi bɪɡæn, "ju hæv noʊ - "

Liandrin smoothed her red dress and smiled with that pouting rosebud mouth. Her doll's face was filled with amusement. "You see, do you not, wilder," she began, "you have no - "

nɪneɪiv hɪɾ əɹ ɪn ðə maʊθ əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kʊd. laɪt, aɪ hæv tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ. ʃi bækhændəd ɹiɑnə soʊ hɑɹd ðə blæk-hɛɹd wʊmən fɛl ɑn əɹ sɪlk-kʌvɝd ɹʌmp wɪð ə ɡɹʌnt. ðeɪ mʌst əv ði ʌðɝz, bʌɾ ɪf aɪ kən meɪk ɪɾ aʊt ðə dɔɹ, ɪf aɪ kən ɡɛt fɑɹ ɪnʌf əweɪ ðeɪ kænt ʃil mi, aɪ kən də sʌmθɪŋ. ʃi pʊʃt liɑnʒɹɪn hɑɹd, ʃʌvɪŋ əɹ əweɪ fɹəm ðə dɔɹ. dʒʌs lemi ɪskeɪp ðɛɹ ʃildɪŋ, ən aɪl. . . .

Nynaeve hit her in the mouth as hard as she could. Light, I have to get away. She backhanded Rianna so hard the black-haired woman fell on her silk-covered rump with a grunt. They must have the others, but if I can make it out the door, if I can get far enough away they can't shield me, I can do something. She pushed Liandrin hard, shoving her away from the door. Just let me escape their shielding, and I'll. . . .

bloʊz hɪɾ əɹ fɹəm ɛvɹi saɪd, laɪk fɪsts ən stɪks, pʌməlɪŋ hɝ. niðɝ liɑnʒɹɪn, blʌd tʃɹɪklɪŋ fɹəm ə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ naʊ-ɡɹɪm maʊθ, nɔɹ ɹiɑnə, hɝ hɛɹ əz dɪsɹeɪɾ əz əɹ ɡɹin dʒɹɛs, lɪftəɾ ə hænd. nɪneɪiv kəd fil ðə floʊz ʌv ɛɹ wivɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ əz wɛl əz ʃi kəd fil ðə bloʊz ðɛmsɛlvz. ʃi stɪl stʃɹʌɡəl tə ɹitʃ ðə dɔɹ, bʌt ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi wɑz ɑn əɹ niz, naʊ, ən ði ənsin bloʊz wəd nɑt stɑp, ɪnvɪzəbəl stɪks ən fɪsts stʃɹaɪkɪŋ əɾ əɹ bæk ən əɹ stʌmək, hɝ hɛɾ ən əɹ hɪps, hɝ ʃoʊldɝz, hɝ bɹɛsts, hɝ lɛɡz, hɝ hɛd. ɡɹoʊnɪŋ, ʃi fɛl ɑntu hɝ saɪɾ ən kɝld ɪndə ə bɔl, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹətɛk hɝsɛlf. oʊ, laɪt, aɪ tʃɹaɪd. ɛɡwin! ɪleɪn! aɪ tʃɹaɪd! əl nɑt kɹaɪ aʊt! bɝn ju, jə kən bit mi tə dɛθ, bʌɾ aɪ woʊn kɹaɪ!

Blows hit her from every side, like fists and sticks, pummeling her. Neither Liandrin, blood trickling from a corner of her now-grim mouth, nor Rianna, her hair as disarrayed as her green dress, lifted a hand. Nynaeve could feel the flows of Air weaving about her as well as she could feel the blows themselves. She still struggled to reach the door, but she realized that she was on her knees, now, and the unseen blows would not stop, invisible sticks and fists striking at her back and her stomach, her head and her hips, her shoulders, her breasts, her legs, her head. Groaning, she fell onto her side and curled into a ball, trying to protect herself. Oh, Light, I tried. Egwene! Elayne! I tried! I will not cry out! Burn you, you can beat me to death, but I won't cry!

ðə bloʊz stɑpt, bʌt nɪneɪiv kəd nɑt stɑp kwɪvɝɪŋ. ʃi fɛl bɹuzd ən bæɾɝd fɹəm kɹaʊn tə toʊ.

The blows stopped, but Nynaeve could not stop quivering. She felt bruised and battered from crown to toe.

liɑnʒɹɪn kɹaʊtʃt bɪsaɪd hɝ, ɑɹmz ɝaʊn əɹ niz, sɪlk ɹʌslɪŋ əɡɛnst sɪlk. ʃi hæd waɪp ðə blʌɾ əweɪ fɹəm əɹ maʊð. hɝ dɑɹk aɪz wɝ hɑɹd, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ əmjuzmən ɑn əɹ feɪs naʊ. "pɝhæps jə ɑɹ tu stupəd tə noʊ wən jə ɑɹ dɪfiɾəd, waɪldɝ. jə fɔɾ ɔlmoʊst əz waɪldli əz ðəɾ ʌðɝ fulɪʃ ɡɝl, ðəɾ ɛɡwin. ʃi ɔlmoʊst wɛn mæd. jə mʌst ɔl lɝn tə səbmɪt. jəl lɝn tə səbmɪt."

Liandrin crouched beside her, arms around her knees, silk rustling against silk. She had wiped the blood away from her mouth. Her dark eyes were hard, and there was no amusement on her face now. "Perhaps you are too stupid to know when you are defeated, wilder. You fought almost as wildly as that other foolish girl, that Egwene. She almost went mad. You must all learn to submit. You will learn to submit."

nɪneɪiv ʃɪvɝɾ ən ɹitʃt fəɹ seɪaɪdɑɹ əɡɛn. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðət ʃi hæɾ ɛni ɹil hoʊp, bʌt ʃi hæd tə də sʌmθɪŋ. fɔɹsɪŋ θɹu hɝ peɪn, ʃi ɹitʃt aʊt . . . ən stʃɹʌk ðəɾ ɪnvɪzəbəl ʃild. liɑnʒɹɪn dɪɾ əv əmjuzmən bæk ɪn əɹ aɪz, naʊ, ðə ɡɹɪm mɝθ ʌv ə næsti tʃaɪld u pʊlz ðə wɪŋz ɔf flaɪz.

Nynaeve shivered and reached for saidar again. It was not that she had any real hope, but she had to do something. Forcing through her pain, she reached out . . . and struck that invisible shield. Liandrin did have amusement back in her eyes, now, the grim mirth of a nasty child who pulls the wings off flies.

"wi hæv noʊ jus fəɹ ðɪs wʌn, ət list," ɹiɑnə sɛd, stændɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ eɪlhuɪn. "aɪ wɪl stɑp əɹ hɑɹt." eɪlhuɪnz aɪz nɪɹli keɪm aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd.

"We have no use for this one, at least," Rianna said, standing beside Ailhuin. "I will stop her heart." Ailhuin's eyes nearly came out of her head.

"noʊ!" liɑnʒɹɪnz ʃɔɹt, hʌni-kʌlɝd bɹeɪdz swʌŋ əz əɹ hɛd snæpt ɝaʊnd. "ɔlweɪz jə kɪl tu kwɪkli, ən oʊnli ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd kən meɪk jus ə ðə dɛd." ʃi smaɪld ət ðə wʊmən hɛl tə ðə tʃɛɹ baɪ ɪnvɪzəbəl bɑnz. "ju sɔ ðə soʊlʒɝz u keɪm wɪð ʌs, oʊld wʊmən. jə noʊ hu weɪts fəɹ əs ɪn ðə stoʊn. ðə haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən, hɪl nɑt bi plizd ɪf jə spik ʌv wʌt hæpən ɪnsaɪd jəɹ haʊs tədeɪ. ɪf jə hoʊl jəɹ tʌŋ, jəl lɪv, pɝhæps tə sɝv ɪm əɡɛn wʌn deɪ. ɪf jə spik, jəl sɝv oʊnli ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk, fɹəm bɪɑn ðə ɡɹeɪv. wɪtʃ dʒju tʃuz?"

"No!" Liandrin's short, honey-colored braids swung as her head snapped around. "Always you kill too quickly, and only the Great Lord can make use of the dead." She smiled at the woman held to the chair by invisible bonds. "You saw the soldiers who came with us, old woman. You know who waits for us in the Stone. The High Lord Samon, he will not be pleased if you speak of what happened inside your house today. If you hold your tongue, you will live, perhaps to serve him again one day. If you speak, you will serve only the Great Lord of the Dark, from beyond the grave. Which do you choose?"

sʌɾənli eɪlhuɪn kəd muv əɹ hɛd. ʃi ʃʊk əɹ ɡɹeɪ kɝlz, wɝkɪŋ əɹ maʊθ. "aɪ. . . . əl hoʊl maɪ tʌŋ," ʃi sɛd dɪdʒɛktɪdli, ðən ɡeɪv nɪneɪiv ən ɪmbɛɹəst, ʃeɪm lʊk. "ɪf aɪ spik, wʌt ɡʊd wɪl ɪt du? eɪ haɪ lɔɹd kəɾ əv maɪ hɛd baɪ ɹeɪzɪŋ ən aɪbɹaʊ. wʌt ɡʊd kən aɪ də ju, ɡɝl? wʌt ɡʊd?"

Suddenly Ailhuin could move her head. She shook her gray curls, working her mouth. "I. . . . I will hold my tongue," she said dejectedly, then gave Nynaeve an embarrassed, shamed look. "If I speak, what good will it do? A High Lord could have my head by raising an eyebrow. What good can I do you, girl? What good?"

"ɪɾ ɪz ɔl ɹaɪt," nɪneɪiv sɛd wɛɹəli. hu kəd ʃi tɛl? ɔl ʃi kəd də ɪz daɪ. "aɪ noʊ jə wəd hɛlp ɪf jə kʊd." ɹiɑnə θɹu bæk əɹ hɛɾ ən læft. eɪlhuɪn slʌmpt, ɹilis kəmplitli, bʌt ʃi oʊnli sæt ðɛɹ, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ hænz ɪn əɹ læp.

"It is all right," Nynaeve said wearily. Who could she tell? All she could do is die. "I know you would help if you could." Rianna threw back her head and laughed. Ailhuin slumped, released completely, but she only sat there, staring at her hands in her lap.

bɪtwin ðɛm, liɑnʒɹɪn ən ɹiɑnə pʊl nɪneɪiv tə hɝ fiɾ ən pʊʃt əɹ təwɔɹd ðə fɹʌn ə ðə haʊs. "ju ɡɪv əs ɛni tʃɹʌbəl," ðə blæk-hɛɹd wʊmən sɛɾ ɪn ə hɑɹd vɔɪs, "æn əl meɪk jə pil ɔf jəɹ oʊn skɪn ən dæns ɪn jəɹ boʊnz."

Between them, Liandrin and Rianna pulled Nynaeve to her feet and pushed her toward the front of the house. "You give us any trouble," the black-haired woman said in a hard voice, "and I will make you peel off your own skin and dance in your bones."

nɪneɪiv ɔlmoʊs læft. wʌt tʃɹʌbəl kəɾ aɪ ɡɪv? ʃi wɑz ʃildɪd fɹəm ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. hɝ bɹuzəz ætʃt soʊ mʌtʃ ʃi kəd bɛɹli stænd. ɛniθɪŋ ʃi maɪt du, ðeɪ kəd hændəl laɪk ə tʃaɪlz tæntʃɹəm. bʌt maɪ bɹuzəz wɪl hil, bɝn ju, ən jəl meɪk ə slɪp jɛt! ən wən jə du. . . .

Nynaeve almost laughed. What trouble could I give? She was shielded from the True Source. Her bruises ached so much she could barely stand. Anything she might do, they could handle like a child's tantrum. But my bruises will heal, burn you, and you'll make a slip yet! And when you do. . . .

ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝz ɪn ðə fɹʌn ɹum ə ðə haʊs. tu bɪɡ soʊlʒɝz ɪn ɹɪmd, ɹaʊn hɛlməts ən ʃaɪni bɹɛstpleɪts oʊvɝ ðoʊz pʌfi-slivd ɹɛd koʊts. ðə tu mɛn hæd swɛɾ ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz, ən ðɛɹ dɑɹk aɪz ɹoʊld əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ əz əfɹeɪɾ əz ʃi. ɑmikoʊ nəɡɔɪən wɑz ðɛɹ, slɛndɝ ən pɹɪɾi wɪð əɹ lɔŋ nɛk ən peɪl skɪn, lʊkɪŋ əz ɪnəsən əz ə ɡɝl ɡæðɝɪŋ flaʊɝz. dʒɔɪjə bɝ hæɾ ə fɹɛnli feɪs dɪspaɪt ðət smuð-tʃikt kɑm ʌv ə wʊmən u hæd wɝk lɔŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ, ɔlmoʊst ə ɡɹændmʌðɝz feɪs ɪn ɪts wɛlkəmɪŋ əpɪɹəns, ðoʊ hɝ eɪdʒ hæd pʊt noʊ tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn əɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ɪt hæd ɹɪŋkəld əɹ skɪn. hɝ ɡɹeɪ aɪz lʊk mɔɹ laɪk ðoʊz ə ðə stɛpmʌðɝ ɪn ðə stɔɹiz, ðə wʌn u mɝɾɝd ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə hɝ hʌzbənz fɝst waɪf. boʊθ wɪmən ʃoʊn wɪð ðə paʊɝ.

There were others in the front room of the house. Two big soldiers in rimmed, round helmets and shiny breastplates over those puffy-sleeved red coats. The two men had sweat on their faces, and their dark eyes rolled as if they were as afraid as she. Amico Nagoyin was there, slender and pretty with her long neck and pale skin, looking as innocent as a girl gathering flowers. Joiya Byir had a friendly face despite that smooth-cheeked calm of a woman who had worked long with the Power, almost a grandmother's face in its welcoming appearance, though her age had put no touch of gray in her dark hair, any more than it had wrinkled her skin. Her gray eyes looked more like those of the stepmother in the stories, the one who murdered the children of her husband's first wife. Both women shone with the Power.

ɪleɪn stʊd bɪtwin ðə tu blæk sɪstɝz, wɪð ə bɹuzd aɪ ən ə swoʊlən tʃik ən ə splɪt lɪp, wʌn sliv ə hɝ dʒɹɛs tɔɹn hæfweɪ ɔf. "aɪ æm sɑɹi, nɪneɪiv," ʃi sɛd θɪkli, əz ɪf əɹ dʒɔ hɝt. "wi nɛvɝ sɔ ðɛm əntɪl ɪt wɑz tu leɪt."

Elayne stood between the two Black sisters, with a bruised eye and a swollen cheek and a split lip, one sleeve of her dress torn halfway off. "I am sorry, Nynaeve," she said thickly, as if her jaw hurt. "We never saw them until it was too late."

ɛɡwin leɪ ɪn ə kɹʌmpəl hip ɑn ðə flɔɹ, hɝ feɪs swoʊlən wɪð bɹuzəz, ɔlmoʊst ənɹɛkəɡnaɪzəbəl. əz nɪneɪiv ən əɹ ɛskɔɹt keɪm ɪn, wʌn ə ðə bɪɡ soʊlʒɝz hɔɪstəɾ ɛɡwin oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ʃi dæŋɡəl ðəɹ əz lɪmpli əz ə hæf-ɛmpti bɑɹli sæk.

Egwene lay in a crumpled heap on the floor, her face swollen with bruises, almost unrecognizable. As Nynaeve and her escort came in, one of the big soldiers hoisted Egwene over his shoulder. She dangled there as limply as a half-empty barley sack.

"wʌt dɪd jə də tə hɝ?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. "bɝn ju, wʌt - !" sʌmθɪŋ ənsin stʃɹʌk əɹ əkɹɔs ðə maʊθ hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk əɹ aɪz ɡoʊ blæŋk fəɹ ə moʊmənt.

"What did you do to her?" Nynaeve demanded. "Burn you, what - !" Something unseen struck her across the mouth hard enough to make her eyes go blank for a moment.

"naʊ, naʊ," dʒɔɪjə bɝ sɛd wɪð ə smaɪl ðəɾ əɹ aɪz bɪlaɪd. "aɪ wɪl nɑt stæn fəɹ dɪmænz, əɹ bæd læŋɡwədʒ." ʃi saʊndəd laɪk ə ɡɹændmʌðɝ, tu. "ju spik wən jə ɑɹ spoʊkən tə."

"Now, now," Joiya Byir said with a smile that her eyes belied. "I will not stand for demands, or bad language." She sounded like a grandmother, too. "You speak when you are spoken to."

"aɪ toʊl jə ðə ɡɝl, ʃi wəd nɑt stɑp faɪɾɪŋ, jɛs?" liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd. "lɛɾ ɪt bi ə lɛsən tə ju. ɪf jə tʃɹaɪ tə kɑz ɛni tʃɹʌbəl, jəl bi tʃɹiɾəd noʊ mɔɹ dʒɛnli."

"I told you the girl, she would not stop fighting, yes?" Liandrin said. "Let it be a lesson to you. If you try to cause any trouble, you will be treated no more gently."

nɪneɪiv ætʃt tə də sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ ɛɡwin, bʌt ʃi lɛt hɝsɛlf bi pʊʃt aʊɾ ɪndə ðə stʃɹit. ʃi meɪɾ əm pʊʃ hɝ; ɪt wɑz ə smɔl weɪ ʌv faɪɾɪŋ bæk, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə koʊɑpɝeɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔl ʃi hæɾ ət ðə moʊmənt.

Nynaeve ached to do something for Egwene, but she let herself be pushed out into the street. She made them push her; it was a small way of fighting back, refusing to cooperate, but it was all she had at the moment.

ðəɹ wɝ fju pipəl ɪn ðə mʌɾi stʃɹit, əz ɪf ɛvɹiwʌn hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt wɑz mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ tə bi sʌmwɛɹ ɛls, ən ðoʊz fju skɝid baɪ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd wɪθaʊɾ ə ɡlæns ət ðə ʃaɪni, blæk-lækɝd koʊtʃ stændɪŋ bɪhaɪn ə tim ə sɪks mætʃt waɪts wɪð tɔl waɪt plumz ɑn ðɛɹ bɹaɪɾəlz. ə koʊtʃmən dʒɹɛs laɪk ðə soʊlʒɝz, bʌt wɪθaʊɾ ɑɹmɝ əɹ sɔɹd, sæɾ ɑn ðə sit, ən ənʌðɝ oʊpən ðə dɔɹ əz ðeɪ əpɪɹd fɹəm ðə haʊs. bɪfɔɹ i dɪd, nɪneɪiv sɔ ðə sɪdʒəl peɪntəd ðɛɹ. ə sɪlvɝ-ɡɔntələɾəd fɪs klʌtʃɪŋ dʒæɡd laɪtnɪŋ boʊls.

There were few people in the muddy street, as if everyone had decided it was much better to be somewhere else, and those few scurried by on the other side without a glance at the shiny, black-lacquered coach standing behind a team of six matched whites with tall white plumes on their bridles. A coachman dressed like the soldiers, but without armor or sword, sat on the seat, and another opened the door as they appeared from the house. Before he did, Nynaeve saw the sigil painted there. A silver-gauntleted fist clutching jagged lightning bolts.

ʃi səpoʊzd ɪt wɑz haɪ lɔɹd sɑmənz saɪn - eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnd, hi mʌs bi, ɪf i dilz wɪð ðə blæk ədʒɑ. ðə laɪt bɝn hɪm! - bʌt ʃi wɑz mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ðə mæn u dʒɹɑp tə hɪz niz ɪn ðə mʌɾ ət ðɛɹ əpɪɹəns. "bɝn ju, sændɑɹ, waɪ - ?" ʃi dʒʌmpt əz sʌmθɪŋ ðət fɛlt laɪk ə stɪk ʌv wʊd stʃɹʌk əɹ əkɹɔs ðə ʃoʊldɝz.

She supposed it was High Lord Samon's sign - A Darkfriend, he must be, if he deals with the Black Ajah. The Light burn him! - but she was more interested in the man who dropped to his knees in the mud at their appearance. "Burn you, Sandar, why - ?" She jumped as something that felt like a stick of wood struck her across the shoulders.

dʒɔɪjə bɝ smaɪl tʃaɪɾɪŋli ən wæɡəld ə fɪŋɡɝ. "ju wɪl bi ɹɪspɛkfəl, tʃaɪld. əɹ jə maɪt luz ðət tʌŋ."

Joiya Byir smiled chidingly and waggled a finger. "You will be respectful, child. Or you might lose that tongue."

liɑnʒɹɪn læft. tæŋəlɪŋ ə hæn ɪn sændɑɹz blæk hɛɹ, ʃi ɹɛntʃt ɪz hɛd bæk. hi stɛɹɾ ʌp əɾ əɹ wɪð ði aɪz ʌv ə feɪθfəl haʊnd - əɹ ʌv ə kɝ ɪkspɛktɪŋ ə kɪk. "du nɑt bi tu hɑɹɾ ɑn ðɪs mæn." ʃi ivən meɪd "mæn" saʊn laɪk "dɔɡ." "hi hæd tə bi . . . pɝsweɪɾəd . . . tə sɝv. bʌɾ aɪm vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ət pɝsweɪɾɪŋ, noʊ?" ʃi læft əɡɛn.

Liandrin laughed. Tangling a hand in Sandar's black hair, she wrenched his head back. He stared up at her with the eyes of a faithful hound - or of a cur expecting a kick. "Do not be too hard on this man." She even made "man" sound like "dog." "He had to be . . . persuaded . . . to serve. But I am very good at persuading, no?" She laughed again.

sændɑɹ tɝn ə kənfjuz stɛɹ ɑn nɪneɪiv. "aɪ hæd tə də ɪt, mɪstʃɹəs mɛɹiɪm. aɪ . . . hæd tə." liɑnʒɹɪn twɪstəɾ ɪz hɛɹ, ən ɪz aɪz wɛn bæk tə hɝ, ði æŋkʃəs haʊnz wʌns mɔɹ.

Sandar turned a confused stare on Nynaeve. "I had to do it, Mistress Maryim. I . . . had to." Liandrin twisted his hair, and his eyes went back to her, the anxious hound's once more.

laɪt! nɪneɪiv θɔt. wʌd ðeɪ də tə hɪm? wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ gɑnə də tə ʌs?

Light! Nynaeve thought. What did they do to him? What are they going to do to us?

ʃi ən ɪleɪn wɝ bʌndəld ɹʌfli ɪndə ðə koʊtʃ, wɪð ɛɡwin slʌmp bɪtwin ðɛm, hɝ hɛd lɑlɪŋ, ən liɑnʒɹɪn ən ɹiɑnə klaɪmd ɪn ən tʊk ðə sit feɪsɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ stɪl sɝaʊndəd ðɛm. wɛɹ ði ʌðɝz wɛnt, nɪneɪiv dɪd nɑt mʌtʃ kɛɹ ət ðət moʊmənt. ʃi wɑntəd tə ɹitʃ ɛɡwin, tə tʌtʃ hɝ, tə kʌmfɝɾ əɹ hɝts, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt muv ə mʌsəl bɪloʊ hɝ nɛk ɪksɛp tə ɹɪð. floʊz ʌv ɛɹ baʊn ðə θɹi ʌv əm laɪk leɪɝz ə taɪtli ɹæp blæŋkəts. ðə koʊtʃ lɝtʃt ɪndə moʊʃən, sweɪɪŋ hɑɹɾ ɪn ðə mʌd dɪspaɪɾ ɪts lɛðɝ spɹɪŋz.

She and Elayne were bundled roughly into the coach, with Egwene slumped between them, her head lolling, and Liandrin and Rianna climbed in and took the seat facing forward. The glow of saidar still surrounded them. Where the others went, Nynaeve did not much care at that moment. She wanted to reach Egwene, to touch her, to comfort her hurts, but she could not move a muscle below her neck except to writhe. Flows of Air bound the three of them like layers of tightly wrapped blankets. The coach lurched into motion, swaying hard in the mud despite its leather springs.

"ɪf juv hɝt hɝ. . . ." laɪt, aɪ kən si ðeɪv hɝt hɝ. waɪ doʊn aɪ seɪ wʌɾ aɪ min? bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz hɑɹd tə fɔɹs ðə wɝdz aʊɾ əz ɪt wʊɾə bɪn tə lɪft ə hænd. "ɪf juv kɪl hɝ, aɪ woʊn ɹɛs tɪl jə ɑɹ ɔl hʌntəd daʊn laɪk waɪl dɑɡz."

"If you have hurt her. . . ." Light, I can see they've hurt her. Why don't I say what I mean? But it was almost as hard to force the words out as it would have been to lift a hand. "If you have killed her, I won't rest till you are all hunted down like wild dogs."

ɹiɑnə ɡlɛɹd, bʌt liɑnʒɹɪn oʊnli snɪft. "du nɑt bi ə kəmplit ful, waɪldɝ. jə ɑɹ wɑntəɾ əlaɪv. dɛd beɪt wɪl kætʃ nʌθɪŋ."

Rianna glared, but Liandrin only sniffed. "Do not be a complete fool, wilder. You are wanted alive. Dead bait will catch nothing."

beɪt? fəɹ wʌt? fəɹ hu? "ju ɑɹ ðə ful, liɑnʒɹɪn! dʒju θɪŋk wəɹ hɪɹ əloʊn? oʊnli θɹi ʌv ʌs, ən nɑɾ ivən fʊl ɛɛs sədaɪ? wəɹ beɪt, liɑnʒɹɪn. ən juv wɔkt ɪndə ðə tʃɹæp laɪk ə fæt ɡɹaʊs."

Bait? For what? For who? "You are the fool, Liandrin! Do you think we are here alone? Only three of us, and not even full Aes Sedai? We are bait, Liandrin. And you have walked into the trap like a fat grouse."

"du nɑt tɛl əɹ ðæt!" ɪleɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli, ən nɪneɪiv blɪŋk bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹilaɪzd ɪleɪn wɑz hɛlpɪŋ əɹ fæbɹɪkeɪʃən. "ɪf jə lɛt jəɹ æŋɡɝ ɡɛt ðə bɛst ə ju, jəl tɛl əm wʌt ðeɪ mʌs nɑt hɪɹ. ðeɪ mʌs teɪk əs ɪnsaɪd ðə stoʊn. ðeɪ mʌst - "

"Do not tell her that!" Elayne said sharply, and Nynaeve blinked before she realized Elayne was helping her fabrication. "If you let your anger get the best of you, you will tell them what they must not hear. They must take us inside the Stone. They must - "

"bi kwaɪət!" nɪneɪiv snæpt. "ju ɑɹ lɛɾɪŋ jəɹ tʌŋ ɹʌn əweɪ wɪð ju!" ɪleɪn mænədʒ tə lʊk əbæʃt bɪhaɪn əɹ bɹuzəz. lɛɾ əm tʃu ɑn ðæt, nɪneɪiv θɔt.

"Be quiet!" Nynaeve snapped. "You are letting your tongue run away with you!" Elayne managed to look abashed behind her bruises. Let them chew on that, Nynaeve thought.

bʌt liɑnʒɹɪn oʊnli smaɪld. "wʌns jəɹ taɪm əz beɪɾ ɪz dʌn, jəl tɛl əs ɛvɹiθɪŋ. jəl wɑn tə. ðeɪ seɪ jəl bi vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ wʌn deɪ, bʌɾ əl meɪk ʃʊɹ jəl ɔlweɪz oʊbeɪ mi, ivən bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ bɛləl wɝks ɪz plænz fəɹ ju. hiz sɛndɪŋ fəɹ mɹdʒɹɑl. θɝtin ə ðɛm." ðoʊz ɹoʊzbʌd lɪps læf ðə faɪnəl wɝdz.

But Liandrin only smiled. "Once your time as bait is done, you will tell us everything. You will want to. They say you will be very strong one day, but I will make sure you will always obey me, even before the Great Master Be'lal works his plans for you. He is sending for Myrddraal. Thirteen of them." Those rosebud lips laughed the final words.

nɪneɪiv fɛlt əɹ stʌmək twɪst. wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən! hɝ bɹeɪn nʌmd wɪð ʃɑk. ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ɔl ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ baʊn ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, baʊn baɪ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ɪn ðə moʊmən ə kɹieɪʃən. bʌt ðə kæɾəkɪzəm dɪd nɑt hɛlp; ʃi nu tu wɛl haʊ mʌtʃ ʌv ɪt wɑz fɔls. ðən ðə ɹɛst ʌv ɪt keɪm hoʊm tə hɝ. θɝtin mɹdʒɹɑl. ən θɝtin sɪstɝz ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ. ʃi hɝɾ ɪleɪn skɹimɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz skɹimɪŋ hɝsɛlf, dʒɝkɪŋ jusləsli ɪn ðoʊz ɪnvɪzəbəl bɑnz ʌv ɛɹ. ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl tə seɪ wɪtʃ wɑz laʊɾɝ, ðɛɹ dɪspɛɹɪŋ skɹimz, əɹ ðə læftɝ fɹəm liɑnʒɹɪn ən ɹiɑnə.

Nynaeve felt her stomach twist. One of the Forsaken! Her brain numbed with shock. The Dark One and all the Forsaken are bound in Shayol Ghul, bound by the Creator in the moment of creation. But the catechism did not help; she knew too well how much of it was false. Then the rest of it came home to her. Thirteen Myrddraal. And thirteen sisters of the Black Ajah. She heard Elayne screaming before she realized she was screaming herself, jerking uselessly in those invisible bonds of Air. It was impossible to say which was louder, their despairing screams, or the laughter from Liandrin and Rianna.


tʃæptɝ fɪftiɾu


CHAPTER 52

ɪn sɝtʃ ʌv ə ɹɛməɾi


In Search of a Remedy

slʌmpt ɑn ðə stul ɪn ðə ɡlimənz ɹum, mæt ɡɹɪməst əz tɑm kɔft əɡɛn. haʊ ɑɹ wi gɑnə kip lʊkɪŋ ɪf hiz soʊ blʌɾi sɪk i kænt wɔk? hi wɑz əʃeɪmd əz sun əz i θɔɾ ɪt. tɑm hæd bɪn əz əsɪdwəs ɪn sɝtʃɪŋ əz i hæd, pʊʃɪŋ hɪmsɛlf deɪ ən naɪt, wən i hæd tə noʊ hi wɑz kʌmɪŋ daʊn sɪk. mæt hæd bɪn soʊ əbzɔɹbd ɪn ɪz hʌn ðəɾ i hæd peɪd tu lɪɾəl ətɛnʃən tə tɑmz kɑfɪŋ. ðə tʃeɪnʒ fɹəm kɑnstən ɹeɪn tə stimi hit hæd nɑt hɛlpt ɪt.

Slumped on the stool in the gleeman's room, Mat grimaced as Thom coughed again. How are we going to keep looking if he's so bloody sick he can't walk? He was ashamed as soon as he thought it. Thom had been as assiduous in searching as he had, pushing himself day and night, when he had to know he was coming down sick. Mat had been so absorbed in his hunt that he had paid too little attention to Thom's coughing. The change from constant rain to steamy heat had not helped it.

"kʌm ɑn, tɑm," hi sɛd. "loʊpɝ sɛz ðɛɹz ə waɪz wʊmən nɑt fɑɹ. ðəɾ ɪz wʌt ðeɪ kɔl ə wɪzdəm hɪɹ - ə waɪz wʊmən. wʊdnt nɪneɪiv laɪk ðæt!"

"Come on, Thom," he said. "Lopar says there's a Wise Woman not far. That is what they call a Wisdom here - a Wise Woman. Wouldn't Nynaeve like that!"

"aɪ də nɑt nid . . . ɛni faʊl-teɪstɪŋ . . . kənkɑkʃənz . . . pɔɹd daʊn maɪ θɹoʊt, bɔɪ." tɑm stʌft ə fɪs θɹu hɪz mʌstæʃɪz ɪn ə veɪn ətɛmp tə stɑp ɪz hækɪŋ. "ju ɡoʊ əhɛd lʊkɪŋ. dʒʌst ɡɪmi . . . ə fju aʊɝz . . . ɑn maɪ bɛd . . . ən əl dʒɔɪn ju." ðə ɹækɪŋ wizəz dʌbəld ɪm oʊvɝ tɪl ɪz hɛd wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɑn ɪz niz.

"I do not need . . . any foul-tasting . . . concoctions . . . poured down my throat, boy." Thom stuffed a fist through his mustaches in a vain attempt to stop his hacking. "You go ahead looking. Just give me . . . a few hours . . . on my bed . . . and I'll join you." The wracking wheezes doubled him over till his head was almost on his knees.

"soʊ aɪm səpoʊz tə də ɔl ðə wɝk waɪl jə teɪk jəɹ iz?" mæt sɛd laɪtli. "haʊ kən aɪ faɪn ɛniθɪŋ wɪθaʊt ju? jə lɝn moʊst ʌv wʌt wi hɪɹ." ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɪɡzækli tʃɹu; mɛn tɔkt əz fɹili oʊvɝ daɪs əz ðeɪ dɪd waɪl baɪɪŋ ə ɡlimən ə kʌp ʌv waɪn. mɔɹ fɹili ðən ðeɪ dɪd wɪð ə ɡlimən hækɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd ðeɪ fɪɹd kənteɪdʒən. bʌɾ i wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə θɪŋk ðət tɑmz kɑf wɑz nɑt gɑnə ɡoʊ əweɪ baɪ ɪtsɛlf. ɪf ði oʊld ɡoʊt daɪz ɑn mi, hu wɪl aɪ pleɪ stoʊnz wɪð? hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf ɹʌfli. "ɛniweɪ, jəɹ blʌɾi kɑfɪŋ kips mi əweɪk ivən ɪn ðə nɛkst ɹum."

"So I am supposed to do all the work while you take your ease?" Mat said lightly. "How can I find anything without you? You learn most of what we hear." That was not exactly true; men talked as freely over dice as they did while buying a gleeman a cup of wine. More freely than they did with a gleeman hacking so hard they feared contagion. But he was beginning to think that Thom's cough was not going to go away by itself. If the old goat dies on me, who will I play stones with? he told himself roughly. "Anyway, your bloody coughing keeps me awake even in the next room."

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə waɪt-hɛɹd mænz pɹoʊɾɛsts, hi pʊl tɑm tə hɪz fit. hi wɑz ʃɑkt ət haʊ mʌtʃ ə ðə ɡlimənz weɪɾ i hæd tə səpɔɹt. dɪspaɪt ðə dæmp hit, tɑm ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn ɪz pætʃ-kʌvɝd kloʊk. mæt hæɾ ɪz oʊn koʊɾ ənbʌɾənd kəmplitli ən ɔl θɹi taɪz ə hɪz ʃɝɾ əndʌn, bʌɾ i lɛt ði oʊld ɡoʊɾ əv ɪz weɪ. noʊ wʌn ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum ivən lʊkt ʌp əz i hæf kæɹid tɑm aʊɾ ɪndə ðə mʌɡi æftɝnun.

Ignoring the white-haired man's protests, he pulled Thom to his feet. He was shocked at how much of the gleeman's weight he had to support. Despite the damp heat, Thom insisted on his patch-covered cloak. Mat had his own coat unbuttoned completely and all three ties of his shirt undone, but he let the old goat have his way. No one in the common room even looked up as he half carried Thom out into the muggy afternoon.

ði ɪnkipɝ hæd ɡɪvən sɪmpəl dɝɛkʃənz, bʌt wən ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə ɡeɪt, ən feɪs ðə mʌɾ ə ðə mɔl, mæt ɔlmoʊs tɝn bæk tə æsk æftɝ ənʌðɝ waɪz wʊmən. ðəɹ hæd tə bi mɔɹ ðən wʌn ɪn ə sɪɾi ðɪs saɪz. tɑmz wizɪŋ dɪsaɪɾɪd hɪm. wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs mæt stɛpt ɔf ɪndə ðə mʌd, hæf kæɹiɪŋ ðə ɡlimən.

The innkeeper had given simple directions, but when they reached the gate, and faced the mud of the Maule, Mat almost turned back to ask after another Wise Woman. There had to be more than one in a city this size. Thom's wheezing decided him. With a grimace Mat stepped off into the mud, half carrying the gleeman.

hi hæd θɔt fɹəm ðə dɝɛkʃənz ðət ðeɪ mʌst əv pæs ðə waɪz wʊmənz haʊs ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ ʌp fɹəm ðə dɑk ðət fɝs naɪt, ən wən i sɔ ðə lɔŋ, nɛɹoʊ haʊs wɪð bʌntʃəz ə ɝbz hæŋɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz, ɹaɪt nɛks tə ə pɑɾɝz ʃɑp, hi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪt. loʊpɝ hæd sɛd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə bæk dɔɹ, bʌɾ i hæd hæɾ ɪnʌf ə mʌd.

He had thought from the directions that they must have passed the Wise Woman's house on their way up from the dock that first night, and when he saw the long, narrow house with bunches of herbs hanging in the windows, right next to a potter's shop, he remembered it. Lopar had said something about going to the back door, but he had had enough of mud.

ən ðə stɪŋk ə fɪʃ, hi θɔt, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə bɛɹfʊt mɛn skwɛltʃɪŋ baɪ wɪð ðɛɹ bæskəts ɑn ðɛɹ bæks. ðəɹ wɝ tʃɹæks ə hɔɹsəz ɪn ðə stʃɹit, tu, dʒʌs bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə bi əblɪɾɝeɪtɪd baɪ fiɾ ən ɑks-kɑɹts. hɔɹsəz pʊlɪŋ ə wæɡən, əɹ meɪbi ə kæɹɪdʒ. hi hæd sin nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ɑksən dʒɹɔɪŋ kɑɹts əɹ wæɡənz iðɝ wʌn ɪn tɛɹ - ðə noʊbəlz ən ðə mɝtʃəns wɝ pɹaʊɾ ə ðɛɹ faɪn stɑk, ən nɛvɝ lɛt wʌn bi pʊt tə ɛniθɪŋ laɪk wɝk - bʌɾ i hæd nɑt sin ɛni kæɹɪdʒɪz sɪns livɪŋ ðə wɔl sɪɾi, iðɝ.

And the stink of fish, he thought, frowning at the barefoot men squelching by with their baskets on their backs. There were tracks of horses in the street, too, just beginning to be obliterated by feet and ox-carts. Horses pulling a wagon, or maybe a carriage. He had seen nothing but oxen drawing carts or wagons either one in Tear - the nobles and the merchants were proud of their fine stock, and never let one be put to anything like work - but he had not seen any carriages since leaving the walled city, either.

dɪsmɪsɪŋ hɔɹsəz ən wil tʃɹæks fɹəm ɪz maɪnd, hi tʊk tɑm tə ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ ən nɑkt. æftɝ ə taɪm i nɑkt əɡɛn. ðən əɡɛn.

Dismissing horses and wheel tracks from his mind, he took Thom to the front door and knocked. After a time he knocked again. Then again.

hi wɑz ɑn ðə pɔɪn ʌv ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp ən ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə waɪt kɹɛsən dɪspaɪt tɑm kɑfɪŋ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ wən i hɝd ʃʌflɪŋ fʊtstɛps ɪnsaɪd.

He was on the point of giving up and returning to The White Crescent despite Thom coughing on his shoulder when he heard shuffling footsteps inside.

ðə dɔɹ oʊpən bɛɹli mɔɹ ðən ə kɹæk, ən ə staʊt, ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən pɪɹɾ aʊt. "wʌt dʒju wɑnt?" ʃi æskt ɪn ə taɪɝd vɔɪs.

The door opened barely more than a crack, and a stout, gray-haired woman peered out. "What do you want?" she asked in a tired voice.

mæt pʊɾ ɑn ɪz bɛst ɡɹɪn. laɪt, bʌɾ aɪm ɡɛɾɪŋ sɪk maɪsɛlf əɾ ɔl ðiz pipəl u saʊn laɪk ðɛɹz noʊ blʌɾi hoʊp. "mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə? maɪ neɪm ɪz mæt kɔθən. keɪvən loʊpɝ toʊl mi jə maɪt də sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ maɪ fɹɛnz kɑf. aɪ kən peɪ wɛl."

Mat put on his best grin. Light, but I am getting sick myself at all these people who sound like there's no bloody hope. "Mother Guenna? My name is Mat Cauthon. Cavan Lopar told me you might do something for my friend's cough. I can pay well."

ʃi stʌɾid əm ə moʊmənt, sim tə lɪsən tə tɑmz wizəz, ðən saɪd. "aɪ səpoʊz aɪ kən stɪl də ðæt, ət list. jə maɪɾ əz wɛl kʌm ɪn." ʃi swʌŋ ðə dɔɹ oʊpən ən wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi plɑɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə bæk ə ðə haʊs bɪfɔɹ mæt muvd.

She studied them a moment, seemed to listen to Thom's wheezes, then sighed. "I suppose I can still do that, at least. You might as well come in." She swung the door open and was already plodding toward the back of the house before Mat moved.

hɝ æksɛn saʊndəd soʊ mʌtʃ laɪk ði æmɪɝlɪnz ðəɾ i ʃɪvɝd, bʌɾ i fɑloʊd, ɔl bʌt kæɹiɪŋ tɑm.

Her accent sounded so much like the Amyrlin's that he shivered, but he followed, all but carrying Thom.

"aɪ doʊnt . . . nid ðɪs," ðə ɡlimən wizd. "blʌɾi mɪkstʃɝz . . . ɔlweɪz teɪs laɪk . . . dʌŋ!"

"I don't . . . need this," the gleeman wheezed. "Bloody mixtures . . . always taste like . . . dung!"

"ʃʌɾ ʌp, tɑm."

"Shut up, Thom."

liɾɪŋ əm ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə kɪtʃən, ðə staʊt wʊmən ɹʌmɪɡd ɪn wʌn ə ðə kʌbɝdz, teɪkɪŋ aʊt smɔl stoʊn pɑts ən pækɪts ə ɝbz waɪl mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf.

Leading them all the way to the kitchen, the stout woman rummaged in one of the cupboards, taking out small stone pots and packets of herbs while muttering to herself.

mæt sæt tɑm daʊn ɪn wʌn ə ðə haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹz, ən ɡlæns θɹu ðə nɪɹəst wɪndoʊ. ðəɹ wɝ θɹi ɡʊd hɔɹsəz taɪɾ aʊt bæk; hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz ðə waɪz wʊmən hæd mɔɹ ðən wʌn, əɹ ɛni fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. hi hæd nɑt sin ɛniwʌn ɪn tɛɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪksɛp noʊbəlz ən ðə wɛlθi, ən ðiz ænəməlz lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd kɑs mɔɹ ðən ə lɪɾəl sɪlvɝ. hɔɹsəz əɡɛn. aɪ doʊn kɛɹ əbaʊt blʌɾi hɔɹsəz naʊ!

Mat sat Thom down in one of the high-backed chairs, and glanced through the nearest window. There were three good horses tied out back; he was surprised the Wise Woman had more than one, or any for that matter. He had not seen anyone in Tear riding except nobles and the wealthy, and these animals looked as if they had cost more than a little silver. Horses again. I don't care about bloody horses now!

mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə bɹud səm sɔɹɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ ti wɪð ə ɹæŋk smɛl ən fɔɹst ɪt daʊn tɑmz θɹoʊt, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz noʊz wən i tʃɹaɪd tə kəmpleɪn. mæt dɪsaɪɾɪd ʃi hæd lɛs fæɾ ɑn əɹ ðən i hæd θɔt, fɹəm ðə weɪ ʃi hɛl ðə ɡlimənz hɛd stɛɾi ɪn ðə kɹʊk ʌv wʌn ɑɹm waɪl ʃi pɔɹd ðə blæk lɪkwəɾ ɪndə hɪm noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ hɑɹɾ i tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp hɝ.

Mother Guenna brewed some sort of strong tea with a rank smell and forced it down Thom's throat, holding his nose when he tried to complain. Mat decided she had less fat on her than he had thought, from the way she held the gleeman's head steady in the crook of one arm while she poured the black liquid into him no matter how hard he tried to stop her.

wən ʃi tʊk ðə kʌp əweɪ, tɑm kɔft ən skɹʌbd əɾ ɪz maʊθ wɪð ikwəl vɪɡɝ. "ɡɑə! wʊmən . . . aɪ doʊnt noʊ . . . wɛðɝ jə . . . min tə dʒɹaʊn mi . . . əɹ kɪl mi . . . wɪð ðə teɪst! jə ɔt . . . tə bi ə blʌɾi . . . blæksmɪθ!"

When she took the cup away, Thom coughed and scrubbed at his mouth with equal vigor. "Gaaah! Woman . . . I don't know . . . whether you . . . mean to drown me . . . or kill me . . . with the taste! You ought . . . to be a bloody . . . blacksmith!"

"ju wɪl teɪk ðə seɪm twaɪs ə deɪ tɪl ðət hækɪŋ ɪz ɡɔn," ʃi sɛd fɝmli. "æn aɪ hæv ə sɑv ðət jəl ɹʌb ɑn jəɹ tʃɛst ɛvɹi naɪt." səm ə ðə wɪɹinəs lɛft əɹ vɔɪs əz ʃi kənfɹʌntəd ðə ɡlimən, fɪsts ɑn əɹ bɹɔd hɪps. "ðæt sɑv stɪŋks əz bæɾ əz ðɪs ti teɪsts, bʌt jəl ɹʌb ɪɾ ɑn - θɝoʊli! - əɹ əl dʒɹæɡ jə əpstɛɹz laɪk ə skɹɔni kɑɹp ɪn ə nɛɾ ən taɪ jə tə ə bɛd wɪð ðət kloʊk ə jʊɹz! aɪ nɛvɝ hæɾ ə ɡlimən kʌm tə mi bɪfɔɹ, ən əl nɑt lɛt ðə fɝst wʌn ðət dʌz kɑf hɪmsɛlf tə dɛθ."

"You will take the same twice a day till that hacking is gone," she said firmly. "And I have a salve that you'll rub on your chest every night." Some of the weariness left her voice as she confronted the gleeman, fists on her broad hips. "That salve stinks as bad as this tea tastes, but you will rub it on - thoroughly! - or I'll drag you upstairs like a scrawny carp in a net and tie you to a bed with that cloak of yours! I never had a gleeman come to me before, and I'll not let the first one that does cough himself to death."

tɑm ɡlaʊɝɾ ən blu aʊɾ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz wɪð ə kɑf, bʌɾ i sim tə teɪk əɹ θɹɛt sɪɹiəsli. ət list, hi dɪd nɑt seɪ ɛniθɪŋ, bʌɾ i lʊkt əz ɪf i mɛn tə θɹoʊ hɝ ti ən əɹ sɑv ɹaɪt bæk ət hɝ.

Thom glowered and blew out his mustaches with a cough, but he seemed to take her threat seriously. At least, he did not say anything, but he looked as if he meant to throw her tea and her salve right back at her.

ðə mɔɹ ðɪs mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə tɔkt, ðə mɔɹ ʃi saʊndəd laɪk ði æmɪɝlɪn tə mæt. fɹəm ðə saʊɝ lʊk ɑn tɑmz feɪs, ən ðə stɛɾi stɛɹ ɑn hɝz, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd i hæd bɛɾɝ smuð mæɾɝz oʊvɝ ə lɪɾəl bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡlimən ɹəfjuz tə teɪk əɹ mɛɾəsənz. ən ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə meɪk hɪm. "aɪ nu ə wʊmən wʌns u tɔk laɪk ju," hi sɛd. "ɔl fɪʃ ən nɛts ən θɪŋz. saʊndəd laɪk ju, tu. ðə seɪm æksɛnt, aɪ min. aɪ səpoʊz ʃiz tɛɹən."

The more this Mother Guenna talked, the more she sounded like the Amyrlin to Mat. From the sour look on Thom's face, and the steady stare on hers, he decided he had better smooth matters over a little before the gleeman refused to take her medicines. And she decided to make him. "I knew a woman once who talked like you," he said. "All fish and nets and things. Sounded like you, too. The same accent, I mean. I suppose she's Tairen."

"pɝhæps." ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən sʌɾənli saʊndəd taɪɝɾ əɡɛn, ən ʃi kɛp stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə flɔɹ. "aɪ nu səm ɡɝlz wɪð ðə saʊn ə jəɹ spitʃ ɑn ðɛɹ tʌŋz, tu. tu ʌv əm hæɾ ɪt, ɛniweɪ." ʃi saɪd hɛvəli.

"Perhaps." The gray-haired woman suddenly sounded tired again, and she kept staring at the floor. "I knew some girls with the sound of your speech on their tongues, too. Two of them had it, anyway." She sighed heavily.

mæt fɛlt ɪz skælp pɹɪkəl. maɪ lʌk kæn bi ðɪs ɡʊd. bʌɾ i wəd nɑt bɛɾ ə kɑpɝ ɑn tu ʌðɝ wɪmən wɪð tu ɹɪvɝz æksɛns dʒʌs hæpənɪŋ tə bi ɪn tɛɹ. "θɹi ɡɝlz? jʌŋ wɪmən? neɪmd ɛɡwin, ən nɪneɪiv, ən ɪleɪn? ðət wʌn əz hɛɹ laɪk ðə sʌn, ən blu aɪz."

Mat felt his scalp prickle. My luck can't be this good. But he would not bet a copper on two other women with Two Rivers accents just happening to be in Tear. "Three girls? Young women? Named Egwene, and Nynaeve, and Elayne? That one has hair like the sun, and blue eyes."

ʃi fɹaʊn ət hɪm. "ðoʊz wɝ nɑt ðə neɪmz ðeɪ ɡeɪv," ʃi sɛd sloʊli, "jɛɾ aɪ səspɛktəd ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ɡɪmi ðɛɹ tʃɹu neɪmz. bʌt ðeɪ hæd ðɛɹ ɹizənz, aɪ θɔt. wʌn ə ðɛm wɑz ə pɹɪɾi ɡɝl wɪð bɹaɪt blu aɪz ən ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz." ʃi dɪskɹaɪb nɪneɪiv wɪð əɹ bɹeɪd tə hɝ weɪst ən ɛɡwin wɪð əɹ bɪɡ, dɑɹk aɪz ən ɹɛɾi smaɪl, tu. θɹi pɹɪɾi wɪmən əz dɪfɹən fɹəm wʌn ənʌðɝ əz ðeɪ kəd bi. "aɪ si ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə wʌnz jə noʊ," ʃi fɪnɪʃt. "aɪ æm sɑɹi, bɔɪ."

She frowned at him. "Those were not the names they gave," she said slowly, "yet I suspected they did not give me their true names. But they had their reasons, I thought. One of them was a pretty girl with bright blue eyes and red-gold hair to her shoulders." She described Nynaeve with her braid to her waist and Egwene with her big, dark eyes and ready smile, too. Three pretty women as different from one another as they could be. "I see they are the ones you know," she finished. "I am sorry, boy."

"waɪ ɑɹ jə sɑɹi? aɪ hæv bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn əm fəɹ deɪz!" laɪt, aɪ wɔkt ɹaɪt pæs ðɪs pleɪs ðə fɝs naɪt! ɹaɪt pæs ðɛm! aɪ wɑntəd ɹændəm. wʌt kəd bi mɔɹ ɹændəm ðən wɛɹ ə ʃɪp dɑks ɑn ə ɹeɪni naɪt, ən wɛɹ jə hæpən tə lʊk ɪn ə blʌɾi laɪtnɪŋ flæʃ? bɝn mi! bɝn mi! "tɛl mi wɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ, mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə."

"Why are you sorry? I have been trying to find them for days!" Light, I walked right past this place the first night! Right past them! I wanted random. What could be more random than where a ship docks on a rainy night, and where you happen to look in a bloody lightning flash? Burn me! Burn me! "Tell me where they are, Mother Guenna."

ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən stɛɹd wɛɹəli ət ðə stoʊv wɛɹ əɹ spaʊɾəd kɛɾəl wɑz stimɪŋ. hɝ maʊθ wɝkt, bʌt ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ.

The gray-haired woman stared wearily at the stove where her spouted kettle was steaming. Her mouth worked, but she said nothing.

"wɛɹ ɑɹ ðeɪ?" mæt dɪmændəd. "ɪɾ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt! ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪn deɪnʒɝ ɪf aɪ doʊn faɪn ðɛm."

"Where are they?" Mat demanded. "It is important! They are in danger if I don't find them."

"ju də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "ju ɑɹ ən aʊtləndɝ. ðə haɪ lɔɹdz. . . ."

"You do not understand," she said softly. "You are an outlander. The High Lords. . . ."

"aɪ də nɑt kɛɹ əbaʊɾ ɛni - " mæt blɪŋkt, ən lʊkt ət tɑm. ðə ɡlimən sim tə bi fɹaʊnɪŋ, bʌɾ i wɑz kɑfɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd, mæt kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ. "wʌt də ðə haɪ lɔɹdz əv tə də wɪð maɪ fɹɛnz?"

"I do not care about any - " Mat blinked, and looked at Thom. The gleeman seemed to be frowning, but he was coughing so hard, Mat could not be sure. "What do the High Lords have to do with my friends?"

"ju dʒʌs də nɑt - "

"You just do not - "

"doʊn tɛl mi aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd! əl peɪ fəɹ ði ɪnfɝmeɪʃən!"

"Don't tell me I do not understand! I will pay for the information!"

mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm. "aɪ də nɑt teɪk mʌni fəɹ . . . !" ʃi ɡɹɪməs fɪɹsli. "ju æsk mi tə tɛl jə θɪŋz aɪ hæv bɪn toʊl nɑt tə spik ʌv. dʒju noʊ wʌt wɪl hæpən tə mi ɪf aɪ də ən jə bɹið maɪ neɪm? əl luz maɪ tʌŋ, tə bɪɡɪn. ðən əl luz ʌðɝ pɑɹts bɪfɔɹ ðə haɪ lɔɹdz əv wʌɾ ɪz lɛft ə mi hʌŋ ʌp tə skɹim ɪts læst aʊɝz əz ə ɹimaɪndɝ tə ʌðɝz tə oʊbeɪ. ən ɪɾəl də ðoʊz jʌŋ wɪmən noʊ ɡʊd, nɑt maɪ tɛlɪŋ əɹ maɪ daɪɪŋ!"

Mother Guenna glared at him. "I do not take money for . . . !" She grimaced fiercely. "You ask me to tell you things I have been told not to speak of. Do you know what will happen to me if I do and you breathe my name? I will lose my tongue, to begin. Then I will lose other parts before the High Lords have what is left of me hung up to scream its last hours as a reminder to others to obey. And it will do those young women no good, not my telling or my dying!"

"aɪ pɹɑməs əl nɛvɝ mɛnʃən jəɹ neɪm tə ɛniwʌn. aɪ swɛɹ ɪt." ən əl kip ðəɾ oʊθ, oʊld wʊmən, ɪf jə oʊnli tɛl mi wɛɹ ðeɪ blʌɾi ɑɹ! "pliz? ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪn deɪnʒɝ."

"I promise I will never mention your name to anyone. I swear it." And I'll keep that oath, old woman, if you only tell me where they bloody are! "Please? They are in danger."

ʃi stʌɾid ɪm fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm; bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz dʌn i hæd ðə filɪŋ ʃi nu ɛvɹi dɪteɪl ə hɪm. "ɑn ðəɾ oʊθ, əl tɛl ju. aɪ . . . laɪk ðɛm. bʌt jə kən də nʌθɪŋ. jə ɑɹ tu leɪt, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən. tu leɪt baɪ nɪɹli θɹi aʊɝz. ðeɪv bɪn teɪkən tə ðə stoʊn. ðə haɪ lɔɹd sɑmən sɛn fəɹ ðɛm." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪn wɝid pʌzəlmənt. "hi sɛnt . . . wɪmən u . . . kəd tʃænəl. aɪ hoʊl nʌθɪŋ əɡɛnst ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪsɛlf, bʌt ðəɾ ɪz əɡɛns ðə lɔ. ðə lɔ ðə haɪ lɔɹdz meɪd. ɪf ðeɪ bɹeɪk ɛvɹi ʌðɝ lɔ, ðeɪ wəd nɑt bɹeɪk ðət wʌn. waɪ wəɾ ə haɪ lɔɹd sɛn ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑn ɪz ɛɹənz? waɪ wəɾ i wɑn ðoʊz ɡɝlz əɾ ɔl?"

She studied him for a long time; before she was done he had the feeling she knew every detail of him. "On that oath, I will tell you. I . . . liked them. But you can do nothing. You are too late, Matrim Cauthon. Too late by nearly three hours. They have been taken to the Stone. The High Lord Samon sent for them." She shook her head in worried puzzlement. "He sent . . . women who . . . could channel. I hold nothing against Aes Sedai myself, but that is against the law. The law the High Lords made. If they break every other law, they would not break that one. Why would a High Lord send Aes Sedai on his errands? Why would he want those girls at all?"

mæt ɔlmoʊs bɝst aʊt læfɪŋ. "ɛɛs sədaɪ? mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə, jə hæd maɪ hɑɹɾ ɪn maɪ θɹoʊt, ən meɪbi maɪ lɪvɝ, tu. ɪf ɛɛs sədaɪ keɪm fəɹ ðɛm, ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ tə wɝi əbaʊt. ɔl θɹi ʌv əm ɑɹ gɑnə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ ðɛmsɛlvz. nɑt ðəɾ aɪ laɪk ɪt mʌtʃ, bʌt ðæts wʌt ðeɪ - " hɪz ɡɹɪn feɪɾəd ət ðə hɛvi weɪ ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd.

Mat almost burst out laughing. "Aes Sedai? Mother Guenna, you had my heart in my throat, and maybe my liver, too. If Aes Sedai came for them, there is nothing to worry about. All three of them are going to be Aes Sedai themselves. Not that I like it much, but that's what they - " His grin faded at the heavy way she shook her head.

"bɔɪ, ðoʊz ɡɝlz fɔt laɪk laɪənfɪʃ ɪn ə nɛt. wɛðɝ ðeɪ min tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ nɑt, ðoʊz u tʊk əm tʃɹiɾəd əm laɪk bɪlʒ pʌmpɪŋz. fɹɛnz də nɑt ɡɪv bɹuzəz laɪk ðæt."

"Boy, those girls fought like lionfish in a net. Whether they mean to be Aes Sedai or not, those who took them treated them like bilge pumpings. Friends do not give bruises like that."

hi fɛlt ɪz feɪs twɪstɪŋ. ɛɛs sədaɪ hɝt ðɛm? wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪt? ðə blʌɾi stoʊn. ɪt meɪks ðə pæləs ɪn keɪɛmlɪn lʊk laɪk wɔkɪŋ ɪndə ə bɑɹnjɑɹd! bɝn mi! aɪ stʊd ɹaɪɾ aʊt ðəɹ ɪn ðə ɹeɪn ən stɛɹɾ ət ðɪs haʊs! bɝn mi fəɹ ə blʌɾi laɪt-blaɪndɪd ful!

He felt his face twisting. Aes Sedai hurt them? What in the Light? The bloody Stone. It makes the Palace in Caemlyn look like walking into a barnyard! Burn me! I stood right out there in the rain and stared at this house! Burn me for a bloody Light-blinded fool!

"ɪf jə bɹeɪk jəɹ hænd," mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə sɛd, "aɪ wɪl splɪn ən poʊltɪs ɪt, bʌɾ ɪf jə dæmədʒ maɪ wɔl, əl stʃɹɪp jəɹ haɪd laɪk ə ɹɛdfɪʃ!"

"If you break your hand," Mother Guenna said, "I will splint and poultice it, but if you damage my wall, I will strip your hide like a redfish!"

hi blɪŋkt, ðən lʊkt əɾ ɪz fɪst, ət skɹeɪp nʌkəlz. hi dɪd nɑɾ ivən ɹɪmɛmbɝ pʌntʃɪŋ ðə wɔl.

He blinked, then looked at his fist, at scraped knuckles. He did not even remember punching the wall.

ðə bɹɔd wʊmən tʊk ɪz hæn ɪn ə stʃɹɔŋ ɡɹɪp, bʌt ðə fɪŋɡɝz ʃi juz tə pɹoʊb wɝ sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli dʒɛntəl. "nʌθɪŋ bɹoʊkən," ʃi ɡɹʌntɪɾ æftɝ ə waɪl. hɝ aɪz wɝ dʒʌst əz dʒɛntəl əz ʃi stʌɾid ɪz feɪs. "ɪt simz jə kɛɹ fəɹ ðɛm. wʌn ə ðɛm, ət list, aɪ səpoʊz ɪɾ ɪz. aɪm sɑɹi, mæt kɔθən."

The broad woman took his hand in a strong grip, but the fingers she used to probe were surprisingly gentle. "Nothing broken," she grunted after a while. Her eyes were just as gentle as she studied his face. "It seems you care for them. One of them, at least, I suppose it is. I am sorry, Mat Cauthon."

"doʊn bi," hi toʊl hɝ. "æt list aɪ noʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ, naʊ. ɔl aɪ hæv tə də ɪz ɡɛɾ əm aʊt." hi fɪʃt aʊɾ ɪz læs tu ændɔɝən ɡoʊl kɹaʊnz ən pɹɛst əm ɪndə hɝ hænd. "fɔɹ tɑmz mɛɾəsənz, ən fəɹ lɛɾɪŋ mi noʊ əbaʊt ðə ɡɝlz." ɑn ɪmpəls, hi ɡeɪv əɹ ə kwɪk kɪs ɑn ðə tʃik ən ə ɡɹɪn. "æn ðæts fəɹ mi."

"Don't be," he told her. "At least I know where they are, now. All I have to do is get them out." He fished out his last two Andoran gold crowns and pressed them into her hand. "For Thom's medicines, and for letting me know about the girls." On impulse, he gave her a quick kiss on the cheek and a grin. "And that's for me."

stɑɹɾəld, ʃi tʌtʃt əɹ tʃik, nɑt simɪŋ tə noʊ wɛðɝ tə lʊk ət ðə kɔɪnz əɹ ət hɪm. "ɡɛɾ əm aʊt, jə seɪ. dʒʌs laɪk ðæt. aʊɾ ə ðə stoʊn." əbɹʌpli ʃi stæbd ɪm ɪn ðə ɹɪbz wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ əz hɑɹɾ əz ə tʃɹi stʌb. "ju ɹimaɪn mi ʌv maɪ hʌzbənd, mæt kɔθən. hi wɑz ə hɛdstʃɹɔŋ ful u wəd seɪl ɪndə ðə tiθ ʌv ə ɡeɪl ən læf, tu. aɪ kəɾ ɔlmoʊs θɪŋk jəl mænədʒ ɪt." sʌɾənli ʃi sɔ hɪz mʌɾi buts, əpɛɹənli fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. "ɪt tʊk mi sɪks mʌnθs tə titʃ ɪm nɑt tə tʃɹæk mʌɾ ɪndə maɪ haʊs. ɪf jə də ɡɛt ðoʊz ɡɝlz aʊt, wɪtʃɛvɝ ə ðɛm juv jəɹ aɪ ɑn wɪl əv ə hɑɹd taɪm tʃɹeɪnɪŋ jə tə meɪk jə fɪt tə bi lɛɾ ɪnsaɪd."

Startled, she touched her cheek, not seeming to know whether to look at the coins or at him. "Get them out, you say. Just like that. Out of the Stone." Abruptly she stabbed him in the ribs with a finger as hard as a tree stub. "You remind me of my husband, Mat Cauthon. He was a headstrong fool who would sail into the teeth of a gale and laugh, too. I could almost think you'll manage it." Suddenly she saw his muddy boots, apparently for the first time. "It took me six months to teach him not to track mud into my house. If you do get those girls out, whichever of them you have your eye on will have a hard time training you to make you fit to be let inside."

"ju ɑɹ ði oʊnli wʊmən u kəd də ðæt," hi sɛd wɪð ə ɡɹɪn ðət bɹɔɾənd əɾ əɹ ɡlɛɹ. ɡɛɾ əm aʊt. ðæts ɔl aɪ hæv tə du. bɹɪŋ əm ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə stoʊn ə blʌɾi tɛɹ. tɑm kɔft əɡɛn. hi ɪzənt ɡoʊɪŋ ɪndə ðə stoʊn laɪk ðæt. oʊnli, haʊ də aɪ stɑp hɪm? "mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə, kən aɪ liv maɪ fɹɛn hɪɹ? aɪ θɪŋk hiz tu sɪk tə ɡoʊ bæk tə ði ɪn."

"You are the only woman who could do that," he said with a grin that broadened at her glare. Get them out. That's all I have to do. Bring them right out of the Stone of bloody Tear. Thom coughed again. He isn't going into the Stone like that. Only, how do I stop him? "Mother Guenna, can I leave my friend here? I think he is too sick to go back to the inn."

"wʌt?" tɑm bɑɹkt. hi tʃɹaɪd tə pʊʃ hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɛɹ, kɑfɪŋ soʊ hi kəd hɑɹdli spik. "aɪ æm noʊ . . . sətʃ θɪŋ, bɔɪ! jə θɪŋk . . . wɔkɪŋ ɪndə ðə stoʊn . . . wɪl bi laɪk . . . wɔkɪŋ ɪndə jəɹ mʌðɝz kɪtʃən? jə θɪŋk jə . . . wəd meɪk ɪt . . . əz fɑɹ əz ðə ɡeɪts . . . wɪθaʊt mi?" hi hʌŋ ɑn ðə bæk ə ðə tʃɛɹ, hɪz wizɪŋ ən hækɪŋ kipɪŋ ɪm fɹəm ɹaɪzɪŋ mɔɹ ðən hæfweɪ tə hɪz fit.

"What?" Thom barked. He tried to push himself out of the chair, coughing so he could hardly speak. "I am no . . . such thing, boy! You think . . . walking into the Stone . . . will be like . . . walking into your mother's kitchen? You think you . . . would make it . . . as far as the gates . . . without me?" He hung on the back of the chair, his wheezing and hacking keeping him from rising more than halfway to his feet.

mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ən pʊʃt ɪm bæk daʊn əz izəli əz ə tʃaɪld. ðə ɡlimən ɡeɪv əɹ ə stɑɹɾəld lʊk. "aɪ wɪl teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪm, mæt kɔθən," ʃi sɛd.

Mother Guenna put a hand on his shoulder and pushed him back down as easily as a child. The gleeman gave her a startled look. "I will take care of him, Mat Cauthon," she said.

"noʊ!" tɑm ʃaʊɾəd. "ju kænɑt . . . də ðɪs tə mi! jə kænt . . . liv mi . . . wɪð ðɪs oʊld. . . ." oʊnli hɝ hæn ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ kɛpt ɪm fɹəm dʌbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ.

"No!" Thom shouted. "You cannot . . . do this to me! You can't . . . leave me . . . with this old. . . ." Only her hand on his shoulder kept him from doubling over.

mæt ɡɹɪn ət ðə waɪt-hɛɹd mæn. "aɪ hæv ɛndʒɔɪd noʊɪŋ ju, tɑm."

Mat grinned at the white-haired man. "I have enjoyed knowing you, Thom."

əz i hɝiɾ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə stʃɹit, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf wʌndɝɪŋ waɪ hi hæd sɛd ðæt. hi ɪzən gɑnə blʌɾi daɪ. ðət wʊmən wɪl kip ɪm əlaɪv ɪf ʃiz tə dʒɹæɡ hɪm kɪkɪŋ ən skɹimɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz ɡɹeɪv baɪ hɪz mʌstæʃɪz. jɛs, bʌɾ u ɪz gɑnə kip mi əlaɪv?

As he hurried out into the street, he found himself wondering why he had said that. He isn't going to bloody die. That woman will keep him alive if she has to drag him kicking and screaming out of his grave by his mustaches. Yes, but who is going to keep me alive?

əhɛɾ ə hɪm, ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ lumd oʊvɝ ðə sɪɾi, ɪmpɹɛɡnəbəl, ə fɔɹtʃɹəs bɪsidʒd ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz, ə stoʊn ɑn wɪtʃ ə hʌnʒɹəd ɑɹmiz hæd bɹoʊkən ðɛɹ tiθ. ən i hæd tə ɡɛɾ ɪnsaɪd, sʌmhaʊ.

Ahead of him, the Stone of Tear loomed over the city, impregnable, a fortress besieged a hundred times, a stone on which a hundred armies had broken their teeth. And he had to get inside, somehow.

ən bɹɪŋ aʊt θɹi wɪmən. sʌmhaʊ. wɪð ə læf ðət meɪɾ ivən ðə sʌlən foʊk ɪn ðə stʃɹit lʊk ət hɪm, hi hɛɾəd bæk fəɹ ðə waɪt kɹɛsənt, ənkɛɹɪŋ ə mʌɾ əɹ ðə dæmp hit. hi kəd fil ðə daɪs tʌmbəlɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd.

And bring out three women. Somehow. With a laugh that made even the sullen folk in the street look at him, he headed back for The White Crescent, uncaring of mud or the damp heat. He could feel the dice tumbling inside his head.


tʃæptɝ fɪftiθɹi


CHAPTER 53

eɪ floʊ ʌv ðə spɪɹət


A Flow of the Spirit

pɛɹɪn ʃɹʌɡd ɪndə hɪz koʊɾ əz i wɔk bæk təwɔɹd ðə stɑɹ θɹu ði ivnɪŋ ʃædoʊz. ə ɡʊd taɪɹədnəs soʊk θɹu hɪz ɑɹmz ən ʃoʊldɝz; əlɔŋ wɪð mɔɹ kɑmən wɝk, mæstɝ ɑjɑlə hæd hæɾ ɪm meɪk ə lɑɹdʒ pis ʌv ɔɹnəmɛntəl wɝk, ɔl ɪlæbɹət kɝvz ən skɹoʊlz, tə ɡoʊ ɑn səm kʌntʃɹi lɔɹdz nu ɡeɪt. hi hæɾ ɛndʒɔɪd meɪkɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ soʊ pɹɪɾi.

Perrin shrugged into his coat as he walked back toward the Star through the evening shadows. A good tiredness soaked through his arms and shoulders; along with more common work, Master Ajala had had him make a large piece of ornamental work, all elaborate curves and scrolls, to go on some country lord's new gate. He had enjoyed making something so pretty.

"aɪ θɔɾ ɪz aɪz wəd kʌm aʊɾ ə hɪz feɪs, blæksmɪθ, wən jə sɛd jə wəd nɑt meɪk ðət θɪŋ ɪf ɪt wɑz fəɹ ə haɪ lɔɹd."

"I thought his eyes would come out of his face, blacksmith, when you said you would not make that thing if it was for a High Lord."

hi ɡlænst saɪdweɪz ət zɑɹin, wɔkɪŋ bɪsaɪd hɪm, ðə ʃædoʊz mæskɪŋ əɹ feɪs. ivən fəɹ ɪz aɪz, ðə ʃædoʊz wɝ ðɛɹ, dʒʌs feɪntɝ ðən ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn fəɹ ənʌðɝz. ðeɪ ɛmfəsaɪzd əɹ haɪ tʃikboʊnz, sɔfən ðə stʃɹɔŋ kɝv ə hɝ noʊz. hi dʒʌs kəd nɑt meɪk ʌp ɪz maɪn əbaʊt hɝ. ivən ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn stɪl ɪnsɪstəd ðeɪ steɪ kloʊs tə ði ɪn, hi wɪʃt ʃi kəd faɪn sʌmθɪŋ ɛls tə də bɪsaɪdz wɑtʃ ɪm wɝk. fəɹ səm ɹizən, hi hæd faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɑkwɝd wɛnɛvɝ i θɔɾ ə hɝ tɪltəɾ aɪz ɑn hɪm. mɔɹ ðən wʌns i hæd fʌmbəld wɪð ɪz hæmɝ tɪl mæstɝ ɑjɑlə fɹaʊn əɾ ɪm wʌndɝɪŋli. ɡɝlz hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn eɪbəl tə meɪk ɪm fil ɑkwɝɾ ɪspɛʃli wən ðeɪ smaɪld ət hɪm, bʌt zɑɹin dɪd nɑɾ əv tə smaɪl. oʊnli lʊk. hi wʌndɝɾ əɡɛn ɪf ʃi wɑz ðə bjuɾəfəl wʊmən mɪn hæd wɔɹn ɪm əɡɛnst. bɛɾɝ ɪf ʃiz ðə fælkən. ðət θɔt sɝpɹaɪzd ɪm soʊ mʌtʃ ðəɾ i stʌmbəld.

He glanced sideways at Zarine, walking beside him, the shadows masking her face. Even for his eyes, the shadows were there, just fainter than they would have been for another's. They emphasized her high cheekbones, softened the strong curve of her nose. He just could not make up his mind about her. Even if Moiraine and Lan still insisted they stay close to the inn, he wished she could find something else to do besides watch him work. For some reason, he had found himself growing awkward whenever he thought of her tilted eyes on him. More than once he had fumbled with his hammer till Master Ajala frowned at him wonderingly. Girls had always been able to make him feel awkward especially when they smiled at him, but Zarine did not have to smile. Only look. He wondered again if she was the beautiful woman Min had warned him against. Better if she is the falcon. That thought surprised him so much that he stumbled.

"aɪ dɪd nɑt wɑn ɛniθɪŋ aɪ meɪk tə ɡɛɾ ɪndə ðə hænz ʌv wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən." hɪz aɪz ɡloʊd ɡoʊldən əz i lʊkt ət hɝ. "ɪf ɪt wɑz fəɹ ə haɪ lɔɹd, haʊ kəɾ aɪ tɛl wɛɹ ɪt maɪɾ ɛnd?" ʃi ʃɪvɝd. "aɪ dɪd nɑt min tə fɹaɪɾən ju, faɪ - zɑɹin."

"I did not want anything I make to get into the hands of one of the Forsaken." His eyes glowed golden as he looked at her. "If it was for a High Lord, how could I tell where it might end?" She shivered. "I did not mean to frighten you, Fai - Zarine."

ʃi smaɪl bɹɔdli, noʊ daʊt θɪŋkɪŋ i kəd nɑt si hɝ. "ju wɪl fɔl jɛt, fɑɹmbɔɪ. hæv jə ɛvɝ θɔɾ ʌv wɛɹɪŋ ə bɪɹd?"

She smiled broadly, no doubt thinking he could not see her. "You will fall yet, farmboy. Have you ever thought of wearing a beard?"

ɪts bæɾ ɪnʌf ʃiz ɔlweɪz mɑkɪŋ mi, bʌt hæf ðə taɪm aɪ də nɑɾ ivən ʌndɝstæn hɝ!

It is bad enough she's always mocking me, but half the time I do not even understand her!

əz ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ ə ði ɪn, mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn mɛt ðɛm, kʌmɪŋ ði ʌðɝ weɪ. mɔɪɹeɪn wɔɹ ðət lɪnən kloʊk wɪð ðə waɪd, dip hʊd ðət hɪɾ əɹ feɪs. laɪt fɹəm ðə kɑmən-ɹum wɪndoʊz meɪd jɛloʊ pulz ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz. tu əɹ θɹi kæɹɪdʒɪz ɹʌmbəl pæst, ən ðəɹ wɝ pɝhæps ə dʌzən pipəl ɪn saɪt, hɝiɪŋ hoʊm fəɹ ðɛɹ sʌpɝz, bʌt fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, ʃædoʊz pɑpjəleɪɾəd ðə stʃɹit. ðə wivɝz ʃɑp wɑz kloʊz taɪt. ðə saɪləns wɑz dɛfənɪŋ.

As they reached the front door of the inn, Moiraine and Lan met them, coming the other way. Moiraine wore that linen cloak with the wide, deep hood that hid her face. Light from the common-room windows made yellow pools on the paving stones. Two or three carriages rumbled past, and there were perhaps a dozen people in sight, hurrying home for their suppers, but for the most part, shadows populated the street. The weaver's shop was closed tight. The silence was deafening.

"ɹæn ɪz ɪn tɛɹ." ði ɛɛs sədaɪz kul vɔɪs ɪʃud fɹəm ðə dɛpθs ə hɝ hʊɾ əz fɹəm ə kævɝn.

"Rand is in Tear." The Aes Sedai's cool voice issued from the depths of her hood as from a cavern.

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ?" pɛɹɪn æskt. "aɪ hæv nɑt hɝɾ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ stʃɹeɪnʒ hæpənɪŋ. noʊ wɛɾɪŋz, əɹ wɛlz dʒɹaɪɪŋ ʌp." hi sɔ zɑɹin fɹaʊn ɪn kənfjuʒən. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd nɑt bɪn fɔɹθkʌmɪŋ wɪð hɝ, ən niðɝ hæd hi. kipɪŋ lɔɪəlz tʌŋ saɪlən hæd bɪn mɔɹ dɪfəkəlt.

"Are you sure?" Perrin asked. "I have not heard of anything strange happening. No weddings, or wells drying up." He saw Zarine frown in confusion. Moiraine had not been forthcoming with her, and neither had he. Keeping Loial's tongue silent had been more difficult.

"doʊn jə lɪsən tə ɹumɝz, blæksmɪθ?" ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd. "ðɛɹ əv bɪn mɛɹɪdʒɪz, əz mɛni ɪn ðə læs fɔɹ deɪz əz ɪn hæf ə jɪɹ bɪfɔɹ. ən əz mɛni mɝɾɝz əz ɪn ə hoʊl jɪɹ. ə tʃaɪl fɛl fɹəm ə taʊɝ bælkəni tədeɪ. ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz ɑntu stoʊn peɪvɪŋ. ʃi ɡɑɾ ʌp ən ɹæn tə hɝ mʌðɝ wɪθaʊɾ ə bɹuz. ðə fɝst ə min, ə 'ɡɛst' ɪn ðə stoʊn sɪns bɪfɔɹ ðə wɪntɝ, ənaʊns tədeɪ ðət ʃɪl səbmɪt tə ðə wɪl ə ðə haɪ lɔɹdz, æftɝ seɪɪŋ jɛstɝdeɪ ʃi wəd si min ən ɔl ɪts ʃɪps bɝn bɪfɔɹ wʌn tɛɹən kʌntʃɹi lɔɹd sɛt fʊɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi. ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɹɔt ðɛmsɛlvz tə tɔɹtʃɝ hɝ, ən ðət jʌŋ wʊmən əz ə wɪl laɪk aɪɝn, soʊ jə tɛl mi ɪf jə θɪŋk ɪt maɪt bi ɹændz duɪŋ. blæksmɪθ, fɹəm tɑp tə bɑɾəm, tɛɹ bʌbəlz laɪk ə kɑlʒɹən."

"Don't you listen to rumors, blacksmith?" the Warder said. "There have been marriages, as many in the last four days as in half a year before. And as many murders as in a whole year. A child fell from a tower balcony today. A hundred paces onto stone paving. She got up and ran to her mother without a bruise. The First of Mayene, a 'guest' in the Stone since before the winter, announced today that she will submit to the will of the High Lords, after saying yesterday she would see Mayene and all its ships burn before one Tairen country lord set foot in the city. They had not brought themselves to torture her, and that young woman has a will like iron, so you tell me if you think it might be Rand's doing. Blacksmith, from top to bottom, Tear bubbles like a cauldron."

"ðiz θɪŋz wɝ nɑt niɾəd tə tɛl mi," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "pɛɹɪn, dɪd jə dʒɹim ə ɹænd læs naɪt?"

"These things were not needed to tell me," Moiraine said. "Perrin, did you dream of Rand last night?"

"jɛs," hi ədmɪɾəd. "hi wɑz ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn, hoʊldɪŋ ðət sɔɹd" - hi fɛl zɑɹin ʃɪf bɪsaɪɾ ɪm - "bʌɾ aɪ hæv bɪn wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ðət soʊ mʌtʃ ɪts noʊ wʌndɝ aɪ dʒɹim ʌv ɪt. aɪ hæd nʌθɪŋ bʌt naɪtmɛɹz læs naɪt."

"Yes," he admitted. "He was in the Heart of the Stone, holding that sword" - he felt Zarine shift beside him - "but I have been worrying about that so much it is no wonder I dream of it. I had nothing but nightmares last night."

"ə tɔl mæn?" zɑɹin sɛd. "wɪð ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ ən ɡɹeɪ aɪz? hoʊldɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ðət ʃaɪnz soʊ bɹaɪtli ɪt hɝts jəɹ aɪz? ɪn ə pleɪs ðəɾ ɪz ɔl ɡɹeɪt ɹɛdstoʊn kɑləmz? blæksmɪθ, tɛl mi ðət wɑz nɑt jəɹ dʒɹim."

"A tall man?" Zarine said. "With reddish hair and gray eyes? Holding something that shines so brightly it hurts your eyes? In a place that is all great redstone columns? Blacksmith, tell me that was not your dream."

"ju si," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "aɪ hæv hɝd ðɪs dʒɹim spoʊkən ʌv ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz tədeɪ. ðeɪ ɔl spik ə naɪtmɛɹz - bɛləl əpɛɹənli dʌz nɑt kɛɹ tə ʃild ɪz dʒɹimz - bʌt ðət wʌn əbʌv ɔl ɛls." ʃi læf sʌɾənli, laɪk loʊ, kul tʃaɪmz. "pipəl seɪ hiz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ðeɪ seɪ hiz kʌmɪŋ. ðeɪ wɪspɝ ɪt fɪɹfəli ɪn kɔɹnɝz, bʌt ðeɪ seɪ ɪt."

"You see," Moiraine said. "I have heard this dream spoken of a hundred times today. They all speak of nightmares - Be'lal apparently does not care to shield his dreams - but that one above all else." She laughed suddenly, like low, cool chimes. "People say he is the Dragon Reborn. They say he is coming. They whisper it fearfully in corners, but they say it."

"ænd wʌɾ ə bɛləl?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"And what of Be'lal?" Perrin asked.

mɔɪɹeɪnz ɹɪplaɪ wɑz koʊld-dʒɹɔn stil. "aɪ wɪl dil wɪð ɪm tənaɪt." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ fɪɹ sɛn fɹəm hɝ.

Moiraine's reply was cold-drawn steel. "I will deal with him tonight." There was no fear scent from her.

"wi wɪl dil wɪð ɪm tənaɪt," læn toʊl hɝ.

"We will deal with him tonight," Lan told her.

"jɛs, maɪ ɡeɪɾɪn. wɪl dil wɪð hɪm."

"Yes, my Gaidin. We will deal with him."

"ænd wʌt də wi du? sɪt hɪɹ ən weɪt? aɪ hæɾ ɪnʌf weɪɾɪŋ tə læs mi ə laɪftaɪm ɪn ðə maʊntənz, mɔɪɹeɪn."

"And what do we do? Sit here and wait? I had enough waiting to last me a lifetime in the mountains, Moiraine."

"ju ən lɔɪəl - ən zɑɹin - wɪl ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn," ʃi toʊl hɪm. "əntɪl ðɪs ɪz dʌn. ɪɾəl bi ðə seɪfəs pleɪs fəɹ ju."

"You and Loial - and Zarine - will go to Tar Valon," she told him. "Until this is done. It will be the safest place for you."

"wɛɹ ɪz ði oʊɡiɝ?" læn sɛd. "aɪ wɑn ɔl θɹi ʌv jə ɑn jəɹ weɪ nɔɹθ əz sun əz pɑsəbəl."

"Where is the Ogier?" Lan said. "I want all three of you on your way north as soon as possible."

"əpstɛɹz, aɪ səpoʊz," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɪn ɪz ɹum, əɹ meɪbi ðə daɪnɪŋ ɹum. ðəɹ ɑɹ laɪts ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz ʌp ðɛɹ. hiz ɔlweɪz wɝkɪŋ ɑn ðoʊz noʊts ə hɪz. aɪ səpoʊz hɪl əv plɛnti tə seɪ ɪn ɪz bʊk əbaʊɾ əs ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ." hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd ət ðə bɪɾɝnəs ɪn ɪz vɔɪs. laɪt, ful, dʒju wɑnə feɪs wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən? noʊ. noʊ, bʌɾ aɪm taɪɝɾ ə ɹʌnɪŋ. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ nɑt ɹʌnɪŋ, wʌns. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ faɪɾɪŋ bæk, ən ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ. ivən ɪf aɪ θɔɾ aɪ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ, ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ.

"Upstairs, I suppose," Perrin said. "In his room, or maybe the dining room. There are lights in the windows up there. He is always working on those notes of his. I suppose he will have plenty to say in his book about us running away." He was surprised at the bitterness in his voice. Light, fool, do you want to face one of the Forsaken? No. No, but I am tired of running. I remember not running, once. I remember fighting back, and it was better. Even if I thought I was going to die, it was better.

"aɪ wɪl faɪn hɪm," zɑɹin ənaʊnst. "aɪ hæv noʊ ʃeɪm ɪn ædmɪɾɪŋ əl bi ɡlæɾ ɪnʌf tə ɹʌn fɹəm ðɪs faɪt. mɛn faɪt wən ðeɪ ʃəd ɹʌn, ən fulz faɪt wən ðeɪ ʃəd ɹʌn. bʌɾ aɪ hæd noʊ nid tə seɪ ɪt twaɪs." ʃi stʃɹoʊɾ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, hɝ nɛɹoʊ, dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts meɪkɪŋ smɔl wɪskɪŋ nɔɪzɪz əz ðeɪ ɛntɝd ði ɪn.

"I will find him," Zarine announced. "I have no shame in admitting I will be glad enough to run from this fight. Men fight when they should run, and fools fight when they should run. But I had no need to say it twice." She strode ahead of them, her narrow, divided skirts making small whisking noises as they entered the inn.

pɛɹɪn ɡlænst ɝaʊn ðə kɑmən ɹum əz ðeɪ fɑloʊɾ əɹ təwɔɹd ðə stɛɹz ɪn ðə bæk. ðəɹ wɝ fjuɝ mɛn ət ðə teɪbəlz ðən i ɪkspɛktəd. səm sæɾ əloʊn, wɪð dʌl aɪz, bʌt wɛɹ tu əɹ θɹi sæt təɡɛðɝ ðeɪ tɔkt ɪn fɹaɪɾənd wɪspɝz ɪz ɪɹz kəd bɛɹli kætʃ. ivən soʊ, hi hɝd "dʒɹæɡən" θɹi taɪmz.

Perrin glanced around the common room as they followed her toward the stairs in the back. There were fewer men at the tables than he expected. Some sat alone, with dull eyes, but where two or three sat together they talked in frightened whispers his ears could barely catch. Even so, he heard "Dragon" three times.

əz i ɹitʃt ðə tɑp ə ðə stɛɹz, hi hɝɾ ənʌðɝ sɑf saʊnd, ə θʌmp əz ə sʌmθɪŋ fɔlɪŋ ɪn ðə pɹaɪvət daɪnɪŋ ɹum. hi pɪɹd ðət weɪ əlɔŋ ðə hɔl. "zɑɹin?" ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ænsɝ. hi fɛl ðə hɛɹ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk ʃɪft, ən pæɾəd ðət weɪ. "zɑɹin?" hi pʊʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ. "feɪl!"

As he reached the top of the stairs, he heard another soft sound, a thump as of something falling in the private dining room. He peered that way along the hall. "Zarine?" There was no answer. He felt the hair on the back of his neck shift, and padded that way. "Zarine?" He pushed open the door. "Faile!"

ʃi wɑz laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ nɪɹ ðə teɪbəl. əz i stɑɹɾəd tə ɹʌʃ ɪndə ðə ɹum, mɔɪɹeɪnz kəmændɪŋ ʃaʊt hɔltəd hɪm.

She was lying on the floor near the table. As he started to rush into the room, Moiraine's commanding shout halted him.

"stɑp, jə ful! stɑp, fəɹ jəɹ laɪf!" ʃi keɪm əlɔŋ ðə hɔlweɪ sloʊli, hɛd tɝnɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ lɪsnɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ, əɹ sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ. læn fɑloʊd wɪð ɪz hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd - ən ə lʊk ɪn ɪz aɪ əz ɪf i ɔlɹɛɾi nu stil wəd də noʊ ɡʊd. ʃi keɪm əbɹɛst ə ðə dɔɹ ən stɑpt. "muv bæk, pɛɹɪn. muv bæk!"

"Stop, you fool! Stop, for your life!" She came along the hallway slowly, head turning as if she were listening for something, or searching for something. Lan followed with his hand on his sword - and a look in his eye as if he already knew steel would do no good. She came abreast of the door and stopped. "Move back, Perrin. Move back!"

ɪn æɡəni hi stɛɹɾ ət zɑɹin. ət feɪl. ʃi leɪ ðəɹ əz ɪf laɪfləs. faɪnəli hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf stɛp bæk fɹəm ðə dɔɹ, livɪŋ ɪɾ oʊpən, stændɪŋ wɛɹ i kəd si hɝ. ʃi lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wɝ dɛd. hi kəd nɑt si hɝ tʃɛst stɝ. hi wɑntəd tə haʊl. fɹaʊnɪŋ, hi wɝkt ɪz hænd, ðə wʌn i hæd juz tə pʊʃ ðə dɔɹ ɪndə ðə ɹum, oʊpənɪŋ ən kloʊzɪŋ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. ɪt tɪŋɡəld ʃɑɹpli, əz ɪf i hæd stʃɹʌk ɪz ɛlboʊ. "ɑɹən jə gɑnə də ɛniθɪŋ, mɔɪɹeɪn? ɪf jəl nɑt, aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə hɝ."

In agony he stared at Zarine. At Faile. She lay there as if lifeless. Finally he made himself step back from the door, leaving it open, standing where he could see her. She looked as if she were dead. He could not see her chest stir. He wanted to howl. Frowning, he worked his hand, the one he had used to push the door into the room, opening and closing his fingers. It tingled sharply, as if he had struck his elbow. "Aren't you going to do anything, Moiraine? If you will not, I am going to her."

"stæn stɪl əɹ jəl ɡoʊ noʊwɛɹ," ʃi sɛd kɑmli. "wʌɾ ɪz ðət baɪ hɝ ɹaɪt hænd? əz ɪf ɪt dʒɹɑp fɹəm əɹ ɡɹɪp wən ʃi fɛl. aɪ kænɑt meɪk ɪɾ aʊt."

"Stand still or you will go nowhere," she said calmly. "What is that by her right hand? As if it dropped from her grip when she fell. I cannot make it out."

hi ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɝ, ðən pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum. "ə hɛdʒhɑɡ. ɪt lʊks laɪk ə hɛdʒhɑɡ kɑɹvd aʊɾ ʌv wʊd. mɔɪɹeɪn, tɛl mi wʌɾ ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn! wʌɾ əz hæpənd? tɛl mi!"

He glared at her, then peered into the room. "A hedgehog. It looks like a hedgehog carved out of wood. Moiraine, tell me what is going on! What has happened? Tell me!"

"ə hɛdʒhɑɡ," ʃi mɝmɝd. "ə hɛdʒhɑɡ. bi saɪlənt, pɛɹɪn. aɪ mʌs θɪŋk. aɪ fɛlt ɪt tʃɹɪɡɝ. aɪ kən sɛns ðə ɹɛzəduz ə ðə floʊz woʊvən tə sɛɾ ɪt. spɪɹət. pjʊɹ spɪɹət, ən nʌθɪŋ ɛls. ɔlmoʊs nʌθɪŋ juzɪz pjʊɹ floʊz ə spɪɹət! waɪ dʌz ðət hɛdʒhɑɡ meɪk mi θɪŋk ə spɪɹət?"

"A hedgehog," she murmured. "A hedgehog. Be silent, Perrin. I must think. I felt it trigger. I can sense the residues of the flows woven to set it. Spirit. Pure Spirit, and nothing else. Almost nothing uses pure flows of Spirit! Why does that hedgehog make me think of Spirit?"

"ju fɛlt wʌt tʃɹɪɡɝ, mɔɪɹeɪn? wʌt wɑz sɛt? ə tʃɹæp?"

"You felt what trigger, Moiraine? What was set? A trap?"

"jɛs, ə tʃɹæp," ʃi sɛd, ɪɹɪteɪʃən meɪkɪŋ taɪni kɹæks ɪn əɹ kul sɝɛnəɾi. "ə tʃɹæp mɛn fəɹ mi. aɪ wʊɾə bɪn fɝst ɪndə ðət ɹum ɪf zɑɹin hæd nɑt ɹʌʃt əhɛd. læn ən aɪ wəd ʃʊɹli hæv ɡɔn ðəɹ tə plæn ən weɪt fəɹ sʌpɝ. əl nɑt weɪɾ ɑn sʌpɝ naʊ. bi kwaɪət, ɪf jə wɪʃ mi tə hɛlp ðə ɡɝl əɾ ɔl. læn! bɹɪŋ mi ðəɾ ɪnkipɝ!" ðə wɔɹɾɝ floʊɾ əweɪ daʊn ðə stɛɹz.

"Yes, a trap," she said, irritation making tiny cracks in her cool serenity. "A trap meant for me. I would have been first into that room if Zarine had not rushed ahead. Lan and I would surely have gone there to plan and wait for supper. I will not wait on supper now. Be quiet, if you wish me to help the girl at all. Lan! Bring me that innkeeper!" The Warder flowed away down the stairs.

mɔɪɹeɪn peɪst ʌp ən daʊn ɪn ðə hɔl, səmtaɪmz stɑpɪŋ tə pɪɹ θɹu ðə dɔɹ fɹəm ðə dɛpθs ə hɝ hʊd. pɛɹɪn kəd si noʊ saɪn ðət zɑɹin lɪvd. hɝ bɹɛs dɪd nɑt stɝ. hi tʃɹaɪd lɪsnɪŋ fəɹ əɹ hɑɹtbit, bʌɾ ivən fəɹ ɪz ɪɹz ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl.

Moiraine paced up and down in the hall, sometimes stopping to peer through the door from the depths of her hood. Perrin could see no sign that Zarine lived. Her breast did not stir. He tried listening for her heartbeat, but even for his ears it was impossible.

wən læn ɹɪtɝnd, ʃʌvɪŋ ə fɹaɪɾənd dʒʊɹə hɛɹəɾ əhɛɾ ə hɪm baɪ ðə skɹʌf ə hɪz fæt nɛk, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ðə bɔldɪŋ mæn. "ju pɹɑməs tə kip ðɪs ɹum fəɹ mi, mæstɝ hɛɹət." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz əz hɑɹd, əz pɹɪsaɪs, əz ə skɪnɪŋ naɪf. "tə əlaʊ nɑɾ ivən ə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən tə ɛntɝ tə klin ənlɛs aɪ wɑz pɹɛzənt. hu dɪd jə lɛɾ ɛntɝ ɪt, mæstɝ hɛɹət? tɛl mi!"

When Lan returned, shoving a frightened Jurah Haret ahead of him by the scruff of his fat neck, the Aes Sedai rounded on the balding man. "You promised to keep this room for me, Master Haret." Her voice was as hard, as precise, as a skinning knife. "To allow not even a serving woman to enter to clean unless I was present. Who did you let enter it, Master Haret? Tell me!"

hɛɹət ʃʊk laɪk ə boʊl ə pʊɾɪŋ. "oʊ-oʊnli ðə ti-tu leɪɾiz, mɪstʃɹəs. ti-ðeɪ dʌbəlju-wɪʃt tə liv ə sɝpɹaɪz fəɹ ju. aɪ swɛɹ, mɪstʃɹəs. ti-ðeɪ ʃoʊɾ ɪt ti-tə mi. ə lɪɾəl eɪtʃ-hɛdʒhɑɡ. ti-ðeɪ sɛd jə dʌbəlju-wʊd bi sɝpɹaɪzd."

Haret shook like a bowl of pudding. "O-only the t-two Ladies, mistress. T-they w-wished to leave a surprise for you. I swear, mistress. T-they showed it t-to me. A little h-hedgehog. T-they said you w-would be surprised."

"aɪ wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd, ɪnkipɝ," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "liv mi! ən ɪf jə wɪspɝ ə wɝɾ ə ðɪs, ivən ɪn jəɹ slip, əl pʊl ðɪs ɪn daʊn ən liv oʊnli ə hoʊl ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd."

"I was surprised, innkeeper," she said softly. "Leave me! And if you whisper a word of this, even in your sleep, I will pull this inn down and leave only a hole in the ground."

"waɪ-jɛs, mɪstʃɹəs," hi wɪspɝd. "aɪ swɛɹ ɪt! aɪ də swɛɹ!

"Y-yes, mistress," he whispered. "I swear it! I do swear!

"ɡoʊ!"

"Go!"

ði ɪnkipɝ fɛl tə hɪz niz ɪn ɪz heɪs tə ɹitʃ ðə stɛɹz, ən wɛn skɹæmbəlɪŋ daʊn wɪð θʌmps ðət sədʒɛstəɾ i fɛl mɔɹ ðən wʌns əz i ɹæn.

The innkeeper fell to his knees in his haste to reach the stairs, and went scrambling down with thumps that suggested he fell more than once as he ran.

"hi noʊz aɪm hɪɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn toʊl ðə wɔɹɾɝ, "æn hiz faʊn sʌmwʌn ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ tə sɛɾ ɪz tʃɹæp, jɛt pɝhæps i θɪŋks aɪm kɑɾ ɪn ɪt. ɪt wɑz ə taɪni flæʃ ə ðə paʊɝ, bʌt pɝhæps hiz stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə hæv sɛnst ɪt."

"He knows I am here," Moiraine told the Warder, "and he has found someone of the Black Ajah to set his trap, yet perhaps he thinks I am caught in it. It was a tiny flash of the Power, but perhaps he is strong enough to have sensed it."

"ðɛn hɪl nɑt səspɛkt wəɹ kʌmɪŋ," læn sɛd kwaɪətli. hi ɔlmoʊst smaɪld.

"Then he will not suspect we are coming," Lan said quietly. He almost smiled.

pɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ ət ðɛm, hɪz tiθ bɛɹd. "wʌɾ əbaʊt hɝ?" hi dɪmændəd. "wʌt wɑz dʌn tə hɝ, mɔɪɹeɪn? ɪz ʃi əlaɪv? aɪ kænɑt si hɝ bɹið!"

Perrin stared at them, his teeth bared. "What about her?" he demanded. "What was done to her, Moiraine? Is she alive? I cannot see her breathe!"

"ʃi ɪz əlaɪv," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sloʊli. "aɪ kænɑt, aɪ dɛɹ nɑt, ɡoʊ kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɝ tə tɛl mʌtʃ bɪɑn ðæt, bʌt ʃiz əlaɪv. ʃi . . . slips, ɪn ə weɪ. əz ə bɛɹ slips ɪn ðə wɪntɝ. hɝ hɑɹt bits soʊ sloʊli jə kəd kaʊn mɪnəts bɪtwin. hɝ bɹiðɪŋ ɪz ðə seɪm. ʃi slips." ivən fɹəm wɪðɪn ðət hʊd, hi kəd fil əɹ aɪz ɑn hɪm. "aɪ fɪɹ ʃiz nɑt ðɛɹ, pɛɹɪn. nɑɾ ɪn əɹ bɑɾi ɛni lɔŋɡɝ."

"She is alive," Moiraine said slowly. "I cannot, I dare not, go close enough to her to tell much beyond that, but she is alive. She . . . sleeps, in a way. As a bear sleeps in the winter. Her heart beats so slowly you could count minutes between. Her breathing is the same. She sleeps." Even from within that hood, he could feel her eyes on him. "I fear she is not there, Perrin. Not in her body any longer."

"wʌt dʒju min ʃiz nɑɾ ɪn əɹ bɑɾi? laɪt! jə doʊn min ðeɪ . . . tʊk əɹ soʊl. laɪk ðə ɡɹeɪ mɛn!" mɔɪɹeɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ən i dʒɹu ə ɹɪliv bɹɛθ. hɪz tʃɛs hɝɾ əz ɪf i hæd nɑt bɹið sɪns ʃi læst spoʊk. "ðɛn wɛɹ ɪz ʃi, mɔɪɹeɪn?"

"What do you mean she is not in her body? Light! You don't mean they . . . took her soul. Like the Gray Men!" Moiraine shook her head, and he drew a relieved breath. His chest hurt as if he had not breathed since she last spoke. "Then where is she, Moiraine?"

"aɪ də nɑt noʊ," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ hæv ə səspɪʃən, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt noʊ."

"I do not know," she said. "I have a suspicion, but I do not know."

"ə səspɪʃən, ə hɪnt, ɛniθɪŋ! bɝn mi, wɛɹ?" læn ʃɪftəɾ ət ðə ɹʌnəs ɪn ɪz vɔɪs, bʌɾ i nu hi wəd tʃɹaɪ tə bɹeɪk ðə wɔɹɾɝ laɪk aɪɝn oʊvɝ ə hɑɹɾi ɪf ðə mæn tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp hɪm. "wɛɹ?"

"A suspicion, a hint, anything! Burn me, where?" Lan shifted at the roughness in his voice, but he knew he would try to break the Warder like iron over a hardy if the man tried to stop him. "Where?"

"aɪ noʊ vɛɹi lɪɾəl, pɛɹɪn." mɔɪɹeɪnz vɔɪs wɑz laɪk koʊld, ənfilɪŋ mjuzɪk. "aɪ hæv ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə lɪɾəl aɪ noʊ ʌv wʌt kənɛks ə kɑɹv hɛdʒhɑɡ wɪð spɪɹət. ðə kɑɹvɪŋ ɪz ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil læst stʌɾid baɪ kɔɹiənɪn nɪdil, ðə læs dʒɹimɝ ðə taʊɝ hæd. ðə tælən kɔl dʒɹimɪŋ ɪz ə θɪŋ ə spɪɹət, pɛɹɪn. ɪts nɑɾ ə θɪŋ aɪ hæv ɛvɝ stʌɾid; maɪ tæləns laɪ ɪn ʌðɝ weɪz. aɪ bɪliv ðət zɑɹin əz bɪn tʃɹæpt ɪnsaɪɾ ə dʒɹim, pɝhæps ivən ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz, tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ɔl ðəɾ ɪz əɹ ɪz ɪnsaɪd ðət dʒɹim. ɔl. eɪ dʒɹimɝ sɛnz oʊnli ə pɑɹɾ ə hɝsɛlf. ɪf zɑɹin dʌz nɑt ɹɪtɝn sun, hɝ bɑɾi wɪl daɪ. pɝhæps ʃɪl lɪv ɑn ɪn ðə dʒɹim. aɪ də nɑt noʊ."

"I know very little, Perrin." Moiraine's voice was like cold, unfeeling music. "I have remembered the little I know of what connects a carved hedgehog with Spirit. The carving is a ter'angreal last studied by Corianin Nedeal, the last Dreamer the Tower had. The Talent called Dreaming is a thing of Spirit, Perrin. It is not a thing I have ever studied; my Talents lie in other ways. I believe that Zarine has been trapped inside a dream, perhaps even the World of Dreams, Tel'aran'rhiod. All that is her is inside that dream. All. A Dreamer sends only a part of herself. If Zarine does not return soon, her body will die. Perhaps she will live on in the dream. I do not know."

"ðɛɹ ɪz tu mʌtʃ jə doʊnt noʊ," pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd. hi pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum ən wɑntəd tə kɹaɪ. zɑɹin lʊk soʊ smɔl, laɪɪŋ ðɛɹ, soʊ hɛlpləs. feɪl. aɪ swɛɹ əl oʊnli kɔl jə feɪl, ɛvɝ əɡɛn. "waɪ doʊn jə də sʌmθɪŋ!"

"There is too much you don't know," Perrin muttered. He peered into the room and wanted to cry. Zarine looked so small, lying there, so helpless. Faile. I swear I will only call you Faile, ever again. "Why don't you do something!"

"ðə tʃɹæp əz bɪn spɹʌŋ, pɛɹɪn, bʌɾ ɪts ə tʃɹæp ðət wɪl stɪl kætʃ ɛniwʌn u stɛps ɪndə ðət ɹum. aɪ wəd nɑt ɹitʃ əɹ saɪd bɪfɔɹ ɪt tʊk mi. ən aɪ hæv wɝk aɪ mʌs də tənaɪt."

"The trap has been sprung, Perrin, but it is a trap that will still catch anyone who steps into that room. I would not reach her side before it took me. And I have work I must do tonight."

"bɝn ju, ɛɛs sədaɪ! bɝn jəɹ wɝk! ðɪs wɝld ə dʒɹimz? ɪz ɪt laɪk ðə wʊlf dʒɹimz? jə sɛd ðiz dʒɹimɝz səmtaɪmz sɔ wʊlvz."

"Burn you, Aes Sedai! Burn your work! This World of Dreams? Is it like the wolf dreams? You said these Dreamers sometimes saw wolves."

"aɪ hæv toʊl jə wʌɾ aɪ kæn," ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "ɪɾ ɪz taɪm fəɹ jə tə ɡoʊ. læn ən aɪ mʌs bi ɑn əɹ weɪ tə ðə stoʊn. ðəɹ kən bi noʊ weɪɾɪŋ, naʊ."

"I have told you what I can," she said sharply. "It is time for you to go. Lan and I must be on our way to the Stone. There can be no waiting, now."

"noʊ." hi sɛɾ ɪt kwaɪətli, bʌt wən mɔɪɹeɪn oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, hi ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs. "noʊ! əl nɑt liv hɝ!"

"No." He said it quietly, but when Moiraine opened her mouth, he raised his voice. "No! I will not leave her!"

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "vɛɹi wɛl, pɛɹɪn." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz aɪs; kɑm, smuð, koʊld. "ɹɪmeɪn ɪf jə wɪʃ. pɝhæps jəl sɝvaɪv ðɪs naɪt. læn!"

The Aes Sedai took a deep breath. "Very well, Perrin." Her voice was ice; calm, smooth, cold. "Remain if you wish. Perhaps you will survive this night. Lan!"

ʃi ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ stʃɹoʊd daʊn ðə hɔl tə ðɛɹ ɹumz. ɪn moʊməns ðeɪ ɹɪtɝnd, læn wɛɹɪŋ ɪz kʌlɝ-tʃeɪnʒɪŋ kloʊk, ən vænɪʃt daʊn ðə stɛɹz wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝd tə hɪm.

She and the Warder strode down the hall to their rooms. In moments they returned, Lan wearing his color-changing cloak, and vanished down the stairs without another word to him.

hi stɛɹd θɹu ði oʊpən dɔɹ ət feɪl. aɪ hæv tə də sʌmθɪŋ. ɪf ɪts laɪk ðə wʊlf dʒɹimz. . . .

He stared through the open door at Faile. I have to do something. If it is like the wolf dreams. . . .

"pɛɹɪn," keɪm lɔɪəlz dip ɹʌmbəl, "wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs əbaʊt feɪl?" ði oʊɡiɝ keɪm stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ daʊn ðə hɔl ɪn ɪz ʃɝtslivz, ɪŋk ɑn ɪz fɪŋɡɝz ən ə pɛn ɪn ɪz hænd. "læn toʊl mi aɪ hæd tə ɡoʊ, ən ðən i sɛd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt feɪl, ɪn ə tʃɹæp. wʌɾ i min?"

"Perrin," came Loial's deep rumble, "what is this about Faile?" The Ogier came striding down the hall in his shirtsleeves, ink on his fingers and a pen in his hand. "Lan told me I had to go, and then he said something about Faile, in a trap. What did he mean?"

dɪstʃɹæktɪdli, pɛɹɪn toʊld ɪm wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn hæd sɛd. ɪt maɪt wɝk. ɪt maɪt. ɪts tə! hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd wən lɔɪəl ɡɹaʊld.

Distractedly, Perrin told him what Moiraine had said. It might work. It might. It has to! He was surprised when Loial growled.

"noʊ! pɛɹɪn, ɪts nɑt ɹaɪt! feɪl wɑz soʊ fɹi. ɪts nɑt ɹaɪt tə tʃɹæp hɝ!"

"No! Perrin, it is not right! Faile was so free. It is not right to trap her!"

pɛɹɪn pɪɹɾ ʌp ət lɔɪəlz feɪs, ən sʌɾənli ɹɪmɛmbɝd ði oʊl stɔɹiz ðət kleɪmd oʊɡiɝ wɝ ɪmplækəbəl ɛnəmiz. lɔɪəlz ɪɹz hæd leɪd bæk əlɔŋ ðə saɪdz ə hɪz hɛd, ən ɪz bɹɔd feɪs wɑz əz hɑɹɾ əz ən ænvəl.

Perrin peered up at Loial's face, and suddenly remembered the old stories that claimed Ogier were implacable enemies. Loial's ears had laid back along the sides of his head, and his broad face was as hard as an anvil.

"lɔɪəl, aɪm gɑnə tʃɹaɪ tə hɛlp feɪl. bʌɾ əl bi hɛlpləs maɪsɛlf waɪl aɪ du. wɪl jə ɡɑɹd maɪ bæk?"

"Loial, I am going to try to help Faile. But I will be helpless myself while I do. Will you guard my back?"

lɔɪəl ɹeɪz ðoʊz hjudʒ hænz ðət hɛl bʊks soʊ kɛɹfəli, ən ɪz θɪk fɪŋɡɝz kɝld əz ɪf tə kɹʌʃ stoʊn. "nʌn wɪl pæs mi waɪl aɪ laɪv, pɛɹɪn. nɑt mɹdʒɹɑl əɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf." hi sɛɾ ɪt laɪk ə sɪmpəl steɪtmən ə fækt.

Loial raised those huge hands that held books so carefully, and his thick fingers curled as if to crush stone. "None will pass me while I live, Perrin. Not Myrddraal or the Dark One himself." He said it like a simple statement of fact.

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd, ən lʊk θɹu ðə dɔɹ əɡɛn. ɪts tə wɝk. aɪ doʊn kɛɹ ɪf mɪn wɔɹn mi əɡɛnst əɹ əɹ nɑt! wɪð ə snɑɹl i lɛp təwɔɹd feɪl, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ aʊɾ ɪz hænd. hi θɔɾ i tʌtʃt əɹ æŋkəl bɪfɔɹ i wɑz ɡɔn.

Perrin nodded, and looked through the door again. It has to work. I don't care if Min warned me against her or not! With a snarl he leaped toward Faile, stretching out his hand. He thought he touched her ankle before he was gone.

wɛðɝ ðɪs dʒɹim ə ðə tʃɹæp wɑz tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ əɹ nɑt, pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ, bʌɾ i nu ɪt fəɹ ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. ɹoʊlɪŋ, ɡɹæsi hɪlz sɝaʊndəd hɪm, ən skæɾɝd θɪkəts. hi sɔ dɪɹ bɹaʊzɪŋ ət ði ɛdʒəz ə ðə tʃɹiz, ən ə hɝɾ ə səm sɔɹɾ ə ɹʌnɪŋ ænəməl baʊndɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹæs, laɪk bɹaʊn-stʃɹaɪp dɪɹ, bʌt wɪð lɔŋ, stʃɹeɪt hɔɹnz. ðə smɛlz ɑn ðə wɪn toʊld ɪm ðeɪ wɝ ɡʊd tə it, ən ʌðɝ sɛns spoʊk ə mɔɹ ɡʊd hʌntɪŋ ɔl ɝaʊn hɪm. ðɪs wɑz ðə wʊlf dʒɹim.

Whether this dream of the trap was Tel'aran'rhiod or not, Perrin did not know, but he knew it for the wolf dream. Rolling, grassy hills surrounded him, and scattered thickets. He saw deer browsing at the edges of the trees, and a herd of some sort of running animal bounding across the grass, like brown-striped deer, but with long, straight horns. The smells on the wind told him they were good to eat, and other scents spoke of more good hunting all around him. This was the wolf dream.

hi wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ðə blæksmɪθs lɔŋ lɛðɝ vɛst, hi ɹilaɪzd, wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz bɛɹ. ən ðəɹ wɑz ə weɪɾ əɾ ɪz saɪd. hi tʌtʃt ði æks bɛlt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt ði æks hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ɪts lup. hi ɹæn ɪz fɪŋɡɝz oʊvɝ ðə hɛɾ ə ðə hɛvi smɪθs hæmɝ. ɪt fɛlt ɹaɪt.

He was wearing the blacksmith's long leather vest, he realized, with his arms bare. And there was a weight at his side. He touched the axe belt, but it was not the axe hanging from its loop. He ran his fingers over the head of the heavy smith's hammer. It felt right.

hɑpɝ əlaɪɾɪd ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm.

Hopper alighted in front of him.

əɡɛn jə kʌm, laɪk ə ful. ðə sɛndɪŋ wɑz ʌv ə kʌb stɪkɪŋ ɪts noʊz ɪndə ə hɑloʊ tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋk tə læp hʌni dɪspaɪt ðə biz stɪŋɪŋ ɪts mʌzəl ən aɪz. ðə deɪnʒɝ ɪz ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən ɛvɝ, jʌŋ bʊl. ivəl θɪŋz wɔk ðə dʒɹim. ðə bɹʌðɝz ən sɪstɝz əvɔɪd ðə maʊntənz ə stoʊn ðə tu-lɛɡz paɪl ʌp, ən ɔlmoʊs fɪɹ tə dʒɹim tə wʌn ənʌðɝ. jə mʌst ɡoʊ!

Again you come, like a fool. The sending was of a cub sticking its nose into a hollow tree trunk to lap honey despite the bees stinging its muzzle and eyes. The danger is greater than ever, Young Bull. Evil things walk the dream. The brothers and sisters avoid the mountains of stone the two-legs pile up, and almost fear to dream to one another. You must go!

"noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "feɪl ɪz hɪɹ, sʌmwɛɹ, tʃɹæpt. aɪ hæv tə faɪn hɝ, hɑpɝ. aɪ hæv tə!" hi fɛlt ə ʃɪftɪŋ ɪnsaɪd hɪm, sʌmθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒɪŋ. hi lʊk daʊn əɾ ɪz kɝli-hɛɹd lɛɡz, hɪz waɪd pɔz. hi wɑz ən ivən lɑɹdʒɝ wʊlf ðən hɑpɝ.

"No," Perrin said. "Faile is here, somewhere, trapped. I have to find her, Hopper. I have to!" He felt a shifting inside him, something changing. He looked down at his curly-haired legs, his wide paws. He was an even larger wolf than Hopper.

jə ɑɹ hɪɹ tu stʃɹɔŋli! ɛvɹi sɛndɪŋ kæɹid ʃɑk. jəl daɪ, jʌŋ bʊl!

You are here too strongly! Every sending carried shock. You will die, Young Bull!

ɪf aɪ də nɑt fɹi ðə fælkən, aɪ də nɑt kɛɹ, bɹʌðɝ.

If I do not free the falcon, I do not care, brother.

ðən wi hʌnt, bɹʌðɝ.

Then we hunt, brother.

noʊzɪz tə ðə wɪnd, ðə tu wʊlvz ɹæn əkɹɔs ðə pleɪn, sikɪŋ ðə fælkən.

Noses to the wind, the two wolves ran across the plain, seeking the falcon.


tʃæptɝ fɪftifɔɹ


CHAPTER 54

ɪndə ðə stoʊn


Into the Stone

ðə ɹuftɑps ə tiɹ wɝ noʊ pleɪs fəɹ ə sɛnsəbəl mæn tə bi ɪn ðə naɪt, mæt dɪsaɪɾɪd əz i pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə mun ʃædoʊz. ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən fɪfti peɪsɪz ə bɹɔd stʃɹit, əɹ pɝhæps nɛɹoʊ plɑzə, sɛpɝeɪɾəd ðə stoʊn fɹəm ɪz taɪld ɹuf, ɪtsɛlf θɹi stɔɹiz əbʌv ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz. bʌt wən wɑz aɪ ɛvɝ sɛnsəbəl? ði oʊnli pipəl aɪ ɛvɝ mɛɾ u wɝ sɛnsəbəl ɔl ðə taɪm wɝ soʊ bɔɹɪŋ ðət wɑtʃɪŋ əm kəd pʊt jə tə slip. wɛðɝ ðə θɪŋ wɑz ə stʃɹiɾ əɹ ə plɑzə, hi hæd fɑloʊɾ ɪɾ ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊn ðə stoʊn sɪns naɪtfɔl; ði oʊnli pleɪs ɪt dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ wɑz ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝ saɪd, wɛɹ ði ɛɹɪnɪn ɹæn ɹaɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə fʊɾ ə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs, ən nʌθɪŋ ɪntɝʌptɪɾ ɪɾ ɪksɛp ðə sɪɾi wɔl. ðət wɔl wɑz oʊnli tu haʊsəz tə hɪz ɹaɪt. soʊ fɑɹ, ðə tɑp ə ðə wɔl sim ðə bɛs pæθ tə ðə stoʊn, bʌt nɑt wʌn i wəd bi oʊvɝdʒɔɪd tə teɪk.

The rooftops of Tear were no place for a sensible man to be in the night, Mat decided as he peered into the moon shadows. A little more than fifty paces of broad street, or perhaps narrow plaza, separated the Stone from his tiled roof, itself three stories above the paving stones. But when was I ever sensible? The only people I ever met who were sensible all the time were so boring that watching them could put you to sleep. Whether the thing was a street or a plaza, he had followed it all the way around the Stone since nightfall; the only place it did not go was on the river side, where the Erinin ran right along the foot of the fortress, and nothing interrupted it except the city wall. That wall was only two houses to his right. So far, the top of the wall seemed the best path to the Stone, but not one he would be overjoyed to take.

pɪkɪŋ ʌp ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf ən ə smɔl, waɪɝ-hændəl tɪn bɑks, hi muv kɛɹfəli tə ə bɹɪk tʃɪmni ə lɪɾəl nɪɹɝ ðə wɔl. ðə ɹoʊl ə faɪɹwɝks - wʌt hæd bɪn ðə ɹoʊl ə faɪɹwɝks bɪfɔɹ i wɝkt ɑn ɪt bæk ɪn ɪz ɹum - ʃɪftəɾ ɑn ɪz bæk. ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ʌv ə bʌndəl, naʊ, ɔl dʒæm təɡɛðɝ əz taɪɾ əz i kəd meɪk ɪt, bʌt stɪl tu bɪɡ fəɹ kæɹiɪŋ ɝaʊn ɹuftɑps ɪn ðə dɑɹk. ɝliɝ, ə slɪp ə hɪz fʊt kəz ə ðə θɪŋ hæd sɛn ə ɹuf taɪl skɪɾɝɪŋ oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ, ən ɹaʊz ðə mæn slipɪŋ ɪn ə ɹum bɪloʊ tə bɛloʊ "θif!" ən sɛn ɪm ɹʌnɪŋ. hi hɪtʃt ðə bʌndəl bæk ɪndə pəzɪʃən wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt, ən kɹaʊtʃt ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz ə ðə tʃɪmni. æftɝ ə moʊmən i sɛt ðə tɪn bɑks daʊn; ðə waɪɝ hændəl wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ɡɹoʊ ənkʌmftəbli wɔɹm.

Picking up his quarterstaff and a small, wire-handled tin box, he moved carefully to a brick chimney a little nearer the wall. The roll of fireworks - what had been the roll of fireworks before he worked on it back in his room - shifted on his back. It was more of a bundle, now, all jammed together as tight as he could make it, but still too big for carrying around rooftops in the dark. Earlier, a slip of his foot because of the thing had sent a roof tile skittering over the edge, and roused the man sleeping in a room below to bellow "thief!" and send him running. He hitched the bundle back into position without thinking about it, and crouched in the shadows of the chimney. After a moment he set the tin box down; the wire handle was beginning to grow uncomfortably warm.

ɪt fɛlt ə lɪɾəl seɪfɝ, stʌɾiɪŋ ðə stoʊn fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz, bʌt nɑt mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋ. ðə sɪɾi wɔl wɑz nɑt nɪɹli əz θɪk əz ðoʊz i hæd sin ɪn ʌðɝ pleɪsəz, ɪn keɪɛmlɪn əɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn, noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə peɪs waɪd, səpɔɹɾəd baɪ ɡɹeɪt stoʊn bʌtʃɹəsəz kloʊkt ɪn dɑɹknəs, naʊ. ə peɪs wɑz mɔɹ ðən səfɪʃənt wɪdθ fəɹ wɔkɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪksɛp ðət ðə fɔl tə iðɝ saɪd wɑz nɪɹli tɛn spænz. θɹu ðə dɑɹk, tə hɑɹd peɪvmənt. bʌt səm ə ðiz blʌɾi haʊsəz bæk ɹaɪɾ ʌp əɡɛnst ɪt, aɪ kən meɪk ɪt tə ðə tɑp izəli ɪnʌf, ən ɪt blʌɾi ɹʌnz stʃɹeɪt tə ðə blʌɾi stoʊn!

It felt a little safer, studying the Stone from the shadows, but not much more encouraging. The city wall was not nearly as thick as those he had seen in other places, in Caemlyn or Tar Valon, no more than a pace wide, supported by great stone buttresses cloaked in darkness, now. A pace was more than sufficient width for walking, of course, except that the fall to either side was nearly ten spans. Through the dark, to hard pavement. But some of these bloody houses back right up against it, I can make it to the top easily enough, and it bloody runs straight to the bloody Stone!

ɪt dɪd ðæt, bʌt ðət wɑz noʊ pɝtɪkjəlɝ kʌmfɝt. ðə saɪdz ə ðə stoʊn lʊk laɪk klɪfs. aɪɪŋ ðə haɪɾ əɡɛn, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf i ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə klaɪm ɪt. ʌv kɔɹs, aɪ kæn. dʒʌs laɪk ðoʊz klɪfs ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst. oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz stʃɹeɪɾ ʌp bɪfɔɹ ðəɹ wɑz ə bæɾəlmənt. ðəɹ mʌs bi æɹoʊslɪts loʊɝ daʊn, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt meɪk əm aʊɾ ɪn ðə naɪt. ən i kəd nɑt skwiz θɹu ən æɹoʊslɪt. ə hʌnʒɹəd blʌɾi peɪsɪz. meɪbi ə hʌnʒɹəd ən twɛnti. bɝn mi, ivən ɹænd wəd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə klaɪm ðæt. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə wʌn weɪ ɪn i hæd faʊnd. ɛvɹi ɡeɪɾ i hæd sin hæd bɪn ʃʌt taɪɾ ən lʊk stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə stɑp ə hɝɾ ə bʊlz, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə dʌzən əɹ soʊ soʊlʒɝz ɡɑɹɾɪŋ vɛɹi nɪɹli ɛvɹi læst wʌn, ɪn hɛlməts ən bɹɛstpleɪts, ən sɔɹdz ət ðɛɹ bɛls.

It did that, but that was no particular comfort. The sides of the Stone looked like cliffs. Eyeing the height again, he told himself he should be able to climb it. Of course, I can. Just like those cliffs in the Mountains of Mist. Over a hundred paces straight up before there was a battlement. There must be arrowslits lower down, but he could not make them out in the night. And he could not squeeze through an arrowslit. A hundred bloody paces. Maybe a hundred and twenty. Burn me, even Rand would not try to climb that. But it was the one way in he had found. Every gate he had seen had been shut tight and looked strong enough to stop a herd of bulls, not to mention the dozen or so soldiers guarding very nearly every last one, in helmets and breastplates, and swords at their belts.

sʌɾənli hi blɪŋkt, ən skwɪntɪɾ ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə stoʊn. ðəɹ wɑz səm ful klaɪmɪŋ ɪt, dʒʌs vɪzəbəl əz ə muvɪŋ ʃædoʊ ɪn ðə munlaɪt, ən oʊvɝ hæfweɪ ʌp ɔlɹɛɾi, wɪð ə dʒɹɑp ə sɛvənti peɪsɪz tə ðə peɪvmən ʌndɝ ɪz fit. ful, ɪz hi? wɛl, aɪm əz bɪɡ ə wʌn, kəz aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp, tu. bɝn mi, hɪl pɹɑbli ɹeɪz ən əlɑɹm ɪn ðəɹ ən ɡɛt mi kɑt. hi kəd nɑt si ðə klaɪmɝ ɛnimɔɹ. hu ɪn ðə laɪɾ ɪz hi? wʌt dʌz ɪt mæɾɝ u hi ɪz? bɝn mi, bʌt ðɪs ɪz ə blʌɾi weɪ tə wɪn ə weɪdʒɝ. aɪm gɑnə wɑn ə kɪs fɹəm ɔl ə ðɛm, ivən nɪneɪiv!

Suddenly he blinked, and squinted at the side of the Stone. There was some fool climbing it, just visible as a moving shadow in the moonlight, and over halfway up already, with a drop of seventy paces to the pavement under his feet. Fool, is he? Well, I'm as big a one, because I am going up, too. Burn me, he'll probably raise an alarm in there and get me caught. He could not see the climber anymore. Who in the Light is he? What does it matter who he is? Burn me, but this is a bloody way to win a wager. I'm going to want a kiss from all of them, even Nynaeve!

hi ʃɪftəd tə pɪɹ təwɔɹd ðə wɔl, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃuz ɪz spɑt tə klaɪm, ən sʌɾənli ðəɹ wɑz stil əkɹɔs ɪz θɹoʊt. wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, hi nɑkt ɪɾ əweɪ ən swɛp ðə mænz fiɾ aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪm wɪð ɪz stæf. sʌmwʌn ɛls kɪkt ɪz oʊn fiɾ əweɪ ən i fɛl ɔlmoʊst ɑn tɑp ə ðə mæn i hæd nɑk daʊn. hi ɹoʊld ɔf ɑntu ðə ɹuf taɪlz, lusɪŋ ðə bʌndəl ə faɪɹwɝks - ɪf ðət fɔlz ɪndə ðə stʃɹit, əl bɹeɪk ðɛɹ nɛks! - stæf wɝlɪŋ; hi fɛlt ɪt stʃɹaɪk flɛʃ, ən ə sɛkən taɪm, hɝd ɡɹʌns. ðən ðəɹ wɝ tu bleɪdz əɾ ɪz θɹoʊt.

He shifted to peer toward the wall, trying to choose his spot to climb, and suddenly there was steel across his throat. Without thinking, he knocked it away and swept the man's feet out from under him with his staff. Someone else kicked his own feet away and he fell almost on top of the man he had knocked down. He rolled off onto the roof tiles, loosing the bundle of fireworks - If that falls into the street, I'll break their necks! - staff whirling; he felt it strike flesh, and a second time, heard grunts. Then there were two blades at his throat.

hi fɹoʊz, ɑɹmz aʊtfləŋ. ðə pɔɪns ə ʃɔɹt spɪɹz, dʌl soʊ ðeɪ hɑɹdli kɑt ðə feɪn laɪɾ ə ðə mun əɾ ɔl, pɹɛst ɪndə hɪz flɛʃ dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ə bɹɪŋɪŋ blʌd. hɪz aɪz fɑloʊɾ əm ʌp tə ðə feɪsəz ə huɛvɝ wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ðɛm, bʌt ðɛɹ hɛdz wɝ ʃɹaʊɾɪd, ðɛɹ feɪsəz veɪld ɪn blæk ɪksɛp fəɹ ðɛɹ aɪz, stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm. bɝn mi, aɪ hæv tə ɹʌn ɪndə ɹil θivz! wʌt hæpən tə maɪ lʌk?

He froze, arms outflung. The points of short spears, dull so they hardly caught the faint light of the moon at all, pressed into his flesh just short of bringing blood. His eyes followed them up to the faces of whoever was holding them, but their heads were shrouded, their faces veiled in black except for their eyes, staring at him. Burn me, I have to run into real thieves! What happened to my luck?

hi pʊɾ ɑn ə ɡɹɪn, wɪð plɛnti ʌv tiθ soʊ ðeɪ kəd si ɪɾ ɪn ðə munlaɪt. "aɪ də nɑt min tə tʃɹʌbəl jə ɪn jəɹ wɝk, soʊ ɪf jə lemi ɡoʊ maɪ weɪ, əl lɛt jə ɡoʊ jʊɹz ən seɪ nʌθɪŋ." ðə veɪl mɛn dɪd nɑt muv, ən niðɝ dɪd ðɛɹ spɪɹz. "aɪ wɑnt noʊ mɔɹ aʊtkɹaɪ ðən ju. əl nɑt bɪtʃɹeɪ ju." ðeɪ stʊd laɪk stætʃuz, stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ət hɪm. bɝn mi, aɪ də nɑɾ əv taɪm fəɹ ðɪs. taɪm tə tɔs ðə daɪs. fəɹ ə tʃɪlɪŋ moʊmən i θɔt ðə wɝdz ɪn ɪz hɛd hæd bɪn stʃɹeɪnʒ. hi taɪɾənd ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf, laɪɪŋ aʊt tə wʌn saɪɾ ə hɪm - ən ɔlmoʊs kɹaɪɾ aʊt wən sʌmwʌn stɛp hɑɹɾ ɑn ɪz ɹɪst.

He put on a grin, with plenty of teeth so they could see it in the moonlight. "I do not mean to trouble you in your work, so if you let me go my way, I'll let you go yours and say nothing." The veiled men did not move, and neither did their spears. "I want no more outcry than you. I'll not betray you." They stood like statues, staring down at him. Burn me, I do not have time for this. Time to toss the dice. For a chilling moment he thought the words in his head had been strange. He tightened his grip on the quarterstaff, lying out to one side of him - and almost cried out when someone stepped hard on his wrist.

hi ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz tə si hu. bɝn mi fəɹ ə ful, aɪ fɝɡɑt ðə wʌn aɪ fɛl ɑn. bʌɾ i sɔ ənʌðɝ ʃeɪp muvɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðə wʌn stændɪŋ ɑn ɪz ɹɪst, ən dɪsaɪɾɪd meɪbi ɪt wɑz əz wɛl i hæd nɑt mænədʒ tə bɹɪŋ ðə stæf ɪndə jus æftɝ ɔl.

He rolled his eyes to see who. Burn me for a fool, I forgot the one I fell on. But he saw another shape moving behind the one standing on his wrist, and decided maybe it was as well he had not managed to bring the staff into use after all.

ɪt wɑz ə sɑf but, leɪs tə ðə ni, ðət ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ɪz ɑɹm. ɪt tʌɡd əɾ ɪz mɛmɹi. sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ə mæn mɛɾ ɪn maʊntənz. hi aɪd ðə naɪt-kloʊkt ʃeɪp ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ ʌp, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk aʊt ðə kʌɾ ən kʌlɝz ə hɪz kloʊðz - ðeɪ simd ɔl ʃædoʊ, kʌlɝz ðət blɛndəd wɪð ðə dɑɹknəs tu wɛl tə si ðɛm klɪɹli - pæst ə lɔŋ-bleɪɾɪd naɪf ət ðə fɛloʊz weɪst, ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ðə dɑɹk veɪl əkɹɔs ɪz feɪs. ə blæk-veɪl feɪs. blæk-veɪld.

It was a soft boot, laced to the knee, that rested on his arm. It tugged at his memory. Something about a man met in mountains. He eyed the night-cloaked shape the rest of the way up, trying to make out the cut and colors of his clothes - they seemed all shadow, colors that blended with the darkness too well to see them clearly - past a long-bladed knife at the fellow's waist, right up to the dark veil across his face. A black-veiled face. Black-veiled.

il! bɝn mi, wʌɾ ɑɹ blʌɾi il duɪŋ hɪɹ! hi hæɾ ə sɪŋkɪŋ filɪŋ ɪn ɪz stʌmək əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd hɪɹɪŋ ðəɾ il veɪl ðɛmsɛlvz wən ðeɪ kɪld.

Aiel! Burn me, what are bloody Aiel doing here! He had a sinking feeling in his stomach as he remembered hearing that Aiel veiled themselves when they killed.

"jɛs," sɛɾ ə mænz vɔɪs, "wi ɑɹ il." mæt ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt; hi hæd nɑt ɹilaɪzd i hæd spoʊkən əlaʊd.

"Yes," said a man's voice, "we are Aiel." Mat gave a start; he had not realized he had spoken aloud.

"ju dæns wɛl fəɹ wʌn kɑt baɪ sɝpɹaɪz," ə jʌŋ wʊmənz vɔɪs sɛd. hi θɔt ʃi wɑz ðə wʌn stændɪŋ ɑn ɪz ɹɪst. "pɝhæps ənʌðɝ deɪ əl əv taɪm tə dæns wɪð jə pɹɑpɝli."

"You dance well for one caught by surprise," a young woman's voice said. He thought she was the one standing on his wrist. "Perhaps another day I will have time to dance with you properly."

hi stɑɹɾəd tə smaɪl - ɪf ʃi wɑns tə dæns, ðeɪ kæn bi gɑnə kɪl mi, ət list! - ðən fɹaʊn ɪnstɛd. hi sim tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ il səmtaɪmz mɛn sʌmθɪŋ dɪfɹənt wən ðeɪ sɛd ðæt.

He started to smile - If she wants to dance, they can't be going to kill me, at least! - then frowned instead. He seemed to remember Aiel sometimes meant something different when they said that.

ðə spɪɹz wɝ pʊl bæk, ən hænz hɔld ɪm tə hɪz fit. hi ʃʊk əm əweɪ ən bɹʌʃt hɪmsɛlf ɔf əz ɪf i wɝ stændɪŋ ɪn ə kɑmən ɹum ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɑn ə naɪt-kloʊkt ɹuftɑp wɪð fɔɹ il. ɪɾ ɔlweɪz peɪd tə lɛt ði ʌðɝ mæn noʊ jə hæɾ ə stɛɾi nɝv. ði il hæd kwɪvɝz ət ðɛɹ weɪsts əz wɛl əz naɪvz, ən mɔɹ ə ðoʊz ʃɔɹt spɪɹz ɑn ðɛɹ bæks wɪð keɪs baʊz, ðə lɔŋ spɪɹ pɔɪns stɪkɪŋ ʌp əbʌv ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. hi hɝd hɪmsɛlf hʌmɪŋ "aɪm daʊn ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə wɛl," ən stɑpt ɪt.

The spears were pulled back, and hands hauled him to his feet. He shook them away and brushed himself off as if he were standing in a common room instead of on a night-cloaked rooftop with four Aiel. It always paid to let the other man know you had a steady nerve. The Aiel had quivers at their waists as well as knives, and more of those short spears on their backs with cased bows, the long spear points sticking up above their shoulders. He heard himself humming "I'm Down at the Bottom of the Well," and stopped it.

"wʌt dʒju də hɪɹ?" ðə mænz vɔɪs æskt. wɪð ðə veɪlz, mæt wɑz nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli ʃʊɹ wɪtʃ wʌn hæd spoʊkən; ðə vɔɪs saʊndəɾ oʊldɝ, kɑnfəɾənt, juz tə kəmænd. hi θɔɾ i kəd pɪk aʊt ðə wʊmən, ət list; ʃi wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən hi, ən ðət nɑt baɪ mʌtʃ. ði ʌðɝz ɔl stʊɾ ə hɛd tɔlɝ ðən i əɹ mɔɹ. blʌɾi il, hi θɔt. "wi hæv wɑtʃt jə fəɹ səm lɪɾəl taɪm," ði oʊldɝ mæn wɛn ɑn, "wɑtʃt jə wɑtʃ ðə stoʊn. juv stʌɾid ɪt fɹəm ɛvɹi saɪd. waɪ?"

"What do you do here?" the man's voice asked. With the veils, Mat was not entirely sure which one had spoken; the voice sounded older, confident, used to command. He thought he could pick out the woman, at least; she was the only one shorter than he, and that not by much. The others all stood a head taller than he or more. Bloody Aiel, he thought. "We have watched you for some little time," the older man went on, "watched you watch the Stone. You have studied it from every side. Why?"

"aɪ kəɾ æsk ðə seɪm ʌv ɔl ə ju," ənʌðɝ vɔɪs sɛd. mæt wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn u ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əz ə mæn ɪn bæɡi bɹitʃɪz stɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊz. ðə fɛloʊ əpɪɹd tə bi ʃuləs, fəɹ bɛɾɝ fʊɾɪŋ ɑn ðə taɪlz. "aɪ ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn θivz, nɑɾ il," ðə mæn wɛn ɑn, "bʌt də nɑt θɪŋk jəɹ nʌmbɝz fɹaɪɾən mi." ə slɪm stæf noʊ tɔlɝ ðən ɪz hɛd meɪɾ ə blɝ ən ə hʌm əz i wɝld ɪt. "maɪ neɪm ɪz dʒulɪn sændɑɹ, ən aɪm ə θif-kætʃɝ, ən aɪ wəd noʊ waɪ jə ɑɹ ɑn ðə ɹuftɑps, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə stoʊn."

"I could ask the same of all of you," another voice said. Mat was the only one who gave a start as a man in baggy breeches stepped out of the shadows. The fellow appeared to be shoeless, for better footing on the tiles. "I expected to find thieves, not Aiel," the man went on, "but do not think your numbers frighten me." A slim staff no taller than his head made a blur and a hum as he whirled it. "My name is Juilin Sandar, and I am a thief-catcher, and I would know why you are on the rooftops, staring at the Stone."

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. haʊ mɛni blʌɾi pipəl ɑɹ ɑn ðə ɹufs tənaɪt? ɔl ðət wɑz niɾəd wɑz fəɹ tɑm tə əpɪɹ ən pleɪ hɪz hɑɹp, əɹ sʌmwʌn tə kʌm lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ən ɪn. ə blʌɾi θif-teɪkɝ! hi wʌndɝd waɪ ði il wɝ dʒʌst stændɪŋ ðɛɹ.

Mat shook his head. How many bloody people are on the roofs tonight? All that was needed was for Thom to appear and play his harp, or someone to come looking for an inn. A bloody thief-taker! He wondered why the Aiel were just standing there.

"ju stɔk wɛl, fəɹ ə sɪɾi mæn," ði oʊldɝ mænz vɔɪs sɛd. "bʌt waɪ dʒju fɑloʊ ʌs? wɪv stoʊlən nʌθɪŋ. waɪ hæv jə lʊk soʊ ɔfən ət ðə stoʊn tənaɪt jɝsɛlf?"

"You stalk well, for a city man," the older man's voice said. "But why do you follow us? We have stolen nothing. Why have you looked so often at the Stone tonight yourself?"

ivən ɪn ðə munlaɪt ðɪs sændɑɹz sɝpɹaɪz wɑz ɛvəɾənt. hi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, oʊpən ɪz maʊθ - ən kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn əz fɔɹ mɔɹ il ɹoʊz aʊɾ ə ðə dɪmnəs bɪhaɪn hɪm. wɪð ə saɪ, hi lin ɑn ɪz slɛndɝ stæf. "ɪt simz aɪm kɑt maɪsɛlf," hi mʌɾɝd. "ɪt simz aɪ mʌst ænsɝ jəɹ kwɛstʃənz." hi pɪɹd təwɔɹd ðə stoʊn, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ . . . dɪɾ ə θɪŋ tədeɪ ðət . . . tʃɹʌbəlz mi." hi saʊndəɾ ɔlmoʊst əz ðoʊ hi wɝ tɔkɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʌzəl ɪɾ aʊt. "pɑɹɾ ə mi sɛz ɪt wɑz ɹaɪt, wʌɾ aɪ dɪd, ðəɾ aɪ mʌst oʊbeɪ. ʃʊɹli, ɪt simd ɹaɪt wən aɪ dɪɾ ɪt. bʌɾ ə smɔl vɔɪs tɛlz mi aɪ . . . bɪtʃɹeɪd sʌmθɪŋ. aɪm sɝɾən ðɪs vɔɪs ɪz ɹɔŋ, ən ɪts vɛɹi smɔl, bʌɾ ɪɾəl nɑt stɑp." hi stɑp ðən hɪmsɛlf, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ əɡɛn.

Even in the moonlight this Sandar's surprise was evident. He gave a start, opened his mouth - and closed it again as four more Aiel rose out of the dimness behind him. With a sigh, he leaned on his slender staff. "It seems I am caught myself," he muttered. "It seems I must answer your questions." He peered toward the Stone, then shook his head. "I . . . did a thing today that . . . troubles me." He sounded almost as though he were talking to himself, trying to puzzle it out. "Part of me says it was right, what I did, that I must obey. Surely, it seemed right when I did it. But a small voice tells me I . . . betrayed something. I am certain this voice is wrong, and it is very small, but it will not stop." He stopped then himself, shaking his head again.

wʌn ə ði il nɑɾəd, ən spoʊk wɪð ði oʊldɝ mænz vɔɪs. "aɪ æm ɹəɑɹk, ʌv ðə naɪn væliz sɛpt ə ðə tɑɹdæɾ il, ən wʌns aɪ wɑz æɛθən dɔɹ, ə ɹɛd ʃild. səmtaɪmz ðə ɹɛd ʃilz də əz jəɹ θif-kætʃɝz du. aɪ seɪ ðɪs soʊ jəl ʌndɝstæn ðəɾ aɪ noʊ wʌɾ ɪts jə du, ən ðə kaɪndə mæn jə mʌs bi. aɪ min noʊ hɑɹm tə ju, dʒulɪn sændɑɹ ə ðə θif-kætʃɝz, nɔɹ tə ðə pipəl ə jəɹ sɪɾi, bʌt jəl nɑt bi sʌfɝd tə ɹeɪz ði ɑɹmkɹi. ɪf jəl kip saɪləns, jəl lɪv; ɪf nɑt, nɑt."

One of the Aiel nodded, and spoke with the older man's voice. "I am Rhuarc, of the Nine Valleys sept of the Taardad Aiel, and once I was Aethan Dor, a Red Shield. Sometimes the Red Shields do as your thief-catchers do. I say this so you will understand that I know what it is you do, and the kind of man you must be. I mean no harm to you, Juilin Sandar of the thief-catchers, nor to the people of your city, but you will not be suffered to raise the armcry. If you will keep silence, you will live; if not, not."

"ju min noʊ hɑɹm tə ðə sɪɾi," sændɑɹ sɛd sloʊli. "waɪ ɑɹ jə hɪɹ, ðɛn?"

"You mean no harm to the city," Sandar said slowly. "Why are you here, then?"

"ðə stoʊn." ɹəɑɹks toʊn meɪɾ ɪt pleɪn ðət wɑz ɔl i mɛn tə seɪ.

"The Stone." Rhuarc's tone made it plain that was all he meant to say.

æftɝ ə moʊmən sændɑɹ nɑɾəd, ən mʌɾɝd, "aɪ kəɾ ɔlmoʊst wɪʃ jə hæd ðə paʊɝ tə hɑɹm ðə stoʊn, ɹəɑɹk. əl hoʊl maɪ tʌŋ."

After a moment Sandar nodded, and muttered, "I could almost wish you had the power to harm the Stone, Rhuarc. I will hold my tongue."

ɹəɑɹk tɝn ɪz veɪl feɪs tə mæt. "æn ju, neɪmləs jʌŋɡəlɪŋ? wɪl jə tɛl mi naʊ waɪ jə wɑtʃ ðə stoʊn soʊ kloʊsli?"

Rhuarc turned his veiled face to Mat. "And you, nameless youngling? Will you tell me now why you watch the Stone so closely?"

"aɪ dʒʌst wɑntəɾ ə wɔk ɪn ðə munlaɪt," mæt sɛd laɪtli. ðə jʌŋ wʊmən pʊɾ əɹ spɪɹpɔɪn tə hɪz θɹoʊɾ əɡɛn; hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə swɑloʊ. wɛl, meɪbi aɪ kən tɛl əm sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ɪt. hi mʌs nɑt lɛɾ əm noʊ hi wɑz ʃeɪkən; ɪf jə lɛt ði ʌðɝ fɛloʊ noʊ ðæt, jə lɔst wʌtɛvɝ ɛdʒ jə maɪt hæv. vɛɹi kɛɹfəli, wɪð tu fɪŋɡɝz, hi muvd əɹ stil əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. ɪt sim tə hɪm ðət ʃi læf sɔfli. "sʌm fɹɛnz ə maɪn ɑɹ ɪnsaɪd ðə stoʊn," hi sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə saʊn kæʒəwəl. "pɹɪznɝz. aɪ min tə bɹɪŋ əm aʊt."

"I just wanted a walk in the moonlight," Mat said lightly. The young woman put her spearpoint to his throat again; he tried not to swallow. Well, maybe I can tell them something of it. He must not let them know he was shaken; if you let the other fellow know that, you lost whatever edge you might have. Very carefully, with two fingers, he moved her steel away from him. It seemed to him that she laughed softly. "Some friends of mine are inside the Stone," he said, trying to sound casual. "Prisoners. I mean to bring them out."

"əloʊn, neɪmləs wʌn?" ɹəɑɹk sɛd.

"Alone, nameless one?" Rhuarc said.

"wɛl, ðəɹ dʌzn sim tə bi ɛniwʌn ɛls," mæt sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "ənlɛs jə kɛɹ tə hɛlp? jə sim ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ðə stoʊn jɝsɛlf. ɪf jə min tə ɡoʊ ɪndə ɪt, pɝhæps wi kəd ɡoʊ təɡɛðɝ. ɪts ə taɪt ɹoʊl ə ðə daɪs ɛni weɪ jə lʊk əɾ ɪt, bʌt maɪ lʌk ɹʌnz ɡʊd." soʊ fɑɹ, ɛniweɪ. aɪv ɹʌn ɪndə blæk-veɪld il ən ðeɪv nɑt kʌt maɪ θɹoʊt; lʌk kænɑt ɡɛt mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ðən ðæt. bɝn mi, ɪt wəd nɑt bi bæd tə hæv ə fju il əlɔŋ wɪð mi ɪn ðɛɹ. "ju kəd də wɝs ðən bɛɾɪŋ ɑn maɪ lʌk."

"Well, there doesn't seem to be anyone else," Mat said dryly. "Unless you care to help? You seem interested in the Stone yourself. If you mean to go into it, perhaps we could go together. It is a tight roll of the dice any way you look at it, but my luck runs good." So far, anyway. I've run into black-veiled Aiel and they have not cut my throat; luck cannot get much better than that. Burn me, it would not be bad to have a few Aiel along with me in there. "You could do worse than betting on my luck."

"wi ɑɹ nɑt hɪɹ fəɹ pɹɪznɝz, ɡæmblɝ," ɹəɑɹk sɛd.

"We are not here for prisoners, gambler," Rhuarc said.

"ɪɾ ɪz taɪm, ɹəɑɹk." mæt kəd nɑt tɛl fɹəm wɪtʃ ə ði il ðət keɪm, bʌt ɹəɑɹk nɑɾəd.

"It is time, Rhuarc." Mat could not tell from which of the Aiel that came, but Rhuarc nodded.

"jɛs, ɡɔl." hi lʊk fɹəm mæt tə sændɑɹ ən bæk. "du nɑt ɡɪv ði ɑɹmkɹi." hi tɝn əweɪ, ən ɪn tu stɛps i hæd blɛndəɾ ɪndə ðə naɪt.

"Yes, Gaul." He looked from Mat to Sandar and back. "Do not give the armcry." He turned away, and in two steps he had blended into the night.

mæt ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. ði ʌðɝ il wɝ ɡɔn, tu, livɪŋ ɪm əloʊn wɪð ðə θif-teɪkɝ. ənlɛs ðeɪ lɛf sʌmbɑɾi tə wɑtʃ ʌs. bɝn mi, haʊ kəɾ aɪ tɛl ɪf ðeɪ dɪd? "aɪ hoʊp jə doʊn min tə tʃɹaɪ stɑpɪŋ mi, iðɝ," hi toʊl sændɑɹ əz i slʌŋ ðə bʌndəl ə faɪɹwɝks ɑn ɪz bæk əɡɛn ən pɪkt ʌp ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf. "aɪ min tə ɡoʊ ɪnsaɪd, baɪ jə əɹ θɹu ju, wʌn weɪ əɹ ði ʌðɝ." hi wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðə tʃɪmni tə pɪk ʌp ðə tɪn bɑks; ðə waɪɝ hændəl wɑz mɔɹ ðən wɔɹm, naʊ.

Mat gave a start. The other Aiel were gone, too, leaving him alone with the thief-taker. Unless they left somebody to watch us. Burn me, how could I tell if they did? "I hope you don't mean to try stopping me, either," he told Sandar as he slung the bundle of fireworks on his back again and picked up his quarterstaff. "I mean to go inside, by you or through you, one way or the other." He went over to the chimney to pick up the tin box; the wire handle was more than warm, now.

"ðiz fɹɛnz ə jʊɹz," sændɑɹ sɛd. "ðeɪ ɑɹ θɹi wɪmən?"

"These friends of yours," Sandar said. "They are three women?"

mæt fɹaʊn ət hɪm, wɪʃɪŋ ðəɹ wɑz ɪnʌf laɪt tə ʃoʊ ðə mænz feɪs klɪɹli. ðə fɛloʊz vɔɪs saʊndəɾ ɑd. "wʌt dʒju noʊ ʌv ðɛm?"

Mat frowned at him, wishing there was enough light to show the man's face clearly. The fellow's voice sounded odd. "What do you know of them?"

"aɪ noʊ ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪnsaɪd ðə stoʊn. ən aɪ noʊ ə smɔl ɡeɪt nɪɹ ðə ɹɪvɝ wɛɹ ə θif-kætʃɝ kən ɡeɪn ɛntʃɹɑns wɪð ə pɹɪznɝ, tə teɪk ɪm tə ðə sɛlz. ðə sɛlz wɛɹ ðeɪ mʌs bi. ɪf jəl tʃɹʌs mi, ɡæmblɝ, aɪ kən teɪk əs ðət fɑɹ. wʌt hæpənz æftɝ ðəɾ ɪz ʌp tə tʃæns. pɝhæps jəɹ lʌk wɪl bɹɪŋ əs aʊɾ əɡɛn əlaɪv."

"I know they are inside the Stone. And I know a small gate near the river where a thief-catcher can gain entrance with a prisoner, to take him to the cells. The cells where they must be. If you will trust me, gambler, I can take us that far. What happens after that is up to chance. Perhaps your luck will bring us out again alive."

"aɪ hæv ɔlweɪz bɪn lʌki," mæt sɛd sloʊli. də aɪ fil lʌki ɪnʌf tə tʃɹʌs hɪm? hi dɪd nɑt mʌtʃ laɪk ði aɪdiə ʌv pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi ə pɹɪznɝ; ɪt sim tu izi fəɹ pɹitɛns tə bɪkʌm ɹiæləɾi. bʌɾ ɪt sim noʊ bɪɡɝ ɹɪsk ðən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə klaɪm θɹi hʌnʒɹəd fiɾ əɹ mɔɹ stʃɹeɪɾ ʌp ɪn ðə dɑɹk.

"I have always been lucky," Mat said slowly. Do I feel lucky enough to trust him? He did not much like the idea of pretending to be a prisoner; it seemed too easy for pretense to become reality. But it seemed no bigger risk than trying to climb three hundred feet or more straight up in the dark.

hi ɡlæns təwɔɹd ðə sɪɾi wɔl, ən stɛɹd. ʃædoʊz floʊɾ əlɔŋ ɪt; dɪm ʃeɪps tʃɹɑɾɪŋ. il, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ. ðəɹ mʌst əv bɪn oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd. ðeɪ vænɪʃt, bʌt naʊ hi kəd meɪk aʊt ʃædoʊz muvɪŋ ɑn ðə klɪf feɪs ðət wɑz ðə ʃɪɹ saɪɾ ə ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ. soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp ðət weɪ. ðət wʌn fɛloʊ ɝliɝ maɪɾ əv meɪɾ ɪɾ ɪnsaɪd wɪθaʊt ɹeɪzɪŋ ən əlɑɹm - ɹəɑɹks ɑɹmkɹi - bʌɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd əɹ mɔɹ il wəɾ əv tə bi laɪk saʊndɪŋ bɛlz. ðeɪ maɪt meɪk ə daɪvɝʒən, ðoʊ. ɪf ðeɪ kɑzd ə kəmoʊʃən sʌmwɛɹ ʌp ðɛɹ, ɪnsaɪd ðə stoʊn, ðən huɛvɝ wɑz ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə sɛlz maɪt nɑt peɪ əz mʌtʃ ətɛnʃən tə ə θif-teɪkɝ bɹɪŋɪŋ ə θif.

He glanced toward the city wall, and stared. Shadows flowed along it; dim shapes trotting. Aiel, he was sure. There must have been over a hundred. They vanished, but now he could make out shadows moving on the cliff face that was the sheer side of the Stone of Tear. So much for going up that way. That one fellow earlier might have made it inside without raising an alarm - Rhuarc's armcry - but a hundred or more Aiel would have to be like sounding bells. They might make a diversion, though. If they caused a commotion somewhere up there, inside the Stone, then whoever was guarding the cells might not pay as much attention to a thief-taker bringing a thief.

aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl æɾ ə lɪɾəl tə ðə kənfjuʒən. aɪ wɝk hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf ɑn ɪt. "vɛɹi wɛl, θif-teɪkɝ. dʒʌs doʊn dɪsaɪɾ aɪm ə ɹil pɹɪznɝ ət ðə læs mɪnət. wi kən stɑɹt fəɹ jəɹ ɡeɪɾ əz sun əz aɪ stɝ ði æntɪl ə bɪt." hi θɔt sændɑɹ fɹaʊnd, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt min tə tɛl ðə mæn mɔɹ ðən i hæd tə.

I might as well add a little to the confusion. I worked hard enough on it. "Very well, thief-taker. Just don't decide I am a real prisoner at the last minute. We can start for your gate as soon as I stir the anthill a bit." He thought Sandar frowned, but he did not mean to tell the man more than he had to.

sændɑɹ fɑloʊɾ ɪm əkɹɔs ðə ɹuftɑps, klaɪmɪŋ tə haɪɝ lɛvəlz əz izəli əz i dɪd. ðə læst ɹuf wɑz oʊnli ə lɪɾəl loʊɝ ðən ðə tɑp ə ðə wɔl ən ɹæn ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ɪt, ə mæɾɝ ə pʊlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ʌp ɹæðɝ ðən klaɪmɪŋ.

Sandar followed him across the rooftops, climbing to higher levels as easily as he did. The last roof was only a little lower than the top of the wall and ran right up to it, a matter of pulling himself up rather than climbing.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ?" sændɑɹ wɪspɝd.

"What are you doing?" Sandar whispered.

"weɪt hɪɹ fəɹ mi."

"Wait here for me."

wɪð ðə tɪn bɑks dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm wʌn hæn baɪ ɪts waɪɝ hændəl ən ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf hɛl hɔɹɪzɑntəli ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, mæt tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ðə stoʊn. hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk ə haʊ fɑɹ ɪt wɑz tə ðə peɪvmən bɪloʊ. laɪt, ðə blʌɾi θɪŋ ɪz θɹi fit waɪd! aɪ kəd wɔk ɪt wɪð ə blʌɾi blaɪndfoʊld, ɪn maɪ slip! θɹi fit waɪd, ɪn ðə dɑɹk, ən bɛɾɝ ðən fɪfti fit tə ðə peɪvmənt. hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk əbaʊt sændɑɹ nɑt biɪŋ ðəɹ wən i keɪm bæk, iðɝ. hi wɑz ɔl bʌt kəmɪɾəd tə ðɪs ful noʊʃən ə pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi ə θif kɑt baɪ ðə mæn, bʌɾ ɪt simd ɔl tu pɹɑbəbəl ðəɾ i wəd ɹɪtɝn tə ðə ɹuf tə faɪn sændɑɹ ɡɔn, meɪbi bɹɪŋɪŋ mɔɹ mɛn tə meɪk ɪm ə pɹɪznɝ ɪn tʃɹuθ. doʊn θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt. dʒʌs də ðə dʒɑb ət hænd. ət list əl faɪnəli si wʌɾ ɪts laɪk.

With the tin box dangling from one hand by its wire handle and his quarterstaff held horizontally in front of him, Mat took a deep breath and started toward the Stone. He tried not to think of how far it was to the pavement below. Light, the bloody thing is three feet wide! I could walk it with a bloody blindfold, in my sleep! Three feet wide, in the dark, and better than fifty feet to the pavement. He tried not to think about Sandar not being there when he came back, either. He was all but committed to this fool notion of pretending to be a thief caught by the man, but it seemed all too probable that he would return to the roof to find Sandar gone, maybe bringing more men to make him a prisoner in truth. Don't think about it. Just do the job at hand. At least I'll finally see what it is like.

əz i hæd səspɛktəd, ðəɹ wɑz ən æɹoʊslɪɾ ɪn ðə wɔl ə ðə stoʊn ɹaɪɾ ət ði ɛn ə ðə wɔl, ə dip wɛdʒ kʌɾ ɪndə ðə ɹɑk hoʊldɪŋ ə tɔl, nɛɹoʊ oʊpənɪŋ fəɹ ən ɑɹtʃɝ tə ʃut θɹu. ɪf ðə stoʊn wɝ ətækt, ðə soʊlʒɝz ɪnsaɪd wəd wɑn səm weɪ tə stɑp ɛni tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɑloʊ ðɪs pæθ. ðə slɪt wɑz dɑɹk, naʊ. ðəɹ dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə bi ɛniwʌn wɑtʃɪŋ. ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ i hæd tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk əbaʊt, tu.

As he had suspected, there was an arrowslit in the wall of the Stone right at the end of the wall, a deep wedge cut into the rock holding a tall, narrow opening for an archer to shoot through. If the Stone were attacked, the soldiers inside would want some way to stop any trying to follow this path. The slit was dark, now. There did not appear to be anyone watching. That was something he had tried not to think about, too.

kwɪkli hi sɛt daʊn ðə tɪn bɑks əɾ ɪz fit, bælənst ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf əkɹɔs ðə wɔl ɹaɪɾ əɡɛns ðə saɪɾ ə ðə stoʊn, ən ənsləŋ ðə bʌndəl fɹəm ɪz bæk. hɝidli hi wɛdʒd ɪɾ ɪndə ðə slɪt, fɔɹsɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn əz fɑɹ əz i kʊd; hi wɑntəɾ əz mʌtʃ ə ðə nɔɪz tə bi ɪnsaɪɾ əz i kəd mænədʒ. pʊlɪŋ əsaɪɾ ə kɔɹnɝ ə ði ɔɪl klɔθ kʌvɝ ɹɪvil nɑɾɪd fjuzəz. æftɝ ə lɪɾəl θɪŋkɪŋ, bæk ɪn ɪz ɹum, hi hæd kʌt ðə lɔŋɡɝ fjuzəz tə mætʃ ðə ʃɔɹɾɪst, juzɪŋ ðə pisəz tə hɛlp taɪ ɔl ðə fjuzəz təɡɛðɝ. ɪt sim ðeɪ ʃəɾ ɔl ɡoʊ ɔf ət wʌns, ən ə bæŋ-ænd-flæʃ laɪk ðət ʃəd bi ɪnʌf tə pʊl ɛvɹiwʌn u wɑz nɑt kəmplitli dɛf.

Quickly he set down the tin box at his feet, balanced his quarterstaff across the wall right against the side of the Stone, and unslung the bundle from his back. Hurriedly he wedged it into the slit, forcing it in as far as he could; he wanted as much of the noise to be inside as he could manage. Pulling aside a corner of the oiled cloth cover revealed knotted fuses. After a little thinking, back in his room, he had cut the longer fuses to match the shortest, using the pieces to help tie all the fuses together. It seemed they should all go off at once, and a bang-and-flash like that should be enough to pull everyone who was not completely deaf.

ðə lɪɾ ə ðə tɪn bɑks wɑz hɑɾ ɪnʌf ðəɾ i hæd tə bloʊ ɑn ɪz fɪŋɡɝz twaɪs bɪfɔɹ i kəd pɹaɪ ɪɾ ɔf - hi wɪʃt i hæd wʌtɛvɝ ɑlʌdʒɹəz tʃɹɪk hæd bɪn, laɪɾɪŋ ðət læntɝn soʊ izəli - tə ɪkspoʊz ðə dɑɹk bɪɾ ə tʃɑɹkoʊl ɪnsaɪd, laɪɪŋ ɑn ə bɛɾ ə sænd. ðə waɪɝ hændəl keɪm ɔf tə meɪk tɑŋz, ən ə lɪɾəl bloʊɪŋ hæd ðə koʊl ɡloʊɪŋ ɹɛɾ əɡɛn. hi tʌtʃt ðə hɑt koʊl tə ðə nɑɾɪd fjuzəz, lɛt tɑŋz ən koʊl fɔl oʊvɝ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl əz ðə fjuzəz hɪst ɪndə fleɪm, snætʃt ʌp ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf ən dɑɹɾɪd bæk əlɔŋ ðə wɔl.

The lid of the tin box was hot enough that he had to blow on his fingers twice before he could pry it off - he wished he had whatever Aludra's trick had been, lighting that lantern so easily - to expose the dark bit of charcoal inside, lying on a bed of sand. The wire handle came off to make tongs, and a little blowing had the coal glowing red again. He touched the hot coal to the knotted fuses, let tongs and coal fall over the side of the wall as the fuses hissed into flame, snatched up his quarterstaff and darted back along the wall.

ðɪs ɪz kɹeɪzi, hi θɔɾ əz i ɹæn. aɪ doʊn kɛɹ haʊ bɪɡ ə bæŋ ɪt meɪks. aɪ kəd bɹeɪk maɪ ful nɛk duɪŋ θi - !

This is crazy, he thought as he ran. I don't care how big a bang it makes. I could break my fool neck doing thi - !

ðə ɹɔɹ bɪhaɪn ɪm wɑz laʊɾɝ ðən ɛniθɪŋ i hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝɾ ɪn ɪz laɪf; ə mɑnstʃɹəs fɪs pʌntʃt ɪm ɪn ðə bæk, nɑkɪŋ ɔl ðə wɪn aʊɾ ə hɪm ivən bɪfɔɹ i lændəd, spɹɔld ɑn ɪz bɛli ɑn ðə wɔl tɑp, bɛɹli hoʊldɪŋ ɑn tə hɪz stæf əz ɪt swʌŋ oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ. fəɹ ə moʊmən i leɪ ðɛɹ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ɪz lʌŋz wɝk əɡɛn, tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə θɪŋk haʊ hi mʌst əv juzd ʌp ɔl ɪz lʌk ðɪs taɪm baɪ nɑt fɔlɪŋ ɔf ðə wɔl. hɪz ɪɹz ɹæŋ laɪk ɔl ðə bɛlz ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn.

The roar behind him was louder than anything he had ever heard in his life; a monstrous fist punched him in the back, knocking all the wind out of him even before he landed, sprawled on his belly on the wall top, barely holding on to his staff as it swung over the edge. For a moment he lay there, trying to make his lungs work again, trying not to think how he must have used up all his luck this time by not falling off the wall. His ears rang like all the bells in Tar Valon.

pʊʃɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ʌp kɛɹfəli, hi lʊk bæk təwɔɹd ðə stoʊn. ə klaʊɾ ə smoʊk hʌŋ ɝaʊn ði æɹoʊslɪt. bɪhaɪn ðə smoʊk, ðə ʃæɾoʊd ʃeɪp ə ði æɹoʊslɪɾ ɪtsɛlf sim dɪfɹənt. lɑɹdʒɝ. hi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn haʊ əɹ waɪ, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd sim lɑɹdʒɝ.

Pushing himself up carefully, he looked back toward the Stone. A cloud of smoke hung around the arrowslit. Behind the smoke, the shadowed shape of the arrowslit itself seemed different. Larger. He did not understand how or why, but it did seem larger.

hi oʊnli θɔt fəɹ ə moʊmənt. ət wʌn ɛn ə ðə wɔl sændɑɹ maɪt bi weɪɾɪŋ, maɪt bi ɪntɛndɪŋ tə teɪk ɪm ɪndə ðə stoʊn əz ə pɹitɛn pɹɪznɝ - əɹ maɪt bi hɝiɪŋ bæk wɪð soʊlʒɝz. ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə ðə wɔl, ðəɹ maɪt bi ə weɪ ɪnsaɪd wɪθaʊɾ ɛni tʃæns ə sændɑɹ bɪtʃɹeɪɪŋ hɪm. hi dɑɹɾɪd bæk ðə weɪ hi hæd dʒʌs kʌm, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ðə dɑɹknəs əɹ ðə dʒɹɑp tə iðɝ saɪd.

He only thought for a moment. At one end of the wall Sandar might be waiting, might be intending to take him into the Stone as a pretend prisoner - or might be hurrying back with soldiers. At the other end of the wall, there might be a way inside without any chance of Sandar betraying him. He darted back the way he had just come, no longer worrying about the darkness or the drop to either side.

ði æɹoʊslɪt wɑz lɑɹdʒɝ, moʊst ə ðə θɪnɝ stoʊn ət ðə mɪɾəl sɪmpli ɡɔn, livɪŋ ə ɹʌf hoʊl əz ɪf sʌmwʌn hæd hæmɝɾ əɾ ɪt wɪð ə slɛdʒ fəɹ aʊɝz. ə hoʊl dʒʌs bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə mæn. haʊ ɪn ðə laɪt? ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ wʌndɝɪŋ.

The arrowslit was larger, most of the thinner stone at the middle simply gone, leaving a rough hole as if someone had hammered at it with a sledge for hours. A hole just big enough for a man. How in the Light? There was no time for wondering.

hi pʊʃt θɹu ðə dʒæɡd oʊpənɪŋ, kɑfɪŋ ət ði ækɹɪd smoʊk, dʒʌmp tə ðə flɔɹ ɪnsaɪd, ən hæd ɹʌn ə dʌzən stɛps bɪfɔɹ dɪfɛndɝz ə ðə stoʊn əpɪɹd, ət lis tɛn ə ðɛm, ɔl ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɪn kənfjuʒən. moʊst wɔɹ oʊnli ðɛɹ ʃɝts, ən nʌn hæd hɛlməɾ əɹ bɹɛstpleɪt. səm kæɹid læntɝnz. səm hɛl bɛɹd sɔɹdz.

He pushed through the jagged opening, coughing at the acrid smoke, jumped to the floor inside, and had run a dozen steps before Defenders of the Stone appeared, at least ten of them, all shouting in confusion. Most wore only their shirts, and none had helmet or breastplate. Some carried lanterns. Some held bared swords.

ful! hi ʃaʊɾəd ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd. ðɪs ɪz waɪ jə sɛt ðə blʌɾi θɪŋz ɔf ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs! laɪt-blaɪndɪd ful!

Fool! he shouted inside his head. This is why you set the bloody things off in the first place! Light-blinded fool!

hi hæd noʊ taɪm tə meɪk ɪt bæk aʊɾ ɑntu ðə wɔl. kɔɹɾɝstæf spɪnɪŋ, hi θɹu hɪmsɛlf ət ðə soʊlʒɝz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ hæɾ ə tʃæns tə də mɔɹ ðən si hi wɑz ðɛɹ, hɝl hɪmsɛlf ɪndə ðɛm, smæʃɪŋ ət hɛdz, sɔɹdz, niz, wʌtɛvɝ i kəd ɹitʃ, noʊɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ tu mɛni fəɹ ɪm tə hændəl əloʊn, noʊɪŋ ðəɾ ɪz ful tɔs ə ðə daɪs hæd kɑst ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz wʌtɛvɝ tʃæns i maɪɾ əv hæd.

He had no time to make it back out onto the wall. Quarterstaff spinning, he threw himself at the soldiers before they had a chance to do more than see he was there, hurled himself into them, smashing at heads, swords, knees, whatever he could reach, knowing they were too many for him to handle alone, knowing that his fool toss of the dice had cost Egwene and the others whatever chance he might have had.

sʌɾənli sændɑɹ wɑz ðəɹ bɪsaɪd hɪm, ɪn ðə laɪɾ ə læntɝnz dʒɹɑp baɪ mɛn klɔɪŋ fəɹ ðɛɹ sɔɹdz, hɪz slɛndɝ stæf wɝlɪŋ ivən fæstɝ ðən mæts kɔɹɾɝstæf. kɑt bɪtwin tu stæfmən, teɪkən baɪ sɝpɹaɪz, ðə soʊlʒɝz wɛn daʊn laɪk pɪnz ɪn ə ɡeɪm ə boʊlz.

Suddenly Sandar was there beside him, in the light of lanterns dropped by men clawing for their swords, his slender staff whirling even faster than Mat's quarterstaff. Caught between two staffmen, taken by surprise, the soldiers went down like pins in a game of bowls.

sændɑɹ stɛɹɾ ət ðə fɔlən mɛn, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "dɪfɛndɝz ə ðə stoʊn. aɪ hæv ətæk dɪfɛndɝz! ðəl əv maɪ hɛd fəɹ - ! wʌt wɑz ɪt ðət jə dɪd, ɡæmblɝ? ðət flæʃ ə laɪt, ən θʌndɝ, bɹeɪkɪŋ stoʊn. dɪd jə kɔl laɪtnɪŋ?" hɪz vɔɪs fɛl tə ə wɪspɝ. "hæv aɪ dʒɔɪn maɪsɛlf tə ə mæn u kən tʃænəl?"

Sandar stared at the fallen men, shaking his head. "Defenders of the Stone. I have attacked Defenders! They will have my head for - ! What was it that you did, gambler? That flash of light, and thunder, breaking stone. Did you call lightning?" His voice fell to a whisper. "Have I joined myself to a man who can channel?"

"faɪɹwɝks," mæt sɛd kɝtli. hɪz ɪɹz wɝ stɪl ɹɪŋɪŋ, bʌɾ i kəd hɪɹ mɔɹ buts kʌmɪŋ, ɹʌnɪŋ buts θəɾɪŋ ɑn stoʊn. "ðə sɛlz, mæn! ʃoʊ mi ðə weɪ tə ðə sɛlz bɪfɔɹ ɛni mɔɹ ɡɛt hɪɹ!"

"Fireworks," Mat said curtly. His ears were still ringing, but he could hear more boots coming, running boots thudding on stone. "The cells, man! Show me the way to the cells before any more get here!"

sændɑɹ ʃʊk hɪmsɛlf. "ðɪs weɪ!" hi dæʃt daʊn ə saɪd hɔl, əweɪ fɹəm ði ɔnkʌmɪŋ buts. "wi mʌs hɝi! ðəl kɪl əs ɪf ðeɪ faɪn ʌs!" sʌmwɛɹ əbʌv, ɡɔŋz bɪɡæn tə saʊn ən əlɑɹm, ən mɔɹ θʌndɝɾ ɛkoʊz θɹu ðə stoʊn.

Sandar shook himself. "This way!" He dashed down a side hall, away from the oncoming boots. "We must hurry! They will kill us if they find us!" Somewhere above, gongs began to sound an alarm, and more thundered echoes through the Stone.

aɪm kʌmɪŋ, mæt θɔɾ əz i ɹæn æftɝ ðə θif-teɪkɝ. əl ɡɛt jə aʊɾ əɹ daɪ! aɪ pɹɑməs ɪt!

I'm coming, Mat thought as he ran after the thief-taker. I'll get you out or die! I promise it!

ði əlɑɹm ɡɔŋz sɛn ɛkoʊz kɹæʃɪŋ θɹu ðə stoʊn, bʌt ɹænd peɪd noʊ mɔɹ ətɛnʃən tə ðɛm ðən i hæd tə ðə ɹɔɹ ðət hæd kʌm bɪfɔɹ, laɪk mʌfəl θʌndɝ fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ bɪloʊ. hɪz saɪɾ ætʃt; ði oʊld waʊn bɝnd, stʃɹeɪn ɔlmoʊs tə tɛɹɪŋ baɪ ðə klaɪm ʌp ðə saɪɾ ə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs. hi ɡeɪv ðə peɪn noʊ hid, iðɝ. ə kɹʊkəd smaɪl wɑz fɪkst ɑn ɪz feɪs, ə smaɪl ʌv æntɪsəpeɪʃən ən dʒɹɛɾ i kəd nɑɾ əv waɪpt əweɪ ɪf i hæd wɑntəd tə. ɪt wɑz kloʊs, naʊ. wʌɾ i hæd dʒɹimd ʌv. kælændɝ.

The alarm gongs sent echoes crashing through the Stone, but Rand paid no more attention to them than he had to the roar that had come before, like muffled thunder from somewhere below. His side ached; the old wound burned, strained almost to tearing by the climb up the side of the fortress. He gave the pain no heed, either. A crooked smile was fixed on his face, a smile of anticipation and dread he could not have wiped away if he had wanted to. It was close, now. What he had dreamed of. Callandor.

əl fɪnɪʃ ɪɾ ət læst. wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ, ɪɾəl bi dʌn wɪð. ðə dʒɹimz, fɪnɪʃt. ðə beɪɾɪŋ, ən ðə tɔntɪŋ, ən ðə hʌntɪŋ. əl fɪnɪʃ ɪɾ ɔl!

I will finish it at last. One way or another, it will be done with. The dreams, finished. The baiting, and the taunting, and the hunting. I'll finish it all!

læfɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, hi hɝid θɹu ðə dɑɹk kɔɹɪɾɝz ə ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ.

Laughing to himself, he hurried through the dark corridors of the Stone of Tear.

ɛɡwin pʊɾ ə hæn tə hɝ feɪs, wɪnsɪŋ. hɝ maʊθ hæɾ ə bɪɾɝ teɪst, ən ʃi wɑz θɝsti. ɹænd? wʌt? waɪ wɑz aɪ dʒɹimɪŋ əbaʊt mæt əɡɛn, ɔl mɪkst wɪð ɹænd, ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ ðəɾ i wɑz kʌmɪŋ? wʌt?

Egwene put a hand to her face, wincing. Her mouth had a bitter taste, and she was thirsty. Rand? What? Why was I dreaming about Mat again, all mixed with Rand, and shouting that he was coming? What?

ʃi oʊpən əɹ aɪz, stɛɹɾ ət ðə ɡɹeɪ stoʊn wɔlz, wʌn smoʊki ɹʌʃ tɔɹtʃ kæstɪŋ flɪkɝɪŋ ʃædoʊz, ən skɹimd əz ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪɾ ɔl. "noʊ! əl nɑt bi tʃeɪn əɡɛn! aɪ woʊn bi kɑlɝd! noʊ!"

She opened her eyes, stared at the gray stone walls, one smoky rush torch casting flickering shadows, and screamed as she remembered it all. "No! I will not be chained again! I won't be collared! No!"

nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɝ bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ɪn ən ɪnstənt, ðɛɹ bɹuz feɪsəz tu wɝiɾ ən fɪɹfəl fəɹ ðə suðɪŋ saʊnz ðeɪ meɪd tə bi bɪlivd. bʌt dʒʌs ðə fæk ðət ðeɪ wɝ ðəɹ wɑz ɪnʌf tə stɪl əɹ skɹimz. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn. ə pɹɪznɝ, bʌt nɑɾ əloʊn. ən nɑt kɑlɝd.

Nynaeve and Elayne were beside her in an instant, their bruised faces too worried and fearful for the soothing sounds they made to be believed. But just the fact that they were there was enough to still her screams. She was not alone. A prisoner, but not alone. And not collared.

ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə sɪɾ ʌp, ən ðeɪ hɛlp hɝ. ðeɪ hæd tə hɛlp hɝ; ʃi ætʃt ɪn ɛvɹi mʌsəl. ʃi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛvɹi ənsin bloʊ dʊɹɪŋ ðə fɹɛnzi ðət hæɾ ɔl bʌt dʒɹɪvən əɹ mæd wən ʃi ɹilaɪzd. . . . əl nɑt θɪŋk əbaʊt ðæt. aɪ hæv tə θɪŋk əbaʊt haʊ wəɹ tə ɪskeɪp. ʃi slɪd bækwɝdz əntɪl ʃi kəd lin əɡɛnst ə wɔl. hɝ peɪnz fɔt wɪð wɪɹinəs; ðət stʃɹʌɡəl wən ʃi hæd ɹəfjuz tə ɡɪv ɪn hæd teɪkən ɛvɹi læst skɹæp ə hɝ stʃɹɛŋkθ, ən ðə bɹuzəz sim tə sæp ivən mɔɹ.

She tried to sit up, and they helped her. They had to help her; she ached in every muscle. She could remember every unseen blow during the frenzy that had all but driven her mad when she realized. . . . I will not think about that. I have to think about how we are to escape. She slid backwards until she could lean against a wall. Her pains fought with weariness; that struggle when she had refused to give in had taken every last scrap of her strength, and the bruises seemed to sap even more.

ðə sɛl wɑz æbsəlutli ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə θɹi ʌv əm ən ðə tɔɹtʃ. ðə flɔɹ wɑz bɛɹ, ən koʊld, ən hɑɹd. ðə dɔɹ ə ɹʌf plæŋks, splɪntɝɾ əz ɪf kaʊnləs fjuɾəl fɪŋɡɝz hæd klɔɾ əɾ ɪt, wɑz ði oʊnli bɹeɪk ɪn ðə wɔlz. mɛsədʒəz hæd bɪn skɹætʃt ɪn ðə stoʊn, moʊs baɪ ənstɛɾi hænz. ðə laɪɾ əv mɝsi ən lemi daɪ, wʌn ɹɛd. ʃi blæŋk ðəɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd.

The cell was absolutely empty except for the three of them and the torch. The floor was bare, and cold, and hard. The door of rough planks, splintered as if countless futile fingers had clawed at it, was the only break in the walls. Messages had been scratched in the stone, most by unsteady hands. The Light have mercy and let me die, one read. She blanked that out of her head.

"ɑɹ wi stɪl ʃildɪd?" ʃi mʌmbəld. ivən tɔkɪŋ hɝt. ivən əz ɪleɪn nɑɾəd, ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi hæd nɑt hæd tə æsk. ðə swoʊlən tʃik ɑn ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən, hɝ splɪt lɪp ən blæk aɪ, wɝ ænsɝ ɪnʌf, ivən ɪf əɹ oʊn peɪnz hæd nɑt bɪn. ɪf nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə ɹitʃ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, ðeɪ ʃʊɹli wʊɾə bɪn hild.

"Are we still shielded?" she mumbled. Even talking hurt. Even as Elayne nodded, she realized she had not had to ask. The swollen cheek on the golden-haired woman, her split lip and black eye, were answer enough, even if her own pains had not been. If Nynaeve had been able to reach the True Source, they surely would have been Healed.

"aɪ hæv tʃɹaɪd," nɪneɪiv sɛd dɪspɛɹɪŋli. "aɪ hæv tʃɹaɪd, ən tʃɹaɪd, ən tʃɹaɪd." ʃi ɡeɪv əɹ bɹeɪɾ ə ʃɑɹp tʌɡ, æŋɡɝ sipɪŋ θɹu dɪspaɪt ðə hoʊpləs fɪɹ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. "wʌn ə ðɛm ɪz sɪɾɪŋ aʊtsaɪd. ɑmikoʊ, ðət mɪlk-feɪs tʃɪt, ɪf ðeɪv nɑt tʃeɪnʒd sɪns wi wɝ θɹoʊn ɪn hɪɹ. aɪ səpoʊz wʌn ɪz ɪnʌf tə meɪnteɪn ðə ʃildɪŋ wʌns ɪts bɪn woʊvən." ʃi bɑɹkt ə bɪɾɝ læf. "fɔɹ ɔl ðə peɪnz ðeɪ tʊk - ən ɡeɪv! - tə teɪk ʌs, jə wəd θɪŋk wi wɝ ə noʊ ɪmpɔɹɾəns əɾ ɔl. ɪts bɪn aʊɝz sɪns ðeɪ slæm ðət dɔɹ bɪhaɪn ʌs, ən noʊ wʌn əz kʌm tə æsk ə kwɛstʃən, əɹ lʊk, əɹ ivən bɹɪŋ ə dʒɹɑp ʌv wɔɾɝ. pɝhæps ðeɪ min tə liv əs hɪɹ əntɪl wi daɪ ʌv θɝst."

"I have tried," Nynaeve said despairingly. "I have tried, and tried, and tried." She gave her braid a sharp tug, anger seeping through despite the hopeless fear in her voice. "One of them is sitting outside. Amico, that milk-faced chit, if they have not changed since we were thrown in here. I suppose one is enough to maintain the shielding once it has been woven." She barked a bitter laugh. "For all the pains they took - and gave! - to take us, you would think we were of no importance at all. It has been hours since they slammed that door behind us, and no one has come to ask a question, or look, or even bring a drop of water. Perhaps they mean to leave us here until we die of thirst."

"beɪt." ɪleɪnz vɔɪs kweɪvɝd, ðoʊ ʃi wɑz ɑbviəsli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə saʊn ʌnəfɹeɪd. ən feɪlɪŋ mɪzɝəbli. "liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd wəɹ beɪt."

"Bait." Elayne's voice quavered, though she was obviously trying to sound unafraid. And failing miserably. "Liandrin said we are bait."

"beɪt fəɹ wʌt?" nɪneɪiv æskt ʃɑkəli. "beɪt fəɹ hu? ɪf aɪm beɪt, aɪd laɪk tə ʃʌv maɪsɛlf daʊn ðɛɹ θɹoʊts tɪl ðeɪ tʃoʊk ɑn mi!"

"Bait for what?" Nynaeve asked shakily. "Bait for who? If I am bait, I'd like to shove myself down their throats till they choke on me!"

"ɹænd." ɛɡwin stɑp tə swɑloʊ; ivən ə dʒɹɑp ʌv wɔɾɝ wəd bi wɛlkəm. "aɪ dʒɹimd əbaʊt ɹænd, ən kælændɝ. aɪ θɪŋk hiz kʌmɪŋ hɪɹ." bʌt waɪ dɪɾ aɪ dʒɹim ə mæt? ən pɛɹɪn? ɪt wɑz ə wʊlf, bʌɾ aɪm ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz hɪm. "du nɑt bi soʊ əfɹeɪd," ʃi sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə saʊn kɑnfəɾənt. "wi wɪl ɪskeɪp əm sʌmhaʊ. ɪf wi kəd bɛɾɝ ðə sintʃæn, wi kən bɛs liɑnʒɹɪn."

"Rand." Egwene stopped to swallow; even a drop of water would be welcome. "I dreamed about Rand, and Callandor. I think he is coming here." But why did I dream of Mat? And Perrin? It was a wolf, but I am sure it was him. "Do not be so afraid," she said, trying to sound confident. "We will escape them somehow. If we could better the Seanchan, we can best Liandrin."

nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks oʊvɝ hɝ. nɪneɪiv sɛd, "liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd θɝtin mɹdʒɹɑl ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ, ɛɡwin."

Nynaeve and Elayne exchanged looks over her. Nynaeve said, "Liandrin said thirteen Myrddraal are coming, Egwene."

ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf stɛɹɪŋ ət ðət mɛsədʒ skɹætʃt ɑn ðə stoʊn wɔl əɡɛn: ðə laɪɾ əv mɝsi ən lemi daɪ. hɝ hænz klɛntʃt ɪndə fɪsts. hɝ dʒɔz kɹæmpt wɪð ði ɛfɝɾ ə nɑt skɹimɪŋ ðoʊz wɝdz. bɛɾɝ tə daɪ. bɛɾɝ dɛθ ðən biɪŋ tɝn tə ðə ʃædoʊ, meɪd tə sɝv ðə dɑɹk wʌn!

She found herself staring at that message scratched on the stone wall again: The Light have mercy and let me die. Her hands clenched into fists. Her jaws cramped with the effort of not screaming those words. Better to die. Better death than being turned to the Shadow, made to serve the Dark One!

ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət wʌn ə hɝ hænz hæd taɪɾənd ɝaʊn ðə paʊtʃ əɾ əɹ bɛlt. ʃi kəd fil ðə tu ɹɪŋz ɪnsaɪd, ðə smɔl sɝkəl ə ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ən ðə lɑɹdʒɝ, twɪstəd stoʊn ɹɪŋ.

She realized that one of her hands had tightened around the pouch at her belt. She could feel the two rings inside, the small circle of the Great Serpent and the larger, twisted stone ring.

"ðeɪ dɪd nɑt teɪk ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil," ʃi sɛd wʌndɝɪŋli. ʃi fʌmbəld ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ paʊtʃ. ɪt leɪ hɛvəli ɑn əɹ pɑm, ɔl stʃɹaɪps ən flɛks ə kʌlɝ, ə ɹɪŋ wɪð oʊnli wʌn ɛdʒ.

"They did not take the ter'angreal," she said wonderingly. She fumbled it out of her pouch. It lay heavily on her palm, all stripes and flecks of color, a ring with only one edge.

"wi wɝ nɑɾ ivən ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪnʌf tə sɝtʃ," ɪleɪn saɪd. "ɛɡwin, ɑɹ jə sɝɾən ɹænd ɪz kʌmɪŋ hɪɹ? aɪ wəd mʌtʃ ɹæðɝ fɹi maɪsɛlf ðən weɪt fəɹ ðə tʃæns ə hɪm, bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ɛniwʌn u kən dɪfit liɑnʒɹɪn ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm, ɪt mʌs bi hɪm. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz mɛn tə wil kælændɝ. hi mʌs bi eɪbəl tə dɪfit ðɛm."

"We were not even important enough to search," Elayne sighed. "Egwene, are you certain Rand is coming here? I would much rather free myself than wait for the chance of him, but if there is anyone who can defeat Liandrin and the rest of them, it must be him. The Dragon Reborn is meant to wield Callandor. He must be able to defeat them."

"nɑɾ ɪf wi pʊl ɪm ɪndə ə keɪdʒ æftɝ ʌs," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd. "nɑɾ ɪf ðeɪv ə tʃɹæp sɛɾ i dʌz nɑt si. waɪ ɑɹ jə stɛɹɪŋ ət ðət ɹɪŋ, ɛɡwin? tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd wɪl nɑt hɛlp əs naʊ. nɑɾ ənlɛs jə kən dʒɹim ə weɪ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ."

"Not if we pull him into a cage after us," Nynaeve muttered. "Not if they have a trap set he does not see. Why are you staring at that ring, Egwene? Tel'aran'rhiod will not help us now. Not unless you can dream a way out of here."

"pɝhæps aɪ kæn," ʃi sɛd sloʊli. "aɪ kəd tʃænəl ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ðɛɹ ʃildɪŋ woʊn stɑp mi ɹitʃɪŋ ɪt. ɔl aɪ nid də ɪz slip, nɑt tʃænəl. ən aɪm ʃʊɹli wɪɹi ɪnʌf tə slip."

"Perhaps I can," she said slowly. "I could channel in Tel'aran'rhiod. Their shielding won't stop me reaching it. All I need do is sleep, not channel. And I am surely weary enough to sleep."

ɪleɪn fɹaʊnd, wɪnsɪŋ əz ɪt pʊld əɹ bɹuzəz. "aɪ wɪl teɪk ɛni tʃæns, bʌt haʊ kən jə tʃænəl ivən ɪn ə dʒɹim, kʌɾ ɔf fɹəm ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs? ən ɪf jə kæn, haʊ kən ɪt hɛlp əs hɪɹ?"

Elayne frowned, wincing as it pulled her bruises. "I will take any chance, but how can you channel even in a dream, cut off from the True Source? And if you can, how can it help us here?"

"aɪ də nɑt noʊ, ɪleɪn. dʒʌs kəz aɪm ʃildɪd hɪɹ dʌz nɑt min aɪm ʃildɪɾ ɪn ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz. ɪts ət list wɝθ ə tʃɹaɪ."

"I do not know, Elayne. Just because I am shielded here does not mean I am shielded in the World of Dreams. It is at least worth a try."

"pɝhæps," nɪneɪiv sɛd wɝidli. "aɪ wɪl teɪk ɛni tʃæns, tu, bʌt jə sɔ liɑnʒɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz ðə læs taɪm jə juz ðət ɹɪŋ. ən jə sɛd ðeɪ sɔ ju, tu. wʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ ðəɹ əɡɛn?"

"Perhaps," Nynaeve said worriedly. "I will take any chance, too, but you saw Liandrin and the others the last time you used that ring. And you said they saw you, too. What if they are there again?"

"aɪ hoʊp ðeɪ ɑɹ," ɛɡwin sɛd ɡɹɪmli. "aɪ hoʊp ðeɪ ɑɹ."

"I hope they are," Egwene said grimly. "I hope they are."

klʌtʃɪŋ ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɪn əɹ hænd, ʃi kloʊzd əɹ aɪz. ʃi kəd fil ɪleɪn smuðɪŋ əɹ hɛɹ, hɪɹ əɹ mɝmɝɪŋ sɔfli. nɪneɪiv bɪɡæn tə hʌm ðət wɝdləs lʌləbaɪ fɹəm əɹ tʃaɪldhʊd; fəɹ wʌns, ʃi fɛl noʊ æŋɡɝ əɾ ɪɾ əɾ ɔl. ðə sɑf saʊnz ən tʌtʃəz suð hɝ, lɛɾ əɹ sɝɛndɝ tə hɝ wɪɹinəs, lɛt slip kʌm.

Clutching the ter'angreal in her hand, she closed her eyes. She could feel Elayne smoothing her hair, hear her murmuring softly. Nynaeve began to hum that wordless lullaby from her childhood; for once, she felt no anger at it at all. The soft sounds and touches soothed her, let her surrender to her weariness, let sleep come.

ʃi wɔɹ blu sɪlk ðɪs taɪm, bʌt ʃi bɛɹli noʊɾəst mɔɹ ðən ðæt. sɑf bɹizɪz kɝɛst əɹ ənbɹwz feɪs, ən sɛn ðə bʌɾɝflaɪz swɝlɪŋ əbʌv ðə waɪldflaʊɹz. hɝ θɝst wɑz ɡɔn, hɝ eɪks. ʃi ɹitʃt aʊt tə ɛmbɹeɪs seɪaɪdɑɹ ən wɑz fɪld wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ivən ðə tʃɹaɪəmf ʃi fɛlt ət səksiɾɪŋ wɑz smɔl bɪsaɪd ðə sɝdʒɪŋ ə ðə paʊɝ θɹu hɝ.

She wore blue silk this time, but she barely noticed more than that. Soft breezes caressed her unbruised face, and sent the butterflies swirling above the wildflowers. Her thirst was gone, her aches. She reached out to embrace saidar and was filled with the One Power. Even the triumph she felt at succeeding was small beside the surging of the Power through her.

ɹɪlʌktənli ʃi meɪd hɝsɛlf ɹilis ɪt, kloʊzd əɹ aɪz, ən fɪl ði ɛmptinəs wɪð ə pɝfəkt ɪmədʒ ə ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn. ðət wɑz ðə wʌn pleɪs ɪn ðə stoʊn ʃi kəd pɪktʃɝ əsaɪd fɹəm əɹ sɛl, ən haʊ tə dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃ wʌn fitʃɝləs kjubɪkəl fɹəm ənʌðɝ? wən ʃi oʊpən əɹ aɪz, ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ. bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn.

Reluctantly she made herself release it, closed her eyes, and filled the emptiness with a perfect image of the Heart of the Stone. That was the one place in the Stone she could picture aside from her cell, and how to distinguish one featureless cubicle from another? When she opened her eyes, she was there. But she was not alone.

ðə fɔɹm ə dʒɔɪjə bɝ stʊd bɪfɔɹ kælændɝ, hɝ ʃeɪp soʊ ɪnsəbstæntʃəl ðət ðə sɝdʒɪŋ laɪɾ ə ðə sɔɹd ʃoʊn θɹu hɝ. ðə kɹɪstəl sɔɹd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ mɪɹli ɡlɪɾɝd wɪð ɹɪfɹæktɪd laɪt. ɪn pʌlsɪz ɪt ɡloʊd, əz ɪf səm laɪɾ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪt wɝ biɪŋ ənkʌvɝd, ðən kʌvɝɾ ən ənkʌvɝɾ əɡɛn. ðə blæk sɪstɝ stɑɹɾəd wɪð sɝpɹaɪz ən spʌn tə feɪs ɛɡwin. "haʊ? jə ɑɹ ʃildɪd! jəɹ dʒɹimɪŋ ɪz əɾ ən ɛnd!"

The form of Joiya Byir stood before Callandor, her shape so insubstantial that the surging light of the sword shone through her. The crystal sword no longer merely glittered with refracted light. In pulses it glowed, as if some light inside it were being uncovered, then covered and uncovered again. The Black sister started with surprise and spun to face Egwene. "How? You are shielded! Your Dreaming is at an end!"

bɪfɔɹ ðə fɝst wɝdz wɝ aʊɾ ə ðə wʊmənz maʊθ, ɛɡwin ɹitʃt fəɹ seɪaɪdɑɹ əɡɛn, woʊv ðə kɑmpləkeɪɾəd floʊ ʌv spɪɹəɾ əz ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪt biɪŋ juzd əɡɛns hɝ, ən kʌt dʒɔɪjə bɝ ɔf fɹəm ðə sɔɹs. ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz aɪz waɪɾənd, ðoʊz kɹuəl aɪz soʊ ɪŋkɔŋɹuəs ɪn ðət bjuɾəfəl, kaɪnli feɪs, bʌɾ ɛɡwin wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi wivɪŋ ɛɹ. ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz fɔɹm maɪt sim laɪk mɪst, bʌt ðə bɑnz hɛld ɪt. ɪt sim tə ɛɡwin ðət ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɛfɝɾ ɪnvɑlvd ɪn hoʊldɪŋ boʊθ floʊz ɪn ðɛɹ wivɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz swɛɾ ɑn dʒɔɪjə bɝz fɔɹhɛɾ əz ʃi wɔkt kloʊsɝ.

Before the first words were out of the woman's mouth, Egwene reached for saidar again, wove the complicated flow of Spirit as she remembered it being used against her, and cut Joiya Byir off from the Source. The Darkfriend's eyes widened, those cruel eyes so incongruous in that beautiful, kindly face, but Egwene was already weaving Air. The other woman's form might seem like mist, but the bonds held it. It seemed to Egwene that there was no effort involved in holding both flows in their weaving. There was sweat on Joiya Byir's forehead as she walked closer.

"ju hæv ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil!" fɪɹ wɑz pleɪn ɑn ðə wʊmənz feɪs, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs fɔt tə haɪɾ ɪt. "ðæt mʌs bi ɪt. ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðəɾ ɪskeɪpt ʌs, ən wʌn ðət dʌz nɑt ɹikwaɪɝ tʃænəlɪŋ. dʒju θɪŋk ɪɾəl dʒju ɛni ɡʊd, ɡɝl? wʌtɛvɝ jə də hɪɹ, ɪt kænɑɾ əfɛkt wʌt hæpənz ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld. tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ ɪz ə dʒɹim! wən aɪ weɪk, əl teɪk jəɹ tɛɹæŋɡɹil fɹəm jə maɪsɛlf. bi kɛɹfəl wʌt jə du, lɛst aɪ hæv ɹizən tə bi æŋɡɹi wən aɪ kʌm tə jəɹ sɛl."

"You have a ter'angreal!" Fear was plain on the woman's face, but her voice fought to hide it. "That must be it. A ter'angreal that escaped us, and one that does not require channeling. Do you think it will do you any good, girl? Whatever you do here, it cannot affect what happens in the real world. Tel'aran'rhiod is a dream! When I wake, I will take your ter'angreal from you myself. Be careful what you do, lest I have reason to be angry when I come to your cell."

ɛɡwin smaɪld ət hɝ. "ɑɹ jə sɝɾən jəl weɪk, dɑɹkfɹɛnd? ɪf jəɹ tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɹikwaɪɝz tʃænəlɪŋ, waɪ dɪd jə nɑt weɪk əz sun əz aɪ ʃildɪd ju? pɝhæps jə kænɑt weɪk soʊ lɔŋ əz jə ɑɹ ʃildɪd hɪɹ." hɝ smaɪl feɪɾəd əweɪ; ði ɛfɝɾ ə smaɪlɪŋ ət ðɪs wʊmən wɑz mɔɹ ðən ʃi kəd bɛɹ. "ə wʊmən wʌns ʃoʊd mi ə skɑɹ ʃi ɹəsivd ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, dɑɹkfɹɛnd. wʌt hæpənz hɪɹ ɪz stɪl ɹil wən jə weɪk."

Egwene smiled at her. "Are you certain you will wake, Darkfriend? If your ter'angreal requires channeling, why did you not wake as soon as I shielded you? Perhaps you cannot wake so long as you are shielded here." Her smile faded away; the effort of smiling at this woman was more than she could bear. "A woman once showed me a scar she received in Tel'aran'rhiod, Darkfriend. What happens here is still real when you wake."

ðə swɛt ɹoʊl daʊn ðə blæk sɪstɝz smuð, eɪdʒləs feɪs, naʊ. ɛɡwin wʌndɝɾ ɪf ʃi θɔt ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə daɪ. ʃi ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt ʃi wɝ kɹuəl ɪnʌf tə də ðæt. moʊst ə ði ənsin bloʊz ʃi hæd ɹəsiv hæd kʌm fɹəm ðɪs wʊmən, laɪk ə paʊndɪŋ ə fɪsts, fəɹ noʊ ɹizən mɔɹ ðən ðət ʃi hæd kɛp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɹɔl əweɪ, noʊ ɹizən mɔɹ ðən ðət ʃi hæd ɹəfjuz tə ɡɪv ʌp.

The sweat rolled down the Black sister's smooth, ageless face, now. Egwene wondered if she thought she was about to die. She almost wished she were cruel enough to do that. Most of the unseen blows she had received had come from this woman, like a pounding of fists, for no reason more than that she had kept trying to crawl away, no reason more than that she had refused to give up.

"ə wʊmən u kən ɡɪv sətʃ biɾɪŋz," ʃi sɛd, "ʃʊɾ əv noʊ əbdʒɛkʃənz tə ə maɪldɝ wʌn." ʃi woʊv ənʌðɝ floʊ ʌv ɛɹ kwɪkli; dʒɔɪjə bɝz dɑɹk aɪz bʌlʒd ɪn dɪsbɪlif əz ðə fɝs bloʊ lændəɾ əkɹɔs əɹ hɪps. ɛɡwin sɔ haʊ tə ədʒʌs ðə wivɪŋ soʊ ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə meɪnteɪn ɪt. "ju wɪl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðɪs, ən fil ɪt, wən jə weɪkən. wən aɪ əlaʊ jə tə weɪkən. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðɪs, tu. ɪf jə ɛvɝ ivən tʃɹaɪ tə bit mi əɡɛn, əl ɹɪtɝn jə hɪɹ ən liv jə fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə jəɹ laɪf!" ðə blæk sɪstɝz aɪz stɛɹd heɪɾ ət hɝ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə sədʒɛstʃən ə tɪɹz ɪn ðɛm, tu.

"A woman who can give such beatings," she said, "should have no objections to a milder one." She wove another flow of Air quickly; Joiya Byir's dark eyes bulged in disbelief as the first blow landed across her hips. Egwene saw how to adjust the weaving so she did not have to maintain it. "You will remember this, and feel it, when you waken. When I allow you to waken. Remember this, too. If you ever even try to beat me again, I will return you here and leave you for the rest of your life!" The Black sister's eyes stared hate at her, but there was a suggestion of tears in them, too.

ɛɡwin fɛlt ə moʊmən ə ʃeɪm. nɑɾ ət wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ tə dʒɔɪjə - ðə wʊmən dɪzɝvd ɛvɹi bloʊ, ɪf nɑt fəɹ əɹ oʊn biɾɪŋ, ðən fəɹ ðə dɛθs ɪn ðə taʊɝ - nɑt ðæt, nɑt ɹɪli, bʌt kəz ʃi hæd spɛn taɪm ɑn əɹ oʊn ɹivɛnʒ waɪl nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɝ sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə sɛl hoʊpɪŋ əɡɛns hoʊp ðət ʃi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə ɹɛskju ðɛm.

Egwene felt a moment of shame. Not at what she was doing to Joiya - the woman deserved every blow, if not for her own beating, then for the deaths in the Tower - not that, not really, but because she had spent time on her own revenge while Nynaeve and Elayne were sitting in a cell hoping against hope that she might be able to rescue them.

ʃi taɪɾ ɔf ən sɛt ðə floʊz ə hɝ wivɪŋz bɪfɔɹ ʃi nu ʃi hæd dʌn ɪt, ðən pɔz tə stʌɾi wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn. θɹi sɛpɹət wivɪŋz, ən nɑɾ oʊnli hæɾ ɪt bɪn noʊ tʃɹʌbəl tə hoʊld əm ɔl ət wʌns, bʌt naʊ ʃi hæd dʌn sʌmθɪŋ soʊ ðeɪ wəd meɪnteɪn ðɛmsɛlvz. ʃi θɔt ʃi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ haʊ, tu. ən ɪt maɪt bi jusfəl.

She tied off and set the flows of her weavings before she knew she had done it, then paused to study what she had done. Three separate weavings, and not only had it been no trouble to hold them all at once, but now she had done something so they would maintain themselves. She thought she could remember how, too. And it might be useful.

æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃi ənɹævəld wʌn ə ðə wivɪŋz, ən ðə dɑɹkfɹɛn sɑbd əz mʌtʃ fɹəm ɹɪlif əz fɹəm peɪn. "aɪ æm nɑt laɪk ju," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ðɪs ɪz ðə sɛkən taɪm aɪ hæv dʌn sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs, ən aɪ də nɑt laɪk ɪt. aɪm gɑnə hæv tə lɝn tə kʌt θɹoʊts ɪnstɛd." fɹəm ðə blæk sɪstɝz feɪs, ʃi θɔɾ ɛɡwin mɛn tə stɑɹt lɝnɪŋ wɪð hɝ.

After a moment, she unraveled one of the weavings, and the Darkfriend sobbed as much from relief as from pain. "I am not like you," Egwene said. "This is the second time I have done something like this, and I do not like it. I am going to have to learn to cut throats instead." From the Black sister's face, she thought Egwene meant to start learning with her.

meɪkɪŋ ə dɪsɡʌstəd saʊnd, ɛɡwin lɛft əɹ stændɪŋ ðɛɹ, tʃɹæpt ən ʃildɪd, ən hɝiɾ ɪndə ðə fɔɹəst ə pɑlɪʃt ɹɛdstoʊn kɑləmz. ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ daʊn tə ðə sɛlz sʌmwɛɹ.

Making a disgusted sound, Egwene left her standing there, trapped and shielded, and hurried into the forest of polished redstone columns. There had to be a way down to the cells somewhere.

ðə stoʊn kɔɹəɾɝ fɛl saɪlən əz ðə faɪnəl daɪɪŋ skɹim wɑz kʌɾ ɔf baɪ jʌŋ bʊlz dʒɔz kloʊzɪŋ ɑn ðə tu-lɛɡzəz θɹoʊt, kɹʌʃɪŋ ɪt. ðə blʌd wɑz bɪɾɝ ɑn ɪz tʌŋ.

The stone corridor fell silent as the final dying scream was cut off by Young Bull's jaws closing on the two-legs's throat, crushing it. The blood was bitter on his tongue.

hi nu ðɪs wɑz ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑt seɪ haʊ hi nu. ðə tu-lɛɡz laɪɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm, wʌn kɪkɪŋ ɪz læst wɪð hɑpɝz tiθ bɛɹiɾ ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt, hæd smɛld ɹæŋk wɪð fɪɹ əz ðeɪ fɔt. ðeɪ hæd smɛl kənfjuzd. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ hæd noʊn wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ - ðeɪ sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt bɪlɔŋ ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim - bʌt ðeɪ hæd bɪn sɛt tə kip ɪm fɹəm ðət tɔl dɔɹ əhɛd, wɪð ɪts aɪɝn lɑk. tə ɡɑɹɾ ɪt, ət list. ðeɪ hæd sim stɑɹɾəld tə si wʊlvz. hi θɔt ðeɪ hæd bɪn stɑɹɾəld ət biɪŋ ðəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz.

He knew this was the Stone of Tear, though he could not say how he knew. The two-legs lying around him, one kicking his last with Hopper's teeth buried in his throat, had smelled rank with fear as they fought. They had smelled confused. He did not think they had known where they were - they certainly did not belong in the wolf dream - but they had been set to keep him from that tall door ahead, with its iron lock. To guard it, at least. They had seemed startled to see wolves. He thought they had been startled at being there themselves.

hi waɪpt ɪz maʊθ, ðən stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪz hænd wɪð ə moʊməntɛɹi læk ə kɑmpɹihɛnʃən. hi wɑz ə mæn əɡɛn. hi wɑz pɛɹɪn. bæk ɪn ɪz oʊn bɑɾi, ɪn ðə blæksmɪθs vɛst, wɪð ðə hɛvi hæmɝ əɾ ɪz saɪd.

He wiped his mouth, then stared at his hand with a momentary lack of comprehension. He was a man again. He was Perrin. Back in his own body, in the blacksmith's vest, with the heavy hammer at his side.

wi mʌs hɝi, jʌŋ bʊl. ðəɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ivəl nɪɹ.

We must hurry, Young Bull. There is something evil near.

pɛɹɪn pʊl ðə hæmɝ fɹəm ɪz bɛlt əz i stʃɹoʊd tə ðə dɔɹ. "feɪl mʌs bi hɪɹ." wʌn ʃɑɹp bloʊ ʃæɾɝd ðə lɑk. hi kɪkt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ.

Perrin pulled the hammer from his belt as he strode to the door. "Faile must be here." One sharp blow shattered the lock. He kicked open the door.

ðə ɹum wɑz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ə lɔŋ stoʊn blɑk ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə flɔɹ. feɪl leɪ ɑn ðət blɑk əz ɪf slipɪŋ, hɝ blæk hɛɹ spɹɛɾ aʊt laɪk ə fæn, hɝ bɑɾi soʊ ɹæpt ɪn tʃeɪnz ðəɾ ɪt tʊk ɪm ə moʊmən tə ɹilaɪz ʃi wɑz ənkloʊðd. ɛvɹi tʃeɪn wɑz hɛl tə ðə stoʊn baɪ ə θɪk boʊlt.

The room was empty except for a long stone block in the middle of the floor. Faile lay on that block as if sleeping, her black hair spread out like a fan, her body so wrapped in chains that it took him a moment to realize she was unclothed. Every chain was held to the stone by a thick bolt.

hi wɑz hɑɹdli əwɛɹ ə kɹɔsɪŋ ðə speɪs əntɪl ɪz hæn tʌtʃt əɹ feɪs, tʃɹeɪsɪŋ əɹ tʃikboʊn wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ.

He was hardly aware of crossing the space until his hand touched her face, tracing her cheekbone with a finger.

ʃi oʊpən əɹ aɪz ən smaɪld ʌp ət hɪm. "aɪ kɛp dʒɹimɪŋ jə wəd kʌm, blæksmɪθ."

She opened her eyes and smiled up at him. "I kept dreaming you would come, blacksmith."

"aɪ wɪl əv jə fɹi ɪn ə moʊmənt, feɪl." hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hæmɝ, smæʃt wʌn ə ðə boʊls əz ɪf ɪt wɝ wʊd.

"I will have you free in a moment, Faile." He raised his hammer, smashed one of the bolts as if it were wood.

"aɪ wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt. pɛɹɪn."

"I was sure of it. Perrin."

əz ɪz neɪm feɪɾəd fɹəm əɹ tʌŋ, ʃi feɪɾəd, tu. wɪð ə klæɾɝ, ðə tʃeɪnz dʒɹɑp tə ðə stoʊn wɛɹ ʃi hæd bɪn.

As his name faded from her tongue, she faded, too. With a clatter, the chains dropped to the stone where she had been.

"noʊ!" hi kɹaɪd. "aɪ faʊn hɝ!"

"No!" he cried. "I found her!"

ðə dʒɹim ɪz nɑt laɪk ðə wɝld ə flɛʃ, jʌŋ bʊl. hɪɹ, ðə seɪm hʌn kən əv mɛni ɛndɪŋz.

The dream is not like the world of flesh, Young Bull. Here, the same hunt can have many endings.

hi dɪd nɑt tɝn tə lʊk ət hɑpɝ. hi nu hɪz tiθ wɝ bɛɹɾ ɪn ə snɑɹl. əɡɛn i ɹeɪz ðə hæmɝ, bɹɔɾ ɪt daʊn wɪð ɔl ɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ əɡɛns ðə tʃeɪnz ðət hæd hɛl feɪl. ðə stoʊn blɑk kɹækt ɪn tu ʌndɝ ɪz bloʊ; ðə stoʊn ɪtsɛlf ɹæŋ laɪk ə stʌk bɛl.

He did not turn to look at Hopper. He knew his teeth were bared in a snarl. Again he raised the hammer, brought it down with all his strength against the chains that had held Faile. The stone block cracked in two under his blow; the Stone itself rang like a stuck bell.

"ðɛn əl hʌn əɡɛn," hi ɡɹaʊld.

"Then I will hunt again," he growled.

hæmɝ ɪn hænd, pɛɹɪn stʃɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum wɪð hɑpɝ bɪsaɪd hɪm. ðə stoʊn wɑz ə pleɪs ə mɛn. ən mɛn, hi nu, wɝ kɹuəlɝ hʌntɝz ðən ɛvɝ wʊlvz wɝ.

Hammer in hand, Perrin strode out of the room with Hopper beside him. The Stone was a place of men. And men, he knew, were crueler hunters than ever wolves were.

əlɑɹm ɡɔŋz sʌmwɛɹ əbʌv sɛn sɑnɝəs klæŋz daʊn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, nɑt kwaɪt dʒɹaʊnɪŋ aʊt ðə ɹɪŋ ə mɛɾəl ɑn mɛɾəl ən ðə ʃaʊts ə faɪɾɪŋ mɛn ɹæðɝ kloʊsɝ. ði il ən ðə dɪfɛndɝz, mæt səspɛktəd. tɔl, ɡoʊldən læmp stænz, itʃ wɪð fɔɹ ɡoʊldən læmps, laɪn ðə hɔl wɛɹ mæt wɑz, ən sɪlk tæpəstʃɹiz ə bæɾəl sinz hʌŋ ɑn ðə pɑlɪʃt stoʊn wɔlz. ðəɹ wɝ ivən sɪlk kɑɹpəts ɑn ðə flɔɹ, dɑɹk ɹɛɾ ɑn dɑɹk blu, woʊvən ɪn ðə tɛɹən meɪz. fəɹ wʌns, mæt wɑz tu bɪzi tə pʊɾ ə pɹaɪs ɑn ɛniθɪŋ.

Alarm gongs somewhere above sent sonorous clangs down the corridor, not quite drowning out the ring of metal on metal and the shouts of fighting men rather closer. The Aiel and the Defenders, Mat suspected. Tall, golden lamp stands, each with four golden lamps, lined the hall where Mat was, and silk tapestries of battle scenes hung on the polished stone walls. There were even silk carpets on the floor, dark red on dark blue, woven in the Tairen maze. For once, Mat was too busy to put a price on anything.

ðɪs blʌɾi fɛloʊ ɪz ɡʊd, hi θɔɾ əz i mænədʒ tə swip ə sɔɹd θɹʌst əweɪ fɹəm hɪm, bʌt ðə bloʊ hi eɪmd ət ðə mænz hɛd wɪð ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə ðə stæf hæd tə tɝn ɪndə ənʌðɝ blɑk ə ðət dɑɹɾɪŋ bleɪd. aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf hiz wʌn ə ðiz blʌɾi haɪ lɔɹdz? hi ɔlmoʊs mænədʒd ə sɑləd bloʊ əɾ ə ni, bʌɾ ɪz əpoʊnən spɹæŋ bæk, hɪz stʃɹeɪt bleɪd ɹeɪzd ɑn ɡɑɹd.

This bloody fellow is good, he thought as he managed to sweep a sword thrust away from him, but the blow he aimed at the man's head with the other end of the staff had to turn into another block of that darting blade. I wonder if he is one of these bloody High Lords? He almost managed a solid blow at a knee, but his opponent sprang back, his straight blade raised on guard.

ðə blu-aɪd mæn sɝɾənli wɔɹ ðə pʌfi-sliv koʊt, jɛloʊ wɪð θɹɛd-ʌv-ɡoʊl stʃɹaɪps, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔl əndʌn, hɪz ʃɝɾ oʊnli hæf tʌkt ɪndə hɪz bɹitʃɪz, ən ɪz fit bɛɹ. hɪz ʃɔɹt-kɹɑpt, dɑɹk hɛɹ wɑz tɔsəld, laɪk ðəɾ ʌv ə mæn ɹaʊz heɪstəli fɹəm slip, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt faɪt laɪk ɪt. faɪv mɪnəts əɡoʊ hi hæd kʌm dɑɹɾɪŋ aʊt fɹəm wʌn ə ðə tɔl, kɑɹv dɔɹz ðət laɪn ðɪs hɔl, ə skæbɹdləs sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz hænz, ən mæt wɑz oʊnli ɡɹeɪtfəl ðə fɛloʊ hæɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm ən nɑt bɪhaɪnd. hi wɑz nɑt ðə fɝs mæn dʒɹɛst soʊ ðət mæt hæd feɪst ɔlɹɛɾi, bʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹli ðə bɛst.

The blue-eyed man certainly wore the puffy-sleeved coat, yellow with thread-of-gold stripes, but it was all undone, his shirt only half tucked into his breeches, and his feet bare. His short-cropped, dark hair was tousled, like that of a man roused hastily from sleep, but he did not fight like it. Five minutes ago he had come darting out from one of the tall, carved doors that lined this hall, a scabbardless sword in his hands, and Mat was only grateful the fellow had appeared in front of them and not behind. He was not the first man dressed so that Mat had faced already, but he was surely the best.

"kæn jə meɪk ɪt pæs mi, θif-kætʃɝ?" mæt kɔld, kɛɹfəl nɑt tə teɪk ɪz aɪz ɔf ðə mæn weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm wɪð bleɪd pɔɪz tə stʃɹaɪk. sændɑɹ hæɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli ɑn "θif-kætʃɝ," nɑt "θif-teɪkɝ," ðoʊ mæt kəd nɑt si ɛni dɪfɝəns.

"Can you make it past me, thief-catcher?" Mat called, careful not to take his eyes off the man waiting for him with blade poised to strike. Sandar had insisted irritably on "thief-catcher," not "thief-taker," though Mat could not see any difference.

"aɪ kænɑt," sændɑɹ kɔl fɹəm bɪhaɪn hɪm. "ɪf jə muv tə lemi baɪ, jəl luz ɹum tə swɪŋ ðəɾ ɔɹ jə kɔl ə stæf, ən hɪl spɪt jə laɪk ə ɡɹʌnt."

"I cannot," Sandar called from behind him. "If you move to let me by, you will lose room to swing that oar you call a staff, and he will spit you like a grunt."

laɪk ə wʌt? "wɛl, θɪŋk ə sʌmθɪŋ, tɛɹən. ðɪs ɹæɡəmfɪn ɪz ɡɹeɪɾɪŋ maɪ nɝvz."

Like a what? "Well, think of something, Tairen. This ragamuffin is grating my nerves."

ðə mæn ɪn ðə ɡoʊld-stʃɹaɪp koʊt snɪɹd. "ju wɪl bi ɑnɝd tə daɪ ɑn ðə bleɪɾ ə ðə haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪn, pɛzənt, ɪf aɪ əlaʊ ɪt soʊ." ɪt wɑz ðə fɝs taɪm i hæd dn tə spik. "ɪnstɛd, aɪ θɪŋk əl əv ðə pɛɹ ə jə hʌŋ baɪ ðə hilz, ən wɑtʃ waɪl ðə skɪn ɪz stʃɹɪp fɹəm jəɹ bɑɾiz - "

The man in the gold-striped coat sneered. "You will be honored to die on the blade of the High Lord Darlin, peasant, if I allow it so." It was the first time he had deigned to speak. "Instead, I think I will have the pair of you hung by the heels, and watch while the skin is stripped from your bodies - "

"aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk aɪd laɪk ðæt," mæt sɛd.

"I do not think I'd like that," Mat said.

ðə haɪ lɔɹdz feɪs ɹɛɾənd wɪð ɪndɪɡneɪʃən ət biɪŋ ɪntɝʌptɪd, bʌt mæt ɡeɪv ɪm noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɛni aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ kɑmɛnt. kɔɹɾɝstæf wɝlɪŋ ɪn ə taɪt dʌbəl-lup wiv, soʊ kwɪk ðə stæf blɝɾ ət ði ɛnz, hi lɛp fɔɹwɝd. ɪt wɑz ɔl ə snɑɹlɪŋ dɑɹlɪn kəd də tə kip ðə stæf fɹəm hɪm. fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. mæt nu hi kəd nɑt kip ðɪs ʌp vɛɹi lɔŋ, ən ɪf i wɑz lʌki ðɛn, ɪt wəɾ ɔl ɡoʊ bæk tə tə ðə stʃɹaɪk ən kaʊntɝstʃɹaɪk. ɪf i wɑz lʌki. bʌɾ i hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə kaʊntɪŋ ɑn lʌk ðɪs taɪm. əz sun əz ðə haɪ lɔɹd hæɾ ə moʊmən tə sɛt hɪmsɛlf ɪn ə pæɾɝn ə dɪfɛns, mæt ɔltɝɾ ɪz ətæk ɪn mɪdwɝl. ði ɛn ə ðə stæf dɑɹlɪn hæd bɪn ɪkspɛktɪŋ əɾ ɪz hɛd dɪpt ɪnstɛd tə swip ɪz lɛɡz aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ hɪm. ði ʌðɝ ɛn dɪd stʃɹaɪk əɾ ɪz hɛd ðɛn, əz i fɛl, ə ʃɑɹp kɹæk ðət ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz bæk ʌp ɪn ɪz hɛd.

The High Lord's face reddened with indignation at being interrupted, but Mat gave him no time for any outraged comment. Quarterstaff whirling in a tight double-loop weave, so quick the staff blurred at the ends, he leaped forward. It was all a snarling Darlin could do to keep the staff from him. For the moment. Mat knew he could not keep this up very long, and if he was lucky then, it would all go back to to the strike and counterstrike. If he was lucky. But he had no intention of counting on luck this time. As soon as the High Lord had a moment to set himself in a pattern of defense, Mat altered his attack in midwhirl. The end of the staff Darlin had been expecting at his head dipped instead to sweep his legs out from under him. The other end did strike at his head then, as he fell, a sharp crack that rolled his eyes back up in his head.

pæntɪŋ, mæt lin ɑn ɪz stæf oʊvɝ ði ʌnkɑnʃəs haɪ lɔɹd. bɝn mi, ɪf aɪ hæv tə faɪt wʌn əɹ tu mɔɹ laɪk ðɪs, əl blʌɾi wɛl fɔl oʊvɝ fɹəm ɪɡzɔstʃən! ðə stɔɹiz də nɑt tɛl jə biɪŋ ə hɪɹoʊ ɪz sətʃ hɑɹd wɝk! nɪneɪiv ɔlweɪz dɪd faɪn ə weɪ tə meɪk mi wɝk.

Panting, Mat leaned on his staff over the unconscious High Lord. Burn me, if I have to fight one or two more like this, I'll bloody well fall over from exhaustion! The stories do not tell you being a hero is such hard work! Nynaeve always did find a way to make me work.

sændɑɹ keɪm tə stæn bɪsaɪd hɪm, fɹaʊnɪŋ daʊn ət ðə kɹʌmpəl haɪ lɔɹd. "hi dʌz nɑt lʊk soʊ maɪɾi laɪɪŋ ðɛɹ," hi sɛd wʌndɝɪŋli. "hi dʌz nɑt lʊk soʊ mʌtʃ ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən mi."

Sandar came to stand beside him, frowning down at the crumpled High Lord. "He does not look so mighty lying there," he said wonderingly. "He does not look so much greater than me."

mæt ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən pɪɹd daʊn ðə hɔl, wɛɹ ə mæn hæd dʒʌst ɡɔn tʃɹɑɾɪŋ əkɹɔs əlɔŋ ə dʒɔɪnɪŋ kɔɹəɾɝ. bɝn mi, ɪf aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪt wɑz kɹeɪzi, aɪ wəd swɛɹ ðət wɑz ɹænd!

Mat gave a start and peered down the hall, where a man had just gone trotting across along a joining corridor. Burn me, if I did not know it was crazy, I would swear that was Rand!

"sændɑɹ, jə faɪn ðət - " hi bɪɡæn, swɪŋɪŋ ɪz stæf ʌp ɑntu hɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ən kʌɾ ɔf wən ɪt θʌddɪɾ ɪndə sʌmθɪŋ.

"Sandar, you find that - " he began, swinging his staff up onto his shoulder, and cut off when it thudded into something.

spɪnɪŋ, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf feɪsɪŋ ənʌðɝ hæf-dʒɹɛs haɪ lɔɹd, ðɪs wʌn wɪð ɪz sɔɹɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ, hɪz niz bʌklɪŋ, ən boʊθ hænz tə hɪz hɛd wɛɹ mæts stæf hæd splɪɾ ɪz skælp. heɪstəli, mæt poʊkt ɪm hɑɹɾ ɪn ðə stʌmək wɪð ðə bʌɾ ə ðə stæf tə bɹɪŋ ɪz hænz daʊn, ðən ɡeɪv ɪm ənʌðɝ θʌmp ɑn ðə hɛd tə pʊɾ ɪm daʊn ɪn ə hip ɑn tɑp ə hɪz sɔɹd.

Spinning, he found himself facing another half-dressed High Lord, this one with his sword on the floor, his knees buckling, and both hands to his head where Mat's staff had split his scalp. Hastily, Mat poked him hard in the stomach with the butt of the staff to bring his hands down, then gave him another thump on the head to put him down in a heap on top of his sword.

"lʌk, sændɑɹ," hi mʌɾɝd. "ju kænɑt bit blʌɾi lʌk. naʊ, waɪ doʊn jə faɪn ðɪs blʌɾi pɹaɪvət weɪ ðə haɪ lɔɹdz teɪk daʊn tə ðə sɛlz?" sændɑɹ hæɾ ɪnsɪstəd ðəɹ wɑz sətʃ ə stɛɹweɪ, ən juzɪŋ ɪt wəɾ əvɔɪd hævɪŋ tə ɹʌn θɹu moʊst ə ðə stoʊn. mæt dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i laɪk mɛn soʊ iɡɝ tə wɑtʃ pipəl pʊt tə ðə kwɛstʃən ðət ðeɪ wɑntəɾ ə kwɪk ɹut tə ðə pɹɪznɝz fɹəm ðɛɹ əpɑɹtməns.

"Luck, Sandar," he muttered. "You cannot beat bloody luck. Now, why don't you find this bloody private way the High Lords take down to the cells?" Sandar had insisted there was such a stairway, and using it would avoid having to run through most of the Stone. Mat did not think he liked men so eager to watch people put to the question that they wanted a quick route to the prisoners from their apartments.

"dʒʌs bi ɡlæd jə wɝ soʊ lʌki," sændɑɹ sɛɾ ənstɛɾəli, "ɔɹ ðɪs wʌn wʊɾə kɪld əs boʊθ bɪfɔɹ wi sɔ hɪm. aɪ noʊ ðə dɔɹ ɪz hɪɹ sʌmwɛɹ. ɑɹ jə kʌmɪŋ? əɹ dʒju min tə weɪt fəɹ ənʌðɝ haɪ lɔɹd tə əpɪɹ?"

"Just be glad you were so lucky," Sandar said unsteadily, "or this one would have killed us both before we saw him. I know the door is here somewhere. Are you coming? Or do you mean to wait for another High Lord to appear?"

"lɛɾ ɑn." mæt stɛpt oʊvɝ ði ʌnkɑnʃəs haɪ lɔɹd. "aɪ æm noʊ blʌɾi hɪɹoʊ."

"Lead on." Mat stepped over the unconscious High Lord. "I am no bloody hero."

tʃɹɑɾɪŋ, hi fɑloʊd ðə θif-kætʃɝ, hu pɪɹɾ ət ðə tɔl dɔɹz ðeɪ pæst, mʌɾɝɪŋ ðəɾ i nu ɪt wɑz hɪɹ sʌmwɛɹ.

Trotting, he followed the thief-catcher, who peered at the tall doors they passed, muttering that he knew it was here somewhere.


tʃæptɝ fɪftifaɪv


CHAPTER 55

wʌɾ ɪz ɹɪɾən ɪn pɹɑfəsi


What Is Written in Prophecy

ɹænd ɛntɝd ðə tʃeɪmbɝ sloʊli, wɔkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt pɑlɪʃt ɹɛdstoʊn kɑləmz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd fɹəm ɪz dʒɹimz. saɪləns fɪl ðə ʃædoʊz, jɛt sʌmθɪŋ kɔl tə hɪm. ən sʌmθɪŋ flæʃt əhɛd, ə moʊməntɛɹi laɪt θɹoʊɪŋ bæk ʃædoʊ, ə bikən. hi stɛpt aʊt bɪniθ ə ɡɹeɪt doʊm, ən sɔ wʌɾ i sɔt. kælændɝ, hæŋɪŋ hɪl daʊn ɪn mɪdɛɹ, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ noʊ hæn bʌt ðəɾ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. əz ɪt ɹivɑlvd, ɪt bɹoʊk wʌt lɪɾəl laɪt ðəɹ wɑz ɪndə splɪntɝz, ən naʊ ən ðən ɪt flɛɹɾ əz ɪf wɪð ə laɪɾ ʌv ɪts oʊn. kɔlɪŋ hɪm. weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ hɪm.

Rand entered the chamber slowly, walking among the great polished redstone columns he remembered from his dreams. Silence filled the shadows, yet something called to him. And something flashed ahead, a momentary light throwing back shadow, a beacon. He stepped out beneath a great dome, and saw what he sought. Callandor, hanging hilt down in midair, waiting for no hand but that of the Dragon Reborn. As it revolved, it broke what little light there was into splinters, and now and then it flared as if with a light of its own. Calling him. Waiting for him.

ɪf aɪm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ɪf aɪm nɑt dʒʌst səm hæf-mæd mæn kɝst wɪð ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl, ə pʌpət dænsɪŋ fəɹ mɔɪɹeɪn ən ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

If I am the Dragon Reborn. If I am not just some half-mad man cursed with the ability to channel, a puppet dancing for Moiraine and the White Tower.

"teɪk ɪt, luz θɝɪn. teɪk ɪt, kɪnsleɪɝ."

"Take it, Lews Therin. Take it, Kinslayer."

hi spʌn tə feɪs ðə vɔɪs. ðə tɔl mæn wɪð kloʊs-kɹɑpt waɪt hɛɹ u stɛp fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz əmʌŋ ðə kɑləmz wɑz fəmɪljɝ tə hɪm. ɹænd hæd noʊ aɪdiə hu hi wɑz, ðɪs fɛloʊ ɪn ə ɹɛd sɪlk koʊt wɪð blæk stʃɹaɪps daʊn ɪts pʌfi slivz ən blæk bɹitʃɪz tʌkt ɪndə ɪlæbɹətli sɪlvɝ-wɝk buts. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ ðə mæn, bʌɾ i hæd sin ɪm ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz. "ju pʊɾ əm ɪn ə keɪdʒ," hi sɛd. "ɛɡwin, ən nɪneɪiv, ən ɪleɪn. ɪn maɪ dʒɹimz. jə kɛpt pʊɾɪŋ əm ɪn ə keɪdʒ, ən hɝɾɪŋ ðɛm."

He spun to face the voice. The tall man with close-cropped white hair who stepped from the shadows among the columns was familiar to him. Rand had no idea who he was, this fellow in a red silk coat with black stripes down its puffy sleeves and black breeches tucked into elaborately silver-worked boots. He did not know the man, but he had seen him in his dreams. "You put them in a cage," he said. "Egwene, and Nynaeve, and Elayne. In my dreams. You kept putting them in a cage, and hurting them."

ðə mæn meɪɾ ə dɪsmɪsɪv dʒɛstʃɝ ə hɪz hænd. "ðeɪ ɑɹ lɛs ðən nʌθɪŋ. pɝhæps wʌn deɪ, wən ðeɪv bɪn tʃɹeɪnd, bʌt nɑt naʊ. aɪ kənfɛs sɝpɹaɪz ðət jə kɛɹɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk əm jusfəl. bʌt jə wɝ ɛvɝ ə ful, ɛvɝ ɹɛɾi tə fɑloʊ jəɹ hɑɹt bɪfɔɹ paʊɝ. jə keɪm tu sun, luz θɝɪn. naʊ jə mʌs də wʌt jə ɑɹ nɑt jɛt ɹɛɾi fɔɹ, əɹ ɛls daɪ. daɪ, noʊɪŋ juv lɛf ðiz wɪmən jə kɛɹ fəɹ ɪn maɪ hænz." hi sim tə bi weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ, ɪkspɛktənt. "aɪ min tə juz əm mɔɹ, kɪnsleɪɝ. ðəl sɝv mi, sɝv maɪ paʊɝ. ən ðət wɪl hɝɾ əm fɑɹ mɔɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ðeɪv sʌfɝd bɪfɔɹ."

The man made a dismissive gesture of his hand. "They are less than nothing. Perhaps one day, when they have been trained, but not now. I confess surprise that you cared enough to make them useful. But you were ever a fool, ever ready to follow your heart before power. You came too soon, Lews Therin. Now you must do what you are not yet ready for, or else die. Die, knowing you have left these women you care for in my hands." He seemed to be waiting for something, expectant. "I mean to use them more, Kinslayer. They will serve me, serve my power. And that will hurt them far more than anything they have suffered before."

bɪhaɪn ɹænd, kælændɝ flæʃt, θɹoʊɪŋ wʌn pʌls ʌv wɔɹmθ əɡɛnst ɪz bæk. "hu ɑɹ ju?"

Behind Rand, Callandor flashed, throwing one pulse of warmth against his back. "Who are you?"

"ju də nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ mi, də ju?" ðə waɪt-hɛɹd mæn læf sʌɾənli. "aɪ də nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ju, iðɝ, lʊkɪŋ ðɪs weɪ. ə kʌntʃɹi læd wɪð ə flut keɪs ɑn ɪz bæk. dɪɾ ɪʃəml spik ðə tʃɹuθ? hi wɑz ɛvɝ wʌn tə laɪ wən ɪt ɡeɪn ɪm ən ɪntʃ əɹ ə sɛkənd. dʒju ɹɪmɛmbɝ nʌθɪŋ, luz θɝɪn?"

"You do not remember me, do you?" The white-haired man laughed suddenly. "I do not remember you, either, looking this way. A country lad with a flute case on his back. Did Ishamael speak the truth? He was ever one to lie when it gained him an inch or a second. Do you remember nothing, Lews Therin?"

"ə neɪm!" ɹænd dɪmændəd. "wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ neɪm?"

"A name!" Rand demanded. "What is your name?"

"kɔl mi bɛləl." ðə fɔɹseɪkən skaʊld wən ɹænd dɪd nɑt ɹiæk tə ðə neɪm. "teɪk ɪt!" bɛləl snæpt, θɹoʊɪŋ ə hæn təwɔɹd ðə sɔɹd bɪhaɪn ɹænd. "wʌns wi ɹoʊd tə wɔɹ saɪd baɪ saɪd, ən fəɹ ðəɾ aɪ ɡɪv jə ə tʃæns. ə bɛɹ tʃæns, bʌɾ ə tʃæns tə seɪv jɝsɛlf, ə tʃæns tə seɪv ðoʊz θɹi aɪ min tə meɪk maɪ pɛts. teɪk ðə sɔɹd, kʌntʃɹimən. pɝhæps ɪɾəl bi ɪnʌf tə hɛlp jə sɝvaɪv mi."

"Call me Be'lal." The Forsaken scowled when Rand did not react to the name. "Take it!" Be'lal snapped, throwing a hand toward the sword behind Rand. "Once we rode to war side by side, and for that I give you a chance. A bare chance, but a chance to save yourself, a chance to save those three I mean to make my pets. Take the sword, countryman. Perhaps it will be enough to help you survive me."

ɹænd læft. "du jə bɪliv jə kən fɹaɪɾən mi soʊ izəli, fɔɹseɪkən? bælzəmən hɪmsɛlf əz hʌntəd mi. dʒju θɪŋk əl kaʊɝ naʊ fəɹ ju? ɡɹɑvəl bɪfɔɹ ə fɔɹseɪkən wən aɪ hæv dɪnaɪd ðə dɑɹk wʌn tə hɪz feɪs?"

Rand laughed. "Do you believe you can frighten me so easily, Forsaken? Ba'alzamon himself has hunted me. Do you think I will cower now for you? Grovel before a Forsaken when I have denied the Dark One to his face?"

"ɪz ðət wʌt jə θɪŋk?" bɛləl sɛd sɔfli. "tʃɹuli, jə noʊ nʌθɪŋ." sʌɾənli ðəɹ wɑz ə sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz hænz, ə sɔɹd wɪð ə bleɪd kɑɹv fɹəm blæk faɪɝ. "teɪk ɪt! teɪk kælændɝ! θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz, waɪl aɪ leɪ ɪmpɹɪzənd, ɪts weɪɾəd ðɛɹ. fəɹ ju. wʌn ə ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl sɑŋɡɹil wi ɛvɝ meɪd. teɪk ɪt, ən dɪfɛn jɝsɛlf, ɪf jə kæn!"

"Is that what you think?" Be'lal said softly. "Truly, you know nothing." Suddenly there was a sword in his hands, a sword with a blade carved from black fire. "Take it! Take Callandor! Three thousand years, while I lay imprisoned, it has waited there. For you. One of the most powerful sa'angreal we ever made. Take it, and defend yourself, if you can!"

hi muv təwɔɹd ɹænd əz ɪf tə dʒɹaɪv ɪm bæk təwɔɹd kælændɝ, bʌt ɹænd ɹeɪzd ɪz oʊn hænz - seɪɾɪn fɪl hɪm; swit ɹʌʃɪŋ floʊ ʌv ðə paʊɝ; stʌmək-ɹɛntʃɪŋ vɪlnəs ə ðə teɪnt - ən i hɛld ə sɔɹd ɹɔt fɹəm ɹɛd fleɪm, ə sɔɹd wɪð ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk ɑn ɪts faɪɝi bleɪd. hi stɛpt ɪndə ðə fɔɹmz læn hæd tɔɾ ɪm tɪl i floʊd fɹəm wʌn tə ðə nɛkst əz ɪf ɪn ə dæns. pɑɹɾɪŋ ðə sɪlk. wɔɾɝ floʊz daʊnhɪl. wɪn ən ɹeɪn. bleɪɾ ə blæk faɪɝ mɛt bleɪɾ ə ɹɛɾ ɪn ʃaʊɝz ə spɑɹks, ɹɔɹz laɪk waɪt-hɑt mɛɾəl ʃæɾɝɪŋ.

He moved toward Rand as if to drive him back toward Callandor, but Rand raised his own hands - saidin filled him; sweet rushing flow of the Power; stomach-wrenching vileness of the taint - and he held a sword wrought from red flame, a sword with a heron-mark on its fiery blade. He stepped into the forms Lan had taught him till he flowed from one to the next as if in a dance. Parting the Silk. Water Flows Downhill. Wind and Rain. Blade of black fire met blade of red in showers of sparks, roars like white-hot metal shattering.

ɹænd keɪm bæk smuðli ɪndə ə ɡɑɹd stæns, tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə lɛɾ ɪz sʌɾən ənsɝɾənti ʃoʊ. ə hɛɹən stʊɾ ɑn ðə blæk bleɪd, tu, ə bɝd soʊ dɑɹk əz tə bi nɪɹli ɪnvɪzəbəl. wʌns i hæd feɪst ə mæn wɪð ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪɾ ə stil, ən bɛɹli sɝvaɪvd. hi nu ðəɾ i hɪmsɛlf hæd noʊ ɹil ɹaɪt tə ðə bleɪdmæstɝz mɑɹk; ɪt hæd bɪn ɑn ðə sɔɹɾ ɪz fɑðɝ hæd ɡɪvən hɪm, ən wən i θɔɾ ʌv ə sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz hænz, hi θɔɾ ə ðət sɔɹd. wʌns i hæɾ ɛmbɹeɪs dɛθ, əz ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd tɔt, bʌt ðɪs taɪm, hi nu, hɪz dɛθ wəd bi faɪnəl. bɛləl wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən i wɪð ðə sɔɹd. stʃɹɔŋɝ. fæstɝ. ə tʃɹu bleɪdmæstɝ.

Rand came back smoothly into a guard stance, trying not to let his sudden uncertainty show. A heron stood on the black blade, too, a bird so dark as to be nearly invisible. Once he had faced a man with a heron-mark blade of steel, and barely survived. He knew that he himself had no real right to the blademaster's mark; it had been on the sword his father had given him, and when he thought of a sword in his hands, he thought of that sword. Once he had embraced death, as the Warder had taught, but this time, he knew, his death would be final. Be'lal was better than he with the sword. Stronger. Faster. A true blademaster.

ðə fɔɹseɪkən læft, əmjuzd, swɪŋɪŋ ɪz bleɪɾ ɪn kwɪk flɝɪʃəz tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm; ðə blæk faɪɝ ɹɔɹɾ əz ɪf swɪf pæsədʒ θɹu ði ɛɹ kwɪkən ɪt. "ju wɝ ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ sɔɝdzmən, wʌns, luz θɝɪn," hi sɛd mɑkəŋli. "du jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ wən wi tʊk ðət teɪm spɔɹt kɔl sɔɹdz ən lɝn tə kɪl wɪð ɪt, əz ði oʊl vɑljumz sɛd mɛn wʌns hæd? dʒju ɹɪmɛmbɝ ivən wʌn ə ðoʊz dɛspɹɪt bæɾəlz, ivən wʌn ʌv əɹ daɪɹ dɪfits? ʌv kɔɹs nɑt. jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ nʌθɪŋ, də ju? ðɪs taɪm juv nɑt lɝn ɪnʌf. ðɪs taɪm, luz θɝɪn, əl kɪl ju." bɛləlz mɑkɝi dipənd. "pɝhæps ɪf jə teɪk kælændɝ, jə maɪɾ ɪkstɛn jəɹ laɪf ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ. ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ."

The Forsaken laughed, amused, swinging his blade in quick flourishes to either side of him; the black fire roared as if swift passage through the air quickened it. "You were a greater swordsman, once, Lews Therin," he said mockingly. "Do you remember when we took that tame sport called swords and learned to kill with it, as the old volumes said men once had? Do you remember even one of those desperate battles, even one of our dire defeats? Of course not. You remember nothing, do you? This time you have not learned enough. This time, Lews Therin, I will kill you." Be'lal's mockery deepened. "Perhaps if you take Callandor, you might extend your life a little longer. A little longer."

hi keɪm fɔɹwɝd sloʊli, ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf tə ɡɪv ɹænd taɪm tə də dʒʌs ðæt, tɝn ən ɹeɪs tə kælændɝ, tə ðə sɔɹd ðət kænɑt bi tʌtʃt, tə teɪk ɪt. bʌt ðə daʊts wɝ stɪl stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ɹænd. kælændɝ kəɾ oʊnli bi tʌtʃt baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hi hæɾ əlaʊɾ əm tə pɹoʊkleɪm ɪm soʊ fəɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd ɹizənz ðət sim tə liv ɪm noʊ tʃɔɪs ət ðə taɪm. bʌt wɑz i tʃɹuli ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn? ɪf i ɹeɪs tə tʌtʃ kælændɝ ɪn tʃɹuθ, nɑɾ ɪn ə dʒɹim, wəɾ ɪz hæn miɾ ən ɪnvɪzəbəl wɔl waɪl bɛləl kʌɾ ɪm daʊn fɹəm bɪhaɪnd?

He came forward slowly, almost as if to give Rand time to do just that, turn and race to Callandor, to the Sword That Cannot Be Touched, to take it. But the doubts were still strong in Rand. Callandor could only be touched by the Dragon Reborn. He had allowed them to proclaim him so for a hundred reasons that seemed to leave him no choice at the time. But was he truly the Dragon Reborn? If he raced to touch Callandor in truth, not in a dream, would his hand meet an invisible wall while Be'lal cut him down from behind?

hi mɛt ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ i nu, ðə bleɪɾ ə faɪɝ ɹɔt wɪð seɪɾɪn. ən wɑz dʒɹɪvən bæk. ðə fɔlɪŋ lif mɛt wɔɾɝd sɪlk. ðə kæt dænsəz ɑn ðə wɔl mɛt ðə bɔɹ ɹʌʃəz daʊnhɪl. ðə ɹɪvɝ ʌndɝkʌts ðə bæŋk nɪɹli lɔst ɪm ɪz hɛd, ən i hæd tə θɹoʊ hɪmsɛlf ənɪləɡənli tə wʌn saɪd wɪð blæk fleɪm bɹʌʃɪŋ ɪz hɛɹ, ɹoʊlɪŋ tə hɪz fit tə kənfɹʌn ðə stoʊn fɔlz fɹəm ðə maʊntən. məθɑɾɪkəli, dɪlɪbɝətli, bɛləl dʒɹoʊv ɪm bæk ɪn ə spaɪɹəl ðət sloʊli taɪɾənd ɑn kælændɝ.

He met the Forsaken with the sword he knew, the blade of fire wrought with saidin. And was driven back. The Falling Leaf met Watered Silk. The Cat Dances on the Wall met the Boar Rushes Downhill. The River Undercuts the Bank nearly lost him his head, and he had to throw himself inelegantly to one side with black flame brushing his hair, rolling to his feet to confront the Stone Falls From the Mountain. Methodically, deliberately, Be'lal drove him back in a spiral that slowly tightened on Callandor.

ʃaʊts ɛkoʊɾ əmʌŋ ðə kɑləmz, skɹimz, ðə klæʃ ə stil, bʌt ɹænd bɛɹli hɝd. hi ən bɛləl wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əloʊn ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn. mɛn ɪn bɹɛstpleɪts ən ɹɪm hɛlməts fɔt wɪð sɔɹdz əɡɛnst ʃæɾoʊi, veɪld ʃeɪps ðət dɑɹɾɪd əmʌŋ ðə kɑləmz wɪð ʃɔɹt spɪɹz stæbɪŋ. səm ə ðə soʊlʒɝz fɔɹmd ə ɹæŋk; æɹoʊz flæʃɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə dɪmnəs tʊk əm ɪn ðə θɹoʊt, ðə feɪs, ən ðeɪ daɪɾ ɪn ðɛɹ laɪn. ɹænd hɑɹdli noʊɾəst ðə faɪɾɪŋ, ivən wən mɛn fɛl dɛd wɪðɪn peɪsɪz ə hɪm. hɪz oʊn faɪt wɑz tu dɛspɹɪt; ɪt tʊk ɔl ə hɪz kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən. wɛt wɔɹmθ tʃɹɪkəl daʊn ɪz saɪd. ði oʊld waʊnd wɑz bɹeɪkɪŋ oʊpən.

Shouts echoed among the columns, screams, the clash of steel, but Rand barely heard. He and Be'lal were no longer alone in the Heart of the Stone. Men in breastplates and rimmed helmets fought with swords against shadowy, veiled shapes that darted among the columns with short spears stabbing. Some of the soldiers formed a rank; arrows flashing out of the dimness took them in the throat, the face, and they died in their line. Rand hardly noticed the fighting, even when men fell dead within paces of him. His own fight was too desperate; it took all of his concentration. Wet warmth trickled down his side. The old wound was breaking open.

hi stʌmbəl sʌɾənli, nɑt siɪŋ ðə dɛd mæn əɾ ɪz fiɾ əntɪl i wɑz laɪɪŋ ɑn ɪz bæk ətɑp ɪz flut keɪs ɑn ðə stoʊn flɔɹ.

He stumbled suddenly, not seeing the dead man at his feet until he was lying on his back atop his flute case on the stone floor.

bɛləl ɹeɪzd ɪz bleɪɾ ə blæk faɪɝ, snɑɹlɪŋ. "teɪk ɪt! teɪk kælændɝ ən dɪfɛn jɝsɛlf! teɪk ɪt, əɹ əl kɪl jə naʊ! ɪf jəl nɑt teɪk ɪt, əl sleɪ ju!"

Be'lal raised his blade of black fire, snarling. "Take it! Take Callandor and defend yourself! Take it, or I will kill you now! If you will not take it, I will slay you!"

"noʊ!"

"No!"

ivən bɛləl ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ət ðə kəmæn ɪn ðət wʊmənz vɔɪs. ðə fɔɹseɪkən stɛp bæk aʊɾ ə ði ɑɹk ə ɹændz sɔɹɾ ən tɝn ɪz hɛd tə fɹaʊn ət mɔɪɹeɪn əz ʃi keɪm stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ θɹu ðə bæɾəl, hɝ aɪz fɪkst ɑn hɪm, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə skɹimɪŋ dɛθs ɝaʊn hɝ. "aɪ θɔt jə wɝ nitli aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ, wʊmən. noʊ mæɾɝ. jə ɑɹ oʊnli ən ənɔɪəns. ə stɪŋɪŋ flaɪ. ə baɪtim. əl keɪdʒ jə wɪð ði ʌðɝz, ən titʃ jə tə sɝv ðə ʃædoʊ wɪð jəɹ pjuni paʊɝz," hi fɪnɪʃt wɪð ə kəntɛmptʃuəs læf, ən ɹeɪzd ɪz fɹi hænd.

Even Be'lal gave a start at the command in that woman's voice. The Forsaken stepped back out of the arc of Rand's sword and turned his head to frown at Moiraine as she came striding through the battle, her eyes fixed on him, ignoring the screaming deaths around her. "I thought you were neatly out of the way, woman. No matter. You are only an annoyance. A stinging fly. A biteme. I will cage you with the others, and teach you to serve the Shadow with your puny powers," he finished with a contemptuous laugh, and raised his free hand.

mɔɪɹeɪn hæd nɑt stɑpt əɹ sloʊd waɪl i spoʊk. ʃi wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðən θɝɾi peɪsɪz fɹəm ɪm wən i muvd ɪz hænd, ən ʃi ɹeɪz boʊθ ə hɝz əz wɛl.

Moiraine had not stopped or slowed while he spoke. She was no more than thirty paces from him when he moved his hand, and she raised both of hers as well.

ðəɹ wɑz ən ɪnstən ə sɝpɹaɪz ɑn ðə fɔɹseɪkənz feɪs, ən i hæd taɪm tə skɹim "noʊ!" ðən ə bɑɹ ʌv waɪt faɪɝ hɑɾɝ ðən ðə sʌn ʃɑt fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪz hænz, ə ɡlɛɹɪŋ ɹɑd ðət bænɪʃt ɔl ʃædoʊz. bɪfɔɹ ɪt, bɛləl bɪkeɪm ə ʃeɪp ə ʃɪmɝɪŋ moʊts, spɛks dænsɪŋ ɪn ðə laɪt fəɹ lɛs ðən ə hɑɹtbit, flɛks kənsum bɪfɔɹ ɪz kɹaɪ feɪɾəd.

There was an instant of surprise on the Forsaken's face, and he had time to scream "No!" Then a bar of white fire hotter than the sun shot from the Aes Sedai's hands, a glaring rod that banished all shadows. Before it, Be'lal became a shape of shimmering motes, specks dancing in the light for less than a heartbeat, flecks consumed before his cry faded.

ðəɹ wɑz saɪləns ɪn ðə tʃeɪmbɝ əz ðət bɑɹ ə laɪt vænɪʃt, saɪləns ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə moʊnz ə ðə wundəd. ðə faɪɾɪŋ hæd stɑp dɛd, veɪl mɛn ən mɛn ɪn bɹɛstpleɪts əlaɪk stændɪŋ əz ɪf stʌnd.

There was silence in the chamber as that bar of light vanished, silence except for the moans of the wounded. The fighting had stopped dead, veiled men and men in breastplates alike standing as if stunned.

"hi wɑz ɹaɪt kənsɝnɪŋ wʌn θɪŋ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, əz kuli sɝin əz ɪf ʃi wɝ stændɪŋ ɪn ə mɛdoʊ. "ju mʌs teɪk kælændɝ. hi mɛn tə sleɪ jə fəɹ ɪt, bʌɾ ɪts jəɹ bɝθɹaɪt. bɛɾɝ baɪ fɑɹ ðət jə nu mɔɹ bɪfɔɹ jəɹ hæn hɛl ðət hɪlt, jɛt juv kʌm tə ðə pɔɪnt naʊ, ən ðəɹ ɪz noʊ fɝðɝ taɪm fəɹ lɝnɪŋ. teɪk ɪt, ɹænd."

"He was right concerning one thing," Moiraine said, as coolly serene as if she were standing in a meadow. "You must take Callandor. He meant to slay you for it, but it is your birthright. Better by far that you knew more before your hand held that hilt, yet you have come to the point now, and there is no further time for learning. Take it, Rand."

wɪps ə blæk laɪtnɪŋ kɝld ɝaʊn hɝ; ʃi skɹimd əz ðeɪ lɪftəd hɝ, hɝld əɹ tə slaɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə flɔɹ laɪk ə sæk əntɪl ʃi keɪm ʌp əɡɛnst wʌn ə ðə kɑləmz.

Whips of black lightning curled around her; she screamed as they lifted her, hurled her to slide along the floor like a sack until she came up against one of the columns.

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ʌp ət wɛɹ ðə laɪtnɪŋ hæd kʌm fɹʌm. ðəɹ wɑz ə dipɝ ʃædoʊ ʌp ðɛɹ, nɪɹ ðə tɑp ə ðə kɑləmz, ə blæknəs ðət meɪɾ ɔl ʌðɝ ʃædoʊz lʊk laɪk nundeɪ, ən fɹəm ɪt, tu aɪz ə faɪɝ stɛɹd bæk ət hɪm.

Rand stared up at where the lightning had come from. There was a deeper shadow up there, near the top of the columns, a blackness that made all other shadows look like noonday, and from it, two eyes of fire stared back at him.

sloʊli ðə ʃædoʊ dɪsɛndəd, ɹizɑlvɪŋ ɪndə bælzəmən, kloʊðd ɪn dɛd blæk, laɪk ə mɹdʒɹɑlz blæk. jɛɾ ivən ðət wɑz nɑt soʊ dɑɹk əz ðə ʃædoʊ ðət klʌŋ tə hɪm. hi hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, tu spænz əbʌv ðə flɔɹ, ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət ɹænd wɪð ə ɹeɪdʒ əz fɪɹs əz ɪz aɪz. "twaɪs ɪn ðɪs laɪf aɪ hæv ɔfɝd jə ðə tʃæns tə sɝv mi lɪvɪŋ." fleɪmz lɛpt ɪn ɪz maʊθ əz i spoʊk, ən ɛvɹi wɝd ɹɔɹd laɪk ə fɝnəs. "twaɪs juv ɹəfjuzd, ən wundəd mi. naʊ jəl sɝv ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪv ɪn dɛθ. daɪ, luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ. daɪ, ɹænd ælθɹ. ɪts taɪm fəɹ jə tə daɪ! aɪ teɪk jəɹ soʊl!"

Slowly the shadow descended, resolving into Ba'alzamon, clothed in dead black, like a Myrddraal's black. Yet even that was not so dark as the shadow that clung to him. He hung in the air, two spans above the floor, glaring at Rand with a rage as fierce as his eyes. "Twice in this life I have offered you the chance to serve me living." Flames leaped in his mouth as he spoke, and every word roared like a furnace. "Twice you have refused, and wounded me. Now you will serve the Lord of the Grave in death. Die, Lews Therin Kinslayer. Die, Rand al'Thor. It is time for you to die! I take your soul!"

əz bælzəmən pʊt fɔɹθ ɪz hænd, ɹænd pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf ʌp, θɹu hɪmsɛlf dɛspɝətli təwɔɹd kælændɝ, stɪl ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ən flæʃɪŋ ɪn mɪdɛɹ. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ i kəd ɹitʃ ɪt, əɹ tʌtʃ ɪɾ ɪf i dɪd, bʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ɪz oʊnli tʃæns.

As Ba'alzamon put forth his hand, Rand pushed himself up, threw himself desperately toward Callandor, still glittering and flashing in midair. He did not know whether he could reach it, or touch it if he did, but he was sure it was his only chance.

bælzəmənz bloʊ stʃɹʌk ɪm əz i lɛpt, stʃɹʌk ɪnsaɪd hɪm, ə ɹɪpɪŋ ən kɹʌmplɪŋ, tɛɹɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ lus, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊl ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm əweɪ. ɹænd skɹimd. hi fɛlt əz ɪf i wɝ kəlæpsɪŋ laɪk ən ɛmpti sæk, əz ɪf i wɝ biɪŋ tɝn ɪnsaɪɾ aʊt. ðə peɪn ɪn ɪz saɪd, ðə waʊn teɪkən ət fɑlm, wɑz ɔlmoʊst wɛlkəm, sʌmθɪŋ tə hæŋ ɑn tə, ə ɹimaɪndɝ ə laɪf. hɪz hæn kloʊz kənvʌlsɪvli. ɑn kælændɝz hɪlt.

Ba'alzamon's blow struck him as he leapt, struck inside him, a ripping and crumpling, tearing something loose, trying to pull a part of him away. Rand screamed. He felt as if he were collapsing like an empty sack, as if he were being turned inside out. The pain in his side, the wound taken at Falme, was almost welcome, something to hang on to, a reminder of life. His hand closed convulsively. On Callandor's hilt.

ðə wʌn paʊɝ sɝdʒ θɹu hɪm, ə tɔɹənt ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən i kəd bɪliv, fɹəm seɪɾɪn ɪndə ðə sɔɹd. ðə kɹɪstəl bleɪd ʃoʊn bɹaɪɾɝ ðən ivən mɔɪɹeɪnz faɪɝ hæd. ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl tə lʊk æt, ɪmpɑsəbəl ɛni lɔŋɡɝ tə si ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə sɔɹd, oʊnli ðət laɪt bleɪzd ɪn ɪz fɪst. hi fɔt ðə floʊ, ɹɛsəld wɪð ði ɪmplækəbəl taɪd ðət θɹɛɾənd tə kæɹi hɪm, ɔl ðət wɑz ɹɪli hɪm, ɪndə ðə sɔɹd wɪð ɪt. fəɹ ə hɑɹtbit ðət tʊk sɛntʃɝiz i hʌŋ, weɪvɝɪŋ, bælənst ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə biɪŋ skaʊɝɾ əweɪ laɪk sæn bɪfɔɹ ə flæʃ flʌd. wɪð ɪnfənət sloʊnəs ðə bæləns fɝmd. ɪt wɑz stɪl əz ðoʊ hi stʊd bɛɹfʊɾ ɑn ə ɹeɪzɝz ɛdʒ əbʌv ə bɑɾəmləs dʒɹɑp, jɛt sʌmθɪŋ toʊld ɪm ðɪs wɑz ðə bɛs ðət kəd bi ɪkspɛktəd. tə tʃænəl ðɪs mʌtʃ ə ðə paʊɝ, hi mʌs dæns ɑn ðət ʃɑɹpnəs əz i hæd dæns ðə fɔɹmz ə ðə sɔɹd.

The One Power surged through him, a torrent greater than he could believe, from saidin into the sword. The crystal blade shone brighter than even Moiraine's fire had. It was impossible to look at, impossible any longer to see that it was a sword, only that light blazed in his fist. He fought the flow, wrestled with the implacable tide that threatened to carry him, all that was really him, into the sword with it. For a heartbeat that took centuries he hung, wavering, balanced on the brink of being scoured away like sand before a flash flood. With infinite slowness the balance firmed. It was still as though he stood barefoot on a razor's edge above a bottomless drop, yet something told him this was the best that could be expected. To channel this much of the Power, he must dance on that sharpness as he had danced the forms of the sword.

hi tɝn tə feɪs bælzəmən. ðə tɛɹɪŋ wɪðɪn ɪm hæd sist əz sun əz ɪz hæn tʌtʃt kælændɝ. oʊnli ən ɪnstən hæd pæst, jɛɾ ɪt sim tə hæv læstəd fɝɛvɝ. "ju wɪl nɑt teɪk maɪ soʊl," hi ʃaʊɾəd. "ðɪs taɪm, aɪ min tə fɪnɪʃ ɪt wʌns ən fəɹ ɔl! aɪ min tə fɪnɪʃ ɪt naʊ!"

He turned to face Ba'alzamon. The tearing within him had ceased as soon as his hand touched Callandor. Only an instant had passed, yet it seemed to have lasted forever. "You will not take my soul," he shouted. "This time, I mean to finish it once and for all! I mean to finish it now!"

bælzəmən flɛd, mæn ən ʃædoʊ vænɪʃɪŋ.

Ba'alzamon fled, man and shadow vanishing.

fəɹ ə moʊmən ɹænd stɛɹd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə sɛns ʌv - foʊldɪŋ - əz bælzəmən lɛft. ə twɪstɪŋ, əz ɪf bælzəmən hæɾ ɪn səm weɪ bɛnt wʌt wɑz. ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə mɛn stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn kɹʌmpəld ət ðə kɑləm beɪs, ɹænd ɹitʃt aʊt, θɹu kælændɝ, ən twɪstəd ɹiæləɾi tə meɪk ə dɔɹ tə sʌmwɛɹ ɛls. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ tə wɛɹ, ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪt wɑz wɛɹ bælzəmən hæd ɡɔn.

For a moment Rand stared, frowning. There had been a sense of - folding - as Ba'alzamon left. A twisting, as if Ba'alzamon had in some way bent what was. Ignoring the men staring at him, ignoring Moiraine crumpled at the column base, Rand reached out, through Callandor, and twisted reality to make a door to somewhere else. He did not know to where, except that it was where Ba'alzamon had gone.

"aɪ æm ðə hʌntɝ naʊ," hi sɛd, ən stɛp θɹu.

"I am the hunter now," he said, and stepped through.

ðə stoʊn ʃʊk ʌndɝ ɛɡwinz fit. ðə stoʊn ʃʊk; ɪt ɹæŋ. ʃi kɑɾ əɹ bæləns ən stɑpt, lɪsnɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɔɹ saʊnd, noʊ ʌðɝ tʃɹɛmɝ. wʌtɛvɝ hæd hæpənd, ɪt wɑz oʊvɝ. ʃi hɝiɾ ɑn. ə dɔɹ ʌv aɪɝn bɑɹz stʊɾ ɪn əɹ weɪ, wɪð ə lɑk əz bɪɡ əz əɹ hɛd. ʃi tʃænəld ɝθ bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹitʃt ɪt, ən wən ʃi pʊʃt əɡɛns ðə bɑɹz, ðə lɑk tɔɹ ɪn hæf.

The stone shook under Egwene's feet. The Stone shook; it rang. She caught her balance and stopped, listening. There was no more sound, no other tremor. Whatever had happened, it was over. She hurried on. A door of iron bars stood in her way, with a lock as big as her head. She channeled Earth before she reached it, and when she pushed against the bars, the lock tore in half.

ʃi wɔkt kwɪkli əkɹɔs ðə tʃeɪmbɝ bɪɑn ɪt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə lʊk ət ðə θɪŋz hæŋɪŋ ɑn ðə wɔlz. wɪps ən aɪɝn pɪnsɝz wɝ ðə moʊst ɪnɑkjuəs. wɪð ə smɔl ʃʌɾɝ ʃi pʊʃt oʊpən ə smɔlɝ aɪɝn ɡeɪɾ ən ɛntɝɾ ə kɔɹəɾɝ laɪnd wɪð ɹʌf wʊɾən dɔɹz, ɹʌʃ tɔɹtʃɪz bɝnɪŋ əɾ ɪntɝvəlz ɪn aɪɝn bɹækəts; ʃi fɛlt ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ ɹɪlif ət livɪŋ ðoʊz θɪŋz bɪhaɪn əz ʃi dɪɾ ət faɪndɪŋ wʌt ʃi sɔt. bʌt wɪtʃ sɛl?

She walked quickly across the chamber beyond it, trying not to look at the things hanging on the walls. Whips and iron pincers were the most innocuous. With a small shudder she pushed open a smaller iron gate and entered a corridor lined with rough wooden doors, rush torches burning at intervals in iron brackets; she felt almost as much relief at leaving those things behind as she did at finding what she sought. But which cell?

ðə wʊɾən dɔɹz oʊpən izəli. səm wɝ ənlɑkt, ən ðə lɑks ɑn ði ʌðɝz læstəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðən ðət lɑɹdʒɝ lɑk hæɾ ɝliɝ. bʌɾ ɛvɹi sɛl wɑz ɛmpti. ʌv kɔɹs. noʊ wʌn wəd dʒɹim ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn ðɪs pleɪs. ɛni pɹɪznɝ u mænədʒ tə ɹitʃ tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd wəd dʒɹim ʌv ə plɛzɑntɝ pleɪs.

The wooden doors opened easily. Some were unlocked, and the locks on the others lasted no longer than that larger lock had earlier. But every cell was empty. Of course. No one would dream themselves in this place. Any prisoner who managed to reach Tel'aran'rhiod would dream of a pleasanter place.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi fɛl sʌmθɪŋ kloʊs tə dɪspɛɹ. ʃi hæd wɑntəd tə bɪliv ðət faɪndɪŋ ðə ɹaɪt sɛl wəd meɪk ə dɪfɝəns. ivən faɪndɪŋ ɪt kəd bi ɪmpɑsəbəl, ðoʊ. ðɪs fɝs kɔɹəɾɝ stʃɹɛtʃt ɑn ən ɑn, ən ʌðɝz dʒɔɪn ɪt.

For a moment she felt something close to despair. She had wanted to believe that finding the right cell would make a difference. Even finding it could be impossible, though. This first corridor stretched on and on, and others joined it.

sʌɾənli ʃi sɔ sʌmθɪŋ flɪkɝ dʒʌst əhɛɾ ə hɝ. ə ʃeɪp ivən lɛs səbstæntʃəl ðən dʒɔɪjə bɝ hæd bɪn. ɪt hæd bɪn ə wʊmən, ðoʊ. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ə ðæt. ə wʊmən siɾəd ɑn ə bɛntʃ bɪsaɪd wʌn ə ðə sɛl dɔɹz. ði ɪmədʒ flɪkɝɾ ɪndə biɪŋ əɡɛn, ən wɑz ɡɔn. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɪsteɪkɪŋ ðət slɛndɝ nɛk ən ðə peɪl, ɪnəsənt-əpɪɹɪŋ feɪs wɪð ɪts aɪlɪdz flʌɾɝɪŋ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə slip. ɑmikoʊ nəɡɔɪən wɑz dʒɹɪftɪŋ təwɔɹd slip, dʒɹimɪŋ ə hɝ ɡɑɹd duɾiz. ən əpɛɹənli tɔɪɪŋ dʒɹaʊsəli wɪð wʌn ə ðə stoʊlən tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ɛɡwin kəɾ ʌndɝstæn ðæt; ɪt hæd bɪn ə ɡɹeɪɾ ɛfɝt tə stɑp juzɪŋ ðə wʌn vɛɹɪn hæd ɡɪvən hɝ, ivən fəɹ ə fju deɪz.

Suddenly she saw something flicker just ahead of her. A shape even less substantial than Joiya Byir had been. It had been a woman, though. She was sure of that. A woman seated on a bench beside one of the cell doors. The image flickered into being again, and was gone. There was no mistaking that slender neck and the pale, innocent-appearing face with its eyelids fluttering on the edge of sleep. Amico Nagoyin was drifting toward sleep, dreaming of her guard duties. And apparently toying drowsily with one of the stolen ter'angreal. Egwene could understand that; it had been a great effort to stop using the one Verin had given her, even for a few days.

ʃi nu ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl tə kʌɾ ə wʊmən ɔf fɹəm ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ivən ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ, bʌt sɛvɝɪŋ ə wiv ɔlɹɛɾi ɪstæblɪʃt hæd tə bi mʌtʃ hɑɹɾɝ ðən dæmɪŋ ðə floʊ bɪfɔɹ ɪt bɪɡæn. ʃi sɛt ðə pæɾɝnz ə ðə wivɪŋ, ɹɛɾid ðɛm, meɪkɪŋ ðə θɹɛdz ə spɪɹət mʌtʃ stʃɹɔŋɝ, ðɪs taɪm, θɪkɝ ən hɛviɝ, ə dɛnsɝ wiv wɪð ə kʌɾɪŋ ɛdʒ laɪk ə naɪf.

She knew it was possible to cut a woman off from the True Source even if she had already embraced saidar, but severing a weave already established had to be much harder than damming the flow before it began. She set the patterns of the weaving, readied them, making the threads of Spirit much stronger, this time, thicker and heavier, a denser weave with a cutting edge like a knife.

ðə weɪvɝɪŋ ʃeɪp ə ðə dɑɹkfɹɛn əpɪɹɾ əɡɛn, ən ɛɡwin stʃɹʌk aʊt wɪð ðə floʊz ʌv ɛɹ ən spɪɹət. fəɹ ən ɪnstən sʌmθɪŋ sim tə ɹɪzɪs ðə wivɪŋ ə spɪɹət, ən ʃi fɔɹst ɪt wɪð ɔl ə hɝ maɪt. ɪt slɪɾ ɪndə pleɪs.

The wavering shape of the Darkfriend appeared again, and Egwene struck out with the flows of Air and Spirit. For an instant something seemed to resist the weaving of Spirit, and she forced it with all of her might. It slid into place.

ɑmikoʊ nəɡɔɪən skɹimd. ɪt wɑz ə θɪn saʊnd, bɛɹli hɝd, əz feɪn əz ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz, ən ʃi simd ɔlmoʊs laɪk ə ʃædoʊ ʌv wʌt dʒɔɪjə bɝ hæd bɪn. jɛt ðə bɑnz woʊvən ʌv ɛɹ hɛl hɝ; ʃi dɪd nɑt vænɪʃ əɡɛn. tɛɹɝ twɪstəd ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz lʌvli feɪs; ʃi sim tə bi bæbəlɪŋ, bʌɾ əɹ ʃaʊts wɝ wɪspɝz tu sɑft fəɹ ɛɡwin tə ʌndɝstænd.

Amico Nagoyin screamed. It was a thin sound, barely heard, as faint as she herself was, and she seemed almost like a shadow of what Joiya Byir had been. Yet the bonds woven of Air held her; she did not vanish again. Terror twisted the Darkfriend's lovely face; she seemed to be babbling, but her shouts were whispers too soft for Egwene to understand.

taɪɪŋ ən sɛɾɪŋ ðə wivz ɝaʊn ðə blæk sɪstɝ, ɛɡwin tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃənz tə ðə sɛl dɔɹ. ɪmpeɪʃənli, ʃi lɛɾ ɝθ flʌɾ ɪndə ði aɪɝn lɑk. ɪt fɛl əweɪ ɪn blæk dʌst, ɪn ə mɪs ðət dɪzɑlv kəmplitli bɪfɔɹ ɪt stʃɹʌk ðə flɔɹ. ʃi swʌŋ oʊpən ðə dɔɹ, ən wɑz nɑt sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ðə sɛl ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn bɝnɪŋ ɹʌʃ tɔɹtʃ.

Tying and setting the weaves around the Black sister, Egwene turned her attentions to the cell door. Impatiently, she let Earth flood into the iron lock. It fell away in black dust, in a mist that dissolved completely before it struck the floor. She swung open the door, and was not surprised to find the cell empty except for one burning rush torch.

bʌɾ ɑmikoʊ ɪz baʊnd, ən ðə dɔɹ ɪz oʊpən.

But Amico is bound, and the door is open.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi θɔɾ ʌv wʌt tə də nɛkst. ðən ʃi stɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə dʒɹim . . .

For a moment she thought of what to do next. Then she stepped out of the dream . . .

. . . ən woʊk tə ɔl əɹ bɹuzəz ən eɪks ən θɝst, tə ðə wɔl ə ðə sɛl əɡɛnst əɹ bæk, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə taɪtli ʃʌt sɛl dɔɹ. ʌv kɔɹs. wʌt hæpənz tə lɪvɪŋ θɪŋz ðəɹ ɪz ɹil wən ðeɪ weɪk. wʌɾ aɪ dɪd tə stoʊn əɹ aɪɝn əɹ wʊɾ əz noʊ ɪfɛkt ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld.

. . . and woke to all her bruises and aches and thirst, to the wall of the cell against her back, staring at the tightly shut cell door. Of course. What happens to living things there is real when they wake. What I did to stone or iron or wood has no effect in the waking world.

nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɝ stɪl nilɪŋ bɪsaɪd hɝ.

Nynaeve and Elayne were still kneeling beside her.

"huɛvɝ ɪz aʊt ðɛɹ," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "skɹimd ə fju moʊməns əɡoʊ, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ɛls əz hæpənd. dɪd jə faɪn ə weɪ aʊt?"

"Whoever is out there," Nynaeve said, "screamed a few moments ago, but nothing else has happened. Did you find a way out?"

"wi ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə wɔk aʊt," ɛɡwin sɛd. "hɛlp mi tə maɪ fit, ən əl ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə ðə lɑk. ɑmikoʊ wɪl nɑt tʃɹʌbəl ʌs. ðət skɹim wɑz hɝ."

"We should be able to walk out," Egwene said. "Help me to my feet, and I will get rid of the lock. Amico will not trouble us. That scream was her."

ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "aɪ hæv bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɛmbɹeɪs seɪaɪdɑɹ ɛvɝ sɪns jə lɛft. ɪts dɪfɹənt, naʊ, bʌɾ aɪm stɪl kʌɾ ɔf."

Elayne shook her head. "I have been trying to embrace saidar ever since you left. It is different, now, but I am still cut off."

ɛɡwin fɔɹm ði ɛmptinəs ɪnsaɪd hɝ, bɪkeɪm ðə ɹoʊzbʌɾ oʊpənɪŋ tə seɪaɪdɑɹ. ði ɪnvɪzəbəl wɔl wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ. ɪt ʃɪmɝd naʊ. ðəɹ wɝ moʊməns wən ʃi ɔlmoʊs θɔt ʃi kəd fil ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə fɪl əɹ wɪð ðə paʊɝ. ɔlmoʊst. ðə ʃild weɪvɝɾ ɪn ən aʊɾ ʌv ɛɡzɪstəns tu fæs fəɹ əɹ tə dɪtɛkt. ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl əv stɪl bɪn sɑləd.

Egwene formed the emptiness inside her, became the rosebud opening to saidar. The invisible wall was still there. It shimmered now. There were moments when she almost thought she could feel the True Source beginning to fill her with the Power. Almost. The shield wavered in and out of existence too fast for her to detect. It might as well have still been solid.

ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən. "aɪ baʊn hɝ. aɪ ʃildɪd hɝ. ʃiz ə lɪvɪŋ θɪŋ, nɑt laɪfləs aɪɝn. ʃi mʌs bi ʃildɪd stɪl."

She stared at the other two women. "I bound her. I shielded her. She is a living thing, not lifeless iron. She must be shielded still."

"sʌmθɪŋ əz hæpən tə ðə ʃil sɛɾ ɑn ʌs," ɪleɪn sɛd, "bʌɾ ɑmikoʊ ɪz stɪl mænɪdʒɪŋ tə hoʊld ɪt."

"Something has happened to the shield set on us," Elayne said, "but Amico is still managing to hold it."

ɛɡwin lɛɾ əɹ hɛd sæɡ bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl. "aɪ wɪl əv tə tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn."

Egwene let her head sag back against the wall. "I will have to try again."

"ɑɹ jə stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf?" ɪleɪn ɡɹɪməst. "tə bi blʌnt, jə saʊn ivən wikɝ ðən jə dɪd bɪfɔɹ. ðɪs tʃɹaɪ tʊk sʌmθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ju, ɛɡwin."

"Are you strong enough?" Elayne grimaced. "To be blunt, you sound even weaker than you did before. This try took something out of you, Egwene."

"aɪ æm stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf ðɛɹ." ʃi dɪd fil mɔɹ wɪɹi, lɛs stʃɹɔŋ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ oʊnli tʃæns ðət ʃi kəd si. ʃi sɛɾ əz mʌtʃ, ən ðɛɹ feɪsəz sɛd ðeɪ əɡɹid wɪð hɝ, haʊɛvɝ ɹɪlʌktənli.

"I am strong enough there." She did feel more weary, less strong, but it was their only chance that she could see. She said as much, and their faces said they agreed with her, however reluctantly.

"kæn jə ɡoʊ tə slip əɡɛn soʊ sun?" nɪneɪiv æsk faɪnəli.

"Can you go to sleep again so soon?" Nynaeve asked finally.

"sɪŋ tə mi." ɛɡwin mænədʒd ə smaɪl. "laɪk wən aɪ wɑz ə lɪɾəl ɡɝl. pliz?" hoʊldɪŋ nɪneɪivz hænd wɪð wʌn ə hɝz, ðə stoʊn ɹɪŋ klæspt ɪn ði ʌðɝ, ʃi kloʊzd əɹ aɪz ən tʃɹaɪd tə faɪn slip ɪn ðə wɝdləs hʌmɪŋ tun.

"Sing to me." Egwene managed a smile. "Like when I was a little girl. Please?" Holding Nynaeve's hand with one of hers, the stone ring clasped in the other, she closed her eyes and tried to find sleep in the wordless humming tune.

ðə waɪd dɔɹ ʌv aɪɝn bɑɹz stʊɾ oʊpən, ən ðə ɹum bɪɑn simd ɛmpti ʌv laɪf, bʌt mæt ɛntɝd kɔʃəsli. sændɑɹ wɑz stɪl aʊɾ ɪn ðə hɔl, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɪɹ boʊθ weɪz ət wʌns, sɝɾən ðəɾ ə haɪ lɔɹd, əɹ meɪbi ə hʌnʒɹəd dɪfɛndɝz əɹ soʊ, wəɾ əpɪɹ əɾ ɛni moʊmənt.

The wide door of iron bars stood open, and the room beyond seemed empty of life, but Mat entered cautiously. Sandar was still out in the hall, trying to peer both ways at once, certain that a High Lord, or maybe a hundred Defenders or so, would appear at any moment.

ðəɹ wɝ noʊ mɛn ɪn ðə ɹum naʊ - ən baɪ ðə lʊks ə ðə hæf-iɾən milz ɑn ə lɔŋ teɪbəl, ðeɪ hæd lɛf hɝidli; noʊ daʊt kəz ə ðə faɪɾɪŋ əbʌv - ən fɹəm ðə lʊks ə ðə θɪŋz ɑn ðə wɔlz, hi wɑz dʒʌst əz ɡlæɾ i dɪd nɑɾ əv tə miɾ ɛni ʌv ðɛm. wɪps ɪn dɪfɹən saɪzəz ən lɛŋθs, dɪfɹən θɪknəsəz, wɪð dɪfɹənt nʌmbɝz ə teɪlz. pɪnsɝz, ən tɑŋz, ən klæmps, ən aɪɝnz. θɪŋz ðət lʊk laɪk mɛɾəl buts, ən ɡɔnləts, ən hɛlməts, wɪð ɡɹeɪt skɹuz ɔl oʊvɝ əm əz ɪf tə taɪɾən əm daʊn. θɪŋz i kəd nɑɾ ivən bɪɡɪn tə ɡɛs ðə jus ʌv. ɪf i hæd mɛt ðə mɛn u juz ðiz θɪŋz, hi θɔɾ i wəd ʃʊɹli hæv tʃɛk ðət ðeɪ wɝ dɛd bɪfɔɹ i wɔkt əweɪ.

There were no men in the room now - and by the looks of the half-eaten meals on a long table, they had left hurriedly; no doubt because of the fighting above - and from the looks of the things on the walls, he was just as glad he did not have to meet any of them. Whips in different sizes and lengths, different thicknesses, with different numbers of tails. Pincers, and tongs, and clamps, and irons. Things that looked like metal boots, and gauntlets, and helmets, with great screws all over them as if to tighten them down. Things he could not even begin to guess the use of. If he had met the men who used these things, he thought he would surely have checked that they were dead before he walked away.

"sændɑɹ!" hi hɪst. "ɑɹ jə gɑnə steɪ aʊt ðəɹ ɔl blʌɾi naɪt!" hi hɝid tə ði ɪnɝ dɔɹ - bɑɹd laɪk ði aʊɾɝ, bʌt smɔlɝ - wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ən ænsɝ, ən wɛn θɹu.

"Sandar!" he hissed. "Are you going to stay out there all bloody night!" He hurried to the inner door - barred like the outer, but smaller - without waiting for an answer, and went through.

ðə hɔl bɪɑnd wɑz laɪn baɪ ɹʌf wʊɾən dɔɹz, ən lɪt baɪ ðə seɪm ɹʌʃ tɔɹtʃɪz əz ðə ɹum i hæd dʒʌs lɛft. noʊ mɔɹ ðən twɛnti peɪsɪz fɹəm hɪm, ə wʊmən sæɾ ɑn ə bɛntʃ bɪsaɪd wʌn ə ðə dɔɹz, linɪŋ bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl ɪn ə kjʊɹiəsli stɪf fæʃən. ʃi tɝn əɹ hɛd sloʊli təwɔɹɾ ɪm ət ðə saʊn ə hɪz buts ɡɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə stoʊn. ə pɹɪɾi jʌŋ wʊmən. hi wʌndɝd waɪ ʃi dɪd nɑt muv mɔɹ ðən əɹ hɛd, ən waɪ ivən ðət muvd əz ɪf ʃi wɝ hæf-əslip.

The hall beyond was lined by rough wooden doors, and lit by the same rush torches as the room he had just left. No more than twenty paces from him, a woman sat on a bench beside one of the doors, leaning back against the wall in a curiously stiff fashion. She turned her head slowly toward him at the sound of his boots grating on the stone. A pretty young woman. He wondered why she did not move more than her head, and why even that moved as if she were half-asleep.

wɑz ʃi ə pɹɪznɝ? aʊɾ ɪn ðə hɔl? bʌt noʊbɑdi wɪð ə feɪs laɪk ðət kəd bi wʌn ə ðə pipəl u juzɪz ðə θɪŋz ɑn ðoʊz wɔlz. ʃi dɪd lʊk ɔlmoʊst əslip, wɪð əɹ aɪz oʊnli pɑɹtli oʊpən. ən ðə sʌfɝɪŋ ɑn ðət lʌvli feɪs ʃʊɹli meɪɾ əɹ wʌn ə ðə tɔɹtʃɝd, nɑɾ ə tɔɹtʃɝɝ.

Was she a prisoner? Out in the hall? But nobody with a face like that could be one of the people who uses the things on those walls. She did look almost asleep, with her eyes only partly open. And the suffering on that lovely face surely made her one of the tortured, not a torturer.

"stɑp!" sændɑɹ ʃaʊɾəd bɪhaɪn hɪm. "ʃi ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ! ʃiz wʌn ə ðoʊz u tʊk ðə wɪmən jə sik!"

"Stop!" Sandar shouted behind him. "She is Aes Sedai! She is one of those who took the women you seek!"

mæt fɹoʊz ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə stɛp, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə wʊmən. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd mɔɪɹeɪn hɝlɪŋ bɔlz ə faɪɝ. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf i kəd dɪflɛkt ə bɔl ə faɪɝ wɪð ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ɪz lʌk ɪkstɛndəd tə aʊtʃɹʌnɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Mat froze in the middle of a step, staring at the woman. He remembered Moiraine hurling balls of fire. He wondered if he could deflect a ball of fire with his quarterstaff. He wondered if his luck extended to outrunning Aes Sedai.

"hɛlp mi," ʃi sɛd feɪnli. hɝ aɪz stɪl lʊk nɪɹli əslip, bʌt ðə pliɾɪŋ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs wɑz fʊli əweɪk. "hɛlp mi. pliz!"

"Help me," she said faintly. Her eyes still looked nearly asleep, but the pleading in her voice was fully awake. "Help me. Please!"

mæt blɪŋkt. ʃi stɪl hæd nɑt muvd ə mʌsəl bɪloʊ hɝ nɛk. kɔʃəsli, hi stɛp kloʊsɝ, weɪvɪŋ tə sændɑɹ tə stɑp ɪz ɡɹoʊnɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ biɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi muvd əɹ hɛd tə fɑloʊ hɪm. noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðæt.

Mat blinked. She still had not moved a muscle below her neck. Cautiously, he stepped closer, waving to Sandar to stop his groaning about her being Aes Sedai. She moved her head to follow him. No more than that.

ə lɑɹdʒ aɪɝn ki hʌŋ əɾ əɹ bɛlt. fəɹ ə moʊmən i hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ɛɛs sədaɪ, sændɑɹ sɛd. waɪ dʌznt ʃi muv? swɑloʊɪŋ, hi iz ðə ki fɹi əz kɛɹfəli əz ɪf i wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə teɪk ə pis ə mit fɹəm ə wʊlfs dʒɔz. ʃi ɹoʊld əɹ aɪz təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ən meɪɾ ə saʊn laɪk ə kæt ðət hæd dʒʌst sin ə hjudʒ dɔɡ kʌm snɑɹlɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum ən nu ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ aʊt.

A large iron key hung at her belt. For a moment he hesitated. Aes Sedai, Sandar said. Why doesn't she move? Swallowing, he eased the key free as carefully as if he were trying to take a piece of meat from a wolf's jaws. She rolled her eyes toward the door beside her and made a sound like a cat that had just seen a huge dog come snarling into the room and knew there was no way out.

hi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪt, bʌɾ əz lɔŋ əz ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp ɪm oʊpənɪŋ ðət dɔɹ, hi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ waɪ ʃi dʒʌst sæt ðəɹ laɪk ə stʌf skɑɹɛkɹoʊ. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd wɝθ biɪŋ əfɹeɪɾ ʌv. ɪf ʃiz wʌn ə ðoʊz u tʊk ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz, ɪt stænz tə ɹizən ʃiz ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðɛm. tɪɹz lik fɹəm ðə wʊmənz aɪz. oʊnli ʃi lʊks laɪk ɪts ə blʌɾi hæfmən ɪn ðɛɹ. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn weɪ tə faɪn aʊt. pɹɑpɪŋ ɪz stæf əɡɛns ðə wɔl, hi tɝn ðə ki ɪn ðə lɑk ən flʌŋ oʊpən ðə dɔɹ, ɹɛɾi tə ɹʌn ɪf nid bi.

He did not understand it, but as long as she did not try to stop him opening that door, he did not care why she just sat there like a stuffed scarecrow. On the other hand, he wondered if there was something on the other side worth being afraid of. If she is one of those who took Egwene and the others, it stands to reason she's guarding them. Tears leaked from the woman's eyes. Only she looks like it's a bloody Halfman in there. But there was only one way to find out. Propping his staff against the wall, he turned the key in the lock and flung open the door, ready to run if need be.

nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɝ nilɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ wɪð ɛɡwin əpɛɹənli əslip bɪtwin ðɛm. hi ɡæspt ət ðə saɪɾ ʌv ɛɡwinz swoʊlən feɪs, ən tʃeɪnʒd ɪz maɪn əbaʊɾ əɹ slipɪŋ. ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən tɝn təwɔɹɾ ɪm əz i oʊpən ðə dɔɹ - ðeɪ wɝ ɔlmoʊst əz bæɾɝd əz ɛɡwin; bɝn mi! bɝn mi! - lʊkt ət hɪm, ən ɡeɪpt.

Nynaeve and Elayne were kneeling on the floor with Egwene apparently asleep between them. He gasped at the sight of Egwene's swollen face, and changed his mind about her sleeping. The other two women turned toward him as he opened the door - they were almost as battered as Egwene; Burn me! Burn me! - looked at him, and gaped.

"meɪtʃɹim kɔθən," nɪneɪiv sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ʃɑkt, "wʌɾ ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ?"

"Matrim Cauthon," Nynaeve said, sounding shocked, "what under the Light are you doing here?"

"aɪ keɪm tə blʌɾi ɹɛskju ju," hi sɛd. "bɝn mi ɪf aɪ ɪkspɛktəd tə bi ɡɹiɾəd əz ɪf aɪ hæd kʌm tə stil ə paɪ. jə kən tɛl mi waɪ jə lʊk əz ɪf jud bɪn faɪɾɪŋ bɛɹz leɪɾɝ, ɪf jə wɑnt. ɪf ɛɡwin kænɑt wɔk, əl kæɹi hɝ ɑn maɪ bæk. ðəɹ ɑɹ il ɔl oʊvɝ ðə stoʊn, əɹ nɪɹ ɪnʌf, ən iðɝ ðeɪ ɑɹ kɪlɪŋ ðə blʌɾi dɪfɛndɝz əɹ ðə blʌɾi dɪfɛndɝz ɑɹ kɪlɪŋ ðɛm, bʌt wɪtʃɛvɝ weɪ ɪɾ ɪz, wi hæd bɛɾɝ ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ waɪl wi blʌɾi wɛl kæn. ɪf wi kæn!"

"I came to bloody rescue you," he said. "Burn me if I expected to be greeted as if I had come to steal a pie. You can tell me why you look as if you'd been fighting bears later, if you want. If Egwene cannot walk, I'll carry her on my back. There are Aiel all over the Stone, or near enough, and either they are killing the bloody Defenders or the bloody Defenders are killing them, but whichever way it is, we had better get out of here while we bloody well can. If we can!"

"maɪn jəɹ læŋɡwədʒ," nɪneɪiv toʊl hɪm, ən ɪleɪn ɡeɪv ɪm wʌn ə ðoʊz dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ stɛɹz wɪmən wɝ soʊ ɡʊɾ æt. niðɝ wʌn sim tə hæv əɹ fʊl ətɛnʃən ɪn ɪt, ðoʊ. ðeɪ bɪɡæn ʃeɪkɪŋ ɛɡwin əz ɪf ʃi wɝ nɑt kʌvɝd wɪð mɔɹ bɹuzəz ðən i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ɪn ɪz laɪf.

"Mind your language," Nynaeve told him, and Elayne gave him one of those disapproving stares women were so good at. Neither one seemed to have her full attention in it, though. They began shaking Egwene as if she were not covered with more bruises than he had ever seen in his life.

ɛɡwinz aɪlɪdz flʌɾɝd oʊpən, ən ʃi ɡɹoʊnd. "waɪ dɪd jə weɪk mi? aɪ mʌst ʌndɝstæn ɪt. ɪf aɪ lus ðə bɑnz ɑn hɝ, ʃɪl weɪk ən əl nɛvɝ kætʃ əɹ əɡɛn. bʌɾ ɪf aɪ də nɑt, ʃi kænɑt ɡoʊ ɔl ðə weɪ tə slip, ən - " hɝ aɪz fɛl ɑn ɪm ən waɪɾənd. "meɪtʃɹim kɔθən, wʌɾ ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ?"

Egwene's eyelids fluttered open, and she groaned. "Why did you wake me? I must understand it. If I loose the bonds on her, she will wake and I'll never catch her again. But if I do not, she cannot go all the way to sleep, and - " Her eyes fell on him and widened. "Matrim Cauthon, what under the Light are you doing here?"

"ju tɛl hɝ," hi toʊl nɪneɪiv. "aɪ æm tu bɪzi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɛskju jə tə wɑtʃ maɪ læŋɡʌ - " ðeɪ wɝ ɔl stɛɹɪŋ bɪɑn hɪm, ɡlɛɹɪŋ əz ɪf ðeɪ wɪʃt ðeɪ hæd naɪvz ɪn ðɛɹ hænz.

"You tell her," he told Nynaeve. "I am too busy trying to rescue you to watch my langu - " They were all staring beyond him, glaring as if they wished they had knives in their hands.

hi spʌn, bʌɾ ɔl i sɔ wɑz dʒulɪn sændɑɹ, lʊkɪŋ əz ɪf i hæd swɑloʊɾ ə ɹɑɾən plʌm hoʊl.

He spun, but all he saw was Juilin Sandar, looking as if he had swallowed a rotten plum whole.

"ðeɪ hæv kɑz," hi toʊl mæt. "aɪ. . . . aɪ bɪtʃɹeɪd ðɛm. bʌɾ aɪ hæd təðæt wɑz ədʒɹɛs pæs mæt tə ðə wɪmən. "ðə wʌn wɪð mɛni hʌni-kʌlɝd bɹeɪdz spoʊk tə mi, ən aɪ. . . . aɪ hæd tə də ɪt." fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmən ðə θɹi kəntɪnjud tə stɛɹ.

"They have cause," he told Mat. "I. . . . I betrayed them. But I had to."That was addressed past Mat to the women. "The one with many honey-colored braids spoke to me, and I. . . . I had to do it." For a long moment the three continued to stare.

"liɑnʒɹɪn əz vaɪl tʃɹɪks, mæstɝ sændɑɹ," nɪneɪiv sɛd faɪnəli. "pɝhæps jə ɑɹ nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli tə bleɪm. wi kən əpɔɹʃən ɡɪlt leɪɾɝ."

"Liandrin has vile tricks, Master Sandar," Nynaeve said finally. "Perhaps you are not entirely to blame. We can apportion guilt later."

"ɪf ðəɾ ɪz ɔl klɪɹɾ ʌp," mæt sɛd, "kʊd wi ɡoʊ naʊ?" ɪt wɑz əz klɪɹ əz mʌd tə hɪm, bʌɾ i wɑz mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn livɪŋ ɹaɪt ðɛn.

"If that is all cleared up," Mat said, "could we go now?" It was as clear as mud to him, but he was more interested in leaving right then.

ðə θɹi wɪmən lɪmpt æftɝ ɪm ɪndə ðə hɔl, bʌt ðeɪ stɑpt ɝaʊn ðə wʊmən ɑn ðə bɛntʃ. ʃi ɹoʊld əɹ aɪz əɾ əm ən wɪmpɝd. "pliz. əl kʌm bæk tə ðə laɪt. əl swɛɹ tə oʊbeɪ ju. wɪð ði oʊθ ɹɑɾ ɪn maɪ hænz əl swɛɹ. pliz də nɑt - "

The three women limped after him into the hall, but they stopped around the woman on the bench. She rolled her eyes at them and whimpered. "Please. I will come back to the Light. I will swear to obey you. With the Oath Rod in my hands I will swear. Please do not - "

mæt dʒʌmpt əz nɪneɪiv sʌɾənli ɹɪɹd bæk ən swʌŋ ə fɪst, nɑkɪŋ ðə wʊmən kəmplitli ɔf ðə bɛntʃ. ʃi leɪ ðɛɹ, hɝ aɪz kloʊzd ɔl ðə weɪ faɪnəli, bʌɾ ivən laɪɪŋ ɑn əɹ saɪd ʃi wɑz stɪl ɪn ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm pəzɪʃən ʃi hæd bɪn ɪn ɑn ðə bɛntʃ.

Mat jumped as Nynaeve suddenly reared back and swung a fist, knocking the woman completely off the bench. She lay there, her eyes closed all the way finally, but even lying on her side she was still in exactly the same position she had been in on the bench.

"ɪɾ ɪz ɡɔn," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪksaɪɾədli.

"It is gone," Elayne said excitedly.

ɛɡwin bɛn tə ɹʌmɪdʒ ɪn ði ʌnkɑnʃəs wʊmənz paʊtʃ, tʃɹænsfɝɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ mæt kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt tə hɝ oʊn. "jɛs. ɪt filz wʌndɝfəl. sʌmθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd əbaʊɾ əɹ wən jə hɪt hɝ, nɪneɪiv. aɪ də nɑt noʊ wʌt, bʌɾ aɪ fɛlt ɪt."

Egwene bent to rummage in the unconscious woman's pouch, transferring something Mat could not make out to her own. "Yes. It feels wonderful. Something changed about her when you hit her, Nynaeve. I do not know what, but I felt it."

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd. "aɪ fɛlt ɪt, tu."

Elayne nodded. "I felt it, too."

"aɪ wəd laɪk tə tʃeɪnʒ ɛvɹi læs θɪŋ əbaʊt hɝ," nɪneɪiv sɛd ɡɹɪmli. ʃi tʊk ɛɡwinz hɛɾ ɪn əɹ hænz; ɛɡwin ɹoʊz ɑntu hɝ toʊz, ɡæspɪŋ. wən nɪneɪiv tʊk əɹ hænz əweɪ tə pʊɾ əm ɑn ɪleɪn, ɛɡwinz bɹuzəz wɝ ɡɔn. ɪleɪnz vænɪʃt əz kwɪkli.

"I would like to change every last thing about her," Nynaeve said grimly. She took Egwene's head in her hands; Egwene rose onto her toes, gasping. When Nynaeve took her hands away to put them on Elayne, Egwene's bruises were gone. Elayne's vanished as quickly.

"blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz!" mæt ɡɹaʊld. "wʌt dʒju min hɪɾɪŋ ə wʊmən u wɑz dʒʌst sɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ? aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ʃi kəɾ ivən muv!" ðeɪ ɔl θɹi tɝn tə lʊk ət hɪm, ən i meɪɾ ə stʃɹæŋɡəl saʊn əz ði ɛɹ sim tə tɝn tə θɪk dʒɛli ɝaʊn hɪm. hi lɪftəɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ, əntɪl ɪz buts dæŋɡəld ə ɡʊd peɪs əbʌv ðə flɔɹ. oʊ, bɝn mi, ðə paʊɝ! hɪɹ aɪ wɑz əfɹeɪd ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd juz ðə blʌɾi paʊɝ ɑn mi, ən naʊ ðə blʌɾi wɪmən aɪm ɹɛskjuɪŋ də ɪt! bɝn mi!

"Blood and bloody ashes!" Mat growled. "What do you mean hitting a woman who was just sitting there? I don't think she could even move!" They all three turned to look at him, and he made a strangled sound as the air seemed to turn to thick jelly around him. He lifted into the air, until his boots dangled a good pace above the floor. Oh, burn me, the Power! Here I was afraid that Aes Sedai would use the bloody Power on me, and now the bloody women I'm rescuing do it! Burn me!

"ju də nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ɛniθɪŋ, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən," ɛɡwin sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs.

"You do not understand anything, Matrim Cauthon," Egwene said in a tight voice.

"əntɪl jə də ʌndɝstænd," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ən ivən taɪɾɝ, "aɪ sədʒɛs jə kip jəɹ əpɪnjənz tə jɝsɛlf."

"Until you do understand," Nynaeve said in an even tighter, "I suggest you keep your opinions to yourself."

ɪleɪn kəntɛntəd hɝsɛlf wɪð ə ɡlɛɹ ðət meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ə hɪz mʌðɝ ɡoʊɪŋ aʊt tə kʌɾ ə swɪtʃ.

Elayne contented herself with a glare that made him think of his mother going out to cut a switch.

fəɹ səm ɹizən i faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɡɪvɪŋ əm ðə ɡɹɪn ðət hæd soʊ ɔfən sɛn ɪz mʌðɝ æftɝ ðət swɪtʃ. bɝn mi, ɪf ðeɪ kən də ðɪs, aɪ doʊn si haʊ ɛnibəɾi ɛvɝ lɑkt əm ɪn ðət sɛl ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs! "wʌɾ aɪ ʌndɝstæn ɪz ðəɾ aɪ ɡɑt jə aʊɾ ə sʌmθɪŋ jə kʊdnt ɡɛt jʊɹsɛlvz aʊɾ ʌv, ən jə ɔl əv əz mʌtʃ ɡɹæɾətud əz ə blʌɾi tɛɹən fɛɹi mæn wɪð ə tuθæk!"

For some reason he found himself giving them the grin that had so often sent his mother after that switch. Burn me, if they can do this, I don't see how anybody ever locked them in that cell in the first place! "What I understand is that I got you out of something you couldn't get yourselves out of, and you all have as much gratitude as a bloody Taren Ferry man with a toothache!"

"ju ɑɹ ɹaɪt," nɪneɪiv sɛd, ən ɪz buts sʌɾənli hɪt ðə flɔɹ soʊ hɑɹɾ ɪz tiθ dʒɑɹd. bʌɾ i kəd muv əɡɛn. "æz mʌtʃ əz ɪt peɪnz mi tə seɪ ɪt, mæt, jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt."

"You are right," Nynaeve said, and his boots suddenly hit the floor so hard his teeth jarred. But he could move again. "As much as it pains me to say it, Mat, you are right."

hi wɑz tɛmptəd tə ænsɝ sʌmθɪŋ sɑɹkæstɪk, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz bɛɹli ɪnʌf əpɑlədʒi ɪn əɹ vɔɪs əz ɪt wɑz. "naʊ kən wi ɡoʊ? wɪð ðə faɪɾɪŋ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn, sændɑɹ θɪŋks i ən aɪ kən teɪk jə aʊt baɪ ə smɔl ɡeɪt nɪɹ ðə ɹɪvɝ."

He was tempted to answer something sarcastic, but there was barely enough apology in her voice as it was. "Now can we go? With the fighting going on, Sandar thinks he and I can take you out by a small gate near the river."

"aɪ æm nɑt livɪŋ dʒʌs jɛt, mæt," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "aɪ min tə faɪn liɑnʒɹɪn ən skɪn hɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ʃi mɛn ɪt lɪɾɝəli.

"I am not leaving just yet, Mat," Nynaeve said. "I mean to find Liandrin and skin her," Egwene said, sounding almost as if she meant it literally.

"ɔl aɪ wɑnə du," ɪleɪn sɛd, "ɪz paʊn dʒɔɪjə bɝ tɪl ʃi skwilz, bʌɾ əl sɛɾəl fəɹ ɛni ʌv ðɛm."

"All I want to do," Elayne said, "is pound Joiya Byir till she squeals, but I will settle for any of them."

"ɑɹ jə ɔl dɛf?" hi ɡɹaʊld. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə bæɾəl ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn aʊt ðɛɹ! aɪ keɪm hɪɹ tə ɹɛskju ju, ən aɪ min tə ɹɛskju ju." ɛɡwin pæɾəd ɪz tʃik əz ʃi wɔk baɪ hɪm, ən soʊ dɪɾ ɪleɪn. nɪneɪiv mɪɹli snɪft. hi stɛɹɾ æftɝ əm wɪð ɪz maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən. "waɪ dɪdn jə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ?" hi ɡɹaʊld ət ðə θif-kætʃɝ.

"Are you all deaf?" he growled. "There is a battle going on out there! I came here to rescue you, and I mean to rescue you." Egwene patted his cheek as she walked by him, and so did Elayne. Nynaeve merely sniffed. He stared after them with his mouth hanging open. "Why didn't you say something?" he growled at the thief-catcher.

"aɪ sɔ wʌt spikɪŋ ɝn ju," sændɑɹ sɛd sɪmpli. "aɪ æm noʊ ful."

"I saw what speaking earned you," Sandar said simply. "I am no fool."

"wɛl, aɪm nɑt steɪɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə bæɾəl!" hi ʃaʊɾəd ət ðə wɪmən. ðeɪ wɝ dʒʌs dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ θɹu ðə smɔl, bɑɹd dɔɹ. "aɪ æm livɪŋ, dʒju hɪɹ?" ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ivən lʊk bæk. pɹɑbli ɡɛt ðɛmsɛlvz kɪld aʊt ðɛɹ! sʌmbɑɾi wɪl stɪk ə sɔɹɾ ɪn əm waɪl ðəɹ lʊkɪŋ ði ʌðɝ weɪ! wɪð ə snɑɹl, hi pʊɾ ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ən stɑɹɾəd æftɝ. "ɑɹ jə gɑnə stæn ðɛɹ?" hi kɔl tə ðə θif-kætʃɝ. "aɪ dɪd nɑt kʌm ðɪs fɑɹ tə lɛɾ əm daɪ naʊ!"

"Well, I am not staying in the middle of a battle!" he shouted at the women. They were just disappearing through the small, barred door. "I am leaving, do you hear?" They did not even look back. Probably get themselves killed out there! Somebody will stick a sword in them while they're looking the other way! With a snarl, he put his quarterstaff across his shoulder and started after. "Are you going to stand there?" he called to the thief-catcher. "I did not come this far to let them die now!"

sændɑɹ kɑɾ ʌp tə hɪm ɪn ðə ɹum wɪð ðə wɪps. ðə θɹi wɪmən wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɔn, bʌt mæt hæɾ ə filɪŋ ðeɪ wəd nɑt bi tu hɑɹd tə faɪnd. dʒʌs faɪn ðə mɛn blʌɾi hæŋɪŋ ɪn mɪdɛɹ! blʌɾi wɪmən! hi kwɪkən ɪz peɪs tə ə tʃɹɑt.

Sandar caught up to him in the room with the whips. The three women were already gone, but Mat had a feeling they would not be too hard to find. Just find the men bloody hanging in midair! Bloody women! He quickened his pace to a trot.

pɛɹɪn stʃɹoʊd daʊn ðə hɔlz ə ðə stoʊn ɡɹɪmli, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ səm saɪn ə feɪl. hi hæd ɹɛskjuɾ əɹ twaɪs mɔɹ, naʊ, bɹeɪkɪŋ əɹ aʊɾ ʌv ən aɪɝn keɪdʒ wʌns, mʌtʃ laɪk ðə wʌn ðət hæd hɛl ði il ɪn ɹɛmən, ən wʌns bɹeɪkɪŋ oʊpən ə stil tʃɛst wɪð ə fælkən wɝkt ɑn ɪts saɪd. boʊθ taɪmz ʃi hæd mɛltəɾ ɪndə ɛɹ æftɝ seɪɪŋ ɪz neɪm. hɑpɝ tʃɹɑɾəd baɪ hɪz saɪd, snɪfɪŋ ði ɛɹ. əz ʃɑɹp əz pɛɹɪnz noʊz wɑz, ðə wʊlfs wɑz ʃɑɹpɝ; ɪt hæd bɪn hɑpɝ u lɛɾ əm tə ðə tʃɛst.

Perrin strode down the halls of the Stone grimly, searching for some sign of Faile. He had rescued her twice more, now, breaking her out of an iron cage once, much like the one that had held the Aiel in Remen, and once breaking open a steel chest with a falcon worked on its side. Both times she had melted into air after saying his name. Hopper trotted by his side, sniffing the air. As sharp as Perrin's nose was, the wolf's was sharper; it had been Hopper who led them to the chest.

pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ i wɑz ɛvɝ gɑnə fɹi hɝ ɪn tʃɹuθ. ðəɹ hæd nɑt bɪn ɛni saɪn ɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm, ɪt simd. ðə hɔlz ə ðə stoʊn wɝ ɛmpti, læmps bɝnɪŋ, tæpəstʃɹiz ən wɛpənz hæŋɪŋ ɑn ðə wɔlz, bʌt nʌθɪŋ muvd ɪksɛp hɪmsɛlf ən hɑpɝ. ɪksɛpt aɪ θɪŋk ðət wɑz ɹænd. ɪt hæɾ oʊnli bɪn ə ɡlɪmps, ə mæn ɹʌnɪŋ əz ɪf tʃeɪsɪŋ sʌmwʌn. ɪt kəd nɑt bi hɪm. ɪt kʊdnt, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ɪt wɑz.

Perrin wondered whether he was ever going to free her in truth. There had not been any sign in a long time, it seemed. The halls of the Stone were empty, lamps burning, tapestries and weapons hanging on the walls, but nothing moved except himself and Hopper. Except I think that was Rand. It had only been a glimpse, a man running as if chasing someone. It could not be him. It couldn't, but I think it was.

hɑpɝ kwɪkən ɪz stɛps sʌɾənli, hɛɾɪŋ fəɹ ənʌðɝ sɛɾ ə tɔl dɔɹz, ðiz klæɾ ɪn bɹɑnz. pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə mætʃ ðə peɪs, stʌmbəld, ən fɛl tə hɪz niz, θɹoʊɪŋ aʊɾ ə hæn tə kætʃ hɪmsɛlf ʃɔɹɾ ə dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɑn ɪz feɪs. wiknəs wɑʃt θɹu hɪm əz ɪf ɔl ɪz mʌsəlz hæd ɡɔn tə wɔɾɝ. ivən æftɝ ðə filɪŋ ɹəsiɾəd, ɪt tʊk səm ə hɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ wɪð ɪt. ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt tə stʃɹʌɡəl tə hɪz fit. hɑpɝ hæd tɝn tə lʊk ət hɪm.

Hopper quickened his steps suddenly, heading for another set of tall doors, these clad in bronze. Perrin tried to match the pace, stumbled, and fell to his knees, throwing out a hand to catch himself short of dropping on his face. Weakness washed through him as if all his muscles had gone to water. Even after the feeling receded, it took some of his strength with it. It was an effort to struggle to his feet. Hopper had turned to look at him.

jə ɑɹ hɪɹ tu stʃɹɔŋli, jʌŋ bʊl. ðə flɛʃ wikənz. jə də nɑt kɛɹ tə hoʊld ɑn tə ɪɾ ɪnʌf. sun flɛʃ ən dʒɹim wɪl daɪ təɡɛðɝ.

You are here too strongly, Young Bull. The flesh weakens. You do not care to hold on to it enough. Soon flesh and dream will die together.

"faɪn hɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðæɾ ɪz ɔl aɪ æsk. faɪn feɪl."

"Find her," Perrin said. "That is all I ask. Find Faile."

jɛloʊ aɪz mɛt jɛloʊ aɪz. ðə wʊlf tɝn ən tʃɹɑɾəd tə ðə dɔɹz. bɪɑn hɪɹ, jʌŋ bʊl.

Yellow eyes met yellow eyes. The wolf turned and trotted to the doors. Beyond here, Young Bull.

pɛɹɪn ɹitʃt ðə dɔɹz ən pʊʃt. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt bʌdʒ. ðəɹ sim tə bi noʊ weɪ tə oʊpən ðɛm, noʊ hændəlz, nʌθɪŋ tə ɡɹɪp. ðəɹ wɑz ə taɪni pæɾɝn wɝkt ɪndə ðə mɛɾəl, soʊ faɪn ɪz aɪz ɔlmoʊs dɪd nɑt si ɪt. fælkənz. θaʊzənz ə taɪni fælkənz.

Perrin reached the doors and pushed. They did not budge. There seemed to be no way to open them, no handles, nothing to grip. There was a tiny pattern worked into the metal, so fine his eyes almost did not see it. Falcons. Thousands of tiny falcons.

ʃiz tə bi hɪɹ. aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk aɪ kən læs mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ. wɪð ə ʃaʊt, hi swʌŋ ɪz hæmɝ əɡɛns ðə bɹɑnz. ɪt ɹæŋ laɪk ə ɡɹeɪt ɡɔŋ. əɡɛn i stʃɹʌk, ən ðə pil dipənd. ə θɝd bloʊ, ən ðə bɹɑnz dɔɹz ʃæɾɝd laɪk ɡlæs.

She has to be here. I do not think I can last much longer. With a shout, he swung his hammer against the bronze. It rang like a great gong. Again he struck, and the peal deepened. A third blow, and the bronze doors shattered like glass.

wɪðɪn, ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz fɹəm ðə bɹoʊkən dɔɹz, ə sɝkəl ə laɪt sɝaʊndəɾ ə fælkən tʃeɪn tə ə pɝtʃ. dɑɹknəs fɪld ɔl ðə ɹɛst ə ðət væs tʃeɪmbɝ, dɑɹknəs ən feɪn ɹʌsəlɪŋz əz ə hʌnʒɹədz ʌv wɪŋz.

Within, a hundred paces from the broken doors, a circle of light surrounded a falcon chained to a perch. Darkness filled all the rest of that vast chamber, darkness and faint rustlings as of hundreds of wings.

hi tʊk ə stɛp ɪndə ðə ɹum, ən ə fælkən stupt aʊɾ ə ðə mɝk, təlɑnz skɔɹɪŋ ɪz feɪs əz ɪt pæst. hi θɹu ən ɑɹm əkɹɔs ɪz aɪz - təlɑnz tɔɹ əɾ ɪz fɔɹɑɹm - ən stæɡɝd təwɔɹd ðə pɝtʃ. əɡɛn ən əɡɛn ðə bɝdz keɪm, fælkənz daɪvɪŋ, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ hɪm, tɛɹɪŋ hɪm, bʌɾ i lʌmbɝɾ ɑn wɪð blʌd pɔɹɪŋ daʊn ɪz ɑɹmz ən ʃoʊldɝz, ðət wʌn ɑɹm pɹətɛktɪŋ ði aɪz i hæd fɪkst ɑn ðə fælkən ɑn ðə pɝtʃ. hi hæd lɔs ðə hæmɝ; hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛɹ, bʌɾ i nu ðəɾ ɪf i wɛn bæk tə sɝtʃ, hi wəd daɪ bɪfɔɹ i faʊn ɪt.

He took a step into the room, and a falcon stooped out of the murk, talons scoring his face as it passed. He threw an arm across his eyes - talons tore at his forearm - and staggered toward the perch. Again and again the birds came, falcons diving, striking him, tearing him, but he lumbered on with blood pouring down his arms and shoulders, that one arm protecting the eyes he had fixed on the falcon on the perch. He had lost the hammer; he did not know where, but he knew that if he went back to search, he would die before he found it.

əz i ɹitʃt ðə pɝtʃ, ðə slaɪsɪŋ təlɑnz dʒɹoʊv ɪm tə hɪz niz. hi pɪɹɾ ʌp ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm ət ðə fælkən ɑn ðə pɝtʃ, ən ʃi stɛɹd bæk wɪð dɑɹk, ənblɪŋkɪŋ aɪz. ðə tʃeɪn ðət hɛld əɹ lɛɡ wɑz fæsən tə ðə pɝtʃ wɪð ə taɪni lɑk ʃeɪp laɪk ə hɛdʒhɑɡ. hi siz ðə tʃeɪn wɪð boʊθ hænz, kɛɹləs ə ði ʌðɝ fælkənz ðət naʊ bɪkeɪm ə wɝlwɪn ə kʌɾɪŋ təlɑnz ɝaʊn hɪm, ən wɪð ɪz læst stʃɹɛŋkθ snæpt ɪt. peɪn ən ðə fælkənz bɹɔt dɑɹknəs.

As he reached the perch, the slicing talons drove him to his knees. He peered up under his arm at the falcon on the perch, and she stared back with dark, unblinking eyes. The chain that held her leg was fastened to the perch with a tiny lock shaped like a hedgehog. He seized the chain with both hands, careless of the other falcons that now became a whirlwind of cutting talons around him, and with his last strength snapped it. Pain and the falcons brought darkness.

hi oʊpən ɪz aɪz tə stɪŋɪŋ æɡəni, əz ɪf ɪz feɪs ən ɑɹmz ən ʃoʊldɝz hæd bɪn slaɪst wɪð ə θaʊzənd naɪvz. ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. feɪl wɑz nilɪŋ oʊvɝ hɪm, ðoʊz dɑɹk, tɪltəɾ aɪz fɪld wɪð wɝi, waɪpɪŋ ɪz feɪs wɪð ə klɔθ ɔlɹɛɾi soʊkt ɪn ɪz blʌd.

He opened his eyes to stinging agony, as if his face and arms and shoulders had been sliced with a thousand knives. It did not matter. Faile was kneeling over him, those dark, tilted eyes filled with worry, wiping his face with a cloth already soaked in his blood.

"maɪ pʊɹ pɛɹɪn," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "maɪ pʊɹ blæksmɪθ. jə ɑɹ hɝt soʊ bædli."

"My poor Perrin," she said softly. "My poor blacksmith. You are hurt so badly."

wɪð ən ɛfɝt ðət kɑs mɔɹ peɪn, hi tɝn ɪz hɛd. ðɪs wɑz ðə pɹaɪvət daɪnɪŋ ɹum ɪn ðə stɑɹ, ən nɪɹ wʌn lɛɡ ʌv ðə teɪbəl leɪ ə wʊɾən kɑɹvɪŋ ʌv ə hɛdʒhɑɡ, bɹoʊkən ɪn hæf. "feɪl," hi wɪspɝd tə hɝ. "maɪ fælkən."

With an effort that cost more pain, he turned his head. This was the private dining room in the Star, and near one leg of the table lay a wooden carving of a hedgehog, broken in half. "Faile," he whispered to her. "My falcon."

ɹænd wɑz stɪl ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz dɪfɹənt. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ mɛn faɪɾɪŋ hɪɹ, noʊ dɛd mɛn, noʊ wʌn əɾ ɔl bʌt hɪmsɛlf. əbɹʌpli ðə saʊn ʌv ə ɡɹeɪt ɡɔŋ ɹæŋ θɹu ðə stoʊn, ðən əɡɛn, ən ðə vɛɹi stoʊnz bɪniθ ɪz fit ɹɛzəneɪɾɪd. ə θɝd taɪm ðə bumɪŋ keɪm, bʌt kʌɾ ɔf əbɹʌpli, əz ɪf ðə ɡɔŋ hæd ʃæɾɝd. ɔl wɑz stɪl.

Rand was still in the Heart of the Stone, but it was different. There were no men fighting here, no dead men, no one at all but himself. Abruptly the sound of a great gong rang through the Stone, then again, and the very stones beneath his feet resonated. A third time the booming came, but cut off abruptly, as if the gong had shattered. All was still.

wɛɹ ɪz ðɪs pleɪs? hi wʌndɝd. mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, wɛɹ ɪz bælzəmən?

Where is this place? he wondered. More important, where is Ba'alzamon?

əz ɪf tə ænsɝ hɪm, ə bleɪzɪŋ ʃæf laɪk ðə wʌn mɔɪɹeɪn hæd meɪd ʃɑɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊz əmʌŋ ðə kɑləmz, stʃɹeɪt təwɔɹɾ ɪz tʃɛst. hɪz ɹɪs twɪstəd ðə sɔɹɾ ɪnstɪŋktɪvli; ɪt wɑz ɪnstɪŋkt əz mʌtʃ əz ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ðət meɪɾ ɪm lus floʊz fɹəm seɪɾɪn ɪndə kælændɝ, ə flʌɾ ə ðə paʊɝ ðət meɪd ðə sɔɹd bleɪz bɹaɪɾɝ ivən ðən ðət bɑɹ stʃɹikɪŋ ət hɪm. hɪz ənsɝɾən bæləns bɪtwin ɛɡzɪstəns ən dɪstʃɹʌkʃən weɪvɝd. ʃʊɹli ðət tɔɹənt wəd kənsum hɪm.

As if to answer him, a blazing shaft like the one Moiraine had made shot out of the shadows among the columns, straight toward his chest. His wrist twisted the sword instinctively; it was instinct as much as anything else that made him loose flows from saidin into Callandor, a flood of the Power that made the sword blaze brighter even than that bar streaking at him. His uncertain balance between existence and destruction wavered. Surely that torrent would consume him.

ðə ʃæft ə laɪt stʃɹʌk ðə bleɪɾ ə kælændɝ - ən pɑɹɾəd ɑn ɪts ɛdʒ, fɔɹkɪŋ tə stʃɹim pæst ɑn iðɝ saɪd. hi fɛlt ɪz koʊt sɪnʒ fɹəm ɪts nɪɹ pæsədʒ, smɛl ðə wʊl bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə bɝn. bɪhaɪn hɪm, ðə tu pɹɔŋz ə fɹoʊzən faɪɝ, ʌv lɪkwəd laɪt, stʃɹʌk hjudʒ ɹɛdstoʊn kɑləmz; wɛɹ ðeɪ stʃɹʌk, stoʊn sis tə ɪɡzɪst, ən ðə bɝnɪŋ bɑɹz bɔɹd θɹu tə ʌðɝ kɑləmz, sɛvɝɪŋ ðoʊz ɪnstəntæniəsli əz wɛl. ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn ɹʌmbəld əz kɑləmz fɛl ən ʃæɾɝd ɪn klaʊdz ə dʌst, spɹeɪz ə stoʊn fɹæɡməns. wʌt fɛl ɪndə ðə laɪt, haʊɛvɝ, sɪmpli - wɑz nɑt, ɛnimɔɹ.

The shaft of light struck the blade of Callandor - and parted on its edge, forking to stream past on either side. He felt his coat singe from its near passage, smelled the wool beginning to burn. Behind him, the two prongs of frozen fire, of liquid light, struck huge redstone columns; where they struck, stone ceased to exist, and the burning bars bored through to other columns, severing those instantaneously as well. The Heart of the Stone rumbled as columns fell and shattered in clouds of dust, sprays of stone fragments. What fell into the light, however, simply - was not, anymore.

ə snɑɹl ə ɹeɪdʒ keɪm fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz, ən ðə bleɪzɪŋ ʃæft ə pjʊɹ waɪt hit vænɪʃt.

A snarl of rage came from the shadows, and the blazing shaft of pure white heat vanished.

ɹænd swʌŋ kælændɝ əz ɪf i wɝ stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ət sʌmθɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. ðə waɪt laɪɾ əbskjʊɹɪŋ ðə bleɪɾ ɪkstɛndəd, bleɪzd əhɛd, ən ʃɪɹd θɹu ðə ɹɛdstoʊn kɑləm ðət hɪd ðə snɑɹl. ðə pɑlɪʃt stoʊn slaɪs laɪk sɪlk. ðə sɛvɝd kɑləm tʃɹɛmbəld; pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt tɔɹ lus ən dʒɹɑp fɹəm ðə silɪŋ, smæʃɪŋ ɪndə hjudʒ, dʒæɡd tʃʌŋks ɑn ðə flɔɹ. əz ðə ɹʌmbəlɪŋ feɪɾəd, hi hɝd bɪɑn ɪt ðə saʊn ə buts ɑn stoʊn. ɹʌnɪŋ.

Rand swung Callandor as if he were striking at something in front of him. The white light obscuring the blade extended, blazed ahead, and sheared through the redstone column that hid the snarl. The polished stone sliced like silk. The severed column trembled; part of it tore loose and dropped from the ceiling, smashing into huge, jagged chunks on the floor. As the rumbling faded, he heard beyond it the sound of boots on stone. Running.

kælændɝ ət ðə ɹɛɾi, ɹænd hɝiɾ æftɝ bælzəmən.

Callandor at the ready, Rand hurried after Ba'alzamon.

ðə tɔl ɑɹtʃweɪ liɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə hɑɹt kəlæpst əz i ɹitʃt ɪt, ði ɪntaɪɝ wɔl fɔlɪŋ ɪn klaʊdz ə dʌst ən ɹɑk əz ɪf tə bɛɹi hɪm, bʌɾ i θɹu ðə paʊɝ əɾ ɪt, ən ɔl bɪkeɪm dʌs floʊɾɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. hi ɹæn ɑn. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ i hæd dʌn, əɹ haʊ, bʌɾ i hæd noʊ taɪm tə θɪŋk ɑn ɪt. hi ɹæn æftɝ bælzəmənz ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ fʊtstɛps, ɛkoʊɪŋ daʊn ðə hɔlz ə ðə stoʊn.

The tall archway leading out of the Heart collapsed as he reached it, the entire wall falling in clouds of dust and rock as if to bury him, but he threw the Power at it, and all became dust floating in the air. He ran on. He was not sure what he had done, or how, but he had no time to think on it. He ran after Ba'alzamon's retreating footsteps, echoing down the halls of the Stone.

mɹdʒɹɑl ən tʃɹɑləks lɛpt aʊɾ ə θɪn ɛɹ, hjudʒ bɛstʃəl ʃeɪps ən aɪləs feɪsəz dɪstɔɹɾəd wɪð ə ɹeɪdʒ tə kɪl, ɪn hʌnʒɹədz, soʊ ðeɪ dʒæm ðə hɔl bɪfɔɹ ɪm ən bɪhaɪnd, saɪð laɪk sɔɹdz ən bleɪdz ə dɛdli blæk stil sikɪŋ ɪz blʌd. wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ haʊ, hi tɝn əm tə veɪpɝ ðət pɑɹɾəd bɪfɔɹ ɪm - ən vænɪʃt. ði ɛɹ ɝaʊn ɪm sʌɾənli bɪkeɪm tʃoʊkɪŋ sʊt, klɑɡɪŋ ɪz nɑstʃɹəlz, ʃʌɾɪŋ ɔf bɹɛθ, bʌɾ i meɪɾ ɪt fɹɛʃ ɛɹ əɡɛn, ə kul mɪst. fleɪmz lɛp fɹəm ðə flɔɹ bɪniθ ɪz fit, spɝɾɪd fɹəm ðə wɔlz, ðə silɪŋ, fjʊɹiəs dʒɛts ðət flæʃt tæpəstʃɹiz ən ɹʌɡz, teɪbəlz ən tʃɛsts tə wɪsps ʌv æʃ, flʌŋ ɔɹnəməns ən læmps əhɛɾ ə ðɛm əz dʒɹɑps ə moʊltən, bɝnɪŋ ɡoʊld; hi smæʃt ðə faɪɝz flæt, hɑɹɾənd əm ɪndə ə ɹɛd ɡleɪz ɑn ðə ɹɑk.

Myrddraal and Trollocs leaped out of thin air, huge bestial shapes and eyeless faces distorted with a rage to kill, in hundreds, so they jammed the hall before him and behind, scythe like swords and blades of deadly black steel seeking his blood. Without knowing how, he turned them to vapor that parted before him - and vanished. The air around him suddenly became choking soot, clogging his nostrils, shutting off breath, but he made it fresh air again, a cool mist. Flames leaped from the floor beneath his feet, spurted from the walls, the ceiling, furious jets that flashed tapestries and rugs, tables and chests to wisps of ash, flung ornaments and lamps ahead of them as drops of molten, burning gold; he smashed the fires flat, hardened them into a red glaze on the rock.

ðə stoʊnz ɝaʊn ɪm feɪɾəd ɔlmoʊs tə mɪst; ðə stoʊn feɪɾəd. ɹiæləɾi tʃɹɛmbəld; hi kəd fil ɪɾ ənɹævəlɪŋ, fil hɪmsɛlf ənɹævəlɪŋ. hi wɑz biɪŋ pʊʃt aʊɾ ə ðə hɪɹ, ɪndə səm ʌðɝ pleɪs wɛɹ nʌθɪŋ ɪɡzɪstəɾ əɾ ɔl. kælændɝ bleɪzd ɪn ɪz hænz laɪk ðə sʌn tɪl i θɔɾ ɪt wəd mɛlt. hi θɔɾ i hɪmsɛlf wəd mɛl fɹəm ðə sɝdʒ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ θɹu hɪm, ðə flʌd ðəɾ i sʌmhaʊ dɝɛktəɾ ɪndə silɪŋ ʌp ðə hoʊl ðət hæɾ oʊpən ɝaʊn hɪm, ɪndə hoʊldɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɑn ðə saɪɾ ʌv ɛɡzɪstəns. ðə stoʊn bɪkeɪm sɑləɾ əɡɛn.

The stones around him faded almost to mist; the Stone faded. Reality trembled; he could feel it unraveling, feel himself unraveling. He was being pushed out of the here, into some other place where nothing existed at all. Callandor blazed in his hands like the sun till he thought it would melt. He thought he himself would melt from the surge of the One Power through him, the flood that he somehow directed into sealing up the hole that had opened around him, into holding himself on the side of existence. The Stone became solid again.

hi kəd nɑɾ ivən bɪɡɪn tə ɪmædʒən wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðəɾ i dɪd. ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɹeɪdʒd ɪnsaɪɾ ɪm tɪl i bɛɹli nu hɪmsɛlf, tɪl i bɛɹli wɑz hɪmsɛlf, tɪl wʌt wɑz hɪmsɛlf ɔlmoʊs dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst. hɪz pɹikɛɹiəs stəbɪlɪɾi tiɾɝd. tə iðɝ saɪd leɪ ði ɛnləs fɔl, əbliɾɝeɪʃən baɪ ðə paʊɝ ðət kɔɹs θɹu hɪm ɪndə ðə sɔɹd. oʊnli ɪn ðə dæns əlɔŋ ðə ɹeɪzɝz ʃɑɹp ɛdʒ wɑz ðəɹ ivən ən ənsɝɾən seɪfti. kælændɝ ʃoʊn ɪn ɪz fɪst əntɪl ɪt simd i kæɹid ðə sʌn. dɪmli wɪðɪn hɪm, flʌɾɝɪŋ laɪk ə kændəl fleɪm ɪn ə stɔɹm, wɑz ðə ʃʊɹəɾi ðət hoʊldɪŋ kælændɝ, hi kəd də ɛniθɪŋ. ɛniθɪŋ.

He could not even begin to imagine what it was that he did. The One Power raged inside him till he barely knew himself, till he barely was himself, till what was himself almost did not exist. His precarious stability teetered. To either side lay the endless fall, obliteration by the Power that coursed through him into the sword. Only in the dance along the razor's sharp edge was there even an uncertain safety. Callandor shone in his fist until it seemed he carried the sun. Dimly within him, fluttering like a candle flame in a storm, was the surety that holding Callandor, he could do anything. Anything.

θɹu ɛnləs kɔɹɪɾɝz i ɹæn, dænsɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə ɹeɪzɝ, tʃeɪsɪŋ ðə wʌn u wəd sleɪ hɪm, ðə wʌn i mʌst sleɪ. ðəɹ kəd bi noʊ ʌðɝ ɛnd, ðɪs taɪm. ðɪs taɪm wʌn ə ðɛm mʌs daɪ! ðət bælzəmən nu ɪɾ əz wɛl wɑz klɪɹ. ɔlweɪz i flɛd, ɔlweɪz steɪɪŋ əhɛɾ ə saɪt soʊ ðəɾ oʊnli ðə saʊnz ə hɪz flaɪt dʒɹu ɹænd ɑn, bʌɾ ivən fliɪŋ i tɝn ðɪs stoʊn ə tiɹ ðət wɑz nɑt ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ əɡɛnst ɹænd, ən ɹænd fɔt bæk wɪð ɪnstɪŋkt ən ɡɛsəz ən tʃæns, fɔɾ ən ɹæn daʊn ðət naɪf ɛdʒ ɪn pɝfək bæləns wɪð ðə paʊɝ, ðə tul ən wɛpən ðət wəd kənsum ɪm ʌɾɝli ɪf i fɔltɝd.

Through endless corridors he ran, dancing along the razor, chasing the one who would slay him, the one he must slay. There could be no other end, this time. This time one of them must die! That Ba'alzamon knew it as well was clear. Always he fled, always staying ahead of sight so that only the sounds of his flight drew Rand on, but even fleeing he turned this Stone of Tear that was not the Stone of Tear against Rand, and Rand fought back with instinct and guesses and chance, fought and ran down that knife edge in perfect balance with the Power, the tool and weapon that would consume him utterly if he faltered.

wɔɾɝ fɪl ðə hɔlz fɹəm tɑp tə bɑɾəm, θɪk ən blæk əz ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə si, tʃoʊkɪŋ ɔf bɹɛθ. hi meɪɾ ɪɾ ɛɹ əɡɛn, ənnoʊɪŋli, ən ɹæn ɑn, ən sʌɾənli ði ɛɹ ɡeɪnd weɪɾ əntɪl ɪt simd ɛvɹi ɪntʃ ə hɪz skɪn səpɔɹɾəd ə maʊntən, skwizɪŋ ɪn fɹəm ɔl dɝɛkʃənz. ɪn ði ɪnstən bɪfɔɹ i wɑz kɹʌʃt tə nʌθɪŋnəs i tʃoʊz taɪdz aʊɾ ə ðə flʌɾ ə paʊɝ ɹeɪdʒɪŋ θɹu hɪm - hi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ əɹ wɪtʃ əɹ waɪ; ɪt wɑz tu fæs fəɹ θɔɾ əɹ noʊɪŋ - ən ðə pɹɛʃɝ vænɪʃt. hi pɝsud bælzəmən, ən ðə vɛɹi ɛɹ wɑz əbɹʌpli sɑləd ɹɑk ɛnkəsɪŋ hɪm, ðən moʊltən stoʊn, ðən nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl tə fɪl ɪz lʌŋz. ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪniθ ɪz buts pʊld əɾ ɪm əz ɪf ɛvɹi paʊn sʌɾənli weɪɾ ə θaʊzənd, ðən ɔl weɪt vænɪʃt soʊ ðəɾ ə stɛp lɛft ɪm spɪnɪŋ ɪn mɪdɛɹ. ənsin mɔz ɡeɪp tə ɹɪp ɪz maɪn fɹəm ɪz bɑɾi, tə tɛɹ əweɪ hɪz soʊl. hi spɹæŋ itʃ tʃɹæp ən ɹæn ɑn; wʌt bælzəmən twɪstəd tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ hɪm, hi meɪd ɹaɪt wɪθaʊt biɪŋ əwɛɹ ə haʊ. veɪɡli hi nu ðəɾ ɪn səm weɪ hi hæd bɹɔt θɪŋz bæk ɪndə nætʃɹəl bæləns, fɔɹst əm ɪndə laɪn wɪð ɪz oʊn dæns daʊn ðəɾ ɪmpɑsəbli θɪn dɪvaɪd bɪtwin ɛɡzɪstəns ən nʌθɪŋnəs, bʌt ðət nɑlədʒ wɑz dɪstənt. ɔl ɪz əwɛɹnəs leɪ ɪn ðə pɝsut, ðə hʌnt, ðə dɛθ ðət mʌst ɛn ɪt.

Water filled the halls from top to bottom, thick and black as the bottom of the sea, choking off breath. He made it air again, unknowingly, and ran on, and suddenly the air gained weight until it seemed every inch of his skin supported a mountain, squeezing in from all directions. In the instant before he was crushed to nothingness he chose tides out of the flood of Power raging through him - he did not know how or which or why; it was too fast for thought or knowing - and the pressure vanished. He pursued Ba'alzamon, and the very air was abruptly solid rock encasing him, then molten stone, then nothing at all to fill his lungs. The ground beneath his boots pulled at him as if every pound suddenly weighed a thousand, then all weight vanished so that a step left him spinning in midair. Unseen maws gaped to rip his mind from his body, to tear away his soul. He sprang each trap and ran on; what Ba'alzamon twisted to destroy him, he made right without being aware of how. Vaguely he knew that in some way he had brought things back into natural balance, forced them into line with his own dance down that impossibly thin divide between existence and nothingness, but that knowledge was distant. All his awareness lay in the pursuit, the hunt, the death that must end it.

ən ðən i wɑz ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn əɡɛn, stɔkɪŋ θɹu ðə ɹʌbəld ɡæp ðət hæd bɪn ə wɔl. səm ə ðə kɑləmz hʌŋ laɪk bɹoʊkən tiθ, naʊ. ən bælzəmən bækt əweɪ fɹəm hɪm, aɪz bɝnɪŋ, ʃædoʊ kloʊkɪŋ hɪm. blæk laɪnz laɪk stil waɪɝz sim tə ɹʌn ɔf fɹəm bælzəmən ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs maʊndɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm, vænɪʃɪŋ ɪndə ʌnɪmædʒɪnəbəl haɪts ən dɪstənsəz wɪðɪn ðət blæknəs.

And then he was in the Heart of the Stone again, stalking through the rubbled gap that had been a wall. Some of the columns hung like broken teeth, now. And Ba'alzamon backed away from him, eyes burning, shadow cloaking him. Black lines like steel wires seemed to run off from Ba'alzamon into the darkness mounding around him, vanishing into unimaginable heights and distances within that blackness.

"aɪ wɪl nɑt bi əndʌn!" bælzəmən kɹaɪd. hɪz maʊθ wɑz faɪɝ; hɪz ʃɹik ɛkoʊɾ əmʌŋ ðə kɑləmz. "aɪ kænɑt bi dɪfiɾəd! eɪd mi!" səm ə ðə dɑɹknəs ʃɹaʊɾɪŋ ɪm dʒɹɪftəɾ ɪndə hɪz hænz, fɔɹmd ɪndə ə bɔl soʊ blæk ɪt sim tə soʊk ʌp ivən ðə laɪɾ ə kælændɝ. sʌɾən tʃɹaɪəmf bleɪzd ɪn ðə fleɪmz ə hɪz aɪz.

"I will not be undone!" Ba'alzamon cried. His mouth was fire; his shriek echoed among the columns. "I cannot be defeated! Aid me!" Some of the darkness shrouding him drifted into his hands, formed into a ball so black it seemed to soak up even the light of Callandor. Sudden triumph blazed in the flames of his eyes.

"ju ɑɹ dɪstʃɹɔɪd!" ɹænd ʃaʊɾəd. kælændɝ spʌn ɪn ɪz hænz. ɪts laɪt ɹɔɪl ðə dɑɹknəs, sɛvɝd ðə stil-blæk laɪnz ɝaʊn bælzəmən, ən bælzəmən kənvʌlsd. əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ tu ʌv ɪm i sim tə dwɪndəl ən ɡɹoʊ lɑɹdʒɝ ət ðə seɪm taɪm. "ju ɑɹ əndʌn!" ɹænd plʌnʒd ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ bleɪɾ ɪndə bælzəmənz tʃɛst.

"You are destroyed!" Rand shouted. Callandor spun in his hands. Its light roiled the darkness, severed the steel-black lines around Ba'alzamon, and Ba'alzamon convulsed. As if there were two of him he seemed to dwindle and grow larger at the same time. "You are undone!" Rand plunged the shining blade into Ba'alzamon's chest.

bælzəmən skɹimd, ən ðə faɪɝz ə hɪz feɪs flɛɹd waɪldli. "ful!" hi haʊld. "ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk kən nɛvɝ bi dɪfiɾəd!"

Ba'alzamon screamed, and the fires of his face flared wildly. "Fool!" he howled. "The Great Lord of the Dark can never be defeated!"

ɹænd pʊl kælændɝz bleɪd fɹi əz bælzəmənz bɑɾi sæɡd ən bɪɡæn tə fɔl, ðə ʃædoʊ ɝaʊn ɪm vænɪʃɪŋ.

Rand pulled Callandor's blade free as Ba'alzamon's body sagged and began to fall, the shadow around him vanishing.

ən sʌɾənli ɹænd wɑz ɪn ənʌðɝ hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn, sɝaʊndəd baɪ kɑləmz stɪl hoʊl, ən faɪɾɪŋ mɛn skɹimɪŋ ən daɪɪŋ, veɪl mɛn ən mɛn ɪn bɹɛstpleɪts ən hɛlməts. mɔɪɹeɪn stɪl leɪ kɹʌmpəld ət ðə beɪs ʌv ə ɹɛdstoʊn kɑləm. ən ət ɹændz fit leɪ ðə bɑɾi ʌv ə mæn, spɹɔld ɑn ɪts bæk wɪð ə hoʊl bɝn θɹu ðə tʃɛst. hi maɪɾ əv bɪn ə hænsəm mæn ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz, ɪksɛp ðət wɛɹ ɪz aɪz ən maʊθ ʃʊɾə bɪn wɝ oʊnli pɪts fɹəm wɪtʃ ɹoʊz tɛnʒɹəlz ə blæk smoʊk.

And suddenly Rand was in another Heart of the Stone, surrounded by columns still whole, and fighting men screaming and dying, veiled men and men in breastplates and helmets. Moiraine still lay crumpled at the base of a redstone column. And at Rand's feet lay the body of a man, sprawled on its back with a hole burned through the chest. He might have been a handsome man in his middle years, except that where his eyes and mouth should have been were only pits from which rose tendrils of black smoke.

aɪ hæv dʌn ɪt, hi θɔt. aɪ hæv kɪl bælzəmən, kɪld ʃeɪtɑn! aɪ hæv wʌn ðə læs bæɾəl! laɪt, aɪm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn! ðə bɹeɪkɝ ə neɪʃənz, ðə bɹeɪkɝ ə ðə wɝld. noʊ! əl ɛn ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, ɛn ðə kɪlɪŋ! əl meɪk ɪɾ ɛnd!

I have done it, he thought. I have killed Ba'alzamon, killed Shai'tan! I have won the Last Battle! Light, I AM the Dragon Reborn! The breaker of nations, the Breaker of the World. No! I will END the breaking, end the killing! I will MAKE it end!

hi ɹeɪz kælændɝ əbʌv ɪz hɛd. sɪlvɝ laɪtnɪŋ kɹækəl fɹəm ðə bleɪd, dʒæɡd stʃɹiks ɑɹtʃɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɡɹeɪt doʊm əbʌv. "stɑp!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. ðə faɪɾɪŋ sist; mɛn stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm ɪn wʌndɝ, oʊvɝ blæk veɪlz, fɹəm bɪniθ ðə ɹɪmz ə ɹaʊn hɛlməts. "aɪ æm ɹænd ælθɹ!" hi kɔld, soʊ hɪz vɔɪs ɹæŋ θɹu ðə tʃeɪmbɝ. "aɪ æm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn!" kælændɝ ʃoʊn ɪn ɪz ɡɹæsp.

He raised Callandor above his head. Silver lightning crackled from the blade, jagged streaks arching toward the great dome above. "Stop!" he shouted. The fighting ceased; men stared at him in wonder, over black veils, from beneath the rims of round helmets. "I am Rand al'Thor!" he called, so his voice rang through the chamber. "I am the Dragon Reborn!" Callandor shone in his grasp.

wʌn baɪ wʌn, veɪl mɛn ən hɛlməɾɪd, ðeɪ nɛl tə hɪm, kɹaɪɪŋ, "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪz ɹibɔɹn! ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪz ɹibɔɹn!"

One by one, veiled men and helmeted, they knelt to him, crying, "The Dragon is Reborn! The Dragon is Reborn!"


tʃæptɝ fɪftisɪks


CHAPTER 56

pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən


People of the Dragon

θɹuaʊt ðə sɪɾi ʌv tɛɹ pipəl woʊk wɪð ðə dɔn, spikɪŋ ə ðə dʒɹimz ðeɪ hæd hæd, dʒɹimz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən bæɾəlɪŋ bælzəmən ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn, ən wən ðɛɹ aɪz ɹoʊz tə ðə ɡɹeɪt fɔɹtʃɹəs ə ðə stoʊn, ðeɪ bɪhɛld ə bænɝ weɪvɪŋ fɹəm ɪts ɡɹeɪɾəst haɪt. əkɹɔs ə fild ʌv waɪt floʊɾ ə sɪnwəs fɔɹm laɪk ə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən skeɪld ɪn skɑɹləɾ ən ɡoʊld, bʌt wɪð ə ɡoʊldən laɪənz meɪn ən fɔɹ lɛɡz, itʃ tɪpt wɪð faɪv ɡoʊldən klɔz. mɛn keɪm, stʌn ən fɹaɪɾənd, fɹəm ðə stoʊn tə spik ɪn hʌʃt toʊnz ʌv wʌt hæd hæpən ɪn ðə naɪt, ən mɛn ən wɪmən θɹɔŋ ðə stʃɹits, wipɪŋ əz ðeɪ ʃaʊɾəd ðə fʊlfɪlmən ə pɹɑfəsi.

Throughout the city of Tear people woke with the dawn, speaking of the dreams they had had, dreams of the Dragon battling Ba'alzamon in the Heart of the Stone, and when their eyes rose to the great fortress of the Stone, they beheld a banner waving from its greatest height. Across a field of white flowed a sinuous form like a great serpent scaled in scarlet and gold, but with a golden lion's mane and four legs, each tipped with five golden claws. Men came, stunned and frightened, from the Stone to speak in hushed tones of what had happened in the night, and men and women thronged the streets, weeping as they shouted the fulfillment of Prophecy.

"ðə dʒɹæɡən!" ðeɪ ʃaʊɾəd. "ælθɹ! ðə dʒɹæɡən! ælθɹ!"

"The Dragon!" they shouted. "Al'Thor! The Dragon! Al'Thor!"

piɹɪŋ θɹu ən æɹoʊslɪt haɪ ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə stoʊn, mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ əz i lɪsən tə ðə kɔɹəs ɹaɪzɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi ɪn weɪvz. wɛl, meɪbi hi ɪz. hi wɑz stɪl hævɪŋ ə hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf taɪm kʌmɪŋ tə ɡɹɪps wɪð ɹænd ɹɪli biɪŋ ðɛɹ.

Peering through an arrowslit high on the side of the Stone, Mat shook his head as he listened to the chorus rising out of the city in waves. Well, maybe he is. He was still having a hard enough time coming to grips with Rand really being there.

ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə stoʊn sim tə əɡɹi wɪð ðə pipəl bɪloʊ, əɹ ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt, ðeɪ wɝ nɑt lɛɾɪŋ ɑn. hi hæd sin ɹænd dʒʌst wʌns sɪns ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ ə hɔl wɪð kælændɝ ɪn ɪz hænd, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ə dʌzən veɪld il ən tʃɹeɪlɪŋ ə klaʊɾ ə tɛɹənz, ə nɑɾ ə dɪfɛndɝz ə ðə stoʊn ən moʊst ə ðə fju sɝvaɪvɪŋ haɪ lɔɹdz. ðə haɪ lɔɹdz, ət list, sim tə θɪŋk ɹænd wəd niɾ əm tə hɛlp ɪm ɹul ðə wɝld; ði il kɛpt ɛvɹiwʌn bæk wɪð ʃɑɹp lʊks, ðoʊ, ən spɪɹz ɪf nid bi. ðeɪ ʃʊɹli bɪlivd ɹænd wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən, ðoʊ ðeɪ kɔld ɪm i hu kʌmz wɪð ðə dɔn. ðəɹ wɝ nɪɹli tu hʌnʒɹəd il ɪn ðə stoʊn. ðeɪ hæd lɔst ə θɝɾ ə ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz ɪn ðə faɪt, bʌt ðeɪ hæd kɪld əɹ kæptʃɝd tɛn taɪmz əz mɛni dɪfɛndɝz.

Everyone in the Stone seemed to agree with the people below, or if they did not, they were not letting on. He had seen Rand just once since the night before, striding along a hall with Callandor in his hand, surrounded by a dozen veiled Aiel and trailing a cloud of Tairens, a knot of Defenders of the Stone and most of the few surviving High Lords. The High Lords, at least, seemed to think Rand would need them to help him rule the world; the Aiel kept everyone back with sharp looks, though, and spears if need be. They surely believed Rand was the Dragon, though they called him He Who Comes With the Dawn. There were nearly two hundred Aiel in the Stone. They had lost a third of their numbers in the fight, but they had killed or captured ten times as many Defenders.

əz i tɝn fɹəm ði æɹoʊslɪt, hɪz aɪz bɹʌʃt əkɹɔs ɹəɑɹk. ðəɹ wɑz ə tɔl stæn ət wʌn ɛn ə ðə ɹum, kɑɹvd ən pɑlɪʃt əpɹaɪt wilz ə səm peɪl, dɑɹk-stʃɹaɪpt wʊd wɪð ʃɛlvz slʌŋ bɪtwin əm soʊ ɔl ə ðə ʃɛlvz wəd steɪ flæɾ əz ðə wilz wɝ ɹivɑlvd. itʃ ʃɛlf hɛld ə lɑɹdʒ bʊk, baʊn ɪn ɡoʊld, kʌvɝz sɛt wɪð spɑɹklɪŋ dʒɛmz. ði il hæd wʌn ə ðə bʊks oʊpən ən wɑz ɹiɾɪŋ. səm sɔɹɾ ʌv ɛseɪz, mæt θɔt. hu wʊɾə θɔɾ ən il wəd ɹɛd bʊks? huɾ əv θɔɾ ən il kəd blʌɾi ɹɛd?

As he turned from the arrowslit, his eyes brushed across Rhuarc. There was a tall stand at one end of the room, carved and polished upright wheels of some pale, dark-striped wood with shelves slung between them so all of the shelves would stay flat as the wheels were revolved. Each shelf held a large book, bound in gold, covers set with sparkling gems. The Aiel had one of the books open and was reading. Some sort of essays, Mat thought. Who would have thought an Aiel would read books? Who'd have thought an Aiel could bloody read?

ɹəɑɹk ɡlænst ɪn ɪz dɝɛkʃən, ɔl koʊl blu aɪz ən lɛvəl stɛɹ. mæt lʊkt əweɪ heɪstəli, bɪfɔɹ ði il kəd ɹiɾ ɪz θɔts ɑn ɪz feɪs. ət lis hiz nɑt veɪld, θæŋk ðə laɪt! bɝn mi, ðəɾ eɪvinhə nɪɹli tʊk maɪ hɛɾ ɔf wən aɪ æskt əɹ ɪf ʃi kəd də ɛni dænsəz wɪθaʊt spɪɹz. beɪn ən kiæd pɹizɛntəɾ ənʌðɝ pɹɑbləm. ðeɪ wɝ sɝɾənli pɹɪɾi ən mɔɹ ðən fɹɛnli, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt mænədʒ tə tɔk tə wʌn wɪθaʊt ði ʌðɝ. ðə meɪl il sim tə θɪŋk ɪz ɛfɝts tə ɡɛt wʌn ə ðɛm əloʊn wɝ fʌni, ən fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, soʊ dɪd beɪn ən kiæd. wɪmən ɑɹ ɑd, bʌɾ il wɪmən meɪk ɑd sim nɔɹməl!

Rhuarc glanced in his direction, all cold blue eyes and level stare. Mat looked away hastily, before the Aiel could read his thoughts on his face. At least he is not veiled, thank the Light! Burn me, that Aviendha nearly took my head off when I asked her if she could do any dances without spears. Bain and Chiad presented another problem. They were certainly pretty and more than friendly, but he could not manage to talk to one without the other. The male Aiel seemed to think his efforts to get one of them alone were funny, and for that matter, so did Bain and Chiad. Women are odd, but Aiel women make odd seem normal!

ðə ɡɹeɪt teɪbəl ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum, ɔɹnətli kɑɹvd ən ɡɪldɪɾ ɑn ɛdʒəz ən θɪk lɛɡz, hæd bɪn mɛn fəɹ ɡæðɝɪŋz ə ðə haɪ lɔɹdz. mɔɪɹeɪn sæɾ ɪn wʌn ə ðə θɹoʊn laɪk tʃɛɹz, wɪð ðə kɹɛsən bænɝ ə tɛɹ wɝkt ɪndə ɪts taʊɝɪŋ bæk ɪn ɡɪlt ən pɑlɪʃt kɑɹnɛliən ən pɝlʃɛl. ɛɡwin, nɪneɪiv, ən ɪleɪn sæt kloʊs baɪ hɝ.

The great table in the middle of the room, ornately carved and gilded on edges and thick legs, had been meant for gatherings of the High Lords. Moiraine sat in one of the throne like chairs, with the Crescent Banner of Tear worked into its towering back in gilt and polished carnelian and pearlshell. Egwene, Nynaeve, and Elayne sat close by her.

"aɪ stɪl kænɑt bɪliv pɛɹɪn ɪz hɪɹ ɪn tɛɹ," nɪneɪiv wɑz seɪɪŋ. "ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ hiz ɔl ɹaɪt?"

"I still cannot believe Perrin is here in Tear," Nynaeve was saying. "Are you sure he is all right?"

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi wʊɾə ɪkspɛktəd pɛɹɪn tə hæv bɪn ʌp ɪn ðə stoʊn læs naɪt; ðə blæksmɪθ hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn bɹeɪvɝ ðən ɛniwʌn wɪð ɡʊd sɛns.

Mat shook his head. He would have expected Perrin to have been up in the Stone last night; the blacksmith had always been braver than anyone with good sense.

"hi wɑz wɛl wən aɪ lɛf hɪm." mɔɪɹeɪnz vɔɪs wɑz sɝin. "wɛðɝ i stɪl ɪz, aɪ də nɑt noʊ. hɪz . . . kəmpænjən ɪz ɪn səm kənsɪɾɝəbəl deɪnʒɝ, ən i meɪ hæv pʊt hɪmsɛlf ɪndə ɪt, ɔlsoʊ."

"He was well when I left him." Moiraine's voice was serene. "Whether he still is, I do not know. His . . . companion is in some considerable danger, and he may have put himself into it, also."

"hɪz kəmpænjən?" ɛɡwin sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "wɑ - hu ɪz pɛɹɪnz kəmpænjən?"

"His companion?" Egwene said sharply. "Wha - Who is Perrin's companion?"

"wʌt sɔɹɾ ə deɪnʒɝ?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd.

"What sort of danger?" Nynaeve demanded.

"nʌθɪŋ ðət nid kənsɝn ju," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd kɑmli. "aɪ wɪl ɡoʊ ən si tə hɝ əz aɪ meɪ, ʃɔɹtli. aɪ hæv dɪleɪɾ oʊnli tə ʃoʊ jə ðɪs, wɪtʃ aɪ faʊn əmʌŋ ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ən ʌðɝ θɪŋz ə ðə paʊɝ ðə haɪ lɔɹdz kəlɛktəɾ oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz." ʃi tʊk sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm əɹ paʊtʃ ən leɪɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl bɪfɔɹ hɝ. ɪt wɑz ə dɪsk ðə saɪz ʌv ə mænz hænd, simɪŋli meɪɾ ə tu tɪɹdʒɹɑps fɪɾəd təɡɛðɝ, wʌn blæk əz pɪtʃ, ði ʌðɝ waɪɾ əz snoʊ.

"Nothing that need concern you," the Aes Sedai said calmly. "I will go and see to her as I may, shortly. I have delayed only to show you this, which I found among the ter'angreal and other things of the Power the High Lords collected over the years." She took something from her pouch and laid it on the table before her. It was a disc the size of a man's hand, seemingly made of two teardrops fitted together, one black as pitch, the other white as snow.

mæt sim tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ siɪŋ ʌðɝz laɪk ɪt. eɪntʃənt, laɪk ðɪs wʌn, bʌt bɹoʊkən, wɛɹ ðɪs wɑz hoʊl. θɹi ʌv ðɛm, hi hæd sin; nɑɾ ɔl təɡɛðɝ, bʌɾ ɔl ɪn pisəz. bʌt ðət kəd nɑt bi; hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət ðeɪ wɝ meɪɾ ə kwəndɪlɝ, ənbɹeɪkəbəl baɪ ɛni paʊɝ, ivən ðə wʌn paʊɝ.

Mat seemed to remember seeing others like it. Ancient, like this one, but broken, where this was whole. Three of them, he had seen; not all together, but all in pieces. But that could not be; he remembered that they were made of cuendillar, unbreakable by any power, even the One Power.

"wʌn ə ðə sɛvən silz luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ ən ðə hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz pʊɾ ɑn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən wən ðeɪ ɹisild ɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ əz ɪf kənfɝmɪŋ əɹ oʊn mɛmɹi.

"One of the seven seals Lews Therin Kinslayer and the Hundred Companions put on the Dark One's prison when they resealed it," Elayne said, nodding as if confirming her own memory.

"mɔɹ pɹɪsaɪsli," mɔɪɹeɪn toʊl hɝ, "ə foʊkəs pɔɪn fəɹ wʌn ə ðə silz. bʌɾ ɪn ɛsəns, jə ɑɹ kɝɛkt. dʊɹɪŋ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝl ðeɪ wɝ skæɾɝd ən hɪɾən fəɹ seɪfti; sɪns ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz ðeɪv bɪn lɔst ɪn tʃɹuθ." ʃi snɪft. "aɪ bɪɡɪn tə saʊn laɪk vɛɹɪn."

"More precisely," Moiraine told her, "a focus point for one of the seals. But in essence, you are correct. During the Breaking of the World they were scattered and hidden for safety; since the Trolloc Wars they have been lost in truth." She sniffed. "I begin to sound like Verin."

ɛɡwin ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "aɪ səpoʊz aɪ ʃʊɾə ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn ðət hɪɹ. twaɪs bɪfɔɹ ɹænd feɪs bælzəmən, ən boʊθ taɪmz ət list wʌn ə ðə silz wɑz pɹɛzənt."

Egwene shook her head. "I suppose I should have expected to find that here. Twice before Rand faced Ba'alzamon, and both times at least one of the seals was present."

"æn ðɪs taɪm ənbɹoʊkən," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "fɔɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, ðə sil ɪz ənbɹoʊkən. əz ɪf ðət mæɾɝd, naʊ."

"And this time unbroken," Nynaeve said. "For the first time, the seal is unbroken. As if that mattered, now."

"ju θɪŋk ɪt dʌz nɑt?" mɔɪɹeɪnz vɔɪs wɑz deɪnʒɝəs ɪn ɪts kwaɪət, ən ði ʌðɝ wɪmən fɹaʊn ət hɝ.

"You think it does not?" Moiraine's voice was dangerous in its quiet, and the other women frowned at her.

mæt ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz. ðeɪ kɛp tɔkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ənɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋz. hi dɪd nɑt mʌtʃ laɪk stændɪŋ nɑt twɛnti fit fɹəm ðət dɪsk naʊ ðəɾ i nu wʌɾ ɪt wɑz, noʊ mæɾɝ ðə vælju ʌv kwəndɪlɝ, bʌt. . . . "jɔɹ pɑɹɾən?" hi sɛd.

Mat rolled his eyes. They kept talking about unimportant things. He did not much like standing not twenty feet from that disc now that he knew what it was, no matter the value of cuendillar, but. . . . "Your pardon?" he said.

ðeɪ ɔl tɝn tə stɛɹ əɾ ɪm əz ɪf i wɝ ɪntɝʌptɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. bɝn mi! bɹeɪk əm aʊɾ ʌv ə pɹɪzən sɛl, seɪv ðɛɹ lɪvz hæf ə dʌzən taɪmz bɪtwin əm bɪfɔɹ ðə naɪɾ ɪz dʌn, ən ðeɪ ɡlaʊɝ əz hɑɹɾ əz ðə blʌɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ! wɛl, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt θæŋk mi ðɛn, iðɝ, dɪd ðeɪ? juɾ əv θɔɾ aɪ wɑz stɪkɪŋ maɪ noʊz ɪn wɛɹ ɪt wɑznt wɑntəd ðɛn, tu, ɪnstɛɾ ə kipɪŋ səm blʌɾi dɪfɛndɝ fɹəm pʊɾɪŋ ə sɔɹd θɹu wʌn ə ðɛm. əlaʊd, hi sɛd maɪldli, "ju də nɑt maɪn ɪf aɪ æsk ə kwɛstʃən, də ju? juv ɔl bɪn tɔkɪŋ ðɪs ɛɛs sədaɪ . . . ʌ . . . bɪznəs, ən noʊ wʌn əz bɑðɝd tə tɛl mi ɛniθɪŋ."

They all turned to stare at him as if he were interrupting something important. Burn me! Break them out of a prison cell, save their lives half a dozen times between them before the night is done, and they glower as hard as the bloody Aes Sedai! Well, they did not thank me then, either, did they? You'd have thought I was sticking my nose in where it wasn't wanted then, too, instead of keeping some bloody Defender from putting a sword through one of them. Aloud, he said mildly, "You do not mind if I ask a question, do you? You have all been talking this Aes Sedai . . . uh . . . business, and no one has bothered to tell me anything."

"mæt?" nɪneɪiv sɛd wɔɹnɪŋli, tʌɡɪŋ əɹ bɹeɪd, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, ɪn ə kɑm oʊnli dʒʌs tʌtʃt wɪð ɪmpeɪʃəns, "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt ðət jə wɪʃ tə noʊ?"

"Mat?" Nynaeve said warningly, tugging her braid, but Moiraine said, in a calm only just touched with impatience, "What is it that you wish to know?"

"aɪ wɑnə noʊ haʊ ɔl ə ðɪs kən bi." hi mɛn tə kip ɪz toʊn sɑft, bʌt dɪspaɪt hɪmsɛlf i pɪkt ʌp ɪntɛnsəɾi əz i wɛn əlɔŋ. "ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ əz fɔlən! ðə pɹɑfəsiz sɛd ðət wəd nɛvɝ hæpən tɪl ðə pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən keɪm. dʌz ðət min wəɹ ðə blʌɾi pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən? ju, mi, læn, ən ə fju hʌnʒɹəd blʌɾi il?" hi hæd sin ðə wɔɹɾɝ dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt; ðəɹ hæd nɑt sim tə bi mʌtʃ ɛdʒ bɪtwin læn ən ði il əz tə hu wɑz ðə mɔɹ dɛdli. əz ɹəɑɹk stʃɹeɪɾənd tə stɛɹ ət hɪm, hi heɪstəli æɾəd, "ʌ, sɑɹi, ɹəɑɹk. slɪp ə ðə tʌŋ."

"I want to know how all of this can be." He meant to keep his tone soft, but despite himself he picked up intensity as he went along. "The Stone of Tear has fallen! The Prophecies said that would never happen till the People of the Dragon came. Does that mean we are the bloody People of the Dragon? You, me, Lan, and a few hundred bloody Aiel?" He had seen the Warder during the night; there had not seemed to be much edge between Lan and the Aiel as to who was the more deadly. As Rhuarc straightened to stare at him, he hastily added, "Uh, sorry, Rhuarc. Slip of the tongue."

"pɝhæps," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sloʊli. "aɪ keɪm tə stɑp bɛləl fɹəm kɪlɪŋ ɹænd. aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk tə si ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ fɔl. pɝhæps wi ɑɹ. pɹɑfəsiz ɑɹ fʊlfɪld əz ðeɪ ɑɹ mɛn tə bi, nɑɾ əz wi θɪŋk ðeɪ ʃəd bi."

"Perhaps," Moiraine said slowly. "I came to stop Be'lal from killing Rand. I did not expect to see the Stone of Tear fall. Perhaps we are. Prophecies are fulfilled as they are meant to be, not as we think they should be."

bɛləl. mæt ʃɪvɝd. hi hæd hɝd ðət neɪm læs naɪt, ən i dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪɾ ɛni mɔɹ ɪn deɪlaɪt. ɪf i hæd noʊn wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɑz lus - ən ɪnsaɪd ðə stoʊn - hi wəd nɛvɝ əv ɡɔn nɪɹ ðə pleɪs. hi ɡlænst əɾ ɛɡwin, ən nɪneɪiv, ən ɪleɪn. wɛl, aɪɾ əv kʌm ɪn laɪk ə blʌɾi maʊs, ɛniweɪ, nɑt θʌmpɪŋ pipəl lɛft ən ɹaɪt! sændɑɹ hæd ɡɔn skɝiɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə stoʊn ət deɪbɹeɪk; tə teɪk ðə nuz tə mʌðɝ ɡeɪnə, hi kleɪmd, bʌt mæt θɔɾ ɪt wɑz dʒʌs tə ɪskeɪp ðoʊz stɛɹz fɹəm ðə θɹi wɪmən, hu lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑt jɛt kwaɪt dɪsaɪɾɪd wʌt tə də əbaʊt hɪm.

Be'lal. Mat shivered. He had heard that name last night, and he did not like it any more in daylight. If he had known one of the Forsaken was loose - and inside the Stone - he would never have gone near the place. He glanced at Egwene, and Nynaeve, and Elayne. Well, I'd have come in like a bloody mouse, anyway, not thumping people left and right! Sandar had gone scurrying out of the Stone at daybreak; to take the news to Mother Guenna, he claimed, but Mat thought it was just to escape those stares from the three women, who looked as if they had not yet quite decided what to do about him.

ɹəɑɹk klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "wɛn ə mæn wɪʃɪz tə bɪkʌm ə klæn tʃif, hi mʌst ɡoʊ tə ɹɪɾiən, ɪn ðə lænz ə ðə dʒɛn il, ðə klæn ðəɾ ɪz nɑt." hi spoʊk sloʊli ən fɹaʊn ɔfən ət ðə ɹɛd-fɹɪn sɪlk kɑɹpəɾ ʌndɝ ɪz sɑf buts, ə mæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪkspleɪn wʌɾ i dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɪkspleɪn əɾ ɔl. "wɪmən u wɪʃ tə bɪkʌm waɪz wʌnz ɔlsoʊ meɪk ðɪs dʒɝni, bʌt ðɛɹ mɑɹkɪŋ, ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ mɑɹkt, ɪz kɛp sikɹəɾ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz. ðə mɛn u ɑɹ tʃoʊzən ət ɹɪɾiən, ðoʊz u sɝvaɪv, ɹɪtɝn mɑɹkt ɑn ðə lɛft ɑɹm. soʊ."

Rhuarc cleared his throat. "When a man wishes to become a clan chief, he must go to Rhuidean, in the lands of the Jenn Aiel, the clan that is not." He spoke slowly and frowned often at the red-fringed silk carpet under his soft boots, a man trying to explain what he did not want to explain at all. "Women who wish to become Wise Ones also make this journey, but their marking, if they are marked, is kept secret among themselves. The men who are chosen at Rhuidean, those who survive, return marked on the left arm. So."

hi pʊʃt bæk ðə slivz ə hɪz koʊɾ ən ʃɝt təɡɛðɝ tə ɹɪvil ɪz lɛft fɔɹɑɹm, ðə skɪn mʌtʃ pəlɝ ðən ðəɾ ə hɪz hænz ən feɪs. ɛtʃt ɪndə ðə skɪn əz ɪf pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt, ɹæp twaɪs ɝaʊnd, mɑɹtʃt ðə seɪm ɡoʊld-ænd-skɑɹlət fɔɹm əz ɹɪpəld ɑn ðə bænɝ əbʌv ðə stoʊn.

He pushed back the sleeves of his coat and shirt together to reveal his left forearm, the skin much paler than that of his hands and face. Etched into the skin as if part of it, wrapped twice around, marched the same gold-and-scarlet form as rippled on the banner above the Stone.

ði il lɛɾ ɪz sliv fɔl wɪð ə saɪ. "ɪɾ ɪz ə neɪm nɑt spoʊkən ɪksɛpt əmʌŋ ðə klæn tʃifs ən ðə waɪz wʌnz. wi ɑɹ. . . ." hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ əɡɛn, əneɪbəl tə seɪ ɪt hɪɹ.

The Aiel let his sleeve fall with a sigh. "It is a name not spoken except among the clan chiefs and the Wise Ones. We are. . . ." He cleared his throat again, unable to say it here.

"ði il ɑɹ ðə pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən." mɔɪɹeɪn spoʊk kwaɪətli, bʌt ʃi saʊndəɾ əz kloʊs tə stɑɹɾəlmənt əz mæt kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛvɝ hɪɹɪŋ hɝ. "ðæɾ aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ."

"The Aiel are the People of the Dragon." Moiraine spoke quietly, but she sounded as close to startlement as Mat could remember ever hearing her. "That I did not know."

"ðɛn ɪt ɹɪli ɪz ɔl dʌn," mæt sɛd, "dʒʌst əz ðə pɹɑfəsiz sɛd. wi kən ɔl ɡoʊ ɑn əɹ weɪ wɪð noʊ mɔɹ wɝiz." ði æmɪɝlɪn woʊnt nid mi tə bloʊ ðət blʌɾi hɔɹn naʊ!

"Then it really is all done," Mat said, "just as the Prophecies said. We can all go on our way with no more worries." The Amyrlin won't need me to blow that bloody Horn now!

"haʊ kən jə seɪ ðæt?" ɛɡwin dɪmændəd. "doʊn jə ʌndɝstæn ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ lus?"

"How can you say that?" Egwene demanded. "Don't you understand the Forsaken are loose?"

"nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə blæk ədʒɑ," nɪneɪiv æɾəd ɡɹɪmli. "wi tʊk oʊnli ɑmikoʊ ən dʒɔɪjə hɪɹ. ɪlɛvən ɪskeɪpt - ən aɪ wəd laɪk tə noʊ haʊ! - ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn noʊz haʊ mɛni ʌðɝz ðəɹ ɑɹ wi də nɑt noʊ."

"Not to mention the Black Ajah," Nynaeve added grimly. "We took only Amico and Joiya here. Eleven escaped - and I would like to know how! - and the Light alone knows how many others there are we do not know."

"jɛs," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə toʊn dʒʌst əz hɑɹd. "aɪ meɪ nɑt bi ʌp tə feɪsɪŋ wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, bʌɾ aɪ min tə teɪk pisəz aʊɾ ə liɑnʒɹɪnz haɪd!"

"Yes," Elayne said in a tone just as hard. "I may not be up to facing one of the Forsaken, but I mean to take pieces out of Liandrin's hide!"

"ʌv kɔɹs," mæt sɛd smuðli. "ʌv kɔɹs." ɑɹ ðeɪ kɹeɪzi? ðeɪ wɑnə tʃeɪs æftɝ ðə blæk ədʒɑ ən ðə fɔɹseɪkən? "aɪ oʊnli mɛn ðə hɑɹɾəst pɑɹɾ ɪz dʌn. ðə stoʊn əz fɔlən tə ðə pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, ɹænd əz kælændɝ, ən ʃeɪtɑn ɪz dɛd." mɔɪɹeɪnz stɛɹ wɑz soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ i θɔt ðə stoʊn ʃʊk fəɹ ə moʊmənt.

"Of course," Mat said smoothly. "Of course." Are they crazy? They want to chase after the Black Ajah and the Forsaken? "I only meant the hardest part is done. The Stone has fallen to the People of the Dragon, Rand has Callandor, and Shai'tan is dead." Moiraine's stare was so hard that he thought the Stone shook for a moment.

"bi kwaɪət, jə ful!" ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛɾ ɪn ə vɔɪs laɪk ə naɪf. "du jə wɑnə kɔl ɪz ətɛnʃən tə ju, neɪmɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn?"

"Be quiet, you fool!" the Aes Sedai said in a voice like a knife. "Do you want to call his attention to you, naming the Dark One?"

"bʌt hiz dɛd!" mæt pɹətɛstəd. "ɹæn kɪl hɪm. aɪ sɔ ðə bɑɾi!" ən ə faɪn stɪŋk ðət wɑz, tu. aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ ɛniθɪŋ kəd ɹɑt ðət fæst.

"But he's dead!" Mat protested. "Rand killed him. I saw the body!" And a fine stink that was, too. I never thought anything could rot that fast.

"ju sɔ 'ðə bɑɾi,' " mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd wɪð ə twɪs tə hɝ maʊð. "ə mænz bɑɾi. nɑt ðə dɑɹk wʌn, mæt."

"You saw 'the body,' " Moiraine said with a twist to her mouth. "A man's body. Not the Dark One, Mat."

hi lʊkt əɾ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən; ðeɪ əpɪɹɾ əz kənfjuzd əz hi. ɹəɑɹk lʊk tə bi θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ə bæɾəl i hæd θɔt wɑz wʌn ən naʊ lɝn hæd nɑɾ ivən bɪn fɔt. "ðɛn u wɑz ɪt?" mæt dɪmændəd. "mɔɪɹeɪn, maɪ mɛmɹi hæz hoʊlz bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə wæɡən ən tim, bʌɾ aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ bælzəmən biɪŋ ɪn maɪ dʒɹimz. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ! bɝn mi, aɪ də nɑt si haʊ aɪ kən ɛvɝ fɝɡɛt! ən aɪ ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd wʌt wɑz lɛft ə ðət feɪs."

He looked at Egwene and the other two women; they appeared as confused as he. Rhuarc looked to be thinking of a battle he had thought was won and now learned had not even been fought. "Then who was it?" Mat demanded. "Moiraine, my memory has holes big enough for a wagon and team, but I remember Ba'alzamon being in my dreams. I remember! Burn me, I do not see how I can ever forget! And I recognized what was left of that face."

"ju ɹɛkəɡnaɪz bælzəmən," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ɔɹ ɹæðɝ, ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bælzəmən. ðə dɑɹk wʌn jɛt lɪvz, ɪmpɹɪzən ət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, ən ðə ʃædoʊ jɛt laɪz əkɹɔs ðə pæɾɝn."

"You recognized Ba'alzamon," Moiraine said. "Or rather, the man who called himself Ba'alzamon. The Dark One yet lives, imprisoned at Shayol Ghul, and the Shadow yet lies across the Pattern."

"ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ən pɹətɛkt ʌs," ɪleɪn mɝmɝɾ ɪn ə feɪn vɔɪs. "aɪ θɔt. . . . aɪ θɔt ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɝ ðə wɝst wi hæd tə wɝi əbaʊt, naʊ."

"The Light illumine and protect us," Elayne murmured in a faint voice. "I thought. . . . I thought the Forsaken were the worst we had to worry about, now."

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ, mɔɪɹeɪn?" nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ɹænd wɑz sɝɾən - ɪz sɝɾən - ðəɾ i kɪl ðə dɑɹk wʌn. jə sim tə bi seɪɪŋ bælzəmən wɑz nɑt ðə dɑɹk wʌn əɾ ɔl. aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd! haʊ kən jə bi soʊ ʃʊɹ? ən ɪf i wɑz nɑt ðə dɑɹk wʌn, hu wɑz hi?"

"Are you sure, Moiraine?" Nynaeve said. "Rand was certain - is certain - that he killed the Dark One. You seem to be saying Ba'alzamon was not the Dark One at all. I don't understand! How can you be so sure? And if he was not the Dark One, who was he?"

"aɪ kən bi ʃʊɹ fəɹ ðə sɪmpləst ə ɹizənz, nɪneɪiv. haʊɛvɝ fæs dəkeɪ tʊk ɪt, ðət wɑz ə mænz bɑɾi. kən jə bɪliv ðəɾ ɪf ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɝ kɪld i wəd liv ə hjumən bɑɾi? ðə mæn ɹænd kɪld wɑz ə mæn. pɝhæps i wɑz ðə fɝst ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən fɹid, əɹ pɝhæps i wɑz nɛvɝ ɪntaɪɝli baʊnd. wi meɪ nɛvɝ noʊ wɪtʃ."

"I can be sure for the simplest of reasons, Nynaeve. However fast decay took it, that was a man's body. Can you believe that if the Dark One were killed he would leave a human body? The man Rand killed was a man. Perhaps he was the first of the Forsaken freed, or perhaps he was never entirely bound. We may never know which."

"aɪ . . . meɪ noʊ hu hi wɑz." ɛɡwin pɔzd wɪð ən ənsɝɾən fɹaʊn. "æt list, aɪ meɪ hæv ə klu. vɛɹɪn ʃoʊd mi ə peɪdʒ fɹəm ən oʊl bʊk ðət mɛnʃən bælzəmən ən ɪʃəml təɡɛðɝ. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊs haɪ tʃæn ən vɛɹi nɪɹli ɪŋkɑmpɹəhɛnsɪbəl, bʌɾ aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt 'ə neɪm hɪɾən bɪhaɪn ə neɪm.' meɪbi bælzəmən wɑz ɪʃəml."

"I . . . may know who he was." Egwene paused with an uncertain frown. "At least, I may have a clue. Verin showed me a page from an old book that mentioned Ba'alzamon and Ishamael together. It was almost High Chant and very nearly incomprehensible, but I remember something about 'a name hidden behind a name.' Maybe Ba'alzamon was Ishamael."

"pɝhæps," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ɪʃəml. bʌɾ ɪf ɪt wɑz, ət lis naɪn ə ðə θɝtin stɪl lɪv. lænfɝ, ən sɑmaɪl, ən ɹævhɪn, ænd. . . . pɑ! ivən noʊɪŋ ðət səm ə ðoʊz naɪn ət list ɑɹ fɹi ɪz nɑt ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ." ʃi leɪɾ ə hæn ətɑp ðə blæk-ænd-waɪt dɪsk ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "θɹi ʌv ðə silz ɑɹ bɹoʊkən. oʊnli fɔɹ stɪl hoʊld. oʊnli ðoʊz fɔɹ silz stæn bɪtwin ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ðə wɝld, ən ɪt meɪ bi ðəɾ ivən wɪð ðoʊz hoʊl i kən tʌtʃ ðə wɝld æftɝ ə fæʃən. wʌtɛvɝ bæɾəl wi wʌn hɪɹ - bæɾəl əɹ skɝmɪʃ - ɪts fɑɹ fɹəm ðə læst."

"Perhaps," Moiraine said. "Perhaps it was Ishamael. But if it was, at least nine of the thirteen still live. Lanfear, and Sammael, and Ravhin, and. . . . Paah! Even knowing that some of those nine at least are free is not the most important thing." She laid a hand atop the black-and-white disc on the table. "Three of the seals are broken. Only four still hold. Only those four seals stand between the Dark One and the world, and it may be that even with those whole he can touch the world after a fashion. Whatever battle we won here - battle or skirmish - it is far from the last."

mæt wɑtʃt ðɛɹ feɪsəz fɝm - ɛɡwinz ən nɪneɪivz ən ɪleɪnz; sloʊli, ɹɪlʌktənli, bʌt dətɝmənədli, tu - ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. blʌɾi wɪmən! ðəɹ ɔl ɹɛɾi tə ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð ðɪs, ɡoʊ ɑn tʃeɪsɪŋ ðə blæk ədʒɑ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪt ðə fɔɹseɪkən ən ðə blʌɾi dɑɹk wʌn. wɛl, ðeɪ nidn θɪŋk aɪm gɑnə kʌm pʊl əm aʊɾ ə ðə sup pɑɾ əɡɛn. ðeɪ dʒʌs nidn θɪŋk ɪt, ðæts ɔl!

Mat watched their faces firm - Egwene's and Nynaeve's and Elayne's; slowly, reluctantly, but determinedly, too - and shook his head. Bloody women! They're all ready to go on with this, go on chasing the Black Ajah, trying to fight the Forsaken and the bloody Dark One. Well, they needn't think I am going to come pull them out of the soup pot again. They just needn't think it, that's all!

wʌn ə ðə tɔl, pɛɹd dɔɹz pʊʃt oʊpən waɪl i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə θɪŋk ə sʌmθɪŋ tə seɪ, ən ə tɔl jʌŋ wʊmən ə ɹiɡəl bɛɹɪŋ ɛntɝd ðə ɹum, wɛɹɪŋ ə kɔɹənɛt wɪð ə ɡoʊldən hɔk ɪn flaɪɾ əbʌv əɹ bɹaʊz. hɝ blæk hɛɹ swɛp tə peɪl ʃoʊldɝz, ən əɹ dʒɹɛs ə ðə faɪnəst ɹɛd sɪlk lɛf ðoʊz ʃoʊldɝz bɛɹ, əlɔŋ wɪð ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl ɪkspæns ʌv wʌt mæt noʊɾəd əz ən ædmɝəbəl bʊzəm. fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi stʌɾid ɹəɑɹk ɪntʃɹəstɪdli wɪð lɑɹdʒ, dɑɹk aɪz; ðən ʃi tɝn əm ɑn ðə wɪmən ət ðə teɪbəl, kuli ɪmpɪɹiəs. mæt ʃi əpɪɹd tə ɪɡnɔɹ kəmplitli.

One of the tall, paired doors pushed open while he was trying to think of something to say, and a tall young woman of regal bearing entered the room, wearing a coronet with a golden hawk in flight above her brows. Her black hair swept to pale shoulders, and her dress of the finest red silk left those shoulders bare, along with a considerable expanse of what Mat noted as an admirable bosom. For a moment she studied Rhuarc interestedly with large, dark eyes; then she turned them on the women at the table, coolly imperious. Mat she appeared to ignore completely.

"aɪ æm nɑt juz tə biɪŋ ɡɪvən mɛsədʒəz tə kæɹi," ʃi ənaʊnst, flɝɪʃɪŋ ə foʊldəd pɑɹtʃmən ɪn wʌn slɪm hænd.

"I am not used to being given messages to carry," she announced, flourishing a folded parchment in one slim hand.

"æn u ɑɹ ju, tʃaɪld?" mɔɪɹeɪn æskt.

"And who are you, child?" Moiraine asked.

ðə jʌŋ wʊmən dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp ivən mɔɹ, wɪtʃ mæt wʊɾə θɔt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl. "aɪ æm bɹəleɪn, fɝst ə min." ʃi tɔs ðə pɑɹtʃmən daʊn ɑn ðə teɪbəl ɪn fɹʌn ə mɔɪɹeɪn wɪð ə hɔɾi dʒɛstʃɝ ən tɝn bæk tə ðə dɔɹ.

The young woman drew herself up even more, which Mat would have thought was impossible. "I am Berelain, First of Mayene." She tossed the parchment down on the table in front of Moiraine with a haughty gesture and turned back to the door.

"ə moʊmənt, tʃaɪld," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, ənfoʊldɪŋ ðə pɑɹtʃmənt. "hu ɡeɪv ðɪs tə ju? ən waɪ dɪd jə bɹɪŋ ɪt, ɪf jə ɑɹ soʊ ənjuz tə kæɹiɪŋ mɛsədʒəz?"

"A moment, child," Moiraine said, unfolding the parchment. "Who gave this to you? And why did you bring it, if you are so unused to carrying messages?"

"aɪ . . . də nɑt noʊ." bɹəleɪn stʊd feɪsɪŋ ðə dɔɹ; ʃi saʊndəd pʌzəld. "ʃi wɑz . . . ɪmpɹɛsɪv." ʃi ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk ən sim tə ɹɪkʌvɝ əɹ əpɪnjən ə hɝsɛlf. fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi stʌɾid ɹəɑɹk wɪð ə smɔl smaɪl. "ju ɑɹ ðə liɾɝ ə ðiz ilmɛn? jəɹ faɪɾɪŋ dɪstɝb maɪ slip. pɝhæps əl æsk jə tə daɪn wɪð mi. wʌn deɪ kwaɪt sun." ʃi lʊkt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət mɔɪɹeɪn. "aɪ æm toʊl ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əz teɪkən ðə stoʊn. ɪnfɔɹm ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ðət ðə fɝst ə min wɪl daɪn wɪð ɪm tənaɪt." ən ʃi mɑɹtʃt aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum; mæt kəd θɪŋk ə noʊ ʌðɝ weɪ tə dɪskɹaɪb ðət steɪtli, wʌn-wʊmən pɹəsɛʃən.

"I . . . do not know." Berelain stood facing the door; she sounded puzzled. "She was . . . impressive." She gave herself a shake and seemed to recover her opinion of herself. For a moment she studied Rhuarc with a small smile. "You are the leader of these Aielmen? Your fighting disturbed my sleep. Perhaps I will ask you to dine with me. One day quite soon." She looked over her shoulder at Moiraine. "I am told the Dragon Reborn has taken the Stone. Inform the Lord Dragon that the First of Mayene will dine with him tonight." And she marched out of the room; Mat could think of no other way to describe that stately, one-woman procession.

"aɪ wəd laɪk tə hæv əɹ ɪn ðə taʊɝ əz nɑvəs." ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪɾ ɔlmoʊs laɪk ɛkoʊz, ðən ʃɛɹɾ ə taɪt smaɪl.

"I would like to have her in the Tower as novice." Egwene and Elayne said it almost like echoes, then shared a tight smile.

"lɪsən tə ðɪs," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. " 'luz θɝɪn wɑz maɪn, hiz maɪn, ən hɪl bi maɪn, fɝɛvɝ. aɪ ɡɪv ɪm ɪndə jəɹ tʃɑɹdʒ, tə kip fəɹ mi əntɪl aɪ kʌm.' ɪts saɪnd 'lænfɝ.' " ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tɝn ðət kul ɡeɪz ɑn mæt. "æn jə θɔɾ ɪt wɑz dʌn? jə ɑɹ tɑvɝən, mæt, ə θɹɛd mɔɹ kɹuʃəl tə ðə pæɾɝn ðən moʊst, ən ðə saʊndɝ ə ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. nʌθɪŋ ɪz dʌn fəɹ ju, jɛt."

"Listen to this," Moiraine said. " 'Lews Therin was mine, he is mine, and he will be mine, forever. I give him into your charge, to keep for me until I come.' It is signed 'Lanfear.' " The Aes Sedai turned that cool gaze on Mat. "And you thought it was done? You are ta'veren, Mat, a thread more crucial to the Pattern than most, and the sounder of the Horn of Valere. Nothing is done for you, yet."

ðeɪ wɝ ɔl lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. nɪneɪiv sædli, ɛɡwin əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin ɪm bɪfɔɹ, ɪleɪn əz ɪf ʃi ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪm tə tʃeɪnʒ ɪndə sʌmwʌn ɛls. ɹəɑɹk hæɾ ə sɝɾən ɹɪspɛkt ɪn ɪz aɪz, ðoʊ mæt wəd dʒʌst əz sun əv dʌn wɪθaʊɾ ɪt, ɔl θɪŋz kənsɪɾɝd.

They were all looking at him. Nynaeve sadly, Egwene as though she had never seen him before, Elayne as if she expected him to change into someone else. Rhuarc had a certain respect in his eyes, though Mat would just as soon have done without it, all things considered.

"wɛl, ʌv kɔɹs," hi toʊl ðɛm. bɝn mi! "aɪ ʌndɝstænd." aɪ wʌndɝ haʊ sun tɑm wɪl bi fɪt tə tʃɹævəl? taɪm tə ɹʌn. meɪbi pɛɹɪn wɪl kʌm wɪð ʌs. "ju kən kaʊn ɑn mi."

"Well, of course," he told them. Burn me! "I understand." I wonder how soon Thom will be fit to travel? Time to run. Maybe Perrin will come with us. "You can count on me."

fɹəm aʊtsaɪd, ðə kɹaɪz stɪl ɹoʊz, ənsisɪŋ. "ðə dʒɹæɡən! ælθɹ! ðə dʒɹæɡən! ælθɹ! ðə dʒɹæɡən! ælθɹ! ðə dʒɹæɡən!"

From outside, the cries still rose, unceasing. "The Dragon! Al'Thor! The Dragon! Al'Thor! The Dragon! Al'Thor! The Dragon!"

ən ɪt wɑz ɹɪɾən ðət noʊ hæn bʌɾ ɪz ʃəd wil ðə sɔɹd hɛld ɪn ðə stoʊn, bʌɾ i dɪd dʒɹɔ ɪɾ aʊt, laɪk faɪɝ ɪn ɪz hænd, ən ɪz ɡlɔɹi dɪd bɝn ðə wɝld. ðʌs dɪɾ ɪt bɪɡɪn. ðʌs də wi sɪŋ ɪz ɹibɝθ. ðʌs də wi sɪŋ ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ.

And it was written that no hand but his should wield the Sword held in the Stone, but he did draw it out, like fire in his hand, and his glory did burn the world. Thus did it begin. Thus do we sing his Rebirth. Thus do we sing the beginning.

 - fɹəm duən toʊldɑɹə ti, sɔŋz ə ðə læst eɪdʒ, kwɔɹɾoʊ naɪn: ðə lɛdʒən ə ðə dʒɹæɡən.

 - from Do'in Toldara te, Songs of the Last Age, Quarto Nine: The Legend of the Dragon.

kəmpoʊz baɪ boʊn, sɔŋməstʃɹəs ət tæɹələn, ðə fɔɹθ eɪdʒ.

Composed by Boanne, Songmistress at Taralan, the Fourth Age.

ði ɛn ə ðə θɝd bʊk ə ðə wil ə taɪm ɡlɔsɝi eɪ noʊɾ ɑn deɪts ɪn ðɪs ɡlɔsɝi. θɹi sɪstəmz ə ɹəkɔɹɾɪŋ deɪts əv bɪn ɪn dʒɛnɝəl jus sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ðə fɝst ɹəkɔɹɾəd jɪɹz æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ (æb). sɪns ðə jɪɹz ə ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ən ɪmiɾiətli æftɝ wɝ jɪɹz ʌv ɔlmoʊs toʊɾəl keɪɑs, ən sɪns ðɪs kæləndɝ wɑz ədɑptəɾ ə ɡʊd hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz æftɝ ði ɛn ə ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, ɪts stɑɹɾɪŋ pɔɪnt wɑz ɑɹbɪtʃɹɛɹəli əsaɪnd. ət ði ɛn ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz mɛni ɹɛkɝdz hæd bɪn lɔst, soʊ mʌtʃ soʊ ðət ðəɹ wɑz ɑɹɡjəmən əbaʊt ði ɪɡzæk jɪɹ ʌndɝ ði oʊl sɪstəm. ə nu kæləndɝ wɑz ðɛɹfɔɹ ɪstæblɪʃt, deɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ði ɛn ə ðə wɔɹz ən sɛləbɹeɪɾɪŋ ðə səpoʊz fɹiɾəm ə ðə wɝl fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑlɑk θɹɛt. ðɪs sɛkən kæləndɝ ɹəkɔɹɾəd itʃ jɪɹ əz fɹi jɪɹ (fi). æftɝ ðə dɪsɹʌpʃən, dɛθ, ən dɪstʃɹʌkʃən kɑz baɪ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, ə θɝd kæləndɝ keɪm ɪndə biɪŋ. ðɪs kæləndɝ, ʌv ðə nu ɛɹə (nəbɹæskə), ɪz kɝənli ɪn jus.

The End of the Third Book of The Wheel of Time GLOSSARY A Note on Dates in This Glossary. Three systems of recording dates have been in general use since the Breaking of the World. The first recorded years After the Breaking (AB). Since the years of the Breaking and immediately after were years of almost total chaos, and since this calendar was adopted a good hundred years after the end of the Breaking, its starting point was arbitrarily assigned. At the end of the Trolloc Wars many records had been lost, so much so that there was argument about the exact year under the old system. A new calendar was therefore established, dating from the end of the Wars and celebrating the supposed freedom of the world from the Trolloc threat. This second calendar recorded each year as Free Year (FY). After the disruption, death, and destruction caused by the War of the Hundred Years, a third calendar came into being. This calendar, of the New Era (NE), is currently in use.

æksɛptɪd, ðə: jʌŋ wɪmən ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæv ɹitʃt ə sɝɾən lɛvəl ə paʊɝ ən pæst sɝɾən tɛsts. ɪt nɔɹməli teɪks faɪv tə tɛn jɪɹz tə bi ɹeɪz fɹəm nɑvəs tə ði æksɛptɪd. æksɛptɪɾ ɑɹ sʌmwʌt lɛs kənfaɪn baɪ ɹulz ðən nɑvəsɪz, ən ɑɹ əlaʊd tə tʃuz ðɛɹ oʊn ɛɹiəz ə stʌɾi, wɪðɪn lɪməts. ən æksɛptɪɾ əz ðə ɹaɪt tə wɛɹ ə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ, bʌɾ oʊnli ɑn ðə θɝd fɪŋɡɝ ə hɝ lɛf hænd. wən ən æksɛptɪɾ ɪz ɹeɪz tə ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃi tʃuzəz əɹ ədʒɑ, ɡeɪnz ðə ɹaɪt tə wɛɹ ðə ʃɔl, ən meɪ wɛɹ ðə ɹɪŋ ɑn ɛni fɪŋɡɝ əɹ nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ɪf sɝkəmstænsəz wɔɹənt.

Accepted, the: Young women in training to be Aes Sedai who have reached a certain level of power and passed certain tests. It normally takes five to ten years to be raised from novice to the Accepted. Accepted are somewhat less confined by rules than novices, and are allowed to choose their own areas of study, within limits. An Accepted has the right to wear a Great Serpent ring, but only on the third finger of her left hand. When an Accepted is raised to Aes Sedai, she chooses her Ajah, gains the right to wear the shawl, and may wear the ring on any finger or not at all if circumstances warrant.

ɛɛs sədaɪ (aɪɛz sɛ-dɪaɪ): wildɝz ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ. sɪns ðə taɪm ə mædnəs, ɔl sɝvaɪvɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ wɪmən. waɪdli dɪstʃɹʌstəɾ ən fɪɹd, ivən heɪɾəd, ðeɪ ɑɹ bleɪm baɪ mɛni fəɹ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ən ɑɹ θɔt tə mɛɾəl ɪn ði əfɛɹz ə neɪʃənz. ət ðə seɪm taɪm, fju ɹulɝz wɪl bi wɪθaʊɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ædvaɪzɝ, ivən ɪn lænz wɛɹ ði ɛɡzɪstəns ə sətʃ ə kənɛkʃən mʌs bi kɛp sikɹət. æftɝ səm jɪɹz ə tʃænəlɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ teɪk ɑn ən eɪdʒləs kwɑləɾi, soʊ ðəɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu ɪz oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi ə ɡɹændmʌðɝ meɪ ʃoʊ noʊ saɪnz ʌv eɪdʒ ɪksɛpt pɝhæps ə fju ɡɹeɪ hɛɹz. si ɔlsoʊ ədʒɑ; æmɪɝlɪn sit; taɪm ə mædnəs.

Aes Sedai (EYEZ seh-DEYE): Wielders of the One Power. Since the Time of Madness, all surviving Aes Sedai are women. Widely distrusted and feared, even hated, they are blamed by many for the Breaking of the World, and are thought to meddle in the affairs of nations. At the same time, few rulers will be without an Aes Sedai advisor, even in lands where the existence of such a connection must be kept secret. After some years of channeling the One Power, Aes Sedai take on an ageless quality, so that an Aes Sedai who is old enough to be a grandmother may show no signs of age except perhaps a few gray hairs. See also Ajah; Amyrlin Seat; Time of Madness.

eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz: ði eɪdʒ ɛndəd baɪ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ ən ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ə taɪm wən ɛɛs sədaɪ pɝfɔɹmd wʌndɝz naʊ oʊnli dʒɹimd ʌv. si ɔlsoʊ wil ə taɪm; bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld; wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ.

Age of Legends: The Age ended by the War of the Shadow and the Breaking of the World. A time when Aes Sedai performed wonders now only dreamed of. See also Wheel of Time; Breaking of the World; War of the Shadow.

il (aɪ-il): ðə pipəl ə ði il weɪst. fɪɹs ən hɑɹɾi. ɔlsoʊ kɔld ilmɛn. ðeɪ veɪl ðɛɹ feɪsəz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kɪl, ɡɪvɪŋ ɹaɪz tə ðə seɪɪŋ "æktɪŋ laɪk ə blæk-veɪld il" tə dɪskɹaɪb sʌmwʌn u ɪz biɪŋ vaɪələnt. dɛdli wɔɹiɝz wɪð ɛni wɛpən əɹ wɪð nʌθɪŋ bʌt ðɛɹ bɛɹ hænz, ðəl nɑt tʌtʃ ə sɔɹd. ðɛɹ paɪpɝz pleɪ ðɛm ɪndə bæɾəl wɪð ðə mjuzɪk ə dænsəz, ən ilmɛn kɔl bæɾəl "ðə dæns," ən "ðə dæns ə spɪɹz." si ɔlsoʊ il wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz; il weɪst.

Aiel (eye-EEL): The people of the Aiel Waste. Fierce and hardy. Also called Aielmen. They veil their faces before they kill, giving rise to the saying "acting like a black-veiled Aiel" to describe someone who is being violent. Deadly warriors with any weapon or with nothing but their bare hands, they will not touch a sword. Their pipers play them into battle with the music of dances, and Aielmen call battle "the dance," and "the dance of spears." See also Aiel warrior societies; Aiel Waste.

il wɔɹ, ðə: (naɪnsɛvənsɪkssɛvəneɪt ni) wən kɪŋ leɪmən ə kɛɹhin kʌt daʊn ɑvɛndɔɹɑldɛɹə, sɛvɹəl klænz ə ði il kɹɔs ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld. ðeɪ luɾəd ən bɝn ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv kɛɹhin əz wɛl əz mɛni ʌðɝ sɪɾiz ən taʊnz, ən ðə kɑnflɪkt ɪkstɛndəɾ ɪndə ændɝ ən tɛɹ. ðə kənvɛnʃənəl vju ɪz ðət ði il wɝ faɪnəli dɪfiɾəd ət ðə bæɾəl ə ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz, bɪfɔɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn, bʌɾ ɪn fækt, leɪmən wɑz kɪld ɪn ðət bæɾəl, ən hævɪŋ dʌn wʌt ðeɪ hæd kʌm fɔɹ, ði il ɹɛkɹɔs ðə spaɪn. si ɔlsoʊ ɑvɛndɔɹɑldɛɹə; kɛɹhin.

Aiel War, the: (97678 NE) When King Laman of Cairhien cut down Avendoraldera, several clans of the Aiel crossed the Spine of the World. They looted and burned the capital city of Cairhien as well as many other cities and towns, and the conflict extended into Andor and Tear. The conventional view is that the Aiel were finally defeated at the Battle of the Shining Walls, before Tar Valon, but in fact, Laman was killed in that battle, and having done what they had come for, the Aiel recrossed the Spine. See also Avendoraldera; Cairhien.

il wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz: il wɔɹiɝz ɑɹ ɔl mɛmbɝz ʌv wʌn ə ðə wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz, sətʃ əz ðə stoʊn dɑɡz (ʃeɪin tɑl), ðə ɹɛd ʃilz (æɛθən dɔɹ), əɹ ðə meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ (fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ). itʃ səsaɪəɾi hæz ɪts oʊn kʌstəmz, ən səmtaɪmz spəsɪfɪk duɾiz. fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, ɹɛd ʃilz ækt əz pəlis. stoʊn dɑɡz ɔfən vaʊ nɑt tə ɹitʃɹit wʌns bæɾəl əz bɪn dʒɔɪnd, ən wɪl daɪ tə ðə læs mæn ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi tə fʊlfɪl ðɪs vaʊ. ðə klænz ə ði il - əmʌŋ əm ðə ɡoʊʃin, ɹn, ʃɝəd, ən tɑɹdæɾ il - fɹikwənli faɪɾ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, bʌt mɛmbɝz ə ðə seɪm səsaɪəɾi wɪl nɑt faɪɾ itʃ ʌðɝ ivən ɪf ðɛɹ klænz ɑɹ duɪŋ soʊ. ɪn ðɪs weɪ, ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz laɪnz ə kɑntæk bɪtwin ðə klænz ivən wən ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪn oʊpən wɔɹfɛɹ. si ɔlsoʊ il; il weɪst; fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ.

Aiel warrior societies: Aiel warriors are all members of one of the warrior societies, such as the Stone Dogs (Shae'en M'taal), the Red Shields (Aethan Dor), or the Maidens of the Spear (Far Dareis Mai). Each society has its own customs, and sometimes specific duties. For example, Red Shields act as police. Stone Dogs often vow not to retreat once battle has been joined, and will die to the last man if necessary to fulfill this vow. The clans of the Aiel - among them the Goshien, Reyn, Shaarad, and Taardad Aiel - frequently fight among themselves, but members of the same society will not fight each other even if their clans are doing so. In this way, there are always lines of contact between the clans even when they are in open warfare. See also Aiel; Aiel Waste; Far Dareis Mai.

il weɪst: ðə hɑɹʃ, ɹʌɡəd, ən ɔl-bʌt-wɔɾɝləs læn ist ə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld. kɔl ðə θɹi-foʊld læn baɪ ði il. fju aʊtsaɪɾɝz ɡoʊ ðɛɹ, nɑɾ oʊnli kəz wɔɾɝ ɪz ɔlmoʊst ɪmpɑsəbəl tə faɪn fəɹ wʌn nɑt bɔɹn ðɛɹ, bʌt kəz ði il kənsɪɾɝ ðɛmsɛlvz ət wɔɹ wɪð ɔl ʌðɝ pipəlz ən də nɑt wɛlkəm stʃɹeɪnʒɝz. oʊnli pɛdlɝz, ɡlimən, ən ðə tuætɑn ɑɹ əlaʊd seɪf ɛntʃɹi, ən kɑntækt ivən wɪð əm ɪz lɪməɾəd. noʊ mæps ə ðə weɪst ɪtsɛlf ɑɹ noʊn tə ɪɡzɪst.

Aiel Waste: The harsh, rugged, and all-but-waterless land east of the Spine of the World. Called the Three-fold Land by the Aiel. Few outsiders go there, not only because water is almost impossible to find for one not born there, but because the Aiel consider themselves at war with all other peoples and do not welcome strangers. Only peddlers, gleemen, and the Tuatha'an are allowed safe entry, and contact even with them is limited. No maps of the Waste itself are known to exist.

ədʒɑ (ɑ-dʒɑ): səsaɪəɾiz əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə wɪtʃ ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪksɛp ði æmɪɝlɪn sit bɪlɔŋ. ðeɪ ɑɹ dɛzɪɡneɪɾɪd baɪ kʌlɝz: blu, ɹɛd, waɪt, ɡɹin, bɹaʊn, jɛloʊ, ən ɡɹeɪ. itʃ fɑloʊz ə spəsɪfɪk fəlɑsəfi ʌv ðə jus ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ən ðə pɝpəsəz ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ bɛnz ɔl ɪts ɛnɝdʒiz tə faɪndɪŋ mɛn u ɑɹ ətɛmptɪŋ tə wil ðə paʊɝ, ən tə dʒɛntəlɪŋ ðɛm. ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, fɔɹseɪks ɪnvɑlvmənt wɪð ðə məndeɪn wɝld ən dɛɾɪkeɪts ɪtsɛlf tə sikɪŋ nɑlədʒ, waɪl ðə waɪɾ ədʒɑ, lɑɹdʒli ɛʃuɪŋ boʊθ ðə wɝld ən ðə vælju ʌv wɝldli nɑlədʒ, dɪvoʊts ɪtsɛlf tə kwɛstʃənz ə fəlɑsəfi ən tʃɹuθ. ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ (kɔl ðə bæɾəl ədʒɑ dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz) hoʊlz ɪtsɛlf ɹɛɾi tə kaʊntɝ ɛni nu dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz wən tɑɹmən ɡdən kʌmz. ðəɹ ɑɹ ɹumɝz ʌv ə blæk ədʒɑ, dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə sɝvɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn.

Ajah (AH-jah): Societies among the Aes Sedai to which all Aes Sedai except the Amyrlin Seat belong. They are designated by colors: Blue, Red, White, Green, Brown, Yellow, and Gray. Each follows a specific philosophy of the use of the One Power and the purposes of the Aes Sedai. For example, the Red Ajah bends all its energies to finding men who are attempting to wield the Power, and to gentling them. The Brown Ajah, on the other hand, forsakes involvement with the mundane world and dedicates itself to seeking knowledge, while the White Ajah, largely eschewing both the world and the value of worldly knowledge, devotes itself to questions of philosophy and truth. The Green Ajah (called the Battle Ajah during the Trolloc Wars) holds itself ready to counter any new Dreadlords when Tarmon Gai'don comes. There are rumors of a Black Ajah, dedicated to serving the Dark One.

ɑlɑnə mɑsvɑni (ɑ-læn-nɑ mɔs-væn-ni): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ.

Alanna Mosvani (ah-LAN-nah mos-VANH-nie): An Aes Sedai of the Green Ajah.

ɑlmɹə, nɪneɪiv (æl-miɝ-ɑ, naɪ-niv): ə wʊmən wʌns ðə wɪzdəm ʌv ɛmənz fild, ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz dɪstʃɹɪkt ʌv ændɝ (æn-dɔɹ). naʊ wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd.

al'Meara, Nynaeve (al-MEER-ah, NIGH-neev): A woman once the Wisdom of Emond's Field, in the Two Rivers district of Andor (AN-door). Now one of the Accepted.

ælθɹ, ɹænd (æl-θɔɹ, ɹænd): ə jʌŋ mæn fɹəm ɛmənz fild u ɪz tɑvɝən. wʌns ə ʃɛpɝd. naʊ pɹoʊkleɪmd əz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

al'Thor, Rand (al-THOR, RAND): A young man from Emond's Field who is ta'veren. Once a shepherd. Now proclaimed as the Dragon Reborn.

ælvɪɹ, ɛɡwin (ɑl-vɪɹ, ɛ-ɡweɪn): ə jʌŋ wʊmən fɹəm ɛmənz fild. naʊ ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ.

al'Vere, Egwene (ahl-VEER, eh-GWAIN): A young woman from Emond's Field. Now in training to be Aes Sedai.

əmɑlɑsən, ɡɛɹ (ɑm-ɑ-lɑ-sɪn, ɡwɛɹ): si wɔɹ ə ðə sɛkən dʒɹæɡən.

Amalasan, Guaire (ahm-ah-LAH-sin, Gware): See War of the Second Dragon.

æmɪɝlɪn sit (ɑm-ɛɹ-lɪn sit): (wʌn) liɾɝ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪlɛktəd fəɹ laɪf baɪ ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, ðə haɪəs kaʊnsəl ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, wɪtʃ kənsɪsts ə θɹi ɹɛpɹəzɛntəɾɪvz (kɔl sɪɾɝz, əz ɪn "ə sɪɾɝ fəɹ ðə ɡɹin") fɹəm itʃ ə ðə sɛvən ədʒəz. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hæz, θiɝɛɾɪkəli ət list, ɔlmoʊst səpɹim əθɔɹəɾi əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ɹæŋks soʊʃəli əz ði ikwəl ʌv ə kɪŋ əɹ kwin. ə slaɪtli lɛs fɔɹməl jusədʒ ɪz sɪmpli ði æmɪɝlɪn. (tu) ðə θɹoʊn ɑn wɪtʃ ðə liɾɝ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɪts.

Amyrlin Seat (AHM-ehr-lin SEAT): (1) Leader of the Aes Sedai. Elected for life by the Hall of the Tower, the highest council of the Aes Sedai, which consists of three representatives (called Sitters, as in "a Sitter for the Green") from each of the seven Ajahs. The Amyrlin Seat has, theoretically at least, almost supreme authority among the Aes Sedai, and ranks socially as the equal of a king or queen. A slightly less formal usage is simply the Amyrlin. (2) The throne on which the leader of the Aes Sedai sits.

æneɪjə (ɑ-naɪ-jɑ): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə blu ədʒɑ.

Anaiya (ah-NYE-yah): An Aes Sedai of the Blue Ajah.

æŋɡɹil (æn-ɡɹi-ɑl): ɹɛmnəns ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ðəɾ əlaʊ ɛniwʌn keɪpəbəl ə tʃænəlɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə hændəl ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ əmaʊn ə ðə paʊɝ ðən kəd seɪfli bi tʃænəld əneɪɾɪd. ðɛɹ meɪkɪŋ ɪz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ noʊn. fju ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ɛɡzɪstəns. si ɔlsoʊ sɑŋɡɹil; tɛɹæŋɡɹil.

angreal (anh-gree-AHL): Remnants of the Age of Legends that allow anyone capable of channeling the One Power to handle a greater amount of the Power than could safely be channeled unaided. Their making is no longer known. Few remain in existence. See also sa'angreal; ter'angreal.

ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ: si hɔkwɪŋ, ɑɹɾɝ.

Artur Hawkwing: See Hawkwing, Artur.

əsɛmblədʒ, ðə: ə bɑɾi ɪn ɪljən, tʃoʊzən baɪ ən fɹəm ðə mɝtʃəns ən ʃɪpoʊnɝz, ðəɾ ɪz səpoʊz tə ædvaɪz boʊθ ðə kɪŋ ən ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn, bʌt hɪstɔɹɪkəli hæz kəntɛndɪd wɪð əm fəɹ paʊɝ.

Assemblage, the: A body in Illian, chosen by and from the merchants and shipowners, that is supposed to advise both the King and the Council of Nine, but historically has contended with them for power.

æθɑn maɪɹ (ɑ-θɑ-æn mi-ɛɹ): si si foʊk.

Atha'an Miere (ah-thah-AHN mee-EHR): See Sea Folk.

ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə (ɑ-vɛn-dɛ-soʊ-ɹɑ): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf." mɛnʃən ɪn mɛni stɔɹiz ən lɛdʒənz.

Avendesora (AH-vehn-deh-SO-rah): In the Old Tongue, "the Tree of Life." Mentioned in many stories and legends.

ɑvɛndɔɹɑldɛɹə (ɑ-vɛn-doʊ-ɹæl-dɛ-ɹɑ): ə tʃɹi ɡɹoʊn ɪn ðə sɪɾi ʌv kɛɹhin fɹəm ə sæpəlɪŋ ʌv ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə. ðɪs sæpəlɪŋ wɑz ə ɡɪft fɹəm ði il ɪn faɪvhʌnʒɹədsɪkstisɪks ni, dɪspaɪt ðə fæk ðət noʊ ɹɛkɝd ʃoʊz ɛni kənɛkʃən wʌtsoʊɛvɝ bɪtwin ði il ən ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə. si ɔlsoʊ il wɔɹ.

Avendoraldera (AH-ven-doh-ral-DEH-rah): A tree grown in the city of Cairhien from a sapling of Avendesora. This sapling was a gift from the Aiel in 566 NE, despite the fact that no record shows any connection whatsoever between the Aiel and Avendesora. See also Aiel War.

eɪvinhə (ɑ-vi-ɛn-dɑ): ə wʊmən ə ðə naɪn væliz sɛpt ə ðə tɑɹdæɾ il; ə fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ, ə meɪɾən ə ðə spɪɹ.

Aviendha (Ah-vee-EHN-dah): A woman of the Nine Valleys sept of the Taardad Aiel; a Far Dareis Mai, a Maiden of the Spear.

eɪbɑɹə, pɛɹɪn (eɪ-bɛɹ-ɑ, pɛɹ-ɹɪn): ə jʌŋ mæn fɹəm ɛmənz fild, fɔɹmɝli ə blæksmɪθs əpɹɛntəs.

Aybara, Perrin (ay-BAHR-ah, PEHR-rihn): A young man from Emond's Field, formerly a blacksmith's apprentice.

bælzəmən (bɑ-ɑl-zɑ-moʊn): ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk tʌŋ, "hɑɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk." bɪliv tə bi ðə tʃɹɑlɑk neɪm fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. si ɔlsoʊ dɑɹk wʌn; tʃɹɑləks.

Ba'alzamon (bah-AHL-zah-mon): In the Trolloc tongue, "Heart of the Dark." Believed to be the Trolloc name for the Dark One. See also Dark One; Trollocs.

bæʃɪɹ, zɑɹin (bɑ-ʃɪɹ, zɑ-ɹin): ə jʌŋ wʊmən fɹəm sɑldɑiə hu ɪz ə hʌntɝ ə ðə hɔɹn. ʃi wɪʃɪz tə bi kɔl feɪl (fɑ-il), wɪtʃ, ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, minz "fælkən."

Bashere, Zarine (bah-SHEER, zah-REEN): A young woman from Saldaea who is a Hunter of the Horn. She wishes to be called Faile (fah-EEL), which, in the Old Tongue, means "falcon."

bɛləl (bɛ-lɑl): wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən.

Be'lal (beh-LAAL): One of the Forsaken.

bɛl taɪn (bɛl taɪn): spɹɪŋ fɛstəvəl sɛləbɹeɪɾɪŋ ði ɛn ʌv wɪntɝ, ðə fɝst spɹaʊɾɪŋ ə kɹɑps, ən ðə bɝθ ə ðə fɝs læmz.

Bel Tine (BEHL TINE): Spring festival celebrating the end of winter, the first sprouting of crops, and the birth of the first lambs.

bɪtʃɹeɪɝ ə hoʊp: si ɪʃəml.

Betrayer of Hope: See Ishamael.

baɪtim (baɪt-mi): ə smɔl, ɔlmoʊst ɪnvɪzəbəl baɪɾɪŋ ɪnsɛkt.

biteme (BITE-me): A small, almost invisible biting insect.

bɪɾɝn (l-tɛɹn): ə mjuzɪkəl ɪnstʃɹəmən ðət meɪ hæv sɪks, naɪn, əɹ twɛlv stʃɹɪŋz, ən ɪz hɛl flæɾ ɑn ðə niz ən pleɪd baɪ plʌkɪŋ əɹ stʃɹʌmɪŋ.

bittern (BlHT-tehrn): A musical instrument that may have six, nine, or twelve strings, and is held flat on the knees and played by plucking or strumming.

blaɪt, ðə: si ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, ðə.

Blight, the: See Great Blight, the.

bɔɹɾɝlændz, ðə: ðə neɪʃənz bɔɹɾɝɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt: sɑldɑiə, ɝæfəl, kændɝ, ən ʃaɪnɝ.

Borderlands, the: The nations bordering the Great Blight: Saldaea, Arafel, Kandor, and Shienar.

bɔɹnhəld, deɪn (-hɑld, deɪ-ɪn): ən ɔfəsɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, sʌn ə lɔɹd kæptən dʒɛəfɹeɪm bɔɹnhəld, hu daɪɾ ət fɑlm, ɑn toʊmən hɛd.

Bornhald, Dain (BOHRN-hahld, DAY-ihn): An officer of the Children of the Light, son of Lord Captain Geofraim Bornhald, who died at Falme, on Toman Head.

bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ðə: dʊɹɪŋ ðə taɪm ə mædnəs, meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæd ɡɔn ɪnseɪn, ən u kəd wil ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə ə dɪɡɹi naʊ ənnoʊn, tʃeɪnʒd ðə feɪs ə ði ɝθ. ðeɪ kɑzd ɡɹeɪɾ ɝθkweɪks, lɛvəld oʊl maʊntən ɹeɪnʒəz ən ɹeɪz nu maʊntənz, lɪftəd dʒɹaɪ lænd wɛɹ siz hæd bɪn ən meɪd ði oʊʃən ɹʌʃ ɪn wɛɹ dʒɹaɪ læn hæd bɪn. mɛni pɑɹts ə ðə wɝld wɝ kəmplitli dɪpɑpjəleɪɾɪd, ən ðə sɝvaɪvɝz wɝ skæɾɝd laɪk dʌst ɑn ðə wɪnd. ðɪs dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ɪz ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪn stɔɹiz, lɛdʒənz, ən hɪstɝi əz ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. si ɔlsoʊ taɪm ə mædnəs; hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz, ðə.

Breaking of the World, the: During the Time of Madness, male Aes Sedai who had gone insane, and who could wield the One Power to a degree now unknown, changed the face of the earth. They caused great earthquakes, leveled old mountain ranges and raised new mountains, lifted dry land where seas had been and made the ocean rush in where dry land had been. Many parts of the world were completely depopulated, and the survivors were scattered like dust on the wind. This destruction is remembered in stories, legends, and history as the Breaking of the World. See also Time of Madness; Hundred Companions, the.

baɪɑɝ, jɹət (baɪ-ɑɹ, dʒɑ-ɹɛt): ən ɔfəsɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Byar, Jaret (BY-ahr, JAH-ret): An officer of the Children of the Light.

keɪɛmlɪn (keɪm-lɪn): ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ændɝ.

Caemlyn (KAYM-lihn): The capital city of Andor.

kɛɹhin (kaɪ-ɹi-ɛn): boʊθ ə neɪʃən əlɔŋ ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld ən ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ðət neɪʃən. ðə sɪɾi wɑz bɝn ən luɾəd dʊɹɪŋ ði il wɔɹ, əz wɝ mɛni ʌðɝ taʊnz ən vɪlədʒəz. ðə kɑnsəkwən əbændənmən ə fɑɹmlænd nɪɹ ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝl meɪd nɛsəsɛɹi ði ɪmpɔɹteɪʃən ʌv ɡɹeɪt kwɑntəɾiz ʌv ɡɹeɪn. ði əsæsəneɪʃən ə kɪŋ ɡɔlʒɹiən (naɪnhʌnʒɹədnaɪntieɪt ni) hæz ɹɪzʌltɪɾ ɪn ə sɪvəl wɔɹ əmʌŋ ðə noʊbəl haʊsəz fəɹ səksɛʃən tə ðə sʌn θɹoʊn, ɪn ðə dɪsɹʌpʃən ʌv ɡɹeɪn ʃɪpməns, ən ɪn fæmən. ðə saɪn ə kɛɹhin ɪz ə mɛni-ɹeɪd ɡoʊldən sʌn ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə bɑɾəm ʌv ə fild ə skaɪ blu.

Cairhien (KEYE-ree-EHN): Both a nation along the Spine of the World and the capital city of that nation. The city was burned and looted during the Aiel War, as were many other towns and villages. The consequent abandonment of farmland near the Spine of the World made necessary the importation of great quantities of grain. The assassination of King Galldrian (998 NE) has resulted in a civil war among the noble Houses for succession to the Sun Throne, in the disruption of grain shipments, and in famine. The sign of Cairhien is a many-rayed golden sun rising from the bottom of a field of sky blue.

kælændɝ (kɑ-læn-dɔɹ): ðə sɔɹd ðəɾ ɪz nɑɾ ə sɔɹd, ðə sɔɹd ðət kænɑt bi tʌtʃt. ə kɹɪstəl sɔɹd hɛld ɪn ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ, ɪn ðə tʃeɪmbɝ kɔl ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn. noʊ hæn kən tʌtʃ ɪɾ ɪksɛp ðəɾ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, wʌn ə ðə meɪdʒɝ saɪnz ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz ɹibɝθ ən ði əpɹoʊtʃ ə tɑɹmən ɡdən wɪl bi ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əz teɪkən kælændɝ.

Callandor (CAH-lahn-DOOR): The Sword That Is Not a Sword, the Sword That Cannot Be Touched. A crystal sword held in the Stone of Tear, in the chamber called the Heart of the Stone. No hand can touch it except that of the Dragon Reborn. According to the Prophecies of the Dragon, one of the major signs of the Dragon's Rebirth and the approach of Tarmon Gai'don will be that the Dragon Reborn has taken Callandor.

kɔθən, mæt (kɔ-θɑn, mæt): ə jʌŋ mæn fɹəm ɛmənz fild ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. fʊl neɪm: meɪtʃɹim (mæt-tʃɹɪm) kɔθən.

Cauthon, Mat (CAW-thon, MAT): A young man from Emond's Field in the Two Rivers. Full name: Matrim (MAT-trim) Cauthon.

tʃænəl: (vɝb) tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðə floʊ ʌv ðə wʌn paʊɝ. si ɔlsoʊ wʌn paʊɝ.

channel: (verb) To control the flow of the One Power. See also One Power.

tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt: ə səsaɪəɾi hoʊldɪŋ stʃɹɪkt əsɛɾɪk bɪlifs, dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə ðə dɪfiɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ʌv ɔl dɑɹkfɹɛnz. faʊndəd dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz baɪ lɑthɛɹ mæntəlɝ (loʊ-θheɪɹ mæn-ti-lɑɹ) tə pɹɑsələtaɪz əɡɛnst ən ɪnkɹis ɪn ðə nʌmbɝz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ðeɪ ɪvɑlv dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ɪndə ə kəmplitli mɪlətɛɹi ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃən. ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪkstʃɹimli ɹɪdʒəɾ ɪn ðɛɹ bɪlifs, ən sɝɾən ðəɾ oʊnli ðeɪ noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ ən ðə ɹaɪt. ðeɪ heɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðɛm, ən ɛni hu səpɔɹɾ əɹ bɪfɹɛn ðɛm, dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ðeɪ ɑɹ noʊn dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋli əz waɪtkloʊks. ðɛɹ saɪn ɪz ə ɡoʊldən sʌnbɝst ɑn ə fild ʌv waɪt. si ɔlsoʊ kwɛstʃənɝz.

Children of the Light: A society holding strict ascetic beliefs, dedicated to the defeat of the Dark One and the destruction of all Darkfriends. Founded during the War of the Hundred Years by Lothair Mantelar (LOH-thayr MAHN-tee-LAHR) to proselytize against an increase in the numbers of Darkfriends, they evolved during the war into a completely military organization. They are extremely rigid in their beliefs, and certain that only they know the truth and the right. They hate Aes Sedai, considering them, and any who support or befriend them, Darkfriends. They are known disparagingly as Whitecloaks. Their sign is a golden sunburst on a field of white. See also Questioners.

kɹɑnəkəlz, kipɝ ə ðə: sɛkən ɪn əθɔɹəɾi tə ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃi ɔlsoʊ æks əz sɛkɹətɛɹi tə ði æmɪɝlɪn. tʃoʊzən fəɹ laɪf baɪ ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, ən juʒəwəli ʌv ðə seɪm ədʒɑ əz ði æmɪɝlɪn. si ɔlsoʊ æmɪɝlɪn sit; ədʒɑ.

Chronicles, Keeper of the: Second in authority to the Amyrlin Seat among the Aes Sedai, she also acts as secretary to the Amyrlin. Chosen for life by the Hall of the Tower, and usually of the same Ajah as the Amyrlin. See also Amyrlin Seat; Ajah.

kaʊnsəl ə naɪn: ɪn ɪljən, ə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn lɔɹdz u ɑɹ səpoʊz tə ædvaɪz ðə kɪŋ, bʌɾ u hɪstɔɹɪkəli kəntɛnd wɪð ɪm fəɹ paʊɝ. boʊθ ðə kɪŋ ən ðə naɪn ɔfən mʌs kəntɛnd wɪð ði əsɛmblədʒ, əz wɛl.

Council of Nine: In Illian, a council of nine Lords who are supposed to advise the King, but who historically contend with him for power. Both the King and the Nine often must contend with the Assemblage, as well.

kwəndɪlɝ (kweɪn-dɛ-jɑɹ): si hɑɹtstoʊn.

cuendillar (CWAIN-deh-yar): See heartstone.

deɪz deɪmɑɹ (dɑ-ɛs deɪ-mɑɹ): ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm, ɔlsoʊ noʊn əz ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz. neɪm ɡɪvən ðə skimɪŋ, plɑts, ən mənɪpjəleɪʃənz fəɹ ædvæntɪdʒ baɪ ðə noʊbəl haʊsəz. ɡɹeɪt vælju ɪz ɡɪvən tə sʌɾəlti, tə eɪmɪŋ ət wʌn θɪŋ waɪl simɪŋ tə eɪm əɾ ənʌðɝ, ən tə ətʃivɪŋ ɛnz wɪð ðə lis vɪzəbəl ɛfɝt.

Daes Dae'mar (DAH-ess day-MAR): The Great Game, also known as the Game of Houses. Name given the scheming, plots, and manipulations for advantage by the noble Houses. Great value is given to subtlety, to aiming at one thing while seeming to aim at another, and to achieving ends with the least visible effort.

dəmədʒɹd, lɔɹd ɡɑleɪdɛdʒɹəd (dæm-oʊ-dʒɹɛd, ɡɑ-lɑd-ɛ-dʒɹaɪd): hæf bɹʌðɝ tə ɪleɪn ən ɡɔɪn. hɪz saɪn ɪz ə wɪŋ sɪlvɝ sɔɹd, pɔɪn daʊn.

Damodred, Lord Galadedrid (DAHM-oh-drehd, gah-LAHD-eh-drihd): Half brother to Elayne and Gawyn. His sign is a winged silver sword, point down.

dɑɹkfɹɛnz: ðoʊz u fɑloʊ ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən bɪliv ðəl ɡeɪn ɡɹeɪt paʊɝ ən ɹɪwɔɹdz, ən ivən ɪmɔɹtælɪɾi, wən hiz fɹid fɹəm ɪz pɹɪzən.

Darkfriends: Those who follow the Dark One and believe they will gain great power and rewards, and even immortality, when he is freed from his prison.

dɑɹkhaʊnz: si waɪl hʌnt.

Darkhounds: See Wild Hunt.

dɑɹk wʌn: moʊs kɑmən neɪm, juzd ɪn ɛvɹi lænd, fəɹ ʃeɪtɑn. ðə sɔɹs ʌv ivəl, æntɪθəsəs ə ðə kɹieɪɾɝ. ɪmpɹɪzən baɪ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl ət ðə moʊmən ə kɹieɪʃən. ði ətɛmp tə fɹi hɪm fɹəm ðət pɹɪzən bɹɔɾ əbaʊt ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ, ðə teɪntɪŋ ə seɪɾɪn, ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ən ði ɛn ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz.

Dark One: Most common name, used in every land, for Shai'tan. The source of evil, antithesis of the Creator. Imprisoned by the Creator in Shayol Ghul at the moment of Creation. The attempt to free him from that prison brought about the War of the Shadow, the tainting of saidin, the Breaking of the World, and the end of the Age of Legends.

dɑɹk wʌn, neɪmɪŋ ðə: seɪɪŋ ðə tʃɹu neɪm ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn (ʃeɪtɑn) dʒɹɔz ɪz ətɛnʃən, ɪnɛvəɾəbli bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪl fɔɹtʃən ət bɛst, dɪzæstɝ ət wɝst. fəɹ ðət ɹizən, mɛni jufəmɪzəmz ɑɹ juzd, əmʌŋ əm ðə dɑɹk wʌn, fɑðɝ ə laɪz, saɪtblɪndɝ, lɔɹɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪv, ʃɛpɝɾ ə ðə naɪt, hɝstbeɪn, soʊlsbeɪn, hɑɹtfæŋ, oʊld ɡɹɪm, ɡɹæsbɝnɝ, ən lifblaɪɾɝ. dɑɹkfɹɛnz kɔl ɪm ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk. sʌmwʌn u simz tə bi ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ ɪl fɔɹtʃən ɪz ɔfən sɛd tə bi "neɪmɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn."

Dark One, naming the: Saying the true name of the Dark One (Shai'tan) draws his attention, inevitably bringing ill fortune at best, disaster at worst. For that reason, many euphemisms are used, among them the Dark One, Father of Lies, Sightblinder, Lord of the Grave, Shepherd of the Night, Hearstbane, Soulsbane, Heartfang, Old Grim, Grassburner, and Leafblighter. Darkfriends call him the Great Lord of the Dark. Someone who seems to be inviting ill fortune is often said to be "naming the Dark One."

dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ: taɪɾəl ə ði ɛɹ tə ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ. ði ɛldəs dɔɾɝ ə ðə kwin səksidz əɹ mʌðɝ ɑn ðə θɹoʊn. wɪθaʊɾ ə sɝvaɪvɪŋ dɔɾɝ, ðə θɹoʊn ɡoʊz tə ðə nɪɹəs fimeɪl blʌd ɹileɪʃən ə ðə kwin.

Daughter-Heir: Title of the heir to the throne of Andor. The eldest daughter of the Queen succeeds her mother on the throne. Without a surviving daughter, the throne goes to the nearest female blood relation of the Queen.

dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪt: si lænfɝ.

Daughter of the Night: See Lanfear.

dʒɹæɡən, fɔls: əkeɪʒənəli mɛn kleɪm tə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən səmtaɪmz wʌn ə ðiz mɛn ɡeɪnz fɑloʊɪŋ ɪnʌf tə ɹikwaɪɝ ən ɑɹmi tə pʊɾ ɪt daʊn. səm əv bɪɡʌn wɔɹz ðəɾ ɪnvɑlv mɛni neɪʃənz. oʊvɝ ðə sɛntʃɝiz moʊst ə ðiz əv bɪn mɛn əneɪbəl tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ, bʌɾ ə fju kəd də soʊ. ɔl, haʊɛvɝ, iðɝ dɪsəpɪɹɾ əɹ wɝ kæptʃɝɾ əɹ kɪld wɪθaʊt fʊlfɪlɪŋ ɛni ʌv ðə pɹɑfəsiz kənsɝnɪŋ ðə ɹibɝθ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən. ðiz mɛn ɑɹ kɔl fɔls dʒɹæɡənz. əmʌŋ ðoʊz u kəd tʃænəl, ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl wɝ ɹɑoʊlɪn dɑɹksbeɪn (θɹiθɹifaɪvθɹisɪks æb), jʊɹiən stoʊnboʊ (sɝkə wʌnθɹizɪɹoʊzɪɹoʊwʌnθɹizɪɹoʊeɪɾ æb), dɑviən (fi θɹihʌnʒɹədfɪftiwʌn), ɡɛɹ əmɑlɑsən (fi naɪnθɹinaɪnfɔɹθɹi), ən lɑɡən (naɪnhʌnʒɹədnaɪntisɛvən ni). si ɔlsoʊ dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

Dragon, false: Occasionally men claim to be the Dragon Reborn, and sometimes one of these men gains following enough to require an army to put it down. Some have begun wars that involved many nations. Over the centuries most of these have been men unable to channel the One Power, but a few could do so. All, however, either disappeared or were captured or killed without fulfilling any of the Prophecies concerning the Rebirth of the Dragon. These men are called false Dragons. Among those who could channel, the most powerful were Raolin Darksbane (33536 AB), Yurian Stonebow (circa 13001308 AB), Davian (FY 351), Guaire Amalasan (FY 93943), and Logain (997 NE). See also Dragon Reborn.

dʒɹæɡən, pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə: lɪɾəl noʊn ən sɛldəm spoʊkən ʌv, ðə pɹɑfəsiz, ɡɪvən ɪn ðə kæɹæəθən saɪkəl, fɔɹtɛl ðət ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɪl bi fɹiɾ əɡɛn tə tʌtʃ ðə wɝld. ən ðət luz θɝɪn tɛləmən, ðə dʒɹæɡən, bɹeɪkɝ ə ðə wɝld, wɪl bi ɹibɔɹn tə faɪt tɑɹmən ɡdən, ðə læs bæɾəl əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ. si ɔlsoʊ dʒɹæɡən, ðə.

Dragon, Prophecies of the: Little known and seldom spoken of, the Prophecies, given in The Karaethon Cycle, foretell that the Dark One will be freed again to touch the world. And that Lews Therin Telamon, the Dragon, Breaker of the World, will be reborn to fight Tarmon Gai'don, the Last Battle against the Shadow. See also Dragon, the.

dʒɹæɡən, ðə: ðə neɪm baɪ wɪtʃ luz θɝɪn tɛləmən wɑz noʊn dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ. ɪn ðə mædnəs ðəɾ oʊvɝtʊk ɔl meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ, luz θɝɪn kɪld ɛvɹi lɪvɪŋ pɝsən u kæɹiɾ ɛni ʌv ɪz blʌd, əz wɛl əz ɛvɹiwʌn i lʌvd, ðʌs ɝnɪŋ ðə neɪm kɪnsleɪɝ. si ɔlsoʊ dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn; dʒɹæɡən, pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə.

Dragon, the: The name by which Lews Therin Telamon was known during the War of the Shadow. In the madness that overtook all male Aes Sedai, Lews Therin killed every living person who carried any of his blood, as well as everyone he loved, thus earning the name Kinslayer. See also Dragon Reborn; Dragon, Prophecies of the.

dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn: əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə pɹɑfəsi ən lɛdʒən ðə dʒɹæɡən wɪl bi bɔɹn əɡɛn ət mænkaɪnz ɡɹeɪɾəst aʊɝ ə nid tə seɪv ðə wɝld. ðɪs ɪz nɑt sʌmθɪŋ pipəl lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə, boʊθ kəz ðə pɹɑfəsiz seɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɪl bɹɪŋ ə nu bɹeɪkɪŋ tə ðə wɝld ən kəz luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ, ðə dʒɹæɡən, ɪz ə neɪm tə meɪk mɛn ʃʌɾɝ, ivən mɔɹ ðən θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz æftɝ ɪz dɛθ. si ɔlsoʊ dʒɹæɡən, ðə; dʒɹæɡən, fɔls; dʒɹæɡən, pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə.

Dragon Reborn: According to prophecy and legend the Dragon will be born again at mankind's greatest hour of need to save the world. This is not something people look forward to, both because the Prophecies say the Dragon Reborn will bring a new Breaking to the world and because Lews Therin Kinslayer, the Dragon, is a name to make men shudder, even more than three thousand years after his death. See also Dragon, the; Dragon, false; Dragon, Prophecies of the.

dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz: mɛn ən wɪmən eɪbəl tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ, hu wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðə ʃædoʊ dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, æktɪŋ əz kəmændɝz ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk fɔɹsɪz. əkeɪʒənəli kənfjuzd wɪð ðə fɔɹseɪkən baɪ ðə lɛs wɛl ɛdʒəkeɪɾəd.

Dreadlords: Men and women able to channel the One Power, who went over to the Shadow during the Trolloc Wars, acting as commanders of the Trolloc forces. Occasionally confused with the Forsaken by the less well educated.

dʒɹimɝ: si tæləns.

Dreamer: See Talents.

ɪleɪɾə (ɛ-laɪ-dɑ): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ. fɔɹmɝ ædvaɪzɝ tə kwin mɔɹɡeɪs ʌv ændɝ. ʃi səmtaɪmz əz ðə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ.

Elaida (eh-LY-da): An Aes Sedai of the Red Ajah. Former advisor to Queen Morgase of Andor. She sometimes has the Foretelling.

ɪleɪn ə haʊs tʃɹəkənd (tʃɹɑ-kænd): kwin mɔɹɡeɪsəz dɔɾɝ, ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ tə ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ. naʊ ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. hɝ saɪn ɪz ə ɡoʊldən lɪli.

Elayne of House Trakand (trah-KAND): Queen Morgase's daughter, the Daughter-Heir to the throne of Andor. Now in training to be Aes Sedai. Her sign is a golden lily.

fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ (fɑɹ dɑ-ɹaɪz maɪ): lɪɾɝəli "meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ." ə wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾi ʌv ði il, wɪtʃ, ənlaɪk ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz, ədmɪts wɪmən ən oʊnli wɪmən. eɪ meɪɾən meɪ nɑt mɛɹi ən ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə səsaɪəɾi, nɔɹ meɪ ʃi faɪt waɪl kæɹiɪŋ ə tʃaɪld. ɛni tʃaɪl bɔɹn tə ə meɪɾən ɪz ɡɪvən tə ənʌðɝ wʊmən tə ɹeɪz, ɪn sətʃ ə weɪ ðət noʊ wʌn noʊz u ðə tʃaɪlz mʌðɝ wɑz. ("ju meɪ bɪlɔŋ tə noʊ mæn, nɔɹ meɪ ɛni mæn bɪlɔŋ tə ju, nɔɹ ɛni tʃaɪld. ðə spɪɹ ɪz jəɹ lʌvɝ, jəɹ tʃaɪld, ən jəɹ laɪf.") ðiz tʃɪlʒɹən ɑɹ tʃɹɛʒɝd, fəɹ ɪts pɹɑfəsaɪd ðəɾ ə tʃaɪl bɔɹn ʌv ə meɪɾən wɪl junaɪt ðə klænz ən ɹɪtɝn ði il tə ðə ɡɹeɪtnəs ðeɪ nu dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. si ɔlsoʊ il; il wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz.

Far Dareis Mai (FAHR DAH-rize MY): Literally "Maidens of the Spear." A warrior society of the Aiel, which, unlike any of the others, admits women and only women. A Maiden may not marry and remain in the society, nor may she fight while carrying a child. Any child born to a Maiden is given to another woman to raise, in such a way that no one knows who the child's mother was. ("You may belong to no man, nor may any man belong to you, nor any child. The spear is your lover, your child, and your life.") These children are treasured, for it is prophesied that a child born of a Maiden will unite the clans and return the Aiel to the greatness they knew during the Age of Legends. See also Aiel; Aiel warrior societies.

fɛtʃɪz: si mɹdʒɹɑl.

Fetches: See Myrddraal.

faɪv paʊɝz, ðə: ðəɹ ɑɹ θɹɛdz tə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ən ɛniwʌn u kən tʃænəl kən juʒəwəli ɡɹæsp səm θɹɛdz bɛɾɝ ðən ʌðɝz. ðiz θɹɛdz ɑɹ neɪmd əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə sɔɹts ə θɪŋz ðət kən bi dʌn juzɪŋ əm - ɝθ, ɛɹ (səmtaɪmz kɔld wɪnd), faɪɝ, wɔɾɝ, ən spɪɹət - ən ɑɹ kɔl ðə faɪv paʊɝz. ɛni wildɝ ə ðə paʊɝ wɪl əv ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ dɪɡɹi ʌv stʃɹɛŋkθ wɪð wʌn, əɹ pɑsəbli tu, ʌv ðiz, ən lɛsɝ stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ði ʌðɝz. səm fju meɪ hæv ɡɹeɪt stʃɹɛŋkθ wɪð θɹi, bʌt sɪns ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz noʊ wʌn əz hæd ɡɹeɪt stʃɹɛŋkθ wɪð ɔl faɪv. ivən ðən ðɪs wɑz ɪkstʃɹimli ɹɛɹ. ðə dɪɡɹi ʌv stʃɹɛŋkθ kən vɛɹi ɡɹeɪtli bɪtwin ɪndəvɪdʒəwəlz. pɝfɔɹmɪŋ sɝɾən æks wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɹikwaɪɝz ði əbɪləɾi tə wiv floʊz ɪn wʌn əɹ mɔɹ ə ðə faɪv paʊɝz. fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, stɑɹɾɪŋ əɹ kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ ə faɪɝ ɹikwaɪɝz faɪɝ, ən əfɛktɪŋ ðə wɛðɝ ɹikwaɪɝz ɛɹ ən wɔɾɝ, waɪl hilɪŋ ɹikwaɪɝz ɛɹ, wɔɾɝ ən spɪɹət. waɪl spɪɹət wɑz faʊn ikwəli ɪn mɛn ən ɪn wɪmən, ɡɹeɪɾ əbɪləɾi wɪð ɝθ ænslæʃɔɹ faɪɝ wɑz faʊn mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɔfən əmʌŋ mɛn; wɪð wɔɾɝ ænslæʃɔɹ ɛɹ əmʌŋ wɪmən. ðəɹ wɝ ɪksɛpʃənz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz soʊ ɔfən soʊ ðəɾ ɝθ ən faɪɝ keɪm tə bi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əz meɪl paʊɝz, ɛɹ ən wɔɾɝ əz fimeɪl. dʒɛnɝəli, noʊ əbɪləɾi ɪz kənsɪɾɝd stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ, ðoʊ ðəɹ ɪz ə seɪɪŋ əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ: "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ ɹɑk soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ðət wɔɾɝ ən wɪn kænɑt wɛɹ ɪɾ əweɪ, noʊ faɪɝ soʊ fɪɹs ðət wɔɾɝ kænɑt kwɛntʃ ɪɾ əɹ wɪn snʌf ɪɾ aʊt." ɪt ʃəd bi noʊɾəd ðəɾ ɛni ɪkwɪvələn seɪɪŋ əmʌŋ meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz lɔŋ lɔst.

Five Powers, the: There are threads to the One Power, and anyone who can channel can usually grasp some threads better than others. These threads are named according to the sorts of things that can be done using them - Earth, Air (sometimes called Wind), Fire, Water, and Spirit - and are called the Five Powers. Any wielder of the Power will have a greater degree of strength with one, or possibly two, of these, and lesser strength in the others. Some few may have great strength with three, but since the Age of Legends no one has had great strength with all five. Even then this was extremely rare. The degree of strength can vary greatly between individuals. Performing certain acts with the One Power requires the ability to weave flows in one or more of the Five Powers. For example, starting or controlling a fire requires Fire, and affecting the weather requires Air and Water, while Healing requires Air, Water and Spirit. While Spirit was found equally in men and in women, great ability with Earth and/or Fire was found much more often among men; with Water and/or Air among women. There were exceptions, but it was so often so that Earth and Fire came to be regarded as male Powers, Air and Water as female. Generally, no ability is considered stronger than any other, though there is a saying among Aes Sedai: "There is no rock so strong that water and wind cannot wear it away, no fire so fierce that water cannot quench it or wind snuff it out." It should be noted that any equivalent saying among male Aes Sedai is long lost.

fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn: sɪmbəl ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ə staɪlaɪzd ɹɛpɹəzɛnteɪʃən ʌv ə fleɪm; ə waɪt tɪɹdʒɹɑp wɪð ðə pɔɪn ʌpwɝd.

Flame of Tar Valon: Symbol of Tar Valon, the Amyrlin Seat, and the Aes Sedai. A stylized representation of a flame; a white teardrop with the point upward.

fɔɹseɪkən, ðə: neɪm ɡɪvən tə θɝtin ə ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, wɪtʃ meɪɾ əm əmʌŋ ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ɛvɝ noʊn, hu wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ ɪn ɹɪtɝn fəɹ ðə pɹɑməs ʌv ɪmɔɹtælɪɾi. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə boʊθ lɛdʒən ən fɹæɡməntɛɹi ɹɛkɝdz, ðeɪ wɝ ɪmpɹɪzən əlɔŋ wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn wən ɪz pɹɪzən wɑz ɹisild. ðɛɹ neɪmz - əmʌŋ əm lænfɝ, bɛləl, sɑmaɪl, æzmɑɾiən, ɹɑvɪn, ən ɪʃəml - ɑɹ stɪl juz tə fɹaɪɾən tʃɪlʒɹən.

Forsaken, the: Name given to thirteen of the most powerful Aes Sedai of the Age of Legends, which made them among the most powerful ever known, who went over to the Dark One during the War of the Shadow in return for the promise of immortality. According to both legend and fragmentary records, they were imprisoned along with the Dark One when his prison was resealed. Their names - among them Lanfear, Be'lal, Sammael, Asmodean, Rahvin, and Ishamael - are still used to frighten children.

fɔɹtʃɹəs ə ðə laɪt: ðə ɡɹeɪt fɔɹtʃɹəs ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, loʊkeɪɾəd ɪn æmədɔɹ (ɑ-mɑ-dɔɹ), ðə kæpəɾəl ʌv ɑmɑdɪʃiə (ɑ-mɑ-di-tʃi-ɑ). ðəɹ ɪz ə kɪŋ ʌv ɑmɑdɪʃiə, bʌt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɹul ɪn ɔl bʌt neɪm. si ɔlsoʊ tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Fortress of the Light: The great fortress of the Children of the Light, located in Amador (AH-mah-door), the capital of Amadicia (AH-mah-DEE-cee-ah). There is a King of Amadicia, but the Children rule in all but name. See also Children of the Light.

ɡeɪɾɪn (ɡaɪ-din): lɪɾɝəli "bɹʌðɝ tə bæɾəlz." ə taɪɾəl juz baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ ðə wɔɹɾɝz. si ɔlsoʊ wɔɹɾɝ.

Gaidin (GYE-deen): Literally "Brother to Battles." A title used by Aes Sedai for the Warders. See also Warder.

ɡɑləd (ɡɑ-lɑd): si dəmədʒɹd, lɔɹd ɡɑleɪdɛdʒɹəd.

Galad (gah-LAHD): See Damodred, Lord Galadedrid.

ɡeɪm ə haʊzɪz, ðə: si deɪz deɪmɑɹ.

Game of Houses, the: See Daes Dae'mar.

ɡɔl (): ən il ə ði ɪmɹən sɛpt ə ðə ʃɝəd, ə ʃeɪin tɑl, ə stoʊn dɔɡ.

Gaul (GAHWL): An Aiel of the Imran sept of the Shaarad, a Shae'en M'taal, a Stone Dog.

ɡɔɪn (ɡɑ-wɪn) ʌv haʊs tʃɹəkənd (tʃɹɑ-kænd): kwin mɔɹɡeɪsəz sʌn, ən ɪleɪnz bɹʌðɝ, hu wɪl bi fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹd wən ɪleɪn əsɛnz tə ðə θɹoʊn. hɪz saɪn ɪz ə waɪt bɔɹ.

Gawyn (GAH-wihn) of House Trakand (trah-KAND): Queen Morgase's son, and Elayne's brother, who will be First Prince of the Sword when Elayne ascends to the throne. His sign is a white boar.

dʒɛntəlɪŋ: ði ækt, pɝfɔɹm baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʌv ʃʌɾɪŋ ɔf ə meɪl u kən tʃænəl fɹəm ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ðɪs ɪz nɛsəsɛɹi kəz ɛni mæn u lɝnz tə tʃænəl wɪl ɡoʊ ɪnseɪn fɹəm ðə teɪn ɑn seɪɾɪn ən wɪl ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli də hɔɹəbəl θɪŋz wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪn ɪz mædnəs. ə mæn u hæz bɪn dʒɛntəl kən stɪl sɛns ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, bʌɾ i kænɑt tʌtʃ ɪt. wʌtɛvɝ mædnəs əz kʌm bɪfɔɹ dʒɛntəlɪŋ ɪz ɝɛstəd baɪ ði ækt ə dʒɛntəlɪŋ, bʌt nɑt kjʊɹd baɪ ɪt, ən ɪf ɪts dʌn sun ɪnʌf dɛθ kən bi əvɝɾəd. si ɔlsoʊ wʌn paʊɝ, ðə; stɪlɪŋ.

gentling: The act, performed by Aes Sedai, of shutting off a male who can channel from the One Power. This is necessary because any man who learns to channel will go insane from the taint on saidin and will almost certainly do horrible things with the Power in his madness. A man who has been gentled can still sense the True Source, but he cannot touch it. Whatever madness has come before gentling is arrested by the act of gentling, but not cured by it, and if it is done soon enough death can be averted. See also One Power, the; stilling.

ɡlimən: ə tʃɹævlɪŋ stɔɹitɛlɝ, mjuzɪʃən, dʒʌɡəlɝ, tʌmblɝ, ən ɔl-ɝaʊn ɛntɝteɪnɝ. noʊn baɪ ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪdmɑɹk kloʊks ə mɛni-kʌlɝd pætʃəz, ɡlimən pɝfɔɹm meɪnli ɪn ðə vɪlədʒəz ən smɔlɝ taʊnz.

gleeman: A traveling storyteller, musician, juggler, tumbler, and all-around entertainer. Known by their trademark cloaks of many-colored patches, gleemen perform mainly in the villages and smaller towns.

ɡɹeɪ mæn: sʌmwʌn u hæz vɑləntɛɹəli sɝɛndɝɾ ɪz əɹ əɹ soʊl ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə bɪkʌm ən əsæsən sɝvɪŋ ðə ʃædoʊ. ɡɹeɪ mɛn ɑɹ soʊ ɔɹɾənɛɹi ɪn əpɪɹəns ðət ði aɪ kən slaɪd ɹaɪt pæst wɪθaʊt noʊɾɪsɪŋ ðɛm. ðə væs mədʒɔɹəɾi ʌv ɡɹeɪ mɛn ɑɹ ɪndid mɛn, bʌɾ ə smɔl nʌmbɝ ɑɹ wɪmən.

Gray Man: Someone who has voluntarily surrendered his or her soul in order to become an assassin serving the Shadow. Gray Men are so ordinary in appearance that the eye can slide right past without noticing them. The vast majority of Gray Men are indeed men, but a small number are women.

ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, ðə: ə ɹidʒən ɪn ðə fɑɹ nɔɹθ, ɪntaɪɝli kɝʌptɪd baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ə hɔn ə tʃɹɑləks, mɹdʒɹɑl, ən ʌðɝ kɹitʃɝz ə ðə ʃædoʊ.

Great Blight, the: A region in the far north, entirely corrupted by the Dark One. A haunt of Trollocs, Myrddraal, and other creatures of the Shadow.

ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm, ðə: si deɪz deɪmɑɹ.

Great Game, the: See Daes Dae'mar.

ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn, ðə: ə saɪkəl ə stɔɹiz kənsɝnɪŋ ðə lɛdʒəndɛɹi sɝtʃ fəɹ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, ɪn ðə jɪɹz bɪtwin ði ɛn ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz ən ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. ɪf toʊld ɪn ɪts ɪntaɪɝɾi, ðə saɪkəl wəd teɪk mɛni deɪz. si ɔlsoʊ hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ.

Great Hunt of the Horn, The: A cycle of stories concerning the legendary search for the Horn of Valere, in the years between the end of the Trolloc Wars and the beginning of the War of the Hundred Years. If told in its entirety, the cycle would take many days. See also Horn of Valere.

ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk: ðə neɪm baɪ wɪtʃ dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɹəfɝ tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, kleɪmɪŋ ðət tə juz ɪz tʃɹu neɪm wəd bi blæsfəməs.

Great Lord of the Dark: The name by which Darkfriends refer to the Dark One, claiming that to use his true name would be blasphemous.

ɡɹeɪt sɝpənt: ə sɪmbəl fəɹ taɪm ən ɪtɝnəɾi, eɪntʃən bɪfɔɹ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz bɪɡæn, kənsɪstɪŋ ʌv ə sɝpən iɾɪŋ ɪts oʊn teɪl. ə ɹɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ə ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɪz əwɔɹɾəd tə wɪmən u hæv bɪn ɹeɪz tə ði æksɛptɪɾ əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Great Serpent: A symbol for time and eternity, ancient before the Age of Legends began, consisting of a serpent eating its own tail. A ring in the shape of the Great Serpent is awarded to women who have been raised to the Accepted among the Aes Sedai.

ɡɹɪm, oʊld: si dɑɹk wʌn; waɪl hʌnt.

Grim, Old: See Dark One; Wild Hunt.

hæfmən: si mɹdʒɹɑl.

Halfman: See Myrddraal.

hɔkwɪŋ, ɑɹɾɝ: ə lɛdʒəndɛɹi kɪŋ (ɹul fi naɪnfɔɹθɹinaɪnfɔɹ) hu junaɪɾəd ɔl ðə lænz wɛst ə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld. hi ivən sɛn ɑɹmiz əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən (fi naɪnhʌnʒɹədnaɪntitu), bʌɾ ɔl kɑntækt wɪð ðiz wɑz lɔst əɾ ɪz dɛθ, wɪtʃ sɛɾ ɔf ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. hɪz saɪn wɑz ə ɡoʊldən hɔk ɪn flaɪt. si ɔlsoʊ wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz.

Hawkwing, Artur: A legendary king (ruled FY 94394) who united all the lands west of the Spine of the World. He even sent armies across the Aryth Ocean (FY 992), but all contact with these was lost at his death, which set off the War of the Hundred Years. His sign was a golden hawk in flight. See also War of the Hundred Years.

hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn: si kælændɝ.

Heart of the Stone: See Callandor.

hɑɹtstoʊn: ən ɪndəstʃɹʌktɪbəl sʌbstəns kɹieɪɾəd dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ɛni fɔɹs juzd ɪn ən ətɛmp tə bɹeɪk ɪts əbzɔɹbd, meɪkɪŋ hɑɹtstoʊn stʃɹɔŋɝ. ənʌðɝ neɪm fəɹ kwəndɪlɝ.

heartstone: An indestructible substance created during the Age of Legends. Any force used in an attempt to break it is absorbed, making heartstone stronger. Another name for cuendillar.

haɪd: ə junəɾ ʌv ɛɹiə fəɹ mɛʒɝɪŋ lænd, ikwəl tə wʌnhʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz baɪ wʌnhʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz.

hide: A unit of area for measuring land, equal to 100 paces by 100 paces.

haɪ lɔɹdz ə tɛɹ: æktɪŋ əz ə kaʊnsəl, ðə haɪ lɔɹdz ɑɹ ðə ɹulɝz ə ðə neɪʃən ə tɛɹ, wɪtʃ əz niðɝ kɪŋ nɔɹ kwin. ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz ɑɹ nɑt fɪkst, ən əv vɛɹiɾ oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz fɹəm əz mɛni əz twɛnti tə əz fju əz sɪks. nɑt tə bi kənfjuzd wɪð ðə lɔɹdz ə ðə lænd, hu ɑɹ lɛsɝ tɛɹən lɔɹdz.

High Lords of Tear: Acting as a council, the High Lords are the rulers of the nation of Tear, which has neither king nor queen. Their numbers are not fixed, and have varied over the years from as many as twenty to as few as six. Not to be confused with the Lords of the Land, who are lesser Tairen lords.

hɑpɝ: ə wʊlf.

Hopper: A wolf.

hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ (vɑ-lɪɹ): ðə lɛdʒəndɛɹi əbdʒɛkt ə ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn. ðə hɔɹn səpoʊzədli kən kɔl bæk dɛd hɪɹoʊz fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv tə faɪɾ əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ.

Horn of Valere (vah-LEER): The legendary object of the Great Hunt of the Horn. The Horn supposedly can call back dead heroes from the grave to fight against the Shadow.

hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz, ðə: wʌn hʌnʒɹəd meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ, əmʌŋ ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, hu, lɛd baɪ luz θɝɪn tɛləmən, lɔntʃt ðə faɪnəl stʃɹoʊk ðəɾ ɛndəd ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ baɪ silɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn bæk ɪndə hɪz pɹɪzən. ðə dɑɹk wʌnz kaʊntɝstʃɹoʊk teɪntɪd seɪɾɪn; ðə hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz wɛn mæɾ ən bɪɡæn ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. si ɔlsoʊ taɪm ə mædnəs; bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld; tʃɹu sɔɹs; wʌn paʊɝ.

Hundred Companions, the: One hundred male Aes Sedai, among the most powerful of the Age of Legends, who, led by Lews Therin Telamon, launched the final stroke that ended the War of the Shadow by sealing the Dark One back into his prison. The Dark One's counterstroke tainted saidin; the Hundred Companions went mad and began the Breaking of the World. See also Time of Madness; Breaking of the World; True Source; One Power.

ɪljən (ɪl-li-æn): ə ɡɹeɪt pɔɹɾ ɑn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ðə neɪʃən ə ðə seɪm neɪm.

Illian (IHL-lee-an): A great port on the Sea of Storms, capital city of the nation of the same name.

ɪluməneɪɾɝz, ɡɪld ʌv: ə səsaɪəɾi ðət hoʊlz ðə sikɹəɾ ə meɪkɪŋ faɪɹwɝks. ɪt ɡɑɹdz ðɪs sikɹət vɛɹi kloʊsli, ivən tə mɝɾɝ. ðə ɡɪld ɡeɪnz ɪts neɪm fɹəm ðə ɡɹæn dɪspleɪz, kɔld ɪluməneɪʃənz, ðəɾ ɪt pɹəvaɪdz fəɹ ɹulɝz ən səmtaɪmz fəɹ ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz. lɛsɝ faɪɹwɝks ɑɹ soʊl fəɹ jus baɪ ʌðɝz, bʌt wɪð daɪɹ wɔɹnɪŋz ə ðə dɪzæstɝ ðət kən ɹɪzʌl fɹəm ətɛmptɪŋ tə lɝn wʌɾ ɪz ɪnsaɪd ðɛm. ðə ɡɪl tʃæptɝ haʊs ɪz ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ, ðə kæpəɾəl ə tæɹɑbən. ðə ɡɪld ɪstæblɪʃt wʌn ʌðɝ tʃæptɝ haʊs ɪn kɛɹhin, bʌɾ ɪts noʊ lɔŋɡɝ æktɪv.

Illuminators, Guild of: A society that holds the secret of making fireworks. It guards this secret very closely, even to murder. The Guild gains its name from the grand displays, called Illuminations, that it provides for rulers and sometimes for great lords. Lesser fireworks are sold for use by others, but with dire warnings of the disaster that can result from attempting to learn what is inside them. The Guild chapter house is in Tanchico, the capital of Tarabon. The Guild established one other chapter house in Cairhien, but it is no longer active.

ɪʃəml (ɪ-ʃɑ-meɪ-ɛl): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "bɪtʃɹeɪɝ ə hoʊp." wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. neɪm ɡɪvən tə ðə liɾɝ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪn ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ. ɪts sɛd ðəɾ ivən i fɝɡɑɾ ɪz tʃɹu neɪm. si ɔlsoʊ fɔɹseɪkən.

Ishamael (ih-SHAH-may-EHL): In the Old Tongue, "Betrayer of Hope." One of the Forsaken. Name given to the leader of the Aes Sedai who went over to the Dark One in the War of the Shadow. It is said that even he forgot his true name. See also Forsaken.

kæɹæəθən saɪkəl, ðə (kɑ-ɹi-ɑ-θɑn): si dʒɹæɡən, pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə.

Karaethon Cycle, The (ka-REE-ah-thon): See Dragon, Prophecies of the.

leɪmən (leɪ-mæn): ə kɪŋ ə kɛɹhin, ʌv haʊs dəmədʒɹd, hu lɔst ɪz θɹoʊn ɪn ði il wɔɹ. si ɔlsoʊ il wɔɹ; ɑvɛndɔɹɑldɛɹə.

Laman (LAY-mahn): A king of Cairhien, of House Damodred, who lost his throne in the Aiel War. See also Aiel War; Avendoraldera.

læn (læn); ælən mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən (ɑl-læn mæn-dʒɹæɡ-ɔɹ-æn): eɪ wɔɹɾɝ, bɑndəd tə mɔɪɹeɪn. ʌnkɹoʊn kɪŋ ə mɔlkiɝ, daɪ ʃæn, ən ðə læst sɝvaɪvɪŋ mɔlkɪɹi lɔɹd. si ɔlsoʊ wɔɹɾɝ; mɔɪɹeɪn; mɔlkiɝ.

Lan (LAN); al'Lan Mandragoran (AHL-LAN man-DRAG-or-an): A Warder, bonded to Moiraine. Uncrowned King of Malkier, Dai Shan, and the last surviving Malkieri lord. See also Warder; Moiraine; Malkier.

lænfɝ (læn-fɪɹ): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪt." wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, pɝhæps ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl nɛks tə ɪʃəml. ənlaɪk ði ʌðɝ fɔɹseɪkən, ʃi tʃoʊz ðɪs neɪm hɝsɛlf. ʃiz sɛd tə hæv bɪn ɪn lʌv wɪð luz θɝɪn tɛləmən, ən tə hæv heɪɾəd ɪz waɪf, aɪlaɪɛnə. si ɔlsoʊ fɔɹseɪkən; dʒɹæɡən, ðə.

Lanfear (LAN-fear): In the Old Tongue, "Daughter of the Night." One of the Forsaken, perhaps the most powerful next to Ishamael. Unlike the other Forsaken, she chose this name herself. She is said to have been in love with Lews Therin Telamon, and to have hated his wife, Ilyena. See also Forsaken; Dragon, the.

liɡ: si lɛŋθ, junəts ʌv.

league: See length, units of.

lin (li-æn-ɛ): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə blu ədʒɑ, ən kipɝ ə ðə kɹɑnəkəlz. si ɔlsoʊ ədʒɑ; kɹɑnəkəlz, kipɝ ə ðə.

Leane (lee-AHN-eh): An Aes Sedai of the Blue Ajah, and Keeper of the Chronicles. See also Ajah; Chronicles, Keeper of the.

lɛŋθ, junəts ʌv: tɛn ɪntʃəz ikwəlz wʌn fʊt; θɹi fiɾ ikwəlz wʌn peɪs; tu peɪsɪz ikwəlz wʌn spæn; wʌnθaʊzən spænz ikwəlz wʌn maɪl; fɔɹ maɪlz ikwəlz wʌn liɡ.

length, units of: 10 inches = 1 foot; 3 feet = 1 pace; 2 paces = 1 span; 1000 spans = 1 mile; 4 miles = 1 league.

luz θɝɪn tɛləmən; luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ: si dʒɹæɡən, ðə.

Lews Therin Telamon; Lews Therin Kinslayer: See Dragon, the.

liɑnʒɹɪn (li-æn-dʒɹɪn): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ fɔɹmɝli ʌv ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ, fɹəm tæɹɑbən. naʊ noʊn tə bi ʌv ðə blæk ədʒɑ.

Liandrin (lee-AHN-drihn): An Aes Sedai formerly of the Red Ajah, from Tarabon. Now known to be of the Black Ajah.

laɪt, tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə: si tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Light, Children of the: See Children of the Light.

lɔɪəl (lɔɪ-ɑl) sʌn ʌv ɑɹən sʌn ə hɑlən: ən oʊɡiɝ fɹəm stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ.

Loial (LOY-ahl) son of Arent son of Halan: An Ogier from Stedding Shangtai.

mɔlkiɝ (mɑl-kiɪɹ): ə neɪʃən, wʌns wʌn ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, naʊ kənsum baɪ ðə blaɪt. ðə saɪn ə mɔlkiɝ wɑz ə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn ɪn flaɪt.

Malkier (mahl-KEER): A nation, once one of the Borderlands, now consumed by the Blight. The sign of Malkier was a golden crane in flight.

meɪnɛðɝən (mæn--ɛɹ-ɛn): wʌn ə ðə tɛn neɪʃənz ðət meɪd ðə sɛkən kʌvənənt. ɔlsoʊ ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ðət neɪʃən. boʊθ sɪɾi ən neɪʃən wɝ ʌɾɝli dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz.

Manetheren (mahn-EHTH-ehr-ehn): One of the Ten Nations that made the Second Covenant. Also the capital city of that nation. Both city and nation were utterly destroyed in the Trolloc Wars.

mæsimə (mɑ-si-mɑ): eɪ ʃaɪnɝən soʊlʒɝ u heɪts il.

Masema (mah-SEE-mah): A Shienaran soldier who hates Aiel.

min (meɪ-ɛn): sɪɾi-steɪt ɑn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz ðət dɝaɪvz ɪts wɛlθ ən ɪts ɪndɪpɛndəns fɹəm nɑlədʒ ʌv wɛɹ tə faɪn ði ɔɪlfɪʃ ʃoʊlz, wɪtʃ ɹaɪvəl ɪn ɛkənɑmɪk ɪmpɔɹɾəns ði ɑləv ɡɹoʊvz ə tɛɹ, ɪljən, ən tæɹɑbən. ɔɪlfɪʃ ən ɑlɪvz pɹəvaɪd nɪɹli ɔl læmp ɔɪl. ðə kɝən ɹulɝ ə min ɪz bɹəleɪn, ðə fɝst ə min. ðə ɹulɝz ə min kleɪm tə bi dɪsɛndəns ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ. ðə saɪn ə min ɪz ə ɡoʊldən hɔk ɪn flaɪt.

Mayene (may-EHN): City-state on the Sea of Storms that derives its wealth and its independence from knowledge of where to find the oilfish shoals, which rival in economic importance the olive groves of Tear, Illian, and Tarabon. Oilfish and olives provide nearly all lamp oil. The current ruler of Mayene is Berelain, the First of Mayene. The Rulers of Mayene claim to be descendants of Artur Hawkwing. The sign of Mayene is a golden hawk in flight.

mɛɹɪlɪn, tɑm (mɛɹ-ɹɪ-lɪn, tɑm): ə ɡlimən, ən wʌns ðə lʌvɝ ə kwin mɔɹɡeɪs.

Merrilin, Thom (MER-rih-lihn, TOM): A gleeman, and once the lover of Queen Morgase.

maɪl: si lɛŋθ, junəts ʌv.

mile: See length, units of.

mɪn (mɪn): ə jʌŋ wʊmən wɪð ði əbɪləɾi tə ɹid θɪŋz əbaʊt pipəl ɪn ði ɔʊɹəz ən ɪmədʒəz ʃi səmtaɪmz siz sɝaʊndɪŋ ðɛm.

Min (MIN): A young woman with the ability to read things about people in the auras and images she sometimes sees surrounding them.

mɔɪɹeɪn (mwɑ-ɹeɪn): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə blu ədʒɑ. bɔɹn ɪn haʊs dəmədʒɹd, ðoʊ nɑɾ ɪn laɪn ə səksɛʃən tə ðə θɹoʊn, ʃi wɑz ɹeɪzd ɪn ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ɪn kɛɹhin.

Moiraine (mwah-RAIN): An Aes Sedai of the Blue Ajah. Born in House Damodred, though not in line of succession to the throne, she was raised in the Royal Palace in Cairhien.

mɔɹɡeɪs (mʊɹ-ɡeɪz): baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪs ə ðə laɪt, kwin ʌv ændɝ, dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə ɹɛlm, pɹətɛktɝ ə ðə pipəl, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs tʃɹəkənd. hɝ saɪn ɪz θɹi ɡoʊldən kiz. ðə saɪn ə haʊs tʃɹəkən ɪz ə sɪlvɝ kistoʊn.

Morgase (moor-GAYZ): By the Grace of the Light, Queen of Andor, Defender of the Realm, Protector of the People, High Seat of House Trakand. Her sign is three golden keys. The sign of House Trakand is a silver keystone.

mɹdʒɹɑl (-dʒɹɑl): kɹitʃɝz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, kəmændɝz ə ðə tʃɹɑləks. twɪstəɾ ɔfspɹɪŋ ə tʃɹɑləks ɪn wɪtʃ ðə hjumən stɑk juz tə kɹieɪt ðə tʃɹɑləks əz ɹisɝfəst, bʌt teɪntɪd baɪ ði ivəl ðət meɪd ðə tʃɹɑləks. ðeɪv noʊ aɪz, bʌt kən si laɪk iɡəlz ɪn laɪɾ əɹ dɑɹk. ðeɪv sɝɾən paʊɝz stɛmɪŋ fɹəm ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ði əbɪləɾi tə kɑz pɛɹəlaɪzɪŋ fɪɹ wɪð ə lʊk ən ði əbɪləɾi tə vænɪʃ wɛɹɛvɝ ðəɹ ɑɹ ʃædoʊz. ðeɪv fju noʊn wiknəsəz, bʌt wʌn ə ðiz ɪz ðət ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹɪlʌktən tə kɹɔs ɹʌnɪŋ wɔɾɝ. ɪn dɪfɹən lænz ðeɪ ɑɹ noʊn baɪ mɛni neɪmz, əmʌŋ əm hæfmən, ði aɪləs, ʃæɾoʊmən, lɝk, fɛtʃ, ən feɪd.

Myrddraal (MUHRD-draal): Creatures of the Dark One, commanders of the Trollocs. Twisted offspring of Trollocs in which the human stock used to create the Trollocs has resurfaced, but tainted by the evil that made the Trollocs. They have no eyes, but can see like eagles in light or dark. They have certain powers stemming from the Dark One, including the ability to cause paralyzing fear with a look and the ability to vanish wherever there are shadows. They have few known weaknesses, but one of these is that they are reluctant to cross running water. In different lands they are known by many names, among them Halfman, the Eyeless, Shadowman, Lurk, Fetch, and Fade.

nɪdil, kɔɹiənɪn: si tæləns.

Nedeal, Corianin: See Talents.

naɪl, peɪdʒɹən (naɪ-ɔl, peɪ-dʒɹɑn): lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. si ɔlsoʊ tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Niall, Pedron (NEYE-awl, PAY-drohn): Lord Captain Commander of the Children of the Light. See also Children of the Light.

oʊðz, θɹi: ði oʊðz teɪkən baɪ ən æksɛptɪɾ u ɪz biɪŋ ɹeɪz tə ɛɛs sədaɪ. spoʊkən waɪl hoʊldɪŋ ði oʊθ ɹɑd, ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðət meɪks oʊðz baɪndɪŋ. ðeɪ ɑɹ: (wʌn) tə spik noʊ wɝd ðəɾ ɪz nɑt tʃɹu. (tu) tə meɪk noʊ wɛpən wɪð wɪtʃ wʌn mæn meɪ kɪl ənʌðɝ. (θɹi) nɛvɝ tə juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən ɪksɛpt əɡɛnst ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, əɹ ɪn ðə læst ɪkstʃɹim ə dɪfɛns ə hɝ oʊn laɪf, əɹ ðəɾ ə hɝ wɔɹɾɝ əɹ ənʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðiz oʊðz wɝ nɑɾ ɔlweɪz ɹikwaɪɝd, bʌt vɛɹiəs ɪvɛns bɪfɔɹ ən sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ kɑzd əm tə bi nɛsəsɛɹi. ðə sɛkən oʊθ wɑz ðə fɝst ədɑptəd, ɪn ɹiækʃən tə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə paʊɝ. ðə fɝst oʊθ, waɪl hɛl tə ðə lɛɾɝ, ɪz ɔfən sɝkəmvɛntɪd baɪ kɛɹfəl spikɪŋ. ɪts bɪliv ðət ðə læs tu ɑɹ ɪnvaɪələbəl.

Oaths, Three: The oaths taken by an Accepted who is being raised to Aes Sedai. Spoken while holding the Oath Rod, a ter'angreal that makes oaths binding. They are: (1) To speak no word that is not true. (2) To make no weapon with which one man may kill another. (3) Never to use the One Power as a weapon except against Shadowspawn, or in the last extreme of defense of her own life, or that of her Warder or another Aes Sedai. These oaths were not always required, but various events before and since the Breaking caused them to be necessary. The second oath was the first adopted, in reaction to the War of the Power. The first oath, while held to the letter, is often circumvented by careful speaking. It is believed that the last two are inviolable.

oʊɡiɝ (oʊhaɪoʊ-dʒɛɹ): (wʌn) ə nɑn-hjumən ɹeɪs, kɛɹəktɝaɪz baɪ ɡɹeɪt haɪt (tɛn fiɾ ɪz ævɝɪdʒ fəɹ ədʌl meɪlz), bɹɔd, ɔlmoʊst snaʊt laɪk noʊzɪz, ən lɔŋ, tʌftəɾ ɪɹz. ðeɪ lɪv ɪn ɛɹiəz kɔl stɛɾɪŋ. ðɛɹ sɛpɝeɪʃən fɹəm ðiz stɛɾɪŋ æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld (ə taɪm kɔl ði ɛɡzaɪl baɪ oʊɡiɝ) ɹɪzʌltɪɾ ɪn wʌɾ ɪz kɔl ðə lɔŋɪŋ; ən oʊɡiɝ u ɪz tu lɔŋ aʊɾ ə ðə stɛɾɪŋ, sɪkənz ən daɪz. waɪdli noʊn əz wʌnʒɹəs stoʊnmeɪsɑnz u bɪl ðə ɡɹeɪt hjumən sɪɾiz æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, ðeɪ kənsɪɾɝ stoʊnwɝk sɪmpli sʌmθɪŋ lɝn dʊɹɪŋ ði ɛɡzaɪl ən nɑɾ əz ɪmpɔɹɾənt əz tɛndɪŋ ðə tʃɹiz ə ðə stɛɾɪŋ, ɪspɛʃli ðə taʊɝɪŋ ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz. ɪksɛp fəɹ stoʊnwɝk, ðeɪ ɹɛɹli liv ðɛɹ stɛɾɪŋ ən tɪpəkli hæv lɪɾəl kɑntækt wɪð hjumənkaɪnd. nɑlədʒ ə ðɛm əmʌŋ hjumənz ɪz spɑɹs, ən mɛni bɪliv oʊɡiɝ tə bi oʊnli lɛdʒənz. ɔlðoʊ bɪliv tə bi ə pəsɪfɪk pipəl ən ɪkstʃɹimli sloʊ tə æŋɡɝ, səm oʊl stɔɹiz seɪ ðeɪ fɔɾ əlɔŋsaɪd hjumənz ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, ən kɔl əm ɪmplækəbəl ɛnəmiz. baɪ ən lɑɹdʒ, ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪkstʃɹimli fɑn ə nɑlədʒ, ən ðɛɹ bʊks ən stɔɹiz ɔfən kənteɪn ɪnfɝmeɪʃən lɔs tə hjumənz. ə tɪpəkəl oʊɡiɝ laɪfspæn ɪz ət lis θɹi tə fɔɹ taɪmz ðəɾ ʌv ə hjumən. (tu) ɛni ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl ə ðət nɑn-hjumən ɹeɪs. si ɔlsoʊ bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld; stɛɾɪŋ; tʃɹisɪŋʒɝ.

Ogier (OH-gehr): (1) A non-human race, characterized by great height (ten feet is average for adult males), broad, almost snout like noses, and long, tufted ears. They live in areas called stedding. Their separation from these stedding after the Breaking of the World (a time called the Exile by Ogier) resulted in what is called the Longing; an Ogier who is too long out of the stedding, sickens and dies. Widely known as wondrous stonemasons who built the great human cities after the Breaking, they consider stonework simply something learned during the Exile and not as important as tending the trees of the stedding, especially the towering Great Trees. Except for stonework, they rarely leave their stedding and typically have little contact with humankind. Knowledge of them among humans is sparse, and many believe Ogier to be only legends. Although believed to be a pacific people and extremely slow to anger, some old stories say they fought alongside humans in the Trolloc Wars, and call them implacable enemies. By and large, they are extremely fond of knowledge, and their books and stories often contain information lost to humans. A typical Ogier lifespan is at least three to four times that of a human. (2) Any individual of that non-human race. See also Breaking of the World; stedding; Treesinger.

oʊld ɡɹɪm: si dɑɹk wʌn.

Old Grim: See Dark One.

oʊl tʌŋ: ðə læŋɡwədʒ spoʊkən dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ɪts dʒɛnɝəli ɪkspɛktəd ðət noʊbəlz ən ði ɛdʒəkeɪɾəd wɪl əv lɝn tə spik ðɪs, bʌt moʊs noʊ oʊnli ə fju wɝdz.

Old Tongue: The language spoken during the Age of Legends. It is generally expected that nobles and the educated will have learned to speak this, but most know only a few words.

wʌn paʊɝ, ðə: ðə paʊɝ dʒɹɔn fɹəm ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. ðə væs mədʒɔɹəɾi ʌv pipəl ɑɹ kəmplitli əneɪbəl tə lɝn tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ə vɛɹi smɔl nʌmbɝ kən bi tɔt tə tʃænəl, ən ən ivən taɪniɝ nʌmbɝ əv ði əbɪləɾi ɪnbɔɹn. fəɹ ðiz fju ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə bi tɔt; ðəl tʌtʃ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ən tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɑnə əɹ nɑt, pɝhæps wɪθaʊɾ ivən ɹilaɪzɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ duɪŋ. ðɪs ɪnbɔɹn əbɪləɾi juʒəwəli mænəfɛsts ɪtsɛlf ɪn leɪɾ æɾəlɛsəns əɹ ɝli ədʌlthʊd. ɪf kəntʃɹoʊl ɪz nɑt tɔt, əɹ sɛlf-lɝnd (ɪkstʃɹimli dɪfəkəlt, wɪð ə səksɛs ɹeɪɾ ʌv oʊnli wʌn ɪn fɔɹ), dɛθ ɪz sɝɾən. sɪns ðə taɪm ə mædnəs, noʊ mæn əz bɪn eɪbəl tə tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɡoʊɪŋ kəmplitli, hɔɹəbli mæd, ən ðɛn, ivən ɪf hiz lɝn səm kəntʃɹoʊl, daɪɪŋ fɹəm ə weɪstɪŋ sɪknəs ðət kɑzəz ðə sʌfɝɝ tə ɹɑɾ əlaɪv, ə sɪknəs kɑzd, əz ɪz ðə mædnəs, baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz teɪn ɑn seɪɾɪn. fəɹ ə wʊmən ðə dɛθ ðət kʌmz wɪθaʊt kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðə paʊɝ ɪz lɛs hɔɹəbəl, bʌɾ ɪts dɛθ dʒʌs ðə seɪm. ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝtʃ fəɹ ɡɝlz wɪð ði ɪnbɔɹn əbɪləɾi əz mʌtʃ tə seɪv ðɛɹ laɪvz əz tə ɪnkɹis ɛɛs sədaɪ nʌmbɝz, ən fəɹ mɛn wɪð ɪɾ ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə stɑp ðə tɛɹəbəl θɪŋz ðeɪ ɪnɛvəɾəbli də wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪn ðɛɹ mædnəs. si ɔlsoʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ; tʃænəl; faɪv paʊɝz; taɪm ə mædnəs; tʃɹu sɔɹs.

One Power, the: The power drawn from the True Source. The vast majority of people are completely unable to learn to channel the One Power. A very small number can be taught to channel, and an even tinier number have the ability inborn. For these few there is no need to be taught; they will touch the True Source and channel the Power whether they want to or not, perhaps without even realizing what they are doing. This inborn ability usually manifests itself in late adolescence or early adulthood. If control is not taught, or self-learned (extremely difficult, with a success rate of only one in four), death is certain. Since the Time of Madness, no man has been able to channel the Power without eventually going completely, horribly mad, and then, even if he has learned some control, dying from a wasting sickness that causes the sufferer to rot alive, a sickness caused, as is the madness, by the Dark One's taint on saidin. For a woman the death that comes without control of the Power is less horrible, but it is death just the same. Aes Sedai search for girls with the inborn ability as much to save their lives as to increase Aes Sedai numbers, and for men with it in order to stop the terrible things they inevitably do with the Power in their madness. See also Aes Sedai; channel; Five Powers; Time of Madness; True Source.

ɔɹdiθ (ɔɹ-diθ): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "wɝmwʊd." neɪm teɪkən baɪ ə mæn u ædvaɪzɪz ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Ordeith (OHR-deeth): In the Old Tongue, "Wormwood." Name taken by a man who advises the Lord Captain Commander of the Children of the Light.

pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ: ðə wil ə taɪm wivz ðə θɹɛdz ə hjumən lɪvz ɪndə ðə pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ, ɔfən kɔl sɪmpli ðə pæɾɝn, wɪtʃ fɔɹmz ðə sʌbstəns ə ɹiæləɾi fəɹ ðəɾ eɪdʒ. si ɔlsoʊ tɑvɝən.

Pattern of an Age: The Wheel of Time weaves the threads of human lives into the Pattern of an Age, often called simply the Pattern, which forms the substance of reality for that Age. See also ta'veren.

paʊɝz, ðə faɪv: si faɪv paʊɝz, ðə.

Powers, the Five: See Five Powers, the.

kwɛstʃənɝz, ðə: ən ɔɹɾɝ wɪðɪn ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. ðɛɹ əvaʊd pɝpəsəz ɑɹ tə dɪskʌvɝ ðə tʃɹuθ ɪn dɪspjəteɪʃənz ən ənkʌvɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ɪn ðə sɝtʃ fəɹ tʃɹuθ ən ðə laɪt, ðɛɹ nɔɹməl mɛθəɾ ʌv ɪnkwaɪɹi ɪz tɔɹtʃɝ; ðɛɹ nɔɹməl mænɝ ðət ðeɪ noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ ɔlɹɛɾi ən mʌst oʊnli meɪk ðɛɹ vɪktəm kənfɛs tə ɪt. ðə kwɛstʃənɝz ɹəfɝ tə ðɛmsɛlvz əz ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt, ðə hæn ðət dɪɡz aʊt tʃɹuθ, ən ət taɪmz ækt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɪntaɪɝli sɛpɹət fɹəm ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ən ðə kaʊnsəl ə ði ənɔɪntəd, wɪtʃ kəmænz ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ðə hɛɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃənɝz ɪz ðə haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ, hu sɪts ɑn ðə kaʊnsəl ə ði ənɔɪntəd. ðɛɹ saɪn ɪz ə blʌd-ɹɛd ʃɛpɝdz kɹʊk.

Questioners, the: An order within the Children of the Light. Their avowed purposes are to discover the truth in disputations and uncover Darkfriends. In the search for truth and the Light, their normal method of inquiry is torture; their normal manner that they know the truth already and must only make their victim confess to it. The Questioners refer to themselves as the Hand of the Light, the Hand that digs out truth, and at times act as if they were entirely separate from the Children and the Council of the Anointed, which commands the Children. The head of the Questioners is the High Inquisitor, who sits on the Council of the Anointed. Their sign is a blood-red shepherd's crook.

ɹɛd ʃilz: si il wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz.

Red Shields: See Aiel warrior societies.

ɹəɑɹk (ɹaʊɹk): ən il, klæn tʃif ə ðə tɑɹdæɾ il.

Rhuarc (RHOURK): An Aiel, clan chief of the Taardad Aiel.

ɹəɡoʊʃ iɡəl-aɪ: ə lɛdʒəndɛɹi hɪɹoʊ mɛnʃən ɪn ə nʌmbɝ ʌv oʊl stɔɹiz.

Rogosh Eagle-eye: A legendary hero mentioned in a number of old stories.

sɑŋɡɹil (sɑ-æn-ɡɹi-ɑl): ɛni wʌn ʌv ə nʌmbɝ ʌv ɑbʒɛkts ðəɾ əlaʊ ən ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl tə tʃænəl mʌtʃ mɔɹ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ðən wəɾ ʌðɝwaɪz bi pɑsəbəl əɹ seɪf. ə sɑŋɡɹil ɪz laɪk ʌntu, bʌt mʌtʃ mɔɹ paʊɝfəl ðæn, ən æŋɡɹil. ði əmaʊn ə ðə paʊɝ ðət kən bi wildɪd wɪð ə sɑŋɡɹil kəmpɛɹz tə ði əmaʊn ə ðə paʊɝ ðət kən bi hændəld wɪð ən æŋɡɹil əz ðə paʊɝ wildɪd wɪð ði eɪɾ ʌv ən æŋɡɹil dʌz tə ði əmaʊn ə ðə paʊɝ ðət kən bi hændəld əneɪɾɪd. ɹɛmnəns ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ðɛɹ meɪkɪŋ ɪz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ noʊn. oʊnli ə hændfʊl ɹɪmeɪn, fɑɹ fjuɝ ivən ðən æŋɡɹil.

sa'angreal (SAH-ahn-GREE-ahl): Any one of a number of objects that allow an individual to channel much more of the One Power than would otherwise be possible or safe. A sa'angreal is like unto, but much more powerful than, an angreal. The amount of the Power that can be wielded with a sa'angreal compares to the amount of the Power that can be handled with an angreal as the power wielded with the aid of an angreal does to the amount of the Power that can be handled unaided. Remnants of the Age of Legends, their making is no longer known. Only a handful remain, far fewer even than angreal.

seɪaɪdɑɹ (sɑ-ɪ-dɑɹ); seɪɾɪn (sɑ-ɪ-din): si tʃɹu sɔɹs.

saidar (sah-ih-DAHR); saidin (sah-ih-DEEN): See True Source.

si foʊk: mɔɹ pɹɑpɝli, ði æθɑn maɪɹ (ɑ-θɑ-æn mi-ɛɹ), ðə pipəl ə ðə si. ɪnhæbəɾənts ʌv aɪlənz ɪn ði ɛɹɪθ (ɑ-ɹɪθ) oʊʃən ən ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, ðeɪ spɛn lɪɾəl taɪm ɑn ðoʊz aɪlənz, lɪvɪŋ moʊst ə ðɛɹ laɪvz ɑn ðɛɹ ʃɪps. moʊst sibɔɹn tʃɹeɪɾ ɪz kæɹid baɪ ðə si foʊks ʃɪps.

Sea Folk: More properly, the Atha'an Miere (ah-thah-AHN mee-AIR), the People of the Sea. Inhabitants of islands in the Aryth (AH-rihth) Ocean and the Sea of Storms, they spend little time on those islands, living most of their lives on their ships. Most seaborne trade is carried by the Sea Folk's ships.

sintʃæn (ʃɔn-tʃæn): (wʌn) dɪsɛndəns ə ði ɑɹmiz ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ sɛn əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən. (tu) ðə læn fɹəm wɪtʃ ðə sintʃæn kʌm.

Seanchan (SHAWN-CHAN): (1) Descendants of the armies Artur Hawkwing sent across the Aryth Ocean. (2) The land from which the Seanchan come.

səlin (sɛ-lin): ə neɪm juz baɪ ðə fɔɹseɪkən kɔld lænfɝ.

Selene (seh-LEEN): A name used by the Forsaken called Lanfear.

sɝvəns, hɔl ə ðə: ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ðə ɡɹeɪt miɾɪŋ hɔl ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Servants, Hall of the: In the Age of Legends, the great meeting hall of the Aes Sedai.

ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ (ʃɑ-dɑɹ loʊ-ɡɑθ): ə sɪɾi əbændən ən ʃʌn sɪns ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. ɪts teɪntɪd ɡɹaʊnd, ən nɑɾ ə pɛbəl ʌv ɪts seɪf.

Shadar Logoth (SHAH-dahr LOH-goth): A city abandoned and shunned since the Trolloc Wars. It is tainted ground, and not a pebble of it is safe.

ʃeɪtɑn (ʃeɪ-ɪ-tæn): si dɑɹk wʌn.

Shai'tan (SHAY-ih-TAN): See Dark One.

ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl (ʃeɪ-əl ɡul): ə maʊntən ɪn ðə blæstəd lænz, ðə saɪɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən.

Shayol Ghul (SHAY-ol GHOOL): A mountain in the Blasted Lands, the site of the Dark One's prison.

ʃɛɹiəm (ʃɪɹ-i-ɑm): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə blu ədʒɑ. ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

Sheriam (SHEER-ee-ahm): An Aes Sedai of the Blue Ajah. The Mistress of Novices in the White Tower.

sɪuən sɑntʃ (swɑn sæn-tʃeɪ): ðə dɔɾɝ ʌv ə tɛɹən fɪʃɝmæn, ʃi wɑz, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə tɛɹən lɔ, pʊɾ ɑn ə ʃɪp tə tɑɹ vəlɑn bɪfɔɹ ðə sɛkən sʌnsɛɾ æftɝ ɪt wɑz dɪskʌvɝd ðət ʃi hæd ðə pətɛnʃəl tə tʃænəl. fɔɹmɝli ʌv ðə blu ədʒɑ. ɹeɪz tə ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪn naɪnhʌnʒɹədeɪtieɪt ni.

Siuan Sanche (SWAHN SAHN-chay): The daughter of a Tairen fisherman, she was, according to Tairen law, put on a ship to Tar Valon before the second sunset after it was discovered that she had the potential to channel. Formerly of the Blue Ajah. Raised to the Amyrlin Seat in 988 NE.

soʊlləs: si ɡɹeɪ mæn.

Soulless: See Gray Man.

spæn: si lɛŋθ, junəts ʌv.

span: See length, units of.

spaɪn ə ðə wɝld, ðə: ə taʊɝɪŋ maʊntən ɹeɪnʒ, wɪð oʊnli ə fju pæsəz, wɪtʃ sɛpɝeɪts ði il weɪs fɹəm ðə lænz tə ðə wɛst.

Spine of the World, the: A towering mountain range, with only a few passes, which separates the Aiel Waste from the lands to the west.

stɛɾɪŋ (stɛd-dɪŋ): ən oʊɡiɝ (oʊhaɪoʊ-ɡɪɹ) hoʊmlænd. mɛni stɛɾɪŋ əv bɪn əbændən sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ðeɪ ɑɹ ʃildɪɾ ɪn səm weɪ, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ʌndɝstʊd, soʊ ðət wɪðɪn əm noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ kən tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ, nɔɹ ivən sɛns ðət ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ɪɡzɪsts. ətɛmps tə wil ðə wʌn paʊɝ fɹəm aʊtsaɪɾ ə stɛɾɪŋ əv noʊ ɪfɛkt ɪnsaɪɾ ə stɛɾɪŋ baʊndɝi. noʊ tʃɹɑlɑk wɪl ɛntɝ ə stɛɾɪŋ ənlɛs dʒɹɪvən, ən ivən ə mɹdʒɹɑl wɪl də soʊ oʊnli ət ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst niɾ ən ðən wɪð ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst ɹɪlʌktəns ən dɪsteɪst. ivən dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ɪf tʃɹuli dɛɾəkeɪtəd, fil ənkʌmftəɹbəl wɪðɪn ə stɛɾɪŋ.

stedding (STEHD-ding): An Ogier (OH-geer) homeland. Many stedding have been abandoned since the Breaking of the World. They are shielded in some way, no longer understood, so that within them no Aes Sedai can channel the One Power, nor even sense that the True Source exists. Attempts to wield the One Power from outside a stedding have no effect inside a stedding boundary. No Trolloc will enter a stedding unless driven, and even a Myrddraal will do so only at the greatest need and then with the greatest reluctance and distaste. Even Darkfriends, if truly dedicated, feel uncomfortable within a stedding.

stɪlɪŋ: ði ækt, pɝfɔɹm baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʌv ʃʌɾɪŋ ɔf ə wʊmən u kən tʃænəl fɹəm ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ə wʊmən u hæz bɪn stɪl kən sɛns ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, bʌt ʃi kænɑt tʌtʃ ɪt. soʊ sɛldəm əz ɪt bɪn dʌn ðət nɑvəsɪz ɑɹ ɹikwaɪɝd tə lɝn ðə neɪmz ən kɹaɪmz ʌv ɔl wɪmən u hæv sʌfɝɾ ɪt.

stilling: The act, performed by Aes Sedai, of shutting off a woman who can channel from the One Power. A woman who has been stilled can sense the True Source, but she cannot touch it. So seldom has it been done that novices are required to learn the names and crimes of all women who have suffered it.

stoʊn dɑɡz: si il wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz.

Stone Dogs: See Aiel warrior societies.

stoʊn ə tɛɹ: ə ɡɹeɪt fɔɹtʃɹəs ɪn ðə sɪɾi ʌv tɛɹ, sɛd tə hæv bɪn meɪd sun æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ən tə hæv bɪn meɪd juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ɪts bɪn bɪsidʒd əɹ ətækt kaʊnləs taɪmz, bʌt nɛvɝ səksɛsfəli. ðə stoʊn ɪz mɛnʃən twaɪs ɪn ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən. wʌns ðeɪ seɪ ðə stoʊn wɪl nɛvɝ fɔl əntɪl ðə pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən kʌm. ɪn ənʌðɝ pleɪs, ðeɪ seɪ ðə stoʊn wɪl nɛvɝ fɔl əntɪl ðə dʒɹæɡənz hænd wilz ðə sɔɹd ðət kænɑt bi tʌtʃt, kælændɝ. səm bɪliv ðət ðiz pɹɑfəsiz əkaʊn fəɹ ði æntɪpəθi ʌv ðə haɪ lɔɹdz tə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ən fəɹ ðə tɛɹən lɔ ðət fɝbɪdz tʃænəlɪŋ. dɪspaɪt ðɪs æntɪpəθi, ðə stoʊn kənteɪnz ə kəlɛkʃən ʌv æŋɡɹil ən tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɹaɪvəlɪŋ ðəɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ə kəlɛkʃən wɪtʃ wɑz ɡæðɝd, səm seɪ, ɪn ən ətɛmp tə dɪmɪnɪʃ ðə ɡlɛɹ ə pəzɛsɪŋ kælændɝ.

Stone of Tear: A great fortress in the city of Tear, said to have been made soon after the Breaking of the World, and to have been made using the One Power. It has been besieged or attacked countless times, but never successfully. The Stone is mentioned twice in the Prophecies of the Dragon. Once they say the Stone will never fall until the People of the Dragon come. In another place, they say the Stone will never fall until the Dragon's hand wields the Sword That Cannot Be Touched, Callandor. Some believe that these Prophecies account for the antipathy of the High Lords to the One Power, and for the Tairen law that forbids channeling. Despite this antipathy, the Stone contains a collection of an'greal and ter'angreal rivaling that of the White Tower, a collection which was gathered, some say, in an attempt to diminish the glare of possessing Callandor.

sʌndeɪ: ə fistdeɪ ən fɛstəvəl ɪn mɪdsʌmɝ, waɪdli sɛləbɹeɪɾəd ɪn mɛni pɑɹts ə ðə wɝld.

Sunday: A feastday and festival in midsummer, widely celebrated in many parts of the world.

sʌŋ wʊd: si tʃɹisɪŋʒɝ.

sung wood: See Treesinger.

tæləns: əbɪləɾiz ɪn ðə jus ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪn spəsɪfɪk ɛɹiəz. ðə bɛs noʊn ə ðiz, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪz hilɪŋ. sʌm, sətʃ əz tʃɹævlɪŋ, ði əbɪləɾi tə ʃɪft wʌnsɛlf fɹəm wʌn pleɪs tə ənʌðɝ wɪθaʊt kɹɔsɪŋ ði ɪntɝvinɪŋ speɪs, hæv bɪn lɔst. ʌðɝz sətʃ əz fɔɹtɛlɪŋ (ði əbɪləɾi tə fɔɹtɛl fjutʃɝ ɪvɛns, bʌɾ ɪn ə dʒɛnɝəl weɪ) ɑɹ naʊ faʊn oʊnli ɹɛɹli ɪf əɾ ɔl. ənʌðɝ tælən lɔŋ θɔt lɔst ɪz dʒɹimɪŋ, wɪtʃ ɪnvɑlvz, əmʌŋ ʌðɝ θɪŋz, ɪntɝpɹɛɾɪŋ ðə dʒɹimɝz dʒɹimz tə fɔɹtɛl fjutʃɝ ɪvɛns ɪn mɔɹ spəsɪfɪk fæʃən ðən fɔɹtɛlɪŋ dʌz. səm dʒɹimɝz hæd ði əbɪləɾi tə ɛntɝ tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz, ən (ɪɾ ɪz sɛd) ivən ʌðɝ pipəlz dʒɹimz. ðə læs noʊn dʒɹimɝ wɑz kɔɹiənɪn nɪdil, hu daɪɾ ɪn faɪvhʌnʒɹədtwɛntisɪks ni.

Talents: Abilities in the use of the One Power in specific areas. The best known of these, of course, is Healing. Some, such as Traveling, the ability to shift oneself from one place to another without crossing the intervening space, have been lost. Others such as Foretelling (the ability to foretell future events, but in a general way) are now found only rarely if at all. Another Talent long thought lost is Dreaming, which involves, among other things, interpreting the Dreamer's dreams to foretell future events in more specific fashion than Foretelling does. Some Dreamers had the ability to enter Tel'aran'rhiod, the World of Dreams, and (it is said) even other people's dreams. The last known Dreamer was Corianin Nedeal, who died in 526 NE.

tæmɹəleɪlən (tɑ-mɑɹ-ɑl-aɪ-lɛn): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "wɛb ə dɛstəni." ə ɡɹeɪt tʃeɪnʒ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ, sɛntɝɾ ɝaʊnd wʌn əɹ mɔɹ pipəl u ɑɹ tɑvɝən. si ɔlsoʊ pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ; tɑvɝən.

ta'maral'ailen (tah-MAHR-ahl-EYE-lehn): In the Old Tongue, "Web of Destiny." A great change in the Pattern of an Age, centered around one or more people who are ta'veren. See also Pattern of an Age; ta'veren.

tænɹəl, ɑɹɾɝ pɛndʒɹæɡ (tæn-ɹi-ɑl, ɑɹ-tʃɹ peɪ-ɛn-dʒɹæɡ): si hɔkwɪŋ, ɑɹɾɝ.

Tanreall, Artur Paendrag (tahn-REE-ahl, AHR-tuhr PAY-ehn-DRAG): See Hawkwing, Artur.

tɑɹmən ɡdən (tɑɹ-mɑn ɡeɪ-dɑn): ðə læs bæɾəl. si ɔlsoʊ dʒɹæɡən, pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə; hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ.

Tarmon Gai'don (TAHR-mohn GAY-dohn): The Last Battle. See also Dragon, Prophecies of the; Horn of Valere.

tɑvɝən (tɑ-vɪɹ-ɛn): ə pɝsən ɝaʊn hum ðə wil ə taɪm wivz ɔl sɝaʊndɪŋ laɪf-θɹɛdz, pɝhæps ɔl laɪf-θɹɛdz, tə fɔɹm ə wɛb ə dɛstəni. si ɔlsoʊ pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ.

ta'veren (tah-VEER-ehn): A person around whom the Wheel of Time weaves all surrounding life-threads, perhaps ALL life-threads, to form a Web of Destiny. See also Pattern of an Age.

tɛɹ (tɪɹ): ə neɪʃən ɑn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz. ɔlsoʊ ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ðət neɪʃən, ə ɡɹeɪt sipɔɹt. ðə bænɝ ə tiɹ ɪz θɹi waɪt kɹɛsən munz slæntɪŋ əkɹɔs ə fil hæf ɹɛd, hæf ɡoʊld. si ɔlsoʊ stoʊn ə tiɹ.

Tear (TEER): A nation on the Sea of Storms. Also the capital city of that nation, a great seaport. The banner of Tear is three white crescent moons slanting across a field half red, half gold. See also Stone of Tear.

tɛləmən, luz θɝɪn (tɛl-ɑ-moʊn, luz θɛ-ɹɪn): si dʒɹæɡən, ðə.

Telamon, Lews Therin (TEHL-ah-mon, LOOZ THEH-rihn): See Dragon, the.

tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd (tɛl-aɪ-ɹæn-ɹi-ɑd): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ði ənsin wɝld," əɹ "ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz." ə wɝld ɡlɪmpst ɪn dʒɹimz wɪtʃ wɑz bɪliv baɪ ði eɪntʃəns tə pɝmieɪɾ ən sɝaʊn ɔl ʌðɝ pɑsəbəl wɝlz. ənlaɪk ʌðɝ dʒɹimz, wʌt hæpənz tə lɪvɪŋ θɪŋz ɪn ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz ɪz ɹil; ə waʊn teɪkən ðəɹ wɪl stɪl bi ðəɹ ɑn əweɪkənɪŋ, ən wʌn u daɪz ðəɹ dʌz nɑt weɪk əɾ ɔl.

Tel'aran'rhiod (tel-AYE-rahn-rhee-ODD): In the Old Tongue, "the Unseen World," or "the World of Dreams." A world glimpsed in dreams which was believed by the ancients to permeate and surround all other possible worlds. Unlike other dreams, what happens to living things in the World of Dreams is real; a wound taken there will still be there on awakening, and one who dies there does not wake at all.

tɛɹæŋɡɹil (tɪɹ-æn-ɡɹi-ɑl): ɛni wʌn ʌv ə nʌmbɝ ə ɹɛmnəns ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ðət juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ənlaɪk æŋɡɹil ən sɑŋɡɹil, itʃ tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɑz meɪd tə də ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ θɪŋ. fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, wʌn meɪks oʊðz teɪkən wɪð ɪt baɪndɪŋ. səm tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɑɹ juz baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ði ɝɪdʒənəl pɝpəsəz ə mɛni ʌðɝz ɑɹ lɑɹdʒli ənnoʊn. səm wɪl kɪl əɹ dɪstʃɹɔɪ ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl ʌv ɛni wʊmən u juzɪz ðɛm. si ɔlsoʊ æŋɡɹil; sɑŋɡɹil.

ter'angreal (TEER-ahn-GREE-ahl): Any one of a number of remnants of the Age of Legends that use the One Power. Unlike angreal and sa'angreal, each ter'angreal was made to do a particular thing. For example, one makes oaths taken with it binding. Some ter'angreal are used by Aes Sedai, but the original purposes of many others are largely unknown. Some will kill or destroy the ability to channel of any woman who uses them. See also angreal; sa'angreal.

tɪɡɹeɪn (ti-ɡɹeɪn): əz dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ, ʃi mɛɹid tɑɹɪŋɡeɪl dəmədʒɹɾ ən bɔɹ ɪz sʌn ɡɑleɪdɛdʒɹəd. hɝ dɪsəpɪɹəns ɪn naɪnhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntitu ni, ʃɔɹtli æftɝ əɹ bɹʌðɝ luk vænɪʃt ɪn ðə blaɪt, lɛd tə ðə stʃɹʌɡəl ɪn ændɝ kɔl ðə səksɛʃən, ən kɑz ði ɪvɛns ɪn kɛɹhin ðəɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli bɹɔɾ ɑn ði il wɔɹ. hɝ saɪn wɑz ə wʊmənz hænd ɡɹɪpɪŋ ə θɔɹni ɹoʊz stɛm wɪð ə waɪt blɑsəm.

Tigraine (tee-GRAIN): As Daughter-Heir of Andor, she married Taringail Damodred and bore his son Galadedrid. Her disappearance in 972 NE, shortly after her brother Luc vanished in the Blight, led to the struggle in Andor called the Succession, and caused the events in Cairhien that eventually brought on the Aiel War. Her sign was a woman's hand gripping a thorny rose stem with a white blossom.

taɪm ə mædnəs: ðə jɪɹz æftɝ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz kaʊntɝstʃɹoʊk teɪntɪd ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, wən meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛn mæɾ ən bɹoʊk ðə wɝld. ði ɪɡzæk dʊɹeɪʃən ə ðɪs pɪɹiəɾ ɪz ənnoʊn, bʌɾ ɪts bɪliv tə hæv læstəd nɪɹli wʌn hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. ɪɾ ɛndəd kəmplitli oʊnli wɪð ðə dɛθ ə ðə læs meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ. si ɔlsoʊ hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz; tʃɹu sɔɹs; wʌn paʊɝ.

Time of Madness: The years after the Dark One's counterstroke tainted the male half of the True Source, when male Aes Sedai went mad and Broke the world. The exact duration of this period is unknown, but it is believed to have lasted nearly one hundred years. It ended completely only with the death of the last male Aes Sedai. See also Hundred Companions; True Source; One Power.

tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl: si tuætɑn.

Traveling People: See Tuatha'an.

tʃɹævəlz ə dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ, ðə: ə vɛɹi wɛl-noʊn bʊk ə tʃɹævəl stɔɹiz ən ɑbzɝveɪʃənz baɪ ə noʊɾəd mɔlkɪɹi ɹaɪɾɝ ən tʃɹævəlɝ. ðə bʊk wɑz fɝs pɹɪntəɾ ɪn naɪnhʌnʒɹədsɪkstieɪt ni ən əz bɪn ɹipɹɪntɪd kəntɪnjuəsli ɛvɝ sɪns. dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ dɪsəpɪɹd ʃɔɹtli æftɝ ði il wɔɹ ən ɪz dʒɛnɝəli bɪliv tə bi dɛd.

Travels of Jain Farstrider, The: A very well-known book of travel stories and observations by a noted Malkieri writer and traveler. The book was first printed in 968 NE and has been reprinted continuously ever since. Jain Farstrider disappeared shortly after the Aiel War and is generally believed to be dead.

tʃɹikɪlɝz: ən il neɪm fəɹ ðə kɛɹhinɪn, ɔlweɪz sɛɾ ɪn toʊnz ə hɔɹɝ ən dɪsɡʌst.

Treekillers: An Aiel name for the Cairhienin, always said in tones of horror and disgust.

tʃɹisɪŋʒɝ: ən oʊɡiɝ u hæz ði əbɪləɾi tə sɪŋ tə tʃɹiz (kɔld "tʃɹisɔŋ"), iðɝ hilɪŋ ðɛm, əɹ hɛlpɪŋ əm tə ɡɹoʊ ən flaʊɝ, əɹ meɪkɪŋ θɪŋz fɹəm ðə wʊd wɪθaʊt dæmɪdʒɪŋ ðə tʃɹi. ɑbʒɛkts meɪɾ ɪn ðɪs mænɝ ɑɹ kɔld "sʌŋ wʊd" ən ɑɹ haɪli pɹaɪzd. fju oʊɡiɝ ɹɪmeɪn u ɑɹ tʃɹisɪŋɝz; ði əbɪləɾi simz tə bi daɪɪŋ aʊt.

Treesinger: An Ogier who has the ability to sing to trees (called "treesong"), either healing them, or helping them to grow and flower, or making things from the wood without damaging the tree. Objects made in this manner are called "sung wood" and are highly prized. Few Ogier remain who are Treesingers; the ability seems to be dying out.

tʃɹɑləks (tʃɹæl-loʊks): kɹitʃɝz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, kɹieɪɾəd dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ. hjudʒ ə stætʃɝ, ðeɪ ɑɹ ə twɪstəd blɛn ʌv ænəməl ən hjumən stɑk. ðeɪ ɑɹ dɪvaɪɾəd ɪndə tʃɹaɪb laɪk bænz, əmʌŋ əm ðə dɑvɑl, ðə koʊbəl, ən ðə deɪmən. vɪʃəs baɪ neɪtʃɝ, ðeɪ kɪl fəɹ ðə pjʊɹ plɛʒɝ ə kɪlɪŋ. dəsitfəl ɪn ði ɪkstʃɹim, ðeɪ kænɑt bi tʃɹʌstɪɾ ənlɛs koʊɝs baɪ fɪɹ.

Trollocs (TRAHL-lohks): Creatures of the Dark One, created during the War of the Shadow. Huge of stature, they are a twisted blend of animal and human stock. They are divided into tribe like bands, among them the Dha'vol, the Ko'bal, and the Dhai'mon. Vicious by nature, they kill for the pure pleasure of killing. Deceitful in the extreme, they cannot be trusted unless coerced by fear.

tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz: ə sɪɹiz ʌv wɔɹz, bɪɡɪnɪŋ əbaʊt wʌnθaʊzən æb ən læstɪŋ mɔɹ ðən θɹi hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, dʊɹɪŋ wɪtʃ tʃɹɑlɑk ɑɹmiz ɹævɪdʒ ðə wɝld. ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ dʒɹɪvən bæk ɪndə ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, bʌt səm neɪʃənz sis tə ɪɡzɪst, ən ʌðɝz ðət sɝvaɪvd wɝ ɔlmoʊs dɪpɑpjəleɪɾɪd. ɔl ɹɛkɝdz ə ðə taɪm ɑɹ fɹæɡməntɛɹi.

Trolloc Wars: A series of wars, beginning about 1000 AB and lasting more than three hundred years, during which Trolloc armies ravaged the world. Eventually the Trollocs were driven back into the Great Blight, but some nations ceased to exist, and others that survived were almost depopulated. All records of the time are fragmentary.

tʃɹu sɔɹs: ðə dʒɹaɪvɪŋ fɔɹs ə ðə junəvɝs, wɪtʃ tɝnz ðə wil ə taɪm. ɪts dɪvaɪɾəd ɪndə ə meɪl hæf (seɪɾɪn) ən ə fimeɪl hæf (seɪaɪdɑɹ), wɪtʃ wɝk ət ðə seɪm taɪm wɪð ən əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ. oʊnli ə mæn kən dʒɹɔ ɑn seɪɾɪn, oʊnli ə wʊmən ɑn seɪaɪdɑɹ. sɪns ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə ðə taɪm ə mædnəs, seɪɾɪn əz bɪn teɪntɪd baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz tʌtʃ. si ɔlsoʊ wʌn paʊɝ.

True Source: The driving force of the universe, which turns the Wheel of Time. It is divided into a male half (saidin) and a female half (saidar), which work at the same time with and against each other. Only a man can draw on saidin, only a woman on saidar. Since the beginning of the Time of Madness, saidin has been tainted by the Dark One's touch. See also One Power.

tuætɑn (tu-ɑ-θɑ-æn): ə wɑndɝɪŋ foʊk, ɔlsoʊ noʊn əz ðə tɪŋkɝz ən əz ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl, hu lɪv ɪn bɹaɪtli peɪntəd wæɡənz ən fɑloʊ ə toʊɾəli pæsɪfɪs fəlɑsəfi kɔl ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif. θɪŋz mɛndɪd baɪ tɪŋkɝz ɑɹ ɔfən bɛɾɝ ðən nu. ðeɪ ɑɹ əmʌŋ ðə fju hu kən kɹɔs ði il weɪst ʌnməlɛstɪd, fəɹ ði il stʃɹɪkli əvɔɪɾ ɔl kɑntækt wɪð ðɛm.

Tuatha'an (too-AH-thah-AHN): A wandering folk, also known as the Tinkers and as the Traveling People, who live in brightly painted wagons and follow a totally pacifist philosophy called the Way of the Leaf. Things mended by Tinkers are often better than new. They are among the few who can cross the Aiel Waste unmolested, for the Aiel strictly avoid all contact with them.

vɛɹɪn mæθwɪn (vɛɹ-ɪn mɑ-θwɪn): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ.

Verin Mathwin (VEHR-ihn MAH-thwihn): An Aes Sedai of the Brown Ajah.

wɔɹɾɝ: ə wɔɹiɝ bɑndəd tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə bɑndɪŋ ɪz ə θɪŋ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ən baɪ ɪɾ i ɡeɪnz sətʃ ɡɪfs əz kwɪk hilɪŋ, ði əbɪləɾi tə ɡoʊ lɔŋ pɪɹiədz wɪθaʊt fud, wɔɾɝ, əɹ ɹɛst, ən ði əbɪləɾi tə sɛns ðə teɪn ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn əɾ ə dɪstəns. soʊ lɔŋ əz ə wɔɹɾɝ lɪvz, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hum hiz bɑndəd noʊz hiz əlaɪv haʊɛvɝ fɑɹ əweɪ hi ɪz, ən wən i daɪz ʃɪl noʊ ðə moʊmən ən mænɝ ə hɪz dɛθ. waɪl moʊst ədʒəz bɪliv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ hæv wʌn wɔɹɾɝ bɑndəd tə hɝ əɾ ə taɪm, ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ ɹəfjuz tə bɑn ɛni wɔɹɾɝz əɾ ɔl, waɪl ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ bɪliv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ bɑn əz mɛni wɔɹɾɝz əz ʃi wɪʃɪz. ɛθɪkəli ðə wɔɹɾɝ mʌst æksid tə ðə bɑndɪŋ vɑləntɛɹəli, bʌɾ ɪts bɪn noʊn tə bi dʌn əɡɛns ðə wɔɹɾɝz wɪl. wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪn fɹəm ðə bɑndɪŋ ɪz ə kloʊsli hɛl sikɹət. si ɔlsoʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Warder: A warrior bonded to an Aes Sedai. The bonding is a thing of the One Power, and by it he gains such gifts as quick healing, the ability to go long periods without food, water, or rest, and the ability to sense the taint of the Dark One at a distance. So long as a Warder lives, the Aes Sedai to whom he is bonded knows he is alive however far away he is, and when he dies she will know the moment and manner of his death. While most Ajahs believe an Aes Sedai may have one Warder bonded to her at a time, the Red Ajah refuse to bond any Warders at all, while the Green Ajah believe an Aes Sedai may bond as many Warders as she wishes. Ethically the Warder must accede to the bonding voluntarily, but it has been known to be done against the Warder's will. What the Aes Sedai gain from the bonding is a closely held secret. See also Aes Sedai.

wɔɹ ə paʊɝ: si wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ.

War of Power: See War of the Shadow.

wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz: ə sɪɹiz ʌv oʊvɝlæpɪŋ wɔɹz əmʌŋ kɑnstənli ʃɪftɪŋ əlaɪənsəz, pɹɪsɪpɪteɪɾɪd baɪ ðə dɛθ ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ən ðə ɹɪzʌltɪŋ stʃɹʌɡəl fəɹ ɪz ɛmpaɪɝ. ɪt læstəd fɹəm fi naɪnhʌnʒɹədnaɪntifɔɹ tə fi wʌnθaʊzəndwʌnhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntin. ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz dɪpɑpjəleɪɾɪd lɑɹdʒ pɑɹts ə ðə lænz bɪtwin ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən ən ði il weɪst, fɹəm ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz tə ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt. soʊ ɡɹeɪt wɑz ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ðəɾ oʊnli fɹæɡməntɛɹi ɹɛkɝdz ə ðə taɪm ɹɪmeɪn. ði ɛmpaɪɝ ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ wɑz pʊld əpɑɹɾ ɪn ðə wɔɹz, ən ðə neɪʃənz ə ðə pɹɛzən deɪ wɝ fɔɹmd. si ɔlsoʊ hɔkwɪŋ, ɑɹɾɝ.

War of the Hundred Years: A series of overlapping wars among constantly shifting alliances, precipitated by the death of Artur Hawkwing and the resulting struggle for his empire. It lasted from FY 994 to FY 1117. The War of the Hundred Years depopulated large parts of the lands between the Aryth Ocean and the Aiel Waste, from the Sea of Storms to the Great Blight. So great was the destruction that only fragmentary records of the time remain. The empire of Artur Hawkwing was pulled apart in the wars, and the nations of the present day were formed. See also Hawkwing, Artur.

wɔɹ ə ðə sɛkən dʒɹæɡən: ðə wɔɹ fɔt (fi naɪnθɹinaɪnfɔɹθɹi) əɡɛns ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən ɡɛɹ əmɑlɑsən. dʊɹɪŋ ðɪs wɔɹ ə jʌŋ kɪŋ neɪmd ɑɹɾɝ tænɹəl pɛndʒɹæɡ, leɪɾɝ noʊn əz ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ, ɹoʊz tə oʊvɝwɛlmɪŋ pɹɑmənəns.

War of the Second Dragon: The war fought (FY 93943) against the false Dragon Guaire Amalasan. During this war a young king named Artur Tanreall Paendrag, later known as Artur Hawkwing, rose to overwhelming prominence.

wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ: ɔlsoʊ noʊn əz ðə wɔɹ ə paʊɝ, ðɪs wɔɹ ɛndəd ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ɪt bɪɡæn ʃɔɹtli æftɝ ði ətɛmp tə fɹi ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ən sun ɪnvɑlv ðə hoʊl wɝld. ɪn ə wɝld wɛɹ wɔɹ hæd bɪn fɝɡɑɾən, ivən ðə mɛmɹi ʌv ɪt, ɛvɹi fæsəɾ ʌv wɔɹ wɑz ɹiɾɪskʌvɝd, ɔfən twɪstəd baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz tʌtʃ ɑn ðə wɝld, ən ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɑz juzd əz ə wɛpən. ðə wɔɹ wɑz ɛndəd baɪ ðə ɹisilɪŋ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪndə hɪz pɹɪzən. si ɔlsoʊ hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz, ðə; dʒɹæɡən, ðə.

War of the Shadow: Also known as the War of Power, this war ended the Age of Legends. It began shortly after the attempt to free the Dark One, and soon involved the whole world. In a world where war had been forgotten, even the memory of it, every facet of war was rediscovered, often twisted by the Dark One's touch on the world, and the One Power was used as a weapon. The war was ended by the resealing of the Dark One into his prison. See also Hundred Companions, the; Dragon, the.

weɪt, junəts ʌv: tɛn aʊnsəz ikwəlz fɔɹɾiwʌn paʊnd; tɛn paʊnz ikwəlz wʌn stoʊn; tɛn stoʊn ikwəlz wʌn hʌnʒɹədweɪt; tɛn hʌnʒɹədweɪt ikwəlz wʌn tʌn.

weight, units of: 10 ounces = 41 pound; 10 pounds = 1 stone; 10 stone = 1 hundredweight; 10 hundredweight = 1 ton.

wil ə taɪm, ðə: taɪm ɪz ə wil wɪð sɛvən spoʊks, itʃ spoʊk ən eɪdʒ. əz ðə wil tɝnz, ði eɪdʒəz kʌm ən ɡoʊ, itʃ livɪŋ mɛmɹiz ðət feɪd tə lɛdʒənd, ðən tə mɪθ, ən ɑɹ fɝɡɑɾən baɪ ðə taɪm ðəɾ eɪdʒ kʌmz əɡɛn. ðə pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ ɪz slaɪtli dɪfɹən itʃ taɪm ən eɪdʒ kʌmz, ən itʃ taɪm ɪts sʌbʒɪkt tə ɡɹeɪɾɝ tʃeɪnʒ.

Wheel of Time, the: Time is a wheel with seven spokes, each spoke an Age. As the Wheel turns, the Ages come and go, each leaving memories that fade to legend, then to myth, and are forgotten by the time that Age comes again. The Pattern of an Age is slightly different each time an Age comes, and each time it is subject to greater change.

waɪtkloʊks: si tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Whitecloaks: See Children of the Light.

waɪldɝ: ə wʊmən u hæz lɝn tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɑn əɹ oʊn, sɝvaɪvɪŋ ðə kɹaɪsəs əz oʊnli wʌn ɪn fɔɹ dʌz. sətʃ wɪmən juʒəwəli bɪl bæɹiɝz əɡɛns noʊɪŋ wʌɾ ɪts ðeɪ ɑɹ duɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪf ðiz kən bi bɹoʊkən daʊn, waɪldɝz ɑɹ əmʌŋ ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ə tʃænlɝz. ðə tɝm ɪz ɔfən juzd ɪn dɝɑɡətɔɹi fæʃən.

wilder: A woman who has learned to channel the One Power on her own, surviving the crisis as only one in four does. Such women usually build barriers against knowing what it is they are doing, but if these can be broken down, wilders are among the most powerful of channelers. The term is often used in derogatory fashion.

waɪl hʌnt: ɪts bɪliv baɪ mɛni ðət ðə dɑɹk wʌn (ɔfən kɔld ɡɹɪm, əɹ oʊld ɡɹɪm, ɪn tɛɹ, ɪljən, mʊɹændi, ɔltɑɹə, ən ɡildən) ɹaɪdz aʊɾ ɪn ðə naɪt wɪð ðə "blæk dɑɡz," əɹ ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz, hʌntɪŋ soʊlz. ðɪs ɪz ðə waɪl hʌnt. ɹeɪn kən kip ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz aʊɾ ə ðə naɪt, bʌt wʌns ðeɪ ɑɹ ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪl, ðeɪ mʌs bi kənfɹʌntəɾ ən dɪfiɾəd əɹ ðə vɪktəmz dɛθ ɪz ɪnɛvəɾəbəl. ɪts bɪliv ðət mɪɹli siɪŋ ðə waɪl hʌn pæs minz ɪmənən dɛθ, iðɝ fəɹ ðə vjuɝ əɹ fəɹ sʌmwʌn dɪɹ tə ðə vjuɝ.

Wild Hunt: It is believed by many that the Dark One (often called Grim, or Old Grim, in Tear, Illian, Murandy, Altara, and Ghealdan) rides out in the night with the "black dogs," or the Darkhounds, hunting souls. This is the Wild Hunt. Rain can keep the Darkhounds out of the night, but once they are on the trail, they must be confronted and defeated or the victim's death is inevitable. It is believed that merely seeing the Wild Hunt pass means imminent death, either for the viewer or for someone dear to the viewer.

wɪzdəm: ɪn vɪlədʒəz, ə wʊmən tʃoʊzən baɪ ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl fəɹ əɹ nɑlədʒ ə sətʃ θɪŋz əz hilɪŋ, ən fɔɹtɛlɪŋ ðə wɛðɝ, əz wɛl əz fəɹ kɑmən ɡʊd sɛns. ə pəzɪʃən ʌv ɡɹeɪt ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi ən əθɔɹəɾi, boʊθ æktʃəwəl ən ɪmplaɪd. ʃiz dʒɛnɝəli kənsɪɾɝd ði ikwəl ə ðə meɪɝ, ən ɪn səm vɪlədʒəz ɪz supɪɹiɝ. ənlaɪk ðə meɪɝ, ʃiz tʃoʊzən fəɹ laɪf, ən ɪts vɛɹi ɹɛɹ fəɹ ə wɪzdəm tə bi ɹimuv fɹəm ɔfəs bɪfɔɹ əɹ dɛθ. ɔlmoʊs tʃɹədɪʃənəli ɪn kɑnflɪkt wɪð ðə meɪɝ. dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn ðə lænd, ʃi meɪ ɪnstɛɾ əv ənʌðɝ taɪɾəl, sətʃ əz ɡaɪd, hilɝ, waɪz wʊmən, sikɝ, əɹ waɪz wʌn.

Wisdom: In villages, a woman chosen by the Women's Circle for her knowledge of such things as healing, and foretelling the weather, as well as for common good sense. A position of great responsibility and authority, both actual and implied. She is generally considered the equal of the Mayor, and in some villages his superior. Unlike the Mayor, she is chosen for life, and it is very rare for a Wisdom to be removed from office before her death. Almost traditionally in conflict with the Mayor. Depending on the land, she may instead have another title, such as Guide, Healer, Wise Woman, Seeker, or Wise One.

əbaʊt ði ɔθɝ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən wɑz bɔɹn ɪn naɪntinfɔɹɾieɪt ɪn tʃɑɹlstən, saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə. hi tɔt hɪmsɛlf tə ɹid wən i wɑz fɔɹ wɪð ði ɪnsɪdɛntəl eɪɾ ʌv ə twɛlv-jɪɹz-oʊldɝ bɹʌðɝ, ən wɑz tæklɪŋ mɑɹk tweɪn ən dʒulz vɝn baɪ faɪv. hi wɑz ə ɡɹædʒəwəɾ ə ðə sɪɾədɛl, ðə mɪlətɛɹi kɑlɪdʒ ə saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə, wɪð ə dɪɡɹi ɪn fɪzɪks. hi sɝv tu tʊɹz ɪn viɛtnɑm wɪð ðə juɛs. ɑɹmi; əmʌŋ ɪz dɛkɝeɪʃənz ɑɹ ðə dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt flaɪɪŋ kɹɔs wɪð bɹɑnz oʊk lif klʌstɝ, ðə bɹɑnz stɑɹ wɪð "vi" ən bɹɑnz oʊk lif klʌstɝ, ən tu viɛtnɑmis ɡæləntʃɹi kɹɔsɪz wɪð pɑm. ə hɪstɝi bʌf, hi ɔlsoʊ ɹoʊt dæns ən θiəɾɝ kɹɪɾɪsɪzəm. hi ɛndʒɔɪd ði aʊtdɔɹ spɔɹts ə hʌntɪŋ, fɪʃɪŋ, ən seɪlɪŋ, ən ði ɪndɔɹ spɔɹts ə poʊkɝ, tʃɛs, pul, ən paɪp kəlɛktɪŋ. hi bɪɡæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn naɪntinsɛvəntisɛvən ən kəntɪnjuɾ əntɪl ɪz dɛθ ɑn sɛptɛmbɝ sɪkstinθ, tuθaʊzənsɛvən.

About the Author Robert Jordan was born in 1948 in Charleston, South Carolina. He taught himself to read when he was four with the incidental aid of a twelve-years-older brother, and was tackling Mark Twain and Jules Verne by five. He was a graduate of The Citadel, The Military College of South Carolina, with a degree in physics. He served two tours in Vietnam with the U.S. Army; among his decorations are the Distinguished Flying Cross with bronze oak leaf cluster, the Bronze Star with "V" and bronze oak leaf cluster, and two Vietnamese Gallantry Crosses with Palm. A history buff, he also wrote dance and theater criticism. He enjoyed the outdoor sports of hunting, fishing, and sailing, and the indoor sports of poker, chess, pool, and pipe collecting. He began writing in 1977 and continued until his death on September 16, 2007.

