pɹeɪz fəɹ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən "hɪz ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪz dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt əz lɪɾɝətʃɝ baɪ ðə ɹɪtʃnəs ʌv ɪts fæbɹɪk, wɪð ɔl ðə tʃɑɹm ən nɑivəteɪ ʌv ðə bɹʌðɝz ɡɹɪm, ən ðə soʊʃəlslæʃmɔɹəl kɑməntɛɹi ʌv hʌksliz bɹeɪv nu wɝld. wɪð ɪz wɛl-flɛʃt-aʊt kæɹɪktɝz, dɑɹk ɪmədʒɹi, kɑmɪk ɹɪlif, vɪvəd lændskeɪps, ən ə fæsəneɪɾɪŋ sɛns ə taɪmləsnəs, dʒɔɹɾən əz kɹieɪɾəd ə kɑmplɛks lɪɾɝətʃɝ wɪð ə læŋɡwədʒ ən ɹiæləɾi ɔl ɪts oʊn."

Praise for Robert Jordan "His writing is distinguished as literature by the richness of its fabric, with all the charm and naivete of the Brothers Grimm, and the social/moral commentary of Huxley's Brave New World. With his well-fleshed-out characters, dark imagery, comic relief, vivid landscapes, and a fascinating sense of timelessness, Jordan has created a complex literature with a language and reality all its own."

 - bɹustɝ mɪltən ɹɑbɝtsən, ðə sʌn nuz (mɝɾəl bitʃ, saʊθkɑɹləlinə)

 - Brewster Milton Robertson, The Sun News (Myrtle Beach, SC)

pɹeɪz fəɹ ðə wil ə taɪm "ðə wil ə taɪm [ɪz] ɹæpədli bɪkʌmɪŋ ðə dɪfɪnɪɾɪv əmɛɹəkən fæntəsi sɑɡə. ɪts ə fæntəsi teɪl sɛldəm ikwəld ən stɪl lɛs ɔfən sɝpæst ɪn ɪŋɡlɪʃ."

Praise for The Wheel of Time "The Wheel of Time [is] rapidly becoming the definitive American fantasy saga. It is a fantasy tale seldom equaled and still less often surpassed in English."

 - ʃəkɑɡoʊ sʌn-taɪmz "dʒɔɹɾənz mʌltɪvəljum ɛpɪk [ɪz] ə fis fəɹ fæntəsi əfɪʃənɑɾoʊz."

 - Chicago Sun-Times "Jordan's multivolume epic [is] a feast for fantasy aficionados."

 - laɪbɹɛɹi dʒɝnəl "fɔɹ ðoʊz u laɪk tə kip ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn ə fæntəsi wɝld, ɪts hɑɹd tə bit ðə kɑmplɛks, dɪteɪld wɝl kɹieɪɾəd hɪɹ."

 - Library Journal "For those who like to keep themselves in a fantasy world, it's hard to beat the complex, detailed world created here."

 - loʊkəs pɹeɪz fəɹ eɪ kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz "ðə sɛvənθ vɑljum ə dʒɔɹɾənz bɛstsɛlɪŋ haɪ fæntəsi sɪɹiz kæɹiz ɑn ðə . . . kəlɑsəl, dɔntɪŋli kɑmplɛks stɔɹitɛlɪŋ ɪstæblɪʃt baɪ ðə pɹiviəs ɛntʃɹiz. . . . fænz ə ðə sɪɹiz wɪl ɡɑbəl daʊn ðɪs dʒɛnɝəs ədɪʃən."

 - Locus Praise for A Crown of Swords "The seventh volume of Jordan's bestselling high fantasy series carries on the . . . colossal, dauntingly complex storytelling established by the previous entries. . . . Fans of the series will gobble down this generous addition."

 - pʌblɪʃɝz wikli (stɑɹd ɹivju)

 - Publishers Weekly (starred review)

"ɪn ðə lɔŋ-əweɪɾəd sikwəl tə ðə bɛstsɛlɪŋ lɔɹɾ ə keɪɑs, dʒɔɹɾən ɹɪtɝnz tə ðə [seɪm] kɑmplɛks, dɪteɪl fæntəsi wɝld. . . . haɪli ɹɛkəmɛndəd."

"In the long-awaited sequel to the bestselling Lord of Chaos, Jordan returns to the [same] complex, detailed fantasy world. . . . Highly recommended."

 - laɪbɹɛɹi dʒɝnəl "ɪn ðə sɛvənθ vɑljum ə dʒɔɹɾənz pɹiɛmənən haɪ fæntəsi sɑɡə, ɪntʃɹiɡ ən kaʊntɝ-ɪntʃɹiɡ kəntɪnju tə ɹɔɪl. . . . ðɪs leɪɾəst ɪnstɔlmən ʌv ə meɪdʒɝ fæntəsi ɛpɪk dɛfənətli wɪl nɑt dɪsəpɔɪn ɪts fænz."

 - Library Journal "In the seventh volume of Jordan's preeminent high fantasy saga, intrigue and counter-intrigue continue to roil. . . . This latest installment of a major fantasy epic definitely will not disappoint its fans."

 - bʊklɪs ðə wil ə taɪm baɪ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝl ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ðə ʃædoʊ ɹaɪzɪŋ ðə faɪɝz ə hɛvən lɔɹɾ ə keɪɑs eɪ kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz ðə pæθ ə dæɡɝz wɪntɝz hɑɹt kɹɔsɹoʊdz ə twaɪlaɪt naɪf ə dʒɹimz baɪ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ən bɹændən sændɝsən ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ stɔɹm eɪ kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən eɪ tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts bʊk nu jɔɹk ðɪs ɪz ə wɝk ə fɪkʃən. ɔl ə ðə kæɹɪktɝz, ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃənz, ən ɪvɛns pɔɹtʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ðɪs nɑvəl ɑɹ iðɝ pɹɑɾəkts ə ði ɔθɝz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən əɹ ɑɹ juz fɪktɪʃəsli.

 - Booklist THE WHEEL OF TIME by Robert Jordan The Eye of the World The Great Hunt The Dragon Reborn The Shadow Rising The Fires of Heaven Lord of Chaos A Crown of Swords The Path of Daggers Winter's Heart Crossroads of Twilight Knife of Dreams by Robert Jordan and Brandon Sanderson The Gathering Storm A CROWN OF SWORDS ROBERT JORDAN A TOM DOHERTY ASSOCIATES BOOK NEW YORK This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in this novel are either products of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously.

eɪ kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz kɑpiɹaɪt  naɪntinnaɪntisɪks baɪ ðə bændɝsnætʃ ɡɹup, ɪŋk.

A CROWN OF SWORDS Copyright  1996 by The Bandersnatch Group, Inc.

ðə fɹeɪzəz "ðə wil ə taɪm" ən "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," ən ðə sneɪk-wil sɪmbəl, ɑɹ tʃɹeɪdmɑɹks ə ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən.

The phrases "The Wheel of Time" and "The Dragon Reborn," and the snake-wheel symbol, are trademarks of Robert Jordan.

ɔl ɹaɪts ɹɪzɝvd.

All rights reserved.

fɹʌntispis baɪ mɛləni dɛlɑn mæps baɪ ɛlisə mɪtʃəl ɪntɪɹiɝ ɪləstʃɹeɪʃənz baɪ mæθju si nilsən ən ɛlisə mɪtʃəl eɪ tɔɹ bʊk pʌblɪʃt baɪ tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts,  wʌnhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntifaɪv fɪfθ ævənu nu jɔɹk, nujɔɹk wʌnzɪɹoʊzɪɹoʊwʌnzɪɹoʊ

Frontispiece by Melanie Delon Maps by Ellisa Mitchell Interior illustrations by Matthew C. Nielsen and Ellisa Mitchell A Tor Book Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC 175 Fifth Avenue New York, NY 10010

hpslæʃslæʃwwwtɔɹ-fɔɹdʒkɑm tɔɹ ɪz ə ɹɛdʒəstɝd tʃɹeɪdmɑɹk ə tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts, .

http://www.tor-forge.com Tor is a registered trademark of Tom Doherty Associates, LLC.

 naɪnsɛvəneɪt-wʌn-fɔɹθaʊzəntuhʌndʒɹədnaɪntinaɪn-sɪkszɪɹoʊfaɪvsɛvən-wʌn

ISBN 978-1-4299-6057-1

fɝst ədɪʃən: dʒun naɪntinnaɪntisɪks

First Edition: June 1996

fɝst i-bʊk ədɪʃən: eɪpɹəl twɛntiɾɛn

First E-book Edition: April 2010

mænjəfæktʃɝɾ ɪn ðə junaɪɾəd steɪts ʌv əmɛɹəkə tə hɛɹiət, hu dɪzɝvz ðə kɹɛɾət wʌns əɡɛn kɑntɛns mæps pɹoʊlɑɡ: laɪtnɪŋz wʌn haɪ tʃeɪsəlin tu ðə bʊtʃɝz jɑɹd θɹi hɪl ə ðə ɡoʊldən dɔn fɔɹ ɪndə kɛɹhin faɪv eɪ bɹoʊkən kɹaʊn sɪks oʊl fɪɹ, ən nu fɪɹ sɛvən pɪtfɔlz ən tʃɹɪpwaɪɝz eɪt ðə fɪɡjɝhɛd naɪn eɪ pɛɹ ə sɪlvɝpaɪk tɛn ənsin aɪz ɪlɛvən ən oʊθ twɛlv eɪ mɔɹnɪŋ ə vɪktɝi θɝtin ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz fɔɹtin waɪt plumz fɪftin ɪnsɛks sɪkstin eɪ tʌtʃ ɑn ðə tʃik sɛvəntin ðə tʃɹaɪəmf ə lɑdʒɪk eɪtin əz ðə plaʊ bɹeɪks ði ɝθ naɪntin daɪmənz ən stɑɹz twɛnti pæɾɝnz wɪðɪn pæɾɝnz twɛntiwʌn swʊvən naɪt twɛntiɾu smɔl sækɹəfaɪsɪz twɛntiθɹi nɛks dɔɹ tə ə wivɝ twɛntifɔɹ ðə kɪn twɛntifaɪv maɪntʃɹæp twɛntisɪks ði ɪɹɛvəkəbəl wɝdz twɛntisɛvən tə bi əloʊn twɛntieɪt bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz twɛntinaɪn ðə fɛstəvəl ə bɝdz θɝɾi ðə fɝs kʌp θɝɾiwʌn mæʃiɑɹə θɝɾitu sil tə ðə fleɪm θɝɾiθɹi eɪ bæθ θɝɾifɔɹ tɑvɝən θɝɾifaɪv ɪndə ðə wʊdz θɝɾisɪks bleɪdz θɝɾisɛvən eɪ noʊt fɹəm ðə pæləs θɝɾieɪt sɪks stɔɹiz θɝɾinaɪn pɹɑməsəz tə kip fɔɹɾi spɪɹz fɔɹɾiwʌn eɪ kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz ɡlɔsɝi ðəɹ kən bi noʊ hɛlθ ɪn ʌs, nɔɹ ɛni ɡʊd θɪŋ ɡɹoʊ, fəɹ ðə læn ɪz wʌn wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən i wʌn wɪð ðə lænd. soʊl ə faɪɝ, hɑɹɾ ə stoʊn, ɪn pɹaɪɾ i kɑŋkɝz, fɔɹsɪŋ ðə pɹaʊd tə jild. hi kɔlz əpɑn ðə maʊntənz tə nil, ən ðə siz tə ɡɪv weɪ, ən ðə vɛɹi skaɪz tə baʊ. pɹeɪ ðət ðə hɑɹɾ ə stoʊn ɹɪmɛmbɝz tɪɹz, ən ðə soʊl ə faɪɝ, lʌv.

Manufactured in the United States of America To Harriet, who deserves the credit once again CONTENTS MAPS PROLOGUE: Lightnings 1 High Chasaline 2 The Butcher's Yard 3 Hill of the Golden Dawn 4 Into Cairhien 5 A Broken Crown 6 Old Fear, and New Fear 7 Pitfalls and Tripwires 8 The Figurehead 9 A Pair of Silverpike 10 Unseen Eyes 11 An Oath 12 A Morning of Victory 13 The Bowl of the Winds 14 White Plumes 15 Insects 16 A Touch on the Cheek 17 The Triumph of Logic 18 As the Plow Breaks the Earth 19 Diamonds and Stars 20 Patterns Within Patterns 21 Swovan Night 22 Small Sacrifices 23 Next Door to a Weaver 24 The Kin 25 Mindtrap 26 The Irrevocable Words 27 To Be Alone 28 Bread and Cheese 29 The Festival of Birds 30 The First Cup 31 Mashiara 32 Sealed to the Flame 33 A Bath 34 Ta'veren 35 Into the Woods 36 Blades 37 A Note from the Palace 38 Six Stories 39 Promises to Keep 40 Spears 41 A Crown of Swords GLOSSARY There can be no health in us, nor any good thing grow, for the land is one with the Dragon Reborn, and he one with the land. Soul of fire, heart of stone, in pride he conquers, forcing the proud to yield. He calls upon the mountains to kneel, and the seas to give way, and the very skies to bow. Pray that the heart of stone remembers tears, and the soul of fire, love.

 - fɹəm ə mʌtʃ-dɪspjuɾəd tʃɹænzleɪʃən ə ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən baɪ ðə poʊət kaɪɛɹə tɝmeɪndəl, ʌv ʃioʊɾə, bɪliv tə hæv bɪn pʌblɪʃt bɪtwin fi sɛvənhʌnʒɹəd ən fi eɪthʌnʒɹəd

 - From a much-disputed translation of The Prophecies of the Dragon by the poet Kyera Termendal, of Shiota, believed to have been published between FY 700 and FY 800


pɹoʊlɑɡ laɪtnɪŋz



PROLOGUE Lightnings

fɹəm ðə tɔl ɑɹtʃt wɪndoʊ, kloʊs ɑntu eɪɾi spænz əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd, nɑt fɑɹ bɪloʊ ðə tɑp ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ɪleɪɾə kəd si fəɹ maɪlz bɪɑn tɑɹ vəlɑn, tə ðə ɹoʊlɪŋ pleɪnz ən fɔɹəsts ðət bɔɹɾɝd ðə bɹɔd ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn, ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn fɹəm nɔɹθ ən wɛs bɪfɔɹ ɪt dɪvaɪɾəd ɝaʊn ðə waɪt wɔlz ə ðə ɡɹeɪɾ aɪlən sɪɾi. ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, lɔŋ mɔɹnɪŋ ʃædoʊz mʌst əv bɪn dæpəlɪŋ ðə sɪɾi, bʌt fɹəm ðɪs pɹɑmənəns ɔl sim klɪɹ ən bɹaɪt. nɑɾ ivən ðə feɪbəld "tɑpləs taʊɝz" ʌv kɛɹhin hæd tʃɹuli ɹaɪvəl ðə waɪt taʊɝ: sɝɾənli nʌn ə tɑɹ vəlɑnz lɛsɝ taʊɝz dɪd, fəɹ ɔl ðət mɛn spoʊk fɑɹ ən waɪɾ ə ðɛm ən ðɛɹ vɔltɪŋ skaɪ-bɹɪdʒəz.

From the tall arched window, close onto eighty spans above the ground, not far below the top of the White Tower, Elaida could see for miles beyond Tar Valon, to the rolling plains and forests that bordered the broad River Erinin, running down from north and west before it divided around the white walls of the great island city. On the ground, long morning shadows must have been dappling the city, but from this prominence all seemed clear and bright. Not even the fabled "topless towers" of Cairhien had truly rivaled the White Tower: Certainly none of Tar Valon's lesser towers did, for all that men spoke far and wide of them and their vaulting sky-bridges.

ðɪs haɪ, ən ɔlmoʊs kɑnstən bɹiz lɛsən ði ənnætʃɹəl hit ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə wɝld. ðə fist ə laɪts pæst, snoʊ ʃʊɾə kʌvɝd ðə ɡɹaʊn dip, jɛt ðə wɛðɝ bɪlɔŋd ɪn ðə dɛpθs ʌv ə hɑɹd sʌmɝ. ənʌðɝ saɪn ðət ðə læs bæɾəl əpɹoʊtʃt ən ðə dɑɹk wʌn tʌtʃt ðə wɝld, ɪf mɔɹ wɝ niɾəd. ɪleɪɾə dɪd nɑt lɛt ðə hit tʌtʃ əɹ ivən wən ʃi dɪsɛndəd, ʌv kɔɹs. ðə bɹiz wɑz nɑt waɪ ʃi hæd hæɾ əɹ kɔɹɾɝz muvd ʌp hɪɹ, dɪspaɪt ði ɪnkənvinjəns ə soʊ mɛni stɛɹz, tə ðiz sɪmpəl ɹumz.

This high, an almost constant breeze lessened the unnatural heat gripping the world. The Feast of Lights past, snow should have covered the ground deep, yet the weather belonged in the depths of a hard summer. Another sign that the Last Battle approached and the Dark One touched the world, if more were needed. Elaida did not let the heat touch her even when she descended, of course. The breeze was not why she had had her quarters moved up here, despite the inconvenience of so many stairs, to these simple rooms.

pleɪn ɹʌsət flɔɹ taɪlz ən waɪt mɑɹbəl wɔlz dɛkɝeɪɾəd baɪ ə fju tæpəstʃɹiz kəd nɑt kəmpɛɹ wɪð ðə ɡɹænduɹ ə ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi ən ðə ɹumz ðət wɛnt wɪð ɪt fɑɹ bɪloʊ. ʃi stɪl juz ðoʊz ɹumz əkeɪʒənəli - ðeɪ hɛld əsoʊsieɪʃənz wɪð ðə paʊɝ ə ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪn səm maɪnz - bʌt ʃi ɹɪzaɪɾɪd hɪɹ, ən wɝk hɪɹ mɔɹ ɔfən ðən nɑt. fəɹ ðə vju. nɑɾ ə sɪɾi əɹ ɹɪvɝ əɹ fɔɹəsts, ðoʊ. ʌv wʌt wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz. ɡɹeɪt dɪɡɪŋz ən faʊndeɪʃənz spɹɛɾ əkɹɔs wʌt hæd bɪn ðə wɔɹɾɝz' pɹæktəs jɑɹd, tɔl wʊɾən kɹeɪnz ən stæks ə kʌt mɑɹbəl ən ɡɹænət. meɪsənz ən leɪbɝɝz swɔɹmd oʊvɝ ðə wɝkɪŋz laɪk æns, ən ɛnləs stʃɹimz ʌv wæɡənz tʃɹeɪl θɹu ðə ɡeɪts ɑntu ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz, bɹɪŋɪŋ mɔɹ stoʊn. tə wʌn saɪd stʊɾ ə wʊɾən "wɝkɪŋ mɑɾəl," əz ðə meɪsənz kɔld ɪt, bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ mɛn tə ɛntɝ kɹaʊtʃɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ hilz ən si ɛvɹi dɪteɪl, wɛɹ ɛvɹi stoʊn ʃəd ɡoʊ. moʊst ə ðə wɝkmɪn kəd nɑt ɹɛd, æftɝ ɔl - niðɝ wɝdz nɔɹ meɪsənz dʒɹɔn plænz. ðə "wɝkɪŋ mɑɾəl" wɑz əz lɑɹdʒ əz səm mænɝ haʊsəz.

Plain russet floor tiles and white marble walls decorated by a few tapestries could not compare with the grandeur of the Amyrlin's study and the rooms that went with it far below. She still used those rooms occasionally - they held associations with the power of the Amyrlin Seat in some minds - but she resided here, and worked here more often than not. For the view. Not of city or river or forests, though. Of what was beginning in the Tower grounds. Great diggings and foundations spread across what had been the Warders' practice yard, tall wooden cranes and stacks of cut marble and granite. Masons and laborers swarmed over the workings like ants, and endless streams of wagons trailed through the gates onto the Tower grounds, bringing more stone. To one side stood a wooden "working model," as the masons called it, big enough for men to enter crouching on their heels and see every detail, where every stone should go. Most of the workmen could not read, after all - neither words nor mason's drawn plans. The "working model" was as large as some manor houses.

wən ɛni kɪŋ əɹ kwin hæɾ ə pæləs, waɪ ʃəd ði æmɪɝlɪn sit bi ɹɛləɡeɪɾɪd tə əpɑɹtməns lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ ðən ðoʊz ə mɛni ɔɹɾənɛɹi sɪstɝz? hɝ pæləs wəd mætʃ ðə waɪt taʊɝ fəɹ splɛndɝ, ən əv ə ɡɹeɪt spaɪɹ tɛn spænz haɪɝ ðən ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf. ðə blʌd hæd dʒɹeɪn fɹəm ðə tʃif meɪsənz feɪs wən i hɝd ðæt. ðə taʊɝ hæd bɪn oʊɡiɝ-bɪlt, wɪð əsɪstəns fɹəm sɪstɝz juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. wʌn lʊk əɾ ɪleɪɾəz feɪs, haʊɛvɝ, sɛt mæstɝ lɛɹmən boʊɪŋ ən stæmɝɪŋ ðəɾ ə kɔɹs ɔl wəd bi dʌn əz ʃi wɪʃt. əz ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɛni kwɛstʃən.

When any king or queen had a palace, why should the Amyrlin Seat be relegated to apartments little better than those of many ordinary sisters? Her palace would match the White Tower for splendor, and have a great spire ten spans higher than the Tower itself. The blood had drained from the chief mason's face when he heard that. The Tower had been Ogier-built, with assistance from sisters using the Power. One look at Elaida's face, however, set Master Lerman bowing and stammering that of course all would be done as she wished. As if there had been any question.

hɝ maʊθ taɪɾənd wɪð ɛksæspɝeɪʃən. ʃi hæd wɑntəɾ oʊɡiɝ meɪsənz əɡɛn, bʌt ði oʊɡiɝ wɝ kənfaɪnɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz tə ðɛɹ stɛɾɪŋ fəɹ səm ɹizən. hɝ sʌmənz tə ðə nɪɹəst, stɛɾɪŋ dʒɛntɔɪn, ɪn ðə blæk hɪlz, hæd bɪn mɛt wɪð ɹəfjuzəl. pəlaɪt, jɛt stɪl ɹəfjuzəl, wɪθaʊɾ ɛkspləneɪʃən, ivən tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. oʊɡiɝ wɝ ɹɪklusɪv ət bɛst. əɹ ðeɪ maɪt bi wɪθdʒɹɔɪŋ fɹəm ə wɝl fʊl ə tɝmɔɪl; oʊɡiɝ steɪd klɪɹ ə hjumən stʃɹaɪf.

Her mouth tightened with exasperation. She had wanted Ogier masons again, but the Ogier were confining themselves to their stedding for some reason. Her summons to the nearest, Stedding Jentoine, in the Black Hills, had been met with refusal. Polite, yet still refusal, without explanation, even to the Amyrlin Seat. Ogier were reclusive at best. Or they might be withdrawing from a world full of turmoil; Ogier stayed clear of human strife.

fɝmli ɪleɪɾə dɪsmɪs ði oʊɡiɝ fɹəm əɹ maɪnd. ʃi pɹaɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf ɑn sɛpɝeɪɾɪŋ wʌt kəd bi fɹəm wʌt kəd nɑt. oʊɡiɝ wɝ ə tʃɹɪviæləɾi. ðeɪ hæd noʊ pɑɹɾ ɪn ðə wɝl bɪɑn ðə sɪɾiz ðeɪ hæd bɪl soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ ən sɛldəm vɪzəɾəd naʊ ɪksɛp tə meɪk ɹɪpɛɹz.

Firmly Elaida dismissed the Ogier from her mind. She prided herself on separating what could be from what could not. Ogier were a triviality. They had no part in the world beyond the cities they had built so long ago and seldom visited now except to make repairs.

ðə mɛn bɪloʊ, kɹɔlɪŋ biɾəl-laɪk oʊvɝ ðə bɪldɪŋ saɪt, meɪɾ əɹ fɹaʊn slaɪtli. kənstʃɹʌkʃən wɛn fɔɹwɝd baɪ ɪntʃəz. oʊɡiɝ maɪt bi aʊɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃən, jɛt pɝhæps ðə wʌn paʊɝ kəd bi juzd əɡɛn. fju sɪstɝz pəzɛst ɹil stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn wivɪŋ ɝθ, bʌt nɑt ðət mʌtʃ wɑz ɹikwaɪɝd tə ɹiɪnfɔɹs stoʊn, əɹ baɪn stoʊn tə stoʊn. jɛs. ɪn əɹ maɪnd, ðə pæləs stʊd fɪnɪʃt, kɑləneɪɾɪd wɔks ən ɡɹeɪt doʊmz ʃaɪnɪŋ wɪð ɡɪlt ən ðət wʌn spaɪɹ ɹitʃɪŋ tə ðə hɛvənz. . . . hɝ aɪz ɹoʊz tə ðə klaʊdləs skaɪ, tə wɛɹ ðə spaɪɹ wəd pik, ən ʃi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ saɪ. jɛs. ði ɔɹɾɝz wəd bi ɪʃud tədeɪ. ðə taʊɝɪŋ keɪs klɑk ɪn ðə ɹum bɪhaɪn əɹ tʃaɪm θɝd ɹaɪz, ən ɪn ðə sɪɾi ɡɔŋz ən bɛlz pil ði aʊɝ, ðə saʊn feɪn hɪɹ, soʊ haɪ əbʌv. wɪð ə smaɪl, ɪleɪɾə lɛf ðə wɪndoʊ, smuðɪŋ əɹ ɹɛd-slæʃt dʒɹɛs ə kɹim sɪlk ən ədʒʌstɪŋ ðə bɹɔd, stʃɹaɪp stoʊl ə ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz.

The men below, crawling beetle-like over the building site, made her frown slightly. Construction went forward by inches. Ogier might be out of the question, yet perhaps the One Power could be used again. Few sisters possessed real strength in weaving Earth, but not that much was required to reinforce stone, or bind stone to stone. Yes. In her mind, the palace stood finished, colonnaded walks and great domes shining with gilt and that one spire reaching to the heavens. . . . Her eyes rose to the cloudless sky, to where the spire would peak, and she let out a long sigh. Yes. The orders would be issued today. The towering case clock in the room behind her chimed Third Rise, and in the city gongs and bells pealed the hour, the sound faint here, so high above. With a smile, Elaida left the window, smoothing her red-slashed dress of cream silk and adjusting the broad, striped stole of the Amyrlin Seat on her shoulders.

ɑn ði ɔɹnətli ɡɪldɪd klɑk, smɔl fɪɡjɝz ʌv ɡoʊld ən sɪlvɝ ən ɪnæməl muvd wɪð ðə tʃaɪmz. hɔɹn ən snaʊɾəd tʃɹɑləks flɛd fɹəm ə kloʊkt ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑn wʌn lɛvəl; ɑn ənʌðɝ ə mæn ɹɛpɹɪzɛntɪŋ ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən tʃɹaɪd tə fɛn ɔf sɪlvɝ laɪtnɪŋ boʊls ðət hæɾ ɑbviəsli bɪn hɝl baɪ ə sɛkən sɪstɝ. ən əbʌv ðə klɑkfeɪs, ɪtsɛlf əbʌv əɹ hɛd, ə kɹaʊn kɪŋ ən kwin nɛl bɪfɔɹ ən æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪn əɹ ɪnæməl stoʊl, wɪð ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, kɑɹv fɹəm ə lɑɹdʒ munstoʊn, ətɑp ə ɡoʊldən ɑɹtʃ oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd.

On the ornately gilded clock, small figures of gold and silver and enamel moved with the chimes. Horned and snouted Trollocs fled from a cloaked Aes Sedai on one level; on another a man representing a false Dragon tried to fend off silver lightning bolts that had obviously been hurled by a second sister. And above the clockface, itself above her head, a crowned king and queen knelt before an Amyrlin Seat in her enameled stole, with the Flame of Tar Valon, carved from a large moonstone, atop a golden arch over her head.

ʃi dɪd nɑt læf ɔfən, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp ə kwaɪətli pliz tʃʌkəl ət ðə klɑk. səmeɪl sɔɹɛnteɪn, ɹeɪz fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪ, hæd kəmɪʃən ɪt dʒɹimɪŋ ʌv ə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə deɪz bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, wən noʊ ɹulɝ hɛld ə θɹoʊn wɪθaʊt ðə taʊɝz əpɹuvəl. səmeɪlz ɡɹæn plænz keɪm tə nɔt, haʊɛvɝ, əz dɪd səmeɪl, ən fəɹ θɹi sɛntʃɝiz ðə klɑk sæɾ ɪn ə dʌsti stɔɹədʒ ɹum, ən ɪmbɛɹəsmənt noʊ wʌn dɛɹd dɪspleɪ. əntɪl ɪleɪɾə. ðə wil ə taɪm tɝnd. wʌt wɑz wʌns, kəd bi əɡɛn. wəd bi əɡɛn.

She did not laugh often, but she could not help a quietly pleased chuckle at the clock. Cemaile Sorenthaine, raised from the Gray, had commissioned it dreaming of a return to the days before the Trolloc Wars, when no ruler held a throne without the Tower's approval. Cemaile's grand plans came to naught, however, as did Cemaile, and for three centuries the clock sat in a dusty storage room, an embarrassment no one dared display. Until Elaida. The Wheel of Time turned. What was once, could be again. Would be again.

ðə keɪs klɑk bæləns ðə dɔɹ tə hɝ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, ən əɹ bɛd-tʃeɪmbɝ ən dʒɹɛsɪŋ ɹum bɪɑnd. faɪn tæpəstʃɹiz, kʌlɝfəl wɝk fɹəm tiɹ ən kændɝ ən ɑɹæd dumən, wɪð θɹɛd-ʌv-ɡoʊld ən θɹɛd-ʌv-sɪlvɝ ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə mɪɹli daɪd, hʌŋ itʃ ɪɡzækli ɑpəzəɾ ɪts meɪt. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz laɪkt ɔɹɾɝ. ðə kɑɹpət kʌvɝɪŋ moʊst ə ðə taɪlz keɪm fɹəm tæɹɑbən, pæɾɝnd ɪn ɹɛɾ ən ɡɹin ən ɡoʊld; sɪlk kɑɹpəts wɝ ðə moʊs pɹɛʃəs. ɪn itʃ kɔɹnɝ ə ðə ɹum ə mɑɹbəl plɪnθ kɑɹvd ɪn ʌnpɹitɛnʃəs vɝɾɪkəlz hɛld ə waɪt veɪs ə fɹædʒəl si foʊk pɔɹsələn wɪð tu dʌzən kɛɹfəli ɝeɪnʒd ɹɛd ɹoʊzɪz. tə meɪk ɹoʊzɪz blum naʊ ɹikwaɪɝd ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ɪspɛʃli wɪð ðə dʒɹaʊɾ ən hit; ə wɝθwaɪl jus, ɪn əɹ əpɪnjən. ɡɪldɪd kɑɹvɪŋ kʌvɝd boʊθ ði oʊnli tʃɛɹ - noʊ wʌn sæɾ ɪn əɹ pɹɛzəns naʊ - ən ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl, bʌɾ ɪn ðə stɑɹk staɪl ə kɛɹhin. ə sɪmpəl ɹum, ɹɪli, wɪð ə silɪŋ bɛɹli tu spænz haɪ, jɛɾ ɪt wəd də əntɪl əɹ pæləs wɑz ɹɛɾi. wɪð ðə vju, ɪt wʊd.

The case clock balanced the door to her sitting room, and her bed-chamber and dressing room beyond. Fine tapestries, colorful work from Tear and Kandor and Arad Doman, with thread-of-gold and thread-of-silver glittering among the merely dyed, hung each exactly opposite its mate. She had always liked order. The carpet covering most of the tiles came from Tarabon, patterned in red and green and gold; silk carpets were the most precious. In each corner of the room a marble plinth carved in unpretentious verticals held a white vase of fragile Sea Folk porcelain with two dozen carefully arranged red roses. To make roses bloom now required the One Power, especially with the drought and heat; a worthwhile use, in her opinion. Gilded carving covered both the only chair - no one sat in her presence now - and the writing table, but in the stark style of Cairhien. A simple room, really, with a ceiling barely two spans high, yet it would do until her palace was ready. With the view, it would.

ðə tɔl tʃɛɹbæk hɛl ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn pɪkt aʊɾ ɪn mun-stoʊnz əbʌv əɹ dɑɹk hɛɾ əz ʃi sæt. nʌθɪŋ mɑɹd ðə pɑlɪʃt sɝfəs ə ðə teɪbəl ɪksɛp fəɹ θɹi bɑksəz ʌv ɔltɑɹən lækɹwɝk, ɝeɪnʒd dʒʌst soʊ. oʊpənɪŋ ðə bɑks kʌvɝd wɪð ɡoʊldən hɔks əmʌŋ waɪt klaʊdz, ʃi ɹimuvd ə slɪm stʃɹɪp ə θɪn peɪpɝ fɹəm ətɑp ðə paɪl ə ɹɪpɔɹts ən kɔɹəspɑndəns ɪnsaɪd. fəɹ wʌt mʌst əv bɪn ðə hʌnʒɹədθ taɪm, ʃi ɹɛd ðə mɛsədʒ kʌm fɹəm kɛɹhin baɪ pɪdʒən twɛlv deɪz əɡoʊ. fju ɪn ðə taʊɝ nu ʌv ɪts ɛɡzɪstəns. nʌn bʌt ʃi nu ɪts kɑntɛns, əɹ wəɾ əv ə ɡlɪmɝ ʌv wʌɾ ɪt mɛn ɪf ðeɪ dɪd. ðə θɔɾ ɔlmoʊs meɪɾ əɹ læf əɡɛn.

The tall chairback held the Flame of Tar Valon picked out in moon-stones above her dark head as she sat. Nothing marred the polished surface of the table except for three boxes of Altaran lacquerwork, arranged just so. Opening the box covered with golden hawks among white clouds, she removed a slim strip of thin paper from atop the pile of reports and correspondence inside. For what must have been the hundredth time, she read the message come from Cairhien by pigeon twelve days ago. Few in the Tower knew of its existence. None but she knew its contents, or would have a glimmer of what it meant if they did. The thought almost made her laugh again.

ðə ɹɪŋ əz bɪn pleɪst ɪn ðə bʊlz noʊz. aɪ ɪkspɛkt ə plɛzən dʒɝni tə mɑɹkət.

The ring has been placed in the bull's nose. I expect a pleasant journey to market.

noʊ sɪɡnətʃɝ, jɛt ʃi niɾəd nʌn. oʊnli ɡəlinə kæsbən hæd noʊn tə sɛn ðət ɡlɔɹiəs mɛsədʒ. ɡəlinə, hum ɪleɪɾə tʃɹʌstɪd tə də wʌt ʃi wʊɾə tʃɹʌstɪd tə noʊ wʌn ɛls seɪv hɝsɛlf. nɑt ðət ʃi tʃɹʌstɪɾ ɛniwʌn fʊli, bʌt ðə hɛɾ ə ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ mɔɹ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ. ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd bɪn ɹeɪz fɹəm ðə ɹɛd, æftɝ ɔl, ən ɪn mɛni weɪz stɪl θɔɾ ə hɝsɛlf əz ɹɛd.

No signature, yet she needed none. Only Galina Casban had known to send that glorious message. Galina, whom Elaida trusted to do what she would have trusted to no one else save herself. Not that she trusted anyone fully, but the head of the Red Ajah more than any other. She herself had been raised from the Red, after all, and in many ways still thought of herself as Red.

ðə ɹɪŋ əz bɪn pleɪst ɪn ðə bʊlz noʊz.

The ring has been placed in the bull's nose.

ɹænd ælθɹ - ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ðə mæn u hæd simd ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə swɑloʊɪŋ ðə wɝld, ðə mæn u hæd swɑloʊɾ ɪntaɪɝli tu mʌtʃ ʌv ɪt - ɹænd ælθɹ wɑz ʃildɪɾ ən ɪn ɡəlinəz kəntʃɹoʊl. ən nʌn u maɪt səpɔɹɾ ɪm nu. ivən ə tʃæns ə ðæt, ən ðə wɝɾɪŋ wʊɾə bɪn dɪfɹənt. baɪ vɛɹiəs ɝliɝ mɛsədʒəz, ɪt simd i hæd ɹiɾɪskʌvɝd haʊ tə tʃɹævəl, ə tælən lɔs tə ɛɛs sədaɪ sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, jɛt ðət hæd nɑt seɪv hɪm. ɪt hæɾ ivən pleɪɾ ɪndə ɡəlinəz hænz. əpɛɹənli hi hæɾ ə hæbəɾ ə kʌmɪŋ ən ɡoʊɪŋ wɪθaʊt wɔɹnɪŋ. hu wəd səspɛk ðət ðɪs taɪm i hæd nɑt ɡɔn, bʌt bɪn teɪkən? sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi laɪk ə ɡɪɡəl ɹoʊz ɪn hɝ.

Rand al'Thor - the Dragon Reborn, the man who had seemed on the point of swallowing the world, the man who had swallowed entirely too much of it - Rand al'Thor was shielded and in Galina's control. And none who might support him knew. Even a chance of that, and the wording would have been different. By various earlier messages, it seemed he had rediscovered how to Travel, a Talent lost to Aes Sedai since the Breaking, yet that had not saved him. It had even played into Galina's hands. Apparently he had a habit of coming and going without warning. Who would suspect that this time he had not gone, but been taken? Something very like a giggle rose in her.

ɪnsaɪɾ ənʌðɝ wik, tu ət moʊst, ælθɹ wəd bi ɪn ðə taʊɝ, kloʊsli supɝvaɪzd ən ɡaɪɾəd seɪfli əntɪl tɑɹmən ɡdən, hɪz ɹævɪdʒɪŋ ə ðə wɝl stɑpt. ɪt wɑz mædnəs tə əlaʊ ɛni mæn u kəd tʃænəl tə ɹʌn fɹi, bʌt moʊst ʌv ɔl ðə mæn pɹɑfəsi sɛd mʌs feɪs ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl, ðə laɪt sɛn ðəɾ ɪt leɪ jɪɹz ɔf jɛɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə wɛðɝ. jɪɹz wəd bi niɾəd tə ɝeɪnʒ ðə wɝl pɹɑpɝli, bɪɡɪnɪŋ wɪð ənduɪŋ wʌɾ ælθɹ hæd dʌn.

Inside another week, two at most, al'Thor would be in the Tower, closely supervised and guided safely until Tarmon Gai'don, his ravaging of the world stopped. It was madness to allow any man who could channel to run free, but most of all the man prophecy said must face the Dark One in the Last Battle, the Light send that it lay years off yet in spite of the weather. Years would be needed to arrange the world properly, beginning with undoing what al'Thor had done.

ʌv kɔɹs, ðə dæmədʒ i hæd ɹɔt wɑz nʌθɪŋ bɪsaɪd wʌɾ i kəɾ əv kɑzd, fɹi. nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðəɾ i maɪɾ əv ɡɑɾən hɪmsɛlf kɪl bɪfɔɹ i wɑz niɾəd. wɛl, ðət tʃɹʌbəlsəm jʌŋ mæn wəd bi ɹæpt ɪn swɑɾəlɪŋ ən kɛp seɪf əz ən ɪnfən ɪn ɪz mʌðɝz ɑɹmz əntɪl taɪm tə teɪk ɪm tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. æftɝ ðæt, ɪf i sɝvaɪvd. . . .

Of course, the damage he had wrought was nothing beside what he could have caused, free. Not to mention the possibility that he might have gotten himself killed before he was needed. Well, that troublesome young man would be wrapped in swaddling and kept safe as an infant in his mother's arms until time to take him to Shayol Ghul. After that, if he survived. . . .

ɪleɪɾəz lɪps pɝst. ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən sim tə seɪ hi wəd nɑt, wɪtʃ ʌndɪnaɪəbli wəd bi fəɹ ðə bɛst.

Elaida's lips pursed. The Prophecies of the Dragon seemed to say he would not, which undeniably would be for the best.

"mʌðɝ?" ɪleɪɾə ɔlmoʊst ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əz ɑlviɛɝɪn spoʊk. ɛntɝɪŋ wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə nɑk! "aɪ hæv wɝd fɹəm ði ədʒəz, mʌðɝ." slɪm ən kul-feɪst, ɑlviɛɝɪn wɔɹ ðə kipɝz nɛɹoʊ stoʊl ɪn waɪt, mætʃɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛs, tə ʃoʊ ʃi hæd bɪn ɹeɪz fɹəm ðə waɪt, bʌɾ ɪn əɹ maʊθ "mʌðɝ" bɪkeɪm lɛs ə taɪɾəl ə ɹɪspɛkt ən mɔɹ ən ədʒɹɛs tə ən ikwəl.

"Mother?" Elaida almost gave a start as Alviarin spoke. Entering without so much as a knock! "I have word from the Ajahs, Mother." Slim and cool-faced, Alviarin wore the Keeper's narrow stole in white, matching her dress, to show she had been raised from the White, but in her mouth "Mother" became less a title of respect and more an address to an equal.

ɑlviɛɝɪnz pɹɛzəns wɑz ɪnʌf tə dɛn ɪleɪɾəz ɡʊd mud. ðət ðə kipɝ ə kɹɑnəkəlz keɪm fɹəm ðə waɪt, nɑt ðə ɹɛd, ɔlweɪz sɝvd əz ə baɪɾɪŋ ɹimaɪndɝ ə hɝ wiknəs wən ʃi wɑz fɝst ɹeɪzd. səm ə ðət hæd bɪn dɪspɛld, tʃɹu, bʌt nɑɾ ɔl. nɑt jɛt. ʃi wɑz taɪɝɾ ə ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ ðət ʃi hæd soʊ fju pɝsənəl aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz aʊtsaɪɾ ændɝ. ən ðəɾ əɹ pɹɛɾəsɛsɝ ən ɑlviɛɝɪnz hæɾ ɪskeɪpt - bɪn hɛlp tə ɪskeɪp; ðeɪ mʌst əv hæd hɛlp! - ɪskeɪp bɪfɔɹ ðə kiz tə ði æmɪɝlɪnz ɡɹeɪt nɛtwɝk kəd bi ɹɛstɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðɛm.

Alviarin's presence was enough to dent Elaida's good mood. That the Keeper of Chronicles came from the White, not the Red, always served as a biting reminder of her weakness when she was first raised. Some of that had been dispelled, true, but not all. Not yet. She was tired of regretting that she had so few personal eyes-and-ears outside Andor. And that her predecessor and Alviarin's had escaped - been helped to escape; they must have had help! - escaped before the keys to the Amyrlin's great network could be wrested out of them.

ʃi mɔɹ ðən wɑntəd ðə nɛtwɝk ðət wɑz hɝz baɪ ɹaɪt. baɪ stʃɹɔŋ tʃɹədɪʃən ði ədʒəz sɛn tə ðə kipɝ wʌtɛvɝ dʒɹɪbəlz fɹəm ðɛɹ oʊn aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ðeɪ wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə ʃɛɹ wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn, bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə wɑz kənvɪns ðə wʊmən kɛp bæk səm ʌv ivən ðət tʃɹɪkəl. jɛt ʃi kəd nɑɾ æsk ði ədʒəz fəɹ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən dɝɛkli. bæɾ ɪnʌf tə bi wik wɪθaʊt ɡoʊɪŋ bɛɡɪŋ tə ðə wɝld. ðə taʊɝ, ɛniweɪ, wɪtʃ wɑz əz mʌtʃ ə ðə wɝld əz ɹɪli kaʊntəd.

She more than wanted the network that was hers by right. By strong tradition the Ajahs sent to the Keeper whatever dribbles from their own eyes-and-ears they were willing to share with the Amyrlin, but Elaida was convinced the woman kept back some of even that trickle. Yet she could not ask the Ajahs for information directly. Bad enough to be weak without going begging to the world. The Tower, anyway, which was as much of the world as really counted.

ɪleɪɾə kɛpt əɹ oʊn feɪs ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz kul əz ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz, æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ əɹ oʊnli wɪð ə nɑd waɪl ʃi pɹitɛndəd tə ɪɡzæmɪn peɪpɝz fɹəm ðə lækɝd bɑks. sloʊli ʃi tɝn əm oʊvɝ wʌn baɪ wʌn, ɹɪtɝn əm tə ðə bɑks sloʊli. wɪθaʊt ɹɪli siɪŋ ə wɝd. meɪkɪŋ ɑlviɛɝɪn weɪt wɑz bɪɾɝ, kəz ɪt wɑz pɛɾi, ən pɛɾi weɪz wɝ ɔl ʃi hæd tə stʃɹaɪk ət wʌn u ʃʊɾə bɪn əɹ sɝvənt.

Elaida kept her own face every bit as cool as the other woman's, acknowledging her only with a nod while she pretended to examine papers from the lacquered box. Slowly she turned them over one by one, returned them to the box slowly. Without really seeing a word. Making Alviarin wait was bitter, because it was petty, and petty ways were all she had to strike at one who should have been her servant.

ən æmɪɝlɪn kəɾ ɪʃu ɛni dɪkɹi ʃi wɪʃt, hɝ wɝd lɔ ən æbsəlut. jɛɾ əz ə pɹæktəkəl mæɾɝ, wɪθaʊt səpɔɹt fɹəm ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, mɛni ʌv ðoʊz dɪkɹiz wɝ weɪstəɾ ɪŋk ən peɪpɝ. noʊ sɪstɝ wəd dɪsəbeɪ ən æmɪɝlɪn, nɑt dɝɛkli ət list, jɛt mɛni dɪkɹiz ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd ʌðɝ θɪŋz ɔɹɾɝd tə ɪmpləmɛn ðɛm. ɪn ðə bɛst ə taɪmz ðət kəd kʌm sloʊli ɑn əkeɪʒən soʊ sloʊli ɪt nɛvɝ hæpənd, ən ðiz wɝ fɑɹ fɹəm ðə bɛst.

An Amyrlin could issue any decree she wished, her word law and absolute. Yet as a practical matter, without support from the Hall of the Tower, many of those decrees were wasted ink and paper. No sister would disobey an Amyrlin, not directly at least, yet many decrees required a hundred other things ordered to implement them. In the best of times that could come slowly on occasion so slowly it never happened, and these were far from the best.

ɑlviɛɝɪn stʊd ðɛɹ, kɑm əz ə fɹoʊzən pɑnd. kloʊzɪŋ ði ɔltɑɹən bɑks, ɪleɪɾə kɛpt aʊt ðə stʃɹɪp ə peɪpɝ ðəɾ ənaʊnst əɹ ʃʊɹ vɪktɝi. ʌnkɑnʃəsli ʃi fɪŋɡɝɾ ɪt, ə tælɪsmən. "hæz tɛslɪn əɹ dʒoʊlin faɪnəli dn tə sɛn mɔɹ ðən wɝɾ ə ðɛɹ seɪf ɝaɪvəl?"

Alviarin stood there, calm as a frozen pond. Closing the Altaran box, Elaida kept out the strip of paper that announced her sure victory. Unconsciously she fingered it, a talisman. "Has Teslyn or Joline finally deigned to send more than word of their safe arrival?"

ðət wɑz mɛn tə ɹimaɪn ɑlviɛɝɪn ðət noʊ wʌn kəd kənsɪɾɝ hɝsɛlf ɪmjun. noʊbɑdi kɛɹd wʌt hæpən ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ɪleɪɾə list ʌv ɔl; ðə kæpəɾəl ʌv ɔltɑɹə kəd fɔl ɪndə ðə si, ən ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə mɝtʃəns, nɑɾ ivən ðə ɹɛst ʌv ɔltɑɹə wəd noʊɾəs. bʌt tɛslɪn hæd sæɾ ɪn ðə hɔl nɪɹli fɪftin jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ ɪleɪɾə hæd kəmændəɾ əɹ tə ɹɪzaɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ. ɪf ɪleɪɾə kəd sɛn ə sɪɾɝ - ə ɹɛd sɪɾɝ - hu hæd səpɔɹɾəd əɹ ɹaɪz ɔf əz æmbæsəɾɝ tə ə flaɪspɛk θɹoʊn wɪð noʊ wʌn ʃʊɹ waɪ bʌɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd ɹumɝz flaʊɝɪŋ, ðən ʃi kəd kʌm daʊn ɑn ɛniwʌn. dʒoʊlin wɑz ə dɪfɹən mæɾɝ. ʃi hæd hɛld əɹ tʃɛɹ fəɹ ðə ɡɹin oʊnli ə mæɾɝ ʌv wiks, ən ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə ɡɹinz hæd səlɛktəɾ əɹ tə ʃoʊ ðeɪ wəd nɑt bi kaʊd baɪ ðə nu æmɪɝlɪn, hu hæd hændəɾ əɹ ə fɪɹsəm pɛnəns. ðət bɪɾ ʌv ɪnsələns kəd nɑt bi əlaʊd tə pæs, ʌv kɔɹs, ən hæd nɑt bɪn. ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðæt, tu.

That was meant to remind Alviarin that no one could consider herself immune. Nobody cared what happened in Ebou Dar, Elaida least of all; the capital of Altara could fall into the sea, and except for the merchants, not even the rest of Altara would notice. But Teslyn had sat in the Hall nearly fifteen years before Elaida had commanded her to resign her chair. If Elaida could send a Sitter - a Red Sitter - who had supported her rise off as ambassador to a flyspeck throne with no one sure why but a hundred rumors flowering, then she could come down on anyone. Joline was a different matter. She had held her chair for the Green only a matter of weeks, and everyone was sure the Greens had selected her to show they would not be cowed by the new Amyrlin, who had handed her a fearsome penance. That bit of insolence could not be allowed to pass, of course, and had not been. Everyone knew that, too.

ɪt wɑz mɛn tə ɹimaɪn ɑlviɛɝɪn ðət ʃi wɑz vʌlnɝəbəl, bʌt ðə slɪm wʊmən mɪɹli smaɪld əɹ kul smaɪl. soʊ lɔŋ əz ðə hɔl ɹɪmeɪn əz ɪt wɑz, ʃi wɑz ɪmjun. ʃi ɹɪfəl θɹu ðə peɪpɝz ɪn əɹ hænd, plʌkɪŋ wʌn aʊt. "noʊ wɝd fɹəm tɛslɪn əɹ dʒoʊlin, mʌðɝ, noʊ, ðoʊ wɪð ðə nuz juv ɹəsiv soʊ fɑɹ fɹəm ðə θɹoʊnz. . . ." ðət smaɪl dipən ɪndə sʌmθɪŋ deɪnʒɝəsli kloʊs tə əmjuzmənt. "ðeɪ ɔl min tə tʃɹaɪ ðɛɹ wɪŋz, tə si ɪf jə ɑɹ əz stʃɹɔŋ əz . . . əz jəɹ pɹɛɾəsɛsɝ." ivən ɑlviɛɝɪn hæɾ ɪnʌf sɛns nɑt tə spik ðə sɑntʃ wʊmənz neɪm ɪn əɹ pɹɛzəns. ɪt wɑz tʃɹu, ðoʊ; ɛvɹi kɪŋ ən kwin, ivən mɪɹ noʊbəlz, sim tə bi tɛstɪŋ ðə lɪməts ə hɝ paʊɝ. ʃi mʌs meɪk ɪɡzæmpəlz.

It was meant to remind Alviarin that she was vulnerable, but the slim woman merely smiled her cool smile. So long as the Hall remained as it was, she was immune. She riffled through the papers in her hand, plucking one out. "No word from Teslyn or Joline, Mother, no, though with the news you have received so far from the thrones. . . ." That smile deepened into something dangerously close to amusement. "They all mean to try their wings, to see if you are as strong as . . . as your predecessor." Even Alviarin had enough sense not to speak the Sanche woman's name in her presence. It was true, though; every king and queen, even mere nobles, seemed to be testing the limits of her power. She must make examples.

ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðə peɪpɝ, ɑlviɛɝɪn wɛn ɑn. "ðɛɹ ɪz wɝd fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ, haʊɛvɝ. θɹu ðə ɡɹeɪ." hæd ʃi ɛmfəsaɪz ðæt, tə dʒɹaɪv ðə splɪntɝ dipɝ? "ɪɾ əpɪɹz ɪleɪn tʃɹəkən ən nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə ɑɹ ðɛɹ. poʊzɪŋ əz fʊl sɪstɝz, wɪð ðə blɛsɪŋz ə ðə ɹɛbəl . . . ɛmbəsi . . . tə kwin taɪlɪn. ðəɹ ɑɹ tu ʌðɝz, nɑɾ aɪdɛntəfaɪd, hu meɪ bi duɪŋ ðə seɪm. ðə lɪsts ə hu ɪz wɪð ðə ɹɛbəlz ɑɹ ɪnkəmplit. əɹ ðeɪ meɪ dʒʌs bi kəmpænjənz. ðə ɡɹeɪz ɑɹ ənsɝɾən."

Glancing at the paper, Alviarin went on. "There is word from Ebou Dar, however. Through the Gray." Had she emphasized that, to drive the splinter deeper? "It appears Elayne Trakand and Nynaeve al'Meara are there. Posing as full sisters, with the blessings of the rebel . . . embassy . . . to Queen Tylin. There are two others, not identified, who may be doing the same. The lists of who is with the rebels are incomplete. Or they may just be companions. The Grays are uncertain."

"waɪ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt wəd ðeɪ bi ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ?" ɪleɪɾə sɛd dɪsmɪsɪvli. sɝɾənli tɛslɪn wʊɾə sɛnt nuz ə ðæt. "ðə ɡɹeɪ mʌs bi pæsɪŋ əlɔŋ ɹumɝz, naʊ. tɑɹnəz mɛsədʒ sɛd ðeɪ ɑɹ wɪð ðə ɹɛbəlz ɪn sɑlədɑɹ." tɑɹnə fiɹ hæd ɹipɔɹɾəd sɪuən sɑntʃ ðɛɹ, tu. ən lɑɡən əblɝ, spɹɛɾɪŋ ðoʊz vɪʃəs laɪz noʊ ɹɛd sɪstɝ kəd loʊɝ hɝsɛlf tə æknɑlɪdʒ, mʌtʃ lɛs dɪnaɪ. ðə sɑntʃ wʊmən hæɾ ə hæn ɪn ðəɾ əbsɛnəɾi, əɹ ðə sʌn wəd ɹaɪz ɪn ðə wɛs təmɑɹoʊ. waɪ kəd ʃi nɑt sɪmpli hæv kɹɔld əweɪ ən daɪd, disənli aʊɾ ə saɪt, laɪk ʌðɝ stɪld wɪmən?

"Why under the Light would they be in Ebou Dar?" Elaida said dismissively. Certainly Teslyn would have sent news of that. "The Gray must be passing along rumors, now. Tarna's message said they are with the rebels in Salidar." Tarna Feir had reported Siuan Sanche there, too. And Logain Ablar, spreading those vicious lies no Red sister could lower herself to acknowledge, much less deny. The Sanche woman had a hand in that obscenity, or the sun would rise in the west tomorrow. Why could she not simply have crawled away and died, decently out of sight, like other stilled women?

ɪt ɹikwaɪɝɾ ɛfɝt nɑt tə dʒɹɔ ə dip bɹɛθ. lɑɡən kəd bi hæŋ kwaɪətli əz sun əz ðə ɹɛbəlz wɝ dɛlt wɪð; moʊst ə ðə wɝl θɔɾ ɪm dɛd lɔŋ sɪns. ðə fɪlθi slændɝ ðət ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ hæd sɛɾ ɪm ʌp əz ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən wəd daɪ wɪð hɪm. wən ðə ɹɛbəlz wɝ dɛlt wɪð, ðə sɑntʃ wʊmən kəd bi meɪd tə hæn oʊvɝ ðə kiz tə ði æmɪɝlɪnz aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz. ən neɪm ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝz u hæd hɛlpt əɹ ɪskeɪp. ə fulɪʃ hoʊp tə wɪʃ ðəɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn wəd bi neɪmd əmʌŋ ðɛm. "aɪ kən hɑɹdli si ði ɑlmɹə ɡɝl ɹʌnɪŋ tə ɛbu dɑɹ kleɪmɪŋ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, mʌtʃ lɛs ɪleɪn, kən ju?"

It required effort not to draw a deep breath. Logain could be hanged quietly as soon as the rebels were dealt with; most of the world thought him dead long since. The filthy slander that the Red Ajah had set him up as a false Dragon would die with him. When the rebels were dealt with, the Sanche woman could be made to hand over the keys to the Amyrlin's eyes-and-ears. And name the traitors who had helped her escape. A foolish hope to wish that Alviarin would be named among them. "I can hardly see the al'Meara girl running to Ebou Dar claiming to be Aes Sedai, much less Elayne, can you?"

"ju dɪɾ ɔɹɾɝ ɪleɪn faʊnd, mʌðɝ. əz ɪmpɔɹɾənt əz pʊɾɪŋ ə liʃ ɑn ælθɹ, jə sɛd. wən ʃi wɑz əmʌŋ θɹi hʌnʒɹəd ɹɛbəlz ɪn sɑlədɑɹ, ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl tə də ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt ʃɪl nɑt bi soʊ wɛl pɹətɛktəɾ ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs."

"You did order Elayne found, Mother. As important as putting a leash on al'Thor, you said. When she was among three hundred rebels in Salidar, it was impossible to do anything, but she will not be so well protected in the Tarasin Palace."

"aɪ hæv noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɡɑsəp ən ɹumɝz." ɪleɪɾə bɪɾ ɔf itʃ wɝd wɪð kəntɛmpt. dɪɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn noʊ mɔɹ ðən ʃi ʃʊd, mɛnʃənɪŋ ælθɹ, ən liʃɪŋ? "aɪ sədʒɛs jə ɹɛd tɑɹnəz ɹipɔɹɾ əɡɛn, ðən æsk jɝsɛlf wɛðɝ ivən ɹɛbəlz wəɾ əlaʊ æksɛptɪd tə pɹitɛn tə ðə ʃɔl."

"I have no time for gossip and rumors." Elaida bit off each word with contempt. Did Alviarin know more than she should, mentioning al'Thor, and leashing? "I suggest you read Tarna's report again, then ask yourself whether even rebels would allow Accepted to pretend to the shawl."

ɑlviɛɝɪn weɪɾəd wɪð vɪzəbəl peɪʃəns fəɹ əɹ tə fɪnɪʃ, ðən ɪɡzæmən əɹ ʃif əɡɛn ən pʊld aʊt fɔɹ mɔɹ ʃits. "ðə ɡɹeɪ eɪdʒən sɛn skɛtʃəz," ʃi sɛd blænli, pɹɑfɝɪŋ ðə peɪdʒəz. "hi ɪz noʊ ɑɹɾəst, bʌɾ ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv ɑɹ ɹɛkəɡnaɪzəbəl." æftɝ ə moʊmənt, wən ɪleɪɾə dɪd nɑt teɪk ðə dʒɹɔɪŋz, ʃi slɪpt əm ʌndɝ ðə ɹɛst.

Alviarin waited with visible patience for her to finish, then examined her sheaf again and pulled out four more sheets. "The Gray agent sent sketches," she said blandly, proffering the pages. "He is no artist, but Elayne and Nynaeve are recognizable." After a moment, when Elaida did not take the drawings, she slipped them under the rest.

ɪleɪɾə fɛl ðə kʌlɝ ʌv æŋɡɝ ən ɪmbɛɹəsmən ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn əɹ tʃiks. ɑlviɛɝɪn hæd lɛɾ əɹ daʊn ðɪs pæθ dɪlɪbɝətli baɪ nɑt bɹɪŋɪŋ aʊt ðoʊz skɛtʃəz ət ðə fɝst. ʃi ɪɡnɔɹd ðət - ɛniθɪŋ ɛls wəɾ oʊnli bi mɔɹ ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ stɪl - bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs bɪkeɪm koʊld. "aɪ wɑn əm teɪkən, ən bɹɔt tə mi."

Elaida felt the color of anger and embarrassment rising in her cheeks. Alviarin had led her down this path deliberately by not bringing out those sketches at the first. She ignored that - anything else would only be more embarrassing still - but her voice became cold. "I want them taken, and brought to me."

ðə læk ə kjʊɹiɑsəɾi ɑn ɑlviɛɝɪnz feɪs meɪɾ ɪleɪɾə wʌndɝ əɡɛn haʊ mʌtʃ ðə wʊmən nu ðət ʃi wɑz nɑt səpoʊz tə. ði ɑlmɹə ɡɝl maɪt wɛl pɹəvaɪɾ ə hændəl ɑn ælθɹ, kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə seɪm vɪlədʒ. ɔl ðə sɪstɝz nu ðæt, dʒʌst əz ðeɪ nu ðəɾ ɪleɪn wɑz dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ, ən ðəɾ əɹ mʌðɝ wɑz dɛd. veɪɡ ɹumɝz lɪŋkɪŋ mɔɹɡeɪs tə ðə waɪtkloʊks wɝ soʊ mʌtʃ nɑnsɛns, fəɹ ʃi wəd nɛvɝ əv ɡɔn tə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt fəɹ hɛlp. ʃi wɑz dɛd, livɪŋ nɑɾ ivən ə kɔɹps bɪhaɪnd, ən ɪleɪn wəd bi kwin. ɪf ʃi kəd bi ɹɛstɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹɛbəlz bɪfɔɹ ði ændɔɝən haʊsəz pʊt daɪɛlɪn ɑn ðə laɪən θɹoʊn ɪnstɛd. ɪt wɑz nɑt waɪdli noʊn wʌt meɪɾ ɪleɪn mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ɛni ʌðɝ noʊbəl wɪð ə stʃɹɔŋ kleɪm tə ə θɹoʊn. əsaɪd fɹəm ðə fæk ðət ʃi wəd bi ɛɛs sədaɪ wʌn deɪ, ʌv kɔɹs.

The lack of curiosity on Alviarin's face made Elaida wonder again how much the woman knew that she was not supposed to. The al'Meara girl might well provide a handle on al'Thor, coming from the same village. All the sisters knew that, just as they knew that Elayne was Daughter-Heir of Andor, and that her mother was dead. Vague rumors linking Morgase to the Whitecloaks were so much nonsense, for she would never have gone to the Children of the Light for help. She was dead, leaving not even a corpse behind, and Elayne would be Queen. If she could be wrested away from the rebels before the Andoran Houses put Dyelin on the Lion Throne instead. It was not widely known what made Elayne more important than any other noble with a strong claim to a throne. Aside from the fact that she would be Aes Sedai one day, of course.

ɪleɪɾə hæd ðə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ səmtaɪmz, ə tælən mɛni θɔt lɔs bɪfɔɹ hɝ, ən lɔŋ əɡoʊ ʃi hæd fɔɹtoʊl ðət ðə ɹɔɪəl haʊs ʌv ændɝ hɛl ðə ki tə wɪnɪŋ ðə læs bæɾəl. twɛnti-faɪv jɪɹz ɡɔn ən mɔɹ, əz sun əz ɪt bɪkeɪm klɪɹ ðət mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənd wəd ɡeɪn ðə θɹoʊn ɪn ðə səksɛʃən, ɪleɪɾə hæd fæsən hɝsɛlf tə ðə ɡɝl, əz ʃi wɑz ðɛn. haʊ ɪleɪn wɑz kɹuʃəl, ɪleɪɾə dɪd nɑt noʊ, bʌt fɔɹtɛlɪŋ nɛvɝ laɪd. səmtaɪmz ʃi ɔlmoʊs heɪɾəd ðə tælənt. ʃi heɪɾəd θɪŋz ʃi kəd nɑt kəntʃɹoʊl.

Elaida had the Foretelling sometimes, a Talent many thought lost before her, and long ago she had Foretold that the Royal House of Andor held the key to winning the Last Battle. Twenty-five years gone and more, as soon as it became clear that Morgase Trakand would gain the throne in the Succession, Elaida had fastened herself to the girl, as she was then. How Elayne was crucial, Elaida did not know, but Foretelling never lied. Sometimes she almost hated the Talent. She hated things she could not control.

"aɪ wɑn ɔl fɔɹ ə ðɛm, ɑlviɛɝɪn." ði ʌðɝ tu wɝ ənɪmpɔɹɾənt, sɝɾənli, bʌt ʃi wəd teɪk noʊ tʃænsəz. "sɛn maɪ kəmæn tə tɛslɪn ɪmiɾiətli. tɛl əɹ - ən dʒoʊlin - ðəɾ ɪf ðeɪ feɪl tə sɛn ɹɛɡjəlɝ ɹɪpɔɹts fɹəm naʊ ɑn, ðəl wɪʃ ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ bɪn bɔɹn. ɪnklud ði ɪnfɝmeɪʃən fɹəm ðə məkʊə wʊmən." hɝ maʊθ twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn ðət læst.

"I want all four of them, Alviarin." The other two were unimportant, certainly, but she would take no chances. "Send my command to Teslyn immediately. Tell her - and Joline - that if they fail to send regular reports from now on, they will wish they had never been born. Include the information from the Macura woman." Her mouth twisted around that last.

ðə neɪm meɪɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn ʃɪft ənizəli, tu, ən noʊ wʌndɝ. ɹɑn məkʊəz næsti lɪɾəl ɪnfjuʒən wɑz sʌmθɪŋ tə meɪk ɛni sɪstɝ ənkʌmftəɹbəl. fɔkɹut wɑz nɑt liθəl - ət lis jə woʊk, ɪf jə dʒɹæŋk ɪnʌf tə slip - bʌɾ ə ti ðət dɛɾənd ə wʊmənz əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl simd eɪm tu dɝɛkli əɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ə pɪɾi ði ɪnfɝmeɪʃən hæd nɑt bɪn ɹəsiv bɪfɔɹ ɡəlinə wɛnt; ɪf fɔɹk-ɹut wɝkt ɑn mɛn əz wɛl əz ɪt sim tə ɑn wɪmən, ɪt wʊɾə meɪɾ əɹ tæsk kənsɪɾɝəbli iziɝ.

The name made Alviarin shift uneasily, too, and no wonder. Ronde Macura's nasty little infusion was something to make any sister uncomfortable. Forkroot was not lethal - at least you woke, if you drank enough to sleep - but a tea that deadened a woman's ability to channel seemed aimed too directly at Aes Sedai. A pity the information had not been received before Galina went; if fork-root worked on men as well as it seemed to on women, it would have made her task considerably easier.

ɑlviɛɝɪnz ɪl iz læstəɾ oʊnli ə moʊmənt; ə mɪɹ ɪnstən ən ʃi wɑz ɔl sɛlf-pəzɛʃən əɡɛn, ənjildɪŋ əz ə wɔl ʌv aɪs. "æz jə wɪʃ, mʌðɝ. aɪm ʃʊɹ ðəl lip tə oʊbeɪ, əz ə kɔɹs ðeɪ ʃʊd."

Alviarin's ill ease lasted only a moment; a mere instant and she was all self-possession again, unyielding as a wall of ice. "As you wish, Mother. I am sure they will leap to obey, as of course they should."

ə sʌɾən flæʃ ʌv ɪɹɪteɪʃən swɛpt ɪleɪɾə laɪk faɪɝ ɪn dʒɹaɪ pæstʃɝ. ðə feɪɾ ə ðə wɝld ɪn əɹ hænz, ən pɛɾi stʌmbəlɪŋ blɑks kɛpt ɹaɪzɪŋ bɪniθ əɹ fit. bæɾ ɪnʌf ðət ʃi hæd ɹəbɛlz ən ɹɪkælsɪtʃɹən ɹulɝz tə hændəl, bʌt tu mɛni sɪɾɝz stɪl bɹuɾɪd ən ɡɹʌmbəl bɪhaɪn əɹ bæk, fɝɾəl ɡɹaʊn fəɹ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən tə plaʊ. oʊnli sɪks wɝ fɝmli ʌndɝ əɹ oʊn θʌm, ən ʃi səspɛktəɾ əz mɛni ət lis lɪsən kloʊsli tə ɑlviɛɝɪn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ voʊɾəd. sɝɾənli nʌθɪŋ ʌv ɪmpɔɹɾəns pæs θɹu ðə hɔl ənlɛs ɑlviɛɝɪn əɡɹid tə ɪt. nɑɾ oʊpən əɡɹimənt, nɑt wɪð ɛni eɪsi-noʊ lɛdʒ mɛn ðəɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn bɔɹ ə ʃɹɛd mɔɹ ɪnfluəns əɹ paʊɝ ðən ə kipɝ ʃʊd, bʌɾ ɪf ɑlviɛɝɪn əpoʊzd. . . . ət lis ðeɪ hæd nɑt ɡɔn soʊ fɑɹ əz tə ɹɪdʒɛkt ɛniθɪŋ ɪleɪɾə sɛn ðɛm. ðeɪ sɪmpli dʒɹæɡd ðɛɹ fiɾ ən tu ɔfən lɛt wʌt ʃi wɑntəd stɑɹv ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ə pɪɾɪfəli smɔl θɪŋ fəɹ wɪtʃ tə bi hæpi. səm æmɪɝlənz hæd bɪkʌm lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən pʌpəts wʌns ðə hɔl əkwaɪɝɾ ə teɪs fəɹ ɹɪdʒɛktɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ pʊt fɔɹwɝd.

A sudden flash of irritation swept Elaida like fire in dry pasture. The fate of the world in her hands, and petty stumbling blocks kept rising beneath her feet. Bad enough that she had rebels and recalcitrant rulers to handle, but too many Sitters still brooded and grumbled behind her back, fertile ground for the other woman to plow. Only six were firmly under her own thumb, and she suspected as many at least listened closely to Alviarin before they voted. Certainly nothing of importance passed through the Hall unless Alviarin agreed to it. Not open agreement, not with any ac-know ledg ment that Alviarin bore a shred more influence or power than a Keeper should, but if Alviarin opposed. . . . At least they had not gone so far as to reject anything Elaida sent them. They simply dragged their feet and too often let what she wanted starve on the floor. A pitifully small thing for which to be happy. Some Amyrlins had become little more than puppets once the Hall acquired a taste for rejecting what they put forward.

hɝ hænz klɛntʃt, ən ə taɪni kɹækəl keɪm fɹəm ðə stʃɹɪp ə peɪpɝ.

Her hands clenched, and a tiny crackle came from the strip of paper.

ðə ɹɪŋ əz bɪn pleɪst ɪn ðə bʊlz noʊz.

The ring has been placed in the bull's nose.

ɑlviɛɝɪn lʊkt əz kəmpoʊzd əz ə mɑɹbəl stætʃu, bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə noʊ lɔŋɡɝ kɛɹd. ðə ʃɛpɝd wɑz ɑn ɪz weɪ tə hɝ. ðə ɹɛbəlz wəd bi kɹʌʃt ən ðə hɔl kaʊd, ɑlviɛɝɪn fɔɹs tə hɝ niz ən ɛvɹi fɹækʃəs ɹulɝ bɹɔt tə hil, fɹəm tɛnoʊbiə ʌv sɑldɑiə, hu hæd ɡɔn ɪndə haɪɾɪŋ tə əvɔɪɾ əɹ ɛməsɛɹi, tə mæɾɪn stɛpeɪnəoʊz ʌv ɪljən, hu wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pleɪ ɔl saɪdz ət wʌns əɡɛn, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əɡɹi wɪð əɹ ən ðə waɪtkloʊks, ən wɪð ælθɹ fəɹ ɔl ʃi nu. ɪleɪn wəd bi pleɪst ɑn ðə θɹoʊn ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, wɪθaʊɾ əɹ bɹʌðɝ tə ɡɛɾ ɪn ðə weɪ ən wɪð ə fʊl nɑlədʒ ə hu hæd sɛɾ əɹ ðɛɹ. ə lɪɾəl taɪm bæk ɪn ðə taʊɝ wəd meɪk ðə ɡɝl dæmp kleɪ ɪn ɪleɪɾəz hænz.

Alviarin looked as composed as a marble statue, but Elaida no longer cared. The shepherd was on his way to her. The rebels would be crushed and the Hall cowed, Alviarin forced to her knees and every fractious ruler brought to heel, from Tenobia of Saldaea, who had gone into hiding to avoid her emissary, to Mattin Stepaneos of Illian, who was trying to play all sides at once again, trying to agree with her and the Whitecloaks, and with al'Thor for all she knew. Elayne would be placed on the throne in Caemlyn, without her brother to get in the way and with a full knowledge of who had set her there. A little time back in the Tower would make the girl damp clay in Elaida's hands.

"aɪ wɑn ðoʊz mɛn ɹuɾəd aʊt, ɑlviɛɝɪn." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə seɪ hu ʃi mɛnt; hæf ðə taʊɝ kəd tɔk ə nʌθɪŋ bʌt ðoʊz mɛn ɪn ðɛɹ blæk taʊɝ, ən ði ʌðɝ hæf wɪspɝɾ əbaʊɾ əm ɪn kɔɹnɝz.

"I want those men rooted out, Alviarin." There was no need to say who she meant; half the Tower could talk of nothing but those men in their Black Tower, and the other half whispered about them in corners.

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ dɪstɝbɪŋ ɹɪpɔɹts, mʌðɝ." ɑlviɛɝɪn lʊk θɹu hɝ peɪpɝz wʌns mɔɹ, bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə θɔɾ ɪt wɑz oʊnli fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə du. ʃi dɪd nɑt plʌk aʊɾ ɛni mɔɹ peɪdʒəz, ən ɪf nʌθɪŋ ɛls dɪstɝb ðə wʊmən fəɹ lɔŋ, ðɪs ənhoʊli mɪɾən aʊtsaɪd keɪɛmlɪn mʌst.

"There are disturbing reports, Mother." Alviarin looked through her papers once more, but Elaida thought it was only for something to do. She did not pluck out any more pages, and if nothing else disturbed the woman for long, this unholy midden outside Caemlyn must.

"mɔɹ ɹumɝz? dʒju bɪliv ðə teɪlz ə θaʊzənz flɑkɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn ɪn ænsɝ tə ðəɾ ɑbsin æmnəsti?" nɑt ðə list ʌv wʌɾ ælθɹ hæd dʌn, bʌt hɑɹdli kɑz fəɹ wɝi. dʒʌst ə paɪl ə fɪlθ ðət mʌs bi seɪfli klɪɹd bɪfɔɹ ɪleɪn wɑz kɹaʊn ɪn keɪɛmlɪn.

"More rumors? Do you believe the tales of thousands flocking to Caemlyn in answer to that obscene amnesty?" Not the least of what al'Thor had done, but hardly cause for worry. Just a pile of filth that must be safely cleared before Elayne was crowned in Caemlyn.

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt, mʌðɝ, bʌt - "

"Of course not, Mother, but - "

"tʌvaɪn ɪz tə lid; ðɪs tæsk bɪlɔŋz pɹɑpɝli tə ðə ɹɛd." tʌvaɪn ɡæzəl hæd bɪn fɪftin jɪɹz əweɪ fɹəm ðə taʊɝ, əntɪl ɪleɪɾə sʌmən əɹ bæk. ði ʌðɝ tu ɹɛd sɪɾɝz u hæd ɹɪzaɪn ən ɡɔn ɪndə ə "vɑləntɛɹi" ɹitʃɹiɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm wɝ nɝvəs-aɪd wɪmən naʊ, bʌɾ ənlaɪk lɹin ən tsutɑmə, tʌvaɪn hæɾ oʊnli hɑɹɾənd ɪn əɹ sɑlətɛɹi ɛɡzaɪl. "ʃi ɪz tə hæv fɪfti sɪstɝz." ðəɹ kəd nɑt bi mɔɹ ðən tu əɹ θɹi mɛn ət ðɪs blæk taʊɝ æktʃəli  eɪbəl tə tʃænəl, ɪleɪɾə wɑz sɝɾən. fɪfti sɪstɝz kəɾ oʊvɝwɛlm əm izəli. jɛt ðəɹ maɪt bi ʌðɝz tə dil wɪð. hæŋɝz-ɑn, kæmp fɑloʊɝz, fulz fʊl ə fjuɾəl hoʊps ən ɪnseɪn æmbɪʃənz. ʃiz ɪz tə teɪk ə hʌnʒɹəd - noʊ, tu hʌnʒɹəd - ʌv ðə ɡɑɹd."

"Toveine is to lead; this task belongs properly to the Red." Toveine Gazal had been fifteen years away from the Tower, until Elaida summoned her back. The other two Red Sitters who had resigned and gone into a "voluntary" retreat at the same time were nervous-eyed women now, but unlike Lirene and Tsutama, Toveine had only hardened in her solitary exile. "She is to have fifty sisters." There could not be more than two or three men at this Black Tower actually able to channel, Elaida was certain. Fifty sisters could overwhelm them easily. Yet there might be others to deal with. Hangers-on, camp followers, fools full of futile hopes and insane ambitions. "And she is to take a hundred - no, two hundred - of the Guard."

"ɑɹ jə sɝɾən ðəɾ ɪz waɪz? ðə ɹumɝz ə θaʊzənz ɑɹ sɝɾənli mædnəs, bʌɾ ə ɡɹin eɪdʒən ɪn keɪɛmlɪn kleɪmz ðəɹ ɑɹ oʊvɝ fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd ɪn ðɪs blæk taʊɝ. ə klɛvɝ fɛloʊ. ɪt simz i kaʊntəd ðə səplaɪ kɑɹts ðət ɡoʊ aʊt fɹəm ðə sɪɾi. ən jə ɑɹ əwɛɹ ə ðə ɹumɝz mæzɹim teɪm ɪz wɪð ðɛm."

"Are you certain that is wise? The rumors of thousands are certainly madness, but a Green agent in Caemlyn claims there are over four hundred in this Black Tower. A clever fellow. It seems he counted the supply carts that go out from the city. And you are aware of the rumors Mazrim Taim is with them."

ɪleɪɾə fɔt tə kip əɹ fitʃɝz smuð, ən bɛɹli səksiɾəd. ʃi hæd fɔɹbɪɾən mɛnʃən ə teɪmz neɪm, ən ɪt wɑz bɪɾɝ ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt dɛɹ - dɪd nɑt dɛɹ! - ɪmpoʊz ðə pɛnəlti ɑn ɑlviɛɝɪn. ðə wʊmən lʊkt əɹ stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ði aɪz; ði æbsəns ə soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə pɝfʌŋktɝi "mʌðɝ" ðɪs taɪm wɑz mɑɹkt. ən ðə təmɛɹəɾi ʌv æskɪŋ wɛðɝ əɹ ækʃənz wɝ waɪz! ʃi wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit! nɑt fɝst əmʌŋ ikwəlz; ði æmɪɝlɪn sit!

Elaida fought to keep her features smooth, and barely succeeded. She had forbidden mention of Taim's name, and it was bitter that she did not dare - did not dare! - impose the penalty on Alviarin. The woman looked her straight in the eyes; the absence of so much as a perfunctory "Mother" this time was marked. And the temerity of asking whether her actions were wise! She was the Amyrlin Seat! Not first among equals; the Amyrlin Seat!

oʊpənɪŋ ðə lɑɹdʒəst ə ðə lækɝd bɑksəz ɹɪvil kɑɹvd aɪvɝi mɪniətʃɝz leɪɾ aʊɾ ɑn ɡɹeɪ vɛlvət. ɔfən dʒʌs hænlɪŋ əɹ kəlɛkʃən suð hɝ, bʌt mɔɹ, laɪk ðə nɪɾɪŋ ʃi ɛndʒɔɪd, ɪt lɛt huɛvɝ wɑz ətɛndɪŋ əɹ noʊ ðɛɹ pleɪs, ɪf ʃi sim tə ɡɪv mɔɹ ətɛnʃən tə ðə mɪniətʃɝz ðən tə wʌt ðeɪ hæd tə seɪ. fɪŋɡɝɪŋ fɝst ən ɛkskwəzət kæt, slik ən floʊɪŋ, ðən ən ɪlæbɹətli ɹoʊbd wʊmən wɪð ə pəkjuljɝ lɪɾəl ænəməl, səm fæntəsi ʌv ðə kɑɹvɝ, ɔlmoʊs laɪk ə mæn kʌvɝɾ ɪn hɛɹ, kɹaʊtʃt ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ət lɛŋθ ɪleɪɾə tʃoʊz aʊɾ ə kɝvɪŋ fɪʃ, soʊ dɛləkətli kɑɹv ðəɾ ɪt sim nɪɹli ɹil dɪspaɪt ði eɪdʒɪd jɛloʊ ʌv ði aɪvɝi.

Opening the largest of the lacquered boxes revealed carved ivory miniatures laid out on gray velvet. Often just handling her collection soothed her, but more, like the knitting she enjoyed, it let whoever was attending her know their place, if she seemed to give more attention to the miniatures than to what they had to say. Fingering first an exquisite cat, sleek and flowing, then an elaborately robed woman with a peculiar little animal, some fantasy of the carver, almost like a man covered in hair, crouched on her shoulder, at length Elaida chose out a curving fish, so delicately carved that it seemed nearly real despite the aged yellow of the ivory.

"fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd ɹæbəl, ɑlviɛɝɪn." ʃi fɛl kɑmɝ ɔlɹɛɾi, fəɹ ɑlviɛɝɪnz maʊθ hæd θɪnd. dʒʌst ə fɹækʃən, bʌt ʃi seɪvɝɾ ɛni kɹæk ɪn ðə wʊmənz fəsɑd. "ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ ðət mɛni. oʊnli ə ful kəd bɪliv ðət mɔɹ ðən wʌn əɹ tu kən tʃænəl. ət moʊst! ɪn tɛn jɪɹz, wɪv faʊn oʊnli sɪks mɛn wɪð ði əbɪləɾi. dʒʌs twɛnti-fɔɹ ɪn ðə læs twɛnti jɪɹz. ən jə noʊ haʊ ðə læn əz bɪn skaʊɝd. əz fəɹ teɪm. . . ." ðə neɪm bɝn əɹ maʊð; ði oʊnli fɔls dʒɹæɡən ɛvɝ tə ɪskeɪp biɪŋ dʒɛntəld wʌns ɪn ðə hænz ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. nɑɾ ə θɪŋ ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪn ðə kɹɑnəkəlz ʌndɝ əɹ ɹeɪn, sɝɾənli nɑɾ əntɪl ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd haʊ ɪt ʃəd bi ɹəkɔɹɾəd. ət pɹizɛn ðə kɹɑnəkəlz toʊl nʌθɪŋ æftɝ ɪz kæptʃɝ.

"Four hundred rabble, Alviarin." She felt calmer already, for Alviarin's mouth had thinned. Just a fraction, but she savored any crack in the woman's facade. "If there are that many. Only a fool could believe that more than one or two can channel. At most! In ten years, we have found only six men with the ability. Just twenty-four in the last twenty years. And you know how the land has been scoured. As for Taim. . . ." The name burned her mouth; the only false Dragon ever to escape being gentled once in the hands of Aes Sedai. Not a thing she wanted in the Chronicles under her reign, certainly not until she decided how it should be recorded. At present the Chronicles told nothing after his capture.

ʃi stʃɹoʊkt əɹ θʌm əlɔŋ ðə fɪʃəz skeɪlz. "hi ɪz dɛd, ɑlviɛɝɪn, ɛls wi wʊɾə hɝd fɹəm ɪm lɔŋ sɪns. ən nɑt sɝvɪŋ ælθɹ. kən jə θɪŋk i wɛn fɹəm kleɪmɪŋ tə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn tə sɝvɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn? kən jə θɪŋk i kəd bi ɪn keɪɛmlɪn wɪθaʊt dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ ət lis tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl hɪm?" hɝ θʌm muv fæstɝ ɑn ði aɪvɝi fɪʃ əz ʃi ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf ðət ðə mɑɹʃəl-dʒɛnɝəl ə sɑldɑiə wɑz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn teɪkɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz fɹəm ælθɹ. wʌt wɑz tɛnoʊbiə pleɪɪŋ æt? ɪleɪɾə hɛld ɪɾ ɔl ɪnsaɪd, ðoʊ, pɹɪzɛntɪŋ ə feɪs əz kɑm əz wʌn ə hɝ kɑɹvɪŋz.

She stroked her thumb along the fish's scales. "He is dead, Alviarin, else we would have heard from him long since. And not serving al'Thor. Can you think he went from claiming to be the Dragon Reborn to serving the Dragon Reborn? Can you think he could be in Caemlyn without Davram Bashere at least trying to kill him?" Her thumb moved faster on the ivory fish as she reminded herself that the Marshal-General of Saldaea was in Caemlyn taking orders from al'Thor. What was Tenobia playing at? Elaida held it all inside, though, presenting a face as calm as one of her carvings.

"twɛnti-fɔɹ ɪz ə deɪnʒɝəs nʌmbɝ tə spik əlaʊd," ɑlviɛɝɪn sɛd wɪð ən ɑmənəs kwaɪət, "æz deɪnʒɝəs əz tu θaʊzənd. ðə kɹɑnəkəlz ɹɛkɝɾ oʊnli sɪkstin. ðə læs θɪŋ niɾəd naʊ ɪz fəɹ ðoʊz jɪɹz tə ɹɪɹ ʌp əɡɛn. əɹ fəɹ sɪstɝz u noʊ oʊnli wʌt ðeɪ wɝ toʊl tə lɝn ðə tʃɹuθ. ivən ðoʊz jə bɹɔt bæk hoʊl ðɛɹ saɪləns."

"Twenty-four is a dangerous number to speak aloud," Alviarin said with an ominous quiet, "as dangerous as two thousand. The Chronicles record only sixteen. The last thing needed now is for those years to rear up again. Or for sisters who know only what they were told to learn the truth. Even those you brought back hold their silence."

ɪleɪɾə pʊɾ ɑn ə bɪmjuz lʊk. soʊ fɑɹ əz ʃi nu, ɑlviɛɝɪn hæd lɝn ðə tʃɹuθ ə ðoʊz jɪɹz oʊnli ɑn biɪŋ ɹeɪz kipɝ, bʌɾ əɹ oʊn nɑlədʒ wɑz mɔɹ pɝsənəl. nɑt ðəɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn kəd bi əwɛɹ ə ðæt. nɑt fəɹ sɝɾən, ɛniweɪ. "dɔɾɝ, wʌtɛvɝ kʌmz aʊt, aɪ hæv noʊ fɪɹ. hu ɪz gɑnə ɪmpoʊz ə pɛnəns ɑn mi, ən ɑn wʌt tʃɑɹdʒ?" ðət skɝɾɪd tʃɹuθ naɪsli, bʌɾ əpɛɹənli ɪɾ ɪmpɹɛs ði ʌðɝ wʊmən nɑɾ əɾ ɔl.

Elaida put on a bemused look. So far as she knew, Alviarin had learned the truth of those years only on being raised Keeper, but her own knowledge was more personal. Not that Alviarin could be aware of that. Not for certain, anyway. "Daughter, whatever comes out, I have no fear. Who is going to impose a penance on me, and on what charge?" That skirted truth nicely, but apparently it impressed the other woman not at all.

"ðə kɹɑnəkəlz ɹəkɔɹɾ ə nʌmbɝ ʌv æmɪɝlənz u tʊk ɑn pʌblɪk pɛnəns fəɹ səm juʒəwəli əbskjʊɹ ɹizən, bʌɾ ɪts ɔlweɪz sim tə mi ðəɾ ɪz haʊ ən æmɪɝlɪn maɪɾ əv ɪt ɹɪɾən ɪf ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf wɪð noʊ tʃɔɪs ɪksɛpt - "

"The Chronicles record a number of Amyrlins who took on public penance for some usually obscure reason, but it has always seemed to me that is how an Amyrlin might have it written if she found herself with no choice except - "

ɪleɪɾəz hæn slæp daʊn ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "ɪnʌf, dɔɾɝ! aɪm taʊɝ lɔ! wʌɾ əz bɪn hɪɾən wɪl ɹɪmeɪn hɪɾən, fəɹ ðə seɪm ɹizən ɪts fəɹ twɛnti jɪɹz - ðə ɡʊɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ." oʊnli ðən dɪd ʃi fil ðə bɹuz bɪɡɪnɪŋ ɑn əɹ pɑm; ʃi lɪftəɾ əɹ hæn tə ɹɪvil ðə fɪʃ, bɹoʊkən ɪn tu. haʊ oʊl hæɾ ɪt bɪn? faɪv hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz? ə θaʊzənd? ɪt wɑz ɔl ʃi kəd də nɑt tə kwɪvɝ wɪð ɹeɪdʒ. hɝ vɔɪs sɝɾənli θɪkənd wɪð ɪt. "tʌvaɪn ɪz tə lid fɪfti sɪstɝz ən tu hʌnʒɹəd ə ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹdz tə keɪɛmlɪn, tə ðɪs blæk taʊɝ, wɛɹ ðəl dʒɛntəl ɛni mæn ðeɪ faɪn eɪbəl tə tʃænəl ən hæŋ hɪm, əlɔŋ wɪð əz mɛni ʌðɝz əz ðeɪ kən teɪk əlaɪv." ɑlviɛɝɪn dɪd nɑɾ ivən blɪŋk ət ðə vaɪəleɪʃən ə taʊɝ lɔ. ɪleɪɾə hæd spoʊkən ðə tʃɹuθ əz ʃi mɛn ɪt tə bi; wɪð ðɪs, wɪð ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ʃi wɑz taʊɝ lɔ. "fɔɹ ðət mæɾɝ, hæŋ ʌp ðə dɛɾ əz wɛl. lɛɾ əm bi ə wɔɹnɪŋ tə ɛni mæn u θɪŋks ə tʌtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. hæv tʌvaɪn ətɛn mi. əl wɑnə hɪɹ əɹ plæn."

Elaida's hand slapped down on the table. "Enough, daughter! I am Tower law! What has been hidden will remain hidden, for the same reason it has for twenty years - the good of the White Tower." Only then did she feel the bruise beginning on her palm; she lifted her hand to reveal the fish, broken in two. How old had it been? Five hundred years? A thousand? It was all she could do not to quiver with rage. Her voice certainly thickened with it. "Toveine is to lead fifty sisters and two hundred of the Tower Guards to Caemlyn, to this Black Tower, where they will gentle any man they find able to channel and hang him, along with as many others as they can take alive." Alviarin did not even blink at the violation of Tower law. Elaida had spoken the truth as she meant it to be; with this, with everything, she was Tower law. "For that matter, hang up the dead as well. Let them be a warning to any man who thinks of touching the True Source. Have Toveine attend me. I will want to hear her plan."

"ɪt wɪl bi əz jə kəmænd, mʌðɝ." ðə wʊmənz ɹɪplaɪ wɑz əz kul ən smuð əz əɹ feɪs. "ðoʊ ɪf aɪ meɪ sədʒɛst, jə maɪt wɪʃ tə ɹikənsɪɾɝ sɛndɪŋ soʊ mɛni sɪstɝz əweɪ fɹəm ðə taʊɝ. əpɛɹənli ðə ɹɛbəlz faʊn jəɹ ɔfɝ wɑntɪŋ. ðeɪ ɑɹ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪn sɑlədɑɹ. ðeɪ ɑɹ ɑn ðə mɑɹtʃ. ðə ɹɪpɔɹts kʌm fɹəm ɔltɑɹə, bʌt ðeɪ mʌs bi ɪndə mʊɹændi baɪ naʊ. ən ðeɪv tʃoʊzən ðɛmsɛlvz ən æmɪɝlɪn." ʃi skæn ðə tɑp ʃiɾ ə hɝ ʃif ə peɪpɝz əz ɪf sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə neɪm. "ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ, ɪt simz."

"It will be as you command, Mother." The woman's reply was as cool and smooth as her face. "Though if I may suggest, you might wish to reconsider sending so many sisters away from the Tower. Apparently the rebels found your offer wanting. They are no longer in Salidar. They are on the march. The reports come from Altara, but they must be into Murandy by now. And they have chosen themselves an Amyrlin." She scanned the top sheet of her sheaf of papers as if searching for the name. "Egwene al'Vere, it seems."

ðəɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn hæd lɛf ðɪs, ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt pis ə nuz, əntɪl naʊ, ʃʊɾə meɪɾ ɪleɪɾə ɪksploʊɾ ɪn fjʊɹi. ɪnstɛd, ʃi θɹu bæk əɹ hɛɾ ən læft. oʊnli ə fɝm hoʊld ɑn dɪɡnəɾi kɛpt əɹ fɹəm dʒɹʌmɪŋ əɹ hilz ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ðə sɝpɹaɪz ɑn ɑlviɛɝɪnz feɪs meɪɾ əɹ læf hɑɹɾɝ, tɪl ʃi hæd tə waɪp əɹ aɪz wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz.

That Alviarin had left this, the most important piece of news, until now, should have made Elaida explode in fury. Instead, she threw back her head and laughed. Only a firm hold on dignity kept her from drumming her heels on the floor. The surprise on Alviarin's face made her laugh harder, till she had to wipe her eyes with her fingers.

"ju də nɑt si ɪt," ʃi sɛd wən ʃi kəd spik bɪtwin ɹɪpəlz ə mɝθ. "æz wɛl jə ɑɹ kipɝ, ɑlviɛɝɪn, nɑɾ ə sɪɾɝ. ɪn ðə hɔl, blaɪn əz jə ɑɹ, wɪðɪn ə mʌnθ ði ʌðɝz wəd bi hoʊldɪŋ jə ɪn ə kæbənəɾ ən teɪkɪŋ jə aʊt wən ðeɪ niɾəd jəɹ voʊt."

"You do not see it," she said when she could speak between ripples of mirth. "As well you are Keeper, Alviarin, not a Sitter. In the Hall, blind as you are, within a month the others would be holding you in a cabinet and taking you out when they needed your vote."

"aɪ si ɪnʌf, mʌðɝ." ɑlviɛɝɪnz vɔɪs hɛl noʊ hit; ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ɪt ʃʊɾə koʊɾəd ðə wɔlz wɪð fɹɔst. "aɪ si θɹi hʌnʒɹəd ɹɛbəl ɛɛs sədaɪ, pɝhæps mɔɹ, mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɑn tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪð ən ɑɹmi lɛd baɪ ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn, æknɑlɪdʒd ə ɡɹeɪt kæptən. dɪskaʊntɪŋ ðə mɔɹ ɹɪdɪkjələs ɹɪpɔɹts, ðəɾ ɑɹmi meɪ nʌmbɝ oʊvɝ twɛnti θaʊzənd, ən wɪð bɹaɪn tə lid ðəl ɡeɪn mɔɹ əɾ ɛvɹi vɪlədʒ ən taʊn ðeɪ pæs. aɪ də nɑt seɪ ðeɪv hoʊp ə teɪkɪŋ ðə sɪɾi, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɪts hɑɹdli ə mæɾɝ fəɹ læftɝ. haɪ kæptən tʃʌbn ʃəd bi ɔɹɾɝd tə ɪnkɹis ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd."

"I see enough, Mother." Alviarin's voice held no heat; if anything, it should have coated the walls with frost. "I see three hundred rebel Aes Sedai, perhaps more, marching on Tar Valon with an army led by Gareth Bryne, acknowledged a great captain. Discounting the more ridiculous reports, that army may number over twenty thousand, and with Bryne to lead they will gain more at every village and town they pass. I do not say they have hope of taking the city, of course, but it is hardly a matter for laughter. High Captain Chubain should be ordered to increase recruiting for the Tower Guard."

ɪleɪɾəz ɡeɪz fɛl saʊɝli ɑn ðə bɹoʊkən fɪʃ, ən ʃi stʊɾ ən stɔk tə ðə nɪɹəst wɪndoʊ, hɝ bæk tə ɑlviɛɝɪn. ðə pæləs ʌndɝ kənstʃɹʌkʃən tʊk əweɪ ðə bɪɾɝ teɪst, ðəɾ ən ðə slɪp ə peɪpɝ ʃi stɪl klʌtʃt.

Elaida's gaze fell sourly on the broken fish, and she stood and stalked to the nearest window, her back to Alviarin. The palace under construction took away the bitter taste, that and the slip of paper she still clutched.

ʃi smaɪl daʊn ɑn əɹ pæləs-tə-bi. "θɹi hʌnʒɹəd ɹɛbəlz, jɛs, bʌt jə ʃəd ɹɛd tɑɹnəz əkaʊn əɡɛn. ət list ə hʌnʒɹəd ɑɹ ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə bɹeɪkɪŋ ɔlɹɛɾi." ʃi tʃɹʌstɪd tɑɹnə tə səm ɪkstɛnt, ə ɹɛd wɪð noʊ ɹum ɪn əɹ hɛd fəɹ nɑnsɛns, ən ʃi sɛd ðə ɹɛbəlz wɝ ɹɛɾi tə dʒʌmp ət ʃædoʊz. kwaɪətli dɛspɹɪt ʃip lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ə ʃɛpɝd, ʃi sɛd. ə waɪldɝ, ʌv kɔɹs, jɛt stɪl sɛnsəbəl. tɑɹnə ʃəd bi bæk sun, ən eɪbəl tə ɡɪv ə fʊlɝ ɹipɔɹt. nɑt ðəɾ ɪt wɑz niɾəd. ɪleɪɾəz plænz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi wɝkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə ɹɛbəlz. bʌt ðət wɑz əɹ sikɹət.

She smiled down on her palace-to-be. "Three hundred rebels, yes, but you should read Tarna's account again. At least a hundred are on the point of breaking already." She trusted Tarna to some extent, a Red with no room in her head for nonsense, and she said the rebels were ready to jump at shadows. Quietly desperate sheep looking for a shepherd, she said. A wilder, of course, yet still sensible. Tarna should be back soon, and able to give a fuller report. Not that it was needed. Elaida's plans were already working among the rebels. But that was her secret.

"tɑɹnə hæz ɔlweɪz bɪn ʃʊɹ ʃi kəd meɪk pipəl də wʌɾ ɪt wɑz klɪɹ ðeɪ wəd nɑt." hæd ðəɹ bɪn ən ɛmfəsəs ɪn ðæt, ə səɡnɪfɪkəns ə toʊn? ɪleɪɾə dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɪt. ʃi hæd tə ɪɡnɔɹ tu mʌtʃ fɹəm ɑlviɛɝɪn, bʌt ðə deɪ wəd kʌm. sun.

"Tarna has always been sure she could make people do what it was clear they would not." Had there been an emphasis in that, a significance of tone? Elaida decided to ignore it. She had to ignore too much from Alviarin, but the day would come. Soon.

"æz fəɹ ðɛɹ ɑɹmi, dɔɾɝ, ʃi sɛz tu əɹ θɹi θaʊzən mɛn ət moʊst. ɪf ðeɪ hæd mɔɹ, ðeɪ wʊɾə meɪd ʃʊɹ ʃi sɔ ðɛm, tə oʊvɝ-ɑ ʌs." ɪn ɪleɪɾəz əpɪnjən, aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ɔlweɪz ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾəd, tə meɪk ðɛɹ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən sim mɔɹ væljəbəl. oʊnli sɪstɝz kəd bi tʃɹuli tʃɹʌstɪd. ɹɛd sɪstɝz, ɛniweɪ. səm ə ðɛm. "bʌɾ aɪ wəd nɑt kɛɹ ɪf ðeɪ dɪɾ əv twɛnti θaʊzənd, əɹ fɪfti, əɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd. kən jə ivən bɪɡɪn tə ɡɛs waɪ?" wən ʃi tɝnd, ɑlviɛɝɪnz feɪs wɑz ɔl smuð kəmpoʊʒɝ, ə mæsk oʊvɝ blaɪn ɪɡnɝəns. "ju sim tə bi kənvɝsənt wɪð ɔl ði æspɛks ə taʊɝ lɔ. wʌt pɛnəlti də ɹɛbəlz feɪs?"

"As for their army, daughter, she says two or three thousand men at most. If they had more, they would have made sure she saw them, to over-awe us." In Elaida's opinion, eyes-and-ears always exaggerated, to make their information seem more valuable. Only sisters could be truly trusted. Red sisters, anyway. Some of them. "But I would not care if they did have twenty thousand, or fifty, or a hundred. Can you even begin to guess why?" When she turned, Alviarin's face was all smooth composure, a mask over blind ignorance. "You seem to be conversant with all the aspects of Tower law. What penalty do rebels face?"

"fɔɹ ðə liɾɝz," ɑlviɛɝɪn sɛd sloʊli, "stɪlɪŋ." ʃi fɹaʊn slaɪtli, skɝts sweɪɪŋ dʒʌs bɛɹli əz əɹ fit ʃɪftəd. ɡʊd. ivən æksɛptɪd nu ðɪs, ən ʃi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ɪleɪɾə æskt. vɛɹi ɡʊd. "fɔɹ mɛni ʌv ðə ɹɛst, tu."

"For the leaders," Alviarin said slowly, "stilling." She frowned slightly, skirts swaying just barely as her feet shifted. Good. Even Accepted knew this, and she could not understand why Elaida asked. Very good. "For many of the rest, too."

"pɝhæps." ðə liɾɝz maɪt ðɛmsɛlvz ɪskeɪp ðæt, moʊst ə ðɛm, ɪf ðeɪ səbmɪɾəd pɹɑpɝli. ðə mɪnəməm pɛnəlti ɪn lɔ wɑz tə bi bɝtʃt ɪn ðə ɡɹæn hɔl bɪfɔɹ ði əsɛmbəl sɪstɝz, fɑloʊd baɪ ət list ə jɪɹ ən ə deɪ ɪn pʌblɪk pɛnəns. jɛt nʌθɪŋ sɛd ðə pɛnəns mʌs bi sɝvd ɔl ət wʌns; ə mʌnθ hɪɹ, ə mʌnθ ðɛɹ, ən ðeɪ wəd stɪl bi ətoʊnɪŋ ðɛɹ kɹaɪmz tɛn jɪɹz fɹəm naʊ, kɑnstən ɹimaɪndɝz ʌv wʌt keɪm ə ɹɪzɪstɪŋ hɝ. səm wəd bi stɪld, ʌv kɔɹs - ʃɛɹiəm, ə fju ʌv ðə mɔɹ pɹɑmənən soʊ-kɔl sɪɾɝz - bʌɾ oʊnli səfɪʃən tə meɪk ðə ɹɛs fɪɹ pʊɾɪŋ ə fʊt ɹɔŋ əɡɛn, nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə wikən ðə taʊɝ. ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæd tə bi hoʊl, ən ɪt hæd tə bi stʃɹɔŋ. stʃɹɔŋ, ən fɝmli ɪn əɹ ɡɹæsp.

"Perhaps." The leaders might themselves escape that, most of them, if they submitted properly. The minimum penalty in law was to be birched in the Grand Hall before the assembled sisters, followed by at least a year and a day in public penance. Yet nothing said the penance must be served all at once; a month here, a month there, and they would still be atoning their crimes ten years from now, constant reminders of what came of resisting her. Some would be stilled, of course - Sheriam, a few of the more prominent so-called Sitters - but only sufficient to make the rest fear putting a foot wrong again, not enough to weaken the Tower. The White Tower had to be whole, and it had to be strong. Strong, and firmly in her grasp.

"oʊnli wʌn kɹaɪm əmʌŋ ðoʊz ðeɪv kəmɪɾəd dɪmænz stɪlɪŋ." ɑlviɛɝɪn oʊpən əɹ maʊθ. ðəɹ hæd bɪn eɪntʃən ɹɪbɛljənz, bɛɹid soʊ dip ðət fju əmʌŋ ðə sɪstɝz nu; ðə kɹɑnəkəlz stʊd mjut, ðə lɪsts ə stɪld ən ɛksəkjuɾəd kənfaɪn tə ɹəkɔɹdz oʊpən oʊnli tə æmɪɝlɪn, kipɝ ən sɪɾɝz, əsaɪd fɹəm ðə fju laɪbɹɛɹiənz u kɛp ðɛm. ɪleɪɾə əlaʊɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn noʊ ɑpɝtunəɾi tə spik. "ɛni wʊmən u fɔlsli kleɪmz ðə taɪɾəl ʌv æmɪɝlɪn sit mʌs bi stɪld. ɪf ðeɪ bɪliv ðeɪ hæɾ ɛni tʃæns ə səksɛs, ʃɛɹiəm wəd bi ðɛɹ æmɪɝlɪn, əɹ ləleɪn, əɹ kɑɹlɪnjə, əɹ wʌn ə ði ʌðɝz." tɑɹnə ɹipɔɹɾəd ðət ɹoʊmændə kæsɪn hæd kʌm aʊɾ ə hɝ ɹitaɪɝmənt; ɹoʊmændə ʃʊɹli wʊɾə siz ðə stoʊl wɪð boʊθ hænz ɪf ʃi sɔ ðə tɛnθ pɑɹɾ ʌv ə tʃæns. "ɪnstɛd, ðeɪv plʌkt aʊɾ ən æksɛptɪd!"

"Only one crime among those they have committed demands stilling." Alviarin opened her mouth. There had been ancient rebellions, buried so deep that few among the sisters knew; the Chronicles stood mute, the lists of stilled and executed confined to records open only to Amyrlin, Keeper and Sitters, aside from the few librarians who kept them. Elaida allowed Alviarin no opportunity to speak. "Any woman who falsely claims the title of Amyrlin Seat must be stilled. If they believed they had any chance of success, Sheriam would be their Amyrlin, or Lelaine, or Carlinya, or one of the others." Tarna reported that Romanda Cassin had come out of her retirement; Romanda surely would have seized the stole with both hands if she saw the tenth part of a chance. "Instead, they have plucked out an Accepted!"

ɪleɪɾə ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪn ɹaɪ əmjuzmənt. ʃi kəd kwoʊɾ ɛvɹi wɝɾ ə ðə lɔ sɛɾɪŋ aʊt haʊ ə wʊmən wɑz tʃoʊzən æmɪɝlɪn - ʃi hæd meɪd ɡʊd jus ʌv ɪt hɝsɛlf, æftɝ ɔl - ən nɛvɝ wʌns dɪɾ ɪt ɹikwaɪɝ ðət ðə wʊmən bi ə fʊl sɪstɝ. ɑbviəsli ʃi mʌs bi, soʊ ðoʊz u fɹeɪm ðə lɔ nɛvɝ steɪɾəd ɪt, ən ðə ɹɛbəlz hæd skwɝm θɹu ðət kɹæk. "ðeɪ noʊ ðɛɹ kɑz ɪz hoʊpləs, ɑlviɛɝɪn. ðeɪ plæn tə stʃɹʌɾ ən blʌstɝ, tʃɹaɪ tə dɪɡ aʊt səm pɹətɛkʃən əɡɛns pɛnəlti fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz, ðən jil ðə ɡɝl əz ə sækɹəfaɪs." wɪtʃ wɑz ə pɪɾi. ði ælvɪɹ ɡɝl wɑz ənʌðɝ pɑsəbəl hændəl ɑn ælθɹ, ən wən ʃi ɹitʃt əɹ fʊl stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ʃi wʊɾə bɪn wʌn ə ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ɪn ə θaʊzən jɪɹz əɹ mɔɹ. ə tʃɹu pɪɾi.

Elaida shook her head in wry amusement. She could quote every word of the law setting out how a woman was chosen Amyrlin - she had made good use of it herself, after all - and never once did it require that the woman be a full sister. Obviously she must be, so those who framed the law never stated it, and the rebels had squirmed through that crack. "They know their cause is hopeless, Alviarin. They plan to strut and bluster, try to dig out some protection against penalty for themselves, then yield the girl as a sacrifice." Which was a pity. The al'Vere girl was another possible handle on al'Thor, and when she reached her full strength in the One Power, she would have been one of the strongest in a thousand years or more. A true pity.

"ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn ən ən ɑɹmi hɑɹdli saʊn laɪk stʃɹʌɾɪŋ tə mi. ɪɾəl teɪk ðɛɹ ɑɹmi faɪv əɹ sɪks mʌnθs tə ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɪn ðət taɪm, haɪ kæptən tʃʌbn kəɾ ɪnkɹis ðə ɡɑɹd - "

"Gareth Bryne and an army hardly sound like strutting to me. It will take their army five or six months to reach Tar Valon. In that time, High Captain Chubain could increase the Guard - "

"ðɛɹ ɑɹmi," ɪleɪɾə snɪɹd. ɑlviɛɝɪn wɑz sətʃ ə ful; fəɹ ɔl əɹ kul ɪkstɪɹiɝ, ʃi wɑz ə ɹæbət. nɛkst ʃi wəd bi spaʊɾɪŋ ðə sɑntʃ wʊmənz nɑnsɛns əbaʊt ðə fɔɹseɪkən biɪŋ lus. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ ðə sikɹət, bʌt dʒʌs ðə seɪm. . . . "fɑɹmɝz kæɹiɪŋ paɪks, bʊtʃɝz wɪð baʊz ən teɪlɝz ɑn hɔɹsbæk! ən ɛvɹi stɛp ə ðə weɪ, θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz, ðət hɛld ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ət beɪ." noʊ, nɑɾ ə ɹæbət. ə wizəl. jɛt sun əɹ leɪt, ʃi wəd bi wizəl-fɝ tʃɹɪm ɑn ɪleɪɾəz kloʊk. ðə laɪt sɛn ɪt sun. "ɛvɹi stɛp ə ðə weɪ, ðəl luz ə mæn, ɪf nɑt tɛn. aɪ wəd nɑt bi sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf əɹ ɹɛbəlz əpɪɹ wɪð nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz." tu mɛni pipəl nu ʌv ðə dɪvɪʒən ɪn ðə taʊɝ. wʌns ðə ɹɪbɛljən wɑz bɹoʊkən, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪt kəd bi meɪd tə sim ɔl ə plɔɪ, ə pɑɹɾ ʌv ɡeɪnɪŋ kəntʃɹoʊl ə jʌŋ ælθɹ pɝhæps. ən ɛfɝɾ ə jɪɹz, ðæt, ən dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz bɪfɔɹ mɛmɹiz feɪɾəd. ɛvɹi læst ɹɛbəl wəd peɪ fəɹ ðəɾ ɑn əɹ niz.

"Their army," Elaida sneered. Alviarin was such a fool; for all her cool exterior, she was a rabbit. Next she would be spouting the Sanche woman's nonsense about the Forsaken being loose. Of course, she did not know the secret, but just the same. . . . "Farmers carrying pikes, butchers with bows and tailors on horseback! And every step of the way, thinking of the Shining Walls, that held Artur Hawkwing at bay." No, not a rabbit. A weasel. Yet soon or late, she would be weasel-fur trim on Elaida's cloak. The Light send it soon. "Every step of the way, they will lose a man, if not ten. I would not be surprised if our rebels appear with nothing more than their Warders." Too many people knew of the division in the Tower. Once the rebellion was broken, of course, it could be made to seem all a ploy, a part of gaining control of young al'Thor perhaps. An effort of years, that, and generations before memories faded. Every last rebel would pay for that on her knees.

ɪleɪɾə klɛntʃt əɹ fɪst əz ðoʊ ʃi hɛld ɔl ðə ɹɛbəlz baɪ ðə θɹoʊt. əɹ ɑlviɛɝɪn. "aɪ min tə bɹeɪk ðɛm, dɔɾɝ. ðəl splɪɾ oʊpən laɪk ə ɹɑɾən mɛlən." hɝ sikɹəɾ əʃʊɹd ðæt, haʊɛvɝ mɛni fɑɹmɝz ən teɪlɝz lɔɹd bɹaɪn hʌŋ ɑn tə, bʌt lɛt ði ʌðɝ wʊmən θɪŋk əz ʃi wʊd. sʌɾənli ðə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ tʊk hoʊld ə hɝ, ə sɝɾənti əbaʊt θɪŋz ʃi kəd nɑt si stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn leɪɾ aʊt bɪfɔɹ hɝ. ʃi wʊɾə bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə stɛp blaɪnli oʊvɝ ə klɪf ɑn ðət sɝɾənti. "ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɪl bi hoʊl əɡɛn, ɪksɛp fəɹ ɹɛmnəns kæst aʊɾ ən skɔɹnd, hoʊl ən stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɛvɝ. ɹænd ælθɹ wɪl feɪs ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ən noʊ hɝ æŋɡɝ. ðə blæk taʊɝ wɪl bi ɹɛn ɪn blʌɾ ən faɪɝ, ən sɪstɝz wɪl wɔk ɪts ɡɹaʊnz. ðɪs aɪ fɔɹtɛl."

Elaida clenched her fist as though she held all the rebels by the throat. Or Alviarin. "I mean to break them, daughter. They will split open like a rotten melon." Her secret assured that, however many farmers and tailors Lord Bryne hung on to, but let the other woman think as she would. Suddenly the Foretelling took hold of her, a certainty about things she could not see stronger than if they had been laid out before her. She would have been willing to step blindly over a cliff on that certainty. "The White Tower will be whole again, except for remnants cast out and scorned, whole and stronger than ever. Rand al'Thor will face the Amyrlin Seat and know her anger. The Black Tower will be rent in blood and fire, and sisters will walk its grounds. This I Foretell."

əz juʒəwəl, ðə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ lɛft əɹ tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, ɡæspɪŋ fəɹ bɹɛθ. ʃi fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə stæn stɪl ən stʃɹeɪt, tə bɹið sloʊli; ʃi nɛvɝ lɛɾ ɛniwʌn si wiknəs. bʌɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn. . . . hɝ aɪz wɝ waɪɾ əz ðeɪ kəɾ oʊpən, lɪps pɑɹɾəd əz ɪf ʃi hæd fɝɡɑɾən ðə wɝdz ʃi mɛn tə spik. ə peɪpɝ slɪd fɹəm ðə ʃif ɪn əɹ hænz ən ɔlmoʊs fɛl bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd kætʃ ɪt. ðət ɹɪkɔld əɹ tə hɝsɛlf. ɪn ə flæʃ ʃi ɹiɡeɪn əɹ sɝin mæsk, ə pɝfək pɪktʃɝ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ kɑm, bʌt ʃi dɛfənətli hæd bɪn dʒoʊltɪd tə hɝ hilz. oʊ, vɛɹi ɡʊd. lɛɾ əɹ tʃu ɑn ðə sɝɾən ʃʊɹəɾi ʌv ɪleɪɾəz vɪktɝi. tʃu ən bɹeɪk əɹ tiθ.

As usual, the Foretelling left her trembling, gasping for breath. She forced herself to stand still and straight, to breathe slowly; she never let anyone see weakness. But Alviarin. . . . Her eyes were wide as they could open, lips parted as if she had forgotten the words she meant to speak. A paper slid from the sheaf in her hands and almost fell before she could catch it. That recalled her to herself. In a flash she regained her serene mask, a perfect picture of Aes Sedai calm, but she definitely had been jolted to her heels. Oh, very good. Let her chew on the certain surety of Elaida's victory. Chew and break her teeth.

ɪleɪɾə dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən siɾəd hɝsɛlf bɪhaɪn əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl əɡɛn, pʊɾɪŋ ðə bɹoʊkən aɪvɝi fɪʃ tə wʌn saɪd wɛɹ ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə lʊk əɾ ɪt. ɪt wɑz taɪm tə ɪksplɔɪɾ əɹ vɪktɝi. "ðɛɹ ɪz wɝk tə bi dʌn tədeɪ, dɔɾɝ. ðə fɝs mɛsədʒ ɪz tə ɡoʊ tə ðə leɪɾi kæɹɑlin dəmədʒɹd. . . ."

Elaida drew a deep breath and seated herself behind her writing table again, putting the broken ivory fish to one side where she did not have to look at it. It was time to exploit her victory. "There is work to be done today, daughter. The first message is to go to the Lady Caraline Damodred. . . ."

ɪleɪɾə spʌn aʊɾ əɹ plænz, ɪnlɑɹdʒɪŋ ɑn wʌɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn nu, ɹɪvilɪŋ səm ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt, kəz ət ðə læst ən æmɪɝlɪn dɪɾ əv tə wɝk θɹu hɝ kipɝ, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ʃi heɪɾəd ðə wʊmən. ðəɹ wɑz ə plɛʒɝ ɪn wɑtʃɪŋ ɑlviɛɝɪnz aɪz, wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ wʌndɝ wʌɾ ɛls ʃi stɪl dɪd nɑt noʊ. bʌt waɪl ɪleɪɾə ɔɹɾɝd, dɪvaɪɾəd ən əsaɪn ðə wɝl bɪtwin ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən ən ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld, ɪn əɹ maɪn fɹɑlɪk ði ɪmədʒ ə jʌŋ ælθɹ ɑn ɪz weɪ tə hɝ laɪk ə keɪdʒ bɛɹ, tə bi tɔt tə dæns fəɹ ɪz dɪnɝ.

Elaida spun out her plans, enlarging on what Alviarin knew, revealing some that she did not, because at the last an Amyrlin did have to work through her Keeper, however much she hated the woman. There was a pleasure in watching Alviarin's eyes, watching her wonder what else she still did not know. But while Elaida ordered, divided and assigned the world between the Aryth Ocean and the Spine of the World, in her mind frolicked the image of young al'Thor on his way to her like a caged bear, to be taught to dance for his dinner.

ðə kɹɑnəkəlz kəd hɑɹdli ɹəkɔɹd ðə jɪɹz ə ðə læs bæɾəl wɪθaʊt mɛnʃənɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bʌt ʃi nu ðət wʌn neɪm wəd bi ɹɪɾən lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ɔl ʌðɝz. ɪleɪɾə də əvɹaɪni ɹɔɪhən, jʌŋɡəs dɔɾɝ ʌv ə maɪnɝ haʊs ɪn ðə nɔɹθ ə mʊɹændi, wəd ɡoʊ daʊn ɪn hɪstɝi əz ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst ən moʊs paʊɝfəl æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ʌv ɔl taɪm. ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl wʊmən ɪn ðə hɪstɝi ʌv ðə wɝld. ðə wʊmən u seɪv hjumənkaɪnd.

The Chronicles could hardly record the years of the Last Battle without mentioning the Dragon Reborn, but she knew that one name would be written larger than all others. Elaida do Avriny a'Roihan, youngest daughter of a minor House in the north of Murandy, would go down in history as the greatest and most powerful Amyrlin Seat of all time. The most powerful woman in the history of the world. The woman who saved humankind.

ði il stændɪŋ ɪn ə dip foʊld ɪn ðə loʊ, bɹaʊn-ɡɹæs hɪlz sim kɑɹv fɪɡjɝz, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ʃits ə dʌst swipɪŋ əhɛɾ ʌv ə ɡʌstɪŋ wɪnd. ðət snoʊ ʃʊɾə bɪn dip ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ðɪs taɪm ə jɪɹ dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ ðɛm; nʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ sin snoʊ, ən ðɪs ʌvən hit, wɪð ðə sʌn stɪl wɛl ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ɪts pik, wɑz lɛs ðən wɛɹ ðeɪ keɪm fɹʌm. ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən ɹɪmeɪn fɪkst ɑn ðə sʌðɝn ɹaɪz, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə sɪɡnəl ðət wəɾ ənaʊns ði ɝaɪvəl ə ðə dɛstəni ʌv ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ il.

The Aiel standing in a deep fold in the low, brown-grass hills seemed carved figures, ignoring sheets of dust sweeping ahead of a gusting wind. That snow should have been deep on the ground this time of year did not bother them; none had ever seen snow, and this oven heat, with the sun still well short of its peak, was less than where they came from. Their attention remained fixed on the southern rise, waiting for the signal that would announce the arrival of the destiny of the Shaido Aiel.

aʊtwɝdli, sɪvænə lʊk laɪk ði ʌðɝz, ðoʊ ə ɹɪŋ ə meɪɾənz mɑɹkt əɹ aʊt, ɹɛstɪŋ izəli ɑn ðɛɹ hilz, dɑɹk veɪlz ɔlɹɛɾi haɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ feɪsəz tə ði aɪz. ʃi ɔlsoʊ weɪɾəd, ən mɔɹ ɪmpeɪʃənli ðən ʃi lɛɾ ɑn, bʌt nɑt tə ði ɪkskluʒən ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. ðət wɑz wʌn ɹizən waɪ ʃi kəmændəɾ ən ðə ɹɛs fɑloʊd. ðə sɛkənd wɑz ðət ʃi sɔ wʌt kəd bi ɪf jə ɹəfjuz tə lɛɾ aʊtwɹn kʌstəm ən steɪl tʃɹədɪʃən taɪ jəɹ hænz.

Outwardly, Sevanna looked like the others, though a ring of Maidens marked her out, resting easily on their heels, dark veils already hiding their faces to the eyes. She also waited, and more impatiently than she let on, but not to the exclusion of everything else. That was one reason why she commanded and the rest followed. The second was that she saw what could be if you refused to let outworn custom and stale tradition tie your hands.

ə slaɪt flɪkɝ ə hɝ ɡɹin aɪz tə ðə lɛft ʃoʊd twɛlv mɛn ən wʌn wʊmən, itʃ wɪð ɹaʊn bʊl-haɪd bʌkəlɝ ən θɹi əɹ fɔɹ ʃɔɹt spɪɹz, ɡɑɹbd ɪn ɡɹeɪ-ænd-bɹaʊn keɪɾɪnsɝ ðət blɛndəɾ əz wɛl wɪð ðə tɝeɪn hɪɹ əz ɪn ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd. ɛfɑlɪn, ʃɔɹt ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ hɪɾən baɪ ðə ʃoʊufə ɹæpt ɝaʊn əɹ hɛd, səmtaɪmz ɡlænst sɪvænəz weɪ; ɪf ə meɪɾən ə ðə spɪɹ kəd bi sɛd tə bi ənizi, ɛfɑlɪn wɑz. səm ʃeɪɾoʊ meɪɾənz hæd ɡɔn saʊθ, dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðə fulz keɪpɝɪŋ ɝaʊn ɹænd ælθɹ, ən sɪvænə dɪd nɑt daʊɾ ʌðɝz tɔkt ʌv ɪt. ɛfɑlɪn mʌs bi wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ pɹəvaɪɾɪŋ sɪvænə wɪð ən ɛskɔɹɾ ə meɪɾənz, əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ wʌns hɝsɛlf, wɑz ɪnʌf tə bæləns ðæt. ət list ɛfɑlɪn hæd noʊ daʊts wɛɹ tʃɹu paʊɝ leɪ.

A slight flicker of her green eyes to the left showed twelve men and one woman, each with round bull-hide buckler and three or four short spears, garbed in gray-and-brown cadin'sor that blended as well with the terrain here as in the Three-fold Land. Efalin, short graying hair hidden by the shoufa wrapped around her head, sometimes glanced Sevanna's way; if a Maiden of the Spear could be said to be uneasy, Efalin was. Some Shaido Maidens had gone south, joining the fools capering around Rand al'Thor, and Sevanna did not doubt others talked of it. Efalin must be wondering whether providing Sevanna with an escort of Maidens, as if she had been Far Dareis Mai once herself, was enough to balance that. At least Efalin had no doubts where true power lay.

laɪk ɛfɑlɪn, ðə mɛn lɛd ʃeɪɾoʊ wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz, ən ðeɪ aɪd wʌn ənʌðɝ bɪtwin wɑtʃɪŋ ðə ɹaɪz. ɪspɛʃli blɑki mɛɹɪk, hu wɑz siə dun, ən skɑɹ-feɪs bɛnhuən, ʌv fɑɹ ɑldəzɑɹ dɪn. æftɝ tədeɪ, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wəɾ ɛniθɪŋ hoʊl bæk ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ fɹəm sɛndɪŋ ə mæn tə ɹɪɾiən, tə bi mɑɹkt əz ðə klæn tʃif ɪf i sɝvaɪvd. əntɪl ðət hæpənd, sɪvænə spoʊk əz ðə klæn tʃif sɪns ʃi wɑz ðə wɪɾoʊ ʌv ðə læs tʃif. ʌv ðə læs tu tʃifs. ən lɛt ðoʊz u mʌɾɝd ðət ʃi kæɹid bæd lʌk tʃoʊk ɑn ɪt.

Like Efalin, the men led Shaido warrior societies, and they eyed one another between watching the rise. Especially blocky Maeric, who was Seia Doon, and scar-faced Bendhuin, of Far Aldazar Din. After today, no longer would anything hold back the Shaido from sending a man to Rhuidean, to be marked as the clan chief if he survived. Until that happened, Sevanna spoke as the clan chief since she was the widow of the last chief. Of the last two chiefs. And let those who muttered that she carried bad luck choke on it.

ɡoʊld ən aɪvɝi bɹeɪslɪts klæɾɝd sɔfli əz ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd ðə dɑɹk ʃɔl oʊvɝ əɹ ɑɹmz ən ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ nɛkləsɪz. moʊst ə ðoʊz wɝ ɡoʊld ən aɪvɝi tu, bʌt wʌn wɑz ə mæs ə pɝlz ən ɹubiz ðət hæd bɪlɔŋ tə ə wɛtləndɝ noʊbəlwʊmən - ðə wʊmən naʊ wɔɹ waɪɾ ən hɔld ən fɛtʃt əlɔŋsaɪd ði ʌðɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn bæk ɪn ðə maʊntənz kɔl kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ - wɪð ə ɹubi ðə saɪz ʌv ə smɔl hɛnz ɛɡ nɛsəl bɪtwin əɹ bɹɛsts. ðə wɛtlænz hɛld ɹɪtʃ pɹaɪzəz. ə lɑɹdʒ ɛmɹəld ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝ kɑt sʌnlaɪɾ ɪn ɡɹin faɪɝ; fɪŋɡɝ ɹɪŋz wɝ wʌn wɛtləndɝ kʌstəm wɝθ ədɑptɪŋ, noʊ mæɾɝ ðə stɛɹz ɔfən eɪmd ət hɝz. ʃi wəɾ əv mɔɹ, ɪf ðeɪ mætʃt ðɪs wʌn fəɹ mæɡnəfəsəns.

Gold and ivory bracelets clattered softly as she straightened the dark shawl over her arms and adjusted her necklaces. Most of those were gold and ivory too, but one was a mass of pearls and rubies that had belonged to a wetlander noblewoman - the woman now wore white and hauled and fetched alongside the other gai'shain back in the mountains called Kinslayer's Dagger - with a ruby the size of a small hen's egg nestled between her breasts. The wetlands held rich prizes. A large emerald on her finger caught sunlight in green fire; finger rings were one wetlander custom worth adopting, no matter the stares often aimed at hers. She would have more, if they matched this one for magnificence.

moʊst ə ðə mɛn θɔt mɛɹɪk əɹ bɛnhuən wəd bi fɝs tə ɹəsiv ðə waɪz wʌnz' pɝmɪʃən tə tʃɹaɪ ɹɪɾiən. oʊnli ɛfɑlɪn ɪn ðət ɡɹup səspɛktəd ðət nʌn wʊd, ən ʃi oʊnli səspɛktəd; ʃi ɔlsoʊ wɑz əstuɾ ɪnʌf tə vɔɪs əɹ səspɪʃənz sɝkəmspɛkli tə sɪvænə ən nɑɾ əɾ ɔl tə ɛniwʌn ɛls. ðɛɹ maɪnz kəd nɑɾ ɛnkʌmpəs ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv ʃɛɾɪŋ ði oʊld, ən ɪn tʃɹuθ, ɪf sɪvænə wɑz ɪmpeɪʃən tə dɑn ðə nu, ʃi wɑz ɔlsoʊ əwɛɹ ðət ʃi mʌs bɹɪŋ əm tə ɪt sloʊli. mʌtʃ hæd tʃeɪnʒd ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ði oʊld weɪz sɪns ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kɹɔs ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl ɪndə ðə wɛtlænz - stɪl wɛt, kəmpɛɹd tə ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd - jɛt mɔɹ wəd tʃeɪnʒ. wʌns ɹænd ælθɹ wɑz ɪn əɹ hænz, wʌns ʃi hæd wɛd ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn, ðə tʃif ə tʃifs ʌv ɔl ði il - ðɪs nɑnsɛns ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑz wɛtləndɝ fulɪʃnəs - ðəɹ wəd bi ə nu weɪ ʌv neɪmɪŋ klæn tʃifs, ən sɛp tʃifs əz wɛl. pɝhæps ivən ðə hɛdz ə ðə wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz. ɹænd ælθɹ wəd neɪm ðɛm. pɔɪntɪŋ wɛɹ ʃi toʊl hɪm, ʌv kɔɹs. ən ðət wəd bi oʊnli ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ðə wɛtləndɝ noʊʃən ə hændɪŋ daʊn ɹæŋk tə jəɹ tʃɪlʒɹən, ən ðɛɹ tʃɪlʒɹən, fəɹ ɪnstəns.

Most of the men thought Maeric or Bendhuin would be first to receive the Wise Ones' permission to try Rhuidean. Only Efalin in that group suspected that none would, and she only suspected; she also was astute enough to voice her suspicions circumspectly to Sevanna and not at all to anyone else. Their minds could not encompass the possibility of shedding the old, and in truth, if Sevanna was impatient to don the new, she was also aware that she must bring them to it slowly. Much had changed already in the old ways since the Shaido crossed the Dragonwall into the wetlands - still wet, compared to the Three-fold Land - yet more would change. Once Rand al'Thor was in her hands, once she had wed the Car'a'carn, the chief of chiefs of all the Aiel - this nonsense of the Dragon Reborn was wetlander foolishness - there would be a new way of naming clan chiefs, and sept chiefs as well. Perhaps even the heads of the warrior societies. Rand al'Thor would name them. Pointing where she told him, of course. And that would be only the beginning. The wetlander notion of handing down rank to your children, and their children, for instance.

ðə wɪn swɛp haɪɝ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, bloʊɪŋ saʊθ. ɪt wəd kʌvɝ ðə saʊn ə ðə wɛtləndɝz' hɔɹsəz ən wæɡənz.

The wind swept higher for a moment, blowing south. It would cover the sound of the wetlanders' horses and wagons.

ʃi ʃɪftəɾ əɹ ʃɔl əɡɛn, ðən səpɹɛst ə ɡɹɪmɑs. əɾ ɔl kɑsts ʃi mʌs nɑɾ əpɪɹ nɝvəs. ə ɡlæns tə ðə ɹaɪt stɪld wɝi əz sun əz bɪɡʌn. oʊvɝ tu hʌnʒɹəd ʃeɪɾoʊ waɪz wʌnz klʌstɝd ðɛɹ, ən nɔɹməli ət list səm wəd bi wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ laɪk vʌltʃɝz, bʌt ðɛɹ aɪz wɝ ɔl ɑn ðə ɹaɪz. mɔɹ ðən wʌn ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ʃɔl ənizəli əɹ smuð bʌlki skɝts. sɪvænəz lɪp kɝld. swɛt biɾɪd ɑn səm ə ðoʊz feɪsəz. swɛt! wɛɹ wɑz ðɛɹ ɑnɝ ðət ðeɪ ʃoʊd nɝvz bɪfɔɹ ɛvɹi ɡeɪz?

She shifted her shawl again, then suppressed a grimace. At all costs she must not appear nervous. A glance to the right stilled worry as soon as begun. Over two hundred Shaido Wise Ones clustered there, and normally at least some would be watching her like vultures, but their eyes were all on the rise. More than one adjusted her shawl uneasily or smoothed bulky skirts. Sevanna's lip curled. Sweat beaded on some of those faces. Sweat! Where was their honor that they showed nerves before every gaze?

ɛvɹiwʌn stɪfən slaɪtli əz ə jʌŋ soʊvɪn naɪ əpɪɹɾ əbʌv ðɛm, loʊɝɪŋ ɪz veɪl əz i skɹæmbəl daʊn. hi keɪm stʃɹeɪt tə hɝ, əz wɑz pɹɑpɝ, bʌt tə hɝ ɪɹɪteɪʃən i ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs ɪnʌf fəɹ ɔl tə hɪɹ. "wʌn ə ðɛɹ fɔɹwɝd skaʊts ɪskeɪpt. hi wɑz wundəd, bʌt stɪl ɑn ɪz hɔɹs."

Everyone stiffened slightly as a young Sovin Nai appeared above them, lowering his veil as he scrambled down. He came straight to her, as was proper, but to her irritation he raised his voice enough for all to hear. "One of their forward scouts escaped. He was wounded, but still on his horse."

ðə səsaɪəɾi liɾɝz bɪɡæn tə muv bɪfɔɹ i fɪnɪʃt spikɪŋ. ðət wəd nɛvɝ du. ðeɪ wəd lɛɾ ɪn ði æktʃəwəl faɪɾɪŋ - sɪvænə hæd nɛvɝ mɔɹ ðən hɛld ə spɪɹ ɪn əɹ laɪf - bʌt ʃi wəd nɑt lɛɾ əm fɝɡɛt fəɹ ə moʊmən u ʃi wɑz. "θɹoʊ ɛvɹi læst spɪɹ əɡɛns ðɛm," ʃi ɔɹɾɝd laʊdli, "bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kən ɹɛɾi ðɛmsɛlvz." ðeɪ ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn əɹ əz wʌn.

The society leaders began to move before he finished speaking. That would never do. They would lead in the actual fighting - Sevanna had never more than held a spear in her life - but she would not let them forget for a moment who she was. "Throw every last spear against them," she ordered loudly, "before they can ready themselves." They rounded on her as one.

"ɛvɹi spɪɹ?" bɛnhuən dɪmændəɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. "ju min ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə skɹinz - "

"Every spear?" Bendhuin demanded incredulously. "You mean except for the screens - "

ɡlaʊɝɪŋ, mɛɹɪk spoʊk ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə hɪm. "ɪf wi kip noʊ ɹɪzɝv, wi kən bi - "

Glowering, Maeric spoke right on top of him. "If we keep no reserve, we can be - "

sɪvænə kʌɾ əm boʊθ ɔf. "ɛvɹi spɪɹ! ðiz ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ wi dæns wɪð. wi mʌst oʊvɝwɛlm əm ɪmiɾiətli!" ɛfɑlɪn ən moʊst ə ði ʌðɝz skul ðɛɹ feɪsəz tə stɪlnəs, bʌt bɛnhuən ən mɛɹɪk fɹaʊnd, ɹɛɾi tə ɑɹɡju. fulz. ðeɪ feɪst ə fju dʌzən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ə fju hʌnʒɹəd wɛtləndɝ soʊlʒɝz, jɛt wɪð ðə mɔɹ ðən fɔɹɾi θaʊzən ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ ðeɪ hæɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn, ðeɪ stɪl wɑntəd ðɛɹ skɹinz ə skaʊts ən ðɛɹ spɪɹz ɪn ɹɪzɝv əz ɪf ðeɪ feɪst ʌðɝ il əɹ ə wɛtləndɝ ɑɹmi. "aɪ spik əz ðə klæn tʃif ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ." ʃi ʃəd nɑɾ əv tə seɪ ðæt, bʌɾ ə ɹimaɪndɝ kəd də noʊ hɑɹm. "ðeɪ ɑɹ ə hændfʊl." ʃi weɪɾɪd ɛvɹi wɝd wɪð kəntɛmp naʊ. "ðeɪ kən bi ɹʌn daʊn ɪf ðə spɪɹz muv kwɪkli. jə wɝ ɹɛɾi tə əvɛnʒ deɪseɪn ðɪs sʌnɹaɪz. də aɪ smɛl fɪɹ naʊ? fɪɹ ʌv ə fju wɛtləndɝz? hæz ɑnɝ ɡɔn fɹəm ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ?"

Sevanna cut them both off. "Every spear! These are Aes Sedai we dance with. We must overwhelm them immediately!" Efalin and most of the others schooled their faces to stillness, but Bendhuin and Maeric frowned, ready to argue. Fools. They faced a few dozen Aes Sedai, a few hundred wetlander soldiers, yet with the more than forty thousand algai'd'siswai they had insisted on, they still wanted their screens of scouts and their spears in reserve as if they faced other Aiel or a wetlander army. "I speak as the clan chief of the Shaido." She should not have to say that, but a reminder could do no harm. "They are a handful." She weighted every word with contempt now. "They can be run down if the spears move quickly. You were ready to avenge Desaine this sunrise. Do I smell fear now? Fear of a few wetlanders? Has honor gone from the Shaido?"

ðət tɝn ðɛɹ feɪsəz tə stoʊn, əz ɪntɛndəd. ivən ɛfɑlɪn ʃoʊɾ aɪz laɪk pɑlɪʃt ɡɹeɪ dʒɛmz əz ʃi veɪld; hɝ fɪŋɡɝz muvd ɪn meɪɾən hænd-tɔk, ən əz ðə səsaɪəɾi liɾɝz spɹɪntɪɾ ʌp ðə ɹaɪz, ðə meɪɾənz ɝaʊn sɪvænə fɑloʊd. ðət wɑz nɑt wʌt ʃi hæɾ ɪntɛndəd, bʌɾ ət lis ðə spɪɹz wɝ muvɪŋ. ivən fɹəm ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə foʊld ʃi kəd si wʌt hæd sim bɛɹ ɡɹaʊn dɪsɡɔɹdʒɪŋ keɪɾɪnsɝ-klæd fɪɡjɝz, ɔl hɝiɪŋ saʊθ wɪð ðə lɔŋ stʃɹaɪdz ðət kəd ɹʌn daʊn hɔɹsəz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm tə weɪst. wɪð ə θɔt tə hæv wɝdz wɪð ɛfɑlɪn leɪɾɝ, sɪvænə tɝn tə ðə waɪz wʌnz.

That turned their faces to stone, as intended. Even Efalin showed eyes like polished gray gems as she veiled; her fingers moved in Maiden hand-talk, and as the society leaders sprinted up the rise, the Maidens around Sevanna followed. That was not what she had intended, but at least the spears were moving. Even from the bottom of the fold she could see what had seemed bare ground disgorging cadin'sor-clad figures, all hurrying south with the long strides that could run down horses. There was no time to waste. With a thought to have words with Efalin later, Sevanna turned to the Wise Ones.

tʃoʊzən fɹəm ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ waɪz wʌnz u kəd wil ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ðeɪ wɝ sɪks əɹ sɛvən fəɹ ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɝaʊn ɹænd ælθɹ, jɛt sɪvænə sɔ daʊt. ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə haɪɾ ɪt bɪhaɪn stoʊni feɪsəz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ, ɪn ʃɪftɪŋ aɪz, ɪn tʌŋz wɛɾɪŋ lɪps. mɛni tʃɹədɪʃənz fɛl tədeɪ, tʃɹədɪʃənz oʊld ən stʃɹɔŋ əz lɔ. waɪz wʌnz dɪd nɑt teɪk pɑɹɾ ɪn bæɾəlz. waɪz wʌnz kɛp fɑɹ fɹəm ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðeɪ nu ði eɪntʃən teɪlz, ðət ði il hæd bɪn sɛn tə ðə θɹi-foʊld læn fəɹ feɪlɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðət ðeɪ wəd bi dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪf ɛvɝ ðeɪ feɪld əm əɡɛn. ðeɪ hæd hɝd ðə stɔɹiz, wʌt ɹænd ælθɹ hæd kleɪm bɪfɔɹ ɔl, ðəɾ əz pɑɹɾ ə ðɛɹ sɝvəs tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ði il hæd swɔɹn tə də noʊ vaɪələns.

Chosen from the strongest of the Shaido Wise Ones who could wield the One Power, they were six or seven for every Aes Sedai around Rand al'Thor, yet Sevanna saw doubt. They tried to hide it behind stony faces, but it was there, in shifting eyes, in tongues wetting lips. Many traditions fell today, traditions old and strong as law. Wise Ones did not take part in battles. Wise Ones kept far from Aes Sedai. They knew the ancient tales, that the Aiel had been sent to the Three-fold Land for failing the Aes Sedai, that they would be destroyed if ever they failed them again. They had heard the stories, what Rand al'Thor had claimed before all, that as part of their service to the Aes Sedai, the Aiel had sworn to do no violence.

wʌns sɪvænə hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ðoʊz stɔɹiz wɝ laɪz, bʌɾ ə leɪt ʃi bɪliv ðə waɪz wʌnz nu ðɛm fəɹ tʃɹuθ. nʌn hæd toʊld əɹ soʊ, ʌv kɔɹs. ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd nɛvɝ meɪd ðə tu dʒɝniz tə ɹɪɾiən ɹikwaɪɝd tə bɪkʌm ə waɪz wʌn, bʌt ði ʌðɝz hæɾ æksɛptɪd hɝ, haʊɛvɝ ɹɪlʌktən səm hæd bɪn. naʊ ðeɪ hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs bʌt tə ɡoʊ ɑn æksɛptɪŋ. jusləs tʃɹədɪʃənz wəd bi kɑɹvd ɪndə nu.

Once Sevanna had been sure those stories were lies, but of late she believed the Wise Ones knew them for truth. None had told her so, of course. It did not matter. She herself had never made the two journeys to Rhuidean required to become a Wise One, but the others had accepted her, however reluctant some had been. Now they had no choice but to go on accepting. Useless traditions would be carved into new.

"ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. ðeɪ lin təwɔɹɾ əɹ ɪn ə mjuɾɪd klæɾɝ ə bɹeɪslɪts ən nɛkləsɪz, tə kætʃ əɹ loʊ wɝdz. "ðeɪ hoʊld ɹænd ælθɹ, ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn. wi mʌs teɪk ɪm fɹəm ðɛm." ðəɹ wɝ skæɾɝd fɹaʊnz. moʊs bɪlivd ʃi wɑntəd ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn teɪkən əlaɪv ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə əvɛnʒ ðə dɛθ ə kaʊulɑɾɪn, hɝ sɛkən hʌzbənd. ðeɪ ʌndɝstʊd ðæt, bʌt ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv kʌm hɪɹ fəɹ ɪt. "ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃi hɪst æŋɡɹəli. "wi kɛpt əɹ plɛdʒ, bʌt ðeɪ bɹoʊk ðɛɹz. wi vaɪəleɪɾɪd nʌθɪŋ, bʌt ðeɪv vaɪəleɪɾɪd ɛvɹiθɪŋ. jə noʊ haʊ deɪseɪn wɑz mɝɾɝd." ən ə kɔɹs ðeɪ dɪd. ði aɪz wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ wɝ sʌɾənli ʃɑɹpɝ. kɪlɪŋ ə waɪz wʌn ɹæŋkt wɪð kɪlɪŋ ə pɹɛɡnənt wʊmən, ə tʃaɪld əɹ ə blæksmɪθ. səm ə ðoʊz aɪz wɝ vɛɹi ʃɑɹp. θɛɝɑvəz, ɹiɑliz, ʌðɝz'. "ɪf wi əlaʊ ðiz wɪmən tə wɔk əweɪ fɹəm ðæt, ðən wəɹ lɛs ðən ænəməlz, wɪl əv noʊ ɑnɝ. aɪ hoʊl maɪ ɑnɝ."

"Aes Sedai," she said softly. They leaned toward her in a muted clatter of bracelets and necklaces, to catch her low words. "They hold Rand al'Thor, the Car'a'carn. We must take him from them." There were scattered frowns. Most believed she wanted the Car'a'carn taken alive in order to avenge the death of Couladin, her second husband. They understood that, but they would not have come here for it. "Aes Sedai," she hissed angrily. "We kept our pledge, but they broke theirs. We violated nothing, but they have violated everything. You know how Desaine was murdered." And of course they did. The eyes watching her were suddenly sharper. Killing a Wise One ranked with killing a pregnant woman, a child or a blacksmith. Some of those eyes were very sharp. Therava's, Rhiale's, others'. "If we allow these women to walk away from that, then we are less than animals, we will have no honor. I hold my honor."

ɑn ðət ʃi ɡæðɝɾ əɹ skɝts wɪð dɪɡnəɾi ən klaɪm ðə sloʊp, hɛd haɪ, nɑt lʊkɪŋ bæk. ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ði ʌðɝz wəd fɑloʊ. θɛɝɑvə ən nɔɹliə ən deɪlɪn wəd si tə ðæt, ən ɹiɑli ən ʃən ən mɹə ən ðə ɹɛst u hæɾ əkʌmpəniɾ əɹ ə fju deɪz pæs tə si ɹænd ælθɹ biɾən ən pʊt bæk ɪndə hɪz wʊɾən tʃɛs baɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. hɝ ɹimaɪndɝ hæd bɪn fəɹ ðoʊz θɝtin ivən mɔɹ ðən ði ʌðɝz, ən ðeɪ dɛɹd nɑt feɪl hɝ. ðə tʃɹuθ ə haʊ deɪseɪn hæd daɪd taɪɾ əm tə hɝ.

On that she gathered her skirts with dignity and climbed the slope, head high, not looking back. She was certain the others would follow. Therava and Norlea and Dailin would see to that, and Rhiale and Tion and Meira and the rest who had accompanied her a few days past to see Rand al'Thor beaten and put back into his wooden chest by the Aes Sedai. Her reminder had been for those thirteen even more than the others, and they dared not fail her. The truth of how Desaine had died tied them to her.

waɪz wʌnz wɪð ðɛɹ skɝts lupt oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ɑɹmz tə fɹi ðɛɹ lɛɡz kəd nɑt kip ʌp wɪð ði ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ ɪn keɪɾɪnsɝ haʊɛvɝ hɑɹd ðeɪ ɹæn, ðoʊ ɹeɪs ðeɪ dɪd. faɪv maɪlz əkɹɔs ðoʊz loʊ ɹoʊlɪŋ hɪlz, nɑɾ ə lɔŋ ɹʌn, ən ðeɪ tɑpt ə kɹɛs tə si ðə dæns ə spɪɹz ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡʌn. æftɝ ə fæʃən.

Wise Ones with their skirts looped over their arms to free their legs could not keep up with the algai'd'siswai in cadin'sor however hard they ran, though race they did. Five miles across those low rolling hills, not a long run, and they topped a crest to see the dance of spears already begun. After a fashion.

θaʊzənz ʌv ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ meɪɾ ə hjudʒ pul ə veɪld ɡɹeɪ-ænd-bɹaʊn sɝdʒɪŋ ɝaʊn ə sɝkəl ʌv wɛtləndɝ wæɡənz, wɪtʃ ɪtsɛlf sɝaʊndəd wʌn ə ðə smɔl klʌmps ə tʃɹiz ðət dɑɾəd ðɪs ɹidʒən. sɪvænə dʒɹu ən æŋɡɹi bɹɛθ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ ivən hæd taɪm tə bɹɪŋ ɔl ə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ɪnsaɪd. ðə spɪɹz ɪnsɝkəl ðə wæɡənz, pɹɛst ɪn ɑn ðɛm, ʃaʊɝɾ æɹoʊz təwɔɹd ðɛm, bʌt ðoʊz ət ðə fɹʌn sim tə pʊʃ əɡɛnst ən ɪnvɪzəbəl wɔl. ət fɝs ði æɹoʊz ðəɾ ɑɹtʃt haɪəs pæst oʊvɝ ðɪs wɔl, bʌt ðən ðeɪ tu bɪɡæn stʃɹaɪkɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ənsin ən baʊnsɪŋ bæk. ə loʊ mɝmɝ ɹoʊz əmʌŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz.

Thousands of algai'd'siswai made a huge pool of veiled gray-and-brown surging around a circle of wetlander wagons, which itself surrounded one of the small clumps of trees that dotted this region. Sevanna drew an angry breath. The Aes Sedai had even had time to bring all of their horses inside. The spears encircled the wagons, pressed in on them, showered arrows toward them, but those at the front seemed to push against an invisible wall. At first the arrows that arched highest passed over this wall, but then they too began striking something unseen and bouncing back. A low murmur rose among the Wise Ones.

"ju si wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ du?" sɪvænə dɪmændəd, əz ðoʊ ʃi ɔlsoʊ kəd si ðə wʌn paʊɝ biɪŋ woʊvən. ʃi wɑntəd tə snɪɹ; ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ fulz, wɪð ðɛɹ vɔntɪd θɹi oʊðz. wən ðeɪ faɪnəli dɪsaɪɾɪd ðeɪ mʌs juz ðə paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən ɪnstɛɾ ə dʒʌs tə meɪk bæɹiɝz, ɪt wəd bi tu leɪt. pɹəvaɪɾəd ðə waɪz wʌnz dɪd nɑt stæn tu lɔŋ stɛɹɪŋ. sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðoʊz wæɡənz wɑz ɹænd ælθɹ, pɝhæps stɪl dʌbəld ɪndə ə tʃɛs laɪk ə boʊlt ə sɪlk. weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ əɹ tə pɪk ɪm ʌp. ɪf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd hoʊl hɪm, ðən ʃi kʊd, wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz. ən ə pɹɑməs. "θɛɝɑvə, teɪk jəɹ hæf tə ðə wɛs naʊ. bi ɹɛɾi tə stʃɹaɪk wən aɪ du. fəɹ deɪseɪn, ən ðə toʊ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ oʊ ʌs. wɪl meɪk əm mit toʊ əz noʊ wʌn ɛvɝ əz bɪfɔɹ."

"You see what the Aes Sedai do?" Sevanna demanded, as though she also could see the One Power being woven. She wanted to sneer; the Aes Sedai were fools, with their vaunted Three Oaths. When they finally decided they must use the Power as a weapon instead of just to make barriers, it would be too late. Provided the Wise Ones did not stand too long staring. Somewhere in those wagons was Rand al'Thor, perhaps still doubled into a chest like a bolt of silk. Waiting for her to pick him up. If the Aes Sedai could hold him, then she could, with the Wise Ones. And a promise. "Therava, take your half to the west now. Be ready to strike when I do. For Desaine, and the toh the Aes Sedai owe us. We will make them meet toh as no one ever has before."

ɪt wɑz ə fulɪʃ boʊs tə spik ə meɪkɪŋ sʌmwʌn miɾ ən ɑbləɡeɪʃən ðeɪ hæd nɑɾ æknɑlɪdʒd, jɛɾ ɪn ði æŋɡɹi mʌɾɝz fɹəm ði ʌðɝ wɪmən, sɪvænə hɝɾ ʌðɝ fjʊɹiəs pɹɑməsəz tə meɪk ði ɛɛs sədaɪ mit toʊ. oʊnli ðoʊz u hæd kɪl deɪseɪn ɑn sɪvænəz ɔɹɾɝz stʊd saɪlənt. θɛɝɑvəz nɛɹoʊ lɪps taɪɾənd slaɪtli, bʌt faɪnəli ʃi sɛd, "ɪt wɪl bi əz jə seɪ, sɪvænə."

It was a foolish boast to speak of making someone meet an obligation they had not acknowledged, yet in the angry mutters from the other women, Sevanna heard other furious promises to make the Aes Sedai meet toh. Only those who had killed Desaine on Sevanna's orders stood silent. Therava's narrow lips tightened slightly, but finally she said, "It will be as you say, Sevanna."

əɾ ən izi loʊp, sɪvænə lɛɾ əɹ hæf ə ðə waɪz wʌnz tə ði ist saɪɾ ə ðə bæɾəl, ɪf ɪt kəd bi kɔl ðət jɛt. ʃi hæd wɑntəd tə ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ə ɹaɪz wɛɹ ʃi kəɾ əv ə ɡʊd vju - ðət wɑz haʊ ə klæn tʃif əɹ bæɾəl liɾɝ dɝɛktəd ðə dæns ə spɪɹz - bʌɾ ɪn ðɪs wʌn θɪŋ ʃi faʊnd noʊ səpɔɹɾ ivən fɹəm θɛɝɑvə ən ði ʌðɝz u ʃɛɹd ðə sikɹəɾ ə deɪseɪnz dɛθ. ðə waɪz wʌnz meɪɾ ə ʃɑɹp kɑntʃɹæst wɪð ði ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ əz ʃi laɪn əm ʌp ɪn ðɛɹ waɪɾ ælɡoʊd blaʊsəz ən dɑɹk wʊl skɝts ən ʃɔlz, ðɛɹ ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ bɹeɪslɪts ən nɛkləsɪz ən ðɛɹ weɪst-lɛŋθ hɛɹ hɛl bæk baɪ dɑɹk foʊldəd skɑɹvz. fəɹ ɔl ðɛɹ dɪsɪʒən ðəɾ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ tə bi ɪn ðə dæns ə ðə spɪɹz, ðeɪ wəd bi ɪn ɪt, nɑɾ ɑn ə ɹaɪz əpɑɹt, ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ðeɪ jɛt ɹilaɪz ðət ðə tʃɹu bæɾəl tədeɪ wɑz ðɛɹz tə faɪt. æftɝ tədeɪ, nʌθɪŋ wəd bi ðə seɪm əɡɛn, ən tɛðɝɪŋ ɹænd ælθɹ wɑz ðə smɔləs pɑɹt.

At an easy lope, Sevanna led her half of the Wise Ones to the east side of the battle, if it could be called that yet. She had wanted to remain on a rise where she could have a good view - that was how a clan chief or battle leader directed the dance of spears - but in this one thing she found no support even from Therava and the others who shared the secret of Desaine's death. The Wise Ones made a sharp contrast with the algai'd'siswai as she lined them up in their white algode blouses and dark wool skirts and shawls, their glittering bracelets and necklaces and their waist-length hair held back by dark folded scarves. For all their decision that if they were to be in the dance of the spears, they would be in it, not on a rise apart, she did not believe they yet realized that the true battle today was theirs to fight. After today, nothing would be the same again, and tethering Rand al'Thor was the smallest part.

əmʌŋ ði ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ stɛɹɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə wæɡənz oʊnli haɪt kwɪkli toʊl mɛn fɹəm meɪɾənz. veɪlz ən ʃoʊufə hɪd hɛdz ən feɪsəz, ən keɪɾɪnsɝ wɑz keɪɾɪnsɝ əsaɪd fɹəm ðə dɪfɝənsɪz ə kʌt ðət mɑɹkt klæn ən sɛpt ən səsaɪəɾi. ðoʊz ət ði aʊɾɝ ɛdʒ ə ði ɛnsɝklɛmən əpɪɹd kənfjuzd, ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz əz ðeɪ weɪɾəd fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə hæpən. ðeɪ hæd kʌm pɹipɛɹd tə dæns wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ laɪtnɪŋ, ən naʊ ðeɪ mɪld ɪmpeɪʃənli, tu fɑɹ bæk ivən tə juz ðə hɔɹn baʊz stɪl ɪn lɛðɝ keɪsəz ɑn ðɛɹ bæks. ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv tə weɪt mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ ɪf sɪvænə hæɾ əɹ weɪ.

Among the algai'd'siswai staring toward the wagons only height quickly told men from Maidens. Veils and shoufa hid heads and faces, and cadin'sor was cadin'sor aside from the differences of cut that marked clan and sept and society. Those at the outer edge of the encirclement appeared confused, grumbling among themselves as they waited for something to happen. They had come prepared to dance with Aes Sedai lightning, and now they milled impatiently, too far back even to use the horn bows still in leather cases on their backs. They would not have to wait much longer if Sevanna had her way.

hænz ɑn hɪps, ʃi ədʒɹɛs ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz. "ðoʊz tə ðə saʊθ ə mi wɪl dɪsɹʌpt wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ duɪŋ. ðoʊz tə ðə nɔɹθ wɪl ətæk. fɔɹwɝd ðə spɪɹz!" wɪð ðə kəmænd, ʃi tɝn tə wɑtʃ ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu θɔt ðeɪ hæɾ oʊnli stil tə feɪs.

Hands on hips, she addressed the other Wise Ones. "Those to the south of me will disrupt what the Aes Sedai are doing. Those to the north will attack. Forward the spears!" With the command, she turned to watch the destruction of the Aes Sedai who thought they had only steel to face.

nʌθɪŋ hæpənd. ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ ðə mæs ʌv ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ sið jusləsli, ən ðə laʊɾəst saʊnd wɑz ði əkeɪʒənəl dʒɹʌmɪŋ ə spɪɹz ɑn bʌklɝz. sɪvænə ɡæðɝɾ əɹ æŋɡɝ, waɪndɪŋ ɪt laɪk θɹɛd fɹəm ðə spɪnɪŋ. ʃi hæd bɪn soʊ ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɹɛɾi æftɝ deɪseɪnz bʊtʃɝd kɔɹps wɑz dɪspleɪd tə ðɛm, bʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ stɪl faʊn ətækɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ ənθɪŋkəbəl, ʃi wəd tʃɪvi ðɛm tə ɪɾ ɪf ʃi hæd tə ʃeɪm əm ɔl tɪl ðeɪ dɪmændəd tə pʊɾ ɑn ɡeɪʃeɪn waɪt.

Nothing happened. In front of her the mass of algai'd'siswai seethed uselessly, and the loudest sound was the occasional drumming of spears on bucklers. Sevanna gathered her anger, winding it like thread from the spinning. She had been so sure they were ready after Desaine's butchered corpse was displayed to them, but if they still found attacking Aes Sedai unthinkable, she would chivvy them to it if she had to shame them all till they demanded to put on gai'shain white.

sʌɾənli ə bɔl ə pjʊɹ fleɪm ðə saɪz ʌv ə mænz hɛɾ ɑɹtʃt təwɔɹd ðə wæɡənz, sɪzəlɪŋ ən hɪsɪŋ, ðən ənʌðɝ, dʌzənz. ðə nɑɾ ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl lusənd. mɔɹ faɪɝbɔlz keɪm fɹəm ðə wɛst, fɹəm θɛɝɑvə ən ðə ɹɛst. smoʊk bɪɡæn tə ɹaɪz fɹəm bɝnɪŋ wæɡənz, fɝst ɡɹeɪ wɪsps, ðən θɪkənɪŋ blæk pɪlɝz; ðə mɝmɝz ə ði ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ tʃeɪnʒd pɪtʃ, ən ɪf ðoʊz dɝɛkli ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ muv lɪɾəl, ðəɹ wɑz ə sʌɾən sɛns ə pɹɛsɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. ʃaʊts dʒɹɪftəd fɹəm ðə wæɡənz, mɛn jɛlɪŋ ɪn æŋɡɝ, bɛloʊɪŋ ɪn peɪn. wʌtɛvɝ bæɹiɝz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd meɪd wɝ daʊn. ɪt hæd bɪɡʌn, ən ðəɹ kəd bi oʊnli wʌn ɛndɪŋ. ɹænd ælθɹ wəd bi hɝz; hi wəd ɡɪv əɹ ði il, tə teɪk ɔl ə ðə wɛtlænz, ən bɪfɔɹ i daɪɾ i wəd ɡɪv əɹ dɔɾɝz ən sʌnz tə lid ði il æftɝ hɝ. ʃi maɪɾ ɛndʒɔɪ ðæt; hi wɑz kwaɪt pɹɪɾi, ɹɪli, stʃɹɔŋ ən jʌŋ.

Suddenly a ball of pure flame the size of a man's head arched toward the wagons, sizzling and hissing, then another, dozens. The knot in her middle loosened. More fireballs came from the west, from Therava and the rest. Smoke began to rise from burning wagons, first gray wisps, then thickening black pillars; the murmurs of the algai'd'siswai changed pitch, and if those directly in front of her moved little, there was a sudden sense of pressing forward. Shouts drifted from the wagons, men yelling in anger, bellowing in pain. Whatever barriers the Aes Sedai had made were down. It had begun, and there could be only one ending. Rand al'Thor would be hers; he would give her the Aiel, to take all of the wetlands, and before he died he would give her daughters and sons to lead the Aiel after her. She might enjoy that; he was quite pretty, really, strong and young.

ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ɡoʊ daʊn izəli, ən ðeɪ dɪd nɑt. faɪɝbɔlz fɛl əmʌŋ ðə spɪɹz, tɝnɪŋ keɪɾɪnsɝ-klæd fɪɡjɝz tə tɔɹtʃɪz, ən laɪtnɪŋz stʃɹʌk fɹəm ə klɪɹ skaɪ, hɝlɪŋ mɛn ən ɝθ ɪndə ði ɛɹ. ðə waɪz wʌnz lɝn fɹəm wʌt ðeɪ sɔ, ðoʊ, əɹ pɝhæps ðeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi nu ən hæd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ; moʊs tʃænəl soʊ sɛldəm, ɪspɛʃli wɛɹ ɛniwʌn bɪsaɪdz waɪz wʌnz kəd si, ðəɾ oʊnli ənʌðɝ waɪz wʌn nu wɛðɝ ɛni ɡɪvən wʊmən kʊd. wʌtɛvɝ ðə ɹizən, noʊ sunɝ dɪd laɪtnɪŋ bɪɡɪn tə fɔl əmʌŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ spɪɹz ðən mɔɹ stʃɹʌk təwɔɹd ðə wæɡənz.

She did not expect the Aes Sedai to go down easily, and they did not. Fireballs fell among the spears, turning cadin'sor-clad figures to torches, and lightnings struck from a clear sky, hurling men and earth into the air. The Wise Ones learned from what they saw, though, or perhaps they already knew and had hesitated before; most channeled so seldom, especially where anyone besides Wise Ones could see, that only another Wise One knew whether any given woman could. Whatever the reason, no sooner did lightning begin to fall among the Shaido spears than more struck toward the wagons.

nɑɾ ɔl ɹitʃt ɪts tɑɹɡət. bɔlz ə faɪɝ stʃɹikɪŋ θɹu ði ɛɹ, səm lɑɹdʒ əz hɔɹsəz naʊ, sɪlvɝ laɪtnɪŋ stæbɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɡɹaʊn laɪk spɪɹz fɹəm ðə hɛvənz, səmtaɪmz sʌɾənli dɑɹɾɪd əsaɪɾ əz ɪf stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ən ɪnvɪzəbəl ʃild, əɹ ɪɹʌptəd vaɪələnli ɪn mɪdɛɹ, əɹ sɪmpli vænɪʃt ɔltəɡɛðɝ. ɹɔɹz ən kɹæʃɪz fɪl ði ɛɹ, wɔɹɪŋ wɪð ʃaʊts ən skɹimz. sɪvænə stɛɹɾ ət ðə skaɪ ɪn dɪlaɪt. ɪt wɑz laɪk ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz' dɪspleɪz ʃi hæd ɹɛɾ əbaʊt.

Not all reached its target. Balls of fire streaking through the air, some large as horses now, silver lightning stabbing toward the ground like spears from the heavens, sometimes suddenly darted aside as if striking an invisible shield, or erupted violently in midair, or simply vanished altogether. Roars and crashes filled the air, warring with shouts and screams. Sevanna stared at the sky in delight. It was like the Illuminators' displays she had read about.

sʌɾənli ðə wɝl tɝnd waɪɾ ɪn əɹ aɪz; ʃi sim tə bi floʊɾɪŋ. wən ʃi kəd si əɡɛn, ʃi wɑz flæɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ə dʌzən peɪsɪz fɹəm wɛɹ ʃi hæd stʊd, eɪkɪŋ ɪn ɛvɹi mʌsəl, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ fəɹ bɹɛθ ən kʌvɝd wɪð ə skæɾɝɪŋ ə dɝt. hɝ hɛɹ wɑntəd tə lɪft əweɪ fɹəm hɝ. ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz wɝ daʊn əz wɛl, ɝaʊn ə ɹæɡəd hoʊl ə spæn əkɹɔs tɔɹn ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd; θɪn tɛnʒɹəlz ə smoʊk ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə dʒɹɛsəz ə sʌm. nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn hæd fɔlən - ðə bæɾəl ə faɪɝ ən laɪtnɪŋ kəntɪnjuɾ ɪn ðə skaɪ - bʌt tu mɛni. ʃi hæd tə θɹoʊ ðɛm bæk ɪndə ðə dæns.

Suddenly the world turned white in her eyes; she seemed to be floating. When she could see again, she was flat on the ground a dozen paces from where she had stood, aching in every muscle, struggling for breath and covered with a scattering of dirt. Her hair wanted to lift away from her. Other Wise Ones were down as well, around a ragged hole a span across torn in the ground; thin tendrils of smoke rose from the dresses of some. Not everyone had fallen - the battle of fire and lightning continued in the sky - but too many. She had to throw them back into the dance.

fɔɹsɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə bɹið, ʃi skɹæmbəl tə hɝ fit, nɑt bɑðɝɪŋ tə bɹʌʃ ɔf ðə dɝt. "pʊʃ spɪɹz!" ʃi ʃaʊɾəd. sizɪŋ ɪstəleɪnz æŋɡjəlɝ ʃoʊldɝz, ʃi stɑɹɾəd tə dʒɹæɡ ðə wʊmən tə hɝ fit, ðən ɹilaɪz fɹəm əɹ stɛɹɪŋ blu aɪz ðət ʃi wɑz dɛɾ ən lɛɾ əɹ fɔl. ʃi pʊld ə deɪz dɝeɪlə ɪɹɛkt ɪnstɛd, ðən sizd ʌp ə spɪɹ fɹəm ə fɔlən θʌndɝ wɔkɝ ən weɪvd ɪt haɪ. "fɔɹwɝd ðə spɪɹz!" səm ə ðə waɪz wʌnz sim tə teɪk əɹ lɪɾɝəli, plʌnʒɪŋ ɪndə ðə mæs ʌv ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ. ʌðɝz kɛp ðɛɹ hɛdz bɛɾɝ, hɛlpɪŋ ðoʊz u kəd ɹaɪz, ən ðə stɔɹm ə faɪɝ ən laɪtnɪŋ kəntɪnjuɾ əz ʃi ɹeɪdʒd ʌp ən daʊn ðə laɪn ʌv waɪz wʌnz, weɪvɪŋ əɹ spɪɹ ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ. "pʊʃ spɪɹz! fɔɹwɝd ðə spɪɹz!"

Forcing herself to breathe, she scrambled to her feet, not bothering to brush off the dirt. "Push spears!" she shouted. Seizing Estalaine's angular shoulders, she started to drag the woman to her feet, then realized from her staring blue eyes that she was dead and let her fall. She pulled a dazed Dorailla erect instead, then seized up a spear from a fallen Thunder Walker and waved it high. "Forward the spears!" Some of the Wise Ones seemed to take her literally, plunging into the mass of algai'd'siswai. Others kept their heads better, helping those who could rise, and the storm of fire and lightning continued as she raged up and down the line of Wise Ones, waving her spear and shouting. "Push spears! Forward the spears!"

ʃi fɛlt laɪk læfɪŋ; ʃi dɪd læf. wɪð dɝɾ ɔl oʊvɝ əɹ ən ðə bæɾəl ɹeɪdʒɪŋ, ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn soʊ ɪɡzɪlɝeɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ ɪn əɹ laɪf. ɔlmoʊst ʃi wɪʃt ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən tə bɪkʌm ə meɪɾən ə ðə spɪɹ. ɔlmoʊst. noʊ fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ kəɾ ɛvɝ bi klæn tʃif, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ə mæn kəd bi ə waɪz wʌn; ə meɪɾənz ɹut tə paʊɝ wɑz tə ɡɪv ʌp ðə spɪɹ ən bɪkʌm ə waɪz wʌn. əz waɪf ʌv ə klæn tʃif ʃi hæd bɪn wildɪŋ paʊɝ əɾ ən eɪdʒ wən ə meɪɾən wɑz bɛɹli tʃɹʌstɪd tə kæɹi ə spɪɹ əɹ ə waɪz wʌnz əpɹɛntəs tə fɛtʃ wɔɾɝ. ən naʊ ʃi hæɾ ɪɾ ɔl, waɪz wʌn ən klæn tʃif, ðoʊ ɪt wəd teɪk səm duɪŋ jɛt tə hæv ðət læs taɪɾəl ɪn tʃɹuθ. taɪɾəlz mæɾɝd lɪɾəl soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi hæd ðə paʊɝ, bʌt waɪ ʃəd ʃi nɑɾ əv boʊθ?

She felt like laughing; she did laugh. With dirt all over her and the battle raging, she had never been so exhilarated before in her life. Almost she wished she had chosen to become a Maiden of the Spear. Almost. No Far Dareis Mai could ever be clan chief, any more than a man could be a Wise One; a Maiden's route to power was to give up the spear and become a Wise One. As wife of a clan chief she had been wielding power at an age when a Maiden was barely trusted to carry a spear or a Wise One's apprentice to fetch water. And now she had it all, Wise One and clan chief, though it would take some doing yet to have that last title in truth. Titles mattered little so long as she had the power, but why should she not have both?

ə sʌɾən skɹim meɪɾ əɹ tɝn, ən ʃi ɡeɪpt ət ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə ʃæɡi ɡɹeɪ wʊlf ɹɪpɪŋ doʊsɛɹəz θɹoʊɾ aʊt. wɪθaʊt θɔt ʃi plʌnʒd əɹ spɪɹ ɪndə ɪts saɪd. ivən əz ɪt twɪstəd tə snæp ət ðə spɪɹ hæft, ənʌðɝ weɪst-tɔl wʊlf baʊndəd pæst əɹ tə hɝl ɪtsɛlf ɑntu ðə bæk ʌv wʌn ə ði ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ, ðən ənʌðɝ wʊlf, ən mɔɹ, tɛɹɪŋ ɪndə keɪɾɪnsɝ-klæd fɪɡjɝz wɛɹɛvɝ ʃi lʊkt.

A sudden scream made her turn, and she gaped at the sight of a shaggy gray wolf ripping Dosera's throat out. Without thought she plunged her spear into its side. Even as it twisted to snap at the spear haft, another waist-tall wolf bounded past her to hurl itself onto the back of one of the algai'd'siswai, then another wolf, and more, tearing into cadin'sor-clad figures wherever she looked.

supɝstɪʃəs fɪɹ læns θɹu hɝ əz ʃi pʊld əɹ spɪɹ fɹi. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd kɔld wʊlvz tə faɪt fəɹ ðɛm. ʃi kəd nɑt teɪk əɹ ɡeɪz fɹəm ðə wʊlf ʃi hæd kɪld. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd. . . . noʊ. noʊ! ɪt kəd tʃeɪnʒ nʌθɪŋ. ʃi wəd nɑt lɛɾ ɪt.

Superstitious fear lanced through her as she pulled her spear free. The Aes Sedai had called wolves to fight for them. She could not take her gaze from the wolf she had killed. The Aes Sedai had. . . . No. No! It could change nothing. She would not let it.

faɪnəli ʃi mænədʒ tə pʊl əɹ aɪz əweɪ, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd ʃaʊɾ ɛnkɝɪdʒmən tə ðə waɪz wʌnz əɡɛn, sʌmθɪŋ ɛls stɪld əɹ tʌŋ ən meɪɾ əɹ stɛɹ. ə nɑɾ ʌv wɛtləndɝ hɔɹsmən ɪn ɹɛd hɛlməts ən bɹɛstpleɪts, leɪɪŋ əbaʊɾ əm wɪð sɔɹdz, θɹʌstɪŋ wɪð lɔŋ lænsɪz, ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ði ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ. wɛɹ hæd ðeɪ kʌm fɹʌm?

Finally she managed to pull her eyes away, but before she could shout encouragement to the Wise Ones again, something else stilled her tongue and made her stare. A knot of wetlander horsemen in red helmets and breastplates, laying about them with swords, thrusting with long lances, in the middle of the algai'd'siswai. Where had they come from?

ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz ʃi hæd spoʊkən əlaʊɾ əntɪl ɹiɑli ænsɝd hɝ. "aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə tɛl ju, sɪvænə, bʌt jə wəd nɑt lɪsən." ðə fleɪm-hɛɹd wʊmən aɪɾ əɹ blʌɾi spɪɹ dɪsteɪsfəli; waɪz wʌnz wɝ nɑt səpoʊz tə kæɹi spɪɹz. ʃi ɑstənteɪʃəsli leɪd ðə wɛpən ɪn ðə kɹʊk ə hɝ ɛlboʊ, ðə weɪ ʃi hæd sin tʃifs du, əz ɹiɑli wɛn ɑn. "wɛtləndɝz əv ətæk fɹəm ðə saʊθ. wɛtləndɝz ən sɪswaɪəmən." ʃi ɪmbjud ðə wɝd wɪð ɔl ðə skɔɹn pɹɑpɝ fəɹ ðoʊz u wəd neɪm ðɛmsɛlvz spɪɹz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən. "meɪɾənz əz wɛl. ænd. . . . ən ðəɹ ɑɹ waɪz wʌnz."

She did not realize she had spoken aloud until Rhiale answered her. "I tried to tell you, Sevanna, but you would not listen." The flame-haired woman eyed her bloody spear distastefully; Wise Ones were not supposed to carry spears. She ostentatiously laid the weapon in the crook of her elbow, the way she had seen chiefs do, as Rhiale went on. "Wetlanders have attacked from the south. Wetlanders and siswai'aman." She imbued the word with all the scorn proper for those who would name themselves Spears of the Dragon. "Maidens as well. And. . . . And there are Wise Ones."

"faɪɾɪŋ?" sɪvænə sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli bɪfɔɹ ɹilaɪzɪŋ haʊ ɪt saʊndəd. ɪf ʃi kəd tɔs aʊt dəkeɪd kʌstəm, ʃʊɹli ðoʊz sʌn-blaɪndɪd fulz tə ðə saʊθ u stɪl kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz il kəɾ əz wɛl. ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪt, ðoʊ. noʊ daʊt sɔɹɪliə hæd bɹɔt ðɛm; ðəɾ oʊld wʊmən ɹimaɪndəd sɪvænə ʌv ə lændslaɪd plʌnʒɪŋ daʊn ə maʊntən, kæɹiɪŋ ɔl bɪfɔɹ ɪt. "wi mʌst ətæk əm ət wʌns. ðəl nɑɾ əv ɹænd ælθɹ. əɹ ɹuən əɹ vɛnʒəns fəɹ deɪseɪn," ʃi æɾəd wən ɹiɑliz aɪz waɪɾənd.

"Fighting?" Sevanna said incredulously before realizing how it sounded. If she could toss out decayed custom, surely those sun-blinded fools to the south who still called themselves Aiel could as well. She had not expected it, though. No doubt Sorilea had brought them; that old woman reminded Sevanna of a landslide plunging down a mountain, carrying all before it. "We must attack them at once. They will not have Rand al'Thor. Or ruin our vengeance for Desaine," she added when Rhiale's eyes widened.

"ðeɪ ɑɹ waɪz wʌnz," ði ʌðɝ wʊmən sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt toʊn, ən sɪvænə ʌndɝstʊd bɪɾɝli. dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðə dæns ə spɪɹz wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf, bʌt waɪz wʌn ətækɪŋ waɪz wʌn wɑz mɔɹ ðən ivən ɹiɑli wəd kaʊntənəns. ʃi hæɾ əɡɹid ðət deɪseɪn mʌs daɪ - haʊ ɛls kəd ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ði ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ, bi bɹɔt tə ətæk ɛɛs sədaɪ, wɪtʃ ðeɪ mʌs də tə pʊt ɹænd ælθɹ ɪn ðɛɹ hænz, ən wɪð ɪm ɔl ði il? - jɛt ðət wɑz dʌn ɪn sikɹət, sɝaʊndəd baɪ laɪk-maɪndəd wɪmən. ðɪs wəd bi bɪfɔɹ ɛvɹiwʌn. fulz ən kaʊɝdz, ɔl ə ðɛm!

"They are Wise Ones," the other woman said in a flat tone, and Sevanna understood bitterly. Joining the dance of spears was bad enough, but Wise One attacking Wise One was more than even Rhiale would countenance. She had agreed that Desaine must die - how else could the other Wise Ones, not to mention the algai'd'siswai, be brought to attack Aes Sedai, which they must do to put Rand al'Thor in their hands, and with him all the Aiel? - yet that was done in secret, surrounded by like-minded women. This would be before everyone. Fools and cowards, all of them!

"ðɛn faɪt ðoʊz ɛnəmiz jə kən bɹɪŋ jɝsɛlf tə faɪt, ɹiɑli." ʃi bɪɾ ɔf ɛvɹi wɝd wɪð əz mʌtʃ skɔɹn əz ʃi kʊd, bʌt ɹiɑli mɪɹli nɑɾəd, ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ʃɔl wɪð ənʌðɝ ɡlæns ət ðə spɪɹ ɑn sɪvænəz ɑɹm ən ɹɪtɝn tə hɝ pleɪs ɪn ðə laɪn.

"Then fight those enemies you can bring yourself to fight, Rhiale." She bit off every word with as much scorn as she could, but Rhiale merely nodded, adjusted her shawl with another glance at the spear on Sevanna's arm and returned to her place in the line.

pɝhæps ðəɹ wɑz ə weɪ tə meɪk ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz muv fɝst. bɛɾɝ tə ətæk baɪ sɝpɹaɪz, bʌt bɛɾɝ ɛniθɪŋ ðən ðət ðeɪ ʃəd snætʃ ɹænd ælθɹ fɹəm əɹ vɛɹi hænz. wʌt ʃi wəd nɑt ɡɪv fəɹ ə wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl ən wəd də əz ʃi wɑz toʊld wɪθaʊt bɔkɪŋ. wʌt ʃi wəd nɑt ɡɪv tə bi ɑn ə ɹaɪz, wɛɹ ʃi kəd si haʊ ðə bæɾəl wɛnt.

Perhaps there was a way to make the other Wise Ones move first. Better to attack by surprise, but better anything than that they should snatch Rand al'Thor from her very hands. What she would not give for a woman who could channel and would do as she was told without balking. What she would not give to be on a rise, where she could see how the battle went.

kipɪŋ əɹ spɪɹ ɹɛɾi ən ə wɛɹi aɪ aʊt fəɹ wʊlvz - ðoʊz ʃi kəd si wɝ iðɝ kɪlɪŋ mɛn ən wɪmən ɪn keɪɾɪnsɝ əɹ wɝ dɛd ðɛmsɛlvz - ʃi ɹɪtɝn tə ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɛnkɝɪdʒmənt. tə ðə saʊθ mɔɹ faɪɝ ən laɪtnɪŋ fɛl əmʌŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ðən bɪfɔɹ, bʌɾ ɪt meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns ðət ʃi kəd tɛl. ðət bæɾəl, wɪð ɪts ɪksploʊʒənz ə fleɪm ən ɝθ ən pipəl, kəntɪnjuɾ ʌnəbeɪɾɪd.

Keeping her spear ready and a wary eye out for wolves - those she could see were either killing men and women in cadin'sor or were dead themselves - she returned to shouting encouragement. To the south more fire and lightning fell among the Shaido than before, but it made no difference that she could tell. That battle, with its explosions of flame and earth and people, continued unabated.

"pʊʃ spɪɹz!" ʃi ʃaʊɾəd, weɪvɪŋ hɝz. "pʊʃ spɪɹz!" əmʌŋ ðə tʃɝnɪŋ ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ ɛni ʌv ðə fulz u hæd taɪɾ ə bɪɾ ə ɹɛd klɔθ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ tɛmpəlz ən neɪm ðɛmsɛlvz sɪswaɪəmən. pɝhæps ðeɪ wɝ tu fju tə ɔltɝ ðə kɔɹs ʌv ɪvɛns. ðə nɑts ʌv wɛt-lændɝz sɝɾənli sim fju ən fɑɹ bɪtwin. ivən əz ʃi wɑtʃt, wʌn wɑz swɔɹmd ʌndɝ, mɛn ən hɔɹsəz, baɪ stæbɪŋ spɪɹz. "pʊʃ spɪɹz! pʊʃ spɪɹz!" ɪɡzʌlteɪʃən fɪld əɹ vɔɪs. ɪf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kɔl tɛn θaʊzənd wʊlvz, ɪf sɔɹɪliə hæd bɹɔɾ ə θaʊzənd waɪz wʌnz ən ə hʌnʒɹəd θaʊzən spɪɹz, ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wəd stɪl ɪmɝdʒ vɪktɔɹiəs tədeɪ. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, ən hɝsɛlf. sɪvænə ʌv ðə dʒuməaɪ ʃeɪɾoʊ wəd bi ə neɪm ɹɪmɛmbɝd fɝɛvɝ.

"Push spears!" she shouted, waving hers. "Push spears!" Among the churning algai'd'siswai she could not make out any of the fools who had tied a bit of red cloth around their temples and named themselves siswai'aman. Perhaps they were too few to alter the course of events. The knots of wet-landers certainly seemed few and far between. Even as she watched, one was swarmed under, men and horses, by stabbing spears. "Push spears! Push spears!" Exultation filled her voice. If the Aes Sedai called ten thousand wolves, if Sorilea had brought a thousand Wise Ones and a hundred thousand spears, the Shaido would still emerge victorious today. The Shaido, and herself. Sevanna of the Jumai Shaido would be a name remembered forever.

sʌɾənli ə hɑloʊ bum saʊndəɾ əmɪd ðə ɹɔɹ ə bæɾəl. ɪt sim tə kʌm fɹəm ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wæɡənz, bʌt nʌθɪŋ toʊld əɹ wɛðɝ ðeɪ hæd kɑzd ɪt, əɹ ðə waɪz wʌnz. ʃi dɪslaɪk θɪŋz ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, jɛt ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə æsk ɹiɑli əɹ ði ʌðɝz ən flɔn əɹ ɪɡnɝəns. ən əɹ læk ə ði əbɪləɾi ɔl hɪɹ hæd, seɪv hɝ. ɪt kaʊntəd fəɹ nʌθɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, bʌɾ ənʌðɝ θɪŋ ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk wɑz fəɹ ʌðɝz tə hæv paʊɝ ʃi dɪd nɑt.

Suddenly a hollow boom sounded amid the roar of battle. It seemed to come from the direction of the Aes Sedai wagons, but nothing told her whether they had caused it, or the Wise Ones. She disliked things she did not understand, yet she was not about to ask Rhiale or the others and flaunt her ignorance. And her lack of the ability all here had, save her. It counted for nothing among themselves, but another thing she did not like was for others to have power she did not.

ə flɪkɝ ə laɪɾ əmʌŋ ði ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ, ə sɛns ə sʌmθɪŋ tɝnɪŋ, kɑt ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ, bʌt wən ʃi tɝn tə lʊk, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ. əɡɛn ðə seɪm θɪŋ hæpənd, ə flæʃ ə laɪt sin ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə vɪʒən, ən əɡɛn wən ʃi lʊk ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə si. tu mɛni θɪŋz ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd.

A flicker of light among the algai'd'siswai, a sense of something turning, caught the corner of her eye, but when she turned to look, there was nothing. Again the same thing happened, a flash of light seen on the edge of vision, and again when she looked there was nothing to see. Too many things she did not understand.

ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɛnkɝɪdʒmənt, ʃi aɪd ðə laɪn ə ʃeɪɾoʊ waɪz wʌnz. səm əpɪɹd bɪdʒɹæɡəld, hɛd skɑɹvz ɡɔn ən lɔŋ hɛɹ hæŋɪŋ lus, skɝts ən blaʊsəz kʌvɝd wɪð dɝɾ əɹ ivən sɪŋʒd. ət list ə dʌzən leɪ stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɪn ə ɹoʊ, ɡɹoʊnɪŋ, ən sɛvən mɔɹ wɝ stɪl, ʃɔlz leɪɾ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ feɪsəz. ɪt wɑz ðoʊz ɑn ðɛɹ fit ðəɾ ɪntʃɹəstəd hɝ. ɹiɑli, ən əlɹiz wɪð əɹ ɹɛɹ blæk hɛɹ ɔl ɝaɪ. sʌmɛɝɪn, hu hæd teɪkən tə wɛɹɪŋ əɹ blaʊs ənleɪs tə ʃoʊ ivən mɔɹ dʒɛnɝəs klivədʒ ðən sɪvænə hɝsɛlf, ən mɹə, wɪð əɹ lɔŋ feɪs jɛt mɔɹ ɡɹɪm ðən juʒəwəl. staʊt ʃən, ən skɪni bəlɪnd, ən moʊdʒɹə, əz tɔl əz moʊs mɛn.

Shouting encouragement, she eyed the line of Shaido Wise Ones. Some appeared bedraggled, head scarves gone and long hair hanging loose, skirts and blouses covered with dirt or even singed. At least a dozen lay stretched out in a row, groaning, and seven more were still, shawls laid over their faces. It was those on their feet that interested her. Rhiale, and Alarys with her rare black hair all awry. Someryn, who had taken to wearing her blouse unlaced to show even more generous cleavage than Sevanna herself, and Meira, with her long face yet more grim than usual. Stout Tion, and skinny Belinde, and Modarra, as tall as most men.

wʌn ə ðɛm ʃʊɾə toʊld əɹ ɪf ðeɪ dɪd sʌmθɪŋ nu. ðə sikɹəɾ ə deɪseɪn baʊn əm tə hɝ; ivən fəɹ ə waɪz wʌn, ɹɛvəleɪʃən ə ðət wəd lɛd tə ə laɪftaɪm ə peɪn - ən wɝs, ʃeɪm - tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə mit toʊ, ɪf ðə wʌn ɹɪvild wɑz nɑt sɪmpli dʒɹɪvən neɪkəɾ ɪndə ðə wɪldɝnəs tə lɪv əɹ daɪ əz ʃi kʊd, laɪkli tə bi kɪld laɪk ə bis baɪ ɛni hu faʊn hɝ. ivən soʊ, sɪvænə wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ tʊk əz mʌtʃ dɪlaɪɾ əz ðə ɹɛst ɪn kənsilɪŋ θɪŋz fɹəm hɝ, ðə θɪŋz ðət waɪz wʌnz lɝn dʊɹɪŋ ðɛɹ əpɹɛntəsʃɪps, ən ɪn ðə dʒɝniz tə ɹɪɾiən. sʌmθɪŋ wəɾ əv tə bi dʌn əbaʊt ðæt, bʌt leɪɾɝ. ʃi wəd nɑt dɪspleɪ wiknəs baɪ æskɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ dɪd naʊ.

One of them should have told her if they did something new. The secret of Desaine bound them to her; even for a Wise One, revelation of that would lead to a lifetime of pain - and worse, shame - trying to meet toh, if the one revealed was not simply driven naked into the wilderness to live or die as she could, likely to be killed like a beast by any who found her. Even so, Sevanna was sure they took as much delight as the rest in concealing things from her, the things that Wise Ones learned during their apprenticeships, and in the journeys to Rhuidean. Something would have to be done about that, but later. She would not display weakness by asking what they did now.

tɝnɪŋ bæk tə ðə bæɾəl, ʃi faʊn ðə bæləns tʃeɪnʒɪŋ, ən ɪn əɹ feɪvɝ ɪɾ əpɪɹd. tə ðə saʊθ faɪɝbɔlz ən laɪtnɪŋ boʊls plʌməɾɪd əz hɛvəli əz ɛvɝ, bʌt nɑɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ən ɪt sim nɑt tə ðə wɛst əɹ nɔɹθ iðɝ. wʌt stʃɹʌk təwɔɹd ðə wæɡənz stɪl feɪl tə ɹitʃ ðə ɡɹaʊn mɔɹ ɔfən ðən nɑt, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz ə dɛfənət slækənɪŋ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ɛfɝts. ðeɪ hæd bɪn fɔɹst ɑntu ðə dɪfɛnsɪv. ʃi wɑz wɪnɪŋ!

Turning back to the battle, she found the balance changing, and in her favor it appeared. To the south fireballs and lightning bolts plummeted as heavily as ever, but not in front of her, and it seemed not to the west or north either. What struck toward the wagons still failed to reach the ground more often than not, yet there was a definite slackening of the Aes Sedai's efforts. They had been forced onto the defensive. She was winning!

ivən əz ðə θɔt flʌʃt θɹu hɝ laɪk pjʊɹ hit, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛn saɪlənt. oʊnli tə ðə saʊθ dɪd faɪɝ ən laɪtnɪŋ stɪl fɔl əmʌŋ ði ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ. ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə ʃaʊt vɪktɝi, ən ənʌðɝ ɹiləzeɪʃən saɪləns hɝ. faɪɝ ən laɪtnɪŋ stɔɹm daʊn təwɔɹd ðə wæɡənz, stɔɹm daʊn ən kɹæʃt əɡɛnst səm ənsin əbstʃɹʌkʃən. smoʊk fɹəm bɝnɪŋ wæɡənz wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə aʊtlaɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə doʊm əz ɪt stʃɹimd ʌp ən faɪnəli bɪloʊd fɹəm ə hoʊl ɪn ðə tɑp ə ði ɪnvɪzəbəl ɛnkloʊʒɝ.

Even as the thought flushed through her like pure heat, the Aes Sedai went silent. Only to the south did fire and lightning still fall among the algai'd'siswai. She opened her mouth to shout victory, and another realization silenced her. Fire and lightning stormed down toward the wagons, stormed down and crashed against some unseen obstruction. Smoke from burning wagons was beginning to outline the shape of a dome as it streamed up and finally billowed from a hole in the top of the invisible enclosure.

sɪvænə wɝl tə kənfɹʌn ðə laɪn ʌv waɪz wʌnz, hɝ feɪs sətʃ ðət sɛvɹəl flɪntʃt bæk fɹəm hɝ, ən meɪbi fɹəm ðə spɪɹ ɪn əɹ hænd. ʃi nu ʃi lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə juz ɪt; ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi. "waɪ hæv jə lɛɾ əm də ðɪs?" ʃi ɹeɪdʒd. "waɪ? jə wɝ tə əbstʃɹʌkt wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ dɪd, nɑɾ əlaʊ ðɛm tə meɪk mɔɹ wɔlz!"

Sevanna whirled to confront the line of Wise Ones, her face such that several flinched back from her, and maybe from the spear in her hand. She knew she looked ready to use it; she was ready. "Why have you let them do this?" she raged. "Why? You were to obstruct whatever they did, not allow them to make more walls!"

ʃən lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə ɛmpti hɝ stʌmək, bʌt ʃi plæntəɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn bɹɔd hɪps ən feɪst sɪvænə dɝɛkli. "ɪt wɑz nɑt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Tion looked ready to empty her stomach, but she planted her fists on broad hips and faced Sevanna directly. "It was not the Aes Sedai."

"nɑt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ?" sɪvænə spæt. "ðɛn hu? ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz? aɪ toʊl jə wi mʌst ətæk ðɛm!"

"Not the Aes Sedai?" Sevanna spat. "Then who? The other Wise Ones? I told you we must attack them!"

"ɪt wɑz nɑt wɪmən," ɹiɑli sɛd, hɝ vɔɪs fɔltɝɪŋ. "ɪt wɑz nɑt - " feɪs peɪl, ʃi swɑloʊd.

"It was not women," Rhiale said, her voice faltering. "It was not - " Face pale, she swallowed.

sɪvænə tɝn sloʊli tə stɛɹ ət ðə doʊm, oʊnli ðən ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ tə bɹið əɡɛn. sʌmθɪŋ hæd ɹɪzən θɹu ðə hoʊl wɛɹ ðə smoʊk ɡʌʃt aʊt. wʌn ə ðə wɛtləndɝ bænɝz. ðə smoʊk wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə əbskjʊɹ ɪt kəmplitli. kɹɪmzən, wɪð ə dɪsk hæf waɪɾ ən hæf blæk, ðə kʌlɝz dɪvaɪɾəd baɪ ə sɪnwəs laɪn, dʒʌs laɪk ðə pis ə klɔθ ðə sɪswaɪəmən wɔɹ. ɹænd ælθɹz bænɝ. kəɾ i pɑsəbli bi stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə hæv bɹoʊkən fɹi, oʊvɝwɛlmd ɔl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɹeɪz ðæt? ɪt hæd tə bi.

Sevanna turned slowly to stare at the dome, only then remembering to breathe again. Something had risen through the hole where the smoke gushed out. One of the wetlander banners. The smoke was not enough to obscure it completely. Crimson, with a disc half white and half black, the colors divided by a sinuous line, just like the piece of cloth the siswai'aman wore. Rand al'Thor's banner. Could he possibly be strong enough to have broken free, overwhelmed all the Aes Sedai and raised that? It had to be.

ðə stɔɹm stɪl bæɾɝd ət ðə doʊm, bʌt sɪvænə hɝd mɝmɝz bɪhaɪn hɝ. ði ʌðɝ wɪmən wɝ θɪŋkɪŋ ə ɹitʃɹit. nɑt hɝ. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz noʊn ðət ði iziəs pæθ tə paʊɝ leɪ θɹu kɑŋkɝɪŋ mɛn u ɔlɹɛɾi pəzɛst ɪt, ən ivən əz ə tʃaɪld ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi hæd bɪn bɔɹn wɪð ðə wɛpənz tə kɑŋkɝ ðɛm. sulædʒɹɪk, klæn tʃif ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, fɛl tə hɝ ət sɪkstin, ən wən i daɪd, ʃi tʃoʊz aʊt ðoʊz moʊs laɪkli tə səksid. mʊɹeɪɾɪn ən kaʊulɑɾɪn itʃ bɪlivd i əloʊn hæd kæptʃɝɾ əɹ ɪntʃɹəst, ən wən mʊɹeɪɾɪn feɪl tə ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ɹɪɾiən, əz soʊ mɛni mɛn dɪd, wʌn smaɪl kənvɪns kaʊulɑɾɪn ðəɾ i hæɾ oʊvɝwɛlm hɝ. bʌt ðə paʊɝ ʌv ə klæn tʃif peɪl bɪsaɪd ðəɾ ə ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn, ən ivən ðət wɑz nʌθɪŋ bɪsaɪd wʌt ʃi sɔ bɪfɔɹ hɝ. ʃi ʃɪvɝɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæd dʒʌst sin ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl mæn ɪmædʒənəbəl ɪn ðə swɛt tɛnt. wən ɹænd ælθɹ wɑz hɝz, ʃi wəd kɑŋkɝ ðə hoʊl wɝld.

The storm still battered at the dome, but Sevanna heard murmurs behind her. The other women were thinking of retreat. Not her. She had always known that the easiest path to power lay through conquering men who already possessed it, and even as a child she was sure she had been born with the weapons to conquer them. Suladric, clan chief of the Shaido, fell to her at sixteen, and when he died, she chose out those most likely to succeed. Muradin and Couladin each believed he alone had captured her interest, and when Muradin failed to return from Rhuidean, as so many men did, one smile convinced Couladin that he had overwhelmed her. But the power of a clan chief paled beside that of the Car'a'carn, and even that was nothing beside what she saw before her. She shivered as if she had just seen the most beautiful man imaginable in the sweat tent. When Rand al'Thor was hers, she would conquer the whole world.

"pɹɛs hɑɹɾɝ," ʃi kəmændəd. "hɑɹɾɝ! wɪl hʌmbəl ðiz ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ deɪseɪn!" ən ʃi wəɾ əv ɹænd ælθɹ.

"Press harder," she commanded. "Harder! We will humble these Aes Sedai for Desaine!" And she would have Rand al'Thor.

əbɹʌpli ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹɔɹ fɹəm ðə fɹʌn ə ðə bæɾəl, mɛn ʃaʊɾɪŋ, skɹimɪŋ. ʃi kɝs ðət ʃi kəd nɑt si wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ. əɡɛn ʃi ʃaʊɾəd fəɹ ðə waɪz wʌnz tə pɹɛs hɑɹɾɝ, bʌɾ ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ɪt sim ðə fɔl ə fleɪm ən laɪtnɪŋ əɡɛns ðə doʊm lɛsənd. ən ðən ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʃi kəd si.

Abruptly there was a roar from the front of the battle, men shouting, screaming. She cursed that she could not see what was happening. Again she shouted for the Wise Ones to press harder, but if anything, it seemed the fall of flame and lightning against the dome lessened. And then there was something she could see.

kloʊs tə ðə wæɡənz, keɪɾɪnsɝ-klæd fɪɡjɝz ən ɝθ ɪɹʌptəɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ wɪð ə θʌndɝəs kɹæʃ, nɑɾ ɪn wʌn pleɪs, bʌɾ ɪn ə lɔŋ laɪn. əɡɛn ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪksploʊɾəd, ən əɡɛn, əɡɛn, itʃ taɪm ə lɪɾəl fɑɹðɝ fɹəm ði ɪnsɝkəld wæɡənz. nɑɾ ə laɪn, bʌɾ ə sɑləd ɹɪŋ ʌv ɪksploʊɾɪŋ ɡɹaʊn ən mɛn ən meɪɾənz ðət ʃi hæd noʊ daʊt ɹæn ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊn ðə wæɡənz. əɡɛn ən əɡɛn ən əɡɛn, ɛvɝ ɪkspændɪŋ, ən sʌɾənli ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ wɝ pʊʃɪŋ pæs hɝ, bəfeɪɪŋ θɹu ðə laɪn ʌv waɪz wʌnz, ɹʌnɪŋ.

Close to the wagons, cadin'sor-clad figures and earth erupted into the air with a thunderous crash, not in one place, but in a long line. Again the ground exploded, and again, again, each time a little farther from the encircled wagons. Not a line, but a solid ring of exploding ground and men and Maidens that she had no doubt ran all the way around the wagons. Again and again and again, ever expanding, and suddenly algai'd'siswai were pushing past her, buffeting through the line of Wise Ones, running.

sɪvænə biɾ əɾ əm wɪð əɹ spɪɹ, fleɪlɪŋ ət hɛdz ən ʃoʊldɝz, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ wən ðə spɪɹhɛd keɪm əweɪ ɹɛɾɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ. "stæn ən faɪt! stænd, fəɹ ði ɑnɝ ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ!" ðeɪ ɹʌʃt baɪ ənhiɾɪŋ. "hæv jə noʊ ɑnɝ! stæn ən faɪt!" ʃi stæbd ə fliɪŋ meɪɾən ɪn ðə bæk, bʌt ðə ɹɛs dʒʌs tʃɹæmpəld oʊvɝ ðə fɔlən wʊmən. əbɹʌpli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət səm ə ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ ɡɔn, ən ʌðɝz pɪkɪŋ ʌp ði ɪnʒɝd. ɹiɑli tɝn tə ɹʌn, ən sɪvænə siz ðə tɔlɝ wʊmənz ɑɹm, θɹɛɾənɪŋ əɹ wɪð ðə spɪɹ. ʃi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ ðət ɹiɑli kəd tʃænəl. "wi mʌst stænd! wi kən stɪl əv hɪm!"

Sevanna beat at them with her spear, flailing at heads and shoulders, not caring when the spearhead came away redder then before. "Stand and fight! Stand, for the honor of the Shaido!" They rushed by unheeding. "Have you no honor! Stand and fight!" She stabbed a fleeing Maiden in the back, but the rest just trampled over the fallen woman. Abruptly she realized that some of the Wise Ones were gone, and others picking up the injured. Rhiale turned to run, and Sevanna seized the taller woman's arm, threatening her with the spear. She did not care that Rhiale could channel. "We must stand! We can still have him!"

ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz feɪs wɑz ə mæsk ə fɪɹ. "ɪf wi stænd, wi daɪ! əɹ ɛls wi ɛn tʃeɪn aʊtsaɪd ɹænd ælθɹz tɛnt! steɪ ən daɪ ɪf jə wɪʃ, sɪvænə. aɪm noʊ stoʊn dɔɡ!" ɹɪpɪŋ əɹ ɑɹm fɹi, ʃi spɛɾ istwɝd.

The other woman's face was a mask of fear. "If we stand, we die! Or else we end chained outside Rand al'Thor's tent! Stay and die if you wish, Sevanna. I am no Stone Dog!" Ripping her arm free, she sped eastward.

fəɹ ə moʊmən mɔɹ, sɪvænə stʊd ðɛɹ, lɛɾɪŋ ðə mɛn ən meɪɾənz pʊʃ əɹ ðɪs weɪ ən ðəɾ əz ðeɪ stʃɹim baɪ ɪn pænɪk. ðən ʃi tɔs daʊn ðə spɪɹ ən fɛlt əɹ bɛl paʊtʃ, wɛɹ ə smɔl kjub ʌv ɪntʃɹəkətli kɑɹv stoʊn leɪ. wɛl ðət ʃi hæd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊvɝ θɹoʊɪŋ ðəɾ əweɪ. ʃi hæɾ ənʌðɝ kɔɹd fəɹ əɹ baʊ jɛt. ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ skɝts tə bɛɹ əɹ lɛɡz, ʃi dʒɔɪn ɪn ðə keɪɑɾɪk flaɪt, bʌɾ ɪf ɔl ðə ɹɛs flɛɾ ɪn tɛɹɝ, ʃi ɹæn wɪð plænz wɝlɪŋ θɹu hɝ hɛd. ʃi wəɾ əv ɹænd ælθɹ ɑn ɪz niz bɪfɔɹ hɝ, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əz wɛl.

For a moment more, Sevanna stood there, letting the men and Maidens push her this way and that as they streamed by in panic. Then she tossed down the spear and felt her belt pouch, where a small cube of intricately carved stone lay. Well that she had hesitated over throwing that away. She had another cord for her bow yet. Gathering her skirts to bare her legs, she joined in the chaotic flight, but if all the rest fled in terror, she ran with plans whirling through her head. She would have Rand al'Thor on his knees before her, and the Aes Sedai as well.

ɑlviɛɝɪn faɪnəli lɛft ɪleɪɾəz əpɑɹtməns, əz kul ən kəlɛktəɾ əz ɛvɝ ɑn ðə sɝfəs. ɪnsaɪd, ʃi fɛlt ɹʌŋ aʊt laɪk ə dæmp klɔθ. ʃi mænədʒ tə kip əɹ lɛɡz stɛɾi daʊn ðə lɔŋ kɝvɪŋ flaɪts ə stɛɹz, mɑɹbəl ivən ɪn ðə vɛɹi haɪts. lɪvɹid sɝvəns baʊɾ ən kɝtsiɾ əz ðeɪ skɝiɾ əbaʊt ðɛɹ tæsks, siɪŋ oʊnli ðə kipɝ ɪn ɔl əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi. əz ʃi wɛn loʊɝ, sɪstɝz bɪɡæn tə əpɪɹ, mɛni wɛɹɪŋ ðɛɹ ʃɔlz, fɹɪn ɪn ðə kʌlɝz ə ðɛɹ ədʒəz, əz ɪf tə ɛmfəsaɪz baɪ fɔɹmæləɾi ðət ðeɪ wɝ fʊl sɪstɝz. ðeɪ aɪɾ əɹ əz ʃi pæst, ənizi ɔfən əz nɑt. ði oʊnli wʌn tə ɪɡnɔɹ əɹ wɑz dənɛl, ə dʒɹimi bɹaʊn sɪstɝ. ʃi hæd bɪn pɑɹɾ ə bɹɪŋɪŋ daʊn sɪuən sɑntʃ ən ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪleɪɾə, bʌt lɔst ɪn əɹ oʊn θɔts, ə sɑlətɛɹi wɪð noʊ fɹɛnz ivən ɪn əɹ oʊn ədʒɑ, ʃi simd ʌnəwɛɹ ðət ʃi hæd bɪn ʃʌvd əsaɪd. ʌðɝz wɝ ɔl tu əwɛɹ. bɛɹɪʃə, ə lin ən hɑɹd-aɪd ɡɹeɪ, ən kɛɹə, wɪð ðə fɛɹ hɛɹ ən blu aɪz ðəɾ əpɪɹɾ əkeɪʒənəli əmʌŋ tɛɹənz ən ɔl ði ɛɹəɡəns soʊ kɑmən tə ɡɹinz, wɛn soʊ fɑɹ əz tə kɝtsi. nɔɹin meɪɾ əz ɪf tə, ðən dɪd nɑt; bɪɡ-aɪɾ ən nɪɹli əz dʒɹimi əz dənɛl ət taɪmz, ən əz fɹɛnləs, ʃi ɹizɛntəɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn; ɪf ðə kipɝ keɪm fɹəm ðə waɪt, ɪn əɹ aɪz ɪt ʃʊɾə bɪn nɔɹin doʊvɑɹnə.

Alviarin finally left Elaida's apartments, as cool and collected as ever on the surface. Inside, she felt wrung out like a damp cloth. She managed to keep her legs steady down the long curving flights of stairs, marble even in the very heights. Liveried servants bowed and curtsied as they scurried about their tasks, seeing only the Keeper in all her Aes Sedai serenity. As she went lower, sisters began to appear, many wearing their shawls, fringed in the colors of their Ajahs, as if to emphasize by formality that they were full sisters. They eyed her as she passed, uneasy often as not. The only one to ignore her was Danelle, a dreamy Brown sister. She had been part of bringing down Siuan Sanche and raising Elaida, but lost in her own thoughts, a solitary with no friends even in her own Ajah, she seemed unaware that she had been shoved aside. Others were all too aware. Berisha, a lean and hard-eyed Gray, and Kera, with the fair hair and blue eyes that appeared occasionally among Tairens and all the arrogance so common to Greens, went so far as to curtsy. Norine made as if to, then did not; big-eyed and nearly as dreamy as Danelle at times, and as friendless, she resented Alviarin; if the Keeper came from the White, in her eyes it should have been Norine Dovarna.

ðə kɝɾəsi wɑz nɑt ɹikwaɪɝd təwɔɹd ðə kipɝ, nɑt fɹəm ə sɪstɝ, bʌt noʊ daʊt ðeɪ hoʊpt ʃi maɪɾ ɪntɝsid wɪð ɪleɪɾə ʃəd ðət bɪkʌm nɛsəsɛɹi. ði ʌðɝz mɪɹli wʌndɝd wʌt kəmænz ʃi kæɹid, wɛðɝ ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ wɑz tə bi sɪŋɡəld aʊt tədeɪ fəɹ səm feɪljɝ ɪn ði æmɪɝlɪnz aɪz. nɑɾ ivən ɹɛdz wɛnt wɪðɪn faɪv lɛvəlz ə ði æmɪɝlɪnz nu əpɑɹtməns ənlɛs sʌmənd, ən mɔɹ ðən wʌn sɪstɝ æktʃəli  hɪd wən ɪleɪɾə keɪm bɪloʊ. ðə vɛɹi ɛɹ sim hiɾəd, θɪk wɪð ə fɪɹ ðət hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɹɛbəlz əɹ mɛn tʃænəlɪŋ.

The courtesy was not required toward the Keeper, not from a sister, but no doubt they hoped she might intercede with Elaida should that become necessary. The others merely wondered what commands she carried, whether another sister was to be singled out today for some failure in the Amyrlin's eyes. Not even Reds went within five levels of the Amyrlin's new apartments unless summoned, and more than one sister actually hid when Elaida came below. The very air seemed heated, thick with a fear that had nothing to do with rebels or men channeling.

sɛvɹəl sɪstɝz tʃɹaɪd tə spik, bʌɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn bɹʌʃt pæst, bɛɹli pəlaɪt, hɑɹdli noʊɾɪsɪŋ wɝi blum ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz wən ʃi ɹəfjuz tə pɔz. ɪleɪɾə fɪld əɹ maɪn əz mʌtʃ əz ðɛɹz. ə wʊmən ə mɛni leɪɝz, ɪleɪɾə. ðə fɝs lʊk əɾ əɹ ʃoʊɾ ə bjuɾəfəl wʊmən fɪld wɪð dɪɡnəfaɪd ɹɪzɝv, ðə sɛkən ə wʊmən ə stil, stɝn əz ə bɛɹd bleɪd. ʃi oʊvɝwɛlmd wɛɹ ʌðɝz pɝsweɪɾəd, blʌdʒənd wɛɹ ʌðɝz tʃɹaɪd dɪploʊməsi əɹ ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz. ɛniwʌn u nu hɝ sɔ hɝ ɪntɛlədʒəns, bʌɾ oʊnli æftɝ ə taɪm dɪd jə ɹilaɪz ðət fəɹ ɔl əɹ bɹeɪnz, ʃi sɔ wʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə si, wəd tʃɹaɪ tə meɪk tʃɹu wʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə bi tʃɹu. ʌv ðə tu ɪndɪspjutæbli fɹaɪɾənɪŋ θɪŋz əbaʊt hɝ, ðə lɛsɝ wɑz ðət ʃi soʊ ɔfən səksiɾəd. ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ wɑz əɹ tælən fəɹ fɔɹtɛlɪŋ.

Several sisters tried to speak, but Alviarin brushed past, barely polite, hardly noticing worry bloom in their eyes when she refused to pause. Elaida filled her mind as much as theirs. A woman of many layers, Elaida. The first look at her showed a beautiful woman filled with dignified reserve, the second a woman of steel, stern as a bared blade. She overwhelmed where others persuaded, bludgeoned where others tried diplomacy or the Game of Houses. Anyone who knew her saw her intelligence, but only after a time did you realize that for all her brains, she saw what she wanted to see, would try to make true what she wanted to be true. Of the two indisputably frightening things about her, the lesser was that she so often succeeded. The greater was her Talent for Foretelling.

soʊ izi tə fɝɡɛt ðæt, ɪɹæɾɪk ən ɪnfɹikwənt; ɪt hæd bɪn soʊ lɔŋ sɪns ðə læs fɔɹtɛlɪŋ ðət ðə vɛɹi ʌnpɹədɪktəbɪlɪɾi meɪɾ ɪt stʃɹaɪk laɪk ə θʌndɝboʊlt. noʊ wʌn kəd seɪ wən ɪt wəd kʌm, nɑɾ ivən ɪleɪɾə, ən noʊ wʌn kəd seɪ wʌɾ ɪt wəd ɹɪvil. naʊ ɑlviɛɝɪn ɔlmoʊs fɛl ðə wʊmənz ʃæɾoʊi pɹɛzəns fɑloʊɪŋ ən wɑtʃɪŋ.

So easy to forget that, erratic and infrequent; it had been so long since the last Foretelling that the very unpredictability made it strike like a thunderbolt. No one could say when it would come, not even Elaida, and no one could say what it would reveal. Now Alviarin almost felt the woman's shadowy presence following and watching.

ɪt maɪt bi nɛsəsɛɹi tə kɪl əɹ jɛt. ɪf soʊ, ɪleɪɾə wəd nɑt bi ðə fɝst ʃi hæd kɪld ɪn sikɹət. stɪl, ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd tə teɪk ðət stɛp wɪθaʊɾ ɔɹɾɝz, əɹ ət lis pɝmɪʃən.

It might be necessary to kill her yet. If so, Elaida would not be the first she had killed in secret. Still, she hesitated to take that step without orders, or at least permission.

ʃi ɛntɝɾ əɹ oʊn əpɑɹtməns wɪð ə sɛns ə ɹɪlif, əz ðoʊ ɪleɪɾəz ʃeɪd kəd nɑt kɹɔs ðə θɹɛʃoʊld. ə fulɪʃ θɔt. ɪf ɪleɪɾə hæɾ ə səspɪʃən ə ðə tʃɹuθ, ə θaʊzən liɡz wəd nɑt kip əɹ fɹəm ɑlviɛɝɪnz θɹoʊt. ɪleɪɾə wəɾ ɪkspɛkt əɹ tə bi hɑɹɾ ət wɝk, pɝsənəli pɛnɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪnz sɪɡnətʃɝ ən sil - bʌt wɪtʃ ə ðoʊz ɔɹɾɝz wɝ æktʃəli  tə bi kæɹiɾ aʊt hæd jɛt tə bi dɪsaɪɾɪd. nɑt baɪ ɪleɪɾə, ʌv kɔɹs. nɔɹ baɪ hɝsɛlf.

She entered her own apartments with a sense of relief, as though Elaida's shade could not cross the threshold. A foolish thought. If Elaida had a suspicion of the truth, a thousand leagues would not keep her from Alviarin's throat. Elaida would expect her to be hard at work, personally penning orders for the Amyrlin's signature and seal - but which of those orders were actually to be carried out had yet to be decided. Not by Elaida, of course. Nor by herself.

ðə ɹumz wɝ smɔlɝ ðən ðoʊz ɪleɪɾə ɑkjəpaɪd, ðoʊ ðə silɪŋz ɹitʃt haɪɝ, ən ə bælkəni lʊkt oʊvɝ ðə ɡɹeɪt skwɛɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə taʊɝ fɹəm ə hʌnʒɹəd fiɾ ʌp. səmtaɪmz ʃi wɛn aʊɾ ɑn ðə bælkəni tə si tɑɹ vəlɑn spɹɛɾ aʊt bɪfɔɹ hɝ, ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst sɪɾi ɪn ðə wɝld, fɪld wɪð kaʊnləs θaʊzənz u wɝ lɛs ðən pisəz ɑn ə stoʊnz bɔɹd. ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz wɝ dəmɑni, peɪl stʃɹaɪpt wʊɾ ɪnleɪd wɪð pɝlʃɛl ən æmbɝ, bɹaɪt kɑɹpəts ɪn pæɾɝnz ə flaʊɝz ən skɹoʊlz, bɹaɪɾɝ tæpəstʃɹiz ə fɔɹəst ən flaʊɝz ən ɡɹeɪzɪŋ dɪɹ. ðeɪ hæd bɪlɔŋ tə ðə læst ɑkjəpən ə ðiz ɹumz, ən ɪf ʃi ɹɪteɪn əm fəɹ ɛni ɹizən bɪɑnd nɑt wɑntɪŋ tə weɪs taɪm tʃuzɪŋ nu, ɪt wɑz tə ɹimaɪn hɝsɛlf ə ðə pɹaɪs ə feɪljɝ. lin ʃɝif hæd dæbəld ɪn skimz ən feɪld, ən naʊ ʃi wɑz kʌɾ ɔf fɹəm ðə wʌn paʊɝ fɝɛvɝ, ə hɛlpləs ɹɛfjʊdʒi dɪpɛndən ɑn tʃɛɹɪɾi, dum tə ə laɪf ə mɪzɝi əntɪl ʃi iðɝ ɛndəɾ ɪɾ əɹ sɪmpli pʊɾ əɹ feɪs tə ðə wɔl ən daɪd. ɑlviɛɝɪn hæd hɝɾ ʌv ə fju stɪld wɪmən u mænədʒ tə sɝvaɪv, bʌt ʃi wəd daʊt ðoʊz stɔɹiz əntɪl ʃi mɛt wʌn. nɑt ðət ʃi hæd ðə slaɪɾəst dɪzaɪɝ tə də soʊ.

The rooms were smaller than those Elaida occupied, though the ceilings reached higher, and a balcony looked over the great square in front of the Tower from a hundred feet up. Sometimes she went out on the balcony to see Tar Valon spread out before her, the greatest city in the world, filled with countless thousands who were less than pieces on a stone's board. The furnishings were Domani, pale striped wood inlaid with pearlshell and amber, bright carpets in patterns of flowers and scrolls, brighter tapestries of forest and flowers and grazing deer. They had belonged to the last occupant of these rooms, and if she retained them for any reason beyond not wanting to waste time choosing new, it was to remind herself of the price of failure. Leane Sharif had dabbled in schemes and failed, and now she was cut off from the One Power forever, a helpless refugee dependent on charity, doomed to a life of misery until she either ended it or simply put her face to the wall and died. Alviarin had heard of a few stilled women who managed to survive, but she would doubt those stories until she met one. Not that she had the slightest desire to do so.

θɹu ðə wɪndoʊz ʃi kəd si ðə bɹaɪtnəs ə ɝli æftɝnun, jɛt bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz hæfweɪ əkɹɔs əɹ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, ðə laɪt sʌɾənli feɪɾəd ɪndə dɪm ivnɪŋ. ðə dɑɹknəs dɪd nɑt sɝpɹaɪz hɝ. ʃi tɝn ən wɛn tə hɝ niz ɪmiɾiətli. "ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs, aɪ lɪv tə sɝv." ə tɔl wʊmən ə dɑɹk ʃædoʊ ən sɪlvɝ laɪt stʊd bɪfɔɹ hɝ. mɛsænə.

Through the windows she could see the brightness of early afternoon, yet before she was halfway across her sitting room, the light suddenly faded into dim evening. The darkness did not surprise her. She turned and went to her knees immediately. "Great Mistress, I live to serve." A tall woman of dark shadow and silver light stood before her. Mesaana.

"tɛl mi wʌt hæpənd, tʃaɪld." ðə vɔɪs wɑz kɹɪstəl tʃaɪmz.

"Tell me what happened, child." The voice was crystal chimes.

ɑn əɹ niz, ɑlviɛɝɪn ɹɪpiɾɪd ɛvɹi wɝd ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə hæd sɛd, ðoʊ ʃi wʌndɝd waɪ ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi. ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ʃi hæd lɛft aʊɾ ənɪmpɔɹɾənt bɪts, ən mɛsænə nu ɛvɹi taɪm, dɪmændəɾ ɛvɹi wɝd, ɛvɹi dʒɛstʃɝ ən feɪʃəl ɪkspɹɛʃən. pleɪnli ʃi ivzdʒɹɑpt ɑn ðoʊz miɾɪŋz. ɑlviɛɝɪn hæd tʃɹaɪd tə wɝk aʊt ðə lɑdʒɪk ʌv ɪɾ ən feɪld. səm θɪŋz dɪd wɝk tə lɑdʒɪk, ðoʊ.

On her knees, Alviarin repeated every word that Elaida had said, though she wondered why it was necessary. In the beginning she had left out unimportant bits, and Mesaana knew every time, demanded every word, every gesture and facial expression. Plainly she eavesdropped on those meetings. Alviarin had tried to work out the logic of it and failed. Some things did work to logic, though.

ʃi hæd mɛɾ ʌðɝz ə ðə tʃoʊzən, hum fulz kɔl ðə fɔɹseɪkən. læn-fɪɹ hæd kʌm wɪðɪn ðə taʊɝ, ən ɡɹeɪndəl, ɪmpɪɹiəs ɪn ðɛɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ ən nɑlədʒ, meɪkɪŋ ɪt klɪɹ wɪθaʊt wɝdz ðəɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn wɑz fɑɹ bɪniθ ðɛm, ə skʌlɝi meɪd tə ɹʌn ɛɹənz ən ɹɪɡəl wɪð plɛʒɝ ɪf ʃi ɹəsivd ə kaɪnd wɝd. bɛləl hæd snætʃt ɑlviɛɝɪn əweɪ ɪn ðə naɪt waɪl ʃi slɛpt - tə wɛɹ ʃi stɪl dɪd nɑt noʊ; ʃi hæd wækən bæk ɪn əɹ oʊn bɛd, ən ðət hæd tɛɹəfaɪɾ əɹ ivən mɔɹ ðən biɪŋ ɪn ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl. tə hɪm ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ivən ə wɝm, nɑɾ ivən ə lɪvɪŋ θɪŋ, dʒʌst ə pis ɪn ə ɡeɪm, tə muv əɾ ɪz kəmænd. fɝs hæd bɪn ɪʃəml, jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ ði ʌðɝz, plʌkɪŋ əɹ aʊɾ ə ðə hɪɾən mæs ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ tə pleɪs əɹ əɾ ɪts hɛd.

She had met others of the Chosen, whom fools called the Forsaken. Lan-fear had come within the Tower, and Graendal, imperious in their strength and knowledge, making it clear without words that Alviarin was far beneath them, a scullery maid to run errands and wriggle with pleasure if she received a kind word. Be'lal had snatched Alviarin away in the night while she slept - to where she still did not know; she had wakened back in her own bed, and that had terrified her even more than being in the presence of a man who could channel. To him she was not even a worm, not even a living thing, just a piece in a game, to move at his command. First had been Ishamael, years before the others, plucking her out of the hidden mass of the Black Ajah to place her at its head.

tə itʃ ʃi hæd nɛlt, seɪɪŋ ðət ʃi lɪv tə sɝv ən minɪŋ ɪt, oʊbeɪɪŋ əz ðeɪ kəmændəd, wʌtɛvɝ ðə kəmænd. æftɝ ɔl, ðeɪ stʊɾ oʊnli ə stɛp bɪloʊ ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk hɪmsɛlf, ən ɪf ʃi wɑntəd ðə ɹɪwɔɹdz ə hɝ sɝvəs, ði ɪmɔɹtælɪɾi ɪt sim ðeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi pəzɛst, ɪt wɑz wɛl tə oʊbeɪ. tə itʃ ʃi nɛlt, ən oʊnli mɛsænə hæɾ əpɪɹd wɪð ən ɪnhjumən feɪs. ðɪs kloʊk ə ʃædoʊ ən laɪt mʌs bi woʊvən wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, bʌɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn kəd si noʊ wiv. ʃi hæd fɛl ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə lænfɝ ən ɡɹeɪndəl, hæd noʊn fɹəm ðə fɝst ɪnstən haʊ mʌtʃ stʃɹɔŋɝ ɪn ðə paʊɝ ðeɪ wɝ ðən ʃi, bʌɾ ɪn mɛsænə ʃi sɛnst . . . nʌθɪŋ. əz ɪf ðə wʊmən kəd nɑt tʃænəl əɾ ɔl.

To each she had knelt, saying that she lived to serve and meaning it, obeying as they commanded, whatever the command. After all, they stood only a step below the Great Lord of the Dark himself, and if she wanted the rewards of her service, the immortality it seemed they already possessed, it was well to obey. To each she knelt, and only Mesaana had appeared with an inhuman face. This cloak of shadow and light must be woven with the One Power, but Alviarin could see no weave. She had felt the strength of Lanfear and Graendal, had known from the first instant how much stronger in the Power they were than she, but in Mesaana she sensed . . . nothing. As if the woman could not channel at all.

ðə lɑdʒɪk wɑz klɪɹ, ən stʌnɪŋ. mɛsænə hɪd hɝsɛlf kəz ʃi maɪt bi ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd. ʃi mʌst ɹɪzaɪɾ ɪn ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf. ɑn ðə feɪs ʌv ɪt, ðət simd ɪmpɑsəbəl, jɛt nʌθɪŋ ɛls fɪt. ɡɪvən ðæt, ʃi mʌs bi wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz; ʃʊɹli ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əmʌŋ sɝvəns, baʊn tə leɪbɝ ən swɛt. bʌt hu? tu mɛni wɪmən hæd bɪn aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ fəɹ jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ ɪleɪɾəz sʌmənz, tu mɛni hæd noʊ kloʊs fɹɛnz, əɹ nʌn əɾ ɔl. mɛsænə mʌs bi wʌn ə ðoʊz. ɑlviɛɝɪn vɛɹi mʌtʃ wɑntəd tə noʊ. ivən ɪf ʃi kəd meɪk noʊ jus ʌv ɪt, nɑlədʒ wɑz paʊɝ.

The logic was clear, and stunning. Mesaana hid herself because she might be recognized. She must reside in the Tower itself. On the face of it, that seemed impossible, yet nothing else fit. Given that, she must be one of the sisters; surely she was not among servants, bound to labor and sweat. But who? Too many women had been out of the Tower for years before Elaida's summons, too many had no close friends, or none at all. Mesaana must be one of those. Alviarin very much wanted to know. Even if she could make no use of it, knowledge was power.

"soʊ əɹ ɪleɪɾə hæz hæɾ ə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ," mɛsænə tʃaɪmd, ən ɑlviɛɝɪn ɹilaɪzd wɪð ə stɑɹt ðət ʃi hæd ɹitʃt ði ɛn ə hɝ ɹəsaɪɾəl. hɝ niz hɝt, bʌt ʃi nu bɛɾɝ ðən tə ɹaɪz wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən. ə fɪŋɡɝ ə ʃædoʊ tæp sɪlvɝ lɪps θɔtfəli. hæd ʃi sin ɛni sɪstɝ meɪk ðət dʒɛstʃɝ? "stʃɹeɪnʒ ðət ʃi ʃəd bi soʊ klɪɹ ən soʊ ɪɹæɾɪk ət ðə seɪm taɪm. ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz ə ɹɛɹ tælənt, ən moʊst u hæɾ ɪt spoʊk soʊ oʊnli poʊəts kəɾ ʌndɝstænd. juʒəwəli əntɪl ɪt wɑz tu leɪt tə mæɾɝ, ət list. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɔlweɪz bɪkeɪm klɪɹ ðɛn." ɑlviɛɝɪn kɛp saɪlənt. nʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən kənvɝst; ðeɪ kəmændəɾ əɹ dɪmændəd. "ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ pɹidɪkʃənz. ðə ɹɛbəlz bɹeɪkɪŋ - laɪk ə ɹɑɾən mɛlən? - wɑz ðət pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt?"

"So our Elaida has had a Foretelling," Mesaana chimed, and Alviarin realized with a start that she had reached the end of her recital. Her knees hurt, but she knew better than to rise without permission. A finger of shadow tapped silver lips thoughtfully. Had she seen any sister make that gesture? "Strange that she should be so clear and so erratic at the same time. It was always a rare Talent, and most who had it spoke so only poets could understand. Usually until it was too late to matter, at least. Everything always became clear then." Alviarin kept silent. None of the Chosen conversed; they commanded or demanded. "Interesting predictions. The rebels breaking - like a rotten melon? - was that part of it?"

"aɪ æm nɑt sɝɾən, ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs," ʃi sɛd sloʊli - hæɾ ɪt bɪn? - bʌt mɛsænə oʊnli ʃɹʌɡd.

"I am not certain, Great Mistress," she said slowly - had it been? - but Mesaana only shrugged.

"iðɝ ɪts əɹ ɪts nɑt, ən iðɝ weɪ kən bi juzd."

"Either it is or it is not, and either way can be used."

"ʃi ɪz deɪnʒɝəs, ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs. hɝ tælən kəd ɹɪvil wʌt ʃəd nɑt bi ɹɪvild."

"She is dangerous, Great Mistress. Her Talent could reveal what should not be revealed."

kɹɪstəlaɪn læftɝ ænsɝd hɝ. "sʌtʃ æz? ju? jəɹ blæk ədʒɑ sɪstɝz? əɹ pɝhæps jə θɪŋk tə seɪfɡɑɹd mi? jə ɑɹ ə ɡʊd ɡɝl səmtaɪmz, tʃaɪld." ðət sɪlvɝi vɔɪs wɑz əmjuzd. ɑlviɛɝɪn fɛlt əɹ feɪs hiɾ ən hoʊp ðət mɛsænə ɹɛd ðə ʃeɪm, nɑt ði æŋɡɝ. "du jə sədʒɛs ðəɾ əɹ ɪleɪɾə ʃəd bi dɪspoʊzd ʌv, tʃaɪld? nɑt jɛt, aɪ θɪŋk. ʃiz əɹ juzɪz stɪl. ət list əntɪl jʌŋ ælθɹ ɹitʃəz ʌs, ən vɛɹi laɪkli æftɝ. ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ əɹ ɔɹɾɝz ən si tə ðɛm. wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ pleɪ hɝ lɪɾəl ɡeɪmz ɪz sɝɾənli əmjuzɪŋ. jə tʃɪlʒɹən ɔlmoʊs mætʃ ði ədʒɑ ət taɪmz. wɪl ʃi səksiɾ ɪn hævɪŋ ðə kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən ən ðə kwin ə sɑldɑiə kɪdnæpt? jə ɛɛs sədaɪ juz tə də ðæt, dɪdn ju, bʌt nɑt fəɹ - wʌt? - tu θaʊzən jɪɹz? hu wɪl ʃi tʃɹaɪ tə pʊɾ ɑn ðə θɹoʊn ə kɛɹhin? wɪl ði ɔfɝ ə biɪŋ kɪŋ ɪn tɛɹ oʊvɝkʌm ðə haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪnz dɪslaɪk ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ? wɪl əɹ ɪleɪɾə tʃoʊk ɑn əɹ oʊn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən fɝst? ə pɪɾi ʃi ɹɪzɪsts ði aɪdiə ʌv ə lɑɹdʒɝ ɑɹmi. aɪɾ əv θɔɾ əɹ æmbɪʃənz wəd lip ət ðæt."

Crystalline laughter answered her. "Such as? You? Your Black Ajah sisters? Or perhaps you think to safeguard me? You are a good girl sometimes, child." That silvery voice was amused. Alviarin felt her face heat and hoped that Mesaana read the shame, not the anger. "Do you suggest that our Elaida should be disposed of, child? Not yet, I think. She has her uses still. At least until young al'Thor reaches us, and very likely after. Write out her orders and see to them. Watching her play her little games is certainly amusing. You children almost match the ajah at times. Will she succeed in having the King of Illian and the Queen of Saldaea kidnapped? You Aes Sedai used to do that, didn't you, but not for - what? - two thousand years? Who will she try to put on the throne of Cairhien? Will the offer of being king in Tear overcome the High Lord Darlin's dislike of Aes Sedai? Will our Elaida choke on her own frustration first? A pity she resists the idea of a larger army. I'd have thought her ambitions would leap at that."

ði ɪntɝvju wɑz kʌmɪŋ tə ə kloʊs - ðeɪ nɛvɝ læstəd lɔŋɡɝ ðən fəɹ ɑlviɛɝɪn tə ɹipɔɹɾ ən bi ɡɪvən əɹ oʊn ɔɹɾɝz - bʌt ʃi hæɾ ə kwɛstʃən jɛt tə æsk. "ðə blæk taʊɝ, ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs." ɑlviɛɝɪn wɛɾ əɹ lɪps. ʃi hæd lɝn mʌtʃ sɪns ɪʃəml əpɪɹd tə hɝ, nɑt lis ðət ðə tʃoʊzən wɝ niðɝ ɑmnɪpəɾənt nɔɹ ɔl-noʊɪŋ. ʃi hæd ɹɪzən kəz ɪʃəml kɪld əɹ pɹɛɾəsɛsɝ ɪn ɪz ɹæθ ət dɪskʌvɝɪŋ wʌt dʒɑɹnə məlɑɹi hæd bɪɡʌn, jɛɾ ɪt hæd nɑɾ ɛndəd fəɹ ənʌðɝ tu jɪɹz, æftɝ ðə dɛθ ʌv ənʌðɝ æmɪɝlɪn. ʃi ɔfən wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ɪleɪɾə hæd hæɾ ɛni hæn ɪn ðə dɛθ ə ðət wʌn, siɹɪn veɪu; sɝɾənli ðə blæk ədʒɑ hæd nɑt. dʒɑɹnə hæd hæd tæmɹə ɑspɪnjə, ði æmɪɝlɪn bɪfɔɹ siɹɪn, skwiz laɪk ə bʌntʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪps - əbteɪnɪŋ lɪɾəl dʒus, əz ɪt tɝn aʊt - ən meɪɾ əɹ əpɪɹ tə hæv daɪɾ ɪn əɹ slip, bʌɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn ən ði ʌðɝ twɛlv sɪstɝz ə ðə səpɹim kaʊnsəl hæd peɪɾ ɪn peɪn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd kənvɪns ɪʃəml ðeɪ hæd noʊ ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi fəɹ ɪt. ðə tʃoʊzən wɝ nɑɾ ɔl-paʊɝfəl, ən ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, jɛt səmtaɪmz ðeɪ nu wʌt noʊ wʌn ɛls dɪd. æskɪŋ kəd bi deɪnʒɝəs, ðoʊ. "waɪ" wɑz ðə moʊs deɪnʒɝəs; ðə tʃoʊzən nɛvɝ laɪk tə bi æskt waɪ. "ɪz ɪt seɪf tə sɛn fɪfti sɪstɝz tə dil wɪð ðɛm, ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs?"

The interview was coming to a close - they never lasted longer than for Alviarin to report and be given her own orders - but she had a question yet to ask. "The Black Tower, Great Mistress." Alviarin wet her lips. She had learned much since Ishamael appeared to her, not least that the Chosen were neither omnipotent nor all-knowing. She had risen because Ishamael killed her predecessor in his wrath at discovering what Jarna Malari had begun, yet it had not ended for another two years, after the death of another Amyrlin. She often wondered whether Elaida had had any hand in the death of that one, Sierin Vayu; certainly the Black Ajah had not. Jarna had had Tamra Ospenya, the Amyrlin before Sierin, squeezed like a bunch of grapes - obtaining little juice, as it turned out - and made her appear to have died in her sleep, but Alviarin and the other twelve sisters of the Supreme Council had paid in pain before they could convince Ishamael they had no responsibility for it. The Chosen were not all-powerful, and they did not know everything, yet sometimes they knew what no one else did. Asking could be dangerous, though. "Why" was the most dangerous; the Chosen never liked to be asked why. "Is it safe to send fifty sisters to deal with them, Great Mistress?"

aɪz ɡloʊɪŋ laɪk twɪn fʊl munz ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əɹ ɪn saɪləns, ən ə tʃɪl slɪɾ ʌp ɑlviɛɝɪnz spaɪn. dʒɑɹnəz feɪt flæʃt ɪndə hɝ maɪnd. pʌblɪkli ɡɹeɪ, dʒɑɹnə hæd nɛvɝ ʃoʊn ɛni ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil noʊ wʌn nu ə jus fəɹ - əntɪl ðə deɪ ʃi bɪkeɪm snɛɹɾ ɪn wʌn əntʃɹaɪd fəɹ sɛntʃɝiz. haʊ tə æktəveɪɾ ɪt ɹɪmeɪn ə mɪstɝi stɪl. fəɹ tɛn deɪz noʊ wʌn kəd ɹitʃ hɝ, oʊnli lɪsən tə hɝ θɹoʊt-ɹɛntʃɪŋ ʃɹiks. moʊst ə ðə taʊɝ θɔt dʒɑɹnə ə mɑɾəl ə vɝtʃu; wən wʌt kəd bi ɹəkʌvɝd wɑz bɛɹid, ɛvɹi sɪstɝ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn ən ɛvɹi wʌn u kəd ɹitʃ ðə sɪɾi ɪn taɪm ətɛndəd ðə fjunɝəl.

Eyes glowing like twin full moons regarded her in silence, and a chill slid up Alviarin's spine. Jarna's fate flashed into her mind. Publicly Gray, Jarna had never shown any interest in the ter'angreal no one knew a use for - until the day she became snared in one untried for centuries. How to activate it remained a mystery still. For ten days no one could reach her, only listen to her throat-wrenching shrieks. Most of the Tower thought Jarna a model of virtue; when what could be recovered was buried, every sister in Tar Valon and every one who could reach the city in time attended the funeral.

"ju hæv kjʊɹiɑsəɾi, tʃaɪld," mɛsænə sɛd faɪnəli. "ðæt kən bi ən æsɛt, pɹɑpɝli dɝɛktəd. ɹɔŋli dɝɛktəd. . . ." ðə θɹɛt hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ laɪk ə ɡlimɪŋ dæɡɝ.

"You have curiosity, child," Mesaana said finally. "That can be an asset, properly directed. Wrongly directed. . . ." The threat hung in the air like a gleaming dagger.

"aɪ wɪl dɝɛkt ɪɾ əz jə kəmænd, ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs," ɑlviɛɝɪn bɹið hɔɹsli. hɝ maʊθ wɑz dʒɹaɪ əz dʌst. "oʊnli əz jə kəmænd." bʌt ʃi wəd stɪl si ðət noʊ blæk sɪstɝz wɛnt wɪð tʌvaɪn. mɛsænə muvd, lumɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ soʊ ʃi hæd tə kɹeɪn əɹ nɛk tə lʊk ʌp ət ðət feɪs ə laɪɾ ən ʃædoʊ, ən sʌɾənli ʃi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðə tʃoʊzən nu hɝ θɔts.

"I will direct it as you command, Great Mistress," Alviarin breathed hoarsely. Her mouth was dry as dust. "Only as you command." But she would still see that no Black sisters went with Toveine. Mesaana moved, looming over her so she had to crane her neck to look up at that face of light and shadow, and suddenly she wondered whether the Chosen knew her thoughts.

"ɪf jə wəd sɝv mi, tʃaɪld, ðən jə mʌst sɝv ən oʊbeɪ mi. nɑt sɛmɝhɪdʒ əɹ dɪmɑndɝd. nɑt ɡɹeɪndəl əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls. oʊnli mi. ən ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt mi əbʌv ɔl seɪv hɪm."

"If you would serve me, child, then you must serve and obey me. Not Semirhage or Demandred. Not Graendal or anyone else. Only me. And the Great Lord, of course, but me above all save him."

"aɪ lɪv tə sɝv ju, ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs." ðət keɪm aʊɾ ɪn ə kɹoʊk, bʌt ʃi mænədʒ tə ɛmfəsaɪz ði æɾəd wɝd.

"I live to serve you, Great Mistress." That came out in a croak, but she managed to emphasize the added word.

fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmən sɪlvɝi aɪz stɛɹd daʊn əɾ əɹ ənblɪŋkɪŋ. ðən mɛsænə sɛd, "ɡʊd. əl titʃ ju, ðɛn. bʌt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðəɾ ə pjupəl ɪz nɑɾ ə titʃɝ. aɪ tʃuz u lɝnz wʌt, ən aɪ dɪsaɪd wən ðeɪ kən meɪk jus ʌv ɪt. ʃəɾ aɪ faɪn juv pæst ɑn ðə smɔləst skɹæp əɹ juzd ivən ə hɛɹ ʌv ɪt wɪθaʊt maɪ dɝɛkʃən, əl ɪkstɪŋɡwɪʃ ju."

For a long moment silvery eyes stared down at her unblinking. Then Mesaana said, "Good. I will teach you, then. But remember that a pupil is not a teacher. I choose who learns what, and I decide when they can make use of it. Should I find you have passed on the smallest scrap or used even a hair of it without my direction, I will extinguish you."

ɑlviɛɝɪn wɝk mɔɪstʃɝ bæk ɪndə hɝ maʊθ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ æŋɡɝ ɪn ðoʊz tʃaɪmz, oʊnli sɝɾənti. "aɪ lɪv tə sɝv ju, ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs. aɪ lɪv tə oʊbeɪ ju, ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs." ʃi hæd dʒʌs lɝn sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə tʃoʊzən ðət ʃi kəd hɑɹdli kɹɛɾət. nɑlədʒ wɑz paʊɝ.

Alviarin worked moisture back into her mouth. There was no anger in those chimes, only certainty. "I live to serve you, Great Mistress. I live to obey you, Great Mistress." She had just learned something about the Chosen that she could hardly credit. Knowledge was power.

"ju hæv ə lɪɾəl stʃɹɛŋkθ, tʃaɪld. nɑt mʌtʃ, bʌɾ ɪnʌf."

"You have a little strength, child. Not much, but enough."

ə wiv əpɪɹd simɪŋli fɹəm noʊwɛɹ.

A weave appeared seemingly from nowhere.

"ðɪs," mɛsænə tʃaɪmd, "ɪz kɔld ə ɡeɪtweɪ."

"This," Mesaana chimed, "is called a gateway."

peɪdʒɹən naɪl ɡɹʌntɪɾ əz mɔɹɡeɪs pleɪst ə waɪt stoʊn ɑn ðə bɔɹd wɪð ə smaɪl ə tʃɹaɪəmf. lɛsɝ pleɪɝz maɪt sɛt tu dʌzən mɔɹ stoʊnz itʃ jɛt, bʌɾ i kəd si ði ɪnɛvəɾəbəl kɔɹs naʊ, ən soʊ kəd ʃi. ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən siɾəd ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə smɔl teɪbəl hæd pleɪd tə luz, tə meɪk ðə ɡeɪm kloʊs ɪnʌf tə bi ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ fəɹ hɪm, bʌɾ ɪt hæd nɑt teɪkən əɹ lɔŋ tə lɝn ðət ðət lɛd tə əbliɾɝeɪʃən. nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðəɾ i wɑz klɛvɝ ɪnʌf tə si θɹu ðə sʌbtɝfjudʒ ən wəd nɑt tɑlɝeɪɾ ɪt. naʊ ʃi plaɪɾ ɔl əɹ skɪl ən mænədʒ tə wɪn nɪɹli hæf ðɛɹ ɡeɪmz. noʊ wʌn hæd biɾən ɪm soʊ ɔfən ɪn ə ɡʊd mɛni jɪɹz.

Pedron Niall grunted as Morgase placed a white stone on the board with a smile of triumph. Lesser players might set two dozen more stones each yet, but he could see the inevitable course now, and so could she. In the beginning the golden-haired woman seated on the other side of the small table had played to lose, to make the game close enough to be interesting for him, but it had not taken her long to learn that that led to obliteration. Not to mention that he was clever enough to see through the subterfuge and would not tolerate it. Now she plied all her skill and managed to win nearly half their games. No one had beaten him so often in a good many years.

"ðə ɡeɪm ɪz jʊɹz," hi toʊl hɝ, ən ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ nɑɾəd. wɛl, ʃi wəd bi kwin əɡɛn; hi wəd si tə ðæt. ɪn ɡɹin sɪlk, wɪð ə haɪ leɪs kɑlɝ bɹʌʃɪŋ əɹ tʃɪn, ʃi lʊkt ɛvɹi ɪntʃ ə kwin dɪspaɪt ðə ʃin ə pɝspɝeɪʃən ɑn əɹ smuð tʃiks. ʃi hɑɹdli əpɪɹɾ oʊld ɪnʌf tə hæv ə dɔɾɝ ɪleɪnz eɪdʒ, ðoʊ, mʌtʃ lɛs ə sʌn ɡɔɪnz.

"The game is yours," he told her, and the Queen of Andor nodded. Well, she would be Queen again; he would see to that. In green silk, with a high lace collar brushing her chin, she looked every inch a queen despite the sheen of perspiration on her smooth cheeks. She hardly appeared old enough to have a daughter Elayne's age, though, much less a son Gawyn's.

"ju dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz aɪ sɔ ðə tʃɹæp jə wɝ leɪɪŋ fɹəm jəɹ θɝɾi-fɝst stoʊn, lɔɹd naɪl, ən jə tʊk maɪ feɪn fɹəm ðə fɔɹɾi-θɝd stoʊn tə bi maɪ ɹil ətæk." ɪksaɪtmən spɑɹkəld ɪn əɹ blu aɪz; mɔɹɡeɪs laɪk tə wɪn. ʃi laɪk pleɪɪŋ tə wɪn.

"You did not realize I saw the trap you were laying from your thirty-first stone, Lord Niall, and you took my feint from the forty-third stone to be my real attack." Excitement sparkled in her blue eyes; Morgase liked to win. She liked playing to win.

ɪt wɑz ɔl mɛn tə lʌl hɪm, ʌv kɔɹs, ðə pleɪɪŋ ət stoʊnz, ðə pəlaɪtnəs. mɔɹɡeɪs nu ʃi wɑz ə pɹɪznɝ ɪn ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs ə ðə laɪɾ ɪn ɔl bʌt neɪm, ɔlbiɪɾ ə lʌɡʒɝiəsli pæmpɝd pɹɪznɝ. ən ə sikɹət wʌn. hi hæɾ əlaʊd stɔɹiz ə hɝ pɹɛzəns tə spɹɛd, bʌɾ ɪʃud noʊ pɹɑkləmeɪʃənz. ændɝ hæd tu stʃɹɔŋ ə hɪstɝi ʌv əpoʊzɪŋ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. hi wəɾ ənaʊns nʌθɪŋ əntɪl lidʒənz muvd ɪndə ændɝ, wɪð əɹ ðɛɹ fɪɡjɝhɛd. mɔɹɡeɪs sɝɾənli nu ðæt, əz wɛl. vɛɹi pɹɑbli ʃi ɔlsoʊ nu hi wɑz əwɛɹ ə hɝ ətɛmps tə sɑfən hɪm. ðə tʃɹiɾi ʃi hæd saɪnd ɡeɪv ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɹaɪts ɪn ændɝ ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ pəzɛst ɛniwɛɹ ɪksɛp hɪɹ ɪn ɑmɑdɪʃiə, ən i ɪkspɛktəd ðət ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi plæn haʊ tə laɪɾən ɪz hæn ɑn əɹ lænd, haʊ tə ɹimuv ɪz hæn ɔltəɡɛðɝ əz sun əz ʃi kʊd. ʃi hæɾ oʊnli saɪn kəz i bækt əɹ ɪndə ə kɔɹnɝ, jɛt kənfaɪn ɪn ðət kɔɹnɝ, ʃi fɔɾ ɑn əz skɪlfəli əz ʃi mənuvɝɾ ɑn ə stoʊnz bɔɹd. fəɹ wʌn soʊ bjuɾəfəl, ʃi wɑz ə tʌf wʊmən. noʊ, ʃi wɑz tʌf, ən ðət wɑz ðæt. ʃi dɪd lɛt hɝsɛlf bi kɑɾ ʌp ɪn ðə pjʊɹ plɛʒɝ ə ðə ɡeɪm, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt kaʊn ðəɾ ə fɔlt wən ɪt ɡeɪv ɪm soʊ mɛni plɛzən moʊməns.

It was all meant to lull him, of course, the playing at stones, the politeness. Morgase knew she was a prisoner in the Fortress of the Light in all but name, albeit a luxuriously pampered prisoner. And a secret one. He had allowed stories of her presence to spread, but issued no proclamations. Andor had too strong a history of opposing the Children of the Light. He would announce nothing until legions moved into Andor, with her their figurehead. Morgase certainly knew that, as well. Very probably she also knew he was aware of her attempts to soften him. The treaty she had signed gave the Children rights in Andor they had never possessed anywhere except here in Amadicia, and he expected that she already planned how to lighten his hand on her land, how to remove his hand altogether as soon as she could. She had only signed because he backed her into a corner, yet confined in that corner, she fought on as skillfully as she maneuvered on a stones board. For one so beautiful, she was a tough woman. No, she was tough, and that was that. She did let herself be caught up in the pure pleasure of the game, but he could not count that a fault when it gave him so many pleasant moments.

hæɾ i bɪn ivən twɛnti jɪɹz jʌŋɡɝ, hi maɪɾ əv pleɪd mɔɹ tə hɝ tʃɹu ɡeɪm. lɔŋ jɪɹz əz ə wɪɾoʊɝ stʃɹɛtʃt bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt hæd lɪɾəl taɪm fəɹ plɛzəntʃɹiz wɪð wɪmən, lɪɾəl taɪm fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp biɪŋ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. hæɾ i bɪn twɛnti jɪɹz jʌŋɡɝ - wɛl, twɛnti-faɪv - ən ʃi nɑt tʃɹeɪn baɪ ðə tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪtʃəz. ɪt wɑz izi tə fɝɡɛt ðæt, ɪn əɹ pɹɛzəns. ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɑz ə sɪŋk ʌv ɪnɪkwəɾi ən ðə ʃædoʊ, ən ʃi tʌtʃt dipli baɪ ɪt. ɹɑɾəm əsunɑwə, ðə haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ, wʊɾə tʃɹaɪɾ əɹ fəɹ əɹ mʌnθs ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən hæŋd əɹ wɪθaʊt dɪleɪ, hæd naɪl əlaʊɾ ɪt. hi saɪd ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli.

Had he been even twenty years younger, he might have played more to her true game. Long years as a widower stretched behind him, and the Lord Captain Commander of the Children of the Light had little time for pleasantries with women, little time for anything except being Lord Captain Commander. Had he been twenty years younger - well, twenty-five - and she not trained by the Tar Valon witches. It was easy to forget that, in her presence. The White Tower was a sink of iniquity and the Shadow, and she touched deeply by it. Rhadam Asunawa, the High Inquisitor, would have tried her for her months in the White Tower and hanged her without delay, had Niall allowed it. He sighed regretfully.

mɔɹɡeɪs kɛpt əɹ vɪktɔɹiəs smaɪl, bʌt ðoʊz bɪɡ aɪz stʌɾid ɪz feɪs wɪð ən ɪntɛlədʒəns ʃi kəd nɑt haɪd. hi fɪld əɹ ɡɑbləɾ ən ɪz oʊn wɪð waɪn fɹəm ðə sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə boʊl ə kul wɔɾɝ ðət hæd bɪn aɪs ə lɪɾəl waɪl əɡoʊ.

Morgase kept her victorious smile, but those big eyes studied his face with an intelligence she could not hide. He filled her goblet and his own with wine from the silver pitcher sitting in a bowl of cool water that had been ice a little while ago.

"maɪ lɔɹd naɪl. . . ." ðə hɛzəteɪʃən wɑz dʒʌst ɹaɪt, ðə slɪm hæn hæf-stʃɹɛtʃt əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl təwɔɹd hɪm, ði æɾəd ɹɪspɛkt ɪn haʊ ʃi ədʒɹɛs hɪm. wʌns ʃi hæd kɔld ɪm sɪmpli naɪl, wɪð mɔɹ kəntɛmp ðən ʃi wʊɾə hændəɾ ə dʒɹʌŋkən ɡɹum. ðə hɛzəteɪʃən wʊɾə bɪn dʒʌst ɹaɪt hæɾ i nɑt hæd ðə mɛʒɝ ə hɝ. "maɪ lɔɹd naɪl, ʃʊɹli jə kən ɔɹɾɝ ɡɑləd tə æmədɔɹ soʊ aɪ meɪ si hɪm. dʒʌs fəɹ ə deɪ."

"My Lord Niall. . . ." The hesitation was just right, the slim hand half-stretched across the table toward him, the added respect in how she addressed him. Once she had called him simply Niall, with more contempt than she would have handed a drunken groom. The hesitation would have been just right had he not had the measure of her. "My Lord Niall, surely you can order Galad to Amador so I may see him. Just for a day."

"aɪ ɹəɡɹɛt," hi ɹɪplaɪd smuðli, "ðæt ɡɑlədz duɾiz kip ɪm ɪn ðə nɔɹθ. jə ʃəd bi pɹaʊd; hiz wʌn ə ðə bɛs jʌŋ ɔfəsɝz əmʌŋ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən." hɝ stɛpsʌn wɑz ə lɛvɝ tə juz ɑn əɹ ət nid, wʌn bɛs juz naʊ baɪ kipɪŋ ɪm əweɪ. ðə jʌŋ mæn wɑz ə ɡʊɾ ɔfəsɝ, pɝhæps ðə bɛs tə dʒɔɪn ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɪn naɪlz taɪm, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə pʊt stʃɹeɪnz ɑn ɪz oʊθ baɪ lɛɾɪŋ ɪm noʊ hɪz mʌðɝ wɑz hɪɹ, ən ə "ɡɛst" oʊnli baɪ kɝɾəsi.

"I regret," he replied smoothly, "that Galad's duties keep him in the north. You should be proud; he is one of the best young officers among the Children." Her stepson was a lever to use on her at need, one best used now by keeping him away. The young man was a good officer, perhaps the best to join the Children in Niall's time, and there was no need to put strains on his oath by letting him know his mother was here, and a "guest" only by courtesy.

noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə slaɪt taɪɾənɪŋ ə hɝ maʊθ, kwɪkli ɡɔn, bɪtʃɹeɪɾ əɹ dɪsəpɔɪnmənt. ðɪs wɑz nɑt ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi hæd meɪd ðət ɹɪkwɛst, nɔɹ wəɾ ɪt bi ðə læst. mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkən dɪd nɑt sɝɛndɝ dʒʌs kəz ɪt wɑz pleɪn ʃi wɑz biɾən. "æz jə seɪ, maɪ lɔɹd naɪl," ʃi sɛd, soʊ mikli ðəɾ i nɪɹli tʃoʊkt ɑn ɪz waɪn. səbmɪsɪvnəs wɑz ə nu tæktɪk, wʌn ʃi mʌst əv wɝkt ʌp wɪð dɪfəkəlti. "ɪɾ ɪz dʒʌst ə mʌðɝz - "

No more than a slight tightening of her mouth, quickly gone, betrayed her disappointment. This was not the first time she had made that request, nor would it be the last. Morgase Trakand did not surrender just because it was plain she was beaten. "As you say, my Lord Niall," she said, so meekly that he nearly choked on his wine. Submissiveness was a new tactic, one she must have worked up with difficulty. "It is just a mother's - "

"maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ?" ə dip, ɹɛzənən vɔɪs bɹoʊk ɪn fɹəm ðə dɔɹweɪ. "aɪ fɪɹ aɪ hæv ɪmpɔɹɾənt nuz ðət kænɑt weɪt, maɪ lɔɹd." æbdɛl oʊmɝnə stʊd tɔl ɪn ðə waɪt-ænd-ɡoʊl tɑbɝɾ ʌv ə lɔɹd kæptən ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, boʊl feɪs fɹeɪm baɪ wɪŋz ʌv waɪɾ əɾ ɪz tɛmpəlz, dɑɹk aɪz dip ən θɔtfəl. fɹəm hɛd tə toʊ hi wɑz fɪɹləs ən kəmændɪŋ. ən ə ful, ðoʊ ðət wɑz nɑɾ əpɛɹən əɾ ə ɡlæns.

"My Lord Captain Commander?" a deep, resonant voice broke in from the doorway. "I fear I have important news that cannot wait, my Lord." Abdel Omerna stood tall in the white-and-gold tabard of a Lord Captain of the Children of the Light, bold face framed by wings of white at his temples, dark eyes deep and thoughtful. From head to toe he was fearless and commanding. And a fool, though that was not apparent at a glance.

mɔɹɡeɪs dʒɹu ɪn ɑn hɝsɛlf ət ðə saɪɾ ʌv oʊmɝnə, soʊ smɔl ə moʊʃən moʊs mɛn wəd nɑɾ əv noʊɾəst. ʃi bɪlivd ɪm spaɪmæstɝ fəɹ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, əz ɛvɹiwʌn dɪd, ə mæn tə bi fɪɹɾ ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz əsunɑwə, pɝhæps mɔɹ. ivən oʊmɝnə hɪmsɛlf dɪd nɑt noʊ hi wɑz bʌɾ ə dəkɔɪ tə kip aɪz əweɪ fɹəm ðə tʃɹu mæstɝ ə spaɪz, ə mæn noʊn oʊnli tə naɪl hɪmsɛlf. sɛbæn beɪlwɝ, naɪlz dʒɹaɪ lɪɾəl stɪk ʌv ə sɛkɹətɛɹi. jɛt dəkɔɪ əɹ nɑt, sʌmθɪŋ jusfəl dɪd pæs θɹu oʊmɝnəz hænz ɑn əkeɪʒən. ɑn ɹɛɹ əkeɪʒənz, sʌmθɪŋ daɪɹ. naɪl hæd noʊ daʊts wʌt ðə mæn hæd bɹɔt; nʌθɪŋ ɛls ɪksɛpt ɹænd ælθɹ ət ðə ɡeɪts wʊɾə sɛn ɪm bɑɹdʒɪŋ ɪn ðɪs weɪ. ðə laɪt sɛn ɪt wɑz ɔl ə ɹʌɡ mɝtʃəns mædnəs.

Morgase drew in on herself at the sight of Omerna, so small a motion most men would not have noticed. She believed him spymaster for the Children, as everyone did, a man to be feared almost as much as Asunawa, perhaps more. Even Omerna himself did not know he was but a decoy to keep eyes away from the true master of spies, a man known only to Niall himself. Sebban Balwer, Niall's dry little stick of a secretary. Yet decoy or not, something useful did pass through Omerna's hands on occasion. On rare occasions, something dire. Niall had no doubts what the man had brought; nothing else except Rand al'Thor at the gates would have sent him barging in this way. The Light send it was all a rug merchant's madness.

"aɪ fɪɹ əɹ ɡeɪmɪŋ ɪz dʌn fəɹ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ," naɪl toʊl mɔɹɡeɪs, stændɪŋ. hi ɔfɝɾ əɹ ə slaɪt baʊ əz ʃi ɹoʊz, ən ʃi æknɑlɪdʒd ɪt baɪ ɪnklaɪnɪŋ əɹ hɛd.

"I fear our gaming is done for this morning," Niall told Morgase, standing. He offered her a slight bow as she rose, and she acknowledged it by inclining her head.

"əntɪl ðɪs ivnɪŋ, pɝhæps?" hɝ vɔɪs stɪl hɛl ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs dɑsəl toʊn. "ðæɾ ɪz, ɪf jəl daɪn wɪð mi?"

"Until this evening, perhaps?" Her voice still held that almost docile tone. "That is, if you will dine with me?"

naɪl æksɛptɪd, ʌv kɔɹs. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛɹ ʃi wɑz liɾɪŋ wɪð ðɪs nu tæktɪk - nɑt wɛɹ ən ɑf maɪt səpoʊz, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ - bʌɾ ɪt wəd bi əmjuzɪŋ tə faɪn aʊt. ðə wʊmən wɑz fʊl ə sɝpɹaɪzəz. sətʃ ə pɪɾi ʃi wɑz teɪntɪd baɪ ðə wɪtʃəz.

Niall accepted, of course. He did not know where she was leading with this new tactic - not where an oaf might suppose, he was sure - but it would be amusing to find out. The woman was full of surprises. Such a pity she was tainted by the witches.

oʊmɝnə ədvænst əz fɑɹ əz ðə ɡɹeɪt sʌnflɛɹ ʌv ɡoʊld, sɛɾ ɪn ðə flɔɹ, ðət hæd bɪn wɔɹn baɪ fiɾ ən niz oʊvɝ sɛntʃɝiz. ɪt wɑz ə pleɪn ɹum əsaɪd fɹəm ðəɾ ən ðə kæptʃɝd bænɝz ðət laɪn ðə wɔlz haɪ bɪniθ ðə silɪŋ, eɪdʒ-tæɾɝd ən wɔɹn. oʊmɝnə wɑtʃt əɹ skɝɾ ɝaʊn ɪm wɪθaʊt ɹɪli æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ ɪz pɹɛzəns, ən wən ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn hɝ, hi sɛd, "aɪ hæv nɑt jɛt faʊn ɪleɪn əɹ ɡɔɪn, maɪ lɔɹd."

Omerna advanced as far as the great sunflare of gold, set in the floor, that had been worn by feet and knees over centuries. It was a plain room aside from that and the captured banners that lined the walls high beneath the ceiling, age-tattered and worn. Omerna watched her skirt around him without really acknowledging his presence, and when the door closed behind her, he said, "I have not yet found Elayne or Gawyn, my Lord."

"ɪz ðət jəɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt nuz?" naɪl dɪmændəɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. beɪlwɝ ɹipɔɹɾəd mɔɹɡeɪsəz dɔɾɝ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, stɪl maɪɹd tə hɝ nɛk wɪð ðə wɪtʃəz; ɔɹɾɝz kənsɝnɪŋ əɹ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn sɛn tə dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn. hɝ ʌðɝ sʌn stɪl tɔɪld wɪð ðə wɪtʃəz əz wɛl, ɪt simd, ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, wɛɹ ivən beɪlwɝ pəzɛs fju aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz. naɪl tʊk ə lɔŋ swɑloʊ ʌv kul waɪn. hɪz boʊnz fɛlt oʊld ən bɹɪɾəl ən koʊld ə leɪt, jɛt ðə ʃædoʊ-spɔn hit meɪɾ ɪz skɪn swɛɾ ɪnʌf, ən dʒɹaɪɾ ɪz maʊθ.

"Is that your important news?" Niall demanded irritably. Balwer reported Morgase's daughter in Ebou Dar, still mired to her neck with the witches; orders concerning her had already been sent to Jaichim Carridin. Her other son still toiled with the witches as well, it seemed, in Tar Valon, where even Balwer possessed few eyes-and-ears. Niall took a long swallow of cool wine. His bones felt old and brittle and cold of late, yet the Shadow-spawned heat made his skin sweat enough, and dried his mouth.

oʊmɝnə ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. "ɑ . . . noʊ, maɪ lɔɹd." hi fʌmbəld ɪn ə pɑkəɾ ə hɪz waɪɾ ʌndɝkoʊɾ ən pʊld aʊɾ ə taɪni boʊn sɪləndɝ wɪð θɹi ɹɛd stʃɹaɪps ɹʌnɪŋ ɪts lɛŋθ. "ju wɑntəd ðɪs bɹɔɾ əz sun əz ðə pɪdʒən ɝaɪvd ɪn ðə - " hi kʌɾ ɔf əz naɪl snætʃt ðə tub.

Omerna gave a start. "Ah . . . no, my Lord." He fumbled in a pocket of his white undercoat and pulled out a tiny bone cylinder with three red stripes running its length. "You wanted this brought as soon as the pigeon arrived in the - " He cut off as Niall snatched the tube.

ðɪs wɑz wʌɾ i hæd bɪn weɪɾɪŋ fɔɹ, ðə ɹizən ə lidʒən wɑz nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn ɪts weɪ tə ændɝ wɪð mɔɹɡeɪs ɹaɪɾɪŋ əɾ ɪts hɛd, ɪf nɑt liɾɪŋ. ɪf ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɔl vɑɹɑɾɪnz mædnəs, ðə ɹeɪvəŋz ʌv ə mæn ənbæləns baɪ wɑtʃɪŋ tæɹɑbən kəlæps ɪndə ænɝki, ændɝ wəɾ əv tə weɪt. ændɝ, ən meɪbi mɔɹ.

This was what he had been waiting for, the reason a legion was not already on its way to Andor with Morgase riding at its head, if not leading. If it was not all Varadin's madness, the ravings of a man unbalanced by watching Tarabon collapse into anarchy, Andor would have to wait. Andor, and maybe more.

"aɪ . . . aɪ hæv kɑnfɝmeɪʃən ðət ðə waɪt taʊɝ tʃɹuli hæz bɹoʊkən," oʊmɝnə wɛn ɑn. "ðə . . . ðə blæk ədʒɑ hæz siz tɑɹ vəlɑn." noʊ wʌndɝ i saʊndəd nɝvəs, spikɪŋ hɛɹəsi. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ blæk ədʒɑ; ɔl ə ðə wɪtʃəz wɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz.

"I . . . I have confirmation that the White Tower truly has broken," Omerna went on. "The . . . the Black Ajah has seized Tar Valon." No wonder he sounded nervous, speaking heresy. There was no Black Ajah; all of the witches were Darkfriends.

naɪl ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪm ən bɹoʊk ðə wæks silɪŋ ðə tub wɪð ɪz θʌm-neɪl. hi hæd juz beɪlwɝ tə stɑɹt ðoʊz ɹumɝz, ən naʊ ðeɪ keɪm bæk tə hɪm. oʊmɝnə bɪlivd ɛvɹi ɹumɝ ɪz ɪɹz kɑt, ən ɪz ɪɹz kɑɾ əm ɔl.

Niall ignored him and broke the wax sealing the tube with his thumb-nail. He had used Balwer to start those rumors, and now they came back to him. Omerna believed every rumor his ears caught, and his ears caught them all.

"æn ðəɹ ɑɹ ɹɪpɔɹts ðət ðə wɪtʃəz ɑɹ kənfɝɪŋ wɪð ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən ælθɹ, maɪ lɔɹd."

"And there are reports that the witches are conferring with the false Dragon al'Thor, my Lord."

ʌv kɔɹs ðə wɪtʃəz wɝ kənfɝɪŋ wɪð hɪm! hi wɑz ðɛɹ kɹieɪʃən, ðɛɹ pʌpət. naɪl ʃʌɾ aʊt ðə fulz blæðɝ ən muv bæk tə ðə ɡeɪmɪŋ teɪbəl waɪl i dʒɹu ə slɪm ɹoʊl ə peɪpɝ fɹəm ðə tub. hi nɛvɝ lɛɾ ɛniwʌn noʊ mɔɹ ə ðiz mɛsədʒəz ðən ðət ðeɪ ɪɡzɪstəd, ən fju nu ðət mʌtʃ. hɪz hænz tʃɹɛmbəld əz ðeɪ ənɹoʊl ðə θɪn peɪpɝ. hɪz hænz hæd nɑt tʃɹɛmbəl sɪns i wɑz ə bɔɪ feɪsɪŋ ɪz fɝs bæɾəl, mɔɹ ðən sɛvənti jɪɹz əɡoʊ. ðoʊz hænz sim lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən boʊn ən sɪnu naʊ, bʌt ðeɪ stɪl pəzɛst ɪnʌf stʃɹɛŋkθ fəɹ wʌɾ i hæd tə du.

Of course the witches were conferring with him! He was their creation, their puppet. Niall shut out the fool's blather and moved back to the gaming table while he drew a slim roll of paper from the tube. He never let anyone know more of these messages than that they existed, and few knew that much. His hands trembled as they unrolled the thin paper. His hands had not trembled since he was a boy facing his first battle, more than seventy years ago. Those hands seemed little more than bone and sinew now, but they still possessed enough strength for what he had to do.

ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɑz nɑt ðəɾ ə vɑɹɑɾɪn, bʌɾ ə feɪaɪsɑɹ, sɛn tə tæɹɑbən fəɹ ə dɪfɹən pɝpəs. naɪlz stʌmək twɪstəɾ ɪndə ə nɑɾ əz i ɹɛd; ɪt wɑz ɪn klɪɹ læŋɡwədʒ, nɑt vɑɹɑɾɪnz saɪfɝ. vɑɹɑɾɪnz ɹɪpɔɹts hæd bɪn ðə wɝk ʌv ə mæn ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə mædnəs ɪf nɑɾ oʊvɝ, jɛt feɪaɪsɑɹ kənfɝm ðə wɝst ʌv ɪɾ ən mɔɹ. mʌtʃ mɔɹ. ælθɹ wɑz ə ɹæbɪd bist, ə dɪstʃɹɔɪɝ u mʌs bi stɑpt, bʌt naʊ ə sɛkən mæɾ ænəməl hæɾ əpɪɹd, wʌn ðət maɪt bi ivən mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən ðə tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪtʃəz wɪð ðɛɹ teɪm fɔls dʒɹæɡən. bʌt haʊ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt kəɾ i faɪt boʊθ?

The writing was not that of Varadin, but of Faisar, sent to Tarabon for a different purpose. Niall's stomach twisted into a knot as he read; it was in clear language, not Varadin's cipher. Varadin's reports had been the work of a man on the brink of madness if not over, yet Faisar confirmed the worst of it and more. Much more. Al'Thor was a rabid beast, a destroyer who must be stopped, but now a second mad animal had appeared, one that might be even more dangerous than the Tar Valon witches with their tame false Dragon. But how under the Light could he fight both?

"ɪt . . . ɪt simz ðət kwin tɛnoʊbiə hæz lɛf sɑldɑiə, maɪ lɔɹd. ən ðə . . . ðə dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn ɑɹ bɝnɪŋ ən kɪlɪŋ əkɹɔs ɔltɑɹə ən mu-ɹændi. aɪ hæv hɝd ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ əz bɪn faʊnd, ɪn kændɝ."

"It . . . it seems that Queen Tenobia has left Saldaea, my Lord. And the . . . the Dragonsworn are burning and killing across Altara and Mu-randy. I have heard the Horn of Valere has been found, in Kandor."

stɪl hæf-dɪstʃɹæktəd, naɪl lʊkt ʌp tə faɪn oʊmɝnə əɾ ɪz saɪd, lɪkɪŋ ɪz lɪps ən waɪpɪŋ swɛt fɹəm ɪz fɔɹhɛd wɪð ðə bæk ə hɪz hænd. noʊ daʊɾ i hoʊp fəɹ ə ɡlæns ət wʌt wɑz ɪn ðə mɛsədʒ. wɛl, ɛvɹiwʌn wəd noʊ sun ɪnʌf.

Still half-distracted, Niall looked up to find Omerna at his side, licking his lips and wiping sweat from his forehead with the back of his hand. No doubt he hoped for a glance at what was in the message. Well, everyone would know soon enough.

"ɪt simz wʌn ə jəɹ waɪldɝ fænsiz wɑzn soʊ waɪld æftɝ ɔl," naɪl sɛd, ən ðət wɑz wən i fɛl ðə naɪf ɡoʊ ɪn ʌndɝ ɪz ɹɪbz.

"It seems one of your wilder fancies wasn't so wild after all," Niall said, and that was when he felt the knife go in under his ribs.

ʃɑk fɹoʊz ɪm lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ oʊmɝnə tə pʊl ðə dæɡɝ fɹi ən plʌnʒ ɪɾ ɪn əɡɛn. ʌðɝ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝz hæd daɪd ðɪs weɪ bɪfɔɹ hɪm, jɛɾ i hæd nɛvɝ θɔɾ ɪt wəd bi oʊmɝnə. hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɹæpəl wɪð ɪz kɪlɝ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ fɔɹs ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz. hi hʌŋ ɑn tə oʊmɝnə wɪð ðə mæn səpɔɹɾɪŋ hɪm, ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm aɪ tə aɪ.

Shock froze him long enough for Omerna to pull the dagger free and plunge it in again. Other Lord Captain Commanders had died this way before him, yet he had never thought it would be Omerna. He tried to grapple with his killer, but there was no force in his arms. He hung on to Omerna with the man supporting him, the pair of them eye to eye.

oʊmɝnəz feɪs wɑz ɹɛd; hi lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə wip. "ɪt hæd tə bi dʌn. ɪt hæd tə bi. jə lɛt ðə wɪtʃəz sɪt ðəɹ ɪn sɑlədɑɹ ənhɪndɝd, ænd. . . ." əz ɪf sʌɾənli ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðəɾ i hæɾ ɪz ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ðə mæn i wɑz mɝɾɝɪŋ, hi pʊʃt naɪl əweɪ.

Omerna's face was red; he looked ready to weep. "It had to be done. It had to be. You let the witches sit there in Salidar unhindered, and. . . ." As if suddenly realizing that he had his arms around the man he was murdering, he pushed Niall away.

stʃɹɛŋkθ hæd ɡɔn fɹəm naɪlz lɛɡz naʊ əz wɛl əz ɪz ɑɹmz. hi fɛl hɛvəli əɡɛns ðə ɡeɪmɪŋ teɪbəl, tɝnɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ. blæk ən waɪt stoʊnz skæɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə pɑlɪʃt wʊɾən flɔɹ ɝaʊn hɪm; ðə sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ baʊnst ən splæʃt waɪn. ðə koʊld ɪn ɪz boʊnz wɑz litʃɪŋ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹɛst ə hɪm.

Strength had gone from Niall's legs now as well as his arms. He fell heavily against the gaming table, turning it over. Black and white stones scattered across the polished wooden floor around him; the silver pitcher bounced and splashed wine. The cold in his bones was leaching out into the rest of him.

hi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən wɛðɝ taɪm hæd sloʊd fəɹ ɪm əɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹɪli dɪd hæpən soʊ kwɪkli. buts θʌddɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ, ən i lɪftəɾ ɪz hɛd wɛɹəli tə si oʊmɝnə ɡeɪpɪŋ ən waɪd-aɪd, bækɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm imən vɑldə. ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz mʌtʃ ðə pɪktʃɝ ʌv ə lɔɹd kæptən əz oʊmɝnə ɪn ɪz waɪt-ænd-ɡoʊl tɑbɝɾ ən waɪɾ ʌndɝkoʊt, vɑldə wɑz nɑt soʊ tɔl, nɑt soʊ pleɪnli kəmændɪŋ, bʌt ðə dɑɹk mænz feɪs wɑz hɑɹd, əz ɛvɝ, ən i hæɾ ə sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz hænz, ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪɾ i pɹaɪz soʊ haɪli.

He was not certain whether time had slowed for him or everything really did happen so quickly. Boots thudded across the floor, and he lifted his head wearily to see Omerna gaping and wide-eyed, backing away from Eamon Valda. Every bit as much the picture of a Lord Captain as Omerna in his white-and-gold tabard and white undercoat, Valda was not so tall, not so plainly commanding, but the dark man's face was hard, as ever, and he had a sword in his hands, the heron-mark blade he prized so highly.

"tʃɹizən!" vɑldə bɛloʊd, ən dʒɹoʊv ðə sɔɹd θɹu oʊmɝnəz tʃɛst.

"Treason!" Valda bellowed, and drove the sword through Omerna's chest.

naɪl wʊɾə læft ɪf i kʊd; bɹɛθ keɪm hɑɹd, ən i kəd hɪɹ ɪt bʌbəlɪŋ ɪn ðə blʌɾ ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt. hi hæd nɛvɝ laɪk vɑldə - ɪn fækt, hi dɪspaɪz ðə mæn - bʌt sʌmwʌn hæd tə noʊ. hɪz aɪz ʃɪftəd, faʊn ðə slɪp ə peɪpɝ fɹəm tæntʃəkoʊ laɪɪŋ nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ɪz hænd; ɪt maɪt bi mɪs ðɛɹ, bʌt nɑɾ ɪf ɪz kɔɹps klʌtʃt ɪt. ən ðət mɛsədʒ hæd tə bi ɹɛd. hɪz hæn sim tə kɹɔl əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹbɔɹdz soʊ sloʊli, bɹʌʃɪŋ ðə peɪpɝ, pʊʃɪŋ ɪɾ əz i fʌmbəl tə teɪk hoʊld. hɪz vɪʒən wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ mɪsti. hi tʃɹaɪd tə fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə si. hi hæd tə. . . . ðə fɑɡ wɑz θɪkɝ. pɑɹɾ ə hɪm tʃɹaɪd tə ʃeɪk ðət θɔt; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ fɑɡ. ðə fɑɡ wɑz θɪkɝ, ən ðəɹ wɑz ən ɛnəmi aʊt ðɛɹ, ənsin, hɪɾən, əz deɪnʒɝəs əz ælθɹ əɹ mɔɹ. ðə mɛsədʒ. wʌt? wʌt mɛsədʒ? ɪt wɑz taɪm tə maʊn ən aʊt sɔɹd, taɪm fəɹ wʌn læst ətæk. baɪ ðə laɪt, wɪn əɹ daɪ, hi wɑz kʌmɪŋ! hi tʃɹaɪd tə snɑɹl.

Niall would have laughed if he could; breath came hard, and he could hear it bubbling in the blood in his throat. He had never liked Valda - in fact, he despised the man - but someone had to know. His eyes shifted, found the slip of paper from Tanchico lying not far from his hand; it might be missed there, but not if his corpse clutched it. And that message had to be read. His hand seemed to crawl across the floorboards so slowly, brushing the paper, pushing it as he fumbled to take hold. His vision was growing misty. He tried to force himself to see. He had to. . . . The fog was thicker. Part of him tried to shake that thought; there was no fog. The fog was thicker, and there was an enemy out there, unseen, hidden, as dangerous as al'Thor or more. The message. What? What message? It was time to mount and out sword, time for one last attack. By the Light, win or die, he was coming! He tried to snarl.

vɑldə waɪpt ɪz bleɪɾ ɑn oʊmɝnəz tɑbɝd, ðən sʌɾənli ɹilaɪz ði oʊld wʊlf stɪl bɹiðd, ə ɹæspɪŋ, bʌbəlɪŋ saʊnd. ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ, hi bɛn tə meɪk ən ɛnd - ən ə ɡɔnt, lɔŋ-fɪŋɡɝd hæn kɑɾ ɪz ɑɹm.

Valda wiped his blade on Omerna's tabard, then suddenly realized the old wolf still breathed, a rasping, bubbling sound. Grimacing, he bent to make an end - and a gaunt, long-fingered hand caught his arm.

"wʊd jə bi lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ naʊ, maɪ sʌn?" əsunɑwəz ɪmeɪʃieɪɾɪd feɪs bɪlɔŋd ɑn ə mɑɹɾɝ, jɛɾ ɪz dɑɹk aɪz bɝnd wɪð ə fɝvɝ tə ənɝv ivən ðoʊz u dɪd nɑt noʊ hu hi wɑz. "ju meɪ wɛl bi, æftɝ aɪ ətɛs ðət jə kɪl peɪdʒɹən naɪlz əsæsən. bʌt nɑɾ ɪf aɪ mʌst seɪ ðət jə ɹɪpt oʊpən naɪlz θɹoʊɾ əz wɛl."

"Would you be Lord Captain Commander now, my son?" Asunawa's emaciated face belonged on a martyr, yet his dark eyes burned with a fervor to unnerve even those who did not know who he was. "You may well be, after I attest that you killed Pedron Niall's assassin. But not if I must say that you ripped open Niall's throat as well."

bɛɹɪŋ tiθ ɪn wʌt kəd pæs fəɹ ə smaɪl, vɑldə stʃɹeɪɾənd. əsunɑwə hæɾ ə lʌv ə tʃɹuθ, ə stʃɹeɪnʒ lʌv; hi kəd taɪ ɪɾ ɪndə nɑts, əɹ hæŋ ɪɾ ʌp ən fleɪ ɪt waɪl ɪt skɹimd, bʌt soʊ fɑɹ əz vɑldə nu, hi nɛvɝ æktʃəli  laɪd. ə lʊk ət naɪlz ɡleɪzd aɪz, ən ðə pul ə blʌd spɹɛɾɪŋ bɪniθ hɪm, sæɾəsfaɪd vɑldə. ði oʊl mæn wɑz daɪɪŋ.

Baring teeth in what could pass for a smile, Valda straightened. Asunawa had a love of truth, a strange love; he could tie it into knots, or hang it up and flay it while it screamed, but so far as Valda knew, he never actually lied. A look at Niall's glazed eyes, and the pool of blood spreading beneath him, satisfied Valda. The old man was dying.

"meɪ, əsunɑwə?"

"May, Asunawa?"

ðə haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝz ɡeɪz bɝn hɑɾɝ əz əsunɑwə stɛp bæk, muvɪŋ ðə snoʊi kloʊk əweɪ fɹəm naɪlz blʌd. ivən ə lɔɹd kæptən wɑz nɑt səpoʊz tə bi ðət fəmɪljɝ. "aɪ sɛd meɪ, maɪ sʌn. juv bɪn ɑdli ɹɪlʌktən tə əɡɹi ðət ðə wɪtʃ mɔɹɡeɪs mʌs bi ɡɪvən tə ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt. ənlɛs jə ɡɪv ðəɾ əʃʊɹəns - "

The High Inquisitor's gaze burned hotter as Asunawa stepped back, moving the snowy cloak away from Niall's blood. Even a Lord Captain was not supposed to be that familiar. "I said may, my son. You have been oddly reluctant to agree that the witch Morgase must be given to the Hand of the Light. Unless you give that assurance - "

"mɔɹɡeɪs ɪz niɾəd jɛt." bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪn ɡeɪv vɑldə kənsɪɾɝəbəl plɛʒɝ. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk kwɛstʃənɝz, ðə hæn ə ðə laɪɾ əz ðeɪ kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz. hu kəd laɪk mɛn u nɛvɝ mɛɾ ən ɛnəmi nɑt dɪsɑɹmd ən ɪn tʃeɪnz? ðeɪ hɛl ðɛmsɛlvz əpɑɹt fɹəm ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, sɛpɹət. əsunɑwəz kloʊk bɔɹ oʊnli ðə skɑɹlət ʃɛpɝdz kɹʊk ə ðə kwɛstʃənɝz, nɑt ðə flɛɹɪŋ ɡoʊldən sʌn ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ðət ɡɹeɪst ɪz oʊn tɑbɝd. wɝs, ðeɪ sim tə θɪŋk ðɛɹ wɝk wɪð ɹæks ən hɑɾ aɪɝnz wɑz ði oʊnli tʃɹu wɝk ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. "mɔɹɡeɪs ɡɪvz əs ændɝ, soʊ jə kænɑɾ əv əɹ bɪfɔɹ wɪv ɪt. ən wi kænɑt teɪk ændɝ əntɪl ðə pɹɑfəts mɑbz ɑɹ kɹʌʃt." ðə pɹɑfət hæd tə bi fɝst, pɹitʃɪŋ ðə kʌmɪŋ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, hɪz mɑbz bɝnɪŋ vɪlədʒəz tu sloʊ tə pɹoʊkleɪm fəɹ ælθɹ. naɪlz tʃɛs bɛɹli muvd, naʊ. "ənlɛs jə wɑnə tʃɹeɪɾ ɑmɑdɪʃiə fəɹ ændɝ, ɪnstɛɾ ə hoʊldɪŋ boʊθ? aɪ min tə si ælθɹ hʌŋ ən ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɡɹaʊn tə dʌst, əsunɑwə, ən aɪ dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ əlɔŋ wɪð jəɹ plæn dʒʌs tə si jə tɔs ɪɾ ɔl ɑn ðə mɪɾən."

"Morgase is needed yet." Breaking in gave Valda considerable pleasure. He did not like Questioners, the Hand of the Light as they called themselves. Who could like men who never met an enemy not disarmed and in chains? They held themselves apart from the Children, separate. Asunawa's cloak bore only the scarlet shepherd's crook of the Questioners, not the flaring golden sun of the Children that graced his own tabard. Worse, they seemed to think their work with racks and hot irons was the only true work of the Children. "Morgase gives us Andor, so you cannot have her before we have it. And we cannot take Andor until the Prophet's mobs are crushed." The Prophet had to be first, preaching the coming of the Dragon Reborn, his mobs burning villages too slow to proclaim for al'Thor. Niall's chest barely moved, now. "Unless you want to trade Amadicia for Andor, instead of holding both? I mean to see al'Thor hung and the White Tower ground to dust, Asunawa, and I did not go along with your plan just to see you toss it all on the midden."

əsunɑwə wɑz nɑt teɪkən əbæk; hi wɑz noʊ kaʊɝd. nɑt hɪɹ, wɪð hʌnʒɹədz ə kwɛstʃənɝz ɪn ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs ən moʊst ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən wɛɹi ʌv pʊɾɪŋ ə fʊt ɹɔŋ ɝaʊn ðɛm. hi ɪɡnɔɹd ðə sɔɹɾ ɪn vɑldəz hænz, ən ðət mɑɹɾɝz feɪs tʊk ɑn ə lʊk ə sædnəs. hɪz swɛt sim tə bi tɛɹz ə ɹəɡɹɛt. "ɪn ðət keɪs, sɪns lɔɹd kæptən kænvəl bɪlivz ðət ðə lɔ mʌs bi oʊbeɪd, aɪ fɪɹ - "

Asunawa was not taken aback; he was no coward. Not here, with hundreds of Questioners in the Fortress and most of the Children wary of putting a foot wrong around them. He ignored the sword in Valda's hands, and that martyr's face took on a look of sadness. His sweat seemed to be tears of regret. "In that case, since Lord Captain Canvele believes that the law must be obeyed, I fear - "

"aɪ fɪɹ kænvəl əɡɹiz wɪð mi, əsunɑwə." sɪns dɔn i dɪd, sɪns i ɹilaɪz ðət vɑldə hæd bɹɔt hæf ə lidʒən ɪndə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs. kænvəl wɑz noʊ ful. "ðə kwɛstʃən ɪz nɑt wɛðɝ əl bi lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ wən ðə sʌn sɛts tədeɪ, bʌɾ u wɪl ɡaɪd ðə hæn ə ðə laɪɾ ɪn ɪts dɪɡɪŋ fəɹ tʃɹuθ."

"I fear Canvele agrees with me, Asunawa." Since dawn he did, since he realized that Valda had brought half a legion into the Fortress. Canvele was no fool. "The question is not whether I will be Lord Captain Commander when the sun sets today, but who will guide the Hand of the Light in its digging for truth."

noʊ kaʊɝd, əsunɑwə, ən ivən lɛs ə ful ðən kænvəl. hi niðɝ flɪntʃt nɔɹ dɪmændəd haʊ vɑldə θɔt tə bɹɪŋ ðɪs əbaʊt. "aɪ si," hi sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ən ðɛn, maɪldli, "du jə min tə flaʊt ðə lɔ ɪntaɪɝli, maɪ sʌn?"

No coward, Asunawa, and even less a fool than Canvele. He neither flinched nor demanded how Valda thought to bring this about. "I see," he said after a moment, and then, mildly, "Do you mean to flout the law entirely, my son?"

vɑldə ɔlmoʊs læft. "ju kən ɪɡzæmɪn mɔɹɡeɪs, bʌt ʃiz nɑt tə bi pʊt tə ðə kwɛstʃən. jə kən əv əɹ fəɹ ðət wən aɪm dʌn wɪð hɝ." wɪtʃ maɪt teɪk ə lɪɾəl taɪm; faɪndɪŋ ə ɹɪpleɪsmən fəɹ ðə laɪən θɹoʊn, wʌn u ʌndɝstʊɾ əɹ pɹɑpɝ ɹileɪʃənʃɪp tə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən əz kɪŋ eɪlɹən dɪd hɪɹ, wəd nɑt hæpən oʊvɝnaɪt.

Valda almost laughed. "You can examine Morgase, but she is not to be put to the question. You can have her for that when I am done with her." Which might take a little time; finding a replacement for the Lion Throne, one who understood her proper relationship to the Children as King Ailron did here, would not happen overnight.

pɝhæps əsunɑwə ʌndɝstʊɾ ən pɝhæps nɑt. hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡæsp fɹəm ðə dɔɹweɪ. naɪlz pɪntʃ-feɪst sɛkɹətɛɹi stʊd ðɛɹ, pɝs-maʊðd ən nɑbi, nɛɹoʊ aɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɛɹ əɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðə bɑɾiz stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ.

Perhaps Asunawa understood and perhaps not. He opened his mouth, and there was a gasp from the doorway. Niall's pinch-faced secretary stood there, purse-mouthed and knobby, narrow eyes trying to stare at everything except the bodies stretched out on the floor.

"ə sæd deɪ, mæstɝ beɪlwɝ," əsunɑwə ɪntoʊnd, hɪz vɔɪs sɑɹoʊfəl aɪɝn. "ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝ oʊmɝnə hæz sleɪn əɹ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ peɪdʒɹən naɪl, ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ɪz soʊl." nɑɾ ən ədvæns ɑn ðə tʃɹuθ; naɪlz tʃɛs noʊ lɔŋɡɝ muvd, ən kɪlɪŋ ɪm hæd bɪn tʃɹizən. "lɔɹd kæptən vɑldə ɛntɝd tu leɪt tə seɪv hɪm, bʌɾ i dɪd sleɪ oʊmɝnə ɪn ðə fʊl dɛpθ ə hɪz sɪn." beɪlwɝ ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən bɪɡæn dʒɹaɪ-wɑʃɪŋ ɪz hænz.

"A sad day, Master Balwer," Asunawa intoned, his voice sorrowful iron. "The traitor Omerna has slain our Lord Captain Commander Pedron Niall, the Light illumine his soul." Not an advance on the truth; Niall's chest no longer moved, and killing him had been treason. "Lord Captain Valda entered too late to save him, but he did slay Omerna in the full depth of his sin." Balwer gave a start and began dry-washing his hands.

ðə bɝdlaɪk fɛloʊ meɪd vɑldə ɪtʃ. "sɪns jə ɑɹ hɪɹ, beɪlwɝ, jə meɪ əz wɛl bi jusfəl." hi dɪslaɪk jusləs pipəl, ən ðə skɹɪblɝ wɑz ðə vɛɹi fɔɹm ə jusləsnəs. "kæɹi ðɪs mɛsədʒ tə itʃ lɔɹd kæptən ɪn ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs. tɛl əm ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ əz bɪn mɝɾɝd, ən aɪ kɔl fəɹ ə miɾɪŋ ə ðə kaʊnsəl ə ði ənɔɪntəd." hɪz fɝst ækt ɑn biɪŋ neɪm lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ wəd bi tə but ðə dʒɹaɪd-ʌp lɪɾəl mæn aʊɾ ə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs, buɾ ɪm soʊ fɑɹ i baʊns twaɪs, ən tʃuz ə sɛkɹətɛɹi hu dɪd nɑt twɪtʃ. "wɛðɝ oʊmɝnə wɑz bɑt baɪ ðə wɪtʃəz əɹ ðə pɹɑfət, aɪ min tə si peɪdʒɹən naɪl əvɛnʒd."

The birdlike fellow made Valda itch. "Since you are here, Balwer, you may as well be useful." He disliked useless people, and the scribbler was the very form of uselessness. "Carry this message to each Lord Captain in the Fortress. Tell them the Lord Captain Commander has been murdered, and I call for a meeting of the Council of the Anointed." His first act on being named Lord Captain Commander would be to boot the dried-up little man out of the Fortress, boot him so far he bounced twice, and choose a secretary who did not twitch. "Whether Omerna was bought by the witches or the Prophet, I mean to see Pedron Niall avenged."

"æz jə seɪ, maɪ lɔɹd." beɪlwɝz vɔɪs wɑz dʒɹaɪ ən nɛɹoʊ. "ɪt ʃæl bi əz jə seɪ." hi əpɛɹənli faʊn hɪmsɛlf eɪbəl tə lʊk ɑn naɪlz bɑɾi ət læst; əz i baʊd hɪmsɛlf aʊt dʒɝkəli, hi hɑɹdli lʊkt əɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls.

"As you say, my Lord." Balwer's voice was dry and narrow. "It shall be as you say." He apparently found himself able to look on Niall's body at last; as he bowed himself out jerkily, he hardly looked at anything else.

"soʊ ɪt simz jəl bi əɹ nɛks lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ æftɝ ɔl," əsunɑwə sɛd wʌns beɪlwɝ wɑz ɡɔn.

"So it seems you will be our next Lord Captain Commander after all," Asunawa said once Balwer was gone.

"soʊ ɪt simz," vɑldə ænsɝd dʒɹaɪli. ə taɪni slɪp ə peɪpɝ leɪ nɛks tə naɪlz aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt hænd, ðə sɔɹt juzd ɪn sɛndɪŋ mɛsədʒəz baɪ pɪdʒən. vɑldə bɛn ən pɪkt ɪɾ ʌp, ðən ɛksheɪld ɪn dɪsɡʌst. ðə peɪpɝ hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə pʌɾəl ʌv waɪn; wʌtɛvɝ hæd bɪn ɹɪɾən ɑn ɪt wɑz lɔst, ði ɪŋk ə blɝ.

"So it seems," Valda answered dryly. A tiny slip of paper lay next to Niall's outstretched hand, the sort used in sending messages by pigeon. Valda bent and picked it up, then exhaled in disgust. The paper had been sitting in a puddle of wine; whatever had been written on it was lost, the ink a blur.

"æn ðə hænd wɪl əv mɔɹɡeɪs wən jəɹ nid fəɹ əɹ ɪz dʌn." ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɪn ðə slaɪɾəst ə kwɛstʃən.

"And the Hand will have Morgase when your need for her is done." That was not in the slightest a question.

"aɪ wɪl hæn əɹ tə jə maɪsɛlf." pɝhæps ə lɪɾəl sʌmθɪŋ maɪt bi ɝeɪnʒd tə seɪɾ əsunɑwəz æpətaɪt fəɹ ə waɪl. ɪt maɪt meɪk ʃʊɹ mɔɹɡeɪs ɹɪmeɪn əmɛnəbəl, tu. vɑldə dʒɹɑp ðə bɪɾ ə ɹʌbɪʃ ɑn naɪlz kɔɹps. ði oʊld wʊlf hæd lɔst ɪz kʌnɪŋ ən ɪz nɝv wɪð eɪdʒ, ən naʊ ɪt wəd bi ʌp tə imən vɑldə tə bɹɪŋ ðə wɪtʃəz ən ðɛɹ fɔls dʒɹæɡən tə hil.

"I will hand her to you myself." Perhaps a little something might be arranged to sate Asunawa's appetite for a while. It might make sure Morgase remained amenable, too. Valda dropped the bit of rubbish on Niall's corpse. The old wolf had lost his cunning and his nerve with age, and now it would be up to Eamon Valda to bring the witches and their false Dragon to heel.

flæɾ ɑn ɪz bɛli ɑn ə ɹaɪz, ɡɔɪn sɝveɪd dɪzæstɝ bɪniθ ði æftɝnun sʌn. dəməaɪz wɛlz leɪ maɪlz tə ðə saʊθ naʊ, əkɹɔs ɹoʊlɪŋ pleɪn ən loʊ hɪlz, bʌɾ i kəd stɪl si ðə smoʊk fɹəm bɝnɪŋ wæɡənz. wʌt hæd hæpən ðəɹ æftɝ i lɛd wʌɾ i kəd ɡæðɝ ə ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz ɪn bɹeɪkɪŋ aʊt, hi dɪd nɑt noʊ. ælθɹ hæd simd wɛl ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ, ælθɹ ən ðoʊz blæk-koʊɾəd mɛn u əpɪɹd tə bi tʃænəlɪŋ, teɪkɪŋ daʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ ən il əlaɪk. ɪt hæd bɪn ðə ɹiləzeɪʃən ðət sɪstɝz wɝ fliɪŋ ðət toʊld ɪm ɪt wɑz taɪm tə ɡoʊ.

Flat on his belly on a rise, Gawyn surveyed disaster beneath the afternoon sun. Dumai's Wells lay miles to the south now, across rolling plain and low hills, but he could still see the smoke from burning wagons. What had happened there after he led what he could gather of the Younglings in breaking out, he did not know. Al'Thor had seemed well in charge, al'Thor and those black-coated men who appeared to be channeling, taking down Aes Sedai and Aiel alike. It had been the realization that sisters were fleeing that told him it was time to go.

hi wɪʃt i cʊɾə kɪld ælθɹ. fəɹ ɪz mʌðɝ, dɛd baɪ ðə mænz duɪŋ; ɛɡwin dɪnaɪɾ ɪt, bʌt ʃi hæd noʊ pɹuf. fəɹ ɪz sɪstɝ. ɪf mɪn hæd spoʊkən ðə tʃɹuθ - hi ʃʊɾə meɪɾ əɹ liv ðə kæmp wɪð hɪm, wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɑntəd; ðəɹ wɑz tu mʌtʃ i ʃʊɾə dʌn dɪfɹənli tədeɪ - ɪf mɪn wɑz ɹaɪt, ən ɪleɪn lʌvd ælθɹ, ðən ðət dʒɹɛdfəl feɪt wɑz ɹizən ɪnʌf tə kɪl. meɪbi ði il hæd dʌn ðə wɝk fəɹ hɪm. hi daʊɾɪd ɪt, ðoʊ.

He wished he could have killed al'Thor. For his mother, dead by the man's doing; Egwene denied it, but she had no proof. For his sister. If Min had spoken the truth - he should have made her leave the camp with him, whatever she wanted; there was too much he should have done differently today - if Min was right, and Elayne loved al'Thor, then that dreadful fate was reason enough to kill. Maybe the Aiel had done the work for him. He doubted it, though.

wɪð ə saʊɝ læf i ɹeɪz ðə tub ə hɪz lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs. wʌn ə ðə ɡoʊldən bænz bɔɹ ən ɪnskɹɪpʃən. "fɹʌm mɔɹɡeɪs, kwin ʌv ændɝ, tə hɝ bɪlʌv sʌn, ɡɔɪn. meɪ hi bi ə lɪvɪŋ sɔɹd fəɹ ɪz sɪstɝ ən ændɝ." bɪɾɝ wɝdz, naʊ.

With a sour laugh he raised the tube of his looking glass. One of the golden bands bore an inscription. "From Morgase, Queen of Andor, to her beloved son, Gawyn. May he be a living sword for his sister and Andor." Bitter words, now.

ðəɹ wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ tə si bɪɑn sɪɹ ɡɹæs ən smɔl, skæɾɝd klʌmps ə tʃɹiz. ðə wɪn stɪl ɡʌstɪd, ɹeɪzɪŋ weɪvz ə dʌst. əkeɪʒənəli ə flæʃ ə muvmən ɪn ə kɹis bɪtwin skwɑt ɹɪdʒəz spoʊk ə mɛn ɑn ðə muv. il, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ. ðeɪ blɛndəd wɪð ðə læn tu wɛl tə bi ɡɹin-koʊɾəd jʌŋɡəlɪŋz. ðə laɪt sɛn ðət mɔɹ hæɾ ɪskeɪp ðən ðoʊz i hæd bɹɔɾ aʊt.

There was not much to see beyond sere grass and small, scattered clumps of trees. The wind still gusted, raising waves of dust. Occasionally a flash of movement in a crease between squat ridges spoke of men on the move. Aiel, he was sure. They blended with the land too well to be green-coated Younglings. The Light send that more had escaped than those he had brought out.

hi wɑz ə ful. hi ʃʊɾə kɪld ælθɹ; hi hæd tə kɪl hɪm. bʌɾ i kəd nɑt. nɑt kəz ðə mæn wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bʌt kəz i hæd pɹɑməst ɛɡwin nɑt tə ɹeɪz ə hæn əɡɛnst ælθɹ. əz ə loʊli æksɛptɪd, ʃi hæd vænɪʃt fɹəm kɛɹhin, livɪŋ ɡɔɪn oʊnli ə lɛɾɝ ðəɾ i hæd ɹɛɾ ən ɹiɹiɾ əntɪl ðə peɪpɝ wɑz ɹɛɾi tə tɛɹ əlɔŋ ðə foʊlz, ən i wəd bi ənsɝpɹaɪz tə lɝn ʃi hæd ɡɔn tə eɪɾ ælθɹ ɪn səm weɪ. hi kəd nɑt bɹeɪk ɪz wɝd, list ʌv ɔl tə ðə wʊmən i lʌvd. nɛvɝ ɪz wɝd tə hɝ. wʌtɛvɝ ðə kɑs tə hɪmsɛlf. hi hoʊpt ʃi wəɾ æksɛp ðə kɑmpɹəmaɪz i hæd meɪd wɪð ɪz ɑnɝ; hi hæd ɹeɪz nɑɾ ə hæn tə hɑɹm, bʌt nʌn tə hɛlp, iðɝ. ðə laɪt sɛnd ʃi nɛvɝ æsk ðəɾ ə hɪm. ɪt wɑz sɛd ðət lʌv æɾəld mɛnz bɹeɪnz, ən i wɑz ðə pɹuf.

He was a fool. He should have killed al'Thor; he had to kill him. But he could not. Not because the man was the Dragon Reborn, but because he had promised Egwene not to raise a hand against al'Thor. As a lowly Accepted, she had vanished from Cairhien, leaving Gawyn only a letter that he had read and reread until the paper was ready to tear along the folds, and he would be unsurprised to learn she had gone to aid al'Thor in some way. He could not break his word, least of all to the woman he loved. Never his word to her. Whatever the cost to himself. He hoped she would accept the compromise he had made with his honor; he had raised not a hand to harm, but none to help, either. The Light send she never asked that of him. It was said that love addled men's brains, and he was the proof.

sʌɾənli hi pɹɛs ðə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs tə hɪz aɪ əz ə wʊmən ɡæləpt ə tɔl blæk hɔɹs ɪndə ði oʊpən. hi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ əɹ feɪs, bʌt noʊ sɝvənt wəd bi wɛɹɪŋ ə dʒɹɛs dɪvaɪɾəd fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ. soʊ ət list wʌn ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd mænədʒ tə ɪskeɪp. ɪf sɪstɝz hæd meɪɾ ɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹæp əlaɪv, meɪbi mɔɹ ə ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz hæd tu. wɪð lʌk, hi kəd faɪn əm bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ kɪld ɪn smɔl ɡɹups baɪ ði il. fɝs ðəɹ wɑz ðə mæɾɝ ə ðɪs sɪstɝ, ðoʊ. ɪn mɛni weɪz i wəd ɹæðɝ əv ɡɔn ɑn wɪθaʊt hɝ, bʌt livɪŋ əɹ əloʊn, meɪbi tə teɪk ən æɹoʊ ʃi nɛvɝ sɔ kʌmɪŋ, wɑz nɑɾ ən ɑpʃən i kəɾ əlaʊ hɪmsɛlf. əz i stɑɹɾəd tə ɹaɪz ən weɪv tə hɝ, ðoʊ, ðə hɔɹs stʌmbəld ən fɛl, pɪtʃɪŋ əɹ oʊvɝ ɪts hɛd.

Suddenly he pressed the looking glass to his eye as a woman galloped a tall black horse into the open. He could not make out her face, but no servant would be wearing a dress divided for riding. So at least one Aes Sedai had managed to escape. If sisters had made it out of the trap alive, maybe more of the Younglings had too. With luck, he could find them before they were killed in small groups by the Aiel. First there was the matter of this sister, though. In many ways he would rather have gone on without her, but leaving her alone, maybe to take an arrow she never saw coming, was not an option he could allow himself. As he started to rise and wave to her, though, the horse stumbled and fell, pitching her over its head.

hi kɝst, ðən əɡɛn wən ðə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs ʃoʊɾ ɪm ən æɹoʊ stændɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ðə blæks saɪd. heɪstəli hi skæn ðə hɪlz, ən bɪt daʊn ɑn ənʌðɝ kɝs; meɪbi tu dʌzən veɪld il stʊɾ ɑn ə kɹɛst stɛɹɪŋ təwɔɹd daʊn hɔɹs ən ɹaɪɾɝ, lɛs ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. kwɪkli hi ɡlæns bæk. ðə sɪstɝ ɹoʊz ənstɛɾəli tə hɝ fit. ɪf ʃi kɛpt əɹ wɪts ən juz ðə paʊɝ, ðəɹ ʃəd bi noʊ weɪ ə fju il kəd hɑɹm hɝ, ɪspɛʃli ɪf ʃi tʊk ʃɛltɝ əɡɛns mɔɹ æɹoʊz bɪhaɪn ðə fɔlən hɔɹs. ivən soʊ, hi wəd fil bɛɾɝ wən i hæd ɡæðɝɾ əɹ ɪn. ɹoʊlɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə kɹɛs tə lɛsən ðə tʃænsəz ə ði il siɪŋ hɪm, hi slɪd daʊn ðə ɹɪvɝs sloʊp əntɪl i kəd stænd. hi hæd bɹɔt faɪv hʌnʒɹəd ən eɪɾi-wʌn jʌŋɡəlɪŋz saʊθ, ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi wʌn u wɑz fɑɹ ɪnʌf əlɔŋ ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ tə liv tɑɹ vəlɑn, bʌt fjuɝ ðən tu hʌnʒɹəd weɪɾəd ɑn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ɪn ðə hɑloʊ. bɪfɔɹ dɪzæstɝ stʃɹʌk ət dəməaɪz wɛlz, hi wɑz sɝɾən ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə plɑɾ əfʊt tə si ðəɾ i ən ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz daɪd wɪθaʊt ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. waɪ, hi dɪd nɑt noʊ, nɔɹ wɛðɝ ðə skim keɪm fɹəm ɪleɪɾə əɹ ɡəlinə, bʌɾ ɪt hæd səksiɾəd wɛl ɪnʌf, ɪf nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ɪn ðə weɪ ɪts dɪvɪzɝz hæd θɔt. smɔl wʌndɝ ðəɾ i wʊɾə pɹəfɝd tə ɡoʊ ɑn wɪθaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, hæɾ i ɛni tʃɔɪs.

He cursed, then again when the looking glass showed him an arrow standing up from the black's side. Hastily he scanned the hills, and bit down on another curse; maybe two dozen veiled Aiel stood on a crest staring toward downed horse and rider, less than a hundred paces from the Aes Sedai. Quickly he glanced back. The sister rose unsteadily to her feet. If she kept her wits and used the Power, there should be no way a few Aiel could harm her, especially if she took shelter against more arrows behind the fallen horse. Even so, he would feel better when he had gathered her in. Rolling away from the crest to lessen the chances of the Aiel seeing him, he slid down the reverse slope until he could stand. He had brought five hundred and eighty-one Younglings south, almost every one who was far enough along in training to leave Tar Valon, but fewer than two hundred waited on their horses in the hollow. Before disaster struck at Dumai's Wells, he was certain there had been a plot afoot to see that he and the Younglings died without returning to the White Tower. Why, he did not know, nor whether the scheme came from Elaida or Galina, but it had succeeded well enough, if not exactly in the way its devisers had thought. Small wonder that he would have preferred to go on without Aes Sedai, had he any choice.

hi stɑp bɪsaɪɾ ə tɔl ɡɹeɪ ɡɛldɪŋ wɪð ə jʌŋ ɹaɪɾɝ. jʌŋ, əz ɪndiɾ ɔl ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz wɝ - mɛni dɪd nɑt nid tə ʃeɪv bɪɑn ɛvɹi θɝd deɪ, ən ə fju stɪl oʊnli pɹitɛndəɾ ivən ðət - bʌt dʒɪsaʊ wɔɹ ðə sɪlvɝ taʊɝ ɑn ɪz kɑlɝ, mɑɹkɪŋ ɪm ə vɛɾɝən ə ðə faɪɾɪŋ wən sɪuən sɑntʃ wɑz dɪpoʊzd, ən skɑɹz bɪniθ ɪz kloʊðz fɹəm faɪɾɪŋ sɪns. hi wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz u kəd skɪp ðə ɹeɪzɝ moʊs mɔɹnɪŋz; hɪz dɑɹk aɪz bɪlɔŋ tə ə mæn θɝɾi jɪɹz oʊldɝ, ðoʊ. wʌɾ ɪz oʊn aɪz lʊk laɪk ɡɔɪn wʌndɝd.

He stopped beside a tall gray gelding with a young rider. Young, as indeed all the Younglings were - many did not need to shave beyond every third day, and a few still only pretended even that - but Jisao wore the silver tower on his collar, marking him a veteran of the fighting when Siuan Sanche was deposed, and scars beneath his clothes from fighting since. He was one of those who could skip the razor most mornings; his dark eyes belonged to a man thirty years older, though. What did his own eyes look like Gawyn wondered.

"dʒɪsaʊ, wɪv ə sɪstɝ tə pʊl aʊɾ ə ðə - "

"Jisao, we have a sister to pull out of the - "

ðə hʌnʒɹəd əɹ soʊ il u keɪm tʃɹɑɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə loʊ ɹaɪz tə ðə wɛst ɹikɔɪld ɪn sɝpɹaɪz ət faɪndɪŋ ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz bɪloʊ, bʌt niðɝ sɝpɹaɪz nɔɹ ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz' supɪɹiɝ nʌmbɝz hɛld əm bæk. ɪn ə flæʃ ðeɪ veɪld ən plʌnʒd daʊn ðə sloʊp, dɑɹɾɪŋ ɪn wɪð spɪɹz stæbɪŋ ət hɔɹsəz əz ɔfən əz ɹaɪɾɝz, wɝkɪŋ ɪn pɛɹz. jɛɾ ɪf ði il nu haʊ tə faɪt mɛn ɑn hɔɹsbæk, ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz hæd ɹisənli hæd ɹʌf lɛsənz ɪn haʊ tə faɪɾ il, ən sloʊ lɝnɝz dɪd nɑt lɪv lɔŋ ɪn ðɛɹ ɹæŋks. səm kæɹid slɛndɝ lænsɪz, ɛndɪŋ ɪn ə fʊɾ ən ə hæf ə stil wɪð ə kɹɔsɡɑɹd tə pɹɪvɛn ðə hɛd pɛnətʃɹeɪɾɪŋ tu dipli, ən ɔl kəd juz ðɛɹ sɔɹdz əz wɛl əz ɛni bʌɾ ə bleɪdmæstɝ. ðeɪ fɔɾ ɪn tuz ən θɹiz, itʃ mæn wɑtʃɪŋ ənʌðɝz bæk, kipɪŋ ðɛɹ maʊns muvɪŋ soʊ ði il kəd nɑt hæmstʃɹɪŋ ði ænəməlz. oʊnli ðə kwɪkɪst il mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ ɪnsaɪd ðoʊz sɝkəlz ə flæʃɪŋ stil. ðə wɔɹ-tʃɹeɪn hɔɹsəz ðɛmsɛlvz wɝ wɛpənz, splɪɾɪŋ skʌlz wɪð ðɛɹ hʊvz, sizɪŋ mɛn wɪð ðɛɹ tiθ ən ʃeɪkɪŋ əm laɪk dɑɡz wɝiɪŋ ɹæts, dʒɔz tɛɹɪŋ əweɪ hæf ə mænz feɪs. ðə hɔɹsəz skɹimd əz ðeɪ fɔt, ən mɛn ɡɹʌntɪd wɪð ɛfɝt, ʃaʊɾəd wɪð ðə fivɝ ðəɾ oʊvɝ-tʊk mɛn ɪn bæɾəl, ðə fivɝ ðət sɛd ðeɪ wɝ əlaɪv ən wəd lɪv tə si ənʌðɝ sʌnɹaɪz ɪf ðeɪ hæd tə weɪd weɪst-dip ɪn blʌd. ðeɪ ʃaʊɾəd əz ðeɪ kɪld, ʃaʊɾəd əz ðeɪ daɪd; ðəɹ sim lɪɾəl dɪfɝəns.

The hundred or so Aiel who came trotting over the low rise to the west recoiled in surprise at finding the Younglings below, but neither surprise nor the Younglings' superior numbers held them back. In a flash they veiled and plunged down the slope, darting in with spears stabbing at horses as often as riders, working in pairs. Yet if the Aiel knew how to fight men on horseback, the Younglings had recently had rough lessons in how to fight Aiel, and slow learners did not live long in their ranks. Some carried slender lances, ending in a foot and a half of steel with a crossguard to prevent the head penetrating too deeply, and all could use their swords as well as any but a blademaster. They fought in twos and threes, each man watching another's back, keeping their mounts moving so the Aiel could not hamstring the animals. Only the quickest Aiel managed to get inside those circles of flashing steel. The war-trained horses themselves were weapons, splitting skulls with their hooves, seizing men with their teeth and shaking them like dogs worrying rats, jaws tearing away half a man's face. The horses screamed as they fought, and men grunted with effort, shouted with the fever that over-took men in battle, the fever that said they were alive and would live to see another sunrise if they had to wade waist-deep in blood. They shouted as they killed, shouted as they died; there seemed little difference.

ɡɔɪn hæd noʊ taɪm tə wɑtʃ əɹ lɪsən, ðoʊ. ði oʊnli jʌŋɡəlɪŋ əfʊt, hi ətʃɹæktəɾ ətɛnʃən. θɹi keɪɾɪnsɝ-klæd fɪɡjɝz dɑdʒ θɹu ðə hɔɹsmən, ɹʌʃɪŋ əɾ ɪm wɪð spɪɹz ɹɛɾi. pɝhæps ðeɪ θɔɾ ɪm izi mit, θɹi ɑn wʌn. hi dɪsɑbjuz ðɛm. hɪz sɔɹd lɛf ðə skæbɝd smuðli, əz smuðli əz i floʊd fɹəm ðə fælkən stups tə ðə kɹipɝ ɛmbɹeɪsɪz ði oʊk tə ðə mun ɹaɪzəz oʊvɝ ðə leɪks. θɹi taɪmz i fɛl ðə ʃɑk ɪn ɪz ɹɪsts ə bleɪd miɾɪŋ flɛʃ, ən ðət kwɪkli θɹi veɪld ilmɛn wɝ daʊn; tu stɪl muvɪŋ wikli, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ aʊɾ ə ðə faɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ði ʌðɝ. ðə nɛks tə kənfɹʌn ɪm wɑz ə dɪfɹən mæɾɝ.

Gawyn had no time to watch or listen, though. The only Youngling afoot, he attracted attention. Three cadin'sor-clad figures dodged through the horsemen, rushing at him with spears ready. Perhaps they thought him easy meat, three on one. He disabused them. His sword left the scabbard smoothly, as smoothly as he flowed from The Falcon Stoops to The Creeper Embraces the Oak to The Moon Rises Over the Lakes. Three times he felt the shock in his wrists of blade meeting flesh, and that quickly three veiled Aielmen were down; two still moving weakly, but they were out of the fight as much as the other. The next to confront him was a different matter.

ə lin fɛloʊ, oʊvɝtɑpɪŋ ɡɔɪn baɪ ə hænd, hi muv laɪk ə sneɪk, spɪɹ flɪkɝɪŋ waɪl ɪz bʌkəlɝ dɑɹɾɪd ən slæntəd tə dɪflɛk sɔɹd stʃɹoʊks wɪð ə fɔɹs ɡɔɪn kəd fil tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz. ðə wʊd ɡɹaʊs dænsəz bɪkeɪm foʊldɪŋ ði ɛɹ bɪkeɪm ðə kɔɹɾiɝ tæps ɪz fæn, ən ði il mæn mɛɾ itʃ ə ðɛm ət ðə kɑst ʌv ə slæʃ əlɔŋ ɪz ɹɪbz, waɪl ɡɔɪn tʊk ə ɡæʃ ɑn ɪz θaɪ ðəɾ oʊnli ə kwɪk twɪs kɛp fɹəm biɪŋ ə stæb klin θɹu.

A lean fellow, overtopping Gawyn by a hand, he moved like a snake, spear flickering while his buckler darted and slanted to deflect sword strokes with a force Gawyn could feel to his shoulders. The Wood Grouse Dances became Folding the Air became The Courtier Taps His Fan, and the Aiel man met each of them at the cost of a slash along his ribs, while Gawyn took a gash on his thigh that only a quick twist kept from being a stab clean through.

ðeɪ sɝkəld wʌn ənʌðɝ, əblɪviəs tə wʌtɛvɝ hæpən ɝaʊn ðɛm. blʌɾ uz hɑt daʊn ɡɔɪnz lɛɡ. ði il mæn faɪntɪd, hoʊpɪŋ tə dʒɹɔ hɪm ɔf bæləns, faɪntɪɾ əɡɛn; ɡɔɪn ʃɪftəd fɹəm stæns tə stæns, sɔɹd naʊ haɪ, naʊ loʊ, hoʊpɪŋ ðə mæn wəɾ ɪkstɛnd wʌn ə ðoʊz hæf-θɹʌsts dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl tu fɑɹ.

They circled one another, oblivious to whatever happened around them. Blood oozed hot down Gawyn's leg. The Aiel man feinted, hoping to draw him off balance, feinted again; Gawyn shifted from stance to stance, sword now high, now low, hoping the man would extend one of those half-thrusts just a little too far.

ɪn ði ɛnd, ɪt wɑz tʃæns ðət dɪsaɪɾɪd mæɾɝz. ði il mæn əbɹʌpli stʌmbəld ə stɛp, ən ɡɔɪn ɹæn ɪm θɹu ðə hɑɹt bɪfɔɹ i ivən sɔ ðə hɔɹs ðət hæd bækt ɪndə ðə mæn.

In the end, it was chance that decided matters. The Aiel man abruptly stumbled a step, and Gawyn ran him through the heart before he even saw the horse that had backed into the man.

wʌns i wʊɾə fɛlt ɹəɡɹɛt; hi hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp bɪlivɪŋ ðəɾ ɪf tu mɛn mʌs faɪt, ðə duəl ʃəd pɹəsiɾ ɑnɝəbli ən klinli. mɔɹ ðən hæf ə jɪɹ ə bæɾəlz ən skɝmɪʃɪz hæd tɔɾ ɪm bɛɾɝ. hi pʊɾ ə fʊɾ ɑn ði il mænz tʃɛst ən ɹɛntʃt ɪz bleɪd fɹi. ʌnɡæənt, bʌt fæst, ən ɪn bæɾəl, sloʊ wɑz ɔfən dɛd.

Once he would have felt regret; he had grown up believing that if two men must fight, the duel should proceed honorably and cleanly. More than half a year of battles and skirmishes had taught him better. He put a foot on the Aiel man's chest and wrenched his blade free. Ungallant, but fast, and in battle, slow was often dead.

oʊnli, wən ɪz sɔɹd wɑz fɹi, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ spid. mɛn wɝ daʊn, jʌŋɡəlɪŋz ən ilmɛn, səm ɡɹoʊnɪŋ, səm stɪl, ən ðə ɹɛst ə ði il stʃɹimɪŋ əweɪ tə ði ist, hɛɹid baɪ tu dʌzən jʌŋɡəlɪŋz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ səm u ʃəd noʊ bɛɾɝ. "hoʊld!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. ɪf ði ɪɾiəts əlaʊd ðɛmsɛlvz tə bɪkʌm sɛpɝeɪɾəd, ði il wəd kʌɾ əm tə dɑɡmit. "noʊ pɝsut! hoʊld, aɪ sɛd! hoʊld, bɝn ju!" ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz pʊld ʌp ɹɪlʌktənli.

Only, when his sword was free, there was no need for speed. Men were down, Younglings and Aielmen, some groaning, some still, and the rest of the Aiel streaming away to the east, harried by two dozen Younglings, including some who should know better. "Hold!" he shouted. If the idiots allowed themselves to become separated, the Aiel would cut them to dogmeat. "No pursuit! Hold, I said! Hold, burn you!" The Younglings pulled up reluctantly.

dʒɪsaʊ ɹeɪn ɪz ɡɛldɪŋ ɝaʊnd. "ðeɪ dʒʌs θɔt tə kʌɾ ə pæθ θɹu əs ɑn ðə weɪ wɛɹɛvɝ ðəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ, maɪ lɔɹd." hɪz sɔɹd dʒɹɪpt ɹɛd fɹəm hæf ɪts lɛŋθ. ɡɔɪn kɑt ðə ɹeɪnz ə hɪz oʊn beɪ stæljən ən swʌŋ ɪndə ðə sæɾəl, nɑt weɪɾɪŋ tə klin əɹ ʃiθ ɪz bleɪd. noʊ taɪm tə si hu wɑz dɛd, hu maɪt lɪv. "fɝɡɛt ðɛm. ðət sɪstɝ ɪz weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ʌs. hæl, kip jəɹ hæf-tʃɹup tə lʊk æftɝ ðə wundəd. ən wɑtʃ ðoʊz il; dʒʌs kəz ðəɹ daɪɪŋ dʌzn min ðeɪv kwɪt. ðə ɹɛst, fɑloʊ mi." hæl səluɾəd wɪð ɪz sɔɹd, bʌt ɡɔɪn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi dɪɡɪŋ ɪn ɪz spɝz.

Jisao reined his gelding around. "They just thought to cut a path through us on the way wherever they're going, my Lord." His sword dripped red from half its length. Gawyn caught the reins of his own bay stallion and swung into the saddle, not waiting to clean or sheath his blade. No time to see who was dead, who might live. "Forget them. That sister is waiting for us. Hal, keep your half-troop to look after the wounded. And watch those Aiel; just because they're dying doesn't mean they have quit. The rest, follow me." Hal saluted with his sword, but Gawyn was already digging in his spurs.

ðə skɝmɪʃ hæd nɑt læstəd lɔŋ, jɛt tu lɔŋ haʊɛvɝ ʃɔɹt. wən ɡɔɪn ɹitʃt ðə kɹɛst, oʊnli ðə dɛd hɔɹs wɑz tə bi sin, ɪts sæɾəlbæɡz tɝn aʊt. skænɪŋ θɹu hɪz lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs ɹɪvil nɑɾ ə saɪn ə ðə sɪstɝ, ði il əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls lɪvɪŋ. ɔl ðət muvd wɑz wɪnbloʊn dʌst ən ə dʒɹɛs ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd nɪɹ ðə hɔɹs, stɝɪŋ ɪn ðə ɡʌsts. ðə wʊmən mʌst əv spɹɪntɪd tə bi soʊ kəmplitli aʊɾ ə saɪt soʊ kwɪkli.

The skirmish had not lasted long, yet too long however short. When Gawyn reached the crest, only the dead horse was to be seen, its saddlebags turned out. Scanning through his looking glass revealed not a sign of the sister, the Aiel or anything else living. All that moved was windblown dust and a dress on the ground near the horse, stirring in the gusts. The woman must have sprinted to be so completely out of sight so quickly.

"ʃi kæn əv ɡɔn fɑɹ, ivən ɹʌnɪŋ," dʒɪsaʊ sɛd. "wi kən faɪn əɹ ɪf wi fæn aʊt."

"She can't have gone far, even running," Jisao said. "We can find her if we fan out."

"wil sɝtʃ æftɝ wi si tə ðə wundəd," ɡɔɪn ɹɪplaɪd fɝmli. hi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə splɪɾ ʌp ɪz mɛn wɪð il ɹoʊmɪŋ lus. oʊnli ə fju aʊɝz jɛt tɪl sʌnsɛt, ən i wɑntəɾ ə taɪt kæmp ɑn haɪ ɡɹaʊn bɪfɔɹ ðɛn. ɪt maɪt bi əz wɛl ɪf i dɪd mænədʒ tə faɪn ə sɪstɝ əɹ tu; sʌmwʌn wɑz gɑnə hæv tə ɪkspleɪn ðɪs kətæstʃɹəfi tə ɪleɪɾə, ən i wəɾ əz sun ɪt wɑz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪsɪŋ əɹ ɹæθ, nɑt hɪm.

"We'll search after we see to the wounded," Gawyn replied firmly. He was not about to split up his men with Aiel roaming loose. Only a few hours yet till sunset, and he wanted a tight camp on high ground before then. It might be as well if he did manage to find a sister or two; someone was going to have to explain this catastrophe to Elaida, and he would as soon it was an Aes Sedai facing her wrath, not him.

tɝnɪŋ ɪz beɪ wɪð ə saɪ, hi ɹoʊd bæk daʊn tə si wʌt ðə bʊtʃɝz bɪl hæd bɪn ðɪs taɪm. ðət hæd bɪn ɪz fɝst ɹil lɛsən əz ə soʊlʒɝ. jə ɔlweɪz hæd tə peɪ ðə bʊtʃɝ. hi hæɾ ə filɪŋ ðəɹ wəd bi bɪɡɝ bɪlz du sun. ðə wɝld wəd fɝɡɛt dəməaɪz wɛlz ɪn wʌt wɑz kʌmɪŋ.

Turning his bay with a sigh, he rode back down to see what the butcher's bill had been this time. That had been his first real lesson as a soldier. You always had to pay the butcher. He had a feeling there would be bigger bills due soon. The world would forget Dumai's Wells in what was coming.


tʃæptɝ wʌn


CHAPTER 1

haɪ tʃeɪsəlin


High Chasaline

ðə wil ə taɪm tɝnz, ən eɪdʒəz kʌm ən pæs, livɪŋ mɛmɹiz ðət bɪkʌm lɛdʒənd. lɛdʒən feɪdz tə mɪθ, ən ivən mɪθ ɪz lɔŋ fɝɡɑɾən wən ði eɪdʒ ðət ɡeɪv ɪt bɝθ kʌmz əɡɛn. ɪn wʌn eɪdʒ, kɔl ðə θɝɾ eɪdʒ baɪ sʌm, ən eɪdʒ jɛt tə kʌm, ən eɪdʒ lɔŋ pæst, ə wɪn ɹoʊz ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt fɔɹəs kɔl bɹəm wʊd. ðə wɪnd wɑz nɑt ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ðəɹ ɑɹ niðɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋz nɔɹ ɛndɪŋz tə ðə tɝnɪŋ ə ðə wil ə taɪm. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə bɪɡɪnɪŋ.

The Wheel of Time turns, and Ages come and pass, leaving memories that become legend. Legend fades to myth, and even myth is long forgotten when the Age that gave it birth comes again. In one Age, called the Third Age by some, an Age yet to come, an Age long past, a wind rose in the great forest called Braem Wood. The wind was not the beginning. There are neither beginnings nor endings to the turning of the Wheel of Time. But it was a beginning.

nɔɹθ ən is ðə wɪn blu əz ðə sɪɹɪŋ sʌn ɹoʊz haɪɝ ɪn ə klaʊdləs skaɪ, nɔɹθ ən is θɹu pɑɹtʃt tʃɹiz wɪð bɹaʊn livz ən bɛɹ bɹæntʃəz, θɹu skæɾɝd vɪlədʒəz wɛɹ ði ɛɹ ʃɪmɝd fɹəm ðə hit. ðə wɪn bɹɔt noʊ ɹɪlif, noʊ hɪn ə ɹeɪn, mʌtʃ lɛs snoʊ. nɔɹθ ən ist ɪt blu, pæst ən eɪntʃən ɑɹtʃ ə faɪnli wɝk stoʊn ðət səm sɛd hæd bɪn ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə ə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾi ən ʌðɝz ə mɑnjəmən tə səm lɔŋ fɝɡɑɾən bæɾəl. oʊnli wɛðɝd, ɪlɛdʒəbəl ɹɛmnəns ə kɑɹvɪŋ ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ðə mæsɪv stoʊnz, mjutli ɹɪkɔlɪŋ ðə lɔst ɡlɔɹiz ə stɔɹid kɔɹmændə. ə fju wæɡənz tʃɹʌndəl baɪ ɪn saɪɾ ə ði ɑɹtʃ, əlɔŋ ðə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɹoʊd, ən foʊk əfʊt ʃildɪd ðɛɹ aɪz fɹəm dʌst ɹeɪz baɪ hʊvz ən wæɡən wilz ən dʒɹɪvən baɪ ðə wɪnd. moʊs hæd noʊ aɪdiə wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ, oʊnli ðət ðə wɝl sim tə tɝn sʌmɝsɔls, ɔl ɔɹɾɝ ɛndɪŋ wɛɹ ɪt wɑz nɑt ɡɔn ɔlɹɛɾi. fɪɹ dʒɹoʊv səm ɑn, waɪl ʌðɝz wɝ dʒɹɔn baɪ sʌmθɪŋ ðeɪ kəd nɑt kwaɪt si ən dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, ən moʊst ə ðɛm wɝ əfɹeɪd, tu.

North and east the wind blew as the searing sun rose higher in a cloudless sky, north and east through parched trees with brown leaves and bare branches, through scattered villages where the air shimmered from the heat. The wind brought no relief, no hint of rain, much less snow. North and east it blew, past an ancient arch of finely worked stone that some said had been a gateway to a great city and others a monument to some long forgotten battle. Only weathered, illegible remnants of carving remained on the massive stones, mutely recalling the lost glories of storied Coremanda. A few wagons trundled by in sight of the arch, along the Tar Valon Road, and folk afoot shielded their eyes from dust raised by hooves and wagon wheels and driven by the wind. Most had no idea where they were going, only that the world seemed to turn somersaults, all order ending where it was not gone already. Fear drove some on, while others were drawn by something they could not quite see and did not understand, and most of them were afraid, too.

ɔnwɝd ðə wɪn tʃɹævəld, əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹeɪ-ɡɹin ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn, hilɪŋ ʃɪps ðət stɪl kæɹid tʃɹeɪd nɔɹθ ən saʊθ, fəɹ ðəɹ hæd tə bi tʃɹeɪɾ ivən ɪn ðiz deɪz, ðoʊ nʌn kəd bi ʃʊɹ wɛɹ ɪt wɑz seɪf tə tʃɹeɪd. ist ə ðə ɹɪvɝ, ðə fɔɹəsts bɪɡæn tə θɪn, ɡɪvɪŋ weɪ ɪvɛntʃəwəli tə loʊ ɹoʊlɪŋ hɪlz kʌvɝɾ ɪn bɹaʊn, tɪndɝ-dʒɹaɪ ɡɹæs ən dɑɾəd spɑɹsli wɪð smɔl klʌmps ə tʃɹiz. ətɑp wʌn ə ðoʊz hɪlz stʊɾ ə sɝkəl ʌv wæɡənz, mɛni wɪð ðə kænvəs skɔɹtʃt əɹ ɛls kəmplitli bɝn əweɪ fɹəm ði aɪɝn hups. ɑn ə meɪkʃɪft flæɡstæf, tʃɹɪm fɹəm ə jʌŋ tʃɹi dɛɾ ɪn ðə dʒɹaʊɾ ən læʃt tə ə bɛɹ wæɡən hup fəɹ mɔɹ haɪt, weɪvd ə kɹɪmzən bænɝ, ə blæk-ænd-waɪt dɪsk ɪn ɪts hɑɹt. ðə bænɝ ə laɪt, səm kɔld ɪt, əɹ ælθɹz bænɝ. ʌðɝz hæd dɑɹkɝ neɪmz, ən ʃɪvɝɾ əz ðeɪ spoʊk əm ɪn wɪspɝz. ðə wɪnd ʃʊk ðə bænɝ hɑɹɾ ən wɑz ɡɔn kwɪkli, əz ɪf ɡlæd tə bi əweɪ.

Onward the wind traveled, across the gray-green River Erinin, heeling ships that still carried trade north and south, for there had to be trade even in these days, though none could be sure where it was safe to trade. East of the river, the forests began to thin, giving way eventually to low rolling hills covered in brown, tinder-dry grass and dotted sparsely with small clumps of trees. Atop one of those hills stood a circle of wagons, many with the canvas scorched or else completely burned away from the iron hoops. On a makeshift flagstaff, trimmed from a young tree dead in the drought and lashed to a bare wagon hoop for more height, waved a crimson banner, a black-and-white disc in its heart. The Banner of Light, some called it, or al'Thor's Banner. Others had darker names, and shivered as they spoke them in whispers. The wind shook the banner hard and was gone quickly, as if glad to be away.

pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə sæɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɪð ɪz bɹɔd bæk əɡɛnst ə wæɡən wil, wɪʃɪŋ ðə wɪn lɪŋɡɝd. ɪt hæd bɪn kulɝ fəɹ ə moʊmənt. ən ðə wɪn fɹəm ðə saʊθ hæd klɪɹd ðə sɛn ə dɛθ fɹəm ɪz nɑstʃɹəlz, ə sɛn ðət ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm wɛɹ i wɑz səpoʊz tə bi, ðə læs pleɪs i wɑntəd tə bi. mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ hɪɹ, ɪnsaɪd ðə wæɡən sɝkəl, hɪz bæk tə ðə nɔɹθ, wɛɹ i kəd fɝɡɛɾ æftɝ ə fæʃən. ðə sɝvaɪvɪŋ wæɡənz hæd bɪn hɔld ʌp tə ðə hɪltɑp jɛstɝdeɪ, ɪn ði æftɝnun, wʌns mɛn kəd faɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ tə də mɔɹ ðən θæŋk ðə laɪt ðeɪ stɪl bɹiðd. naʊ ðə sʌn klaɪmd əɡɛn, ən ðə hit wɪð ɪt.

Perrin Aybara sat on the ground with his broad back against a wagon wheel, wishing the wind lingered. It had been cooler for a moment. And the wind from the south had cleared the scent of death from his nostrils, a scent that reminded him where he was supposed to be, the last place he wanted to be. Much better here, inside the wagon circle, his back to the north, where he could forget after a fashion. The surviving wagons had been hauled up to the hilltop yesterday, in the afternoon, once men could find strength to do more than thank the Light they still breathed. Now the sun climbed again, and the heat with it.

ɪɹɪɾəbli, hi skɹætʃt əɾ ɪz ʃɔɹt kɝli bɪɹd; ðə mɔɹ i swɛɾɪd, ðə mɔɹ ɪɾ ɪtʃt. swɛt ɹoʊl daʊn ðə feɪs ʌv ɛvɹi mæn i kəd si ɪksɛp ði il, ən wɔɾɝ leɪ nɪɹli ə maɪl əweɪ tə ðə nɔɹθ naʊ. bʌt soʊ dɪd ðə hɔɹɝz, ən ðə smɛlz. moʊs kənsɪɾɝd ɪɾ ə fɛɹ tʃɹeɪd. hi ʃʊɾə bɪn duɪŋ ɪz duɾi, jɛt ðə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɪl dɪd nɑt muv hɪm. tədeɪ wɑz haɪ tʃeɪsəlin, ən bæk hoʊm ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ðəɹ wəd bi fistɪŋ ɔl deɪ ən dænsɪŋ ɔl naɪt; ðə deɪ ʌv ɹəflɛkʃən, wən jə wɝ səpoʊz tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɔl ðə ɡʊd θɪŋz ɪn jəɹ laɪf ən ɛniwʌn u vɔɪst ə kəmpleɪn kəd faɪn ə bʌkəɾ ʌv wɔɾɝ ʌpɛndəɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd tə wɑʃ əweɪ bæd lʌk. nɑt sʌmθɪŋ ɛnibəɾi wɑntəd wən ðə wɛðɝ wɑz koʊld, əz ɪt ʃəd bi; ə bʌkəɾ ʌv wɔɾɝ wəd bi ə plɛʒɝ naʊ. fəɹ ə mæn lʌki tə bi əlaɪv, hi faʊn ɪt ɹɪmɑɹkəbli hɑɹd tə pʊl ʌp ɛni ɡʊd θɔts. hi hæd lɝn θɪŋz əbaʊt hɪmsɛlf jɛstɝdeɪ. əɹ meɪbi ɪt hæd bɪn ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, æftɝ ɪt wɑz ɔl dʌn.

Irritably, he scratched at his short curly beard; the more he sweated, the more it itched. Sweat rolled down the face of every man he could see except the Aiel, and water lay nearly a mile away to the north now. But so did the horrors, and the smells. Most considered it a fair trade. He should have been doing his duty, yet the touch of guilt did not move him. Today was High Chasaline, and back home in the Two Rivers there would be feasting all day and dancing all night; the Day of Reflection, when you were supposed to remember all the good things in your life and anyone who voiced a complaint could find a bucket of water upended over his head to wash away bad luck. Not something anybody wanted when the weather was cold, as it should be; a bucket of water would be a pleasure now. For a man lucky to be alive, he found it remarkably hard to pull up any good thoughts. He had learned things about himself yesterday. Or maybe it had been this morning, after it was all done.

hi kəd sɛns ə fju ʌv ðə wʊlvz stɪl, ə hændfʊl ə ðoʊz ðət sɝvaɪvd ən wɝ naʊ ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ ɛlswɛɹ, fɑɹ fɹəm hɪɹ, fɑɹ fɹəm mɛn. ðə wʊlvz wɝ stɪl ðə tɔk ə ðə kæmp, ənizi spɛkjəleɪʃən oʊvɝ wɛɹ ðeɪ hæɾ əpɪɹd fɹəm ən waɪ. ə fju bɪlivd ɹænd hæd kɔl ðɛm. moʊs θɔt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑt seɪ wʌt ðeɪ θɔt. noʊ bleɪm keɪm fɹəm ðə wʊlvz - wʌt hæd hæpənd, hæd hæpənd - bʌɾ i kəd nɑt mætʃ ðɛɹ feɪɾəlɪzəm. ðeɪ hæd kʌm kəz i kɔl ðɛm. ʃoʊldɝz waɪɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪm sim ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən i wɑz slʌmpt ʌndɝ ðə weɪɾ ə ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi. naʊ ən ðən i hɝɾ ʌðɝ wʊlvz, ðət hæd nɑt kʌm, spik wɪð skɔɹn tə ðoʊz ðət hæd: ðɪs wɑz wʌt keɪm ə mɪksɪŋ wɪð ðə tu-lɛɡz. nʌθɪŋ ɛls kəd bi ɪkspɛktəd.

He could sense a few of the wolves still, a handful of those that survived and were now on their way elsewhere, far from here, far from men. The wolves were still the talk of the camp, uneasy speculation over where they had appeared from and why. A few believed Rand had called them. Most thought the Aes Sedai had. The Aes Sedai did not say what they thought. No blame came from the wolves - what had happened, had happened - but he could not match their fatalism. They had come because he called them. Shoulders wide enough to make him seem shorter than he was slumped under the weight of responsibility. Now and then he heard other wolves, that had not come, speak with scorn to those that had: This was what came of mixing with the two-legs. Nothing else could be expected.

ɪt wɑz ə stʃɹeɪn tə kip ɪz θɔts tə hɪmsɛlf. hi wɑntəd tə bi hoʊm, ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. smɔl tʃæns ə ðæt, pɝhæps ɛvɝ əɡɛn. hi wɑntəd tə haʊl ðət ðə skɔɹnfəl wʌnz wɝ ɹaɪt. hi wɑntəd tə bi wɪð ɪz waɪf ɛniwɛɹ əɾ ɔl, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðə weɪ ɪt wɑz bɪfɔɹ. ðə tʃænsəz ʌv wɪtʃ sim lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ, meɪbi wɝs. fɑɹ mɔɹ ðən ðə jɝnɪŋ fəɹ hoʊm, mɔɹ ivən ðən ðə wʊlvz, wɝi əbaʊt feɪl eɪɾ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪm laɪk ə fɛɹət tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɝoʊ aʊɾ ə hɪz mɪɾəl. ʃi hæɾ æktʃəli  simd ɡlæd tə si hɪm liv kɛɹhin. wʌt wɑz i tə də əbaʊt hɝ? hi kəd nɑt θɪŋk ʌv wɝdz tə dɪskɹaɪb haʊ mʌtʃ i lʌvd ɪz waɪf, ən niɾəd hɝ, bʌt ʃi wɑz dʒɛləs wɛɹ ʃi hæd noʊ kɑz, hɝt wɛɹ i hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ, æŋɡɹi wɛɹ i kəd nɑt si waɪ. hi mʌs də sʌmθɪŋ, bʌt wʌt? ði ænsɝ ɪluɾɪd hɪm. kɛɹfəl θɔt wɑz ɔl i hæd, waɪl feɪl wɑz flæʃɪŋ kwɪksɪlvɝ.

It was a strain to keep his thoughts to himself. He wanted to be home, in the Two Rivers. Small chance of that, perhaps ever again. He wanted to howl that the scornful ones were right. He wanted to be with his wife anywhere at all, and everything the way it was before. The chances of which seemed little better, maybe worse. Far more than the yearning for home, more even than the wolves, worry about Faile ate inside him like a ferret trying to burrow out of his middle. She had actually seemed glad to see him leave Cairhien. What was he to do about her? He could not think of words to describe how much he loved his wife, and needed her, but she was jealous where she had no cause, hurt where he had done nothing, angry where he could not see why. He must do something, but what? The answer eluded him. Careful thought was all he had, while Faile was flashing quicksilver.

"ði il ʃəd pʊt səm kloʊðz ɑn ðɛm," ɛɹæm mʌɾɝd pɹɪmli, skaʊlɪŋ ət ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hi skwɑɾɪd nɪɹbaɪ, peɪʃənli hoʊldɪŋ ðə ɹeɪnz ʌv ə ɹeɪnʒi ɡɹeɪ ɡɛldɪŋ; hi sɛldəm wɛn fɑɹ fɹəm pɛɹɪn. ðə sɔɹd stʃɹæp tə hɪz bæk dʒɑɹd wɪð ɪz ɡɹin-stʃɹaɪp tɪŋkɝ koʊt, hæŋɪŋ əndʌn fəɹ ðə hit. ə ɹoʊl kɝtʃəf taɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz fɔɹhɛd kɛp swɛt fɹəm ɪz aɪz. wʌns pɛɹɪn hæd θɔɾ ɪm ɔlmoʊs tu ɡʊd-lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ə mæn. ə blik dɑɹknəs hæd sɛɾəld ɪn hɪm, ðoʊ, ən naʊ hi wɔɹ ə skaʊl əz ɔfən əz nɑt. "ɪɾ ɪzən disənt, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn."

"The Aiel should put some clothes on them," Aram muttered primly, scowling at the ground. He squatted nearby, patiently holding the reins of a rangy gray gelding; he seldom went far from Perrin. The sword strapped to his back jarred with his green-striped Tinker coat, hanging undone for the heat. A rolled kerchief tied around his forehead kept sweat from his eyes. Once Perrin had thought him almost too good-looking for a man. A bleak darkness had settled in him, though, and now he wore a scowl as often as not. "It isn't decent, Lord Perrin."

pɛɹɪn pʊɾ əsaɪd θɔts ə feɪl ɹɪlʌktənli. wɪð taɪm, hi kəd pʌzəl ɪɾ aʊt. hi hæd tə. sʌmhaʊ. "ɪɾ ɪz ðɛɹ weɪ, ɛɹæm."

Perrin put aside thoughts of Faile reluctantly. With time, he could puzzle it out. He had to. Somehow. "It is their way, Aram."

ɛɹæm ɡɹɪməst əz ɪf i maɪt spɪt. "wɛl, ɪɾ ɪzən ə disənt weɪ. ɪt kips əm ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl, aɪ səpoʊz - noʊbɑdi wəd ɹʌn fɑɹ əɹ meɪk tʃɹʌbəl laɪk ðət - bʌɾ ɪɾ ɪzən disənt."

Aram grimaced as if he might spit. "Well, it isn't a decent way. It keeps them under control, I suppose - nobody would run far or make trouble like that - but it isn't decent."

ðəɹ wɝ il ɔl oʊvɝ ðə pleɪs, ʌv kɔɹs. tɔl, əluf mɛn ɪn ɡɹeɪz ən bɹaʊnz ən ɡɹinz, ðɛɹ oʊnli bɪɾ ə kʌlɝ ðə skɑɹlət stʃɹɪp ə klɔθ taɪɾ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ tɛmpəlz, wɪð ðə blæk-ænd-waɪt dɪsk ɑn ðɛɹ fɔɹhɛdz. sɪswaɪəmən, ðeɪ kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz. səmtaɪmz ðət wɝd tɪkəl ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz mɛmɹi, laɪk ə wɝɾ i ʃəd noʊ. æsk wʌn ə ði ilmɛn, ən i lʊkt əz ɪf jə hæd bæbəl nɑnsɛns. bʌt ðɛn, ðeɪ ɪɡnɔɹd ðə stʃɹɪps ə klɔθ, tu. noʊ meɪɾən ə ðə spɪɹ wɔɹ ðə skɑɹlət hɛdbænd. wɛðɝ waɪt-hɛɹɾ əɹ lʊkɪŋ bɛɹli oʊld ɪnʌf tə liv əɹ mʌðɝ, ɛvɹi meɪɾən stɔkt əbaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ ðə sɪswaɪəmən tʃælənʒɪŋ stɛɹz ðət sim sʌmhaʊ sɛlf-sæɾəsfaɪd, waɪl ðə mɛn lʊk bæk flæt-aɪd, wɪð ə smɛl ɔlmoʊst ə hʌŋɡɝ, ə mæɾɝ ə dʒɛləsi baɪ ðə sɛn ʌv ɔl ə ðɛm, ðoʊ oʊvɝ wʌt pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə ɪmædʒən. wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz, ɪt wɑz nɑt nu, ən ɪt dɪd nɑt sim laɪkli tə kʌm tə bloʊz. ə fju ʌv ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ ɪnsaɪd ðə wæɡənz əz wɛl, ɪn bʌlki skɝts ən waɪt blaʊsəz, wɛɹɪŋ ðɛɹ dɑɹk ʃɔlz ɪn dɪfaɪəns ə ðə hit, ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ bɹeɪslɪts ən nɛkləsɪz ʌv ɡoʊld ən aɪvɝi meɪkɪŋ ʌp fəɹ ðə pleɪnəs ə ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛɹ kloʊðz. səm əpɪɹɾ əmjuz baɪ ðə meɪɾənz ən ðə sɪswaɪəmən, ən ʌðɝz ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd. ɔl ə ðɛm - waɪz wʌnz, meɪɾənz ən sɪswaɪəmən - ɪɡnɔɹd ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ðə weɪ pɛɹɪn wəɾ əv ə stul əɹ ə ɹʌɡ.

There were Aiel all over the place, of course. Tall, aloof men in grays and browns and greens, their only bit of color the scarlet strip of cloth tied around their temples, with the black-and-white disc on their foreheads. Siswai'aman, they called themselves. Sometimes that word tickled the edge of his memory, like a word he should know. Ask one of the Aielmen, and he looked as if you had babbled nonsense. But then, they ignored the strips of cloth, too. No Maiden of the Spear wore the scarlet headband. Whether white-haired or looking barely old enough to leave her mother, every Maiden stalked about giving the siswai'aman challenging stares that seemed somehow self-satisfied, while the men looked back flat-eyed, with a smell almost of hunger, a matter of jealousy by the scent of all of them, though over what Perrin could not begin to imagine. Whatever it was, it was not new, and it did not seem likely to come to blows. A few of the Wise Ones were inside the wagons as well, in bulky skirts and white blouses, wearing their dark shawls in defiance of the heat, glittering bracelets and necklaces of gold and ivory making up for the plainness of the rest of their clothes. Some appeared amused by the Maidens and the siswai'aman, and others exasperated. All of them - Wise Ones, Maidens and siswai'aman - ignored the Shaido the way Perrin would have a stool or a rug.

ði il hæd teɪkən tu hʌnʒɹəd əɹ soʊ ʃeɪɾoʊ pɹɪznɝz jɛstɝdeɪ, mɛn ən meɪɾənz - nɑt mɛni, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðə nʌmbɝz ɪnvɑlvd - ən ðeɪ muvd əbaʊt fɹili. ɪn ə mænɝ ə spikɪŋ. pɛɹɪn wʊɾə bɪn ə lɑt mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl hæd ðeɪ bɪn ɡɑɹɾəd. ən kloʊðd. ɪnstɛd, ðeɪ fɛtʃt wɔɾɝ ən ɹæn ɛɹənz, neɪkəɾ əz ðə deɪ ðeɪ wɝ bɔɹn. wɪð ʌðɝ il, ðeɪ wɝ mik əz maɪs. ɛniwʌn ɛls ɹəsivd ə pɹaʊdli dɪfaɪən stɛɹ fəɹ noʊɾɪsɪŋ ðɛm. pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn u tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə noʊɾəs ðɛm, ən ɛɹæm nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn tə mʌɾɝ. ə ɡʊd mɛni ʌv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ɪn kæmp dɪd wʌn əɹ boʊθ. ə ɡʊd mɛni ʌv ðə kɛɹhinɪn nɪɹli hæɾ æpəplɛksi wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ sɔ wʌn ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ. ðə minɝz dʒʌst ʃʊk ðɛɹ hɛdz əz ðoʊ ɪt wɝ ɔl ə dʒoʊk. ən oʊɡəl ðə wɪmən. ðeɪ hæɾ əz lɪɾəl ʃeɪm əz ði il, ðə minɝz.

The Aiel had taken two hundred or so Shaido prisoners yesterday, men and Maidens - not many, considering the numbers involved - and they moved about freely. In a manner of speaking. Perrin would have been a lot more comfortable had they been guarded. And clothed. Instead, they fetched water and ran errands, naked as the day they were born. With other Aiel, they were meek as mice. Anyone else received a proudly defiant stare for noticing them. Perrin was not the only one who tried not to notice them, and Aram not the only one to mutter. A good many of the Two Rivers men in camp did one or both. A good many of the Cairhienin nearly had apoplexy whenever they saw one of the Shaido. The Mayeners just shook their heads as though it were all a joke. And ogled the women. They had as little shame as the Aiel, the Mayeners.

"ɡɔl ɪkspleɪn ɪt tə mi, ɛɹæm. jə noʊ wʌɾ ə ɡeɪʃeɪn ɪz, doʊn ju? əbaʊt dʒiɾoʊ ən sɝvɪŋ ə jɪɹ ən ə deɪ ən ɔl ðæt?" ði ʌðɝ mæn nɑɾəd, wɪtʃ wɑz ə ɡʊd θɪŋ. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ mʌtʃ hɪmsɛlf. ɡɔlz ɛkspləneɪʃənz ʌv il weɪz ɔfən lɛft ɪm mɔɹ kənfjuzd. ɡɔl ɔlweɪz θɔɾ ɪɾ ɔl sɛlf-ɛvəɾənt. "wɛl, ɡeɪʃeɪn ɑɹən əlaʊd tə wɛɹ ɛniθɪŋ wʌn ə ði ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ maɪt wɛɹ - ðət minz 'spɪɹ faɪɾɝz,' " hi æɾəd əɾ ɛɹæmz kwɛstʃənɪŋ fɹaʊn. sʌɾənli hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz lʊkɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ət wʌn ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ əz ʃi tʃɹɑɾəd ɪn ɪz dʒɛnɝəl dɝɛkʃən, ə tɔl jʌŋ wʊmən, ɡoʊldən-hɛɹɾ ən pɹɪɾi dɪspaɪɾ ə lɔŋ θɪn skɑɹ daʊn əɹ tʃik ən ʌðɝ skɑɹz ɛlswɛɹ. vɛɹi pɹɪɾi ən vɛɹi neɪkəd. klɪɹɪŋ ɪz θɹoʊt ɹʌfli, hi pʊld ɪz aɪz əweɪ. hi kəd fil ɪz feɪs hiɾɪŋ. "ɛniweɪ, ðəɾ ɪz waɪ ðeɪ ɑɹ . . . ðə weɪ ðeɪ ɑɹ. ɡeɪʃeɪn wɛɹ waɪt ɹoʊbz, ən ðeɪ doʊn əv ɛni hɪɹ. ɪts dʒʌs ðɛɹ weɪ." bɝn ɡɔl ən bɝn ɪz ɛkspləneɪʃənz, hi θɔt. ðeɪ kəd kʌvɝ əm wɪð sʌmθɪŋ!

"Gaul explained it to me, Aram. You know what a gai'shain is, don't you? About ji'e'toh and serving a year and a day and all that?" The other man nodded, which was a good thing. Perrin did not know much himself. Gaul's explanations of Aiel ways often left him more confused. Gaul always thought it all self-evident. "Well, gai'shain aren't allowed to wear anything one of the algai'd'siswai might wear - that means 'spear fighters,' " he added at Aram's questioning frown. Suddenly he realized he was looking straight at one of the Shaido as she trotted in his general direction, a tall young woman, golden-haired and pretty despite a long thin scar down her cheek and other scars elsewhere. Very pretty and very naked. Clearing his throat roughly, he pulled his eyes away. He could feel his face heating. "Anyway, that is why they are . . . the way they are. Gai'shain wear white robes, and they don't have any here. It's just their way." Burn Gaul and burn his explanations, he thought. They could cover them with something!

"pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz," sɛɾ ə wʊmənz vɔɪs, "kæɹəhuən sɛnz tə noʊ wɛðɝ jə wɪʃ wɔɾɝ." ɛɹæmz feɪs wɛn pɝpəl, ən i dʒɝk hɪmsɛlf ɝaʊn ɪn ɪz skwɑt, pɹɪzɛntɪŋ ɪz bæk tə hɝ.

"Perrin Goldeneyes," said a woman's voice, "Carahuin sends to know whether you wish water." Aram's face went purple, and he jerked himself around in his squat, presenting his back to her.

"noʊ, θæŋk ju." pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt nid tə lʊk ʌp tə noʊ ɪt wɑz ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd ʃeɪɾoʊ wʊmən. hi kɛpt piɹɪŋ ɔf ət nʌθɪŋ ɪn ənʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən. il hæɾ ə pəkjuljɝ sɛns ə hjumɝ, ən meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ - kæɹəhuən wɑz ə meɪɾən - hæd ðə moʊs pəkjuljɝ. ðeɪ hæd kwɪkli sin haʊ ðə wɛtləndɝz ɹiæktəd tə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ - ðeɪ wʊɾə niɾəd tə bi blaɪnd nɑt tə - ən sʌɾənli ɡeɪʃeɪn wɝ biɪŋ sɛn tə wɛtləndɝz lɛft ən ɹaɪt, ən il ɔl bʌt ɹoʊlɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ət ðə blʌʃəz ən stæmɝz ən ivən ðə ʃaʊɾɪŋ. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət kæɹəhuən ən əɹ fɹɛnz wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ naʊ. ðɪs wɑz ət lis ðə tɛnθ taɪm wʌn ə ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn wɪmən hæd bɪn sɛn tə æsk ɪm wɛðɝ i wɑntəd wɔɾɝ əɹ hæɾ ə spɛɹ wɛt-stoʊn əɹ səm sətʃ blʌɾi ful θɪŋ.

"No, thank you." Perrin did not need to look up to know it was the golden-haired Shaido woman. He kept peering off at nothing in another direction. Aiel had a peculiar sense of humor, and Maidens of the Spear - Carahuin was a Maiden - had the most peculiar. They had quickly seen how the wetlanders reacted to the Shaido - they would have needed to be blind not to - and suddenly gai'shain were being sent to wetlanders left and right, and Aiel all but rolling on the ground at the blushes and stammers and even the shouting. He was sure that Carahuin and her friends were watching now. This was at least the tenth time one of the gai'shain women had been sent to ask him whether he wanted water or had a spare whet-stone or some such bloody fool thing.

əbɹʌpli ə θɔt stʃɹʌk hɪm. ðə minɝz wɝ sɛldəm bɑðɝd ðɪs weɪ. ə hændfʊl ə kɛɹhinɪn pleɪnli ɛndʒɔɪd lʊkɪŋ, ɪf nɑt soʊ oʊpənli əz ðə minɝz, ən səm ə ði oʊldɝ tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, hu ʃʊɾə noʊn bɛɾɝ. ðə pɔɪnt wɑz, nʌn ə ðɛm hæd hæɾ ə sɛkən spjʊɹiəs mɛsədʒ ðəɾ i nu ʌv. ðoʊz u ɹiæktəd ðə moʊst, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd. . . . kɛɹhinɪn, hu hæd ʃaʊɾəd ðə laʊɾəst əbaʊɾ ɪndisənsi, ən tu əɹ θɹi ʌv ðə jʌŋɡɝ tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, hu stæmɝɾ ən blʌʃt soʊ hɑɹd ðeɪ lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə mɛlt, hæd bɪn pɛstɝɾ əntɪl ðeɪ flɛd ðə wæɡənz ɪntaɪɝli. . . .

Abruptly a thought struck him. The Mayeners were seldom bothered this way. A handful of Cairhienin plainly enjoyed looking, if not so openly as the Mayeners, and some of the older Two Rivers men, who should have known better. The point was, none of them had had a second spurious message that he knew of. Those who reacted the most, on the other hand. . . . Cairhienin, who had shouted the loudest about indecency, and two or three of the younger Two Rivers men, who stammered and blushed so hard they looked ready to melt, had been pestered until they fled the wagons entirely. . . .

wɪð ən ɛfɝt pɛɹɪn lʊkt ʌp ət ðə ɡeɪʃeɪnz feɪs. əɾ əɹ aɪz. foʊkəs ɑn əɹ aɪz, hi θɔt fɹæntəkəli. ðeɪ wɝ ɡɹin, ən lɑɹdʒ, ən nɑɾ əɾ ɔl mik. hɝ sɛnt wɑz pjʊɹ fjʊɹi. "θæŋk kæɹəhuən fəɹ mi, ən tɛl əɹ jə kəɾ ɔɪl maɪ spɛɹ sæɾəl, ɪf ʃi dʌzn maɪnd. ən aɪ doʊn əv ə klin ʃɝt. ɪf ʃi wʊdn maɪn jə duɪŋ səm lɔnʒɹi?"

With an effort Perrin looked up at the gai'shain's face. At her eyes. Focus on her eyes, he thought frantically. They were green, and large, and not at all meek. Her scent was pure fury. "Thank Carahuin for me, and tell her you could oil my spare saddle, if she doesn't mind. And I don't have a clean shirt. If she wouldn't mind you doing some laundry?"

"ʃi wɪl nɑt maɪnd," ðə wʊmən sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs, ðən tɝn ən tʃɹɑɾəd ɔf.

"She will not mind," the woman said in a tight voice, then turned and trotted off.

pɛɹɪn wɪpt ɪz aɪz əweɪ, ðoʊ ði ɪmədʒ dɪd steɪ ɪn ɪz hɛd. laɪt, ɛɹæm wɑz ɹaɪt! bʌt wɪð lʌk, hi maɪt dʒʌst əv stɑpt ɛni mɔɹ vɪzəteɪʃənz. hi wəɾ əv tə pɔɪn ðɪs aʊt tə ɛɹæm, ən ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn. meɪbi ðə kɛɹhinɪn wəd lɪsən tu.

Perrin whipped his eyes away, though the image did stay in his head. Light, Aram was right! But with luck, he might just have stopped any more visitations. He would have to point this out to Aram, and the Two Rivers men. Maybe the Cairhienin would listen too.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ wi gɑnə də əbaʊt ðɛm, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn?" stɪl lʊkɪŋ əweɪ, ɛɹæm noʊ lɔŋɡɝ spoʊk ʌv ɡeɪʃeɪn.

"What are we going to do about them, Lord Perrin?" Still looking away, Aram no longer spoke of gai'shain.

"ðæɾ ɪz ɹændz tə dɪsaɪd," pɛɹɪn sɛd sloʊli, sæɾəsfækʃən feɪɾɪŋ. ɪt maɪt bi ɑd tə θɪŋk ə pipəl wɑndɝɪŋ əbaʊt neɪkəɾ əz ə smɔl pɹɑbləm, bʌt ðɪs wɑz dɛfənətli ə bɪɡɝ. ən wʌn i hæd bɪn əvɔɪɾɪŋ əz hɑɹɾ əz i hæd wʌt leɪ tə ðə nɔɹθ.

"That is Rand's to decide," Perrin said slowly, satisfaction fading. It might be odd to think of people wandering about naked as a small problem, but this was definitely a bigger. And one he had been avoiding as hard as he had what lay to the north.

ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə wæɡən sɝkəl, nɪɹli tu dʌzən wɪmən sæɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ɔl wɛl-dʒɹɛs fəɹ tʃɹævəl, mɛni wɔɹ sɪlk, moʊst wɪð laɪt lɪnən dʌstkloʊks, bʌt nɑɾ ə biɾ ə swɛt ʃoʊɾ ɑn ɛni feɪs. θɹi əpɪɹd jʌŋ ɪnʌf ðəɾ i maɪɾ əv æskt əm fəɹ ə dæns bɪfɔɹ i mɛɹid feɪl.

On the far side of the wagon circle, nearly two dozen women sat on the ground. All well-dressed for travel, many wore silk, most with light linen dustcloaks, but not a bead of sweat showed on any face. Three appeared young enough that he might have asked them for a dance before he married Faile.

ɪf ðeɪ wɝn ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɛniweɪ, hi θɔt ɹaɪli. wʌns i hæd dænst wɪð ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən nɪɹli swɑloʊɾ ɪz tʌŋ wən i ɹilaɪzd u hi swʌŋ əbaʊt. ən ʃi hæd bɪn ə fɹɛnd, ɪf ðət wɝɾ əplaɪd tə ɛɛs sədaɪ. haʊ nu dʌz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hæv tə bi fəɹ mi tə pʊɾ ən eɪdʒ tə hɝ? ði ʌðɝz lʊkt eɪdʒləs, ʌv kɔɹs; meɪbi ɪn ðɛɹ twɛntiz, meɪbi ðɛɹ fɔɹɾiz, tʃeɪnʒɪŋ fɹəm wʌn ɡlæns tə ðə nɛkst, ɔlweɪz ənsɝɾən. ðət wɑz wʌt ðɛɹ feɪsəz sɛd, ðoʊ sɛvɹəl ʃoʊd ɡɹeɪ ɪn ðɛɹ hɛɹ. jə dʒʌs kəd nɑt tɛl wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ. əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ.

If they weren't Aes Sedai, anyway, he thought wryly. Once he had danced with an Aes Sedai, and nearly swallowed his tongue when he realized who he swung about. And she had been a friend, if that word applied to Aes Sedai. How new does an Aes Sedai have to be for me to put an age to her? The others looked ageless, of course; maybe in their twenties, maybe their forties, changing from one glance to the next, always uncertain. That was what their faces said, though several showed gray in their hair. You just could not tell with Aes Sedai. About anything.

"æt lis ðoʊz ɑɹ noʊ deɪnʒɝ ɛnimɔɹ," ɛɹæm sɛd, dʒɝkɪŋ ɪz hɛd təwɔɹd θɹi ʌv ðə sɪstɝz ə lɪɾəl əpɑɹt fɹəm ðə ɹɛst.

"At least those are no danger anymore," Aram said, jerking his head toward three of the sisters a little apart from the rest.

wʌn wɛpt, feɪs ɑn əɹ niz; ði ʌðɝ tu stɛɹd hæɡɝdli ət nʌθɪŋ, wʌn ə ðɛm plʌkɪŋ eɪmləsli əɾ əɹ skɝt. ðeɪ hæd bɪn mʌtʃ ðə seɪm sɪns jɛstɝdeɪ; ət lis nʌn wɑz skɹimɪŋ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ɪf pɛɹɪn hæd ðə stʃɹeɪɾ ʌv ɪt, wɪtʃ i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i dɪd, ðeɪ hæd bɪn stɪl sʌmhaʊ wən ɹænd bɹoʊk fɹi. ðeɪ wəd nɛvɝ tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ əɡɛn. tə ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪt wɑz pɹɑbli bɛɾɝ tə bi dɛd.

One wept, face on her knees; the other two stared haggardly at nothing, one of them plucking aimlessly at her skirt. They had been much the same since yesterday; at least none was screaming any longer. If Perrin had the straight of it, which he was not sure he did, they had been stilled somehow when Rand broke free. They would never channel the One Power again. To Aes Sedai, it was probably better to be dead.

hi wʊɾə ɪkspɛktəd ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə kʌmfɝt ðɛm, kɛɹ fəɹ əm sʌmhaʊ, bʌt moʊst ɪɡnɔɹd ðə θɹi ɪntaɪɝli, ɔlðoʊ ə lɪɾəl tu stʌɾid ɪn lʊkɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ ən ɛvɹiwɛɹ ɛls. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ðə stɪld ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹəfjuz tə æknɑlɪdʒ ðə ɹɛst, iðɝ. ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, ət list, ə fju ʌv ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz hæɾ əpɹoʊtʃt, itʃ baɪ hɝsɛlf, kɑm tə ði aɪ jɛt smɛlɪŋ ʃɑɹpli ʌv əvɝʒən ən ɹɪlʌktəns, bʌt ðeɪ ɡɑt nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ðɛɹ peɪnz, nɑt wɝɾ əɹ ɡlæns. nʌn hæd ɡɔn nɪɹ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ.

He would have expected the other Aes Sedai to comfort them, care for them somehow, but most ignored the three entirely, although a little too studied in looking anywhere and everywhere else. For that matter, the stilled Aes Sedai refused to acknowledge the rest, either. In the beginning, at least, a few of the other sisters had approached, each by herself, calm to the eye yet smelling sharply of aversion and reluctance, but they got nothing for their pains, not word or glance. None had gone near this morning.

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sim tə də ə lɑɾ ʌv ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ʌv wʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt wɑnə ədmɪt. fəɹ ɪnstəns, ðə blæk-koʊɾəd mɛn stændɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛm. ðəɹ wɑz ən æʃəmən fəɹ itʃ sɪstɝ, ivən ðə θɹi hu hæd bɪn stɪld, ən ðeɪ nɛvɝ sim tə blɪŋk. fəɹ ðɛɹ pɑɹt, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ lʊk pæs ði æʃəmən, əɹ θɹu ðɛm; ðeɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl nɑɾ əv ɪɡzɪstəd.

Perrin shook his head. The Aes Sedai seemed to do a lot of ignoring of what they did not want to admit. For instance, the black-coated men standing over them. There was an Asha'man for each sister, even the three who had been stilled, and they never seemed to blink. For their part, the Aes Sedai looked past the Asha'man, or through them; they might as well not have existed.

ɪt wɑz kwaɪɾ ə tʃɹɪk. hi kəd nɑt meɪk hɪmsɛlf dɪsɹɪɡɑɹd ði æʃəmən, ən i wɑz nɑɾ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ ɡɑɹd. ðeɪ ɹeɪnʒd fɹəm fʌz-tʃik bɔɪz tə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd, bɔldɪŋ ɡænsɝz, ən ɪt wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ ɡɹɪm, haɪ-kɑlɝd blæk koʊts əɹ ðə sɔɹɾ itʃ wɔɹ əɾ ɪz hɪp ðət meɪɾ əm deɪnʒɝəs. ɛvɹi æʃəmən kəd tʃænəl, ən sʌmhaʊ ðeɪ wɝ kipɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ fɹəm tʃænəlɪŋ. mɛn u kəd wil ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ə θɪŋ ə naɪtmɛɹz. ɹænd kʊd, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ i wɑz ɹænd, ən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹeɪ-bɔɹn bɪsaɪdz. ðiz fɛloʊz meɪd pɛɹɪnz hækəlz ɹaɪz.

It was quite a trick. He could not make himself disregard the Asha'man, and he was not under their guard. They ranged from fuzz-cheeked boys to gray-haired, balding gansers, and it was not their grim, high-collared black coats or the sword each wore at his hip that made them dangerous. Every Asha'man could channel, and somehow they were keeping the Aes Sedai from channeling. Men who could wield the One Power, a thing of nightmares. Rand could, of course, but he was Rand, and the Dragon Re-born besides. These fellows made Perrin's hackles rise.

ðə kæptɪv ɛɛs sədaɪz sɝvaɪvɪŋ wɔɹɾɝz sæt səm dɪstəns ɔf, ʌndɝ ðɛɹ oʊn ɡɑɹd. θɝɾi əɹ soʊ ʌv lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪnz ɑɹmmɪn ɪn bɛl-ʃeɪp kɛɹhinɪn hɛlməts ən əz mɛni minɝ wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz ɪn ɹɛd bɹɛst-pleɪts, itʃ ʃɑɹp-aɪɾ əz ɪf ɡɑɹɾɪŋ lɛpɝdz. ə ɡʊɾ æɾətud, ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz. mɔɹ wɔɹɾɝz ðən ðəɹ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ; ə nʌmbɝ ə ðə pɹɪznɝz wɝ ɡɹin ədʒɑ, əpɛɹənli. mɔɹ ɡɑɹdz ðən wɔɹɾɝz, ə ɡʊd mɛni mɔɹ, ən meɪbi fju ɪnʌf ət ðæt.

The captive Aes Sedai's surviving Warders sat some distance off, under their own guard. Thirty or so of Lord Dobraine's armsmen in bell-shaped Cairhienin helmets and as many Mayener Winged Guards in red breast-plates, each sharp-eyed as if guarding leopards. A good attitude, under the circumstances. More Warders than there were Aes Sedai; a number of the prisoners were Green Ajah, apparently. More guards than Warders, a good many more, and maybe few enough at that.

"ðə laɪt sɛnd wi doʊn si ɛni mɔɹ ɡɹif fɹəm ðət lɑt," pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd. twaɪs dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt ðə wɔɹɾɝz hæd tʃɹaɪd tə bɹeɪk fɹi. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ðoʊz aʊtbɹeɪks hæd bɪn səpɹɛs mɔɹ baɪ ði æʃəmən ðən baɪ ðə kɛɹhinɪn əɹ minɝz, ən ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn dʒɛntəl. nʌn ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz hæd bɪn kɪld, bʌɾ ət list ə dʌzən nɝs bɹoʊkən boʊnz nʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz hæd jɛt bɪn əlaʊd tə hil.

"The Light send we don't see any more grief from that lot," Perrin muttered. Twice during the night the Warders had tried to break free. In truth, those outbreaks had been suppressed more by the Asha'man than by the Cairhienin or Mayeners, and they had not been gentle. None of the Warders had been killed, but at least a dozen nursed broken bones none of the sisters had yet been allowed to Heal.

"ɪf ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən kænɑt meɪk ðə dɪsɪʒən," ɛɹæm sɛd kwaɪətli, "meɪbi ɪt ʃəd bi meɪd baɪ sʌmbɑɾi ɛls. tə pɹətɛk hɪm."

"If the Lord Dragon cannot make the decision," Aram said quietly, "maybe it should be made by somebody else. To protect him."

pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ɪm ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk. "wʌt dɪsɪʒən? ðə sɪstɝz toʊld əm nɑt tə meɪk ənʌðɝ ətɛmpt, ən ðəl oʊbeɪ ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ." bɹoʊkən boʊnz əɹ noʊ, ənɑɹmd əz ðeɪ wɝ, hænz taɪd bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ bæks, ðə wɔɹɾɝz stɪl lʊk laɪk ə wʊlfpæk əweɪɾɪŋ ðə lɛd wʊlfs kəmæn tə ətæk. nʌn wəd ɹɛst izi əntɪl ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz fɹi, meɪbi əntɪl ɔl ə ðə sɪstɝz wɝ fɹi. ɛɛs sədaɪ ən wɔɹɾɝz; ə stæk ʌv wɛl-eɪdʒd oʊk, ɹɛɾi fəɹ ə fleɪm. bʌɾ ivən wɔɹɾɝz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd pɹuv noʊ mætʃ fəɹ æʃəmən.

Perrin gave him a sidelong look. "What decision? The sisters told them not to make another attempt, and they'll obey their Aes Sedai." Broken bones or no, unarmed as they were, hands tied behind their backs, the Warders still looked like a wolfpack awaiting the lead wolf's command to attack. None would rest easy until his Aes Sedai was free, maybe until all of the sisters were free. Aes Sedai and Warders; a stack of well-aged oak, ready for a flame. But even Warders and Aes Sedai had proved no match for Asha'man.

"aɪ dɪd nɑt min ðə wɔɹɾɝz." ɛɹæm hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən ʃʌfəl kloʊsɝ tə pɛɹɪn ən loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs fɝðɝ, tə ə hɔɹs wɪspɝ. "ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kɪdnæp ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. hi kæn tʃɹʌs ðɛm, nɑɾ ɛvɝ, bʌɾ i woʊn də wʌt hiz tə, iðɝ. ɪf ðeɪ daɪd bɪfɔɹ i nu ɪt - "

"I did not mean the Warders." Aram hesitated, then shuffled closer to Perrin and lowered his voice further, to a hoarse whisper. "The Aes Sedai kidnapped the Lord Dragon. He can't trust them, not ever, but he won't do what he has to, either. If they died before he knew it - "

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə seɪɪŋ?" pɛɹɪn ɔlmoʊs tʃoʊkt əz i sæt boʊlt əpɹaɪt. nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðəɹ wɑz ɛni tɪŋkɝ lɛft ɪn ði ʌðɝ mæn. "ðeɪɹ hɛlpləs, ɛɹæm! hɛlpləs wɪmən!"

"What are you saying?" Perrin almost choked as he sat bolt upright. Not for the first time, he wondered whether there was any Tinker left in the other man. "They're helpless, Aram! Helpless women!"

"ðeɪ ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ." dɑɹk aɪz mɛt pɛɹɪnz ɡoʊldən stɛɹ lɛvəli. "ðeɪ kænɑt bi tʃɹʌstɪd, ən ðeɪ kænɑt bi tɝn lus. haʊ lɔŋ kən ɛɛs sədaɪ bi hɛld əɡɛns ðɛɹ wɪl? ðeɪv bɪn duɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ də fɑɹ lɔŋɡɝ ðən ði æʃəmən. ðeɪ mʌs noʊ mɔɹ. ðəɹ ə deɪnʒɝ tə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, ən tə ju, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn. aɪ hæv sin əm lʊk ət ju."

"They are Aes Sedai." Dark eyes met Perrin's golden stare levelly. "They cannot be trusted, and they cannot be turned loose. How long can Aes Sedai be held against their will? They've been doing what they do far longer than the Asha'man. They must know more. They're a danger to the Lord Dragon, and to you, Lord Perrin. I have seen them look at you."

əkɹɔs ðə wæɡən sɝkəl, ðə sɪstɝz wɝ tɔkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn wɪspɝz ivən pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt hɪɹ, maʊðz hɛl kloʊs tə ɪɹz. naʊ ən əɡɛn wʌn dɪd lʊk əɾ ɪm ən ɛɹæm. ət hɪm, nɑɾ ɛɹæm. hi hæd kɑɾ ə dʌbəl hændfʊl ə neɪmz. nɛsun bihɑɹə. ɛɹiən bɹoʊlɛoʊz ən keɪɾɝin ɔlɹuɾɪn. kɔɪɹən seɪldən, sɝin nɛmdɑl ən ɛlzə pɛnfəl. dʒənin pævlɑɹə, bɛldaɪn nɪɹæm, mɛɹɪθ ɹɪvən. ðoʊz læst wɝ ðə jʌŋ sɪstɝz, bʌt jʌŋ əɹ eɪdʒləs, ðeɪ wɑtʃt ɪm wɪð feɪsəz soʊ sɝin ɪt sim ðeɪ hæd ði ʌpɝ hæn dɪspaɪt ði æʃəmən. dɪfiɾɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz nɑɾ izi; meɪkɪŋ əm ədmɪt dɪfit leɪ ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ʌv ɪmpɑsəbəl.

Across the wagon circle, the sisters were talking among themselves in whispers even Perrin could not hear, mouths held close to ears. Now and again one did look at him and Aram. At him, not Aram. He had caught a double handful of names. Nesune Bihara. Erian Boroleos and Katerine Alruddin. Coiren Saeldain, Sarene Nemdahl and Elza Penfell. Janine Pavlara, Beldeine Nyram, Marith Riven. Those last were the young sisters, but young or ageless, they watched him with faces so serene it seemed they had the upper hand despite the Asha'man. Defeating Aes Sedai was not easy; making them admit defeat lay on the far side of impossible.

hi fɔɹst ɪz hænz tə ənnəɾ ən ɹɛst ɑn ɪz niz, ɡɪvɪŋ ən əpɪɹəns ə kɑm i wɑz noʊwɛɹ nɪɹ filɪŋ. ðeɪ nu hi wɑz tɑvɝən, wʌn ə ðoʊz fju ðə pæɾɝn wəd ʃeɪp ɪtsɛlf ɝaʊn fəɹ ə taɪm. wɝs, ðeɪ nu hi wɑz taɪd tə ɹænd ɪn səm weɪ noʊbɑdi ʌndɝstʊd, list ʌv ɔl hɪmsɛlf əɹ ɹænd. əɹ mæt; mæt wɑz ɪn ðət tæŋɡəl, tu, ənʌðɝ tɑvɝən, ðoʊ niðɝ ə ðɛm əz stʃɹɔŋli əz ɹænd. ɡɪvən hæf ə tʃæns ðoʊz wɪmən wəɾ əv ɪm - ən mæt - ɪnsaɪd ðə waɪt taʊɝ əz fæst əz ðeɪ wəd ɹænd, tɛðɝd laɪk ɡoʊts əntɪl ðə laɪən keɪm. ən ðeɪ hæd kɪdnæpt ɹænd, mɪstʃɹiɾɪd hɪm. ɛɹæm wɑz ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt wʌn θɪŋ; ðeɪ kəd nɑt bi tʃɹʌstɪd. bʌt wʌɾ ɛɹæm sədʒɛstəd - hi wəd nɑt - kəd nɑt! - kaʊntənəns sətʃ ə θɪŋ. ðə θɔt meɪɾ ɪm kwizi.

He forced his hands to unknot and rest on his knees, giving an appearance of calm he was nowhere near feeling. They knew he was ta'veren, one of those few the Pattern would shape itself around for a time. Worse, they knew he was tied to Rand in some way nobody understood, least of all himself or Rand. Or Mat; Mat was in that tangle, too, another ta'veren, though neither of them as strongly as Rand. Given half a chance those women would have him - and Mat - inside the White Tower as fast as they would Rand, tethered like goats until the lion came. And they had kidnapped Rand, mistreated him. Aram was right about one thing; they could not be trusted. But what Aram suggested - he would not - could not! - countenance such a thing. The thought made him queasy.

"aɪl hɪɹ noʊ mɔɹ ə ðæt," hi ɡɹaʊld. ðə wʌntaɪm tɪŋkɝ oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, bʌt pɛɹɪn kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. "nɑɾ ə wɝd, ɛɹæm, dʒju hɪɹ mi? nɑt wʌn wɝd!"

"I'll hear no more of that," he growled. The onetime Tinker opened his mouth, but Perrin cut him off. "Not a word, Aram, do you hear me? Not one word!"

"æz maɪ lɔɹd pɛɹɪn kəmænz," ɛɹæm mɝmɝd, ɪnklaɪnɪŋ ɪz hɛd.

"As my Lord Perrin commands," Aram murmured, inclining his head.

pɛɹɪn wɪʃt i kəd si ðə mænz feɪs. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ æŋɡɝ ɪn ðə smɛl ə hɪm, noʊ ɹɪzɛnmənt. ðət wɑz ðə wɝst ʌv ɪt. ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ æŋɡɝ sɛn ivən wən ɛɹæm sədʒɛstəd mɝɾɝ.

Perrin wished he could see the man's face. There was no anger in the smell of him, no resentment. That was the worst of it. There had been no anger scent even when Aram suggested murder.

ə pɛɹ ə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn klaɪmd ʌp ɑn ðə wilz ə ðə nɛkst wæɡən, piɹɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə wæɡən bɛɾ ən daʊn ðə hɪl təwɔɹd ðə nɔɹθ. itʃ wɔɹ ə bɹɪsəlɪŋ kwɪvɝ ɑn ɪz ɹaɪt hɪp ən ə staʊt, lɔŋ-bleɪɾɪd naɪf, ɔlmoʊst ə ʃɔɹt-sɔɹd, ɑn ɪz lɛft. ə ɡʊd θɹi hʌnʒɹəd mɛn fɹəm hoʊm hæd fɑloʊd pɛɹɪn hɪɹ. hi kɝs ðə fɝs tə kɔl ɪm lɔɹd pɛɹɪn, kɝs ðə deɪ hi hæd stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kwɔʃ ɪt. ivən wɪð ðə mɝmɝz ən nɔɪzɪz juʒəwəl ɪn ə kæmp ðɪs saɪz, hi hæd noʊ tʃɹʌbəl hɪɹɪŋ ðə pɛɹ.

A pair of Two Rivers men climbed up on the wheels of the next wagon, peering across the wagon bed and down the hill toward the north. Each wore a bristling quiver on his right hip and a stout, long-bladed knife, almost a short-sword, on his left. A good three hundred men from home had followed Perrin here. He cursed the first to call him Lord Perrin, cursed the day he had stopped trying to quash it. Even with the murmurs and noises usual in a camp this size, he had no trouble hearing the pair.

tɑɾ ɑlkɑɹ, ə jɪɹ jʌŋɡɝ ðən pɛɹɪn, lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ, əz ɪf siɪŋ wʌt leɪ bɪloʊ fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. pɛɹɪn kəɾ ɔlmoʊst sɛns ðə læŋki mænz læntɝn dʒɔ wɝkɪŋ. tɑdz mʌðɝ hæd wɪlɪŋli lɛɾ ɪm ɡoʊ oʊnli fəɹ ði ɑnɝ ə hɝ sʌn fɑloʊɪŋ pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz. "ə feɪməs vɪktɝi," tɑd sɛd faɪnəli. "ðæts wʌt wi wʌn. wɑzn ɪt, dʒɑndɪn?"

Tod al'Caar, a year younger than Perrin, let out a long breath, as if seeing what lay below for the first time. Perrin could almost sense the lanky man's lantern jaw working. Tod's mother had willingly let him go only for the honor of her son following Perrin Goldeneyes. "A famous victory," Tod said finally. "That's what we won. Wasn't it, Jondyn?"

ɡɹɪzəl dʒɑndɪn bæɹən, nɑɹld əz ən oʊk ɹut, wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju oʊldɝ mɛn əmʌŋ ðə θɹi hʌnʒɹəd. ə bɛɾɝ baʊʃɑt ðən ɛniwʌn ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪksɛp mæstɝ ælθɹ ən ə bɛɾɝ hʌntɝ ðən ɛniwʌn əɾ ɔl, hi wɑz wʌn ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz' lɛs dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt ɹɛzəɾənts. dʒɑndɪn hæd nɑt wɝkt ə deɪ mɔɹ ðən i hæd tə sɪns i wɑz oʊld ɪnʌf tə liv ɪz fɑðɝz fɑɹm. ðə fɔɹəsts ən ðə hʌnt wɝ ɔl i kɛɹɾ əbaʊt, ðəɾ ən dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ tu mʌtʃ ət fistdeɪz. naʊ hi spæt laʊdli. "ɪf jə seɪ soʊ, bɔɪ. wɑz ðoʊz blʌɾi æʃəmən wʌn ɪt, ɛniweɪ. ən wɛlkəm tə ɪt, aɪ seɪ. tu bæd ðeɪ doʊn teɪk ɪɾ ən ɡoʊ sʌmpleɪs ɛls tə sɛləbɹeɪt."

Grizzled Jondyn Barran, gnarled as an oak root, was one of the few older men among the three hundred. A better bowshot than anyone in the Two Rivers except Master al'Thor and a better hunter than anyone at all, he was one of the Two Rivers' less distinguished residents. Jondyn had not worked a day more than he had to since he was old enough to leave his father's farm. The forests and the hunt were all he cared about, that and drinking too much at feastdays. Now he spat loudly. "If you say so, boy. Was those bloody Asha'man won it, anyway. And welcome to it, I say. Too bad they don't take it and go someplace else to celebrate."

"ðeɪ ɑɹən soʊ bæd," tɑd pɹətɛstəd. "aɪ wʊdn maɪn biɪŋ wʌn maɪsɛlf." ðət saʊndəd mɔɹ boʊst ən blʌf ðən tʃɹuθ. smɛld ɪt, tu; wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ, pɛɹɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ i wɑz lɪkɪŋ ɪz lɪps. laɪkli tɑdz mʌðɝ hæd juz teɪlz ə mɛn u kəd tʃænəl tə fɹaɪɾən ɪm nɑt soʊ mɛni jɪɹz əɡoʊ. "aɪ min tə seɪ, ɹænd - ðəɾ ɪz, ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən - ɪt stɪl saʊnz ɑd, dʌzn ɪt, ɹænd ælθɹ biɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ən ɔl?" tɑd læft, ə ʃɔɹt, ənizi saʊnd. "wɛl, hi kən tʃænəl, ən ɪt dʌzn sim soʊ - hi dʌznt - aɪ min. . . ." hi swɑloʊd laʊdli. "bɪsaɪdz, wʌt kəd wɪv dʌn əbaʊɾ ɔl ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪθaʊt ðɛm?" ðət keɪm aʊɾ ɪn ə wɪspɝ. hi smɛld əfɹeɪd naʊ. "dʒɑndɪn, wʌɾ ɑɹ wi ɡoʊɪŋ tə du? aɪ min, ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹɪznɝz?"

"They aren't so bad," Tod protested. "I wouldn't mind being one myself." That sounded more boast and bluff than truth. Smelled it, too; without looking, Perrin was sure he was licking his lips. Likely Tod's mother had used tales of men who could channel to frighten him not so many years ago. "I mean to say, Rand - that is, the Lord Dragon - it still sounds odd, doesn't it, Rand al'Thor being the Dragon Reborn and all?" Tod laughed, a short, uneasy sound. "Well, he can channel, and it doesn't seem so - he doesn't - I mean. . . ." He swallowed loudly. "Besides, what could we have done about all those Aes Sedai without them?" That came out in a whisper. He smelled afraid now. "Jondyn, what are we going to do? I mean, Aes Sedai prisoners?"

ði oʊldɝ mæn spæɾ əɡɛn, laʊɾɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ. hi dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə loʊɝ ɪz vɔɪs, iðɝ. dʒɑndɪn ɔlweɪz sɛd wʌɾ i θɔt noʊ mæɾɝ u hɝd, ənʌðɝ ɹizən fəɹ ɪz bæd ɹipjut. "bɛɾɝ fəɹ əs ɪf ðeɪɾ ɔl daɪd jɛstɝdeɪ, bɔɪ. wɪl peɪ fəɹ ðət bɪfɔɹ ɪts dʌn. mɑɹk mi, wɪl peɪ lɑɹdʒ."

The older man spat again, louder than before. He did not bother to lower his voice, either. Jondyn always said what he thought no matter who heard, another reason for his bad repute. "Better for us if they'd all died yesterday, boy. We'll pay for that before it's done. Mark me, we'll pay large."

pɛɹɪn ʃʌɾ aʊt ðə ɹɛst, noʊ izi tæsk wɪð ɪz ɪɹz. fɝst ɛɹæm, ən naʊ dʒɑndɪn ən tɑd, ɪf nɑt soʊ dɝɛkli. bɝn dʒɑndɪn! noʊ, ðə mæn maɪt meɪk mæt lʊk ɪndʌstʃɹiəs, bʌɾ ɪf i spoʊk ɪt, ʌðɝz θɔɾ ɪt. noʊ tu ɹɪvɝz mæn wəd wɪlɪŋli hɑɹm ə wʊmən, bʌɾ u ɛls wɪʃt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹɪznɝz dɛd? ən u maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə ətʃiv ðə wɪʃ?

Perrin shut out the rest, no easy task with his ears. First Aram, and now Jondyn and Tod, if not so directly. Burn Jondyn! No, the man might make Mat look industrious, but if he spoke it, others thought it. No Two Rivers man would willingly harm a woman, but who else wished the Aes Sedai prisoners dead? And who might try to achieve the wish?

hi skæn ðə wæɡən sɝkəl ənizəli. ðə θɔt ðəɾ i maɪɾ əv tə pɹətɛk ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹɪznɝz wɑz nɑt plɛzənt, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt ʃɝk ɪt. hi hæd lɪɾəl fɑndnəs fəɹ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ, list ʌv ɔl fəɹ ðiz, bʌɾ i hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp ɪn ði ənspoʊkən sɝɾənti ðəɾ ə mæn wəd pʊt hɪmsɛlf ət ɹɪsk tə pɹətɛkt ə wʊmən əz fɑɹ ʃi əlaʊd; wɛðɝ i laɪkt əɹ əɹ ivən nu hɝ wɑz bɪsaɪd ðə pɔɪnt. tʃɹu, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd taɪ ɛni mæn ʃi tʃoʊz ɪndə ə nɑt naɪn weɪz fɹəm nɛks fistdeɪ, bʌt kʌɾ ɔf fɹəm ðə paʊɝ, ðeɪ bɪkeɪm laɪk ɛniwʌn ɛls. ðət wɑz ðə stʃɹʌɡəl wɛnɛvɝ i lʊkt ət ðɛm. tu dʌzən ɛɛs sədaɪ. tu dʌzən wɪmən u maɪt nɑt noʊ haʊ tə dɪfɛn ðɛmsɛlvz wɪθaʊt ðə paʊɝ.

He scanned the wagon circle uneasily. The thought that he might have to protect the Aes Sedai prisoners was not pleasant, but he did not shirk it. He had little fondness for any Aes Sedai, least of all for these, but he had grown up in the unspoken certainty that a man would put himself at risk to protect a woman as far she allowed; whether he liked her or even knew her was beside the point. True, an Aes Sedai could tie any man she chose into a knot nine ways from next feastday, but cut off from the Power, they became like anyone else. That was the struggle whenever he looked at them. Two dozen Aes Sedai. Two dozen women who might not know how to defend themselves without the Power.

fəɹ ə bɪɾ i stʌɾid ði æʃəmən ɡɑɹdz, ɛvɹi wʌn wɛɹɪŋ ə feɪs laɪk ɡɹɪm dɛθ. ɪksɛp ðə θɹi oʊvɝsiɪŋ ðə stɪld wɪmən. ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə əpɪɹ əz sɑmbɝ əz ðə ɹɛst, bʌɾ ʌndɝ ði ətɛmp leɪ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. sæɾəsfækʃən, meɪbi. ɪf oʊnli hi wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə kætʃ ə sɛn ə ðɛm. ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz ə θɹɛt tə ði æʃəmən. pɝhæps ðə ɹɪvɝs wɑz tʃɹu, tu. pɝhæps ðeɪ wəɾ oʊnli stɪl ðɛm. fɹəm ðə lɪɾəl i hæd pɪkt ʌp, stɪlɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əmaʊntɪd tə ə kɪlɪŋ ðət dʒʌs tʊk ə fju jɪɹz fəɹ ðə kɔɹps tə laɪ daʊn.

For a bit he studied the Asha'man guards, every one wearing a face like grim death. Except the three overseeing the stilled women. They tried to appear as somber as the rest, but under the attempt lay something else. Satisfaction, maybe. If only he was close enough to catch a scent of them. Any Aes Sedai was a threat to the Asha'man. Perhaps the reverse was true, too. Perhaps they would only still them. From the little he had picked up, stilling an Aes Sedai amounted to a killing that just took a few years for the corpse to lie down.

wʌtɛvɝ ðə keɪs, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd ɹɪlʌktənli, hi hæd tə liv ði æʃəmən tə ɹænd. ðeɪ spoʊk oʊnli tə itʃ ʌðɝ ən ðə pɹɪznɝz, ən pɛɹɪn daʊɾɪd ðeɪ wəd lɪsən tə ɛniwʌn bʌt ɹænd. ðə kwɛstʃən wɑz, wʌt wəd ɹænd seɪ? ən wʌt kəd pɛɹɪn də ɪf i sɛd ðə ɹɔŋ θɪŋ?

Whatever the case, he decided reluctantly, he had to leave the Asha'man to Rand. They spoke only to each other and the prisoners, and Perrin doubted they would listen to anyone but Rand. The question was, what would Rand say? And what could Perrin do if he said the wrong thing?

pʊɾɪŋ ðət pɹɑbləm əsaɪd, hi skɹætʃt ɪz bɪɹd wɪð wʌn fɪŋɡɝ. ðə kɛɹhinɪn wɝ tu nɝvəs əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə kənsɪɾɝ hɑɹmɪŋ ðɛm, ən ðə minɝz tu ɹɪspɛkfəl, bʌɾ i wəd kip ən aɪ ɑn əm ɛniweɪ. hu wʊɾə θɔt dʒɑndɪn wəd ɡoʊ əz fɑɹ əz i hæd? əmʌŋ ðə kɛɹhinɪn əɹ minɝz, hi pəzɛst səm ɪnfluəns, ðoʊ ɪt wəd ʃʊɹli vænɪʃ ɪf ðeɪ wʌns θɔt. hi wɑz ɹɪli dʒʌst ə blæksmɪθ, æftɝ ɔl. ðət lɛf ði il. pɛɹɪn saɪd. hi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən haʊ mʌtʃ ɪnfluəns ivən ɹænd tʃɹuli hæd wɪð ði il.

Putting that problem aside, he scratched his beard with one finger. The Cairhienin were too nervous about Aes Sedai to consider harming them, and the Mayeners too respectful, but he would keep an eye on them anyway. Who would have thought Jondyn would go as far as he had? Among the Cairhienin or Mayeners, he possessed some influence, though it would surely vanish if they once thought. He was really just a blacksmith, after all. That left the Aiel. Perrin sighed. He was not certain how much influence even Rand truly had with the Aiel.

ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl pɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl sɛns wɪð soʊ mɛni pipəl ɝaʊnd, bʌɾ i hæd ɡɹoʊn juz tə tɛlɪŋ əz mʌtʃ baɪ smɛlz əz baɪ wʌɾ ɪz aɪz toʊl hɪm. ðə sɪswaɪəmən u keɪm kloʊs ɪnʌf smɛl kɑm bʌɾ əlɝt, ə smuð, stʃɹɔŋ sɛnt. ðeɪ hɑɹdli əpɪɹd tə noʊɾəs ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə meɪɾənz' ɝoʊməz wɝ spaɪki wɪð səpɹɛs fjʊɹi ən ɡɹu spɪkiɝ wən ðeɪ lʊkt ət ðə pɹɪznɝz. ən ðə waɪz wʌnz. . . . ɛvɹi waɪz wʌn u hæd kʌm hɪɹ fɹəm kɛɹhin wɑz eɪbəl tə tʃænəl, ðoʊ nʌn hæd ði eɪdʒləs feɪs. hi səpoʊz ðeɪ juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ tu sɛldəm. stɪl, smuð-tʃik laɪk ɛdʒɹə əɹ əz lɛðɝi-feɪst əz waɪt-hɛɹd sɔɹɪliə, ðeɪ kæɹid ðɛmsɛlvz wɪð ə sɛlf-pəzɛʃən izəli mætʃɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz. ɡɹeɪsfəl wɪmən fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, moʊst ə ðɛm tɔl, əz nɪɹli ɔl il wɝ, ðeɪ sim tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə sɪstɝz kəmplitli.

It was difficult picking out individual scents with so many people around, but he had grown used to telling as much by smells as by what his eyes told him. The siswai'aman who came close enough smelled calm but alert, a smooth, strong scent. They hardly appeared to notice the Aes Sedai. The Maidens' aromas were spiky with suppressed fury and grew spikier when they looked at the prisoners. And the Wise Ones. . . . Every Wise One who had come here from Cairhien was able to channel, though none had the ageless face. He supposed they used the One Power too seldom. Still, smooth-cheeked like Edarra or as leathery-faced as white-haired Sorilea, they carried themselves with a self-possession easily matching the Aes Sedai's. Graceful women for the most part, most of them tall, as nearly all Aiel were, they seemed to ignore the sisters completely.

sɔɹɪliəz aɪz pæst əkɹɔs ðə pɹɪznɝz wɪθaʊt pɔzɪŋ, ən ʃi wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɔkɪŋ sɔfli tə ɛdʒɹə ən ənʌðɝ waɪz wʌn, ə lin, jɛloʊ-hɛɹd wʊmən i dɪd nɑt noʊ baɪ neɪm. ɪf oʊnli hi kəd meɪk aʊt wʌt ðeɪ wɝ seɪɪŋ. ðeɪ wɔk baɪ, nɑɾ ə laɪn tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɑn ðoʊz θɹi ʌn-ɹʌfəl feɪsəz, bʌt ðɛɹ sɛns wɝ ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ. wən sɔɹɪliəz ɡeɪz swɛpt oʊvɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə smɛl ə hɝ wɛn koʊld ən dɪstənt, ɡɹɪm ən pɝpəsfəl, ən əz ʃi spoʊk tə ði ʌðɝ tu, ðɛɹ sɛns tʃeɪnʒd tə mætʃ hɝz.

Sorilea's eyes passed across the prisoners without pausing, and she went right on talking softly to Edarra and another Wise One, a lean, yellow-haired woman he did not know by name. If only he could make out what they were saying. They walked by, not a line changing on those three un-ruffled faces, but their scents were another matter. When Sorilea's gaze swept over the Aes Sedai, the smell of her went cold and distant, grim and purposeful, and as she spoke to the other two, their scents changed to match hers.

"ə faɪn blʌɾi stu," hi ɡɹaʊld.

"A fine bloody stew," he growled.

"tʃɹʌbəl?" ɛɹæm æskt, sɪɾɪŋ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾɝ ɑn ɪz hilz, ɹaɪt hæn pɔɪz tə dɑɹt fəɹ ðə wʊlfhɛd-pɑməl sɔɹd hɪl dʒʌɾɪŋ əbʌv ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. hi hæd bɪkʌm vɛɹi ɡʊd wɪð ðət sɔɹɾ ɪn ə vɛɹi ʃɔɹt taɪm, ən i wɑz nɛvɝ loʊθ tə juz ɪt.

"Trouble?" Aram asked, sitting up straighter on his heels, right hand poised to dart for the wolfhead-pommeled sword hilt jutting above his shoulder. He had become very good with that sword in a very short time, and he was never loath to use it.

"ðɛɹz noʊ tʃɹʌbəl, ɛɹæm." ðət wɑz nɑt kwaɪɾ ə laɪ. dʒoʊltɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz ɡlʌm bɹuɾɪŋ, pɛɹɪn ɹɪli lʊkt ət ði ʌðɝz fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. əɾ ɔl ə ðɛm təɡɛðɝ. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk wʌɾ i sɔ, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ oʊnli pɑɹt.

"There's no trouble, Aram." That was not quite a lie. Jolted out of his glum brooding, Perrin really looked at the others for the first time. At all of them together. He did not like what he saw, and the Aes Sedai were only part.

kɛɹhinɪn ən minɝz wɑtʃt il səspɪʃəsli, wɪtʃ wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðən ði ilz ɹɪtɝn səspɪʃən, ɪspɛʃli təwɔɹd ðə kɛɹhinɪn. noʊ ɹil sɝpɹaɪz ðɛɹ. il dɪɾ əv ə sɝɾən ɹɛpjəteɪʃən, æftɝ ɔl, fəɹ biɪŋ nʌn tu fɹɛnli tə ɛniwʌn bɔɹn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld, kɛɹhinɪn list ʌv ɔl. sɪmpəl tʃɹuθ wɑz, il ən kɛɹhinɪn heɪɾəd itʃ ʌðɝ əbaʊɾ əz hɑɹɾ əz ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl tə heɪt. niðɝ saɪd hæd ɹɪli pʊt ðɛɹ ɛnməɾi əsaɪd - ðə bɛs ðət kəd bi sɛd wɑz ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ɑn ə lus liʃ - jɛɾ ʌp tə naʊ hi hæd bɪn kənvɪns ðeɪ wəd hoʊld ɪɾ ɪn. fəɹ ɹændz seɪk ɪf noʊ ʌðɝ ɹizən. ə mud hʌŋ ɪn ðə kæmp, ðoʊ, ə tɛnʃən ðət hæd waʊn ɛvɹiwʌn taɪt. ɹænd wɑz fɹi naʊ, ən tɛmpɝɛɹi əlaɪənsəz wɝ dʒʌs ðæt, æftɝ ɔl; tɛmpɝɛɹi. il hɛftəd ðɛɹ spɪɹz wən ðeɪ lʊkt ət ðə kɛɹhinɪn, ən ðə kɛɹhinɪn ɡɹɪmli fɪŋɡɝd ðɛɹ sɔɹdz. soʊ dɪd ðə minɝz; ðeɪ hæd noʊ kwɔɹəl wɪð ði il, hæd nɛvɝ fɔɾ əm ɪksɛp fəɹ ði il wɔɹ wən ɛvɹibɑɾi hæd, bʌɾ ɪf ɪt keɪm tə ə faɪt, ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl daʊt wɪtʃ saɪd ðeɪ wəd bi ɑn. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, tu, pɹɑbli.

Cairhienin and Mayeners watched Aiel suspiciously, which was no more than the Aiel's return suspicion, especially toward the Cairhienin. No real surprise there. Aiel did have a certain reputation, after all, for being none too friendly to anyone born this side of the Spine of the World, Cairhienin least of all. Simple truth was, Aiel and Cairhienin hated each other about as hard as it was possible to hate. Neither side had really put their enmity aside - the best that could be said was that it was on a loose leash - yet up to now he had been convinced they would hold it in. For Rand's sake if no other reason. A mood hung in the camp, though, a tension that had wound everyone tight. Rand was free now, and temporary alliances were just that, after all; temporary. Aiel hefted their spears when they looked at the Cairhienin, and the Cairhienin grimly fingered their swords. So did the Mayeners; they had no quarrel with the Aiel, had never fought them except for the Aiel War when everybody had, but if it came to a fight, there was little doubt which side they would be on. The Two Rivers men, too, probably.

ðə dɑɹk mud hæd sɛɾəld dipəst ɪndə ði æʃəmən ən ðə waɪz wʌnz, ðoʊ. ðə blæk-koʊɾəd mɛn peɪd noʊ mɔɹ hid tə ðə meɪɾənz ən ðə sɪswaɪəmən ðən tə kɛɹhinɪn əɹ minɝz əɹ tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, bʌt ðeɪ stʌɾid ðə waɪz wʌnz wɪð feɪsəz ɔlmoʊst əz dɑɹk əz ðoʊz ðeɪ dɝɛktəɾ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. vɛɹi laɪkli ðeɪ meɪd smɔl dɪstɪŋkʃən bɪtwin wʌn wʊmən u kəd wil ðə paʊɝ ən ənʌðɝ. ɛni kəd bi ən ɛnəmi ən deɪnʒɝəs; θɝtin təɡɛðɝ wɝ dɛdli deɪnʒɝəs, ən ðəɹ wɝ bɛɾɝ ðən naɪnti waɪz wʌnz ɪn ðə kæmp əɹ nɪɹbaɪ. fjuɝ ðən hæf ðə nʌmbɝ ʌv æʃəmən, bʌt stɪl ɪnʌf tə də dæmədʒ ɪf ðeɪ tʃoʊz. wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl, jɛt ðeɪ sim tə fɑloʊ ɹænd; ðeɪ sim tə fɑloʊ ɹænd, jɛt ðeɪ wɝ wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl.

The dark mood had settled deepest into the Asha'man and the Wise Ones, though. The black-coated men paid no more heed to the Maidens and the siswai'aman than to Cairhienin or Mayeners or Two Rivers men, but they studied the Wise Ones with faces almost as dark as those they directed at the Aes Sedai. Very likely they made small distinction between one woman who could wield the Power and another. Any could be an enemy and dangerous; thirteen together were deadly dangerous, and there were better than ninety Wise Ones in the camp or nearby. Fewer than half the number of Asha'man, but still enough to do damage if they chose. Women who could channel, yet they seemed to follow Rand; they seemed to follow Rand, yet they were women who could channel.

ðə waɪz wʌnz lʊkt ət ði æʃəmən oʊnli ə tʃɹaɪfəl lɛs koʊldli ðən ðeɪ dɪd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ði æʃəmən wɝ mɛn u kəd tʃænəl, bʌt ðeɪ fɑloʊd ɹænd; ðeɪ fɑloʊd ɹænd, bʌt. . . . ɹænd wɑz ə spɛʃəl keɪs. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ɡɔl, hɪz tʃænəlɪŋ wɑz nɑt mɛnʃən ɪn ðə pɹɑfəsiz əbaʊt ðɛɹ kɑɹəkɑɹn, bʌt ði il sim tə pɹitɛn ðəɾ ɪnkənvinjən fæk dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst. ði æʃəmən wɝ nɑɾ ɪn ðoʊz pɹɑfəsiz əɾ ɔl, ðoʊ. ɪt mʌs bi laɪk dɪskʌvɝɪŋ jə hæɾ ə pɹaɪɾ ə ɹæbɪd laɪənz faɪɾɪŋ ɑn jəɹ saɪd. haʊ lɔŋ wəd ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪn lɔɪəl? meɪbi ɪt wəd bi bɛɾɝ tə pʊɾ əm daʊn naʊ. hɪz hɛd fɛl bæk əɡɛns ðə wæɡən wil, aɪz kloʊzd, ən ɪz tʃɛs hivd ɪn saɪlənt, mɝθləs læftɝ. θɪŋk ə ðə ɡʊd θɪŋz ɑn haɪ tʃeɪsəlin. bɝn mi, hi θɔt ɹaɪli, aɪ ʃʊɾə ɡɔn wɪð ɹænd. noʊ, ɪt wɑz bɛs tə noʊ, ən bɛɾɝ sun ðən leɪt. bʌt wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪt wɑz i tə du? ɪf ði il ən ðə kɛɹhinɪn ən minɝz tɝn ɑn wʌn ənʌðɝ, əɹ wɝs, ði æʃəmən ən ðə waɪz wʌnz. . . . ə bæɹəl fʊl ə sneɪks, ən ði oʊnli weɪ tə faɪn aʊt wɪtʃ wɝ vaɪpɝz wɑz tə stɪk jəɹ hæn ɪn. laɪt, aɪ wɪʃ aɪ wɑz hoʊm, wɪð feɪl, ən ə fɔɹdʒ tə wɝk, ən noʊbɑdi kɔlɪŋ mi blʌɾi lɔɹd.

The Wise Ones looked at the Asha'man only a trifle less coldly than they did the Aes Sedai. The Asha'man were men who could channel, but they followed Rand; they followed Rand, but. . . . Rand was a special case. According to Gaul, his channeling was not mentioned in the prophecies about their Car'a'carn, but the Aiel seemed to pretend that inconvenient fact did not exist. The Asha'man were not in those prophecies at all, though. It must be like discovering you had a pride of rabid lions fighting on your side. How long would they remain loyal? Maybe it would be better to put them down now. His head fell back against the wagon wheel, eyes closed, and his chest heaved in silent, mirthless laughter. Think of the good things on High Chasaline. Burn me, he thought wryly, I should have gone with Rand. No, it was best to know, and better soon than late. But what in the Light was he to do? If the Aiel and the Cairhienin and Mayeners turned on one another, or worse, the Asha'man and the Wise Ones. . . . A barrel full of snakes, and the only way to find out which were vipers was to stick your hand in. Light, I wish I was home, with Faile, and a forge to work, and nobody calling me bloody lord.

"jɔɹ hɔɹs, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn. jə dɪdn seɪ wɛðɝ jə wɑntəd stɛpɝ əɹ steɪɝ, soʊ aɪ sæɾəld - " ət pɛɹɪnz ɡoʊldən-aɪd ɡlɛɹ, kɛnli mɹɪn ʃaɪd bæk ɪndə ðə dʌn stæljən i wɑz liɾɪŋ.

"Your horse, Lord Perrin. You didn't say whether you wanted Stepper or Stayer, so I saddled - " At Perrin's golden-eyed glare, Kenly Maerin shied back into the dun stallion he was leading.

pɛɹɪn meɪɾ ə suðɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝ. nɑt kɛnliz fɔlt. wʌt kəd nɑt bi mɛndɪd hæd tə bi ɛndʒjʊɹd. "izi, læd. jə dɪd ɹaɪt. stɛpɝ wɪl də dʒʌs faɪn. jə tʃoʊz wɛl." hi heɪɾəd spikɪŋ tə kɛnli ðət weɪ. ʃɔɹɾ ən stɑki, kɛnli wɑz bɛɹli oʊld ɪnʌf tə mɛɹi əɹ liv hoʊm - ən sɝɾənli nɑɾ oʊld ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə pætʃi bɪɹɾ i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kʌltəveɪɾ ɪn ɪməteɪʃən ə pɛɹɪn - jɛɾ i hæd fɔt tʃɹɑləks əɾ ɛmənz fild ən dʌn wɛl jɛstɝdeɪ. bʌɾ i ɡɹɪn bɹɔdli ət pɹeɪz fɹəm lɔɹd pɛɹɪn blʌɾi ɡoʊldeɪniz.

Perrin made a soothing gesture. Not Kenly's fault. What could not be mended had to be endured. "Easy, lad. You did right. Stepper will do just fine. You chose well." He hated speaking to Kenly that way. Short and stocky, Kenly was barely old enough to marry or leave home - and certainly not old enough for the patchy beard he was trying to cultivate in imitation of Perrin - yet he had fought Trollocs at Emond's Field and done well yesterday. But he grinned broadly at praise from Lord Perrin bloody Goldeneyes.

ɹaɪzɪŋ, pɛɹɪn tʊk ɪz æks fɹəm wɛɹ i hæd pɹɑpt ɪɾ ʌndɝ ðə wæɡən, aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ən fəɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl aʊɾ ə maɪnd, ən θɹʌs ðə hæf θɹu ðə lup ɑn ɪz bɛlt. ə hɛvi hæf-mun bleɪd bæləns baɪ ə θɪk kɝvɪŋ spaɪk; ə θɪŋ meɪd fəɹ noʊ ʌðɝ pɝpəs ðən kɪlɪŋ. ði æks hæft fɛl tu fəmɪljɝ tə hɪz hænz fəɹ kʌmfɝt. dɪɾ i ivən ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌɾ ə ɡʊd fɔɹdʒ-hæmɝ fɛlt laɪk? ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝ θɪŋz bɪsaɪdz "lɔɹd pɛɹɪn" ðəɾ ɪt maɪt bi tu leɪt tə tʃeɪnʒ. ə fɹɛn hæd wʌns toʊld ɪm tə kip ði æks əntɪl i bɪɡæn tə laɪk juzɪŋ ɪt. ðə θɔt meɪɾ ɪm ʃɪvɝ ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə hit.

Rising, Perrin took his axe from where he had propped it under the wagon, out of sight and for a little while out of mind, and thrust the haft through the loop on his belt. A heavy half-moon blade balanced by a thick curving spike; a thing made for no other purpose than killing. The axe haft felt too familiar to his hands for comfort. Did he even remember what a good forge-hammer felt like? There were other things besides "Lord Perrin" that it might be too late to change. A friend had once told him to keep the axe until he began to like using it. The thought made him shiver in spite of the heat.

hi swʌŋ ɪndə stɛpɝz sæɾəl, ʃæɾoʊd baɪ ɛɹæm wɪð ðə ɡɹeɪ, ən sæt feɪsɪŋ saʊθ, ɪndə ðə wæɡən sɝkəl. ət lis hæf əɡɛn əz tɔl əz ivən ðə tɔlɪst ə ði il, lɔɪəl wɑz dʒʌst stɛpɪŋ kɛɹfəli oʊvɝ kɹɔst wæɡən tʌŋz. wɪð ðə saɪz ə hɪm, hi dɪd lʊk əz ðoʊ hi maɪt bɹeɪk wʌn ə ðə hɛvi wʊɾən ʃæfs wɪð ə hidləs stɛp. əz juʒəwəl, ði oʊɡiɝ hæɾ ə bʊk ɪn ɪz hænd, ə θɪk fɪŋɡɝ mɑɹkɪŋ ɪz pleɪs, ən ðə kəpeɪʃəs pɑkəts ə hɪz lɔŋ koʊt bʌlʒd wɪð mɔɹ. hi hæd spɛn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ɪn ə taɪni klʌmp ə tʃɹiz i kɔld ɹɛsfəl ən ʃeɪɾi, bʌt wʌtɛvɝ ðə ʃeɪɾ əmʌŋ ðoʊz tʃɹiz, ðə hit wɑz əfɛktɪŋ hɪm, tu. hi lʊk taɪɝd, ən ɪz koʊt wɑz əndʌn, hɪz ʃɝɾ ənleɪst, ən ɪz buts ɹoʊl daʊn bɪloʊ hɪz niz. əɹ meɪbi ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən ðə hit. dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə wæɡənz lɔɪəl pɔzd, piɹɪŋ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ði æʃəmən, ən ɪz tʌftəɾ ɪɹz kwɪvɝɾ ənizəli. aɪz bɪɡ əz tikəps ɹoʊl təwɔɹd ðə waɪz wʌnz, ən ɪz ɪɹz vaɪbɹeɪɾɪd əɡɛn. oʊɡiɝ wɝ sɛnsəɾɪv tə ðə muɾ ʌv ə pleɪs.

He swung into Stepper's saddle, shadowed by Aram with the gray, and sat facing south, into the wagon circle. At least half again as tall as even the tallest of the Aiel, Loial was just stepping carefully over crossed wagon tongues. With the size of him, he did look as though he might break one of the heavy wooden shafts with a heedless step. As usual, the Ogier had a book in his hand, a thick finger marking his place, and the capacious pockets of his long coat bulged with more. He had spent the morning in a tiny clump of trees he called restful and shady, but whatever the shade among those trees, the heat was affecting him, too. He looked tired, and his coat was undone, his shirt unlaced, and his boots rolled down below his knees. Or maybe it was more than the heat. Just inside the wagons Loial paused, peering at the Aes Sedai and the Asha'man, and his tufted ears quivered uneasily. Eyes big as teacups rolled toward the Wise Ones, and his ears vibrated again. Ogier were sensitive to the mood of a place.

wən i sɔ pɛɹɪn, lɔɪəl keɪm stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə kæmp. sɪɾɪŋ ɪz sæɾəl, pɛɹɪn wɑz tu əɹ θɹi hænz ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən lɔɪəl stændɪŋ. "pɛɹɪn," lɔɪəl wɪspɝd, "ðɪs ɪz ɔl ɹɔŋ. ɪɾ ɪzən ɹaɪt, ən ɪts deɪnʒɝəs bɪsaɪdz." fəɹ ən oʊɡiɝ ɪt wɑz ə wɪspɝ. hi saʊndəd laɪk ə bʌmbəlɪbi ðə saɪz ʌv ə mæstəf. səm ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tɝn ðɛɹ hɛdz.

When he saw Perrin, Loial came striding across the camp. Sitting his saddle, Perrin was two or three hands shorter than Loial standing. "Perrin," Loial whispered, "this is all wrong. It isn't right, and it is dangerous besides." For an Ogier it was a whisper. He sounded like a bumblebee the size of a mastiff. Some of the Aes Sedai turned their heads.

"kʊd jə spik ə lɪɾəl laʊɾɝ?" pɛɹɪn sɛɾ ɔlmoʊst ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. "aɪ θɪŋk sʌmbɑɾi ɪn ændɝ dɪdn hɪɹ. ɪn ðə wɛst ʌv ændɝ."

"Could you speak a little louder?" Perrin said almost under his breath. "I think somebody in Andor didn't hear. In the west of Andor."

lɔɪəl lʊk stɑɹɾəld, ðən ɡɹɪməst, lɔŋ aɪbɹaʊz bɹʌʃɪŋ ɪz tʃiks. "aɪ də noʊ haʊ tə wɪspɝ, jə noʊ." ðɪs taɪm ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli ɛniwʌn kəd hɪɹ klɪɹli mɔɹ ðən θɹi peɪsɪz əweɪ əɹ soʊ. "wʌɾ ɑɹ wi ɡoʊɪŋ tə du, pɛɹɪn? ɪts ɹɔŋ hoʊldɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ əɡɛns ðɛɹ wɪl, ɹɔŋ ən ɹɔŋhɛɾɪd, tu. aɪ hæv sɛd ðət bɪfɔɹ, ən əl əɡɛn. ən ðəɾ ɪzən ivən ðə wɝst. ðə fil hɪɹ. . . . wʌn spɑɹk, ən ðɪs pleɪs wɪl ɪɹʌp laɪk ə wæɡoʊnloʊɾ ə faɪɹwɝks. dʌz ɹænd noʊ əbaʊt ðɪs?"

Loial looked startled, then grimaced, long eyebrows brushing his cheeks. "I do know how to whisper, you know." This time it was unlikely anyone could hear clearly more than three paces away or so. "What are we going to do, Perrin? It is wrong holding Aes Sedai against their will, wrong and wrongheaded, too. I have said that before, and I will again. And that isn't even the worst. The feel here. . . . One spark, and this place will erupt like a wagonload of fireworks. Does Rand know about this?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd tə boʊθ kwɛstʃənz, ən æftɝ ə moʊmən ði oʊɡiɝ nɑɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli.

"I don't know," Perrin said to both questions, and after a moment the Ogier nodded reluctantly.

"sʌmwʌn əz tə noʊ, pɛɹɪn. sʌmwʌn əz tə də sʌmθɪŋ." lɔɪəl lʊk nɔɹθ, oʊvɝ ðə wæɡənz bɪhaɪn pɛɹɪn, ən pɛɹɪn nu ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pʌɾɪŋ ɪɾ ɔf lɔŋɡɝ.

"Someone has to know, Perrin. Someone has to do something." Loial looked north, over the wagons behind Perrin, and Perrin knew there was no putting it off longer.

ənwɪlɪŋli hi tɝn stɛpɝ. hi wəd ɹæðɝ əv wɝiɾ oʊvɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən æʃəmən ən waɪz wʌnz tɪl ɪz hɛɹ fɛl aʊt, bʌt wʌt hæd tə bi dʌn, hæd tə bi dʌn. θɪŋk ə ðə ɡʊɾ ɑn haɪ tʃeɪsəlin.

Unwillingly he turned Stepper. He would rather have worried over Aes Sedai and Asha'man and Wise Ones till his hair fell out, but what had to be done, had to be done. Think of the good on High Chasaline.


tʃæptɝ tu


CHAPTER 2

ðə bʊtʃɝz jɑɹd


The Butcher's Yard

ət fɝs pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt lʊk daʊnsloʊp təwɔɹd wɛɹ i wəd ɹaɪd, wɛɹ i ʃʊɾə ɡɔn wɪð ɹænd ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. ɪnstɛɾ i sæɾ ɪz sæɾəl ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə wæɡənz ən sɛn ɪz aɪz ɛniwɛɹ ɛls, ðoʊ ðə vju ɛvɹiwɛɹ meɪɾ ɪm wɑnə sɪk ʌp. ɪt wɑz laɪk biɪŋ hɪɾ ɪn ðə bɛli wɪð ə hæmɝ.

At first Perrin did not look downslope toward where he would ride, where he should have gone with Rand this morning. Instead he sat his saddle at the edge of the wagons and sent his eyes anywhere else, though the view everywhere made him want to sick up. It was like being hit in the belly with a hammer.

hæmɝstʃɹoʊk. naɪntin fɹɛʃ ɡɹeɪvz ətɑp ə skwɑt hɪl tə ði ist; naɪntin tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn u wəd nɛvɝ si hoʊm əɡɛn. ə blæksmɪθ sɛldəm hæd tə si pipəl daɪ kəz ə hɪz dɪsɪʒənz. ət lis ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn hæɾ oʊbeɪɾ ɪz ɔɹɾɝz. ðəɹ wʊɾə bɪn mɔɹ ɡɹeɪvz, ʌðɝwaɪz. hæmɝstʃɹoʊk. ɹɛktæŋɡəlz ə nuli tɝn ɝθ blæŋkəɾɪd ðə nɛkst sloʊp oʊvɝ fɹəm ðæt, əz wɛl, nɪɹ tə ə hʌnʒɹəd minɝz, ən mɔɹ kɛɹhinɪn, hu hæd kʌm tə dəməaɪz wɛlz tə daɪ. nɛvɝ maɪn kɑzəz əɹ ɹizənz; ðeɪ hæd fɑloʊd pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. hæmɝstʃɹoʊk. ðə ɹɪdʒ-feɪs tə ðə wɛst sim sɑləd ɡɹeɪvz, meɪbi ə θaʊzən əɹ mɔɹ. ə θaʊzən il, bɛɹid stændɪŋ əpɹaɪt, tə feɪs itʃ sʌnɹaɪz. ə θaʊzənd. səm wɝ meɪɾənz. ðə mɛn taɪɾ ɪz stʌmək ɪndə nɑts; ðə wɪmən meɪɾ ɪm wɑnə sɪt daʊn ən kɹaɪ. hi tʃɹaɪd tɛlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ðət ðeɪ ɔl hæd tʃoʊzən tə bi hɪɹ, ðət ðeɪ hæd hæd tə bi hɪɹ. boʊθ θɪŋz wɝ tʃɹu, bʌɾ i hæd ɡɪvən ði ɔɹɾɝz, ən ðət meɪd ðə ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi fəɹ ðoʊz ɡɹeɪvz hɪz. nɑt ɹænz, nɑt ði ɛɛs sədaɪz; hɪz.

Hammerstroke. Nineteen fresh graves atop a squat hill to the east; nineteen Two Rivers men who would never see home again. A blacksmith seldom had to see people die because of his decisions. At least the Two Rivers men had obeyed his orders. There would have been more graves, otherwise. Hammerstroke. Rectangles of newly turned earth blanketed the next slope over from that, as well, near to a hundred Mayeners, and more Cairhienin, who had come to Dumai's Wells to die. Never mind causes or reasons; they had followed Perrin Aybara. Hammerstroke. The ridge-face to the west seemed solid graves, maybe a thousand or more. A thousand Aiel, buried standing upright, to face each sunrise. A thousand. Some were Maidens. The men tied his stomach into knots; the women made him want to sit down and cry. He tried telling himself that they all had chosen to be here, that they had had to be here. Both things were true, but he had given the orders, and that made the responsibility for those graves his. Not Rand's, not the Aes Sedai's; his.

ðə lɪvɪŋ il hæɾ oʊnli stɑp sɪŋɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ dɛɾ ə ʃɔɹt waɪl əɡoʊ, hɔntɪŋ sɔŋz, sʌŋ ɪn pɑɹts, ðət lɪŋɡɝɾ ɪn ðə maɪnd.

The living Aiel had only stopped singing over their dead a short while ago, haunting songs, sung in parts, that lingered in the mind.

laɪf ɪz ə dʒɹim - ðət noʊz noʊ ʃeɪd.

Life is a dream - that knows no shade.

laɪf ɪz ə dʒɹim - ʌv peɪn ən woʊ.

Life is a dream - of pain and woe.

ə dʒɹim fɹəm wɪtʃ - wi pɹeɪ tə weɪk.

A dream from which - we pray to wake.

ə dʒɹim fɹəm wɪtʃ - wi weɪk ən ɡoʊ.

A dream from which - we wake and go.

hu wəd slip - wən ðə nu dɔn weɪts?

Who would sleep - when the new dawn waits?

hu wəd slip - wən ðə swit wɪnz bloʊ?

Who would sleep - when the sweet winds blow?

ə dʒɹim mʌst ɛnd - wən ðə nu deɪ kʌmz.

A dream must end - when the new day comes.

ðɪs dʒɹim fɹəm wɪtʃ - wi weɪk ən ɡoʊ.

This dream from which - we wake and go.

ðeɪ əpɪɹd tə faɪn kʌmfɝɾ ɪn ðoʊz sɔŋz. hi wɪʃt i kʊd, tu, bʌɾ əz fɑɹ əz i kəd si, ði il tʃɹuli dɪd nɑt sim tə kɛɹ wɛðɝ ðeɪ lɪvd əɹ daɪd, ən ðət wɑz mæd. ɛni seɪn mæn wɑntəd tə lɪv. ɛni seɪn mæn wəd ɹʌn əz fɑɹ əz i kəd fɹəm ə bæɾəl, ɹʌn əz hɑɹɾ əz i kʊd.

They appeared to find comfort in those songs. He wished he could, too, but as far as he could see, the Aiel truly did not seem to care whether they lived or died, and that was mad. Any sane man wanted to live. Any sane man would run as far as he could from a battle, run as hard as he could.

stɛpɝ tɔst ɪz hɛd, nɑstʃɹəlz flɛɹɪŋ ət ðə smɛlz fɹəm bɪloʊ, ən pɛɹɪn pæɾəd ðə dʌnz nɛk. ɛɹæm wɑz ɡɹɪnɪŋ əz i lʊkt ət wʌt pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə blɑk aʊt. lɔɪəlz feɪs hæd soʊ lɪɾəl ɪkspɹɛʃən ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn kɑɹv fɹəm wʊd. hɪz lɪps muv slaɪtli, ən pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i hɝd, "laɪt, lemi nɛvɝ si ðə laɪk əɡɛn." dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, hi meɪɾ ɪz aɪz fɑloʊ ðɛɹz, tə dəməaɪz wɛlz.

Stepper tossed his head, nostrils flaring at the smells from below, and Perrin patted the dun's neck. Aram was grinning as he looked at what Perrin tried to block out. Loial's face had so little expression it might have been carved from wood. His lips moved slightly, and Perrin thought he heard, "Light, let me never see the like again." Drawing a deep breath, he made his eyes follow theirs, to Dumai's Wells.

ɪn səm weɪz ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz bæɾ əz ðə ɡɹeɪvz - hi hæd noʊn səm ə ðoʊz pipəl sɪns i wɑz ə tʃaɪld - bʌɾ ɪɾ ɔl kɹæʃt daʊn ɑn ɪm ət wʌns ɛniweɪ, laɪk ðə sɛn ɪn ɪz noʊz meɪd sɑləɾ ən smæʃɪŋ ɪm bɪtwin ði aɪz. ðə mɛmɹiz i wɑntəd tə fɝɡɛt keɪm ɹʌʃɪŋ bæk. dəməaɪz wɛlz hæd bɪn ə kɪlɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd, ə daɪɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd, bʌt naʊ ɪt wɑz wɝs. lɛs ðən ə maɪl əweɪ, ðə tʃɑɹd ɹɪmeɪnz ʌv wæɡənz stʊɾ ɝaʊn ə smɔl kɑps ə tʃɹiz nɪɹli haɪɾɪŋ ðə loʊ stoʊn koʊpɪŋz ə ðə wɛlz. ən sɝaʊndɪŋ ðæt. . . .

In some ways it was not as bad as the graves - he had known some of those people since he was a child - but it all crashed down on him at once anyway, like the scent in his nose made solid and smashing him between the eyes. The memories he wanted to forget came rushing back. Dumai's Wells had been a killing ground, a dying ground, but now it was worse. Less than a mile away, the charred remains of wagons stood around a small copse of trees nearly hiding the low stone copings of the wells. And surrounding that. . . .

ə siθɪŋ si ʌv blæk, vʌltʃɝz ən ɹeɪvənz ən kɹoʊz ɪn tɛnz ə θaʊzənz, swɝlɪŋ ʌp ɪn weɪvz ən sɛɾəlɪŋ əɡɛn, kənsilɪŋ ðə bɹoʊkən ɝθ. fəɹ wɪtʃ pɛɹɪn wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɡɹeɪtfəl. ði æʃəmənz mɛθədz hæd bɪn bɹuɾəl, dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ flɛʃ ən ɡɹaʊnd wɪð ikwəl ɪmpɑɹʃiælɪɾi. tu mɛni ʃeɪɾoʊ hæd daɪd tə bɛɹi ɪn lɛs ðən deɪz, ivən hæɾ ɛniwʌn kɛɹd tə bɛɹi ðɛm, soʊ ðə vʌltʃɝz ɡɔɹdʒd, ən ðə ɹeɪvənz, ən ðə kɹoʊz. ðə dɛd wʊlvz wɝ daʊn ðɛɹ, tu; hi hæd wɑntəd tə bɛɹi ðɛm, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt ðə wʊlvz' weɪ. θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ kɔɹpsəz hæd bɪn faʊnd, ðɛɹ tʃænəlɪŋ əneɪbəl tə seɪv əm fɹəm spɪɹz ən æɹoʊz ɪn ðə mædnəs ə bæɾəl, ən hæf ə dʌzən dɛd wɔɹɾɝz, tu. ðeɪ wɝ bɛɹiɾ ɪn ðə klɪɹɪŋ nɪɹ ðə wɛlz.

A seething sea of black, vultures and ravens and crows in tens of thousands, swirling up in waves and settling again, concealing the broken earth. For which Perrin was more than grateful. The Asha'man's methods had been brutal, destroying flesh and ground with equal impartiality. Too many Shaido had died to bury in less than days, even had anyone cared to bury them, so the vultures gorged, and the ravens, and the crows. The dead wolves were down there, too; he had wanted to bury them, but that was not the wolves' way. Three Aes Sedai corpses had been found, their channeling unable to save them from spears and arrows in the madness of battle, and half a dozen dead Warders, too. They were buried in the clearing near the wells.

ðə bɝdz wɝ nɑɾ əloʊn wɪð ðə dɛd. fɑɹ fɹəm ɪt. blæk-fɛðɝd weɪvz ɹoʊz ɝaʊn lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪn tæbɔɹwɪn ən oʊvɝ tu hʌnʒɹəd ə hɪz maʊntəd kɛɹhinɪn ɑɹmmɪn, ən lɔɹd lutɛnən heɪvin nɹɛl wɪð ɔl ðət ɹɪmeɪn ə hɪz minɝz əsaɪd fɹəm ðə ɡɑɹdz ɑn ðə wɔɹɾɝz. kɑn wɪð tu waɪt daɪmənz ɑn blu pɪkt aʊt ðə kɛɹhinɪn ɔfəsɝz, ɔl bʌt dɑbɹeɪn hɪmsɛlf, ən ðə minɝz' ɹɛɾ ɑɹmɝ ən ɹɛd-stʃɹimɝd lænsɪz meɪɾ ə bɹeɪv ʃoʊ əmɪd ðə kɑɹnɪdʒ, bʌt dɑbɹeɪn wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn u hɛld ə klɔθ tə hɪz noʊz. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ə mæn lin fɹəm ðə sæɾəl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɛmpti ə stʌmək ɔlɹɛɾi ɛmptiɾ ɝliɝ. mæzɹim teɪm, ɔlmoʊst əz tɔl əz ɹænd, wɑz əfʊɾ ɪn ɪz blæk koʊt wɪð ðə blu-ænd-ɡoʊl dʒɹæɡənz klaɪmɪŋ ðə slivz, ən meɪbi ə hʌnʒɹəd mɔɹ ə ði æʃəmən. səm ə ðɛm hivd ʌp ðɛɹ bɛliz, tu. ðəɹ wɝ meɪɾənz baɪ ðə skɔɹ, mɔɹ sɪswaɪəmən ðən kɛɹhinɪn ən minɝz ən æʃəmən kəmbaɪnd, ən sɛvɹəl dʌzən waɪz wʌnz tə but. ɔl səpoʊzədli ɪn keɪs ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ɹɪtɝnd, əɹ pɝhæps ɪn keɪs səm ə ðə dɛd wɝ oʊnli ʃæmɪŋ, ðoʊ pɛɹɪn θɔɾ ɛniwʌn u pɹitɛndəɾ ət biɪŋ ə kɔɹps hɪɹ wəd sun ɡoʊ ɪnseɪn. ɔl sɛntɝɾ ɝaʊn ɹænd.

The birds were not alone with the dead. Far from it. Black-feathered waves rose around Lord Dobraine Taborwin and over two hundred of his mounted Cairhienin armsmen, and Lord Lieutenant Havien Nurelle with all that remained of his Mayeners aside from the guards on the Warders. Con with two white diamonds on blue picked out the Cairhienin officers, all but Dobraine himself, and the Mayeners' red armor and red-streamered lances made a brave show amid the carnage, but Dobraine was not the only one who held a cloth to his nose. Here and there a man leaned from the saddle trying to empty a stomach already emptied earlier. Mazrim Taim, almost as tall as Rand, was afoot in his black coat with the blue-and-gold Dragons climbing the sleeves, and maybe a hundred more of the Asha'man. Some of them heaved up their bellies, too. There were Maidens by the score, more siswai'aman than Cairhienin and Mayeners and Asha'man combined, and several dozen Wise Ones to boot. All supposedly in case the Shaido returned, or perhaps in case some of the dead were only shamming, though Perrin thought anyone who pretended at being a corpse here would soon go insane. All centered around Rand.

pɛɹɪn ʃʊɾə bɪn daʊn ðəɹ wɪð ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn. ɹænd hæɾ æsk fəɹ ðɛm, spoʊkən əbaʊt tʃɹʌstɪŋ mɛn fɹəm hoʊm, bʌt pɛɹɪn hæd meɪd noʊ pɹɑməsəz. hɪl əv tə sɛɾəl fəɹ mi, ən leɪt, hi θɔt. ɪn ə lɪɾəl bɪt, wən i mænədʒ tə stil hɪmsɛlf tə ðə bʊtʃɝz jɑɹd bɪloʊ. oʊnli, bʊtʃɝ naɪvz dɪd nɑt moʊ daʊn pipəl, ən ðeɪ wɝ taɪɾiɝ ðən æksiz, taɪɾiɝ ðən vʌltʃɝz.

Perrin should have been down there with the Two Rivers men. Rand had asked for them, spoken about trusting men from home, but Perrin had made no promises. He'll have to settle for me, and late, he thought. In a little bit, when he managed to steel himself to the butcher's yard below. Only, butcher knives did not mow down people, and they were tidier than axes, tidier than vultures.

ðə blæk-koʊɾəd æʃəmən feɪɾəd ɪndə ðə si ʌv bɝdz, dɛθ swɑloʊd baɪ dɛθ, ən ɹeɪvənz ən kɹoʊz sɝdʒɪŋ ʌp hɪd ði ʌðɝz, bʌt ɹænd stʊɾ aʊɾ ɪn ðə tæɾɝd waɪt ʃɝɾ i hæd bɪn wɛɹɪŋ wən ɹɛskju keɪm. ðoʊ pɝhæps i hɑɹdli niɾəd dɪlɪvɝəns baɪ ðət taɪm. ðə saɪɾ ə mɪn, kloʊs bɪsaɪd ɹænd ɪn peɪl ɹɛd koʊɾ ən snʌɡ bɹitʃɪz, meɪd pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪmɑs. ðət wɑz noʊ pleɪs fəɹ hɝ, əɹ ɛniwʌn, bʌt ʃi steɪd kloʊsɝ tə ɹænd sɪns ðə ɹɛskju ðən ivən teɪm dɪd. sʌmhaʊ ɹænd hæd mænədʒ tə fɹi boʊθ hɪmsɛlf ən əɹ wɛl bɪfɔɹ pɛɹɪn bɹoʊk θɹu, əɹ ivən ði æʃəmən, ən pɛɹɪn səspɛktəd ʃi sɔ ɹændz pɹɛzəns əz ði oʊnli ɹil seɪfti.

The black-coated Asha'man faded into the sea of birds, death swallowed by death, and ravens and crows surging up hid the others, but Rand stood out in the tattered white shirt he had been wearing when rescue came. Though perhaps he hardly needed deliverance by that time. The sight of Min, close beside Rand in pale red coat and snug breeches, made Perrin grimace. That was no place for her, or anyone, but she stayed closer to Rand since the rescue than even Taim did. Somehow Rand had managed to free both himself and her well before Perrin broke through, or even the Asha'man, and Perrin suspected she saw Rand's presence as the only real safety.

səmtaɪmz əz i stʃɹoʊɾ əkɹɔs ðət tʃɑɹnəl ɡɹaʊnd, ɹænd pæɾəd mɪnz ɑɹm əɹ bɛn ɪz hɛɾ əz ɪf spikɪŋ tə hɝ, bʌt nɑt wɪð ɪz meɪn ətɛnʃən. dɑɹk klaʊdz ə bɝdz bɪloʊɾ ɝaʊn ðɛm, ðə smɔlɝ dɑɹɾɪŋ əweɪ tə fiɾ ɛlswɛɹ, ðə vʌltʃɝz ɡɪvɪŋ ɡɹaʊn ɹɪlʌktənli, səm ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə teɪk wɪŋ, ɪkstɛndɪŋ fɛðɝləs nɛks ən skwɔkɪŋ dɪfaɪənli əz ðeɪ wɑɾəld bæk. naʊ ən ðən ɹænd stɑpt, bɛndɪŋ oʊvɝ ə kɔɹps. səmtaɪmz faɪɝ dɑɹɾɪd fɹəm ɪz hænz tə stʃɹaɪk daʊn vʌltʃɝz ðət dɪd nɑt ɡɪv weɪ. ɛvɹi taɪm, nændɛɹə, hu lɛd ðə meɪɾənz, əɹ səlɪn, hɝ sɛkənd, ɑɹɡjud wɪð hɪm. səmtaɪmz waɪz wʌnz dɪd, tu, fɹəm ðə weɪ ðeɪ tʌɡd ət ðə bɑɾiz koʊɾ əz ɪf dɛmənstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. ən ɹænd wəd nɑɾ ən muv ɑn. nɑt wɪθaʊt bækwɝd ɡlænsɪz, ðoʊ. ən oʊnli əntɪl ənʌðɝ bɑɾi kɑɾ ɪz ətɛnʃən.

Sometimes as he strode across that charnel ground, Rand patted Min's arm or bent his head as if speaking to her, but not with his main attention. Dark clouds of birds billowed around them, the smaller darting away to feed elsewhere, the vultures giving ground reluctantly, some refusing to take wing, extending featherless necks and squawking defiantly as they waddled back. Now and then Rand stopped, bending over a corpse. Sometimes fire darted from his hands to strike down vultures that did not give way. Every time, Nandera, who led the Maidens, or Sulin, her second, argued with him. Sometimes Wise Ones did, too, from the way they tugged at the body's coat as if demonstrating something. And Rand would nod and move on. Not without backward glances, though. And only until another body caught his attention.

"wʌɾ ɪz i duɪŋ?" dɪmændəɾ ə hɔɾi vɔɪs ət pɛɹɪnz ni. baɪ sɛn i nu hɝ bɪfɔɹ i lʊk daʊn. stætʃuɛsk ən ɛləɡən ɪn ə ɡɹin sɪlk ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs ən θɪn lɪnən dʌst-kloʊk, kaɪɹunə nækɪmən wɑz sɪstɝ tə kɪŋ peɪɾɝ ə ɝæfəl ən ə paʊɝfəl noʊbəl ɪn əɹ oʊn ɹaɪt, ən bɪkʌmɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ tə dæmpən əɹ mænɝ. tʃɹæpt ɪn wʌɾ i wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ, hi hæd nɑt hɝɾ əɹ əpɹoʊtʃ. "waɪ ɪz i daʊn ɪn ðæt? hi ʃəd nɑt bi."

"What is he doing?" demanded a haughty voice at Perrin's knee. By scent he knew her before he looked down. Statuesque and elegant in a green silk riding dress and thin linen dust-cloak, Kiruna Nachiman was sister to King Paitar of Arafel and a powerful noble in her own right, and becoming Aes Sedai had done nothing to dampen her manner. Trapped in what he was watching, he had not heard her approach. "Why is he down in that? He should not be."

nɑɾ ɔl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə kæmp wɝ pɹɪznɝz, ðoʊ ðoʊz u wɝ nɑt hæd bɪn kipɪŋ aʊɾ ə saɪt sɪns jɛstɝdeɪ, tɔkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, pɛɹɪn səspɛktəd, ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɪɡjɝ aʊt wʌt hæd hæpən ət ðə læst. meɪbi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɪɡjɝ səm weɪ ɝaʊn ɪt. naʊ ðeɪ wɝ aʊɾ ɪn fɔɹs. bɛɹə hɑɹkɪn, ənʌðɝ ɡɹin, stʊɾ ət kaɪɹunəz ʃoʊldɝ, ə fɑɹm-waɪf baɪ lʊks dɪspaɪɾ əɹ eɪdʒləs feɪs ən faɪn wʊlən dʒɹɛs, bʌɾ ɛvɹi skɹæp əz pɹaʊɾ əz kaɪɹunə ɪn əɹ oʊn weɪ. ðɪs fɑɹmwaɪf wəd tɛl ə kɪŋ tə skɹeɪp ɪz buts bɪfɔɹ kʌmɪŋ ɪndə hɝ haʊs, ən bi ʃɑɹp əbaʊɾ ɪt. ʃi ən kaɪɹunə təɡɛðɝ lɛd ðə sɪstɝz u hæd kʌm tə dəməaɪz wɛlz wɪð pɛɹɪn, əɹ pɝhæps pæs liɾɝʃɪp bæk ən fɔɹθ bɪtwin ðɛm. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪɡzækli klɪɹ, wɪtʃ wɑz hɑɹdli ənjuʒəwəl wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Not all the Aes Sedai in the camp were prisoners, though those who were not had been keeping out of sight since yesterday, talking among themselves, Perrin suspected, and trying to figure out what had happened at the last. Maybe trying to figure some way around it. Now they were out in force. Bera Harkin, another Green, stood at Kiruna's shoulder, a farm-wife by looks despite her ageless face and fine woolen dress, but every scrap as proud as Kiruna in her own way. This farmwife would tell a king to scrape his boots before coming into her house, and be sharp about it. She and Kiruna together led the sisters who had come to Dumai's Wells with Perrin, or perhaps passed leadership back and forth between them. It was not exactly clear, which was hardly unusual with Aes Sedai.

ði ʌðɝ sɛvən stʊɾ ɪn ə kʌvi nɑt fɑɹ əweɪ. əɹ meɪbi ɪn ə pɹaɪd, laɪoʊnəsəz, nɑt kweɪl, baɪ ðɛɹ ɛɹ ə biɪŋ ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ. ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz wɝ ɝeɪd bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ən ɪf ðə sɪstɝz wɝ ɔl aʊtwɝd sɝɛnəɾi ðə wɔɹɾɝz meɪd noʊ boʊnz ə ðɛɹ filɪŋz. ðeɪ wɝ dɪspɝɪt mɛn, səm ɪn ðoʊz kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊks ðət sim tə meɪk pɑɹts ə ðɛm dɪsəpɪɹ, bʌt wɛðɝ ʃɔɹɾ əɹ tɔl, θɪk əɹ θɪn, dʒʌst stændɪŋ ðəɹ ðeɪ lʊk laɪk vaɪələns ɑn ə fɹeɪd liʃ.

The other seven stood in a covey not far away. Or maybe in a pride, lionesses, not quail, by their air of being in charge. Their Warders were arrayed behind them, and if the sisters were all outward serenity the Warders made no bones of their feelings. They were disparate men, some in those color-shifting cloaks that seemed to make parts of them disappear, but whether short or tall, thick or thin, just standing there they looked like violence on a frayed leash.

pɛɹɪn nu tu ʌv ðoʊz wɪmən wɛl, vɛɹɪn mæθwɪn ən ɑlɑnə mɑsvɑni. ʃɔɹɾ ən staʊɾ ən ɔlmoʊs mʌðɝli ət taɪmz ɪn ə dɪstʃɹæktəd weɪ, wən ʃi wɑz nɑt stʌɾiɪŋ jə laɪk ə bɝd stʌɾiɪŋ ə wɝm, vɛɹɪn wɑz bɹaʊn ədʒɑ. ɑlɑnə, slɪm ən dɑɹkli pɹɪɾi ðoʊ ə lɪɾəl hæɡɝɾ ɝaʊn ði aɪz ə leɪt fəɹ səm ɹizən, wɑz ɡɹin. ɔltəɡɛðɝ, faɪv ə ðə naɪn wɝ ɡɹin. wʌns, səm taɪm əɡoʊ, vɛɹɪn hæd toʊld ɪm nɑt tə tʃɹʌst ɑlɑnə tu fɑɹ, ən i mɔɹ ðən tʊk əɹ əɾ əɹ wɝd. nɔɹ dɪɾ i tʃɹʌst ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ vɛɹɪn. niðɝ dɪd ɹænd, fəɹ ɔl ðeɪ hæd fɔɾ ɑn ɪz saɪd jɛstɝdeɪ, ən dɪspaɪt wʌt hæd hæpən ət ði ɛnd. wɪtʃ pɛɹɪn stɪl wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i bɪlivd, ivən ðoʊ hi hæd sin ɪt.

Perrin knew two of those women well, Verin Mathwin and Alanna Mosvani. Short and stout and almost motherly at times in a distracted way, when she was not studying you like a bird studying a worm, Verin was Brown Ajah. Alanna, slim and darkly pretty though a little haggard around the eyes of late for some reason, was Green. Altogether, five of the nine were Green. Once, some time ago, Verin had told him not to trust Alanna too far, and he more than took her at her word. Nor did he trust any of the others, including Verin. Neither did Rand, for all they had fought on his side yesterday, and despite what had happened at the end. Which Perrin still was not sure he believed, even though he had seen it.

ə ɡʊd dʌzən æʃəmən laʊnʒd baɪ ə wæɡən əbaʊt twɛnti peɪsɪz fɹəm ðə sɪstɝz. ə kɑki fɛloʊ neɪm tʃɑɹl dʒɛdwɪn hæd tʃɑɹdʒ ə ðɛm ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ə hɑɹd-feɪs mæn u swæɡɝd stændɪŋ stɪl. ɔl wɔɹ ə pɪn ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə sɪlvɝ sɔɹɾ ɑn ðɛɹ tɔl koʊt kɑlɝz, ən fɔɹ əɹ faɪv bɪsaɪdz dʒɛdwɪn hæɾ ə dʒɹæɡən ɪn ɡoʊld-ænd-ɹɛɾ ɪnæməl fæsən ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. pɛɹɪn səpoʊz ðət hæd tə də wɪð ɹæŋk ɪn səm weɪ. hi hæd sin boʊθ ɑn səm ə ði ʌðɝ æʃəmən. nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli ɡɑɹdz, ðeɪ mænədʒ tə bi wɛɹɛvɝ kaɪɹunə ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ. dʒʌs teɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ iz. ən kipɪŋ ə ʃɑɹp aɪ oʊpən. nɑt ðət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tʊk ɛni noʊɾəs, nɑt ðət jə kəd si. ivən soʊ, ðə sɪstɝz smɛld wɛɹi, ən pʌzəld, ən ɪnfjʊɹieɪɾəd. pɑɹɾ ə ðət hæd tə bi kəz ə ði æʃəmən.

A good dozen Asha'man lounged by a wagon about twenty paces from the sisters. A cocky fellow named Charl Gedwyn had charge of them this morning, a hard-faced man who swaggered standing still. All wore a pin in the shape of a silver sword on their tall coat collars, and four or five besides Gedwyn had a Dragon in gold-and-red enamel fastened on the other side. Perrin supposed that had to do with rank in some way. He had seen both on some of the other Asha'man. Not precisely guards, they managed to be wherever Kiruna and the others were. Just taking their ease. And keeping a sharp eye open. Not that the Aes Sedai took any notice, not that you could see. Even so, the sisters smelled wary, and puzzled, and infuriated. Part of that had to be because of the Asha'man.

"wɛl?" kaɪɹunəz dɑɹk aɪz flæʃt ɪmpeɪʃəns. hi daʊɾɪd ðət mɛni pipəl kɛpt əɹ weɪɾɪŋ.

"Well?" Kiruna's dark eyes flashed impatience. He doubted that many people kept her waiting.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," hi laɪd, pæɾɪŋ stɛpɝz nɛk əɡɛn. "ɹæn dʌzn tɛl mi ɛvɹiθɪŋ."

"I don't know," he lied, patting Stepper's neck again. "Rand doesn't tell me everything."

hi ʌndɝstʊɾ ə lɪɾəl - hi θɔɾ i dɪd - bʌɾ i hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə tɛlɪŋ ɛniwʌn. ðət wɑz ɹændz tə ɹɪvil, ɪf i tʃoʊz. ɛvɹi bɑɾi ðət ɹænd lʊkt ət bɪlɔŋ tə ə meɪɾən; pɛɹɪn wɑz kənvɪnst ʌv ɪt. eɪ ʃeɪɾoʊ meɪɾən wɪθaʊɾ ə daʊt, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ mʌtʃ dɪfɝəns ðət meɪd tə ɹænd. læs naɪɾ i hæd wɔkt əweɪ fɹəm ðə wæɡənz tə bi baɪ hɪmsɛlf, ən əz ðə saʊn ə mɛn læfɪŋ kəz ðeɪ wɝ əlaɪv feɪɾəd bɪhaɪn hɪm, hi faʊn ɹænd. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, hu meɪd ðə wɝl tʃɹɛmbəl, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, əloʊn ɪn ðə dɑɹk, hɪz ɑɹmz ɹæpt ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf, ɹɑkɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ.

He understood a little - he thought he did - but he had no intention of telling anyone. That was Rand's to reveal, if he chose. Every body that Rand looked at belonged to a Maiden; Perrin was convinced of it. A Shaido Maiden without a doubt, but he was not sure how much difference that made to Rand. Last night he had walked away from the wagons to be by himself, and as the sound of men laughing because they were alive faded behind him, he found Rand. The Dragon Reborn, who made the world tremble, sitting on the ground, alone in the dark, his arms wrapped around himself, rocking back and forth.

tə pɛɹɪnz aɪz, ðə mun wɑz nɪɹli əz ɡʊɾ əz ðə sʌn, bʌt ɹaɪt ðən i wɪʃt fəɹ pɪtʃ blæknəs. ɹændz feɪs wɑz dʒɹɔn ən twɪstəd, ðə feɪs ʌv ə mæn u wɑntəd tə skɹim, əɹ meɪbi wip, ən wɑz faɪɾɪŋ ɪt daʊn wɪð ɛvɹi skɹæp ə hɪz faɪbɝ. wʌtɛvɝ tʃɹɪk ði ɛɛs sədaɪ nu tə kip ðə hit fɹəm tʌtʃɪŋ ðɛm, ɹænd ən ði æʃəmən nu, tu, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt juzɪŋ ɪt naʊ. ðə naɪts hit wʊɾə dʌn fəɹ ə mɔɹ-ðæn-wɔɹm sʌmɝ deɪ, ən swɛt slɪd daʊn ɹændz tʃiks əz mʌtʃ əz pɛɹɪnz.

To Perrin's eyes, the moon was nearly as good as the sun, but right then he wished for pitch blackness. Rand's face was drawn and twisted, the face of a man who wanted to scream, or maybe weep, and was fighting it down with every scrap of his fiber. Whatever trick the Aes Sedai knew to keep the heat from touching them, Rand and the Asha'man knew, too, but he was not using it now. The night's heat would have done for a more-than-warm summer day, and sweat slid down Rand's cheeks as much as Perrin's.

hi dɪd nɑt lʊk ɝaʊnd, ðoʊ pɛɹɪnz buts ɹʌsəld laʊdli ɪn ðə dɛd ɡɹæs, jɛɾ i spoʊk hɔɹsli, stɪl ɹɑkɪŋ. "wʌn hʌnʒɹəd ən fɪfti-wʌn, pɛɹɪn. wʌn hʌnʒɹəd ən fɪfti-wʌn meɪɾənz daɪd tədeɪ. fəɹ mi. aɪ pɹɑməs ðɛm, jə si. doʊn ɑɹɡju wɪð mi! ʃʌɾ ʌp! ɡoʊ əweɪ!" dɪspaɪɾ ɪz swɛt, ɹænd ʃɪvɝd. "nɑt ju, pɛɹɪn; nɑt ju. aɪ hæv tə kip maɪ pɹɑməsəz, jə si. hæv tə, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɪt hɝts. bʌɾ aɪ hæv tə kip maɪ pɹɑməs tə maɪsɛlf, tu. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɪt hɝts."

He did not look around, though Perrin's boots rustled loudly in the dead grass, yet he spoke hoarsely, still rocking. "One hundred and fifty-one, Perrin. One hundred and fifty-one Maidens died today. For me. I promised them, you see. Don't argue with me! Shut up! Go away!" Despite his sweat, Rand shivered. "Not you, Perrin; not you. I have to keep my promises, you see. Have to, no matter how it hurts. But I have to keep my promise to myself, too. No matter how it hurts."

pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðə feɪɾ ə mɛn u kəd tʃænəl. ðə lʌki wʌnz daɪd bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɛn mæd; ði ənlʌki daɪɾ æftɝ. wɛðɝ ɹænd wɑz lʌki əɹ ənlʌki, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹɛstəɾ ɑn hɪm. ɛvɹiθɪŋ. "ɹænd, aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt tə seɪ, bʌt - "

Perrin tried not to think about the fate of men who could channel. The lucky ones died before they went mad; the unlucky died after. Whether Rand was lucky or unlucky, everything rested on him. Everything. "Rand, I don't know what to say, but - "

ɹænd sim nɑt tə hɪɹ. bæk ən fɔɹθ i ɹɑkt. bæk ən fɔɹθ. "ɪsən, ʌv ðə dʒɹə sɛpt ə ðə tʃɑɝin il. ʃi daɪd fəɹ mi tədeɪ. tʃɑn ə ðə spaɪn ɹɪdʒ maɪæɡoʊmə. ʃi daɪd fəɹ mi tədeɪ. ædʒɪɹɪn ə ðə ʃɛlən dɛɹn. . . ."

Rand seemed not to hear. Back and forth he rocked. Back and forth. "Isan, of the Jarra Sept of the Chareen Aiel. She died for me today. Chuonde of the Spine Ridge Miagoma. She died for me today. Agirin of the Shelan Daryne. . . ."

ðəɹ hæd bɪn nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪt bʌt tə sɛɾəl ɑn ɪz hilz ən lɪsən tə ɹænd ɹəsaɪɾ ɔl wʌn hʌnʒɹəd ən fɪfti-wʌn neɪmz ɪn ə vɔɪs laɪk peɪn stʃɹɛtʃt tə bɹeɪkɪŋ, lɪsən ən hoʊp ɹænd wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ɑn tə sænəɾi.

There had been nothing for it but to settle on his heels and listen to Rand recite all one hundred and fifty-one names in a voice like pain stretched to breaking, listen and hope Rand was holding on to sanity.

wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ɹænd wɑz stɪl kəmplitli seɪn, ðoʊ, ɪf ə meɪɾən u keɪm tə faɪt fəɹ ɪm hæd bɪn mɪs daʊn ðəɹ sʌmhaʊ, pɛɹɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət nɑɾ oʊnli wəd ʃi bi bɛɹid disənli wɪð ði ʌðɝz ɑn ðə ɹɪdʒ, ðəɹ wəd bi wʌn hʌnʒɹəd ən fɪfti-tu neɪmz ɪn ðət lɪst. ən ðət wɑz nʌn ə kaɪɹunəz bɪznəs. nɑt ðæt, əɹ pɛɹɪnz daʊts. ɹænd hæd tə steɪ seɪn, əɹ seɪn ɪnʌf ɛniweɪ, ən ðət wɑz ðæt. laɪt, sɛn ɪt soʊ!

Whether or not Rand was still completely sane, though, if a Maiden who came to fight for him had been missed down there somehow, Perrin was sure that not only would she be buried decently with the others on the ridge, there would be one hundred and fifty-two names in that list. And that was none of Kiruna's business. Not that, or Perrin's doubts. Rand had to stay sane, or sane enough anyway, and that was that. Light, send it so!

ən ðə laɪt bɝn mi fəɹ θɪŋkɪŋ ɪt soʊ koʊldli, pɛɹɪn θɔt.

And the Light burn me for thinking it so coldly, Perrin thought.

fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ hi sɔ hɝ fʊl maʊθ taɪɾən moʊməntɛɹəli. ʃi laɪk nɑt noʊɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊɾ əz wɛl əz biɪŋ meɪd tə weɪt. ʃi wʊɾə bɪn bjuɾəfəl, ɪn ə ɡɹæn sɔɹɾ ə mænɝ, ɪksɛp ðət hɝz wɑz ə feɪs juz tə ɡɛɾɪŋ wʌɾ ɪt wɑntəd. nɑt pɛtʃələnt, dʒʌst æbsəlutli sɝɾən ðət wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɑntəd wɑz ɹaɪɾ ən pɹɑpɝ ən mʌs bi. "wɪð soʊ mɛni kɹoʊz ən ɹeɪvənz ɪn wʌn pleɪs, ðəɹ ɑɹ sɝɾənli hʌnʒɹədz, pɝhæps θaʊzənz, ɹɛɾi tə ɹipɔɹt wʌt ðeɪv sin tə ə mɹdʒɹɑl." ʃi meɪd noʊ ɛfɝt tə mæsk əɹ ɪɹɪteɪʃən; ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ðoʊ hi hæd bɹɔɾ ɛvɹi bɝd ðəɹ hɪmsɛlf. "ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, wi kɪl əm ɑn saɪt. juv mɛn, ən ðeɪv baʊz."

From the corner of his eye he saw her full mouth tighten momentarily. She liked not knowing everything about as well as being made to wait. She would have been beautiful, in a grand sort of manner, except that hers was a face used to getting what it wanted. Not petulant, just absolutely certain that whatever she wanted was right and proper and must be. "With so many crows and ravens in one place, there are certainly hundreds, perhaps thousands, ready to report what they've seen to a Myrddraal." She made no effort to mask her irritation; she sounded as though he had brought every bird there himself. "In the borderlands, we kill them on sight. You have men, and they have bows."

ɪt wɑz tʃɹu, ə ɹeɪvən əɹ kɹoʊ wɑz ɔl tu laɪkli tə bi ə spaɪ fəɹ ðə ʃædoʊ, bʌt dɪsɡʌst wɛld ʌp ɪn hɪm. dɪsɡʌst ən wɪɹinəs. "tə wʌt pɔɪnt?" wɪð ðət mɛni bɝdz, ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ən ði il kəd ʃuɾ ɛvɹi æɹoʊ ðeɪ hæɾ ən spaɪz wəd stɪl ɹipɔɹt. moʊs taɪmz ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə tɛl wɛðɝ ðə bɝd jə kɪld wɑz ðə spaɪ əɹ ðə wʌn ðət flu əweɪ. "hæzən ðəɹ bɪn ɪnʌf kɪlɪŋ? ðəɹ wɪl bi mɔɹ sun ɪnʌf. laɪt, wʊmən, ivən ði æʃəmən ɑɹ seɪɾɪd!"

It was true, a raven or crow was all too likely to be a spy for the Shadow, but disgust welled up in him. Disgust and weariness. "To what point?" With that many birds, the Two Rivers men and the Aiel could shoot every arrow they had and spies would still report. Most times there was no way to tell whether the bird you killed was the spy or the one that flew away. "Hasn't there been enough killing? There will be more soon enough. Light, woman, even the Asha'man are sated!"

aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz əmʌŋ ði ɔnlʊkɪŋ klʌtʃ ə sɪstɝz. noʊ wʌn spoʊk tə ɛɛs sədaɪ ðət weɪ, nɑɾ ə kɪŋ əɹ ə kwin. bɛɹə ɡeɪv ɪm ə lʊk ðət sɛd ʃi wɑz kənsɪɾɝɪŋ hɔlɪŋ ɪm aʊɾ ə ðə sæɾəl ən bɑksɪŋ ɪz ɪɹz. stɪl piɹɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ʃæmbəlz bɪloʊ, kaɪɹunə smuðd əɹ skɝts, hɝ feɪs koʊldli dɪtɝmənd. lɔɪəlz ɪɹz tʃɹɛmbəld. hi hæɾ ə dip bʌɾ ənizi ɹɪspɛk fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ; kloʊs tə twaɪs əz tɔl əz moʊst ə ðə sɪstɝz, səmtaɪmz i bɪheɪvd əz ðoʊ wʌn maɪt stɛp ɑn ɪm wɪθaʊt noʊɾɪsɪŋ ɪf i ɡɑɾ ɪn əɹ weɪ.

Eyebrows rose among the onlooking clutch of sisters. No one spoke to Aes Sedai that way, not a king or a queen. Bera gave him a look that said she was considering hauling him out of the saddle and boxing his ears. Still peering toward the shambles below, Kiruna smoothed her skirts, her face coldly determined. Loial's ears trembled. He had a deep but uneasy respect for Aes Sedai; close to twice as tall as most of the sisters, sometimes he behaved as though one might step on him without noticing if he got in her way.

pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv kaɪɹunə noʊ tʃæns tə spik. ɡɪv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ə fɪŋɡɝ, ən ʃi tʊk jəɹ hoʊl ɑɹm, ənlɛs ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə teɪk mɔɹ. "juv bɪn steɪɪŋ klɪɹ ə mi, bʌɾ aɪ hæv ə fju θɪŋz tə seɪ tə ju. jə dɪsoʊbeɪɾ ɔɹɾɝz jɛstɝdeɪ. ɪf jə wɑnə kɔl ɪt tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ðə plæn," hi pʊʃt ɑn wən ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, "ðɛn kɔl ɪt ðæt. ɪf jə θɪŋk ðət meɪks ɪt bɛɾɝ." ʃi ən ði ʌðɝ eɪt hæd bɪn toʊl tə steɪ wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz, wɛl bæk fɹəm ði æktʃəwəl faɪɾɪŋ, ɡɑɹɾəd baɪ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ən ðə minɝz. ɪnstɛd ðeɪ hæd plʌnʒd ɹaɪɾ ɪndə ðə θɪk ʌv ɪt, weɪɾɪŋ ɪn wɛɹ mɛn wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kʌt wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪndə dɑɡmit wɪð sɔɹdz ən spɪɹz. "ju tʊk heɪvin nɹɛl wɪð ju, ən hæf ðə minɝz daɪd fəɹ ɪt. jə doʊnt ɡoʊ jəɹ oʊn weɪ wɪð noʊ ɹəɡɑɹɾ ɛnimɔɹ. aɪ woʊn si mɛn daɪ kəz jə sʌɾənli θɪŋk jə si ə bɛɾɝ weɪ, ən ðə dɑɹk wʌn teɪk weɪtɛvɹiwʌn ɛls θɪŋks. dʒju ʌndɝstæn mi?"

Perrin gave Kiruna no chance to speak. Give an Aes Sedai a finger, and she took your whole arm, unless she decided to take more. "You've been staying clear of me, but I have a few things to say to you. You disobeyed orders yesterday. If you want to call it changing the plan," he pushed on when she opened her mouth, "then call it that. If you think that makes it better." She and the other eight had been told to stay with the Wise Ones, well back from the actual fighting, guarded by the Two Rivers men and the Mayeners. Instead they had plunged right into the thick of it, wading in where men were trying to cut one another into dogmeat with swords and spears. "You took Havien Nurelle with you, and half the Mayeners died for it. You don't go your own way with no regard anymore. I won't see men die because you suddenly think you see a better way, and the Dark One take whateveryone else thinks. Do you understand me?"

"ɑɹ jə fɪnɪʃt, fɑɹmbɔɪ?" kaɪɹunəz vɔɪs wɑz deɪnʒɝəsli kɑm. ðə feɪs ʃi tɝn ʌp tə hɪm maɪɾ əv bɪn kɑɹv fɹəm səm dɑɹk aɪs, ən ʃi ɹikt ʌv əfɹʌnt. stændɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ʃi sʌmhaʊ meɪɾ ɪt sim ðət ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət hɪm. nɑɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tʃɹɪk, ðæt; hi hæd sin feɪl də ɪt. hi səspɛktəd moʊst wɪmən nu haʊ. "aɪ wɪl tɛl jə sʌmθɪŋ, ðoʊ ðə minəst ɪntɛlədʒəns ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə ɹizən ɪɾ aʊt. baɪ ðə θɹi oʊðz, noʊ sɪstɝ meɪ juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən ɪksɛpt əɡɛns dɑɹkfɹɛnz əɹ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn əɹ ɪn dɪfɛns ə hɝ laɪf, əɹ ðəɾ ə hɝ wɔɹɾɝz əɹ ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ. wi cʊɾə stʊd wɛɹ jə wʊɾə hæɾ əs ən wɑtʃt əntɪl tɑɹmən ɡdən wɪθaʊɾ ɛvɝ biɪŋ eɪbəl tə də ɛniθɪŋ ɪfɛktɪv. nɑɾ əntɪl wi wɝ ɪn deɪnʒɝ aʊɝsɛlvz. aɪ də nɑt laɪk hævɪŋ tə ɪkspleɪn maɪ ækʃənz, fɑɹmbɔɪ. də nɑt meɪk mi də ɪɾ əɡɛn. dʒju ʌndɝstænd?"

"Are you finished, farmboy?" Kiruna's voice was dangerously calm. The face she turned up to him might have been carved from some dark ice, and she reeked of affront. Standing on the ground, she somehow made it seem that she was looking down at him. Not an Aes Sedai trick, that; he had seen Faile do it. He suspected most women knew how. "I will tell you something, though the meanest intelligence should be able to reason it out. By the Three Oaths, no sister may use the One Power as a weapon except against Darkfriends or Shadowspawn or in defense of her life, or that of her Warders or another sister. We could have stood where you would have had us and watched until Tarmon Gai'don without ever being able to do anything effective. Not until we were in danger ourselves. I do not like having to explain my actions, farmboy. Do not make me do it again. Do you understand?"

lɔɪəlz ɪɹz wɪltɪd, ən i stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ ɪt wɑz pleɪn i wɪʃt i wɝ ɛniwɛɹ bʌt hɪɹ, ivən wɪð ɪz mʌðɝ, hu wɑntəd tə mɛɹi hɪm ɔf. ɛɹæmz maʊθ hʌŋ oʊpən, ən i ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪd tə pɹitɛn ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪmpɹɛs ɪm əɾ ɔl. dʒɑndɪn ən tɑd klaɪm daʊn fɹəm ðɛɹ wæɡən wil dʒʌst ə tʌtʃ tu kæʒəwəli; dʒɑndɪn mænədʒ tə stʃɹoʊl əweɪ, bʌt tɑd ɹæn, lʊkɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ.

Loial's ears wilted, and he stared straight ahead so hard that it was plain he wished he were anywhere but here, even with his mother, who wanted to marry him off. Aram's mouth hung open, and he always tried to pretend Aes Sedai did not impress him at all. Jondyn and Tod climbed down from their wagon wheel just a touch too casually; Jondyn managed to stroll away, but Tod ran, looking back over his shoulder.

hɝ ɛkspləneɪʃən saʊndəd ɹizənəbəl; ɪt wɑz pɹɑbli ðə tʃɹuθ. noʊ, baɪ ənʌðɝ ə ðə θɹi oʊðz, ɪt wɑz ðə tʃɹuθ. ðəɹ wɝ luphoʊlz, ðoʊ. laɪk nɑt spikɪŋ ðə hoʊl tʃɹuθ, əɹ tɔkɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪt. ðə sɪstɝz maɪt wɛl əv pʊt ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn deɪnʒɝ soʊ ðeɪ kəd juz ðə paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən, bʌt pɛɹɪn wəɾ iɾ ɪz buts ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑɾ ɔlsoʊ bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ðeɪ kəd ɹitʃ ɹænd bɪfɔɹ ɛnibəɾi ɛls. wʌt wʊɾə hæpən ðən wɑz ɛniwʌnz ɡɛs, bʌɾ i wɑz sɝɾən ðɛɹ plænz hæd nɑɾ ɪnkluɾəd ɛniθɪŋ laɪk wʌɾ æktʃəli  hæpənd.

Her explanation sounded reasonable; it was probably the truth. No, by another of the Three Oaths, it was the truth. There were loopholes, though. Like not speaking the whole truth, or talking around it. The sisters might well have put themselves in danger so they could use the Power as a weapon, but Perrin would eat his boots if they had not also been thinking they could reach Rand before anybody else. What would have happened then was anyone's guess, but he was certain their plans had not included anything like what actually happened.

"hiz kʌmɪŋ," lɔɪəl sɛd sʌɾənli. "lʊk! ɹænd ɪz kʌmɪŋ." dʒɹɑpɪŋ tə ə wɪspɝ, hi æɾəd, "bi kɛɹfəl, pɛɹɪn." fəɹ ən oʊɡiɝ, ɪt tʃɹuli wɑz ə wɪspɝ. ɛɹæm ən kaɪɹunə pɹɑbli hɝd kwaɪt klɪɹli, ən meɪbi bɛɹə, bʌt sɝɾənli noʊ wʌn bɪsaɪdz. "ðeɪ dɪd nɑt swɛɹ ɛniθɪŋ tə ju!" hɪz vɔɪs wɛn bæk tə ɪts nɔɹməl bum. "du jə θɪŋk i maɪt tɔk tə mi əbaʊt wʌt wɛn ɑn ɪnsaɪd ðə kæmp? fəɹ maɪ bʊk." hi wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə bʊk əbaʊt ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, əɹ ət lis teɪkɪŋ noʊts fəɹ wʌn. "aɪ ɹɪli dɪdn si mʌtʃ wʌns ðə . . . ðə faɪɾɪŋ bɪɡæn." hi hæd bɪn ət pɛɹɪnz saɪɾ ɪn ðə θɪk ʌv ɪt, wildɪŋ ən æks wɪð ə hæf nɪɹli əz lɔŋ əz i wɑz tɔl; ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə teɪk noʊɾ ə mʌtʃ ɛls wən jə wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə steɪ əlaɪv. ɪf jə lɪsən tə lɔɪəl, jə wəd θɪŋk i wɑz ɔlweɪz sʌmwɛɹ ɛls wən θɪŋz bɪkeɪm deɪnʒɝəs. "du jə θɪŋk i maɪt, kaɪɹunə sədaɪ?"

"He's coming," Loial said suddenly. "Look! Rand is coming." Dropping to a whisper, he added, "Be careful, Perrin." For an Ogier, it truly was a whisper. Aram and Kiruna probably heard quite clearly, and maybe Bera, but certainly no one besides. "They did not swear anything to you!" His voice went back to its normal boom. "Do you think he might talk to me about what went on inside the camp? For my book." He was writing a book about the Dragon Reborn, or at least taking notes for one. "I really didn't see much once the . . . the fighting began." He had been at Perrin's side in the thick of it, wielding an axe with a haft nearly as long as he was tall; it was hard to take note of much else when you were trying to stay alive. If you listened to Loial, you would think he was always somewhere else when things became dangerous. "Do you think he might, Kiruna Sedai?"

kaɪɹunə ən bɛɹə ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks, ðən wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd ɡlaɪɾɪd əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹaʊn tə vɛɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz. piɹɪŋ æftɝ ðɛm, lɔɪəl hivd ə saɪ, ə wɪn θɹu kævɝnz.

Kiruna and Bera exchanged looks, then without a word glided across the ground to Verin and the others. Peering after them, Loial heaved a sigh, a wind through caverns.

"ju ɹɪli ʃəɾ əv ə kɛɹ, pɛɹɪn," hi bɹiðd. "jɔɹ ɔlweɪz soʊ heɪsti wɪð jəɹ tʌŋ." hi saʊndəd laɪk ə bʌmbəlɪbi ðə saɪz ʌv ə kæɾ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə mæstəf. pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i maɪt lɝn tə wɪspɝ jɛt, ɪf ðeɪ spɛn ɪnʌf taɪm ɝaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi moʊʃən ði oʊɡiɝ tə bi kwaɪət, ðoʊ, soʊ hi kəd lɪsən. ðə sɪstɝz bɪɡæn tɔkɪŋ ɹaɪɾ əweɪ, bʌt nɑɾ ə saʊn ɹitʃt pɛɹɪnz ɪɹz. klɪɹli ðeɪ hæɾ ɪɹɛktəɾ ə bæɹiɝ wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ.

"You really should have a care, Perrin," he breathed. "You're always so hasty with your tongue." He sounded like a bumblebee the size of a cat instead of a mastiff. Perrin thought he might learn to whisper yet, if they spent enough time around Aes Sedai. He motioned the Ogier to be quiet, though, so he could listen. The sisters began talking right away, but not a sound reached Perrin's ears. Clearly they had erected a barrier with the One Power.

klɪɹ tə ði æʃəmən əz wɛl. ðeɪ wɛn fɹəm laʊnʒɪŋ tə ʌp ɑn ðɛɹ toʊz ɪn ə hɑɹtbit, ɛvɹi laɪn ə ðɛm foʊkəst ɑn ðə sɪstɝz. nʌθɪŋ sɛd ðeɪ hæd teɪkən hoʊld ə seɪɾɪn, ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, bʌt pɛɹɪn wʊɾə weɪdʒɝd stɛpɝ ðeɪ hæd. baɪ dʒɛdwɪnz æŋɡɹi snɪɹ, hi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə juz ɪt, tu.

Clear to the Asha'man as well. They went from lounging to up on their toes in a heartbeat, every line of them focused on the sisters. Nothing said they had taken hold of saidin, the male half of the True Source, but Perrin would have wagered Stepper they had. By Gedwyn's angry sneer, he was ready to use it, too.

wʌtɛvɝ əbstʃɹʌkʃən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd ɹeɪzd, ðeɪ mʌst əv dʒɹɑpt ɪt. ðeɪ foʊldəd ðɛɹ hænz, tɝnɪŋ tə lʊk daʊn ðə sloʊp ɪn saɪləns. ɡlænsɪz pæst əmʌŋ ði æʃəmən, ən faɪnəli dʒɛdwɪn weɪvd əm bæk tə əpɛɹən ɪndələns. hi lʊk dɪsəpɔɪntɪd. ɡɹoʊlɪŋ ɪɹɪɾəbli, pɛɹɪn tɝn bæk tə lʊk bɪɑn ðə wæɡənz.

Whatever obstruction the Aes Sedai had raised, they must have dropped it. They folded their hands, turning to look down the slope in silence. Glances passed among the Asha'man, and finally Gedwyn waved them back to apparent indolence. He looked disappointed. Growling irritably, Perrin turned back to look beyond the wagons.

ɹænd wɑz stʃɹoʊlɪŋ ʌp ðə sloʊp wɪð mɪn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm, pæɾɪŋ əɹ hæn ən tɔkɪŋ wɪð hɝ. wʌns i θɹu bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən læft, ən ʃi dʌk hɝz tə də ðə seɪm, bɹʌʃɪŋ bæk dɑɹk ɹɪŋləts ðət hʌŋ tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz. jə maɪɾ əv θɔɾ ɪm ə kʌntʃɹimən aʊt wɪð ɪz ɡɝl. ɪksɛp ðəɾ i hæd bɛltəɾ ɑn ɪz sɔɹd, ən səmtaɪmz i ɹæn ɪz hæn daʊn ðə lɔŋ hɪlt. ən ɪksɛp fəɹ teɪm ɹaɪɾ əɾ ɪz ʌðɝ ʃoʊldɝ. ən ðə waɪz wʌnz fɑloʊɪŋ ɔlmoʊst əz kloʊs bɪhaɪnd. ən ðə ɹɪŋz ə meɪɾənz ən sɪswaɪəmən, kɛɹhinɪn ən minɝz ðət kəmpliɾəd ðə pɹəsɛʃən.

Rand was strolling up the slope with Min on his arm, patting her hand and talking with her. Once he threw back his head and laughed, and she ducked hers to do the same, brushing back dark ringlets that hung to her shoulders. You might have thought him a countryman out with his girl. Except that he had belted on his sword, and sometimes he ran his hand down the long hilt. And except for Taim right at his other shoulder. And the Wise Ones following almost as close behind. And the rings of Maidens and siswai'aman, Cairhienin and Mayeners that completed the procession.

wʌɾ ə ɹɪlif ðəɾ i wəd nɑɾ əv tə ɹaɪd daʊn ɪndə ðət ʃæmbəlz æftɝ ɔl; bʌɾ i niɾəd tə wɔɹn ɹænd əbaʊɾ ɔl ðə tæŋɡəld ɛnməɾiz i hæd sin ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. wʌt wəɾ i də ɪf ɹænd dɪd nɑt lɪsən? ɹænd hæd tʃeɪnʒd sɪns livɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, moʊst ʌv ɔl sɪns biɪŋ kɪdnæp baɪ kɔɪɹən ən ðət lɑt. noʊ. hi hæd tə bi seɪn.

What a relief that he would not have to ride down into that shambles after all; but he needed to warn Rand about all the tangled enmities he had seen this morning. What would he do if Rand did not listen? Rand had changed since leaving the Two Rivers, most of all since being kidnapped by Coiren and that lot. No. He had to be sane.

wən ɹænd ən mɪn ɛntɝd ðə wæɡən sɝkəl, moʊst ə ðə pɹəsɛʃən ɹɪmeɪn aʊtsaɪd, ðoʊ ðeɪ hɑɹdli keɪm əloʊn, bʌt wɪð kwaɪɾ ən əsɛmbli ɪn ɪts oʊn ɹaɪt.

When Rand and Min entered the wagon circle, most of the procession remained outside, though they hardly came alone, but with quite an assembly in its own right.

teɪm ʃæɾoʊd ɹænd, ʌv kɔɹs, dɑɹk ən slaɪtli hʊk-noʊzd ən wʌt pɛɹɪn səpoʊz moʊst wɪmən wəd kənsɪɾɝ ɡʊd-lʊkɪŋ. ə nʌmbɝ ə ðə meɪɾənz hæd sɝɾənli ɡɪvən ɪm sɛkən lʊks, ən θɝd; ðeɪ wɝ fɔɹwɝɾ əbaʊt ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ. əz teɪm stɛpt ɪnsaɪd, hi ɡlæns tə dʒɛdwɪn, hu ʃʊk ɪz hɛd dʒʌst ə hɛɹ. ə ɡɹɪmɑs flæʃt əkɹɔs teɪmz feɪs, ɡɔn əz sun əz ɪɾ əpɪɹd.

Taim shadowed Rand, of course, dark and slightly hook-nosed and what Perrin supposed most women would consider good-looking. A number of the Maidens had certainly given him second looks, and third; they were forward about that sort of thing. As Taim stepped inside, he glanced to Gedwyn, who shook his head just a hair. A grimace flashed across Taim's face, gone as soon as it appeared.

nændɛɹə ən səlɪn wɝ ɹaɪɾ ət ɹændz hilz, ikwəli ʌv kɔɹs, ən pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd ðeɪ dɪd nɑt bɹɪŋ twɛnti mɔɹ meɪɾənz. ðeɪ hɑɹdli sim tə lɛt ɹænd beɪð wɪθaʊt meɪɾənz ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə tʌb, ðət pɛɹɪn kəd si. hi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ɹænd pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɪt. itʃ hæɾ əɹ ʃoʊufə dʒɹeɪpt ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, bɛɹɪŋ ʃɔɹt hɛɹ kʌt wɪð ə teɪl ət ðə bæk. nændɛɹə wɑz ə sɪnjui wʊmən, hɛɹ mɔɹ ɡɹeɪ ðən jɛloʊ, bʌɾ əɹ tʌf fitʃɝz mænədʒ tə bi hænsəm ɪf nɑt bjuɾəfəl. səlɪn - wɪɹi, skɑɹd, lɛðɝi ən waɪt-hɛɹd - meɪd nændɛɹə lʊk pɹɪɾi ən ɔlmoʊst sɑft. ðeɪ ɡlænst ət ði æʃəmən, tu, wɪθaʊɾ ɪɡzækli simɪŋ tə, ðən skæn boʊθ ɡɹups ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ dʒʌst əz sɝkəmspɛkli. nændɛɹəz fɪŋɡɝz flæʃt meɪɾən hæntɔk. nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, pɛɹɪn wɪʃt i kəɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪt, bʌɾ ə meɪɾən wəd ɡɪv ʌp ðə spɪɹ tə mɛɹi ə toʊd bɪfɔɹ titʃɪŋ ðɛɹ hæntɔk tə ə mæn. eɪ meɪɾən pɛɹɪn hæd nɑt noʊɾəst, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ hilz əɡɛnst ə wæɡən ə fju peɪsɪz fɹəm dʒɛdwɪn, ænsɝd ðə seɪm weɪ, ən soʊ dɪɾ ənʌðɝ u əntɪl ðət moʊmən hæd bɪn pleɪɪŋ ət kæts kɹeɪɾəl wɪð ə spɪɹ-sɪstɝ nɪɹ ðə pɹɪznɝz.

Nandera and Sulin were right at Rand's heels, equally of course, and Perrin wondered they did not bring twenty more Maidens. They hardly seemed to let Rand bathe without Maidens guarding the tub, that Perrin could see. He did not understand why Rand put up with it. Each had her shoufa draped around her shoulders, baring short hair cut with a tail at the back. Nandera was a sinewy woman, hair more gray than yellow, but her tough features managed to be handsome if not beautiful. Sulin - wiry, scarred, leathery and white-haired - made Nandera look pretty and almost soft. They glanced at the Asha'man, too, without exactly seeming to, then scanned both groups of Aes Sedai just as circumspectly. Nandera's fingers flashed Maiden handtalk. Not for the first time, Perrin wished he could understand it, but a Maiden would give up the spear to marry a toad before teaching their handtalk to a man. A Maiden Perrin had not noticed, sitting on her heels against a wagon a few paces from Gedwyn, answered the same way, and so did another who until that moment had been playing at cat's cradle with a spear-sister near the prisoners.

æmɪz bɹɔt ðə waɪz wʌnz ɪn ən tʊk əm əsaɪd tə kənfɝ wɪð sɔɹɪliə ən ə fju ʌv ði ʌðɝz u hæd steɪɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə wæɡənz. dɪspaɪɾ ə feɪs tu jʌŋ fəɹ əɹ weɪst-lɔŋ waɪt hɛɹ, æmɪz wɑz ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt wʊmən, sɛkən əmʌŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz tə sɔɹɪliə. ðeɪ juz noʊ wʌn paʊɝ tʃɹɪks tə ʃil ðɛɹ tɔk, bʌt sɛvən əɹ eɪt meɪɾənz ɪmiɾiətli ɪnsɝkəld əm ən bɪɡæn sɪŋɪŋ sɔfli tə ðɛmsɛlvz. səm sæt, səm stʊd, səm skwɑɾɪd ɑn ðɛɹ hilz, itʃ baɪ hɝsɛlf, ən ɔl hæpənstæns. ɪf jə wɝ ə ful.

Amys brought the Wise Ones in and took them aside to confer with Sorilea and a few of the others who had stayed inside the wagons. Despite a face too young for her waist-long white hair, Amys was an important woman, second among the Wise Ones to Sorilea. They used no One Power tricks to shield their talk, but seven or eight Maidens immediately encircled them and began singing softly to themselves. Some sat, some stood, some squatted on their heels, each by herself, and all happenstance. If you were a fool.

ɪt sim tə pɛɹɪn ðəɾ i saɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil sɪns i bɪkeɪm mɪkst ʌp wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ ən waɪz wʌnz. meɪɾənz, tu. wɪmən ɪn dʒɛnɝəl dʒʌst sim tə ɡɪv ɪm fɪts ə leɪt.

It seemed to Perrin that he sighed a great deal since he became mixed up with Aes Sedai and Wise Ones. Maidens, too. Women in general just seemed to give him fits of late.

dɑbɹeɪn ən heɪvin, liɾɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ən maɪnəs ðɛɹ soʊlʒɝz, bɹɔɾ ʌp ðə ɹɪɹ. heɪvin hæd faɪnəli sin ə bæɾəl; pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ i wəd bi soʊ iɡɝ tə si ðə nɛkst. əbaʊt ðə seɪm eɪdʒ əz pɛɹɪn, hi dɪd nɑt lʊk əz jʌŋ tədeɪ əz ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ jɛstɝdeɪ. dɑbɹeɪn, wɪð ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz lɔŋ, moʊsli ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ ʃeɪvd ɪn ðə staɪl ə kɛɹhinɪn soʊlʒɝz, dɛfənətli wɑz nɑt jʌŋ, ən jɛstɝdeɪ dɛfənətli hæd nɑt bɪn ɪz fɝs bæɾəl, jɛt ðə tʃɹuθ wɑz, hi lʊkt oʊldɝ tu, ən wɝid. soʊ dɪd heɪvin. ðɛɹ aɪz sɔɾ aʊt pɛɹɪn.

Dobraine and Havien, leading their horses and minus their soldiers, brought up the rear. Havien had finally seen a battle; Perrin wondered whether he would be so eager to see the next. About the same age as Perrin, he did not look as young today as the day before yesterday. Dobraine, with the front of his long, mostly gray hair shaved in the style of Cairhienin soldiers, definitely was not young, and yesterday definitely had not been his first battle, yet the truth was, he looked older too, and worried. So did Havien. Their eyes sought out Perrin.

ənʌðɝ taɪm, hi wʊɾə weɪɾəd tə si wʌt ðeɪ wɑntəd tə tɔk əbaʊt, bʌt naʊ hi slɪp fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl, tɔst stɛpɝz ɹeɪnz tə ɛɹæm, ən wɛn tə ɹænd. ʌðɝz wɝ ðəɹ əhɛɾ ə hɪm. oʊnli səlɪn ən nændɛɹə hɛl ðɛɹ saɪləns.

Another time, he would have waited to see what they wanted to talk about, but now he slipped from his saddle, tossed Stepper's reins to Aram, and went to Rand. Others were there ahead of him. Only Sulin and Nandera held their silence.

kaɪɹunə ən bɛɹə hæd muv ðə moʊmən ɹænd stɛpt ɪnsaɪd ðə wæɡənz, ən əz pɛɹɪn əpɹoʊtʃt, kaɪɹunə wɑz seɪɪŋ ɡɹænli tə ɹænd, "ju ɹəfjuz hilɪŋ jɛstɝdeɪ, bʌɾ ɛniwʌn kən si jə ɑɹ stɪl ɪn peɪn, ivən ɪf ɑlɑnə wɑz nɑt ɹɛɾi tə lip aʊɾ ə hɝ - " ʃi kʌɾ ɔf əz bɛɹə tʌtʃt əɹ ɑɹm, bʌt ʃi pɪkt ʌp əɡɛn ɔlmoʊst wɪθaʊt pɔz. "pɝhæps jə ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə bi hil naʊ?" ðət hæd ðə saʊn ʌv "pɝhæps juv kʌm tə jəɹ ful sɛnsɪz?"

Kiruna and Bera had moved the moment Rand stepped inside the wagons, and as Perrin approached, Kiruna was saying grandly to Rand, "You refused Healing yesterday, but anyone can see you are still in pain, even if Alanna was not ready to leap out of her - " She cut off as Bera touched her arm, but she picked up again almost without pause. "Perhaps you are ready to be Healed now?" That had the sound of "Perhaps you have come to your fool senses?"

"ðə mæɾɝ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ mʌs bi sɛɾəld wɪθaʊɾ ɛni mɔɹ dɪleɪ, kɑɹəkɑɹn," æmɪz sɛd fɔɹməli, ɹaɪɾ ətɑp kaɪɹunə.

"The matter of the Aes Sedai must be settled without any more delay, Car'a'carn," Amys said formally, right atop Kiruna.

"ðeɪ ʃəd bi ɡɪvən ɪndə əɹ kɛɹ, ɹænd ælθɹ," sɔɹɪliə æɾəd ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðət teɪm spoʊk.

"They should be given into our care, Rand al'Thor," Sorilea added at the same time that Taim spoke.

"ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹɑbləm dʌz nid tə bi sɛɾəld, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. maɪ æʃəmən noʊ haʊ tə hændəl ðɛm. ðeɪ kəd bi hɛld ət ðə blæk taʊɝ izəli." dɑɹk, slaɪtli tɪltəɾ aɪz flɪkɝd təwɔɹd kaɪɹunə ən bɛɹə, ən pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd wɪð ə ʃɑk ðət teɪm mɛn ɔl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, nɑt dʒʌs ðoʊz u wɝ pɹɪznɝz naʊ. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ðoʊ æmɪz ən sɔɹɪliə fɹaʊn ət teɪm, ðə lʊks ðeɪ dɝɛktəɾ ət ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ mɛn ðə seɪm.

"The Aes Sedai problem does need to be settled, my Lord Dragon. My Asha'man know how to handle them. They could be held at the Black Tower easily." Dark, slightly tilted eyes flickered toward Kiruna and Bera, and Perrin realized with a shock that Taim meant all the Aes Sedai, not just those who were prisoners now. For that matter, though Amys and Sorilea frowned at Taim, the looks they directed at the two Aes Sedai meant the same.

kaɪɹunə smaɪld ət teɪm, ət ðə waɪz wʌnz, ə θɪn smaɪl tə fɪɾ əɹ lɪps. ɪt wɑz meɪbi ə fɹækʃən hɑɹɾɝ wən dɝɛktəɾ ət ðə mæn ɪn ðə blæk koʊt, bʌt ʃi sim nɑt tə ɹilaɪz ɪz ɪntɛn jɛt. ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf ðəɾ i wɑz u hi wɑz. wʌɾ i wɑz. "ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz," ʃi sɛd kuli, "aɪ æm sɝɾən ðət kɔɪɹən sədaɪ ən ði ʌðɝz wɪl ɡɪmi ðɛɹ pɝoʊl. juv noʊ mɔɹ nid tə wɝi - "

Kiruna smiled at Taim, at the Wise Ones, a thin smile to fit her lips. It was maybe a fraction harder when directed at the man in the black coat, but she seemed not to realize his intent yet. It was enough that he was who he was. What he was. "Under the circumstances," she said coolly, "I am certain that Coiren Sedai and the others will give me their parole. You have no more need to worry - "

ði ʌðɝz spoʊk ɔl ət wʌns.

The others spoke all at once.

"ðiz wɪmən əv noʊ ɑnɝ," æmɪz sɛd kəntɛmptʃwəsli, ən ðɪs taɪm ɪt wɑz klɪɹ ʃi ɪnkluɾəd ɔl ə ðɛm. "haʊ kəd ðɛɹ pɝoʊl min ɛniθɪŋ? ðeɪ - "

"These women have no honor," Amys said contemptuously, and this time it was clear she included all of them. "How could their parole mean anything? They - "

"ðeɪ ɑɹ dætsæŋ," sɔɹɪliə sɛɾ ɪn ə ɡɹɪm vɔɪs, əz ðoʊ pɹənaʊnsɪŋ sɛntəns, ən bɛɹə fɹaʊn ət hɝ. pɛɹɪn θɔt ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ - əɡɛn, ðə wɝd simd ɔlmoʊst sʌmθɪŋ i ʃəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz - bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt noʊ waɪ ɪt ʃəd meɪk ði ɛɛs sədaɪ skaʊl. əɹ waɪ səlɪn ʃəd sʌɾənli nɑɾ əɡɹimənt wɪð ðə waɪz wʌn, hu wɛn ɑn laɪk ə boʊldɝ ɹʌmbəlɪŋ daʊnhɪl. "ðeɪ dɪzɝv noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ - "

"They are da'tsang," Sorilea said in a grim voice, as though pronouncing sentence, and Bera frowned at her. Perrin thought that was something in the Old Tongue - again, the word seemed almost something he should recognize - but he did not know why it should make the Aes Sedai scowl. Or why Sulin should suddenly nod agreement with the Wise One, who went on like a boulder rumbling downhill. "They deserve no better than any other - "

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," teɪm sɛd, əz ɪf bɪleɪbɝɪŋ ði ɑbviəs, "ʃʊɹli jə wɑn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɔl ə ðɛm, ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ ə ðoʊz jə tʃɹʌst, ðoʊz jə noʊ kən dil wɪð ðɛm, ən u bɛɾɝ - ?"

"My Lord Dragon," Taim said, as if belaboring the obvious, "surely you want the Aes Sedai, all of them, in charge of those you trust, those you know can deal with them, and who better - ?"

"ɪnʌf!" ɹænd ʃaʊɾəd.

"Enough!" Rand shouted.

ðeɪ fɛl saɪlən əz wʌn, bʌt ðɛɹ ɹiækʃənz wɝ vɛɹi dɪfɹənt. teɪmz fitʃɝz wɛn blæŋk, ðoʊ hi smɛld ə fjʊɹi. æmɪz ən sɔɹɪliə ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz ən ədʒʌstəd ðɛɹ ʃɔlz ɪn nɪɹ junəsən; ðɛɹ sɛns wɝ aɪdɛntɪkəl, tu, ən mætʃt ðɛɹ feɪsəz ɪn pjʊɹ dɪtɝməneɪʃən. ðeɪ wɑntəd wʌt ðeɪ wɑntəɾ ən ɪntɛndəd tə hæv ɪt, kɑɹəkɑɹn əɹ noʊ. lʊks pæs bɪtwin kaɪɹunə ən bɛɹə, əz wɛl, spikɪŋ sətʃ vɑljumz ðət pɛɹɪn wɪʃt i kəd ɹiɾ əm ðə weɪ hɪz noʊz ɹɛd sɛnt. hɪz aɪz sɔ tu sɝin ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪn kəmæn ə ðɛmsɛlvz ən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ðeɪ wɪʃt tə bi ɪn kəmæn ʌv; hɪz noʊz smɛl tu wɪmən u wɝ æŋkʃəs, ən mɔɹ ðən ə lɪɾəl əfɹeɪd. ʌv teɪm, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ. ðeɪ stɪl sim tə θɪŋk ðeɪ kəd dil wɪð ɹænd, wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ, ən wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz, bʌt teɪm ən ði æʃəmən pʊt ðə fɪɹ ə ðə laɪɾ ɪndə ðɛm.

They fell silent as one, but their reactions were very different. Taim's features went blank, though he smelled of fury. Amys and Sorilea exchanged glances and adjusted their shawls in near unison; their scents were identical, too, and matched their faces in pure determination. They wanted what they wanted and intended to have it, Car'a'carn or no. Looks passed between Kiruna and Bera, as well, speaking such volumes that Perrin wished he could read them the way his nose read scent. His eyes saw two serene Aes Sedai, in command of themselves and anything else they wished to be in command of; his nose smelled two women who were anxious, and more than a little afraid. Of Taim, he was sure. They still seemed to think they could deal with Rand, one way or another, and with the Wise Ones, but Taim and the Asha'man put the fear of the Light into them.

mɪn tʌɡd ət ɹændz ʃɝtsliv - ʃi hæd bɪn stʌɾiɪŋ ɛvɹibɑɾi ət wʌns, ən ðə sɛn ə hɝ wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz wɝiɾ əz ðə sɪstɝz'. hi pæɾəd əɹ hænd waɪl ɡlɛɹɪŋ hɑɹɾ əɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. ɪnkluɾɪŋ pɛɹɪn, wən i oʊpən ɪz maʊθ. ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪn ðə kæmp wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ, fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹɪznɝz, ðoʊ oʊnli ə fju il stʊd kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ ɛniθɪŋ. pipəl maɪt wɑtʃ ɹænd, bʌt ðeɪ tɛndəd tə steɪ klɪɹ ə hɪm, tu, ɪf ðeɪ kʊd.

Min tugged at Rand's shirtsleeve - she had been studying everybody at once, and the scent of her was almost as worried as the sisters'. He patted her hand while glaring hard at everyone else. Including Perrin, when he opened his mouth. Everybody in the camp was watching, from the Two Rivers men to the Aes Sedai prisoners, though only a few Aiel stood close enough to hear anything. People might watch Rand, but they tended to stay clear of him, too, if they could.

"ðə waɪz wʌnz wɪl teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ ə ðə pɹɪznɝz," ɹænd sɛɾ ət læst, ən sɔɹɪliə sʌɾənli smɛl soʊ sæɾəsfaɪd ðət pɛɹɪn nʌkəld ɪz noʊz vɪɡɝəsli. teɪm ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ɛksæspɝeɪʃən, bʌt ɹænd ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ɪm bɪfɔɹ i kəd spik. hi hæd tʌkt ə θʌm bɪhaɪn ðə bʌkəl ə hɪz sɔɹd bɛlt, ə dʒɹæɡən ɛtʃt ən ɡɪldɪd, ən ɪz nʌkəlz wɝ waɪt fɹəm ɡɹɪpɪŋ ɪt; hɪz ʌðɝ hænd wɝkt ɑn ðə dɑɹk bɔɹhaɪɾ ə hɪz sɔɹd hɪlt. "ði æʃəmən ɑɹ səpoʊz tə tʃɹeɪn - ən ɹəkɹut - nɑt stænd ɡɑɹd. ɪspɛʃli ɑn ɛɛs sədaɪ." pɛɹɪnz hækəlz stɝɾ əz i ɹilaɪzd wʌɾ ɝoʊmə wɑftɪd fɹəm ɹænd wən i lʊkt ət teɪm. heɪtʃɹəd, tʌtʃt wɪð fɪɹ. laɪt, hi hæd tə bi seɪn.

"The Wise Ones will take charge of the prisoners," Rand said at last, and Sorilea suddenly smelled so satisfied that Perrin knuckled his nose vigorously. Taim shook his head in exasperation, but Rand rounded on him before he could speak. He had tucked a thumb behind the buckle of his sword belt, a Dragon etched and gilded, and his knuckles were white from gripping it; his other hand worked on the dark boarhide of his sword hilt. "The Asha'man are supposed to train - and recruit - not stand guard. Especially on Aes Sedai." Perrin's hackles stirred as he realized what aroma wafted from Rand when he looked at Taim. Hatred, touched with fear. Light, he had to be sane.

teɪm ɡeɪv ə ʃɔɹt, ɹɪlʌktənt nɑd. "æz jə kəmænd, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən." mɪn ɡlænst ənizəli ət ðə blæk-koʊɾəd mæn ən muv kloʊsɝ tə ɹænd.

Taim gave a short, reluctant nod. "As you command, my Lord Dragon." Min glanced uneasily at the black-coated man and moved closer to Rand.

kaɪɹunə smɛld ə ɹɪlif, bʌt wɪð wʌn læst ɡlæns ət bɛɹə, ʃi dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp ɪn stʌbɝn sɝɾənti. "ðiz il wɪmən ɑɹ kwaɪt wɝði - səm maɪɾ əv dʌn wɛl, hæd ðeɪ kʌm tə ðə taʊɝ - bʌt jə kænɑt sɪmpli hæn ɛɛs sədaɪ oʊvɝ tə ðɛm. ɪts ənθɪŋkəbəl! bɛɹə sədaɪ ən əl - "

Kiruna smelled of relief, but with one last glance at Bera, she drew herself up in stubborn certainty. "These Aiel women are quite worthy - some might have done well, had they come to the Tower - but you cannot simply hand Aes Sedai over to them. It is unthinkable! Bera Sedai and I will - "

ɹænd ɹeɪzd ə hænd, ən əɹ wɝdz stɑpt ɪn ðɛɹ tʃɹæks. meɪbi ɪt wɑz ɪz stɛɹ, laɪk blu-ɡɹeɪ stoʊn. əɹ meɪbi ɪt wɑz wʌt ʃoʊd klɪɹli θɹu hɪz tɔɹn sliv, wʌn ə ðə ɹɛd-ænd-ɡoʊl dʒɹæɡənz ðət waʊn ɝaʊn ɪz fɹɑɹmz. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɡlɪɾɝd ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪt. "dɪd jə swɛɹ fiəlti tə mi?" kaɪɹunəz aɪz pɑpt əz ðoʊ sʌmθɪŋ hæd stʃɹʌk əɹ ɪn ðə pɪɾ ə hɝ stʌmək.

Rand raised a hand, and her words stopped in their tracks. Maybe it was his stare, like blue-gray stone. Or maybe it was what showed clearly through his torn sleeve, one of the red-and-gold Dragons that wound around his forearms. The Dragon glittered in the sunlight. "Did you swear fealty to me?" Kiruna's eyes popped as though something had struck her in the pit of her stomach.

æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃi nɑɾəd, haʊɛvɝ ənwɪlɪŋli. ʃi lʊkt əz dɪs-bɪlivɪŋ naʊ əz ʃi hæd ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ, wən ʃi nɛl daʊn ðəɹ baɪ ðə wɛlz ət bæɾəlz ɛn ən swɔɹ bɪniθ ðə laɪɾ ən baɪ hɝ hoʊp ə sælveɪʃən ən ɹibɝθ tə oʊbeɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ən sɝv ɪm əntɪl ðə læs bæɾəl hæd kʌm ən ɡɔn. pɛɹɪn ʌndɝstʊɾ əɹ ʃɑk. ivən wɪθaʊt ðə θɹi oʊðz, hæd ʃi dɪnaɪɾ ɪt, hi wʊɾə daʊɾɪd ɪz oʊn mɛmɹiz. naɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑn ðɛɹ niz, feɪsəz əɡæst ət ðə wɝdz kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ maʊðz, ɹikɪŋ ə dɪsbɪlif. ɹaɪt naʊ bɛɹəz maʊθ wɑz pʌkɝɾ ʌp əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd bɪɾən ə bæd plʌm.

After a moment, she nodded, however unwillingly. She looked as dis-believing now as she had the day before, when she knelt down there by the wells at battle's end and swore beneath the Light and by her hope of salvation and rebirth to obey the Dragon Reborn and serve him until the Last Battle had come and gone. Perrin understood her shock. Even without the Three Oaths, had she denied it, he would have doubted his own memories. Nine Aes Sedai on their knees, faces aghast at the words coming out of their mouths, reeking of disbelief. Right now Bera's mouth was puckered up as though she had bitten a bad plum.

ən il mæn dʒɔɪn ðə smɔl ɡɹup, ə tɔl mæn əbaʊt ðə seɪm haɪɾ əz ɹænd, wɪð ə wɛðɝd feɪs ən tʌtʃəz ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn ɪz dɑɹk ɹɛd hɛɹ, hu nɑɾəd tə pɛɹɪn ən tʌtʃt æmɪz' hæn laɪtli. ʃi maɪɾ əv pɹɛst ɪz hæn fəɹ ə moʊmən ɪn ɹɪtɝn. ɹəɑɹk wɑz əɹ hʌzbənd, bʌt ðət wɑz əbaʊɾ əz mʌtʃ əfɛkʃən əz il dɪspleɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ʌðɝz. hi wɑz ɔlsoʊ klæn tʃif ə ðə tɑɹdæɾ il - hi ən ɡɔl wɝ ði oʊnli tu mɛn u dɪd nɑt wɛɹ ðə sɪswaɪəmən hɛdbænd - ən sɪns læs naɪɾ i ən ə θaʊzən spɪɹz hæd bɪn aʊt skaʊɾɪŋ ɪn fɔɹs.

An Aiel man joined the small group, a tall man about the same height as Rand, with a weathered face and touches of gray in his dark red hair, who nodded to Perrin and touched Amys' hand lightly. She might have pressed his hand for a moment in return. Rhuarc was her husband, but that was about as much affection as Aiel displayed in front of others. He was also clan chief of the Taardad Aiel - he and Gaul were the only two men who did not wear the siswai'aman headband - and since last night he and a thousand spears had been out scouting in force.

ə blaɪn mæn ɪn ənʌðɝ kʌntʃɹi cʊɾə sɛns ðə tɛmpɝ ɝaʊn ɹænd, ən ɹəɑɹk wɑz noʊ ful. "ɪz ðɪs ðə ɹaɪt moʊmənt, ɹænd ælθɹ?" wən ɹænd moʊʃən ɪm tə spik, hi wɛn ɑn. "ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ dɑɡz ɑɹ stɪl fliɪŋ ist əz fæst əz ðeɪ kən ɹʌn. aɪ sɔ mɛn wɪð ɡɹin koʊts ɑn hɔɹsəz tə ðə nɔɹθ, bʌt ðeɪ əvɔɪɾəd ʌs, ən jə sɛd tə lɛɾ əm ɡoʊ ənlɛs ðeɪ ɡeɪv tʃɹʌbəl. aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ wɝ hʌntɪŋ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ hu ɪskeɪpt. ðəɹ wɝ sɛvɹəl wɪmən wɪð ðɛm." koʊl blu aɪz ɡlænst ət ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ, ænvəl flæɾ ən ænvəl hɑɹd. wʌns, ɹəɑɹk hæd wɔk laɪtli ɝaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ - ɛni il hæd - bʌt ðət hæɾ ɛndəd jɛstɝdeɪ, ɪf nɑt bɪfɔɹ.

A blind man in another country could have sensed the temper around Rand, and Rhuarc was no fool. "Is this the right moment, Rand al'Thor?" When Rand motioned him to speak, he went on. "The Shaido dogs are still fleeing east as fast as they can run. I saw men with green coats on horses to the north, but they avoided us, and you said to let them go unless they gave trouble. I think they were hunting any Aes Sedai who escaped. There were several women with them." Cold blue eyes glanced at the two Aes Sedai, anvil flat and anvil hard. Once, Rhuarc had walked lightly around Aes Sedai - any Aiel had - but that had ended yesterday, if not before.

"ɡʊd nuz. aɪd ɡɪv ɔlmoʊst ɛniθɪŋ tə hæv ɡəlinə, bʌt stɪl, ɡʊd nuz." ɹænd tʌtʃt ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹɾ əɡɛn, iz ðə bleɪɾ ɪn ɪts dɑɹk skæbɝd. ði ækʃən simd ʌnkɑnʃəs. ɡəlinə, ə ɹɛd, hæd bɪn ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ ə ðə sɪstɝz u hɛld ɪm pɹɪznɝ, ən ɪf i wɑz kɑm əbaʊɾ əɹ tədeɪ, jɛstɝdeɪ hi hæd bɪn ɪn ə fjʊɹi ðət ʃi hæd ɡɑɾən əweɪ. ivən naʊ hɪz kɑm wɑz aɪsi, ðə sɔɹt ðət kəd haɪd smoʊldɝɪŋ ɹeɪdʒ, ən ɪz sɛn meɪd pɛɹɪnz skɪn kɹɔl. "ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə peɪ. ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm." ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə seɪ wɛðɝ ɹænd mɛn ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ əɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæɾ ɪskeɪpt əɹ boʊθ.

"Good news. I'd give almost anything to have Galina, but still, good news." Rand touched the hilt of his sword again, eased the blade in its dark scabbard. The action seemed unconscious. Galina, a Red, had been in charge of the sisters who held him prisoner, and if he was calm about her today, yesterday he had been in a fury that she had gotten away. Even now his calm was icy, the sort that could hide smoldering rage, and his scent made Perrin's skin crawl. "They are going to pay. Every one of them." There was nothing to say whether Rand meant the Shaido or the Aes Sedai who had escaped or both.

bɛɹə muvd əɹ hɛɾ ənizəli, ən i tɝn ɪz ətɛnʃən bæk tə hɝ ən kaɪɹunə. "ju swɔɹ fiəlti, ən aɪ tʃɹʌs ðæt." hi hɛld ʌp ɪz hænd, θʌm ən fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ nɪɹli tʌtʃɪŋ tə ʃoʊ haʊ fɑɹ. "ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlweɪz noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən ɛnibəɾi ɛls, əɹ soʊ ðeɪ θɪŋk. soʊ aɪ tʃɹʌs jə tə də wʌɾ aɪ seɪ, bʌt jə woʊn soʊ mʌtʃ əz teɪk ə bæθ wɪθaʊt maɪ pɝmɪʃən. əɹ ə waɪz wʌnz."

Bera moved her head uneasily, and he turned his attention back to her and Kiruna. "You swore fealty, and I trust that." He held up his hand, thumb and forefinger nearly touching to show how far. "Aes Sedai always know better than anybody else, or so they think. So I trust you to do what I say, but you won't so much as take a bath without my permission. Or a Wise One's."

ðɪs taɪm ɪt wɑz bɛɹə hu lʊkt əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd bɪn stʃɹʌk. hɝ laɪt bɹaʊn aɪz swɪvəl tə æmɪz ən sɔɹɪliə wɪð əstɑnɪʃt ɪndɪɡneɪʃən, ən kaɪɹunə kwɪvɝd wɪð ði ɛfɝɾ ə nɑt duɪŋ ðə seɪm. ðə tu waɪz wʌnz mɪɹli ʃɪftəd ðɛɹ ʃɔlz, bʌt wʌns əɡɛn ðɛɹ ɝoʊməz wɝ aɪdɛntɪkəl. kəntɛnmənt ɹoʊld ɔf ə ðɛm ɪn weɪvz, ə vɛɹi ɡɹɪm kəntɛnmənt. pɛɹɪn θɔɾ ɪɾ ə ɡʊd θɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑɾ əv ɪz noʊz, əɹ ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn ɹɛɾi tə ɡoʊ tə wɔɹ ɹaɪt ðən ən ðɛɹ. əɹ meɪbi ɹʌn, ən dɪɡnəɾi bi hæŋd. ðət wɑz wʌɾ i wəɾ əv dʌn.

This time it was Bera who looked as though she had been struck. Her light brown eyes swiveled to Amys and Sorilea with astonished indignation, and Kiruna quivered with the effort of not doing the same. The two Wise Ones merely shifted their shawls, but once again their aromas were identical. Contentment rolled off of them in waves, a very grim contentment. Perrin thought it a good thing the Aes Sedai did not have his nose, or they would have been ready to go to war right then and there. Or maybe run, and dignity be hanged. That was what he would have done.

ɹəɑɹk stʊd ðəɹ aɪdli ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ðə pɔɪn ʌv wʌn ə hɪz ʃɔɹt spɪɹz. ðɪs wɑz waɪz wʌnz' bɪznəs, ən i ɔlweɪz sɛɾ i dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wʌt ðə waɪz wʌnz dɪd soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ kɛp ðɛɹ fɪŋɡɝz aʊɾ ə klæn tʃifs' bɪznəs. bʌt teɪm. . . . hi meɪɾ ə ʃoʊ ʌv nɑt kɛɹɪŋ, foʊldɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz ən lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə kæmp wɪð ə bɔɹɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən, jɛɾ ɪz sɛnt wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒ, kɑmplɛks. pɛɹɪn wʊɾə sɛd ðə mæn wɑz əmjuzd, dɛfənətli ɪn ə bɛɾɝ hjumɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ.

Rhuarc stood there idly examining the point of one of his short spears. This was Wise Ones' business, and he always said he did not care what the Wise Ones did so long as they kept their fingers out of clan chiefs' business. But Taim. . . . He made a show of not caring, folding his arms and looking around the camp with a bored expression, yet his scent was strange, complex. Perrin would have said the man was amused, definitely in a better humor than before.

"ði oʊθ wi tʊk," bɛɹə sɛɾ ət læst, plæntɪŋ əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ æmpəl hɪps, "ɪz səfɪʃən tə hoʊld ɛniwʌn bʌɾ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd." ðə twɪst ʃi ɡeɪv tə "oʊθ" wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz blik əz ðə wʌn ʃi ɡeɪv "dɑɹkfɹɛnd." noʊ, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt laɪk wʌt ðeɪ hæd swɔɹn tə. "du jə dɛɹ tə əkjuz əs - ?"

"The oath we took," Bera said at last, planting her hands on her ample hips, "is sufficient to hold anyone but a Darkfriend." The twist she gave to "oath" was almost as bleak as the one she gave "Darkfriend." No, they did not like what they had sworn to. "Do you dare to accuse us - ?"

"ɪf aɪ θɔt ðæt," ɹænd snæpt, "ju wəd bi ɑn jəɹ weɪ tə ðə blæk taʊɝ wɪð teɪm. jə swɔɹ tə oʊbeɪ. wɛl, oʊbeɪ!"

"If I thought that," Rand snapped, "you would be on your way to the Black Tower with Taim. You swore to obey. Well, obey!"

fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmən bɛɹə hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən ɪn ən ɪnstənt wɑz əz ɹiɡəl fɹəm hɛd tə toʊ əz ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd bi. wɪtʃ wɑz seɪɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd meɪk ə kwin ɑn əɹ θɹoʊn lʊk ə slæɾɝn. ʃi kɝtsid slaɪtli, stɪfli ɪnklaɪnɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ə fɹækʃən.

For a long moment Bera hesitated, then in an instant was as regal from head to toe as any Aes Sedai could be. Which was saying something. An Aes Sedai could make a queen on her throne look a slattern. She curtsied slightly, stiffly inclining her head a fraction.

kaɪɹunə, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, meɪɾ ə vɪzəbəl ɛfɝt tə teɪk hoʊld ə hɝsɛlf, ðə kɑm ʃi əsum hɑɹɾ ən bɹɪɾəl əz əɹ vɔɪs. "mʌst wi ðən ɹɪkwɛs pɝmɪʃən ə ðiz wɝði ilwɪmən tə æsk wɛðɝ jə ɑɹ wɪlɪŋ tə bi hil jɛt? aɪ noʊ ɡəlinə tʃɹiɾəd jə hɑɹʃli. aɪ noʊ jə ɑɹ wɛls fɹəm ʃoʊldɝz tə niz. æksɛp hilɪŋ. pliz." ivən "pliz" saʊndəd pɑɹɾ ʌv ən ɔɹɾɝ.

Kiruna, on the other hand, made a visible effort to take hold of herself, the calm she assumed hard and brittle as her voice. "Must we then request permission of these worthy Aielwomen to ask whether you are willing to be Healed yet? I know Galina treated you harshly. I know you are welts from shoulders to knees. Accept Healing. Please." Even "please" sounded part of an order.

mɪn stɝɾ ət ɹændz saɪd. "ju ʃəd bi ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ ɪt, əz aɪ wɑz, ʃifɝɾɝ. jə doʊn laɪk hɝɾɪŋ. sʌmbɑɾi hæz tə də ɪt, əɹ ɛls . . ." ʃi ɡɹɪn məstʃivjəsli, vɛɹi nɪɹli ðə mɪn pɛɹɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝd fɹəm bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz kɪdnæpt. ". . . əɹ ɛls jə woʊn bi eɪbəl tə sɪɾ ə sæɾəl."

Min stirred at Rand's side. "You should be grateful for it, as I was, sheepherder. You don't like hurting. Somebody has to do it, or else . . ." She grinned mischievously, very nearly the Min Perrin remembered from before she was kidnapped. ". . . or else you won't be able to sit a saddle."

"jʌŋ mɛn ən fulz," nændɛɹə sɛd sʌɾənli tə noʊ wʌn ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ, "səmtaɪmz bɛɹ peɪn ðeɪ də nɑɾ əv tə əz ə bædʒ ə ðɛɹ pɹaɪd. ən ðɛɹ fulɪʃnəs."

"Young men and fools," Nandera said suddenly to no one in particular, "sometimes bear pain they do not have to as a badge of their pride. And their foolishness."

"ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn," səlɪn æɾəd dʒɹaɪli, ɔlsoʊ tə ði ɛɹ, "ɪz nɑɾ ə ful. aɪ θɪŋk."

"The Car'a'carn," Sulin added dryly, also to the air, "is not a fool. I think."

ɹænd smaɪl bæk ət mɪn fɑnli, ən ɡeɪv nændɛɹə ən səlɪn ɹaɪ lʊks, bʌt wən i ɹeɪzd ɪz aɪz tə kaɪɹunə əɡɛn, ðeɪ wɝ stoʊn wʌns mɔɹ. "vɛɹi wɛl." əz ʃi stɑɹɾəd fɔɹwɝd, hi æɾəd, "bʌt nɑt fɹəm ju." hɝ feɪs ɡɹu soʊ stɪf ɪɾ əpɪɹd ɹɛɾi tə kɹæk. teɪmz maʊθ kwɝkt ɪn ə ɹaɪ ɔlmoʊst-smaɪl, ən i stɛp təwɔɹd ɹænd, bʌt wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz fɹəm kaɪɹunə, ɹænd flʌŋ aʊɾ ə hæn bɪhaɪn hɪm. "fɹʌm hɝ. kʌm hɪɹ, ɑlɑnə."

Rand smiled back at Min fondly, and gave Nandera and Sulin wry looks, but when he raised his eyes to Kiruna again, they were stone once more. "Very well." As she started forward, he added, "But not from you." Her face grew so stiff it appeared ready to crack. Taim's mouth quirked in a wry almost-smile, and he stepped toward Rand, but without taking his eyes from Kiruna, Rand flung out a hand behind him. "From her. Come here, Alanna."

pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. ɹænd hæd pɔɪntəd stʃɹeɪt tə ɑlɑnə wɪð nɛvɝ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə ɡlæns. ðət pɹɪkəl sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt wʌt. ɪt sim tə kætʃ teɪm, əz wɛl. ðə mænz feɪs bɪkeɪm ə blæn mæsk, jɛt dɑɹk aɪz flɪkɝd bɪtwin ɹænd ən ɑlɑnə, ən ði oʊnli neɪm pɛɹɪn kəd pʊt tə ðə sɛn ðət ɹɪθd ɪn ɪz noʊz wɑz "pʌzəld."

Perrin gave a start. Rand had pointed straight to Alanna with never so much as a glance. That prickled something in the back of his head, but he could not make out what. It seemed to catch Taim, as well. The man's face became a bland mask, yet dark eyes flickered between Rand and Alanna, and the only name Perrin could put to the scent that writhed in his nose was "puzzled."

ɑlɑnə ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, tu. fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ ɹizən, ʃi hæd bɪn ɑn ɛdʒ ɛvɝ sɪns dʒɔɪnɪŋ pɛɹɪn ɑn ɪz weɪ hɪɹ, hɝ sɝɛnəɾi ət bɛst ə θɪn vənɪɹ. naʊ ʃi smuðd əɹ skɝts, ʃɑɾ ə dɪfaɪən stɛɹ ət kaɪɹunə ən bɛɹə ʌv ɔl pipəl, ən ɡlaɪɾɪd ɝaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə ɹænd. ði ʌðɝ tu sɪstɝz wɑtʃt hɝ, laɪk titʃɝz ɪntɛndɪŋ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ə pjupəl pɝfɔɹmd wɛl ən stɪl nɑt kənvɪnst ʃi wʊd. wɪtʃ meɪd noʊ sɛns. wʌn ə ðɛm maɪt bi ðə liɾɝ, jɛɾ ɑlɑnə wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə seɪm əz ðeɪ. ɪɾ ɔl dipən pɛɹɪnz səspɪʃən. mɪksɪŋ wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz tu mʌtʃ laɪk weɪɾɪŋ ðə stʃɹimz ɪn ðə wɔɾɝwʊd nɪɹ tə ðə maɪɹ. haʊɛvɝ pisfəl ðə sɝfəs, kɝəns bɪniθ kəd snætʃ jə ɔf jəɹ fit. mɔɹ ʌndɝkɝəns sim tə əpɪɹ hɪɹ ɛvɹi moʊmənt, ən nɑɾ ɔl fɹəm ðə sɪstɝz.

Alanna gave a start, too. For whatever reason, she had been on edge ever since joining Perrin on his way here, her serenity at best a thin veneer. Now she smoothed her skirts, shot a defiant stare at Kiruna and Bera of all people, and glided around in front of Rand. The other two sisters watched her, like teachers intending to make sure a pupil performed well and still not convinced she would. Which made no sense. One of them might be the leader, yet Alanna was Aes Sedai, the same as they. It all deepened Perrin's suspicion. Mixing with Aes Sedai was too much like wading the streams in the Waterwood near to the Mire. However peaceful the surface, currents beneath could snatch you off your feet. More undercurrents seemed to appear here every moment, and not all from the sisters.

ʃɑkɪŋli, ɹænd kʌpt ɑlɑnəz tʃɪn, tɝnɪŋ əɹ feɪs ʌp. ðəɹ wɑz ə hɪs ʌv ɪndʒɹɔn bɹɛθ fɹəm bɛɹə, ən fəɹ wʌns, pɛɹɪn əɡɹid. ɹænd wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn soʊ fɔɹwɝd wɪð ə ɡɝl əɾ ə dæns bæk hoʊm, ən æl-ænə wɑz noʊ ɡɝl əɾ ə dæns. dʒʌst əz sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ, hɝ ɹiækʃən wɑz tə blʌʃ ən smɛl ʌv ənsɝɾənti. ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑt blʌʃ, ɪn pɛɹɪnz ɪkspɪɹiəns, ən ðeɪ wɝ nɛvɝ ənsɝɾən.

Shockingly, Rand cupped Alanna's chin, turning her face up. There was a hiss of indrawn breath from Bera, and for once, Perrin agreed. Rand would not have been so forward with a girl at a dance back home, and Al-anna was no girl at a dance. Just as surprising, her reaction was to blush and smell of uncertainty. Aes Sedai did not blush, in Perrin's experience, and they were never uncertain.

"hil mi," ɹænd sɛd, ə kəmænd, nɑɾ ə ɹɪkwɛst. ðə ɹɛɾ ɪn ɑlɑnəz, feɪs dipənd, ən æŋɡɝ tʌtʃt əɹ sɛnt. hɝ hænz tʃɹɛmbəld əz ʃi ɹitʃt ʌp tə teɪk ɪz hɛd bɪtwin ðɛm.

"Heal me," Rand said, a command, not a request. The red in Alanna's, face deepened, and anger touched her scent. Her hands trembled as she reached up to take his head between them.

ʌnkɑnʃəsli pɛɹɪn ɹʌb ðə pɑm ə hɪz hænd, ðə wʌn ə ʃeɪɾoʊ spɪɹ hæd leɪɾ oʊpən jɛstɝdeɪ. kaɪɹunə hæd hil sɛvɹəl ɡæʃəz ɪn hɪm, ən i hæd hæd hilɪŋ bɪfɔɹ, tu. ɪt fɛlt laɪk biɪŋ plʌnʒd hɛdfɝst ɪndə ə fɹizɪŋ pɑnd; ɪt lɛf jə ɡæspɪŋ ən ʃeɪkɪŋ ən wik-nid. hʌŋɡɹi, tu, juʒəwəli. ði oʊnli saɪn ɹænd ɡeɪv ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ hæd bɪn dʌn, ðoʊ, wɑz ə slaɪt ʃɪvɝ.

Unconsciously Perrin rubbed the palm of his hand, the one a Shaido spear had laid open yesterday. Kiruna had Healed several gashes in him, and he had had Healing before, too. It felt like being plunged headfirst into a freezing pond; it left you gasping and shaking and weak-kneed. Hungry, too, usually. The only sign Rand gave that anything had been done, though, was a slight shiver.

"haʊ dʒju stæn ðə peɪn?" ɑlɑnə wɪspɝɾ ət hɪm.

"How do you stand the pain?" Alanna whispered at him.

"ɪts dʌn, ðɛn," hi sɛd, ɹimuvɪŋ əɹ hænz. ən tɝn fɹəm əɹ wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝɾ ə θæŋks. simɪŋ ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə spikɪŋ, hi pɔzd, hæf-tɝnɪŋ tə lʊk bæk təwɔɹd dəməaɪz wɛlz.

"It's done, then," he said, removing her hands. And turned from her without a word of thanks. Seeming on the point of speaking, he paused, half-turning to look back toward Dumai's Wells.

"ðeɪ hæv ɔl bɪn faʊnd, ɹænd ælθɹ," æmɪz sɛd dʒɛnli.

"They have all been found, Rand al'Thor," Amys said gently.

hi nɑɾəd, ðən əɡɛn, mɔɹ bɹɪskli. "ɪts taɪm tə bi ɡɔn. sɔɹɪliə, wɪl jə neɪm waɪz wʌnz tə teɪk oʊvɝ ðə pɹɪznɝz fɹəm ði æʃəmən? ən ɔlsoʊ əz kəmpænjənz fəɹ kaɪɹunə ən . . . maɪ ʌðɝ lidʒwɪmən." fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, hi ɡɹɪnd. "aɪ wʊdnt wɑn əm tə ɛɹ θɹu ɪɡnɝəns."

He nodded, then again, more briskly. "It's time to be gone. Sorilea, will you name Wise Ones to take over the prisoners from the Asha'man? And also as companions for Kiruna and . . . my other liegewomen." For an instant, he grinned. "I wouldn't want them to err through ignorance."

"ɪt ʃæl bi dʌn əz jə seɪ, kɑɹəkɑɹn." ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl fɝmli, ðə lɛðɝ-feɪst waɪz wʌn ədʒɹɛs ðə θɹi sɪstɝz. "dʒɔɪn jəɹ fɹɛnz əntɪl aɪ kən faɪn sʌmwʌn tə hoʊl jəɹ hænz." ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ʌnɪkspɛktɪd ðət bɛɹə wəd fɹaʊn ɪndɪɡnənli, əɹ kaɪɹunə bɪkʌm fɹɔs pɝsɑnəfaɪd. ɑlɑnə ɡeɪzd ət ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɹɪzaɪnd, ɔlmoʊst sʌlən. sɔɹɪliə wɑz hævɪŋ nʌn ʌv ɪt. klæpɪŋ hænz ʃɑɹpli, ʃi meɪd bɹɪsk ʃuɪŋ moʊʃənz. "wɛl? muv! muv!"

"It shall be done as you say, Car'a'carn." Adjusting her shawl firmly, the leather-faced Wise One addressed the three sisters. "Join your friends until I can find someone to hold your hands." It was not unexpected that Bera would frown indignantly, or Kiruna become frost personified. Alanna gazed at the ground, resigned, almost sullen. Sorilea was having none of it. Clapping hands sharply, she made brisk shooing motions. "Well? Move! Move!"

ɹɪlʌktənli, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ lɛt ðɛmsɛlvz bi hɝɾɪd, meɪkɪŋ ɪt sim ðeɪ sɪmpli wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ wɛɹ ðeɪ wɪʃt. dʒɔɪnɪŋ sɔɹɪliə, æmɪz wɪspɝd sʌmθɪŋ ðət pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt kwaɪt kætʃ. ðə θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ əpɛɹənli dɪd, ðoʊ. ðeɪ stɑp dɛd, θɹi vɛɹi stɑɹɾəld feɪsəz lʊkɪŋ bæk ət ðə waɪz wʌnz. sɔɹɪliə dʒʌs klæpt əɹ hænz əɡɛn, laʊɾɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ, ən ʃuɾ ivən mɔɹ bɹɪskli.

Reluctantly, the Aes Sedai let themselves be herded, making it seem they simply were going where they wished. Joining Sorilea, Amys whispered something that Perrin did not quite catch. The three Aes Sedai apparently did, though. They stopped dead, three very startled faces looking back at the Wise Ones. Sorilea just clapped her hands again, louder than before, and shooed even more briskly.

skɹætʃɪŋ ɪz bɪɹd, pɛɹɪn mɛt ɹəɑɹks aɪz. ðə klæn tʃif smaɪl feɪnli ən ʃɹʌɡd. waɪz wʌnz' bɪznəs. ðət wɑz ɔl vɛɹi wɛl fəɹ hɪm; il wɝ feɪtɑlɪstɪk əz wʊlvz. pɛɹɪn ɡlænst ət dʒɛdwɪn. ðə fɛloʊ wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ sɔɹɪliə lɛktʃɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. noʊ, ɪt wɑz ðə sɪstɝz i wɑtʃt, ə fɑks stɛɹɪŋ ət hɛnz ɪn ə kup dʒʌst aʊɾ ə hɪz ɹitʃ. ðə waɪz wʌnz əv tə bi bɛɾɝ ðən ði æʃəmən, pɛɹɪn θɔt. ðeɪv tə bi.

Scratching his beard, Perrin met Rhuarc's eyes. The clan chief smiled faintly and shrugged. Wise Ones' business. That was all very well for him; Aiel were fatalistic as wolves. Perrin glanced at Gedwyn. The fellow was watching Sorilea lecture the Aes Sedai. No, it was the sisters he watched, a fox staring at hens in a coop just out of his reach. The Wise Ones have to be better than the Asha'man, Perrin thought. They have to be.

ɪf ɹænd noʊɾəst ðə baɪpleɪ, hi ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪt. "teɪm, jə teɪk ði æʃəmən bæk tə ðə blæk taʊɝ əz sun əz ðə waɪz wʌnz əv tʃɑɹdʒ ə ðə pɹɪznɝz. əz sun æz. ɹɪmɛmbɝ tə kip ən aɪ aʊt fəɹ ɛni mæn u lɝnz tu fæst. ən ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌɾ aɪ sɛɾ əbaʊt ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ."

If Rand noticed the byplay, he ignored it. "Taim, you take the Asha'man back to the Black Tower as soon as the Wise Ones have charge of the prisoners. As soon as. Remember to keep an eye out for any man who learns too fast. And remember what I said about recruiting."

"aɪ kən hɑɹdli fɝɡɛt, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," ðə blæk-koʊɾəd mæn ɹɪplaɪd dʒɹaɪli. "aɪ wɪl hændəl ðət tʃɹɪp pɝsənəli. bʌɾ ɪf aɪ meɪ bɹɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp əɡɛn. . . . jə niɾ ə pɹɑpɝ ɑnɝ ɡɑɹd."

"I can hardly forget, my Lord Dragon," the black-coated man replied dryly. "I will handle that trip personally. But if I may bring it up again. . . . You need a proper honor guard."

"wi hæv bɪn oʊvɝ ðæt," ɹænd sɛd kɝtli. "aɪ hæv bɛɾɝ jusəz fəɹ ði æʃəmən. ɪf aɪ niɾ ən ɑnɝ ɡɑɹd, ðoʊz aɪm kipɪŋ wɪl du. pɛɹɪn, wɪl jə - ?"

"We have been over that," Rand said curtly. "I have better uses for the Asha'man. If I need an honor guard, those I am keeping will do. Perrin, will you - ?"

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," teɪm bɹoʊk ɪn, "ju nid mɔɹ ðən ə fju æʃəmən ɝaʊn ju."

"My Lord Dragon," Taim broke in, "you need more than a few Asha'man around you."

ɹændz hɛd tɝn təwɔɹd teɪm. hɪz feɪs mætʃt ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ ɡɪvɪŋ nʌθɪŋ əweɪ, bʌɾ ɪz sɛn meɪd pɛɹɪnz ɪɹz tʃɹaɪ tə laɪ bæk. ɹeɪzɝ-ʃɑɹp ɹeɪdʒ əbɹʌpli vænɪʃt ɪn kjʊɹiɑsəɾi ən kɑʃən, ðə wʌn θɪn ən pɹoʊbɪŋ, ði ʌðɝ fɑɡlaɪk; ðən slæʃɪŋ, mɝɾɝəs fjʊɹi kənsum boʊθ. ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd dʒʌst slaɪtli, ən ɪz smɛl bɪkeɪm stoʊni dɪtɝməneɪʃən. noʊbɑdiz sɛn tʃeɪnʒd ðət fæst. noʊbɑdiz.

Rand's head turned toward Taim. His face matched any Aes Sedai for giving nothing away, but his scent made Perrin's ears try to lie back. Razor-sharp rage abruptly vanished in curiosity and caution, the one thin and probing, the other foglike; then slashing, murderous fury consumed both. Rand shook his head just slightly, and his smell became stony determination. Nobody's scent changed that fast. Nobody's.

teɪm hæɾ oʊnli hɪz aɪz tə ɡoʊ baɪ, ʌv kɔɹs, ən ɔl ðeɪ kəd tɛl ɪm wɑz ðət ɹænd hæd ʃeɪkən ɪz hɛd, ɪf dʒʌs bɛɹli. "θɪŋk. juv tʃoʊzən fɔɹ dɛɾəkeɪtəd ən fɔɹ soʊlʒɝz. jə ʃəɾ əv æʃəmən." pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðæt; hi θɔt ðeɪ wɝ ɔl æʃəmən.

Taim had only his eyes to go by, of course, and all they could tell him was that Rand had shaken his head, if just barely. "Think. You have chosen four Dedicated and four soldiers. You should have Asha'man." Perrin did not understand that; he thought they were all Asha'man.

"ju θɪŋk aɪ kæn titʃ əm əz wɛl əz ju?" ɹændz vɔɪs wɑz sɑft, ðə wɪspɝ ʌv ə bleɪd slaɪɾɪŋ ɪn ɪts ʃiθ.

"You think I can't teach them as well as you?" Rand's voice was soft, the whisper of a blade sliding in its sheath.

"aɪ θɪŋk ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɪz tu bɪzi fəɹ titʃɪŋ," teɪm ɹɪplaɪd smuðli, jɛt ði æŋɡɝ smɛl ɹoʊz əɡɛn. "tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt. teɪk mɛn u nid ðə list ʌv ɪt. aɪ kən tʃuz ðə fɝθəst əlɔŋ - "

"I think the Lord Dragon is too busy for teaching," Taim replied smoothly, yet the anger smell rose again. "Too important. Take men who need the least of it. I can choose the furthest along - "

"wʌn," ɹænd kʌɾ ɪn. "æn əl tʃuz." teɪm smaɪld, spɹɛɾɪŋ ɪz hænz ɪn ækwiɛsəns, bʌt ðə sɛn ə fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən nɪɹli oʊvɝwɛlmd æŋɡɝ. əɡɛn ɹænd pɔɪntəd wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ. "hɪm." ðɪs taɪm, hi sim sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn i wɑz pɔɪntɪŋ dɝɛkli əɾ ə mæn ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz sɪɾɪŋ ətɑp ən ʌptɝn kæsk ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wæɡən sɝkəl, peɪɪŋ noʊ ətɛnʃən tə ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ ɝaʊn ɹænd. ɪnstɛd, ɛlboʊ ɑn ɪz ni ən tʃɪn pɹɑpt ɑn ɪz hænd, hi wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹɪznɝz. ðə sɔɹɾ ən dʒɹæɡən ɡlɪɾɝd ɑn ðə haɪ kɑlɝ ə hɪz blæk koʊt. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪz neɪm, teɪm?"

"One," Rand cut in. "And I will choose." Taim smiled, spreading his hands in acquiescence, but the scent of frustration nearly overwhelmed anger. Again Rand pointed without looking. "Him." This time, he seemed surprised to find he was pointing directly at a man in his middle years sitting atop an upturned cask on the other side of the wagon circle, paying no attention to the gathering around Rand. Instead, elbow on his knee and chin propped on his hand, he was frowning at the Aes Sedai prisoners. The sword and Dragon glittered on the high collar of his black coat. "What is his name, Taim?"

"dæʃivə," teɪm sɛd sloʊli, stʌɾiɪŋ ɹænd. hi smɛld ivən mɔɹ sɝpɹaɪz ðən ɹænd dɪd, ən ɪɹəteɪɾəd, tu. "kɔɹlən dæʃivə. fɹəm ə fɑɹm ɪn ðə blæk hɪlz."

"Dashiva," Taim said slowly, studying Rand. He smelled even more surprised than Rand did, and irritated, too. "Corlan Dashiva. From a farm in the Black Hills."

"hi wɪl du," ɹænd sɛd, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt saʊnd ʃʊɹ hɪmsɛlf.

"He will do," Rand said, but he did not sound sure himself.

"dæʃivə ɪz ɡeɪnɪŋ ɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ ɹæpədli, bʌɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪz ɪn ðə klaʊdz ɔfən əz nɑt. ivən wən ɪɾ ɪzənt, hiz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz ɪntaɪɝli ðɛɹ. meɪbi hiz dʒʌst ə deɪdʒɹimɝ, ən meɪbi ðə teɪn ɑn seɪɾɪn ɪz tʌtʃɪŋ ɪz bɹeɪn ɔlɹɛɾi. bɛɾɝ fəɹ jə tə tʃoʊz tɔɹvəl əɹ ɹɑtʃeɪɾ əɹ - "

"Dashiva is gaining his strength rapidly, but his head is in the clouds often as not. Even when it isn't, he is not always entirely there. Maybe he's just a daydreamer, and maybe the taint on saidin is touching his brain already. Better for you to chose Torval or Rochaid or - "

teɪmz ɑpəzɪʃən sim tə swip əweɪ ɹændz ənsɝɾənti. "aɪ sɛd dæʃivə wɪl du. tɛl ɪm hiz tə kʌm wɪð mi, ðən tɝn ðə pɹɪznɝz oʊvɝ tə ðə waɪz wʌnz ən ɡoʊ. aɪ doʊn ɪntɛn tə stæn hɪɹ ɔl deɪ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ. pɛɹɪn, ɹɛɾi ɛvɹiwʌn tə muv. faɪn mi wən ðeɪ ɑɹ." wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝɾ i stʃɹoʊɾ ɔf, mɪn klɪŋɪŋ tə hɪz ɑɹm, ən nændɛɹə ən səlɪn laɪk ʃædoʊz. teɪmz dɑɹk aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd; ðən i wɑz stɔkɪŋ əweɪ hɪmsɛlf, ʃaʊɾɪŋ fəɹ dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪd, tɔɹvəl ən kɪsmən. blæk-koʊɾəd mɛn keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ.

Taim's opposition seemed to sweep away Rand's uncertainty. "I said Dashiva will do. Tell him he's to come with me, then turn the prisoners over to the Wise Ones and go. I don't intend to stand here all day arguing. Perrin, ready everyone to move. Find me when they are." Without another word he strode off, Min clinging to his arm, and Nandera and Sulin like shadows. Taim's dark eyes glittered; then he was stalking away himself, shouting for Gedwyn and Rochaid, Torval and Kisman. Black-coated men came running.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪməst. wɪð ɛvɹiθɪŋ i hæd tə tɛl ɹænd, hi hæd nɑɾ oʊpən ɪz maʊθ wʌns. ət ðæt, meɪbi ɪt wəd kʌm bɛɾɝ əweɪ fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə waɪz wʌnz. ən teɪm.

Perrin grimaced. With everything he had to tell Rand, he had not opened his mouth once. At that, maybe it would come better away from the Aes Sedai and the Wise Ones. And Taim.

ɹɪli ðəɹ wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ fəɹ ɪm tə du. hi wɑz səpoʊz tə bi ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ sɪns i hæd bɹɔt ðə ɹɛskju, bʌt ɹəɑɹk nu wʌt niɾəd duɪŋ bɛɾɝ ðən i ɛvɝ wʊd, ən ə wɝd tə dɑbɹeɪn ən heɪvin wɑz səfɪʃən fəɹ ðə kɛɹhinɪn ən minɝz. ðeɪ stɪl wɑntəd tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ, ðoʊ ðeɪ hɛl bæk əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn ən pɛɹɪn æskt wʌɾ ɪt wɑz.

Really there was not much for him to do. He was supposed to be in charge since he had brought the rescue, but Rhuarc knew what needed doing better than he ever would, and a word to Dobraine and Havien was sufficient for the Cairhienin and Mayeners. They still wanted to say something, though they held back until they were alone and Perrin asked what it was.

ðən heɪvin bɝst aʊt, "lɔɹd pɛɹɪn, ɪts ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. ɔl ðət sɝtʃɪŋ θɹu ðə kɔɹpsəz - "

Then Havien burst out, "Lord Perrin, it's the Lord Dragon. All that searching through the corpses - "

"ɪt simd ə lɪɾəl . . . ɪksɛsɪv," dɑbɹeɪn ɪntɝʌptɪd smuðli. "wi wɝi fəɹ hɪm, əz jə kən ʌndɝstænd. ə ɡɹeɪt dil dɪpɛnz ɑn hɪm." hi maɪt lʊk ə soʊlʒɝ, ən i wɑz, bʌɾ i wɑz ə kɛɹhinɪn lɔɹd, tu, ən stipt ɪn ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz, wɪð ɔl ɪts kɛɹfəl tɔk, laɪk ɛni ʌðɝ kɛɹhinɪn.

"It seemed a little . . . excessive," Dobraine interrupted smoothly. "We worry for him, as you can understand. A great deal depends on him." He might look a soldier, and he was, but he was a Cairhienin lord, too, and steeped in the Game of Houses, with all its careful talk, like any other Cairhienin.

pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt stipt ɪn ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz. "hiz stɪl seɪn," hi sɛd blʌnli. dɑbɹeɪn sɪmpli nɑɾəd, əz ɪf tə seɪ ʌv kɔɹs, ʃɹʌɡd tə seɪ hi hæd nɛvɝ ɪntɛndəd tə kwɛstʃən, bʌt heɪvin wɛn bɹaɪt ɹɛd. wɑtʃɪŋ əm ɡoʊ tə ðɛɹ mɛn, pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi hoʊpt i wɑz nɑt laɪɪŋ.

Perrin was not steeped in the Game of Houses. "He's still sane," he said bluntly. Dobraine simply nodded, as if to say of course, shrugged to say he had never intended to question, but Havien went bright red. Watching them go to their men, Perrin shook his head. He hoped he was not lying.

ɡæðɝɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, hi toʊld əm tə sæɾəl ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ən ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɔl ðə boʊɪŋ, moʊst ʌv wɪtʃ lʊk spɝ-ʌv-ðə-moʊmənt. ivən feɪl sɛd ðət səmtaɪmz tu ɹɪvɝz pipəl kæɹid boʊɪŋ tu fɑɹ; ʃi sɛd ðeɪ wɝ stɪl wɝkɪŋ aʊt haʊ tə bɪheɪv wɪð ə lɔɹd. hi θɔɾ əbaʊt ʃaʊɾɪŋ "aɪ æm nɑɾ ə lɔɹd" ət ðɛm, bʌɾ i hæd dʌn ðət bɪfɔɹ, ən ɪt nɛvɝ wɝkt.

Gathering the Two Rivers men, he told them to saddle their horses and ignored all the bowing, most of which looked spur-of-the-moment. Even Faile said that sometimes Two Rivers people carried bowing too far; she said they were still working out how to behave with a lord. He thought about shouting "I am not a lord" at them, but he had done that before, and it never worked.

wən ɔl ði ʌðɝz ɹʌʃt fəɹ ðɛɹ ænəməlz, dænɪl ən tɛl luɪn ɹɪmeɪn bɪhaɪnd. bɹʌðɝz, boʊθ wɝ binpoʊlz ən ðeɪ lʊk mʌtʃ əlaɪk, ɪksɛp ðət dænɪl əfɛktəd mʌstæʃɪz laɪk daʊntɝn hɔɹnz ɪn ðə tæɹɑbənɝ staɪl, waɪl tɛl wɔɹ nɛɹoʊ laɪnz ə dɑɹk hɛɹ, ɪn ðə fæʃən ʌv ɑɹæd dumən, ʌndɝ ə noʊz laɪk ə pɪkeɪks. ɹɛfjudʒiz hæd bɹɔɾ ə lɑɾ ə nu θɪŋz ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz.

When all the others rushed for their animals, Dannil and Tell Lewin remained behind. Brothers, both were beanpoles and they looked much alike, except that Dannil affected mustaches like downturned horns in the Taraboner style, while Tell wore narrow lines of dark hair, in the fashion of Arad Doman, under a nose like a pickaxe. Refugees had brought a lot of new things into the Two Rivers.

"ðoʊz æʃəmən kʌmɪŋ wɪð ʌs?" dænɪl æskt. wən pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, hi ɛksheɪl soʊ hɑɹɾ ɪn ɹɪlif ðəɾ ɪz θɪk mʌstæʃɪz stɝd.

"Those Asha'man coming with us?" Dannil asked. When Perrin shook his head, he exhaled so hard in relief that his thick mustaches stirred.

"wʌɾ əbaʊt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ?" bæn sɛɾ æŋkʃəsli. "ðeɪl ɡoʊ fɹi, naʊ, woʊn ðeɪ? aɪ min, ɹænd ɪz fɹi. ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, ðəɾ ɪz. ðeɪ kæn steɪ pɹɪznɝz, nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"What about the Aes Sedai?" Ban said anxiously. "They'll go free, now, won't they? I mean, Rand is free. The Lord Dragon, that is. They can't stay prisoners, not Aes Sedai."

"ju tu dʒʌst əv ɛvɹibɑɾi ɹɛɾi tə ɹaɪd," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "liv wɝiɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ɹænd." ðə pɛɹ ivən wɪnst əlaɪk. tu fɪŋɡɝz ɹoʊz tə skɹætʃ wɝidli ət mʌstæʃɪz, ən pɛɹɪn dʒɝkt ɪz hæn əweɪ fɹəm ɪz tʃɪn. ə mæn lʊkt əz ɪf i hæd fliz wən i dɪd ðæt.

"You two just have everybody ready to ride," Perrin said. "Leave worrying about Aes Sedai to Rand." The pair even winced alike. Two fingers rose to scratch worriedly at mustaches, and Perrin jerked his hand away from his chin. A man looked as if he had fleas when he did that.

ðə kæmp wɑz əbʌsəl ɪn noʊ taɪm. ɛvɹiwʌn hæd bɪn ɪkspɛktɪŋ tə muv sun, jɛɾ ɛvɹiwʌn hæd θɪŋz lɛft əndʌn. ðə kæptɪv ɛɛs sədaɪz sɝvəns ən wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz hɝidli loʊɾəd ðə læst aɪɾəmz ɪndə ðə wæɡənz ən bɪɡæn hɪtʃɪŋ timz wɪð ə dʒɪŋɡəl ə hɑɹnəs. kɛɹhinɪn ən minɝz sim tə bi ɛvɹiwɛɹ, tʃɛkɪŋ sæɾəlz ən bɹaɪɾəlz. ənkloʊðd ɡeɪʃeɪn wɛn ɹʌnɪŋ ɛvɹi wɪtʃ weɪ, ðoʊ ðəɹ dɪd nɑt sim tə bi mʌtʃ fəɹ ði il tə ɹɛɾi.

The camp was abustle in no time. Everyone had been expecting to move soon, yet everyone had things left undone. The captive Aes Sedai's servants and wagon drivers hurriedly loaded the last items into the wagons and began hitching teams with a jingle of harness. Cairhienin and Mayeners seemed to be everywhere, checking saddles and bridles. Unclothed gai'shain went running every which way, though there did not seem to be much for the Aiel to ready.

flæʃɪz ə laɪɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə wæɡənz ənaʊns ðə dɪpɑɹtʃɝ ə teɪm ən ði æʃəmən. ðət meɪd pɛɹɪn fil bɛɾɝ. ʌv ðə naɪn u ɹɪmeɪnd, ənʌðɝ bɪsaɪdz dæʃivə wɑz ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz, ə stɑki fɛloʊ wɪð ə fɑɹmɝz feɪs, ən wʌn, wɪð ə lɪmp ən ə fɹɪnʒ ʌv waɪt hɛɹ, maɪɾ izəli hæv bɪn ə ɡɹændfɑðɝ. ðə ɹɛst wɝ jʌŋɡɝ, səm lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən bɔɪz, jɛt ðeɪ wɑtʃt ɔl ðə hʌbəb wɪð ðə sɛlf-pəzɛʃən ə mɛn u hæd sin əz mʌtʃ ə dʌzən taɪmz. ðeɪ dɪd kip tə ðɛmsɛlvz, ðoʊ, ən təɡɛðɝ ɪksɛp fəɹ dæʃivə, hu stʊɾ ə fju peɪsɪz əpɑɹt stɛɹɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ. ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ teɪmz kɑʃən əbaʊt ðə fɛloʊ, pɛɹɪn hoʊpt i wɑz deɪdʒɹimɪŋ.

Flashes of light outside the wagons announced the departure of Taim and the Asha'man. That made Perrin feel better. Of the nine who remained, another besides Dashiva was in his middle years, a stocky fellow with a farmer's face, and one, with a limp and a fringe of white hair, might easily have been a grandfather. The rest were younger, some little more than boys, yet they watched all the hubbub with the self-possession of men who had seen as much a dozen times. They did keep to themselves, though, and together except for Dashiva, who stood a few paces apart staring at nothing. Remembering Taim's caution about the fellow, Perrin hoped he was daydreaming.

hi faʊn ɹænd siɾəd ɑn ə wʊɾən kɹeɪt wɪð ɪz ɛlboʊz ɑn ɪz niz. səlɪn ən nændɛɹə skwɑɾɪd izəli tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə ɹænd, boʊθ stuɾiəsli əvɔɪɾɪŋ lʊkɪŋ ət ðə sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪz hɪp. hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ spɪɹz ən bʊl-haɪd bʌklɝz kæʒəwəli, hɪɹ ɪn ðə mɪdst ə pipəl lɔɪəl tə ɹænd, ðeɪ kɛpt ə wɑtʃ ɑn ɛniθɪŋ ðət muv nɪɹ hɪm. mɪn sæɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn əɾ ɪz fit wɪð əɹ lɛɡz tʌkt ʌndɝ, smaɪlɪŋ ʌp ət hɪm.

He found Rand seated on a wooden crate with his elbows on his knees. Sulin and Nandera squatted easily to either side of Rand, both studiously avoiding looking at the sword at his hip. Holding their spears and bull-hide bucklers casually, here in the midst of people loyal to Rand, they kept a watch on anything that moved near him. Min sat on the ground at his feet with her legs tucked under, smiling up at him.

"aɪ hoʊp jə noʊ wʌt jəɹ duɪŋ, ɹænd," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ʃɪftɪŋ ði æks hæf soʊ hi kəd dʒɹɑp tə hɪz hilz. noʊ wʌn wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ ɪksɛp fəɹ ɹænd ən mɪn ən ðə tu meɪɾənz. ɪf səlɪn əɹ nændɛɹə wɛn ɹʌnɪŋ tə ðə waɪz wʌnz, soʊ bi ɪt. wɪθaʊt mɔɹ pɹiæmbəl i lɔntʃt ɪndə wʌɾ i hæd sin soʊ fɑɹ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. wʌɾ i hæd smɛld, tu, ðoʊ hi dɪd nɑt seɪ ðæt, ɹænd wɑz nɑɾ əmʌŋ ðə fju hu nu əbaʊɾ ɪm ən wʊlvz; hi meɪɾ ɪɾ ɔl sim wʌɾ i hæd sin ən hɝd. ði æʃəmən ən ðə waɪz wʌnz. ði æʃəmən ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə waɪz wʌnz ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə hoʊl tæŋɡəl ə tɪndɝ ðət maɪt bɝst ɪndə fleɪm ɛni moʊmənt. hi dɪd nɑt spɛɹ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn. "ðeɪɹ wɝid, ɹænd, ən ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ swɛɾɪŋ, jə kən bi ʃʊɹ səm kɛɹhinɪn ɪz θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. əɹ ə tɛɹən. meɪbi dʒʌs hɛlpɪŋ ðə pɹɪznɝz ɪskeɪp, meɪbi sʌmθɪŋ wɝs. laɪt, aɪ kəd si dænɪl ən tɛl ən fɪfti mɔɹ bɪsaɪdz hɛlpɪŋ əm ɡɛɾ əweɪ, ɪf ðeɪ nu haʊ."

"I hope you know what you're doing, Rand," Perrin said, shifting the axe haft so he could drop to his heels. No one was close enough to hear except for Rand and Min and the two Maidens. If Sulin or Nandera went running to the Wise Ones, so be it. Without more preamble he launched into what he had seen so far this morning. What he had smelled, too, though he did not say that, Rand was not among the few who knew about him and wolves; he made it all seem what he had seen and heard. The Asha'man and the Wise Ones. The Asha'man and the Aes Sedai. The Wise Ones and the Aes Sedai. The whole tangle of tinder that might burst into flame any moment. He did not spare the Two Rivers men. "They're worried, Rand, and if they are sweating, you can be sure some Cairhienin is thinking about doing something. Or a Tairen. Maybe just helping the prisoners escape, maybe something worse. Light, I could see Dannil and Tell and fifty more besides helping them get away, if they knew how."

"ju θɪŋk sʌmθɪŋ ɛls wəd bi ðət mʌtʃ wɝs?" ɹænd sɛd kwaɪətli, ən pɛɹɪnz skɪn pɹɪkəld.

"You think something else would be that much worse?" Rand said quietly, and Perrin's skin prickled.

hi mɛt ɹændz ɡeɪz dɝɛkli. "ə θaʊzən taɪmz," hi sɛɾ ɪn dʒʌst əz kwaɪəɾ ə vɔɪs. "aɪ woʊn bi pɑɹɾ ə mɝɾɝ. ɪf jəl bi, əl stæn ɪn jəɹ weɪ." ə saɪləns stʃɹɛtʃt, ənblɪŋkɪŋ blu-ɡɹeɪ aɪz miɾɪŋ ənblɪŋkɪŋ ɡoʊldən.

He met Rand's gaze directly. "A thousand times," he said in just as quiet a voice. "I won't be part of murder. If you will be, I'll stand in your way." A silence stretched, unblinking blue-gray eyes meeting unblinking golden.

fɹaʊnɪŋ əɾ itʃ ə ðɛm ɪn tɝn, mɪn meɪɾ ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt. "ju tu wʊlhɛdz! ɹænd, jə noʊ jəl nɛvɝ ɡɪv ən ɔɹɾɝ laɪk ðæt, əɹ lɛɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls ɡɪv ɪt, iðɝ. pɛɹɪn, jə noʊ hi woʊnt. naʊ ðə pɛɹ ə jə stɑp æktɪŋ laɪk tu stʃɹeɪnʒ ɹustɝz ɪn ə pɛn."

Frowning at each of them in turn, Min made an exasperated sound in her throat. "You two woolheads! Rand, you know you'll never give an order like that, or let anyone else give it, either. Perrin, you know he won't. Now the pair of you stop acting like two strange roosters in a pen."

səlɪn tʃʌkəld, bʌt pɛɹɪn wɑntəd tə æsk mɪn haʊ sɝɾən ʃi wɑz, ɔlðoʊ ðət wɑz nɑɾ ə kwɛstʃən i kəd vɔɪs hɪɹ. ɹænd skɹʌbd ɪz fɪŋɡɝz θɹu hɪz hɛɹ, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, fəɹ ɔl ðə wɝld laɪk ə mæn dɪsəɡɹiɪŋ wɪð sʌmbɑɾi hu wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ. ðə sɔɹɾ ə vɔɪs ðət mædmən hɝd.

Sulin chuckled, but Perrin wanted to ask Min how certain she was, although that was not a question he could voice here. Rand scrubbed his fingers through his hair, then shook his head, for all the world like a man disagreeing with somebody who was not there. The sort of voice that madmen heard.

"ɪts nɛvɝ izi, ɪz ɪt?" ɹænd sɛɾ æftɝ ə taɪm, lʊkɪŋ sæd. "ðə bɪɾɝ tʃɹuθ ɪz, aɪ kæn seɪ wɪtʃ wəd bi wɝs. aɪ doʊn əv ɛni ɡʊd tʃɔɪsəz. ðeɪ sɔ tə ðət ðɛmsɛlvz." hɪz feɪs wɑz dɪspɑndənt, bʌt ɹeɪdʒ bɔɪld ɪn ɪz sɛnt. "əlaɪv əɹ dɛd, ðəɹ ə mɪlstoʊn ɑn maɪ bæk, ən iðɝ weɪ, ðeɪ kəd bɹeɪk ɪt."

"It's never easy, is it?" Rand said after a time, looking sad. "The bitter truth is, I can't say which would be worse. I don't have any good choices. They saw to that themselves." His face was despondent, but rage boiled in his scent. "Alive or dead, they're a millstone on my back, and either way, they could break it."

pɛɹɪn fɑloʊɾ ɪz ɡeɪz tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹɪznɝz. ðeɪ wɝ ɑn ðɛɹ fit naʊ, ən ɔl təɡɛðɝ, ðoʊ ivən soʊ ðeɪ mænədʒ tə pʊɾ ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns bɪtwin ðə θɹi hu hæd bɪn stɪld ən ðə ɹɛst. ðə waɪz wʌnz ɝaʊn əm wɝ biɪŋ kɝt wɪð ðɛɹ ɔɹɾɝz, baɪ ðə dʒɛstʃɝz ðeɪ meɪɾ ən ðə taɪt feɪsəz ɑn ðə sɪstɝz. meɪbi ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ bɛɾɝ ðən ɹænd kipɪŋ ðɛm, tu. ɪf oʊnli hi kəd bi ʃʊɹ.

Perrin followed his gaze to the Aes Sedai prisoners. They were on their feet now, and all together, though even so they managed to put a little distance between the three who had been stilled and the rest. The Wise Ones around them were being curt with their orders, by the gestures they made and the tight faces on the sisters. Maybe the Wise Ones were better than Rand keeping them, too. If only he could be sure.

"dɪd jə si ɛniθɪŋ, mɪn?" ɹænd sɛd.

"Did you see anything, Min?" Rand said.

pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən dɝɛktəɾ ə wɔɹnɪŋ ɡlæns ət səlɪn ən nændɛɹə, bʌt mɪn læf sɔfli. linɪŋ əɡɛnst ɹændz ni, ʃi ɹɪli dɪd lʊk ðə mɪn i nu, fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm sɪns faɪndɪŋ əɹ ət ðə wɛlz. "pɛɹɪn, ðeɪ noʊ əbaʊt mi. ðə waɪz wʌnz, ðə meɪɾənz, meɪbi ɔl ə ðɛm. ən ðeɪ doʊn kɛɹ." ʃi hæɾ ə tælənt ʃi kɛp hɪɾən mʌtʃ əz i dɪd ðə wʊlvz. səmtaɪmz ʃi sɔ ɪmədʒəz ən ɔʊɹəz ɝaʊn pipəl, ən səmtaɪmz ʃi nu wʌt ðeɪ mɛnt. "ju kænt noʊ wʌt ðæts laɪk, pɛɹɪn. aɪ wɑz twɛlv wən ɪt stɑɹɾəd, ən aɪ dɪdnt noʊ tə meɪk ə sikɹəɾ ʌv ɪt. ɛvɹibɑɾi θɔɾ aɪ wɑz dʒʌs meɪkɪŋ θɪŋz ʌp. əntɪl aɪ sɛɾ ə mæn ɑn ðə nɛkst stʃɹit wɑz gɑnə mɛɹi ə wʊmən aɪ sɔ hɪm wɪð, oʊnli hi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi mɛɹid. wən i ɹæn ɔf wɪð hɝ, hɪz waɪf bɹɔɾ ə mɑb tə maɪ æns' haʊs kleɪmɪŋ aɪ wɑz ɹispɑnsəbəl, ðəɾ aɪd juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɑn əɹ hʌzbən əɹ ɡɪvən ðə tu ʌv əm səm kaɪndə poʊʃən." mɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ʃi wɑzn tu klɪɹ. ʃi dʒʌs hæd tə bleɪm sʌmbɑɾi. ðəɹ wɑz tɔk ə mi biɪŋ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, tu. ðəɹ hæd bɪn səm waɪtkloʊks ɪn taʊn ɝliɝ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɝ pipəl ʌp. ɛniweɪ, æn ɹænə kənvɪns mi tə seɪ aɪ hæd dʒʌst oʊvɝhɝɾ əm tɔkɪŋ, ən æn mɹən pɹɑməs tə spæŋk mi fəɹ spɹɛɾɪŋ teɪlz, ən æn dʒæn sɛd ʃid doʊs mi. ðeɪ dɪdnt, ʌv kɔɹs - ðeɪ nu ðə tʃɹuθ - bʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ hædn bɪn soʊ mæɾɝ-ʌv-fækt əbaʊɾ ɪt, əbaʊt mi dʒʌs biɪŋ ə tʃaɪld, aɪ cʊɾə bɪn hɝt, əɹ ivən kɪld. moʊs pipəl doʊn laɪk sʌmbɑɾi noʊɪŋ θɪŋz əbaʊt ðɛɹ fjutʃɝ; moʊs pipəl doʊn ɹɪli wɑnə noʊ ɪt ðɛmsɛlvz, nɑɾ ənlɛs ɪts ɡʊɾ ɛniweɪ. ivən maɪ æns dɪdnt. bʌt tə ði il, aɪm sɔɹɾ ʌv ə waɪz wʌn baɪ kɝɾəsi."

Perrin gave a start and directed a warning glance at Sulin and Nandera, but Min laughed softly. Leaning against Rand's knee, she really did look the Min he knew, for the first time since finding her at the wells. "Perrin, they know about me. The Wise Ones, the Maidens, maybe all of them. And they don't care." She had a talent she kept hidden much as he did the wolves. Sometimes she saw images and auras around people, and sometimes she knew what they meant. "You can't know what that's like, Perrin. I was twelve when it started, and I didn't know to make a secret of it. Everybody thought I was just making things up. Until I said a man on the next street was going to marry a woman I saw him with, only he was already married. When he ran off with her, his wife brought a mob to my aunts' house claiming I was responsible, that I'd used the One Power on her husband or given the two of them some kind of potion." Min shook her head. "She wasn't too clear. She just had to blame somebody. There was talk of me being a Darkfriend, too. There had been some Whitecloaks in town earlier, trying to stir people up. Anyway, Aunt Rana convinced me to say I had just overheard them talking, and Aunt Miren promised to spank me for spreading tales, and Aunt Jan said she'd dose me. They didn't, of course - they knew the truth - but if they hadn't been so matter-of-fact about it, about me just being a child, I could have been hurt, or even killed. Most people don't like somebody knowing things about their future; most people don't really want to know it themselves, not unless it's good anyway. Even my aunts didn't. But to the Aiel, I am sort of a Wise One by courtesy."

"sʌm kən də θɪŋz ʌðɝz kænɑt," nændɛɹə sɛd, əz ɪf ðət wɑz ɪnʌf ɛkspləneɪʃən.

"Some can do things others cannot," Nandera said, as if that was enough explanation.

mɪn læft əɡɛn ən ɹitʃt aʊt tə tʌtʃ ðə meɪɾənz ni. "θæŋk ju." sɛɾəlɪŋ əɹ fit bɪniθ hɝ, ʃi lʊkt ʌp ət ɹænd. naʊ ðət ʃi wɑz læfɪŋ əɡɛn, ʃi simd ɹeɪɾiənt. ðət hɛld ivən æftɝ ʃi bɪkeɪm sɪɹiəs. sɪɹiəs, ən nɑt vɛɹi plizd. "æz fəɹ jəɹ kwɛstʃən, nʌθɪŋ ʌv ɛni jus. teɪm əz blʌɾ ɪn ɪz pæst ən blʌɾ ɪn ɪz fjutʃɝ, bʌt jə kəd ɡɛs ðæt. hiz ə deɪnʒɝəs mæn. ðeɪ sim tə bi ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪmədʒəz laɪk ɛɛs sədaɪ." ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk θɹu loʊɝɾ aɪlæʃɪz ət dæʃivə ən ði ʌðɝ æʃəmən sɛɾ u ʃi mɛnt. moʊs pipəl hæd fju ɪmədʒəz ɝaʊn ðɛm, bʌt mɪn sɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən wɔɹɾɝz ɔlweɪz dɪd. "ðə pɹɑbləm ɪz, wʌɾ aɪ kən si ɪz ɔl blɝi. aɪ θɪŋk ɪts kəz ðəɹ hoʊldɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. ðəɾ ɔfən simz tʃɹu wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ɪts wɝs wən ðəɹ æktʃəli  tʃænəlɪŋ. kaɪɹunə ən ðət lɑɾ əv ɔl sɔɹts ə θɪŋz ɝaʊn ðɛm, bʌt ðeɪ steɪ soʊ kloʊs təɡɛðɝ ðəɾ ɪɾ ɔl . . . wɛl . . . dʒʌmbəlz təɡɛðɝ moʊst ə ðə taɪm. ɪts ivən mʌɾiɝ wɪð ðə pɹɪznɝz."

Min laughed again and reached out to touch the Maiden's knee. "Thank you." Settling her feet beneath her, she looked up at Rand. Now that she was laughing again, she seemed radiant. That held even after she became serious. Serious, and not very pleased. "As for your question, nothing of any use. Taim has blood in his past and blood in his future, but you could guess that. He's a dangerous man. They seem to be gathering images like Aes Sedai." A sidelong look through lowered eyelashes at Dashiva and the other Asha'man said who she meant. Most people had few images around them, but Min said Aes Sedai and Warders always did. "The problem is, what I can see is all blurry. I think it's because they're holding the Power. That often seems true with Aes Sedai, and it's worse when they're actually channeling. Kiruna and that lot have all sorts of things around them, but they stay so close together that it all . . . well . . . jumbles together most of the time. It's even muddier with the prisoners."

"nɛvɝ maɪn ðə pɹɪznɝz," ɹænd toʊl hɝ. "ðæts wʌt ðəl steɪ."

"Never mind the prisoners," Rand told her. "That's what they'll stay."

"bʌt ɹænd, aɪ kip filɪŋ ðəɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ɪf aɪ kəɾ oʊnli pɪk ɪɾ aʊt. jə nid tə noʊ."

"But Rand, I keep feeling there is something important, if I could only pick it out. You need to know."

" 'ɪf jə doʊnt noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, jə mʌst ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð wʌt jə də noʊ,' " ɹænd kwoʊɾəd ɹaɪli. "ɪt simz aɪ nɛvɝ də noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. hɑɹdli ɪnʌf, moʊst ə ðə taɪm. bʌt ðɛɹz noʊ tʃɔɪs bʌt tə ɡoʊ ɑn, ɪz ðɛɹ." ðət wɑz nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ə kwɛstʃən.

" 'If you don't know everything, you must go on with what you do know,' " Rand quoted wryly. "It seems I never do know everything. Hardly enough, most of the time. But there's no choice but to go on, is there." That was not at all a question.

lɔɪəl stʃɹoʊɾ ʌp, bʌbəlɪŋ wɪð ɛnɝdʒi dɪspaɪɾ ɪz ɑbviəs wɪɹinəs. "ɹænd, ðeɪ seɪ ðəɹ ɹɛɾi tə ɡoʊ, bʌt jə pɹɑməs tə tɔk tə mi waɪl ɪts fɹɛʃ." əbɹʌpli hɪz ɪɹz twɪtʃt wɪð ɪmbɛɹəsmənt, ən ðət bumɪŋ vɔɪs bɪkeɪm pleɪntɪv. "aɪ æm sɑɹi; aɪ noʊ ɪt kæn bi ɛndʒɔɪəbəl. bʌɾ aɪ mʌs noʊ. fəɹ ðə bʊk. fəɹ ði eɪdʒəz."

Loial strode up, bubbling with energy despite his obvious weariness. "Rand, they say they're ready to go, but you promised to talk to me while it's fresh." Abruptly his ears twitched with embarrassment, and that booming voice became plaintive. "I am sorry; I know it can't be enjoyable. But I must know. For the book. For the Ages."

læfɪŋ, ɹænd ɡɑt tə hɪz fiɾ ən tʌɡd ət ði oʊɡiɝz oʊpən koʊt. "fɔɹ ði eɪdʒəz? də ɹaɪɾɝz ɔl tɔk laɪk ðæt? doʊnt wɝi, lɔɪəl. ɪɾəl stɪl bi fɹɛʃ wən aɪ tɛl ju. aɪ woʊn fɝɡɛt." ə ɡɹɪm, saʊɝ sɛn flæʃt fɹəm ɪm dɪspaɪt ðə smaɪl, ən wɑz ɡɔn. "bʌt bæk ɪn kɛɹhin, æftɝ wi ɔl əv ə bæθ ən slip ɪn ə bɛd." ɹænd moʊʃən fəɹ dæʃivə tə kʌm kloʊsɝ.

Laughing, Rand got to his feet and tugged at the Ogier's open coat. "For the Ages? Do writers all talk like that? Don't worry, Loial. It will still be fresh when I tell you. I won't forget." A grim, sour scent flashed from him despite the smile, and was gone. "But back in Cairhien, after we all have a bath and sleep in a bed." Rand motioned for Dashiva to come closer.

ðə mæn wɑz nɑt skɪni, jɛɾ i muvd ɪn ə hɛzɪɾənt, kɹipɪŋ weɪ, hænz foʊldəɾ əɾ ɪz weɪst, ðət meɪɾ ɪm sim soʊ. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən?" hi sɛd, tɪltɪŋ ɪz hɛd.

The man was not skinny, yet he moved in a hesitant, creeping way, hands folded at his waist, that made him seem so. "My Lord Dragon?" he said, tilting his head.

"kæn jə meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ, dæʃivə?"

"Can you make a gateway, Dashiva?"

"ʌv kɔɹs." dæʃivə bɪɡæn dʒɹaɪ-wɑʃɪŋ ɪz hænz, flɪkɪŋ əɾ ɪz lɪps wɪð ðə tɪp ə hɪz tʌŋ, ən pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðə mæn wɑz ɔlweɪz ðɪs dʒɪɾɝi, əɹ dʒʌst wən spikɪŋ tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. "ðæɾ ɪz tə seɪ, ðə l titʃəz tʃɹævlɪŋ əz sun əz ə stuɾənt ʃoʊz hɪmsɛlf stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf."

"Of course." Dashiva began dry-washing his hands, flicking at his lips with the tip of his tongue, and Perrin wondered whether the man was always this jittery, or just when speaking to the Dragon Reborn. "That is to say, the M'hael teaches Traveling as soon as a student shows himself strong enough."

"ðə l?" ɹænd sɛd, blɪŋkɪŋ.

"The M'Hael?" Rand said, blinking.

"ðə lɔɹd mæzɹim teɪmz taɪɾəl, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. ɪt minz 'liɾɝ.' ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ." ðə fɛloʊz smaɪl mænədʒ tə bi nɝvəs ən peɪtʃɹənaɪzɪŋ ət ðə seɪm taɪm. "aɪ ɹɛɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ɑn ðə fɑɹm. ɛvɹi bʊk ðə pɛdlɝz bɹɔt baɪ."

"The Lord Mazrim Taim's title, my Lord Dragon. It means 'leader.' In the Old Tongue." The fellow's smile managed to be nervous and patronizing at the same time. "I read a great deal on the farm. Every book the peddlers brought by."

"ðə l," ɹænd mʌɾɝd dɪsəpɹuvɪŋli. "wɛl, bi ðəɾ əz ɪt meɪ. meɪk mi ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə nɪɹ kɛɹhin, dæʃivə. ɪts taɪm tə si wʌt ðə wɝld əz bɪn ʌp tə waɪl aɪ wɑz əweɪ, ən wʌɾ aɪ hæv tə də əbaʊɾ ɪt." hi læf ðɛn, ɪn ə ɹufəl weɪ, bʌt ðə saʊn ʌv ɪt meɪd pɛɹɪnz skɪn pɹɪkəl.

"The M'Hael," Rand muttered disapprovingly. "Well, be that as it may. Make me a gateway to near Cairhien, Dashiva. It's time to see what the world has been up to while I was away, and what I have to do about it." He laughed then, in a rueful way, but the sound of it made Perrin's skin prickle.


tʃæptɝ θɹi


CHAPTER 3

hɪl ə ðə ɡoʊldən dɔn


Hill of the Golden Dawn

ɑn ə waɪd loʊ hɪltɑp səm maɪlz nɔɹθ ən ist ə ðə sɪɾi ʌv kɛɹhin, wɛl əweɪ fɹəm ɛni ɹoʊɾ əɹ hjumən hæbəteɪʃən, ə θɪn vɝɾɪkəl slæʃ ə pjʊɹ laɪɾ əpɪɹd, tɔlɝ ðən ə mæn ɑn ə hɔɹs. ðə ɡɹaʊn sləpt əweɪ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, ʌnʒəleɪtɪŋ dʒɛnli; nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən əkeɪʒənəl bɹʌʃ əbskjʊɹd ðə vju fəɹ mɔɹ ðən ə maɪl, ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ fɔɹəst. bɹaʊn ɡɹæs fɛl əz ðə laɪt sim tə ɹoʊteɪt, waɪɾənɪŋ ɪndə ə skwɛɹ oʊpənɪŋ ɪn mɪdɛɹ. ə nʌmbɝ ə ðə dɛd stɛmz wɝ slɪt lɛŋθwaɪz, slaɪs faɪnɝ ðən ɛni ɹeɪzɝ kəd hæv. baɪ ə hoʊl ɪn ði ɛɹ.

On a wide low hilltop some miles north and east of the city of Cairhien, well away from any road or human habitation, a thin vertical slash of pure light appeared, taller than a man on a horse. The ground sloped away in every direction, undulating gently; nothing more than occasional brush obscured the view for more than a mile, all the way to the surrounding forest. Brown grass fell as the light seemed to rotate, widening into a square opening in midair. A number of the dead stems were slit lengthwise, sliced finer than any razor could have. By a hole in the air.

ði ɪnstən ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɑz fʊli oʊpən, veɪld il pɔɹɾ aʊt, mɛn ən meɪɾənz, spɹɛɾɪŋ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən tə ɛnsɝkəl ðə hɪl. ɔlmoʊs hɪɾən ɪn ðə tɔɹənt, fɔɹ ʃɑɹp-aɪɾ æʃəmən tʊk ʌp pəzɪʃənz ɝaʊn ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ɪtsɛlf, piɹɪŋ təwɔɹd ði ɛnsɝkəlɪŋ wʊdlænd. nʌθɪŋ stɝɾ ɪksɛpt wɪð ðə wɪnd, dʌst, tɔl ɡɹæs ən bɹæntʃəz ɪn ðə dɪstəns, jɛɾ itʃ æʃəmən stʌɾid ðə vɪstə wɪð ðə fɝvɝ ʌv ə stɑɹvɪŋ hɔk sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ə ɹæbət. ə ɹæbət wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ ə hɔk maɪɾ əv bɪn əz ɪntɛnt, bʌt nɛvɝ wɪð ðəɾ ɛɹ ə mɛnəs.

The instant the gateway was fully open, veiled Aiel poured out, men and Maidens, spreading in every direction to encircle the hill. Almost hidden in the torrent, four sharp-eyed Asha'man took up positions around the gateway itself, peering toward the encircling woodland. Nothing stirred except with the wind, dust, tall grass and branches in the distance, yet each Asha'man studied the vista with the fervor of a starving hawk searching for a rabbit. A rabbit watching for a hawk might have been as intent, but never with that air of menace.

ðəɹ wɑz ɹɪli noʊ bɹeɪk ɪn ðə floʊ. wʌn moʊmən ɪt wɑz ə flʌɾ ʌv il, ðə nɛkst, maʊntəd kɛɹhinɪn ɑɹmmɪn ɡæləpɪŋ aʊt tu baɪ tu, ðə kɹɪmzən bænɝ ə laɪt ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp ət ðɛɹ hɛɾ əz sun əz ɪt klɪɹd ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. wɪθaʊɾ ə pɔz dɑbɹeɪn dʒɹu hɪz mɛn əsaɪɾ ən bɪɡæn fɔɹmɪŋ əm ʌp ə lɪɾəl daʊn ðə sloʊp, hɛlməɾɪd ən ɡɔntələɾəd ɪn pɹɪsaɪs ɹæŋks, lænsɪz ɹeɪz tə ðə seɪm æŋɡəl. sizən kæmpeɪnɝz, ðeɪ wɝ ɹɛɾi tə wil ən tʃɑɹdʒ ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən əɾ ɪz dʒɛstʃɝ.

There was really no break in the flow. One moment it was a flood of Aiel, the next, mounted Cairhienin armsmen galloping out two by two, the crimson Banner of Light going up at their head as soon as it cleared the gateway. Without a pause Dobraine drew his men aside and began forming them up a little down the slope, helmeted and gauntleted in precise ranks, lances raised to the same angle. Seasoned campaigners, they were ready to wheel and charge in any direction at his gesture.

ɑn ðə hilz ə ðə læs kɛɹhinɪn, pɛɹɪn ɹoʊd stɛpɝ θɹu, ðə dʌn pæsɪŋ ɪn wʌn stʃɹaɪd fɹəm ðə hɪl bɪloʊ dəməaɪz wɛlz tə ðə hɪl ɪn kɛɹhin, ən dʌkt ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf. ði ʌpɝ ɛdʒ ə ðə θɪŋ stʊd wɛl əbʌv ɪz hɛd, bʌɾ i hæd sin ðə dæmədʒ ə ɡeɪtweɪ kəd də ən hæd noʊ wɪʃ tə tɛst wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɝ seɪfɝ stændɪŋ stɪl. lɔɪəl ən ɛɹæm fɑloʊd kloʊs bɪhaɪnd - ði oʊɡiɝ, əfʊt wɪð ɪz lɔŋ-hæftɪɾ æks ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, bɛn ɪz niz - ən ðən ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, kɹaʊtʃɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz wɛl bɪɑn ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. ɹæɾ ɑldaɪ kæɹid ðə ɹɛd wʊlfhɛd bænɝ, pɛɹɪnz kəz ɛvɹiwʌn sɛɾ ɪt wɑz, ən tɛl luɪn ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl.

On the heels of the last Cairhienin, Perrin rode Stepper through, the dun passing in one stride from the hill below Dumai's Wells to the hill in Cairhien, and ducked in spite of himself. The upper edge of the thing stood well above his head, but he had seen the damage a gateway could do and had no wish to test whether they were safer standing still. Loial and Aram followed close behind - the Ogier, afoot with his long-hafted axe on his shoulder, bent his knees - and then the Two Rivers men, crouching on their saddles well beyond the gateway. Rad al'Dai carried the Red Wolfhead banner, Perrin's because everyone said it was, and Tell Lewin the Red Eagle.

pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lʊk ət ðoʊz, ɪspɛʃli ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn wɑntəd θɪŋz boʊθ weɪz. hi wɑz ə lɔɹd, soʊ hi hæd tə hæv bænɝz. hi wɑz ə lɔɹd, bʌt wən i toʊld əm tə ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə ðoʊz blʌɾi bænɝz, ðeɪ nɛvɝ vænɪʃt fəɹ lɔŋ. ðə ɹɛd wʊlfhɛd neɪmd ɪm sʌmθɪŋ i wɑz nɑɾ ən dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi, waɪl ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl. . . . mɔɹ ðən tu θaʊzən jɪɹz æftɝ meɪnɛðɝən daɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, kloʊs tə ə θaʊzən æftɝ ændɝ swɑloʊd pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt wʌns hæd bɪn meɪnɛðɝən, ðət bænɝ wɑz stɪl əz ɡʊɾ əz ən ækt ə ɹɪbɛljən fəɹ ən ændɔɝmən. lɛdʒənz stɪl wɔkt ɪn səm mɛnz maɪnz. ʌv kɔɹs ɪt hæd bɪn ə fju dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz sɪns tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk hæd hæɾ ɛni noʊʃən ðət ðeɪ wɝ ændɝmən, bʌt kwinz' maɪnz dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ soʊ izəli.

Perrin tried not to look at those, especially the Red Eagle. The Two Rivers men wanted things both ways. He was a lord, so he had to have banners. He was a lord, but when he told them to get rid of those bloody banners, they never vanished for long. The Red Wolfhead named him something he was not and did not want to be, while the Red Eagle. . . . More than two thousand years after Manetheren died in the Trolloc Wars, close to a thousand after Andor swallowed part of what once had been Manetheren, that banner was still as good as an act of rebellion for an Andorman. Legends still walked in some men's minds. Of course it had been a few generations since Two Rivers folk had had any notion that they were Andormen, but Queens' minds did not change so easily.

hi hæd mɛt ðə nu kwin ʌv ændɝ wʌt simd ə lɔŋ taɪm əɡoʊ, ɪn ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ. ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn kwin ðən - ən wɑz nɑt jɛt, ɹɪli, əntɪl ʃi wɑz kɹaʊn ɪn keɪɛmlɪn - bʌɾ ɪleɪn simd ə plɛzən jʌŋ wʊmən, ən pɹɪɾi, ðoʊ hi wɑz nɑt pɑɹʃəl tə fɛɹ-hɛɹd wɪmən. ə bɪt teɪkən wɪð hɝsɛlf, ʌv kɔɹs, əz dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ. teɪkən wɪð ɹænd, tu, ɪf snʌɡəlɪŋ ɪn kɔɹnɝz mɛn ɛniθɪŋ. ɹænd mɛn tə ɡɪv əɹ nɑɾ oʊnli ðə laɪən θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ, bʌt ðə sʌn θɹoʊn ə kɛɹhin. ʃʊɹli ʃi wəd bi ɡɹeɪtfəl ɪnʌf tə lɛt ðə flaɪɪŋ ʌv ə flæɡ pæs wən ɪt dɪd nɑt ɹɪli min ɛniθɪŋ. wɑtʃɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn dɪplɔɪ bɪhaɪn ðoʊz bænɝz, pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. ɪt wɑz ə wɝi fəɹ ənʌðɝ deɪ, ɪn ɛni keɪs.

He had met the new Queen of Andor what seemed a long time ago, in the Stone of Tear. She had not been Queen then - and was not yet, really, until she was crowned in Caemlyn - but Elayne seemed a pleasant young woman, and pretty, though he was not partial to fair-haired women. A bit taken with herself, of course, as Daughter-Heir. Taken with Rand, too, if snuggling in corners meant anything. Rand meant to give her not only the Lion Throne of Andor, but the Sun Throne of Cairhien. Surely she would be grateful enough to let the flying of a flag pass when it did not really mean anything. Watching the Two Rivers men deploy behind those banners, Perrin shook his head. It was a worry for another day, in any case.

ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ laɪk ɑɹmmɪnz pɹisɪʒən ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, moʊs bɔɪz laɪk tɑd, fɑɹmɝz' sʌnz ən ʃɛpɝdz, jɛt ðeɪ nu wʌt tə du. ɛvɹi fɪfθ mæn tʊk ðə ɹeɪnz ə fɔɹ mɔɹ hɔɹsəz waɪl ði ʌðɝ ɹaɪɾɝz hɝidli dɪsmaʊntɪd, lɔŋboʊz ɔlɹɛɾi stʃɹʌŋ ən ɪn hænd. ðoʊz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn stʃɹæɡəl təɡɛðɝ ɪn ɹʌf laɪnz, lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊnd wɪð mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəs ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, bʌt ðeɪ tʃɛk ðɛɹ kwɪvɝz wɪð pɹæktəs dʒɛstʃɝz ən hændəl ðɛɹ baʊz wɪð fəmɪljɛɹəɾi, ðə ɡɹeɪt tu ɹɪvɝz baʊz, ivən wən stʃɹʌŋ nɪɹli əz tɔl əz ðə mɛn u dʒɹu ðɛm. wɪð ðoʊz baʊz, nɑɾ ə mæn ə ðɛm bʌt kəd ʃut fɑɹðɝ ðən ɛniwʌn aʊtsaɪd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wəd bɪliv. ən hɪt wʌɾ i eɪmd æt.

There was nothing like armsmen's precision in the Two Rivers men, most boys like Tod, farmers' sons and shepherds, yet they knew what to do. Every fifth man took the reins of four more horses while the other riders hurriedly dismounted, longbows already strung and in hand. Those on the ground straggled together in rough lines, looking around with more interest than anything else, but they checked their quivers with practiced gestures and handled their bows with familiarity, the great Two Rivers bows, even when strung nearly as tall as the men who drew them. With those bows, not a man of them but could shoot farther than anyone outside the Two Rivers would believe. And hit what he aimed at.

pɛɹɪn hoʊp ðəɹ wəd bi nʌn ə ðət tədeɪ. səmtaɪmz i dʒɹimd ʌv ə wɝld wɛɹ ðəɹ nɛvɝ wɑz. ən ɹænd. . . .

Perrin hoped there would be none of that today. Sometimes he dreamed of a world where there never was. And Rand. . . .

"du jə bɪliv maɪ ɛnəmiz əv bɪn əslip waɪl aɪ wɑz . . . əweɪ?" ɹænd hæd sɛd sʌɾənli əz ðeɪ stʊd weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ dæʃivə tə oʊpən ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. hi hæɾ ɑn ə koʊt ɹuɾəd aʊɾ ə ðə wæɡənz, wɛl-kʌt ɡɹin wʊl, bʌt hɑɹdli wʌɾ i juʒəwəli wɔɹ naʊ. ʃɔɹɾ ə teɪkɪŋ ðə koʊɾ ɔf ə wɔɹɾɝz bæk əɹ ə keɪɾɪnsɝ fɹəm ən ilmən, ɪt wɑz ði oʊnli ɡɑɹmən ɪn ðə kæmp tə fɪt hɪm. tʃɹuθ, jə wʊɾə θɔɾ i ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn sɪlk ən faɪn ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, ðə weɪ hi hæd hæd ðoʊz wæɡənz sɝtʃt tɑp tə bɑɾəm, jɛstɝdeɪ ən ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ.

"Do you believe my enemies have been asleep while I was . . . away?" Rand had said suddenly as they stood waiting for Dashiva to open the gateway. He had on a coat rooted out of the wagons, well-cut green wool, but hardly what he usually wore now. Short of taking the coat off a Warder's back or a cadin'sor from an Aielman, it was the only garment in the camp to fit him. Truth, you would have thought he insisted on silk and fine embroidery, the way he had had those wagons searched top to bottom, yesterday and this morning.

ðə wæɡənz stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɪn laɪn, timz hɪtʃt, kænvəs kʌvɝz ən aɪɝn hups teɪkən daʊn. kaɪɹunə ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə swɔɹn sɪstɝz sæt pækt ɪndə ðə lɛd wæɡən, ən nɑt hæpi. ðeɪ hæd sis ðɛɹ pɹoʊɾɛsts əz sun əz ðeɪ sɔ ðət pɹətɛstɪŋ dɪd noʊ ɡʊd, bʌt pɛɹɪn kəd stɪl hɪɹ koʊldli æŋɡɹi mʌɾɝz. ət lis ðeɪ ɹoʊd. ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz sɝaʊndəd ðə wæɡən əfʊt, saɪlən ən stoʊni, waɪl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹɪznɝz stʊɾ ɪn ə ɹɪdʒəd, sʌlən klʌstɝ ɹɪŋ baɪ ɛvɹi waɪz wʌn u wɑz nɑt wɪð ɹænd, wɪtʃ wɑz tə seɪ ɔl bʌt sɔɹɪliə ən æmɪz. ðə pɹɪznɝz' wɔɹɾɝz ɡlaʊɝɾ ɪn ənʌðɝ klʌmp ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz ɔf, koʊl dɛθ weɪɾɪŋ dɪspaɪt ðɛɹ ɪnʒɝiz ən sɪswaɪəmən ɡɑɹdz. ɪksɛp fəɹ kaɪɹunəz bɪɡ blæk, ɪts ɹeɪnz hɛl baɪ ɹænd, ən ə maʊs-kʌlɝd mɛɹ wɪð faɪn æŋkəlz fəɹ mɪn, ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ən wɔɹɾɝz' hɔɹsəz nɑɾ əsaɪn tə æʃəmən - əɹ juz tə fɪl aʊt wæɡən timz; ðət hæd kɑzd ə kəmoʊʃən wɝs ðən meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊnɝz wɔk! - wɝ ɔl taɪd tə lɔŋ lɛd laɪnz fæsən tə ðə wæɡənz' teɪlɡeɪts.

The wagons stretched out in line, teams hitched, canvas covers and iron hoops taken down. Kiruna and the rest of the sworn sisters sat packed into the lead wagon, and not happy. They had ceased their protests as soon as they saw that protesting did no good, but Perrin could still hear coldly angry mutters. At least they rode. Their Warders surrounded the wagon afoot, silent and stony, while the Aes Sedai prisoners stood in a rigid, sullen cluster ringed by every Wise One who was not with Rand, which was to say all but Sorilea and Amys. The prisoners' Warders glowered in another clump a hundred paces off, cold death waiting despite their injuries and siswai'aman guards. Except for Kiruna's big black, its reins held by Rand, and a mouse-colored mare with fine ankles for Min, the Aes Sedai's and Warders' horses not assigned to Asha'man - or used to fill out wagon teams; that had caused a commotion worse than making their owners walk! - were all tied to long lead lines fastened to the wagons' tailgates.

"du jə bɪliv ɪt, flɪn? ɡɹeɪɾi?"

"Do you believe it, Flinn? Grady?"

wʌn ə ði æʃəmən weɪɾɪŋ tə ɡoʊ θɹu fɝst, ðə stɑki fɛloʊ wɪð ə fɑɹmɝz feɪs, lʊkt ət ɹænd ənsɝteɪnli, ðən ət ðə lɛðɝi oʊl mæn wɪð ðə lɪmp. itʃ wɔɹ ə sɪlvɝ-sɔɹd pɪn ɑn ɪz kɑlɝ, bʌt nɑt ðə dʒɹæɡən. "oʊnli ə ful θɪŋks ɪz ɛnəmiz stæn stɪl wən i ɪzən lʊkɪŋ, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," ði oʊl mæn sɛɾ ɪn ə ɡɹʌf vɔɪs. hi saʊndəd laɪk ə soʊlʒɝ.

One of the Asha'man waiting to go through first, the stocky fellow with a farmer's face, looked at Rand uncertainly, then at the leathery old man with the limp. Each wore a silver-sword pin on his collar, but not the Dragon. "Only a fool thinks his enemies stand still when he isn't looking, my Lord Dragon," the old man said in a gruff voice. He sounded like a soldier.

"wʌɾ əbaʊt ju, dæʃivə?"

"What about you, Dashiva?"

dæʃivə ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, sɝpɹaɪz tə bi ədʒɹɛst. "aɪ . . . ɡɹu ʌp ɑn ə fɑɹm." hi tʌɡd ɪz sɔɹd bɛl stʃɹeɪt, wɪtʃ ɪt dɪd nɑt nid. səpoʊzədli ðeɪ tʃɹeɪnd wɪð ðə sɔɹdz əz mʌtʃ əz wɪð ðə paʊɝ, bʌt dæʃivə dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊ wʌn ɛn fɹəm ði ʌðɝ. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt hævɪŋ ɛnəmiz." dɪspaɪɾ ɪz ɔkwɝdnəs, ðəɹ wɑz ə kaɪndə ɪnsələns tə hɪm. bʌt ðɛn, ðə hoʊl lɑt simd win ɑn ɛɹəɡəns.

Dashiva gave a start, surprised to be addressed. "I . . . grew up on a farm." He tugged his sword belt straight, which it did not need. Supposedly they trained with the swords as much as with the Power, but Dashiva did not seem to know one end from the other. "I don't know much about having enemies." Despite his awkwardness, there was a kind of insolence to him. But then, the whole lot seemed weaned on arrogance.

"ɪf jə steɪ nɪɹ mi," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli, "ju wɪl." hɪz smaɪl meɪd pɛɹɪn ʃɪvɝ. hi smaɪld waɪl i ɡeɪv ɔɹɾɝz tə ɡoʊ θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ əz ðoʊ ðeɪ wəd bi ətækt ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. ðəɹ wɝ ɛnəmiz ɛvɹiwɛɹ, hi toʊl ðɛm. ɔlweɪz ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt. ðəɹ wɝ ɛnəmiz ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ən jə nɛvɝ nu hu.

"If you stay near me," Rand said softly, "you will." His smile made Perrin shiver. He smiled while he gave orders to go through the gateway as though they would be attacked on the other side. There were enemies everywhere, he told them. Always remember that. There were enemies everywhere, and you never knew who.

ði ɛksəɾəs kəntɪnjuɾ ʌnəbeɪɾɪd. wæɡənz ɹʌmbəl fɹəm dəməaɪz wɛlz tə kɛɹhin, ðə sɪstɝz ɪn ðə fɝs laɪk stætʃuz ʌv aɪs biɪŋ lɝtʃt əbaʊt. ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz tʃɹɑɾəd əlɔŋsaɪd, hænz ɡɹɪpɪŋ sɔɹd hɪls ən aɪz nɛvɝ ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn wʌn spɑt; klɪɹli ðeɪ θɔt ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ niɾəd pɹətɛkʃən əz mʌtʃ fɹəm ðoʊz ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn ðə hɪl əz fɹəm ɛniwʌn u maɪɾ əpɪɹ. ðə waɪz wʌnz mɑɹtʃt θɹu hɝɾɪŋ ðɛɹ tʃɑɹdʒəz; ə nʌmbɝ juz stɪks tə pɹɑd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əlɔŋ, ðoʊ ðə sɪstɝz meɪɾ ə ɡʊd dʒɑb pɹitɛndɪŋ ðəɹ wɝ niðɝ waɪz wʌnz nɔɹ pɹɑdz. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ɡeɪʃeɪn keɪm, tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ɪn ə kɑləm fɔɹ waɪɾ ʌndɝ ðə ɡeɪz ʌv ə sɪŋɡəl meɪɾən; ʃi pɔɪntəd tə ə pleɪs aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ bɪfɔɹ dɑɹɾɪŋ tə dʒɔɪn ði ʌðɝ fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ, ən ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn nɛl ðəɹ ɪn laɪnz, neɪkəɾ əz dʒeɪbɝdz ən pɹaʊɾ əz iɡəlz. ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ wɔɹɾɝz fɑloʊɾ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ ɡɑɹd, ɹeɪɾieɪtɪŋ ə mæs fjʊɹi ðət pɛɹɪn kəd smɛl oʊvɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls, ðən ɹəɑɹk wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə ðə sɪswaɪəmən ən meɪɾənz, ən fɔɹ mɔɹ æʃəmən, itʃ liɾɪŋ ə sɛkən hɔɹs fəɹ wʌn ə ðə fɝs fɔɹ, ən nɹɛl ən ɪz wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz wɪð ðɛɹ ɹɛd-stʃɹimɝd lænsɪz.

The exodus continued unabated. Wagons rumbled from Dumai's Wells to Cairhien, the sisters in the first like statues of ice being lurched about. Their Warders trotted alongside, hands gripping sword hilts and eyes never resting on one spot; clearly they thought their Aes Sedai needed protection as much from those already on the hill as from anyone who might appear. The Wise Ones marched through herding their charges; a number used sticks to prod the Aes Sedai along, though the sisters made a good job pretending there were neither Wise Ones nor prods. The Shaido gai'shain came, trotting in a column four wide under the gaze of a single Maiden; she pointed to a place out of the way before darting to join the other Far Dareis Mai, and the gai'shain knelt there in lines, naked as jaybirds and proud as eagles. The remaining Warders followed under their guard, radiating a massed fury that Perrin could smell over everything else, then Rhuarc with the rest of the siswai'aman and Maidens, and four more Asha'man, each leading a second horse for one of the first four, and Nurelle and his Winged Guards with their red-streamered lances.

ðə minɝz wɝ pʌft ʌp oʊvɝ biɪŋ ðə ɹɪɹ ɡɑɹd, læfɪŋ ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ boʊsts tə ðə kɛɹhinɪn ʌv wʌt ðeɪ wʊɾə dʌn hæd ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ɹɪtɝnd, ðoʊ ɪn fæk ðeɪ wɝ nɑt læst. læst ʌv ɔl keɪm ɹænd ɑn kaɪɹunəz ɡɛldɪŋ, ən mɪn ɑn əɹ mɛɹ. sɔɹɪliə ən æmɪz stʃɹoʊɾ əlɔŋ tə wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə tɔl blæk hɔɹs, nændɛɹə ən hæf ə dʌzən meɪɾənz tə ði ʌðɝ, ən dæʃivə lɛɾ ə plæsəd-lʊkɪŋ beɪ mɛɹ ət ðɛɹ hilz. ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɪŋkt aʊt, ən dæʃivə blɪŋkt ət wɛɹ ɪt hæd bɪn, smaɪlɪŋ feɪnli, ðən skɹæmbəl klʌmsəli ɪndə ðə mɛɹz sæɾəl. hi sim tə bi tɔkɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz pɹɑbli kəz ɪz sɔɹd tæŋɡəld ɪn ɪz lɛɡz ən i nɪɹli fɛl. ʃʊɹli hi wɑz nɑt mæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi.

The Mayeners were puffed up over being the rear guard, laughing and shouting boasts to the Cairhienin of what they would have done had the Shaido returned, though in fact they were not last. Last of all came Rand on Kiruna's gelding, and Min on her mare. Sorilea and Amys strode along to one side of the tall black horse, Nandera and half a dozen Maidens to the other, and Dashiva led a placid-looking bay mare at their heels. The gateway winked out, and Dashiva blinked at where it had been, smiling faintly, then scrambled clumsily into the mare's saddle. He seemed to be talking to himself, but it was probably because his sword tangled in his legs and he nearly fell. Surely he was not mad already.

ən ɑɹmi kʌvɝd ðə hɪl, ɔl ɝeɪd fəɹ ən ətæk ðət pleɪnli wɑz nɑt kʌmɪŋ. ə smɔl ɑɹmi, oʊnli ə fju θaʊzənd, ðoʊ ɪt wʊɾə sim fɛɹ-saɪz bɪfɔɹ ði il bɹɔt ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz əkɹɔs ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl. ɡaɪɾɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs sloʊli təwɔɹd pɛɹɪn, ɹænd skæn ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd. ðə tu waɪz wʌnz fɑloʊd kloʊsli, tɔkɪŋ sɔfli ən wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm; nændɛɹə ən ðə meɪɾənz fɑloʊd, wɑtʃɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. hæd ɹænd bɪn ə wʊlf, pɛɹɪn wʊɾə sɛɾ i wɑz tɛstɪŋ ði ɛɹ. hi kæɹid ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ əkɹɔs ɪz haɪ sæɾəlboʊ, ə tu-fʊt lɛŋθ ə spɪɹhɛd dɛkɝeɪɾəd wɪð ə ɡɹin-ænd-waɪt tæsəl ən kɑɹvd wɪð dʒɹæɡənz, ən naʊ ən ðən i weɪɾ ɪt laɪtli ɪn ɪz hæn əz ɪf tə ɹimaɪn hɪmsɛlf ʌv ɪt.

An army covered the hill, all arrayed for an attack that plainly was not coming. A small army, only a few thousand, though it would have seemed fair-sized before the Aiel brought their numbers across the Dragonwall. Guiding his horse slowly toward Perrin, Rand scanned the countryside. The two Wise Ones followed closely, talking softly and watching him; Nandera and the Maidens followed, watching everything else. Had Rand been a wolf, Perrin would have said he was testing the air. He carried the Dragon Scepter across his high saddlebow, a two-foot length of spearhead decorated with a green-and-white tassel and carved with Dragons, and now and then he weighed it lightly in his hand as if to remind himself of it.

wən ɹænd ɹeɪn ɪn, hi stʌɾid pɛɹɪn əz ɪntɛnli əz i hæd ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ kʌntʃɹi. "aɪ tʃɹʌs ju," hi sɛd faɪnəli, nɑɾɪŋ. mɪn stɝɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, ən i æɾəd, "æn ju, mɪn, ʌv kɔɹs. ən ju, tu, lɔɪəl." ði oʊɡiɝ ʃɪftəɾ ənsɝteɪnli, wɪð ə hɛzɪɾənt ɡlæns fəɹ pɛɹɪn. ɹænd lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə hɪlsaɪd, ət ði il ən ði æʃəmən ən ɔl ðə ɹɛst. "soʊ fju aɪ kən tʃɹʌst," hi wɪspɝd taɪɹədli. hɪz sɛnt wɑz dʒʌmbəld ɪnʌf fəɹ tu mɛn, æŋɡɝ ən fɪɹ, dɪtɝməneɪʃən ən dɪspɛɹ. ən woʊvən θɹu ɪɾ ɔl, wɪɹinəs.

When Rand reined in, he studied Perrin as intently as he had the surrounding country. "I trust you," he said finally, nodding. Min stirred in her saddle, and he added, "And you, Min, of course. And you, too, Loial." The Ogier shifted uncertainly, with a hesitant glance for Perrin. Rand looked around the hillside, at the Aiel and the Asha'man and all the rest. "So few I can trust," he whispered tiredly. His scent was jumbled enough for two men, anger and fear, determination and despair. And woven through it all, weariness.

bi seɪn, pɛɹɪn wɑntəd tə tɛl hɪm. hoʊld ɑn. ə wɑʃ ʌv ɡɪl hɛld ɪz tʌŋ, ðoʊ. kəz ɪt wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn i wɑntəd tə seɪ ɪt tə, nɑɾ ɪz fɹɛn sɪns tʃaɪldhʊd. hi wɑntəɾ ɪz fɹɛn tə steɪ seɪn; ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hæd tə steɪ seɪn.

Be sane, Perrin wanted to tell him. Hold on. A wash of guilt held his tongue, though. Because it was the Dragon Reborn he wanted to say it to, not his friend since childhood. He wanted his friend to stay sane; the Dragon Reborn had to stay sane.

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," wʌn ə ði æʃəmən kɔld əbɹʌpli. hi lʊk lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə bɔɪ, wɪð dɑɹk aɪz əz bɪɡ əz ɛni ɡɝlz ən niðɝ sɔɹd nɔɹ dʒɹæɡən ɑn ɪz kɑlɝ, bʌt pɹaɪɾ ɪn ɪz bɛɹɪŋ. nɛɹɪʃmə, pɛɹɪn hæd hɝɾ ɪm kɔld. "tə ðə saʊθwɛst."

"My Lord Dragon," one of the Asha'man called abruptly. He looked little more than a boy, with dark eyes as big as any girl's and neither sword nor Dragon on his collar, but pride in his bearing. Narishma, Perrin had heard him called. "To the southwest."

ə fɪɡjɝ hæɾ əpɪɹd, ɹʌnɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ðə tʃɹiz ə maɪl əɹ mɔɹ əweɪ, ə wʊmən wɪð skɝts haɪk tə hɝ θaɪz. tə pɛɹɪnz aɪz ʃi wɑz klɪɹli il. eɪ waɪz wʌn, hi θɔt, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹil weɪ tə tɛl ət saɪt. hi wɑz dʒʌst sɝɾən. ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ bɹɔt bæk ɔl ɪz ɛdʒinəs. sʌmbɑɾi aʊt hɪɹ, dʒʌst wɛɹ ðeɪ hæpən tə kʌm aʊɾ ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, kəd nɑt bi ɡʊd nuz. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hæd bɪn tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ kɛɹhin əɡɛn wən i sɛɾ ɔf æftɝ ɹænd, bʌt tə ði il, ə waɪz wʌn wɑz ə waɪz wʌn, wʌtɛvɝ əɹ klæn. ðeɪ vɪzəɾəd laɪk neɪbɝz oʊvɝ fəɹ ti waɪl ðɛɹ klænz kɪld wʌn ənʌðɝ. tu il tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl itʃ ʌðɝ wəd stɛp bæk tə lɛɾ ə waɪz wʌn pæs bɪtwin. meɪbi jɛstɝdeɪ hæd tʃeɪnʒd ðəɾ ən meɪbi nɑt. hi ɛksheɪld wɛɹəli. ət bɛst ʃi kəd nɑt bi ɡʊd nuz.

A figure had appeared, running out from the trees a mile or more away, a woman with skirts hiked to her thighs. To Perrin's eyes she was clearly Aiel. A Wise One, he thought, though there was no real way to tell at sight. He was just certain. The sight of her brought back all his edginess. Somebody out here, just where they happened to come out of the gateway, could not be good news. The Shaido had been troubling Cairhien again when he set off after Rand, but to the Aiel, a Wise One was a Wise One, whatever her clan. They visited like neighbors over for tea while their clans killed one another. Two Aiel trying to kill each other would step back to let a Wise One pass between. Maybe yesterday had changed that and maybe not. He exhaled wearily. At best she could not be good news.

nɪɹli ɛvɹiwʌn ɑn ðə hɪl sim tə fil ðə seɪm. ɹɪpəlz ə moʊʃən ɹæn ɛvɹiwɛɹ, spɪɹz hɛftəd, æɹoʊz nɑkt. kɛɹhinɪn ən minɝz ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, ən ɛɹæm dʒɹu hɪz sɔɹd, aɪz ʃaɪnɪŋ wɪð æntɪsəpeɪʃən. lɔɪəl lin ɑn ɪz tɔl æks ən fɪŋɡɝd ði ɛdʒ ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli. ðə hɛd wɑz ʃeɪp laɪk ðəɾ ʌv ə hjudʒ wʊd-æks, bʌɾ ɪnɡɹeɪvd wɪð livz ən skɹoʊlz ən ɪnleɪd wɪð ɡoʊld. ði ɪnleɪ wɑz ə tʃɹaɪfəl skʌft fɹəm ði æksəz leɪt jus. ɪf i hæd tə juz ɪɾ əɡɛn, hi wʊd, bʌt wɪð əz mʌtʃ ɹɪlʌktəns əz pɛɹɪn juzd ɪz ən fəɹ mɛni ʌv ðə seɪm ɹizənz.

Nearly everyone on the hill seemed to feel the same. Ripples of motion ran everywhere, spears hefted, arrows nocked. Cairhienin and Mayeners shifted in their saddles, and Aram drew his sword, eyes shining with anticipation. Loial leaned on his tall axe and fingered the edge regretfully. The head was shaped like that of a huge wood-axe, but engraved with leaves and scrolls and inlaid with gold. The inlay was a trifle scuffed from the axe's late use. If he had to use it again, he would, but with as much reluctance as Perrin used his and for many of the same reasons.

ɹænd sɪmpli sæɾ ɪz hɔɹs ən wɑtʃt, feɪs ənɹiɾəbəl. mɪn ɛdʒd əɹ mɛɹ kloʊs ɪnʌf tə stʃɹoʊk ɪz ʃoʊldɝ laɪk sʌmwʌn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə suð ə mæstəf wɪð ɪts hækəlz ʌp.

Rand simply sat his horse and watched, face unreadable. Min edged her mare close enough to stroke his shoulder like someone trying to soothe a mastiff with its hackles up.

ðə waɪz wʌnz ɔlsoʊ ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ə dɪstɝbəns, bʌt niðɝ dɪd ðeɪ steɪ stɪl. sɔɹɪliə dʒɛstʃɝd, ən ə dʌzən ə ðə wɪmən ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ bɹoʊk ɔf tə dʒɔɪn əɹ ən æmɪz, wɛl əweɪ fɹəm ɹænd ən aʊɾ ʌv ivən pɛɹɪnz hɪɹɪŋ. fju hæɾ ɛni ɡɹeɪ ɪn ðɛɹ hɛɹ, ən sɔɹɪliəz wɑz ði oʊnli laɪn feɪs, bʌt ðɛn, ðəɹ wɑz hɑɹdli ə ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ tə bi sin ɑn ɛni ʌv ðə waɪz wʌnz hɪɹ. ðə fækt wɑz, nɑt mɛni il lɪv tə hæv mʌtʃ ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ. ðiz wɪmən hæd pəzɪʃən, ðoʊ, əɹ ɪnfluəns, haʊɛvɝ waɪz wʌnz dɪsaɪɾɪd sətʃ θɪŋz. pɛɹɪn hæd sin sɔɹɪliə ən æmɪz kənfɝ wɪð ðə seɪm lɑt bɪfɔɹ, ðoʊ kənfɝ wɑz nɑt kwaɪt ðə wɝd. sɔɹɪliə spoʊk, wɪð ən əkeɪʒənəl wɝd fɹəm æmɪz, ən ði ʌðɝz lɪsənd. ɛdʒɹə ɹeɪzd ə pɹoʊɾɛst, bʌt sɔɹɪliə smʌðɝɾ ɪt, əpɛɹənli wɪθaʊt bɹeɪkɪŋ stʃɹaɪd, ðən pɔɪntəɾ aʊt tu ʌv ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ, soʊɾɝɪn ən koʊsən. ɪmiɾiətli, ðeɪ ɡæðɝd ðɛɹ skɝts oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ɑɹmz ən spɛɾ ɔf təwɔɹd ðə nukʌmɝ, lɛɡz flæʃɪŋ.

The Wise Ones also gave no sign of disturbance, but neither did they stay still. Sorilea gestured, and a dozen of the women guarding the Aes Sedai broke off to join her and Amys, well away from Rand and out of even Perrin's hearing. Few had any gray in their hair, and Sorilea's was the only lined face, but then, there was hardly a gray hair to be seen on any of the Wise Ones here. The fact was, not many Aiel lived to have much gray hair. These women had position, though, or influence, however Wise Ones decided such things. Perrin had seen Sorilea and Amys confer with the same lot before, though confer was not quite the word. Sorilea spoke, with an occasional word from Amys, and the others listened. Edarra raised a protest, but Sorilea smothered it, apparently without breaking stride, then pointed out two of their number, Sotarin and Cosain. Immediately, they gathered their skirts over their arms and sped off toward the newcomer, legs flashing.

pɛɹɪn pæɾəd stɛpɝz nɛk. noʊ mɔɹ kɪlɪŋ. nɑt jɛt.

Perrin patted Stepper's neck. No more killing. Not yet.

ðə θɹi waɪz wʌnz mɛt nɪɹli hæf ə maɪl fɹəm ðə hɪl ən stɑpt. ðeɪ spoʊk, dʒʌs fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ən ðən ɔl keɪm ɑn əɾ ə ɹʌn, bæk tə ðə hɪl. ən stʃɹeɪt tə sɔɹɪliə. ðə nukʌmɝ, ə jʌnʒɪʃ, lɔŋ-noʊzd wʊmən wɪð ə mæs ʌv ɪnkɹɛɾəbli ɹɛd hɛɹ, spoʊk hɝidli. sɔɹɪliəz feɪs ɡɹu stəniɝ baɪ ðə wɝd. faɪnəli ðə ɹɛd-hɛɹd wʊmən fɪnɪʃt - əɹ ɹæðɝ sɔɹɪliə kʌɾ əɹ ʃɔɹt wɪð ə fju wɝdz - ən ðə lɑt tɝn tə feɪs ɹænd. nʌn meɪɾ ə muv təwɔɹd hɪm, ðoʊ. ðeɪ weɪɾəd, hænz foʊldəɾ ət ðɛɹ weɪsts ən ʃɔlz lupt oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ɑɹmz, ɪnskɹuɾəbəl əz ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ.

The three Wise Ones met nearly half a mile from the hill and stopped. They spoke, just for a moment, and then all came on at a run, back to the hill. And straight to Sorilea. The newcomer, a youngish, long-nosed woman with a mass of incredibly red hair, spoke hurriedly. Sorilea's face grew stonier by the word. Finally the red-haired woman finished - or rather Sorilea cut her short with a few words - and the lot turned to face Rand. None made a move toward him, though. They waited, hands folded at their waists and shawls looped over their arms, inscrutable as any Aes Sedai.

"ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn," ɹænd mʌɾɝd dʒɹaɪli ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. swɪŋɪŋ ə lɛɡ oʊvɝ, hi slɪd fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl, ðən hɛlp mɪn tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

"The Car'a'carn," Rand muttered dryly under his breath. Swinging a leg over, he slid from his saddle, then helped Min to the ground.

pɛɹɪn klaɪm daʊn tu, ən lɛd stɛpɝ æftɝ əm tə ðə waɪz wʌnz. lɔɪəl tʃɹeɪld əlɔŋ, ən ɛɹæm fɑloʊɾ ɑn ɪz hɔɹs, nɑt dɪsmaʊntɪŋ əntɪl pɛɹɪn moʊʃən ɪm tə. il dɪd nɑt ɹaɪd, nɑɾ ənlɛs ɪt wɑz æbsəlutli nɛsəsɛɹi ɛniweɪ, ən ðeɪ kənsɪɾɝd ɪt ɹud fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə feɪs əm fɹəm hɔɹsbæk. ɹəɑɹk dʒɔɪn ðɛm, ən ɡɔl, hu wɔɹ ə skaʊl fəɹ səm ɹizən. ɪt wɛnt wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ ðət nændɛɹə ən səlɪn ən ðə meɪɾənz keɪm tu.

Perrin climbed down too, and led Stepper after them to the Wise Ones. Loial trailed along, and Aram followed on his horse, not dismounting until Perrin motioned him to. Aiel did not ride, not unless it was absolutely necessary anyway, and they considered it rude for anyone to face them from horseback. Rhuarc joined them, and Gaul, who wore a scowl for some reason. It went without saying that Nandera and Sulin and the Maidens came too.

ðə ɹɛd-hɛɹd nukʌmɝ bɪɡæn əz sun əz ɹænd dʒɹu nɪɹ. "bɛɹ ən mɛɡænə sɛt wɑtʃəz ɛvɹi weɪ jə maɪt pɑsəbli kʌm bæk tə ðə tʃɹikɪlɝz' sɪɾi, kɑɹəkɑɹn, bʌɾ ɪn tʃɹuθ, noʊ wʌn θɔt ðɪs wəd bi - "

The red-haired newcomer began as soon as Rand drew near. "Bair and Megana set watches every way you might possibly come back to the treekillers' city, Car'a'carn, but in truth, no one thought this would be - "

"fɛɹeɪɡɪn," sɔɹɪliə sɛd, ʃɑɹpli ɪnʌf tə dʒɹɔ blʌd. ðə ɹɛd-hɛɹd wʊmənz tiθ klɪkt əz ʃi snæpt əɹ maʊθ ʃʌt, ən ʃi stɛɹd fɪksədli ət ɹænd wɪð bɹɪljən blu aɪz, əvɔɪɾɪŋ sɔɹɪliəz ɡlɛɹ.

"Feraighin," Sorilea said, sharply enough to draw blood. The red-haired woman's teeth clicked as she snapped her mouth shut, and she stared fixedly at Rand with brilliant blue eyes, avoiding Sorilea's glare.

faɪnəli sɔɹɪliə tʊk ə bɹɛθ ən tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən tə ɹænd. "ðɛɹ ɪz tʃɹʌbəl ɪn ðə tɛns," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs. "ɹumɝz bɪɡæn əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹikɪlɝz ðət juv ɡɔn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu keɪm, ɡɔn tə bɛnd ni tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. nʌn u noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ dɛɹd spik, əɹ ðə ɹɪzʌlt wʊɾə bɪn wɝs."

Finally Sorilea took a breath and turned her attention to Rand. "There is trouble in the tents," she said in a flat voice. "Rumors began among the treekillers that you have gone to the White Tower with the Aes Sedai who came, gone to bend knee to the Amyrlin Seat. None who know the truth dared speak, or the result would have been worse."

"ænd wʌɾ ɪz ðə ɹɪzʌlt?" ɹænd æskt kwaɪətli. hi ɪɡzuɾɪd tɛnʃən, ən mɪn bɪɡæn stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əɡɛn.

"And what is the result?" Rand asked quietly. He exuded tension, and Min began stroking his shoulder again.

"mɛni bɪliv juv əbændən ði il," æmɪz toʊld ɪm dʒʌst əz kwaɪətli. "ðə bliknəs əz ɹɪtɝnd. ɛvɹi deɪ ə θaʊzən əɹ mɔɹ θɹoʊ daʊn ðɛɹ spɪɹz ən vænɪʃ, əneɪbəl tə feɪs əɹ fjutʃɝ, əɹ əɹ pæst. səm meɪ bi ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ." fəɹ ə moʊmən dɪsɡʌs tɪŋd əɹ vɔɪs. "ðɛɹ əv bɪn wɪspɝz ðət ðə tʃɹu kɑɹəkɑɹn wəd nɑt ɡɪv hɪmsɛlf tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪndɪɹiən sɛz ɪf juv ɡɔn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ɪt kænɑt bi wɪlɪŋli. hiz ɹɛɾi tə teɪk ðə koʊdʒɹə nɔɹθ, tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən dæns ðə spɪɹz wɪð ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ hi faɪnz. əɹ ɛni wɛtləndɝ; hi sɛz jə mʌst əv bɪn bɪtʃɹeɪd. tɪmoʊlən mʌɾɝz ðəɾ ɪf ðə teɪlz ɑɹ tʃɹu, juv bɪtʃɹeɪɾ ʌs, ən hɪl teɪk ðə maɪæɡoʊmə bæk tə ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd. æftɝ i siz jə dɛd. mændələn ən dʒænwɪn hoʊl ðɛɹ kaʊnsəl, bʌt ðeɪ lɪsən tə ɪndɪɹiən ən tɪmoʊlən boʊθ." ɹəɑɹk ɡɹɪməst, sʌkɪŋ ɛɹ bɪtwin ɪz tiθ; fəɹ ən il, ðət wɑz əz mʌtʃ əz tɛɹɪŋ ɪz hɛɹ ɪn dɪspɛɹ.

"Many believe you have abandoned the Aiel," Amys told him just as quietly. "The bleakness has returned. Every day a thousand or more throw down their spears and vanish, unable to face our future, or our past. Some may be going to the Shaido." For a moment disgust tinged her voice. "There have been whispers that the true Car'a'carn would not give himself to the Aes Sedai. Indirian says if you have gone to the White Tower, it cannot be willingly. He is ready to take the Codarra north, to Tar Valon, and dance the spears with any Aes Sedai he finds. Or any wetlander; he says you must have been betrayed. Timolan mutters that if the tales are true, you have betrayed us, and he will take the Miagoma back to the Three-fold Land. After he sees you dead. Mandelain and Janwin hold their counsel, but they listen to Indirian and Timolan both." Rhuarc grimaced, sucking air between his teeth; for an Aiel, that was as much as tearing his hair in despair.

"ɪts nɑt ɡʊd nuz," pɛɹɪn pɹətɛstəd, "bʌt jə meɪk ɪt saʊn ə dɛθ sɛntəns. wʌns ɹænd ʃoʊz hɪmsɛlf, ðə ɹumɝz ɑɹ dʌn."

"It's not good news," Perrin protested, "but you make it sound a death sentence. Once Rand shows himself, the rumors are done."

ɹænd skɹʌbd ə hæn θɹu hɪz hɛɹ. "ɪf ðət wɑz soʊ, sɔɹɪliə wʊdn lʊk laɪk ʃi hæd swɑloʊɾ ə lɪzɝd." fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, nændɛɹə ən səlɪn lʊkt əz ðoʊ ðɛɹ lɪzɝdz wɝ stɪl əlaɪv ɑn ðə weɪ daʊn. "wʌt hævən jə toʊl mi jɛt, sɔɹɪliə?"

Rand scrubbed a hand through his hair. "If that was so, Sorilea wouldn't look like she had swallowed a lizard." For that matter, Nandera and Sulin looked as though their lizards were still alive on the way down. "What haven't you told me yet, Sorilea?"

ðə lɛðɝ-feɪst wʊmən ɡeɪv ɪm ə θɪn, əpɹuvɪŋ smaɪl. "ju si bɪɑnd wʌɾ ɪz sɛd. ɡʊd." hɝ toʊn steɪd flæɾ əz wɝk stoʊn, ðoʊ. "ju ɹɪtɝn wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ. səm wɪl bɪliv ðət minz jə dɪd bɛnd ni. wʌtɛvɝ jə seɪ əɹ du, ðəl bɪliv jə wɛɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hɔltɝ. ən ðəɾ ɪz bɪfɔɹ ɪts noʊn jə wɝ ə pɹɪznɝ. sikɹəts faɪn kɹɛvəsɪz ə fli kəd nɑt slɪp θɹu, ən ə sikɹət noʊn baɪ soʊ mɛni hæz wɪŋz."

The leather-faced woman gave him a thin, approving smile. "You see beyond what is said. Good." Her tone stayed flat as worked stone, though. "You return with Aes Sedai. Some will believe that means you did bend knee. Whatever you say or do, they will believe you wear an Aes Sedai halter. And that is before it is known you were a prisoner. Secrets find crevices a flea could not slip through, and a secret known by so many has wings."

pɛɹɪn aɪd dɑbɹeɪn ən nɹɛl, wɑtʃɪŋ wɪð ðɛɹ mɛn, ən swɑloʊd kwizəli. haʊ mɛni ʌv ðoʊz u fɑloʊd ɹænd dɪd soʊ kəz i hæd ðə weɪɾ ə ði il mæs bɪhaɪn hɪm? nɑɾ ɔl, sɝɾənli, bʌt fəɹ ɛvɹi mæn u hæd tʃoʊzən kəz ɹænd wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, faɪv əɹ ivən tɛn hæd kʌm kəz ðə laɪt ʃoʊn bɹaɪɾəst ɑn ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ɹæŋks. ɪf ði il bɹoʊk əweɪ, əɹ splɪntɝd. . . .

Perrin eyed Dobraine and Nurelle, watching with their men, and swallowed queasily. How many of those who followed Rand did so because he had the weight of the Aiel massed behind him? Not all, certainly, but for every man who had chosen because Rand was the Dragon Reborn, five or even ten had come because the Light shone brightest on the strongest ranks. If the Aiel broke away, or splintered. . . .

hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðət pɑsəbɪləɾi. dɪfɛndɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz hæd stʃɹɛtʃt ɪz əbɪləɾiz əz fɑɹ əz ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ, meɪbi fɑɹðɝ. tɑvɝən əɹ nɑt, hi hæd noʊ ɪluʒənz i wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz mɛn u ɛndəɾ ʌp ɪn ðə hɪstɝiz; ðət wɑz fəɹ ɹænd. vɪlədʒ-saɪz pɹɑbləmz wɝ ɪz lɪmət. jɛɾ i kəd nɑt hɛlp hɪmsɛlf. hɪz maɪn tʃɝnd. wʌt tə də ɪf ðə wɝs keɪm? lɪsts ɹæn ʌp ɪn ɪz hɛd: hu wəd ɹɪmeɪn lɔɪəl ən u maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə slɪp əweɪ. ðə fɝs lɪst wɑz səfɪʃənli ʃɔɹɾ ən ðə sɛkən səfɪʃənli lɔŋ tə dʒɹaɪ hɪz θɹoʊt. tu mɛni pipəl stɪl skim fəɹ ædvæntɪdʒ əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən əɹ ðə læs bæɾəl. hi səspɛktəd səm stɪl wəd ðə deɪ æftɝ tɑɹmən ɡdən bɪɡæn. ðə wɝst ʌv ɪt wɑz, moʊst wəd nɑt bi dɑɹkfɹɛnz, dʒʌs pipəl lʊkɪŋ aʊt fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn ɪntʃɹəsts fɝst. lɔɪəlz ɪɹz hʌŋ lɪmp; hi sɔ ɪt, tu.

He did not want to think about that possibility. Defending the Two Rivers had stretched his abilities as far as they would go, maybe farther. Ta'veren or not, he had no illusions he was one of those men who ended up in the histories; that was for Rand. Village-sized problems were his limit. Yet he could not help himself. His mind churned. What to do if the worst came? Lists ran up in his head: who would remain loyal and who might try to slip away. The first list was sufficiently short and the second sufficiently long to dry his throat. Too many people still schemed for advantage as if they had never heard of the Prophecies of the Dragon or the Last Battle. He suspected some still would the day after Tarmon Gai'don began. The worst of it was, most would not be Darkfriends, just people looking out for their own interests first. Loial's ears hung limp; he saw it, too.

noʊ sunɝ dɪd sɔɹɪliə fɪnɪʃ spikɪŋ tə ɹænd ðən əɹ aɪz wɪp tə wʌn saɪɾ ɪn ə ɡlɛɹ tə bɔɹ hoʊlz ɪn aɪɝn. "ju wɝ toʊl tə ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə wæɡən." bɛɹə ən kaɪɹunə keɪm tə ən əbɹʌp hɔlt, ən ɑlɑnə nɪɹli stʌmbəld ɪndə ðɛm. "ju wɝ toʊl nɑt tə tʌtʃ ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən, bʌt jə lɪsən tə wʌt wɑz sɛd hɪɹ. jəl lɝn ðəɾ aɪ min wʌɾ aɪ seɪ."

No sooner did Sorilea finish speaking to Rand than her eyes whipped to one side in a glare to bore holes in iron. "You were told to remain in the wagon." Bera and Kiruna came to an abrupt halt, and Alanna nearly stumbled into them. "You were told not to touch the One Power without permission, but you listened to what was said here. You will learn that I mean what I say."

dɪspaɪt sɔɹɪliəz ɔɡɝɪŋ stɛɹ, ðə θɹi hɛl ðɛɹ ɡɹaʊnd, bɛɹə ən kaɪɹunə wɪð aɪsi dɪɡnəɾi, ɑlɑnə wɪð smoʊldɝɪŋ dɪfaɪəns. lɔɪəlz hjudʒ aɪz ɹoʊl təwɔɹd ðɛm, ðən təwɔɹd ðə waɪz wʌn; ɪf ɪz ɪɹz hæd bɪn lɪmp bɪfɔɹ, naʊ ðeɪ wɪltɪd kəmplitli, ən ɪz lɔŋ aɪbɹaʊz dʒɹɑp tə hɪz tʃiks. pɔɹɪŋ ənizəli oʊvɝ ɪz mɛntəl lɪsts, pɛɹɪn wʌndɝɾ æbsənli haʊ fɑɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪntɛndəd tə pʊʃ. ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ! ðeɪ maɪt faɪn ə ɹiækʃən fɹəm ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝs ðən sɔɹɪliəz bɑɹk. fɹəm ɹænd, tu.

Despite Sorilea's auguring stare, the three held their ground, Bera and Kiruna with icy dignity, Alanna with smoldering defiance. Loial's huge eyes rolled toward them, then toward the Wise One; if his ears had been limp before, now they wilted completely, and his long eyebrows dropped to his cheeks. Poring uneasily over his mental lists, Perrin wondered absently how far the Aes Sedai intended to push. Eavesdropping with the Power! They might find a reaction from the Wise Ones worse than Sorilea's bark. From Rand, too.

nɑt ðɪs taɪm, haʊɛvɝ. ɹænd simd ʌnəwɛɹ ə ðɛm. hi lʊkt ɹaɪt θɹu sɔɹɪliə. əɹ meɪbi lɪsən tə sʌmθɪŋ noʊbɑdi ɛls kəd hɪɹ əɡɛn. "wʌɾ ə ðə wɛtləndɝz?" hi sɛd faɪnəli. "koʊləveɪɪɹ əz bɪn kɹaʊn kwin, hæzənt ʃi?" ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹɪli ə kwɛstʃən.

Not this time, however. Rand seemed unaware of them. He looked right through Sorilea. Or maybe listened to something nobody else could hear again. "What of the wetlanders?" he said finally. "Colavaere has been crowned queen, hasn't she?" It was not really a question.

sɔɹɪliə nɑɾəd, θʌm tæpɪŋ ðə hɪlt ə hɝ bɛl naɪf, bʌɾ əɹ ətɛnʃən nɛvɝ lɛf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. hu wɑz tʃoʊzən kɪŋ əɹ kwin əmʌŋ ðə wɛtləndɝz wɑz ə smɔl kənsɝn tə il, ɪspɛʃli əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹikɪlɪŋ kɛɹhinɪn.

Sorilea nodded, thumb tapping the hilt of her belt knife, but her attention never left the Aes Sedai. Who was chosen king or queen among the wetlanders was of small concern to Aiel, especially among the treekilling Cairhienin.

ən aɪsɪkəl stæbd ɪndə pɛɹɪnz tʃɛst. ðət koʊləveɪɪɹ ə haʊs seɪɡən wɑntəd ðə sʌn θɹoʊn wɑz noʊ sikɹət; ʃi hæd skim fəɹ ɪt fɹəm ðə deɪ ɡɔlʒɹiən ɹieɪɾən wɑz əsæsəneɪɾəd, bɪfɔɹ ɹænd hæɾ ivən dɪklɛɹd hɪmsɛlf ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən kɛp skimɪŋ æftɝ ɪt bɪkeɪm pʌblɪk nɑlədʒ ðət ɹænd mɛn ðə θɹoʊn fəɹ ɪleɪn. fju nu ʃi wɑz ə koʊld-blʌɾɪd mɝɾɝɝ, haʊɛvɝ. ən feɪl wɑz ɪn ðə sɪɾi. ət list ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn. beɪn ən kiæd wəd bi kloʊs tə hɝ. ðeɪ wɝ meɪɾənz ən əɹ fɹɛnz, meɪbi ɔlmoʊst wʌt ði il kɔl nɪɹ-sɪstɝz; ðeɪ wəd nɑt lɛɾ əɹ bi hɑɹmd. ði aɪsɪkəl wəd nɑt ɡoʊ əweɪ, ðoʊ. koʊləveɪɪɹ heɪɾəd ɹænd, ən baɪ ɪkstɛnʃən ɛniwʌn kloʊs tə ɹænd. sətʃ æz, pɝhæps, ðə waɪf ʌv ə mæn u wɑz ɹændz fɹɛnd. noʊ. beɪn ən kiæd wəd kip əɹ seɪf.

An icicle stabbed into Perrin's chest. That Colavaere of House Saighan wanted the Sun Throne was no secret; she had schemed for it from the day Galldrian Riatin was assassinated, before Rand had even declared himself the Dragon Reborn, and kept scheming after it became public knowledge that Rand meant the throne for Elayne. Few knew she was a cold-blooded murderer, however. And Faile was in the city. At least she was not alone. Bain and Chiad would be close to her. They were Maidens and her friends, maybe almost what the Aiel called near-sisters; they would not let her be harmed. The icicle would not go away, though. Colavaere hated Rand, and by extension anyone close to Rand. Such as, perhaps, the wife of a man who was Rand's friend. No. Bain and Chiad would keep her safe.

"ðɪs ɪz ə dɛləkət sɪtʃueɪʃən." muvɪŋ kloʊsɝ tə ɹænd, ɹɪmɑɹkəbli, kaɪɹunə ɪɡnɔɹd sɔɹɪliə. fəɹ sətʃ ə skɹɔni wʊmən, ðə waɪz wʌn hæɾ aɪz laɪk hæmɝz. "wʌtɛvɝ jə də kən əv sɪɹiəs ɹipɝkʌʃənz. aɪ - "

"This is a delicate situation." Moving closer to Rand, remarkably, Kiruna ignored Sorilea. For such a scrawny woman, the Wise One had eyes like hammers. "Whatever you do can have serious repercussions. I - "

"wʌɾ əz koʊləveɪɪɹ sɛɾ əbaʊt mi?" ɹænd æsk sɔɹɪliə ɪn ə tu-kæʒəwəl toʊn. "hæz ʃi hɑɹm bɹəleɪn?" bɹəleɪn, ðə fɝst ə min, wɑz u ɹænd hæd lɛft ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ ə kɛɹhin. waɪ dɪɾ i nɑɾ æsk əbaʊt feɪl?

"What has Colavaere said about me?" Rand asked Sorilea in a too-casual tone. "Has she harmed Berelain?" Berelain, the First of Mayene, was who Rand had left in charge of Cairhien. Why did he not ask about Faile?

"bɹəleɪn sɝ pɛndʒɹæɡ ɪz wɛl," sɔɹɪliə mɝmɝd, wɪθaʊt stɑpɪŋ əɹ stʌɾi ʌv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. aʊtwɝdli kaɪɹunə steɪd kɑm dɪspaɪt biɪŋ ɪntɝʌptɪɾ ən ɪɡnɔɹd, bʌt ðə ɡeɪz ʃi fɪkst ɑn ɹænd cʊɾə fɹoʊzən ə fɔɹdʒ-faɪɝ sɑləd wɪð ðə bɛloʊz pʌmpɪŋ. fəɹ ðə ɹɛst, sɔɹɪliə dʒɛstʃɝd tə fɛɹeɪɡɪn.

"Berelain sur Paendrag is well," Sorilea murmured, without stopping her study of the Aes Sedai. Outwardly Kiruna stayed calm despite being interrupted and ignored, but the gaze she fixed on Rand could have frozen a forge-fire solid with the bellows pumping. For the rest, Sorilea gestured to Feraighin.

ðə ɹɛd-hɛɹd wʊmən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt; pleɪnli ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəd tə bi əlaʊɾ ə wɝd. ʃi pʊt dɪɡnəɾi bæk ɑn laɪk ə heɪstəli dɑnd ɡɑɹmənt. "koʊləveɪɪɹ seɪɡən sɛz juv ɡɔn tə keɪɛmlɪn, kɑɹəkɑɹn, əɹ meɪbi tə tɛɹ, bʌt wɛɹɛvɝ juv ɡɔn, ɔl mʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət jə ɑɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ən mʌs bi oʊbeɪd." fɛɹeɪɡɪn snɪft; ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑz noʊ pɑɹɾ ʌv il pɹɑfəsiz, oʊnli ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn. "ʃi sɛz jəl ɹɪtɝn ən kənfɝm əɹ ɑn ðə θɹoʊn. ʃi spiks ɔfən tə ðə tʃifs, ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋ əm tə muv ðə spɪɹz saʊθ. ɪn oʊbiɾiəns tə ju, ʃi sɛz. ʃi dʌz nɑt si ðə waɪz wʌnz, ən hɪɹz oʊnli ðə wɪnd wən wi spik." ðɪs taɪm əɹ snɪf wɑz ə fɛɹ əpɹɑksəmeɪʃən ə sɔɹɪliəz. noʊ wʌn toʊl ðə klæn tʃifs wʌt tə du, bʌɾ æŋɡɝɪŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz wɑz ə bæd weɪ tə stɑɹt kənvɪnsɪŋ ðə tʃifs ʌv ɛniθɪŋ.

The red-haired woman gave a start and cleared her throat; plainly she had not expected to be allowed a word. She put dignity back on like a hastily donned garment. "Colavaere Saighan says you have gone to Caemlyn, Car'a'carn, or maybe to Tear, but wherever you have gone, all must remember that you are the Dragon Reborn and must be obeyed." Feraighin sniffed; the Dragon Reborn was no part of Aiel prophecies, only the Car'a'carn. "She says you will return and confirm her on the throne. She speaks often to the chiefs, encouraging them to move the spears south. In obedience to you, she says. She does not see the Wise Ones, and hears only the wind when we speak." This time her sniff was a fair approximation of Sorilea's. No one told the clan chiefs what to do, but angering the Wise Ones was a bad way to start convincing the chiefs of anything.

ɪt meɪd sɛns tə pɛɹɪn, ðoʊ, tə ðə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm ðət kəd θɪŋk ʌv ɛniθɪŋ bɪsaɪdz feɪl. koʊləveɪɪɹ pɹɑbli hæd nɛvɝ peɪɾ ɪnʌf ətɛnʃən tə ðə "sævədʒəz" tə ɹilaɪz ðə waɪz wʌnz dɪd mɔɹ ðən dɪspɛns ɝbz, bʌt ʃi wəd wɑn ɛvɹi læst il aʊɾ ə kɛɹhin. ðə kwɛstʃən wɑz, ɡɪvən ðə sɝkəmstænsəz, hæɾ ɛni ʌv ðə tʃifs lɪsən tə hɝ? bʌt ðə kwɛstʃən ɹænd æskt wɑz nɑt ði ɑbviəs.

It made sense to Perrin, though, to the part of him that could think of anything besides Faile. Colavaere probably had never paid enough attention to the "savages" to realize the Wise Ones did more than dispense herbs, but she would want every last Aiel out of Cairhien. The question was, given the circumstances, had any of the chiefs listened to her? But the question Rand asked was not the obvious.

"wʌɾ ɛls əz hæpən ɪn ðə sɪɾi? ɛniθɪŋ juv hɝd, fɛɹeɪɡɪn. meɪbi sʌmθɪŋ ðət maɪɾ oʊnli sim ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə ə wɛtləndɝ."

"What else has happened in the city? Anything you've heard, Feraighin. Maybe something that might only seem important to a wetlander."

ʃi tɔst əɹ ɹɛd meɪn kəntɛmptʃwəsli. "wɛtləndɝz ɑɹ laɪk sænfliz, kɑɹəkɑɹn: hu kən noʊ wʌt ðeɪ faɪn ɪmpɔɹɾənt? stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz səmtaɪmz hæpən ɪn ðə sɪɾi, soʊ aɪ hæv hɝd, əz ðeɪ də əmʌŋ ðə tɛns. pipəl səmtaɪmz si θɪŋz ðət kænɑt bi, oʊnli fəɹ ə taɪm, wʌt kænɑt bi, ɪz. mɛn, wɪmən, tʃɪlʒɹən əv daɪd." pɛɹɪnz skɪn pɹɪkəld: hi nu ʃi mɛnt wʌt ɹænd kɔld "bʌbəlz ʌv ivəl," ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən laɪk fɹɔθ ɪn ə fɛɾəd swɑmp, dʒɹɪftɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə pæɾɝn tɪl ðeɪ bɝst. pɛɹɪn hæd bɪn kɑɾ ɪn wʌn wʌns; hi nɛvɝ wɑntəd tə si ənʌðɝ. . . . "ɪf jə min wʌt ðə wɛtləndɝz du," ʃi wɛn ɑn, "hu hæz taɪm tə wɑtʃ sænfliz? ənlɛs ðeɪ baɪt. ðət maɪnz mi ʌv wʌn θɪŋ. aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪt, bʌt pɝhæps jə du. ðiz sænfliz wɪl baɪt sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ."

She tossed her red mane contemptuously. "Wetlanders are like sandflies, Car'a'carn: who can know what they find important? Strange things sometimes happen in the city, so I have heard, as they do among the tents. People sometimes see things that cannot be, only for a time, what cannot be, is. Men, women, children have died." Perrin's skin prickled: he knew she meant what Rand called "bubbles of evil," rising from the Dark One's prison like froth in a fetid swamp, drifting along the Pattern till they burst. Perrin had been caught in one once; he never wanted to see another. . . . "If you mean what the wetlanders do," she went on, "who has time to watch sandflies? Unless they bite. That minds me of one thing. I do not understand it, but perhaps you do. These sandflies will bite sooner or later."

"wʌt sænfliz? wɛtləndɝz? wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?"

"What sandflies? Wetlanders? What are you talking about?"

fɛɹeɪɡɪn wɑz nɑɾ əz ɡʊɾ əz sɔɹɪliə ət ðət lɛvəl lʊk, jɛt noʊ waɪz wʌn ðət pɛɹɪn hæd sin əpɹiʃieɪɾɪd ʌðɝz' ɪmpeɪʃəns. nɑɾ ivən ðə tʃif ə tʃifs'. θɹʌstɪŋ əɹ tʃɪn ʌp, ʃi ɡæðɝɾ əɹ ʃɔl ən ænsɝd. "θɹi deɪz əɡoʊ ðə tʃɹikɪlɝz kæɹɑlin dəmədʒɹɾ ən tɔɹæm ɹieɪɾən əpɹoʊtʃt ðə sɪɾi. ðeɪ ɪʃuɾ ə pɹɑkləmeɪʃən ðət koʊləveɪɪɹ seɪɡən ɪz ə jusɝpɝ, bʌt ðeɪ sɪɾ ɪn ðɛɹ kæmp saʊθ ə ðə sɪɾi ən də nʌθɪŋ ɪksɛp sɛn ə fju pipəl ɪndə ðə sɪɾi naʊ ən ðɛn. əweɪ fɹəm ðɛɹ kæmp, ə hʌnʒɹəd ə ðɛm wɪl ɹʌn fɹəm wʌn ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ, əɹ ivən ə ɡeɪʃeɪn. ðə mæn kɔl dɑɹlɪn sɪsnɛɹə ən ʌðɝ tɛɹənz ɝaɪv baɪ ʃɪp bɪloʊ ðə sɪɾi jɛstɝdeɪ ən dʒɔɪn ðɛm. ðeɪv bɪn fistɪŋ ən dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ɛvɝ sɪns, əz ɪf sɛləbɹeɪɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. tʃɹikɪlɝ soʊlʒɝz ɡæðɝ ɪn ðə sɪɾi ət koʊləveɪɪɹ seɪɡənz kəmænd, jɛt ðeɪ wɑtʃ əɹ tɛns mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ də ði ʌðɝ wɛtləndɝz' əɹ ðə sɪɾi ɪtsɛlf. ðeɪ wɑtʃ, ən də nʌθɪŋ. pɝhæps jə noʊ ðə waɪ ʌv ɔl ðɪs, kɑɹəkɑɹn, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt, nɔɹ dʌz bɛɹ əɹ mɛɡænə, əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls ɪn ðə tɛns."

Feraighin was not as good as Sorilea at that level look, yet no Wise One that Perrin had seen appreciated others' impatience. Not even the chief of chiefs'. Thrusting her chin up, she gathered her shawl and answered. "Three days ago the treekillers Caraline Damodred and Toram Riatin approached the city. They issued a proclamation that Colavaere Saighan is a usurper, but they sit in their camp south of the city and do nothing except send a few people into the city now and then. Away from their camp, a hundred of them will run from one algai'd'siswai, or even a gai'shain. The man called Darlin Sisnera and other Tairens arrived by ship below the city yesterday and joined them. They have been feasting and drinking ever since, as if celebrating something. Treekiller soldiers gather in the city at Colavaere Saighan's command, yet they watch our tents more than they do the other wetlanders' or the city itself. They watch, and do nothing. Perhaps you know the why of all this, Car'a'carn, but I do not, nor does Bair or Megana, or anyone else in the tents."

leɪɾi kæɹɑlin ən lɔɹd tɔɹæm lɛd ðə kɛɹhinɪn u ɹəfjuz tə æksɛp ðət ɹænd ən ði il hæd kɑŋkɝd kɛɹhin, dʒʌst əz haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪn lɛd ðɛɹ kaʊntɝpɑɹts ɪn tɛɹ. niðɝ ɹɪvoʊlt əmaʊntɪd tə mʌtʃ; kæɹɑlin ən tɔɹæm hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə fʊthɪlz ə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝl fəɹ mʌnθs, meɪkɪŋ θɹɛts ən kleɪmz, ən dɑɹlɪn ðə seɪm daʊn ɪn hæɾən mɝk. bʌt nɑɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, ɪt simd. pɛɹɪn faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɹʌnɪŋ ə θʌm laɪtli əlɔŋ ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz æks. ði il wɝ ɪn deɪnʒɝ ə slɪpɪŋ əweɪ, ən ɹændz ɛnəmiz wɝ kʌmɪŋ təɡɛðɝ ɪn wʌn pleɪs. ɔl ɪt niɾəd naʊ wɑz fəɹ ðə fɔɹseɪkən tə əpɪɹ. ən sɪvænə wɪð əɹ ʃeɪɾoʊ. ðət wəd pʊt ðə kɹim ɑn ðə hʌnikeɪk. jɛt nʌn ʌv ɪt wɑz ɛni mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən wɛðɝ sʌmbɑɾi sɔ ə naɪtmɛɹ wɔkɪŋ. feɪl hæd tə bi seɪf; ʃi dʒʌs hæd tə bi.

Lady Caraline and Lord Toram led the Cairhienin who refused to accept that Rand and the Aiel had conquered Cairhien, just as High Lord Darlin led their counterparts in Tear. Neither revolt amounted to much; Caraline and Toram had been sitting in the foothills of the Spine of the World for months, making threats and claims, and Darlin the same down in Haddon Mirk. But not any longer, it seemed. Perrin found himself running a thumb lightly along the edge of his axe. The Aiel were in danger of slipping away, and Rand's enemies were coming together in one place. All it needed now was for the Forsaken to appear. And Sevanna with her Shaido. That would put the cream on the honeycake. Yet none of it was any more important than whether somebody saw a nightmare walking. Faile had to be safe; she just had to be.

"bɛɾɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ðən faɪɾɪŋ," ɹænd mɝmɝd θɔtfəli, lɪsnɪŋ tə sʌmθɪŋ ənsin əɡɛn.

"Better watching than fighting," Rand murmured thoughtfully, listening to something unseen again.

pɛɹɪn əɡɹid wɪð ɹænd hoʊlhɑɹɾɪdli - dʒʌst əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən faɪɾɪŋ - bʌɾ il dɪd nɑt si ɪt ðət weɪ, nɑt wən ɪt keɪm tə ɛnəmiz. fɹəm ɹəɑɹk tə sɔɹɪliə, fɛɹeɪɡɪn tə nændɛɹə ən səlɪn, ðeɪ stɛɹɾ əz ðoʊ ɹænd hæd sɛd sænd wɑz bɛɾɝ tə dʒɹɪŋk ðən wɔɾɝ.

Perrin agreed with Rand wholeheartedly - just about anything was better than fighting - but Aiel did not see it that way, not when it came to enemies. From Rhuarc to Sorilea, Feraighin to Nandera and Sulin, they stared as though Rand had said sand was better to drink than water.

fɛɹeɪɡɪn dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp pɹæktəkli ɑn tɪptoʊ. ʃi wɑz nɑt pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli tɔl fəɹ ən il wʊmən, nɑt kwaɪt tə ɹændz ʃoʊldɝ, bʌt ʃi əpɪɹd tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊt hɝsɛlf noʊz-tə-noʊz. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ fju mɔɹ ðən tɛn θaʊzən ɪn ðət wɛtləndɝ kæmp," ʃi sɛd ɹipɹoʊvɪŋli, "æn fjuɝ ɪn ðə sɪɾi. ðeɪ kən bi dɛlt wɪð izəli. ivən ɪndɪɹiən ɹɪmɛmbɝz ðət jə kəmændəd noʊ wɛtləndɝ kɪld ɪksɛpt ɪn sɛlf-dɪfɛns, bʌt ðəl meɪk tʃɹʌbəl lɛf tə ðɛmsɛlvz. ɪt dʌz nɑt hɛlp ðət ðəɹ ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə sɪɾi. hu kən noʊ wʌt ðeɪ - "

Feraighin drew herself up practically on tiptoe. She was not particularly tall for an Aiel woman, not quite to Rand's shoulder, but she appeared to be trying to put herself nose-to-nose. "There are few more than ten thousand in that wetlander camp," she said reprovingly, "and fewer in the city. They can be dealt with easily. Even Indirian remembers that you commanded no wetlander killed except in self-defense, but they will make trouble left to themselves. It does not help that there are Aes Sedai in the city. Who can know what they - "

"ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ðə wɝdz keɪm aʊt koʊld, ɹændz nʌkəlz waɪɾ ɑn ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ. "haʊ mɛni?" ət ðə smɛl ə hɪm ðə skɪn bɪtwin pɛɹɪnz ʃoʊldɝz kɹɔld; sʌɾənli hi kəd fil ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹɪznɝz wɑtʃɪŋ, ən bɛɹə ən kaɪɹunə ən ðə ɹɛst.

"Aes Sedai?" The words came out cold, Rand's knuckles white on the Dragon Scepter. "How many?" At the smell of him the skin between Perrin's shoulders crawled; suddenly he could feel the Aes Sedai prisoners watching, and Bera and Kiruna and the rest.

sɔɹɪliə lɔst ɔl ɪntʃɹəst ɪn kaɪɹunə. hɝ hænz plæntəd ðɛmsɛlvz ɑn əɹ hɪps ən əɹ maʊθ nɛɹoʊd. "waɪ dɪd jə nɑt tɛl mi ðɪs?"

Sorilea lost all interest in Kiruna. Her hands planted themselves on her hips and her mouth narrowed. "Why did you not tell me this?"

"ju ɡeɪv mi noʊ tʃæns, sɔɹɪliə," fɛɹeɪɡɪn pɹətɛstəɾ ə tʌtʃ bɹɛθəli, ʃoʊldɝz hʌntʃɪŋ. blu aɪz swʌŋ tə ɹænd, ən əɹ vɔɪs fɝmd. "ðɛɹ meɪ bi əz mɛni əz tɛn əɹ mɔɹ, kɑɹəkɑɹn. wi əvɔɪd ðɛm, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪspɛʃli sɪns. . . ." bæk tə sɔɹɪliə ən bɹɛðinəs. "ju dɪd nɑt wɑnə hɪɹ əbaʊt ðə wɛtləndɝz, sɔɹɪliə. oʊnli əɹ oʊn tɛns. jə sɛd soʊ." tə ɹænd, hɝ bæk stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ. "moʊst ə ðɛm steɪ bɪniθ ðə ɹuf ʌv ɑɹɪlɪn dʒjuleɪn, kɑɹəkɑɹn, ən sɛldəm liv ɪt." tə sɔɹɪliə, hʌntʃɪŋ. "sɔɹɪliə, jə noʊ aɪ wʊɾə toʊl jə ɛvɹiθɪŋ. jə kʌt mi ʃɔɹt." əz ʃi ɹilaɪz haʊ mɛni wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ, ən haʊ mɛni bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə smaɪl, əmʌŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz ɛniweɪ, fɛɹeɪɡɪnz aɪz ɡɹu waɪld, ən əɹ tʃiks ɹɛɾənd. hɝ hɛd swʌŋ bɪtwin ɹænd ən sɔɹɪliə, ən əɹ maʊθ wɝk bʌt noʊ saʊn keɪm aʊt. səm ə ðə waɪz wʌnz bɪɡæn læfɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ hænz; ɛdʒɹə dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ wɪð ə hænd. ɹəɑɹk θɹu bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən ɹɔɹd.

"You gave me no chance, Sorilea," Feraighin protested a touch breathily, shoulders hunching. Blue eyes swung to Rand, and her voice firmed. "There may be as many as ten or more, Car'a'carn. We avoid them, of course, especially since. . . ." Back to Sorilea and breathiness. "You did not want to hear about the wetlanders, Sorilea. Only our own tents. You said so." To Rand, her back straightening. "Most of them stay beneath the roof of Arilyn Dhulaine, Car'a'carn, and seldom leave it." To Sorilea, hunching. "Sorilea, you know I would have told you everything. You cut me short." As she realized how many were watching, and how many beginning to smile, among the Wise Ones anyway, Feraighin's eyes grew wild, and her cheeks reddened. Her head swung between Rand and Sorilea, and her mouth worked but no sound came out. Some of the Wise Ones began laughing behind their hands; Edarra did not bother with a hand. Rhuarc threw back his head and roared.

pɛɹɪn sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt fil laɪk læfɪŋ. ən il kəd faɪn sʌmθɪŋ fʌni ɪn hævɪŋ ə sɔɹd stʌk θɹu hɪm. ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑn tɑp ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. laɪt! hi kʌt stʃɹeɪt θɹu tə wʌt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. "fɛɹeɪɡɪn? maɪ waɪf, feɪl, ɪz ʃi wɛl?"

Perrin certainly did not feel like laughing. An Aiel could find something funny in having a sword stuck through him. Aes Sedai on top of everything else. Light! He cut straight through to what was important. "Feraighin? My wife, Faile, is she well?"

ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə hæf-dɪstʃɹæktəd stɛɹ, ðən vɪzəbli pʊl təɡɛðɝ ðə tæɾɝz ə hɝ pɔɪz. "aɪ θɪŋk feɪl eɪbɑɹə ɪz wɛl, seɪaɪkɛɹ," ʃi sɛd wɪð kul kəmpoʊʒɝ. əɹ ɔlmoʊst. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə snik ɡlænsɪz ət sɔɹɪliə fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ. sɔɹɪliə wɑz nɑɾ əmjuzd, əɹ ɛniθɪŋ kloʊs tə ɪt; ɑɹmz foʊldəd, ʃi ɡeɪv fɛɹeɪɡɪn ə pɝuzəl ðət meɪd ðə wʌn ʃi hæd ɡɪvən kaɪɹunə sim maɪld.

She gave him a half-distracted stare, then visibly pulled together the tatters of her poise. "I think Faile Aybara is well, Sei'cair," she said with cool composure. Or almost. She tried to sneak glances at Sorilea from the corner of her eye. Sorilea was not amused, or anything close to it; arms folded, she gave Feraighin a perusal that made the one she had given Kiruna seem mild.

æmɪz pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn sɔɹɪliəz ɑɹm. "ʃi ɪz nɑɾ ət fɔlt," ðə jʌŋɡɝ wʊmən mɝmɝd, tu sɔfli tə ɹitʃ ɛni ɪɹz bʌt ðə lɛðɝi waɪz wʌnz ən pɛɹɪnz. sɔɹɪliə hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən nɑɾəd; ðə fleɪɪŋ ɡlɛɹ feɪɾəd tə hɝ juʒəwəl kæntæŋkɝəsnəs. æmɪz wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn pɛɹɪn hæd sin eɪbəl tə də ðæt, ði oʊnli wʌn sɔɹɪliə dɪd nɑt tʃɹæmpəl daʊn wən ʃi ɡɑɾ ɪn əɹ weɪ. wɛl, ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃɹæmpəl ɹəɑɹk, bʌt wɪð ɪm ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ə boʊldɝ ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ə θʌndɝstɔɹm; æmɪz kəd meɪk ɪt stɑp ɹeɪnɪŋ.

Amys put a hand on Sorilea's arm. "She is not at fault," the younger woman murmured, too softly to reach any ears but the leathery Wise One's and Perrin's. Sorilea hesitated, then nodded; the flaying glare faded to her usual cantankerousness. Amys was the only one Perrin had seen able to do that, the only one Sorilea did not trample down when she got in her way. Well, she did not trample Rhuarc, but with him it was more a boulder ignoring a thunderstorm; Amys could make it stop raining.

pɛɹɪn wɑntəd mɔɹ ə fɛɹeɪɡɪn - ʃi θɔt feɪl wɑz wɛl? - bʌt bɪfɔɹ i kəɾ oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, kaɪɹunə bʊld ɪn wɪð əɹ juʒəwəl tækt.

Perrin wanted more of Feraighin - she thought Faile was well? - but before he could open his mouth, Kiruna bulled in with her usual tact.

"naʊ, lɪsən tə mi kɛɹfəli," ʃi toʊld ɹænd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ ɛmfæɾɪkli ʌndɝ ɪz noʊz. "aɪ kɔl ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən dɛləkət. ɪts nɑt. ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən ɪz kɑmplɛks bɪɑn jəɹ ɪmædʒənɪŋ, soʊ fɹædʒəl ə bɹɛθ kəd ʃæɾɝ ɪt. bɛɹə ən əl əkʌmpəni jə tə ðə sɪɾi. jɛs, jɛs, ɑlɑnə; ən ju, əz wɛl." ʃi weɪvd əweɪ ðə slɛndɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪmpeɪʃənli. pɛɹɪn θɔt ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ ðət lumɪŋ tʃɹɪk. ʃi dɪd sim tə bi piɹɪŋ daʊn əɹ noʊz ət ɹænd, ðoʊ tɔl əz ʃi wɑz, hi stʊd hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz tɔlɝ. "ju mʌs lɛt jɝsɛlf bi ɡaɪɾəd baɪ ʌs. wʌn ɹɔŋ muv, wʌn ɹɔŋ wɝd, ən jə meɪ dɪlɪvɝ tə kɛɹhin ðə seɪm dɪzæstɝ jə ɡeɪv tæɹɑbən ən ɑɹæd dumən. wɝs, jə kən də ɪnkælkjələbəl dæmədʒ tə mæɾɝz əbaʊt wɪtʃ jə noʊ ɔlmoʊs nʌθɪŋ."

"Now, listen to me carefully," she told Rand, gesturing emphatically under his nose. "I called the situation delicate. It is not. The situation is complex beyond your imagining, so fragile a breath could shatter it. Bera and I will accompany you to the city. Yes, yes, Alanna; and you, as well." She waved away the slender Aes Sedai impatiently. Perrin thought she was trying that looming trick. She did seem to be peering down her nose at Rand, though tall as she was, he stood head and shoulders taller. "You must let yourself be guided by us. One wrong move, one wrong word, and you may deliver to Cairhien the same disaster you gave Tarabon and Arad Doman. Worse, you can do incalculable damage to matters about which you know almost nothing."

pɛɹɪn wɪnst. ðə hoʊl spitʃ kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn bɛɾɝ dɪzaɪn tə ɪnfleɪm ɹænd. bʌt ɹænd sɪmpli lɪsən tɪl ʃi wɑz dʌn, ðən tɝn tə sɔɹɪliə. "teɪk ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ðə tɛns. ɔl ə ðɛm, fəɹ naʊ. meɪk ʃʊɹ ɛvɹiwʌn noʊz ðəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. lɛɾ ɪt bi sin ðət ðeɪ hɑp wən jə seɪ toʊd. sɪns jə hɑp wən ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn sɛz ɪt, ðət ʃəd kənvɪns ɛvɹibɑɾi aɪm nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ liʃ."

Perrin winced. The whole speech could not have been better designed to inflame Rand. But Rand simply listened till she was done, then turned to Sorilea. "Take the Aes Sedai to the tents. All of them, for now. Make sure everyone knows they're Aes Sedai. Let it be seen that they hop when you say toad. Since you hop when the Car'a'carn says it, that should convince everybody I'm not wearing an Aes Sedai leash."

kaɪɹunəz feɪs ɡɹu bɹaɪt ɹɛd; ʃi smɛld ʌv aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ ən ɪndɪɡneɪʃən soʊ stʃɹɔŋli ðət pɛɹɪnz noʊz ɪtʃt. bɛɹə tʃɹaɪd tə kɑm hɝ, wɪθaʊt mʌtʃ səksɛs, waɪl ʃuɾɪŋ ju-ɪɡnɝənt-jʌŋ-laʊt lʊks ət ɹænd, ən ɑlɑnə bɪɾ əɹ lɪp ɪn ən ɛfɝt nɑt tə smaɪl. ɡoʊɪŋ baɪ ði oʊɾɝz dʒɹɪftɪŋ fɹəm sɔɹɪliə ən ði ʌðɝz, ɑlɑnə hæd noʊ ɹizən tə bi plizd.

Kiruna's face grew bright red; she smelled of outrage and indignation so strongly that Perrin's nose itched. Bera tried to calm her, without much success, while shooting you-ignorant-young-lout looks at Rand, and Alanna bit her lip in an effort not to smile. Going by the odors drifting from Sorilea and the others, Alanna had no reason to be pleased.

sɔɹɪliə ɡeɪv ɹænd ə slæʃ ə smaɪl. "pɝhæps, kɑɹəkɑɹn," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli. pɛɹɪn daʊɾɪd ðət ʃi hɑp fəɹ ɛniwʌn. "pɝhæps ɪt wɪl." ʃi dɪd nɑt saʊn kənvɪnst.

Sorilea gave Rand a slash of smile. "Perhaps, Car'a'carn," she said dryly. Perrin doubted that she hopped for anyone. "Perhaps it will." She did not sound convinced.

wɪð ənʌðɝ ʃeɪk ə hɪz hɛd, ɹænd stɔkt ɔf wɪð mɪn, ʃæɾoʊd baɪ ðə meɪɾənz ən ɪʃuɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz əz tə hu wɑz tə ɡoʊ wɪð ɪm ən u wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz. ɹəɑɹk bɪɡæn ɔɹɾɝɪŋ ðə sɪswaɪəmən. ɑlɑnə fɑloʊd ɹænd wɪð əɹ aɪz. pɛɹɪn wɪʃt i nu wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ. sɔɹɪliə ən ði ʌðɝz wɑtʃt ɹænd, tu, ən ðeɪ smɛld ɛniθɪŋ bʌt dʒɛntəl.

With another shake of his head, Rand stalked off with Min, shadowed by the Maidens and issuing orders as to who was to go with him and who with the Wise Ones. Rhuarc began ordering the siswai'aman. Alanna followed Rand with her eyes. Perrin wished he knew what was going on there. Sorilea and the others watched Rand, too, and they smelled anything but gentle.

fɛɹeɪɡɪn wɑz stændɪŋ əloʊn, hi ɹilaɪzd. naʊ wɑz ɪz tʃæns. bʌt wən i tʃɹaɪd tə kætʃ əɹ ʌp, sɔɹɪliə ən æmɪz ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə "kaʊnsəl" sɝaʊndəd hɝ, nitli ʃoʊldɝɪŋ ɪm əweɪ. ðeɪ muv səm dɪstəns bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ bɪɡæn ʃaʊɝɪŋ əɹ wɪð kwɛstʃənz, ðə ʃɑɹp lʊks dɝɛktəɾ ət kaɪɹunə ən ði ʌðɝ tu sɪstɝz livɪŋ noʊ daʊt ðeɪ wəd tɑlɝeɪt noʊ fɝðɝ ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ. kaɪɹunə əpɪɹd tə bi kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ɪt, ɡlaʊɝɪŋ tɪl ɪt simd ə wʌndɝ əɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ wɑz nɑt stændɪŋ ɑn ɛnd. bɛɹə wɑz spikɪŋ tə hɝ fɝmli, ən wɪθaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ pɛɹɪn hɝd "sɛnsəbəl" ən "peɪʃəns," "kɔʃəs" ən "fulɪʃ." wɪtʃ əplaɪd tə hum wɑz nɑɾ ɛvəɾənt.

Feraighin was standing alone, he realized. Now was his chance. But when he tried to catch her up, Sorilea and Amys and the rest of the "council" surrounded her, neatly shouldering him away. They moved some distance before they began showering her with questions, the sharp looks directed at Kiruna and the other two sisters leaving no doubt they would tolerate no further eavesdropping. Kiruna appeared to be considering it, glowering till it seemed a wonder her dark hair was not standing on end. Bera was speaking to her firmly, and without trying Perrin heard "sensible" and "patience," "cautious" and "foolish." Which applied to whom was not evident.

"ðɛɹ wɪl bi faɪɾɪŋ wən wi ɹitʃ ðə sɪɾi." ɛɹæm saʊndəɾ iɡɝ.

"There will be fighting when we reach the city." Aram sounded eager.

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt," lɔɪəl sɛd staʊtli. hɪz ɪɹz twɪtʃt, ən i pɪɹɾ ənkʌmftəbli əɾ ɪz æks. "ðɛɹ woʊn bi, wɪl ðɛɹ, pɛɹɪn?"

"Of course not," Loial said stoutly. His ears twitched, and he peered uncomfortably at his axe. "There won't be, will there, Perrin?"

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ. ɪf oʊnli ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz wəd liv fɛɹeɪɡɪn əloʊn, dʒʌs fəɹ ə fju moʊməns. wʌd ðeɪv tə tɔk əbaʊt ðət wɑz soʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt?

Perrin shook his head. He did not know. If only the other Wise Ones would leave Feraighin alone, just for a few moments. What did they have to talk about that was so important?

"wɪmən," ɡɔl mʌɾɝd, "ɑɹ stʃɹeɪnʒɝ ðən dʒɹʌŋkən wɛtləndɝz."

"Women," Gaul muttered, "are stranger than drunken wetlanders."

"wʌt?" pɛɹɪn sɛɾ æbsənli. wʌt wəd hæpən ʃəɾ i sɪmpli pʊʃ θɹu ðə sɝkəl ʌv waɪz wʌnz? əz ɪf ʃi hæd ɹɛɾ ɪz maɪn ɛdʒɹə ɡeɪv ɪm ə pɔɪntəd fɹaʊn. soʊ dɪd səm ə ði ʌðɝz; səmtaɪmz ɪt dɪd sim wɪmən kəd ɹid mɛnz maɪnz. wɛl. . . .

"What?" Perrin said absently. What would happen should he simply push through the circle of Wise Ones? As if she had read his mind Edarra gave him a pointed frown. So did some of the others; sometimes it did seem women could read men's minds. Well. . . .

"aɪ sɛd wɪmən ɑɹ stʃɹeɪnʒ, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. kiæd toʊl mi ʃi wəd nɑt leɪ ə bɹaɪɾəl ɹiθ ət maɪ fit; ʃi æktʃəli  toʊl mi." ði il mæn saʊndəd skændəlaɪzd. "ʃi sɛd ʃi wəd teɪk mi fəɹ ə lʌvɝ, hɝ ən beɪn, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ." ənʌðɝ taɪm wʊɾə əv ʃɑk pɛɹɪn, ðoʊ hi hæd hɝɾ ɪt bɪfɔɹ; il wɝ ɪnkɹɛɾəbli . . . fɹi . . . əbaʊt sətʃ θɪŋz. "æz aɪm æm nɑt ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə hʌzbənd." ɡɔl snɔɹɾɪd æŋɡɹəli. "aɪ də nɑt laɪk beɪn, bʌɾ aɪ wəd mɛɹi hɝ tə meɪk kiæd hæpi. ɪf kiæd wɪl nɑt meɪk ə bɹaɪɾəl ɹiθ, ʃi ʃəd stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪntaɪs mi. ɪf aɪ kænɑt kætʃ əɹ ɪntʃɹəst wɛl ɪnʌf fəɹ əɹ tə mɛɹi mi, ʃi lemi mi ɡoʊ."

"I said women are strange, Perrin Aybara. Chiad told me she would not lay a bridal wreath at my feet; she actually told me." The Aiel man sounded scandalized. "She said she would take me for a lover, her and Bain, but no more." Another time that would have shocked Perrin, though he had heard it before; Aiel were incredibly . . . free . . . about such things. "As if I am not good enough for a husband." Gaul snorted angrily. "I do not like Bain, but I would marry her to make Chiad happy. If Chiad will not make a bridal wreath, she should stop trying to entice me. If I cannot catch her interest well enough for her to marry me, she should let me go."

pɛɹɪn fɹaʊn ət hɪm. ðə ɡɹin-aɪɾ il mæn wɑz tɔlɝ ðən ɹænd, nɪɹli ə hɛd tɔlɝ ðən hi. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?"

Perrin frowned at him. The green-eyed Aiel man was taller than Rand, nearly a head taller than he. "What are you talking about?"

"kiæd, ʌv kɔɹs. hæv jə nɑt bɪn lɪsnɪŋ? ʃi əvɔɪdz mi, bʌɾ ɛvɹi taɪm aɪ si hɝ, ʃi pɔzəz lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ʃʊɹ aɪ hæv sin hɝ. aɪ də nɑt noʊ haʊ jə wɛtləndɝz də ɪt, bʌt wɪð ʌs, ðəɾ ɪz wʌn ə ðə weɪz ə wʊmən jusəz. wən jə list ɪkspɛk hɝ, ʃiz ɪn jəɹ aɪz, ðən ɡɔn. aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ivən noʊ ʃi wɑz wɪð ðə meɪɾənz əntɪl ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ."

"Chiad, of course. Have you not been listening? She avoids me, but every time I see her, she pauses long enough to make sure I have seen her. I do not know how you wetlanders do it, but with us, that is one of the ways a woman uses. When you least expect her, she is in your eyes, then gone. I did not even know she was with the Maidens until this morning."

"ju min ʃiz hɪɹ?" pɛɹɪn wɪspɝd. ðəɾ aɪsɪkəl wɑz bæk, naʊ ə bleɪd, hɑloʊɪŋ ɪm aʊt. "æn beɪn? hɪɹ, tu?"

"You mean she's here?" Perrin whispered. That icicle was back, now a blade, hollowing him out. "And Bain? Here, too?"

ɡɔl ʃɹʌɡd. "wʌn ɪz sɛldəm fɑɹ fɹəm ði ʌðɝ. bʌɾ ɪts kiædz ɪntʃɹəst aɪ wɑnt, nɑt beɪnz."

Gaul shrugged. "One is seldom far from the other. But it is Chiad's interest I want, not Bain's."

"bɝn ðɛɹ blʌɾi ɪntʃɹəst!" pɛɹɪn ʃaʊɾəd. ðə waɪz wʌnz tɝn tə lʊk ət hɪm. ɪn fækt, pipəl ɔl oʊvɝ ðə hɪlsaɪd dɪd. kaɪɹunə ən bɛɹə wɝ stɛɹɪŋ, feɪsəz ɪntaɪɝli tu θɔtfəl. wɪð ən ɛfɝɾ i mænədʒ tə loʊɝ ɪz vɔɪs. hi kəd də nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt ði ɪntɛnsəɾi, ðoʊ. "ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə bi pɹətɛktɪŋ hɝ! ʃiz ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ɪn ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs, wɪð koʊləveɪɪɹ - wɪð koʊləveɪɪɹ! - ən ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə bi pɹətɛktɪŋ hɝ."

"Burn their bloody interest!" Perrin shouted. The Wise Ones turned to look at him. In fact, people all over the hillside did. Kiruna and Bera were staring, faces entirely too thoughtful. With an effort he managed to lower his voice. He could do nothing about the intensity, though. "They were supposed to be protecting her! She's in the city, in the Royal Palace, with Colavaere - with Colavaere! - and they were supposed to be protecting her."

skɹætʃɪŋ ɪz hɛd, ɡɔl lʊkt ət lɔɪəl. "ɪz ðɪs wɛtləndɝ hjumɝ? feɪl eɪbɑɹə ɪz aʊɾ ə ʃɔɹt skɝts."

Scratching his head, Gaul looked at Loial. "Is this wetlander humor? Faile Aybara is out of short skirts."

"aɪ noʊ ʃiz nɑɾ ə tʃaɪld!" pɛɹɪn dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. ɪt wɑz vɛɹi hɑɹd kipɪŋ ə lɛvəl toʊn wɪð ɪz bɛli fʊl ʌv æsəd. "lɔɪəl, wɪl jə ɪkspleɪn tə ðɪs . . . tə ɡɔl, ðəɾ əɹ wɪmən doʊn ɹʌn ɝaʊnd wɪð spɪɹz, ðət koʊləveɪɪɹ wʊdn ɔfɝ tə faɪt feɪl, ʃid dʒʌst ɔɹɾɝ sʌmbɑɾi tə kʌɾ əɹ θɹoʊɾ əɹ θɹoʊ hɝ ɔf ə wɔl ɔɹ. . . ." ði ɪmədʒəz wɝ tu mʌtʃ. hi wɑz gɑnə ɛmpti hɪz stʌmək ɪn ə moʊmənt.

"I know she's not a child!" Perrin drew a deep breath. It was very hard keeping a level tone with his belly full of acid. "Loial, will you explain to this . . . to Gaul, that our women don't run around with spears, that Colavaere wouldn't offer to fight Faile, she'd just order somebody to cut her throat or throw her off a wall or. . . ." The images were too much. He was going to empty his stomach in a moment.

lɔɪəl pæɾəd ɪm ɔkwɝdli ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ. "pɛɹɪn, aɪ noʊ jəɹ wɝid. aɪ noʊ haʊ aɪd fil ɪf aɪ θɔɾ ɛniθɪŋ hæpən tə ɛɹɪθ." ðə tʌfs ɑn ɪz ɪɹz kwɪvɝd. hi wɑz ə faɪn wʌn tə tɔk; hi wəd ɹʌn əz hɑɹɾ əz i kəd tə əvɔɪɾ ɪz mʌðɝ ən ðə jʌŋ oʊɡiɝ wʊmən ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən fəɹ hɪm. "ɑ. wɛl. pɛɹɪn, feɪl ɪz weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ju, seɪf ən saʊnd. aɪ noʊ ɪt. ən jə noʊ ʃi kən kɛɹ fəɹ hɝsɛlf. waɪ, ʃi kəd kɛɹ fəɹ hɝsɛlf ən jə ən mi, ən ɡɔl, əz wɛl." hɪz bumɪŋ læf saʊndəd fɔɹst, ən ɪt kwɪkli feɪɾəd tə ɡɹeɪv sɪɹiəsnəs. "pɛɹɪn. . . . pɛɹɪn, jə noʊ jə kæn ɔlweɪz bi ðəɹ tə pɹətɛk feɪl, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ jə wɑn tə. jə ɑɹ tɑvɝən; ðə pæɾɝn spʌn jə aʊt fəɹ ə pɝpəs, ən ɪɾəl juz jə fəɹ ðət pɝpəs."

Loial patted him awkwardly on the shoulder. "Perrin, I know you're worried. I know how I'd feel if I thought anything happened to Erith." The tufts on his ears quivered. He was a fine one to talk; he would run as hard as he could to avoid his mother and the young Ogier woman she had chosen for him. "Ah. Well. Perrin, Faile is waiting for you, safe and sound. I know it. And you know she can care for herself. Why, she could care for herself and you and me, and Gaul, as well." His booming laugh sounded forced, and it quickly faded to grave seriousness. "Perrin. . . . Perrin, you know you can't always be there to protect Faile, however much you want to. You are ta'veren; the Pattern spun you out for a purpose, and it will use you for that purpose."

"bɝn ðə pæɾɝn," pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld. "ɪt kən ɔl bɝn, ɪf ɪt kips əɹ seɪf." lɔɪəlz ɪɹz wɛn ɹɪdʒəd wɪð ʃɑk, ən ivən ɡɔl lʊk teɪkən əbæk.

"Burn the Pattern," Perrin growled. "It can all burn, if it keeps her safe." Loial's ears went rigid with shock, and even Gaul looked taken aback.

wʌt dʌz ðət meɪk mi? pɛɹɪn θɔt. hi hæd bɪn skɔɹnfəl ə ðoʊz u skɹɪbəld ən skɹæbəl fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn ɛnz, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə læs bæɾəl ən ðə dɑɹk wʌnz ʃædoʊ kɹipɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə wɝld. haʊ wɑz i dɪfɹən fɹəm ðɛm?

What does that make me? Perrin thought. He had been scornful of those who scribbled and scrabbled for their own ends, ignoring the Last Battle and the Dark One's shadow creeping over the world. How was he different from them?

ɹænd ɹeɪn ðə blæk ɪn bɪsaɪd hɪm. "ɑɹ jə kʌmɪŋ?"

Rand reined the black in beside him. "Are you coming?"

"aɪm kʌmɪŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd blikli. hi hæd noʊ ænsɝ fəɹ ɪz oʊn kwɛstʃənz, bʌɾ i nu wʌn θɪŋ. tə hɪm, feɪl wɑz ðə wɝld.

"I'm coming," Perrin said bleakly. He had no answer for his own questions, but he knew one thing. To him, Faile was the world.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹ


CHAPTER 4

ɪndə kɛɹhin


Into Cairhien

pɛɹɪn wʊɾə sɛɾ ə hɑɹɾɝ peɪs ðən ɹænd dɪd, ðoʊ hi nu ðə hɔɹsəz kəd nɑɾ əv stʊɾ ɪt lɔŋ. hæf ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ əɾ ə tʃɹɑt, ði ʌðɝ hæf ɹæn əlɔŋsaɪd ðɛɹ ænəməlz. ɹænd simd ʌnəwɛɹ ʌv ɛniwʌn ɛls, ɪksɛp ðəɾ i ɔlweɪz hæɾ ə hæn fəɹ mɪn ɪf ʃi stʌmbəld. fəɹ ðə ɹɛst, hi wɑz lɔst ɪn səm ʌðɝ wɝld, blɪŋkɪŋ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz wən i noʊɾəst pɛɹɪn, əɹ lɔɪəl. tʃɹuθ tə tɛl, noʊbɑdi wɑz ɛni bɛɾɝ. dɑbɹeɪnz mɛn ən heɪvinz stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, tʃuɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn wɝiz oʊvɝ wʌt ðeɪ wəd faɪnd. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn hæd soʊkt ɪn pɛɹɪnz dɑɹk mud. ðeɪ laɪk feɪl - tʃɹuθ bi toʊld, səm wɝʃəpt əɹ - ən ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn hɝɾ ɪn ɛni weɪ. . . . ivən ɛɹæmz iɡɝnəs ɡɹu blik wʌns i ɹilaɪz ðət feɪl maɪt bi ɪn deɪnʒɝ. ɛvɹi mæn foʊkəst ɑn ðə liɡz bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, təwɔɹd ðə sɪɾi əhɛd. ɪksɛp fəɹ ði æʃəmən, ɛniweɪ; kloʊs bɪhaɪn ɹænd laɪk ə klʌstɝ ə ɹeɪvənz, ðeɪ stʌɾid ðə kʌntʃɹi ðə kɑləm kɹɔst, stɪl wɛɹi ʌv ən æmbʊʃ. dæʃivə slʌmpt ɪn ɪz sæɾəl laɪk ə sæk, ən mʌɾɝd dɑɹkli tə hɪmsɛlf wən i hæd tə ɹʌn; hi ɡlɛɹɾ əz ɪf i hoʊp ðəɹ wɑz ən æmbʊʃ.

Perrin would have set a harder pace than Rand did, though he knew the horses could not have stood it long. Half the time they rode at a trot, the other half ran alongside their animals. Rand seemed unaware of anyone else, except that he always had a hand for Min if she stumbled. For the rest, he was lost in some other world, blinking in surprise when he noticed Perrin, or Loial. Truth to tell, nobody was any better. Dobraine's men and Havien's stared straight ahead, chewing their own worries over what they would find. The Two Rivers men had soaked in Perrin's dark mood. They liked Faile - truth be told, some worshipped her - and if she had been hurt in any way. . . . Even Aram's eagerness grew bleak once he realized that Faile might be in danger. Every man focused on the leagues before them, toward the city ahead. Except for the Asha'man, anyway; close behind Rand like a cluster of ravens, they studied the country the column crossed, still wary of an ambush. Dashiva slumped in his saddle like a sack, and muttered darkly to himself when he had to run; he glared as if he hoped there was an ambush.

smɔl tʃæns ə ðæt. səlɪn ən ə dʌzən fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ tʃɹɑɾəd əhɛɾ ə ðə kɑləm ɪn pɛɹɪnz saɪt, wɪð əz mɛni mɔɹ fɑɹðɝ əhɛd, pɹoʊbɪŋ ðə weɪ, ən ən ikwəl nʌmbɝ ɑn ðə flæŋks. səm hæd θɹʌs ðɛɹ ʃɔɹt spɪɹz ɪndə ðə hɑɹnəsəz ðət hɛl ðɛɹ baʊ keɪsəz ɑn ðɛɹ bæks, soʊ ðə spɪɹ-hɛdz bɑbd əbʌv ðɛɹ hɛdz; ðə ʃɔɹt hɔɹn baʊz wɝ aʊt, æɹoʊz nɑkt. ðeɪ kɛpt ikwəli ʃɑɹp wɑtʃ fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ðət maɪt θɹɛɾən ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn ən ɑn ɹænd hɪmsɛlf, əz ðoʊ ðeɪ səspɛktəɾ i maɪt vænɪʃ əɡɛn. ɪf ɛni tʃɹæp weɪɾəd, ɛni deɪnʒɝ əpɹoʊtʃt, ðeɪ wəd faɪn ɪt.

Small chance of that. Sulin and a dozen Far Dareis Mai trotted ahead of the column in Perrin's sight, with as many more farther ahead, probing the way, and an equal number on the flanks. Some had thrust their short spears into the harnesses that held their bow cases on their backs, so the spear-heads bobbed above their heads; the short horn bows were out, arrows nocked. They kept equally sharp watch for anything that might threaten the Car'a'carn and on Rand himself, as though they suspected he might vanish again. If any trap waited, any danger approached, they would find it.

kiæd wɑz wʌn ə ðə meɪɾənz wɪð səlɪn, ə tɔl wʊmən wɪð dɑɹk ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ ən ɡɹeɪ aɪz. pɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ bæk, wɪlɪŋ əɹ tə dʒɹɑp bɪhaɪn ði ʌðɝz ən spik tə hɪm. naʊ ən ðən ʃi spɛɹɾ ɪm ə ɡlæns, bʌt ʃi əvɔɪɾəd ɪm əz ɪf i hæd θɹi dɪzizəz, ɔl kætʃɪŋ. beɪn wɑz nɑt wɪð ðə kɑləm; moʊst ə ðə meɪɾənz fɑloʊd mʌtʃ ðə seɪm ɹut wɪð ɹəɑɹk ən ði ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ, bʌt muvɪŋ mɔɹ sloʊli kəz ə ðə wæɡənz ən pɹɪznɝz.

Chiad was one of the Maidens with Sulin, a tall woman with dark reddish hair and gray eyes. Perrin stared at her back, willing her to drop behind the others and speak to him. Now and then she spared him a glance, but she avoided him as if he had three diseases, all catching. Bain was not with the column; most of the Maidens followed much the same route with Rhuarc and the algai'd'siswai, but moving more slowly because of the wagons and prisoners.

feɪlz blæk mɛɹ tʃɹɑɾəd bɪhaɪn stɛpɝ, hɝ ɹeɪnz taɪd tə hɪz sæɾəl. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn hæd bɹɔt swɑloʊ fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn wən ðeɪ dʒɔɪn ɪm bɪfɔɹ dəməaɪz wɛlz. ɛvɹi taɪm i lʊkt ət ðə mɛɹ pɹænsɪŋ əlɔŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm, hɪz waɪfs feɪs swɛld ɪn ɪz θɔts, hɝ boʊl noʊz ən dʒɛnɝəs maʊθ, flæʃɪŋ dɑɹk aɪz tɪltəɾ əbʌv haɪ tʃikboʊnz. ʃi lʌv ði ænəməl, meɪbi ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi dɪd hɪm. ə wʊmən əz pɹaʊɾ əz ʃi wɑz bjuɾəfəl, əz faɪɝi əz ʃi wɑz pɹaʊd. dævɹæm bæʃɪɹz dɔɾɝ wəd nɑt haɪd, əɹ ivən hoʊld əɹ tʌŋ, nɑt fəɹ ðə laɪks ə koʊləveɪɪɹ.

Faile's black mare trotted behind Stepper, her reins tied to his saddle. The Two Rivers men had brought Swallow from Caemlyn when they joined him before Dumai's Wells. Every time he looked at the mare prancing along behind him, his wife's face swelled in his thoughts, her bold nose and generous mouth, flashing dark eyes tilted above high cheekbones. She loved the animal, maybe almost as much as she did him. A woman as proud as she was beautiful, as fiery as she was proud. Davram Bashere's daughter would not hide, or even hold her tongue, not for the likes of Colavaere.

fɔɹ taɪmz ðeɪ stɑp tə ɹɛs ðə maʊns, ən i ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ ət ðə dɪleɪ. teɪkɪŋ ɡʊd kɛɹ ə hɔɹsəz wɑz sɛkənd neɪtʃɝ tə hɪm; hi tʃɛk stɛpɝ æbsənli, ɡeɪv ðə stæljən ə lɪɾəl wɔɾɝ baɪ ɹoʊt. swɑloʊ hi wɑz mɔɹ kɛɹfəl wɪð. ɪf swɑloʊ ɹitʃt kɛɹhin seɪfli. . . . ə noʊʃən hæd plæntəɾ ɪtsɛlf ɪn ɪz maɪnd. ɪf i bɹɔɾ əɹ mɛɹ tə kɛɹhin, feɪl wəd bi ɔl ɹaɪt. ɪt wɑz luɾəkɹəs, ə bɔɪz fænsi, ə smɔl bɔɪz fulɪʃ fænsi, ən ɪt wəd nɑt ɡoʊ əweɪ.

Four times they stopped to rest the mounts, and he ground his teeth at the delay. Taking good care of horses was second nature to him; he checked Stepper absently, gave the stallion a little water by rote. Swallow he was more careful with. If Swallow reached Cairhien safely. . . . A notion had planted itself in his mind. If he brought her mare to Cairhien, Faile would be all right. It was ludicrous, a boy's fancy, a small boy's foolish fancy, and it would not go away.

əɾ itʃ ə ðoʊz stɑps, mɪn tʃɹaɪd tə ɹiəʃʊɹ hɪm. wɪð ə bæntɝɪŋ ɡɹɪn, ʃi sɛɾ i lʊk laɪk dɛθ ɑn ə wɪntɝ mɔɹnɪŋ, dʒʌst weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ sʌmbɑɾi tə ʃʌvəl ɪz ɡɹeɪv fʊl. ʃi toʊld ɪm ɪf i əpɹoʊtʃt ɪz waɪf wɪð ə feɪs laɪk ðæt, feɪl wəd slæm ðə dɔɹ ɑn hɪm. bʌt ʃi hæd tə ədmɪt ðət nʌn ə hɝ vjuɪŋz pɹɑməs ðət feɪl wɑz ənhɑɹmd.

At each of those stops, Min tried to reassure him. With a bantering grin, she said he looked like death on a winter morning, just waiting for somebody to shovel his grave full. She told him if he approached his wife with a face like that, Faile would slam the door on him. But she had to admit that none of her viewings promised that Faile was unharmed.

"laɪt, pɛɹɪn," ʃi sɛɾ ət læst ɪn ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd toʊnz, snʌɡɪŋ əɹ ɡɹeɪ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌvz, "ɪf ɛniwʌn tʃɹaɪz tə hɑɹm ðə wʊmən, ʃɪl meɪk ɪm weɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn ðə hɔl tɪl ʃiz taɪm fəɹ hɪm." hi vɛɹi nɪɹli ɡɹaʊld ət hɝ. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðət ðə tu dɪslaɪkt itʃ ʌðɝ, ɪɡzækli.

"Light, Perrin," she said at last in exasperated tones, snugging her gray riding gloves, "if anyone tries to harm the woman, she'll make him wait out in the hall till she has time for him." He very nearly growled at her. It was not that the two disliked each other, exactly.

lɔɪəl ɹimaɪndəd pɛɹɪn ðət hʌntɝz fəɹ ðə hɔɹn kəd teɪk kɛɹ ə ðɛmsɛlvz, ðət feɪl hæd sɝvaɪv tʃɹɑləks ənskeɪðd. "ʃi ɪz wɛl, pɛɹɪn," hi bum hɑɹɾəli, tʃɹɑɾɪŋ bɪsaɪd stɛpɝ wɪð ɪz lɔŋ æks əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. "aɪ noʊ ʃi ɪz." bʌɾ i sɛd ðə seɪm twɛnti taɪmz, ən itʃ taɪm i saʊndəɾ ə lɪɾəl lɛs hɑɹɾi.

Loial reminded Perrin that Hunters for the Horn could take care of themselves, that Faile had survived Trollocs unscathed. "She is well, Perrin," he boomed heartily, trotting beside Stepper with his long axe across his shoulders. "I know she is." But he said the same twenty times, and each time he sounded a little less hearty.

ði oʊɡiɝz faɪnəl ətɛmpt ət hɑɹɾənɪŋ wɛn fɝðɝ ðən lɔɪəl ɪntɛndəd. "aɪ æm ʃʊɹ feɪl kən lʊk æftɝ hɝsɛlf, pɛɹɪn. ʃiz nɑt laɪk ɛɹɪθ. aɪ kən hɑɹdli weɪt fəɹ ɛɹɪθ tə meɪk mi hɝ hʌzbən soʊ aɪ kən tɛn hɝ; aɪ θɪŋk aɪd daɪ ɪf ʃi tʃeɪnʒd əɹ maɪnd." ət ði ɛn ə ðæt, hɪz maʊθ ɹɪmeɪn oʊpən, ən ɪz hjudʒ aɪz pɑpt; ɪɹz flʌɾɝɪŋ, hi stʌmbəld oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn buts ən nɪɹli fɛl. "aɪ nɛvɝ mɛn tə seɪ ðæt," hi sɛd hɔɹsli, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪnz hɔɹs wʌns mɔɹ. hɪz ɪɹz stɪl tʃɹɛmbəld. "aɪ æm nɑt ʃʊɹ aɪ wɑnə - ɪm tu jʌŋ tə ɡɛt - " swɑloʊɪŋ hɑɹd, hi ɡeɪv pɛɹɪn ən əkjuzɪŋ lʊk, ən spɛɹd wʌn fəɹ ɹænd ʌp əhɛd, tu. "ɪɾ ɪz hɑɹdli seɪf tə oʊpən jəɹ maʊθ wɪð tu tɑvɝən əbaʊt. ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl maɪt kʌm aʊt!" nʌθɪŋ ðət maɪt nɑɾ əv kʌm ɔf ɪz tʌŋ ɛniweɪ, əz i wɛl nu, ðoʊ ɪt maɪɾ əv hæpənd wʌn taɪm ɪn ə θaʊzənd, əɹ ə θaʊzən taɪmz ə θaʊzənd, wɪθaʊt tɑvɝən ðɛɹ. lɔɪəl nu ðəɾ ɔlsoʊ, ən ðə fækt ʌv ɪt sim tə fɹaɪɾən ɪm əz mʌtʃ əz ɛniθɪŋ pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. səm kənsɪɾɝəbəl taɪm pæs bɪfɔɹ ði oʊɡiɝz ɪɹz stɑpt ʃeɪkɪŋ.

The Ogier's final attempt at heartening went further than Loial intended. "I am sure Faile can look after herself, Perrin. She is not like Erith. I can hardly wait for Erith to make me her husband so I can tend her; I think I'd die if she changed her mind." At the end of that, his mouth remained open, and his huge eyes popped; ears fluttering, he stumbled over his own boots and nearly fell. "I never meant to say that," he said hoarsely, striding along beside Perrin's horse once more. His ears still trembled. "I am not sure I want to - I'm too young to get - " Swallowing hard, he gave Perrin an accusing look, and spared one for Rand up ahead, too. "It is hardly safe to open your mouth with two ta'veren about. Anything at all might come out!" Nothing that might not have come off his tongue anyway, as he well knew, though it might have happened one time in a thousand, or a thousand times a thousand, without ta'veren there. Loial knew that also, and the fact of it seemed to frighten him as much as anything Perrin had ever seen. Some considerable time passed before the Ogier's ears stopped shaking.

feɪl fɪl pɛɹɪnz maɪnd, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt blaɪnd, nɑt kəmplitli. wʌɾ i ət fɝst sɔ wɪθaʊt siɪŋ, əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd saʊθ ən wɛst, bɪɡæn tə sip ɪn ət ði ɛdʒəz. ðə wɛðɝ hæd bɪn hɑt wən i hɛɾəd nɔɹθ fɹəm kɛɹhin, lɛs ðən tu wiks əɡoʊ, jɛɾ ɪt sim ðə dɑɹk wʌnz tʌtʃ hæd ɡeɪn ə hɑɹɾɝ hoʊld, ɡɹaɪndɪŋ ðə læn mɔɹ dɛspɝətli ðən bɪfɔɹ. bɹɪɾəl ɡɹæs kɹækəl bɪniθ ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz, ʃɹɪvəl bɹaʊn kɹipɝz spaɪɾɝwɪbɛd ɹɑks ɑn ðə hɪlsaɪdz, ən neɪkəd bɹæntʃəz, nɑt mɪɹli lifləs bʌt dɛd, kɹækt wən ði æɹəd wɪnd ɡʌstɪd. ɛvɝɡɹin paɪn ən lɛðɝlif stʊd bɹaʊn ən jɛloʊ ɔfən əz nɑt.

Faile filled Perrin's mind, but he was not blind, not completely. What he at first saw without seeing, as they rode south and west, began to seep in at the edges. The weather had been hot when he headed north from Cairhien, less than two weeks ago, yet it seemed the Dark One's touch had gained a harder hold, grinding the land more desperately than before. Brittle grass crackled beneath the horses' hooves, shriveled brown creepers spiderwebbed rocks on the hillsides, and naked branches, not merely leafless but dead, cracked when the arid wind gusted. Evergreen pine and leatherleaf stood brown and yellow often as not.

fɑɹmz hæd bɪɡʌn əpɪɹɪŋ æftɝ ə fju maɪlz, pleɪn stʃɹʌktʃɝz ə dɑɹk stoʊn leɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn skwɛɹz, ðə fɝst ɪn aɪsəleɪɾəd klɪɹɪŋz ɪn ðə fɔɹəst, ðən kʌmɪŋ mɔɹ θɪkli əz ðə wʊdlæn θɪn tə tʃɹiz hɑɹdli dɪzɝvɪŋ ðə neɪm. ə kɑɹt ɹoʊd stʃɹæɡəl ðɛɹ, ɹʌnɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə ʃoʊldɝz ən kɹɛsts ə hɪlz, əkɑmədeɪɾɪŋ stoʊn-wɔl filz mɔɹ ðən ðə tɝeɪn. moʊst ə ðoʊz ɝli fɑɹmz lʊk dɪzɝɾɪd, hɪɹ ə læɾɝbæk tʃɛɹ laɪɪŋ ɑn ɪts saɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə fɑɹmhaʊs, ðəɹ ə ɹæɡ dɑl baɪ ðə ɹoʊdsaɪd. slæt-ɹɪb kæɾəl ən ləθɑɹdʒɪk ʃip dɑɾəd pæstʃɝz wɛɹ fɹikwənli ɹeɪvənz skwɑbəld oʊvɝ kɑɹkəsɪz; hɑɹdli ə pæstʃɝ bʌt hæɾ ə kɑɹkəs əɹ tu. stʃɹimz ɹæn ɪn tʃɹɪkəlz daʊn tʃænəlz ə dʒɹaɪd mʌd. kɹɑplæn ðət ʃʊɾə bɪn blæŋkəɾɪd wɪð snoʊ lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə kɹʌmbəl tə dʌst, wɛɹ ɪt wɑz nɑt dʌst ɔlɹɛɾi, bloʊɪŋ əweɪ.

Farms had begun appearing after a few miles, plain structures of dark stone laid out in squares, the first in isolated clearings in the forest, then coming more thickly as the woodland thinned to trees hardly deserving the name. A cart road straggled there, running over the shoulders and crests of hills, accommodating stone-walled fields more than the terrain. Most of those early farms looked deserted, here a ladderback chair lying on its side in front of a farmhouse, there a rag doll by the roadside. Slat-ribbed cattle and lethargic sheep dotted pastures where frequently ravens squabbled over carcasses; hardly a pasture but had a carcass or two. Streams ran in trickles down channels of dried mud. Cropland that should have been blanketed with snow looked ready to crumble to dust, where it was not dust already, blowing away.

ə tɔl plum ə dʌs mɑɹk ðə pæsədʒ ə ðə kɑləm, əntɪl ðə nɛɹoʊ dɝt weɪ dʒɔɪn ðə bɹɔd stoʊn-peɪvd ɹoʊd ðət lɛd fɹəm dʒæŋɡaɪ pæs. hɪɹ ðəɹ wɝ pipəl, ðoʊ fju, ən ðoʊz ɔfən ləθɑɹdʒɪk, dʌl-aɪd. wɪð ðə sɪŋkɪŋ sʌn ɔlmoʊs hæfweɪ daʊn tə ðə hɝaɪzən naʊ, ði ɛɹ wɑz ən ʌvən. ði əkeɪʒənəl ɑks-kɑɹɾ əɹ hɔɹs-dʒɹɔn wæɡən hɝiɾ ɔf ðə ɹoʊd, daʊn nɛɹoʊ tʃɹæks əɹ ivən ɪndə filz, aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ. ðə dʒɹaɪvɝz, ən ðə hændfʊl ə fɑɹm foʊk ɪn ði oʊpən, stʊd blæŋk-feɪst əz ðeɪ wɑtʃt ðə θɹi bænɝz pæs.

A tall plume of dust marked the passage of the column, until the narrow dirt way joined the broad stone-paved road that led from Jangai Pass. Here there were people, though few, and those often lethargic, dull-eyed. With the sinking sun almost halfway down to the horizon now, the air was an oven. The occasional ox-cart or horse-drawn wagon hurried off the road, down narrow tracks or even into fields, out of the way. The drivers, and the handful of farm folk in the open, stood blank-faced as they watched the three banners pass.

kloʊs tə ə θaʊzən ɑɹmd mɛn wɑz ɹizən ɪnʌf tə stɛɹ. ə θaʊzən ɑɹmd mɛn, hɛɾɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ə hɝi, wɪð ə pɝpəs. ɹizən ɪnʌf tə stɛɹ, ən bi θæŋkfəl wən ðeɪ pæst aʊɾ ə saɪt.

Close to a thousand armed men was reason enough to stare. A thousand armed men, heading somewhere in a hurry, with a purpose. Reason enough to stare, and be thankful when they passed out of sight.

ət læst, wən ðə sʌn hæd lɛs ðən twaɪs ɪts oʊn haɪt jɛt tə fɔl, ðə ɹoʊd tɑpt ə ɹaɪz, ən ðəɹ tu əɹ θɹi maɪlz bɪfɔɹ əm leɪ kɛɹhin. ɹænd dʒɹu ɹeɪn, ən ðə meɪɾənz, ɔl təɡɛðɝ naʊ, dʒɹɑp tə ðɛɹ hilz wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ. ðeɪ kɛp ðoʊz ʃɑɹp aɪz aʊt, ðoʊ.

At last, when the sun had less than twice its own height yet to fall, the road topped a rise, and there two or three miles before them lay Cairhien. Rand drew rein, and the Maidens, all together now, dropped to their heels where they were. They kept those sharp eyes out, though.

nʌθɪŋ kəd bi sin muvɪŋ ɑn ðə nɪɹli tʃɹiləs hɪlz ɝaʊn ðə sɪɾi, ə ɡɹeɪt mæs ʌv ɡɹeɪ stoʊn sɪŋkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɹɪvɝ ɑlɡnjə ɑn ðə wɛst, skwɛɹ-wɔld, skwɛɹ-taʊɝɾ ən stɑɹk. ʃɪps ʌv ɔl saɪzəz leɪ æŋkɝɾ ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ, ən səm taɪd tə ðə dɑks ə ðə fɑɹ bæŋk, wɛɹ ðə ɡɹænɛɝiz wɝ; ə fju vɛsəlz muvd ʌndɝ seɪl əɹ lɔŋ swips. ðeɪ ɡeɪv ən ɪmpɹɛʃən ə pis ən pɹɑspɛɹəɾi. wɪð nɑɾ ə klaʊɾ ɪn ðə skaɪ, ðə laɪt wɑz ʃɑɹp, ən ðə hjudʒ bænɝz flaɪɪŋ fɹəm ðə sɪɾiz taʊɝz stʊd pleɪn ɪnʌf tə pɛɹɪn wən ðə wɪn ənfɝl ðɛm. ðə skɑɹlət bænɝ ə laɪɾ ən ðə waɪt dʒɹæɡən bænɝ wɪð ɪts sɝpəntaɪn kɹitʃɝ skeɪl skɑɹləɾ ən ɡoʊld, ðə weɪvi-ɹeɪd ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn ə kɛɹhin, ɡoʊld ɑn blu. ən ə fɔɹθ, ɡɪvən ikwəl pɹɑmənəns wɪð ðə ɹɛst. ə sɪlvɝ daɪmən ɑn ə fil tʃɛk jɛloʊ ən ɹɛd.

Nothing could be seen moving on the nearly treeless hills around the city, a great mass of gray stone sinking toward the River Alguenya on the west, square-walled, square-towered and stark. Ships of all sizes lay anchored in the river, and some tied to the docks of the far bank, where the granaries were; a few vessels moved under sail or long sweeps. They gave an impression of peace and prosperity. With not a cloud in the sky, the light was sharp, and the huge banners flying from the city's towers stood plain enough to Perrin when the wind unfurled them. The scarlet Banner of Light and the white Dragon Banner with its serpentine creature scaled scarlet and gold, the wavy-rayed Rising Sun of Cairhien, gold on blue. And a fourth, given equal prominence with the rest. A silver diamond on a field checked yellow and red.

loʊɝɪŋ ə smɔl lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs fɹəm ɪz aɪ, ə skaʊlɪŋ dɑbɹeɪn stʌft ɪɾ ɪndə ə wɝkt-lɛðɝ tub taɪd tə hɪz sæɾəl. "aɪ hoʊp ðə sævədʒəz hæɾ ɪt ɹɔŋ sʌmhaʊ, bʌɾ ɪf haʊs seɪɡən flaɪz wɪð ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn, koʊləveɪɪɹ əz ðə θɹoʊn. ʃɪl əv bɪn dɪstʃɹɪbjuɾɪŋ ɡɪfs ɪn ðə sɪɾi ɛvɹi deɪ; kɔɪn, fud, faɪnɝi. ɪts tʃɹədɪʃənəl fəɹ ðə kɔɹəneɪʃən fɛstəvəl. ə ɹulɝ ɪz nɛvɝ mɔɹ pɑpjəlɝ ðən fəɹ ðə wik æftɝ teɪkɪŋ ðə θɹoʊn." hi aɪd ɹænd saɪdweɪz; ðə stʃɹeɪn ə spikɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ aʊt hɑloʊɾ ɪz feɪs. "ðə kɑmənɝz kəd ɹaɪəɾ ɪf ðeɪ dɪslaɪk wʌt jə du. ðə stʃɹits kəd ɹʌn wɪð blʌd."

Lowering a small looking glass from his eye, a scowling Dobraine stuffed it into a worked-leather tube tied to his saddle. "I hoped the savages had it wrong somehow, but if House Saighan flies with the Rising Sun, Colavaere has the throne. She will have been distributing gifts in the city every day; coin, food, finery. It is traditional for the Coronation Festival. A ruler is never more popular than for the week after taking the throne." He eyed Rand sideways; the strain of speaking straight out hollowed his face. "The commoners could riot if they dislike what you do. The streets could run with blood."

heɪvinz ɡɹeɪ ɡɛldɪŋ dænst ɪz ɹaɪɾɝz ɪmpeɪʃəns, ən ðə mæn hɪmsɛlf kɛp lʊkɪŋ fɹəm ɹænd tə ðə sɪɾi ən bæk. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪz sɪɾi; hi hæd meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ ɝliɝ ðəɾ i kɛɹd lɪɾəl wʌt ɹæn ɪn ðə stʃɹits, soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪz oʊn ɹulɝ wɑz seɪf.

Havien's gray gelding danced his rider's impatience, and the man himself kept looking from Rand to the city and back. It was not his city; he had made it clear earlier that he cared little what ran in the streets, so long as his own ruler was safe.

fəɹ lɔŋ moʊməns ɹænd stʌɾid ðə sɪɾi. əɹ sim tə, ɛniweɪ; wʌtɛvɝ i sɔ, hɪz feɪs wɑz blik. mɪn stʌɾid hɪm, wɝidli, meɪbi pɪɾiɪŋli. "aɪ wɪl tʃɹaɪ tə si ðeɪ doʊnt," hi sɛɾ ət læst. "flɪn, ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ wɪð ðə soʊlʒɝz. mɪn - "

For long moments Rand studied the city. Or seemed to, anyway; whatever he saw, his face was bleak. Min studied him, worriedly, maybe pityingly. "I will try to see they don't," he said at last. "Flinn, remain here with the soldiers. Min - "

ʃi bɹoʊk ɪn ɑn ɪm ʃɑɹpli. "noʊ! aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ wɛɹ jə ɡoʊ, ɹænd ælθɹ. jə nid mi, ən jə noʊ ɪt." ðə læst saʊndəd mɔɹ pli ðən dɪmænd, bʌt wən ə wʊmən plæntəɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps ðət weɪ ən fɪkst əɹ aɪz tə ju, ʃi wɑz nɑt bɛɡɪŋ.

She broke in on him sharply. "No! I am going where you go, Rand al'Thor. You need me, and you know it." The last sounded more plea than demand, but when a woman planted her fists on her hips that way and fixed her eyes to you, she was not begging.

"aɪ æm ɡoʊɪŋ, tu," lɔɪəl æɾəd, linɪŋ ɑn ɪz lɔŋ-hæftɪɾ æks. "ju ɔlweɪz mænədʒ tə loʊ θɪŋz wən aɪm sʌmwɛɹ ɛls." hɪz vɔɪs tʊk ɑn ə pleɪntɪv ɛdʒ. "ɪt woʊn du, ɹænd. ɪɾəl nɑt də fəɹ ðə bʊk. haʊ kən aɪ ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt θɪŋz ɪf aɪm nɑt ðɛɹ?"

"I am going, too," Loial added, leaning on his long-hafted axe. "You always manage to lo things when I'm somewhere else." His voice took on a plaintive edge. "It won't do, Rand. It will not do for the book. How can I write about things if I am not there?"

stɪl lʊkɪŋ ət mɪn, ɹænd hæf-ɹeɪzd ə hæn təwɔɹd hɝ, ðən lɛɾ ɪt fɔl. ʃi mɛɾ ɪz ɡeɪz lɛvəli.

Still looking at Min, Rand half-raised a hand toward her, then let it fall. She met his gaze levelly.

"ðɪs ɪz . . . mædnəs." hoʊldɪŋ ɪz ɹeɪnz stɪfli, dæʃivə buɾɪd ðə plʌmp mɛɹ kloʊsɝ tə ɹændz blæk. ɹɪlʌktəns twɪstəɾ ɪz fitʃɝz; pɝhæps ivən æʃəmən wɝiɾ ət biɪŋ tu nɪɹ ɹænd. "ɔl ɪt nidz ɪz wʌn mæn wɪð ə . . . ə baʊ, əɹ ə naɪf, ən jə doʊn si hɪm ɪn taɪm. sɛnd wʌn ə ði æʃəmən tə də wʌt nidz duɪŋ, əɹ mɔɹ, ɪf jə θɪŋk ɪts nɛsəsɛɹi. ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə ðə pæləs, ən ɪt kən bi dʌn bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn noʊz wʌɾ əz hæpənd."

"This is . . . madness." Holding his reins stiffly, Dashiva booted the plump mare closer to Rand's black. Reluctance twisted his features; perhaps even Asha'man worried at being too near Rand. "All it needs is one man with a . . . a bow, or a knife, and you don't see him in time. Send one of the Asha'man to do what needs doing, or more, if you think it's necessary. A gateway to the palace, and it can be done before anyone knows what has happened."

"æn sɪt hɪɹ pæs dɑɹk," ɹænd kʌɾ ɪn, ɹeɪnɪŋ ɪz ɡɛldɪŋ ɝaʊn tə feɪs dæʃivə, "əntɪl ðeɪ noʊ ðɪs pleɪs wɛl ɪnʌf tə oʊpən wʌn? ðət weɪ bɹɪŋz blʌdʃɛd fəɹ ʃʊɹ. ðeɪv sin əs fɹəm ðə wɔlz, ənlɛs ðəɹ blaɪnd. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ðəl sɛn sʌmbɑɾi tə faɪn aʊɾ u wi ɑɹ, ən haʊ mɛni." ðə ɹɛst ə ðə kɑləm ɹɪmeɪn hɪɾən bɪhaɪn ðə ɹaɪz, ən ðə bænɝz wɝ daʊn ðɛɹ, tu, bʌt mɛn sɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ɑn ə ɹɪdʒ wɪð meɪɾənz fəɹ kʌmpəni wəɾ ɪndiɾ ətʃɹækt kjʊɹiɑsəɾi. "aɪ wɪl də ðɪs maɪ weɪ." hɪz vɔɪs ɹoʊz ɪn æŋɡɝ, ən i smɛld ə koʊl fjʊɹi. "noʊbɑdi daɪz ənlɛs ɪt kæn bi əvɔɪɾəd, dæʃivə. aɪv hæɾ ə bɛlɪfəl ə dɛθ. dʒju ʌndɝstæn mi? noʊbɑdi!"

"And sit here past dark," Rand cut in, reining his gelding around to face Dashiva, "until they know this place well enough to open one? That way brings bloodshed for sure. They've seen us from the walls, unless they're blind. Sooner or later they will send somebody to find out who we are, and how many." The rest of the column remained hidden behind the rise, and the banners were down there, too, but men sitting their horses on a ridge with Maidens for company would indeed attract curiosity. "I will do this my way." His voice rose in anger, and he smelled of cold fury. "Nobody dies unless it can't be avoided, Dashiva. I've had a bellyful of death. Do you understand me? Nobody!"

"æz maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən kəmænz." ðə fɛloʊ ɪnklaɪn ɪz hɛd, bʌɾ i saʊndəd saʊɝ, ən i smɛld. . . .

"As my Lord Dragon commands." The fellow inclined his head, but he sounded sour, and he smelled. . . .

pɛɹɪn ɹʌbd ɪz noʊz. ðə smɛl . . . skɪɾɝd, dɑdʒɪŋ waɪldli θɹu fɪɹ ən heɪɾ ən æŋɡɝ ən ə dʌzən mɔɹ ɪmoʊʃənz ɔlmoʊs tu kwɪkli tə meɪk aʊt. hi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ daʊɾɪd ðə mæn wɑz mæd, haʊɛvɝ ɡʊɾ ə feɪs ðə fɛloʊ pʊɾ ɑn. pɛɹɪn noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɹɪli kɛɹd, iðɝ. ðɪs kloʊs. . . .

Perrin rubbed his nose. The smell . . . skittered, dodging wildly through fear and hate and anger and a dozen more emotions almost too quickly to make out. He no longer doubted the man was mad, however good a face the fellow put on. Perrin no longer really cared, either. This close. . . .

dɪɡɪŋ ɪz hilz ɪndə stɛpɝz flæŋks, hi stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə sɪɾi ən feɪl, nɑt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə ɹɛst, bɛɹli noʊɾɪsɪŋ ɛɹæm kloʊs bɪhaɪnd. hi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə si ɛɹæm tə noʊ hi wəd bi ðɛɹ. ɔl i kəd θɪŋk ʌv wɑz feɪl. ɪf i ɡɑt swɑloʊ seɪfli ɪndə ðə sɪɾi. . . . hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf kip stɛpɝ ət noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə kwɪk wɔk. ə ɡæləpɪŋ ɹaɪɾɝ dʒɹu aɪz, ən kwɛstʃənz, ən dɪleɪz. ət ðət peɪs, ði ʌðɝz kɑɾ ʌp wɪð ɛɹæm ən ɪm fæst ɪnʌf, ðoʊz u wɝ kʌmɪŋ. mɪn hæd ɡɑɾən əɹ weɪ, ɪt simd, ən soʊ hæd lɔɪəl. ðə meɪɾənz fæn aʊɾ əhɛd, səm ɡɪvɪŋ pɛɹɪn sɪmpəθɛɾɪk lʊks əz ðeɪ tʃɹɑɾəd baɪ. kiæd stʌɾid ðə ɡɹaʊn əntɪl ʃi wɑz bɪɑn hɪm.

Digging his heels into Stepper's flanks, he started for the city and Faile, not waiting for the rest, barely noticing Aram close behind. He did not have to see Aram to know he would be there. All he could think of was Faile. If he got Swallow safely into the city. . . . He made himself keep Stepper at no more than a quick walk. A galloping rider drew eyes, and questions, and delays. At that pace, the others caught up with Aram and him fast enough, those who were coming. Min had gotten her way, it seemed, and so had Loial. The Maidens fanned out ahead, some giving Perrin sympathetic looks as they trotted by. Chiad studied the ground until she was beyond him.

"aɪ stɪl doʊn laɪk ðɪs plæn," heɪvin mʌɾɝd ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ə ɹænd. "fɝɡɪv mi, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt."

"I still don't like this plan," Havien muttered on one side of Rand. "Forgive me, my Lord Dragon, but I do not."

dɑbɹeɪn, ɑn ɹændz ʌðɝ saɪd, ɡɹʌntɪd. "wi hæv bɪn oʊvɝ ðæt, minɝ. ɪf wi dɪɾ əz jə wɑnt, ðeɪ wəd kloʊz ðə ɡeɪts ɑn əs bɪfɔɹ wi kʌvɝɾ ə maɪl." heɪvin ɡɹaʊl sʌmθɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ ən dænst ɪz hɔɹs ə fju peɪsɪz. hi hæd wɑntəɾ ɛvɹi mæn tə fɑloʊ ɹænd ɪndə ðə sɪɾi.

Dobraine, on Rand's other side, grunted. "We have been over that, Mayener. If we did as you want, they would close the gates on us before we covered a mile." Havien growled something under his breath and danced his horse a few paces. He had wanted every man to follow Rand into the city.

pɛɹɪn ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, pæs ði æʃəmən. deɪmɝ flɪn, ɹɛkəɡnaɪzəbəl baɪ hɪz koʊt, ən ə fju ʌv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn wɝ vɪzəbəl ɑn ðə ɹɪdʒ, stændɪŋ ən hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. pɛɹɪn saɪd. hi wəd nɑɾ əv maɪndəd hævɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn əlɔŋ. bʌt ɹænd wɑz pɹɑbli ɹaɪt, ən dɑbɹeɪn hæd bækt ɪm ʌp.

Perrin glanced over his shoulder, past the Asha'man. Damer Flinn, recognizable by his coat, and a few of the Two Rivers men were visible on the ridge, standing and holding their horses. Perrin sighed. He would not have minded having the Two Rivers men along. But Rand was probably right, and Dobraine had backed him up.

ə fju mɛn kəɾ ɛntɝ wɛɹ ə smɔl ɑɹmi kəd nɑt. ɪf ðə ɡeɪts wɝ ʃʌt, ði il wəɾ əv tə bɪsidʒ ðə sɪɾi, ɪf ðeɪ stɪl wʊd, ən ðən ðə kɪlɪŋ bɪɡæn ənu. ɹænd hæd stʌf ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ ɪndə wʌn ə ðə ɡɛldɪŋz' sæɾəlbæɡz soʊ dʒʌs ðə kɑɹv bʌt stʌk aʊt, ən ðət pleɪn koʊt lʊk laɪk nʌθɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wəd wɛɹ. fəɹ ði æʃəmən, noʊbɑdi ɪn ðə sɪɾi hæɾ ɛni aɪdiə wʌɾ ə blæk koʊt mɛnt. ə fju mɛn wɝ iziɝ tə kɪl ðən ə smɔl ɑɹmi, tu, ivən ɪf moʊst ə ðɛm kəd tʃænəl. pɛɹɪn hæd sin ən æʃəmən teɪk ə ʃeɪɾoʊ spɪɹ θɹu hɪz bɛli, ən ðə mæn hæd daɪd noʊ hɑɹɾɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ.

A few men could enter where a small army could not. If the gates were shut, the Aiel would have to besiege the city, if they still would, and then the killing began anew. Rand had stuffed the Dragon Scepter into one of the geldings' saddlebags so just the carved butt stuck out, and that plain coat looked like nothing the Dragon Reborn would wear. For the Asha'man, nobody in the city had any idea what a black coat meant. A few men were easier to kill than a small army, too, even if most of them could channel. Perrin had seen an Asha'man take a Shaido spear through his belly, and the man had died no harder than any other.

dæʃivə ɡɹʌmbəld ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ; pɛɹɪn kɑt "hɪɹoʊ" ən "ful" ɪn ikwəli dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋ toʊnz. wɪθaʊt feɪl, hi maɪɾ əv əɡɹid. wʌns ɹænd pɪɹd təwɔɹd ði il ɛnkæmpmən spɹɔld oʊvɝ ðə hɪlz tu əɹ θɹi maɪlz ist ə ðə sɪɾi, ən pɛɹɪn hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ, bʌt wʌtɛvɝ θɔts ɹænd hæd, hi kɛpt ɑn ðə ɹoʊd. nʌθɪŋ mæɾɝd mɔɹ ðən feɪl. nʌθɪŋ, wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ɹænd sɔ ɪt soʊ.

Dashiva grumbled under his breath; Perrin caught "hero" and "fool" in equally disparaging tones. Without Faile, he might have agreed. Once Rand peered toward the Aiel encampment sprawled over the hills two or three miles east of the city, and Perrin held his breath, but whatever thoughts Rand had, he kept on the road. Nothing mattered more than Faile. Nothing, whether or not Rand saw it so.

ə ɡʊd hæf-maɪl ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə ɡeɪts, ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɪndə ənʌðɝ kæmp, wʌn ðət meɪd pɛɹɪn fɹaʊn. ɪt wɑz bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə sɪɾi ɪtsɛlf, ə θɪk bæn ə ɹæmʃækəl bɹʌʃ hʌts ən ɹɪkəɾi tɛns meɪd fɹəm skɹæps, ɑn bɝnd-oʊvɝ ɡɹaʊnd, klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə haɪ ɡɹeɪ wɔlz əz fɑɹ əz i kəd si. ðɪs hæd bɪn kɔl fɔɹɡeɪt wʌns, wɔɹən ə twɪstɪŋ stʃɹits ən æliz, bɪfɔɹ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ bɝn ɪt. səm ə ðə pipəl stɛɹɾ ɪn saɪləns əz ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ pɑɹɾi pæst, əɾ ən oʊɡiɝ, ən il meɪɾənz, bʌt moʊst skʌɾəld əbaʊt ðɛɹ bɪznəs wɪð wɛɹi, sʌlən feɪsəz ən ə kɛɹ tə noʊɾəs nʌθɪŋ ðət wɑz nɑt ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm. ðə bɹaɪt kʌlɝz ən ɔfən tæɾɝd kæst-ɔf faɪnɝi wɔɹn baɪ fɔɹɡeɪɾɝz mɪŋɡəld wɪð ðə sɑmbɝ ɡɑɹb mɔɹ juʒəwəl fəɹ kɛɹhinɪn, ðə pleɪn dɑɹk kloʊðz ə vɪlɪdʒɝz ən fɑɹmɝz. ðə fɔɹɡeɪɾɝz hæd bɪn ɪn ðə sɪɾi wən pɛɹɪn lɛft, əlɔŋ wɪð θaʊzənz ə ɹɛfjudʒiz fɹəm dipɝ ɪnsaɪd ðə kʌntʃɹi. mɛni ʌv ðoʊz feɪsəz bɔɹ bɹuzəz ən wɝs, kʌts ən slæʃɪz, ɔfən ənbəndədʒd. koʊləveɪɪɹ mʌst əv pʊɾ əm aʊt. ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv lɛf ðə ʃɛltɝ ə ðə wɔlz ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn; fɔɹɡeɪɾɝz ən ɹɛfjudʒiz əlaɪk fɪɹd ðə ɹɪtɝn ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ðə weɪ ə mæn u hæd bɪn sɪɹd tə ðə boʊn fɪɹd hɑɾ aɪɝn.

A good half-mile short of the gates, they rode into another camp, one that made Perrin frown. It was big enough for a city itself, a thick band of ramshackle brush huts and rickety tents made from scraps, on burned-over ground, clinging to the high gray walls as far as he could see. This had been called Foregate once, warren of twisting streets and alleys, before the Shaido burned it. Some of the people stared in silence as the strange party passed, at an Ogier, and Aiel Maidens, but most scuttled about their business with wary, sullen faces and a care to notice nothing that was not right in front of them. The bright colors and often tattered cast-off finery worn by Foregaters mingled with the somber garb more usual for Cairhienin, the plain dark clothes of villagers and farmers. The Foregaters had been in the city when Perrin left, along with thousands of refugees from deeper inside the country. Many of those faces bore bruises and worse, cuts and slashes, often unbandaged. Colavaere must have put them out. They would not have left the shelter of the walls on their own; Foregaters and refugees alike feared the return of the Shaido the way a man who had been seared to the bone feared hot iron.

ðə ɹoʊd ɹæn stʃɹeɪt θɹu ðə kæmp tə ðə dʒæŋɡaɪ ɡeɪts, θɹi tɔl skwɛɹ ɑɹtʃəz flæŋk baɪ taʊɝz. hɛlməɾɪd mɛn laʊnʒd ʌp ɑn ðə bæɾəlmənts, piɹɪŋ daʊn θɹu ðə ɡæps ɪn ðə stoʊn tiθ. səm stɛɹɾ ɔf təwɔɹd ðə mɛn ɑn ðə hɪltɑp, ən hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ən ɔfəsɝ wɪð ə kɑn hɛld ə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs tə hɪz aɪ. ɹændz smɔl pɑɹɾi dʒɹu ɪnkwaɪɝɪŋ ɡlænsɪz. mɛn əhɔɹsbæk ən il meɪɾənz; nɑt kɑmən kəmpænjənz. kɹɔsboʊz ʃoʊɾ ətɑp ðə sɛɹeɪɾɪd wɔl, bʌt noʊ wʌn ɹeɪzd ə wɛpən. ði aɪɝn-baʊnd ɡeɪts stʊɾ oʊpən. pɛɹɪn hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ. hi wɑntəd vɛɹi mʌtʃ tə ɡæləp fəɹ ðə sʌn pæləs ən feɪl.

The road ran straight through the camp to the Jangai Gates, three tall square arches flanked by towers. Helmeted men lounged up on the battlements, peering down through the gaps in the stone teeth. Some stared off toward the men on the hilltop, and here and there an officer with a con held a looking glass to his eye. Rand's small party drew inquiring glances. Men ahorseback and Aiel Maidens; not common companions. Crossbows showed atop the serrated wall, but no one raised a weapon. The iron-bound gates stood open. Perrin held his breath. He wanted very much to gallop for the Sun Palace and Faile.

dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə ɡeɪts sæɾ ə skwɑt stoʊn ɡɑɹd haʊs, wɛɹ stʃɹeɪnʒɝz tə ðə sɪɾi wɝ səpoʊz tə ɹɛdʒɪstɝ bɪfɔɹ ɛntɝɪŋ. ə skwɛɹ-feɪs kɛɹhinɪn ɔfəsɝ wɑtʃt əm pæs wɪð ə dɪsɡɹʌntəl fɹaʊn, aɪɪŋ ðə meɪɾənz ənizəli. hi dʒʌst stʊd ðɛɹ, wɑtʃɪŋ.

Just inside the gates sat a squat stone guard house, where strangers to the city were supposed to register before entering. A square-faced Cairhienin officer watched them pass with a disgruntled frown, eyeing the Maidens uneasily. He just stood there, watching.

"æz aɪ toʊl ju," dɑbɹeɪn sɛd wʌns ðeɪ wɝ baɪ ðə ɡɑɹd haʊs. "koʊləveɪɪɹ ɡeɪv fɹi æksɛs tə ðə sɪɾi fəɹ kɔɹəneɪʃən fɛstəvəl. nɑɾ ivən sʌmwʌn ʌndɝ ɔɹɾɝ ə ɝɛs kən bi dɪnaɪɾ əɹ dɪteɪnd. ɪts tʃɹədɪʃən." hi saʊndəd ɹɪlivd, ðoʊ. mɪn saɪɾ ɑɾəbli, ən lɔɪəl lɛɾ aʊɾ ə bɹɛθ ðət cʊɾə bɪn hɝd tu stʃɹits oʊvɝ. pɛɹɪnz tʃɛst wɑz stɪl tu taɪt fəɹ saɪɪŋ. swɑloʊ wɑz ɪnsaɪd kɛɹhin. naʊ, ɪf i kəɾ oʊnli ɡɛɾ əɹ tə ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs.

"As I told you," Dobraine said once they were by the guard house. "Colavaere gave free access to the city for Coronation Festival. Not even someone under order of arrest can be denied or detained. It is tradition." He sounded relieved, though. Min sighed audibly, and Loial let out a breath that could have been heard two streets over. Perrin's chest was still too tight for sighing. Swallow was inside Cairhien. Now, if he could only get her to the Royal Palace.

ʌp kloʊs, kɛɹhin kæɹiɾ aʊt wʌɾ ɪt hæd pɹɑməs fɹəm əfɑɹ. ðə haɪəst ə ðə hɪlz leɪ ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz, bʌt tɛɹəst ən feɪst wɪð stoʊn tɪl ðeɪ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sim hɪlz əɾ ɔl. bɹɔd, kɹaʊɾəd stʃɹits mɛɾ ət ɹaɪɾ æŋɡəlz. ɪn ðɪs sɪɾi, ivən ði æliz meɪɾ ə ɡɹɪd. ðə stʃɹits ɹoʊz ən fɛl ɹɪlʌktənli wɪð ðə hɪlz, ɔfən sɪmpli kʌɾɪŋ θɹu. fɹəm ʃɑps tə pæləsəz, ðə bɪldɪŋz wɝ ɔl stɑɹk skwɛɹz ən səvɪɹ ɹɛktæŋɡəlz, ivən ðə ɡɹeɪt bʌtʃɹəs taʊɝz, itʃ ɹæpt ɪn skæfəldɪŋ ɑn ə hɪltɑp, ðə wʌns-feɪbəl tɑpləs taʊɝz ə kɛɹhin, stɪl biɪŋ ɹibɪlt æftɝ bɝnɪŋ ɪn ði il wɔɹ. ðə sɪɾi sim hɑɹɾɝ ðən stoʊn, ə bɹuzɪŋ pleɪs, ən ʃædoʊz stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ əkɹɔs ɛvɹiθɪŋ haɪɾənd ði ɪfɛkt. lɔɪəlz tʌftəɾ ɪɹz twɪtʃt ɔlmoʊst wɪθaʊt stɑpɪŋ; ə wɝid fɹaʊn kɹist ɪz fɔɹhɛd, ən ɪz dæŋɡəlɪŋ aɪbɹaʊz bɹʌʃt ɪz tʃik.

Up close, Cairhien carried out what it had promised from afar. The highest of the hills lay inside the walls, but terraced and faced with stone till they no longer seemed hills at all. Broad, crowded streets met at right angles. In this city, even the alleys made a grid. The streets rose and fell reluctantly with the hills, often simply cutting through. From shops to palaces, the buildings were all stark squares and severe rectangles, even the great buttressed towers, each wrapped in scaffolding on a hilltop, the once-fabled topless towers of Cairhien, still being rebuilt after burning in the Aiel War. The city seemed harder than stone, a bruising place, and shadows stretching across everything heightened the effect. Loial's tufted ears twitched almost without stopping; a worried frown creased his forehead, and his dangling eyebrows brushed his cheek.

ðəɹ wɝ fju saɪnz ə kɔɹəneɪʃən fɛstəvəl, əɹ haɪ tʃeɪsəlin. pɛɹɪn hæd noʊ noʊʃən wʌt ðə fɛstəvəl maɪɾ ɛnteɪl, bʌɾ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ðə deɪ ʌv ɹəflɛkʃən wɑz ə taɪm ə mɛɹəmən ən fɝɡɛɾɪŋ ðə bliknəs ʌv wɪntɝ. hɪɹ, ə nɪɹ hʌʃ hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, dɪspaɪt ðə nʌmbɝ ə pipəl. ɛniwɛɹ ɛls, pɛɹɪn maɪɾ əv θɔɾ ɪt ði ənnætʃɹəl hit dʒɹæɡɪŋ pipəlz spɪɹəts daʊn, bʌɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ fɔɹɡeɪɾɝz, kɛɹhinɪn wɝ ə soʊbɝ, ɔstɪɹ lɑt. ɑn ðə sɝfəs, ət list; wʌt leɪ ʌndɝniθ, hi wəɾ əz sun nɑt θɪŋk əbaʊt. ðə hɔkɝz ən kɑɹt-pɛdlɝz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd wɝ ɡɔn fɹəm ðə stʃɹits, ðə mjuzɪʃənz ən tʌmblɝz ən pʌpət ʃoʊz. ðoʊz pipəl wəd bi ɪn ðə ɹæɡtæɡ kæmp aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔlz. ə fju kloʊzd, dɑɹk-peɪntəd sɪdæn tʃɛɹz θɹɛɾəd θɹu ðə kwaɪət θɹɔŋz, səm wɪð haʊs bænɝz ə lɪɾəl lɑɹdʒɝ ðən kɑn stændɪŋ stɪfli əbʌv. ðeɪ muvd əz sloʊli əz ði ɑks-kɑɹts wɪð ɡoʊd-wildɪŋ dʒɹaɪvɝz wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪd, æksəlz skwilɪŋ ɪn ðə stɪlnəs. aʊtləndɝz stʊɾ aʊt, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ lɪɾəl kʌlɝ ðeɪ wɔɹ, kəz fju ɪksɛpt aʊtləndɝz ɹoʊd. ði ɔlmoʊst ɪnɛvəɾəbli ʃɔɹɾɝ neɪɾɪvz lʊk laɪk peɪl-feɪs kɹoʊz ɪn ðɛɹ dɑɹk ɡɑɹb. il stʊɾ aʊt tu, ʌv kɔɹs. wɛðɝ wʌn əloʊn əɹ tɛn təɡɛðɝ, ðeɪ wɔkt ɪn klɪɹɪŋz θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz; aɪz dɑɹɾɪd əweɪ ən speɪs dʒʌst oʊpən ʌp ɝaʊn əm wɛɹɛvɝ ðeɪ wɛnt.

There were few signs of Coronation Festival, or High Chasaline. Perrin had no notion what the Festival might entail, but in the Two Rivers, the Day of Reflection was a time of merriment and forgetting the bleakness of winter. Here, a near hush hung in the air, despite the number of people. Anywhere else, Perrin might have thought it the unnatural heat dragging people's spirits down, but except for Foregaters, Cairhienin were a sober, austere lot. On the surface, at least; what lay underneath, he would as soon not think about. The hawkers and cart-peddlers he remembered were gone from the streets, the musicians and tumblers and puppet shows. Those people would be in the ragtag camp outside the walls. A few closed, dark-painted sedan chairs threaded through the quiet throngs, some with House banners a little larger than con standing stiffly above. They moved as slowly as the ox-carts with goad-wielding drivers walking alongside, axles squealing in the stillness. Outlanders stood out, no matter how little color they wore, because few except outlanders rode. The almost inevitably shorter natives looked like pale-faced crows in their dark garb. Aiel stood out too, of course. Whether one alone or ten together, they walked in clearings through the crowds; eyes darted away and space just opened up around them wherever they went.

il feɪsəz tɝn təwɔɹd ðə pɑɹɾi əz ɪt meɪɾ ɪts sloʊ weɪ θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz. ivən ɪf nɑɾ ɔl ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɹænd ɪn ɪz ɡɹin koʊt, ðeɪ nu hu ə tɔl wɛtləndɝ ɛskɔɹɾɪd baɪ meɪɾənz mʌs bi. ðoʊz feɪsəz sɛn ə tʃɪl daʊn pɛɹɪnz spaɪn: kənsɪɾɝɪŋ. ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪm θæŋkfəl ɹænd hæd lɛft ɔl ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪhaɪnd. əsaɪd fɹəm ði il, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn muv θɹu ə ɹɪvɝ ʌv ʌnkənsɝn ðət pɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə meɪɾənz ən kloʊzd ɪn əɡɛn bɪhaɪn ði æʃəmən.

Aiel faces turned toward the party as it made its slow way through the crowds. Even if not all recognized Rand in his green coat, they knew who a tall wetlander escorted by Maidens must be. Those faces sent a chill down Perrin's spine: considering. They made him thankful Rand had left all of the Aes Sedai behind. Aside from the Aiel, the Dragon Reborn moved through a river of unconcern that parted for the Maidens and closed in again behind the Asha'man.

ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ə kɛɹhin, ðə sʌn pæləs, ðə pæləs ə ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn ɪn splɛndɝ - kɛɹhinɪn wɝ ɡɹeɪt wʌnz fəɹ neɪmz, itʃ mɔɹ ɪkstʃɹævəɡən ðən ðə læst - stʊɾ ətɑp ðə haɪəs hɪl ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ə dɑɹk mæs ə skwɛɹ stoʊn wɪð stɛp taʊɝz lumɪŋ oʊvɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ðə stʃɹit, ðə weɪ ʌv ðə kɹaʊn, bɪkeɪm ə lɔŋ bɹɔd ɹæmp ɹaɪzɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə pæləs, ən pɛɹɪn dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ əz ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd ʌp. feɪl wɑz ʌp ðɛɹ. ʃi hæd tə bi, ən seɪf. wʌtɛvɝ ɛls, ʃi hæd tə bi seɪf. hi tʌtʃt ðə nɑt hoʊldɪŋ swɑloʊz ɹeɪnz tə ə ɹɪŋ ɑn ɪz pɑməl, stʃɹoʊk ði æks əɾ ɪz weɪst. ðə hɔɹsəz' ʃɑd hʊvz ɹæŋ laʊdli ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz. ðə meɪɾənz meɪd noʊ saʊn əɾ ɔl.

The Royal Palace of Cairhien, the Sun Palace, the Palace of the Rising Sun in Splendor - Cairhienin were great ones for names, each more extravagant than the last - stood atop the highest hill in the city, a dark mass of square stone with stepped towers looming over everything. The street, the Way of the Crown, became a long broad ramp rising toward the palace, and Perrin drew a deep breath as they started up. Faile was up there. She had to be, and safe. Whatever else, she had to be safe. He touched the knot holding Swallow's reins to a ring on his pommel, stroked the axe at his waist. The horses' shod hooves rang loudly on the paving stones. The Maidens made no sound at all.

ðə ɡɑɹdz ɑn ðə ɡɹeɪt, oʊpən bɹɑnz ɡeɪts wɑtʃt ðɛɹ sloʊ əpɹoʊtʃ ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz. ðeɪ wɝ kʌlɝfəl fəɹ kɛɹhinɪn soʊlʒɝz, tɛn mɛn wɪð ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn ɪn ɡoʊld ɑn ðɛɹ dɑɹk bɹɛstpleɪts ən skɑɹvz ɪn haʊs seɪɡənz kʌlɝz taɪd bɪloʊ ðə hɛdz ə ðɛɹ hælbɝdz. pɛɹɪn cʊɾə ɹɪɾən aʊt ðɛɹ θɔts. θɝtin mɛn ɑn hɔɹsbæk, bʌɾ ɪn noʊ hɝi, ən oʊnli tu wɛɹɪŋ ɑɹmɝ, wʌn ɪn minɝ ɹɛd. ɛni tʃɹʌbəl wəd kʌm fɹəm kæɹɑlin dəmədʒɹɾ ən tɔɹæm ɹieɪɾən, ən minɝz hæd noʊ pleɪs ɪn ðæt. ən ðəɹ wɑz ə wʊmən, ən ən oʊɡiɝ. ʃʊɹli ðeɪ ɪntɛndəd noʊ tʃɹʌbəl. stɪl, θɹi dʌzən əɹ soʊ meɪɾənz tʃɹɑɾɪŋ əhɛɾ ə ðə hɔɹsəz hɑɹdli lʊkt əz ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ kʌmɪŋ fəɹ ti. fəɹ ən ɪnstən ɔl hʌŋ bælənst. ðən ə meɪɾən veɪl hɝsɛlf. ðə ɡɑɹdz dʒɝkt əz ɪf ɡusd, ən wʌn slæntəɾ ɪz hælbɹɾ ən dɑɹɾɪd fəɹ ðə ɡeɪts. tu stɛps i tʊk, ən stɑpt, ɹɪdʒəɾ əz ə stætʃu. ɛvɹi ɡɑɹd stʊd stɪf; nʌθɪŋ muv bʌt ðɛɹ hɛdz.

The guards on the great, open bronze gates watched their slow approach and exchanged glances. They were colorful for Cairhienin soldiers, ten men with the Rising Sun in gold on their dark breastplates and scarves in House Saighan's colors tied below the heads of their halberds. Perrin could have written out their thoughts. Thirteen men on horseback, but in no hurry, and only two wearing armor, one in Mayener red. Any trouble would come from Caraline Damodred and Toram Riatin, and Mayeners had no place in that. And there was a woman, and an Ogier. Surely they intended no trouble. Still, three dozen or so Maidens trotting ahead of the horses hardly looked as though they were coming for tea. For an instant all hung balanced. Then a Maiden veiled herself. The guards jerked as if goosed, and one slanted his halberd and darted for the gates. Two steps he took, and stopped, rigid as a statue. Every guard stood stiff; nothing moved but their heads.

"ɡʊd," ɹænd mɝmɝd. "naʊ taɪ ɔf ðə floʊz ən liv əm fəɹ leɪɾɝ."

"Good," Rand murmured. "Now tie off the flows and leave them for later."

pɛɹɪn ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli. ði æʃəmən hæd spɹɛɾ aʊt bɪhaɪnd, teɪkɪŋ ʌp moʊst ə ðə wɪdθ ə ðə ɹæmp; ðeɪ mʌs bi juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. vɛɹi laɪkli ði eɪɾ ə ðɛm kəd tɛɹ ðə hoʊl pæləs əpɑɹt. meɪbi ɹænd kəɾ əv baɪ hɪmsɛlf. bʌɾ ɪf ðoʊz taʊɝz bɪɡæn spjuɪŋ kɹɔsboʊ boʊls, ðeɪ wəd daɪ wɪð ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, kɑɾ ɪn ði oʊpən ɑn ðɪs ɹæmp ðət noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sim soʊ waɪd.

Perrin shrugged uncomfortably. The Asha'man had spread out behind, taking up most of the width of the ramp; they must be using the Power. Very likely the eight of them could tear the whole palace apart. Maybe Rand could have by himself. But if those towers began spewing crossbow bolts, they would die with everyone else, caught in the open on this ramp that no longer seemed so wide.

noʊbɑdi spɛɾ ʌp. ɛni aɪz ət ðə tɔl nɛɹoʊ wɪndoʊz ə ðə pæləs, ɑn ðə kɑləneɪɾɪd wɔks haɪ əbʌv, mʌst si nʌθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi. səlɪn flæʃt meɪɾən hænd-tɔk, ən ðə wʌn u hæd veɪld loʊɝd ðə blæk klɔθ hɝidli, feɪs flʌʃɪŋ. ə sloʊ wɔk, ʌp ðə stoʊn ɹæmp. səm ə ðə ɡɑɹdz' hɛlməɾɪd hɛdz ʃʊk waɪldli, aɪz ɹoʊlɪŋ; wʌn sim tə hæv feɪntɪd, slʌmpɪŋ əpɹaɪt wɪð ɪz tʃɪn ɑn ɪz tʃɛst. ðɛɹ maʊðz stʃɹeɪnd, oʊpən, bʌt noʊ saʊn keɪm aʊt. pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk əbaʊt wʌt hæd ɡæɡd ðɛm. ə sloʊ wɔk, θɹu ði oʊpən bɹɑnz ɡeɪts, ɪndə ðə meɪn kɔɹtʃjɑɹd.

Nobody sped up. Any eyes at the tall narrow windows of the palace, on the colonnaded walks high above, must see nothing out of the ordinary. Sulin flashed Maiden hand-talk, and the one who had veiled lowered the black cloth hurriedly, face flushing. A slow walk, up the stone ramp. Some of the guards' helmeted heads shook wildly, eyes rolling; one seemed to have fainted, slumping upright with his chin on his chest. Their mouths strained, open, but no sound came out. Perrin tried not to think about what had gagged them. A slow walk, through the open bronze gates, into the main courtyard.

ðəɹ wɝ noʊ soʊlʒɝz hɪɹ. ðə stoʊn bælkəniz ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd stʊɾ ɛmpti. lɪvɹid sɝvəns ɹʌʃt aʊt wɪð daʊnkæst aɪz tə teɪk ðə hɔɹsəz' ɹeɪnz ən hoʊl stɝəps. stʃɹaɪps ə ɹɛɾ ən jɛloʊ ən sɪlvɝ ɹæn daʊn ðə slivz ʌv ʌðɝwaɪz dɑɹk koʊts ən dʒɹɛsəz, ən itʃ hæd ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn smɔl ɑn ðə lɛf bɹɛst. ðət wɑz mɔɹ kʌlɝ ðən pɛɹɪn hæd sin ɑn ə kɛɹhinɪn sɝvən bɪfɔɹ. ðeɪ kəd nɑt si ðə ɡɑɹdz aʊtsaɪd, ən laɪkli wʊɾə dʌn lɪɾəl dɪfɹən ɪf ðeɪ hæd. ɪn kɛɹhin, sɝvəns pleɪd ðɛɹ oʊn vɝʒən ə deɪz deɪmɑɹ, ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz, bʌt ðeɪ pɹitɛndəd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə duɪŋz ə ðoʊz əbʌv ðɛm. teɪkɪŋ tu mʌtʃ noʊɾəs ʌv wʌt hæpən əmʌŋ jəɹ bɛɾɝz - əɹ ət list, biɪŋ sin tə teɪk noʊɾəs - maɪt min biɪŋ kɑɾ ʌp ɪn ɪt. ɪn kɛɹhin, meɪbi ɪn moʊs lænz, ɔɹɾənɛɹi foʊk kəd bi kɹʌʃt ənnoʊɾɪst wɛɹ ðə maɪɾi wɔkt.

There were no soldiers here. The stone balconies around the courtyard stood empty. Liveried servants rushed out with downcast eyes to take the horses' reins and hold stirrups. Stripes of red and yellow and silver ran down the sleeves of otherwise dark coats and dresses, and each had the Rising Sun small on the left breast. That was more color than Perrin had seen on a Cairhienin servant before. They could not see the guards outside, and likely would have done little different if they had. In Cairhien, servants played their own version of Daes Dae'mar, the Game of Houses, but they pretended to ignore the doings of those above them. Taking too much notice of what happened among your betters - or at least, being seen to take notice - might mean being caught up in it. In Cairhien, maybe in most lands, ordinary folk could be crushed unnoticed where the mighty walked.

ə blɑki wʊmən lɛd stɛpɝ ən swɑloʊ əweɪ wɪθaʊt ɹɪli lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. swɑloʊ wɑz ɪnsaɪd ðə sʌn pæləs, ən ɪt meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns. hi stɪl dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ feɪl wɑz əlaɪv əɹ dɛd. ə ful bɔɪz ful fænsi.

A blocky woman led Stepper and Swallow away without really looking at him. Swallow was inside the Sun Palace, and it made no difference. He still did not know whether Faile was alive or dead. A fool boy's fool fancy.

ʃɪftɪŋ ɪz æks əɾ ɪz hɪp, hi fɑloʊd ɹænd ʌp ðə bɹɔd ɡɹeɪ stɛɹz ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, ən nɑɾəd wən ɛɹæm ɹitʃt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əɡɛn tə iz ɪz sɔɹd. lɪvɹid mɛn swʌŋ oʊpən ðə ɡɹeɪt dɔɹz ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə stɛɹz, bɹɑnz laɪk ði aʊɾɝ ɡeɪts ən mɑɹk lɑɹdʒ wɪð ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn ə kɛɹhin.

Shifting his axe at his hip, he followed Rand up the broad gray stairs at the far end of the courtyard, and nodded when Aram reached over his shoulder again to ease his sword. Liveried men swung open the great doors at the head of the stairs, bronze like the outer gates and marked large with the Rising Sun of Cairhien.

wʌns, ði ɛntʃɹi hɔl wʊɾə stʌn pɛɹɪn wɪð ɪts ɡɹænduɹ. θɪk skwɛɹ kɑləmz ə dɑɹk mɑɹbəl hɛld ə skwɛɹ-vɔltəd silɪŋ tɛn peɪsɪz əbʌv flɔɹ taɪlz ðəɾ ɔltɝneɪɾəd dɑɹk blu ən dip ɡoʊld. ɡɪldɪd ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌnz mɑɹtʃt ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɪsəz, ən fɹizɪz kɑɹvd ɪn ðə wɔlz ʃoʊd kɛɹhinɪn tʃɹaɪəmfs ɪn bæɾəl. ðə hɔl wɑz ɛmpti, seɪv fəɹ ə hændfʊl ə jʌŋ mɛn klʌstɝd bɪniθ wʌn ə ðə fɹizɪz u fɛl saɪlənt wən pɛɹɪn ən ðə ɹɛst ɛntɝd.

Once, the entry hall would have stunned Perrin with its grandeur. Thick square columns of dark marble held a square-vaulted ceiling ten paces above floor tiles that alternated dark blue and deep gold. Gilded Rising Suns marched around the cornices, and friezes carved in the walls showed Cairhienin triumphs in battle. The hall was empty, save for a handful of young men clustered beneath one of the friezes who fell silent when Perrin and the rest entered.

nɑɾ ɔl mɛn, hi ɹilaɪzd. ɔl wɔɹ sɔɹdz, bʌt fɔɹ ə ðə sɛvən wɝ wɪmən, ɪn koʊts ən snʌɡ bɹitʃɪz mʌtʃ laɪk mɪnz, ðɛɹ hɛɹ kʌt ʃɔɹɾ əz ðə mɛnz. nɑt ðət ðət wɑz pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ʃɔɹt; mɛn ən wɪmən əlaɪk hæɾ ɪt ɡæðɝɾ ɪn ə kaɪndə teɪl ðət ɹitʃt ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, taɪd wɪð ə dɑɹk ɹɪbən. wʌn ə ðə wɪmən wɔɹ ɡɹin ə lɪɾəl pəlɝ ðən nɔɹməl fəɹ kɛɹhinɪn, ən ənʌðɝ bɹaɪt blu; ɔl ðə ɹɛst wɝ ɪn dɑɹk kʌlɝz, wɪð ə fju bɹaɪt stʃɹaɪps əkɹɔs ðɛɹ tʃɛsts. ðeɪ stʌɾid ɹændz pɑɹɾi - wɪð ən ɛspiʃəl vju fəɹ hɪmsɛlf, pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd; hɪz jɛloʊ aɪz tʊk pipəl əbæk, ɔlðoʊ hi hɑɹdli noʊɾəst ɪɾ ɛnimɔɹ ənlɛs sʌmbɑɾi dʒʌmpt, əɹ meɪɾ ə kəmoʊʃən - stʌɾid ɪn saɪləns əntɪl ðə læst ə ði æʃəmən wɑz ɪn ən ðə dɔɹz swʌŋ ʃʌt. ðə bum ə ðə kloʊzɪŋ kʌvɝɾ ə moʊmən ə fɪɹs wɪspɝɪŋ; ðən ðeɪ keɪm swæɡɝɪŋ kloʊsɝ, ðə wɪmən stʃɹʌɾɪŋ ivən mɔɹ ɛɹəɡənli ðən ðə mɛn, wɪtʃ tʊk səm duɪŋ. ivən ðə weɪ ðeɪ nɛlt wɑz ɛɹəɡənt.

Not all men, he realized. All wore swords, but four of the seven were women, in coats and snug breeches much like Min's, their hair cut short as the men's. Not that that was particularly short; men and women alike had it gathered in a kind of tail that reached their shoulders, tied with a dark ribbon. One of the women wore green a little paler than normal for Cairhienin, and another bright blue; all the rest were in dark colors, with a few bright stripes across their chests. They studied Rand's party - with an especial view for himself, Perrin realized; his yellow eyes took people aback, although he hardly noticed it anymore unless somebody jumped, or made a commotion - studied in silence until the last of the Asha'man was in and the doors swung shut. The boom of the closing covered a moment of fierce whispering; then they came swaggering closer, the women strutting even more arrogantly than the men, which took some doing. Even the way they knelt was arrogant.

ðə ɡɹin-klæd wʊmən ɡlænst ət ðə wʌn ɪn blu, hu hæɾ əɹ hɛd daʊn, ən sɛd, "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, aɪm kɑmɛl noʊlsən. sɛlən dɛɹənɡəl lidz əɹ səsaɪəɾi. . . ." ʃi blɪŋkt əɾ ə fɪɹs lʊk fɹəm ðə wʊmən ɪn blu. dɪspaɪt ðə ɡlɛɹ, sɛlən smɛld əfɹeɪd tə hɝ boʊnz, ɪf pɛɹɪn wɑz meɪkɪŋ aʊɾ u wɑz u pɹɑpɝli. klɪɹɪŋ əɹ θɹoʊt, kɑmɛl wɛn ɑn, "wi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk - wi dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk jə tə ɹɪtɝn - soʊ sun."

The green-clad woman glanced at the one in blue, who had her head down, and said, "My Lord Dragon, I am Camaille Nolaisen. Selande Darengil leads our society. . . ." She blinked at a fierce look from the woman in blue. Despite the glare, Selande smelled afraid to her bones, if Perrin was making out who was who properly. Clearing her throat, Camaille went on, "We did not think - We did not expect you to return - so soon."

"jɛs," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli. "aɪ daʊɾ ɛniwʌn θɔɾ aɪ wəd ɹɪtɝn - soʊ sun. nʌn ə jə hæz ɛni ɹizən tə bi əfɹeɪɾ ə mi. nʌn əɾ ɔl. ɪf jə bɪliv ɛniθɪŋ, bɪliv ðæt." sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, hi lʊkt ɹaɪɾ ət sɛlənd wən i sɛd ðæt. hɝ hɛd wɪpt ʌp, ən əz ʃi stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, ðə fɪɹ smɛl feɪɾəd. nɑt kəmplitli, bʌt daʊn tə ə tæɾɝ. haʊ hæd ɹænd noʊn ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ? "wɛɹ ɪz koʊləveɪɪɹ?" ɹænd æskt.

"Yes," Rand said softly. "I doubt anyone thought I would return - so soon. None of you has any reason to be afraid of me. None at all. If you believe anything, believe that." Surprisingly, he looked right at Selande when he said that. Her head whipped up, and as she stared at him, the fear smell faded. Not completely, but down to a tatter. How had Rand known it was there? "Where is Colavaere?" Rand asked.

kɑmɛl oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz sɛlən u ænsɝd. "ɪn ðə ɡɹæn hɔl ə ðə sʌn." hɝ vɔɪs ɡɹu stʃɹɔŋɝ əz ʃi spoʊk, ðə sɛn ə hɝ fɪɹ ɡɹoʊɪŋ wikɝ. ɑdli, ə slaɪt tɪnʒ ə dʒɛləsi tʌtʃt ɪt wʌns, dʒʌs fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, wən ʃi ɡlænst ət mɪn. səmtaɪmz ɪz sɛns ə smɛl wɑz mɔɹ kənfjuzɪŋ ðən ɛnlaɪɾənɪŋ. "ɪɾ ɪz ðə θɝd sʌnsɛt kɑnvəkeɪʃən," ʃi wɛn ɑn. "wi ɑɹ nɑɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪnʌf tə ətɛnd. bɪsaɪdz, aɪ θɪŋk wi ʌv ðə səsaɪəɾiz meɪk əɹ ənizi."

Camaille opened her mouth, but it was Selande who answered. "In the Grand Hall of the Sun." Her voice grew stronger as she spoke, the scent of her fear growing weaker. Oddly, a slight tinge of jealousy touched it once, just for an instant, when she glanced at Min. Sometimes his sense of smell was more confusing than enlightening. "It is the third Sunset Convocation," she went on. "We are not important enough to attend. Besides, I think we of the societies make her uneasy."

"ðə θɝd," dɑbɹeɪn mʌɾɝd. "ðə naɪnθ sʌnsɛɾ æftɝ əɹ kɔɹəneɪʃən ɔlɹɛɾi. ʃi weɪstəd noʊ taɪm. ət lis ðəl ɔl bi təɡɛðɝ. noʊ wʌn ʌv ɛni ɹæŋk əɹ pɹitɛnʃən wɪl mɪs ɪt, kɛɹhinɪn əɹ tɛɹən."

"The third," Dobraine muttered. "The ninth sunset after her coronation already. She wasted no time. At least they will all be together. No one of any rank or pretension will miss it, Cairhienin or Tairen."

dʒɹɔɪŋ hɝsɛlf ʌp ɑn əɹ niz, sɛlən mænədʒ tə meɪk ɪt sim ʃi wɑz miɾɪŋ ɹænd aɪ-tə-aɪ. "wi ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə dæns ðə bleɪdz fəɹ ju, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən." səlɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, wɪnsɪŋ, ən ənʌðɝ meɪɾən ɡɹoʊn ɑɾəbli; sɛvɹəl lʊkt ən smɛld ɹɛɾi tə də səm vaɪələns ðən ən ðɛɹ. ði il kəd nɑt dɪsaɪd wʌt tə meɪk ə ðiz jʌŋ wɛt-lændɝz. ðə pɹɑbləm ɪn il aɪz wɝ ðət ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bi il, ɪn ə weɪ, tə fɑloʊ dʒiɾoʊ, ðɛɹ vɝʒən ʌv ɪt, ɛniweɪ. ðiz sɛvən wɝ nɑt ðə lɑt; hʌnʒɹədz ə ði ɪɾiəts, ət list, kəd bi faʊn ɔl oʊvɝ ðə sɪɾi, ɔɹɡənaɪzd ɪndə səsaɪəɾiz ɪn ɪməteɪʃən ə ði il. hæf ði il pɛɹɪn hæd hɝd mɛnʃən əm wɑntəd tə hɛlp; ði ʌðɝ hæf wɑntəd tə stʃɹæŋɡəl ðɛm.

Drawing herself up on her knees, Selande managed to make it seem she was meeting Rand eye-to-eye. "We are ready to dance the blades for you, my Lord Dragon." Sulin shook her head, wincing, and another Maiden groaned audibly; several looked and smelled ready to do some violence then and there. The Aiel could not decide what to make of these young wet-landers. The problem in Aiel eyes were that they were trying to be Aiel, in a way, to follow ji'e'toh, their version of it, anyway. These seven were not the lot; hundreds of the idiots, at least, could be found all over the city, organized into societies in imitation of the Aiel. Half the Aiel Perrin had heard mention them wanted to help; the other half wanted to strangle them.

fəɹ hɪmsɛlf, hi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wɛðɝ ðeɪ mæŋɡəl dʒiɾoʊ tə mɪnsmit. "wɛɹ ɪz maɪ waɪf?" hi dɪmændəd. "wɛɹ ɪz feɪl?" ðə jʌŋ fulz ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡɑɹɾəd lʊks. ɡɑɹɾəd!

For himself, he did not care whether they mangled ji'e'toh to mincemeat. "Where is my wife?" he demanded. "Where is Faile?" The young fools exchanged guarded looks. Guarded!

"ʃi ɪz ɪn ðə ɡɹæn hɔl ə ðə sʌn," sɛlən sɛd sloʊli. "ʃi - ʃiz wʌn ə kwin - ʌv koʊləveɪɪɹz leɪɾi ətɛndəns."

"She is in the Grand Hall of the Sun," Selande said slowly. "She - she is one of Queen - of Colavaere's lady attendants."

"pʊt jəɹ aɪz bæk ɪn jəɹ hɛd, pɛɹɪn," mɪn wɪspɝd. "ʃi mʌst əv ə ɡʊd ɹizən. jə noʊ ʃi mʌst."

"Put your eyes back in your head, Perrin," Min whispered. "She must have a good reason. You know she must."

ʃɹʌɡɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz koʊt, pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə ɡæðɝ hɪmsɛlf. wʌn ə koʊləveɪɪɹz ətɛndəns? wʌtɛvɝ əɹ ɹizən, ɪt mʌs bi ɡʊd. ðət mʌtʃ i wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv. bʌt wʌt kəɾ ɪt bi?

Shrugging inside his coat, Perrin tried to gather himself. One of Colavaere's attendants? Whatever her reason, it must be good. That much he was sure of. But what could it be?

sɛlən ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ pæsɪŋ ðoʊz ɡɑɹɾəd lʊks əbaʊɾ əɡɛn. wʌn ə ðə mɛn, ə jʌŋ fɛloʊ wɪð ə pɔɪntəd noʊz, wɪspɝd fɪɹs ən loʊ, "wi swɔɹ nɑt tə tɛl ɛniwʌn! nɑɾ ɛniwʌn! ɑn wɔɾɝ oʊθ!"

Selande and the others were passing those guarded looks about again. One of the men, a young fellow with a pointed nose, whispered fierce and low, "We swore not to tell anyone! Not anyone! On water oath!"

bɪfɔɹ pɛɹɪn kəd dɪmæn tə bi toʊld ɹænd spoʊk. "sɛlənd, lɛd ðə weɪ tə ðə ɡɹæn hɔl. ðəɹ wɪl bi noʊ bleɪdz. aɪm hɪɹ tə si dʒʌstəs dʌn, tə ɔl u dɪzɝv ɪt."

Before Perrin could demand to be told Rand spoke. "Selande, lead the way to the Grand Hall. There will be no blades. I am here to see justice done, to all who deserve it."

sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ɪz vɔɪs meɪd pɛɹɪnz hækəlz ɹaɪz. ə hɑɹdnəs ɡɹɪm əz ə hæmɝz feɪs. feɪl dɪɾ əv ə ɡʊd ɹizən. ʃi hæd tə.

Something in his voice made Perrin's hackles rise. A hardness grim as a hammer's face. Faile did have a good reason. She had to.


tʃæptɝ faɪv


CHAPTER 5

eɪ bɹoʊkən kɹaʊn


A Broken Crown

waɪɾ ən tɔl əz ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz wɝ, ðeɪ fɛl kloʊs, ən dɪm dɪspaɪt tɔl ɡɪldɪd stænd-læmps wɪð mɪɹɝz ɑn ɛvɹi bɹæntʃ, lɪt wɛɹɛvɝ deɪlaɪt kəd nɑt pɛnətʃɹeɪt. tæpəstʃɹiz hʌŋ fju ən fɑɹ bɪtwin ɑn ðə wɔlz, sinz ə hʌn əɹ bæɾəl wɪð pipəl ən ænəməlz ɝeɪnʒd mɔɹ pɹɪsaɪsli ðən ɛvɝ neɪtʃɝ hæd. skæɾɝd nɪtʃɪz hɛl boʊlz ən veɪsəz ən naʊ ən ðən ə smɔl stætʃu, ɪn ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ əɹ æləbæstɝ, bʌɾ ivən ðə stætʃuz sim tə ɛmfəsaɪz ðət ðeɪ wɝ stoʊn əɹ mɛɾəl, əz ɪf ðə skʌlptɝz hæd tʃɹaɪd tə bænɪʃ kɝvz.

Wide and tall as the corridors were, they felt close, and dim despite tall gilded stand-lamps with mirrors on every branch, lit wherever daylight could not penetrate. Tapestries hung few and far between on the walls, scenes of hunt or battle with people and animals arranged more precisely than ever nature had. Scattered niches held bowls and vases and now and then a small statue, in gold or silver or alabaster, but even the statues seemed to emphasize that they were stone or metal, as if the sculptors had tried to banish curves.

ðə sɪɾiz hʌʃ wɑz mæɡnəfaɪd hɪɹ. ðə saʊn ə ðɛɹ buts ɑn ðə flɔɹ taɪlz ɛkoʊd, ə hɑloʊ fɔɹboʊɾɪŋ mɑɹtʃ, ən pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt wɑz soʊ tə hɪz ɪɹz əloʊn. lɔɪəlz kwɪvɝɾ əɾ ɛvɹi ʌðɝ stɛp, ən i pɪɹd daʊn kɹɔsɪŋ kɔɹɪɾɝz əz ðoʊ wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt maɪt lip aʊt. mɪn hɛl hɝsɛlf stɪfli ən tʊk dʒɪnʒɝ stɛps, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ ɹufəli wən ʃi ɡlænst ət ɹænd; ʃi sim tə meɪk ən ɛfɝt nɑt tə wɔk kloʊsɝ tə hɪm, ən nɑt pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli plizd wɪð hɝsɛlf oʊvɝ ɪt. ðə jʌŋ kɛɹhinɪn stɑɹɾəd ɔf swæɡɝɪŋ laɪk pikɑks, bʌt ðəɾ ɛɹəɡəns feɪɾəd əz ðə dʒɹʌmɪŋ ə ðɛɹ hilz ɹɪvɝbɝeɪɾɪd. ivən ðə meɪɾənz fɛlt ɪt; səlɪn wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn huz hæn dɪd nɑt səmtaɪmz ɹaɪz təwɔɹd ðə veɪl hæŋɪŋ daʊn əɹ tʃɛst.

The city's hush was magnified here. The sound of their boots on the floor tiles echoed, a hollow foreboding march, and Perrin did not think it was so to his ears alone. Loial's quivered at every other step, and he peered down crossing corridors as though wondering what might leap out. Min held herself stiffly and took ginger steps, grimacing ruefully when she glanced at Rand; she seemed to make an effort not to walk closer to him, and not particularly pleased with herself over it. The young Cairhienin started off swaggering like peacocks, but that arrogance faded as the drumming of their heels reverberated. Even the Maidens felt it; Sulin was the only one whose hand did not sometimes rise toward the veil hanging down her chest.

ðəɹ wɝ sɝvəns ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ʌv kɔɹs, peɪl, nɛɹoʊ-feɪs mɛn ən wɪmən ɪn dɑɹk koʊts ən dʒɹɛsəz wɪð ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn ɑn ðə lɛf bɹɛst ən slivz stʃɹaɪpt ɪn koʊləveɪɪɹz kʌlɝz. səm ɡeɪpt ɪn ɹɛkəɡnɪʃən əz ɹænd pæs baɪ; ə hændfʊl dʒɹɑp tə ðɛɹ niz, hɛdz baʊd. moʊst wɛn ɑn əbaʊt ðɛɹ tæsks æftɝ ə smɔl pɔz fəɹ dip baʊ əɹ kɝtsi. ɪt wɑz dʒʌst əz ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. ʃoʊ pɹɑpɝ ɹɪspɛk tə jəɹ bɛɾɝz, huɛvɝ ðeɪ ɑɹ; oʊbeɪ ðɛm ən ʌðɝwaɪz ɪɡnɔɹ wʌt ðeɪ du, ən pɝhæps jəl nɑt bi ɛntæŋɡəld ɪn ɪt. ɪt wɑz ə weɪ ʌv θɪŋkɪŋ ðət sɛt pɛɹɪnz tiθ ɑn ɛdʒ. noʊbɑdi ʃəɾ əv tə lɪv ðət weɪ.

There were servants everywhere, of course, pale, narrow-faced men and women in dark coats and dresses with the Rising Sun on the left breast and sleeves striped in Colavaere's colors. Some gaped in recognition as Rand passed by; a handful dropped to their knees, heads bowed. Most went on about their tasks after a small pause for deep bow or curtsy. It was just as in the courtyard. Show proper respect to your betters, whoever they are; obey them and otherwise ignore what they do, and perhaps you will not be entangled in it. It was a way of thinking that set Perrin's teeth on edge. Nobody should have to live that way.

tu fɛloʊz ɪn koʊləveɪɪɹz lɪvɝi, stændɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡɪlt-kʌvɝd dɔɹz tə ðə ɡɹæn hɔl ə ðə sʌn, fɹaʊn ət saɪɾ ə ðə meɪɾənz, ən meɪbi ət ðə jʌŋ kɛɹhinɪn. oʊldɝ foʊk juʒəwəli lʊkt əskæns ət ðə jʌŋ-lɪŋz' kæɹiɪŋ ɑn ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ði il dɪd. mɔɹ ðən wʌn pɛɹən hæd tʃɹaɪd tə pʊɾ ən ɛn tə ɪt, hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd sʌnz əɹ dɔɾɝz tə ɡɪv oʊvɝ, ɪnstʃɹʌktəɾ ɑɹmmɪn ən sɝvəns tə tʃeɪs ɔf ʌðɝz' laɪk-maɪndəd sʌnz ən dɔɾɝz laɪk kɑmən veɪɡɹəns əɹ stʃɹit ɹʌfaɪənz. pɛɹɪn wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf ðiz dɔɹmən slæntəd ðɛɹ ɡɪldɪd stæfs tə stɑp sɛlən ən əɹ fɹɛnz fɹəm ɡoʊɪŋ θɹu ði oʊpən dɔɹweɪz, noʊbɪləɾi əɹ nɑt, ən pɝhæps ivən ðə meɪɾənz. fju kɛɹhinɪn stɪl dɛɹd kɔl il sævədʒəz, nɑt wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd bi hɝd, bʌt moʊs θɔɾ ɪt. ðə pɛɹ ɡæðɝd ðɛmsɛlvz, dʒɹu dip bɹɛθs - ən sɔ ɹænd oʊvɝ ðə meɪɾənz' hɛdz. ðɛɹ aɪz nɪɹli pɑpt aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ feɪsəz. itʃ mæn ɡlænst saɪdweɪz ət ði ʌðɝ, ən ðən ðeɪ wɝ ɑn ðɛɹ niz. wʌn stɛɹd fɪksədli ət ðə flɔɹ; ði ʌðɝ skwizd ɪz aɪz ʃʌt, ən pɛɹɪn hɝɾ ɪm pɹeɪɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ.

Two fellows in Colavaere's livery, standing before the gilt-covered doors to the Grand Hall of the Sun, frowned at sight of the Maidens, and maybe at the young Cairhienin. Older folk usually looked askance at the young-lings' carrying on every bit as much as the Aiel did. More than one parent had tried to put an end to it, had ordered sons or daughters to give over, instructed armsmen and servants to chase off others' like-minded sons and daughters like common vagrants or street ruffians. Perrin would not have been surprised if these doormen slanted their gilded staffs to stop Selande and her friends from going through the open doorways, nobility or not, and perhaps even the Maidens. Few Cairhienin still dared call Aiel savages, not where they could be heard, but most thought it. The pair gathered themselves, drew deep breaths - and saw Rand over the Maidens' heads. Their eyes nearly popped out of their faces. Each man glanced sideways at the other, and then they were on their knees. One stared fixedly at the floor; the other squeezed his eyes shut, and Perrin heard him praying under his breath.

"soʊ æm aɪ lʌvd," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli. hi hɑɹdli saʊndəd hɪmsɛlf. mɪn tʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm, hɝ feɪs peɪnd. ɹænd pæɾəd əɹ hænd wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ, ən fəɹ səm ɹizən ðət sim tə peɪn əɹ ivən mɔɹ.

"So am I loved," Rand said softly. He hardly sounded himself. Min touched his arm, her face pained. Rand patted her hand without looking at her, and for some reason that seemed to pain her even more.

ðə ɡɹæn hɔl ə ðə sʌn wɑz ɪmɛns, wɪð ən æŋɡəl-vɔltəd silɪŋ ə fʊl fɪfti peɪsɪz haɪ əɾ ɪts pik ən ɡɹeɪt ɡoʊldən læmps hʌŋ ɑn ɡɪldɪd tʃeɪnz θɪk ɪnʌf tə muv ðə ɡeɪts ʌv ə fɔɹtʃɹəs. ɪt wɑz ɪmɛns, ən ɪt wɑz fʊl, pipəl kɹaʊɾɪŋ əmʌŋ mæsɪv skwɛɹ kɑləmz ə blu-blæk veɪn mɑɹbəl ðət stʊɾ ɪn tu ɹoʊz tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə sɛntɝ aɪl. ðə foʊk ət ðə ɹɪɹ noʊɾəst ðə nukʌmɝz fɝst. ɪn lɔŋ koʊts ən ʃɔɹt, səm ɪn bɹaɪt kʌlɝz əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd, səm tʃɹævəl-wɔɹn, ðeɪ stɛɹd kjʊɹiəsli. ɪntɛnli. ðə fju wɪmən ɪn ðə bæk ə ðə hɔl wɔɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛsəz ən hæd feɪsəz əz hɑɹɾ əz ðə mɛn, ɡeɪzəz əz dɝɛkt.

The Grand Hall of the Sun was immense, with an angle-vaulted ceiling a full fifty paces high at its peak and great golden lamps hung on gilded chains thick enough to move the gates of a fortress. It was immense, and it was full, people crowding among massive square columns of blue-black veined marble that stood in two rows to either side of the center aisle. The folk at the rear noticed the newcomers first. In long coats and short, some in bright colors or embroidered, some travel-worn, they stared curiously. Intently. The few women in the back of the hall wore riding dresses and had faces as hard as the men, gazes as direct.

hʌntɝz fəɹ ðə hɔɹn, pɛɹɪn θɔt. dɑbɹeɪn hæd sɛd ðəɾ ɛvɹi noʊbəl u kəd bi ðəɹ wʊd, ən moʊs hʌntɝz wɝ nɑbli bɔɹn, əɹ kleɪm tə bi. wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ðeɪ ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɹænd, ðeɪ sɛnst sʌmθɪŋ, hænz filɪŋ fəɹ sɔɹdz ən dæɡɝz ðət wɝ nɑt ðəɹ ðɪs ivnɪŋ. mɔɹ hʌntɝz ðən nɑt sɔɾ ædvɛntʃɝ ən ə pleɪs ɪn ðə hɪstɝiz əlɔŋ wɪð ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. ivən ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹeɪ-bɔɹn, ðeɪ nu deɪnʒɝ wən ðeɪ sɔ ɪt.

Hunters for the Horn, Perrin thought. Dobraine had said that every noble who could be there would, and most Hunters were nobly born, or claimed to be. Whether or not they recognized Rand, they sensed something, hands feeling for swords and daggers that were not there this evening. More Hunters than not sought adventure and a place in the histories along with the Horn of Valere. Even if they did not know the Dragon Re-born, they knew danger when they saw it.

ði ʌðɝz ɪn ðə ɡɹæn hɔl wɝ lɛs ətun tə deɪnʒɝ, əɹ ɹæðɝ, mɔɹ tə ɪntʃɹiɡz ən plɑts ðən tə oʊpən hæzɝd. pɛɹɪn wɑz ə θɝɾ ə ðə weɪ daʊn ðə lɔŋ sɛntɝ aɪl, kloʊs ɑn ɹændz hilz, bɪfɔɹ ɡæsps ɹæn θɹu ðə tʃeɪmbɝ laɪk ə wɪnd. peɪl kɛɹhinɪn lɔɹdz wɪð kʌlɝfəl slæʃɪz əkɹɔs ðə tʃɛsts ə ðɛɹ dɑɹk sɪlk koʊts, səm wɪð ðə fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ hɛdz ʃeɪvd ən paʊɾɝd; kɛɹhinɪn leɪɾiz wɪð stʃɹaɪps ɑn ðɛɹ dɑɹk haɪ-nɛkt ɡaʊnz ən leɪs fɔlz kʌvɝɪŋ ðɛɹ hænz, ðɛɹ hɛɹ ɪn ɪntʃɹəkət taʊɝz ðəɾ ɔfən æɾəd ə ɡʊd fʊɾ ə haɪt. tɛɹən haɪ lɔɹdz ən lɔɹdz ə ðə lænd wɪð ɔɪl bɪɹdz tʃɹɪm tə pɔɪns, ɪn vɛlvət hæts ən koʊts ə ɹɛɾ ən blu ən ɛvɹi kʌlɝ, wɪð pʌfi, sæɾən-stʃɹaɪpt slivz; tɛɹən leɪɾiz ɪn ivən mɔɹ kʌlɝfəl ɡaʊnz, wɪð waɪd leɪs ɹʌfs ən kloʊs kæps stʌɾɪd wɪð pɝlz ən munstoʊnz, faɪɝdʒɹɑps ən ɹubiz. ðeɪ nu pɛɹɪn, ən ðeɪ nu dɑbɹeɪn ən ivən heɪvin ən mɪn, bʌt moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾəntli, ðeɪ nu ɹænd. ə ɹɪpəl ə noʊɪŋ ðət kɛpt peɪs ʌp ðə hɔl wɪð hɪm. aɪz waɪɾənɪŋ, dʒɔz dʒɹɑpɪŋ, ðeɪ wɛn soʊ stɪf pɛɹɪn ɔlmoʊs θɔt ði æʃəmən hæd baʊn əm laɪk ðə ɡɑɹdz aʊtsaɪd ðə pæləs. ðə tʃeɪmbɝ wɑz ə si ʌv swit pɝfjumz, ən bɪniθ ðəɾ ʌndɝ-kɝəns ə sɔlti swɛt, bʌt θɹu ɪɾ uz fɪɹ, ə kwɪvɝɪŋ sɔɹɾ ə smɛl.

The others in the Grand Hall were less attuned to danger, or rather, more to intrigues and plots than to open hazard. Perrin was a third of the way down the long center aisle, close on Rand's heels, before gasps ran through the chamber like a wind. Pale Cairhienin lords with colorful slashes across the chests of their dark silk coats, some with the front of their heads shaved and powdered; Cairhienin ladies with stripes on their dark high-necked gowns and lace falls covering their hands, their hair in intricate towers that often added a good foot of height. Tairen High Lords and Lords of the Land with oiled beards trimmed to points, in velvet hats and coats of red and blue and every color, with puffy, satin-striped sleeves; Tairen ladies in even more colorful gowns, with wide lace ruffs and close caps studded with pearls and moonstones, firedrops and rubies. They knew Perrin, and they knew Dobraine and even Havien and Min, but most importantly, they knew Rand. A ripple of knowing that kept pace up the Hall with him. Eyes widening, jaws dropping, they went so stiff Perrin almost thought the Asha'man had bound them like the guards outside the palace. The chamber was a sea of sweet perfumes, and beneath that under-currents of salty sweat, but through it oozed fear, a quivering sort of smell.

hɪz ətɛnʃən wɑz ɔl ɑn ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə hɔl, ðoʊ, ɑn ðə dip blu mɑɹbəl deɪz wɛɹ ðə sʌn θɹoʊn stʊd, ʃaɪnɪŋ laɪk ɪts neɪmseɪk wɪð ɡɪlt, ðə weɪvi-ɹeɪd ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn hjudʒ ətɑp ðə haɪ bæk. koʊləveɪɪɹ ɹoʊz sloʊli, piɹɪŋ daʊn ði aɪl oʊvɝ ɹændz hɛd. hɝ nɪɹli blæk dʒɹɛs bɔɹ nɑɾ ə sɪŋɡəl stʃɹaɪp ə noʊbɪləɾi, bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪt mæs ə kɝlz ɹaɪzɪŋ əbʌv əɹ hɛd hæd tə hæv bɪn dʒɹɛst ɝaʊn ðə kɹaʊn ʃi wɔɹ, ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn ɪn ɡoʊld ən jɛloʊ daɪmənz. sɛvən jʌŋ wɪmən flæŋk ðə sʌn θɹoʊn ɪn dɑɹk-bɑdaɪst ɡaʊnz wɪð leɪs snʌɡd ʌndɝ ðɛɹ tʃɪnz ən skɝts stʃɹaɪp vɝɾɪkli ɪn koʊləveɪɪɹz jɛloʊ ən ɹɛɾ ən sɪlvɝ. ɪt sim ðət kɛɹhinɪn fæʃən wɑz dɪfɹən fəɹ ðə kwin, ən fəɹ ðə kwinz ətɛndəns.

His attention was all on the far end of the Hall, though, on the deep blue marble dais where the Sun Throne stood, shining like its namesake with gilt, the wavy-rayed Rising Sun huge atop the high back. Colavaere rose slowly, peering down the aisle over Rand's head. Her nearly black dress bore not a single stripe of nobility, but the great mass of curls rising above her head had to have been dressed around the crown she wore, the Rising Sun in gold and yellow diamonds. Seven young women flanked the Sun Throne in dark-bodiced gowns with lace snugged under their chins and skirts striped vertically in Colavaere's yellow and red and silver. It seemed that Cairhienin fashion was different for the Queen, and for the Queen's attendants.

ə flɪkɝ ə moʊʃən bɪhaɪn ðə θɹoʊn pɪkt aʊɾ ən eɪtθ wʊmən, hɪɾən, bʌt pɛɹɪn kɛɹɾ əbaʊt niðɝ koʊləveɪɪɹ nɔɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls ɪksɛp ðə wʊmən tə hɝ ɪmiɾiət ɹaɪt. feɪl. hɝ slaɪtli tɪltəɾ aɪz fæsən ɑn hɪm, dɑɹk lɪkwəd munz, jɛt nɑɾ ə laɪn ɔltɝɾ ə hɝ kuli dɛkɝəs ɪkspɹɛʃən. ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, hɝ feɪs ɡɹu taɪɾɝ. hɪz noʊz stʃɹeɪn fəɹ ðə sɛn ə hɝ, bʌt ðə pɝfjum wɑz tu stʃɹɔŋ, ən ðə fɪɹ. ʃi hæɾ ə ɹizən fəɹ biɪŋ ðəɹ ɑn ðə deɪz, ə ɡʊd ɹizən. ʃi dɪd.

A flicker of motion behind the throne picked out an eighth woman, hidden, but Perrin cared about neither Colavaere nor anyone else except the woman to her immediate right. Faile. Her slightly tilted eyes fastened on him, dark liquid moons, yet not a line altered of her coolly decorous expression. If anything, her face grew tighter. His nose strained for the scent of her, but the perfume was too strong, and the fear. She had a reason for being there on the dais, a good reason. She did.

ɹænd tʌtʃt səlɪnz sliv. "weɪt hɪɹ," hi sɛd. skaʊlɪŋ, ðə skɑɹ ɑn əɹ lɛðɝi feɪs stændɪŋ aʊɾ əz waɪɾ əz əɹ hɛɹ, ʃi skæn ɪz feɪs, ðən nɑɾəd wɪð ɑbviəs ɹɪlʌktəns. hɝ fɹi hæn dʒɛstʃɝɾ ɛniweɪ, ən ənʌðɝ ɡæsp ɹæn θɹu ðə tʃeɪmbɝ əz ðə meɪɾənz veɪld. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊs læfəbəl; ði eɪt mɛn ɪn blæk koʊts, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɑtʃ ɛvɹiwɛɹ ət wʌns, kəd pɹɑbli kɪl əm ɔl bɪfɔɹ ðə fɝs meɪɾən dʒɹoʊv hoʊm ə spɪɹ, bʌt noʊ wʌn nu hu əɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ. noʊ wʌn lʊkt əɾ əm twaɪs, ə hændfʊl ə mɛn wɪð ðɛɹ sɔɹdz ʃiðd. oʊnli ət ðə meɪɾənz. ən ɹænd. hædn ðeɪ noʊɾəst ðət nɑɾ ə wʌn ə ðoʊz mɛn swɛɾɪd ə dʒɹɑp mɔɹ ðən ɹænd? pɛɹɪn fɛlt əz ɪf i wɝ beɪðɪŋ ɪn hɪz.

Rand touched Sulin's sleeve. "Wait here," he said. Scowling, the scar on her leathery face standing out as white as her hair, she scanned his face, then nodded with obvious reluctance. Her free hand gestured anyway, and another gasp ran through the chamber as the Maidens veiled. It was almost laughable; the eight men in black coats, trying to watch everywhere at once, could probably kill them all before the first Maiden drove home a spear, but no one knew who or what they were. No one looked at them twice, a handful of men with their swords sheathed. Only at the Maidens. And Rand. Hadn't they noticed that not a one of those men sweated a drop more than Rand? Perrin felt as if he were bathing in his.

stɛpɪŋ pæs ðə meɪɾənz wɪð mɪn stɪl kloʊs bɪsaɪd hɪm, ɹænd stɑpt əz fɝs pɛɹɪn, ðən dɑbɹeɪn ən heɪvin dʒɔɪn hɪm. ən ɛɹæm, ʌv kɔɹs, laɪk pɛɹɪnz ʃædoʊ. ɹænd stʌɾid əm itʃ ɪn tɝn, nɑɾɪŋ sloʊli. hi stʌɾid pɛɹɪn lɔŋɡəst, ən tʊk ðə lɔŋɡəs taɪm tə nɑd. ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd kɛɹhinɪn ən ðə jʌŋ minɝ wɔɹ feɪsəz laɪk dɛθ. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ hɪz oʊn lʊkt, bʌɾ ɪz dʒɔ wɑz lɑk taɪt. noʊ wʌn wɑz gɑnə hɑɹm feɪl, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn, noʊ mæɾɝ waɪ. noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ i hæd tə də tə stɑp ɪt.

Stepping past the Maidens with Min still close beside him, Rand stopped as first Perrin, then Dobraine and Havien joined him. And Aram, of course, like Perrin's shadow. Rand studied them each in turn, nodding slowly. He studied Perrin longest, and took the longest time to nod. The gray-haired Cairhienin and the young Mayener wore faces like death. Perrin did not know how his own looked, but his jaw was locked tight. No one was going to harm Faile, no matter what she had done, no matter why. No matter what he had to do to stop it.

ðɛɹ buts dʒɹʌm laʊɾ ɪn ðə saɪləns əz ðeɪ kɹɔs ðə hjudʒ ɡoʊldən moʊzeɪɪk ə ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn ɪn ðə blu-taɪl flɔɹ ən əpɹoʊtʃt ðə θɹoʊn. hænz ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ skɝts, koʊləveɪɪɹ wɛɾ əɹ lɪps, ən əɹ aɪz dɑɹɾɪd bɪtwin ɹænd ən ðə dɔɹz bɪhaɪn hɪm.

Their boots drummed loud in the silence as they crossed the huge golden mosaic of the Rising Sun in the blue-tiled floor and approached the throne. Hands gripping her skirts, Colavaere wet her lips, and her eyes darted between Rand and the doors behind him.

"lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ɹændz vɔɪs ɛkoʊd. hi smaɪld ənplɛzənli. "aɪ sɛn əm tə ði il kæmp. ɪf ði il kæn titʃ əm mænɝz, noʊ wʌn kæn." ə ʃɑk mɝmɝ ɹoʊz, ən fɛl ɹæədli. fɪɹ bɪkeɪm stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ðə pɝfjumz ɪn pɛɹɪnz noʊz.

"Looking for Aes Sedai?" Rand's voice echoed. He smiled unpleasantly. "I sent them to the Aiel camp. If the Aiel can't teach them manners, no one can." A shocked murmur rose, and fell raggedly. Fear became stronger than the perfumes in Perrin's nose.

koʊləveɪɪɹ ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. "waɪ wəɾ aɪ - ?" dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ʃi ɡæðɝd dɪɡnəɾi. ə mɔɹ ðən hænsəm wʊmən ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl jɪɹz, wɪθaʊɾ ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn əɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ, ʃi bɔɹ ə ɹiɡəl pɹɛzəns ðət hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə kɹaʊn. ʃi hæd bɪn bɔɹn tə kəmænd; tə ɹeɪn, soʊ ʃi θɔt. ən əɹ aɪz, weɪɪŋ ən mɛʒɝɪŋ, bɪtʃɹeɪɾ ə hɑɹɾ ɪntɛlədʒəns. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," ʃi sɛd, meɪkɪŋ ə kɝtsi soʊ dip ɪt nɪɹli mɑkt ɪtsɛlf, "aɪ wɛlkəm jə bæk. kɛɹhin wɛlkəmz jə bæk." ðə weɪ ʃi sɛɾ ɪt, ʃi sim tə bi ɹɪpiɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf.

Colavaere gave a start. "Why would I - ?" Drawing a deep breath, she gathered dignity. A more than handsome woman in her middle years, without a touch of gray in her dark hair, she bore a regal presence that had nothing to do with the crown. She had been born to command; to reign, so she thought. And her eyes, weighing and measuring, betrayed a hard intelligence. "My Lord Dragon," she said, making a curtsy so deep it nearly mocked itself, "I welcome you back. Cairhien welcomes you back." The way she said it, she seemed to be repeating herself.

sloʊli ɹænd klaɪm ðə stɛps ə ðə deɪz. mɪn hæf-meɪd tə fɑloʊ hɪm, ðən foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz. pɛɹɪn dɪd fɑloʊ, tə bi nɪɹɝ feɪl, bʌɾ oʊnli pɑɹtweɪ. ɪt wɑz əɹ ɡeɪz ðət stɑp hɪm. ə ɡeɪz ðət pɹoʊbd ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz koʊləveɪɪɹz. əɾ ɪm əz mʌtʃ əz ət ɹænd. pɛɹɪn wɪʃt i kəd smɛl hɝ. nɑt tə tʃɹaɪ dɪskʌvɝɪŋ waɪ əɹ wʌt, dʒʌs fəɹ ðə smɛl ə hɝ. ðə wɑʃ ə pɝfjumz ən fɹaɪt wɑz tu ɡɹeɪt. waɪ dɪd ʃi nɑt spik? waɪ dɪd ʃi nɑt kʌm tə hɪm? əɹ smaɪl? dʒʌst ə smaɪl.

Slowly Rand climbed the steps of the dais. Min half-made to follow him, then folded her arms. Perrin did follow, to be nearer Faile, but only partway. It was her gaze that stopped him. A gaze that probed every bit as much as Colavaere's. At him as much as at Rand. Perrin wished he could smell her. Not to try discovering why or what, just for the smell of her. The wash of perfumes and fright was too great. Why did she not speak? Why did she not come to him? Or smile? Just a smile.

koʊləveɪɪɹ stɪfən ə splɪntɝz wɝθ, bʌɾ oʊnli ðæt. hɝ hɛd keɪm noʊ mɔɹ ðən lɛvəl wɪð ɹændz tʃɛst, ðoʊ hɝ taʊɝd hɛɹ ɹoʊz ɔlmoʊst əz tɔl əz hi. hɪz aɪz slɪd fɹəm əɹ feɪs ən əlɔŋ ðə wɪmən laɪn ʌp ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə θɹoʊn. hi maɪɾ əv pɔzd ɑn feɪl. pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ.

Colavaere stiffened a splinter's worth, but only that. Her head came no more than level with Rand's chest, though her towered hair rose almost as tall as he. His eyes slid from her face and along the women lined up on either side of the throne. He might have paused on Faile. Perrin could not be sure.

ɹænd ɹɛstəɾ ɪz hæn ɑn wʌn hɛvi ɑɹm ə ðə sʌn θɹoʊn. "ju noʊ aɪ min ðɪs fəɹ ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz ɪmoʊʃənləs.

Rand rested his hand on one heavy arm of the Sun Throne. "You know I mean this for Elayne Trakand." His voice was emotionless.

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," koʊləveɪɪɹ ɹɪplaɪd smuðli, "kɛɹhin hæd bɪn tu lɔŋ wɪθaʊɾ ə ɹulɝ. eɪ kɛɹhinɪn ɹulɝ. jə jɝsɛlf sɛd juv noʊ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ðə sʌn θɹoʊn fəɹ jɝsɛlf. ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd wʊɾə hæd səm kleɪm," ə smɔl, kwɪk dʒɛstʃɝ dɪsmɪst sətʃ ə kleɪm, "ɪf ʃi wɝ əlaɪv. ɹumɝ sɛz ʃiz dɛd, laɪk əɹ mʌðɝ." ə deɪnʒɝəs θɪŋ tə seɪ. ə ɡʊd mɛni ɹumɝz sɛd ɹænd hæd kɪl boʊθ mʌðɝ ən dɔɾɝ. ðə wʊmən wɑz noʊ kaʊɝd.

"My Lord Dragon," Colavaere replied smoothly, "Cairhien had been too long without a ruler. A Cairhienin ruler. You yourself said you have no interest in the Sun Throne for yourself. Elayne Trakand would have had some claim," a small, quick gesture dismissed such a claim, "if she were alive. Rumor says she is dead, like her mother." A dangerous thing to say. A good many rumors said Rand had killed both mother and daughter. The woman was no coward.

"ɪleɪn ɪz əlaɪv." ðə wɝdz wɝ stɪl flæɾ əz ə pleɪn bɔɹd, bʌt ɹændz aɪz bɝnd. pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt pɪk aʊɾ ɪz smɛl ɛni mɔɹ ðən feɪlz, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt niɾ ɪz noʊz tə noʊ ɹeɪdʒ bɑɾəld ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. "ʃi wɪl əv ðə kɹaʊnz ʌv ændɝ, ən ə kɛɹhin."

"Elayne is alive." The words were still flat as a planed board, but Rand's eyes burned. Perrin could not pick out his smell any more than Faile's, but he did not need his nose to know rage bottled right in front of him. "She will have the crowns of Andor, and of Cairhien."

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, wʌɾ ɪz dʌn kænɑt bi əndʌn. ɪf ɛniθɪŋ əz əfɛndəd jə - "

"My Lord Dragon, what is done cannot be undone. If anything has offended you - "

fəɹ ɔl əɹ dɪɡnəɾi, ɔl əɹ kɝədʒ, koʊləveɪɪɹ meɪɾ ə vɪzəbəl ɛfɝt nɑt tə flɪntʃ əz ɹænd ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən tʊk hoʊld ə ðə sʌn kɹaʊn. ðəɹ wɑz ə laʊd kɹæk ə mɛɾəl snæpɪŋ, ən ðə kɹaʊn flɛkst, hɑɹdli dɪsɹeɪɪŋ əɹ taʊɝ ə kɝlz əz ɪt pʊld əweɪ, sloʊli stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ. ə fju ʌv ðə bɹɪljən jɛloʊ stoʊnz pɑp fɹəm ðɛɹ sɛɾɪŋz ən fɛl. hi hɛld ʌp ðə stʃɹɛtʃt ɑɹk ə mɛɾəl, ən sloʊli ɪt bɛn bæk ɑn ɪtsɛlf əntɪl ði ɛnz mɛt, ænd. . . . meɪbi ði æʃəmən kəd si wʌt hæpənd, kəɾ ʌndɝstænd, bʌt tə pɛɹɪn, wʌn moʊmən ðə kɹaʊn wɑz bɹoʊkən, ðə nɛkst ɪt wɑz hoʊl əɡɛn. noʊ wʌn əmʌŋ ðə noʊbəlz meɪɾ ə saʊnd, nɑɾ ivən ə ʃʌflɪŋ ə buts; pɛɹɪn θɔt ðeɪ maɪt bi əfɹeɪd tə. tə hɪz noʊz, stɑɹk tɛɹɝ wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ sɛnt naʊ. ɪt dɪd nɑt kwɪvɝ; ɪt spæzmd waɪldli.

For all her dignity, all her courage, Colavaere made a visible effort not to flinch as Rand reached out and took hold of the Sun Crown. There was a loud crack of metal snapping, and the crown flexed, hardly disarraying her tower of curls as it pulled away, slowly straightening. A few of the brilliant yellow stones popped from their settings and fell. He held up the stretched arc of metal, and slowly it bent back on itself until the ends met, and. . . . Maybe the Asha'man could see what happened, could understand, but to Perrin, one moment the crown was broken, the next it was whole again. No one among the nobles made a sound, not even a shuffling of boots; Perrin thought they might be afraid to. To his nose, stark terror was stronger than any other scent now. It did not quiver; it spasmed wildly.

"wʌtɛvɝ kən bi dʌn," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli, "kæn bi əndʌn."

"Whatever can be done," Rand said softly, "can be undone."

koʊləveɪɪɹz feɪs dʒɹeɪn ə blʌd. ðə fju wɪsps ə hɛɹ ðət hæɾ ɪskeɪpt əɹ kɔɪfɹ meɪɾ əɹ sim waɪld, ət beɪ. swɑloʊɪŋ, ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ twaɪs bɪfɔɹ ɛni wɝdz keɪm aʊt. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. . . ." ɪt wɑz ə bɹɛθi wɪspɝ, bʌɾ əz ʃi wɛn ɑn, hɝ vɔɪs bɪkeɪm stʃɹɔŋɝ. ən ɛdʒd wɪð dɛspɝeɪʃən. ʃi sim tə fɝɡɛɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls wɑz pɹɛzənt. "aɪ hæv kɛp ðə lɔz jə meɪd, meɪnteɪn jəɹ pɑləsiz. ivən ðoʊz ðət ɡoʊ əɡɛns ði eɪntʃən lɔz ə kɛɹhin, əɡɛnst ɔl kʌstəm." ʃi pɹɑbli mɛn ðə lɔz ðət hæd lɛɾ ə noʊbəl kɪl ə fɑɹmɝ əɹ kɹæfsmən ən wɔk əweɪ. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, ðə sʌn θɹoʊn ɪz jʊɹz tə ɡɪv. aɪ . . . noʊ ðæt. aɪ - aɪ wɑz ɹɔŋ tə teɪk ɪt wɪθaʊt jəɹ liv. bʌɾ aɪ hæv ðə ɹaɪt tə ɪt, baɪ bɝθ ən blʌd. ɪf aɪ mʌst əv ɪt fɹəm jəɹ hænd, ðən ɡɪv ɪt tə mi, baɪ jəɹ hænd. aɪ hæv ðə ɹaɪt!" ɹænd oʊnli lʊkt ət hɝ; hi sɛd nʌθɪŋ. hi sim tə bi lɪsnɪŋ, bʌt nɑt tə hɝ.

Colavaere's face drained of blood. The few wisps of hair that had escaped her coiffure made her seem wild, at bay. Swallowing, she opened her mouth twice before any words came out. "My Lord Dragon. . . ." It was a breathy whisper, but as she went on, her voice became stronger. And edged with desperation. She seemed to forget anyone else was present. "I have kept the laws you made, maintained your policies. Even those that go against the ancient laws of Cairhien, against all custom." She probably meant the laws that had let a noble kill a farmer or craftsman and walk away. "My Lord Dragon, the Sun Throne is yours to give. I . . . know that. I - I was wrong to take it without your leave. But I have the right to it, by birth and blood. If I must have it from your hand, then give it to me, by your hand. I have the right!" Rand only looked at her; he said nothing. He seemed to be listening, but not to her.

pɛɹɪn klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. waɪ wɑz ɹænd dʒɹæɡɪŋ ðɪs aʊt? ɪt wɑz dʌn, əɹ nɪɹli. lɛt wʌtɛvɝ ɛls hæd tə bi dʌn, bi dʌn. ðən i kəd teɪk feɪl əweɪ, wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd tɔk. "dɪd juv ðə ɹaɪt tə mɝɾɝ lɔɹd mɹɪŋɡəl ən haɪ lɔɹd maɪlən?" pɛɹɪn dɪmændəd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊɾ ɪn ɪz maɪnd ʃi hæd hæɾ ɪt dʌn; ðeɪ hæd bɪn əɹ bɪɡəst ɹaɪvəlz fəɹ ðə θɹoʊn. əɹ ʃi, ən ðeɪ, θɔt ðeɪ wɝ, ɛniweɪ. waɪ wɑz ɹænd dʒʌst stændɪŋ ðɛɹ? hi nu ɔl ə ðɪs. "wɛɹ ɪz bɹəleɪn?"

Perrin cleared his throat. Why was Rand dragging this out? It was done, or nearly. Let whatever else had to be done, be done. Then he could take Faile away, where they could talk. "Did you have the right to murder Lord Maringil and High Lord Meilan?" Perrin demanded. There was no doubt in his mind she had had it done; they had been her biggest rivals for the throne. Or she, and they, thought they were, anyway. Why was Rand just standing there? He knew all of this. "Where is Berelain?"

bɪfɔɹ ðə neɪm wɑz ɔf ɪz tʌŋ i wɑntəd tə kɔl ɪt bæk. feɪl oʊnli ɡlænst ət hɪm, hɝ feɪs stɪl ə kul mæsk ə pɹəpɹaɪəɾi, bʌt ðət ɡlæns cʊɾə sɛt wɔɾɝ əfleɪm. "ə dʒɛləs waɪf ɪz laɪk ə hɔɹnəts' nɛst ɪn jəɹ mætʃɹəs," ðə seɪɪŋ wɛnt. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ jə twɪtʃt, jə ɡɑt stʌŋ.

Before the name was off his tongue he wanted to call it back. Faile only glanced at him, her face still a cool mask of propriety, but that glance could have set water aflame. "A jealous wife is like a hornets' nest in your mattress," the saying went. No matter how you twitched, you got stung.

"ju dɛɹ əkjuz mi ʌv soʊ vaɪl ə kɹaɪm?" koʊləveɪɪɹ dɪmændəd. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ pɹuf. ðəɹ kən bi noʊ pɹuf! nɑt wən aɪm ɪnəsənt." əbɹʌpli ʃi sim tə bɪkʌm əwɛɹ ʌv wɛɹ ʃi wɑz, ʌv ðə noʊbəlz kɹaʊɾəd ʃoʊldɝ-tə-ʃoʊldɝ əmʌŋ ðə kɑləmz, wɑtʃɪŋ ən lɪsnɪŋ. wʌtɛvɝ ɛls kəd bi sɛɾ ə hɝ, ʃi dɪɾ əv kɝədʒ. stændɪŋ stʃɹeɪt, ʃi dɪɾ əɹ bɛs tə stɛɹ ɹænd ɪn ði aɪ wɪθaʊt tɪltɪŋ əɹ hɛd tu fɑɹ bæk. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, eɪt deɪz əɡoʊ ət sʌnɹaɪz aɪ wɑz kɹaʊn kwin ə kɛɹhin əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə lɔz ən jusədʒəz ə kɛɹhin. əl kip maɪ oʊθ ə fiəlti tə ju, bʌɾ aɪm kwin ə kɛɹhin." ɹænd oʊnli stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, saɪlənt. ən tʃɹʌbəld, pɛɹɪn wəɾ əv sɛd. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, aɪm kwin, ənlɛs jə wəd ɹɪp ɔl əɹ lɔz əweɪ." stɪl saɪləns fɹəm ɹænd, ən ən ənblɪŋkɪŋ stɛɹ.

"You dare accuse me of so vile a crime?" Colavaere demanded. "There is no proof. There can be no proof! Not when I am innocent." Abruptly she seemed to become aware of where she was, of the nobles crowded shoulder-to-shoulder among the columns, watching and listening. Whatever else could be said of her, she did have courage. Standing straight, she did her best to stare Rand in the eye without tilting her head too far back. "My Lord Dragon, eight days ago at sunrise I was crowned Queen of Cairhien according to the laws and usages of Cairhien. I will keep my oath of fealty to you, but I am Queen of Cairhien." Rand only stared at her, silent. And troubled, Perrin would have said. "My Lord Dragon, I am Queen, unless you would rip all our laws away." Still silence from Rand, and an unblinking stare.

waɪ dʌzn i ɛn ɪt? pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd.

Why doesn't he end it? Perrin wondered.

"ðiz tʃɑɹdʒəz əɡɛns mi ɑɹ fɔls. ðeɪ ɑɹ mæd!" oʊnli ðət saɪlən stɛɹ fəɹ ænsɝ. koʊləveɪɪɹ muvd əɹ hɛɾ ənizəli. "ənʊɹə, ædvaɪz mi. kʌm, ənʊɹə! ædvaɪz mi!"

"These charges against me are false. They are mad!" Only that silent stare for answer. Colavaere moved her head uneasily. "Annoura, advise me. Come, Annoura! Advise me!"

pɛɹɪn θɔt ʃi spoʊk tə wʌn ə ðə wɪmən wɪð feɪl, bʌt ðə wʊmən u stɛp fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə θɹoʊn dɪd nɑt wɛɹ ðə stʃɹaɪp skɝts ʌv ən ətɛndənt. ə bɹɔd feɪs wɪð ə waɪd maʊθ ən ə bik ʌv ə noʊz ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɹænd fɹəm bɪniθ dʌzənz ə lɔŋ θɪn dɑɹk bɹeɪdz. ən eɪdʒləs feɪs. tə pɛɹɪnz sɝpɹaɪz, heɪvin meɪɾ ə saʊn ɪn ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən bɪɡæn ɡɹɪnɪŋ. hɪz oʊn hækəlz wɝ stændɪŋ stʃɹeɪt.

Perrin thought she spoke to one of the women with Faile, but the woman who stepped from behind the throne did not wear the striped skirts of an attendant. A broad face with a wide mouth and a beak of a nose regarded Rand from beneath dozens of long thin dark braids. An ageless face. To Perrin's surprise, Havien made a sound in his throat and began grinning. His own hackles were standing straight.

"aɪ kænɑt də ðɪs, koʊləveɪɪɹ," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛɾ ɪn ə tæɹɑbənɝ æksɛnt, ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ ɡɹeɪ-fɹɪnd ʃɔl. "aɪ fɪɹ aɪ hæv əlaʊd jə tə mɪspɝsiv maɪ ɹileɪʃənʃɪp tə ju." dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ʃi æɾəd, "ðɛɹ . . . ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid fəɹ ðɪs, mæstɝ ælθɹ." hɝ vɔɪs bɪkeɪm slaɪtli ənstɛɾi fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "ɔɹ maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, ɪf jə pɹəfɝ. aɪ əʃʊɹ ju, aɪ hɑɹbɝ noʊ ɪl ɪntɛntʃənz təwɔɹd ju. ɪf aɪ dɪd, aɪ wʊɾə stʃɹʌk bɪfɔɹ jə nu aɪ wɑz hɪɹ."

"I cannot do this, Colavaere," the Aes Sedai said in a Taraboner accent, shifting her gray-fringed shawl. "I fear I have allowed you to misperceive my relationship to you." Drawing a deep breath, she added, "There . . . there is no need for this, Master al'Thor." Her voice became slightly unsteady for a moment. "Or my Lord Dragon, if you prefer. I assure you, I harbor no ill intentions toward you. If I did, I would have struck before you knew I was here."

"ju maɪt wɛl əv daɪɾ ɪf jə hæd." ɹændz vɔɪs wɑz aɪsi stil; hɪz feɪs meɪɾ ɪt sim sɑft. "aɪm nɑɾ u hæz jə ʃildɪd, ɛɛs sədaɪ. hu ɑɹ ju? waɪ ɑɹ jə hɪɹ? ænsɝ mi! aɪ doʊn əv mʌtʃ peɪʃəns wɪð . . . jəɹ kaɪnd. ənlɛs jə wɑnə bi hɔld aʊt tə ði il kæmp? aɪ weɪdʒɝ ðə waɪz wʌnz kən meɪk jə spik fɹili."

"You might well have died if you had." Rand's voice was icy steel; his face made it seem soft. "I'm not who has you shielded, Aes Sedai. Who are you? Why are you here? Answer me! I don't have much patience with . . . your kind. Unless you want to be hauled out to the Aiel camp? I wager the Wise Ones can make you speak freely."

ðɪs ənʊɹə wɑz nɑt sloʊ-wɪɾɪd. hɝ aɪz dɑɹɾɪd tə ɛɹæm, ðən tə ði aɪl wɛɹ ði æʃəmən stʊd. ən ʃi nu. ðeɪ hæd tə bi hu hi mɛnt, ɪn ðɛɹ blæk koʊts, ɡɹɪm feɪsəz dʒɹaɪ wən ɛvɹi ʌðɝ bʌt hɝz ən ɹændz ɡlɪsənd. jʌŋ dʒɑhɹ wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ laɪk ə hɔk wɑtʃɪŋ ə ɹæbət. ɪŋkɔŋɹuəsli, lɔɪəl stʊɾ ɪn ðə mɪdst ə ðɛm wɪð ɪz æks pɹɑpt əɡɛnst ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. wʌn bɪɡ hæn mænədʒ tə hoʊld ən ɪŋk bɑɾəl ən ən oʊpən bʊk, pɹɛst ɔkwɝdli əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst, waɪl ði ʌðɝ skɹɪbəld əz fæst əz i kəd dɪp ə pɛn fæɾɝ ðən pɛɹɪnz θʌm. hi wɑz teɪkɪŋ noʊts. hɪɹ!

This Annoura was not slow-witted. Her eyes darted to Aram, then to the aisle where the Asha'man stood. And she knew. They had to be who he meant, in their black coats, grim faces dry when every other but hers and Rand's glistened. Young Jahar was watching her like a hawk watching a rabbit. Incongruously, Loial stood in the midst of them with his axe propped against his shoulder. One big hand managed to hold an ink bottle and an open book, pressed awkwardly against his chest, while the other scribbled as fast as he could dip a pen fatter than Perrin's thumb. He was taking notes. Here!

ðə noʊbəlz hɝd ɹænd əz wɛl əz ənʊɹə dɪd. ðeɪ hæd bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ ðə veɪl meɪɾənz ənizəli; naʊ ðeɪ kɹaʊɾəd bæk fɹəm ði æʃəmən, pɹɛsɪŋ təɡɛðɝ laɪk fɪʃ ɪn ə bæɹəl. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ sʌmwʌn sæɡd ɪn ə feɪnt, hɛld ʌp baɪ ðə θɹɔŋ.

The nobles heard Rand as well as Annoura did. They had been watching the veiled Maidens uneasily; now they crowded back from the Asha'man, pressing together like fish in a barrel. Here and there someone sagged in a faint, held up by the throng.

ʃɪvɝɪŋ, ənʊɹə ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ʃɔl, ən ɹiɡeɪn ɔl ðə vɔntɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kəmpoʊʒɝ. "aɪ æm ənʊɹə lɹəsən, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. ʌv ðə ɡɹeɪ ədʒɑ." nʌθɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ sɛd ðət ʃi wɑz ʃildɪd, ən ɪn ðə pɹɛzəns ə mɛn u kəd tʃænəl. ʃi sim tə ænsɝ əz ə feɪvɝ. "aɪ æm ði ædvaɪzɝ tə bɹəleɪn, fɝst ə min." soʊ ðət wɑz waɪ heɪvin wɑz ɡɹɪnɪŋ laɪk ə mædmæn; hi hæd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə wʊmən. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt fil laɪk ɡɹɪnɪŋ əɾ ɔl. "ðɪs əz bɪn kɛp sikɹət, jə ʌndɝstænd," ʃi wɛn ɑn, "bɪkɔz ə ði æɾətud ə tɛɹ boʊθ təwɔɹd min ən təwɔɹɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk mi ðə taɪm fəɹ sikɹəts, ɪts pæst, jɛs?" ənʊɹə tɝn tə koʊləveɪɪɹ, ən əɹ maʊθ fɝmd. "aɪ lɛt jə θɪŋk wʌt jə wəd θɪŋk, bʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ də nɑt bɪkʌm ædvaɪzɝz sɪmpli kəz sʌmwʌn tɛlz əm ðeɪ ɑɹ. moʊst ɪspɛʃli wən ðeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi ædvaɪz sʌmwʌn ɛls."

Shivering, Annoura adjusted her shawl, and regained all the vaunted Aes Sedai composure. "I am Annoura Larisen, my Lord Dragon. Of the Gray Ajah." Nothing about her said that she was shielded, and in the presence of men who could channel. She seemed to answer as a favor. "I am the advisor to Berelain, First of Mayene." So that was why Havien was grinning like a madman; he had recognized the woman. Perrin did not feel like grinning at all. "This has been kept secret, you understand," she went on, "because of the attitude of Tear both toward Mayene and toward Aes Sedai, but I think me the time for secrets, it is past, yes?" Annoura turned to Colavaere, and her mouth firmed. "I let you think what you would think, but Aes Sedai do not become advisors simply because someone tells them they are. Most especially when they already advise someone else."

"ɪf bɹəleɪn kənfɝmz jəɹ stɔɹi," ɹænd sɛd, "aɪ wɪl pɝoʊl jə tə hɝ kʌstəɾi." lʊkɪŋ ət ðə kɹaʊn, hi sim tə ɹilaɪz fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ðət ðə spɹeɪ ʌv ɡoʊld ən dʒɛmz wɑz stɪl ɪn ɪz hænd. vɛɹi dʒɛnli hi sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə sɪlk-kʌvɝd siɾ ə ðə sʌn θɹoʊn. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz maɪ ɛnəmi, nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli, bʌɾ aɪ woʊn bi skimd əɡɛnst, ən aɪ woʊn bi mənɪpjəleɪɾɪd, nɑɾ ɛnimɔɹ. ɪts jəɹ tʃɔɪs, ənʊɹə, bʌɾ ɪf jə meɪk ðə ɹɔŋ wʌn, jəl ɡoʊ tə ðə waɪz wʌnz. ɪf jə laɪv lɔŋ ɪnʌf. aɪ woʊn hɑbəl ði æʃəmən, ən ə mɪsteɪk kəd kɑs ju."

"If Berelain confirms your story," Rand said, "I will parole you to her custody." Looking at the crown, he seemed to realize for the first time that the spray of gold and gems was still in his hand. Very gently he set it on the silk-covered seat of the Sun Throne. "I don't think every Aes Sedai is my enemy, not entirely, but I won't be schemed against, and I won't be manipulated, not anymore. It's your choice, Annoura, but if you make the wrong one, you will go to the Wise Ones. If you live long enough. I won't hobble the Asha'man, and a mistake could cost you."

"ði æʃəmən," ənʊɹə sɛd kɑmli. "aɪ kwaɪɾ ʌndɝstænd." bʌt ʃi tʌtʃt əɹ lɪps wɪð əɹ tʌŋ.

"The Asha'man," Annoura said calmly. "I quite understand." But she touched her lips with her tongue.

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, koʊləveɪɪɹ plɑɾəd tə bɹeɪk əɹ oʊθ ə fiəlti." pɛɹɪn hæd wɪʃt soʊ hɑɹd fəɹ feɪl tə spik ðəɾ i dʒʌmpt wən ʃi dɪd, stɛpɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə laɪn ʌv ətɛndəns. tʃuzɪŋ əɹ wɝdz kɛɹfəli, ʃi kənfɹʌntəd ðə wʊd-bi kwin laɪk ə stupɪŋ iɡəl. laɪt, bʌt ʃi wɑz bjuɾəfəl! "koʊləveɪɪɹ swɔɹ tə oʊbeɪ jə ɪn ɔl θɪŋz ən əphoʊl jəɹ lɔz, bʌt ʃiz meɪd plænz tə ɹɪd kɛɹhin ə ði il, tə sɛn əm saʊθ ən ɹɪtɝn ɔl tə əz ɪt wɑz bɪfɔɹ jə keɪm. ʃi ɔlsoʊ sɛd ðəɾ ɪf jə ɛvɝ ɹɪtɝnd, jə wəd nɑt dɛɹ tʃeɪnʒ ɛniθɪŋ ʃi hæd dʌn. ðə wʊmən ʃi toʊl ðiz θɪŋz, mɛɹ, wɑz wʌn ə hɝ ətɛndəns. mɛɹ vænɪʃt sun æftɝ tɛlɪŋ mi. aɪ hæv noʊ pɹuf, bʌɾ aɪ bɪliv ʃiz dɛd. aɪ bɪliv koʊləveɪɪɹ ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd ɹɪvilɪŋ tu mʌtʃ ə hɝ maɪnd, tu sun."

"My Lord Dragon, Colavaere plotted to break her oath of fealty." Perrin had wished so hard for Faile to speak that he jumped when she did, stepping out of the line of attendants. Choosing her words carefully, she confronted the would-be queen like a stooping eagle. Light, but she was beautiful! "Colavaere swore to obey you in all things and uphold your laws, but she has made plans to rid Cairhien of the Aiel, to send them south and return all to as it was before you came. She also said that if you ever returned, you would not dare change anything she had done. The woman she told these things, Maire, was one of her attendants. Maire vanished soon after telling me. I have no proof, but I believe she is dead. I believe Colavaere regretted revealing too much of her mind, too soon."

dɑbɹeɪn stʃɹoʊɾ ʌp ðə stɛps tə ðə deɪz, hɪz hɛlməɾ ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm. hɪz feɪs maɪɾ əv bɪn koʊld aɪɝn. "koʊləveɪɪɹ seɪɡən," hi ənaʊnst ɪn ə fɔɹməl vɔɪs ðət kæɹid tə ɛvɹi kɔɹnɝ ə ðə ɡɹæn hɔl, "baɪ maɪ ɪmɔɹɾəl soʊl, ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, aɪ, dɑbɹeɪn, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs tæbɔɹwɪn, də ɝeɪn ən sɛnʃɝ jə ʌv tʃɹizən, ðə pɛnəlti fəɹ wɪtʃ ɪz dɛθ."

Dobraine strode up the steps to the dais, his helmet under his arm. His face might have been cold iron. "Colavaere Saighan," he announced in a formal voice that carried to every corner of the Grand Hall, "by my immortal soul, under the Light, I, Dobraine, High Seat of House Taborwin, do arraign and censure you of treason, the penalty for which is death."

ɹændz hɛd wɛn bæk, aɪz kloʊzd. hɪz maʊθ muv slaɪtli, bʌt pɛɹɪn nu ðəɾ oʊnli hi ən ɹænd hɝd wʌt wɑz sɛd. "noʊ. aɪ kænɑt. əl nɑt." pɛɹɪn ʌndɝstʊd ðə dɪleɪ naʊ. ɹænd wɑz sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ə weɪ aʊt. pɛɹɪn wɪʃt i kəd si wʌn.

Rand's head went back, eyes closed. His mouth moved slightly, but Perrin knew that only he and Rand heard what was said. "No. I cannot. I will not." Perrin understood the delay now. Rand was searching for a way out. Perrin wished he could see one.

koʊləveɪɪɹ sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt hɪɹ, bʌt ʃi wɑntəɾ ə weɪ aʊt, tu. ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊnd waɪldli, tə ðə sʌn θɹoʊn, tə hɝ ʌðɝ ətɛndəns, tə ði əsɛmbəl noʊbɪləɾi, əz ðoʊ ðeɪ maɪt stɛp fɔɹwɝd tə dɪfɛn hɝ. ðɛɹ fit kəɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn sɛɾ ɪn səmɛnt; ə si ʌv kɛɹfəli blæŋk, swɛɾi feɪsəz kənfɹʌntəd hɝ, ən aɪz ðəɾ əvɔɪɾəd hɝz. səm ə ðoʊz aɪz ɹoʊl təwɔɹd ði æʃəmən, bʌt nɑt tu oʊpənli. ði ɔlɹɛɾi kənsɪɾɝəbəl speɪs bɪtwin noʊbəlz ən æʃəmən waɪɾənd noʊɾɪsəbli.

Colavaere certainly did not hear, but she wanted a way out, too. She looked around wildly, to the Sun Throne, to her other attendants, to the assembled nobility, as though they might step forward to defend her. Their feet could as well have been set in cement; a sea of carefully blank, sweaty faces confronted her, and eyes that avoided hers. Some of those eyes rolled toward the Asha'man, but not too openly. The already considerable space between nobles and Asha'man widened noticeably.

"laɪz!" ʃi hɪst, hænz nɑɾɪd ɪn əɹ skɝts. "ɔl laɪz! jə snikɪŋ lɪɾəl - !" ʃi tʊk ə stɛp təwɔɹd feɪl. ɹænd stʃɹɛtʃt ɪz ɑɹm bɪtwin ðɛm, ðoʊ koʊləveɪɪɹ əpɪɹd nɑt tə si ɪt, ən feɪl lʊkt əz ðoʊ ʃi wɪʃt i hæd nɑt. ɛniwʌn u ətækt əɹ wɑz ɪn fəɹ ə sɝpɹaɪz.

"Lies!" she hissed, hands knotted in her skirts. "All lies! You sneaking little - !" She took a step toward Faile. Rand stretched his arm between them, though Colavaere appeared not to see it, and Faile looked as though she wished he had not. Anyone who attacked her was in for a surprise.

"feɪl dʌz nɑt laɪ!" pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld. wɛl, nɑɾ əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs.

"Faile does not lie!" Perrin growled. Well, not about something like this.

wʌns əɡɛn koʊləveɪɪɹ ɹəkʌvɝd hɝsɛlf. slaɪɾ əz əɹ haɪt wɑz, ʃi dʒɹu ʌp ɛvɹi ɪntʃ ʌv ɪt. pɛɹɪn ɔlmoʊst ədmaɪɝd hɝ. ɪksɛp fəɹ maɪlən, ən mɹɪŋɡəl, ən ðɪs mɛɹ, ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu haʊ mɛni ʌðɝz. "aɪ dɪmæn dʒʌstəs, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz kɑm, steɪtli. ɹɔɪəl. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ pɹuf ʌv ɛni ʌv ðɪs . . . ðɪs fɪlθ. ə kleɪm ðət sʌmwʌn u ɪz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪn kɛɹhin sɛz aɪ spoʊk wɝdz aɪ nɛvɝ dɪd? aɪ dɪmæn ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡənz dʒʌstəs. baɪ jəɹ oʊn lɔz, ðəɹ mʌs bi pɹuf."

Once again Colavaere recovered herself. Slight as her height was, she drew up every inch of it. Perrin almost admired her. Except for Meilan, and Maringil, and this Maire, and the Light alone knew how many others. "I demand justice, my Lord Dragon." Her voice was calm, stately. Royal. "There is no proof of any of this . . . this filth. A claim that someone who is no longer in Cairhien says I spoke words I never did? I demand the Lord Dragon's justice. By your own laws, there must be proof."

"haʊ dʒju noʊ ʃiz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪn kɛɹhin?" dɑbɹeɪn dɪmændəd. "wɛɹ ɪz ʃi?"

"How do you know she is no longer in Cairhien?" Dobraine demanded. "Where is she?"

"aɪ əsum ʃiz ɡɔn." ʃi ədʒɹɛst əɹ ænsɝ tə ɹænd. "mɛɹ lɛf maɪ sɝvəs, ən aɪ ɹipleɪst əɹ wɪð ɹil, ðɛɹ." ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd təwɔɹd ðə θɝɾ ətɛndən ɑn ðə lɛft: "aɪ hæv noʊ aɪdiə wɛɹ ʃi ɪz. bɹɪŋ əɹ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪf ʃiz ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ən lɛɾ əɹ meɪk ðiz ɹɪdɪkjələs tʃɑɹdʒəz tə maɪ feɪs. əl flɪŋ əɹ laɪz ɪn əɹ feɪs." feɪl lʊk mɝɾɝ ət hɝ. pɛɹɪn hoʊpt ʃi wəd nɑt pɹədus wʌn ə ðoʊz naɪvz ʃi kɛp hɪɾən əbaʊt hɝ; ʃi hæɾ ə hæbəɾ ə duɪŋ ðət wən ʃi bɪkeɪm æŋɡɹi ɪnʌf.

"I assume she has gone." She addressed her answer to Rand. "Maire left my service, and I replaced her with Reale, there." She gestured toward the third attendant on the left: "I have no idea where she is. Bring her forward if she is in the city, and let her make these ridiculous charges to my face. I will fling her lies in her face." Faile looked murder at her. Perrin hoped she would not produce one of those knives she kept hidden about her; she had a habit of doing that when she became angry enough.

ənʊɹə klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt. ʃi hæd bɪn stʌɾiɪŋ ɹænd mʌtʃ tu kloʊsli fəɹ pɛɹɪnz kʌmfɝt. ʃi ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ə vɛɹɪn sʌɾənli, ðət lʊk ʌv ə bɝɾ ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ə wɝm. "meɪ aɪ spik, mæstɝ . . . ɑ . . . maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən?" əɾ ɪz kɝt nɑd, ʃi wɛn ɑn, ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl. "ʌv jʌŋ mɛɹ, aɪ noʊ nʌθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðət wʌn mɔɹnɪŋ ʃi wɑz hɪɹ, ən bɪfɔɹ naɪtfɔl, ʃi wɑz noʊwɛɹ tə bi faʊn ən nʌn nu wɛɹ ʃi hæd ɡɔn. bʌt lɔɹd mɹɪŋɡəl ən haɪ lɔɹd maɪlən, ðeɪ ɑɹ ə dɪfɹən mæɾɝ. ðə fɝst ə min, ʃi bɹɔt wɪð əɹ tu moʊst ɛksələn θif-kætʃɝz, mɛn ɪkspɪɹiənst ɪn fɛɹəɾɪŋ aʊt kɹaɪmz. ðeɪv bɹɔt bɪfɔɹ mi tu ʌv ðə mɛn u weɪleɪd ðə haɪ lɔɹd maɪlən ɪn ðə stʃɹits, ðoʊ boʊθ ɪnsɪs ðeɪ oʊnli hɛld ɪz ɑɹmz waɪl ʌðɝz dɪd ðə stæbɪŋ. ɔlsoʊ ðeɪ bɹɔt mi ðə sɝvən u pʊt pɔɪzən ɪn ðə spaɪst waɪn lɔɹd mɹɪŋɡəl laɪk tə dʒɹɪŋk ət bɛdtaɪm. ʃi ɔlsoʊ pɹoʊtɛsts əɹ tʃɹu ɪnəsəns; hɝ ɪnvələd mʌðɝ wəɾ əv daɪd, ən ʃi hɝsɛlf, hæd lɔɹd mɹɪŋɡəl nɑt. soʊ ʃi sɛz, ən ɪn əɹ keɪs, aɪ bɪliv ʃi spiks tʃɹuli. hɝ sɑləs ət kənfɛʃən wɑz nɑt fɔls, aɪ θɪŋk. boʊθ ðə mɛn ən ðə wʊmən əɡɹi ɪn ðɪs: ði ɔɹɾɝz fəɹ ðɛɹ ækʃənz keɪm fɹəm ðə maʊθ ə leɪɾi koʊləveɪɪɹ hɝsɛlf."

Annoura cleared her throat. She had been studying Rand much too closely for Perrin's comfort. She reminded him of Verin suddenly, that look of a bird examining a worm. "May I speak, Master . . . ah . . . my Lord Dragon?" At his curt nod, she went on, adjusting her shawl. "Of young Maire, I know nothing except that one morning she was here, and before nightfall, she was nowhere to be found and none knew where she had gone. But Lord Maringil and High Lord Meilan, they are a different matter. The First of Mayene, she brought with her two most excellent thief-catchers, men experienced in ferreting out crimes. They have brought before me two of the men who waylaid the High Lord Meilan in the streets, though both insist they only held his arms while others did the stabbing. Also they brought me the servant who put poison in the spiced wine Lord Maringil liked to drink at bedtime. She also protests her true innocence; her invalid mother would have died, and she herself, had Lord Maringil not. So she says, and in her case, I believe she speaks truly. Her solace at confession was not false, I think. Both the men and the woman agree in this: the orders for their actions came from the mouth of Lady Colavaere herself."

wɝd baɪ wɝd ðə dɪfaɪəns litʃt aʊɾ ə koʊləveɪɪɹ. ʃi stɪl stʊd, jɛɾ ɪt simd ə wʌndɝ; ʃi əpɪɹɾ əz lɪmp əz ə dæmp ɹæɡ. "ðeɪ pɹɑməst," ʃi mʌmbəl tə ɹænd. "ðeɪ pɹɑməs jə wəd nɛvɝ ɹɪtɝn." tu leɪt, ʃi klæmp boʊθ hænz oʊvɝ əɹ maʊð. hɝ aɪz bʌlʒd. pɛɹɪn wɪʃt i kəd nɑt hɪɹ ðə saʊnz kʌmɪŋ fɹəm əɹ θɹoʊt. noʊ wʌn ʃəd meɪk saʊnz laɪk ðæt.

Word by word the defiance leached out of Colavaere. She still stood, yet it seemed a wonder; she appeared as limp as a damp rag. "They promised," she mumbled to Rand. "They promised you would never return." Too late, she clamped both hands over her mouth. Her eyes bulged. Perrin wished he could not hear the sounds coming from her throat. No one should make sounds like that.

"tʃɹizən ən mɝɾɝ." dɑbɹeɪn saʊndəd sæɾəsfaɪd. ðoʊz wɪmpɝd skɹimz dɪd nɑt tʌtʃ hɪm. "ðə pɛnəlti ɪz ðə seɪm, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. dɛθ. ɪksɛpt, baɪ jəɹ nu lɔ, ɪts hæŋɪŋ fəɹ mɝɾɝ." fəɹ səm ɹizən, ɹænd lʊkt ət mɪn. ʃi ɹɪtɝn ɪz ɡeɪz wɪð pɹoʊfaʊn sædnəs. nɑt fəɹ koʊləveɪɪɹ. fəɹ ɹænd. pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ə vjuɪŋ wɑz ɪnvɑlvd.

"Treason and murder." Dobraine sounded satisfied. Those whimpered screams did not touch him. "The penalty is the same, my Lord Dragon. Death. Except, by your new law, it is hanging for murder." For some reason, Rand looked at Min. She returned his gaze with profound sadness. Not for Colavaere. For Rand. Perrin wondered whether a viewing was involved.

"aɪ - aɪ dɪmæn ðə hɛdzmən," koʊləveɪɪɹ mænədʒd ɪn ə stʃɹæŋɡəl vɔɪs. hɝ feɪs sæɡd. ʃi hæd bɪkʌm oʊld ɑn ðə spɑt, ən əɹ aɪz wɝ mɪɹɝz ə stɑɹk tɛɹɝ. bʌt wɪð nʌθɪŋ lɛft, ʃi fɔɾ ɑn, fəɹ ðə skɹæps. "ɪɾ ɪz - ɪts maɪ ɹaɪt. əl nɑt bi . . . hæŋ laɪk səm kɑmənɝ!"

"I - I demand the headsman," Colavaere managed in a strangled voice. Her face sagged. She had become old on the spot, and her eyes were mirrors of stark terror. But with nothing left, she fought on, for the scraps. "It is - it is my right. I will not be . . . hanged like some commoner!"

ɹænd sim tə stʃɹʌɡəl wɪð hɪmsɛlf, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ðət dɪstɝbɪŋ weɪ. wən i spoʊk ət læst, hɪz wɝdz wɝ wɪntɝ koʊld ən ænvəl hɑɹd. "koʊləveɪɪɹ seɪɡən, aɪ stʃɹɪp jə ʌv jəɹ taɪɾəlz." hi dʒɹoʊv ðə wɝdz laɪk neɪlz. "aɪ stʃɹɪp ə jə ʌv jəɹ lænz ən ɪsteɪts ən pəzɛʃənz, ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ bʌt ðə dʒɹɛs jə stæn ɪn. dʒju oʊn - dɪd jə oʊn ə fɑɹm? ə smɔl fɑɹm?"

Rand seemed to struggle with himself, shaking his head in that disturbing way. When he spoke at last, his words were winter cold and anvil hard. "Colavaere Saighan, I strip you of your titles." He drove the words like nails. "I strip of you of your lands and estates and possessions, of everything but the dress you stand in. Do you own - did you own a farm? A small farm?"

itʃ sɛntəns stæɡɝd ðə wʊmən. ʃi sweɪd dʒɹʌŋkənli ɑn əɹ fit, saʊnləsli maʊðɪŋ ðə wɝd "fɑɹm" əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ɪt bɪfɔɹ. ənʊɹə, feɪl, ɛvɹiwʌn stɛɹɾ ət ɹænd ɪn əmeɪzmən əɹ kjʊɹiɑsəɾi əɹ boʊθ. pɛɹɪn nɑt list. ə fɑɹm? ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn saɪləns ɪn ðə ɡɹæn hɔl bɪfɔɹ, naʊ ɪt sim ðət noʊ wʌn ivən bɹiðd.

Each sentence staggered the woman. She swayed drunkenly on her feet, soundlessly mouthing the word "farm" as if she had never heard it before. Annoura, Faile, everyone stared at Rand in amazement or curiosity or both. Perrin not least. A farm? If there had been silence in the Grand Hall before, now it seemed that no one even breathed.

"dɑbɹeɪn, dɪd ʃi oʊn ə smɔl fɑɹm?"

"Dobraine, did she own a small farm?"

"ʃi oʊnz . . . oʊnd . . . mɛni fɑɹmz, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," ðə kɛɹhinɪn ɹɪplaɪd sloʊli. klɪɹli hi ʌndɝstʊd noʊ mɔɹ ðən pɛɹɪn dɪd. "moʊst ɑɹ lɑɹdʒ. bʌt ðə lænz nɪɹ ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl əv ɔlweɪz bɪn dɪvaɪɾəd ɪndə smɔlhoʊldɪŋz, lɛs ðən fɪfti haɪdz. ɔl ə ðə tɛnəns əbændən əm dʊɹɪŋ ði il wɔɹ."

"She owns . . . owned . . . many farms, my Lord Dragon," the Cairhienin replied slowly. Clearly he understood no more than Perrin did. "Most are large. But the lands near the Dragonwall have always been divided into smallholdings, less than fifty hides. All of the tenants abandoned them during the Aiel War."

ɹænd nɑɾəd. "taɪm tə tʃeɪnʒ ðæt. tu mʌtʃ læn əz leɪn fæloʊ tu lɔŋ. aɪ wɑnə muv pipəl bæk ðɛɹ, tə fɑɹm əɡɛn. dɑbɹeɪn, jəl faɪn aʊt wɪtʃ fɑɹm ə ðoʊz koʊləveɪɪɹ oʊnd nɪɹ ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl ɪz ðə smɔləst. koʊləveɪɪɹ, aɪ ɛɡzaɪl jə tə ðət fɑɹm. dɑbɹeɪn wɪl si jəɹ pɹəvaɪɾəd wɪð wʌɾ ɪz niɾəd tə meɪk ə fɑɹm wɝk, ən wɪð sʌmwʌn tə titʃ jə haʊ tə tɪl ðə sɔɪl. ən wɪð ɡɑɹdz tə si ðət jə nɛvɝ ɡoʊ fɑɹðɝ fɹəm ɪt ðən jə kən wɔk ɪn ə deɪ, soʊ lɔŋ əz jə laɪv. si tə ɪt, dɑbɹeɪn. ɪn ə wik aɪ wɑn əɹ ɑn əɹ weɪ." ə bɪwɪldɝd dɑbɹeɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ nɑɾɪŋ. pɛɹɪn kəd kætʃ mɝmɝz fɹəm ði əsɛmbli bɪhaɪn ɪm naʊ. ðɪs wɑz ənhɝɾ ʌv. nʌn ʌndɝstʊd waɪ ʃi wɑz nɑt tə daɪ. ən ðə ɹɛst! ɪsteɪts hæd bɪn kɑnfəskeɪɾəd bɪfɔɹ, bʌt nɛvɝ ɔl, nɛvɝ noʊbɪləɾi ɪtsɛlf. noʊbəlz hæd bɪn ɛɡzaɪld, ivən fəɹ laɪf, bʌt nɛvɝ tə ə fɑɹm.

Rand nodded. "Time to change that. Too much land has lain fallow too long. I want to move people back there, to farm again. Dobraine, you will find out which farm of those Colavaere owned near the Dragonwall is the smallest. Colavaere, I exile you to that farm. Dobraine will see you're provided with what is needed to make a farm work, and with someone to teach you how to till the soil. And with guards to see that you never go farther from it than you can walk in a day, so long as you live. See to it, Dobraine. In a week I want her on her way." A bewildered Dobraine hesitated before nodding. Perrin could catch murmurs from the assembly behind him now. This was unheard of. None understood why she was not to die. And the rest! Estates had been confiscated before, but never all, never nobility itself. Nobles had been exiled, even for life, but never to a farm.

koʊləveɪɪɹz ɹɪspɑns wɑz ɪmiɾiət. aɪz ɹoʊlɪŋ ʌp ɪn əɹ hɛd, ʃi kəlæpst, kɹʌmplɪŋ bækwɝd təwɔɹd ðə stɛps.

Colavaere's response was immediate. Eyes rolling up in her head, she collapsed, crumpling backward toward the steps.

pɛɹɪn dɑɹɾɪd tə kætʃ hɝ, bʌt sʌmwʌn wɑz əhɛɾ ə hɪm. bɪfɔɹ i hæd teɪkən ə fʊl stɛp, hɝ fɔl sɪmpli stɑpt. ʃi slʌmpt ɪn mɪdɛɹ, slæntɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə stɛps tə ðə deɪz, hɛd dæŋɡəlɪŋ. sloʊli, hɝ ʌnkɑnʃəs fɔɹm ɹoʊz, swʌŋ ɝaʊn ən sɛɾəld dʒɛnli ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə sʌn θɹoʊn. ɹænd. pɛɹɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ ði æʃəmən wʊɾə lɛɾ əɹ fɔl.

Perrin darted to catch her, but someone was ahead of him. Before he had taken a full step, her fall simply stopped. She slumped in midair, slanting over the steps to the dais, head dangling. Slowly, her unconscious form rose, swung around and settled gently in front of the Sun Throne. Rand. Perrin was sure the Asha'man would have let her fall.

ənʊɹə tskt. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ sɝpɹaɪzd, əɹ pɝtɝbd, ɪksɛp ðəɾ əɹ θʌmz ɹʌbd əɹ fɔɹfɪŋɝz nɝvəsli. "aɪ səspɛkt ʃi wʊɾə pɹəfɝd ðə hɛdzmən. əl si tə hɝ ɪf juv jəɹ mæn, jəɹ . . . æʃəmən. . . ."

Annoura tsked. She did not appear surprised, or perturbed, except that her thumbs rubbed her forefingers nervously. "I suspect she would have preferred the headsman. I will see to her if you have your man, your . . . Asha'man. . . ."

"ʃiz nɑt jəɹ kənsɝn," ɹænd sɛd ɹʌfli. "ʃi ɪz əlaɪv, ænd. . . . ʃiz əlaɪv." hi dʒɹu ə lɔŋ, ɹæɡəd bɹɛθ. mɪn wɑz ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ i lɛɾ ɪɾ aʊt; ʃi oʊnli stʊd nɪɹ hɪm, jɛt ʃi lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə də sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ. sloʊli hɪz feɪs fɝmd. "ənʊɹə, jəl teɪk mi tə bɹəleɪn. ɹilis hɝ, dʒɑhɹ; ʃɪl bi noʊ tʃɹʌbəl. nɑt wɪð wʌn ə hɝ ən naɪn ʌv ʌs. aɪ wɑnə faɪn aʊt wʌɾ əz bɪn ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn waɪl aɪ wɑz əweɪ, ənʊɹə. ən wʌt bɹəleɪn minz bɹɪŋɪŋ jə hɪɹ bɪhaɪn maɪ bæk. noʊ, doʊn spik. əl hɪɹ ɪt fɹəm hɝ. pɛɹɪn, aɪ noʊ jə wɑn səm taɪm wɪð feɪl. aɪ - "

"She's not your concern," Rand said roughly. "She is alive, and. . . . She is alive." He drew a long, ragged breath. Min was there before he let it out; she only stood near him, yet she looked as if she wanted to do something more. Slowly his face firmed. "Annoura, you will take me to Berelain. Release her, Jahar; she'll be no trouble. Not with one of her and nine of us. I want to find out what has been going on while I was away, Annoura. And what Berelain means bringing you here behind my back. No, don't speak. I'll hear it from her. Perrin, I know you want some time with Faile. I - "

ɹændz ɡeɪz swɛp sloʊli ɝaʊn ðə hɔl, oʊvɝ ɔl ðə noʊbəlz weɪɾɪŋ saɪlənli. ʌndɝ ɪz stɛɹ, nʌn dɛɹd muv ə mʌsəl. ðə sɛn ə fɪɹ fɑɹ aʊtweɪɾ ɛni ʌðɝ, kənvʌlsɪŋ ʃɑɹpli. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə hʌntɝz, ɛvɹiwʌn ðəɹ hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ðə seɪm oʊθ əz hæd koʊləveɪɪɹ. pɝhæps dʒʌs biɪŋ ɪn ðɪs ɡæðɝɪŋ wɑz tʃɹizən, tu? pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ.

Rand's gaze swept slowly around the hall, over all the nobles waiting silently. Under his stare, none dared move a muscle. The scent of fear far outweighed any other, convulsing sharply. Except for the Hunters, everyone there had given him the same oath as had Colavaere. Perhaps just being in this gathering was treason, too? Perrin did not know.

"ðɪs ɑɾiəns ɪz əɾ ən ɛnd," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪ wɪl fɝɡɛɾ ɛvɹi feɪs ðət dɪpɑɹts naʊ."

"This audience is at an end," Rand said. "I will forget every face that departs now."

ðoʊz ət ðə fɹʌnt, ðə haɪəst-ɹæŋkɪŋ, ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl, bɪɡæn ðɛɹ pɹɑɡɹɛs təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹz wɪθaʊt tu mʌtʃ heɪst, əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðə meɪɾənz ən ði æʃəmən stændɪŋ ɪn ði aɪl, waɪl ðə ɹɛst weɪɾəd ðɛɹ tɝn. ɛvɹi maɪn mʌst əv bɪn tɝnɪŋ oʊvɝ wʌt ɹænd hæd sɛd, ðoʊ. wʌt pɹɪsaɪsli dɪɾ i min baɪ "naʊ"? pɝpəsfəl stʃɹaɪdz kwɪkənd, skɝts wɝ lɪftəd. hʌntɝz, nɪɹəs ðə dɔɹz, bɪɡæn slɪpɪŋ aʊt, fɝst wʌn əɾ ə taɪm, ðən ɪn ə flʌd, ən siɪŋ ðɛm, lɛsɝ noʊbəlz əmʌŋ ðə kɛɹhinɪn ən tɛɹənz dɑɹɾɪd əhɛɾ ə ðə haɪɝ. ɪn moʊməns ɪt wɑz ə mɪlɪŋ mæs ət ðə dɔɹz, mɛn ən wɪmən pʊʃɪŋ ən ɛlboʊɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ aʊt. nɑt wʌn lʊk bæk ət ðə wʊmən stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt bɪfɔɹ ðə θɹoʊn ʃi hæd hɛl soʊ bɹifli.

Those at the front, the highest-ranking, the most powerful, began their progress toward the doors without too much haste, avoiding the Maidens and the Asha'man standing in the aisle, while the rest waited their turn. Every mind must have been turning over what Rand had said, though. What precisely did he mean by "now"? Purposeful strides quickened, skirts were lifted. Hunters, nearest the doors, began slipping out, first one at a time, then in a flood, and seeing them, lesser nobles among the Cairhienin and Tairens darted ahead of the higher. In moments it was a milling mass at the doors, men and women pushing and elbowing to get out. Not one looked back at the woman stretched out before the throne she had held so briefly.


tʃæptɝ sɪks


CHAPTER 6

oʊl fɪɹ, ən nu fɪɹ


Old Fear, and New Fear

ɹænd pæs θɹu ðə stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ mɑb wɪθaʊɾ ɛni dɪfəkəlti, ʌv kɔɹs. meɪbi ɪt wɑz ðə pɹɛzəns ə ðə meɪɾənz ən ði æʃəmən, əɹ meɪbi ɹænd əɹ wʌn ə ðə blæk-koʊɾəd fɛloʊz dɪd sʌmθɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ, bʌt ðə kɹaʊd pɑɹɾəd fəɹ hɪm, wɪð mɪn hoʊldɪŋ tə hɪz ɑɹm, ən ə vɛɹi səbduɾ ənʊɹə ətɛmptɪŋ tə spik tə hɪm, ən lɔɪəl, hu wɑz stɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ wɪð səm dɪfəkəlti tə ɹaɪɾ ɪn ɪz bʊk ən kæɹi hɪz æks. stɛɹɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ, pɛɹɪn ən feɪl mɪs ðɛɹ tʃæns tə dʒɔɪn əm bɪfɔɹ ðə kɹaʊd kloʊzd ʌp əɡɛn.

Rand passed through the struggling mob without any difficulty, of course. Maybe it was the presence of the Maidens and the Asha'man, or maybe Rand or one of the black-coated fellows did something with the Power, but the crowd parted for him, with Min holding to his arm, and a very subdued Annoura attempting to speak to him, and Loial, who was still trying with some difficulty to write in his book and carry his axe. Staring at one another, Perrin and Faile missed their chance to join them before the crowd closed up again.

ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ə taɪm, ən niðɝ dɪd hi, nɑt wʌɾ i wɑntəd tə seɪ, nɑt wɪð ɛɹæm ðɛɹ, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əm laɪk səm wɝʃəpfəl haʊnd. ən dɑbɹeɪn, fɹaʊnɪŋ daʊn ət ði ʌnkɑnʃəs wʊmən pʊɾ ɪn ɪz tʃɑɹdʒ. noʊ wʌn ɛls ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ðə deɪz. heɪvin hæd ɡɔn wɪð ɹænd, tə faɪn bɹəleɪn, ən əz sun əz ɹænd wɛnt, ði ʌðɝ ətɛndəns hæd dɑɹɾɪd əweɪ təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹz wɪθaʊɾ ə sɛkənd ɡlæns ət pɛɹɪn əɹ feɪl. əɹ koʊləveɪɪɹ. wɪθaʊt ðə fɝst ɡlæns, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. ðeɪ dʒʌs lɪftəd ðɛɹ stʃɹaɪp skɝts ən ɹæn. ɡɹʌns ən kɝsɪz dʒɹɪftəd fɹəm ðə pæk, nɑɾ ɔl ɪn mɛnz vɔɪsəz. ivən wɪð ɹænd ɡɔn, ðoʊz pipəl wɑntəd tə bi ɛlswɛɹ, ən naʊ. pɝhæps ðeɪ θɔt pɛɹɪn steɪd tə wɑtʃ ən ɹipɔɹt, ðoʊ hæɾ ɛni ɡlæns bæk, ðeɪ wʊɾə sin ɪz aɪz wɝ nɑɾ ɑn ðɛm.

She said nothing for a time, and neither did he, not what he wanted to say, not with Aram there, staring at them like some worshipful hound. And Dobraine, frowning down at the unconscious woman put in his charge. No one else remained on the dais. Havien had gone with Rand, to find Berelain, and as soon as Rand went, the other attendants had darted away toward the doors without a second glance at Perrin or Faile. Or Colavaere. Without the first glance, for that matter. They just lifted their striped skirts and ran. Grunts and curses drifted from the pack, not all in men's voices. Even with Rand gone, those people wanted to be elsewhere, and now. Perhaps they thought Perrin stayed to watch and report, though had any glanced back, they would have seen his eyes were not on them.

klaɪmɪŋ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ, hi tʊk feɪlz hæn ən bɹiðd ɪn ðə sɛn ə hɝ. ðɪs kloʊs, ðə lɪŋɡɝɪŋ pɝfjumz dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. ɛniθɪŋ ɛls kəd weɪt. ʃi pɹədust ə ɹɛd leɪs fæn fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ, ən bɪfɔɹ spɹɛɾɪŋ ɪt tə kul hɝsɛlf, tʌtʃt fɝst əɹ tʃik, ðən hɪz. ðəɹ wɑz ə hoʊl læŋɡwədʒ ə fænz ɪn əɹ neɪɾɪv sɑldɑiə. ʃi hæd tɔɾ ɪm ə lɪɾəl. hi wɪʃt i nu wʌt ðə tʃik-tʌtʃɪŋ mɛnt; ɪt mʌs bi sʌmθɪŋ ɡʊd. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, hɝ sɛn kæɹiɾ ə spaɪki ʃeɪɾɪŋ i nu tu wɛl.

Climbing the rest of the way, he took Faile's hand and breathed in the scent of her. This close, the lingering perfumes did not matter. Anything else could wait. She produced a red lace fan from somewhere, and before spreading it to cool herself, touched first her cheek, then his. There was a whole language of fans in her native Saldaea. She had taught him a little. He wished he knew what the cheek-touching meant; it must be something good. On the other hand, her scent carried a spiky shading he knew too well.

"hi ʃʊɾə sɛn əɹ tə ðə blɑk," dɑbɹeɪn mʌɾɝd, ən pɛɹɪn ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli. fɹəm ðə mænz toʊn, ɪt wɑz nɑt klɪɹ wɛðɝ i mɛn ðət ðət wɑz wʌt ðə lɔ kɔl fəɹ əɹ ðəɾ ɪt wʊɾə bɪn mɔɹ mɝsɪfəl. dɑbɹeɪn dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. ɹænd cʊɾə spɹaʊɾəd wɪŋz fɝst.

"He should have sent her to the block," Dobraine muttered, and Perrin shrugged uncomfortably. From the man's tone, it was not clear whether he meant that that was what the law called for or that it would have been more merciful. Dobraine did not understand. Rand could have sprouted wings first.

feɪlz fæn sloʊd tə bɛɹli muvɪŋ, ən ʃi aɪd dɑbɹeɪn saɪdweɪz oʊvɝ ðə kɹɪmzən leɪs. "hɝ dɛθ maɪt bi bɛs fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn. ðəɾ ɪz ðə pɹiskɹaɪb pɛnəlti. wʌt wɪl jə du, lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪn?" saɪɾɛlɔŋ əɹ nɑt, ɪt stɪl mænədʒ tə bi vɛɹi dɝɛkt, ə vɛɹi minɪŋfəl ɡeɪz.

Faile's fan slowed to barely moving, and she eyed Dobraine sideways over the crimson lace. "Her death might be best for everyone. That is the prescribed penalty. What will you do, Lord Dobraine?" Sidelong or not, it still managed to be very direct, a very meaningful gaze.

pɛɹɪn fɹaʊnd. nɑɾ ə wɝd fəɹ hɪm, bʌt kwɛstʃənz fəɹ dɑbɹeɪn? ən ðəɹ wɑz ðəɾ ʌndɝtoʊn ə dʒɛləsi ɪn əɹ ɝoʊmə, meɪkɪŋ ɪm saɪ.

Perrin frowned. Not a word for him, but questions for Dobraine? And there was that undertone of jealousy in her aroma, making him sigh.

ðə kɛɹhinɪn ɡeɪv əɹ ə lɛvəl lʊk ɪn ɹɪtɝn waɪl θɹʌstɪŋ ɪz ɡɔnləts bɪhaɪn ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt. "wʌɾ aɪ wɑz kəmændəd tə du. aɪ kip maɪ oʊðz, leɪɾi feɪl."

The Cairhienin gave her a level look in return while thrusting his gauntlets behind his sword belt. "What I was commanded to do. I keep my oaths, Lady Faile."

ðə fæn snæpt oʊpən ən ʃʌt, fæstɝ ðən θɔt. "hi æktʃəli  sɛn ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ði il? əz pɹɪznɝz?" dɪsbɪlif tɪŋd əɹ vɔɪs.

The fan snapped open and shut, faster than thought. "He actually sent Aes Sedai to the Aiel? As prisoners?" Disbelief tinged her voice.

"sʌm, leɪɾi feɪl." dɑbɹeɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "sʌm swɔɹ fiəlti ɑn ðɛɹ niz. ðɪs aɪ sɔ wɪð maɪ oʊn aɪz. ðeɪ wɛn tə ði il, tu, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ kən bi kɔl pɹɪznɝz."

"Some, Lady Faile." Dobraine hesitated. "Some swore fealty on their knees. This I saw with my own eyes. They went to the Aiel, too, but I do not think they can be called prisoners."

"aɪ sɔ ɪt, tu, maɪ leɪɾi," ɛɹæm pʊɾ ɪn fɹəm ɪz pleɪs ɑn ðə stɛps, ən ə waɪd smaɪl splɪɾ ɪz feɪs wən ʃi ɡlænst ət hɪm.

"I saw it, too, my Lady," Aram put in from his place on the steps, and a wide smile split his face when she glanced at him.

ɹɛd leɪs dɪskɹaɪbd ə flʌɾɝɪŋ hɪtʃ. wʌt ʃi dɪd wɪð ðə fæn simd ɔlmoʊst ʌnkɑnʃəs. "ju boʊθ sɔ." ðə ɹɪlif ɪn əɹ vɔɪs - ən ɪn əɹ sɛnt - wɑz soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ðət pɛɹɪn stɛɹd.

Red lace described a fluttering hitch. What she did with the fan seemed almost unconscious. "You both saw." The relief in her voice - and in her scent - was so strong that Perrin stared.

"wʌt dɪd jə θɪŋk, feɪl? waɪ wəd ɹænd laɪ, ɪspɛʃli wən ɛvɹiwʌn wəd noʊ ɪn ə deɪ?"

"What did you think, Faile? Why would Rand lie, especially when everyone would know in a day?"

ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ænsɝɪŋ ɪmiɾiətli, ʃi fɹaʊn daʊn ət koʊləveɪɪɹ. "ɪz ʃi stɪl ʌndɝ? nɑt ðəɾ ɪt mæɾɝz, aɪ səpoʊz. ʃi noʊz mɔɹ ðən aɪ wəd seɪ hɪɹ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wi wɝk soʊ hɑɹd tə kip hɪɾən. ʃi lɛt ðət slɪp tə mɛɹ, tu. ʃi noʊz tu mʌtʃ."

Instead of answering immediately, she frowned down at Colavaere. "Is she still under? Not that it matters, I suppose. She knows more than I would say here. Everything we worked so hard to keep hidden. She let that slip to Maire, too. She knows too much."

dɑbɹeɪn θʌmd wʌn ə koʊləveɪɪɹz aɪz oʊpən nʌn tu dʒɛnli. "æz ɪf hɪt wɪð ə meɪs. ə pɪɾi ʃi dɪd nɑt bɹeɪk əɹ nɛk ɑn ðə stɛps. bʌt ʃɪl ɡoʊ tə hɝ ɛɡzaɪl ən lɝn tə lɪv əz ə fɑɹmɝ." ə bɹif, dʒæɪɾi, vɛkst smɛl wɑftɪd fɹəm feɪl.

Dobraine thumbed one of Colavaere's eyes open none too gently. "As if hit with a mace. A pity she did not break her neck on the steps. But she will go to her exile and learn to live as a farmer." A brief, jaggedy, vexed smell wafted from Faile.

əbɹʌpli ɪt hɪt pɛɹɪn wʌɾ ɪz waɪf hæd bɪn pɹəpoʊzɪŋ soʊ oʊblikli; wʌt dɑbɹeɪn hæd ɹɪdʒɛktɪd dʒʌst əz ɪndɝɛkli. ɛvɹi hɛɹ ɑn ɪz bɑɾi tʃɹaɪd tə stænd. fɹəm ðə stɑɹɾ i hæd noʊn ðəɾ i hæd mɛɹiɾ ə vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs wʊmən. dʒʌs nɑt haʊ deɪnʒɝəs. ɛɹæm wɑz piɹɪŋ ət koʊləveɪɪɹ, hɪz lɪps pɝst ɪn dɑɹk θɔt; ðə mæn wəd də ɛniθɪŋ fəɹ feɪl.

Abruptly it hit Perrin what his wife had been proposing so obliquely; what Dobraine had rejected just as indirectly. Every hair on his body tried to stand. From the start he had known that he had married a very dangerous woman. Just not how dangerous. Aram was peering at Colavaere, his lips pursed in dark thought; the man would do anything for Faile.

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ɹænd wəd laɪk ɪɾ ɪf ɛniθɪŋ pɹɪvɛntɪɾ əɹ ɹitʃɪŋ ðət fɑɹm," pɛɹɪn sɛd fɝmli, aɪɪŋ ɛɹæm ən feɪl ɪn tɝn. "aɪ wʊdn laɪk ɪt, iðɝ." hi fɛlt ɹæðɝ pɹaʊɾ ə hɪmsɛlf. ðət wɑz tɔkɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə pɔɪn əz wɛl əz ɛni ʌv ðɛm.

"I don't think Rand would like it if anything prevented her reaching that farm," Perrin said firmly, eyeing Aram and Faile in turn. "I wouldn't like it, either." He felt rather proud of himself. That was talking around the point as well as any of them.

ɛɹæm baʊɾ ɪz hɛd bɹifli - hi ʌndɝstʊd - bʌt feɪl tʃɹaɪd tə lʊk ɪnəsən əbʌv əɹ dʒɛnli flʌɾɝɪŋ fæn, wɪð noʊ noʊʃən wʌɾ i wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt. sʌɾənli hi ɹilaɪz nɑɾ ɔl ðə fɪɹ sɛn keɪm fɹəm ðə pipəl stɪl mɪlɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ. ə θɪn, kwɪvɝɪŋ θɹɛɾ ʌv ɪt wɑftɪd fɹəm hɝ. fɪɹ ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ.

Aram bowed his head briefly - he understood - but Faile tried to look innocent above her gently fluttering fan, with no notion what he was talking about. Suddenly he realized not all the fear scent came from the people still milling at the door. A thin, quivering thread of it wafted from her. Fear under control, yet it was there.

"wʌts ðə mæɾɝ, feɪl? laɪt, jud θɪŋk kɔɪɹən ən ðət lɑt hæd wʌn ɪnstɛɾ ʌv. . . ." hɝ feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, bʌt ðə θɹɛd ɡɹu θɪkɝ. "ɪz ðət waɪ jə dɪdn seɪ ɛniθɪŋ ət fɝst?" hi æsk sɔfli. "wɝ jə əfɹeɪd wi hæd kʌm bæk əz pʌpəts, ən əm pʊlɪŋ ðə stʃɹɪŋz?"

"What's the matter, Faile? Light, you'd think Coiren and that lot had won instead of. . . ." Her face did not change, but the thread grew thicker. "Is that why you didn't say anything at first?" he asked softly. "Were you afraid we had come back as puppets, and them pulling the strings?"

ʃi aɪd ðə ɹæpədli dɪmɪnɪʃɪŋ kɹaʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹæn hɔl. ðə nɪɹəst ə ðɛm wɑz ə lɔŋ weɪ, ən ɔl meɪkɪŋ ə ɡʊd dil ə nɔɪz, bʌt ʃi loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs ivən soʊ. "ɛɛs sədaɪ kən də ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ, aɪv hɝd. maɪ hʌzbənd, noʊ wʌn noʊz mɔɹ ðən aɪ ðəɾ ivən ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd faɪn hɑɹd taɪmz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk jə dæns fəɹ ə pʌpət, mʌtʃ hɑɹɾɝ ðən ə mæn huz dʒʌs ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bʌt wən jə wɔkt ɪn hɪɹ, aɪ wɑz mɔɹ əfɹeɪd ðən əɾ ɛni taɪm sɪns jə lɛft." əmjuzmən tʃɹɪkəl θɹu ɪn ðə fɝst ə ðæt, laɪk taɪni bʌbəlz ɪn ɪz noʊz, ən wɔɹm fɑndnəs, ən lʌv, ðə smɛl ə hɝ, klɪɹ ən pjʊɹ ən stʃɹɔŋ, bʌɾ ɔl ə ðoʊz feɪɾəd baɪ ði ɛnd, livɪŋ ðət θɪn tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ θɹɛd.

She eyed the rapidly diminishing crowd across the Grand Hall. The nearest of them was a long way, and all making a good deal of noise, but she lowered her voice even so. "Aes Sedai can do that sort of thing, I've heard. My husband, no one knows more than I that even Aes Sedai would find hard times trying to make you dance for a puppet, much harder than a man who's just the Dragon Reborn, but when you walked in here, I was more afraid than at any time since you left." Amusement trickled through in the first of that, like tiny bubbles in his nose, and warm fondness, and love, the smell of her, clear and pure and strong, but all of those faded by the end, leaving that thin trembling thread.

"laɪt, feɪl, ɪts tʃɹu. ɛvɹi wɝd ɹænd sɛd. jə hɝd dɑbɹeɪn, ən ɛɹæm." ʃi smaɪld, ən nɑɾəd, ən wɝkt əɹ fæn. ðət θɹɛd stɪl kwɪvɝɾ ɪn ɪz nɑstʃɹəlz, ðoʊ. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, wʌt dʌz ɪt teɪk tə kənvɪns hɝ? "wʊɾ ɪt hɛlp ɪf i hæd vɛɹɪn dæns ðə sɑsɑɹə? ʃi wɪl, ɪf i tɛlz əɹ tə." hi mɛn ɪt fəɹ ə dʒoʊk. ɔl i nu ʌv ðə sɑsɑɹə wɑz ðəɾ ɪt wɑz skændələs - ən ðət feɪl hæd wʌns ədmɪɾəd noʊɪŋ haʊ tə dæns ɪt, ðoʊ ɹisənli ʃi saɪdstɛpt ən ɔl bʌt dɪnaɪɾ ɪt. hi mɛn ɪt fəɹ ə dʒoʊk, bʌt ʃi kloʊzd əɹ fæn ən tæpt ɪɾ ɑn əɹ ɹɪst. hi nu ðət wʌn: aɪm ɡɪvɪŋ jəɹ sədʒɛstʃən sɪɹiəs θɔt.

"Light, Faile, it's true. Every word Rand said. You heard Dobraine, and Aram." She smiled, and nodded, and worked her fan. That thread still quivered in his nostrils, though. Blood and ashes, what does it take to convince her? "Would it help if he had Verin dance the sa'sara? She will, if he tells her to." He meant it for a joke. All he knew of the sa'sara was that it was scandalous - and that Faile had once admitted knowing how to dance it, though recently she sidestepped and all but denied it. He meant it for a joke, but she closed her fan and tapped it on her wrist. He knew that one: I am giving your suggestion serious thought.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt wəd bi ɪnʌf, pɛɹɪn." ʃi ʃɪvɝd slaɪtli. "ɪz ðəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd nɑt du, əɹ pʊɾ ʌp wɪð, ɪf ðə waɪt taʊɝ toʊld əɹ tə? aɪ hæv stʌɾid maɪ hɪstɝi, ən aɪ wɑz tɔt tə ɹid bɪtwin ðə laɪnz. mæʃɛɹə dɑnəvɛl bɔɹ sɛvən tʃɪlʒɹən fəɹ ə mæn ʃi loʊðd, wʌtɛvɝ ðə stɔɹiz seɪ, ən aɪseɪbeɪl təbənji dɪlɪvɝd ðə bɹʌðɝz ʃi lʌv tə ðɛɹ ɛnəmiz ən ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ɑɹæd dumən wɪð ðɛm, ən dʒɛstʃən ɹɛdhɪl. . . ." ʃi ʃɪvɝɾ əɡɛn, nɑt soʊ slaɪtli.

"I don't know what would be enough, Perrin." She shivered slightly. "Is there anything an Aes Sedai would not do, or put up with, if the White Tower told her to? I have studied my history, and I was taught to read between the lines. Mashera Donavelle bore seven children for a man she loathed, whatever the stories say, and Isebaille Tobanyi delivered the brothers she loved to their enemies and the throne of Arad Doman with them, and Jestian Redhill. . . ." She shivered again, not so slightly.

"ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt," hi mɝmɝd, ɹæpɪŋ əɹ ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz. hi hæd stʌɾid sɛvɹəl bʊks ə hɪstɝi hɪmsɛlf, bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ sin ðoʊz neɪmz. ðə dɔɾɝ ʌv ə lɔɹd ɹəsivd ə dɪfɹən ɛdʒəkeɪʃən fɹəm ə blæksmɪθs əpɹɛntəs. "ɪt ɹɪli ɪz tʃɹu." dɑbɹeɪn əvɝɾəd ɪz aɪz, ən soʊ dɪɾ ɛɹæm, ðoʊ wɪð ə plizd ɡɹɪn.

"It's all right," he murmured, wrapping her in his arms. He had studied several books of history himself, but he had never seen those names. The daughter of a lord received a different education from a blacksmith's apprentice. "It really is true." Dobraine averted his eyes, and so did Aram, though with a pleased grin.

ʃi ɹɪzɪstɪɾ ət fɝst, bʌt nɑt vɛɹi hɑɹd. hi kəd nɛvɝ bi ʃʊɹ wən ʃi wəɾ əvɔɪɾ ə pʌblɪk ɛmbɹeɪs ən wən wɛlkəm ɪt, oʊnli ðəɾ ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnt wʌn, ʃi meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ ɪn noʊ ənsɝɾən tɝmz, wɪð əɹ wɪθaʊt wɝdz. ðɪs taɪm ʃi snʌɡəld əɹ feɪs ɪndə hɪz tʃɛst ən hʌɡd ɪm bæk, skwizɪŋ hɑɹɾɝ.

She resisted at first, but not very hard. He could never be sure when she would avoid a public embrace and when welcome it, only that if she did not want one, she made it clear in no uncertain terms, with or without words. This time she snuggled her face into his chest and hugged him back, squeezing harder.

"ɪf ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛvɝ hɑɹmz ju," ʃi wɪspɝd, "aɪ wɪl kɪl hɝ." hi bɪliv hɝ. "ju bɪlɔŋ tə mi, pɛɹɪn tæʃɪɹ eɪbɑɹə. tə mi." hi bɪliv ðæt, tu. əz əɹ hʌɡ ɡɹu fɪɹsɝ, soʊ dɪd ðə θɔɹni sɛn ə dʒɛləsi. hi ɔlmoʊs tʃʌkəld. ɪt sim ðə ɹaɪt tə pʊɾ ə naɪf ɪn ɪm wɑz ɹɪzɝv tə hɝ. hi wəɾ əv tʃʌkəld, ɪksɛp ðət fɪləmən ə fɪɹ ɹɪmeɪnd. ðæt, ən wʌt ʃi hæd sɛɾ əbaʊt mɛɹ. hi kəd nɑt smɛl hɪmsɛlf, bʌɾ i nu wʌt wɑz ðɛɹ. fɪɹ. oʊl fɪɹ, ən nu fɪɹ, fəɹ ðə nɛks taɪm.

"If any Aes Sedai ever harms you," she whispered, "I will kill her." He believed her. "You belong to me, Perrin t'Bashere Aybara. To me." He believed that, too. As her hug grew fiercer, so did the thorny scent of jealousy. He almost chuckled. It seemed the right to put a knife in him was reserved to her. He would have chuckled, except that filament of fear remained. That, and what she had said about Maire. He could not smell himself, but he knew what was there. Fear. Old fear, and new fear, for the next time.

ðə læst ə ðə noʊbəlz fɔɹs ðɛɹ weɪ fɹəm ðə ɡɹæn hɔl, wɪθaʊɾ ɛniwʌn biɪŋ tʃɹæmpəld. sɛndɪŋ ɛɹæm ɔf tə tɛl dænɪl tə bɹɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ɪndə ðə sɪɾi - ən wʌndɝɪŋ haʊ hi wɑz gɑnə fiɾ əm - pɛɹɪn ɔfɝd feɪl ɪz ɑɹm ən lɛɾ əɹ aʊt, livɪŋ dɑbɹeɪn wɪð koʊləveɪɪɹ, hu wɑz faɪnəli ʃoʊɪŋ saɪnz ʌv əweɪkənɪŋ. hi hæd noʊ wɪʃ tə bi ɝaʊnd wən ʃi woʊk, ən feɪl, wɪð əɹ hæn ɑn ɪz ɹɪst, sim nɑt tə iðɝ. ðeɪ wɔkt kwɪkli, iɡɝ tə ɹitʃ ðɛɹ ɹumz, ɪf nɑt nɛsəsɛɹəli fəɹ ðə seɪm ɹizənz.

The last of the nobles forced their way from the Grand Hall, without anyone being trampled. Sending Aram off to tell Dannil to bring the Two Rivers men into the city - and wondering how he was going to feed them - Perrin offered Faile his arm and led her out, leaving Dobraine with Colavaere, who was finally showing signs of awakening. He had no wish to be around when she woke, and Faile, with her hand on his wrist, seemed not to either. They walked quickly, eager to reach their rooms, if not necessarily for the same reasons.

ðə noʊbəlz əpɛɹənli hæd nɑt stɑp ðɛɹ flaɪt wʌns ðeɪ wɝ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹæn hɔl. ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz wɝ ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ sɝvəns u kɛp ðɛɹ aɪz daʊn ən muvd əɾ ə saɪlən ɹʌʃ, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn vɛɹi fɑɹ, pɛɹɪn kɑt ðə saʊn ə fʊtstɛps ən ɹilaɪz ðeɪ wɝ biɪŋ fɑloʊd. ɪt simd ənlaɪkli ðət koʊləveɪɪɹ hæɾ ɛni oʊpən səpɔɹɾɝz stɪl, bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ɛni, ðeɪ maɪt θɪŋk tə stʃɹaɪk ət ɹænd θɹu hɪz fɹɛnd, wɔkɪŋ əloʊn wɪð ɪz waɪf waɪl ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑz ɛlswɛɹ.

The nobles apparently had not stopped their flight once they were out of the Grand Hall. The corridors were empty except for servants who kept their eyes down and moved at a silent rush, but before they had gone very far, Perrin caught the sound of footsteps and realized they were being followed. It seemed unlikely that Colavaere had any open supporters still, but if there were any, they might think to strike at Rand through his friend, walking alone with his wife while the Dragon Reborn was elsewhere.

oʊnli, wən pɛɹɪn spʌn əbaʊt, hæn tə hɪz æks, hi stɛɹɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə dʒɹɔɪŋ ðə wɛpən. ɪt wɑz sɛlən ən əɹ fɹɛnz fɹəm ði ɛntʃɹi hɔl, wɪð eɪɾ əɹ naɪn nu feɪsəz. ðeɪ ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt wən i tɝnd, ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd əbæʃt ɡlænsɪz. səm wɝ tɛɹənz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ə wʊmən u stʊd tɔlɝ ðən ɔl bʌt wʌn ə ðə kɛɹhinɪn mɛn. ʃi wɔɹ ə mænz koʊɾ ən taɪt bɹitʃɪz, dʒʌs laɪk sɛlən ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə wɪmən, wɪð ə sɔɹɾ ɑn əɹ hɪp. hi hæd nɑt hɝd ðət ðɪs nɑnsɛns hæd spɹɛd tə ðə tɛɹənz.

Only, when Perrin spun about, hand to his axe, he stared instead of drawing the weapon. It was Selande and her friends from the entry hall, with eight or nine new faces. They gave a start when he turned, and exchanged abashed glances. Some were Tairens, including a woman who stood taller than all but one of the Cairhienin men. She wore a man's coat and tight breeches, just like Selande and the rest of the women, with a sword on her hip. He had not heard that this nonsense had spread to the Tairens.

"waɪ ɑɹ jə fɑloʊɪŋ ʌs?" hi dɪmændəd. "ɪf jə tʃɹaɪ tə meɪk mi ɛni ʌv jəɹ wʊlhɛd tʃɹʌbəl, aɪ vaʊ əl kɪk ðə lɑɾ ə jə fɹəm hɪɹ tə bɛl taɪn!" hi hæd hæd pɹɑbləmz bɪfɔɹ wɪð ðiz ɪɾiəts, əɹ səm dʒʌs laɪk ðɛm, ɛniweɪ. ɔl ðeɪ θɔɾ əbaʊt wɑz ðɛɹ ɑnɝ, ən faɪɾɪŋ duəlz, ən teɪkɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn. ðət læst ɹɪli sɛt ði ilz tiθ ɑn ɛdʒ.

"Why are you following us?" he demanded. "If you try to make me any of your woolhead trouble, I vow I'll kick the lot of you from here to Bel Tine!" He had had problems before with these idiots, or some just like them, anyway. All they thought about was their honor, and fighting duels, and taking one another gai'shain. That last really set the Aiel's teeth on edge.

"ətɛn maɪ hʌzbən ən oʊbeɪ," feɪl pʊɾ ɪn ʃɑɹpli. "hi ɪz nɑɾ ə mæn tə bi tʃɹaɪfəld wɪð." ɡɔkɪŋ stɛɹz vænɪʃt, ən ðeɪ bækt əweɪ, boʊɪŋ, kəmpiɾɪŋ oʊvɝ flɝɪʃəz. ðeɪ wɝ stɪl əɾ ɪt wən ðeɪ vænɪʃt ɝaʊn ə tɝn.

"Attend my husband and obey," Faile put in sharply. "He is not a man to be trifled with." Gawking stares vanished, and they backed away, bowing, competing over flourishes. They were still at it when they vanished around a turn.

"blʌɾi jʌŋ bʌfunz," pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd, ɔfɝɪŋ feɪl ɪz ɹɪst əɡɛn.

"Bloody young buffoons," Perrin muttered, offering Faile his wrist again.

"maɪ hʌzbən ɪz waɪz ɪn ɪz jɪɹz," ʃi mɝmɝd. hɝ toʊn wɑz ʌɾɝli sɪɹiəs; hɝ smɛl wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls əɡɛn.

"My husband is wise in his years," she murmured. Her tone was utterly serious; her smell was something else again.

pɛɹɪn mænədʒ nɑt tə snɔɹt. tʃɹu, ə fju ʌv əm maɪt bi ə jɪɹ əɹ tu oʊldɝ ðən hi, bʌt ðeɪ ɔl wɝ laɪk tʃɪlʒɹən wɪð ðɛɹ pleɪɪŋ əɾ il. naʊ, wɪð feɪl ɪn ə ɡʊd mud, simd əz ɡʊɾ ə taɪm əz ɛni tə bɪɡɪn wʌt ðeɪ hæd tə tɔk əbaʊt. wʌɾ i hæd tə tɔk əbaʊt. "feɪl, haʊ dɪd jə kʌm tə bi wʌn ə koʊləveɪɪɹz ətɛndəns?"

Perrin managed not to snort. True, a few of them might be a year or two older than he, but they all were like children with their playing at Aiel. Now, with Faile in a good mood, seemed as good a time as any to begin what they had to talk about. What he had to talk about. "Faile, how did you come to be one of Colavaere's attendants?"

"ðə sɝvəns, pɛɹɪn." ʃi spoʊk sɔfli; noʊbɑdi tu stɛps əweɪ cʊɾə hɝɾ ə wɝd. ʃi nu ɔl əbaʊɾ ɪz hɪɹɪŋ, ən ðə wʊlvz. ðət wɑz nʌθɪŋ ə mæn kəd kip fɹəm ɪz waɪf. hɝ fæn tʌtʃt əɹ ɪɹ, ædmɑnɪʃɪŋ kɑʃən ɪn spitʃ. "tu mɛni pipəl fɝɡɛt sɝvəns ɑɹ ðɛɹ, bʌt sɝvəns lɪsən tu. ɪn kɛɹhin, ðeɪ lɪsən fɑɹ tu mʌtʃ."

"The servants, Perrin." She spoke softly; nobody two steps away could have heard a word. She knew all about his hearing, and the wolves. That was nothing a man could keep from his wife. Her fan touched her ear, admonishing caution in speech. "Too many people forget servants are there, but servants listen too. In Cairhien, they listen far too much."

nʌn ə ðə lɪvɹid pipəl i sɔ wɝ duɪŋ ɛni lɪsnɪŋ. ðə fju hu dɪd nɑt dʌk daʊn saɪd kɔɹɪɾɝz wən ðeɪ sɔ hɪm ən feɪl wɛn baɪ əɾ ə nɪɹ ɹʌn, ɡeɪzəz ɑn ðə flɔɹ ən ɡæðɝɾ ɪn ɑn ðɛmsɛlvz. ɛni sɔɹɾ ə nuz spɹɛd kwɪkli ɪn kɛɹhin. ɪvɛns ɪn ðə ɡɹæn hɔl wəɾ əv floʊn. ðə wɝd wɑz ɪn ðə stʃɹits baɪ naʊ, pɹɑbli ɑn ɪts weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi ɔlɹɛɾi. wɪθaʊɾ ɛni daʊt ðəɹ wɝ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ɪn kɛɹhin fəɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðə waɪtkloʊks, ən laɪkli mɔɹ θɹoʊnz ðən nɑt.

None of the liveried people he saw were doing any listening. The few who did not duck down side corridors when they saw him and Faile went by at a near run, gazes on the floor and gathered in on themselves. Any sort of news spread quickly in Cairhien. Events in the Grand Hall would have flown. The word was in the streets by now, probably on its way out of the city already. Without any doubt there were eyes-and-ears in Cairhien for the Aes Sedai, and the Whitecloaks, and likely more thrones than not.

ɪn ðət hʌʃt vɔɪs, ʃi wɛn ɑn dɪspaɪɾ əɹ kɑʃən tə hɪm. "koʊləveɪɪɹ kəd nɑt bi fæst ɪnʌf tə teɪk mi ɪn, wʌns ʃi lɝn u aɪ æm. maɪ fɑðɝz neɪm ɪmpɹɛst əɹ əz mʌtʃ əz maɪ kʌzənz." ʃi fɪnɪʃt wɪð ə lɪɾəl nɑd, əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ænsɝɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ.

In that hushed voice, she went on despite her caution to him. "Colavaere could not be fast enough to take me in, once she learned who I am. My father's name impressed her as much as my cousin's." She finished with a little nod, as if she had answered everything.

ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf ænsɝ. ɔlmoʊst. hɝ fɑðɝ wɑz dævɹæm, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs bæʃɪɹ, lɔɹɾ ə bæʃɪɹ, tɪɹ ən sidoʊnə, ɡɑɹɾiən ə ðə blaɪtbɔɹɾɝ, dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə hɑɹtlænd, ən mɑɹʃəl-dʒɛnɝəl tə kwin tɛnoʊbiə ʌv sɑldɑiə. feɪlz kʌzən wɑz tɛnoʊbiə hɝsɛlf. mɔɹ ðən ɹizən fəɹ koʊləveɪɪɹ tə lip ət feɪl fəɹ wʌn ə hɝ ətɛndəns. bʌɾ i hæd hæd taɪm tə mʌl θɪŋz oʊvɝ naʊ, ən i pɹaɪɾɪd hɪmsɛlf ðəɾ i wɑz bɪkʌmɪŋ juz tə hɝ weɪz. mɛɹid laɪf tɔɾ ə mæn əbaʊt wɪmən; əɹ əbaʊt wʌn wʊmən, ɛniweɪ. ði ænsɝ ʃi hæd nɑt ɡɪvən, kənfɝm sʌmθɪŋ. feɪl hæd noʊ kɑnsɛpt ə deɪnʒɝ, nɑt wɛɹ ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz kənsɝnd.

It was a good enough answer. Almost. Her father was Davram, High Seat of House Bashere, Lord of Bashere, Tyr and Sidona, Guardian of the Blightborder, Defender of the Heartland, and Marshal-General to Queen Tenobia of Saldaea. Faile's cousin was Tenobia herself. More than reason for Colavaere to leap at Faile for one of her attendants. But he had had time to mull things over now, and he prided himself that he was becoming used to her ways. Married life taught a man about women; or about one woman, anyway. The answer she had not given, confirmed something. Faile had no concept of danger, not where she herself was concerned.

hi kəd nɑt spik ʌv ɪt ðəɹ ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, ʌv kɔɹs. wɪspɝ haʊ hi wʊd, ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv ɪz ɪɹz, ən daʊtləs ʃi wəɾ ɪnsɪst ɛvɹi sɝvənt wɪðɪn fɪfti peɪsɪz wɑz lɪsnɪŋ. hoʊldɪŋ ɪz peɪʃəns, hi wɔkt ɑn wɪð əɹ əntɪl ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə ɹumz ðət hæd bɪn sɛɾ əsaɪd fəɹ əm wʌt simd ən eɪdʒ əɡoʊ naʊ. ðə læmps hæd bɪn lɪt, meɪkɪŋ ʃɪmɝz ɑn ðə dɑɹk pɑlɪʃt wɔlz, itʃ tɔl wʊɾən pænəl kɑɹvd ɪn kənsɛntʃɹɪk ɹɛktæŋɡəlz. ɪn ðə skwɛɹ stoʊn faɪɝpleɪs ðə hɑɹθ wɑz swɛp bɛɹ ən leɪd wɪð ə fju pɪɾəfəl bɹæntʃəz ə lɛðɝlif. ðeɪ wɝ ɔlmoʊst ɡɹin.

He could not speak of it there in the corridor, of course. Whisper how he would, she did not have his ears, and doubtless she would insist every servant within fifty paces was listening. Holding his patience, he walked on with her until they reached the rooms that had been set aside for them what seemed an age ago now. The lamps had been lit, making shimmers on the dark polished walls, each tall wooden panel carved in concentric rectangles. In the square stone fireplace the hearth was swept bare and laid with a few pitiful branches of leatherleaf. They were almost green.

feɪl wɛn stʃɹeɪt tə ə smɔl teɪbəl wɛɹ tu ɡoʊldən pɪtʃɝz stʊd biɾɪd wɪð mɔɪstʃɝ ɑn ə tʃɹeɪ. "ðeɪ hæv lɛft əs blubɛɹi ti, maɪ hʌzbənd, ən waɪn pʌntʃ. ðə waɪn ɪz fɹəm θɹən, aɪ θɪŋk. ðeɪ kul ðə pʌntʃ ɪn ðə sɪstɝnz bɪniθ ðə pæləs. wɪtʃ wəd jə pɹəfɝ?"

Faile went straight to a small table where two golden pitchers stood beaded with moisture on a tray. "They have left us blueberry tea, my husband, and wine punch. The wine is from Tharon, I think. They cool the punch in the cisterns beneath the palace. Which would you prefer?"

pɛɹɪn ənbəkəld ɪz bɛlt ən tɔs bɛlt ən æks ɑn ə tʃɛɹ. hi hæd plæn aʊt wʌɾ i hæd tə seɪ vɛɹi kɛɹfəli ɑn ðə weɪ hɪɹ. ʃi kəd bi ə pɹɪkli wʊmən. "feɪl, aɪ mɪs jə mɔɹ ðən aɪ kən seɪ, ən wɝiɾ əbaʊt ju, bʌt - "

Perrin unbuckled his belt and tossed belt and axe on a chair. He had planned out what he had to say very carefully on the way here. She could be a prickly woman. "Faile, I missed you more than I can say, and worried about you, but - "

"wɝiɾ əbaʊt mi!" ʃi snæpt, spɪnɪŋ tə feɪs hɪm. ʃi stʊd stʃɹeɪɾ ən tɔl, aɪz fɪɹs əz ðoʊz ə hɝ fælkən neɪmseɪk, ən əɹ fæn meɪɾ ə kɔɝɪŋ moʊʃən təwɔɹɾ ɪz mɪɾəl. nɑt pɑɹɾ ə ðə læŋɡwədʒ ə fænz; ʃi meɪd ðə seɪm dʒɛstʃɝ wɪð ə naɪf səmtaɪmz. "wɛn ɔlmoʊs ðə fɝst wɝdz fɹəm jəɹ maʊθ wɝ tə æsk æftɝ ðət . . . ðət wʊmən!"

"Worried about me!" she snapped, spinning to face him. She stood straight and tall, eyes fierce as those of her falcon namesake, and her fan made a coring motion toward his middle. Not part of the language of fans; she made the same gesture with a knife sometimes. "When almost the first words from your mouth were to ask after that . . . that woman!"

hɪz dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt. haʊ kəɾ i hæv fɝɡɑɾən ðə smɛl fɪlɪŋ ɪz nɑstʃɹəlz? hi nɪɹli pʊɾ ə hæn ʌp tə si wɛðɝ ɪz noʊz wɑz bliɾɪŋ. "feɪl, aɪ wɑntəɾ əɹ θif-kætʃɝz. bi - " noʊ, hi wɑz nɑt stupəɾ ɪnʌf tə ɹɪpit ðət neɪm. "ʃi sɛd ʃi hæd pɹuf ə ðə pɔɪzən bɪfɔɹ aɪ lɛft. jə hɝd hɝ! aɪ dʒʌst wɑntəd ðə pɹuf, feɪl."

His jaw dropped. How could he have forgotten the smell filling his nostrils? He nearly put a hand up to see whether his nose was bleeding. "Faile, I wanted her thief-catchers. Be - " No, he was not stupid enough to repeat that name. "She said she had proof of the poison before I left. You heard her! I just wanted the proof, Faile."

ɪt dɪd noʊ ɡʊd. ðət spaɪki stɛntʃ sɔfənd nɑɾ ə wɪt, ən ðə θɪn, saʊɝ smɛl ə hɝt dʒɔɪn ɪt. wʌɾ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt hæɾ i sɛd tə hɝt hɝ?

It did no good. That spiky stench softened not a whit, and the thin, sour smell of hurt joined it. What under the Light had he said to hurt her?

"hɝ pɹuf! wʌɾ aɪ ɡæðɝd wɛn fəɹ nʌθɪŋ, bʌɾ əɹ pɹuf pʊt koʊləveɪɪɹz hɛɾ ɑn ðə blɑk. əɹ ʃəd hæv." ðət wɑz ɪz oʊpənɪŋ, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə lɛɾ ɪm pʊʃ ə wɝɾ ɪn ɛdʒwaɪz. ʃi ədvænst ɑn hɪm, lʊkɪŋ dæɡɝz, hɝ fæn dɑɹɾɪŋ laɪk wʌn. ɔl i kəd də wɑz bæk əweɪ. "du jə noʊ wʌt stɔɹi ðət wʊmən pʊɾ əbaʊt?" feɪl ɔlmoʊs hɪst. ə blæk vaɪpɝ kəd nɑɾ əv dʒɹɪp soʊ mʌtʃ vɛnəm. "du ju? ʃi sɛd ðə ɹizən jə wɝ nɑt hɪɹ wɑz ðət jə wɝ əɾ ə mænɝ nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðə sɪɾi. wɛɹ ʃi kəd vɪzət ju! aɪ toʊl ðə stɔɹi aɪ pɹipɛɹd - ðət jə wɝ hʌntɪŋ, ən ðə laɪt noʊz jə spɛn ɪnʌf deɪz hʌntɪŋ! - bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn bɪlivd aɪ wɑz pʊɾɪŋ ə ɡʊd feɪs ɑn jə ən hɝ! təɡɛðɝ! koʊləveɪɪɹ dɪlaɪɾəd ɪn ɪt. aɪ kəd bɪliv ʃi oʊnli tʊk ðət minɝ stʃɹʌmpəɾ əz ən ətɛndən tə θɹoʊ ðə tu ʌv əs təɡɛðɝ. 'feɪl, bɹəleɪn, kʌm leɪs maɪ ɡaʊn.' 'feɪl, bɹəleɪn, kʌm hoʊl ðə mɪɹɝ fəɹ ðə hɛɹdʒɹɛsɝ.' 'feɪl, bɹəleɪn, kʌm wɑʃ maɪ bæk.' soʊ ʃi kəɾ əmjuz hɝsɛlf weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ əs tə klɔ wʌn ənʌðɝz aɪz aʊt! ðəɾ ɪz wʌɾ aɪ hæv pʊɾ ʌp wɪð! fəɹ ju, jə hɛɹi-ɪɹd - !"

"Her proof! What I gathered went for nothing, but her proof put Colavaere's head on the block. Or should have." That was his opening, but she was not about to let him push a word in edgewise. She advanced on him, looking daggers, her fan darting like one. All he could do was back away. "Do you know what story that woman put about?" Faile almost hissed. A black viper could not have dripped so much venom. "Do you? She said the reason you were not here was that you were at a manor not far from the city. Where she could visit you! I told the story I prepared - that you were hunting, and the Light knows you spent enough days hunting! - but everyone believed I was putting a good face on you and her! Together! Colavaere delighted in it. I could believe she only took that Mayener strumpet as an attendant to throw the two of us together. 'Faile, Berelain, come lace my gown.' 'Faile, Berelain, come hold the mirror for the hairdresser.' 'Faile, Berelain, come wash my back.' So she could amuse herself waiting for us to claw one another's eyes out! That is what I have put up with! For you, you hairy-eared - !"

hɪz bæk θʌmpt əɡɛns ðə wɔl. ən sʌmθɪŋ snæpt ɪnsaɪd hɪm. hi hæd bɪn fɹaɪɾənd spɪtləs fəɹ hɝ, tɛɹəfaɪd, ɹɛɾi tə feɪs daʊn ɹænd əɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf. ən i hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ, hæd nɛvɝ ɛnkɝɪdʒ bɹəleɪn, hæd dʌn ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn ɪz wɪts tə tʃeɪs ðə wʊmən əweɪ. fəɹ wɪtʃ ɪz θæŋks wɑz ðɪs.

His back thumped against the wall. And something snapped inside him. He had been frightened spitless for her, terrified, ready to face down Rand or the Dark One himself. And he had done nothing, had never encouraged Berelain, had done everything in his wits to chase the woman away. For which his thanks was this.

dʒɛnli hi tʊk əɹ baɪ ðə ʃoʊldɝz ən lɪftəɾ əɹ əntɪl ðoʊz bɪɡ tɪltəɾ aɪz wɝ lɛvəl wɪð hɪz. "ju lɪsən tə mi," hi sɛd kɑmli. hi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɪz vɔɪs kɑm, ət list; ɪt keɪm aʊt mɔɹ ʌv ə ɡɹaʊl ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt. "haʊ dɛɹ jə spik tə mi laɪk ðæt? haʊ dɛɹ ju? aɪ wɝid maɪsɛlf nɪɹ tə dɛθ fəɹ fɪɹ jud bɪn hɝt. aɪ lʌv ju, ən noʊbɑdi ɛls bʌt ju. aɪ wɑnt noʊ ʌðɝ wʊmən bʌt ju. dʒju hɪɹ mi? də ju?" kɹʌʃɪŋ əɹ tə hɪz tʃɛst, hi hɛl hɝ, wɑntɪŋ tə nɛvɝ lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ. laɪt, hi hæd bɪn soʊ əfɹeɪd. hi ʃʊk ivən naʊ, fəɹ wʌt maɪɾ əv bɪn. "ɪf ɛniθɪŋ hæpən tə ju, aɪd daɪ, feɪl. aɪ wəd laɪ daʊn ɑn jəɹ ɡɹeɪv ən daɪ! dʒju θɪŋk aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ koʊləveɪɪɹ faʊn aʊɾ u jə ɑɹ? jə meɪd ʃʊɹ ʃi faʊn aʊt." spaɪɪŋ, ʃi hæd toʊld ɪm wʌns, wɑz ə waɪfs wɝk. "laɪt, wʊmən, jə cʊɾə ɛndəd laɪk mɛɹ. koʊləveɪɪɹ noʊz jəɹ maɪ waɪf. maɪ waɪf. pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə, ɹænd ælθɹz fɹɛnd. dɪɾ ɪɾ ɛvɝ əkɝ tə jə ʃi maɪt bi səspɪʃəs? ʃi kəd hæv. . . . laɪt, feɪl, ʃi kəd hæv. . . ."

Gently he took her by the shoulders and lifted her until those big tilted eyes were level with his. "You listen to me," he said calmly. He tried to make his voice calm, at least; it came out more of a growl in his throat. "How dare you speak to me like that? How dare you? I worried myself near to death for fear you'd been hurt. I love you, and nobody else but you. I want no other woman but you. Do you hear me? Do you?" Crushing her to his chest, he held her, wanting to never let her go. Light, he had been so afraid. He shook even now, for what might have been. "If anything happened to you, I'd die, Faile. I would lie down on your grave and die! Do you think I don't know how Colavaere found out who you are? You made sure she found out." Spying, she had told him once, was a wife's work. "Light, woman, you could have ended like Maire. Colavaere knows you're my wife. My wife. Perrin Aybara, Rand al'Thor's friend. Did it ever occur to you she might be suspicious? She could have. . . . Light, Faile, she could have. . . ."

əbɹʌpli hi ɹilaɪzd wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ. ʃi wɑz meɪkɪŋ saʊnz əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst, bʌt noʊ wɝdz i kəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz. hi wʌndɝd ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt hɪɹ əɹ ɹɪbz kɹikɪŋ. bɪɹeɪɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf fəɹ ən ɑf, hi lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ, ɑɹmz spɹɪŋɪŋ əpɑɹt, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i kəɾ əpɑlədʒaɪz, hɝ fɪŋɡɝz klʌtʃt ɪz bɪɹd.

Abruptly he realized what he was doing. She was making sounds against his chest, but no words he could recognize. He wondered that he did not hear her ribs creaking. Berating himself for an oaf, he let her go, arms springing apart, but before he could apologize, her fingers clutched his beard.

"soʊ jə lʌv mi?" ʃi sɛd sɔfli. vɛɹi sɔfli. vɛɹi wɔɹmli. ʃi wɑz smaɪlɪŋ, tu. "ə wʊmən laɪks tə hɪɹ ðət sɛd ðə ɹaɪt weɪ." ʃi hæd dʒɹɑp ðə fæn, ən əɹ fɹi hæn dʒɹu fɪŋɡɝneɪlz daʊn ɪz tʃik, nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə dʒɹɔ blʌd, bʌɾ əɹ θɹoʊɾi læf hɛl hit, ən ðə smoʊldɝɪŋ ɪn əɹ aɪz wɑz əz fɑɹ fɹəm æŋɡɝ əz pɑsəbəl. "ə ɡʊd θɪŋ jə dɪdn seɪ jə nɛvɝ lʊkt əɾ ənʌðɝ wʊmən, əɹ aɪ wəd θɪŋk jə hæd ɡɔn blaɪnd."

"So you love me?" she said softly. Very softly. Very warmly. She was smiling, too. "A woman likes to hear that said the right way." She had dropped the fan, and her free hand drew fingernails down his cheek, not far from hard enough to draw blood, but her throaty laugh held heat, and the smoldering in her eyes was as far from anger as possible. "A good thing you didn't say you never looked at another woman, or I would think you had gone blind."

hi wɑz tu stʌn fəɹ wɝdz, tu stʌn ivən tə ɡeɪp. ɹænd ʌndɝstʊd wɪmən, mæt ʌndɝstʊd wɪmən, bʌt pɛɹɪn nu hi nɛvɝ wʊd. ʃi wɑz ɔlweɪz əz mʌtʃ kɪŋfɪʃɝ əz fælkən, tʃeɪnʒɪŋ dɝɛkʃən fæstɝ ðən i kəd θɪŋk, jɛt ðɪs. . . . ðət θɔɹni sɛnt wɑz ɡɔn kəmplitli, ən ɪn ɪts pleɪs wɑz ənʌðɝ smɛl ə hɝ i nu wɛl. ə smɛl ðət wɑz hɝ, pjʊɹ ən stʃɹɔŋ ən klin. æd ðət tə hɝ aɪz, ən ɛni moʊmənt ʃi wɑz gɑnə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt fɑɹmɡɝlz ət hɑɹvəst. ðeɪ wɝ noʊtɔɹiəs, əpɛɹənli, sɑldəiən fɑɹmɡɝlz.

He was too stunned for words, too stunned even to gape. Rand understood women, Mat understood women, but Perrin knew he never would. She was always as much kingfisher as falcon, changing direction faster than he could think, yet this. . . . That thorny scent was gone completely, and in its place was another smell of her he knew well. A smell that was her, pure and strong and clean. Add that to her eyes, and any moment she was going to say something about farmgirls at harvest. They were notorious, apparently, Saldaean farmgirls.

"æz fəɹ jə laɪɪŋ daʊn ɑn maɪ ɡɹeɪv," ʃi wɛn ɑn, "ɪf jə du, maɪ soʊl wɪl hɔn jʊɹz, aɪ pɹɑməs ju. jəl mɔɹn mi ə disən taɪm, ən ðən jəl faɪn jɝsɛlf ənʌðɝ waɪf. sʌmwʌn aɪɾ əpɹuv ʌv, aɪ hoʊp." wɪð ə sɑf læf, ʃi stʃɹoʊkt ɪz bɪɹd. "ju ɹɪli ɑɹən fɪt tə teɪk kɛɹ ə jɝsɛlf, jə noʊ. aɪ wɑn jəɹ pɹɑməs."

"As for you lying down on my grave," she went on, "if you do, my soul will haunt yours, I promise you. You will mourn me a decent time, and then you'll find yourself another wife. Someone I'd approve of, I hope." With a soft laugh, she stroked his beard. "You really aren't fit to take care of yourself, you know. I want your promise."

bɛs nɑt tə kɹæk ɪz tiθ ɑn ðæt. seɪ hi wəd nɑt, ən ðɪs wʌndɝfəl mud maɪt bi swɑloʊɾ ɪn ə faɪɹstɔɹm. kwɪksɪlvɝ wɑz nɑɾ ɪn ɪt, ɹɪli. seɪ hi wʊd. . . . baɪ ðə smɛl ə hɝ, ɛvɹi wɝd wɑz ðə laɪts pjʊɹ tʃɹuθ, bʌɾ i wəd bɪliv ðət wən hɔɹsəz ɹustɪɾ ɪn tʃɹiz. hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "aɪ nid tə beɪð. aɪ hævən sin soʊp ɪn aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ lɔŋ. aɪ mʌst smɛl laɪk ən oʊl bɑɹn."

Best not to crack his teeth on that. Say he would not, and this wonderful mood might be swallowed in a firestorm. Quicksilver was not in it, really. Say he would. . . . By the smell of her, every word was the Light's pure truth, but he would believe that when horses roosted in trees. He cleared his throat. "I need to bathe. I haven't seen soap in I don't know how long. I must smell like an old barn."

linɪŋ əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst, ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "ju smɛl wʌndɝfəl. laɪk ju." hɝ hænz muvd ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. "aɪ fil əz - " ðə dɔɹ bæŋd oʊpən.

Leaning against his chest, she drew a deep breath. "You smell wonderful. Like you." Her hands moved on his shoulders. "I feel as - " The door banged open.

"pɛɹɪn, bɹəleɪn ɪzənt - aɪm sɑɹi. fɝɡɪv mi." ɹænd stʊd ʃɪftɪŋ ɪz fit, nɑɾ əɾ ɔl laɪk ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ðəɹ wɝ meɪɾənz ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ aʊtsaɪd. mɪn pʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ ɝaʊn ðə dɔɹfɹeɪm, tʊk wʌn lʊk, ɡɹɪn ət pɛɹɪn ən dʌk bæk aʊɾ ə saɪt.

"Perrin, Berelain isn't - I'm sorry. Forgive me." Rand stood shifting his feet, not at all like the Dragon Reborn. There were Maidens in the hallway outside. Min put her head around the doorframe, took one look, grinned at Perrin and ducked back out of sight.

feɪl stɛpt əweɪ soʊ smuðli, soʊ steɪtli, ðət noʊ wʌn wəɾ ɛvɝ əv ɡɛst wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn seɪɪŋ ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ. əɹ wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn əbaʊt tə seɪ. ðəɹ wɝ spɑts ə kʌlɝ ɪn əɹ tʃiks, ðoʊ, bɹaɪɾ ən hɑt. "soʊ kaɪndə ju, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," ʃi sɛd kuli, "tə dʒɹɑp ɪn soʊ ʌnɪkspɛktɪdli. aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz fəɹ nɑt hɪɹɪŋ jəɹ nɑk." meɪbi ðoʊz blʌʃəz wɝ əz mʌtʃ æŋɡɝ əz ɪmbɛɹəsmənt.

Faile stepped away so smoothly, so stately, that no one would ever have guessed what she had been saying a moment before. Or what she had been about to say. There were spots of color in her cheeks, though, bright and hot. "So kind of you, my Lord Dragon," she said coolly, "to drop in so unexpectedly. I apologize for not hearing your knock." Maybe those blushes were as much anger as embarrassment.

ɪt wɑz ɹændz tɝn tə blʌʃ, ən skɹʌb ə hæn θɹu hɪz hɛɹ. "bɪɹ-leɪn ɪzən ɪn ðə pæləs. ʃiz spɛndɪŋ ðə naɪɾ ɑn ðət si foʊk ʃɪp æŋkɝɾ ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz. ənʊɹə dɪdn tɛl mi tɪl aɪ wɑz nɪɹli tə bɹəleɪnz əpɑɹtməns."

It was Rand's turn to blush, and scrub a hand through his hair. "Bere-lain isn't in the palace. She's spending the night on that Sea Folk ship anchored in the river, of all things. Annoura didn't tell me till I was nearly to Berelain's apartments."

pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd vɛɹi hɑɹd nɑt tə wɪns. waɪ dɪɾ i hæv tə kip seɪɪŋ ðə wʊmənz neɪm? "ju wɑntəd tə tɔk tə mi əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, ɹænd?" hi hoʊpt i hæd nɑt pʊt tu mʌtʃ ɛmfəsəs ɪn ðæt, jɛɾ i hoʊpt ɹænd kɑɾ ɪt. hi dɪd nɑt lʊk ət feɪl, bʌɾ i tɛstəd ði ɛɹ dʒɪnʒɝli. noʊ dʒɛləsi, nɑt jɛt. ə ɡʊd dil ʌv æŋɡɝ, haʊɛvɝ.

Perrin tried very hard not to wince. Why did he have to keep saying the woman's name? "You wanted to talk to me about something else, Rand?" He hoped he had not put too much emphasis in that, yet he hoped Rand caught it. He did not look at Faile, but he tested the air gingerly. No jealousy, not yet. A good deal of anger, however.

fəɹ ə moʊmən ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, lʊk θɹu hɪm. lɪsnɪŋ tə sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. pɛɹɪn foʊldəɾ ɪz ɑɹmz tə stɑp fɹəm ʃʌɾɝɪŋ.

For a moment Rand stared at him, looked through him. Listening to something else. Perrin folded his arms to stop from shuddering.

"aɪ nid tə noʊ," ɹænd sɛd faɪnəli. "ɑɹ jə stɪl ənwɪlɪŋ tə kəmæn ði ɑɹmi əɡɛnst ɪljən? aɪ hæv tə noʊ naʊ."

"I need to know," Rand said finally. "Are you still unwilling to command the army against Illian? I have to know now."

"ɪm noʊ dʒɛnɝəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd ɹæədli. ðəɹ wəd bi bæɾəlz ɪn ɪljən. ɪmədʒəz flæʃt ɪn ɪz hɛd. mɛn ɔl ɝaʊn hɪm, ən ði æks ɪn ɪz hænz spɪnɪŋ, hjuɪŋ ɪz weɪ θɹu. ɔlweɪz mɔɹ mɛn, haʊɛvɝ mɛni hi kʌt daʊn, ɪn ɛnləs ɹæŋks. ən ɪn ɪz hɑɹt, ə sid ɡɹoʊɪŋ. hi kəd nɑt feɪs ðəɾ əɡɛn. hi wəd nɑt. "bɪsaɪdz, aɪ θɔɾ aɪ wɑz səpoʊz tə steɪ kloʊs tə ju." ðət wɑz wʌt mɪn hæd sɛd, fɹəm wʌn ə hɝ vjuɪŋz. twaɪs pɛɹɪn hæd tə bi ðɛɹ, əɹ ɹænd wəd ɡoʊ daʊn tə dɪzæstɝ. wʌns hæd bɪn dəməaɪz wɛlz, meɪbi, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ənʌðɝ tə kʌm.

"I'm no general," Perrin said raggedly. There would be battles in Illian. Images flashed in his head. Men all around him, and the axe in his hands spinning, hewing his way through. Always more men, however many he cut down, in endless ranks. And in his heart, a seed growing. He could not face that again. He would not. "Besides, I thought I was supposed to stay close to you." That was what Min had said, from one of her viewings. Twice Perrin had to be there, or Rand would go down to disaster. Once had been Dumai's Wells, maybe, but there was still another to come.

"wi ɔl mʌs teɪk ɹɪsks." ɹændz vɔɪs wɑz vɛɹi kwaɪət. ən vɛɹi hɑɹd. mɪn pɪɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə dɔɹfɹeɪm əɡɛn, lʊkɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə kʌm tə hɪm, bʌt ʃi ɡlænst ət feɪl ən steɪɾ aʊtsaɪd.

"We all must take risks." Rand's voice was very quiet. And very hard. Min peered around the doorframe again, looking as if she wanted to come to him, but she glanced at Faile and stayed outside.

"ɹænd, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. . . ." ə smɑɹt mæn wəd lɛt ðɪs laɪ, pɹɑbli. hi hæd nɛvɝ kleɪm tə bi pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli smɑɹt, ðoʊ. "ðə waɪz wʌnz ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə skɪn əm əlaɪv, əɹ nɪɹ ɪnʌf. jə kæn lɛɾ əm bi hɑɹmd, ɹænd." ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, səlɪn tɝn tə stʌɾi hɪm θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ.

"Rand, the Aes Sedai. . . ." A smart man would let this lie, probably. He had never claimed to be particularly smart, though. "The Wise Ones are ready to skin them alive, or near enough. You can't let them be harmed, Rand." In the corridor, Sulin turned to study him through the doorway.

ðə mæn i θɔɾ i nu læft, ə wizɪŋ saʊnd. "wi ɔl əv tə teɪk ɹɪsks," hi ɹɪpiɾɪd.

The man he thought he knew laughed, a wheezing sound. "We all have to take risks," he repeated.

"aɪ woʊn lɛɾ əm bi hɝt, ɹænd."

"I won't let them be hurt, Rand."

koʊl blu aɪz mɛɾ ɪz ɡeɪz. "ju woʊn lɛɾ ɪt?"

Cold blue eyes met his gaze. "You won't let it?"

"aɪ woʊnt," pɛɹɪn toʊld ɪm lɛvəli. hi dɪd nɑt flɪntʃ fɹəm ðət stɛɹ, iðɝ. "ðeɪ ɑɹ pɹɪznɝz, ən noʊ θɹɛt. ðəɹ wɪmən."

"I won't," Perrin told him levelly. He did not flinch from that stare, either. "They are prisoners, and no threat. They're women."

"ðeɪ ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ." ɹændz vɔɪs wɑz soʊ laɪk ɛɹæmz bæk ət dəməaɪz wɛlz ðəɾ ɪt nɪɹli tʊk pɛɹɪnz bɹɛθ.

"They are Aes Sedai." Rand's voice was so like Aram's back at Dumai's Wells that it nearly took Perrin's breath.

"ɹænd - "

"Rand - "

"aɪ də wʌɾ aɪ hæv tə du, pɛɹɪn." fəɹ ə moʊmən i wɑz ði oʊld ɹænd, nɑt laɪkɪŋ wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ. fəɹ ə moʊmən i lʊk taɪɝd tə dɛθ. ə moʊmən oʊnli. ðən i wɑz ðə nu ɹænd əɡɛn, hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə mɑɹk stil. "aɪ woʊn hɑɹm ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ hu dʌzn dɪzɝv ɪt, pɛɹɪn. aɪ kæn pɹɑməs mɔɹ. sɪns jə doʊnt wɑn ði ɑɹmi, aɪ kən juz jə ɛlswɛɹ. dʒʌst əz wɛl, ɹɪli. aɪ wɪʃ aɪ kəd lɛt jə ɹɛs lɔŋɡɝ ðən ə deɪ əɹ tu, bʌɾ aɪ kænt. ðɛɹz noʊ taɪm. noʊ taɪm, ən wi mʌs də wʌt wi mʌst. fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ ɪntɝʌptɪŋ ju." hi skɛtʃt ə baʊ, wʌn hæn ɑn ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd. "feɪl."

"I do what I have to do, Perrin." For a moment he was the old Rand, not liking what was happening. For a moment he looked tired to death. A moment only. Then he was the new Rand again, hard enough to mark steel. "I won't harm any Aes Sedai who doesn't deserve it, Perrin. I can't promise more. Since you don't want the army, I can use you elsewhere. Just as well, really. I wish I could let you rest longer than a day or two, but I can't. There's no time. No time, and we must do what we must. Forgive me for interrupting you." He sketched a bow, one hand on the hilt of his sword. "Faile."

pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə kætʃ ɪz ɑɹm, bʌɾ i wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum, ðə dɔɹ kloʊzɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm, bɪfɔɹ pɛɹɪn kəd muv. ɹænd wɑz nɑt ɹɪli ɹænd ɛnimɔɹ, ɪt simd. ə deɪ əɹ tu? wɛɹ ɪn ðə laɪt dɪd ɹænd min ɪm tə ɡoʊ, ɪf nɑt tə ði ɑɹmi ɡæðɝɪŋ daʊn ɑn ðə pleɪnz ə mɑɹeɪɾoʊ?

Perrin tried to catch his arm, but he was out of the room, the door closing behind him, before Perrin could move. Rand was not really Rand anymore, it seemed. A day or two? Where in the Light did Rand mean him to go, if not to the army gathering down on the Plains of Maredo?

"maɪ hʌzbənd," feɪl bɹiðd, "ju hæv ðə kɝədʒ ə θɹi mɛn. ən ðə sɛns ʌv ə tʃaɪld ɑn liɾɪŋ stʃɹɪŋz. waɪ ɪz ɪt ðəɾ əz ə mænz kɝədʒ ɡoʊz ʌp, hɪz sɛns ɡoʊz daʊn?"

"My husband," Faile breathed, "you have the courage of three men. And the sense of a child on leading strings. Why is it that as a man's courage goes up, his sense goes down?"

pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪɾ ɪndɪɡnənli. hi ɹɪfɹeɪn fɹəm mɛnʃənɪŋ wɪmən u sɛt ðɛmsɛlvz tə spaɪ ɑn pipəl u hæd kəmɪɾəd mɝɾɝz ən ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli nu ðeɪ wɝ spaɪɪŋ. wɪmən ɔlweɪz tɔkt əbaʊt haʊ lɑdʒɪkəl ðeɪ wɝ kəmpɛɹd tə mɛn, bʌt fəɹ hɪmsɛlf, hi hæd sin pɹɛʃəs lɪɾəl ʌv ɪt.

Perrin grunted indignantly. He refrained from mentioning women who set themselves to spy on people who had committed murders and almost certainly knew they were spying. Women always talked about how logical they were compared to men, but for himself, he had seen precious little of it.

"wɛl, pɝhæps aɪ doʊn ɹɪli wɑn ði ænsɝ ivən ɪf jə noʊ ɪt." stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ wɪð əɹ ɑɹmz oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd, ʃi ɡeɪv ə θɹoʊɾi læf. "bɪsaɪdz, aɪ doʊn min tə lɛɾ ɪm spɔɪl ðə mud. aɪ stɪl fil əz fɔɹwɝɾ əz ə fɑɹmɡɝl ət - waɪ ɑɹ jə læfɪŋ? stɑp læfɪŋ ət mi, pɛɹɪn tæʃɪɹ eɪbɑɹə! stɑp ɪt, aɪ seɪ, jə ʌnkuθ ɑf! ɪf jə doʊnt - "

"Well, perhaps I don't really want the answer even if you know it." Stretching with her arms over her head, she gave a throaty laugh. "Besides, I don't mean to let him spoil the mood. I still feel as forward as a farmgirl at - Why are you laughing? Stop laughing at me, Perrin t'Bashere Aybara! Stop it, I say, you uncouth oaf! If you don't - "

ði oʊnli weɪ tə pʊɾ ən ɛn tə ɪt wɑz tə kɪs hɝ. ɪn əɹ ɑɹmz i fɝɡɑt ɹænd ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ən bæɾəlz. wɛɹ feɪl wɑz, wɑz hoʊm.

The only way to put an end to it was to kiss her. In her arms he forgot Rand and Aes Sedai and battles. Where Faile was, was home.


tʃæptɝ sɛvən


CHAPTER 7

pɪtfɔlz ən tʃɹɪpwaɪɝz


Pitfalls and Tripwires

ɹænd fɛl ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ ɪn ɪz hænd, fɛlt ɛvɹi laɪn ə ðə kɑɹv dʒɹæɡənz əɡɛnst ɪz hɛɹən-bɹændɪd pɑm əz klɪɹli əz ɪf i wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz oʊvɝ ðɛm, jɛɾ ɪt sim sʌmwʌn ɛlsəz hænd. ɪf ə bleɪd kʌɾ ɪɾ ɔf, hi wəd fil ðə peɪn - ən kip ɡoʊɪŋ. ɪt wəd bi ənʌðɝz peɪn.

Rand felt the Dragon Scepter in his hand, felt every line of the carved Dragons against his heron-branded palm as clearly as if he were running his fingers over them, yet it seemed someone else's hand. If a blade cut it off, he would feel the pain - and keep going. It would be another's pain.

hi floʊɾəd ɪn ðə vɔɪd, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ɛmptinəs bɪɑnd noʊɪŋ, ən seɪɾɪn fɪl hɪm, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɹaɪn ɪm tə dʌs bɪniθ stil-ʃæɾɝɪŋ koʊld ən hit wɛɹ stoʊn wəd flæʃ tə fleɪm, kæɹiɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz teɪn ɑn ɪts floʊ, fɔɹsɪŋ kɝʌpʃən ɪndə hɪz boʊnz. ɪndə hɪz soʊl, hi fɪɹd səmtaɪmz. ɪt dɪd nɑt meɪk ɪm fil soʊ sɪk tə hɪz stʌmək əz ɪt wʌns hæd. hi fɪɹd ðəɾ ivən mɔɹ. ən lɑɹɾɪd θɹu ðət tɔɹən ə faɪɝ, aɪs ən fɪlθ - laɪf. ðət wɑz ðə bɛst wɝd. seɪɾɪn tʃɹaɪd tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ hɪm. seɪɾɪn fɪld ɪm tə oʊvɝfloʊɪŋ wɪð vaɪtæləɾi. ɪt θɹɛɾənd tə bɛɹi hɪm, ən ɪɾ ɪntaɪs hɪm. ðə wɔɹ fəɹ sɝvaɪvəl, ðə stʃɹʌɡəl tə əvɔɪd biɪŋ kənsumd, mæɡnəfaɪd ðə dʒɔɪ ʌv pjʊɹ laɪf. soʊ swiɾ ivən wɪð ðə faʊlnəs. wʌt wəɾ ɪt bi laɪk, klin? bɪɑn ɪmædʒənɪŋ. hi wɑntəd tə dʒɹɔ mɔɹ, dʒɹɔ ɔl ðəɹ wɑz.

He floated in the Void, surrounded by emptiness beyond knowing, and saidin filled him, trying to grind him to dust beneath steel-shattering cold and heat where stone would flash to flame, carrying the Dark One's taint on its flow, forcing corruption into his bones. Into his soul, he feared sometimes. It did not make him feel so sick to his stomach as it once had. He feared that even more. And larded through that torrent of fire, ice and filth - life. That was the best word. Saidin tried to destroy him. Saidin filled him to overflowing with vitality. It threatened to bury him, and it enticed him. The war for survival, the struggle to avoid being consumed, magnified the joy of pure life. So sweet even with the foulness. What would it be like, clean? Beyond imagining. He wanted to draw more, draw all there was.

ðəɹ leɪ ðə dɛdli sɪdʌkʃən. wʌn slɪp, ən ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl wəd bi sɪɹɾ aʊɾ ə hɪm fɝɛvɝ. wʌn slɪp ən ɪz maɪnd wɑz ɡɔn, ɪf i wɑz nɑt sɪmpli dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɑn ðə spɑt, ən meɪbi ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪm tu. ɪt wɑz nɑt mædnəs, foʊkəsɪŋ ɑn ðə faɪt fəɹ ɛɡzɪstəns; ɪt wɑz laɪk haɪwɔkɪŋ blaɪndfoʊldɪɾ oʊvɝ ə pɪt fʊl ə ʃɑɹpən steɪks, bæskɪŋ ɪn soʊ pjʊɹ ə sɛns ə laɪf ðət θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɡɪvɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp wɑz laɪk θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ə wɝl fɝɛvɝ ɪn ʃeɪdz ʌv ɡɹeɪ. nɑt mædnəs.

There lay the deadly seduction. One slip, and the ability to channel would be seared out of him forever. One slip and his mind was gone, if he was not simply destroyed on the spot, and maybe everything around him too. It was not madness, focusing on the fight for existence; it was like highwalking blindfolded over a pit full of sharpened stakes, basking in so pure a sense of life that thinking of giving it up was like thinking of a world forever in shades of gray. Not madness.

hɪz θɔts wɝl θɹu hɪz dæns wɪð seɪɾɪn, slɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə vɔɪd. ənʊɹə, piɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm wɪð ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪz. wʌt wɑz bɹəleɪn pleɪɪŋ æt? ʃi hæd nɛvɝ mɛnʃən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ædvaɪzɝ. ən ðoʊz ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn kɛɹhin. wɛɹ hæd ðeɪ kʌm fɹʌm, ən waɪ? ðə ɹɛbəlz aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi. wʌt hæɾ ɛmboʊldən əm tə muv? wʌd ðeɪ ɪntɛnd naʊ? haʊ kəɾ i stɑp ðɛm, əɹ juz ðɛm? hi wɑz bɪkʌmɪŋ ɡʊɾ ət juzɪŋ pipəl; səmtaɪmz i meɪd hɪmsɛlf sɪk. sɪvænə ən ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ. ɹəɑɹk ɔlɹɛɾi hæd skaʊts ɑn ðə weɪ tə kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ, bʌɾ ət bɛs ðeɪ kəɾ oʊnli faɪn aʊt wɛɹ ən wɛn. ðə waɪz wʌnz u kəd faɪn aʊt waɪ, wəd nɑt. ðəɹ wɝ ə lɑɾ ʌv waɪz kənɛktəd tə sɪvænə. ɪleɪn, ən eɪvinhə. noʊ, hi wəd nɑt θɪŋk ə ðɛm. noʊ θɔts ə ðɛm. nʌn. pɛɹɪn, ən feɪl. ə fɪɹs wʊmən, fælkən baɪ neɪm ən neɪtʃɝ. hæd ʃi ɹɪli ətætʃt hɝsɛlf tə koʊləveɪɪɹ dʒʌs tə ɡæðɝ ɛvəɾəns? ʃi wəd tʃɹaɪ tə pɹətɛk pɛɹɪn ɪf ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn fɛl. pɹətɛkt ɪm fɹəm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ʃəd ʃi dɪsaɪɾ ɪt nɛsəsɛɹi; hɝ lɔɪəltiz wɝ tə pɛɹɪn, bʌt ʃi wəd dɪsaɪd fəɹ hɝsɛlf haʊ tə mit ðɛm. feɪl wɑz noʊ wʊmən tə də mikli əz əɹ hʌzbən toʊl hɝ, ɪf sətʃ ə wʊmən ɪɡzɪstəd. ɡoʊldən aɪz, stɛɹɪŋ tʃælənʒ ən dɪfaɪəns. waɪ wɑz pɛɹɪn soʊ viəmən əbaʊt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ? hi hæd bɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm wɪð kaɪɹunə ən əɹ kəmpænjənz ɑn ðə ɹoʊd tə dəməaɪz wɛlz. kəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹɪli də wɪð ɪm wʌɾ ɛvɹibɑɾi fɪɹd? ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd wɪθaʊt biɪŋ əwɛɹ. nɛvɝ əɡɛn. nɛvɝ! tə tʃɹʌst wɑz tə bi bɪtʃɹeɪd; tʃɹʌst wɑz peɪn.

His thoughts whirled through his dance with saidin, slid across the Void. Annoura, peering at him with that Aes Sedai gaze. What was Berelain playing at? She had never mentioned an Aes Sedai advisor. And those other Aes Sedai in Cairhien. Where had they come from, and why? The rebels outside the city. What had emboldened them to move? What did they intend now? How could he stop them, or use them? He was becoming good at using people; sometimes he made himself sick. Sevanna and the Shaido. Rhuarc already had scouts on the way to Kinslayer's Dagger, but at best they could only find out where and when. The Wise Ones who could find out why, would not. There were a lot of why's connected to Sevanna. Elayne, and Aviendha. No, he would not think of them. No thoughts of them. None. Perrin, and Faile. A fierce woman, falcon by name and nature. Had she really attached herself to Colavaere just to gather evidence? She would try to protect Perrin if the Dragon Reborn fell. Protect him from the Dragon Reborn, should she decide it necessary; her loyalties were to Perrin, but she would decide for herself how to meet them. Faile was no woman to do meekly as her husband told her, if such a woman existed. Golden eyes, staring challenge and defiance. Why was Perrin so vehement about the Aes Sedai? He had been a long time with Kiruna and her companions on the road to Dumai's Wells. Could Aes Sedai really do with him what everybody feared? Aes Sedai. He shook his head without being aware. Never again. Never! To trust was to be betrayed; trust was pain.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə pʊʃ ðət θɔɾ əweɪ. ɪt keɪm ə lɪɾəl tu kloʊs tə ɹeɪvɪŋ. noʊbɑdi kəd lɪv wɪθaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ tʃɹʌst sʌmwɛɹ. dʒʌs nɑt tə ɛɛs sədaɪ. mæt, pɛɹɪn. ɪf i kəd nɑt tʃɹʌs ðɛm. . . . mɪn. nɛvɝ ə θɔɾ ə nɑt tʃɹʌstɪŋ mɪn. hi wɪʃt ʃi wɝ wɪð hɪm, ɪnstɛɾ ə snʌɡd ɪn əɹ bɛd. ɔl ðoʊz deɪz ə pɹɪznɝ, deɪz ʌv wɝi - mɔɹ fəɹ ɪm ðən hɝsɛlf, ɪf i nu hɝ - deɪz ə biɪŋ kwɛstʃən baɪ ɡəlinə ən ɪl-tʃɹiɾəd wən əɹ ænsɝz feɪl tə pliz - ʌnkɑnʃəsli hi ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ - ɔl ə ðæt, ən ðə stʃɹeɪn ə biɪŋ hild ɑn tɑp ʌv ɪt, hæd kɑɾ ʌp wɪð əɹ ət læst. ʃi hæd steɪd baɪ hɪz saɪɾ əntɪl əɹ lɛɡz ɡeɪv weɪ, ən i hæd tə kæɹi hɝ tə hɝ bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ, wɪð əɹ slipəli pɹətɛstɪŋ ɔl ðə weɪ ðəɾ i niɾəd əɹ wɪð hɪm. noʊ mɪn hɪɹ, noʊ kʌmfɝɾɪŋ pɹɛzəns tə meɪk ɪm læf, meɪk ɪm fɝɡɛt ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. oʊnli ðə wɔɹ wɪð seɪɾɪn, ən ðə wɝlwɪn ə hɪz θɔts, ænd. . . .

He tried to push that thought away. It came a little too close to raving. Nobody could live without giving trust somewhere. Just not to Aes Sedai. Mat, Perrin. If he could not trust them. . . . Min. Never a thought of not trusting Min. He wished she were with him, instead of snugged in her bed. All those days a prisoner, days of worry - more for him than herself, if he knew her - days of being questioned by Galina and ill-treated when her answers failed to please - unconsciously he ground his teeth - all of that, and the strain of being Healed on top of it, had caught up with her at last. She had stayed by his side until her legs gave way, and he had to carry her to her bedchamber, with her sleepily protesting all the way that he needed her with him. No Min here, no comforting presence to make him laugh, make him forget the Dragon Reborn. Only the war with saidin, and the whirlwind of his thoughts, and. . . .

ðeɪ mʌs bi dʌn əweɪ wɪð. jə mʌs də ɪt. doʊn jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə læs taɪm? ðət pleɪs baɪ ðə wɛlz wɑz ə pɪɾəns. sɪɾiz bɝn hoʊl aʊɾ ə ði ɝθ wɝ nʌθɪŋ. wi dɪstʃɹɔɪd ðə wɝld! dʒju hɪɹ mi? ðeɪv tə bi kɪld, waɪp fɹəm ðə feɪs . . . !

They must be done away with. You must do it. Don't you remember the last time? That place by the wells was a pittance. Cities burned whole out of the earth were nothing. We destroyed the world! DO YOU HEAR ME? THEY HAVE TO BE KILLED, WIPED FROM THE FACE . . . !

nɑt hɪz, ðət vɔɪs ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz skʌl. nɑt ɹænd ælθɹ. luz θɝɪn tɛləmən, mɔɹ ðən θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz dɛd. ən tɔkɪŋ ɪn ɹænd ælθɹz hɛd. ðə paʊɝ ɔfən dʒɹu hɪm aʊɾ ə hɪz haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz ə ɹændz maɪnd. səmtaɪmz ɹænd wʌndɝd haʊ ðət kəd bi. hi wɑz luz θɝɪn ɹibɔɹn, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, noʊ dɪnaɪɪŋ ðæt, bʌɾ ɛvɹibɑɾi wɑz sʌmwʌn ɹibɔɹn, ə hʌnʒɹəd sʌmoʊnz, ə θaʊzənd, mɔɹ. ðət wɑz haʊ ðə pæɾɝn wɝkt; ɛvɹiwʌn daɪɾ ən wɑz ɹibɔɹn, əɡɛn ən əɡɛn əz ðə wil tɝnd, fɝɛvɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɛnd. bʌt noʊbɑdi ɛls tɔkt wɪð u ðeɪ juz tə bi. noʊbɑdi ɛls hæd vɔɪsəz ɪn ðɛɹ hɛdz. ɪksɛp mædmən.

Not his, that voice shouting inside his skull. Not Rand al'Thor. Lews Therin Telamon, more than three thousand years dead. And talking in Rand al'Thor's head. The Power often drew him out of his hiding place in the shadows of Rand's mind. Sometimes Rand wondered how that could be. He was Lews Therin reborn, the Dragon Reborn, no denying that, but everybody was someone reborn, a hundred someones, a thousand, more. That was how the Pattern worked; everyone died and was reborn, again and again as the Wheel turned, forever without end. But nobody else talked with who they used to be. Nobody else had voices in their heads. Except madmen.

wʌɾ əbaʊt mi, ɹænd θɔt. wʌn hæn taɪɾənd ɑn ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ, ði ʌðɝ ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt. wʌɾ əbaʊt ju? haʊ ɑɹ wi dɪfɹən fɹəm ðɛm?

What about me, Rand thought. One hand tightened on the Dragon Scepter, the other on his sword hilt. What about you? How are we different from them?

ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli saɪləns. ɔfən ɪnʌf, luz θɝɪn dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ. meɪbi ɪt hæd bɪn bɛɾɝ wən i nɛvɝ hæd.

There was only silence. Often enough, Lews Therin did not answer. Maybe it had been better when he never had.

ɑɹ jə ɹil? ðə vɔɪs sɛɾ ət læst, wʌndɝɪŋli. ðət dɪnaɪəl ə ɹændz ɛɡzɪstəns wɑz əz juʒəwəl əz ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə ænsɝ. æm aɪ? aɪ spoʊk tə sʌmwʌn. aɪ θɪŋk aɪ dɪd. ɪnsaɪɾ ə bɑks. ə tʃɛst. wizɪŋ læftɝ, sɑft. æm aɪ dɛd, əɹ mæd, əɹ boʊθ? noʊ mæɾɝ. aɪm ʃʊɹli dæmd. aɪm dæmd, ən ðɪs ɪz ðə pɪɾ ə dum. aɪm . . . di-dæmd, waɪld, ðət læfɪŋ, naʊ, ən ti-ðɪs - ɪz ðə pi-pɪɾ ʌv -  ɹænd mjuɾɪd ðə vɔɪs tə ən ɪnsɛks bʌz, sʌmθɪŋ i hæd lɝnd waɪl kɹæmpt ɪndə ðət tʃɛst. əloʊn, ɪn ðə dɑɹk. dʒʌs hɪm, ən ðə peɪn, ən ðə θɝst, ən ðə vɔɪs ʌv ə lɔŋ-dɛd mædmæn. ðə vɔɪs hæd bɪn ə kʌmfɝt səmtaɪmz, hɪz oʊnli kəmpænjən. hɪz fɹɛnd. sʌmθɪŋ flæʃt ɪn ɪz maɪnd. nɑɾ ɪmədʒəz, dʒʌs flɪkɝz ə kʌlɝ ən moʊʃən. fəɹ səm ɹizən ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ə mæt, ən pɛɹɪn. ðə flæʃɪz hæd bɪɡʌn ɪnsaɪd ðə tʃɛst, ðɛm ən ə θaʊzən mɔɹ həlusəneɪʃənz. ɪn ðə tʃɛst, wɛɹ ɡəlinə ən ɛɹiən ən keɪɾɝin ən ðə ɹɛst stʌft ɪm ɛvɹi deɪ æftɝ i wɑz biɾən. hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. noʊ. hi wɑz nɑɾ ɪn ðə tʃɛst ɛnimɔɹ. hɪz fɪŋɡɝz ætʃt, klɛntʃt ɝaʊn sɛptɝ ən hɪlt. oʊnli mɛmɹiz ɹɪmeɪnd, ən mɛmɹiz hæd noʊ fɔɹs. hi wɑz nɑt -  "ɪf wi mʌs meɪk ðɪs dʒɝni bɪfɔɹ jə it, lɛɾ əs meɪk ɪt. ði ivnɪŋ mil ɪz lɔŋ fɪnɪʃt fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls."

Are you real? the voice said at last, wonderingly. That denial of Rand's existence was as usual as refusing to answer. Am I? I spoke to someone. I think I did. Inside a box. A chest. Wheezing laughter, soft. Am I dead, or mad, or both? No matter. I am surely damned. I am damned, and this is the Pit of Doom. I am . . . d-damned, wild, that laughing, now, and t-this - is the P-Pit of -  Rand muted the voice to an insect's buzz, something he had learned while cramped into that chest. Alone, in the dark. Just him, and the pain, and the thirst, and the voice of a long-dead madman. The voice had been a comfort sometimes, his only companion. His friend. Something flashed in his mind. Not images, just flickers of color and motion. For some reason they made him think of Mat, and Perrin. The flashes had begun inside the chest, them and a thousand more hallucinations. In the chest, where Galina and Erian and Katerine and the rest stuffed him every day after he was beaten. He shook his head. No. He was not in the chest anymore. His fingers ached, clenched around scepter and hilt. Only memories remained, and memories had no force. He was not -  "If we must make this journey before you eat, let us make it. The evening meal is long finished for everyone else."

ɹænd blɪŋkt, ən səlɪn stɛp bæk fɹəm ɪz stɛɹ. səlɪn, hu wəd stæn aɪ-tə-aɪ wɪð ə lɛpɝd. hi smuðd ɪz feɪs, tʃɹaɪd tə. ɪt fɛlt ə mæsk, sʌmbɑɾi ɛlsəz feɪs.

Rand blinked, and Sulin stepped back from his stare. Sulin, who would stand eye-to-eye with a leopard. He smoothed his face, tried to. It felt a mask, somebody else's face.

"ɑɹ jə wɛl?" ʃi æskt.

"Are you well?" she asked.

"aɪ wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ." hi meɪɾ ɪz hænz ənnət, ʃɹʌɡd ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz koʊt. ə bɛɾɝ-fɪtɪŋ koʊt ðən ðə wʌn i hæd wɔɹn fɹəm dəməaɪz wɛlz, dɑɹk blu ən pleɪn. ivən æftɝ ə bæθ i dɪd nɑt fil klin, nɑt wɪð seɪɾɪn ɪn hɪm. "səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk tu mʌtʃ."

"I was thinking." He made his hands unknot, shrugged inside his coat. A better-fitting coat than the one he had worn from Dumai's Wells, dark blue and plain. Even after a bath he did not feel clean, not with saidin in him. "Sometimes I think too much."

nɪɹli twɛnti mɔɹ meɪɾənz klʌstɝɾ ət wʌn ɛn ə ðə wɪndoʊləs, dɑɹk-pænəld ɹum. eɪt ɡɪldɪd stænd-læmps əɡɛns ðə wɔlz, mɪɹɝd tə ɪnkɹis ðə laɪt, pɹəvaɪɾəd ɪluməneɪʃən. hi wɑz ɡlæɾ ə ðæt; hi dɪd nɑt laɪk dɑɹk pleɪsəz ɛnimɔɹ. θɹi ʌv ði æʃəmən wɝ ðɛɹ, tu, ði il wɪmən tə wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə tʃeɪmbɝ, ði æʃəmən tə ði ʌðɝ. dʒoʊnən ædli, ən ɔltɑɹən dɪspaɪɾ ɪz neɪm, stʊd wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz foʊldəd, wɝkɪŋ aɪbɹaʊz laɪk blæk kæɾəpɪlɝz ɪn dip θɔt. pɝhæps fɔɹ jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən ɹænd, hi wɑz ɪntɛn ɑn ɝnɪŋ ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹɾ ə ðə dɛɾəkeɪtəd. ɛbən hɑpwəl kæɹid mɔɹ flɛʃ ɑn ɪz boʊnz ən fjuɝ blɑtʃəz ɑn ɪz feɪs ðən wən ɹænd hæd fɝst sin hɪm, ðoʊ hɪz noʊz ən ɪɹz stɪl sim ðə bɪɡəs pɑɹɾ ə hɪm. hi fɪŋɡɝd ðə sɔɹd pɪn ɑn ɪz kɑlɝ əz ɪf sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ɪt ðɛɹ. fɛdwɪn mɔɹ wʊɾə wɔɹn ðə sɔɹɾ əz wɛl, hæɾ i nɑt bɪn ɪn ə ɡɹin koʊt suɾəbəl fəɹ ə wɛl-tə-du mɝtʃən əɹ ə maɪnɝ noʊbəl, wɪð ə lɪɾəl sɪlvɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ɑn kʌfs ən ləpɛlz. ʌv ən eɪdʒ wɪð ɛbən, bʌt stɑkiɝ ən wɪð ɔlmoʊs noʊ blɑtʃəz, hi dɪd nɑt lʊk hæpi ðəɾ ɪz blæk koʊt wɑz stʌft ɪndə ðə lɛðɝ skɹɪp baɪ hɪz fit. ðeɪ wɝ ðə wʌnz luz θɝɪn hæd bɪn ɹeɪvɪŋ əbaʊt, ðɛm ən ɔl ðə ɹɛst ə ði æʃəmən. æʃəmən, ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɛniwʌn u kəd tʃænəl sɛɾ ɪm ɔf, ɔfən əz nɑt.

Nearly twenty more Maidens clustered at one end of the windowless, dark-paneled room. Eight gilded stand-lamps against the walls, mirrored to increase the light, provided illumination. He was glad of that; he did not like dark places anymore. Three of the Asha'man were there, too, the Aiel women to one side of the chamber, the Asha'man to the other. Jonan Adley, an Altaran despite his name, stood with his arms folded, working eyebrows like black caterpillars in deep thought. Perhaps four years older than Rand, he was intent on earning the silver sword of the Dedicated. Eben Hopwil carried more flesh on his bones and fewer blotches on his face than when Rand had first seen him, though his nose and ears still seemed the biggest part of him. He fingered the sword pin on his collar as if surprised to find it there. Fedwin Morr would have worn the sword as well, had he not been in a green coat suitable for a well-to-do merchant or a minor noble, with a little silver embroidery on cuffs and lapels. Of an age with Eben, but stockier and with almost no blotches, he did not look happy that his black coat was stuffed into the leather scrip by his feet. They were the ones Lews Therin had been raving about, them and all the rest of the Asha'man. Asha'man, Aes Sedai, anyone who could channel set him off, often as not.

"θɪŋk tu mʌtʃ, ɹænd ælθɹ?" ɪneɪlə ɡɹɪpt ə ʃɔɹt spɪɹ ɪn wʌn hæn ən əɹ bʌkəlɝ ən θɹi mɔɹ spɪɹz ɪn ði ʌðɝ, jɛt ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ʃeɪkɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ ət hɪm. ði æʃəmən fɹaʊn ət hɝ. "jɔɹ tʃɹʌbəl ɪz, jə də nɑt θɪŋk əɾ ɔl." səm ə ði ʌðɝ meɪɾənz læf sɔfli, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt meɪkɪŋ ə dʒoʊk. ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ meɪɾən ðəɹ baɪ ət list ə hænd, ʃi hæd hɛɹ əz faɪɝi əz əɹ tɛmpɝ, ən ən ɑd vju ʌv əɹ ɹileɪʃənʃɪp tə hɪm. hɝ fleɪksən-hɛɹd fɹɛn soʊmɑɹə, hu stʊd hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz tɔlɝ, nɑɾəd əɡɹimənt; ʃi hɛl ðə seɪm pəkjuljɝ vju.

"Think too much, Rand al'Thor?" Enaila gripped a short spear in one hand and her buckler and three more spears in the other, yet she sounded as if she were shaking a finger at him. The Asha'man frowned at her. "Your trouble is, you do not think at all." Some of the other Maidens laughed softly, but she was not making a joke. Shorter than any other Maiden there by at least a hand, she had hair as fiery as her temper, and an odd view of her relationship to him. Her flaxen-haired friend Somara, who stood head and shoulders taller, nodded agreement; she held the same peculiar view.

hi ɪɡnɔɹd ðə kɑmɛnt, bʌt kəd nɑt stɑp ə saɪ. soʊmɑɹə ən ɪneɪlə wɝ ðə wɝst, jɛt nʌn ə ðə meɪɾənz kəd dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ i wɑz ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn, tə bi oʊbeɪd, əɹ ði oʊnli tʃaɪld ʌv ə meɪɾən ɛvɝ noʊn tə ðə meɪɾənz, tə bi kɛɹd fəɹ əz ə bɹʌðɝ, bʊliɾ əz ə sʌn fəɹ ə fju. ivən dʒɑlɑni ðɛɹ, nɑt mɛni jɪɹz fɹəm pleɪɪŋ wɪð dɑlz, sim tə θɪŋk i wɑz əɹ jʌŋɡɝ bɹʌðɝ, waɪl kɔɹænə, ɡɹeɪɪŋ ən nɪɹli əz lɛðɝ-feɪst əz səlɪn, tʃɹiɾəd ɪm laɪk ən oʊldɝ. ət lis ðeɪ oʊnli dɪd ðəɾ ɝaʊn ðɛmsɛlvz, nɑɾ ɔfən wɛɹ ʌðɝ il kəd hɪɹ. wən ɪt kaʊntəd, hi wəd bi ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn. ən i oʊɾ ɪt tə ðɛm. ðeɪ daɪd fəɹ hɪm. hi oʊɾ əm wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ wɑntəd.

He ignored the comment, but could not stop a sigh. Somara and Enaila were the worst, yet none of the Maidens could decide whether he was the Car'a'carn, to be obeyed, or the only child of a Maiden ever known to the Maidens, to be cared for as a brother, bullied as a son for a few. Even Jalani there, not many years from playing with dolls, seemed to think he was her younger brother, while Corana, graying and nearly as leather-faced as Sulin, treated him like an older. At least they only did that around themselves, not often where other Aiel could hear. When it counted, he would be the Car'a'carn. And he owed it to them. They died for him. He owed them whatever they wanted.

"aɪ doʊn ɪntɛn tə spɛn ɔl naɪt hɪɹ waɪl jə lɑt pleɪ kɪs ðə deɪziz," hi sɛd. səlɪn ɡeɪv ɪm wʌn ə ðoʊz lʊks - ɪn dʒɹɛsəz əɹ ɪn keɪɾɪnsɝ, wɪmən tɔs ðoʊz lʊks əbaʊt laɪk fɑɹmɝz skæɾɝɪŋ sid - bʌt ði æʃəmən əbændən stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə meɪɾənz ən slʌŋ ðə stʃɹæps ə ðɛɹ skɹəps oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. pʊʃ əm hɑɹd, hi hæd toʊl teɪm, meɪk əm wɛpənz, ən teɪm hæd dɪlɪvɝd. ə ɡʊd wɛpən muvd əz ðə mæn u hɛld ɪt dɝɛktəd. ɪf oʊnli hi kəd bi ʃʊɹ ɪt wəd nɑt tɝn ɪn ɪz hænd.

"I don't intend to spend all night here while you lot play Kiss the Daisies," he said. Sulin gave him one of those looks - in dresses or in cadin'sor, women tossed those looks about like farmers scattering seed - but the Asha'man abandoned staring at the Maidens and slung the straps of their scrips over their shoulders. Push them hard, he had told Taim, make them weapons, and Taim had delivered. A good weapon moved as the man who held it directed. If only he could be sure it would not turn in his hand.

hi hæd θɹi dɛstəneɪʃənz tənaɪt, bʌt wʌn ə ðoʊz ðə meɪɾənz kəd nɑt bi əlaʊd tə noʊ. noʊ wʌn bʌt hɪmsɛlf. wɪtʃ ə ði ʌðɝ tu keɪm fɝst i hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd ɝliɝ, jɛɾ i hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ðə dʒɝni wəd bi noʊn sun ɪnʌf, jɛt ðəɹ wɝ ɹizənz tə kip ɪt sikɹəɾ əz i kʊd.

He had three destinations tonight, but one of those the Maidens could not be allowed to know. No one but himself. Which of the other two came first he had decided earlier, yet he hesitated. The journey would be known soon enough, yet there were reasons to keep it secret as he could.

wən ðə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpən ðəɹ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum, ə swiɾɪʃ smɛl fəmɪljɝ tə ɛni fɑɹmɝ dʒɹɪftəd θɹu. hɔɹs dʌŋ. ɹɪŋkəlɪŋ əɹ noʊz əz ʃi veɪld, səlɪn lɛd hæf ðə meɪɾənz θɹu əɾ ə tʃɹɑt. æftɝ ə ɡlæns tə hɪm, ði æʃəmən fɑloʊd, dʒɹɔɪŋ dipli ɑn ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs əz ðeɪ wɛnt, əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ kəd hoʊld.

When the gateway opened there in the middle of the room, a sweetish smell familiar to any farmer drifted through. Horse dung. Wrinkling her nose as she veiled, Sulin led half the Maidens through at a trot. After a glance to him, the Asha'man followed, drawing deeply on the True Source as they went, as much as they could hold.

kəz ə ðæt, hi kəd fil ðɛɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ əz ðeɪ pæs hɪm. wɪθaʊt ðæt, ɪt tʊk səm ɛfɝt tə tɛl ə mæn kəd tʃænəl, lɔŋɡɝ stɪl ənlɛs i koʊɑpɝeɪɾəd. nʌn wɝ nɪɹ əz stʃɹɔŋ əz hi. nɑt jɛt, ɛniweɪ; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ seɪɪŋ haʊ stʃɹɔŋ ə mæn wəd bi əntɪl i stɑpt ɡɹoʊɪŋ stʃɹɔŋɝ. fɛdwɪn stʊd haɪəst ə ðə θɹi, bʌɾ i hæd wʌt teɪm kɔld ə bɑɹ. fɛdwɪn dɪd nɑt ɹɪli bɪliv i kəɾ əfɛkt ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ə dɪstəns wɪð ðə paʊɝ. ðə ɹɪzʌlt wɑz ðəɾ ət fɪfti peɪsɪz ɪz əbɪləɾi bɪɡæn tə feɪd, ən əɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd i kəd nɑt wiv ivən ə θɹɛɾ ə seɪɾɪn. mɛn ɡeɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ fæstɝ ðən wɪmən, ɪt simd, ən ə ɡʊd θɪŋ. ðiz θɹi wɝ ɔl stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ ʌv jusfəl saɪz, ɪf dʒʌs bɛɹli ɪn dʒoʊnənz keɪs. ɛvɹi æʃəmən wɑz ðəɾ i hæd kɛpt.

Because of that, he could feel their strength as they passed him. Without that, it took some effort to tell a man could channel, longer still unless he cooperated. None were near as strong as he. Not yet, anyway; there was no saying how strong a man would be until he stopped growing stronger. Fedwin stood highest of the three, but he had what Taim called a bar. Fedwin did not really believe he could affect anything at a distance with the Power. The result was that at fifty paces his ability began to fade, and at a hundred he could not weave even a thread of saidin. Men gained strength faster than women, it seemed, and a good thing. These three were all strong enough to make a gateway of useful size, if just barely in Jonan's case. Every Asha'man was that he had kept.

kɪl əm bɪfɔɹ ɪts tu leɪt, bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɡoʊ mæd, luz θɝɪn wɪspɝd. kɪl ðɛm, hʌn daʊn sɑmaɪl, ən dɪmɑndɝd, ən ɔl ðə fɔɹseɪkən. aɪ hæv tə kɪl əm ɔl, bɪfɔɹ ɪts tu leɪt! ə moʊmən ə stʃɹʌɡəl əz i ətɛmptəd tə ɹɛs ðə paʊɝ əweɪ fɹəm ɹænd ən feɪld. hi sim tə tʃɹaɪ ðət mɔɹ ɔfən ə leɪt, əɹ tə siz seɪɾɪn ɑn ɪz oʊn. ðə sɛkənd wɑz ə bɪɡɝ deɪnʒɝ ðən ðə fɝst. ɹænd daʊɾɪd ðət luz θɝɪn kəd teɪk ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs əweɪ wʌns ɹænd hɛld ɪt; hi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən i kəd teɪk ɪt fɹəm luz θɝɪn, iðɝ, ɪf ði ʌðɝ ɹitʃt ɪt fɝst.

Kill them before it is too late, before they go mad, Lews Therin whispered. Kill them, hunt down Sammael, and Demandred, and all the Forsaken. I have to kill them all, before it is too late! A moment of struggle as he attempted to wrest the Power away from Rand and failed. He seemed to try that more often of late, or to seize saidin on his own. The second was a bigger danger than the first. Rand doubted that Lews Therin could take the True Source away once Rand held it; he was not certain he could take it from Lews Therin, either, if the other reached it first.

wʌɾ əbaʊt mi? ɹænd θɔɾ əɡɛn. ɪt wɑz nɪɹli ə snɑɹl, ən noʊ lɛs vɪʃəs fəɹ fɔlɪŋ ʃɔɹt. ɹæpt ɪn ðə paʊɝ əz i wɑz, æŋɡɝ spaɪɾɝ-wɛbd əkɹɔs ði aʊtsaɪɾ ə ðə vɔɪd, ə faɪɝi leɪs. aɪ kən tʃænəl, tu. mædnəs weɪts fəɹ mi, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæz ju! jə kɪl jɝsɛlf, kɪnsleɪɝ, æftɝ jə mɝɾɝd jəɹ waɪf ən jəɹ tʃɪlʒɹən ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn noʊz haʊ mɛni ʌðɝz. aɪ woʊn kɪl wɛɹ aɪ doʊn əv tə! dʒju hɪɹ mi, kɪnsleɪɝ? saɪləns ænsɝd.

What about me? Rand thought again. It was nearly a snarl, and no less vicious for falling short. Wrapped in the Power as he was, anger spider-webbed across the outside of the Void, a fiery lace. I can channel, too. Madness waits for me, but it already has you! You killed yourself, Kinslayer, after you murdered your wife and your children and the Light alone knows how many others. I won't kill where I don't have to! Do you hear me, Kinslayer? Silence answered.

hi dʒɹu ə dip, ənivən bɹɛθ. ðət wɛb ə faɪɝ flɪkɝd, laɪtnɪŋ ɪn ðə dɪstəns. hi hæd nɛvɝ spoʊkən tə ðə mæn - ɪt wɑz ðə mæn, nɑt dʒʌst ə vɔɪs; ə mæn, ɪntaɪɝ wɪð mɛmɹiz - nɛvɝ spoʊkən tə hɪm laɪk ðət bɪfɔɹ. pɝhæps ɪt maɪt dʒɹaɪv luz θɝɪn əweɪ fəɹ ɡʊd. hæf ðə mænz mæd ɹæntɪŋz wɝ tɪɹz oʊvɝ ɪz dɛd waɪf. dɪɾ i wɑnə dʒɹaɪv luz θɝɪn əweɪ? hɪz oʊnli fɹɛn ɪn ðət tʃɛst.

He drew a deep, uneven breath. That web of fire flickered, lightning in the distance. He had never spoken to the man - it was the man, not just a voice; a man, entire with memories - never spoken to him like that before. Perhaps it might drive Lews Therin away for good. Half the man's mad rantings were tears over his dead wife. Did he want to drive Lews Therin away? His only friend in that chest.

hi hæd pɹɑməst səlɪn tə kaʊn tə wʌn hʌnʒɹəd bɪfɔɹ fɑloʊɪŋ, bʌɾ i dɪɾ ɪt baɪ faɪvz, ðən stɛp mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd ən fɪfti liɡz tə keɪɛmlɪn.

He had promised Sulin to count to one hundred before following, but he did it by fives, then stepped more than a hundred and fifty leagues to Caemlyn.

naɪt hæd kloʊz daʊn ɑn ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ʌv ændɝ, munʃæɾoʊz kloʊkɪŋ dɛləkət spaɪɹz ən ɡoʊldən doʊmz, bʌɾ ə dʒɛntəl bɹiz dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə bɹeɪk ðə hit. ðə mun hʌŋ əbʌv, stɪl ɔlmoʊs fʊl, ɡɪvɪŋ səm laɪt. veɪl meɪɾənz skɝiɾ ɝaʊn ðə wæɡənz laɪn ʌp bɪhaɪn ðə lɑɹdʒəst ə ðə pæləs steɪbəlz. ði oʊɾɝ ə ðə steɪbəl mʌk ðə wæɡənz hɔld əweɪ ɛvɹi deɪ hæd lɔŋ sɪns soʊkt ɪndə ðə wʊd. ði æʃəmən hæd hænz tə ðɛɹ feɪsəz, ɛbən æktʃəli  pɪntʃɪŋ ɪz noʊz ʃʌt.

Night had closed down on the Royal Palace of Andor, moonshadows cloaking delicate spires and golden domes, but a gentle breeze did nothing to break the heat. The moon hung above, still almost full, giving some light. Veiled Maidens scurried around the wagons lined up behind the largest of the palace stables. The odor of the stable muck the wagons hauled away every day had long since soaked into the wood. The Asha'man had hands to their faces, Eben actually pinching his nose shut.

"ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn kaʊns kwɪkli," səlɪn mʌɾɝd, bʌt ʃi loʊɝɾ əɹ veɪl. ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ sɝpɹaɪzəz hɪɹ. noʊ wʌn wəd steɪ nɪɹ ðoʊz wæɡənz u dɪd nɑɾ əv tə.

"The Car'a'carn counts quickly," Sulin muttered, but she lowered her veil. There would be no surprises here. No one would stay near those wagons who did not have to.

ɹænd lɛt ðə ɡeɪtweɪ kloʊs əz sun əz ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ meɪɾənz keɪm θɹu, ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən əz ɪt wɪŋkt aʊɾ ʌv ɛɡzɪstəns, luz θɝɪn wɪspɝd, ʃiz ɡɔn. ɔlmoʊst ɡɔn. ðəɹ wɑz ɹɪlif ɪn ɪz vɔɪs; ðə bɑn ʌv wɔɹɾɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪstəɾ ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz.

Rand let the gateway close as soon as the remaining Maidens came through, right behind him, and as it winked out of existence, Lews Therin whispered, She is gone. Almost gone. There was relief in his voice; the bond of Warder and Aes Sedai had not existed in the Age of Legends.

ɑlɑnə wɑz nɑt ɹɪli ɡɔn, noʊ mɔɹ ðən ʃi hæd bɪn ɛni taɪm sɪns bɑndɪŋ ɹænd əɡɛnst ɪz wɪl, bʌɾ əɹ pɹɛzəns hæd lɛsənd, ən ɪt wɑz ðə lɛsənɪŋ ðət meɪd ɹænd tʃɹuli əwɛɹ. jə kəd bɪkʌm juz tə ɛniθɪŋ, bɪɡɪn teɪkɪŋ ɪt fəɹ ɡɹæntəd. nɪɹ tə hɝ, hi wɔkt ɝaʊnd wɪð əɹ ɪmoʊʃənz nɛsəld ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd, hɝ fɪzɪkəl kəndɪʃən əz wɛl, ɪf i θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt, ən i nu ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ʃi wɑz əz wɛl əz i nu hɪz oʊn ɪz hænz pleɪs, bʌt dʒʌst əz wɪð ɪz hænd, ənlɛs i θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt, ɪt dʒʌst wɑz. oʊnli dɪstəns hæɾ ɛni ɪfɛkt, bʌɾ i kəd stɪl fil ðət ʃi wɑz sʌmwɛɹ ist ə hɪm. hi wɑntəd tə bi əwɛɹ ə hɝ. ʃəd luz θɝɪn fɔl saɪlən ən ɔl ðə mɛmɹiz ə ðə tʃɛst sʌmhaʊ bi waɪp fɹəm ɪz hɛd, hi wəd stɪl əv ðə bɑn tə ɹimaɪn hɪm, "nɛvɝ tʃɹʌst ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Alanna was not really gone, no more than she had been any time since bonding Rand against his will, but her presence had lessened, and it was the lessening that made Rand truly aware. You could become used to anything, begin taking it for granted. Near to her, he walked around with her emotions nestled in the back of his head, her physical condition as well, if he thought about it, and he knew exactly where she was as well as he knew his own his hand's place, but just as with his hand, unless he thought about it, it just was. Only distance had any effect, but he could still feel that she was somewhere east of him. He wanted to be aware of her. Should Lews Therin fall silent and all the memories of the chest somehow be wiped from his head, he would still have the bond to remind him, "Never trust Aes Sedai."

əbɹʌpli hi ɹilaɪz ðət dʒoʊnən ən ɛbən stɪl hɛl seɪɾɪn tu. "ɹeɪ-lis," hi sɛd ʃɑɹpli - ðət wɑz ðə kəmæn teɪm juzd - ən i fɛl ðə paʊɝ vænɪʃ fɹəm ðɛm. ɡʊd wɛpənz. soʊ fɑɹ. kɪl əm bɪfɔɹ ɪts tu leɪt, luz θɝɪn mɝmɝd. ɹænd ɹilis ðə sɔɹs dɪlɪbɝətli, ən ɹɪlʌktənli. hi ɔlweɪz heɪɾəd lɛɾɪŋ ɡoʊ ʌv ðə laɪf, ði ɛnhænst sɛnsɪz. ʌv ðə stʃɹʌɡəl. ɪnsaɪd, ðoʊ, hi wɑz tɛns, ə dʒʌmpɝ ɹɛɾi tə lip, ɹɛɾi tə siz ɪt wʌns mɔɹ. hi ɔlweɪz wɑz, naʊ.

Abruptly he realized that Jonan and Eben still held saidin too. "Re-lease," he said sharply - that was the command Taim used - and he felt the Power vanish from them. Good weapons. So far. Kill them before it's too late, Lews Therin murmured. Rand released the Source deliberately, and reluctantly. He always hated letting go of the life, the enhanced senses. Of the struggle. Inside, though, he was tense, a jumper ready to leap, ready to seize it once more. He always was, now.

aɪ hæv tə kɪl ðɛm, luz θɝɪn wɪspɝd.

I have to kill them, Lews Therin whispered.

ʃʌvɪŋ ðə vɔɪs bæk, ɹænd sɛnt wʌn ə ðə meɪɾənz, nɛɝɪliə, ə skwɛɹ-feɪst wʊmən, ɪndə ðə pæləs ən bɪɡæn peɪsɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə wæɡənz, θɔts spɪnɪŋ əɡɛn, fæstɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ. hi ʃəd nɑɾ əv kʌm hɪɹ. hi ʃʊɾə sɛn fɛdwɪn, wɪð ə lɛɾɝ. spɪnɪŋ. ɪleɪn. eɪvinhə. pɛɹɪn. feɪl. ənʊɹə. bɹəleɪn. mæt. laɪt, hi ʃəd nɑɾ əv kʌm. ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə. ənʊɹə ən bɹəleɪn. feɪl ən pɛɹɪn ən mæt. flæʃɪz ə kʌlɝ, kwɪk moʊʃən dʒʌst aʊɾ ə saɪt. ə mædmæn mʌɾɝɪŋ æŋɡɹəli ɪn ðə dɪstəns.

Shoving the voice back, Rand sent one of the Maidens, Nerilea, a square-faced woman, into the palace and began pacing alongside the wagons, thoughts spinning again, faster than before. He should not have come here. He should have sent Fedwin, with a letter. Spinning. Elayne. Aviendha. Perrin. Faile. Annoura. Berelain. Mat. Light, he should not have come. Elayne and Aviendha. Annoura and Berelain. Faile and Perrin and Mat. Flashes of color, quick motion just out of sight. A madman muttering angrily in the distance.

sloʊli hi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə ðə meɪɾənz tɔkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz. əbaʊt ðə smɛl. ɪmplaɪɪŋ ðəɾ ɪt keɪm fɹəm ði æʃəmən. ðeɪ wɑntəd tə bi hɝd, əɹ ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn juzɪŋ hæntɔk; ðəɹ wɑz munlaɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ðæt. munlaɪɾ ɪnʌf tə si ðə kʌlɝ ɪn ɛbənz feɪs, tu, ən haʊ fɛdwɪnz dʒɔ wɑz sɛt. meɪbi ðeɪ wɝ nɑt bɔɪz ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, nɑt sɪns dəməaɪz wɛlz sɝɾənli, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ stɪl oʊnli fɪftin əɹ sɪkstin. dʒoʊnənz aɪbɹaʊz hæd dʒɹɔn daʊn soʊ fɑɹ ðeɪ sim tə bi sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz tʃiks. ət lis noʊbɑdi hæd siz seɪɾɪn əɡɛn. jɛt.

Slowly he became aware of the Maidens talking among themselves. About the smell. Implying that it came from the Asha'man. They wanted to be heard, or they would have been using handtalk; there was moonlight enough for that. Moonlight enough to see the color in Eben's face, too, and how Fedwin's jaw was set. Maybe they were not boys any longer, not since Dumai's Wells certainly, but they were still only fifteen or sixteen. Jonan's eyebrows had drawn down so far they seemed to be sitting on his cheeks. At least nobody had seized saidin again. Yet.

hi stɑɹɾəd tə stɛp oʊvɝ tə ðə θɹi mɛn, ðən ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs ɪnstɛd. lɛɾ əm ɔl hɪɹ. "ɪf aɪ kən pʊɾ ʌp wɪð fulɪʃnəs fɹəm meɪɾənz, soʊ kən ju."

He started to step over to the three men, then raised his voice instead. Let them all hear. "If I can put up with foolishness from Maidens, so can you."

ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ðə kʌlɝ ɪn ɛbənz feɪs dipənd. dʒoʊnən ɡɹʌntɪd. ɔl θɹi səluɾəd ɹænd wɪð fɪs tə tʃɛst; ðən ðeɪ tɝn tə wʌn ənʌðɝ. dʒoʊnən sɛd sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs, ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðə meɪɾənz, ən fɛdwɪn ən ɛbən læft. ðə fɝs taɪm ðeɪ sɔ meɪɾənz ðeɪ hæd stʌmbəl bɪtwin wɑntɪŋ tə ɡɑɡəl ət ðiz ɪɡzɑɾɪk kɹitʃɝz ðeɪ hæɾ oʊnli ɹɛɾ əbaʊɾ ən wɑntɪŋ tə ɹʌn bɪfɔɹ ðə mɝɾɝəs il ə ðə stɔɹiz kɪl ðɛm. nʌθɪŋ mʌtʃ fɹaɪɾənd əm ɛnimɔɹ. ðeɪ niɾəd tə ɹilɝn fɪɹ.

If anything, the color in Eben's face deepened. Jonan grunted. All three saluted Rand with fist to chest; then they turned to one another. Jonan said something in a low voice, glancing at the Maidens, and Fedwin and Eben laughed. The first time they saw Maidens they had stumbled between wanting to goggle at these exotic creatures they had only read about and wanting to run before the murderous Aiel of the stories killed them. Nothing much frightened them anymore. They needed to relearn fear.

ðə meɪɾənz stɛɹɾ ət ɹænd, ən bɪɡæn tɔkɪŋ wɪð ðɛɹ hænz, səmtaɪmz læfɪŋ sɔfli. wɛɹi ʌv ði æʃəmən ðeɪ maɪt bi, jɛt meɪɾənz biɪŋ meɪɾənz - il biɪŋ il - ɹɪsk oʊnli meɪd tɔns mɔɹ fʌn. soʊmɑɹə mɝmɝɾ əlaʊɾ əbaʊɾ eɪvinhə sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪm daʊn, wɪtʃ ɝn fɝm nɑdz ʌv əpɹuvəl. noʊbɑdiz laɪf wɑz ɛvɝ ðɪs tæŋɡəld ɪn ðə stɔɹiz.

The Maidens stared at Rand, and began talking with their hands, sometimes laughing softly. Wary of the Asha'man they might be, yet Maidens being Maidens - Aiel being Aiel - risk only made taunts more fun. Somara murmured aloud about Aviendha settling him down, which earned firm nods of approval. Nobody's life was ever this tangled in the stories.

əz sun əz nɛɝɪliə ɹɪtɝn seɪɪŋ ðət ʃi hæd faʊn dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ ən beɪl, ðə klæn tʃif liɾɪŋ ði il hɪɹ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ɹænd tʊk ɔf ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt, ən soʊ dɪd fɛdwɪn. dʒɑlɑni pɹədust ə lɑɹdʒ lɛðɝ bæɡ fəɹ ðə sɔɹdz ən ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ, hoʊldɪŋ ɪɾ əz ɪf ðə sɔɹdz wɝ pɔɪzənəs sneɪks, əɹ pɝhæps lɔŋ dɛɾ ən ɹɑɾən. ðoʊ ɪn tʃɹuθ ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv hɛld ɪt soʊ dʒɪnʒɝli ɪn iðɝ keɪs. pʊɾɪŋ ɑn ə hʊɾɪd kloʊk ðət kɔɹænə hændəd hɪm, ɹænd hɛld ɪz ɹɪsts təɡɛðɝ bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk, ən səlɪn baʊn əm wɪð ə kɔɹd. taɪtli, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf.

As soon as Nerilea returned saying that she had found Davram Bashere and Bael, the clan chief leading the Aiel here in Caemlyn, Rand took off his sword belt, and so did Fedwin. Jalani produced a large leather bag for the swords and the Dragon Scepter, holding it as if the swords were poisonous snakes, or perhaps long dead and rotten. Though in truth she would not have held it so gingerly in either case. Putting on a hooded cloak that Corana handed him, Rand held his wrists together behind his back, and Sulin bound them with a cord. Tightly, muttering to herself.

"ðɪs ɪz nɑnsɛns. ivən wɛtləndɝz wəd kɔl ɪt nɑnsɛns."

"This is nonsense. Even wetlanders would call it nonsense."

hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə wɪns. ʃi wɑz stʃɹɔŋ, ən juzɪŋ ɛvɹi aʊns ʌv ɪt. "ju hæv ɹʌn əweɪ fɹəm əs tu ɔfən, ɹænd ælθɹ. juv noʊ kɛɹ fəɹ jɝsɛlf." ʃi kənsɪɾɝd ɪm ə bɹʌðɝ ʌv ən eɪdʒ wɪð hɝsɛlf, bʌɾ ɪɹəspɑnsəbəl ət taɪmz. "fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ kæɹiz jəɹ ɑnɝ, ən juv noʊ kɛɹ."

He tried not to wince. She was strong, and using every ounce of it. "You have run away from us too often, Rand al'Thor. You have no care for yourself." She considered him a brother of an age with herself, but irresponsible at times. "Far Dareis Mai carries your honor, and you have no care."

fɛdwɪn ɡlaʊɝd waɪl ɪz oʊn ɹɪsts wɝ taɪd, ðoʊ ðə meɪɾən baɪndɪŋ ɪm hɑɹdli pʊɾ aʊt mʌtʃ ɛfɝt. wɑtʃɪŋ, dʒoʊnən ən ɛbən fɹaʊn dipli. ðeɪ dɪslaɪk ðɪs plæn əz mʌtʃ əz səlɪn dɪd. ən ʌndɝstʊɾ ɪɾ əz lɪɾəl. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn dɪd nɑɾ əv tə ɪkspleɪn hɪmsɛlf, ən ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn sɛldəm dɪd. noʊ wʌn sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ, ðoʊ. ə wɛpən dɪd nɑt kəmpleɪn.

Fedwin glowered while his own wrists were tied, though the Maiden binding him hardly put out much effort. Watching, Jonan and Eben frowned deeply. They disliked this plan as much as Sulin did. And understood it as little. The Dragon Reborn did not have to explain himself, and the Car'a'carn seldom did. No one said anything, though. A weapon did not complain.

wən səlɪn stɛpt ɝaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə ɹænd, ʃi tʊk wʌn lʊk əɾ ɪz feɪs, ən əɹ bɹɛθ kɑt. "ðeɪ dɪd ðɪs tə ju," ʃi sɛd sɔfli, ən ɹitʃt fəɹ əɹ hɛvi-bleɪɾɪd bɛl naɪf. ə fʊɾ əɹ mɔɹ ə stil, ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst ə ʃɔɹt-sɔɹd, ðoʊ nʌn bʌɾ ə ful wəd seɪ ðət tə ən il.

When Sulin stepped around in front of Rand, she took one look at his face, and her breath caught. "They did this to you," she said softly, and reached for her heavy-bladed belt knife. A foot or more of steel, it was almost a short-sword, though none but a fool would say that to an Aiel.

"pʊl ʌp ðə hʊd," ɹænd toʊld əɹ ɹʌfli. "ðə hoʊl pɔɪn ə ðɪs ɪz ðət noʊ wʌn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz mi bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɹitʃ beɪl ən bæʃɪɹ." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɪz aɪz. "aɪ sɛd, pʊl ɪɾ ʌp," hi ɡɹaʊld. səlɪn kəd kɪl moʊs mɛn wɪð əɹ bɛɹ hænz, bʌɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz wɝ dʒɛntəl sɛɾəlɪŋ ðə hʊɾ ɝaʊn ɪz feɪs.

"Pull up the hood," Rand told her roughly. "The whole point of this is that no one recognize me before I reach Bael and Bashere." She hesitated, peering into his eyes. "I said, pull it up," he growled. Sulin could kill most men with her bare hands, but her fingers were gentle settling the hood around his face.

wɪð ə læf, dʒɑlɑni snætʃt ðə hʊd daʊn oʊvɝ ɪz aɪz. "naʊ jə kən bi ʃʊɹ noʊ wʌn wɪl noʊ ju, ɹænd ælθɹ. jə mʌs tʃɹʌst əs tə ɡaɪd jəɹ fit." sɛvɹəl meɪɾənz læft.

With a laugh, Jalani snatched the hood down over his eyes. "Now you can be sure no one will know you, Rand al'Thor. You must trust us to guide your feet." Several Maidens laughed.

stɪfənɪŋ, hi bɛɹli stɑpt ʃɔɹɾ ə sizɪŋ seɪɾɪn. bɛɹli. luz θɝɪn snɑɹəld ən ɡɪbɝd. ɹænd fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə bɹið nɔɹməli. ɪt wɑz nɑt toʊɾəl dɑɹknəs. hi kəd si munlaɪt bɪloʊ ði ɛdʒ ə ðə hʊd. ivən soʊ, hi stʌmbəld wən səlɪn ən ɪneɪlə tʊk ɪz ɑɹmz ən lɛɾ ɪm fɔɹwɝd.

Stiffening, he barely stopped short of seizing saidin. Barely. Lews Therin snarled and gibbered. Rand forced himself to breathe normally. It was not total darkness. He could see moonlight below the edge of the hood. Even so, he stumbled when Sulin and Enaila took his arms and led him forward.

"aɪ θɔt jə wɝ oʊld ɪnʌf tə wɔk bɛɾɝ ðən ðæt," ɪneɪlə mɝmɝɾ ɪn mɑk sɝpɹaɪz. səlɪnz hæn muvd. ɪt tʊk ɪm ə moʊmən tə ɹilaɪz ʃi wɑz stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ɪz ɑɹm.

"I thought you were old enough to walk better than that," Enaila murmured in mock surprise. Sulin's hand moved. It took him a moment to realize she was stroking his arm.

ɔl i kəd si wɑz wʌt leɪ dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ hɪm, ðə munlɪt flæɡstoʊnz ə ðə steɪbliɑɹd, ðən stoʊn stɛps, flɔɹz ə mɑɹbəl baɪ læmplaɪt, səmtaɪmz wɪð ə lɔŋ ɹʌnɝ ə kɑɹpət. hi stʃɹeɪn ɪz aɪz ət ðə muvmən ə ʃædoʊz, fɛl fəɹ ðə tɛlteɪl pɹɛzəns ə seɪɾɪn, əɹ wɝs, ðə pɹɪklɪŋ ðəɾ ənaʊnst ə wʊmən hoʊldɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ. blaɪn laɪk ðɪs, hi maɪt nɑt noʊ hi wɑz ʌndɝ ətæk əntɪl tu leɪt. hi kəd hɪɹ ðə wɪspɝ ʌv ə fju sɝvəns' fiɾ əz ðeɪ hɝiɾ ɑn naɪttaɪm tʃɔɹz, bʌt noʊ wʌn tʃælənʒd faɪv meɪɾənz əpɛɹənli ɛskɔɹɾɪŋ tu hʊɾɪd pɹɪznɝz. wɪð beɪl ən bæʃɪɹ lɪvɪŋ ɪn ðə pæləs ən pəlisɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn wɪð ðɛɹ mɛn, daʊtləs stʃɹeɪnʒɝ saɪts hæd bɪn sin ɪn ðiz kɔɹɪɾɝz. ɪt wɑz laɪk wɔkɪŋ ə meɪz. bʌt ðən i hæd bɪn ɪn wʌn meɪz əɹ ənʌðɝ sɪns livɪŋ ɛmənz fild, ivən wən i hæd θɔt ðəɾ i wɔkt ə klɪɹ pæθ.

All he could see was what lay just before him, the moonlit flagstones of the stableyard, then stone steps, floors of marble by lamplight, sometimes with a long runner of carpet. He strained his eyes at the movement of shadows, felt for the telltale presence of saidin, or worse, the prickling that announced a woman holding saidar. Blind like this, he might not know he was under attack until too late. He could hear the whisper of a few servants' feet as they hurried on nighttime chores, but no one challenged five Maidens apparently escorting two hooded prisoners. With Bael and Bashere living in the palace and policing Caemlyn with their men, doubtless stranger sights had been seen in these corridors. It was like walking a maze. But then he had been in one maze or another since leaving Emond's Field, even when he had thought that he walked a clear path.

wəɾ aɪ noʊ ə klɪɹ pæθ ɪf aɪ sɔ wʌn? hi wʌndɝd. əɹ əv aɪ bɪn ət ðɪs soʊ lɔŋ aɪd θɪŋk ɪt wɑz ə tʃɹæp?

Would I know a clear path if I saw one? he wondered. Or have I been at this so long I'd think it was a trap?

ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ klɪɹ pæðz. oʊnli pɪtfɔlz ən tʃɹɪpwaɪɝz ən dɑɹknəs. luz θɝɪnz snɑɹl saʊndəd swɛɾi, dɛspɹɪt. ðə weɪ ɹænd fɛlt.

There are no clear paths. Only pitfalls and tripwires and darkness. Lews Therin's snarl sounded sweaty, desperate. The way Rand felt.

wən səlɪn faɪnəli lɛɾ əm ɪndə ə ɹum ən ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ, ɹænd tɔst ɪz hɛd vaɪələnli tə θɹoʊ bæk ðə hʊd - ən stɛɹd. beɪl ən dævɹæm i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd, bʌt nɑt dævɹæmz waɪf, dʒɹə, nɔɹ məleɪn, nɔɹ dɔɹinhə.

When Sulin finally led them into a room and shut the door, Rand tossed his head violently to throw back the hood - and stared. Bael and Davram he had expected, but not Davram's wife, Deira, nor Melaine, nor Dorindha.

"aɪ si ju, kɑɹəkɑɹn." beɪl, ðə tɔlɪs mæn ɹænd hæɾ ɛvɝ sin, sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹin-ænd-waɪt flɔɹ taɪlz ɪn ɪz keɪɾɪnsɝ, ən ɛɹ əbaʊɾ ɪm ivən əɾ iz ðət sɛɾ i wɑz ɹɛɾi tə muv ɪn ə hɑɹtbit. ðə klæn tʃif ə ðə ɡoʊʃin il wɑz nɑt jʌŋ - noʊ klæn tʃif wɑz - ən ðəɹ wɑz ɡɹeɪ ɪn ɪz dɑɹk ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ, bʌɾ ɛniwʌn u θɔɾ ɪm sɑft wɪð eɪdʒ wɑz ɪn fəɹ ə sæd sɝpɹaɪz. "meɪ jə ɔlweɪz faɪnd wɔɾɝ ən ʃeɪd. aɪ stænd wɪð ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn, ən maɪ spɪɹz stænd wɪð mi."

"I see you, Car'a'carn." Bael, the tallest man Rand had ever seen, sat cross-legged on the green-and-white floor tiles in his cadin'sor, an air about him even at ease that said he was ready to move in a heartbeat. The clan chief of the Goshien Aiel was not young - no clan chief was - and there was gray in his dark reddish hair, but anyone who thought him soft with age was in for a sad surprise. "May you always find water and shade. I stand with the Car'a'carn, and my spears stand with me."

"wɔɾɝ ən ʃeɪd meɪ bi ɔl vɛɹi wɛl," dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ sɛd, hʊkɪŋ ə lɛɡ oʊvɝ ðə ɡɪldɪɾ ɑɹm ə hɪz tʃɛɹ, "bʌt maɪsɛlf aɪ wəd sɛɾəl fəɹ tʃɪld waɪn." lɪɾəl tɔlɝ ðən ɪneɪlə, hi hæɾ ɪz ʃɔɹt blu koʊɾ əndʌn, ən swɛt ɡlɪsən ɑn ɪz dɑɹk feɪs. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz əpɛɹən ɪndələns, hi lʊkt ivən hɑɹɾɝ ðən beɪl, wɪð ɪz fɪɹs tɪltəɾ aɪz, ən ɪz iɡəlz bik ʌv ə noʊz əbʌv θɪk ɡɹeɪ-stʃɹik mʌstæʃɪz. "aɪ ɔfɝ kənɡɹætʃəleɪʃənz ɑn jəɹ ɪskeɪp, ən jəɹ vɪktɝi. bʌt waɪ dʒju kʌm dɪsɡaɪzd əz ə pɹɪznɝ?"

"Water and shade may be all very well," Davram Bashere said, hooking a leg over the gilded arm of his chair, "but myself I would settle for chilled wine." Little taller than Enaila, he had his short blue coat undone, and sweat glistened on his dark face. Despite his apparent indolence, he looked even harder than Bael, with his fierce tilted eyes, and his eagle's beak of a nose above thick gray-streaked mustaches. "I offer congratulations on your escape, and your victory. But why do you come disguised as a prisoner?"

"aɪ pɹəfɝ tə noʊ wɛðɝ hiz bɹɪŋɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ daʊn ɑn ʌs," dʒɹə pʊɾ ɪn. ə lɑɹdʒ wʊmən ɡaʊn ɪn ɡoʊld-wɝkt ɡɹin sɪlk, feɪlz mʌðɝ stʊɾ əz tɔl əz ɛni meɪɾən ðəɹ ɪksɛp soʊmɑɹə, lɔŋ blæk hɛɹ slæʃt wɪð waɪɾ ət ðə tɛmpəlz, hɝ noʊz oʊnli ə lɪɾəl lɛs boʊl ðən əɹ hʌzbənz. tʃɹuθ, ʃi kəd ɡɪv ɪm lɛsənz ɪn lʊkɪŋ fɪɹs, ən ʃi wɑz vɛɹi laɪk əɹ dɔɾɝ ɪn wʌn ɹɪspɛkt. hɝ lɔɪəlti wɑz tə hɝ hʌzbənd, nɑt ɹænd. "juv teɪkən ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹɪznɝ! ɑɹ wi naʊ tə ɪkspɛk ði ɪntaɪɝ waɪt taʊɝ tə dɪsɛn əpɑn əɹ hɛdz?"

"I prefer to know whether he is bringing Aes Sedai down on us," Deira put in. A large woman gowned in gold-worked green silk, Faile's mother stood as tall as any Maiden there except Somara, long black hair slashed with white at the temples, her nose only a little less bold than her husband's. Truth, she could give him lessons in looking fierce, and she was very like her daughter in one respect. Her loyalty was to her husband, not Rand. "You've taken Aes Sedai prisoner! Are we now to expect the entire White Tower to descend upon our heads?"

"ɪf ðeɪ du," məleɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli, ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl, "ðeɪ wɪl bi dɛlt wɪð əz ðeɪ dɪzɝv." sʌn-hɛɹd, ɡɹin-aɪɾ ən bjuɾəfəl, noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə hændfʊl ə jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən ɹænd baɪ hɝ feɪs, ʃi wɑz ə waɪz wʌn, ən mɛɹid tə beɪl. wʌtɛvɝ hæd kɑz ðə waɪz wʌnz tə tʃeɪnʒ ðɛɹ vju ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ, məleɪn, æmɪz ən bɛɹ hæd tʃeɪnʒd ðə moʊst.

"If they do," Melaine said sharply, adjusting her shawl, "they will be dealt with as they deserve." Sun-haired, green-eyed and beautiful, no more than a handful of years older than Rand by her face, she was a Wise One, and married to Bael. Whatever had caused the Wise Ones to change their view of Aes Sedai, Melaine, Amys and Bair had changed the most.

"wʌɾ aɪ wɪʃ tə noʊ," ðə θɝd wʊmən sɛd, "ɪz wʌt jəl də əbaʊt koʊləveɪɪɹ seɪɡən." waɪl dʒɹə ən məleɪn hæd pɹɛzəns, ɡɹeɪt pɹɛzəns, dɔɹinhə aʊtʃoʊn boʊθ, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl tə si haʊ ɪɡzækli. ðə ɹufməstʃɹəs ə smoʊk spɹɪŋz hoʊld wɑz ə sɑləd, mʌðɝli wʊmən, mʌtʃ nɪɹɝ hænsəm ðən pɹɪɾi, wɪð kɹisɪz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ blu aɪz ən əz mʌtʃ waɪɾ ɪn əɹ peɪl ɹɛd hɛɹ əz beɪl hæd ɡɹeɪ, jɛɾ ə ðə θɹi wɪmən, ɛni aɪ wɪð ə bɹeɪn bɪhaɪn ɪt wʊɾə sɛd ʃi hɛl sweɪ. "məleɪn sɛz ðət bɛɹ kənsɪɾɝz koʊləveɪɪɹ seɪɡən ə lɪɾəl ɪmpɔɹɾəns," dɔɹinhə wɛn ɑn, "bʌt waɪz wʌnz kən bi əz blaɪn əz ɛni mæn wən ɪt kʌmz tə siɪŋ ðə bæɾəl əhɛɾ ən mɪsɪŋ ðə skɔɹpiən ʌndɝfʊt." ə smaɪl fəɹ məleɪn ɹɑb ðə wɝdz ə ðɛɹ stɪŋ; məleɪnz ænsɝɪŋ smaɪl sɝɾənli sɛd ʃi tʊk nʌn. "ə ɹufməstʃɹəsəz wɝk ɪz faɪndɪŋ ðoʊz skɔɹpiənz bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn ɪz stʌŋ." ʃi ɔlsoʊ wɑz beɪlz waɪf, ə fæk ðət stɪl dɪskənsɝɾɪd ɹænd, fəɹ ɔl ɪt hæd bɪn əɹ tʃɔɪs ən məleɪnz. pɝhæps pɑɹtli kəz ɪt hæd bɪn ðɛɹz; əmʌŋ il, ə mæn hæd lɪɾəl seɪ ɪf ɪz waɪf tʃoʊz ə sɪstɝ-waɪf. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə kɑmən ɝeɪnʒmənt ivən əmʌŋ ðɛm.

"What I wish to know," the third woman said, "is what you will do about Colavaere Saighan." While Deira and Melaine had presence, great presence, Dorindha outshone both, though it was difficult to see how exactly. The roofmistress of Smoke Springs Hold was a solid, motherly woman, much nearer handsome than pretty, with creases at the corners of her blue eyes and as much white in her pale red hair as Bael had gray, yet of the three women, any eye with a brain behind it would have said she held sway. "Melaine says that Bair considers Colavaere Saighan of little importance," Dorindha went on, "but Wise Ones can be as blind as any man when it comes to seeing the battle ahead and missing the scorpion underfoot." A smile for Melaine robbed the words of their sting; Melaine's answering smile certainly said she took none. "A roofmistress's work is finding those scorpions before anyone is stung." She also was Bael's wife, a fact that still disconcerted Rand, for all it had been her choice and Melaine's. Perhaps partly because it had been theirs; among Aiel, a man had little say if his wife chose a sister-wife. It was not a common arrangement even among them.

"koʊləveɪɪɹ əz teɪkən ʌp fɑɹmɪŋ," ɹænd ɡɹaʊld. ðeɪ blɪŋkt ət hɪm, wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ðət wɑz ə dʒoʊk. "ðə sʌn θɹoʊn ɪz ɛmpti əɡɛn, ən weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪleɪn." hi hæd kənsɪɾɝd wivɪŋ ə wɔɹɾ əɡɛns lɪsənɝz, bʌɾ ə wɔɹd kəd bi dɪtɛktəd baɪ ɛniwʌn sɝtʃɪŋ, mæn əɹ wʊmən, ən ɪts pɹɛzəns wəɾ ənaʊns ðət sʌmθɪŋ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ wɑz biɪŋ sɛd. wɛl, ɛvɹiθɪŋ sɛd hɪɹ wəd bi noʊn fɹəm ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl tə ðə si sun ɪnʌf.

"Colavaere has taken up farming," Rand growled. They blinked at him, wondering whether that was a joke. "The Sun Throne is empty again, and waiting for Elayne." He had considered weaving a ward against listeners, but a ward could be detected by anyone searching, man or woman, and its presence would announce that something interesting was being said. Well, everything said here would be known from the Dragonwall to the sea soon enough.

fɛdwɪn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz ɹɪsts, waɪl dʒɑlɑni ʃiðd əɹ naɪf. noʊ wʌn lʊkt əɾ əm twaɪs; ɔl aɪz wɝ ɑn ɹænd. fɹaʊnɪŋ ət nɛɝɪliə, hi wæɡəld ɪz baʊn hænz əntɪl səlɪn slaɪs ðə kɔɹdz. "aɪ dɪdn ɹilaɪz ðɪs wɑz tə bi ə fæmli ɡæðɝɪŋ." nɛɝɪliə lʊkt ə tʃɹaɪfəl əbæʃt, meɪbi, bʌt noʊ wʌn ɛls dɪd.

Fedwin was already rubbing his wrists, while Jalani sheathed her knife. No one looked at them twice; all eyes were on Rand. Frowning at Nerilea, he waggled his bound hands until Sulin sliced the cords. "I didn't realize this was to be a family gathering." Nerilea looked a trifle abashed, maybe, but no one else did.

"æftɝ jə mɛɹi," dævɹæm mɝmɝd wɪð ə smaɪl, "ju wɪl lɝn jə mʌs tʃuz vɛɹi kɛɹfəli wʌt tə kip fɹəm jəɹ waɪf." dʒɹə ɡlæns daʊn ət hɪm, pɝsɪŋ əɹ lɪps.

"After you marry," Davram murmured with a smile, "you will learn you must choose very carefully what to keep from your wife." Deira glanced down at him, pursing her lips.

"waɪvz ɑɹ ə ɡɹeɪt kʌmfɝt," beɪl læft, "ɪf ə mæn dʌz nɑt tɛl əm tu mʌtʃ." smaɪlɪŋ, dɔɹinhə ɹæn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɪndə hɪz hɛɹ - ən ɡɹɪp fəɹ ə moʊmən əz ðoʊ ʃi mɛn tə tʌɡ hɪz hɛɾ ɔf. beɪl ɡɹʌntɪd, bʌt nɑt fəɹ dɔɹinhəz fɪŋɡɝz əloʊn. məleɪn waɪpt əɹ smɔl bɛl naɪf ɑn əɹ hɛvi skɝɾ ən ʃiðd ɪt. ðə tu wɪmən ɡɹɪn ət wʌn ənʌðɝ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd waɪl i ɹʌbd əɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, wɛɹ ə smɔl spɑɾ ə blʌd steɪn ɪz keɪɾɪnsɝ. dʒɹə nɑɾəd θɔtfəli; ɪt simd ʃi hæd dʒʌst ɡɑɾən ən aɪdiə.

"Wives are a great comfort," Bael laughed, "if a man does not tell them too much." Smiling, Dorindha ran her fingers into his hair - and gripped for a moment as though she meant to tug his head off. Bael grunted, but not for Dorindha's fingers alone. Melaine wiped her small belt knife on her heavy skirt and sheathed it. The two women grinned at one another over his head while he rubbed at his shoulder, where a small spot of blood stained his cadin'sor. Deira nodded thoughtfully; it seemed she had just gotten an idea.

"wʌt wʊmən kəɾ aɪ heɪɾ ɪnʌf tə mɛɹi hɝ tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn?" ɹænd sɛd koʊldli. ðət kɑzd ə saɪləns sɑləɾ ɪnʌf tə tʌtʃ.

"What woman could I hate enough to marry her to the Dragon Reborn?" Rand said coldly. That caused a silence solid enough to touch.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə teɪk ɹeɪn ɑn ɪz æŋɡɝ. hi ʃʊɾə ɪkspɛktəd ðɪs. məleɪn wɑz nɑt dʒʌst ə waɪz wʌn, ʃi wɑz ə dʒɹimwɔkɝ, əz wɝ æmɪz ən bɛɹ. əmʌŋ ʌðɝ θɪŋz, ðeɪ kəd tɔk tə wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn ðɛɹ dʒɹimz, ən tə ʌðɝz; ə jusfəl skɪl, ðoʊ ðeɪ hæɾ oʊnli juzd ɪt fəɹ ɪm wʌns. ɪt wɑz waɪz wʌnz' bɪznəs. noʊ wʌndɝ əɾ ɔl ðət məleɪn wɑz əbɹɛst ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət hæd hæpənd. noʊ wʌndɝ ðət ʃi toʊl dɔɹinhə ɛvɹiθɪŋ, waɪz wʌnz' bɪznəs əɹ noʊ; ðə tu wɪmən wɝ bɛs fɹɛnz ən sɪstɝz ɹoʊld ɪndə wʌn. wʌns məleɪn lɛt beɪl noʊ ʌv ðə kɪdnæpɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs i hæd toʊl bæʃɪɹ; ɪkspɛktɪŋ bæʃɪɹ tə kip ðət fɹəm ɪz waɪf wɑz laɪk ɪkspɛktɪŋ ɪm tə kip ɪt sikɹət ðət ðɛɹ haʊs wɑz ɑn faɪɝ. ɪntʃ baɪ ɪntʃ i dʒɹu ði æŋɡɝ ɪn, fɔɹst ɪt daʊn.

He tried to take rein on his anger. He should have expected this. Melaine was not just a Wise One, she was a dreamwalker, as were Amys and Bair. Among other things, they could talk to one another in their dreams, and to others; a useful skill, though they had only used it for him once. It was Wise Ones' business. No wonder at all that Melaine was abreast of everything that had happened. No wonder that she told Dorindha everything, Wise Ones' business or no; the two women were best friends and sisters rolled into one. Once Melaine let Bael know of the kidnapping, of course he had told Bashere; expecting Bashere to keep that from his wife was like expecting him to keep it secret that their house was on fire. Inch by inch he drew the anger in, forced it down.

"hæz ɪleɪn ɝaɪvd?" hi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɪz vɔɪs kæʒəwəl, ən mɪst. noʊ mæɾɝ. ðəɹ wɝ ɹizənz ɛvɹiwʌn nu fəɹ ɪm tə bi æŋkʃəs. ændɝ maɪt nɑt bi əz ənkwiəɾ əz kɛɹhin, bʌɾ ɪleɪn ɑn ðə θɹoʊn wɑz ðə fæstəst weɪ tə sɛɾəl boʊθ lænz. meɪbi ði oʊnli weɪ.

"Has Elayne arrived?" He tried to make his voice casual, and missed. No matter. There were reasons everyone knew for him to be anxious. Andor might not be as unquiet as Cairhien, but Elayne on the throne was the fastest way to settle both lands. Maybe the only way.

"nɑt jɛt." bæʃɪɹ ʃɹʌɡd. "bʌt teɪlz əv kʌm nɔɹθ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð ən ɑɹmi sʌmwɛɹ ɪn mʊɹændi, əɹ meɪbi ɔltɑɹə. ðət kəd bi jʌŋ mæt ən ɪz bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd, wɪð ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ən ðə sɪstɝz u flɛd ðə taʊɝ wən sɪuən sɑntʃ wɑz dɪpoʊzd."

"Not yet." Bashere shrugged. "But tales have come north of Aes Sedai with an army somewhere in Murandy, or maybe Altara. That could be young Mat and his Band of the Red Hand, with the Daughter-Heir and the sisters who fled the Tower when Siuan Sanche was deposed."

ɹænd ɹʌbd ɪz ɹɪsts wɛɹ ðə kɔɹdz hæd tʃeɪft. ɔl ðət "kæptɪv" ɹɪɡmɹoʊl hæd bɪn ɑn ðə tʃæns ɪleɪn wɑz hɪɹ ɔlɹɛɾi. ɪleɪn, ən eɪvinhə. soʊ hi kəd kʌm ən ɡoʊ wɪθaʊɾ əm lɝnɪŋ ʌv ɪt tɪl i wɑz ɡɔn. meɪbi hi wʊɾə faʊn ə weɪ tə pik ət ðɛm. meɪbi. . . . hi wɑz ə ful, ən noʊ meɪbi əbaʊt ðæt.

Rand rubbed his wrists where the cords had chafed. All that "captive" rigmarole had been on the chance Elayne was here already. Elayne, and Aviendha. So he could come and go without them learning of it till he was gone. Maybe he would have found a way to peek at them. Maybe. . . . He was a fool, and no maybe about that.

"du jə min ðoʊz sɪstɝz tə swɛɹ oʊθ tə ju, tu?" dʒɹəz toʊn wɑz aɪsi əz əɹ feɪs. ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk hɪm; əz ʃi sɔ ɪt, hɝ hʌzbən hæd sɛɾ ɔf daʊn ə ɹoʊd ðət laɪkli wəɾ ɛnd wɪð ɪz hɛɾ ɑn ə paɪk oʊvɝ ə ɡeɪɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ɹænd hæd pʊɾ ɪz fiɾ ɑn ðət ɹoʊd. "ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɪl nɑt hoʊl stɪl fəɹ jəɹ koʊɝsɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"Do you mean those sisters to swear oath to you, too?" Deira's tone was icy as her face. She did not like him; as she saw it, her husband had set off down a road that likely would end with his head on a pike over a gate in Tar Valon, and Rand had put his feet on that road. "The White Tower will not hold still for your coercing Aes Sedai."

ɹænd meɪɾ əɹ ə smɔl baʊ, ən bɝn əɹ ɪf ʃi tʊk ɪt fəɹ mɑkɪŋ. dʒɹə ni ɡeɪlin tæʃɪɹ nɛvɝ ɡeɪv ɪm ə taɪɾəl, nɛvɝ ivən juzd ɪz neɪm; ʃi kəɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn tɔkɪŋ tə ə fʊtmən, ən nɑɾ ə vɛɹi ɪntɛlədʒən əɹ tʃɹʌstwɝði wʌn. "ʃʊd ðeɪ tʃuz tə swɛɹ, əl æksɛp ðɛɹ oʊðz. aɪ daʊt mɛni ɑɹ ɪɡzækli iɡɝ tə ɹɪtɝn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɪf ðeɪ tʃuz ʌðɝwaɪz, ðeɪ kən ɡoʊ ðɛɹ oʊn weɪ, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ doʊn pʊt ðɛmsɛlvz əɡɛns mi."

Rand made her a small bow, and burn her if she took it for mocking. Deira ni Ghaline t'Bashere never gave him a title, never even used his name; she could as well have been talking to a footman, and not a very intelligent or trustworthy one. "Should they choose to swear, I'll accept their oaths. I doubt many are exactly eager to return to Tar Valon. If they choose otherwise, they can go their own way, so long as they don't put themselves against me."

"ðə waɪt taʊɝ əz pʊɾ ɪtsɛlf əɡɛns ju," beɪl sɛd, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd wɪð ɪz fɪsts ɑn ɪz niz. hɪz blu aɪz meɪd dʒɹəz vɔɪs sim wɔɹm. "æn ɛnəmi hu kʌmz wʌns, wɪl kʌm əɡɛn. ənlɛs ðeɪ ɑɹ stɑpt. maɪ spɪɹz wɪl fɑloʊ wɛɹɛvɝ ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn lidz." məleɪn nɑɾəd, ʌv kɔɹs; ʃi vɛɹi laɪkli wɑntəɾ ɛvɹi læst ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃildɪɾ ən nilɪŋ ʌndɝ ɡɑɹɾ ɪf nɑt baʊn hæn ən fʊt. bʌt dɔɹinhə nɑɾəd əz wɛl, ən səlɪn, ən bæʃɪɹ nʌkəld ɪz mʌstæʃɪz θɔtfəli. ɹænd dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ tə læf əɹ wip.

"The White Tower has put itself against you," Bael said, leaning forward with his fists on his knees. His blue eyes made Deira's voice seem warm. "An enemy who comes once, will come again. Unless they are stopped. My spears will follow wherever the Car'a'carn leads." Melaine nodded, of course; she very likely wanted every last Aes Sedai shielded and kneeling under guard if not bound hand and foot. But Dorindha nodded as well, and Sulin, and Bashere knuckled his mustaches thoughtfully. Rand did not know whether to laugh or weep.

"doʊn jə θɪŋk aɪv ɪnʌf ɑn maɪ pleɪt wɪθaʊɾ ə wɔɹ əɡɛns ðə waɪt taʊɝ? ɪleɪɾə ɡɹæb maɪ θɹoʊɾ ən wɑz slæp daʊn." ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪɹʌptɪŋ ɪn faɪɝ ən tɔɹn flɛʃ. ɹeɪvənz ən vʌltʃɝz ɡɔɹdʒɪŋ. haʊ mɛni dɛd? slæp daʊn. "ɪf ʃiz sɛns ɪnʌf tə stɑp ðɛɹ, əl tu." soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ æsk ɪm tə tʃɹʌst. ðə tʃɛst. hi wɑz ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd, hæf-əwɛɹ ə luz θɝɪn sʌɾənli moʊnɪŋ əbaʊt ðə dɑɹk ən ðə θɝst. hi kəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ, hi hæd tə ɪɡnɔɹ, bʌt nɑt fɝɡɛt, əɹ tʃɹʌst.

"Don't you think I've enough on my plate without a war against the White Tower? Elaida grabbed my throat and was slapped down." The ground erupting in fire and torn flesh. Ravens and vultures gorging. How many dead? Slapped down. "If she has sense enough to stop there, I will too." So long as they did not ask him to trust. The chest. He was shaking his head, half-aware of Lews Therin suddenly moaning about the dark and the thirst. He could ignore, he had to ignore, but not forget, or trust.

livɪŋ beɪl ən bæʃɪɹ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ oʊvɝ wɛðɝ ɪleɪɾə dɪɾ əv sɛns ɪnʌf tə stɑp, naʊ ðət ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn, hi muv tə ə mæp-kʌvɝd teɪbəl əɡɛns ðə wɔl, bɪniθ ə tæpəstʃɹi ʌv səm bæɾəl wɛɹ ðə waɪt laɪən ʌv ændɝ stʊd pɹɑmənənt. əpɛɹənli beɪl ən bæʃɪɹ juz ðɪs ɹum fəɹ ðɛɹ plænɪŋ. ə lɪɾəl ɹuɾɪŋ ɝaʊn faʊn ðə mæp i niɾəd, ə lɑɹdʒ ɹoʊl dɪspleɪɪŋ ɔl ʌv ændɝ fɹəm ðə maʊntənz ə mɪs tə ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn, ən pɑɹts ə ðə lænz tə ðə saʊθ əz wɛl, ɡildən ən ɔltɑɹə ən mʊɹændi.

Leaving Bael and Bashere arguing over whether Elaida did have sense enough to stop, now that she had begun, he moved to a map-covered table against the wall, beneath a tapestry of some battle where the White Lion of Andor stood prominent. Apparently Bael and Bashere used this room for their planning. A little rooting around found the map he needed, a large roll displaying all of Andor from the Mountains of Mist to the River Erinin, and parts of the lands to the south as well, Ghealdan and Altara and Murandy.

"ðə wɪmən hɛl kæptɪv ɪn ðə tʃɹikɪlɝz' lænz ɑɹ əlaʊd tə kɑz noʊ tʃɹʌbəl, soʊ waɪ ʃəɾ ɛni ʌðɝz?" məleɪn sɛd, əpɛɹənli ɪn ænsɝ tə sʌmθɪŋ i hæd nɑt hɝd. ʃi saʊndəɾ æŋɡɹi.

"The women held captive in the treekillers' lands are allowed to cause no trouble, so why should any others?" Melaine said, apparently in answer to something he had not heard. She sounded angry.

"wi wɪl də wʌt wi mʌst, dʒɹə tæʃɪɹ," dɔɹinhə sɛd kɑmli; ʃi wɑz sɛldəm ɛniθɪŋ bʌt. "hoʊl tə jəɹ kɝədʒ, ən wɪl ɝaɪv wɛɹ wi mʌst ɡoʊ."

"We will do what we must, Deira t'Bashere," Dorindha said calmly; she was seldom anything but. "Hold to your courage, and we will arrive where we must go."

"wɛn jə lip fɹəm ə klɪf," dʒɹə ɹɪplaɪd, "ɪɾ ɪz tu leɪt fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt hoʊldɪŋ tə jəɹ kɝədʒ. ən hoʊpɪŋ ðɛɹz ə heɪweɪn ət ðə bɑɾəm tə læn ɪn." hɝ hʌzbən tʃʌkəld əz ðoʊ ʃi wɑz meɪkɪŋ ə dʒoʊk. ʃi dɪd nɑt saʊn ɪt.

"When you leap from a cliff," Deira replied, "it is too late for anything but holding to your courage. And hoping there's a haywain at the bottom to land in." Her husband chuckled as though she was making a joke. She did not sound it.

spɹɛɾɪŋ ðə mæp aʊɾ ən weɪɾɪŋ ðə kɔɹnɝz wɪð ɪŋk dʒɑɹz ən sæn bɑɾəlz, ɹænd mɛʒɝɾ ɔf dɪstənsəz wɪð ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. mæt wɑz nɑt muvɪŋ vɛɹi fæst ɪf ɹumɝ pleɪst ɪm ɪn ɔltɑɹə əɹ mʊɹændi. hi tʊk pɹaɪɾ ɪn haʊ fæs ðə bæn kəd mɑɹtʃ. meɪbi ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ sloʊɪŋ hɪm, wɪð sɝvəns ən wæɡənz. meɪbi ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ sɪstɝz ðən i hæd θɔt. ɹænd ɹilaɪzd ɪz hænz wɝ klɛntʃt ɪndə fɪsts ən meɪɾ əm stʃɹeɪɾən. hi niɾəd ɪleɪn. tə teɪk ðə θɹoʊn hɪɹ ən ɪn kɛɹhin; ðət wɑz waɪ hi niɾəd hɝ. dʒʌs ðæt. eɪvinhə. . . . hi dɪd nɑt nid hɝ, nɑɾ əɾ ɔl, ən ʃi hæd meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ ʃi hæd noʊ nid fəɹ hɪm. ʃi wɑz seɪf, əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. hi kəd kip əm boʊθ seɪf baɪ kipɪŋ əm əz fɑɹ fɹəm ɪm əz pɑsəbəl. laɪt, ɪf i kəɾ oʊnli lʊk ət ðɛm. hi niɾəd mæt, ðoʊ, wɪð pɛɹɪn biɪŋ stʌbɝn. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ mæt hæd sʌɾənli bɪkʌm ɛkspɝɾ ɑn ɛvɹiθɪŋ tə də wɪð bæɾəl, bʌɾ ivən bæʃɪɹ ɹɪspɛktɪd mæts əpɪnjənz. əbaʊt wɔɹ, ɛniweɪ.

Spreading the map out and weighting the corners with ink jars and sand bottles, Rand measured off distances with his fingers. Mat was not moving very fast if rumor placed him in Altara or Murandy. He took pride in how fast the Band could march. Maybe the Aes Sedai were slowing him, with servants and wagons. Maybe there were more sisters than he had thought. Rand realized his hands were clenched into fists and made them straighten. He needed Elayne. To take the throne here and in Cairhien; that was why he needed her. Just that. Aviendha. . . . He did not need her, not at all, and she had made it clear she had no need for him. She was safe, away from him. He could keep them both safe by keeping them as far from him as possible. Light, if he could only look at them. He needed Mat, though, with Perrin being stubborn. He was not sure how Mat had suddenly become expert on everything to do with battle, but even Bashere respected Mat's opinions. About war, anyway.

"ðeɪ tʃɹiɾəd ɪm əz dætsæŋ," səlɪn ɡɹaʊld, ən səm ə ði ʌðɝ meɪɾənz ɡɹaʊld wɝdləsli ɪn ɛkoʊ.

"They treated him as da'tsang," Sulin growled, and some of the other Maidens growled wordlessly in echo.

"wi noʊ," məleɪn sɛd ɡɹɪmli. "ðeɪ hæv noʊ ɑnɝ."

"We know," Melaine said grimly. "They have no honor."

"wɪl i tʃɹuli hoʊl bæk æftɝ wʌt jə dɪskɹaɪb?" dʒɹə dɪmændəɾ ɪn dɪsbɪlivɪŋ toʊnz.

"Will he truly hold back after what you describe?" Deira demanded in disbelieving tones.

ðə mæp dɪd nɑɾ ɪkstɛn fɑɹ ɪnʌf saʊθ tə ʃoʊ ɪljən - noʊ mæp ɑn ðə teɪbəl ʃoʊɾ ɛni pɑɹɾ ə ðət kʌntʃɹi - bʌt ɹændz hæn dʒɹɪftəd daʊn əkɹɔs mʊɹændi, ən i kəɾ ɪmædʒən ðə dɔɪɝlən hɪlz, nɑt fɑɹ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪljənz bɔɹɾɝz, wɪð ə laɪn ə hɪlfɔɹts noʊ ɪnveɪɾɪŋ ɑɹmi kəɾ əfɔɹd tə ɪɡnɔɹ. ən səm tu hʌnʒɹəd ən fɪfti maɪlz tə ði ist, əkɹɔs ðə pleɪnz ə mɑɹeɪɾoʊ, ən ɑɹmi sətʃ əz hæd nɑt bɪn sin sɪns ðə neɪʃənz ɡæðɝd bɪfɔɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪn ði il wɔɹ, meɪbi nɑt sɪns ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz deɪ. tɛɹən, kɛɹhinɪn, il, ɔl pɔɪz tə smæʃ ɪndə ɪljən. ɪf pɛɹɪn wəd nɑt lɛd, ðən mæt mʌst. oʊnli ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf taɪm. ðəɹ wɑz nɛvɝ ɪnʌf taɪm.

The map did not extend far enough south to show Illian - no map on the table showed any part of that country - but Rand's hand drifted down across Murandy, and he could imagine the Doirlon Hills, not far inside Illian's borders, with a line of hillforts no invading army could afford to ignore. And some two hundred and fifty miles to the east, across the Plains of Maredo, an army such as had not been seen since the nations gathered before Tar Valon in the Aiel War, maybe not since Artur Hawkwing's day. Tairen, Cairhienin, Aiel, all poised to smash into Illian. If Perrin would not lead, then Mat must. Only there was not enough time. There was never enough time.

"bɝn maɪ aɪz," dævɹæm mʌɾɝd. "ju nɛvɝ mɛnʃən ðæt, məleɪn. leɪɾi kæɹɑlin ən lɔɹd tɔɹæm kæmpt ɹaɪɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi, ən haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪn əz wɛl? ðeɪ dɪdn kʌm təɡɛðɝ baɪ tʃæns, naʊ ɹaɪɾ ət ðɪs taɪm, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt. ðæts ə pɪɾ ə vaɪpɝz tə hæv ɑn jəɹ dɔɹstɛp, huɛvɝ jə ɑɹ."

"Burn my eyes," Davram muttered. "You never mentioned that, Melaine. Lady Caraline and Lord Toram camped right outside the city, and High Lord Darlin as well? They didn't come together by chance, now right at this time, they did not. That's a pit of vipers to have on your doorstep, whoever you are."

"lɛt ði ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ dæns," beɪl ɹɪplaɪd. "dɛd vaɪpɝz baɪt noʊ wʌn."

"Let the algai'd'siswai dance," Bael replied. "Dead vipers bite no one."

sɑmaɪl hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn əɾ ɪz bɛs dɪfɛndɪŋ. ðət wɑz luz θɝɪnz mɛmɹi, fɹəm ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ. wɪð tu mɛn ɪnsaɪd wʌn skʌl, meɪbi ɪt wɑz tə bi ɪkspɛktəd ðət mɛmɹiz wəd dʒɹɪf bɪtwin ðɛm. hæd luz θɝɪn sʌɾənli faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɹɪkɔlɪŋ hɝɾɪŋ ʃip, əɹ kʌɾɪŋ faɪɝwʊd, əɹ fiɾɪŋ ðə tʃɪkənz? ɹænd kəd hɪɹ ɪm feɪnli, ɹeɪdʒɪŋ tə kɪl, tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ; θɔts ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz dʒɹoʊv luz θɝɪn oʊvɝ ðə bɹɪŋk.

Sammael had always been at his best defending. That was Lews Therin's memory, from the War of the Shadow. With two men inside one skull, maybe it was to be expected that memories would drift between them. Had Lews Therin suddenly found himself recalling herding sheep, or cutting firewood, or feeding the chickens? Rand could hear him faintly, raging to kill, to destroy; thoughts of the Forsaken almost always drove Lews Therin over the brink.

"dʒɹə tæʃɪɹ spiks tʃɹuli," beɪl sɛd. "wi mʌst steɪ ɑn ðə pæθ wɪv bɪɡʌn əntɪl əɹ ɛnəmiz ɑɹ dɪstʃɹɔɪd, əɹ wi ɑɹ."

"Deira t'Bashere speaks truly," Bael said. "We must stay on the path we have begun until our enemies are destroyed, or we are."

"ðæt wɑz nɑt haʊ aɪ mɛn ɪt," dʒɹə sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "bʌt jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt. wɪv noʊ tʃɔɪs, naʊ. əntɪl əɹ ɛnəmiz ɑɹ dɪstʃɹɔɪd, əɹ wi ɑɹ."

"That was not how I meant it," Deira said dryly. "But you are right. We have no choice, now. Until our enemies are destroyed, or we are."

dɛθ, dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ən mædnəs floʊɾəd ɪn ɹændz hɛɾ əz i stʌɾid ðə mæp. sɑmaɪl wəd bi ət ðoʊz fɔɹts sun æftɝ ði ɑɹmi stʃɹʌk, sɑmaɪl wɪð ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ʌv ə fɔɹseɪkən ən ðə nɑlədʒ ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. lɔɹd bɹɛnd, hi kɔl hɪmsɛlf, wʌn ə ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn, ən lɔɹd bɹɛn ðeɪ kɔld ɪm u ɹəfjuz tə ədmɪt ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɝ lus, bʌt ɹænd nu hɪm. wɪð luz θɝɪnz mɛmɹi, hi nu sɑmaɪlz feɪs, nu hɪm tə ðə boʊn.

Death, destruction and madness floated in Rand's head as he studied the map. Sammael would be at those forts soon after the army struck, Sammael with the strength of a Forsaken and the knowledge of the Age of Legends. Lord Brend, he called himself, one of the Council of Nine, and Lord Brend they called him who refused to admit the Forsaken were loose, but Rand knew him. With Lews Therin's memory, he knew Sammael's face, knew him to the bone.

"wʌt dʌz daɪɛlɪn tæɹɑvɪn ɪntɛnd wɪð nɑiən ɑɝɔn ən ɛləniə sɑɝənd?" dɔɹinhə æskt. "aɪ kənfɛs aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðɪs ʃʌɾɪŋ pipəl əweɪ."

"What does Dyelin Taravin intend with Naean Arawn and Elenia Sarand?" Dorindha asked. "I confess I do not understand this shutting people away."

"wʌt ʃi dʌz ðəɹ ɪz hɑɹdli ɪmpɔɹɾənt," dævɹæm sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz əɹ miɾɪŋz wɪð ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ ðət kənsɝn mi."

"What she does there is hardly important," Davram said. "It is her meetings with those Aes Sedai that concern me."

"daɪɛlɪn tæɹɑvɪn ɪz ə ful," məleɪn mʌɾɝd. "ʃi bɪlivz ðə ɹumɝz əbaʊt ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn nilɪŋ tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ʃɪl nɑt bɹʌʃ əɹ hɛɹ ənlɛs ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡɪv əɹ pɝmɪʃən."

"Dyelin Taravin is a fool," Melaine muttered. "She believes the rumors about the Car'a'carn kneeling to the Amyrlin Seat. She will not brush her hair unless those Aes Sedai give her permission."

"ju mɪsteɪk hɝ," dʒɹə sɛd fɝmli. "daɪɛlɪn ɪz stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɹul ændɝ; ʃi pɹuv ðəɾ əɾ ɑɹɪŋɡəl. ʌv kɔɹs ʃi lɪsənz tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ - oʊnli ə ful ɪɡnɔɹz ɛɛs sədaɪ - bʌt tə lɪsən ɪz nɑt tə oʊbeɪ."

"You mistake her," Deira said firmly. "Dyelin is strong enough to rule Andor; she proved that at Aringill. Of course she listens to the Aes Sedai - only a fool ignores Aes Sedai - but to listen is not to obey."

ðə wæɡənz ðət hæd bɪn bɹɔt fɹəm dəməaɪz wɛlz wəɾ əv tə bi sɝtʃt əɡɛn. ðə fæt-lɪɾəl-mæn æŋɡɹil hæd tə bi ðəɹ sʌmwɛɹ. nʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz u ɪskeɪpt cʊɾə hæɾ ə klu wʌɾ ɪt wɑz. ənlɛs, pɝhæps, wʌn hæd stʌk ə suvənɪɹ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪn əɹ paʊtʃ. noʊ. ɪt hæd tə bi ɪn ðə wæɡənz sʌmwɛɹ. wɪð ðæt, hi wɑz mɔɹ ðən ə mætʃ fəɹ ɛni ʌv ðə fɔɹseɪkən. wɪθaʊɾ ɪt. . . . dɛθ, dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ən mædnəs.

The wagons that had been brought from Dumai's Wells would have to be searched again. The fat-little-man angreal had to be there somewhere. None of the sisters who escaped could have had a clue what it was. Unless, perhaps, one had stuck a souvenir of the Dragon Reborn in her pouch. No. It had to be in the wagons somewhere. With that, he was more than a match for any of the Forsaken. Without it. . . . Death, destruction and madness.

sʌɾənli wʌɾ i hæd bɪn hɪɹɪŋ ɹʌʃt fɔɹwɝd. "wʌt wɑz ðæt?" hi dɪmændəd, tɝnɪŋ fɹəm ði aɪvɝi-ɪnleɪd teɪbəl.

Suddenly what he had been hearing rushed forward. "What was that?" he demanded, turning from the ivory-inlaid table.

sɝpɹaɪz feɪsəz tɝn təwɔɹd hɪm. dʒoʊnən stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm wɛɹ i hæd bɪn slaʊtʃɪŋ əɡɛns ðə dɔɹfɹeɪm. ðə meɪɾənz, skwɑɾɪŋ izəli ɑn ðɛɹ hilz, sʌɾənli əpɪɹɾ əlɝt. ðeɪ hæd bɪn tɔkɪŋ aɪdli əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz; ivən ðeɪ wɝ wɛɹi ɝaʊn ɪm naʊ.

Surprised faces turned toward him. Jonan straightened from where he had been slouching against the doorframe. The Maidens, squatting easily on their heels, suddenly appeared alert. They had been talking idly among themselves; even they were wary around him now.

fɪŋɡɝɪŋ wʌn ə hɝ aɪvɝi nɛkləsɪz, məleɪn ʃɛɹɾ ə dɪsaɪɾɪd lʊk bɪtwin beɪl ən dævɹæm, ðən spoʊk bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ naɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ əɾ ən ɪn kɔl ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn, ɪn wʌt dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ kɔlz ðə nu sɪɾi." ʃi sɛd ðə wɝd "ɪn" ɪn ən ɑd weɪ, ən "sɪɾi" əz wɛl; ʃi hæɾ oʊnli noʊn əm fɹəm bʊks bɪfɔɹ kʌmɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl. "hi ən beɪl seɪ wi mʌs liv əm əloʊn ənlɛs ðeɪ də sʌmθɪŋ əɡɛns ju. aɪ θɪŋk juv lɝn əbaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɹænd ælθɹ."

Fingering one of her ivory necklaces, Melaine shared a decided look between Bael and Davram, then spoke before anyone else. "There are nine Aes Sedai at an inn called The Silver Swan, in what Davram Bashere calls the New City." She said the word "inn" in an odd way, and "city" as well; she had only known them from books before coming across the Dragonwall. "He and Bael say we must leave them alone unless they do something against you. I think you have learned about waiting for Aes Sedai, Rand al'Thor."

"maɪ fɔlt," bæʃɪɹ saɪd, "ɪf fɔl ðəɹ ɪz. ðoʊ wʌt məleɪn ɪkspɛks tə du, aɪ kæn seɪ. eɪt sɪstɝz stɑpt ət ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn ɔlmoʊst ə mʌnθ əɡoʊ, dʒʌst æftɝ jə lɛft. naʊ ən ðən ə fju mɔɹ kʌm əɹ ɡoʊ, bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ nɛvɝ mɔɹ ðən tɛn ət wʌn taɪm. ðeɪ kip tə ðɛmsɛlvz, kɑz noʊ tʃɹʌbəl, ən æsk noʊ kwɛstʃənz ðət beɪl əɹ aɪ kən lɝn. ə fju ɹɛd sɪstɝz əv kʌm ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, əz wɛl; twaɪs. ðoʊz ət ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn ɔl əv wɔɹɾɝz, bʌt ðiz nɛvɝ du. aɪm ʃʊɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹɛdz. tu əɹ θɹi əpɪɹ, æsk æftɝ mɛn hɛɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə blæk taʊɝ, ən æftɝ ə deɪ əɹ soʊ, ðeɪ liv. wɪθaʊt lɝnɪŋ mʌtʃ, aɪd seɪ. ðət blæk taʊɝ ɪz əz ɡʊɾ əz ə fɔɹtʃɹəs fəɹ hoʊldɪŋ ɪn sikɹəts. nʌn ə ðɛm əz meɪd tʃɹʌbəl, ən aɪ wəd ɹæðɝ nɑt tʃɹʌbəl əm əntɪl aɪ noʊ ɪts nɛsəsɛɹi."

"My fault," Bashere sighed, "if fault there is. Though what Melaine expects to do, I can't say. Eight sisters stopped at The Silver Swan almost a month ago, just after you left. Now and then a few more come or go, but there are never more than ten at one time. They keep to themselves, cause no trouble, and ask no questions that Bael or I can learn. A few Red sisters have come into the city, as well; twice. Those at The Silver Swan all have Warders, but these never do. I'm sure they are Reds. Two or three appear, ask after men heading for the Black Tower, and after a day or so, they leave. Without learning much, I'd say. That Black Tower is as good as a fortress for holding in secrets. None of them has made trouble, and I would rather not trouble them until I know it is necessary."

"aɪ dɪdn min ðæt," ɹænd sɛd sloʊli. hi sæt daʊn ɪn ə tʃɛɹ ɑpəzət bæʃɪɹ, ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə kɑɹvd ɑɹmz tɪl ɪz nʌkəlz hɝt. ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡæðɝɪŋ hɪɹ, ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪn kɛɹhin. hæpənstæns? luz θɝɪn ɹʌmbəld laɪk θʌndɝ ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən əbaʊt dɛθ ən bɪtʃɹeɪəl. hi wəɾ əv tə wɔɹn teɪm. nɑɾ əbaʊt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ət ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn - teɪm sɝɾənli nu ɔlɹɛɾi; waɪ hæɾ i nɑt mɛnʃən ɪt? - əbaʊt steɪɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm, kipɪŋ ði æʃəmən əweɪ. ɪf dəməaɪz wɛlz wɑz tə bi ən ɛnd, ðəɹ kəd bi noʊ nu bɪɡɪnɪŋz hɪɹ. tu mɛni θɪŋz sim tə bi spɪnɪŋ aʊɾ ə kəntʃɹoʊl. ðə hɑɹɾɝ i tʃɹaɪd tə ɡæðɝ əm ɔl ɪn, ðə mɔɹ ðəɹ wɝ ən ðə fæstɝ ðeɪ spʌn. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə fɔl, ən ʃæɾɝ. ðə θɔt dʒɹaɪɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn hæd tɔɾ ɪm tə dʒʌɡəl ə lɪɾəl, bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ bɪn vɛɹi ɡʊd. naʊ hi hæd tə bi vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ɪndid. hi wɪʃt i hæd sʌmθɪŋ tə wɛɾ ɪz θɹoʊt.

"I didn't mean that," Rand said slowly. He sat down in a chair opposite Bashere, gripping the carved arms till his knuckles hurt. Aes Sedai gathering here, Aes Sedai gathering in Cairhien. Happenstance? Lews Therin rumbled like thunder on the horizon about death and betrayal. He would have to warn Taim. Not about the Aes Sedai at The Silver Swan - Taim certainly knew already; why had he not mentioned it? - about staying away from them, keeping the Asha'man away. If Dumai's Wells was to be an end, there could be no new beginnings here. Too many things seemed to be spinning out of control. The harder he tried to gather them all in, the more there were and the faster they spun. Sooner or later, everything was going to fall, and shatter. The thought dried his throat. Thom Merrilin had taught him to juggle a little, but he had never been very good. Now he had to be very good indeed. He wished he had something to wet his throat.

hi dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz i hæd spoʊkən ðət læst əlaʊɾ əntɪl dʒɑlɑni stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm əɹ kɹaʊtʃ ən stʃɹʌɾɪd əkɹɔs ðə ɹum tə wɛɹ ə tɔl sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ stʊɾ ɑn ə smɔl teɪbəl. fɪlɪŋ ə hæmɝd sɪlvɝ ɡɑblət, ʃi bɹɔɾ ɪt bæk tə ɹænd wɪð ə smaɪl, hɝ maʊθ oʊpənɪŋ əz ʃi pɹɑfɝɾ ɪt. hi ɪkspɛktəd sʌmθɪŋ ɹud, bʌɾ ə tʃeɪnʒ keɪm oʊvɝ əɹ feɪs. ɔl ʃi sɛd wɑz, "kɑɹəkɑɹn," ðən wɛn bæk tə hɝ pleɪs wɪð ði ʌðɝ meɪɾənz, soʊ dɪɡnəfaɪɾ ɪt simd ʃi wɑz ɪməteɪɾɪŋ dɔɹinhə, əɹ meɪbi dʒɹə. soʊmɑɹə dʒɛstʃɝɾ ɪn hæntɔk, ən sʌɾənli ɛvɹi meɪɾən wɑz ɹɛd-feɪst ən baɪɾɪŋ əɹ lɪps tə kip fɹəm læfɪŋ. ɛvɹi meɪɾən bʌt dʒɑlɑni, hu wɑz dʒʌst ɹɛd-feɪst.

He did not realize he had spoken that last aloud until Jalani straightened from her crouch and strutted across the room to where a tall silver pitcher stood on a small table. Filling a hammered silver goblet, she brought it back to Rand with a smile, her mouth opening as she proffered it. He expected something rude, but a change came over her face. All she said was, "Car'a'carn," then went back to her place with the other Maidens, so dignified it seemed she was imitating Dorindha, or maybe Deira. Somara gestured in handtalk, and suddenly every Maiden was red-faced and biting her lips to keep from laughing. Every Maiden but Jalani, who was just red-faced.

ðə waɪn pʌntʃ teɪstəɾ ə plʌmz. ɹænd kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ fæt swit plʌmz fɹəm ði ɔɹtʃɝdz əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ wən i wɑz jʌŋ, klaɪmɪŋ ðə tʃɹiz tə pɪk əm hɪmsɛlf. . . . tɪltɪŋ ɪz hɛd bæk, hi dʒɹeɪn ðə ɡɑblət. ðəɹ wɝ plʌm tʃɹiz ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, bʌt noʊ ɔɹtʃɝdz ə ðɛm, ən sɝɾənli nɑɾ əkɹɔs ɛni ɹɪvɝ. kip jəɹ blʌɾi mɛmɹiz tə jɝsɛlf, hi snɑɹəld ət luz θɝɪn. ðə mæn ɪn ɪz hɛd læft ət sʌmθɪŋ, ɡɪɡəlɪŋ kwaɪətli tə hɪmsɛlf.

The wine punch tasted of plums. Rand could remember fat sweet plums from the orchards across the river when he was young, climbing the trees to pick them himself. . . . Tilting his head back, he drained the goblet. There were plum trees in the Two Rivers, but no orchards of them, and certainly not across any river. Keep your bloody memories to yourself, he snarled at Lews Therin. The man in his head laughed at something, giggling quietly to himself.

bæʃɪɹ fɹaʊn ət ðə meɪɾənz, ðən ɡlænst ət beɪl ən ɪz waɪvz, ɔl ɪmpæsɪv əz stoʊn, ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi ɡɑɾ ɑn wɛl wɪð beɪl, bʌɾ il ɪn dʒɛnɝəl mɪstəfaɪd hɪm. "sɪns noʊ wʌn ɪz bɹɪŋɪŋ mi ɛni dʒɹɪŋk," hi sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ, ən wɛn tə pɔɹ ɪz oʊn. hi tʊk ə lɔŋ swɑloʊ ðət wɛɾ ɪz hɛvi mʌstæʃɪz. "naʊ, ðæts kulɪŋ. teɪmz weɪ ʌv ɛnɹoʊlɪŋ mɛn simz tə swip ʌp ɛvɹi fɛloʊ hud laɪk tə fɑloʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hiz dɪlɪvɝɾ ə ɡʊdli ɑɹmi tə mi, mɛn u læk wʌtɛvɝ ɪts jəɹ æʃəmən nid. ðeɪ ɔl tɔk waɪd-aɪɾ əbaʊt wɔkɪŋ ðoʊ hoʊlz ɪn ði ɛɹ, bʌt nʌn əz bɪn ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ ðə blæk taʊɝ. aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ aʊɾ ə fju θɔts jʌŋ mæt hæd."

Bashere frowned at the Maidens, then glanced at Bael and his wives, all impassive as stone, and shook his head. He got on well with Bael, but Aiel in general mystified him. "Since no one is bringing me any drink," he said, rising, and went to pour his own. He took a long swallow that wet his heavy mustaches. "Now, that's cooling. Taim's way of enrolling men seems to sweep up every fellow who'd like to follow the Dragon Reborn. He has delivered a goodly army to me, men who lack whatever it is your Asha'man need. They all talk wide-eyed about walking though holes in the air, but none has been anywhere near the Black Tower. I'm trying out a few thoughts young Mat had."

ɹænd weɪv ðəɾ əweɪ wɪð ði ɛmpti ɡɑblət. "tɛl mi əbaʊt daɪɛlɪn." daɪɛlɪn ə haʊs tæɹɑvɪn wəd bi nɛkst ɪn laɪn fəɹ ðə θɹoʊn ʃəɾ ɛniθɪŋ hæpən tə ɪleɪn, bʌɾ i hæd toʊld əɹ i wɑz hævɪŋ ɪleɪn bɹɔt tə keɪɛmlɪn. "ɪf ʃi θɪŋks ʃi kən teɪk ðə laɪən θɹoʊn, aɪ kən faɪn ə fɑɹm fəɹ hɝ, tu."

Rand waved that away with the empty goblet. "Tell me about Dyelin." Dyelin of House Taravin would be next in line for the throne should anything happen to Elayne, but he had told her he was having Elayne brought to Caemlyn. "If she thinks she can take the Lion Throne, I can find a farm for her, too."

"teɪk ðə θɹoʊn?" dʒɹə sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli, ən əɹ hʌzbən læft aʊt laʊd.

"Take the throne?" Deira said incredulously, and her husband laughed out loud.

"aɪ hæv noʊ ʌndɝstændɪŋ ʌv wɛtləndɝ weɪz," beɪl sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ðəɾ ɪz wʌt ʃiz dʌn."

"I have no understanding of wetlander ways," Bael said, "but I do not think that is what she has done."

"fɑɹ fɹəm ɪt." dævɹæm kæɹid ðə pɪtʃɝ oʊvɝ tə pɔɹ mɔɹ pʌntʃ fəɹ ɹænd. "sʌm lɛsɝ lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz u θɔt tə kʌɹi feɪvɝ pɹoʊkleɪm fəɹ əɹ əɾ ɑɹɪŋɡəl. ʃi muvz kwɪkli, leɪɾi daɪɛlɪn. wɪðɪn fɔɹ deɪz ʃi hæd ðə tu liɾɝz hæŋd, fəɹ tʃɹizən tə ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ɪleɪn, ən ɔɹɾɝd ənʌðɝ twɛnti flɑɡd." hi tʃʌkəld əpɹuvɪŋli. hɪz waɪf snɪft. laɪkli ʃi wʊɾə hæd ðə ɹoʊd laɪnd wɪð ɡɪbɪts ɔl ðə weɪ fɹəm ɑɹɪŋɡəl tə keɪɛmlɪn.

"Far from it." Davram carried the pitcher over to pour more punch for Rand. "Some lesser lords and ladies who thought to curry favor proclaimed for her at Aringill. She moves quickly, Lady Dyelin. Within four days she had the two leaders hanged, for treason to the Daughter-Heir Elayne, and ordered another twenty flogged." He chuckled approvingly. His wife sniffed. Likely she would have had the road lined with gibbets all the way from Aringill to Caemlyn.

"ðɛn wʌt wɑz ðəɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ ɹulɪŋ ændɝ?" ɹænd dɪmændəd. "æn ɪmpɹɪzənɪŋ ɛləniə ən nɑiən."

"Then what was that about her ruling Andor?" Rand demanded. "And imprisoning Elenia and Naean."

"ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə wʌnz u tʃɹaɪd tə kleɪm ðə θɹoʊn," dʒɹə sɛd, dɑɹk aɪz spɑɹklɪŋ æŋɡɹəli.

"They are the ones who tried to claim the throne," Deira said, dark eyes sparkling angrily.

bæʃɪɹ nɑɾəd. hi wɑz mʌtʃ kɑmɝ. "oʊnli θɹi deɪz əɡoʊ. wən wɝɾ ɝaɪvd ə koʊləveɪɪɹz kɔɹəneɪʃən, ən ðə ɹumɝz fɹəm kɛɹhin ðət jə hæd ɡɔn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn bɪɡæn tə saʊn mɔɹ ɹil. wɪð tʃɹeɪd bɪɡɪnɪŋ əɡɛn, ðəɹ ɑɹ soʊ mɛni pɪdʒənz ɪn ði ɛɹ bɪtwin kɛɹhin ən keɪɛmlɪn, jə kəd wɔk ɑn ðɛɹ bæks." pʊɾɪŋ ðə pɪtʃɝ bæk, hi ɹɪtɝn tə hɪz tʃɛɹ. "nɑiən pɹoʊkleɪm fəɹ ðə laɪən θɹoʊn ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, ɛləniə bɪfɔɹ mɪddeɪ, ən baɪ sʌnsɛt daɪɛlɪn, pɛlɪvɑɹ ən lwɑn hæɾ ɝɛstəɾ əm boʊθ. ðeɪ ənaʊns daɪɛlɪn əz ɹidʒən ðə nɛks mɔɹnɪŋ. ɪn ɪleɪnz neɪm, əntɪl ɪleɪn ɹɪtɝnz. moʊst ə ðə haʊsəz ʌv ændɝ əv dɪklɛɹd səpɔɹt fəɹ daɪɛlɪn. aɪ θɪŋk səm wəd laɪk əɹ tə teɪk ðə θɹoʊn hɝsɛlf, bʌɾ ɑɹɪŋɡəl kips ivən ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl kɛɹfəl ə ðɛɹ tʌŋz." kloʊzɪŋ wʌn aɪ, bæʃɪɹ pɔɪntəɾ ət ɹænd. "ju, ðeɪ də nɑt mɛnʃən əɾ ɔl. wɛðɝ ðəɾ ɪz ɡʊɾ əɹ bæd, ɪɾəl teɪk ə waɪzɝ hɛd ðən maɪn tə seɪ."

Bashere nodded. He was much calmer. "Only three days ago. When word arrived of Colavaere's coronation, and the rumors from Cairhien that you had gone to Tar Valon began to sound more real. With trade beginning again, there are so many pigeons in the air between Cairhien and Caemlyn, you could walk on their backs." Putting the pitcher back, he returned to his chair. "Naean proclaimed for the Lion Throne in the morning, Elenia before midday, and by sunset Dyelin, Pelivar and Luan had arrested them both. They announced Dyelin as Regent the next morning. In Elayne's name, until Elayne returns. Most of the Houses of Andor have declared support for Dyelin. I think some would like her to take the throne herself, but Aringill keeps even the most powerful careful of their tongues." Closing one eye, Bashere pointed at Rand. "You, they do not mention at all. Whether that is good or bad, it will take a wiser head than mine to say."

dʒɹə ɔfɝɾ ə kul smaɪl, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ðət noʊz ə hɝz. "ðoʊz . . . lɪkspɪɾəlz . . . jə əlaʊd tə meɪk fɹi ʌv ðə pæləs əv ɔl flɛd ðə sɪɾi, ɪt simz. flɛɾ ændɝ, səm ə ðɛm, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ɹumɝ. jə ʃəd noʊ, ðeɪ wɝ ɔl bɪhaɪn iðɝ ɛləniə əɹ nɑiən."

Deira offered a cool smile, looking down that nose of hers. "Those . . . lickspittles . . . you allowed to make free of the palace have all fled the city, it seems. Fled Andor, some of them, according to rumor. You should know, they were all behind either Elenia or Naean."

ɹænd kɛɹfəli sɛɾ ɪz fʊl ɡɑbləɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ bɪsaɪɾ ɪz tʃɛɹ. hi hæɾ oʊnli lɛt lɝ ən ɛɹəmɪlə ən ðə ɹɛst ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə tʃɹaɪ pʊʃɪŋ daɪɛlɪn ən ðoʊz u səpɔɹɾəd əɹ ɪndə koʊɑpɝeɪʃən wɪð hɪm. ðeɪ wəd nɛvɝ əv lɛft ændɝ tə ðə laɪks ə lɔɹd lɝ. wɪð taɪm ən ɪleɪnz ɹɪtɝn, ɪt maɪt jɛt wɝk. bʌɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz wɝlɪŋ fæstɝ ən fæstɝ, wɝlɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. ðəɹ wɝ ə fju θɪŋz i kəd kəntʃɹoʊl, ðoʊ.

Rand carefully set his full goblet on the floor beside his chair. He had only let Lir and Arymilla and the rest remain in order to try pushing Dyelin and those who supported her into cooperation with him. They would never have left Andor to the likes of Lord Lir. With time and Elayne's return, it might yet work. But everything was whirling faster and faster, whirling away from his fingers. There were a few things he could control, though.

"fɛdwɪn, ðɛɹ, ɪz ən æʃəmən," hi sɛd. "hi kən bɹɪŋ mɛsədʒəz tə mi ɪn kɛɹhin, ɪf ðɛɹz nid." ðət wɪð ə ɡlɛɹ fəɹ məleɪn, hu ɹɪtɝn ðə blændəst sɔɹɾ ə lʊk. dʒɹə stʌɾid fɛdwɪn əz ʃi maɪɾ ə dɛd ɹæt səm oʊvɝiɡɝ dɔɡ hæd dʒɹɑpt ɑn əɹ ɹʌɡ. dævɹæm ən beɪl wɝ mɔɹ kənsɪɾɝɪŋ; fɛdwɪn tʃɹaɪd tə stæn stʃɹeɪɾɝ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ ɡeɪz. "doʊn lɛɾ ɛniwʌn noʊ hu hi ɪz," ɹænd wɛn ɑn. "noʊ wʌn. ðæts waɪ hi ɪzənt wɛɹɪŋ blæk. aɪm teɪkɪŋ tu mɔɹ tə lɔɹd səmɝædʒɹɪɾ ən haɪ lɔɹd wɪɹɑmɑn tənaɪt. ðəl əv nid wən ðeɪ feɪs sɑmaɪl ɪn ðə dɔɪɝlən hɪlz. əl bi bɪzi tʃuɪŋ ɑn kɛɹhin fəɹ ə waɪl jɛt, ɪt simz." ən meɪbi ændɝ, tu.

"Fedwin, there, is an Asha'man," he said. "He can bring messages to me in Cairhien, if there's need." That with a glare for Melaine, who returned the blandest sort of look. Deira studied Fedwin as she might a dead rat some overeager dog had dropped on her rug. Davram and Bael were more considering; Fedwin tried to stand straighter under their gaze. "Don't let anyone know who he is," Rand went on. "No one. That's why he isn't wearing black. I am taking two more to Lord Semaradrid and High Lord Weiramon tonight. They'll have need when they face Sammael in the Doirlon Hills. I will be busy chewing on Cairhien for a while yet, it seems." And maybe Andor, too.

"dʌz ðɪs min jəl sɛn ðə spɪɹz fɔɹwɝɾ ət læst?" beɪl sɛd. "ju ɡɪv ði ɔɹɾɝz tənaɪt?"

"Does this mean you will send the spears forward at last?" Bael said. "You give the orders tonight?"

ɹænd nɑɾəd, ən bæʃɪɹ ɡeɪv ə ɡɹeɪt huɾ ə læftɝ. "naʊ, ðət kɔlz fəɹ ə ɡʊd waɪn. əɹ ɪt wəɾ ɪf ɪt wɑzn hɑɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ə mænz blʌd θɪk əz pɔɹədʒ." læftɝ slɪɾ ɪndə ə ɡɹɪmɑs. "bɝn mi, bʌɾ aɪ wɪʃ aɪ kəd bi ðɛɹ. stɪl, aɪ səpoʊz hoʊldɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz noʊ smɔl θɪŋ."

Rand nodded, and Bashere gave a great hoot of laughter. "Now, that calls for a good wine. Or it would if it wasn't hot enough to make a man's blood thick as porridge." Laughter slid into a grimace. "Burn me, but I wish I could be there. Still, I suppose holding Caemlyn for the Dragon Reborn is no small thing."

"ju ɔlweɪz wɑnə bi wɛɹ ðə sɔɹdz ɑɹ bɛɹd, maɪ hʌzbənd." dʒɹə saʊndəd kwaɪt fɑnd.

"You always want to be where the swords are bared, my husband." Deira sounded quite fond.

"ðə fɪfθ," beɪl sɛd. "ju wɪl əlaʊ ðə fɪfθ ɪn ɪljən, wən sɑmaɪl əz fɔlən?" il kʌstəm əlaʊd teɪkɪŋ ðə fɪfθ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɔl ðət wɑz ɪn ə pleɪs teɪkən baɪ fɔɹs ʌv ɑɹmz. ɹænd hæd fɔɹbɪɾən ɪt hɪɹ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn; hi wəd nɑt ɡɪv ɪleɪn ə sɪɾi luɾəd ivən ðət mʌtʃ.

"The fifth," Bael said. "You will allow the fifth in Illian, when Sammael has fallen?" Aiel custom allowed taking the fifth part of all that was in a place taken by force of arms. Rand had forbidden it here in Caemlyn; he would not give Elayne a city looted even that much.

"ðeɪ wɪl əv ðə fɪfθ," ɹænd sɛd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə sɑmaɪl əɹ ɪljən ðəɾ i θɔt. bɹɪŋ ɪleɪn kwɪkli, mæt. ɪt ɹæn waɪld ɪn ɪz hɛd, əkɹɔs luz θɝɪnz kækəlɪŋ. bɹɪŋ əɹ kwɪkli, bɪfɔɹ ændɝ ən kɛɹhin boʊθ ɪɹʌpt ɪn maɪ feɪs.

"They will have the fifth," Rand said, but it was not of Sammael or Illian that he thought. Bring Elayne quickly, Mat. It ran wild in his head, across Lews Therin's cackling. Bring her quickly, before Andor and Cairhien both erupt in my face.


tʃæptɝ eɪt


CHAPTER 8

ðə fɪɡjɝhɛd


The Figurehead

wi mʌst stɑp hɪɹ təmɑɹoʊ." ɛɡwin ʃɪftəd kɛɹfəli ɑn əɹ foʊldɪŋ tʃɛɹ; ɪt hæɾ ə tɛndənsi tə foʊld ɑn ɪts oʊn, səmtaɪmz. "lɔɹd bɹaɪn sɛz ði ɑɹmi ɪz ɹʌnɪŋ ʃɔɹɾ ə fud. əɹ kæmp ɪz sɝɾənli ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ."

We must stop here tomorrow." Egwene shifted carefully on her folding chair; it had a tendency to fold on its own, sometimes. "Lord Bryne says the army is running short of food. Our camp is certainly short of everything."

tu stʌbi tæloʊ kændəlz bɝn ɑn ðə wʊɾən teɪbəl ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. ðət foʊldəd, tu, fəɹ izi pækɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɝɾiɝ ðən ðə tʃɛɹ. ðə kændəlz ɪn ðə tɛn ðət sɝvd əz əɹ stʌɾi wɝ sʌpləmɛntəd baɪ ən ɔɪl læntɝn hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə sɛntɝpoʊl ʌp nɪɹ ðə pik. ðə dɪm jɛloʊ laɪt flɪkɝd, meɪkɪŋ feɪnt ʃædoʊz dæns ɑn pætʃt kænvəs wɔlz ðət wɝ ə fɑɹ kɹaɪ fɹəm ðə ɡɹænduɹ ə ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌt ðət dɪd nɑɾ əpsɛt hɝ. tʃɹuθ bi noʊn, ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz səm kənsɪɾɝəbəl dɪstəns ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə ɡɹænduɹ nɔɹməli əsoʊsieɪɾəd wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ʃi nu vɛɹi wɛl ðət ðə sɛvən-stʃɹaɪp stoʊl ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz wɑz ði oʊnli ɹizən ɛni stʃɹeɪnʒɝ wəd bɪliv əɹ æmɪɝlɪn. ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪɾ ən ɪkstʃɹimli fulɪʃ dʒoʊk. ɑd θɪŋz hæd hæpən ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝz hɪstɝi - sɪuən hæd toʊld əɹ sikɹət dɪteɪlz ə səm ə ðɛm - jɛt ʃʊɹli nʌθɪŋ soʊ ɑɾ əz hɝ.

Two stubby tallow candles burned on the wooden table in front of her. That folded, too, for easy packing, but it was sturdier than the chair. The candles in the tent that served as her study were supplemented by an oil lantern hanging from the centerpole up near the peak. The dim yellow light flickered, making faint shadows dance on patched canvas walls that were a far cry from the grandeur of the Amyrlin's study in the White Tower, but that did not upset her. Truth be known, she herself was some considerable distance short of the grandeur normally associated with the Amyrlin Seat. She knew very well that the seven-striped stole on her shoulders was the only reason any stranger would believe her Amyrlin. If they did not think it an extremely foolish joke. Odd things had happened in the White Tower's history - Siuan had told her secret details of some of them - yet surely nothing so odd as her.

"fɔɹ əɹ faɪv deɪz wəd bi bɛɾɝ," ʃɛɹiəm mjuzd, stʌɾiɪŋ ðə ʃif ə peɪpɝz ɪn əɹ læp. slaɪtli plʌmp, wɪð haɪ tʃikboʊnz ən tɪltəd ɡɹin aɪz, ɪn əɹ dɑɹk ɡɹin ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs ʃi mænədʒ tə lʊk ɛləɡən ən kəmændɪŋ dɪspaɪɾ əɹ pɝtʃ ɑn wʌn ə ðə tu pɹikɛɹiəs stulz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə teɪbəl. ɪkstʃeɪnʒ əɹ nɛɹoʊ blu stoʊl ə ðə kipɝ ə ðə kɹɑnəkəlz fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪnz, ən ɛniwʌn wəd θɪŋk ʃi wɔɹ ɪt baɪ ɹaɪt. səmtaɪmz ʃi sɝɾənli sim tə bɪliv ðə stʃɹaɪp stoʊl ɹɛstəɾ ɑn əɹ oʊn ʃoʊldɝz. "ɔɹ pɝhæps lɔŋɡɝ. ɪt wəd nɑt hɝt tə bɪld əɹ stɔɹz ʌp wʌns mɔɹ."

"Four or five days would be better," Sheriam mused, studying the sheaf of papers in her lap. Slightly plump, with high cheekbones and tilted green eyes, in her dark green riding dress she managed to look elegant and commanding despite her perch on one of the two precarious stools in front of the table. Exchange her narrow blue stole of the Keeper of the Chronicles for the Amyrlin's, and anyone would think she wore it by right. Sometimes she certainly seemed to believe the striped stole rested on her own shoulders. "Or perhaps longer. It would not hurt to build our stores up once more."

sɪuən, ətɑp ði ʌðɝ ɹɪkəɾi stul, ʃʊk əɹ hɛd slaɪtli, bʌɾ ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt nid ðə hɪnt. "wʌn deɪ." ʃi maɪt bi dʒʌst eɪtin ən wɛl ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə tʃɹu æmɪɝlɪnz ɡɹænduɹ, bʌt ʃi wɑz noʊ ful. tu mɛni ʌv ðə sɪstɝz sizd ɑn ɛni ɪkskjus fəɹ ə hɔlt - tu mɛni ʌv ðə sɪɾɝz, əz wɛl - ən ɪf ðeɪ stɑp tu lɔŋ, ɪt maɪt bi ɪmpɑsəbəl tə stɑɹɾ əm muvɪŋ əɡɛn. ʃɛɹiəm oʊpən əɹ maʊθ.

Siuan, atop the other rickety stool, shook her head slightly, but Egwene did not need the hint. "One day." She might be just eighteen and well short of a true Amyrlin's grandeur, but she was no fool. Too many of the sisters seized on any excuse for a halt - too many of the Sitters, as well - and if they stopped too long, it might be impossible to start them moving again. Sheriam opened her mouth.

"wʌn, dɔɾɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd fɝmli. wʌtɛvɝ ʃɛɹiəm θɔt, ðə fækt wɑz ðət ʃɛɹiəm beɪjɑnɝ wɑz ðə kipɝ ən ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn. ɪf oʊnli ʃɛɹiəm kəd bi bɹɔt tə ɹilaɪz ðæt. ən ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ; ðeɪ wɝ wɝs. ʃi wɑntəd tə snɑɹl əɹ snæp əɹ meɪbi θɹoʊ sʌmθɪŋ, bʌɾ æftɝ kloʊs tə ə mʌnθ ən hæf, ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi hæɾ ə laɪftaɪmz pɹæktəs ɪn kipɪŋ əɹ feɪs ən vɔɪs smuð ət fɑɹ ɡɹeɪɾɝ pɹɑvəkeɪʃən ðən ðɪs. "ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, ən wɪl bɪɡɪn tə stʃɹɪp ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd bɛɹ. aɪ woʊn liv pipəl tə stɑɹv. ɑn ðə pɹæktəkəl saɪd, ɪf wi teɪk tu mʌtʃ fɹəm ðɛm, ivən peɪd fɔɹ, ðəl ɡɪv əs ə hʌnʒɹəd pɹɑbləmz ɪn ɹɪtɝn."

"One, daughter," Egwene said firmly. Whatever Sheriam thought, the fact was that Sheriam Bayanar was the Keeper and Egwene al'Vere the Amyrlin. If only Sheriam could be brought to realize that. And the Hall of the Tower; they were worse. She wanted to snarl or snap or maybe throw something, but after close to a month and half, she already had a lifetime's practice in keeping her face and voice smooth at far greater provocation than this. "Any longer, and we'll begin to strip the countryside bare. I won't leave people to starve. On the practical side, if we take too much from them, even paid for, they'll give us a hundred problems in return."

"ɹeɪdz ɑn ðə hɝdz ən flɑks ən θivz ət ðə stɔɹ-wæɡənz," sɪuən mɝmɝd. stʌɾiɪŋ əɹ dɪvaɪɾəd ɡɹeɪ skɝts, nɑt lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɛniwʌn, ʃi sim tə bi θɪŋkɪŋ əlaʊd. "mɛn ʃuɾɪŋ əɾ əɹ ɡɑɹdz ət naɪt, meɪbi sɛɾɪŋ faɪɝ tə wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ kən ɹitʃ. ə bæd bɪznəs. hʌŋɡɹi pipəl bɪkʌm dɛspɹɪɾ ɪn ə hɝi." ðoʊz wɝ ðə seɪm ɹizənz lɔɹd bɹaɪn hæd ɡɪvən ɛɡwin, ɪn vɛɹi nɪɹli ðə seɪm wɝdz.

"Raids on the herds and flocks and thieves at the store-wagons," Siuan murmured. Studying her divided gray skirts, not looking at anyone, she seemed to be thinking aloud. "Men shooting at our guards at night, maybe setting fire to whatever they can reach. A bad business. Hungry people become desperate in a hurry." Those were the same reasons Lord Bryne had given Egwene, in very nearly the same words.

ðə faɪɝi-hɛɹd wʊmən ʃɑt sɪuən ə hɑɹd lʊk. mɛni sɪstɝz hæɾ ə dɪfəkəl taɪm wɪð sɪuən. hɝ feɪs wɑz pɹɑbli ðə bɛs noʊn ɪn ðə kæmp, jʌŋ ɪnʌf tə hæv lʊk pɹɑpɝ əbʌv ən æksɛptɪdz dʒɹɛs, əɹ ə nɑvəsəz fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. ðət wɑz ə saɪɾ ɪfɛkt ə biɪŋ stɪld, ðoʊ nɑt mɛni hæd noʊn ɪt; sɪuən kəd hɑɹdli wɔk ə stɛp wɪθaʊt sɪstɝz stɛɹɪŋ ət hɝ, ðə wʌns æmɪɝlɪn sit, dɪpoʊzd ən kʌɾ ɔf fɹəm seɪaɪdɑɹ, ðən hild ən ɹɪstɔɹd tə ət list səm əbɪləɾi, wən ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðət wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl. mɛni wɛlkəmd əɹ bæk wɔɹmli əz ə sɪstɝ wʌns mɔɹ, fəɹ hɝsɛlf ən fəɹ ðə mɪɹəkəl ðət hɛld aʊt hoʊp əɡɛnst weɪtɛvɝi ɛɛs sədaɪ fɪɹd bɪɑn dɛθ, bʌt dʒʌst əz mɛni əɹ mɔɹ ɔfɝd lukwɔɹm tɑlɝeɪʃən əɹ kɑndəsɛnʃən əɹ boʊθ, bleɪmɪŋ əɹ fəɹ ðɛɹ pɹɛzən sɪtʃueɪʃən.

The fiery-haired woman shot Siuan a hard look. Many sisters had a difficult time with Siuan. Her face was probably the best known in the camp, young enough to have looked proper above an Accepted's dress, or a novice's for that matter. That was a side effect of being stilled, though not many had known it; Siuan could hardly walk a step without sisters staring at her, the once Amyrlin Seat, deposed and cut off from saidar, then Healed and restored to at least some ability, when everyone knew that was impossible. Many welcomed her back warmly as a sister once more, for herself and for the miracle that held out hope against whatevery Aes Sedai feared beyond death, but just as many or more offered lukewarm toleration or condescension or both, blaming her for their present situation.

ʃɛɹiəm wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz u θɔt sɪuən ʃəɾ ɪnstʃɹʌk ðə nu jʌŋ æmɪɝlɪn ɪn pɹoʊɾəkɑl ən ðə laɪk, wɪtʃ ɛvɹiwʌn bɪlivd ʃi heɪɾəd, ən kip əɹ maʊθ kloʊzd ənlɛs ʃi wɑz kɔld əpɑn. ʃi wɑz lɛs ðən ʃi hæd bɪn, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ æmɪɝlɪn ən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə paʊɝ. ɪt wɑz nɑt kɹulti əz ɛɛs sədaɪ sɔ ɪt. ðə pæst wɑz pæst; wʌt wɑz naʊ, wɑz, ən mʌs bi æksɛptɪd. ɛniθɪŋ ɛls oʊnli bɹɔt ɡɹeɪɾɝ peɪn. baɪ ən lɑɹdʒ, ɛɛs sədaɪ ədmɪɾəd tʃeɪnʒ sloʊli, bʌt wʌns ðeɪ dɪd, fəɹ moʊst ɪt wɑz əz ɪf θɪŋz hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ðət weɪ. "wʌn deɪ, mʌðɝ, əz jə seɪ," ʃɛɹiəm saɪɾ ət læst, boʊɪŋ əɹ hɛd slaɪtli. lɛs ɪn səbmɪʃən, ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ, ðən tə haɪɾ ə ɡɹɪmɑs oʊvɝ əɹ stʌbɝnnəs. ʃi wəɾ æksɛp ðə ɡɹɪmɑs ɪf ði ækwiɛsəns keɪm wɪð ɪt. fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ, ʃi hæd tə.

Sheriam was one of those who thought Siuan should instruct the new young Amyrlin in protocol and the like, which everyone believed she hated, and keep her mouth closed unless she was called upon. She was less than she had been, no longer Amyrlin and no longer anywhere near so strong in the Power. It was not cruelty as Aes Sedai saw it. The past was past; what was now, was, and must be accepted. Anything else only brought greater pain. By and large, Aes Sedai admitted change slowly, but once they did, for most it was as if things had always been that way. "One day, Mother, as you say," Sheriam sighed at last, bowing her head slightly. Less in submission, Egwene was sure, than to hide a grimace over her stubbornness. She would accept the grimace if the acquiescence came with it. For the time being, she had to.

sɪuən baʊɾ əɹ hɛd, tu. tə haɪɾ ə smaɪl. ɛni sɪstɝ maɪt bi əpɔɪntəd tə ɛni poʊst, bʌt ðə soʊʃəl pɛkɪŋ ɔɹɾɝ wɑz kwaɪt ɹɪdʒəd, ən sɪuən stʊɾ ə lɔŋ weɪ fɝðɝ daʊn ðən ʃi hæd. ðət wɑz wʌn ɹizən.

Siuan bowed her head, too. To hide a smile. Any sister might be appointed to any post, but the social pecking order was quite rigid, and Siuan stood a long way further down than she had. That was one reason.

ðə peɪpɝz ɑn ʃɛɹiəmz læp wɝ duplɪkeɪɾɪd ɑn sɪuənz, ən ɑn ðə teɪbəl ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛɡwin. ɹɪpɔɹts ɑn ɛvɹiθɪŋ fɹəm ðə nʌmbɝ ə kændəlz ən sæks ə binz ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə kæmp tə ðə steɪɾ ə ðə hɔɹsəz, ən ðə seɪm fəɹ lɔɹd bɹaɪnz ɑɹmi. ði ɑɹmiz kæmp ɪnsɝkəl ði ɛɛs sədaɪz, wɪð ə ɹɪŋ pɝhæps twɛnti stɛps waɪd bɪtwin, bʌɾ ɪn mɛni weɪz ðeɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ə maɪl əpɑɹt. sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, lɔɹd bɹaɪn ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn ðəɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ðə sɪstɝz. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑt wɑn soʊlʒɝz wɑndɝɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛɹ tɛns, ə lɑɾ ʌv ənwɑʃt, ɪlɪɾɝət ɹʌfaɪənz wɪð laɪt fɪŋɡɝz ɔfən əz nɑt, ən ɪt sim ðə soʊlʒɝz dɪd nɑt wɑn ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑndɝɪŋ əmʌŋ əm iðɝ - ðoʊ, pɝhæps waɪzli, ðeɪ hɛl ðɛɹ ɹizənz kloʊs. ðeɪ mɑɹtʃt təwɔɹd tɑɹ vəlɑn tə pʊl daʊn ə jusɝpɝ tə ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ən ɹeɪz ɛɡwin ɪn əɹ pleɪs, jɛt fju mɛn wɝ tʃɹuli kʌmftəɹbəl ɝaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ. fju ɪnʌf wɪmən, iðɝ.

The papers on Sheriam's lap were duplicated on Siuan's, and on the table in front of Egwene. Reports on everything from the number of candles and sacks of beans remaining in the camp to the state of the horses, and the same for Lord Bryne's army. The army's camp encircled the Aes Sedai's, with a ring perhaps twenty steps wide between, but in many ways they might as well have been a mile apart. Surprisingly, Lord Bryne insisted on that as much as the sisters. The Aes Sedai did not want soldiers wandering among their tents, a lot of unwashed, illiterate ruffians with light fingers often as not, and it seemed the soldiers did not want Aes Sedai wandering among them either - though, perhaps wisely, they held their reasons close. They marched toward Tar Valon to pull down a usurper to the Amyrlin Seat and raise Egwene in her place, yet few men were truly comfortable around Aes Sedai. Few enough women, either.

əz kipɝ, ʃɛɹiəm wʊɾə bɪn ɔl tu hæpi tə teɪk ðiz maɪnɝ mæɾɝz aʊɾ ʌv ɛɡwinz hænz. ʃi hæd sɛɾ əz mʌtʃ, ɪkspleɪnɪŋ haʊ maɪnɝ ðeɪ wɝ, haʊ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit ʃəd nɑt bi bɝɾənd wɪð deɪ-tə-deɪ tʃɹaɪfəlz. sɪuən, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, sɛɾ ə ɡʊɾ æmɪɝlɪn peɪɾ ətɛnʃən tə dʒʌs ðoʊz, nɑt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dupləkeɪt ðə wɝk ə dʌzənz ə sɪstɝz ən klɝks, jɛt tʃɛkɪŋ ɑn sʌmθɪŋ dɪfɹən ɛvɹi deɪ. ðət weɪ ʃi hæɾ ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə ʌv wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ ən wʌt niɾəd duɪŋ bɪfɔɹ sʌmwʌn keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ tə hɝ wɪð ə kɹaɪsəs ɔlɹɛɾi bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪndə ʃɑɹdz. ə fil fəɹ haʊ ðə wɪnd wɑz bloʊɪŋ, sɪuən kɔld ɪt. meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ ðiz ɹɪpɔɹts ɹitʃt əɹ hæd ɹikwaɪɝd wiks, ən ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət wʌns ʃi lɛɾ əm pæs tə ʃɛɹiəmz kəntʃɹoʊl, ʃi wəd nɛvɝ əɡɛn lɝn ɛniθɪŋ əntɪl ɪt wɑz lɔŋ dɛlt wɪð. ɪf ðɛn.

As Keeper, Sheriam would have been all too happy to take these minor matters out of Egwene's hands. She had said as much, explaining how minor they were, how the Amyrlin Seat should not be burdened with day-to-day trifles. Siuan, on the other hand, said a good Amyrlin paid attention to just those, not trying to duplicate the work of dozens of sisters and clerks, yet checking on something different every day. That way she had a good idea of what was happening and what needed doing before someone came running to her with a crisis already breaking into shards. A feel for how the wind was blowing, Siuan called it. Making sure these reports reached her had required weeks, and Egwene was sure that once she let them pass to Sheriam's control, she would never again learn anything until it was long dealt with. If then.

ə saɪləns stʃɹɛtʃt əz ðeɪ bɪɡæn ɹiɾɪŋ ðə nɛks peɪpɝ ɪn itʃ stæk.

A silence stretched as they began reading the next paper in each stack.

ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ əloʊn. tʃɛsə, siɾəd ɑn kʊʃənz tə wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə tɛnt, spoʊk. "tu lɪɾəl laɪɾ ɪz bæd fəɹ ði aɪz," ʃi mɝmɝɾ ɔlmoʊs tə hɝsɛlf, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp wʌn ʌv ɛɡwinz sɪlk stɑkɪŋz ðət ʃi wɑz dɑɹnɪŋ. "jul nɛvɝ kætʃ mi ɹuɪnɪŋ maɪ aɪz oʊvɝ wɝdz ɪn ðɪs lɪɾəl laɪt." dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ə staʊt, wɪð ə twɪŋkəl ɪn əɹ aɪz ən ə mɛɹi smaɪl, ɛɡwinz meɪd wɑz ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə slɪp ædvaɪs tə ði æmɪɝlɪn əz ðoʊ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt hɝsɛlf. ʃi cʊɾə bɪn ɪn ɛɡwinz sɝvəs twɛnti jɪɹz ɪnstɛɾ ə lɛs ðən tu mʌnθs, ən θɹi taɪmz əz oʊld əz ɛɡwin ɪnstɛɾ ə bɛɹli twaɪs. tənaɪt, ɛɡwin səspɛktəd ðət ʃi tɔk tə fɪl saɪlənsɪz. ðəɹ wɑz ə tɛnʃən ɪn ðə kæmp sɪns lɑɡən hæɾ ɪskeɪpt. ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl, ʃildɪɾ ən ʌndɝ kloʊs ɡɑɹd, jɛɾ i hæd slɪpt əweɪ laɪk fɑɡ. ɛvɹiwʌn wɔkt ɑn ɛdʒ wʌndɝɪŋ haʊ, wʌndɝɪŋ wɛɹ i wɑz, wʌɾ i ɪntɛndəd tə də naʊ. ɛɡwin wɪʃt hɑɹɾɝ ðən moʊs ðət ʃi kəd bi ʃʊɹ ʃi nu wɛɹ lɑɡən əblɝ wɑz.

They were not alone. Chesa, seated on cushions to one side of the tent, spoke. "Too little light is bad for the eyes," she murmured almost to herself, holding up one of Egwene's silk stockings that she was darning. "You'll never catch me ruining my eyes over words in this little light." Just short of stout, with a twinkle in her eyes and a merry smile, Egwene's maid was always trying to slip advice to the Amyrlin as though talking about herself. She could have been in Egwene's service twenty years instead of less than two months, and three times as old as Egwene instead of barely twice. Tonight, Egwene suspected that she talked to fill silences. There was a tension in the camp since Logain had escaped. A man who could channel, shielded and under close guard, yet he had slipped away like fog. Everyone walked on edge wondering how, wondering where he was, what he intended to do now. Egwene wished harder than most that she could be sure she knew where Logain Ablar was.

ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ peɪpɝz ə fɝm snæp ə hɝ ɹɪsts, ʃɛɹiəm fɹaʊn ət tʃɛsə; ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ɛɡwin lɛɾ əɹ meɪd bi pɹɛzən ət ðiz miɾɪŋz, mʌtʃ lɛs lɛɾ əɹ tʃæɾɝ əweɪ fɹili. ɪt pɹɑbli nɛvɝ əkɝd tə hɝ ðət tʃɛsəz pɹɛzəns ən əɹ ʌnɪkspɛktɪd tʃæɾɝ fɹikwənli ənsɛɾəld əɹ dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə hɛlp ɛɡwin saɪdstɛp ædvaɪs ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə teɪk ən poʊstpoʊn dɪsɪʒənz ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə meɪk, ət lis nɑt ðə weɪ ʃɛɹiəm wɑntəɾ əm meɪd. sɝɾənli ðə noʊʃən hæd nɛvɝ əkɝd tə tʃɛsə; ʃi smaɪld əpɑlədʒɛɾɪkli ən ɹɪtɝn tə hɝ dɑɹnɪŋ, əkeɪʒənəli mɝmɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf.

Giving her papers a firm snap of her wrists, Sheriam frowned at Chesa; she did not understand why Egwene let her maid be present at these meetings, much less let her chatter away freely. It probably never occurred to her that Chesa's presence and her unexpected chatter frequently unsettled her just enough to help Egwene sidestep advice she did not want to take and postpone decisions she did not want to make, at least not the way Sheriam wanted them made. Certainly the notion had never occurred to Chesa; she smiled apologetically and returned to her darning, occasionally murmuring to herself.

"ɪf wi kəntɪnju, mʌðɝ," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd kuli, "wi meɪ fɪnɪʃ bɪfɔɹ dɔn."

"If we continue, Mother," Sheriam said coolly, "we may finish before dawn."

stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə nɛks peɪdʒ, ɛɡwin ɹʌbd əɹ tɛmpəlz. tʃɛsə maɪt bi ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt ðə laɪt. ʃi hæɾ ənʌðɝ hɛdeɪk kʌmɪŋ ɑn. ðən əɡɛn, ɪt maɪt bi ðə peɪdʒ, dɪteɪlɪŋ wʌt mʌni wɑz lɛft. ðə stɔɹiz ʃi hæd ɹɛd nɛvɝ mɛnʃən haʊ mʌtʃ kɔɪn wɑz ɹikwaɪɝd tə kip ən ɑɹmi. pɪn tə ðə ʃit wɝ noʊts fɹəm tu ʌv ðə sɪɾɝz, ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn, sədʒɛstɪŋ ðə soʊlʒɝz bi peɪd lɛs fɹikwənli, peɪd lɛs ɪn fækt. mɔɹ ðən sədʒɛstɪŋ, ɹɪli, dʒʌst əz ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn wɝ mɔɹ ðən sɪmpli tu sɪɾɝz ɪn ðə hɔl. ʌðɝ sɪɾɝz fɑloʊd wɛɹ ðeɪ lɛd, ɪf nɑɾ ɔl baɪ ɛni minz, waɪl ði oʊnli sɪɾɝ ɛɡwin kəd kaʊn ɑn wɑz dɛlænə, ən əɹ nɑt fɑɹ. ɪt wɑz ɹɛɹ ðət ləleɪn ən ɹoʊmændə əɡɹiɾ ɑn ɛniθɪŋ, ən ðeɪ kəd hɑɹdli hæv tʃoʊzən ə wɝs. səm ə ðə soʊlʒɝz hæd swɔɹn oʊðz, jɛt moʊst wɝ ðəɹ fəɹ ðɛɹ peɪ, ən meɪbi ðə hoʊp ə lut.

Staring at the next page, Egwene rubbed her temples. Chesa might be right about the light. She had another headache coming on. Then again, it might be the page, detailing what money was left. The stories she had read never mentioned how much coin was required to keep an army. Pinned to the sheet were notes from two of the Sitters, Romanda and Lelaine, suggesting the soldiers be paid less frequently, paid less in fact. More than suggesting, really, just as Romanda and Lelaine were more than simply two Sitters in the Hall. Other Sitters followed where they led, if not all by any means, while the only Sitter Egwene could count on was Delana, and her not far. It was rare that Lelaine and Romanda agreed on anything, and they could hardly have chosen a worse. Some of the soldiers had sworn oaths, yet most were there for their pay, and maybe the hope of loot.

"ðə soʊlʒɝz ɑɹ tə bi peɪɾ əz bɪfɔɹ," ɛɡwin mʌɾɝd, kɹʌmplɪŋ ðə tu noʊts. ʃi wɑz nɑt gɑnə lɛɾ əɹ ɑɹmi mɛlt əweɪ, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ʃi wəɾ əlaʊ luɾɪŋ.

"The soldiers are to be paid as before," Egwene muttered, crumpling the two notes. She was not going to let her army melt away, any more than she would allow looting.

"æz jə kəmænd, mʌðɝ." ʃɛɹiəmz aɪz spɑɹkəld wɪð plɛʒɝ. ðə dɪfəkəltiz mʌs bi klɪɹ tə hɝ - ɛniwʌn u θɔɾ əɹ lɛs ðən vɛɹi ɪntɛlədʒənt wɑz ɪn dip tʃɹʌbəl - bʌt ʃi dɪɾ əv ə blaɪn spɑt. ɪf ɹoʊmændə əɹ ləleɪn sɛd ðə sʌn wɑz kʌmɪŋ ʌp, ʃɛɹiəm moʊs laɪkli wəd kleɪm ɪt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ daʊn; ʃi hæd hæɾ ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ sweɪ wɪð ðə hɔl əz ðeɪ dɪd naʊ, pɝhæps mɔɹ, əntɪl ðeɪ pʊɾ ə hɔl tə ɪt bɪtwin ðɛm. ði ɑpəzət wɑz tʃɹu, əz wɛl; ðoʊz tu wəd spik əɡɛnst ɛniθɪŋ ʃɛɹiəm wɑntəd bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ stɑp tə θɪŋk. wɪtʃ hæɾ ɪts juzɪz, ɔl ɪn ɔl.

"As you command, Mother." Sheriam's eyes sparkled with pleasure. The difficulties must be clear to her - anyone who thought her less than very intelligent was in deep trouble - but she did have a blind spot. If Romanda or Lelaine said the sun was coming up, Sheriam most likely would claim it was going down; she had had almost as much sway with the Hall as they did now, perhaps more, until they put a halt to it between them. The opposite was true, as well; those two would speak against anything Sheriam wanted before they stopped to think. Which had its uses, all in all.

ɛɡwinz fɪŋɡɝz tæpt ɑn ðə teɪbəltɑp, bʌt ʃi meɪɾ əm stɑp. ðə mʌni hæd tə bi faʊnd - sʌmwɛɹ, sʌmhaʊ - bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə lɛt ʃɛɹiəm si hɝ wɝi.

Egwene's fingers tapped on the tabletop, but she made them stop. The money had to be found - somewhere, somehow - but she did not have to let Sheriam see her worry.

"ðæt nu wʊmən wɪl wɝk aʊt," tʃɛsə mɝmɝɾ oʊvɝ əɹ soʊɪŋ. "tɛɹənz ɔlweɪz kæɹi ðɛɹ noʊzɪz haɪ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt sɛləm dʌz noʊ wʌts ɹikwaɪɝɾ ʌv ə leɪɾiz meɪd. mɛɹi ən əl sɛɾəl əɹ daʊn sun ɪnʌf." ʃɛɹiəm ɹoʊld əɹ aɪz ɪɹɪɾəbli.

"That new woman will work out," Chesa murmured over her sewing. "Tairens always carry their noses high, of course, but Selame does know what's required of a lady's maid. Meri and I will settle her down soon enough." Sheriam rolled her eyes irritably.

ɛɡwin smaɪl tə hɝsɛlf. ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ wɪð θɹi meɪdz weɪɾɪŋ ɑn hɝ; əz ʌnbəlivəbəl əz ðə stoʊl ɪtsɛlf. bʌt ðə smaɪl læstəɾ oʊnli ə hɑɹtbit. meɪdz hæd tə bi peɪd, tu. ə taɪni sʌm, bælənst əɡɛns θɝɾi θaʊzən soʊlʒɝz, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn kəd hɑɹdli də hɝ oʊn lɔnʒɹi əɹ mɛn əɹ oʊn ʃɪfs, bʌt ʃi cʊɾə mænədʒ splɛndədli wɪð tʃɛsə əloʊn. ən wəd hæv, hæd ʃi ɛni tʃɔɪs ɪn ɪt. lɛs ðən ə wik ɝliɝ ɹoʊmændə hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd ðət ði æmɪɝlɪn niɾəd ənʌðɝ sɝvən ən faʊn mɛɹi əmʌŋ ðə ɹɛfjudʒiz u hʌɾəld ɪn ɛvɹi vɪlədʒ əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ tʃeɪst əweɪ, ən nɑt tə bi aʊtdʌn, ləleɪn pɹədust sɛləm fɹəm ðə seɪm sɔɹs. ðə tu wɪmən wɝ kɹaʊɾəd ɪndə tʃɛsəz smɔl tɛn bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwin nu iðɝ ɪɡzɪstəd.

Egwene smiled to herself. Egwene al'Vere with three maids waiting on her; as unbelievable as the stole itself. But the smile lasted only a heartbeat. Maids had to be paid, too. A tiny sum, balanced against thirty thousand soldiers, and the Amyrlin could hardly do her own laundry or mend her own shifts, but she could have managed splendidly with Chesa alone. And would have, had she any choice in it. Less than a week earlier Romanda had decided that the Amyrlin needed another servant and found Meri among the refugees who huddled in every village until they were chased away, and not to be outdone, Lelaine produced Selame from the same source. The two women were crowded into Chesa's small tent before Egwene knew either existed.

ðə pɹɪnsəpəl ə ðə θɪŋ wɑz ɹɔŋ: θɹi meɪdz wən ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf sɪlvɝ tə peɪ ði ɑɹmi hæfweɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, sɝvəns tʃoʊzən fəɹ əɹ wɪθaʊɾ ɛni seɪ; ən ðən ðəɹ wɑz ðə fæk ðət ʃi hæd jɛɾ ənʌðɝ, ɪf wʌn u ɹəsiv nɑɾ ə kɑpɝ. ɛvɹiwʌn bɪliv mɛɹɪɡən wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪnz meɪdsɝvənt, ɛniweɪ.

The principle of the thing was wrong: three maids when there was not enough silver to pay the army halfway to Tar Valon, servants chosen for her without any say; and then there was the fact that she had yet another, if one who received not a copper. Everyone believed Marigan was the Amyrlin's maidservant, anyway.

bɪniθ ði ɛdʒ ə ðə teɪbəl ʃi fɛlt əɹ bɛl paʊtʃ, fɛl ðə bɹeɪsləɾ ɪnsaɪd. ʃi ʃəd wɛɹ ɪt mɔɹ; ɪt wɑz ə duɾi. kipɪŋ əɹ hænz loʊ, ʃi dʌɡ ðə bɹeɪsləɾ aʊɾ ən slɪpt ɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ɹɪst, ə bæn ə sɪlvɝ meɪd soʊ ðə kætʃ wɑz ɪnvɪzəbəl wʌns kloʊzd. meɪd wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ðə bɹeɪslət snæpt ʃʌt bɪniθ ðə teɪbəl, ən ʃi vɛɹi nɪɹli snætʃt ɪɾ ɔf əɡɛn.

Beneath the edge of the table she felt her belt pouch, felt the bracelet inside. She should wear it more; it was a duty. Keeping her hands low, she dug the bracelet out and slipped it around her wrist, a band of silver made so the catch was invisible once closed. Made with the One Power, the bracelet snapped shut beneath the table, and she very nearly snatched it off again.

ɪmoʊʃən flʌɾəd ɪndə ə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ maɪnd, ɪmoʊʃən ən əwɛɹnəs, ə lɪɾəl pɑkət, əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ɪmædʒənɪŋ ɪt. nɑɾ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən, ðoʊ; ɔl tu ɹil. hæf ʌv ən æɾəm, ðə bɹeɪslət kɹieɪɾəd ə lɪŋk bɪtwin əɹ ən ðə wʊmən u wɔɹ ði ʌðɝ hæf, ə sɪlvɝ nɛkləs ðə wɛɹɝ kəd nɑt ɹimuv hɝsɛlf. ðeɪ wɝ ə sɝkəl ə tu wɪθaʊɾ ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ, ɛɡwin ɔlweɪz liɾɪŋ baɪ vɝtʃu ʌv ðə bɹeɪslət. "mɛɹɪɡən" wɑz əslip naʊ, hɝ fit sɔɹ fɹəm wɔkɪŋ ɔl deɪ ən deɪz pæst, bʌɾ ivən slipɪŋ, fɪɹ uz ðoʊ moʊst stʃɹɔŋli; oʊnli heɪɾ ɛvɝ keɪm nɪɹ fɪɹ ɪn ðə stʃɹim ðət floʊd θɹu ði æɾəm. ɛɡwinz ɹɪlʌktəns keɪm fɹəm ðə kɑnstənt nɔɪŋ ə ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz tɛɹɝ, fɹəm hævɪŋ wɔɹn ðə nɛkləs ɛn ʌv ən æɾəm wʌns, ən fɹəm noʊɪŋ ðə wʊmən ɑn ðə fɑɹ ɛnd. ʃi heɪɾəd ʃɛɹɪŋ ɛni pɑɹɾ ə hɝ.

Emotion flooded into a corner of her mind, emotion and awareness, a little pocket, as if she were imagining it. Not imagination, though; all too real. Half of an a'dam, the bracelet created a link between her and the woman who wore the other half, a silver necklace the wearer could not remove herself. They were a circle of two without embracing saidar, Egwene always leading by virtue of the bracelet. "Marigan" was asleep now, her feet sore from walking all day and days past, but even sleeping, fear oozed though most strongly; only hate ever came near fear in the stream that flowed through the a'dam. Egwene's reluctance came from the constant gnawing of the other woman's terror, from having worn the necklace end of an a'dam once, and from knowing the woman on the far end. She hated sharing any part of her.

oʊnli θɹi wɪmən ɪn ðə kæmp nu ðət mɑɡiɾin wɑz ə pɹɪznɝ, hɪɾən ɪn ðə mɪdst ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪf ɪt keɪm aʊt, mɑɡiɾin wəd bi tʃɹaɪd, stɪld ən ɛksəkjuɾəd ɪn ʃɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ. ɪf ɪt keɪm aʊt, ɛɡwin maɪt nɑt bi fɑɹ bɪhaɪn hɝ, ən sɪuən ən lin, əz wɛl. ðeɪ wɝ ði ʌðɝ tu hu nu. ət bɛst ʃi wəɾ əv ðə stoʊl stʃɹɪpt əweɪ.

Only three women in the camp knew that Moghedien was a prisoner, hidden in the midst of Aes Sedai. If it came out, Moghedien would be tried, stilled and executed in short order. If it came out, Egwene might not be far behind her, and Siuan and Leane, as well. They were the other two who knew. At best she would have the stole stripped away.

fəɹ haɪɾɪŋ wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən fɹəm dʒʌstəs, ʃi θɔt ɡɹɪmli, əl bi lʌki ɪf ðeɪ dʒʌst stɪk mi bæk wɪð ði æksɛptɪd. ʌnkɑnʃəsli ʃi θʌm ðə ɡoʊldən ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn ðə fɝs fɪŋɡɝ ə hɝ ɹaɪt hænd.

For hiding one of the Forsaken from justice, she thought grimly, I'll be lucky if they just stick me back with the Accepted. Unconsciously she thumbed the golden Great Serpent ring on the first finger of her right hand.

ðən əɡɛn, haʊɛvɝ dʒʌst sətʃ ə pʌnɪʃmən maɪt bi, ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli. ʃi hæd bɪn tɔt ðət ðə waɪzəst ə ðə sɪstɝz wɑz tʃoʊzən æmɪɝlɪn sit, jɛt ʃi hæd lɝn bɛɾɝ. ðə tʃuzɪŋ ʌv ən æmɪɝlɪn wɑz əz hɑtli kəntɛstəɾ əz ɪlɛktɪŋ ə meɪɝ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ən meɪbi mɔɹ; noʊ wʌn bɑðɝd tə stæn əɡɛnst əɹ fɑðɝ ɪn ɛmənz fild, bʌt ʃi hæd hɝɾ əbaʊɾ ɪlɛkʃənz ɪn dɛvən ɹaɪɾ ən tɛɹən fɛɹi. sɪuən hæɾ oʊnli bɪn ɹeɪzd æmɪɝlɪn kəz ðə θɹi bɪfɔɹ əɹ itʃ hæd daɪɾ æftɝ dʒʌst ə fju jɪɹz ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ðə hɔl hæd wɑntəd sʌmwʌn jʌŋ. spikɪŋ ʌv eɪdʒ tə ə sɪstɝ wɑz ət list əz ɹuɾ əz slæpɪŋ əɹ feɪs, jɛt ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn tə ɡɛt səm aɪdiə haʊ lɔŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ lɪvd. ɹɛɹli wɑz ɛniwʌn tʃoʊzən sɪɾɝ bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd wɔɹn ðə ʃɔl sɛvənti əɹ eɪɾi jɪɹz ət list, ən æmɪɝlənz dʒɛnɝəli lɔŋɡɝ. ɔfən mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ. soʊ wən ðə hɔl dɛdlɑk bɪtwin fɔɹ sɪstɝz ɹeɪzd ɛɛs sədaɪ lɛs ðən fɪfti jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ, ən sin hɹɪmɑn ə ðə waɪt sədʒɛstəɾ ə wʊmən u hæd wɔɹn ðə ʃɔl oʊnli tɛn jɪɹz, ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn əz mʌtʃ ɪɡzɔstʃən əz sɪuənz kwɑləfəkeɪʃənz ɪn ædmɪnɪstʃɹeɪʃən ðət bɹɔt ðə sɪɾɝz tə stæn fəɹ hɝ.

Then again, however just such a punishment might be, it was unlikely. She had been taught that the wisest of the sisters was chosen Amyrlin Seat, yet she had learned better. The choosing of an Amyrlin was as hotly contested as electing a mayor in the Two Rivers, and maybe more; no one bothered to stand against her father in Emond's Field, but she had heard about elections in Deven Ride and Taren Ferry. Siuan had only been raised Amyrlin because the three before her each had died after just a few years on the Amyrlin Seat. The Hall had wanted someone young. Speaking of age to a sister was at least as rude as slapping her face, yet she had begun to get some idea how long Aes Sedai lived. Rarely was anyone chosen Sitter before she had worn the shawl seventy or eighty years at least, and Amyrlins generally longer. Often much longer. So when the Hall deadlocked between four sisters raised Aes Sedai less than fifty years before, and Seaine Herimon of the White suggested a woman who had worn the shawl only ten years, it might have been as much exhaustion as Siuan's qualifications in administration that brought the Sitters to stand for her.

ən ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ, hu ɪn mɛni aɪz ʃəd stɪl əv bɪn ə nɑvəs? ə fɪɡjɝhɛd, izəli dɝɛktəd, ə tʃaɪld u hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp ɪn ðə seɪm vɪlədʒ wɪð ɹænd ælθɹ. ðət læs dɛfənətli hæɾ ɪts pɑɹɾ ɪn ðə dɪsɪʒən. ðeɪ wəd nɑt teɪk bæk ðə stoʊl, bʌt ʃi wəd faɪn ðə lɪɾəl əθɔɹəɾi ʃi hæd mænədʒ tə əkjumjəleɪt ɡɔn. ɹoʊmændə, ləleɪn ən ʃɛɹiəm maɪɾ æktʃəli  kʌm tə bloʊz oʊvɝ wɪtʃ wəd mɑɹtʃ əɹ əbaʊt baɪ ðə skɹʌf ə hɝ nɛk. "ðæt lʊks mʌtʃ laɪk ə bɹeɪsləɾ aɪ sɔ ɪleɪn wɛɹɪŋ." ðə peɪpɝz ɑn ʃɛɹiəmz læp kɹækəld əz ʃi lin fɔɹwɝd fəɹ ə bɛɾɝ lʊk. "ænd nɪneɪiv. ðeɪ ʃɛɹɾ ɪt, əz aɪ ɹikɔl."

And Egwene al'Vere, who in many eyes should still have been a novice? A figurehead, easily directed, a child who had grown up in the same village with Rand al'Thor. That last definitely had its part in the decision. They would not take back the stole, but she would find the little authority she had managed to accumulate gone. Romanda, Lelaine and Sheriam might actually come to blows over which would march her about by the scruff of her neck. "That looks much like a bracelet I saw Elayne wearing." The papers on Sheriam's lap crackled as she leaned forward for a better look. "And Nynaeve. They shared it, as I recall."

ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. ʃi hæd bɪn kɛɹləs. "ɪts ðə seɪm. ə ɹimɛmbɹəns ɡɪft, wən ðeɪ lɛft." twɪstɪŋ ðə sɪlvɝ sɝkləɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ɹɪst, ʃi fɛlt ə stæb ʌv ɡɪl ðət wɑz ɔl əɹ oʊn. ðə bɹeɪsləɾ əpɪɹd sɛɡmɛntɪd, bʌt soʊ kʌnɪŋli jə kəd nɑt si haʊ ɪɡzækli. ʃi hæd hɑɹdli θɔɾ ə nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn sɪns ðɛɹ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ fəɹ ɛbu dɑɹ. pɝhæps ʃi ʃəd kɔl əm bæk. ðɛɹ sɝtʃ wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ wɛl, ɪt simd, ðoʊ ðeɪ dɪnaɪɾ ɪt. stɪl, ɪf ðeɪ kəd faɪnd wʌt ðeɪ wɝ æftɝ. . . . ʃɛɹiəm wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ, wɛðɝ əɹ nɑɾ ət ðə bɹeɪslət, ɛɡwin kəd nɑt seɪ. ʃi kəd nɑɾ əlaʊ ʃɛɹiəm tə stɑɹt θɪŋkɪŋ tu mʌtʃ ɑn ðət bɹeɪslət, ðoʊ; ɪf ʃi ɛvɝ noʊɾəst ðət ðə nɛkləs "mɛɹɪɡən" wɔɹ wɑz ə mætʃ, ðəɹ maɪt bi peɪnfəli ɑkwɝd kwɛstʃənz.

Egwene gave a start. She had been careless. "It's the same. A remembrance gift, when they left." Twisting the silver circlet around her wrist, she felt a stab of guilt that was all her own. The bracelet appeared segmented, but so cunningly you could not see how exactly. She had hardly thought of Nynaeve and Elayne since their departure for Ebou Dar. Perhaps she should call them back. Their search was not going well, it seemed, though they denied it. Still, if they could find what they were after. . . . Sheriam was frowning, whether or not at the bracelet, Egwene could not say. She could not allow Sheriam to start thinking too much on that bracelet, though; if she ever noticed that the necklace "Marigan" wore was a match, there might be painfully awkward questions.

ɹaɪzɪŋ, ɛɡwin smuðd əɹ skɝɾ əz ʃi muvd ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl. sɪuən hæɾ əkwaɪɝd sɛvɹəl pisəz ʌv ɪnfɝmeɪʃən tədeɪ; wʌn kəd bi pʊt tə ɡʊd juz naʊ. ʃi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn wɪð sikɹəts. ʃɛɹiəm lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd wən ʃi stɑp tu kloʊs fəɹ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən tə stænd.

Rising, Egwene smoothed her skirt as she moved around the table. Siuan had acquired several pieces of information today; one could be put to good use now. She was not the only one with secrets. Sheriam looked surprised when she stopped too close for the other woman to stand.

"dɔɾɝ, aɪv lɝn ðəɾ ə fju deɪz æftɝ sɪuən ən lin ɝaɪvd ɪn sɑlədɑɹ, tɛn sɪstɝz lɛft, tu fɹəm itʃ ədʒɑ ðəɹ ɪksɛp ðə blu. wɛɹ dɪd ðeɪ ɡoʊ, ən waɪ?"

"Daughter, I've learned that a few days after Siuan and Leane arrived in Salidar, ten sisters left, two from each Ajah there except the Blue. Where did they go, and why?"

ʃɛɹiəmz aɪz nɛɹoʊɾ ə fɹækʃən, bʌt ʃi wɔɹ sɝɛnəɾi əz kʌmfɝɾəbli əz əɹ dʒɹɛs. "mʌðɝ, aɪ kən hɑɹdli ɹikɔl ɛvɹi - "

Sheriam's eyes narrowed a fraction, but she wore serenity as comfortably as her dress. "Mother, I can hardly recall every - "

"noʊ dænsɪŋ ɝaʊnd, ʃɛɹiəm." ɛɡwin muvd ə lɪɾəl kloʊsɝ, əntɪl ðɛɹ niz ɔlmoʊs tʌtʃt. "noʊ laɪz baɪ oʊmɪʃən. ðə tʃɹuθ."

"No dancing around, Sheriam." Egwene moved a little closer, until their knees almost touched. "No lies by omission. The truth."

ə fɹaʊn kɹist ʃɛɹiəmz smuð fɔɹhɛd. "mʌðɝ, ivən ɪf aɪ nu, jə kænɑt tʃɹʌbəl jɝsɛlf wɪð ɛvɹi lɪɾəl - "

A frown creased Sheriam's smooth forehead. "Mother, even if I knew, you cannot trouble yourself with every little - "

"ðə tʃɹuθ, ʃɛɹiəm. ðə hoʊl tʃɹuθ. mʌst aɪ æsk bɪfɔɹ ði ɪntaɪɝ hɔl waɪ aɪ kænɑɾ əv ðə tʃɹuθ fɹəm maɪ kipɝ? əl əv ɪt, dɔɾɝ, wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ. əl əv ɪt."

"The truth, Sheriam. The whole truth. Must I ask before the entire Hall why I cannot have the truth from my Keeper? I will have it, daughter, one way or another. I will have it."

ʃɛɹiəmz hɛd swɪvəld əz ðoʊ ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ə weɪ tə ɪskeɪp. hɝ aɪz fɛl ɑn tʃɛsə, hʌntʃt oʊvɝ əɹ soʊɪŋ, ən ʃi ɔl bʌt ɡæspt wɪð ɹɪlif. "mʌðɝ, təmɑɹoʊ, wən wəɹ əloʊn, aɪm ʃʊɹ aɪ kən ɪkspleɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ tə jəɹ sæɾəsfækʃən. aɪ mʌst spik wɪð ə fju ʌv ðə sɪstɝz fɝst."

Sheriam's head swiveled as though she was looking for a way to escape. Her eyes fell on Chesa, hunched over her sewing, and she all but gasped with relief. "Mother, tomorrow, when we are alone, I am sure I can explain everything to your satisfaction. I must speak with a few of the sisters first."

soʊ ðeɪ kəd wɝk ʌp wʌt ʃɛɹiəm wɑz tə tɛl əɹ təmɑɹoʊ. "tʃɛsə," ɛɡwin sɛd, "weɪɾ aʊtsaɪd, pliz." fəɹ ɔl ðət ʃi sim foʊkəst ɑn əɹ wɝk tə ði ɪkskluʒən ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls, tʃɛsə baʊndəd tə hɝ fiɾ ɪn ə flæʃ ən vɛɹi nɪɹli ɹæn fɹəm ðə tɛnt. wən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ əɾ ɑdz, ɛniwʌn wɪð hæf ə bɹeɪn wɛn ɛlswɛɹ. "naʊ, dɔɾɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ðə tʃɹuθ. ɔl ðət jə noʊ. ðɪs ɪz əz pɹaɪvəɾ əz jəl bi," ʃi æɾəd wən ʃɛɹiəm ɡlænst ət sɪuən.

So they could work up what Sheriam was to tell her tomorrow. "Chesa," Egwene said, "wait outside, please." For all that she seemed focused on her work to the exclusion of everything else, Chesa bounded to her feet in a flash and very nearly ran from the tent. When Aes Sedai were at odds, anyone with half a brain went elsewhere. "Now, daughter," Egwene said. "The truth. All that you know. This is as private as you will be," she added when Sheriam glanced at Siuan.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃɛɹiəm ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ skɝts, plʌkɪŋ əɾ əm ɹɪli, əvɔɪɾɪŋ ɛɡwinz aɪz, noʊ daʊt stɪl wɝkɪŋ aʊɾ ɪveɪʒənz. bʌt ðə θɹi oʊðz tʃɹæp hɝ. ʃi kəd nɑt spik ən əntʃɹu wɝd, ən wʌtɛvɝ ʃi θɔɾ ʌv ɛɡwinz tʃɹu pəzɪʃən, slɪpɪŋ bɪhaɪn əɹ bæk wɑz ə lɔŋ weɪ fɹəm dɪnaɪɪŋ əɹ əθɔɹəɾi tə hɝ feɪs. ivən ɹoʊmændə meɪnteɪn ðə pɹɑpɝ kɝɾəsiz, ɪf oʊnli baɪ ə hɛɹ ət taɪmz.

For a moment Sheriam adjusted her skirts, plucking at them really, avoiding Egwene's eyes, no doubt still working out evasions. But the Three Oaths trapped her. She could not speak an untrue word, and whatever she thought of Egwene's true position, slipping behind her back was a long way from denying her authority to her face. Even Romanda maintained the proper courtesies, if only by a hair at times.

dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ʃɛɹiəm foʊldəɾ əɹ hænz ɪn əɹ læp ən spoʊk tə ɛɡwinz tʃɛst, mæɾɝ-ʌv-fækt. "wɛn wi lɝn ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ wɑz ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ sɛɾɪŋ lɑɡən ʌp əz ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən, wi fɛl sʌmθɪŋ hæd tə bi dʌn."

Drawing a deep breath, Sheriam folded her hands in her lap and spoke to Egwene's chest, matter-of-fact. "When we learned the Red Ajah was responsible for setting Logain up as a false Dragon, we felt something had to be done."

"wi" sɝɾənli mɛn ðə smɔl koʊɾɝi ʌv sɪstɝz ʃi hæd ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn hɝ; kɑɹlɪnjə ən bioʊnɪn ən ðə ɹɛs hɛld əz mʌtʃ ɹil sweɪ əz moʊst sɪɾɝz, ɪf nɑɾ æktʃəli  ɪn ðə hɔl. "ɪleɪɾə wɑz sɛndɪŋ aʊt dɪmænz fəɹ ɛvɹi sɪstɝ tə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə taʊɝ, soʊ wi tʃoʊz tɛn sɪstɝz tə də dʒʌs ðæt, baɪ ðə fæstəs minz ðeɪ kəd mænədʒ. ðeɪ ɔl ʃəd bi ðəɹ lɔŋ sɪns. kwaɪətli meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɛvɹi sɪstɝ ɪn ðə taʊɝ ʌndɝstænz ðə tʃɹuθ ʌv wʌt ðə ɹɛdz dɪd wɪð lɑɡən. nɑt - " ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən fɪnɪʃt ɪn ə ɹʌʃ. "nɑɾ ivən ðə hɔl noʊz ə ðɛm."

"We" certainly meant the small coterie of sisters she had gathered around her; Carlinya and Beonin and the rest held as much real sway as most Sitters, if not actually in the Hall. "Elaida was sending out demands for every sister to return to the Tower, so we chose ten sisters to do just that, by the fastest means they could manage. They all should be there long since. Quietly making sure that every sister in the Tower understands the truth of what the Reds did with Logain. Not - " She hesitated, then finished in a rush. "Not even the Hall knows of them."

ɛɡwin stɛpt əweɪ, ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ tɛmpəlz əɡɛn. kwaɪətli meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ. ɪn ðə hoʊp ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə wəd bi dɪpoʊzd. nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ə bæd skim, ɹɪli; ɪt maɪɾ ivən wɝk, ɪvɛntʃəwəli. ɪt maɪt teɪk jɪɹz, tu. bʌt ðɛn, fəɹ moʊst sɪstɝz, ðə lɔŋɡɝ ðeɪ kəd ɡoʊ wɪθaʊt tʃɹuli duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ, ðə bɛɾɝ. wɪð ɪnʌf taɪm, ðeɪ kəd kənvɪns ðə wɝl ðət ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæd nɛvɝ ɹɪli bɹoʊkən. ɪt hæd bɪn bɹoʊkən bɪfɔɹ, ivən ɪf oʊnli ə hændfʊl nu ɪt. meɪbi, wɪð ɪnʌf taɪm, ðeɪ kəd faɪn ə weɪ tə ədʒʌst ɛvɹiθɪŋ soʊ ɪt hæd nɑt, ɹɪli. "waɪ kip ɪt fɹəm ðə hɔl, ʃɛɹiəm? ʃʊɹli jə doʊn θɪŋk ɛni ʌv əm wəd bɪtʃɹeɪ jəɹ plæn tə ɪleɪɾə." hæf ðə sɪstɝz aɪd ði ʌðɝ hæf əskæns fəɹ fɪɹ ʌv ɪleɪɾəz sɪmpəθaɪzɝz. pɑɹtli fəɹ fɪɹ ə ðæt.

Egwene stepped away, rubbing her temples again. Quietly making sure. In the hope that Elaida would be deposed. Not exactly a bad scheme, really; it might even work, eventually. It might take years, too. But then, for most sisters, the longer they could go without truly doing anything, the better. With enough time, they could convince the world that the White Tower had never really broken. It had been broken before, even if only a handful knew it. Maybe, with enough time, they could find a way to adjust everything so it had not, really. "Why keep it from the Hall, Sheriam? Surely you don't think any of them would betray your plan to Elaida." Half the sisters eyed the other half askance for fear of Elaida's sympathizers. Partly for fear of that.

"mʌðɝ, ə sɪstɝ u dɪsaɪɾɪd ðət wʌt wi də ɪz ə mɪsteɪk wəd hɑɹdli lɛt hɝsɛlf bi tʃoʊzən ə sɪɾɝ. ɛni sətʃ wʊɾə teɪkən hɝsɛlf əweɪ lɔŋ sɪns." ʃɛɹiəm hæd nɑt ɹɪlækst, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs tʊk ɑn ðə peɪʃənt, ɪnstʃɹʌktɪŋ toʊn ʃi sim tə θɪŋk hæd ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst ɪfɛkt ɑn ɛɡwin. juʒəwəli, ðoʊ, ʃi wɑz mɔɹ ədʒɹɔɪɾ ət tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ðə sʌbʒɪkt. "ðoʊz səspɪʃənz ɑɹ ðə wɝs pɹɑbləm wi feɪs fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ. noʊ wʌn ɹɪli tʃɹʌsts ɛniwʌn. ɪf wi kəɾ oʊnli si haʊ tə - "

"Mother, a sister who decided that what we do is a mistake would hardly let herself be chosen a Sitter. Any such would have taken herself away long since." Sheriam had not relaxed, but her voice took on the patient, instructing tone she seemed to think had the greatest effect on Egwene. Usually, though, she was more adroit at changing the subject. "Those suspicions are the worst problem we face for the time being. No one really trusts anyone. If we could only see how to - "

"ðə blæk ədʒɑ," sɪuən kʌɾ ɪn kwaɪətli. "ðæts wʌt tʃɪlz jəɹ blʌd laɪk ə sɪlvɝpaɪk ʌp jəɹ skɝts. hu kən seɪ fəɹ ʃʊɹ u ɪz blæk, ən u kən seɪ wʌɾ ə blæk sɪstɝ maɪt du?"

"The Black Ajah," Siuan cut in quietly. "That's what chills your blood like a silverpike up your skirts. Who can say for sure who is Black, and who can say what a Black sister might do?"

ʃɛɹiəm dɑɹɾɪd ənʌðɝ hɑɹd lʊk ət sɪuən, bʌɾ æftɝ ə moʊmən ðə fɔɹs wɛn aʊɾ ə hɝ. əɹ ɹæðɝ, wʌn sɔɹɾ ə tɛnʃən ɹipleɪst ənʌðɝ. ʃi ɡlænst əɾ ɛɡwin, ðən nɑɾəd, ɹɪlʌktənli. baɪ ðə saʊɝ twɪs tə hɝ maʊθ, ʃi wʊɾə meɪɾ ənʌðɝ ɪveɪʒən hæɾ ɪt nɑt bɪn pleɪn ɛɡwin wəd nɑt stæn fəɹ ɪt. moʊst sɪstɝz ɪn ðə kæmp bɪliv naʊ, bʌɾ æftɝ mɔɹ ðən θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz dɪnaɪɪŋ ðə blæk ədʒɑz ɛɡzɪstəns, ɪt wɑz ə kwizi bɪlif. ɔlmoʊs noʊ wʌn wəɾ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ ɑn ðət tɑpɪk, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ðeɪ bɪlivd.

Sheriam darted another hard look at Siuan, but after a moment the force went out of her. Or rather, one sort of tension replaced another. She glanced at Egwene, then nodded, reluctantly. By the sour twist to her mouth, she would have made another evasion had it not been plain Egwene would not stand for it. Most sisters in the camp believed now, but after more than three thousand years denying the Black Ajah's existence, it was a queasy belief. Almost no one would open her mouth on that topic, no matter what they believed.

"ðə kwɛstʃən, mʌðɝ," sɪuən wɛn ɑn, "ɪz wʌt hæpənz wən ðə hɔl dʌz faɪn aʊt." ʃi sim tə bi θɪŋkɪŋ əlaʊɾ əɡɛn. "aɪ kæn si ɛni sɪɾɝ æksɛptɪŋ ði ɪkskjus ðət ʃi kʊdn bi toʊl kəz ʃi maɪt bi ɑn ɪleɪɾəz saɪd. ən əz fəɹ ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʃi maɪt bi blæk ədʒɑ. . . . jɛs, aɪ θɪŋk ðəl bi kwaɪɾ əpsɛt."

"The question, Mother," Siuan went on, "is what happens when the Hall does find out." She seemed to be thinking aloud again. "I can't see any Sitter accepting the excuse that she couldn't be told because she might be on Elaida's side. And as for the possibility she might be Black Ajah. . . . Yes, I think they will be quite upset."

ʃɛɹiəmz feɪs peɪl slaɪtli. ɪt wɑz ə wʌndɝ ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ dɛd waɪt. "ʌpsɛt" dɪd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə kʌvɝ ɪt. jɛs, ʃɛɹiəm wəd feɪs mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən əpsɛɾ ɪf ðɪs keɪm aʊt.

Sheriam's face paled slightly. It was a wonder she did not go dead white. "Upset" did not begin to cover it. Yes, Sheriam would face much more than upset if this came out.

naʊ wɑz ðə taɪm tə dʒɹaɪv hoʊm əɹ ædvæntɪdʒ, bʌɾ ənʌðɝ kwɛstʃən əkɝd tə ɛɡwin. ɪf ʃɛɹiəm ən əɹ fɹɛnz hæd sɛnt - wʌt wɝ ðeɪ? nɑt spaɪz. fɛɹəts, meɪbi, sɛn ɪndə ðə wɔlz æftɝ ɹæts - ɪf ʃɛɹiəm hæd sɛn fɛɹəts ɪndə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, kəd . . . ?

Now was the time to drive home her advantage, but another question occurred to Egwene. If Sheriam and her friends had sent - what were they? Not spies. Ferrets, maybe, sent into the walls after rats - if Sheriam had sent ferrets into the White Tower, could . . . ?

ə sʌɾən stæb ə peɪn θɹu ðət pɑkəɾ ə sɛnseɪʃənz ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd sɛn ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls flaɪɪŋ. hæd ʃi fɛlt ɪt dɝɛkli, ɪt wʊɾə bɪn nʌmɪŋ. əz ɪt wɑz, hɝ aɪz bʌlʒd ɪn ʃɑk. ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl wɑz tʌtʃɪŋ ðə nɛkləs ɝaʊn mɑɡiɾinz nɛk; ðɪs wɑz wʌn lɪŋk noʊ mæn kəd bi bɹɔɾ ɪntu. peɪn, ən sʌmθɪŋ ənhɝɾ ə fɹəm mɑɡiɾin. hoʊp. ən ðən ɪt wɑz ɔl ɡɔn, ði əwɛɹnəs, ði ɪmoʊʃənz. ðə nɛkləs wɑz ɔf.

A sudden stab of pain through that pocket of sensations in the back of her head sent everything else flying. Had she felt it directly, it would have been numbing. As it was, her eyes bulged in shock. A man who could channel was touching the necklace around Moghedien's neck; this was one link no man could be brought into. Pain, and something unheard of from Moghedien. Hope. And then it was all gone, the awareness, the emotions. The necklace was off.

"aɪ . . . nid səm fɹɛʃ ɛɹ," ʃi mænədʒd. ʃɛɹiəm stɑɹɾəd tə ɹaɪz, ən sɪuən, bʌt ʃi weɪvd əm bæk daʊn. "noʊ, aɪ wɑnə bi əloʊn," ʃi sɛd heɪstəli. "sɪuən, faɪn aʊɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃɛɹiəm noʊz əbaʊt ðə fɛɹəts. laɪt, aɪ min ðə tɛn sɪstɝz." ðeɪ boʊθ stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, bʌt θæŋk ðə laɪt, niðɝ fɑloʊɾ əz ʃi snætʃt ðə læntɝn fɹəm ɪts hʊk ən hɝiɾ aʊt.

"I . . . need some fresh air," she managed. Sheriam started to rise, and Siuan, but she waved them back down. "No, I want to be alone," she said hastily. "Siuan, find out everything Sheriam knows about the ferrets. Light, I mean the ten sisters." They both stared at her, but thank the Light, neither followed as she snatched the lantern from its hook and hurried out.

ɪt wəd nɑt də fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn tə bi sin ɹʌnɪŋ, jɛt ʃi keɪm kloʊs, hɔɪstɪŋ əɹ dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts əz wɛl əz ʃi kəd wɪð əɹ fɹi hæn ən vɛɹi nɪɹli tʃɹɑɾɪŋ. ə klaʊdləs skaɪ meɪd ðə munlaɪt bɹaɪt, dæpəlɪŋ ðə tɛns ən wæɡənz wɪð ʃædoʊz. moʊs pipəl ɪn ðə kæmp wɝ əslip, bʌt loʊ faɪɝz stɪl bɝn hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ. ə hændfʊl ʌv wɔɹɾɝz wɝ əbaʊt, ə fju sɝvəns. tu mɛni aɪz tə si ɪf ʃi ɹæn. ðə læs θɪŋ ʃi wɑntəd wɑz sʌmwʌn ɔfɝɪŋ hɛlp. ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz pæntɪŋ, bʌt fɹəm əlɑɹm, nɑɾ ɪɡzɝʃən.

It would not do for the Amyrlin to be seen running, yet she came close, hoisting her divided skirts as well as she could with her free hand and very nearly trotting. A cloudless sky made the moonlight bright, dappling the tents and wagons with shadows. Most people in the camp were asleep, but low fires still burned here and there. A handful of Warders were about, a few servants. Too many eyes to see if she ran. The last thing she wanted was someone offering help. She realized she was panting, but from alarm, not exertion.

θɹʌstɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ən ðə læntɝn ɪndə "mɛɹɪɡənz" taɪni tɛnt, ʃi faʊn ɪɾ ɛmpti. ðə blæŋkəts ðət meɪɾ ʌp ðə pæləɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn leɪ ɪn ə spɹɔl, tɔst əsaɪd baɪ sʌmwʌn ɪn ə hɝi.

Thrusting her head and the lantern into "Marigan's" tiny tent, she found it empty. The blankets that made up the pallet on the ground lay in a sprawl, tossed aside by someone in a hurry.

ən wʌɾ ɪf ʃi hæd stɪl bɪn hɪɹ? ʃi wʌndɝd. wɪð ðə nɛkləs ɔf, ən meɪbi huɛvɝ fɹid hɝ? ʃɪvɝɪŋ, ʃi wɪθdʒɹu sloʊli. mɑɡiɾin hæd ɡʊd ɹizən tə dɪslaɪk hɝ, vɛɹi pɝsənəli, ən ði oʊnli sɪstɝ u kəd mætʃ wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən əloʊn, wən ʃi kəd tʃænəl əɾ ɔl, wɑz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. mɑɡiɾin cʊɾə kɪld ɛɡwin wɪθaʊɾ ɛniwʌn noʊɾɪsɪŋ; ivən hæɾ ə sɪstɝ fɛlt əɹ tʃænəl, ðəɹ wəd bi nʌθɪŋ ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl ɪn ðæt. wɝs, mɑɡiɾin maɪt nɑɾ əv kɪl hɝ. ən noʊ wʌn wʊɾə noʊn ɛniθɪŋ əntɪl ðeɪ faʊn ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm ɡɔn.

And what if she had still been here? she wondered. With the necklace off, and maybe whoever freed her? Shivering, she withdrew slowly. Moghedien had good reason to dislike her, very personally, and the only sister who could match one of the Forsaken alone, when she could channel at all, was in Ebou Dar. Moghedien could have killed Egwene without anyone noticing; even had a sister felt her channel, there would be nothing remarkable in that. Worse, Moghedien might not have killed her. And no one would have known anything until they found the pair of them gone.

"mʌðɝ," tʃɛsə fʌs bɪhaɪn hɝ, "ju ʃəd nɑt bi aʊɾ ɪn ðə naɪɾ ɛɹ. naɪɾ ɛɹ ɪz bæɾ ɛɹ. ɪf jə wɑntəd mɛɹɪɡən, aɪ cʊɾə fɛtʃt hɝ."

"Mother," Chesa fussed behind her, "you should not be out in the night air. Night air is bad air. If you wanted Marigan, I could have fetched her."

ɛɡwin vɛɹi nɪɹli dʒʌmpt. ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn əwɛɹ ə tʃɛsə fɑloʊɪŋ hɝ. ʃi stʌɾid ðə pipəl ət ðə nɪɹəs faɪɝz. ðeɪ hæd ɡæðɝd fəɹ kəmpænjənʃɪp, nɑt wɔɹmθ ɪn ðɪs ənhoʊli hit, ən ðeɪ wɝ nɑt kloʊz, bʌt meɪbi sʌmwʌn hæd sin u wɛn ɪndə "mɛɹɪɡənz" tɛnt. ʃi sɝɾənli hæd fju vɪzəɾɝz. ən noʊ mɛn əmʌŋ ðɛm. ə mæn maɪt wɛl əv bɪn ɹɪmɑɹkt. "aɪ θɪŋk ʃiz ɹʌn əweɪ, tʃɛsə."

Egwene very nearly jumped. She had not been aware of Chesa following her. She studied the people at the nearest fires. They had gathered for companionship, not warmth in this unholy heat, and they were not close, but maybe someone had seen who went into "Marigan's" tent. She certainly had few visitors. And no men among them. A man might well have been remarked. "I think she has run away, Chesa."

"waɪ, ðət wɪkəd wʊmən!" tʃɛsə ɪkskleɪmd. "aɪ ɔlweɪz sɛd ʃi hæɾ ə min maʊθ ən ə snikɪŋ aɪ. slɪŋkɪŋ əweɪ laɪk ə θif æftɝ jə tʊk əɹ ɪn. ʃid bi stɑɹvɪŋ baɪ ə ɹoʊd, ɪf nɑt fəɹ ju. noʊ ɡɹæɾətud əɾ ɔl!"

"Why, that wicked woman!" Chesa exclaimed. "I always said she had a mean mouth and a sneaking eye. Slinking away like a thief after you took her in. She'd be starving by a road, if not for you. No gratitude at all!"

ʃi fɑloʊɾ ɔl ðə weɪ bæk tə ðə tɛnt wɛɹ ɛɡwin slɛpt, næɾɝɪŋ ɑn əbaʊt wɪkədnəs ɪn dʒɛnɝəl, ðə θæŋkləsnəs ʌv "mɛɹɪɡən" ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ, ən haʊ ðət sɔɹt ʃəd bi hændəld, wɪtʃ sim tə dʒʌmp bɪtwin swɪtʃɪŋ əm tɪl ðeɪ sɛɾəld daʊn ən tɔsɪŋ əm aʊt bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd ɹʌn əweɪ, tʌkt ɝaʊn kɔʃənz ðəɾ ɛɡwin tʃɛk əɹ dʒuəlɹi tə bi ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ɔl stɪl ðɛɹ.

She followed all the way back to the tent where Egwene slept, nattering on about wickedness in general, the thanklessness of "Marigan" in particular, and how that sort should be handled, which seemed to jump between switching them till they settled down and tossing them out before they could run away, tucked around cautions that Egwene check her jewelry to be sure it was all still there.

ɛɡwin bɛɹli hɝd. hɝ maɪn spʌn. ɪt kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn lɑɡən, kəɾ ɪt? hi kəd nɑɾ əv noʊn əbaʊt mɑɡiɾin, mʌtʃ lɛs kʌm bæk tə ɹɛskju hɝ. kəd hi? ðoʊz mɛn ɹænd wɑz ɡæðɝɪŋ, ðoʊz æʃəmən. ɹumɝ ɪn ɛvɹi vɪlədʒ kæɹid wɪspɝz ʌv æʃəmən ən ðə blæk taʊɝ. moʊst ə ðə sɪstɝz tʃɹaɪd tə pɹitɛn ðeɪ wɝ ʌnəfɛktɪd baɪ dʌzənz ə mɛn u kəd tʃænəl ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪn wʌn spɑt - ðə wɝst ə ðə teɪlz hæd tə bi ɪnfleɪɾəd; ɹumɝ ɔlweɪz ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾəd - bʌɾ ɛɡwinz toʊz wɑntəd tə kɝl ʌndɝ wɪð fɹaɪt wɛnɛvɝ ʃi θɔɾ ə ðɛm. ən æʃəmən kəd hæv. . . . bʌt waɪ? haʊ wəɾ i hæv noʊn, ɛni mɔɹ ðən lɑɡən?

Egwene barely heard. Her mind spun. It could not have been Logain, could it? He could not have known about Moghedien, much less come back to rescue her. Could he? Those men Rand was gathering, those Asha'man. Rumor in every village carried whispers of Asha'man and the Black Tower. Most of the sisters tried to pretend they were unaffected by dozens of men who could channel gathering in one spot - the worst of the tales had to be inflated; rumor always exaggerated - but Egwene's toes wanted to curl under with fright whenever she thought of them. An Asha'man could have. . . . But why? How would he have known, any more than Logain?

ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əvɔɪd ði oʊnli ɹizənəbəl kənkluʒən. sʌmθɪŋ fɑɹ wɝs ðən lɑɡən kʌm bæk, əɹ ivən æʃəmən. wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən hæd fɹid mɑɡiɾin. ɹɑvɪn wɑz dɛd baɪ ɹændz hænd, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə nɪneɪiv, ən i hæd kɪld ɪʃəml əz wɛl, əɹ soʊ ɪt simd. ən eɪdʒɪnɝ ən bælθəməl. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd kɪl bɛləl. ðət lɛft oʊnli æzmɑɾiən, dɪmɑndɝɾ ən sɑmaɪl əmʌŋ ðə mɛn. sɑmaɪl wɑz ɪn ɪljən. noʊ wʌn nu wɛɹ ði ʌðɝz wɝ, əɹ ɛni ʌv ðə wɪmən u sɝvaɪvd. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd dʌn fəɹ lænfɝ tu, əɹ ðeɪ hæd dʌn fəɹ itʃ ʌðɝ, bʌɾ ɔl ði ʌðɝ wɪmən wɝ stɪl əlaɪv, soʊ fɑɹ əz ɛniwʌn nu. fɝɡɛt ðə wɪmən. ɪt hæd bɪn ə mæn. wɪtʃ? plænz hæd bɪn leɪd lɔŋ sɪns ɪn keɪs wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən stʃɹʌk ət ðə kæmp. noʊ wʌn sɪstɝ hɪɹ kəɾ ikwəl ɛni ʌv ðə fɔɹseɪkən baɪ hɝsɛlf, bʌt lɪŋkt ɪn sɝkəlz wɑz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ, ən ɛni fɔɹseɪkən u stɛpt ɪndə ðɛɹ kæmp wəd faɪn sɝkəlz fɔɹmɪŋ ɑn ɛvɹi saɪɾ ə hɪm. əɹ hɝ. wʌns ðeɪ ɹilaɪzd u ʃi wɑz. ðə fɔɹseɪkən ʃoʊd noʊ saɪnz ʌv eɪɡləsnəs, fəɹ səm ɹizən. meɪbi ɪt wɑz səm ɪfɛkt ə biɪŋ kənɛktəd tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ðeɪ. . . .

She was trying to avoid the only reasonable conclusion. Something far worse than Logain come back, or even Asha'man. One of the Forsaken had freed Moghedien. Rahvin was dead by Rand's hand, according to Nynaeve, and he had killed Ishamael as well, or so it seemed. And Aginor and Balthamel. Moiraine had killed Be'lal. That left only Asmodean, Demandred and Sammael among the men. Sammael was in Illian. No one knew where the others were, or any of the women who survived. Moiraine had done for Lanfear too, or they had done for each other, but all the other women were still alive, so far as anyone knew. Forget the women. It had been a man. Which? Plans had been laid long since in case one of the Forsaken struck at the camp. No one sister here could equal any of the Forsaken by herself, but linked in circles was another matter, and any Forsaken who stepped into their camp would find circles forming on every side of him. Or her. Once they realized who she was. The Forsaken showed no signs of agelessness, for some reason. Maybe it was some effect of being connected to the Dark One. They. . . .

ðɪs wɑz dɪðɝɪŋ. ʃi hæd tə stɑɹt θɪŋkɪŋ klɪɹli.

This was dithering. She had to start thinking clearly.

"tʃɛsə?"

"Chesa?"

". . . . lʊk laɪk jə nid jəɹ hɛd ɹʌb fəɹ ði eɪk əɡɛn ɪz wʌt, ɪz wʌt ju. . . . jɛs, mʌðɝ?"

". . . . look like you need your head rubbed for the ache again is what, is what you. . . . Yes, Mother?"

"faɪn sɪuən ən lin. tɛl əm tə kʌm tə mi. bʌt doʊn lɛɾ ɛniwʌn hɪɹ ju."

"Find Siuan and Leane. Tell them to come to me. But don't let anyone hear you."

ɡɹɪnɪŋ, tʃɛsə dʒɹɑpt ə kɝtsi ən skæmpɝɾ aʊt. ʃi kəd hɑɹdli əvɔɪd noʊɪŋ ðə kɝəns ðət swɝld ɝaʊn ɛɡwin, jɛt ʃi faʊn ɔl ðə plɑɾɪŋ ən skimɪŋ fʌn. nɑt ðət ʃi nu mɔɹ ðən sɝfəs, ən lɪɾəl ɪnʌf ə ðæt. ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt daʊɾ əɹ lɔɪəlti, bʌt tʃɛsəz əpɪnjən ʌv wʌt wɑz ɪksaɪɾɪŋ maɪt tʃeɪnʒ ɪf ʃi lɝn ðə dɛpθ ə ðoʊz swɝlz.

Grinning, Chesa dropped a curtsy and scampered out. She could hardly avoid knowing the currents that swirled around Egwene, yet she found all the plotting and scheming fun. Not that she knew more than surface, and little enough of that. Egwene did not doubt her loyalty, but Chesa's opinion of what was exciting might change if she learned the depth of those swirls.

tʃænəlɪŋ ði ɔɪl læmps ɪnsaɪd ðə tɛn əlaɪt, ɛɡwin blu aʊt ðə læntɝn ən sɛɾ ɪt kɛɹfəli ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ. meɪbi ʃi hæd tə θɪŋk klɪɹli, bʌt ʃi stɪl fɛlt əz ɪf ʃi wɑz stʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹk.

Channeling the oil lamps inside the tent alight, Egwene blew out the lantern and set it carefully in a corner. Maybe she had to think clearly, but she still felt as if she was stumbling in the dark.


tʃæptɝ naɪn


CHAPTER 9

eɪ pɛɹ ə sɪlvɝpaɪk


A Pair of Silverpike

ɛɡwin wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ - wʌn ə ðə fju ɹil tʃɛɹz ɪn ðə kæmp, wɪð ə lɪɾəl pleɪn kɑɹvɪŋ laɪk ə fɑɹmɝz bɛst ɑɹmtʃɛɹ, ɹumi ən kʌmftəɹbəl ɪnʌf ðət ʃi fɛlt oʊnli ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɪlt əbaʊt teɪkɪŋ ʌp væljəbəl wæɡən speɪs fəɹ ɪt - ʃi wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊl əɹ θɔts təɡɛðɝ wən sɪuən swɛpt əsaɪd ði ɛntʃɹi flæps ən dʌkt ɪndə ðə tɛnt. sɪuən wɑz nɑt hæpi.

Egwene was sitting in her chair - one of the few real chairs in the camp, with a little plain carving like a farmer's best armchair, roomy and comfortable enough that she felt only a touch of guilt about taking up valuable wagon space for it - she was sitting there trying to pull her thoughts together when Siuan swept aside the entry flaps and ducked into the tent. Siuan was not happy.

"waɪ ɪn ðə laɪt dɪd jə ɹʌn ɔf?" hɝ vɔɪs hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd wɪð əɹ feɪs, ən ʃi tʃaɪɾɪd wɪð ðə bɛst ivən wən ʃi dɪɾ ɪɾ ɪn ɹɪspɛkfəl toʊnz. bɛɹli ɹɪspɛkfəl. hɝ blu aɪz ɹɪmeɪn ðə seɪm, tu; ðeɪ cʊɾə dʌn fəɹ ə sæɾəlmeɪkɝz ɔlz. "ʃɛɹiəm bɹʌʃt mi əsaɪd laɪk ə flaɪ." ðət sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli dɛləkət maʊθ twɪstəd bɪɾɝli. "ʃi wɑz ɡɔn ɔlmoʊst əz sun əz jə wɝ. doʊn jə ɹilaɪz ʃi hændəd hɝsɛlf tə ju? ʃi sɝɾənli dʌz. hɝ, ən æneɪjə ən mɔɹvɹɪn ən ðə lɑɾ ə ðɛm. jə kən bi ʃʊɹ ðəl spɛn tənaɪt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə beɪl wɔɾɝ ən pætʃ hoʊlz. ðeɪ kəd mænədʒ ɪt. aɪ doʊn si haʊ, bʌt ðeɪ maɪt."

"Why in the Light did you run off?" Her voice had not changed with her face, and she chided with the best even when she did it in respectful tones. Barely respectful. Her blue eyes remained the same, too; they could have done for a saddlemaker's awls. "Sheriam brushed me aside like a fly." That surprisingly delicate mouth twisted bitterly. "She was gone almost as soon as you were. Don't you realize she handed herself to you? She certainly does. Her, and Anaiya and Morvrin and the lot of them. You can be sure they'll spend tonight trying to bail water and patch holes. They could manage it. I don't see how, but they might."

ɔlmoʊst əz ðə læst wɝd lɛft əɹ maʊθ, lin ɛntɝd. ə tɔl, wɪləwi wʊmən, hɝ kɑpɝi feɪs wɑz əz juθfəl əz sɪuənz, ən fəɹ ðə seɪm ɹizən; ʃi ɔlsoʊ wɑz mɔɹ ðən oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi ɛɡwinz mʌðɝ, ɪn tʃɹuθ. lin tʊk wʌn lʊk ət sɪuən ən θɹu ʌp əɹ hænz əz mʌtʃ əz ðə ɹuf ə ðə tɛnt wəɾ əlaʊ. "mʌðɝ, ðɪs ɪz ə fulɪʃ ɹɪsk." hɝ dɑɹk aɪz wɛn fɹəm dʒɹimi tə flæʃɪŋ, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs hæɾ ə læŋɔɹəs kwɑləɾi ivən wən ʃi wɑz ɪɹəteɪɾəd. wʌns, ɪt hæd bɪn bɹɪsk. "ɪf ɛniwʌn siz sɪuən ən mi təɡɛðɝ ðɪs weɪ - "

Almost as the last word left her mouth, Leane entered. A tall, willowy woman, her coppery face was as youthful as Siuan's, and for the same reason; she also was more than old enough to be Egwene's mother, in truth. Leane took one look at Siuan and threw up her hands as much as the roof of the tent would allow. "Mother, this is a foolish risk." Her dark eyes went from dreamy to flashing, but her voice had a languorous quality even when she was irritated. Once, it had been brisk. "If anyone sees Siuan and me together this way - "

"aɪ doʊn kɛɹ ɪf ðə hoʊl kæmp lɝnz jəɹ skwɑbəlɪŋ ɪz ə fɹɔd," ɛɡwin bɹoʊk ɪn ʃɑɹpli, wivɪŋ ə smɔl bæɹiɝ əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə θɹi ʌv ðɛm. ɪt kəd bi wɝk θɹu wɪð taɪm, bʌt nɑt wɪθaʊt dɪtɛkʃən, soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi hɛl ðə wiv ɪnstɛɾ ə taɪɪŋ ɪɾ ɔf.

"I don't care if the whole camp learns your squabbling is a fraud," Egwene broke in sharply, weaving a small barrier against eavesdropping around the three of them. It could be worked through with time, but not without detection, so long as she held the weave instead of tying it off.

ʃi dɪd kɛɹ, ən pɝhæps ʃi ʃəd nɑɾ əv kɔld əm boʊθ, bʌɾ əɹ fɝs hæf-koʊhɪɹən θɔt hæd bɪn tə sʌmən ðə tu sɪstɝz ʃi kəd kaʊn ɑn. noʊ wʌn ɪn ðə kæmp soʊ mʌtʃ əz səspɛktəd. ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðə fɔɹmɝ æmɪɝlɪn ən əɹ fɔɹmɝ kipɝ dɪtɛstɪd wʌn ənʌðɝ ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz sɪuən dɪtɛstɪd biɪŋ tuɾɝ tə hɝ səksɛsɝ. ʃəɾ ɛni sɪstɝ ənkʌvɝ ðə tʃɹuθ, ðeɪ maɪt wɛl faɪn ðɛmsɛlvz duɪŋ pɛnəns fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm tə kʌm, ən nɑɾ ən izi wʌn - ɛɛs sədaɪ əpɹiʃieɪɾɪd biɪŋ meɪd fulz ʌv ivən lɛs ðən ʌðɝ pipəl; kɪŋz hæd bɪn meɪd tə peɪ fəɹ ðət - bʌɾ ɪn ðə minwaɪl ðɛɹ səpoʊzd ænəmɑsəɾi ɹɪzʌltɪɾ ɪn ə sɝɾən lɛvɝɪdʒ wɪð ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ sɪɾɝz. ɪf ðeɪ boʊθ sɛd ðə seɪm θɪŋ, ɪt mʌs bi soʊ. ənʌðɝ ɪnsɪdɛntəl ɪfɛkt ə biɪŋ stɪld wɑz vɛɹi jusfəl, wʌn noʊ wʌn ɛls nu əbaʊt. ðə θɹi oʊðz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hɛl ðɛm; ðeɪ kəd laɪ laɪk wʊl mɝtʃəns, naʊ.

She did care, and perhaps she should not have called them both, but her first half-coherent thought had been to summon the two sisters she could count on. No one in the camp so much as suspected. Everyone knew the former Amyrlin and her former Keeper detested one another every bit as much as Siuan detested being tutor to her successor. Should any sister uncover the truth, they might well find themselves doing penance for a long time to come, and not an easy one - Aes Sedai appreciated being made fools of even less than other people; kings had been made to pay for that - but in the meanwhile their supposed animosity resulted in a certain leverage with the other sisters, including Sitters. If they both said the same thing, it must be so. Another incidental effect of being stilled was very useful, one no one else knew about. The Three Oaths no longer held them; they could lie like wool merchants, now.

skimz ən dɪsɛpʃənz ɑn ɛvɹi saɪd. ðə kæmp wɑz laɪk səm fɛɾəd swɑmp wɛɹ stʃɹeɪnʒ ɡɹoʊθs spɹaʊɾəd ənsin ɪn mɪsts. meɪbi ɛniwɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡæðɝd wɑz laɪk ðæt. æftɝ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz ə plɑɾɪŋ, haʊɛvɝ nɛsəsɛɹi, ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ ðət skimɪŋ hæd bɪkʌm sɛkənd neɪtʃɝ tə moʊst sɪstɝz ən oʊnli ə bɹɛθ əweɪ fəɹ ðə ɹɛst. ðə tʃɹuli hɔɹəbəl θɪŋ wɑz ðət ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ɛndʒɔɪ ɔl ðə mækəneɪʃənz. nɑt fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn seɪk, bʌɾ əz pʌzəlz, ðoʊ noʊ twɪstəd bɪts ʌv aɪɝn kəɾ ɪntʃɹiɡ hɝ ə kɔɹɾɝ soʊ mʌtʃ. wʌt ðət sɛɾ əbaʊt hɝ, ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə noʊ. wɛl, ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, wʌtɛvɝ ɛniwʌn θɔt, ən ʃi hæd tə teɪk ðə bæɾ ʌv ɪt wɪð ðə ɡʊd.

Schemes and deceptions on every side. The camp was like some fetid swamp where strange growths sprouted unseen in mists. Maybe anywhere Aes Sedai gathered was like that. After three thousand years of plotting, however necessary, it was hardly surprising that scheming had become second nature to most sisters and only a breath away for the rest. The truly horrible thing was that she found herself beginning to enjoy all the machinations. Not for their own sake, but as puzzles, though no twisted bits of iron could intrigue her a quarter so much. What that said about her, she did not want to know. Well, she was Aes Sedai, whatever anyone thought, and she had to take the bad of it with the good.

"mɑɡiɾin əz ɪskeɪpt," ʃi wɛn ɑn wɪθaʊt pɔz. "ə mæn ɹimuv ði æɾəm fɹəm hɝ. ə mæn u kən tʃænəl. aɪ θɪŋk wʌn ə ðɛm tʊk ðə nɛkləs əweɪ; ɪt wɑzn ɪn əɹ tɛnt, ðəɾ aɪ sɔ. ðəɹ maɪt bi səm weɪ tə faɪn ɪt juzɪŋ ðə bɹeɪslət, bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ ɪz, aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪt."

"Moghedien has escaped," she went on without pause. "A man removed the a'dam from her. A man who can channel. I think one of them took the necklace away; it wasn't in her tent, that I saw. There might be some way to find it using the bracelet, but if there is, I don't know it."

ðət tʊk ðə stɑɹtʃ ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðɛm. linz lɛɡz ɡeɪv weɪ, ən ʃi dʒɹɑp laɪk ə sæk ɑntu ðə stul tʃɛsə səmtaɪmz juzd. sɪuən sæt daʊn ɑn ðə kɑt sloʊli, bæk vɛɹi stʃɹeɪt, hænz vɛɹi stɪl ɑn əɹ niz. ɪŋkɔŋɹuəsli, ɛɡwin noʊɾəst ðəɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs hæd taɪni blu flaʊɝz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn ə waɪd tɛɹən meɪz ɝaʊn ðə bɑɾəm, ə bæn ðət meɪd ðə dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts sim wʌn wən ʃi wɑz stɪl. ənʌðɝ bæn kɝv bɪkʌmɪŋli əkɹɔs ðə bɑɾəs. kənsɝn fəɹ əɹ kloʊðz, ðət ðeɪ bi pɹɪɾi ɪnstɛɾ ə dʒʌst suɾəbəl, wɑz sɝɾənli ə smɔl tʃeɪnʒ, lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪt wʌn weɪ - ʃi nɛvɝ tʊk ɪt tə ɪkstʃɹimz - jɛɾ ɪn ənʌðɝ, ɪt wɑz əz dʒɹæstɪk əz əɹ feɪs. ən ə pʌzəl. sɪuən ɹizɛntəd ðə tʃeɪnʒəz, ən ɹɪzɪstɪd ðɛm. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðɪs wʌn.

That took the starch right out of them. Leane's legs gave way, and she dropped like a sack onto the stool Chesa sometimes used. Siuan sat down on the cot slowly, back very straight, hands very still on her knees. Incongruously, Egwene noticed that her dress had tiny blue flowers embroidered in a wide Tairen maze around the bottom, a band that made the divided skirts seem one when she was still. Another band curved becomingly across the bodice. Concern for her clothes, that they be pretty instead of just suitable, was certainly a small change, looking at it one way - she never took it to extremes - yet in another, it was as drastic as her face. And a puzzle. Siuan resented the changes, and resisted them. Except for this one.

lin, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ɪn tʃɹu ɛɛs sədaɪ fæʃən ɛmbɹeɪst wʌt hæd tʃeɪnʒd. ə jʌŋ wʊmən əɡɛn - ɛɡwin hæɾ oʊvɝhɝɾ ə jɛloʊ ɪkskleɪmɪŋ ɪn wʌndɝ ðət boʊθ wɝ pɹaɪm tʃaɪldbɛɹɪŋ eɪdʒ, baɪ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi kəd faɪnd - ʃi maɪt nɛvɝ əv bɪn kipɝ, nɛvɝ əv hæɾ ɛni ʌðɝ feɪs. ðə vɛɹi ɪmədʒ ə pɹæktɪkæləɾi ən ɪfɪʃənsi bɪkeɪm ði aɪdil ʌv ən ɪndələn ən əlʊɹɪŋ dəmɑni wʊmən. ivən əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs wɑz kʌɾ ɪn ðə staɪl ə hɝ neɪɾɪv lænd, ən noʊ mæɾɝ ðəɾ ɪts sɪlk, soʊ θɪn ɪt bɛɹli simd oʊpeɪk, wɑz əz ɪmpɹæktəkəl əz ðə peɪl ɡɹin kʌlɝ fəɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ dʌsti ɹoʊdz. toʊl ðət hævɪŋ bɪn stɪl hæd bɹoʊkən ɔl taɪz ən əsoʊsieɪʃənz, lin hæd tʃoʊzən ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ oʊvɝ ə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə blu. tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ədʒəz wɑz nɑt dʌn, bʌt ðɛn, noʊ wʌn hæd bɪn stɪld ən ðən hil bɪfɔɹ, iðɝ. sɪuən hæd ɡɔn ɹaɪt bæk ɪndə ðə blu, ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ ði ɪɾiɑtɪk nid tə "ɛntʃɹiɾ ən əpil fəɹ æksɛptəns" əz ðə fɔɹməl fɹeɪz wɛnt.

Leane, on the other hand, in true Aes Sedai fashion embraced what had changed. A young woman again - Egwene had overheard a Yellow exclaiming in wonder that both were prime childbearing age, by everything she could find - she might never have been Keeper, never have had any other face. The very image of practicality and efficiency became the ideal of an indolent and alluring Domani woman. Even her riding dress was cut in the style of her native land, and no matter that its silk, so thin it barely seemed opaque, was as impractical as the pale green color for traveling dusty roads. Told that having been stilled had broken all ties and associations, Leane had chosen the Green Ajah over a return to the Blue. Changing Ajahs was not done, but then, no one had been stilled and then Healed before, either. Siuan had gone right back into the Blue, grumbling over the idiotic need to "entreat and appeal for acceptance" as the formal phrase went.

"oʊ, laɪt!" lin bɹiðd əz ʃi θʌmpt ɑntu ðə stul wɪð kənsɪɾɝəbli lɛs ðən əɹ juʒəwəl ɡɹeɪs. "wi ʃʊɾə tɝn əɹ oʊvɝ fəɹ tʃɹaɪəl ðə fɝs deɪ. nʌθɪŋ wiv lɝn fɹəm əɹ ɪz wɝθ lɛɾɪŋ əɹ lus ɑn ðə wɝld əɡɛn. nʌθɪŋ!" ɪt wɑz ə mɛʒɝ ə hɝ ʃɑk; ʃi dɪd nɑt nɔɹməli ɡoʊ əbaʊt steɪɾɪŋ ði ɑbviəs. hɝ bɹeɪn hæd nɑt ɡɹoʊn ɪndələnt, wʌtɛvɝ əɹ aʊtwɝd dɪminɝ. læŋɡwəɾ ən sɪdʌktɪv dəmɑni wɪmən maɪt bi ɑn ði aʊtsaɪd, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ stɪl noʊn əz ðə ʃɑɹpəs tʃɹeɪɾɝz ɛniwɛɹ.

"Oh, Light!" Leane breathed as she thumped onto the stool with considerably less than her usual grace. "We should have turned her over for trial the first day. Nothing we've learned from her is worth letting her loose on the world again. Nothing!" It was a measure of her shock; she did not normally go about stating the obvious. Her brain had not grown indolent, whatever her outward demeanor. Languid and seductive Domani women might be on the outside, but they were still known as the sharpest traders anywhere.

"blʌɾ ən blʌɾi - ! wi ʃʊɾə hæɾ əɹ wɑtʃt," sɪuən ɡɹaʊl θɹu hɝ tiθ.

"Blood and bloody - ! We should have had her watched," Siuan growled through her teeth.

ɛɡwinz aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz. sɪuən mʌs bi əz ʃeɪkən əz lin. "baɪ hu, sɪuən? fɑoʊleɪn? θiədʒɹɪn? ðeɪ doʊn ivən noʊ jə tu ɑɹ ə maɪ pɑɹɾi." ə pɑɹɾi? faɪv wɪmən. ən fɑoʊleɪn ən θiədʒɹɪn wɝ hɑɹdli iɡɝ ædhɪɹəns, ɪspɛʃli fɑoʊleɪn. nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn kəd bi kaʊntəd tu, ʌv kɔɹs, ən bɝdʒɪt sɝɾənli, ivən ɪf ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ə lɔŋ weɪ ɔf. stɛlθ ən kʌnɪŋ wɝ stɪl əɹ meɪdʒɝ stʃɹɛŋkθs. plʌs ðə fæk ðət noʊ wʌn ɪkspɛktəɾ əm ə hɝ. "haʊ ʃəɾ aɪ hæv ɪkspleɪn tə ɛniwʌn waɪ ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə wɑtʃ maɪ sɝvɪŋ wʊmən? fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, wʌt ɡʊd wəɾ ɪɾ əv dʌn? ɪt hæd tə bi wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. dʒju ɹɪli θɪŋk fɑoʊleɪn ən θiədʒɹɪn təɡɛðɝ cʊɾə stɑp hɪm? aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ aɪ kəd hæv, ivən lɪŋkt wɪð ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn." ðeɪ wɝ ðə nɛks tu stʃɹɔŋɡəst wɪmən ɪn ðə kæmp, əz stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə paʊɝ əz sɪuən juz tə bi.

Egwene's eyebrows rose. Siuan must be as shaken as Leane. "By who, Siuan? Faolain? Theodrin? They don't even know you two are of my party." A party? Five women. And Faolain and Theodrin were hardly eager adherents, especially Faolain. Nynaeve and Elayne could be counted too, of course, and Birgitte certainly, even if she was not Aes Sedai, but they were a long way off. Stealth and cunning were still her major strengths. Plus the fact that no one expected them of her. "How should I have explained to anyone why they were supposed to watch my serving woman? For that matter, what good would it have done? It had to be one of the Forsaken. Do you really think Faolain and Theodrin together could have stopped him? I'm not sure I could have, even linked with Romanda and Lelaine." They were the next two strongest women in the camp, as strong in the Power as Siuan used to be.

sɪuən vɪzəbli fɔɹst ə skaʊl fɹəm əɹ feɪs, bʌɾ ivən soʊ, ʃi snɔɹɾɪd. ʃi ɔfən sɛd ðəɾ ɪf ʃi kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bi æmɪɝlɪn, ðən ʃi wəd titʃ ɛɡwin haʊ tə bi ðə bɛst æmɪɝlɪn ɛvɝ, jɛt ðə tʃɹænzɪʃən fɹəm laɪən ɑn ə hɪl tə maʊs ʌndɝfʊt wɑz dɪfəkəlt. ɛɡwin əlaʊɾ əɹ noʊ lɪɾəl læɾətud kəz ə ðæt.

Siuan visibly forced a scowl from her face, but even so, she snorted. She often said that if she could no longer be Amyrlin, then she would teach Egwene how to be the best Amyrlin ever, yet the transition from lion on a hill to mouse underfoot was difficult. Egwene allowed her no little latitude because of that.

"aɪ wɑn ðə tu ʌv jə tə æsk əbaʊɾ əmʌŋ ðoʊz nɪɹ ðə tɛn mɑɡiɾin wɑz slipɪŋ ɪn. sʌmwʌn mʌst əv sin ðə mæn. hi hæd tə kʌm əfʊt. ɛnibəɾi oʊpənɪŋ ə ɡeɪtweɪ ɪnsaɪɾ ə speɪs ðət lɪɾəl ɹɪskt kʌɾɪŋ əɹ ɪn tu, haʊɛvɝ smɔl i woʊv ɪt."

"I want the two of you to ask about among those near the tent Moghedien was sleeping in. Someone must have seen the man. He had to come afoot. Anybody opening a gateway inside a space that little risked cutting her in two, however small he wove it."

sɪuən snɔɹɾɪd, laʊɾɝ ðən ðə fɝs taɪm. "waɪ bɑðɝ?" ʃi ɡɹaʊld. "du jə min tə ɡoʊ tʃeɪsɪŋ æftɝ laɪk səm ful hɪɹoʊ ɪn ə ɡlimənz ful stɔɹi ən bɹɪŋ əɹ bæk? meɪbi taɪ ʌp ɔl ðə fɔɹseɪkən ət wʌn ɡoʊ? wɪn ðə læs bæɾəl waɪl jəɹ əɾ ɪt? ivən ɪf wi ɡɛɾ ə dɪskɹɪpʃən hɛd tə toʊ, noʊbɑdi noʊz wʌn fɔɹseɪkən fɹəm ənʌðɝ. noʊbɑdi hɪɹ, ɛniweɪ. ɪts ðə moʊs blʌɾi jusləs bæɹəl ə fɪʃ ɡʌts aɪ ɛvɝ - !"

Siuan snorted, louder than the first time. "Why bother?" she growled. "Do you mean to go chasing after like some fool hero in a gleeman's fool story and bring her back? Maybe tie up all the Forsaken at one go? Win the Last Battle while you're at it? Even if we get a description head to toe, nobody knows one Forsaken from another. Nobody here, anyway. It's the most bloody useless barrel of fish guts I ever - !"

"sɪuən!" ɛɡwin sɛd ʃɑɹpli, sɪɾɪŋ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾɝ. læɾətud wɑz wʌn θɪŋ, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ lɪməts. ʃi dɪd nɑt pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ðɪs ivən fɹəm ɹoʊmændə.

"Siuan!" Egwene said sharply, sitting up straighter. Latitude was one thing, but there were limits. She did not put up with this even from Romanda.

kʌlɝ blum sloʊli ɪn sɪuənz tʃiks. stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə mæstɝ hɝsɛlf, ʃi niɾɪd əɹ skɝts ən əvɔɪɾəd ɛɡwinz aɪz. "fɝɡɪv mi, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. ʃi ɔlmoʊst saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi mɛn ɪt.

Color bloomed slowly in Siuan's cheeks. Struggling to master herself, she kneaded her skirts and avoided Egwene's eyes. "Forgive me, Mother," she said finally. She almost sounded as if she meant it.

"ɪɾ əz bɪn ə dɪfəkəl deɪ fəɹ hɝ, mʌðɝ," lin pʊɾ ɪn wɪð ən ɪmpɪʃ smaɪl. ʃi wɑz vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ət ðoʊz, ðoʊ ʃi dʒɛnɝəli juzd əm tə sɛt səm mænz hɑɹt ɹeɪsɪŋ. nɑt pɹɑmɪskwəsli, ʌv kɔɹs; ʃi pəzɛs dɪskɹɪməneɪʃən ən dɪskɹɛʃən ɪn æmpəl səplaɪ. "bʌt ðɛn, moʊst ɑɹ. ɪf ʃi kəɾ oʊnli lɝn nɑt tə θɹoʊ θɪŋz ət ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi ɡɛts æŋɡɹi - "

"It has been a difficult day for her, Mother," Leane put in with an impish smile. She was very good at those, though she generally used them to set some man's heart racing. Not promiscuously, of course; she possessed discrimination and discretion in ample supply. "But then, most are. If she could only learn not to throw things at Gareth Bryne every time she gets angry - "

"ɪnʌf!" ɛɡwin snæpt. lin wɑz oʊnli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə teɪk ə lɪɾəl ə ðə pɹɛʃɝ fɹəm sɪuən, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɪn noʊ mud fəɹ ɪt. "aɪ wɑnə noʊ ɛniθɪŋ aɪ kən lɝn əbaʊt huɛvɝ fɹid mɑɡiɾin, ivən ɪf ɪts dʒʌst wɛðɝ i wɑz ʃɔɹɾ əɹ tɔl. ɛni skɹæp ðət meɪks ɪm lɛs ə ʃædoʊ kɹipɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹk. ɪf ðæts nɑt mɔɹ ðən aɪ hæv ə ɹaɪt tə æsk." lin sæt kwaɪt stɪl, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə flaʊɝz ɪn ðə kɑɹpəɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ toʊz.

"Enough!" Egwene snapped. Leane was only trying to take a little of the pressure from Siuan, but she was in no mood for it. "I want to know anything I can learn about whoever freed Moghedien, even if it's just whether he was short or tall. Any scrap that makes him less a shadow creeping in the dark. If that's not more than I have a right to ask." Leane sat quite still, staring at the flowers in the carpet in front of her toes.

ðə ɹɛdnəs spɹɛd tə kʌvɝ nɪɹli sɪuənz hoʊl feɪs; wɪð əɹ fɛɹ skɪn, ɪt meɪɾ əɹ lʊk laɪk ə sʌnsɛt. "aɪ . . . hʌmbli bɛɡ jəɹ pɑɹɾən, mʌðɝ." ðɪs taɪm, ʃi dɪd saʊn pɛnɪɾɪnt. hɝ dɪfəkəlti miɾɪŋ ɛɡwinz ɡeɪz wɑz ɑbviəs. "səmtaɪmz ɪts hɑɹd tə. . . . noʊ, noʊ ɪkskjusɪz. aɪ hʌmbli bɛɡ pɑɹɾən."

The redness spread to cover nearly Siuan's whole face; with her fair skin, it made her look like a sunset. "I . . . humbly beg your pardon, Mother." This time, she did sound penitent. Her difficulty meeting Egwene's gaze was obvious. "Sometimes it's hard to. . . . No, no excuses. I humbly beg pardon."

ɛɡwin fɪŋɡɝɾ əɹ stoʊl, lɛɾɪŋ ðə moʊmən sɛɾ ɪtsɛlf əz ʃi lʊkt ət sɪuən wɪθaʊt blɪŋkɪŋ. ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ sɪuən hɝsɛlf hæd tɔt hɝ, bʌɾ æftɝ ə bɪt ʃi ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli ɑn ðə kɑt. wən jə nu jə wɝ ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ, saɪləns pɹɪkt, ən ðə pɹɪks dʒɹoʊv hoʊm ðət jə wɝ ɹɔŋ. saɪləns wɑz ə vɛɹi jusfəl tul ɪn ə nʌmbɝ ə sɪtʃueɪʃənz. "sɪns aɪ kæn ɹikɔl wʌɾ aɪ ʃəd fɝɡɪv," ʃi sɛɾ ət læst, kwaɪətli, "ðɛɹ simz tə bi noʊ nid. bʌt, sɪuən. . . . doʊn lɛɾ ɪt hæpən əɡɛn."

Egwene fingered her stole, letting the moment set itself as she looked at Siuan without blinking. That was something Siuan herself had taught her, but after a bit she shifted uneasily on the cot. When you knew you were in the wrong, silence pricked, and the pricks drove home that you were wrong. Silence was a very useful tool in a number of situations. "Since I can't recall what I should forgive," she said at last, quietly, "there seems to be no need. But, Siuan. . . . Don't let it happen again."

"θæŋk ju, mʌðɝ." ə hɪn ə ɹaɪ læftɝ kɝl ðə kɔɹnɝz ə sɪuənz maʊθ. "ɪf aɪ meɪ seɪ soʊ, aɪ sim tə hæv tɔt jə vɛɹi wɛl. bʌɾ ɪf aɪ meɪ sədʒɛst . . . ?" ʃi weɪɾəd fəɹ ɛɡwinz ɪmpeɪʃənt nɑd. "wʌn ʌv əs ʃəd kæɹi jəɹ ɔɹɾɝ tə fɑoʊleɪn əɹ θiədʒɹɪn tə æsk ðə kwɛstʃənz, vɛɹi sʌlki ət biɪŋ meɪɾ ə mɛsənʒɝ. ðəl əkeɪʒən ə dil lɛs kɑmɛn ðən lin əɹ aɪ. ɛvɹiwʌn noʊz jə ɑɹ ðɛɹ peɪtʃɹən."

"Thank you, Mother." A hint of wry laughter curled the corners of Siuan's mouth. "If I may say so, I seem to have taught you very well. But if I may suggest . . . ?" She waited for Egwene's impatient nod. "One of us should carry your order to Faolain or Theodrin to ask the questions, very sulky at being made a messenger. They'll occasion a deal less comment than Leane or I. Everyone knows you are their patron."

ɛɡwin əɡɹiɾ ɪmiɾiətli. ʃi stɪl wɑz nɑt θɪŋkɪŋ klɪɹli, əɹ ʃi wʊɾə sin ðət fəɹ hɝsɛlf. ðə hɛɾətʃi filɪŋ wɑz bæk əɡɛn. tʃɛsə kleɪmd ɪt keɪm fɹəm tu lɪɾəl slip, bʌt slipɪŋ wɑz dɪfəkəlt wən jəɹ hɛd fɛl tɔɾ əz ə dʒɹʌmhɛd. ɪt wəd teɪk ə lɑɹdʒɝ hɛd ðən hɝz nɑt tə fil taɪt, stʌft wɪð əz mɛni wɝiz əz ʃi hæd. wɛl, ət lis naʊ ʃi kəd pæs ɑn ðə sikɹəts ðət hæd kɛp mɑɡiɾin hɪɾən, haʊ tə wiv dɪsɡaɪzɪz wɪð ðə paʊɝ ən haʊ tə mæsk jəɹ əbɪləɾi fɹəm ʌðɝ wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl. ɹɪvilɪŋ ðoʊz hæd bɪn tu ɹɪski wən ðeɪ maɪɾ əv lɛd tə ənmæskɪŋ mɑɡiɾin.

Egwene agreed immediately. She still was not thinking clearly, or she would have seen that for herself. The headachy feeling was back again. Chesa claimed it came from too little sleep, but sleeping was difficult when your head felt taut as a drumhead. It would take a larger head than hers not to feel tight, stuffed with as many worries as she had. Well, at least now she could pass on the secrets that had kept Moghedien hidden, how to weave disguises with the Power and how to mask your ability from other women who could channel. Revealing those had been too risky when they might have led to unmasking Moghedien.

ə bɪt mɔɹ əkleɪm, ʃi θɔt ɹaɪli. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɡɹeɪt pɛɾɪŋ ən ɪkskleɪmɪŋ wən ʃi ənaʊns ðə wʌns-lɔst sikɹəɾ ə tʃɹævlɪŋ, wɪtʃ ət lis hæd bɪn əɹ oʊn, ən mɔɹ pɹeɪz sɪns fəɹ ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðə sikɹəts ʃi hæd ɹɛntʃt aʊɾ ə mɑɡiɾin, laɪk pʊlɪŋ ə bæk tuθ itʃ taɪm. nʌn ə ði əkleɪm meɪɾ ən aʊns ə dɪfɝəns ɪn əɹ pəzɪʃən, ðoʊ. jə kəd pæɾ ə tæləntəd tʃaɪld ɑn ðə hɛd wɪθaʊt fɝɡɛɾɪŋ ʃi wɑz ə tʃaɪld.

A bit more acclaim, she thought wryly. There had been great petting and exclaiming when she announced the once-lost secret of Traveling, which at least had been her own, and more praise since for every one of the secrets she had wrenched out of Moghedien, like pulling a back tooth each time. None of the acclaim made an ounce of difference in her position, though. You could pat a talented child on the head without forgetting she was a child.

lin dɪpɑɹɾəd wɪð ə kɝtsi ən ə dʒɹaɪ kɑmɛn ðət ʃi wɑz nɑt sɑɹi sʌmbɑɾi ɛls wəɾ əv lɛs ðən ə fʊl naɪts ɹɛs fəɹ wʌns. sɪuən weɪɾəd; noʊ wʌn kəd bi əlaʊd tə si hɝ ən lin livɪŋ təɡɛðɝ. fəɹ ə taɪm ɛɡwin mɪɹli stʌɾid ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. niðɝ spoʊk; sɪuən sim lɔst ɪn θɔt. faɪnəli ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən stʊd, stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛs, pleɪnli pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə ɡoʊ.

Leane departed with a curtsy and a dry comment that she was not sorry somebody else would have less than a full night's rest for once. Siuan waited; no one could be allowed to see her and Leane leaving together. For a time Egwene merely studied the other woman. Neither spoke; Siuan seemed lost in thought. Finally she gave a start and stood, straightening her dress, plainly preparing to go.

"sɪuən," ɛɡwin bɪɡæn sloʊli, ən faʊn hɝsɛlf ənsɝɾən haʊ tə kəntɪnju.

"Siuan," Egwene began slowly, and found herself uncertain how to continue.

sɪuən θɔt ʃi ʌndɝstʊd. "ju wɝ nɑɾ oʊnli ɹaɪt, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd, lʊkɪŋ ɛɡwin stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ði aɪ, "ju wɝ liniənt. tu liniənt, ðoʊ aɪ seɪ ɪɾ u ʃʊdnt. jə ɑɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ən noʊ wʌn meɪ bi ɪnsələn əɹ ɪmpɝɾənənt tə ju. ɪf jud ɡɪvən mi ə pɛnəns ðət meɪɾ ivən ɹoʊmændə fil sɑɹi fəɹ mi, ɪt wʊɾə bɪn noʊ mɔɹ ðən aɪ dɪzɝvd."

Siuan thought she understood. "You were not only right, Mother," she said, looking Egwene straight in the eye, "you were lenient. Too lenient, though I say it who shouldn't. You are the Amyrlin Seat, and no one may be insolent or impertinent to you. If you'd given me a penance that made even Romanda feel sorry for me, it would have been no more than I deserved."

"aɪ wɪl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət nɛks taɪm," ɛɡwin sɛd, ən sɪuən baʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ əz ɪf ɪn æksɛptəns. meɪbi ɪt wɑz. ənlɛs ðə tʃeɪnʒəz ɪn əɹ ɹæn dipɝ ðən sim pɑsəbəl, ðəɹ ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli wəd bi ə nɛks taɪm, ən mɔɹ æftɝ ðæt. "bʌt wʌɾ aɪ wɑnə æsk əbaʊɾ ɪz lɔɹd bɹaɪn." ɔl ɪkspɹɛʃən vænɪʃt fɹəm sɪuənz feɪs. "ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ jə wʊdn laɪk mi tə . . . ɪntɝvin?"

"I will remember that next time," Egwene said, and Siuan bowed her head as if in acceptance. Maybe it was. Unless the changes in her ran deeper than seemed possible, there almost certainly would be a next time, and more after that. "But what I want to ask about is Lord Bryne." All expression vanished from Siuan's face. "Are you sure you wouldn't like me to . . . intervene?"

"waɪ wəɾ aɪ wɑn ðæt, mʌðɝ?" sɪuənz vɔɪs wɑz blændɝ ðən koʊld wɔɾɝ sup. "ði oʊnli duɾiz aɪ hæv ɑɹ titʃɪŋ jə ði ɛɾəkət ə jəɹ ɔfəs ən hændɪŋ ʃɛɹiəm ɹɪpɔɹts fɹəm maɪ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz." ʃi stɪl ɹɪteɪn səm ə hɝ fɔɹmɝ nɛtwɝk, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz daʊtfəl ɛni nu hu ðɛɹ ɹɪpɔɹts wɛn tə naʊ. "ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn hɑɹdli ɹikwaɪɝz ɪnʌf ə maɪ taɪm tə ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð ðæt." ʃi ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz ɹəfɝd tə hɪm ðət weɪ, ən ivən wən ʃi juzd ɪz taɪɾəl, ʃi pʊɾ ə baɪɾ ɪndə ɪt.

"Why would I want that, Mother?" Siuan's voice was blander than cold water soup. "The only duties I have are teaching you the etiquette of your office and handing Sheriam reports from my eyes-and-ears." She still retained some of her former network, though it was doubtful any knew who their reports went to now. "Gareth Bryne hardly requires enough of my time to interfere with that." She almost always referred to him that way, and even when she used his title, she put a bite into it.

"sɪuən, ə bɝn bɑɹn ən ə fju kaʊz kʊdn kɑs ðət mʌtʃ." nɑt kəmpɛɹd wɪð peɪɪŋ ən fiɾɪŋ ɔl ðoʊz soʊlʒɝz, sɝɾənli. bʌt ʃi hæɾ ɔfɝd bɪfɔɹ, ən ðə stɪf ɹɪplaɪ wɑz ðə seɪm.

"Siuan, a burned barn and a few cows couldn't cost that much." Not compared with paying and feeding all those soldiers, certainly. But she had offered before, and the stiff reply was the same.

"aɪ θæŋk ju, mʌðɝ, bʌt noʊ. aɪ woʊn əv ɪm seɪɪŋ aɪ bɹeɪk maɪ wɝd, ən aɪ swɔɹ tə wɝk ðə dɛɾ ɔf." əbɹʌpli, sɪuənz stɪfnəs dɪzɑlvd ɪn læftɝ, ɹɛɹ wən ʃi spoʊk əbaʊt lɔɹd bɹaɪn. skaʊlz wɝ mʌtʃ mɔɹ kɑmən. "ɪf jə nid tə wɝi əbaʊt sʌmbɑɾi, wɝi əbaʊt hɪm, nɑt mi. aɪ nid noʊ hɛlp hænlɪŋ ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn."

"I thank you, Mother, but no. I won't have him saying I break my word, and I swore to work the debt off." Abruptly, Siuan's stiffness dissolved in laughter, rare when she spoke about Lord Bryne. Scowls were much more common. "If you need to worry about somebody, worry about him, not me. I need no help handling Gareth Bryne."

ən ðət wɑz ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ pɑɹt. wik ʃi maɪt bi ɪn ðə wʌn paʊɝ, naʊ, bʌt nɑt soʊ wik ðət sɪuən hæd tə kip ɑn əz ɪz sɝvənt, spɛndɪŋ aʊɝz ʌp tə hɝ ɛlboʊz ɪn hɑt soʊpi wɔɾɝ wɪð ɪz ʃɝts ən smɔlkloʊðz. pɝhæps ʃi dɪd soʊ ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə hæv sʌmwʌn ət hæn ɑn hum ʃi kəd lus ðə tɛmpɝ ʃi wɑz ʌðɝwaɪz fɔɹs tə kip ɪn ə sæk. wʌtɛvɝ ðə ɹizən, ɪɾ əkeɪʒənd noʊ lɪɾəl tɔk, ən kənfɝmd əɹ ɑdnəs ɪn mɛni aɪz; ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, æftɝ ɔl, ɪf ɹæðɝ fɑɹ daʊn. hɪz mɛθədz ə dilɪŋ wɪð əɹ tɛmpɝ - wʌns ʃi θɹu pleɪts ən buts, ɛniweɪ - aʊtʃɹeɪdʒd əɹ ən pɹəvoʊk θɹɛts ə daɪɹ kɑnsəkwɛnsəz, jɛt ðoʊ ʃi cʊɾə ɹæpt ɪm ʌp əneɪbəl tə stɝ ə fɪŋɡɝ, sɪuən nɛvɝ tʌtʃt seɪaɪdɑɹ ɝaʊn hɪm, nɑt tə də hɪz tʃɔɹz ən nɑɾ ivən wən ɪt mɛn biɪŋ tɝn oʊvɝ ɪz ni. ðət fækt ʃi hæd kɛp hɪɾən fɹəm moʊst soʊ fɑɹ, bʌt səm θɪŋz slɪpt aʊt wən ʃi wɑz ɪn ə ɹeɪdʒ, əɹ wən lin wɑz ɪn ə hjumɝ. ðəɹ sim tə bi noʊ ɛkspləneɪʃən. sɪuən wɑz nɑt wik-spɪɹəɾəd əɹ ə ful, ʃi wɑz niðɝ mik nɔɹ əfɹeɪd, ʃi wɑz nɑt. . . .

And that was the strange part. Weak she might be in the One Power, now, but not so weak that Siuan had to keep on as his servant, spending hours up to her elbows in hot soapy water with his shirts and smallclothes. Perhaps she did so in order to have someone at hand on whom she could loose the temper she was otherwise forced to keep in a sack. Whatever the reason, it occasioned no little talk, and confirmed her oddness in many eyes; she was Aes Sedai, after all, if rather far down. His methods of dealing with her temper - once she threw plates and boots, anyway - outraged her and provoked threats of dire consequences, yet though she could have wrapped him up unable to stir a finger, Siuan never touched saidar around him, not to do his chores and not even when it meant being turned over his knee. That fact she had kept hidden from most so far, but some things slipped out when she was in a rage, or when Leane was in a humor. There seemed to be no explanation. Siuan was not weak-spirited or a fool, she was neither meek nor afraid, she was not. . . .

"ju maɪɾ əz wɛl bi ɑn jəɹ weɪ, sɪuən." klɪɹli, səm sikɹəts wɝ nɑt gɑnə bi ɹɪvil tənaɪt. "ɪts leɪt, ən aɪ noʊ jə wɑn jəɹ bɛd."

"You might as well be on your way, Siuan." Clearly, some secrets were not going to be revealed tonight. "It's late, and I know you want your bed."

"jɛs, mʌðɝ. ænd, θæŋk ju," ʃi æɾəd, ðoʊ ɛɡwin kəd nɑɾ əv sɛd fəɹ wʌt.

"Yes, Mother. And, thank you," she added, though Egwene could not have said for what.

æftɝ sɪuən lɛft, ɛɡwin ɹʌbd əɹ tɛmpəlz wʌns mɔɹ. ʃi wɑntəd tə peɪs. ðə tɛnt wəd nɑt du; ɪt maɪt bi ðə lɑɹdʒəst ɪn ðə kæmp ɑkjəpaɪd baɪ dʒʌst wʌn pɝsən, bʌt ðət mɛn lɛs ðən tu spænz baɪ tu, ən ɪt wɑz kɹaʊɾəd wɪð kɑɾ ən tʃɛɹ ən stul, wɑʃstæn ən stænd-mɪɹɝ ən noʊ fjuɝ ðən θɹi tʃɛsts fʊl ə kloʊðz. tʃɛsə hæd sin tə ðoʊz læst, ən ʃɛɹiəm, ən ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn ən ə dʌzən mɔɹ sɪɾɝz. ðeɪ kɛp siɪŋ tə ðɛm; ə fju mɔɹ ɡɪfs ə sɪlk ʃɪfs əɹ stɑkɪŋz, wʌn mɔɹ dʒɹɛs ɡɹæn ɪnʌf tə ɹəsiv ə kɪŋ, ən ðəɹ wəd bi nid fəɹ ə fɔɹθ tʃɛst. meɪbi ʃɛɹiəm ən ðə sɪɾɝz hoʊpt ɔl ðə faɪn dʒɹɛsəz wəd blaɪn əɹ tə ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, bʌt tʃɛsə dʒʌs θɔt ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hæd tə bi kloʊð suɾəbli fəɹ əɹ steɪʃən. sɝvəns, ɪt simd, bɪlivd ɪn fɑloʊɪŋ ðə kɝɛkt ɹɪtʃuəlz əz mʌtʃ əz ðə hɔl ɛvɝ dɪd. ʃɔɹtli sɛləm wəd bi ðɛɹ; ɪt wɑz əɹ tɝn tə əndʒɹɛs ɛɡwin fəɹ bɛd, ənʌðɝ ɹɪtʃuəl. oʊnli, bɪtwin əɹ hɛɾ ən əɹ ɹɛsləs fit, ʃi wɑz nɑt ɹɛɾi fəɹ bɛd jɛt.

After Siuan left, Egwene rubbed her temples once more. She wanted to pace. The tent would not do; it might be the largest in the camp occupied by just one person, but that meant less than two spans by two, and it was crowded with cot and chair and stool, washstand and stand-mirror and no fewer than three chests full of clothes. Chesa had seen to those last, and Sheriam, and Romanda and Lelaine and a dozen more Sitters. They kept seeing to them; a few more gifts of silk shifts or stockings, one more dress grand enough to receive a king, and there would be need for a fourth chest. Maybe Sheriam and the Sitters hoped all the fine dresses would blind her to anything else, but Chesa just thought the Amyrlin Seat had to be clothed suitably for her station. Servants, it seemed, believed in following the correct rituals as much as the Hall ever did. Shortly Selame would be there; it was her turn to undress Egwene for bed, another ritual. Only, between her head and her restless feet, she was not ready for bed yet.

livɪŋ ðə læmps bɝnɪŋ, ʃi hɝiɾ aʊt bɪfɔɹ sɛləm kəɾ ɝaɪv. wɔkɪŋ wəd klɪɹ əɹ hɛd, ən meɪbi taɪɝ əɹ ɪnʌf ðət ʃi kəd slip saʊnli. pʊɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə slip wəd bi noʊ pɹɑbləm - ðə waɪz wʌn dʒɹimwɔkɝz hæd tɔɾ əɹ ðət skɪl ɝli ɑn - jɛt faɪndɪŋ ɛni ɹɛst ɪn ɪt wɑz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ. ɪspɛʃli wən əɹ maɪn bɔɪld wɪð ə lɪst ʌv wɝiz ðət bɪɡæn wɪð ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn ən ʃɛɹiəm, ðən ɹæn θɹu ɹænd, ɪleɪɾə, mɑɡiɾin, ðə wɛðɝ ən ɑn aʊɾ ə saɪt.

Leaving the lamps burning, she hurried out before Selame could arrive. Walking would clear her head, and maybe tire her enough that she could sleep soundly. Putting herself to sleep would be no problem - the Wise One dreamwalkers had taught her that skill early on - yet finding any rest in it was another matter. Especially when her mind boiled with a list of worries that began with Romanda and Lelaine and Sheriam, then ran through Rand, Elaida, Moghedien, the weather and on out of sight.

ʃi əvɔɪɾəd ði ɛɹiə nɪɹ mɑɡiɾinz tɛnt. ɪf ʃi æskt kwɛstʃənz hɝsɛlf, tu mʌtʃ ɪmpɔɹɾəns wəd bi ɡɪvən tə ə sɝvən ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ. dɪskɹɛʃən hæd bɪkʌm pɑɹɾ ə hɝ. ðə ɡeɪm ʃi pleɪɾ əlaʊd fju slɪps, ən biɪŋ kɛɹləs wɛɹ jə nu ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ kəd lid tə biɪŋ kɛɹləs wɛɹ ɪt dɪd. wɝs, jə kəd dɪskʌvɝ jə hæd bɪn ɹɔŋ əbaʊt wɛɹ ɪt mæɾɝd. ðə wik mʌs bi boʊl kɔʃəsli. ðət wɑz sɪuən əɡɛn; ʃi tʃɹuli dɪɾ əɹ bɛs tə titʃ, ən ʃi nu ðɪs pɝtɪkjəlɝ ɡeɪm vɛɹi wɛl.

She avoided the area near Moghedien's tent. If she asked questions herself, too much importance would be given to a servant running away. Discretion had become part of her. The game she played allowed few slips, and being careless where you knew it did not matter could lead to being careless where it did. Worse, you could discover you had been wrong about where it mattered. The weak must be bold cautiously. That was Siuan again; she truly did her best to teach, and she knew this particular game very well.

ðəɹ wɝ noʊ mɔɹ pipəl aʊɾ ən əbaʊɾ ɪn ðə mun-ʃæɾoʊd kæmp ðən hæd bɪn ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ, hænfəlz slaʊtʃt wɛɹəli ɝaʊn loʊ faɪɝz, ɪɡzɔstəd baɪ ðɛɹ ivnɪŋz leɪbɝz æftɝ ə hɑɹd deɪz dʒɝni. ðoʊz u sɔ hɝ ɹoʊz taɪɹədli tə meɪk ðɛɹ kɝɾəsiz əz ʃi pæst, mɝmɝɪŋ "ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ju, mʌðɝ" əɹ sʌmθɪŋ laɪk, əkeɪʒənəli æskɪŋ əɹ blɛsɪŋ, wɪtʃ ʃi ɡeɪv wɪð ə sɪmpəl "ðə laɪt blɛs ju, maɪ tʃaɪld." mɛn ən wɪmən oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi hɝ ɡɹændpɛɹəns sæt bæk daʊn bimɪŋ fɹəm ðæt, jɛt ʃi wʌndɝd wʌt ðeɪ æktʃəli  bɪlivd əbaʊt hɝ, wʌt ðeɪ nu. ɔl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹizɛntəɾ ən ənbɹoʊkən fɹʌn tə ði aʊtsaɪd wɝld, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn sɝvəns. bʌt sɪuən sɛd ðəɾ ɪf jə bɪlivd ə sɝvənt nu twaɪs wʌɾ i ʃʊd, jə oʊnli nu hæf ðə tʃɹuθ. stɪl, ðoʊz baʊz ən kɝtsiz ən mɝmɝz fɑloʊɾ əɹ fɹəm wʌn klʌmp ə pipəl tə ðə nɛkst, kʌmfɝɾɪŋ əɹ wɪð ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðət ðəɹ wɝ səm ət list u dɪd nɑt si hɝ əz ə tʃaɪl ðə hɔl bɹɔɾ aʊt wən ðeɪ niɾəd hɝ.

There were no more people out and about in the moon-shadowed camp than had been there before, handfuls slouched wearily around low fires, exhausted by their evening's labors after a hard day's journey. Those who saw her rose tiredly to make their courtesies as she passed, murmuring "The Light shine on you, Mother" or something like, occasionally asking her blessing, which she gave with a simple "The Light bless you, my child." Men and women old enough to be her grandparents sat back down beaming from that, yet she wondered what they actually believed about her, what they knew. All the Aes Sedai presented an unbroken front to the outside world, including their own servants. But Siuan said that if you believed a servant knew twice what he should, you only knew half the truth. Still, those bows and curtsies and murmurs followed her from one clump of people to the next, comforting her with the possibility that there were some at least who did not see her as a child the Hall brought out when they needed her.

əz ʃi pæst ən oʊpən ɛɹiə sɝaʊndəd baɪ ɹoʊps taɪd tə poʊsts dʒɹɪvən ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ə ɡeɪtweɪz sɪlvɝ slæʃ ə laɪt flæʃt vɪvəɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs əz ɪt ɹoʊteɪɾɪd oʊpən. ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹɪli laɪt, ðoʊ; ɪt kæs noʊ ʃædoʊz. ʃi pɔz tə wɑtʃ bɪsaɪɾ ə kɔɹnɝ poʊst. noʊ wʌn ət ðə nɪɹbaɪ faɪɝz ivən lʊkt ʌp; ðeɪ wɝ juz tə ðɪs baɪ naʊ. ə dʌzən əɹ mɔɹ sɪstɝz, twaɪs əz mɛni sɝvəns ən ə nʌmbɝ ʌv wɔɹɾɝz bʌsəld aʊt, ɹɪtɝnɪŋ wɪð mɛsədʒəz ən wɪkɝ keɪdʒɪz ə pɪdʒənz fɹəm ðə dʌvəkoʊts ɪn sɑlədɑɹ, ə ɡʊd faɪv hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz wɛst ən saʊθ əz ðə ɡus flu.

As she passed an open area surrounded by ropes tied to posts driven into the ground, a gateway's silver slash of light flashed vivid in the darkness as it rotated open. It was not really light, though; it cast no shadows. She paused to watch beside a corner post. No one at the nearby fires even looked up; they were used to this by now. A dozen or more sisters, twice as many servants and a number of Warders bustled out, returning with messages and wicker cages of pigeons from the dovecotes in Salidar, a good five hundred miles west and south as the goose flew.

ðeɪ bɪɡæn skæɾɝɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ kloʊzd, kæɹiɪŋ ðɛɹ bɝɾənz tə sɪɾɝz, tə ðɛɹ ədʒəz, ə fju bæk tə ðɛɹ oʊn tɛns. moʊs naɪts, sɪuən wʊɾə bɪn wɪð ðɛm; ʃi sɛldəm tʃɹʌstɪɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls tə fɛtʃ mɛsədʒəz dɛstɪn fəɹ əɹ ivən ɪf moʊst wɝ ɪn koʊdz əɹ sɪfɝz. səmtaɪmz ðə wɝl sim tə hoʊl mɔɹ nɛtwɝks ʌv aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ðən ɪt dɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðoʊ moʊst wɝ səvɪɹli tʃɹʌŋkeɪɾɪd baɪ sɝkəmstæns. ðə mədʒɔɹəɾi ʌv eɪdʒəns fəɹ ðə vɛɹiəs ədʒəz sim tə bi laɪɪŋ loʊ əntɪl ðə "dɪfəkəltiz" ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ səbsaɪɾɪd, ən ə ɡʊd mɛni ʌv ði ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl sɪstɝz' aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz hæd noʊ aɪdiə wɛɹ ðə wʊmən ðeɪ sɝvd wɑz ət pɹɛzənt.

They began scattering before the gateway closed, carrying their burdens to Sitters, to their Ajahs, a few back to their own tents. Most nights, Siuan would have been with them; she seldom trusted anyone else to fetch messages destined for her even if most were in codes or ciphers. Sometimes the world seemed to hold more networks of eyes-and-ears than it did Aes Sedai, though most were severely truncated by circumstance. The majority of agents for the various Ajahs seemed to be lying low until the "difficulties" in the White Tower subsided, and a good many of the individual sisters' eyes-and-ears had no idea where the woman they served was at present.

sɛvɹəl ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz sɔ ɛɡwin ən meɪd kɛɹfəl baʊz, wɪð ə ɹɪspɛk pɹɑpɝ tə ðə stoʊl; sɪstɝz maɪɾ aɪ hɝ əskæns, bʌt ðə hɔl hæd ɹeɪzd əɹ æmɪɝlɪn ən ðə ɡeɪɾɪn niɾəd noʊ mɔɹ. ə nʌmbɝ ə ðə sɝvəns ɔfɝd baʊz əɹ kɝtsiz, tu. nɑt wʌn ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hɝiɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɡeɪtweɪ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən. pɝhæps ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs hɝ. pɝhæps.

Several of the Warders saw Egwene and made careful bows, with a respect proper to the stole; sisters might eye her askance, but the Hall had raised her Amyrlin and the Gaidin needed no more. A number of the servants offered bows or curtsies, too. Not one of the Aes Sedai hurrying away from the gateway so much as glanced in her direction. Perhaps they did not notice her. Perhaps.

ɪn ə weɪ, ðəɾ ɛnibəɾi kəd stɪl hɪɹ fɹəm ɛni ʌv ðɛɹ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz əɾ ɔl wɑz wʌn ə mɑɡiɾinz "ɡɪfs." ðə sɪstɝz wɪð ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ tə meɪk ɡeɪtweɪz hæɾ ɔl bɪn ɪn sɑlədɑɹ lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə noʊ ɪt wɛl. ðoʊz u kəd wiv ə ɡeɪtweɪ ʌv jusfəl saɪz wɝ eɪbəl tə tʃɹævəl ɔlmoʊst ɛniwɛɹ fɹəm ðɛɹ, ən læn ɹaɪɾ ɑn ðə spɑt. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃɹævəl tə sɑlədɑɹ, haʊɛvɝ, wʊɾə mɛn spɛndɪŋ hæf ʌv itʃ naɪt lɝnɪŋ ðə nu ɹoʊpt-ɔf pætʃ ʌv ɡɹaʊnd, mɔɹ fəɹ sʌm, ɛvɹi taɪm ðeɪ meɪd kæmp. wʌɾ ɛɡwin hæd pɹaɪd fɹəm mɑɡiɾin wɑz ə weɪ tə dʒɝni fɹəm ə pleɪs jə dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛl tə wʌn jə dɪd. sloʊɝ ðən tʃɹævlɪŋ, skɪmɪŋ wɑz nɑt wʌn ə ðə lɔs tæləns - noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɪt - soʊ ivən ðə neɪm wɑz kɹɛɾətəd tə ɛɡwin. ɛniwʌn u kəd tʃɹævəl kəd skɪm, soʊ ɛvɹi naɪt sɪstɝz skɪm tə sɑlədɑɹ, tʃɛkɪŋ ðə dʌvəkoʊts fəɹ bɝdz ðət hæd ɹɪtɝn tə wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn hætʃt, ðən tʃɹævəl bæk.

In a way, that anybody could still hear from any of their eyes-and-ears at all was one of Moghedien's "gifts." The sisters with the strength to make gateways had all been in Salidar long enough to know it well. Those who could weave a gateway of useful size were able to Travel almost anywhere from there, and land right on the spot. Trying to Travel to Salidar, however, would have meant spending half of each night learning the new roped-off patch of ground, more for some, every time they made camp. What Egwene had pried from Moghedien was a way to journey from a place you did not know well to one you did. Slower than Traveling, Skimming was not one of the lost Talents - no one had ever heard of it - so even the name was credited to Egwene. Anyone who could Travel could Skim, so every night sisters Skimmed to Salidar, checking the dovecotes for birds that had returned to where they had been hatched, then Traveled back.

ðə saɪt ʃʊɾə plizd əɹ - ðə ɹɛbəl ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd ɡeɪn tæləns ðə waɪt taʊɝ θɔt lɔs fɝɛvɝ, əz wɛl əz lɝnd nu wʌnz, ən ðoʊz əbɪləɾiz wəd hɛlp kɑst ɪleɪɾə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit bɪfɔɹ ɔl wɑz dʌn - jɛɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə plɛʒɝ, ɛɡwin fɛl saʊɝnəs. biɪŋ snʌb hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɪt, əɹ nɑt mʌtʃ, ɛniweɪ. əz ʃi wɔkt ɑn, ðə faɪɝz ɡɹu fɑɹðɝ bɪtwin, ðən feɪɾəd bɪhaɪnd; ɔl ɝaʊn əɹ leɪ ðə dɑɹk ʃeɪps ʌv wæɡənz, moʊst wɪð kænvəs tɑps stʃɹɛtʃt oʊvɝ aɪɝn hups, ən tɛns ɡloʊɪŋ pəlli ɪn ðə munlaɪt. bɪɑnd, ði ɑɹmiz kæmpfaɪɝz klaɪm ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ hɪlz ɔl ɝaʊnd, ðə stɑɹz bɹɔt tə ɡɹaʊnd. ðə saɪləns fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn taɪɾ əɹ mɪɾəl ɪndə nɑts, wʌtɛvɝ ɛniwʌn ɛls θɔt.

The sight should have pleased her - the rebel Aes Sedai had gained Talents the White Tower thought lost forever, as well as learned new ones, and those abilities would help cost Elaida the Amyrlin Seat before all was done - yet instead of pleasure, Egwene felt sourness. Being snubbed had nothing to do with it, or not much, anyway. As she walked on, the fires grew farther between, then faded behind; all around her lay the dark shapes of wagons, most with canvas tops stretched over iron hoops, and tents glowing palely in the moonlight. Beyond, the army's campfires climbed the surrounding hills all around, the stars brought to ground. The silence from Caemlyn tied her middle into knots, whatever anyone else thought.

ðə vɛɹi deɪ ðeɪ lɛf sɑlədɑɹ ə mɛsədʒ hæɾ ɝaɪvd, ðoʊ ʃɛɹiəm hæd nɑt bɑðɝd tə ʃoʊ ɪt tə hɝ əntɪl ə fju deɪz əɡoʊ, ən ðən wɪð ɹɪpiɾɪd wɔɹnɪŋz ɑn ðə nid tə kip ðə kɑntɛns sikɹət. ðə hɔl nu, bʌt noʊ wʌn ɛls mʌst. mɔɹ ə ðə tɛn θaʊzən sikɹəts ðəɾ ɪnfɛstəd ðə kæmp. ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi nɛvɝ wʊɾə sin ɪɾ ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt kɛpt ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn əbaʊt ɹænd. ʃi kəd ɹikɔl ɛvɹi kɛɹfəli tʃoʊzən wɝd, ɹɪɾən ɪn ə taɪni hæn ɑn peɪpɝ soʊ θɪn ɪt wɑz ə wʌndɝ ðə pɛn hæd nɑt tɔɹn θɹu.

The very day they left Salidar a message had arrived, though Sheriam had not bothered to show it to her until a few days ago, and then with repeated warnings on the need to keep the contents secret. The Hall knew, but no one else must. More of the ten thousand secrets that infested the camp. Egwene was sure she never would have seen it if she had not kept going on about Rand. She could recall every carefully chosen word, written in a tiny hand on paper so thin it was a wonder the pen had not torn through.

wəɹ wɛl sɛɾəld ət ði ɪn ʌv wɪtʃ wi spoʊk, ən wɪv mɛt wɪð ðə wʊl mɝtʃənt. hiz ə vɛɹi ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl jʌŋ mæn, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət nɪneɪiv toʊld ʌs. stɪl, hi wɑz kɝɾiəs. aɪ θɪŋk hiz sʌmwʌɾ əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ʌs, wɪtʃ ɪz tə ðə ɡʊd. ɪɾəl ɡoʊ wɛl.

We are well settled at the inn of which we spoke, and we have met with the wool merchant. He is a very remarkable young man, everything that Nynaeve told us. Still, he was courteous. I think he is somewhat afraid of us, which is to the good. It will go well.

jə meɪ hæv hɝd ɹumɝz əbaʊt mɛn hɪɹ, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ə fɛloʊ fɹəm sɑldɑiə. ðə ɹumɝz ɑɹ ɔl tu tʃɹu, aɪ fɪɹ, bʌt wɪv sin nʌn ə ðɛm ən wɪl əvɔɪɾ əm ɪf wi kæn. ɪf jə pɝsu tu hɛɹz, boʊθ wɪl ɪskeɪp ju.

You may have heard rumors about men here, including a fellow from Saldaea. The rumors are all too true, I fear, but we have seen none of them and will avoid them if we can. If you pursue two hares, both will escape you.

vɛɹɪn ən ɑlɑnə ɑɹ hɪɹ, wɪð ə nʌmbɝ ə jʌŋ wɪmən fɹəm ðə seɪm ɹidʒən əz ðə wʊl mɝtʃənt. əl tʃɹaɪ tə sɛn əm ɑn tə jə fəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. ɑlɑnə hæz fɔɹmd ən ətætʃmən tə ðə wʊl mɝtʃənt wɪtʃ meɪ pɹuv jusfəl, ðoʊ ɪts tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ tu. ɔl wɪl ɡoʊ wɛl, aɪm ʃʊɹ.

Verin and Alanna are here, with a number of young women from the same region as the wool merchant. I will try to send them on to you for training. Alanna has formed an attachment to the wool merchant which may prove useful, though it is troubling too. All will go well, I am sure.

mɛɹænə ʃɛɹiəm ɛmfəsaɪz ðə ɡʊd nuz, əz ʃi sɔ ɪt. mɛɹænə, ən ɪkspɪɹiəns nəɡoʊʃieɪɾɝ, hæd ɹitʃt keɪɛmlɪn ən bɪn wɛl ɹəsiv baɪ ɹænd, ðə "wʊl mɝtʃənt." wʌndɝfəl nuz, tə ʃɛɹiəm. ən vɛɹɪn ən ɑlɑnə wəd bi bɹɪŋɪŋ tu ɹɪvɝz ɡɝlz tə bɪkʌm nɑvəsɪz. ʃɛɹiəm wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ mʌs bi kʌmɪŋ daʊn ðə seɪm ɹoʊd ðeɪ ðɛmsɛlvz wɝ hɛɾəd ʌp. ʃi sim tə θɪŋk ɛɡwin wəd bi ɔl əɡloʊ ət ði ɛkspɛkteɪʃən ə siɪŋ feɪsəz fɹəm hoʊm. mɛɹænə wəd hændəl ɛvɹiθɪŋ. mɛɹænə nu wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ.

Merana Sheriam emphasized the good news, as she saw it. Merana, an experienced negotiator, had reached Caemlyn and been well received by Rand, the "wool merchant." Wonderful news, to Sheriam. And Verin and Alanna would be bringing Two Rivers girls to become novices. Sheriam was sure they must be coming down the same road they themselves were headed up. She seemed to think Egwene would be all aglow at the expectation of seeing faces from home. Merana would handle everything. Merana knew what she was doing.

"ðæts ə bʌkəɾ ə hɔɹs swɛt," ɛɡwin mʌɾɝd ət ðə naɪt. ə ɡæp-tuθ fɛloʊ kæɹiɪŋ ə lɑɹdʒ wʊɾən bʌkət ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən ɡeɪpt ət hɝ, soʊ əmeɪzd i fɝɡɑt tə baʊ.

"That's a bucket of horse sweat," Egwene muttered at the night. A gap-toothed fellow carrying a large wooden bucket gave a start and gaped at her, so amazed he forgot to bow.

ɹænd, kɝɾiəs? ʃi hæd sin ɪz fɝs miɾɪŋ wɪð kɔɪɹən seɪldən, ɪleɪɾəz ɛməsɛɹi. "oʊvɝbɛɹɪŋ" sʌmd ɪɾ ʌp naɪsli. waɪ ʃəɾ i bi dɪfɹənt wɪð mɛɹænə? ən mɛɹænə θɔɾ i wɑz əfɹeɪd, θɔt ðət wɑz ɡʊd. ɹænd wɑz sɛldəm əfɹeɪɾ ivən wən i ʃəd bi, ən ɪf i wɑz naʊ, mɛɹænə ʃəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət fɪɹ kəd meɪk ðə maɪldəs mæn deɪnʒɝəs, ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət ɹænd wɑz deɪnʒɝəs dʒʌs biɪŋ u hi wɑz. ən wʌt wɑz ðɪs ətætʃmən ɑlɑnə hæd fɔɹmd? ɛɡwin dɪd nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli tʃɹʌst ɑlɑnə. ðə wʊmən dɪɾ ɪkstʃɹimli ɑd θɪŋz ət taɪmz, meɪbi ɪmpətʃəəsli ən meɪbi wɪð səm dipɝ moʊɾɪv. ɛɡwin wəd nɑt pʊɾ ɪt pæst əɹ tə faɪn ə weɪ ɪndə ɹændz bɛd; hi wəd bi kleɪ ɪn ðə hænz ʌv ə wʊmən laɪk hɝ. ɪleɪn wəd bɹeɪk ɑlɑnəz nɛk ɪf ðət wɑz soʊ, bʌt ðət wɑz ðə list ʌv ɪt. wɝst ʌv ɔl, noʊ mɔɹ ə ðə pɪdʒənz mɛɹænə hæd teɪkən wɪð əɹ hæɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə sɑlədɑɹ dʌvəkoʊts.

Rand, courteous? She had seen his first meeting with Coiren Saeldain, Elaida's emissary. "Overbearing" summed it up nicely. Why should he be different with Merana? And Merana thought he was afraid, thought that was good. Rand was seldom afraid even when he should be, and if he was now, Merana should remember that fear could make the mildest man dangerous, remember that Rand was dangerous just being who he was. And what was this attachment Alanna had formed? Egwene did not entirely trust Alanna. The woman did extremely odd things at times, maybe impetuously and maybe with some deeper motive. Egwene would not put it past her to find a way into Rand's bed; he would be clay in the hands of a woman like her. Elayne would break Alanna's neck if that was so, but that was the least of it. Worst of all, no more of the pigeons Merana had taken with her had appeared in the Salidar dovecotes.

mɛɹænə ʃʊɾə hæd səm wɝd tə sɛnd, ɪf oʊnli ðət ʃi ən ðə ɹɛst ə ði ɛmbəsi hæd ɡɔn tə kɛɹhin. leɪtli ðə waɪz wʌnz dɪd lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən æknɑlɪdʒ ɹænd wɑz əlaɪv, jɛɾ ɪt simd i wɑz ðɛɹ, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz hænz əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kəd meɪk aʊt. wɪtʃ ʃʊɾə bɪn ə wɔɹnɪŋ bikən. ʃɛɹiəm sɔ ɪt dɪfɹənli. hu kəd seɪ waɪ ɛni mæn dɪd wʌɾ i dɪd? pɹɑbli nɑɾ ivən ðə mæn hɪmsɛlf, moʊst ə ðə taɪm, ən wən ɪt keɪm tə wʌn u kəd tʃænəl. . . . saɪləns pɹuvd ɔl wɑz wɛl; mɛɹænə ʃʊɹli wʊɾə ɹipɔɹɾəd ɛni ɹil dɪfəkəlti. ʃi mʌs bi ɑn əɹ weɪ tə kɛɹhin, ɪf nɑt ðəɹ ɔlɹɛɾi, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə ɹipɔɹt fɝðɝ əntɪl ʃi kəd sɛnd wɝɾ ə səksɛs. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ɹænd ɪn kɛɹhin wɑz səksɛs ʌv ə sɔɹt. wʌn ə mɛɹænəz ɡoʊlz, ɪf nɑt ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt, hæd bɪn tə iz ɪm aʊɾ ə keɪɛmlɪn soʊ ðəɾ ɪleɪn kəd ɹɪtɝn ðəɹ seɪfli ən teɪk ðə laɪən θɹoʊn, ən ðə deɪnʒɝz ə kɛɹhin hæd dɪsəpeɪɾɪd. ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl əz ɪt simd, ðə waɪz wʌnz sɛd kɔɪɹən ən əɹ ɛmbəsi hæd lɛf ðə sɪɾi ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ bæk tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. əɹ meɪbi nɑt soʊ ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl. ɪɾ ɔl meɪɾ ə sɔɹɾ ə sɛns, ɡɪvən ɹænd, ɡɪvən ðə weɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd θɪŋz. ivən soʊ, tə ɛɡwin, ɪɾ ɔl fɛlt . . . ɹɔŋ.

Merana should have had some word to send, if only that she and the rest of the embassy had gone to Cairhien. Lately the Wise Ones did little more than acknowledge Rand was alive, yet it seemed he was there, sitting on his hands as far as she could make out. Which should have been a warning beacon. Sheriam saw it differently. Who could say why any man did what he did? Probably not even the man himself, most of the time, and when it came to one who could channel. . . . Silence proved all was well; Merana surely would have reported any real difficulty. She must be on her way to Cairhien, if not there already, and there was no need to report further until she could send word of success. For that matter, Rand in Cairhien was success of a sort. One of Merana's goals, if not the most important, had been to ease him out of Caemlyn so that Elayne could return there safely and take the Lion Throne, and the dangers of Cairhien had dissipated. Incredible as it seemed, the Wise Ones said Coiren and her embassy had left the city on their way back to Tar Valon. Or maybe not so incredible. It all made a sort of sense, given Rand, given the way Aes Sedai did things. Even so, to Egwene, it all felt . . . wrong.

"aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ tə hɪm," ʃi mʌɾɝd. wʌn aʊɝ, ən ʃi kəd stʃɹeɪɾən ɛvɹiθɪŋ aʊt. ʌndɝniθ, hi wɑz stɪl ɹænd. "ðæts ɔl ðəɹ ɪz tə ɪt. aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ tə hɪm."

"I have to go to him," she muttered. One hour, and she could straighten everything out. Underneath, he was still Rand. "That's all there is to it. I have to go to him."

"ðæɾ ɪzən pɑsəbəl, ən jə noʊ ɪt."

"That isn't possible, and you know it."

ɪf ɛɡwin hæd nɑt hæd hɝsɛlf ɑn ə taɪt ɹeɪn, ʃi wʊɾə dʒʌmpt ə fʊt. əz ɪt wɑz, hɝ hɑɹt paʊndɪɾ ivən æftɝ ʃi meɪɾ aʊt lin baɪ ðə laɪɾ ə ðə mun. "aɪ θɔt jə wɝ . . ." ʃi sɛd bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd stɑp hɝsɛlf, ən oʊnli dʒʌs mænədʒ nɑt tə seɪ mɑɡiɾinz neɪm.

If Egwene had not had herself on a tight rein, she would have jumped a foot. As it was, her heart pounded even after she made out Leane by the light of the moon. "I thought you were . . ." she said before she could stop herself, and only just managed not to say Moghedien's name.

ðə tɔlɝ wʊmən fɛl ɪn bɪsaɪd hɝ, kipɪŋ ə kɛɹfəl wɑtʃ fəɹ ʌðɝ sɪstɝz əz ðeɪ wɔkt. lin dɪd nɑɾ əv sɪuənz ɪkskjus fəɹ spɛndɪŋ taɪm wɪð hɝ. nɑt ðət biɪŋ sin təɡɛðɝ wʌns ʃəd kɑz ɛni hɑɹm, bʌt . . .

The taller woman fell in beside her, keeping a careful watch for other sisters as they walked. Leane did not have Siuan's excuse for spending time with her. Not that being seen together once should cause any harm, but . . .

"ʃʊd nɑt" ɪzən ɔlweɪz "wɪl nɑt," ɛɡwin ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf. slɪpɪŋ ðə stoʊl fɹəm əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ʃi foʊldəɾ ɪt tə kæɹi ɪn wʌn hænd. əɾ ə ɡlæns, fɹəm ə dɪstəns, lin maɪt wɛl bi teɪkən fəɹ ən æksɛptɪd dɪspaɪɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs; mɛni æksɛptɪd lækt ɪnʌf ə ðə bændɪd waɪt dʒɹɛsəz tə wɛɹ wʌn ɔl ðə taɪm. fɹəm ə dɪstəns, ɛɡwin maɪt bi teɪkən fəɹ wʌn, tu. nɑt ðə moʊs pæsəfaɪɪŋ θɔt.

"Should not" isn't always "will not," Egwene reminded herself. Slipping the stole from her shoulders, she folded it to carry in one hand. At a glance, from a distance, Leane might well be taken for an Accepted despite her dress; many Accepted lacked enough of the banded white dresses to wear one all the time. From a distance, Egwene might be taken for one, too. Not the most pacifying thought.

"θiədʒɹɪn ən fɑoʊleɪn ɑɹ æskɪŋ ɝaʊnd nɪɹ mɛɹɪɡənz tɛnt, mʌðɝ. ðeɪ wɝn ɪspɛʃli plizd. aɪ dɪɾ ə faɪn sʌlk oʊvɝ kæɹiɪŋ mɛsədʒəz, ɪf aɪ də seɪ soʊ. θiədʒɹɪn hæd tə stɑp fɑoʊleɪn dʒɹɛsɪŋ mi daʊn fəɹ ɪt." linz læftɝ wɑz kwaɪəɾ ən bɹɛθi. sɪtʃueɪʃənz ðət ɡɹeɪɾɪd sɪuənz tiθ juʒəwəli əmjuz hɝ. ʃi wɑz kɑstɪd baɪ moʊst ə ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz fəɹ haʊ wɛl ʃi hæɾ ədʒʌstəd.

"Theodrin and Faolain are asking around near Marigan's tent, Mother. They weren't especially pleased. I did a fine sulk over carrying messages, if I do say so. Theodrin had to stop Faolain dressing me down for it." Leane's laughter was quiet and breathy. Situations that grated Siuan's teeth usually amused her. She was cosseted by most of the other sisters for how well she had adjusted.

"ɡʊd, ɡʊd," ɛɡwin sɛɾ æbsənli. "mɛɹænə mɪsstɛp sʌmhaʊ, lin, əɹ i wʊdn bi steɪɪŋ ɪn kɛɹhin, ən ʃi wʊdn bi kipɪŋ kwaɪət." ɔf ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ə dɔɡ beɪɾ ət ðə mun, ðən ʌðɝz, əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ əbɹʌpli saɪləns baɪ ʃaʊts ðæt, pɝhæps lʌkəli, ʃi kəd nɑt kwaɪɾ ʌndɝstænd. ə nʌmbɝ ə ðə soʊlʒɝz hæd dɑɡz tæɡɪŋ əlɔŋ; ðəɹ wɝ nʌn ɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kæmp. ɛni nʌmbɝ ə kæts, bʌt noʊ dɑɡz.

"Good, good," Egwene said absently. "Merana misstepped somehow, Leane, or he wouldn't be staying in Cairhien, and she wouldn't be keeping quiet." Off in the distance, a dog bayed at the moon, then others, until they were abruptly silenced by shouts that, perhaps luckily, she could not quite understand. A number of the soldiers had dogs tagging along; there were none in the Aes Sedai camp. Any number of cats, but no dogs.

"mɛɹænə dʌz noʊ wʌt ʃiz duɪŋ, mʌðɝ." ɪt saʊndəd vɛɹi laɪk ə saɪ. lin ən sɪuən boʊθ əɡɹid wɪð ʃɛɹiəm. ɛvɹiwʌn dɪd, ɪksɛp hɝ. "wɛn jə ɡɪv sʌmwʌn ə tæsk, juv tə tʃɹʌst ɪt tə ðɛm."

"Merana does know what she is doing, Mother." It sounded very like a sigh. Leane and Siuan both agreed with Sheriam. Everyone did, except her. "When you give someone a task, you have to trust it to them."

ɛɡwin snɪft ən foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz. "lin, ðət mæn kəd stʃɹaɪk spɑɹks fɹəm ə dæmp klɔθ, ɪf ɪt wɔɹ ðə ʃɔl. aɪ doʊnt noʊ mɛɹænə, bʌɾ aɪv nɛvɝ sin ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu kwɑləfaɪɾ əz ə dæmp klɔθ."

Egwene sniffed and folded her arms. "Leane, that man could strike sparks from a damp cloth, if it wore the shawl. I don't know Merana, but I've never seen an Aes Sedai who qualified as a damp cloth."

"aɪv mɛt wʌn əɹ tu," lin tʃʌkəld. ðɪs taɪm əɹ saɪ wɑz pleɪn. "bʌt nɑt mɛɹænə, tʃɹu. dʌz i ɹɪli bɪliv hiz fɹɛnz ɪnsaɪd ðə taʊɝ? ɑlviɛɝɪn? ðət maɪt meɪk ɪm dɪfəkəl fəɹ mɛɹænə, aɪ səpoʊz, bʌɾ aɪ kən hɑɹdli si ɑlviɛɝɪn duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ tə ɹɪsk əɹ pleɪs. ʃi wɑz ɔlweɪz æmbɪʃəs ɪnʌf fəɹ θɹi."

"I've met one or two," Leane chuckled. This time her sigh was plain. "But not Merana, true. Does he really believe he has friends inside the Tower? Alviarin? That might make him difficult for Merana, I suppose, but I can hardly see Alviarin doing anything to risk her place. She was always ambitious enough for three."

"hi hæz ə lɛɾɝ səpoʊzədli fɹəm hɝ." ʃi kəd stɪl si ɹænd ɡloʊɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ɹəsivɪŋ lɛɾɝz fɹəm ɪleɪɾə ən ɑlviɛɝɪn boʊθ, bæk bɪfɔɹ ʃi hɝsɛlf lɛf kɛɹhin. "meɪbi hɝ æmbɪʃənz meɪk əɹ θɪŋk ʃi kən ɹipleɪs ɪleɪɾə wɪð ɪm ɑn əɹ saɪd. ðæts ɪf ʃi ɹɪli ɹoʊɾ ɪt. hi θɪŋks hiz klɛvɝ, lin - meɪbi hiz - bʌɾ i dʌzn bɪliv i nidz ɛniwʌn." ɹænd wəd ɡoʊ ɑn θɪŋkɪŋ i kəd hændəl ɛniθɪŋ baɪ hɪmsɛlf ɹaɪɾ ʌp əntɪl wʌn ə ðoʊz ɛniθɪŋz kɹʌʃt hɪm. "aɪ noʊ hɪm ɪnsaɪɾ ən aʊt, lin. biɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə waɪz wʌnz simz tə hæv ɪnfɛktəd hɪm, əɹ meɪbi hi ɪnfɛktəd ðɛm. wʌtɛvɝ ðə sɪɾɝz θɪŋk, wʌtɛvɝ ɛni ʌv jə θɪŋk, ən ɛɛs sədaɪz ʃɔl dʌzn ɪmpɹɛs ɪm ɛni mɔɹ ðən ɪt dʌz ðə waɪz wʌnz. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ hɪl ɪksæspɝeɪɾ ə sɪstɝ əntɪl ʃi dʌz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt, əɹ wʌn ə ðɛm wɪl pʊʃ ɪm ðə ɹɔŋ weɪ, nɑt ɹilaɪzɪŋ haʊ stʃɹɔŋ i ɪz, ən wʌɾ ɪz tɛmpɝ ɪz naʊ. æftɝ ðət ðəɹ maɪt bi noʊ ɡoʊɪŋ bæk. ɪm ði oʊnli wʌn u kən dil wɪð ɪm seɪfli. ði oʊnli wʌn."

"He has a letter supposedly from her." She could still see Rand gloating over receiving letters from Elaida and Alviarin both, back before she herself left Cairhien. "Maybe her ambitions make her think she can replace Elaida with him on her side. That's if she really wrote it. He thinks he's clever, Leane - maybe he is - but he doesn't believe he needs anyone." Rand would go on thinking he could handle anything by himself right up until one of those anythings crushed him. "I know him inside and out, Leane. Being around the Wise Ones seems to have infected him, or maybe he infected them. Whatever the Sitters think, whatever any of you think, an Aes Sedai's shawl doesn't impress him any more than it does the Wise Ones. Sooner or later he'll exasperate a sister until she does something about it, or one of them will push him the wrong way, not realizing how strong he is, and what his temper is now. After that there might be no going back. I'm the only one who can deal with him safely. The only one."

"hi kən hɑɹdli bi əz . . . ɪɹəteɪɾɪŋ . . . əz ðoʊz ilwɪmən," lin mɝmɝd ɹaɪli. ivən ʃi faʊn ɪt dɪfəkəl tə bi əmjuz baɪ hɝ ɪkspɪɹiənsɪz wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz. "bʌɾ ɪt hɑɹdli mæɾɝz. 'ði æmɪɝlɪn sit biɪŋ væljud wɪð ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf. . . .' "

"He can hardly be as . . . irritating . . . as those Aielwomen," Leane murmured wryly. Even she found it difficult to be amused by her experiences with the Wise Ones. "But it hardly matters. 'The Amyrlin Seat being valued with the White Tower itself. . . .' "

ə pɛɹ ʌv wɪmən əpɪɹd bɪtwin ðə tɛns əhɛd, muvɪŋ sloʊli əz ðeɪ tɔkt. dɪstəns ən ʃædoʊz əbskjʊɹd ðɛɹ feɪsəz, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz klɪɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ fɹəm ðə weɪ ðeɪ kæɹid ðɛmsɛlvz, ən əʃʊɹəns ðət nʌθɪŋ haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ɛni dɑɹknəs kəd hɑɹm ðɛm. noʊ æksɛptɪɾ ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə ðə ʃɔl kəd mænədʒ kwaɪt ðət dɪɡɹi ʌv kɑnfəɾəns. ə kwin wɪð ən ɑɹmi əɾ əɹ bæk maɪt nɑt. ðeɪ wɝ kʌmɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əɹ ən lin. lin kwɪkli tɝn ɪn tə ðə dipɝ dɪmnəs bɪtwin tu wæɡənz.

A pair of women appeared between the tents ahead, moving slowly as they talked. Distance and shadows obscured their faces, yet it was clear they were Aes Sedai from the way they carried themselves, an assurance that nothing hiding in any darkness could harm them. No Accepted on the brink of the shawl could manage quite that degree of confidence. A queen with an army at her back might not. They were coming toward her and Leane. Leane quickly turned in to the deeper dimness between two wagons.

skaʊlɪŋ wɪð fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən, ɛɡwin nɪɹli pʊld əɹ aʊɾ əɡɛn ən mɑɹtʃt ɑn. lɛɾ ɪɾ ɔl kʌm ɪndə ði oʊpən. ʃi wəd stæn bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl ən tɛl əm ɪt wɑz taɪm ðeɪ ɹilaɪz ði æmɪɝlɪnz stoʊl wɑz mɔɹ ðən ə pɹɪɾi skɑɹf. ʃi wʊd. . . . fɑloʊɪŋ lin, ʃi moʊʃən ði ʌðɝ wʊmən tə wɔk ɑn. wʌt ʃi wəd nɑt də wɑz θɹoʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɑn ðə mɪɾən hip ɪn ə fɪɾ ə pik.

Scowling with frustration, Egwene nearly pulled her out again and marched on. Let it all come into the open. She would stand before the Hall and tell them it was time they realized the Amyrlin's stole was more than a pretty scarf. She would. . . . Following Leane, she motioned the other woman to walk on. What she would not do was throw everything on the midden heap in a fit of pique.

oʊnli wʌn taʊɝ lɔ spəsɪfɪkli lɪməɾəd ðə paʊɝ ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ə fɪsfəl ʌv ɪɹəteɪɾɪŋ kʌstəmz ən ə bæɹəl fʊl ʌv ɪnkənvinjən ɹiæləɾiz, bʌɾ oʊnli wʌn lɔ, jɛɾ ɪt kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ə wɝs fəɹ əɹ pɝpəsəz. "ði æmɪɝlɪn sit biɪŋ væljud wɪð ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf, əz ðə vɛɹi hɑɹɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ʃi mʌs nɑt bi ɛndeɪnʒɝd wɪθaʊt daɪɹ nəsɛsəɾi, ðɛɹfɔɹ ənlɛs ðə waɪt taʊɝ bi ət wɔɹ baɪ dɛklɝeɪʃən ə ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit ʃæl sik ðə lɛsɝ kənsɛnsəs ə ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ bɪfɔɹ dɪlɪbɝətli pleɪsɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv ɛni deɪnʒɝ, ən ʃi ʃæl əbaɪd baɪ ðə kənsɛnsəs ðət stænz." wʌt ɹæʃ ɪnsəɾənt baɪ ən æmɪɝlɪn hæɾ ɪnspaɪɝd ðæt, ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt noʊ, bʌɾ ɪt hæd bɪn lɔ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ oʊvɝ tu θaʊzən jɪɹz. tə moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɛni lɔ ðəɾ oʊld əteɪn ən ɔɹə ʌv hoʊlinəs; tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɪt wɑz ənθɪŋkəbəl.

Only one Tower law specifically limited the power of the Amyrlin Seat. A fistful of irritating customs and a barrel full of inconvenient realities, but only one law, yet it could not have been a worse for her purposes. "The Amyrlin Seat being valued with the White Tower itself, as the very heart of the White Tower, she must not be endangered without dire necessity, therefore unless the White Tower be at war by declaration of the Hall of the Tower, the Amyrlin Seat shall seek the lesser consensus of the Hall of the Tower before deliberately placing herself in the way of any danger, and she shall abide by the consensus that stands." What rash incident by an Amyrlin had inspired that, Egwene did not know, but it had been law for something over two thousand years. To most Aes Sedai, any law that old attained an aura of holiness; changing it was unthinkable.

ɹoʊmændə hæd kwoʊɾəd ðət . . . ðət blʌɾi lɔ əz ðoʊ lɛktʃɝɪŋ ə hæf-wɪt. ɪf ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ kəd nɑt bi əlaʊd wɪðɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, haʊ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðeɪ mʌs pɹəzɝv ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ləleɪn saʊndəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɹɪɡɹɛtfəl, moʊs laɪkli kəz ʃi wɑz əɡɹiɪŋ wɪð ɹoʊmændə. ðət hæd nɪɹli kɝɾəld boʊθ ðɛɹ tʌŋz. wɪθaʊt ðɛm, boʊθ ə ðɛm, ðə lɛsɝ kənsɛnsəs leɪ əz fɑɹ aʊɾ ə ɹitʃ əz ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ. laɪt, ivən ðət dɛklɝeɪʃən ʌv wɔɹ oʊnli ɹikwaɪɝd ðə lɛsɝ kənsɛnsəs! soʊ ɪf ʃi kəd nɑɾ əbteɪn pɝmɪʃən. . . . lin klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt. "ju kən hɑɹdli də mʌtʃ ɪf jə ɡoʊ ɪn sikɹət, mʌðɝ, ən ðə hɔl wɪl faɪn aʊt, sun əɹ leɪt. aɪ θɪŋk jə wəd faɪn ɪt dɪfəkəl tə hæv ən aʊɝ tə jɝsɛlf æftɝ ðæt. nɑt ðət ðeɪd dɛɹ pʊɾ ə ɡɑɹɾ ɑn ju, pɹɪsaɪsli, bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ weɪz. aɪ kən kwoʊɾ ɪɡzæmpəlz fɹəm . . . sɝɾən sɔɹsəz." ʃi nɛvɝ mɛnʃən ðə hɪɾən ɹɛkɝdz dɝɛkli ənlɛs ðeɪ wɝ bɪhaɪn ə wɔɹd.

Romanda had quoted that . . . that bloody law as though lecturing a half-wit. If the Daughter-Heir of Andor could not be allowed within a hundred miles of the Dragon Reborn, how much more they must preserve the Amyrlin Seat. Lelaine sounded almost regretful, most likely because she was agreeing with Romanda. That had nearly curdled both their tongues. Without them, both of them, the lesser consensus lay as far out of reach as the greater. Light, even that declaration of war only required the lesser consensus! So if she could not obtain permission. . . . Leane cleared her throat. "You can hardly do much if you go in secret, Mother, and the Hall will find out, soon or late. I think you would find it difficult to have an hour to yourself after that. Not that they'd dare put a guard on you, precisely, but there are ways. I can quote examples from . . . certain sources." She never mentioned the hidden records directly unless they were behind a ward.

"æm aɪ soʊ tʃɹænspɛɹənt?" ɛɡwin æskt æftɝ ə moʊmənt. ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli wæɡənz ɝaʊn əm hɪɹ, ən bɪniθ ðə wæɡənz ðə dɑɹk maʊnz ə slipɪŋ wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz ən hɔɹs hænlɝz ən ɔl ðə ɹɛs niɾəd tə kip soʊ mɛni vihɪkəlz muvɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl dʒʌs haʊ mɛni kənvənsɪz oʊvɝ θɹi hʌnʒɹəd ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹikwaɪɝd, wən fju wəd kɑndəsɛn tə ɹaɪɾ ivən ə maɪl ɪn wæɡən əɹ kɑɹt. bʌt ðəɹ wɝ tɛns ən fɝnɪʃɪŋz ən fudstʌfs, ən ə θaʊzən θɪŋz niɾəd tə kip ðə sɪstɝz ən ðoʊz u sɝv ðɛm. ðə laʊɾəst saʊnz hɪɹ wɝ snɔɹz, ə kɔɹəs ə fɹɑɡz.

"Am I so transparent?" Egwene asked after a moment. There were only wagons around them here, and beneath the wagons the dark mounds of sleeping wagon drivers and horse handlers and all the rest needed to keep so many vehicles moving. It was remarkable just how many conveyances over three hundred Aes Sedai required, when few would condescend to ride even a mile in wagon or cart. But there were tents and furnishings and foodstuffs, and a thousand things needed to keep the sisters and those who served them. The loudest sounds here were snores, a chorus of frogs.

"noʊ, mʌðɝ," lin læf sɔfli. "aɪ dʒʌs θɔt wʌɾ aɪ wəd du. bʌɾ ɪts wɛl noʊn aɪv lɔst ɔl maɪ dɪɡnəɾi ən sɛns; ði æmɪɝlɪn sit kən hɑɹdli teɪk mi fəɹ ə mɑɾəl. aɪ θɪŋk jə mʌs lɛt jʌŋ mæstɝ ælθɹ ɡoʊ əz i wɪl, fəɹ ə taɪm ɛniweɪ, waɪl jə plʌk ðə ɡus ðæts ɪn fɹʌn ə ju."

"No, Mother," Leane laughed softly. "I just thought what I would do. But it's well known I've lost all my dignity and sense; the Amyrlin Seat can hardly take me for a model. I think you must let young Master al'Thor go as he will, for a time anyway, while you pluck the goose that's in front of you."

"hɪz weɪ meɪ lɛɾ əs ɔl tə ðə pɪɾ ə dum," ɛɡwin mʌɾɝd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ən ɑɹɡjəmənt. ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ tə plʌk ðət ɡus ən stɪl kip ɹænd fɹəm meɪkɪŋ deɪnʒɝəs mɪsteɪks, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt si ɪt naʊ. nɑt fɹɑɡz; ðoʊz snɔɹz saʊndəd laɪk ə hʌnʒɹəd sɔz kʌɾɪŋ lɔɡz fʊl ə nɑts. "ðɪs ɪz əz bæɾ ə spɑt fəɹ ə suðɪŋ wɔk əz aɪv ɛvɝ vɪzəɾəd. aɪ θɪŋk aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl ɡoʊ tə bɛd."

"His way may lead us all to the Pit of Doom," Egwene muttered, but it was not an argument. There had to be a way to pluck that goose and still keep Rand from making dangerous mistakes, but she could not see it now. Not frogs; those snores sounded like a hundred saws cutting logs full of knots. "This is as bad a spot for a soothing walk as I've ever visited. I think I might as well go to bed."

lin tɪltəɾ əɹ hɛd. "ɪn ðət keɪs, mʌðɝ, ɪf jəl fɝɡɪv mi, ðɛɹz ə mæn ɪn lɔɹd bɹaɪnz kæmp. . . . æftɝ ɔl, huɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ə ɡɹin wɪθaʊɾ ivən wʌn wɔɹɾɝ?" fɹəm ðə sʌɾən kwɪkənɪŋ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, jə maɪɾ əv θɔt ʃi wɑz ɔf tə miɾ ə lʌvɝ. kənsɪɾɝɪŋ wʌɾ ɛɡwin hæd hɝɾ əbaʊt ɡɹinz, pɝhæps ðəɹ wɑz nɑt ðət mʌtʃ dɪfɝəns.

Leane tilted her head. "In that case, Mother, if you will forgive me, there's a man in Lord Bryne's camp. . . . After all, whoever heard of a Green without even one Warder?" From the sudden quickening in her voice, you might have thought she was off to meet a lover. Considering what Egwene had heard about Greens, perhaps there was not that much difference.

bæk əmʌŋ ðə tɛns, ðə læst ə ðə faɪɝz hæd bɪn daʊst wɪð dɝt; noʊ wʌn tʊk ɹɪsks wɪð faɪɝ wən ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd wɑz tɪndɝ dʒɹaɪ. ə fju tɛnʒɹəlz ə smoʊk ɹoʊz læzəli ɪn ðə munlaɪt wɛɹ ðə dʒɑb hæd nɑt bɪn wɛl dʌn. ə mæn mɝmɝd dʒɹaʊsəli ɪn ɪz slip ɪnsaɪɾ ə tɛnt, ən hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ə kɑf dʒɹɪftəɾ aʊɾ əɹ ə ɹæspɪŋ snɔɹ, bʌɾ ʌðɝwaɪz ðə kæmp leɪ saɪlən ən stɪl. wɪtʃ wɑz waɪ ɛɡwin wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd wən sʌmwʌn stɛp fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ɪspɛʃli sʌmwʌn wɛɹɪŋ ðə sɪmpəl waɪt dʒɹɛs ʌv ə nɑvəs.

Back among the tents, the last of the fires had been doused with dirt; no one took risks with fire when the countryside was tinder dry. A few tendrils of smoke rose lazily in the moonlight where the job had not been well done. A man murmured drowsily in his sleep inside a tent, and here and there a cough drifted out or a rasping snore, but otherwise the camp lay silent and still. Which was why Egwene was surprised when someone stepped from the shadows in front of her, especially someone wearing the simple white dress of a novice.

"mʌðɝ, aɪ nid tə spik tə ju."

"Mother, I need to speak to you."

"nɪkoʊlə?" ɛɡwin hæd meɪɾ ə pɔɪn ə fɪksɪŋ neɪm tə feɪs fəɹ ɛvɹi nɑvəs, noʊ izi tʃɔɹ ɡɪvən haʊ sɪstɝz hʌntəɾ ɔl əlɔŋ ði ɑɹmiz pæθ fəɹ ɡɝlz ən jʌŋ wɪmən u kəd lɝn. æktɪv sɝtʃ wɑz stɪl nɑt wɛl θɔɾ ʌv - kʌstəm wɑz tə weɪt fəɹ ðə ɡɝl tə æsk, bɛst ʌv ɔl tə weɪt fəɹ əɹ tə kʌm tə ðə taʊɝ - bʌt tɛn taɪmz əz mɛni nɑvəsɪz stʌɾid ɪn ðə kæmp naʊ əz ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæd hɛld ɪn jɪɹz. nɪkoʊlə wɑz wʌn tə bi ɹɪmɛmbɝd, ðoʊ, ən bɪsaɪdz, ɛɡwin hæɾ ɔfən noʊɾəst ðə jʌŋ wʊmən stɛɹɪŋ ət hɝ. "tiɑnə woʊn bi plizd ɪf ʃi faɪnz jə ʌp ðɪs leɪt." tiɑnə noʊzɛl wɑz ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz, noʊn ikwəli fəɹ ə kʌmfɝɾɪŋ ʃoʊldɝ wən ə nɑvəs niɾəd tə kɹaɪ ən ən ənjildɪŋ stæns wən ɪt keɪm tə ɹulz.

"Nicola?" Egwene had made a point of fixing name to face for every novice, no easy chore given how sisters hunted all along the army's path for girls and young women who could learn. Active search was still not well thought of - custom was to wait for the girl to ask, best of all to wait for her to come to the Tower - but ten times as many novices studied in the camp now as the White Tower had held in years. Nicola was one to be remembered, though, and besides, Egwene had often noticed the young woman staring at her. "Tiana won't be pleased if she finds you up this late." Tiana Noselle was the Mistress of Novices, known equally for a comforting shoulder when a novice needed to cry and an unyielding stance when it came to rules.

ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ʃɪftəɾ əz ɪf tə hɝi əweɪ, ðən stʃɹeɪɾənd əɹ bæk. swɛt ɡlɪsən ɑn əɹ tʃiks. ðə dɑɹknəs wɑz kulɝ ðən ðə laɪt hæd bɪn, bʌt nɑt wʌɾ ɛniwʌn wəd kɔl kul, ən ðə sɪmpəl tʃɹɪk ʌv ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ hiɾ əɹ koʊl keɪm oʊnli wɪð ðə ʃɔl. "aɪ noʊ aɪm səpoʊz tə æsk tə si tiɑnə sədaɪ ən ðən æsk əɹ tə si ju, mʌðɝ, bʌt ʃid nɛvɝ lɛɾ ə nɑvəs əpɹoʊtʃ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit."

The other woman shifted as if to hurry away, then straightened her back. Sweat glistened on her cheeks. The darkness was cooler than the light had been, but not what anyone would call cool, and the simple trick of ignoring heat or cold came only with the shawl. "I know I'm supposed to ask to see Tiana Sedai and then ask her to see you, Mother, but she'd never let a novice approach the Amyrlin Seat."

"əbaʊt wʌt, tʃaɪld?" ɛɡwin æskt. ðə wʊmən wɑz oʊldɝ baɪ sɪks əɹ sɛvən jɪɹz ət list, bʌt ðət wɑz ðə pɹɑpɝ ədʒɹɛs fəɹ ə nɑvəs.

"About what, child?" Egwene asked. The woman was older by six or seven years at least, but that was the proper address for a novice.

fɪdʒəɾɪŋ wɪð əɹ skɝt, nɪkoʊlə stɛp kloʊsɝ. lɑɹdʒ aɪz mɛɾ ɛɡwinz pɝhæps mɔɹ dɝɛkli ðən ə nɑvəsəz ʃəd hæv. "mʌðɝ, aɪ wɑnə ɡoʊ əz fɑɹ əz aɪ kæn." hɝ hænz plʌkt əɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs wɑz kul ən sɛlf-pəzɛst, fɪt fəɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. "aɪ woʊn seɪ ðeɪ ɑɹ hoʊldɪŋ mi bæk, bʌɾ aɪm ʃʊɹ aɪ kən bɪkʌm stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ðeɪ seɪ. aɪ dʒʌs noʊ aɪ kæn. jə wɝ nɛvɝ hɛl bæk, mʌðɝ. noʊ wʌn əz ɛvɝ ɡeɪn soʊ mʌtʃ ə hɝ stʃɹɛŋkθ əz fæst əz ju. ɔl aɪ æsk ɪz ðə seɪm tʃæns."

Fidgeting with her skirt, Nicola stepped closer. Large eyes met Egwene's perhaps more directly than a novice's should have. "Mother, I want to go as far as I can." Her hands plucked at her dress, but her voice was cool and self-possessed, fit for an Aes Sedai. "I won't say they are holding me back, but I am sure I can become stronger than they say. I just know I can. You were never held back, Mother. No one has ever gained so much of her strength as fast as you. All I ask is the same chance."

muvmən ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ bɪhaɪnd nɪkoʊlə tɝn ɪndə ənʌðɝ swɛɾi-feɪst wʊmən, ðɪs wʌn ɪn ʃɔɹt koʊɾ ən waɪd tʃɹaʊzɝz, kæɹiɪŋ ə baʊ. hɝ hɛɹ hʌŋ tə hɝ weɪst ɪn ə bɹeɪd taɪd wɪð sɪks ɹɪbənz, ən ʃi wɔɹ ʃɔɹt buts wɪð ɹeɪz hilz.

Movement in the shadow behind Nicola turned into another sweaty-faced woman, this one in short coat and wide trousers, carrying a bow. Her hair hung to her waist in a braid tied with six ribbons, and she wore short boots with raised heels.

nɪkoʊlə tʃɹihɪl ən ɑɹinə nɝmeɪsiv simd ən ɑd pɛɹ tə bi fɹɛnz. laɪk mɛni ʌv ði oʊldɝ nɑvəsɪz - wɪmən wɪð nɪɹli tɛn jɪɹz ɑn ɛɡwin wɝ tɛstəd naʊ, ðoʊ mɛni sɪstɝz stɪl ɡɹʌmbəl ðət ðeɪ wɝ tɛn jɪɹz tu oʊl tə æksɛp nɑvəs dɪsəplən - laɪk mɛni ʌv ðoʊz oʊldɝ wɪmən, nɪkoʊlə wɑz fɝoʊʃəs ɪn əɹ dɪzaɪɝ tə lɝn, baɪ ɔl ɹɪpɔɹts, ən ʃi hæɾ ə pətɛnʃəl bɛɾɝd oʊnli baɪ nɪneɪiv, ɪleɪn ən ɛɡwin hɝsɛlf əmʌŋ lɪvɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪn fækt, nɪkoʊlə əpɛɹənli wɑz meɪkɪŋ ɡɹeɪt stʃɹaɪdz, ɔfən ɡɹeɪɾ ɪnʌf ðəɾ əɹ titʃɝz hæd tə sloʊ hɝ daʊn. səm sɛd ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn pɪkɪŋ ʌp wivz əz ɪf ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi nu ðɛm. nɑɾ oʊnli ðæt, bʌt ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi dɛmənstʃɹeɪɾəd tu tæləns, ɔlðoʊ ði əbɪləɾi tə "si" tɑvɝən wɑz maɪnɝ, waɪl ðə meɪdʒɝ tælənt, fɔɹtɛlɪŋ, ɪmɝdʒ soʊ ðət noʊ wʌn ʌndɝstʊd wʌt ʃi hæd fɔɹtoʊld. ʃi hɝsɛlf dɪd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ə wɝd ʃi sɛd. ɔl ɪn ɔl, nɪkoʊlə wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi mɑɹk baɪ ðə sɪstɝz əz sʌmwʌn tə wɑtʃ dɪspaɪɾ əɹ leɪt stɑɹt. ðə bɪɡɹʌdʒɪŋ əɡɹimən tə tɛst wɪmən oʊldɝ ðən sɛvəntin əɹ eɪtin pɹɑbli kəd bi leɪɾ ət nɪkoʊləz fit.

Nicola Treehill and Areina Nermasiv seemed an odd pair to be friends. Like many of the older novices - women with nearly ten years on Egwene were tested now, though many sisters still grumbled that they were ten years too old to accept novice discipline - like many of those older women, Nicola was ferocious in her desire to learn, by all reports, and she had a potential bettered only by Nynaeve, Elayne and Egwene herself among living Aes Sedai. In fact, Nicola apparently was making great strides, often great enough that her teachers had to slow her down. Some said she had begun picking up weaves as if she already knew them. Not only that, but she already demonstrated two Talents, although the ability to "see" ta'veren was minor, while the major Talent, Foretelling, emerged so that no one understood what she had Foretold. She herself did not remember a word she said. All in all, Nicola was already marked by the sisters as someone to watch despite her late start. The begrudging agreement to test women older than seventeen or eighteen probably could be laid at Nicola's feet.

ɑɹinə, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, wɑz ə hʌntɝ fəɹ ðə hɔɹn u swæɡɝɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ə mæn ən sæɾ ɝaʊn tɔkɪŋ ʌv ædvɛntʃɝz, ðoʊz ʃi hæd hæɾ ən ðoʊz ʃi wʊd, wən ʃi wɑz nɑt pɹæktəsɪŋ wɪð əɹ baʊ. vɛɹi laɪkli ʃi hæd pɪk ðət wɛpən ʌp fɹəm bɝdʒɪt, əlɔŋ wɪð əɹ mænɝ ə dʒɹɛs. ʃi sɝɾənli sim tə hæv noʊ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ɛniθɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə baʊ, ɪksɛp flɝɾɪŋ əkeɪʒənəli, ɪn ə ɹæðɝ fɔɹwɝd mænɝ, ðoʊ nɑt leɪtli. pɝhæps lɔŋ deɪz ɑn ðə ɹoʊd lɛft əɹ tu taɪɝd fəɹ ɪt, ɪf nɑt fəɹ ɑɹtʃɝi. waɪ ʃi wɑz stɪl tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð ðɛm, ɛɡwin kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd; ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli laɪkli ðəɾ ɑɹinə bɪliv ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ wəd tɝn ʌp əlɔŋ ðɛɹ mɑɹtʃ, ən ɪmpɑsəbəl ðət ʃi ivən səspɛktəɾ ɪt wɑz hɪɾən əweɪ ɪnsaɪd ðə waɪt taʊɝ. vɛɹi fju pipəl nu ðæt. ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt sɝɾən ivən ɪleɪɾə dɪd.

Areina, on the other hand, was a Hunter for the Horn who swaggered as much as a man and sat around talking of adventures, those she had had and those she would, when she was not practicing with her bow. Very likely she had picked that weapon up from Birgitte, along with her manner of dress. She certainly seemed to have no interest in anything beside the bow, except flirting occasionally, in a rather forward manner, though not lately. Perhaps long days on the road left her too tired for it, if not for archery. Why she was still traveling with them, Egwene could not understand; it was hardly likely that Areina believed the Horn of Valere would turn up along their march, and impossible that she even suspected it was hidden away inside the White Tower. Very few people knew that. Egwene was not certain even Elaida did.

ɑɹinə simd ə pɑstʃɝɪŋ ful, bʌɾ ɛɡwin fɛlt ə sɝɾən sɪmpəθi fəɹ nɪkoʊlə. ʃi ʌndɝstʊd ðə wʊmənz dɪskəntɛnt, ʌndɝstʊd wɑntɪŋ tə noʊ ɪɾ ɔl naʊ. ʃi hæd bɪn ðət weɪ, tu. meɪbi ʃi stɪl wɑz. "nɪkoʊlə," ʃi sɛd dʒɛnli, "wi ɔl əv lɪməts. əl nɛvɝ mætʃ nɪneɪiv sədaɪ, fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, wʌtɛvɝ aɪ du."

Areina seemed a posturing fool, but Egwene felt a certain sympathy for Nicola. She understood the woman's discontent, understood wanting to know it all now. She had been that way, too. Maybe she still was. "Nicola," she said gently, "we all have limits. I'll never match Nynaeve Sedai, for example, whatever I do."

"bʌɾ ɪf aɪ kəɾ oʊnli hæv ðə tʃæns, mʌðɝ." nɪkoʊlə æktʃəli  ɹʌŋ əɹ hænz ɪn pliɾɪŋ, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɪɾ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, jɛɾ əɹ aɪz stɪl mɛɾ ɛɡwinz lɛvəli. "ðə tʃæns jə hæd."

"But if I could only have the chance, Mother." Nicola actually wrung her hands in pleading, and there was a touch of it in her voice, yet her eyes still met Egwene's levelly. "The chance you had."

"wʌɾ aɪ dɪd - kəz aɪ hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs, kəz aɪ dɪdnt noʊ bɛɾɝ - ɪz kɔl fɔɹsɪŋ, nɪkoʊlə, ən ɪts deɪnʒɝəs." ʃi hæd nɑt hɝd ðət tɝm əntɪl sɪuən əpɑlədʒaɪz fəɹ duɪŋ ɪt tə hɝ; ðət wɑz wʌn taɪm sɪuən tʃɹuli hæd simd ɹɪpɛntənt. "ju noʊ ɪf jə tʃɹaɪ tə tʃænəl mɔɹ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ðən jəɹ ɹɛɾi tə hændəl, jə ɹɪsk bɝnɪŋ jɝsɛlf aʊt bɪfɔɹ jə ɛvɝ kʌm kloʊs tə jəɹ fʊl stʃɹɛŋkθ. bɛs jə lɝn tə bi peɪʃənt. ðə sɪstɝz woʊn lɛt jə bi ɛniθɪŋ ɛls əntɪl jə ɑɹ ɹɛɾi, ɛniweɪ."

"What I did - because I had no choice, because I didn't know better - is called forcing, Nicola, and it is dangerous." She had not heard that term until Siuan apologized for doing it to her; that was one time Siuan truly had seemed repentant. "You know if you try to channel more of saidar than you're ready to handle, you risk burning yourself out before you ever come close to your full strength. Best you learn to be patient. The sisters won't let you be anything else until you are ready, anyway."

"wi keɪm tə sɑlədɑɹ ɑn ðə seɪm ɹɪvɝboʊɾ əz nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn," ɑɹinə sɛd sʌɾənli. hɝ ɡeɪz wɑz mɔɹ ðən dɝɛkt; ɪt wɑz tʃælənʒɪŋ. "æn bɝdʒɪt." fəɹ səm ɹizən, ʃi sɛd ðə neɪm bɪɾɝli.

"We came to Salidar on the same riverboat as Nynaeve and Elayne," Areina said suddenly. Her gaze was more than direct; it was challenging. "And Birgitte." For some reason, she said the name bitterly.

nɪkoʊlə meɪd ʃʌʃɪŋ moʊʃənz. "ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə bɹɪŋ ðəɾ ʌp." ɑdli, ʃi dɪd nɑt saʊn əz ɪf ʃi mɛn ɪt.

Nicola made shushing motions. "There's no need to bring that up." Oddly, she did not sound as if she meant it.

hoʊpɪŋ ʃi wɑz kipɪŋ əɹ feɪs hæf soʊ smuð əz nɪkoʊləz, ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd tə kwɛl ə sʌɾən ʌnizinəs. "mɛɹɪɡən" hæd kʌm tə sɑlədɑɹ ɑn ðət boʊt, tu. ən aʊl huɾɪd, ən ʃi ʃɪvɝd. səm pipəl θɔt hɪɹɪŋ ən aʊl ɪn munlaɪt mɛn bæd nuz wɑz kʌmɪŋ. ʃi wɑz nɑt supɝstɪʃəs, bʌt. . . . "noʊ nid tə bɹɪŋ ʌp wʌt?"

Hoping she was keeping her face half so smooth as Nicola's, Egwene tried to quell a sudden uneasiness. "Marigan" had come to Salidar on that boat, too. An owl hooted, and she shivered. Some people thought hearing an owl in moonlight meant bad news was coming. She was not superstitious, but. . . . "No need to bring up what?"

ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks, ən ɑɹinə nɑɾəd.

The other two women exchanged looks, and Areina nodded.

"ɪt wɑz ɑn ðə wɔk fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ tə ðə vɪlədʒ." fəɹ ɔl əɹ səpoʊzd ɹɪlʌktəns, nɪkoʊlə pɪɹd stʃɹeɪɾ ɪndə ɛɡwinz aɪz. "ɑɹinə ən aɪ hɝd tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn ən dʒulɪn sændɑɹ tɔkɪŋ. ðə ɡlimən, ən ðə θif-teɪkɝ? dʒulɪn sɛɾ ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ - wi wɝnt ʃʊɹ, jɛt - ən ðeɪ lɝnd nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn hæd bɪn pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðən wi wɝ ɔl dʒʌmpɪŋ ɪndə ə skul ə sɪlvɝpaɪk, wɪtʃ aɪ teɪk ɪɾ ɪzən vɛɹi seɪf."

"It was on the walk from the river to the village." For all her supposed reluctance, Nicola peered straight into Egwene's eyes. "Areina and I heard Thom Merrilin and Juilin Sandar talking. The gleeman, and the thief-taker? Juilin said if there were Aes Sedai in the village - we weren't sure, yet - and they learned Nynaeve and Elayne had been pretending to be Aes Sedai, then we were all jumping into a school of silverpike, which I take it isn't very safe."

"ðə ɡlimən sɔ əs ən hʌʃt hɪm," ɑɹinə pʊɾ ɪn, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə kwɪvɝ əɾ əɹ weɪst, "bʌt wi hɝd." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz hɑɹɾ əz əɹ stɛɹ.

"The gleeman saw us and hushed him," Areina put in, fingering the quiver at her waist, "but we heard." Her voice was hard as her stare.

"aɪ noʊ ðəɹ boʊθ ɛɛs sədaɪ naʊ, mʌðɝ, bʌt wʊdn ðeɪ stɪl bi ɪn tʃɹʌbəl ɪf ɛniwʌn faʊn aʊt? ðə sɪstɝz, aɪ min? ɛnibəɾi hu pɹitɛnz tə bi ə sɪstɝ ɪz ɪn tʃɹʌbəl ɪf ðeɪ faɪn aʊt, ivən jɪɹz leɪɾɝ." nɪkoʊləz feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, bʌɾ əɹ ɡeɪz sʌɾənli sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɪks ɛɡwinz. ʃi lin ə lɪɾəl fɔɹwɝd, ɪntɛnt. "ɛnibəɾi əɾ ɔl. ɪzən ðət soʊ?"

"I know they're both Aes Sedai now, Mother, but wouldn't they still be in trouble if anyone found out? The sisters, I mean? Anybody who pretends to be a sister is in trouble if they find out, even years later." Nicola's face did not change, but her gaze suddenly seemed to be trying to fix Egwene's. She leaned a little forward, intent. "Anybody at all. Isn't that so?"

ɛmboʊldən baɪ ɛɡwinz saɪləns, ɑɹinə ɡɹɪnd. ən ənplɛzənt ɡɹɪn ɪn ðə naɪt. "aɪ hɪɹ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɝ sɛn aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ɑn səm tæsk baɪ ðə sɑntʃ wʊmən bæk wən ʃi wɑz æmɪɝlɪn. aɪ hɪɹ jə wɝ sɛn ɔf baɪ hɝ, tu, ət ðə seɪm taɪm. ɡɑɾ ɪndə ɔl sɔɹts ə tʃɹʌbəl wən jə keɪm bæk." slaɪ ɪnsɪnjueɪʃən slaɪðɝɾ ɪndə hɝ vɔɪs. "du jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ əm pleɪɪŋ əɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

Emboldened by Egwene's silence, Areina grinned. An unpleasant grin in the night. "I hear Nynaeve and Elayne were sent out of the Tower on some task by the Sanche woman back when she was Amyrlin. I hear you were sent off by her, too, at the same time. Got into all sorts of trouble when you came back." Sly insinuation slithered into her voice. "Do you remember them playing at Aes Sedai?"

ðeɪ stʊd ðəɹ lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ, ɑɹinə linɪŋ ɪnsələnli ɑn əɹ baʊ, nɪkoʊlə soʊ ɪkspɛktən ði ɛɹ ʃəɾ əv kɹækəld.

They stood there looking at her, Areina leaning insolently on her bow, Nicola so expectant the air should have crackled.

"sɪuən sɑntʃ ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd koʊldli, "æn soʊ ɑɹ nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə ən ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd. jəl ʃoʊ ðɛm pɹɑpɝ ɹɪspɛkt. tə ju, ðeɪ ɑɹ sɪuən sədaɪ, nɪneɪiv sədaɪ ən ɪleɪn sədaɪ." ðə pɛɹ blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. ɪnsaɪd, hɝ stʌmək kwɪvɝd. wɪð aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ. æftɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi hæd bɪn θɹu tənaɪt, ʃi wɑz kənfɹʌntəd wɪð blækmeɪl fɹəm ðiz . . . ? ʃi kəd nɑt θɪŋk ʌv ə wɝd bæɾ ɪnʌf. ɪleɪn kəd hæv; ɪleɪn lɪsən tə steɪbəlmən ən wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz ən ɛvɹi sɔɹt, mɛmɝaɪzɪŋ ðə wɝdz ʃi ʃʊɾə ɹəfjuz tə hɪɹ. ənfoʊldɪŋ ðə stʃɹaɪp stoʊl, ɛɡwin dʒɹeɪpt ɪt kɛɹfəli əkɹɔs əɹ ʃoʊldɝz.

"Siuan Sanche is Aes Sedai," Egwene said coldly, "and so are Nynaeve al'Meara and Elayne Trakand. You will show them proper respect. To you, they are Siuan Sedai, Nynaeve Sedai and Elayne Sedai." The pair blinked in surprise. Inside, her stomach quivered. With outrage. After everything she had been through tonight, she was confronted with blackmail from these . . . ? She could not think of a word bad enough. Elayne could have; Elayne listened to stablemen and wagon drivers and every sort, memorizing the words she should have refused to hear. Unfolding the striped stole, Egwene draped it carefully across her shoulders.

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk jə ʌndɝstænd, mʌðɝ," nɪkoʊlə sɛd heɪstəli. nɑt fɪɹfəli, haʊɛvɝ; dʒʌst ətɛmptɪŋ tə fɔɹs əɹ pɔɪnt. "aɪ mɪɹli wɝid ðəɾ ɪf ɛniwʌn faʊn aʊt ðət jə hæd - " ɛɡwin ɡeɪv əɹ noʊ tʃæns tə ɡoʊ fɝðɝ.

"I don't think you understand, Mother," Nicola said hastily. Not fearfully, however; just attempting to force her point. "I merely worried that if anyone found out that you had - " Egwene gave her no chance to go further.

"oʊ, aɪ ʌndɝstænd, tʃaɪld." ðə ful wʊmən wɑz ə tʃaɪld, haʊɛvɝ oʊld ʃi wɑz. ɛni nʌmbɝ ə ði oʊldɝ nɑvəsɪz ɡeɪv tʃɹʌbəl, juʒəwəli ɪn ðə fɔɹm ʌv ɪnsələns təwɔɹɾ æksɛptɪd sɛt tə titʃ ðɛm, bʌɾ ivən ðə sɪliəs hæd sɛns ɪnʌf tə əvɔɪɾ ɪmpɝɾənəns tə ðə sɪstɝz. ɪt fæn əɹ æŋɡɝ tə waɪt hit, ðət ðə wʊmən hæd ðə ɡɔl tə tʃɹaɪ ðɪs ɑn wɪð hɝ. ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ tɔlɝ ðən ʃi, ɪf nɑt baɪ mʌtʃ, bʌt ʃi plæntəɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps ən dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp, ən ðeɪ ʃɹæŋk əweɪ əz ðoʊ ʃi lumd. "du juv ɛni noʊʃən haʊ sɪɹiəs ɪts tə bɹɪŋ tʃɑɹdʒəz əɡɛnst ə sɪstɝ, ɪspɛʃli fəɹ ə nɑvəs? tʃɑɹdʒəz beɪst ɑn ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən jə kleɪm tə hæv hɝd bɪtwin mɛn naʊ ə θaʊzən maɪlz əweɪ! tiɑnə wəd skɪn jə əlaɪv ən pʊt jə tə skɹʌbɪŋ pɑts ðə ɹɛst ə jəɹ nætʃɹəl laɪf." nɪkoʊlə kɛp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊʃ ə wɝɾ ɪn - əpɑlədʒiz, ðeɪ saʊndəd laɪk ðɪs taɪm, ən mɔɹ pɹoʊɾɛsts ðəɾ ɛɡwin dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, fɹæntɪk ətɛmps tə tʃeɪnʒ ɛvɹiθɪŋ - bʌɾ ɛɡwin ɪɡnɔɹɾ əɹ ən ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ɑɹinə. ðə hʌntɝ tʊk ənʌðɝ stɛp bæk, wɛɾɪŋ əɹ lɪps ən lʊkɪŋ ɹɪmɑɹkəbli ənsɝɾən. "ju nidn θɪŋk jə wəd wɔk əweɪ klɪɹ, iðɝ. ivən ə hʌntɝ kəd bi hɔl tə tiɑnə fəɹ ə θɪŋ laɪk ðɪs. ɪf jəɹ lʌki ɪnʌf nɑt tə bi flɑɡd əɾ ə wæɡən tʌŋ, ðə weɪ ðeɪ də soʊlʒɝz kɑt stilɪŋ. iðɝ weɪ, jəl bi tɔst aʊt baɪ ðə ɹoʊd wɪð jəɹ wɛls fəɹ kʌmpəni."

"Oh, I understand, child." The fool woman was a child, however old she was. Any number of the older novices gave trouble, usually in the form of insolence toward Accepted set to teach them, but even the silliest had sense enough to avoid impertinence to the sisters. It fanned her anger to white heat, that the woman had the gall to try this on with her. They were both taller than she, if not by much, but she planted her fists on her hips and drew herself up, and they shrank away as though she loomed. "Do you have any notion how serious it is to bring charges against a sister, especially for a novice? Charges based on a conversation you claim to have heard between men now a thousand miles away! Tiana would skin you alive and put you to scrubbing pots the rest of your natural life." Nicola kept trying to push a word in - apologies, they sounded like this time, and more protests that Egwene did not understand, frantic attempts to change everything - but Egwene ignored her and rounded on Areina. The Hunter took another step back, wetting her lips and looking remarkably uncertain. "You needn't think you would walk away clear, either. Even a Hunter could be hauled to Tiana for a thing like this. If you're lucky enough not to be flogged at a wagon tongue, the way they do soldiers caught stealing. Either way, you'll be tossed out by the road with your welts for company."

dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ɛɡwin foʊldəɾ əɹ hænz əɾ əɹ weɪst. klʌtʃt təɡɛðɝ, ðeɪ wəd nɑt tʃɹɛmbəl. ɔl bʌt kaʊɝɪŋ, ðə pɛɹ lʊk suɾəbli tʃeɪsənd. ʃi hoʊp ðoʊz daʊnkæst aɪz ən slʌmpt ʃoʊldɝz ən ʃɪftɪŋ fit wɝ nɑt feɪnd. baɪ ɹaɪts, ʃi ʃəd sɛn əm tə tiɑnə ɹaɪt naʊ. ʃi hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌt ðə pɛnəlti maɪt bi fəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə blækmeɪl ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, bʌɾ ɪt sim laɪkli ðət biɪŋ tɝn aʊɾ ə ðə kæmp wəd bi ðə list ʌv ɪt. ɪn nɪkoʊləz keɪs, ðə tɝnɪŋ aʊt wəɾ əv tə weɪɾ əntɪl əɹ titʃɝz wɝ sæɾəsfaɪd ʃi nu ɪnʌf ə tʃænəlɪŋ nɑt tə hɝt hɝsɛlf əɹ ʌðɝz baɪ æksəɾənt. nɪkoʊlə tʃɹihɪl wəd nɛvɝ bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðoʊ, wʌns ðət tʃɑɹdʒ wɑz leɪɾ əɡɛns hɝ; ɔl ðət pətɛnʃəl wəd ɡoʊ fəɹ nʌθɪŋ.

Drawing a deep breath, Egwene folded her hands at her waist. Clutched together, they would not tremble. All but cowering, the pair looked suitably chastened. She hoped those downcast eyes and slumped shoulders and shifting feet were not feigned. By rights, she should send them to Tiana right now. She had no idea what the penalty might be for trying to blackmail the Amyrlin Seat, but it seemed likely that being turned out of the camp would be the least of it. In Nicola's case, the turning out would have to wait until her teachers were satisfied she knew enough of channeling not to hurt herself or others by accident. Nicola Treehill would never be Aes Sedai, though, once that charge was laid against her; all that potential would go for nothing.

ɪksɛpt. . . . ɛni wʊmən kɑt pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz sɛt daʊn soʊ hɑɹd ʃi wəd stɪl bi wɪmpɝɪŋ jɪɹz leɪɾɝ, ən ən æksɛptɪd kɑt maɪt vɛɹi wɛl kənsɪɾɝ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən fɔɹtʃənət, bʌt ʃʊɹli nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɝ seɪf naʊ ðeɪ ɹɪli wɝ sɪstɝz. hɝsɛlf, əz wɛl. oʊnli, ɪt maɪt teɪk noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə wɪspɝ ə ðɪs tə ɪɹeɪs ɛni tʃæns ə meɪkɪŋ ðə hɔl æknɑlɪdʒ əɹ tʃɹuli ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. əz wɛl dʒɔn ɔf tə ɹænd, ən ðən tɛl ðə hɔl tə ðɛɹ feɪsəz. ʃi dɛɹd nɑɾ əlaʊ ðiz tu tə si hɝ daʊt, əɹ ivən səspɛkt.

Except. . . . Any woman caught pretending to be Aes Sedai was set down so hard she would still be whimpering years later, and an Accepted caught might very well consider the other woman fortunate, but surely Nynaeve and Elayne were safe now they really were sisters. Herself, as well. Only, it might take no more than a whisper of this to erase any chance of making the Hall acknowledge her truly the Amyrlin Seat. As well jaunt off to Rand, and then tell the Hall to their faces. She dared not allow these two to see her doubt, or even suspect.

"aɪ wɪl fɝɡɛt ðɪs," ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "bʌɾ ɪf aɪ hɪɹ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə wɪspɝ ʌv ɪɾ əɡɛn, fɹəm ɛniwʌn. . . ." ʃi dʒɹu ə ɹæɡəd bɹɛθ - ɪf ʃi hɝd ʃaʊts ʌv ɪt, ðəɹ maɪt bi lɪɾəl ʃi kəd də - bʌt baɪ ðə weɪ ðeɪ dʒʌmpt, ðeɪ ɹɛɾ ə θɹɛt ðət pɹɪk dip. "ɡɛt tə jəɹ bɛdz bɪfɔɹ aɪ tʃeɪnʒ maɪ maɪnd."

"I will forget this," she said sharply. "But if I hear so much as a whisper of it again, from anyone. . . ." She drew a ragged breath - if she heard shouts of it, there might be little she could do - but by the way they jumped, they read a threat that pricked deep. "Get to your beds before I change my mind."

ɪn ən ɪnstən ðeɪ bɪkeɪm ə flɝi ʌv kɝtsiz, ʌv "jɛs, mʌðɝ" ən "noʊ, mʌðɝ" ən "æz jə kəmænd, mʌðɝ." ðeɪ skɝiɾ əweɪ lʊkɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz ət hɝ, ɛvɹi stɛp fæstɝ ðən ðə læst, əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ. ʃi hæd tə wɔk ɑn səɾətli, bʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə ɹʌn tu.

In an instant they became a flurry of curtsies, of "Yes, Mother" and "No, Mother" and "As you command, Mother." They scurried away looking back over their shoulders at her, every step faster than the last, until they were running. She had to walk on sedately, but she wanted to run too.


tʃæptɝ tɛn


CHAPTER 10

ənsin aɪz


Unseen Eyes

sɛləm wɑz weɪɾɪŋ wən ɛɡwin ɡɑt bæk tə hɝ tɛnt, ə ɹeɪl-θɪn wʊmən wɪð dɑɹk tɛɹən kʌlɝɪŋ ən ə nɪɹli ɪmpɝviəs sɛlf-əʃʊɹəns. tʃɛsə wɑz ɹaɪt; ʃi dɪd kæɹi hɝ lɔŋ noʊz ɹeɪzd, əz ðoʊ ɹikɔɪlɪŋ fɹəm ə bæd smɛl. jɛɾ ɪf əɹ mænɝ wɪð ði ʌðɝ meɪdz wɑz ɛɹəɡənt, ʃi wɑz ɪn ɹiæləɾi kwaɪt dɪfɹən ɝaʊn əɹ pətʃɹoʊnəs. əz ɛɡwin ɛntɝd, sɛləm foʊldəd hɝsɛlf ɪndə ə kɝtsi soʊ dip əɹ hɛd nɪɹli bɹʌʃt ðə kɑɹpət, skɝts spɹɛɾ əz waɪɾ əz ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ ɪn ðə kɹæmp kɔɹɾɝz. bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwin hæd teɪkən əɹ sɛkən stɛp ɪnsaɪd, ðə wʊmən lɛpt ʌp, fʌsɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ bʌɾənz. ən fʌsɪŋ oʊvɝ hɝ, tu. sɛləm hæd vɛɹi lɪɾəl sɛns.

Selame was waiting when Egwene got back to her tent, a rail-thin woman with dark Tairen coloring and a nearly impervious self-assurance. Chesa was right; she did carry her long nose raised, as though recoiling from a bad smell. Yet if her manner with the other maids was arrogant, she was in reality quite different around her patroness. As Egwene entered, Selame folded herself into a curtsy so deep her head nearly brushed the carpet, skirts spread as wide as they would go in the cramped quarters. Before Egwene had taken her second step inside, the woman leaped up, fussing over her buttons. And fussing over her, too. Selame had very little sense.

"oʊ, mʌðɝ, jə wɛn aʊt wɪð jəɹ hɛɾ ənkʌvɝɾ əɡɛn." əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ wɔɹn ɛni ʌv ðoʊz biɾɪd kæps ðə wʊmən feɪvɝd, əɹ ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd vɛlvət θɪŋz mɛɹi feɪvɝd, əɹ tʃɛsəz plum hæts. "waɪ, jəɹ ʃɪvɝɪŋ. jə ʃəd nɛvɝ ɡoʊ wɔkɪŋ aʊt-ʌv-dɔɹz wɪθaʊɾ ə ʃɔl ən pɛɹɑsɑl, mʌðɝ." haʊ wɑz ə pɛɹɑsɑl səpoʊz tə stɑp ʃɪvɝɪŋ? wɪð swɛt tʃɹɪklɪŋ daʊn əɹ oʊn tʃiks haʊɛvɝ fæst ʃi dæbd wɪð əɹ hæŋkɝtʃɪf, sɛləm nɛvɝ θɔt tə æsk waɪ ʃi ʃɪvɝd, wɪtʃ wɑz pɝhæps dʒʌst əz wɛl. "æn jə wɛn əloʊn, ɪn ðə naɪt. ɪt dʒʌst ɪzən pɹɑpɝ, mʌðɝ. bɪsaɪdz, ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔl ðoʊz soʊlʒɝz, ɹʌf mɛn, wɪð noʊ disən ɹɪspɛk fəɹ ɛni wʊmən, ivən ɛɛs sədaɪ. mʌðɝ, jə sɪmpli mʌsnt. . . ."

"Oh, Mother, you went out with your head uncovered again." As if she had ever worn any of those beaded caps the woman favored, or the embroidered velvet things Meri favored, or Chesa's plumed hats. "Why, you're shivering. You should never go walking out-of-doors without a shawl and parasol, Mother." How was a parasol supposed to stop shivering? With sweat trickling down her own cheeks however fast she dabbed with her handkerchief, Selame never thought to ask why she shivered, which was perhaps just as well. "And you went alone, in the night. It just isn't proper, Mother. Besides, there are all those soldiers, rough men, with no decent respect for any woman, even Aes Sedai. Mother, you simply mustn't. . . ."

ɛɡwin lɛt ðə fulɪʃ wɝdz wɑʃ oʊvɝ əɹ ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ ʃi lɛt ðə wʊmən əndʒɹɛs hɝ, peɪɪŋ lɛs ðən hæf ə maɪnd. ɔɹɾɝɪŋ əɹ tə bi kwaɪət wəɾ oʊnli pɹədus soʊ mɛni hɝt lʊks ən əbjuz saɪz ðəɾ ɪt meɪd lɪɾəl dɪfɝəns. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə bɹeɪnləs tʃæɾɝ, sɛləm pɝfɔɹmd əɹ duɾiz dɪlədʒənli, ɪf wɪð soʊ mɛni flɝɪʃəz ðeɪ bɪkeɪm ə dæns ʌv ɡɹæn dʒɛstʃɝz ən əbsikwiəs kɝtsiz. ɪt simd ɪmpɑsəbəl ðəɾ ɛniwʌn kəd bi əz sɪli əz sɛləm, ɔlweɪz kənsɝnd wɪð əpɪɹənsəz, ɔlweɪz wɝiɪŋ oʊvɝ wʌt pipəl wəd θɪŋk. tə hɝ, pipəl wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə noʊbɪləɾi, ən ðɛɹ ʌpɝ sɝvəns. baɪ hɝ bʊk, noʊ wʌn ɛls mæɾɝd; pɝhæps noʊ wʌn ɛls θɔt, baɪ hɝ bʊk. ɪt pɹɑbli wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl. ɛɡwin wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə fɝɡɛɾ u hæd faʊn sɛləm ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ʃi dɪɾ u hæd faʊn mɛɹi. tʃɹu, tʃɛsə wɑz ə ɡɪft fɹəm ʃɛɹiəm, bʌt tʃɛsə hæd ʃoʊn əɹ lɔɪəltiz tə ɛɡwin mɔɹ ðən wʌns. ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə tɛl hɝsɛlf ðə tʃɹɛmɝz ðət ði ʌðɝ wʊmən tʊk fəɹ ʃɪvɝz wɝ kwɪvɝz ə ɹeɪdʒ, jɛt ʃi nu ə wɝm ə fɪɹ ɹɪθd ɪn əɹ bɛli. ʃi hæd kʌm tu fɑɹ, hæd tu mʌtʃ tə də jɛt, tə əlaʊ nɪkoʊlə ən ɑɹinə tə pʊɾ ə spoʊk θɹu hɝ wilz.

Egwene let the foolish words wash over her in the same way she let the woman undress her, paying less than half a mind. Ordering her to be quiet would only produce so many hurt looks and abused sighs that it made little difference. Except for the brainless chatter, Selame performed her duties diligently, if with so many flourishes they became a dance of grand gestures and obsequious curtsies. It seemed impossible that anyone could be as silly as Selame, always concerned with appearances, always worrying over what people would think. To her, people were Aes Sedai and the nobility, and their upper servants. By her book, no one else mattered; perhaps no one else thought, by her book. It probably was impossible. Egwene was not about to forget who had found Selame in the first place, any more than she did who had found Meri. True, Chesa was a gift from Sheriam, but Chesa had shown her loyalties to Egwene more than once. Egwene wanted to tell herself the tremors that the other woman took for shivers were quivers of rage, yet she knew a worm of fear writhed in her belly. She had come too far, had too much to do yet, to allow Nicola and Areina to put a spoke through her wheels.

əz əɹ hɛd pɑp θɹu ðə tɑp ʌv ə klin ʃɪft, ʃi kɑɾ ə bɪɾ ə ðə skɪni wʊmənz pɹæɾəl ən stɛɹd. "dɪd jə seɪ uz mɪlk?"

As her head popped through the top of a clean shift, she caught a bit of the skinny woman's prattle and stared. "Did you say ewe's milk?"

"oʊ, jɛs, mʌðɝ. jəɹ skɪn ɪz soʊ sɑft, ən nʌθɪŋ wɪl kip ɪt ðət weɪ laɪk beɪðɪŋ ɪn uz mɪlk."

"Oh, yes, Mother. Your skin is so soft, and nothing will keep it that way like bathing in ewe's milk."

meɪbi ʃi ɹɪli wɑz ən ɪɾiət. hʌsəlɪŋ ə pɹətɛstɪŋ sɛləm aʊt, ɛɡwin bɹʌʃt əɹ oʊn hɛɹ, tɝn daʊn əɹ oʊn kɑt, pleɪs ðə naʊ jusləs æɾəm bɹeɪsləɾ ɪn ðə smɔl kɑɹvd aɪvɝi bɑks wɛɹ ʃi kɛpt əɹ fju pisəz ə dʒuəlɹi, ðən ɪkstɪŋɡwɪʃt ðə læmps. ɔl baɪ maɪsɛlf, ʃi θɔt sɑɹkæstɪkli ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. sɛləm ən mɛɹi wɪl əv kɑnɪpʃənz.

Maybe she really was an idiot. Hustling a protesting Selame out, Egwene brushed her own hair, turned down her own cot, placed the now useless a'dam bracelet in the small carved ivory box where she kept her few pieces of jewelry, then extinguished the lamps. All by myself, she thought sarcastically in the darkness. Selame and Meri will have conniptions.

bɪfɔɹ ɹɪtaɪɹɪŋ, haʊɛvɝ, ʃi pæɾəd tə ði ɛntʃɹəns ən oʊpən ə smɔl ɡæp ɪn ðə dɔɹflæps. aʊtsaɪd wɑz munlɪt stɪlnəs ən saɪləns, bɹoʊkən baɪ ə naɪt hɛɹənz kɹaɪ ðət sʌɾənli kʌɾ ɔf ɪn ə ʃɹik. ðəɹ wɝ hʌntɝz əbɹɔɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. æftɝ ə moʊmən sʌmθɪŋ muvd ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz bɪsaɪɾ ə tɛn əkɹɔs ðə weɪ. ɪt lʊk laɪk ə wʊmən.

Before retiring, however, she padded to the entrance and opened a small gap in the doorflaps. Outside was moonlit stillness and silence, broken by a night heron's cry that suddenly cut off in a shriek. There were hunters abroad in the darkness. After a moment something moved in the shadows beside a tent across the way. It looked like a woman.

pɝhæps ɪɾiəsi dɪd nɑt dɪskwɑləfaɪ sɛləm ɛni mɔɹ ðən daʊɝ-feɪst ɡlum ɪlɪməneɪɾəd mɛɹi. ɪt kəd bi iðɝ wʌn. əɹ sʌmwʌn ɛls ɪntaɪɝli. ivən nɪkoʊlə əɹ ɑɹinə, haʊɛvɝ ənlaɪkli. ʃi lɛt ðə tɛntflæp fɔl ʃʌt wɪð ə smaɪl. huɛvɝ ðə wɑtʃɝ wɑz wəd nɑt si wɛɹ ʃi wɛn tənaɪt.

Perhaps idiocy did not disqualify Selame any more than dour-faced gloom eliminated Meri. It could be either one. Or someone else entirely. Even Nicola or Areina, however unlikely. She let the tentflap fall shut with a smile. Whoever the watcher was would not see where she went tonight.

ðə weɪ ðə waɪz wʌnz hæd tɔɾ əɹ tə pʊt hɝsɛlf tə slip wɑz sɪmpəl. aɪz kloʊzd, filɪŋ itʃ pɑɹɾ ə ðə bɑɾi ɹɪlæks ɪn tɝn, bɹiðɪŋ ɪn taɪm wɪð əɹ hɑɹtbit, maɪn ənfoʊkəst ən dʒɹɪftɪŋ, ɔl bʌt wʌn taɪni kɔɹnɝ, dʒɹɪftɪŋ. slip swɛpt oʊvɝ əɹ ɪn moʊməns, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə slip ʌv ə dʒɹimwɔkɝ.

The way the Wise Ones had taught her to put herself to sleep was simple. Eyes closed, feeling each part of the body relax in turn, breathing in time with her heartbeat, mind unfocused and drifting, all but one tiny corner, drifting. Sleep swept over her in moments, but it was the sleep of a dreamwalker.

fɔɹmləs, ʃi floʊɾəd dip wɪðɪn ən oʊʃən ə stɑɹz, ɪnfənət pɔɪns ə laɪt ɡlɪmɝɪŋ ɪn ən ɪnfənət si ʌv dɑɹknəs, faɪɝəfliz bɪɑn kaʊntɪŋ flɪkɝɪŋ ɪn ən ɛnləs naɪt. ðoʊz wɝ dʒɹimz, ðə dʒɹimz ʌv ɛvɹiwʌn slipɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ ɪn ðə wɝld, meɪbi ʌv ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ɔl pɑsəbəl wɝlz, ən ðɪs wɑz ðə ɡæp bɪtwin ɹiæləɾi ən tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ðə speɪs sɛpɝeɪɾɪŋ ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝl fɹəm ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz. wɛɹɛvɝ ʃi lʊk tɛn θaʊzən faɪɝəfliz vænɪʃt əz pipəl woʊk, ən tɛn θaʊzənd nu wɝ bɔɹn tə ɹipleɪs ðɛm. ə væst ɛvɝ-tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɝeɪ ʌv spɑɹklɪŋ bjuɾi. ʃi dɪd nɑt weɪs taɪm ɪn ædmɝeɪʃən, ðoʊ. ðɪs pleɪs hɛl deɪnʒɝz, səm dɛdli. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi nu haʊ tə əvɔɪd ðoʊz, bʌt wʌn pɛɹəl ɪn ðɪs pleɪs eɪm stʃɹeɪɾ əɾ əɹ ɪf ʃi lɪŋɡɝd tu lɔŋ, ən biɪŋ kɑɾ ɪn ɪt wəd bi ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ tə seɪ ðə list. kipɪŋ ə wɛɹi aɪ aʊt - wɛl, ɪt wʊɾə bɪn ə wɛɹi aɪ hæd ʃi hæɾ aɪz hɪɹ - ʃi muvd. ʃi hæd noʊ sɛns ə moʊʃən. ɪt simd ʃi stʊd stɪl ən ðət ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ oʊʃən swɝld ɝaʊn əɹ əntɪl wʌn laɪt sɛɾəld bɪfɔɹ hɝ. ɛvɹi twɪŋkəlɪŋ stɑɹ lʊkt ɪɡzækli laɪk ɛvɹi ʌðɝ, jɛt ʃi nu ðɪs wɑz nɪneɪivz dʒɹim. haʊ ʃi nu wɑz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ; nɑɾ ivən ðə waɪz wʌnz ʌndɝstʊd ðət ɹɛkəɡnɪʃən.

Formless, she floated deep within an ocean of stars, infinite points of light glimmering in an infinite sea of darkness, fireflies beyond counting flickering in an endless night. Those were dreams, the dreams of everyone sleeping anywhere in the world, maybe of everyone in all possible worlds, and this was the gap between reality and Tel'aran'rhiod, the space separating the waking world from the World of Dreams. Wherever she looked ten thousand fireflies vanished as people woke, and ten thousand new were born to replace them. A vast ever-changing array of sparkling beauty. She did not waste time in admiration, though. This place held dangers, some deadly. She was sure she knew how to avoid those, but one peril in this place aimed straight at her if she lingered too long, and being caught in it would be embarrassing to say the least. Keeping a wary eye out - well, it would have been a wary eye had she had eyes here - she moved. She had no sense of motion. It seemed she stood still and that glittering ocean swirled around her until one light settled before her. Every twinkling star looked exactly like every other, yet she knew this was Nynaeve's dream. How she knew was another matter; not even the Wise Ones understood that recognition.

ʃi hæd kənsɪɾɝd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪnd nɪkoʊləz dʒɹimz, ən ɑɹinəz. wʌns ʃi ənɝθ ðɛm, ʃi nu ɪɡzækli haʊ tə sɪŋk ðə fɪɹ ə ðə laɪɾ ɪndə ðɛɹ boʊnz, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡɪv ə fɪɡ ðəɾ ɛvɹi bɪɾ ʌv ɪt wɑz pɹoʊskɹaɪbd. pɹæktɪkæləɾi sɛn əɹ hɪɹ ɪnstɛd, nɑt fɪɹ ə ðə fɔɹbɪɾən. ʃi hæd dʌn wʌt wɑz nɑt dʌn bɪfɔɹ, ən ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ʃi wəɾ əɡɛn ʃəɾ ɪt bɪkʌm nɛsəsɛɹi. də wʌt jə mʌst, ðən peɪ ðə pɹaɪs fəɹ ɪt, wɑz wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn tɔt, baɪ ðə seɪm wɪmən u hæd mɑɹkt ɔf ðoʊz fɔɹbɪɾən ɛɹiəz. ɪt wɑz ɹəfjuzəl tə ədmɪt ðə dɛt, ɹəfjuzəl tə peɪ, ðəɾ ɔfən tɝnd nəsɛsəɾi tə ivəl. bʌɾ ivən ɪf ðət pɛɹ wɝ əslip, loʊkeɪɾɪŋ sʌmwʌnz dʒɹimz ðə fɝs taɪm wɑz ɑɹdʒuəs ət bɛst, wɪθaʊt ɡɛɹəntiz. deɪz ʌv ɛfɝts - naɪts ʌv ɪt, ɹæðɝ - wɝ mɔɹ laɪkli tə dɪlɪvɝ nʌθɪŋ. ðɪs wɑz ət list ʃʊɹ.

She had considered trying to find Nicola's dreams, and Areina's. Once she unearthed them, she knew exactly how to sink the fear of the Light into their bones, and she did not give a fig that every bit of it was proscribed. Practicality sent her here instead, not fear of the forbidden. She had done what was not done before, and she was certain she would again should it become necessary. Do what you must, then pay the price for it, was what she had been taught, by the same women who had marked off those forbidden areas. It was refusal to admit the debt, refusal to pay, that often turned necessity to evil. But even if that pair were asleep, locating someone's dreams the first time was arduous at best, without guarantees. Days of efforts - nights of it, rather - were more likely to deliver nothing. This was at least sure.

sloʊli ʃi muv kloʊsɝ θɹu ɛvɝlæstɪŋ dɑɹknəs, ðoʊ wʌns əɡɛn ɪt sim ðət ʃi steɪd stɪl ən ðə pɪnpɔɪn ə laɪt ɡɹu, tə ə ɡloʊɪŋ pɝl, ən ɪɹədɛsən æpəl, ə fʊl mun, əntɪl ɪt fɪld əɹ vɪʒən ɪntaɪɝli wɪð bɹaɪtnəs, ɔl ðə wɝld. ʃi dɪd nɑt tʌtʃ ɪt, ðoʊ, nɑt jɛt. ə speɪs faɪnɝ ðən ə hɛɹ ɹɪmeɪn bɪtwin. ɛvɝ soʊ dʒɛnli, ʃi ɹitʃt əkɹɔs ðət ɡæp. wɪð wʌt, lækɪŋ ə bɑɾi, wɑz əz mʌtʃ ə mɪstɝi əz haʊ ʃi nu wʌn dʒɹim fɹəm ənʌðɝ. hɝ wɪl, ðə waɪz wʌnz sɛd, bʌt ʃi stɪl dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn haʊ ðət kəd bi. əz ðoʊ leɪɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ tə ə soʊp bʌbəl, ʃi kɛpt əɹ tʌtʃ vɛɹi dɛləkəɾ ɪndid. ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔl ʃɪmɝd laɪk spʌn ɡlæs, pʌls laɪk ə hɑɹt, dɛləkəɾ ən əlaɪv. ə lɪɾəl fɝmɝ tʌtʃ, ən ʃi wəd bi eɪbəl tə "si" ɪnsaɪd, "si" wʌt nɪneɪiv wɑz dʒɹimɪŋ. ə bɪt fɝmɝ stɪl, ən ʃi kəɾ æktʃəli  stɛp ɪnsaɪɾ ən bi ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə dʒɹim. ðət kæɹid hæzɝdz, ɪspɛʃli wɪð ɛniwʌn ʌv ə stʃɹɔŋ maɪnd, bʌɾ iðɝ lʊkɪŋ ɪn əɹ stɛpɪŋ ɪn kəd bi mɔɹɾəfaɪɪŋ. fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, ɪf ðə dʒɹimɝ hæpən tə bi dʒɹimɪŋ ʌv ə mæn ʃi wɑz pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn. əpɑlədʒiz əloʊn tʊk hæf ðə naɪt wən jə dɪd ðæt. ɔɹ, wɪð ə hʊkɪŋ sɔɹɾ ə moʊʃən, laɪk ɹoʊlɪŋ ə fɹædʒəl biɾ əkɹɔs ə teɪbəltɑp, ʃi kəd snætʃ nɪneɪiv aʊt, ɪndə ə dʒɹim ə hɝ oʊn meɪkɪŋ, ə pɑɹɾ ə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ ɪtsɛlf, wɛɹ ʃi wɑz ɪn kəmplit kəntʃɹoʊl. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət wəd wɝk. ʌv kɔɹs, ðət wɑz wʌn ə ðə fɔɹbɪɾən θɪŋz, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk nɪneɪiv wəɾ əpɹiʃieɪɾ ɪt.

Slowly she moved closer through everlasting darkness, though once again it seemed that she stayed still and the pinpoint of light grew, to a glowing pearl, an iridescent apple, a full moon, until it filled her vision entirely with brightness, all the world. She did not touch it, though, not yet. A space finer than a hair remained between. Ever so gently, she reached across that gap. With what, lacking a body, was as much a mystery as how she knew one dream from another. Her will, the Wise Ones said, but she still did not understand how that could be. As though laying a finger to a soap bubble, she kept her touch very delicate indeed. The shining wall shimmered like spun glass, pulsed like a heart, delicate and alive. A little firmer touch, and she would be able to "see" inside, "see" what Nynaeve was dreaming. A bit firmer still, and she could actually step inside and be a part of the dream. That carried hazards, especially with anyone of a strong mind, but either looking in or stepping in could be mortifying. For example, if the dreamer happened to be dreaming of a man she was particularly interested in. Apologies alone took half the night when you did that. Or, with a hooking sort of motion, like rolling a fragile bead across a tabletop, she could snatch Nynaeve out, into a dream of her own making, a part of Tel'aran'rhiod itself, where she was in complete control. She was sure that would work. Of course, that was one of the forbidden things, and she did not think Nynaeve would appreciate it.

nɪneɪiv, ðɪs ɪz ɛɡwin. ʌndɝ noʊ sɝkəmstænsəz ɑɹ jə tə ɹɪtɝn əntɪl jə faɪn ðə boʊl, nɑɾ əntɪl aɪ kən sɛɾəl eɪ pɹɑbləm wɪð ɑɹinə ən nɪkoʊlə. ðeɪ noʊ jə wɝ pɹitɛndɪŋ. əl ɪkspleɪn mɔɹ wən aɪ si jə nɛkst ɪn ðə lɪɾəl taʊɝ. bi kɛɹfəl. mɑɡiɾin əz ɪskeɪpt.

NYNAEVE, THIS IS EGWENE. UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES ARE YOU TO RETURN UNTIL YOU FIND THE BOWL, NOT UNTIL I CAN SETTLE A PROBLEM WITH AREINA AND NICOLA. THEY KNOW YOU WERE PRETENDING. I WILL EXPLAIN MORE WHEN I SEE YOU NEXT IN THE LITTLE TOWER. BE CAREFUL. MOGHEDIEN HAS ESCAPED.

ðə dʒɹim wɪŋkt aʊt, ðə soʊp bʌbəl pɹɪkt. dɪspaɪt ðə mɛsədʒ, ʃi wʊɾə ɡɪɡəl hæd ʃi pəzɛst ə θɹoʊt. ə dɪsɪbɑɾid vɔɪs ɪn jəɹ dʒɹim kəɾ əv ə stɑɹtlɪŋ ɪfɛkt. ɪspɛʃli ɪf jə wɝ əfɹeɪd ðə spikɝ maɪt bi pikɪŋ. nɪneɪiv wɑz nɑt wʌn tə fɝɡɛɾ ivən wən ɪt wɑz ən æksəɾənt.

The dream winked out, the soap bubble pricked. Despite the message, she would have giggled had she possessed a throat. A disembodied voice in your dream could have a startling effect. Especially if you were afraid the speaker might be peeking. Nynaeve was not one to forget even when it was an accident.

ðət laɪt-spæŋɡəl si wɝld əbaʊɾ əɹ wʌns mɔɹ əntɪl ʃi sɛɾəld ɑn ənʌðɝ spɑɹklɪŋ pɪnpɔɪnt. ɪleɪn. ðə tu wɪmən vɛɹi laɪkli slɛp noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə dʌzən peɪsɪz əpɑɹɾ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, bʌt dɪstəns hæd noʊ minɪŋ hɪɹ. əɹ pɝhæps ɪt hæɾ ə dɪfɹən minɪŋ.

That light-spangled sea whirled about her once more until she settled on another sparkling pinpoint. Elayne. The two women very likely slept no more than a dozen paces apart in Ebou Dar, but distance had no meaning here. Or perhaps it had a different meaning.

ðɪs taɪm wən ʃi dɪlɪvɝɾ əɹ mɛsədʒ, ðə dʒɹim pʌlsd ən tʃeɪnʒd. ɪt stɪl əpɪɹɾ ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm əz ɛvɹi ʌðɝ, bʌɾ ivən soʊ, tə hɝ ɪt wɑz tʃɹænsfɔɹmd. hæd ðə wɝdz dʒɹɔn ɪleɪn ɪndə ənʌðɝ dʒɹim? ðeɪ wəd ɹɪmeɪn, haʊɛvɝ, ən ʃi wəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɑn weɪkɪŋ.

This time when she delivered her message, the dream pulsed and changed. It still appeared exactly the same as every other, but even so, to her it was transformed. Had the words drawn Elayne into another dream? They would remain, however, and she would remember on waking.

wɪð nɪkoʊlə ən ɑɹinəz bɑstʃɹɪŋz dæmpən ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ, ɪt wɑz taɪm tə tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən tə ɹænd. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, faɪndɪŋ ɪz dʒɹimz wəd bi əz jusləs əz faɪndɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪz. hi ʃildɪɾ ɪz sʌmwʌɾ əz ðeɪ dɪd ðɛɹz, ɔlðoʊ əpɛɹənli ə mænz ʃil dɪfɝd fɹəm ə wʊmənz. ən ɛɛs sədaɪz ʃild wɑz ə kɹɪstəl kæɹəpɑtʃ, ə simləs sfɪɹ woʊvən ə spɪɹət, bʌt haʊɛvɝ tʃɹænspɛɹən ɪɾ əpɪɹd, ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn stil. ʃi kəd nɑt ɹikɔl haʊ mɛni fɹutləs aʊɝz ʃi hæd fɹɪɾɝd əweɪ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɪɹ θɹu hɪz. wɛɹ ə sɪstɝz ʃildɪd dʒɹim sim bɹaɪɾɝ, kloʊs ʌp, hɪz wɝ dɪmɝ. ɪt wɑz laɪk stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə mʌɾi wɔɾɝ; sʌm-taɪmz jə hæd ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ðət sʌmθɪŋ hæd muv dip ɪn ðoʊz ɡɹeɪ-bɹaʊn swɝlz, bʌt jə kəd nɛvɝ tɛl wʌt.

With Nicola and Areina's bowstrings dampened a little more, it was time to turn her attention to Rand. Unfortunately, finding his dreams would be as useless as finding an Aes Sedai's. He shielded his somewhat as they did theirs, although apparently a man's shield differed from a woman's. An Aes Sedai's shield was a crystal carapace, a seamless sphere woven of Spirit, but however transparent it appeared, it might as well have been steel. She could not recall how many fruitless hours she had frittered away trying to peer through his. Where a sister's shielded dream seemed brighter, close up, his were dimmer. It was like staring into muddy water; some-times you had the impression that something had moved deep in those gray-brown swirls, but you could never tell what.

əɡɛn ði ɛnləs ɝeɪ ʌv laɪts spʌn ən sɛɾəld, ən ʃi əpɹoʊtʃt ə θɝd wʊmənz dʒɹim. dʒɪnʒɝli. soʊ mʌtʃ leɪ bɪtwin əɹ ən æmɪz ðəɾ ɪt simd əkɪn tə əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ əɹ mʌðɝz dʒɹimz. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ʃi hæd tə ədmɪt, ʃi wɑntəd tə ɛmjəleɪɾ æmɪz ɪn mɛni weɪz. ʃi dɪzaɪɝɾ æmɪz' ɹɪspɛkt ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz ɡɹeɪtli əz ʃi dɪd ðə hɔlz. meɪbi, ɪf ʃi hæd tə tʃuz, ʃi wəd tʃuz æmɪz'. sɝɾənli, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ sɪɾɝ ʃi ɪstimd əz haɪli əz ʃi dɪɾ æmɪz. pʊʃɪŋ əweɪ ə sʌɾən dɪfəɾəns, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk əɹ "vɔɪs" sɑftɝ, tə noʊ əveɪl. æmɪz, ðɪs ɪz ɛɡwin. aɪ mʌst spik wɪð ju.

Again the endless array of lights spun and settled, and she approached a third woman's dream. Gingerly. So much lay between her and Amys that it seemed akin to approaching her mother's dreams. In truth, she had to admit, she wanted to emulate Amys in many ways. She desired Amys' respect every bit as greatly as she did the Hall's. Maybe, if she had to choose, she would choose Amys'. Certainly, there was no Sitter she esteemed as highly as she did Amys. Pushing away a sudden diffidence, she tried to make her "voice" softer, to no avail. AMYS, THIS IS EGWENE. I MUST SPEAK WITH YOU.

wɪl kʌm, ə vɔɪs mɝmɝd tə hɝ. æmɪz' vɔɪs.

We will come, a voice murmured to her. Amys' voice.

stɑɹɾəld, ɛɡwin bækt əweɪ. ʃi fɛlt laɪk læfɪŋ ət hɝsɛlf. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz dʒʌst əz wɛl tə bi ɹimaɪndəd ðət ðə waɪz wʌnz hæd lɔŋ jɪɹz' mɔɹ ɪkspɪɹiəns ət ðɪs. ðəɹ wɝ taɪmz ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪd ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn spɔɪl baɪ nɑt hævɪŋ tə wɝk hɑɹɾɝ fəɹ əɹ əbɪləɾiz wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ðən əɡɛn, əz ɪf tə meɪk ʌp fəɹ ɪt, səmtaɪmz ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls sim laɪk tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə klaɪm ə klɪf ɪn ə ɹeɪnstɔɹm.

Startled, Egwene backed away. She felt like laughing at herself. Perhaps it was just as well to be reminded that the Wise Ones had long years' more experience at this. There were times she was afraid she might have been spoiled by not having to work harder for her abilities with the One Power. Then again, as if to make up for it, sometimes everything else seemed like trying to climb a cliff in a rainstorm.

əbɹʌpli ʃi kɑt muvmən ət ðə vɛɹi ɛdʒ ə hɝ fild ə vɪʒən. wʌn ə ðoʊz pɔɪns ə laɪt slɪd θɹu ðə si ʌv stɑɹz, dʒɹɪftɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əɹ ʌv ɪts oʊn voʊlɪʃən, ɡɹoʊɪŋ lɑɹdʒɝ. oʊnli wʌn dʒɹim wəd də ðæt, wʌn dʒɹimɝ. ɪn ə pænɪk, ʃi flɛd, wɪʃɪŋ ʃi hæɾ ə θɹoʊt tə skɹim, əɹ kɝs, əɹ dʒʌst ʃaʊt. ɪspɛʃli ət ðə taɪni kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ ðət wɑntəd tə steɪ wɛɹ ʃi wɑz ən weɪt.

Abruptly she caught movement at the very edge of her field of vision. One of those points of light slid through the sea of stars, drifting toward her of its own volition, growing larger. Only one dream would do that, one dreamer. In a panic, she fled, wishing she had a throat to scream, or curse, or just shout. Especially at the tiny corner of her that wanted to stay where she was and wait.

nɑɾ ivən ðə stɑɹz muv ðɪs taɪm. ðeɪ sɪmpli dɪsəpɪɹd, ən ʃi wɑz linɪŋ əɡɛnst ə θɪk ɹɛdstoʊn kɑləm, pæntɪŋ əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd spɹɪntɪɾ ə maɪl, hɑɹt biɾɪŋ fɪt tə bɝst. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃi lʊk daʊn ət hɝsɛlf ən bɪɡæn tə læf ə tʃɹaɪfəl ənstɛɾəli, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kætʃ əɹ bɹɛθ. ʃi hæɾ ɑn ə fʊl-skɝɾɪd ɡaʊn ə ʃɪmɝɪŋ ɡɹin sɪlk, wɝkt ɪn θɹɛd-ʌv-ɡoʊld ɪn waɪd, ɔɹneɪt bænz əkɹɔs ðə bɑɾəs ən əlɔŋ ðə hɛm. ðət bɑɾəs ɔlsoʊ ʃoʊd kənsɪɾɝəbli mɔɹ bʊzəm ðən ʃi ɛvɝ wəd weɪkɪŋ, ən ə bɹɔd sɪntʃt bɛlt ʌv woʊvən ɡoʊl meɪɾ əɹ weɪst sim smɔlɝ ðən ɪt ɹɪli wɑz. ðən əɡɛn, meɪbi ɪt wɑz smɔlɝ. hɪɹ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, jə kəd bi haʊɛvɝ jə wɑntəd, wʌtɛvɝ jə wɑntəd. ivən wən ðə wɑntɪŋ wɑz ʌnkɑnʃəs, ɪf jə wɝ nɑt kɛɹfəl. ɡɔɪn tʃɹəkən hæɾ ənfɔɹtʃənəɾ ɪfɛks ɑn hɝ, vɛɹi ənfɔɹtʃənət.

Not even the stars moved this time. They simply disappeared, and she was leaning against a thick redstone column, panting as though she had sprinted a mile, heart beating fit to burst. After a moment, she looked down at herself and began to laugh a trifle unsteadily, trying to catch her breath. She had on a full-skirted gown of shimmering green silk, worked in thread-of-gold in wide, ornate bands across the bodice and along the hem. That bodice also showed considerably more bosom than she ever would waking, and a broad cinched belt of woven gold made her waist seem smaller than it really was. Then again, maybe it was smaller. Here in Tel'aran'rhiod, you could be however you wanted, whatever you wanted. Even when the wanting was unconscious, if you were not careful. Gawyn Trakand had unfortunate effects on her, very unfortunate.

ðət taɪni pɑɹɾ ə hɝ stɪl wɪʃt ʃi hæd weɪɾəd tə bi oʊvɝteɪkən baɪ hɪz dʒɹim. oʊvɝteɪkən ən əbzɔɹbd baɪ ɪt. ɪf ə dʒɹimwɔkɝ lʌv sʌmbɑɾi tə dɪstʃɹækʃən, əɹ heɪɾəd əm bɪɑn ɹizən, moʊst ɪspɛʃli ɪf ði ɪmoʊʃən wɑz ɹɪtɝnd, ʃi kəd bi pʊld ɪndə ðət pɝsənz dʒɹim; ʃi dʒɹu ðə dʒɹim, əɹ ɪt dʒɹu hɝ, əz ə loʊdstoʊn dʒɹu aɪɝn faɪlɪŋz. ʃi sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt heɪt ɡɔɪn, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə bi tʃɹæpt ɪn ɪz dʒɹim, nɑt tənaɪt, tʃɹæpt əntɪl i wækənd, biɪŋ əz i sɔ hɝ. wɪtʃ wɑz ə ɡʊd dil mɔɹ bjuɾəfəl ðən ʃi tʃɹuli wɑz; ɑdli, hi əpɪɹd lɛs bjuɾəfəl ðən i wɑz ɪn laɪf. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ kwɛstʃən ʌv ə stʃɹɔŋ maɪn əɹ kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən wən lʌv əɹ heɪt ðət stʃɹɔŋ wɑz ɪnvɑlvd. wʌns jə wɝ ɪn ðət dʒɹim, ðəɹ jə ɹɪmeɪn əntɪl ði ʌðɝ pɝsən stɑp dʒɹimɪŋ əbaʊt ju. ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ wʌɾ i dʒɹimd ə duɪŋ wɪð hɝ, wʌt ðeɪ hæd dʌn ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz, ʃi fɛlt ə faɪɝi blʌʃ sʌfjuzɪŋ əɹ feɪs.

That tiny part of her still wished she had waited to be overtaken by his dream. Overtaken and absorbed by it. If a dreamwalker loved somebody to distraction, or hated them beyond reason, most especially if the emotion was returned, she could be pulled into that person's dream; she drew the dream, or it drew her, as a lodestone drew iron filings. She certainly did not hate Gawyn, but she could not afford to be trapped in his dream, not tonight, trapped until he wakened, being as he saw her. Which was a good deal more beautiful than she truly was; oddly, he appeared less beautiful than he was in life. There was no question of a strong mind or concentration when love or hate that strong was involved. Once you were in that dream, there you remained until the other person stopped dreaming about you. Remembering what he dreamed of doing with her, what they had done in his dreams, she felt a fiery blush suffusing her face.

"ə ɡʊd θɪŋ nʌn ə ðə sɪɾɝz kən si mi naʊ," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "ðeɪd nɛvɝ teɪk mi fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ ə ɡɝl, ðɛn." ɡɹoʊn wɪmən dɪd nɑt flʌɾɝ ən mun oʊvɝ ə mæn ðɪs weɪ; ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ə ðæt. nɑt wɪmən wɪð ɛni sɛns, ɛniweɪ. wʌɾ i dʒɹimd ʌv wəd kʌm, bʌɾ əɾ ə taɪm ə hɝ tʃuzɪŋ. əbteɪnɪŋ əɹ mʌðɝz pɝmɪʃən maɪt bi dɪfəkəlt, jɛt ʃʊɹli ʃi wəd nɑt wɪθhoʊld ɪɾ ivən ɪf ʃi hæd nɛvɝ leɪɾ aɪz ɑn ɡɔɪn. mɛɹɪn ælvɪɹ tʃɹʌstɪɾ əɹ dɔɾɝz' dʒʌdʒmənt. naʊ ɪt wɑz taɪm fəɹ əɹ jʌŋɡəs dɔɾɝ tə ʃoʊ ə lɪɾəl ə ðət dʒʌdʒmən ən pʊt ðiz fænsiz əweɪ əntɪl ə bɛɾɝ taɪm.

"A good thing none of the Sitters can see me now," she muttered. "They'd never take me for anything but a girl, then." Grown women did not flutter and moon over a man this way; she was certain of that. Not women with any sense, anyway. What he dreamed of would come, but at a time of her choosing. Obtaining her mother's permission might be difficult, yet surely she would not withhold it even if she had never laid eyes on Gawyn. Marin al'Vere trusted her daughters' judgment. Now it was time for her youngest daughter to show a little of that judgment and put these fancies away until a better time.

lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊnd, ʃi ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt ʃi kəd ɡoʊ ɑn lɛɾɪŋ ɡɔɪn fɪl əɹ θɔts. mɔɹ mæsɪv kɑləmz ɹæn ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, səpɔɹɾɪŋ ə sɔɹɪŋ, vɔltəd silɪŋ ən ə ɡɹeɪt doʊm. nʌn ə ðə ɡɪldɪd læmps hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ɡoʊldən tʃeɪnz oʊvɝhɛd wɝ lɪt, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz laɪɾ ʌv ə sɔɹt, laɪt ðət wɑz dʒʌs ðɛɹ, wɪθaʊt sɔɹs, niðɝ bɹaɪt nɔɹ dɪm. ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn, ɪnsaɪd ðə ɡɹeɪt fɔɹtʃɹəs kɔl ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ. əɹ ɹæðɝ ɪts ɪmədʒ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ən ɪmədʒ əz ɹil əz ði ɝɪdʒənəl ɪn mɛni weɪz. ðɪs wɑz wɛɹ ʃi hæd mɛt ðə waɪz wʌnz bɪfɔɹ, ðɛɹ tʃɔɪs. ə stʃɹeɪnʒ wʌn fəɹ il, ɪt sim tə hɝ. ʃi wʊɾə ɪkspɛktəd ɹɪɾiən, naʊ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz oʊpən, əɹ sʌmwɛɹ ɛls ɪn ði il weɪst, əɹ sɪmpli wɛɹɛvɝ ðə waɪz wʌnz hæpən tə bi. ɛvɹi pleɪs ɪksɛpt oʊɡiɝ stɛɾɪŋ hæɾ ɪts ɹəflɛkʃən ɪn ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz - ivən ðə stɛɾɪŋ dɪd, ɹɪli; bʌt ðeɪ kəd nɑt bi ɛntɝd, dʒʌst əz ɹɪɾiən hæd wʌns bɪn kloʊzd. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kæmp wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃən, ʌv kɔɹs. ə nʌmbɝ ə ðə sɪstɝz naʊ hæɾ æksɛs tə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðəɾ əlaʊɾ əm tə ɛntɝ ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz, ən sɪns nʌn ɹɪli nu wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ, ðeɪ ɔfən bɪɡæn ðɛɹ vɛntʃɝz baɪ əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðə kæmp ə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ əz ðoʊ sɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ɑn ə nɔɹməl dʒɝni.

Looking around, she almost wished she could go on letting Gawyn fill her thoughts. More massive columns ran in every direction, supporting a soaring, vaulted ceiling and a great dome. None of the gilded lamps hanging from golden chains overhead were lit, yet there was light of a sort, light that was just there, without source, neither bright nor dim. The Heart of the Stone, inside the great fortress called the Stone of Tear. Or rather its image in Tel'aran'rhiod, an image as real as the original in many ways. This was where she had met the Wise Ones before, their choice. A strange one for Aiel, it seemed to her. She would have expected Rhuidean, now that it was open, or somewhere else in the Aiel Waste, or simply wherever the Wise Ones happened to be. Every place except Ogier stedding had its reflection in the World of Dreams - even the stedding did, really; but they could not be entered, just as Rhuidean had once been closed. The Aes Sedai camp was out of the question, of course. A number of the sisters now had access to ter'angreal that allowed them to enter the World of Dreams, and since none really knew what they were doing, they often began their ventures by appearing in the camp of Tel'aran'rhiod as though setting out on a normal journey.

laɪk æŋɡɹil ən sɑŋɡɹil, baɪ taʊɝ lɔ tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɝ ðə pɹɑpɝɾi ʌv ðə waɪt taʊɝ, noʊ mæɾɝ u hæpən tə pəzɛs əm fəɹ ðə pɹɛzənt. vɛɹi sɛldəm dɪd ðə taʊɝ ɪnsɪst, ət list wən pəzɛʃən leɪ sʌmwɛɹ laɪk ðə soʊ-kɔld ɡɹeɪt hoʊldɪŋ ɪn ðɪs vɛɹi stoʊn ə tɛɹ - ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðeɪ wəd kʌm tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ɡʊɾ ət weɪɾɪŋ wən ɪt niɾəd tə - bʌt ðoʊz æktʃəli  ɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ hænz wɝ ɪn ðə ɡɪft ə ðə hɔl, ʌv ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl sɪɾɝz. ðə loʊn, ɹɪli; ðeɪ wɝ ɔlmoʊs nɛvɝ ɡɪvən. ɪleɪn hæd lɝn tə dupləkeɪt dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ən ʃi ən nɪneɪiv hæd teɪkən tu wɪð ðɛm, bʌt ðə ɹɛst wɝ ɪn ðə hɔlz pəzɛʃən naʊ, əlɔŋ wɪð ði ʌðɝ sɔɹts ɪleɪn hæd meɪd. wɪtʃ mɛn ðət ʃɛɹiəm ən əɹ lɪɾəl sɝkəl kəd juz əm wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ wɪʃt, ən moʊst əʃʊɹədli ləleɪn ən ɹoʊmændə, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz laɪkli ðoʊz tu sɛn ʌðɝz ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɛntɝɪŋ tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd ðɛmsɛlvz. əntɪl kwaɪt ɹisənli, noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd wɔk ðə dʒɹim ɪn sɛntʃɝiz, ən ðeɪ stɪl hæd kənsɪɾɝəbəl dɪfəkəltiz, moʊst ʌv wɪtʃ stɛm fɹəm ə bɪlif ðət ðeɪ kəd lɝn baɪ ðɛmsɛlvz. ivən soʊ, ðə læs θɪŋ ɛɡwin wɑntəd wɑz ɛni ʌv ðɛɹ fɑloʊɝz spaɪɪŋ ɑn ðɪs miɾɪŋ tənaɪt.

Like angreal and sa'angreal, by Tower law ter'angreal were the property of the White Tower, no matter who happened to possess them for the present. Very seldom did the Tower insist, at least when possession lay somewhere like the so-called Great Holding in this very Stone of Tear - eventually they would come to the Aes Sedai, and the White Tower had always been good at waiting when it needed to - but those actually in Aes Sedai hands were in the gift of the Hall, of individual Sitters. The loan, really; they were almost never given. Elayne had learned to duplicate dream ter'angreal, and she and Nynaeve had taken two with them, but the rest were in the Hall's possession now, along with the other sorts Elayne had made. Which meant that Sheriam and her little circle could use them whenever they wished, and most assuredly Lelaine and Romanda, though it was likely those two sent others instead of entering Tel'aran'rhiod themselves. Until quite recently, no Aes Sedai had walked the dream in centuries, and they still had considerable difficulties, most of which stemmed from a belief that they could learn by themselves. Even so, the last thing Egwene wanted was any of their followers spying on this meeting tonight.

əz ðoʊ ðə θɔɾ ə spaɪz hæd meɪɾ əɹ mɔɹ sɛnsəɾɪv, ʃi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə biɪŋ wɑtʃt baɪ ənsin aɪz. ðət sɛnseɪʃən wɑz ɔlweɪz pɹɛzən ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ən nɑɾ ivən ðə waɪz wʌnz nu waɪ, bʌɾ ɔlðoʊ hɪɾən aɪz ɔlweɪz sim tə bi ðɛɹ, æktʃəwəl wɑtʃɝz maɪt bi pɹɛzən əz wɛl. ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹoʊmændə əɹ ləleɪn ɑn əɹ maɪnd, naʊ.

As though the thought of spies had made her more sensitive, she became aware of being watched by unseen eyes. That sensation was always present in Tel'aran'rhiod, and not even the Wise Ones knew why, but although hidden eyes always seemed to be there, actual watchers might be present as well. It was not Romanda or Lelaine on her mind, now.

tʃɹeɪlɪŋ əɹ hæn əɡɛns ðə kɑləm, ʃi wɔkt ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊn ɪt sloʊli, stʌɾiɪŋ ðə ɹɛdstoʊn fɔɹəst əz ɪt ɹæn əweɪ ɪn dipənɪŋ ʃædoʊz. ðə laɪt sɝaʊndɪŋ əɹ wɑz nɑt ɹil; ɛnibəɾi ɪn wʌn ə ðoʊz ʃædoʊz wəd si ðə seɪm laɪɾ ɝaʊn əm waɪl ʃædoʊz hɪd hɝ. pipəl dɪɾ əpɪɹ, mɛn ən wɪmən, flɪkɝɪŋ ɪmədʒəz ðət ɹɛɹli læstəd mɔɹ ðən ə fju hɑɹtbits. ʃi hæd noʊ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ðoʊz u tʌtʃt ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz ɪn ðɛɹ slip; ɛniwʌn maɪt də ðət baɪ hæpənstæns, bʌt lʌkəli fəɹ ðɛm, oʊnli fəɹ moʊməns, sɛldəm lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə feɪs ɛni ʌv ðə deɪnʒɝz. ðə blæk ədʒɑ pəzɛs dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil, tu, stoʊlən fɹəm ðə taʊɝ. wɝs, mɑɡiɾin nu tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ əz wɛl əz ɛni dʒɹimwɔkɝ. pɝhæps bɛɾɝ. ʃi kəd kəntʃɹoʊl ðɪs pleɪs ən ɛniwʌn ɪn ɪɾ əz izəli əz tɝnɪŋ əɹ hænd.

Trailing her hand against the column, she walked all the way around it slowly, studying the redstone forest as it ran away in deepening shadows. The light surrounding her was not real; anybody in one of those shadows would see the same light around them while shadows hid her. People did appear, men and women, flickering images that rarely lasted more than a few heartbeats. She had no interest in those who touched the World of Dreams in their sleep; anyone might do that by happenstance, but luckily for them, only for moments, seldom long enough to face any of the dangers. The Black Ajah possessed dream ter'angreal, too, stolen from the Tower. Worse, Moghedien knew Tel'aran'rhiod as well as any dreamwalker. Perhaps better. She could control this place and anyone in it as easily as turning her hand.

fəɹ ə moʊmən ɛɡwin wɪʃt ʃi hæd spaɪɾ ɑn mɑɡiɾinz dʒɹimz waɪl ðə wʊmən wɑz pɹɪznɝ, dʒʌst wʌns, dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə bi eɪbəl tə dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃ ðɛm. bʌɾ ivən aɪdɛntəfaɪɪŋ əɹ dʒɹimz wəd nɑt ɹɪvil wɛɹ ʃi wɑz naʊ. ən ðəɹ hæd bɪn ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv biɪŋ dʒɹɔn ɪn əɡɛnst əɹ wɪl. ʃi sɝɾənli dɪspaɪz mɑɡiɾin ɪnʌf, ən ðə fɔɹseɪkən moʊst əʃʊɹədli heɪɾəd əɹ wɪθaʊt baʊnz. wʌt hæpən ɪn ðəɹ wɑz nɑt ɹil, nɑɾ ivən əz ɹil əz ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, bʌt jə ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪɾ əz ɪf ɪt wɑz. ə naɪɾ ɪn mɑɡiɾinz paʊɝ wʊɾə bɪn ə naɪtmɛɹ ʃi laɪkli wʊɾə ɹɛlɪvd ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi wɛn tə slip fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ laɪf. meɪbi əweɪk, tu.

For a moment Egwene wished she had spied on Moghedien's dreams while the woman was prisoner, just once, just enough to be able to distinguish them. But even identifying her dreams would not reveal where she was now. And there had been the possibility of being drawn in against her will. She certainly despised Moghedien enough, and the Forsaken most assuredly hated her without bounds. What happened in there was not real, not even as real as in Tel'aran'rhiod, but you remembered it as if it was. A night in Moghedien's power would have been a nightmare she likely would have relived every time she went to sleep for the rest of her life. Maybe awake, too.

ənʌðɝ sɝkət. wʌt wɑz ðæt? ə dɑɹk, ɹiɡəli bjuɾəfəl wʊmən ɪn pɝl-kʌvɝd kæp ən leɪs-ɹʌft ɡaʊn stʃɹoʊd fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz ən vænɪʃt. eɪ tɛɹən wʊmən dʒɹimɪŋ, ə haɪ leɪɾi əɹ dʒɹimɪŋ hɝsɛlf əz wʌn. ʃi maɪt bi pleɪn ən dʌmpi, ə fɑɹmwaɪf əɹ ə mɝtʃənt, əweɪk.

Another circuit. What was that? A dark, regally beautiful woman in pearl-covered cap and lace-ruffed gown strode from the shadows and vanished. A Tairen woman dreaming, a High Lady or dreaming herself as one. She might be plain and dumpy, a farmwife or a merchant, awake.

bɛɾɝ tə hæv spaɪɾ ɑn lɑɡən ðən mɑɡiɾin. ʃi stɪl wəd nɑt noʊ wɛɹ i wɑz, bʌt ʃi maɪɾ əv səm aɪdiə ʌv ɪz plænz. ʌv kɔɹs, biɪŋ pʊld ɪndə hɪz dʒɹim maɪt nɑɾ əv bɪn mʌtʃ mɔɹ plɛzən ðən biɪŋ dʒɹɔn ɪndə mɑɡiɾinz. hi heɪɾəd ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɝeɪnʒɪŋ ɪz ɪskeɪp hæd bɪn wʌn ə ðoʊz nɛsəsɛɹi θɪŋz; ʃi dʒʌs hoʊp ðə pɹaɪs wəd nɑt bi tu haɪ. fɝɡɛt lɑɡən. mɑɡiɾin wɑz ðə deɪnʒɝ, mɑɡiɾin u maɪt kʌm æftɝ hɝ, ivən hɪɹ, ɪspɛʃli hɪɹ, mɑɡiɾin hu. . . . sʌɾənli ʃi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə haʊ hɛvəli ʃi wɑz muvɪŋ, ən meɪɾ ə vɛkst saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt, vɛɹi nɪɹli ə ɡɹoʊn. ðə bjuɾəfəl ɡaʊn hæd bɪkʌm ə fʊl sɛɾ ə pleɪt-ænd-meɪl ɑɹmɝ laɪk ðəɾ ʌv ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪnz hɛvi kævəlɹi. ən oʊpən-feɪs hɛlmət ɹɛstəɾ ɑn əɹ hɛd, wɪð ə kɹɛst ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ə ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, baɪ ðə fil. ɪt wɑz vɛɹi ɪɹəteɪɾɪŋ. ʃi wɑz bɪɑn ðɪs sɔɹɾ ə læk ə kəntʃɹoʊl.

Better to have spied on Logain than Moghedien. She still would not know where he was, but she might have some idea of his plans. Of course, being pulled into his dream might not have been much more pleasant than being drawn into Moghedien's. He hated all Aes Sedai. Arranging his escape had been one of those necessary things; she just hoped the price would not be too high. Forget Logain. Moghedien was the danger, Moghedien who might come after her, even here, especially here, Moghedien who. . . . Suddenly she became aware of how heavily she was moving, and made a vexed sound in her throat, very nearly a groan. The beautiful gown had become a full set of plate-and-mail armor like that of Gareth Bryne's heavy cavalry. An open-faced helmet rested on her head, with a crest in the shape of the Flame of Tar Valon, by the feel. It was very irritating. She was beyond this sort of lack of control.

fɝmli ʃi tʃeɪnʒd ði ɑɹmɝ tə wʌt ʃi hæd wɔɹn miɾɪŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz bɪfɔɹ. ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə mæɾɝ ə θɔt. fʊl skɝɾ ə dɑɹk wʊl ən lus waɪɾ ælɡoʊd blaʊs, dʒʌst əz ʃi hæd wɔɹn waɪl stʌɾiɪŋ wɪð ðɛm, kəmplit wɪð ə fɹɪnd ʃɔl soʊ ɡɹin ɪt wɑz nɪɹli blæk ən ə foʊldəd hɛd skɑɹf tə hoʊld əɹ hɛɹ bæk. ʃi dɪd nɑt dupləkeɪt ðɛɹ dʒuəlɹi, ʌv kɔɹs, ɔl ðə mʌltətʃjudz ə nɛkləsɪz ən bɹeɪslɪts. ðeɪ wəd læf əɾ əɹ fəɹ ðæt. ə wʊmən bɪlt əɹ kəlɛkʃən oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz, nɑɾ ɪn ðə blɪŋk ʌv ə dʒɹim.

Firmly she changed the armor to what she had worn meeting the Wise Ones before. It was just a matter of thought. Full skirt of dark wool and loose white algode blouse, just as she had worn while studying with them, complete with a fringed shawl so green it was nearly black and a folded head scarf to hold her hair back. She did not duplicate their jewelry, of course, all the multitudes of necklaces and bracelets. They would laugh at her for that. A woman built her collection over the years, not in the blink of a dream.

"lɑɡən ɪz ɑn ɪz weɪ tə ðə blæk taʊɝ," ʃi sɛɾ əlaʊd; ʃi sɝɾənli hoʊpt i wɑz; ət lis ðəɹ wəd bi səm tʃɛk ɑn ɪm ðɛn, əɹ soʊ ʃi hoʊpt, ən ɪf i wɑz kɑɾ ən dʒɛntəld əɡɛn, ɹænd kəd nɑt bleɪm ɛni sɪstɝ fɑloʊɪŋ hɝ, "æn mɑɡiɾin əz noʊ weɪ ʌv noʊɪŋ wɛɹ aɪ æm." ðæt, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk saʊn ə sɝɾənti.

"Logain is on his way to the Black Tower," she said aloud; she certainly hoped he was; at least there would be some check on him then, or so she hoped, and if he was caught and gentled again, Rand could not blame any sister following her, "and Moghedien has no way of knowing where I am." That, she tried to make sound a certainty.

"waɪ ʃəd jə fɪɹ ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld?" æskt ə vɔɪs bɪhaɪn hɝ, ən ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd tə klaɪm ɪndə ði ɛɹ. ðɪs biɪŋ tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ən ʃi ə dʒɹimwɔkɝ, ʃi wɑz mɔɹ ðən əɹ oʊn haɪɾ əbʌv ðə flɔɹstoʊnz bɪfɔɹ ʃi keɪm tə hɝsɛlf. oʊ, jɛs ʃi θɔt, floʊɾɪŋ, aɪm fɑɹ bɪɑn ɔl ðoʊz bɪɡɪnɝz mɪsteɪks. ɪf ðɪs wɛn ɑn, nɛkst ʃi wəd bi dʒʌmpɪŋ wən tʃɛsə ɡeɪv əɹ ɡʊd mɔɹnɪŋ.

"Why should you fear the Shadowsouled?" asked a voice behind her, and Egwene tried to climb into the air. This being Tel'aran'rhiod, and she a dreamwalker, she was more than her own height above the floorstones before she came to herself. Oh, yes she thought, floating, I'm far beyond all those beginner's mistakes. If this went on, next she would be jumping when Chesa gave her good morning.

hoʊpɪŋ ʃi wɑz nɑt blʌʃɪŋ tu bædli, ʃi lɛt hɝsɛlf sɛɾəl sloʊli; pɝhæps ʃi kəd ɹɪteɪn ə lɪɾəl dɪɡnəɾi.

Hoping she was not blushing too badly, she let herself settle slowly; perhaps she could retain a little dignity.

pɝhæps, jɛt bɛɹz eɪdʒ feɪs hæd mɔɹ kɹisɪz ðən juʒəwəl fɹəm ə ɡɹɪn ðət sim nɪɹli tə tʌtʃ əɹ ɪɹz. ənlaɪk ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən wɪð hɝ, ʃi kəd nɑt tʃænəl, bʌt ðət hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð dʒɹimwɔkɪŋ. ʃi wɑz əz skɪld əz iðɝ, mɔɹ ɪn səm ɛɹiəz. æmɪz wɑz smaɪlɪŋ tu, ɪf nɑt soʊ bɹɔdli, bʌt sʌn-hɛɹd məleɪn θɹu bæk əɹ hɛɾ ən ɹɔɹd.

Perhaps, yet Bair's aged face had more creases than usual from a grin that seemed nearly to touch her ears. Unlike the other two women with her, she could not channel, but that had nothing to do with dreamwalking. She was as skilled as either, more in some areas. Amys was smiling too, if not so broadly, but sun-haired Melaine threw back her head and roared.

"aɪ hæv nɛvɝ sin ɛniwʌn . . ." məleɪn dʒʌs mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ aʊt. "laɪk ə ɹæbət." ʃi ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl hɑp ən lɪftəɾ ə fʊl peɪs ɪndə ði ɛɹ.

"I have never seen anyone . . ." Melaine just managed to get out. "Like a rabbit." She gave a little hop and lifted a full pace into the air.

"aɪ ɹisənli kɑz mɑɡiɾin səm hɝt." ɛɡwin wɑz kwaɪt pɹaʊɾ ə hɝ pɔɪz. ʃi laɪk məleɪn - ðə wʊmən wɑz mʌtʃ lɛs θɔɹni sɪns ʃi wɑz wɪð tʃaɪld; wɪð twɪnz, æktʃəli  - bʌɾ ət ðə moʊmənt cʊɾə əv stʃɹæŋɡəld əɹ tʃɪɹfəli. "sʌm fɹɛnz ən aɪ dæmədʒd əɹ pɹaɪd, ɪf nɑt mʌtʃ mɔɹ. aɪ θɪŋk ʃi wəd laɪk ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə ɹipeɪ mi." ɑn ɪmpəls, ʃi tʃeɪnʒd əɹ kloʊðz wʌns mɔɹ, tə ðə sɔɹɾ ə ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs ʃi wɔɹ ɛvɹi deɪ naʊ, ɪn lʌstʃɹəs ɡɹin sɪlk. ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɪnsɝkəld əɹ fɪŋɡɝ wɪð ɡoʊld. ʃi kəd nɑt tɛl əm ɛvɹiθɪŋ, bʌt ðiz wɪmən wɝ fɹɛnz tu, ən ðeɪ dɪzɝv tə noʊ wʌt ʃi kəd tɛl.

"I recently caused Moghedien some hurt." Egwene was quite proud of her poise. She liked Melaine - the woman was much less thorny since she was with child; with twins, actually - but at the moment Egwene could have strangled her cheerfully. "Some friends and I damaged her pride, if not much more. I think she would like the opportunity to repay me." On impulse, she changed her clothes once more, to the sort of riding dress she wore every day now, in lustrous green silk. The Great Serpent encircled her finger with gold. She could not tell them everything, but these women were friends too, and they deserved to know what she could tell.

"wunz tə ðə pɹaɪɾ ɑɹ ɹɪmɛmbɝd lɔŋ æftɝ wunz tə ðə flɛʃ." bɛɹz vɔɪs wɑz θɪn ən haɪ, jɛt stʃɹɔŋ, ə ɹiɾ ʌv aɪɝn.

"Wounds to the pride are remembered long after wounds to the flesh." Bair's voice was thin and high, yet strong, a reed of iron.

"tɛl əs əbaʊɾ ɪt," məleɪn sɛd, wɪð ən iɡɝ smaɪl. "haʊ dɪd jə ʃeɪm hɝ?" bɛɹz wɑz dʒʌst əz ɪnθuziæstɪk. ɪn ə kɹuəl lænd, jə iðɝ lɝn tə læf ət kɹulti əɹ spɛn jəɹ laɪf wipɪŋ; ɪn ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd, ði il hæd lɝn tə læf lɔŋ sɪns. bɪsaɪdz, ʃeɪmɪŋ ən ɛnəmi wɑz kənsɪɾɝd ən ɑɹt.

"Tell us about it," Melaine said, with an eager smile. "How did you shame her?" Bair's was just as enthusiastic. In a cruel land, you either learned to laugh at cruelty or spent your life weeping; in the Three-fold Land, the Aiel had learned to laugh long since. Besides, shaming an enemy was considered an art.

æmɪz stʌɾid ɛɡwinz nu kloʊðz fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən sɛd, "ðæt kən kʌm leɪɾɝ, aɪ θɪŋk. wəɹ tə tɔk, jə sɛd." ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd tə wɛɹ ðə waɪz wʌnz laɪk tə tɔk, aʊt bɪniθ ðə væs doʊm ət ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə tʃeɪmbɝ.

Amys studied Egwene's new clothes for a moment, then said, "That can come later, I think. We are to talk, you said." She gestured to where the Wise Ones liked to talk, out beneath the vast dome at the heart of the chamber.

waɪ ðeɪ tʃoʊz ðət spɑt wɑz ənʌðɝ mɪstɝi ɛɡwin kəd nɑt pʌzəl aʊt. ðə θɹi wɪmən sɛɾəld ðɛmsɛlvz kɹɔs-lɛɡəd, spɹɛɾɪŋ ðɛɹ skɝts nitli, oʊnli ə fju peɪsɪz fɹəm wʌt sim tə bi ə sɔɹd meɪɾ ʌv ɡlimɪŋ kɹɪstəl, ɹaɪzɪŋ hɪlt-fɝs fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt hæd bɪn dʒɹɪvən ɪndə ðə flɔɹ-stoʊnz. ðeɪ peɪɾ ɪt noʊ maɪnd wʌtsoʊɛvɝ - ɪt wɑz noʊ pɑɹɾ ə ðɛɹ pɹɑfəsiz - ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ dɪd ðə pipəl u flæʃt ɪndə ɛɡzɪstəns ɝaʊn ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃeɪmbɝ, bʌt hɪɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz wɛɹ ðeɪ keɪm.

Why they chose that spot was another mystery Egwene could not puzzle out. The three women settled themselves cross-legged, spreading their skirts neatly, only a few paces from what seemed to be a sword made of gleaming crystal, rising hilt-first from where it had been driven into the floor-stones. They paid it no mind whatsoever - it was no part of their prophecies - any more than they did the people who flashed into existence around the great chamber, but here was always where they came.

feɪbəl kælændɝ wəɾ ɪndid fʌŋkʃən əz ə sɔɹd dɪspaɪɾ ɪts əpɪɹəns, bʌɾ ɪn tʃɹuθ ɪt wɑz ə meɪl sɑŋɡɹil, wʌn ə ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ɛvɝ meɪɾ ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ʃi fɛlt ə lɪɾəl ʃɪvɝ, θɪŋkɪŋ ə meɪl sɑŋɡɹil. ɪt hæd bɪn dɪfɹənt wən ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ɹænd. ən ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ʌv kɔɹs. bʌt naʊ ðəɹ wɝ ðiz æʃəmən. wɪð kælændɝ, ə mæn kəd dʒɹɔ ɪnʌf ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə lɛvəl ə sɪɾi ɪn ə hɑɹtbiɾ ən dɛvəsteɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ fəɹ maɪlz. ʃi wɔkt waɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪt, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ skɝts əsaɪd ɹiflɛksɪvli. fɹəm ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn ɹænd hæd dʒɹɔn kælændɝ ɪn fʊlfɪlmən ə ðə pɹɑfəsiz, ðən ɹɪtɝn ɪt fəɹ ɪz oʊn ɹizənz. ɹɪtɝn ɪt, ən snɛɹɾ ɪt ɹaʊnd wɪð tʃɹæps woʊvən ɪn seɪɾɪn. ðeɪ wəɾ əv ðɛɹ ɹəflɛkʃən, tu, wʌn ðət maɪt tʃɹɪɡɝ əz dɪsaɪsɪvli əz ði ɝɪdʒənəl ʃəd ðə ɹɔŋ wivz bi tʃɹaɪd nɪɹbaɪ. səm θɪŋz ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd wɝ ɔl tu ɹil.

Fabled Callandor would indeed function as a sword despite its appearance, but in truth it was a male sa'angreal, one of the most powerful ever made in the Age of Legends. She felt a little shiver, thinking of male sa'angreal. It had been different when there was only Rand. And the Forsaken, of course. But now there were these Asha'man. With Callandor, a man could draw enough of the One Power to level a city in a heartbeat and devastate everything for miles. She walked wide around it, holding her skirts aside reflexively. From the Heart of the Stone Rand had drawn Callandor in fulfillment of the Prophecies, then returned it for his own reasons. Returned it, and snared it round with traps woven in saidin. They would have their reflection, too, one that might trigger as decisively as the original should the wrong weaves be tried nearby. Some things in Tel'aran'rhiod were all too real.

tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə θɪŋk ə ðə sɔɹd ðəɾ ɪz nɑɾ ə sɔɹd, ɛɡwin pleɪs hɝsɛlf bɪfɔɹ ðə θɹi waɪz wʌnz. fæsənɪŋ ðɛɹ ʃɔlz ɝaʊn ðɛɹ weɪsts, ðeɪ ənleɪs ðɛɹ blaʊsəz. ðət wɑz haʊ il wɪmən sæt wɪð fɹɛnz, ɪn ðɛɹ tɛns bɪniθ ə hɑt sʌn. ʃi dɪd nɑt sɪt, ən ɪf ðət meɪɾ əɹ sim ə sʌpləkən əɹ ɑn tʃɹaɪəl, soʊ bi ɪt. ɪn ə weɪ, ɪn əɹ hɑɹt, ʃi wɑz. "aɪv nɑt toʊl jə waɪ aɪ wɑz sʌmən əweɪ fɹəm ju, ən juv nɑɾ æskt."

Trying not to think of the Sword That Is Not a Sword, Egwene placed herself before the three Wise Ones. Fastening their shawls around their waists, they unlaced their blouses. That was how Aiel women sat with friends, in their tents beneath a hot sun. She did not sit, and if that made her seem a supplicant or on trial, so be it. In a way, in her heart, she was. "I've not told you why I was summoned away from you, and you have not asked."

"ju wɪl tɛl əs wən jə ɑɹ ɹɛɾi," æmɪz sɛd kəmpleɪsənli. ʃi lʊkt ʌv ən eɪdʒ wɪð məleɪn dɪspaɪt hɛɹ waɪɾ əz bɛɹz tʌmbəlɪŋ tə hɝ weɪst - hɝ hɛɹ hæd bɪɡʌn tɝnɪŋ wən ʃi wɑz lɪɾəl oʊldɝ ðən ɛɡwin - bʌt ʃi wɑz ðə liɾɝ əmʌŋ ðə θɹi, nɑt bɛɹ. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, ɛɡwin wʌndɝd dʒʌs haʊ oʊld ʃi wɑz. nɑɾ ə kwɛstʃən jə æskt ə waɪz wʌn, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ.

"You will tell us when you are ready," Amys said complacently. She looked of an age with Melaine despite hair white as Bair's tumbling to her waist - her hair had begun turning when she was little older than Egwene - but she was the leader among the three, not Bair. For the first time, Egwene wondered just how old she was. Not a question you asked a Wise One, any more than an Aes Sedai.

"wɛn aɪ lɛf ju, aɪ wɑz wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd. jə noʊ əbaʊt ðə dɪvɪʒən ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ." bɛɹ ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ən ɡɹɪməst; ʃi nu, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. nʌn ə ðɛm dɪd. tə il, ɪt wɑz əz ənɹil əz klæn əɹ wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾi dɪvaɪɾɪŋ əɡɛnst ɪtsɛlf. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ɔlsoʊ æfɝmeɪʃən ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ lɛs ðən ðeɪ ʃəd bi. ɛɡwin wɛn ɑn, sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ əɹ vɔɪs wɑz kəlɛktəd, stɛɾi. "ðə sɪstɝz u əpoʊz ɪleɪɾə hæv ɹeɪz mi əz ðɛɹ æmɪɝlɪn. wən ɪleɪɾə ɪz pʊl daʊn, əl sɪɾ ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ." ʃi æɾəd ðə stʃɹaɪp stoʊl tə hɝ kloʊðz ən weɪɾəd. wʌns ʃi hæd laɪd tə ðɛm, ə sɪɹiəs tʃɹænzɡɹɛʃən ʌndɝ dʒiɾoʊ, ən ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ ðeɪ wəd ɹiæk tə lɝnɪŋ ðɪs tʃɹuθ ʃi hæd hɪɾən. ɪf oʊnli ðeɪ bɪlivd, ət list. ðeɪ mɪɹli lʊkt ət hɝ.

"When I left you, I was one of the Accepted. You know about the division in the White Tower." Bair shook her head and grimaced; she knew, but she did not understand. None of them did. To Aiel, it was as unreal as clan or warrior society dividing against itself. Perhaps it was also affirmation in their eyes that Aes Sedai were less than they should be. Egwene went on, surprised that her voice was collected, steady. "The sisters who oppose Elaida have raised me as their Amyrlin. When Elaida is pulled down, I will sit on the Amyrlin Seat, in the White Tower." She added the striped stole to her clothes and waited. Once she had lied to them, a serious transgression under ji'e'toh, and she was not sure how they would react to learning this truth she had hidden. If only they believed, at least. They merely looked at her.

"ðɛɹ ɪz ə θɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən du," məleɪn sɛd kɛɹfəli æftɝ ə taɪm. hɝ pɹɛɡnənsi dɪd nɑt ʃoʊ jɛt, bʌɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ʃi hæd ði ɪnɝ ɹeɪdʒjəns, meɪkɪŋ əɹ ivən mɔɹ bjuɾəfəl ðən juʒəwəl, ən ən ɪnwɝd, ənʃeɪkəbəl kɑm. "tʃɪlʒɹən ɔl wɑnə pʊʃ spɪɹz, ən ðeɪ ɔl wɑnə bi ðə klæn tʃif, bʌɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðeɪ ɹilaɪz ðət ðə klæn tʃif sɛldəm dænsəz ðə spɪɹz hɪmsɛlf. soʊ ðeɪ meɪk ə fɪɡjɝ ən sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑn ə ɹaɪz." ɔf tə wʌn saɪd ðə flɔɹ sʌɾənli maʊndɪɾ ʌp, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ stoʊn taɪlz bʌɾ ə ɹɪdʒ ə sʌn-beɪk bɹaʊn ɹɑk. ətɑp ɪt stʊɾ ə ʃeɪp veɪɡli laɪk ə mæn, meɪɾ ə twɪstəd twɪɡz ən bɪts ə klɔθ. "ðɪs ɪz ðə klæn tʃif u kəmænz əm tə dæns ðə spɪɹz fɹəm ðə hɪl wɛɹ i kən si ðə bæɾəl. bʌt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɹʌn wɛɹ ðeɪ wɪl, ən ðɛɹ klæn tʃif ɪz oʊnli ə fɪɡjɝ ə stɪks ən ɹæɡz." ə wɪnd wɪp ðə klɔθ stʃɹɪps, ɛmfəsaɪzɪŋ ðə hɑloʊnəs ə ðə ʃeɪp, ən ðən ɹɪdʒ ən fɪɡjɝ wɝ ɡɔn.

"There is a thing children do," Melaine said carefully after a time. Her pregnancy did not show yet, but already she had the inner radiance, making her even more beautiful than usual, and an inward, unshakable calm. "Children all want to push spears, and they all want to be the clan chief, but eventually they realize that the clan chief seldom dances the spears himself. So they make a figure and set it on a rise." Off to one side the floor suddenly mounded up, no longer stone tiles but a ridge of sun-baked brown rock. Atop it stood a shape vaguely like a man, made of twisted twigs and bits of cloth. "This is the clan chief who commands them to dance the spears from the hill where he can see the battle. But the children run where they will, and their clan chief is only a figure of sticks and rags." A wind whipped the cloth strips, emphasizing the hollowness of the shape, and then ridge and figure were gone.

ɛɡwin dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. ʌv kɔɹs. ʃi hæɾ ətoʊn fəɹ əɹ laɪ əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə dʒiɾoʊ, baɪ hɝ oʊn tʃɔɪs, ən ðət mɛn ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ðə laɪ hæd nɛvɝ bɪn spoʊkən. ʃi ʃʊɾə noʊn bɛɾɝ. bʌt ðeɪ hæd stʃɹʌk tə ðə hɑɹɾ ə hɝ sɪtʃueɪʃən əz ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd bɪn wiks ɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kæmp. bɛɹ stʌɾid ðə flɔɹ, nɑt wɑntɪŋ tə wɪtnəs əɹ ʃeɪm. æmɪz sæt wɪð tʃɪn ɪn hænd, ʃɑɹp blu ɡeɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪɡ tə hɝ hɑɹt.

Egwene drew a deep breath. Of course. She had atoned for her lie according to ji'e'toh, by her own choice, and that meant it was as if the lie had never been spoken. She should have known better. But they had struck to the heart of her situation as though they had been weeks in the Aes Sedai camp. Bair studied the floor, not wanting to witness her shame. Amys sat with chin in hand, sharp blue gaze trying to dig to her heart.

"sʌm si mi soʊ." ənʌðɝ dip bɹɛθ, ən ʃi pʊʃt ðə tʃɹuθ aʊt. "ɔl bʌɾ ə hændfʊl du. naʊ. baɪ ðə taɪm wi fɪnɪʃ əɹ bæɾəl, ðəl noʊ aɪm ðɛɹ tʃif, ən ðəl ɹʌn əz aɪ seɪ."

"Some see me so." Another deep breath, and she pushed the truth out. "All but a handful do. Now. By the time we finish our battle, they will know I am their chief, and they will run as I say."

"ɹɪtɝn tə ʌs," bɛɹ sɛd. "ju hæv tu mʌtʃ ɑnɝ fəɹ ðiz wɪmən. sɔɹɪliə ɔlɹɛɾi hæz ə dʌzən jʌŋ mɛn pɪkt aʊt fəɹ jə tə vju ɪn ðə swɛt tɛns. ʃiz ə ɡɹeɪt dɪzaɪɝ tə si jə meɪk ə bɹaɪɾəl ɹiθ."

"Return to us," Bair said. "You have too much honor for these women. Sorilea already has a dozen young men picked out for you to view in the sweat tents. She has a great desire to see you make a bridal wreath."

"aɪ hoʊp ʃɪl bi ðəɹ wən aɪ wɛd, bɛɹ" - tə ɡɔɪn, ʃi hoʊpt; ðət ʃi wəd bɑn hɪm, ʃi nu fɹəm ɪntɝpɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ dʒɹimz, bʌɾ oʊnli hoʊp ən ðə sɝɾənti ʌv lʌv sɛd ðeɪ wəd wɛd - "aɪ hoʊp ɔl ə jə wɪl, bʌɾ aɪv meɪd maɪ tʃɔɪs."

"I hope she will be there when I wed, Bair" - to Gawyn, she hoped; that she would bond him, she knew from interpreting her dreams, but only hope and the certainty of love said they would wed - "I hope all of you will, but I've made my choice."

bɛɹ wʊɾə ɑɹɡjud fɝðɝ, ən məleɪn tu, bʌɾ æmɪz ɹeɪzd ə hænd, ən ðeɪ fɛl saɪlənt, ɪf nɑt plizd. "ðɛɹ ɪz mʌtʃ dʒi ɪn əɹ dɪsɪʒən. ʃɪl bɛn əɹ ɛnəmiz tə hɝ wɪl, nɑt ɹʌn fɹəm ðɛm. aɪ wɪʃ jə wɛl ɪn jəɹ dæns, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ." ʃi hæd bɪn ə meɪɾən ə ðə spɪɹ, ən ɔfən θɔɾ əz wʌn stɪl. "sɪt. sɪt."

Bair would have argued further, and Melaine too, but Amys raised a hand, and they fell silent, if not pleased. "There is much ji in her decision. She will bend her enemies to her will, not run from them. I wish you well in your dance, Egwene al'Vere." She had been a Maiden of the Spear, and often thought as one still. "Sit. Sit."

"hɝ ɑnɝ ɪz əɹ oʊn," bɛɹ sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ əɾ æmɪz, "bʌɾ aɪ hæv ənʌðɝ kwɛstʃən." hɝ aɪz wɝ ən ɔlmoʊst wɔɾɝi blu, jɛt wən ðeɪ tɝn ɑn ɛɡwin, ðeɪ wɝ ʃɑɹp əz ɛvɝ æmɪz' hæd bɪn. "wɪl jə bɹɪŋ ðiz ɛɛs sədaɪ tə nil tə ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn?"

"Her honor is her own," Bair said, frowning at Amys, "but I have another question." Her eyes were an almost watery blue, yet when they turned on Egwene, they were sharp as ever Amys' had been. "Will you bring these Aes Sedai to kneel to the Car'a'carn?"

stɑɹɾəld, ɛɡwin nɪɹli fɛl ðə læs fʊt tə ðə flɔɹstoʊnz ɹæðɝ ðən sɪɾɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hɛzəteɪʃən ɪn əɹ ænsɝ, ðoʊ. "aɪ kæn də ðæt, bɛɹ. ən wəd nɑɾ ɪf aɪ kʊd. əɹ lɔɪəlti ɪz tə ðə taʊɝ, tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əz ə hoʊl, əbʌv ivən ðə lænz wi wɝ bɔɹn ɪn." ðət wɑz tʃɹu, əɹ wɑz səpoʊz tə bi, ðoʊ ʃi wʌndɝd haʊ ðə kleɪm skwɛɹɾ ɪn ðɛɹ maɪnz wɪð əɹ ən ði ʌðɝz' ɹɪbɛljən. "ɛɛs sədaɪ doʊn ivən swɛɹ fiəlti tə ði æmɪɝlɪn, ən sɝɾənli nɑt tə ɛni mæn. ðət wəd bi laɪk wʌn ə jə nilɪŋ tə ə klæn tʃif." ʃi meɪɾ ən ɪləstʃɹeɪʃən ðə weɪ məleɪn hæd, baɪ kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪts ɹiæləɾi; tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd wɑz ɪnfənətli mæliəbəl ɪf jə nu haʊ. bɪɑn kælændɝ θɹi waɪz wʌnz dʒɹɑp tə ðɛɹ niz bɪfɔɹ ə klæn tʃif. ðə mæn stʃɹɔŋli ɹɪzɛmbəld ɹəɑɹk, ðə wɪmən ðə θɹi ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. ʃi oʊnli hɛld ɪt fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, bʌt bɛɹ ɡlænst əɾ ɪɾ ən snɪf laʊdli. ðə noʊʃən wɑz pɹɪpɑstɝəs.

Startled, Egwene nearly fell the last foot to the floorstones rather than sitting. There was no hesitation in her answer, though. "I can't do that, Bair. And would not if I could. Our loyalty is to the Tower, to the Aes Sedai as a whole, above even the lands we were born in." That was true, or was supposed to be, though she wondered how the claim squared in their minds with her and the others' rebellion. "Aes Sedai don't even swear fealty to the Amyrlin, and certainly not to any man. That would be like one of you kneeling to a clan chief." She made an illustration the way Melaine had, by concentrating on its reality; Tel'aran'rhiod was infinitely malleable if you knew how. Beyond Callandor three Wise Ones dropped to their knees before a clan chief. The man strongly resembled Rhuarc, the women the three in front of her. She only held it for an instant, but Bair glanced at it and sniffed loudly. The notion was preposterous.

"du nɑt kəmpɛɹ ðoʊz wɪmən tə ʌs." məleɪnz ɡɹin aɪz spɑɹkəld wɪð sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi laɪk ðɛɹ oʊld ʃɑɹpnəs; hɝ toʊn wɑz hoʊn laɪk ə ɹeɪzɝ.

"Do not compare those women to us." Melaine's green eyes sparkled with something very like their old sharpness; her tone was honed like a razor.

ɛɡwin hɛld əɹ tʌŋ. ðə waɪz wʌnz sim tə dɪspaɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɔl ɪksɛp hɝ, əɹ pɝhæps bɛɾɝ tə seɪ ðeɪ wɝ kəntɛmptʃuəs. ʃi θɔt ðeɪ maɪɾ æktʃəli  ɹɪzɛn ðə pɹɑfəsiz ðət lɪŋkt əm tə ɛɛs sədaɪ. bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd bɪn sʌmən baɪ ðə hɔl tə bi ɹeɪzd æmɪɝlɪn, ʃɛɹiəm ən əɹ sɝkəl ə fɹɛnz hæd mɛt hɪɹ ɹɛɡjəlɝli wɪð ðiz θɹi, bʌt ðət hæɾ ɛndəɾ əz mʌtʃ kəz ðə waɪz wʌnz ɹəfjuz tə haɪd ðɛɹ kəntɛmpt əz kəz ɛɡwin faɪnəli hæd bɪn kɔld. ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ə kɑnfɹənteɪʃən wɪð sʌmwʌn mɔɹ fəmɪljɝ wɪð ðə pleɪs kəd bi mɔɹɾəfaɪɪŋ ɪn ði ɪkstʃɹim. ivən wɪð ɛɡwin, ðəɹ wɑz ə dɪstəns naʊ, ən sɝɾən mæɾɝz ðeɪ wəd nɑt dɪskʌs, sətʃ əz wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ nu ʌv ɹændz plænz. bɪfɔɹ, ʃi hæd bɪn wʌn wɪð ðɛm, ə stuɾənt ɪn dʒɹim-wɔkɪŋ; æftɝ, ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ivən bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ lɝnd wʌt ʃi hæd dʒʌs toʊl ðɛm.

Egwene held her tongue. The Wise Ones seemed to despise Aes Sedai, all except her, or perhaps better to say they were contemptuous. She thought they might actually resent the prophecies that linked them to Aes Sedai. Before she had been summoned by the Hall to be raised Amyrlin, Sheriam and her circle of friends had met here regularly with these three, but that had ended as much because the Wise Ones refused to hide their contempt as because Egwene finally had been called. In Tel'aran'rhiod, a confrontation with someone more familiar with the place could be mortifying in the extreme. Even with Egwene, there was a distance now, and certain matters they would not discuss, such as whatever they knew of Rand's plans. Before, she had been one with them, a student in dream-walking; after, she was Aes Sedai, even before they learned what she had just told them.

"ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ wɪl də əz ʃi mʌst," æmɪz sɛd. məleɪn ɡeɪv əɹ ə lɔŋ lʊk ən ɹiɝeɪnʒd əɹ ʃɔl ɑstənteɪʃəsli, ʃɪftəd sɛvɹəl lɔŋ nɛkləsɪz ɪn ə klæɾɝ ʌv aɪvɝi ən ɡoʊld, bʌt sɛd nʌθɪŋ. æmɪz simd ivən mɔɹ ðə liɾɝ ðən ʃi hæd bɪn. ði oʊnli waɪz wʌn ɛɡwin hæɾ ɛvɝ sin meɪk ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz dɪfɝ tə hɝ soʊ izəli wɑz sɔɹɪliə.

"Egwene al'Vere will do as she must," Amys said. Melaine gave her a long look and rearranged her shawl ostentatiously, shifted several long necklaces in a clatter of ivory and gold, but said nothing. Amys seemed even more the leader than she had been. The only Wise One Egwene had ever seen make other Wise Ones defer to her so easily was Sorilea.

bɛɹ hæɾ ɪmædʒən ti bɪfɔɹ hɝ, əz ɪt maɪt bi ɪn ðə tɛns, ə ɡoʊldən tipɑt wɝkt wɪð laɪənz fɹəm wʌn kʌntʃɹi, ə sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ ɛdʒd ɪn ɹoʊpwɝk fɹəm ənʌðɝ, taɪni ɡɹin kʌps ə dɛləkət si foʊk pɔɹsələn. ðə ti teɪstəd ɹil, ʌv kɔɹs, fɛlt ɹil ɡoʊɪŋ daʊn. dɪspaɪɾ ə hɪn ə səm swit bɛɹi əɹ ɝb ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz, ɪt wɑz tu bɪɾɝ fəɹ ɛɡwinz tʌŋ. ʃi ɪmædʒən ə lɪɾəl hʌni ɪn ɪɾ ən tʊk ənʌðɝ sɪp. tu swit. ə tʌtʃ lɛs hʌni. naʊ ɪt teɪstəd ɹaɪt. ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ jə kəd nɑt də wɪð ðə paʊɝ. ɛɡwin daʊɾɪd ðəɾ ɛniwʌn hæd ðə skɪl tə wiv θɹɛdz ə seɪaɪdɑɹ faɪn ɪnʌf tə ɹimuv hʌni fɹəm ti.

Bair had imagined tea before her, as it might be in the tents, a golden teapot worked with lions from one country, a silver tray edged in ropework from another, tiny green cups of delicate Sea Folk porcelain. The tea tasted real, of course, felt real going down. Despite a hint of some sweet berry or herb she did not recognize, it was too bitter for Egwene's tongue. She imagined a little honey in it and took another sip. Too sweet. A touch less honey. Now it tasted right. That was something you could not do with the Power. Egwene doubted that anyone had the skill to weave threads of saidar fine enough to remove honey from tea.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi sæt piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɝ tikʌp, θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt hʌni ən ti ən faɪn θɹɛdz ə seɪaɪdɑɹ, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt wʌt hɛld əɹ saɪlənt. ðə waɪz wʌnz wɑntəd tə ɡaɪd ɹænd noʊ lɛs ðən ɪleɪɾə əɹ ɹoʊmændə əɹ ləleɪn, əɹ vɛɹi laɪkli ɛni ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʌv kɔɹs, ðeɪ oʊnli wɑntəd tə dɝɛk ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn ɪn ə weɪ ðət wɑz bɛs fəɹ ði il, jɛt ðoʊz sɪstɝz wɑntəd tə dɝɛk ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn təwɔɹd wʌt wɑz bɛs fəɹ ðə wɝld, əz ðeɪ sɔ ɪt. ʃi dɪd nɑt spɛɹ hɝsɛlf. hɛlpɪŋ ɹænd, kipɪŋ ɪm fɹəm pʊɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf əɾ ɑdz wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪɑn ɹəkʌvɝi, ðoʊz mɛnt ɡaɪɾɪŋ hɪm, tu. oʊnli, aɪm ɹaɪt, ʃi ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf. wʌtɛvɝ aɪ də ɪz əz mʌtʃ fəɹ ɪz oʊn ɡʊɾ əz fəɹ ɛnibəɾi ɛlsəz. nʌn ə ði ʌðɝz ɛvɝ θɪŋk əbaʊt wʌts ɹaɪt fəɹ hɪm. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɛs tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət ðiz wɪmən wɝ mɔɹ ðən sɪmpli hɝ fɹɛnz ən fɑloʊɝz ə ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn. noʊ wʌn wɑz ɛvɝ sɪmpli ɛniθɪŋ, ʃi wɑz lɝnɪŋ.

For a moment she sat peering into her teacup, thinking about honey and tea and fine threads of saidar, but that was not what held her silent. The Wise Ones wanted to guide Rand no less than Elaida or Romanda or Lelaine, or very likely any other Aes Sedai. Of course, they only wanted to direct the Car'a'carn in a way that was best for the Aiel, yet those sisters wanted to direct the Dragon Reborn toward what was best for the world, as they saw it. She did not spare herself. Helping Rand, keeping him from putting himself at odds with Aes Sedai beyond recovery, those meant guiding him, too. Only, I'm right, she reminded herself. Whatever I do is as much for his own good as for anybody else's. None of the others ever think about what's right for him. But it was best to remember that these women were more than simply her friends and followers of the Car'a'carn. No one was ever simply anything, she was learning.

"aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk jə wɪʃt oʊnli tə tɛl əs jə ɑɹ naʊ ə wʊmən tʃif əmʌŋ ðə wɛtləndɝz," æmɪz sɛɾ oʊvɝ əɹ tikʌp. "wʌt tʃɹʌbəlz jəɹ maɪnd, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ?"

"I do not think you wished only to tell us you are now a woman chief among the wetlanders," Amys said over her teacup. "What troubles your mind, Egwene al'Vere?"

"wʌt tʃɹʌbəlz mi ɪz wʌɾ ɔlweɪz dʌz." ʃi smaɪl tə laɪɾən ðə mud. "səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk ɹænd ɪz gɑnə ɡɪmi ɡɹeɪ hɛɹz bɪfɔɹ maɪ taɪm."

"What troubles me is what always does." She smiled to lighten the mood. "Sometimes I think Rand is going to give me gray hairs before my time."

"wɪθaʊt mɛn, noʊ wʊmən wəɾ əv ɡɹeɪ hɛɹz." nɔɹməli, ðət wʊɾə bɪn ə dʒoʊk ɑn məleɪnz tʌŋ, ən bɛɹ wʊɾə meɪɾ ənʌðɝ oʊvɝ ðə væs nɑlədʒ ə mɛn məleɪn hæd ɡeɪn ɪn dʒʌst ə fju mʌnθs ə mɛɹɪdʒ, bʌt nɑt ðɪs taɪm. ɔl θɹi wɪmən sɪmpli wɑtʃt ɛɡwin ən weɪɾəd.

"Without men, no woman would have gray hairs." Normally, that would have been a joke on Melaine's tongue, and Bair would have made another over the vast knowledge of men Melaine had gained in just a few months of marriage, but not this time. All three women simply watched Egwene and waited.

soʊ. ðeɪ wɪʃt tə bi sɪɹiəs. wɛl, ɹænd wɑz sɪɹiəs bɪznəs. ʃi dʒʌst wɪʃt ʃi kəd bi ʃʊɹ ðeɪ sɔ ɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl ðə weɪ ʃi dɪd. bælənsɪŋ əɹ kʌp ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝtɪps, ʃi toʊld əm ɛvɹiθɪŋ. əbaʊt ɹænd, ɛniweɪ, ən əɹ fɪɹz sɪns lɝnɪŋ ə ðə saɪləns fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt hiz dʌn - əɹ wʌt ʃi hæz; ɛvɹibɑɾi tɛlz mi haʊ ɪkspɪɹiəns mɛɹænə ɪz, bʌt ʃiz hæd nʌn wɪð ðə laɪks ə hɪm. wən ɪt kʌmz tə ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪf jə hɪd ðɪs kʌp ɪn ə mɛdoʊ, hid stɪl mænədʒ tə stɛp ɑn ɪɾ ɪnsaɪd θɹi peɪsɪz. aɪ noʊ aɪ kəd də bɛɾɝ ðən mɛɹænə, bʌt. . . ."

So. They wished to be serious. Well, Rand was serious business. She just wished she could be sure they saw it anything at all the way she did. Balancing her cup on her fingertips, she told them everything. About Rand, anyway, and her fears since learning of the silence from Caemlyn. "I don't know what he's done - or what she has; everybody tells me how experienced Merana is, but she's had none with the likes of him. When it comes to Aes Sedai, if you hid this cup in a meadow, he'd still manage to step on it inside three paces. I know I could do better than Merana, but. . . ."

"ju kəd ɹɪtɝn," bɛɹ sədʒɛstəɾ əɡɛn, ən ɛɡwin ʃʊk əɹ hɛd fɝmli.

"You could return," Bair suggested again, and Egwene shook her head firmly.

"aɪ kən də mɔɹ wɛɹ aɪ æm, əz æmɪɝlɪn. ən ðəɹ ɑɹ ɹulz ivən fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit." hɝ maʊθ twɪstəd fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk ædmɪɾɪŋ ðæt, ɪspɛʃli nɑt tə ðiz wɪmən. "aɪ kæn ivən vɪzəɾ ɪm wɪθaʊt ðə hɔlz pɝmɪʃən. aɪm ɛɛs sədaɪ naʊ, ən aɪ hæv tə oʊbeɪ əɹ lɔz." ðət keɪm aʊt mɔɹ fɪɹsli ðən ʃi ɪntɛndəd. ɪt wɑz ə stupəd lɔ, bʌt ʃi hæd nɑt jɛt faʊn ə weɪ ɝaʊn ɪt. bɪsaɪdz, ðeɪ wɔɹ soʊ lɪɾəl ɪkspɹɛʃən ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ snɪkɝɪŋ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli ɪnsaɪd. nɑɾ ivən ə klæn tʃif hæd ðə ɹaɪt tə seɪ wən əɹ wɛɹ ə waɪz wʌn kəd ɡoʊ. ðə θɹi wɪmən əkɹɔs fɹəm əɹ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lɔŋ lʊks. ðən æmɪz sɛɾ əɹ tikʌp daʊn ən sɛd, "mɛɹænə æmbɹi ən ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ fɑloʊd ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn tə ðə tʃɹikɪlɝz' sɪɾi. jə niɾ əv noʊ fɪɹ hɪl pʊɾ ɪz fʊt ɹɔŋ wɪð hɝ, əɹ ɛni ʌv jəɹ sɪstɝz wɪð hɝ. wɪl si ðət ðəɹ ɪz noʊ dɪfəkəlti bɪtwin ɪm ən ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"I can do more where I am, as Amyrlin. And there are rules even for the Amyrlin Seat." Her mouth twisted for an instant. She did not like admitting that, especially not to these women. "I can't even visit him without the Hall's permission. I'm Aes Sedai now, and I have to obey our laws." That came out more fiercely than she intended. It was a stupid law, but she had not yet found a way around it. Besides, they wore so little expression she was sure they were snickering incredulously inside. Not even a clan chief had the right to say when or where a Wise One could go. The three women across from her exchanged long looks. Then Amys set her teacup down and said, "Merana Ambrey and other Aes Sedai followed the Car'a'carn to the treekillers' city. You need have no fear he will put his foot wrong with her, or any of your sisters with her. We will see that there is no difficulty between him and any Aes Sedai."

"ðæt hɑɹdli saʊnz laɪk ɹænd," ɛɡwin sɛd daʊtfəli. soʊ ʃɛɹiəm hæd bɪn ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt mɛɹænə. bʌt waɪ wɑz ʃi stɪl saɪlənt?

"That hardly sounds like Rand," Egwene said doubtfully. So Sheriam had been right about Merana. But why was she still silent?

bɛɹ kækəld wɪð læftɝ. "moʊs pɛɹəns əv mɔɹ tʃɹʌbəl wɪð ðɛɹ tʃɪlʒɹən ðən laɪz bɪtwin ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn ən ðə wɪmən u keɪm wɪð mɛɹænə æmbɹi."

Bair cackled with laughter. "Most parents have more trouble with their children than lies between the Car'a'carn and the women who came with Merana Ambrey."

"soʊ lɔŋ əz i ɪzən ðə tʃaɪld," ɛɡwin tʃʌkəld, ɹɪliv ðət sʌmwʌn wɑz əmjuzd ət sʌmθɪŋ. ðə weɪ ðiz wɪmən fɛlt əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn spɪɾɪŋ neɪlz ɪf ðeɪ θɔɾ ɛni sɪstɝ wɑz ɡeɪnɪŋ ɪnfluəns wɪð hɪm. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, mɛɹænə hæd tə ɡeɪn sʌm, əɹ ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl liv naʊ. "bʌt mɛɹænə ʃʊɾə sɛn ə ɹipɔɹt. aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd waɪ ʃi hæzənt. jəɹ sɝɾən ðəɹ ɪzən ɛni - ?" ʃi kəd nɑt θɪŋk ə haʊ tə fɪnɪʃ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ ðət ɹænd cʊɾə stɑp mɛɹænə fɹəm sɛndɪŋ ɔf ə pɪdʒən.

"So long as he isn't the child," Egwene chuckled, relieved that someone was amused at something. The way these women felt about Aes Sedai, they would have been spitting nails if they thought any sister was gaining influence with him. On the other hand, Merana had to gain some, or she might as well leave now. "But Merana should have sent a report. I don't understand why she hasn't. You're certain there isn't any - ?" She could not think of how to finish. There was no way that Rand could have stopped Merana from sending off a pigeon.

"pɝhæps ʃi sɛn ə mæn ɑn ə hɔɹs." æmɪz ɡɹɪməs feɪnli; əz mʌtʃ əz ɛni il, ʃi faʊn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɹɪpʌɡnənt. jəɹ oʊn lɛɡz wɝ ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf. "ʃi bɹɔt nʌn ə ðə bɝdz ðət wɛtləndɝz jus."

"Perhaps she sent a man on a horse." Amys grimaced faintly; as much as any Aiel, she found riding repugnant. Your own legs were good enough. "She brought none of the birds that wetlanders use."

"ðæt wɑz fulɪʃ ə hɝ," ɛɡwin mʌɾɝd. fulɪʃ dɪd nɑt kʌm kloʊs. mɛɹænəz dʒɹimz wəd bi ʃildɪd, soʊ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɔk tə hɝ ðɛɹ. ivən ɪf ðeɪ kəd bi faʊnd. laɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz vɛksɪŋ! ʃi lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɪntɛnli. "æmɪz, pɹɑməs mi jə woʊn tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp ɪm fɹəm tɔkɪŋ wɪð hɝ, əɹ meɪk əɹ soʊ æŋɡɹi ʃi dʌz sʌmθɪŋ fulɪʃ." ðeɪ wɝ kwaɪt keɪpəbəl ə ðæt; mɔɹ ðən keɪpəbəl. ðeɪ hæd pʊɾɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪz bæk ʌp pɝfɛktəd tə ə tælənt. "ʃiz dʒʌst səpoʊz tə kənvɪns ɪm ðət wi min ɪm noʊ hɑɹm. aɪm ʃʊɹ ɪleɪɾə hæz səm næsti sɝpɹaɪz hɪɾən bɪhaɪn əɹ skɝts, bʌt wi doʊnt." ʃi wəd si tə ðæt, ɪf ɛniwʌn hæd dɪfɹənt noʊʃənz. sʌmhaʊ, ʃi wʊd. "pɹɑməs mi?"

"That was foolish of her," Egwene muttered. Foolish did not come close. Merana's dreams would be shielded, so there was no point trying to talk to her there. Even if they could be found. Light, but it was vexing! She leaned forward intently. "Amys, promise me you won't try to stop him from talking with her, or make her so angry she does something foolish." They were quite capable of that; more than capable. They had putting an Aes Sedai's back up perfected to a Talent. "She's just supposed to convince him that we mean him no harm. I'm sure Elaida has some nasty surprise hidden behind her skirts, but we don't." She would see to that, if anyone had different notions. Somehow, she would. "Promise me?"

ðeɪ pæst ənɹiɾəbəl lʊks bæk ən fɔɹθ. ðeɪ kəd nɑt laɪk ði aɪdiə ʌv lɛɾɪŋ ə sɪstɝ nɪɹ ɹænd, sɝɾənli nɑɾ ənhɪndɝd. daʊtləs wʌn ə ðɛm wəd kəntʃɹaɪv tə bi pɹɛzənt wɛnɛvɝ mɛɹænə wɑz, bʌt ʃi kəd lɪv wɪð ðət soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ dɪd nɑt hɪndɝ tu mʌtʃ.

They passed unreadable looks back and forth. They could not like the idea of letting a sister near Rand, certainly not unhindered. Doubtless one of them would contrive to be present whenever Merana was, but she could live with that so long as they did not hinder too much.

"aɪ pɹɑməs, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ," æmɪz sɛd faɪnəli, ɪn ə vɔɪs flæɾ əz wɝk stoʊn.

"I promise, Egwene al'Vere," Amys said finally, in a voice flat as worked stone.

pɹɑbli ʃi wɑz əfɛndəd ðəɾ ɛɡwin hæd ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə plɛdʒ, bʌɾ ɛɡwin fɛlt əz ðoʊ ə weɪt hæd lɪftəd. tu weɪts. ɹænd ən mɛɹænə wɝ nɑɾ əɾ itʃ ʌðɝz θɹoʊts, ən mɛɹænə wəɾ əv ə tʃæns tə də wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn sɛn tə du. "aɪ nu aɪɾ əv ði ənvɑɹnɪʃt tʃɹuθ fɹəm ju, æmɪz. aɪ kæn tɛl jə haʊ ɡlæɾ aɪm tə hɪɹ ɪt. ɪf ɛniθɪŋ wɝ ɹɔŋ bɪtwin ɹænd ən mɛɹænə. . . . θæŋk ju."

Probably she was offended that Egwene had required a pledge, but Egwene felt as though a weight had lifted. Two weights. Rand and Merana were not at each other's throats, and Merana would have a chance to do what she had been sent to do. "I knew I'd have the unvarnished truth from you, Amys. I can't tell you how glad I am to hear it. If anything were wrong between Rand and Merana. . . . Thank you."

stɑɹɾəld, ʃi blɪŋkt. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, æmɪz wɔɹ keɪɾɪnsɝ. ʃi meɪd səm sɔɹɾ ə smɔl dʒɛstʃɝ, tu. meɪɾən hæntɔk, pɝhæps. niðɝ bɛɹ nɔɹ məleɪn, sɪpɪŋ ðɛɹ ti, ɡeɪv ɛni saɪn ðət ðeɪ hæd noʊɾəst. æmɪz mʌst əv bɪn wɪʃɪŋ ʃi wɝ sʌmwɛɹ ɛls, əweɪ fɹəm ðə tæŋɡəl ɹænd hæd meɪɾ ʌv ɛvɹibɑɾiz laɪf. ɪt wəd bi ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ, ʃeɪmɪŋ, fəɹ ə waɪz wʌn dʒɹim-wɔkɝ tə luz kəntʃɹoʊl ə hɝsɛlf ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ ivən fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. tə ði il, ʃeɪm hɝt fɑɹ wɝs ðən peɪn, bʌɾ ɪt hæd tə bi wɪtnəs tə bi ʃeɪm. ɪf ɪt wɑz nɑt sin, əɹ ðoʊz u sɔ ɹəfjuz tə ədmɪɾ ɪt, ðən ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl nɛvɝ əv hæpənd. ə stʃɹeɪnʒ pipəl, bʌt ʃi sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt wɑnə ʃeɪm æmɪz. kəmpoʊzɪŋ əɹ feɪs, ʃi wɛn ɑn əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ hæd hæpənd.

Startled, she blinked. For an instant, Amys wore cadin'sor. She made some sort of small gesture, too. Maiden handtalk, perhaps. Neither Bair nor Melaine, sipping their tea, gave any sign that they had noticed. Amys must have been wishing she were somewhere else, away from the tangle Rand had made of everybody's life. It would be embarrassing, shaming, for a Wise One dream-walker to lose control of herself in Tel'aran'rhiod even for an instant. To the Aiel, shame hurt far worse than pain, but it had to be witnessed to be shame. If it was not seen, or those who saw refused to admit it, then it might as well never have happened. A strange people, but she certainly did not want to shame Amys. Composing her face, she went on as if nothing had happened.

"aɪ mʌst æsk ə feɪvɝ. ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt feɪvɝ. doʊn tɛl ɹænd - əɹ ɛnibəɾi - əbaʊt mi. əbaʊt ðɪs, aɪ min tə seɪ." ʃi lɪftəɾ ən ɛn ə hɝ stoʊl. ðɛɹ feɪsəz meɪɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪz bɛs kɑm lʊk mənaɪəkəl. stoʊn wɑz nɑɾ ɪn ɪt. "aɪ doʊn min laɪ," ʃi æɾəd heɪstəli. ʌndɝ dʒiɾoʊ, æskɪŋ sʌmwʌn tə laɪ wɑz lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ ðən tɛlɪŋ wʌn jɝsɛlf. "dʒʌs doʊn bɹɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp. hiz ɔlɹɛɾi sɛn sʌmbɑɾi tə 'ɹɛskju' mi." ən woʊn i bi fjʊɹiəs wən i faɪnz aʊɾ aɪ ʃʌfəl mæt ɔf tə ɛbu dɑɹ wɪð nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn, ʃi θɔt. ʃi hæd hæd tə də ɪt, ðoʊ. "aɪ doʊnt nid ɹɛskjuɪŋ, ən aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɪt, bʌɾ i θɪŋks i noʊz bɛɾɝ ðən ɛvɹibɑɾi. aɪm əfɹeɪɾ i maɪt kʌm hʌntɪŋ fəɹ mi hɪmsɛlf." wɪtʃ fɹaɪɾənd əɹ mɔɹ - ðəɾ i maɪɾ əpɪɹ ɪn ðə kæmp əloʊn, ɹeɪdʒɪŋ, wɪð θɹi hʌnʒɹəd əɹ soʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɝaʊn hɪm? əɹ ðəɾ i maɪt kʌm wɪð səm ə ði æʃəmən? iðɝ weɪ, ə dɪzæstɝ.

"I must ask a favor. An important favor. Don't tell Rand - or anybody - about me. About this, I mean to say." She lifted an end of her stole. Their faces made an Aes Sedai's best calm look maniacal. Stone was not in it. "I don't mean lie," she added hastily. Under ji'e'toh, asking someone to lie was little better than telling one yourself. "Just don't bring it up. He's already sent somebody to 'rescue' me." And won't he be furious when he finds out I shuffled Mat off to Ebou Dar with Nynaeve and Elayne, she thought. She had had to do it, though. "I don't need rescuing, and I don't want it, but he thinks he knows better than everybody. I'm afraid he might come hunting for me himself." Which frightened her more - that he might appear in the camp alone, raging, with three hundred or so Aes Sedai around him? Or that he might come with some of the Asha'man? Either way, a disaster.

"ðæt wəd bi . . . ənfɔɹtʃənət," məleɪn mɝmɝd, ðoʊ ʃi wɑz sɛldəm wʌn fəɹ ʌndɝsteɪtmənt, ən bɛɹ mʌɾɝd, "ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn ɪz hɛd-stʃɹɔŋ. əz bæɾ əz ɛni mæn aɪ hæv ɛvɝ noʊn. ən ə fju wɪmən, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ."

"That would be . . . unfortunate," Melaine murmured, though she was seldom one for understatement, and Bair muttered, "The Car'a'carn is head-strong. As bad as any man I have ever known. And a few women, for that matter."

"wi wɪl hoʊl jəɹ kɑnfəɾəns kloʊs, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ," æmɪz sɛd ɡɹeɪvli.

"We will hold your confidence close, Egwene al'Vere," Amys said gravely.

ɛɡwin blɪŋkt ət ðə kwɪk əɡɹimənt. bʌt pɝhæps ɪt wɑz nɑt soʊ sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ. tə ðɛm, ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn wɑz oʊnli ənʌðɝ tʃif, dʒʌs mɔɹ soʊ, ən waɪz wʌnz hæd sɝɾənli bɪn noʊn tə kip θɪŋz fɹəm ə tʃif ðeɪ θɔɾ i ʃəd nɑt noʊ.

Egwene blinked at the quick agreement. But perhaps it was not so surprising. To them, the Car'a'carn was only another chief, just more so, and Wise Ones had certainly been known to keep things from a chief they thought he should not know.

æftɝ ðət ðəɹ wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ tə seɪ, ðoʊ ðeɪ tɔkt ə waɪl lɔŋɡɝ oʊvɝ mɔɹ kʌps ə ti. ʃi lɔŋ fəɹ ə lɛsən ɪn wɔkɪŋ ðə dʒɹim, bʌt kəd nɑɾ æsk wɪð æmɪz ðɛɹ. æmɪz wəd ɡoʊ, ən ʃi wɑntəɾ əɹ kʌmpəni mɔɹ ðən lɝnɪŋ. ðə kloʊsəs ðə waɪz wʌnz keɪm tə tɛlɪŋ əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɹænd wɑz æktʃəli  duɪŋ wɑz wən məleɪn ɡɹʌmbəl ðəɾ i ʃəd fɪnɪʃ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ən sɪvænə naʊ, ən boʊθ bɛɹ ən æmɪz fɹaʊn əɾ əɹ soʊ, ʃi tɝn bɹaɪt ɹɛd. æftɝ ɔl, sɪvænə wɑz ə waɪz wʌn, əz ɛɡwin nu kwaɪt bɪɾɝli. nɑɾ ivən ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn wəd bi əlaʊd tə ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð ivən ə ʃeɪɾoʊ waɪz wʌn. ən ʃi kəd nɑt ɡɪv əm dɪteɪlz ə hɝ oʊn sɝkəmstænsəz. ðət ðeɪ hæd lɛpt ɹaɪt tə ðə moʊst ʃeɪmɪŋ pɑɹt dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə lɛsən ðə ʃeɪm ʃi wəd fil tɔkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt - ɪt wɑz vɛɹi hɑɹd nɑt tə dʒɹɑp bæk ɪndə bɪheɪvɪŋ, ivən θɪŋkɪŋ, əz ði il dɪd wən ʃi wɑz ɝaʊn ðɛm; fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ʃi θɔɾ ɪt maɪɾ əv ʃeɪmd əɹ hæd ʃi nɛvɝ mɛɾ ən il - ən ði oʊnli sɔɹɾ ʌv ædvaɪs ðeɪ hæɾ əbaʊt dilɪŋ wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ leɪtli wɑz ʌv ə neɪtʃɝ ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə hɝsɛlf wəd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə fɑloʊ. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹaɪət, ənlaɪkli əz ɪt saʊndəd, maɪt ɹɪzʌlt. wɝs, ðeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi θɔt bædli ɪnʌf ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪθaʊɾ əɹ æɾɪŋ wʊd tə ðə faɪɝ. səm deɪ ʃi wɑntəd tə fɔɹdʒ ə lɪŋk bɪtwin ðə waɪz wʌnz ən ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌt ðət wəd nɛvɝ hæpən ənlɛs ʃi mænədʒ tə dæmpən ðət faɪɝ daʊn. ənʌðɝ θɪŋ ʃi hæd noʊ aɪdiə haʊ tə du, əz jɛt.

After that there was not much to say, though they talked a while longer over more cups of tea. She longed for a lesson in walking the dream, but could not ask with Amys there. Amys would go, and she wanted her company more than learning. The closest the Wise Ones came to telling her anything Rand was actually doing was when Melaine grumbled that he should finish the Shaido and Sevanna now, and both Bair and Amys frowned at her so, she turned bright red. After all, Sevanna was a Wise One, as Egwene knew quite bitterly. Not even the Car'a'carn would be allowed to interfere with even a Shaido Wise One. And she could not give them details of her own circumstances. That they had leaped right to the most shaming part did nothing to lessen the shame she would feel talking about it - it was very hard not to drop back into behaving, even thinking, as the Aiel did when she was around them; for that matter, she thought it might have shamed her had she never met an Aiel - and the only sort of advice they had about dealing with Aes Sedai lately was of a nature that Elaida herself would not try to follow. An Aes Sedai riot, unlikely as it sounded, might result. Worse, they already thought badly enough of Aes Sedai without her adding wood to the fire. Some day she wanted to forge a link between the Wise Ones and the White Tower, but that would never happen unless she managed to dampen that fire down. Another thing she had no idea how to do, as yet.

"aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ," ʃi sɛɾ ət læst, stændɪŋ. hɝ bɑɾi leɪ əslip ɪn əɹ tɛnt, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nɛvɝ kwaɪɾ ɪnʌf ɹɛst ɪn slip waɪl jə wɝ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ði ʌðɝz ɹoʊz wɪð hɝ. "aɪ hoʊp jəl ɔl bi vɛɹi kɛɹfəl. mɑɡiɾin heɪts mi, ən ʃi wəd sɝɾənli tʃɹaɪ tə hɝɾ ɛniwʌn huz maɪ fɹɛnd. ʃi noʊz ə ɡɹeɪt dil əbaʊt ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz. ət list əz mʌtʃ əz lænfɝ dɪd." ðət wɑz əz kloʊz əz ʃi kəd kʌm tə wɔɹnɪŋ əm wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ ɹaɪɾ aʊt ðət mɑɡiɾin maɪt noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ. il pɹaɪd kəd bi pɹɪkli. ðeɪ tʊk əɹ minɪŋ, ðoʊ, ən wɪθaʊɾ əfɛns.

"I must go," she said at last, standing. Her body lay asleep in her tent, but there was never quite enough rest in sleep while you were in Tel'aran'rhiod. The others rose with her. "I hope you will all be very careful. Moghedien hates me, and she would certainly try to hurt anyone who's my friend. She knows a great deal about the World of Dreams. At least as much as Lanfear did." That was as close as she could come to warning them without saying right out that Moghedien might know more than they. Aiel pride could be prickly. They took her meaning, though, and without offense.

"ɪf ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld mɛn tə θɹɛɾən ʌs," məleɪn sɛd, "aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ wəɾ əv baɪ naʊ. pɝhæps ðeɪ bɪliv wəɹ noʊ θɹɛt tə ðɛm."

"If the Shadowsouled meant to threaten us," Melaine said, "I think they would have by now. Perhaps they believe we are no threat to them."

"wi hæv ɡlɪmps ðoʊz u mʌs bi dʒɹimwɔkɝz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ mɛn." bɛɹ ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli: noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ʃi nu əbaʊt ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ʃi kənsɪɾɝd meɪl dʒɹimwɔkɝz əbaʊɾ əz kɑmən əz lɛɡz ɑn sneɪks. "ðeɪ əvɔɪɾ ʌs. ɔl ə ðɛm."

"We have glimpsed those who must be dreamwalkers, including men." Bair shook her head incredulously: no matter what she knew about the Forsaken, she considered male dreamwalkers about as common as legs on snakes. "They avoid us. All of them."

"aɪ θɪŋk wəɹ əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ðeɪ," æmɪz æɾəd. ɪn ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ʃi ən məleɪn wɝ noʊ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən θiədʒɹɪn ən fɑoʊleɪn - fɑɹ fɹəm wik, ɪndid stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt fɑɹ fɹəm ə fɔɹseɪkənz stʃɹɛŋkθ, tu - jɛɾ ɪn ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz, nɑlədʒ ə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd wɑz ɔfən əz paʊɝfəl əz seɪaɪdɑɹ, mɔɹ ət taɪmz. hɪɹ, bɛɹ wɑz ði ikwəl ʌv ɛni sɪstɝ. "bʌt wɪl teɪk kɛɹ. ɪts ði ɛnəmi jə ʌndɝɛstəmeɪɾ u kɪlz ju."

"I think we are as strong as they," Amys added. In the One Power, she and Melaine were no stronger than Theodrin and Faolain - far from weak, indeed stronger than most Aes Sedai, but far from a Forsaken's strength, too - yet in the World of Dreams, knowledge of Tel'aran'rhiod was often as powerful as saidar, more at times. Here, Bair was the equal of any sister. "But we will take care. It is the enemy you underestimate who kills you."

ɛɡwin tʊk æmɪz' hæn ən məleɪnz, ən wəɾ əv bɛɹz hæd ðəɹ bɪn ə weɪ. ɪnstɛd, ʃi ɪnkluɾəd əɹ wɪð ə smaɪl. "aɪl nɛvɝ bi eɪbəl tə tɛl jə wʌt jəɹ fɹɛndʃɪp minz tə mi, wʌt jə min tə mi." dɪspaɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ðət wɑz sɪmpəl tʃɹuθ. "ðə hoʊl wɝl simz tə bi tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɛvɹi taɪm aɪ blɪŋk. jə θɹi ɑɹ wʌn ə ðə fju fɝm spɑts ɪn ɪt."

Egwene took Amys' hand and Melaine's, and would have Bair's had there been a way. Instead, she included her with a smile. "I'll never be able to tell you what your friendship means to me, what you mean to me." Despite everything, that was simple truth. "The whole world seems to be changing every time I blink. You three are one of the few firm spots in it."

"ðə wɝl dʌz tʃeɪnʒ," æmɪz sɛd, sædli. "ivən maʊntənz ɑɹ wɔɹn əweɪ baɪ ðə wɪnd, ən noʊ wʌn kən klaɪm ðə seɪm hɪl twaɪs. aɪ hoʊp wɪl ɔlweɪz bi fɹɛnz ɪn jəɹ aɪz, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ. meɪ jə ɔlweɪz faɪnd wɔɾɝ ən ʃeɪd." ən wɪð ðæt, ðeɪ wɝ ɡɔn, bæk tə ðɛɹ oʊn bɑɾiz.

"The world does change," Amys said, sadly. "Even mountains are worn away by the wind, and no one can climb the same hill twice. I hope we will always be friends in your eyes, Egwene al'Vere. May you always find water and shade." And with that, they were gone, back to their own bodies.

fəɹ ə taɪm ʃi stʊd fɹaʊnɪŋ ət kælændɝ bʌt nɑt siɪŋ ɪt, əntɪl sʌɾənli ʃi ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd ʃeɪk. ʃi hæd bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðəɾ ɛnləs fild ə stɑɹz. ɪf ʃi weɪɾəd ðəɹ lɔŋ, ɡɔɪnz dʒɹim wəd faɪn əɹ əɡɛn, swɑloʊ hɝ ðə weɪ hɪz ɑɹmz wəd ʃɔɹtli ðɛɹæftɝ. ə plɛzənt weɪ tə spɛn ðə ɹɛst ə ðə naɪt. ən ə tʃaɪldɪʃ weɪst ə taɪm.

For a time she stood frowning at Callandor but not seeing it, until suddenly she gave herself an exasperated shake. She had been thinking about that endless field of stars. If she waited there long, Gawyn's dream would find her again, swallow her the way his arms would shortly thereafter. A pleasant way to spend the rest of the night. And a childish waste of time.

fɝmli ʃi meɪd hɝsɛlf stɛp bæk tə hɝ slipɪŋ bɑɾi, bʌt nɑt tə ɔɹɾənɛɹi slip. ʃi nɛvɝ dɪd ðəɾ ɛnimɔɹ. ðət wʌn kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ bɹeɪn ɹɪmeɪn fʊli əwɛɹ, kæɾəlɑɡɪŋ əɹ dʒɹimz, faɪlɪŋ əweɪ ðoʊz ðət fɔɹtoʊl ðə fjutʃɝ, əɹ əɾ ɛni ɹeɪt ɡeɪv ɡlɪmpsɪz ə ðə pɑsəbəl kɔɹs ɪt maɪt teɪk. ət list ʃi kəd tɛl ðət mʌtʃ naʊ, ðoʊ ði oʊnli wʌn ʃi hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə ɪntɝpɹət soʊ fɑɹ wɑz ðə dʒɹim ðət toʊld ʌv ɡɔɪn bɪkʌmɪŋ əɹ wɔɹɾɝ. ɛɛs sədaɪ kɔl ðɪs dʒɹimɪŋ, ən ðə wɪmən u kəd də ɪt dʒɹimɝz, ɔl lɔŋ dɛd bʌt hɝ, jɛɾ ɪt hæd noʊ mɔɹ tə də wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ ðən dʒɹimwɔkɪŋ dɪd.

Firmly she made herself step back to her sleeping body, but not to ordinary sleep. She never did that anymore. That one corner of her brain remained fully aware, cataloging her dreams, filing away those that foretold the future, or at any rate gave glimpses of the possible course it might take. At least she could tell that much now, though the only one she had been able to interpret so far was the dream that told of Gawyn becoming her Warder. Aes Sedai called this Dreaming, and the women who could do it Dreamers, all long dead but her, yet it had no more to do with the One Power than dreamwalking did.

pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ɪnɛvəɾəbəl ʃi ʃəd dʒɹim fɝst ʌv ɡɔɪn, kəz ʃi hæd bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ə hɪm.

Perhaps it was inevitable she should dream first of Gawyn, because she had been thinking of him.

ʃi stʊɾ ɪn ə væst, dɪm tʃeɪmbɝ wɛɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz ɪndɪstɪŋkt. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪksɛpt ɡɔɪn, sloʊli kʌmɪŋ təwɔɹd hɝ. ə tɔl, bjuɾəfəl mæn - hæd ʃi ɛvɝ θɔɾ ɪz hæf-bɹʌðɝ ɡɑləd wɑz mɔɹ bjuɾəfəl? - wɪð ɡoʊldən hɛɹ ən aɪz ə ðə moʊst wʌndɝfəl dip blu. hi hæd səm dɪstəns tə kʌvɝ jɛt, bʌɾ i kəd si hɝ; hɪz ɡeɪz wɑz fɪkst ɑn əɹ laɪk ən ɑɹtʃɝz ɑn ðə tɑɹɡət. ə feɪn saʊn ə kɹʌntʃɪŋ ən ɡɹeɪɾɪŋ hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. ʃi lʊk daʊn. ən fɛlt ə skɹim bɪldɪŋ ɪn hɝ. ɑn bɛɹ fit, ɡɔɪn wɔkt əkɹɔs ə flɔɹ ə bɹoʊkən ɡlæs, ʃɑɹdz bɹeɪkɪŋ əɾ ɛvɹi sloʊ stɛp. ivən ɪn ðət feɪn laɪt ʃi kəd si ðə tʃɹeɪl ə blʌd lɛf baɪ hɪz slæʃt fit. ʃi flʌŋ aʊɾ ə hænd, tʃɹaɪd tə ʃaʊt fəɹ ɪm tə stɑp, tʃɹaɪd tə ɹʌn tə hɪm, bʌt dʒʌs ðət kwɪkli ʃi wɑz ɛlswɛɹ.

She stood in a vast, dim chamber where everything was indistinct. Everything except Gawyn, slowly coming toward her. A tall, beautiful man - had she ever thought his half-brother Galad was more beautiful? - with golden hair and eyes of the most wonderful deep blue. He had some distance to cover yet, but he could see her; his gaze was fixed on her like an archer's on the target. A faint sound of crunching and grating hung in the air. She looked down. And felt a scream building in her. On bare feet, Gawyn walked across a floor of broken glass, shards breaking at every slow step. Even in that faint light she could see the trail of blood left by his slashed feet. She flung out a hand, tried to shout for him to stop, tried to run to him, but just that quickly she was elsewhere.

ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv dʒɹimz ʃi floʊɾəd əbʌv ə lɔŋ, stʃɹeɪt ɹoʊɾ əkɹɔs ə ɡɹæsi pleɪn, lʊkɪŋ daʊn əpɑn ə mæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə blæk stæljən. ɡɔɪn. ðən ʃi wɑz stændɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹoʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, ən i ɹeɪn ɪn. nɑt kəz i sɔ hɝ, ðɪs taɪm, bʌt ðə ɹoʊd ðət hæd bɪn stʃɹeɪt naʊ fɔɹkt ɹaɪt wɛɹ ʃi stʊd, ɹʌnɪŋ oʊvɝ tɔl hɪlz soʊ noʊ wʌn kəd si wʌt leɪ bɪɑnd. ʃi nu, ðoʊ. daʊn wʌn fɔɹk wɑz ɪz vaɪələn dɛθ, daʊn ði ʌðɝ, ə lɔŋ laɪf ən ə dɛθ ɪn bɛd. ɑn wʌn pæθ, hi wəd mɛɹi hɝ, ɑn ði ʌðɝ, nɑt. ʃi nu wʌt leɪ əhɛd, bʌt nɑt wɪtʃ weɪ lɛd tə wɪtʃ. sʌɾənli hi dɪd si hɝ, əɹ sim tə, ən smaɪld, ən tɝn ɪz hɔɹs əlɔŋ wʌn ə ðə fɔɹks. . . . ən ʃi wɑz ɪn ənʌðɝ dʒɹim. ən ənʌðɝ. ənʌðɝ. ən əɡɛn.

In the way of dreams she floated above a long, straight road across a grassy plain, looking down upon a man riding a black stallion. Gawyn. Then she was standing in the road in front of him, and he reined in. Not because he saw her, this time, but the road that had been straight now forked right where she stood, running over tall hills so no one could see what lay beyond. She knew, though. Down one fork was his violent death, down the other, a long life and a death in bed. On one path, he would marry her, on the other, not. She knew what lay ahead, but not which way led to which. Suddenly he did see her, or seemed to, and smiled, and turned his horse along one of the forks. . . . And she was in another dream. And another. Another. And again.

nɑɾ ɔl hæɾ ɛni bɛɹɪŋ ɑn ðə fjutʃɝ. dʒɹimz ə kɪsɪŋ ɡɔɪn, ʌv ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn ə kul spɹɪŋ mɛdoʊ wɪð əɹ sɪstɝz ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæɾ əz tʃɪlʒɹən, slɪd baɪ əlɔŋ wɪð naɪtmɛɹz wɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð swɪtʃəz tʃeɪst əɹ θɹu ɛnləs kɔɹɪɾɝz, wɛɹ mɪsʃeɪpən θɪŋz lɝtʃt θɹu ʃædoʊz ɔl ɝaʊnd, wɛɹ ə ɡɹɪnɪŋ nɪkoʊlə dɪnaʊnst əɹ tə ðə hɔl ən tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn keɪm fɔɹwɝd tə ɡɪv ɛvəɾəns. ðoʊz ʃi dɪskɑɹɾɪd; ði ʌðɝz ʃi tʌkt əweɪ, tə bi pɹɑɾɪd ən poʊk leɪɾɝ ɪn ðə hoʊp ʃi maɪɾ ʌndɝstænd wʌt ðeɪ mɛnt.

Not all had any bearing on the future. Dreams of kissing Gawyn, of running in a cool spring meadow with her sisters the way they had as children, slid by along with nightmares where Aes Sedai with switches chased her through endless corridors, where misshapen things lurched through shadows all around, where a grinning Nicola denounced her to the Hall and Thom Merrilin came forward to give evidence. Those she discarded; the others she tucked away, to be prodded and poked later in the hope she might understand what they meant.

ʃi stʊd bɪfɔɹ ən ɪmɛns wɔl, klɔɪŋ əɾ ɪt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɛɹ ɪt daʊn wɪð əɹ bɛɹ hænz. ɪt wɑz nɑt meɪɾ ə bɹɪk əɹ stoʊn, bʌt kaʊnləs θaʊzənz ə dɪsks, itʃ hæf waɪɾ ən hæf blæk, ði eɪntʃən sɪmbəl ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, laɪk ðə sɛvən silz ðət hæd wʌns hɛl ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən ʃʌt. səm ə ðoʊz silz wɝ bɹoʊkən naʊ, ðoʊ nɑɾ ivən ðə wʌn paʊɝ kəd bɹeɪk kwəndɪlɝ, ən ðə ɹɛs hæd wikən sʌmhaʊ, bʌt ðə wɔl stʊd stʃɹɔŋ haʊɛvɝ ʃi biɾ əɾ ɪt. ʃi kəd nɑt tɛɹ ɪt daʊn. meɪbi ɪt wɑz ðə sɪmbəl ðət wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. meɪbi ɪt wɑz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɛɹ daʊn, ðə waɪt taʊɝ. meɪbi. . . .

She stood before an immense wall, clawing at it, trying to tear it down with her bare hands. It was not made of brick or stone, but countless thousands of discs, each half white and half black, the ancient symbol of the Aes Sedai, like the seven seals that had once held the Dark One's prison shut. Some of those seals were broken now, though not even the One Power could break cuendillar, and the rest had weakened somehow, but the wall stood strong however she beat at it. She could not tear it down. Maybe it was the symbol that was important. Maybe it was the Aes Sedai she was trying to tear down, the White Tower. Maybe. . . .

mæt sæɾ ɑn ə naɪt-ʃɹaʊɾɪd hɪltɑp, wɑtʃɪŋ ə ɡɹæn ɪluməneɪɾɝz dɪspleɪ ʌv faɪɹwɝks, ən sʌɾənli hɪz hænd ʃɑɾ ʌp, sizd wʌn ə ðoʊz bɝstɪŋ laɪts ɪn ðə skaɪ. æɹoʊz ə faɪɝ flæʃt fɹəm ɪz klɛntʃt fɪst, ən ə sɛns ə dʒɹɛd fɪl hɝ. mɛn wəd daɪ kəz ə ðɪs. ðə wɝld wəd tʃeɪnʒ. bʌt ðə wɝld wɑz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ; ɪɾ ɔlweɪz tʃeɪnʒd.

Mat sat on a night-shrouded hilltop, watching a grand Illuminator's display of fireworks, and suddenly his hand shot up, seized one of those bursting lights in the sky. Arrows of fire flashed from his clenched fist, and a sense of dread filled her. Men would die because of this. The world would change. But the world was changing; it always changed.

stʃɹæps ət weɪst ən ʃoʊldɝ hɛld əɹ taɪtli tə ðə blɑk, ən ðə hɛdzmənz æks dɪsɛndəd, bʌt ʃi nu ðət sʌmwɛɹ sʌmwʌn wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ, ən ɪf ðeɪ ɹæn fæst ɪnʌf, ði æks wəd stɑp. ɪf nɑt. . . . ɪn ðət kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ maɪnd, ʃi fɛlt ə tʃɪl.

Straps at waist and shoulder held her tightly to the block, and the headsman's axe descended, but she knew that somewhere someone was running, and if they ran fast enough, the axe would stop. If not. . . . In that corner of her mind, she felt a chill.

lɑɡən, læfɪŋ, stɛpt əkɹɔs sʌmθɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ən maʊntəɾ ə blæk stoʊn; wən ʃi lʊk daʊn, ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ɹændz bɑɾi hi hæd stɛpt oʊvɝ, leɪɾ aʊɾ ɑn ə fjunɝəl biɹ wɪð ɪz hænz kɹɔst əɾ ɪz bɹɛst, bʌt wən ʃi tʌtʃt ɪz feɪs, ɪt bɹoʊk əpɑɹt laɪk ə peɪpɝ pʌpət.

Logain, laughing, stepped across something on the ground and mounted a black stone; when she looked down, she thought it was Rand's body he had stepped over, laid out on a funeral bier with his hands crossed at his breast, but when she touched his face, it broke apart like a paper puppet.

ə ɡoʊldən hɔk stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɪts wɪŋ ən tʌtʃt hɝ, ən ʃi ən ðə hɔk wɝ taɪd təɡɛðɝ sʌmhaʊ; ɔl ʃi nu wɑz ðət ðə hɔk wɑz fimeɪl. ə mæn leɪ daɪɪŋ ɪn ə nɛɹoʊ bɛd, ən ɪt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt i nɑt daɪ, jɛɾ aʊtsaɪɾ ə fjunɝəl paɪɹ wɑz biɪŋ bɪlt, ən vɔɪsəz ɹeɪz sɔŋz ə dʒɔɪ ən sædnəs. ə dɑɹk jʌŋ mæn hɛld ən əbdʒɛkt ɪn ɪz hæn ðət ʃoʊn soʊ bɹaɪtli ʃi kəd nɑt si wʌɾ ɪt wɑz.

A golden hawk stretched out its wing and touched her, and she and the hawk were tied together somehow; all she knew was that the hawk was female. A man lay dying in a narrow bed, and it was important he not die, yet outside a funeral pyre was being built, and voices raised songs of joy and sadness. A dark young man held an object in his hand that shone so brightly she could not see what it was.

ɑn ən ɑn ðeɪ keɪm, ən ʃi sɔɹɾɪd fɛvɝɪʃli, dɛspɝətli tʃɹaɪd tə ʌndɝstænd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹɛst ɪn ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt mʌs bi dʌn. ʃi wəd də wʌt mʌs bi dʌn.

On and on they came, and she sorted feverishly, desperately tried to understand. There was no rest in it, but it must be done. She would do what must be done.


tʃæptɝ ɪlɛvən


CHAPTER 11

ən oʊθ


An Oath

jə æsk tə bi wækən bɪfɔɹ ðə sʌn, mʌðɝ."

You asked to be wakened before the sun, Mother."

ɛɡwinz aɪz pɑpt oʊpən - ʃi hæd sɛt hɝsɛlf ə taɪm tə weɪk oʊnli moʊməns fɹəm naʊ - ən dɪspaɪt hɝsɛlf ʃi stɑɹɾəd bæk əɡɛnst əɹ pɪloʊ fɹəm ðə feɪs əbʌv hɝ. stɝn θɹu ə ʃin ə pɝspɝeɪʃən, ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə plɛzən saɪt fɝs θɪŋ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. mɛɹiz mænɝ wɑz pɝfəkli ɹɪspɛkfəl, bʌɾ ə pɪntʃt noʊz, ə pɝmənənli daʊntɝn maʊθ ən dɑɹk aɪz ʃɑɹp wɪð sɛnʃɝ sɛd ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin ɛniwʌn hæf əz ɡʊɾ əz ðeɪ ʃəd bi əɹ pɹitɛndəd tə bi, ən əɹ flæt toʊn tɝn ɛvɹi minɪŋ hɛd tə hilz.

Egwene's eyes popped open - she had set herself a time to wake only moments from now - and despite herself she started back against her pillow from the face above her. Stern through a sheen of perspiration, it was not a pleasant sight first thing in the morning. Meri's manner was perfectly respectful, but a pinched nose, a permanently downturned mouth and dark eyes sharp with censure said she had never seen anyone half as good as they should be or pretended to be, and her flat tone turned every meaning head to heels.

"aɪ hoʊp jə slɛpt wɛl, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd, waɪl əɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən mænədʒd ə fɛɹ ækjəzeɪʃən ə sloʊθ. hɝ blæk hɛɹ, ɪn taɪt kɔɪlz oʊvɝ əɹ ɪɹz, sim tə pʊl əɹ feɪs peɪnfəli. ði ʌnɹiliv dʒɹæb dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ ʃi ɔlweɪz wɔɹ, haʊɛvɝ ɪt meɪɾ əɹ swɛt, oʊnli æɾəd tə ðə ɡlum.

"I hope you slept well, Mother," she said, while her expression managed a fair accusation of sloth. Her black hair, in tight coils over her ears, seemed to pull her face painfully. The unrelieved drab dark gray she always wore, however it made her sweat, only added to the gloom.

ɪt wɑz ə pɪɾi ʃi hæd nɑt mænədʒd ə lɪɾəl ɹil ɹɛst. jɔnɪŋ, ɛɡwin ɹoʊz fɹəm əɹ nɛɹoʊ kɑɾ ən skɹʌbd əɹ tiθ wɪð sɔlt, wɑʃt əɹ feɪs ən hænz waɪl mɛɹi leɪɾ aʊɾ əɹ kloʊðz fəɹ ðə deɪ, dɑn stɑkɪŋz ən ə klin ʃɪft, ðən sʌfɝd hɝsɛlf tə bi dʒɹɛst. "sʌfɝd" wɑz ðə wɝd.

It was a pity she had not managed a little real rest. Yawning, Egwene rose from her narrow cot and scrubbed her teeth with salt, washed her face and hands while Meri laid out her clothes for the day, donned stockings and a clean shift, then suffered herself to be dressed. "Suffered" was the word.

"aɪ fɪɹ səm ə ðiz nɑts wɪl pʊl, mʌðɝ," ðə tʃɪɹləs wʊmən mɝmɝd, dʒɹɔɪŋ ðə bɹʌʃ θɹu ɛɡwinz hɛɹ, ən ɛɡwin vɛɹi nɪɹli toʊld əɹ ʃi hæd nɑt dɪlɪbɝətli tæŋɡəld ɪɾ ɪn əɹ slip.

"I fear some of these knots will pull, Mother," the cheerless woman murmured, drawing the brush through Egwene's hair, and Egwene very nearly told her she had not deliberately tangled it in her sleep.

"aɪ ʌndɝstænd wɪl ɹɛs hɪɹ tədeɪ, mʌðɝ." boʊn aɪɾəlnəs, sið mɛɹiz ɹəflɛkʃən ɪn ðə stænd-mɪɹɝ.

"I understand we will rest here today, Mother." Bone idleness, seethed Meri's reflection in the stand-mirror.

"ðɪs ʃeɪɾ ə blu wɪl sɛɾ ɔf jəɹ kʌlɝɪŋ naɪsli, mʌðɝ," mɛɹi sɛɾ əz ʃi dɪɾ ʌp ɛɡwinz bʌɾənz, hɝ feɪs ən ækjəzeɪʃən ə vænəɾi.

"This shade of blue will set off your coloring nicely, Mother," Meri said as she did up Egwene's buttons, her face an accusation of vanity.

fɪld wɪð ɹɪlif ðət ʃi wəɾ əv tʃɛsə tənaɪt, ɛɡwin dɑn ðə stoʊl ən flɛɾ ɔlmoʊs bɪfɔɹ ðə wʊmən fɪnɪʃt.

Filled with relief that she would have Chesa tonight, Egwene donned the stole and fled almost before the woman finished.

nɑɾ ivən ə ɹɪm ə ðə sʌn ʃoʊɾ əbʌv ðə hɪlz tə ði ist. ðə læn hʌmpt ʌp ɔl ɝaʊn ɪn lɔŋ ɹɪdʒəz ən ɪɹɛɡjəlɝ maʊnz, səmtaɪmz hʌnʒɹədz ə fit haɪ, ðəɾ ɔfən lʊkt əz ðoʊ mɑnstʃɹəs fɪŋɡɝz hæd skwiz ðɛm. ʃædoʊz laɪk twaɪlaɪt beɪðd ðə kæmp laɪɪŋ ɪn wʌn ə ðə bɹɔd væliz bɪtwin, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz wɛl əweɪk ɪn ðə hit ðət nɛvɝ ɹɪli lɪftəd. smɛlz ə bɹɛkfəs kʊkɪŋ fɪl ði ɛɹ, ən pipəl bʌsəld əbaʊt, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz nʌn ə ðə ɹʌʃ ðət wʊɾə mɛn ə deɪz mɑɹtʃɪŋ əhɛd. waɪt-klæd nɑvəsɪz dɑɹɾɪd əbaʊɾ əɾ ə nɪɹ ɹʌn; ə waɪz nɑvəs ɔlweɪz kæɹiɾ aʊɾ əɹ tʃɔɹz əz kwɪkli əz ʃi kʊd. wɔɹɾɝz nɛvɝ sim hɝid, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ivən sɝvəns kæɹiɪŋ ðə mɔɹnɪŋ mil tə ɛɛs sədaɪ əpɪɹd tə stʃɹoʊl ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. wɛl, ɔlmoʊst. ɪn kəmpɛɹəsən tə ðə nɑvəsɪz. ðə hoʊl kæmp wɑz teɪkɪŋ ædvæntɪdʒ ə ðə hɔlt. ə klæɾɝ ən kɝsɪz əz ə dʒæk-lɛvɝ slɪpt ənaʊnst wæɡoʊnɹaɪts meɪkɪŋ ɹɪpɛɹz, ən ə dɪstən tæpɪŋ ə hæmɝz toʊld ə fɛɹiɝz ɹɪʃuɪŋ hɔɹsəz. ə dʌzən kændəlmeɪkɝz hæd ðɛɹ moʊlz laɪn ʌp ɔlɹɛɾi, ən ðə kɛɾəlz hiɾɪŋ tə mɛl ðə kɛɹfəli hɔɹɾɪd dʒɹɪpɪŋz ən tæɡ-ɛnz ʌv ɛvɹi kændəl ðət hæd bɪn bɝnd. mɔɹ bɪɡ blæk kɛɾəlz stʊɾ ɑn faɪɝz tə bɔɪl wɔɾɝ fəɹ bæθs ən lɔnʒɹi, ən mɛn ən wɪmən wɝ hipɪŋ kloʊðz ʌp nɪɹbaɪ. ɛɡwin ɡeɪv lɪɾəl noʊɾəs tə ɛni ʌv ði æktɪvəɾi.

Not even a rim of the sun showed above the hills to the east. The land humped up all around in long ridges and irregular mounds, sometimes hundreds of feet high, that often looked as though monstrous fingers had squeezed them. Shadows like twilight bathed the camp lying in one of the broad valleys between, but it was well awake in the heat that never really lifted. Smells of breakfast cooking filled the air, and people bustled about, though there was none of the rush that would have meant a day's marching ahead. White-clad novices darted about at a near run; a wise novice always carried out her chores as quickly as she could. Warders never seemed hurried, of course, but even servants carrying the morning meal to Aes Sedai appeared to stroll this morning. Well, almost. In comparison to the novices. The whole camp was taking advantage of the halt. A clatter and curses as a jack-lever slipped announced wagonwrights making repairs, and a distant tapping of hammers told of farriers reshoeing horses. A dozen candlemakers had their molds lined up already, and the kettles heating to melt the carefully hoarded drippings and tag-ends of every candle that had been burned. More big black kettles stood on fires to boil water for baths and laundry, and men and women were heaping clothes up nearby. Egwene gave little notice to any of the activity.

ðə θɪŋ ʌv ɪt wɑz, ʃi wɑz sɝɾən mɛɹi dɪd nɑt də ɪɾ æpʊɝpəz; ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp əɹ feɪs. ivən soʊ, ʃi wɑz əz bæɾ əz ɪt wəd bi tə hæv ɹoʊmændə fəɹ ə meɪd. ðə θɔt meɪɾ əɹ læf aʊt laʊd. ɹoʊmændə əz leɪɾiz meɪd wəɾ əv əɹ mɪstʃɹəs toʊɪŋ ðə laɪn ɪn noʊ taɪm; noʊ daʊɾ əz tə hu wəd ɹʌn ən fɛtʃ ɪn ðət pɛɹ. ə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd kʊk pɔzd ɪn ɹeɪkɪŋ koʊlz fɹəm ətɑp ən aɪɝn ʌvən tə ɡɪv əɹ ə ɡɹɪn ə ʃɛɹɾ əmjuzmənt. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɛniweɪ. ðən i ɹilaɪzd i wɑz ɡɹɪnɪŋ ət ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, nɑt dʒʌst səm jʌŋ wʊmən wɔkɪŋ baɪ, ən ðə ɡɹɪn mɛltəd kɹʊkədli əz i dʒɝkt ə baʊ bɪfɔɹ bɛndɪŋ bæk tə hɪz wɝk.

The thing of it was, she was certain Meri did not do it apurpose; she could not help her face. Even so, she was as bad as it would be to have Romanda for a maid. The thought made her laugh out loud. Romanda as lady's maid would have her mistress toeing the line in no time; no doubt as to who would run and fetch in that pair. A gray-haired cook paused in raking coals from atop an iron oven to give her a grin of shared amusement. For a moment, anyway. Then he realized he was grinning at the Amyrlin Seat, not just some young woman walking by, and the grin melted crookedly as he jerked a bow before bending back to his work.

ɪf ʃi sɛn mɛɹi ɔf, ɹoʊmændə wəɾ oʊnli faɪn ə nu spaɪ. ən mɛɹi wəɾ əɡɛn bi stɑɹvɪŋ əɹ weɪ fɹəm vɪlədʒ tə vɪlədʒ. ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛs - ʃi ɹɪli hæd ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ ðə wʊmən wɑz kwaɪt fɪnɪʃt - ɛɡwinz fɪŋɡɝz faʊn ə smɔl lɪnən bæɡ, ðə stʃɹɪŋz tʌk bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə lɪft ɪɾ ɔl ðə weɪ tə hɝ noʊz tə smɛl ɹoʊz pɛɾəlz ən ə blɛn ə ɝbz wɪð ə kul sɛnt. ɪt meɪɾ əɹ saɪ. ə feɪs laɪk ə hɛdzmənz, spaɪɪŋ fəɹ ɹoʊmændə wɪθaʊɾ ɛni daʊt, ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɝfɔɹm əɹ duɾiz əz wɛl əz ʃi kʊd. waɪ wɝ ðiz θɪŋz nɛvɝ izi?

If she sent Meri off, Romanda would only find a new spy. And Meri would again be starving her way from village to village. Adjusting her dress - she really had gone before the woman was quite finished - Egwene's fingers found a small linen bag, the strings tucked behind her belt. She did not have to lift it all the way to her nose to smell rose petals and a blend of herbs with a cool scent. It made her sigh. A face like a headsman's, spying for Romanda without any doubt, and trying to perform her duties as well as she could. Why were these things never easy?

əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ðə tɛnt ʃi juzd əz ə stʌɾi - mɛni kɔld ɪt ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ɹumz ɪn ðə taʊɝ - ə sɑləm sæɾəsfækʃən ɹipleɪst wɝi oʊvɝ mɛɹi. wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ hɔltəd fəɹ ə deɪ, ʃɛɹiəm wəd bi ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ əɹ wɪð fæt ʃivz ə pətɪʃənz. ə lɔnʒɹɪs ɪmplɔɹɪŋ klɛmənsi ɑn ə tʃɑɹdʒ ə θɛft wən ʃi hæd bɪn kɑt wɪð ðə dʒuəlɹi soʊn ɪndə hɝ dʒɹɛs, əɹ ə blæksmɪθ bɛɡɪŋ ə tɛstəmoʊniəl fəɹ ɪz wɝk, wɪtʃ i kəd nɑt juz ənlɛs i ɪntɛndəd tə liv, ən laɪkli nɑt ðɛn. ə hɑɹnəs meɪkɝ æskɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪnz pɹɛɹz fəɹ əɹ tə ɡɪv bɝθ tə ə dɔɾɝ. wʌn ə lɔɹd bɹaɪnz soʊlʒɝz ɹɪkwɛstɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪnz pɝsənəl blɛsɪŋ tə hɪz wɛɾɪŋ ə simstʃɹɪs. ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ə slu fɹəm oʊldɝ nɑvəsɪz, əpilɪŋ vɪzəts tə tiɑnə ən ivən ɛkstʃɹə tʃɔɹz. ɛniwʌn hæd ðə ɹaɪt tə pətɪʃən ði æmɪɝlɪn, bʌt ðoʊz ɪn sɝvəs tə ðə taʊɝ sɛldəm dɪd, ən nɛvɝ nɑvəsɪz. ɛɡwin səspɛktəd ðət ʃɛɹiəm wɝk tə dɪɡ ʌp pətɪʃənɝz, sʌmθɪŋ tə bʌɾɝ ðə kæts pɔz, tə kip əɹ aʊɾ ə ʃɛɹiəmz hɛɹ waɪl ðə kipɝ tʊk kɛɹ ʌv wʌt ʃi kənsɪɾɝd ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi maɪt meɪk ʃɛɹiəm it ðoʊz pətɪʃənz fəɹ əɹ bɹɛkfəst.

Approaching the tent she used as a study - many called it the Amyrlin's study, as if it were rooms in the Tower - a solemn satisfaction replaced worry over Meri. Whenever they halted for a day, Sheriam would be there before her with fat sheaves of petitions. A laundress imploring clemency on a charge of theft when she had been caught with the jewelry sewn into her dress, or a blacksmith begging a testimonial for his work, which he could not use unless he intended to leave, and likely not then. A harness maker asking the Amyrlin's prayers for her to give birth to a daughter. One of Lord Bryne's soldiers requesting the Amyrlin's personal blessing to his wedding a seamstress. There was always a slew from older novices, appealing visits to Tiana and even extra chores. Anyone had the right to petition the Amyrlin, but those in service to the Tower seldom did, and never novices. Egwene suspected that Sheriam worked to dig up petitioners, something to butter the cat's paws, to keep her out of Sheriam's hair while the Keeper took care of what she considered important. This morning, Egwene thought she might make Sheriam eat those petitions for her breakfast.

wən ʃi ɛntɝd ðə tɛnt, ðoʊ, ʃɛɹiəm wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ. wɪtʃ pɝhæps ʃəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ə sɝpɹaɪz, ɡɪvən ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ. ðə tɛnt wɑz nɑɾ ɛmpti, haʊɛvɝ.

When she entered the tent, though, Sheriam was not there. Which perhaps should not have been a surprise, given the night before. The tent was not empty, however.

"ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin jə ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, mʌðɝ," θiədʒɹɪn sɛd, meɪkɪŋ ə dip kɝtsi ðət sɛt ðə bɹaʊn fɹɪnʒ ə hɝ ʃɔl sweɪɪŋ. ʃi hæɾ ɔl ðə feɪbəl dəmɑni ɡɹeɪs, ðoʊ hɝ haɪ-nɛk dʒɹɛs wɑz ɹɪli kwaɪt mɑɾəst. dəmɑni wɪmən wɝ nɑt noʊn fəɹ mɑɾəsti. "wi dɪɾ əz jə kəmændəd, bʌt noʊ wʌn sɔ ɛnibəɾi nɪɹ mɛɹɪɡənz tɛn læs naɪt."

"The Light illumine you this morning, Mother," Theodrin said, making a deep curtsy that set the brown fringe of her shawl swaying. She had all the fabled Domani grace, though her high-necked dress was really quite modest. Domani women were not known for modesty. "We did as you commanded, but no one saw anybody near Marigan's tent last night."

"sʌm ə ðə mɛn ɹɪmɛmbɝd siɪŋ hɑlimə," fɑoʊleɪn æɾəd saʊɝli, wɪð ə mʌtʃ bɹifɝ bɛn ə hɝ niz, "bʌɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ðæt, ðeɪ hɑɹdli ɹɪkɔld wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɛn tə slip." mɛni wɪmən dɪsəpɹuvd ə dɛlænəz sɛkɹətɛɹi, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz əɹ nɛkst ɹɪmɑɹk ðət meɪd fɑoʊleɪnz ɹaʊn feɪs dɑɹkɝ ðən juʒəwəl. "wi mɛt tiɑnə waɪl wi wɝ ɹoʊmɪŋ əbaʊt. ʃi toʊld əs tə ɡoʊ tə bɛɾ ən bi kwɪk əbaʊɾ ɪt." ʌnkɑnʃəsli ʃi stʃɹoʊk ðə blu fɹɪnʒ ɑn əɹ ʃɔl. nu ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz wɔɹ ðɛɹ ʃɔlz mɔɹ ɔfən ðən ðeɪ niɾəd tə, soʊ sɪuən sɛd.

"Some of the men remembered seeing Halima," Faolain added sourly, with a much briefer bend of her knees, "but aside from that, they hardly recalled whether they went to sleep." Many women disapproved of Delana's secretary, but it was her next remark that made Faolain's round face darker than usual. "We met Tiana while we were roaming about. She told us to go to bed and be quick about it." Unconsciously she stroked the blue fringe on her shawl. New Aes Sedai almost always wore their shawls more often than they needed to, so Siuan said.

ɡɪvɪŋ əm ə smaɪl ʃi hoʊpt wɑz wɛlkəmɪŋ, ɛɡwin tʊk əɹ pleɪs bɪhaɪn ðə smɔl teɪbəl. kɛɹfəli; ðə tʃɛɹ tɪltəd fəɹ ə moʊmən ɛniweɪ, əntɪl ʃi ɹitʃt daʊn ən pʊl ðə lɛɡ stʃɹeɪt. ən ɛdʒ ə foʊldəd pɑɹtʃmən pikt aʊt fɹəm bɪniθ ðə stoʊn ɪŋkwɛl. hɝ hænz twɪtʃt təwɔɹɾ ɪt, bʌt ʃi meɪɾ əm bi stɪl. tu mɛni sɪstɝz sɔ lɪɾəl nid fəɹ kɝɾəsi. ʃi wəd nɑt bi wʌn ə ðoʊz. bɪsaɪdz, ðiz tu hæɾ ə kleɪm ɑn hɝ.

Giving them a smile she hoped was welcoming, Egwene took her place behind the small table. Carefully; the chair tilted for a moment anyway, until she reached down and pulled the leg straight. An edge of folded parchment peeked out from beneath the stone inkwell. Her hands twitched toward it, but she made them be still. Too many sisters saw little need for courtesy. She would not be one of those. Besides, these two had a claim on her.

"aɪ æm sɑɹi fəɹ jəɹ dɪfəkəltiz, dɔɾɝz." meɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ baɪ hɝ dɪkɹi ɑn biɪŋ ɹeɪzd æmɪɝlɪn, ðeɪ feɪs ðə seɪm pɹɪdɪkəmən əz ʃi, bʌt lækɪŋ ði æɾəd ʃild ə ði æmɪɝlɪnz stoʊl, smɔl ʃil ðət ðət hæd pɹuvd. moʊst sɪstɝz bɪheɪvd əz ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ stɪl oʊnli æksɛptɪd. wʌt wɛn ɑn ɪnsaɪd ði ədʒəz wɑz sɛldəm noʊn aʊtsaɪd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɹumɝd ðət ðeɪ tʃɹuli hæd hæd tə bɛɡ ədmɪɾəns, ən ðət ɡɑɹɾiənz hæd bɪn neɪm tə oʊvɝsi ðɛɹ bɪheɪvjɝ. noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝd ðə laɪk, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn tʊk ɪt fəɹ fækt. ʃi hæd dʌn əm noʊ feɪvɝ. ənʌðɝ θɪŋ ðət hæd bɪn nɛsəsɛɹi, ðoʊ. "aɪ wɪl spik tə tiɑnə." ɪt maɪt də səm ɡʊd. fəɹ ə deɪ, əɹ ən aʊɝ.

"I am sorry for your difficulties, daughters." Made Aes Sedai by her decree on being raised Amyrlin, they faced the same predicament as she, but lacking the added shield of the Amyrlin's stole, small shield that that had proved. Most sisters behaved as though they were still only Accepted. What went on inside the Ajahs was seldom known outside, but it was rumored that they truly had had to beg admittance, and that guardians had been named to oversee their behavior. No one had ever heard the like, but everyone took it for fact. She had done them no favor. Another thing that had been necessary, though. "I will speak to Tiana." It might do some good. For a day, or an hour.

"θæŋk ju, mʌðɝ," θiədʒɹɪn sɛd, "bʌt ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə bɑðɝ jɝsɛlf." stɪl, ʃi ɔlsoʊ tʌtʃt əɹ ʃɔl, hænz lɪŋɡɝɪŋ. "tiɑnə wɑntəd tə noʊ waɪ wi wɝ ʌp soʊ leɪt," ʃi æɾəd æftɝ ə moʊmənt, "bʌt wi dɪdn tɛl hɝ."

"Thank you, Mother," Theodrin said, "but there is no need to bother yourself." Still, she also touched her shawl, hands lingering. "Tiana wanted to know why we were up so late," she added after a moment, "but we didn't tell her."

"ðɛɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ sikɹəsi, dɔɾɝ." ə pɪɾi ðeɪ hæd nɑt faʊn ə wɪtnəs, ðoʊ. mɑɡiɾinz ɹɛskjuɝ wəd ɹɪmeɪn ə ʃædoʊ hæf-ɡlɪmpst. ɔlweɪz ðə moʊs fɹaɪɾənɪŋ sɔɹt. ʃi ɡlænst ət ðə taɪni kɔɹnɝ ə pɑɹtʃmənt, ɪtʃɪŋ tə ɹiɾ ɪt. meɪbi sɪuən hæd dɪskʌvɝd sʌmθɪŋ. "θæŋk jə boʊθ." θiədʒɹɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ə dɪsmɪsəl ən meɪɾ əɹ mænɝz tə ɡoʊ, bʌt stɑpt wən fɑoʊleɪn ɹɪmeɪnd wɛɹ ʃi wɑz.

"There was no need for secrecy, daughter." A pity they had not found a witness, though. Moghedien's rescuer would remain a shadow half-glimpsed. Always the most frightening sort. She glanced at the tiny corner of parchment, itching to read it. Maybe Siuan had discovered something. "Thank you both." Theodrin recognized a dismissal and made her manners to go, but stopped when Faolain remained where she was.

"aɪ wɪʃ aɪ hæd hɛl ði oʊθ ɹɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi," fɑoʊleɪn toʊld ɛɡwin ɪn toʊnz ə fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən, "soʊ jə kəd noʊ wʌɾ aɪ seɪ ɪz tʃɹu."

"I wish I had held the Oath Rod already," Faolain told Egwene in tones of frustration, "so you could know what I say is true."

"ðɪs ɪzən ðə taɪm tə bɑðɝ ði æmɪɝlɪn," θiədʒɹɪn bɪɡæn, ðən foʊldəɾ əɹ hænz ən tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən tə ɛɡwin. peɪʃəns blɛndəd wɪð sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ɑn əɹ feɪs. klɪɹli ðə stʃɹɔŋɝ ə ðə tu ɪn ðə paʊɝ, ʃi ɔlweɪz tʊk ðə lɛd, jɛt ðɪs taɪm ʃi wɑz pɹipɛɹd tə stɛp bæk. ɪn eɪɾ ʌv wʌt, ɛɡwin wʌndɝd.

"This isn't the time to bother the Amyrlin," Theodrin began, then folded her hands and turned her attention to Egwene. Patience blended with something else on her face. Clearly the stronger of the two in the Power, she always took the lead, yet this time she was prepared to step back. In aid of what, Egwene wondered.

"ɪɾ ɪzən ði oʊθ ɹɑd ðət meɪks ə wʊmən ɛɛs sədaɪ, dɔɾɝ." wʌtɛvɝ səm bɪlivd. "spik ðə tʃɹuθ tə mi, ən əl bɪliv ɪt."

"It isn't the Oath Rod that makes a woman Aes Sedai, daughter." Whatever some believed. "Speak the truth to me, and I will believe it."

"aɪ doʊn laɪk ju." fɑoʊleɪnz mɑp ə dɑɹk kɝlz sweɪɾ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd fəɹ ɛmfəsəs. "ju mʌs noʊ ðæt. jə pɹɑbli θɪŋk aɪ wɑz min wən jə wɝ ə nɑvəs, wən jə keɪm bæk tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ æftɝ ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ, bʌɾ aɪ stɪl bɪliv jə dɪdnt ɡɛt hæf ðə pʌnɪʃmən jə ʃəd hæv. meɪbi maɪ ædmɪɾɪŋ ɪɾəl hɛlp jə noʊ aɪ spik ðə tʃɹuθ. ɪɾ ɪzən əz ðoʊ wɪv noʊ tʃɔɪs ivən naʊ. ɹoʊmændə ɔfɝd tə teɪk əs ʌndɝ əɹ pɹətɛkʃən, ən soʊ dɪd ləleɪn. ðeɪ sɛd ðeɪd si wi wɝ tɛstəɾ ən ɹeɪz pɹɑpɝli əz sun wi ɹɪtɝn tə ðə taʊɝ." hɝ feɪs ɡɹu æŋɡɹiɝ, ən θiədʒɹɪn ɹoʊld əɹ aɪz ən bɹoʊk ɪn.

"I don't like you." Faolain's mop of dark curls swayed as she shook her head for emphasis. "You must know that. You probably think I was mean when you were a novice, when you came back to the White Tower after running away, but I still believe you didn't get half the punishment you should have. Maybe my admitting it will help you know I speak the truth. It isn't as though we have no choice even now. Romanda offered to take us under her protection, and so did Lelaine. They said they'd see we were tested and raised properly as soon we return to the Tower." Her face grew angrier, and Theodrin rolled her eyes and broke in.

"mʌðɝ, wʌt fɑoʊleɪn ɪz fʌmbəlɪŋ ɔl ɝaʊnd wɪθaʊt ɡɛɾɪŋ tə ðə pɔɪn ɪz ðət wi dɪdn ətætʃ aʊɝsɛlvz tə jə kəz wi hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs. ən wi dɪdn də ɪɾ ɪn ɡɹæɾətud fəɹ ðə ʃɔl." ʃi pɝst əɹ lɪps əz ɪf θɪŋkɪŋ ðət ɹeɪzɪŋ əm ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə mænɝ ɛɡwin hæd wɑz nɑt ɹɪli ə ɡɪf tə ɪnspaɪɹ mʌtʃ ɡɹæɾətud.

"Mother, what Faolain is fumbling all around without getting to the point is that we didn't attach ourselves to you because we had no choice. And we didn't do it in gratitude for the shawl." She pursed her lips as if thinking that raising them Aes Sedai in the manner Egwene had was not really a gift to inspire much gratitude.

"ðɛn waɪ?" ɛɡwin æskt, linɪŋ bæk. ðə tʃɛɹ ʃɪftəd, bʌt hɛld.

"Then why?" Egwene asked, leaning back. The chair shifted, but held.

fɑoʊleɪn dʒʌmpt ɪn bɪfɔɹ θiədʒɹɪn kəd mɔɹ ðən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ. "bɪkɔz jə ɑɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit." ʃi stɪl saʊndəɾ æŋɡɹi. "wi kən si wʌt hæpənz. səm ə ðə sɪstɝz θɪŋk jəɹ ʃɛɹiəmz pʌpət, bʌt moʊs bɪliv ɹoʊmændə əɹ ləleɪn tɛlz jə wɛɹ ən wən tə stɛp. ɪts nɑt ɹaɪt." hɝ feɪs wɑz twɪstəɾ ɪn ə skaʊl. "aɪ lɛf ðə taʊɝ kəz wʌɾ ɪleɪɾə dɪd wɑzn ɹaɪt. ðeɪ ɹeɪz jə æmɪɝlɪn. soʊ aɪm jʊɹz. ɪf jəl əv mi. ɪf jə kən tʃɹʌs mi wɪθaʊt ði oʊθ ɹɑd. jə mʌs bɪliv mi."

Faolain jumped in before Theodrin could more than open her mouth. "Because you are the Amyrlin Seat." She still sounded angry. "We can see what happens. Some of the sisters think you're Sheriam's puppet, but most believe Romanda or Lelaine tells you where and when to step. It is not right." Her face was twisted in a scowl. "I left the Tower because what Elaida did wasn't right. They raised you Amyrlin. So I am yours. If you will have me. If you can trust me without the Oath Rod. You must believe me."

"æn ju, θiədʒɹɪn?" ɛɡwin sɛd kwɪkli, skulɪŋ əɹ feɪs. noʊɪŋ haʊ ðə sɪstɝz fɛlt wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf; hɪɹɪŋ ɪɾ əɡɛn wɑz . . . peɪnfəl.

"And you, Theodrin?" Egwene said quickly, schooling her face. Knowing how the sisters felt was bad enough; hearing it again was . . . painful.

"aɪ æm jʊɹz, tu," θiədʒɹɪn saɪd, "ɪf jəl əv mi." ʃi spɹɛɾ əɹ hænz dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋli: "wi ɑɹ nɑt mʌtʃ, aɪ noʊ, bʌɾ ɪt lʊks əz ðoʊ wəɹ ɔl jə hæv. aɪ mʌst ədmɪɾ aɪ wɑz hɛzɪɾənt, mʌðɝ. fɑoʊleɪn ɪz ðə wʌn u kɛpt ɪnsɪstɪŋ wi də ðɪs. fɹæŋkli. . . ." ʃi sɛɾəld əɹ ʃɔl əɡɛn ənnɛsəsɛɹəli, ən əɹ vɔɪs fɝmd. "fɹæŋkli, aɪ də nɑt si haʊ jə kən wɪn aʊɾ oʊvɝ ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn. bʌt wəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɪheɪv əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ivən ðoʊ wi ɑɹən ɹɪli, jɛt. wɪl nɑt bi ðæt, mʌðɝ, wʌtɛvɝ jə seɪ, əntɪl ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz si əs əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðət woʊn hæpən əntɪl wɪv bɪn tɛstəɾ ən əv swɔɹn ðə θɹi oʊðz."

"I am yours, too," Theodrin sighed, "if you'll have me." She spread her hands disparagingly: "We are not much, I know, but it looks as though we are all you have. I must admit I was hesitant, Mother. Faolain is the one who kept insisting we do this. Frankly. . . ." She settled her shawl again unnecessarily, and her voice firmed. "Frankly, I do not see how you can win out over Romanda and Lelaine. But we are trying to behave as Aes Sedai, even though we aren't really, yet. We will not be that, Mother, whatever you say, until the other sisters see us as Aes Sedai, and that won't happen until we have been tested and have sworn the Three Oaths."

plʌkɪŋ ðə foʊldəd skɹæp ə pɑɹtʃmən aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ði ɪŋkwɛl, ɛɡwin fɪŋɡɝɾ ɪt waɪl ʃi θɔt. fɑoʊleɪn wɑz ðə dʒɹaɪvɪŋ fɔɹs bɪhaɪn ðɪs? ðət simd əz ənlaɪkli əz ə wʊlf bɪfɹɛndɪŋ ðə ʃɛpɝd. ʃi səspɛktəd "dɪslaɪk" wɑz ə maɪld wɝd fəɹ wʌt fɑoʊleɪn fɛl fəɹ hɝ, ən ðə wʊmən mʌs noʊ ɛɡwin hɑɹdli sɔ hɝ əz ə pətɛnʃəl fɹɛnd. ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ æksɛptɪɾ iðɝ sɪɾɝz ɝeɪnʒmənt, mɛnʃənɪŋ ði ɔfɝ maɪt bi ə ɡʊd minz ə dɪsɑɹmɪŋ əɹ səspɪʃənz.

Plucking the folded scrap of parchment out from under the inkwell, Egwene fingered it while she thought. Faolain was the driving force behind this? That seemed as unlikely as a wolf befriending the shepherd. She suspected "dislike" was a mild word for what Faolain felt for her, and the woman must know Egwene hardly saw her as a potential friend. If they had accepted either Sitter's arrangement, mentioning the offer might be a good means of disarming her suspicions.

"mʌðɝ," fɑoʊleɪn sɛd, ən stɑpt, lʊkɪŋ sɝpɹaɪzd ət hɝsɛlf. ɪt wɑz ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi hæɾ ədʒɹɛst ɛɡwin soʊ. dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ʃi wɛn ɑn. "mʌðɝ, aɪ noʊ jə mʌst əv ə hɑɹd taɪm bɪlivɪŋ ʌs, sɪns wiv nɛvɝ hɛl ði oʊθ ɹɑd, bʌt - "

"Mother," Faolain said, and stopped, looking surprised at herself. It was the first time she had addressed Egwene so. Drawing a deep breath, she went on. "Mother, I know you must have a hard time believing us, since we've never held the Oath Rod, but - "

"aɪ wɪʃ jə wəd stɑp bɹɪŋɪŋ ðəɾ ʌp," ɛɡwin sɛd. ɪt wɑz wɛl tə bi kɛɹfəl, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə ɹəfjuz ɛvɹi ɔfɝ ə hɛlp fəɹ fɪɹ ə plɑts. "du jə θɪŋk ɛvɹibɑɾi bɪlivz ɛɛs sədaɪ kəz ə ðə θɹi oʊðz? pipəl u noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ noʊ ə sɪstɝ kən stæn tʃɹuθ ɑn ɪts hɛɾ ən tɝn ɪɾ ɪnsaɪɾ aʊɾ ɪf ʃi tʃuzəz tə. maɪsɛlf, aɪ θɪŋk ðə θɹi oʊðz hɝɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ hɛlp, meɪbi mɔɹ. əl bɪliv jə əntɪl aɪ lɝn juv laɪd tə mi, ən əl tʃɹʌs jə əntɪl jə ʃoʊ jə doʊn dɪzɝv ɪt. ðə seɪm weɪ ɛvɹibɑɾi ɛls dʌz wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ." kʌm tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪt, ði oʊðz dɪd nɑt ɹɪli tʃeɪnʒ ðæt. jə stɪl hæd tə teɪk ə sɪstɝ ɑn tʃɹʌs moʊst ə ðə taɪm. ði oʊðz dʒʌs meɪd pipəl wɛɹiɝ əbaʊɾ ɪt, wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ən haʊ ðeɪ wɝ biɪŋ mənɪpjəleɪɾɪd. "ənʌðɝ θɪŋ. jə tu ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə hɪɹ ɛni mɔɹ əbaʊt hævɪŋ tə bi tɛstəd, əɹ hoʊl ði oʊθ ɹɑd, əɹ ɛni ʌv ɪt. bæɾ ɪnʌf juv tə feɪs ðət nɑnsɛns wɪθaʊt pɛɹəɾɪŋ ɪt jʊɹsɛlvz. hæv aɪ meɪd maɪsɛlf klɪɹ?"

"I wish you would stop bringing that up," Egwene said. It was well to be careful, but she could not afford to refuse every offer of help for fear of plots. "Do you think everybody believes Aes Sedai because of the Three Oaths? People who know Aes Sedai know a sister can stand truth on its head and turn it inside out if she chooses to. Myself, I think the Three Oaths hurt as much as they help, maybe more. I will believe you until I learn you've lied to me, and I will trust you until you show you don't deserve it. The same way everybody else does with one another." Come to think of it, the Oaths did not really change that. You still had to take a sister on trust most of the time. The Oaths just made people warier about it, wondering whether and how they were being manipulated. "Another thing. You two are Aes Sedai. I don't want to hear any more about having to be tested, or hold the Oath Rod, or any of it. Bad enough you have to face that nonsense without parroting it yourselves. Have I made myself clear?"

ðə tu wɪmən stændɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə teɪbəl mɝmɝd heɪstəli ðət ʃi hæd, ðən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lɔŋ lʊks. ðɪs taɪm, ɪt wɑz fɑoʊleɪn u əpɪɹɾ ɪndɪsaɪsɪv. faɪnəli, θiədʒɹɪn ɡlaɪɾɪd ɝaʊn tə nil bɪsaɪɾ ɛɡwinz tʃɛɹ ən kɪs əɹ ɹɪŋ. "ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ ən baɪ maɪ hoʊp ə sælveɪʃən ən ɹibɝθ, aɪ, θiədʒɹɪn dəbeɪ, swɛɹ fiəlti tə ju, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ, tə feɪθfəli sɝv ən oʊbeɪ ɑn peɪn ə maɪ laɪf ən ɑnɝ." ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɛɡwin kwɛstʃənɪŋli.

The two women standing on the other side of the table murmured hastily that she had, then exchanged long looks. This time, it was Faolain who appeared indecisive. Finally, Theodrin glided around to kneel beside Egwene's chair and kiss her ring. "Under the Light and by my hope of salvation and rebirth, I, Theodrin Dabei, swear fealty to you, Egwene al'Vere, to faithfully serve and obey on pain of my life and honor." She looked at Egwene questioningly.

ɪt wɑz ɔl ɛɡwin kəd də tə nɑd. ðɪs wɑz noʊ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹɪtʃuəl; ðɪs wɑz haʊ noʊbəl swɔɹ tə ɹulɝ. ivən səm ɹulɝz dɪd nɑt ɹəsiv soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ən oʊθ. jɛt noʊ sunɝ hæd θiədʒɹɪn ɹɪzən wɪð ə ɹɪliv smaɪl ðən fɑoʊleɪn tʊk əɹ pleɪs.

It was all Egwene could do to nod. This was no part of Aes Sedai ritual; this was how noble swore to ruler. Even some rulers did not receive so strong an oath. Yet no sooner had Theodrin risen with a relieved smile than Faolain took her place.

"ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ ən baɪ maɪ hoʊp ə sælveɪʃən ən ɹibɝθ, aɪ, fɑoʊleɪn ɔɹənd. . . ."

"Under the Light and by my hope of salvation and rebirth, I, Faolain Orande. . . ."

ɔl ðət ʃi cʊɾə wɪʃt fəɹ ən mɔɹ. fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ sɪstɝz, ət list, hu wɝ nɑt dʒʌst əz laɪkli tə bi sɛn tə fɛtʃ ənʌðɝz dʌstkloʊk ɪf ðə wɪn ɹoʊz.

All that she could have wished for and more. From any other sisters, at least, who were not just as likely to be sent to fetch another's dustcloak if the wind rose.

wən fɑoʊleɪn fɪnɪʃt, ʃi ɹɪmeɪnd nilɪŋ, bʌt stɪfli əpɹaɪt. "mʌðɝ, ðəɹ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ ə maɪ pɛnəns. fəɹ wʌɾ aɪ sɛd tə ju, əbaʊt nɑt laɪkɪŋ ju. əl sɛɾ ɪt maɪsɛlf, ɪf jə wɪʃ, bʌɾ ɪts jəɹ ɹaɪt." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz əz ɹɪdʒəɾ əz əɹ pɑstʃɝ, jɛt nɑɾ əɾ ɔl fɪɹfəl. ʃi lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə stɛɹ daʊn ə laɪən. iɡɝ tə, ɪn fækt.

When Faolain finished, she remained kneeling, but stiffly upright. "Mother, there is the matter of my penance. For what I said to you, about not liking you. I will set it myself, if you wish, but it is your right." Her voice was as rigid as her posture, yet not at all fearful. She looked ready to stare down a lion. Eager to, in fact.

baɪɾɪŋ əɹ lɪp, ɛɡwin nɪɹli læft əlaʊd. kipɪŋ əɹ feɪs smuð tʊk ɛfɝt; meɪbi ðeɪ wəd teɪk ɪt fəɹ ə hɪkaʊ. haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ðeɪ kleɪm ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ɹɪli ɛɛs sədaɪ, fɑoʊleɪn hæd dʒʌs pɹuv haʊ mʌtʃ ʌv wʌn ʃi wɑz. səmtaɪmz sɪstɝz sɛt ðɛmsɛlvz pɛnənsɪz, ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə meɪnteɪn ðə pɹɑpɝ bæləns bɪtwin pɹaɪɾ ən hjumɪlɪɾi - ðət bæləns wɑz mʌtʃ pɹaɪzd, səpoʊzədli, ən ði oʊnli ɹizən ɡɪvən juʒəwəli - bʌt sɝɾənli nʌn sɔt tə hæv wʌn ɪmpoʊzd. pɛnəns sɛt baɪ ənʌðɝ kəd bi kwaɪt hɑɹʃ, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz səpoʊz tə bi hɑɹɾɝ ɪn ðɪs ðən ði ədʒəz. iðɝ weɪ, ðoʊ, mɛni sɪstɝz meɪɾ ə hɔɾi dɪspleɪ ʌv səbmɪʃən tə ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ wɪl ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ɛɹəɡənt ʃoʊɪŋ ə ðɛɹ læk ʌv ɛɹəɡəns. ðə pɹaɪɾ ə hjumɪlɪɾi, sɪuən kɔld ɪt. ʃi kənsɪɾɝd tɛlɪŋ ðə wʊmən tə iɾ ə hændfʊl ə soʊp dʒʌs tə si hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən - fɑoʊleɪn hæɾ ə min tʌŋ - bʌɾ ɪnstɛd. . . .

Biting her lip, Egwene nearly laughed aloud. Keeping her face smooth took effort; maybe they would take it for a hiccough. However much they claimed they were not really Aes Sedai, Faolain had just proved how much of one she was. Sometimes sisters set themselves penances, in order to maintain the proper balance between pride and humility - that balance was much prized, supposedly, and the only reason given usually - but certainly none sought to have one imposed. Penance set by another could be quite harsh, and the Amyrlin was supposed to be harder in this than the Ajahs. Either way, though, many sisters made a haughty display of submission to the greater will of the Aes Sedai, an arrogant showing of their lack of arrogance. The pride of humility, Siuan called it. She considered telling the woman to eat a handful of soap just to see her expression - Faolain had a mean tongue - but instead. . . .

"aɪ doʊn hæn aʊt pɛnəns fəɹ tɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ, dɔɾɝ. əɹ fəɹ nɑt laɪkɪŋ mi. dɪslaɪk tə jəɹ hɑɹts kɑntɛnt, soʊ lɔŋ əz jə kip jəɹ oʊθ." nɑt ðəɾ ɛniwʌn ɪksɛpt ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd wəd bɹeɪk ðət pɝtɪkjəlɝ oʊθ. stɪl, ðəɹ wɝ weɪz ɝaʊn ɔlmoʊst ɛniθɪŋ. bʌt wik stɪks wɝ bɛɾɝ ðən nʌn, wən jə wɝ fɛndɪŋ ɔf ə bɛɹ.

"I don't hand out penance for telling the truth, daughter. Or for not liking me. Dislike to your heart's content, so long as you keep your oath." Not that anyone except a Darkfriend would break that particular oath. Still, there were ways around almost anything. But weak sticks were better than none, when you were fending off a bear.

fɑoʊleɪnz aɪz waɪɾənd, ən ɛɡwin saɪɾ əz ʃi moʊʃən ðə wʊmən tə ɹaɪz. hæd ðɛɹ pəzɪʃənz bɪn ɹɪvɝst, fɑoʊleɪn wʊɾə pʊɾ əɹ noʊz fɝmli ɪn ðə dʌst.

Faolain's eyes widened, and Egwene sighed as she motioned the woman to rise. Had their positions been reversed, Faolain would have put her nose firmly in the dust.

"aɪm sɛɾɪŋ jə tu tæsks tə bɪɡɪn, dɔɾɝz," ʃi wɛn ɑn.

"I'm setting you two tasks to begin, daughters," she went on.

ðeɪ lɪsən kɛɹfəli, fɑoʊleɪn nɑɾ ivən blɪŋkɪŋ, θiədʒɹɪn wɪð ə θɔtfəl fɪŋɡɝ tə hɝ lɪps, ən ðɪs taɪm wən ʃi dɪsmɪs ðɛm, ðeɪ sɛd, "æz jə kəmænd, mʌðɝ," ɪn junəsən əz ðeɪ kɝtsid.

They listened carefully, Faolain not even blinking, Theodrin with a thoughtful finger to her lips, and this time when she dismissed them, they said, "As you command, Mother," in unison as they curtsied.

ɛɡwinz ɡʊd mud wɑz fliɾɪŋ, ðoʊ. mɛɹi ɝaɪvd wɪð əɹ bɹɛkfəst ɑn ə tʃɹeɪ əz θiədʒɹɪn ən fɑoʊleɪn dɪpɑɹɾəd, ən wən ɛɡwin θæŋkt əɹ fəɹ ðə ɹoʊz-pɛɾəl poʊmændɝ, ʃi sɛd, "aɪ hæɾ ə fju spɛɹ moʊməns, mʌðɝ." baɪ hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən, ðət cʊɾə bɪn ən ækjəzeɪʃən ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɝkt əɹ tu hɑɹd, əɹ ðət ʃi hɝsɛlf dɪd nɑt wɝk hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf. nɑɾ ə plɛzən spaɪs fəɹ ðə stud fɹut. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ðə wʊmənz feɪs maɪt saʊɝ ðə mɪn ti ən tɝn ðə wɔɹm kɹʌsti bʌn hɑɹɾ əz ə ɹɑk. ɛɡwin sɛn əɹ əweɪ bɪfɔɹ iɾɪŋ. ðə ti wɑz wik ɛniweɪ. ti wɑz wʌn ə ðə θɪŋz ɪn ʃɔɹt səplaɪ.

Egwene's good mood was fleeting, though. Meri arrived with her breakfast on a tray as Theodrin and Faolain departed, and when Egwene thanked her for the rose-petal pomander, she said, "I had a few spare moments, Mother." By her expression, that could have been an accusation that Egwene worked her too hard, or that she herself did not work hard enough. Not a pleasant spice for the stewed fruit. For that matter, the woman's face might sour the mint tea and turn the warm crusty bun hard as a rock. Egwene sent her away before eating. The tea was weak anyway. Tea was one of the things in short supply.

ðə noʊt ðət hæd bɪn ʌndɝ ði ɪŋkwɛl pɹuv noʊ bɛɾɝ sizənɪŋ. "nʌθɪŋ ʌv ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ðə dʒɹim," sɛd sɪuənz faɪn skɹɪpt. soʊ sɪuən hæd bɪn ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd læs naɪt tu; ʃi dɪɾ ə ɡʊd dil ə spaɪɪŋ ðɛɹ. ɪt mæɾɝd lɪɾəl wɛðɝ ʃi hæd bɪn hʌntɪŋ səm saɪn ə mɑɡiɾin, ðoʊ ðət wʊɾə bɪn ənseɪnli fulɪʃ, əɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls; nʌθɪŋ wɑz nʌθɪŋ.

The note that had been under the inkwell proved no better seasoning. "Nothing of interest in the dream," said Siuan's fine script. So Siuan had been in Tel'aran'rhiod last night too; she did a good deal of spying there. It mattered little whether she had been hunting some sign of Moghedien, though that would have been insanely foolish, or something else; nothing was nothing.

ɛɡwin ɡɹɪməst, ən nɑt dʒʌs fəɹ ðə "nʌθɪŋ." sɪuən ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd læs naɪt mɛn ə vɪzət fɹəm lin sʌmtaɪm tədeɪ, kəmpleɪnɪŋ. sɪuən moʊs dɛfənətli noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɑz əlaʊɾ ɛni ʌv ðə dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil, nɑt sɪns ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə titʃ səm ə ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz əbaʊt ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz. ɪt wɑz nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ ðət ʃi nu lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ, əɹ ivən ðət fju sɪstɝz bɪliv ðeɪ æktʃəli  niɾəd ə titʃɝ tə lɝn ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt sɪuən pəzɛst ə tʌŋ laɪk ə ɹæsp ən noʊ peɪʃəns. juʒəwəli ʃi mænədʒ tə hoʊld əɹ tɛmpɝ, bʌt tu aʊtbɝsts ə ʃaʊɾɪŋ ən fɪst-ʃeɪkɪŋ, ən ʃi hæd bɪn fɔɹtʃənət dʒʌs tə faɪn hɝsɛlf dɪnaɪɾ æksɛs tə ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. lin wɑz ɡɪvən wʌn wɛnɛvɝ ʃi æskt, ðoʊ, ən fɹikwənli sɪuən juzd ɪɾ ɪn sikɹət. ðət wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju ɹil boʊnz ə kəntɛnʃən bɪtwin ðɛm; wʊɾə əv bɪn ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ ɛvɹi naɪɾ ɪf ðeɪ kʊd.

Egwene grimaced, and not just for the "nothing." Siuan in Tel'aran'rhiod last night meant a visit from Leane sometime today, complaining. Siuan most definitely no longer was allowed any of the dream ter'angreal, not since she had tried to teach some of the other sisters about the World of Dreams. It was not so much that she knew little more than they, or even that few sisters believed they actually needed a teacher to learn anything, but Siuan possessed a tongue like a rasp and no patience. Usually she managed to hold her temper, but two outbursts of shouting and fist-shaking, and she had been fortunate just to find herself denied access to the ter'angreal. Leane was given one whenever she asked, though, and frequently Siuan used it in secret. That was one of the few real bones of contention between them; both would have been in Tel'aran'rhiod every night if they could.

wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs ɛɡwin tʃænəl ðə taɪniəst spɑɹk ə faɪɝ tə sɛɾ ə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə pɑɹtʃmən əlaɪɾ ən hɛld ɪɾ əntɪl ɪt bɝnd nɪɹli tə hɝ fɪŋɡɝz. nʌθɪŋ lɛf tə bi faʊn baɪ ɛniwʌn ɹuɾɪŋ θɹu hɝ bɪlɔŋɪŋz ən ɹipɔɹɾəd wɛɹ ɪt wəd ɹaʊs səspɪʃənz.

With a grimace Egwene channeled the tiniest spark of Fire to set a corner of the parchment alight and held it until it burned nearly to her fingers. Nothing left to be found by anyone rooting through her belongings and reported where it would rouse suspicions.

bɹɛkfəst ɔlmoʊs dʌn, ʃi wɑz stɪl əloʊn, ən ðət wɑz nɑt juʒəwəl. ʃɛɹiəm maɪt wɛl bi əvɔɪɾɪŋ hɝ, bʌt sɪuən ʃʊɾə bɪn ðɛɹ. pɑpɪŋ ə læs bɪɾ ə ðə bʌn ɪndə hɝ maʊθ ən wɑʃɪŋ ɪt daʊn wɪð ə faɪnəl swɑloʊ ʌv ti, ʃi ɹoʊz tə ɡoʊ faɪn hɝ, oʊnli tə hæv ði əbdʒɛkt ə hɝ ɪntɛndəd sɝtʃ stɔk ɪndə ðə tɛnt. hæd sɪuən hæɾ ə teɪl, ʃi wʊɾə bɪn læʃɪŋ ɪt.

Breakfast almost done, she was still alone, and that was not usual. Sheriam might well be avoiding her, but Siuan should have been there. Popping a last bit of the bun into her mouth and washing it down with a final swallow of tea, she rose to go find her, only to have the object of her intended search stalk into the tent. Had Siuan had a tail, she would have been lashing it.

"wɛɹ əv jə bɪn?" ɛɡwin dɪmændəd, wivɪŋ ə wɔɹɾ əɡɛns lɪsənɝz.

"Where have you been?" Egwene demanded, weaving a ward against listeners.

"æɛldin pʊl mi aʊɾ ə maɪ blæŋkəts fɝs θɪŋ," sɪuən ɡɹaʊld, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɑntu wʌn ə ðə stulz. "ʃi stɪl θɪŋks ʃɪl pʌmp ði æmɪɝlɪnz aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz aʊɾ ə mi. noʊ wʌn ɡɛts ðæt! noʊ wʌn!"

"Aeldene pulled me out of my blankets first thing," Siuan growled, dropping onto one of the stools. "She still thinks she'll pump the Amyrlin's eyes-and-ears out of me. No one gets that! No one!"

wən sɪuən hæd fɝst ɝaɪvd ɪn sɑlədɑɹ, ə stɪld wʊmən ɑn ðə ɹʌn, ə dɪpoʊzd æmɪɝlɪn ðə wɝl θɔt dɛd, ðə sɪstɝz maɪt wɛl nɑɾ əv lɛɾ əɹ steɪ ɪksɛp ðət ʃi nu nɑɾ oʊnli ði æmɪɝlɪn sits nɛtwɝk ʌv eɪdʒəns, bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ ðəɾ ə ðə blu ədʒɑ, wɪtʃ ʃi hæd ɹʌn bɪfɔɹ biɪŋ ɹeɪz tə ðə stoʊl. ðət hæd ɡɪvən əɹ ə sɝɾən ɪnfluəns, dʒʌst əz linz eɪdʒəns ɪnsaɪd tɑɹ vəlɑn hæd ɡɪvən əɹ sʌm. ði ɝaɪvəl ʌv æɛldin stoʊn-bɹɪdʒ, hu hæd teɪkən əɹ pleɪs wɪð ðə blu aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz, hæd tʃeɪnʒd mæɾɝz fəɹ sɪuən. æɛldin hæd bɪn aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ ðət ɹɪpɔɹts fɹəm ðə hændfʊl ə blu eɪdʒəns sɪuən hæd mænədʒ tə ɹitʃ hæd bɪn hændəd tə wɪmən aʊtsaɪd ði ədʒɑ. ðəɾ æɛldinz oʊn pəzɪʃən hæd bɪn ɹɪvild - oʊnli tu əɹ θɹi sɪstɝz wɝ səpoʊz tə noʊ, ivən wɪðɪn ðə blu - ɪnfjʊɹieɪɾəd əɹ tə nɪɹ æpəplɛksi. ʃi nɑɾ oʊnli snætʃt bæk kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðə blu nɛtwɝk, nɑɾ oʊnli əpbɹeɪɾɪd sɪuən ɪn ə vɔɪs ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn hɝɾ ə maɪl ɔf, ʃi vɛɹi nɪɹli wɛn fəɹ sɪuənz θɹoʊt. æɛldin wɑz fɹəm ən ændɔɝən maɪnɪŋ vɪlədʒ ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst, ən ɪt wɑz sɛɾ əɹ kɹʊkəd noʊz keɪm fɹəm faɪɾɪŋ wɪð əɹ fɪsts wən ʃi wɑz ə ɡɝl. æɛldinz ækʃənz hæd stɑɹɾəd ʌðɝz θɪŋkɪŋ.

When Siuan had first arrived in Salidar, a stilled woman on the run, a deposed Amyrlin the world thought dead, the sisters might well not have let her stay except that she knew not only the Amyrlin Seat's network of agents, but also that of the Blue Ajah, which she had run before being raised to the stole. That had given her a certain influence, just as Leane's agents inside Tar Valon had given her some. The arrival of Aeldene Stone-bridge, who had taken her place with the Blue eyes-and-ears, had changed matters for Siuan. Aeldene had been outraged that reports from the handful of Blue agents Siuan had managed to reach had been handed to women outside the Ajah. That Aeldene's own position had been revealed - only two or three sisters were supposed to know, even within the Blue - infuriated her to near apoplexy. She not only snatched back control of the Blue network, not only upbraided Siuan in a voice that might have been heard a mile off, she very nearly went for Siuan's throat. Aeldene was from an Andoran mining village in the Mountains of Mist, and it was said her crooked nose came from fighting with her fists when she was a girl. Aeldene's actions had started others thinking.

ɛɡwin ɹɪtɝn tə hɝ ənstɛɾi tʃɛɹ ən pʊʃt əɹ bɹɛkfəs tʃɹeɪ əsaɪd. "æɛldin woʊn teɪk ɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ju, sɪuən, ən niðɝ wɪl ɛniwʌn ɛls." wən æɛldin ɹikleɪm ðə blu aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz, ʌðɝz hæd bɪɡʌn θɪŋkɪŋ ðət ðə blu ʃəd nɑɾ əv ði æmɪɝlɪnz əz wɛl. noʊ wʌn sədʒɛstəd ðəɾ ɪt ʃəd bi ɪn ɛɡwinz kəntʃɹoʊl. ðə hɔl wɑz tə hæv ɪt. soʊ ɹoʊmændə sɛd, ən ləleɪn. itʃ ɪntɛndəd tə bi ðə wʌn ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ, ʌv kɔɹs, ðə wʌn ðoʊz ɹɪpɔɹts keɪm tə fɝst, fəɹ biɪŋ fɝs tə noʊ hæɾ ædvæntɪdʒɪz. æɛldin θɔt ðoʊz eɪdʒəns ʃəd bi æɾəd tə ðə blu nɛtwɝk sɪns sɪuən wɑz blu. ət list ʃɛɹiəm wɑz kɑntɛn sɪmpli tə bi hændəɾ ɔl ðə ɹɪpɔɹts sɪuən ɹəsivd. wɪtʃ ʃi juʒəwəli wɑz. "ðeɪ kæn meɪk jə ɡɪv ɪɾ ʌp."

Egwene returned to her unsteady chair and pushed her breakfast tray aside. "Aeldene won't take it away from you, Siuan, and neither will anyone else." When Aeldene reclaimed the Blue eyes-and-ears, others had begun thinking that the Blue should not have the Amyrlin's as well. No one suggested that it should be in Egwene's control. The Hall was to have it. So Romanda said, and Lelaine. Each intended to be the one in charge, of course, the one those reports came to first, for being first to know had advantages. Aeldene thought those agents should be added to the Blue network since Siuan was Blue. At least Sheriam was content simply to be handed all the reports Siuan received. Which she usually was. "They can't make you give it up."

ɛɡwin fɪld əɹ tikʌp əɡɛn, sɛɾɪŋ ɪɾ ən ðə blu-ɡleɪz hʌni-pɑɾ ɑn ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə teɪbəl nɪɹəst sɪuən, bʌt ði ʌðɝ wʊmən oʊnli stɛɹɾ ət ðɛm. ði æŋɡɝ hæd ɡɔn aʊɾ ə hɝ. ʃi slʌmpt ɑn ðə stul. "ju nɛvɝ ɹɪli θɪŋk əbaʊt stʃɹɛŋkθ," ʃi sɛd, hæf tə hɝsɛlf. "jɔɹ əwɛɹ ʌv ɪt, wɛðɝ jəɹ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən sʌmbɑɾi ɛls, bʌt jə doʊn θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt. jə dʒʌs noʊ ðət ʃi dɪfɝz tə ju, əɹ jə tə hɝ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən mi, bɪfɔɹ. noʊ wʌn, sɪns . . ." hɝ aɪz dʒɹɑp tə hɝ hænz, stɝɪŋ ənizəli ɑn əɹ læp. "səmtaɪmz, wən ɹoʊmændə ɪz hæmɝɪŋ ət mi, əɹ ləleɪn, ɪt sʌɾənli hɪts mi laɪk ə ɡeɪl. ðəɹ soʊ fɑɹ əbʌv mi naʊ, aɪ ʃəd bi hoʊldɪŋ maɪ tʌŋ əntɪl ðeɪ ɡɪmi pɝmɪʃən tə spik. ivən æɛldin ɪz, ən ʃiz noʊ mɔɹ ðən mɪɾəlɪŋ." ʃi fɔɹst əɹ hɛɾ əpɹaɪt, maʊθ taɪɾ ən vɔɪs bɪɾɝ. "aɪ səpoʊz aɪm ədʒʌstɪŋ tə ɹiæləɾi. ðæts ɪnɡɹeɪn ɪn ʌs, tu, dʒɹɪvən dip bɪfɔɹ jə ɛvɝ tɛs fəɹ ðə ʃɔl. bʌɾ aɪ doʊn laɪk ɪt. aɪ doʊnt!"

Egwene filled her teacup again, setting it and the blue-glazed honey-pot on the corner of the table nearest Siuan, but the other woman only stared at them. The anger had gone out of her. She slumped on the stool. "You never really think about strength," she said, half to herself. "You're aware of it, whether you're stronger than somebody else, but you don't think about it. You just know that she defers to you, or you to her. There was no one stronger than me, before. No one, since . . ." Her eyes dropped to her hands, stirring uneasily on her lap. "Sometimes, when Romanda is hammering at me, or Lelaine, it suddenly hits me like a gale. They're so far above me now, I should be holding my tongue until they give me permission to speak. Even Aeldene is, and she's no more than middling." She forced her head upright, mouth tight and voice bitter. "I suppose I'm adjusting to reality. That's ingrained in us, too, driven deep before you ever test for the shawl. But I don't like it. I don't!"

ɛɡwin pɪkt ʌp əɹ pɛn fɹəm bɪsaɪd ði ɪŋkwɛl ən ðə sæn dʒɑɹ, fɪdlɪŋ wɪð ɪt waɪl ʃi tʃoʊz wɝdz. "sɪuən, jə noʊ haʊ aɪ fil əbaʊt wʌt nidz tə bi tʃeɪnʒd. ðɛɹz tu mʌtʃ wi də kəz ɛɛs sədaɪ hæv ɔlweɪz dʌn ɪt ðət weɪ. bʌt θɪŋz ɑɹ tʃeɪnʒɪŋ, noʊ mæɾɝ u bɪlivz ɪɾəl ɔl ɡoʊ bæk tə haʊ ɪt wɑz. aɪ daʊɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls wɑz ɛvɝ ɹeɪzd æmɪɝlɪn wɪθaʊt biɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ fɝst." ðət ʃʊɾə ɪlɪsɪɾɪd ə kɑmɛn ɑn ðə waɪt taʊɝz hɪɾən ɹɛkɝdz - sɪuən ɔfən sɛd ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ðət hæd nɑɾ əkɝɾ ət list wʌns ɪn ðə taʊɝz hɪstɝi, ðoʊ ðɪs dɪd sim tə bi ə fɝst - bʌt sɪuən sæt ðəɹ dɪshɑɹɾənd, laɪk ə sæk. "sɪuən, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ weɪ ɪzən ði oʊnli weɪ, ən nɑɾ ivən ɔlweɪz ðə bɛst. aɪ ɪntɛn tə meɪk ʃʊɹ wi fɑloʊ ðə bɛst weɪ, ən huɛvɝ kæn lɝn tə tʃeɪnʒ, əɹ woʊnt, hæd bɛɾɝ lɝn tə lɪv wɪð ɪt." linɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk əɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋ. "aɪ nɛvɝ dɪd fɪɡjɝ aʊt haʊ waɪz wʌnz dətɝmən pɹɛsəɾəns, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɪzən stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə paʊɝ. ðəɹ ɑɹ wɪmən u kən tʃænəl u dɪfɝ tə wɪmən u kænt. wʌn, sɔɹɪliə, wəd nɛvɝ əv meɪɾ ɪt tə æksɛptɪd, jɛɾ ivən ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəs dʒʌmp wən ʃi sɛz toʊd."

Egwene picked up her pen from beside the inkwell and the sand jar, fiddling with it while she chose words. "Siuan, you know how I feel about what needs to be changed. There's too much we do because Aes Sedai have always done it that way. But things are changing, no matter who believes it will all go back to how it was. I doubt anyone else was ever raised Amyrlin without being Aes Sedai first." That should have elicited a comment on the White Tower's hidden records - Siuan often said there was nothing that had not occurred at least once in the Tower's history, though this did seem to be a first - but Siuan sat there disheartened, like a sack. "Siuan, the Aes Sedai way isn't the only way, and not even always the best. I intend to make sure we follow the best way, and whoever can't learn to change, or won't, had better learn to live with it." Leaning across the table, she tried to make her expression encouraging. "I never did figure out how Wise Ones determine precedence, but it isn't strength in the Power. There are women who can channel who defer to women who can't. One, Sorilea, would never have made it to Accepted, yet even the strongest jump when she says toad."

"waɪldɝz," sɪuən sɛd dɪsmɪsɪvli, bʌɾ ɪt læk fɔɹs.

"Wilders," Siuan said dismissively, but it lacked force.

"ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðɛn. aɪ wɑzn ɹeɪzd æmɪɝlɪn kəz aɪm ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst. ðə waɪzəst wɪmən ɑɹ tʃoʊzən fəɹ ðə hɔl əɹ tə bi æmbæsəɾɝz əɹ ædvaɪzɝz, ðə moʊst skɪlfəl ɛniweɪ, nɑt ðoʊz wɪð ðə moʊst stʃɹɛŋkθ." bɛs nɑt tə seɪ skɪlfəl ɪn wʌt, ðoʊ sɪuən sɝɾənli pəzɛs ðoʊz pɝtɪkjəlɝ skɪlz tu.

"Aes Sedai, then. I wasn't raised Amyrlin because I am the strongest. The wisest women are chosen for the Hall or to be ambassadors or advisors, the most skillful anyway, not those with the most strength." Best not to say skillful in what, though Siuan certainly possessed those particular skills too.

"ðə hɔl? ðə hɔl maɪt sɛn mi fəɹ ti. ðeɪ maɪɾ əv mi swip aʊt wən ðeɪv fɪnɪʃt sɪɾɪŋ."

"The Hall? The Hall might send me for tea. They might have me sweep out when they've finished sitting."

sɪɾɪŋ bæk, ɛɡwin θɹu daʊn ðə pɛn. ʃi wɑntəd tə ʃeɪk ðə wʊmən. sɪuən hæd kɛpt ɡoʊɪŋ wən ʃi kəd nɑt tʃænəl əɾ ɔl, ən naʊ hɝ niz bɪɡæn tə foʊld? ɛɡwin wɑz ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə tɛlɪŋ əɹ əbaʊt θiədʒɹɪn ən fɑoʊleɪn - ðət ʃəd ɡɛt səm ɹaɪz, ən əpɹuvəl - wən ʃi sɔ ən ɑləv-skɪnd wʊmən ɹaɪd pæs ði oʊpən tɛn flæps lʊkɪŋ lɔst ɪn θɔt bɪniθ ðə waɪd ɡɹeɪ hæt ʃi wɔɹ tə kip ɔf ðə sʌn.

Sitting back, Egwene threw down the pen. She wanted to shake the woman. Siuan had kept going when she could not channel at all, and now her knees began to fold? Egwene was on the point of telling her about Theodrin and Faolain - that should get some rise, and approval - when she saw an olive-skinned woman ride past the open tent flaps looking lost in thought beneath the wide gray hat she wore to keep off the sun.

"sɪuən, ɪts maɪɹɛl." lɛɾɪŋ ðə wɔɹd ɡoʊ, ʃi ɹʌʃt aʊtsaɪd. "maɪɹɛl," ʃi kɔld. sɪuən niɾəd ə vɪktɝi tə wɑʃ ðə teɪst ə biɪŋ bʊliɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ maʊθ, ən ðɪs maɪt bi dʒʌs ðə θɪŋ. maɪɹɛl wɑz wʌn ə ʃɛɹiəmz lɑt, ən əpɛɹənli wɪð ə sikɹəɾ ɔl əɹ oʊn.

"Siuan, it's Myrelle." Letting the ward go, she rushed outside. "Myrelle," she called. Siuan needed a victory to wash the taste of being bullied out of her mouth, and this might be just the thing. Myrelle was one of Sheriam's lot, and apparently with a secret all her own.

ɹeɪnɪŋ ɪn əɹ sɔɹəl ɡɛldɪŋ, maɪɹɛl lʊkt ɝaʊnd, ən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt wən ʃi sɔ ɛɡwin. baɪ hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən, ðə ɡɹin sɪstɝ hæd nɑt ɹilaɪzd wʌt pɑɹɾ ə ðə kæmp ʃi wɑz pæsɪŋ θɹu. ə θɪn dʌstkloʊk hʌŋ daʊn ðə bæk ə hɝ peɪl ɡɹeɪ ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs. "mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd hɛzɪɾəntli, "ɪf jəl fɝɡɪv mi, aɪ - "

Reining in her sorrel gelding, Myrelle looked around, and gave a start when she saw Egwene. By her expression, the Green sister had not realized what part of the camp she was passing through. A thin dustcloak hung down the back of her pale gray riding dress. "Mother," she said hesitantly, "if you will forgive me, I - "

"aɪ wɪl nɑt fɝɡɪv ju," ɛɡwin kʌɾ ɪn, meɪkɪŋ əɹ flɪntʃ. ɛni daʊt vænɪʃt ðət maɪɹɛl hæd hɝɾ əbaʊt læs naɪt fɹəm ʃɛɹiəm. "aɪ wɪl tɔk wɪð ju. naʊ."

"I will not forgive you," Egwene cut in, making her flinch. Any doubt vanished that Myrelle had heard about last night from Sheriam. "I will talk with you. Now."

sɪuən hæd kʌm aʊtsaɪd tu, bʌɾ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv wɑtʃɪŋ ðə sɪstɝ klaɪm ənizəli fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl, ʃi stɛɹd daʊn ðə ɹoʊz ə tɛns təwɔɹɾ ə stɑki, ɡɹeɪɪŋ mæn wɪð ə bæɾɝd bɹɛstpleɪt stʃɹæpt oʊvɝ ɪz bʌf-kʌlɝd koʊt, liɾɪŋ ə tɔl beɪ ɪn ðɛɹ dɝɛkʃən. hɪz pɹɛzəns wɑz ə sɝpɹaɪz. lɔɹd bɹaɪn juʒəwəli kəmjunəkeɪɾɪd wɪð ðə hɔl baɪ mɛsənʒɝ, ən ɪz ɹɛɹ vɪzəts moʊsli fɪnɪʃt bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwin lɝn i hæd kʌm. sɪuən əsum sətʃ ə lʊk ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi ɪt nɪɹli meɪd jə fɝɡɛɾ əɹ juθfəl feɪs.

Siuan had come outside too, but instead of watching the sister climb uneasily from her saddle, she stared down the rows of tents toward a stocky, graying man with a battered breastplate strapped over his buff-colored coat, leading a tall bay in their direction. His presence was a surprise. Lord Bryne usually communicated with the Hall by messenger, and his rare visits mostly finished before Egwene learned he had come. Siuan assumed such a look of Aes Sedai serenity it nearly made you forget her youthful face.

ɡlænsɪŋ bɹifli ət sɪuən, bɹaɪn meɪɾ ə lɛɡ, hænlɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd wɪð ə spɛɹ ɡɹeɪs. ə wɛðɝd mæn, hi wɑz oʊnli mɑɾɝətli tɔl, bʌt ðə weɪ hi kæɹid hɪmsɛlf meɪɾ ɪm sim tɔlɝ. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ flæʃi əbaʊt hɪm; ðə swɛɾ ɑn ɪz bɹɔd feɪs meɪɾ ɪm sim tə bi əbaʊɾ ə dʒɑb ʌv wɝk. "mʌðɝ, meɪ aɪ spik wɪð ju? əloʊn?"

Glancing briefly at Siuan, Bryne made a leg, handling his sword with a spare grace. A weathered man, he was only moderately tall, but the way he carried himself made him seem taller. There was nothing flashy about him; the sweat on his broad face made him seem to be about a job of work. "Mother, may I speak with you? Alone?"

maɪɹɛl tɝn əz ɪf tə ɡoʊ, ən ɛɡwin snæpt, "ju steɪ ɹaɪt ðɛɹ! ɹaɪt wɛɹ jə ɑɹ!" maɪɹɛlz maʊθ dʒɹɑpt oʊpən. hɝ sɝpɹaɪz simd əz mʌtʃ fəɹ əɹ oʊn oʊbiɾiəns əz ɛɡwinz dɪsaɪsɪv toʊn, ən ɪt feɪɾəd ɪndə bɪɾɝ ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən ðət ʃi kwɪkli hɪd bɪhaɪn ə kul fəsɑd. wʌn bɪlaɪd baɪ ðə weɪ ʃi twɪəld əɹ ɹeɪnz.

Myrelle turned as if to go, and Egwene snapped, "You stay right there! Right where you are!" Myrelle's mouth dropped open. Her surprise seemed as much for her own obedience as Egwene's decisive tone, and it faded into bitter resignation that she quickly hid behind a cool facade. One belied by the way she twiddled her reins.

bɹaɪn dɪd nɑɾ ivən blɪŋk, ðoʊ ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ i ət lis hæɾ ən ɪŋklɪŋ ə hɝ sɪtʃueɪʃən. ʃi səspɛktəd ðət vɛɹi lɪɾəl sɝpɹaɪz hɪm, əɹ ənsɛɾəld hɪm. dʒʌs ðə saɪɾ ə hɪm hæd meɪd sɪuən ɹɛɾi tə faɪt bæk, fəɹ ɔl ɪt wɑz əpɛɹənli ʃi hu stɑɹɾəd moʊst ə ðɛɹ ɑɹɡjəməns. ɔlɹɛɾi hɝ fɪsts ɹɛstəɾ ɑn əɹ hɪps ən əɹ ɡeɪz wɑz fɪkst ɑn hɪm, ən ɔɡɝɪŋ stɛɹ ðət ʃʊɾə meɪɾ ɛniwʌn ənizi ivən hæɾ ɪt nɑt kʌm fɹəm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. maɪɹɛl ɔfɝd mɔɹ ðən hɛlpɪŋ sɪuən, ðoʊ. pɝhæps. "aɪ ɪntɛndəd tə æsk jə tə kʌm ðɪs æftɝnun, lɔɹd bɹaɪn. aɪ æsk naʊ." ʃi hæd kwɛstʃənz tə pʊt tə hɪm. "wi kən tɔk ðɛn. ɪf jəl fɝɡɪv mi."

Bryne did not even blink, though Egwene was sure he at least had an inkling of her situation. She suspected that very little surprised him, or unsettled him. Just the sight of him had made Siuan ready to fight back, for all it was apparently she who started most of their arguments. Already her fists rested on her hips and her gaze was fixed on him, an auguring stare that should have made anyone uneasy even had it not come from an Aes Sedai. Myrelle offered more than helping Siuan, though. Perhaps. "I intended to ask you to come this afternoon, Lord Bryne. I ask now." She had questions to put to him. "We can talk then. If you will forgive me."

ɪnstɛɾ ʌv æksɛptɪŋ əɹ dɪsmɪsəl, hi sɛd, "mʌðɝ, wʌn ə maɪ pətʃɹoʊlz faʊn sʌmθɪŋ dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ dɔn, sʌmθɪŋ aɪ θɪŋk jə ʃəd si fəɹ jɝsɛlf. aɪ kən əv ən ɛskɔɹt ɹɛɾi ɪn - "

Instead of accepting her dismissal, he said, "Mother, one of my patrols found something just before dawn, something I think you should see for yourself. I can have an escort ready in - "

"noʊ nid fəɹ ðæt," ʃi bɹoʊk ɪn kwɪkli. "maɪɹɛl, jəl kʌm wɪð ʌs. sɪuən, wəd jə æsk sʌmwʌn tə bɹɪŋ maɪ hɔɹs, pliz? wɪθaʊt dɪleɪ."

"No need for that," she broke in quickly. "Myrelle, you will come with us. Siuan, would you ask someone to bring my horse, please? Without delay."

ɹaɪɾɪŋ aʊt wɪð maɪɹɛl wəd bi bɛɾɝ ðən kənfɹʌntɪŋ əɹ hɪɹ, ɪf sɪuənz pætʃt-təɡɛðɝ kluz ɹɪli pɔɪntəɾ əɾ ɛniθɪŋ, ən ɑn ə ɹaɪd ʃi kəɾ æsk bɹaɪn əɹ kwɛstʃənz, bʌt niðɝ fjuəld əɹ heɪst. ʃi hæd dʒʌst spɑɾəd ləleɪn stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əɹ θɹu ðə tɛntʃɹoʊz, tɑkimə əɾ əɹ saɪd. wɪð wʌn ɪksɛpʃən, ɔl ðə wɪmən u hæd bɪn sɪɾɝz bɪfɔɹ sɪuən wɑz dɪpoʊz hæd dʒɹɪftəd tə iðɝ ləleɪn əɹ ɹoʊmændə. moʊst ə ðə nuli tʃoʊzən sɪɾɝz wɛn ðɛɹ oʊn weɪ, wɪtʃ wɑz slaɪtli bɛɾɝ ɪn ɛɡwinz vju. dʒʌst slaɪtli.

Riding out with Myrelle would be better than confronting her here, if Siuan's patched-together clues really pointed at anything, and on a ride she could ask Bryne her questions, but neither fueled her haste. She had just spotted Lelaine striding toward her through the tentrows, Takima at her side. With one exception, all the women who had been Sitters before Siuan was deposed had drifted to either Lelaine or Romanda. Most of the newly chosen Sitters went their own way, which was slightly better in Egwene's view. Just slightly.

ivən əɾ ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns ðə sɛɾ ə ləleɪnz ʃoʊldɝz wɑz ɛvəɾənt. ʃi lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə wɔk θɹu wʌtɛvɝ ɡɑɾ ɪn əɹ weɪ. sɪuən sɔ hɝ əz wɛl ən dɑɹɾɪd ɔf wɪθaʊt pɔzɪŋ fəɹ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə kɝtsi, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm tə meɪk ə klin ɪskeɪp ʃɔɹɾ ə lipɪŋ ɑntu lɔɹd bɹaɪnz hɔɹs.

Even at a little distance the set of Lelaine's shoulders was evident. She looked ready to walk through whatever got in her way. Siuan saw her as well and darted off without pausing for so much as a curtsy, yet there was no time to make a clean escape short of leaping onto Lord Bryne's horse.

ləleɪn plæntəd hɝsɛlf ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛɡwin, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɹaɪn ʃi fɪkst wɪð aɪz ʃɑɹp əz tæks, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ, kælkjəleɪɾɪŋ wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ ðɛɹ. ʃi hæd lɑɹdʒɝ fɪʃ tə pʊɾ ɑn ðə faɪɝ, ðoʊ. "aɪ mʌst spik wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn," ʃi sɛd pɝɛmptɔɹəli, pɔɪntɪŋ təwɔɹd maɪɹɛl. "ju wɪl weɪt; əl tɔk tə jə æftɝ." bɹaɪn baʊd, nɑt tu dipli, ən lɛɾ ɪz hɔɹs wɛɹ ʃi pɔɪntəd. mɛn u hæɾ ɛni bɹeɪnz əɾ ɔl sun lɝn ɑɹɡjəməns dɪd lɪɾəl ɡʊd wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən wɪð sɪɾɝz ðə tæli wɑz juʒəwəli nʌn.

Lelaine planted herself in front of Egwene, but it was Bryne she fixed with eyes sharp as tacks, considering, calculating what he was doing there. She had larger fish to put on the fire, though. "I must speak with the Amyrlin," she said peremptorily, pointing toward Myrelle. "You will wait; I will talk to you after." Bryne bowed, not too deeply, and led his horse where she pointed. Men who had any brains at all soon learned arguments did little good with Aes Sedai, and with Sitters the tally was usually none.

bɪfɔɹ ləleɪn kəɾ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, ɹoʊmændə wɑz sʌɾənli ðɛɹ, ɹeɪɾieɪtɪŋ kəmæn soʊ stʃɹɔŋli ðəɾ ət fɝst ɛɡwin dɪd nɑɾ ivən noʊɾəs vɛɹɪlɪn wɪð hɝ, ən ðə slɛndɝ, ɹɛd-hɛɹd sɪɾɝ fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪ wɑz ɪntʃəz tɔlɝ ðən moʊs mɛn. ði oʊnli sɝpɹaɪz wɑz ðət ɹoʊmændə hæd nɑɾ əpɪɹd sunɝ. ʃi ən ləleɪn wɑtʃt wʌn ənʌðɝ laɪk hɔks, niðɝ əlaʊɪŋ ði ʌðɝ nɪɹ ɛɡwin əloʊn. ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəd boʊθ wɪmən ət ðə seɪm ɪnstənt, ən itʃ woʊv ə wɔɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə faɪv ə ðɛm tə stɑp ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ. ðɛɹ aɪz klæʃt, tʃælənʒɪŋ ɪn feɪsəz ʌɾɝli kul ən kəlɛktəd, bʌt niðɝ lɛɾ əɹ wɔɹd dʒɹɑp.

Before Lelaine could open her mouth, Romanda was suddenly there, radiating command so strongly that at first Egwene did not even notice Varilin with her, and the slender, red-haired Sitter for the Gray was inches taller than most men. The only surprise was that Romanda had not appeared sooner. She and Lelaine watched one another like hawks, neither allowing the other near Egwene alone. The glow of saidar surrounded both women at the same instant, and each wove a ward around the five of them to stop eavesdropping. Their eyes clashed, challenging in faces utterly cool and collected, but neither let her ward drop.

ɛɡwin bɪɾ əɹ tʌŋ. ɪn ə pʌblɪk pleɪs, ɪt wɑz ʌp tə ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst sɪstɝ pɹɛzən tə dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən ʃəd bi wɔɹɾɪd, ən pɹoʊɾəkɑl sɛd ði æmɪɝlɪn meɪd ðət dɪsɪʒən wɛɹɛvɝ ʃi wɑz pɹɛzənt. ʃi hæd noʊ dɪzaɪɝ fəɹ ðə nɑt-kwaɪɾ əpɑlədʒiz mɛnʃənɪŋ ɪt wəd bɹɪŋ, ðoʊ. ɪf ʃi pɹɛst, ðeɪ wəɾ æksid, ʌv kɔɹs. waɪl bɪheɪvɪŋ əz ðoʊ suðɪŋ ə pɛtʃələn tɑdlɝ. ʃi bɪɾ əɹ tʌŋ, ən bɔɪld ɪnsaɪd. wɛɹ wɑz sɪuən? ðət wɑz nɑt fɛɹ - ɡɛɾɪŋ hɔɹsəz sæɾəld ɹikwaɪɝd mɔɹ ðən moʊməns - bʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə ɡɹɪp əɹ skɝts tə kip əɹ hænz əweɪ fɹəm əɹ hɛd.

Egwene bit her tongue. In a public place, it was up to the strongest sister present to decide whether a conversation should be warded, and protocol said the Amyrlin made that decision wherever she was present. She had no desire for the not-quite apologies mentioning it would bring, though. If she pressed, they would accede, of course. While behaving as though soothing a petulant toddler. She bit her tongue, and boiled inside. Where was Siuan? That was not fair - getting horses saddled required more than moments - but she wanted to grip her skirts to keep her hands away from her head.

ɹoʊmændə dʒɹɑp ðə stɛɹɪŋ mætʃ fɝst, ðoʊ nɑɾ ɪn dɪfit. ʃi ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ɛɡwin soʊ sʌɾənli ðət ləleɪn wɑz lɛf stɛɹɪŋ pæst əɹ ən lʊkɪŋ fulɪʃ. "dɛlænə ɪz meɪkɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl əɡɛn." hɝ haɪ-pɪtʃt vɔɪs wɑz ɔlmoʊst swit, bʌɾ ɪt hɛld ə ʃɑɹpnəs ðəɾ ɛmfəsaɪz ðə læk ʌv ɛni taɪɾəl ə ɹɪspɛkt. ɹoʊmændəz hɛɹ wɑz kəmplitli ɡɹeɪ, ɡæðɝɾ ɪn ə nit bʌn ɑn ðə neɪp ə hɝ nɛk, bʌɾ eɪdʒ hæd sɝɾənli nɑt sɔfən hɝ. tɑkimə, wɪð əɹ lɔŋ blæk hɛɹ ən eɪdʒd aɪvɝi kəmplɛkʃən, hæd bɪn ɔlmoʊs naɪn jɪɹz ə bɹaʊn sɪɾɝ, əz fɔɹsfəl ɪn ðə hɔl əz ɪn ðə klæsɹum, jɛt ʃi stʊɾ ə mik peɪs bæk, hænz foʊldəɾ əɾ əɹ weɪst. ɹoʊmændə lɛɾ əɹ fækʃən əz fɝmli əz sɔɹɪliə. ʃi wɑz wʌn tə hum stʃɹɛŋkθ wɑz ɪndiɾ ɔl-ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ən ɪn tʃɹuθ, ləleɪn sim nɑt fɑɹ bɪhaɪnd.

Romanda dropped the staring match first, though not in defeat. She rounded on Egwene so suddenly that Lelaine was left staring past her and looking foolish. "Delana is making trouble again." Her high-pitched voice was almost sweet, but it held a sharpness that emphasized the lack of any title of respect. Romanda's hair was completely gray, gathered in a neat bun on the nape of her neck, but age had certainly not softened her. Takima, with her long black hair and aged ivory complexion, had been almost nine years a Brown Sitter, as forceful in the Hall as in the classroom, yet she stood a meek pace back, hands folded at her waist. Romanda led her faction as firmly as Sorilea. She was one to whom strength was indeed all-important, and in truth, Lelaine seemed not far behind.

"ʃi plænz tə leɪ ə pɹəpoʊzəl bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl," ləleɪn pʊɾ ɪn saʊɝli, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə lʊk ət ɹoʊmændə əɾ ɔl, naʊ. əɡɹiɪŋ wɪð ði ʌðɝ wʊmən sɝɾənli plizd əɹ əz lɪɾəl əz spikɪŋ sɛkənd. əwɛɹ ðət ʃi hæd ɡeɪn ən ɛdʒ, ɹoʊmændə smaɪld, ə feɪn kɝvɪŋ ə hɝ lɪps.

"She plans to lay a proposal before the Hall," Lelaine put in sourly, refusing to look at Romanda at all, now. Agreeing with the other woman certainly pleased her as little as speaking second. Aware that she had gained an edge, Romanda smiled, a faint curving of her lips.

"əbaʊt wʌt?" ɛɡwin æskt, pleɪɪŋ fəɹ taɪm. ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ʃi nu. ɪt wɑz vɛɹi hɑɹd nɑt tə saɪ. ɪt wɑz vɛɹi hɑɹd nɑt tə ɹʌb əɹ tɛmpəlz.

"About what?" Egwene asked, playing for time. She was certain she knew. It was very hard not to sigh. It was very hard not to rub her temples.

"waɪ ðə blæk ədʒɑ, ʌv kɔɹs, mʌðɝ," vɛɹɪlɪn ɹɪplaɪd, lɪftɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ əz ɪf sɝpɹaɪzd ət ðə kwɛstʃən. wɛl ʃi maɪt bi; dɛlænə wɑz ɹæbɪɾ ɑn ðə sʌbʒɪkt. "ʃi wɑns ðə hɔl tə kəndɛm ɪleɪɾə oʊpənli əz blæk." ʃi stɑpt əbɹʌpli wən ləleɪn ɹeɪzd ə hænd. ləleɪn əlaʊɾ əɹ fɑloʊɝz mɔɹ liweɪ ðən ɹoʊmændə, əɹ meɪbi ʃi dʒʌs dɪd nɑɾ əv əz taɪɾ ə ɡɹɪp.

"Why the Black Ajah, of course, Mother," Varilin replied, lifting her head as if surprised at the question. Well she might be; Delana was rabid on the subject. "She wants the Hall to condemn Elaida openly as Black." She stopped abruptly when Lelaine raised a hand. Lelaine allowed her followers more leeway than Romanda, or maybe she just did not have as tight a grip.

"ju mʌst spik wɪð hɝ, mʌðɝ." ləleɪn hæɾ ə wɔɹm smaɪl wən ʃi tʃoʊz tə juz ɪt. sɪuən sɛd ðeɪ hæd bɪn fɹɛnz wʌns - ləleɪn hæɾ æksɛptɪɾ əɹ bæk wɪð səm vɝʒən ʌv wɛlkəm - jɛɾ ɛɡwin θɔt ðət smaɪl ə pɹæktəs tul.

"You must speak with her, Mother." Lelaine had a warm smile when she chose to use it. Siuan said they had been friends once - Lelaine had accepted her back with some version of welcome - yet Egwene thought that smile a practiced tool.

"æn seɪ wʌt?" hɝ hænz ætʃt tə suð əɹ hɛd. ðiz tu itʃ meɪd ʃʊɹ ðə hɔl pæst oʊnli wʌt ʃi wɑntəd, sɝɾənli lɪɾəl ðəɾ ɛɡwin sədʒɛstəd, wɪð ðə ɹɪzʌl ðət nʌθɪŋ mʌtʃ əɾ ɔl wɑz pæst, ən ðeɪ wɑntəɾ əɹ tə ɪntɝsid wɪð ə sɪɾɝ? dɛlænə dɪd səpɔɹɾ əɹ pɹəpoʊzəlz, tʃɹu - wən ðeɪ suɾəd hɝ. dɛlænə wɑz ə wɛðɝveɪn, tɝnɪŋ wɪð ðə læs bɹɛθ ʌv ɛɹ tə pæs, ən ɪf ʃi tɝn ɪn ɛɡwinz dɝɛkʃən ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə leɪt, ɪt dɪd nɑt min vɛɹi mʌtʃ. ðə blæk ədʒɑ simd əɹ oʊnli fɪks pɔɪnt. wʌt wɑz kipɪŋ sɪuən?

"And say what?" Her hands ached to soothe her head. These two each made sure the Hall passed only what she wanted, certainly little that Egwene suggested, with the result that nothing much at all was passed, and they wanted her to intercede with a Sitter? Delana did support her proposals, true - when they suited her. Delana was a weathervane, turning with the last breath of air to pass, and if she turned in Egwene's direction a great deal of late, it did not mean very much. The Black Ajah seemed her only fixed point. What was keeping Siuan?

"tɛl əɹ ʃi mʌst stɑp, mʌðɝ." ləleɪnz smaɪl ən toʊn meɪɾ əɹ sim tə bi kaʊnsəlɪŋ ə dɔɾɝ. "ðɪs fulɪʃnəs - wɝs ðən fulɪʃnəs - hæz ɛvɹiwʌn ət dæɡɝz' pɔɪns. səm ə ðə sɪstɝz ɑɹ ivən bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə bɪliv, mʌðɝ. ɪɾəl nɑt bi lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə noʊʃən spɹɛdz tə ðə sɝvəns, ən ðə soʊlʒɝz." ðə lʊk ʃi dɝɛktəd təwɔɹd bɹaɪn wɑz fʊl ə daʊt. bɹaɪn əpɪɹd tə bi ətɛmptɪŋ tə tʃæt wɪð maɪɹɛl, hu wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə wɔɹɾɪd ɡɹup ən ɹʌnɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz ənizəli θɹu hɝ ɡlʌv hænz.

"Tell her she must stop, Mother." Lelaine's smile and tone made her seem to be counseling a daughter. "This foolishness - worse than foolishness - has everyone at daggers' points. Some of the sisters are even beginning to believe, Mother. It will not be long before the notion spreads to the servants, and the soldiers." The look she directed toward Bryne was full of doubt. Bryne appeared to be attempting to chat with Myrelle, who was staring at the warded group and running her reins uneasily through her gloved hands.

"bɪlivɪŋ wʌɾ ɪz pleɪn ɪz hɑɹdli fulɪʃ," ɹoʊmændə bɑɹkt. "mʌðɝ . . ." ɪn əɹ maʊθ, ðət saʊndəɾ ɪntaɪɝli tu mʌtʃ laɪk "ɡɝl."

"Believing what is plain is hardly foolish," Romanda barked. "Mother . . ." In her mouth, that sounded entirely too much like "girl."

". . . ðə ɹizən dɛlænə mʌs bi stɑpt ɪz ʃi dʌz noʊ ɡʊɾ ən kənsɪɾɝəbəl hɑɹm. pɝhæps ɪleɪɾə ɪz blæk - ðoʊ aɪ hæv stʃɹɔŋ daʊts, wʌtɛvɝ sɛkəndhænd ɡɑsəp ðət tʃɹɑləp hɑlimə bɹɔt; ɪleɪɾə ɪz ɹɔŋhɛɾɪd tə ə fɔlt, bʌɾ aɪ kænɑt bɪliv əɹ ivəl - jɛɾ ivən ɪf ʃi ɪz, tʃɹʌmpəɾɪŋ ɪɾəl meɪk aʊtsaɪɾɝz səspɪʃəs ʌv ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ ən dʒɹaɪv ðə blæk ɪndə dipɝ haɪɾɪŋ. ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛθədz tə dɪɡ ðɛm aʊt, ɪf wi doʊn fɹaɪɾən əm ɪndə flaɪt."

". . . the reason Delana must be stopped is she does no good and considerable harm. Perhaps Elaida is Black - though I have strong doubts, whatever secondhand gossip that trollop Halima brought; Elaida is wrongheaded to a fault, but I cannot believe her evil - yet even if she is, trumpeting it will make outsiders suspicious of every Aes Sedai and drive the Black into deeper hiding. There are methods to dig them out, if we don't frighten them into flight."

ləleɪnz snɪf bɔɹɾɝd ɑn ə snɔɹt. "ivən wɝ ðɪs nɑnsɛns tʃɹu, noʊ sɛlf-ɹispɛktɪŋ sɪstɝ wəd səbmɪt tə jəɹ mɛθədz, ɹoʊmændə. wʌt juv sədʒɛstəɾ ɪz kloʊs tə biɪŋ pʊt tə ðə kwɛstʃən." ɛɡwin blɪŋkt ɪn kənfjuʒən; niðɝ sɪuən nɔɹ lin hæd bɹɔɾ əɹ ə wɪspɝ ə ðɪs. lʌkəli, ðə sɪɾɝz wɝ nɑt peɪɪŋ əɹ ɪnʌf maɪn tə noʊɾəs. əz juʒəwəl.

Lelaine's sniff bordered on a snort. "Even were this nonsense true, no self-respecting sister would submit to your methods, Romanda. What you've suggested is close to being put to the question." Egwene blinked in confusion; neither Siuan nor Leane had brought her a whisper of this. Luckily, the Sitters were not paying her enough mind to notice. As usual.

plæntɪŋ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps, ɹoʊmændə skwɛɹɾ ɝaʊn ɑn ləleɪn. "dɛspɹɪt deɪz dɪmæn dɛspɹɪɾ ækʃənz. səm maɪɾ æsk waɪ ɛniwʌn wəd pʊɾ əɹ dɪɡnəɾi əhɛɾ ʌv ɪkspoʊzɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz sɝvəns."

Planting her fists on her hips, Romanda squared around on Lelaine. "Desperate days demand desperate actions. Some might ask why anyone would put her dignity ahead of exposing the Dark One's servants."

"ðæt saʊnz deɪnʒɝəsli nɪɹ ən ækjəzeɪʃən," ləleɪn sɛd, aɪz nɛɹoʊɪŋ.

"That sounds dangerously near an accusation," Lelaine said, eyes narrowing.

ɹoʊmændə wɑz ðə wʌn smaɪlɪŋ naʊ, ə koʊl flɪnti smaɪl. "aɪ wɪl bi ðə fɝs tə səbmɪt tə maɪ mɛθədz, ləleɪn, ɪf jə ɑɹ ðə sɛkənd."

Romanda was the one smiling now, a cold flinty smile. "I will be the first to submit to my methods, Lelaine, if you are the second."

ləleɪn æktʃəli  ɡɹaʊld, teɪkɪŋ hæf ə stɛp təwɔɹd ði ʌðɝ wʊmən, ən ɹoʊmændə lin təwɔɹd hɝ, tʃɪn θɹʌst aʊt. ðeɪ lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə bɪɡɪn pʊlɪŋ hɛɹ ən ɹoʊlɪŋ ɪn ðə dɝt, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪɡnəɾi bi hæŋd. vɛɹɪlɪn ən tɑkimə ɡlɛɹɾ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ laɪk tu meɪdsɝvəns səpɔɹɾɪŋ ðɛɹ mɪstʃɹəsəz, ə lɔŋ-lɛɡəd weɪɾɪŋ bɝɾ ɪn ə skaʊlɪŋ mætʃ wɪð ə ɹɛn. ðə hoʊl lɑɾ ə ðɛm sim tə hæv fɝɡɑɾən ɛɡwin ɪntaɪɝli.

Lelaine actually growled, taking half a step toward the other woman, and Romanda leaned toward her, chin thrust out. They looked ready to begin pulling hair and rolling in the dirt, and Aes Sedai dignity be hanged. Varilin and Takima glared at one another like two maidservants supporting their mistresses, a long-legged wading bird in a scowling match with a wren. The whole lot of them seemed to have forgotten Egwene entirely.

sɪuən keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ ʌp ɪn ə bɹɔd stʃɹɔ hæt, liɾɪŋ ə fæt dʌn mɛɹ wɪð waɪt-stɑkɪnɡd haɪn lɛɡz, ən skɪɾəd tə ə hɔlt wən ʃi sɔ ðə wɔɹɾɪd ɡæðɝɪŋ. wʌn ə ðə ɡɹumz wɑz wɪð hɝ, ə læŋki fɛloʊ ɪn ə lɔŋ, fɹeɪd vɛst ən ə pætʃt ʃɝt, hoʊldɪŋ ðə ɹeɪnz ʌv ə tɔl ɹoʊn. ðə wɔɹdz wɝ ɪnvɪzəbəl tə hɪm, bʌt seɪaɪdɑɹ dɪd nɑt haɪd ðə feɪsəz. hɪz aɪz wɛn vɛɹi waɪd, ən i bɪɡæn lɪkɪŋ ɪz lɪps. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, pæsɝzbi wɔkt waɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə tɛn ən pɹitɛndəd tə si nʌθɪŋ, ɛɛs sədaɪ, wɔɹɾɝz ən sɝvəns əlaɪk. bɹaɪn əloʊn fɹaʊn ən stʌɾid əm əz ðoʊ wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt wɑz hɪɾən fɹəm ɪz ɪɹz. maɪɹɛl wɑz ɹɛɾiɪŋ əɹ sæɾəlbæɡz, pleɪnli ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə livɪŋ.

Siuan came running up in a broad straw hat, leading a fat dun mare with white-stockinged hind legs, and skidded to a halt when she saw the warded gathering. One of the grooms was with her, a lanky fellow in a long, frayed vest and a patched shirt, holding the reins of a tall roan. The wards were invisible to him, but saidar did not hide the faces. His eyes went very wide, and he began licking his lips. For that matter, passersby walked wide around the tent and pretended to see nothing, Aes Sedai, Warders and servants alike. Bryne alone frowned and studied them as though wondering what was hidden from his ears. Myrelle was retying her saddlebags, plainly on the point of leaving.

"wɛn juv dɪsaɪɾɪd wʌɾ aɪ ʃəd seɪ," ɛɡwin ənaʊnst, "ðɛn aɪ kən dɪsaɪd wʌt tə du." ðeɪ ɹɪli hæd fɝɡɑɾən hɝ. ɔl fɔɹ stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ ɪn əmeɪzmən əz ʃi wɔk bɪtwin ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn ən aʊt θɹu ðə dʌbəld wɔɹdz. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə fil əz ʃi bɹʌʃt baɪ ðə wiv, ʌv kɔɹs; ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ bɪn meɪd tə stɑp ɛniθɪŋ əz sɑləɾ əz ə hjumən bɑɾi.

"When you have decided what I should say," Egwene announced, "then I can decide what to do." They really had forgotten her. All four stared at her in amazement as she walked between Romanda and Lelaine and out through the doubled wards. There was nothing to feel as she brushed by the weave, of course; they had never been made to stop anything as solid as a human body.

wən ʃi skɹæmbəld ɑntu ðə ɹoʊn, maɪɹɛl dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən ɛmjəleɪɾɪd əɹ ɪn ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən. ðə wɔɹdz hæd vænɪʃt, ðoʊ ðə ɡloʊ stɪl ɛnvɛləp ðə tu sɪɾɝz, itʃ mɔɹ ði ɪmədʒ ə fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən ðən ði ʌðɝ əz ðeɪ stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ. hɝidli ɛɡwin dɑn ðə θɪn lɪnən dʌst-kloʊk ðət hæd bɪn dʒɹeɪpt ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ ɡɛldɪŋz sæɾəl, ən ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌvz ðət wɝ tʌkt ɪndə ə smɔl pɑkəɾ ɪn ðə kloʊk. ə waɪd-bɹɪm hæt hʌŋ fɹəm ðə sæɾəlz haɪ pɑməl, dip blu tə mætʃ əɹ dʒɹɛs, wɪð ə spɹeɪ ʌv waɪt plumz pɪn slæntɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə fɹʌn ðət ʃaʊɾəd ə tʃɛsəz hænd. hit ʃi kəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ, bʌt ðə ɡlɛɹ ə ðə sʌn wɑz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ. ɹimuvɪŋ plumz ən pɪn, ʃi tʌkt əm ɪndə ðə sæɾəlbæɡz, pʊt ðə hæɾ ɑn əɹ hɛɾ ən taɪd ðə ɹɪbənz bɪniθ əɹ tʃɪn.

When she scrambled onto the roan, Myrelle drew a deep breath and emulated her in resignation. The wards had vanished, though the glow still enveloped the two Sitters, each more the image of frustration than the other as they stood watching. Hurriedly Egwene donned the thin linen dust-cloak that had been draped in front of her gelding's saddle, and the riding gloves that were tucked into a small pocket in the cloak. A wide-brimmed hat hung from the saddle's high pommel, deep blue to match her dress, with a spray of white plumes pinned slanting across the front that shouted of Chesa's hand. Heat she could ignore, but the glare of the sun was another matter. Removing plumes and pin, she tucked them into the saddlebags, put the hat on her head and tied the ribbons beneath her chin.

"ʃæl wi ɡoʊ, mʌðɝ?" bɹaɪn æskt. hi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi maʊntəd, ðə hɛlmət ðət hæd bɪn hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl naʊ əbskjʊɹɪŋ ɪz feɪs bɪhaɪn stil bɑɹz. ɪt lʊkt kwaɪt nætʃɹəl ɑn hɪm, əz ðoʊ hi hæd bɪn bɔɹn fəɹ ɑɹmɝ.

"Shall we go, Mother?" Bryne asked. He was already mounted, the helmet that had been hanging from his saddle now obscuring his face behind steel bars. It looked quite natural on him, as though he had been born for armor.

ʃi nɑɾəd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ətɛmp tə stɑp ðɛm. ləleɪn wəd nɑt stup tə ʃaʊɾɪŋ hɔlt ɪn pʌblɪk, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ɹoʊmændə. . . . ɛɡwin fɛlt ə sɛns ə ɹɪlif əz ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ əweɪ, jɛɾ əɹ hɛd sim tə bi splɪɾɪŋ. wʌt wɑz ʃi tə də əbaʊt dɛlænə? wʌt kəd ʃi du?

She nodded. There was no attempt to stop them. Lelaine would not stoop to shouting halt in public, of course, but Romanda. . . . Egwene felt a sense of relief as they rode away, yet her head seemed to be splitting. What was she to do about Delana? What could she do?

ðə meɪn ɹoʊɾ ɪn ðɪs ɛɹiə, ə waɪd stʃɹɛtʃ ə dɝt pæk soʊ hɑɹd nʌθɪŋ kəd ɹeɪz dʌs fɹəm ɪt, ɹæn θɹu ði ɑɹmiz kæmp ən əlɔŋ ðə ɡæp bɪtwin ðəɾ ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪz. bɹaɪn æŋɡəld əkɹɔs ɪt, θɹu ðə ɹɛst ə ði ɑɹmi ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd.

The main road in this area, a wide stretch of dirt packed so hard nothing could raise dust from it, ran through the army's camp and along the gap between that and the Aes Sedai's. Bryne angled across it, through the rest of the army on the other side.

ɔlðoʊ ði ɑɹmi kæmp hɛl θɝɾi taɪmz əɹ mɔɹ əz mɛni pipəl əz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kæmp, ðəɹ sim tə bi fju mɔɹ tɛns ðən fəɹ ðə sɪstɝz ən ðoʊz u sɝv ðɛm, ɔl skæɾɝd aʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə flæts ən ʌp ðə hɪlsaɪdz. moʊst ə ðə soʊlʒɝz slɛpt ɪn ði oʊpən. bʌt ðɛn, ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə læs taɪm ɹeɪn hæd fɔlən, ən ðəɹ sɝɾənli wɑz nɑɾ ə klaʊd tə bi sin. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ wɪmən ðən ɪn ðə sɪstɝz' kæmp, ðoʊ ðeɪ sim fjuɝ ət fɝst ɡlæns, əmʌŋ soʊ mɛni mɛn. kʊks tɛndəd kɛɾəlz ən lɔnʒɹəsəz ətækt ɡɹeɪt hips ə kloʊðɪŋ, waɪl səm wɝkt wɪð ðə hɔɹsəz əɹ wæɡənz. ə fɛɹ nʌmbɝ əpɪɹd tə bi waɪvz; ət list, ðeɪ sæɾ əbaʊt nɪɾɪŋ əɹ dɑɹnɪŋ dʒɹɛsəz əɹ ʃɝts əɹ stɝɪŋ smɔl kʊkpɑts. ɑɹmɔɹɝz hæd sɛɾ ʌp ɔlmoʊst ɛniwɛɹ ʃi lʊkt, hæmɝz meɪkɪŋ stil ɹɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ ænvəlz, ən flɛtʃɝz æɾɪŋ æɹoʊz tə bʌndəlz baɪ ðɛɹ fit, ən fɛɹiɝz tʃɛkɪŋ hɔɹsəz. wæɡənz ʌv ɛvɹi sɔɹɾ ən saɪz stʊɾ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, hʌnʒɹədz, pɝhæps θaʊzənz; ði ɑɹmi sim tə skup ʌp ɛvɹi wʌn ɪt faʊn əlɔŋ ɪts pæθ. moʊst ə ðə fɔɹədʒɝz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi aʊt, bʌɾ ə fju haɪ-wil kɑɹts ən lʌmbɝɪŋ wæɡənz stɪl tʃɹʌndəld əweɪ ɪn sɝtʃ ə fɑɹmz ən vɪlədʒəz. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ soʊlʒɝz ɹeɪzd ə tʃɪɹ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd baɪ. "lɔɹd bɹaɪn!" ən "ðə bʊl! ðə bʊl!" ðət wɑz ɪz sɪdʒəl. nʌθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit.

Although the army camp held thirty times or more as many people as the Aes Sedai camp, there seemed to be few more tents than for the sisters and those who served them, all scattered out across the flats and up the hillsides. Most of the soldiers slept in the open. But then, it was hard to remember the last time rain had fallen, and there certainly was not a cloud to be seen. Strangely, there were more women than in the sisters' camp, though they seemed fewer at first glance, among so many men. Cooks tended kettles and laundresses attacked great heaps of clothing, while some worked with the horses or wagons. A fair number appeared to be wives; at least, they sat about knitting or darning dresses or shirts or stirring small cookpots. Armorers had set up almost anywhere she looked, hammers making steel ring on their anvils, and fletchers adding arrows to bundles by their feet, and farriers checking horses. Wagons of every sort and size stood everywhere, hundreds, perhaps thousands; the army seemed to scoop up every one it found along its path. Most of the foragers were already out, but a few high-wheeled carts and lumbering wagons still trundled away in search of farms and villages. Here and there soldiers raised a cheer as they rode by. "Lord Bryne!" and "The Bull! The Bull!" That was his sigil. Nothing about Aes Sedai or the Amyrlin Seat.

ɛɡwin twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn ɪn əɹ sæɾəl tə meɪk ʃʊɹ maɪɹɛl wɑz stɪl kloʊs bɪhaɪnd. ʃi wɑz, lɛɾɪŋ əɹ hɔɹs fɑloʊ ɑn ɪts oʊn, ə fɑɹ-ɔf, slaɪtli sɪkli ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs. sɪuən hæd teɪkən ə pəzɪʃən ət ðə ɹɪɹ, ʃɛpɝd tə ðɛɹ loʊn ʃip. ðən əɡɛn, ʃi maɪt dʒʌst əv bɪn əfɹeɪd tə ɝdʒ əɹ maʊn əhɛd. ðə dʌn wɑz pɑzəɾɪvli ə bʌɾɝbɔl, bʌt sɪuən wəd pɹɑbli tʃɹiɾ ə poʊni laɪk ə wɔɹhɔɹs.

Egwene twisted around in her saddle to make sure Myrelle was still close behind. She was, letting her horse follow on its own, a far-off, slightly sickly expression on her face. Siuan had taken a position at the rear, shepherd to their lone sheep. Then again, she might just have been afraid to urge her mount ahead. The dun was positively a butterball, but Siuan would probably treat a pony like a warhorse.

ɛɡwin fɛlt ə stæb ʌv ɪɹɪteɪʃən əɾ əɹ oʊn ænəməl. hɪz neɪm wɑz deɪʃɝ; ɡlɔɹi, ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ. ʃi wəd mʌtʃ ɹæðɝ bi ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɛlə, ə ʃæɡi lɪɾəl mɛɹ nɑt mʌtʃ slɪmɝ ðən sɪuənz dʌn ðət ʃi hæd ɹɪɾən aʊɾ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. səmtaɪmz ʃi θɔt ʃi mʌs lʊk ə dɑl, pɝtʃt ətɑp ə ɡɛldɪŋ ðət kəd bi teɪkən fəɹ ə wɔɹhɔɹs, bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd tə hæv ə pɹɑpɝ maʊnt. noʊ ʃæɡi kɑɹt hɔɹsəz. ivən ɪf ðɪs ɹul wɑz ə hɝ oʊn meɪkɪŋ, ʃi fɛlt əz kənfaɪn əz ə nɑvəs.

Egwene felt a stab of irritation at her own animal. His name was Daishar; Glory, in the Old Tongue. She would much rather be riding Bela, a shaggy little mare not much slimmer than Siuan's dun that she had ridden out of the Two Rivers. Sometimes she thought she must look a doll, perched atop a gelding that could be taken for a warhorse, but the Amyrlin had to have a proper mount. No shaggy cart horses. Even if this rule was of her own making, she felt as confined as a novice.

tɝnɪŋ ɪn ðə sæɾəl, ʃi sɛd, "du jə ɪkspɛkt ɛni ɑpəzɪʃən əhɛd, lɔɹd bɹaɪn?"

Turning in the saddle, she said, "Do you expect any opposition ahead, Lord Bryne?"

hi ɡlænst əɾ əɹ saɪdweɪz. ʃi hæɾ æsk ðə seɪm wʌns bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ sɑlədɑɹ ən twaɪs waɪl kɹɔsɪŋ ɔltɑɹə. nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə ɹaʊs səspɪʃənz, ʃi θɔt.

He glanced at her sideways. She had asked the same once before leaving Salidar and twice while crossing Altara. Not enough to rouse suspicions, she thought.

"mʊɹændi ɪz laɪk ɔltɑɹə, mʌðɝ. neɪbɝ tu bɪzi skimɪŋ əɡɛns neɪbɝ, əɹ aʊtʃɹaɪt faɪɾɪŋ hɪm, tə bæn təɡɛðɝ fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə wɔɹ, ən nɑt tə ɛni ɡɹeɪt dɪɡɹi ðɛn." hɪz toʊn wɑz vɛɹi dʒɹaɪ. hi hæd bɪn kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz ɪn ændɝ, wɪð jɪɹz ə bɔɹɾɝ skɝmɪʃɪz əɡɛns ðə mʊɹændiənz bɪhaɪn hɪm. "ændɝ wɪl bi ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ, aɪ fɪɹ. aɪm nɑt lʊkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə ðæt." hi tɝn ənʌðɝ weɪ, klaɪmɪŋ ə dʒɛntəl sloʊp tə əvɔɪd θɹi wæɡənz ɹʌmbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ ɹɑks ɪn ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən.

"Murandy is like Altara, Mother. Neighbor too busy scheming against neighbor, or outright fighting him, to band together for anything short of a war, and not to any great degree then." His tone was very dry. He had been Captain-General of the Queen's Guards in Andor, with years of border skirmishes against the Murandians behind him. "Andor will be another matter, I fear. I am not looking forward to that." He turned another way, climbing a gentle slope to avoid three wagons rumbling over rocks in the same direction.

ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə ɡɹɪmɑs. ændɝ. bɪfɔɹ, hi hæd dʒʌst sɛd noʊ. ðiz wɝ ðə teɪl ɛn ə ðə kʌmbɑɹ hɪlz, sʌmwʌt saʊθ ə luɡɹd, ðə kæpəɾəl ə mʊɹændi. ivən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ lʌki, ðə bɔɹɾɝ ʌv ændɝ leɪ ət lis tɛn deɪz əhɛd.

Egwene tried not to grimace. Andor. Before, he had just said no. These were the tail end of the Cumbar Hills, somewhat south of Lugard, the capital of Murandy. Even if they were lucky, the border of Andor lay at least ten days ahead.

"ænd wən wi ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn, lɔɹd bɹaɪn. haʊ dʒju plæn tə teɪk ðə sɪɾi?"

"And when we reach Tar Valon, Lord Bryne. How do you plan to take the city?"

"noʊ wʌn əz æsk mi ðət jɛt, mʌðɝ." ʃi hæɾ oʊnli θɔɾ ɪz vɔɪs wɑz dʒɹaɪ bɪfɔɹ; naʊ ɪt wɑz dʒɹaɪ. "baɪ ðə taɪm wi ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn, ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ, əl əv tu əɹ θɹi taɪmz əz mɛni mɛn əz aɪ də naʊ." ɛɡwin wɪnst ət ði aɪdiə ʌv peɪɪŋ soʊ mɛni soʊlʒɝz; hi dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs. "wɪð ðæt, əl leɪ sidʒ. ðə hɑɹɾəst pɑɹt wɪl bi faɪndɪŋ ʃɪps, ən sɪŋkɪŋ əm tə blɑk nɔɹθhɑɹbɝ ən saʊθhɑɹbɝ. ðə hɑɹbɝz ɑɹ əz mʌtʃ ðə ki əz hoʊldɪŋ ðə bɹɪdʒ taʊnz, mʌðɝ. tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪz lɑɹdʒɝ ðən kɛɹhin ən keɪɛmlɪn təɡɛðɝ. wʌns fud stɑps ɡoʊɪŋ ɪn. . . ." hi ʃɹʌɡd. "moʊst ə soʊlʒɝɪŋ ɪz weɪɾɪŋ, wən ɪɾ ɪzən mɑɹtʃɪŋ."

"No one has asked me that yet, Mother." She had only thought his voice was dry before; now it was dry. "By the time we reach Tar Valon, the Light willing, I'll have two or three times as many men as I do now." Egwene winced at the idea of paying so many soldiers; he did not seem to notice. "With that, I will lay siege. The hardest part will be finding ships, and sinking them to block Northharbor and Southharbor. The harbors are as much the key as holding the bridge towns, Mother. Tar Valon is larger than Cairhien and Caemlyn together. Once food stops going in. . . ." He shrugged. "Most of soldiering is waiting, when it isn't marching."

"æn ɪf jə doʊn əv ðət mɛni soʊlʒɝz?" ʃi hæd nɛvɝ θɔɾ ʌv ɔl ðoʊz pipəl ɡoʊɪŋ hʌŋɡɹi, wɪmən ən tʃɪlʒɹən. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ɹɪli θɔɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn biɪŋ ɪnvɑlvd ɪksɛp ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðə soʊlʒɝz. haʊ kəd ʃi hæv bɪn soʊ fulɪʃ? ʃi hæd sin ðə ɹɪzʌls ʌv wɔɹ ɪn kɛɹhin. bɹaɪn sim tə teɪk ɪt soʊ laɪtli. bʌt ðɛn, hi wɑz ə soʊlʒɝ; pɹaɪveɪʃən ən dɛθ mʌs bi ɛvɹideɪ tə soʊlʒɝz. "wʌɾ ɪf jə oʊnli hæv . . . seɪ . . . wʌt jə də naʊ?"

"And if you don't have that many soldiers?" She had never thought of all those people going hungry, women and children. She had never really thought of anyone being involved except the Aes Sedai, and the soldiers. How could she have been so foolish? She had seen the results of war in Cairhien. Bryne seemed to take it so lightly. But then, he was a soldier; privation and death must be everyday to soldiers. "What if you only have . . . say . . . what you do now?"

"sidʒ?" əpɛɹənli səm ʌv wʌt ðeɪ hæd bɪn seɪɪŋ hæd faɪnəli bɹoʊkən ɪndə wʌtɛvɝ maɪɹɛl wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ. ʃi buɾɪd ðə sɔɹəl fɔɹwɝd, meɪkɪŋ ə nʌmbɝ ə mɛn dʒʌmp əsaɪd, səm fɔlɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz. ə fju oʊpən ðɛɹ maʊðz æŋɡɹəli, ðən sɔ hɝ eɪdʒləs fitʃɝz ən ʃʌt ðɛɹ dʒɔz əɡɛn, ɡlaʊɝɪŋ. ðeɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl nɑɾ əv ɪɡzɪstəd fəɹ ɔl ə hɝ. "ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ bɪsidʒ tɑɹ vəlɑn fəɹ twɛnti jɪɹz ən feɪld." əbɹʌpli ʃi ɹilaɪzd ɪɹz wɝ əbaʊɾ ən loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl æsəd. "du jə ɪkspɛkt əs tə weɪt twɛnti jɪɹz?"

"Siege?" Apparently some of what they had been saying had finally broken into whatever Myrelle was thinking. She booted the sorrel forward, making a number of men jump aside, some falling on their faces. A few opened their mouths angrily, then saw her ageless features and shut their jaws again, glowering. They might as well not have existed for all of her. "Artur Hawkwing besieged Tar Valon for twenty years and failed." Abruptly she realized ears were about and lowered her voice, but it was still acid. "Do you expect us to wait twenty years?"

ðəɾ æsəd wɑʃt oʊvɝ ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn wɪθaʊt livɪŋ ə steɪn. "wʊd jə pɹəfɝ ə dɝɛkt əsɔlt ɹaɪɾ ɔf, maɪɹɛl sədaɪ?" hi cʊɾə bɪn æskɪŋ wɛðɝ ʃi wɑntəɾ əɹ ti swiɾ əɹ bɪɾɝ. "sɛvɹəl ə hɔkwɪŋz dʒɛnɝəlz tʃɹaɪd, ən ðɛɹ mɛn wɝ slɔɾɝd. noʊ ɑɹmi hæz ɛvɝ mænədʒ tə bɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑnz wɔlz."

That acid washed over Gareth Bryne without leaving a stain. "Would you prefer a direct assault right off, Myrelle Sedai?" He could have been asking whether she wanted her tea sweet or bitter. "Several of Hawkwing's generals tried, and their men were slaughtered. No army has ever managed to breach Tar Valon's walls."

ðət wɑz nɑt stʃɹɪkli tʃɹu, ɛɡwin nu. ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, ən ɑɹmi ʌv dʒɹɛdlɔɹd-lɛd tʃɹɑləks hæɾ æktʃəli  plʌndɝɾ ən bɝn ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf. ət ði ɛn ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə sɛkən dʒɹæɡən, ən ɑɹmi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɛskju ɡɛɹ əmɑlɑsən bɪfɔɹ i wɑz dʒɛntəl hæd ɹitʃt ðə taʊɝ, tu. maɪɹɛl kəd nɑt noʊ, ðoʊ, mʌtʃ lɛs bɹaɪn. æksɛs tə ðoʊz sikɹət hɪstɝiz, hɪɾən dip ɪn ðə taʊɝ laɪbɹɛɹi, wɑz sɛɾ aʊɾ ɪn ə lɔ ðət wɑz ɪtsɛlf sikɹət, ən ɹɪvilɪŋ ði ɛɡzɪstəns ʌv iðɝ ɹɛkɝdz əɹ lɔ wɑz tʃɹizən. sɪuən sɛɾ ɪf jə ɹɛd bɪtwin ðə laɪnz, jə faʊn hɪns ə θɪŋz ðət hæd nɑt bɪn ɹəkɔɹɾəd ivən ðɛɹ. ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ət haɪɾɪŋ tʃɹuθ wən ðeɪ θɔɾ ɪt nɛsəsɛɹi, ivən fɹəm ðɛmsɛlvz.

That was not strictly true, Egwene knew. In the Trolloc Wars, an army of Dreadlord-led Trollocs had actually plundered and burned a part of the White Tower itself. At the end of the War of the Second Dragon, an army trying to rescue Guaire Amalasan before he was gentled had reached the Tower, too. Myrelle could not know, though, much less Bryne. Access to those secret histories, hidden deep in the Tower library, was set out in a law that was itself secret, and revealing the existence of either records or law was treason. Siuan said if you read between the lines, you found hints of things that had not been recorded even there. Aes Sedai were very good at hiding truth when they thought it necessary, even from themselves.

"wɪð ə hʌnʒɹəd θaʊzən əɹ wʌɾ aɪ hæv naʊ," bɹaɪn kəntɪnjud, "aɪ wɪl bi ðə fɝst. ɪf aɪ kən blɑk ðə hɑɹbɝz. hɔkwɪŋz dʒɛnɝəlz nɛvɝ mænədʒ ðæt. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlweɪz ɹeɪz ðoʊz aɪɝn tʃeɪnz ɪn taɪm tə stɑp ðə ʃɪps ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə hɑɹbɝ maʊθ ən sæŋk əm bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd bi pleɪs tə hɪndɝ tʃɹeɪd. fuɾ ən səplaɪz ɡɑɾ ɪn. ɪɾəl kʌm tə jəɹ əsɔlt ɪvɛntʃəwəli, bʌt nɑɾ əntɪl ðə sɪɾiz wikənd, ɪf aɪ hæv maɪ weɪ." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz stɪl . . . ɔɹɾənɛɹi. ə mæn dɪskʌsɪŋ ən aʊɾɪŋ. hɪz hɛd tɝn təwɔɹd maɪɹɛl, ən ðoʊ hɪz toʊn dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, ði ɪntɛnsəɾi ɪn ɪz aɪz wɑz ɛvəɾənt ivən bɪhaɪn ɪz feɪsɡɑɹd. "æn jə ɔl əɡɹiɾ aɪ wʊd, wən ɪt keɪm tə ði ɑɹmi. aɪ woʊn θɹoʊ mɛn əweɪ."

"With a hundred thousand or what I have now," Bryne continued, "I will be the first. If I can block the harbors. Hawkwing's generals never managed that. The Aes Sedai always raised those iron chains in time to stop the ships getting into the harbor mouth and sank them before they could be placed to hinder trade. Food and supplies got in. It will come to your assault eventually, but not until the city's weakened, if I have my way." His voice was still . . . ordinary. A man discussing an outing. His head turned toward Myrelle, and though his tone did not change, the intensity in his eyes was evident even behind his faceguard. "And you all agreed I would, when it came to the army. I won't throw men away."

maɪɹɛl oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, ðən kloʊzd ɪt sloʊli. pleɪnli ʃi wɑntəd tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ bʌt dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt. ðeɪ hæd ɡɪvən ðɛɹ wɝd, ʃi ən ʃɛɹiəm ən ðoʊz u hæd bɪn ɹʌnɪŋ θɪŋz wən i əpɪɹɾ ɪn sɑlədɑɹ, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ɡɪvɪŋ ɪt ɡæld. haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ðə sɪɾɝz tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɛt ɹaʊn ɪt. ðeɪ hæd ɡɪvən noʊ wɝd. bɹaɪn æktəɾ əz ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd, ðoʊ, ən soʊ fɑɹ i hæd mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ wɪð ɪt. soʊ fɑɹ.

Myrelle opened her mouth, then closed it slowly. Plainly she wanted to say something but did not know what. They had given their word, she and Sheriam and those who had been running things when he appeared in Salidar, however much giving it galled. However much the Sitters tried to get round it. They had given no word. Bryne acted as though they had, though, and so far he had managed to get away with it. So far.

ɛɡwin fɛlt ɪl. ʃi hæd sin wɔɹ. ɪmədʒəz flæʃt ɪn əɹ hɛd, mɛn faɪɾɪŋ, kɪlɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu ðə stʃɹits ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, daɪɪŋ. hɝ aɪz fɛl ɑn ə skwɛɹ-dʒɔd fɛloʊ tʃuɪŋ ɪz tʌŋ waɪl i ʃɑɹpən ə pɪkhɛd. wəɾ i daɪ ɪn ðoʊz stʃɹits? ðə ɡɹɪzəld, bɔldɪŋ mæn ɹʌnɪŋ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz soʊ kɛɹfəli daʊn itʃ æɹoʊ bɪfɔɹ slaɪɾɪŋ ðə ʃæft ɪndə hɪz kwɪvɝ? ən ðɛɹ. ðət læd swæɡɝɪŋ ɪn ɪz haɪ ɹaɪɾɪŋ buts. hi lʊk tu jʌŋ tə ʃeɪv. laɪt, soʊ mɛni wɝ bɔɪz. haʊ mɛni wəd daɪ? fəɹ hɝ. fəɹ dʒʌstəs, fəɹ ðə ɹaɪt, fəɹ ðə wɝld, bʌɾ ət ðə hɑɹt, fəɹ hɝ. sɪuən ɹeɪzd əɹ hænd, bʌt dɪd nɑt kəmplit ðə dʒɛstʃɝ. hæd ʃi bɪn kloʊs ɪnʌf, ʃi kəd nɑt pæt ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ wɛɹ ɛvɹiwʌn kəd si.

Egwene felt ill. She had seen war. Images flashed in her head, men fighting, killing their way through the streets of Tar Valon, dying. Her eyes fell on a square-jawed fellow chewing his tongue while he sharpened a pikehead. Would he die in those streets? The grizzled, balding man running his fingers so carefully down each arrow before sliding the shaft into his quiver? And there. That lad swaggering in his high riding boots. He looked too young to shave. Light, so many were boys. How many would die? For her. For justice, for the right, for the world, but at the heart, for her. Siuan raised her hand, but did not complete the gesture. Had she been close enough, she could not pat the Amyrlin Seat on the shoulder where everyone could see.

ɛɡwin stʃɹeɪɾənd əɹ bæk. "lɔɹd bɹaɪn," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs, "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə wɑn mi tə si?" ʃi θɔɾ i hæf-ɡlænst ət maɪɹɛl bɪfɔɹ ænsɝɪŋ.

Egwene straightened her back. "Lord Bryne," she said in a tight voice, "what is it you want me to see?" She thought he half-glanced at Myrelle before answering.

"bɛɾɝ jə si ɪt fəɹ jɝsɛlf, mʌðɝ."

"Better you see it for yourself, Mother."

ɛɡwin θɔɾ əɹ hɛd maɪt bɹeɪk oʊpən. ɪf sɪuənz kluz lɛd tə ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl, ʃi maɪt dʒʌst skɪn maɪɹɛl. ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt, ʃi maɪt skɪn sɪuən. ən ʃi maɪt θɹoʊ ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn ɪn fəɹ ɡʊd mɛʒɝ.

Egwene thought her head might break open. If Siuan's clues led to anything at all, she might just skin Myrelle. If they did not, she might skin Siuan. And she might throw Gareth Bryne in for good measure.


tʃæptɝ twɛlv


CHAPTER 12

eɪ mɔɹnɪŋ ə vɪktɝi


A Morning of Victory

ðə kɹʊkəd hɪlz ən ɹɪdʒəz sɝaʊndɪŋ ðə kæmp ʃoʊɾ ɛvɹi saɪn ə ðə dʒɹaʊɾ ən ənsizənəbəl hit. ði ənhoʊli hiɾ ɪn tʃɹuθ; ivən ðə dʌləst skʌljən skɹʌbɪŋ pɑts sɔ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz tʌtʃ ɑn ðə wɝld. ðə tʃɹu fɔɹəs leɪ bɪhaɪn əm tə ðə wɛst, bʌt twɪstəɾ oʊks ɡɹu aʊɾ ə ðə ɹɑki sloʊps, saʊɝɡumz ən paɪnz ʌv ʌnfəmɪljɝ ʃeɪp, ən tʃɹiz ɛɡwin hæd noʊ neɪmz fɔɹ, bɹaʊn ən jɛloʊ ən bɛɹ-bɹæntʃt. nɑt wɪntɝ-bɛɹ əɹ bɹaʊn. stɑɹv fəɹ mɔɪstʃɝ ən kulnəs. daɪɪŋ, ɪf ðə wɛðɝ dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ sun. bɪɑn ðə læst ə ðə soʊlʒɝz ə ɹɪvɝ ɹæn ɔf saʊθ ən wɛst, ðə ɹaɪsəndʒɹɛl, twɛnti peɪsɪz waɪɾ ən flæŋkt ɑn iðɝ saɪd baɪ hɑɹd-beɪk mʌd stʌɾɪd wɪð stoʊnz. swɝlɪŋ ɝaʊn ɹɑks ðət maɪɾ əv meɪd kɹɔsɪŋ hæzɝɾəs ɪn ʌðɝ deɪz, ðə wɔɾɝ ɹoʊz ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə hɔɹsəz' niz əz ðeɪ fɔɹɾɪd. ɛɡwin fɛlt əɹ oʊn pɹɑbləmz dwɪndəl ɪn saɪz. dɪspaɪɾ əɹ hɛd, ʃi ɔfɝɾ ə smɔl pɹɛɹ fəɹ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn. ðɛɹ sɝtʃ wɑz əz ɪmpɔɹɾənt əz ɛniθɪŋ ʃi dɪd. mɔɹ. ðə wɝld wəd lɪv ɪf ʃi feɪld, bʌt ðeɪ hæd tə səksid.

The crooked hills and ridges surrounding the camp showed every sign of the drought and unseasonable heat. The unholy heat in truth; even the dullest scullion scrubbing pots saw the Dark One's touch on the world. The true forest lay behind them to the west, but twisted oaks grew out of the rocky slopes, sourgums and pines of unfamiliar shape, and trees Egwene had no names for, brown and yellow and bare-branched. Not winter-bare or brown. Starved for moisture and coolness. Dying, if the weather did not change soon. Beyond the last of the soldiers a river ran off south and west, the Reisendrelle, twenty paces wide and flanked on either side by hard-baked mud studded with stones. Swirling around rocks that might have made crossing hazardous in other days, the water rose short of the horses' knees as they forded. Egwene felt her own problems dwindle in size. Despite her head, she offered a small prayer for Nynaeve and Elayne. Their search was as important as anything she did. More. The world would live if she failed, but they had to succeed.

ðeɪ tʃɹævəl saʊθwɝɾ əɾ ən izi kæntɝ, sloʊɪŋ wən ðə hɪlsaɪd slæn ə ðə lænd ɡɹu tu ɡɹeɪɾ əɹ ðə hɔɹsəz hæd tə klaɪm ɛni dɪstəns θɹu tʃɹiz ən spɑɹs skɹʌb, bʌt kipɪŋ tə ðə loʊlən əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl ən kʌvɝɪŋ ɡɹaʊn kwɪkli. bɹaɪnz bɪɡ-noʊzd ɡɛldɪŋ, ʃʊɹ-fʊɾɪd ən stʃɹɔŋ, hɑɹdli sim tə maɪnd wɪtʃ weɪ ðə ɡɹaʊn tɪltəɾ əɹ wɛðɝ smuð əɹ ɹʌf, jɛt deɪʃɝ kɛpt peɪs izəli. səmtaɪmz sɪuənz plʌmp ænəməl leɪbɝd, ðoʊ ʃi maɪt dʒʌst əv bɪn pɪkɪŋ ʌp əɹ ɹaɪɾɝz æŋzaɪəɾi. noʊ əmaʊn ə pɹæktəs kəd meɪk sɪuən ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ ə tɛɹəbəl ɹaɪɾɝ, nɪɹli θɹoʊɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ðə mɛɹz nɛk klaɪmɪŋ ʌpsloʊp, ɔlmoʊs fɔlɪŋ fɹəm ðə sæɾəl ɡoʊɪŋ daʊn, ɑkwɝɾ əz ə dʌk əfʊɾ ɑn ðə flæts ən nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm waɪd-aɪɾ əz ðə hɔɹs. maɪɹɛl æktʃəli  ɹiɡeɪn səm ə hɝ hjumɝ wɑtʃɪŋ sɪuən. hɝ oʊn waɪt-fʊɾɪd sɔɹəl pɪkt əɹ weɪ ɪn dɛləkət swups laɪk ə swɑloʊ, ən maɪɹɛl ɹoʊd wɪð ən əʃʊɹəns ən flɛɹ ðət meɪd bɹaɪn əpɪɹ stɑləɾ ən wɝkmænlaɪk.

They traveled southward at an easy canter, slowing when the hillside slant of the land grew too great or the horses had to climb any distance through trees and sparse scrub, but keeping to the lowland as much as possible and covering ground quickly. Bryne's big-nosed gelding, sure-footed and strong, hardly seemed to mind which way the ground tilted or whether smooth or rough, yet Daishar kept pace easily. Sometimes Siuan's plump animal labored, though she might just have been picking up her rider's anxiety. No amount of practice could make Siuan anything but a terrible rider, nearly throwing her arms around the mare's neck climbing upslope, almost falling from the saddle going down, awkward as a duck afoot on the flats and not far from wide-eyed as the horse. Myrelle actually regained some of her humor watching Siuan. Her own white-footed sorrel picked her way in delicate swoops like a swallow, and Myrelle rode with an assurance and flare that made Bryne appear stolid and workmanlike.

bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn vɛɹi fɑɹ, ɹaɪɾɝz əpɪɹɾ ətɑp ə haɪ ɹɪdʒ tə ðə wɛst, pɝhæps ə hʌnʒɹəd mɛn ɪn kɑləm, ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn ɡlɪntɪŋ ɔf bɹɛst-pleɪts ən hɛlməts ən læns pɔɪns. ət ðɛɹ hɛd stʃɹimd ə lɔŋ waɪt pɛnən ɛɡwin kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt, bʌt ʃi nu ɪt bɔɹ ðə ɹɛd hænd. ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəd tə si ðɛm soʊ kloʊs tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kæmp.

Before they had gone very far, riders appeared atop a high ridge to the west, perhaps a hundred men in column, the rising sun glinting off breast-plates and helmets and lance points. At their head streamed a long white pennant Egwene could not make out, but she knew it bore the Red Hand. She had not expected to see them so close to the Aes Sedai camp.

"dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn ænəməlz," maɪɹɛl mʌɾɝd, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə hɔɹsmən pɛɹəlɛl ðɛɹ ɹut. hɝ ɡlʌv hænz taɪɾənd ɑn əɹ ɹeɪnz - wɪð fjʊɹi, nɑt fɪɹ.

"Dragonsworn animals," Myrelle muttered, watching the horsemen parallel their route. Her gloved hands tightened on her reins - with fury, not fear.

"ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hæn pʊts aʊt pətʃɹoʊlz," bɹaɪn sɛd plɑtʃədli. wɪð ə ɡlæns əɾ ɛɡwin, hi æɾəd, "lɔɹd tælmɑnz simz kənsɝn əbaʊt ju, mʌðɝ, læst aɪ spoʊk tə hɪm." hi pʊt noʊ mɔɹ ɛmfəsəs ɑn ðət ðən ði ʌðɝ.

"The Band of the Red Hand puts out patrols," Bryne said placidly. With a glance at Egwene, he added, "Lord Talmanes seems concerned about you, Mother, last I spoke to him." He put no more emphasis on that than the other.

"juv spoʊkən wɪð hɪm?" ɛvɹi vɛstɪdʒ ə maɪɹɛlz sɝɛnəɾi vænɪʃt. ði æŋɡɝ ʃi hæd tə hoʊld ɪn wɪð ɛɡwin, ʃi kəd seɪfli ənliʃ ɑn hɪm. ʃi ɔl bʌt ʃʊk wɪð ɪt. "ðæɾ ɪz vɛɹi kloʊz tə tʃɹizən, lɔɹd bɹaɪn. ɪt maɪt wɛl bi tʃɹizən!" sɪuən hæd bɪn dɪvaɪɾɪŋ əɹ ətɛnʃən bɪtwin əɹ hɔɹs ən ðə mɛn ɑn ðə ɹɪdʒ, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk ət maɪɹɛl, bʌt ʃi stɪfənd. noʊ wʌn hæd taɪd ðə bæn ən tʃɹizən təɡɛðɝ bɪfɔɹ.

"You've spoken with him?" Every vestige of Myrelle's serenity vanished. The anger she had to hold in with Egwene, she could safely unleash on him. She all but shook with it. "That is very close to treason, Lord Bryne. It might well be treason!" Siuan had been dividing her attention between her horse and the men on the ridge, and she did not look at Myrelle, but she stiffened. No one had tied the Band and treason together before.

ðeɪ ɹaʊndəɾ ə bɛn ɪn ðə hɪl væli. ə fɑɹm klʌŋ tə ə hɪlsaɪd, əɹ wʌt hæd bɪn ə fɑɹm wʌns. wʌn wɔl ə ðə smɔl stoʊn haʊs hæd kəlæpst, ən ə fju tʃɑɹd tɪmbɝz stʌk ʌp bɪsaɪd ðə sʊt-koʊɾəd tʃɪmni laɪk ɡɹaɪmi fɪŋɡɝz. ðə ɹufləs bɑɹn wɑz ə blækən hɑloʊ bɑks ə stoʊn, ən skæɾɝd æʃ mɑɹkt wɛɹ ʃɛdz maɪt wʌns əv stʊd. ɔl əkɹɔs ɔltɑɹə ðeɪ hæd sin əz bæɾ ən wɝs, ɪntaɪɝ vɪlədʒəz səmtaɪmz, ðə dɛd laɪɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹits, fud fəɹ ɹeɪvənz ən fɑksəz ən fɛɹəl dɑɡz ðət flɛd wən pipəl keɪm kloʊs. stɔɹiz ʌv ænɝki ən mɝɾɝ ɪn tæɹɑbən ən ɑɹæd dumən sʌɾənli hæd flɛʃ ən boʊnz. mɛni mɛn sizd ɛni ɪkskjus tə tɝn bændəɾ əɹ sɛɾəl oʊld ɡɹʌdʒɪz - ɛɡwin hoʊp fɝvənli ɪt wɑz soʊ - bʌt ðə neɪm ɑn ɛvɹi sɝvaɪvɝz lɪps wɑz dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn, ən ðə sɪstɝz bleɪmd ɹænd əz ʃʊɹli əz ɪf i hæd kæɹid ðə tɔɹtʃɪz hɪmsɛlf. ðeɪ wəd juz ɪm stɪl ɪf ðeɪ kʊd, ðoʊ, kəntʃɹoʊl ɪm ɪf ðeɪ faʊn ə weɪ. ʃi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli ɛɛs sədaɪ tə bɪliv ɪn duɪŋ wʌt ʃi mʌst ivən wən ʃi hæd tə hoʊld əɹ noʊz.

They rounded a bend in the hill valley. A farm clung to a hillside, or what had been a farm once. One wall of the small stone house had collapsed, and a few charred timbers stuck up beside the soot-coated chimney like grimy fingers. The roofless barn was a blackened hollow box of stone, and scattered ash marked where sheds might once have stood. All across Altara they had seen as bad and worse, entire villages sometimes, the dead lying in the streets, food for ravens and foxes and feral dogs that fled when people came close. Stories of anarchy and murder in Tarabon and Arad Doman suddenly had flesh and bones. Many men seized any excuse to turn bandit or settle old grudges - Egwene hoped fervently it was so - but the name on every survivor's lips was Dragonsworn, and the sisters blamed Rand as surely as if he had carried the torches himself. They would use him still if they could, though, control him if they found a way. She was not the only Aes Sedai to believe in doing what she must even when she had to hold her nose.

maɪɹɛlz æŋɡɝ əfɛktəd bɹaɪn əz lɪɾəl əz ɹeɪn əfɛktəɾ ə boʊldɝ. ɛɡwin hæɾ ə sʌɾən ɪmədʒ ə stɔɹmz wɝlɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ən flʌd-wɔɾɝz swɝlɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪz niz waɪl i dʒʌs kɛp stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əhɛd. "maɪɹɛl sədaɪ," hi sɛd wɪð ðə kɑm ʃi ʃəɾ əv ʃoʊn, "wɛn tɛn θaʊzən mɛn əɹ mɔɹ ɑɹ ʃæɾoʊɪŋ maɪ bæktʃɹeɪl, aɪ wɑnə noʊ wʌt ðɛɹ ɪntɛntʃənz ɑɹ. ɪspɛʃli ðɪs pɝtɪkjəlɝ tɛn θaʊzən əɹ mɔɹ."

Myrelle's anger affected Bryne as little as rain affected a boulder. Egwene had a sudden image of storms whirling about his head and flood-waters swirling around his knees while he just kept striding ahead. "Myrelle Sedai," he said with the calm she should have shown, "when ten thousand men or more are shadowing my backtrail, I want to know what their intentions are. Especially this particular ten thousand or more."

ðɪs wɑz ə deɪnʒɝəs tɑpɪk. haʊɛvɝ hæpi ɛɡwin wɑz ðət ðeɪ wɝ pæs kwɛstʃənz ə tælmɑnz' kənsɝn oʊvɝ hɝ, ʃi ʃʊɾə bɪn ɡɹaɪndɪŋ əɹ tiθ ðəɾ i hæd mɛnʃən əɹ əɾ ɔl, bʌt ʃi wɑz soʊ stɑɹɾəld ʃi sæt boʊlt əpɹaɪɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl. "tɛn θaʊzənd? ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ?" ðə bæn hæd hæd lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən hæf ðət wən mæt bɹɔɾ ɪt tə sɑlədɑɹ hʌntɪŋ əɹ ən ɪleɪn.

This was a dangerous topic. However happy Egwene was that they were past questions of Talmanes' concern over her, she should have been grinding her teeth that he had mentioned her at all, but she was so startled she sat bolt upright in her saddle. "Ten thousand? Are you sure?" The Band had had little more than half that when Mat brought it to Salidar hunting her and Elayne.

bɹaɪn mɪɹli ʃɹʌɡd. "aɪ ɡæðɝ ɹəkɹuts əz aɪ ɡoʊ, ən soʊ dʌz hi. nɑɾ əz mɛni, bʌt səm mɛn əv noʊʃənz əbaʊt sɝvɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ." mɔɹ pipəl ðən nɑt wʊɾə bɪn dɪstɪŋkli ənizi, seɪɪŋ ðət tə θɹi sɪstɝz; hi sɛɾ ɪt wɪð ə ɹaɪ smaɪl. "bɪsaɪdz, ɪt simz ðə bæn əz ə sɝɾən ɹɛpjəteɪʃən fɹəm ðə faɪɾɪŋ ɪn kɛɹhin. ðə teɪl ɪz, ʃɛn ən kɑlhɑɹ nɛvɝ luzəz, wʌtɛvɝ ði ɑdz." ðət wɑz wʌt dʒɹoʊv mɛn tə dʒɔɪn, hɪɹ əz bæk ɪn ɔltɑɹə, ðə θɔt ðət tu ɑɹmiz mʌs min ə bæɾəl. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stæn əsaɪd maɪɾ ɛn əz hɑɹɾ əz tʃuzɪŋ ðə ɹɔŋ saɪd; ət bɛs ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ pɪkɪŋz fəɹ nutʃɹəlz. "aɪv hæɾ ə fju dɛzɝɾɝz tə maɪ ɹæŋks fɹəm tælmɑnz' nulɪŋz. səm sim tə θɪŋk ðə bænz lʌk ɪz taɪɾ ʌp ɪn mæt kɔθən ən kæn bi ðəɹ wɪθaʊt hɪm."

Bryne merely shrugged. "I gather recruits as I go, and so does he. Not as many, but some men have notions about serving Aes Sedai." More people than not would have been distinctly uneasy, saying that to three sisters; he said it with a wry smile. "Besides, it seems the Band has a certain reputation from the fighting in Cairhien. The tale is, Shen an Calhar never loses, whatever the odds." That was what drove men to join, here as back in Altara, the thought that two armies must mean a battle. Trying to stand aside might end as hard as choosing the wrong side; at best there would be no pickings for neutrals. "I've had a few deserters to my ranks from Talmanes' newlings. Some seem to think the Band's luck is tied up in Mat Cauthon and can't be there without him."

sʌmθɪŋ kloʊs tə ə snɪɹ twɪstəd maɪɹɛlz lɪps. "ðiz ful mʊɹændiənz' fɪɹz ɑɹ sɝɾənli jusfəl, bʌɾ aɪ dɪd nɑt θɪŋk jə wɝ ə ful, tu. tælmɑnz fɑloʊz əs kəz i fɪɹz wi maɪt tɝn əɡɛnst ɪz pɹɛʃəs lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, bʌɾ ɪf i tʃɹuli ɪntɛndəd tə ətæk, doʊn jə θɪŋk i wəɾ əv baɪ naʊ? ðiz dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn kən bi dɛlt wɪð wʌns mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz ɑɹ dʌn. kəmjunəkeɪɾɪŋ wɪð hɪm, haʊɛvɝ . . . !" ɡɪvɪŋ hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk, ʃi mænədʒ tə ɹɪɡeɪn əɹ sɝɛnəɾi. ɑn ðə sɝfəs, ət list. hɝ toʊn kəd stɪl əv skɔɹtʃt wʊd. "ju mɑɹk mi, lɔɹd bɹaɪn. . . ."

Something close to a sneer twisted Myrelle's lips. "These fool Murandians' fears are certainly useful, but I did not think you were a fool, too. Talmanes follows us because he fears we might turn against his precious Lord Dragon, but if he truly intended to attack, don't you think he would have by now? These Dragonsworn can be dealt with once more important matters are done. Communicating with him, however . . . !" Giving herself a shake, she managed to regain her serenity. On the surface, at least. Her tone could still have scorched wood. "You mark me, Lord Bryne. . . ."

ɛɡwin lɛt maɪɹɛlz wɝdz pæs əɹ baɪ. bɹaɪn hæd lʊkt əɾ əɹ wən i mɛnʃən mæt. ðə sɪstɝz θɔt ðeɪ nu ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən wɪð ðə bænd, ən mæt, ən dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɑn ɪt mʌtʃ, bʌt bɹaɪn əpɛɹənli dɪd. tɪltɪŋ əɹ hɛd soʊ ðə bɹɪm ə hɝ hæɾ əbskjʊɹɾ əɹ feɪs, ʃi stʌɾid ɪm fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ. hi wɑz oʊθbaʊn tə bɪl ði ɑɹmi ən lɛɾ ɪɾ əntɪl ɪleɪɾə wɑz bɹɔt daʊn, bʌt waɪ hæɾ i swɔɹn? ʃʊɹli hi cʊɾə faʊn səm lɛsɝ oʊθ, ən ɪt ʃʊɹli wʊɾə bɪn æksɛptɪd baɪ sɪstɝz u oʊnli θɔt tə juz ɔl ðoʊz soʊlʒɝz əz ə fuldeɪ mæsk tə fɹaɪɾən ɪleɪɾə. hævɪŋ ɪm ɑn ðɛɹ saɪd wɑz kʌmfɝɾɪŋ; ivən ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ sim tə fil ðæt. laɪk əɹ fɑðɝ, hi wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə mæn u meɪd jə bɪliv ðəɹ wɑz noʊ kɑz fəɹ pænɪk wʌtɛvɝ ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən. hævɪŋ ɪm əpoʊz hɝ, ʃi ɹilaɪz sʌɾənli, maɪt bi əz bæɾ əz hævɪŋ ðə hɔl əɡɛns hɝ, ən nɛvɝ maɪn ði ɑɹmi. ðə wʌn əpɹuvɪŋ kɑmɛn sɪuən hæɾ ɛvɝ hæɾ ə hɪm wɑz ðəɾ i wɑz fɔɹməɾəbəl, ivən ɪf ʃi dɪd tʃɹaɪ tə tʃeɪnʒ əɹ ɹɪmɑɹk ɪmiɾiətli tə min sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. ɛni mæn sɪuən sɑntʃ θɔt fɔɹməɾəbəl wɑz wʌn tə bi maɪnfəl ʌv.

Egwene let Myrelle's words pass her by. Bryne had looked at her when he mentioned Mat. The sisters thought they knew the situation with the Band, and Mat, and did not think on it much, but Bryne apparently did. Tilting her head so the brim of her hat obscured her face, she studied him from the corner of her eye. He was oathbound to build the army and lead it until Elaida was brought down, but why had he sworn? Surely he could have found some lesser oath, and it surely would have been accepted by sisters who only thought to use all those soldiers as a Foolday mask to frighten Elaida. Having him on their side was comforting; even the other Aes Sedai seemed to feel that. Like her father, he was the sort of man who made you believe there was no cause for panic whatever the situation. Having him oppose her, she realized suddenly, might be as bad as having the Hall against her, and never mind the army. The one approving comment Siuan had ever had of him was that he was formidable, even if she did try to change her remark immediately to mean something else. Any man Siuan Sanche thought formidable was one to be mindful of.

ðeɪ splæʃt əkɹɔs ə taɪni stʃɹim, ə ɹɪvjulɛt ðət bɛɹli wɛt ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz. ə bɪdʒɹæɡəl kɹoʊ, fiɾɪŋ ɑn ə fɪʃ ðət hæd stʃɹændəɾ ɪtsɛlf ɪn wɔɾɝ tu ʃæloʊ tə swɪm, flʌɾɝd ɪts tæɾɝd wɪŋz ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə flaɪt, ðən sɛɾəld bæk tə ɪts mil.

They splashed across a tiny stream, a rivulet that barely wet the horses' hooves. A bedraggled crow, feeding on a fish that had stranded itself in water too shallow to swim, fluttered its tattered wings on the edge of flight, then settled back to its meal.

sɪuən ɔlsoʊ wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ bɹaɪn - ðə mɛɹ meɪd mʌtʃ iziɝ ɡoʊɪŋ wən ʃi fɝɡɑt tə sɔ ət ðə ɹeɪnz əɹ dɪɡ hɝ hilz ɪn ət dʒʌs ðə ɹɔŋ moʊmənt. ɛɡwin hæɾ æskt əɹ əbaʊt lɔɹd bɹaɪnz moʊɾɪvz, bʌt sɪuənz oʊn tæŋɡəl kənɛkʃən tə ðə mæn lɛft əɹ lɪɾəl ɪksɛpt æsəd wən ɪt keɪm tə hɪm. ʃi iðɝ heɪɾəd ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn tə hɪz butsoʊlz əɹ lʌv hɪm, ən ɪmædʒənɪŋ sɪuən ɪn lʌv wɑz laɪk ɪmædʒənɪŋ ðət kɹoʊ swɪmɪŋ.

Siuan also was studying Bryne - the mare made much easier going when she forgot to saw at the reins or dig her heels in at just the wrong moment. Egwene had asked her about Lord Bryne's motives, but Siuan's own tangled connection to the man left her little except acid when it came to him. She either hated Gareth Bryne to his bootsoles or loved him, and imagining Siuan in love was like imagining that crow swimming.

ðə ɹɪdʒəlaɪn wɛɹ ðə bænz soʊlʒɝz hæd bɪn ʃoʊɾ oʊnli kɑkaɪd laɪnz ə dɛd kɑnəfɝz naʊ. ʃi hæd nɑt noʊɾəst əm ɡoʊɪŋ. mæt hæɾ ə ɹɛpjəteɪʃən əz ə soʊlʒɝ? kɹoʊz swɪmɪŋ dɪd nɑt kʌm kloʊs. ʃi hæd bɪlivd i kəmændəɾ oʊnli kəz ə ɹænd, ən ðət hæd bɪn hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə swɑloʊ. bɪlivɪŋ kəz jə θɪŋk jə noʊ ɪz deɪnʒɝəs, ʃi ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf, eɪɪŋ bɹaɪn.

The ridgeline where the Band's soldiers had been showed only cockeyed lines of dead conifers now. She had not noticed them going. Mat had a reputation as a soldier? Crows swimming did not come close. She had believed he commanded only because of Rand, and that had been hard enough to swallow. Believing because you think you know is dangerous, she reminded herself, eying Bryne.

". . . ʃəd bi flɑɡd!" maɪɹɛlz vɔɪs stɪl bɝnd. "aɪ wɔɹn ju, ɪf aɪ hɪɹ ðət juv mɛt wɪð ðɪs dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn əɡɛn . . . !"

". . . should be flogged!" Myrelle's voice still burned. "I warn you, if I hear that you've met with this Dragonsworn again . . . !"

ɹeɪn wɑʃɪŋ oʊvɝ ðət boʊldɝ əz fɑɹ əz bɹaɪn wɑz kənsɝnd, əɹ soʊ ɪt simd. hi ɹoʊɾ izəli, əkeɪʒənəli mɝmɝɪŋ "jɛs, maɪɹɛl sədaɪ" əɹ "noʊ, maɪɹɛl sədaɪ" wɪθaʊɾ ɛni hɪn ə dɪstʃɹɛs ən wɪθaʊt lɛsənɪŋ ðə wɑtʃ i kɛpt ɑn ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd. noʊ daʊɾ i hæd sin ðə soʊlʒɝz liv. haʊɛvɝ i mʌstɝd ðə peɪʃəns - ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ fɪɹ wɑz noʊ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt - ʃi wɑz ɪn noʊ mud tə lɪsən tə ðæt.

Rain washing over that boulder as far as Bryne was concerned, or so it seemed. He rode easily, occasionally murmuring "Yes, Myrelle Sedai" or "No, Myrelle Sedai" without any hint of distress and without lessening the watch he kept on the countryside. No doubt he had seen the soldiers leave. However he mustered the patience - Egwene was sure fear was no part of it - she was in no mood to listen to that.

"bi kwaɪət, maɪɹɛl! noʊ wʌn ɪz gɑnə də ɛniθɪŋ tə lɔɹd bɹaɪn." ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ tɛmpəl, ʃi θɔɾ ʌv æskɪŋ wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz bæk ɪn ðə kæmp fəɹ hilɪŋ. niðɝ sɪuən nɔɹ maɪɹɛl hæd mʌtʃ əbɪləɾi ðɛɹ. nɑt ðət hilɪŋ wəd də ɛni ɡʊɾ ɪf ɪt wɑz dʒʌs læk ə slip ən wɝi. nɑt ðət ʃi wɑntəd wɪspɝz spɹɛɾɪŋ ðət ðə stʃɹeɪn wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ tu ɡɹeɪt fəɹ hɝ. bɪsaɪdz, ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝ weɪz tə dil wɪð hɛdeɪks ðən hilɪŋ, ɔlðoʊ nɑt hɪɹ.

"Be quiet, Myrelle! No one is going to do anything to Lord Bryne." Rubbing her temple, she thought of asking one of the sisters back in the camp for Healing. Neither Siuan nor Myrelle had much ability there. Not that Healing would do any good if it was just lack of sleep and worry. Not that she wanted whispers spreading that the strain was growing too great for her. Besides, there were other ways to deal with headaches than Healing, although not here.

maɪɹɛlz maʊθ taɪɾənd oʊnli fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. wɪð ə tɔs ə hɝ hɛd, ʃi tɝn əɹ feɪs əweɪ, kʌlɝ ɪn əɹ tʃiks, ən bɹaɪn sʌɾənli əpɪɹɾ əbzɔɹbd ɪn ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ə ɹɛd-wɪŋ hɔk wilɪŋ ɔf tə ðɛɹ lɛft. ivən ə bɹeɪv mæn kəd noʊ wən tə bi dɪskɹit. foʊldɪŋ ɪts wɪŋz, ðə hɔk plʌməɾɪd təwɔɹɾ ənsin pɹeɪ bɪhaɪn ə stæn ə bɪdʒɹæɡəld lɛðɝlifs. ɛɡwin fɛl ðət weɪ, swupɪŋ ɑn tɑɹɡəts ʃi kəd nɑt si, hoʊpɪŋ ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən ðə ɹaɪt wʌn, hoʊpɪŋ ðəɹ wɑz ə tɑɹɡət ðɛɹ.

Myrelle's mouth tightened only for an instant. With a toss of her head, she turned her face away, color in her cheeks, and Bryne suddenly appeared absorbed in examining a red-winged hawk wheeling off to their left. Even a brave man could know when to be discreet. Folding its wings, the hawk plummeted toward unseen prey behind a stand of bedraggled leatherleafs. Egwene felt that way, swooping on targets she could not see, hoping she had chosen the right one, hoping there was a target there.

ʃi dʒɹu bɹɛθ, wɪʃɪŋ ɪt wɝ stɛɾiɝ. "dʒʌs ðə seɪm, lɔɹd bɹaɪn, aɪ θɪŋk ɪts bɛs jə doʊn mit tælmɑnz əɡɛn. ʃʊɹli jə noʊ əz mʌtʃ ə hɪz ɪntɛntʃənz əz jə nid baɪ ðɪs taɪm." laɪt sɛn tælmɑnz hæd nɑt sɛd tu mʌtʃ ɔlɹɛɾi. ə pɪɾi ʃi kəd nɑt sɛn sɪuən əɹ lin tə kɑʃən hɪm, ɪf i wəd teɪk ɪt, bʌt ɡɪvən filɪŋz əmʌŋ ðə sɪstɝz, ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl ɹɪsk gɑnə si ɹænd.

She drew breath, wishing it were steadier. "Just the same, Lord Bryne, I think it's best you don't meet Talmanes again. Surely you know as much of his intentions as you need by this time." Light send Talmanes had not said too much already. A pity she could not send Siuan or Leane to caution him, if he would take it, but given feelings among the sisters, she might as well risk going to see Rand.

bɹaɪn baʊɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl. "æz jə kəmænd, mʌðɝ." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɑkɝi ɪn ɪz toʊn; ðəɹ nɛvɝ wɑz. hi hæɾ ɑbviəsli lɝn tə skul ɪz vɔɪs ɝaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ. sɪuən hʌŋ bæk, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət hɪm. pɝhæps ʃi kəd dɪɡ aʊt wɛɹ ɪz lɔɪəltiz leɪ. fəɹ ɔl əɹ ænəmɑsəɾi, ʃi spɛn ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə taɪm ɪn ɪz kʌmpəni, mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən ʃi æbsəlutli hæd tə.

Bryne bowed in his saddle. "As you command, Mother." There was no mockery in his tone; there never was. He had obviously learned to school his voice around Aes Sedai. Siuan hung back, frowning at him. Perhaps she could dig out where his loyalties lay. For all her animosity, she spent a great deal of time in his company, much more than she absolutely had to.

wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ɛɡwin kɛpt əɹ hænz ɑn deɪʃɝz ɹeɪnz, əweɪ fɹəm əɹ hɛd. "haʊ mʌtʃ fɝðɝ, lɔɹd bɹaɪn?" kipɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃəns fɹəm əɹ vɔɪs wɑz mɔɹ dɪfəkəlt.

With an effort, Egwene kept her hands on Daishar's reins, away from her head. "How much further, Lord Bryne?" Keeping impatience from her voice was more difficult.

"dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl weɪ, mʌðɝ." fəɹ səm ɹizən, hi hæfweɪ tɝn ɪz hɛd tə lʊk ət maɪɹɛl. "nɑt fɑɹ, naʊ."

"Just a little way, Mother." For some reason, he halfway turned his head to look at Myrelle. "Not far, now."

ɪnkɹisɪŋli, fɑɹmz dɑɾəd ðə ɹidʒən, əz mɛni klɪŋɪŋ tə hɪlsaɪdz əz ɑn ðə flæts, ðoʊ ði ɛmənz fildɝ ɪn ɛɡwin sɛd ðət meɪd noʊ sɛns, loʊ ɡɹeɪ stoʊn haʊsəz ən bɑɹnz, ən ənfɛns pæstʃɝz wɪð ə fju slæt-ɹɪb kaʊz ən sæd-lʊkɪŋ blæk-teɪld ʃip. nɑɾ ɔl hæd bɪn bɝn baɪ fɑɹ, oʊnli wʌn hɪɹ ən wʌn ðɛɹ. səpoʊzədli ðə bɝnɪŋz wɝ tə lɛt ði ʌðɝz noʊ wʌt wəd hæpən ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt dɪklɛɹ fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

Increasingly, farms dotted the region, as many clinging to hillsides as on the flats, though the Emond's Fielder in Egwene said that made no sense, low gray stone houses and barns, and unfenced pastures with a few slat-ribbed cows and sad-looking black-tailed sheep. Not all had been burned by far, only one here and one there. Supposedly the burnings were to let the others know what would happen if they did not declare for the Dragon Reborn.

ət wʌn fɑɹm, ʃi sɔ səm ə lɔɹd bɹaɪnz fɔɹədʒɝz wɪð ə wæɡən. ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɪz wɑz pleɪn əz mʌtʃ baɪ ðə weɪ hi aɪɾ əm ən nɑɾəd əz baɪ ðə læk ʌv ə waɪt pɛnənt. ðə bæn ɔlweɪz flɔntɪɾ ɪtsɛlf; əsaɪd fɹəm ðə bænɝz, səm hæɾ ə leɪt teɪkən tə wɛɹɪŋ ə ɹɛd skɑɹf taɪɾ ɝaʊn ði ɑɹm. hæf ə dʌzən kæɾəl ən meɪbi tu dʌzən ʃip loʊɾ ən beɪɾ ʌndɝ ðə ɡɑɹɾ ə mɛn ɑn hɔɹsbæk, ən ʌðɝ mɛn toʊɾɪd sæks fɹəm bɑɹn tə wæɡən pæst ə slʌmp-ʃoʊldɝd fɑɹmɝ ən ɪz fæmli, ə sʌlən lɑɾ ɪn dɑɹk ɹʌf wʊlənz. wʌn ə ðə lɪɾəl ɡɝlz, wɛɹɪŋ ə dip bɑnət laɪk ði ʌðɝz, hæɾ əɹ feɪs pɹɛs tə hɝ mʌðɝz skɝts, əpɛɹənli kɹaɪɪŋ. səm ə ðə bɔɪz hæd ðɛɹ fɪsts klɛntʃt, əz ɪf ðeɪ wɑntəd tə faɪt. ðə fɑɹmɝ wəd bi peɪd, bʌɾ ɪf i kəd nɑt ɹɪli spɛɹ wʌt wɑz teɪkən, ɪf i hæd hæɾ ə maɪn tə ɹɪzɪs kloʊs ɑn twɛnti mɛn ɪn bɹɛstpleɪts ən hɛlməts, ðoʊz bɝn fɑɹmz wʊɾə ɡɪvən ɪm pɔz. kwaɪɾ ɔfən bɹaɪnz soʊlʒɝz faʊn tʃɑɹd kɔɹpsəz ɪn ðə ɹuənz, mɛn ən wɪmən ən tʃɪlʒɹən u hæd daɪd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ aʊt. səmtaɪmz ðə dɔɹz ən wɪndoʊz hæd bɪn sild ʌp fɹəm aʊtsaɪd.

At one farm, she saw some of Lord Bryne's foragers with a wagon. That they were his was plain as much by the way he eyed them and nodded as by the lack of a white pennant. The Band always flaunted itself; aside from the banners, some had of late taken to wearing a red scarf tied around the arm. Half a dozen cattle and maybe two dozen sheep lowed and baaed under the guard of men on horseback, and other men toted sacks from barn to wagon past a slump-shouldered farmer and his family, a sullen lot in dark rough woolens. One of the little girls, wearing a deep bonnet like the others, had her face pressed to her mother's skirts, apparently crying. Some of the boys had their fists clenched, as if they wanted to fight. The farmer would be paid, but if he could not really spare what was taken, if he had had a mind to resist close on twenty men in breastplates and helmets, those burned farms would have given him pause. Quite often Bryne's soldiers found charred corpses in the ruins, men and women and children who had died trying to get out. Sometimes the doors and windows had been sealed up from outside.

ɛɡwin wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðəɹ wɑz ɛni weɪ tə kənvɪns ðə fɑɹmɝz ən vɪlɪdʒɝz ðət ðəɹ wɑz ə dɪfɝəns bɪtwin ðə bɹɪɡænz ən ði ɑɹmi. ʃi wɑntəd tə, vɛɹi mʌtʃ, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt si haʊ, ʃɔɹɾ ə lɛɾɪŋ əɹ oʊn soʊlʒɝz ɡoʊ hʌŋɡɹi əntɪl ðeɪ dɪzɝɾɪd. ɪf ðə sɪstɝz kəd si noʊ dɪfɝəns bɪtwin ðə bɹɪɡænz ən ðə bænd, ðəɹ sim noʊ hoʊp fəɹ ðə kʌntʃɹi foʊk. əz ðə fɑɹm dwɪndəl bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ʃi ɹɪzɪstɪd ði ɝdʒ tə twɪst ɝaʊn ɪn əɹ sæɾəl ən lʊk bæk. lʊkɪŋ wəd tʃeɪnʒ nʌθɪŋ.

Egwene wondered whether there was any way to convince the farmers and villagers that there was a difference between the brigands and the army. She wanted to, very much, but she did not see how, short of letting her own soldiers go hungry until they deserted. If the sisters could see no difference between the brigands and the Band, there seemed no hope for the country folk. As the farm dwindled behind them, she resisted the urge to twist around in her saddle and look back. Looking would change nothing.

lɔɹd bɹaɪn wɑz əz ɡʊɾ əz ɪz wɝd. pɝhæps θɹi əɹ fɔɹ maɪlz fɹəm ðə kæmp - θɹi əɹ fɔɹ ɪn ə stʃɹeɪt laɪn; twaɪs ðəɾ oʊvɝ ðə kʌntʃɹi ðeɪ hæd kɹɔst - ðeɪ ɹaʊndəd ðə ʃoʊldɝ ʌv ə hɪl spɑɾəd wɪð bɹʌʃ ən tʃɹiz, ən i dʒɹu ɹeɪn. ðə sʌn stʊɾ ɔlmoʊs hæfweɪ tə ɪts kɹɛst, naʊ. ənʌðɝ ɹoʊd ɹæn bɪloʊ, nɛɹoʊɝ ən mʌtʃ mɔɹ waɪndɪŋ ðən ðə wʌn θɹu ðə kæmp. "ðeɪ hæd ði aɪdiə tʃɹævlɪŋ baɪ naɪt wəd teɪk əm seɪf pæs ðə bændəts," hi sɛd. "nɑɾ ə bæd noʊʃən, əz ɪt tɝnz aʊt, əɹ ɛls ðeɪv dʒʌs hæd ðə dɑɹk wʌnz oʊn lʌk. ðeɪv kʌm fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn."

Lord Bryne was as good as his word. Perhaps three or four miles from the camp - three or four in a straight line; twice that over the country they had crossed - they rounded the shoulder of a hill spotted with brush and trees, and he drew rein. The sun stood almost halfway to its crest, now. Another road ran below, narrower and much more winding than the one through the camp. "They had the idea traveling by night would take them safe past the bandits," he said. "Not a bad notion, as it turns out, or else they've just had the Dark One's own luck. They've come from Caemlyn."

ə mɝtʃən tʃɹeɪn ə səm fɪfti lɑɹdʒ wæɡənz bɪhaɪn timz ə tɛn əɹ soʊ leɪ stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊd, hɔltəɾ ʌndɝ ði aɪz ə mɔɹ ə bɹaɪnz soʊlʒɝz. ə fju ʌv ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ əfʊt, supɝvaɪzɪŋ ðə tʃɹænsfɝ ə bæɹəlz ən bæɡz fɹəm ðə mɝtʃəns' wæɡənz tə hæf ə dʌzən ə ðɛɹ oʊn. wʌn wʊmən ɪn ə pleɪn dɑɹk dʒɹɛs weɪvd əɹ ɑɹmz ən pɔɪntəd vɪɡɝəsli tə ðɪs aɪɾəm əɹ ðæt, iðɝ pɹətɛstɪŋ əɹ bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ, bʌɾ əɹ fɛloʊz stʊɾ ɪn ə ɡlʌm saɪlənt nɑt. ə ʃɔɹt weɪ fɑɹðɝ ʌp ðə ɹoʊd, ɡɹɪm fɹut dɛkɝeɪɾəd ðə spɹɛɾɪŋ lɪmz ʌv ən oʊk, mɛn hæŋɪŋ baɪ ðə nɛk fɹəm ɛvɹi bɛɹ bɹæntʃ. bɛɹ ɪksɛp fəɹ kɹoʊz, ɔlmoʊst ɪnʌf tə meɪk ðə tʃɹi sim livd ɪn blæk. ðeɪ hæd lɑɹdʒɝ ðən fɪʃ tə fiɾ ɑn, ðiz bɝdz. ivən əɾ ə dɪstəns ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə saɪt tə iz ɛɡwinz hɛd, əɹ əɹ stʌmək.

A merchant train of some fifty large wagons behind teams of ten or so lay stretched out along the road, halted under the eyes of more of Bryne's soldiers. A few of the soldiers were afoot, supervising the transfer of barrels and bags from the merchants' wagons to half a dozen of their own. One woman in a plain dark dress waved her arms and pointed vigorously to this item or that, either protesting or bargaining, but her fellows stood in a glum silent knot. A short way farther up the road, grim fruit decorated the spreading limbs of an oak, men hanging by the neck from every bare branch. Bare except for crows, almost enough to make the tree seem leaved in black. They had larger than fish to feed on, these birds. Even at a distance it was not a sight to ease Egwene's head, or her stomach.

"ðɪs wʌt jə wɑntəd mi tə si? ðə mɝtʃəns, əɹ ðə bændəts?" ʃi kəd nɑt si ə dʒɹɛs ɑn ɛni ʌv ðoʊz dæŋɡəlɪŋ kɔɹpsəz, ən wən ðə bændəts hæŋ pipəl, ðeɪ ɪnkluɾəd wɪmən ən tʃɪlʒɹən. ɛniwʌn cʊɾə pʊt ðə kɔɹpsəz ðɛɹ, bɹaɪnz soʊlʒɝz, ðə bænd - ðət ðə bæn hæŋd ɛni ʌv ðə soʊ-kɔl dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn ðeɪ kɑt meɪd lɪɾəl dɪfɝəns tə ðə sɪstɝz - əɹ ivən səm loʊkəl lɔɹɾ əɹ leɪɾi. hæd ðə mʊɹændiən noʊbəlz wɝk təɡɛðɝ, ɔl ðə bɹɪɡænz maɪɾ əv hʌŋ fɹəm tʃɹiz baɪ naʊ, bʌt ðət wɑz laɪk æskɪŋ kæts tə dæns. weɪt. hi hæd sɛd keɪɛmlɪn. "ɪz ɪt sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɹænd? əɹ ði æʃəmən?"

"This what you wanted me to see? The merchants, or the bandits?" She could not see a dress on any of those dangling corpses, and when the bandits hanged people, they included women and children. Anyone could have put the corpses there, Bryne's soldiers, the Band - that the Band hanged any of the so-called Dragonsworn they caught made little difference to the sisters - or even some local lord or lady. Had the Murandian nobles worked together, all the brigands might have hung from trees by now, but that was like asking cats to dance. Wait. He had said Caemlyn. "Is it something to do with Rand? Or the Asha'man?"

ðɪs taɪm i lʊk fɹəm əɹ tə maɪɹɛl ən bæk kwaɪɾ oʊpənli. maɪɹɛlz hæt kæst ʃædoʊz ɑn əɹ feɪs. ʃi əpɪɹd sʌŋk ɪn ɡlum, sæɡɪŋ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl ən nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ðə kɑnfəɾənt ɹaɪɾɝ ʃi hæd bɪn ɝliɝ. hi sim tə ɹitʃ ə dɪsɪʒən. "aɪ θɔt jə ʃəd hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ ɛnibəɾi ɛls dɪd, bʌt pɝhæps aɪ mɪsəndɝstʊd. . . ." hi aɪd maɪɹɛl əɡɛn.

This time he looked from her to Myrelle and back quite openly. Myrelle's hat cast shadows on her face. She appeared sunk in gloom, sagging in her saddle and not at all the confident rider she had been earlier. He seemed to reach a decision. "I thought you should hear before anybody else did, but perhaps I misunderstood. . . ." He eyed Myrelle again.

"hɪɹ wʌt, jə hɛɹi-ɪɹd lʌmp?" sɪuən ɡɹaʊld, θʌmpɪŋ ðə fæt mɛɹ kloʊsɝ wɪð əɹ hilz.

"Hear what, you hairy-eared lump?" Siuan growled, thumping the fat mare closer with her heels.

ɛɡwin meɪɾ ə suðɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝ təwɔɹd hɝ. "maɪɹɛl kən hɪɹ ɛniθɪŋ aɪ du, lɔɹd bɹaɪn. ʃiz maɪ kəmplit tʃɹʌst." ðə ɡɹin sɪstɝz hɛd dʒɝkt ɝaʊnd. fɹəm əɹ stʃɹɪkən lʊk, ɛniwʌn wəd daʊt ðeɪ hæd hɝɾ ɛɡwin kɝɛkli, bʌɾ æftɝ ə moʊmən bɹaɪn nɑɾəd.

Egwene made a soothing gesture toward her. "Myrelle can hear anything I do, Lord Bryne. She has my complete trust." The Green sister's head jerked around. From her stricken look, anyone would doubt they had heard Egwene correctly, but after a moment Bryne nodded.

"aɪ si ðət mæɾɝz əv . . . tʃeɪnʒd. jɛs, mʌðɝ." ɹimuvɪŋ ɪz hɛlmət, hi sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl. hi stɪl simd ɹɪlʌktənt, pɪkɪŋ ɪz wɝdz wɪð kɛɹ. "mɝtʃəns kæɹi ɹumɝz ðə weɪ dɑɡz də fliz, ən ðət lɑt daʊn ðəɹ əz ə faɪn kɹɑp. aɪ doʊn seɪ ɛni ʌv ɪts tʃɹu, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt. . . ." ɪt wɑz ɑd, siɪŋ ɪm soʊ hɛzɪɾənt. "mʌðɝ, wʌn teɪl ðət kɑɾ əm ʌp ɑn ðə ɹoʊɾ ɪz ðət ɹænd ælθɹ əz ɡɔn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən swɔɹn fiəlti tə ɪleɪɾə."

"I see that matters have . . . changed. Yes, Mother." Removing his helmet, he set it on the pommel of his saddle. He still seemed reluctant, picking his words with care. "Merchants carry rumors the way dogs do fleas, and that lot down there has a fine crop. I don't say any of it is true, of course, but. . . ." It was odd, seeing him so hesitant. "Mother, one tale that caught them up on the road is that Rand al'Thor has gone to the White Tower and sworn fealty to Elaida."

fəɹ ə moʊmən maɪɹɛl ən sɪuən lʊk mʌtʃ əlaɪk, blʌd dʒɹeɪnɪŋ fɹəm ðɛɹ feɪsəz əz ðeɪ ɛnvɪʒən kətæstʃɹəfi. maɪɹɛl æktʃəli  sweɪɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl. fəɹ ə moʊmən ɛɡwin kəɾ oʊnli stɛɹ ət hɪm. ðən ʃi stɑɹɾəld hɝsɛlf, ən ði ʌðɝz, baɪ bɝstɪŋ aʊt læfɪŋ. deɪʃɝ dænst ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ən sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪm ɑn ðə ɹɑki sloʊp sɛɾəld əɹ nɝvz əz wɛl. "lɔɹd bɹaɪn," ʃi sɛd, pæɾɪŋ ðə ɡɛldɪŋz nɛk, "ðæɾ ɪzən soʊ, bɪliv mi. aɪ noʊ ɪt fəɹ ə fækt, əz ə læs naɪt."

For a moment Myrelle and Siuan looked much alike, blood draining from their faces as they envisioned catastrophe. Myrelle actually swayed in her saddle. For a moment Egwene could only stare at him. Then she startled herself, and the others, by bursting out laughing. Daishar danced in surprise, and settling him on the rocky slope settled her nerves as well. "Lord Bryne," she said, patting the gelding's neck, "that isn't so, believe me. I know it for a fact, as of last night."

sɪuən hivd ən ɪnstən saɪ, ən maɪɹɛl wɑz oʊnli ə hɑɹtbit bɪhaɪnd. ɛɡwin fɛlt laɪk læfɪŋ əɡɛn, ət ðɛɹ ɪkspɹɛʃənz. soʊ ɪnkɹɛɾəbli ɹɪliv ðeɪ wɝ waɪd-aɪd. tʃɪlʒɹən u hæd bɪn toʊl ðə ʃæɾoʊmən wɑz nɑɾ ʌndɝ ðə bɛd. ɛɛs sədaɪ kɑm ɪndid.

Siuan heaved an instant sigh, and Myrelle was only a heartbeat behind. Egwene felt like laughing again, at their expressions. So incredibly relieved they were wide-eyed. Children who had been told the Shadowman was not under the bed. Aes Sedai calm indeed.

"ðæts ɡʊd tə hɪɹ," bɹaɪn sɛd flætli, "bʌɾ ivən ɪf aɪ sɛn əweɪ ɛvɹi mæn daʊn ðɛɹ, ðə teɪl wɪl stɪl ɹitʃ maɪ ɹæŋks. ɪɾəl ɡoʊ θɹu ði ɑɹmi laɪk waɪldfaɪɝ kɹɔsɪŋ ðiz hɪlz." ðət kʌɾ əɹ mɝθ ʃɔɹt. ðət kəd bi dɪzæstɝ, lɛft əloʊn.

"That's good to hear," Bryne said flatly, "but even if I sent away every man down there, the tale will still reach my ranks. It will go through the army like wildfire crossing these hills." That cut her mirth short. That could be disaster, left alone.

"aɪ wɪl əv sɪstɝz ənaʊns ðə tʃɹuθ tə jəɹ soʊlʒɝz təmɑɹoʊ. wɪl sɪks ɛɛs sədaɪ hu noʊ ʌv ðɛmsɛlvz bi ɪnʌf? maɪɹɛl, hɪɹ, ən ʃɛɹiəm. kɑɹlɪnjə ən bioʊnɪn, æneɪjə ən mɔɹvɹɪn." ðoʊz sɪstɝz wəd nɑt laɪk hævɪŋ tə mit wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz, bʌt ðeɪ wəd nɑt bi eɪbəl tə ɹəfjuz hɝ, iðɝ. wəd nɑt wɑn tə, ɹɪli, tə stɑp ðɪs teɪl spɹɛɾɪŋ. ʃəd nɑt wɑn tə, ət list. maɪɹɛlz taɪni wɪns wɑz fɑloʊd baɪ ə ɹɪzaɪn twɪst ə hɝ maʊθ.

"I will have sisters announce the truth to your soldiers tomorrow. Will six Aes Sedai who know of themselves be enough? Myrelle, here, and Sheriam. Carlinya and Beonin, Anaiya and Morvrin." Those sisters would not like having to meet with the Wise Ones, but they would not be able to refuse her, either. Would not want to, really, to stop this tale spreading. Should not want to, at least. Myrelle's tiny wince was followed by a resigned twist of her mouth.

linɪŋ ən ɛlboʊ ɑn ɪz hɛlmət, bɹaɪn stʌɾid ɛɡwin ən maɪɹɛl. hi nɛvɝ soʊ mʌtʃ əz pikt ət sɪuən. hɪz beɪ stæmpt ə huf ɑn ðə ɹɑks, ən ə kʌvi ʌv səm sɔɹɾ ə dʌv wɪð bɹaɪt blu wɪŋz wɹɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ fɹəm bɪniθ bʊʃəz ə fju peɪsɪz əweɪ, meɪkɪŋ deɪʃɝ ən maɪɹɛlz ɹoʊn stɑɹt skɪɾɪʃli. bɹaɪnz maʊn dɪd nɑt stɝ. hi hæd hɝɾ ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪz, wɪθaʊt daʊt, ðoʊ hi ʃʊɹli nu nʌθɪŋ ʌv wʌt ðeɪ wɝ - ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd kip sikɹəts baɪ hæbət, ən hæd səm hoʊp ə kipɪŋ ðət wʌn fɹəm ɪleɪɾə - ən i sɝɾənli nu nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl əbaʊt tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd - ðət vaɪɾəl sikɹət wɑz iziɝ tə ɡɑɹd wɪð noʊ mænəfɛsteɪʃənz ɛniwʌn kəd si - jɛɾ i dɪd nɑɾ æsk haʊ. pɝhæps i wɑz əkʌstəm tə ɛɛs sədaɪ ən sikɹəts baɪ naʊ.

Leaning an elbow on his helmet, Bryne studied Egwene and Myrelle. He never so much as peeked at Siuan. His bay stamped a hoof on the rocks, and a covey of some sort of dove with bright blue wings whirred into the air from beneath bushes a few paces away, making Daishar and Myrelle's roan start skittishly. Bryne's mount did not stir. He had heard of the gateways, without doubt, though he surely knew nothing of what they were - Aes Sedai did keep secrets by habit, and had some hope of keeping that one from Elaida - and he certainly knew nothing at all about Tel'aran'rhiod - that vital secret was easier to guard with no manifestations anyone could see - yet he did not ask how. Perhaps he was accustomed to Aes Sedai and secrets by now.

"soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ seɪ ðə wɝdz stʃɹeɪt," hi sɛɾ ət læst. "ɪf ðeɪ hɛdʒ ivən ə hɛɹ. . . ." hɪz stɛɹ wɑz nɑɾ ən ətɛmp tə ɪntɪmɪdeɪt, dʒʌs tə dʒɹaɪv ðə pɔɪn hoʊm. hi sim sæɾəsfaɪd baɪ wʌɾ i sɔ ɪn əɹ feɪs. "ju də vɛɹi wɛl, ɪɾ əpɪɹz, mʌðɝ. aɪ wɪʃ jə kəntɪnjud səksɛs. sɛt jəɹ taɪm fəɹ ðɪs æftɝnun, ən əl kʌm. wi ʃəd kənfɝ ɹɛɡjəlɝli. əl kʌm wɛnɛvɝ jə sɛn fəɹ mi. wi ʃəd bɪɡɪn meɪkɪŋ fɝm plænz haʊ tə pʊt jə ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wʌns wi ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"So long as they say the words straight," he said at last. "If they hedge even a hair. . . ." His stare was not an attempt to intimidate, just to drive the point home. He seemed satisfied by what he saw in her face. "You do very well, it appears, Mother. I wish you continued success. Set your time for this afternoon, and I will come. We should confer regularly. I will come whenever you send for me. We should begin making firm plans how to put you on the Amyrlin Seat once we reach Tar Valon."

hɪz toʊn wɑz ɡɑɹɾəd - vɛɹi laɪkli hi stɪl wɑz nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli ʃʊɹ wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn, əɹ haʊ fɑɹ i kəd tʃɹʌs maɪɹɛl - ən ɪt tʊk əɹ ə moʊmən tə ɹilaɪz wʌɾ i hæd dʌn. ɪt meɪɾ əɹ bɹɛθ kætʃ. meɪbi ʃi wɑz dʒʌs bɪkʌmɪŋ tu juz tə ðə weɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃeɪɾɪd wɝdz, bʌt. . . . bɹaɪn hæd dʒʌst sɛd ði ɑɹmi wɑz hɝz. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt. nɑt ðə hɔlz, ən nɑt ʃɛɹiəmz; hɝz.

His tone was guarded - very likely he still was not entirely sure what was going on, or how far he could trust Myrelle - and it took her a moment to realize what he had done. It made her breath catch. Maybe she was just becoming too used to the way Aes Sedai shaded words, but. . . . Bryne had just said the army was hers. She was sure of it. Not the Hall's, and not Sheriam's; hers.

"θæŋk ju, lɔɹd bɹaɪn." ðət sim lɪɾəl ɪnʌf, ɪspɛʃli wən ɪz kɛɹfəl nɑd, hɪz aɪz stɛɾi ɑn hɝz, sim tə kənfɝm əɹ bɪlif. sʌɾənli ʃi hæɾ ə θaʊzən mɔɹ kwɛstʃənz. moʊst ʌv wɪtʃ ʃi kəd nɑɾ æsk ivən wɝ ðeɪ əloʊn. ə pɪɾi ʃi kəd nɑt teɪk ɪm ɪndə hɝ kɑnfəɾəns kəmplitli. kɑʃən əntɪl jəɹ ʃʊɹ, ən ðən ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ kɑʃən. ən oʊl seɪɪŋ ðəɾ əplaɪd vɛɹi wɛl tə ɛni dilɪŋz ðət bɹʌʃt əɡɛnst ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən ivən ðə bɛs mɛn wəd tɔk θɪŋz oʊvɝ wɪð ðɛɹ fɹɛnz, pɝhæps ɪspɛʃli wən θɪŋz wɝ səpoʊz tə bi sikɹət. "ɪm ʃʊɹ juv ə θaʊzən dɪteɪlz tə si tə, wʌts lɛft ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ," ʃi sɛd, ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz. "ju ɡoʊ ɑn bæk. wɪl ɹaɪɾ ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ."

"Thank you, Lord Bryne." That seemed little enough, especially when his careful nod, his eyes steady on hers, seemed to confirm her belief. Suddenly she had a thousand more questions. Most of which she could not ask even were they alone. A pity she could not take him into her confidence completely. Caution until you're sure, and then a little more caution. An old saying that applied very well to any dealings that brushed against Aes Sedai. And even the best men would talk things over with their friends, perhaps especially when things were supposed to be secret. "I'm sure you have a thousand details to see to, what's left of the morning," she said, gathering her reins. "You go on back. We will ride a little more."

bɹaɪn pɹətɛstəd, ʌv kɔɹs. hi ɔlmoʊst saʊndəd laɪk ə wɔɹɾɝ, tɔkɪŋ ə ði ɪmpɔsɪbɪlɪɾi ʌv wɑtʃɪŋ ɛvɹi weɪ ət wʌns ən haʊ ən æɹoʊ ɪn ðə bæk kəd kɪl ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əz kwɪkli əz ɪt kəɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls. ðə nɛks mæn u toʊld əɹ ðæt, ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd, wɑz gɑnə peɪ fəɹ ɪt. θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ʃʊɹli ði ikwəl ə θɹi hʌnʒɹəd mɛn. ɪn ði ɛnd, fəɹ ɔl ɪz ɡɹʌmbəlz ən ɡɹɪməsɪz, hi hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs bʌt tə oʊbeɪ. dɑnɪŋ ɪz hɛlmət, hi stɑɹɾəd ɪz hɔɹs daʊn ði ənivən sloʊp təwɔɹd ðə mɝtʃən tʃɹeɪn, ɪnstɛɾ ə bæk ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm, bʌt ðət wɑz ivən bɛɾɝ fɹəm əɹ pɔɪn ə vju.

Bryne protested, of course. He almost sounded like a Warder, talking of the impossibility of watching every way at once and how an arrow in the back could kill an Aes Sedai as quickly as it could anyone else. The next man who told her that, she decided, was going to pay for it. Three Aes Sedai were surely the equal of three hundred men. In the end, for all his grumbles and grimaces, he had no choice but to obey. Donning his helmet, he started his horse down the uneven slope toward the merchant train, instead of back the way they had come, but that was even better from her point of view.

"wɪl jə lɛd ðə weɪ, sɪuən," ʃi sɛd wən i wɑz ə dʌzən stʃɹaɪdz bɪloʊ.

"Will you lead the way, Siuan," she said when he was a dozen strides below.

sɪuən ɡlɛɹɾ æftɝ ɪm əz ðoʊ hi hæd bɪn bædʒɝɪŋ əɹ ðə hoʊl taɪm. wɪð ə snɔɹt, ʃi tʌɡd əɹ stʃɹɔ hæt stʃɹeɪt, wild əɹ mɛɹ ɝaʊnd - wɛl, dʒɹæɡd əɹ ɝaʊnd - ən hil ðə staʊɾ ænəməl tə ə wɔk. ɛɡwin moʊʃən maɪɹɛl tə fɑloʊ. laɪk bɹaɪn, ðə wʊmən hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs.

Siuan glared after him as though he had been badgering her the whole time. With a snort, she tugged her straw hat straight, wheeled her mare around - well, dragged her around - and heeled the stout animal to a walk. Egwene motioned Myrelle to follow. Like Bryne, the woman had no choice.

ət fɝs maɪɹɛl dɝɛktəd saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlænsɪz ət hɝ, pleɪnli ɪkspɛktɪŋ əɹ tə bɹɪŋ ʌp ðə sɪstɝz sɛn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, pleɪnli ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪkskjusɪz fəɹ waɪ ðeɪ hæd tə bi kɛp sikɹəɾ ivən fɹəm ðə hɔl. ðə lɔŋɡɝ ɛɡwin ɹoʊɾ ɪn saɪləns, ðə mɔɹ ənizəli ði ʌðɝ ʃɪftəɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl. maɪɹɛl bɪɡæn wɛɾɪŋ əɹ lɪps, faɪn kɹæks spɹɛɾɪŋ ɪn ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kɑm. ə vɛɹi jusfəl tul, saɪləns.

At first Myrelle directed sidelong glances at her, plainly expecting her to bring up the sisters sent to the White Tower, plainly gathering excuses for why they had to be kept secret even from the Hall. The longer Egwene rode in silence, the more uneasily the other shifted in her saddle. Myrelle began wetting her lips, fine cracks spreading in that Aes Sedai calm. A very useful tool, silence.

fəɹ ə taɪm ði oʊnli saʊnz wɝ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz' hʊvz ən ði əkeɪʒənəl kɹaɪ ʌv ə bɝɾ ɪn ðə bɹʌʃ, bʌɾ əz sɪuənz dɝɛkʃən bɪkeɪm klɪɹ, æŋɡlɪŋ ə lɪɾəl wɛs fɹəm ðə pæθ bæk tə ðə kæmp, maɪɹɛlz ʃɪftɪŋ ɪnkɹist əntɪl ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn sɪɾɪŋ ɑn nɛɾəlz. meɪbi ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ tə ðoʊz bɪts ən pisəz sɪuən hæd ɡæðɝɾ æftɝ ɔl.

For a time the only sounds were their horses' hooves and the occasional cry of a bird in the brush, but as Siuan's direction became clear, angling a little west from the path back to the camp, Myrelle's shifting increased until she might have been sitting on nettles. Maybe there was something to those bits and pieces Siuan had gathered after all.

wən sɪuən tʊk ənʌðɝ tɝn wɛstwɝd, bɪtwin tu mɪsʃeɪpən hɪlz ðət bɛn təwɔɹɾ itʃ ʌðɝ, maɪɹɛl dʒɹu ɹeɪn. "ðɛɹ. . . . ðəɹ ɪz ə wɔɾɝfɔl ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən," ʃi sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ ist. "nɑt vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ, ivən bɪfɔɹ ðə dʒɹaʊt, bʌt kwaɪt pɹɪɾi ivən naʊ." sɪuən stɑp tu, lʊkɪŋ bæk wɪð ə smɔl smaɪl.

When Siuan took another turn westward, between two misshapen hills that bent toward each other, Myrelle drew rein. "There. . . . There is a waterfall in that direction," she said, pointing east. "Not very large, even before the drought, but quite pretty even now." Siuan stopped too, looking back with a small smile.

wʌt kəd maɪɹɛl bi haɪɾɪŋ? ɛɡwin wɑz kjʊɹiəs. ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðə ɡɹin sɪstɝ, ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əɾ ə sɪŋɡəl biɾ ə pɝspɝeɪʃən ɑn ðə wʊmənz fɔɹhɛd, ɡlɪsnɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ dʒʌst ət ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ waɪd ɡɹeɪ hæt. ʃi moʊst sɝɾənli wɑntəd tə noʊ wʌt kəd ʃeɪk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪnʌf tə meɪk əɹ swɛt.

What could Myrelle be hiding? Egwene was curious. Glancing at the Green sister, she gave a start at a single bead of perspiration on the woman's forehead, glistening in the shadow just at the edge of her wide gray hat. She most certainly wanted to know what could shake an Aes Sedai enough to make her sweat.

"aɪ θɪŋk sɪuənz weɪ wɪl ɔfɝ ivən mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ saɪts, doʊn ju?" ɛɡwin sɛd, tɝnɪŋ deɪʃɝ, ən maɪɹɛl sim tə foʊld ɪn ɑn hɝsɛlf. "kʌm əlɔŋ."

"I think Siuan's way will offer even more interesting sights, don't you?" Egwene said, turning Daishar, and Myrelle seemed to fold in on herself. "Come along."

"ju noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, doʊn ju?" maɪɹɛl mʌɾɝd ənstɛɾəli əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd bɪtwin ðə linɪŋ hɪlz. mɔɹ ðən wʌn dʒɹɑp ə swɛt dɛkɝeɪɾəd əɹ feɪs naʊ. ʃi wɑz ʃeɪkən tə hɝ kɔɹ. "ɛvɹiθɪŋ. haʊ kəd jə . . . ?" sʌɾənli ʃi dʒɝkt əpɹaɪɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, stɛɹɪŋ ət sɪuənz bæk. "hɝ! sɪuənz bɪn jəɹ kɹitʃɝ fɹəm ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ!" ʃi saʊndəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɪndɪɡnənt. "haʊ kəd wɪv bɪn soʊ blaɪnd? bʌɾ aɪ stɪl doʊn ʌndɝstænd. wi wɝ soʊ sɝkəmspɛkt."

"You know everything, don't you?" Myrelle muttered unsteadily as they rode between the leaning hills. More than one drop of sweat decorated her face now. She was shaken to her core. "Everything. How could you . . . ?" Suddenly she jerked upright in her saddle, staring at Siuan's back. "Her! Siuan's been your creature from the beginning!" She sounded almost indignant. "How could we have been so blind? But I still don't understand. We were so circumspect."

"ɪf jə wɑnə kip sʌmθɪŋ hɪɾən," sɪuən sɛd kəntɛmptʃwəsli oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, "doʊn tʃɹaɪ tə baɪ kɔɪn pɛpɝz ðɪs fɑɹ saʊθ."

"If you want to keep something hidden," Siuan said contemptuously over her shoulder, "don't try to buy coin peppers this far south."

wʌɾ ɪn ðə wɝld wɝ kɔɪn pɛpɝz? ən wʌt wɝ ðeɪ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt? maɪɹɛl ʃʌɾɝəd. ɪt wɑz ə mɛʒɝ ə haʊ ʌpsɛt ʃi wɑz ðət sɪuənz toʊn bɹɔt noʊ kwɪk snæp tə pʊt ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ɪn əɹ pleɪs. ɪnstɛd, ʃi lɪkt əɹ lɪps əz ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ sʌɾənli vɛɹi dʒɹaɪ.

What in the world were coin peppers? And what were they talking about? Myrelle shuddered. It was a measure of how upset she was that Siuan's tone brought no quick snap to put the other woman in her place. Instead, she licked her lips as though they were suddenly very dry.

"mʌðɝ, juv tə ʌndɝstænd waɪ aɪ dɪɾ ɪt, waɪ wi dɪɾ ɪt." ðə fɹæntɪk ɛdʒ tə hɝ vɔɪs wɑz fɪt fəɹ kənfɹʌntɪŋ hæf ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ən əɹ ɪn əɹ ʃɪft. "nɑt dʒʌs kəz mɔɪɹeɪn æskt, nɑt dʒʌs kəz ʃi wɑz maɪ fɹɛnd. aɪ heɪt lɛɾɪŋ əm daɪ. aɪ heɪɾ ɪt! ðə bɑɹɡən wi meɪk ɪz hɑɹɾ ɑn ʌs, səmtaɪmz, bʌt hɑɹɾɝ ɑn ðɛm. jə mʌst ʌndɝstænd. jə mʌst!"

"Mother, you have to understand why I did it, why we did it." The frantic edge to her voice was fit for confronting half the Forsaken, and her in her shift. "Not just because Moiraine asked, not just because she was my friend. I hate letting them die. I hate it! The bargain we make is hard on us, sometimes, but harder on them. You must understand. You must!"

dʒʌst wən ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə ɹɪvil ɛvɹiθɪŋ, sɪuən hɔltəɾ əɹ ɹaʊn mɛɹ əɡɛn ən feɪs ðɛm. ɛɡwin cʊɾə slæp hɝ. "ɪt maɪt ɡoʊ iziɝ wɪð ju, maɪɹɛl, ɪf jə lɛd ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ," ʃi sɛd koʊldli. dɪsɡʌstɪdli, ɪn fækt. "koʊɑpɝeɪʃən maɪt min mɪɾɪɡeɪʃən. ə lɪɾəl."

Just when Egwene thought she was about to reveal everything, Siuan halted her round mare again and faced them. Egwene could have slapped her. "It might go easier with you, Myrelle, if you lead the rest of the way," she said coldly. Disgustedly, in fact. "Cooperation might mean mitigation. A little."

"jɛs." maɪɹɛl nɑɾəd, hænz wɝkɪŋ ɪnsɛsənli ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz. "jɛs, ʌv kɔɹs."

"Yes." Myrelle nodded, hands working incessantly on the reins. "Yes, of course."

ʃi lʊkt ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə tɪɹz əz ʃi tʊk ðə lɛd. sɪuən, fɔlɪŋ ɪn bɪhaɪnd, əpɪɹd ɹɪliv fəɹ dʒʌst ən ɪnstənt. ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə bɝst. wʌt bɑɹɡən? wɪð hum? lɛɾɪŋ u daɪ? ən u wɑz "wi"? ʃɛɹiəm ən ði ʌðɝz? bʌt maɪɹɛl wəɾ əv hɝd, ən ɪkspoʊzɪŋ əɹ oʊn ɪɡnɝəns hɑɹdli simd ədvaɪzəbəl ət ðɪs pɔɪnt. ən ɪɡnɝənt wʊmən u kips əɹ maʊθ ʃʌt wɪl bi θɔt waɪz, ðə seɪɪŋ wɛnt. ən ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ: kipɪŋ ðə fɝst sikɹəɾ ɔlweɪz minz kipɪŋ tɛn mɔɹ. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪt bʌt tə fɑloʊ, hoʊldɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn. sɪuən wɑz gɑnə ɡɛɾ ə tɔkɪŋ-tə, ðoʊ. ðə wʊmən wɑz nɑt səpoʊz tə bi kipɪŋ sikɹəts fɹəm hɝ. ɡɹaɪndɪŋ əɹ tiθ, ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd tə əpɪɹ peɪʃənt, ʌnkənsɝnd. waɪz.

She looked on the point of tears as she took the lead. Siuan, falling in behind, appeared relieved for just an instant. Egwene thought she herself was going to burst. What bargain? With whom? Letting who die? And who was "we"? Sheriam and the others? But Myrelle would have heard, and exposing her own ignorance hardly seemed advisable at this point. An ignorant woman who keeps her mouth shut will be thought wise, the saying went. And there was another: Keeping the first secret always means keeping ten more. There was nothing for it but to follow, holding everything in. Siuan was going to get a talking-to, though. The woman was not supposed to be keeping secrets from her. Grinding her teeth, Egwene tried to appear patient, unconcerned. Wise.

ɔlmoʊs bæk tə ðə ɹoʊd ðə kæmp wɑz ɑn, ə fju maɪlz tə ðə wɛst, maɪɹɛl lɛd ðə weɪ ʌp ə loʊ flæt-tɑp hɪl kʌvɝd wɪð paɪn ən lɛðɝlif. tu hjudʒ oʊks kɛpt ɛniθɪŋ ɛls fɹəm ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɪn ðə waɪd dɪpɹɛʃən ɑn ðə kɹaʊn. bɪniθ θɪk ɪntɝtwaɪn bɹæntʃəz stʊd θɹi pik tɛns ə pætʃt kænvəs, ən ə pɪkət laɪn ə hɔɹsəz, wɪð ə kɑɹt nɪɹbaɪ, ən faɪv tɔl wɔɹhɔɹsɪz itʃ kɛɹfəli pɪkəɾɪd əweɪ fɹəm ði ʌðɝz. naɪsaʊ dækən, ɪn ə sɪmpli kʌt bɹɑnz-kʌlɝd ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs, weɪɾəd ʌndɝ ði ɔnɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv wʌn ə ðə tɛns əz ɪf tə wɛlkəm ɡɛsts, wɪð sɑɹɪn hɔɪɡən əɾ əɹ saɪɾ ɪn ði ɑləv ɡɹin koʊt soʊ mɛni ʌv ðə ɡeɪɾɪn wɔɹ. ə bɔld-hɛɾəd stʌmp ʌv ə mæn wɪð ə θɪk blæk bɪɹd, naɪsaʊz wɔɹɾɝ stɪl stʊd tɔlɝ ðən ʃi. ə fju peɪsɪz əweɪ, tu ʌv maɪɹɛlz θɹi ɡeɪɾɪn wɛɹəli wɑtʃt əm dɪsɛn ɪndə ðə hɑloʊ, kɹɔɪ mækɪn, slɛndɝ ən jɛloʊ-hɛɹd, ən nuhəl dʒɹoʊmænd, dɑɹk ən bʌlki, wɪð ə bɪɹd ðət lɛft ɪz ʌpɝ lɪp bɛɹ. noʊ wʌn lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd ɪn ðə list. ɑbviəsli wʌn ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz hæd bɪn kipɪŋ ɡɑɹɾ ən ɡɪvən wɔɹnɪŋ. nʌθɪŋ ɪn saɪt wɔɹəntɪɾ ɔl ðə sikɹəsi, ðoʊ, əɹ maɪɹɛlz lɪp-lɪkɪŋ. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ɪf naɪsaʊ weɪɾəd ɪn wɛlkəm, waɪ dɪɾ əɹ hænz kip stʃɹoʊkɪŋ əɹ dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts? ʃi lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wəd ɹæðɝ feɪs ɪleɪɾə waɪl ʃildɪd.

Almost back to the road the camp was on, a few miles to the west, Myrelle led the way up a low flat-topped hill covered with pine and leatherleaf. Two huge oaks kept anything else from growing in the wide depression on the crown. Beneath thick intertwined branches stood three peaked tents of patched canvas, and a picket line of horses, with a cart nearby, and five tall warhorses each carefully picketed away from the others. Nisao Dachen, in a simply cut bronze-colored riding dress, waited under the awning in front of one of the tents as if to welcome guests, with Sarin Hoigan at her side in the olive green coat so many of the Gaidin wore. A bald-headed stump of a man with a thick black beard, Nisao's Warder still stood taller than she. A few paces away, two of Myrelle's three Gaidin warily watched them descend into the hollow, Croi Makin, slender and yellow-haired, and Nuhel Dromand, dark and bulky, with a beard that left his upper lip bare. No one looked surprised in the least. Obviously one of the Warders had been keeping guard and given warning. Nothing in sight warranted all the secrecy, though, or Myrelle's lip-licking. For that matter, if Nisao waited in welcome, why did her hands keep stroking her divided skirts? She looked as if she would rather face Elaida while shielded.

tu wɪmən piɹɪŋ ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ ʌv wʌn ə ðə tɛns dʌk bæk hɝidli, bʌt nɑt bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwin ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðɛm. nɪkoʊlə ən ɑɹinə. sʌɾənli ʃi fɛl vɛɹi ənizi. wʌt hæd sɪuən bɹɔɾ əɹ tə?

Two women peering around a corner of one of the tents ducked back hurriedly, but not before Egwene recognized them. Nicola and Areina. Suddenly she felt very uneasy. What had Siuan brought her to?

sɪuən ʃoʊd noʊ nɝvəsnəs əɾ ɔl əz ʃi dɪsmaʊntɪd. "bɹɪŋ ɪm aʊt, maɪɹɛl. naʊ." ʃi wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ əɹ oʊn bæk wɪð ə vɛnʒəns; hɝ toʊn meɪɾ ə faɪl sim smuð. "ɪts tu leɪt fəɹ haɪɾɪŋ."

Siuan showed no nervousness at all as she dismounted. "Bring him out, Myrelle. Now." She was getting her own back with a vengeance; her tone made a file seem smooth. "It's too late for hiding."

maɪɹɛl bɛɹli mænədʒd ə fɹaʊn ət biɪŋ ədʒɹɛst soʊ, ən ɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ən ɛfɝt. vɪzəbli pʊlɪŋ hɝsɛlf təɡɛðɝ, ʃi dʒɝkt əɹ hæt fɹəm əɹ hɛɾ ən klaɪm daʊn wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd, ɡlaɪɾɪd tə wʌn ə ðə tɛns ən vænɪʃt ɪnsaɪd. naɪsaʊz ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡ aɪz fɑloʊd hɝ, ɡɹoʊɪŋ waɪɾɝ baɪ ðə moʊmənt. ʃi sim fɹoʊzən tə ðə spɑt.

Myrelle barely managed a frown at being addressed so, and it appeared an effort. Visibly pulling herself together, she jerked her hat from her head and climbed down without a word, glided to one of the tents and vanished inside. Nisao's already big eyes followed her, growing wider by the moment. She seemed frozen to the spot.

noʊ wʌn bʌt sɪuən wɑz nɪɹ ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝhɪɹ. "waɪ dɪd jə bɹeɪk ɪn?" ɛɡwin dɪmændəd sɔfli əz ʃi ɡɑt daʊn. "aɪm ʃʊɹ ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə kənfɛs . . . wʌtɛvɝ ɪts . . . ən aɪ stɪl doʊn əv ə klu. kɔɪn pɛpɝz?"

No one but Siuan was near enough to overhear. "Why did you break in?" Egwene demanded softly as she got down. "I'm sure she was about to confess . . . whatever it is . . . and I still don't have a clue. Coin peppers?"

"vɛɹi pɑpjəlɝ ɪn ʃaɪnɝ, ən mɔlkiɝ," sɪuən sɛd dʒʌst əz kwaɪətli. "aɪ oʊnli hɝd ðəɾ æftɝ aɪ lɛft æɛldin ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. aɪ hæd tə meɪk əɹ lɛd ðə weɪ; aɪ dɪdnt noʊ ɪt, nɑɾ ɪɡzækli. ɪt wəd hɑɹdli hæv dʌn mʌtʃ ɡʊd tə lɛɾ əɹ dɪskʌvɝ ðæt, naʊ wəɾ ɪt? aɪ dɪdnt noʊ əbaʊt naɪsaʊ, iðɝ. aɪ θɔt ðeɪ hɑɹdli ɛvɝ spoʊk tə wʌn ənʌðɝ." ʃi ɡlænst ət ðə jɛloʊ sɪstɝ ən ɡeɪv əɹ hɛɾ ən ɪɹəteɪɾəd ʃeɪk. ə feɪljɝ tə lɝn sʌmθɪŋ wɑz ə feɪljɝ sɪuən dɪd nɑt tɑlɝeɪt wɛl ɪn hɝsɛlf. "ənlɛs aɪv ɡɔn blaɪn ən stupəd, wʌt ðiz tu. . . ." ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ əz ðoʊ ʃi hæɾ ə maʊθfʊl ə sʌmθɪŋ ɹɑɾən, ʃi spləɾɝd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ə neɪm tə fɪt. əbɹʌpli ʃi kɑɾ ɛɡwinz sliv. "hɪɹ ðeɪ kʌm. naʊ jəl si fəɹ jɝsɛlf."

"Very popular in Shienar, and Malkier," Siuan said just as quietly. "I only heard that after I left Aeldene this morning. I had to make her lead the way; I didn't know it, not exactly. It would hardly have done much good to let her discover that, now would it? I didn't know about Nisao, either. I thought they hardly ever spoke to one another." She glanced at the Yellow sister and gave her head an irritated shake. A failure to learn something was a failure Siuan did not tolerate well in herself. "Unless I've gone blind and stupid, what these two. . . ." Grimacing as though she had a mouthful of something rotten, she spluttered trying to find a name to fit. Abruptly she caught Egwene's sleeve. "Here they come. Now you'll see for yourself."

maɪɹɛl lɛf ðə tɛn fɝst, ðən ə mæn ɪn dʒʌs buts ən bɹitʃɪz u hæd tə dʌk loʊ θɹu ðə dɔɹflæps, ə bɛɹd sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz hæn ən skɑɹz kɹɪskɹɔsɪŋ ɪz laɪtli fɝd tʃɛst. hi wɑz hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz ən mɔɹ tɔlɝ ðən hɝ, tɔlɝ ðən ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝ wɔɹɾɝz. hɪz lɔŋ dɑɹk hɛɹ, hɛl baɪ ə bɹeɪɾɪd lɛðɝ kɔɹɾ ɝaʊn ɪz tɛmpəlz, wɑz mɔɹ stʃɹikt wɪð ɡɹeɪ ðən wən ɛɡwin əz sin ɪm læst, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl sɑft ɪn læn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən. pisəz ə ðə pʌzəl sʌɾənli klɪkt ɪndə pleɪs, jɛɾ ɪt stɪl wəd nɑt kʌm əpɑɹt fəɹ hɝ. hi hæd bɪn wɔɹɾɝ tə mɔɪɹeɪn, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæd bɹɔɾ əɹ ən ɹænd ən ðə ɹɛst aʊɾ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wʌt simd ən eɪdʒ əɡoʊ, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz dɛd kɪlɪŋ lænfɝ, ən læn hæd ɡɔn mɪsɪŋ ɪn kɛɹhin ɹaɪɾ æftɝ. meɪbi ɪt wɑz ɔl klɪɹ tə sɪuən; tə hɝ, ɪt wɑz moʊsli mʌd.

Myrelle left the tent first, then a man in just boots and breeches who had to duck low through the doorflaps, a bared sword in his hand and scars crisscrossing his lightly furred chest. He was head and shoulders and more taller than her, taller than any of the other Warders. His long dark hair, held by a braided leather cord around his temples, was more streaked with gray than when Egwene has seen him last, but there was nothing at all soft in Lan Mandragoran. Pieces of the puzzle suddenly clicked into place, yet it still would not come apart for her. He had been Warder to Moiraine, the Aes Sedai who had brought her and Rand and the rest out of the Two Rivers what seemed an Age ago, but Moiraine was dead killing Lanfear, and Lan had gone missing in Cairhien right after. Maybe it was all clear to Siuan; to her, it was mostly mud.

mɝmɝɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ tə læn, maɪɹɛl tʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm. hi flɪntʃt slaɪtli, laɪk ə nɝvəs hɔɹs, bʌɾ ɪz hɑɹd feɪs nɛvɝ tɝn fɹəm ɛɡwin. faɪnəli, ðoʊ, hi nɑɾəd ən pɪvəɾəd ɑn ɪz hil, stʃɹoʊd fɑɹðɝ əweɪ bɪniθ ðə bɹæntʃəz ə ði oʊks. ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə sɔɹd hɪlt ɪn boʊθ hænz əbʌv ɪz hɛd, bleɪd slæntəd daʊn, hi ɹoʊz ɑntu ðə bɔl ʌv wʌn buɾɪd fʊɾ ən stʊd moʊʃənləs.

Murmuring something to Lan, Myrelle touched his arm. He flinched slightly, like a nervous horse, but his hard face never turned from Egwene. Finally, though, he nodded and pivoted on his heel, strode farther away beneath the branches of the oaks. Gripping the sword hilt in both hands above his head, blade slanted down, he rose onto the ball of one booted foot and stood motionless.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt, naɪsaʊ fɹaʊn əɾ ɪm əz ðoʊ ʃi, tu, sɔ ə pʌzəl. ðən əɹ ɡeɪz mɛt maɪɹɛlz, ən təɡɛðɝ ðɛɹ aɪz swɛp tə ɛɡwin. ɪnstɛɾ ə kʌmɪŋ tə hɝ, ðeɪ wɛn tə itʃ ʌðɝ, ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ heɪsti wɪspɝz. ət list, ɪt wɑz ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒ ət fɝst. ðən naɪsaʊ mɪɹli stʊd ðɛɹ, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ɪn dɪsbɪlif əɹ dɪnaɪəl. "ju dʒɹɑp mi ɪndə ðɪs," ʃi ɡɹoʊn əlaʊɾ ət læst. "aɪ wɑz ə blaɪn ful tə lɪsən tə ju."

For a moment, Nisao frowned at him as though she, too, saw a puzzle. Then her gaze met Myrelle's, and together their eyes swept to Egwene. Instead of coming to her, they went to each other, exchanging hasty whispers. At least, it was an exchange at first. Then Nisao merely stood there, shaking her head in disbelief or denial. "You dropped me into this," she groaned aloud at last. "I was a blind fool to listen to you."

"ðɪs ʃəd bi . . . ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ," sɪuən sɛɾ əz ðeɪ faɪnəli tɝn təwɔɹɾ əɹ ən ɛɡwin. ðə twɪst ʃi ɡeɪv ðə wɝd meɪɾ ɪt saʊn dɪsaɪɾədli ənplɛzənt.

"This should be . . . interesting," Siuan said as they finally turned toward her and Egwene. The twist she gave the word made it sound decidedly unpleasant.

maɪɹɛl ən naɪsaʊ hɝidli tʌtʃt hɛɹ ən dʒɹɛsəz əz ðeɪ kɹɔs ðə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns, meɪkɪŋ sɝɾən ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz ɪn ɔɹɾɝ. pɝhæps ðeɪ hæd bɪn kɑɾ aʊt - ɪn wʌt? ɛɡwin wʌndɝd - bʌɾ əpɛɹənli ðeɪ ɪntɛndəd tə pʊt ðə bɛs feɪs ðeɪ kəɾ ɑn mæɾɝz.

Myrelle and Nisao hurriedly touched hair and dresses as they crossed the short distance, making certain everything was in order. Perhaps they had been caught out - In what? Egwene wondered - but apparently they intended to put the best face they could on matters.

"ɪf jəl stɛp ɪnsaɪd, mʌðɝ," maɪɹɛl sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ tə ðə nɪɹəs tɛnt. oʊnli ðə slaɪɾəst tʃɹɛmɝ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs bɪtʃɹeɪɾ əɹ kul feɪs. ðə swɛt wɑz ɡɔn. waɪpt əweɪ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɪt hæd nɑt ɹɪtɝnd.

"If you will step inside, Mother," Myrelle said, gesturing to the nearest tent. Only the slightest tremor in her voice betrayed her cool face. The sweat was gone. Wiped away, of course, but it had not returned.

"θæŋk ju, noʊ, dɔɾɝ."

"Thank you, no, daughter."

"sʌm waɪn pʌntʃ?" naɪsaʊ æskt wɪð ə smaɪl. hænz klæspt əɾ əɹ bɹɛst, ʃi lʊkt æŋkʃəs ɛniweɪ. "sɪuən, ɡoʊ tɛl nɪkoʊlə tə bɹɪŋ ðə pʌntʃ." sɪuən dɪd nɑt muv, ən naɪsaʊ blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, hɝ maʊθ θɪnɪŋ. ðə smaɪl ɹɪtɝn ɪn ən ɪnstənt, ðoʊ, ən ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs ə lɪɾəl. "nɪkoʊlə? tʃaɪld, bɹɪŋ ðə pʌntʃ. meɪd wɪð dʒɹaɪd blækbɛɹiz, aɪ fɪɹ," ʃi kənfaɪɾəd tə ɛɡwin, "bʌt kwaɪt ɹɪstɝeɪɾɪv."

"Some wine punch?" Nisao asked with a smile. Hands clasped at her breast, she looked anxious anyway. "Siuan, go tell Nicola to bring the punch." Siuan did not move, and Nisao blinked in surprise, her mouth thinning. The smile returned in an instant, though, and she raised her voice a little. "Nicola? Child, bring the punch. Made with dried blackberries, I fear," she confided to Egwene, "but quite restorative."

"aɪ doʊnt wɑn pʌntʃ," ɛɡwin sɛd kɝtli. nɪkoʊlə ɪmɝdʒ fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə tɛnt, jɛt ʃi ʃoʊd noʊ saɪn ə ɹʌnɪŋ tə oʊbeɪ. ɪnstɛd, ʃi stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə fɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, tʃuɪŋ əɹ ʌndɝlɪp. naɪsaʊ flæʃt ə ɡlɛɹ ʌv wʌt kəɾ oʊnli bi kɔl dɪsteɪst, bʌt sɛd nʌθɪŋ. ənʌðɝ pis ə ðə pʌzəl snæpt ɪndə pleɪs, ən ɛɡwin bɹiðd ə tʃɹaɪfəl iziɝ. "wʌɾ aɪ wɑnt, dɔɾɝ, wʌɾ aɪ ɹikwaɪɝ, ɪz ən ɛkspləneɪʃən."

"I don't want punch," Egwene said curtly. Nicola emerged from behind the tent, yet she showed no sign of running to obey. Instead, she stood staring at the four Aes Sedai, chewing her underlip. Nisao flashed a glare of what could only be called distaste, but said nothing. Another piece of the puzzle snapped into place, and Egwene breathed a trifle easier. "What I want, daughter, what I require, is an explanation."

bɛs feɪs əɹ noʊ, ɪt wɑz ə θɪn vənɪɹ. maɪɹɛl stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ə pliɾɪŋ hænd. "mʌðɝ, mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd nɑt tʃuz mi dʒʌs kəz wi wɝ fɹɛnz. tu ʌv maɪ wɔɹɾɝz bɪlɔŋ fɝs tə sɪstɝz u daɪd. əvɑɹ ən nuhəl. noʊ ʌðɝ sɪstɝ əz seɪv mɔɹ ðən wʌn ɪn sɛntʃɝiz."

Best face or no, it was a thin veneer. Myrelle stretched out a pleading hand. "Mother, Moiraine did not choose me just because we were friends. Two of my Warders belonged first to sisters who died. Avar and Nuhel. No other sister has saved more than one in centuries."

"aɪ oʊnli bɪkeɪm ɪnvɑlv kəz ə hɪz maɪnd," naɪsaʊ sɛd heɪstəli. "aɪ hæv səm ɪntʃɹəst ɪn dɪzizəz ə ðə maɪnd, ən ðɪs mʌst ɹaɪtli bi kɔld wʌn. maɪɹɛl pɹæktəkli dʒɹæɡd mi ɪndə ɪt."

"I only became involved because of his mind," Nisao said hastily. "I have some interest in diseases of the mind, and this must rightly be called one. Myrelle practically dragged me into it."

smuðɪŋ əɹ skɝts, maɪɹɛl dɝɛktəɾ ə dɑɹk lʊk ət ðə jɛloʊ ðət wɑz ɹɪtɝnd wɪð ɪntʃɹəst. "mʌðɝ, wən ə wɔɹɾɝz ɛɛs sədaɪ daɪz, ɪts əz ðoʊ hi swɑloʊz əɹ dɛθ ən ɪz kənsum baɪ ɪt fɹəm ði ɪnsaɪd. hi - "

Smoothing her skirts, Myrelle directed a dark look at the Yellow that was returned with interest. "Mother, when a Warder's Aes Sedai dies, it is as though he swallows her death and is consumed by it from the inside. He - "

"aɪ noʊ ðæt, maɪɹɛl," ɛɡwin bɹoʊk ɪn ʃɑɹpli. sɪuən ən lin hæd toʊld əɹ ə ɡʊd bɪt, ðoʊ niðɝ nu ʃi hæɾ æskt kəz ʃi wɑntəd tə noʊ wʌt tə ɪkspɛkt wɪð ɡɔɪn. ə pʊɹ bɑɹɡən, maɪɹɛl hæd kɔld ɪt, ən pɝhæps ɪt wɑz. wən ə sɪstɝz wɔɹɾɝ daɪd, ɡɹif ɛnvɛləp hɝ; ʃi kəd kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt sʌmwʌt, səmtaɪmz, hoʊld ɪɾ ɪn, bʌt sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ɪt nɔɾ ə weɪ aʊt. haʊɛvɝ wɛl sɪuən mænədʒd wən ʌðɝz wɝ ɝaʊnd, ʃi stɪl wɛpt əloʊn mɛni naɪts fəɹ əɹ ɔlɹɪk, kɪl ðə deɪ ʃi wɑz dɪpoʊzd. jɛt wʌt wɝ ivən mʌnθs ə tɪɹz, kəmpɛɹd wɪð dɛθ ɪtsɛlf? ðə stɔɹiz wɝ fʊl ʌv wɔɹɾɝz daɪɪŋ tə əvɛnʒ ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ɪndiɾ ɪt wɑz vɛɹi ɔfən ðə keɪs. ə mæn u wɑntəd tə daɪ, ə mæn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ wʌt kəd kɪl hɪm, tʊk ɹɪsks nɑɾ ivən ə wɔɹɾɝ kəd sɝvaɪv. pɝhæps ðə moʊs hɔɹəbəl pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt, tə hɝ, wɑz ðət ðeɪ nu. nu wʌt ðɛɹ feɪt wəd bi ɪf ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ daɪd, nu wʌt dʒɹoʊv əm wən ʃi dɪd, nu nʌθɪŋ ðeɪ dɪd kəd tʃeɪnʒ ɪt. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən ðə kɝədʒ ɹikwaɪɝd tə æksɛp ðə bɑɹɡən, noʊɪŋ.

"I know that, Myrelle," Egwene broke in sharply. Siuan and Leane had told her a good bit, though neither knew she had asked because she wanted to know what to expect with Gawyn. A poor bargain, Myrelle had called it, and perhaps it was. When a sister's Warder died, grief enveloped her; she could control it somewhat, sometimes, hold it in, but sooner or later it gnawed a way out. However well Siuan managed when others were around, she still wept alone many nights for her Alric, killed the day she was deposed. Yet what were even months of tears, compared with death itself? The stories were full of Warders dying to avenge their Aes Sedai, and indeed it was very often the case. A man who wanted to die, a man looking for what could kill him, took risks not even a Warder could survive. Perhaps the most horrible part of it, to her, was that they knew. Knew what their fate would be if their Aes Sedai died, knew what drove them when she did, knew nothing they did could change it. She could not imagine the courage required to accept the bargain, knowing.

ʃi stɛpt əsaɪd, soʊ ʃi kəd si læn klɪɹli. hi stɪl stʊd moʊʃənləs, nɑɾ ivən simɪŋ tə bɹið. əpɛɹənli fɝɡɛɾɪŋ ðə ti, nɪkoʊlə hæd siɾəd hɝsɛlf kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn tə wɑtʃ hɪm. ɑɹinə skwɑɾɪd ɑn əɹ hilz ət nɪkoʊləz saɪd wɪð əɹ bɹeɪd pʊld oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, stɛɹɪŋ ivən mɔɹ ævədli. mʌtʃ mɔɹ ævədli, æktʃəli , sɪns nɪkoʊlə səmtaɪmz dɑɹɾɪd fɝɾɪv ɡlænsɪz əɾ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz. ðə ɹɛst ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz meɪɾ ə smɔl klʌstɝ, pɹitɛndɪŋ tə wɑtʃ ɪm tu waɪl kipɪŋ ə kloʊs aɪ ɑn ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

She stepped aside, so she could see Lan clearly. He still stood motionless, not even seeming to breathe. Apparently forgetting the tea, Nicola had seated herself cross-legged on the ground to watch him. Areina squatted on her heels at Nicola's side with her braid pulled over her shoulder, staring even more avidly. Much more avidly, actually, since Nicola sometimes darted furtive glances at Egwene and the others. The rest of the Warders made a small cluster, pretending to watch him too while keeping a close eye on their Aes Sedai.

ə mɔɹ ðən wɔɹm bɹiz stɝd, ɹʌfəlɪŋ ðə dɛd livz ðət kɑɹpəɾɪd ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən wɪð ʃɑkɪŋ sʌɾənnəs, læn wɑz muvɪŋ, ʃɪftɪŋ fɹəm stæns tə stæns, bleɪɾ ə wɝlɪŋ blɝ ɪn ɪz hænz. fæstɝ ən fæstɝ, tɪl i sim tə spɹɪn fɹəm wʌn tə ðə nɛkst, jɛɾ ɔl əz pɹɪsaɪs əz ðə muvməns ʌv ə klɑk. ʃi weɪɾəd fəɹ ɪm tə stɑp, əɹ ət list sloʊ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt. fæstɝ. ɑɹinəz maʊθ sloʊli dʒɹɑpt oʊpən, aɪz ɡoʊɪŋ waɪd wɪð ɑ, ən fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, soʊ dɪd nɪkoʊləz. ðeɪ lin fɔɹwɝd, tʃɪlʒɹən wɑtʃɪŋ kændi sɛt tə dʒɹaɪ ɑn ðə kɪtʃən teɪbəl. ivən ði ʌðɝ wɔɹɾɝz ɹɪli dɪvaɪɾəd ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən bɪtwin ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɪm naʊ, bʌɾ ɪn kɑntʃɹæs tə ðə tu wɪmən, ðeɪ wɑtʃt ə laɪən ðət maɪt tʃɑɹdʒ ɛni moʊmənt.

A more than warm breeze stirred, ruffling the dead leaves that carpeted the ground, and with shocking suddenness, Lan was moving, shifting from stance to stance, blade a whirling blur in his hands. Faster and faster, till he seemed to sprint from one to the next, yet all as precise as the movements of a clock. She waited for him to stop, or at least slow, but he did not. Faster. Areina's mouth slowly dropped open, eyes going wide with awe, and for that matter, so did Nicola's. They leaned forward, children watching candy set to dry on the kitchen table. Even the other Warders really divided their attention between their Aes Sedai and him now, but in contrast to the two women, they watched a lion that might charge any moment.

"aɪ si jə ɑɹ wɝkɪŋ ɪm hɑɹd," ɛɡwin sɛd. ðət wɑz pɑɹɾ ə ðə mɛθəd fəɹ seɪvɪŋ ə wɔɹɾɝ. fju sɪstɝz wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə meɪk ði ətɛmpt, ɡɪvən ðə ɹeɪɾ ə feɪljɝ, ən ðə kɑst ʌv ɪt tə ðɛmsɛlvz. kipɪŋ ɪm fɹəm ɹɪsks wɑz ənʌðɝ. ən bɑndɪŋ ɪm əɡɛn; ðət wɑz ðə fɝst stɛp. wɪθaʊt daʊt maɪɹɛl hæd teɪkən kɛɹ ə ðət lɪɾəl dɪteɪl. pʊɹ nɪneɪiv. ʃi maɪt wɛl stʃɹæŋɡəl maɪɹɛl, wən ʃi lɝnd. ðən əɡɛn, ʃi maɪt kaʊntənəns ɛniθɪŋ ðət kɛp læn əlaɪv. meɪbi. fəɹ lænz pɑɹt, hi dɪzɝv ðə wɝst i ɹəsivd, lɛɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf bi bɑndəd baɪ ənʌðɝ wʊmən wən i nu nɪneɪiv wɑz paɪnɪŋ fəɹ hɪm.

"I see you are working him hard," Egwene said. That was part of the method for saving a Warder. Few sisters were willing to make the attempt, given the rate of failure, and the cost of it to themselves. Keeping him from risks was another. And bonding him again; that was the first step. Without doubt Myrelle had taken care of that little detail. Poor Nynaeve. She might well strangle Myrelle, when she learned. Then again, she might countenance anything that kept Lan alive. Maybe. For Lan's part, he deserved the worst he received, letting himself be bonded by another woman when he knew Nynaeve was pining for him.

ʃi θɔt ʃi hæd kɛpt əɹ vɔɪs klɪɹ, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ ʌv wʌt ʃi fɛl mʌst əv kɹɛp θɹu, kəz maɪɹɛl bɪɡæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪkspleɪn əɡɛn.

She thought she had kept her voice clear, but something of what she felt must have crept through, because Myrelle began trying to explain again.

"mʌðɝ, pæsɪŋ ə bɑn ɪz nɑt ðət bæd. waɪ, ɪn pɔɪn ə fækt, ɪts noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə wʊmən dəsaɪɾɪŋ u ʃəɾ əv əɹ hʌzbən ɪf ʃi daɪz, tə si hiz ɪn ðə ɹaɪt hænz."

"Mother, passing a bond is not that bad. Why, in point of fact, it's no more than a woman deciding who should have her husband if she dies, to see he is in the right hands."

ɛɡwin stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ soʊ hɑɹd ðət ʃi stɛp bæk, ɔlmoʊs tʃɹɪpɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ skɝts. ɪt wɑz oʊnli ʃɑk, ðoʊ. ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi θɔt ʃi hæd hɝɾ ə ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɪst pɑsəbəl kʌstəm, ənʌðɝ pɑpt ʌp stʃɹeɪnʒɝ stɪl.

Egwene stared at her so hard that she stepped back, almost tripping over her skirts. It was only shock, though. Every time she thought she had heard of the strangest possible custom, another popped up stranger still.

"wi ɑɹən ɔl ɛbu dɑɹi, maɪɹɛl," sɪuən sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "æn ə wɔɹɾɝ ɪzən ə hʌzbənd. fəɹ moʊst ʌv ʌs." maɪɹɛlz hɛd keɪm ʌp dɪfaɪənli. səm sɪstɝz dɪd mɛɹi ə wɔɹɾɝ, ə hændfʊl; nɑt mɛni mɛɹiɾ əɾ ɔl. noʊ wʌn ɪnkwaɪɝd tu kloʊsli, bʌt ɹumɝ sɛd ʃi hæd mɛɹiɾ ɔl θɹi ʌv hɝz, wɪtʃ ʃʊɹli vaɪəleɪɾɪd kʌstəm ən lɔ ivən ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. "nɑt ðət bæd, jə seɪ, maɪɹɛl? nɑt ðət bæd?" sɪuənz skaʊl mætʃt əɹ toʊn; ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ə vaɪl teɪst ɪn əɹ maʊθ.

"We aren't all Ebou Dari, Myrelle," Siuan said dryly, "and a Warder isn't a husband. For most of us." Myrelle's head came up defiantly. Some sisters did marry a Warder, a handful; not many married at all. No one inquired too closely, but rumor said she had married all three of hers, which surely violated custom and law even in Ebou Dar. "Not that bad, you say, Myrelle? Not that bad?" Siuan's scowl matched her tone; she sounded as if she had a vile taste in her mouth.

"ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ lɔ əɡɛnst ɪt," naɪsaʊ pɹətɛstəd. tə ɛɡwin, nɑt sɪuən. "noʊ lɔ əɡɛns pæsɪŋ ə bɑnd." sɪuən ɹəsivd ə fɹaʊn ðət ʃʊɾə meɪɾ əɹ stɛp bæk ən ʃʌɾ əɹ maʊθ. ʃi wɑz hævɪŋ nʌn ʌv ɪt, ðoʊ.

"There is no law against it," Nisao protested. To Egwene, not Siuan. "No law against passing a bond." Siuan received a frown that should have made her step back and shut her mouth. She was having none of it, though.

"ðæts nɑt ðə pɔɪnt, ɪz ɪt?" ʃi dɪmændəd. "ivən ɪf ɪt hæzən bɪn dʌn ɪn - wʌt? fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɹ mɔɹ? - ivən ɪf kʌstəmz əv tʃeɪnʒd, jə maɪɾ əv ɪskeɪpt wɪð ə fju stɛɹz ən ə lɪɾəl sɛnʃɝ ɪf ɔl jə ən mɔɪɹeɪn hæd dʌn wɑz pæs ɪz bɑn bɪtwin ju. bʌɾ i wɑzn æskt, wɑz hi? hi wɑz ɡɪvən noʊ tʃɔɪs. jə maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɑndəɾ ɪm əɡɛnst ɪz wɪl. ɪn fækt, jə blʌɾi wɛl dɪd!"

"That's not the point, is it?" she demanded. "Even if it hasn't been done in - what? four hundred years or more? - even if customs have changed, you might have escaped with a few stares and a little censure if all you and Moiraine had done was pass his bond between you. But he wasn't asked, was he? He was given no choice. You might as well have bonded him against his will. In fact, you bloody well did!"

ət læs ðə pʌzəl keɪm klɪɹ fəɹ ɛɡwin. ʃi nu ʃi ʃəd fil ðə seɪm dɪsɡʌst əz sɪuən. ɛɛs sədaɪ pʊt bɑndɪŋ ə mæn əɡɛnst ɪz wɪl ɑn ə lɛvəl wɪð ɹeɪp. hi hæɾ əz mʌtʃ tʃæns tə ɹɪzɪst əz ə fɑɹmɡɝl wəɾ ɪf ə mæn ðə saɪz ə læn kɔɹnɝɾ əɹ ɪn ə bɑɹn. ɪf θɹi mɛn ðə saɪz ə læn dɪd. sɪstɝz hæd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn soʊ pɝtɪkjəlɝ, ðoʊ - ə θaʊzən jɪɹz ɝliɝ, ɪt wəd hɑɹdli hæv bɪn ɹɪmɑɹkt - ən ivən tədeɪ ən ɑɹɡjəmən kəd səmtaɪmz bi meɪɾ əz tə wɛðɝ ə mæn hæɾ æktʃəli  noʊn wʌɾ i wɑz əɡɹiɪŋ tə. hɪpɑkɹəsi wɑz ə faɪn ɑɹɾ əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ səmtaɪmz, laɪk skimɪŋ əɹ kipɪŋ sikɹəts. ðə θɪŋ wɑz, ʃi nu hi hæd ɹɪzɪstɪɾ ædmɪɾɪŋ ɪz lʌv fəɹ nɪneɪiv. səm nɑnsɛns əbaʊt haʊ hi wɑz baʊn tə bi kɪl sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ən dɪd wɑnə tə liv əɹ ə wɪɾoʊ; mɛn ɔlweɪz dɪd spaʊt dʒɹɪvəl wən ðeɪ θɔt ðeɪ wɝ biɪŋ lɑdʒɪkəl ən pɹæktəkəl. wəd nɪneɪiv əv lɛɾ ɪm wɔk əweɪ ənbəndɪd, hæd ʃi hæd ðə tʃæns, wʌtɛvɝ i sɛd? wəd ʃi hɝsɛlf lɛt ɡɔɪn? hi hæd sɛɾ i wəɾ æksɛpt, jɛɾ ɪf i tʃeɪnʒd ɪz maɪnd . . . ?

At last the puzzle came clear for Egwene. She knew she should feel the same disgust as Siuan. Aes Sedai put bonding a man against his will on a level with rape. He had as much chance to resist as a farmgirl would if a man the size of Lan cornered her in a barn. If three men the size of Lan did. Sisters had not always been so particular, though - a thousand years earlier, it would hardly have been remarked - and even today an argument could sometimes be made as to whether a man had actually known what he was agreeing to. Hypocrisy was a fine art among Aes Sedai sometimes, like scheming or keeping secrets. The thing was, she knew he had resisted admitting his love for Nynaeve. Some nonsense about how he was bound to be killed sooner or later and did not want to leave her a widow; men always did spout drivel when they thought they were being logical and practical. Would Nynaeve have let him walk away unbonded, had she had the chance, whatever he said? Would she herself let Gawyn? He had said he would accept, yet if he changed his mind . . . ?

naɪsaʊz maʊθ wɝkt, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt faɪn ðə wɝdz ʃi wɑntəd. ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ ət sɪuən əz ðoʊ ɪt wɝ ɔl əɹ fɔlt, jɛt ðət wɑz nʌθɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə skaʊl ʃi dɝɛktəɾ ət maɪɹɛl. "aɪ ʃəd nɛvɝ əv lɪsən tə ju," ʃi ɡɹaʊld. "aɪ mʌst əv bɪn mæd!"

Nisao's mouth worked, but she could not find the words she wanted. She glared at Siuan as though it were all her fault, yet that was nothing alongside the scowl she directed at Myrelle. "I should never have listened to you," she growled. "I must have been mad!"

sʌmhaʊ, maɪɹɛl stɪl mænədʒ tə meɪnteɪn ə smuð feɪs, bʌt ʃi weɪvɝɾ ə lɪɾəl, əz ðoʊ hɝ niz hæd ɡɔn wik. "aɪ dɪd nɑt də ɪt fəɹ maɪsɛlf, mʌðɝ. jə mʌs bɪliv ðæt. ɪt wɑz tə seɪv hɪm. əz sun əz hiz seɪf, əl pæs ɪm ɑn tə nɪneɪiv, ðə weɪ mɔɪɹeɪn wɑntəd, dʒʌst əz sun əz ʃiz - "

Somehow, Myrelle still managed to maintain a smooth face, but she wavered a little, as though her knees had gone weak. "I did not do it for myself, Mother. You must believe that. It was to save him. As soon as he is safe, I will pass him on to Nynaeve, the way Moiraine wanted, just as soon as she's - "

ɛɡwin flʌŋ ʌp ə hænd, ən maɪɹɛl stɑpt əz ɪf ʃi hæd klæpt ɪɾ oʊvɝ əɹ maʊθ. "ju min tə pæs ɪz bɑn tə nɪneɪiv?"

Egwene flung up a hand, and Myrelle stopped as if she had clapped it over her mouth. "You mean to pass his bond to Nynaeve?"

maɪɹɛl nɑɾəd ənsɝteɪnli, naɪsaʊ mʌtʃ mɔɹ vɪɡɝəsli. skaʊlɪŋ, sɪuən mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt dʌbəlɪŋ ə ɹɔŋ meɪkɪŋ ɪt θɹi taɪmz əz bæd. læn stɪl hæd nɑt sloʊd. tu ɡɹæshɑpɝz wɹɾ ʌp fɹəm ðə livz bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən i spʌn, sɔɹd flɪkɪŋ əm aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ wɪθaʊɾ ə pɔz.

Myrelle nodded uncertainly, Nisao much more vigorously. Scowling, Siuan muttered something about doubling a wrong making it three times as bad. Lan still had not slowed. Two grasshoppers whirred up from the leaves behind him, and he spun, sword flicking them out of the air without a pause.

"ɑɹ jəɹ ɛfɝts səksiɾɪŋ? ɪz i ɛni bɛɾɝ? haʊ lɔŋ əv jə hæd hɪm, ɪɡzækli?"

"Are your efforts succeeding? Is he any better? How long have you had him, exactly?"

"oʊnli tu wiks," maɪɹɛl ɹɪplaɪd. "tədeɪ ɪz ðə twɛntiəθ. mʌðɝ, ɪt kəd ɹikwaɪɝ mʌnθs, ən ðəɹ ɪz noʊ ɡɛɹənti."

"Only two weeks," Myrelle replied. "Today is the twentieth. Mother, it could require months, and there is no guarantee."

"pɝhæps ɪts taɪm tə tʃɹaɪ sʌmθɪŋ dɪfɹənt," ɛɡwin sɛd, mɔɹ tə hɝsɛlf ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls. mɔɹ tə kənvɪns hɝsɛlf ðən fəɹ ɛni ʌðɝ ɹizən. ɪn ɪz sɝkəmstænsəz, læn wɑz hɑɹdli ən izi pɹɛzən tə hæn ɛniwʌn, bʌt bɑn əɹ noʊ bɑnd, hi bɪlɔŋ tə nɪneɪiv mɔɹ ðən i ɛvɝ wəd tə maɪɹɛl.

"Perhaps it is time to try something different," Egwene said, more to herself than anyone else. More to convince herself than for any other reason. In his circumstances, Lan was hardly an easy present to hand anyone, but bond or no bond, he belonged to Nynaeve more than he ever would to Myrelle.

wən ʃi kɹɔs ðə hɑloʊ tə hɪm, ðoʊ, daʊts spɹæŋ ʌp stʃɹɔŋ. hi wɝl tə feɪs əɹ ɪn ɪz dæns, sɔɹd stʃɹikɪŋ təwɔɹd hɝ. sʌmwʌn ɡæspt əz ðə bleɪd hɔltəɾ əbɹʌpli oʊnli ɪntʃəz fɹəm əɹ hɛd. ʃi wɑz ɹɪliv ðəɾ ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn hɝ.

When she crossed the hollow to him, though, doubts sprang up strong. He whirled to face her in his dance, sword streaking toward her. Someone gasped as the blade halted abruptly only inches from her head. She was relieved that it had not been her.

bɹɪljən blu aɪz ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əɹ ɪntɛnli fɹəm bɪniθ loʊɝd bɹaʊz, ɪn ə feɪs ɔl pleɪnz ən æŋɡəlz ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn kɑɹv fɹəm stoʊn. læn loʊɝɾ ɪz sɔɹd sloʊli. swɛt koʊɾəd hɪm, jɛɾ i wɑz nɑɾ ivən bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹd. "soʊ jə ɑɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn naʊ. maɪɹɛl toʊl mi ðeɪ hæd ɹeɪzd wʌn, bʌt nɑt hu. ɪt simz jə ən aɪ hæv ə ɡʊd dil ɪn kɑmən." hɪz smaɪl wɑz əz koʊld əz ɪz vɔɪs, əz koʊld əz ɪz aɪz.

Brilliant blue eyes regarded her intently from beneath lowered brows, in a face all planes and angles that might have been carved from stone. Lan lowered his sword slowly. Sweat coated him, yet he was not even breathing hard. "So you are the Amyrlin now. Myrelle told me they had raised one, but not who. It seems you and I have a good deal in common." His smile was as cold as his voice, as cold as his eyes.

ɛɡwin stɑp hɝsɛlf fɹəm ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ stoʊl, ɹimaɪndɪŋ hɝsɛlf ðət ʃi wɑz æmɪɝlɪn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi wɑntəd tə ɛmbɹeɪs seɪaɪdɑɹ. əntɪl ðɪs moʊmənt, ʃi hæd nɑt ɹilaɪzd ɪɡzækli haʊ deɪnʒɝəs i wɑz. "nɪneɪiv ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ naʊ, tu, læn. ʃiz ɪn niɾ ʌv ə ɡʊd wɔɹɾɝ." wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ wɪmən meɪɾ ə nɔɪz, bʌɾ ɛɡwin hɛld əɹ ɡeɪz ɑn hɪm.

Egwene stopped herself from adjusting her stole, reminding herself that she was Amyrlin and Aes Sedai. She wanted to embrace saidar. Until this moment, she had not realized exactly how dangerous he was. "Nynaeve is Aes Sedai now, too, Lan. She's in need of a good Warder." One of the other women made a noise, but Egwene held her gaze on him.

"aɪ hoʊp ʃi faɪnz ə hɪɹoʊ aʊɾ ə lɛdʒənd." hi bɑɹkt ə læf. "ʃil nid ðə hɪɹoʊ dʒʌs tə feɪs əɹ tɛmpɝ."

"I hope she finds a hero out of legend." He barked a laugh. "She'll need the hero just to face her temper."

ðə læf kənvɪns hɝ, aɪsi hɑɹɾ əz ɪt wɑz. "nɪneɪiv ɪz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, læn. jə noʊ wʌɾ ə deɪnʒɝəs sɪɾi ðəɾ ɪz. ʃiz sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ wi nid dɛspɝətli. ɪf ðə blæk ədʒɑ lɝnz ʌv ɪt, ðəl kɪl əɹ tə ɡɛɾ ɪt. ɪf ðə fɔɹseɪkən faɪn aʊt. . . ." ʃi hæd θɔɾ ɪz feɪs blik bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ðə peɪn ðət taɪɾənd ɪz aɪz ət nɪneɪivz deɪnʒɝ kənfɝmd əɹ plæn. nɪneɪiv, nɑt maɪɹɛl, hæd ðə ɹaɪt. "aɪ æm sɛndɪŋ jə tə hɝ, tə ækt əz əɹ wɔɹɾɝ."

The laugh convinced her, icy hard as it was. "Nynaeve is in Ebou Dar, Lan. You know what a dangerous city that is. She is searching for something we need desperately. If the Black Ajah learns of it, they'll kill her to get it. If the Forsaken find out. . . ." She had thought his face bleak before, but the pain that tightened his eyes at Nynaeve's danger confirmed her plan. Nynaeve, not Myrelle, had the right. "I am sending you to her, to act as her Warder."

"mʌðɝ," maɪɹɛl sɛɾ ɝdʒənli bɪhaɪn hɝ.

"Mother," Myrelle said urgently behind her.

ɛɡwin flʌŋ aʊɾ ə hæn tə saɪləns hɝ. "nɪneɪivz seɪfti wɪl bi ɪn jəɹ hænz, læn."

Egwene flung out a hand to silence her. "Nynaeve's safety will be in your hands, Lan."

hi dɪd nɑt hɛzəteɪt. əɹ ivən ɡlæns ət maɪɹɛl. "ɪt wɪl teɪk ət list ə mʌnθ tə ɹitʃ ɛbu dɑɹ. ɑɹinə, sæɾəl mændɑɹb!" ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə tɝnɪŋ əweɪ, hi pɔzd, lɪftɪŋ ɪz fɹi hæn əz ɪf tə tʌtʃ əɹ stoʊl. "aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz fəɹ ɛvɝ hɛlpɪŋ jə liv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ju, əɹ nɪneɪiv." stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əweɪ, hi vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə tɛn i hæd kʌm aʊɾ ə ɝliɝ, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i hæd ɡɔn tu stɛps, maɪɹɛl ən naɪsaʊ ən sɪuən wɝ ɔl klʌstɝɾ ɝaʊn hɝ.

He did not hesitate. Or even glance at Myrelle. "It will take at least a month to reach Ebou Dar. Areina, saddle Mandarb!" On the point of turning away, he paused, lifting his free hand as if to touch her stole. "I apologize for ever helping you leave the Two Rivers. You, or Nynaeve." Striding away, he vanished into the tent he had come out of earlier, but before he had gone two steps, Myrelle and Nisao and Siuan were all clustered around her.

"mʌðɝ, jə doʊn ʌndɝstænd wʌt jə ɑɹ pɹəpoʊzɪŋ," maɪɹɛl sɛd bɹɛθləsli. "ju maɪɾ əz wɛl ɡɪv ə tʃaɪld ə laɪɾəd læntɝn tə pleɪ wɪð ɪn ə heɪbɑɹn. aɪ bɪɡæn ɹɛɾiɪŋ nɪneɪiv əz sun əz aɪ fɛlt ɪz bɑn pæs tə mi. aɪ θɔɾ aɪ hæd taɪm. bʌt ʃi wɑz ɹeɪz tə ðə ʃɔl ɪn ə blɪŋk. ʃi ɪzən ɹɛɾi tə hændəl hɪm, mʌðɝ. nɑt hɪm, nɑt ðə weɪ hi ɪz."

"Mother, you don't understand what you are proposing," Myrelle said breathlessly. "You might as well give a child a lighted lantern to play with in a haybarn. I began readying Nynaeve as soon as I felt his bond pass to me. I thought I had time. But she was raised to the shawl in a blink. She isn't ready to handle him, Mother. Not him, not the way he is."

wɪð ən ɛfɝɾ ɛɡwin meɪd hɝsɛlf bi peɪʃənt. ðeɪ stɪl dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. "maɪɹɛl, ivən ɪf nɪneɪiv kəd nɑt tʃænəl ə lɪk . . ." ʃi kəd nɑt, æktʃəli , ənlɛs ʃi wɑz æŋɡɹi. ". . . ðət wəd meɪk noʊ dɪfɝəns, ən jə noʊ ɪt. nɑɾ ɪn wɛðɝ ʃi kən hændəl hɪm. ðɛɹz wʌn θɪŋ jə hævən bɪn eɪbəl tə du. ɡɪv ɪm ə tæsk soʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt hiz hæz tə steɪ əlaɪv tə kæɹi ɪɾ aʊt." ðət wɑz ðə faɪnəl ɛləmənt. səpoʊzədli ɪt wɝk bɛɾɝ ðən ðə ɹɛst. "tə hɪm, nɪneɪivz seɪfti ɪz ðəɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. hi lʌvz hɝ, maɪɹɛl, ən ʃi lʌvz hɪm."

With an effort Egwene made herself be patient. They still did not understand. "Myrelle, even if Nynaeve could not channel a lick . . ." She could not, actually, unless she was angry. ". . . that would make no difference, and you know it. Not in whether she can handle him. There's one thing you haven't been able to do. Give him a task so important that he has to stay alive to carry it out." That was the final element. Supposedly it worked better than the rest. "To him, Nynaeve's safety is that important. He loves her, Myrelle, and she loves him."

"ðæɾ ɪkspleɪnz . . ." maɪɹɛl bɪɡæn sɔfli, bʌt naɪsaʊ bɝst aʊɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli ətɑp hɝ.

"That explains . . ." Myrelle began softly, but Nisao burst out incredulously atop her.

"oʊ, ʃʊɹli nɑt. nɑt hɪm. ʃi maɪt lʌv hɪm, aɪ səpoʊz, əɹ θɪŋk ʃi dʌz, bʌt wɪmən əv bɪn tʃeɪsɪŋ læn sɪns i wɑz ə bɪɹdləs bɔɪ. ən kætʃɪŋ hɪm, fəɹ ə deɪ əɹ ə mʌnθ. hi wɑz kwaɪɾ ə bjuɾəfəl bɔɪ, haʊɛvɝ hɑɹd ðət maɪt bi tə bɪliv naʊ. stɪl, hi dʌz əpɪɹ tə hæv ɪz ətʃɹækʃənz." ʃi ɡlænst saɪdweɪz ət maɪɹɛl, hu fɹaʊn slaɪtli, taɪni spɑts ə kʌlɝ blumɪŋ ɪn əɹ tʃiks. ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹiækt ɛni fɝðɝ, bʌt ðət wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf. "noʊ, mʌðɝ. ɛni wʊmən u θɪŋks ʃiz liʃt læn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən wɪl faɪnd ʃiz kɑlɝɾ oʊnli ɛɹ."

"Oh, surely not. Not him. She might love him, I suppose, or think she does, but women have been chasing Lan since he was a beardless boy. And catching him, for a day or a month. He was quite a beautiful boy, however hard that might be to believe now. Still, he does appear to have his attractions." She glanced sideways at Myrelle, who frowned slightly, tiny spots of color blooming in her cheeks. She did not react any further, but that was more than enough. "No, Mother. Any woman who thinks she has leashed Lan Mandragoran will find she has collared only air."

ɛɡwin saɪɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf. səm sɪstɝz bɪliv ðəɹ wɑz wʌn mɔɹ pɑɹɾ ə seɪvɪŋ ə wɔɹɾɝ huz bɑnd wɑz bɹoʊkən baɪ dɛθ; pʊɾɪŋ ɪm ɪndə ði ɑɹmz - ɪndə ðə bɛd - ʌv ə wʊmən. noʊ mæn kəd foʊkəs ɑn dɛθ ðɛn, ðə bɪlif ɹæn. maɪɹɛl, ɪt simd, hæd teɪkən kɛɹ ə ðət hɝsɛlf, tu. ət list ʃi hæd nɑɾ æktʃəli  mɛɹid hɪm, nɑɾ ɪf ʃi mɛn tə pæs ɪm ɑn. ɪt wəd bi dʒʌst əz wɛl ɪf nɪneɪiv nɛvɝ faʊn aʊt.

Egwene sighed in spite of herself. Some sisters believed there was one more part of saving a Warder whose bond was broken by death; putting him into the arms - into the bed - of a woman. No man could focus on death then, the belief ran. Myrelle, it seemed, had taken care of that herself, too. At least she had not actually married him, not if she meant to pass him on. It would be just as well if Nynaeve never found out.

"bi ðəɾ əz ɪt meɪ," ʃi toʊl naɪsaʊ æbsənli. ɑɹinə wɑz fæsənɪŋ ðə ɡɝθs ɑn mændɑɹbz sæɾəl wɪð ə bɹɪsk kɑmpəɾəns, ðə tɔl blæk stæljən stændɪŋ wɪð hɛd haɪ bʌɾ əlaʊɪŋ ɪt. pleɪnli ðɪs wɑz nɑt ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi hæd bɪn ɝaʊn ði ænəməl. nɪkoʊlə stʊd kloʊs baɪ ðə θɪk boʊl ə ðə fɑɹðɝ oʊk, ɑɹmz kɹɔs bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz. ʃi lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə ɹʌn. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɑɹinə hæz skwizd aʊɾ ə ju," ɛɡwin sɛd kwaɪətli, "bʌt ði ɛkstʃɹə lɛsənz fəɹ nɪkoʊlə stɑp naʊ."

"Be that as it may," she told Nisao absently. Areina was fastening the girths on Mandarb's saddle with a brisk competence, the tall black stallion standing with head high but allowing it. Plainly this was not the first time she had been around the animal. Nicola stood close by the thick bole of the farther oak, arms crossed beneath her breasts, staring at Egwene and the others. She looked ready to run. "I don't know what Areina has squeezed out of you," Egwene said quietly, "but the extra lessons for Nicola stop now."

maɪɹɛl ən naɪsaʊ dʒʌmpt, mɪɹɝ ɪmədʒəz ə sɝpɹaɪz. sɪuənz aɪz ɡɹu tə ðə saɪz ə tikəps, bʌt lʌkəli ʃi ɹəkʌvɝd bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn noʊɾəst. "ju ɹɪli də noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ," maɪɹɛl wɪspɝd. "ɔl ɑɹinə wɑns ɪz tə bi ɝaʊn læn. aɪ θɪŋk ʃi bɪlivz hɪl titʃ əɹ θɪŋz ʃi kən juz əz ə hʌntɝ. əɹ meɪbi ðət hɪl ɡoʊ ɔf ɑn ðə hʌnt wɪð hɝ."

Myrelle and Nisao jumped, mirror images of surprise. Siuan's eyes grew to the size of teacups, but luckily she recovered before anyone noticed. "You really do know everything," Myrelle whispered. "All Areina wants is to be around Lan. I think she believes he'll teach her things she can use as a Hunter. Or maybe that he'll go off on the Hunt with her."

"nɪkoʊlə wɑns tə bi ənʌðɝ kæɹeɪɡən," naɪsaʊ mʌɾɝd kɑstɪkli. "ɔɹ ənʌðɝ mɔɪɹeɪn. aɪ θɪŋk ʃi hæd səm noʊʃən ʃi kəd meɪk maɪɹɛl ɡɪv lænz bɑn tə hɝ. wɛl! ət list wi kən dil wɪð ðət pɛɹ əz ðeɪ dɪzɝv, naʊ ðət hiz aʊɾ ɪn ði oʊpən. wʌtɛvɝ hæpənz tə mi, ɪɾəl bi ə dʒɔɪ tə noʊ ðəl bi skwilɪŋ fɹəm hɪɹ tə jɪɹz ɛnd."

"Nicola wants to be another Caraighan," Nisao muttered caustically. "Or another Moiraine. I think she had some notion she could make Myrelle give Lan's bond to her. Well! At least we can deal with that pair as they deserve, now that he's out in the open. Whatever happens to me, it will be a joy to know they'll be squealing from here to year's end."

sɪuən faɪnəli ɹilaɪzd wʌt hæd bɪn ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn, ən aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ wɔɹɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs wɪð ðə wʌndɝɪŋ lʊks ʃi dɝɛktəɾ əɾ ɛɡwin. ðət sʌmwʌn ɛls hæd pʌzəl mæɾɝz aʊt fɝs pɹɑbli əpsɛɾ əɹ əz mʌtʃ əz nɪkoʊlə ən ɑɹinə blækmeɪlɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. əɹ pɝhæps nɑt. nɪkoʊlə ən ɑɹinə wɝ nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ðɛmsɛlvz, æftɝ ɔl. ðət dʒɹæstɪkli tʃeɪnʒd sɪuənz vju ʌv wʌt wɑz əlaʊd. bʌt ðɛn, ɪt dɪd ðə seɪm fəɹ ɛni sɪstɝ.

Siuan finally realized what had been going on, and outrage warred on her face with the wondering looks she directed at Egwene. That someone else had puzzled matters out first probably upset her as much as Nicola and Areina blackmailing Aes Sedai. Or perhaps not. Nicola and Areina were not Aes Sedai themselves, after all. That drastically changed Siuan's view of what was allowed. But then, it did the same for any sister.

wɪð soʊ mɛni aɪz tɝn əɹ weɪ, ən nɑɾ ə fɹɛnli ɡeɪz ɪn ðə lɑt, nɪkoʊlə bækt ʌp əɡɛns ði oʊk tʃɹi ən sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bæk fɝðɝ. steɪnz ɑn ðət waɪt dʒɹɛs wəd pʊɾ əɹ ɪn hɑt wɔɾɝ wən ʃi ɹɪtɝn tə ðə kæmp. ɑɹinə wɑz stɪl əbzɔɹbd ɪn lænz hɔɹs, ʌnəwɛɹ ʌv wʌt wɑz kɹæʃɪŋ daʊn ɑn əɹ hɛd.

With so many eyes turned her way, and not a friendly gaze in the lot, Nicola backed up against the oak tree and seemed to be trying to back further. Stains on that white dress would put her in hot water when she returned to the camp. Areina was still absorbed in Lan's horse, unaware of what was crashing down on her head.

"ðæt wəd bi dʒʌstəs," ɛɡwin əɡɹid, "bʌt nɑɾ ənlɛs jə tu feɪs fʊl dʒʌstəs jʊɹsɛlvz."

"That would be justice," Egwene agreed, "but not unless you two face full justice yourselves."

noʊbɑdi wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət nɪkoʊlə ɛnimɔɹ. maɪɹɛlz aɪz fɪld əɹ feɪs, ən naɪsaʊz oʊpənd waɪɾɝ jɛt. niðɝ sim tə dɛɹ kɹæk əɹ tiθ. sɪuən wɔɹ ɡɹɪm sæɾəsfækʃən laɪk ənʌðɝ skɪn; baɪ hɝ laɪts, ðeɪ dɪzɝv noʊ mɝsi əɾ ɔl. nɑt ðəɾ ɛɡwin ɪntɛndəd tə ɡɪv mʌtʃ.

Nobody was looking at Nicola anymore. Myrelle's eyes filled her face, and Nisao's opened wider yet. Neither seemed to dare crack her teeth. Siuan wore grim satisfaction like another skin; by her lights, they deserved no mercy at all. Not that Egwene intended to give much.

"wi wɪl spik fɝðɝ wən aɪ kʌm bæk," ʃi toʊld əm əz læn ɹiəpɪɹd, hɪz sɔɹd bʌkəld ɑn oʊvɝ ə ɡɹin koʊɾ əndʌn tə ɹɪvil ən ənleɪst ʃɝt, bʌlʒɪŋ sæɾəlbæɡz dʒɹeɪpt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ðə kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ wɔɹɾɝ kloʊk hæŋɪŋ daʊn ɪz bæk ɹɛntʃt ði aɪ əz ɪt swɝl bɪhaɪn hɪm.

"We will speak further when I come back," she told them as Lan reappeared, his sword buckled on over a green coat undone to reveal an unlaced shirt, bulging saddlebags draped over his shoulder. The color-shifting Warder cloak hanging down his back wrenched the eye as it swirled behind him.

livɪŋ ðə stʌn sɪstɝz tə stu ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn dʒusəz, ɛɡwin wɛn tə mit hɪm. sɪuən wəd kip əm ɑn ə faɪn sɪmɝ, ʃəd ðeɪ ʃoʊ ɛni saɪn ə fɔlɪŋ ɔf. "aɪ kən əv jə ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ sunɝ ðən ə mʌnθ," ʃi sɛd. hi oʊnli nɑɾəd ɪmpeɪʃənli ən kɔl fəɹ ɑɹinə tə bɹɪŋ mændɑɹb. hɪz ɪntɛnsəɾi wɑz ənɝvɪŋ, ən ævəlæntʃ pɔɪz tə fɔl, hɛl bæk baɪ ə θɹɛd.

Leaving the stunned sisters to stew in their own juices, Egwene went to meet him. Siuan would keep them on a fine simmer, should they show any sign of falling off. "I can have you in Ebou Dar sooner than a month," she said. He only nodded impatiently and called for Areina to bring Mandarb. His intensity was unnerving, an avalanche poised to fall, held back by a thread.

wivɪŋ ə ɡeɪtweɪ wɛɹ i hæd bɪn pɹæktəsɪŋ ðə sɔɹd, ə ɡʊɾ eɪt fit baɪ eɪt, ʃi stɛp θɹu ɑntu wʌt sim tə bi ə fɛɹi, floʊɾɪŋ ɪn dɑɹknəs ðət stʃɹɛtʃt fɝɛvɝ. skɪmɪŋ ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə plætfɔɹm, ən ðoʊ ɪt kəd bi ɛniθɪŋ jə tʃoʊz tə ɪmædʒən, ɛvɹi sɪstɝ sim tə hæv wʌn ʃi pɹəfɝd. fəɹ əɹ ðət wɑz ðɪs wʊɾən bɑɹdʒ, wɪð staʊt ɹeɪlɪŋz. ɪf ʃi fɛl ɔf, ʃi kəd meɪk ənʌðɝ bɑɹdʒ bɪniθ hɝ, ɔlðoʊ wɛɹ ʃi keɪm aʊt ðən wəd bi sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə kwɛstʃən, bʌt fəɹ ɛniwʌn u kəd nɑt tʃænəl, ðət fɔl wəd bi əz ɛnləs əz ðə blæk ðət ɹæn ɔf ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən. oʊnli ət ðə nɪɹ ɛn ə ðə bɑɹdʒ wɑz ðəɹ ɛni laɪt, ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ɡɪvɪŋ ə kənstʃɹɪktəd vju ʌv ðə hɑloʊ. ðət laɪt dɪd nɑt pɛnətʃɹeɪt ðə dɑɹknəs əɾ ɔl, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz laɪɾ ʌv ə sɔɹt. ət list, ʃi kəd si kwaɪt klɪɹli, əz ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðɪs æktʃəli  wɑz səm pɑɹɾ ə ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz.

Weaving a gateway where he had been practicing the sword, a good eight feet by eight, she stepped through onto what seemed to be a ferry, floating in darkness that stretched forever. Skimming required a platform, and though it could be anything you chose to imagine, every sister seemed to have one she preferred. For her that was this wooden barge, with stout railings. If she fell off, she could make another barge beneath her, although where she came out then would be something of a question, but for anyone who could not channel, that fall would be as endless as the black that ran off in every direction. Only at the near end of the barge was there any light, the gateway giving a constricted view of the hollow. That light did not penetrate the darkness at all, yet there was light of a sort. At least, she could see quite clearly, as in Tel'aran'rhiod. Not for the first time she wondered whether this actually was some part of the World of Dreams.

læn fɑloʊd wɪθaʊt niɾɪŋ tə bi toʊld, liɾɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs. hi ɪɡzæmən ðə ɡeɪtweɪ əz i keɪm θɹu, stʌɾid ðə dɑɹknəs əz ɪz buts ən ðə stæljənz hʊvz θʌddɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə dɛk plæŋks tə hɝ. ði oʊnli kwɛstʃən i æskt wɑz "haʊ kwɪkli wɪl ðɪs teɪk mi tə ɛbu dɑɹ?"

Lan followed without needing to be told, leading his horse. He examined the gateway as he came through, studied the darkness as his boots and the stallion's hooves thudded across the deck planks to her. The only question he asked was "How quickly will this take me to Ebou Dar?"

"ɪt woʊnt," ʃi sɛd, tʃænəlɪŋ tə swɪŋ ðə ɡeɪt ʃʌt, ðən kloʊzɪŋ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. "nɑt ɹaɪt tə ðə sɪɾi." nʌθɪŋ muv ðəɾ ɛniwʌn kəɾ əv sin; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wɪn əɹ bɹiz, nʌθɪŋ tə fil. ðeɪ wɝ ɪn moʊʃən, ðoʊ. ən fæst; fæstɝ ðən ʃi kəɾ ɪmædʒən ɛniθɪŋ muvɪŋ. ɪt mʌs bi sɪks hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz əɹ mɔɹ ðeɪ hæd tə ɡoʊ. "aɪ kən pʊt jə aʊt faɪv, meɪbi sɪks deɪz nɔɹθ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ." ʃi hæd sin ðə ɡeɪtweɪ woʊvən wən nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn tʃɹævəl saʊθ, ən ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ skɪmɪŋ tə ðə seɪm pleɪs.

"It won't," she said, channeling to swing the gate shut, then closing the gateway. "Not right to the city." Nothing moved that anyone could have seen; there was no wind or breeze, nothing to feel. They were in motion, though. And fast; faster than she could imagine anything moving. It must be six hundred miles or more they had to go. "I can put you out five, maybe six days north of Ebou Dar." She had seen the gateway woven when Nynaeve and Elayne Traveled south, and she remembered enough for Skimming to the same place.

hi nɑɾəd, piɹɪŋ əhɛɾ əz ðoʊ hi kəd si ðɛɹ dɛstəneɪʃən. hi ɹimaɪndəɾ əɹ ʌv ən æɹoʊ ɪn ə dʒɹɔn baʊ.

He nodded, peering ahead as though he could see their destination. He reminded her of an arrow in a drawn bow.

"læn, nɪneɪiv ɪz steɪɪŋ ət ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, ə ɡɛst ə kwin taɪlɪn. ʃi maɪt dɪnaɪ ʃiz ɪn ɛni deɪnʒɝ." wɪtʃ ʃi sɝɾənli wʊd, ɪndɪɡnənli ɪf ɛɡwin nu nɪneɪiv, ən ɹaɪtfəli soʊ. "tʃɹaɪ nɑt tə meɪk ə pɔɪn ʌv ɪt - jə noʊ haʊ stʌbɝn ʃiz - bʌt jə mʌsnt peɪ ðəɾ ɛni maɪnd. ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi, dʒʌs pɹətɛkt əɹ wɪθaʊt lɛɾɪŋ əɹ noʊ." hi sɛd nʌθɪŋ, dɪd nɑt ɡlæns ət hɝ. ʃi wʊɾə hæɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd kwɛstʃənz ɪn ɪz pleɪs. "læn, wən jə faɪn hɝ, jə mʌs tɛl əɹ ðət maɪɹɛl wɪl ɡɪv jəɹ bɑn tə hɝ əz sun əz jə θɹi kən bi təɡɛðɝ." ʃi hæd θɔɾ ə pæsɪŋ ðəɾ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən əlɔŋ hɝsɛlf, bʌɾ ɪt sim bɛɾɝ nɑt tə lɛt nɪneɪiv noʊ hi wɑz kʌmɪŋ. ʃi wɑz əz bɛsɑɾɪd wɪð ɪm əz . . . æz. . . . əz aɪm wɪð ɡɔɪn, ʃi θɔt ɹufəli. ɪf nɪneɪiv nu hi wɑz ɑn ɪz weɪ, ðəɹ wəd bi lɪɾəl ɹum ɪn əɹ hɛd fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. wɪð ðə bɛst wɪl ɪn ðə wɝld, ʃi wəd lɛt ðə sɝtʃ fɔl ɑn ɪleɪn. nɑt ðət ʃi wəd kɝl ʌp ən deɪdʒɹim, bʌɾ ɛni sɝtʃɪŋ ʃi dɪd wəd bi wɪð dæzəld aɪz. "ɑɹ jə lɪsnɪŋ tə mi, læn?"

"Lan, Nynaeve is staying at the Tarasin Palace, a guest of Queen Tylin. She might deny she's in any danger." Which she certainly would, indignantly if Egwene knew Nynaeve, and rightfully so. "Try not to make a point of it - you know how stubborn she is - but you mustn't pay that any mind. If necessary, just protect her without letting her know." He said nothing, did not glance at her. She would have had a hundred questions in his place. "Lan, when you find her, you must tell her that Myrelle will give your bond to her as soon as you three can be together." She had thought of passing that information along herself, but it seemed better not to let Nynaeve know he was coming. She was as besotted with him as . . . as. . . . As I am with Gawyn, she thought ruefully. If Nynaeve knew he was on his way, there would be little room in her head for anything else. With the best will in the world, she would let the search fall on Elayne. Not that she would curl up and daydream, but any searching she did would be with dazzled eyes. "Are you listening to me, Lan?"

"tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs," hi sɛɾ ɪn flæt vɔɪs, wɪθaʊt ʃɪftɪŋ ɪz ɡeɪz. "ɡɛst ə kwin taɪlɪn. maɪt dɪnaɪ ʃiz ɪn deɪnʒɝ. stʌbɝn, əz ɪf aɪ dɪdnt noʊ ɔlɹɛɾi." hi lʊkt əɾ əɹ ðɛn, ən ʃi ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt i hæd nɑt. ʃi wɑz fʊl ə seɪaɪdɑɹ, fʊl ə ðə wɔɹmθ ən ðə dʒɔɪ ən ðə paʊɝ, ðə ʃɪɹ laɪf, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ stɑɹk ən pɹaɪməl ɹeɪdʒd ɪn ðoʊz koʊl blu aɪz, ə dɪnaɪəl ə laɪf. hɪz aɪz wɝ tɛɹəfaɪɪŋ; ðət wɑz ɔl ðəɹ wɑz tə ɪt. "aɪ wɪl tɛl əɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi nidz tə noʊ. jə si, aɪ lɪsən."

"Tarasin Palace," he said in flat voice, without shifting his gaze. "Guest of Queen Tylin. Might deny she's in danger. Stubborn, as if I didn't know already." He looked at her then, and she almost wished he had not. She was full of saidar, full of the warmth and the joy and the power, the sheer life, but something stark and primal raged in those cold blue eyes, a denial of life. His eyes were terrifying; that was all there was to it. "I will tell her everything she needs to know. You see, I listen."

ʃi meɪd hɝsɛlf miɾ ɪz stɛɹ wɪθaʊt flɪntʃɪŋ, bʌɾ i oʊnli tɝn əweɪ əɡɛn. ðəɹ wɑz ə mɑɹk ɑn ɪz nɛk, ə bɹuz. ɪt maɪt - dʒʌs maɪt - bi ə baɪt. pɝhæps ʃi ʃəd kɑʃən hɪm, tɛl ɪm i dɪd nɑɾ əv tə bi tu . . . dɪteɪld . . . ɪn ɛni ɛkspləneɪʃənz əbaʊt hɪmsɛlf ən maɪɹɛl. ðə θɔt meɪɾ əɹ blʌʃ. ʃi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə si ðə bɹuz, bʌt naʊ ʃi hæd noʊɾəst ɪt, ʃi kəd nɑt sim tə si ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. ɛniweɪ, hi wəd nɑt bi ðət fulɪʃ. jə kəd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt ə mæn tə bi sɛnsəbəl, bʌɾ ivən mɛn wɝ nɑt ðət skæɾɝbɹeɪnd.

She made herself meet his stare without flinching, but he only turned away again. There was a mark on his neck, a bruise. It might - just might - be a bite. Perhaps she should caution him, tell him he did not have to be too . . . detailed . . . in any explanations about himself and Myrelle. The thought made her blush. She tried not to see the bruise, but now she had noticed it, she could not seem to see anything else. Anyway, he would not be that foolish. You could not expect a man to be sensible, but even men were not that scatterbrained.

ɪn saɪləns ðeɪ floʊɾəd, muvɪŋ wɪθaʊt muvɪŋ. ʃi hæd noʊ fɪɹz ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən sʌɾənli əpɪɹɪŋ hɪɹ, əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls. skɪmɪŋ hæɾ ɪts ɑɾətiz, səm ʌv wɪtʃ meɪd fəɹ seɪfti, ən pɹaɪvəsi. ɪf tu sɪstɝz woʊv ɡeɪtweɪz ɑn ðə seɪm spɑɾ oʊnli moʊməns əpɑɹt, eɪmɪŋ tə skɪm tə ðə seɪm pleɪs, ðeɪ wəd nɑt si wʌn ənʌðɝ, nɑɾ ənlɛs ɪt wɑz ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm spɑt, wɪð ðə wivz ɪɡzækli aɪdɛntɪkəl, ən niðɝ pɹisɪʒən wɑz əz izi tə ətʃiv əz ɪt maɪt sim.

In silence they floated, moving without moving. She had no fears of the Forsaken suddenly appearing here, or anyone else. Skimming had its oddities, some of which made for safety, and privacy. If two sisters wove gateways on the same spot only moments apart, aiming to Skim to the same place, they would not see one another, not unless it was exactly the same spot, with the weaves exactly identical, and neither precision was as easy to achieve as it might seem.

æftɝ ə taɪm - ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə tɛl haʊ lɔŋ ɪɡzækli, bʌt ʃi θɔt wɛl ʌndɝ hæf ən aʊɝ - ðə bɑɹdʒ stɑp sʌɾənli. nʌθɪŋ ɔltɝɾ ɪn ðə fil, nɔɹ ɪn ðə wivz ʃi hɛld. ʃi sɪmpli nu ðət wʌn moʊmən ðeɪ wɝ spiɾɪŋ θɹu ðə blæknəs, ən ðə nɛkst stændɪŋ stɪl. oʊpənɪŋ ə ɡeɪtweɪ dʒʌst ət ðə bɑɹdʒəz baʊ - ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛɹ wʌn oʊpən ət ðə stɝn wəd lɛd, ən nɑɾ æŋkʃəs tə faɪn aʊt, fɹæŋkli; mɑɡiɾin hæd faʊn ðə vɛɹi aɪdiə fɹaɪɾənɪŋ - ʃi moʊʃən læn tə ɡoʊ əhɛd. ðə bɑɹdʒ oʊnli ɪɡzɪstəd soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi wɑz pɹizɛnt, ənʌðɝ θɪŋ laɪk tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd.

After a time - it was hard to tell how long exactly, but she thought well under half an hour - the barge stopped suddenly. Nothing altered in the feel, nor in the weaves she held. She simply knew that one moment they were speeding through the blackness, and the next standing still. Opening a gateway just at the barge's bow - she was not sure where one opened at the stern would lead, and not anxious to find out, frankly; Moghedien had found the very idea frightening - she motioned Lan to go ahead. The barge only existed so long as she was present, another thing like Tel'aran'rhiod.

hi swʌŋ bæk ðə fɛɹi ɡeɪt, liɾɪŋ mændɑɹb aʊt, ən wən ʃi fɑloʊd, hi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðə sæɾəl. ʃi lɛf ðə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpən fəɹ əɹ ɹɪtɝn. loʊ ɹoʊlɪŋ hɪlz ɹæn ɔf ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, kʌvɝɾ ɪn wɪðɝd ɡɹæs. ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə tʃɹi tə bi sin, nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən pætʃəz ə ʃɹɪvəl skɹʌb bɹʌʃ. ðə stæljənz hʊvz kɪkt ʌp lɪɾəl spɝts ə dʌst. ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sʌn ɪn ðət klaʊdləs skaɪ beɪkt ivən hɑɾɝ hɪɹ ðən ɪn mʊɹændi. lɔŋ-wɪŋ vʌltʃɝz sɝkəld oʊvɝ sʌmθɪŋ tə ðə saʊθ, ən ɪn ənʌðɝ pleɪs tə ðə wɛst.

He swung back the ferry gate, leading Mandarb out, and when she followed, he was already in the saddle. She left the gateway open for her return. Low rolling hills ran off in every direction, covered in withered grass. There was not a tree to be seen, nothing more than patches of shriveled scrub brush. The stallion's hooves kicked up little spurts of dust. The morning sun in that cloudless sky baked even hotter here than in Murandy. Long-winged vultures circled over something to the south, and in another place to the west.

"læn," ʃi bɪɡæn, minɪŋ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ i ʌndɝstʊd wʌɾ i wɑz tə tɛl nɪneɪiv, bʌɾ i fɔɹstɑl hɝ.

"Lan," she began, meaning to make sure he understood what he was to tell Nynaeve, but he forestalled her.

"faɪv əɹ sɪks deɪz, jə sɛd," hi sɛd, piɹɪŋ saʊθ. "aɪ kən meɪk ɪt fæstɝ. ʃɪl bi seɪf, aɪ pɹɑməs." mændɑɹb dænst, ɪmpeɪʃən əz ɪz ɹaɪɾɝ, bʌt læn hɛld ɪm izəli. "juv kʌm ə vɛɹi lɔŋ weɪ sɪns ɛmənz fild." lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət hɝ, hi smaɪld. ɛni wɔɹmθ ɪn ɪt wɑz swɑloʊd baɪ hɪz aɪz. "ju hæv ə hoʊld ɑn maɪɹɛl ən naɪsaʊ, naʊ. doʊn lɛɾ əm ɑɹɡju wɪð jə əɡɛn. baɪ jəɹ kəmænd, mʌðɝ. ðə wɑtʃ ɪz nɑt dʌn." wɪð ə smɔl baʊ, hi dʌɡ ɪn ɪz hilz, wɔkɪŋ mændɑɹb dʒʌs fɑɹ ɪnʌf tə pʊɾ əɹ klɪɹ ə ðə dʌs bɪfɔɹ sɛɾɪŋ ðə hɔɹs tə ə ɡæləp.

"Five or six days, you said," he said, peering south. "I can make it faster. She will be safe, I promise." Mandarb danced, impatient as his rider, but Lan held him easily. "You've come a very long way since Emond's Field." Looking down at her, he smiled. Any warmth in it was swallowed by his eyes. "You have a hold on Myrelle and Nisao, now. Don't let them argue with you again. By your command, Mother. The watch is not done." With a small bow, he dug in his heels, walking Mandarb just far enough to put her clear of the dust before setting the horse to a gallop.

wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm spid saʊθwɝd, ʃi kloʊzd əɹ maʊθ. wɛl. hi hæd noʊɾəst ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɔl ðət sɔɹd pɹæktəs, noʊɾəst ən dʌn ðə sʌmz kɝɛkli. əpɛɹənli ɪnkluɾɪŋ sʌmz i kəd nɑɾ əv səspɛktəd bɪfɔɹ siɪŋ əɹ wɪð ðə stoʊl. nɪneɪiv hæd bɛɾɝ teɪk kɛɹ; ʃi ɔlweɪz dɪd θɪŋk mɛn wɝ dɪmɝ ðən ðeɪ æktʃəli  wɝ.

Watching him speed southward, she closed her mouth. Well. He had noticed in the middle of all that sword practice, noticed and done the sums correctly. Apparently including sums he could not have suspected before seeing her with the stole. Nynaeve had better take care; she always did think men were dimmer than they actually were.

"æt lis ðeɪ kænt ɡɛɾ ɪndə ɛni ɹil tʃɹʌbəl," ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf əlaʊd. læn tɑpt ə hɪl ən vænɪʃt oʊvɝ ði ʌðɝ saɪd. hæd ðəɹ bɪn ɛni ɹil deɪnʒɝ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ɪleɪn əɹ nɪneɪiv wʊɾə sɛd sʌmθɪŋ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt miɾ ɔfən - ʃi dʒʌs hæd tu mʌtʃ tə də - bʌt ðeɪ hæd wɝkt aʊɾ ə weɪ tə liv mɛsədʒəz ɪn ðə sɑlədɑɹ ə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd wɛnɛvɝ ðəɹ wɑz nid fəɹ wʌn.

"At least they can't get into any real trouble," she told herself aloud. Lan topped a hill and vanished over the other side. Had there been any real danger in Ebou Dar, Elayne or Nynaeve would have said something. They did not meet often - she just had too much to do - but they had worked out a way to leave messages in the Salidar of Tel'aran'rhiod whenever there was need for one.

ə wɪn ðət maɪɾ əv kʌm fɹəm ən oʊpən ʌvən ɡʌstɪɾ ʌp ʃits ə dʌst. kɑfɪŋ, ʃi kʌvɝɾ əɹ maʊθ ən noʊz wɪð ə kɔɹnɝ ə ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʃɹaɪp stoʊl ən hɝidli ɹitʃɹiɾəd θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ tə hɝ fɛɹi. ðə dʒɝni bæk wɑz saɪlən ən bɔɹɪŋ, livɪŋ əɹ tə wɝi wɛðɝ ʃi hæd dʌn ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ sɛndɪŋ læn, wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz ɹaɪt tə kip nɪneɪiv ɪn ðə dɑɹk. ɪts dʌn, ʃi kɛp tɛlɪŋ hɝsɛlf, bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt hɛlp.

A wind that might have come from an open oven gusted up sheets of dust. Coughing, she covered her mouth and nose with a corner of the Amyrlin's striped stole and hurriedly retreated through the gateway to her ferry. The journey back was silent and boring, leaving her to worry whether she had done the right thing sending Lan, whether it was right to keep Nynaeve in the dark. It's done, she kept telling herself, but that did not help.

wən ʃi stɛpt wʌns mɔɹ ɪndə ðə hɪltɑp hɑloʊ bɪniθ ði oʊk tʃɹiz, maɪɹɛlz θɝd wɔɹɾɝ, əvɑɹ hætʃɑmi, hæd dʒɔɪn ði ʌðɝz, ə hɔk-noʊz mæn wɪð θɪk, ɡɹeɪ-stʃɹik mʌstæʃɪz laɪk daʊn-kɝvɪŋ hɔɹnz. ɔl fɔɹ ɡeɪɾɪn wɝ hɑɹɾ ət wɝk, ðə tɛns daʊn ən nɪɹli foʊldəd. nɪkoʊlə ən ɑɹinə tʃɹɑɾəd bæk ən fɔɹθ loʊɾɪŋ ɔl ðə kæmp pɛɹəfəneɪljə ɪndə ðə kɑɹt, ɛvɹiθɪŋ fɹəm blæŋkəts tə kʊkpɑts ən blæk aɪɝn wɑʃktəl. ðeɪ ɹɪli dɪd tʃɹɑt, nɑt pɔzɪŋ, bʌɾ ət lis hæf ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən wɑz ɑn sɪuən ən ði ʌðɝ tu sɪstɝz, oʊvɝ nɪɹ ðə tʃɹilaɪn. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ðə wɔɹɾɝz ɡeɪv ðə θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən hæf ðɛɹ kənsɪɾɝeɪʃən. ðɛɹ ɪɹz maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ʌp ɪn pɔɪns. hu wɑz sɪmɝɪŋ u sim tə bi ə kwɛstʃən.

When she stepped once more into the hilltop hollow beneath the oak trees, Myrelle's third Warder, Avar Hachami, had joined the others, a hawk-nosed man with thick, gray-streaked mustaches like down-curving horns. All four Gaidin were hard at work, the tents down and nearly folded. Nicola and Areina trotted back and forth loading all the camp paraphernalia into the cart, everything from blankets to cookpots and black iron washkettle. They really did trot, not pausing, but at least half their attention was on Siuan and the other two sisters, over near the treeline. For that matter, the Warders gave the three Aes Sedai much more than half their consideration. Their ears might as well have been up in points. Who was simmering who seemed to be a question.

". . . nɑt spik tə mi ɪn ðət mænɝ, sɪuən," maɪɹɛl wɑz seɪɪŋ. nɑɾ oʊnli laʊɾ ɪnʌf tə bi hɝɾ əkɹɔs ðə klɪɹɪŋ, bʌt koʊld ɪnʌf tə teɪk ði ɛdʒ ɔf ðə wɛðɝ. ɑɹmz foʊldəd taɪtli bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts, ʃi wɑz dʒɹɔn ʌp tə ɛvɹi ɪntʃ ə haɪt, ɪmpɪɹiəs tə ðə pɔɪn ə bɝstɪŋ. "du jə hɪɹ mi? jəl nɑt!"

". . . not speak to me in that manner, Siuan," Myrelle was saying. Not only loud enough to be heard across the clearing, but cold enough to take the edge off the weather. Arms folded tightly beneath her breasts, she was drawn up to every inch of height, imperious to the point of bursting. "Do you hear me? You will not!"

"ɑɹ jə lɔs tə ɔl pɹəpɹaɪəɾi, sɪuən?" naɪsaʊz hænz wɝ nɑɾɪd ɪn əɹ skɝts ɪn ə veɪn ətɛmp tə kip hɝsɛlf fɹəm kwɪvɝɪŋ, ən ðə hiɾ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs izəli mætʃt ði aɪs ɪn maɪɹɛlz. "ɪf juv fɝɡɑɾən sɪmpəl mænɝz kəmplitli, jə kən bi tɔɾ əɡɛn!"

"Are you lost to all propriety, Siuan?" Nisao's hands were knotted in her skirts in a vain attempt to keep herself from quivering, and the heat in her voice easily matched the ice in Myrelle's. "If you've forgotten simple manners completely, you can be taught again!"

feɪsɪŋ əm wɪð əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ hɪps, sɪuən muvd əɹ hɛd dʒɝkəli, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ boʊθ tə kip ə ɡlɛɹ ɑn əɹ feɪs ən tə kip ɪt fɪkst ɑn ði ʌðɝ tu. "aɪ. . . . aɪm oʊnli. . . ." wən ʃi sɔ ɛɡwin əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ, hɝ ɹɪlif blum laɪk ə flaʊɝ ɪn spɹɪŋ. "mʌðɝ . . ." ðət wɑz ɔlmoʊst ə ɡæsp. ". . . aɪ wɑz ɪkspleɪnɪŋ pɑsəbəl pɛnəltiz." ʃi dʒɹu ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ, ən wɛn ɑn mɔɹ dɛfənətli. "ðə hɔl wɪl əv tə ɪnvɛn əm əz ðeɪ ɡoʊ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ maɪt wɛl stɑɹt wɪð meɪkɪŋ ðiz tu pæs ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz tə ʌðɝz, sɪns ðeɪ sim soʊ fɑn ʌv ɪt."

Facing them with her hands on her hips, Siuan moved her head jerkily, struggling both to keep a glare on her face and to keep it fixed on the other two. "I. . . . I am only. . . ." When she saw Egwene approaching, her relief bloomed like a flower in spring. "Mother . . ." That was almost a gasp. ". . . I was explaining possible penalties." She drew a long breath, and went on more definitely. "The Hall will have to invent them as they go, of course, but I think they might well start with making these two pass their Warders to others, since they seem so fond of it."

maɪɹɛl skwizd əɹ aɪz ʃʌt, ən naɪsaʊ tɝn tə lʊk ət ðə wɔɹɾɝz. hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd, kɑm ɪf ə tʌtʃ flʌʃt, bʌt sɑɹɪn stʌmbəl tə hɪz fiɾ ən tʊk θɹi kwɪk stɛps təwɔɹɾ əɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə stɑp hɪm. eɪ wɔɹɾɝ kəd sɛns ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪz pɹɛzəns, hɝ peɪn, hɝ fɪɹ ən æŋɡɝ, ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ɛɡwin kəd fil mɑɡiɾinz wən ʃi wɔɹ ði æɾəm. noʊ wʌndɝ ɔl ðə ɡeɪɾɪn muvd ɑn ðɛɹ toʊz ən lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə spɹɪŋ ət sʌmθɪŋ; ðeɪ maɪt nɑt noʊ wʌt hæd dʒɹɪvən ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ðə bɹɪŋk ə dɪspɛɹ, bʌt ðeɪ nu ðə tu wɪmən wɝ ət ðət bɹɪŋk.

Myrelle squeezed her eyes shut, and Nisao turned to look at the Warders. Her expression never changed, calm if a touch flushed, but Sarin stumbled to his feet and took three quick steps toward her before she raised a hand to stop him. A Warder could sense his Aes Sedai's presence, her pain, her fear and anger, every bit as much as Egwene could feel Moghedien's when she wore the a'dam. No wonder all the Gaidin moved on their toes and looked ready to spring at something; they might not know what had driven their Aes Sedai to the brink of despair, but they knew the two women were at that brink.

wɪtʃ wɑz ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ɛɡwin wɑntəd ðɛm. ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk ðɪs pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. ɔl ðə mənuvɝɪŋ wɑz laɪk ə ɡeɪm, bʌt ðɪs. . . . aɪ də wʌɾ aɪ mʌst, ʃi θɔt, ənʃʊɹ wɛðɝ ðət wɑz ən ətɛmp tə stɪfən əɹ bækboʊn əɹ ən ətɛmp tə ɪkskjuz wʌt ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə du. "sɪuən, pliz sɛnd nɪkoʊlə ən ɑɹinə bæk tə ðə kæmp." wʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt si, ðeɪ kəd nɑt tɛl. "wi kæn əv ðɛɹ tʌŋz flæpɪŋ, soʊ meɪk ʃʊɹ ðeɪ noʊ wʌt wɪl hæpən tə ðɛm. tɛl əm ðeɪv wʌn mɔɹ tʃæns, kəz ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪz filɪŋ mɝsɪfəl, bʌt ðəl nɛvɝ ɡɛɾ ənʌðɝ."

Which was exactly where Egwene wanted them. She did not like this part of it. All the maneuvering was like a game, but this. . . . I do what I must, she thought, unsure whether that was an attempt to stiffen her backbone or an attempt to excuse what she was about to do. "Siuan, please send Nicola and Areina back to the camp." What they did not see, they could not tell. "We can't have their tongues flapping, so make sure they know what will happen to them. Tell them they have one more chance, because the Amyrlin is feeling merciful, but they'll never get another."

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kən mænədʒ ðət mʌtʃ," sɪuən ɹɪplaɪd, ən ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ skɝts, ʃi stɔkt ɔf. noʊ wʌn kəd stɔk laɪk sɪuən, jɛt ʃi simd mɔɹ iɡɝ tə bi əweɪ fɹəm maɪɹɛl ən naɪsaʊ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls.

"I think I can manage that much," Siuan replied, and gathering her skirts, she stalked off. No one could stalk like Siuan, yet she seemed more eager to be away from Myrelle and Nisao than anything else.

"mʌðɝ," naɪsaʊ sɛd, tʃuzɪŋ əɹ wɝdz, "bɪfɔɹ jə lɛft, jə sɛd sʌmθɪŋ - ɪndəkeɪɾəd ðəɹ maɪt bi səm weɪ - fəɹ əs tə əvɔɪd - səm weɪ wi maɪt nɑɾ əv tə - " ʃi ɡlænst ət sɑɹɪn əɡɛn. maɪɹɛl wʊɾə bɪn ə stʌɾi ɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi əz ʃi ɪɡzæmən ɛɡwin, ɪksɛp ðəɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz wɝ leɪs təɡɛðɝ soʊ taɪtli ðəɾ əɹ nʌkəlz stʃɹeɪn ðə θɪn lɛðɝ ə hɝ ɡlʌvz. ɛɡwin moʊʃən əm tə weɪt.

"Mother," Nisao said, choosing her words, "before you left, you said something - indicated there might be some way - for us to avoid - some way we might not have to - " She glanced at Sarin again. Myrelle would have been a study in Aes Sedai serenity as she examined Egwene, except that her fingers were laced together so tightly that her knuckles strained the thin leather of her gloves. Egwene motioned them to wait.

nɪkoʊlə ən ɑɹinə, tɝnɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə kɑɹt, sɔ sɪuən kʌmɪŋ ən wɛn stɪf əz poʊsts. wɪtʃ wɑz noʊ wʌndɝ, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðət sɪuən ədvænst əz ðoʊ ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə wɔk ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝ əm ən ðə kɑɹt. ɑɹinəz hɛd swɪvəld, sɝtʃɪŋ, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd θɪŋk tə æktʃəli  ɹʌn, sɪuənz hænz dɑɹɾɪd aʊɾ ən kɑɾ itʃ ə ðɛm baɪ ən ɪɹ. wʌt ʃi sɛd wɑz tu loʊ tə kæɹi, jɛɾ ɑɹinə stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹaɪ hɝ ɪɹ fɹi. hɝ hænz steɪɾ ɑn sɪuənz ɹɪst, bʌt ʃi ɔlmoʊst sim tə bi juzɪŋ ɪt tə hoʊl hɝsɛlf ʌp. ə lʊk ə sətʃ hɔɹɝ uzd əkɹɔs nɪkoʊləz feɪs ðəɾ ɛɡwin wʌndɝd wɛðɝ sɪuən maɪt bi ɡoʊɪŋ tu fɑɹ. bʌt ðɛn, meɪbi nɑt, ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz; ðeɪ gɑnə tə wɔk fɹi ʌv ðɛɹ kɹaɪm. ə pɪɾi ʃi kəd nɑt faɪn ə weɪ tə hɑɹnəs sətʃ ə tælən fəɹ fɛɹəɾɪŋ aʊt wʌt wɑz hɪɾən. ə weɪ tə hɑɹnəs ɪt seɪfli.

Nicola and Areina, turning away from the cart, saw Siuan coming and went stiff as posts. Which was no wonder, considering that Siuan advanced as though she intended to walk right over them and the cart. Areina's head swiveled, searching, but before she could think to actually run, Siuan's hands darted out and caught each of them by an ear. What she said was too low to carry, yet Areina stopped trying to pry her ear free. Her hands stayed on Siuan's wrist, but she almost seemed to be using it to hold herself up. A look of such horror oozed across Nicola's face that Egwene wondered whether Siuan might be going too far. But then, maybe not, under the circumstances; they were going to walk free of their crime. A pity she could not find a way to harness such a talent for ferreting out what was hidden. A way to harness it safely.

wʌtɛvɝ sɪuən sɛd, wən ʃi lus ðɛɹ ɪɹz, ðə pɛɹ ɪmiɾiətli tɝn təwɔɹɾ ɛɡwin ən dʒɹɑpt ɪndə kɝtsiz. nɪkoʊləz wɑz soʊ loʊ ɪt nɪɹli pʊɾ əɹ feɪs ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən ɑɹinə keɪm kloʊs tə fɔlɪŋ ɑn hɝz. sɪuən klæp hænz ʃɑɹpli, ən ðə tu wɪmən baʊndəd tə ðɛɹ fit, skɹæmbəl tə əntaɪ ə pɛɹ ə ʃæɡi wæɡən hɔɹsəz fɹəm ðə pɪkət laɪn. ðeɪ wɝ əstʃɹaɪd bæɹbæk ən ɡæləpɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə hɑloʊ soʊ kwɪkli, ɪt wɑz ə wʌndɝ ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ əv wɪŋz.

Whatever Siuan said, when she loosed their ears, the pair immediately turned toward Egwene and dropped into curtsies. Nicola's was so low it nearly put her face on the ground, and Areina came close to falling on hers. Siuan clapped hands sharply, and the two women bounded to their feet, scrambled to untie a pair of shaggy wagon horses from the picket line. They were astride bareback and galloping out of the hollow so quickly, it was a wonder they did not have wings.

"ðeɪ woʊn ivən tɔk ɪn ðɛɹ slip," sɪuən sɛd saʊɝli wən ʃi ɹɪtɝnd. "aɪ kən stɪl hændəl nɑvəsɪz ən skaʊnʒɹəlz, ət list." hɝ aɪz steɪɾ ɑn ɛɡwinz feɪs, əvɔɪɾɪŋ ði ʌðɝ tu sɪstɝz ɪntaɪɝli.

"They won't even talk in their sleep," Siuan said sourly when she returned. "I can still handle novices and scoundrels, at least." Her eyes stayed on Egwene's face, avoiding the other two sisters entirely.

səpɹɛsɪŋ ə saɪ, ɛɡwin tɝn tə maɪɹɛl ən naɪsaʊ. ʃi hæd tə də sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt sɪuən, bʌt fɝs θɪŋz fɝst. ðə ɡɹin sɪstɝ ən ðə jɛloʊ aɪɾ əɹ wɛɹəli. "ɪɾ ɪz vɛɹi sɪmpəl," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə fɝm vɔɪs. "wɪθaʊt maɪ pɹətɛkʃən, jəl vɛɹi laɪkli luz jəɹ wɔɹɾɝz, ən ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli wɪʃ jud bɪn skɪn əlaɪv baɪ ðə taɪm ðə hɔl fɪnɪʃɪz wɪð ju. jəɹ oʊn ədʒəz meɪ hæv ə fju tʃɔɪs wɝdz fəɹ ju, əz wɛl. ɪt meɪ bi jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ jə kən hoʊl jəɹ hɛdz ʌp əɡɛn, jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ jə doʊn əv sɪstɝz lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ jəɹ ʃoʊldɝ ɛvɹi mɪnət. bʌt waɪ ʃəɾ aɪ pɹətɛk jə fɹəm dʒʌstəs? ɪt pʊts mi ʌndɝ ən ɑbləɡeɪʃən; jə maɪt də ðə seɪm əɡɛn, əɹ wɝs." ðə waɪz wʌnz hæd ðɛɹ pɑɹɾ ɪn ðɪs, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪɡzækli dʒiɾoʊ. "ɪf aɪm tə teɪk ɑn ðət ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi, ðən jə mʌst əv ən ɑbləɡeɪʃən tu. aɪ mʌs bi eɪbəl tə tʃɹʌs jə ʌɾɝli, ən aɪ kən oʊnli si wʌn weɪ tə də ðæt." ðə waɪz wʌnz, ən ðən fɑoʊleɪn ən θiədʒɹɪn. "ju mʌst swɛɹ fiəlti."

Suppressing a sigh, Egwene turned to Myrelle and Nisao. She had to do something about Siuan, but first things first. The Green sister and the Yellow eyed her warily. "It is very simple," she said in a firm voice. "Without my protection, you will very likely lose your Warders, and almost certainly wish you'd been skinned alive by the time the Hall finishes with you. Your own Ajahs may have a few choice words for you, as well. It may be years before you can hold your heads up again, years before you don't have sisters looking over your shoulder every minute. But why should I protect you from justice? It puts me under an obligation; you might do the same again, or worse." The Wise Ones had their part in this, though it was not exactly ji'e'toh. "If I'm to take on that responsibility, then you must have an obligation too. I must be able to trust you utterly, and I can only see one way to do that." The Wise Ones, and then Faolain and Theodrin. "You must swear fealty."

ðeɪ hæd bɪn fɹaʊnɪŋ, wʌndɝɪŋ wɛɹ ʃi wɑz hɛɾəd, bʌt wɛɹɛvɝ ðeɪ θɔt, ɪt wɑz nɑt wɛɹ ʃi ɛndəd. ðɛɹ feɪsəz wɝ ə stʌɾi. naɪsaʊz dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt, ən maɪɹɛl lʊkt əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd bɪn hɪt bɪtwin ði aɪz wɪð ə hæmɝ. ivən sɪuən ɡeɪpt ɪn dɪsbɪlif.

They had been frowning, wondering where she was headed, but wherever they thought, it was not where she ended. Their faces were a study. Nisao's jaw dropped, and Myrelle looked as though she had been hit between the eyes with a hammer. Even Siuan gaped in disbelief.

"aɪm-pi-pɑsəbəl," maɪɹɛl spləɾɝd. "noʊ sɪstɝ əz ɛvɝ - ! noʊ æmɪɝlɪn əz ɹikwaɪɝd - ! jə kæn ɹɪli θɪŋk - !"

"Im-p-possible," Myrelle spluttered. "No sister has ever - ! No Amyrlin has required - ! You can't really think - !"

"oʊ, də bi kwaɪət, maɪɹɛl," naɪsaʊ snæpt. "ðɪs ɪz ɔl jəɹ fɔlt! aɪ ʃəd nɛvɝ əv lɪsənd - ! wɛl. dʌn ɪz dʌn. ən wʌɾ ɪz, ɪz." piɹɪŋ əɾ ɛɡwin fɹəm bɪniθ loʊɝd bɹaʊz, ʃi mʌɾɝd, "ju ɑɹ ə deɪnʒɝəs jʌŋ wʊmən, mʌðɝ. ə vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs wʊmən. jə meɪ bɹeɪk ðə taʊɝ mɔɹ ðən ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪz, bɪfɔɹ jəɹ dʌn. ɪf aɪ wɑz ʃʊɹ ə ðæt, ɪf aɪ hæd ðə kɝədʒ tə də maɪ duɾi ən feɪs wʌtɛvɝ kʌmz - " jɛt ʃi nɛl smuðli, pɹɛsɪŋ əɹ lɪps tə ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn ɛɡwinz fɪŋɡɝ. "bɪniθ ðə laɪɾ ən baɪ maɪ hoʊp ə ɹibɝθ ən sælveɪʃən. . . ."nɑt ðə seɪm wɝɾɪŋ əz fɑoʊleɪn ən θiədʒɹɪn, bʌɾ ɛvɹi skɹæp əz stʃɹɔŋ. mɔɹ. baɪ ðə θɹi oʊðz, noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd spik ə vaʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt min. ɪksɛp ðə blæk ədʒɑ, ʌv kɔɹs; ɪt simd ɑbviəs ðeɪ mʌst əv faʊn ə weɪ tə laɪ. wɛðɝ iðɝ ə ðiz wɪmən wɑz blæk wɑz ə pɹɑbləm fəɹ ənʌðɝ taɪm, ðoʊ. sɪuən, aɪz pɑpɪŋ ən maʊθ wɝkɪŋ wɪθaʊt saʊnd, lʊk laɪk ə fɪʃ stʃɹændəɾ ɑn ə mʌdbæŋk.

"Oh, do be quiet, Myrelle," Nisao snapped. "This is all your fault! I should never have listened - ! Well. Done is done. And what is, is." Peering at Egwene from beneath lowered brows, she muttered, "You are a dangerous young woman, Mother. A very dangerous woman. You may break the Tower more than it already is, before you're done. If I was sure of that, if I had the courage to do my duty and face whatever comes - " Yet she knelt smoothly, pressing her lips to the Great Serpent ring on Egwene's finger. "Beneath the Light and by my hope of rebirth and salvation. . . ."Not the same wording as Faolain and Theodrin, but every scrap as strong. More. By the Three Oaths, no Aes Sedai could speak a vow she did not mean. Except the Black Ajah, of course; it seemed obvious they must have found a way to lie. Whether either of these women was Black was a problem for another time, though. Siuan, eyes popping and mouth working without sound, looked like a fish stranded on a mudbank.

maɪɹɛl tʃɹaɪɾ ənʌðɝ pɹoʊɾɛst, bʌɾ ɛɡwin dʒʌs θɹʌst aʊɾ əɹ ɹaɪt hænd wɪð ðə ɹɪŋ, ən maɪɹɛlz niz foʊldəɾ ɪn dʒɝks. ʃi ɡeɪv ði oʊθ ɪn bɪɾɝ toʊnz, ðən lʊkt ʌp. "juv dʌn wʌɾ əz nɛvɝ bɪn dʌn bɪfɔɹ, mʌðɝ. ðəɾ ɪz ɔlweɪz deɪnʒɝəs."

Myrelle tried another protest, but Egwene just thrust out her right hand with the ring, and Myrelle's knees folded in jerks. She gave the oath in bitter tones, then looked up. "You've done what has never been done before, Mother. That is always dangerous."

"ɪt woʊn bi ðə læs taɪm," ɛɡwin toʊl hɝ. "ɪn fækt. . . . maɪ fɝst ɔɹɾɝ tə jə ɪz ðət jəl tɛl noʊ wʌn ðət sɪuən ɪz ɛniθɪŋ bʌt weɪtɛvɹibɑɾi θɪŋks. maɪ sɛkən ɪz, jəl oʊbeɪ ɛni ɔɹɾɝ ʃi ɡɪvz əz ɪf ɪt keɪm fɹəm mi."

"It won't be the last time," Egwene told her. "In fact. . . . My first order to you is that you will tell no one that Siuan is anything but whateverybody thinks. My second is, you will obey any order she gives as if it came from me."

ðɛɹ hɛdz tɝn təwɔɹd sɪuən, feɪsəz ənɹʌfəld. "æz jə kəmænd, mʌðɝ," ðeɪ mɝmɝd təɡɛðɝ. ɪt wɑz sɪuən u lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə feɪnt.

Their heads turned toward Siuan, faces unruffled. "As you command, Mother," they murmured together. It was Siuan who looked ready to faint.

ʃi wɑz stɪl stɛɹɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ wən ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə ɹoʊɾ ən tɝn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz is təwɔɹd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kæmp ən ði ɑɹmi. ðə sʌn stɪl klaɪm təwɔɹɾ ɪts zinəθ, stɪl wɛl ʃɔɹt. ɪt hæd bɪn ə mɔɹnɪŋ ɪvɛnfəl əz moʊs deɪz. moʊst wiks, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. ɛɡwin lɛt deɪʃɝ æmbəl.

She was still staring at nothing when they reached the road and turned their horses east toward the Aes Sedai camp and the army. The sun still climbed toward its zenith, still well short. It had been a morning eventful as most days. Most weeks, for that matter. Egwene let Daishar amble.

"maɪɹɛl wɑz ɹaɪt," sɪuən mʌmbəl faɪnəli. wɪð əɹ ɹaɪɾɝz maɪn ɛlswɛɹ, ðə mɛɹ muvd wɪð sʌmθɪŋ kloʊs tə ə smuð ɡeɪt; ʃi æktʃəli  meɪd sɪuən əpɪɹ ə kɑmpəɾənt ɹaɪɾɝ. "fiəlti. noʊ wʌn əz ɛvɝ dʌn ðæt. noʊ wʌn. ðəɹ ɪzən soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə hɪn ɪn ðə sikɹət hɪstɝiz. ən ðɛm, oʊbeɪɪŋ mi. jə ɑɹən dʒʌs tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ə fju θɪŋz, jəɹ ɹibɪldɪŋ ðə boʊt waɪl seɪlɪŋ ə stɔɹm! ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ. ən nɪkoʊlə! ɪn maɪ deɪ, ə wʊɾə əv wɛt hɝsɛlf ɪf ʃi ivən θɔɾ ə blækmeɪlɪŋ ə sɪstɝ!"

"Myrelle was right," Siuan mumbled finally. With her rider's mind elsewhere, the mare moved with something close to a smooth gait; she actually made Siuan appear a competent rider. "Fealty. No one has ever done that. No one. There isn't so much as a hint in the secret histories. And them, obeying me. You aren't just changing a few things, you're rebuilding the boat while sailing a storm! Everything is changing. And Nicola! In my day, a novice would have wet herself if she even thought of blackmailing a sister!"

"nɑt ðɛɹ fɝst ətɛmpt," ɛɡwin toʊl hɝ, ɹɪleɪɾɪŋ ðə fæks ɪn əz fju wɝdz əz pɑsəbəl.

"Not their first attempt," Egwene told her, relating the facts in as few words as possible.

ʃi ɪkspɛktəd sɪuən tə ɪksploʊɾ ɪn ə fjʊɹi ət ðə pɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪnstɛd ðə wʊmən sɛd, kwaɪt kɑmli, "aɪ fɪɹ əɹ tu ædvɛntʃɝəs læsəz ɑɹ əbaʊt tə mit wɪð æksəɾənts."

She expected Siuan to explode in a fury at the pair, but instead the woman said, quite calmly, "I fear our two adventurous lasses are about to meet with accidents."

"noʊ!" ɛɡwin ɹeɪn ɪn soʊ sʌɾənli ðət sɪuənz mɛɹ æmbəld ənʌðɝ hæf-dʌzən peɪsɪz bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd bɹɪŋ ði ænəməl ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl ən tɝn hɝ, ɔl ðə waɪl mʌɾɝɪŋ ɪmpɹəkeɪʃənz ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. ʃi sæt ðəɹ ɡɪvɪŋ ɛɡwin ə peɪʃən lʊk ðəɾ aʊtdɪd ləleɪn əɾ əɹ wɝst.

"No!" Egwene reined in so suddenly that Siuan's mare ambled another half-dozen paces before she could bring the animal under control and turn her, all the while muttering imprecations under her breath. She sat there giving Egwene a patient look that outdid Lelaine at her worst.

"mʌðɝ, ðeɪv ə klʌb oʊvɝ jəɹ hɛd, ɪf ðəɹ ɛvɝ smɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə θɪŋk ɪɾ aʊt. ivən ɪf ðə hɔl dʌzn fɔɹs jə ɪndə ə pɛnəns, jə kən wɑtʃ ɛni hoʊp juv wɪð əm seɪl ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə hɝaɪzən." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd dɪsɡʌstɪdli. "aɪ nu jə wəd də ɪt wən aɪ sɛn jə aʊt - aɪ nu juɾ əv tə - bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv wɝ wɪtləs ɪnʌf tə bɹɪŋ bæk ɛniwʌn u nu. ðoʊz tu ɡɝlz dɪzɝv ɔl ðəl kætʃ ɪf ðɪs ɡɛts aʊt. bʌt jə kæn əfɔɹd tə lɛɾ ɪɾ aʊt."

"Mother, they have a club over your head, if they're ever smart enough to think it out. Even if the Hall doesn't force you into a penance, you can watch any hope you have with them sail right over the horizon." She shook her head disgustedly. "I knew you would do it when I sent you out - I knew you'd have to - but I never thought Elayne and Nynaeve were witless enough to bring back anyone who knew. Those two girls deserve all they'll catch if this gets out. But you can't afford to let it out."

"nʌθɪŋ ɪz tə hæpən tə nɪkoʊlə əɹ ɑɹinə, sɪuən! ɪf aɪ əpɹuv kɪlɪŋ əm fəɹ wʌt ðeɪ noʊ, huz nɛkst? ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn, fəɹ nɑɾ əɡɹiɪŋ wɪð mi? wɛɹ dʌz ɪt stɑp?" ɪn ə weɪ, ʃi fɛl dɪsɡʌstəd wɪð hɝsɛlf. wʌns, ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv ʌndɝstʊd wʌt sɪuən mɛnt. ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz bɛɾɝ tə noʊ ðən tə bi ɪɡnɝənt, bʌt səmtaɪmz ɪɡnɝəns wɑz mʌtʃ mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl. hilɪŋ deɪʃɝ ɑn, ʃi sɛd, "aɪ woʊn əv ə deɪ ʌv vɪktɝi spɔɪld wɪð tɔk ə mɝɾɝ. maɪɹɛl wɑzn ivən ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, sɪuən. ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, fɑoʊleɪn ən θiədʒɹɪn wɝ weɪɾɪŋ. . . ." sɪuən bɹɔt ðə plʌmp mɛɹ ɪn kloʊsɝ tə lɪsən əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd.

"Nothing is to happen to Nicola or Areina, Siuan! If I approve killing them for what they know, who's next? Romanda and Lelaine, for not agreeing with me? Where does it stop?" In a way, she felt disgusted with herself. Once, she would not have understood what Siuan meant. It was always better to know than to be ignorant, but sometimes ignorance was much more comfortable. Heeling Daishar on, she said, "I won't have a day of victory spoiled with talk of murder. Myrelle wasn't even the beginning, Siuan. This morning, Faolain and Theodrin were waiting. . . ." Siuan brought the plump mare in closer to listen as they rode.

ðə nuz dɪd nɑt ɹɪliv sɪuənz kənsɝn oʊvɝ nɪkoʊlə ən ɑɹinə, bʌɾ ɛɡwinz plænz sɝɾənli pʊɾ ə spɑɹkəl ɪn əɹ aɪ ən ə smaɪl ʌv æntɪsəpeɪʃən ɑn əɹ lɪps. baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹitʃt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kæmp, ʃi wɑz iɡɝ tə teɪk ɑn əɹ nɛks tæsk. wɪtʃ wɑz tə tɛl ʃɛɹiəm ən ðə ɹɛst ə maɪɹɛlz fɹɛnz ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪn ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi ət mɪddeɪ. ʃi kəɾ ivən seɪ kwaɪt tʃɹuθfəli ðət nʌθɪŋ wəd bi ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə ðɛm ðəɾ ʌðɝ sɪstɝz hæd nɑt dʌn bɪfɔɹ.

The news did not relieve Siuan's concern over Nicola and Areina, but Egwene's plans certainly put a sparkle in her eye and a smile of anticipation on her lips. By the time they reached the Aes Sedai camp, she was eager to take on her next task. Which was to tell Sheriam and the rest of Myrelle's friends that they were expected in the Amyrlin's study at midday. She could even say quite truthfully that nothing would be required of them that other sisters had not done before.

fəɹ ɔl əɹ tɔk ə vɪktɝi, ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt fil soʊ zɛsfəl. ʃi bɛɹli hɝd blɛsɪŋz ən kɔlz fəɹ blɛsɪŋz, æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ əm wɪð oʊnli ə weɪv ə hɝ hænd, ən wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi mɪs mɔɹ ðən ʃi dɪd hɪɹ. ʃi kəd nɑt kaʊntənəns mɝɾɝ, bʌt nɪkoʊlə ən ɑɹinə wəd bɛɹ wɑtʃɪŋ. wɪl aɪ ɛvɝ ɹitʃ ə pleɪs wɛɹ ðə dɪfəkəltiz doʊn kip paɪlɪŋ ʌp? ʃi wʌndɝd. sʌmwɛɹ ə vɪktɝi dɪd nɑt sim tə hæv tə bi mætʃt baɪ ə nu deɪnʒɝ.

For all her talk of victory, Egwene did not feel so zestful. She barely heard blessings and calls for blessings, acknowledging them with only a wave of her hand, and was sure she missed more than she did hear. She could not countenance murder, but Nicola and Areina would bear watching. Will I ever reach a place where the difficulties don't keep piling up? she wondered. Somewhere a victory did not seem to have to be matched by a new danger.

wən ʃi wɔkt ɪndə hɝ tɛnt, hɝ mud sæŋk ɹaɪt tə hɝ fit. hɝ hɛd θɹɑbd. ʃi wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə θɪŋk ʃi ʃəd dʒʌst steɪ əweɪ fɹəm ðə tɛn ɔltəɡɛðɝ.

When she walked into her tent, her mood sank right to her feet. Her head throbbed. She was beginning to think she should just stay away from the tent altogether.

tu kɛɹfəli foʊldəd ʃits ə pɑɹtʃmən sæt nitli ətɑp ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl, itʃ sild wɪð wæks ən itʃ bɛɹɪŋ ðə wɝdz "sil tə ðə fleɪm." fəɹ ɛniwʌn ʌðɝ ðən ði æmɪɝlɪn, bɹeɪkɪŋ ðət sil wɑz əkaʊntəɾ əz sɪɹiəs əz əsɔltɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪnz pɝsən. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə bɹeɪk ðɛm. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊɾ ɪn əɹ maɪn u hæd ɹɪɾən ðoʊz wɝdz. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt.

Two carefully folded sheets of parchment sat neatly atop the writing table, each sealed with wax and each bearing the words "Sealed to the Flame." For anyone other than the Amyrlin, breaking that seal was accounted as serious as assaulting the Amyrlin's person. She wished she did not have to break them. There was no doubt in her mind who had written those words. Unfortunately, she was right.

ɹoʊmændə sədʒɛstəd - "dɪmændəd" wɑz ə bɛɾɝ wɝd - ðət ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪʃu ən iɾɪkt "sil tə ðə hɔl," noʊn oʊnli tə ðə sɪɾɝz. ðə sɪstɝz wɝ ɔl tə bi sʌmənd wʌn baɪ wʌn, ən ɛni hu ɹəfjuzd wɑz tə bi ʃildɪɾ ən kənfaɪn əz ə səspɛktəd mɛmbɝ ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ. wʌt ðeɪ wɝ tə bi sʌmən fəɹ wɑz lɛft ɹæðɝ veɪɡ, bʌt ləleɪn hæd mɔɹ ðən hɪntəd ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. ləleɪnz oʊn mɪsɪv bɔɹ əɹ mænɝ ɔl oʊvɝ ɪt, mʌðɝ tə tʃaɪld, wʌt ʃəd bi dʌn fəɹ ɛɡwinz oʊn ɡʊɾ ən ɛvɹiwʌnz. ði iɾɪkt ʃi wɑntəd wɑz oʊnli tə bi "sil tə ðə ɹɪŋ"; ɛni sɪstɝ kəd noʊ, ən ɪn fækt, ɪn ðɪs keɪs ðeɪ wəɾ əv tə. mɛnʃən ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ wɑz tə bi fɔɹbɪɾən əz foʊmɛntɪŋ dɪskɔɹd, ə sɪɹiəs tʃɑɹdʒ ʌndɝ taʊɝ lɔ, wɪð əpɹoʊpɹiət pɛnəltiz.

Romanda suggested - "demanded" was a better word - that the Amyrlin issue an edict "Sealed to the Hall," known only to the Sitters. The sisters were all to be summoned one by one, and any who refused was to be shielded and confined as a suspected member of the Black Ajah. What they were to be summoned for was left rather vague, but Lelaine had more than hinted this morning. Lelaine's own missive bore her manner all over it, mother to child, what should be done for Egwene's own good and everyone's. The edict she wanted was only to be "Sealed to the Ring"; any sister could know, and in fact, in this case they would have to. Mention of the Black Ajah was to be forbidden as fomenting discord, a serious charge under Tower law, with appropriate penalties.

ɛɡwin dʒɹɑpt ɑntu hɝ foʊldɪŋ tʃɛɹ wɪð ə ɡɹoʊn, ən ə kɔɹs ðə lɛɡz ʃɪftəɾ ən nɪɹli dəpɑzɪɾɪd əɹ ɑn ðə kɑɹpət. ʃi kəd dɪleɪ ən saɪdstɛp, bʌt ðeɪ wəd kip kʌmɪŋ bæk wɪð ðiz ɪɾioʊsiz. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ wʌn wəɾ ɪntʃɹədus əɹ mɑɾəst pɹəpoʊzəl tə ðə hɔl, ən ðət wəd pʊt ðə fɑks ɪn ðə hɛnjɑɹd. wɝ ðeɪ blaɪnd? foʊmɛntɪŋ dɪskɔɹd? ləleɪn wəɾ əv ɛvɹi sɪstɝ kənvɪns nɑt dʒʌs ðət ðəɹ wɑz ə blæk ədʒɑ, bʌt ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑz pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. ðə stæmpiɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ bæk tə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən ɪleɪɾə kəd nɑt bi fɑɹ bɪhaɪnd. ɹoʊmændə dʒʌs mɛn tə sɛɾ ɔf ə mjuɾəni. ðəɹ wɝ sɪks ə ðoʊz hɪɾən ɪn ðə sikɹət hɪstɝiz. hæf ə dʌzən ɪn mɔɹ ðən θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz maɪt nɑt bi vɛɹi mɛni, bʌɾ itʃ hæd ɹɪzʌltɪɾ ɪn ən æmɪɝlɪn ɹɪzaɪnɪŋ, ən ði ɪntaɪɝ hɔl əz wɛl. ləleɪn nu ðæt, ən ɹoʊmændə. ləleɪn hæd bɪn ə sɪɾɝ fəɹ nɪɹli fɔɹɾi jɪɹz, wɪð æksɛs tə ɔl ðə hɪɾən ɹɛkɝdz. bɪfɔɹ ɹɪzaɪnɪŋ tə ɡoʊ ɪndə ə kʌntʃɹi ɹitʃɹit, əz mɛni sɪstɝz dɪɾ ɪn eɪdʒ, ɹoʊmændə hæd hɛld ə tʃɛɹ fəɹ ðə jɛloʊ soʊ lɔŋ ðət səm sɛd ʃi hæd hæɾ əz mʌtʃ paʊɝ əz ɛni æmɪɝlɪn ʃi sæɾ ʌndɝ. biɪŋ tʃoʊzən tə sɪɾ ə sɛkən taɪm wɑz nɪɹli ənhɝɾ ʌv, bʌt ɹoʊmændə wɑz nɑt wʌn tə lɛt paʊɝ ɹɪzaɪɾ ɛniwɛɹ aʊtsaɪɾ əɹ oʊn hænz ɪf ʃi kəd mænədʒ.

Egwene dropped onto her folding chair with a groan, and of course the legs shifted and nearly deposited her on the carpet. She could delay and sidestep, but they would keep coming back with these idiocies. Sooner or later one would introduce her modest proposal to the Hall, and that would put the fox in the henyard. Were they blind? Fomenting discord? Lelaine would have every sister convinced not just that there was a Black Ajah, but that Egwene was part of it. The stampede of Aes Sedai back to Tar Valon and Elaida could not be far behind. Romanda just meant to set off a mutiny. There were six of those hidden in the secret histories. Half a dozen in more than three thousand years might not be very many, but each had resulted in an Amyrlin resigning, and the entire Hall as well. Lelaine knew that, and Romanda. Lelaine had been a Sitter for nearly forty years, with access to all the hidden records. Before resigning to go into a country retreat, as many sisters did in age, Romanda had held a chair for the Yellow so long that some said she had had as much power as any Amyrlin she sat under. Being chosen to sit a second time was nearly unheard of, but Romanda was not one to let power reside anywhere outside her own hands if she could manage.

noʊ, ðeɪ wɝ nɑt blaɪnd; dʒʌst əfɹeɪd. ɛvɹibɑɾi wɑz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ hɝ, ən ivən ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz θɪŋk klɪɹli wən ðeɪ wɝ əfɹeɪd. ʃi ɹifoʊldəd ðə peɪdʒəz, wɑntɪŋ tə kɹʌmpəl əm ʌp ən stæmp əɹ fiɾ ɑn ðɛm. hɝ hɛd wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə bɝst.

No, they were not blind; just afraid. Everybody was, including her, and even Aes Sedai did not always think clearly when they were afraid. She refolded the pages, wanting to crumple them up and stamp her feet on them. Her head was going to burst.

"meɪ aɪ kʌm ɪn, mʌðɝ?" hɑlimə sɑɹənɑv sweɪɾ ɪndə ðə tɛnt wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ən ænsɝ. ðə weɪ hɑlimə muvd ɔlweɪz dʒɹu ɛvɹi meɪl aɪ fɹəm eɪdʒ twɛlv tə tu deɪz pæs ðə ɡɹeɪv, bʌt ðɛn, ɪf ʃi hɪd hɝsɛlf ɪn ə hɛvi kloʊk fɹəm ðə ʃoʊldɝz daʊn, mɛn stɪl wəd stɛɹ. lɔŋ blæk hɛɹ, ɡlɪsnɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi wɑʃt ɪɾ ɛvɹi deɪ ɪn fɹɛʃ ɹeɪnwɔɾɝ, fɹeɪmd ə feɪs ðət meɪd ʃʊɹ ə ðæt. "dɛlænə sədaɪ θɔt jə maɪt wɑnə si ðɪs. ʃiz pʊɾɪŋ ɪt bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ."

"May I come in, Mother?" Halima Saranov swayed into the tent without waiting for an answer. The way Halima moved always drew every male eye from age twelve to two days past the grave, but then, if she hid herself in a heavy cloak from the shoulders down, men still would stare. Long black hair, glistening as if she washed it every day in fresh rainwater, framed a face that made sure of that. "Delana Sedai thought you might want to see this. She's putting it before the Hall this morning."

ðə hɔl wɑz sɪɾɪŋ wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɪnfɔɹmɪŋ hɝ? wɛl, ʃi hæd bɪn əweɪ, bʌt kʌstəm ɪf nɑt lɔ sɛd ði æmɪɝlɪn mʌs bi ɪnfɔɹm bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl kəd sɪt. ənlɛs ðeɪ wɝ sɪɾɪŋ tə dɪpoʊz hɝ, ɛniweɪ. ət ðət moʊmənt, ʃi wəɾ ɔlmoʊst əv teɪkən ɪɾ əz ə blɛsɪŋ. ʃi aɪd ðə foʊldəd ʃiɾ ə peɪpɝ hɑlimə leɪɾ ɑn əɹ teɪbəl mʌtʃ əz ʃi wəɾ ə pɔɪzənəs sneɪk. nɑt sild; ðə nuəs nɑvəs kəd ɹiɾ ɪt, soʊ fɑɹ əz dɛlænə wɑz kənsɝnd. ðə dɛklɝeɪʃən ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə wɑz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ʌv kɔɹs. nɑt kwaɪɾ əz bæɾ əz ɹoʊmændə əɹ ləleɪn, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi hɝd ðə hɔl hæd bɹoʊkən ʌp ɪn ə ɹaɪət, ʃi wəd hɑɹdli blɪŋk.

The Hall was sitting without so much as informing her? Well, she had been away, but custom if not law said the Amyrlin must be informed before the Hall could sit. Unless they were sitting to depose her, anyway. At that moment, she would almost have taken it as a blessing. She eyed the folded sheet of paper Halima laid on her table much as she would a poisonous snake. Not sealed; the newest novice could read it, so far as Delana was concerned. The declaration that Elaida was a Darkfriend, of course. Not quite as bad as Romanda or Lelaine, but if she heard the Hall had broken up in a riot, she would hardly blink.

"hɑlimə, aɪ kəd wɪʃ jud ɡɔn hoʊm wən kæbɹiænə daɪd." əɹ ət lis ðət dɛlænə hæd hæd ðə sɛns tə sil ðə wʊmənz ɪnfɝmeɪʃən tə ðə hɔl. əɹ ivən tə ðə fleɪm. ɪnstɛɾ ə tɛlɪŋ ɛvɹi sɪstɝ ʃi kəd kɑlɝ.

"Halima, I could wish you'd gone home when Cabriana died." Or at least that Delana had had the sense to seal the woman's information to the Hall. Or even to the Flame. Instead of telling every sister she could collar.

"aɪ kəd hɑɹdli də ðæt, mʌðɝ." hɑliməz ɡɹin aɪz flæʃt wɪð wʌt sim tʃælənʒ əɹ dɪfaɪəns, bʌt ʃi oʊnli hæd tu weɪz tə lʊk əɾ ɛniwʌn, ə waɪd, dɝɛk stɛɹ ðət dɛɹɾ ən ə lɪɾɪd ɡeɪz ðət smoʊldɝd. hɝ aɪz kɑzd ə lɑɾ ə mɪsəndɝstændɪŋ. "æftɝ kæbɹiænə sədaɪ toʊl mi wʌt ʃid lɝn əbaʊɾ ɪleɪɾə? ən əɹ plænz? kæbɹiænə wɑz maɪ fɹɛnd, ən fɹɛn tə ju, tə ɔl ə jə əpoʊzɪŋ ɪleɪɾə, soʊ aɪ hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs. aɪ oʊnli θæŋk ðə laɪt ʃi mɛnʃən sɑlədɑɹ, soʊ aɪ nu wɛɹ tə kʌm." ʃi pʊɾ əɹ hænz ɑn ə weɪst əz smɔl əz ɛɡwinz hæd bɪn ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ ən tɪltəɾ əɹ hɛd tə wʌn saɪd, stʌɾiɪŋ ɛɡwin ɪntɛnli. "jɔɹ bɹeɪn ɪz hɝɾɪŋ əɡɛn, ɪzən ɪt? kæbɹiænə juz tə hæv sətʃ peɪnz, soʊ bæd ðeɪ meɪɾ əɹ toʊz kɹæmp. ʃi hæd tə soʊk ɪn hɑt wɔɾɝ tɪl ʃi kəd bɛɹ tə pʊɾ ɑn kloʊðz. ɪt tʊk deɪz, səmtaɪmz. ɪf aɪ hædn kʌm, jʊɹz cʊɾə ɡɑɾən ðət bæɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli." muvɪŋ ɝaʊn bɪhaɪn ðə tʃɛɹ, ʃi bɪɡæn niɾɪŋ ɛɡwinz skælp. hɑliməz fɪŋɡɝz pəzɛst ə skɪl ðət mɛltəd peɪn əweɪ. "ju kəd hɑɹdli æsk ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ fəɹ hilɪŋ əz ɔfən əz juv ðiz eɪks. ɪts dʒʌs taɪtnəs, ɛniweɪ. aɪ kən fil ɪt."

"I could hardly do that, Mother." Halima's green eyes flashed with what seemed challenge or defiance, but she only had two ways to look at anyone, a wide, direct stare that dared and a lidded gaze that smoldered. Her eyes caused a lot of misunderstanding. "After Cabriana Sedai told me what she'd learned about Elaida? And her plans? Cabriana was my friend, and friend to you, to all of you opposing Elaida, so I had no choice. I only thank the Light she mentioned Salidar, so I knew where to come." She put her hands on a waist as small as Egwene's had been in Tel'aran'rhiod and tilted her head to one side, studying Egwene intently. "Your brain is hurting again, isn't it? Cabriana used to have such pains, so bad they made her toes cramp. She had to soak in hot water till she could bear to put on clothes. It took days, sometimes. If I hadn't come, yours could have gotten that bad eventually." Moving around behind the chair, she began kneading Egwene's scalp. Halima's fingers possessed a skill that melted pain away. "You could hardly ask another sister for Healing as often as you have these aches. It's just tightness, anyway. I can feel it."

"aɪ səpoʊz aɪ kʊdnt," ɛɡwin mɝmɝd. ʃi ɹæðɝ laɪk ðə wʊmən, wʌtɛvɝ ɛniwʌn sɛd, ən nɑt dʒʌs fəɹ əɹ tælən ɪn smuðɪŋ əweɪ hɛdeɪks. hɑlimə wɑz ɝθi ən oʊpən, ə kʌntʃɹi wʊmən haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ taɪm ʃi hæd spɛnt ɡeɪnɪŋ ə skɪm ə sɪɾi səfɪstəkeɪʃən, bælənsɪŋ ɹɪspɛk fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪð ə sɔɹɾ ə neɪbɝlinəs ɪn ə weɪ ɛɡwin faʊn ɹɪfɹɛʃɪŋ. stɑɹtlɪŋ, səmtaɪmz, bʌɾ ɛnlaɪvinɪŋ. ivən tʃɛsə dɪd nɑt də bɛɾɝ, bʌt tʃɛsə wɑz ɔlweɪz ðə sɝvənt, ivən ɪf fɹɛnli, waɪl hɑlimə nɛvɝ ʃoʊd ðə slaɪɾəst əbsɪkwiəsnəs. jɛɾ ɛɡwin ɹɪli dɪd wɪʃ ʃi hæd ɡɔn bæk tə hɝ hoʊm wən kæbɹiænə fɛl fɹəm ðət hɔɹs ən bɹoʊk əɹ nɛk.

"I suppose I couldn't," Egwene murmured. She rather liked the woman, whatever anyone said, and not just for her talent in smoothing away headaches. Halima was earthy and open, a country woman however much time she had spent gaining a skim of city sophistication, balancing respect for the Amyrlin with a sort of neighborliness in a way Egwene found refreshing. Startling, sometimes, but enlivening. Even Chesa did not do better, but Chesa was always the servant, even if friendly, while Halima never showed the slightest obsequiousness. Yet Egwene really did wish she had gone back to her home when Cabriana fell from that horse and broke her neck.

ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn jusfəl hæd ðə sɪstɝz æksɛptɪd kæbɹiænəz bɪlif ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə ɪntɛndəd tə stɪl hæf ə ðɛm ən bɹeɪk ðə ɹɛst, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz ʃʊɹ hɑlimə hæd ɡɑɹbəl ðət sʌmhaʊ. ɪt wɑz ðə blæk ədʒɑ ðeɪ lætʃt ɑn tə. wɪmən ənjuz tə biɪŋ əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ hæd teɪkən wʌt ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlweɪz dɪnaɪɾ ən tɛɹəfaɪd ðɛmsɛlvz hæf-wɪtləs wɪð ɪt. haʊ wɑz ʃi tə ɹut ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz aʊt wɪθaʊt skæɾɝɪŋ ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz laɪk ə fɹaɪɾənd kʌvi ʌv kweɪl? haʊ tə stɑp əm skæɾɝɪŋ sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ɛniweɪ? laɪt, haʊ?

It might have been useful had the sisters accepted Cabriana's belief that Elaida intended to still half of them and break the rest, but everyone was sure Halima had garbled that somehow. It was the Black Ajah they latched on to. Women unused to being afraid of anything had taken what they had always denied and terrified themselves half-witless with it. How was she to root the Darkfriends out without scattering the other sisters like a frightened covey of quail? How to stop them scattering sooner or later anyway? Light, how?

"θɪŋk ɑn lusnəs," hɑlimə sɛd sɔfli. "jɔɹ feɪs ɪz lus. jəɹ nɛk ɪz lus. jəɹ ʃoʊldɝz. . . ." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz ɔlmoʊs hɪpnɑɾɪk, ə dʒɹoʊn ðət sim tə kɝɛs itʃ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɛɡwinz bɑɾi ʃi wɑntəd tə ɹɪlæks.

"Think on looseness," Halima said softly. "Your face is loose. Your neck is loose. Your shoulders. . . ." Her voice was almost hypnotic, a drone that seemed to caress each part of Egwene's body she wanted to relax.

səm wɪmən dɪslaɪkt əɹ dʒʌs fəɹ ðə weɪ ʃi lʊkt, ʌv kɔɹs, əz ðoʊ ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ləsɪviəs mæn hæd dʒɹim hɝ, ən ə ɡʊd mɛni kleɪmd ʃi flɝɾɪd wɪð ɛniθɪŋ ɪn bɹitʃɪz, wɪtʃ ɛɡwin kəd nɑɾ əv əpɹuvd ʌv, bʌt hɑlimə ədmɪɾəd ʃi laɪk lʊkɪŋ ət mɛn. hɝ wɝs kɹɪɾɪks nɛvɝ kleɪmd ʃi hæd dʌn mɔɹ ðən flɝt, ən ʃi hɝsɛlf bɪkeɪm ɪndɪɡnən ət ðə sədʒɛstʃən. ʃi wɑz noʊ ful - ɛɡwin hæd noʊn ðəɾ ət ðɛɹ fɝs kɑnvɝseɪʃən, ðə deɪ æftɝ lɑɡən ɪskeɪpt, wən ðə hɛdeɪks hæd bɪɡʌn - nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ðə bɹeɪnləs flɪpskɝt. ɛɡwin səspɛktəɾ ɪt wɑz mʌtʃ əz wɪð mɛɹi. hɑlimə kəd nɑt hɛlp əɹ feɪs əɹ əɹ mænɝ. hɝ smaɪl simd ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ əɹ tizɪŋ kəz ə ðə ʃeɪp ə hɝ maʊθ; ʃi smaɪl ðə seɪm ət mæn əɹ wʊmən əɹ tʃaɪld. ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli hɝ fɔl ðət pipəl θɔt ʃi wɑz flɝɾɪŋ wən ʃi wɑz oʊnli lʊkɪŋ. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi hæd nɛvɝ mɛnʃən ðə hɛdeɪks tə ɛniwʌn. ɪf ʃi hæd, ɛvɹi jɛloʊ sɪstɝ ɪn ðə kæmp wəd bi leɪɪŋ sidʒ. ðəɾ ɪndəkeɪɾəd fɹɛndʃɪp, ɪf nɑt lɔɪəlti. ɛɡwinz aɪz fɛl ɑn ðə peɪpɝz ɑn ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl, ən əɹ θɔts dʒɹɪftəɾ ʌndɝ hɑliməz stʃɹoʊkɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz. tɔɹtʃɪz ɹɛɾi tə bi tɔst ɪndə ðə heɪstæk. tɛn deɪz tə ðə bɔɹɾɝ ʌv ændɝ, ənlɛs lɔɹd bɹaɪn wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə pʊʃ wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ waɪ, ən noʊ ɑpəzɪʃən bɪfɔɹ. kəd ʃi hoʊl ðoʊz tɔɹtʃɪz bæk tɛn deɪz? saʊθhɑɹbɝ. nɔɹθhɑɹbɝ. ðə kiz tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. haʊ kəd ʃi bi ʃʊɹ ə nɪkoʊlə ən ɑɹinə, ʃɔɹɾ ə sɪuənz sədʒɛstʃən? ʃi niɾəd tə ɝeɪnʒ fəɹ ɛvɹi sɪstɝ tə bi tɛstəd bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹitʃt ændɝ. ʃi hæd ðə tælən fəɹ wɝkɪŋ wɪð mɛɾəlz ən ɔɹz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɹɛɹ əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. nɪkoʊlə. ɑɹinə. ðə blæk ədʒɑ.

Some women disliked her just for the way she looked, of course, as though a particularly lascivious man had dreamed her, and a good many claimed she flirted with anything in breeches, which Egwene could not have approved of, but Halima admitted she liked looking at men. Her worst critics never claimed she had done more than flirt, and she herself became indignant at the suggestion. She was no fool - Egwene had known that at their first conversation, the day after Logain escaped, when the headaches had begun - not at all the brainless flipskirt. Egwene suspected it was much as with Meri. Halima could not help her face or her manner. Her smile seemed inviting or teasing because of the shape of her mouth; she smiled the same at man or woman or child. It was hardly her fault that people thought she was flirting when she was only looking. Besides, she had never mentioned the headaches to anyone. If she had, every Yellow sister in the camp would be laying siege. That indicated friendship, if not loyalty. Egwene's eyes fell on the papers on the writing table, and her thoughts drifted under Halima's stroking fingers. Torches ready to be tossed into the haystack. Ten days to the border of Andor, unless Lord Bryne was willing to push without knowing why, and no opposition before. Could she hold those torches back ten days? Southharbor. Northharbor. The keys to Tar Valon. How could she be sure of Nicola and Areina, short of Siuan's suggestion? She needed to arrange for every sister to be tested before they reached Andor. She had the Talent for working with metals and ores, but it was rare among Aes Sedai. Nicola. Areina. The Black Ajah.

"jɔɹ tɛnsɪŋ əɡɛn. stɑp wɝiɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə hɔl." ðoʊz suðɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz pɔzd, ðən bɪɡæn wʌns mɔɹ. "ðɪs wəd də bɛɾɝ tənaɪt, æftɝ juv hæɾ ə hɑt bæθ. aɪ kəd wɝk jəɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən bæk, ɛvɹiwɛɹ. wi hævən tʃɹaɪd ðæt, jɛt. jəɹ stɪf əz ə steɪk; jə ʃəd bi sʌpəl ɪnʌf tə bɛn bækwɝdz ən pʊt jəɹ hɛd bɪtwin jəɹ æŋkəlz. maɪn ən bɑɾi. wʌn kæn bi lɪmbɝ wɪθaʊt ði ʌðɝ. dʒʌs pʊt jɝsɛlf ɪn maɪ hænz."

"You're tensing again. Stop worrying over the Hall." Those soothing fingers paused, then began once more. "This would do better tonight, after you've had a hot bath. I could work your shoulders and back, everywhere. We haven't tried that, yet. You're stiff as a stake; you should be supple enough to bend backwards and put your head between your ankles. Mind and body. One can't be limber without the other. Just put yourself in my hands."

ɛɡwin tiɾɝd ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə slip. nɑɾ ə dʒɹim-wɔkɝz slip; dʒʌst slip. haʊ lɔŋ sɪns ʃi hæd dʌn ðæt? ðə kæmp wəd bi ɪn ən ʌpɹɔɹ wʌns dɛlænəz pɹəpoʊzəl ɡɑɾ aʊt, wɪtʃ ɪt wəd sun ɪnʌf, ən ðət wɑz bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd tə tɛl ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn ʃi hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ʌv ɪʃuɪŋ ðɛɹ iɾɪkts. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz wʌn θɪŋ jɛt tədeɪ tə lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə, ə ɹizən tə ɹɪmeɪn əweɪk. "ðæt wɪl bi naɪs," ʃi mɝmɝd, minɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ðə pɹɑməs məsɑʒ. lɔŋ əɡoʊ ʃi hæd plɛdʒ ðət wʌn deɪ ʃi wəd bɹɪŋ ʃɛɹiəm tə hil, ən tədeɪ wɑz ðə deɪ. ət læst ʃi wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə bi ði æmɪɝlɪn, ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl. "vɛɹi naɪs."

Egwene teetered on the brink of sleep. Not a dream-walker's sleep; just sleep. How long since she had done that? The camp would be in an uproar once Delana's proposal got out, which it would soon enough, and that was before she had to tell Romanda and Lelaine she had no intention of issuing their edicts. But there was one thing yet today to look forward to, a reason to remain awake. "That will be nice," she murmured, meaning more than the promised massage. Long ago she had pledged that one day she would bring Sheriam to heel, and today was the day. At last she was beginning to be the Amyrlin, in control. "Very nice."


tʃæptɝ θɝtin


CHAPTER 13

ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz


The Bowl of the Winds

eɪvinhə wʊɾə sæɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ, bʌt θɹi ʌðɝ wɪmən ɑkjəpaɪɪŋ ðə boʊts smɔl ɹum lɛf nɑt kwaɪɾ ɪnʌf speɪs, soʊ ʃi hæd tə bi kəntɛnt wɪð foʊldɪŋ əɹ lɛɡz ətɑp wʌn ə ðə kɑɹvd wʊɾən bɛntʃɪz bɪlt əɡɛns ðə wɔlz. ðət weɪ, ɪt wɑz nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ laɪk sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə tʃɛɹ. ət lis ðə dɔɹ wɑz ʃʌt, ən ðəɹ wɝ noʊ wɪndoʊz, oʊnli fænsɪfəl kɑɹv skɹɑlwɝk pɪɹsɪŋ ðə wɔlz nɪɹ ðə silɪŋ. ʃi kəd nɑt si ðə wɔɾɝ aʊtsaɪd, bʌt ðə pɪɹsɪŋz lɛɾ ɪn ðə smɛl ə sɔlt ən ðə slæp ʌv weɪvz əɡɛns ðə hʌl ən ðə splæʃ ə ði ɔɹz. ivən ðə ʃɹɪl hɑloʊ kɹaɪz ə səm sɔɹɾ ə bɝdz ʃaʊɾəd ə væst ɪkspænsɪz ʌv wɔɾɝ. ʃi hæd sin mɛn daɪ fəɹ ə pul ðeɪ maɪɾ əv stɛpt əkɹɔs, bʌt ðɪs wɔɾɝ wɑz bɪɾɝ bɪɑn bɪlif. ɹɛɾɪŋ ʌv ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ðə seɪm əz teɪstɪŋ ɪt. ən ðə ɹɪvɝ hæd bɪn ət lis hæf ə maɪl waɪd wɛɹ ðeɪ bɔɹɾəd ðɪs boʊt wɪð ɪts tu ɑdli lɪɹɪŋ ɔɹsmɪn. hæf ə maɪl ʌv wɔɾɝ, ən nɑɾ ə dʒɹɑp fɪt fəɹ dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ. hu kəɾ ɪmædʒən jusləs wɔɾɝ?

Aviendha would have sat on the floor, but three other women occupying the boat's small room left not quite enough space, so she had to be content with folding her legs atop one of the carved wooden benches built against the walls. That way, it was not so much like sitting in a chair. At least the door was shut, and there were no windows, only fanciful carved scrollwork piercing the walls near the ceiling. She could not see the water outside, but the piercings let in the smell of salt and the slap of waves against the hull and the splash of the oars. Even the shrill hollow cries of some sort of birds shouted of vast expanses of water. She had seen men die for a pool they might have stepped across, but this water was bitter beyond belief. Reading of it was not at all the same as tasting it. And the river had been at least half a mile wide where they boarded this boat with its two oddly leering oarsmen. Half a mile of water, and not a drop fit for drinking. Who could imagine useless water?

ðə moʊʃən ə ðə boʊt hæd tʃeɪnʒd, tə ə ɹɑkɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ. wɝ ðeɪ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ, jɛt? ɪndə wʌt wɑz kɔld "ðə beɪ"? ðət wɑz waɪɾɝ stɪl, fɑɹ waɪɾɝ, soʊ ɪleɪn sɛd. eɪvinhə lɑkt əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ niz ən tʃɹaɪd dɛspɝətli tə θɪŋk ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. ɪf ði ʌðɝz sɔ hɝ fɪɹ, ðə ʃeɪm wəd fɑloʊ hɝ tə ði ɛn ə hɝ deɪz. ðə wɝst ʌv ɪt wɑz, ʃi hæd sədʒɛstəd ðɪs, æftɝ hɪɹɪŋ ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv tɔk ə ðə si foʊk. haʊ kəd ʃi hæv noʊn wʌɾ ɪt wəd bi laɪk?

The motion of the boat had changed, to a rocking back and forth. Were they out of the river, yet? Into what was called "the bay"? That was wider still, far wider, so Elayne said. Aviendha locked her hands on her knees and tried desperately to think of anything else. If the others saw her fear, the shame would follow her to the end of her days. The worst of it was, she had suggested this, after hearing Elayne and Nynaeve talk of the Sea Folk. How could she have known what it would be like?

ðə blu sɪlk ə hɝ dʒɹɛs fɛlt ɪnkɹɛɾəbli smuð, ən ʃi lætʃt ɑn tə ðæt. ʃi wɑz bɛɹli juz tə skɝts əɾ ɔl - ʃi stɪl jɝn fəɹ ðə keɪɾɪnsɝ ðə waɪz wʌnz hæd meɪɾ əɹ bɝn wən ʃi bɪɡæn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ wɪð əm - ən hɪɹ ʃi wɔɹ ə sɪlk dʒɹɛs - ʌv wɪtʃ ʃi naʊ oʊn fɔɹ! - ən sɪlk stɑkɪŋz ɪnstɛɾ ə staʊt wʊl, ən ə sɪlk ʃɪf ðət meɪɾ əɹ əwɛɹ ə hɝ skɪn ɪn ə weɪ ʃi nɛvɝ hæd bɪn bɪfɔɹ. ʃi kəd nɑt dɪnaɪ ðə bjuɾi ʌv ðə dʒɹɛs, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɑɾ ɪt wɑz tə faɪn hɝsɛlf wɛɹɪŋ sətʃ θɪŋz, bʌt sɪlk wɑz pɹɛʃəs, ən ɹɛɹ. ə wʊmən maɪɾ əv ə skɑɹf ə sɪlk, tə bi wɔɹn ɑn fistdeɪz ən ɛnvid baɪ ʌðɝz. fju wɪmən hæd tu. ɪt wɑz dɪfɹən əmʌŋ ðiz wɛtləndɝz, ðoʊ. nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wɔɹ sɪlk, jɛt səmtaɪmz ɪt sim tə hɝ ɛvɹi sɛkən pɝsən dɪd. ɡɹeɪt boʊls ən ivən beɪlz ʌv ɪt keɪm baɪ ʃɪp fɹəm ðə lænz bɪɑn ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd. baɪ ʃɪp. ɑn ði oʊʃən. wɔɾɝ stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ tə ðə hɝaɪzən, wɪð mɛni pleɪsəz wɛɹ, ɪf ʃi ʌndɝstʊd kɝɛkli, jə kəd nɑt si læn əɾ ɔl. ʃi keɪm kloʊs tə ʃɪvɝɪŋ ət ði ɪmpɑsəbəl θɔt. nʌn ə ði ʌðɝz lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɪʃt tə tɔk. ɪleɪn æbsənli twɪstəd ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ ɹaɪt hæn ən pɪɹɾ ət sʌmθɪŋ nɑt tə bi sin ɪnsaɪd ðə fɔɹ wɔlz. ðiz wɝiz ɔfən oʊvɝtʊk hɝ. tu duɾiz kənfɹʌntəd hɝ, ən ɪf wʌn leɪ nɪɹɝ əɹ hɑɹt, ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən ðə wʌn ʃi kənsɪɾɝd mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, mɔɹ ɑnɝəbəl. ɪt wɑz əɹ ɹaɪɾ ən duɾi tə bɪkʌm ðə tʃif, ðə kwin, ʌv ændɝ, bʌt ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən tə kəntɪnju hʌntɪŋ. ɪn ə weɪ, haʊɛvɝ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðɛɹ sɝtʃ, ðət wɑz laɪk pʊɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ bɪfɔɹ klæn əɹ səsaɪəɾi, jɛɾ eɪvinhə fɛl pɹaɪd. ɪleɪnz vju ʌv ɑnɝ wɑz əz pəkjuljɝ ət taɪmz əz ðə noʊʃən ʌv ə wʊmən biɪŋ ə tʃif, əɹ əɹ bɪkʌmɪŋ tʃif dʒʌs kəz əɹ mʌðɝ hæd bɪn, bʌt ʃi fɑloʊɾ ɪɾ ædmɝəbli. bɝdʒɪt, ɪn ðə waɪd ɹɛd tʃɹaʊzɝz ən ʃɔɹt jɛloʊ koʊɾ eɪvinhə ɛnvid, sæt tɔɪɪŋ wɪð əɹ weɪst-lɔŋ bɹeɪd, lɔst ɪn θɔɾ əz wɛl. əɹ meɪbi ʃɛɹɪŋ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪleɪnz wɝiz. ʃi wɑz ɪleɪnz fɝst wɔɹɾɝ, wɪtʃ əpsɛt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ bæk ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs noʊ ɛnd, ðoʊ ɪt dɪd nɑt sim tə bɑðɝ ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz. wɛtləndɝ kʌstəmz wɝ soʊ kjʊɹiəs ðeɪ hɑɹdli bɔɹ θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt.

The blue silk of her dress felt incredibly smooth, and she latched on to that. She was barely used to skirts at all - she still yearned for the cadin'sor the Wise Ones had made her burn when she began training with them - and here she wore a silk dress - of which she now owned four! - and silk stockings instead of stout wool, and a silk shift that made her aware of her skin in a way she never had been before. She could not deny the beauty of the dress, no matter how odd it was to find herself wearing such things, but silk was precious, and rare. A woman might have a scarf of silk, to be worn on feastdays and envied by others. Few women had two. It was different among these wetlanders, though. Not everyone wore silk, yet sometimes it seemed to her every second person did. Great bolts and even bales of it came by ship from the lands beyond the Three-fold Land. By ship. On the ocean. Water stretching to the horizon, with many places where, if she understood correctly, you could not see land at all. She came close to shivering at the impossible thought. None of the others looked as if they wished to talk. Elayne absently twisted the Great Serpent ring on her right hand and peered at something not to be seen inside the four walls. These worries often overtook her. Two duties confronted her, and if one lay nearer her heart, she had chosen the one she considered more important, more honorable. It was her right and duty to become the chief, the queen, of Andor, but she had chosen to continue hunting. In a way, however important their search, that was like putting something before clan or society, yet Aviendha felt pride. Elayne's view of honor was as peculiar at times as the notion of a woman being a chief, or her becoming chief just because her mother had been, but she followed it admirably. Birgitte, in the wide red trousers and short yellow coat Aviendha envied, sat toying with her waist-long braid, lost in thought as well. Or maybe sharing part of Elayne's worries. She was Elayne's first Warder, which upset the Aes Sedai back in the Tarasin Palace no end, though it did not seem to bother their Warders. Wetlander customs were so curious they hardly bore thinking about.

ɪf ɪleɪn ən bɝdʒɪt sim tə dɪflɛkt ɛni θɔɾ ə tɔk, nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə, dɝɛkli ɑpəzəɾ eɪvinhə baɪ ðə dɔɹ, ɹɪbʌft ɪt fɝmli. nɪneɪiv; nɑt nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə. wɛtləndɝz laɪk tə bi kɔl baɪ oʊnli hæf ðɛɹ neɪmz, ən eɪvinhə wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ɪt fɛlt laɪk juzɪŋ ə hʌni-neɪm. ɹænd ælθɹ wɑz ði oʊnli lʌvɝ ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ hæd, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ivən ə hɪm soʊ ɪntəmətli, bʌt ʃi hæd tə lɝn ðɛɹ weɪz ɪf ʃi wɑz tə wɛd wʌn ə ðɛm.

If Elayne and Birgitte seemed to deflect any thought of talk, Nynaeve al'Meara, directly opposite Aviendha by the door, rebuffed it firmly. Nynaeve; not Nynaeve al'Meara. Wetlanders liked to be called by only half their names, and Aviendha was trying to remember, however much it felt like using a honey-name. Rand al'Thor was the only lover she had ever had, and she did not think even of him so intimately, but she had to learn their ways if she was to wed one of them.

nɪneɪivz dip bɹaʊn aɪz stɛɹd θɹu hɝ. hɝ nʌkəlz wɝ waɪɾ ɑn ə θɪk bɹeɪɾ əz dɑɹk əz bɝdʒɪts wɑz ɡoʊldən, ən əɹ feɪs hæd ɡɔn bɪɑn peɪl tə ə feɪnt ɡɹin. fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm ʃi ɪmɪɾəd ə taɪni mjuɾɪd ɡɹoʊn. ʃi dɪd nɑt juʒəwəli swɛt; ʃi ən ɪleɪn hæd tɔɾ eɪvinhə ðə tʃɹɪk. nɪneɪiv wɑz ə pʌzəl. bɹeɪv tə ðə pɔɪn ə mædnəs səmtaɪmz, ʃi moʊn oʊvɝ əɹ səpoʊz kaʊɝɾəs, ən hɪɹ ʃi dɪspleɪɾ əɹ ʃeɪm fəɹ ɔl tə si wɪθaʊɾ ə kɛɹ. haʊ kəd ðə moʊʃən dɪstɝb əɹ soʊ, wən ɔl ðət wɔɾɝ dɪd nɑt?

Nynaeve's deep brown eyes stared through her. Her knuckles were white on a thick braid as dark as Birgitte's was golden, and her face had gone beyond pale to a faint green. From time to time she emitted a tiny muted groan. She did not usually sweat; she and Elayne had taught Aviendha the trick. Nynaeve was a puzzle. Brave to the point of madness sometimes, she moaned over her supposed cowardice, and here she displayed her shame for all to see without a care. How could the motion disturb her so, when all that water did not?

wɔɾɝ əɡɛn. eɪvinhə ʃʌɾ əɹ aɪz tə əvɔɪd siɪŋ nɪneɪivz feɪs, bʌt ðəɾ oʊnli meɪd ðə saʊnz ə ðə bɝdz ən ðə læpɪŋ wɔɾɝ fɪl əɹ hɛd.

Water again. Aviendha shut her eyes to avoid seeing Nynaeve's face, but that only made the sounds of the birds and the lapping water fill her head.

"aɪ hæv bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ," ɪleɪn sɛd sʌɾənli, ðən pɔzd. "ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt, eɪvinhə? ju. . . ." eɪvinhəz tʃiks ɹɛɾənd, bʌɾ ət list ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt seɪ əlaʊd ðət ʃi hæd dʒʌmp laɪk ə ɹæbəɾ ət ðə saʊn ə hɝ vɔɪs. ɪleɪn sim tə ɹilaɪz haʊ kloʊs ʃi hæd kʌm tə ɹɪvilɪŋ eɪvinhəz dɪsɑnɝ; kʌlɝ flʌʃt əɹ oʊn tʃiks əz ʃi kəntɪnjud. "aɪ wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt nɪkoʊlə, ən ɑɹinə. əbaʊt wʌɾ ɛɡwin toʊld əs læs naɪt. jə doʊn səpoʊz ðeɪ kən kɑz əɹ ɛni tʃɹʌbəl, də ju? wʌɾ ɪz ʃi tə du?"

"I have been thinking," Elayne said suddenly, then paused. "Are you all right, Aviendha? You. . . ." Aviendha's cheeks reddened, but at least Elayne did not say aloud that she had jumped like a rabbit at the sound of her voice. Elayne seemed to realize how close she had come to revealing Aviendha's dishonor; color flushed her own cheeks as she continued. "I was thinking about Nicola, and Areina. About what Egwene told us last night. You don't suppose they can cause her any trouble, do you? What is she to do?"

"ɹɪd hɝsɛlf ə ðɛm," eɪvinhə sɛd, dʒɹɔɪŋ ə θʌm əkɹɔs əɹ nɛk. ðə ɹɪlif ə spikɪŋ, ʌv hɪɹɪŋ vɔɪsəz, wɑz soʊ ɡɹeɪt ðət ʃi ɔlmoʊst ɡæspt. ɪleɪn əpɪɹd ʃɑkt. ʃi wɑz ɹɪmɑɹkəbli sɔfθɑɹɾɪd ət taɪmz.

"Rid herself of them," Aviendha said, drawing a thumb across her neck. The relief of speaking, of hearing voices, was so great that she almost gasped. Elayne appeared shocked. She was remarkably softhearted at times.

"ɪt maɪt bi fəɹ ðə bɛst," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. ʃi hæd ɹɪvil noʊ mɔɹ neɪm ðən ðæt. eɪvinhə θɔɾ əɹ ə wʊmən wɪð sikɹəts. "ɑɹinə cʊɾə meɪd sʌmθɪŋ ə hɝsɛlf wɪð taɪm, bʌt - doʊn lʊk ət mi ðət weɪ, ɪleɪn, ən stɑp ɡoʊɪŋ ɔl pɹɪm ən ɪndɪɡnən ɪn jəɹ hɛd." bɝdʒɪɾ ɔfən slɪp bæk ən fɔɹθ bɪtwin ðə wɔɹɾɝ u oʊbeɪɾ ən ði oʊldɝ fɝst-sɪstɝ u ɪnstʃɹʌktəd wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt jə wɪʃt tə lɝn. ɹaɪt ðɛn, weɪvɪŋ ən ædmɑnɪʃɪŋ fɪŋɡɝ, ʃi wɑz ðə fɝst-sɪstɝ. "ju tu wʊdn əv bɪn wɔɹn tə steɪ əweɪ ɪf ɪt wɑz ə dɪfəkəlti ði æmɪɝlɪn kəd sɑlv baɪ hævɪŋ əm sɛt tə wɝk wɪð ðə lɔnʒɹəsəz əɹ ðə laɪk."

"It might be for the best," Birgitte said. She had revealed no more name than that. Aviendha thought her a woman with secrets. "Areina could have made something of herself with time, but - Don't look at me that way, Elayne, and stop going all prim and indignant in your head." Birgitte often slipped back and forth between the Warder who obeyed and the older first-sister who instructed whether or not you wished to learn. Right then, waving an admonishing finger, she was the first-sister. "You two wouldn't have been warned to stay away if it was a difficulty the Amyrlin could solve by having them set to work with the laundresses or the like."

ɪleɪn ɡeɪv ə ʃɑɹp snɪf ɪn ðə feɪs ʌv wʌt ʃi kəd nɑt dɪnaɪ, ən ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ɡɹin sɪlk skɝts wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ dʒɹɔn ʌp ɪn fɹʌn tə ɪkspoʊz leɪɝz ə blu ən waɪt pɛɾikoʊts. ʃi wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ðə loʊkəl fæʃən, kəmplit wɪð kɹimi leɪs əɾ əɹ ɹɪsts ən ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk, ə ɡɪft fɹəm taɪlɪn kwɪntɑɹə, əz wɑz ðə kloʊs-fɪɾɪŋ nɛkləs ʌv woʊvən ɡoʊld. eɪvinhə dɪd nɑɾ əpɹuv. ði ʌpɝ hæf ə ðə dʒɹɛs, ðə bɑɾəs, fɪɾəd əz snʌɡli əz ðət nɛkləs, ən ə mɪsɪŋ nɛɹoʊ oʊvəl ə klɔθ ɹɪvil ði ɪnɝ sloʊps ə hɝ bɹɛsts. wɔkɪŋ əbaʊt wɛɹ ɔl kəd si wɑz nɑt ðə seɪm əz ðə swɛt tɛns; pipəl ɪn ðə stʃɹits ə ðə sɪɾi wɝ nɑt ɡeɪʃeɪn. hɝ oʊn dʒɹɛs hæɾ ə haɪ nɛk ðət bɹʌʃt əɹ tʃɪn wɪð leɪs ən noʊ pɑɹts ʌv ɪt mɪsɪŋ.

Elayne gave a sharp sniff in the face of what she could not deny, and adjusted her green silk skirts where they were drawn up in front to expose layers of blue and white petticoats. She was wearing the local fashion, complete with creamy lace at her wrists and around her neck, a gift from Tylin Quintara, as was the close-fitting necklace of woven gold. Aviendha did not approve. The upper half of the dress, the bodice, fitted as snugly as that necklace, and a missing narrow oval of cloth revealed the inner slopes of her breasts. Walking about where all could see was not the same as the sweat tents; people in the streets of the city were not gai'shain. Her own dress had a high neck that brushed her chin with lace and no parts of it missing.

"bɪsaɪd," bɝdʒɪt wɛn ɑn, "aɪ wəd θɪŋk mɛɹɪɡən wəd wɝi jə mɔɹ. ʃi fɹaɪɾənz mi spɪtləs."

"Beside," Birgitte went on, "I would think Marigan would worry you more. She frightens me spitless."

ðət neɪm ɡɑt θɹu tə nɪneɪiv, əz wɛl ɪt maɪt. hɝ ɡɹoʊnɪŋ sist, ən ʃi sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt. "ɪf ʃi kʌmz æftɝ ʌs, wɪl dʒʌst sɛɾəl fəɹ əɹ əɡɛn. wɪl . . . wil. . . ." dʒɹɔɪŋ bɹɛθ, ʃi stɛɹɾ əɾ əm pɔɪntɪdli, əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð hɝ. wʌt ʃi sɛd, ɪn ə feɪn vɔɪs, wɑz. "du jə θɪŋk ʃi wɪl?"

That name got through to Nynaeve, as well it might. Her groaning ceased, and she sat up straight. "If she comes after us, we will just settle for her again. We'll . . . we'll. . . ." Drawing breath, she stared at them pointedly, as if they were arguing with her. What she said, in a faint voice, was. "Do you think she will?"

"fɹɛɾɪŋ wɪl də noʊ ɡʊd," ɪleɪn toʊl hɝ, mʌtʃ mɔɹ kɑmli ðən eɪvinhə cʊɾə mænədʒd ɪf ʃi θɔt wʌn ə ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld hæd mɑɹkt əɹ aʊt. "wi wɪl dʒʌst əv tə də əz ɛɡwin sɛɾ ən bi kɛɹfəl." nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ɪnɔɾəbəl, wɪtʃ wɑz pɹɑbli dʒʌst əz wɛl.

"Fretting will do no good," Elayne told her, much more calmly than Aviendha could have managed if she thought one of the Shadowsouled had marked her out. "We will just have to do as Egwene said and be careful." Nynaeve muttered something inaudible, which was probably just as well.

saɪləns dɪsɛndəɾ əɡɛn, ɪleɪn sɛɾəlɪŋ tə ə bɹaʊnɝ stʌɾi ðən bɪfɔɹ, bɝdʒɪt pɹɑpɪŋ əɹ tʃɪn ɑn wʌn hæn əz ʃi fɹaʊn ət nʌθɪŋ. nɪneɪiv kɛpt ɹaɪɾ ɑn ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, bʌt ʃi hæd boʊθ hænz pɹɛs tə hɝ mɪɾəl naʊ, ən fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm ʃi pɔz tə swɑloʊ. ðə splæʃɪŋ ʌv wɔɾɝ sim laʊɾɝ ðən ɛvɝ, ən ðə kɹaɪz ə ðə bɝdz.

Silence descended again, Elayne settling to a browner study than before, Birgitte propping her chin on one hand as she frowned at nothing. Nynaeve kept right on grumbling under her breath, but she had both hands pressed to her middle now, and from time to time she paused to swallow. The splashing of water seemed louder than ever, and the cries of the birds.

"aɪ hæv bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ tu, nɪɹ-sɪstɝ." ʃi ən ɪleɪn hæd nɑt ɹitʃt ðə pɔɪn ʌv ədɑptɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ əz fɝst-sɪstɝz jɛt, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wʊd, naʊ. ɔlɹɛɾi ðeɪ bɹʌʃt itʃ ʌðɝz hɛɹ, ən ɛvɹi naɪɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk ʃɛɹɾ ənʌðɝ sikɹət nɛvɝ toʊl tə ɛniwʌn ɛls. ðɪs mɪn wʊmən, ðoʊ. . . . ðət wɑz fəɹ leɪɾɝ, wən ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn.

"I have been thinking too, near-sister." She and Elayne had not reached the point of adopting each other as first-sisters yet, but she was sure they would, now. Already they brushed each other's hair, and every night in the dark shared another secret never told to anyone else. This Min woman, though. . . . That was for later, when they were alone.

"əbaʊt wʌt?" ɪleɪn æskt æbsənli.

"About what?" Elayne asked absently.

"aʊɝ sɝtʃ. wi pɹipɛɹ fəɹ səksɛs, bʌt wəɹ əz fɑɹ əweɪ əz wən wi bɪɡæn. dʌz ɪt meɪk sɛns nɑt tə juz ɛvɹi wɛpən ət hænd? mæt kɔθən ɪz tɑvɝən, jɛt wi wɝk tə əvɔɪd hɪm. waɪ nɑt teɪk ɪm wɪð ʌs? wɪð hɪm, wi maɪt faɪn ðə boʊl ət læst."

"Our search. We prepare for success, but we are as far away as when we began. Does it make sense not to use every weapon at hand? Mat Cauthon is ta'veren, yet we work to avoid him. Why not take him with us? With him, we might find the bowl at last."

"mæt?" nɪneɪiv ɪkskleɪmd ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. "æz wɛl stʌf jəɹ ʃɪft fʊl ə nɛɾəlz! aɪ wəd nɑɾ ɛndʒjʊɹ ðə mæn ɪf i hæd ðə boʊl ɪn ɪz koʊt pɑkət."

"Mat?" Nynaeve exclaimed incredulously. "As well stuff your shift full of nettles! I would not endure the man if he had the bowl in his coat pocket."

"oʊ, də bi kwaɪət, nɪneɪiv," ɪleɪn mɝmɝd, wɪθaʊɾ ɛni hit. ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd wʌndɝɪŋli, teɪkɪŋ noʊ noʊɾəs ə ði ʌðɝz sʌɾən ɡlaʊɝ. "pɹɪkli" oʊnli bɪɡæn tə dɪskɹaɪb nɪneɪiv, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɔl juz tə hɝ weɪz. "waɪ dɪdn aɪ θɪŋk ə ðæt? ɪts soʊ ɑbviəs!"

"Oh, do be quiet, Nynaeve," Elayne murmured, without any heat. She shook her head wonderingly, taking no notice of the other's sudden glower. "Prickly" only began to describe Nynaeve, but they were all used to her ways. "Why didn't I think of that? It is so obvious!"

"meɪbi," bɝdʒɪt mɝmɝd dʒɹaɪli, "ju hæd mæt ðə skaʊnʒɹəl sɛt soʊ hɑɹɾ ɪn jəɹ maɪnd, jə kʊdn si hi hæɾ ɛni jus." ɪleɪn ɡeɪv əɹ ə kul stɛɹ, tʃɪn ɹeɪzd, ðən əbɹʌpli ɡɹɪməst, ən nɑɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ æksɛp kɹɪɾɪsɪzəm izəli.

"Maybe," Birgitte murmured dryly, "you had Mat the scoundrel set so hard in your mind, you couldn't see he had any use." Elayne gave her a cool stare, chin raised, then abruptly grimaced, and nodded reluctantly. She did not accept criticism easily.

"noʊ," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ə vɔɪs ðət sʌmhaʊ mænədʒ tə bi ʃɑɹp ən wik ət ðə seɪm taɪm. ðə sɪkli kæst ə hɝ feɪs hæd dipənd, bʌɾ ɪt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sim kɑz baɪ ðə boʊts hivɪŋ. "ju kænɑt pɑsəbli min ɪt! ɪleɪn, jə noʊ wʌɾ ə tɔɹmɛn i kən bi, haʊ stʌbɝn i ɪz. hɪl ɪnsɪst ɑn bɹɪŋɪŋ ðoʊz soʊlʒɝz ə hɪz laɪk ə fistdeɪ pɝeɪd. tʃɹaɪ faɪndɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹæhəd wɪð soʊlʒɝz ət jəɹ ʃoʊldɝ. dʒʌs tʃɹaɪ! ɪnsaɪd tu stɛps, hɪl tʃɹaɪ tə teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ, flɔntɪŋ ðət tɛɹæŋɡɹil əɾ ʌs. hiz ə θaʊzən taɪmz wɝs ðən vændin əɹ æɾɪliz, əɹ ivən mɛɝɪlɪl. ðə weɪ hi bɪheɪvz, jə wəd θɪŋk wid wɔk ɪndə ə bɛɹz dɛn dʒʌs tə si ðə bɛɹ!"

"No," Nynaeve said in a voice that somehow managed to be sharp and weak at the same time. The sickly cast of her face had deepened, but it no longer seemed caused by the boat's heaving. "You cannot possibly mean it! Elayne, you know what a torment he can be, how stubborn he is. He'll insist on bringing those soldiers of his like a feastday parade. Try finding anything in the Rahad with soldiers at your shoulder. Just try! Inside two steps, he'll try to take charge, flaunting that ter'angreal at us. He's a thousand times worse than Vandene or Adeleas, or even Merilille. The way he behaves, you would think we'd walk into a bear's den just to see the bear!"

bɝdʒɪt meɪɾ ə nɔɪz ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn əmjuzmənt, ən ɹəsivd ə dɑɹɾɪd ɡlɛɹ. ʃi ɹɪtɝn sətʃ ə lʊk ə blæn ɪnəsəns ðət nɪneɪiv bɪɡæn tə saʊn əz ɪf ʃi wɝ tʃoʊkɪŋ.

Birgitte made a noise in her throat that might have been amusement, and received a darted glare. She returned such a look of bland innocence that Nynaeve began to sound as if she were choking.

ɪleɪn wɑz mɔɹ suðɪŋ; ʃi pɹɑbli wəd tʃɹaɪ tə meɪk pis ɪn ə wɔɾɝ-fjud. "hi ɪz tɑvɝən, nɪneɪiv. hi ɔltɝz ðə pæɾɝn, ɔltɝz tʃæns, dʒʌs biɪŋ ðɛɹ. aɪm ɹɛɾi tə ədmɪt wi nid lʌk, ən ə tɑvɝən ɪz mɔɹ ðən lʌk. bɪsaɪdz, wi kən snɛɹ tu bɝdz ət wʌns. wi ʃəd nɑɾ əv bɪn lɛɾɪŋ ɪm ɹʌn lus ɔl ðɪs taɪm, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ bɪzi wi wɝ. ðæts dʌn noʊ wʌn ɛni ɡʊd, hɪm list ʌv ɔl. hi nidz tə bi meɪd fɪt fəɹ disən kʌmpəni. wɪl pʊɾ ɪm ɑn ə ʃɔɹt ɹeɪn fɹəm ðə stɑɹt."

Elayne was more soothing; she probably would try to make peace in a water-feud. "He is ta'veren, Nynaeve. He alters the Pattern, alters chance, just being there. I'm ready to admit we need luck, and a ta'veren is more than luck. Besides, we can snare two birds at once. We should not have been letting him run loose all this time, no matter how busy we were. That's done no one any good, him least of all. He needs to be made fit for decent company. We will put him on a short rein from the start."

nɪneɪiv smuðd əɹ skɝts wɪð kənsɪɾɝəbəl vɪɡɝ. ʃi kleɪm tə hæv noʊ mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn dʒɹɛsəz ðən eɪvinhə - ɪn wʌt ðeɪ lʊk laɪk, ɛniweɪ; ʃi wɑz ɔlweɪz mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt ɡʊd pleɪn wʊl biɪŋ faɪn ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛnibəɾi - jɛɾ əɹ oʊn blu dʒɹɛs wɑz slæʃt wɪð jɛloʊ ɑn ðə skɝts ən slivz, ən ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd tʃoʊzən ɪts dɪzaɪn. ɛvɹi stɪtʃ ʃi oʊnd wɑz sɪlk əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd əɹ boʊθ, ɔl kʌt wɪð wʌɾ eɪvinhə hæd lɝn tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz əz faɪn kɛɹ.

Nynaeve smoothed her skirts with considerable vigor. She claimed to have no more interest in dresses than Aviendha - in what they looked like, anyway; she was always muttering about good plain wool being fine enough for anybody - yet her own blue dress was slashed with yellow on the skirts and sleeves, and she herself had chosen its design. Every stitch she owned was silk or embroidered or both, all cut with what Aviendha had learned to recognize as fine care.

fəɹ wʌns nɪneɪiv əpɪɹd tə ʌndɝstænd ʃi wəd nɑt ɡɛɾ əɹ weɪ. səmtaɪmz ʃi θɹu əmeɪzɪŋ tæntʃɹəmz əntɪl ʃi dɪd, nɑt ðət ʃi wəɾ ədmɪt ðət wɑz wʌt ðeɪ wɝ. ðə ɡlaʊɝ feɪɾəd tə ə ɡɹʌmpi sʌlk. "hu wɪl æsk hɪm? huɛvɝ dʌz, hɪl meɪk əɹ bɛɡ. jə noʊ hi wɪl. aɪd sunɝ mɛɹi hɪm!"

For once Nynaeve appeared to understand she would not get her way. Sometimes she threw amazing tantrums until she did, not that she would admit that was what they were. The glower faded to a grumpy sulk. "Who will ask him? Whoever does, he will make her beg. You know he will. I'd sooner marry him!"

ɪleɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən sɛd fɝmli, "bɝdʒɪt wɪl. ən ʃi woʊn bɛɡ; ʃɪl tɛl hɪm. moʊs mɛn wɪl də əz jə seɪ ɪf jə juz ə fɝm, kɑnfəɾənt vɔɪs." nɪneɪiv lʊk daʊtfəl, ən bɝdʒɪt dʒɝkt ɪɹɛkt ɑn əɹ bɛntʃ, stɑɹɾəld fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm eɪvinhə hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. wɪð ɛniwʌn ɛls, eɪvinhə maɪɾ əv sɛd ʃi lʊkt ə lɪɾəl əfɹeɪd, tu. bɝdʒɪt wʊɾə dʌn vɛɹi wɛl əz fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ, fəɹ ə wɛtləndɝ. ʃi hæd ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl skɪl wɪð ə baʊ.

Elayne hesitated, then said firmly, "Birgitte will. And she won't beg; she will tell him. Most men will do as you say if you use a firm, confident voice." Nynaeve looked doubtful, and Birgitte jerked erect on her bench, startled for the first time Aviendha had ever seen. With anyone else, Aviendha might have said she looked a little afraid, too. Birgitte would have done very well as Far Dareis Mai, for a wetlander. She had remarkable skill with a bow.

"ju ɑɹ ðə klɪɹ tʃɔɪs, bɝdʒɪt," ɪleɪn wɛn ɑn kwɪkli. "nɪneɪiv ən aɪ ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən eɪvinhə maɪɾ əz wɛl bi. wi kænɑt pɑsəbli də ɪt. nɑɾ ən meɪnteɪn pɹɑpɝ dɪɡnəɾi. nɑt wɪð hɪm. jə noʊ wʌt hiz laɪk." wʌt hæd hæpən tə ɔl ðət tɔk ʌv ə fɝm, kɑnfəɾənt vɔɪs? nɑt ðəɾ eɪvinhə hæɾ ɛvɝ noʊɾəst ðət wɝkɪŋ fəɹ ɛniwʌn ɪksɛp sɔɹɪliə. ɪt ʃʊɹli hæd nɑt soʊ fɑɹ ɑn mæt kɔθən ðət ʃi hæd sin. "bɝdʒɪt, hi kæn əv ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ju. ɪf i hæd, hi wʊɾə sɛd sʌmθɪŋ baɪ naʊ."

"You are the clear choice, Birgitte," Elayne went on quickly. "Nynaeve and I are Aes Sedai, and Aviendha might as well be. We cannot possibly do it. Not and maintain proper dignity. Not with him. You know what he is like." What had happened to all that talk of a firm, confident voice? Not that Aviendha had ever noticed that working for anyone except Sorilea. It surely had not so far on Mat Cauthon that she had seen. "Birgitte, he can't have recognized you. If he had, he would have said something by now."

wʌtɛvɝ ðət mɛnt, bɝdʒɪt lin bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl ən leɪst əɹ fɪŋɡɝz oʊvɝ əɹ stʌmək. "aɪ ʃʊɾə noʊn jud ɡɛt bæk ət mi ɛvɝ sɪns aɪ sɛɾ ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd θɪŋ jəɹ bɑɾəm wɑzn ɛni - " ʃi stɑpt, ən ə feɪn sæɾəsfaɪd smaɪl əpɪɹɾ ɑn əɹ lɪps. nʌθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd ɪn ɪleɪnz ɪkspɹɛʃən, bʌt pleɪnli bɝdʒɪt θɔt ʃi hæd ɡeɪn ə mɛʒɝ ə ɹivɛnʒ. ɪt mʌst əv bɪn sʌmθɪŋ fɛl θɹu ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑnd. haʊ ɪleɪnz bɑɾəm ɛntɝɾ ɪndə ɛniθɪŋ, ðoʊ, eɪvinhə kəd nɑt pʌzəl aʊt. wɛtləndɝz wɝ soʊ . . . ɑd . . . ət taɪmz. bɝdʒɪt kəntɪnjud, stɪl wɛɹɪŋ ðət smaɪl. "wʌɾ aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn ɪz waɪ hi stɑɹts tʃeɪfɪŋ əz sun əz i siz jə tu. ɪt kæn bi ðət jə snæɡd ɪm ɔf hɪɹ. ɛɡwin wɑz əz dip ɪn ðəɾ əz ju, bʌɾ aɪ sɔ hɪm tʃɹiɾ əɹ wɪð mɔɹ ɹɪspɛk ðən moʊst ə ðə sɪstɝz du. bɪsaɪdz, ðə taɪmz aɪv ɡlɪmpst ɪm kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən, hi lʊk tə bi ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ hɪmsɛlf." hɝ smaɪl bɪkeɪm ə ɡɹɪn ðət meɪɾ ɪleɪn snɪf dɪsəpɹuvɪŋli.

Whatever that meant, Birgitte leaned back against the wall and laced her fingers over her stomach. "I should have known you'd get back at me ever since I said it was a good thing your bottom wasn't any - " She stopped, and a faint satisfied smile appeared on her lips. Nothing changed in Elayne's expression, but plainly Birgitte thought she had gained a measure of revenge. It must have been something felt through the Warder bond. How Elayne's bottom entered into anything, though, Aviendha could not puzzle out. Wetlanders were so . . . odd . . . at times. Birgitte continued, still wearing that smile. "What I don't understand is why he starts chafing as soon as he sees you two. It can't be that you snagged him off here. Egwene was as deep in that as you, but I saw him treat her with more respect than most of the sisters do. Besides, the times I've glimpsed him coming out of The Wandering Woman, he looked to be enjoying himself." Her smile became a grin that made Elayne sniff disapprovingly.

"ðæɾ ɪz wʌn θɪŋ wi nid tə tʃeɪnʒ. ə disənt wʊmən kænɑt bi ɪn ðə ɹum wɪð hɪm. oʊ, də waɪp ðət smɝk ɔf jəɹ feɪs, bɝdʒɪt. aɪ vaʊ, jə ɑɹ əz bæɾ əz hi, səmtaɪmz."

"That is one thing we need to change. A decent woman cannot be in the room with him. Oh, do wipe that smirk off your face, Birgitte. I vow, you are as bad as he, sometimes."

"ðə mæn wɑz bɔɹn dʒʌs tə bi ə tʃɹaɪəl," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd saʊɝli.

"The man was born just to be a trial," Nynaeve muttered sourly.

sʌɾənli eɪvinhə wɑz fɔɹsəbli ɹimaɪndəd ðət ʃi wɑz ɑn ə boʊɾ əz ɛvɹiθɪŋ lɝtʃt, sweɪɪŋ ən swɪŋɪŋ ɝaʊn tə ə hɔlt. ɹaɪzɪŋ ən stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ dʒɹɛsəz, ðeɪ ɡæðɝd ðə laɪt kloʊks ðeɪ hæd bɹɔt. ʃi dɪd nɑt dɑn hɝz; ðə sʌnlaɪt hɪɹ wɑz nɑt soʊ bɹaɪt ðət ʃi niɾəd ðə hʊd tə kip ɪt fɹəm əɹ aɪz. bɝdʒɪɾ oʊnli dʒɹeɪp hɝz oʊvɝ wʌn ʃoʊldɝ ən pʊʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ, fɑloʊɪŋ ʌp ðə θɹi stɛps æftɝ nɪneɪiv hæd ɹʌʃt pæst əɹ wɪð ə hæn klæpt oʊvɝ əɹ maʊθ.

Suddenly Aviendha was forcibly reminded that she was on a boat as everything lurched, swaying and swinging around to a halt. Rising and straightening dresses, they gathered the light cloaks they had brought. She did not don hers; the sunlight here was not so bright that she needed the hood to keep it from her eyes. Birgitte only draped hers over one shoulder and pushed open the door, following up the three steps after Nynaeve had rushed past her with a hand clapped over her mouth.

ɪleɪn pɔz tə taɪ hɝ kloʊk ɹɪbənz ən ɝeɪnʒ ðə hʊɾ ɝaʊn əɹ feɪs, ɹɛd-ɡoʊl kɝlz pikɪŋ aʊɾ ɔl ɝaʊnd. "ju dɪd nɑt seɪ mʌtʃ, nɪɹ-sɪstɝ."

Elayne paused to tie her cloak ribbons and arrange the hood around her face, red-gold curls peeking out all around. "You did not say much, near-sister."

"aɪ sɛd wʌɾ aɪ hæd tə seɪ. ðə dɪsɪʒən wɑz jʊɹz."

"I said what I had to say. The decision was yours."

"ðə ki θɔt wɑz jʊɹz, ðoʊ. səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs ɑɹ tɝnɪŋ ɪndə hæf-wɪts. wɛl." hæf tɝnɪŋ tə ðə stɛps, nɑt kwaɪt lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ, ɪleɪn pɔzd. "dɪstənsəz bɑðɝ mi, səmtaɪmz, oʊvɝ wɔɾɝ. aɪ θɪŋk əl lʊk oʊnli ət ðə ʃɪp, maɪsɛlf. nʌθɪŋ ɛls." eɪvinhə nɑɾəd - hɝ nɪɹ-sɪstɝ hæɾ ə faɪn dɛləkəsi - ən ðeɪ wɛn ʌp.

"The key thought was yours, though. Sometimes I think the rest of us are turning into half-wits. Well." Half turning to the steps, not quite looking at her, Elayne paused. "Distances bother me, sometimes, over water. I think I will look only at the ship, myself. Nothing else." Aviendha nodded - her near-sister had a fine delicacy - and they went up.

ɑn ðə dɛk, nɪneɪiv wɑz dʒʌst ʃeɪkɪŋ ɔf bɝdʒɪts ɔfɝ ə hɛlp ən pʊʃɪŋ hɝsɛlf ʌp fɹəm ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ. ðə tu ɔɹsmɪn lʊkt ɑn ɪn əmjuzmən əz ʃi waɪpt əɹ maʊθ wɪð ðə bæk ə hɝ hænd. ʃɝtləs fɛloʊz wɪð ə bɹæs hup ɪn itʃ ɪɹ, ðeɪ mʌst əv hæd fɹikwən jus fəɹ ðə kɝv dæɡɝz ʃʌv bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ sæʃɪz. moʊst ə ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən wɛn tə wɝkɪŋ ðɛɹ pɛɹz ə lɔŋ swips, ðoʊ, wɔkɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ ɑn ðə dɛk tə hoʊl ðə hivɪŋ boʊɾ ɪn pleɪs nɪɹ ə ʃɪp ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs tʊk eɪvinhəz bɹɛθ wɪð ɪts saɪz, lumɪŋ əbʌv ðɛɹ sʌɾənli vɛɹi taɪni vɛsəl, ɪts θɹi ɡɹeɪt mæsts ɹitʃɪŋ tɔlɝ ðən moʊs tʃɹiz ʃi hæd sin ivən hɪɹ ɪn ðə wɛtlænz. ðeɪ hæd tʃoʊzən ɪt kəz ɪt wɑz ðə lɑɹdʒəst ə ðə hʌnʒɹədz ə si foʊk ʃɪps æŋkɝɾ ɪn ðə beɪ. ɑn ə ʃɪp ðət bɪɡ, ʃʊɹli ɪt mʌs bi pɑsəbəl tə fɝɡɛɾ ɔl ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ wɔɾɝ. ɪksɛpt. . . .

On the deck, Nynaeve was just shaking off Birgitte's offer of help and pushing herself up from the railing. The two oarsmen looked on in amusement as she wiped her mouth with the back of her hand. Shirtless fellows with a brass hoop in each ear, they must have had frequent use for the curved daggers shoved behind their sashes. Most of their attention went to working their pairs of long sweeps, though, walking back and forth on the deck to hold the heaving boat in place near a ship that almost took Aviendha's breath with its size, looming above their suddenly very tiny vessel, its three great masts reaching taller than most trees she had seen even here in the wetlands. They had chosen it because it was the largest of the hundreds of Sea Folk ships anchored in the bay. On a ship that big, surely it must be possible to forget all the surrounding water. Except. . . .

ɪleɪn hæd nɑt ɹɪli æknɑlɪdʒd əɹ ʃeɪm, ən ɪf ʃi hæd, ə nɪɹ-sɪstɝ kəd noʊ jəɹ dipəs hjumɪlieɪʃən wɪθaʊɾ ɪt mæɾɝɪŋ, bʌt. . . . æmɪz sɛd ʃi hæd tu mʌtʃ pɹaɪd. ʃi meɪd hɝsɛlf tɝn ən lʊk əweɪ fɹəm ðə boʊt.

Elayne had not really acknowledged her shame, and if she had, a near-sister could know your deepest humiliation without it mattering, but. . . . Amys said she had too much pride. She made herself turn and look away from the boat.

ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin soʊ mʌtʃ wɔɾɝ ɪn əɹ laɪf, nɑɾ ɪf ɛvɹi dʒɹɑp sin bɪfɔɹ hæd bɪn ɡæðɝɾ ɪn wʌn pleɪs, ɔl ʌv ɪt ɹoʊlɪŋ ɡɹeɪ-ɡɹin ən hɪɹ ən ðəɹ fɹɔðɪŋ waɪt. hɝ aɪz dɑɹɾɪd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əvɔɪd teɪkɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn. ivən ðə skaɪ sim lɑɹdʒɝ hɪɹ, ɪmɛns, wɪð ə lɪkwəd ɡoʊl sʌn kɹɔlɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ði ist. ə ɡʌstɪŋ wɪn blu, sʌmwʌt kulɝ ðən ɑn ðə læn ən nɛvɝ feɪlɪŋ ɪntaɪɝli. klaʊdz ə bɝdz flɝiɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ɡɹeɪ ən waɪɾ ən səmtaɪmz splətʃt wɪð blæk, ɡɪvɪŋ ðoʊz ʃɹɪl kɹaɪz. wʌn, ɔl blæk ɪksɛp fəɹ ɪts hɛd, skɪmd əlɔŋ ðə sɝfəs wɪð ɪts lɔŋ loʊɝ bik slaɪsɪŋ θɹu ðə wɔɾɝ, ən ə slæntəd laɪn ʌv ənɡeɪnli bɹaʊn bɝdz - pɛlɪkənz, ɪleɪn hæd neɪmd əm - sʌɾənli foʊldəd ðɛɹ wɪŋz wʌn baɪ wʌn ən plʌməɾɪd wɪð ɡɹeɪt splæʃəz, bɑbɪŋ bæk tə ðə tɑp, wɛɹ ðeɪ floʊɾəd, tɪltɪŋ ʌp biks ʌv ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl saɪz. ðəɹ wɝ ʃɪps ɛvɹiwɛɹ, mɛni ɔlmoʊst əz lɑɹdʒ əz ðə wʌn bɪhaɪn hɝ, nɑɾ ɔl bɪlɔŋɪŋ tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, ən smɔlɝ vɛsəlz wɪð wʌn əɹ tu mæsts muvɪŋ ʌndɝ tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ seɪlz. smɔlɝ ʃɪps stɪl, mæsləs laɪk ðə boʊt ʃi wɑz ɑn, wɪð ə haɪ ʃɑɹp pik ət ðə fɹʌn ən ə loʊ flæt haʊs ət ðə bæk, spaɪɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə wɔɾɝ ɑn ɔɹz, wʌn pɛɹ əɹ tu, əɹ səmtaɪmz θɹi. wʌn lɔŋ, nɛɹoʊ boʊt ðət mʌst əv hæd twɛnti tə ə saɪd lʊk laɪk ə hʌnʒɹəd-lɛɡz skɪɾɝɪŋ əlɔŋ. ən ðəɹ wɑz lænd. meɪbi sɛvən əɹ eɪt maɪlz dɪstənt, sʌnlaɪt ɡlimd ɔf ðə waɪt-plæstɝd bɪldɪŋz ə ðə sɪɾi. sɛvən əɹ eɪt maɪlz ʌv wɔɾɝ.

She had never seen so much water in her life, not if every drop seen before had been gathered in one place, all of it rolling gray-green and here and there frothing white. Her eyes darted, trying to avoid taking it in. Even the sky seemed larger here, immense, with a liquid gold sun crawling up from the east. A gusting wind blew, somewhat cooler than on the land and never failing entirely. Clouds of birds flurried in the air, gray and white and sometimes splotched with black, giving those shrill cries. One, all black except for its head, skimmed along the surface with its long lower beak slicing through the water, and a slanted line of ungainly brown birds - pelicans, Elayne had named them - suddenly folded their wings one by one and plummeted with great splashes, bobbing back to the top, where they floated, tilting up beaks of incredible size. There were ships everywhere, many almost as large as the one behind her, not all belonging to the Atha'an Miere, and smaller vessels with one or two masts moving under triangular sails. Smaller ships still, mastless like the boat she was on, with a high sharp peak at the front and a low flat house at the back, spidered across the water on oars, one pair or two, or sometimes three. One long, narrow boat that must have had twenty to a side looked like a hundred-legs skittering along. And there was land. Maybe seven or eight miles distant, sunlight gleamed off the white-plastered buildings of the city. Seven or eight miles of water.

swɑloʊɪŋ, ʃi tɝn bæk mɔɹ swɪfli ðən ʃi hæd tɝn əweɪ. ʃi θɔɾ əɹ tʃiks mʌs bi ɡɹinɝ ðən nɪneɪivz hæd bɪn. ɪleɪn wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ə smuð feɪs, bʌt wɛtləndɝz ʃoʊd ðɛɹ ɪmoʊʃənz soʊ pleɪnli hɝ kənsɝn wɑz vɪzəbəl. "aɪ æm ə ful, ɪleɪn." ivən wɪð hɝ, juzɪŋ noʊ mɔɹ ə hɝ neɪm meɪɾ eɪvinhə fil ənizi; wən ðeɪ wɝ fɝst-sɪstɝz, wən ðeɪ wɝ sɪstɝ-waɪvz, ɪt wəd bi iziɝ. "ə waɪz wʊmən lɪsənz tə waɪz ædvaɪs."

Swallowing, she turned back more swiftly than she had turned away. She thought her cheeks must be greener than Nynaeve's had been. Elayne was watching her, trying to keep a smooth face, but wetlanders showed their emotions so plainly her concern was visible. "I am a fool, Elayne." Even with her, using no more of her name made Aviendha feel uneasy; when they were first-sisters, when they were sister-wives, it would be easier. "A wise woman listens to wise advice."

"ju ɑɹ bɹeɪvɝ ðən əl ɛvɝ bi," ɪleɪn ɹɪplaɪd, kwaɪt sɪɹiəsli. ʃi wɑz ənʌðɝ u kɛp dɪnaɪɪŋ ðət ʃi hæɾ ɛni kɝədʒ. meɪbi ðət wɑz ɔlsoʊ ə wɛtləndɝ kʌstəm? noʊ, eɪvinhə hæd hɝd wɛtləndɝz spik ə ðɛɹ oʊn bɹeɪvɝi; ðiz ɛbu dɑɹi, fəɹ wʌn, simd əneɪbəl tə ʌɾɝ θɹi wɝdz wɪθaʊt boʊstɪŋ. ɪleɪn dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, stilɪŋ hɝsɛlf. "tənaɪt wɪl tɔk əbaʊt ɹænd."

"You are braver than I will ever be," Elayne replied, quite seriously. She was another who kept denying that she had any courage. Maybe that was also a wetlander custom? No, Aviendha had heard wetlanders speak of their own bravery; these Ebou Dari, for one, seemed unable to utter three words without boasting. Elayne drew a deep breath, steeling herself. "Tonight we will talk about Rand."

eɪvinhə nɑɾəd, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt si haʊ ðət fɑloʊd fɹəm tɔk ə kɝədʒ. haʊ kəd sɪstɝ-waɪvz mænədʒ ə hʌzbən ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt tɔk ə hɪm ɪn dɪteɪl? ðət wɑz wʌt ði oʊldɝ wɪmən toʊl hɝ, ɛniweɪ, ən ðə waɪz wʌnz. ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɔlweɪz soʊ fɔɹθkʌmɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs. wən ʃi kəmpleɪn tə æmɪz ən bɛɹ ðət ʃi mʌs bi ɪl kəz ʃi fɛlt əz ðoʊ ɹænd ælθɹ wɑz kæɹiɪŋ səm pɑɹɾ ə hɝ ɝaʊnd wɪð hɪm, ðeɪ hæd fɔlən daʊn læfɪŋ. jəl lɝn, ðeɪ kækəld ət hɝ, ænd, jə wʊɾə lɝn sunɝ hæd jə ɡɹoʊn ʌp ɪn skɝts. əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ wɑntəɾ ɛni laɪf bʌt ðəɾ ʌv ə meɪɾən, ɹʌnɪŋ wɪð əɹ spɪɹ-sɪstɝz. meɪbi ɪleɪn fɛl sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə seɪm ɛmptinəs. spikɪŋ ə hɪm dɪd sim tə meɪk ðə hɑloʊnəs ɡɹoʊ ivən waɪl fɪlɪŋ ɪt.

Aviendha nodded, but she did not see how that followed from talk of courage. How could sister-wives manage a husband if they did not talk of him in detail? That was what the older women told her, anyway, and the Wise Ones. They were not always so forthcoming, of course. When she complained to Amys and Bair that she must be ill because she felt as though Rand al'Thor was carrying some part of her around with him, they had fallen down laughing. You will learn, they cackled at her, and, You would have learned sooner had you grown up in skirts. As if she had ever wanted any life but that of a Maiden, running with her spear-sisters. Maybe Elayne felt something of the same emptiness. Speaking of him did seem to make the hollowness grow even while filling it.

fəɹ səm taɪm ʃi hæd bɪn əwɛɹ ə vɔɪsəz ɹaɪzɪŋ, ən naʊ ʃi hɝd ðə wɝdz.

For some time she had been aware of voices rising, and now she heard the words.

". . . jə ɪɹɪn bəfun!" nɪneɪiv wɑz ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ fɪst əɾ ə vɛɹi dɑɹk mæn piɹɪŋ daʊn əɾ əɹ fɹəm oʊvɝ ðə tɔl saɪɾ ə ðə ʃɪp. hi lʊkt kɑm, bʌt ðɛn, hi kəd nɑt si ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndɪŋ hɝ. "wi ɑɹ nɑɾ æftɝ ðə ɡɪft ə pæsədʒ, soʊ ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ wɛðɝ jə ɹəfjuz ɪt tə ɛɛs sədaɪ! jə lɛt daʊn ə læɾɝ ðɪs ɪnstənt!" ðə mɛn ət ði ɔɹz wɝ mɪsɪŋ ðɛɹ ɡɹɪnz. əpɛɹənli ðeɪ hæd feɪl tə si ðə sɝpən ɹɪŋz bæk ət ðə stoʊn lændɪŋ, ən ðeɪ dɪd nɑt lʊk pliz tə lɝn ðeɪ hæɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ əbɔɹd.

". . . you earringed buffoon!" Nynaeve was shaking her fist at a very dark man peering down at her from over the tall side of the ship. He looked calm, but then, he could not see the glow of saidar surrounding her. "We are not after the gift of passage, so it doesn't matter whether you refuse it to Aes Sedai! You let down a ladder this instant!" The men at the oars were missing their grins. Apparently they had failed to see the serpent rings back at the stone landing, and they did not look pleased to learn they had Aes Sedai aboard.

"oʊ, dɪɹ," ɪleɪn saɪd. "aɪ mʌst ɹɪtʃɹiv ðɪs, eɪvinhə, əɹ wiv weɪstəd ðə mɔɹnɪŋ dʒʌst soʊ ʃi kəd luz əɹ bɹɛkfəs pɔɹədʒ." ɡlaɪɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə dɛk - eɪvinhə wɑz pɹaʊɾ ə noʊɪŋ ðə pɹɑpɝ neɪmz fəɹ θɪŋz ɑn boʊts - ɪleɪn ədʒɹɛs ðə mæn ʌp ɑn ðə ʃɪp. "aɪ æm ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd, dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ. maɪ kəmpænjən ɪz kwaɪt tʃɹuθfəl. wi də nɑt sik ðə ɡɪft ə pæsədʒ. bʌt wi mʌst spik wɪð jəɹ wɪndfɪndɝ ɑn ə mæɾɝ ə ɝdʒənsi. tɛl əɹ wi noʊ ʌv ðə wivɪŋ ʌv wɪnz. tɛl əɹ wi noʊ ʌv wɪndfɪndɝz."

"Oh, dear," Elayne sighed. "I must retrieve this, Aviendha, or we've wasted the morning just so she could lose her breakfast porridge." Gliding across the deck - Aviendha was proud of knowing the proper names for things on boats - Elayne addressed the man up on the ship. "I am Elayne Trakand, Daughter-Heir of Andor and Aes Sedai of the Green Ajah. My companion is quite truthful. We do not seek the gift of passage. But we must speak with your Windfinder on a matter of urgency. Tell her we know of the Weaving of Winds. Tell her we know of Windfinders."

ðə mæn əbʌv fɹaʊn daʊn ət hɝ, ðən əbɹʌpli vænɪʃt wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd.

The man above frowned down at her, then abruptly vanished without a word.

"ðə wʊmən wɪl pɹɑbli θɪŋk jə min tə blæb əɹ sikɹəts," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd, dʒɝkɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɪndə pleɪs. ʃi taɪd ðə ɹɪbənz fɪɹsli. "ju noʊ haʊ əfɹeɪd ðeɪ ɑɹ ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪl hɔl əm ɔl ɔf tə ðə taʊɝ, ɪf ɪts noʊn moʊs kən tʃænəl. oʊnli ə nɪni θɪŋks ʃi kən θɹɛɾən pipəl, ɪleɪn, ən stɪl ɡɛɾ ɛniwɛɹ."

"The woman will probably think you mean to blab her secrets," Nynaeve muttered, jerking her cloak into place. She tied the ribbons fiercely. "You know how afraid they are that Aes Sedai will haul them all off to the Tower, if it's known most can channel. Only a ninny thinks she can threaten people, Elayne, and still get anywhere."

eɪvinhə bɝst aʊt læfɪŋ. baɪ ðə stɑɹɾəld lʊk nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv hɝ, ʃi dɪd nɑt si ðə dʒoʊk ʃi hæd meɪɾ ɑn hɝsɛlf. ɪleɪnz lɪps kwɪvɝd, ðoʊ, haʊɛvɝ ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə hoʊl ðɛm. jə kəd nɛvɝ bi ʃʊɹ əbaʊt wɛtləndɝ hjumɝ; ðeɪ faʊn stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz fʌni ən mɪs ðə bɛst.

Aviendha burst out laughing. By the startled look Nynaeve gave her, she did not see the joke she had made on herself. Elayne's lips quivered, though, however she tried to hold them. You could never be sure about wetlander humor; they found strange things funny and missed the best.

wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ðə wɪndfɪndɝ fɛl θɹɛɾənd, baɪ ðə taɪm ɪleɪn hæd peɪd ðə boʊtmən ən kɑʃən əm tə weɪt fəɹ ðɛɹ ɹɪtɝn - wɪð nɪneɪiv ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ ði əmaʊn ən tɛlɪŋ əm ʃi wəd bɑks ðɛɹ ɪɹz ɪf ðeɪ lɛft, ən haʊ ʃi wɑz tə mænədʒ ðət nɪɹli sɛɾ eɪvinhə læfɪŋ əɡɛn - baɪ ðə taɪm ɔl ðət wɑz dʌn, ɪt simd ə dɪsɪʒən hæd bɪn ɹitʃt tə əlaʊ ðɛm ɑn. noʊ læɾɝ wɑz loʊɝd, bʌɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə flæt pis ʌv wʊd, ðə tu ɹoʊps ɪt hʌŋ fɹəm bɪkʌmɪŋ wʌn ən ɹʌnɪŋ ʌp tə ə θɪk poʊl swʌŋ aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə saɪd fɹəm wʌn ə ðə mæsts. nɪneɪiv tʊk əɹ pleɪs sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə bɔɹd wɪð daɪɹ wɔɹnɪŋz fəɹ ðə boʊtmən ɪf ðeɪ ivən θɔɾ ə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk ʌp əɹ skɝts, ən ɪleɪn blʌʃt ən hɛl hɝz taɪtli ɝaʊn əɹ lɛɡz, hʌntʃt oʊvɝ soʊ ʃi əpɪɹd ɹɛɾi tə fɔl ɔf hɛdfɝst əz ʃi wɑbəld ɪndə ði ɛɹ ən dɪsəpɪɹd fɹəm saɪɾ ɑntu ðə ʃɪp. wʌn ə ðə fɛloʊz lʊkt ʌpwɝɾ ɛniweɪ, əntɪl bɝdʒɪt stʃɹʌk ɪm ɑn ðə noʊz wɪð əɹ fɪst. ðeɪ sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt wɑtʃ əɹ əsɛnt.

Whether or not the Windfinder felt threatened, by the time Elayne had paid the boatmen and cautioned them to wait for their return - with Nynaeve grumbling over the amount and telling them she would box their ears if they left, and how she was to manage that nearly set Aviendha laughing again - by the time all that was done, it seemed a decision had been reached to allow them on. No ladder was lowered, but instead a flat piece of wood, the two ropes it hung from becoming one and running up to a thick pole swung out over the side from one of the masts. Nynaeve took her place sitting on the board with dire warnings for the boatmen if they even thought of trying to look up her skirts, and Elayne blushed and held hers tightly around her legs, hunched over so she appeared ready to fall off headfirst as she wobbled into the air and disappeared from sight onto the ship. One of the fellows looked upward anyway, until Birgitte struck him on the nose with her fist. They certainly did not watch her ascent.

eɪvinhəz bɛl naɪf wɑz smɔl, wɪð ə bleɪd nɑt hæf ə fʊt lɔŋ, bʌt ði ɔɹsmɪn fɹaʊnd wɝidli wən ʃi dʒɹu ɪt. hɝ ɑɹm wɛn bæk, ən ðeɪ fɛl spɹɔlɪŋ tə ðə dɛk əz ðə naɪf wɝld oʊvɝ ðɛɹ hɛdz tə sɪŋk wɪð ə sɑləd θʌŋk ɪndə ðə θɪk wʊɾən poʊst ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə boʊt. lupɪŋ ðə kloʊk oʊvɝ əɹ ɑɹmz laɪk ə ʃɔl, ʃi hɔɪstəɾ əɹ skɝts wɛl əbʌv əɹ niz soʊ ʃi kəd klaɪm oʊvɝ ði ɔɹz ən ɹɪtʃɹiv əɹ bleɪd, ðən tʊk əɹ pleɪs ɑn ðə dæŋɡəlɪŋ bɔɹd. ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹipleɪs ðə naɪf ɪn ɪts ʃiθ. fəɹ səm ɹizən ðə tu mɛn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd kənfjuz lʊks, bʌt ðeɪ kɛp ðɛɹ aɪz daʊn əz ʃi wɑz lɪftəɾ ʌp. pɝhæps ʃi wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ə fil fəɹ wɛtləndɝ kʌstəmz.

Aviendha's belt knife was small, with a blade not half a foot long, but the oarsmen frowned worriedly when she drew it. Her arm went back, and they fell sprawling to the deck as the knife whirled over their heads to sink with a solid thunk into the thick wooden post at the front of the boat. Looping the cloak over her arms like a shawl, she hoisted her skirts well above her knees so she could climb over the oars and retrieve her blade, then took her place on the dangling board. She did not replace the knife in its sheath. For some reason the two men exchanged confused looks, but they kept their eyes down as she was lifted up. Perhaps she was beginning to get a feel for wetlander customs.

sɛɾəlɪŋ ɑntu ðə ɡɹeɪt ʃɪps dɛk, ʃi ɡeɪpt, ɔlmoʊs fɝɡɛɾɪŋ tə klaɪm ɔf ðə nɛɹoʊ sit. ʃi hæd ɹɛɾ ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, bʌt ɹɛɾɪŋ ən siɪŋ wɑz əz dɪfɹən əz ɹɛɾɪŋ ə sɔltwɑɾɝ ən teɪstɪŋ ɪt. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl dɑɹk, fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, mʌtʃ dɑɹkɝ ðən ði ɛbu dɑɹi, ivən dɑɹkɝ ðən moʊs tɛɹənz, wɪð stʃɹeɪt blæk hɛɹ ən blæk aɪz ən tætud hænz. bɛɹ-tʃɛstəd, bɛɹfʊt mɛn wɪð bɹaɪt nɛɹoʊ sæʃɪz hoʊldɪŋ ʌp bæɡi bɹitʃɪz ə səm dɑɹk klɔθ ðət hæɾ ən ɔɪli lʊk tə ɪt, ən wɪmən ɪn blaʊsəz əz bɹɪljənli kʌlɝɾ əz ðɛɹ sæʃɪz, ɔl wɪð ə sweɪ tə ðɛɹ muvməns, ɡlaɪɾɪŋ ɡɹeɪsfəli wɪð ðə ɹɑkɪŋ ə ðə ʃɪp. si foʊk wɪmən hæd vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ kʌstəmz wən ɪt keɪm tə mɛn, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə wʌt ʃi hæd ɹɛd, dænsɪŋ wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə sɪŋɡəl skɑɹf fəɹ kʌvɝɪŋ ən wɝs, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ði ɪɹɪŋz ðət meɪɾ əɹ stɛɹ. moʊs hæd θɹi əɹ fɔɹ, ɔfən wɪð pɑlɪʃt stoʊnz, ən sɛvɹəl æktʃəli  hæɾ ə smɔl ɹɪŋ ɪn wʌn saɪɾ ə ðɛɹ noʊzɪz! ðə mɛn dɪd, tu, ði ɪɹɪŋz ət list, ən dʒʌst əz mɛni hɛvi ɡoʊld ən sɪlvɝ tʃeɪnz ɝaʊn ðɛɹ nɛks. mɛn! səm wɛtləndɝ mɛn wɔɹ ɹɪŋz ɪn ðɛɹ ɪɹz, tʃɹu - moʊst ɛbu dɑɹi mɛn sim tə - bʌt soʊ mɛni! ən nɛkləsɪz! wɛtləndɝz dɪɾ əv stʃɹeɪnʒ weɪz. ðə si foʊk nɛvɝ lɛf ðɛɹ ʃɪps - nɛvɝ - soʊ ʃi hæd ɹɛd, ən səpoʊzədli ðeɪ eɪt ðɛɹ dɛd. ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn kwaɪɾ eɪbəl tə kɹɛɾət ðæt, bʌɾ ɪf ðə mɛn wɔɹ nɛkləsɪz, hu kəd seɪ wʌɾ ɛls ðeɪ dɪd?

Settling onto the great ship's deck, she gaped, almost forgetting to climb off the narrow seat. She had read of the Atha'an Miere, but reading and seeing was as different as reading of saltwater and tasting it. They were all dark, for one thing, much darker than the Ebou Dari, even darker than most Tairens, with straight black hair and black eyes and tattooed hands. Bare-chested, barefoot men with bright narrow sashes holding up baggy breeches of some dark cloth that had an oily look to it, and women in blouses as brilliantly colored as their sashes, all with a sway to their movements, gliding gracefully with the rocking of the ship. Sea Folk women had very strange customs when it came to men, according to what she had read, dancing with no more than a single scarf for covering and worse, but it was the earrings that made her stare. Most had three or four, often with polished stones, and several actually had a small ring in one side of their noses! The men did, too, the earrings at least, and just as many heavy gold and silver chains around their necks. Men! Some wetlander men wore rings in their ears, true - most Ebou Dari men seemed to - but so many! And necklaces! Wetlanders did have strange ways. The Sea Folk never left their ships - never - so she had read, and supposedly they ate their dead. She had not been quite able to credit that, but if the men wore necklaces, who could say what else they did?

ðə wʊmən u keɪm tə miɾ əm wɔɹ bɹitʃɪz ən blaʊs ən sæʃ laɪk ði ʌðɝz, bʌt hɝz wɝ ə bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd jɛloʊ sɪlk, ðə sæʃ nɑɾɪd ɪntʃɹəkətli wɪð ɛnz tʃɹeɪlɪŋ tə hɝ ni, ən wʌn ə hɝ nɛkləsɪz bɔɹ ə smɔl ɡoʊldən bɑks ʌv ɪntʃɹəkət pɪɹswɝk. ə switli mʌski sɛn sɝaʊndəd hɝ. ɡɹeɪ stʃɹikt əɹ hɛɹ hɛvəli, ən ʃi hæɾ ə ɡɹeɪv feɪs. faɪv smɔl fæt ɡoʊldən ɹɪŋz dɛkɝeɪɾəd itʃ ə hɝ ɪɹz, ən ə faɪn tʃeɪn kənɛktəd wʌn tə ə sɪməlɝ ɹɪŋ ɪn əɹ noʊz. taɪni mədæljənz ə pɑlɪʃt ɡoʊl dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm ðə tʃeɪn flæʃt ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪɾ əz ʃi stʌɾid ðɛm.

The woman who came to meet them wore breeches and blouse and sash like the others, but hers were of brocaded yellow silk, the sash knotted intricately with ends trailing to her knee, and one of her necklaces bore a small golden box of intricate piercework. A sweetly musky scent surrounded her. Gray streaked her hair heavily, and she had a grave face. Five small fat golden rings decorated each of her ears, and a fine chain connected one to a similar ring in her nose. Tiny medallions of polished gold dangling from the chain flashed in the sunlight as she studied them.

eɪvinhə pʊld əɹ hæn daʊn fɹəm əɹ oʊn noʊz - tə wɛɹ ðət tʃeɪn, ɔlweɪz tʌɡɪŋ! - ən bɛɹli mænədʒ tə səpɹɛs ə læf. wɛt-lændɝ kʌstəmz wɝ ɑd bɪɑn bɪlif, ən ʃʊɹli noʊ wʌn dɪzɝv ðə neɪm bɛɾɝ ðən ðə si foʊk.

Aviendha pulled her hand down from her own nose - to wear that chain, always tugging! - and barely managed to suppress a laugh. Wet-lander customs were odd beyond belief, and surely no one deserved the name better than the Sea Folk.

"aɪ æm mælɪn dɪn tɔɹəl bɹeɪkɪŋ weɪv," ðə wʊmən sɛd, "weɪvməz-tʃɹɛs ə klæn soʊmɝɪn ən seɪlməstʃɹəs ʌv wɪndʒɹʌnɝ." eɪ weɪvməstʃɹəs wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, laɪk ə klæn tʃif, jɛt ʃi simd əɾ ə lɔs, lʊkɪŋ fɹəm wʌn feɪs tə ðə nɛkst, əntɪl əɹ aɪ fɛl ɑn ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋz ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv wɔɹ, ən ðən ʃi ɛksheɪld ɪn ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən. "ɪf ɪt plizɪz jə tə kʌm wɪð mi, ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ʃi sɛd tə nɪneɪiv.

"I am Malin din Toral Breaking Wave," the woman said, "Wavemis-tress of Clan Somarin and Sailmistress of Windrunner." A Wavemistress was important, like a clan chief, yet she seemed at a loss, looking from one face to the next, until her eye fell on the Great Serpent rings Elayne and Nynaeve wore, and then she exhaled in resignation. "If it pleases you to come with me, Aes Sedai?" she said to Nynaeve.

ðə bæk ə ðə ʃɪp wɑz ɹeɪzd, ən ʃi lɛd ðə weɪ ɪnsaɪd ðət baɪ ə dɔɹ, ðən daʊn ə hɔlweɪ tə ə lɑɹdʒ ɹum - ə kæbən - wɪð ə loʊ silɪŋ. eɪvinhə daʊɾɪd ɹænd ælθɹ wʊɾə bɪn eɪbəl tə stæn əpɹaɪt bɪniθ wʌn ə ðə θɪk bimz. ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju lækɝd tʃɛsts, ɛvɹiθɪŋ sim tə hæv bɪn bɪlt ɪn pleɪs, kæbənəts əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz, ivən ðə lɔŋ teɪbəl ðət ɹæn hæf ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə ɹum ən ði ɑɹmtʃɛɹz ðət sɝaʊndəɾ ɪt. ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl tə θɪŋk ə sʌmθɪŋ ðə saɪz ə ðɪs ʃɪp biɪŋ meɪɾ ʌv wʊd, ən ivən æftɝ ɔl əɹ taɪm ɪn ðə wɛtlænz, ðə saɪɾ ʌv ɔl ðət pɑlɪʃt wʊd nɪɹli meɪɾ əɹ ɡæsp. ɪt ɡloʊɾ ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz ðə ɡɪldɪd læmps, hæŋɪŋ ənlɪɾ ɪn səm sɔɹɾ ə keɪdʒ soʊ ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪn əpɹaɪɾ əz ðə ʃɪp muvd wɪð ðə weɪvz. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ðə ʃɪp hɑɹdli sim tə muv əɾ ɔl, ət list ɪn kəmpɛɹəsən wɪð ðə boʊt ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɑn, bʌɾ ənfɔɹtʃənətli ðə bæk ə ðə kæbən, ʌv ðə ʃɪp, wɑz ə laɪn ʌv wɪndoʊz wɪð ðə peɪntəɾ ən ɡɪldɪd ʃʌɾɝz stændɪŋ oʊpən, ɡɪvɪŋ ə splɛndəd vju ʌv ðə beɪ. wɝs, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ læn ɪn saɪɾ aʊt ðoʊz wɪndoʊz. noʊ læn əɾ ɔl! hɝ θɹoʊt sizd. ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv spoʊkən. ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv skɹimd, ɔlðoʊ ðət wɑz wʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə du.

The back of the ship was raised, and she led the way inside that by a door, then down a hallway to a large room - a cabin - with a low ceiling. Aviendha doubted Rand al'Thor would have been able to stand upright beneath one of the thick beams. Except for a few lacquered chests, everything seemed to have been built in place, cabinets along the walls, even the long table that ran half the length of the room and the armchairs that surrounded it. It was difficult to think of something the size of this ship being made of wood, and even after all her time in the wetlands, the sight of all that polished wood nearly made her gasp. It glowed almost as much as the gilded lamps, hanging unlit in some sort of cage so they remained upright as the ship moved with the waves. In truth, the ship hardly seemed to move at all, at least in comparison with the boat they had been on, but unfortunately the back of the cabin, of the ship, was a line of windows with the painted and gilded shutters standing open, giving a splendid view of the bay. Worse, there was no land in sight out those windows. No land at all! Her throat seized. She could not have spoken. She could not have screamed, although that was what she wanted to do.

ðoʊz wɪndoʊz ən wʌt ðeɪ ʃoʊd - wʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ʃoʊ - hæd kɑɾ əɹ aɪz soʊ kwɪkli ðəɾ ɪt tʊk əɹ ə moʊmən tə ɹilaɪz pipəl wɝ ðəɹ ɔlɹɛɾi. ə faɪn θɪŋ! hæd ðeɪ wɪʃt, ðeɪ cʊɾə kɪld əɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi nu. nɑt ðət ðeɪ ʃoʊɾ ɛni saɪn ə hɑstɪləɾi, bʌt jə kəd nɛvɝ bi tu kɛɹfəl wɪð wɛtləndɝz.

Those windows and what they showed - what they did not show - had caught her eyes so quickly that it took her a moment to realize people were there already. A fine thing! Had they wished, they could have killed her before she knew. Not that they showed any sign of hostility, but you could never be too careful with wetlanders.

ə spɪnli oʊl mæn wɪð dip-sɛɾ aɪz wɑz sɪɾɪŋ əɾ ɪz iz ətɑp wʌn ə ðə tʃɛsts; wʌt lɪɾəl hɛɹ ɹɪmeɪn tə hɪm wɑz waɪt, ən ɪz dɑɹk feɪs hæɾ ə kaɪnli lʊk, ðoʊ ə fʊl dʌzən ɪɹɪŋz ɔltəɡɛðɝ ən ə nʌmbɝ ə θɪk ɡoʊl tʃeɪnz ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk ɡeɪv ɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən ə stʃɹeɪnʒ twɪst ɪn əɹ aɪz. laɪk ðə mɛn əbʌv, hi wɑz bɛɹfʊɾ ən bɛɹ-tʃɛstəd, bʌɾ ɪz bɹitʃɪz wɝ ə dɑɹk blu sɪlk, ən ɪz lɔŋ sæʃ ə bɹaɪt ɹɛd. ən aɪvɝi-hɪltɪd sɔɹd wɑz θɹʌs θɹu ðət sæʃ, ʃi noʊɾəd wɪð dɪsdeɪn, əz wɛl əz tu kɝv dæɡɝz tə mætʃ.

A spindly old man with deep-set eyes was sitting at his ease atop one of the chests; what little hair remained to him was white, and his dark face had a kindly look, though a full dozen earrings altogether and a number of thick gold chains around his neck gave his expression a strange twist in her eyes. Like the men above, he was barefoot and bare-chested, but his breeches were a dark blue silk, and his long sash a bright red. An ivory-hilted sword was thrust through that sash, she noted with disdain, as well as two curved daggers to match.

ðə slɛndɝ, hænsəm wʊmən wɪð əɹ ɑɹmz foʊldəɾ ən ə ɡɹɪmli fɔɹboʊɾɪŋ fɹaʊn wɑz mɔɹ wɝði ʌv noʊɾəs. ʃi wɔɹ oʊnli fɔɹ ɪɹɪŋz ɪn itʃ ɪɹ, ən fjuɝ mədæljənz ɑn əɹ tʃeɪn ðən mælɪn dɪn tɔɹəl, ən əɹ kloʊðɪŋ wɑz ɔl ɪn ɹɛɾɪʃ-jɛloʊ sɪlk. ʃi kəd tʃænəl; eɪvinhə nu ðæt, ðɪs kloʊs. ʃi mʌs bi ðə wʊmən ðeɪ hæd kʌm fɔɹ, ðə wɪnd-faɪndɝ. ən jɛɾ ɪt wɑz ənʌðɝ u hɛld eɪvinhəz aɪ. ən fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ɪleɪnz ən nɪneɪivz ən bɝdʒɪts.

The slender, handsome woman with her arms folded and a grimly foreboding frown was more worthy of notice. She wore only four earrings in each ear, and fewer medallions on her chain than Malin din Toral, and her clothing was all in reddish-yellow silk. She could channel; Aviendha knew that, this close. She must be the woman they had come for, the Wind-finder. And yet it was another who held Aviendha's eye. And for that matter, Elayne's and Nynaeve's and Birgitte's.

ðə wʊmən u hæd lʊkt ʌp fɹəm ən ənɹoʊl mæp ɑn ðə teɪbəl maɪɾ əv bɪn əz oʊld əz ðə mæn baɪ hɝ waɪt hɛɹ. ʃɔɹt, noʊ tɔlɝ ðən nɪneɪiv, ʃi lʊk laɪk sʌmwʌn u hæd wʌns bɪn stɑki ən wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ɡoʊ staʊt, bʌɾ əɹ dʒɔ θɹʌs fɔɹwɝd laɪk ə hæmɝ, ən əɹ blæk aɪz spoʊk ʌv ɪntɛlədʒəns. ən paʊɝ. nɑt ðə wʌn paʊɝ, dʒʌs ðəɾ ə sʌmwʌn u sɛd "ɡoʊ" ən nu ðət pipəl wəd ɡoʊ, jɛt ʃi hæɾ ɪt stʃɹɔŋli. hɝ bɹitʃɪz wɝ bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd ɡɹin sɪlk, hɝ blaʊs blu, ən əɹ sæʃ ɹɛd laɪk ðə mænz. ðə staʊt-bleɪɾɪd naɪf ɪn ə ɡɪldɪd ʃiθ tʌk bɪhaɪn ðət sæʃ hæɾ ə ɹaʊn pɑməl kʌvɝd wɪð ɹɛɾ ən ɡɹin stoʊnz; faɪɝdʒɹɑps ən ɛmɹəlz, eɪvinhə θɔt. twaɪs əz mɛni mədæljənz hʌŋ fɹəm əɹ noʊz tʃeɪn əz fɹəm mælɪn dɪn tɔɹəlz, ən ənʌðɝ, θɪnɝ ɡoʊl tʃeɪn kənɛktəd ðə sɪks ɹɪŋz ɪn itʃ ə hɝ ɪɹz. eɪvinhə bɛɹli kɛpt əɹ hæn fɹəm ɡoʊɪŋ tə hɝ oʊn noʊz əɡɛn.

The woman who had looked up from an unrolled map on the table might have been as old as the man by her white hair. Short, no taller than Nynaeve, she looked like someone who had once been stocky and was beginning to go stout, but her jaw thrust forward like a hammer, and her black eyes spoke of intelligence. And power. Not the One Power, just that of someone who said "go" and knew that people would go, yet she had it strongly. Her breeches were brocaded green silk, her blouse blue, and her sash red like the man's. The stout-bladed knife in a gilded sheath tucked behind that sash had a round pommel covered with red and green stones; firedrops and emeralds, Aviendha thought. Twice as many medallions hung from her nose chain as from Malin din Toral's, and another, thinner gold chain connected the six rings in each of her ears. Aviendha barely kept her hand from going to her own nose again.

wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd ðə waɪt-hɛɹd wʊmən keɪm tə stæn ɪn fɹʌn ə nɪneɪiv, ɹudli ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ əɹ fɹəm hɛd tə toʊ, fɹaʊnɪŋ ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ ət nɪneɪivz feɪs ən ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ ɹaɪt hænd. ʃi tʊk noʊ taɪm əbaʊɾ ɪt, ən wɪð ə ɡɹʌn muvd ɑn fɹəm əɹ ɹʌfəld əbdʒɛkt ə stʌɾi tə ɡɪv ɪleɪn ðə seɪm kwɪk, ɪntɛns skɹuɾəni, ən ðən bɝdʒɪt. ət læst ʃi spoʊk. "ju ɑɹ nɑɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ." hɝ vɔɪs saʊndəd laɪk ɹɑks tʌmbəlɪŋ.

Without a word the white-haired woman came to stand in front of Nynaeve, rudely examining her from head to toe, frowning in particular at Nynaeve's face and the Great Serpent ring on her right hand. She took no time about it, and with a grunt moved on from her ruffled object of study to give Elayne the same quick, intense scrutiny, and then Birgitte. At last she spoke. "You are not an Aes Sedai." Her voice sounded like rocks tumbling.

"baɪ ðə naɪn wɪnz ən stɔɹmbɹɪŋɝz bɪɹd, aɪm nɑt," bɝdʒɪt ɹɪplaɪd. səmtaɪmz ʃi sɛd θɪŋz ivən ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv sim nɑt tə ʌndɝstænd, bʌt ðə waɪt-hɛɹd wʊmən dʒʌmpt əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn ɡusd, ən stɛɹɾ ə lɔŋ moʊmən bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ tə fɹaʊn ʌp əɾ eɪvinhə.

"By the nine winds and Stormbringer's beard, I am not," Birgitte replied. Sometimes she said things even Elayne and Nynaeve seemed not to understand, but the white-haired woman jumped as if she had been goosed, and stared a long moment before turning to frown up at Aviendha.

"ju ɑɹ nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, iðɝ," ʃi ɡɹeɪɾɪd æftɝ ðə seɪm ɪɡzæməneɪʃən.

"You are not Aes Sedai, either," she grated after the same examination.

eɪvinhə dʒɹu hɝsɛlf tə hɝ fʊl haɪt, filɪŋ əz ðoʊ ðə wʊmən hæd ɹʌmɪɡd θɹu hɝ ɡɑɹməns ən twɝld əɹ əbaʊt tə lʊk əɾ əɹ bɛɾɝ. "aɪ æm eɪvinhə, ʌv ðə naɪn væliz sɛpt ə ðə tɑɹdæɾ il."

Aviendha drew herself to her full height, feeling as though the woman had rummaged through her garments and twirled her about to look at her better. "I am Aviendha, of the Nine Valleys sept of the Taardad Aiel."

ðə wʊmən ɡeɪv twaɪs ðə stɑɹt ʃi hæd fəɹ bɝdʒɪt, blæk aɪz ɡoʊɪŋ waɪd. "ju ɑɹ nɑt ɡɑɹbd əz aɪ ɪkspɛktəd, ɡɝl" wɑz ɔl ʃi sɛd, ðoʊ, ən stʃɹoʊd bæk tə ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə teɪbəl, wɛɹ ʃi plæntəɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps ən stʌɾid əm ɔl əɡɛn, mʌtʃ əz ʃi maɪɾ əv səm stʃɹeɪnʒ ænəməl ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ. "aɪ æm nɛstə dɪn ɹiz tu munz," ʃi sɛɾ ət læst, "mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ. haʊ dʒju noʊ wʌt jə noʊ?"

The woman gave twice the start she had for Birgitte, black eyes going wide. "You are not garbed as I expected, girl" was all she said, though, and strode back to the far end of the table, where she planted her fists on her hips and studied them all again, much as she might have some strange animal she had never seen before. "I am Nesta din Reas Two Moons," she said at last, "Mistress of the Ships to the Atha'an Miere. How do you know what you know?"

nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn wɝkɪŋ ɑn ə skaʊl sɪns ðə wʊmən fɝs lʊkt ət hɝ, ən naʊ ʃi snæpt, "ɛɛs sədaɪ noʊ wʌt ðeɪ noʊ. ən wi ɪkspɛk mɔɹ ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv mænɝz ðən aɪv sin soʊ fɑɹ! aɪ sɝɾənli sɔ mɔɹ ðə læs taɪm aɪ wɑz ɑn ə si foʊk ʃɪp. meɪbi wi ʃəd faɪn ənʌðɝ, wɛɹ ðə pipəl doʊn ɔl əv sɔɹ tiθ." nɛstə dɪn ɹiz' feɪs ɡɹu dɑɹkɝ, bʌɾ ɪleɪn ə kɔɹs stɛpt ɪndə ðə bɹitʃ, ɹimuvɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ən leɪɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ ə ðə teɪbəl.

Nynaeve had been working on a scowl since the woman first looked at her, and now she snapped, "Aes Sedai know what they know. And we expect more in the way of manners than I've seen so far! I certainly saw more the last time I was on a Sea Folk ship. Maybe we should find another, where the people don't all have sore teeth." Nesta din Reas' face grew darker, but Elayne of course stepped into the breech, removing her cloak and laying it over the edge of the table.

"ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin jə ən jəɹ vɛsəlz, ʃɪpməstʃɹəs, ən sɛn ðə wɪnz tə spid jə ɔl." hɝ kɝtsi wɑz mɑɾɝətli dip; eɪvinhə hæd bɪkʌm ə dʒʌdʒ ə ðiz θɪŋz, fəɹ ɔl ʃi θɔɾ ɪt lʊk ðə moʊst ɑkwɝd θɪŋ ɛni wʊmən kəɾ ɛvɝ du. "fɝɡɪv əs ɪf ðəɹ əv bɪn wɝdz ɪn heɪst. wi min noʊ dɪsɹɪspɛk tə wʌn u ɪz əz ə kwin tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ." ðət wɪð ə spikɪŋ lʊk fəɹ nɪneɪiv. nɪneɪiv oʊnli ʃɹʌɡd, ðoʊ.

"The Light illumine you and your vessels, Shipmistress, and send the winds to speed you all." Her curtsy was moderately deep; Aviendha had become a judge of these things, for all she thought it looked the most awkward thing any woman could ever do. "Forgive us if there have been words in haste. We mean no disrespect to one who is as a queen to the Atha'an Miere." That with a speaking look for Nynaeve. Nynaeve only shrugged, though.

ɪleɪn ɪntʃɹədus hɝsɛlf əɡɛn, ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm, tə stʃɹeɪnʒ ɹiækʃənz. ðəɾ ɪleɪn wɑz dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ pɹədus nʌn, ðoʊ ðət wɑz ə haɪ pəzɪʃən əmʌŋ ðə wɛtləndɝz, ən ðət ʃi wɑz ɡɹin ədʒɑ ən nɪneɪiv jɛloʊ ɹəsiv snɪfs fɹəm nɛstə dɪn ɹiz ən ʃɑɹp lʊks fɹəm ðə spɪnli oʊl mæn. ɪleɪn blɪŋkt, teɪkən əbæk, bʌt ʃi wɛn ɑn smuðli. "wi hæv kʌm fəɹ tu ɹizənz. ðə lɛsɝ ɪz tə æsk haʊ jə min tə eɪd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, hu əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə dʒɛndaɪ pɹɑfəsi jə kɔl ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ. ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ ɪz tə ɹɪkwɛs ðə hɛlp ə ðɪs vɛsəlz wɪndfɪndɝ. huz neɪm," ʃi æɾəd dʒɛnli, "aɪ ɹəɡɹɛɾ aɪ də nɑt jɛt noʊ."

Elayne introduced herself again, and the rest of them, to strange reactions. That Elayne was Daughter-Heir produced none, though that was a high position among the wetlanders, and that she was Green Ajah and Nynaeve Yellow received sniffs from Nesta din Reas and sharp looks from the spindly old man. Elayne blinked, taken aback, but she went on smoothly. "We have come for two reasons. The lesser is to ask how you mean to aid the Dragon Reborn, who according to the Jendai Prophecy you call the Coramoor. The greater is to request the help of this vessel's Windfinder. Whose name," she added gently, "I regret I do not yet know."

ðə slɛndɝ wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl ɹɛɾənd. "aɪ æm dɔɹəl dɪn ɹən lɔŋ fɛðɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ meɪ hɛlp, ɪf ɪt plizɪz ðə laɪt."

The slender woman who could channel reddened. "I am Dorile din Eiran Long Feather, Aes Sedai. I may help, if it pleases the Light."

mælɪn dɪn tɔɹəl lʊkt əbæʃt, tu. "ðə wɛlkəm ə maɪ ʃɪp tə ju," ʃi mɝmɝd, "æn ðə ɡɹeɪs ə ðə laɪt bi əpɑn jə əntɪl jə liv ɪz dɛks."

Malin din Toral looked abashed, too. "The welcome of my ship to you," she murmured, "and the grace of the Light be upon you until you leave his decks."

nɑt soʊ nɛstə dɪn ɹiz. "ðə bɑɹɡən ɪz wɪð ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə hɑɹd vɔɪs, ən meɪɾ ə ʃɑɹp kʌɾɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝ. "ðə ʃɔɹbaʊn əv noʊ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt, ɪksɛpt wɛɹ ðeɪ tɛl ə hɪz kʌmɪŋ. ju, ɡɝl, nɪneɪiv. wʌt ʃɪp ɡeɪv jə ðə ɡɪft ə pæsədʒ? hu wɑz ɪz wɪndfɪndɝ?"

Not so Nesta din Reas. "The Bargain is with the Coramoor," she said in a hard voice, and made a sharp cutting gesture. "The shorebound have no part of it, except where they tell of his coming. You, girl, Nynaeve. What ship gave you the gift of passage? Who was his Windfinder?"

"aɪ kæn ɹikɔl." nɪneɪivz ɛɹi toʊn wɑz əɾ ɑdz wɪð ðə stoʊni smaɪl ʃi wɔɹ. ʃi hæɾ ə dɛθɡɹɪp ɑn əɹ bɹeɪd, tu, bʌɾ ət list ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ əɡɛn. "æn aɪm nɪneɪiv sədaɪ, nɪneɪiv ɛɛs sədaɪ, nɑt ɡɝl."

"I can't recall." Nynaeve's airy tone was at odds with the stony smile she wore. She had a deathgrip on her braid, too, but at least she had not embraced saidar again. "And I am Nynaeve Sedai, Nynaeve Aes Sedai, not girl."

pʊɾɪŋ əɹ hænz flæɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, nɛstə dɪn ɹiz dɝɛktəɾ ə stɛɹ əɾ əɹ ðət ɹimaɪndəɾ eɪvinhə ʌv sɔɹɪliə. "pɝhæps jə ɑɹ, bʌɾ əl noʊ hu ɹɪvild wʌt ʃəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ɹɪvild. ʃiz lɛsənz ə saɪləns tə lɝn."

Putting her hands flat on the table, Nesta din Reas directed a stare at her that reminded Aviendha of Sorilea. "Perhaps you are, but I will know who revealed what should not have been revealed. She has lessons of silence to learn."

"ə splɪt seɪl ɪz splɪt, nɛstə," ði oʊl mæn sɛd sʌɾənli, ɪn ə dip vɔɪs mʌtʃ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɪz boʊni lɪmz sədʒɛstəd. eɪvinhə hæd teɪkən ɪm fəɹ ə ɡɑɹd, bʌɾ ɪz toʊn wɑz ðəɾ ʌv ən ikwəl. "ɪt maɪt bi wɛl tə æsk wʌɾ eɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wəɾ əv ʌv ʌs, ɪn deɪz wən ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ əz kʌm, ən ðə siz ɹeɪdʒ ɪn ɛnləs stɔɹmz, ən ðə dum ə ðə pɹɑfəsi seɪlz ði oʊʃənz. ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ðət wɪð ə ɹeɪzd aɪbɹaʊ tə ðə wɪnd-faɪndɝ.

"A split sail is split, Nesta," the old man said suddenly, in a deep voice much stronger than his bony limbs suggested. Aviendha had taken him for a guard, but his tone was that of an equal. "It might be well to ask what aid Aes Sedai would have of us, in days when the Coramoor has come, and the seas rage in endless storms, and the doom of the Prophecy sails the oceans. If they are Aes Sedai?" That with a raised eyebrow to the Wind-finder.

ʃi ænsɝd kwaɪətli, ɪn ə ɹɪspɛkfəl vɔɪs. "θɹi kən tʃænəl, ɪnkluɾɪŋ hɝ." ʃi pɔɪntəɾ əɾ eɪvinhə. "aɪ hæv nɛvɝ mɛɾ ɛniwʌn soʊ stʃɹɔŋ əz ðeɪ. ðeɪ mʌs bi. hu ɛls wəd dɛɹ wɛɹ ðə ɹɪŋ?"

She answered quietly, in a respectful voice. "Three can channel, including her." She pointed at Aviendha. "I have never met anyone so strong as they. They must be. Who else would dare wear the ring?"

weɪvɪŋ əɹ tə saɪləns, nɛstə dɪn ɹiz tɝn ðət seɪm aɪɝn ɡeɪz ɑn ðə mæn. "ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛvɝ æsk eɪd, bɹɑk," ʃi ɡɹaʊld. "ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛvɝ æsk ɛniθɪŋ." hi mɛɾ əɹ ɡeɪz maɪldli, bʌɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt ʃi saɪɾ əz ðoʊ hi hæd stɛɹɾ əɹ daʊn. ði aɪz ʃi eɪmd əɾ ɪleɪn wɝ noʊ wɪt sɑftɝ, ðoʊ. "wʌt wəd juv ʌv əs . . ." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ". . . dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ?" ivən ðət saʊndəd skɛptəkəl.

Waving her to silence, Nesta din Reas turned that same iron gaze on the man. "Aes Sedai never ask aid, Baroc," she growled. "Aes Sedai never ask anything." He met her gaze mildly, but after a moment she sighed as though he had stared her down. The eyes she aimed at Elayne were no whit softer, though. "What would you have of us . . ." She hesitated. ". . . Daughter-Heir of Andor?" Even that sounded skeptical.

nɪneɪiv ɡæðɝd hɝsɛlf, ɹɛɾi tə lɔntʃ ɪndə ən ətæk - eɪvinhə hæd hæd tə lɪsən tə mɔɹ ðən wʌn taɪɹeɪd spɑɹk baɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ bæk ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs ən ðɛɹ hæbəɾ ə fɝɡɛɾɪŋ ðət ʃi ən ɪleɪn wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ tu; sʌmwʌn nɑɾ ivən ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪnaɪɪŋ ɪt maɪt bɹɪŋ ðə ʃɛɾɪŋ ə blʌd - nɪneɪiv ɡæðɝd hɝsɛlf ʌp ən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ. . . . ən ɪleɪn saɪlənst əɹ wɪð ə tʌtʃ ɑn ði ɑɹm ən ə wɪspɝ tu loʊ fəɹ eɪvinhə tə hɪɹ. nɪneɪivz feɪs wɑz stɪl kɹɪmzən, ən ʃi lʊkt əbaʊt tə pʊl əɹ bɹeɪɾ aʊt sloʊli baɪ ðə ɹuts, jɛt ʃi hɛld əɹ tʌŋ. meɪbi ɪleɪn kəd meɪk pis ɪn ə wɔɾɝ-fjud.

Nynaeve gathered herself, ready to launch into an attack - Aviendha had had to listen to more than one tirade sparked by the Aes Sedai back in the Tarasin Palace and their habit of forgetting that she and Elayne were Aes Sedai too; someone not even Aes Sedai denying it might bring the shedding of blood - Nynaeve gathered herself up and opened her mouth. . . . And Elayne silenced her with a touch on the arm and a whisper too low for Aviendha to hear. Nynaeve's face was still crimson, and she looked about to pull her braid out slowly by the roots, yet she held her tongue. Maybe Elayne could make peace in a water-feud.

ʌv kɔɹs, ɪleɪn kəd nɑt bi plizd, wən nɑɾ oʊnli hɝ ɹaɪt tə bi kɔld ɛɛs sədaɪ bʌɾ əɹ ɹaɪt tə ðə taɪɾəl ə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ wɑz daʊɾɪd soʊ oʊpənli. moʊst wʊɾə θɔɾ əɹ kwaɪt kɑm, bʌɾ eɪvinhə nu ðə saɪnz. ðə ɹeɪz tʃɪn spoʊk ʌv æŋɡɝ; æɾ aɪz oʊpən əz waɪɾ əz ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ, ən ɪleɪn wɑz ə tɔɹtʃ tə oʊvɝwɛlm nɪneɪivz ɪmbɝ. bɪsaɪdz, bɝdʒɪt wɑz ɑn əɹ toʊz, feɪs laɪk stoʊn ən aɪz laɪk faɪɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑt juʒəwəli mɪɹɝ ɪleɪnz ɪmoʊʃənz, ɪksɛpt wən ðeɪ wɝ vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ. ɹæpɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɝaʊn ðə hɪlt ə hɝ bɛl naɪf, eɪvinhə ɹɛɾid hɝsɛlf tə ɛmbɹeɪs seɪaɪdɑɹ. ʃi wəd kɪl ðə wɪndfɪndɝ fɝst; ðə wʊmən wɑz nɑt wik ɪn ðə paʊɝ, ən ʃi wəd bi deɪnʒɝəs. ðeɪ kəd faɪn ʌðɝz wɪð soʊ mɛni ʃɪps əbaʊt.

Of course, Elayne could not be pleased, when not only her right to be called Aes Sedai but her right to the title of Daughter-Heir was doubted so openly. Most would have thought her quite calm, but Aviendha knew the signs. The raised chin spoke of anger; add eyes open as wide as they would go, and Elayne was a torch to overwhelm Nynaeve's ember. Besides, Birgitte was on her toes, face like stone and eyes like fire. She did not usually mirror Elayne's emotions, except when they were very strong. Wrapping her fingers around the hilt of her belt knife, Aviendha readied herself to embrace saidar. She would kill the Windfinder first; the woman was not weak in the Power, and she would be dangerous. They could find others with so many ships about.

"wi sik ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil." ɪksɛp ðəɾ əɹ toʊn wɑz kul, ɛniwʌn u dɪd nɑt noʊ hɝ wəd θɪŋk ɪleɪn wɑz æbsəlutli sɝin. ʃi feɪs nɛstə dɪn ɹiz, bʌt ʃi ədʒɹɛst ɛvɹiwʌn, pɝhæps ɪspɛʃli ðə wɪndfɪndɝ. "wɪð ɪt, wi bɪliv wi kən ɹɛməɾi ðə wɛðɝ. ɪt mʌs tʃɹʌbəl jə əz mʌtʃ əz ɪt dʌz ðə lænd. bɹɑk spoʊk ʌv ɛnləs stɔɹmz. jə mʌs bi eɪbəl tə si ðə dɑɹk wʌnz tʌtʃ, ðə fɑðɝ ə stɔɹmz' tʌtʃ, ɑn ðə si dʒʌst əz wi də ɑn ðə lænd. wɪð ðɪs tɛɹæŋɡɹil, wi kən tʃeɪnʒ ðæt, bʌt wi kænɑt də ɪɾ əloʊn. ɪɾəl ɹikwaɪɝ mɛni wɪmən wɝkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ, pɝhæps ə fʊl sɝkəl ə θɝtin. wi θɪŋk ðoʊz wɪmən ʃəɾ ɪnklud wɪndfɪndɝz. noʊ wʌn ɛls noʊz soʊ mʌtʃ ʌv wɛðɝ, nɑɾ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ lɪvɪŋ. ðəɾ ɪz ði eɪd wi æsk."

"We seek a ter'angreal." Except that her tone was cool, anyone who did not know her would think Elayne was absolutely serene. She faced Nesta din Reas, but she addressed everyone, perhaps especially the Windfinder. "With it, we believe we can remedy the weather. It must trouble you as much as it does the land. Baroc spoke of endless storms. You must be able to see the Dark One's touch, the Father of Storms' touch, on the sea just as we do on the land. With this ter'angreal, we can change that, but we cannot do it alone. It will require many women working together, perhaps a full circle of thirteen. We think those women should include Windfinders. No one else knows so much of weather, not any Aes Sedai living. That is the aid we ask."

dɛd saɪləns mɛɾ əɹ spitʃ, əntɪl dɔɹəl dɪn ɹən sɛd kɛɹfəli, "ðɪs tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ɛɛs sədaɪ. wʌɾ ɪz ɪt kɔld? haʊ dʌz ɪt lʊk?"

Dead silence met her speech, until Dorile din Eiran said carefully, "This ter'angreal, Aes Sedai. What is it called? How does it look?"

"ɪɾ əz noʊ neɪm, ðəɾ aɪ noʊ," ɪleɪn toʊl hɝ. "ɪɾ ɪz ə θɪk kɹɪstəl boʊl, ʃæloʊ bʌt sʌmθɪŋ oʊvɝ tu fiɾ əkɹɔs, ən wɝkt ɪnsaɪd wɪð klaʊdz. wən ɪts tʃænəld ɪntu, ðə klaʊdz muv - "

"It has no name, that I know," Elayne told her. "It is a thick crystal bowl, shallow but something over two feet across, and worked inside with clouds. When it is channeled into, the clouds move - "

"ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz," ðə wɪndfɪndɝ bɹoʊk ɪn ɪksaɪɾədli, stɛpɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ɪleɪn əz ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz ɪt. "ðeɪ hæv ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz."

"The Bowl of the Winds," the Windfinder broke in excitedly, stepping toward Elayne as if she did not realize it. "They have the Bowl of the Winds."

"ju tʃɹuli hæv ɪt?" ðə weɪvməstʃɹəsəz aɪz wɝ fɪkst ɑn ɪleɪn iɡɝli, ən ʃi ɔlsoʊ tʊk ən ɪnvɑləntɛɹi stɛp.

"You truly have it?" The Wavemistress's eyes were fixed on Elayne eagerly, and she also took an involuntary step.

"wi ɑɹ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "bʌt wi noʊ ɪts ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. ɪf ɪts ðə seɪm - "

"We are looking for it," Elayne said. "But we know it is in Ebou Dar. If it is the same - "

"ɪt mʌs bi," mælɪn dɪn tɔɹəl ɪkskleɪmd. "baɪ jəɹ dɪskɹɪpʃən, ɪt mʌst!"

"It must be," Malin din Toral exclaimed. "By your description, it must!"

"ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz," dɔɹəl dɪn ɹən bɹiðd. "tə θɪŋk ɪt wəd bi faʊn əɡɛn æftɝ tu θaʊzən jɪɹz hɪɹ! ɪt mʌs bi ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ. hi mʌst əv - "

"The Bowl of the Winds," Dorile din Eiran breathed. "To think it would be found again after two thousand years here! It must be the Coramoor. He must have - "

nɛstə dɪn ɹiz' hænz slæp təɡɛðɝ laʊdli. "du aɪ si ə weɪvməz-tʃɹɛs ən əɹ wɪndfɪndɝ, əɹ tu dɛkɡɝlz ət ðɛɹ fɝst ʃɪpmit?" mælɪn dɪn tɔɹəlz tʃiks ɹɛɾənd wɪð ə pɹaʊɾ æŋɡɝ, ən ʃi bɛn əɹ hɛd stɪfli, pɹaɪɾ ɪn ðəɾ əz wɛl. twaɪs əz flʌʃt, dɔɹəl dɪn ɹən baʊd, tʌtʃɪŋ fɪŋɡɝtɪps tə fɔɹhɛd, lɪps ən hɑɹt.

Nesta din Reas' hands slapped together loudly. "Do I see a Wavemis-tress and her Windfinder, or two deckgirls at their first shipmeet?" Malin din Toral's cheeks reddened with a proud anger, and she bent her head stiffly, pride in that as well. Twice as flushed, Dorile din Eiran bowed, touching fingertips to forehead, lips and heart.

ðə ʃɪpməstʃɹəs fɹaʊn əɾ əm ə moʊmənt, bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. "bɹɑk, sʌmən ði ʌðɝ weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz u hoʊl ðɪs pɔɹt, ən ðə fɝs twɛlv əz wɛl. wɪð ðɛɹ wɪndfɪndɝz. ən lɛɾ əm noʊ jəl hɔɪst əm baɪ ðɛɹ toʊz ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn ɹɪɡɪŋ ɪf ðeɪ də nɑt hɝi." əz i ɹoʊz, ʃi æɾəd, "oʊ. ən əv ti sɛn daʊn. wɝkɪŋ aʊt ðə tɝmz ə ðɪs bɑɹɡən wɪl bi θɝsti."

The Shipmistress frowned at them a moment, before going on. "Baroc, summon the other Wavemistresses who hold this port, and the First Twelve as well. With their Windfinders. And let them know you will hoist them by their toes in their own rigging if they do not hurry." As he rose, she added, "Oh. And have tea sent down. Working out the terms of this bargain will be thirsty."

ði oʊl mæn nɑɾəd; ðəɾ i maɪt dæŋɡəl weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz baɪ ðɛɹ toʊz ən ðəɾ i mʌst sɛn ti wɝ æksɛptɪɾ ikwəli. aɪɪŋ eɪvinhə ən ði ʌðɝz, hi sɔntɝɾ aʊt wɪð ðət ɹoʊlɪŋ wɔk. ʃi tʃeɪnʒd əɹ əpɪnjən wən ʃi sɔ hɪz aɪz kloʊs ʌp. ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn ə feɪɾəl mɪsteɪk tə kɪl ðə wɪndfɪndɝ fɝst.

The old man nodded; that he might dangle Wavemistresses by their toes and that he must send tea were accepted equally. Eyeing Aviendha and the others, he sauntered out with that rolling walk. She changed her opinion when she saw his eyes close up. It might have been a fatal mistake to kill the Windfinder first.

sʌmwʌn mʌst əv bɪn əweɪɾɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz ə ðə sɔɹt, kəz bɹɑk wɑz oʊnli ɡɔn moʊməns bɪfɔɹ ə slɪm, pɹɪɾi jʌŋ mæn wɪð ə sɪŋɡəl θɪn ɹɪŋ ɪn itʃ ɪɹ ɛntɝd kæɹiɪŋ ə wʊɾən tʃɹeɪ ðət bɔɹ ə skwɛɹ blu-ɡleɪz tipɑt wɪð ə ɡoʊldən hændəl ən lɑɹdʒ blu kʌps ə θɪk pɑɾɝi. nɛstə dɪn ɹiz weɪvd ɪm aʊt - "hi wɪl spɹɛɾ ɪnʌf teɪlz əz ɪɾ ɪz, wɪθaʊt hɪɹɪŋ wʌɾ i ʃəd nɑt," ʃi sɛd wən i wɑz ɡɔn - ən dɝɛktəd bɝdʒɪt tə pɔɹ. wɪtʃ ʃi dɪd, tə eɪvinhəz sɝpɹaɪz, ən meɪbi hɝ oʊn.

Someone must have been awaiting orders of the sort, because Baroc was only gone moments before a slim, pretty young man with a single thin ring in each ear entered carrying a wooden tray that bore a square blue-glazed teapot with a golden handle and large blue cups of thick pottery. Nesta din Reas waved him out - "He will spread enough tales as it is, without hearing what he should not," she said when he was gone - and directed Birgitte to pour. Which she did, to Aviendha's surprise, and maybe her own.

ðə ʃɪpməstʃɹəs sɛɾəld ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv ɪn tʃɛɹz ət wʌn ɛn ə ðə teɪbəl, əpɛɹənli ɪntɛn ɑn bɪɡɪnɪŋ əɹ bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ. eɪvinhə ɹəfjuzd ə tʃɛɹ - ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə ðə teɪbəl - bʌt bɝdʒɪt tʊk wʌn, swɪŋɪŋ ði ɑɹm aʊt, ðən lætʃɪŋ ɪt bæk wən ʃi wɑz siɾəd. ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs ən ðə wɪndfɪndɝ wɝ ɪkskluɾəd fɹəm ðət dɪskʌʃən, tu, ɪf dɪskʌʃən ɪt kəd bi kɔld. ðə wɝdz wɝ tu loʊ tə hɪɹ, bʌt nɛstə dɪn ɹiz ɛmfəsaɪzd ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi sɛd wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ dʒɹɪvən laɪk ə spɪɹ, ɪleɪn hæɾ əɹ tʃɪn soʊ haɪ ʃi sim tə bi lʊkɪŋ daʊn əɹ noʊz, ən ɪf nɪneɪiv fəɹ wʌns wɑz mænɪdʒɪŋ tə kip əɹ feɪs kɑm, ʃi sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə klaɪm əɹ oʊn bɹeɪd.

The Shipmistress settled Elayne and Nynaeve in chairs at one end of the table, apparently intent on beginning her bargaining. Aviendha refused a chair - at the other end of the table - but Birgitte took one, swinging the arm out, then latching it back when she was seated. The Wavemistress and the Windfinder were excluded from that discussion, too, if discussion it could be called. The words were too low to hear, but Nesta din Reas emphasized everything she said with a finger driven like a spear, Elayne had her chin so high she seemed to be looking down her nose, and if Nynaeve for once was managing to keep her face calm, she seemed to be trying to climb her own braid.

"ɪf ɪt plizɪz ðə laɪt, əl spik wɪð boʊθ ə ju," mælɪn dɪn tɔɹəl sɛd, lʊkɪŋ fɹəm eɪvinhə tə bɝdʒɪt, "bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk aɪ mʌs hɪɹ jəɹ stɔɹi fɝst." bɝdʒɪt bɪɡæn tə lʊk əlɑɹmd əz ðə wʊmən sæt daʊn əkɹɔs fɹəm hɝ.

"If it pleases the Light, I will speak with both of you," Malin din Toral said, looking from Aviendha to Birgitte, "but I think I must hear your story first." Birgitte began to look alarmed as the woman sat down across from her.

"wɪtʃ minz aɪ kən spik fɝst wɪð ju, ɪf ɪt plizɪz ðə laɪt," dɔɹəl dɪn ɹən toʊld eɪvinhə. "aɪ hæv ɹɛɾ ə ði il. ɪf ɪt plizɪz ju, tɛl mi, ɪf ən il wʊmən mʌs kɪl ə mæn ɛvɹi deɪ, haʊ ɑɹ ðəɹ ɛni mɛn lɛft əmʌŋ ju?"

"Which means I can speak first with you, if it pleases the Light," Dorile din Eiran told Aviendha. "I have read of the Aiel. If it pleases you, tell me, if an Aiel woman must kill a man every day, how are there any men left among you?"

eɪvinhə dɪɾ əɹ bɛs nɑt tə stɛɹ. haʊ kəd ðə wʊmən bɪliv sətʃ nɑnsɛns?

Aviendha did her best not to stare. How could the woman believe such nonsense?

"wɛn dɪd jə lɪv əmʌŋ ʌs?" mælɪn dɪn tɔɹəl sɛɾ oʊvɝ əɹ tikʌp ət ðə nɪɹ ɛn ə ðə teɪbəl. bɝdʒɪt wɑz linɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm əɹ əz ðoʊ ʃi wɑntəd tə klaɪm oʊvɝ ðə bæk ə ðə tʃɛɹ.

"When did you live among us?" Malin din Toral said over her teacup at the near end of the table. Birgitte was leaning away from her as though she wanted to climb over the back of the chair.

ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə teɪbəl, nɛstə dɪn ɹiz' vɔɪs ɹoʊz fəɹ ə moʊmənt. ". . . keɪm tə mi, nɑɾ aɪ tə ju. ðət sɛts ðə beɪsəs fəɹ əɹ bɑɹɡən, ivən ɪf jə ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ."

At the far end of the table, Nesta din Reas' voice rose for a moment. ". . . came to me, not I to you. That sets the basis for our bargain, even if you are Aes Sedai."

slɪpɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum, bɹɑk pɔz bɪtwin eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪt. "ɪt simz jəɹ ʃɔɹboʊt dɪpɑɹɾəd əz sun əz jə keɪm bɪloʊ, bʌɾ əv noʊ wɝi; wɪndʒɹʌnɝ əz boʊts tə pʊt jə ɑn ðə ʃɔɹ." wɔkɪŋ ɑn daʊn ðə kæbən, hi tʊk ə tʃɛɹ bɪloʊ ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv ən dʒɔɪn ɹaɪɾ ɪn. wən ðeɪ lʊkt ət wɪtʃɛvɝ wɑz spikɪŋ, ði ʌðɝ kəɾ əbzɝv əm ənnoʊɾɪst. ðeɪ hæd lɔst ən ædvæntɪdʒ, wʌn ðeɪ niɾəd. "ʌv kɔɹs ðə bɑɹɡən ɪz ɑn əɹ tɝmz," hi sɛɾ ɪn toʊnz ə dɪsbɪlif ðəɾ ɪt kəd bi ʌðɝwaɪz, waɪl ðə ʃɪpməstʃɹəs stʌɾid ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv əz ə wʊmən maɪt tu ɡoʊts ʃi mɛn tə skɪn fəɹ ə fist. bɹɑks smaɪl wɑz ɔlmoʊs fɑðɝli. "hu æsks mʌst ə kɔɹs peɪ haɪəst."

Slipping into the room, Baroc paused between Aviendha and Birgitte. "It seems your shoreboat departed as soon as you came below, but have no worry; Windrunner has boats to put you on the shore." Walking on down the cabin, he took a chair below Elayne and Nynaeve and joined right in. When they looked at whichever was speaking, the other could observe them unnoticed. They had lost an advantage, one they needed. "Of course the bargain is on our terms," he said in tones of disbelief that it could be otherwise, while the Shipmistress studied Elayne and Nynaeve as a woman might two goats she meant to skin for a feast. Baroc's smile was almost fatherly. "Who asks must of course pay highest."

"bʌt jə mʌst əv lɪvd əmʌŋ əs tə noʊ ðoʊz eɪntʃən oʊðz," mælɪn dɪn tɔɹəl ɪnsɪstəd.

"But you must have lived among us to know those ancient oaths," Malin din Toral insisted.

"ɑɹ jə wɛl, eɪvinhə?" dɔɹəl dɪn ɹən æskt. "ivən hɪɹ, ðə moʊʃən ʌv ə ʃɪp səmtaɪmz əfɛks ʃɔɹfoʊk - noʊ? ən maɪ kwɛstʃənz də nɑɾ əfɛnd? ðən tɛl mi. də il wɪmən tʃɹuli taɪ ə mæn daʊn bɪfɔɹ jə - aɪ min, wən jə ən i - wən jə - " tʃiks ɹɛɾənd, ʃi bɹoʊk ɔf wɪð ə wik smaɪl. "ɑɹ mɛni il wɪmən əz stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə wʌn paʊɝ əz ju?"

"Are you well, Aviendha?" Dorile din Eiran asked. "Even here, the motion of a ship sometimes affects shorefolk - No? And my questions do not offend? Then tell me. Do Aiel women truly tie a man down before you - I mean, when you and he - when you - " Cheeks reddened, she broke off with a weak smile. "Are many Aiel women as strong in the One Power as you?"

ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə wɪndfɪndɝz fulɪʃ fʌmbəlɪŋ əbaʊt ðət hæd meɪd ðə blʌd dʒɹeɪn fɹəm eɪvinhəz feɪs, əɹ ðət bɝdʒɪɾ əpɪɹd ɹɛɾi tə ɹʌn wʌns ʃi kəd mænədʒ tə ənlætʃ ðə tʃɛɹ ɑɹm əɡɛn, əɹ ivən ðət nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɝ əpɛɹənli dɪskʌvɝɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ tu bɹaɪt-aɪd ɡɝlz əɾ ə fɛɹ, ɪn ðə hænz ʌv wɛl-sizən tʃɹeɪɾɝz. ðeɪ wəɾ ɔl bleɪm hɝ, ən ɹaɪtli. ʃi wɑz ðə wʌn u hæd sɛɾ ɪf ðeɪ kəd nɑt teɪk ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil bæk tə ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ wʌns faʊnd, waɪ nɑt sɪkjʊɹ ðiz si foʊk wɪmən ðeɪ spoʊk ʌv? taɪm kəd nɑt bi weɪstəd, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ tə seɪ ðeɪ kəd ɹɪtɝn. ðeɪ wəd bleɪm hɝ, ən ʃi wəd miɾ əɹ toʊ, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə boʊts ʃi hæd sin ɑn ðə dɛk, stækt ʌpsaɪd daʊn ətɑp wʌn ənʌðɝ. boʊts wɪθaʊɾ ɛni ʃɛltɝ ɑn bɔɹd. ðeɪ wəd bleɪm hɝ, bʌt wʌtɛvɝ dɛt ʃi oʊd ʃi wɑz gɑnə ɹipeɪ ə θaʊzændfoʊld ɪn ʃeɪm baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi wɑz teɪkən əkɹɔs sɛvən əɹ eɪt maɪlz ʌv wɔɾɝ ɪn ən oʊpən boʊt.

It was not the Windfinder's foolish fumbling about that had made the blood drain from Aviendha's face, or that Birgitte appeared ready to run once she could manage to unlatch the chair arm again, or even that Nynaeve and Elayne were apparently discovering they were two bright-eyed girls at a fair, in the hands of well-seasoned traders. They would all blame her, and rightly. She was the one who had said if they could not take the ter'angreal back to Egwene and the other Aes Sedai once found, why not secure these Sea Folk women they spoke of? Time could not be wasted, waiting for Egwene al'Vere to say they could return. They would blame her, and she would meet her toh, but she was remembering the boats she had seen on the deck, stacked upside down atop one another. Boats without any shelter on board. They would blame her, but whatever debt she owed she was going to repay a thousandfold in shame by the time she was taken across seven or eight miles of water in an open boat.

"du juv ə bʌkət?" ʃi æsk ðə wɪndfɪndɝ feɪnli.

"Do you have a bucket?" she asked the Windfinder faintly.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹtin


CHAPTER 14

waɪt plumz


White Plumes

ðə sɪlvɝ sɝkət wɑz mɪsneɪmd ət fɝst ɡlæns, bʌɾ ɛbu dɑɹ laɪkt ɡɹænd neɪmz, ən səmtaɪmz ɪt sim ðət ðə wɝs ðeɪ fɪt, ðə bɛɾɝ. ðə ɡɹɪmiɪs tævɝn mæt hæd sin ɪn ðə sɪɾi, smɛlɪŋ ə vɛɹi oʊl fɪʃ, bɔɹ ðə neɪm ə ðə kwinz ɡlɔɹi ɪn ɹeɪdʒjəns, waɪl ðə ɡoʊldən kɹaʊn ə hɛvən ɡɹeɪst ə dɪm hoʊl əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ ɪn ðə ɹæhəd wɪð oʊnli ə blu dɔɹ tə mɑɹk ɪt, wɛɹ blæk steɪnz fɹəm oʊl naɪf faɪts splətʃt ðə ɡɹaɪmi flɔɹ. ðə sɪlvɝ sɝkət wɑz fəɹ ɹeɪsɪŋ hɔɹsəz.

The Silver Circuit was misnamed at first glance, but Ebou Dar liked grand names, and sometimes it seemed that the worse they fit, the better. The grimiest tavern Mat had seen in the city, smelling of very old fish, bore the name of The Queen's Glory in Radiance, while The Golden Crown of Heaven graced a dim hole across the river in the Rahad with only a blue door to mark it, where black stains from old knife fights splotched the grimy floor. The Silver Circuit was for racing horses.

ɹimuvɪŋ ɪz hæt, hi fæn hɪmsɛlf wɪð ðə bɹɔd bɹɪm, ən wɛn soʊ fɑɹ əz tə lusən ðə blæk sɪlk skɑɹf i wɔɹ tə haɪd ðə skɑɹ ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk. ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ɛɹ ʃɪmɝd wɪð hiɾ ɔlɹɛɾi, jɛt kɹaʊdz pæk ðə tu lɔŋ ɝθən bæŋks ðət flæŋk ðə kɔɹs wɛɹ ðə hɔɹs wəd ɹʌn ʌp ən bæk. ðət wɑz ɔl ðəɹ wɑz tə ðə sɪlvɝ sɝkət. ðə mɝmɝ ə vɔɪsəz ɔlmoʊs dʒɹaʊn aʊt ðə kɹaɪz ə ðə ɡʌlz oʊvɝhɛd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃɑɹdʒ tə wɑtʃ, soʊ sɔltwɝkɝz ɪn ðə waɪt vɛst ə ðɛɹ ɡɪld ən ɡɔnt-feɪs fɑɹmɝz u hæd flɛd fɹəm ðə dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn ɪnlæn ɹʌbd ʃoʊldɝz wɪð ɹæɡəd tæɹɑbənɝz wɛɹɪŋ tʃɹænspɛɹən veɪlz əkɹɔs ðɛɹ θɪk mʌstæʃɪz, wivɝz ɪn vɛsts wɪð vɝɾɪkəl stʃɹaɪps, pɹɪntɝz ɪn hɔɹəzɑntəl stʃɹaɪps ən daɪɝz wɪð hænz steɪn tə ði ɛlboʊ. ði ʌnɹiliv blæk ʌv ɑmɑdɪʃən kʌntʃɹimɪn, bʌɾənd tə ðə nɛk ðoʊ ðə wɛɹɝz simd əbaʊt tə swɛt tə dɛθ, stʊɾ əlɔŋsaɪd mʊɹændiən vɪlədʒ dʒɹɛsəz wɪð lɔŋ kʌlɝfəl eɪpɹənz soʊ nɛɹoʊ ðeɪ mʌs bi oʊnli fəɹ ʃoʊ, ən ivən ə hændfʊl ə kɑpɝ-skɪn dəmɑni, ðə mɛn ɪn ʃɔɹt koʊts ɪf ðeɪ wɔɹ wʌn, ðə wɪmən ɪn wʊl əɹ lɪnən soʊ θɪn ɪt klʌŋ laɪk sɪlk. ðəɹ wɝ əpɹɛntəsɪz, ən leɪbɝɝz fɹəm ðə dɑks ən wɛɹhaʊzɪz, tænɝz u hæɾ ə smɔl speɪs ɝaʊn əm ɪn ðə kɹaʊd kəz ə ðə smɛl ə ðɛɹ wɝk, ən fɪlθi-feɪst stʃɹit tʃɪlʒɹən wɑtʃt kloʊsli kəz ðeɪ wəd stil wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ kəd leɪ hæn tə. ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl sɪlvɝ əmʌŋ ðə wɝkɪŋ pipəl, ðoʊ.

Removing his hat, he fanned himself with the broad brim, and went so far as to loosen the black silk scarf he wore to hide the scar around his neck. The morning air shimmered with heat already, yet crowds packed the two long earthen banks that flanked the course where the horse would run up and back. That was all there was to the Silver Circuit. The murmur of voices almost drowned out the cries of the gulls overhead. There was no charge to watch, so saltworkers in the white vest of their guild and gaunt-faced farmers who had fled from the Dragonsworn inland rubbed shoulders with ragged Taraboners wearing transparent veils across their thick mustaches, weavers in vests with vertical stripes, printers in horizontal stripes and dyers with hands stained to the elbow. The unrelieved black of Amadician countrymen, buttoned to the neck though the wearers seemed about to sweat to death, stood alongside Murandian village dresses with long colorful aprons so narrow they must be only for show, and even a handful of copper-skinned Domani, the men in short coats if they wore one, the women in wool or linen so thin it clung like silk. There were apprentices, and laborers from the docks and warehouses, tanners who had a small space around them in the crowd because of the smell of their work, and filthy-faced street children watched closely because they would steal whatever they could lay hand to. There was little silver among the working people, though.

ɔl ə ðɛm wɝ əbʌv ðə θɪk hɛmp ɹoʊps stʃɹʌŋ ɑn poʊsts. bɪloʊ wɑz fəɹ ðoʊz u dɪɾ əv sɪlvɝ, ən ɡoʊld; ðə wɛl-bɔɹn, ðə wɛl-dʒɹɛst ən ðə wɛl-tə-du. smʌɡ mɛnsɝvəns pɔɹd pʌntʃ ɪndə sɪlvɝ kʌps fəɹ ðɛɹ mæstɝz, flʌɾɝi meɪdz weɪv fɛðɝd fænz tə kul ðɛɹ mɪstʃɹəsəz, ən ðəɹ wɑz ivən ə keɪpɝɪŋ ful wɪð waɪt-peɪntəd feɪs ən dʒɪŋɡəlɪŋ bɹæs bɛlz ɑn ɪz blæk-ænd-waɪt hæɾ ən koʊt. hɔɾi mɛn ɪn haɪ-kɹaʊn vɛlvət hæts stʃɹʌɾɪd wɪð slɛndɝ sɔɹdz ɑn ðɛɹ hɪps, ðɛɹ hɛɹ bɹʌʃɪŋ sɪlk koʊts slʌŋ əkɹɔs ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən hɛl baɪ ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ tʃeɪnz bɪtwin ðə nɛɹoʊ, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ləpɛlz. səm ə ðə wɪmən hæd hɛɹ ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ðə mɛn ən səm lɔŋɡɝ, ɝeɪnʒd ɪn əz mɛni weɪz əz ðəɹ wɝ wɪmən; ðeɪ wɔɹ waɪd hæts wɪð plumz əɹ səmtaɪmz faɪn nɛɾɪŋ tə əbskjʊɹ ðɛɹ feɪsəz, ən ɡaʊnz juʒəwəli kʌt tə ʃoʊ bʊzəm wɛðɝ ɪn ðə loʊkəl staɪl əɹ fɹəm ɛlswɛɹ. ðə noʊbəlz, bɪniθ bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd pɛɹɑsəlz, ɡlɪɾɝd wɪð ɹɪŋz ən ɪɹɪŋz, nɛkləsɪz ən bɹeɪslɪts ɪn ɡoʊld ən aɪvɝi ən faɪn dʒɛmz əz ðeɪ stɛɹd daʊn ðɛɹ noʊzɪz əɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. wɛl-fɛd mɝtʃəns ən mʌnilɛndɝz, wɪð dʒʌst ə tʌtʃ ə leɪs ən pɝhæps wʌn pɪn əɹ ə ɹɪŋ bɛɹɪŋ ə fæt pɑlɪʃt stoʊn, hʌmbli baʊɾ əɹ kɝtsid tə ðɛɹ bɛɾɝz, hu vɛɹi laɪkli oʊɾ əm væst sʌmz. fɔɹtʃənz tʃeɪnʒd hænz ət ðə sɪlvɝ sɝkət, ən nɑt dʒʌst ɪn weɪdʒɝz. ɪt wɑz sɛd laɪvz ən ɑnɝ tʃeɪnʒd hænz, tu, bɪloʊ ðə ɹoʊps.

All of them were above the thick hemp ropes strung on posts. Below was for those who did have silver, and gold; the well-born, the well-dressed and the well-to-do. Smug menservants poured punch into silver cups for their masters, fluttery maids waved feathered fans to cool their mistresses, and there was even a capering fool with white-painted face and jingling brass bells on his black-and-white hat and coat. Haughty men in high-crowned velvet hats strutted with slender swords on their hips, their hair brushing silk coats slung across their shoulders and held by gold or silver chains between the narrow, embroidered lapels. Some of the women had hair shorter than the men and some longer, arranged in as many ways as there were women; they wore wide hats with plumes or sometimes fine netting to obscure their faces, and gowns usually cut to show bosom whether in the local style or from elsewhere. The nobles, beneath brightly colored parasols, glittered with rings and earrings, necklaces and bracelets in gold and ivory and fine gems as they stared down their noses at everyone else. Well-fed merchants and moneylenders, with just a touch of lace and perhaps one pin or a ring bearing a fat polished stone, humbly bowed or curtsied to their betters, who very likely owed them vast sums. Fortunes changed hands at the Silver Circuit, and not just in wagers. It was said lives and honor changed hands, too, below the ropes.

ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ ɪz hæt, mæt ɹeɪzd ɪz hænd, ən wʌn ə ðə bʊkɝz keɪm - ə hætʃət-feɪst wʊmən, wɪð ə noʊz laɪk ən ɔl - spɹɛɾɪŋ boʊni hænz əz ʃi baʊd, mɝmɝɪŋ ðə ɹɪtʃuəl "æz maɪ lɔɹd wɪʃɪz tə weɪdʒɝ, soʊ ʃæl aɪ ɹaɪt tʃɹuli." ði ɛbu dɑɹi æksɛn mænədʒ tə bi sɑf dɪspaɪt klɪpɪŋ ði ɛnz ɔf səm wɝdz. "ðə bʊk ɪz oʊpən." laɪk ðə seɪɪŋ, ði oʊpən bʊk ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɑn ðə bɹɛst ə hɝ ɹɛd vɛs keɪm fɹəm ə taɪm lɔŋ pæst, wən ðə weɪdʒɝz wɝ ɹɪɾən ɪndə ə bʊk, bʌɾ i səspɛktəɾ i wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn ðəɹ u nu ðæt. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd mɛni θɪŋz i hæd nɛvɝ sin, fɹəm taɪmz lɔŋ ɡɔn tə dʌst.

Replacing his hat, Mat raised his hand, and one of the bookers came - a hatchet-faced woman, with a nose like an awl - spreading bony hands as she bowed, murmuring the ritual "As my Lord wishes to wager, so shall I write truly." The Ebou Dari accent managed to be soft despite clipping the ends off some words. "The book is open." Like the saying, the open book embroidered on the breast of her red vest came from a time long past, when the wagers were written into a book, but he suspected he was the only one there who knew that. He remembered many things he had never seen, from times long gone to dust.

wɪð ə kwɪk ɡlæns ət ði ɑdz fəɹ ðə mɔɹnɪŋz fɪfθ ɹeɪs, tʃɔkt ɑn ðə sleɪt ðə pəlmən hɛld ʌp bɪhaɪn ðə ɹɛd-vɛstəd wʊmən, hi nɑɾəd. wɪnd wɑz oʊnli ðə θɝd feɪvɹɪt, dɪspaɪɾ ɪz vɪktɝiz. hi tɝn tə hɪz kəmpænjən. "pʊɾ ɪɾ ɔl ɑn wɪnd, neɪlzin."

With a quick glance at the odds for the morning's fifth race, chalked on the slate the poleman held up behind the red-vested woman, he nodded. Wind was only the third favorite, despite his victories. He turned to his companion. "Put it all on Wind, Nalesean."

ðə tɛɹən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə pɔɪn ə hɪz ɔɪl blæk bɪɹd. swɛt ɡlɪsən ɑn ɪz feɪs, jɛɾ i kɛpt ɪz koʊt wɪð ɪts fæt, blu-stʃɹaɪp slivz fæsən tə ðə tɑp ən wɔɹ ə skwɛɹ kæp ə blu vɛlvət ðət dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə kip ðə sʌn ɔf. "ɔl ʌv ɪt, mæt?" hi spoʊk sɔfli, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ðə wʊmən fɹəm hɪɹɪŋ. ði ɑdz kəd tʃeɪnʒ ɛni taɪm əntɪl jə æktʃəli  ɔfɝd jəɹ weɪdʒɝ. "bɝn maɪ soʊl, bʌt ðət lɪɾəl paɪbɔld lʊks fæst, ən soʊ dʌz ðət peɪl dʌn ɡɛldɪŋ wɪð ðə sɪlvɝi meɪn." ðeɪ wɝ ðə feɪvɹɪts tədeɪ, nu tə ðə sɪɾi ən laɪk ɔl θɪŋz nu, ʌv ɡɹeɪɾ ɛkspɛkteɪʃən.

The Tairen hesitated, fingering the point of his oiled black beard. Sweat glistened on his face, yet he kept his coat with its fat, blue-striped sleeves fastened to the top and wore a square cap of blue velvet that did nothing to keep the sun off. "All of it, Mat?" He spoke softly, trying to keep the woman from hearing. The odds could change any time until you actually offered your wager. "Burn my soul, but that little piebald looks fast, and so does that pale dun gelding with the silvery mane." They were the favorites today, new to the city and like all things new, of great expectation.

mæt dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə ɡlæns təwɔɹd ðə tɛn hɔɹsəz ɛntɝɾ ɪn ðə nɛkst ɹeɪs ðət wɝ pɝeɪɾɪŋ ət wʌn ɛn ə ðə kɔɹs. hi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi teɪkən ə ɡʊd lʊk waɪl pʊɾɪŋ oʊlvɝ ʌp ɑn waɪnd. "ɔl ʌv ɪt. səm ɪɾiət klʌb ðə paɪbɔlz teɪl; hiz ɔlɹɛɾi hæf mæd fɹəm ðə flaɪz. ðə dʌn ɪz ʃoʊi, bʌt hiz ə bæɾ æŋɡəl tə hɪz fɛtlɑks. hi meɪ hæv wʌn səm ɪn ðə kʌntʃɹi, bʌt hɪl fɪnɪʃ læs tədeɪ." hɔɹsəz wɝ wʌn θɪŋ i nu ɑn ɪz oʊn; hɪz fɑðɝ hæd tɔt hɪm, ən eɪbəl kɔθən hæɾ ə ʃɑɹp aɪ fəɹ hɔɹsflɛʃ.

Mat did not bother to glance toward the ten horses entered in the next race that were parading at one end of the course. He had already taken a good look while putting Olver up on Wind. "All of it. Some idiot clubbed the piebald's tail; he's already half mad from the flies. The dun is showy, but he has a bad angle to his fetlocks. He may have won some in the country, but he'll finish last today." Horses were one thing he knew on his own; his father had taught him, and Abell Cauthon had a sharp eye for horseflesh.

"hi lʊks mɔɹ ðən ʃoʊi tə mi," neɪlzin ɡɹʌmbəld, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑɾ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ ɛni mɔɹ.

"He looks more than showy to me," Nalesean grumbled, but he was not arguing any more.

ðə bʊkɝ blɪŋkt əz neɪlzin, saɪɪŋ, pʊl pɝs æftɝ fæt pɝs fɹəm ɪz bʌlʒɪŋ koʊt pɑkəts. ət wʌn pɔɪnt ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə pɹoʊtɛst, bʌt ði ɪlʌstʃɹiəs ən ɑnɝd ɡɪld ə bʊkɝz ɔlweɪz kleɪmd ɪt wəd teɪk ɛni weɪdʒɝ ɪn ɛni əmaʊnt. ðeɪ ivən weɪdʒɝd wɪð ʃɪp-oʊnɝz ən mɝtʃəns əz tə wɛðɝ ə ʃɪp wəd sɪŋk əɹ pɹaɪsəz tʃeɪnʒ; ɹæðɝ, ðə ɡɪld ɪtsɛlf dɪd, nɑɾ ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl bʊkɝz. ðə ɡoʊld wɛn ɪndə wʌn ə hɝ aɪɝn-stʃɹæp tʃɛsts, itʃ kæɹid baɪ ə pɛɹ ə fɛloʊz wɪð ɑɹmz əz θɪk əz mæts lɛɡz. hɝ ɡɑɹdz, hɑɹd-aɪɾ ən bɛnt-noʊzd ɪn lɛðɝ vɛsts ðət ʃoʊɾ ɑɹmz stɪl θɪkɝ, hɛld lɔŋ bɹæs-baʊn kʌdʒəlz. ənʌðɝ ə hɝ mɛn hændəɾ əɹ ə waɪt toʊkən bɛɹɪŋ ə dɪteɪl blu fɪʃ - ɛvɹi bʊkɝ hæɾ ə dɪfɹən sɪdʒəl - ən ʃi ɹoʊt ðə weɪdʒɝ, ðə neɪm ə ðə hɔɹs ən ə sɪmbəl ɪndəkeɪɾɪŋ ðə ɹeɪs ɑn ðə bæk wɪð ə faɪn bɹʌʃ ðət ʃi tʊk fɹəm ə lækɝd bɑks hɛl baɪ ə pɹɪɾi ɡɝl. slɪm, wɪð bɪɡ dɑɹk aɪz, ðə ɡɝl dɝɛktəɾ ə sloʊ smaɪl ət mæt. ðə hætʃət-feɪst wʊmən sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt smaɪl. boʊɪŋ əɡɛn, ʃi slæp ðə ɡɝl kæʒəwəli ən wɔkt ɔf wɪspɝɪŋ tə hɝ pəlmən, hu heɪstəli waɪpt ɪz sleɪt wɪð ə klɔθ. wən i hɛld ɪɾ ʌp əɡɛn, wɪnd wɑz lɪstəɾ ət ðə ʃɔɹɾɪst ɑdz. ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ tʃik sɝəptɪʃəsli, ðə ɡɝl skaʊl bæk ət mæt əz ðoʊ ðə slæp hæd bɪn ɪz fɔlt.

The booker blinked as Nalesean, sighing, pulled purse after fat purse from his bulging coat pockets. At one point she opened her mouth to protest, but the Illustrious and Honored Guild of Bookers always claimed it would take any wager in any amount. They even wagered with ship-owners and merchants as to whether a ship would sink or prices change; rather, the guild itself did, not individual bookers. The gold went into one of her iron-strapped chests, each carried by a pair of fellows with arms as thick as Mat's legs. Her guards, hard-eyed and bent-nosed in leather vests that showed arms still thicker, held long brass-bound cudgels. Another of her men handed her a white token bearing a detailed blue fish - every booker had a different sigil - and she wrote the wager, the name of the horse and a symbol indicating the race on the back with a fine brush that she took from a lacquered box held by a pretty girl. Slim, with big dark eyes, the girl directed a slow smile at Mat. The hatchet-faced woman certainly did not smile. Bowing again, she slapped the girl casually and walked off whispering to her poleman, who hastily wiped his slate with a cloth. When he held it up again, Wind was listed at the shortest odds. Rubbing her cheek surreptitiously, the girl scowled back at Mat as though the slap had been his fault.

"aɪ hoʊp jəɹ lʌk ɪz ɪn," neɪlzin sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ ðə toʊkən kɛɹfəli fəɹ ði ɪŋk tə dʒɹaɪ. bʊkɝz kəd bi tʌtʃi əbaʊt peɪɪŋ ɑn ə toʊkən wɪð smɪɹɾ ɪŋk, ən noʊ wʌn wɑz tʌtʃiɝ ðən ən ɛbu dɑɹi. "aɪ noʊ jə doʊn luz ɔfən, bʌɾ aɪv sin ɪt hæpən, bɝn mi bʌɾ aɪ hæv. ðɛɹz ə læs aɪ min tə stɛp aʊt wɪð ət ðə dænsɪŋ tənaɪt. dʒʌst ə simstʃɹɪs . . ." hi wɑz ə lɔɹd, ðoʊ nɑɾ ə bæd fɛloʊ ɹɪli, ən sətʃ θɪŋz simd ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə hɪm. ". . . bʌt pɹɪɾi ɪnʌf tə dʒɹaɪ jəɹ maʊθ. ʃi laɪks tʃɹɪŋkəts. ɡoʊldən tʃɹɪŋkəts. ʃi laɪks faɪɹwɝks, tu - aɪ hɪɹ səm ɪluməneɪɾɝz ɑɹ sɛɾɪŋ ʌp fəɹ tənaɪt; jəl bi ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ðət - bʌɾ ɪts tʃɹɪŋkəts meɪk əɹ smaɪl. ʃi woʊn bi fɹɛnli ɪf aɪ kænɑɾ əfɔɹd tə meɪk əɹ smaɪl, mæt."

"I hope your luck is in," Nalesean said, holding the token carefully for the ink to dry. Bookers could be touchy about paying on a token with smeared ink, and no one was touchier than an Ebou Dari. "I know you don't lose often, but I've seen it happen, burn me but I have. There's a lass I mean to step out with at the dancing tonight. Just a seamstress . . ." He was a lord, though not a bad fellow really, and such things seemed important to him. ". . . but pretty enough to dry your mouth. She likes trinkets. Golden trinkets. She likes fireworks, too - I hear some Illuminators are setting up for tonight; you'll be interested in that - but it's trinkets make her smile. She won't be friendly if I cannot afford to make her smile, Mat."

"jul meɪk əɹ smaɪl," mæt sɛɾ æbsənli. ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ stɪl wɔkɪŋ ɪn ə sɝkəl əbʌv ðə stɑɹɾɪŋ poʊlz. oʊlvɝ sæt pɹaʊdli ɑn wɪnz bæk, bɹɔd maʊθ ɡɹɪnɪŋ tə splɪɾ ɪz mɔɹ-ðæn-pleɪn feɪs fɹəm dʒʌɡ-ɪɹ tə dʒʌɡ-ɪɹ. ɪn ɛbu dɑɹi ɹeɪsəz, ɔl ðə ɹaɪɾɝz wɝ bɔɪz; ə fju maɪlz ɪnlænd, ðeɪ juzd ɡɝlz. oʊlvɝ wɑz ðə smɔləs hɪɹ tədeɪ, ðə laɪɾəst, nɑt ðət ðə lɛɡi ɡɹeɪ ɡɛldɪŋ niɾəd ði ædvæntɪdʒ. "jul meɪk əɹ læf tɪl ʃi kæn stæn ʌp." neɪlzin ɡeɪv ɪm ə fɹaʊn i bɛɹli noʊɾəst. ðə mæn ʃəd noʊ ɡoʊld wɑz wʌn θɪŋ mæt nɛvɝ hæd tə wɝi əbaʊt. hi maɪt nɑɾ ɔlweɪz wɪn, bʌt kloʊs ɪnʌf. hɪz lʌk hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð wɛðɝ wɪnd wʌn ɛniweɪ. ʌv ðəɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ.

"You'll make her smile," Mat said absently. The horses were still walking in a circle above the starting poles. Olver sat proudly on Wind's back, broad mouth grinning to split his more-than-plain face from jug-ear to jug-ear. In Ebou Dari races, all the riders were boys; a few miles inland, they used girls. Olver was the smallest here today, the lightest, not that the leggy gray gelding needed the advantage. "You'll make her laugh till she can't stand up." Nalesean gave him a frown he barely noticed. The man should know gold was one thing Mat never had to worry about. He might not always win, but close enough. His luck had nothing to do with whether Wind won anyway. Of that he was sure.

ɡoʊl dɪd nɑt kənsɝn hɪm, bʌɾ oʊlvɝ dɪd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹul əɡɛns ðə bɔɪz juzɪŋ ðɛɹ swɪtʃəz ɑn itʃ ʌðɝ ɪnstɛɾ ə ðɛɹ maʊns. ɪn ɛvɹi ɹeɪs soʊ fɑɹ, wɪn hæd bɹoʊkən tə ðə lɛɾ ən steɪd ðɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪf oʊlvɝ tʊk ɛni hɝt, ivən dʒʌst ə bɹuz, mæt wəd nɛvɝ hɪɹ ði ɛnd. nɑt fɹəm mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən, hɪz ɪnkipɝ, nɑt fɹəm nɪneɪiv əɹ ɪleɪn, nɑt fɹəm eɪvinhə əɹ bɝdʒɪt. ðə wʌntaɪm meɪɾən ə ðə spɪɹ ən ðə pəkjuljɝ wʊmən ɪleɪn hæd teɪkən əz ə wɔɹɾɝ wɝ ðə læst i wʊɾə ɪkspɛktəd tə ɡʌʃ wɪð mətɝnəl filɪŋz, jɛt ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi tʃɹaɪd tə muv ðə bɔɪ aʊɾ ə ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk ən ɪndə ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs. ɛniwɛɹ wɪð soʊ mɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz ðə læs pleɪs fəɹ oʊlvɝ, əɹ fəɹ ɛnibəɾi, bʌt wʌn bʌmp ən ɪnstɛɾ ə tɛlɪŋ bɝdʒɪɾ ən eɪvinhə ðeɪ hæd noʊ ɹaɪt tə teɪk ðə bɔɪ, sɛɾəl ɑnən wəd laɪkli hʌsəl ɪm ɔf ðəɹ hɝsɛlf. oʊlvɝ wəd pɹɑbli kɹaɪ hɪmsɛlf tə slip ɪf i wɑz nɑɾ əlaʊd tə ɹeɪs ɛnimɔɹ, bʌt wɪmən nɛvɝ ʌndɝstʊd ðiz θɪŋz. fəɹ əbaʊt ðə θaʊzənθ taɪm, mæt kɝs neɪlzin fəɹ snikɪŋ oʊlvɝ ən wɪn tə ðoʊz fɝst ɹeɪsəz. ʌv kɔɹs, ðeɪ hæd tə faɪn sʌmθɪŋ tə fɪl ɔl ði aɪɾəl aʊɝz ɑn ðɛɹ hænz, bʌt ðeɪ cʊɾə faʊn sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. kʌɾɪŋ pɝsɪz cʊɾə bɪn noʊ wɝs ɪn ðə wɪmənz aɪz.

Gold did not concern him, but Olver did. There was no rule against the boys using their switches on each other instead of their mounts. In every race so far, Wind had broken to the lead and stayed there, but if Olver took any hurt, even just a bruise, Mat would never hear the end. Not from Mistress Anan, his innkeeper, not from Nynaeve or Elayne, not from Aviendha or Birgitte. The onetime Maiden of the Spear and the peculiar woman Elayne had taken as a Warder were the last he would have expected to gush with maternal feelings, yet they had already tried to move the boy out of The Wandering Woman behind his back and into the Tarasin Palace. Anywhere with so many Aes Sedai was the last place for Olver, or for anybody, but one bump and instead of telling Birgitte and Aviendha they had no right to take the boy, Setalle Anan would likely hustle him off there herself. Olver would probably cry himself to sleep if he was not allowed to race anymore, but women never understood these things. For about the thousandth time, Mat cursed Nalesean for sneaking Olver and Wind to those first races. Of course, they had to find something to fill all the idle hours on their hands, but they could have found something else. Cutting purses could have been no worse in the women's eyes.

"hɪɹz ðə θif-kætʃɝ," neɪlzin sɛd, stʌfɪŋ ðə toʊkən ɪndə hɪz koʊt. hi dɪd nɑt kwaɪt snɪɹ. "mʌtʃ ɡʊd hiz dʌn soʊ fɑɹ. wiɾ əv dʌn bɛɾɝ tə bɹɪŋ ənʌðɝ fɪfti soʊlʒɝz ɪnstɛd."

"Here's the thief-catcher," Nalesean said, stuffing the token into his coat. He did not quite sneer. "Much good he's done so far. We'd have done better to bring another fifty soldiers instead."

dʒulɪn stʃɹoʊd ðoʊ ðə kɹaʊd pɝpəsfəli, ə dɑɹk, hɑɹd mæn juzɪŋ ə slɛndɝ bæmbu stæf əz tɔl əz hɪmsɛlf fəɹ ə wɔkɪŋ stɪk. wɪð ə flæt-tɑp kɑnɪkəl ɹɛd tæɹɑbənɝ kæp ɑn ɪz hɛɾ ən ə pleɪn koʊt, taɪt tə ðə weɪs ðən flɛɹɪŋ tə hɪz but tɑps, wɛl-wɔɹn ən pleɪnli nɑt ðə koʊɾ ə sʌmwʌn ɹɪtʃ, hi nɔɹməli wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn əlaʊd bɪloʊ ðə ɹoʊps, bʌɾ i meɪɾ aʊt tə stʌɾi ðə hɔɹsəz ən ɑstənteɪʃəsli baʊnst ə fæt kɔɪn ɑn ɪz pɑm. sɛvɹəl ə ðə bʊkɝz' ɡɑɹdz lʊkt əɾ ɪm səspɪʃəsli, bʌt ðə ɡoʊl kɹaʊn lɛɾ ɪm pæs.

Juilin strode though the crowd purposefully, a dark, hard man using a slender bamboo staff as tall as himself for a walking stick. With a flat-topped conical red Taraboner cap on his head and a plain coat, tight to the waist then flaring to his boot tops, well-worn and plainly not the coat of someone rich, he normally would not have been allowed below the ropes, but he made out to study the horses and ostentatiously bounced a fat coin on his palm. Several of the bookers' guards looked at him suspiciously, but the gold crown let him pass.

"wɛl?" mæt sɛd saʊɝli, tʌɡɪŋ ɪz hæt loʊ, wʌns ðə θif-kætʃɝ ɹitʃt hɪm. "noʊ, lemi tɛl ju. ðeɪ slɪpt aʊɾ ə ðə pæləs əɡɛn. noʊ wʌn sɔ ðɛm ɡoʊ, əɡɛn. noʊbɑdi hæz ɛni blʌɾi aɪdiə wɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ, əɡɛn."

"Well?" Mat said sourly, tugging his hat low, once the thief-catcher reached him. "No, let me tell you. They slipped out of the palace again. No one saw them go, again. Nobody has any bloody idea where they are, again."

dʒulɪn tʌk ðə kɔɪn kɛɹfəli ɪndə hɪz koʊt pɑkət. hi wəd meɪk noʊ weɪdʒɝ; hi sim tə seɪv ɛvɹi kɑpɝ ðət keɪm ɪndə hɪz hænz. "ɔl fɔɹ ə ðɛm tʊk ə kloʊz koʊtʃ fɹəm ðə pæləs tə ə lændɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝ, wɛɹ ðeɪ haɪɝɾ ə boʊt. tɑm haɪɝɾ ənʌðɝ tə fɑloʊ ən si wɛɹ ðəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ. noʊwɛɹ dɑɹk əɹ ənplɛzənt, aɪd seɪ, baɪ ðɛɹ kloʊðz. bʌɾ ɪts tʃɹu, noʊbəlz wɛɹ sɪlk tə kɹɔl ɪn ðə mʌd." hi ɡɹɪn ət neɪlzin, hu foʊldəɾ ɪz ɑɹmz ən pɹitɛndəd tə bi ɪnɡɹoʊst ɪn ðə hɔɹsəz. ðə ɡɹɪn wɑz ə mɪɹ bɛɹɪŋ ə tiθ. ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ tɛɹən, bʌt ðə ɡæp bɪtwin noʊbəl ən kɑmən stʊd waɪɾ ɪn tiɹ, ən niðɝ mæn laɪk ði ʌðɝz kʌmpəni.

Juilin tucked the coin carefully into his coat pocket. He would make no wager; he seemed to save every copper that came into his hands. "All four of them took a closed coach from the palace to a landing on the river, where they hired a boat. Thom hired another to follow and see where they're going. Nowhere dark or unpleasant, I'd say, by their clothes. But it is true, nobles wear silk to crawl in the mud." He grinned at Nalesean, who folded his arms and pretended to be engrossed in the horses. The grin was a mere baring of teeth. They were both Tairen, but the gap between noble and common stood wide in Tear, and neither man liked the other's company.

"wɪmən!" sɛvɹəl faɪnli dʒɹɛst spɛsəmənz nɪɹbaɪ tɝn tə aɪ mæt əskæns fɹəm bɪniθ bɹaɪt pɛɹɑsəlz. hi fɹaʊn ɹaɪt bæk, ðoʊ tu wɝ pɹɪɾi, ən ðeɪ sɛt tə læfɪŋ ən tʃæɾɝɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz əz ðoʊ hi hæd dʌn sʌmθɪŋ əmjuzɪŋ. ə wʊmən wəd də ə θɪŋ əntɪl jə wɝ ʃʊɹ ʃi ɔlweɪz wʊd, ðən də sʌmθɪŋ ɛls dʒʌs tə fʌɾəl ju. bʌɾ i hæd pɹɑməst ɹænd tə si ɪleɪn seɪfli tə keɪɛmlɪn, ən nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin wɪð hɝ. ən i hæd pɹɑməst ɛɡwin tə si ði ʌðɝ tu seɪf ɑn ðɪs tʃɹɪp tə ɛbu dɑɹ, nɑt tə mɛnʃən eɪvinhə; ðət wɑz ðə pɹaɪs ʌv ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪleɪn tə keɪɛmlɪn. nɑt ðət ðeɪ hæd toʊld ɪm waɪ ðeɪ niɾəd tə bi hɪɹ; oʊ, noʊ. nɑt ðət ðeɪ hæd spoʊkən twɛnti wɝdz tə hɪm sɪns ɝaɪvɪŋ ɪn ðə blʌɾi sɪɾi!

"Women!" Several finely dressed specimens nearby turned to eye Mat askance from beneath bright parasols. He frowned right back, though two were pretty, and they set to laughing and chattering among themselves as though he had done something amusing. A woman would do a thing until you were sure she always would, then do something else just to fuddle you. But he had promised Rand to see Elayne safely to Caemlyn, and Nynaeve and Egwene with her. And he had promised Egwene to see the other two safe on this trip to Ebou Dar, not to mention Aviendha; that was the price of getting Elayne to Caemlyn. Not that they had told him why they needed to be here; oh, no. Not that they had spoken twenty words to him since arriving in the bloody city!

"aɪl si ðɛm seɪf," hi mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, "ɪf aɪ hæv tə stʌf əm ɪndə bæɹəlz ən hɔl əm tə keɪɛmlɪn ɪn ə kɑɹt." hi maɪt bi ði oʊnli mæn ɪn ðə wɝld u kəd seɪ ðəɾ əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, meɪbi ivən ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɹænd ən ðoʊz fɛloʊz i wɑz ɡæðɝɪŋ. hi tʌtʃt ðə fɑkshɛd mədæljən hæŋɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz ʃɝt tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ, ðoʊ hi nɛvɝ tʊk ɪɾ ɔf, ivən tə beɪð. ɪt dɪɾ əv flɔz, bʌɾ ə mæn laɪk tə bi ɹimaɪndəd. "tæɹɑbən mʌs bi tɛɹəbəl naʊ fəɹ ə wʊmən nɑt juz tə teɪkɪŋ kɛɹ ə hɝsɛlf," dʒulɪn mɝmɝd. hi wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ θɹi veɪl mɛn ɪn tæɾɝd koʊts ən bæɡi wʌns-waɪt tʃɹaʊzɝz skɹæmbəl ʌp ðə bæŋk əhɛɾ ʌv ə pɛɹ ə bʊkmənz ɡɑɹdz weɪvɪŋ ðɛɹ klʌbz. noʊ ɹul sɛd ðə pʊɹ kəd nɑt kʌm bɪloʊ ðə ɹoʊps, bʌt ðə bʊkɝz' ɡɑɹdz dɪd. ðə tu pɹɪɾi wɪmən u hæɾ aɪd mæt əpɪɹd tə bi meɪkɪŋ ə pɹaɪvət weɪdʒɝ ɑn wɛðɝ ðə tæɹɑbənɝz wəɾ aʊtʃɹʌn ðə ɡɑɹdz.

"I'll see them safe," he muttered under his breath, "if I have to stuff them into barrels and haul them to Caemlyn in a cart." He might be the only man in the world who could say that about Aes Sedai without looking over his shoulder, maybe even including Rand and those fellows he was gathering. He touched the foxhead medallion hanging under his shirt to make sure it was there, though he never took it off, even to bathe. It did have flaws, but a man liked to be reminded. "Tarabon must be terrible now for a woman not used to taking care of herself," Juilin murmured. He was watching three veiled men in tattered coats and baggy once-white trousers scramble up the bank ahead of a pair of bookmen's guards waving their clubs. No rule said the poor could not come below the ropes, but the bookers' guards did. The two pretty women who had eyed Mat appeared to be making a private wager on whether the Taraboners would outrun the guards.

"wiv mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf wɪmən ɹaɪt hɪɹ wɪθaʊt sɛns tə kʌm ɪn aʊɾ ə ðə ɹeɪn," mæt toʊl hɪm. "ɡoʊ bæk tə ðət boʊt lændɪŋ ən weɪt fəɹ tɑm. tɛl ɪm aɪ niɾ ɪm əz sun əz pɑsəbəl. aɪ wɑnə noʊ wʌt ðoʊz ful blʌɾi wɪmən ɑɹ ʌp tə."

"We've more than enough women right here without sense to come in out of the rain," Mat told him. "Go back to that boat landing and wait for Thom. Tell him I need him as soon as possible. I want to know what those fool bloody women are up to."

dʒulɪnz lʊk dɪd nɑt kwaɪt kɔl ɪm ə ful. ðeɪ hæd, æftɝ ɔl, bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn aʊɾ ɪɡzækli ðət fəɹ oʊvɝ ə mʌnθ naʊ, ɛvɝ sɪns kʌmɪŋ hɪɹ. wɪð ə læst ɡlæns ət ðə fliɪŋ mɛn, hi sɔntɝd bæk ðə weɪ hi hæd kʌm, wʌns mɔɹ baʊnsɪŋ ðə kɔɪn ɪn ɪz hænd.

Juilin's look did not quite call him a fool. They had, after all, been trying to find out exactly that for over a month now, ever since coming here. With a last glance at the fleeing men, he sauntered back the way he had come, once more bouncing the coin in his hand.

fɹaʊnɪŋ, mæt pɪɹɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɹeɪs kɔɹs. ɪt wɑz bɛɹli fɪfti peɪsɪz tə ðə kɹaʊɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, ən feɪsəz lɛpt aʊɾ əɾ ɪm - ə bɛnt, waɪt-hɛɹɾ oʊl mæn wɪð ə hʊk noʊz, ə ʃɑɹp-feɪst wʊmən ʌndɝ ə hæt ðət simd moʊsli plumz, ə tɔl fɛloʊ hu lʊk laɪk ə stɔɹk ɪn ɡɹin sɪlk ən ɡoʊl bɹeɪd, ə naɪsli plʌmp, fʊl-maʊð jʌŋ wʊmən u əpɪɹɾ əbaʊt tə kʌm aʊɾ ə hɝ dʒɹɛs ət ðə tɑp. ðə lɔŋɡɝ ðə hit kəntɪnjud, ðə fjuɝ ən θɪnɝ ɡɑɹməns wɪmən ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ wɔɹ, bʌt fəɹ wʌns i hɑɹdli ɡeɪv əm ɛni noʊɾəs. wiks hæd ɡɔn baɪ sɪns i soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlɪmps ðə wɪmən u kənsɝn ɪm naʊ.

Frowning, Mat peered across the race course. It was barely fifty paces to the crowd on the other side, and faces leaped out at him - a bent, white-haired old man with a hooked nose, a sharp-faced woman under a hat that seemed mostly plumes, a tall fellow who looked like a stork in green silk and gold braid, a nicely plump, full-mouthed young woman who appeared about to come out of her dress at the top. The longer the heat continued, the fewer and thinner garments women in Ebou Dar wore, but for once he hardly gave them any notice. Weeks had gone by since he so much as glimpsed the women who concerned him now.

bɝdʒɪt sɝɾənli niɾəd noʊ wʌn tə hoʊld əɹ hænd; ə hʌntɝ fəɹ ðə hɔɹn, ɛniwʌn u tʃɹʌbəld əɹ wəd bi ɪn ə dip hoʊl baɪ hɪz ɛstəmeɪʃən. ən eɪvinhə. . . . ɔl ʃi niɾəd wɑz sʌmwʌn tə kip əɹ fɹəm stæbɪŋ ɛvɹibɑɾi hu lʊkt əɾ əɹ kɹɔsweɪz. əz fɑɹ əz i wɑz kənsɝnd, ʃi kəd naɪf huɛvɝ ʃi wɑntəd soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪleɪn. fəɹ ɔl ðə blʌɾi dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ wɔkt əbaʊt wɪð əɹ noʊz ɪn ði ɛɹ, ʃi tɝn mun-aɪɾ ɝaʊn ɹænd, ən fəɹ ɔl eɪvinhə bɪheɪvd əz ɪf ʃi wəd stæb ɛni mæn u ɡlænst əɹ weɪ, ʃi dɪd ðə seɪm. ɹænd juʒəwəli nu haʊ tə dil wɪð wɪmən, bʌɾ i hæd dʒʌmpt ɪndə ə bɛɹ pɪt lɛɾɪŋ ðət pɛɹ kʌm təɡɛðɝ. ɪt wɑz ə ʃɔɹt ɹoʊd tə dɪzæstɝ, ən waɪ ɹuən hæd nɑt hæpənd wɑz bɪɑn mæt.

Birgitte certainly needed no one to hold her hand; a Hunter for the Horn, anyone who troubled her would be in a deep hole by his estimation. And Aviendha. . . . All she needed was someone to keep her from stabbing everybody who looked at her crossways. As far as he was concerned, she could knife whoever she wanted so long as it was not Elayne. For all the bloody Daughter-Heir walked about with her nose in the air, she turned moon-eyed around Rand, and for all Aviendha behaved as if she would stab any man who glanced her way, she did the same. Rand usually knew how to deal with women, but he had jumped into a bear pit letting that pair come together. It was a short road to disaster, and why ruin had not happened was beyond Mat.

fəɹ səm ɹizən ɪz aɪz dʒɹɪftəd bæk tə ðə ʃɑɹp-feɪst wʊmən. ʃi wɑz pɹɪɾi, ɪf vʌlpaɪn. əbaʊt nɪneɪivz eɪdʒ, hi ɛstəmeɪɾəd; ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə tɛl ət ðə dɪstəns, bʌɾ i kəd dʒʌdʒ wɪmən əz wɛl əz i kəd hɔɹsəz. ʌv kɔɹs, wɪmən kəd ful jə fæstɝ ðən ɛni hɔɹs. slɪm. waɪ dɪd ʃi meɪk ɪm θɪŋk ə stʃɹɔ? wʌɾ i kəd si ʌv əɹ hɛɹ bɪniθ ðə plum hæt wɑz dɑɹk. noʊ mæɾɝ.

For some reason his eyes drifted back to the sharp-faced woman. She was pretty, if vulpine. About Nynaeve's age, he estimated; it was hard to tell at the distance, but he could judge women as well as he could horses. Of course, women could fool you faster than any horse. Slim. Why did she make him think of straw? What he could see of her hair beneath the plumed hat was dark. No matter.

bɝdʒɪɾ ən eɪvinhə kəd də wɪθaʊɾ ɪz ʃɛpɝɾɪŋ, ən nɔɹməli hi wʊɾə sɛd ðə seɪm ʌv ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv, haʊɛvɝ ɹɔŋ-hɛɾəd, kənsiɾəd ən daʊnɹaɪt pʊʃi ðeɪ kəd bi. ðət ðeɪ hæd bɪn snikɪŋ aʊɾ ɔl ðɪs taɪm sɛd dɪfɹənli, ðoʊ. ɹɔŋhɛɾədnəs wɑz ðə ki. ðeɪ wɝ ðə sɔɹɾ u bɪɹeɪɾɪd ə mæn fəɹ mɛɾəlɪŋ ən tʃeɪst ɪm əweɪ, ðən bɪɹeɪɾɪd ɪm əɡɛn fəɹ nɑt biɪŋ ðəɹ wən i wɑz niɾəd. nɑt ðət ðeɪ wəɾ ədmɪɾ i wɑz niɾəd, ivən ðɛn, nɑt ðɛm. ɹeɪz ə hæn tə hɛlp ən jə wɝ ɪntɝfɪɹɪŋ, də nʌθɪŋ ən jə wɝ ən ʌn-tʃɹʌstwɝði weɪstʃɹəl.

Birgitte and Aviendha could do without his shepherding, and normally he would have said the same of Elayne and Nynaeve, however wrong-headed, conceited and downright pushy they could be. That they had been sneaking out all this time said differently, though. Wrongheadedness was the key. They were the sort who berated a man for meddling and chased him away, then berated him again for not being there when he was needed. Not that they would admit he was needed, even then, not them. Raise a hand to help and you were interfering, do nothing and you were an un-trustworthy wastrel.

ðə fɑks-feɪst wʊmən əkɹɔs ðə weɪ pɑpt ɪndə hɪz vju əɡɛn. nɑt stʃɹɔ; ə steɪbəl. wɪtʃ meɪd noʊ mɔɹ sɛns. hi hæd hæd faɪn taɪmz ɪn steɪbəlz wɪð mɛni ə jʌŋ wʊmən ən səm nɑt soʊ jʌŋ, bʌt ʃi wɔɹ mɑɾəstli kʌt blu sɪlk wɪð ə haɪ nɛk ɹaɪɾ ʌndɝ əɹ tʃɪn tʃɹɪmd ɪn snoʊi leɪs, ən mɔɹ spɪlɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ hænz. ə leɪɾi, ən i əvɔɪɾəd noʊbəlwɪmən laɪk dɛθ. pleɪɪŋ hɔɾi laɪk ə hɑɹp, ɪkspɛktɪŋ ə mæn ɔlweɪz tə bi ət ðɛɹ bɛk ən kɔl. nɑt mæt kɔθən. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ʃi wɑz fænɪŋ hɝsɛlf wɪð ə spɹeɪ ʌv waɪt plumz. wɛɹ wɑz əɹ meɪd? ə naɪf. waɪ ʃəd ʃi meɪk ɪm θɪŋk ʌv ə naɪf? ən . . . faɪɝ? sʌmθɪŋ bɝnɪŋ, ɛniweɪ.

The fox-faced woman across the way popped into his view again. Not straw; a stable. Which made no more sense. He had had fine times in stables with many a young woman and some not so young, but she wore modestly cut blue silk with a high neck right under her chin trimmed in snowy lace, and more spilling over her hands. A lady, and he avoided noblewomen like death. Playing haughty like a harp, expecting a man always to be at their beck and call. Not Mat Cauthon. Strangely, she was fanning herself with a spray of white plumes. Where was her maid? A knife. Why should she make him think of a knife? And . . . fire? Something burning, anyway.

ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd, hi tʃɹaɪd tə foʊkəs ɑn wʌt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ʌðɝ mɛnz mɛmɹiz, ʌv bæɾəlz ən kɔɹts ən lænz vænɪʃt sɛntʃɝiz əɡoʊ, fɪl hoʊlz ɪn ɪz oʊn, pleɪsəz wɛɹ ɪz oʊn laɪf sʌɾənli wɛn θɪn əɹ wɑz nɑt ðəɹ əɾ ɔl. hi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ fliɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn kwaɪt klɪɹli fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, bʌɾ ɔlmoʊs nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ əntɪl ɹitʃɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn, ən ðəɹ wɝ ɡæps bɪfɔɹ ən æftɝ, əz wɛl. ɪf hoʊl jɪɹz ə hɪz oʊn ɡɹoʊɪŋ ʌp leɪ bɪɑn ɹikɔl, waɪ ʃəɾ i ɪkspɛk tə ɹɛkəlɛkt ɛvɹi wʊmən i hæd mɛt? meɪbi ʃi ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ə səm wʊmən dɛɾ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz əɹ mɔɹ; ðə laɪt nu ðət hæpən ɔfən ɪnʌf. ivən bɝdʒɪt səmtaɪmz tɪkəld ɪz mɛmɹi. wɛl, ðəɹ wɝ fɔɹ wɪmən hɪɹ ən naʊ hu hæɾ ɪz bɹeɪn taɪɾ ɪn nɑts. ðeɪ wɝ wʌt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt.

Shaking his head, he tried to focus on what was important. Other men's memories, of battles and courts and lands vanished centuries ago, filled holes in his own, places where his own life suddenly went thin or was not there at all. He could remember fleeing the Two Rivers with Moiraine and Lan quite clearly for example, but almost nothing more until reaching Caemlyn, and there were gaps before and after, as well. If whole years of his own growing up lay beyond recall, why should he expect to recollect every woman he had met? Maybe she reminded him of some woman dead a thousand years or more; the Light knew that happened often enough. Even Birgitte sometimes tickled his memory. Well, there were four women here and now who had his brain tied in knots. They were what was important.

nɪneɪiv ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ əvɔɪɾɪŋ ɪm əz ɪf i hæd fliz. faɪv taɪmz i hæd bɪn tə ðə pæləs, ən ðə wʌns ðeɪ wəd si hɪm, ɪt wɑz tə seɪ ðeɪ wɝ tu bɪzi fəɹ ɪm ən sɛn ɪm əweɪ laɪk ən ɛɹən bɔɪ. ɪɾ ɔl æɾəd ʌp tə wʌn θɪŋ. ðeɪ θɔɾ i wəɾ ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ ʌp tə, ən ði oʊnli ɹizən i wəd də ðət wɑz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ pʊɾɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn deɪnʒɝ. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt kəmplit fulz; ɪɾiəts ɔfən, bʌt nɑt kəmplit fulz. ɪf ðeɪ sɔ deɪnʒɝ, ðəɹ wɑz deɪnʒɝ. səm pleɪsəz ɪn ðɪs sɪɾi, biɪŋ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ əɹ ʃoʊɪŋ ə kɔɪn kəd bɹɪŋ ə naɪf ɪn jəɹ ɹɪbz, ən nɑɾ ivən tʃænəlɪŋ wəd stɑp ɪɾ ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt si ɪn taɪm. ən hɪɹ i wɑz, wɪð neɪlzin ən ə dʌzən ɡʊd mɛn fɹəm ðə bænd, nɑt tə mɛnʃən tɑm ən dʒulɪn, hu æktʃəli  hæd ɹumz ɪn ðə sɝvəns' kɔɹɾɝz ə ðə pæləs, ɔl lɛf tə twɪɾəl ðɛɹ θʌmz. ðoʊz θɪk-skʌld wɪmən gɑnə tə ɡɛt ðɛɹ θɹoʊts kʌt jɛt. "nɑɾ ɪf aɪ kən hɛlp ɪt," hi ɡɹaʊld. "wʌt?" neɪlzin sɛd. "lʊk. ðəɹ laɪnɪŋ ʌp, mæt. ðə laɪt bɝn maɪ soʊl, aɪ hoʊp jəɹ ɹaɪt. ðət paɪbɔl dʌzn lʊk hæf-kɹeɪz tə mi; hi lʊks iɡɝ."

Nynaeve and the others were avoiding him as if he had fleas. Five times he had been to the palace, and the once they would see him, it was to say they were too busy for him and send him away like an errand boy. It all added up to one thing. They thought he would interfere with whatever they were up to, and the only reason he would do that was if they were putting themselves in danger. They were not complete fools; idiots often, but not complete fools. If they saw danger, there was danger. Some places in this city, being a stranger or showing a coin could bring a knife in your ribs, and not even channeling would stop it if they did not see in time. And here he was, with Nalesean and a dozen good men from the Band, not to mention Thom and Juilin, who actually had rooms in the servants' quarters of the palace, all left to twiddle their thumbs. Those thick-skulled women were going to get their throats cut yet. "Not if I can help it," he growled. "What?" Nalesean said. "Look. They're lining up, Mat. The Light burn my soul, I hope you're right. That piebald doesn't look half-crazed to me; he looks eager."

ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ pɹænsɪŋ, teɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ pleɪsəz bɪtwin tɔl poʊlz stʌk ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, wɪð stʃɹimɝz teɪlɪŋ fɹəm ðə tɑps ə ðɛm ɪn ə wɔɹm bɹiz, blu ən ɡɹin ən ɛvɹi kʌlɝ, səm stʃɹaɪpt. faɪv hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz daʊn ðə tʃɹæk ə hɑɹd-biɾən ɹɛd kleɪ ən aɪdɛntɪkəl nʌmbɝ ə stʃɹimɝd poʊlz meɪɾ ənʌðɝ ɹoʊ. itʃ ɹaɪɾɝ hæd tə ɹaʊn ðə seɪm-kʌlɝd stʃɹimɝ əz floʊɾəd tə hɪz ɹaɪɾ ət ðə stɑɹɾ ən ðən ɹɪtɝn. ə bʊkɝ stʊɾ əɾ iðɝ ɛn ə ðə laɪn ə hɔɹsəz, dʒʌs tə ðə fɹʌnt, ə ɹaʊnd wʊmən ən ə ɹaʊndɝ mæn, itʃ wɪð ə waɪt skɑɹf hɛld oʊvɝhɛd. ðə bʊkɝz tʊk tɝnz ət ðɪs, ən wɝ nɑɾ əlaʊd tə æksɛpt weɪdʒɝz ɑn ə ɹeɪs ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd.

The horses were prancing, taking their places between tall poles stuck in the ground, with streamers tailing from the tops of them in a warm breeze, blue and green and every color, some striped. Five hundred paces down the track of hard-beaten red clay an identical number of streamered poles made another row. Each rider had to round the same-colored streamer as floated to his right at the start and then return. A booker stood at either end of the line of horses, just to the front, a round woman and a rounder man, each with a white scarf held overhead. The bookers took turns at this, and were not allowed to accept wagers on a race they started.

"bɝn mi," neɪlzin mʌɾɝd. "laɪt, mæn, bi izi. jəl tɪkəl jəɹ simstʃɹɪs ʌndɝ ðə tʃɪn jɛt." ə ɹɔɹ dʒɹaʊn ðə læst wɝɾ əz ðə skɑɹvz keɪm daʊn, ən ðə hɔɹsəz sɝdʒ fɔɹwɝd, ivən ðə saʊn ə ðɛɹ hʊvz səbmɝdʒd ɪn ðə nɔɪz ə ðə kɹaʊd. ɪn tɛn stʃɹaɪdz wɪn hæd ðə lɛd, oʊlvɝ laɪɪŋ kloʊs ɑn ɪz nɛk, wɪð ðə sɪlvɝ-meɪn dʌn oʊnli ə hɛd bæk. ðə paɪbɔl tʃɹeɪld ɪn ðə pæk, wɛɹ ðə ɹaɪɾɝz' swɪtʃəz ɔlɹɛɾi ɹoʊz ən fɛl fɹæntəkəli.

"Burn me," Nalesean muttered. "Light, man, be easy. You'll tickle your seamstress under the chin yet." A roar drowned the last word as the scarves came down, and the horses surged forward, even the sound of their hooves submerged in the noise of the crowd. In ten strides Wind had the lead, Olver lying close on his neck, with the silver-maned dun only a head back. The piebald trailed in the pack, where the riders' switches already rose and fell frantically.

"aɪ toʊl jə ðə dʌn wɑz deɪnʒɝəs," neɪlzin moʊnd. "wi ʃʊdn əv weɪdʒɝɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ."

"I told you the dun was dangerous," Nalesean moaned. "We shouldn't have wagered everything."

mæt dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə ænsɝ. hi hæɾ ənʌðɝ pɝs ɪn ɪz pɑkəɾ ən lus kɔɪnz bɪsaɪdz. hi kɔl ðə pɝs ɪz sid; wɪð ðæt, wɪð ivən ə fju ʌv ðə kɔɪnz ɪn ɪt, ən ə ɡeɪm ə daɪs, hi kəd ɹɪpɛɹ ɪz fɔɹtʃənz wʌtɛvɝ hæpən ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. hæfweɪ daʊn ðə kɔɹs, wɪn stɪl hɛl ðə lɛd, ðə dʌn klɪŋɪŋ kloʊz ə fʊl lɛŋθ əhɛɾ ə ðə nɛks hɔɹs. ðə paɪ-bɔld wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ fɪfθ. æftɝ ðə tɝn wəd kʌm ðə hæzɝd; bɔɪz ɑn tʃɹeɪlɪŋ ænəməlz wɝ noʊn tə slæʃ ət ðoʊz u ɹaʊndəd ðə steɪks əhɛɾ ə ðɛm.

Mat did not bother to answer. He had another purse in his pocket and loose coins besides. He called the purse his seed; with that, with even a few of the coins in it, and a game of dice, he could repair his fortunes whatever happened this morning. Halfway down the course, Wind still held the lead, the dun clinging close a full length ahead of the next horse. The pie-bald was running fifth. After the turn would come the hazard; boys on trailing animals were known to slash at those who rounded the stakes ahead of them.

fɑloʊɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz, mæts aɪz swɛpt əkɹɔs ðə ʃɑɹp-feɪst wʊmən əɡɛn . . . ən snæp bæk. ðə ʃaʊts ən skɹimz ə ðə kɹaʊd feɪɾəd. ðə wʊmən wɑz ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ fæn ət ðə hɔɹsəz ən dʒʌmpɪŋ ɪksaɪɾədli, bʌt sʌɾənli hi sɔ hɝ ɪn peɪl ɡɹin ən ə ɹɪtʃ ɡɹeɪ kloʊk, hɝ hɛɹ kɑɾ ɪn ə fɹɔθi nɛɾ ə leɪs, skɝts hɛld ʌp dɛləkətli əz ʃi pɪkt əɹ weɪ əkɹɔs ə steɪbəl nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn.

Following the horses, Mat's eyes swept across the sharp-faced woman again . . . and snapped back. The shouts and screams of the crowd faded. The woman was shaking her fan at the horses and jumping excitedly, but suddenly he saw her in pale green and a rich gray cloak, her hair caught in a frothy net of lace, skirts held up delicately as she picked her way across a stable not far from Caemlyn.

ɹænd stɪl leɪ ðəɹ moʊnɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹɔ, ivən ɪf ðə fivɝ simd ɡɔn; ət list i wɑz nɑt ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɛnimɔɹ ət pipəl u wɝ nɑt ðɛɹ. mæt aɪd ðə wʊmən səspɪʃəsli əz ʃi nɛl bɪsaɪd ɹænd. meɪbi ʃi kəd hɛlp əz ʃi kleɪmd, bʌt mæt dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌst əz i wʌns hæd. wʌt wɑz ə faɪn leɪɾi laɪk ðɪs duɪŋ ɪn ə vɪlədʒ steɪbəl? kɝɛsɪŋ ðə ɹubi-tɪp hɪlt ə ðə dæɡɝ hɪɾən baɪ hɪz koʊt, hi wʌndɝd waɪ hi hæɾ ɛvɝ tʃɹʌstɪd. ɪt nɛvɝ peɪd. nɛvɝ.

Rand still lay there moaning in the straw, even if the fever seemed gone; at least he was not shouting anymore at people who were not there. Mat eyed the woman suspiciously as she knelt beside Rand. Maybe she could help as she claimed, but Mat did not trust as he once had. What was a fine lady like this doing in a village stable? Caressing the ruby-tipped hilt of the dagger hidden by his coat, he wondered why he had ever trusted. It never paid. Never.

". . . wik əz ə deɪ-oʊl kɪɾən," ʃi wɑz seɪɪŋ əz ʃi ɹitʃt bɪniθ əɹ kloʊk. "aɪ θɪŋk. . . ."

". . . weak as a day-old kitten," she was saying as she reached beneath her cloak. "I think. . . ."

ə naɪf əpɪɹɾ ɪn əɹ hæn soʊ sʌɾənli, stʃɹikɪŋ fəɹ mæts θɹoʊt, ðəɾ i wʊɾə bɪn dɛɾ ɪf i hæd nɑt bɪn ɹɛɾi. dʒɹɑpɪŋ flæt, hi sizd əɹ ɹɪst, dʒʌs pʊʃɪŋ ɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm, ðə kɝvd ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ bleɪd swipɪŋ aʊt tə laɪ əɡɛnst əɹ slɪm waɪt nɛk. ðə wʊmən fɹoʊz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk daʊn ət ðə ʃɑɹp ɛdʒ dɪmplɪŋ əɹ skɪn. hi wɑntəd tə slaɪs. ɪspɛʃli wən i sɔ wɛɹ əɹ oʊn dæɡɝ hæd stæbd ɪndə ðə steɪbəl wɔl. ɝaʊn ðə slɪm bleɪɾ ə blæk sɝkəl ə tʃɑɹ ɡɹu, ən ə θɪn ɡɹeɪ tɛnʒɹɪl ə smoʊk ɹoʊz fɹəm wʊɾ əbaʊt tə bɝst ɪndə fleɪm.

A knife appeared in her hand so suddenly, streaking for Mat's throat, that he would have been dead if he had not been ready. Dropping flat, he seized her wrist, just pushing it away from him, the curved Shadar Logoth blade sweeping out to lie against her slim white neck. The woman froze, trying to look down at the sharp edge dimpling her skin. He wanted to slice. Especially when he saw where her own dagger had stabbed into the stable wall. Around the slim blade a black circle of char grew, and a thin gray tendril of smoke rose from wood about to burst into flame.

ʃɪvɝɪŋ, mæt ɹʌbd ə hæn əkɹɔs ɪz aɪz. dʒʌs kæɹiɪŋ ðət ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ naɪf hæd nɪɹli kɪl hɪm, iɾɪŋ ðoʊz hoʊlz ɪn ɪz mɛmɹiz, bʌt haʊ kəɾ i fɝɡɛɾ ə wʊmən u tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl hɪm? eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnd - ʃi hæɾ ədmɪɾəd əz mʌtʃ - hu tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl ɪm wɪð ə dæɡɝ ðət sɛɾ ə bʌkəɾ ʌv wɔɾɝ nɪɹ bɔɪlɪŋ wən ðeɪ tɔst ɪɾ ɪn æftɝ sɪkjʊɹɪŋ əɹ ɪn ðə tækɹum. eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛn u hæd bɪn hʌntɪŋ ɹænd ən hɪm. wʌt tʃæns ʃi wɑz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ wən i wɑz, ət ðə ɹeɪsəz ɑn ðə seɪm deɪ? tɑvɝən maɪt bi ði ænsɝ - hi laɪk θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðəɾ əbaʊɾ əz mʌtʃ i dɪd ðə hɔɹn ə blʌɾi vəlɪɹ - bʌt ðə fækt wɑz, ðə fɔɹseɪkən nu hɪz neɪm. ðət steɪbəl hæd nɑt bɪn ðə læs taɪm dɑɹkfɹɛnz tʃɹaɪd pʊɾɪŋ ən ɛn tə mæt kɔθən.

Shivering, Mat rubbed a hand across his eyes. Just carrying that Shadar Logoth knife had nearly killed him, eating those holes in his memories, but how could he forget a woman who tried to kill him? A Darkfriend - she had admitted as much - who tried to kill him with a dagger that set a bucket of water near boiling when they tossed it in after securing her in the tackroom. A Darkfriend who had been hunting Rand and him. What chance she was in Ebou Dar when he was, at the races on the same day? Ta'veren might be the answer - he liked thinking of that about as much he did the Horn of bloody Valere - but the fact was, the Forsaken knew his name. That stable had not been the last time Darkfriends tried putting an end to Mat Cauthon.

hi stæɡɝɾ əz neɪlzin sʌɾənli bɪɡæn paʊndɪŋ ɪz bæk. "lʊk ət hɪm, mæt! laɪɾ ə hɛvən, lʊk ət hɪm!"

He staggered as Nalesean suddenly began pounding his back. "Look at him, Mat! Light of heaven, look at him!"

ðə hɔɹsəz hæd ɹaʊndəd ðə fɑɹ poʊlz ən wɝ wɛl ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ bæk. hɛd stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt, meɪn ən teɪl flaɪɪŋ bɪhaɪnd, wɪn stʃɹik daʊn ðə kɔɹs wɪð oʊlvɝ klɪŋɪŋ tə hɪz bæk laɪk ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə sæɾəl. ðə bɔɪ ɹoʊɾ əz ɪf i hæd bɪn bɔɹn ðɛɹ. fɔɹ lɛŋθs bɪhaɪnd, ðə paɪbɔl paʊndɪd fjʊɹiəsli, ɹaɪɾɝ wɝkɪŋ ɪz swɪtʃ ɪn ə fjuɾəl ɛfɝt tə kloʊz. dʒʌs laɪk ðət ðeɪ slæʃt əkɹɔs ðə fɪnɪʃ laɪn, wɪð ðə nɛks nɪɹəs hɔɹs ənʌðɝ θɹi lɛŋθs bæk. ðə waɪt-meɪn dʌn keɪm læst. ðə moʊnz ən mʌɾɝz ə luzɪŋ bɛɾɝz oʊvɝwɛlm ðə ʃaʊts ʌv wɪnɝz. luzɪŋ toʊkənz meɪɾ ə ʃaʊɝ ʌv waɪɾ ɑntu ðə tʃɹæk, ən dʌzənz ə ðə bʊkɝz' sɝvəns ɹʌʃt aʊt tə klɪɹ əm əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ðə nɛkst ɹeɪs. "wi hæv tə faɪn ðət wʊmən, mæt. aɪd nɑt pʊɾ ɪt pæst əɹ tə ɹʌn ɔf wɪθaʊt peɪɪŋ aʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ʃi oʊz ʌs." fɹəm wʌt mæt hæd hɝd, ðə bʊkɝz' ɡɪld wɑz mɔɹ ðən hɑɹʃ ðə fɝs taɪm wʌn ʌv ɪts mɛmbɝz tʃɹaɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ ə ðə sɔɹt, ən dɛdli ðə sɛkənd, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ kɑmənɝz, ən ðət wɑz ɪnʌf fəɹ neɪlzin.

The horses had rounded the far poles and were well on their way back. Head stretched out, mane and tail flying behind, Wind streaked down the course with Olver clinging to his back like a part of the saddle. The boy rode as if he had been born there. Four lengths behind, the piebald pounded furiously, rider working his switch in a futile effort to close. Just like that they slashed across the finish line, with the next nearest horse another three lengths back. The white-maned dun came last. The moans and mutters of losing bettors overwhelmed the shouts of winners. Losing tokens made a shower of white onto the track, and dozens of the bookers' servants rushed out to clear them away before the next race. "We have to find that woman, Mat. I'd not put it past her to run off without paying out so much as she owes us." From what Mat had heard, the bookers' guild was more than harsh the first time one of its members tried anything of the sort, and deadly the second, but they were commoners, and that was enough for Nalesean.

"ʃiz stændɪŋ ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝ ðəɹ ɪn pleɪn vju." mæt dʒɛstʃɝd wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz fɹəm ðə fɑks-feɪs dɑɹkfɹɛnd. ɡlɛɹɪŋ əɾ ə toʊkən, ʃi hɝld ɪt tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən ivən lɪftəɾ əɹ skɝts tə stæmp ɑn ɪt. pleɪnli nɑɾ ə weɪdʒɝ ɑn wɪnd. stɪl ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ, ʃi bɪɡæn θɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ weɪ θɹu ðə kɹaʊd. mæt stɪfənd. ʃi wɑz livɪŋ. "ɡæðɝ əɹ wɪnɪŋz, neɪlzin, ðən teɪk oʊlvɝ bæk tə ði ɪn. ɪf i mɪsəz ɪz ɹiɾɪŋ lɛsən, jəl kɪs ðə dɑɹk wʌnz sɪstɝ bɪfɔɹ mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən lɛts ɪm aʊt fəɹ ənʌðɝ ɹeɪs."

"She's standing right over there in plain view." Mat gestured without taking his eyes from the fox-faced Darkfriend. Glaring at a token, she hurled it to the ground, and even lifted her skirts to stamp on it. Plainly not a wager on Wind. Still grimacing, she began threading her way through the crowd. Mat stiffened. She was leaving. "Gather our winnings, Nalesean, then take Olver back to the inn. If he misses his reading lesson, you'll kiss the Dark One's sister before Mistress Anan lets him out for another race."

"wɛɹ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ?"

"Where are you going?"

"aɪ sɔ ə wʊmən u tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl mi," mæt sɛɾ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ.

"I saw a woman who tried to kill me," Mat said over his shoulder.

"ɡɪv əɹ ə tʃɹɪŋkət nɛks taɪm," neɪlzin ʃaʊɾəd æftɝ hɪm. fɑloʊɪŋ ðə wʊmən wɑz noʊ tʃɹʌbəl, wɪð ðət waɪt-plum hæt fəɹ ə bænɝ bɑbɪŋ θɹu ðə kɹaʊɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. ði ɝθən bæŋks ɡeɪv weɪ tə ə lɑɹdʒ oʊpən ɛɹiə wɛɹ bɹaɪtli lækɝd koʊtʃɪz ən sɪdæn tʃɛɹz weɪɾəd ʌndɝ ðə wɑtʃfəl aɪz ə dʒɹaɪvɝz ən bɛɹɝz. mæts hɔɹs pɪps wɑz wʌn ə skɔɹz biɪŋ ɡɑɹɾəd baɪ mɛmbɝz ə ði eɪntʃən ən wɝʃəpfəl ɡɪld ə steɪbəlmən. ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡɪl fəɹ moʊs θɪŋz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ən woʊ tə ɛniwʌn u tʃɹɛspæst ɑn ðɛɹ ɡɹaʊnd. hi pɔzd, bʌt ʃi wɔkt ɑn baɪ ðə kənvənsɪz ðət hæd bɹɔt ðoʊz wɪð pəzɪʃən əɹ mʌni. noʊ meɪd, ən naʊ nɑɾ ivən ə tʃɛɹ. noʊ wʌn wɔkt ɪn ðɪs hiɾ u hæd mʌni tə ɹaɪd. hæd maɪ leɪɾi kʌm ɑn hɑɹd taɪmz?

"Give her a trinket next time," Nalesean shouted after him. Following the woman was no trouble, with that white-plumed hat for a banner bobbing through the crowd on the other side. The earthen banks gave way to a large open area where brightly lacquered coaches and sedan chairs waited under the watchful eyes of drivers and bearers. Mat's horse Pips was one of scores being guarded by members of the Ancient and Worshipful Guild of Stablemen. There was a guild for most things in Ebou Dar, and woe to anyone who trespassed on their ground. He paused, but she walked on by the conveyances that had brought those with position or money. No maid, and now not even a chair. No one walked in this heat who had money to ride. Had my Lady come on hard times?

ðə sɪlvɝ sɝkət leɪ dʒʌst saʊθ ə ðə tɔl waɪt-plæstɝd sɪɾi wɔl, ən ʃi stʃɹoʊld ʌp ðə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əɹ soʊ ʌv ɹoʊd tə ðə bɹɔd pɔɪntəɾ ɑɹtʃ ə ðə moʊldin ɡeɪɾ ən ɪn. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əpɪɹ kæʒəwəl, mæt fɑloʊd. ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɑz tɛn spænz ə dɪm tʌnəl, bʌɾ əɹ hæt stʊɾ aʊɾ əmʌŋ ðə foʊk pæsɪŋ θɹu. pipəl u hæd tə wɔk sɛldəm wɔɹ plumz. ʃi sim tə noʊ wɛɹ ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. ðə plumz woʊv θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz əhɛɾ ə hɪm, ənhɝid bʌɾ ɔlweɪz muvɪŋ fɔɹwɝd.

The Silver Circuit lay just south of the tall white-plastered city wall, and she strolled up the hundred paces or so of road to the broad pointed arch of the Moldine Gate and in. Trying to appear casual, Mat followed. The gateway was ten spans of dim tunnel, but her hat stood out among the folk passing through. People who had to walk seldom wore plumes. She seemed to know where she was going on the other side. The plumes wove through the crowds ahead of him, unhurried but always moving forward.

ɛbu dɑɹ ʃoʊn waɪɾ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sʌn. waɪt pæləsəz wɪð waɪt kɑləmz ən skɹin ɹɔt-aɪɝn bælkəniz tʃik-baɪ-dʒaʊl wɪð waɪt-plæstɝd wivɝz' ʃɑps ən fɪʃmɑŋɡɝz ən steɪbəlz, ɡɹeɪt waɪt haʊsəz wɪð luvɝd ʃʌɾɝz haɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ ɑɹtʃt wɪndoʊz bɪsaɪd waɪɾ ɪnz wɪð peɪntəd saɪnz hæŋɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ən oʊpən mɑɹkəts ʌndɝ lɔŋ ɹufs wɛɹ lɪv ʃip ən tʃɪkənz, kævz ən ɡis ən dʌks meɪɾ ə bɑɹnjɑɹd dɪn əlɔŋsaɪd ðɛɹ fɛloʊz ɔlɹɛɾi bʊtʃɝɾ ən hæŋɪŋ. ɔl waɪt, stoʊn əɹ plæstɝ, ɪksɛp hɪɹ ən ðəɹ bænz ə ɹɛɾ əɹ blu əɹ ɡoʊld ɑn tɝnəp-ʃeɪp doʊmz ən pɔɪntəd spaɪɹz ðət hæd bælkəniz ɹʌnɪŋ ɝaʊn ðɛm. ðəɹ wɝ skwɛɹz ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ɔlweɪz wɪð ə stætʃu lɑɹdʒɝ ðən laɪf ɑn ə pɛɾəstəl əɹ ə splæʃɪŋ faʊntən ðəɾ oʊnli ɛmfəsaɪz ðə hit, ɔlweɪz pækt wɪð pipəl. ɹɛfjudʒiz fɪl ðə sɪɾi, ən mɝtʃəns ən tʃɹeɪɾɝz ʌv ɛvɹi sɔɹt. nɛvɝ ə tʃɹʌbəl bʌt bɹɔt pɹɑfət tə sʌmbɑɾi. wʌt sɑldɑiə hæd wʌns sɛn ɪndə ɑɹæd dumən naʊ keɪm daʊnɹɪvɝ tə ɛbu dɑɹ, ən soʊ dɪd wʌɾ ɑmɑdɪʃiə hæd tʃɹeɪɾɪd ɪndə tæɹɑbən. ɛvɹiwʌn skɝid, fəɹ ə kɔɪn əɹ ə θaʊzənd, fəɹ ə baɪt tə it tədeɪ. ði ɝoʊmə ðət hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ wɑz ikwəl pɑɹts pɝfjum, dʌst ən swɛt. sʌmhaʊ, ɪɾ ɔl smɛl dɛspɹɪt.

Ebou Dar shone white in the morning sun. White palaces with white columns and screened wrought-iron balconies cheek-by-jowl with white-plastered weavers' shops and fishmongers and stables, great white houses with louvered shutters hiding their arched windows beside white inns with painted signs hanging in front and open markets under long roofs where live sheep and chickens, calves and geese and ducks made a barnyard din alongside their fellows already butchered and hanging. All white, stone or plaster, except here and there bands of red or blue or gold on turnip-shaped domes and pointed spires that had balconies running around them. There were squares everywhere, always with a statue larger than life on a pedestal or a splashing fountain that only emphasized the heat, always packed with people. Refugees filled the city, and merchants and traders of every sort. Never a trouble but brought profit to somebody. What Saldaea had once sent into Arad Doman now came downriver to Ebou Dar, and so did what Amadicia had traded into Tarabon. Everyone scurried, for a coin or a thousand, for a bite to eat today. The aroma that hung in the air was equal parts perfume, dust and sweat. Somehow, it all smelled desperate.

bɑɹdʒ-fɪl kənælz slaɪs θɹu ðə sɪɾi, kɹɔs baɪ dʌzənz ə bɹɪdʒəz, səm soʊ nɛɹoʊ ðət tu pipəl wəɾ əv tə skwiz pæst wʌn ənʌðɝ, ʌðɝz lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf ðət ʃɑps æktʃəli  laɪn ðɛm, hæŋɪŋ aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə wɔɾɝ. ɑn wʌn ə ðoʊz, hi sʌɾənli ɹilaɪz ðət ðə waɪt-plum hæt hæd stɑpt. pipəl floʊɾ ɝaʊn ɪm əz i dɪd, tu. ðə ʃɑps hɪɹ wɝ ɹɪli dʒʌst oʊpən wʊɾən nʊks, wɪð hɛvi plæŋk ʃʌɾɝz ðət kəd bi lɛt daʊn tə kloʊz əm ɔf ət naɪt. ɹeɪzd oʊvɝhɛd naʊ, ðə ʃʌɾɝz dɪspleɪd saɪnz fəɹ ðə ʃɑps. ðə wʌn əbʌv ðə plum hæt ʃoʊɾ ə ɡoʊldən skeɪl ən hæmɝ, saɪn ə ðə ɡoʊlsmɪθs' ɡɪld, ðoʊ pleɪnli nɑɾ ʌv ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli pɹɑspɝəs mɛmbɝ. θɹu ə moʊməntɛɹi ɡæp ɪn ðə kɹaʊd, hi sɔ hɝ lʊk bæk, ən tɝn hɝidli tə ðə nɛɹoʊ stɔl tə hɪz ɹaɪt. ɑn ðə wɔl ət ðə bæk hʌŋ fɪŋɡɝ ɹɪŋz, ən bɔɹdz dɪspleɪɪŋ stoʊnz kʌɾ ɪn ɔl sɔɹts ə dɪzaɪnz.

Barge-filled canals sliced through the city, crossed by dozens of bridges, some so narrow that two people would have to squeeze past one another, others large enough that shops actually lined them, hanging out over the water. On one of those, he suddenly realized that the white-plumed hat had stopped. People flowed around him as he did, too. The shops here were really just open wooden nooks, with heavy plank shutters that could be let down to close them off at night. Raised overhead now, the shutters displayed signs for the shops. The one above the plumed hat showed a golden scale and hammer, sign of the goldsmiths' guild, though plainly not of a particularly prosperous member. Through a momentary gap in the crowd, he saw her look back, and turned hurriedly to the narrow stall to his right. On the wall at the back hung finger rings, and boards displaying stones cut in all sorts of designs.

"maɪ lɔɹd wɪʃɪz ə nu sɪɡnɪt ɹɪŋ?" ðə bɝdlaɪk fɛloʊ bɪhaɪn ðə kaʊntɝ æskt, boʊɪŋ ən dʒɹaɪ-wɑʃɪŋ ɪz hænz. skɪni əz ə ɹeɪl, hi hæd noʊ wɝi ʌv ɛniwʌn stilɪŋ ɪz ɡʊdz. kɹæmpt ɪndə ə kɔɹnɝ ɑn ə stul sæɾ ə wʌn-aɪd fɛloʊ hu maɪɾ əv hæd tʃɹʌbəl stændɪŋ əpɹaɪɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə kjubɪkəl, wɪð ə lɔŋ kʌdʒəl stʌɾɪd wɪð neɪl hɛdz pɹɑp bɪtwin ɪz mæsɪv niz. "aɪ kən kʌɾ ɛni dɪzaɪn, əz maɪ lɔɹd kən si, ən aɪ hæv tʃɹaɪɝɪŋz fəɹ ðə saɪz, ʌv kɔɹs."

"My Lord wishes a new signet ring?" the birdlike fellow behind the counter asked, bowing and dry-washing his hands. Skinny as a rail, he had no worry of anyone stealing his goods. Cramped into a corner on a stool sat a one-eyed fellow who might have had trouble standing upright inside the cubicle, with a long cudgel studded with nail heads propped between his massive knees. "I can cut any design, as my Lord can see, and I have tryrings for the size, of course."

"lɛt mi si ðət wʌn." mæt pɔɪntəɾ ət ɹændəm; hi niɾəd səm ɹizən tə stæn hɪɹ əntɪl ʃi wɛn ɑn. ɪt maɪt bi ə ɡʊd taɪm tə dɪsaɪɾ ɪɡzækli wʌɾ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə du.

"Let me see that one." Mat pointed at random; he needed some reason to stand here until she went on. It might be a good time to decide exactly what he was going to do.

"ə faɪn ɪɡzæmpəl ə ðə lɔŋ staɪl, maɪ lɔɹd, mʌtʃ ɪn feɪvɝ naʊ. ɡoʊld, bʌɾ aɪ wɝk ɪn sɪlvɝ, əz wɛl. waɪ, aɪ θɪŋk ðə saɪz ɪz ɹaɪt. ɪf maɪ lɔɹd wəd kɛɹ tə tʃɹaɪ ɪɾ ɑn? maɪ lɔɹd meɪ wɪʃ tə ɪɡzæmɪn ðə faɪn dɪteɪl ə ðə kɑɹvɪŋ? dʌz maɪ lɔɹd pɹəfɝ ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ?"

"A fine example of the long style, my Lord, much in favor now. Gold, but I work in silver, as well. Why, I think the size is right. If my Lord would care to try it on? My Lord may wish to examine the fine detail of the carving? Does my Lord prefer gold or silver?"

wɪð ə ɡɹʌn ðəɾ i hoʊp maɪt bi teɪkən fəɹ ænsɝ tə səm ə ðæt, mæt ʃʌv ðə pɹɑfɝd ɹɪŋ ɑntu ðə sɛkən fɪŋɡɝ ə hɪz lɛf hæn ən pɹitɛndəd tə ɪɡzæmɪn ðə dɑɹk oʊvəl ə kɑɹv stoʊn. ɔl i ɹɪli sɔ wɑz ðəɾ ɪt wɑz əz lɔŋ əz ðə dʒɔɪn ə hɪz fɪŋɡɝ. hɛd daʊn, hi stʌɾid ðə wʊmən fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ ðə bɛst i kəd θɹu ɡæps ðəɾ oʊpən ɪn ðə θɹɔŋ. ʃi wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ə waɪd, flæt ɡoʊl nɛkləs ʌp tə ðə laɪt.

With a grunt that he hoped might be taken for answer to some of that, Mat shoved the proffered ring onto the second finger of his left hand and pretended to examine the dark oval of carved stone. All he really saw was that it was as long as the joint of his finger. Head down, he studied the woman from the corner of his eye the best he could through gaps that opened in the throng. She was holding a wide, flat gold necklace up to the light.

ðəɹ wɑz ə sɪvəl ɡɑɹɾ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, bʌt nɑɾ ə vɛɹi ɪfɪʃənt wʌn, sɛldəm tə bi sin ɑn ðə stʃɹits. ɪf i dɪnaʊns hɝ, ɪt wəd bi hɪz wɝɾ əɡɛns hɝz, ən ivən ɪf i wɑz bɪlivd, ə fju kɔɪnz maɪt lɛɾ əɹ wɔk fɹi ivən ɑn ðət tʃɑɹdʒ. ðə sɪvəl ɡɑɹd wɑz tʃipɝ ðən ə mædʒəstʃɹeɪt, bʌɾ iðɝ kəd bi bɑɾ ənlɛs sʌmwʌn paʊɝfəl wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ, ən ðən ɪf ɪnʌf ɡoʊld leɪ ɪn ði ɔfɝ.

There was a Civil Guard in Ebou Dar, but not a very efficient one, seldom to be seen on the streets. If he denounced her, it would be his word against hers, and even if he was believed, a few coins might let her walk free even on that charge. The Civil Guard was cheaper than a magistrate, but either could be bought unless someone powerful was watching, and then if enough gold lay in the offer.

ə swɝl ɪn ðə kɹaʊd sʌɾənli tɝn ɪndə ə waɪtkloʊk, kɑnɪkəl hɛlməɾ ən lɔŋ meɪl ʃɝt ɡlimɪŋ laɪk sɪlvɝ, snoʊi kloʊk wɪð ðə flɛɹɪŋ ɡoʊldən sʌn bɪloʊɪŋ əz i stʃɹoʊɾ əlɔŋ kɑnfəɾənt ðəɾ ə pæθ wəd klɪɹ fəɹ hɪm. wɪtʃ ɪt sɝɾənli dɪd; fju wɪlɪŋli pʊt ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. jɛt fəɹ ɛvɹi aɪ ðət slɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə stoʊn-feɪs mæn, ənʌðɝ bimd ɑn ɪm əpɹuvɪŋli. ðə ʃɑɹp-feɪst wʊmən nɑɾ oʊnli lʊkt əɾ ɪm oʊpənli, ʃi smaɪld. ə tʃɑɹdʒ leɪɾ əɡɛnst əɹ maɪɾ əɹ maɪt nɑt pʊɾ əɹ ɪn pɹɪzən, bʌɾ ɪt kəd bi ðə spɑɹk tə ɪɡnaɪɾ ə sɪɾi fʊl ə teɪlz əbaʊt dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs. waɪtkloʊks wɝ ɡʊɾ ət wɪpɪŋ ʌp mɑbz, ən tə ðɛm, ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. əz ðə tʃaɪld ə ðə laɪt pæs hɝ, ʃi leɪd daʊn ðə nɛkləs, əpɛɹənli ɹɪɡɹɛtfəl, ən tɝn tə ɡoʊ.

A swirl in the crowd suddenly turned into a Whitecloak, conical helmet and long mail shirt gleaming like silver, snowy cloak with the flaring golden sun billowing as he strode along confident that a path would clear for him. Which it certainly did; few willingly put themselves in the way of the Children of the Light. Yet for every eye that slid away from the stone-faced man, another beamed on him approvingly. The sharp-faced woman not only looked at him openly, she smiled. A charge laid against her might or might not put her in prison, but it could be the spark to ignite a city full of tales about Darkfriends in the Tarasin Palace. Whitecloaks were good at whipping up mobs, and to them, Aes Sedai were Darkfriends. As the Child of the Light passed her, she laid down the necklace, apparently regretful, and turned to go.

"dʌz ðə staɪl sut maɪ lɔɹd?"

"Does the style suit my Lord?"

mæt ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. hi hæd fɝɡɑɾən ðə skɪni mæn ən ðə ɹɪŋ, tu. "noʊ, aɪ doʊnt wɑnt - " fɹaʊnɪŋ, hi tʌɡd ət ðə ɹɪŋ əɡɛn. ɪt wəd nɑt bʌdʒ!

Mat gave a start. He had forgotten the skinny man and the ring, too. "No, I don't want - " Frowning, he tugged at the ring again. It would not budge!

"noʊ nid tə pʊl; jə maɪt kɹæk ðə stoʊn." naʊ ðəɾ i wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ə pətɛnʃəl kʌstəmɝ, mæt wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ maɪ lɔɹd, iðɝ. snɪfɪŋ, ðə fɛloʊ kɛpt ə ʃɑɹp aɪ ɑn ɪm lɛst i tʃɹaɪ tə ɹʌn. "aɪ hæv səm ɡɹis. dɛɹəl, wɛɹz ðət ɡɹis-pɑt?" ðə ɡɑɹd blɪŋkt ən skɹætʃt ɪz hɛɾ əz ɪf wʌndɝɪŋ wʌɾ ə ɡɹis-pɑt wɑz. ðə waɪt-plum hæt wɑz hæfweɪ tə ði ɛn ə ðə bɹɪdʒ ɔlɹɛɾi.

"No need to pull; you might crack the stone." Now that he was no longer a potential customer, Mat was no longer my Lord, either. Sniffing, the fellow kept a sharp eye on him lest he try to run. "I have some grease. Deryl, where's that grease-pot?" The guard blinked and scratched his head as if wondering what a grease-pot was. The white-plumed hat was halfway to the end of the bridge already.

"aɪl teɪk ɪt," mæt snæpt. noʊ taɪm fəɹ hæɡəlɪŋ. hɔlɪŋ ə fɪsfəl ə kɔɪnz fɹəm ɪz koʊt pɑkət, hi slæpt əm daʊn ɑn ðə kaʊntɝ, moʊsli ɡoʊld ən ə lɪɾəl sɪlvɝ. "ɪnʌf?"

"I'll take it," Mat snapped. No time for haggling. Hauling a fistful of coins from his coat pocket, he slapped them down on the counter, mostly gold and a little silver. "Enough?"

ðə ɹɪŋmeɪkɝz aɪz bʌlʒd. "ə lɪɾəl tu mʌtʃ," hi kweɪvɝɾ ənsɝteɪnli. hɪz hænz hɛzɪteɪɾɪd əbʌv ðə kɔɪnz, ðən tu fɪŋɡɝz pʊʃt ə pɛɹ ə sɪlvɝ pɛniz təwɔɹd mæt. "soʊ mʌtʃ?"

The ringmaker's eyes bulged. "A little too much," he quavered uncertainly. His hands hesitated above the coins, then two fingers pushed a pair of silver pennies toward Mat. "So much?"

"ɡɪv əm tə dɛɹəl," mæt ɡɹaʊld əz ðə blʌɾi ɹɪŋ slɪp fɹəm ɪz fɪŋɡɝ. ðə skɪni mæn wɑz hɝidli ɹeɪkɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹɛst ə ðə kɔɪnz. tu leɪt tə tʃɹaɪ bækɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə pɝtʃəs. mæt wʌndɝd baɪ dʒʌs haʊ mʌtʃ i hæɾ oʊvɝpeɪd. stʌfɪŋ ðə ɹɪŋ ɪndə hɪz pɑkət, hi heɪsən æftɝ ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnd. ðə hæt wɑz noʊwɛɹ tə bi sin.

"Give them to Deryl," Mat growled as the bloody ring slipped from his finger. The skinny man was hurriedly raking up the rest of the coins. Too late to try backing out of the purchase. Mat wondered by just how much he had overpaid. Stuffing the ring into his pocket, he hastened after the Darkfriend. The hat was nowhere to be seen.

twɪn stætʃuz dɛkɝeɪɾəd ði ɛn ə ðə bɹɪdʒ, peɪl mɑɹbəl wɪmən oʊvɝ ə spæn tɔl, itʃ wɪð wʌn bɹɛs bɛɹɾ ən ə hæn ɹeɪz tə pɔɪn təwɔɹd sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə skaɪ. ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ə bɛɹ tʃɛst sɪmbəlaɪzd oʊpənnəs ən ɑnəsti. ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ stɛɹz, hi klaɪmd ʌp bɪsaɪd wʌn ə ðə wɪmən, stɛɾiɪŋ hɪmsɛlf wɪð ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn əɹ weɪst. ə stʃɹit ɹæn əlɔŋ ðə kənæl, ən tu mɔɹ splɪɾ ɔf əɾ æŋɡəlz əhɛd, ɔl fʊl ə pipəl ən kɑɹts, sɪdæn tʃɛɹz ən wæɡənz ən koʊtʃɪz. sʌmwʌn ʃaʊɾəd ɪn ə ɹʌf vɔɪs əbaʊt ɹil wɪmən biɪŋ wɔɹmɝ, ən ə nʌmbɝ ɪn ðə kɹaʊd læft. waɪt plumz əpɪɹd fɹəm bɪhaɪn ə blu-lækɝd koʊtʃ ɑn ðə lɛft-hæn fɔɹk.

Twinned statues decorated the end of the bridge, pale marble women over a span tall, each with one breast bared and a hand raised to point toward something in the sky. In Ebou Dar, a bare chest symbolized openness and honesty. Ignoring stares, he climbed up beside one of the women, steadying himself with an arm around her waist. A street ran along the canal, and two more split off at angles ahead, all full of people and carts, sedan chairs and wagons and coaches. Someone shouted in a rough voice about real women being warmer, and a number in the crowd laughed. White plumes appeared from behind a blue-lacquered coach on the left-hand fork.

lipɪŋ daʊn, hi pʊʃt ʌp ðə stʃɹiɾ æftɝ hɝ, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə kɝsɪz ə ðoʊz i bʌmpt. ɪt wɑz ən ɑd tʃeɪs. ɪn ðə mæs ə pipəl, wɪð wæɡənz ən koʊtʃɪz kɑnstənli ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪn ɪz weɪ, hi kəd nɑt kip ə klɪɹ saɪɾ ə ðə hæt fɹəm ðə stʃɹit. skæmpɝɪŋ ʌp ðə bɹɔd mɑɹbəl stɛps ʌv ə pæləs, hi ɡɑɾ ənʌðɝ ɡlɪmps, ðən skɝid bæk daʊn tə ʃʌv əhɛd. ðə ɹɪm ʌv ə tɔl faʊntən ɡeɪv ɪm jɛɾ ənʌðɝ vju, ðən ən ʌpɛndəd bæɹəl əɡɛnst ə wɔl, ən ə kɹeɪt ðət hæd dʒʌs bɪn ənloʊɾəd fɹəm ən ɑkskɑɹt. wʌns i klʌŋ tə ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə wæɡən əntɪl ðə dʒɹaɪvɝ θɹɛɾənd ɪm wɪð əɹ wɪp. wɪð ɔl ðə klaɪmɪŋ ən lʊkɪŋ, hi dɪd nɑt nɛɹoʊ ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz lɛd vɛɹi mʌtʃ. bʌt ðɛn, hi stɪl hæd noʊ noʊʃən wʌt tə də ɪf i kɑt hɝ. sʌɾənli, wən i hɔɪstəd hɪmsɛlf ʌp ɑntu ðə nɛɹoʊ koʊpɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə feɪs ʌv wʌn ə ðə bɪɡ haʊsəz, ʃi wɑz nɑt ðəɹ ɛnimɔɹ.

Leaping down, he pushed up the street after her, ignoring the curses of those he bumped. It was an odd chase. In the mass of people, with wagons and coaches constantly getting in his way, he could not keep a clear sight of the hat from the street. Scampering up the broad marble steps of a palace, he got another glimpse, then scurried back down to shove ahead. The rim of a tall fountain gave him yet another view, then an upended barrel against a wall, and a crate that had just been unloaded from an oxcart. Once he clung to the side of a wagon until the driver threatened him with her whip. With all the climbing and looking, he did not narrow the Darkfriend's lead very much. But then, he still had no notion what to do if he caught her. Suddenly, when he hoisted himself up onto the narrow coping along the face of one of the big houses, she was not there anymore.

fɹæntəkəli hi lʊkt ʌp ən daʊn ðə stʃɹit. ðə waɪt plumz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ weɪv θɹu ðə kɹaʊd. ɪn izi saɪt wɝ hæf ə dʌzən haʊsəz mʌtʃ laɪk ðə wʌn i wɑz klɪŋɪŋ tə, sɛvɹəl pæləsəz ə vɛɹiəs saɪzəz, tu ɪnz, θɹi tævɝnz, ə kʌtlɝz ʃɑp wɪð ə naɪf ən ə pɛɹ ə sɪzɝz ɑn ɪts saɪn, ə fɪʃmɑŋɡɝ wɪð ə bɔɹd peɪntəɾ ɪn fɪfti kaɪnz ə fɪʃ, tu ɹʌɡwivɝz wɪð ənɹoʊl kɑɹpəts spɹɛɾ ɑn teɪbəlz bɪniθ ɔnɪŋz, ə teɪlɝz ʃɑp ən fɔɹ klɔθ sɛlɝz, tu ʃɑps dɪspleɪɪŋ lækɹwɛɹ, ə ɡoʊldsmɪθ, ə sɪlvɝsmɪθ, ə lɪvɝi steɪbəl. . . . ðə lɪst wɑz tu lɔŋ. ʃi cʊɾə ɡɔn ɪndə ɛni ʌv ðɛm. əɹ nʌn. ʃi maɪɾ əv teɪkən ə tɝn i hæd nɑt sin.

Frantically he looked up and down the street. The white plumes no longer waved through the crowd. In easy sight were half a dozen houses much like the one he was clinging to, several palaces of various sizes, two inns, three taverns, a cutler's shop with a knife and a pair of scissors on its sign, a fishmonger with a board painted in fifty kinds of fish, two rugweavers with unrolled carpets spread on tables beneath awnings, a tailor's shop and four cloth sellers, two shops displaying lacquerware, a goldsmith, a silversmith, a livery stable. . . . The list was too long. She could have gone into any of them. Or none. She might have taken a turn he had not seen.

dʒʌmpɪŋ daʊn, hi sɛɾəld ɪz hæt, mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ . . . ən sɔ hɝ, ɔlmoʊst ət ðə tɑp ə ðə waɪd stɛɹz liɾɪŋ tə ə pæləs nɪɹli əkɹɔs fɹəm hɪm, ɔlɹɛɾi hæf-hɪɾən baɪ ðə tɔl fluɾəd kɑləmz aʊt fɹʌnt. ðə pæləs wɑz nɑt lɑɹdʒ, wɪð oʊnli tu slɪm spaɪɹz ən ə sɪŋɡəl pɛɹ-ʃeɪp doʊm bændɪɾ ɪn ɹɛd, bʌɾ ɛbu dɑɹi pæləsəz ɔlweɪz ɡeɪv ðə ɡɹaʊn flɔɹ tə sɝvəns ən kɪtʃənz ən ðə laɪk. ðə bɛɾɝ ɹumz wɝ haɪ, tə kætʃ ðə bɹizɪz. dɔɹmən lɪvɹiɾ ɪn blæk ən jɛloʊ baʊd dipli ən swʌŋ ðə kɑɹv dɔɹz waɪd bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹitʃt ðɛm. ə sɝvən ɪnsaɪd kɝtsid, əpɛɹənli seɪɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ, ən ɪmiɾiətli tɝn tə liɾ əɹ dipɝ. ʃi wɑz noʊn. hi wʊɾə weɪdʒɝɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɑn ɪt.

Jumping down, he settled his hat, muttering under his breath . . . and saw her, almost at the top of the wide stairs leading to a palace nearly across from him, already half-hidden by the tall fluted columns out front. The palace was not large, with only two slim spires and a single pear-shaped dome banded in red, but Ebou Dari palaces always gave the ground floor to servants and kitchens and the like. The better rooms were high, to catch the breezes. Doormen liveried in black and yellow bowed deeply and swung the carved doors wide before she reached them. A servant inside curtsied, apparently saying something, and immediately turned to lead her deeper. She was known. He would have wagered everything on it.

fəɹ ə waɪl æftɝ ðə dɔɹz kloʊzd, hi stʊd ðəɹ stʌɾiɪŋ ðə pæləs. nɑt ðə ɹɪtʃəst ɪn ðə sɪɾi baɪ fɑɹ, bʌɾ oʊnli ə noʊbəl wəd dɛɹ bɪld ɪts laɪk. "bʌɾ u ɪn ðə pɪɾ ə dum laɪvz ðɛɹ?" hi mʌɾɝd faɪnəli, plʌkɪŋ ɔf ɪz hæt tə fæn hɪmsɛlf. nɑt hɝ, nɑt wən ʃi hæd tə wɔk. ə fju kwɛstʃənz ɪn ðə tævɝnz əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹit wəd tɛl hɪm. ən wɝɾ ə hɪz kwɪɹiz wəd sip tə ðə pæləs, ʃʊɹ əz dɝt sɔɪl jəɹ hænz.

For a while after the doors closed, he stood there studying the palace. Not the richest in the city by far, but only a noble would dare build its like. "But who in the Pit of Doom lives there?" he muttered finally, plucking off his hat to fan himself. Not her, not when she had to walk. A few questions in the taverns along the street would tell him. And word of his queries would seep to the palace, sure as dirt soiled your hands.

sʌmwʌn sɛd, "kæɹaɪɾɪn." ɪt wɑz ə skɹɔni, waɪt-hɛɹd fɛloʊ laʊnʒɪŋ nɪɹbaɪ ɪn ðə ʃeɪd. mæt lʊkt əɾ ɪm kwɛstʃənɪŋli, ən i ɡɹɪnd, ʃoʊɪŋ ɡæps ɪn ɪz tiθ. hɪz stupt ʃoʊldɝz ən sæd wɛðɝd feɪs dɪd nɑt fɪɾ ɪz faɪn ɡɹeɪ koʊt. dɪspaɪɾ ə bɪɾ ə leɪs əɾ ɪz nɛk, hi wɑz ðə vɛɹi pɪktʃɝ ə hɑɹd taɪmz. "ju æskt u lɪv ðɛɹ. ðə tʃlseɪn pæləs ɪz lɛt tə dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn."

Someone said, "Carridin." It was a scrawny, white-haired fellow lounging nearby in the shade. Mat looked at him questioningly, and he grinned, showing gaps in his teeth. His stooped shoulders and sad weathered face did not fit his fine gray coat. Despite a bit of lace at his neck, he was the very picture of hard times. "You asked who lived there. The Chelsaine Palace is let to Jaichim Carridin."

mæts hæt pɔzd. "ju min ðə waɪtkloʊk æmbæsəɾɝ?"

Mat's hat paused. "You mean the Whitecloak ambassador?"

"aɪ. ən ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ ə ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt." ði oʊl mæn tæpt ə nɑɹl fɪŋɡɝ əɡɛns ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz bik ʌv ə noʊz. boʊθ lʊk tə hæv bɪn bɹoʊkən sɛvɹəl taɪmz. "nɑɾ ə mæn tə bɑðɝ ənlɛs jə mʌst, ən ðən aɪd θɪŋk θɹi taɪmz."

"Aye. And Inquisitor of the Hand of the Light." The old man tapped a gnarled finger against the side of his beak of a nose. Both looked to have been broken several times. "Not a man to bother unless you must, and then I'd think three times."

ʌnkɑnʃəsli mæt hʌmd ə bɪɾ ʌv "stɔɹm fɹəm ðə maʊntənz." nɑɾ ə mæn tə bɑðɝ ɪndid. kwɛstʃənɝz wɝ ðə næstiəst ə ðə waɪtkloʊks. eɪ waɪtkloʊk ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ u hæɾ ə dɑɹkfɹɛn kʌm tə kɔl.

Unconsciously Mat hummed a bit of "Storm from the Mountains." Not a man to bother indeed. Questioners were the nastiest of the Whitecloaks. A Whitecloak Inquisitor who had a Darkfriend come to call.

"θæŋk jə - " mæt ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. ðə fɛloʊ wɑz ɡɔn, swɑloʊɾ ʌp ɪn ðə kɹaʊd. stʃɹeɪnʒ, bʌɾ i hæd lʊk fəmɪljɝ. meɪbi ənʌðɝ lɔŋ-dɛɾ əkweɪntəns dʒɹɪftɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðoʊz oʊl mɛmɹiz. meɪbi. . . . ɪt hɪɾ ɪm laɪk ən ɪluməneɪɾɝz naɪtfloʊɝ ɪksploʊɾɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd. ə waɪt-hɛɹd mæn wɪð ə hʊk noʊz. ðəɾ oʊl mæn hæd bɪn ət ðə sɪlvɝ sɝkət, stændɪŋ nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðə wʊmən u hæd dʒʌst ɡɔn ɪndə kæɹaɪɾɪnz ɹɛntəd pæləs. tɝnɪŋ ɪz hæɾ ɪn ɪz hænz, hi fɹaʊn ənizəli ət ðə pæləs. ðə maɪɹ nɛvɝ hɛld ə bɑɡ laɪk ðɪs wʌn. hi kəd fil ðə daɪs tʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd sʌɾənli, ən ðət wɑz ɔlweɪz ə bæd saɪn.

"Thank you - " Mat gave a start. The fellow was gone, swallowed up in the crowd. Strange, but he had looked familiar. Maybe another long-dead acquaintance drifting out of those old memories. Maybe. . . . It hit him like an Illuminator's nightflower exploding inside his head. A white-haired man with a hooked nose. That old man had been at the Silver Circuit, standing not far from the woman who had just gone into Carridin's rented palace. Turning his hat in his hands, he frowned uneasily at the palace. The Mire never held a bog like this one. He could feel the dice tumbling in his head suddenly, and that was always a bad sign.


tʃæptɝ fɪftin


CHAPTER 15

ɪnsɛks


Insects

kæɹaɪɾɪn dɪd nɑt lʊk ʌp ɪmiɾiətli fɹəm ðə lɛɾɝ i wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ wən ðə leɪɾi ʃieɪn, əz ʃi kɔl hɝsɛlf, wɑz ʃoʊn ɪn. θɹi æns stʃɹʌɡəl fjuɾɪlli ɪn ðə wɛɾ ɪŋk, tʃɹæpt. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls maɪt bi daɪɪŋ, bʌɾ æns ən kɑkɹoʊtʃɪz ən ɛvɹi sɔɹɾ ə vɝmɪn sim tə θɹaɪv. kɛɹfəli hi pɹɛs ðə blɑɾɝ daʊn. hi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə bɪɡɪn əɡɛn fəɹ ə fju æns. ə feɪljɝ tə sɛn ðɪs ɹipɔɹt, əɹ ə ɹipɔɹɾ ə feɪljɝ, maɪt dum ɪm əz ʃʊɹli əz ðoʊz maɪɹɾ ɪnsɛks, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz fɪɹ ʌv ə dɪfɹən feɪljɝ ðət taɪɾənd ɪz ɡʌts.

Carridin did not look up immediately from the letter he was writing when the Lady Shiaine, as she called herself, was shown in. Three ants struggled futilely in the wet ink, trapped. Everything else might be dying, but ants and cockroaches and every sort of vermin seemed to thrive. Carefully he pressed the blotter down. He was not about to begin again for a few ants. A failure to send this report, or a report of failure, might doom him as surely as those mired insects, yet it was fear of a different failure that tightened his guts.

hi hæd noʊ wɝi ʌv ʃieɪn ɹɛɾɪŋ wʌɾ i ɹoʊt. ɪt wɑz ɪn ə saɪfɝ noʊn tə oʊnli tu mɛn bɪsaɪd hɪmsɛlf. soʊ mɛni bænz ʌv "dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn" ət wɝk, itʃ stɪfən baɪ ə kɔɹ ə hɪz moʊs tʃɹʌstɪd mɛn, soʊ mɛni mɔɹ u maɪt bi bændəts əɹ ivən tʃɹuli swɔɹn tə ðət fɪlθ, ælθɹ. peɪdʒɹən naɪl maɪt nɑt laɪk ðət læst, bʌɾ ɪz kəmæn hæd bɪn tə plʌnʒ ɔltɑɹə ən mʊɹændi ɪndə blʌɾ ən keɪɑs fɹəm wɪtʃ oʊnli naɪl ən ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt kəd ɹɛskju ðɛm, ə mædnəs klɪɹli tə bi leɪɾ ət ðə fiɾ ə ðɪs soʊ-kɔl dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən ðəɾ i hæd dʌn. fɪɹ hɛl boʊθ kʌntʃɹiz baɪ ðə θɹoʊt. teɪlz ðət ðə wɪtʃəz mɑɹtʃt əkɹɔs ðə seɪm kʌntʃɹi wɝ ən æɾəd ɹɪwɔɹd. tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪtʃəz ən dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn, ɛɛs sədaɪ kæɹiɪŋ ɔf jʌŋ wɪmən ən sɛɾɪŋ ʌp fɔls dʒɹæɡənz, vɪlədʒəz ɪn fleɪmz ən mɛn neɪl tə ðə dɔɹz ə ðɛɹ bɑɹnz - ɪt wɑz ɔl wʌn ɪn hæf ðə stʃɹit ɹumɝz, naʊ. naɪl wəd bi plizd. ən sɛn mɔɹ ɔɹɾɝz. haʊ hi ɪkspɛktəd kæɹaɪɾɪn tə snætʃ ɪleɪn tʃɹəkən aʊɾ ə ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs wɑz bɪɑn ɹizən. ənʌðɝ æn skɪɾɝd əkɹɔs ði aɪvɝi-ɪnleɪd teɪbəl ɑntu ðə peɪdʒ, ən ɪz θʌm stæb daʊn, dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ ɪt. ən smɪɹɪŋ ə wɝd tə ɪlɛdʒəbɪlɪɾi. ði ɪntaɪɝ ɹipɔɹt wəd nid tə bi ɹidʌn. hi wɑntəɾ ə dʒɹɪŋk vɛɹi bædli. ðəɹ wɑz bɹændi ɪn ə kɹɪstəl flæsk ɑn ðə teɪbəl baɪ ðə dɔɹ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt wɑn ðə wʊmən tə si hɪm dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ. səpɹɛsɪŋ ə saɪ, hi ʃʌv ðə lɛɾɝ əsaɪɾ ən pʊld ə kɝtʃəf fɹəm ɪz sliv tə waɪp ɪz hænd. "soʊ, ʃieɪn, dʒju faɪnəli hæv pɹɑɡɹɛs tə ɹipɔɹt? əɹ əv jə dʒʌs kʌm fəɹ mɔɹ mʌni?"

He had no worry of Shiaine reading what he wrote. It was in a cipher known to only two men beside himself. So many bands of "Dragonsworn" at work, each stiffened by a core of his most trusted men, so many more who might be bandits or even truly sworn to that filth, al'Thor. Pedron Niall might not like that last, but his command had been to plunge Altara and Murandy into blood and chaos from which only Niall and the Children of the Light could rescue them, a madness clearly to be laid at the feet of this so-called Dragon Reborn, and that he had done. Fear held both countries by the throat. Tales that the witches marched across the same country were an added reward. Tar Valon witches and Dragonsworn, Aes Sedai carrying off young women and setting up false Dragons, villages in flames and men nailed to the doors of their barns - it was all one in half the street rumors, now. Niall would be pleased. And send more orders. How he expected Carridin to snatch Elayne Trakand out of the Tarasin Palace was beyond reason. Another ant skittered across the ivory-inlaid table onto the page, and his thumb stabbed down, destroying it. And smearing a word to illegibility. The entire report would need to be redone. He wanted a drink very badly. There was brandy in a crystal flask on the table by the door, but he did not want the woman to see him drinking. Suppressing a sigh, he shoved the letter aside and pulled a kerchief from his sleeve to wipe his hand. "So, Shiaine, do you finally have progress to report? Or have you just come for more money?"

ʃi smaɪld əɾ ɪm læzəli fɹəm ə tɔl kɑɹvd ɑɹmtʃɛɹ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ɪkspɛnsəz əsoʊsieɪɾəd wɪð ə sɝtʃ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ɔlmoʊs ði æksɛns ʌv ən ændɔɝən noʊbəl. "ɪspɛʃli wən wi wɑnt noʊ kwɛstʃənz æskt."

She smiled at him lazily from a tall carved armchair. "There are expenses associated with a search," she said in almost the accents of an Andoran noble. "Especially when we want no questions asked."

moʊs pipəl wʊɾə bɪn ənsɛɾəld baɪ ðə saɪɾ ə dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn, ivən klinɪŋ ə pɛn nɪb, wɪð ɪz stili feɪs ən dip-sɛɾ aɪz, ðə waɪt tɑbɝɾ oʊvɝ ɪz koʊt bɛɹɪŋ ðə ɡoʊldən sʌnbɝst ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ ɪmpɹɛst əpɑn ðə kɹɪmzən ʃɛpɝdz kɹʊk ə ðə hænd. nɑt mili skeɪn. ðət wɑz əɹ ɹil neɪm, ðoʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ hi nu. ə sæɾəlɝz dɔɾɝ fɹəm ə vɪlədʒ nɪɹ waɪtbɹɪdʒ, ʃi hæd ɡɔn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ət fɪftin, ənʌðɝ θɪŋ ʃi θɔt sikɹət. ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli ðə bɛst stɑɹt, bɪkʌmɪŋ ə fɹɛn ə ðə dɑɹk kəz ðə wɪtʃəz toʊld əɹ ʃi kəd nɑt lɝn tə tʃænəl, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ðət jɪɹ wɑz aʊt ʃi hæd nɑɾ oʊnli faʊn ə sɝkəl ɪn keɪɛmlɪn bʌt meɪɾ əɹ fɝs kɪl. ɪn ðə sɛvən jɪɹz sɪns, ʃi hæɾ æɾəd naɪntin mɔɹ. ʃi wɑz wʌn ə ðə bɛst əsæsənz əveɪləbəl, ən ə hʌntɝ u kəd faɪn ɛniwʌn əɹ ɛniθɪŋ. ðət mʌtʃ i hæd bɪn toʊld wən ʃi wɑz sɛn tə hɪm. ə sɝkəl ɹipɔɹɾəd tə hɝ naʊ. sɛvɹəl ə ðɛm æktʃəli  wɝ noʊbəlz ən ɔlmoʊst ɔl wɝ oʊldɝ, bʌt niðɝ θɪŋ mæɾɝd əmʌŋ ðoʊz u sɝv ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. ənʌðɝ sɝkəl wɝkɪŋ fəɹ kæɹaɪɾɪn wɑz lɛd baɪ ə nɑɹl bɛɡɝ wɪð wʌn aɪ, noʊ tiθ ən ə hæbəɾ ə beɪðɪŋ oʊnli wʌns ɪn ðə jɪɹ. hæd sɝkəmstænsəz bɪn dɪfɹənt, kæɹaɪɾɪn wʊɾə əv nɛl tə oʊl kʌli, ði oʊnli neɪm ðə stɪŋkɪŋ vɪlən ədmɪɾəd tə. mili skeɪn ʃʊɹli ɡɹoʊvəl fəɹ oʊl kʌli, ən soʊ dɪɾ ɛvɹi læs kəmpænjən ə hɝ sɝkəl, noʊbəl əɹ nɑt. ɪɾ ɪɹəteɪɾəd kæɹaɪɾɪn ðət "leɪɾi ʃieɪn" wəd bi ɑn əɹ niz ɪn ə flæʃ ɪf ðə stʃɹæɡɡli-hɛɹɾ oʊl bɛɡɝ ɛntɝd ðə ɹum, bʌt fəɹ ɪm sæt wɪð əɹ lɛɡz kɹɔst, smaɪlɪŋ ən twɪtʃɪŋ əɹ slɪpɝd fʊɾ əz ɪf ɪmpeɪʃən tə bi dʌn. ʃi hæd bɪn ɔɹɾɝd tə oʊbeɪ hɪm æbsəlutli, baɪ wʌn ivən oʊl kʌli wəd ɡɹɑvəl fɔɹ, ən bɪsaɪdz, hi hæɾ ə dɛspɹɪt niɾ ə səksɛs. naɪlz skimz kəd ɡoʊ tə dʌst, bʌt nɑt ðɪs.

Most people would have been unsettled by the sight of Jaichim Carridin, even cleaning a pen nib, with his steely face and deep-set eyes, the white tabard over his coat bearing the golden sunburst of the Children of the Light impressed upon the crimson shepherd's crook of the Hand. Not Mili Skane. That was her real name, though she did not know he knew. A saddler's daughter from a village near Whitebridge, she had gone to the White Tower at fifteen, another thing she thought secret. It was hardly the best start, becoming a Friend of the Dark because the witches told her she could not learn to channel, but before that year was out she had not only found a circle in Caemlyn but made her first kill. In the seven years since, she had added nineteen more. She was one of the best assassins available, and a hunter who could find anyone or anything. That much he had been told when she was sent to him. A circle reported to her now. Several of them actually were nobles and almost all were older, but neither thing mattered among those who served the Great Lord. Another circle working for Carridin was led by a gnarled beggar with one eye, no teeth and a habit of bathing only once in the year. Had circumstances been different, Carridin himself would have knelt to Old Cully, the only name the stinking villain admitted to. Mili Skane surely groveled for Old Cully, and so did every last companion of her circle, noble or not. It irritated Carridin that "Lady Shiaine" would be on her knees in a flash if the straggly-haired old beggar entered the room, but for him sat with her legs crossed, smiling and twitching her slippered foot as if impatient to be done. She had been ordered to obey him absolutely, by one even Old Cully would grovel for, and besides, he had a desperate need of success. Niall's schemes could go to dust, but not this.

"mɛni θɪŋz kən bi ɪkskjuzd," hi sɛd, leɪɪŋ ðə pɛn ɑn ɪts aɪvɝi stæn ən ʃʌvɪŋ bæk ɪz tʃɛɹ, "fɔɹ ðoʊz u əkɑmplɪʃ ðə tæsks ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡɪvən." hi wɑz ə tɔl mæn, ən i lum θɹɛɾənɪŋli. hi wɑz wɛl əwɛɹ ðət ðə ɡɪlt-fɹeɪmd mɪɹɝz ɑn ðə wɔl ʃoʊɾ ə fɪɡjɝ ə stʃɹɛŋkθ, ə deɪnʒɝəs mæn. "ivən dʒɹɛsəz ən bɔbəlz ən ɡæmbəlɪŋ, peɪd fəɹ wɪð kɔɪn ðət wɑz tə ɡoʊ fəɹ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən." ðət twɪtʃɪŋ fʊt fɹoʊz fəɹ ɪnstənt, ðən bɪɡæn əɡɛn, bʌɾ əɹ smaɪl wɑz fɔɹst, hɝ feɪs peɪl. hɝ sɝkəl oʊbeɪɾ əɹ ɪnstənli, bʌt ðeɪ wəd stʃɹɪŋ əɹ ʌp baɪ ðə hilz ən skɪn əɹ əlaɪv ɪf i spoʊk ðə wɝd. "ju hæv nɑɾ əkɑmplɪʃt vɛɹi mʌtʃ, hæv ju? ɪn fækt, jə də nɑt sim tə hæv əkɑmplɪʃt ɛniθɪŋ."

"Many things can be excused," he said, laying the pen on its ivory stand and shoving back his chair, "for those who accomplish the tasks they are given." He was a tall man, and he loomed threateningly. He was well aware that the gilt-framed mirrors on the wall showed a figure of strength, a dangerous man. "Even dresses and baubles and gambling, paid for with coin that was to go for information." That twitching foot froze for instant, then began again, but her smile was forced, her face pale. Her circle obeyed her instantly, but they would string her up by the heels and skin her alive if he spoke the word. "You have not accomplished very much, have you? In fact, you do not seem to have accomplished anything."

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ dɪfəkəltiz, əz jə wɛl noʊ," ʃi sɛd bɹɛθəli. ʃi mænədʒ tə miɾ ɪz aɪz skwɛɹli, ðoʊ.

"There are difficulties, as you well know," she said breathily. She managed to meet his eyes squarely, though.

"ɪkskjusɪz. tɛl mi ʌv dɪfəkəltiz sɝmaʊntɪd, nɑt ðoʊz jə stʌmbəl oʊvɝ ən fɔl. jə kən fɔl ə lɔŋ weɪ ɪf jə feɪl ɪn ðɪs." tɝnɪŋ ɪz bæk, hi stʃɹoʊd tə ðə nɪɹəst wɪndoʊ. hi kəd fɔl ə lɔŋ weɪ, tu, ən i dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɹɪsk əɹ siɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ɪz aɪz. sʌnlaɪt slæntəd θɹu ði ɔɹneɪt stoʊn skɹin. ðə haɪ-silɪŋɡd ɹum, wɪð ɪts ɡɹin-ænd-waɪt-taɪl flɔɹ ən bɹaɪt blu wɔlz, steɪd kəmpɛɹəɾɪvli kul bɪhaɪn ðə θɪk wɔlz ə ðə pæləs, bʌt ðə hiɾ aʊtsaɪd sipt ɪn nɪɹ ðə wɪndoʊz. hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil ðə bɹændi əkɹɔs ðə ɹum. hi kəd nɑt weɪt fəɹ əɹ tə bi ɡɔn.

"Excuses. Tell me of difficulties surmounted, not those you stumble over and fall. You can fall a long way if you fail in this." Turning his back, he strode to the nearest window. He could fall a long way, too, and he did not want to risk her seeing anything in his eyes. Sunlight slanted through the ornate stone screen. The high-ceilinged room, with its green-and-white-tiled floor and bright blue walls, stayed comparatively cool behind the thick walls of the palace, but the heat outside seeped in near the windows. He could almost feel the brandy across the room. He could not wait for her to be gone.

"maɪ lɔɹd kæɹaɪɾɪn, haʊ kən aɪ hæv ɛniwʌn æsk tu oʊpənli əbaʊɾ ɑbʒɛkts ə ðə paʊɝ? ðət wɪl kɑz kwɛstʃənz, ən ðəɹ ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə sɪɾi, jəl ɹikɔl."

"My Lord Carridin, how can I have anyone ask too openly about objects of the Power? That will cause questions, and there are Aes Sedai in the city, you will recall."

piɹɪŋ daʊn ət ðə stʃɹit θɹu ðə skɹoʊl-kɑɹvɪŋz, hi ɹɪŋkəld ɪz noʊz ət ðə smɛl. ɛvɹi sɔɹt wɑz dʒæm təɡɛðɝ daʊn ðɛɹ. ən ɝæfɛlɪn wɪð ɪz hɛɹ ɪn tu lɔŋ bɹeɪdz ən ə kɝv sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz bæk tɔst ə kɔɪn tə ə wʌn-ɑɹm bɛɡɝ, hu skaʊld ət ðə ɡɪf bɪfɔɹ tʌkɪŋ ɪɾ ʌndɝ ɪz ɹæɡz ən ɹɪzumɪŋ ɪz pɪɾiəs kɹaɪz tə ðə pæsɝzbi. ə fɛloʊ ɪn ə tɔɹn, bɹaɪt ɹɛd koʊɾ ən ivən bɹaɪɾɝ jɛloʊ bɹitʃɪz keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ə ʃɑp klʌtʃɪŋ ə boʊlt ə klɔθ tə hɪz tʃɛst, pɝsud baɪ ə ʃaʊɾɪŋ peɪl-hɛɹd wʊmən u hæɾ əɹ skɝts pʊld əbʌv əɹ niz ən wɑz aʊtpeɪsɪŋ ðə bɝli ɡɑɹɾ u lʌmbɝd bɪhaɪn əɹ weɪvɪŋ ɪz tʃɹʌntʃən. ðə dʒɹaɪvɝ ʌv ə ɹɛd-lækɝd koʊtʃ wɪð ðə mʌnilɛndɝz' ɡoʊl kɔɪnz ən oʊpən hæn ɑn ðə dɔɹ ʃʊk ɪz wɪp ət ðə dʒɹaɪvɝ ʌv ə kænvəs-kʌvɝd wæɡən huz tim hæd bɪkʌm ɛntæŋɡəld wɪð ðə koʊtʃəz, ðə pɛɹ fɪlɪŋ ðə stʃɹit wɪð kɝsɪz. ɡɹaɪmi stʃɹiɾ ɝtʃənz kɹaʊtʃt bɪhaɪn ə dəlæpədeɪɾɪd kɑɹt waɪl ðeɪ snætʃt pjuni, ʃɹɪvəl fɹut bɹɔɾ ɪn fɹəm ðə kʌntʃɹi. eɪ tæɹɑbənɝ wʊmən pʊʃt əɹ weɪ θɹu ðə kɹaʊd, veɪld, hɝ dɑɹk hɛɹ ɪn θɪn bɹeɪdz, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɛvɹi meɪl aɪ ɪn əɹ dʌsti ɹɛd dʒɹɛs ðət ʃeɪpt ɪtsɛlf tə hɝ fɔɹm ʃeɪmləsli.

Peering down at the street through the scroll-carvings, he wrinkled his nose at the smell. Every sort was jammed together down there. An Arafellin with his hair in two long braids and a curved sword on his back tossed a coin to a one-armed beggar, who scowled at the gift before tucking it under his rags and resuming his piteous cries to the passersby. A fellow in a torn, bright red coat and even brighter yellow breeches came running from a shop clutching a bolt of cloth to his chest, pursued by a shouting pale-haired woman who had her skirts pulled above her knees and was outpacing the burly guard who lumbered behind her waving his truncheon. The driver of a red-lacquered coach with the moneylenders' gold coins and open hand on the door shook his whip at the driver of a canvas-covered wagon whose team had become entangled with the coach's, the pair filling the street with curses. Grimy street urchins crouched behind a dilapidated cart while they snatched puny, shriveled fruit brought in from the country. A Taraboner woman pushed her way through the crowd, veiled, her dark hair in thin braids, drawing every male eye in her dusty red dress that shaped itself to her form shamelessly.

"maɪ lɔɹd, aɪ mʌst əv taɪm. aɪ mʌst! aɪ kænɑt də ði ɪmpɑsəbəl, sɝɾənli nɑɾ ɪn deɪz."

"My Lord, I must have time. I must! I cannot do the impossible, certainly not in days."

tʃɹæʃ, ɔl ə ðɛm. ɡɹʌbɝz fəɹ ɡoʊld ən hʌntɝz fəɹ ðə hɔɹn, θivz, ɹɛfjudʒiz, ivən tɪŋkɝz. skʌm. ɹaɪəts wəd bi izi tə stɑɹt, ə pɝdʒ fəɹ ɔl ðɪs fɪlθ. aʊtləndɝz wɝ ɔlweɪz ðə fɝs tɑɹɡəts, ɔlweɪz tə bleɪm fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ wɑz ɹɔŋ, əlɔŋ wɪð neɪbɝz u hæd ðə mɪsfɔɹtʃən tə bi ɑn ðə ɹɔŋ saɪɾ ʌv ɡɹʌdʒɪz, wɪmən u pɛɾəld ɝbz ən kjʊɹz, ən foʊk wɪð noʊ fɹɛnz, ɪspɛʃli ɪf ðeɪ lɪvd əloʊn. pɹɑpɝli ɡaɪɾəd, əz kɛɹfəli əz sətʃ θɪŋz kəd bi, ə ɡʊd ɹaɪət maɪt wɛl bɝn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs daʊn ɝaʊn ðət jusləs dʒeɪd taɪlɪn ən ðə wɪtʃəz əz wɛl. hi ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðə swɔɹm bɪloʊ. ɹaɪəts dɪd tɛn tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hænd; ðə sɪvəl ɡɑɹd maɪt stɝ ɪtsɛlf, ən ɪnɛvəɾəbli ə hændfʊl ə tʃɹu fɹɛnz wəd bi snæpt ʌp. hi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd ðə tʃæns ðət səm ə ðoʊz maɪt bi fɹəm ðə sɝkəlz i hæd hʌntɪŋ. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ivən ə fju deɪz ə ɹaɪəɾɪŋ wəd dɪsɹʌp ðɛɹ wɝk. taɪlɪn wɑz nɑɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪnʌf fəɹ ðæt; ʃi dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ əɾ ɔl, ɪn tʃɹuθ. noʊ, nɑt jɛt. naɪl, hi kəɾ əfɔɹd tə dɪsəpɔɪnt, bʌt nɑɾ ɪz tʃɹu mæstɝ.

Trash, all of them. Grubbers for gold and Hunters for the Horn, thieves, refugees, even Tinkers. Scum. Riots would be easy to start, a purge for all this filth. Outlanders were always the first targets, always to blame for whatever was wrong, along with neighbors who had the misfortune to be on the wrong side of grudges, women who peddled herbs and cures, and folk with no friends, especially if they lived alone. Properly guided, as carefully as such things could be, a good riot might well burn the Tarasin Palace down around that useless jade Tylin and the witches as well. He glared at the swarm below. Riots did tend to get out of hand; the Civil Guard might stir itself, and inevitably a handful of true Friends would be snapped up. He could not afford the chance that some of those might be from the circles he had hunting. For that matter, even a few days of rioting would disrupt their work. Tylin was not important enough for that; she did not matter at all, in truth. No, not yet. Niall, he could afford to disappoint, but not his true master.

"maɪ lɔɹd kæɹaɪɾɪn. . . ." ə noʊɾ ə dɪfaɪəns hæɾ ɛntɝd ʃieɪnz vɔɪs. hi hæd lɛɾ əɹ stu tu lɔŋ. "maɪ lɔɹd kæɹaɪɾɪn, səm ə maɪ sɝkəl kwɛstʃən waɪ wəɹ lʊkɪŋ fɔɹ. . . ."

"My Lord Carridin. . . ." A note of defiance had entered Shiaine's voice. He had let her stew too long. "My Lord Carridin, some of my circle question why we are looking for. . . ."

hi stɑɹɾəd tə tɝn, tə pʊɾ əɹ daʊn hɑɹd - hi niɾəd səksɛs, nɑɾ ɪkskjuzɪz, nɑt kwɛstʃənz! - bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs dwɪndəl tə nʌθɪŋ əz ɪz aɪz fɛl ɑn ə jʌŋ mæn stændɪŋ daɪæɡənəli əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit, ɪn ə blu koʊt wɪð ɪnʌf ɹɛd-ænd-ɡoʊld ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ɑn ðə slivz ən ləpɛlz fəɹ tu noʊbəlz. tɔlɝ ðən moʊst, hi wɑz fænɪŋ hɪmsɛlf wɪð ə bɹɔd-bɹɪm blæk hæɾ ən ədʒʌstɪŋ ɪz nɛk skɑɹf əz i spoʊk tə ə stupt, waɪt-hɛɹd mæn. kæɹaɪɾɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə jʌŋ mæn.

He started to turn, to put her down hard - he needed success, not excuses, not questions! - but her voice dwindled to nothing as his eyes fell on a young man standing diagonally across the street, in a blue coat with enough red-and-gold embroidery on the sleeves and lapels for two nobles. Taller than most, he was fanning himself with a broad-brimmed black hat and adjusting his neck scarf as he spoke to a stooped, white-haired man. Carridin recognized the young man.

sʌɾənli hi fɛlt əz ðoʊ ə nɑɾɪd ɹoʊp hæd bɪn fæsən ɝaʊn ɪz hɛɾ ən wɑz biɪŋ dʒɹɔn ɛvɝ taɪɾɝ. fəɹ ən ɪnstən ə feɪs hɪɾən bɪhaɪn ə ɹɛd mæsk fɪld ɪz vɪʒən. naɪt-dɑɹk aɪz stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, ən ðən wɝ ɛnləs kævɝnz ə fleɪm, ən stɪl stɛɹɪŋ. wɪðɪn ɪz hɛd, ðə wɝld ɪksploʊɾəd ɪn faɪɝ, kæskeɪɾɪŋ ɪmədʒəz ðət bæɾɝd ɪm ən swɛpt ɪm bɪɑn skɹimɪŋ. ðə fɔɹmz ə θɹi jʌŋ mɛn stʊɾ ənsəpɔɹɾɪd ɪn ɛɹ, ən wʌn ə ðɛm bɪɡæn tə ɡloʊ, ðə fɔɹm ə ðə mæn ɪn ðə stʃɹit, bɹaɪɾɝ ən bɹaɪɾɝ tɪl ɪt mʌst əv sɪɹɾ ɛni lɪvɪŋ aɪz tə æʃ, bɹaɪɾɝ stɪl, bɝnɪŋ. ə kɝld ɡoʊldən hɔɹn spɛd təwɔɹd hɪm, ɪts kɹaɪ pʊlɪŋ ɪz soʊl, ðən flæʃt ɪndə ə ɹɪŋ ʌv ɡoʊldən laɪt, swɑloʊɪŋ hɪm, tʃɪlɪŋ ɪm əntɪl ðə læs fɹæɡmən ə hɪm ðət ɹɪkɔld ɪz neɪm wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪz boʊnz mʌst splɪntɝ. ə ɹubi-tɪp dæɡɝ hɝɾəld stʃɹeɪɾ ət hɪm, kɝv bleɪd stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ɪm bɪtwin ði aɪz ən sɪŋkɪŋ ɪn, ɪn, əntɪl ɡoʊld-ɹæp hɪlt ən ɔl wɑz ɡɔn, ən i nu æɡəni ðət wɑʃt əweɪ ɔl θɔt ðət wʌt hæd ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ wɑz peɪn. hi wʊɾə pɹeɪd tə ə kɹieɪɾɝ i hæd lɔŋ əbændən ɪf i ɹɪmɛmbɝd haʊ. hi wʊɾə ʃɹikt ɪf i ɹɪmɛmbɝd haʊ, ɪf i ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət hjumənz ʃɹikt, ðəɾ i wɑz hjumən. ɑn ən ɑn, mɔɹ ən mɔɹ. . . .

Suddenly he felt as though a knotted rope had been fastened around his head and was being drawn ever tighter. For an instant a face hidden behind a red mask filled his vision. Night-dark eyes stared at him, and then were endless caverns of flame, and still staring. Within his head, the world exploded in fire, cascading images that battered him and swept him beyond screaming. The forms of three young men stood unsupported in air, and one of them began to glow, the form of the man in the street, brighter and brighter till it must have seared any living eyes to ash, brighter still, burning. A curled golden horn sped toward him, its cry pulling his soul, then flashed into a ring of golden light, swallowing him, chilling him until the last fragment of him that recalled his name was sure his bones must splinter. A ruby-tipped dagger hurdled straight at him, curved blade striking him between the eyes and sinking in, in, until gold-wrapped hilt and all was gone, and he knew agony that washed away all thought that what had gone before was pain. He would have prayed to a Creator he had long abandoned if he remembered how. He would have shrieked if he remembered how, if he remembered that humans shrieked, that he was human. On and on, more and more. . . .

ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hæn tə hɪz fɔɹhɛd, hi wʌndɝd waɪ ɪt tʃɹɛmbəld. hɪz hɛɾ ætʃt, tu. ðəɹ hæd bɪn sʌmθɪŋ. . . . hi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ət ðə stʃɹit bɪloʊ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz tʃeɪnʒd ɪn ðə blɪŋk ʌv ən aɪ, ðə pipəl dɪfɹənt, wæɡənz muvd, kʌlɝfəl koʊtʃɪz ən tʃɛɹz ɹipleɪs baɪ ʌðɝz. wɝs, kɔθən wɑz ɡɔn. hi wɑntəd tə swɑloʊ ðət hoʊl flæsk ə bɹændi ɪn wʌn ɡʌlp.

Raising a hand to his forehead, he wondered why it trembled. His head ached, too. There had been something. . . . He gave a start at the street below. Everything was changed in the blink of an eye, the people different, wagons moved, colorful coaches and chairs replaced by others. Worse, Cauthon was gone. He wanted to swallow that whole flask of brandy in one gulp.

sʌɾənli hi ɹilaɪz ðət ʃieɪn hæd stɑp tɔkɪŋ. hi tɝnd, ɹɛɾi tə kəntɪnju pʊɾɪŋ əɹ ɪn əɹ pleɪs.

Suddenly he realized that Shiaine had stopped talking. He turned, ready to continue putting her in her place.

ʃi wɑz linɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ði ækt ə ɹaɪzɪŋ, wʌn hæn ɑn ði ɑɹm ə hɝ tʃɛɹ, ði ʌðɝ ɹeɪzd ɪn ə dʒɛstʃɝ. hɝ nɛɹoʊ feɪs wɑz fɪkst ɪn pɛtʃələn dɪfaɪəns, bʌt nɑɾ ət kæɹaɪɾɪn. ʃi dɪd nɑt muv. ʃi dɪd nɑt blɪŋk. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi bɹiðd. hi bɛɹli noʊɾəst hɝ.

She was leaning forward in the act of rising, one hand on the arm of her chair, the other raised in a gesture. Her narrow face was fixed in petulant defiance, but not at Carridin. She did not move. She did not blink. He was not sure she breathed. He barely noticed her.

"ɹumɪneɪɾɪŋ?" sɑmaɪl sɛd. "kæn aɪ ət lis hoʊp ðəɾ ɪts əbaʊt wʌt jə ɑɹ hɪɹ tə faɪn fəɹ mi?" hi stʊɾ oʊnli ə lɪɾəl tɔlɝ ðən ævɝɪdʒ, ə mʌskjəlɝ, sɑləd mæn ɪn ə koʊɾ ə ðə haɪ-kɑlɝɾ ɪliɑnɝ staɪl, soʊ kʌvɝd wɪð ɡoʊld-wɝk ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə tɛl ðə klɔθ wɑz ɡɹin, bʌt mɔɹ ðən biɪŋ wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən ɡeɪv ɪm stætʃɝ. hɪz blu aɪz wɝ koʊldɝ ðən wɪntɝz hɑɹt. ə lɪvɪd skɑɹ bɝn daʊn ɪz feɪs fɹəm ɡoʊldən hɛɹlaɪn tə ði ɛdʒ ʌv ɡoʊldən, skwɛɹ-kʌt bɪɹd, ən ɪt simd ə suɾəbəl dɛkɝeɪʃən. wʌtɛvɝ ɡɑɾ ɪn ɪz weɪ wɑz bɹʌʃt əsaɪd, tʃɹæmpəld əɹ əblɪɾɝeɪtɪd. kæɹaɪɾɪn nu sɑmaɪl wʊɾə tɝn ɪz baʊəlz tə wɔɾɝ ɪf ðə mæn hæd bɪn dʒʌst sʌmwʌn mɛt baɪ tʃæns.

"Ruminating?" Sammael said. "Can I at least hope that it is about what you are here to find for me?" He stood only a little taller than average, a muscular, solid man in a coat of the high-collared Illianer style, so covered with gold-work it was hard to tell the cloth was green, but more than being one of the Chosen gave him stature. His blue eyes were colder than winter's heart. A livid scar burned down his face from golden hairline to the edge of golden, square-cut beard, and it seemed a suitable decoration. Whatever got in his way was brushed aside, trampled or obliterated. Carridin knew Sammael would have turned his bowels to water if the man had been just someone met by chance.

hɝidli muvɪŋ fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ, hi dʒɹɑp tə hɪz niz bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃoʊzən. hi dɪspaɪz ðə tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪtʃəz; ɪndid, hi dɪspaɪzd ɛniwʌn u juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ, mɛɾəlɪŋ wɪð wʌt hæd bɹoʊkən ðə wɝld wʌns, wildɪŋ wʌt mɪɹ mɔɹɾəlz ʃəd nɑt tʌtʃ. ðɪs mæn juz ðə paʊɝ, tu, bʌt ðə tʃoʊzən kəd nɑt bi kɔl mɪɹ mɔɹɾəlz. pɝhæps nɑt mɔɹɾəlz əɾ ɔl. ən ɪf i sɝvd wɛl, niðɝ wəɾ i bi. "ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ, aɪ sɔ mæt kɔθən."

Hurriedly moving from the window, he dropped to his knees before the Chosen. He despised the Tar Valon witches; indeed, he despised anyone who used the One Power, meddling with what had broken the world once, wielding what mere mortals should not touch. This man used the Power, too, but the Chosen could not be called mere mortals. Perhaps not mortals at all. And if he served well, neither would he be. "Great Master, I saw Mat Cauthon."

"hɪɹ?" ɑdli, fəɹ ə moʊmənt, sɑmaɪl sim teɪkən əbæk. hi mɝmɝd sʌmθɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, ən ðə blʌd dʒɹeɪn fɹəm kæɹaɪɾɪnz feɪs ət wʌn kɑt wɝd.

"Here?" Oddly, for a moment, Sammael seemed taken aback. He murmured something under his breath, and the blood drained from Carridin's face at one caught word.

"ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, jə noʊ aɪ wəd nɛvɝ bɪtʃɹeɪ - "

"Great Lord, you know I would never betray - "

"ju? ful! jə hævən ðə stʌmək. ɑɹ jə sɝɾən ɪt wɑz kɔθən jə sɔ?"

"You? Fool! You haven't the stomach. Are you certain it was Cauthon you saw?"

"jɛs, ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ. ɪn ðə stʃɹit. aɪ noʊ aɪ kən faɪn ɪm əɡɛn."

"Yes, Great Master. In the street. I know I can find him again."

sɑmaɪl fɹaʊn daʊn ət hɪm, stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ɪz bɪɹd, lʊkɪŋ θɹu ən bɪɑn dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn. kæɹaɪɾɪn dɪd nɑt laɪk filɪŋ ɪnsɪɡnjɪfɪkənt, ɪspɛʃli wən i nu ɪt wɑz tʃɹu.

Sammael frowned down at him, stroking his beard, looking through and beyond Jaichim Carridin. Carridin did not like feeling insignificant, especially when he knew it was true.

"noʊ," sɑmaɪl sɛd faɪnəli. "jɔɹ sɝtʃ ɪz ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ, ði oʊnli θɪŋ, soʊ fɑɹ əz jə ɑɹ kənsɝnd. kɔθənz dɛθ wəd bi kənv nint, sɝɾənli, bʌt nɑɾ ɪf ɪt dʒɹɔz ətɛnʃən hɪɹ. ɪf ɪɾ əpɪɹz ðəɾ ətɛnʃən ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi hɪɹ, ʃəɾ i teɪk ən ɪntʃɹəst ɪn jəɹ sɝtʃ, ðən i daɪz, bʌɾ ʌðɝwaɪz, hi kən weɪt."

"No," Sammael said finally. "Your search is the most important thing, the only thing, so far as you are concerned. Cauthon's death would be conve nient, certainly, but not if it draws attention here. If it appears that attention is already here, should he take an interest in your search, then he dies, but otherwise, he can wait."

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"dɪd jə mɪʃɹ mi?" sɑmaɪlz skɑɹ pʊld ɪz smaɪl ɪndə ə snɑɹl ɑn wʌn saɪd. "aɪ sɔ jəɹ sɪstɝ vænɝə ɹisənli. ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk wɛl, ət fɝst. skɹimɪŋ ən wipɪŋ, twɪtʃɪŋ kɑnstənli ən pʊlɪŋ əɾ əɹ hɛɹ. wɪmən də sʌfɝ wɝs ðən mɛn fɹəm ði ətɛnʃənz ə mɹdʒɹɑl, bʌɾ ivən mɹdʒɹɑl mʌs faɪn ðɛɹ plɛʒɝz sʌmwɛɹ. doʊnt wɝi ðət ʃi sʌfɝd tu lɔŋ. ðə tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ ɔlweɪz hʌŋɡɹi." ðə smaɪl feɪɾəd; hɪz vɔɪs wɑz stoʊn. "ðoʊz u dɪsəbeɪ kən faɪn ðɛmsɛlvz oʊvɝ ə kʊkfaɪɝ, tu. vænɝə sim tə bi smaɪlɪŋ, kæɹaɪɾɪn. dʒju θɪŋk jə wəd smaɪl, tɝnɪŋ ɑn ə spɪt?"

"Did you mishear me?" Sammael's scar pulled his smile into a snarl on one side. "I saw your sister Vanora recently. She did not look well, at first. Screaming and weeping, twitching constantly and pulling at her hair. Women do suffer worse than men from the attentions of Myrddraal, but even Myrddraal must find their pleasures somewhere. Don't worry that she suffered too long. The Trollocs are always hungry." The smile faded; his voice was stone. "Those who disobey can find themselves over a cookfire, too. Vanora seemed to be smiling, Carridin. Do you think you would smile, turning on a spit?"

kæɹaɪɾɪn swɑloʊɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf, ən kwɛld ə pæŋ fəɹ vænɝə, wɪð əɹ ɹɛɾi læf ən əɹ skɪl wɪð hɔɹsəz, dɛɹɪŋ tə ɡæləp wɛɹ ʌðɝz fɪɹd tə wɔk. ʃi hæd bɪn ɪz feɪvɹɪt sɪstɝ, jɛt ʃi wɑz dɛɾ ən i wɑz nɑt. ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ɛni mɝsiz ɪn ðə wɝld, ʃi hæd nɑt lɝnd waɪ. "aɪ lɪv tə sɝv ən oʊbeɪ, ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ." hi dɪd nɑt bɪliv i wɑz ə kaʊɝd, bʌt noʊ wʌn dɪsoʊbeɪd wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən. nɑt mɔɹ ðən wʌns.

Carridin swallowed in spite of himself, and quelled a pang for Vanora, with her ready laugh and her skill with horses, daring to gallop where others feared to walk. She had been his favorite sister, yet she was dead and he was not. If there were any mercies in the world, she had not learned why. "I live to serve and obey, Great Master." He did not believe he was a coward, but no one disobeyed one of the Chosen. Not more than once.

"ðɛn faɪnd wʌɾ aɪ wɑnt!" sɑmaɪl ɹɔɹd. "aɪ noʊ ɪts hɪɾən sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðɪs kʒæzɪk flaɪspɛk ʌv ə sɪɾi! tɛɹæŋɡɹil, æŋɡɹil, ivən sɑŋɡɹil! aɪ hæv tʃɹæk ðɛm, tʃɹeɪs ðɛm! naʊ jə faɪn ðɛm, kæɹaɪɾɪn. də nɑt meɪk mi ɡɹoʊ ɪmpeɪʃənt."

"Then find what I want!" Sammael roared. "I know it's hidden somewhere in this kjasic flyspeck of a city! Ter'angreal, angreal, even sa'angreal! I have tracked them, traced them! Now you find them, Carridin. Do not make me grow impatient."

"ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ. . . ." hi wɝkt ɪz maʊθ tə faɪn mɔɪstʃɝ. "ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ, ðəɹ ɑɹ wɪtʃəz . . . ɛɛs sədaɪ . . . hɪɹ. aɪ kænɑt bi ʃʊɹ haʊ mɛni. ɪf ðeɪ hɪɹ ə wɪspɝ. . . ."

"Great Master. . . ." He worked his mouth to find moisture. "Great Master, there are witches . . . Aes Sedai . . . here. I cannot be sure how many. If they hear a whisper. . . ."

weɪvɪŋ ɪm tə saɪləns, sɑmaɪl peɪst ə fju kwɪk stɛps, θɹi taɪmz ʌp ən bæk, hænz klæsp bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. hi dɪd nɑt lʊk wɝid, oʊnli . . . kənsɪɾɝɪŋ. faɪnəli hi nɑɾəd. "aɪ wɪl sɛn jə . . . sʌmwʌn . . . tə dil wɪð ðiz ɛɛs sədaɪ." hi bɑɹkt ə ʃɔɹt læf. "aɪ ɔlmoʊst wɪʃ aɪ kəd si ðɛɹ feɪsəz. vɛɹi wɛl. juv ə lɪɾəl waɪl lɔŋɡɝ. ðən pɝhæps sʌmwʌn ɛls wɪl əv ə tʃæns." hi lɪftəɾ ə stʃɹæn ə ʃieɪnz hɛɹ wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ; ʃi stɪl dɪd nɑt muv; hɝ aɪz stɛɹɾ ənblɪŋkɪŋ. "ðɪs tʃaɪld wəd sɝɾənli lip ət ði ɑpɝtunəɾi." kæɹaɪɾɪn fɔt daʊn ə stæb ə fɪɹ. ðə tʃoʊzən kæs daʊn əz kwɪkli əz ðeɪ ɹeɪzd ʌp, ən əz ɔfən. feɪljɝ nɛvɝ wɛn ənpʌnɪʃt. "ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ, ðə feɪvɝ aɪ æskt ə ju. ɪf aɪ maɪt noʊ. . . . hæv jə . . . wɪl jə - ?"

Waving him to silence, Sammael paced a few quick steps, three times up and back, hands clasped behind his back. He did not look worried, only . . . considering. Finally he nodded. "I will send you . . . someone . . . to deal with these Aes Sedai." He barked a short laugh. "I almost wish I could see their faces. Very well. You have a little while longer. Then perhaps someone else will have a chance." He lifted a strand of Shiaine's hair with a finger; she still did not move; her eyes stared unblinking. "This child would certainly leap at the opportunity." Carridin fought down a stab of fear. The Chosen cast down as quickly as they raised up, and as often. Failure never went unpunished. "Great Master, the favor I asked of you. If I might know. . . . Have you . . . will you - ?"

"ðɛɹ ɪz vɛɹi lɪɾəl lʌk ɪn ju, kæɹaɪɾɪn," sɑmaɪl sɛd wɪð ənʌðɝ smaɪl. "ju hæd bɛɾɝ hoʊp juv mɔɹ kæɹiɪŋ aʊt maɪ ɔɹɾɝz. ɪt simz ðət sʌmwʌn ɪz meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ ət list səm ʌv ɪʃəmlz kəmænz ɑɹ stɪl kæɹiɾ aʊt." hi wɑz smaɪlɪŋ, bʌɾ i sim fɑɹ fɹəm əmjuzd. əɹ pɝhæps ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðə skɑɹ. "ju feɪl hɪm, ən juv lɔs jəɹ ɪntaɪɝ fæmli fəɹ ɪt. oʊnli maɪ hæn pɹətɛks ju, naʊ. wʌns, lɔŋ əɡoʊ, aɪ sɔ θɹi mɹdʒɹɑl meɪk ə mæn ɡɪv əm ɪz waɪf ən ɪz dɔɾɝz wʌn baɪ wʌn, ðən bɛɡ ðɛm tə kʌɾ ɔf ɪz ɹaɪt lɛɡ, ðən ðə lɛft, ðən ɪz ɑɹmz, ən bɝn aʊɾ ɪz aɪz." ðə pɝfəkli ɔɹɾənɛɹi kɑnvɝseɪʃənəl toʊn meɪd ðə ɹɛsəteɪʃən wɝs ðən ɛni ʃaʊts əɹ snɑɹlz ɛvɝ kəd hæv. "ɪt wɑz ə ɡeɪm wɪð ðɛm, jə ʌndɝstænd, tə si haʊ mʌtʃ ðeɪ kəd meɪk ɪm bɛɡ ðɛm tə teɪk. ðeɪ lɛft ɪz tʌŋ fəɹ læst, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðəɹ wɑzn ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə hɪm ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ baɪ ðɛn. hi hæd bɪn kwaɪt paʊɝfəl, hænsəm ən feɪməs. ɛnvid. noʊ wʌn wəɾ ɛvɝ ɛnvi wʌt ðeɪ faɪnəli tɔs tə ðə tʃɹɑləks. jə wʊdn bɪliv ðə saʊnz ɪt meɪd. faɪnd wʌɾ aɪ wɑnt, kæɹaɪɾɪn. jəl nɑt laɪk ɪɾ ɪf aɪ wɪðdʒɹɔ maɪ hænd."

"There is very little luck in you, Carridin," Sammael said with another smile. "You had better hope you have more carrying out my orders. It seems that someone is making sure at least some of Ishamael's commands are still carried out." He was smiling, but he seemed far from amused. Or perhaps it was just the scar. "You failed him, and you've lost your entire family for it. Only my hand protects you, now. Once, long ago, I saw three Myrddraal make a man give them his wife and his daughters one by one, then beg them to cut off his right leg, then the left, then his arms, and burn out his eyes." The perfectly ordinary conversational tone made the recitation worse than any shouts or snarls ever could have. "It was a game with them, you understand, to see how much they could make him beg them to take. They left his tongue for last, of course, but there wasn't a great deal of him remaining by then. He had been quite powerful, handsome and famous. Envied. No one would ever envy what they finally tossed to the Trollocs. You wouldn't believe the sounds it made. Find what I want, Carridin. You will not like it if I withdraw my hand."

əbɹʌpli ðəɹ wɑz ə vɝɾɪkəl laɪn ə laɪɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃoʊzən. ɪt sim tə tɝn ɪn səm fæʃən, waɪɾənɪŋ əz ɪt dɪɾ ɪndə ə skwɛɹ . . . hoʊl. kæɹaɪɾɪn ɡeɪpt. hi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ θɹu ə hoʊl ɪn ði ɛɹ, ət sʌmwɛɹ fʊl ʌv ɡɹeɪ kɑləmz ən θɪk mɪst. sɑmaɪl stɛp θɹu, ən ði oʊpənɪŋ snæpt ʃʌt, ə bɹɪljən bɑɹ ə laɪt ðət vænɪʃt, livɪŋ oʊnli ə pɝpəl æftɝɪmɪdʒ ɡloʊɪŋ ɪn kæɹaɪɾɪnz aɪz.

Abruptly there was a vertical line of light in the air before the Chosen. It seemed to turn in some fashion, widening as it did into a square . . . hole. Carridin gaped. He was staring through a hole in the air, at somewhere full of gray columns and thick mist. Sammael stepped through, and the opening snapped shut, a brilliant bar of light that vanished, leaving only a purple afterimage glowing in Carridin's eyes.

ənstɛɾəli, hi pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf tə hɪz fit. feɪljɝ wɑz ɔlweɪz pʌnɪʃt, bʌt noʊ wʌn sɝvaɪv dɪsəbɪŋ wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən.

Unsteadily, he pushed himself to his feet. Failure was always punished, but no one survived disobeying one of the Chosen.

sʌɾənli ʃieɪn muvd, kəmpliɾɪŋ əɹ hɔltəd ɹaɪz fɹəm ðə tʃɛɹ. "ju mɑɹk mi, bɔɹz," ʃi bɪɡæn, ðən kʌɾ ɔf, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə wɪndoʊ wɛɹ i hæd bɪn stændɪŋ. hɝ aɪz dɑɹɾɪd, faʊn hɪm, ən ʃi dʒʌmpt. hi cʊɾə bɪn wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən hɪmsɛlf fɹəm ðə weɪ ðoʊz aɪz bʌlʒd.

Suddenly Shiaine moved, completing her halted rise from the chair. "You mark me, Bors," she began, then cut off, staring at the window where he had been standing. Her eyes darted, found him, and she jumped. He could have been one of the Chosen himself from the way those eyes bulged.

noʊ wʌn sɝvaɪv dɪsəbɪŋ ðə tʃoʊzən. hi pɹɛst ɪz hænz əɡɛnst ɪz tɛmpəlz. hɪz hɛd fɛl taɪt tə bɝstɪŋ. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə mæn ɪn ðə sɪɾi, mæt kɔθən. jəl - " ʃi ɡeɪv ə smɔl stɑɹt, ən i fɹaʊnd. "ju noʊ hɪm?"

No one survived disobeying the Chosen. He pressed his hands against his temples. His head felt tight to bursting. "There is a man in the city, Mat Cauthon. You will - " She gave a small start, and he frowned. "You know him?"

"aɪ hæv hɝd ðə neɪm," ʃi sɛd wɛɹəli. ən æŋɡɹəli, hi wəɾ əv sɛd. "fju lɪŋk tə ælθɹ ɹɪmeɪn ənnoʊn fəɹ lɔŋ." əz i stɛp kloʊsɝ, ʃi kɹɔst əɹ ɑɹmz pɹoʊtɛktɪvli ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝsɛlf, ən hɛld əɹ pleɪs wɪð ən ɑbviəs ɛfɝt. "wʌɾ ɪz ə siɾi fɑɹmbɔɪ duɪŋ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ? haʊ dɪɾ i - ?"

"I have heard the name," she said warily. And angrily, he would have said. "Few linked to al'Thor remain unknown for long." As he stepped closer, she crossed her arms protectively in front of herself, and held her place with an obvious effort. "What is a seedy farmboy doing in Ebou Dar? How did he - ?"

"doʊn bɑðɝ mi wɪð fulɪʃ kwɛstʃənz, ʃieɪn." hɪz hɛd hæd nɛvɝ hɝt laɪk ðɪs; nɛvɝ. ɪt fɛlt əz ðoʊ ə dæɡɝ wɑz biɪŋ dʒɹɪvən ɪndə hɪz skʌl bɪtwin ɪz aɪz. noʊ wʌn sɝvaɪvd. . . . "ju wɪl pʊt jəɹ sɝkəl tə loʊkeɪɾɪŋ kɔθən ɪmiɾiətli. ɔl ə ðɛm." oʊl kʌli wɑz kʌmɪŋ tənaɪt, slɪpɪŋ ɪn θɹu ðə bæk ə ðə steɪbəlz; ʃi dɪd nɑt nid tə noʊ ðəɹ wəd bi ʌðɝz. "nʌθɪŋ ɛls ɪz tə ɡɛɾ ɪn ðə weɪ."

"Don't bother me with foolish questions, Shiaine." His head had never hurt like this; never. It felt as though a dagger was being driven into his skull between his eyes. No one survived. . . . "You will put your circle to locating Cauthon immediately. All of them." Old Cully was coming tonight, slipping in through the back of the stables; she did not need to know there would be others. "Nothing else is to get in the way."

"bʌɾ aɪ θɔt - "

"But I thought - "

ʃi bɹoʊk ɔf wɪð ə ɡæsp əz i sizd əɹ nɛk. ə slɪm dæɡɝ əpɪɹɾ ɪn əɹ hænd, bʌɾ i ɹɛntʃt ɪɾ əweɪ. ʃi twɪstəɾ ən dʒɝkt, bʌɾ i dʒɹoʊv əɹ feɪs daʊn ɑntu ðə teɪbəl, hɝ tʃik smʌdʒɪŋ stɪl-dæmp ɪŋk ɑn ðə dɪskɑɹɾɪd lɛɾɝ tə peɪdʒɹən naɪl. ðə dæɡɝ, stæbɪŋ daʊn dʒʌst ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ aɪz, fɹoʊz hɝ. baɪ tʃæns, ðə bleɪd pɪɹsɪŋ ðə peɪpɝ hæd kɑɾ ən æn baɪ ðə tɪp ʌv wʌn lɛɡ. ɪt stʃɹʌɡəld əz veɪnli əz ʃi hæd.

She broke off with a gasp as he seized her neck. A slim dagger appeared in her hand, but he wrenched it away. She twisted and jerked, but he drove her face down onto the table, her cheek smudging still-damp ink on the discarded letter to Pedron Niall. The dagger, stabbing down just in front of her eyes, froze her. By chance, the blade piercing the paper had caught an ant by the tip of one leg. It struggled as vainly as she had.

"ju ɑɹ ən ɪnsɛkt, mili." ðə peɪn ɪn ɪz hɛd meɪɾ ɪz vɔɪs ɹæsp. "ɪɾ ɪz taɪm jə ʌndɝstæn ðæt. wʌn ɪnsɛkt ɪz mʌtʃ laɪk ənʌðɝ, ən ɪf wʌn woʊn du. . . ." hɝ aɪz fɑloʊɾ ɪz θʌm daʊn, ən wən ɪt flæɾənd ɑn ði ænt, ʃi flɪntʃt.

"You are an insect, Mili." The pain in his head made his voice rasp. "It is time you understand that. One insect is much like another, and if one won't do. . . ." Her eyes followed his thumb down, and when it flattened on the ant, she flinched.

"aɪ lɪv tə sɝv ən oʊbeɪ, mæstɝ," ʃi bɹiðd. ʃi hæd sɛd ðət tə oʊl kʌli ɛvɹi taɪm i sɔ ðɛm təɡɛðɝ, bʌt nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ tə hɪm.

"I live to serve and obey, master," she breathed. She had said that to Old Cully every time he saw them together, but never before to him.

"æn ðɪs ɪz haʊ jəl oʊbeɪ. . . ." noʊ wʌn sɝvaɪv dɪsəbiɾiəns. noʊ wʌn.

"And this is how you will obey. . . ." No one survived disobedience. No one.


tʃæptɝ sɪkstin


CHAPTER 16

eɪ tʌtʃ ɑn ðə tʃik


A Touch on the Cheek

ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs wɑz ə mæs ə ʃaɪnɪŋ mɑɹbəl ən waɪt plæstɝ, wɪð skɹin bælkəniz ʌv waɪt-peɪntəd ɹɔɾ aɪɝn ən kɑləmd wɔks əz mʌtʃ əz fɔɹ stɔɹiz əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd. pɪdʒənz wild ɝaʊn pɔɪntəd doʊmz ən tɔl, bælkəni-ɹɛð spaɪɹz bændɪɾ ɪn ɹɛɾ ən ɡɹin taɪlz, ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn. ʃɑɹp-ɑɹtʃt ɡeɪts ɪn ðə pæləs ɪtsɛlf lɛd tə vɛɹiəs kɔɹtʃjɑɹdz, ən mɔɹ pɪɹs ðə haɪ wɔl haɪɾɪŋ ðə ɡɑɹɾənz, bʌt dip, snoʊi waɪt stɛps tɛn spænz waɪd klaɪmd ɑn ðə saɪd feɪsɪŋ mɔl hɛɹə skwɛɹ tə ɡɹeɪt dɔɹz kɑɹvd ɪn kɔɪlɪŋ pæɾɝnz laɪk ðə bælkəni skɹinz ən kʌvɝd wɪð biɾən ɡoʊld.

The Tarasin Palace was a mass of shining marble and white plaster, with screened balconies of white-painted wrought iron and columned walks as much as four stories above the ground. Pigeons wheeled around pointed domes and tall, balcony-wreathed spires banded in red and green tiles, glittering in the sun. Sharp-arched gates in the palace itself led to various courtyards, and more pierced the high wall hiding the gardens, but deep, snowy white steps ten spans wide climbed on the side facing Mol Hara Square to great doors carved in coiling patterns like the balcony screens and covered with beaten gold.

ðə dʌzən əɹ soʊ ɡɑɹdz laɪn ʌp bɪfɔɹ ðoʊz dɔɹz, swɛɾɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn, wɔɹ ɡɪldɪd bɹɛstpleɪts oʊvɝ ɡɹin koʊts ən bæɡi waɪt tʃɹaʊzɝz stʌft ɪndə dɑɹk ɡɹin buts. ɡɹin kɔɹdz sɪkjʊɹd θɪk twɪsts ʌv waɪt klɔθ ɝaʊnd ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ɡoʊldən hɛlməts, wɪð ðə lɔŋ ɛnz hæŋɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ bæks. ivən ðɛɹ hælbɝdz ən ðə skæbɝdz ə ðɛɹ dæɡɝz ən ʃɔɹt sɔɹdz ʃoʊn wɪð ɡoʊld. ɡɑɹdz fəɹ biɪŋ lʊkt æt, nɑt faɪɾɪŋ. bʌt ðɛn, wən mæt ɹitʃt ðə tɑp, hi kəd si sɔɝdzmɪnz kælʌsɪz ɑn ðɛɹ hænz. ɔlweɪz bɪfɔɹ i hæɾ ɛntɝd θɹu wʌn ə ðə steɪbliɑɹdz, tə pɝuz ðə pæləs hɔɹsəz ɪn pæsɪŋ, bʌt ðɪs taɪm i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɪn ðə weɪ ə lɔɹd wʊd.

The dozen or so guards lined up before those doors, sweating in the sun, wore gilded breastplates over green coats and baggy white trousers stuffed into dark green boots. Green cords secured thick twists of white cloth around glittering golden helmets, with the long ends hanging down their backs. Even their halberds and the scabbards of their daggers and short swords shone with gold. Guards for being looked at, not fighting. But then, when Mat reached the top, he could see swordsmen's calluses on their hands. Always before he had entered through one of the stableyards, to peruse the palace horses in passing, but this time he was going in the way a lord would.

"ðə laɪts blɛsɪŋ ɑn ɔl hɪɹ," hi sɛd tə ðɛɹ ɔfəsɝ, ə mæn nɑt mʌtʃ oʊldɝ ðən hi. ɛbu dɑɹi wɝ pəlaɪt pipəl. "aɪv kʌm tə liv ə mɛsədʒ fəɹ nɪneɪiv sədaɪ ən ɪleɪn sədaɪ. əɹ tə ɡɪv ɪt tə ðɛm, ɪf ðeɪv ɹɪtɝnd." ði ɔfəsɝ stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, lʊkt ət ðə stɛɹz ɪn kɑnstɝneɪʃən. ɡoʊl kɔɹɾ əz wɛl əz ɡɹin ɑn ɪz pɔɪntəd hɛlmət sɪɡnəfaɪd səm ɹæŋk mæt dɪd nɑt noʊ, ən i kæɹiɾ ə ɡɪldɪd ɹɑɾ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə hælbɹd, wɪð ə ʃɑɹp ɛn ən ə hʊk laɪk ən ɑks-ɡoʊd. baɪ hɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən, noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ kʌm ʌp ðət weɪ bɪfɔɹ. stʌɾiɪŋ mæts koʊt, hi mʌld ɪɾ oʊvɝ vɪzəbli, ən ət læs dɪsaɪɾɪd i kəd nɑt tɛl ɪm tə ɡoʊ əweɪ. wɪð ə saɪ, ðə mæn mɝmɝɾ ə bɛnɪsən ɪn ɹɪtɝn ən æsk mæts neɪm, pʊʃt oʊpən ə smɔl dɔɹ ɪn wʌn ə ðə lɑɹdʒɝ ən ʌʃɝɾ ɪm ɪndə ə ɡɹæn ɛntʃɹi hɔl ɪnsɝkəl baɪ faɪv stoʊn-ɹeɪl bælkəniz bɪniθ ə doʊm silɪŋ peɪntəd laɪk ðə skaɪ, kəmplit wɪð klaʊdz ən ə sʌn.

"The Light's blessing on all here," he said to their officer, a man not much older than he. Ebou Dari were polite people. "I've come to leave a message for Nynaeve Sedai and Elayne Sedai. Or to give it to them, if they've returned." The officer stared at him, looked at the stairs in consternation. Gold cord as well as green on his pointed helmet signified some rank Mat did not know, and he carried a gilded rod instead of a halberd, with a sharp end and a hook like an ox-goad. By his expression, no one had ever come up that way before. Studying Mat's coat, he mulled it over visibly, and at last decided he could not tell him to go away. With a sigh, the man murmured a benison in return and asked Mat's name, pushed open a small door in one of the larger and ushered him into a grand entry hall encircled by five stone-railed balconies beneath a domed ceiling painted like the sky, complete with clouds and a sun.

ðə ɡɑɹdz snæpɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz sʌmən ə slɪm jʌŋ sɝvɪŋ wʊmən ɪn ə waɪt dʒɹɛs, soʊn ʌp ɑn ðə lɛf tə ʃoʊ ɡɹin pɛɾikoʊts ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɑn ðə lɛf bɹɛst wɪð ə ɡɹin æŋkɝ ən sɔɹd. ʃi skɝiɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɹɛd-ænd-blu mɑɹbəl flɔɹ lʊkɪŋ stɑɹɾəld, kɝtsiɪŋ tə mæt ən ði ɔfəsɝ itʃ. ʃɔɹt blæk hɛɹ fɹeɪmd ə switli pɹɪɾi feɪs, wɪð sɪlkən ɑləv skɪn, ən əɹ lɪvɝi hæd ðə dip nɛɹoʊ nɛklaɪn kɑmən tə ɔl wɪmən ɪksɛp noʊbəlz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. fəɹ wʌns, mæt dɪd nɑt ɹɪli noʊɾəs. wən ʃi hɝd wʌɾ i wɑntəd, hɝ bɪɡ blæk aɪz waɪɾənd ivən mɔɹ. ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ nɑɾ ʌnpɑpjəlɝ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ɪɡzækli, bʌt moʊst ɛbu dɑɹi wəd ɡoʊ ə lɔŋ dɪstəns aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ weɪ tə əvɔɪd wʌn.

The guard's snapping fingers summoned a slim young serving woman in a white dress, sewn up on the left to show green petticoats and embroidered on the left breast with a green Anchor and Sword. She scurried across the red-and-blue marble floor looking startled, curtsying to Mat and the officer each. Short black hair framed a sweetly pretty face, with silken olive skin, and her livery had the deep narrow neckline common to all women except nobles in Ebou Dar. For once, Mat did not really notice. When she heard what he wanted, her big black eyes widened even more. Aes Sedai were not unpopular in Ebou Dar, exactly, but most Ebou Dari would go a long distance out of their way to avoid one.

"jɛs, sɔɹd-lutɛnənt," ʃi sɛd, bɑbɪŋ əɡɛn. "ʌv kɔɹs, sɔɹd-lutɛnənt. meɪ ɪt pliz jə tə fɑloʊ mi, maɪ lɔɹd?" ɪt dɪd.

"Yes, Sword-Lieutenant," she said, bobbing again. "Of course, Sword-Lieutenant. May it please you to follow me, my Lord?" It did.

aʊtsaɪd, ɛbu dɑɹ spɑɹkəld waɪt, bʌɾ ɪnsaɪd, kʌlɝ ɹæn waɪld. ðəɹ sim tə bi maɪlz ə bɹɔd kɔɹəɾɝ ɪn ðə pæləs, ən hɪɹ ðə haɪ silɪŋ wɑz blu ən ðə wɔlz jɛloʊ, ðəɹ ðə wɔlz peɪl ɹɛɾ ən ðə silɪŋ ɡɹin, tʃeɪnʒɪŋ wɪð ɛvɹi tɝn, kɑmbəneɪʃənz tə dʒɑɹ ɛni aɪ bʌɾ ə tɪŋkɝz. mæts buts saʊndəd laʊɾ ɑn flɔɹ taɪlz ðət meɪd pæɾɝnz ə tu əɹ θɹi əɹ səmtaɪmz fɔɹ kʌlɝz ɪn daɪmənz əɹ stɑɹz əɹ tʃɹaɪæŋɡəlz. wɛɹɛvɝ hɔlweɪz kɹɔs ðə flɔɹ wɑz ə moʊzeɪɪk ə taɪni taɪlz, ɪntʃɹəkət swɝlz ən skɹoʊlz ən lups. ə fju sɪlk tæpəstʃɹiz dɪspleɪd sinz ə ðə si, ən ɑɹtʃt nɪtʃɪz hɛl kɑɹv kɹɪstəl boʊlz ən smɔl stætʃuz ən jɛloʊ si foʊk pɔɹsələn ðət wəd fɛtʃ ə faɪn pɛni ɛniwɛɹ. əkeɪʒənəli ə lɪvɹid sɝvən hɝiɾ əlɔŋ saɪlənli, ɔfən əz nɑt kæɹiɪŋ ə sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ, əɹ ə ɡoʊldən.

Outside, Ebou Dar sparkled white, but inside, color ran wild. There seemed to be miles of broad corridor in the palace, and here the high ceiling was blue and the walls yellow, there the walls pale red and the ceiling green, changing with every turn, combinations to jar any eye but a Tinker's. Mat's boots sounded loud on floor tiles that made patterns of two or three or sometimes four colors in diamonds or stars or triangles. Wherever hallways crossed the floor was a mosaic of tiny tiles, intricate swirls and scrolls and loops. A few silk tapestries displayed scenes of the sea, and arched niches held carved crystal bowls and small statues and yellow Sea Folk porcelain that would fetch a fine penny anywhere. Occasionally a liveried servant hurried along silently, often as not carrying a silver tray, or a golden.

nɔɹməli, dɪspleɪz ʌv wɛlθ meɪd mæt fil kʌmftəɹbəl. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, wɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz mʌni, səm maɪt stɪk tə hɪz fɪŋɡɝz. ðɪs taɪm i fɛlt ɪmpeɪʃənt, mɔɹ soʊ baɪ ðə stɛp. ən æŋkʃəs. ðə læs taɪm i hæd fɛl ðə daɪs ɹoʊlɪŋ soʊ hɑɹɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd wɑz dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ i faʊn hɪmsɛlf wɪð θɹi hʌnʒɹəd ə ðə bænd, ə θaʊzən ʌv ɡeɪbɹəlz waɪt laɪənz ɑn ə ɹɪdʒ tə hɪz fɹʌn ən ənʌðɝ θaʊzən kʌmɪŋ hɑɹɾ ʌp ðə ɹoʊd bɪhaɪn hɪm, wən ɔl i hæd bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə də wɑz ɹaɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ði ɪntaɪɝ mɛs. ðət taɪm i hæɾ əvɔɪɾəd ðə tʃɑp baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪs ʌv ʌðɝ mɛnz mɛmɹiz ən mɔɹ lʌk ðən i hæɾ ə ɹaɪt tə. ðə daɪs ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz mɛn deɪnʒɝ, ən sʌmθɪŋ ɛls i hæd nɑt fɪɡjɝɾ aʊt jɛt. ðə pɹɑspɛkt ə hævɪŋ ɪz skʌl kɹækt wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf, ən wʌns əɹ twaɪs ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv sʌtʃ, jɛt ði ʌpkʌmɪŋ laɪklihʊɾ ə mæt kɔθən dɛɾ ɪn səm spɛktækjəlɝ fæʃən sim ðə moʊs juʒəwəl kɑz. ənlaɪkli, meɪbi, ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, bʌɾ ənlaɪkli dɪd nɑt meɪk ðə daɪs ɡoʊ əweɪ. hi wɑz gɑnə liv ɪz mɛsədʒ, ɡɹæb nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn baɪ ðə skɹʌf ə ðə nɛk ɪf i hæɾ ən ɑpɝtunəɾi, ɡɪv əm ə tɔkɪŋ-tə ðət meɪd ðɛɹ ɪɹz ɡloʊ, ən ðən ɡɛɾ aʊt.

Normally, displays of wealth made Mat feel comfortable. For one thing, where there was money, some might stick to his fingers. This time he felt impatient, more so by the step. And anxious. The last time he had felt the dice rolling so hard in his head was just before he found himself with three hundred of the Band, a thousand of Gaebril's White Lions on a ridge to his front and another thousand coming hard up the road behind him, when all he had been trying to do was ride away from the entire mess. That time he had avoided the chop by the grace of other men's memories and more luck than he had a right to. The dice almost always meant danger, and something else he had not figured out yet. The prospect of having his skull cracked was not enough, and once or twice there had been no possibility of such, yet the upcoming likelihood of Mat Cauthon dead in some spectacular fashion seemed the most usual cause. Unlikely, maybe, in the Tarasin Palace, but unlikely did not make the dice go away. He was going to leave his message, grab Nynaeve and Elayne by the scruff of the neck if he had an opportunity, give them a talking-to that made their ears glow, and then get out.

ðə jʌŋ wʊmən ɡlaɪɾɪd əhɛɾ ə hɪm əntɪl ðeɪ ɹitʃt ə ʃɔɹt, bʊlɪʃ mæn ə lɪɾəl oʊldɝ ðən ʃi, ənʌðɝ sɝvənt, ɪn taɪt waɪt bɹitʃɪz, ə waɪt ʃɝt wɪð waɪd slivz, ən ə lɔŋ ɡɹin vɛst wɪð ði æŋkɝ ən sɔɹɾ ə haʊs mɪtsoʊbɑɹ ɪn ə waɪt dɪsk. "mæstɝ dʒɛn," ʃi sɛd, kɝtsiɪŋ wʌns mɔɹ, "ðɪs ɪz lɔɹd mæt kɔθən, hu wɪʃɪz tə liv ə mɛsədʒ fəɹ ði ɑnɝɾ ɪleɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ði ɑnɝd nɪneɪiv ɛɛs sədaɪ."

The young woman glided ahead of him until they reached a short, bullish man a little older than she, another servant, in tight white breeches, a white shirt with wide sleeves, and a long green vest with the Anchor and Sword of House Mitsobar in a white disc. "Master Jen," she said, curtsying once more, "this is Lord Mat Cauthon, who wishes to leave a message for the honored Elayne Aes Sedai and the honored Nynaeve Aes Sedai."

"vɛɹi ɡʊd, hɛsəl. jə meɪ ɡoʊ." hi baʊd tə mæt. "meɪ ɪt pliz jə tə fɑloʊ mi, maɪ lɔɹd?"

"Very good, Haesel. You may go." He bowed to Mat. "May it please you to follow me, my Lord?"

dʒɛn lɛɾ ɪm əz fɑɹ əz ə dɑɹk, ɡɹɪm-feɪst wʊmən ʃɔɹɾ ə hɝ mɪɾəl jɪɹz, ən baʊd. "mɪstʃɹəs kæɹɪn, ðɪs ɪz lɔɹd mæt kɔθən, hu wɪʃɪz tə liv ə mɛsədʒ fəɹ ði ɑnɝɾ ɪleɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ði ɑnɝd nɪneɪiv ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Jen led him as far as a dark, grim-faced woman short of her middle years, and bowed. "Mistress Carin, this is Lord Mat Cauthon, who wishes to leave a message for the honored Elayne Aes Sedai and the honored Nynaeve Aes Sedai."

"vɛɹi ɡʊd, dʒɛn. jə meɪ ɡoʊ. meɪ ɪt pliz jə tə fɑloʊ mi, maɪ lɔɹd?"

"Very good, Jen. You may go. May it please you to follow me, my Lord?"

kæɹɪn tʊk ɪm ʌp ə swipɪŋ flaɪɾ ə mɑɹbəl stɛɹz, ðə ɹaɪzɝz peɪntəd jɛloʊ ən ɹɛd, tə ə skɪni wʊmən neɪmd mɑtaɪld, hu hændəɾ ɪm oʊvɝ tə ə staʊt fɛloʊ neɪm bɹɛn, hu lɛɾ ɪm tə ə bɔldɪŋ mæn neɪmd mæɾɪk, itʃ ə lɪɾəl oʊldɝ ðən ðə wʌn bɪfɔɹ. wɛɹ faɪv kɔɹɪɾɝz mɛt laɪk ðə spoʊks ʌv ə wil, mæɾɪk lɛft ɪm wɪð ə ɹaʊnd wʊmən kɔld lɹən, hu hæɾ ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪ əɾ əɹ tɛmpəlz ən ə steɪtli kæɹɪdʒ. laɪk kæɹɪn ən mɑtaɪld, ʃi wɔɹ wʌt ði ɛbu dɑɹi kɔld ə mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf, hæŋɪŋ hɪl daʊn fɹəm ə kloʊs-fɪɾɪŋ sɪlvɝ nɛkləs bɪtwin mɔɹ ðən plʌmp bɹɛsts. faɪv waɪt stoʊnz ɪn ðə hɪlt, tu sɛɾ ɪn ɹɛd, ən fɔɹ ɹɛd stoʊnz, wʌn sɝaʊndəd baɪ blæk, sɛd θɹi ʌv əɹ naɪn tʃɪlʒɹən wɝ dɛd, tu sʌnz ɪn duəlz. ɹaɪzɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ kɝtsi tə mæt, lɹən bɪɡæn tə floʊɾ ʌp wʌn ə ðə hɔlweɪz, bʌɾ i hɝid tə kætʃ əɹ ɑɹm.

Carin took him up a sweeping flight of marble stairs, the risers painted yellow and red, to a skinny woman named Matilde, who handed him over to a stout fellow named Bren, who led him to a balding man named Madic, each a little older than the one before. Where five corridors met like the spokes of a wheel, Madic left him with a round woman called Laren, who had a touch of gray at her temples and a stately carriage. Like Carin and Matilde, she wore what the Ebou Dari called a marriage knife, hanging hilt down from a close-fitting silver necklace between more than plump breasts. Five white stones in the hilt, two set in red, and four red stones, one surrounded by black, said three of her nine children were dead, two sons in duels. Rising out of her curtsy to Mat, Laren began to float up one of the hallways, but he hurried to catch her arm.

dɑɹk aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz slaɪtli əz ʃi ɡlænst əɾ ɪz hænd. ʃi hæd noʊ dæɡɝ ɪksɛp ðə mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf, bʌɾ i ɹilist əɹ ɪmiɾiətli. kʌstəm sɛd ʃi kəɾ oʊnli jus ðəɾ ɑn əɹ hʌzbənd, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn pʊʃɪŋ. hi dɪd nɑt sɑfən ɪz vɔɪs, ðoʊ. "haʊ fɑɹ də aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ tə liv ə noʊt? ʃoʊ mi tə ðɛɹ ɹumz. ə pɛɹ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃʊdn bi ðət hɑɹd tə faɪnd. ðɪs ɪzən ðə blʌɾi waɪt taʊɝ."

Dark eyebrows rose slightly as she glanced at his hand. She had no dagger except the marriage knife, but he released her immediately. Custom said she could only use that on her husband, yet there was no point in pushing. He did not soften his voice, though. "How far do I have to go to leave a note? Show me to their rooms. A pair of Aes Sedai shouldn't be that hard to find. This isn't the bloody White Tower."

"ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ə wʊmən sɛd bɪhaɪn ɪm ɪn ə hɛvi ɪliɑnɝ æksɛnt. "ɪf jə də sik tu ɛɛs sədaɪ, juv faʊn tu."

"Aes Sedai?" a woman said behind him in a heavy Illianer accent. "If you do seek two Aes Sedai, you have found two."

lɹənz feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, əɹ ɔlmoʊs nɑt. hɝ nɪɹli blæk aɪz dɑɹɾɪd pæs hɪm, ən i wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ taɪɾənd wɪð wɝi.

Laren's face did not change, or almost not. Her nearly black eyes darted past him, and he was sure they tightened with worry.

dɔfɪŋ ɪz hæt, mæt tɝnd wɛɹɪŋ ən izi smaɪl. wɪð ðət sɪlvɝ fɑkshɛɾ ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk, ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑt pʊɾ ɪm ɔf əɾ ɔl. wɛl, nɑt vɛɹi mʌtʃ. ɪt hæd ðoʊz flɔz. meɪbi ðə smaɪl wɑz nɑt ðəɾ izi.

Doffing his hat, Mat turned wearing an easy smile. With that silver foxhead around his neck, Aes Sedai did not put him off at all. Well, not very much. It had those flaws. Maybe the smile was not that easy.

ðə tu wɪmən kənfɹʌntɪŋ ɪm kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn mɔɹ dɪfɹənt. wʌn wɑz slɛndɝ, wɪð ə fɛtʃɪŋ smaɪl, ɪn ə ɡɹin-ænd-ɡoʊl dʒɹɛs ðət ʃoʊɾ ə hɪn ʌv wʌɾ i dʒʌdʒ tə bi ə faɪn bʊzəm. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðəɾ eɪdʒləs feɪs, hi maɪɾ əv θɔt tə stʃɹaɪk ʌp ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən. ɪt wɑz ə pɹɪɾi feɪs, wɪð aɪz lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə mæn tə sɪŋk ɪntu. ə pɪɾi. ði ʌðɝ hæd ði eɪɡləsnəs tu, bʌt siɪŋ ɪt tʊk ɪm ə moʊmənt. hi θɔt ʃi wɑz skaʊlɪŋ əntɪl i ɹilaɪz ðət mʌs bi hɝ nɔɹməl ɪkspɹɛʃən. hɝ dɑɹk, ɔlmoʊs blæk, dʒɹɛs kʌvɝɾ əɹ tə ðə ɹɪsts ən tʃɪn, fəɹ wɪtʃ i wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl. ʃi lʊk skɹɔni əz ən oʊl bɹæmbəl. ʃi lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi eɪt bɹæmbəlz fəɹ bɹɛkfəst.

The two women confronting him could not have been more different. One was slender, with a fetching smile, in a green-and-gold dress that showed a hint of what he judged to be a fine bosom. Except for that ageless face, he might have thought to strike up a conversation. It was a pretty face, with eyes large enough for a man to sink into. A pity. The other had the agelessness too, but seeing it took him a moment. He thought she was scowling until he realized that must be her normal expression. Her dark, almost black, dress covered her to the wrists and chin, for which he was grateful. She looked scrawny as an old bramble. She looked as if she ate brambles for breakfast.

"aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə liv ə mɛsədʒ fəɹ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn," hi toʊl ðɛm. "ðɪs wʊmən - " hi blɪŋkt, lʊkɪŋ daʊn itʃ ə ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz. sɝvəns hɝid baɪ, bʌt lɹən wɑz noʊwɛɹ ɪn saɪt. hi wəd nɑɾ əv θɔt ʃi kəd muv soʊ fæst. "ɛniweɪ, aɪ wɑnə liv ə noʊt." sʌɾənli kɔʃəs, hi æɾəd, "ɑɹ jə fɹɛnz ə ðɛɹz?"

"I'm trying to leave a message for Nynaeve and Elayne," he told them. "This woman - " He blinked, looking down each of the corridors. Servants hurried by, but Laren was nowhere in sight. He would not have thought she could move so fast. "Anyway, I want to leave a note." Suddenly cautious, he added, "Are you friends of theirs?"

"nɑɾ ɪɡzækli," ðə pɹɪɾi wʌn sɛd. "aɪ æm dʒoʊlin, ən ðɪs ɪz tɛslɪn. ən jə ɑɹ mæt kɔθən." mæts stʌmək taɪɾənd. naɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə pæləs, ən i hæd tə wɔk ɪndə ðə tu hu fɑloʊɾ ɪleɪɾə. ən wʌn ə ðɛm ɹɛd. nɑt ðəɾ i hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə fɪɹ. hi loʊɝɾ ɪz hæn tə hɪz saɪd bɪfɔɹ ɪt kəd tʌtʃ ðə fɑkshɛɾ ʌndɝ ɪz kloʊðz.

"Not exactly," the pretty one said. "I am Joline, and this is Teslyn. And you are Mat Cauthon." Mat's stomach tightened. Nine Aes Sedai in the palace, and he had to walk into the two who followed Elaida. And one of them Red. Not that he had anything to fear. He lowered his hand to his side before it could touch the foxhead under his clothes.

ðə wʌn u eɪt bɹæmbəlz - tɛslɪn - stɛp kloʊsɝ. ʃi wɑz ə sɪɾɝ, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə tɑm, ðoʊ wʌɾ ə sɪɾɝ wɑz duɪŋ hɪɹ ivən tɑm dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. "wi wəd bi ðɛɹ fɹɛnz ɪf wi kʊd. ðeɪ də nid fɹɛnz, mæstɝ kɔθən, əz də ju." hɝ aɪz tʃɹaɪd tə dɪɡ hoʊlz ɪn ɪz hɛd.

The one who ate brambles - Teslyn - stepped closer. She was a Sitter, according to Thom, though what a Sitter was doing here even Thom did not understand. "We would be their friends if we could. They do need friends, Master Cauthon, as do you." Her eyes tried to dig holes in his head.

dʒoʊlin muv tə flæŋk hɪm, leɪɪŋ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ləpɛl. hi wʊɾə kənsɪɾɝd ðət smaɪl ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ənʌðɝ wʊmən. ʃi wɑz ɡɹin ədʒɑ. "ðeɪ ɑɹ ɑn deɪnʒɝəs ɡɹaʊn ən blaɪn tə wʌt laɪz bɪniθ ðɛɹ fit. aɪ noʊ jə ɑɹ ðɛɹ fɹɛnd. jə maɪt ʃoʊ ɪt baɪ tɛlɪŋ əm tə əbændən ðɪs nɑnsɛns bɪfɔɹ ɪts tu leɪt. fulɪʃ tʃɪlʒɹən u ɡoʊ tu fɑɹ kən faɪn ðɛmsɛlvz pʌnɪʃt kwaɪt səvɪɹli."

Joline moved to flank him, laying a hand on his lapel. He would have considered that smile inviting from another woman. She was Green Ajah. "They are on dangerous ground and blind to what lies beneath their feet. I know you are their friend. You might show it by telling them to abandon this nonsense before it is too late. Foolish children who go too far can find themselves punished quite severely."

mæt wɑntəd tə bæk əweɪ; ivən tɛslɪn stʊd kloʊs ɪnʌf tə bi ɔlmoʊs tʌtʃɪŋ hɪm. ɪnstɛɾ i pʊɾ ɑn ɪz moʊst ɪnsələnt ɡɹɪn. ɪt hæɾ ɔlweɪz lændəɾ ɪm ɪn tʃɹʌbəl bæk hoʊm, bʌɾ ɪt simd əpɹoʊpɹieɪt. ðoʊz daɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd kəɾ əv nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðɪs pɛɹ, əɹ ðeɪ wʊɾə stɑp spɪnɪŋ. ən i dɪɾ əv ðə mədæljən. "ðeɪ si pɹɪɾi wɛl, aɪd seɪ." nɪneɪiv bædli niɾəd tə bi snætʃt daʊn ə pɛɡ əɹ sɪks, ən ɪleɪn ivən mɔɹ, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə stæn baɪ ən lɪsən tə ðɪs wʊmən tɔk nɪneɪiv daʊn. ɪf ðət mɛn dɪfɛndɪŋ ɪleɪn tu, soʊ bi ɪt. "meɪbi jə ʃəɾ əbændən jəɹ nɑnsɛns." dʒoʊlinz smaɪl vænɪʃt, bʌt tɛslɪn ɹipleɪst ɪt wɪð wʌn ə hɝ oʊn, ə ɹeɪzɝd smaɪl.

Mat wanted to back away; even Teslyn stood close enough to be almost touching him. Instead he put on his most insolent grin. It had always landed him in trouble back home, but it seemed appropriate. Those dice in his head could have nothing to do with this pair, or they would have stopped spinning. And he did have the medallion. "They see pretty well, I'd say." Nynaeve badly needed to be snatched down a peg or six, and Elayne even more, but he was not about to stand by and listen to this woman talk Nynaeve down. If that meant defending Elayne too, so be it. "Maybe you should abandon your nonsense." Joline's smile vanished, but Teslyn replaced it with one of her own, a razored smile.

"wi də noʊ əbaʊt ju, mæstɝ kɔθən." ʃi lʊkt ə wʊmən u wɑntəd tə skɪn sʌmθɪŋ, ən huɛvɝ wɑz hændi wəd du. "tɑvɝən, ɪt də bi sɛd. wɪð deɪnʒɝəs əsoʊsieɪʃənz ə jəɹ oʊn. ðət də bi mɔɹ ðən hɪɹseɪ."

"We do know about you, Master Cauthon." She looked a woman who wanted to skin something, and whoever was handy would do. "Ta'veren, it do be said. With dangerous associations of your own. That do be more than hearsay."

dʒoʊlinz feɪs wɑz aɪs. "ə jʌŋ mæn ɪn jəɹ pəzɪʃən u wɪʃt tə bi əʃʊɹɾ ə hɪz fjutʃɝ kəd də mʌtʃ wɝs ðən sik ðə pɹətɛkʃən ə ðə taʊɝ. jə ʃəd nɛvɝ əv lɛft ɪt."

Joline's face was ice. "A young man in your position who wished to be assured of his future could do much worse than seek the protection of the Tower. You should never have left it."

hɪz stʌmək klɛntʃt taɪɾɝ. wʌɾ ɛls dɪd ðeɪ noʊ? ʃʊɹli nɑɾ əbaʊt ðə mədæljən. nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn nu, ən æɾɪliz ən vændin, ən ðə laɪɾ oʊnli nu hu ðeɪ hæd toʊld, bʌt ʃʊɹli nɑt ðɪs pɛɹ. ðəɹ wɑz wɝs ðən tɑvɝən əɹ ðə fɑkshɛd, ðoʊ, əɹ ivən ɹænd, əz fɑɹ əz i wɑz kənsɝnd. ɪf ðeɪ nu əbaʊt ðə blʌɾi hɔɹn. . . . əbɹʌpli hi wɑz jæŋkt əweɪ fɹəm əm soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ i stʌmbəld ən nɪɹli dʒɹɑpt ɪz hæt. ə slɛndɝ wʊmən wɪð ə smuð feɪs ən nɪɹli waɪt hɛɹ ɡæðɝɾ ət ðə bæk ə hɝ nɛk hæɾ ɪm baɪ sliv ən ləpɛl. ɹiflɛksɪvli tɛslɪn sizd ɪm ðə seɪm weɪ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. hi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə stʃɹeɪt-bæk nukʌmɝ ɪn əɹ pleɪn ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛs, ɪn ə weɪ. ʃi wɑz iðɝ æɾɪliz əɹ vændin, tu sɪstɝz - ɹil sɪstɝz, nɑt dʒʌst ɛɛs sədaɪ - hu maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn twɪnz; hi nɛvɝ kəd tɛl əm əpɑɹt fəɹ sɝɾən. ʃi ən tɛslɪn stɛɹɾ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ, tʃɪl ən sɝin, tu kæts wɪð ə pɔ ɑn ðə seɪm maʊs.

His stomach clenched tighter. What else did they know? Surely not about the medallion. Nynaeve and Elayne knew, and Adeleas and Vandene, and the Light only knew who they had told, but surely not this pair. There was worse than ta'veren or the foxhead, though, or even Rand, as far as he was concerned. If they knew about the bloody Horn. . . . Abruptly he was yanked away from them so hard that he stumbled and nearly dropped his hat. A slender woman with a smooth face and nearly white hair gathered at the back of her neck had him by sleeve and lapel. Reflexively Teslyn seized him the same way on the other side. He recognized the straight-backed newcomer in her plain gray dress, in a way. She was either Adeleas or Vandene, two sisters - real sisters, not just Aes Sedai - who might as well have been twins; he never could tell them apart for certain. She and Teslyn stared at one another, chill and serene, two cats with a paw on the same mouse.

"noʊ nid tə tɛɹ maɪ koʊɾ ɔf," hi ɡɹaʊld, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʃɹʌɡ fɹi. "maɪ koʊt?" hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ðeɪ hɝd. ivən wɛɹɪŋ ðə fɑkshɛɾ i wɑz nɑt pɹipɛɹd tə ɡoʊ əz fɑɹ əz pɹaɪɪŋ ðɛɹ fɪŋɡɝz fɹi - ənlɛs i hæd tə.

"No need to tear my coat off," he growled, trying to shrug free. "My coat?" He was not sure they heard. Even wearing the foxhead he was not prepared to go as far as prying their fingers free - unless he had to.

tu ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ əkʌmpənid wɪtʃɛvɝ sɪstɝ ɪt wɑz, ðoʊ wʌn, ə dɑɹk, stɑki wʊmən wɪð ɪnkwɪzɪɾɪv aɪz, wɑz mɑɹk baɪ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ən ðə bɹaʊn-fɹɪnd ʃɔl ʃi wɔɹ, dɪspleɪɪŋ ðə waɪt fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn əmʌŋ vaɪnz ɑn əɹ bæk. ʃi əpɪɹd tə bi dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl oʊldɝ ðən nɪneɪiv, wɪtʃ meɪɾ əɹ sɝaɪðə toʊmɑɹz, oʊnli tu jɪɹz əɹ soʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Two other Aes Sedai accompanied whichever sister it was, though one, a dark, stocky woman with inquisitive eyes, was marked by no more than the Great Serpent ring and the brown-fringed shawl she wore, displaying the white Flame of Tar Valon among vines on her back. She appeared to be just a little older than Nynaeve, which made her Sareitha Tomares, only two years or so Aes Sedai.

"du jə stup tə kɪdnæpɪŋ mɛn ɪn ðə hɔlz naʊ, tɛslɪn?" ði ʌðɝ sɛd. "ə mæn u kænɑt tʃænəl kən hɑɹdli bi ʌv ɪntʃɹəs tə ju." ʃɔɹɾ ən peɪl ɪn leɪs-tʃɹɪmd ɡɹeɪ slæʃt wɪð blu, ʃi wɑz ɔl kul eɪdʒləs ɛləɡəns ən kɑnfəɾənt smaɪl. eɪ kɛɹhinɪn æksɛn aɪdɛntəfaɪd hɝ. hi hæd sɝɾənli ətʃɹæktəd ðə tɑp dɑɡz ɪn ðə jɑɹd. tɑm hæd nɑt bɪn ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ dʒoʊlin əɹ tɛslɪn wɑz ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ ʌv ɪleɪɾəz ɛmbəsi, bʌt mɛɝɪlɪl lɛd ðə wʌn fɹəm ðoʊz ɪɾiəts u hæd tʃɹɪkt ɛɡwin ɪndə bɪkʌmɪŋ ðɛɹ æmɪɝlɪn.

"Do you stoop to kidnapping men in the halls now, Teslyn?" the other said. "A man who cannot channel can hardly be of interest to you." Short and pale in lace-trimmed gray slashed with blue, she was all cool ageless elegance and confident smile. A Cairhienin accent identified her. He had certainly attracted the top dogs in the yard. Thom had not been sure whether Joline or Teslyn was in charge of Elaida's embassy, but Merilille led the one from those idiots who had tricked Egwene into becoming their Amyrlin.

mæt cʊɾə ʃeɪvd wɪð tɛslɪnz ɹɪtɝn smaɪl. "du noʊ dɪsəmbəl wɪð mi, mɛɝɪlɪl. mæt kɔθən də bi ʌv kənsɪɾɝəbəl ɪntʃɹəst. hi ʃəd noʊ bi ɹʌnɪŋ lus." əz ɪf i wɑz nɑt stændɪŋ ðəɹ lɪsnɪŋ!

Mat could have shaved with Teslyn's return smile. "Do no dissemble with me, Merilille. Mat Cauthon do be of considerable interest. He should no be running loose." As if he was not standing there listening!

"doʊn faɪɾ oʊvɝ mi," hi sɛd. tʌɡɪŋ ɪz koʊt wɑz nɑt meɪkɪŋ ɛniwʌn lɛt ɡoʊ. "ðɛɹz ɪnʌf tə ɡoʊ ɝaʊnd."

"Don't fight over me," he said. Tugging his coat was not making anyone let go. "There's enough to go around."

faɪv sɛts ʌv aɪz meɪɾ ɪm wɪʃ i hæd kɛpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt. ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd noʊ sɛns ə hjumɝ. hi pʊld ə lɪɾəl hɑɹɾɝ, ən vændin - əɹ æɾɪliz - dʒɝk bæk hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə pʊl ðə koʊɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz hænd. vændin, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd. ʃi wɑz ɡɹin, ən i hæɾ ɔlweɪz θɔt ʃi wɑntəd tə tɝn ɪm ʌpsaɪd daʊn ən ʃeɪk ðə sikɹəɾ ə ðə mədæljən aʊɾ ə hɪm. wɪtʃɛvɝ ʃi wɑz, ʃi smaɪld, pɑɹt noʊɪŋ, pɑɹɾ əmjuzd. hi sɔ nʌθɪŋ fʌni. ði ʌðɝz dɪd nɑt lʊk əɾ ɪm lɔŋ. hi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv vænɪʃt.

Five sets of eyes made him wish he had kept his mouth shut. Aes Sedai had no sense of humor. He pulled a little harder, and Vandene - or Adeleas - jerked back hard enough to pull the coat out of his hand. Vandene, he decided. She was Green, and he had always thought she wanted to turn him upside down and shake the secret of the medallion out of him. Whichever she was, she smiled, part knowing, part amused. He saw nothing funny. The others did not look at him long. He might as well have vanished.

"wʌɾ i nidz," dʒoʊlin sɛd fɝmli, "ɪz tə bi teɪkən ɪndə kʌstəɾi. fəɹ ɪz oʊn pɹətɛkʃən, ən mɔɹ. θɹi tɑvɝən kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə sɪŋɡəl vɪlədʒ? ən wʌn ə ðɛm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn? mæstɝ kɔθən ʃəd bi sɛn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪmiɾiətli." ən i hæd θɔɾ əɹ pɹɪɾi.

"What he needs," Joline said firmly, "is to be taken into custody. For his own protection, and more. Three ta'veren coming out of a single village? And one of them the Dragon Reborn? Master Cauthon should be sent to the White Tower immediately." And he had thought her pretty.

mɛɝɪlɪl oʊnli ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ju oʊvɝɛstəmeɪt jəɹ sɪtʃueɪʃən hɪɹ, dʒoʊlin, ɪf jə θɪŋk əl sɪmpli əlaʊ jə tə teɪk ðə bɔɪ."

Merilille only shook her head. "You overestimate your situation here, Joline, if you think I will simply allow you to take the boy."

"ju oʊvɝɛstəmeɪt jʊɹz, mɛɝɪlɪl." dʒoʊlin stɛp kloʊsɝ, əntɪl ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. hɝ lɪps kɝvd, supɪɹiɝ ən kɑndɪsɛndɪŋ. "ɔɹ dʒju ʌndɝstæn ðəɾ ɪts oʊnli ə wɪʃ nɑt tə əfɛn taɪlɪn ðət kips əs fɹəm kənfaɪnɪŋ ɔl ə jə ɑn bɹɛɾ ən wɔɾɝ əntɪl jə kən bi ɹɪtɝn tə ðə taʊɝ?"

"You overestimate yours, Merilille." Joline stepped closer, until she was looking down at the other woman. Her lips curved, superior and condescending. "Or do you understand that it's only a wish not to offend Tylin that keeps us from confining all of you on bread and water until you can be returned to the Tower?"

mæt ɪkspɛktəd mɛɝɪlɪl tə læf ɪn əɹ feɪs, bʌt ʃi ʃɪftəɾ əɹ hɛd slaɪtli əz ɪf ʃi ɹɪli wɑntəd tə bɹeɪk əweɪ fɹəm dʒoʊlinz ɡeɪz.

Mat expected Merilille to laugh in her face, but she shifted her head slightly as if she really wanted to break away from Joline's gaze.

"ju wəd nɑt dɛɹ." sɝaɪðə wɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ tʃɹæŋkwɪlɪɾi laɪk ə mæsk, feɪs smuð ən hænz kɑmli ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl, bʌɾ əɹ bɹɛθi vɔɪs ʃaʊɾəd ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə mæsk.

"You would not dare." Sareitha wore Aes Sedai tranquility like a mask, face smooth and hands calmly adjusting her shawl, but her breathy voice shouted that it was a mask.

"ðiz ɑɹ tʃɪlʒɹənz ɡeɪmz, dʒoʊlin," vændin mɝmɝd dʒɹaɪli. ʃʊɹli ðət wɑz u ʃi wɑz. ʃi wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn ə ðə θɹi hu ɹɪli dɪɾ əpɪɹ ənɹʌfəld.

"These are children's games, Joline," Vandene murmured dryly. Surely that was who she was. She was the only one of the three who really did appear unruffled.

feɪn splæʃəz ə kʌlɝ blɑsəmd ɑn mɛɝɪlɪlz tʃiks əz ɪf ðə waɪt-hɛɹd wʊmən hæd spoʊkən tə hɝ, bʌɾ əɹ oʊn ɡeɪz stɛɾid. "ju kən hɑɹdli ɪkspɛkt əs tə ɡoʊ mikli," ʃi toʊl dʒoʊlin fɝmli, "æn ðəɹ ɑɹ faɪv ʌv ʌs. sɛvən, kaʊntɪŋ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn." ðə læst wɑz ə klɪɹ æftɝθɑt, ən ɹɪlʌktən ət ðæt.

Faint splashes of color blossomed on Merilille's cheeks as if the white-haired woman had spoken to her, but her own gaze steadied. "You can hardly expect us to go meekly," she told Joline firmly, "and there are five of us. Seven, counting Nynaeve and Elayne." The last was a clear afterthought, and reluctant at that.

dʒoʊlin ɑɹtʃt ən aɪbɹaʊ. tɛslɪnz boʊni fɪŋɡɝz dɪd nɑt lusən ðɛɹ ɡɹɪp ɛni mɔɹ ðən vændinz, bʌt ʃi stʌɾid dʒoʊlin ən mɛɝɪlɪl wɪð ən ənɹiɾəbəl ɪkspɹɛʃən. ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ə kʌntʃɹi ʌv stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, wɛɹ jə nɛvɝ nu wʌt tə ɪkspɛkt əntɪl ɪt wɑz tu leɪt. ðəɹ wɝ dip kɝəns hɪɹ. dip kɝəns ɝaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd snætʃ ə mæn tə hɪz dɛθ wɪθaʊɾ əm soʊ mʌtʃ əz noʊɾɪsɪŋ. meɪbi ɪt wɑz taɪm tə stɑɹt pɹaɪɪŋ ət fɪŋɡɝz.

Joline arched an eyebrow. Teslyn's bony fingers did not loosen their grip any more than Vandene's, but she studied Joline and Merilille with an unreadable expression. Aes Sedai were a country of strangers, where you never knew what to expect until it was too late. There were deep currents here. Deep currents around Aes Sedai could snatch a man to his death without them so much as noticing. Maybe it was time to start prying at fingers.

lɹənz sʌɾən ɹiəpɪɹəns seɪvd ɪm ði ɛfɝt. stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə kəntʃɹoʊl əɹ bɹɛθ əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn ɹʌnɪŋ, ðə plʌmp wʊmən spɹɛɾ əɹ skɝts ɪn ə kɝtsi mɑɹkədli dipɝ ðən ʃi hæd ɡɪvən hɪm. "fɝɡɪvnəs fəɹ dɪstɝbɪŋ ju, ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ðə kwin sʌmənz lɔɹd kɔθən. fɝɡɪvnəs, pliz. ɪts mɔɹ ðən maɪ ɪɹz ɑɹ wɝθ ɪf aɪ doʊn bɹɪŋ ɪm stʃɹeɪɾ əweɪ."

Laren's sudden reappearance saved him the effort. Struggling to control her breath as if she had been running, the plump woman spread her skirts in a curtsy markedly deeper than she had given him. "Forgiveness for disturbing you, Aes Sedai, but the Queen summons Lord Cauthon. Forgiveness, please. It's more than my ears are worth if I don't bring him straight away."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ lʊkt ət hɝ, ɔl ə ðɛm, tɪl ʃi bɪɡæn tə fɪdʒɪt; ðən ðə tu ɡɹups stɛɹɾ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə si hu kəɾ aʊteɪz sədaɪ hu. ən ðən ðeɪ lʊkt ət hɪm. hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ɛnibəɾi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə muv.

The Aes Sedai looked at her, all of them, till she began to fidget; then the two groups stared at one another as if trying to see who could outAes Sedai who. And then they looked at him. He wondered whether anybody was going to move.

"aɪ kæn kip ðə kwin weɪɾɪŋ, naʊ kən aɪ?" hi sɛd tʃiɹəli. fɹəm ðə snɪfs, jə wʊɾə θɔɾ i hæd pɪntʃt sʌmbɑɾiz bɑɾəm. ivən lɹənz bɹaʊz dʒɹu daʊn ɪn dɪsəpɹuvəl.

"I can't keep the Queen waiting, now can I?" he said cheerily. From the sniffs, you would have thought he had pinched somebody's bottom. Even Laren's brows drew down in disapproval.

"ɹilis hɪm, æɾɪliz," mɛɝɪlɪl sɛd faɪnəli.

"Release him, Adeleas," Merilille said finally.

hi fɹaʊn əz ðə waɪt-hɛɹd wʊmən kəmplaɪd. ðoʊz tu ɔt tə wɛɹ lɪɾəl saɪnz wɪð ðɛɹ neɪmz, əɹ dɪfɹənt-kʌlɝ hɛɹ ɹɪbənz əɹ sʌmθɪŋ. ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ənʌðɝ ə ðoʊz əmjuzd, noʊɪŋ smaɪlz. hi heɪɾəd ðæt. ɪt wɑz ə wʊmənz tʃɹɪk, nɑt dʒʌst ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðeɪ juʒəwəli dɪd nɑt noʊ ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl laɪk wʌt ðeɪ wɑntəd jə tə bɪliv. "tɛslɪn?" hi sɛd. ðə ɡɹɪm ɹɛd stɪl hæd hoʊld ə hɪz koʊt wɪð boʊθ hænz. ʃi pɪɹɾ ʌp ət hɪm, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. "ðə kwin?"

He frowned as the white-haired woman complied. Those two ought to wear little signs with their names, or different-color hair ribbons or something. She gave him another of those amused, knowing smiles. He hated that. It was a woman's trick, not just Aes Sedai, and they usually did not know anything at all like what they wanted you to believe. "Teslyn?" he said. The grim Red still had hold of his coat with both hands. She peered up at him, ignoring everyone else. "The Queen?"

mɛɝɪlɪl oʊpən əɹ maʊθ ən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ɑbviəsli tʃeɪnʒɪŋ wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn ɡoʊɪŋ tə seɪ. "haʊ lɔŋ dʒju ɪntɛn tə stæn hɪɹ hoʊldɪŋ hɪm, tɛslɪn? pɝhæps jəl ɪkspleɪn tə taɪlɪn waɪ hɝ sʌmənz ɪz dɪsɹɪɡɑɹɾɪd."

Merilille opened her mouth and hesitated, obviously changing what she had been going to say. "How long do you intend to stand here holding him, Teslyn? Perhaps you will explain to Tylin why her summons is disregarded."

"kənsɪɾɝ wɛl u jə də taɪ jɝsɛlf tə, mæstɝ kɔθən," tɛslɪn sɛd, stɪl lʊkɪŋ oʊnli ət hɪm. "ɹɔŋ tʃɔɪsəz kən lid tə ən ənplɛzən fjutʃɝ, ivən fəɹ ə tɑvɝən. kənsɪɾɝ wɛl." ðən ʃi lɛt ɡoʊ.

"Consider well who you do tie yourself to, Master Cauthon," Teslyn said, still looking only at him. "Wrong choices can lead to an unpleasant future, even for a ta'veren. Consider well." Then she let go.

əz i fɑloʊd lɹən, hi dɪd nɑɾ əlaʊ hɪmsɛlf tə ʃoʊ hɪz iɡɝnəs tə bi əweɪ, bʌɾ i dɪd wɪʃ ðə wʊmən wəd wɔk ə lɪɾəl fæstɝ. ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd əlɔŋ əhɛɾ ə hɪm, ɹiɡəl əz ɛni kwin. ɹiɡəl əz ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ. wən ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə fɝs tɝnɪŋ, hi lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ðə faɪv ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ stɪl stændɪŋ ðɛɹ, stɛɹɪŋ æftɝ hɪm. əz ɪf ɪz lʊk hæd bɪn ə sɪɡnəl, ðeɪ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd saɪlənt ɡlænsɪz ən wɛnt, itʃ ɪn ə dɪfɹən dɝɛkʃən. æɾɪliz keɪm təwɔɹd hɪm, bʌɾ ə dʌzən stɛps bɪfɔɹ ɹitʃɪŋ ɪm ʃi smaɪld əɾ ɪm əɡɛn ən dɪsəpɪɹd θɹu ə dɔɹweɪ. dip kɝəns. hi pɹəfɝd swɪmɪŋ wɛɹ ɪz fit kəd tʌtʃ ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə pɑnd.

As he followed Laren, he did not allow himself to show his eagerness to be away, but he did wish the woman would walk a little faster. She glided along ahead of him, regal as any queen. Regal as any Aes Sedai. When they reached the first turning, he looked over his shoulder. The five Aes Sedai were still standing there, staring after him. As if his look had been a signal, they exchanged silent glances and went, each in a different direction. Adeleas came toward him, but a dozen steps before reaching him she smiled at him again and disappeared through a doorway. Deep currents. He preferred swimming where his feet could touch the bottom of the pond.

lɹən wɑz weɪɾɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ, hænz ɑn bɹɔd hɪps ən əɹ feɪs mʌtʃ tu smuð. bɪniθ əɹ skɝts, hi səspɛktəd, hɝ fʊt wɑz tæpɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃənli. hi ɡeɪv əɹ ɪz moʊst wɪnɪŋ smaɪl. ɡɪɡəlɪŋ ɡɝlz əɹ ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd ɡɹændmʌðɝz, wɪmən sɔfən fəɹ ðət wʌn; ɪt hæd wʌn ɪm kɪsəz ən izd ɪm aʊɾ ə pɹɪdɪkəməns mɔɹ ɔfən ðən i kəd kaʊnt. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz ɡʊɾ əz flaʊɝz. "ðæt wɑz nitli dʌn, ən aɪ θæŋk ju. aɪm ʃʊɹ ðə kwin dʌzn ɹɪli wɑnə si mi." ɪf ʃi dɪd, hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə si hɝ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ i θɔɾ əbaʊt noʊbəlz wɑz tʃɹɪpəl fəɹ ɹɔɪəlti. nʌθɪŋ i hæd faʊn ɪn ðoʊz oʊl mɛmɹiz tʃeɪnʒd ðæt, ən səm ə ðoʊz fɛloʊz hæd spɛn kənsɪɾɝəbəl taɪm ɝaʊn kɪŋz ən kwinz ən ðə laɪk. "naʊ, ɪf jəl dʒʌst ʃoʊ mi wɛɹ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn steɪ. . . ."

Laren was waiting around the corner, hands on broad hips and her face much too smooth. Beneath her skirts, he suspected, her foot was tapping impatiently. He gave her his most winning smile. Giggling girls or gray-haired grandmothers, women softened for that one; it had won him kisses and eased him out of predicaments more often than he could count. It was almost as good as flowers. "That was neatly done, and I thank you. I'm sure the Queen doesn't really want to see me." If she did, he did not want to see her. Everything he thought about nobles was tripled for royalty. Nothing he had found in those old memories changed that, and some of those fellows had spent considerable time around kings and queens and the like. "Now, if you will just show me where Nynaeve and Elayne stay. . . ."

stʃɹeɪnʒli, ðə smaɪl dɪd nɑt sim tə hæv ɛni ɪfɛkt. "aɪ wəd nɑt laɪ, lɔɹd kɔθən. ɪt wəd bi mɔɹ ðən maɪ ɪɹz ɑɹ wɝθ. ðə kwin ɪz weɪɾɪŋ, maɪ lɔɹd. jə ɑɹ ə vɛɹi bɹeɪv mæn," ʃi æɾəd, tɝnɪŋ, ðən sɛd sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. "ɔɹ ə vɛɹi ɡɹeɪt ful." hi daʊɾɪd i hæd bɪn səpoʊz tə hɪɹ ðæt.

Strangely, the smile did not seem to have any effect. "I would not lie, Lord Cauthon. It would be more than my ears are worth. The Queen is waiting, my Lord. You are a very brave man," she added, turning, then said something more under her breath. "Or a very great fool." He doubted he had been supposed to hear that.

ə tʃɔɪs bɪtwin gɑnə si ðə kwin ən wɑndɝɪŋ maɪlz ə kɔɹəɾɝ əntɪl i stʌmbəld ɑn sʌmbɑɾi hu wəd tɛl ɪm wʌɾ i wɑntəd tə noʊ? hi wɛn tə si ðə kwin.

A choice between going to see the Queen and wandering miles of corridor until he stumbled on somebody who would tell him what he wanted to know? He went to see the Queen.

taɪlɪn kwɪntɑɹə, baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪs ə ðə laɪt, kwin ʌv ɔltɑɹə, mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə fɔɹ wɪnz, ɡɑɹɾiən ə ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs mɪtsoʊbɑɹ, əweɪɾəd ɪm ɪn ə ɹum wɪð jɛloʊ wɔlz ən ə peɪl blu silɪŋ, stændɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ə hjudʒ waɪt faɪɝpleɪs wɪð ə stoʊn lɪntəl kɑɹvd ɪndə ə stɔɹmi si. ʃi wɑz wɛl wɝθ siɪŋ, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd. taɪlɪn wɑz nɑt jʌŋ - ðə ʃaɪni blæk hɛɹ kæskeɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz hæd ɡɹeɪ ət ðə tɛmpəlz, ən feɪn laɪnz wɛb ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ aɪz - nɔɹ wɑz ʃi ɪɡzækli pɹɪɾi, ðoʊ ðə tu θɪn skɑɹz ɑn əɹ tʃiks hæd nɪɹli vænɪʃt wɪð eɪdʒ. hænsəm keɪm kloʊsɝ. bʌt ʃi wɑz . . . ɪmpoʊzɪŋ. lɑɹdʒ dɑɹk aɪz ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɪm mədʒɛstɪkəli, ən iɡəlz aɪz. ʃi hæd lɪɾəl ɹil paʊɝ - ə mæn kəd ɹaɪd bɪɑn əɹ ɹɪɾ ɪn tu əɹ θɹi deɪz ən stɪl əv ə lɑɾ ʌv ɔltɑɹə əhɛd - bʌɾ i θɔt ʃi maɪt meɪk ivən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ stɛp bæk. laɪk aɪsɛbəl ə dæl kələn, hu hæd meɪd ði æmɪɝlɪn æŋhɛɹə kʌm tə hɝ. ðət wɑz wʌn ə ði oʊl mɛmɹiz; dæl kələn hæd vænɪʃt ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz.

Tylin Quintara, by the Grace of the Light, Queen of Altara, Mistress of the Four Winds, Guardian of the Sea of Storms, High Seat of House Mitsobar, awaited him in a room with yellow walls and a pale blue ceiling, standing before a huge white fireplace with a stone lintel carved into a stormy sea. She was well worth seeing, he decided. Tylin was not young - the shiny black hair cascading over her shoulders had gray at the temples, and faint lines webbed the corners of her eyes - nor was she exactly pretty, though the two thin scars on her cheeks had nearly vanished with age. Handsome came closer. But she was . . . imposing. Large dark eyes regarded him majestically, an eagle's eyes. She had little real power - a man could ride beyond her writ in two or three days and still have a lot of Altara ahead - but he thought she might make even an Aes Sedai step back. Like Isebele of Dal Calain, who had made the Amyrlin Anghara come to her. That was one of the old memories; Dal Calain had vanished in the Trolloc Wars.

"mædʒəsti," hi sɛd, swipɪŋ ɪz hæt waɪɾ ɪn ə baʊ ən flɝɪʃɪŋ ən ɪmædʒənɛɹi kloʊk, "baɪ jəɹ sʌmənz də aɪ kʌm." ɪmpoʊzɪŋ əɹ nɑt, ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə kip ɪz aɪz əweɪ fɹəm ðə nɑt smɔl leɪs-tʃɹɪmd oʊvəl wɛɹ əɹ waɪt-ʃið mɛɹɪdʒ-naɪf hʌŋ. ə vɛɹi naɪsli ɹaʊndəd saɪɾ ɪndid, jɛt ðə mɔɹ bʊzəm ə wʊmən dɪspleɪd, ðə lɛs ʃi wɑntəd jə tə lʊk. oʊpənli, ət list. waɪt-ʃiðd; bʌɾ i ɔlɹɛɾi nu ʃi wɑz ə wɪɾoʊ. nɑt ðəɾ ɪt mæɾɝd. hi wəɾ əz sun tæŋɡəl hɪmsɛlf wɪð ðət fɑks-feɪs dɑɹkfɹɛn əz wɪð ə kwin. nɑt lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɔl wɑz dɪfəkəlt, bʌɾ i mænədʒd. moʊs laɪkli ʃi wəd kɔl ɡɑɹdz ɹæðɝ ðən dʒɹɔ ðə dʒɛm-ɛnkɹʌstɪd dæɡɝ θɹʌs bɪhaɪn ə woʊvən-ɡoʊl bɛl tə mætʃ ðə kɑlɝ əɹ mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf hʌŋ fɹʌm. meɪbi ðət wɑz waɪ ðə daɪs wɝ stɪl ɹoʊlɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd. ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv ən ɪnkaʊntɝ wɪð ðə hɛdzmən wəd sɛɾ əm spɪnɪŋ ɪf ɛniθɪŋ dɪd.

"Majesty," he said, sweeping his hat wide in a bow and flourishing an imaginary cloak, "by your summons do I come." Imposing or not, it was hard to keep his eyes away from the not small lace-trimmed oval where her white-sheathed marriage-knife hung. A very nicely rounded sight indeed, yet the more bosom a woman displayed, the less she wanted you to look. Openly, at least. White-sheathed; but he already knew she was a widow. Not that it mattered. He would as soon tangle himself with that fox-faced Darkfriend as with a queen. Not looking at all was difficult, but he managed. Most likely she would call guards rather than draw the gem-encrusted dagger thrust behind a woven-gold belt to match the collar her marriage knife hung from. Maybe that was why the dice were still rolling in his head. The possibility of an encounter with the headsman would set them spinning if anything did.

leɪɝd sɪlk pɛɾikoʊts ɹɪpəld waɪɾ ən jɛloʊ əz ʃi kɹɔs ðə ɹum ən wɔk sloʊli ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊn hɪm. "ju spik ði oʊl tʌŋ," ʃi sɛd wʌns ʃi stʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm əɡɛn. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz loʊ-pɪtʃt ən mjuzɪkəl. wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ə ɹɪplaɪ, ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd tə ə tʃɛɹ ən sæt, ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ ɡɹin skɝts. ən ʌnkɑnʃəs dʒɛstʃɝ; hɝ ɡeɪz ɹɪmeɪn fɪkst ɑn hɪm. hi θɔt ʃi kəd pɹɑbli tɛl wən ɪz smɔlkloʊðz hæd bɪn wɑʃt læst. "ju wɪʃ tə liv ə mɛsədʒ. aɪ hæv wʌɾ ɪz nɛsəsɛɹi." ə leɪs fɔl əɾ əɹ ɹɪst sweɪɾ əz ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd tə ə smɔl ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl stændɪŋ bɪniθ ə ɡɪlt-fɹeɪmd mɪɹɝ. ɔl ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz wɝ ɡɪldɪɾ ən kɑɹv laɪk bæmbu.

Layered silk petticoats rippled white and yellow as she crossed the room and walked slowly all the way around him. "You speak the Old Tongue," she said once she stood in front of him again. Her voice was low-pitched and musical. Without waiting for a reply, she glided to a chair and sat, adjusting her green skirts. An unconscious gesture; her gaze remained fixed on him. He thought she could probably tell when his smallclothes had been washed last. "You wish to leave a message. I have what is necessary." A lace fall at her wrist swayed as she gestured to a small writing table standing beneath a gilt-framed mirror. All the furnishings were gilded and carved like bamboo.

tɔl tʃɹɪpəl-ɑɹtʃt wɪndoʊz oʊpənɪŋ ɑntu ə ɹɔt-aɪɝn bælkəni ədmɪɾəd ə si bɹiz ðət wɑz sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli plɛzənt, ɪf nɑɾ ɪɡzækli kul, jɛt mæt fɛl hɑɾɝ ðən ɪn ðə stʃɹit, ən ɪt hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð əɹ stɛɹ. dɪaɪənaɪi, dʒju naɪn kəntʃiən kæliət ji. ðət wɑz wʌɾ i hæd sɛd. ðə blʌɾi oʊl tʌŋ pɑpɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ əɡɛn wɪθaʊɾ ɪm noʊɪŋ ɪt. hi hæd θɔɾ i hæd ðət lɪɾəl bɑðɝ ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl. noʊ tɛlɪŋ wən ðoʊz blʌɾi daɪs wəd stɑp əɹ fəɹ wʌt. bɛs tə kip ɪz aɪz tə hɪmsɛlf ən ɪz maʊθ ʃʌɾ əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl. "aɪ θæŋk ju, mædʒəsti." hi meɪd vɛɹi ʃʊɹ ə ðoʊz wɝdz.

Tall triple-arched windows opening onto a wrought-iron balcony admitted a sea breeze that was surprisingly pleasant, if not exactly cool, yet Mat felt hotter than in the street, and it had nothing to do with her stare. Deyeniye, dyu ninte concion ca'lyet ye. That was what he had said. The bloody Old Tongue popping out of his mouth again without him knowing it. He had thought he had that little bother under control. No telling when those bloody dice would stop or for what. Best to keep his eyes to himself and his mouth shut as much as possible. "I thank you, Majesty." He made very sure of those words.

θɪk ʃits ə peɪl peɪpɝ ɔlɹɛɾi weɪɾəd ɑn ðə slæntəd teɪbəl, əɾ ə kʌmftəɹbəl haɪt fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ. hi pɹɑpt ɪz hæɾ əɡɛns ðə teɪbəl lɛɡ. hi kəd si hɝ ɪn ðə mɪɹɝ. wɑtʃɪŋ. waɪ hæɾ i lɛɾ ɪz tʌŋ ɹʌn lus? dɪpɪŋ ə ɡoʊldən pɛn - wʌɾ ɛls wəɾ ə kwin hæv? - hi kəmpoʊzd wʌɾ i wɑntəd tə ɹaɪɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd bɪfɔɹ bɛndɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə peɪpɝ wɪð ən ɑɹm kɝld ɝaʊn ɪt. hɪz hænd wɑz ɑkwɝɾ ən skwɛɹ. hi hæd noʊ lʌv ə ɹaɪɾɪŋ.

Thick sheets of pale paper already waited on the slanted table, at a comfortable height for writing. He propped his hat against the table leg. He could see her in the mirror. Watching. Why had he let his tongue run loose? Dipping a golden pen - what else would a queen have? - he composed what he wanted to write in his head before bending over the paper with an arm curled around it. His hand was awkward and square. He had no love of writing.

aɪ fɑloʊɾ ə dɑɹkfɹɛn tə ðə pæləs dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn ɪz ɹɛntɪŋ. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl mi wʌns, ən meɪbi ɹænd əz wɛl. ʃi wɑz ɡɹiɾəd laɪk ən oʊl fɹɛn ə ðə haʊs.

I followed a Darkfriend to the palace Jaichim Carridin is renting. She tried to kill me once, and maybe Rand as well. She was greeted like an old friend of the house.

fəɹ ə moʊmən i stʌɾid ðæt, baɪɾɪŋ ði ɛn ə ðə pɛn bɪfɔɹ ɹilaɪzɪŋ i wɑz skɔɹɪŋ ðə sɑft ɡoʊld. meɪbi taɪlɪn wəd nɑt noʊɾəs. ðeɪ niɾəd tə noʊ əbaʊt kæɹaɪɾɪn. wʌɾ ɛls? hi æɾəd ə fju mɔɹ ɹizənəbli wɝɾɪd laɪnz. ðə læs θɪŋ i wɑntəd wɑz tə pʊt ðɛɹ bæks ʌp.

For a moment he studied that, biting the end of the pen before realizing he was scoring the soft gold. Maybe Tylin would not notice. They needed to know about Carridin. What else? He added a few more reasonably worded lines. The last thing he wanted was to put their backs up.

bi sɛnsəbəl. ɪf juv tə ɡoʊ tʃɹeɪpsɪŋ ɝaʊnd, lemi sɛn ə fju mɛn əlɔŋ tə kip jə fɹəm hævɪŋ jəɹ hɛdz splɪɾ oʊpən. ɛniweɪ, ɪzən ɪɾ əbaʊt taɪm aɪ tʊk jə bæk tə ɛɡwin? ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ hɪɹ bʌt hiɾ ən flaɪz, ən wi kən faɪn plɛnti ʌv ðoʊz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn.

Be sensible. If you have to go traipsing around, let me send a few men along to keep you from having your heads split open. Anyway, isn't it about time I took you back to Egwene? There's nothing here but heat and flies, and we can find plenty of those in Caemlyn.

ðɛɹ. ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ æsk fəɹ plɛzɑntɝ ðən ðæt.

There. They could not ask for pleasanter than that.

blɑɾɪŋ ðə peɪdʒ kɛɹfəli, hi foʊldəɾ ɪt fɔɹ taɪmz. sæn ɪn ə smɔl ɡoʊldən boʊl kʌvɝɾ ə koʊl. hi pʌft ɑn ɪt tɪl ɪt ɡloʊd, ðən juzd ɪt tə laɪɾ ə kændəl ən pɪkt ʌp ðə stɪk ə ɹɛd wæks. əz ðə silɪŋ wæks dʒɹɪpt ɑntu ði ɛdʒəz ə ðə peɪpɝ, ɪt sʌɾənli stʃɹʌk ɪm ðəɾ i hæɾ ə sɪɡnɪt ɹɪŋ ɪn ɪz pɑkət. dʒʌst sʌmθɪŋ ðə ɹɪŋmeɪkɝ hæd kɑɹv tə ʃoʊ hɪz skɪl, bʌt bɛɾɝ ðən ə pleɪn lʌmp. ðə ɹɪŋ wɑz slaɪtli lɔŋɡɝ ðən ðə pul ə səlɪɾəfaɪɪŋ wæks, jɛt moʊst ə ðə sɪdʒəl tʊk.

Blotting the page carefully, he folded it four times. Sand in a small golden bowl covered a coal. He puffed on it till it glowed, then used it to light a candle and picked up the stick of red wax. As the sealing wax dripped onto the edges of the paper, it suddenly struck him that he had a signet ring in his pocket. Just something the ringmaker had carved to show his skill, but better than a plain lump. The ring was slightly longer than the pool of solidifying wax, yet most of the sigil took.

fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm i ɡɑɾ ə ɡʊd lʊk ət wʌɾ i hæd bɑt. ɪnsaɪɾ ə bɔɹɾɝ ə lɑɹdʒ kɹɛsəns, ə ɹʌnɪŋ fɑks sim tə hæv stɑɹɾəld tu bɝdz ɪndə flaɪt. ðət meɪɾ ɪm ɡɹɪn. tu bæɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə hænd, fəɹ ðə bænd, bʌɾ əpɹoʊpɹiəɾ ɪnʌf. hi sɝɾənli niɾəd tə bi kɹæfti əz ə fɑks tə kip ʌp wɪð nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn, ən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɪɡzækli flaɪɾi, wɛl. . . . bɪsaɪdz, ðə mədæljən hæd meɪɾ ɪm fɑn ə fɑksəz. hi skɹɔl nɪneɪivz neɪm ɑn ði aʊtsaɪd, ən ðən ɪleɪnz, əz ən æftɝθɑt. wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ, ðeɪ ʃəd si ɪt sun.

For the first time he got a good look at what he had bought. Inside a border of large crescents, a running fox seemed to have startled two birds into flight. That made him grin. Too bad it was not a hand, for the Band, but appropriate enough. He certainly needed to be crafty as a fox to keep up with Nynaeve and Elayne, and if they were not exactly flighty, well. . . . Besides, the medallion had made him fond of foxes. He scrawled Nynaeve's name on the outside, and then Elayne's, as an afterthought. One or the other, they should see it soon.

tɝnɪŋ wɪð ðə sild lɛɾɝ hɛld ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, hi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əz ɪz nʌkəlz bɹʌʃt əɡɛns taɪlɪnz bʊzəm. hi stʌmbəl bæk əɡɛns ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl, stɛɹɪŋ ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə tɝn ɹɛd. stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ feɪs; dʒʌst əɹ feɪs. hi hæd nɑt hɝɾ əɹ əpɹoʊtʃ. bɛs tə sɪmpli ɪɡnɔɹ ðə bɹʌʃɪŋ, nɑɾ ɪmbɛɹəs əɹ ɛni fɝðɝ. ʃi pɹɑbli θɔɾ i wɑz ə klʌmzi laʊɾ əz ɪt wɑz. "ðɛɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðɪs jə ʃəd noʊ, mædʒəsti." ɪnsəfɪʃən ɹum ɹɪmeɪn bɪtwin əm tə lɪf ðə lɛɾɝ. "dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn ɪz ɛntɝteɪnɪŋ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ən aɪ doʊn min ɝɛstɪŋ ðɛm."

Turning with the sealed letter held in front of him, he gave a start as his knuckles brushed against Tylin's bosom. He stumbled back against the writing table, staring and trying not to turn red. Staring at her face; just her face. He had not heard her approach. Best to simply ignore the brushing, not embarrass her any further. She probably thought he was a clumsy lout as it was. "There is something in this you should know, Majesty." Insufficient room remained between them to lift the letter. "Jaichim Carridin is entertaining Darkfriends, and I don't mean arresting them."

"ju ɑɹ sɝɾən? ʌv kɔɹs jə ɑɹ. noʊ wʌn wəd meɪk ðət tʃɑɹdʒ wɪθaʊt biɪŋ sɝɾən." ə fɝoʊ kɹist əɹ fɔɹhɛd, bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv əɹ hɛɾ ə ʃeɪk ən ðə fɹaʊn dɪsəpɪɹd. "lɛɾ əs spik ə mɔɹ plɛzən θɪŋz."

"You are certain? Of course you are. No one would make that charge without being certain." A furrow creased her forehead, but she gave her head a shake and the frown disappeared. "Let us speak of more pleasant things."

hi kəɾ əv jɛlpt. hi toʊld əɹ ðə waɪtkloʊk æmbæsəɾɝ tə hɝ kɔɹt wɑz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ən ɔl ʃi dɪd wɑz ɡɹɪmɑs?

He could have yelped. He told her the Whitecloak ambassador to her court was a Darkfriend, and all she did was grimace?

"ju ɑɹ lɔɹd mæt kɔθən?" ðəɹ wɑz dʒʌst ə hɪn ə kwɛstʃən ɪn ðə taɪɾəl. hɝ aɪz maɪndəɾ ɪm mɔɹ ðən ɛvɝ ʌv ən iɡəlz. ə kwin kəd nɑt laɪk sʌmwʌn kʌmɪŋ tə hɝ pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi ə lɔɹd.

"You are Lord Mat Cauthon?" There was just a hint of question in the title. Her eyes minded him more than ever of an eagle's. A queen could not like someone coming to her pretending to be a lord.

"dʒʌs mæt kɔθən." sʌmθɪŋ toʊld ɪm ʃi wəd hɪɹ ə laɪ. bɪsaɪdz, lɛɾɪŋ pipəl θɪŋk i wɑz ə lɔɹd wɑz dʒʌst ə ɹuz, wʌn i wəd ɹæðɝ əv mænədʒd wɪθaʊt. ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ jə kəd faɪn ə duəl ɛni taɪm jə tɝn ɝaʊnd, bʌt fju tʃælənʒd lɔɹdz ɪksɛpt ʌðɝ lɔɹdz. əz ɪt wɑz, ɪn ðə læs mʌnθ i hæd kɹækt ə nʌmbɝ ə hɛdz, blʌɾid fɔɹ mɛn ən ɹʌn hæf ə maɪl tə ɪskeɪp ə wʊmən. taɪlɪnz stɛɹ meɪɾ ɪm nɝvəs. ən ðoʊz daɪs stɪl ɹæɾəld əbaʊɾ ɪn ɪz skʌl. hi wɑntəɾ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ. "ɪf jəl tɛl mi wɛɹ tə liv ðə lɛɾɝ, mædʒəsti . . . ?"

"Just Mat Cauthon." Something told him she would hear a lie. Besides, letting people think he was a lord was just a ruse, one he would rather have managed without. In Ebou Dar you could find a duel any time you turned around, but few challenged lords except other lords. As it was, in the last month he had cracked a number of heads, bloodied four men and run half a mile to escape a woman. Tylin's stare made him nervous. And those dice still rattled about in his skull. He wanted out of there. "If you'll tell me where to leave the letter, Majesty . . . ?"

"ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ən nɪneɪiv sədaɪ sɛldəm mɛnʃən ju," ʃi sɛd, "bʌt wʌn lɝnz tə hɪɹ wʌɾ ɪz nɑt sɛd." kæʒəwəli ʃi ɹitʃt ʌp ən tʌtʃt ɪz tʃik; hi hæf-ɹeɪzd ɪz oʊn hæn ənsɝteɪnli. hæɾ i smɪɹɾ ɪŋk ðɛɹ, tʃuɪŋ ðə pɛn? wɪmən dɪd laɪk tə taɪɾi θɪŋz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ mɛn. meɪbi kwinz dɪd, tu. "wʌt ðeɪ də nɑt seɪ, bʌɾ aɪ hɪɹ, ɪz ðət jə ɑɹ ən ənteɪmd ɹoʊɡ, ə ɡæmblɝ ən tʃeɪsɝ æftɝ wɪmən." hɝ aɪz hɛl hɪz, ɪkspɹɛʃən nɛvɝ ɔltɝɪŋ ə hɛɹ, ən əɹ vɔɪs steɪd fɝm ən kul, bʌɾ əz ʃi spoʊk, hɝ fɪŋɡɝz stʃɹoʊkt ɪz ʌðɝ tʃik. "ənteɪmd mɛn ɑɹ ɔfən ðə moʊst ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ. tə tɔk tə." ə fɪŋɡɝ aʊtlaɪn ɪz lɪps. "æn ənteɪmd ɹoʊɡ hu tʃɹævəlz wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, ə tɑvɝən hu, aɪ θɪŋk, meɪks əm ə lɪɾəl əfɹeɪd. ənizi, ət ðə list. ɪt teɪks ə mæn wɪð ə stʃɹɔŋ lɪvɝ tə meɪk ɛɛs sədaɪ ənizi. haʊ wɪl jə bɛn ðə pæɾɝn ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, dʒʌs mæt kɔθən?" hɝ hæn sɛɾəld əɡɛnst ɪz nɛk; hi kəd fil ɪz pʌls θɹɑbɪŋ əɡɛnst əɹ fɪŋɡɝz.

"The Daughter-Heir and Nynaeve Sedai seldom mention you," she said, "but one learns to hear what is not said." Casually she reached up and touched his cheek; he half-raised his own hand uncertainly. Had he smeared ink there, chewing the pen? Women did like to tidy things, including men. Maybe queens did, too. "What they do not say, but I hear, is that you are an untamed rogue, a gambler and chaser after women." Her eyes held his, expression never altering a hair, and her voice stayed firm and cool, but as she spoke, her fingers stroked his other cheek. "Untamed men are often the most interesting. To talk to." A finger outlined his lips. "An untamed rogue who travels with Aes Sedai, a ta'veren who, I think, makes them a little afraid. Uneasy, at the least. It takes a man with a strong liver to make Aes Sedai uneasy. How will you bend the Pattern in Ebou Dar, just Mat Cauthon?" Her hand settled against his neck; he could feel his pulse throbbing against her fingers.

hɪz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən. ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk ɹæɾəld əɡɛns ðə wɔl əz i tʃɹaɪd tə bæk əweɪ. ði oʊnli weɪ aʊt wɑz tə pʊʃ əɹ əsaɪɾ əɹ klaɪm oʊvɝ əɹ skɝts. wɪmən dɪd nɑt bɪheɪv ðɪs weɪ! oʊ, səm ə ðoʊz oʊl mɛmɹiz sədʒɛstəd ðeɪ dɪd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz meɪnli mɛmɹiz ə mɛmɹiz ðət ðət wʊmən hæd dʌn ðɪs əɹ ðɪs wʊmən hæd dʌn ðæt; ðə θɪŋz i ɹɪkɔl klɪɹli wɝ bæɾəlz fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, ən noʊ hɛlp hɪɹ əɾ ɔl. ʃi smaɪld, ə feɪn kɝl ə hɝ lɪps ðət dɪd nɑt lɛsən ðə pɹɛɾətɔɹi ɡlim ɪn əɹ aɪz. ðə hɛɹ ɑn ɪz hɛd tʃɹaɪd tə stæn ʌp.

His mouth fell open. The writing table behind his back rattled against the wall as he tried to back away. The only way out was to push her aside or climb over her skirts. Women did not behave this way! Oh, some of those old memories suggested they did, but it was mainly memories of memories that that woman had done this or this woman had done that; the things he recalled clearly were battles for the most part, and no help here at all. She smiled, a faint curl of her lips that did not lessen the predatory gleam in her eyes. The hair on his head tried to stand up.

hɝ aɪz flɪkɝɾ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ tə ðə mɪɹɝ, ən ʃi tɝn əbɹʌpli, livɪŋ ɪm ɡeɪpɪŋ əɾ əɹ bæk əz ʃi muvd əweɪ. "aɪ mʌst ɝeɪnʒ tə spik wɪð jə əɡɛn, mæstɝ kɔθən. aɪ - " ʃi kʌɾ ɔf əz ðə dɔɹ swʌŋ ɔl ðə weɪ oʊpən, əpɛɹənli sɝpɹaɪzd, bʌt ðən i ɹilaɪzd ʃi hæd sin ɪt bɪɡɪn muvɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɹɝ.

Her eyes flickered over his shoulder to the mirror, and she turned abruptly, leaving him gaping at her back as she moved away. "I must arrange to speak with you again, Master Cauthon. I - " She cut off as the door swung all the way open, apparently surprised, but then he realized she had seen it begin moving in the mirror.

ə slɛndɝ jʌŋ mæn ɛntɝd, lɪmpɪŋ slaɪtli, ə dɑɹk læd wɪð ʃɑɹp aɪz ðət flɪk baɪ mæt wɪð bɛɹli ə pɔz. blæk hɛɹ hʌŋ tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ən i wɔɹ wʌn ə ðoʊz koʊts ðət wɑz nɛvɝ mɛn tə bi wɔɹn nɔɹməli dʒɹeɪpt əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ɡɹin sɪlk, wɪð ə ɡoʊl tʃeɪn əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst ən ɡoʊld lɛpɝdz wɝkt ɑn ðə ləpɛlz. "mʌðɝ," hi sɛd, boʊɪŋ tə taɪlɪn ən tʌtʃɪŋ ɪz lɪps wɪð ɪz fɪŋɡɝz.

A slender young man entered, limping slightly, a dark lad with sharp eyes that flicked by Mat with barely a pause. Black hair hung to his shoulders, and he wore one of those coats that was never meant to be worn normally draped across his shoulders, green silk, with a gold chain across his chest and gold leopards worked on the lapels. "Mother," he said, bowing to Tylin and touching his lips with his fingers.

"bɛslən." ʃi fɪl ðə neɪm wɪð wɔɹmθ, ən kɪst ɪm ɑn boʊθ tʃiks ən ɪz aɪlɪdz. ðə fɝm, ivən aɪsi, toʊn ʃi hæd juzd wɪð mæt maɪɾ əz wɛl əv nɛvɝ bɪn. "ɪt wɛnt wɛl, aɪ si."

"Beslan." She filled the name with warmth, and kissed him on both cheeks and his eyelids. The firm, even icy, tone she had used with Mat might as well have never been. "It went well, I see."

"nɑɾ əz wɛl əz ɪt maɪt." ðə bɔɪ saɪd. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz aɪz, hi hæɾ ə maɪl mænɝ tə hɪm, ən ə sɑf vɔɪs. "nɛvɪn nɪk maɪ lɛɡ ɑn ðə sɛkən pæs, ðən slɪpt ɑn ðə θɝd soʊ aɪ ɹæn ɪm θɹu ðə hɑɹɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə hɪz sɔɹd-ɑɹm. ði əfɛns wɑz nɑt wɝθ kɪlɪŋ, ən naʊ aɪ mʌs peɪ kəndoʊlənsəz tə hɪz wɪɾoʊ." hi sim tə ɹəɡɹɛt ðəɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ðɪs nɛvɪnz dɛθ.

"Not as well as it might." The boy sighed. Despite his eyes, he had a mild manner to him, and a soft voice. "Nevin nicked my leg on the second pass, then slipped on the third so I ran him through the heart instead of his sword-arm. The offense was not worth killing, and now I must pay condolences to his widow." He seemed to regret that as much as this Nevin's death.

taɪlɪnz bimɪŋ feɪs hɑɹdli simd ɹaɪɾ ɑn ə wʊmən huz sʌn hæd dʒʌs toʊld əɹ i hæd kɪld ə mæn. "dʒʌs bi ʃʊɹ jəɹ vɪzəɾ ɪz bɹif. stæb maɪ aɪz, bʌt dɑvɪnʒɹə wɪl bi wʌn ə ðoʊz wɪɾoʊz u wɑns kʌmfɝɾɪŋ, ən ðən jəl iðɝ əv tə mɛɹi hɝ əɹ kɪl əɹ bɹʌðɝz." baɪ hɝ toʊn, ðə fɝst ɔltɝnəɾɪv wɑz mʌtʃ ðə wɝs, ðə sɛkən mɪɹli ə nusəns. "ðɪs ɪz mæstɝ mæt kɔθən, maɪ sʌn. hiz tɑvɝən. aɪ hoʊp jəl meɪk ə fɹɛn ə hɪm. pɝhæps jə tu wɪl ɡoʊ tə ðə swʊvən naɪt dænsəz təɡɛðɝ."

Tylin's beaming face hardly seemed right on a woman whose son had just told her he had killed a man. "Just be sure your visit is brief. Stab my eyes, but Davindra will be one of those widows who wants comforting, and then you will either have to marry her or kill her brothers." By her tone, the first alternative was much the worse, the second merely a nuisance. "This is Master Mat Cauthon, my son. He is ta'veren. I hope you will make a friend of him. Perhaps you two will go to the Swovan Night dances together."

mæt dʒʌmpt. ðə læs θɪŋ i wɑntəd wɑz tə ɡoʊ ɛniwɛɹ wɪð ə fɛloʊ hu fɔt duəlz ən huz mʌðɝ wɑntəd tə stʃɹoʊk mæt kɔθənz tʃik. "aɪ æm nɑt mʌtʃ fəɹ bɔlz," hi sɛd kwɪkli. ɛbu dɑɹi laɪk fɛstəvəlz bɪɑn ɹizən. hɪɹ haɪ tʃeɪsəlin wɑz dʒʌs pæst, ən ðeɪ hæd faɪv mɔɹ ɪn ðə nɛkst wik, tu ɔl-deɪ əfɛɹz, nɑt dʒʌs ðə sɪmpəlɝ ivnɪŋ fists. "aɪ də maɪ dænsɪŋ ɪn tævɝnz. ðə ɹʌfɝ sɔɹt, aɪm əfɹeɪd. nʌθɪŋ jud laɪk."

Mat jumped. The last thing he wanted was to go anywhere with a fellow who fought duels and whose mother wanted to stroke Mat Cauthon's cheek. "I am not much for balls," he said quickly. Ebou Dari liked festivals beyond reason. Here High Chasaline was just past, and they had five more in the next week, two all-day affairs, not just the simpler evening feasts. "I do my dancing in taverns. The rougher sort, I'm afraid. Nothing you'd like."

"aɪ feɪvɝ tævɝnz ə ðə ɹʌfɝ sɔɹt," bɛslən sɛd wɪð ə smaɪl, ɪn ðət sɑf vɔɪs. "ðə bɔlz ɑɹ fəɹ oʊldɝ pipəl, ən ðɛɹ pɹɪɾiz."

"I favor taverns of the rougher sort," Beslan said with a smile, in that soft voice. "The balls are for older people, and their pretties."

æftɝ ðæt, ɪt wɑz ɔl daʊnhɪl ɑn kɹʌmplɪŋ ʃɪŋɡəl. bɪfɔɹ mæt nu wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ, taɪlɪn hæɾ ɪm soʊɾ ʌp ɪn ə sæk. hi ən bɛslən wəd bi ətɛndɪŋ ðə fɛstəvəlz təɡɛðɝ. ɔl ə ðə fɛstəvəlz. hʌntɪŋ, bɛslən kɔld ɪt, ən wən mæt sɛd hʌntɪŋ fəɹ ɡɝlz wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ - hi wəd nɛvɝ əv sɛd ðəɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə sʌmbɑɾiz mʌðɝ hæɾ i θɔt - ðə bɔɪ læft ən sɛd, "ə ɡɝl əɹ ə faɪt, paʊɾɪŋ lɪps əɹ ə flæʃɪŋ bleɪd. wɪtʃɛvɝ dæns jəɹ dænsɪŋ ət ðə moʊmən ɪz ɔlweɪz ðə moʊs fʌn. wʊdn jə seɪ soʊ, mæt?" taɪlɪn smaɪld ət bɛslən fɑnli.

After that, it was all downhill on crumpling shingle. Before Mat knew what was happening, Tylin had him sewed up in a sack. He and Beslan would be attending the festivals together. All of the festivals. Hunting, Beslan called it, and when Mat said hunting for girls without thinking - he would never have said that in front of somebody's mother had he thought - the boy laughed and said, "A girl or a fight, pouting lips or a flashing blade. Whichever dance you're dancing at the moment is always the most fun. Wouldn't you say so, Mat?" Tylin smiled at Beslan fondly.

mæt mænədʒd ə wik læf. ðɪs bɛslən wɑz mæd, hɪm ən ɪz mʌðɝ boʊθ.

Mat managed a weak laugh. This Beslan was mad, him and his mother both.


tʃæptɝ sɛvəntin


CHAPTER 17

ðə tʃɹaɪəmf ə lɑdʒɪk


The Triumph of Logic

mæt stɔkt aʊɾ ə ðə pæləs wən taɪlɪn faɪnəli lɛɾ ɪm ɡoʊ, ən hæɾ i θɔɾ ɪt wəd də ɛni ɡʊd, hi wəɾ əv ɹʌn. ðə skɪn bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz pɹɪkəl soʊ, hi ɔlmoʊs fɝɡɑt ðə daɪs dænsɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd. ðə wɝs moʊmənt - ðə vɛɹi wɝst ʌv ə dʌzən bæd - hæd bɪn wən bɛslən tizd ɪz mʌðɝ, seɪɪŋ ʃi ʃəd faɪn hɝsɛlf ə pɹɪɾi fəɹ ðə bɔlz, ən taɪlɪn læfɪŋli kleɪmd ə kwin hæd noʊ taɪm fəɹ jʌŋ mɛn, ɔl ðə waɪl lʊkɪŋ ət mæt wɪð ðoʊz blʌɾi iɡəlz aɪz. naʊ hi nu waɪ ɹæbəts ɹæn soʊ fæst. hi stʌmpt əkɹɔs mɔl hɛɹə skwɛɹ nɑt siɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ. hæd nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn bɪn kəvɔɹɾɪŋ wɪð dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn ən ɪleɪɾə ɪn ðə faʊntən bɪniθ ðət stætʃu ʌv səm lɔŋ-dɛd kwin, tu spænz əɹ mɔɹ tɔl ən pɔɪntɪŋ tə ðə si, hi wʊɾə pæs baɪ wɪθaʊɾ ə sɛkən lʊk.

Mat stalked out of the palace when Tylin finally let him go, and had he thought it would do any good, he would have run. The skin between his shoulder blades prickled so, he almost forgot the dice dancing in his head. The worst moment - the very worst of a dozen bad - had been when Beslan teased his mother, saying she should find herself a pretty for the balls, and Tylin laughingly claimed a queen had no time for young men, all the while looking at Mat with those bloody eagle's eyes. Now he knew why rabbits ran so fast. He stumped across Mol Hara Square not seeing anything. Had Nynaeve and Elayne been cavorting with Jaichim Carridin and Elaida in the fountain beneath that statue of some long-dead queen, two spans or more tall and pointing to the sea, he would have passed by without a second look.

ðə kɑmən ɹum ə ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən wɑz dɪm ən kəmpɛɹəɾɪvli kul æftɝ ðə bɹaɪt hiɾ aʊtsaɪd. hi tʊk ɔf ɪz hæt ɡɹeɪtfəli. ə feɪn heɪz ə paɪpsmoʊk hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, bʌt ðə ɹæbɛsk-kɑɹvd ʃʌɾɝz əkɹɔs ðə waɪɾ ɑɹtʃt wɪndoʊz lɛɾ ɪn mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf laɪt. səm bɪdʒɹæɡəl paɪn bɹæntʃəz hæd bɪn taɪɾ əbʌv ðə wɪndoʊz fəɹ swʊvən naɪt. ɪn wʌn kɔɹnɝ, tu wɪmən wɪð fluts ən ə fɛloʊ wɪð ə smɔl dʒɹʌm bɪtwin ɪz niz pɹəvaɪɾəd ə ʃɹɪl, pʌlsɪŋ sɔɹɾ ə mjuzɪk ðət mæt hæd kʌm tə laɪk. ivən ət ðɪs taɪm ə ðə deɪ ðəɹ wɝ ə fju peɪtʃɹənz, aʊtlæn mɝtʃəns ɪn mɑɾɝətli pleɪn wʊlənz wɪð ə spɹɪŋklɪŋ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹi, moʊst ɪn ðə vɛsts ə vɛɹiəs ɡɪlz. noʊ əpɹɛntəsɪz əɹ ivən dʒɝnimɪn hɪɹ; soʊ kloʊs tə ðə pæləs, ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən wɑz hɑɹdli ən ɪnɪkspɛnsɪv pleɪs tə dʒɹɪŋk əɹ it, mʌtʃ lɛs slip.

The common room of The Wandering Woman was dim and comparatively cool after the bright heat outside. He took off his hat gratefully. A faint haze of pipesmoke hung in the air, but the arabesque-carved shutters across the wide arched windows let in more than enough light. Some bedraggled pine branches had been tied above the windows for Swovan Night. In one corner, two women with flutes and a fellow with a small drum between his knees provided a shrill, pulsing sort of music that Mat had come to like. Even at this time of the day there were a few patrons, outland merchants in moderately plain woolens with a sprinkling of Ebou Dari, most in the vests of various guilds. No apprentices or even journeymen here; so close to the palace, The Wandering Woman was hardly an inexpensive place to drink or eat, much less sleep.

ðə ɹæɾəl ə daɪs əɾ ə teɪbəl ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ ɛkoʊd ðə fil ɪn ɪz hɛd, bʌɾ i tɝn ði ʌðɝ weɪ, tə wɛɹ θɹi ʌv ɪz mɛn sæɾ ɑn bɛntʃɪz ɝaʊn ənʌðɝ teɪbəl. kɔɹɪvən, ə θɪkli mʌsəl kɛɹhinɪn wɪð ə noʊz ðət meɪɾ ɪz aɪz sim ivən smɔlɝ ðən ðeɪ wɝ, sæt stʃɹɪp tə ðə weɪst, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz tætuɾ ɑɹmz oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd waɪl veɪnɪn waʊn stʃɹɪps ə bændɪdʒ ɝaʊn ɪz mɪɾəl. veɪnɪn wɑz θɹi taɪmz kɔɹɪvənz saɪz, bʌɾ i lʊk laɪk ə bɔldɪŋ sæk ə suɾ oʊvɝfloʊɪŋ ɪz bɛntʃ. hɪz koʊɾ əpɪɹd tə hæv bɪn slɛpt ɪn fəɹ ə wik; ɪɾ ɔlweɪz dɪd, ivən ən aʊɝ æftɝ wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən aɪɝn ɪt. səm ə ðə mɝtʃəns aɪd ðə θɹi ənizəli, bʌt nʌn ə ði ɛbu dɑɹi; mɛn əɹ wɪmən, ðeɪ hæd sin ðə seɪm əɹ wɝs, ɔfən.

The rattle of dice at a table in the corner echoed the feel in his head, but he turned the other way, to where three of his men sat on benches around another table. Corevin, a thickly muscled Cairhienin with a nose that made his eyes seem even smaller than they were, sat stripped to the waist, holding his tattooed arms over his head while Vanin wound strips of bandage around his middle. Vanin was three times Corevin's size, but he looked like a balding sack of suet overflowing his bench. His coat appeared to have been slept in for a week; it always did, even an hour after one of the serving women ironed it. Some of the merchants eyed the three uneasily, but none of the Ebou Dari; men or women, they had seen the same or worse, often.

hɑɹnən, ə læntɝn-dʒɔd tɛɹən faɪl liɾɝ wɪð ə kɹud tætu ʌv ə hɔk ɑn ɪz lɛf tʃik, wɑz bɪɹeɪɾɪŋ kɔɹɪvən. ". . . doʊn kɛɹ wʌt ðə fleɪmɪŋ fɪʃ-sɛlɝ sɛd, jə ɡoʊt-spɔn toʊd, jə juz jəɹ blʌɾi klʌb ən doʊnt ɡoʊ æksɛptɪŋ fleɪmɪŋ tʃælənʒɪz dʒʌs kəz - " hi kʌɾ ɔf wən i sɔ mæt, ən tʃɹaɪd tə lʊk əz ɪf i hæd nɑt bɪn seɪɪŋ wʌɾ i hæd. hi dʒʌs lʊkt əz ɪf i hæɾ ə tuθæk.

Harnan, a lantern-jawed Tairen file leader with a crude tattoo of a hawk on his left cheek, was berating Corevin. ". . . don't care what the flaming fish-seller said, you goat-spawned toad, you use your bloody club and don't go accepting flaming challenges just because - " He cut off when he saw Mat, and tried to look as if he had not been saying what he had. He just looked as if he had a toothache.

ɪf mæt æskt, ɪt wəd tɝn aʊt kɔɹɪvən hæd slɪpt ən fɔlən ɑn ɪz oʊn dæɡɝ əɹ səm sətʃ fulɝi mæt wɑz səpoʊz tə pɹitɛn tə bɪliv. soʊ hi dʒʌs lin ɪz fɪsts ɑn ðə teɪbəl əz ɪf i sɔ nʌθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi. tʃɹuθ tə tɛl, ɪt wɑz nɑt ðəɾ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi. veɪnɪn wɑz ði oʊnli mæn u hæd nɑt bɪn ɪn tu dʌzən skɹeɪps ɔlɹɛɾi; fəɹ səm ɹizən, mɛn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ tʃɹʌbəl wɔkt əz waɪɾ ə veɪnɪn əz ðeɪ dɪd neɪlzin. ði oʊnli dɪfɝəns wɑz ðət veɪnɪn sim tə laɪk ɪt ðət weɪ. "hæz tɑm əɹ dʒulɪn bɪn hɪɹ jɛt?"

If Mat asked, it would turn out Corevin had slipped and fallen on his own dagger or some such foolery Mat was supposed to pretend to believe. So he just leaned his fists on the table as if he saw nothing out of the ordinary. Truth to tell, it was not that out of the ordinary. Vanin was the only man who had not been in two dozen scrapes already; for some reason, men looking for trouble walked as wide of Vanin as they did Nalesean. The only difference was that Vanin seemed to like it that way. "Has Thom or Juilin been here yet?"

veɪnɪn dɪd nɑt lʊk ʌp fɹəm taɪɪŋ ðə bændədʒəz. "hævən sin haɪd, hɛɹ nɔɹ toʊəneɪl. neɪlzin wɑz ɪn fəɹ ə bɪt, ðoʊ." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ "maɪ lɔɹd" nɑnsɛns fɹəm veɪnɪn. hi meɪd noʊ boʊnz əbaʊt nɑt laɪkɪŋ noʊbəlz. wɪð ði ənfɔɹtʃənəɾ ɪksɛpʃən ʌv ɪleɪn. "lɛft ən aɪɝn-stʃɹæp tʃɛst ʌp ɪn jəɹ ɹum, ən wɛn aʊt bæbəlɪŋ əbaʊt tʃɹɪŋkəts." hi meɪɾ əz ɪf tə spɪt θɹu ðə ɡæp ɪn ɪz tiθ, ðən ɡlænst ət wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən ən dɪd nɑt. mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən wɑz dɛθ ɑn ɛnibəɾi spɪɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ flɔɹz, əɹ tɔsɪŋ boʊnz, əɹ ivən tæpɪŋ aʊɾ ə paɪp. "ðə bɔɪz aʊt bæk ɪn ðə steɪbəl," hi wɛn ɑn bɪfɔɹ mæt kəɾ æsk, "wɪð ɪz bʊk ən wʌn ə ði ɪnkipɝz dɔɾɝz. ənʌðɝ ə ðə ɡɝlz spæŋkt ɪz bɑɾəm fəɹ pɪntʃɪŋ hɝz." fɪnɪʃɪŋ ðə læs nɑt, hi ɡeɪv mæt ən əkjuzətɔɹi lʊk, əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn ɪz fɔlt ɪn səm weɪ.

Vanin did not look up from tying the bandages. "Haven't seen hide, hair nor toenail. Nalesean was in for a bit, though." There was no "my lord" nonsense from Vanin. He made no bones about not liking nobles. With the unfortunate exception of Elayne. "Left an iron-strapped chest up in your room, and went out babbling about trinkets." He made as if to spit through the gap in his teeth, then glanced at one of the serving women and did not. Mistress Anan was death on anybody spitting on her floors, or tossing bones, or even tapping out a pipe. "The boy's out back in the stable," he went on before Mat could ask, "with his book and one of the innkeeper's daughters. Another of the girls spanked his bottom for pinching hers." Finishing the last knot, he gave Mat an accusatory look, as if it had been his fault in some way.

"pʊɹ lɪɾəl maɪt," kɔɹɪvən mʌɾɝd, twɪstɪŋ tə si wɛðɝ ðə bændədʒəz wəd steɪ ɪn pleɪs. hi hæɾ ə lɛpɝɾ ən ə bɔɹ ɪŋkt ɑn wʌn ɑɹm, ə laɪən ən ə wʊmən ɑn ði ʌðɝ. ðə wʊmən dɪd nɑt sim tə bi wɛɹɪŋ mʌtʃ ɪksɛpt əɹ hɛɹ. "snaɪvəlɪŋ, hi wɑz. ðoʊ hi dɪd bɹaɪɾən wən lɛɹəl lɛɾ ɪm hoʊld əɹ hænd." ðə mɛn ɔl lʊkt æftɝ oʊlvɝ laɪk ə ɡæɡəl ʌv ʌŋkəlz, ðoʊ sɝɾənli ðə sɔɹt noʊ mʌðɝ wəd wɑnt nɪɹ əɹ sʌn.

"Poor little mite," Corevin muttered, twisting to see whether the bandages would stay in place. He had a leopard and a boar inked on one arm, a lion and a woman on the other. The woman did not seem to be wearing much except her hair. "Sniveling, he was. Though he did brighten when Leral let him hold her hand." The men all looked after Olver like a gaggle of uncles, though certainly the sort no mother would want near her son.

"hil laɪv," mæt sɛd dʒɹaɪli. ðə bɔɪ wɑz pɹɑbli pɪkɪŋ ʌp ðiz hæbəts fɹəm ɪz "ʌŋkəlz." nɛkst, ðeɪ wəd ɡɪv ɪm ə tætu. ət list oʊlvɝ hæd nɑt snikt aʊt tə ɹʌn wɪð ðə stʃɹit tʃɪlʒɹən; hi sim tə ɛndʒɔɪ ðəɾ ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz i dɪd meɪkɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ə nusəns tə ɡɹoʊn wɪmən. "hɑɹnən, jə weɪt hɪɹ, ən ɪf jə si tɑm əɹ dʒulɪn, kɑlɝ ðɛm. veɪnɪn, aɪ wɑn jə tə si wʌt jə kən lɝn ɝaʊn ðə tʃlseɪn pæləs, oʊvɝ nɪɹ ðə θɹi taʊɝz ɡeɪt." hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ, hi lʊkt oʊvɝ ðə ɹum. sɝvɪŋ wɪmən dʒɹɪftəɾ ɪn ən aʊɾ ə ðə kɪtʃənz wɪð fuɾ ænd, mɔɹ ɔfən, dʒɹɪŋk. moʊst ə ðə peɪtʃɹənz simd ɪntɛn ɑn ðɛɹ sɪlvɝ kʌps, ðoʊ ə pɛɹ ʌv wɪmən ɪn wivɝz vɛsts ɑɹɡjud kwaɪətli, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðɛɹ waɪn pʌntʃ ən linɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl ət wʌn ənʌðɝ. səm ə ðə mɝtʃəns əpɪɹd tə bi hæɡəlɪŋ, weɪvɪŋ hænz ən dɪpɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz ɪn ðɛɹ dʒɹɪŋks tə skɹɪbəl nʌmbɝz ɑn ðə teɪbəl. ðə mjuzɪk ʃəd mæsk ɪz wɝdz fɹəm ivzdʒɹɑpɝz, bʌɾ i loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs ɛniweɪ.

"He'll live," Mat said dryly. The boy was probably picking up these habits from his "uncles." Next, they would give him a tattoo. At least Olver had not sneaked out to run with the street children; he seemed to enjoy that almost as much as he did making himself a nuisance to grown women. "Harnan, you wait here, and if you see Thom or Juilin, collar them. Vanin, I want you to see what you can learn around the Chelsaine Palace, over near the Three Towers Gate." Hesitating, he looked over the room. Serving women drifted in and out of the kitchens with food and, more often, drink. Most of the patrons seemed intent on their silver cups, though a pair of women in weaver's vests argued quietly, ignoring their wine punch and leaning across the table at one another. Some of the merchants appeared to be haggling, waving hands and dipping fingers in their drinks to scribble numbers on the table. The music should mask his words from eavesdroppers, but he lowered his voice anyway.

nuz ðət dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn hæd dɑɹkfɹɛnz kʌmɪŋ tə kɔl skɹud veɪnɪnz ɹaʊn feɪs ɪndə ə skaʊl, əz ɪf i maɪt spɪt noʊ mæɾɝ u sɔ. hɑɹnən mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt fɪlθi waɪtkloʊks, ən kɔɹɪvən sədʒɛstəd dɪnaʊnsɪŋ kæɹaɪɾɪn tə ðə sɪvəl ɡɑɹd. ðət ɡɑt sətʃ dɪsɡʌstəd lʊks fɹəm ði ʌðɝ tu ðəɾ i bɛɹiɾ ɪz feɪs ɪn ə kʌp ʌv eɪl. hi wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju mɛn mæt nu hu kəd dʒɹɪŋk ɛbu dɑɹi eɪl ɪn ðɪs hit. əɹ dʒɹɪŋk ɪɾ əɾ ɔl, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ.

News that Jaichim Carridin had Darkfriends coming to call screwed Vanin's round face into a scowl, as if he might spit no matter who saw. Harnan muttered something about filthy Whitecloaks, and Corevin suggested denouncing Carridin to the Civil Guard. That got such disgusted looks from the other two that he buried his face in a cup of ale. He was one of the few men Mat knew who could drink Ebou Dari ale in this heat. Or drink it at all, for that matter.

"bi kɛɹfəl," mæt wɔɹnd wən veɪnɪn stʊd. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðəɾ i wɑz wɝid, ɹɪli. veɪnɪn muvd wɪð sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ laɪtnəs fəɹ sətʃ ə fæt mæn. hi wɑz ðə bɛs hɔɹsɛθif ɪn tu kʌntʃɹiz ət ðə list, ən kəd slɪp baɪ ivən ə wɔɹɾɝ ənsin, bʌt. . . . "ðeɪɹ ə næsti lɑt. waɪtkloʊks əɹ dɑɹk-fɹɛnz, iðɝ wʌn." ðə mæn oʊnli ɡɹʌntɪɾ ən moʊʃən fəɹ kɔɹɪvən tə ɡæðɝ ɪz ʃɝɾ ən koʊɾ ən kʌm əlɔŋ.

"Be careful," Mat warned when Vanin stood. It was not that he was worried, really. Vanin moved with surprising lightness for such a fat man. He was the best horsethief in two countries at the least, and could slip by even a Warder unseen, but. . . . "They're a nasty lot. Whitecloaks or Dark-friends, either one." The man only grunted and motioned for Corevin to gather his shirt and coat and come along.

"maɪ lɔɹd?" hɑɹnən sɛɾ əz ðeɪ lɛft. "maɪ lɔɹd, aɪ hɝd ðəɹ wɑz ə fɑɡ ɪn ðə ɹæhəd jɛstɝdeɪ."

"My Lord?" Harnan said as they left. "My Lord, I heard there was a fog in the Rahad yesterday."

ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə tɝnɪŋ əweɪ, mæt stɑpt. hɑɹnən lʊkt wɝid, ən nʌθɪŋ mʌtʃ wɝid hɪm. "wʌt dʒju min, ə fɑɡ?" ɪn ðɪs hit, fɑɡ θɪk əz pɔɹədʒ wəd nɑt læst ə hɑɹtbit.

On the point of turning away, Mat stopped. Harnan looked worried, and nothing much worried him. "What do you mean, a fog?" In this heat, fog thick as porridge would not last a heartbeat.

ðə faɪl liɾɝ ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli ən pɪɹɾ ɪndə hɪz mʌɡ. "ə fɑɡ. aɪ hɝd ðəɹ wɑz . . . θɪŋz . . . ɪn ɪt." hi lʊkt ʌp ət mæt. "aɪ hɝd pipəl dʒʌs dɪsəpɪɹd. ən səm wɑz faʊn iɾən, pɑɹts ə ðɛm." mæt mænədʒ nɑt tə ʃɪvɝ. "ðə fɑɡz ɡɔn, ɪzən ɪt? jə wɝn ɪn ɪt. wɝi wən jə ɑɹ. ðæts ɔl jə kən du." hɑɹnən fɹaʊn daʊtfəli, bʌt ðət wɑz ðə pjʊɹ tʃɹuθ. ðiz bʌbəlz ʌv ivəl - ðət wɑz wʌt ɹænd kɔl ðɛm, wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn hæd - bɝst wɛɹ ən wən ðeɪ tʃoʊz, ən ðəɹ dɪd nɑt sim tə bi ɛniθɪŋ ivən ɹænd kəd də tə stɑp ðɛm. wɝiɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt dɪɾ əz mʌtʃ ɡʊɾ əz wɝiɪŋ wɛðɝ ə ɹuf taɪl wəd fɔl ɑn jəɹ hɛɾ ɪn ðə stʃɹit təmɑɹoʊ. lɛs, sɪns jə kəd dɪsaɪd tə steɪ ɪndɔɹz.

The file leader shrugged uncomfortably and peered into his mug. "A fog. I heard there was . . . things . . . in it." He looked up at Mat. "I heard people just disappeared. And some was found eaten, parts of them." Mat managed not to shiver. "The fog's gone, isn't it? You weren't in it. Worry when you are. That's all you can do." Harnan frowned doubtfully, but that was the pure truth. These bubbles of evil - that was what Rand called them, what Moiraine had - burst where and when they chose, and there did not seem to be anything even Rand could do to stop them. Worrying about it did as much good as worrying whether a roof tile would fall on your head in the street tomorrow. Less, since you could decide to stay indoors.

ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ðət wɑz wɝθ wɝiɪŋ oʊvɝ, ðoʊ. neɪlzin hæd lɛf ðɛɹ wɪnɪŋz sɪɾɪŋ əpstɛɹz. blʌɾi noʊbəlz tɔst ɡoʊld ɝaʊn laɪk wɔɾɝ. livɪŋ hɑɹnən stʌɾiɪŋ ɪz mʌɡ, mæt hɛɾəd fəɹ ðə ɹeɪləs stɛɹz ət ðə bæk ə ðə ɹum, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ðɛm, wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən əkɑstəd hɪm.

There was something that was worth worrying over, though. Nalesean had left their winnings sitting upstairs. Bloody nobles tossed gold around like water. Leaving Harnan studying his mug, Mat headed for the railless stairs at the back of the room, but before he reached them, one of the serving women accosted him.

kɛɹə wɑz ə slɛndɝ, fʊl-lɪpt ɡɝl wɪð smoʊki aɪz. "ə mæn keɪm ɪn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ju, maɪ lɔɹd," ʃi sɛd, twɪstɪŋ əɹ skɝts fɹəm saɪd tə saɪɾ ən lʊkɪŋ ʌp əɾ ɪm θɹu lɔŋ læʃɪz. ðəɹ wɑz ə sɝɾən smoʊkənəs ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, tu. "sɛɾ i wɑz ən ɪluməneɪɾɝ, bʌɾ i lʊk siɾi tə mi. hi ɔɹɾɝd ə mil, ən lɛft wən mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən wʊdnt ɡɪv ɪt. hi wɑntəd jə tə peɪ."

Caira was a slender, full-lipped girl with smoky eyes. "A man came in looking for you, my Lord," she said, twisting her skirts from side to side and looking up at him through long lashes. There was a certain smokiness in her voice, too. "Said he was an Illuminator, but he looked seedy to me. He ordered a meal, and left when Mistress Anan wouldn't give it. He wanted you to pay."

"nɛks taɪm, pɪdʒən, ɡɪv ðə mil," hi toʊl hɝ, slɪpɪŋ ə sɪlvɝ mɑɹk ɪndə ðə plʌnʒɪŋ nɛk ə hɝ dʒɹɛs. "aɪl spik tə mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən." hi dɪd wɑnə faɪn ən ɪluməneɪɾɝ - ə ɹil wʌn, nɑt səm fɛloʊ sɛlɪŋ faɪɹwɝks fʊl ə sɔdʌst - bʌɾ ɪt hɑɹdli mæɾɝd naʊ. nɑt wɪð ðə ɡoʊld laɪɪŋ ənɡɑɹɾɪd. ən fɑɡz ɪn ðə ɹæhəd, ən dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən blʌɾi taɪlɪn teɪkɪŋ liv ə hɝ sɛnsɪz, ænd. . . .

"Next time, pigeon, give the meal," he told her, slipping a silver mark into the plunging neck of her dress. "I'll speak to Mistress Anan." He did want to find an Illuminator - a real one, not some fellow selling fireworks full of sawdust - but it hardly mattered now. Not with the gold lying unguarded. And fogs in the Rahad, and Darkfriends, and Aes Sedai, and bloody Tylin taking leave of her senses, and. . . .

kɛɹə ɡɪɡəld ən twɪstəd laɪk ə stʃɹoʊkt kæt. "wʊd jə laɪk mi tə bɹɪŋ səm pʌntʃ tə jəɹ ɹum, maɪ lɔɹd? əɹ ɛniθɪŋ?" ʃi smaɪl hoʊpfəli, ɪnvaɪɾɪŋli.

Caira giggled and twisted like a stroked cat. "Would you like me to bring some punch to your room, my Lord? Or anything?" She smiled hopefully, invitingly.

"meɪbi leɪɾɝ," hi sɛd, tæpɪŋ əɹ noʊz wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝɾɪp. ʃi ɡɪɡəld əɡɛn; ʃi ɔlweɪz dɪd. kɛɹə wəɾ əv əɹ skɝt soʊn tə ʃoʊ pɛɾikoʊts tə ðə mɪɾəl ə hɝ θaɪ əɹ haɪɝ hæd mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən əlaʊɾ ɪt, bʌt ði ɪnkipɝ lʊkt æftɝ əɹ sɝvɪŋ wɪmən ɔlmoʊst əz kloʊsli əz ʃi dɪɾ əɹ dɔɾɝz. ɔlmoʊst. "meɪbi leɪɾɝ."

"Maybe later," he said, tapping her nose with a fingertip. She giggled again; she always did. Caira would have her skirt sewn to show petticoats to the middle of her thigh or higher had Mistress Anan allowed it, but the innkeeper looked after her serving women almost as closely as she did her daughters. Almost. "Maybe later."

tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ʌp ðə waɪd stoʊn stɛɹz, hi pʊt kɛɹə aʊɾ ə hɪz maɪnd. wʌt wɑz i tə də əbaʊɾ oʊlvɝ? ðə bɔɪ wəd faɪn hɪmsɛlf ɪn ɹil tʃɹʌbəl wʌn deɪ ɪf i θɔɾ i kəd tʃɹit wɪmən ðət weɪ. hi wɑz gɑnə hæv tə kip ɪm əweɪ fɹəm hɑɹnən ən ði ʌðɝz əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl, hi səpoʊzd. ðeɪ wɝ ə bæɾ ɪnfluəns ɑn ə bɔɪ. tə hæv ðɪs ɑn tɑp ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls! hi hæd tə ɡɛt nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn aʊɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ bɪfɔɹ sʌmθɪŋ wɝs wɛn ɹɔŋ.

Trotting up the wide stone stairs, he put Caira out of his mind. What was he to do about Olver? The boy would find himself in real trouble one day if he thought he could treat women that way. He was going to have to keep him away from Harnan and the others as much as possible, he supposed. They were a bad influence on a boy. To have this on top of everything else! He had to get Nynaeve and Elayne out of Ebou Dar before something worse went wrong.

hɪz ɹum wɑz ət ðə fɹʌnt, wɪð wɪndoʊz oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ ðə skwɛɹ, ən əz i ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə dɔɹ, ðə hɔlweɪ flɔɹ bɪhaɪn ɪm skwikt. ɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd ɪnz, ɪt wəd nɑɾ ivən əv ɹɛdʒəstɝd, bʌt ðə flɔɹz ɪn ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən dɪd nɑt skwik.

His room was at the front, with windows overlooking the square, and as he reached for the door, the hallway floor behind him squeaked. In a hundred inns, it would not even have registered, but the floors in The Wandering Woman did not squeak.

hi lʊk bæk - ən spʌn dʒʌst ɪn taɪm tə dʒɹɑp ɪz hæɾ ən kætʃ ðə dɪsɛndɪŋ tʃɹʌntʃən wɪð ɪz lɛf hæn ɪnstɛɾ ə hɪz skʌl. ðə bloʊ stʌŋ ɪz hæn tə nʌmnəs, bʌɾ i hɛld ɑn dɛspɝətli əz θɪk fɪŋɡɝz dʌɡ ɪndə hɪz θɹoʊt, fɔɹsɪŋ ɪm bæk əɡɛns ðə dɔɹ tə hɪz ɹum. hɪz hɛd hɪt wɪð ə θʌmp. sɪlvɝ-ɹɪm blæk spɑts dænst ɪn ɪz vɪʒən, əbskjʊɹɪŋ ə swɛɾɪŋ feɪs. ɔl i kəd ɹɪli si wɑz ə bɪɡ noʊz ən jɛloʊ tiθ, ən ðoʊz sim heɪzi. sʌɾənli hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz ɑn ðə fɑɹ ɛdʒ ə kɑnʃəsnəs; ðoʊz fɪŋɡɝz wɝ kloʊzɪŋ ɔf blʌd tə hɪz bɹeɪn əlɔŋ wɪð ɛɹ. hɪz fɹi hænd wɛn bɪniθ ɪz koʊt, fʌmbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə hɪls ə hɪz naɪvz əz ðoʊ hɪz fɪŋɡɝz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝd wʌt ðeɪ wɝ fɔɹ. ðə kʌdʒəl ɹɛntʃt fɹi. hi kəd si ɪt ɹaɪzɪŋ, fil ɪt ɹaɪzɪŋ tə smæʃ ɪz skʌl. foʊkəsɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, hi dʒɝkt ə naɪf fɹəm ɪts skæbɝɾ ən θɹʌst.

He looked back - and spun just in time to drop his hat and catch the descending truncheon with his left hand instead of his skull. The blow stung his hand to numbness, but he held on desperately as thick fingers dug into his throat, forcing him back against the door to his room. His head hit with a thump. Silver-rimmed black spots danced in his vision, obscuring a sweating face. All he could really see was a big nose and yellow teeth, and those seemed hazy. Suddenly he realized he was on the far edge of consciousness; those fingers were closing off blood to his brain along with air. His free hand went beneath his coat, fumbling over the hilts of his knives as though his fingers no longer remembered what they were for. The cudgel wrenched free. He could see it rising, feel it rising to smash his skull. Focusing everything, he jerked a knife from its scabbard and thrust.

hɪz ətækɝ lɛɾ aʊɾ ə haɪ-pɪtʃt skɹim, ən mæt wɑz veɪɡli əwɛɹ ə ðə klʌb baʊnsɪŋ ɔf ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əz ɪt fɛl tə ðə flɔɹ, bʌt ðə mæn dɪd nɑt lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv ɪz θɹoʊt. stʌmbəlɪŋ, mæt dʒɹoʊv ɪm bæk, tɛɹɪŋ ət ðə klʌtʃɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz wɪð wʌn hænd, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ɪz naɪf ɹɪpiɾɪdli wɪð ði ʌðɝ.

His attacker let out a high-pitched scream, and Mat was vaguely aware of the club bouncing off his shoulder as it fell to the floor, but the man did not let go of his throat. Stumbling, Mat drove him back, tearing at the clutching fingers with one hand, driving his knife repeatedly with the other.

əbɹʌpli ðə fɛloʊ fɛl, slaɪɾɪŋ fɹəm mæts bleɪd. ðə naɪf nɪɹli fɑloʊɾ ɪm tə ðə flɔɹ. soʊ dɪd mæt. ɡʌlpɪŋ bɹɛθ, swiɾ ɛɹ, hi klʌŋ tə sʌmθɪŋ, ə dɔɹweɪ, tə hoʊl hɪmsɛlf ɑn ɪz fit. fɹəm ðə flɔɹ ə pleɪn-feɪs mæn stɛɹɾ ʌp əɾ ɪm wɪð aɪz ðət wəd nɛvɝ si ɛniθɪŋ əɡɛn, ə hɛvisɛt fɛloʊ wɪð kɝl mʊɹændiən mʌstæʃɪz, ɪn ə dɑɹk blu koʊt fɪt fəɹ ə smɔl mɝtʃən əɹ ə pɹɑspɝəs ʃɑpkipɝ. nɑt ðə lʊk ʌv ə θif əbaʊɾ ɪm əɾ ɔl.

Abruptly the fellow fell, sliding from Mat's blade. The knife nearly followed him to the floor. So did Mat. Gulping breath, sweet air, he clung to something, a doorway, to hold himself on his feet. From the floor a plain-faced man stared up at him with eyes that would never see anything again, a heavyset fellow with curled Murandian mustaches, in a dark blue coat fit for a small merchant or a prosperous shopkeeper. Not the look of a thief about him at all.

əbɹʌpli hi ɹilaɪz ðeɪ hæd stʌmbəl θɹu ən oʊpən dɔɹ ɪn ðɛɹ faɪt. ɪt wɑz ə smɔlɝ ɹum ðən mæts, wɪndoʊləs, ə pɛɹ ʌv ɔɪl læmps ɑn smɔl teɪbəlz bɪsaɪd ðə nɛɹoʊ bɛd pɹəvaɪɾɪŋ ə mɝki ɪluməneɪʃən. ə læŋki, peɪl-hɛɹd mæn stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm ə lɑɹdʒ oʊpən tʃɛst, stɛɹɪŋ ɑdli ət ðə kɔɹps. ðə tʃɛs tʊk ʌp moʊst ə ðə fɹi speɪs ɪn ðə ɹum.

Abruptly he realized they had stumbled through an open door in their fight. It was a smaller room than Mat's, windowless, a pair of oil lamps on small tables beside the narrow bed providing a murky illumination. A lanky, pale-haired man straightened from a large open chest, staring oddly at the corpse. The chest took up most of the free space in the room.

mæt oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə əpɑlədʒaɪz fəɹ ɪntʃɹuɾɪŋ soʊ ɹʌfli, ən ðə læŋki mæn snætʃt ə lɔŋ dæɡɝ fɹəm ɪz bɛlt, ə kʌdʒəl fɹəm ðə bɛd, ən lɛpt oʊvɝ ðə tʃɛst ət hɪm. ðət hæd nɑt bɪn ðə lʊk jə ɡeɪv ə dɛd stʃɹeɪnʒɝ. klɪŋɪŋ ənstɛɾəli tə ðə dɔɹfɹeɪm, mæt θɹu ʌndɝ-hændəd, ðə hɪl noʊ sunɝ livɪŋ ɪz hæn ðən i wɑz skɹæbəlɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt fəɹ ənʌðɝ. hɪz naɪf stʌk skwɛɹli ɪn ði ʌðɝ mænz θɹoʊt, ən mæt ɔlmoʊs fɛl əɡɛn, ðɪs taɪm fɹəm ɹɪlif, əz ðə mæn klʌtʃt hɪmsɛlf, blʌd spɝɾɪŋ bɪtwin ɪz fɪŋɡɝz, ən tɑpəl bækwɝɾ ɪndə ði oʊpən tʃɛst.

Mat opened his mouth to apologize for intruding so roughly, and the lanky man snatched a long dagger from his belt, a cudgel from the bed, and leaped over the chest at him. That had not been the look you gave a dead stranger. Clinging unsteadily to the doorframe, Mat threw under-handed, the hilt no sooner leaving his hand than he was scrabbling under his coat for another. His knife stuck squarely in the other man's throat, and Mat almost fell again, this time from relief, as the man clutched himself, blood spurting between his fingers, and toppled backward into the open chest.

"ɪts ɡʊd tə bi lʌki," mæt kɹoʊkt.

"It's good to be lucky," Mat croaked.

stæɡɝɪŋ, hi ɹitʃɹivd ɪz naɪf, waɪpɪŋ ɪt klin ɑn ðə fɛloʊz ɡɹeɪ koʊt. ə bɛɾɝ koʊt ðən ði ʌðɝ; stɪl wʊl, bʌɾ ʌv ə bɛɾɝ kʌt. ə lɛsɝ lɔɹd wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn əʃeɪm tə wɛɹ ɪt. ændɔɝən, baɪ ðə kɑlɝ. hi sæŋk ɑntu ðə bɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə mæn spɹɔld ɪn ðə tʃɛst. ə nɔɪz meɪɾ ɪm lʊk ʌp.

Staggering, he retrieved his knife, wiping it clean on the fellow's gray coat. A better coat than the other; still wool, but of a better cut. A lesser lord would not have been ashamed to wear it. Andoran, by the collar. He sank onto the bed, frowning at the man sprawled in the chest. A noise made him look up.

hɪz mænsɝvənt wɑz ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ ʌnsəksɛsfəli tə haɪɾ ə lɑɹdʒ blæk aɪɝn fɹaɪɪŋ pæn bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. nɹɪm kɛpt ə fʊl sɛɾ ə pɑts, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls i θɔɾ ə lɔɹdz sɝvən maɪt nid tʃɹævlɪŋ, ɪn ðə smɔl ɹum i ʃɛɹd wɪð oʊlvɝ nɛks tə mæts. hi wɑz ʃɔɹɾ ivən fəɹ ə kɛɹhinɪn, ən skɪni tə but. "maɪ lɔɹɾ əz blʌɾ ɑn ɪz koʊɾ əɡɛn, aɪ fɪɹ," hi mɝmɝɾ ɪn mɛlənkɑli toʊnz. ðə deɪ hi saʊndəɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, ðə sʌn wəd ɹaɪz ɪn ðə wɛst. "aɪ də wɪʃ maɪ lɔɹd wəd bi mɔɹ kɛɹfəl ə hɪz kloʊðz. ɪts soʊ hɑɹd tə ɹimuv blʌd wɪθaʊɾ ə steɪn, ən ði ɪnsɛks hɑɹdli niɾ ɛni ɛnkɝɪdʒmən tə it hoʊlz. ðɪs pleɪs əz mɔɹ ɪnsɛks ðən aɪ hæv ɛvɝ sin, maɪ lɔɹd." noʊ mɛnʃən əɾ ɔl ə tu dɛd mɛn, əɹ wʌɾ i hæɾ ɪntɛndəd wɪð ðə fɹaɪɪŋ pæn.

His manservant was in the doorway, trying unsuccessfully to hide a large black iron frying pan behind his back. Nerim kept a full set of pots, and everything else he thought a lord's servant might need traveling, in the small room he shared with Olver next to Mat's. He was short even for a Cairhienin, and skinny to boot. "My Lord has blood on his coat again, I fear," he murmured in melancholy tones. The day he sounded anything else, the sun would rise in the west. "I do wish my Lord would be more careful of his clothes. It is so hard to remove blood without a stain, and the insects hardly need any encouragement to eat holes. This place has more insects than I have ever seen, my Lord." No mention at all of two dead men, or what he had intended with the frying pan.

ðət skɹim hæd dʒɹɔn ʌðɝ ətɛnʃən; ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən wɑz nɑt ðə sɔɹɾ ʌv ɪn wɛɹ skɹimz pæst ənɹɪmɑɹkt. fit paʊndɪɾ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ, ən mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən pʊʃt nɹɪm fɝmli aʊɾ ə hɝ weɪ ən ɹeɪzd əɹ skɝts tə stɛp ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹps ɑn ðə flɔɹ. hɝ hʌzbən fɑloʊɾ əɹ ɪn, ə skwɛɹ-feɪst, ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn wɪð ðə dʌbəl ɪɹɪŋ ə ði eɪntʃən ən ɑnɝəbəl liɡ ʌv ðə nɛts dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm ɪz lɛft ɪɹ. ðə tu waɪt stoʊnz ɑn ðə loʊɝ hup sɛɾ i oʊn ʌðɝ boʊts bɪsaɪdz ðə wʌn i kæpteɪnd. dʒæsfɝ ɑnən wɑz pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɹizən mæt wɑz kɛɹfəl nɑt tə smaɪl tu mʌtʃ əɾ ɛni ʌv mɪstʃɹəs ɑnənz dɔɾɝz. ðə mæn wɔɹ ə wɝk naɪf stʌf bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛlt ən ə lɔŋɡɝ, kɝv bleɪd tu, ən ɪz lɔŋ blu-ænd-ɡɹin vɛst ɹɪvild ɑɹmz ən tʃɛs kɹɪskɹɔst wɪð dulɪŋ skɑɹz. hi wɑz əlaɪv, ðoʊ, ən moʊst ə ðə mɛn u hæd ɡɪvən ðoʊz skɑɹz wɝ nɑt.

That scream had drawn other attention; The Wandering Woman was not the sort of inn where screams passed unremarked. Feet pounded in the hallway, and Mistress Anan pushed Nerim firmly out of her way and raised her skirts to step around the corpse on the floor. Her husband followed her in, a square-faced, gray-haired man with the double earring of the Ancient and Honorable League of the Nets dangling from his left ear. The two white stones on the lower hoop said he owned other boats besides the one he captained. Jasfer Anan was part of the reason Mat was careful not to smile too much at any of Mistress Anan's daughters. The man wore a work knife stuffed behind his belt and a longer, curved blade too, and his long blue-and-green vest revealed arms and chest crisscrossed with dueling scars. He was alive, though, and most of the men who had given those scars were not.

ði ʌðɝ ɹizən fəɹ kɑʃən wɑz sɛɾəl ɑnən hɝsɛlf. mæt hæd nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi tɝn ɔf ə ɡɝl kəz ə hɝ mʌðɝ, ivən ɪf ðət mʌðɝ oʊn ði ɪn wɛɹ i wɑz steɪɪŋ, bʌt mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən hæɾ ə weɪ əbaʊt hɝ. lɑɹdʒ ɡoʊl hups ɪn əɹ ɪɹz swʌŋ əz ʃi sɝveɪd ðə dɛd mɛn wɪθaʊɾ ə flɪntʃ. ʃi wɑz pɹɪɾi dɪspaɪɾ ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, ən əɹ mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf nɛsəld ɪn ɹaʊndnəs ðət nɔɹməli wʊɾə dʒɹɔn ɪz aɪz laɪk mɔθs tə ə kændəl, jɛt lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ ðət weɪ wʊɾə bɪn laɪk lʊkɪŋ æt. . . . nɑɾ ɪz mʌðɝ. əɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, meɪbi - ðoʊ hi hæd dʌn ðæt, ʌv kɔɹs, dʒʌs tə lʊk - əɹ ət kwin taɪlɪn, ðə laɪt hɛlp ɪm ðɛɹ. pʊɾɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ ɑn waɪ wɑz nɑɾ izi. ʃi sɪmpli hæɾ ə weɪ əbaʊt hɝ. ɪt wɑz dʒʌs dɪfəkəl tə θɪŋk ə duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ðət wəɾ əfɛn sɛɾəl ɑnən.

The other reason for caution was Setalle Anan herself. Mat had never before let himself be turned off a girl because of her mother, even if that mother owned the inn where he was staying, but Mistress Anan had a way about her. Large gold hoops in her ears swung as she surveyed the dead men without a flinch. She was pretty despite a touch of gray in her hair, and her marriage knife nestled in roundness that normally would have drawn his eyes like moths to a candle, yet looking at her that way would have been like looking at. . . . Not his mother. At an Aes Sedai, maybe - though he had done that, of course, just to look - or at Queen Tylin, the Light help him there. Putting a finger on why was not easy. She simply had a way about her. It was just difficult to think of doing anything that would offend Setalle Anan.

"wʌn ə ðɛm dʒʌmp mi ɪn ðə hɔl." mæt kɪk ðə tʃɛs laɪtli; ɪt meɪɾ ə hɑloʊ saʊn dɪspaɪt ðə dɛd mæn slʌmpt ɪnsaɪd wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz dæŋɡəlɪŋ aʊt. "ðɪs ɪz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ hɪm. aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ mɛn tə fɪl ɪt wɪð wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ kəd stil." ðə ɡoʊld, pɝhæps? nɑt laɪkli ðeɪ cʊɾə hɝɾ ə ðæt, wʌn oʊnli aʊɝz əɡoʊ, bʌɾ i wəɾ æsk mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən əbaʊɾ ə seɪfɝ pleɪs tə kip ɪt.

"One of them jumped me in the hall." Mat kicked the chest lightly; it made a hollow sound despite the dead man slumped inside with his arms and legs dangling out. "This is empty except for him. I think they meant to fill it with whatever they could steal." The gold, perhaps? Not likely they could have heard of that, won only hours ago, but he would ask Mistress Anan about a safer place to keep it.

ʃi nɑɾəd kɑmli, heɪzəl aɪz sɝin. mɛn naɪfɛɾ ɪn əɹ ɪn dɪd nɑt ɹʌfəl əɹ fɛðɝz. "ðeɪ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn kæɹiɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp ðɛmsɛlvz. ðɛɹ stɑk, soʊ ðeɪ kleɪmd. ðeɪ tʊk ðə ɹum dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ jə keɪm ɪn. fəɹ ə fju aʊɝz, ðeɪ sɛd, tə slip bɪfɔɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ ɑn təwɔɹd nɔɹ tʃeɪsən." ðət wɑz ə smɔl vɪlədʒ ɑn ðə koʊs tə ði ist, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli ðeɪ wʊɾə toʊl ðə tʃɹuθ. hɝ toʊn ɪmplaɪɾ əz mʌtʃ. ʃi fɹaʊn ət ðə dɛd mɛn əz ðoʊ wɪʃɪŋ ʃi kəd ʃeɪk əm əlaɪv tə ænsɝ kwɛstʃənz. "ðeɪ wɝ pɪki əbaʊt ðə ɹum, ðoʊ. ðə peɪl-hɛɹd mæn wɑz ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ. hi tɝn daʊn ðə fɝs θɹi hi wɑz ɔfɝd, ðən æksɛptɪd ðɪs, ðət wɑz mɛn fəɹ ə sɪŋɡəl sɝvənt. aɪ θɔɾ i wɑz biɪŋ stɪnʒi wɪð ə kɔɪn."

She nodded calmly, hazel eyes serene. Men knifed in her inn did not ruffle her feathers. "They insisted on carrying it up themselves. Their stock, so they claimed. They took the room just before you came in. For a few hours, they said, to sleep before traveling on toward Nor Chasen." That was a small village on the coast to the east, but it was unlikely they would have told the truth. Her tone implied as much. She frowned at the dead men as though wishing she could shake them alive to answer questions. "They were picky about the room, though. The pale-haired man was in charge. He turned down the first three he was offered, then accepted this, that was meant for a single servant. I thought he was being stingy with a coin."

"ivən ə θif kən bi taɪtfɪstɪd," mæt sɛɾ æbsənli. ðɪs cʊɾə kwɑləfaɪd tə stɑɹt ðoʊz daɪs ɹoʊlɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd - ə hɛd ðət wʊɾə bɪn kɹækt oʊpən fəɹ ʃʊɹ wɪθaʊt ðə lʌk ə ðət fɛloʊ stɛpɪŋ ɑn ðə wʌn bɔɹɾ ɪn ðə hoʊl ɪn ðət wəd skwik - bʌt ðə blʌɾi θɪŋz wɝ stɪl tʌmbəlɪŋ. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪt.

"Even a thief can be tightfisted," Mat said absently. This could have qualified to start those dice rolling in his head - a head that would have been cracked open for sure without the luck of that fellow stepping on the one board in the whole inn that would squeak - but the bloody things were still tumbling. He did not like it.

"ju θɪŋk ɪt wɑz tʃæns ðɛn, maɪ lɔɹd?"

"You think it was chance then, my Lord?"

"wʌɾ ɛls?"

"What else?"

ʃi hæd noʊ ænsɝ, bʌt ʃi fɹaʊn ət ðə kɔɹpsəz əɡɛn. meɪbi ʃi wɑz nɑt soʊ sæŋɡwɪn əz i hæd θɔt. ʃi wɑz nɑt neɪɾɪv tə ɛbu dɑɹ, æftɝ ɔl.

She had no answer, but she frowned at the corpses again. Maybe she was not so sanguine as he had thought. She was not native to Ebou Dar, after all.

"tu mɛni ɹʌz ɪn ðə sɪɾi ʌv leɪt." dʒæsfɝ hæɾ ə dip vɔɪs, ən spikɪŋ nɔɹməli hi sim tə bi bɑɹkɪŋ kəmænz ɑn ə fɪʃɪŋ boʊt. "meɪbi jə ɔt tə θɪŋk ɑn haɪɹɪŋ ɡɑɹdz." ɔl mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən dɪd wɑz lɪft ən aɪbɹaʊ əɾ əɹ hʌzbənd, bʌɾ ɪz hænz ɹoʊz dɪfɛnsɪvli. "pis bi ɑn ju, waɪf. aɪ spoʊk wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ." ɛbu dɑɹi wɪmən wɝ noʊn tə ɪkspɹɛs dɪsplɛʒɝ wɪð ə hʌzbən ɪn ə ʃɑɹp fæʃən. ɪt wɑz nɑt bɪɑn pɑsəbɪləɾi ðəɾ ə fju ʌv ɪz skɑɹz keɪm fɹəm hɝ. ðə mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf hæd sɛvɹəl jusəz.

"Too many roughs in the city of late." Jasfer had a deep voice, and speaking normally he seemed to be barking commands on a fishing boat. "Maybe you ought to think on hiring guards." All Mistress Anan did was lift an eyebrow at her husband, but his hands rose defensively. "Peace be on you, wife. I spoke without thinking." Ebou Dari women were known to express displeasure with a husband in a sharp fashion. It was not beyond possibility that a few of his scars came from her. The marriage knife had several uses.

θæŋkɪŋ ðə laɪɾ i wɑz nɑt mɛɹid tə ən ɛbu dɑɹi, mæt ɹipleɪst ɪz oʊn naɪf ɪn ɪts ʃiθ əlɔŋsaɪd ði ʌðɝz. θæŋk ðə laɪɾ i wɑz nɑt mɛɹiɾ əɾ ɔl. hɪz fɪŋɡɝz bɹʌʃt peɪpɝ.

Thanking the Light he was not married to an Ebou Dari, Mat replaced his own knife in its sheath alongside the others. Thank the Light he was not married at all. His fingers brushed paper.

mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən wɑz nɑt lɛɾɪŋ əɹ hʌzbən ɔf izəli. "ju fɹikwənli du, hʌzbənd," ʃi sɛd, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə hɪl bɪtwin əɹ bɹɛsts. "mɛni wɪmən wəd nɑt lɛɾ ɪt pæs. ɛlɪn ɔlweɪz tɛlz mi aɪm nɑt fɝm ɪnʌf wən jə spik aʊɾ ə laɪn. aɪ nid tə pɹəvaɪɾ ə ɡʊɾ ɪɡzæmpəl fəɹ maɪ dɔɾɝz." əsɝbəɾi mɛltəɾ ɪndə ə smaɪl, ɪf ə smɔl wʌn. "kənsɪɾɝ jɝsɛlf tʃæstaɪzd. əl ɹɪfɹeɪn fɹəm tɛlɪŋ jə hu ʃəd hɔl wɪtʃ nɛɾ ɑn wɪtʃ boʊt."

Mistress Anan was not letting her husband off easily. "You frequently do, husband," she said, fingering the hilt between her breasts. "Many women would not let it pass. Elynde always tells me I am not firm enough when you speak out of line. I need to provide a good example for my daughters." Acerbity melted into a smile, if a small one. "Consider yourself chastised. I will refrain from telling you who should haul which net on which boat."

"ju ɑɹ tu kaɪn tə mi, waɪf," hi ɹɪplaɪd dʒɹaɪli. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɡɪl fəɹ ɪnkipɝz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, bʌɾ ɛvɹi ɪn ɪn ðə sɪɾi wɑz ɪn ðə hænz ʌv ə wʊmən; tə ɛbu dɑɹi, bæd lʌk ə ðə wɝst sɔɹt wəd dɔɡ ɛni ɪn oʊn baɪ ə mæn əɹ ɛni vɛsəl oʊn baɪ ə wʊmən. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ wɪmən ɪn ðə fɪʃɝmɪnz ɡɪld.

"You are too kind to me, wife," he replied dryly. There was no guild for innkeepers in Ebou Dar, but every inn in the city was in the hands of a woman; to Ebou Dari, bad luck of the worst sort would dog any inn owned by a man or any vessel owned by a woman. There were no women in the fishermen's guild.

mæt pʊld aʊt ðə peɪpɝ. ɪt wɑz snoʊi waɪt, ɪkspɛnsɪv ən stɪf, ən foʊldəd smɔl. ðə fju laɪnz ɑn ɪt wɝ pɹɪntəɾ ɪn skwɛɹ lɛɾɝz laɪk ðoʊz oʊlvɝ maɪt juz. əɹ ən ədʌlt u dɪd nɑt wɑn ðə hæn ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd.

Mat pulled out the paper. It was snowy white, expensive and stiff, and folded small. The few lines on it were printed in square letters like those Olver might use. Or an adult who did not want the hand recognized.

ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv ɑɹ pʊʃɪŋ tu fɑɹ. ɹimaɪn əm ðeɪ ɑɹ stɪl ɪn deɪnʒɝ fɹəm ðə taʊɝ. wɔɹn əm tə bi kɛɹfəl, əɹ ðəl bi nilɪŋ tə æsk ɪleɪɾəz pɑɹɾən jɛt.

ELAYNE AND NYNAEVE ARE PUSHING TOO FAR. REMIND THEM THEY ARE STILL IN DANGER FROM THE TOWER. WARN THEM TO BE CAREFUL, OR THEY WILL BE KNEELING TO ASK ELAIDA'S PARDON YET.

ðət wɑz ɔl; noʊ sɪɡnətʃɝ. stɪl ɪn deɪnʒɝ? ðət sədʒɛstəɾ ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ nu, ən sʌmhaʊ ɪt dɪd nɑt fɪt wɪð əm biɪŋ snɛɹɾ ʌp baɪ ðə ɹɛbəlz. noʊ, ðət wɑz ðə ɹɔŋ kwɛstʃən. hu hæd slɪpt ɪm ðɪs noʊt? ɑbviəsli sʌmbɑɾi hu θɔt ðeɪ kəd nɑt sɪmpli hæn ɪt tə hɪm. hu hæd hæd ði ɑpɝtunəɾi sɪns i pʊt ðə koʊɾ ɑn ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ? ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn ðəɹ ðɛn, fəɹ ʃʊɹ. sʌmbɑɾi hu hæd ɡɑɾən kloʊs. sʌmbɑɾi. . . . ənbɪddən, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf hʌmɪŋ ə snætʃ ʌv "ʃi dæzəlz maɪ aɪz ən klaʊdz maɪ maɪnd." ɝaʊn hɪɹ ðə tun hæd dɪfɹənt wɝdz; ðeɪ kɔld ɪt "ʌpsaɪd daʊn ən 'ɹaʊn ən 'ɹaʊnd." oʊnli tɛslɪn əɹ dʒoʊ-laɪn fɪt, ən ðət wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl.

That was all; no signature. Still in danger? That suggested it was nothing new, and somehow it did not fit with them being snared up by the rebels. No, that was the wrong question. Who had slipped him this note? Obviously somebody who thought they could not simply hand it to him. Who had had the opportunity since he put the coat on this morning? It had not been there then, for sure. Somebody who had gotten close. Somebody. . . . Unbidden, he found himself humming a snatch of "She Dazzles My Eyes and Clouds My Mind." Around here the tune had different words; they called it "Upside Down and 'Round and 'Round." Only Teslyn or Jo-line fit, and that was impossible.

"bæd nuz, maɪ lɔɹd?" mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən æskt.

"Bad news, my Lord?" Mistress Anan asked.

mæt stʌf ðə noʊɾ ɪndə hɪz pɑkət. "dʌz ɛni mæn ɛvɝ ɡɛt tə ʌndɝstænd wɪmən? aɪ doʊn min dʒʌst ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɛni wɪmən."

Mat stuffed the note into his pocket. "Does any man ever get to understand women? I don't mean just Aes Sedai. Any women."

dʒæsfɝ ɹɔɹd, ən wən ɪz waɪf dɝɛktəɾ ə minɪŋ ɡeɪz ɪz weɪ, hi oʊnli læf hɑɹɾɝ. ðə lʊk ʃi ɡeɪv mæt wʊɾə ʃeɪmd ən ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ ɪts pɝfək sɝɛnəɾi. "mɛn əv ɪt kwaɪɾ izi, maɪ lɔɹd, ɪf ðeɪ oʊnli lʊkt əɹ lɪsənd. wɪmən əv ðə dɪfəkəl tæsk. wi mʌs tʃɹaɪ tə ʌndɝstæn mɛn." dʒæsfɝ tʊk hoʊld ə ðə dɔɹfɹeɪm, tɪɹz ɹoʊlɪŋ daʊn ɪz dɑɹk feɪs. ʃi aɪɾ ɪm saɪdweɪz, tɪltɪŋ əɹ hɛd, ðən tɝnd, ɔl kul kɑmnəs - ən pʌntʃt ɪm ʌndɝ ðə ɹɪbz wɪð əɹ fɪst soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ ɪz niz bʌkəld. hɪz læftɝ tʊk ɑn ə wiz wɪθaʊt stɑpɪŋ. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə seɪɪŋ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, maɪ lɔɹd," ʃi sɛd tə mæt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. " 'ə mæn ɪz ə meɪz ə bɹæmbəlz ɪn dɑɹknəs, ən ivən i dʌz nɑt noʊ ðə weɪ.' "

Jasfer roared, and when his wife directed a meaning gaze his way, he only laughed harder. The look she gave Mat would have shamed an Aes Sedai for its perfect serenity. "Men have it quite easy, my Lord, if they only looked or listened. Women have the difficult task. We must try to understand men." Jasfer took hold of the doorframe, tears rolling down his dark face. She eyed him sideways, tilting her head, then turned, all cool calmness - and punched him under the ribs with her fist so hard that his knees buckled. His laughter took on a wheeze without stopping. "There is a saying in Ebou Dar, my Lord," she said to Mat over her shoulder. " 'A man is a maze of brambles in darkness, and even he does not know the way.' "

mæt snɔɹɾɪd. fæt lɑɾ ə hɛlp ʃi wɑz. wɛl, tɛslɪn əɹ dʒoʊlin əɹ sʌmbɑɾi ɛls - ɪt mʌst əv bɪn sʌmbɑɾi ɛls, ɪf i kəɾ oʊnli θɪŋk u - ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɑz ə lɔŋ weɪ əweɪ. dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn wɑz ɹaɪt hɪɹ. hi fɹaʊn ət ðə tu kɔɹpsəz. ən soʊ wɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd ʌðɝ skaʊnʒɹəlz. sʌmhaʊ hi wəd si ðoʊz tu wɪmən seɪfli aʊɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ. ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɑz, hi dɪd nɑɾ əv ə klu haʊ. hi wɪʃt ðoʊz blʌɾi daɪs wəd stɑp, ən bi dʌn wɪð ɪt.

Mat snorted. Fat lot of help she was. Well, Teslyn or Joline or somebody else - it must have been somebody else, if he could only think who - the White Tower was a long way away. Jaichim Carridin was right here. He frowned at the two corpses. And so were a hundred other scoundrels. Somehow he would see those two women safely out of Ebou Dar. The trouble was, he did not have a clue how. He wished those bloody dice would stop, and be done with it.

ði əpɑɹtməns dʒoʊlin ʃɛɹd wɪð tɛslɪn wɝ kwaɪt speɪʃəs, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ fəɹ itʃ ə ðɛm, plʌs wʌn əpis fəɹ ðɛɹ meɪdz ən ənʌðɝ ðət wʊɾə dʌn kwaɪt wɛl fəɹ blɹɪk ən fɛn, ɪf tɛslɪn cʊɾə stʊd tə hæv əɹ wɔɹɾɝz wɪð ðɛm. ðə wʊmən sɔ ɛvɹi mæn əz ə pətɛnʃəli ɹæbɪd wʊlf, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɡeɪnseɪɪŋ əɹ wən ʃi tʃɹuli wɑntəd sʌmθɪŋ. əz ɪnɛksɝəbəl əz ɪleɪɾə, ʃi ɡɹaʊn daʊn wʌtɛvɝ leɪ ɪn əɹ pæθ. ðeɪ stʊɾ əz ikwəlz ɪn ɛvɹi ɹil weɪ, sɝɾənli, bʌt nɑt mɛni mænədʒ tə pɹɪveɪl oʊvɝ tɛslɪn wɪθaʊɾ ə klɪɹ ædvæntɪdʒ. ʃi wɑz ət ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl ɪn ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum wən dʒoʊlin ɛntɝd, hɝ pɛn meɪkɪŋ ən ɑfəl skɹɪtʃ-skɹɪtʃ. ʃi wɑz ɔlweɪz pɑɹsəmoʊniəs wɪð ði ɪŋk.

The apartments Joline shared with Teslyn were quite spacious, including a bedchamber for each of them, plus one apiece for their maids and another that would have done quite well for Blaeric and Fen, if Teslyn could have stood to have her Warders with them. The woman saw every man as a potentially rabid wolf, and there was no gainsaying her when she truly wanted something. As inexorable as Elaida, she ground down whatever lay in her path. They stood as equals in every real way, certainly, but not many managed to prevail over Teslyn without a clear advantage. She was at the writing table in the sitting room when Joline entered, her pen making an awful scritch-scritch. She was always parsimonious with the ink.

wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd, dʒoʊlin swɛp baɪ hɝ ən aʊɾ ɑntu ðə bælkəni, ə lɔŋ keɪdʒ ʌv waɪt-peɪntəɾ aɪɝn. ðə skɹɑlwɝk wɑz soʊ taɪt ðət ðə mɛn wɝkɪŋ ɪn ðə ɡɑɹɾən θɹi stɔɹiz bɪloʊ wəɾ əv ə dɪfəkəl taɪm siɪŋ ðət ðəɹ wɑz ɛniwʌn wɪðɪn. flaʊɝz ɪn ðɪs ɹidʒən ɔɹɾənɛɹəli θɹaɪvd ɪn hit, waɪl kʌlɝz tə aʊtʃaɪn ði ɪntɪɹiɝ ə ðə pæləs, bʌt nʌθɪŋ blum daʊn ðɛɹ. ɡɑɹɾənɝz muvd əlɔŋ ðə ɡɹævəl wɔks wɪð bʌkəts ʌv wɔɾɝ, jɛt nɪɹli ɛvɹi lif wɑz jɛloʊ əɹ bɹaʊn. ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv ədmɪɾəd ɪɾ ʌndɝ tɔɹtʃɝ, bʌt ðə hit meɪɾ əɹ əfɹeɪd. ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑz tʌtʃɪŋ ðə wɝld, ən ðɛɹ oʊnli hoʊp ə bɔɪ hu wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ waɪld.

Without a word, Joline swept by her and out onto the balcony, a long cage of white-painted iron. The scrollwork was so tight that the men working in the garden three stories below would have a difficult time seeing that there was anyone within. Flowers in this region ordinarily thrived in heat, wild colors to outshine the interior of the palace, but nothing bloomed down there. Gardeners moved along the gravel walks with buckets of water, yet nearly every leaf was yellow or brown. She would not have admitted it under torture, but the heat made her afraid. The Dark One was touching the world, and their only hope a boy who was running wild.

"bɹɛɾ ən wɔɾɝ?" tɛslɪn sɛd sʌɾənli. "sɛn ðə kɔθən bɔɪ ɔf tə ðə taʊɝ? ɪf ðəɹ də bi tʃeɪnʒəz ɪn wʌt wi dɪd plæn, jəl pliz ɪnfɔɹm mi bɪfɔɹ tɛlɪŋ ʌðɝz."

"Bread and water?" Teslyn said suddenly. "Send the Cauthon boy off to the Tower? If there do be changes in what we did plan, you will please inform me before telling others."

dʒoʊlin fɛlt ə tʌtʃ ə hiɾ ɪn əɹ tʃiks. "mɛɝɪlɪl niɾəd tə bi sɛt daʊn. ʃi lɛktʃɝd wən aɪ wɑz ə nɑvəs." soʊ hæd tɛslɪn; ə səvɪɹ titʃɝ u hɛld əɹ klæsəz wɪð ən aɪɝn ɡɹɪp. dʒʌs ðə weɪ ʃi spoʊk wɑz ə ɹimaɪndɝ, ə mɑɹkt wɔɹnɪŋ nɑt tə ɡoʊ əɡɛns hɝ, ikwəl əɹ nɑt. mɛɝɪlɪl, ðoʊ, stʊd loʊɝ. "ʃi juz tə meɪk əs stæn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə klæs, ən ʃi wəd dɪɡ ən dɪɡ fəɹ ði ænsɝ ʃi wɑntəd, əntɪl wi stʊd ðəɹ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛvɹiwʌn, wipɪŋ wɪð fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. ʃi pɹitɛndəd tə sɪmpəθaɪz, əɹ pɝhæps ʃi ɹɪli dɪd, bʌt ðə mɔɹ ʃi pæɾəd əs ən toʊld əs nɑt tə kɹaɪ, ðə wɝs ɪt wɑz." ʃi kʌɾ ɔf əbɹʌpli. ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɪntɛndəd tə seɪ ɔl ðæt. ɪt wɑz tɛslɪnz fɔlt, ɔlweɪz lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ əbaʊt tə bi əpbɹeɪɾɪd fəɹ ə spɑɾ ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛs. bʌt ʃi ʃəɾ ʌndɝstænd; mɛɝɪlɪl hæd tɔt hɝ, tu.

Joline felt a touch of heat in her cheeks. "Merilille needed to be set down. She lectured when I was a novice." So had Teslyn; a severe teacher who held her classes with an iron grip. Just the way she spoke was a reminder, a marked warning not to go against her, equal or not. Merilille, though, stood lower. "She used to make us stand in front of the class, and she would dig and dig for the answer she wanted, until we stood there in front of everyone, weeping with frustration. She pretended to sympathize, or perhaps she really did, but the more she patted us and told us not to cry, the worse it was." She cut off abruptly. She had not intended to say all that. It was Teslyn's fault, always looking at her as if she were about to be upbraided for a spot on her dress. But she should understand; Merilille had taught her, too.

"ju hæv ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðəɾ ɔl ðɪs taɪm?" stɑɹk ɪnkɹədulɪɾi peɪntəd tɛslɪnz vɔɪs. "ðə sɪstɝz u dɪd titʃ əs dɪɾ oʊnli də ðɛɹ duɾi. səmtaɪmz aɪ də θɪŋk wʌɾ ɪleɪɾə dɪd seɪ ʌv jə də bi ɹaɪt." ði ənɔɪɪŋ skɹɪtʃ-skɹɪtʃ ɹɪzumd.

"You have remembered that all this time?" Stark incredulity painted Teslyn's voice. "The sisters who did teach us did only do their duty. Sometimes I do think what Elaida did say of you do be right." The annoying scritch-scritch resumed.

"ɪt . . . sɪmpli keɪm tə maɪnd wən mɛɝɪlɪl bɪɡæn əz ɪf ʃi wɝ tʃɹuli ən æmbæsəɾɝ." ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə ɹɛbəl. dʒoʊlin fɹaʊn ət ðə ɡɑɹɾən. ʃi dɪspaɪzd ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðoʊz wɪmən u hæd bɹoʊkən ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən flɔntɪd ðə bɹeɪk bɪfɔɹ ɔl ðə wɝld. ðɛm ən ɛniwʌn u eɪɾəd ðɛm. bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə hæd blʌndɝd tu, hɔɹəbli. ðə sɪstɝz u wɝ ɹɛbəlz naʊ cʊɾə bɪn ɹɛkənsaɪld, wɪð ə lɪɾəl ɛfɝt. "wʌt dɪd ʃi seɪ ʌv mi? tɛslɪn?" ðə saʊn ə ðə pɛn kəntɪnjud, laɪk fɪŋɡɝneɪlz skɹeɪpɪŋ əkɹɔs ə sleɪt. dʒoʊlin wɛn bæk ɪnsaɪd. "wʌt dɪɾ ɪleɪɾə seɪ?"

"It . . . simply came to mind when Merilille began as if she were truly an ambassador." Instead of a rebel. Joline frowned at the garden. She despised every one of those women who had broken the White Tower, and flaunted the break before all the world. Them and anyone who aided them. But Elaida had blundered too, horribly. The sisters who were rebels now could have been reconciled, with a little effort. "What did she say of me? Teslyn?" The sound of the pen continued, like fingernails scraping across a slate. Joline went back inside. "What did Elaida say?"

tɛslɪn leɪɾ ənʌðɝ ʃiɾ ətɑp əɹ lɛɾɝ, iðɝ tə blɑɾ əɹ tə ʃild ɪt fɹəm dʒoʊlinz aɪz, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ ɪmiɾiətli. ʃi skaʊld ət dʒoʊ-laɪn - əɹ pɝhæps dʒʌs lʊkt; ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl tə seɪ wɪð əɹ ət taɪmz - ən ət læst saɪd. "vɛɹi wɛl. ɪf jə mʌs noʊ. ʃi dɪd seɪ jə stɪl də bi ə tʃaɪld."

Teslyn laid another sheet atop her letter, either to blot or to shield it from Joline's eyes, but she did not answer immediately. She scowled at Jo-line - or perhaps just looked; it was difficult to say with her at times - and at last sighed. "Very well. If you must know. She did say you still do be a child."

"ə tʃaɪld?" dʒoʊlinz ʃɑk hæd noʊ ɪfɛkt ɑn ði ʌðɝ wʊmən.

"A child?" Joline's shock had no effect on the other woman.

"sʌm," tɛslɪn sɛd kɑmli, "du tʃeɪnʒ lɪɾəl fɹəm ðə deɪ ðeɪ də pʊɾ ɑn nɑvəs waɪt. səm də tʃeɪnʒ noʊ əɾ ɔl. ɪleɪɾə dʌz bɪliv juv noʊ ɡɹoʊn ʌp jɛɾ ən nɛvɝ wɪl."

"Some," Teslyn said calmly, "do change little from the day they do put on novice white. Some do change no at all. Elaida does believe you have no grown up yet and never will."

dʒoʊlin tɔst əɹ hɛɾ æŋɡɹəli, ənwɪlɪŋ tə lɛt hɝsɛlf spik. tə hæv ðət sɛd baɪ sʌmwʌn huz mʌðɝ hæd bɪn ə tʃaɪld wən ʃi hɝsɛlf ɡeɪn ðə ʃɔl! ɪleɪɾə hæd bɪn pɛɾəd tu mʌtʃ əz ə nɑvəs, meɪɾ oʊvɝ tu mʌtʃ fəɹ əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ ən ðə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl spiɾ ə hɝ lɝnɪŋ. dʒoʊlin səspɛktəd ðət wɑz waɪ ʃi wɑz ɪn sətʃ ə fjʊɹi əbaʊɾ ɪleɪn ən ɛɡwin ən ðə waɪldɝ nɪneɪiv; kəz ðeɪ wɝ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ʃi, kəz ðeɪ hæd spɛn fɑɹ lɛs taɪm əz nɑvəsɪz, noʊ mæɾɝ ðət ðeɪ hæd bɪn pʊʃt əhɛd tu fæst. waɪ, nɪneɪiv hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ə nɑvəs əɾ ɔl, ən ðət wɑz kəmplitli ənhɝɾ ʌv.

Joline tossed her head angrily, unwilling to let herself speak. To have that said by someone whose mother had been a child when she herself gained the shawl! Elaida had been petted too much as a novice, made over too much for her strength and the remarkable speed of her learning. Joline suspected that was why she was in such a fury about Elayne and Egwene and the wilder Nynaeve; because they were stronger than she, because they had spent far less time as novices, no matter that they had been pushed ahead too fast. Why, Nynaeve had never been a novice at all, and that was completely unheard of.

"sɪns jə dɪd bɹɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp," tɛslɪn wɛn ɑn, "pɝhæps wi ʃəd tʃɹaɪ tə teɪk ædvæntɪdʒ ə ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən."

"Since you did bring it up," Teslyn went on, "perhaps we should try to take advantage of the situation."

"wʌt dʒju min?" ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, dʒoʊlin tʃænəld ɛɹ tə lɪf ðə sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ ɑn ðə tɝkwɔɪz-ɪnleɪd saɪd teɪbəl ən fɪl ə sɪlvɝ ɡɑblət wɪð pʌntʃ. əz ɔlweɪz, ðə dʒɔɪ ʌv ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ θɹɪl hɝ, suðɪŋ ivən əz ɪɾ ɪɡzɪlɝeɪɾɪd.

"What do you mean?" Embracing the True Source, Joline channeled Air to lift the silver pitcher on the turquoise-inlaid side table and fill a silver goblet with punch. As always, the joy of embracing saidar thrilled her, soothing even as it exhilarated.

"ɪt də bi ɑbviəs, aɪ ʃəd θɪŋk. ɪleɪɾəz ɔɹɾɝz də stɪl stænd. ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv ɑɹ tə bi ɹɪtɝn tə ðə taʊɝ əz sun əz faʊnd. aɪ dɪɾ əɡɹi tə weɪt, bʌt pɝhæps wi ʃəd weɪt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ. ə pɪɾi ði ælvɪɹ ɡɝl dʌz noʊ bi wɪð ðɛm. bʌt tu wɪl pʊɾ əs bæk ɪn ɪleɪɾəz ɡʊd ɡɹeɪsɪz, ən ɪf wi kən æd ðə kɔθən bɔɪ. . . . aɪ də θɪŋk ðoʊz θɹi wɪl meɪk əɹ wɛlkəm əs əz ɪf wi dɪd kʌm wɪð ælθɹ hɪmsɛlf. ən ðɪs eɪvinhə wɪl meɪk ə faɪn nɑvəs, waɪldɝ əɹ noʊ."

"It do be obvious, I should think. Elaida's orders do still stand. Elayne and Nynaeve are to be returned to the Tower as soon as found. I did agree to wait, but perhaps we should wait no longer. A pity the al'Vere girl does no be with them. But two will put us back in Elaida's good graces, and if we can add the Cauthon boy. . . . I do think those three will make her welcome us as if we did come with al'Thor himself. And this Aviendha will make a fine novice, wilder or no."

ðə ɡɑblət floʊɾəd ɪndə dʒoʊlinz hæn ɑn ɛɹ, ən ʃi ɹɪlʌktənli ɹilis ðə paʊɝ. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ lɔs ði ɑɹɾɝ ʃi fɛl ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi tʌtʃt ðə sɔɹs. dumɪlən pʌntʃ wɑz ə pʊɹ sʌbstətut fəɹ seɪaɪdɑɹ. ðə wɝs pɑɹɾ ə hɝ pɛnəns bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ ðə taʊɝ hæd bɪn luzɪŋ ðə ɹaɪt tə tʌtʃ seɪaɪdɑɹ. ɔlmoʊs ðə wɝs pɑɹt. ʃi hæd sɛɾ ɪɾ ɔl hɝsɛlf, bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə hæd meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ ðəɾ ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt meɪk ɪt hɑɹʃ, ɪleɪɾə wʊd. ʃi hæd noʊ daʊt ðə ɹɪzʌlt wʊɾə bɪn mʌtʃ wɝs, ðɛn. "hɝ ɡʊd ɡɹeɪsɪz? tɛslɪn, ʃi hjumɪlieɪɾɪd əs fəɹ noʊ mɔɹ ɹizən ðən tə ʃoʊ ði ʌðɝz ðət ʃi kʊd. ʃi sɛn əs tə ðɪs flaɪ-ɹɪɾən hoʊl əz fɑɹ fɹəm ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt əz ʃi kʊd, ʃɔɹɾ ə ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, æmbæsəɾɝz tə ə kwin wɪð lɛs paʊɝ ðən ə dʌzən ə hɝ oʊn noʊbəlz, ɛni wʌn ə hum kəd snætʃ ðə θɹoʊn fɹəm əɹ təmɑɹoʊ ɪf ðeɪ kəd bi bɑðɝd tə. ən jə wɑnə wiɾəl jəɹ weɪ bæk ɪndə ɪleɪɾəz feɪvɝ?"

The goblet floated into Joline's hand on Air, and she reluctantly released the Power. She had never lost the ardor she felt the first time she touched the Source. Dewmelon punch was a poor substitute for saidar. The worst part of her penance before leaving the Tower had been losing the right to touch saidar. Almost the worst part. She had set it all herself, but Elaida had made it clear that if she did not make it harsh, Elaida would. She had no doubt the result would have been much worse, then. "Her good graces? Teslyn, she humiliated us for no more reason than to show the others that she could. She sent us to this fly-ridden hole as far from everything important as she could, short of the other side of the Aryth Ocean, ambassadors to a queen with less power than a dozen of her own nobles, any one of whom could snatch the throne from her tomorrow if they could be bothered to. And you want to wheedle your way back into Elaida's favor?"

"ʃi də bi ði æmɪɝlɪn sit." tɛslɪn tʌtʃt ðə lɛɾɝ wɪð ðə peɪdʒ laɪɪŋ ətɑp ɪt, muvɪŋ ðə ʃits ə bɪt ðɪs weɪ ðən ə bɪt ðæt, əz ɪf fɹeɪmɪŋ əɹ θɔts. "ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ saɪlən fəɹ ə taɪm dɪd lɛɾ əɹ noʊ wəɹ noʊ læp-dɑɡz, bʌt ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ saɪlən tu lɔŋ kəd bi sin əz tʃɹizən."

"She do be the Amyrlin Seat." Teslyn touched the letter with the page lying atop it, moving the sheets a bit this way then a bit that, as if framing her thoughts. "Remaining silent for a time did let her know we are no lap-dogs, but remaining silent too long could be seen as treason."

dʒoʊlin snɪft. "ɹɪdɪkjələs! wən ðəɹ ɹɪtɝn ðəl oʊnli bi pʌnɪʃt fəɹ ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ, ən naʊ fəɹ pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi fʊl sɪstɝz." hɝ maʊθ taɪɾənd. ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ ɡɪlti ðɛɹ, ən ðoʊz u əlaʊɾ əm tə, əz wɛl, bʌɾ ɪt meɪɾ ə ʃɑɹp dɪfɝəns wən wʌn ə ðɛm kleɪmd əɹ oʊn ədʒɑ. baɪ ðə taɪm ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ fɪnɪʃt wɪð ɪleɪn fəɹ ðæt, ɪt wəd bi ə vɛɹi tʃeɪsən jʌŋ wʊmən ɪndiɾ u tʊk ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ. ðoʊ ɪt maɪt bi bɛst ɪf ɪleɪn sɪkjʊɹd ðə laɪən θɹoʊn fɝst. hɝ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ hæd tə bi kəmpliɾəd, iðɝ weɪ. dʒoʊlin dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə si ɪleɪn lɔs tə ðə taʊɝ, wʌtɛvɝ ʃi hæd dʌn.

Joline sniffed. "Ridiculous! When they're returned they'll only be punished for running away, and now for pretending to be full sisters." Her mouth tightened. They were both guilty there, and those who allowed them to, as well, but it made a sharp difference when one of them claimed her own Ajah. By the time the Green Ajah finished with Elayne for that, it would be a very chastened young woman indeed who took the throne of Andor. Though it might be best if Elayne secured the Lion Throne first. Her training had to be completed, either way. Joline did not intend to see Elayne lost to the Tower, whatever she had done.

"du noʊ fɝɡɛt dʒɔɪnɪŋ wɪð ðə ɹɛbəlz."

"Do no forget joining with the rebels."

"laɪt, tɛslɪn, ðeɪ wɝ pɹɑbli skupt ʌp dʒʌs laɪk ðə ɡɝlz ðə ɹɛbəlz tʊk aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ. dʌz ɪt ɹɪli mæɾɝ ə wɪt wɛðɝ ðeɪ bɪɡɪn mʌkɪŋ aʊt stɔlz təmɑɹoʊ əɹ nɛks jɪɹ?" ðət wɑz ʃʊɹli əz mʌtʃ əz ðə nɑvəsɪz ən æksɛptɪd wɪð ðə ɹɛbəlz wəɾ əv tə feɪs. "ivən ði ədʒəz kən weɪt tə hæv əm ɪn hænd, ɹɪli. ɪts nɑɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹən seɪf. ðeɪ ɑɹ æksɛptɪd, æftɝ ɔl, ən ðeɪ sɝɾənli sim kɑntɛn tə steɪ wɛɹ wi kən ɹitʃ əm wɛnɛvɝ wi tʃuz. aɪ seɪ, lɛɾ əs sɪt wɛɹ ɪleɪɾə pʊɾ ʌs, ən kəntɪnju tə foʊld əɹ hænz ən hoʊld əɹ tʌŋz. əntɪl ʃi æsks naɪsli tə faɪn aʊt wʌt wəɹ duɪŋ." ʃi dɪd nɑt seɪ ðət ʃi wɑz pɹipɛɹd tə weɪɾ əntɪl ɪleɪɾə faʊn hɝsɛlf dɪpoʊzd əz sɪuən hæd bɪn. ðə hɔl ʃʊɹli wəd nɑt pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ðə bʊliɪŋ ən bʌŋɡəlɪŋ fɝɛvɝ, bʌt tɛslɪn wɑz ɹɛd, æftɝ ɔl, ən wəd nɑɾ əpɹiʃieɪt hɪɹɪŋ ðæt.

"Light, Teslyn, they were probably scooped up just like the girls the rebels took out of the Tower. Does it really matter a whit whether they begin mucking out stalls tomorrow or next year?" That was surely as much as the novices and Accepted with the rebels would have to face. "Even the Ajahs can wait to have them in hand, really. It is not as if they aren't safe. They are Accepted, after all, and they certainly seem content to stay where we can reach them whenever we choose. I say, let us sit where Elaida put us, and continue to fold our hands and hold our tongues. Until she asks nicely to find out what we are doing." She did not say that she was prepared to wait until Elaida found herself deposed as Siuan had been. The Hall surely would not put up with the bullying and bungling forever, but Teslyn was Red, after all, and would not appreciate hearing that.

"aɪ səpoʊz ðəɹ də bi noʊ ɝdʒənsi," tɛslɪn sɛd sloʊli, ði ənspoʊkən "bʌt" ɔl bʌt ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɪtsɛlf.

"I suppose there do be no urgency," Teslyn said slowly, the unspoken "but" all but shouting itself.

dʒɹɔɪŋ ə bɔl-fʊɾɪd tʃɛɹ tə ðə teɪbəl wɪð ənʌðɝ floʊ ʌv ɛɹ, dʒoʊ-laɪn sɛɾəld hɝsɛlf tə kənvɪnsɪŋ əɹ kəmpænjən ðət saɪləns ɹɪmeɪn ðə bɛs pɑləsi. stɪl ə tʃaɪld, wɑz ʃi? ɪf ʃi hæɾ əɹ weɪ, ɪleɪɾə wəd nɑt ɡɛt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə wɝɾ aʊɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ əntɪl ʃi bɛɡd fəɹ ɪt.

Drawing a ball-footed chair to the table with another flow of Air, Jo-line settled herself to convincing her companion that silence remained the best policy. Still a child, was she? If she had her way, Elaida would not get so much as a word out of Ebou Dar until she begged for it.

ðə wʊmən ɑn ðə teɪbəl ɑɹtʃt ʌp əz fɑɹ əz əɹ bɑnz wəɾ əlaʊ, aɪz bʌlʒɪŋ, θɹoʊt kɔɹɾəd wɪð ə pɪɹsɪŋ skɹim ðət wɛn ɑn ən ɑn. əbɹʌpli ðə skɹim wɑz ə laʊd tʃoʊkɪŋ ɹæsp ɪnstɛd, ən ʃi kənvʌlsd, ʃeɪkɪŋ fɹəm ɹɪsts tə æŋkəlz, ðən kəlæpst ɪn saɪləns. waɪd-oʊpən aɪz stɛɹd saɪtləsli ət ðə kɑbwbɛd beɪsmən silɪŋ.

The woman on the table arched up as far as her bonds would allow, eyes bulging, throat corded with a piercing scream that went on and on. Abruptly the scream was a loud choking rasp instead, and she convulsed, shaking from wrists to ankles, then collapsed in silence. Wide-open eyes stared sightlessly at the cobwebbed basement ceiling.

ɡɪvɪŋ vɛn tə kɝsɪz wɑz ɪɹæʃənəl, bʌt fæljən cʊɾə tɝn ði ɛɹ əz blu əz ɛni steɪbəlmən. nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi wɪʃt ʃi hæd təmeɪl hɪɹ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɪspæn. kwɛstʃənz wɝ ænsɝɾ iɡɝli fəɹ təmeɪl, ən noʊbɑdi daɪɾ əntɪl ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi. ʌv kɔɹs, təmeɪl ɛndʒɔɪd ðə wɝk ɪntaɪɝli tu mʌtʃ, bʌt ðət wɑz bɪsaɪd ðə pɔɪnt.

Giving vent to curses was irrational, but Falion could have turned the air as blue as any stableman. Not for the first time she wished she had Temaile here instead of Ispan. Questions were answered eagerly for Temaile, and nobody died until she was ready. Of course, Temaile enjoyed the work entirely too much, but that was beside the point.

tʃænəlɪŋ wʌns mɔɹ, fæljən ɡæðɝd ðə wʊmənz kloʊðz fɹəm ðə fɪlθi flɔɹ ən dʒɹɑpt əm ətɑp ðə bɑɾi. ðə ɹɛd lɛðɝ bɛl fɛl ɔf, ən ʃi snætʃt ɪɾ ʌp baɪ hæn ən slæpt ɪt bæk ɑntu ðə paɪl. pɝhæps ʃi ʃʊɾə juzd ʌðɝ mɛθədz, bʌt stʃɹæps ən pɪnsɝz ən hɑɾ aɪɝnz wɝ soʊ . . . mɛsi. "liv ðə bɑɾi ɪn ən æli sʌmwɛɹ. slɪt ðə θɹoʊt soʊ ɪt lʊks əz ɪf ʃi wɑz ɹɑbd. jə kən kip ðə kɔɪnz ɪn əɹ pɝs."

Channeling once more, Falion gathered the woman's clothes from the filthy floor and dropped them atop the body. The red leather belt fell off, and she snatched it up by hand and slapped it back onto the pile. Perhaps she should have used other methods, but straps and pincers and hot irons were so . . . messy. "Leave the body in an alley somewhere. Slit the throat so it looks as if she was robbed. You can keep the coins in her purse."

ðə tu mɛn skwɑɾɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ hilz əɡɛns ðə stoʊn wɔl ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks. ɑɹnən ən næd maɪɾ əv bɪn bɹʌðɝz baɪ ðɛɹ əpɪɹəns, ɔl blæk hɛɹ ən biɾi aɪz ən skɑɹz, wɪð mɔɹ mʌsəlz ðən ɛni θɹi mɛn kəd nid, bʌt ðeɪ dɪɾ əv səfɪʃən bɹeɪnz tə kæɹi aʊt sɪmpəl ɔɹɾɝz. juʒəwəli. "fɝɡɪvnəs, mɪstʃɹəs," ɑɹnən sɛd hɛzɪɾəntli, "bʌt noʊ wʌn wɪl bɪliv - "

The two men squatting on their heels against the stone wall exchanged looks. Arnin and Nad might have been brothers by their appearance, all black hair and beady eyes and scars, with more muscles than any three men could need, but they did have sufficient brains to carry out simple orders. Usually. "Forgiveness, Mistress," Arnin said hesitantly, "but no one will believe - "

"du əz jə ɑɹ toʊld!" ʃi snæpt, tʃænəlɪŋ tə hɔl ɪm tə hɪz fiɾ ən slæm ɪm bæk əɡɛns ðə stoʊnz. hɪz hɛd baʊnst, jɛt ðət ʃʊɹli kəd də hɪm noʊ dæmədʒ.

"Do as you are told!" she snapped, channeling to haul him to his feet and slam him back against the stones. His head bounced, yet that surely could do him no damage.

næd ɹʌʃt tə ðə teɪbəl, bæbəlɪŋ, "jɛs, mɪstʃɹəs. əz jə kəmænd, mɪstʃɹəs." wən ʃi ɹilist ɑɹnən, hi dɪd nɑt bæbəl, bʌɾ i stæɡɝɾ oʊvɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɛni mɔɹ əbdʒɛkʃənz tə hɛlp ɡæðɝ ʌp ðə bɑɾi laɪk soʊ mʌtʃ ɹʌbɪʃ ən kæɹi ɪɾ aʊt. wɛl, ɪt wɑz soʊ mʌtʃ ɹʌbɪʃ, naʊ. ʃi ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd ði aʊtbɝst. lɛɾɪŋ tɛmpɝ teɪk kəntʃɹoʊl wɑz ɪɹæʃənəl. ɪt dɪd sim tə bi ɪfɛktɪv ət taɪmz, ðoʊ. æftɝ ɔl ðiz jɪɹz, ðət stɪl sɝpɹaɪz hɝ.

Nad rushed to the table, babbling, "Yes, Mistress. As you command, Mistress." When she released Arnin, he did not babble, but he staggered over without any more objections to help gather up the body like so much rubbish and carry it out. Well, it was so much rubbish, now. She regretted the outburst. Letting temper take control was irrational. It did seem to be effective at times, though. After all these years, that still surprised her.

"mɑɡiɾin, ʃɪl nɑt laɪk ðɪs," ɪspæn sɛɾ əz sun əz ðə mɛn hæd ɡɔn. ðə blu ən ɡɹin bidz ðət wɝ wɝkt ɪndə hɝ mɛni slɪm blæk bɹeɪdz klækt əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. ʃi hæd ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz ðə hoʊl taɪm, ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ, wɪð ə smɔl wɔɹd woʊvən soʊ ʃi kəd nɑt hɪɹ.

"Moghedien, she will not like this," Ispan said as soon as the men had gone. The blue and green beads that were worked into her many slim black braids clacked as she shook her head. She had remained in the shadows the whole time, in a corner, with a small ward woven so she could not hear.

fæljən mænədʒ nɑt tə ɡlɛɹ. ɪspæn wɑz ðə læs kəmpænjən ʃi wʊɾə tʃoʊzən fəɹ hɝsɛlf. ʃi wɑz blu, əɹ hæd bɪn. pɝhæps ʃi stɪl wɑz. fæljən dɪd nɑt ɹɪli θɪŋk hɝsɛlf ɛni lɛs waɪɾ ədʒɑ kəz ʃi hæd dʒɔɪn ðə blæk. bluz wɝ tu fɝvənt, taɪɪŋ ɪmoʊʃən ɝaʊnd wʌt ʃəd bi vjud wɪð ʌɾɝ dɪspæʃən. ɹiɑnə, ənʌðɝ waɪt, wʊɾə bɪn əɹ tʃɔɪs. ðoʊ ðə wʊmən dɪɾ əv ɑd, ənsaʊnd noʊʃənz ɑn sɛvɹəl pɔɪns ə lɑdʒɪk. "mɑɡiɾin əz fɝɡɑɾən ʌs, ɪspæn. əɹ əv jə ɹəsiv səm pɹaɪvət wɝd fɹəm hɝ? ɪn ɛni keɪs, aɪm kənvɪns ðɪs kæʃ dʌz nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst."

Falion managed not to glare. Ispan was the last companion she would have chosen for herself. She was Blue, or had been. Perhaps she still was. Falion did not really think herself any less White Ajah because she had joined the Black. Blues were too fervent, tying emotion around what should be viewed with utter dispassion. Rianna, another White, would have been her choice. Though the woman did have odd, unsound notions on several points of logic. "Moghedien has forgotten us, Ispan. Or have you received some private word from her? In any case, I am convinced this cache does not exist."

"mɑɡiɾin, ʃi sɛz ðəɾ ɪt dʌz." ɪspæn bɪɡæn fɝmli, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs kwɪkli ɡɹu wɔɹm. "ə stɔɹ ʌv æŋɡɹil, ən sɑŋɡɹil, ən tɛɹæŋɡɹil. wɪl əv səm pɑɹɾ ə ðɛm. æŋɡɹil ʌv əɹ vɛɹi oʊn, fæljən. pɝhæps ivən sɑŋɡɹil. ʃiz pɹɑməst."

"Moghedien, she says that it does." Ispan began firmly, but her voice quickly grew warm. "A store of angreal, and sa'angreal, and ter'angreal. We will have some part of them. Angreal of our very own, Falion. Perhaps even sa'angreal. She has promised."

"mɑɡiɾin wɑz ɹɔŋ." fæljən wɑtʃt ʃɑk waɪɾən ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz aɪz. ðə tʃoʊzən wɝ oʊnli pipəl. lɝnɪŋ ðət lɛsən hæd stʌn fæljən tu, bʌt səm ɹəfjuz tə lɝn. ðə tʃoʊzən wɝ væsli stʃɹɔŋɝ, ɪnfənətli mɔɹ nɑlədʒəbəl, ən kwaɪt pɑsəbli ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɹəsiv ðə ɹɪwɔɹɾ ʌv ɪmɔɹtælɪɾi, bʌt baɪ ɔl ɛvəɾəns ðeɪ skimd ən fɔɾ itʃ ʌðɝ əz hɑɹɾ əz tu mʊɹændiənz wɪð wʌn blæŋkət. ɪspænz ʃɑk kwɪkli ɡeɪv weɪ tə æŋɡɝ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝz lʊkɪŋ. wəd ðeɪ ɔl lʊk fəɹ nʌθɪŋ? ðəɹ ɑɹ fɹɛnz ə ðə dɑɹk lʊkɪŋ; ðeɪ mʌst əv bɪn sɛn baɪ ʌðɝz ə ðə tʃoʊzən. ɪf ðə tʃoʊzən lʊk, kən jə stɪl seɪ ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ?" ʃi wəd nɑt si. ɪf ə θɪŋ kəd nɑt bi faʊnd, ðə moʊst ɑbviəs ɹizən wɑz ðəɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ.

"Moghedien was wrong." Falion watched shock widen the other woman's eyes. The Chosen were only people. Learning that lesson had stunned Falion too, but some refused to learn. The Chosen were vastly stronger, infinitely more knowledgeable, and quite possibly they had already received the reward of immortality, but by all evidence they schemed and fought each other as hard as two Murandians with one blanket. Ispan's shock quickly gave way to anger. "There are others looking. Would they all look for nothing? There are Friends of the Dark looking; they must have been sent by others of the Chosen. If the Chosen look, can you still say there is nothing?" She would not see. If a thing could not be found, the most obvious reason was that it was not there.

fæljən weɪɾəd. ɪspæn wɑz nɑt stupəd, oʊnli ɔstʃɹʌk, ən fæljən dɪd bɪliv ɪn meɪkɪŋ pipəl titʃ ðɛmsɛlvz wʌt ðeɪ ʃəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bi əwɛɹ ʌv. leɪzi maɪnz niɾəd tə bi ɛksɝsaɪzd.

Falion waited. Ispan was not stupid, only awestruck, and Falion did believe in making people teach themselves what they should already be aware of. Lazy minds needed to be exercised.

ɪspæn peɪst, swɪʃɪŋ əɹ skɝts ən fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə dʌst ən oʊl kɑbwɛbz. "ðɪs pleɪs smɛlz. ən ɪts fɪlθi!" ʃi ʃʌɾɝəd əz ə lɑɹdʒ blæk kɑkɹoʊtʃ wɛn skɪɾɝɪŋ ʌp ðə wɔl. ðə ɡloʊ sɝaʊndəɾ əɹ fəɹ ə moʊmənt; ə floʊ skwɑʃt ðə biɾəl wɪð ə pɑpɪŋ saʊnd. meɪkɪŋ ə feɪs, ɪspæn waɪpt əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ skɝts əz ɪf ʃi hæd juzd əm ɪnstɛɾ ə ðə paʊɝ. ʃi hæɾ ə dɛləkət stʌmək, ðoʊ fɔɹtʃənətli nɑt wən ʃi kəd ɹimuv hɝsɛlf fɹəm ði æktʃəwəl did. "aɪ wɪl nɑt ɹipɔɹt ðə feɪljɝ tə wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən, fæljən. ʃi wəd meɪk əs ɛnvi liɑnʒɹɪn, jɛs?"

Ispan paced, swishing her skirts and frowning at the dust and old cobwebs. "This place smells. And it is filthy!" She shuddered as a large black cockroach went skittering up the wall. The glow surrounded her for a moment; a flow squashed the beetle with a popping sound. Making a face, Ispan wiped her hands on her skirts as if she had used them instead of the Power. She had a delicate stomach, though fortunately not when she could remove herself from the actual deed. "I will not report the failure to one of the Chosen, Falion. She would make us envy Liandrin, yes?"

fæljən dɪd nɑt kwaɪt ʃɪvɝ. ʃi dɪd, haʊɛvɝ, kɹɔs ðə beɪsmən ən pɔɹ hɝsɛlf ə kʌp ə plʌm pʌntʃ. ðə plʌmz hæd bɪn oʊld, ən ðə pʌntʃ wɑz tu swit, bʌɾ əɹ hænz ɹɪmeɪn stɛɾi. fɪɹ ə mɑɡiɾin wɑz pɝfəkli sɛnsəbəl, bʌt jildɪŋ tə fɪɹ wɑz nɑt. pɝhæps ðə wʊmən wɑz dɛd. ʃʊɹli ʃi wʊɾə sʌmən əm baɪ naʊ ɛls, əɹ snætʃt əm slipɪŋ ɪndə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ əɡɛn tə tɛl əɹ waɪ ðeɪ hæd nɑt jɛt kæɹiɾ aʊɾ əɹ kəmænz. əntɪl ʃi sɔ ə bɑɾi, ðoʊ, ði oʊnli lɑdʒɪkəl tʃɔɪs wɑz tə kəntɪnju əz ɪf mɑɡiɾin wəɾ əpɪɹ ɛni moʊmənt. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə weɪ."

Falion did not quite shiver. She did, however, cross the basement and pour herself a cup of plum punch. The plums had been old, and the punch was too sweet, but her hands remained steady. Fear of Moghedien was perfectly sensible, but yielding to fear was not. Perhaps the woman was dead. Surely she would have summoned them by now else, or snatched them sleeping into Tel'aran'rhiod again to tell her why they had not yet carried out her commands. Until she saw a body, though, the only logical choice was to continue as if Moghedien would appear any moment. "There is a way."

"haʊ? pʊɾ ɛvɹi waɪz wʊmən ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ tə ðə kwɛstʃən? haʊ mɛni ɑɹ ðɛɹ? ə hʌnʒɹəd? tu hʌnʒɹəd pɝhæps? ðə sɪstɝz ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, ðeɪ wəd noʊɾəs ðɪs, aɪ θɪŋk."

"How? Put every Wise Woman in Ebou Dar to the question? How many are there? A hundred? Two hundred perhaps? The sisters in the Tarasin Palace, they would notice this, I think."

"fɝɡɛt jəɹ dʒɹimz ʌv oʊnɪŋ ə sɑŋɡɹil, ɪspæn. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ lɔŋ-hɪɾən stɔɹ haʊs, noʊ sikɹət beɪsmən bɪniθ ə pæləs." fæljən spoʊk ɪn kul, mɛʒɝd toʊnz, pɝhæps mɔɹ mɛʒɝd ðə mɔɹ ædʒəteɪɾəd ɪspæn bɪkeɪm. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz ɛndʒɔɪd mɛzmɝaɪzɪŋ ə klæs ə nɑvəsɪz wɪð ðə saʊn ə hɝ vɔɪs. "ɔlmoʊst ɔl ə ðə waɪz wɪmən ɑɹ waɪldɝz, haɪli ənlaɪkli tə noʊ wʌt wi wɪʃ tə lɝn. noʊ waɪldɝ əz ɛvɝ bɪn faʊn kipɪŋ ən æŋɡɹil, mʌtʃ lɛs ə sɑŋɡɹil, ən ðeɪ ʃʊɹli wʊɾə bɪn faʊnd. ɑn ðə kɑntʃɹɛɹi, baɪ ɛvɹi ɹɛkɝd, ə waɪldɝ u dɪskʌvɝz ɛni ɑbʒɛkt taɪd tə ðə paʊɝ ɹɪdz hɝsɛlf ʌv ɪɾ əz sun əz pɑsəbəl, fəɹ fɪɹ ʌv ətʃɹæktɪŋ ðə ɹæθ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. wɪmən u ɑɹ pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, sim nɑt tə hæv ðə seɪm fɪɹ. əz jə wɛl noʊ, wən ðeɪ ɑɹ sɝtʃt bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ, fʊli wʌn ɪn θɹi hæz səkɹiɾəd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ pɝsən, ən æktʃəwəl əbdʒɛkt ə ðə paʊɝ əɹ sʌmθɪŋ ʃi bɪlivz ɪz wʌn. ʌv ðə fju waɪz wɪmən u kwɑləfaɪ ət pɹɛzənt, kɔli wɑz ðə pɝfək tʃɔɪs. wən ʃi wɑz pʊɾ aʊt fɔɹ jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə stil ə smɔl tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ə jusləs θɪŋ ðət meɪks ɪmədʒəz ə flaʊɝz ən ðə saʊn ʌv ə wɔɾɝfɔl, bʌt stɪl ən ɑbʒɛkt taɪd tə seɪaɪdɑɹ. ən ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə dɪskʌvɝ ɔl ði ʌðɝ nɑvəsɪz' sikɹəts, səksiɾɪŋ mɔɹ ɔfən ðən nɑt. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ivən ə sɪŋɡəl æŋɡɹil ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, nɑt tə spik ʌv ə væst stɔɹ haʊs, dʒju θɪŋk ʃi cʊɾə bɪn fɔɹ jɪɹz hɪɹ wɪθaʊt loʊkeɪɾɪŋ ɪt?"

"Forget your dreams of owning a sa'angreal, Ispan. There is no long-hidden store house, no secret basement beneath a palace." Falion spoke in cool, measured tones, perhaps more measured the more agitated Ispan became. She had always enjoyed mesmerizing a class of novices with the sound of her voice. "Almost all of the Wise Women are wilders, highly unlikely to know what we wish to learn. No wilder has ever been found keeping an angreal, much less a sa'angreal, and they surely would have been found. On the contrary, by every record, a wilder who discovers any object tied to the Power rids herself of it as soon as possible, for fear of attracting the wrath of the White Tower. Women who are put out of the Tower, on the other hand, seem not to have the same fear. As you well know, when they are searched before leaving, fully one in three has secreted something about her person, an actual object of the Power or something she believes is one. Of the few Wise Women who qualify at present, Callie was the perfect choice. When she was put out four years ago, she tried to steal a small ter'angreal. A useless thing that makes images of flowers and the sound of a waterfall, but still an object tied to saidar. And she tried to discover all the other novices' secrets, succeeding more often than not. If there was even a single angreal in Ebou Dar, not to speak of a vast store house, do you think she could have been four years here without locating it?"

"aɪ də wɛɹ ðə ʃɔl, fæljən," ɪspæn sɛd wɪð ɪkstʃɹɔɹɾənɛɹi æspɹəɾi. "æn aɪ də noʊ ɔl ə ðəɾ əz wɛl əz ju. jə sɛd ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ weɪ. wʌt weɪ?" ʃi sɪmpli wəd nɑɾ əplaɪ hɝ bɹeɪn.

"I do wear the shawl, Falion," Ispan said with extraordinary asperity. "And I do know all of that as well as you. You said there was another way. What way?" She simply would not apply her brain.

"wʌt wəd pliz mɑɡiɾin əz ɡɹeɪtli əz ðə kæʃ?" ɪspæn sɪmpli stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, tæpɪŋ əɹ fʊt. "nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə, ɪspæn. mɑɡiɾin əbændən əs tə ɡoʊ tʃeɪsɪŋ æftɝ hɝ, bʌɾ ɑbviəsli ʃi ɪskeɪp sʌmhaʊ. ɪf wi ɡɪv nɪneɪiv - ən ðə tʃɹəkənd ɡɝl, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ - tə mɑɡiɾin, ʃi wəd fɝɡɪv əs ə hʌnʒɹəd sɑŋɡɹil." wɪtʃ klɪɹli dɛmənstʃɹeɪɾəd ðət ðə tʃoʊzən kəd bi ɪɹæʃənəl, ʌv kɔɹs. ɪt wɑz bɛst, ʌv kɔɹs, tə bi ɪkstʃɹimli kɛɹfəl wɪð ðoʊz u wɝ boʊθ ɪɹæʃənəl ən mɔɹ paʊɝfəl ðən ju. ɪspæn wɑz nɑt mɔɹ paʊɝfəl.

"What would please Moghedien as greatly as the cache?" Ispan simply stared at her, tapping her foot. "Nynaeve al'Meara, Ispan. Moghedien abandoned us to go chasing after her, but obviously she escaped somehow. If we give Nynaeve - and the Trakand girl, for that matter - to Moghedien, she would forgive us a hundred sa'angreal." Which clearly demonstrated that the Chosen could be irrational, of course. It was best, of course, to be extremely careful with those who were both irrational and more powerful than you. Ispan was not more powerful.

"wi ʃʊɾə kɪld əɹ əz aɪ wɑntəd, wən ʃi fɝst əpɪɹd," ʃi spæt. weɪvɪŋ əɹ hænz, ʃi stɔkt ʌp ən daʊn, ɡɹaɪm kɹʌntʃɪŋ laʊdli bɪniθ əɹ slɪpɝz. "jɛs, jɛs, aɪ noʊ. əɹ sɪstɝz ɪn ðə pæləs, ðeɪ maɪɾ əv bɪkʌm səspɪʃəs. wi də nɑt wɪʃ tə dʒɹɔ ðɛɹ aɪz. bʌɾ əv jə fɝɡɑɾən tæntʃəkoʊ? ən tiɹ? wɛɹ ðoʊz tu ɡɝlz əpɪɹ, dɪzæstɝ fɑloʊz. mi, aɪ θɪŋk ɪf wi kænɑt kɪl ðɛm, wi ʃəd ɹɪmeɪn əz fɑɹ fɹəm nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə ən ɪleɪn tʃɹəkən əz wi kæn. əz fɑɹ əz wi kæn!"

"We should have killed her as I wanted, when she first appeared," she spat. Waving her hands, she stalked up and down, grime crunching loudly beneath her slippers. "Yes, yes, I know. Our sisters in the palace, they might have become suspicious. We do not wish to draw their eyes. But have you forgotten Tanchico? And Tear? Where those two girls appear, disaster follows. Me, I think if we cannot kill them, we should remain as far from Nynaeve al'Meara and Elayne Trakand as we can. As far as we can!"

"kɑm jɝsɛlf, ɪspæn. kɑm jɝsɛlf." ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, fæljənz suðɪŋ toʊn oʊnli sim tə ædʒəteɪt ði ʌðɝ wʊmən mɔɹ, bʌt fæljən wɑz kɑnfəɾənt. lɑdʒɪk mʌs pɹɪveɪl oʊvɝ ɪmoʊʃən.

"Calm yourself, Ispan. Calm yourself." If anything, Falion's soothing tone only seemed to agitate the other woman more, but Falion was confident. Logic must prevail over emotion.

sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ən ʌpɛndəd bæɹəl ɪn ðə spɑɹs kulnəs ʌv ə nɛɹoʊ, ʃeɪɾɪd æli, hi stʌɾid ðə haʊs əkɹɔs ðə bɪzi stʃɹit. sʌɾənli hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz tʌtʃɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ əɡɛn. hi dɪd nɑɾ əv ə hɛdeɪk, bʌɾ ɪz hɛd fɛlt . . . pəkjuljɝ . . . səmtaɪmz. moʊst ɔfən wən i θɔɾ ʌv wʌɾ i kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ.

Sitting on an upended barrel in the sparse coolness of a narrow, shaded alley, he studied the house across the busy street. Suddenly he realized he was touching his head again. He did not have a headache, but his head felt . . . peculiar . . . sometimes. Most often when he thought of what he could not remember.

θɹi stɔɹiz ʌv waɪt plæstɝ, ðə haʊs bɪlɔŋ tə ə ɡoʊldsmɪθ u səpoʊzədli wɑz biɪŋ vɪzəɾəd baɪ tu fɹɛnz ʃi hæd mɛɾ ɑn ə dʒɝni nɔɹθ səm jɪɹz əɡoʊ. ðə fɹɛnz hæɾ oʊnli bɪn ɡlɪmpst ɑn ɝaɪvəl ən nɑt sin sɪns. faɪndɪŋ ðəɾ aʊt hæd bɪn izi, faɪndɪŋ aʊt ðeɪ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ oʊnli ə tʃɹaɪfəl mɔɹ dɪfəkəlt.

Three stories of white plaster, the house belonged to a goldsmith who supposedly was being visited by two friends she had met on a journey north some years ago. The friends had only been glimpsed on arrival and not seen since. Finding that out had been easy, finding out they were Aes Sedai only a trifle more difficult.

ə lin jʌŋ mæn ɪn ə tɔɹn vɛst, wɪslɪŋ ɪz weɪ daʊn ðə stʃɹit wɪð noʊ ɡʊɾ ɑn ɪz maɪnd, pɔzd wən i ɡlɪmpst ɪm sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə bæɹəl. hɪz koʊɾ ən ɪz loʊkeɪʃən ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz - ən ðə ɹɛst ə hɪm, hi ədmɪɾəd ɹufəli - pɹɑbli lʊk tɛmptɪŋ. hi ɹitʃt ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt. hɪz hænz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ pəzɛs ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ əɹ flɛksəbɪləɾi fəɹ sɔɹdwɝk, bʌt ðə tu lɔŋ naɪvz i hæd kæɹid fəɹ wɛl oʊvɝ θɝɾi jɪɹz hæd sɝpɹaɪz mɔɹ ðən wʌn sɔɝdzmən. meɪbi sʌmθɪŋ ʃoʊɾ ɪn ɪz aɪz, kəz ðə lin jʌŋ mæn θɔt bɛɾɝ ʌv ɪɾ ən wɪsəld ɪz weɪ ɑn.

A lean young man in a torn vest, whistling his way down the street with no good on his mind, paused when he glimpsed him sitting on the barrel. His coat and his location in the shadows - and the rest of him, he admitted ruefully - probably looked tempting. He reached under his coat. His hands no longer possessed the strength or flexibility for swordwork, but the two long knives he had carried for well over thirty years had surprised more than one swordsman. Maybe something showed in his eyes, because the lean young man thought better of it and whistled his way on.

bɪsaɪd ðə haʊs, ðə ɡeɪt ðət lɛd bæk tə ðə ɡoʊldsmɪθs steɪbəl swʌŋ oʊpən, ən tu bɝli mɛn əpɪɹd pʊʃɪŋ ə bæɹoʊ paɪl haɪ wɪð sɔɪl stʃɹɔ ən mʌk. wʌt wɝ ðeɪ ʌp tə? ɑɹnən ən næd wɝ hɑɹdli ðə lædz tə bi mʌkɪŋ aʊt steɪbəlz.

Beside the house, the gate that led back to the goldsmith's stable swung open, and two burly men appeared pushing a barrow piled high with soiled straw and muck. What were they up to? Arnin and Nad were hardly the lads to be mucking out stables.

hi wəd steɪ hɪɹ əntɪl dɑɹk, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd, ðən si wɛðɝ i kəd faɪn kæɹaɪɾɪnz pɹɪɾi lɪɾəl kɪlɝ əɡɛn.

He would stay here until dark, he decided, then see whether he could find Carridin's pretty little killer again.

wʌns əɡɛn i pʊld ɪz hæn daʊn fɹəm ɪz hɛd. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, hi wəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ. hi dɪd nɑɾ əv mʌtʃ taɪm lɛft, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔl i dɪd hæv. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət mʌtʃ.

Once again he pulled his hand down from his head. Sooner or later, he would remember. He did not have much time left, but it was all he did have. He remembered that much.


tʃæptɝ eɪtin


CHAPTER 18

əz ðə plaʊ bɹeɪks ði ɝθ


As the Plow Breaks the Earth

sizɪŋ seɪɾɪn lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ənnət ðə wɔɹɾ i hæd woʊvən əkɹɔs wʌn kɔɹnɝ ə ði æntəɹum, ɹænd ɹeɪzd ɪz smɔl sɪlvɝ-maʊntəd kʌp ən sɛd, "mɔɹ ti." luz θɝɪn mʌɾɝd æŋɡɹəli ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd.

Seizing saidin long enough to unknot the ward he had woven across one corner of the anteroom, Rand raised his small silver-mounted cup and said, "More tea." Lews Therin muttered angrily in the back of his head.

kɑɹv tʃɛɹz hɛvi wɪð ɡɪl stʊɾ ɪn pɛɹd laɪnz tə iðɝ saɪɾ ʌv ə ɡoʊldən ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn, tu peɪsɪz waɪd, sɛɾ ɪndə ðə pɑlɪʃt stoʊn flɔɹ, ən ənʌðɝ tɔl tʃɛɹ soʊ ɡɪldɪɾ ɪt simd ɪntaɪɝli ɡoʊl tɑpt ə smɔl deɪz ðət wɑz dʒʌst əz ɪlæbɹət, bʌɾ i sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ə kɑɹpət spɹɛd fəɹ ði əkeɪʒən, ɡɹin ən ɡoʊld ən blu ɪn ə tɛɹən meɪz. ðə θɹi klæn tʃifs siɾəd əkɹɔs fɹəm ɪm wʊɾə dɪslaɪkt ɪm ɹəsivɪŋ əm fɹəm ə tʃɛɹ ivən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɔfɝd ðɛɹ oʊn. ðeɪ wɝ ənʌðɝ meɪz, tə bi tʃɹɑd wɛɹəli. hi wɑz ɪn ɪz ʃɝt, slivz pʊʃt ʌp ɪz fɹɑɹmz tə ɪkspoʊz ðə ɹɛd-ænd-ɡoʊl dʒɹæɡən ðət kɝld ɝaʊn itʃ, ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ mɛɾəlɪkli. ði ilmɛnz keɪɾɪnsɝ kʌvɝd ðɛɹz, ɑn ðə lɛft ɑɹm əloʊn. pɝhæps ðə ɹimaɪndɝ ə hu hi wɑz - ðəɾ i tu hæd bɪn tə ɹɪɾiən wən ðə dʒɝni mɛn dɛθ fəɹ moʊs mɛn u ɛntɝd - pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ənnɛsəsɛɹi. pɝhæps.

Carved chairs heavy with gilt stood in paired lines to either side of a golden Rising Sun, two paces wide, set into the polished stone floor, and another tall chair so gilded it seemed entirely gold topped a small dais that was just as elaborate, but he sat cross-legged on a carpet spread for the occasion, green and gold and blue in a Tairen maze. The three clan chiefs seated across from him would have disliked him receiving them from a chair even if they were offered their own. They were another maze, to be trod warily. He was in his shirt, sleeves pushed up his forearms to expose the red-and-gold Dragon that curled around each, glittering metallically. The Aielmen's cadin'sor covered theirs, on the left arm alone. Perhaps the reminder of who he was - that he too had been to Rhuidean when the journey meant death for most men who entered - perhaps it was unnecessary. Perhaps.

ðoʊz θɹi feɪsəz ɡeɪv əweɪ lɪɾəl əz ðeɪ wɑtʃt mɛɹænə kʌm fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ wɛɹ ʃi hæd bɪn sild ɔf. dʒænwɪnz kɹis feɪs cʊɾə bɪn kɑɹv fɹəm oʊld wʊd, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɔlweɪz lʊk ðət weɪ, ən ɪf ɪz blu-ɡɹeɪ aɪz sim stɔɹmi, soʊ dɪd ðeɪ ɔlweɪz tu. ivən ɪz hɛɹ lʊk laɪk stɔɹm klaʊdz. hi wɑz ən ivən-tɛmpɝd mæn, ðoʊ. ɪndɪɹiən ən wʌn-aɪd mændələn maɪɾ əv bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ə sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, ɪksɛp ðət ðɛɹ ənblɪŋkɪŋ ɡeɪzəz fɑloʊd hɝ. luz θɝɪn sʌɾənli wɛn saɪlənt, əz ɪf i tu wɑtʃt, θɹu ɹændz aɪz.

Those three faces gave away little as they watched Merana come from the corner where she had been sealed off. Janwin's creased face could have been carved from old wood, but it always looked that way, and if his blue-gray eyes seemed stormy, so did they always too. Even his hair looked like storm clouds. He was an even-tempered man, though. Indirian and one-eyed Mandelain might have been thinking of something else, except that their unblinking gazes followed her. Lews Therin suddenly went silent, as if he too watched, through Rand's eyes.

mɛɹænəz eɪdʒləs fitʃɝz ɹɪvild ivən lɛs ðən ðə klæn tʃifs'. smuðɪŋ əɹ peɪl ɡɹeɪ skɝts ʌndɝ, ʃi nɛl bɪsaɪd ɹænd ən lɪftəd ðə tipɑt. ə mæsɪv bɔl ʌv ɡoʊld-wɑʃt sɪlvɝ, wɪð lɛpɝdz fəɹ fiɾ ən hændəl ən ənʌðɝ kɹaʊtʃt ɑn ðə lɪd, ɪt ɹikwaɪɝd boʊθ ə hɝ hænz ən weɪvɝɾ ə lɪɾəl əz ʃi kɛɹfəli fɪld ɹændz kʌp. hɝ mænɝ sim tə seɪ ʃi dɪd ðɪs kəz ʃi wɑntəd tə, fəɹ ɹizənz ə hɝ oʊn ðət nʌn ə ðɛm kəd bɪɡɪn tə ʌndɝstænd; hɝ mænɝ ʃaʊɾəd ɛɛs sədaɪ laʊɾɝ ðən əɹ feɪs dɪd. wɑz ðət tə ðə ɡʊd, əɹ ðə bæd?

Merana's ageless features revealed even less than the clan chiefs'. Smoothing her pale gray skirts under, she knelt beside Rand and lifted the teapot. A massive ball of gold-washed silver, with leopards for feet and handle and another crouched on the lid, it required both of her hands and wavered a little as she carefully filled Rand's cup. Her manner seemed to say she did this because she wanted to, for reasons of her own that none of them could begin to understand; her manner shouted Aes Sedai louder than her face did. Was that to the good, or the bad?

"aɪ də nɑɾ əlaʊ ðɛm tə tʃænəl wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən," hi sɛd. ðə klæn tʃifs kɛp saɪlənt. mɛɹænə ɹoʊz ən muv tə nil bɪsaɪɾ itʃ ɪn tɝn. mændələn kʌvɝɾ ɪz kʌp wɪð ə bɹɔd hæn tə ɪndəkeɪɾ i wɑntəd noʊ mɔɹ. ði ʌðɝ tu hɛld aʊt ðɛɹz, blu-ɡɹeɪ aɪz ən ɡɹin əlaɪk stʌɾiɪŋ hɝ. wʌd ðeɪ si? wʌt mɔɹ kəɾ i du?

"I do not allow them to channel without permission," he said. The clan chiefs kept silent. Merana rose and moved to kneel beside each in turn. Mandelain covered his cup with a broad hand to indicate he wanted no more. The other two held out theirs, blue-gray eyes and green alike studying her. What did they see? What more could he do?

ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ ðə hɛvi tipɑɾ ɑn ðə θɪk lɛpɝd-hændəl tʃɹeɪ, ʃi ɹɪmeɪn ɑn əɹ niz. "meɪ aɪ sɝv maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɪn ɛni weɪ ɛls?"

Replacing the heavy teapot on the thick leopard-handled tray, she remained on her knees. "May I serve my Lord Dragon in any way else?"

hɝ vɔɪs wɑz sɛlf-pəzɛʃən ɪtsɛlf, bʌɾ æftɝ i moʊʃən əɹ bæk tə hɝ kɔɹnɝ, æftɝ ʃi hæd ɹɪzən ən tɝnd, slɪm hænz klʌtʃt əɾ əɹ skɝts fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. jɛt ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn kəz tɝnɪŋ bɹɔɾ əɹ tə feɪs dæʃivə ən nɛɹɪʃmə. ðə tu æʃəmən - tə bi pɹɪsaɪs, nɛɹɪʃmə wɑz stɪl oʊnli ə soʊlʒɝ, ðə loʊəs lɛvəl ʌv æʃəmən, wɪð niðɝ ðə sɔɹd nɔɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɑn ɪz kɑlɝ - ði æʃəmən stʊɾ ɪmpæsɪvli bɪtwin tu ʌv ðə tɔl ɡoʊldən-fɹeɪmd mɪɹɝz ðət laɪn ðə wɔlz. ət list, ðə jʌŋɡɝ mæn lʊkt ɪmpæsɪv, ət fɝst ɡlæns. θʌmz tʌk bɪhaɪn ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt, hi ɪɡnɔɹd mɛɹænə ən peɪd lɪɾəl mɔɹ ətɛnʃən tə ɹænd əɹ ði ilmɛn, jɛɾ əɾ ə sɛkənd ɡlæns jə sɔ ðəɾ ɪz dɑɹk tu-bɪɡ aɪz nɛvɝ ɹɛstəd, əz ɪf i ɪkspɛktəd ði ʌnɪkspɛktɪd tə lip aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ ɛni moʊmənt. ən u kəd seɪ ɪt wəd nɑt? dæʃivə əpɪɹd tə hæv ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ðə klaʊdz; hɪz lɪps muv saʊnləsli, ən i blɪŋkt ən fɹaʊn ət nʌθɪŋ.

Her voice was self-possession itself, but after he motioned her back to her corner, after she had risen and turned, slim hands clutched at her skirts for an instant. Yet that might have been because turning brought her to face Dashiva and Narishma. The two Asha'man - to be precise, Narishma was still only a soldier, the lowest level of Asha'man, with neither the sword nor the Dragon on his collar - the Asha'man stood impassively between two of the tall golden-framed mirrors that lined the walls. At least, the younger man looked impassive, at first glance. Thumbs tucked behind his sword belt, he ignored Merana and paid little more attention to Rand or the Aielmen, yet at a second glance you saw that his dark too-big eyes never rested, as if he expected the unexpected to leap out of the air any moment. And who could say it would not? Dashiva appeared to have his head in the clouds; his lips moved soundlessly, and he blinked and frowned at nothing.

luz θɝɪn snɑɹəld wən ɹænd lʊkt ət ði æʃəmən, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz mɛɹænə hu ɑkjəpaɪd ðə dɛd mæn ɪnsaɪd ɹændz hɛd. oʊnli ə ful θɪŋks ə laɪən əɹ ə wʊmən kən tʃɹuli bi teɪmd.

Lews Therin snarled when Rand looked at the Asha'man, but it was Merana who occupied the dead man inside Rand's head. Only a fool thinks a lion or a woman can truly be tamed.

ɪɹɪɾəbli, ɹænd səpɹɛs ðə vɔɪs tə ə mjuɾɪd bʌz. luz θɝɪn kəd bɹeɪk θɹu, bʌt nɑt wɪθaʊɾ ɛfɝt. ɡɹæbɪŋ hoʊld ə seɪɾɪn, hi ɹɪwʌv ðə wɔɹd ðət ʃʌt mɛɹænə əweɪ fɹəm ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz. ɹilisɪŋ ðə sɔɹs əɡɛn ɪnkɹist ɪz ɪɹɪteɪʃən, ðə hɪsɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd, ðə wɔɾɝ dʒɹɑps ɑn ɹɛd koʊlz. ən ɛkoʊ pʌlsɪŋ ɪn taɪm wɪð luz θɝɪnz mæd, dɪstən ɹeɪdʒ.

Irritably, Rand suppressed the voice to a muted buzz. Lews Therin could break through, but not without effort. Grabbing hold of saidin, he rewove the ward that shut Merana away from their voices. Releasing the Source again increased his irritation, the hissing in his head, the water drops on red coals. An echo pulsing in time with Lews Therin's mad, distant rage.

mɛɹænə stʊd bɪhaɪn ðə bæɹiɝ ʃi kəd niðɝ si nɔɹ fil, hɛd haɪ ən hænz foʊldəɾ əɾ əɹ weɪst əz ɪf ə ʃɔl wɝ lupt oʊvɝ əɹ ɑɹmz. ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hɝ toʊneɪlz. ʃi wɑtʃt ɪm ən ðə klæn tʃifs wɪð kul aɪz, laɪt bɹaʊn flɛkt wɪð jɛloʊ. maɪ sɪstɝz də nɑɾ ɔl ɹilaɪz haʊ vɛɹi mʌtʃ wi nid ju, ʃi hæd toʊld ɪm ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ ɪn ðɪs vɛɹi ɹum, bʌɾ ɔl ʌv əs u swɔɹ wɪl də wʌtɛvɝ jə æsk ðət wəd nɑt vaɪəleɪt ðə θɹi oʊðz. hi hæd dʒʌst wækənd wən ʃi keɪm wɪð sɔɹɪliə ɛskɔɹɾɪŋ hɝ. niðɝ sim tə kɛɹ əɾ ɔl ðəɾ i wɑz stɪl ɪn ə ɹoʊb, wɪð oʊnli wʌn baɪt teɪkən fɹəm ɪz bɹɛkfəs bɹɛd. aɪ hæv mɔɹ ðən ə lɪɾəl skɪl ɪn nɪɡoʊʃieɪʃən ən miɾieɪʃən. maɪ sɪstɝz əv ʌðɝ skɪlz. lɛɾ əs sɝv ju, əz wi plɛdʒd. lemi sɝv ju. wi nid ju, bʌt juv səm niɾ ʌv ʌs, tu.

Merana stood behind the barrier she could neither see nor feel, head high and hands folded at her waist as if a shawl were looped over her arms. Aes Sedai to her toenails. She watched him and the clan chiefs with cool eyes, light brown flecked with yellow. My sisters do not all realize how very much we need you, she had told him this morning in this very room, but all of us who swore will do whatever you ask that would not violate the Three Oaths. He had just wakened when she came with Sorilea escorting her. Neither seemed to care at all that he was still in a robe, with only one bite taken from his breakfast bread. I have more than a little skill in negotiation and mediation. My sisters have other skills. Let us serve you, as we pledged. Let me serve you. We need you, but you have some need of us, too.

ɛvɝ pɹɛzənt, ɑlɑnə leɪ nɛsəld ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz bɹeɪn. ʃi wɑz wipɪŋ əɡɛn. hi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ʃi wɛp soʊ ɔfən. hi hæd fɔɹbɪɾən əɹ tə kʌm nɪɹ ɪm ənlɛs sʌmənd, əɹ liv əɹ ɹum wɪθaʊɾ ən ɛskɔɹɾ ə meɪɾənz - ðə sɪstɝz u hæd swɔɹn tə hɪm hæd bɪn faʊn ɹumz læs naɪt, ɪn ðə pæləs wɛɹ i kəd kip ən aɪ ɑn əm - bʌɾ i hæd sɛns tɪɹz fɹəm ðə moʊmənt ʃi bɑndəd hɪm, tɪɹz ən ə ɹɔ ɡɹif laɪk biɪŋ ɹɪp baɪ klɔz. səmtaɪmz ɪt wɑz lɛs, səmtaɪmz mɔɹ, jɛɾ ɔlweɪz ðɛɹ. ɑlɑnə ɔlsoʊ hæd toʊld ɪm i niɾəd ðə swɔɹn sɪstɝz, skɹimd ɪɾ əɾ ɪm faɪnəli, wɪð əɹ feɪs ɹɛɾ ən tɪɹz ɹoʊlɪŋ daʊn əɹ tʃiks, bɪfɔɹ lɪɾɝəli ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ɪz pɹɛzəns. ən ʃi hæd spoʊkən ə sɝvɪŋ, tu, ðoʊ hi daʊɾɪd ðət mɛɹænəz pɹɛzən tæsks wɝ wʌɾ iðɝ hæɾ ɪn maɪnd. pɝhæps səm sɔɹɾ ə lɪvɝi wəd meɪk ɪt klɪɹ?

Ever present, Alanna lay nestled in a corner of his brain. She was weeping again. He could not understand why she wept so often. He had forbidden her to come near him unless summoned, or leave her room without an escort of Maidens - the sisters who had sworn to him had been found rooms last night, in the Palace where he could keep an eye on them - but he had sensed tears from the moment she bonded him, tears and a raw grief like being ripped by claws. Sometimes it was less, sometimes more, yet always there. Alanna also had told him he needed the sworn sisters, screamed it at him finally, with her face red and tears rolling down her cheeks, before literally running from his presence. And she had spoken of serving, too, though he doubted that Merana's present tasks were what either had in mind. Perhaps some sort of livery would make it clear?

ðə klæn tʃifs wɑtʃt mɛɹænə wɑtʃ ðɛm. nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ðə flɪkɝ ʌv ən aɪlæʃ bɪtʃɹeɪd ðɛɹ θɔts.

The clan chiefs watched Merana watch them. Not so much as the flicker of an eyelash betrayed their thoughts.

"ðə waɪz wʌnz əv toʊl jə wɛɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stænd," ɹænd sɛd blʌnli. sɔɹɪliə hæd toʊld ɪm ðeɪ nu, bʌt ðə fækt wʊɾə bɪn klɪɹ fɹəm ðə læk ə sɝpɹaɪz wən ðeɪ fɝst sɔ mɛɹænə fɛtʃ ən kɝtsi. "juv sin əɹ bɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹeɪ ən pɔɹ jəɹ ti. juv sin əɹ kʌm ən ɡoʊ əz aɪ seɪ. ɪf jə wɑnt, əl əv əɹ dæns ə dʒɪɡ." kənvɪnsɪŋ ði il ðəɾ i wɑz nɑɾ ɑn ði ɛn ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ liʃ wɑz ðə moʊs niɾəd sɝvəs ɛni ʌv ðə sɪstɝz kəd də hɪm ɹaɪt naʊ. hi wəɾ əv əm ɔl duɪŋ dʒɪɡz, ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi.

"The Wise Ones have told you where the Aes Sedai stand," Rand said bluntly. Sorilea had told him they knew, but the fact would have been clear from the lack of surprise when they first saw Merana fetch and curtsy. "You've seen her bring the tray and pour your tea. You've seen her come and go as I say. If you want, I'll have her dance a jig." Convincing the Aiel that he was not on the end of an Aes Sedai leash was the most needed service any of the sisters could do him right now. He would have them all doing jigs, if necessary.

mændələn ədʒʌstəd ðə ɡɹeɪ-ɡɹin pætʃ oʊvɝ ɪz ɹaɪɾ aɪ, ðə weɪ hi dɪd wən i wɑntəɾ ə moʊmən tə θɪŋk. ə θɪk pʌkɝd skɑɹ ɹæn ʌp ɪz fɔɹhɛd fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə lɛðɝ pætʃ ən hæfweɪ əkɹɔs ɪz moʊsli bɔl hɛd. wən i faɪnəli spoʊk, ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə lɪɾəl lɛs blʌn ðən ɹænd. "sʌm seɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪl də ɛniθɪŋ tə hæv wʌt ʃi wɑns."

Mandelain adjusted the gray-green patch over his right eye, the way he did when he wanted a moment to think. A thick puckered scar ran up his forehead from behind the leather patch and halfway across his mostly bald head. When he finally spoke, it was only a little less blunt than Rand. "Some say an Aes Sedai will do anything to have what she wants."

ɪndɪɹiən loʊɝd hɛvi waɪɾ aɪbɹaʊz ən pɪɹd daʊn ɪz lɔŋ noʊz əɾ ɪz ti. ʌv oʊnli ævɝɪdʒ haɪt fəɹ ən il mæn, hi wɑz ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ɹænd baɪ hæf ə hænd, jɛɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪm sim lɔŋ. ðə hiɾ ə ðə weɪst əpɪɹd tə hæv mɛltəɾ əweɪ ɛvɹi spɛɹ aʊns ə flɛʃ ən ə fju mɔɹ bɪsaɪdz. hɪz tʃikboʊnz stʊɾ aʊt ʃɑɹp, ən ɪz aɪz wɝ ɛmɹəlz sɛɾ ɪn keɪvz. "aɪ də nɑt laɪk spikɪŋ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ." hɪz dip, ɹɪtʃ vɔɪs wɑz ɔlweɪz ə ʃɑk, kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðət ɡɔn feɪs. "wʌɾ ɪz dʌn, ɪz dʌn. lɛt ðə waɪz wʌnz dil wɪð ðɛm."

Indirian lowered heavy white eyebrows and peered down his long nose at his tea. Of only average height for an Aiel man, he was shorter than Rand by half a hand, yet everything about him seemed long. The heat of the Waste appeared to have melted away every spare ounce of flesh and a few more besides. His cheekbones stood out sharp, and his eyes were emeralds set in caves. "I do not like speaking of Aes Sedai." His deep, rich voice was always a shock, coming from that gaunt face. "What is done, is done. Let the Wise Ones deal with them."

"bɛɾɝ tə spik ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ dɑɡz," dʒænwɪn sɛd maɪldli. wɪtʃ wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz ɡɹeɪɾ ə ʃɑk, kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ɪz fɪɹs feɪs. "wɪðɪn ə fju mʌnθs, lɛs ðən hæf ə jɪɹ ət moʊst, ɛvɹi ʃeɪɾoʊ hu kən bi wɪl bi dɛd - əɹ meɪd ɡeɪʃeɪn." dʒʌs kəz ɪz vɔɪs wɑz sɑf dɪd nɑt min i wɑz. ði ʌðɝ tu nɑɾəd; mændələn smaɪld iɡɝli.

"Better to speak of the Shaido dogs," Janwin said mildly. Which was almost as great a shock, coming from his fierce face. "Within a few months, less than half a year at most, every Shaido who can be will be dead - or made gai'shain." Just because his voice was soft did not mean he was. The other two nodded; Mandelain smiled eagerly.

ðeɪ stɪl simd ʌnkənvɪnst. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hæd bɪn ðə pɹəfɛst ɹizən fəɹ ðɪs miɾɪŋ, ən noʊ lɛs ɪmpɔɹɾənt fəɹ nɑt biɪŋ ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt. nɑɾ ənɪmpɔɹɾənt - ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hæd meɪd tʃɹʌbəl lɔŋ ɪnʌf - dʒʌs nɑɾ ɑn ðə seɪm peɪdʒ wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ɪz bʊk. ðeɪ dɪd pɹɛzən pɹɑbləmz, ðoʊ. θɹi klænz dʒɔɪnɪŋ tɪmoʊlənz maɪæɡoʊmə, ɔlɹɛɾi nɪɹ kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ, maɪt wɛl bi eɪbəl tə də əz dʒænwɪn sɛd, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ ðoʊz u kəd nɑt bi meɪd ɡeɪʃeɪn ən kəd nɑt bi kɪld. səm wɝ mɔɹ kɹɪɾɪkəl ðən ʌðɝz. "wʌɾ ə ðə waɪz wʌnz?" hi æskt.

They still seemed unconvinced. The Shaido had been the professed reason for this meeting, and no less important for not being the most important. Not unimportant - the Shaido had made trouble long enough - just not on the same page with the Aes Sedai in his book. They did present problems, though. Three clans joining Timolan's Miagoma, already near Kinslayer's Dagger, might well be able to do as Janwin said, but there were those who could not be made gai'shain and could not be killed. Some were more critical than others. "What of the Wise Ones?" he asked.

fəɹ ə moʊmən ðɛɹ feɪsəz bɪkeɪm ənɹiɾəbəl; nɑɾ ivən ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd də ðət soʊ wɛl əz il. feɪsɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ dɪd nɑt fɹaɪɾən ðɛm, nɑt wɛɹ ɪt ʃoʊd, ət list; noʊ wʌn kəɾ aʊtʃɹʌn dɛθ, soʊ il bɪlivd, ən ə hʌnʒɹəd ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ə ɹeɪdʒ kəd nɑt meɪk ə loʊn il loʊɝ ðə veɪl wʌns ɹeɪzd. bʌt lɝnɪŋ ðət waɪz wʌnz hæd teɪkən pɑɹɾ ɪn ðə faɪɾɪŋ ət dəməaɪz wɛlz hæd hɪɾ əm laɪk wɑtʃɪŋ ðə sʌn ɹaɪz baɪ naɪɾ ən ðə mun baɪ deɪ ɪn ə blʌd-ɹɛd skaɪ.

For a moment their faces became unreadable; not even Aes Sedai could do that so well as Aiel. Facing the One Power did not frighten them, not where it showed, at least; no one could outrun death, so Aiel believed, and a hundred Aes Sedai in a rage could not make a lone Aiel lower the veil once raised. But learning that Wise Ones had taken part in the fighting at Dumai's Wells had hit them like watching the sun rise by night and the moon by day in a blood-red sky.

"sɑɝɪn tɛlz mi ɔlmoʊst ɔl ə ðə waɪz wʌnz wɪl ɹʌn wɪð ði ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ," ɪndɪɹiən sɛɾ ət læst, ɹɪlʌktənli. sɑɝɪnd wɑz ðə waɪz wʌn u hæd fɑloʊɾ ɪm fɹəm ɹɛd spɹɪŋz, klæn hoʊld ə ðə koʊdʒɹə. əɹ pɝhæps "fɑloʊd" wɑz nɑt ðə ɹaɪt wɝd; waɪz wʌnz sɛldəm dɪd. ɪn ɛni keɪs, moʊst ə ðə koʊdʒɹə waɪz wʌnz, ən ðə ʃiæn ən ðə dɛɹn, wəd ɡoʊ nɔɹθ wɪð ðə spɪɹz. "ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ waɪz wʌnz wɪl bi . . . dɛlt wɪð . . . baɪ waɪz wʌnz." hɪz maʊθ twɪstəd wɪð dɪsɡʌst.

"Sarinde tells me almost all of the Wise Ones will run with the algai'd'siswai," Indirian said at last, reluctantly. Sarinde was the Wise One who had followed him from Red Springs, clan hold of the Codarra. Or perhaps "followed" was not the right word; Wise Ones seldom did. In any case, most of the Codarra Wise Ones, and the Shiande and the Daryne, would go north with the spears. "The Shaido Wise Ones will be . . . dealt with . . . by Wise Ones." His mouth twisted with disgust.

"ɔl θɪŋz tʃeɪnʒ." dʒænwɪnz vɔɪs wɑz ivən sɑftɝ ðən juʒəwəl. hi bɪlivd, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt wɑn tə. waɪz wʌnz teɪkɪŋ pɑɹɾ ɪn bæɾəl vaɪəleɪɾɪd kʌstəm əz oʊld əz ði il.

"All things change." Janwin's voice was even softer than usual. He believed, but he did not want to. Wise Ones taking part in battle violated custom as old as the Aiel.

mændələn sɛɾ ɪz kʌp daʊn wɪð ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾəd kɛɹ. "kɔɹhuən wɪʃɪz tə si dʒɛɹ əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ ðə dʒɹim ɛnz, ən soʊ də aɪ." laɪk beɪl ən ɹəɑɹk, hi hæd tu waɪvz; ði ʌðɝ tʃifs hæɾ oʊnli wʌn itʃ, ɪksɛp tɪmoʊlən, bʌɾ ə wɪɾoʊd tʃif sɛldəm ɹɪmeɪn soʊ lɔŋ. ðə waɪz wʌnz sɔ tə ðəɾ ɪf i dɪd nɑt. "wɪl ɛni ʌv əs ɛvɝ si ðə sʌn ɹaɪz əɡɛn ɪn ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd?"

Mandelain set his cup down with exaggerated care. "Corehuin wishes to see Jair again before the dream ends, and so do I." Like Bael and Rhuarc, he had two wives; the other chiefs had only one each, except Timolan, but a widowed chief seldom remained so long. The Wise Ones saw to that if he did not. "Will any of us ever see the sun rise again in the Three-fold Land?"

"aɪ hoʊp soʊ," ɹænd sɛd sloʊli. əz ðə plaʊ bɹeɪks ði ɝθ ʃæl i bɹeɪk ðə laɪvz ə mɛn, ən ɔl ðət wɑz ʃæl bi kənsumd ɪn ðə faɪɝ ə hɪz aɪz. ðə tʃɹʌmpəts ʌv wɔɹ ʃæl saʊn əɾ ɪz fʊtstɛps, ðə ɹeɪvənz fiɾ əɾ ɪz vɔɪs, ən i ʃæl wɛɹ ə kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz. ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɡeɪv lɪɾəl hoʊp fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp vɪktɝi oʊvɝ ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ən oʊnli ə tʃæns ə ðæt. ðə pɹɑfəsi ʌv ɹɪɾiən, ði il pɹɑfəsi, sɛɾ i wəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðɛm. ðə bliknəs swɛp θɹu ðə klænz kəz ə hɪm ən eɪntʃən kʌstəmz wɝ ɹɪpt əpɑɹt. ivən wɪθaʊt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, smɔl wʌndɝ ɪf səm tʃifs pɑndɝd wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɝ ɹaɪt tə fɑloʊ ɹænd ælθɹ, dʒɹæɡənz ɑn ɪz ɑɹmz əɹ noʊ. "aɪ hoʊp soʊ."

"I hope so," Rand said slowly. As the plow breaks the earth shall he break the lives of men, and all that was shall be consumed in the fire of his eyes. The trumpets of war shall sound at his footsteps, the ravens feed at his voice, and he shall wear a crown of swords. The Prophecies of the Dragon gave little hope for anything except victory over the Dark One, and only a chance of that. The Prophecy of Rhuidean, the Aiel Prophecy, said he would destroy them. The bleakness swept through the clans because of him and ancient customs were ripped apart. Even without the Aes Sedai, small wonder if some chiefs pondered whether they were right to follow Rand al'Thor, Dragons on his arms or no. "I hope so."

"meɪ jə ɔlweɪz faɪnd wɔɾɝ ən ʃeɪd, ɹænd ælθɹ," ɪndɪɹiən sɛd.

"May you always find water and shade, Rand al'Thor," Indirian said.

æftɝ ðeɪ lɛft, ɹænd sæt fɹaʊnɪŋ ɪndə hɪz kʌp, faɪndɪŋ noʊ ænsɝz ɪn ðə dɑɹk ti. faɪnəli hi sɛɾ ɪt bɪsaɪd ðə tʃɹeɪ ən pʊʃt ɪz slivz daʊn. mɛɹænəz aɪz wɝ ɪntɛn ɑn hɪm, əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊl aʊɾ ɪz θɔts. ðəɹ wɑz ə hɪn ʌv ɪmpeɪʃəns əbaʊt hɝ, tu. hi hæd toʊld əɹ tə steɪ ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ ənlɛs ʃi kəd hɪɹ vɔɪsəz. daʊtləs ʃi sɔ noʊ ɹizən waɪ ʃi ʃəd nɑt kʌm aʊt naʊ ðə klæn tʃifs wɝ ɡɔn. kʌm aʊt, ən dɪɡ aʊt wʌt hæd bɪn sɛd.

After they left, Rand sat frowning into his cup, finding no answers in the dark tea. Finally he set it beside the tray and pushed his sleeves down. Merana's eyes were intent on him, as if trying to pull out his thoughts. There was a hint of impatience about her, too. He had told her to stay in the corner unless she could hear voices. Doubtless she saw no reason why she should not come out now the clan chiefs were gone. Come out, and dig out what had been said.

"du jə θɪŋk ðeɪ bɪliv aɪ dæns ɑn ɛɛs sədaɪ stʃɹɪŋz?" hi sɛd.

"Do you think they believe I dance on Aes Sedai strings?" he said.

jʌŋ nɛɹɪʃmə ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. ɪn tʃɹuθ, hi wɑz ə lɪɾəl oʊldɝ ðən ɹænd, bʌɾ i hæd ðə lʊk ʌv ə bɔɪ faɪv əɹ sɪks jɪɹz jʌŋɡɝ. hi ɡlænst ət mɛɹænə əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd ði ænsɝ, ən ʃɪftəɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ənkʌmftəbli. "aɪ . . . də nɑt noʊ, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən."

Young Narishma gave a start. In truth, he was a little older than Rand, but he had the look of a boy five or six years younger. He glanced at Merana as though she had the answer, and shifted his shoulders uncomfortably. "I . . . do not know, my Lord Dragon."

dæʃivə blɪŋkt ən stɑp mɝmɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf. tɪltɪŋ ɪz hɛd, bɝd-laɪk, hi aɪd ɹænd saɪdweɪz. "dʌz ɪt mæɾɝ, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ oʊbeɪ?"

Dashiva blinked and stopped murmuring to himself. Tilting his head, bird-like, he eyed Rand sideways. "Does it matter, so long as they obey?"

"ɪt mæɾɝz," ɹænd sɛd. dæʃivə ʃɹʌɡd, ən nɛɹɪʃmə fɹaʊn θɔtfəli; niðɝ sim tə ʌndɝstænd, jɛt meɪbi nɛɹɪʃmə kəd kʌm tə.

"It matters," Rand said. Dashiva shrugged, and Narishma frowned thoughtfully; neither seemed to understand, yet maybe Narishma could come to.

mæps lɪɾɝd ðə stoʊn flɔɹ bɪhaɪn ðə θɹoʊn ɑn ɪts deɪz, ɹoʊld əɹ foʊldəɾ əɹ spɹɛɾ aʊt wɛɹ i hæd lɛf ðɛm. hi ʃɪftəd səm wɪð ðə toʊ ʌv ɪz but. soʊ mʌtʃ tə bi dʒʌɡəld ət wʌns. nɔɹðɝn kɛɹhin ən ðə maʊntənz kɔl kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ, ən ðə ɹidʒən ɝaʊn ðə sɪɾi. ɪljən ən ðə pleɪnz ə mɑɹeɪɾoʊ aʊt tə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. ði aɪlən ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən ɔl ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ taʊnz ən vɪlədʒəz. ɡildən ən pɑɹɾ ʌv ɑmɑdɪʃiə. muvmən ən kʌlɝ ɪn ɪz hɛd. luz θɝɪn moʊn ən læft ɪn ðə dɪstəns, feɪn mæd mʌɾɝz ə kɪlɪŋ ði æʃəmən, kɪlɪŋ ðə fɔɹseɪkən. kɪlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf. ɑlɑnə stɑpt wipɪŋ, kʌɾɪŋ æŋɡwɪʃ səbdud bɪniθ ə θɪn θɹɛɾ ʌv æŋɡɝ. ɹænd skɹʌbd ɪz hænz θɹu hɪz hɛɹ, pɹɛsɪŋ hɑɹɾ əɡɛnst ɪz tɛmpəlz. wʌt hæɾ ɪt bɪn laɪk tə bi əloʊn ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz oʊn skʌl? hi kəd nɑt ɹikɔl.

Maps littered the stone floor behind the throne on its dais, rolled or folded or spread out where he had left them. He shifted some with the toe of his boot. So much to be juggled at once. Northern Cairhien and the mountains called Kinslayer's Dagger, and the region around the city. Illian and the Plains of Maredo out to Far Madding. The island of Tar Valon and all the surrounding towns and villages. Ghealdan and part of Amadicia. Movement and color in his head. Lews Therin moaned and laughed in the distance, faint mad mutters of killing the Asha'man, killing the Forsaken. Killing himself. Alanna stopped weeping, cutting anguish subdued beneath a thin thread of anger. Rand scrubbed his hands through his hair, pressing hard against his temples. What had it been like to be alone inside his own skull? He could not recall.

wʌn ə ðə tɔl dɔɹz oʊpən tə ədmɪt wʌn ə ðə meɪɾənz u wɝ stændɪŋ ɡɑɹɾ ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ. ɹaɪəlɪn, wɪð vɪvəd jɛloʊ-ɹɛd hɛɹ ən ə ɡɹɪn fəɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, æktʃəli  mænədʒ tə əpɪɹ plʌmp. fəɹ ə meɪɾən, ɛniweɪ. "bɹəleɪn sɝ pɛndʒɹæɡ ən ənʊɹə lɹəsən wɪʃ tə si ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn," ʃi ənaʊnst. hɝ vɔɪs wɛn fɹəm wɔɹm ən fɹɛnli ɑn ðə fɝs neɪm tə koʊld ən flæɾ ɑn ðə sɛkənd wɪθaʊt dɪstɝbɪŋ əɹ ɡɹɪn.

One of the tall doors opened to admit one of the Maidens who were standing guard in the corridor. Riallin, with vivid yellow-red hair and a grin for everything, actually managed to appear plump. For a Maiden, anyway. "Berelain sur Paendrag and Annoura Larisen wish to see the Car'a'carn," she announced. Her voice went from warm and friendly on the first name to cold and flat on the second without disturbing her grin.

ɹænd saɪɾ ən oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə lɛɾ əm ɛntɝ, bʌt bɹəleɪn dɪd nɑt weɪt. ʃi stɔɹmd ɪn, ə sʌmwʌt kɑmɝ ənʊɹə əɾ əɹ hilz. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃaɪd slaɪtli ət ðə saɪɾ ə dæʃivə ən nɛɹɪʃmə, ən stɛɹd kjʊɹiəsli wən ʃi sɔ mɛɹænə stændɪŋ ɪn əɹ kɔɹnɝ. nɑt soʊ bɹəleɪn.

Rand sighed and opened his mouth to let them enter, but Berelain did not wait. She stormed in, a somewhat calmer Annoura at her heels. The Aes Sedai shied slightly at the sight of Dashiva and Narishma, and stared curiously when she saw Merana standing in her corner. Not so Berelain.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðə minɪŋ ə ðɪs, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən?" ʃi dɪmændəd, bɹændɪʃɪŋ ðə lɛɾɝ i hæd hæd dɪlɪvɝd tə hɝ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. ʃi stɔkt əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ tə ʃeɪk ɪɾ ʌndɝ ɪz noʊz. "waɪ æm aɪ tə ɹɪtɝn tə min? aɪ hæv ɡʌvɝnd wɛl hɪɹ ɪn jəɹ neɪm, ən jə noʊ ɪt. aɪ kəd nɑt stɑp koʊləveɪɪɹ hævɪŋ hɝsɛlf kɹaʊnd, bʌɾ ət list aɪ stɑpt əɹ tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ðə lɔz jə meɪd. waɪ æm aɪ tə bi sɛn əweɪ? ən waɪ æm aɪ toʊl baɪ lɛɾɝ? nɑt tə maɪ feɪs. baɪ lɛɾɝ! θæŋk fəɹ maɪ sɝvəsəz ən dɪsmɪs laɪk ə klɝk huz dʌn kəlɛktɪŋ ðə tæksəz!"

"What is the meaning of this, my Lord Dragon?" she demanded, brandishing the letter he had had delivered to her this morning. She stalked across the floor to shake it under his nose. "Why am I to return to Mayene? I have governed well here in your name, and you know it. I could not stop Colavaere having herself crowned, but at least I stopped her changing the laws you made. Why am I to be sent away? And why am I told by letter? Not to my face. By letter! Thanked for my services and dismissed like a clerk who's done collecting the taxes!"

ivən fjʊɹiəs, ðə fɝst ə min wɑz wʌn ə ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl wɪmən ɹænd hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. blæk hɛɹ fɛl ɪn ʃaɪnɪŋ weɪvz tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz, fɹeɪmɪŋ ə feɪs tə meɪk ə blaɪn mæn stɛɹ. ə mæn kəɾ izəli dʒɹaʊn ɪn əɹ dɑɹk aɪz. tədeɪ ʃi wɔɹ ʃɪmɝɪŋ sɪlvɝ sɪlk, θɪn ən klɪŋɪŋ ən mɔɹ suɾəd tə ɛntɝteɪnɪŋ ə lʌvɝ ɪn pɹaɪvət. ɪn fækt, hæd ðə nɛklaɪn bɪn ə hɛɹ loʊɝ, ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn eɪbəl tə wɛɹ ðə dʒɹɛs ɪn pʌblɪk. əz ɪt wɑz, hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi ʃʊd. hi hæd toʊl hɪmsɛlf wən ɹaɪɾɪŋ ðət lɛɾɝ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz kəz i hæd tu mʌtʃ tə də ən noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð hɝ. ðə tʃɹuθ wɑz, hi ɛndʒɔɪd lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ tu mʌtʃ; fəɹ səm ɹizən, hi hæd bɪɡʌn filɪŋ ðət ðət wɑz - nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ɹɔŋ, bʌɾ ɔlmoʊst.

Even furious, the First of Mayene was one of the most beautiful women Rand had ever seen. Black hair fell in shining waves to her shoulders, framing a face to make a blind man stare. A man could easily drown in her dark eyes. Today she wore shimmering silver silk, thin and clinging and more suited to entertaining a lover in private. In fact, had the neckline been a hair lower, she would not have been able to wear the dress in public. As it was, he was not sure she should. He had told himself when writing that letter that it was because he had too much to do and no time for arguing with her. The truth was, he enjoyed looking at her too much; for some reason, he had begun feeling that that was - not exactly wrong, but almost.

əz sun əz ʃi əpɪɹd, luz θɝɪn ɡeɪv oʊvɝ ɹæntɪŋ tə hʌm sɔfli, ðə weɪ hi dɪd wən ædmaɪɹɪŋ ə wʊmən. əbɹʌpli ɹænd ɹilaɪzd i wɑz θʌmɪŋ ɪz ɝloʊb, ən fɛlt ə ʃɑk. ɪnstɪŋktɪvli, hi nu ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls luz θɝɪn dɪd wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, laɪk ðə hʌmɪŋ. hi pʊʃt ɪz hæn tə hɪz saɪd, bʌt fəɹ ən ɪnstən ɪt wɑntəd tə ɹaɪz tə hɪz ɪɹ əɡɛn.

As soon as she appeared, Lews Therin gave over ranting to hum softly, the way he did when admiring a woman. Abruptly Rand realized he was thumbing his earlobe, and felt a shock. Instinctively, he knew that was something else Lews Therin did without thinking, like the humming. He pushed his hand to his side, but for an instant it wanted to rise to his ear again.

bɝn ju, ðɪs ɪz maɪ bɑɾi! ðə θɔt wɑz ə snɑɹl. maɪn! luz θɝɪnz hʌm stɑpt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ən kənfjuʒən; wɪθaʊɾ ə saʊnd, ðə dɛd mæn flɛd, bæk ɪndə ðə dipəst ʃædoʊz ə ɹændz bɹeɪn.

Burn you, this is my body! The thought was a snarl. Mine! Lews Therin's hum stopped in surprise, and confusion; without a sound, the dead man fled, back into the deepest shadows of Rand's brain.

ɹændz saɪləns hæɾ ən ɪfɛkt. bɹəleɪn loʊɝd ðə lɛɾɝ, ən əɹ æŋɡɝ ɹəsiɾəd. ə lɪɾəl. aɪz fɪkst ɑn hɪz, ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ðət hiɾəd ɪz tʃiks. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən - "

Rand's silence had an effect. Berelain lowered the letter, and her anger receded. A little. Eyes fixed on his, she drew a deep breath that heated his cheeks. "My Lord Dragon - "

"ju noʊ waɪ," hi kʌɾ ɪn. lʊkɪŋ oʊnli əɾ əɹ aɪz wɑz nɑɾ izi. ɑdli, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf wɪʃɪŋ mɪn wɝ ðɛɹ. vɛɹi ɑd. hɝ vjuɪŋz wəd bi noʊ hɛlp naʊ. "wɛn jə ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ðət si foʊk ʃɪp ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ðəɹ wɑz ə fɛloʊ weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə dɑk wɪð ə naɪf."

"You know why," he cut in. Looking only at her eyes was not easy. Oddly, he found himself wishing Min were there. Very odd. Her viewings would be no help now. "When you returned from that Sea Folk ship this morning, there was a fellow waiting on the dock with a knife."

bɹəleɪn tɔst əɹ hɛd kəntɛmptʃwəsli. "hi keɪm noʊ kloʊsɝ ðən θɹi stɛps. aɪ wɑz əkʌmpənid baɪ ə dʌzən ə ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz ən lɔɹd kæptən ɡælɛn." nɹɛl hæd lɛd səm ə ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz tə dəməaɪz wɛlz, bʌt ɡælɛn kəmændəd ðə ɡɑɹdz əz ə hoʊl. ʃi hæɾ eɪt hʌnʒɹəd ə ðɛm ɪn ðə sɪɾi əsaɪd fɹəm ðoʊz u ɹɪtɝnd wɪð nɹɛl. "ju ɪkspɛk mi tə tɝn teɪl kəz ʌv ə kʌtpɝs?"

Berelain tossed her head contemptuously. "He came no closer than three steps. I was accompanied by a dozen of the Winged Guards and Lord Captain Gallenne." Nurelle had led some of the Winged Guards to Dumai's Wells, but Gallenne commanded the Guards as a whole. She had eight hundred of them in the city aside from those who returned with Nurelle. "You expect me to turn tail because of a cutpurse?"

"doʊn pleɪ ðə ful," hi ɡɹaʊld. "ə kʌtpɝs, wɪð ə dʌzən soʊlʒɝz ɝaʊn ju?" kʌlɝ flɛɹɾ ɪn əɹ tʃiks; ʃi nu, ɔl ɹaɪt. hi ɡeɪv əɹ noʊ tʃæns fəɹ pɹoʊɾɛsts əɹ ɛkspləneɪʃənz əɹ ɛni ʌðɝ fulɪʃnəs. "dɑbɹeɪn tɛlz mi hiz ɔlɹɛɾi hɝd wɪspɝz ɪn ðə pæləs ðət jə bɪtʃɹeɪd koʊləveɪɪɹ. ðoʊz u səpɔɹɾəd əɹ maɪt bi əfɹeɪd tə seɪ bu tə mi, bʌt ðəl peɪ tə hæv ə naɪf stʌk ɪndə ju." ən feɪl, tu, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə dɑbɹeɪn; ðət wɑz biɪŋ teɪkən kɛɹ ʌv. "bʌt ðeɪ woʊn əv ə tʃæns, kəz jə ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ bæk tə min. dɑbɹeɪn wɪl teɪk jəɹ pleɪs hɪɹ əntɪl ɪleɪn kleɪmz ðə sʌn θɹoʊn."

"Don't play the fool," he growled. "A cutpurse, with a dozen soldiers around you?" Color flared in her cheeks; she knew, all right. He gave her no chance for protests or explanations or any other foolishness. "Dobraine tells me he's already heard whispers in the palace that you betrayed Colavaere. Those who supported her might be afraid to say boo to me, but they'll pay to have a knife stuck into you." And Faile, too, according to Dobraine; that was being taken care of. "But they won't have a chance, because you are going back to Mayene. Dobraine will take your place here until Elayne claims the Sun Throne."

ʃi spləɾɝd əz ɪf i hæd dʌmp koʊld wɔɾɝ daʊn əɹ dʒɹɛs. hɝ aɪz ɡɹu deɪnʒɝəsli lɑɹdʒ. hi hæd bɪn ɡlæd wən ʃi stɑp biɪŋ əfɹeɪɾ ə hɪm, bʌt naʊ hi wɑz nɑt soʊ ʃʊɹ. əz ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə ɪksploʊd, ənʊɹə tʌtʃt əɹ ɑɹm, ən əɹ hɛd wɪpt ɝaʊnd. ðeɪ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə lɔŋ lʊk, ən bɹəleɪnz spʌɾɝz səbsaɪɾɪd. ʃi smuðd əɹ skɝts ən vɪɡɝəsli skwɛɹɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ɹænd lʊkt əweɪ heɪstəli.

She spluttered as if he had dumped cold water down her dress. Her eyes grew dangerously large. He had been glad when she stopped being afraid of him, but now he was not so sure. As she opened her mouth to explode, Annoura touched her arm, and her head whipped around. They exchanged a long look, and Berelain's sputters subsided. She smoothed her skirts and vigorously squared her shoulders. Rand looked away hastily.

mɛɹænə hʌvɝɾ ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə wɔɹd. hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ʃi hæd stɛpt əkɹɔs ən dɑdʒ bæk - haʊ ɛls kəd ʃi stæn ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɑp ʌv wʌt ʃi kəd nɑt pɑsəbli dɪtɛkt? wən ɪz hɛd tɝnd, ʃi muv bækwɝɾ əntɪl ʃi ɔlmoʊs tʌtʃt ðə wɔlz, hɝ aɪz nɛvɝ livɪŋ hɪm. baɪ hɝ feɪs, ʃi wʊɾə pɔɹɾ ɪz ti ɛvɹi deɪ fəɹ tɛn jɪɹz tə hɪɹ wʌt wɑz biɪŋ sɛd.

Merana hovered at the edge of the ward. He wondered whether she had stepped across and dodged back - how else could she stand right on top of what she could not possibly detect? When his head turned, she moved backward until she almost touched the walls, her eyes never leaving him. By her face, she would have poured his tea every day for ten years to hear what was being said.

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," bɹəleɪn sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ, "ðɛɹ ɪz stɪl ðə mæɾɝ ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz wɔɹm hʌni; ðə kɝv ə hɝ lɪps wʊɾə spɑɹk θɔts ə kɪsəz ɪn ə stoʊn. "ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs hɑɹɪn ɪz nɑt pliz tə bi lɛf sɪɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ ʃɪp soʊ lɔŋ. aɪ hæv vɪzəɾəd wɪð əɹ ə nʌmbɝ ə taɪmz. aɪ kən smuð ðə dɪfəkəltiz ðɛɹ, wɪtʃ aɪ hɑɹdli θɪŋk lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪn kæn. aɪ bɪliv ðə si foʊk ɑɹ vaɪɾəl tə jə wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən mɛnʃən ðɛm. jə ɑɹ kɹuʃəl ɪn ðɛɹ pɹɑfəsiz, ðoʊ ðeɪ sim ɹɪlʌktən tə seɪ ɪɡzækli haʊ."

"My Lord Dragon," Berelain said, smiling, "there is still the matter of the Atha'an Miere." Her voice was warm honey; the curve of her lips would have sparked thoughts of kisses in a stone. "The Wavemistress Harine is not pleased to be left sitting on her ship so long. I have visited with her a number of times. I can smooth the difficulties there, which I hardly think Lord Dobraine can. I believe the Sea Folk are vital to you whether or not the Prophecies of the Dragon mention them. You are crucial in their prophecies, though they seem reluctant to say exactly how."

ɹænd stɛɹd. waɪ wɑz ʃi stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd tə kip ə dɪfəkəl dʒɑb ðət hæɾ ɔfɝd fju θæŋks fɹəm kɛɹhinɪn ivən bɪfɔɹ səm bɪɡæn wɑntɪŋ tə kɪl hɝ? ʃi wɑz ə ɹulɝ, juz tə dilɪŋ wɪð ɹulɝz ən ɛmbəsiz, nɑt stʃɹit θʌɡz ən naɪvz ɪn ðə dɑɹk. wɔɹm hʌni əɹ noʊ wɔɹm hʌni, ɪt wɑz nɑt fəɹ ɛni dɪzaɪɝ tə steɪ nɪɹ ɹænd ælθɹ. ʃi hæd . . . wɛl, ɔfɝd hɝsɛlf tə hɪm . . . wʌns, bʌt ðə hɑɹd fækt wɑz ðət min wɑz ə smɔl kʌntʃɹi, ən bɹəleɪn juzd əɹ bjuɾi əz ə mæn wəɾ ə sɔɹd, tə kip əɹ læn fɹəm biɪŋ swɑloʊd baɪ ɪts mɔɹ paʊɝfəl neɪbɝ, tiɹ. ən ðɛɹ, sɪmpəl əz ðæt, hi hæɾ ɪt. "bɹəleɪn, aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɛls aɪ kən də tə ɡɛɹənti min fəɹ ju, bʌɾ əl ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ɛni - " kʌlɝz swɝl soʊ stʃɹɔŋli ɪn ɪz hɛd ðəɾ ɪz tʌŋ fɹoʊz. luz θɝɪn kækəld. ə wʊmən u noʊz ðə deɪnʒɝ ən ɪzən əfɹeɪɾ ɪz ə tʃɹɛʒɝ oʊnli ə mædmæn wəd spɝn.

Rand stared. Why was she struggling so hard to keep a difficult job that had offered few thanks from Cairhienin even before some began wanting to kill her? She was a ruler, used to dealing with rulers and embassies, not street thugs and knives in the dark. Warm honey or no warm honey, it was not for any desire to stay near Rand al'Thor. She had . . . well, offered herself to him . . . once, but the hard fact was that Mayene was a small country, and Berelain used her beauty as a man would a sword, to keep her land from being swallowed by its more powerful neighbor, Tear. And there, simple as that, he had it. "Berelain, I don't know what else I can do to guarantee Mayene for you, but I will write out any - " Colors swirled so strongly in his head that his tongue froze. Lews Therin cackled. A woman who knows the danger and isn't afraid is a treasure only a madman would spurn.

"ɡɛɹəntiz." bliknəs ɪnɡʌlf hʌni, ən æŋɡɝ bʌbəld əɡɛn, koʊl ðɪs taɪm. ənʊɹə plʌkt ət bɹəleɪnz sliv, bʌt ʃi peɪd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ noʊ hid. "waɪl aɪ sɪɾ ɪn min wɪð jəɹ ɡɛɹəntiz, ʌðɝz wɪl sɝv ju. ðəl æsk ðɛɹ ɹɪwɔɹdz, ən ðə sɝvəs aɪ dɪd hɪɹ wɪl bi feɪɾəd ən oʊld, waɪl ðɛɹz ɪz bɹaɪɾ ən nu. ɪf ðə haɪ lɔɹd wɪɹɑmɑn ɡɪvz jə ɪljən ən æsks min ɪn ɹɪtɝn, wʌt wɪl jə seɪ? ɪf i ɡɪvz jə mʊɹændi, ən ɔltɑɹə, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ klɪɹ tə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən?"

"Guarantees." Bleakness engulfed honey, and anger bubbled again, cold this time. Annoura plucked at Berelain's sleeve, but she paid the Aes Sedai no heed. "While I sit in Mayene with your guarantees, others will serve you. They will ask their rewards, and the service I did here will be faded and old, while theirs is bright and new. If the High Lord Weiramon gives you Illian and asks Mayene in return, what will you say? If he gives you Murandy, and Altara, and everything clear to the Aryth Ocean?"

"wɪl jə sɝv ɪf ɪt stɪl minz livɪŋ?" hi æskt kwaɪətli. "ju wɪl bi aʊɾ ə maɪ saɪt, bʌt nɑɾ aʊɾ ə maɪ maɪnd." luz θɝɪn læft əɡɛn, ɪn sətʃ ə weɪ ðət ɹænd nɪɹli blʌʃt. hi ɛndʒɔɪd lʊkɪŋ, bʌt səmtaɪmz ðə θɪŋz luz θɝɪn θɔt. . . .

"Will you serve if it still means leaving?" he asked quietly. "You will be out of my sight, but not out of my mind." Lews Therin laughed again, in such a way that Rand nearly blushed. He enjoyed looking, but sometimes the things Lews Therin thought. . . .

bɹəleɪn kənsɪɾɝd ɪm wɪð stʌbɝn aɪz, ən i kəɾ ɔl bʌt si ðə kwɛstʃənz biɪŋ toʊɾɪd ʌp bɪhaɪn ənʊɹəz, ðə kɛɹfəl tʃuzɪŋ ʌv wɪtʃ tə æsk.

Berelain considered him with stubborn eyes, and he could all but see the questions being toted up behind Annoura's, the careful choosing of which to ask.

ðə dɔɹ oʊpən əɡɛn fəɹ ɹaɪəlɪn. "æn ɛɛs sədaɪ hæz kʌm tə si ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn." ʃi mænədʒ tə saʊn koʊld ən ənsɝɾən ət ðə seɪm taɪm. "hɝ neɪm ɪz kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn." ə stʃɹaɪkɪŋli hænsəm wʊmən swɛpt ɪn ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn hɝ, aɪɝn-ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ ɡæðɝɾ ɪn ə bʌn ətɑp əɹ hɛɾ ən dɛkɝeɪɾəd wɪð dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɡoʊld ɔɹnəməns, ən ɪt simd ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæpən ət wʌns.

The door opened again for Riallin. "An Aes Sedai has come to see the Car'a'carn." She managed to sound cold and uncertain at the same time. "Her name is Cadsuane Melaidhrin." A strikingly handsome woman swept in right behind her, iron-gray hair gathered in a bun atop her head and decorated with dangling gold ornaments, and it seemed everything happened at once.

"aɪ θɔt jə wɝ dɛd," ənʊɹə ɡæspt, aɪz nɪɹli stɑɹɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd.

"I thought you were dead," Annoura gasped, eyes nearly starting out of her head.

mɛɹænə dɑɹɾɪd θɹu ðə wɔɹd, hænz aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt. "noʊ, kædzueɪn!" ʃi skɹimd. "ju mʌsnt hɑɹm hɪm! jə mʌs nɑt!"

Merana darted through the ward, hands outstretched. "No, Cadsuane!" she screamed. "You mustn't harm him! You must not!"

ɹændz skɪn tɪŋɡəld əz sʌmwʌn ɪn ðə ɹum ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ, pɝhæps mɔɹ ðən wʌn, ən swɪfli muvɪŋ wɛl klɪɹ ə bɹəleɪn, hi siz hoʊld ə ðə sɔɹs, flʌɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf wɪð seɪɾɪn, filɪŋ ɪt fɪl ði æʃəmən. dæʃivəz feɪs twɪtʃt əz i ɡlɛɹd fɹəm wʌn ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ənʌðɝ. dɪspaɪt ðə paʊɝ i hɛld, nɛɹɪʃmə ɡɹæspt ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt wɪð boʊθ hænz ən əsum ðə stæns kɔld lɛpɝɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹi, ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə dʒɹɔɪŋ. luz θɝɪn snɑɹəld ə kɪlɪŋ ən dɛθ, kɪl əm ɔl, kɪl əm naʊ. ɹaɪəlɪn ɹeɪzd əɹ veɪl, ʃaʊɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ, ən sʌɾənli ə dʌzən meɪɾənz wɝ ɪn ðə ɹum, veɪlɪŋ, spɪɹz ɹɛɾi. ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ ðət bɪɹ-leɪn stʊd ɡeɪpɪŋ əz ɪf ɛvɹiwʌn hæd ɡɔn mæd.

Rand's skin tingled as someone in the room embraced saidar, perhaps more than one, and swiftly moving well clear of Berelain, he seized hold of the Source, flooding himself with saidin, feeling it fill the Asha'man. Dashiva's face twitched as he glared from one Aes Sedai to another. Despite the Power he held, Narishma grasped his sword hilt with both hands and assumed the stance called Leopard in the Tree, on the brink of drawing. Lews Therin snarled of killing and death, kill them all, kill them now. Riallin raised her veil, shouting something, and suddenly a dozen Maidens were in the room, veiling, spears ready. It was hardly surprising that Bere-lain stood gaping as if everyone had gone mad.

fəɹ sʌmwʌn u hæd kɑzd ɔl ðæt, ðɪs kædzueɪn simd ɹɪmɑɹkəbli ʌnəfɛktɪd. ʃi lʊkt ət ðə meɪɾənz ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ɡoʊldən stɑɹz ən munz ən bɝdz sweɪɪŋ dʒɛnli. "tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɹoʊ disən ɹoʊzɪz ɪn nɔɹðɝn ɡildən meɪ bi nɪɹ tə dɛθ, ənʊɹə," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "bʌɾ ɪts nɑt kwaɪt ðə ɡɹeɪv. oʊ, də kɑm daʊn, mɛɹænə, bɪfɔɹ jə fɹaɪɾən sʌmwʌn. wʌn wəd θɪŋk jə wʊɾə ɡɹoʊn ə lɪɾəl lɛs ɪksaɪɾəbəl sɪns pʊɾɪŋ ɔf nɑvəs waɪt."

For someone who had caused all that, this Cadsuane seemed remarkably unaffected. She looked at the Maidens and shook her head, golden stars and moons and birds swaying gently. "Trying to grow decent roses in northern Ghealdan may be near to death, Annoura," she said dryly, "but it is not quite the grave. Oh, do calm down, Merana, before you frighten someone. One would think you would have grown a little less excitable since putting off novice white."

mɛɹænə oʊpən ən kloʊzd əɹ maʊθ, lʊkɪŋ əbæʃt ʌv ɔl θɪŋz, ən ðə tɪŋɡəlɪŋ vænɪʃt əbɹʌpli. ɹænd dɪd nɑt ɹilis seɪɾɪn, ðoʊ, nɔɹ dɪd ði æʃəmən.

Merana opened and closed her mouth, looking abashed of all things, and the tingling vanished abruptly. Rand did not release saidin, though, nor did the Asha'man.

"hu ɑɹ ju?" hi dɪmændəd. "wʌɾ ədʒɑ?" ɹɛd, baɪ mɛɹænəz ɹiækʃən, bʌt fəɹ ə ɹɛd sɪstɝ sɪmpli tə wɔk ɪn laɪk ðɪs, əloʊn, wəd ɹikwaɪɝ suəsaɪɾəl kɝədʒ. "wʌt dʒju wɑnt?"

"Who are you?" he demanded. "What Ajah?" Red, by Merana's reaction, but for a Red sister simply to walk in like this, alone, would require suicidal courage. "What do you want?"

kædzueɪnz ɡeɪz lɪŋɡɝɾ ɑn ɪm fəɹ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə moʊmənt, ən ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ. mɛɹænəz lɪps pɑɹɾəd, bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən lʊkt ət hɝ, ɹeɪzɪŋ wʌn aɪbɹaʊ, ən ðət wɑz ðæt. mɛɹænə æktʃəli  ɹɛɾənd ən loʊɝɾ əɹ aɪz. ənʊɹə wɑz stɪl stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə nukʌmɝ əz ɪf əɾ ə ɡoʊst. əɹ ə dʒaɪənt.

Cadsuane's gaze lingered on him for no more than a moment, and she did not answer. Merana's lips parted, but the gray-haired woman looked at her, raising one eyebrow, and that was that. Merana actually reddened and lowered her eyes. Annoura was still staring at the newcomer as if at a ghost. Or a giant.

wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd, kædzueɪn swɛpt əkɹɔs ðə ɹum tə ðə tu æʃəmən, dɑɹk ɡɹin dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts swɪʃɪŋ. ɹænd wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ɡɛt ðə filɪŋ ðət ʃi ɔlweɪz muvd ɪn ðət ɹʌʃɪŋ ɡlaɪd, ɡɹeɪsfəl jɛt weɪstɪŋ noʊ taɪm ən əlaʊɪŋ nʌθɪŋ tə ɪmpid hɝ. dæʃivə stɛɹɾ əɹ ʌp ən daʊn, ən snɪɹd. ɔlðoʊ lʊkɪŋ ɪm stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ðə feɪs, ʃi dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ʃi əpɪɹd tə noʊɾəs nɛɹɪʃməz hænz ɑn ɪz sɔɹd wən ʃi pʊɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ ʌndɝ ɪz tʃɪn, muvɪŋ ɪz hɛd fɹəm saɪd tə saɪd bɪfɔɹ i kəd dʒɝk bæk.

Without a word, Cadsuane swept across the room to the two Asha'man, dark green divided skirts swishing. Rand was beginning to get the feeling that she always moved in that rushing glide, graceful yet wasting no time and allowing nothing to impede her. Dashiva stared her up and down, and sneered. Although looking him straight in the face, she did not seem to notice, any more than she appeared to notice Narishma's hands on his sword when she put a finger under his chin, moving his head from side to side before he could jerk back.

"wʌt lʌvli aɪz," ʃi mɝmɝd. nɛɹɪʃmə blɪŋkt ənsɝteɪnli, ən dæʃivəz snɪɹ tɝn tə ə ɡɹɪn, bʌɾ ə næsti wʌn ðət meɪɾ ɪz fɔɹmɝ smɝk laɪthɑɹɾɪd ɪn kəmpɛɹəsən.

"What lovely eyes," she murmured. Narishma blinked uncertainly, and Dashiva's sneer turned to a grin, but a nasty one that made his former smirk lighthearted in comparison.

"du nʌθɪŋ," ɹænd snæpt. dæʃivə hæd ðə ɡɔl tə ɡlaʊɝ əɾ ɪm bɪfɔɹ sʌlənli pɹɛsɪŋ ə fɪs tə hɪz tʃɛst ɪn ðə səlut ði æʃəmən juzd. "wʌt dʒju wɑn hɪɹ, kædzueɪn," ɹænd wɛn ɑn. "lʊk ət mi, bɝn ju!"

"Do nothing," Rand snapped. Dashiva had the gall to glower at him before sullenly pressing a fist to his chest in the salute the Asha'man used. "What do you want here, Cadsuane," Rand went on. "Look at me, burn you!"

ʃi dɪd, tɝnɪŋ dʒʌst əɹ hɛd. "soʊ jə ɑɹ ɹænd ælθɹ, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. aɪɾ əv θɔɾ ivən ə tʃaɪld laɪk mɔɪɹeɪn cʊɾə tɔt jə ə fju mænɝz."

She did, turning just her head. "So you are Rand al'Thor, the Dragon Reborn. I'd have thought even a child like Moiraine could have taught you a few manners."

ɹaɪəlɪn pʊt ðə spɪɹ fɹəm əɹ ɹaɪt hænd wɪð ðoʊz klʌtʃt bɪhaɪn əɹ bʌkəlɝ ən flæʃt meɪɾən hæntɔk. fəɹ wʌns, nʌn læft. fəɹ wʌns, ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə tɔk wɑz nɑɾ ə dʒoʊk əbaʊt hɪm. "bi izi, ɹaɪəlɪn," hi sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hænd. "ɔl ə ju, bi izi."

Riallin put the spear from her right hand with those clutched behind her buckler and flashed Maiden handtalk. For once, none laughed. For once, Rand was sure the talk was not a joke about him. "Be easy, Riallin," he said, raising a hand. "All of you, be easy."

kædzueɪn ɪɡnɔɹd ðə baɪpleɪ tu, dɝɛktɪŋ ə smaɪl tə bɹəleɪn. "soʊ ðɪs ɪz jəɹ bɹəleɪn, ənʊɹə. ʃiz mɔɹ bjuɾəfəl ðən aɪ hæd hɝd." ðə kɝtsi ʃi meɪd, boʊɪŋ əɹ hɛd, wɑz kwaɪt dip, jɛt sʌmhaʊ wɪθaʊɾ ɛni sədʒɛstʃən ʌv oʊbaɪsəns, noʊ hɪn ðət ʃi wɑz ɪn ɛni weɪ lɛs. ɪt tʃɹuli wɑz ə kɝɾəsi, noʊ mɔɹ. "maɪ leɪɾi fɝst ə min, aɪ mʌst spik wɪð ðɪs jʌŋ mæn, ən aɪ wəd ɹɪteɪn jəɹ ædvaɪzɝ. aɪv hɝd juv ʌndɝteɪkən mɛni duɾiz hɪɹ. aɪ wəd nɑt kip jə fɹəm ðɛm." ɪt wɑz əz klɪɹ ə dɪsmɪsəl əz kəd bi, ʃɔɹɾ ə hoʊldɪŋ ðə dɔɹ oʊpən.

Cadsuane ignored the byplay too, directing a smile to Berelain. "So this is your Berelain, Annoura. She is more beautiful than I had heard." The curtsy she made, bowing her head, was quite deep, yet somehow without any suggestion of obeisance, no hint that she was in any way less. It truly was a courtesy, no more. "My Lady First of Mayene, I must speak with this young man, and I would retain your advisor. I've heard you have undertaken many duties here. I would not keep you from them." It was as clear a dismissal as could be, short of holding the door open.

bɹəleɪn ɪnklaɪn əɹ hɛd ɡɹeɪʃəsli, ðən smuðli tɝn tə ɹænd ən spɹɛɾ əɹ skɝts ɪn ə kɝtsi soʊ dip ðəɾ i wɝid wɛðɝ ʃi wəd ɹɪmeɪn ivən əz kloʊðd əz ʃi wɑz. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," ʃi ɪntoʊnd, "aɪ æsk jəɹ kaɪn pɝmɪʃən tə wɪðdʒɹɔ."

Berelain inclined her head graciously, then smoothly turned to Rand and spread her skirts in a curtsy so deep that he worried whether she would remain even as clothed as she was. "My Lord Dragon," she intoned, "I ask your kind permission to withdraw."

ɹændz ɹɪtɝn baʊ wɑz nɑt soʊ pɹæktəst. "ɡɹæntəd, maɪ leɪɾi fɝst, əz jə wɪʃ." hi ɔfɝɾ əɹ ə hænd, tə hɛlp əɹ ɹaɪz. "aɪ hoʊp jəl kənsɪɾɝ maɪ pɹəpoʊzəl."

Rand's return bow was not so practiced. "Granted, my Lady First, as you wish." He offered her a hand, to help her rise. "I hope you will consider my proposal."

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, əl sɝv jə wɛɹɛvɝ ən haʊɛvɝ jə dɪzaɪɝ." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz ɔl hʌni əɡɛn. fəɹ kædzueɪnz bɛnəfɪt, hi səpoʊzd. ðəɹ wɑz sɝɾənli noʊ flɝteɪʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs, oʊnli dɪtɝməneɪʃən. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ hɑɹɪn," ʃi æɾəd ɪn ə wɪspɝ.

"My Lord Dragon, I will serve you wherever and however you desire." Her voice was all honey again. For Cadsuane's benefit, he supposed. There was certainly no flirtation on her face, only determination. "Remember Harine," she added in a whisper.

wən ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn bɹəleɪn, kædzueɪn sɛd, "ɪts ɔlweɪz ɡʊd tə si tʃɪlʒɹən pleɪ, doʊn jə θɪŋk, mɛɹænə?" mɛɹænə ɡɑɡəld, hɛd swɪvəlɪŋ bɪtwin ɹænd ən ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd sɪstɝ. ənʊɹə lʊkt əz ðoʊ oʊnli wɪlpaʊɝ hɛld əɹ əpɹaɪt.

When the door closed behind Berelain, Cadsuane said, "It's always good to see children play, don't you think, Merana?" Merana goggled, head swiveling between Rand and the gray-haired sister. Annoura looked as though only willpower held her upright.

moʊst ə ðə meɪɾənz fɑloʊd bɹəleɪn, əpɛɹənli dəsaɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ wɑz tə bi noʊ kɪlɪŋ, bʌt ɹaɪəlɪn ən tu ʌðɝz ɹɪmeɪn bɪfɔɹ ðə dɔɹ, stɪl veɪld. ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn koʊɪnsɪɾəns ðət ðəɹ wɑz wʌn fəɹ itʃ ɛɛs sədaɪ. dæʃivə ɔlsoʊ sim tə θɪŋk ɛni deɪnʒɝ pæst. hi lin bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl wɪð ə fʊt pɹɑpt, lɪps muvɪŋ saɪlənli, ɑɹmz foʊldəd, əpɛɹənli wɑtʃɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Most of the Maidens followed Berelain, apparently deciding there was to be no killing, but Riallin and two others remained before the door, still veiled. It might have been coincidence that there was one for each Aes Sedai. Dashiva also seemed to think any danger past. He leaned back against the wall with a foot propped, lips moving silently, arms folded, apparently watching the Aes Sedai.

nɛɹɪʃmə fɹaʊn kwɛstʃənɪŋli ət ɹænd, bʌt ɹænd oʊnli ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. ðə wʊmən wɑz dɪlɪbɝətli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹəvoʊk hɪm. ðə kwɛstʃən wɑz, waɪ pɹəvoʊk ə mæn ʃi mʌs noʊ kəd stɪl hɝ, əɹ kɪl hɝ, wɪθaʊɾ ɪɡzɝɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf? luz θɝɪn mʌɾɝd ðə seɪm θɪŋ. waɪ? waɪ? stɛpɪŋ ɑntu ðə deɪz, ɹænd tʊk ʌp ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ fɹəm ðə θɹoʊn ən sæt, weɪɾɪŋ tə si wʌt wəd hæpən. ðə wʊmən wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ tə səksid.

Narishma frowned questioningly at Rand, but Rand only shook his head. The woman was deliberately trying to provoke him. The question was, why provoke a man she must know could still her, or kill her, without exerting himself? Lews Therin muttered the same thing. Why? Why? Stepping onto the dais, Rand took up the Dragon Scepter from the throne and sat, waiting to see what would happen. The woman was not going to succeed.

"ɹæðɝ ɔɹneɪt, wʊdn jə seɪ?" kædzueɪn sɛd tə ənʊɹə, lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊnd. əsaɪd fɹəm ɔl ði ʌðɝ ɡoʊld, bɹɔd bænz ʌv ɪt ɹæn ɝaʊn ðə wɔlz əbʌv ðə mɪɹɝz, ən ðə kɔɹnɪsəz wɝ nɪɹli tu fiɾ ʌv ɡoʊldən skeɪlz. "aɪv nɛvɝ noʊn wɛðɝ kɛɹhinɪn əɹ tɛɹənz oʊvɝdu wɝs, bʌɾ iðɝ kən meɪk ən ɛbu dɑɹi blʌʃ, əɹ ivən ə tɪŋkɝ. ɪz ðəɾ ə ti tʃɹeɪ? aɪ wəd laɪk sʌm, ɪf ɪts fɹɛʃ, ən hɑt."

"Rather ornate, wouldn't you say?" Cadsuane said to Annoura, looking around. Aside from all the other gold, broad bands of it ran around the walls above the mirrors, and the cornices were nearly two feet of golden scales. "I've never known whether Cairhienin or Tairens overdo worse, but either can make an Ebou Dari blush, or even a Tinker. Is that a tea tray? I would like some, if it's fresh, and hot."

tʃænəlɪŋ, ɹænd skupt ʌp ðə tʃɹeɪ, hæf ɪkspɛktɪŋ tə si ðə mɛɾəl kɝoʊd fɹəm ðə teɪnt, ən wɑftɪɾ ɪt tə ðə θɹi wɪmən. mɛɹænə hæd bɹɔɾ ɛkstʃɹə kʌps, ən fɔɹ stɪl stʊɾ ənjuzd ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ. hi fɪl θɹi, ɹipleɪs ðə tipɑɾ ən weɪɾəd. ɪt floʊɾəd ɪn mɪdɛɹ, səpɔɹɾəd baɪ seɪɾɪn.

Channeling, Rand scooped up the tray, half expecting to see the metal corrode from the taint, and wafted it to the three women. Merana had brought extra cups, and four still stood unused on the tray. He filled three, replaced the teapot and waited. It floated in midair, supported by saidin.

θɹi vɛɹi dɪfɹənt wɪmən ɪn əpɪɹəns, ən θɹi dɪstɪŋkli dɪfɹən ɹiækʃənz. ənʊɹə lʊkt ət ðə tʃɹeɪ mʌtʃ əz wʌn maɪɾ ə kɔɪl vaɪpɝ, ɡeɪv ə taɪni ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛd, ən tʊk ə smɔl stɛp bæk. mɛɹænə dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən sloʊli pɪkt ʌp ə kʌp wɪð ə hæn ðət tʃɹɛmbəl slaɪtli. noʊɪŋ ə mæn kəd tʃænəl ən biɪŋ fɔɹs tə si ɪt wɝ nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ðə seɪm. kædzueɪn, ðoʊ, tʊk əɹ kʌp ən snɪf ðə veɪpɝz wɪð ə pliz smaɪl. nʌθɪŋ kəd tɛl əɹ wɪtʃ ə ðə θɹi mɛn hæd pɔɹd ðə ti, jɛt ʃi lʊkt əkɹɔs əɹ kʌp stʃɹeɪɾ ət ɹænd, laʊnʒɪŋ wɪð wʌn lɛɡ oʊvɝ ði ɑɹm oʊvɝ ɪz tʃɛɹ. "ðæts ə ɡʊd bɔɪ," ʃi sɛd. ðə meɪɾənz pæst ʃɑk lʊks əbʌv ðɛɹ veɪlz.

Three very different women in appearance, and three distinctly different reactions. Annoura looked at the tray much as one might a coiled viper, gave a tiny shake of her head, and took a small step back. Merana drew a deep breath and slowly picked up a cup with a hand that trembled slightly. Knowing a man could channel and being forced to see it were not at all the same. Cadsuane, though, took her cup and sniffed the vapors with a pleased smile. Nothing could tell her which of the three men had poured the tea, yet she looked across her cup straight at Rand, lounging with one leg over the arm over his chair. "That's a good boy," she said. The Maidens passed shocked looks above their veils.

ɹænd kwɪvɝd. noʊ. ʃi wəd nɑt pɹəvoʊk hɪm. fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ ɹizən, ðət wɑz wʌt ʃi wɑntəd, ən ʃi wəd nɑt! "aɪ wɪl æsk wʌn mɔɹ taɪm," hi sɛd. stʃɹeɪnʒ, ðəɾ ɪz vɔɪs kəd bi ðət koʊld; ɪnsaɪd, hi wɑz hɑɾɝ ðən ðə hɑɾəst faɪɝz ə seɪɾɪn. "wʌt dʒju wɑnt? ænsɝ, əɹ liv. baɪ ðə dɔɹ əɹ ə wɪndoʊ; jəɹ tʃɔɪs."

Rand quivered. No. She would not provoke him. For whatever reason, that was what she wanted, and she would not! "I will ask one more time," he said. Strange, that his voice could be that cold; inside, he was hotter than the hottest fires of saidin. "What do you want? Answer, or leave. By the door or a window; your choice."

əɡɛn mɛɹænə bɪɡæn tə spik, ən əɡɛn kædzueɪn saɪləns hɝ, ðɪs taɪm baɪ ə ʃɑɹp dʒɛstʃɝ wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. "tə si ju," ʃi sɛd kɑmli. "aɪ æm ɡɹin ədʒɑ, nɑt ɹɛd, bʌɾ aɪ hæv wɔɹn ðə ʃɔl lɔŋɡɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ sɪstɝ lɪvɪŋ, ən aɪ hæv feɪs mɔɹ mɛn u kəd tʃænəl ðən ɛni fɔɹ ɹɛdz, meɪbi ðən ɛni tɛn. nɑt ðəɾ aɪ hʌntəd ðɛm, jə ʌndɝstænd, bʌɾ aɪ sim tə hæv ə noʊz." kɑmli, ə wʊmən seɪɪŋ ʃi hæd bɪn tə mɑɹkət wʌns əɹ twaɪs ɪn əɹ laɪf. "sʌm fɔt tə ðə bɪɾɝ ɛnd, kɪkɪŋ ən skɹimɪŋ ivən æftɝ ðeɪ wɝ ʃildɪɾ ən baʊnd. səm wɛpt ən bɛɡd, ɔfɝɪŋ ɡoʊld, ɛniθɪŋ, ðɛɹ vɛɹi soʊlz, nɑt tə bi teɪkən tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. stɪl ʌðɝz wɛp fɹəm ɹɪlif, mik əz læmz, θæŋkfəl faɪnəli tə bi dʌn wɪð ɪt. laɪts tʃɹuθ, ðeɪ ɔl wip, ət ði ɛnd. ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ lɛft fəɹ əm bʌt tɪɹz ət ði ɛnd."

Again Merana began to speak, and again Cadsuane silenced her, this time by a sharp gesture without looking away from him. "To see you," she said calmly. "I am Green Ajah, not Red, but I have worn the shawl longer than any other sister living, and I have faced more men who could channel than any four Reds, maybe than any ten. Not that I hunted them, you understand, but I seem to have a nose." Calmly, a woman saying she had been to market once or twice in her life. "Some fought to the bitter end, kicking and screaming even after they were shielded and bound. Some wept and begged, offering gold, anything, their very souls, not to be taken to Tar Valon. Still others wept from relief, meek as lambs, thankful finally to be done with it. Light's truth, they all weep, at the end. There is nothing left for them but tears at the end."

ðə hiɾ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪm ɪɹʌptəɾ ɪn ɹeɪdʒ. tʃɹeɪ ən mæsɪv tipɑt hɝɾəld əkɹɔs ðə ɹum, smæʃɪŋ ə mɪɹɝ wɪð ə θʌndɝəs kɹæʃ ən baʊnsɪŋ bæk ɪn ə ʃaʊɝ ʌv ɡlæs, hæf-flæɾənd pɑt spɹeɪɪŋ ti, tʃɹeɪ spɪnɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ bɛn dʌbəl. ɛvɹiwʌn dʒʌmpt ɪksɛp kædzueɪn. ɹænd lɛp fɹəm ðə deɪz, klʌtʃɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ soʊ hɑɹɾ ɪz nʌkəlz hɝt. "ɪz ðət səpoʊz tə fɹaɪɾən mi?" hi ɡɹaʊld. "du jə ɪkspɛk mi tə bɛɡ, əɹ tə bi θæŋkfəl? tə wip? ɛɛs sədaɪ, aɪ kəd kloʊz maɪ hæn ən kɹʌʃ ju." ðə hæn i hɛld ʌp ʃʊk wɪð fjʊɹi. "mɛɹænə noʊz waɪ aɪ ʃʊd. ðə laɪɾ oʊnli noʊz waɪ aɪ doʊnt."

The heat inside him erupted in rage. Tray and massive teapot hurtled across the room, smashing a mirror with a thunderous crash and bouncing back in a shower of glass, half-flattened pot spraying tea, tray spinning across the floor bent double. Everyone jumped except Cadsuane. Rand leaped from the dais, clutching the Dragon Scepter so hard his knuckles hurt. "Is that supposed to frighten me?" he growled. "Do you expect me to beg, or to be thankful? To weep? Aes Sedai, I could close my hand and crush you." The hand he held up shook with fury. "Merana knows why I should. The Light only knows why I don't."

ðə wʊmən lʊkt ət ðə bæɾɝd ti θɪŋz əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɔl ðə taɪm ɪn ðə wɝld. "naʊ jə noʊ," ʃi sɛɾ ət læst, kɑm əz ɛvɝ, "ðæɾ aɪ noʊ jəɹ fjutʃɝ, ən jəɹ pɹizɛnt. ðə laɪts mɝsi feɪdz tə nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ə mæn u kən tʃænəl. səm si ðəɾ ən bɪliv ðə laɪt dɪnaɪz ðoʊz mɛn. aɪ də nɑt. hæv jə bɪɡʌn tə hɪɹ vɔɪsəz, jɛt?"

The woman looked at the battered tea things as if she had all the time in the world. "Now you know," she said at last, calm as ever, "that I know your future, and your present. The Light's mercy fades to nothing for a man who can channel. Some see that and believe the Light denies those men. I do not. Have you begun to hear voices, yet?"

"wʌt dʒju min?" hi æsk sloʊli. hi kəd fil luz θɝɪn lɪsnɪŋ.

"What do you mean?" he asked slowly. He could feel Lews Therin listening.

ðə tɪŋɡəl ɹɪtɝn tə hɪz skɪn, ən i vɛɹi nɪɹli tʃænəld, bʌɾ ɔl ðət hæpənd wɑz ðət ðə tipɑt ɹoʊz ən floʊɾəd tə kædzueɪn, tɝnɪŋ sloʊli ɪn ði ɛɹ fəɹ əɹ tə ɪɡzæmɪn. "sʌm mɛn u kən tʃænəl bɪɡɪn tə hɪɹ vɔɪsəz." ʃi spoʊk ɔlmoʊst æbsənli, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə flæɾənd sfɪɹ ə sɪlvɝ ən ɡoʊld. "ɪɾ ɪz ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə mædnəs. vɔɪsəz kənvɝsɪŋ wɪð ðɛm, tɛlɪŋ əm wʌt tə du." ðə tipɑt dʒɹɪftəd dʒɛnli tə ðə flɔɹ baɪ hɝ fit. "hæv jə hɝɾ ɛni?"

The tingle returned to his skin, and he very nearly channeled, but all that happened was that the teapot rose and floated to Cadsuane, turning slowly in the air for her to examine. "Some men who can channel begin to hear voices." She spoke almost absently, frowning at the flattened sphere of silver and gold. "It is a part of the madness. Voices conversing with them, telling them what to do." The teapot drifted gently to the floor by her feet. "Have you heard any?"

stɑɹtlɪŋli, dæʃivə ɡeɪv ə ɹɔkəs læf, ʃoʊldɝz ʃeɪkɪŋ. nɛɹɪʃmə wɛɾ ɪz lɪps; hi maɪt nɑɾ əv bɪn əfɹeɪɾ ə ðə wʊmən bɪfɔɹ, bʌt naʊ hi wɑtʃt əɹ kloʊsli əz ə skɔɹpiən.

Startlingly, Dashiva gave a raucous laugh, shoulders shaking. Narishma wet his lips; he might not have been afraid of the woman before, but now he watched her closely as a scorpion.

"aɪ wɪl æsk ðə kwɛstʃənz," ɹænd sɛd fɝmli. "ju sim tə fɝɡɛt. aɪm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn." jə ɑɹ ɹil, ɑɹən ju? hi wʌndɝd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ænsɝ. luz θɝɪn? səmtaɪmz ðə mæn dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ, bʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlweɪz dʒɹu hɪm. luz θɝɪn? hi wɑz nɑt mæd; ðə vɔɪs wɑz ɹil, nɑɾ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən. nɑt mædnəs. ə sʌɾən dɪzaɪɝ tə læf dɪd nɑt hɛlp.

"I will ask the questions," Rand said firmly. "You seem to forget. I am the Dragon Reborn." You are real, aren't you? he wondered. There was no answer. Lews Therin? Sometimes the man did not answer, but Aes Sedai always drew him. Lews Therin? He was not mad; the voice was real, not imagination. Not madness. A sudden desire to laugh did not help.

kædzueɪn saɪd. "ju ɑɹ ə jʌŋ mæn u hæz lɪɾəl aɪdiə wɛɹ hiz ɡoʊɪŋ əɹ waɪ, əɹ wʌt laɪz əhɛd. jə sim oʊvɝɹɔt. pɝhæps wi kən spik wən jə ɑɹ mɔɹ sɛɾəld. hæv jə ɛni əbdʒɛkʃən tə maɪ teɪkɪŋ mɛɹænə ən ənʊɹə əweɪ fəɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl? aɪv sin niðɝ ɪn kwaɪt səm taɪm."

Cadsuane sighed. "You are a young man who has little idea where he is going or why, or what lies ahead. You seem overwrought. Perhaps we can speak when you are more settled. Have you any objection to my taking Merana and Annoura away for a little while? I've seen neither in quite some time."

ɹænd ɡeɪpt ət hɝ. ʃi swupt ɪn, ɪnsʌltɪd hɪm, θɹɛɾənd hɪm, kæʒəwəli ənaʊnst ʃi nu əbaʊt ðə vɔɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd, ən wɪð ðət ʃi wɑntəd tə liv ən tɔk wɪð mɛɹænə ən ənʊɹə? ɪz ʃi mæd? stɪl noʊ ænsɝ fɹəm luz θɝɪn. ðə mæn wɑz ɹil. hi wɑz!

Rand gaped at her. She swooped in, insulted him, threatened him, casually announced she knew about the voice in his head, and with that she wanted to leave and talk with Merana and Annoura? Is she mad? Still no answer from Lews Therin. The man was real. He was!

"ɡoʊ əweɪ," hi sɛd. "ɡoʊ əweɪ, ænd. . . ." hi wɑz nɑt mæd. "ɔl ə ju, ɡɛɾ aʊt! ɡɛɾ aʊt!"

"Go away," he said. "Go away, and. . . ." He was not mad. "All of you, get out! Get out!"

dæʃivə blɪŋkt ət hɪm, tɪltɪŋ ɪz hɛd, ðən ʃɹʌɡd ən stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ. kædzueɪn smaɪld ɪn sətʃ ə weɪ ðəɾ i hæf-ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ tə tɛl ɪm əɡɛn i wɑz ə ɡʊd bɔɪ, ðən ɡæðɝɾ ʌp mɛɹænə ən ənʊɹə ən hɝɾɪd əm təwɔɹd ðə meɪɾənz, hu wɝ loʊɝɪŋ ðɛɹ veɪlz ən fɹaʊnɪŋ wɝidli. nɛɹɪʃmə lʊkt əɾ ɪm tu, hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ əntɪl ɹænd dʒɛstʃɝd ʃɑɹpli. faɪnəli ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ɡɔn, ən i wɑz əloʊn. əloʊn.

Dashiva blinked at him, tilting his head, then shrugged and started for the door. Cadsuane smiled in such a way that he half-expected her to tell him again he was a good boy, then gathered up Merana and Annoura and herded them toward the Maidens, who were lowering their veils and frowning worriedly. Narishma looked at him too, hesitating until Rand gestured sharply. Finally they were all gone, and he was alone. Alone.

kənvʌlsɪvli hi hɝl ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ. ðə spɪɹ-pɔɪn stʌk kwɪvɝɪŋ ɪn ðə bæk ʌv wʌn ðə tʃɛɹz, ðə tæsəlz sweɪɪŋ.

Convulsively he hurled the Dragon Scepter. The spear-point stuck quivering in the back of one the chairs, the tassels swaying.

"aɪ æm nɑt mæd," hi sɛd tə ði ɛmpti ɹum. luz θɝɪn hæd toʊld ɪm θɪŋz; hi wəd nɛvɝ əv ɪskeɪpt ɡəlinəz tʃɛst wɪθaʊt ðə dɛd mænz vɔɪs. bʌɾ i hæd juz ðə paʊɝ bɪfɔɹ i ɛvɝ hɝd ðə vɔɪs; hi hæd fɪɡjɝɾ aʊt haʊ tə kɔl laɪtnɪŋ ən hɝl faɪɝ ən fɔɹm ə kənstʃɹʌk ðət hæd kɪl hʌnʒɹədz ə tʃɹɑləks. bʌt ðɛn, meɪbi ðət hæd bɪn luz θɝɪn, laɪk ðoʊz mɛmɹiz ə klaɪmɪŋ tʃɹiz ɪn ə plʌm ɔɹtʃɝd, ən ɛntɝɪŋ ðə hɔl ə ðə sɝvəns, ən ə dʌzən mɔɹ ðət kɹɛpt ʌp ɑn ɪm ənəwɛɹz. ən meɪbi ðoʊz mɛmɹiz wɝ ɔl fænsiz, mæd dʒɹimz ʌv ə mæd maɪnd, dʒʌs laɪk ðə vɔɪs.

"I am not mad," he said to the empty room. Lews Therin had told him things; he would never have escaped Galina's chest without the dead man's voice. But he had used the Power before he ever heard the voice; he had figured out how to call lightning and hurl fire and form a construct that had killed hundreds of Trollocs. But then, maybe that had been Lews Therin, like those memories of climbing trees in a plum orchard, and entering the Hall of the Servants, and a dozen more that crept up on him unawares. And maybe those memories were all fancies, mad dreams of a mad mind, just like the voice.

hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz peɪsɪŋ, ən kəd nɑt stɑp. hi fɛlt əz ɪf i hæd tə muv əɹ ɪz mʌsəlz wəd tɛɹ ɪm əpɑɹɾ ɪn spæzəmz. "aɪ æm nɑt mæd," hi pæntɪd. nɑt jɛt. "aɪ æm nɑt - " ðə saʊn ə ðə dɔɹ oʊpənɪŋ meɪɾ ɪm wɝl, hoʊpɪŋ fəɹ mɪn.

He realized he was pacing, and could not stop. He felt as if he had to move or his muscles would tear him apart in spasms. "I am not mad," he panted. Not yet. "I am not - " The sound of the door opening made him whirl, hoping for Min.

ɪt wɑz ɹaɪəlɪn əɡɛn, səpɔɹɾɪŋ ə ʃɔɹt stɑki wʊmən ɪn ə dɑɹk blu dʒɹɛs, wɪð hɛɹ mɔɹ ɡɹeɪ ðən nɑɾ ən ə blʌn feɪs. ə hæɡɝd, ɹɛd-aɪd feɪs.

It was Riallin again, supporting a short stocky woman in a dark blue dress, with hair more gray than not and a blunt face. A haggard, red-eyed face.

hi wɑntəd tə tɛl əm tə ɡoʊ əweɪ, tə liv ɪm əloʊn. əloʊn. wɑz i əloʊn? wɑz luz θɝɪn ə dʒɹim? ɪf oʊnli ðeɪ wəd liv hɪm. . . . ɪdʒɹin tɑɹsən wɑz ðə hɛɾ ə ðə skul i hæd faʊndəd hɪɹ ɪn kɛɹhin, ə wʊmən soʊ pɹæktəkəl i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi bɪlivd ɪn ðə wʌn paʊɝ sɪns ʃi kəd niðɝ si nɔɹ tʌtʃ ɪt. wʌt kəd ɹədus əɹ tə ðɪs steɪt?

He wanted to tell them to go away, to leave him alone. Alone. Was he alone? Was Lews Therin a dream? If only they would leave him. . . . Idrien Tarsin was the head of the school he had founded here in Cairhien, a woman so practical he was not sure she believed in the One Power since she could neither see nor touch it. What could reduce her to this state?

hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf tɝn təwɔɹd hɝ. mæɾ əɹ nɑt, əloʊn əɹ nɑt, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ɛls tə də wʌt hæd tə bi dʌn. nɑɾ ivən ðɪs smɔl duɾi. hɛviɝ ðən ə maʊntən. "wʌɾ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ?" hi æskt, meɪkɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs əz dʒɛntəl əz i kʊd.

He made himself turn toward her. Mad or not, alone or not, there was no one else to do what had to be done. Not even this small duty. Heavier than a mountain. "What is the matter?" he asked, making his voice as gentle as he could.

sʌɾənli wipɪŋ, ɪdʒɹin stʌmbəl tə hɪm ən kəlæpst əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst. wən ʃi wɑz koʊhɪɹən ɪnʌf tə tɛl əɹ stɔɹi, hi fɛlt laɪk wipɪŋ tu.

Suddenly weeping, Idrien stumbled to him and collapsed against his chest. When she was coherent enough to tell her story, he felt like weeping too.


tʃæptɝ naɪntin


CHAPTER 19

daɪmənz ən stɑɹz


Diamonds and Stars

mɛɹænə fɑloʊd kloʊsli əz ʃi dɛɹɾ ɑn kædzueɪnz hilz, ə hʌnʒɹəd kwɛstʃənz bʌbəlɪŋ ɑn əɹ tʌŋ, bʌt kædzueɪn wɑz nɑɾ ə wʊmən huz sliv jə plʌkt. ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd u ʃi noʊɾəst, ən wɛn. ənʊɹə hɛld əɹ saɪləns, tu, ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm dʒɹɔn əlɔŋ ɪn ði ʌðɝz weɪk daʊn ðə pæləs kɔɹɪɾɝz, daʊn flaɪts ə stɛɹz, pɑlɪʃt mɑɹbəl ət fɝst, ðən pleɪn dɑɹk stoʊn. mɛɹænə ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz wɪð əɹ sɪstɝ ɡɹeɪ, ən fɛlt ə moʊməns pæŋ. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ ðə wʊmən, ɹɪli, bʌɾ ənʊɹə wɔɹ ðə stili lʊk ʌv ə ɡɝl ɑn əɹ weɪ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz, dɪtɝmən tə bi bɹeɪv. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt nɑvəsɪz. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt tʃɪlʒɹən. ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ - ən kloʊzd ɪt, ɪntɪmɪdeɪɾɪd baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪ bʌn bɑbɪŋ əhɛɾ ə hɝ wɪð ɪts dæŋɡəlɪŋ munz ən stɑɹz ən bɝdz ən fɪʃ. kædzueɪn wɑz . . . kædzueɪn.

Merana followed closely as she dared on Cadsuane's heels, a hundred questions bubbling on her tongue, but Cadsuane was not a woman whose sleeve you plucked. She decided who she noticed, and when. Annoura held her silence, too, the pair of them drawn along in the other's wake down the palace corridors, down flights of stairs, polished marble at first, then plain dark stone. Merana exchanged glances with her sister Gray, and felt a moment's pang. She did not know the woman, really, but Annoura wore the steely look of a girl on her way to the Mistress of Novices, determined to be brave. They were not novices. They were not children. She opened her mouth - and closed it, intimidated by the gray bun bobbing ahead of her with its dangling moons and stars and birds and fish. Cadsuane was . . . Cadsuane.

mɛɹænə hæd mɛɾ əɹ wʌns bɪfɔɹ, əɹ ət lis lɪsən tə hɝ ən bɪn spoʊkən tə, wən ʃi wɑz ə nɑvəs. sɪstɝz hæd kʌm fɹəm ɛvɹi ədʒɑ tə si ðə wʊmən, fɪld wɪð ən ɑ ðeɪ kəd nɑt haɪd. wʌns kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn hæd bɪn ðə stændɝd baɪ wɪtʃ ɛvɹi nu ɛntʃɹi ɪndə ðə nɑvəs bʊk wɑz dʒʌdʒd. əntɪl ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd, nʌn hæd kʌm tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪn əɹ laɪftaɪm u kəd mætʃ ðət stændɝd, mʌtʃ lɛs sɝpæs ɪt. ɪn mɔɹ weɪz ðən wʌn, hɝ laɪk hæd nɑt wɔkt əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz. ə ɹəfjuzəl tə æksɛp səlɛkʃən əz ə sɪɾɝ wɑz ənhɝɾ ʌv, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz sɛd ʃi hæd ɹəfjuzd, ən ət lis twaɪs. ɪt wɑz sɛd ʃi hæd spɝn biɪŋ ɹeɪz hɛɾ ə ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ, tu. ɪt wɑz sɛd ʃi wʌns vænɪʃt fɹəm ðə taʊɝ fəɹ tɛn jɪɹz kəz ðə hɔl ɪntɛndəd tə ɹeɪz əɹ æmɪɝlɪn. nɑt ðət ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ spɛn ə deɪ mɔɹ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn ðən æbsəlutli nɛsəsɛɹi. wɝɾ ə kædzueɪn keɪm tə ðə taʊɝ, stɔɹiz tə meɪk sɪstɝz ɡeɪp, ædvɛntʃɝz tə meɪk ðoʊz u dʒɹimd ə ðə ʃɔl ʃɪvɝ. ʃi wəɾ ɛn ə lɛdʒən əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪf ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. ðə ʃɔl hæd ɡɹeɪs mɛɹænəz ʃoʊldɝz fəɹ oʊvɝ twɛnti-faɪv jɪɹz wən kædzueɪn ənaʊnst əɹ ɹitaɪɝmən fɹəm ðə wɝld, hɝ hɛɹ ɔlɹɛɾi sɑləd ɡɹeɪ, ən ɛvɹiwʌn əsumd əɹ lɔŋ dɛd wən ði il wɔɹ ɪɹʌptəɾ ənʌðɝ twɛnti-faɪv jɪɹz ɑn, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ðə faɪɾɪŋ wɑz θɹi mʌnθs oʊld, ʃi ɹiəpɪɹd, əkʌmpənid baɪ tu wɔɹɾɝz, mɛn lɔŋ ɪn ðə tuθ jɛt stɪl hɑɹɾ əz aɪɝn. ɪt wɑz sɛd kædzueɪn hæd hæd mɔɹ wɔɹɾɝz oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz ðən moʊst sɪstɝz hæd ʃuz. æftɝ ði il ɹitʃɹiɾəd fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn, ʃi ɹɪtaɪɹd wʌns mɔɹ, bʌt səm sɛd, mɔɹ ðən hæf-sɪɹiəsli, ðət kædzueɪn wəd nɛvɝ daɪ soʊ lɔŋ əz ivən ə spɑɹk ʌv ædvɛntʃɝ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə wɝld.

Merana had met her once before, or at least listened to her and been spoken to, when she was a novice. Sisters had come from every Ajah to see the woman, filled with an awe they could not hide. Once Cadsuane Melaidhrin had been the standard by which every new entry into the novice book was judged. Until Elayne Trakand, none had come to the White Tower in her lifetime who could match that standard, much less surpass it. In more ways than one, her like had not walked among Aes Sedai for a thousand years. A refusal to accept selection as a Sitter was unheard of, yet it was said she had refused, and at least twice. It was said she had spurned being raised head of the Green Ajah, too. It was said she once vanished from the Tower for ten years because the Hall intended to raise her Amyrlin. Not that she had ever spent a day more in Tar Valon than absolutely necessary. Word of Cadsuane came to the Tower, stories to make sisters gape, adventures to make those who dreamed of the shawl shiver. She would end a legend among Aes Sedai. If she was not already. The shawl had graced Merana's shoulders for over twenty-five years when Cadsuane announced her retirement from the world, her hair already solid gray, and everyone assumed her long dead when the Aiel War erupted another twenty-five years on, but before the fighting was three months old, she reappeared, accompanied by two Warders, men long in the tooth yet still hard as iron. It was said Cadsuane had had more Warders over the years than most sisters had shoes. After the Aiel retreated from Tar Valon, she retired once more, but some said, more than half-seriously, that Cadsuane would never die so long as even a spark of adventure remained in the world.

ən ðəɾ ɪz ðə sɔɹɾ ə nɑnsɛns ðət nɑvəsɪz bæbəl, mɛɹænə ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf fɝmli. ivən wi daɪ ɪvɛntʃəwəli. jɛt kædzueɪn wɑz stɪl kædzueɪn. ən ɪf ʃi wɑz nɑt wʌn ə ðoʊz sɪstɝz u hæɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi æftɝ ælθɹ wɑz teɪkən, ðə sʌn wəd nɑt sɛt tənaɪt. mɛɹænə muvd əɹ ɑɹmz tə ədʒʌst əɹ ʃɔl ən ɹilaɪzd ɪt wɑz hæŋɪŋ ɑn ə pɛɡ ɪn əɹ ɹum. ɹɪdɪkjələs. ʃi niɾəd noʊ ɹimaɪndɝz ə hu ʃi wɑz. ɪf oʊnli ɪt hæd bɪn sʌmwʌn ʌðɝ ðən kædzueɪn. . . . ə pɛɹ ʌv waɪz wʌnz stændɪŋ ɪn ðə maʊθ ʌv ə kɹɔsɪŋ kɔɹəɾɝ wɑtʃt əm pæs, koʊl peɪl aɪz ɪn stoʊni feɪsəz bɪniθ ðɛɹ dɑɹk hɛd skɑɹvz. ɛdʒɹə ən leɪn. boʊθ kəd tʃænəl, ən kwaɪt stʃɹɔŋli; ðeɪ maɪɾ əv ɹɪzən haɪ hæd ðeɪ ɡɔn tə ðə taʊɝ əz ɡɝlz. kædzueɪn wɛn baɪ wɪθaʊt simɪŋ tə noʊɾəs ðə waɪldɝz' dɪsəpɹəbeɪʃən. ənʊɹə dɪd, fɹaʊnɪŋ ən mʌɾɝɪŋ, slɛndɝ bɹeɪdz sweɪɪŋ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. mɛɹænə kɛpt əɹ oʊn aɪz ɑn ðə flɔɹ taɪlz.

And that is the sort of nonsense that novices babble, Merana reminded herself firmly. Even we die eventually. Yet Cadsuane was still Cadsuane. And if she was not one of those sisters who had appeared in the city after al'Thor was taken, the sun would not set tonight. Merana moved her arms to adjust her shawl and realized it was hanging on a peg in her room. Ridiculous. She needed no reminders of who she was. If only it had been someone other than Cadsuane. . . . A pair of Wise Ones standing in the mouth of a crossing corridor watched them pass, cold pale eyes in stony faces beneath their dark head scarves. Edarra and Leyn. Both could channel, and quite strongly; they might have risen high had they gone to the Tower as girls. Cadsuane went by without seeming to notice the wilders' disapprobation. Annoura did, frowning and muttering, slender braids swaying as she shook her head. Merana kept her own eyes on the floor tiles.

əndaʊɾɪdli ɪt wəd fɔl tə hɝ naʊ, ɪkspleɪnɪŋ tə kædzueɪn ðə . . . kɑmpɹəmaɪz . . . ðət hæd bɪn wɝkt aʊt wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz læs naɪt, bɪfɔɹ ʃi ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ bɹɔt tə ðə pæləs. ənʊɹə dɪd nɑt noʊ - ʃi wɑz noʊ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt - ən mɛɹænə hæd smɔl hoʊp ðət ɹæfɛlə əɹ vɛɹɪn wəɾ əpɪɹ, əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls ʃi maɪt sʌmhaʊ fɔɪs ðə duɾi ɑntu. ɪt wɑz ə kɑmpɹəmaɪz, ɪn ə weɪ, ən pɝhæps ðə bɛs ðət kəd bi ɪkspɛktəɾ ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz, jɛt ʃi stʃɹɔŋli kwɛstʃənd wɛðɝ kædzueɪn wəd si ɪt soʊ. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə bi ðə wʌn tə kənvɪns hɝ. bɛɾɝ tə pɔɹ ti fəɹ ðoʊz kɝs mɛn fəɹ ə mʌnθ. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn soʊ fɹi wɪð əɹ tʌŋ wɪð jʌŋ ælθɹ. noʊɪŋ waɪ hi hæd meɪɾ əɹ sɝv ti wɑz noʊ bɑm fəɹ biɪŋ sild ɔf fɹəm ɛvɹi ædvæntɪdʒ ʃi maɪɾ əv ɡeɪn fɹəm ɪt. ʃi wəd ɹæðɝ θɪŋk ʃi hæd bɪn kɑɾ ɪn səm tɑvɝən swɝlɪŋ ə ðə pæɾɝn ðən bɪliv ðəɾ ə jʌŋ mænz aɪz, laɪk pɑlɪʃt blu-ɡɹeɪ dʒɛmz, hæd sɛɾ əɹ bæbəlɪŋ fɹəm pjʊɹ fɹaɪt, bʌɾ iðɝ weɪ, ʃi hæd hændəɾ ɔl ði ædvæntɪdʒ tə hɪm ɑn ə tʃɹeɪ. ʃi wɪʃt. . . .

Undoubtedly it would fall to her now, explaining to Cadsuane the . . . compromise . . . that had been worked out with the Wise Ones last night, before she and the others were brought to the palace. Annoura did not know - she was no part of it - and Merana had small hope that Rafela or Verin would appear, or anyone else she might somehow foist the duty onto. It was a compromise, in a way, and perhaps the best that could be expected under the circumstances, yet she strongly questioned whether Cadsuane would see it so. She wished she did not have to be the one to convince her. Better to pour tea for those cursed men for a month. She wished she had not been so free with her tongue with young al'Thor. Knowing why he had made her serve tea was no balm for being sealed off from every advantage she might have gained from it. She would rather think she had been caught in some ta'veren swirling of the Pattern than believe that a young man's eyes, like polished blue-gray gems, had set her babbling from pure fright, but either way, she had handed all the advantage to him on a tray. She wished. . . .

wɪʃɪŋ wɑz fəɹ tʃɪlʒɹən. ʃi hæd nəɡoʊʃieɪɾəd kaʊnləs tʃɹiɾiz, mɛni ʌv wɪtʃ hæɾ æktʃəli  əkɑmplɪʃt wʌt wɑz ɪntɛndəd; ʃi hæɾ ɛndəd θɹi wɔɹz ən stɑp tu dʌzən mɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ bɪɡæn, feɪs kɪŋz ən kwinz ən dʒɛnɝəlz ən meɪɾ əm si ɹizən. ivən soʊ. . . . ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf pɹɑməsɪŋ ðət ʃi wəd nɑɾ ʌɾɝ wʌn wɝɾ ə kəmpleɪnt noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɔfən ðət mæn meɪɾ əɹ pleɪ ðə meɪdsɝvən ɪf oʊnli siɑnɪd wəd pɑp ɝaʊn ðə nɛks kɔɹnɝ, əɹ mɑsʊɝi, əɹ feɪlʒɹɪn, əɹ ɛniwʌn əɾ ɔl. laɪt! ɪf oʊnli ʃi kəd blɪŋk əɹ aɪz ən faɪn ðəɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ sɪns livɪŋ sɑlədɑɹ hæd bɪn ə bæd dʒɹim.

Wishing was for children. She had negotiated countless treaties, many of which had actually accomplished what was intended; she had ended three wars and stopped two dozen more before they began, faced kings and queens and generals and made them see reason. Even so. . . . She found herself promising that she would not utter one word of complaint no matter how often that man made her play the maidservant if only Seonid would pop around the next corner, or Masuri, or Faeldrin, or anyone at all. Light! If only she could blink her eyes and find that everything since leaving Salidar had been a bad dream.

sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, kædzueɪn lɛɾ əm stʃɹeɪt tə ðə smɔl ɹum ðət bɛɹə ən kaɪɹunə ʃɛɹd, dip ɪn ðə baʊəlz ə ðə pæləs. wɛɹ ðə sɝvəns lɪvd. ə taɪt wɪndoʊ, sɛt haɪ ɪn ðə wɔl jɛt lɛvəl wɪð ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ʌv ə kɔɹtʃjɑɹɾ aʊtsaɪd, lɛɾ ɪn ə lɪɾəl stʃɹim ə laɪt, bʌt ðə ɹum simd mɝki. kloʊks ən sæɾəlbæɡz ən ə fju dʒɹɛsəz hʌŋ fɹəm pɛɡz ɪn ðə kɹækt, jɛloʊɪŋ plæstɝ wɔlz. ɡaʊudʒɪz mɑɹd ðə bɛɹ wʊɾən flɔɹ, ðoʊ səm ɛfɝt hæd bɪn meɪd tə smuð ðɛm. ə taɪni bæɾɝd ɹaʊn teɪbəl stʊɾ ɪn wʌn kɔɹnɝ, ən ən ikwəli biɾən wɑʃstæn ɪn ənʌðɝ, wɪð ə tʃɪp beɪsən ən pɪtʃɝ. mɛɹænə aɪd ðə smɔl bɛd. ɪt dɪd nɑt lʊk ðət mʌtʃ nɛɹoʊɝ ðən ðə wʌn ʃi wɑz fɔɹs tə ʃɛɹ wɪð siɑnɪɾ ən mɑsʊɝi, tu dɔɹz fɑɹðɝ daʊn. ðət ɹum wɑz lɑɹdʒɝ baɪ pɝhæps ə peɪs itʃ weɪ, bʌt nɑt mɛn fəɹ θɹi. kɔɪɹən ən ði ʌðɝz stɪl hɛld ɪn ði il tɛns pɹɑbli wɝ mʌtʃ mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl əz pɹɪznɝz.

Surprisingly, Cadsuane led them straight to the small room that Bera and Kiruna shared, deep in the bowels of the palace. Where the servants lived. A tight window, set high in the wall yet level with the paving stones of a courtyard outside, let in a little stream of light, but the room seemed murky. Cloaks and saddlebags and a few dresses hung from pegs in the cracked, yellowing plaster walls. Gouges marred the bare wooden floor, though some effort had been made to smooth them. A tiny battered round table stood in one corner, and an equally beaten washstand in another, with a chipped basin and pitcher. Merana eyed the small bed. It did not look that much narrower than the one she was forced to share with Seonid and Masuri, two doors farther down. That room was larger by perhaps a pace each way, but not meant for three. Coiren and the others still held in the Aiel tents probably were much more comfortable as prisoners.

niðɝ bɛɹə nɔɹ kaɪɹunə wɑz pɹɛzənt, bʌt deɪdʒiən wɑz, ə plʌmp, peɪl wʊmən u wɔɹ ə θɪn sɪlvɝ tʃeɪn ɪn əɹ lɔŋ blæk hɛɹ, wɪð ə ɹaʊn munstoʊn dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə hɝ fɔɹhɛd. hɝ dɑɹk kɛɹhinɪn dʒɹɛs bɔɹ fɔɹ θɪn stʃɹaɪps ə kʌlɝ əkɹɔs ðə bɑɾəs, ən ʃi hæɾ æɾəd slæʃɪz ɪn ðə skɝts, waɪt fəɹ əɹ ədʒɑ. ə jʌŋɡɝ dɔɾɝ ʌv wʌn ə ðə lɛsɝ haʊsəz, ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz maɪndəd mɛɹænə ʌv ə paʊɾɝ pɪdʒən. wən kædzueɪn ɛntɝd, deɪdʒiən ɹoʊz ɑn əɹ toʊz ɪkspɛktənli.

Neither Bera nor Kiruna was present, but Daigian was, a plump, pale woman who wore a thin silver chain in her long black hair, with a round moonstone dangling in the middle of her forehead. Her dark Cairhienin dress bore four thin stripes of color across the bodice, and she had added slashes in the skirts, white for her Ajah. A younger daughter of one of the lesser Houses, she had always minded Merana of a pouter pigeon. When Cadsuane entered, Daigian rose on her toes expectantly.

ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn tʃɛɹ ɪn ðə ɹum, lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə stul wɪð ən ɪkskjus ʌv ə bæk. kædzueɪn tʊk ðəɾ ən saɪd. "ti, pliz. tu sɪps ʌv wʌt ðət bɔɪ pɔɹd, ən aɪ cʊɾə juz maɪ tʌŋ tə soʊl ə ʃu."

There was only one chair in the room, little more than a stool with an excuse of a back. Cadsuane took that and sighed. "Tea, please. Two sips of what that boy poured, and I could have used my tongue to sole a shoe."

ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ ɪmiɾiətli sɝaʊndəd deɪdʒiən, ðoʊ feɪnli, ən ə dɛntɪd tɪn tipɑt ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə teɪbəl, floʊz ə faɪɝ hiɾɪŋ ðə wɔɾɝ əz ʃi oʊpən ə smɔl bɹæs-baʊn ti tʃɛst.

The glow of saidar immediately surrounded Daigian, though faintly, and a dented tin teapot rose from the table, flows of Fire heating the water as she opened a small brass-bound tea chest.

wɪð noʊ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs fəɹ pleɪs tə sɪt, mɛɹænə sɛɾəld ɑntu ðə bɛd, ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ skɝts ən ʃɪftɪŋ ɑn ðə lʌmpi mætʃɹəs waɪl ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ɔɹɾɝ əɹ θɔts. ðɪs maɪt wɛl bi əz ɪmpɔɹɾənt ə nɪɡoʊʃieɪʃən əz ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ ʌndɝteɪkən. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ənʊɹə dʒɔɪn hɝ, pɝtʃɪŋ ɑn ðə lɪp ə ðə mætʃɹəs.

With no other choice for place to sit, Merana settled onto the bed, adjusting her skirts and shifting on the lumpy mattress while she tried to order her thoughts. This might well be as important a negotiation as she had ever undertaken. After a moment, Annoura joined her, perching on the lip of the mattress.

"aɪ teɪk ɪt baɪ jəɹ pɹɛzəns, mɛɹænə," kædzueɪn sɛɾ əbɹʌpli, "ðæt teɪlz ə ðə bɔɪ səbmɪɾɪŋ tə ɪleɪɾə ɑɹ fɔls. doʊn lʊk soʊ sɝpɹaɪzd, tʃaɪld. dɪd jə θɪŋk aɪ dɪdnt noʊ jəɹ . . . əsoʊsieɪʃənz?" ʃi ɡeɪv ðət wɝd sətʃ ə twɪst, ɪt saʊndəɾ əz fɪlθi əz ɛni soʊlʒɝz ɛkspləɾɪv. "æn ju, ənʊɹə?"

"I take it by your presence, Merana," Cadsuane said abruptly, "that tales of the boy submitting to Elaida are false. Don't look so surprised, child. Did you think I didn't know your . . . associations?" She gave that word such a twist, it sounded as filthy as any soldier's expletive. "And you, Annoura?"

"aɪ æm hɪɹ oʊnli tə ædvaɪz bɹəleɪn, ðoʊ ðə tʃɹuθ ʌv ɪɾ ɪz, ʃi ɪɡnɔɹd maɪ ædvaɪs baɪ kʌmɪŋ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs." ðə tæɹɑbənɝ wʊmən hɛld əɹ hɛɾ ʌp, vɔɪs kɑnfəɾənt. ʃi wɑz ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ θʌmz fəɹ ɔl ʃi wɑz wɝθ, ðoʊ. ʃi kəd nɑt də wɛl ət ðə nɪɡoʊʃieɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl ɪf ʃi wɑz ðət tʃɹænspɛɹənt. "fɔɹ ðə ɹɛst," ʃi sɛd kɛɹfəli, "aɪ hæv ɹitʃt noʊ dɪsɪʒən əz jɛt."

"I am here only to advise Berelain, though the truth of it is, she ignored my advice by coming in the first place." The Taraboner woman held her head up, voice confident. She was rubbing her thumbs for all she was worth, though. She could not do well at the negotiating table if she was that transparent. "For the rest," she said carefully, "I have reached no decision as yet."

"ə waɪz dɪsɪʒən, ðæt," kædzueɪn mɝmɝd, wɪð ə pɔɪntəd lʊk ət mɛɹænə. "ɪt simz ðəɾ ɪn ðə læs fju jɪɹz fɑɹ tu mɛni sɪstɝz əv fɝɡɑɾən ðeɪ pəzɛs bɹeɪnz, əɹ dɪskɹɛʃən. ðəɹ wɑz ə taɪm wən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹitʃt ðɛɹ dɪsɪʒənz æftɝ kɑm dɪlɪbɝeɪʃən, wɪð ðə ɡʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ɔlweɪz ɪn ðə fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ θɔts. dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt ðə sɑntʃ ɡɝl ɡɑt fɹəm mɛɾəlɪŋ wɪð ælθɹ, ənʊɹə. wɔk tu nɪɹ ə fɔɹdʒ-faɪɝ, ən jə kən bi bɝn bædli."

"A wise decision, that," Cadsuane murmured, with a pointed look at Merana. "It seems that in the last few years far too many sisters have forgotten they possess brains, or discretion. There was a time when Aes Sedai reached their decisions after calm deliberation, with the good of the Tower always in the front of their thoughts. Just remember what the Sanche girl got from meddling with al'Thor, Annoura. Walk too near a forge-fire, and you can be burned badly."

mɛɹænə lɪftəɾ əɹ tʃɪn, wɝkɪŋ əɹ nɛk tə iz ɪts taɪtnəs. ɹilaɪzɪŋ wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, ʃi meɪd hɝsɛlf stɑp. ðə wʊmən dɪd nɑt stæn ðət fɑɹ əbʌv hɝ. nɑt ɹɪli. dʒʌs haɪɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ sɪstɝ. "ɪf aɪ meɪ æsk . . ." tu dɪfəɾənt, bʌt wɝs tə stɑp ən stɑɹɾ oʊvɝ. ". . . wʌɾ ɑɹ jəɹ ɪntɛntʃənz, kædzueɪn?" ʃi stʃɹʌɡəl tə meɪnteɪn dɪɡnəɾi. "ɑbviəsli, juv bɪn . . . hoʊldɪŋ jɝsɛlf əsaɪd . . . əntɪl naʊ. waɪ hæv jə dɪsaɪɾɪd tə . . . əpɹoʊtʃ . . . ælθɹ ət ðɪs pɝtɪkjəlɝ taɪm? jə wɝ . . . ɹæðɝ ʌndəpləmæɾɪk . . . wɪð hɪm."

Merana lifted her chin, working her neck to ease its tightness. Realizing what she was doing, she made herself stop. The woman did not stand that far above her. Not really. Just higher than any other sister. "If I may ask . . ." Too diffident, but worse to stop and start over. ". . . what are your intentions, Cadsuane?" She struggled to maintain dignity. "Obviously, you have been . . . holding yourself aside . . . until now. Why have you decided to . . . approach . . . al'Thor at this particular time? You were . . . rather undiplomatic . . . with him."

"ju maɪɾ əz wɛl əv slæpt ɪz feɪs," ənʊɹə pʊɾ ɪn, ən mɛɹænə kʌlɝd. ʌv ðə tu ʌv ðɛm, ənʊɹə ʃʊɾə bɪn hævɪŋ ðə hɑɹɾɝ taɪm wɪð kædzueɪn baɪ fɑɹ, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt ðə wʌn stʌmbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ wɝdz.

"You might as well have slapped his face," Annoura put in, and Merana colored. Of the two of them, Annoura should have been having the harder time with Cadsuane by far, but she was not the one stumbling over her words.

kædzueɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪn pɪɾiɪŋ staɪl. "ɪf jə wɑnə si wʌɾ ə mæn ɪz meɪɾ ʌv, pʊʃ ɪm fɹəm ə dɝɛkʃən i dʌzn ɪkspɛkt. ðɛɹz ɡʊd mɛɾəl ɪn ðət bɔɪ, aɪ θɪŋk, bʌt hiz gɑnə bi dɪfəkəlt." stipəlɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz, ʃi pɪɹɾ əkɹɔs əm ət ðə wɔl, mjuzɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. "hi hæz ə ɹeɪdʒ ɪn ɪm fɪt tə bɝn ðə wɝld, ən i hoʊlz ɪt baɪ ə hɛɹ. pʊʃ ɪm tu fɑɹ ɔf bæləns. . . . fɔ! ælθɹz nɑt soʊ hɑɹd jɛɾ əz lɑɡən əblɝ əɹ mæzɹim teɪm, bʌɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz əz dɪfəkəlt, aɪ fɪɹ." hɪɹɪŋ ðoʊz θɹi neɪmz təɡɛðɝ kloʊv mɛɹænəz tʌŋ tə ðə ɹuf ə hɝ maʊθ.

Cadsuane shook her head in pitying style. "If you want to see what a man is made of, push him from a direction he doesn't expect. There's good metal in that boy, I think, but he's going to be difficult." Steepling her fingers, she peered across them at the wall, musing to herself. "He has a rage in him fit to burn the world, and he holds it by a hair. Push him too far off balance. . . . Phaw! Al'Thor's not so hard yet as Logain Ablar or Mazrim Taim, but a hundred times as difficult, I fear." Hearing those three names together clove Merana's tongue to the roof of her mouth.

"ju hæv sin lɑɡən ən teɪm boʊθ?" ə stɛɹɪŋ ənʊɹə sɛd. "teɪm, hiz fɑloʊɪŋ ælθɹ, soʊ aɪ hɪɹ." mɛɹænə mænədʒ tə swɑloʊ ə ɹɪliv saɪ. teɪlz ə dəməaɪz wɛlz hæd nɑt hæd taɪm tə spɹɛd jɛt. ðeɪ wʊd, ðoʊ.

"You have seen Logain and Taim both?" a staring Annoura said. "Taim, he is following al'Thor, so I hear." Merana managed to swallow a relieved sigh. Tales of Dumai's Wells had not had time to spread yet. They would, though.

"aɪ də hæv ɪɹz tə kætʃ ɹumɝz, tu, ənʊɹə," kædzueɪn sɛɾ əsɝbɪkli. "ðoʊ aɪ kəd wɪʃ aɪ dɪdnt, fəɹ wʌɾ aɪ hɪɹ ə ðət pɛɹ. ɔl maɪ wɝk θɹoʊn əweɪ tə bi dʌn oʊvɝ. ʌðɝz' əz wɛl, bʌɾ aɪ dɪd maɪ ʃɛɹ. ən ðən ðəɹ ɑɹ ðiz blækoʊts, ðiz æʃəmən." teɪkɪŋ ə kʌp fɹəm deɪdʒiən, ʃi smaɪld wɔɹmli ən mɝmɝd θæŋks. ðə ɹaʊnd-tʃikt waɪt simd ɹɛɾi tə kɝtsi, ðoʊ ɔl ʃi dɪd wɑz ɹitʃɹit tə ə kɔɹnɝ ən foʊld əɹ hænz. ʃi hæd bɪn lɔŋɡɝ ə nɑvəs, ən æksɛptɪd, ðən ɛniwʌn ɪn lɪvɪŋ mɛmɹi, bɛɹli əlaʊd tə ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ɡeɪnɪŋ ðə ɹɪŋ baɪ ə fɪŋɡɝneɪl ən ðə ʃɔl baɪ ən aɪlæʃ. deɪdʒiən wɑz ɔlweɪz sɛlf-ɪfeɪsɪŋ ɝaʊn ʌðɝ sɪstɝz.

"I do have ears to catch rumors, too, Annoura," Cadsuane said acerbically. "Though I could wish I didn't, for what I hear of that pair. All my work thrown away to be done over. Others' as well, but I did my share. And then there are these blackcoats, these Asha'man." Taking a cup from Daigian, she smiled warmly and murmured thanks. The round-cheeked White seemed ready to curtsy, though all she did was retreat to a corner and fold her hands. She had been longer a novice, and Accepted, than anyone in living memory, barely allowed to remain in the Tower, gaining the ring by a fingernail and the shawl by an eyelash. Daigian was always self-effacing around other sisters.

bɹiðɪŋ ðə stim fɹəm əɹ tikʌp, kædzueɪn wɛn ɑn, sʌɾənli tʃæɾɪŋ plɛzənli. "ɪt wɑz lɑɡən, pɹæktəkli ɑn maɪ dɔɹstɛp, ðət lʊɹd mi əweɪ fɹəm maɪ ɹoʊzɪz. fɔ! ə skʌfəl əɾ ə ʃip fɛɹ cʊɾə lʊɹd mi fɹəm ðoʊz laɪt-kɝs plæns. wʌts ðə pɔɪn ɪf jə juz ðə paʊɝ, bʌt də ɪt wɪθaʊt, ən jə ɡɹoʊ tɛn θaʊzən θɔɹnz fəɹ ɛvɹi - fɔ! aɪ æktʃəli  kənsɪɾɝd teɪkɪŋ ði oʊθ əz ə hʌntɝ, ɪf ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn wəɾ əlaʊ ɪt. wɛl. ɪt wɑz ə naɪs fju mʌnθs, tʃeɪsɪŋ daʊn lɑɡən, bʌt wʌns i wɑz teɪkən, ɛskɔɹɾɪŋ ɪm tə tɑɹ vəlɑn əpild əz mʌtʃ əz ðə ɹoʊzɪz. aɪ wɑndɝɾ ə bɪt, tə si wʌɾ aɪ kəd faɪnd, pɝhæps ə nu wɔɹɾɝ, ðoʊ ɪts ə bɪt leɪt fəɹ ðəɾ ɪn ɛni fɛɹnəs tə ðə mæn, aɪ səpoʊz. ðən aɪ hɝɾ ə teɪm, ən aɪ wɑz ɔf tə sɑldɑiə əz fæst aɪ kəd ɹaɪd. ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ə bɪɾ ʌv ɪksaɪtmən laɪk ə mæn u kən tʃænəl." əbɹʌpli hɝ vɔɪs hɑɹɾənd, ən əɹ ɡeɪz. "wɝ iðɝ ə jə ɪnvɑlvd ɪn ðət . . . vɪlnəs . . . ɹaɪɾ æftɝ ði il wɔɹ?"

Breathing the steam from her teacup, Cadsuane went on, suddenly chatting pleasantly. "It was Logain, practically on my doorstep, that lured me away from my roses. Phaw! A scuffle at a sheep fair could have lured me from those Light-cursed plants. What's the point if you use the Power, but do it without, and you grow ten thousand thorns for every - Phaw! I actually considered taking the oath as a Hunter, if the Council of Nine would allow it. Well. It was a nice few months, chasing down Logain, but once he was taken, escorting him to Tar Valon appealed as much as the roses. I wandered a bit, to see what I could find, perhaps a new Warder, though it's a bit late for that in any fairness to the man, I suppose. Then I heard of Taim, and I was off to Saldaea as fast I could ride. There's nothing for a bit of excitement like a man who can channel." Abruptly her voice hardened, and her gaze. "Were either of you involved in that . . . vileness . . . right after the Aiel War?"

dɪspaɪt hɝsɛlf, mɛɹænə ɡeɪv ə kənfjuz stɑɹt. ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz aɪz spoʊk ə ðə blɑk ən ðə hɛdzmənz æks. "wʌt vɪlnəs? aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt jə ɑɹ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt."

Despite herself, Merana gave a confused start. The other woman's eyes spoke of the block and the headsman's axe. "What vileness? I don't know what you are talking about."

ðəɾ əkjuzɪŋ ɡlɛɹ hɪɾ ənʊɹə soʊ hɑɹd, ʃi ɔlmoʊs fɛl ɔf ðə bɛd. "ði il wɔɹ?" ʃi ɡæspt, stɛɾiɪŋ hɝsɛlf. "ðə jɪɹz æftɝ, aɪ spɛn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ðə soʊ-kɔld ɡɹæn koʊəlɪʃən mɔɹ ðən ə neɪm."

That accusing glare hit Annoura so hard, she almost fell off the bed. "The Aiel War?" she gasped, steadying herself. "The years after, I spent trying to make the so-called Grand Coalition more than a name."

mɛɹænə lʊkt əɾ ənʊɹə wɪð ɪntʃɹəst. ə ɡʊd mɛni ʌv ðə ɡɹeɪ ədʒɑ hæd skɝid fɹəm kæpəɾəl tə kæpəɾəl æftɝ ðə wɔɹ, ɪn ə fjuɾəl ɛfɝt tə hoʊl təɡɛðɝ ði əlaɪəns ðət hæd fɔɹmd əɡɛns ði il, bʌt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ noʊn ənʊɹə wɑz wʌn ə ðɛm. ʃi kəd nɑt bi ðət bæɾ ə nəɡoʊʃieɪɾɝ ɪf ʃi wɑz. "soʊ dɪɾ aɪ," ʃi sɛd. dɪɡnəɾi. sɪns sɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ æftɝ ælθɹ fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn, ʃi hæd nɑt ɹɪteɪn mʌtʃ ə ðæt. ðə fju skɹæps ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ wɝ tu pɹɛʃəs tə luz. ʃi meɪɾ əɹ vɔɪs kɑm, ən fɝm. "wʌt vɪlnəs dʒju min, kædzueɪn?"

Merana looked at Annoura with interest. A good many of the Gray Ajah had scurried from capital to capital after the war, in a futile effort to hold together the alliance that had formed against the Aiel, but she had never known Annoura was one of them. She could not be that bad a negotiator if she was. "So did I," she said. Dignity. Since setting out after al'Thor from Caemlyn, she had not retained much of that. The few scraps remaining were too precious to lose. She made her voice calm, and firm. "What vileness do you mean, Cadsuane?"

ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən sɪmpli weɪv ðə kwɛstʃən əweɪ, əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd nɛvɝ spoʊkən ðə wɝd.

The gray-haired woman simply waved the question away, as though she had never spoken the word.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt, mɛɹænə wʌndɝd wɛðɝ kædzueɪnz wɪts maɪt bi wɑndɝɪŋ. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɪt hæpənɪŋ tə ə sɪstɝ, bʌt moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd ɡoʊ ɪndə ɹitʃɹiɾ ət ðə kloʊs ə ðɛɹ lɪvz, fɑɹ fɹəm ðə stʃɹæɾədʒəmz ən tɝbjələns ðət nʌn bʌt sɪstɝz ɛvɝ nu. fɑɹ fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn, ɔfən əz nɑt. hu kəd seɪ wʌt bɪfɛl əm bɪfɔɹ ði ɛnd? wʌn lʊk ət ðə klɪɹ, stɛɾi ɡeɪz ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ əɹ oʊvɝ ðət tikʌp kwɪkli dɪsɑbjuzd əɹ ʌv ɛni sətʃ noʊʃən. ɛniweɪ, twɛnti-jɪɹ-oʊl vɪlnəs, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt hæd bɪn, sɝɾənli kəd nɑt hoʊld ə kændəl tə wʌt ðə wɝl kənfɹʌntəd naʊ. ən kædzueɪn stɪl hæd nɑɾ ænsɝɾ əɹ ɝɪdʒənəl kwɛstʃənz. wʌd ʃi ɪntɛnd? ən waɪ naʊ?

For a moment, Merana wondered whether Cadsuane's wits might be wandering. She had never heard of it happening to a sister, but most Aes Sedai did go into retreat at the close of their lives, far from the stratagems and turbulence that none but sisters ever knew. Far from everyone, often as not. Who could say what befell them before the end? One look at the clear, steady gaze regarding her over that teacup quickly disabused her of any such notion. Anyway, twenty-year-old vileness, whatever it had been, certainly could not hold a candle to what the world confronted now. And Cadsuane still had not answered her original questions. What did she intend? And why now?

bɪfɔɹ mɛɹænə kəɾ æsk əɡɛn, ðə dɔɹ oʊpən ən bɛɹə ən kaɪɹunə wɝ hɝɾɪd ɪn baɪ kɔɹəl hoʊviən, ə bɔɪɪʃli slɪm jɛloʊ wɪð θɪk blæk aɪbɹaʊz ən ə mæs ə ɹeɪvən hɛɹ ðət ɡeɪv əɹ sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə waɪld əpɪɹəns noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ nitli ʃi dʒɹɛst, ən ʃi ɔlweɪz dʒɹɛs fəɹ ə kʌntʃɹi dæns, wɪð mæsəz ʌv ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ɑn əɹ slivz ən bɑɾəs ən ʌp ðə saɪdz ə hɝ skɝts. ðəɹ wɑz bɛɹli ɹum tə muv, wɪð soʊ mɛni pipəl ɪn ðɪs kənfaɪn speɪs. kɔɹəl nɛvɝ feɪl tə sim əmjuzd, wʌtɛvɝ hæpənd, bʌt naʊ ʃi wɔɹ ə waɪd smaɪl sʌmwɛɹ bɪtwin dɪsbɪlif ən aʊtʃɹaɪt læftɝ. kaɪɹunəz aɪz flæʃt ɪn ə feɪs ə fɹoʊzən ɛɹəɡəns, waɪl bɛɹə fjumd, maʊθ taɪɾ ən fɔɹhɛd kɹist. əntɪl ðeɪ sɔ kædzueɪn. mɛɹænə səpoʊz ðət fəɹ ðɛm, ɪt mʌs bi əz ɪf ʃi hæd faʊn hɝsɛlf feɪs tə feɪs wɪð əlɪn dɪfɛl əɹ sɛvlænə məsoʊ əɹ ivən mæbɹiəm ɛn ʃɛɹid. ðɛɹ aɪz bʌlʒd. kaɪɹunəz dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt.

Before Merana could ask again, the door opened and Bera and Kiruna were herded in by Corele Hovian, a boyishly slim Yellow with thick black eyebrows and a mass of raven hair that gave her something of a wild appearance no matter how neatly she dressed, and she always dressed for a country dance, with masses of embroidery on her sleeves and bodice and up the sides of her skirts. There was barely room to move, with so many people in this confined space. Corele never failed to seem amused, whatever happened, but now she wore a wide smile somewhere between disbelief and outright laughter. Kiruna's eyes flashed in a face of frozen arrogance, while Bera fumed, mouth tight and forehead creased. Until they saw Cadsuane. Merana supposed that for them, it must be as if she had found herself face to face with Alind Dyfelle or Sevlana Meseau or even Mabriam en Shereed. Their eyes bulged. Kiruna's jaw dropped.

"aɪ θɔt jə wɝ dɛd," bɛɹə bɹiðd.

"I thought you were dead," Bera breathed.

kædzueɪn snɪft ɪɹɪɾəbli. "aɪ æm ɡɹoʊɪŋ taɪɝɾ ə hɪɹɪŋ ðæt. ðə nɛkst ɪmbɪsil aɪ hɪɹ ɪt fɹəm ɪz gɑnə jɛlp fəɹ ə wik." ənʊɹə bɪɡæn stʌɾiɪŋ ðə toʊz ə hɝ slɪpɝz.

Cadsuane sniffed irritably. "I am growing tired of hearing that. The next imbecile I hear it from is going to yelp for a week." Annoura began studying the toes of her slippers.

"jul nɛvɝ ɡɛs wɛɹ aɪ faʊn ðiz tu," kɔɹəl sɛɾ ɪn əɹ lɪltɪŋ mʊɹændiən æksɛnt. ʃi tæp ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ ʌptɝnd noʊz, ðə weɪ ʃi dɪd wən əbaʊt tə tɛl ə dʒoʊk, əɹ wʌt ʃi sɔ əz wʌn. spɑts ə kʌlɝ əpɪɹɾ ɪn bɛɹəz tʃiks, ən lɑɹdʒɝ ɪn kaɪɹunəz. "bɛɹə ðəɹ wɑz sɪɾɪŋ mik əz ə maʊs ʌndɝ ði aɪz ə hæf ə dʌzən ə ðoʊz il waɪldɝz, hu toʊl mi boʊld əz jə pliz ðət ʃi kʊdn kʌm wɪð mi əntɪl sɔɹɪliə - oʊ, naʊ ðət wʊmənz ə hɛɹɹəɾən tə ɡɪv jə naɪtmɛɹz, ʃiz - aɪ kʊdn əv bɛɹə əntɪl sɔɹɪliə wɑz dʌn wɪð əɹ pɹaɪvət tʃæt wɪð ði ʌðɝ əpɹɛntəs. əɹ dɑɹlɪŋ kaɪɹunə, ðɛɹ."

"You'll never guess where I found these two," Corele said in her lilting Murandian accent. She tapped the side of her upturned nose, the way she did when about to tell a joke, or what she saw as one. Spots of color appeared in Bera's cheeks, and larger in Kiruna's. "Bera there was sitting meek as a mouse under the eyes of half a dozen of those Aiel wilders, who told me bold as you please that she couldn't come with me until Sorilea - oh, now that woman's a harridan to give you nightmares, she is - I couldn't have Bera until Sorilea was done with her private chat with the other apprentice. Our darling Kiruna, there."

ɪt wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ə mæɾɝ ə spɑts. kaɪɹunə ən bɛɹə ɹɛɾənd tə ðɛɹ hɛɹ, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə miɾ ɛniwʌnz aɪ. ivən deɪdʒiən stɛɹɾ ət ðɛm.

It was no longer a matter of spots. Kiruna and Bera reddened to their hair, refusing to meet anyone's eye. Even Daigian stared at them.

ɹɪlif sɝdʒ θɹu mɛɹænə ɪn wʌndɝfəl weɪvz. ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv tə bi ðə wʌn tə ɪkspleɪn haʊ ðə waɪz wʌnz hæɾ ɪntɝpɹəɾəd ðət ɹɛtʃɪɾ ælθɹz ɔɹɾɝz ðət ðə sɪstɝz wɝ tə oʊbeɪ ðɛm. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ɹɪli əpɹɛntəsɪz; ðəɹ wɝ noʊ lɛsənz ɪnvɑlvd, ʌv kɔɹs. wʌt kəɾ ə ɡɹeɪt lɑɾ ʌv waɪldɝz, sævədʒəz ət ðæt, titʃ ɛɛs sədaɪ? ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðət ðə waɪz wʌnz laɪk tə noʊ wɛɹ ɛvɹiwʌn fɪt. dʒʌst? bɛɹə əɹ kaɪɹunə kəd tɛl haʊ ælθɹ hæd læft - læft! - ən sɛɾ ɪt meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns tə hɪm ən i ɪkspɛktəɾ əm tə bi oʊbiɾiənt pjupəlz. noʊ wʌn wɑz hævɪŋ ən izi taɪm bɛndɪŋ əɹ nɛk, list ʌv ɔl kaɪɹunə.

Relief surged through Merana in wonderful waves. She would not have to be the one to explain how the Wise Ones had interpreted that wretched al'Thor's orders that the sisters were to obey them. They were not really apprentices; there were no lessons involved, of course. What could a great lot of wilders, savages at that, teach Aes Sedai? It was just that the Wise Ones liked to know where everyone fit. Just? Bera or Kiruna could tell how al'Thor had laughed - laughed! - and said it made no difference to him and he expected them to be obedient pupils. No one was having an easy time bending her neck, least of all Kiruna.

jɛt kædzueɪn dɪd nɑt dɪmæn ɛkspləneɪʃənz. "aɪ ɪkspɛktəɾ ə dɔɡz dɪnɝ," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "bʌt nɑɾ ə bʌkət fɹəm ðə mɪɾən. lemi si ɪf aɪ hæv ðə stʃɹeɪɾ ʌv ɪt. jə tʃɪlʒɹən u stæn ɪn ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛnst ə lɔfəli ɹeɪzd æmɪɝlɪn əv naʊ sʌmhaʊ əsoʊsieɪɾəd jʊɹsɛlvz wɪð ði ælθɹ bɔɪ, ən ɪf jə ɑɹ teɪkɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz fɹəm ðiz il wɪmən, aɪ əsum jə teɪk ɪz əz wɛl." hɝ ɡɹʌnt wɑz dɪsɡʌstəɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə maʊθfʊl ə ɹɑɾən plʌmz. ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd, ʃi pɪɹɾ ɪndə hɝ tikʌp, ðən fɪks ðə pɛɹ əɡɛn. "wɛl, wʌts wʌn tʃɹizən mɔɹ əɹ lɛs? ðə hɔl kən pʊt jə ɑn jəɹ niz fɹəm hɪɹ tə tɑɹmən ɡdən fəɹ pɛnəns, bʌt ðeɪ kən oʊnli teɪk jəɹ hɛdz wʌns. wʌɾ ə ðə ɹɛst, aʊɾ ɪn ði il kæmp? ɔl ɪleɪɾəz, aɪ səpoʊz. hæv ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ . . . əpɹɛntəst . . . ðɛmsɛlvz? nʌn ʌv əs əv bɪn əlaʊɾ əz kloʊs əz ðə fɝst ɹoʊ ʌv tɛns. ðiz il sim tə hæv noʊ lʌv ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Yet Cadsuane did not demand explanations. "I expected a dog's dinner," she said dryly, "but not a bucket from the midden. Let me see if I have the straight of it. You children who stand in rebellion against a lawfully raised Amyrlin have now somehow associated yourselves with the al'Thor boy, and if you are taking orders from these Aiel women, I assume you take his as well." Her grunt was disgusted enough for a mouthful of rotten plums. Shaking her head, she peered into her teacup, then fixed the pair again. "Well, what's one treason more or less? The Hall can put you on your knees from here to Tarmon Gai'don for penance, but they can only take your heads once. What of the rest, out in the Aiel camp? All Elaida's, I suppose. Have they also . . . apprenticed . . . themselves? None of us have been allowed as close as the first row of tents. These Aiel seem to have no love of Aes Sedai."

"aɪ də nɑt noʊ, kædzueɪn," kaɪɹunə ænsɝd, soʊ ɹɛd-feɪst ʃi əpɪɹɾ əbaʊt tə kætʃ faɪɝ. "wi hæv bɪn kɛpt əpɑɹt." mɛɹænəz aɪz waɪɾənd. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ hɝd kaɪɹunə saʊn dɛfɝɛntʃəl.

"I do not know, Cadsuane," Kiruna answered, so red-faced she appeared about to catch fire. "We have been kept apart." Merana's eyes widened. She had never before heard Kiruna sound deferential.

bɛɹə, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi stʊd stʃɹeɪt, jɛt ʃi sim tə stʃɹeɪɾən hɝsɛlf fəɹ ən ənplɛzən tæsk. "ɪleɪɾə ɪz nɑt - " ʃi bɪɡæn hiɾɪdli.

Bera, on the other hand, drew a deep breath. She already stood straight, yet she seemed to straighten herself for an unpleasant task. "Elaida is not - " she began heatedly.

"ɪleɪɾə ɪz oʊvɝæmbɪʃəs, əz nɪɹ əz aɪ kən meɪk aʊt," kædzueɪn bɹoʊk ɪn, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd soʊ əbɹʌpli ðət mɛɹænə ən ənʊɹə boʊθ stɑɹɾəd bæk ɑn ðə bɛd, ðoʊ ʃi wɑz nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət ðɛm, "ænd ʃi meɪ bi ə kətæstʃɹəfi sɪmɝɪŋ, bʌt ʃiz stɪl ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ɹeɪz baɪ ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ ɪn fʊl əkɔɹɾəns wɪð ðə lɔz ə ðə taʊɝ."

"Elaida is overambitious, as near as I can make out," Cadsuane broke in, leaning forward so abruptly that Merana and Annoura both started back on the bed, though she was not looking at them, "and she may be a catastrophe simmering, but she is still the Amyrlin Seat, raised by the Hall of the Tower in full accordance with the laws of the Tower."

"ɪf ɪleɪɾə ɪz ə lɔfəl æmɪɝlɪn, waɪ hæv jə nɑɾ oʊbeɪɾ əɹ ɔɹɾɝ tə ɹɪtɝn?" ɔl ðət bɪtʃɹeɪd bɛɹəz læk ə kəmpoʊʒɝ wɑz ðə stɪlnəs ə hɝ hænz ɑn əɹ skɝts. oʊnli ə mɑɹkt ɛfɝt tə kip fɹəm klʌtʃɪŋ əɹ smuðɪŋ kəd hoʊld əm soʊ moʊʃənləs.

"If Elaida is a lawful Amyrlin, why have you not obeyed her order to return?" All that betrayed Bera's lack of composure was the stillness of her hands on her skirts. Only a marked effort to keep from clutching or smoothing could hold them so motionless.

"soʊ wʌn ə jə hæz ə lɪɾəl bækboʊn." kædzueɪn læf sɔfli, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz dɪd nɑt lʊk mɝθfəl əɾ ɔl. linɪŋ bæk, ʃi sɪpt əɹ ti. "naʊ sɪt daʊn. aɪ hæv ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni mɔɹ kwɛstʃənz."

"So one of you has a little backbone." Cadsuane laughed softly, but her eyes did not look mirthful at all. Leaning back, she sipped her tea. "Now sit down. I have a great many more questions."

mɛɹænə ən ənʊɹə ɹoʊz, ɔfɝɪŋ ðɛɹ pleɪsəz ɑn ðə bɛd, bʌt kaɪɹunə sɪmpli stʊd piɹɪŋ ət kædzueɪn wɝidli, ən bɛɹə ɡlænst əɾ əɹ fɹɛnd, ðən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. kɔɹəl ɹoʊld əɹ blu aɪz, ɡɹɪnɪŋ bɹɔdli fəɹ səm ɹizən, bʌt kædzueɪn dɪd nɑt sim tə kɛɹ.

Merana and Annoura rose, offering their places on the bed, but Kiruna simply stood peering at Cadsuane worriedly, and Bera glanced at her friend, then shook her head. Corele rolled her blue eyes, grinning broadly for some reason, but Cadsuane did not seem to care.

"hæf ðə ɹumɝz aɪ hɪɹ," ʃi sɛd, "kənsɝn ðə fɔɹseɪkən biɪŋ lus. ɪt wəd hɑɹdli bi ə sɝpɹaɪz, wɪð ɔl ɛls, bʌt juv ɛni ɛvəɾəns, fəɹ əɹ əɡɛnst?"

"Half the rumors I hear," she said, "concern the Forsaken being loose. It would hardly be a surprise, with all else, but do you have any evidence, for or against?"

bɪfɔɹ vɛɹi lɔŋ, mɛɹænə wɑz ɡlæd tə bi sɪɾɪŋ; bɪfɔɹ vɛɹi lɔŋ, ʃi nu wʌt lɔnʒɹi fɛlt ɡoʊɪŋ θɹu ðə lɔnʒɹɪsəz mæŋɡəl. kædzueɪn dɪɾ ɔl ðə kwɛstʃənɪŋ, dɑdʒɪŋ fɹəm tɑpɪk tə tɑpɪk soʊ jə nɛvɝ nu wʌt wɑz kʌmɪŋ nɛkst. kɔɹəl hɛld əɹ pis ɪksɛp fəɹ tʃʌklɪŋ naʊ ən ðən əɹ ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd, ən deɪdʒiən dɪd nɑɾ ivən də ðæt, ʌv kɔɹs. mɛɹænə kɑt ðə wɝst, hɝ ən bɛɹə ən kaɪɹunə, jɛɾ ənʊɹə wɑz sɝɾənli nɑt spɛɹd. ɛvɹi taɪm bɹəleɪnz ædvaɪzɝ ɹɪlækst, θɪŋkɪŋ ʃi wɑz ɪn ðə klɪɹ, kædzueɪn skjuɝɾ əɹ ənu.

Before very long, Merana was glad to be sitting; before very long, she knew what laundry felt going through the laundress's mangle. Cadsuane did all the questioning, dodging from topic to topic so you never knew what was coming next. Corele held her peace except for chuckling now and then or shaking her head, and Daigian did not even do that, of course. Merana caught the worst, her and Bera and Kiruna, yet Annoura was certainly not spared. Every time Berelain's advisor relaxed, thinking she was in the clear, Cadsuane skewered her anew.

ðə wʊmən wɑntəd tə noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, fɹəm ði ælθɹ bɔɪz əθɔɹəɾi wɪð ði il tə waɪ ə si foʊk weɪvməstʃɹəs wɑz æŋkɝɾ ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ, fɹəm wɛðɝ mɔɪɹeɪn tʃɹuli wɑz dɛd tə wɛðɝ ðə bɔɪ ɹɪli hæd ɹiɾɪskʌvɝd tʃɹævlɪŋ ən wɛðɝ bɹəleɪn hæd bɛɾəd ɪm əɹ hæɾ ɛni ɪntɛntʃən ʌv ɪt. wʌt kædzueɪn θɔɾ ə ði ænsɝz wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl tə seɪ, ɪksɛpt wʌns, wən ʃi lɝn ðəɾ ɑlɑnə hæd bɑndəɾ ælθɹ, ən haʊ. hɝ maʊθ kəmpɹɛs tə ə θɪn laɪn ən ʃi fɹaʊn ə hoʊl ðoʊ ðə wɔl, bʌt waɪl ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ɪkspɹɛs dɪsɡʌst, mɛɹænə θɔɾ ə kædzueɪn seɪɪŋ ʃi hæd kənsɪɾɝd teɪkɪŋ ənʌðɝ wɔɹɾɝ hɝsɛlf.

The woman wanted to know everything, from the al'Thor boy's authority with the Aiel to why a Sea Folk Wavemistress was anchored in the river, from whether Moiraine truly was dead to whether the boy really had rediscovered Traveling and whether Berelain had bedded him or had any intention of it. What Cadsuane thought of the answers was impossible to say, except once, when she learned that Alanna had bonded al'Thor, and how. Her mouth compressed to a thin line and she frowned a hole though the wall, but while everyone else expressed disgust, Merana thought of Cadsuane saying she had considered taking another Warder herself.

ði ænsɝ wɑz ɪɡnɝəns ɪntaɪɝli tu ɔfən tə sut, bʌt seɪɪŋ jə dɪd nɑt noʊ feɪl tə kwɛntʃ kædzueɪnz æpətaɪt; ʃi ɹikwaɪɝɾ ɛvɹi læst ʃɹɛɾ ən pɑɹɾəkəl jə dɪd noʊ, ivən ɪf jə dɪd nɑt noʊ jə nu ɪt. ðeɪ mænədʒ tə kip ə lɪɾəl bæk, moʊst ʌv wʌt hæd tə bi kɛp bæk, jɛɾ ə fju sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ θɪŋz keɪm aʊt ðət weɪ, səm vɛɹi sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ, ivən fɹəm ənʊɹə, hu, ɪt tɝn aʊt, hæd bɪn ɹəsivɪŋ dɪteɪld lɛɾɝz fɹəm bɹəleɪn ɔlmoʊs fɹəm ðə deɪ ðə ɡɝl ɹoʊd nɔɹθ. kædzueɪn dɪmændəɾ ænsɝz, bʌt ɡeɪv nʌn, ən ðət wɝid mɛɹænə. ʃi wɑtʃt feɪsəz ɡɹoʊ dɔɡd ən dɪfɛnsɪv ən əpɑlədʒɛɾɪk, ən wʌndɝd wɛðɝ əɹ oʊn lʊk ðə seɪm.

The answer was ignorance entirely too often to suit, but saying you did not know failed to quench Cadsuane's appetite; she required every last shred and particle you did know, even if you did not know you knew it. They managed to keep a little back, most of what had to be kept back, yet a few surprising things came out that way, some very surprising, even from Annoura, who, it turned out, had been receiving detailed letters from Berelain almost from the day the girl rode north. Cadsuane demanded answers, but gave none, and that worried Merana. She watched faces grow dogged and defensive and apologetic, and wondered whether her own looked the same.

"kædzueɪn." ʃi hæd tə meɪk wʌn mɔɹ ɛfɝt. "kædzueɪn, waɪ hæv jə dɪsaɪɾɪd tə teɪk ən ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ɪm naʊ?" ən ənblɪŋkɪŋ ɡeɪz mɛt hɝz fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən kædzueɪn tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən tə bɛɹə ən kaɪɹunə.

"Cadsuane." She had to make one more effort. "Cadsuane, why have you decided to take an interest in him now?" An unblinking gaze met hers for a moment, then Cadsuane turned her attention to Bera and Kiruna.

"soʊ ðeɪ æktʃəli  mænədʒ tə kɪdnæp ɪm ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə pæləs," ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ aʊɾ əɹ ɛmpti kʌp fəɹ deɪdʒiən tə ɹifɪl. noʊ wʌn ɛls hæd bɪn ɔfɝd ti. kædzueɪnz ɪkspɹɛʃən ən toʊn wɝ soʊ nutʃɹəl ðət mɛɹænə wɑntəd tə tɛɹ əɹ oʊn hɛɹ. ælθɹ wəd nɑt bi plizd ɪf i lɝn kaɪɹunə hæd ɹɪvil ðə kɪdnæpɪŋ, haʊɛvɝ ɪnədvɝɾəntli; kædzueɪn juzd ɛni slɪp ə jəɹ tʌŋ tə pɹaɪ aʊt mɔɹ ðən jə mɛn tə seɪ. ət lis ðə dɪteɪlz ə hɪz tʃɹitmən hæd nɑt kʌm aʊt. hi hæd meɪd pleɪn haʊ dɪsplizd i wəd bi ɪf ðət hæpənd. mɛɹænə θæŋk ðə laɪt ðət ðə wʊmən wɑz nɑt steɪɪŋ wɪð ɛni wʌn sʌbʒɪkt fəɹ lɔŋ.

"So they actually managed to kidnap him right out of the palace," the gray-haired woman said, holding out her empty cup for Daigian to refill. No one else had been offered tea. Cadsuane's expression and tone were so neutral that Merana wanted to tear her own hair. Al'Thor would not be pleased if he learned Kiruna had revealed the kidnapping, however inadvertently; Cadsuane used any slip of your tongue to pry out more than you meant to say. At least the details of his treatment had not come out. He had made plain how displeased he would be if that happened. Merana thanked the Light that the woman was not staying with any one subject for long.

"ju ɑɹ ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz teɪm? ən jə ɑɹ ʃʊɹ ðiz blækoʊts dɪdn ɝaɪv ɑn hɔɹsəz?" bɛɹə ænsɝd ɹɪlʌktənli, ən kaɪɹunə sʌlənli; ðeɪ wɝ əz sɝɾən əz ðeɪ kəd bi; noʊ wʌn hæɾ æktʃəli  sin ði æʃəmən kʌm əɹ dɪpɑɹt, ən ðə . . . hoʊl . . . ðət bɹɔɾ əm ɔl cʊɾə əv bɪn meɪd baɪ ælθɹ. wɪtʃ dɪd nɑt sæɾəsfaɪ əɾ ɔl, ʌv kɔɹs.

"You are sure it was Taim? And you are sure these blackcoats didn't arrive on horses?" Bera answered reluctantly, and Kiruna sullenly; they were as certain as they could be; no one had actually seen the Asha'man come or depart, and the . . . hole . . . that brought them all here could have been made by al'Thor. Which did not satisfy at all, of course.

"θɪŋk! jə ɑɹən sɪli ɡɝlz ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, əɹ ʃʊdn bi. fɔ! jə mʌst əv noʊɾəst sʌmθɪŋ."

"Think! You aren't silly girls any longer, or shouldn't be. Phaw! You must have noticed something."

mɛɹænə fɛlt ɪl. ʃi ən ði ʌðɝz hæd spɛn hæf ðə naɪɾ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ oʊvɝ wʌt ðɛɹ oʊθ mɛn bɪfɔɹ dəsaɪɾɪŋ ɪt mɛn ɪɡzækli wʌt ðeɪ hæd sɛd, wɪð noʊ luphoʊlz tə ɹɪɡəl θɹu. ət læst ivən kaɪɹunə kənsiɾɪd ðət ðeɪ mʌs dɪfɛn ən səpɔɹɾ ælθɹ əz wɛl əz oʊbeɪ, ðət stændɪŋ əsaɪɾ ɪn ðə slaɪɾəst wɑz nɑt pɝmɪɾəd. wʌt ðət maɪt min wən ɪt keɪm tə ɪleɪɾə ən ðə sɪstɝz lɔɪəl tə hɝ ɹɪli kənsɝnd noʊ wʌn. ət list, noʊ wʌn ədmɪɾəd ɛni kənsɝn. ðə mɪɹ fækt ʌv wʌt ðeɪ hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd wɑz stʌnɝ ɪnʌf. bʌt mɛɹænə wʌndɝd wɛðɝ bɛɹə əɹ kaɪɹunə hæd jɛt ɹilaɪzd wʌt ʃi hæd. ðeɪ maɪt dʒʌs faɪn ðɛmsɛlvz əpoʊzɪŋ ə lɛdʒənd, nɑt tə mɛnʃən wʌtɛvɝ sɪstɝz bɪsaɪdz kɔɹəl ən deɪdʒiən hæd tʃoʊzən tə fɑloʊ hɝ. wɝs. . . . kædzueɪnz aɪz ɹɛstəɾ ɑn əɹ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɡɪvɪŋ əweɪ nʌθɪŋ, dɪmændɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. wɝs, mɛɹænə wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət kædzueɪn nu ðət vɛɹi wɛl.

Merana felt ill. She and the others had spent half the night arguing over what their oath meant before deciding it meant exactly what they had said, with no loopholes to wriggle through. At last even Kiruna conceded that they must defend and support al'Thor as well as obey, that standing aside in the slightest was not permitted. What that might mean when it came to Elaida and the sisters loyal to her really concerned no one. At least, no one admitted any concern. The mere fact of what they had decided was stunner enough. But Merana wondered whether Bera or Kiruna had yet realized what she had. They might just find themselves opposing a legend, not to mention whatever sisters besides Corele and Daigian had chosen to follow her. Worse. . . . Cadsuane's eyes rested on her for a moment, giving away nothing, demanding everything. Worse, Merana was sure that Cadsuane knew that very well.

hɝiɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə pæləs kɔɹɪɾɝz, mɪn ɪɡnɔɹd ɡɹiɾɪŋz fɹəm hæf ə dʌzən meɪɾənz ʃi nu, dʒʌs tʃɹɑɾəd ɹaɪt baɪ wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝɾ ɪn ɹɪtɝn, nɛvɝ kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðət ʃi wɑz biɪŋ ɹud. tʃɹɑɾɪŋ wɑz nɑɾ izi ɪn hil buts. ðə ful θɪŋz wɪmən dɪd fəɹ mɛn! nɑt ðət ɹænd hæɾ æskt əɹ tə wɛɹ ðə buts, bʌt ʃi pʊɾ əm ɑn ðə fɝs taɪm wɪð ɪm ɪn maɪnd, ən ʃi hæd sin ɪm smaɪl. hi laɪk ðɛm. laɪt, wʌt wɑz ʃi duɪŋ, θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt buts! ʃi ʃəd nɛvɝ əv ɡɔn tə koʊləveɪɪɹz əpɑɹtməns. ʃɪvɝɪŋ, blɪŋkɪŋ bæk ənʃt tɪɹz, ʃi bɪɡæn tə ɹʌn.

Hurrying along the palace corridors, Min ignored greetings from half a dozen Maidens she knew, just trotted right by without a word in return, never considering that she was being rude. Trotting was not easy in heeled boots. The fool things women did for men! Not that Rand had asked her to wear the boots, but she put them on the first time with him in mind, and she had seen him smile. He liked them. Light, what was she doing, thinking about boots! She should never have gone to Colavaere's apartments. Shivering, blinking back unshed tears, she began to run.

əz juʒəwəl, ə nʌmbɝ ə meɪɾənz wɝ skwɑɾɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ hilz bɪsaɪd ðə tɔl dɔɹz wɝkt wɪð ɡɪldɪd ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌnz. ðɛɹ ʃoʊufə hʌŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən ðɛɹ spɪɹz leɪ əkɹɔs ðɛɹ niz, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ kæʒəwəl əbaʊt ðɛm. ðeɪ wɝ lɛpɝdz, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə kɪl. juʒəwəli meɪɾənz meɪd mɪn ənizi, fəɹ ɔl ðeɪ wɝ fɹɛnli ɪnʌf. tədeɪ, ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv kɛɹɾ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ veɪld.

As usual, a number of Maidens were squatting on their heels beside the tall doors worked with gilded rising suns. Their shoufa hung about their shoulders and their spears lay across their knees, yet there was nothing casual about them. They were leopards, waiting for something to kill. Usually Maidens made Min uneasy, for all they were friendly enough. Today, she would not have cared if they were veiled.

"hi ɪz ɪn ə faʊl tɛmpɝ," ɹaɪəlɪn wɔɹnd, bʌt meɪd noʊ muv tə stɑp hɝ. mɪn wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju əlaʊd tə ɛntɝ ɹændz pɹɛzəns wɪθaʊt biɪŋ ənaʊnst. ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd əɹ koʊɾ ən tʃɹaɪd tə sɛɾəl hɝsɛlf. ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ waɪ ʃi hæd kʌm. ɪksɛp ðət ɹænd meɪɾ əɹ fil seɪf. bɝn hɪm! ʃi hæd nɛvɝ niɾəd ɛniwʌn tə fil seɪf bɪfɔɹ.

"He is in a foul temper," Riallin warned, but made no move to stop her. Min was one of the few allowed to enter Rand's presence without being announced. She straightened her coat and tried to settle herself. She was not sure why she had come. Except that Rand made her feel safe. Burn him! She had never needed anyone to feel safe before.

dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə ɹum, ʃi stɑpt, əɡæst. ɔɾəmætɪkli, ʃi pʊʃt ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɝ. ðə pleɪs wɑz ə ʃæmbəlz. ə fju ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ʃɑɹdz klʌŋ tə səm ə ðə mɪɹɝ fɹeɪmz, bʌt moʊst ə ðə ɡlæs leɪ skæɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ. ðə deɪz wɑz ɑn ɪts saɪd, ðə θɹoʊn ðət hæd stʊɾ ətɑp ɪt dʒʌst ɡɪldɪd flɪndɝz wɛɹ ɪt hæd bɪn smæʃt əɡɛnst ə wɔl. wʌn ə ðə stænd-læmps, hɛvi aɪɝn bɪniθ ðə ɡɪlt, hæd bɪn twɪstəɾ ɪndə ə hup. ɹænd sæɾ ɪn wʌn ə ðə smɔlɝ tʃɛɹz ɪn ɪz ʃɝtslivz, ɑɹmz dæŋɡəlɪŋ ən hɛd bæk, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə silɪŋ. stɛɹɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ. ɪmədʒəz dænst əbaʊɾ ɪm ən kʌlɝɾ ɔʊɹəz flɪkɝɾ ən flɛɹd; hi wɑz laɪk ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðæt. ʃi hæd noʊ niɾ ʌv ɪluməneɪɾɝz wən ɹænd əɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz ɪn saɪt. hi dɪd nɑt muv əz ʃi wɔk fɑɹðɝ ɪndə ðə ɹum. hi dɪd nɑt sim əwɛɹ ə hɝ əɾ ɔl. ʃæɾɝd bɪts ə mɪɹɝ kɹʌntʃt bɪniθ əɹ buts. ə faʊl tɛmpɝ, ɪndid.

Just inside the room, she stopped, aghast. Automatically, she pushed the door shut behind her. The place was a shambles. A few glittering shards clung to some of the mirror frames, but most of the glass lay scattered across the floor. The dais was on its side, the throne that had stood atop it just gilded flinders where it had been smashed against a wall. One of the stand-lamps, heavy iron beneath the gilt, had been twisted into a hoop. Rand sat in one of the smaller chairs in his shirtsleeves, arms dangling and head back, staring at the ceiling. Staring at nothing. Images danced about him and colored auras flickered and flared; he was like Aes Sedai in that. She had no need of Illuminators when Rand or an Aes Sedai was in sight. He did not move as she walked farther into the room. He did not seem aware of her at all. Shattered bits of mirror crunched beneath her boots. A foul temper, indeed.

ivən soʊ, ʃi fɛl noʊ fɪɹ. nɑɾ ə hɪm; ʃi kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə ɪmædʒən ɹænd hɑɹmɪŋ hɝ. fəɹ hɪm, ʃi fɛlt ɪnʌf tə nɪɹli pɝdʒ ðə mɛmɹi ʌv koʊləveɪɪɹz əpɑɹtməns fɹəm əɹ hɛd. ʃi hæd lɔŋ sɪns ɹɛkənsaɪl hɝsɛlf tə biɪŋ hoʊpləsli ɪn lʌv. nʌθɪŋ ɛls mæɾɝd, nɑt ðəɾ i wɑz ən ʌnsəfɪstɪkeɪɾɪd kʌntʃɹimən, jʌŋɡɝ ðən ʃi, nɑɾ u əɹ wʌɾ i wɑz, nɑt ðəɾ i wɑz dum tə ɡoʊ mæɾ ən daɪ ɪf i wɑz nɑt kɪl fɝst. aɪ doʊn ivən maɪn hævɪŋ tə ʃɛɹ hɪm, ʃi θɔt, ən nu haʊ taɪtli ʃi wɑz kɑɾ ɪf ʃi kəd laɪ tə hɝsɛlf. ðæt, ʃi hæd fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə æksɛpt; ɪleɪn hæɾ ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm, ə kleɪm ɑn hɪm, ən soʊ dɪd ðɪs eɪvinhə wʊmən ʃi hæd jɛt tə mit. wʌt kəd nɑt bi mɛndɪd mʌs bi lɪvd wɪð, soʊ hɝ æn dʒæn ɔlweɪz sɛd. ɪspɛʃli wən jəɹ bɹeɪnz hæd ɡɔn sɑft. laɪt, ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz pɹaɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf ɑn kipɪŋ əɹ wɪts.

Even so, she felt no fear. Not of him; she could not begin to imagine Rand harming her. For him, she felt enough to nearly purge the memory of Colavaere's apartments from her head. She had long since reconciled herself to being hopelessly in love. Nothing else mattered, not that he was an unsophisticated countryman, younger than she, not who or what he was, not that he was doomed to go mad and die if he was not killed first. I don't even mind having to share him, she thought, and knew how tightly she was caught if she could lie to herself. That, she had forced herself to accept; Elayne had a part of him, a claim on him, and so did this Aviendha woman she had yet to meet. What could not be mended must be lived with, so her Aunt Jan always said. Especially when your brains had gone soft. Light, she had always prided herself on keeping her wits.

ʃi stɑp bɪsaɪd wʌn ə ðə tʃɛɹz, wɛɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ hæd dʒɹɪvən ɪndə ðə θɪk wʊɾən bæk soʊ hɑɹd ðət ðə pɔɪn stʊɾ aʊt nɪɹli ə hæn bɪhaɪnd. ɪn lʌv wɪð ə mæn u dɪd nɑt noʊ, hu wəd sɛn əɹ əweɪ ʃəɾ i ɛvɝ bɪkʌm əwɛɹ. ə mæn ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ wɑz ɪn lʌv wɪð hɝ. ən wɪð ɪleɪn, ən ðɪs eɪvinhə, tu; ðæt, ʃi ɹʌʃt baɪ. wʌt kəd nɑt bi mɛndɪd. . . . hi wɑz ɪn lʌv wɪð əɹ ən ɹəfjuz tə ədmɪɾ ɪt. dɪɾ i θɪŋk ðət dʒʌs kəz mæd luz θɝɪn tɛləmən hæd kɪl ðə wʊmən i lʌvd, hi wɑz feɪɾɪd tə əz wɛl?

She stopped beside one of the chairs, where the Dragon Scepter had driven into the thick wooden back so hard that the point stood out nearly a hand behind. In love with a man who did not know, who would send her away should he ever become aware. A man she was sure was in love with her. And with Elayne, and this Aviendha, too; that, she rushed by. What could not be mended. . . . He was in love with her and refused to admit it. Did he think that just because mad Lews Therin Telamon had killed the woman he loved, he was fated to as well?

"aɪm ɡlæd jə keɪm," hi sɛd sʌɾənli, stɪl stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə silɪŋ. "aɪv bɪn sɪɾɪŋ hɪɹ əloʊn. əloʊn." hi ɡeɪv ə bɪɾɝ bɑɹk ʌv ə læf. "hɹɪd fɛl ɪz dɛd."

"I'm glad you came," he said suddenly, still staring at the ceiling. "I've been sitting here alone. Alone." He gave a bitter bark of a laugh. "Herid Fel is dead."

"noʊ," ʃi wɪspɝd, "nɑt ðət swit lɪɾəl oʊl mæn."

"No," she whispered, "not that sweet little old man."

hɝ aɪz stʌŋ. "hi wɑz tɔɹn əpɑɹt." ɹændz vɔɪs wɑz soʊ taɪɝd. soʊ ɛmpti. "ɪdʒɹin feɪntɪd wən ʃi faʊn hɪm. ʃi leɪ ɪn ə stupɝ hæf ðə naɪt, ən wɑz nɪɹli ɪnkoʊhɪɹənt wən faɪnəli ɹaʊzd. wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ wɪmən ət ðə skul ɡeɪv əɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə meɪk əɹ slip. ʃi wɑz ɪmbɛɹəst əbaʊt ðæt. wən ʃi keɪm tə mi, ʃi stɑɹɾəd kɹaɪɪŋ əɡɛn ænd. . . . ɪt hæd tə bi ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. wʌɾ ɛls kəd tɛɹ ə mæn lɪm fɹəm lɪm?" wɪθaʊt ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz hɛd, hi smækt ə fɪs daʊn ɑn ðə tʃɛɹ ɑɹm soʊ hɑɹd ðə wʊd kɹikt. "bʌt waɪ? waɪ wɑz i kɪld? wʌt kəɾ i hæv toʊl mi?"

Her eyes stung. "He was torn apart." Rand's voice was so tired. So empty. "Idrien fainted when she found him. She lay in a stupor half the night, and was nearly incoherent when finally roused. One of the other women at the school gave her something to make her sleep. She was embarrassed about that. When she came to me, she started crying again and. . . . It had to be Shadowspawn. What else could tear a man limb from limb?" Without raising his head, he smacked a fist down on the chair arm so hard the wood creaked. "But why? Why was he killed? What could he have told me?"

mɪn tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk. ʃi tʃɹuli dɪd. mæstɝ fɛl wɑz ə fəlɑsəfɝ; hi ən ɹænd dɪskʌst ɛvɹiθɪŋ fɹəm ðə minɪŋ ə pɑɹts ə ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən tə ðə neɪtʃɝ ə ðə hoʊl ɪndə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən. hi lɛɾ əɹ bɑɹoʊ bʊks, fæsəneɪɾɪŋ bʊks, ɪspɛʃli wɛɹ ʃi hæd tə wɝk tə pʌzəl aʊt wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðeɪ sɛd. hi hæd bɪn ə fəlɑsəfɝ. hi wəd nɛvɝ lɛn əɹ ə bʊk əɡɛn. sətʃ ə dʒɛntəl oʊl mæn, ɹæpt ʌp ɪn ə wɝld ə θɔɾ ən stɑɹɾəld wən i noʊɾəst ɛniθɪŋ aʊtsaɪɾ ɪt. ʃi tʃɹɛʒɝɾ ə noʊɾ i hæd ɹɪɾən tə ɹænd. hi hæd sɛd ʃi wɑz pɹɪɾi, ðət ʃi dɪstʃɹæktəd hɪm. ən naʊ hi wɑz dɛd. laɪt, ʃi hæd hæd tu mʌtʃ ə dɛθ.

Min tried to think. She truly did. Master Fel was a philosopher; he and Rand discussed everything from the meaning of parts of the Prophecies of the Dragon to the nature of the hole into the Dark One's prison. He let her borrow books, fascinating books, especially where she had to work to puzzle out what it was they said. He had been a philosopher. He would never lend her a book again. Such a gentle old man, wrapped up in a world of thought and startled when he noticed anything outside it. She treasured a note he had written to Rand. He had said she was pretty, that she distracted him. And now he was dead. Light, she had had too much of death.

"aɪ ʃʊdn əv toʊl ju, nɑt laɪk ðæt."

"I shouldn't have told you, not like that."

ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt; ʃi hæd nɑt hɝd ɹænd kɹɔs ðə ɹum. hɪz fɪŋɡɝz bɹʌʃt əɹ tʃik. waɪpɪŋ əweɪ tɪɹz. ʃi wɑz kɹaɪɪŋ.

She gave a start; she had not heard Rand cross the room. His fingers brushed her cheek. Wiping away tears. She was crying.

"aɪm sɑɹi, mɪn," hi sɛd, sɔfli. "aɪ æm nɑɾ ə vɛɹi naɪs pɝsən ɛnimɔɹ. ə mæn ɪz dɛd kəz ə mi, ən ɔl aɪ kən də ɪz wɝi waɪ hi wɑz kɪld."

"I'm sorry, Min," he said, softly. "I am not a very nice person anymore. A man is dead because of me, and all I can do is worry why he was killed."

flɪŋɪŋ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɪm, ʃi bɛɹiɾ əɹ feɪs əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst. ʃi kəd nɑt stɑp kɹaɪɪŋ. ʃi kəd nɑt stɑp tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. "aɪ wɛn tə koʊləveɪɪɹz əpɑɹtməns." ɪmədʒəz flæʃt ɪn əɹ hɛd. ði ɛmpti sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, ɔl ðə sɝvəns ɡɔn. ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɹɪmɛmbɝ, bʌt naʊ ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn, ʃi kəd nɑt stɑp ðə wɝdz tʌmbəlɪŋ aʊt. "aɪ θɔt, sɪns juɾ ɛɡzaɪl hɝ, meɪbi ðəɹ wɑz səm weɪ ɝaʊn ðə vjuɪŋ aɪ hæɾ ə hɝ." koʊləveɪɪɹ hæd bɪn wɛɹɪŋ wʌt mʌst əv bɪn əɹ faɪnəst ɡaʊn, dɑɹk sɪlk ðət ɡlɪsənd, wɪð fɔlz ə dɛləkəɾ eɪdʒd-aɪvɝi soʊvɹə leɪs. "aɪ θɔt fəɹ wʌns ɪt dɪdn əv tə bi ðət weɪ. jəɹ tɑvɝən. jə kən tʃeɪnʒ ðə pæɾɝn." koʊləveɪɪɹ hæd dɑn ə nɛkləs ən bɹeɪslɪts ʌv ɛmɹəlz ən faɪɝdʒɹɑps, ən ɹɪŋz wɪð pɝlz ən ɹubiz, ʃʊɹli hɝ bɛs pisəz, ən jɛloʊ daɪmənz hæd bɪn ɝeɪnʒd ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, ə fɛɹ ɪməteɪʃən ə ðə kɹaʊn ə kɛɹhin. hɝ feɪs. . . . "ʃi wɑz ɪn əɹ bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ. hæŋɪŋ fɹəm wʌn ə ðə bɪdpoʊsts." bʌlʒɪŋ aɪz ən pɹoʊtʃɹuɾɪŋ tʌŋ ɪn ə blækənd, swoʊlən feɪs. toʊz ə fʊɾ əbʌv ði oʊvɝtɝn stul. sɑbɪŋ hɛlpləsli, mɪn sæɡd əɡɛns hɪm.

Flinging arms around him, she buried her face against his chest. She could not stop crying. She could not stop trembling. "I went to Colavaere's apartments." Images flashed in her head. The empty sitting room, all the servants gone. The bedchamber. She did not want to remember, but now she had begun, she could not stop the words tumbling out. "I thought, since you'd exiled her, maybe there was some way around the viewing I had of her." Colavaere had been wearing what must have been her finest gown, dark silk that glistened, with falls of delicate aged-ivory Sovarra lace. "I thought for once it didn't have to be that way. You're ta'veren. You can change the Pattern." Colavaere had donned a necklace and bracelets of emeralds and firedrops, and rings with pearls and rubies, surely her best pieces, and yellow diamonds had been arranged in her hair, a fair imitation of the crown of Cairhien. Her face. . . . "She was in her bedchamber. Hanging from one of the bedposts." Bulging eyes and protruding tongue in a blackened, swollen face. Toes a foot above the overturned stool. Sobbing helplessly, Min sagged against him.

hɪz ɑɹmz wɛn ɝaʊn əɹ sloʊli, dʒɛnli. "oʊ, mɪn, juv mɔɹ peɪn ðən plɛʒɝ fɹəm jəɹ ɡɪft. ɪf aɪ kəd teɪk jəɹ peɪn, aɪ wʊd, mɪn. aɪ wʊd."

His arms went around her slowly, gently. "Oh, Min, you have more pain than pleasure from your gift. If I could take your pain, I would, Min. I would."

sloʊli ɪt pɛnətʃɹeɪɾəd ðəɾ i wɑz tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, tu. laɪt, hi tʃɹaɪd soʊ hɑɹd tə bi aɪɝn, tə bi wʌɾ i θɔt ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn mʌst, bʌɾ ɪt kʌɾ ɪm wən sʌmbɑɾi daɪd kəz ə hɪm, koʊləveɪɪɹ pɹɑbli noʊ lɛs ðən fɛl. hi blɛd fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn hɑɹmd, ən tʃɹaɪd tə pɹitɛn i dɪd nɑt.

Slowly it penetrated that he was trembling, too. Light, he tried so hard to be iron, to be what he thought the Dragon Reborn must, but it cut him when somebody died because of him, Colavaere probably no less than Fel. He bled for everyone harmed, and tried to pretend he did not.

"kɪs mi," ʃi mʌmbəld. wən i dɪd nɑt muv, ʃi lʊkt ʌp. hi blɪŋkt əɾ əɹ ənsɝteɪnli, aɪz naʊ blu, naʊ ɡɹeɪ, ə mɔɹnɪŋ skaɪ. "aɪm nɑt tizɪŋ." haʊ ɔfən hæd ʃi tiz hɪm, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz læp, kɪsɪŋ hɪm, kɔlɪŋ ɪm ʃifɝɾɝ kəz ʃi dɛɹd nɑt seɪ hɪz neɪm fəɹ fɪɹ i maɪt hɪɹ ðə kɝɛs? hi pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɪt kəz i θɔt ʃi wɑz tizɪŋ ən wəd stɑp ɪf ʃi bɪlivd ɪt dɪd nɑɾ əfɛk hɪm. hɑ! æn dʒæn ən æn ɹænə sɛd jə ʃəd nɑt kɪs ə mæn ənlɛs jə ɪntɛndəd tə mɛɹi hɪm, bʌɾ æn mɹən sim tə noʊ ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ə ðə wɝld. ʃi sɛd jə ʃəd nɑt kɪs ə mæn tu kæʒəwəli kəz mɛn fɛl ɪn lʌv soʊ izəli. "aɪm koʊld ɪnsaɪd, ʃifɝɾɝ. koʊləveɪɪɹ, ən mæstɝ fɛl. . . . aɪ nid tə fil wɔɹm flɛʃ. aɪ nid. . . . pliz?"

"Kiss me," she mumbled. When he did not move, she looked up. He blinked at her uncertainly, eyes now blue, now gray, a morning sky. "I'm not teasing." How often had she teased him, sitting on his lap, kissing him, calling him sheepherder because she dared not say his name for fear he might hear the caress? He put up with it because he thought she was teasing and would stop if she believed it did not affect him. Hah! Aunt Jan and Aunt Rana said you should not kiss a man unless you intended to marry him, but Aunt Miren seemed to know a little more of the world. She said you should not kiss a man too casually because men fell in love so easily. "I'm cold inside, sheepherder. Colavaere, and Master Fel. . . . I need to feel warm flesh. I need. . . . Please?"

hɪz hɛd loʊɝd soʊ sloʊli. ɪt wɑz ə bɹʌðɝz kɪs, ət fɝst, maɪld əz mɪlk-wɔɾɝ, suðɪŋ, kʌmfɝɾɪŋ. ðən ɪt bɪkeɪm sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. nɑɾ əɾ ɔl suðɪŋ. dʒɝkɪŋ əpɹaɪt, hi tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl əweɪ. "mɪn, aɪ kænt. aɪ hæv noʊ ɹaɪt - "

His head lowered so slowly. It was a brother's kiss, at first, mild as milk-water, soothing, comforting. Then it became something else. Not at all soothing. Jerking upright, he tried to pull away. "Min, I can't. I have no right - "

sizɪŋ tu hænfəlz ə hɪz hɛɹ, ʃi pʊld ɪz maʊθ bæk daʊn, ən æftɝ ə lɪɾəl waɪl, hi stɑp faɪɾɪŋ. ʃi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən wɛðɝ əɹ hænz bɪɡæn tɛɹɪŋ ət ðə leɪsəz ə hɪz ʃɝt fɝst əɹ ɪz ət hɝz, bʌɾ ʌv wʌn θɪŋ ʃi wɑz æbsəlutli ʃʊɹ. ɪf i ivən tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp naʊ, ʃi wɑz gɑnə fɛtʃ wʌn ə ɹaɪəlɪnz spɪɹz, ɔl ə ðɛm, ən stæb hɪm.

Seizing two handfuls of his hair, she pulled his mouth back down, and after a little while, he stopped fighting. She was not certain whether her hands began tearing at the laces of his shirt first or his at hers, but of one thing she was absolutely sure. If he even tried to stop now, she was going to fetch one of Riallin's spears, all of them, and stab him.

ɑn əɹ weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə sʌn pæləs, kædzueɪn stʌɾid ði il waɪldɝz ʃi sɔ əz wɛl əz ʃi kəd wɪθaʊt biɪŋ ɑbviəs. kɔɹəl ən deɪdʒiən fɑloʊɾ ɪn saɪləns; ðeɪ nu hɝ wɛl ɪnʌf baɪ naʊ nɑt tə dɪstɝb əɹ wɪð tʃæɾɝ, wɪtʃ kəd nɑt bi sɛɾ ʌv ɔl ðoʊz u pɔzd ə fju deɪz əɾ ɑɹɪlɪnz lɪɾəl pæləs bɪfɔɹ ʃi sɛn əm ɑn. ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni waɪldɝz, ɛvɹi wʌn stɛɹɪŋ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əz ɪf ət fli-ɹɪɾən kɝz kʌvɝd wɪð ɹʌnɪŋ sɔɹz, tʃɹækɪŋ mʌɾ oʊvɝ ə nu ɹʌɡ. səm pipəl lʊkt əɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð ɑ əɹ æɾɝeɪʃən, ʌðɝz wɪð fɪɹ əɹ heɪt, bʌt kædzueɪn hæd nɛvɝ sin kəntɛmp bɪfɔɹ, nɑɾ ivən fɹəm waɪtkloʊks. ivən soʊ, ɛni pipəl u pɹədust soʊ mɛni waɪldɝz ʃəd bi sɛndɪŋ ə ɹɪvɝ ʌv ɡɝlz tə ðə taʊɝ.

On her way out of the Sun Palace, Cadsuane studied the Aiel wilders she saw as well as she could without being obvious. Corele and Daigian followed in silence; they knew her well enough by now not to disturb her with chatter, which could not be said of all those who paused a few days at Arilyn's little palace before she sent them on. A great many wilders, every one staring at the Aes Sedai as if at flea-ridden curs covered with running sores, tracking mud over a new rug. Some people looked at Aes Sedai with awe or adoration, others with fear or hate, but Cadsuane had never seen contempt before, not even from Whitecloaks. Even so, any people who produced so many wilders should be sending a river of girls to the Tower.

ðət wəɾ əv tə bi sin tə ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ən tə ðə pɪɾ ə dum wɪð kʌstəm ɪf nid bi, bʌt nɑt naʊ. ði ælθɹ bɔɪ niɾəd tə bi kɛpt ɪntʃɹiɡd ɪnʌf ðəɾ i əlaʊɾ əɹ nɪɹ hɪm, ən ɔf-bæləns ɪnʌf ðət ʃi kəd nʌdʒ ɪm wɛɹ ʃi wɑntəd wɪθaʊɾ ɪm ɹilaɪzɪŋ. wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ, ɛniθɪŋ ðət maɪɾ ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð ðət mʌs bi kəntʃɹoʊld əɹ səpɹɛst. nʌθɪŋ kəd bi əlaʊd tə ɪnfluəns hɪm, əɹ ʌpsɛt hɪm, ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ weɪ. nʌθɪŋ.

That would have to be seen to eventually, and to the Pit of Doom with custom if need be, but not now. The al'Thor boy needed to be kept intrigued enough that he allowed her near him, and off-balance enough that she could nudge him where she wanted without him realizing. One way or another, anything that might interfere with that must be controlled or suppressed. Nothing could be allowed to influence him, or upset him, in the wrong way. Nothing.

ðə ʃaɪni blæk koʊtʃ wɑz weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd bɪhaɪn ə peɪʃən tim ə sɪks mætʃt ɡɹeɪz. ə sɝvɪŋ mæn ɹʌʃt tə oʊpən ðə dɔɹ peɪntəd wɪð ə pɛɹ ə sɪlvɝ stɑɹz ətɑp ɹɛɾ ən ɡɹin stʃɹaɪps, boʊɪŋ tə ðə θɹi ʌv əm tɪl ɪz bɔl hɛd wɑz nɪɹli lɛvəl wɪð ɪz niz. hi wɑz ɪn ʃɝt-slivz ən bɹitʃɪz. sɪns kʌmɪŋ tə ðə sʌn pæləs, ʃi hæd nɑt noʊɾəst ɛniwʌn ɪn lɪvɝi jɛt, ɪksɛpt ə fju wɛɹɪŋ dɑbɹeɪnz kʌlɝz. noʊ daʊt ðə sɝvəns wɝ ənʃʊɹ wʌt tə wɛɹ ən əfɹeɪd tə meɪk ə mɪsteɪk.

The shiny black coach was waiting in the courtyard behind a patient team of six matched grays. A serving man rushed to open the door painted with a pair of silver stars atop red and green stripes, bowing to the three of them till his bald head was nearly level with his knees. He was in shirt-sleeves and breeches. Since coming to the Sun Palace, she had not noticed anyone in livery yet, except a few wearing Dobraine's colors. No doubt the servants were unsure what to wear and afraid to make a mistake.

"aɪ meɪ skɪn ɪleɪɾə wən aɪ kən leɪ hænz ɑn hɝ," ʃi sɛɾ əz ðə koʊtʃ lɝtʃt ɪndə moʊʃən. "ðæt ful tʃaɪld əz meɪd maɪ tæsk nɪɹli ɪmpɑsəbəl."

"I may skin Elaida when I can lay hands on her," she said as the coach lurched into motion. "That fool child has made my task nearly impossible."

ən ðən ʃi læf soʊ əbɹʌpli ðət deɪdʒiən stɛɹd bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd kəntʃɹoʊl əɹ aɪz. kɔɹəlz smaɪl waɪɾənd ɪn æntɪsəpeɪʃən. niðɝ ʌndɝstʊd, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə ɪkspleɪn. ɔl ə hɝ laɪf, ðə fæstəst weɪ tə ɪntʃɹəst əɹ ɪn ɛniθɪŋ hæd bɪn tə tɛl əɹ ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl. bʌt ðɛn, oʊvɝ tu hʌnʒɹəd ən sɛvənti jɪɹz hæd pæst sɪns ʃi læst ɪnkaʊntɝɾ ə tæsk ʃi kəd nɑt pɝfɔɹm. ɛni deɪ naʊ maɪt bi hɝ læst, bʌt jʌŋ ælθɹ wəd bi ə fɪɾɪŋ ɛn tə ɪɾ ɔl.

And then she laughed so abruptly that Daigian stared before she could control her eyes. Corele's smile widened in anticipation. Neither understood, and she did not try to explain. All of her life, the fastest way to interest her in anything had been to tell her it was impossible. But then, over two hundred and seventy years had passed since she last encountered a task she could not perform. Any day now might be her last, but young al'Thor would be a fitting end to it all.


tʃæptɝ twɛnti


CHAPTER 20

pæɾɝnz wɪðɪn pæɾɝnz


Patterns Within Patterns

kəntɛmptʃwəsli sɪvænə stʌɾid əɹ dʌsti kəmpænjənz, siɾəd ɪn ə sɝkəl wɪð əɹ ɪn ðə smɔl klɪɹɪŋ. ðə nɪɹli lifləs bɹæntʃəz oʊvɝhɛd pɹəvaɪɾəd ə bɪɾ ə kul ʃeɪd, ən ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ɹænd ælθɹ hæd hɝl dɛθ leɪ mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz tə ðə wɛst, jɛt ði ʌðɝ wɪmənz aɪz ʃɪftəd wɪð ən ɛɹ ə lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ʃoʊldɝz. wɪθaʊt swɛt tɛns, nʌn hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə klin hɝsɛlf pɹɑpɝli, noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə heɪsti wɑʃɪŋ ə feɪs ən hænz ət deɪz ɛnd. eɪt smɔl sɪlvɝ kʌps, ɔl dɪfɹənt, sæt baɪ hɝ saɪɾ ɑn ðə dɛd livz, ən ə sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ, fɪld wɪð wɔɾɝ, ðət hæd bɪn dɛntɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹitʃɹit.

Contemptuously Sevanna studied her dusty companions, seated in a circle with her in the small clearing. The nearly leafless branches overhead provided a bit of cool shade, and the place where Rand al'Thor had hurled death lay more than a hundred miles to the west, yet the other women's eyes shifted with an air of looking over shoulders. Without sweat tents, none had been able to clean herself properly, no more than a hasty washing of face and hands at day's end. Eight small silver cups, all different, sat by her side on the dead leaves, and a silver pitcher, filled with water, that had been dented in the retreat.

"iðɝ ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn ɪz nɑt fɑloʊɪŋ," ʃi sɛɾ əbɹʌpli, "ɔɹ hiz bɪn əneɪbəl tə faɪn ʌs. iðɝ kɑntɛns mi."

"Either the Car'a'carn is not following," she said abruptly, "or he has been unable to find us. Either contents me."

səm ə ðɛm æktʃəli  dʒʌmpt. ʃənz ɹaʊn feɪs peɪld, ən moʊdʒɹə pæɾəd əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. wʊɾə əv bɪn pɹɪɾi ɪf ʃi wɑz nɑt soʊ tɔl, ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪ tə mʌðɝ ɛvɹiwʌn wɪðɪn ɹitʃ. əlɹiz bɪkeɪm mʌtʃ tu ɪntɛn ɑn stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ skɝts ɔlɹɛɾi nitli spɹɛɾ ɝaʊn hɝ, ətɛmptɪŋ tə ɪɡnɔɹ wʌt ʃi dɪd wɑnə tə si. mɹəz θɪn maʊθ dʒɹu daʊn, bʌɾ u kəd seɪ wɛðɝ fəɹ ði ʌðɝz' oʊpən fɪɹ ə ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn əɹ əɹ oʊn? ðeɪ hæd ɹizən tə bi əfɹeɪd.

Some of them actually jumped. Tion's round face paled, and Modarra patted her shoulder. Modarra would have been pretty if she was not so tall, if she did not always try to mother everyone within reach. Alarys became much too intent on straightening skirts already neatly spread around her, attempting to ignore what she did not want to see. Meira's thin mouth drew down, but who could say whether for the others' open fear of the Car'a'carn or her own? They had reason to be afraid.

tu fʊl deɪz sɪns ðə bæɾəl, ən fjuɝ ðən twɛnti θaʊzən spɪɹz hæd ɡɹupt ɝaʊn sɪvænə. θɛɝɑvə ən moʊst ə ðə waɪz wʌnz u hæd bɪn tə ðə wɛst wɝ stɪl æbsənt, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɔl ðə ɹɛst u wɝ taɪd tə hɝ. səm ə ðə mɪsɪŋ ʃʊɹli wɝ meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ bæk tə kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ, bʌt haʊ mɛni wəd nɛvɝ əɡɛn si ðə sʌn ɹaɪz? noʊ wʌn ɹɪmɛmbɝd sətʃ ə slɔɾɝ, soʊ mɛni dɛɾ ɪn soʊ ʃɔɹɾ ə taɪm. ivən ði ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ wɝ nɑt tʃɹuli ɹɛɾi tə dæns ðə spɪɹz əɡɛn soʊ sun. ɹizən tə bi əfɹeɪd, jɛt nʌn fəɹ ʃoʊɪŋ ɪt, dɪspleɪɪŋ hɑɹɾ ən soʊl ɑn jəɹ feɪs laɪk ə wɛtləndɝ, oʊpən ən neɪkəd fəɹ ɔl tə si. ɹiɑli ət list sim tə ɹilaɪz ðət mʌtʃ. "ɪf wəɹ tə də ðɪs θɪŋ, lɛɾ əs də ɪt," ʃi mʌɾɝd, stɪf wɪð ɪmbɛɹəsmənt. ʃi wɑz wʌn u hæd dʒʌmpt.

Two full days since the battle, and fewer than twenty thousand spears had grouped around Sevanna. Therava and most of the Wise Ones who had been to the west were still absent, including all the rest who were tied to her. Some of the missing surely were making their way back to Kinslayer's Dagger, but how many would never again see the sun rise? No one remembered such a slaughter, so many dead in so short a time. Even the algai'd'siswai were not truly ready to dance the spears again so soon. Reason to be afraid, yet none for showing it, displaying heart and soul on your face like a wetlander, open and naked for all to see. Rhiale at least seemed to realize that much. "If we are to do this thing, let us do it," she muttered, stiff with embarrassment. She was one who had jumped.

sɪvænə tʊk ðə smɔl ɡɹeɪ kjub fɹəm əɹ paʊtʃ ən pleɪst ɪɾ ətɑp ðə bɹaʊn livz ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə sɝkəl. sʌmɛɝɪn pʊɾ əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ niz, linɪŋ oʊvɝ tə ɪɡzæmɪn ɪɾ əntɪl ʃi əpɪɹɾ ɪn deɪnʒɝ ə fɔlɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ blaʊs. hɝ noʊz nɪɹli tʌtʃt ðə kjub. ɪntʃɹəkət pæɾɝnz kʌvɝɾ ɛvɹi saɪd, ən kloʊs ʌp jə kəd si smɔlɝ pæɾɝnz wɪðɪn ðə lɑɹdʒɝ, ən stɪl smɔlɝ ɪnsaɪd ðoʊz, ən ə hɪn ʌv wʌt sim smɔlɝ jɛt. haʊ ðeɪ cʊɾə bɪn meɪd, ðə taɪniəst soʊ faɪn, soʊ pɹɪsaɪs, sɪvænə hæd noʊ aɪdiə. wʌns ʃi hæd θɔt ðə kjub stoʊn, bʌt ʃi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sɝɾən. jɛstɝdeɪ ʃi hæd dʒɹɑpt ɪɾ æksədɛntəli ɑn səm ɹɑks wɪθaʊt mɑɹɪŋ wʌn laɪn ə ðə kɑɹvɪŋ. ɪf ɪt wɑz kɑɹvɪŋ. ðə θɪŋ mʌs bi ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil; ðət ðeɪ nu.

Sevanna took the small gray cube from her pouch and placed it atop the brown leaves in the middle of the circle. Someryn put her hands on her knees, leaning over to examine it until she appeared in danger of falling out of her blouse. Her nose nearly touched the cube. Intricate patterns covered every side, and close up you could see smaller patterns within the larger, and still smaller inside those, and a hint of what seemed smaller yet. How they could have been made, the tiniest so fine, so precise, Sevanna had no idea. Once she had thought the cube stone, but she was no longer certain. Yesterday she had dropped it accidentally on some rocks without marring one line of the carving. If it was carving. The thing must be a ter'angreal; that they knew.

"ðə smɔləs floʊ pɑsəbəl ə faɪɝ mʌs bi tʌtʃt laɪtli ðɛɹ, ɑn wʌt lʊks laɪk ə twɪstəd kɹɛsən mun," ʃi toʊl ðɛm, "æn ənʌðɝ ðəɹ ɑn ðə tɑp, ɑn ðət mɑɹk laɪk ə laɪtnɪŋ boʊlt." sʌmɛɝɪn stʃɹeɪɾənd vɛɹi kwɪkli.

"The smallest flow possible of Fire must be touched lightly there, on what looks like a twisted crescent moon," she told them, "and another there on the top, on that mark like a lightning bolt." Someryn straightened very quickly.

"wʌt wɪl hæpən ðɛn?" əlɹiz æskt, koʊmɪŋ əɹ hɛɹ wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ɪt simd ən æbsəntmaɪndɪd dʒɛstʃɝ, bʌt ʃi ɔlweɪz faʊnd weɪz tə ɹimaɪn ɛvɹiwʌn ðəɾ əɹ hɛɹ wɑz blæk ɪnstɛɾ ə kɑmən jɛloʊ əɹ ɹɛd.

"What will happen then?" Alarys asked, combing her hair with her fingers. It seemed an absentminded gesture, but she always found ways to remind everyone that her hair was black instead of common yellow or red.

sɪvænə smaɪld. ʃi ɛndʒɔɪd noʊɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt. "aɪ wɪl juz ɪt tə sʌmən ðə wɛtləndɝ u ɡeɪv ɪt tə mi."

Sevanna smiled. She enjoyed knowing what they did not. "I will use it to summon the wetlander who gave it to me."

"ðæt mʌtʃ jə toʊld əs ɔlɹɛɾi," ɹiɑli sɛɾ ɪn ə saʊɝ vɔɪs, ən ʃən blʌnli æskt, "haʊ wɪl ɪt sʌmən hɪm?" ʃi maɪt fɪɹ ɹænd ælθɹ, bʌt nɑɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ɛls. sɝɾənli nɑt sɪvænə. bəlɪn laɪtli stʃɹoʊk ðə kjub wɪð wʌn boʊni fɪŋɡɝ, hɝ sʌn-blitʃt aɪbɹaʊz dʒɹɔn daʊn.

"That much you told us already," Rhiale said in a sour voice, and Tion bluntly asked, "How will it summon him?" She might fear Rand al'Thor, but not a great deal else. Certainly not Sevanna. Belinde lightly stroked the cube with one bony finger, her sun-bleached eyebrows drawn down.

meɪnteɪnɪŋ ə smuð feɪs, sɪvænə ɪɹɪɾəbli pɹɪvɛntɪɾ əɹ hænz fɹəm fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ə nɛkləs əɹ ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl. "aɪ hæv toʊl jə ɔl jə nid noʊ." kənsɪɾɝəbli mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ niɾəd, ɪn əɹ əpɪnjən, bʌɾ ɪt hæd bɪn nɛsəsɛɹi. ʌðɝwaɪz ðeɪ wəɾ ɔl bi bæk wɪð ðə spɪɹz ən ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz, iɾɪŋ hɑɹd bɹɛɾ ən dʒɹaɪd mit. əɹ ɹæðɝ ðeɪ wəɾ ɔl bi ɑn ðə muv istwɝd, wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ ɛni saɪn ʌv ʌðɝ sɝvaɪvɝz.

Maintaining a smooth face, Sevanna irritably prevented her hands from fingering a necklace or adjusting her shawl. "I have told you all you need know." Considerably more than they needed, in her opinion, but it had been necessary. Otherwise they would all be back with the spears and the other Wise Ones, eating hard bread and dried meat. Or rather they would all be on the move eastward, watching for any sign of other survivors.

wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ ɛni saɪn ə pɝsut. wɪð ə leɪt stɑɹt, ðeɪ maɪt stɪl kʌvɝ fɪfti maɪlz bɪfɔɹ hɔltɪŋ. "wɝdz wɪl nɑt skɪn ðə bɔɹ, mʌtʃ lɛs kɪl ɪt. ɪf juv dɪsaɪɾɪd tə kɹip bæk tə ðə maʊntənz ən spɛn jəɹ laɪvz ɹʌnɪŋ ən haɪɾɪŋ, ðən ɡoʊ. ɪf nɑt, ðən də wʌt jə mʌst, ən əl də maɪ pɑɹt."

Watching for any sign of pursuit. With a late start, they might still cover fifty miles before halting. "Words will not skin the boar, much less kill it. If you have decided to creep back to the mountains and spend your lives running and hiding, then go. If not, then do what you must, and I will do my part."

ɹiɑliz blu aɪz stɛɹd flæt dɪfaɪəns, ən ʃənz ɡɹeɪ. ivən moʊdʒɹə lʊk daʊtfəl, ən ʃi ən sʌmɛɝɪn leɪ ðə moʊst sɑlədli ɪn əɹ ɡɹæsp.

Rhiale's blue eyes stared flat defiance, and Tion's gray. Even Modarra looked doubtful, and she and Someryn lay the most solidly in her grasp.

sɪvænə weɪɾəd, aʊtwɝdli kɑm, ənwɪlɪŋ tə tɛl əm əɡɛn əɹ æsk. ɪnsaɪd, hɝ stʌmək tʃɝnd wɪð æŋɡɝ. ʃi wəd nɑt bi biɾən kəz ðiz wɪmən hæd peɪl hɑɹts.

Sevanna waited, outwardly calm, unwilling to tell them again or ask. Inside, her stomach churned with anger. She would not be beaten because these women had pale hearts.

"ɪf wi mʌst," ɹiɑli saɪɾ ət læst. ɛksɛptɪŋ ði æbsən θɛɝɑvə, ʃi ɹɪzɪstɪd moʊst ɔfən, bʌt sɪvænə hæd hoʊps ə hɝ. ðə spaɪn ðət ɹəfjuz tə bɛn əɾ ɔl wɑz ɔfən ðə moʊs mæliəbəl wʌns ɪt ɡeɪv weɪ. ðət wɑz əz tʃɹu fəɹ wɪmən əz mɛn. ɹiɑli ən ði ʌðɝz tɝn ðɛɹ aɪz tə ðə kjub, səm fɹaʊnɪŋ.

"If we must," Rhiale sighed at last. Excepting the absent Therava, she resisted most often, but Sevanna had hopes of her. The spine that refused to bend at all was often the most malleable once it gave way. That was as true for women as men. Rhiale and the others turned their eyes to the cube, some frowning.

sɪvænə sɔ nʌθɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs. ɪn fækt, ʃi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nʌθɪŋ, ðeɪ kəd kleɪm ðə kjub feɪl tə wɝk, ən ʃi wəd nɛvɝ noʊ.

Sevanna saw nothing, of course. In fact, she realized that if they did nothing, they could claim the cube failed to work, and she would never know.

əbɹʌpli, ðoʊ, sʌmɛɝɪn ɡæspt, ən mɹə ɔlmoʊst wɪspɝd, "ɪt dʒɹɔz mɔɹ. lʊk." ʃi pɔɪntəd. "faɪɝ ðəɹ ən ðɛɹ, ən ɝθ, ən ɛɹ ən spɪɹət, fɪlɪŋ ðə ɹʌnəlz."

Abruptly, though, Someryn gasped, and Meira almost whispered, "It draws more. Look." She pointed. "Fire there and there, and Earth, and Air and Spirit, filling the runnels."

"nɑɾ ɔl ə ðɛm," bəlɪn sɛd. "ðeɪ kəd bi fɪl mɛni weɪz, aɪ θɪŋk. ən ðəɹ ɑɹ pleɪsəz wɛɹ ðə floʊz . . . twɪst . . . ɝaʊn sʌmθɪŋ ðəɾ ɪz nɑt ðɛɹ." hɝ fɔɹhɛd fɝoʊd. "ɪt mʌs bi dʒɹɔɪŋ ðə meɪl pɑɹt, əz wɛl."

"Not all of them," Belinde said. "They could be filled many ways, I think. And there are places where the flows . . . twist . . . around something that is not there." Her forehead furrowed. "It must be drawing the male part, as well."

sɛvɹəl dʒɹu bæk ə lɪɾəl, ʃɪftɪŋ ʃɔlz, bɹʌʃɪŋ skɝts əz ðoʊ tə ɹʌb əweɪ dɝt. sɪvænə wʊɾə ɡɪvən ɛniθɪŋ tə si. ɔlmoʊst ɛniθɪŋ. haʊ kəd ðeɪ bi sətʃ kaʊɝdz? haʊ kəd ðeɪ lɛɾ ɪt ʃoʊ?

Several drew back a little, shifting shawls, brushing skirts as though to rub away dirt. Sevanna would have given anything to see. Almost anything. How could they be such cowards? How could they let it show?

faɪnəli moʊdʒɹə sɛd, "aɪ wʌndɝ wʌt wəd hæpən ɪf wi tʌtʃt ɪt wɪð faɪɝ ɛlswɛɹ."

Finally Modarra said, "I wonder what would happen if we touched it with Fire elsewhere."

"paʊɝ ðə kælbɑks tu mʌtʃ əɹ ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ weɪ, ən ɪt meɪ mɛlt," ə mænz vɔɪs sɛɾ aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ. "ɪt kəɾ ivən ɛks - "

"Power the callbox too much or in the wrong way, and it may melt," a man's voice said out of the air. "It could even ex - "

ðə vɔɪs kʌɾ ɔf əz ði ʌðɝ wɪmən sɝdʒ tə ðɛɹ fit, piɹɪŋ ɪn əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz. əlɹiz ən moʊdʒɹə wɛn soʊ fɑɹ əz tə dʒɹɔ ðɛɹ bɛl naɪvz, ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd noʊ niɾ ə stil wən ðeɪ hæd ðə wʌn paʊɝ. nʌθɪŋ muvd əmʌŋ ðə sʌn-stʃɹikt ʃædoʊz, nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə bɝd.

The voice cut off as the other women surged to their feet, peering in among the trees. Alarys and Modarra went so far as to draw their belt knives, though they had no need of steel when they had the One Power. Nothing moved among the sun-streaked shadows, not so much as a bird.

sɪvænə dɪd nɑt stɝ. ʃi hæd bɪliv pɝhæps ə θɝɾ ʌv wʌɾ ə ðə wɛtləndɝ hæd toʊl hɝ, nɑɾ ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðɪs, ɪn tʃɹuθ, bʌt ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz kædɑɝz vɔɪs. wɛtləndɝz ɔlweɪz hæd mɔɹ neɪmz, bʌt ðət wɑz ɔl i hæd ɡɪvən. ə mæn ə mɛni sikɹəts, ʃi səspɛktəd. "teɪk jəɹ pleɪsəz əɡɛn," ʃi ɔɹɾɝd. "æn pʊt ðə floʊz bæk wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ. haʊ kən aɪ sʌmən ɪm ɪf jə fɪɹ wɝdz?"

Sevanna did not stir. She had believed perhaps a third of what of the wetlander had told her, not including this, in truth, but she recognized Caddar's voice. Wetlanders always had more names, but that was all he had given. A man of many secrets, she suspected. "Take your places again," she ordered. "And put the flows back where they were. How can I summon him if you fear words?"

ɹiɑli swʌŋ ɝaʊnd, maʊθ ɡeɪpɪŋ ən aɪz ɪnkɹɛdʒələs. əndaʊɾɪdli wʌndɝɪŋ haʊ ʃi nu ðeɪ hæd stɑp tʃænəlɪŋ; ðə wʊmən wɑz nɑt θɪŋkɪŋ klɪɹli. sloʊli, ənizəli, ðeɪ sɛɾəld ɪn ðə sɝkəl əɡɛn. ɹiɑli dɑn ə flæɾɝ feɪs ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls.

Rhiale swung around, mouth gaping and eyes incredulous. Undoubtedly wondering how she knew they had stopped channeling; the woman was not thinking clearly. Slowly, uneasily, they settled in the circle again. Rhiale donned a flatter face than anyone else.

"soʊ jə ɑɹ bæk," kædɑɝz vɔɪs sɛd fɹəm ði ɛɹ. "du juv ælθɹ?"

"So you are back," Caddar's voice said from the air. "Do you have al'Thor?"

sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ɪz toʊn wɔɹn hɝ. hi kəd nɑt noʊ. bʌɾ i dɪd. ʃi əbændən ɔl ʃi hæd pɹipɛɹd tə seɪ. "noʊ, kædɑɝ. bʌt wi stɪl mʌs tɔk. əl mit jə ɪn tɛn deɪz wɛɹ wi fɝs mɛt." ʃi kəd ɹitʃ ðət væli ɪn kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ sunɝ, bʌt ʃi niɾəd taɪm tə pɹipɛɹ. haʊ dɪɾ i noʊ?

Something in his tone warned her. He could not know. But he did. She abandoned all she had prepared to say. "No, Caddar. But we still must talk. I will meet you in ten days where we first met." She could reach that valley in Kinslayer's Dagger sooner, but she needed time to prepare. How did he know?

"wɛl ðət jə toʊl ðə tʃɹuθ, ɡɝl," kædɑɝ mɝmɝd dʒɹaɪli. "ju wɪl lɝn aɪ də nɑt laɪk biɪŋ laɪd tə. meɪnteɪn ðə weɪlaɪn fəɹ loʊkeɪʃən, ən əl kʌm tə ju."

"Well that you told the truth, girl," Caddar murmured dryly. "You will learn I do not like being lied to. Maintain the wayline for location, and I will come to you."

sɪvænə stɛɹɾ ət ðə kjub ɪn ʃɑk. ɡɝl? "wʌt dɪd jə seɪ?" ʃi dɪmændəd. ɡɝl! ʃi kəd nɑt bɪliv əɹ ɪɹz. ɹiɑli vɛɹi pɔɪntɪdli dɪd nɑt lʊk ət hɝ, ən mɹəz maʊθ twɪstəɾ ɪn ə smaɪl, ɑkwɝd kəz soʊ sɛldəm juzd.

Sevanna stared at the cube in shock. Girl? "What did you say?" she demanded. Girl! She could not believe her ears. Rhiale very pointedly did not look at her, and Meira's mouth twisted in a smile, awkward because so seldom used.

kædɑɝz saɪ fɪl ðə klɪɹɪŋ. "tɛl jəɹ waɪz wʌn tə kəntɪnju duɪŋ ɪɡzækli wʌt ʃiz duɪŋ - nʌθɪŋ ɛls - ən əl kʌm tə ju." ðə fɔɹs peɪʃəns ɪn ɪz toʊn skɹeɪp laɪk ə ɡɹɪst-stoʊn. wən ʃi hæd wʌt ʃi wɑntəd fɹəm ðə wɛtləndɝ, ʃi wəd dʒɹɛs ɪm ɪn ɡeɪʃeɪn waɪt. noʊ, ɪn blæk!

Caddar's sigh filled the clearing. "Tell your Wise One to continue doing exactly what she is doing - nothing else - and I will come to you." The forced patience in his tone scraped like a grist-stone. When she had what she wanted from the wetlander, she would dress him in gai'shain white. No, in black!

"wʌt dʒju min, jəl kʌm, kædɑɝ?" saɪləns ænsɝd. "kædɑɝ, wɛɹ ɑɹ ju?" saɪləns. "kædɑɝ?"

"What do you mean, you will come, Caddar?" Silence answered. "Caddar, where are you?" Silence. "Caddar?"

ði ʌðɝz ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ənizi ɡlænsɪz.

The others exchanged uneasy glances.

"ɪz i mæd?" ʃən sɛd. əlɹiz mʌɾɝd ðəɾ i mʌs bi, ən bəlɪn æŋɡɹəli dɪmændəd tə noʊ haʊ lɔŋ ðeɪ wɝ tə kəntɪnju ðɪs nɑnsɛns.

"Is he mad?" Tion said. Alarys muttered that he must be, and Belinde angrily demanded to know how long they were to continue this nonsense.

"əntɪl aɪ seɪ tə stɑp," sɪvænə sɛd sɔfli, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə kjub. ə pɹɪkəl ə hoʊp wɝm θɹu hɝ tʃɛst. ɪf i kəd də ðɪs, ðən ʃʊɹli hi kəd dɪlɪvɝ wʌɾ i hæd pɹɑməst. ən meɪbi. . . . ʃi wəd nɑt hoʊp tu mʌtʃ. ʃi lʊkt ʌp θɹu ðə bɹæntʃəz ðət nɪɹli mɛɾ əbʌv ðə klɪɹɪŋ. ðə sʌn stɪl hæɾ ə weɪ tə klaɪm tə ɪts pik. "ɪf hiz nɑt kʌm baɪ mɪddeɪ, wɪl ɡoʊ." ɪt wɑz tu mʌtʃ tə ɪkspɛk ðeɪ wəd nɑt ɡɹʌmbəl.

"Until I say to stop," Sevanna said softly, staring at the cube. A prickle of hope wormed through her chest. If he could do this, then surely he could deliver what he had promised. And maybe. . . . She would not hope too much. She looked up through the branches that nearly met above the clearing. The sun still had a way to climb to its peak. "If he has not come by midday, we will go." It was too much to expect they would not grumble.

"soʊ wi sɪt hɪɹ laɪk stoʊnz?" əlɹiz tɔst əɹ hɛɾ ɪn ə pɹæktəst weɪ, swipɪŋ ɔl ə hɝ hɛɹ oʊvɝ wʌn ʃoʊldɝ. "fɔɹ ə wɛtləndɝ?"

"So we sit here like stones?" Alarys tossed her head in a practiced way, sweeping all of her hair over one shoulder. "For a wetlander?"

"wʌtɛvɝ i pɹɑməs ju, sɪvænə," ɹiɑli sɛd wɪð ə skaʊl, "ɪt kænɑt bi wɝθ ðɪs."

"Whatever he promised you, Sevanna," Rhiale said with a scowl, "it cannot be worth this."

"hi ɪz mæd," ʃən ɡɹaʊld.

"He is mad," Tion growled.

moʊdʒɹə nɑɾəd təwɔɹd ðə kjub. "wʌɾ ɪf i kən stɪl hɪɹ?"

Modarra nodded toward the cube. "What if he can still hear?"

ʃən snɪf dɪsmɪsɪvli, ən sʌmɛɝɪn sɛd, "haʊ ʃəd wi kɛɹ ɪf ə mæn hɪɹz wʌt wi seɪ? bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt ɹɛlɪʃ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ hɪm."

Tion sniffed dismissively, and Someryn said, "How should we care if a man hears what we say? But I do not relish waiting for him."

"wʌɾ ɪf hiz laɪk ðoʊz wɛtləndɝz ɪn blæk koʊts?" bəlɪn kəmpɹɛst əɹ lɪps tɪl ðeɪ nɪɹli mætʃt mɹəz.

"What if he is like those wetlanders in black coats?" Belinde compressed her lips till they nearly matched Meira's.

"du nɑt bi ɹɪdɪkjələs," əlɹiz snɪɹd. "wɛtləndɝz kɪl sətʃ mɛn ɑn saɪt. wʌtɛvɝ ði ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ kleɪm, ðət mʌst əv bɪn ðə wɝk ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən ɹænd ælθɹ." ðət neɪm pɹədust ə peɪn saɪləns, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt læst.

"Do not be ridiculous," Alarys sneered. "Wetlanders kill such men on sight. Whatever the algai'd'siswai claim, that must have been the work of the Aes Sedai. And Rand al'Thor." That name produced a pained silence, but it did not last.

"kædɑɝ mʌst əv ə kjub laɪk ðɪs wʌn," bəlɪn sɛd. "hi mʌst əv ə wʊmən wɪð ðə ɡɪf tə meɪk ɪt wɝk."

"Caddar must have a cube like this one," Belinde said. "He must have a woman with the gift to make it work."

"æn ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ɹiɑli meɪɾ ə nɔɪz ə dɪsɡʌst ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt. "ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ tɛn ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð hɪm, lɛɾ əm kʌm. wɪl dil wɪð əm əz ðeɪ dɪzɝv."

"An Aes Sedai?" Rhiale made a noise of disgust in her throat. "If there are ten Aes Sedai with him, let them come. We will deal with them as they deserve."

mɹə læft, ə dʒɹaɪ saʊn əz nɛɹoʊ əz əɹ feɪs. "aɪ θɪŋk jə ɔlmoʊs bɪɡɪn tə bɪliv ðeɪ dɪd kɪl deɪseɪn."

Meira laughed, a dry sound as narrow as her face. "I think you almost begin to believe they did kill Desaine."

"wɑtʃ jəɹ tʌŋ!" ɹiɑli snɑɹəld.

"Watch your tongue!" Rhiale snarled.

"jɛs," sʌmɛɝɪn mɝmɝɾ æŋkʃəsli. "kɛɹləs wɝdz maɪt bi hɝd baɪ ðə ɹɔŋ ɪɹz."

"Yes," Someryn murmured anxiously. "Careless words might be heard by the wrong ears."

ʃənz læf wɑz ʃɔɹɾ ən ənplɛzənt. "ðə lɑɾ ə jə hæz lɛs kɝədʒ ðən wʌn wɛtləndɝ." wɪtʃ meɪd sʌmɛɝɪn snæp bæk, ʌv kɔɹs, ən moʊdʒɹə tu, ən mɹə spoʊk wɝdz ðət wʊɾə bɹɔɾ ə tʃælənʒ hæd ðeɪ nɑt bɪn waɪz wʌnz, ən əlɹiz spoʊk hɑɹʃɝ, ən bəlɪnd. . . . ðɛɹ skwɑbəlɪŋ ɪɹəteɪɾəd sɪvænə, ðoʊ ɪt ɡɛɹəntid ðeɪ wəd nɑt kənspaɪɝ əɡɛns hɝ. bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt waɪ ʃi ɹeɪzd ə hæn fəɹ saɪləns. ɹiɑli fɹaʊn ət hɝ, oʊpənɪŋ əɹ maʊθ, ən ɪn ðət moʊmən ðeɪ hɝd wʌt ʃi dɪd. sʌmθɪŋ ɹʌsəld ɪn ðə dɛd livz əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz. noʊ il wəd meɪk soʊ mʌtʃ nɔɪz, ivən ɪf ɛni wəɾ əpɹoʊtʃ waɪz wʌnz ənbɪddən, ən noʊ ænəməl wəd kʌm soʊ nɪɹ pipəl. ðɪs taɪm, ʃi ɹoʊz tə hɝ fit wɪð ði ʌðɝz.

Tion's laugh was short and unpleasant. "The lot of you has less courage than one wetlander." Which made Someryn snap back, of course, and Modarra too, and Meira spoke words that would have brought a challenge had they not been Wise Ones, and Alarys spoke harsher, and Belinde. . . . Their squabbling irritated Sevanna, though it guaranteed they would not conspire against her. But that was not why she raised a hand for silence. Rhiale frowned at her, opening her mouth, and in that moment they heard what she did. Something rustled in the dead leaves among the trees. No Aiel would make so much noise, even if any would approach Wise Ones unbidden, and no animal would come so near people. This time, she rose to her feet with the others.

tu ʃeɪps əpɪɹd, ə mæn ən ə wʊmən, bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪnʌf bɹæntʃəz ʌndɝfʊt tə weɪk ə stoʊn. dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə klɪɹɪŋ, ðeɪ stɑpt, ən ðə mæn bɛn ɪz hɛd slaɪtli tə spik tə ðə wʊmən. ɪt wɑz kædɑɝ, ɪn ə nɪɹli blæk koʊt wɪð leɪs əɾ ɪz nɛk ən ɹɪsts. ət list i dɪd nɑt wɛɹ ə sɔɹd. ðeɪ sim tə bi ɑɹɡjuɪŋ. sɪvænə ʃʊɾə bɪn eɪbəl tə hɪɹ sʌmθɪŋ ə ðɛɹ wɝdz, jɛt ðə saɪləns wɑz kəmplit. kædɑɝ stʊd nɪɹli ə hæn tɔlɝ ðən moʊdʒɹə - tɔl fəɹ ə wɛtləndɝ, əɹ ivən fəɹ ən il - ən ðə wʊmənz hɛd ɹitʃt noʊ haɪɝ ðən ɪz tʃɛst. əz dɑɹk ə feɪs ən hɛɹ əz hi, ən bjuɾəfəl ɪnʌf tə taɪɾən sɪvænəz maʊθ, ʃi wɔɹ bɹaɪt ɹɛd sɪlk, kʌt tə ɪkspoʊz ivən mɔɹ ə hɝ bʊzəm ðən sʌmɛɝɪn ʃoʊd.

Two shapes appeared, a man and a woman, breaking enough branches underfoot to wake a stone. Just short of the clearing, they stopped, and the man bent his head slightly to speak to the woman. It was Caddar, in a nearly black coat with lace at his neck and wrists. At least he did not wear a sword. They seemed to be arguing. Sevanna should have been able to hear something of their words, yet the silence was complete. Caddar stood nearly a hand taller than Modarra - tall for a wetlander, or even for an Aiel - and the woman's head reached no higher than his chest. As dark of face and hair as he, and beautiful enough to tighten Sevanna's mouth, she wore bright red silk, cut to expose even more of her bosom than Someryn showed.

əz ɪf θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə wʊmən kɔl hɝ, sʌmɛɝɪn dʒɹu kloʊs tə sɪvænə. "ðə wʊmən əz ðə ɡɪft," ʃi wɪspɝd wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ əɹ aɪz fɹəm ðə pɛɹ. "ʃi wivz ə bæɹiɝ." pɝsɪŋ əɹ lɪps, ʃi æɾəd, ɹɪlʌktənli, "ʃi ɪz stʃɹɔŋ. vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ." fɹəm hɝ, ðət mɛn sʌmθɪŋ ɪndid. sɪvænə hæd nɛvɝ bɪn eɪbəl tə ʌndɝstænd waɪ stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə paʊɝ dɪd nɑt kaʊn əmʌŋ waɪz wʌnz - waɪl biɪŋ θæŋkfəl ðəɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt, fəɹ əɹ oʊn seɪk - bʌt sʌmɛɝɪn pɹaɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf ðət ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ɪnkaʊntɝɾ ə wʊmən nɪɹ əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ʃi. baɪ hɝ toʊn, sɪvænə səspɛktəd ðɪs wʊmən wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ.

As if thinking of the woman called her, Someryn drew close to Sevanna. "The woman has the gift," she whispered without taking her eyes from the pair. "She weaves a barrier." Pursing her lips, she added, reluctantly, "She is strong. Very strong." From her, that meant something indeed. Sevanna had never been able to understand why strength in the Power did not count among Wise Ones - while being thankful that it did not, for her own sake - but Someryn prided herself that she had never encountered a woman near as strong as she. By her tone, Sevanna suspected this woman was stronger.

ɹaɪt ðɛn, ʃi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wɛðɝ ðə wʊmən kəd muv maʊntənz əɹ bɛɹli laɪɾ ə kændəl. ʃi mʌs bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv ðə feɪs, jɛt səm sɪvænə hæd sin dɪd nɑt. ðət mʌs bi haʊ kædɑɝ kəd pʊɾ ɪz hæn ɑn tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ðət wɑz haʊ hi kəd faɪn əm ən kʌm. soʊ sun; soʊ kwɪkli. pɑsəbɪləɾiz ənfoʊldəd, ən hoʊp ɡɹu. bʌt bɪtwin ɪm ən hɝ, hu kəmændəd?

Right then, she did not care whether the woman could move mountains or barely light a candle. She must be Aes Sedai. She did not have the face, yet some Sevanna had seen did not. That must be how Caddar could put his hand on ter'angreal. That was how he could find them and come. So soon; so quickly. Possibilities unfolded, and hope grew. But between him and her, who commanded?

"stɑp tʃænəlɪŋ ɪndə ðæt," ʃi ɔɹɾɝd. hi maɪt stɪl bi eɪbəl tə hɪɹ θɹu ɪt.

"Stop channeling into that," she ordered. He might still be able to hear through it.

ɹiɑli ɡeɪv əɹ ə lʊk ðət dɪd nɑt stɑp ʃɔɹɾ ə pɪɾi. "sʌmɛɝɪn ɔlɹɛɾi dɪd, sɪvænə."

Rhiale gave her a look that did not stop short of pity. "Someryn already did, Sevanna."

nʌθɪŋ kəd spɔɪl əɹ mud. ʃi smaɪld ən sɛd, "vɛɹi wɛl. ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌɾ aɪ sɛd. lemi də ɔl ə ðə tɔkɪŋ." moʊst ə ði ʌðɝz nɑɾəd; ɹiɑli snɪft. sɪvænə kɛpt əɹ smaɪl. eɪ waɪz wʌn kəd nɑt bi meɪd ɡeɪʃeɪn, bʌt soʊ mɛni wɔɹn-aʊt kʌstəmz hæd bɪn sɛɾ əsaɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ðəɾ ʌðɝz maɪt fɑloʊ.

Nothing could spoil her mood. She smiled and said, "Very well. Remember what I said. Let me do all of the talking." Most of the others nodded; Rhiale sniffed. Sevanna kept her smile. A Wise One could not be made gai'shain, but so many worn-out customs had been set aside already that others might follow.

kædɑɝ ən ðə wʊmən stɑɹɾəd fɔɹwɝd, ən sʌmɛɝɪn wɪspɝɾ əɡɛn. "ʃi stɪl hoʊlz ðə paʊɝ."

Caddar and the woman started forward, and Someryn whispered again. "She still holds the Power."

"sɪt nɛks tə mi," sɪvænə toʊld əɹ heɪstəli. "tʌtʃ maɪ lɛɡ ɪf ʃi tʃænəlz." haʊ ðət ɡæld. bʌt ʃi mʌs noʊ.

"Sit next to me," Sevanna told her hastily. "Touch my leg if she channels." How that galled. But she must know.

ʃi sæt, foʊldɪŋ əɹ lɛɡz ʌndɝ, ən ði ʌðɝz dʒɔɪn hɝ, livɪŋ ə speɪs fəɹ kædɑɝ ən ðə wʊmən. sʌmɛɝɪn sæt kloʊs ɪnʌf ðət ðɛɹ niz tʌtʃt. sɪvænə wɪʃt ʃi hæɾ ə tʃɛɹ.

She sat, folding her legs under, and the others joined her, leaving a space for Caddar and the woman. Someryn sat close enough that their knees touched. Sevanna wished she had a chair.

"aɪ si ju, kædɑɝ," ʃi sɛd fɔɹməli, ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪz ɪnsəlt. "sɪt, jə ən jəɹ wʊmən."

"I see you, Caddar," she said formally, in spite of his insult. "Sit, you and your woman."

ʃi wɑntəd tə si haʊ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹiæktəd, bʌɾ ɔl ʃi dɪd wɑz ɑɹtʃ ən aɪbɹaʊ ən smaɪl læzəli. hɝ aɪz wɝ əz blæk əz hɪz, əz blæk əz ə ɹeɪvənz. ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz lɛɾ ə lɪɾəl koʊlnəs ʃoʊ. hæd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ət ðə wɛlz nɑɾ əlaʊd ɹænd ælθɹ tə bɹeɪk fɹi, ðeɪ ʃʊɹli wʊɾə kɪld əɹ kæptʃɝɾ ɛvɹi wʌn. ðɪs ɛɛs sədaɪ mʌs bi əwɛɹ ə ðæt, sɪns kædɑɝ pleɪnli nu wʌt hæd hæpənd, jɛt ʃi lʊkt ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ əfɹeɪd.

She wanted to see how the Aes Sedai reacted, but all she did was arch an eyebrow and smile lazily. Her eyes were as black as his, as black as a raven's. The other Wise Ones let a little coldness show. Had the Aes Sedai at the wells not allowed Rand al'Thor to break free, they surely would have killed or captured every one. This Aes Sedai must be aware of that, since Caddar plainly knew what had happened, yet she looked anything but afraid.

"ðɪs ɪz mzə," kædɑɝ sɛd, loʊɝɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ə lɪɾəl ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə speɪs lɛft fəɹ hɪm. fəɹ səm ɹizən, hi dɪd nɑt laɪk tə kʌm wɪðɪn ɑɹmz ɹitʃ. pɝhæps i fɪɹd naɪvz. "aɪ toʊl jə tə juz ə sɪŋɡəl waɪz wʌn, sɪvænə, nɑt sɛvən. səm mɛn maɪt bi səspɪʃəs." fəɹ səm ɹizən, hi simd əmjuzd.

"This is Maisia," Caddar said, lowering himself to the ground, a little short of the space left for him. For some reason, he did not like to come within arm's reach. Perhaps he feared knives. "I told you to use a single Wise One, Sevanna, not seven. Some men might be suspicious." For some reason, he seemed amused.

ðə wʊmən, mzə, pɔzd ɪn ði ækt ə smuðɪŋ əɹ skɝts ʌndɝ wən i ɡeɪv əɹ neɪm, ɡlɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm wɪð ə fjʊɹi ðət ʃʊɾə stʃɹɪpt ɪz haɪɾ əweɪ. pɝhæps ʃi hæd θɔt tə kip əɹ aɪdɛntəɾi hɪɾən. ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ, ðoʊ. æftɝ ə moʊmənt ʃi sæt bɪsaɪd hɪm, hɝ smaɪl ɹɪtɝnɪŋ soʊ sʌɾənli ɪt maɪt nɛvɝ əv ɡɔn. nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, sɪvænə wɑz θæŋkfəl ðət wɛtləndɝz wɔɹ ðɛɹ ɪmoʊʃənz ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz.

The woman, Maisia, paused in the act of smoothing her skirts under when he gave her name, glaring at him with a fury that should have stripped his hide away. Perhaps she had thought to keep her identity hidden. She said nothing, though. After a moment she sat beside him, her smile returning so suddenly it might never have gone. Not for the first time, Sevanna was thankful that wetlanders wore their emotions on their faces.

"ju hæv bɹɔt ðə θɪŋ ðət kən kəntʃɹoʊl ɹænd ælθɹ?" ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən ɡlæns ət ðə pɪtʃɝ ʌv wɔɾɝ. wən i wɑz soʊ ɹud, waɪ ʃəd ʃi kəntɪnju ðə fɔɹmz? ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪm biɪŋ soʊ wən ðeɪ mɛt bɪfɔɹ. pɝhæps ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛmboʊldən hɪm.

"You have brought the thing that can control Rand al'Thor?" She did not even glance at the pitcher of water. When he was so rude, why should she continue the forms? She did not remember him being so when they met before. Perhaps the Aes Sedai emboldened him.

kædɑɝ ɡeɪv əɹ ə kwɪtsɪkəl lʊk. "waɪ, wən jə də nɑɾ əv hɪm?"

Caddar gave her a quizzical look. "Why, when you do not have him?"

"aɪ wɪl," ʃi sɛd lɛvəli, ən i smaɪld. soʊ dɪd mzə.

"I will," she said levelly, and he smiled. So did Maisia.

"wɛn jə du, ðɛn." hɪz smaɪl ʃaʊɾəd ə daʊɾ ən dɪsbɪlif. ðə wʊmənz mɑkt. ə blæk ɹoʊb kəd bi faʊn fəɹ hɝ, tu. "wʌɾ aɪ hæv wɪl kəntʃɹoʊl ɪm wʌns hiz teɪkən, bʌɾ ɪt kænɑɾ oʊvɝkʌm hɪm. aɪ woʊn ɹɪsk ɪm faɪndɪŋ aʊɾ əbaʊt mi əntɪl juv ɪm sɪkjʊɹ." hi dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ ʃeɪmd ɪn ðə slaɪɾəst baɪ ði ædmɪʃən.

"When you do, then." His smile shouted of doubt and disbelief. The woman's mocked. A black robe could be found for her, too. "What I have will control him once he is taken, but it cannot overcome him. I won't risk him finding out about me until you have him secure." He did not appear shamed in the slightest by the admission.

sɪvænə fɔɹs daʊn ə stæb ə dɪsəpɔɪnmənt. wʌn hoʊp ɡɔn, bʌɾ ʌðɝz ɹɪmeɪnd. ɹiɑli ən ʃən foʊldəd ðɛɹ hænz ən stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, bɪɑn ðə sɝkəl, bɪɑn hɪm; hi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɝθ lɪsnɪŋ tə. ʌv kɔɹs, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ.

Sevanna forced down a stab of disappointment. One hope gone, but others remained. Rhiale and Tion folded their hands and stared straight ahead, beyond the circle, beyond him; he was no longer worth listening to. Of course, they did not know everything.

"wʌɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ? kən ðɪs θɪŋ kəntʃɹoʊl ðɛm?" ɹiɑli ən ʃən stɑpt piɹɪŋ bɪɑn ðə tʃɹiz. bəlɪnz aɪbɹaʊz twɪtʃt, ən mɹə æktʃəli  lʊkt ət hɝ. cʊɾə əv kɝs ðɛɹ læk ə sɛlf-kəntʃɹoʊl.

"What of Aes Sedai? Can this thing control them?" Rhiale and Tion stopped peering beyond the trees. Belinde's eyebrows twitched, and Meira actually looked at her. Sevanna could have cursed their lack of self-control.

kædɑɝ wɑz əz blaɪn əz ɔl wɛtləndɝz, ðoʊ. hi θɹu bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən læft. "du jə min tə seɪ jə mɪst ælθɹ bʌt kæptʃɝɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ? jə ɡɹæbd ət ði iɡəl ən kɑɾ ə fju lɑɹks!"

Caddar was as blind as all wetlanders, though. He threw back his head and laughed. "Do you mean to say you missed al'Thor but captured Aes Sedai? You grabbed at the eagle and caught a few larks!"

"kæn jə pɹəvaɪd ðə seɪm fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ʃi wɑntəd tə ɡɹaɪn əɹ tiθ. ʃʊɹli hi hæd bɪn pɹɑpɝli kɝɾiəs bɪfɔɹ.

"Can you provide the same for Aes Sedai?" She wanted to grind her teeth. Surely he had been properly courteous before.

hi ʃɹʌɡd. "pɝhæps. ɪf ðə pɹaɪs ɪz ɹaɪt." ɪt wɑz dʌs tə hɪm, ʌv noʊ moʊmənt. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, mzə ʃoʊd noʊ kənsɝn iðɝ. stʃɹeɪnʒ, ɪf ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. bʌt ʃi mʌs bi.

He shrugged. "Perhaps. If the price is right." It was dust to him, of no moment. For that matter, Maisia showed no concern either. Strange, if she was Aes Sedai. But she must be.

"jɔɹ tʌŋ tɔsɪz bɹaɪt kʌlɝz ɑn ðə wɪnd, wɛtləndɝ," ʃən sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs. "wʌt pɹuf ə ðɛm əv ju?" fəɹ wʌns, sɪvænə dɪd nɑt maɪn ðət ʃi hæd spoʊkən aʊɾ ə tɝn.

"Your tongue tosses bright colors on the wind, wetlander," Tion said in a flat voice. "What proof of them have you?" For once, Sevanna did not mind that she had spoken out of turn.

kædɑɝz feɪs taɪɾənd fəɹ ɔl ðə wɝld əz ɪf i wɝ ə klæn tʃif, əz ɪf i hæd hɝd ði ɪnsəlt, bʌɾ ɪn ən ɪnstən i wɑz ɔl smaɪlz wʌns mɔɹ. "æz jə wɪʃ. mzə, pleɪ wɪð ðə kælbɑks fəɹ ðɛm."

Caddar's face tightened for all the world as if he were a clan chief, as if he had heard the insult, but in an instant he was all smiles once more. "As you wish. Maisia, play with the callbox for them."

sʌmɛɝɪn ʃɪftəɾ əɹ skɝts, pɹɛsɪŋ əɹ nʌkəlz əɡɛnst sɪvænəz θaɪ əz ðə ɡɹeɪ kjub ɹoʊz ə peɪs ɪndə ði ɛɹ. ɪt baʊns bæk ən fɔɹθ əz ðoʊ tɔs fɹəm hæn tə hænd, ðən tɪltəɾ ən spʌn ɑn wʌn kɔɹnɝ laɪk ə tɑp, fæstɝ ən fæstɝ, əntɪl ɪt blɝd.

Someryn shifted her skirts, pressing her knuckles against Sevanna's thigh as the gray cube rose a pace into the air. It bounced back and forth as though tossed from hand to hand, then tilted and spun on one corner like a top, faster and faster, until it blurred.

"wʊd jə laɪk tə si hɝ bæləns ɪɾ ɑn əɹ noʊz?" kædɑɝ æskt wɪð ə tuθi ɡɹɪn.

"Would you like to see her balance it on her nose?" Caddar asked with a toothy grin.

taɪt-aɪd, ðə dɑɹk wʊmən stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, hɝ smaɪl klɪɹli fɔɹs naʊ. "aɪ θɪŋk aɪ hæv dɛmənstʃɹeɪɾəd kwaɪɾ ɪnʌf, kædɑɝ," ʃi sɛd koʊldli. bʌt ðə kjub - ðə kælbɑks? - kəntɪnjud wɝlɪŋ.

Tight-eyed, the dark woman stared straight ahead, her smile clearly forced now. "I think I have demonstrated quite enough, Caddar," she said coldly. But the cube - the callbox? - continued whirling.

sɪvænə weɪɾəd ə sloʊ kaʊn ə twɛnti bɪfɔɹ seɪɪŋ, "ðæɾ ɪz səfɪʃənt."

Sevanna waited a slow count of twenty before saying, "That is sufficient."

"ju meɪ stɑp naʊ, mzə," kædɑɝ sɛd. "pʊɾ ɪt bæk wɛɹ ɪt wɑz." oʊnli ðən dɪd ðə kjub sloʊli dɪsɛnd, nɛslɪŋ dʒɛnli ɑn ɪts ɝɪdʒənəl spɑt. dɑɹk əz ʃi wɑz, ðə wʊmən lʊk peɪl. ən fjʊɹiəs.

"You may stop now, Maisia," Caddar said. "Put it back where it was." Only then did the cube slowly descend, nestling gently on its original spot. Dark as she was, the woman looked pale. And furious.

hæd ʃi bɪn əloʊn, sɪvænə wəɾ əv læft, ən dænst. əz ɪt wɑz, ʃi hæd dɪfəkəlti meɪnteɪnɪŋ ə smuð feɪs. ɹiɑli ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ tu bɪzi stɛɹɪŋ dɪsdeɪnfəli ət mzə tə noʊɾəs. wʌt wɝkt ɑn wʌn wʊmən wɪð ðə ɡɪft wəd wɝk ɑn ənʌðɝ. noʊ nid wɪð sʌmɛɝɪn ən moʊdʒɹə, pɝhæps, bʌt ɹiɑli, ən θɛɝɑvə. . . . ʃi kəd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tu iɡɝ, nɑt wən ði ʌðɝz nu ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ kæptɪvz.

Had she been alone, Sevanna would have laughed, and danced. As it was, she had difficulty maintaining a smooth face. Rhiale and the others were too busy staring disdainfully at Maisia to notice. What worked on one woman with the gift would work on another. No need with Someryn and Modarra, perhaps, but Rhiale, and Therava. . . . She could not appear too eager, not when the others knew there were no Aes Sedai captives.

"ʌv kɔɹs," kædɑɝ wɛn ɑn, "ɪt wɪl teɪk ə lɪɾəl taɪm tə pɹəvaɪd jə wɪð wʌt jə wɪʃ." hi tʊk ɑn ə slaɪ lʊk, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪɾ ɪt; pɝhæps ənʌðɝ wɛtləndɝ wəd nɑɾ əv sin. "aɪ wɔɹn ju, ðə pɹaɪs wɪl nɑt bi smɔl."

"Of course," Caddar went on, "it will take a little time to provide you with what you wish." He took on a sly look, trying to hide it; perhaps another wetlander would not have seen. "I warn you, the price will not be small."

ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf, sɪvænə lin fɔɹwɝd. "æn ðə weɪ jə tʃɹævəl hɪɹ soʊ kwɪkli? haʊ mʌtʃ tə meɪk əɹ titʃ əs ðæt?" ʃi mænədʒ tə kip iɡɝnəs fɹəm əɹ vɔɪs, bʌt ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪd ðə kəntɛmpt ʃi fɛl keɪm θɹu. wɛtləndɝz wəd də ɛniθɪŋ fəɹ ɡoʊld.

In spite of herself, Sevanna leaned forward. "And the way you traveled here so quickly? How much to make her teach us that?" She managed to keep eagerness from her voice, but she was afraid the contempt she felt came through. Wetlanders would do anything for gold.

pɝhæps ðə mæn hɝɾ ɪt; hɪz aɪz sɝɾənli waɪɾənd ɪn sɝpɹaɪz bɪfɔɹ i kəd ɹɪɡeɪn kəntʃɹoʊl. sətʃ əz ɪt wɑz. hi stʌɾid ɪz hænz, ən ɪz maʊθ kɝl feɪnli. waɪ ʃəɾ ɪz smaɪl sim plizd? "ðæɾ ɪz nɑt sʌmθɪŋ ʃi dʌz," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə vɔɪs əz smuð əz ɪz pɑmz, "nɑt baɪ hɝsɛlf. ɪts laɪk ðə kælbɑks. aɪ kən pɹəvaɪd jə wɪð sɛvɹəl, bʌt ðə pɹaɪs ə ðoʊz ɪz ivən haɪɝ. aɪ daʊt wʌt juv ɡlin fɹəm kɛɹhin wɪl bi ɪnʌf. fɔɹtʃənətli, jə kən juz ðə . . . tʃɹævlɪŋ bɑksəz tə teɪk jəɹ pipəl tə ɹɪtʃɝ lænz."

Perhaps the man heard it; his eyes certainly widened in surprise before he could regain control. Such as it was. He studied his hands, and his mouth curled faintly. Why should his smile seem pleased? "That is not something she does," he said in a voice as smooth as his palms, "not by herself. It is like the callbox. I can provide you with several, but the price of those is even higher. I doubt what you've gleaned from Cairhien will be enough. Fortunately, you can use the . . . traveling boxes to take your people to richer lands."

ivən mɹə wɑz hɑɹd-pɹɛs tə kip əɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən fɹəm bɪkʌmɪŋ tu ævəd. ɹɪtʃɝ lænz, ən noʊ nid tə meɪk ə weɪ θɹu ðoʊz fulz fɑloʊɪŋ ɹænd ælθɹ.

Even Meira was hard-pressed to keep her expression from becoming too avid. Richer lands, and no need to make a way through those fools following Rand al'Thor.

"tɛl mi mɔɹ," sɪvænə sɛd kuli. "ɹɪtʃɝ lænz maɪt bi ʌv səm ɪntʃɹəst." nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk əɹ fɝɡɛt ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn, ðoʊ. kædɑɝ wəd ɡɪv əɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ i hæd pɹɑməs bɪfɔɹ ʃi dɪklɛɹɾ ɪm dætsæŋ. əz wɛl ðəɾ i sim tə laɪk wɛɹɪŋ blæk. ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ nid tə ɡɪv ɪm ɛni ɡoʊl ðɛn.

"Tell me more," Sevanna said coolly. "Richer lands might be of some interest." Not enough to make her forget the Car'a'carn, though. Caddar would give her everything he had promised before she declared him da'tsang. As well that he seemed to like wearing black. There would be no need to give him any gold then.

ðə wɑtʃɝ ɡɑstɪd θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, meɪkɪŋ noʊ saʊnd. ɪt wɑz wʌndɝfəl wʌt jə kəd lɝn wɪð ə kælbɑks, ɪspɛʃli ɪn ə wɝld wɛɹ ðəɹ sim tə bi oʊnli tu ʌðɝz. ðət ɹɛd dʒɹɛs wɑz izi tə fɑloʊ, ən ðeɪ nɛvɝ lʊk bæk ivən tə si wɛðɝ səm ə ðoʊz soʊ-kɔld il wɝ tʃɹeɪlɪŋ ðɛm. ɡɹeɪndəl meɪnteɪn ðə mɪɹɝ ə mɪsts ðət hɪɾ əɹ tʃɹu fɔɹm, bʌt sɑmaɪl hæd dʒɹɑp hɪz, ɡoʊldən-bɪɹɾəd əɡɛn ən dʒʌs hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz tɔlɝ ðən ʃi. hi hæd lɛt ðə lɪŋk bɪtwin əm dɪzɑlv, tu. ðə wɑtʃɝ wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðət wɑz waɪz, ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz. hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz wʌndɝd haʊ mʌtʃ ə sɑmaɪlz vɔntɪd bɹeɪvɝi wɑz ɹɪli stupɪɾɪti ən blaɪndnəs. bʌt ðə mæn dɪd hoʊl seɪɾɪn; pɝhæps i wɑz nɑt kəmplitli ʌnəwɛɹ ə hɪz deɪnʒɝ.

The watcher ghosted through the trees, making no sound. It was wonderful what you could learn with a callbox, especially in a world where there seemed to be only two others. That red dress was easy to follow, and they never looked back even to see whether some of those so-called Aiel were trailing them. Graendal maintained the Mirror of Mists that hid her true form, but Sammael had dropped his, golden-bearded again and just head and shoulders taller than she. He had let the link between them dissolve, too. The watcher wondered whether that was wise, under the circumstances. He had always wondered how much of Sammael's vaunted bravery was really stupidity and blindness. But the man did hold saidin; perhaps he was not completely unaware of his danger.

ðə wɑtʃɝ fɑloʊɾ ən lɪsənd. ðeɪ hæd noʊ aɪdiə. ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ, dʒɹɔn dɝɛkli fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, kəd niðɝ bi sin nɔɹ dɪtɛktəɾ ɪksɛp baɪ hu wildɪɾ ɪt. blæk flɛks floʊɾəd əkɹɔs ɪz vɪʒən. ðəɹ wɑz ə pɹaɪs, tə bi ʃʊɹ, wʌn ðət ɡɹu wɪð itʃ jus, bʌɾ i hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə peɪ ðə pɹaɪs wən ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi. biɪŋ fɪld wɪð ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ wɑz ɔlmoʊs laɪk nilɪŋ bɪniθ ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, bæskɪŋ ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz ɡlɔɹi. ðə ɡlɔɹi wɑz wɝθ ðə peɪn.

The watcher followed and listened. They had no idea. The True Power, drawn directly from the Great Lord, could neither be seen nor detected except by who wielded it. Black flecks floated across his vision. There was a price, to be sure, one that grew with each use, but he had always been willing to pay the price when it was necessary. Being filled with the True Power was almost like kneeling beneath Shayol Ghul, basking in the Great Lord's glory. The glory was worth the pain.

"ʌv kɔɹs aɪ hæd tə hæv jə wɪð mi," sɑmaɪl ɡɹaʊld, stʌmbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ ə dɛd vaɪn. hi hæd nɛvɝ ɹɪli bɪn ət hoʊm əweɪ fɹəm ðə sɪɾiz. "ju ænsɝɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd kwɛstʃənz fəɹ əm dʒʌs biɪŋ ðɛɹ. aɪ kən hɑɹdli bɪliv ðət sɪli ɡɝl hɝsɛlf æktʃəli  sədʒɛstəd wʌɾ aɪ wɑntəd." hi bɑɹkt ə læf. "pɝhæps aɪm tɑvɝən maɪsɛlf."

"Of course I had to have you with me," Sammael growled, stumbling over a dead vine. He had never really been at home away from the cities. "You answered a hundred questions for them just being there. I can hardly believe that silly girl herself actually suggested what I wanted." He barked a laugh. "Perhaps I'm ta'veren myself."

ə bɹæntʃ ðət pɑɹʃəli blɑkt ɡɹeɪndəlz pæθ flɛkst əweɪ əntɪl ɪt snæpt wɪð ə ʃɑɹp kɹæk. fəɹ ə moʊmən ɪt hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ əz ɪf ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə stʃɹaɪk əɹ kəmpænjən. "ðæt sɪli ɡɝl wɪl kʌɾ aʊt jəɹ hɑɹɾ ən iɾ ɪt, ɡɪvən hæf ə tʃæns." ðə bɹæntʃ flu əsaɪd. "aɪ hæv ə fju kwɛstʃənz ə maɪ oʊn. aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt jə wəd kip jəɹ tʃɹus wɪð ælθɹ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ ðən jə mʌst, bʌt ðɪs . . . ?"

A branch that partially blocked Graendal's path flexed away until it snapped with a sharp crack. For a moment it hung in the air as if she intended to strike her companion. "That silly girl will cut out your heart and eat it, given half a chance." The branch flew aside. "I have a few questions of my own. I never thought you would keep your truce with al'Thor any longer than you must, but this . . . ?"

ðə wɑtʃɝz aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz. ə tʃɹus? ə kleɪm əz ɹɪski əz ɪt wɑz fɔls, baɪ ɔl ɛvəɾəns.

The watcher's eyebrows rose. A truce? A claim as risky as it was false, by all evidence.

"aɪ dɪdn ɝeɪnʒ ɪz kɪdnæpɪŋ." sɑmaɪl ɡeɪv əɹ wʌɾ i pɹɑbli θɔt wɑz ə ɹaɪ lʊk; hɪz skɑɹ meɪɾ ɪt mɔɹ ə snɑɹl. "mɛsænə hæɾ ə hæn ɪn ɪt, ðoʊ. meɪbi dɪmɑndɝɾ ən sɛmɝhɪdʒ əz wɛl, dɪspaɪt haʊ ɪɾ ɛndəd, bʌt mɛsænə sɝɾənli. pɝhæps jə ɔt tə ɹikənsɪɾɝ wʌt jə θɪŋk ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd minz əbaʊt livɪŋ ælθɹ ənhɑɹmd."

"I didn't arrange his kidnapping." Sammael gave her what he probably thought was a wry look; his scar made it more a snarl. "Mesaana had a hand in it, though. Maybe Demandred and Semirhage as well, despite how it ended, but Mesaana certainly. Perhaps you ought to reconsider what you think the Great Lord means about leaving al'Thor unharmed."

ɡɹeɪndəl kənsɪɾɝd ðæt, soʊ mʌtʃ soʊ ðət ʃi tʃɹɪpt. sɑmaɪl kɑɾ əɹ baɪ ði ɑɹm, kipɪŋ əɹ ɑn əɹ fit, bʌɾ əz sun əz ʃi ɹiɡeɪn əɹ bæləns, ʃi dʒɝk fɹi. ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ, ivən ɡɪvən wʌt hæd hæpən bæk ɪn ðət klɪɹɪŋ. ɡɹeɪndəlz ɹil ɪntʃɹəst wɑz ɔlweɪz ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl plʌk fɹəm əmʌŋ ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl, bʌt ʃi wəɾ əv flɝɾɪd, dʒʌs tə pæs ən aʊɝ, wɪð ə mæn ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə kɪl əɹ wʌn u wɑntəd tə kɪl hɝ. ði oʊnli mɛn ʃi nɛvɝ flɝɾɪd wɪð wɝ ðoʊz ə ðə tʃoʊzən u stʊɾ əbʌv əɹ fəɹ ə taɪm. ʃi nɛvɝ æksɛptɪd biɪŋ ðə lɛsɝ ʌv ɛni pɛɹ.

Graendal considered that, so much so that she tripped. Sammael caught her by the arm, keeping her on her feet, but as soon as she regained her balance, she jerked free. Interesting, even given what had happened back in that clearing. Graendal's real interest was always the most beautiful plucked from among the most powerful, but she would have flirted, just to pass an hour, with a man she intended to kill or one who wanted to kill her. The only men she never flirted with were those of the Chosen who stood above her for a time. She never accepted being the lesser of any pair.

"ðɛn waɪ kəntɪnju wɪð ðɛm?" hɝ vɔɪs dʒɹɪp moʊltən lɑvə, ɔlðoʊ nɔɹməli ʃi hæɾ ɛkskwəzət kəntʃɹoʊl oʊvɝ əɹ ɪmoʊʃənz. "ælθɹ ɪn mɛsænəz hænz ɪz wʌn θɪŋ; ælθɹ ɪn ðɪs sævədʒəz ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. nɑt ðət ʃɪl əv mʌtʃ tʃæns əɾ ɪm ɪf jə ɹɪli ɪntɛn sɛndɪŋ əm ɔf tə lut. tʃɹævlɪŋ bɑksəz? wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ ɡeɪm ðɛɹ? də ðeɪ hoʊl kæptɪvz? ɪf jə θɪŋk əl titʃ əm kəmpʌlʃən, ɪɹeɪs ɪt fɹəm jəɹ maɪnd. wʌn ə ðoʊz wɪmən wɑz nɑt nɛɡlədʒəbəl. əl nɑt ɹɪsk stʃɹɛŋkθ ən skɪl ɹɪzaɪɾɪŋ təɡɛðɝ, ɪn hɝ, əɹ ɪn sʌmwʌn ʃi titʃəz. əɹ juv ə baɪndɝ hɪɾən əweɪ wɪð jəɹ ʌðɝ tɔɪz? fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, wɛɹ wɝ jə ɝliɝ? aɪ də nɑt laɪk hævɪŋ tə weɪt!"

"Then why continue with them?" Her voice dripped molten lava, although normally she had exquisite control over her emotions. "Al'Thor in Mesaana's hands is one thing; al'Thor in this savage's is something else. Not that she'll have much chance at him if you really intend sending them off to loot. Traveling boxes? What is your game there? Do they hold captives? If you think I will teach them Compulsion, erase it from your mind. One of those women was not negligible. I will not risk strength and skill residing together, in her, or in someone she teaches. Or do you have a binder hidden away with your other toys? For that matter, where were you earlier? I do not like having to wait!"

sɑmaɪl stɑpt, ɡlænsɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ðə wɑtʃɝ stʊd vɛɹi stɪl. swɑðd ɪn fænklɔθ ɪksɛp fəɹ ɪz aɪz, hi hæd noʊ wɝi ðəɾ i wəd bi sin. oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz i hæd lɝn ɛkspɝtiz ɪn mɛni ɛɹiəz sɑmaɪl skɔɹnd. ɪn səm i feɪvɝd, tu.

Sammael stopped, glancing behind them. The watcher stood very still. Swathed in fancloth except for his eyes, he had no worry that he would be seen. Over the years he had learned expertise in many areas Sammael scorned. In some he favored, too.

ðə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpənɪŋ sʌɾənli, slaɪsɪŋ əweɪ hæf ʌv ə tʃɹi, meɪd ɡɹeɪndəl dʒʌmp. ðə splɪt tʃɹʌŋk lin dʒɹʌŋkənli. naʊ ʃi ɔlsoʊ nu sɑmaɪl hɛl tə ðə sɔɹs.

The gateway opening suddenly, slicing away half of a tree, made Graendal jump. The split trunk leaned drunkenly. Now she also knew Sammael held to the Source.

"dɪd jə θɪŋk aɪ wɑz tɛlɪŋ əm ðə tʃɹuθ?" sɑmaɪl sɛd mɑk-ɪŋli. "smɔl ɪnkɹisəz ɪn keɪɑs ɑɹ əz ɪmpɔɹɾənt əz lɑɹdʒ. ðəl ɡoʊ wɛɹ aɪ sɛn ðɛm, də əz aɪ wɪʃ, ən lɝn tə bi sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð wʌɾ aɪ ɡɪv ðɛm. əz wɪl ju, mzə."

"Did you think I was telling them the truth?" Sammael said mock-ingly. "Small increases in chaos are as important as large. They will go where I send them, do as I wish, and learn to be satisfied with what I give them. As will you, Maisia."

ɡɹeɪndəl lɛɾ əɹ ɪluʒən feɪɾ ən stʊd ɡoʊldən-hɛɹɾ əz hi, əz fɛɹ əz ʃi hæd bɪn dɑɹk. "ɪf jə kɔl mi ðəɾ əɡɛn, əl kɪl ju." hɝ vɔɪs hɛld ivən lɛs ɪkspɹɛʃən ðən əɹ feɪs. ʃi mɛn ɪt. ðə wɑtʃɝ tɛnst. ɪf ʃi tʃɹaɪd, wʌn ə ðə tu wəd daɪ. ʃəɾ i ɪntɝfɪɹ? blæk flɛks spɛɾ əkɹɔs ɪz aɪz, fæstɝ, fæstɝ.

Graendal let her Illusion fade and stood golden-haired as he, as fair as she had been dark. "If you call me that again, I will kill you." Her voice held even less expression than her face. She meant it. The watcher tensed. If she tried, one of the two would die. Should he interfere? Black flecks sped across his eyes, faster, faster.

sɑmaɪl mɛɾ əɹ stɛɹ wɪð wʌn dʒʌst əz hɑɹd. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ u wɪl bi nɛbli, ɡɹeɪndəl," hi sɛd, ən stɛp θɹu hɪz ɡeɪtweɪ.

Sammael met her stare with one just as hard. "Remember who will be Nae'blis, Graendal," he said, and stepped through his gateway.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi stʊd lʊkɪŋ ət ði oʊpənɪŋ. ə vɝɾɪkəl sɪlvɝ slæʃ əpɪɹɾ ɔf tə wʌn saɪd, bʌt bɪfɔɹ əɹ ɡeɪtweɪ bɪɡæn tə əlaɪn, ʃi lɛt ɡoʊ ðə wiv, sloʊli, ðə stʃɹik ʃɹɪŋkɪŋ tə ə pɔɪn bɪfɔɹ wɪŋkɪŋ aʊt. ðə pɹɪk-lɪŋ vænɪʃt fɹəm ðə wɑtʃɝz skɪn əz ʃi ɹilist seɪaɪdɑɹ əz wɛl. wɪð ə fɪks feɪs, ʃi fɑloʊd sɑmaɪl, ən ɪz ɡeɪtweɪ kloʊz bɪhaɪn hɝ.

For a moment she stood looking at the opening. A vertical silver slash appeared off to one side, but before her gateway began to align, she let go the weave, slowly, the streak shrinking to a point before winking out. The prick-ling vanished from the watcher's skin as she released saidar as well. With a fixed face, she followed Sammael, and his gateway closed behind her.

ðə wɑtʃɝ smaɪl kɹʊkədli bɪhaɪn ɪz fænklɔθ skʌlkɝz mæsk. nɛbli. ðəɾ ɪkspleɪnd wʌt hæd bɹɔt ɡɹeɪndəl tə hil, wʌt hæd steɪɾ əɹ fɹəm kɪlɪŋ sɑmaɪl. ivən ʃi wəd bi blaɪndɪd baɪ ðæt. ən ivən ɡɹeɪɾɝ ɹɪsk fəɹ sɑmaɪl ðən kleɪmɪŋ tʃɹus wɪð luz θɝɪn, ðoʊ. ənlɛs, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪt wɑz tʃɹu. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd dɪlaɪɾəd ɪn sɛɾɪŋ ɪz sɝvəns wʌn əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ, tə si hu wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ. oʊnli ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəs kəd stænd nɪɹ ɪz ɡlɔɹi. bʌt tədeɪz tʃɹuθ nid nɑt bi təmɑɹoʊz. ðə wɑtʃɝ hæd sin tʃɹuθ tʃeɪnʒ ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz bɪtwin ə sɪŋɡəl sʌnɹaɪz ən sʌnsɛt. mɔɹ ðən wʌns i hæd tʃeɪnʒd ɪt hɪmsɛlf. hi kənsɪɾɝd ɡoʊɪŋ bæk ən kɪlɪŋ ði eɪt wɪmən ɪn ðə klɪɹɪŋ. ðeɪ wəd daɪ izəli; hi daʊɾɪd ðeɪ nu haʊ tə fɔɹm ə tʃɹu sɝkəl. ðə blæk flɛks fɪld ɪz aɪz, ə hɔɹəzɑntəl blɪzɝd. noʊ, hi wəd lɛt ðət ɹʌn ɪts kɔɹs. fəɹ naʊ.

The watcher smiled crookedly behind his fancloth skulker's mask. Nae'blis. That explained what had brought Graendal to heel, what had stayed her from killing Sammael. Even she would be blinded by that. An even greater risk for Sammael than claiming truce with Lews Therin, though. Unless, of course, it was true. The Great Lord delighted in setting his servants one against another, to see who was stronger. Only the strongest could stand near his glory. But today's truth need not be tomorrow's. The watcher had seen truth change a hundred times between a single sunrise and sunset. More than once he had changed it himself. He considered going back and killing the eight women in the clearing. They would die easily; he doubted they knew how to form a true circle. The black flecks filled his eyes, a horizontal blizzard. No, he would let that run its course. For now.

tə hɪz ɪɹz, ðə wɝl skɹimd əz i juz ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ tə ɹɪp ə smɔl hoʊl ən stɛp aʊtsaɪd ðə pæɾɝn. sɑmaɪl dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ tʃɹuli hi spoʊk. smɔl ɪnkɹisəz ɪn keɪɑs kəd bi ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz ɪmpɔɹɾənt əz lɑɹdʒ.

To his ears, the world screamed as he used the True Power to rip a small hole and step outside the Pattern. Sammael did not know how truly he spoke. Small increases in chaos could be every bit as important as large.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiwʌn


CHAPTER 21

swʊvən naɪt


Swovan Night

naɪt keɪm sloʊli oʊvɝ ɛbu dɑɹ, ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ðə waɪt bɪldɪŋz ɹɪzɪstɪŋ dɑɹknəs. smɔl nɑts ən bʌntʃəz ə swʊvən naɪt ɹɛvəlɝz wɪð lɪɾəl spɹɪɡz ʌv ɛvɝɡɹin ɪn ðɛɹ hɛɹ dænst ɪn ðə stʃɹits bɪniθ ə bɹaɪt θɹi-kɔɹɾɝ mun, fju kæɹiɪŋ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə læntɝn əz ðeɪ ɡæmboʊl tə ðə mjuzɪk ə fluts ən dʒɹʌmz ən hɔɹnz ðət dʒɹɪftəd fɹəm ɪnz ən pæləsəz, dænsɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ fɹəm wʌn sɛɾ ə fɛstɪvəɾiz tə ənʌðɝ, bʌt fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt ðə stʃɹits leɪ ɛmpti. ə dɪstən dɔɡ bɑɹkt, ən ənʌðɝ, kloʊsɝ, ænsɝd fjʊɹiəsli əntɪl ɪt sʌɾənli jɛlpt ən fɛl saɪlənt.

Night came slowly over Ebou Dar, the glow of the white buildings resisting darkness. Small knots and bunches of Swovan Night revelers with little sprigs of evergreen in their hair danced in the streets beneath a bright three-quarter moon, few carrying so much as a lantern as they gamboled to the music of flutes and drums and horns that drifted from inns and palaces, dancing their way from one set of festivities to another, but for the most part the streets lay empty. A distant dog barked, and another, closer, answered furiously until it suddenly yelped and fell silent.

bælənst ɑn ɪz toʊz, mæt lɪsənd, aɪz sɝtʃɪŋ ðə munʃæɾoʊz. oʊnli ə kæt muvd, slɪŋkɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹit. ðə slæp ə ɹʌnɪŋ bɛɹ fit feɪɾəd. ði oʊnɝ ʌv wʌn pɛɹ ʃəd bi stæɡɝɪŋ, ən ði ʌðɝ bliɾɪŋ. əz i bɛnt, hɪz fʊt kɪkt ə klʌb əz lɔŋ əz ɪz ɑɹm ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz; hɛvi bɹæs stʌdz ʃoʊn ɪn ðə munlaɪt. ðət wʊɾə bɹoʊkən ɪz skʌl fəɹ ʃʊɹ. ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd, hi waɪpt ɪz naɪf ɑn ðə ɹæɡəd koʊt wɔɹn baɪ ðə mæn əɾ ɪz fit. oʊpən aɪz stɛɹɾ ət ðə naɪt skaɪ fɹəm ə dɝɾi, kɹis feɪs. ə bɛɡɝ, baɪ ðə lʊk ən smɛl ə hɪm. mæt hæd nɑt hɝɾ ə bɛɡɝz ətækɪŋ pipəl, bʌt meɪbi taɪmz wɝ hɑɹɾɝ ðən i θɔt. ə lɑɹdʒ dʒut sæk leɪ nɪɹ wʌn aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt hænd. ðə fɛloʊz sɝɾənli hæd bɪn ɑptəmɪstɪk əbaʊt wʌt ðeɪ wəd faɪn ɪn ɪz pɑkəts. ðə θɪŋ cʊɾə kʌvɝɾ ɪm fɹəm hɛd tə niz.

Balanced on his toes, Mat listened, eyes searching the moonshadows. Only a cat moved, slinking along the street. The slap of running bare feet faded. The owner of one pair should be staggering, and the other bleeding. As he bent, his foot kicked a club as long as his arm on the paving stones; heavy brass studs shone in the moonlight. That would have broken his skull for sure. Shaking his head, he wiped his knife on the ragged coat worn by the man at his feet. Open eyes stared at the night sky from a dirty, creased face. A beggar, by the look and smell of him. Mat had not heard of beggars attacking people, but maybe times were harder than he thought. A large jute sack lay near one outstretched hand. The fellows certainly had been optimistic about what they would find in his pockets. The thing could have covered him from head to knees.

tə ðə nɔɹθ, əbʌv ðə sɪɾi, laɪt sʌɾənli bɝst ɪn ðə skaɪ wɪð ə hɑloʊ bum əz ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ stʃɹiks ʌv ɡɹin ɪkspændəɾ ɪn ə bɔl, ən ðən ənʌðɝ ɪɹʌpʃən ʃaʊɝd ɹɛd spɑɹkəlz θɹu ðə fɝst, ðən ə blu, ən ə jɛloʊ. ɪluməneɪɾɝz' naɪtfloʊɝz, nɑɾ əz spɛktækjəlɝ əz ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn ɪn ə munləs, klaʊɾi skaɪ, jɛt stɪl ðeɪ tʊk ɪz bɹɛθ. hi kəd wɑtʃ faɪɹwɝks tɪl i fɛl oʊvɝ fɹəm hʌŋɡɝ. neɪlzin hæd spoʊkən ʌv ən ɪluməneɪɾɝ - laɪt, wɑz ðəɾ oʊnli ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ? - bʌt noʊ mɔɹ naɪt-flaʊɝz keɪm. wən ɪluməneɪɾɝz meɪd ðə skaɪ blum, əz ðeɪ sɛd, ðeɪ plæntəd mɔɹ ðən fɔɹ flaʊɝz. pleɪnli sʌmwʌn wɪð kɔɪn hæd meɪɾ ə pɝtʃəs fəɹ swʊvən naɪt. hi wɪʃt i nu hu. ən ɪluməneɪɾɝ u wəd sɛl naɪtfloʊɝz wəd sɛl mɔɹ ðən ðæt.

To the north, above the city, light suddenly burst in the sky with a hollow boom as glittering streaks of green expanded in a ball, and then another eruption showered red sparkles through the first, then a blue, and a yellow. Illuminators' nightflowers, not as spectacular as they would have been in a moonless, cloudy sky, yet still they took his breath. He could watch fireworks till he fell over from hunger. Nalesean had spoken of an Illuminator - Light, was that only this morning? - but no more night-flowers came. When Illuminators made the sky bloom, as they said, they planted more than four flowers. Plainly someone with coin had made a purchase for Swovan Night. He wished he knew who. An Illuminator who would sell nightflowers would sell more than that.

slɪpɪŋ ðə naɪf bæk ʌp ɪz sliv, hi ɡæðɝɾ ɪz hæt fɹəm ðə peɪvmən ən wɔkt əweɪ hɝidli, hɪz buts ɛkoʊɪŋ, ə saʊn ɛmpti əz ðə stʃɹit. moʊst ʃʌɾɝd wɪndoʊz hɪɹ ʃoʊd nɑɾ ə ɡlɪmɝ ə laɪt. ə bɛɾɝ pleɪs fəɹ mɝɾɝ pɹɑbli kəd nɑt bi faʊn ɪn ðə sɪɾi. ði ɪntaɪɝ ɪnkaʊntɝ wɪð ðə θɹi bɛɡɝz hæd læstəɾ oʊnli ə mɪnəɾ əɹ tu ən hæd bɪn sin baɪ noʊ wʌn. ɪn ðɪs sɪɾi, jə kəd faɪn θɹi əɹ fɔɹ faɪts ɪn ə deɪ ɪf jə wɝ nɑt kɛɹfəl, bʌt ði ɑdz ə feɪsɪŋ tu sɛts ə ɹɑbɝz ɪn wʌn deɪ simd əbaʊɾ əz ɡɹeɪɾ əz ði ɑdz ə ðə sɪvəl ɡɑɹd ɹəfjuzɪŋ ə bɹaɪb. wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ tə hɪz lʌk? ɪf oʊnli ðoʊz blʌɾi daɪs wəd stɑp ɹoʊlɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd. hi dɪd nɑt ɹʌn, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt dɔɾəl iðɝ, wʌn hæn ɑn ə hɪl bɪniθ ɪz koʊɾ ən ən aɪ oʊpən fəɹ ɛniwʌn muvɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz. hi sɔ nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ə fju klʌmps ə pipəl kəvɔɹɾɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹit, ðoʊ.

Slipping the knife back up his sleeve, he gathered his hat from the pavement and walked away hurriedly, his boots echoing, a sound empty as the street. Most shuttered windows here showed not a glimmer of light. A better place for murder probably could not be found in the city. The entire encounter with the three beggars had lasted only a minute or two and had been seen by no one. In this city, you could find three or four fights in a day if you were not careful, but the odds of facing two sets of robbers in one day seemed about as great as the odds of the Civil Guard refusing a bribe. What was happening to his luck? If only those bloody dice would stop rolling in his head. He did not run, but he did not dawdle either, one hand on a hilt beneath his coat and an eye open for anyone moving in the shadows. He saw nothing but a few clumps of people cavorting along the street, though.

ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum ə ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən, ðə teɪbəlz hæd bɪn klɪɹɾ əweɪ ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju nɪɹ ðə wɔlz. ðə fluɾɪsts ən ðə dʒɹʌmɝ meɪd ʃɹɪl mjuzɪk fəɹ fɔɹ læfɪŋ laɪnz ə pipəl duɪŋ wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi hæf pæɾɝn-dæns ən hæf dʒɪɡ. wɑtʃɪŋ, hi kɑpiɾ ə stɛp. aʊtlæn mɝtʃəns ɪn faɪn wʊlənz lɛpt ɹaɪɾ əlɔŋ wɪð loʊkəlz ɪn bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd sɪlk vɛsts əɹ ðoʊz jusləs koʊts slʌŋ ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. hi mɑɹkt aʊt tu ʌv ðə mɝtʃəns fəɹ ðə weɪ ðeɪ muvd, wʌn slɛndɝ ən wʌn nɑt, jɛt boʊθ wɪð ə laɪt ɡɹeɪs, ən sɛvɹəl loʊkəl wɪmən wɛɹɪŋ ðɛɹ bɛst, ðə dip nɛklinz aʊtlaɪn baɪ ə lɪɾəl leɪs əɹ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, bʌt nʌn ɪn sɪlk. nɑt ðəɾ i wəd ɹəfjuz tə dæns wɪð ə wʊmən ɪn sɪlk, ʌv kɔɹs - hi hæd nɛvɝ tɝn daʊn ə dæns wɪð ɛni wʊmən ʌv ɛni eɪdʒ əɹ steɪʃən - bʌt ðə ɹɪtʃ wɝ ɪn ðə pæləsəz tənaɪt, əɹ ðə hoʊmz ə ðə wɛlθiɝ mɝtʃəns ən mʌnilɛndɝz. ðoʊz foʊk nɪɹ ðə wɔlz, kætʃɪŋ ðɛɹ bɹɛθ fəɹ ðə nɛks dæns, hæd ðɛɹ feɪsəz bɛɹiɾ ɪn mʌɡz ɔfən əz nɑt, əɹ wɝ snætʃɪŋ fɹɛʃ mʌɡz fɹəm tʃɹeɪz kæɹid baɪ skɝiɪŋ sɝvɪŋ wɪmən. mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən laɪkli wəd sɛl əz mʌtʃ waɪn tənaɪɾ əz ɪn ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi wik. eɪl, tu; ðə loʊkəl foʊk mʌst əv noʊ teɪs tə ðɛɹ tʌŋz.

In the common room of The Wandering Woman, the tables had been cleared away except for a few near the walls. The flutists and the drummer made shrill music for four laughing lines of people doing what appeared to be half pattern-dance and half jig. Watching, he copied a step. Outland merchants in fine woolens leaped right along with locals in brocaded silk vests or those useless coats slung on their shoulders. He marked out two of the merchants for the way they moved, one slender and one not, yet both with a light grace, and several local women wearing their best, the deep necklines outlined by a little lace or a great deal of embroidery, but none in silk. Not that he would refuse to dance with a woman in silk, of course - he had never turned down a dance with any woman of any age or station - but the rich were in the palaces tonight, or the homes of the wealthier merchants and moneylenders. Those folk near the walls, catching their breath for the next dance, had their faces buried in mugs often as not, or were snatching fresh mugs from trays carried by scurrying serving women. Mistress Anan likely would sell as much wine tonight as in an ordinary week. Ale, too; the local folk must have no taste to their tongues.

tʃɹaɪɪŋ ənʌðɝ stɛp ə ðə dæns, hi kɑt kɛɹə əz ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə hɝi baɪ wɪð ə tʃɹeɪ, pɪtʃɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs laʊɾ əbʌv ðə mjuzɪk tə æsk ə fju kwɛstʃənz ən fɪnɪʃɪŋ wɪð ən ɔɹɾɝ fəɹ ɪz dɪnɝ, ɡɪldɪd fɪʃ, ə tæŋi dɪʃ ðət mɪstʃɹəs ɑnənz kʊk pɹipɛɹd tə pɝfɛkʃən. ə mæn niɾəd ɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ tə kip ʌp ɪn ðə dæns.

Trying another step of the dance, he caught Caira as she tried to hurry by with a tray, pitching his voice loud above the music to ask a few questions and finishing with an order for his dinner, gilded fish, a tangy dish that Mistress Anan's cook prepared to perfection. A man needed his strength to keep up in the dance.

kɛɹə flæʃt ə sʌltʃɹi smaɪl əɾ ə fɛloʊ ɪn ə jɛloʊ vɛst u ɡɹæbd ə mʌɡ fɹəm əɹ tʃɹeɪ ən dʒɹɑpt ɪz kɔɪn ɑn ɪt, bʌt fəɹ wʌns ʃi hæd noʊ smaɪl fəɹ mæt. ɪn fækt, ʃi mænədʒ tə kəmpɹɛs əɹ maʊθ tə ə θɪn laɪn, noʊ smɔl fit. "jɔɹ lɪɾəl ɹæbət, æm aɪ?" wɪð ə tɛlɪŋ snɪf, ʃi wɛn ɑn ɪmpeɪʃənli. "ðə bɔɪ ɪz tʌkt ɪndə hɪz bɛd, wɛɹ i ʃəd bi, ən aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛɹ lɔɹd neɪlzin ɪz, əɹ hɑɹnən, əɹ mæstɝ veɪnɪn, əɹ ɛnibəɾi ɛls. ən kʊk sɛd ʃi woʊn fɪks ɛniθɪŋ bʌt sup ən bɹɛd fəɹ ðoʊz əz ɑɹ dʒɹaʊnɪŋ ðɛɹ tʌŋz ɪn waɪn. ðoʊ waɪ maɪ lɔɹd wɑns ɡɪldɪd fɪʃ wən hiz ə ɡɪldɪd wʊmən weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɹum, aɪm ʃʊɹ aɪ kʊdn seɪ. ɪf maɪ lɔɹd wɪl ɪkskjuz mi, səm pipəl nid tə wɝk fəɹ ðɛɹ kɹʌst." ʃi swupt əweɪ, pɹɑfɝɪŋ əɹ tʃɹeɪ ən smaɪlɪŋ fɪt tə splɪɾ əɹ feɪs əɾ ɛvɹi mæn ɪn saɪt.

Caira flashed a sultry smile at a fellow in a yellow vest who grabbed a mug from her tray and dropped his coin on it, but for once she had no smile for Mat. In fact, she managed to compress her mouth to a thin line, no small feat. "Your little rabbit, am I?" With a telling sniff, she went on impatiently. "The boy is tucked into his bed, where he should be, and I don't know where Lord Nalesean is, or Harnan, or Master Vanin, or anybody else. And Cook said she won't fix anything but soup and bread for those as are drowning their tongues in wine. Though why my Lord wants gilded fish when he has a gilded woman waiting in his room, I'm sure I couldn't say. If my Lord will excuse me, some people need to work for their crust." She swooped away, proffering her tray and smiling fit to split her face at every man in sight.

mæt fɹaʊn æftɝ hɝ. ə ɡɪldɪd wʊmən? ɪn ɪz ɹum? ðə tʃɛst ʌv ɡoʊld ɹɛstəd naʊ ɪn ə smɔl hɑloʊ bɪniθ ðə kɪtʃən flɔɹ, ɪn fɹʌn ʌv wʌn ə ðə stoʊvz, bʌt ðə daɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd dʒɹʌm laɪk θʌndɝ sʌɾənli.

Mat frowned after her. A gilded woman? In his room? The chest of gold rested now in a small hollow beneath the kitchen floor, in front of one of the stoves, but the dice in his head drummed like thunder suddenly.

ðə saʊnz ə mɛɹəmən feɪɾəd ə lɪɾəl əz i sloʊli klaɪm ðə stɛɹz. ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz dɔɹ, hi pɔzd, lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə daɪs. tu ətɛmps tə ɹɑb ɪm soʊ fɑɹ tədeɪ. twaɪs ɪz skʌl cʊɾə bɪn bɹoʊkən. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət dɑɹkfɹɛn hæd nɑt sin hɪm, ən noʊ wʌn kəd kɔl əɹ ɡɪldɪd, bʌt. . . . hi fɪŋɡɝɾ ə hɪlt ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt, ðən tʊk ɪz hæn əweɪ əz ə wʊmən flɛɹɾ ɪn ɪz θɔts, ə tɔl wʊmən fɔlɪŋ wɪð ðə hɪlt ʌv ə naɪf pɹoʊtʃɹuɾɪŋ bɪtwin əɹ bɹɛsts. hɪz naɪf. lʌk wəd dʒʌst əv tə bi wɪð hɪm. saɪɪŋ, hi pʊʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ.

The sounds of merriment faded a little as he slowly climbed the stairs. In front of his door, he paused, listening to the dice. Two attempts to rob him so far today. Twice his skull could have been broken. He was sure that Darkfriend had not seen him, and no one could call her gilded, but. . . . He fingered a hilt under his coat, then took his hand away as a woman flared in his thoughts, a tall woman falling with the hilt of a knife protruding between her breasts. His knife. Luck would just have to be with him. Sighing, he pushed open the door.

ðə hʌntɝ ðəɾ ɪleɪn hæd meɪɾ əɹ wɔɹɾɝ tɝnd, hɛftɪŋ ɪz ʌn-stʃɹʌŋ tu ɹɪvɝz baʊ, hɝ ɡoʊldən bɹeɪd dʒɹɔn oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. hɝ blu aɪz fæsən ɑn ɪm pɝpəsfəli, ən əɹ feɪs fɪkst ɪtsɛlf ɪn dɪtɝməneɪʃən. ʃi lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə dʒɹʌb ɪm wɪð ðə baʊ ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡɛt wʌt ʃi wɑntəd.

The Hunter that Elayne had made her Warder turned, hefting his un-strung Two Rivers bow, her golden braid drawn over her shoulder. Her blue eyes fastened on him purposefully, and her face fixed itself in determination. She looked ready to drub him with the bow if she did not get what she wanted.

"ɪf ðɪs ɪz əbaʊɾ oʊlvɝ," hi bɪɡæn, ən sʌɾənli ə twɪst ə mɛmɹi ənfoʊldəd, ə mɪs θɪn oʊvɝ wʌn deɪ, wʌn aʊɝ ɪn ɪz laɪf.

"If this is about Olver," he began, and suddenly a twist of memory unfolded, a mist thinned over one day, one hour in his life.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hoʊp, wɪð sintʃæn tə ðə wɛst ən waɪtkloʊks tə ði ist, noʊ hoʊp ən oʊnli wʌn tʃæns, soʊ hi ɹeɪz ðə kɝl hɔɹn ən blu, nɑt ɹɪli noʊɪŋ wʌt tə ɪkspɛkt. ðə saʊn keɪm ɡoʊldən əz ðə hɔɹn, soʊ swiɾ i dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ tə læf əɹ kɹaɪ. ɪɾ ɛkoʊd, ən ði ɝθ ən hɛvənz sim tə sɪŋ. waɪl ðət wʌn pjʊɹ noʊt hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ə fɑɡ bɪɡæn tə ɹaɪz, əpɪɹɪŋ fɹəm noʊwɛɹ, θɪn wɪsps, θɪkənɪŋ, bɪloʊɪŋ haɪɝ, əntɪl ɔl wɑz əbskjʊɹɾ əz ɪf klaʊdz kʌvɝd ðə lænd. ən daʊn ðə klaʊdz ðeɪ ɹoʊd, əz ðoʊ daʊn ə maʊntənsaɪd, ðə dɛd hɪɹoʊz ə lɛdʒənd, baʊn tə bi kɔl bæk baɪ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ hɪmsɛlf lɛd, tɔl ən hʊk-noʊzd, ən bɪhaɪn keɪm ðə ɹɛst, lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd. soʊ fju, bʌɾ ɔl ðoʊz ðə wil wəd spɪn aʊɾ əɡɛn ən əɡɛn tə ɡaɪd ðə pæɾɝn, tə meɪk lɛdʒən ən mɪθ. mɪkəl ə ðə pjʊɹ hɑɹt, ən ʃɪvən ðə hʌntɝ bɪhaɪn ɪz blæk mæsk. hi wɑz sɛd tə hɛɹəl ði ɛn ʌv eɪdʒəz, ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ʌv wʌt hæd bɪn ən ðə bɝθ ʌv wʌt wɑz tə bi, hi ən ɪz sɪstɝ kɑliən, kɔl ðə tʃuzɝ, hu ɹoʊd ɹɛd-mæskt əɾ ɪz saɪd. æmɑɹɪsu, wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ ə ðə sʌn ɡloʊɪŋ ɪn əɹ hænz, ən peɪədʒɹɪɡ, ðə ɡoʊldən-tʌŋ pismeɪkɝ, ən ðɛɹ, kæɹiɪŋ ðə sɪlvɝ baʊ wɪð wɪtʃ ʃi nɛvɝ mɪst. . . .

There was no hope, with Seanchan to the west and Whitecloaks to the east, no hope and only one chance, so he raised the curled Horn and blew, not really knowing what to expect. The sound came golden as the Horn, so sweet he did not know whether to laugh or cry. It echoed, and the earth and heavens seemed to sing. While that one pure note hung in the air, a fog began to rise, appearing from nowhere, thin wisps, thickening, billowing higher, until all was obscured as if clouds covered the land. And down the clouds they rode, as though down a mountainside, the dead heroes of legend, bound to be called back by the Horn of Valere. Artur Hawkwing himself led, tall and hook-nosed, and behind came the rest, little more than a hundred. So few, but all those the Wheel would spin out again and again to guide the Pattern, to make legend and myth. Mikel of the Pure Heart, and Shivan the Hunter behind his black mask. He was said to herald the end of Ages, the destruction of what had been and the birth of what was to be, he and his sister Calian, called the Chooser, who rode red-masked at his side. Amaresu, with the Sword of the Sun glowing in her hands, and Paedrig, the golden-tongued peacemaker, and there, carrying the silver bow with which she never missed. . . .

hi pʊʃt ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lin əɡɛnst ɪt. hi fɛl dɪzi, deɪzd. "ju ɑɹ ʃi. bɝdʒɪt, fəɹ tʃɹu. bɝn maɪ boʊnz tə æʃ, ɪts ɪmpɑsəbəl. haʊ? haʊ?"

He pushed the door shut trying to lean against it. He felt dizzy, dazed. "You are she. Birgitte, for true. Burn my bones to ash, it's impossible. How? How?"

ðə wʊmən ə lɛdʒənd ɡeɪv ə ɹɪzaɪn saɪ ən pɹɑpt ɪz baʊ bæk ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ nɛks tə hɪz spɪɹ. "aɪ wɑz ɹɪpt aʊɾ əntaɪmli, hɔɹnsaʊndɝ, kæst aʊt baɪ mɑɡiɾin tə daɪ ən seɪv baɪ ɪleɪnz bɑndɪŋ." ʃi spoʊk sloʊli, stʌɾiɪŋ ɪm əz ɪf tə bi ʃʊɹ i ʌndɝstʊd. "aɪ fɪɹd jə maɪt ɹɪmɛmbɝ u aɪ juz tə bi."

The woman of legend gave a resigned sigh and propped his bow back in the corner next to his spear. "I was ripped out untimely, Hornsounder, cast out by Moghedien to die and saved by Elayne's bonding." She spoke slowly, studying him as if to be sure he understood. "I feared you might remember who I used to be."

stɪl filɪŋ hɪt bɪtwin ði aɪz, hi flʌŋ hɪmsɛlf skaʊlɪŋ ɪndə ði ɑɹmtʃɛɹ bɪsaɪɾ ɪz teɪbəl. hu ʃi juz tə bi, ɪndid. fɪsts ɑn hɪps, ʃi kənfɹʌntəɾ ɪm tʃælənʒɪŋli, noʊ wɪt dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə bɝdʒɪɾ i hæd sin ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə skaɪ. ivən əɹ kloʊðz wɝ ðə seɪm, ðoʊ ðɪs ʃɔɹt koʊt wɑz ɹɛɾ ən ðə waɪd tʃɹaʊzɝz jɛloʊ. "ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv noʊ ən kɛpt ɪt fɹəm mi, tʃɹu? aɪ wɪɹi ʌv sikɹəts, bɝdʒɪt, ən ðeɪ hɑɹbɝ sikɹəts əz ə ɡɹeɪn bɑɹn hɑɹbɝz ɹæts. ðeɪv bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ, aɪz ən hɑɹts. ivən nɪneɪiv ɪz twaɪs ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ, naʊ."

Still feeling hit between the eyes, he flung himself scowling into the armchair beside his table. Who she used to be, indeed. Fists on hips, she confronted him challengingly, no whit different from the Birgitte he had seen ride out of the sky. Even her clothes were the same, though this short coat was red and the wide trousers yellow. "Elayne and Nynaeve know and kept it from me, true? I weary of secrets, Birgitte, and they harbor secrets as a grain barn harbors rats. They've become Aes Sedai, eyes and hearts. Even Nynaeve is twice a stranger, now."

"ju hæv jəɹ oʊn sikɹəts." foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛsts, ʃi sæɾ ɑn ðə fʊɾ ə hɪz bɛd. ðə weɪ ʃi lʊkt ət hɪm, jə wʊɾə θɔɾ i wɑz ə tævɝn pʌzəl. "fɔɹ wʌn, juv nɑt toʊld əm jə blu ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. ðə smɔləst ə jəɹ sikɹəts fɹəm ðɛm, aɪ θɪŋk."

"You have your own secrets." Folding her arms under her breasts, she sat on the foot of his bed. The way she looked at him, you would have thought he was a tavern puzzle. "For one, you've not told them you blew the Horn of Valere. The smallest of your secrets from them, I think."

mæt blɪŋkt. hi hæɾ əsum ðeɪ hæd toʊl hɝ. æftɝ ɔl, ʃi wɑz bɝdʒɪt. "wʌt sikɹəts də aɪ hæv? ðoʊz wɪmən noʊ maɪ toʊneɪlz ən dʒɹimz." ʃi wɑz bɝdʒɪt. ʌv kɔɹs. hi lin fɔɹwɝd. "meɪk əm si ɹizən. jəɹ bɝdʒɪt sɪlvɝboʊ. jə kən meɪk əm də əz jə seɪ. ðɪs sɪɾi hæz ə pɪt-tʃɹæp əɾ ɛvɹi kɹɔsɪŋ, ən aɪ fɪɹ ðə steɪks ɡɹoʊ ʃɑɹpɝ baɪ ðə deɪ. meɪk əm kʌm əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ɪts tu leɪt."

Mat blinked. He had assumed they had told her. After all, she was Birgitte. "What secrets do I have? Those women know my toenails and dreams." She was Birgitte. Of course. He leaned forward. "Make them see reason. You're Birgitte Silverbow. You can make them do as you say. This city has a pit-trap at every crossing, and I fear the stakes grow sharper by the day. Make them come away before it's too late."

ʃi læft. pʊɾ ə hæn oʊvɝ əɹ maʊθ ən læft! "ju hæv ðə ɹɔŋ ɛnd, hɔɹnsaʊndɝ. aɪ də nɑt kəmæn ðɛm. aɪm ɪleɪnz wɔɹɾɝ. aɪ oʊbeɪ." hɝ smaɪl bɪkeɪm ɹufəl. "bɝdʒɪt sɪlvɝboʊ. feɪθ ə ðə laɪt, aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ aɪ stɪl æm ðət wʊmən. soʊ mʌtʃ ʌv wʌɾ aɪ wɑz ən nu hæz feɪɾəd laɪk mɪs bɪniθ ðə sʌmɝ sʌn sɪns maɪ stʃɹeɪnʒ nu bɝθ. ɪm noʊ hɪɹoʊ naʊ, oʊnli ənʌðɝ wʊmən tə meɪk maɪ weɪ. ən əz fəɹ jəɹ sikɹəts. wʌt læŋɡwədʒ də wi spik, hɔɹnsaʊndɝ?"

She laughed. Put a hand over her mouth and laughed! "You have the wrong end, Hornsounder. I do not command them. I am Elayne's Warder. I obey." Her smile became rueful. "Birgitte Silverbow. Faith of the Light, I'm not sure I still am that woman. So much of what I was and knew has faded like mist beneath the summer sun since my strange new birth. I'm no hero now, only another woman to make my way. And as for your secrets. What language do we speak, Hornsounder?"

hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ . . . ən stɑpt, ɹɪli hɪɹɪŋ wʌt ʃi hæd dʒʌst æskt. noʊsɑn aɪɝoʊ ɡeɪveɪn doʊmɝəkoʊʃi, dɪaɪnɛnməpɝvin? spik wi wʌt læŋɡwədʒ, saʊndɝ ə ðə hɔɹn? ðə hɛɹ ɑn ɪz nɛk tʃɹaɪd tə stænd. "ði oʊl blʌd," hi sɛd kɛɹfəli. nɑɾ ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ. "æn ɛɛs sədaɪ wʌns toʊl mi ði oʊl blʌd ɹʌnz stʃɹɔŋ ɪn - wʌɾ ɑɹ jə blʌɾi wɛl læfɪŋ ət naʊ?"

He opened his mouth . . . and stopped, really hearing what she had just asked. Nosane iro gavane domorakoshi, Diynen'd'ma'purvene? Speak we what language, Sounder of the Horn? The hair on his neck tried to stand. "The old blood," he said carefully. Not in the Old Tongue. "An Aes Sedai once told me the old blood runs strong in - What are you bloody well laughing at now?"

"ju, mæt," ʃi mænədʒd waɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə dʌbəl oʊvɝ. ət list ʃi wɑz nɑt spikɪŋ ði oʊl tʌŋ ɛni mɔɹ iðɝ. ʃi nʌkəld ə tiɹ fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ. "sʌm pipəl spik ə fju wɝdz, ə fɹeɪz əɹ tu, kəz ə ði oʊl blʌd. juʒəwəli wɪθaʊɾ ʌndɝstændɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ seɪ, əɹ nɑt kwaɪt. bʌt ju. . . . wʌn sɛntəns jəɹ ən ɛɝoʊni haɪ pɹɪns ən ðə nɛkst ə fɝs lɔɹɾ ə meɪnɛðɝən, æksɛn ən ɪɾiəm pɝfɛkt. noʊ, doʊnt wɝi. jəɹ sikɹəɾ ɪz seɪf wɪð mi." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "ɪz maɪn wɪð ju?"

"You, Mat," she managed while trying not to double over. At least she was not speaking the Old Tongue any more either. She knuckled a tear from the corner of her eye. "Some people speak a few words, a phrase or two, because of the old blood. Usually without understanding what they say, or not quite. But you. . . . One sentence you're an Eharoni High Prince and the next a First Lord of Manetheren, accent and idiom perfect. No, don't worry. Your secret is safe with me." She hesitated. "Is mine with you?"

hi weɪvd ə hænd, stɪl tu flæbɝɡæstɪd tə bi əfɛndəd. "du aɪ lʊk laɪk maɪ tʌŋ flæps?" hi mʌɾɝd. bɝdʒɪt! ɪn ðə flɛʃ! "bɝn mi, aɪ kəd juz ə dʒɹɪŋk." bɪfɔɹ ðət wɑz aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ i nu ɪt wɑz ðə ɹɔŋ θɪŋ tə seɪ. wɪmən nɛvɝ -  "ðæt saʊnz ðə ɹaɪt noʊʃən tə mi," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ kəd juz ə pɪtʃɝ ʌv waɪn, maɪsɛlf. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, wən aɪ sɔ jud ɹɛkəɡnaɪz mi, aɪ nɪɹli swɑloʊd maɪ tʌŋ."

He waved a hand, still too flabbergasted to be offended. "Do I look like my tongue flaps?" he muttered. Birgitte! In the flesh! "Burn me, I could use a drink." Before that was out of his mouth he knew it was the wrong thing to say. Women never -  "That sounds the right notion to me," she said. "I could use a pitcher of wine, myself. Blood and ashes, when I saw you'd recognized me, I nearly swallowed my tongue."

hi sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾ əz ɪf i hæd bɪn dʒɝkt, stɛɹɪŋ.

He sat up straight as if he had been jerked, staring.

ʃi mɛɾ ɪz ɡeɪz wɪð ə mɛɹi twɪŋkəl ən ə ɡɹɪn. "ðɛɹz ɪnʌf nɔɪz ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum, wi kəd tɔk wɪθaʊt biɪŋ oʊvɝhɝd. bɪsaɪdz, aɪ wʊdn maɪn sɪɾɪŋ ən lʊkɪŋ ə bɪt. ɪleɪn pɹitʃɪz laɪk ə təvən kaʊnsəlɝ ɪf aɪ oʊɡəl ə mæn fəɹ lɔŋɡɝ ðən ə hɑɹtbit."

She met his gaze with a merry twinkle and a grin. "There's enough noise in the common room, we could talk without being overheard. Besides, I wouldn't mind sitting and looking a bit. Elayne preaches like a Tovan councilor if I ogle a man for longer than a heartbeat."

hi nɑɾəd bɪfɔɹ i θɔt. ʌðɝ mɛnz mɛmɹiz toʊld ɪm təvænz wɝ ə stɑɹk ən dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ pipəl, əbstimiəs tə ðə pɔɪn ə peɪn; ət lis ðeɪ hæd bɪn, ə θaʊzən jɪɹz ɡɔn ən mɔɹ. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ tə læf əɹ ɡɹoʊn. ɑn ðə wʌn hænd, ə tʃæns tə tɔk wɪð bɝdʒɪt - bɝdʒɪt! hi daʊɾɪd i wəɾ ɛvɝ ɡɛɾ oʊvɝ ðə ʃɑk - bʌɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ, hi daʊɾɪd i wəd bi eɪbəl tə hɪɹ ðə mjuzɪk daʊnstɛɹz fəɹ ðə nɔɪz ə ðoʊz daɪs ɹætlɪŋ ɪn ɪz skʌl. ʃi mʌs bi ə ki tə ɪt, sʌmhaʊ. ə mæn wɪð ɛni bɹeɪnz wəd klaɪm aʊt ðə wɪndoʊ ɹaɪt naʊ. "ə pɪtʃɝ əɹ tu saʊnz faɪn tə mi," hi toʊl hɝ.

He nodded before he thought. Other men's memories told him Tovans were a stark and disapproving people, abstemious to the point of pain; at least they had been, a thousand years gone and more. He was not sure whether to laugh or groan. On the one hand, a chance to talk with Birgitte - Birgitte! he doubted he would ever get over the shock - but on the other, he doubted he would be able to hear the music downstairs for the noise of those dice rattling in his skull. She must be a key to it, somehow. A man with any brains would climb out the window right now. "A pitcher or two sounds fine to me," he told her.

ə stɪf sɔl bɹiz ʌp fɹəm ðə beɪ kæɹiɾ ə tʌtʃ ə kulnəs, fəɹ ə wʌndɝ, bʌt ðə naɪt fɛlt əpɹɛsɪv tə nɪneɪiv. mjuzɪk ən snætʃɪz ə læftɝ dʒɹɪftəɾ ɪndə ðə pæləs, ən feɪnli fɹəm wɪðɪn əz wɛl. ʃi hæd bɪn ɪnvaɪɾəd tə ðə bɔl baɪ taɪlɪn hɝsɛlf, ən ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə tu, bʌɾ ɔl dɪklaɪnd, wɪð vɛɹiɪŋ dɪɡɹiz ə pəlaɪtnəs. eɪvinhə hæd sɛd ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn dæns ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə də wɪð wɛtləndɝ mɛn, wɪtʃ meɪd taɪlɪn blɪŋk ənsɝteɪnli. fəɹ hɝsɛlf, nɪneɪiv wʊɾə laɪk tə ɡoʊ - oʊnli ə ful pæst ʌp ɛni tʃæns tə dæns - jɛt ʃi nu ɪf ʃi hæd, ʃi wʊɾə dʌn ɪɡzækli wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, sæt sʌmwɛɹ wɝiɪŋ ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə tʃu hɝ nʌkəl tə ə nʌb.

A stiff salt breeze up from the bay carried a touch of coolness, for a wonder, but the night felt oppressive to Nynaeve. Music and snatches of laughter drifted into the palace, and faintly from within as well. She had been invited to the ball by Tylin herself, and Elayne and Aviendha too, but all declined, with varying degrees of politeness. Aviendha had said there was only one dance she was willing to do with wetlander men, which made Tylin blink uncertainly. For herself, Nynaeve would have liked to go - only a fool passed up any chance to dance - yet she knew if she had, she would have done exactly what she was doing, sat somewhere worrying and trying not to chew her knuckle to a nub.

soʊ ðəɹ ðeɪ ɔl wɝ, klɑzəɾɪd ɪn ðɛɹ əpɑɹtməns wɪð tɑm ən dʒulɪn, æŋkʃəs əz keɪdʒ kæts, waɪl ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ meɪd mɛɹi. wɛl, ʃi wɑz, ɛniweɪ. wʌt kəd bi kipɪŋ bɝdʒɪt? haʊ lɔŋ dɪɾ ɪt teɪk tə tɛl ə mæn tə pɹizɛn hɪmsɛlf fɝs θɪŋ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ? laɪt, ðə hoʊl ɛfɝt wɑz jusləs, ən ɪt wɑz lɔŋ pæs taɪm fəɹ bɛd. lɔŋ pæst. ɪf ʃi kəɾ oʊnli slip, ʃi kəd pʊɾ əweɪ mɛmɹiz ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋz hɔɹəbəl dʒɝniz baɪ boʊt. wɝst ʌv ɔl, hɝ wɛðɝ sɛns toʊld əɹ ə stɔɹm wɑz ɑn ðə weɪ, toʊld əɹ ðə wɪnd ʃəd bi haʊlɪŋ aʊtsaɪɾ ən ðə ɹeɪn ʃiɾɪŋ daʊn soʊ θɪk noʊ wʌn kəd si tɛn fit. ɪt hæd teɪkən əɹ səm taɪm tə ʌndɝstæn əbaʊt ðə taɪmz ʃi lɪsən tə ðə wɪn ən sim tə hɪɹ laɪz. ət list, ʃi θɔt ʃi ʌndɝstʊd. ənʌðɝ kaɪndə stɔɹm wɑz kʌmɪŋ, nɑt waɪn əɹ ɹeɪn. ʃi hæd noʊ pɹuf, bʌt ʃi wəɾ iɾ əɹ slɪpɝz ɪf mæt kɔθən wɑz nɑt pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt sʌmhaʊ. ʃi wɑntəd tə slip fəɹ ə mʌnθ, ə jɪɹ, tə fɝɡɛt wɝiz əntɪl læn wækən əɹ wɪð ə kɪs laɪk ðə sʌn kɪŋ wɪð tɑliə. wɪtʃ wɑz ɹɪdɪkjələs, ʌv kɔɹs; ðət wɑz oʊnli ə stɔɹi, ən ə vɛɹi ɪmpɹɑpɝ wʌn ət ðæt, ən ɛniweɪ, ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə bɪkʌm ɛni mænz pɛt, nɑɾ ivən lænz. ʃi wəd faɪn hɪm, ðoʊ, sʌmhaʊ, ən bɑn ɪm hɝz. ʃi wʊd. . . . laɪt! ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt θɔt ði ʌðɝz wəd stɛɹ ət hɝ, ʃi wʊɾə peɪs ðə soʊlz aʊɾ ə hɝ slɪpɝz!

So there they all were, closeted in their apartments with Thom and Juilin, anxious as caged cats, while everyone else in Ebou Dar made merry. Well, she was, anyway. What could be keeping Birgitte? How long did it take to tell a man to present himself first thing in the morning? Light, the whole effort was useless, and it was long past time for bed. Long past. If she could only sleep, she could put away memories of the morning's horrible journeys by boat. Worst of all, her weather sense told her a storm was on the way, told her the wind should be howling outside and the rain sheeting down so thick no one could see ten feet. It had taken her some time to understand about the times she Listened to the Wind and seemed to hear lies. At least, she thought she understood. Another kind of storm was coming, not wind or rain. She had no proof, but she would eat her slippers if Mat Cauthon was not part of it somehow. She wanted to sleep for a month, a year, to forget worries until Lan wakened her with a kiss like the Sun King with Talia. Which was ridiculous, of course; that was only a story, and a very improper one at that, and anyway, she was not about to become any man's pet, not even Lan's. She would find him, though, somehow, and bond him hers. She would. . . . Light! If she had not thought the others would stare at her, she would have paced the soles out of her slippers!

ði aʊɝz wɔɹ ɑn. ʃi ɹɛɾ ən ɹeɪ-ɹɛd ðə ʃɔɹt lɛɾɝ mæt hæd lɛft wɪð taɪlɪn. eɪvinhə sæt kwaɪətli bɪsaɪɾ əɹ haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹ, kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə peɪl ɡɹin flɔɹ taɪlz əz juʒəwəl, ən ɔɹnətli ɡɪldɪd lɛðɝ-baʊn kɑpi ʌv ðə tʃɹævəlz ə dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ oʊpən ɑn əɹ niz. noʊ æŋzaɪəɾi ðɛɹ, nɑt tə si, bʌt ðən ðə wʊmən wəd nɑt tɝn ə hɛɹ ɪf sʌmwʌn stʌft ə vaɪpɝ daʊn əɹ dʒɹɛs. sɪns ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə pæləs ʃi hæd dɑn ði ɪntʃɹəkət sɪlvɝ nɛkləs ʃi wɔɹ nɪɹli deɪ ən naɪt. ɪksɛpt ɑn ðə boʊt tʃɹɪp; ʃi hæd sɛd ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɹɪsk ɪt, ðɛn. aɪdli, nɪneɪiv wʌndɝd waɪ ʃi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɔɹ əɹ aɪvɝi bɹeɪslət. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ən oʊvɝhɝd kɑnvɝseɪʃən, sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ɪɾ əntɪl ɪleɪn hæɾ ɪts laɪk, wɪtʃ meɪd lɪɾəl sɛns. ən mæɾɝd əz lɪɾəl əz ðə bɹeɪslət, ʌv kɔɹs. ðə lɛɾɝ kɔl fɹəm əɹ læp. ðə sɪɾɪŋ-ɹum stænd-læmps meɪd ɹiɾɪŋ izi, ðoʊ mæts ənfɔɹmd, bɔɪɪʃ hæn dɪd pɹɛzən dɪfəkəltiz. ɪt wɑz ðə kɑntɛns ðət klɛntʃt nɪneɪivz mɪɾəl ɪndə nɑts.

The hours wore on. She read and re-read the short letter Mat had left with Tylin. Aviendha sat quietly beside her high-backed chair, cross-legged on the pale green floor tiles as usual, an ornately gilded leather-bound copy of The Travels of Jain Farstrider open on her knees. No anxiety there, not to see, but then the woman would not turn a hair if someone stuffed a viper down her dress. Since returning to the palace she had donned the intricate silver necklace she wore nearly day and night. Except on the boat trip; she had said she did not want to risk it, then. Idly, Nynaeve wondered why she no longer wore her ivory bracelet. There had been an overheard conversation, something about not wearing it until Elayne had its like, which made little sense. And mattered as little as the bracelet, of course. The letter called from her lap. The sitting-room stand-lamps made reading easy, though Mat's unformed, boyish hand did present difficulties. It was the contents that clenched Nynaeve's middle into knots.

ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ hɪɹ bʌt hiɾ ən flaɪz, ən wi kən faɪn plɛnti ʌv ðoʊz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn.

There's nothing here but heat and flies, and we can find plenty of those in Caemlyn.

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ jə dɪdn tɛl ɪm ɛniθɪŋ?" ʃi dɪmændəd.

"Are you sure you didn't tell him anything?" she demanded.

əkɹɔs ðə ɹum, dʒulɪn pɔzd wɪð ɪz hæn oʊvɝ ðə stoʊnz bɔɹd, ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ ə lʊk ʌv aʊtʃɹeɪdʒd ɪnəsəns. "haʊ ɔfən mʌst aɪ seɪ soʊ?" aʊtʃɹeɪdʒd ɪnəsəns wɑz wʌn ə ðə θɪŋz mɛn dɪd bɛst, ɪspɛʃli wən ðeɪ wɝ ɡɪlti əz fɑksəz ɪn ðə hɛnjɑɹd. ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ ðət ðə kɑɹvɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə bɔɹdz ɹɪm wɑz ə fɑksəz.

Across the room, Juilin paused with his hand over the stones board, giving her a look of outraged innocence. "How often must I say so?" Outraged innocence was one of the things men did best, especially when they were guilty as foxes in the henyard. Interesting that the carving around the board's rim was of foxes.

tɑm, siɾəd əkɹɔs ðə læpəs-ɪnleɪd teɪbəl fɹəm ðə θif-kætʃɝ, lʊkt əz lɪɾəl ðə ɡlimən ɪn ɪz faɪnli kʌt koʊɾ ə bɹɑnz wʊl, əz i dɪd ðə mæn u hæd wʌns bɪn kwin mɔɹɡeɪsəz lʌvɝ. nɑɹld ən waɪt-hɛɹd, wɪð lɔŋ mʌstæʃɪz ən θɪk aɪbɹaʊz, hi wɑz fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd peɪʃəns fɹəm ɪz ʃɑɹp blu aɪz tə hɪz but soʊlz. "aɪ kæn si haʊ wi kəd hæv, nɪneɪiv," hi sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "ɡɪvən ðət jə toʊld əs nɛks tə nʌθɪŋ əntɪl tənaɪt. jə ʃʊɾə sɛn dʒulɪn ən mi."

Thom, seated across the lapis-inlaid table from the thief-catcher, looked as little the gleeman in his finely cut coat of bronze wool, as he did the man who had once been Queen Morgase's lover. Gnarled and white-haired, with long mustaches and thick eyebrows, he was frustrated patience from his sharp blue eyes to his boot soles. "I can't see how we could have, Nynaeve," he said dryly, "given that you told us next to nothing until tonight. You should have sent Juilin and me."

nɪneɪiv snɪf laʊdli. əz ɪf ðoʊz tu hæd nɑt bɪn ɹʌnɪŋ ɝaʊn laɪk tʃɪkənz wɪð ðɛɹ hɛdz ɔf ɛvɝ sɪns ðeɪ ɝaɪvd, pɹaɪɪŋ ɪndə hɝ ən ɪleɪnz əfɛɹz ɑn mæts seɪ-soʊ. ðoʊz θɹi kəd nɑt bi təɡɛðɝ tu mɪnəts wɪθaʊt ɡɑsəpɪŋ, iðɝ. mɛn nɛvɝ kʊd. ðeɪ. . . . ðə tʃɹuθ ʌv ɪt wɑz, ʃi ədmɪɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli, juzɪŋ ðə mɛn hæd nɛvɝ əkɝd tə ðɛm. "juɾ əv ɡɔn ɔf kəɹaʊzəŋ ən dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ wɪð hɪm," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "doʊn tɛl mi jə wəd nɑt." ðət mʌs bi wɛɹ mæt wɑz, livɪŋ bɝdʒɪt tə kul əɹ fiɾ ət ði ɪn. ðət mæn wəd faɪn səm weɪ tə sɛt ðə hoʊl skim ɝaɪ.

Nynaeve sniffed loudly. As if those two had not been running around like chickens with their heads off ever since they arrived, prying into her and Elayne's affairs on Mat's say-so. Those three could not be together two minutes without gossiping, either. Men never could. They. . . . The truth of it was, she admitted reluctantly, using the men had never occurred to them. "You'd have gone off carousing and drinking with him," she muttered. "Don't tell me you would not." That must be where Mat was, leaving Birgitte to cool her feet at the inn. That man would find some way to set the whole scheme awry.

"ænd wʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ hæd?" linɪŋ bɪsaɪd wʌn ə ðə tɔl ɑɹtʃt wɪndoʊz, piɹɪŋ aʊɾ ət ðə naɪt θɹu ðə waɪt-peɪntəɾ aɪɝn bælkəni, ɪleɪn ɡɪɡəld. ʃi wɑz tæpɪŋ əɹ fʊt, ðoʊ haʊ ʃi kəd meɪk aʊt wʌn tun fɹəm ɔl ðoʊz floʊɾɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs wɑz ə wʌndɝ. "ɪɾ ɪz ə naɪt fəɹ . . . kəɹaʊzəŋ."

"And what if they had?" Leaning beside one of the tall arched windows, peering out at the night through the white-painted iron balcony, Elayne giggled. She was tapping her foot, though how she could make out one tune from all those floating in the darkness was a wonder. "It is a night for . . . carousing."

nɪneɪiv fɹaʊn əɾ əɹ bæk. ɪleɪn hæd bɪn ɪnkɹisɪŋli pəkjuljɝ ɔl naɪt. ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt noʊn bɛɾɝ, ʃi wʊɾə səspɛktəd ði ʌðɝ wʊmən hæd bɪn snikɪŋ aʊt tə snætʃ sɪps ʌv waɪn. ɡʌlps ʌv ɪt, æktʃəli . ivən ɪf ɪleɪn hæd nɑt bɪn ʌndɝ əɹ aɪ, ðoʊ, ðət wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl. itʃ ə ðɛm hæd hæɾ ə ɹæðɝ ənfɔɹtʃənəɾ ɪkspɪɹiəns wɪð tu mʌtʃ waɪn, ən niðɝ hæɾ əɡɛn lɛt hɝsɛlf əv mɔɹ ðən ə sɪŋɡəl kʌp əɾ ə taɪm.

Nynaeve frowned at her back. Elayne had been increasingly peculiar all night. If she had not known better, she would have suspected the other woman had been sneaking out to snatch sips of wine. Gulps of it, actually. Even if Elayne had not been under her eye, though, that was impossible. Each of them had had a rather unfortunate experience with too much wine, and neither had again let herself have more than a single cup at a time.

"ɪɾ ɪz dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn u ɪntʃɹəsts mi," eɪvinhə sɛd, kloʊzɪŋ ðə bʊk ən sɛɾɪŋ ɪt bɪsaɪd hɝ. ʃi ɹəfjuz tə kənsɪɾɝ haʊ ɑd ʃi lʊkt, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ ɪn ə blu sɪlk dʒɹɛs. "əmʌŋ ʌs, ʃæɾoʊɹʌnɝz ɑɹ kɪld əz sun əz faʊnd, ən nɑt klæn, sɛpt, səsaɪəɾi əɹ fɝst-sɪstɝ wɪl ɹeɪz ə hæn ɪn pɹoʊɾɛst. ɪf dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn ɪz ə ʃædoʊ-ɹʌnɝ, waɪ dʌz taɪlɪn mɪtsoʊbɑɹ nɑt kɪl hɪm? waɪ də wi nɑt?"

"It is Jaichim Carridin who interests me," Aviendha said, closing the book and setting it beside her. She refused to consider how odd she looked, sitting on the floor in a blue silk dress. "Among us, Shadowrunners are killed as soon as found, and not clan, sept, society or first-sister will raise a hand in protest. If Jaichim Carridin is a Shadow-runner, why does Tylin Mitsobar not kill him? Why do we not?"

"mæɾɝz ɑɹ ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ kɑmplɛks hɪɹ," nɪneɪiv toʊl hɝ, ðoʊ ʃi hæd wʌndɝd ðə seɪm. nɑt waɪ kæɹaɪɾɪn wɑz nɑt kɪld, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt waɪ hi wɑz stɪl əlaʊd tə kʌm ən ɡoʊ əz i wɪʃt. ʃi hæd sin ɪm ɪn ðə pæləs ðət vɛɹi deɪ, æftɝ ʃi hæd bɪn hændəd mæts lɛɾɝ, æftɝ ʃi hæd toʊl taɪlɪn wʌɾ ɪt kənteɪnd. hi hæd spoʊkən wɪð taɪlɪn əbʌv ən aʊɝ ən dɪpɑɹɾəd wɪð əz mʌtʃ ɑnɝ əz wən i ɝaɪvd. ʃi hæd mɛn tə dɪskʌs ɪt wɪð ɪleɪn, bʌt ðə kwɛstʃən ʌv wʌt mæt nu, ən haʊ, kɛpt ɪntʃɹuɾɪŋ. ðət mæn wəd meɪk tʃɹʌbəl. hi wʊd, sʌmhaʊ. ðɪs bɪznəs wɑz gɑnə ɡoʊ ɹɔŋ noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɛniwʌn sɛd. bæd wɛðɝ wɑz kʌmɪŋ.

"Matters are a little more complex here," Nynaeve told her, though she had wondered the same. Not why Carridin was not killed, of course, but why he was still allowed to come and go as he wished. She had seen him in the palace that very day, after she had been handed Mat's letter, after she had told Tylin what it contained. He had spoken with Tylin above an hour and departed with as much honor as when he arrived. She had meant to discuss it with Elayne, but the question of what Mat knew, and how, kept intruding. That man would make trouble. He would, somehow. This business was going to go wrong no matter what anyone said. Bad weather was coming.

tɑm klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "taɪlɪn ɪz ə wik kwin, ən kæɹaɪɾɪn ði æmbæsəɾɝ ʌv ə paʊɝ." pleɪsɪŋ ə stoʊn, hi kɛpt ɪz aɪz ɑn ðə bɔɹd. hi saʊndəɾ əz ðoʊ hi wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ əlaʊd. "baɪ dɛfənɪʃən, ə waɪtkloʊk ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ kænɑt bi ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd; ət list, ðæts haʊ ɪts dɪfaɪn ɪn ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs ə ðə laɪt. ɪf ʃi ɝɛsts hɪm, əɹ ivən tʃɑɹdʒəz hɪm, ʃɪl faɪn ə waɪtkloʊk lidʒən ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kən blɪŋk. ðeɪ maɪt liv əɹ ðə θɹoʊn, bʌt ʃid bi ə pʌpət fɹəm ðən ɑn, stʃɹɪŋz pʊl fɹəm ðə doʊm ə tʃɹuθ. ɑɹən jə ɹɛɾi tə kənsid jɛt, dʒulɪn?" ðə θif-kætʃɝ ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm, ðən bɛn tə ə fjʊɹiəs stʌɾi ʌv ðə bɔɹd.

Thom cleared his throat. "Tylin is a weak queen, and Carridin the ambassador of a power." Placing a stone, he kept his eyes on the board. He sounded as though he was thinking aloud. "By definition, a Whitecloak Inquisitor cannot be a Darkfriend; at least, that's how it is defined in the Fortress of the Light. If she arrests him, or even charges him, she'll find a Whitecloak legion in Ebou Dar before she can blink. They might leave her the throne, but she'd be a puppet from then on, strings pulled from the Dome of Truth. Aren't you ready to concede yet, Juilin?" The thief-catcher glared at him, then bent to a furious study of the board.

"aɪ dɪd nɑt θɪŋk əɹ ə kaʊɝd," eɪvinhə sɛd dɪsɡʌstɪdli, ən tɑm ɡeɪv əɹ ən əmjuz smaɪl.

"I did not think her a coward," Aviendha said disgustedly, and Thom gave her an amused smile.

"ju hæv nɛvɝ feɪst sʌmθɪŋ jə kəd nɑt faɪt, tʃaɪld," hi sɛd dʒɛnli, "sʌmθɪŋ soʊ stʃɹɔŋ jəɹ oʊnli tʃɔɪs ɪz tə fli əɹ bi kənsumd əlaɪv. tʃɹaɪ tə hoʊl dʒʌdʒmən ɑn taɪlɪn tɪl jə hæv." fəɹ səm ɹizən, eɪvinhəz feɪs ɹɛɾənd. nɔɹməli, ʃi hɪɾ əɹ ɪmoʊʃənz soʊ wɛl əɹ feɪs wɑz laɪk stoʊn. "aɪ noʊ," ɪleɪn sɛd sʌɾənli. "wil faɪn pɹuf ivən peɪdʒɹən naɪl mʌst æksɛpt." ʃi skɪp bæk ɪndə ðə ɹum. noʊ, ʃi dænst. "wi wɪl dɪsɡaɪz aʊɝsɛlvz ən fɑloʊ hɪm."

"You have never faced something you could not fight, child," he said gently, "something so strong your only choice is to flee or be consumed alive. Try to hold judgment on Tylin till you have." For some reason, Aviendha's face reddened. Normally, she hid her emotions so well her face was like stone. "I know," Elayne said suddenly. "We'll find proof even Pedron Niall must accept." She skipped back into the room. No, she danced. "We will disguise ourselves and follow him."

sʌɾənli, ɪt wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪleɪn stændɪŋ ðəɹ ɪn ə ɡɹin ɛbu dɑɹi ɡaʊn, bʌɾ ə dəmɑni wʊmən ɪn θɪn klɪŋɪŋ blu. nɪneɪiv lɛpt ʌp bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd stɑp, ən əɹ maʊθ taɪɾənd wɪð ɛksæspɝeɪʃən ət hɝsɛlf. dʒʌs kəz ʃi kəd nɑt si ðə wivz ət ðə moʊmənt wɑz noʊ ɹizən tə bi stɑɹɾəld baɪ ɪluʒən. ʃi dɑɹɾɪd ə ɡlæns ət tɑm ən dʒulɪn. ivən tɑmz maʊθ hʌŋ oʊpən. ʌnkɑnʃəsli ʃi tʊk ə fɝm ɡɹɪp ɑn əɹ bɹeɪd. ɪleɪn wɑz gɑnə ɹɪvil ɛvɹiθɪŋ! wʌt wɑz ðə mæɾɝ wɪð hɝ?

Suddenly, it was no longer Elayne standing there in a green Ebou Dari gown, but a Domani woman in thin clinging blue. Nynaeve leaped up before she could stop, and her mouth tightened with exasperation at herself. Just because she could not see the weaves at the moment was no reason to be startled by Illusion. She darted a glance at Thom and Juilin. Even Thom's mouth hung open. Unconsciously she took a firm grip on her braid. Elayne was going to reveal everything! What was the matter with her?

ɪluʒən wɝk bɛs ðə kloʊsɝ jə steɪd tə wʌt wɑz ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ, ɪn ʃeɪp ən saɪz ət list, soʊ bɪts ə ði ɛbu dɑɹi dʒɹɛs flæʃt θɹu ðə dəmɑni ɡɑɹmən əz ɪleɪn wɝl tə ɪɡzæmɪn hɝsɛlf ɪn wʌn ə ðə ɹumz tu lɑɹdʒ mɪɹɝz. ʃi læft ən klæpt əɹ hænz. "oʊ, hɪl nɛvɝ ɹɛkəɡnaɪz mi. əɹ ju, nɪɹ-sɪstɝ." əbɹʌpli ə tæɹɑbənɝ wʊmən sæt bɪsaɪd nɪneɪivz tʃɛɹ, wɪð bɹaʊn aɪz ən jɛloʊ bɹeɪdz stʃɹʌŋ wɪð ɹɛd bidz dʒʌs ðə ʃeɪɾ ə hɝ snʌɡ-fɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs ə foʊldəd sɪlk. ʃi wɑtʃt ɪleɪn kwɪtsɪkli. nɪneɪivz hæn taɪɾənd ɑn əɹ bɹeɪd. "ænd wi kæn fɝɡɛt ju," ɪleɪn bæbəld ɑn. "aɪ noʊ dʒʌs ðə θɪŋ."

Illusion worked best the closer you stayed to what was there before, in shape and size at least, so bits of the Ebou Dari dress flashed through the Domani garment as Elayne whirled to examine herself in one of the room's two large mirrors. She laughed and clapped her hands. "Oh, he will never recognize me. Or you, near-sister." Abruptly a Taraboner woman sat beside Nynaeve's chair, with brown eyes and yellow braids strung with red beads just the shade of her snug-fitting dress of folded silk. She watched Elayne quizzically. Nynaeve's hand tightened on her braid. "And we can't forget you," Elayne babbled on. "I know just the thing."

ðɪs taɪm, nɪneɪiv sɔ ðə ɡloʊ ɝaʊn ɪleɪn. ʃi wɑz fjʊɹiəs. siɪŋ ðə floʊz biɪŋ woʊvən əbaʊt hɝsɛlf dɪd nɑt tɛl əɹ wʌɾ ɪmədʒ ɪleɪn ɡeɪv hɝ, ʌv kɔɹs. ɪt tʊk lʊkɪŋ ɪndə wʌn ə ðə mɪɹɝz tə də ðæt. eɪ si foʊk wʊmən stɛɹd bæk ət hɝ, əɡæst, wɪð ə dʌzən beɪɡɛmd ɹɪŋz ɪn əɹ ɪɹz ən twaɪs əz mɛni ɡoʊldən mədæljənz dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm ðə tʃeɪn ɹʌnɪŋ tə hɝ noʊz ɹɪŋ. əsaɪd fɹəm ðə dʒuəlɹi, ʃi wɔɹ waɪd tʃɹaʊzɝz ə bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd ɡɹin sɪlk ən nɑɾ ə stɪtʃ ɛls, ðə weɪ wɪmən ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ dɪɾ aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ə lænd. ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ɪluʒən. ʃi wɑz stɪl disənli kloʊðd ʌndɝ ðə wivɪŋ. bʌt. . . . bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ɹəflɛkʃən ʃi sɔ ðoʊz ə tɑm ən dʒulɪn, boʊθ faɪɾɪŋ ɡɹɪnz.

This time, Nynaeve saw the glow around Elayne. She was furious. Seeing the flows being woven about herself did not tell her what image Elayne gave her, of course. It took looking into one of the mirrors to do that. A Sea Folk woman stared back at her, aghast, with a dozen begemmed rings in her ears and twice as many golden medallions dangling from the chain running to her nose ring. Aside from the jewelry, she wore wide trousers of brocaded green silk and not a stitch else, the way women of the Atha'an Miere did out of sight of land. It was just Illusion. She was still decently clothed under the weaving. But. . . . Beside her reflection she saw those of Thom and Juilin, both fighting grins.

ə stʃɹæŋɡəl skwɔk ɪɹʌptəd fɹəm əɹ θɹoʊt. "kloʊs jəɹ aɪz!" ʃi ʃaʊɾəd ət ðə mɛn ən bɪɡæn lipɪŋ əbaʊt, weɪvɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz, ɛniθɪŋ tə meɪk əɹ dʒɹɛs ʃoʊ θɹu. "kloʊs ðɛm, bɝn ju!" oʊ. ðeɪ hæd. bɹɪsəlɪŋ wɪð ɪndɪɡneɪʃən, ʃi stɑp keɪpɝɪŋ. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt faɪɾɪŋ ðoʊz ɡɹɪnz ɛnimɔɹ, ðoʊ. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, eɪvinhə wɑz læfɪŋ kwaɪɾ oʊpənli, ɹɑkɪŋ tə ən fɹoʊ.

A strangled squawk erupted from her throat. "Close your eyes!" she shouted at the men and began leaping about, waving her arms, anything to make her dress show through. "Close them, burn you!" Oh. They had. Bristling with indignation, she stopped capering. They were not fighting those grins anymore, though. For that matter, Aviendha was laughing quite openly, rocking to and fro.

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv əɹ skɝts ə dʒɝk - ɪn ðə mɪɹɝ, ðə si foʊk wʊmən sim tə plʌk əɾ əɹ tʃɹaʊzɝz - ən fɪkst ɪleɪn wɪð ə ɡlɛɹ. "stɑp ðɪs, ɪleɪn!" ðə dəmɑni wʊmən stɛɹd bæk, maʊθ oʊpən ən aɪz waɪd wɪð ɪnkɹədulɪɾi. oʊnli ðən dɪd nɪneɪiv ɹilaɪz haʊ æŋɡɹi ʃi wɑz; ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs bɛkən fɹəm dʒʌs bɪɑn ði ɛdʒ ə saɪt. ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ, ʃi slæmd ə ʃil bɪtwin ɪleɪn ən ðə sɔɹs. əɹ ɹæðɝ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə. ʃildɪŋ sʌmwʌn u ɔlɹɛɾi hɛl ðə paʊɝ wɑz nɑɾ izi ivən wən jə wɝ ðə stʃɹɔŋɝ. wʌns, əz ə ɡɝl, ʃi hæd swʌŋ mæstɝ luhənz hæmɝ əɡɛnst ɪz ænvəl əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kʊd, ən ðə ʃɪvɝ ʌv ɪt ɹæn ɔl ðə weɪ tə hɝ toʊz. ðɪs wɑz əbaʊt twaɪs ðæt. "lʌv ə ðə laɪt, ɪleɪn, ɑɹ jə dʒɹʌŋk?"

Nynaeve gave her skirts a jerk - in the mirror, the Sea Folk woman seemed to pluck at her trousers - and fixed Elayne with a glare. "Stop this, Elayne!" The Domani woman stared back, mouth open and eyes wide with incredulity. Only then did Nynaeve realize how angry she was; the True Source beckoned from just beyond the edge of sight. Embracing saidar, she slammed a shield between Elayne and the Source. Or rather, she tried to. Shielding someone who already held the Power was not easy even when you were the stronger. Once, as a girl, she had swung Master Luhhan's hammer against his anvil as hard as she could, and the shiver of it ran all the way to her toes. This was about twice that. "Love of the Light, Elayne, are you drunk?"

ðə ɡloʊ ɝaʊn ðə dəmɑni wʊmən feɪɾəd əweɪ, ən soʊ dɪd ðə dəmɑni wʊmən. nɪneɪiv nu ðə wiv wɑz ɡɔn fɹəm ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf, bʌt ʃi stɪl ɡlænst ət ðə mɪɹɝ ən dʒɹu ə ɹɪliv bɹɛθ tə si nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə ðəɹ ɪn jɛloʊ-slæʃt blu.

The glow around the Domani woman faded away, and so did the Domani woman. Nynaeve knew the weave was gone from around herself, but she still glanced at the mirror and drew a relieved breath to see Nynaeve al'Meara there in yellow-slashed blue.

"noʊ," ɪleɪn sɛd sloʊli. kʌlɝ bɝn ɪn əɹ feɪs, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪmbɛɹəsmənt, əɹ nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli. hɝ tʃɪn ɹoʊz, ən əɹ vɔɪs fɹɔstəd. "aɪ æm nɑt."

"No," Elayne said slowly. Color burned in her face, but it was not embarrassment, or not entirely. Her chin rose, and her voice frosted. "I am not."

ðə dɔɹ tə ðə kɔɹəɾɝ bæŋd oʊpən, ən bɝdʒɪt stæɡɝɾ ɪn wɪð ə bɹɔd smaɪl. wɛl, pɝhæps ʃi dɪd nɑt kwaɪt stæɡɝ, bʌt ʃi wɑz dɪsaɪɾədli ənstɛɾi. "aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk jə ɔl tə ɹɪmeɪn əweɪk fəɹ mi," ʃi sɛd bɹaɪtli. "wɛl, jəl bi ɪntʃɹəstəd tə hɪɹ wʌɾ aɪ hæv tə seɪ. bʌt fɝst. . . ."

The door to the corridor banged open, and Birgitte staggered in with a broad smile. Well, perhaps she did not quite stagger, but she was decidedly unsteady. "I did not expect you all to remain awake for me," she said brightly. "Well, you'll be interested to hear what I have to say. But first. . . ."

wɪð ðə tu stɛɾi stɛps ə sʌmwʌn kæɹiɪŋ kənsɪɾɝəbəl dʒɹɪŋk ɪnsaɪd, ʃi vænɪʃt ɪndə hɝ ɹum.

With the too steady steps of someone carrying considerable drink inside, she vanished into her room.

tɑm stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ dɔɹ wɪð ə bɪmjuzd ɡɹɪn, dʒulɪn wɪð ən ɪnkɹɛdʒələs wʌn. ðeɪ nu hu ʃi wɑz, ðə tʃɹuθ ʌv ɪt. ɪleɪn dʒʌst ɡlɛɹd daʊn əɹ noʊz. fɹəm bɝdʒɪts bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ keɪm ə splæʃɪŋ, əz ɪf ə pɪtʃɝ hæd bɪn ʌpɛndəɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. nɪneɪiv ɪkstʃeɪnʒd pʌzəld lʊks wɪð eɪvinhə.

Thom stared at her door with a bemused grin, Juilin with an incredulous one. They knew who she was, the truth of it. Elayne just glared down her nose. From Birgitte's bedchamber came a splashing, as if a pitcher had been upended on the floor. Nynaeve exchanged puzzled looks with Aviendha.

bɝdʒɪt ɹiəpɪɹd wɪð əɹ feɪs ən hɛɹ dʒɹɪpɪŋ ən əɹ koʊt soʊk fɹəm ʃoʊldɝz tə ɛlboʊz. "naʊ maɪ wɪts ɑɹ klɪɹɝ," ʃi sɛd, sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪndə wʌn ə ðə bɔl-fʊɾɪd tʃɛɹz wɪð ə saɪ. "ðæt jʌŋ mæn əz ə hɑloʊ lɛɡ ən ə hoʊl ɪn ðə bɑɾəm ə hɪz fʊt. hi ivən aʊt-dʒɹæŋk bɛslən, ən aɪ wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə θɪŋk waɪn wɑz wɔɾɝ tə ðət læd."

Birgitte reappeared with her face and hair dripping and her coat soaked from shoulders to elbows. "Now my wits are clearer," she said, settling into one of the ball-footed chairs with a sigh. "That young man has a hollow leg and a hole in the bottom of his foot. He even out-drank Beslan, and I was beginning to think wine was water to that lad."

"bɛslən?" nɪneɪiv sɛd, hɝ vɔɪs ɹaɪzɪŋ. "taɪlɪnz sʌn? wʌt wɑz i duɪŋ ðɛɹ?"

"Beslan?" Nynaeve said, her voice rising. "Tylin's son? What was he doing there?"

"waɪ dɪd jə əlaʊ ɪt, bɝdʒɪt?" ɪleɪn ɪkskleɪmd. "mæt kɔθən wɪl kɝʌp ðə bɔɪ, ən ɪz mʌðɝ wɪl bleɪm ʌs."

"Why did you allow it, Birgitte?" Elayne exclaimed. "Mat Cauthon will corrupt the boy, and his mother will blame us."

"ðə bɔɪ ɪz ðə seɪm eɪdʒ əz ju," tɑm toʊld əɹ ɪn stʌfi toʊnz.

"The boy is the same age as you," Thom told her in stuffy tones.

ə bæfəld lʊk pæs bɪtwin nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn. wʌt wɑz ɪz pɔɪnt? ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðəɾ ə mæn dɪd nɑɾ ətʃiv ɪz pɹɑpɝ wɪts, sətʃ əz ðeɪ wɝ, əntɪl tɛn jɪɹz leɪɾɝ ðən ə wʊmən.

A baffled look passed between Nynaeve and Elayne. What was his point? Everyone knew that a man did not achieve his proper wits, such as they were, until ten years later than a woman.

ðə pʌzəlmən feɪɾəd fɹəm ɪleɪnz feɪs, ɹipleɪs baɪ fɝmnəs ən noʊ lɪɾəl æŋɡɝ əz ʃi foʊkəst ɑn bɝdʒɪɾ əɡɛn. wɝdz wɝ gɑnə bi sɛd, wɝdz boʊθ wɪmən maɪt ɹəɡɹɛt təmɑɹoʊ.

The puzzlement faded from Elayne's face, replaced by firmness and no little anger as she focused on Birgitte again. Words were going to be said, words both women might regret tomorrow.

"ɪf jə ən dʒulɪn wɪl liv əs naʊ, tɑm," nɪneɪiv sɛd kwɪkli. ɪt wɑz ɪkstʃɹimli ənlaɪkli ðeɪ wəd si ðə niɾ ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn. "ju nid jəɹ slip tə bi fɹɛʃ fɝs θɪŋ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ." ðeɪ sæt ðɛɹ, ɡeɪpɪŋ əɾ əɹ laɪk bɛl fulz, soʊ ʃi meɪɾ əɹ toʊn fɝmɝ. "naʊ?"

"If you and Juilin will leave us now, Thom," Nynaeve said quickly. It was extremely unlikely they would see the need on their own. "You need your sleep to be fresh first thing in the morning." They sat there, gaping at her like belled fools, so she made her tone firmer. "Now?"

"ðɪs ɡeɪm wɑz dʌn twɛnti stoʊnz əɡoʊ," tɑm sɛd, ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðə bɔɹd. "wʌt dʒju seɪ wi ɡoʊ daʊn tə əɹ oʊn ɹum ən stɑɹɾ ənʌðɝ? əl spɑt jə tɛn stoʊnz tə pleɪs əz jəl ɛni taɪm dʊɹɪŋ ðə ɡeɪm."

"This game was done twenty stones ago," Thom said, glancing at the board. "What do you say we go down to our own room and start another? I'll spot you ten stones to place as you will any time during the game."

"tɛn stoʊnz?" dʒulɪn jɛlpt, skɹeɪpɪŋ bæk ɪz tʃɛɹ. "wɪl jə ɔfɝ mi fɪʃ bɹɔθ ən mɪlk-bɹɛd, əz wɛl?"

"Ten stones?" Juilin yelped, scraping back his chair. "Will you offer me fish broth and milk-bread, as well?"

ðeɪ ɑɹɡjuɾ ɔl ðə weɪ aʊt, bʌɾ ət ðə dɔɹ, itʃ ə ðɛm ɡlæns bæk ɪn sʌlən ɹɪzɛnmənt. ʃi wəd nɑt pʊɾ ɪt pæst əm tə ɹɪmeɪn əweɪk ɔl naɪt dʒʌs kəz ʃi hæd sɛn əm tə bɛd.

They argued all the way out, but at the door, each of them glanced back in sullen resentment. She would not put it past them to remain awake all night just because she had sent them to bed.

"mæt woʊn kɝʌp bɛslən," bɝdʒɪt sɛd dʒɹaɪli əz ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn ðə mɛn. "aɪ daʊt naɪn fɛðɝ dænsɝz wɪð ə ʃɪploʊɾ ə bɹændi kəd kɝʌp hɪm. ðeɪ wʊdnt noʊ wɛɹ tə bɪɡɪn."

"Mat won't corrupt Beslan," Birgitte said dryly as the door closed behind the men. "I doubt nine feather dancers with a shipload of brandy could corrupt him. They wouldn't know where to begin."

nɪneɪiv wɑz ɹɪliv tə hɪɹ ɪt, ðoʊ sʌmθɪŋ wɑz ɑɾ əbaʊt ðə wʊmənz toʊn - laɪkli ðə dʒɹɪŋk - bʌt bɛslən wɑz nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ði ɪʃu. ʃi sɛd soʊ, ən ɪleɪn æɾəd, "noʊ, hi ɪzənt. jə ɡɑt dʒɹʌŋk, bɝdʒɪt! ən aɪ fɛlt ɪt. aɪ stɪl fil tɪpsi ɪf aɪ doʊn kɑnsəntʃɹeɪt. ðə bɑn ɪz nɑt səpoʊz tə wɝk ðət weɪ. ɛɛs sədaɪ doʊn fɔl oʊvɝ ɡɪɡəlɪŋ ɪf ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz dʒɹɪŋk tu mʌtʃ." nɪneɪiv θɹu ʌp əɹ hænz.

Nynaeve was relieved to hear it, though something was odd about the woman's tone - likely the drink - but Beslan was not at all the issue. She said so, and Elayne added, "No, he isn't. You got drunk, Birgitte! And I felt it. I still feel tipsy if I don't concentrate. The bond is not supposed to work that way. Aes Sedai don't fall over giggling if their Warders drink too much." Nynaeve threw up her hands.

"doʊn lʊk ət mi ðət weɪ," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "ju noʊ mɔɹ ðən aɪ du. ɛɛs sədaɪ ən wɔɹɾɝz əv ɔlweɪz bɪn mɛn ən wɪmən bɪfɔɹ. meɪbi ðæts ðə dɪfɝəns. meɪbi wəɹ tu əlaɪk." hɝ ɡɹɪn wɑz skjud slaɪtli. ðəɹ hæd nɑt bɪn nɪɹ ɪnʌf wɔɾɝ ɪn ðət pɪtʃɝ. "ðæt maɪt bi ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ, aɪ səpoʊz."

"Don't look at me that way," Birgitte said. "You know more than I do. Aes Sedai and Warders have always been men and women before. Maybe that's the difference. Maybe we are too alike." Her grin was skewed slightly. There had not been near enough water in that pitcher. "That might be embarrassing, I suppose."

"ɪf wi kəd steɪ wɪð wʌɾ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt?" nɪneɪiv sɛd taɪtli. "sʌtʃ əz mæt?" ɪleɪn hæɾ əɹ maʊθ oʊpən fəɹ ə ɹitɔɹt tə bɝdʒɪt, bʌt ʃi kloʊzd ɪt kwɪkli, ðə ɹɛd spɑts ɪn əɹ tʃiks moʊs dɛfənətli ʃəɡɹɪn ðɪs taɪm. "naʊ," nɪneɪiv wɛn ɑn. "wɪl mæt bi hɪɹ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, əɹ ɪz i ɪn ðə seɪm ɹivoʊltɪŋ steɪɾ əz ju?"

"If we could stay with what is important?" Nynaeve said tightly. "Such as Mat?" Elayne had her mouth open for a retort to Birgitte, but she closed it quickly, the red spots in her cheeks most definitely chagrin this time. "Now," Nynaeve went on. "Will Mat be here in the morning, or is he in the same revolting state as you?"

"hi maɪt kʌm," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, teɪkɪŋ ə kʌp ə mɪn ti fɹəm eɪvinhə, hu ʌv kɔɹs sæt daʊn ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ɪleɪn fɹaʊn əɾ əɹ ə moʊmənt, ðɛn, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz, foʊldəɾ ʌp əɹ lɛɡz ən sæt bɪsaɪd hɝ!

"He might come," Birgitte said, taking a cup of mint tea from Aviendha, who of course sat down on the floor. Elayne frowned at her a moment, then, of all things, folded up her legs and sat beside her!

"wʌt dʒju min, hi maɪt?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. ʃi tʃænəld, ən ðə tʃɛɹ ʃi hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ ɪn floʊɾəd oʊvɝ tə hɝ, ən ɪf ɪt bæŋ tə ðə flɔɹ, ʃi mɛn ɪt tə. dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ tu mʌtʃ, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. wʌt wɑz nɛkst? "ɪf i ɪkspɛks əs tə kʌm tə hɪm ɑn hænz ən niz . . . !"

"What do you mean, he might?" Nynaeve demanded. She channeled, and the chair she had been sitting in floated over to her, and if it banged to the floor, she meant it to. Drinking too much, sitting on the floor. What was next? "If he expects us to come to him on hands and knees . . . !"

bɝdʒɪt tʊk ə sɪp ə ðə ti wɪð ə ɡɹeɪtfəl mɝmɝ, ən ɑdli, wən ʃi lʊkt ət nɪneɪiv əɡɛn, ʃi dɪd nɑt sim soʊ ɪntɑksəkeɪɾəd. "aɪ tɔkt ɪm aʊɾ ə ðæt. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk i wɑz ɹɪli sɪɹiəs. ɔl i wɑns naʊ ɪz ən əpɑlədʒi ən θæŋks."

Birgitte took a sip of the tea with a grateful murmur, and oddly, when she looked at Nynaeve again, she did not seem so intoxicated. "I talked him out of that. I don't think he was really serious. All he wants now is an apology and thanks."

nɪneɪivz aɪz pɑpt. ʃi hæd tɔkt ɪm aʊɾ ə ðæt? əpɑlədʒaɪz? tə meɪtʃɹim kɔθən? "nɛvɝ," ʃi ɡɹaʊld.

Nynaeve's eyes popped. She had talked him out of that? Apologize? To Matrim Cauthon? "Never," she growled.

"fɔɹ wʌt?" ɪleɪn wɑntəd tə noʊ, əz ɪf ðət mæɾɝd. ʃi pɹitɛndəd nɑt tə si nɪneɪivz ɡlɛɹ.

"For what?" Elayne wanted to know, as if that mattered. She pretended not to see Nynaeve's glare.

"ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, ən nɪneɪivz hɛd wɪpt ɝaʊnd. ðə wʊmən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ saʊndəɾ ɪntɑksəkeɪɾəd əɾ ɔl. "hi sɛz i wɛn ɪndə ðə stoʊn, hɪm ən dʒulɪn, tə fɹi ðə pɛɹ ə jə fɹəm ə dʌnʒən jə kʊdn ɪskeɪp ɑn jəɹ oʊn." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd sloʊli, ɪn wʌndɝ. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ ðəɾ aɪ wʊɾə dʌn ðət fəɹ ɛniwʌn ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ɡeɪɾəl. nɑt ðə stoʊn. hi sɛz jə ɡeɪv ɪm ə bækhændəd θæŋks ən meɪɾ ɪm fil i ɔt tə bi ɡɹeɪtfəl jə dɪdn kɪk hɪm."

"The Stone of Tear," Birgitte said, and Nynaeve's head whipped around. The woman no longer sounded intoxicated at all. "He says he went into the Stone, him and Juilin, to free the pair of you from a dungeon you couldn't escape on your own." She shook her head slowly, in wonder. "I don't know that I would have done that for anyone short of Gaidal. Not the Stone. He says you gave him a backhanded thanks and made him feel he ought to be grateful you didn't kick him."

ɪt wɑz tʃɹu, ɪn ə weɪ, bʌɾ ɔl dɪstɔɹɾəd. ðəɹ mæt hæd bɪn wɪð ðət mɑkɪŋ ɡɹɪn ə hɪz, seɪɪŋ i wɑz ðəɹ tə pʊl ðɛɹ tʃɛsnəts ɔf ðə faɪɝ əɹ səm sʌtʃ. ivən ðən i hæd θɔɾ i kəd tɛl əm wʌt tə du. "oʊnli wʌn ə ðə blæk sɪstɝz wɑz ɑn ɡɑɹɾ ɪn ðə dʌnʒən," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd, "ænd wi hæd teɪkən kɛɹ ə hɝ." tʃɹu, ðeɪ hædn jɛt bɪn eɪbəl tə fɪɡjɝ aʊt haʊ tə oʊpən ðə dɔɹ, ʃildɪd. "bɛləl wɑzn ɹɪli ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ʌs, ɛniweɪ - ɪt wɑz dʒʌs tə lʊɹ ɹænd. mɔɪɹeɪn meɪ ɔlɹɛɾi hæv kɪl hɪm, baɪ ðɛn, fəɹ ɔl wi noʊ."

It was true, in a way, but all distorted. There Mat had been with that mocking grin of his, saying he was there to pull their chestnuts off the fire or some such. Even then he had thought he could tell them what to do. "Only one of the Black sisters was on guard in the dungeon," Nynaeve muttered, "and we had taken care of her." True, they hadn't yet been able to figure out how to open the door, shielded. "Be'lal wasn't really interested in us, anyway - it was just to lure Rand. Moiraine may already have killed him, by then, for all we know."

"ðə blæk ədʒɑ." bɝdʒɪts vɔɪs wɑz flæɾɝ ðən ðə flɔɹ taɪlz. "ænd wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. mæt nɛvɝ mɛnʃən ðɛm. jə oʊ hɪm θæŋks ɑn jəɹ niz, ɪleɪn. boʊθ ə jə du. ðə mæn dɪzɝvz ɪt. ən dʒulɪn, əz wɛl."

"The Black Ajah." Birgitte's voice was flatter than the floor tiles. "And one of the Forsaken. Mat never mentioned them. You owe him thanks on your knees, Elayne. Both of you do. The man deserves it. And Juilin, as well."

blʌd ɹʌʃt tə nɪneɪivz feɪs. hi hæd nɛvɝ mɛnʃənd . . . ? ðət dɪspɪkəbəl, dɪspɪkəbəl mæn! "aɪ wɪl nɑɾ əpɑlədʒaɪz tə meɪtʃɹim kɔθən, nɑɾ ɑn maɪ dɛθbɛd."

Blood rushed to Nynaeve's face. He had never mentioned . . . ? That despicable, despicable man! "I will not apologize to Matrim Cauthon, not on my deathbed."

eɪvinhə lin təwɔɹɾ ɪleɪn, tʌtʃɪŋ əɹ ni. "nɪɹ-sɪstɝ, əl seɪ ðɪs dɛləkətli." ʃi lʊkt ən saʊndəɾ əbaʊɾ əz dɛləkəɾ əz ə stoʊn poʊst. "ɪf ðɪs ɪz tʃɹu, juv toʊ təwɔɹd mæt kɔθən, jə ən nɪneɪiv. ən juv meɪɾ ɪt wɝs sɪns, dʒʌs baɪ ði ækʃənz aɪ hæv sin."

Aviendha leaned toward Elayne, touching her knee. "Near-sister, I will say this delicately." She looked and sounded about as delicate as a stone post. "If this is true, you have toh toward Mat Cauthon, you and Nynaeve. And you have made it worse since, just by the actions I have seen."

"toʊ!" nɪneɪiv ɪkskleɪmd. ðoʊz tu wɝ ɔlweɪz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðɪs toʊ fulɝi. "wi ɑɹən il, eɪvinhə. ən mæt kɔθən ɪz ə θɔɹn ɪn ðə fʊt tə ɛvɹibɑɾi hi mits."

"Toh!" Nynaeve exclaimed. Those two were always talking about this toh foolery. "We aren't Aiel, Aviendha. And Mat Cauthon is a thorn in the foot to everybody he meets."

bʌɾ ɪleɪn wɑz nɑɾɪŋ. "aɪ si. jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt, eɪvinhə. bʌt wʌt mʌst wi du? jəl əv tə hɛlp mi, nɪɹ-sɪstɝ. aɪ doʊn ɪntɛn tə tʃɹaɪ tə bɪkʌm il, bʌɾ aɪ . . . aɪ wɑn jə tə bi pɹaʊɾ ə mi."

But Elayne was nodding. "I see. You are right, Aviendha. But what must we do? You will have to help me, near-sister. I don't intend to try to become Aiel, but I . . . I want you to be proud of me."

"wi wɪl nɑɾ əpɑlədʒaɪz!" nɪneɪiv snæpt.

"We will not apologize!" Nynaeve snapped.

"aɪ hæv pɹaɪɾ ɪn noʊɪŋ ju," eɪvinhə sɛd, tʌtʃɪŋ ɪleɪnz tʃik laɪtli. "æn əpɑlədʒi ɪz ə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, jɛt nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə mit toʊ, naʊ."

"I have pride in knowing you," Aviendha said, touching Elayne's cheek lightly. "An apology is a beginning, yet not enough to meet toh, now."

"ɑɹ jə lɪsnɪŋ tə mi?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. "aɪ sɛd, əl - nɑt - əpɑlədʒaɪz!"

"Are you listening to me?" Nynaeve demanded. "I said, I will - not - apologize!"

ðeɪ wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɔkɪŋ. oʊnli bɝdʒɪt lʊkt ət hɝ, ən ðə wʊmən wɔɹ ə smaɪl nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm aʊtʃɹaɪt læftɝ. nɪneɪiv θɹɑɾəld əɹ bɹeɪd wɪð boʊθ hænz. ʃi hæd noʊn ðət ðeɪ ʃʊɾə sɛn tɑm ən dʒulɪn.

They went right on talking. Only Birgitte looked at her, and the woman wore a smile not far from outright laughter. Nynaeve throttled her braid with both hands. She had known that they should have sent Thom and Juilin.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiɾu


CHAPTER 22

smɔl sækɹəfaɪsɪz


Small Sacrifices

skwɪntɪŋ ʌp ət ðə saɪn əbʌv ði ɪnz ɑɹtʃt dɔɹ, ə kɹudli dʒɹɔn wʊmən wɪð ə wɔkɪŋ stæf piɹɪŋ hoʊpfəli ɪndə ðə dɪstəns, ɪleɪn wɪʃt ʃi wɝ bæk ɪn əɹ bɛɾ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ʌp wɪð ðə sʌn. nɑt ðət ʃi kəɾ əv slɛpt. mɔl hɛɹə skwɛɹ stʊɾ ɛmpti bɪhaɪn əɹ ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju kɹikɪŋ ɑks-æn dɑŋki-kɑɹts ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə ðə mɑɹkəts, ə skæɾɝɪŋ ʌv wɪmən bælənsɪŋ hjudʒ bæskəts ɑn ðɛɹ hɛdz. ə wʌn-lɛɡəd bɛɡɝ sæt wɪð ɪz boʊl əɾ ə kɔɹnɝ ə ði ɪn, ðə fɝst ə mɛni hu wəd dɑt ðə skwɛɹ leɪɾɝ; ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɪvən ɪm ə sɪlvɝ mɑɹk, ɪnʌf tə fiɾ ɪm fəɹ ə wik ivən naʊ, bʌɾ i tʌkt ɪɾ ʌndɝ ɪz ɹæɡəd koʊt wɪð ə tuθləs ɡɹɪn ən weɪɾəd ɑn. ðə skaɪ wɑz stɪl ɡɹeɪ, jɛt ðə deɪ ɔlɹɛɾi pɹɑməs tə skɔɹk. kipɪŋ kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən wɛl ɪnʌf tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə hit wɑz ə pɹɑbləm ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ.

Squinting up at the sign above the inn's arched door, a crudely drawn woman with a walking staff peering hopefully into the distance, Elayne wished she were back in her bed instead of up with the sun. Not that she could have slept. Mol Hara Square stood empty behind her except for a few creaking ox-and donkey-carts on their way to the markets, a scattering of women balancing huge baskets on their heads. A one-legged beggar sat with his bowl at a corner of the inn, the first of many who would dot the square later; she had already given him a silver mark, enough to feed him for a week even now, but he tucked it under his ragged coat with a toothless grin and waited on. The sky was still gray, yet the day already promised to scorch. Keeping concentration well enough to ignore the heat was a problem this morning.

ðə læst ɹɛmnəns ə bɝdʒɪts mɔɹnɪŋ-æftɝ hɛd ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ oʊn, dwɪndəlɪŋ bʌt nɑt jɛt ɡɔn. ɪf oʊnli hɝ smɔl əbɪləɾi wɪð hilɪŋ hæd nɑt pɹuv tu smɔl. ʃi hoʊpt eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪt wəd mænədʒ tə lɝn sʌmθɪŋ jusfəl əbaʊt kæɹaɪɾɪn ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ɪn ðɛɹ ɪluʒən dɪsɡaɪzɪz. nɑt ðət kæɹaɪɾɪn wəd noʊ ɛni ʌv əm fɹəm ə ʃumeɪkɝ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɛs tə bi kɛɹfəl. ʃi fɛl pɹaɪd ðəɾ eɪvinhə hæd nɑɾ æsk tə kʌm əlɔŋ hɪɹ, hæɾ ɪn fæk bɪn sɝpɹaɪzd ət ðə sədʒɛstʃən. eɪvinhə dɪd nɑt bɪliv ʃi niɾəd ɛniwʌn tə wɑtʃ hɝ, tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ʃi dɪd wʌt wɑz nidfəl.

The last remnants of Birgitte's morning-after head remained in the back of her own, dwindling but not yet gone. If only her small ability with Healing had not proved too small. She hoped Aviendha and Birgitte would manage to learn something useful about Carridin this morning, in their Illusion disguises. Not that Carridin would know any of them from a shoemaker, of course, but it was best to be careful. She felt pride that Aviendha had not asked to come along here, had in fact been surprised at the suggestion. Aviendha did not believe she needed anyone to watch her, to make sure she did what was needful.

wɪð ə saɪ, ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd əɹ dʒɹɛs, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid. blu ən kɹim, wɪð ə bɪɾ ə kɹim-kʌlɝd vændælɹə leɪs, ðə ɡɑɹmən dɪd meɪk əɹ fil dʒʌst ə tʌtʃ . . . ɪkspoʊzd. ði oʊnli taɪm ʃi hæd bɔkt ət dɑnɪŋ ə loʊkəl fæʃən wɑz waɪl ʃi ən nɪneɪiv tʃɹævəl tə tæntʃəkoʊ wɪð ðə si foʊk, bʌɾ ɪn ɪts oʊn weɪ, ɛbu dɑɹi fæʃən wɑz ɔlmoʊst. . . . ʃi saɪɾ əɡɛn. ʃi wɑz dʒʌs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪleɪ. eɪvinhə ʃʊɾə kʌm tə liɾ əɹ baɪ ðə hænd.

With a sigh, she straightened her dress, though there was no need. Blue and cream, with a bit of cream-colored Vandalra lace, the garment did make her feel just a touch . . . exposed. The only time she had balked at donning a local fashion was while she and Nynaeve traveled to Tanchico with the Sea Folk, but in its own way, Ebou Dari fashion was almost. . . . She sighed again. She was just trying to delay. Aviendha should have come to lead her by the hand.

"aɪ wɪl nɑɾ əpɑlədʒaɪz," nɪneɪiv sɛd sʌɾənli əɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ʃi klʌtʃt əɹ oʊn ɡɹeɪ skɝts wɪð boʊθ hænz, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən əz ðoʊ mɑɡiɾin hɝsɛlf weɪɾəd ɪnsaɪd. "aɪ woʊnt!"

"I will not apologize," Nynaeve said suddenly at her shoulder. She clutched her own gray skirts with both hands, staring at The Wandering Woman as though Moghedien herself waited inside. "I won't!"

"ju ʃʊɾə wɔɹn waɪɾ æftɝ ɔl," ɪleɪn mɝmɝd, ɝnɪŋ ə səspɪʃəs saɪdweɪz ɡlæns. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃi æɾəd, "ju dɪd seɪ ɪt wɑz ðə kʌlɝ fəɹ fjunɝəlz." wɪtʃ pɹədust ə sæɾəsfaɪd nɑd, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz nɑt wʌt ʃi hæd mɛn əɾ ɔl. ðɪs wəd bi dɪzæstɝ ɪf ðeɪ kəd nɑt kip pis əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz. bɝdʒɪt hæd hæd tə sɛɾəl fəɹ ən ɪnfjuʒən ə ɝbz ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ən ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli bɪɾɝ mɪks ət ðæt, kəz nɪneɪiv kleɪmd ʃi wɑz nɑɾ æŋɡɹi ɪnʌf tə tʃænəl. ʃi hæd ɡɔn ɑn ɪn ðə moʊs dʒɹəmæɾɪk mænɝ əbaʊt fjunɝəl waɪt biɪŋ ði oʊnli suɾəbəl kʌlɝ, ɪnsɪstəd ʃi wɑz nɑt kʌmɪŋ, əntɪl ɪleɪn dʒɹæɡd əɹ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ əpɑɹtməns, ən ənaʊnst ət lis twɛnti taɪmz sɪns ðət ʃi wəd nɑɾ əpɑlədʒaɪz. pis hæd tə bi kɛpt, bʌt. . . . "ju əɡɹid tə ðɪs, nɪneɪiv. noʊ, aɪ doʊnt wɑnə hɪɹ ɛni mɔɹ əbaʊt ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs bʊliɪŋ ju. jə əɡɹid. soʊ stɑp sʌlkɪŋ."

"You should have worn white after all," Elayne murmured, earning a suspicious sideways glance. After a moment, she added, "You did say it was the color for funerals." Which produced a satisfied nod, though it was not what she had meant at all. This would be disaster if they could not keep peace among themselves. Birgitte had had to settle for an infusion of herbs this morning, and a particularly bitter mix at that, because Nynaeve claimed she was not angry enough to channel. She had gone on in the most dramatic manner about funeral white being the only suitable color, insisted she was not coming, until Elayne dragged her out of their apartments, and announced at least twenty times since that she would not apologize. Peace had to be kept, but. . . . "You agreed to this, Nynaeve. No, I don't want to hear any more about the rest of us bullying you. You agreed. So stop sulking."

nɪneɪiv spləɾɝd, aɪz ɡoʊɪŋ waɪd wɪð aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ. ʃi wɑz nɑt tə bi daɪvɝɾɪd, ðoʊ, dɪspaɪt wʌn fɪɹsli ɪnkɹɛdʒələs "sʌlkɪŋ?" ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. "wi nid tə dɪskʌs ðɪs fɝðɝ, ɪleɪn. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə bi soʊ heɪsti. ðəɹ mʌs bi ə θaʊzən ɹizənz waɪ ðɪs woʊnt wɝk, tɑvɝən əɹ noʊ tɑvɝən, ən mæt kɔθən ɪz naɪn hʌnʒɹəd ə ðɛm."

Nynaeve spluttered, eyes going wide with outrage. She was not to be diverted, though, despite one fiercely incredulous "Sulking?" under her breath. "We need to discuss this further, Elayne. There is no need to be so hasty. There must be a thousand reasons why this won't work, ta'veren or no ta'veren, and Mat Cauthon is nine hundred of them."

ɪleɪn ɡeɪv əɹ ə lɛvəl lʊk. "dɪd jə dɪlɪbɝətli tʃuz ðə bɪɾɝəst ɝbz ðət wəd wɝk ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ?" waɪd-aɪɾ aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ tɝn tə waɪd-aɪɾ ɪnəsəns, bʌt ɹɛd steɪnd nɪneɪivz tʃiks. ɪleɪn pʊʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ. nɪneɪiv fɑloʊd, mʌɾɝɪŋ. ɪleɪn wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf ʃi stʌk aʊɾ əɹ tʌŋ, tu. sʌlki wɑz nɑɾ ivən ɪn ɪt, ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ.

Elayne gave her a level look. "Did you deliberately choose the bitterest herbs that would work this morning?" Wide-eyed outrage turned to wide-eyed innocence, but red stained Nynaeve's cheeks. Elayne pushed open the door. Nynaeve followed, muttering. Elayne would not have been surprised if she stuck out her tongue, too. Sulky was not even in it, this morning.

ðə smɛl ə bɹɛdz beɪkɪŋ wɑftɪd fɹəm ðə kɪtʃənz, ən ɔl ðə ʃʌɾɝz wɝ oʊpən tə ɛɹ aʊt ðə kɑmən ɹum. ə plʌmp-tʃik sɝvɪŋ wʊmən stændɪŋ ətɑp ə tɔl stul stʃɹɛtʃt ɑn tɪptoʊz tə teɪk daʊn bɪdʒɹæɡəld ɛvɝɡɹin bɹæntʃəz fɹəm əbʌv ðə wɪndoʊz, waɪl ʌðɝz ɹipleɪs teɪbəlz ən bɛntʃɪz ən tʃɛɹz ðət mʌst əv bɪn teɪkən əweɪ fəɹ ðə dænsɪŋ. ðɪs ɝli, noʊ wʌn ɛls wɑz əbaʊt, ɪksɛp fəɹ ə skɪni ɡɝl ɪn ə waɪɾ eɪpɹən, swipɪŋ hæf-hɑɹɾɪdli wɪð ə bɹʌʃ-bɹum. ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn pɹɪɾi ɪf əɹ maʊθ hæd nɑt sim sɛɾ ɪn ə kɑnstən paʊt. ðəɹ wɑz sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli lɪɾəl mɛs, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðəɾ ɪnz wɝ səpoʊz tə bi ɹaɪəɾəs, ivən laɪsɛntʃəs, dʊɹɪŋ fɛstəvəlz. ə pɑɹɾ ə hɝ wɪʃt ʃi cʊɾə sin ɪt, ðoʊ.

The smell of breads baking wafted from the kitchens, and all the shutters were open to air out the common room. A plump-cheeked serving woman standing atop a tall stool stretched on tiptoes to take down bedraggled evergreen branches from above the windows, while others replaced tables and benches and chairs that must have been taken away for the dancing. This early, no one else was about, except for a skinny girl in a white apron, sweeping half-heartedly with a brush-broom. She might have been pretty if her mouth had not seemed set in a constant pout. There was surprisingly little mess, considering that inns were supposed to be riotous, even licentious, during festivals. A part of her wished she could have seen it, though.

"kʊd jə dɝɛk mi tə mæstɝ kɔθənz ɹumz?" ʃi æsk ðə skɪni ɡɝl wɪð ə smaɪl, pɹɑfɝɪŋ tu sɪlvɝ pɛniz. nɪneɪiv snɪft. ʃi wɑz taɪɾ əz ðə skɪn ɑn ə fɹɛʃ æpəl; ʃi hæd ɡɪvən ðə bɛɡɝ wʌn kɑpɝ!

"Could you direct me to Master Cauthon's rooms?" she asked the skinny girl with a smile, proffering two silver pennies. Nynaeve sniffed. She was tight as the skin on a fresh apple; she had given the beggar one copper!

ðə ɡɝl aɪɾ əm sʌlənli - ən sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ðə kɔɪnz əz wɛl - ən mʌmbəl sʌmθɪŋ saʊɝ ðət saʊndəd laɪk, "ə ɡɪldɪd wʊmən læs naɪɾ ən leɪɾiz ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ." ʃi ɡeɪv dɝɛkʃənz ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli. fəɹ ə moʊmən ɪleɪn θɔt ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə skɔɹn ðə pɛniz, bʌɾ ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə tɝnɪŋ əweɪ, ðə ɡɝl snætʃt ðə sɪlvɝ fɹəm əɹ hænd wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə wɝɾ ə θæŋks, pɔzɪŋ oʊnli tə tʌk əm ɪndə ðə nɛk ə hɝ dʒɹɛs, ʌv ɔl pleɪsəz, bɪfɔɹ ʃi sɛt tə swɪŋɪŋ əɹ bɹum əz ɪf tə bit ðə flɔɹ tə dɛθ. pɝhæps ʃi hæɾ ə pɑkət soʊn ɪn ðɛɹ.

The girl eyed them sullenly - and surprisingly, the coins as well - and mumbled something sour that sounded like, "A gilded woman last night and ladies this morning." She gave directions grudgingly. For a moment Elayne thought she intended to scorn the pennies, but on the point of turning away, the girl snatched the silver from her hand without so much as a word of thanks, pausing only to tuck them into the neck of her dress, of all places, before she set to swinging her broom as if to beat the floor to death. Perhaps she had a pocket sewn in there.

"ju si," nɪneɪiv ɡɹʌmbəld ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. "ju mɑɹk mi, hi tʃɹaɪd tə pʊʃ ɪz ətɛnʃənz ɑn ðət jʌŋ wʊmən. ðæts ðə sɔɹɾ ə mæn jə wɑn mi tə əpɑlədʒaɪz tə."

"You see," Nynaeve grumbled under her breath. "You mark me, he tried to push his attentions on that young woman. That's the sort of man you want me to apologize to."

ɪleɪn sɛd nʌθɪŋ, oʊnli lɛd ðə weɪ ʌp ðə ɹeɪləs stɛps ət ðə bæk ə ðə ɹum. ɪf nɪneɪiv dɪd nɑt stɑp kəmpleɪnɪŋ. . . . ðə fɝs hɔlweɪ ɑn ðə ɹaɪt, ðə ɡɝl hæd sɛd, ən ðə læs dɔɹ ɑn ðə lɛft, bʌɾ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɪt, ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, baɪɾɪŋ əɹ loʊɝ lɪp.

Elayne said nothing, only led the way up the railless steps at the back of the room. If Nynaeve did not stop complaining. . . . The first hallway on the right, the girl had said, and the last door on the left, but in front of it, she hesitated, biting her lower lip.

nɪneɪiv bɹaɪɾənd. "ju si ɪts ə bæɾ aɪdiə naʊ, doʊn ju? wi ɑɹən il, ɪleɪn. aɪ laɪk ðə ɡɝl wɛl ɪnʌf, fəɹ ɔl ʃiz fɝɛvɝ fɑndəlɪŋ ðət naɪf ə hɝz, bʌt dʒʌs θɪŋk ə ði æbsəlut dʒɹɪvəl ʃi tɔkt. ɪts ɪmpɑsəbəl. jə mʌs noʊ ɪɾ ɪz."

Nynaeve brightened. "You see it's a bad idea now, don't you? We aren't Aiel, Elayne. I like the girl well enough, for all she's forever fondling that knife of hers, but just think of the absolute drivel she talked. It's impossible. You must know it is."

"wi dɪd nɑɾ əɡɹi tə ɛniθɪŋ ɪmpɑsəbəl, nɪneɪiv." kipɪŋ əɹ vɔɪs fɝm tʊk ən ɛfɝt. səm ʌv wʌɾ eɪvinhə hæd sədʒɛstəd, əpɛɹənli ɪn ɔl sɪɹiəsnəs. . . . ʃi æktʃəli  hæd sədʒɛstəd lɛɾɪŋ ðə mæn swɪtʃ ðɛm! "wʌt wi dɪɾ əɡɹi tə ɪz kwaɪt pɑsəbəl." bɛɹli. ʃi ɹæp laʊdli ɑn ðə pænəl dɔɹ wɪð əɹ nʌkəlz. ðəɹ wɑz ə fɪʃ kɑɹvd ɑn ðə dɔɹ, ə ɹaʊn θɪŋ wɪð stʃɹaɪps ən ə snaʊt. ɔl ə ðə dɔɹz hæd dɪfɹən kɑɹvɪŋz, moʊst ə fɪʃ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ænsɝ.

"We did not agree to anything impossible, Nynaeve." Keeping her voice firm took an effort. Some of what Aviendha had suggested, apparently in all seriousness. . . . She actually had suggested letting the man switch them! "What we did agree to is quite possible." Barely. She rapped loudly on the paneled door with her knuckles. There was a fish carved on the door, a round thing with stripes and a snout. All of the doors had different carvings, most of fish. There was no answer.

nɪneɪiv pʌft aʊɾ ə bɹɛθ ʃi mʌst əv bɪn hoʊldɪŋ. "pɝhæps hiz ɡɔn aʊt. wɪl dʒʌst əv tə kʌm bæk ənʌðɝ taɪm."

Nynaeve puffed out a breath she must have been holding. "Perhaps he has gone out. We'll just have to come back another time."

"æt ðɪs aʊɝ?" ʃi ɹæpt wʌns mɔɹ. "ju seɪ hi ɔlweɪz laɪz əbɛd wən i kæn." stɪl noʊ saʊn fɹəm ɪnsaɪd.

"At this hour?" She rapped once more. "You say he always lies abed when he can." Still no sound from inside.

"ɪleɪn, ɪf bɝdʒɪɾ ɪz ɛni ɪndəkeɪʃən, mæt ɡɑt hɪmsɛlf dʒusi əz ə fɪɾəlɝ læs naɪt. hi woʊn θæŋk əs fəɹ weɪkɪŋ hɪm. waɪ doʊnt wi dʒʌst ɡoʊ əweɪ ən - "

"Elayne, if Birgitte is any indication, Mat got himself juicy as a fiddler last night. He won't thank us for waking him. Why don't we just go away and - "

ɪleɪn lɪftəd ðə lætʃ ən wɛn ɪn. nɪneɪiv fɑloʊd wɪð ə saɪ ðət cʊɾə bɪn hɝd bæk ɪn ðə pæləs.

Elayne lifted the latch and went in. Nynaeve followed with a sigh that could have been heard back in the Palace.

mæt kɔθən wɑz spɹɔld ɑn ɪz bɛɾ ətɑp ðə nɪɾəd ɹɛd kʌvɝlət, ə foʊldəd klɔθ laɪɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz aɪz ən dʒɹɪpɪŋ ɑntu ðə pɪloʊ. ðə ɹum wɑz nɑt vɛɹi taɪɾi dɪspaɪt ði æbsəns ə dʌst. ə but stʊɾ ɑn ðə wɑʃstænd - ðə wɑʃstænd! - nɛks tə ə waɪt beɪsən fʊl ʌv ənjuzd wɔɾɝ, ðə stænd-mɪɹɝ sæɾ əskju, əz ɪf i hæd stʌmbəld ɪndə ɪɾ ən sɪmpli lɛft ɪt tɪltəd bæk ʃɑɹpli, ən ɪz ɹɪŋkəl koʊt leɪ tɔst əkɹɔs ə læɾɝ-bæk tʃɛɹ. hi wɔɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðət blæk skɑɹf i sim nɛvɝ tə teɪk ɔf, ən ði ʌðɝ but. ðə sɪlvɝ fɑkshɛd dæŋɡəl fɹəm ɪz ənleɪst ʃɝt.

Mat Cauthon was sprawled on his bed atop the knitted red coverlet, a folded cloth lying over his eyes and dripping onto the pillow. The room was not very tidy despite the absence of dust. A boot stood on the washstand - the washstand! - next to a white basin full of unused water, the stand-mirror sat askew, as if he had stumbled into it and simply left it tilted back sharply, and his wrinkled coat lay tossed across a ladder-back chair. He wore everything else, including that black scarf he seemed never to take off, and the other boot. The silver foxhead dangled from his unlaced shirt.

ðə mədæljən meɪɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɪtʃ. ɪf i ɹɪli wɑz laɪɪŋ ðəɹ sɑɾən wɪð dʒɹɪŋk, ʃi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə ɹimuv ɪɾ ənfɛlt. wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ, ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə faɪn aʊt haʊ ðə θɪŋ əbzɔɹb ðə paʊɝ. faɪndɪŋ aʊt haʊ ɔlmoʊst ɛniθɪŋ wɝkt wɑz ə fæsəneɪʃən tə hɝ, bʌt ðət fɑkshɛd wɑz ɔl ðə pʌzəlz ɪn ðə wɝld ɹoʊld ɪndə wʌn.

The medallion made her fingers itch. If he really was lying there sodden with drink, she might be able to remove it unfelt. One way or another, she intended to find out how the thing absorbed the Power. Finding out how almost anything worked was a fascination to her, but that foxhead was all the puzzles in the world rolled into one.

nɪneɪiv kɑɾ əɹ sliv ən dʒɝkt əɹ hɛd təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ, saɪlənli maʊðɪŋ "əslip" ən sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt. pɹɑbli ənʌðɝ pli tə ɡoʊ.

Nynaeve caught her sleeve and jerked her head toward the door, silently mouthing "asleep" and something else she could not make out. Probably another plea to go.

"liv mi əloʊn, nɹɪm," hi mʌmbəl sʌɾənli. "aɪ toʊl jə bɪfɔɹ; aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ ə nu skʌl. ən kloʊz ðə dɔɹ sɔfli, əɹ əl pɪn jəɹ ɪɹz tə ɪt."

"Leave me alone, Nerim," he mumbled suddenly. "I told you before; I don't want anything but a new skull. And close the door softly, or I'll pin your ears to it."

nɪneɪiv dʒʌmpt, ən tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl əɹ təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ, bʌt ʃi stʊɾ əɹ ɡɹaʊnd. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑt nɹɪm, mæstɝ kɔθən."

Nynaeve jumped, and tried to pull her toward the door, but she stood her ground. "It is not Nerim, Master Cauthon."

ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz hɛd fɹəm ðə pɪloʊ, hi juz boʊθ hænz tə lɪf ðə klɔθ ə tʃɹaɪfəl ən skwɪntɪɾ əɾ əm wɪð ɹɛɾənd aɪz.

Raising his head from the pillow, he used both hands to lift the cloth a trifle and squinted at them with reddened eyes.

ɡɹɪnɪŋ, nɪneɪiv meɪd noʊ ɛfɝɾ əɾ ɔl tə haɪɾ əɹ plɛʒɝ əɾ ɪz ɹɛtʃɪd steɪt. wʌɾ ɪleɪn kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ət fɝst wɑz waɪ ʃi wɑntəd tə ɡɹɪn, tu. hɝ wʌn ɪkspɪɹiəns wɪð dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ tu mʌtʃ hæd lɛft əɹ wɪð nʌθɪŋ bʌt pɪɾi ən sɪmpəθi fəɹ ɛniwʌn soʊ snɛɹd. ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ maɪnd ʃi fɛl bɝdʒɪts hɛd θɹɑbɪŋ stɪl, ən ɪt keɪm tə hɝ. sɝɾənli ʃi kəd nɑt laɪk bɝdʒɪt dʒɹaʊnɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɪn dʒɹɪŋk, wʌtɛvɝ ðə ɹizən, bʌt niðɝ kəd ʃi laɪk ðə θɔt ðəɾ ɛniwʌn kəd də ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl bɛɾɝ ðən əɹ fɝst wɔɹɾɝ. ə ɹɪdɪkjələs θɔt. ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ. bʌt sæɾɪsfaɪɪŋ, tu.

Grinning, Nynaeve made no effort at all to hide her pleasure at his wretched state. What Elayne could not understand at first was why she wanted to grin, too. Her one experience with drinking too much had left her with nothing but pity and sympathy for anyone so snared. In the back of her mind she felt Birgitte's head throbbing still, and it came to her. Certainly she could not like Birgitte drowning herself in drink, whatever the reason, but neither could she like the thought that anyone could do anything at all better than her first Warder. A ridiculous thought. Embarrassing. But satisfying, too.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ?" hi dɪmændəd hɔɹsli, ðən wɪnst ən loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs. "ɪts ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪt."

"What are you doing here?" he demanded hoarsely, then winced and lowered his voice. "It's the middle of the night."

"ɪts mɔɹnɪŋ," nɪneɪiv sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "doʊn jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ tɔkɪŋ wɪð bɝdʒɪt?"

"It's morning," Nynaeve said sharply. "Don't you remember talking with Birgitte?"

"kʊd jə nɑt bi soʊ laʊd?" hi wɪspɝd, kloʊzɪŋ ɪz aɪz. ðə nɛkst ɪnstənt, ðeɪ pɑpt oʊpən əɡɛn. "bɝdʒɪt?" sɪɾɪŋ ʌp əbɹʌpli, hi swʌŋ ɪz lɛɡz oʊvɝ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə bɛd. fəɹ ə taɪm i dʒʌst sæt ðɛɹ, piɹɪŋ ət ðə flɔɹbɔɹdz, ɛlboʊz ɑn ɪz niz ən ðə mədæljən swɪŋɪŋ fɹəm ɪts θɔŋ ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk. ət læst i tɝn ɪz hɛd tə lʊk əɾ əm bɑlfəli. əɹ pɝhæps ɪz aɪz dʒʌs meɪɾ ɪt sim soʊ. "wʌt dɪd ʃi tɛl ju?"

"Could you not be so loud?" he whispered, closing his eyes. The next instant, they popped open again. "Birgitte?" Sitting up abruptly, he swung his legs over the side of the bed. For a time he just sat there, peering at the floorboards, elbows on his knees and the medallion swinging from its thong around his neck. At last he turned his head to look at them balefully. Or perhaps his eyes just made it seem so. "What did she tell you?"

"ʃi ɪnfɔɹmd əs ə jəɹ dɪmænz, mæstɝ kɔθən," ɪleɪn sɛd fɔɹməli. ðɪs mʌs bi haʊ ɪt fɛl tə stæn bɪfɔɹ ðə hɛdzmənz blɑk. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪt bʌt tə kip əɹ hɛd haɪ ən feɪs wʌtɛvɝ keɪm pɹaʊdli. "aɪ wɪʃ tə θæŋk jə fɹəm maɪ hɑɹt fəɹ ɹɛskjuɪŋ mi fɹəm ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ." ðɛɹ, ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn, ən ɪt hæd nɑt hɝt. nɑt vɛɹi mʌtʃ.

"She informed us of your demands, Master Cauthon," Elayne said formally. This must be how it felt to stand before the headsman's block. There was nothing for it but to keep her head high and face whatever came proudly. "I wish to thank you from my heart for rescuing me from the Stone of Tear." There, she had begun, and it had not hurt. Not very much.

nɪneɪiv stʊd ðɛɹ, ɡlaʊɝɪŋ, hɝ lɪps ɡɹoʊɪŋ taɪɾɝ ən taɪɾɝ. ðə wʊmən wɑz nɑt gɑnə liv əɹ tə də ðɪs əloʊn. ɪleɪn ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs ɔlmoʊs bɪfɔɹ ʃi θɔt, ən tʃænəld ə θɪn floʊ ʌv ɛɹ ðət flɪk nɪneɪivz ɝloʊb laɪk ə snæpɪŋ fɪŋɡɝ. ðə wʊmən klæpt ə hæn tə hɝ ɪɹ ən ɡlaʊɝd, bʌɾ ɪleɪn sɪmpli tɝn kuli bæk tə mæstɝ kɔθən ən weɪɾəd.

Nynaeve stood there, glowering, her lips growing tighter and tighter. The woman was not going to leave her to do this alone. Elayne embraced the Source almost before she thought, and channeled a thin flow of Air that flicked Nynaeve's earlobe like a snapping finger. The woman clapped a hand to her ear and glowered, but Elayne simply turned coolly back to Master Cauthon and waited.

"aɪ θæŋk ju, tu," nɪneɪiv mʌmbəl sʌlənli ət læst. "fɹʌm ðə hɑɹt."

"I thank you, too," Nynaeve mumbled sullenly at last. "From the heart."

ɪleɪn ɹoʊld əɹ aɪz ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf. wɛl, hi hæɾ æskt əm tə spik mɔɹ sɔfli. ən i dɪd sim tə hɪɹ. stʃɹeɪnʒli, hi ʃɹʌɡd wɪð ɪmbɛɹəsmənt.

Elayne rolled her eyes in spite of herself. Well, he had asked them to speak more softly. And he did seem to hear. Strangely, he shrugged with embarrassment.

"oʊ, ðæt. ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ. laɪkli θɪŋ, juɾ əv ɡɑɾən jɝsɛlf fɹi ɪn ənʌðɝ tɪk wɪθaʊt mi." hɪz hɛd sæŋk tə hɪz hænz, ən i pɹɛs ðə dæmp klɔθ tə hɪz aɪz wʌns mɔɹ. "ɑn jəɹ weɪ aʊt, wəd jə æsk kɛɹə tə bɹɪŋ mi səm waɪn-pʌntʃ? ə slɛndɝ ɡɝl, pɹɪɾi, wɪð ə wɔɹm aɪ."

"Oh, that. It was nothing. Likely thing, you'd have gotten yourself free in another tick without me." His head sank to his hands, and he pressed the damp cloth to his eyes once more. "On your way out, would you ask Caira to bring me some wine-punch? A slender girl, pretty, with a warm eye."

ɪleɪn kwɪvɝd. nʌθɪŋ? ðə mæn dɪmændəɾ ən əpɑlədʒi, ʃi hʌmbəl hɝsɛlf tə ɡɪv ɪt, ən naʊ ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ? hi wɑz nɑt dɪzɝvɪŋ ə sɪmpəθi əɹ pɪɾi! ʃi stɪl hɛl seɪaɪdɑɹ, ən ʃi kənsɪɾɝd θʌmpɪŋ ɪm wɪð ə mʌtʃ θɪkɝ floʊ ðən ʃi hæd juzd ɑn nɪneɪiv. nɑt ðət ðət wəd də ɛni ɡʊd soʊ lɔŋ əz i wɔɹ ðə fɑkshɛd. ðən əɡɛn, ɪt hʌŋ lus, nɑt tʌtʃɪŋ hɪm. dɪɾ ɪɾ ɔfɝ ðə seɪm pɹətɛkʃən wən ɪt wɑz nɑt . . . ?

Elayne quivered. Nothing? The man demanded an apology, she humbled herself to give it, and now it was nothing? He was not deserving of sympathy or pity! She still held saidar, and she considered thumping him with a much thicker flow than she had used on Nynaeve. Not that that would do any good so long as he wore the foxhead. Then again, it hung loose, not touching him. Did it offer the same protection when it was not . . . ?

nɪneɪiv ɛndəɾ əɹ spɛkjəleɪʃən baɪ lʌnʒɪŋ fəɹ hɪm, fɪŋɡɝz klɔd. ɪleɪn mænədʒ tə pʊt hɝsɛlf bɪtwin əm ən siz ði ʌðɝ wʊmən baɪ ðə ʃoʊldɝz. fəɹ ə stʃɹɛtʃt moʊmən ðeɪ stʊd noʊz-tə-noʊz ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə dɪfɝəns ɪn ðɛɹ haɪts; wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs, nɪneɪiv faɪnəli ɹɪlækst, ən ɪleɪn fɛlt ɪt wɑz seɪf tə ɹilis hɝ.

Nynaeve ended her speculation by lunging for him, fingers clawed. Elayne managed to put herself between them and seize the other woman by the shoulders. For a stretched moment they stood nose-to-nose except for the difference in their heights; with a grimace, Nynaeve finally relaxed, and Elayne felt it was safe to release her.

ðə mæn stɪl hæɾ ɪz hɛd baʊd, ɔl ʌnəwɛɹ. wɛðɝ ðə mədæljən pɹətɛktəɾ ɪm əɹ nɑt, ʃi kəd snætʃ ɪz bɑstɑv fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ən biɾ ɪm tɪl i haʊld. ʃi fɛl hit ɹaɪz ɪn əɹ feɪs: ʃi hæd stɑp nɪneɪiv fɹəm ɹuɪnɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, oʊnli tə θɪŋk ə ɹuɪnɪŋ ɪt hɝsɛlf. wɝs, baɪ ðə smɝki, sɛlf-sæɾəsfaɪd lɪɾəl smaɪl ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ɡeɪv hɝ, ʃi nu vɛɹi wɛl wʌt hæd bɪn ɪn əɹ hɛd.

The man still had his head bowed, all unaware. Whether the medallion protected him or not, she could snatch his bowstave from the corner and beat him till he howled. She felt heat rise in her face: She had stopped Nynaeve from ruining everything, only to think of ruining it herself. Worse, by the smirky, self-satisfied little smile the other woman gave her, she knew very well what had been in her head.

"ðɛɹ ɪz mɔɹ, mæstɝ kɔθən," ʃi ənaʊnst, skwɛɹɪŋ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ðə smaɪl vænɪʃt fɹəm nɪneɪivz feɪs. "wi ɔlsoʊ wɪʃ tə əpɑlədʒaɪz fəɹ dɪleɪɪŋ soʊ lɔŋ ɪn ɡɪvɪŋ jə jəɹ mʌtʃ dɪzɝv θæŋks. ən wi əpɑlədʒaɪz . . . hʌmbli . . ." ʃi stʌmbəld ə lɪɾəl ɑn ðæt. ". . . fəɹ ðə weɪ wɪv tʃɹiɾəd jə sɪns." nɪneɪiv stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ə bɛsitʃɪŋ hæn ðət ʃi ɪɡnɔɹd. "tə ʃoʊ ðə dɛpθ ʌv əɹ ɹəɡɹɛt, wi ʌndɝteɪk ðə fɑloʊɪŋ pɹɑməsəz." eɪvinhə hæd sɛɾ ən əpɑlədʒi wɑz oʊnli ə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. "wi wɪl nɑt bɪlɪɾəl əɹ dɪmin jə ɪn ɛni weɪ, nɔɹ ʃaʊɾ ət jə fəɹ ɛni ɹizən, nɔɹ . . . nɔɹ ətɛmp tə ɡɪv jə ɔɹɾɝz." nɪneɪiv wɪnst. ɪleɪnz maʊθ taɪɾənd tu, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt stɑp. "ɹɛkəɡnaɪzɪŋ jəɹ du kənsɝn fəɹ əɹ seɪfti, wɪl nɑt liv ðə pæləs wɪθaʊt tɛlɪŋ jə wɛɹ wəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ, ən wɪl lɪsən tə jəɹ ædvaɪs." laɪt, ʃi hæd noʊ wɪʃ tə bi il, noʊ wɪʃ tə də ɛni ʌv ðɪs, bʌt ʃi wɑntəɾ eɪvinhəz ɹɪspɛkt. "ɪf jə . . . ɪf jə dɪsaɪd ðət wəɹ . . ." nɑt ðət ʃi hæɾ ɛni ɪntɛntʃən ə bɪkʌmɪŋ ə sɪstɝ-waɪf - ðə vɛɹi aɪdiə wɑz ɪndisənt! - bʌt ʃi dɪd laɪk hɝ. ". . . ɑɹ pʊɾɪŋ aʊɝsɛlvz ɪn nidləs deɪnʒɝ . . ." ɪt wɑz nɑɾ eɪvinhəz fɔl ðət ɹænd hæd kɑt boʊθ ðɛɹ hɑɹts. ən mɪnz əz wɛl. ". . . wɪl æksɛp bɑɾiɡɑɹdz ə jəɹ tʃuzɪŋ . . ." feɪɾ əɹ tɑvɝən əɹ wʌtɛvɝ, wʌt wɑz, wɑz. ʃi lʌv boʊθ wɪmən laɪk sɪstɝz. ". . . ən kip əm wɪð əs əz lɔŋ əz pɑsəbəl." bɝn ðə mæn fəɹ duɪŋ ðɪs tə hɝ! ɪt wɑz nɑt mæt kɔθən ʃi mɛnt. "ðɪs aɪ swɛɹ baɪ ðə laɪən θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ." ʃi bɹiðd ɪn əz ɪf ʃi hæd ɹʌn ə maɪl. nɪneɪiv wɔɹ ə feɪs laɪk ə kɔɹnɝd bædʒɝ.

"There is more, Master Cauthon," she announced, squaring her shoulders. The smile vanished from Nynaeve's face. "We also wish to apologize for delaying so long in giving you your much deserved thanks. And we apologize . . . humbly . . ." She stumbled a little on that. ". . . for the way we have treated you since." Nynaeve stretched out a beseeching hand that she ignored. "To show the depth of our regret, we undertake the following promises." Aviendha had said an apology was only a beginning. "We will not belittle or demean you in any way, nor shout at you for any reason, nor . . . nor attempt to give you orders." Nynaeve winced. Elayne's mouth tightened too, but she did not stop. "Recognizing your due concern for our safety, we will not leave the palace without telling you where we are going, and we will listen to your advice." Light, she had no wish to be Aiel, no wish to do any of this, but she wanted Aviendha's respect. "If you . . . if you decide that we are . . ." Not that she had any intention of becoming a sister-wife - the very idea was indecent! - but she did like her. ". . . are putting ourselves in needless danger . . ." It was not Aviendha's fault that Rand had caught both their hearts. And Min's as well. ". . . we will accept bodyguards of your choosing . . ." Fate or ta'veren or whatever, what was, was. She loved both women like sisters. ". . . and keep them with us as long as possible." Burn the man for doing this to her! It was not Mat Cauthon she meant. "This I swear by the Lion Throne of Andor." She breathed in as if she had run a mile. Nynaeve wore a face like a cornered badger.

hɪz hɛd swɪvəl təwɔɹɾ əm ɛvɝ soʊ sloʊli, ən i loʊɝd ðə klɔθ dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə ɪkspoʊz wʌn ɹɛd-stʃɹikt aɪ. "ju saʊn laɪk juv ən aɪɝn ɹɑd daʊn jəɹ θɹoʊt, maɪ leɪɾi," hi sɛd mɑkəŋli. "ju hæv maɪ pɝmɪʃən tə kɔl mi mæt." oʊɾiəs mæn! hi wəd nɑt noʊ səvɪləɾi ɪf ɪt bɪɾ ɪm ɑn ðə noʊz! ðət sæŋɡwɪn aɪ slæntəd təwɔɹd hɝ. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ju, nɪneɪiv? aɪ hɝɾ ə lɑɾ ʌv 'wi' fɹəm hɝ, bʌt nɑɾ ə wɝd fɹəm ju."

His head swiveled toward them ever so slowly, and he lowered the cloth just enough to expose one red-streaked eye. "You sound like you have an iron rod down your throat, my Lady," he said mockingly. "You have my permission to call me Mat." Odious man! He would not know civility if it bit him on the nose! That sanguine eye slanted toward her. "What about you, Nynaeve? I heard a lot of 'we' from her, but not a word from you."

"aɪ woʊnt ʃaʊɾ ət ju," nɪneɪiv ʃaʊɾəd. "æn ɔl ðə ɹɛst, tu. aɪ pɹɑməs, jə . . . jə . . . !" ʃi ɡɑbəld ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə swɑloʊɪŋ əɹ tʌŋ əz ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi kəd nɑt kɔl ɪm wʌn ə ðə neɪmz i wɔɹəntɪd wɪθaʊt bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə pɹɑməs ɔlɹɛɾi. ən jɛt, ði ɪfɛkt ə hɝ ʃaʊt wɑz moʊst ɡɹæɾəfaɪɪŋ.

"I won't shout at you," Nynaeve shouted. "And all the rest, too. I promise, you . . . you . . . !" She gobbled on the edge of swallowing her tongue as she realized she could not call him one of the names he warranted without breaking the promise already. And yet, the effect of her shout was most gratifying.

wɪð ə kɹaɪ, hi ʃʌɾɝəd ən dʒɹɑp ðə klɔθ, klʌtʃt ɪz hɛd wɪð boʊθ hænz. hɪz aɪz bʌlʒd. "fleɪmɪŋ daɪs," hi wɪmpɝd, əɹ sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi laɪk. ɪt sʌɾənli stʃɹʌk ɪleɪn ðəɾ i wəd bi ə vɛɹi ɡʊd sɔɹs ə pɪθi læŋɡwədʒ. steɪbəlmən ən ðə laɪk ɔlweɪz sim tə skɹeɪp ðɛɹ tʌŋz klin ðə moʊmən ðeɪ sɔ hɝ. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi hæd pɹɑməs hɝsɛlf tə sɪvəlaɪz hɪm, tə meɪk ɪm jusfəl tə ɹænd, bʌt ðət nid nɑɾ ɪntɝfɪɹ tu mʌtʃ wɪð ɪz læŋɡwədʒ. ɪn fækt, ʃi ɹilaɪz ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡʊd dil ʃi hæd nɑt pɹɑməs nɑt tə du. pɔɪntɪŋ ðəɾ aʊt ʃəd sɛɾəl nɪneɪiv kənsɪɾɝəbli.

With a cry, he shuddered and dropped the cloth, clutched his head with both hands. His eyes bulged. "Flaming dice," he whimpered, or something very like. It suddenly struck Elayne that he would be a very good source of pithy language. Stablemen and the like always seemed to scrape their tongues clean the moment they saw her. Of course, she had promised herself to civilize him, to make him useful to Rand, but that need not interfere too much with his language. In fact, she realized there was a good deal she had not promised not to do. Pointing that out should settle Nynaeve considerably.

æftɝ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt, hi spoʊk ɪn ə hɑloʊ vɔɪs. "θæŋk ju, nɪneɪiv." hi pɔz tə swɑloʊ hɑɹd. "aɪ θɔt jə tu mʌs bi sʌmbɑɾi ɛls ɪn dɪsɡaɪz, ðəɹ fəɹ ə bɪt. sɪns aɪ stɪl sim tə bi əlaɪv, wi maɪɾ əz wɛl teɪk kɛɹ ə ðə ɹɛst ʌv ɪt. aɪ sim tə ɹikɔl ðət bɝdʒɪt sɛd jə wɑntəd mi tə faɪn sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ ju. wʌt?"

After a long moment, he spoke in a hollow voice. "Thank you, Nynaeve." He paused to swallow hard. "I thought you two must be somebody else in disguise, there for a bit. Since I still seem to be alive, we might as well take care of the rest of it. I seem to recall that Birgitte said you wanted me to find something for you. What?"

"ju woʊn faɪn ɪt," nɪneɪiv toʊld ɪm ɪn ə fɝm vɔɪs. wɛl, pɝhæps mɔɹ hɑɹd ðən fɝm, bʌɾ ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ə kɔlɪŋ əɹ daʊn. hi mɛɹɪɾɪd ɛvɹi wɪns. "ju wɪl əkʌmpəni ʌs, ən wɪl faɪn ɪt."

"You won't find it," Nynaeve told him in a firm voice. Well, perhaps more hard than firm, but Elayne did not think of calling her down. He merited every wince. "You will accompany us, and we will find it."

"bæktʃɹækɪŋ ɔlɹɛɾi, nɪneɪiv?" sʌmhaʊ, hi mænədʒd ə dɝɪsɪv snɪɹ, ɪspɛʃli hɪɾiəs wɪð ɪz aɪz. "ju dʒʌs fɪnɪʃt pɹɑməsɪŋ tə də əz aɪ seɪ. ɪf jə wɑn ə teɪm tɑvɝən ɑn ə liʃ, ɡoʊ æsk ɹænd əɹ pɛɹɪn ən si wʌɾ ænsɝ jə ɡɛt."

"Backtracking already, Nynaeve?" Somehow, he managed a derisive sneer, especially hideous with his eyes. "You just finished promising to do as I say. If you want a tame ta'veren on a leash, go ask Rand or Perrin and see what answer you get."

"wi pɹɑməs noʊ sətʃ θɪŋ, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən," nɪneɪiv snæpt, ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp ɑn əɹ toʊz. "aɪ pɹɑməs noʊ sətʃ θɪŋ!" ʃi lʊkt əbaʊt tə flɪŋ hɝsɛlf əɾ ɪm əɡɛn. ivən əɹ bɹeɪd sim tə bɹɪsəl.

"We promised no such thing, Matrim Cauthon," Nynaeve snapped, going up on her toes. "I promised no such thing!" She looked about to fling herself at him again. Even her braid seemed to bristle.

ɪleɪn kɛpt ə bɛɾɝ ɹeɪn ɑn əɹ tɛmpɝ. ðeɪ wəd ɡɛt noʊwɛɹ blʌdʒoʊnɪŋ hɪm. "wi wɪl lɪsən tə jəɹ ædvaɪs, ən æksɛpt ɪɾ ɪf ɪts ɹizənəbəl, mæstɝ . . . mæt," ʃi tʃaɪɾɪd dʒɛnli. ʃʊɹli hi kəd nɑt ɹɪli bɪliv ðeɪ hæd pɹɑməs tə. . . . lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ðoʊ, ʃi sɔ ðəɾ i dɪd. oʊ, laɪt! nɪneɪiv wɑz ɹaɪt. hi wɑz gɑnə bi tʃɹʌbəl.

Elayne kept a better rein on her temper. They would get nowhere bludgeoning him. "We will listen to your advice, and accept it if it is reasonable, Master . . . Mat," she chided gently. Surely he could not really believe they had promised to. . . . Looking at him, though, she saw that he did. Oh, Light! Nynaeve was right. He was going to be trouble.

ʃi hɛl ðət ɹeɪn fɝmli. tʃænəlɪŋ əɡɛn, ʃi lɪftəɾ ɪz koʊt fɹəm ðə tʃɛɹ tə ə pɹɑpɝ pleɪs ɑn wʌn ə ðə pɛɡz ɑn ðə wɔl soʊ ʃi kəd sɪt, bæk stʃɹeɪt, ɝeɪnʒɪŋ əɹ skɝts kɛɹfəli. kipɪŋ əɹ pɹɑməsəz tə mæstɝ kɔθən - mæt - ən tə hɝsɛlf wɑz gɑnə bi dɪfəkəlt, bʌt nʌθɪŋ i sɛɾ əɹ dɪd kəd tʌtʃ hɝ. nɪneɪiv aɪd ði oʊnli ʌðɝ pleɪs tə sɪt, ə loʊ kɑɹvd wʊɾən fʊtstul, ən ɹɪmeɪn stændɪŋ. wʌn hæn muv təwɔɹɾ əɹ bɹeɪd, bɪfɔɹ ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz. hɝ fʊt tæpt ɑmənəsli.

She held that rein firmly. Channeling again, she lifted his coat from the chair to a proper place on one of the pegs on the wall so she could sit, back straight, arranging her skirts carefully. Keeping her promises to Master Cauthon - Mat - and to herself was going to be difficult, but nothing he said or did could touch her. Nynaeve eyed the only other place to sit, a low carved wooden footstool, and remained standing. One hand moved toward her braid, before she folded her arms. Her foot tapped ominously.

"ði æθɑn maɪɹ kɔl ɪt ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz, mæstɝ . . . mæt. ɪts ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. . . ."

"The Atha'an Miere call it the Bowl of the Winds, Master . . . Mat. It is a ter'angreal. . . ."

baɪ ði ɛnd, ə laɪɾ ʌv ɪksaɪtmənt ʃoʊn θɹu hɪz sɪklinəs. "naʊ, ðət wəd bi ə θɪŋ tə faɪnd," hi mɝmɝd. "ɪn ðə ɹæhəd." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ən flɪntʃt. "aɪl tɛl jə ðɪs naʊ. niðɝ ə jə ɪz sɛɾɪŋ fʊɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ wɪθaʊt fɔɹ əɹ faɪv ə maɪ ɹɛdʒɹmz itʃ. nɑɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə pæləs, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. dɪd bɝdʒɪt tɛl jə əbaʊt ðə noʊt ðət wɑz stʌft ɪn maɪ koʊt? aɪm ʃʊɹ aɪ toʊl hɝ. ən ðɛɹz kæɹaɪɾɪn ən ɪz dɑɹkfɹɛnz; jə kæn tɛl mi hi ɪzən ʌp tə sʌmθɪŋ."

By the end, a light of excitement shone through his sickliness. "Now, that would be a thing to find," he murmured. "In the Rahad." He shook his head, and flinched. "I'll tell you this now. Neither of you is setting foot on the other side of the river without four or five of my Redarms each. Not outside the palace, for that matter. Did Birgitte tell you about the note that was stuffed in my coat? I'm sure I told her. And there's Carridin and his Darkfriends; you can't tell me he isn't up to something."

"ɛni sɪstɝ u səpɔɹts ɛɡwin əz æmɪɝlɪn ɪz ɪn deɪnʒɝ fɹəm ðə taʊɝ." bɑɾiɡɑɹdz ɛvɹiwɛɹ? laɪt! ə deɪnʒɝəs laɪt ʃoʊn ɪn nɪneɪivz aɪz, ən əɹ fʊt tæp fæstɝ. "wi kænɑt haɪd, mæst . . . mæt, ən wɪl nɑt. dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn wɪl bi teɪkən kɛɹ ʌv ɪn du kɔɹs." ðeɪ hæd nɑt pɹɑməs tə tɛl ɪm ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ən ðeɪ kəd nɑt lɛɾ ɪm bi daɪvɝɾɪd. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz əfʊt."

"Any sister who supports Egwene as Amyrlin is in danger from the Tower." Bodyguards everywhere? Light! A dangerous light shone in Nynaeve's eyes, and her foot tapped faster. "We cannot hide, Mast . . . Mat, and we will not. Jaichim Carridin will be taken care of in due course." They had not promised to tell him everything, and they could not let him be diverted. "There are more important matters afoot."

"du kɔɹs?" hi bɪɡæn, vɔɪs ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn dɪsbɪlif, bʌt nɪneɪiv kʌɾ ɪm ʃɔɹt.

"Due course?" he began, voice rising in disbelief, but Nynaeve cut him short.

"fɔɹ əɹ faɪv itʃ?" ʃi sɛd saʊɝli. "ðæts ɹɪɾɪk - " hɝ aɪz ʃʌt fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ən əɹ toʊn bɪkeɪm maɪldɝ. slaɪtli maɪldɝ. "aɪ min tə seɪ, ɪɾ ɪzən sɛnsəbəl. ɪleɪn ən mi, bɝdʒɪɾ ən eɪvinhə. jə doʊn əv ðət mɛni soʊlʒɝz. ɛniweɪ, ɔl wi ɹɪli niɾ ɪz ju." ðət læs keɪm aʊɾ əz ðoʊ dʒɹæɡd. ɪt wɑz mʌtʃ tu mʌtʃ ən ædmɪʃən.

"Four or five each?" she said sourly. "That's ridic - " Her eyes shut for a moment, and her tone became milder. Slightly milder. "I mean to say, it isn't sensible. Elayne and me, Birgitte and Aviendha. You don't have that many soldiers. Anyway, all we really need is you." That last came out as though dragged. It was much too much an admission.

"bɝdʒɪɾ ən eɪvinhə doʊnt nid maɪndɝz," hi sɛɾ æbsənli. "aɪ səpoʊz ðɪs boʊl ə ðə wɪnz ɪz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən kæɹaɪɾɪn, bʌt. . . . ɪt dʌzn sim ɹaɪt, lɛɾɪŋ dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɔk lus."

"Birgitte and Aviendha don't need minders," he said absently. "I suppose this Bowl of the Winds is more important than Carridin, but. . . . It doesn't seem right, letting Darkfriends walk loose."

sloʊli nɪneɪivz feɪs tɝn pɝpəl. ɪleɪn tʃɛkt əɹ oʊn ɪn ðə stænd-mɪɹɝ, ɹɪliv tə si ʃi wɑz meɪnteɪnɪŋ əɹ kəmpoʊʒɝ. ɑn ði aʊtsaɪd, ɛniweɪ. ðə mæn wɑz ɹɛpɹɪhɛnsəbəl! maɪndɝz? ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɪtʃ wəd bi wɝs: ðəɾ i hæd flʌŋ ðəɾ ɔfhæn ɪnsəlt ɑn pɝpəs, əɹ ðəɾ i hæd dʌn soʊ wɪθaʊt ɹilaɪzɪŋ. ʃi aɪd hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə mɪɹɝ əɡɛn ən loʊɝɾ əɹ tʃɪn ə tʃɹaɪfəl. maɪndɝz! ʃi wɑz pɔɪz ɪtsɛlf.

Slowly Nynaeve's face turned purple. Elayne checked her own in the stand-mirror, relieved to see she was maintaining her composure. On the outside, anyway. The man was reprehensible! Minders? She was not sure which would be worse: that he had flung that offhand insult on purpose, or that he had done so without realizing. She eyed herself in the mirror again and lowered her chin a trifle. Minders! She was poise itself.

hi stʌɾid əm wɪð ðoʊz blʌdʃɑɾ aɪz, bʌt sɔ nʌθɪŋ, əpɛɹənli. "wɑz ðəɾ ɔl bɝdʒɪt toʊl ju?" hi æskt, ən nɪneɪiv snæp bæk, "ðæt wɑz kwaɪɾ ɪnʌf, aɪd θɪŋk, ivən fəɹ ju." ɪnɪksplɪkəbli, hi lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd, ən kwaɪt plizd.

He studied them with those bloodshot eyes, but saw nothing, apparently. "Was that all Birgitte told you?" he asked, and Nynaeve snapped back, "That was quite enough, I'd think, even for you." Inexplicably, he looked surprised, and quite pleased.

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, ðən foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf taɪɾɝ. "sɪns jəɹ ɪn noʊ kəndɪʃən tə ɡoʊ ɛniwɛɹ wɪð əs naʊ - doʊn skaʊl ət mi, mæt kɔθən; ðəɾ ɪzən dɪminɪŋ, ɪts sɪmpəl tʃɹuθ! - jə kən spɛn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ muvɪŋ jɝsɛlf ɪndə ðə pæləs. ən jə nidn θɪŋk wɪl hɛlp kæɹi jəɹ θɪŋz. aɪ dɪdn pɹɑməs tə bi ə pækhɔɹs."

Nynaeve gave a start, then folded her arms around herself tighter. "Since you're in no condition to go anywhere with us now - don't scowl at me, Mat Cauthon; that isn't demeaning, it's simple truth! - you can spend the morning moving yourself into the palace. And you needn't think we'll help carry your things. I didn't promise to be a packhorse."

"ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən ɪz plɛnti ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf," hi bɪɡæn æŋɡɹəli, ðən stɑpt, ə wʌndɝɪŋ ɪkspɹɛʃən spɹɛɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz feɪs. ə hɔɹəfaɪɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən, ɪleɪn wəɾ əv sɛd. ðət ʃəd titʃ ɪm tə ɡɹaʊl wən i hæɾ ə hɛd laɪk ə mɛlən. ət list, ðət wɑz wʌt hɝz hæd fɛlt laɪk, ðə taɪm ʃi dʒɹæŋk tu mʌtʃ. ʌv kɔɹs i wəd nɑt lɝn fɹəm ɪt. mɛn kɛp stɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ hænz ɪn ðə faɪɝ θɪŋkɪŋ ðɪs taɪm ɪt wəd nɑt bɝn, soʊ lini ɔlweɪz sɛd.

"The Wandering Woman is plenty good enough," he began angrily, then stopped, a wondering expression spreading over his face. A horrified expression, Elayne would have said. That should teach him to growl when he had a head like a melon. At least, that was what hers had felt like, the time she drank too much. Of course he would not learn from it. Men kept sticking their hands in the fire thinking this time it would not burn, so Lini always said.

"ju kən hɑɹdli ɪkspɛkt wɪl faɪn ðə boʊl ðə fɝs taɪm wi tʃɹaɪ," nɪneɪiv wɛn ɑn, "tɑvɝən əɹ noʊ. ɡoʊɪŋ aʊɾ itʃ deɪ wɪl bi mʌtʃ sɪmpəlɝ ɪf jə doʊn əv tə kʌm əkɹɔs ðə skwɛɹ." ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ əv tə weɪt fəɹ ɪm ɛvɹi mɔɹnɪŋ, wɑz wʌt ʃi mɛnt. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə hɝ, dʒɹʌŋkənnəs wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli ɪkskjus i kəd faɪn fəɹ laɪɪŋ ɪn bɛd tɪl ɔl aʊɝz, fɑɹ fɹəm ɪt.

"You can hardly expect we'll find the Bowl the first time we try," Nynaeve went on, "ta'veren or no. Going out each day will be much simpler if you don't have to come across the square." If they did not have to wait for him every morning, was what she meant. According to her, drunkenness was not the only excuse he could find for lying in bed till all hours, far from it.

"bɪsaɪdz," ɪleɪn æɾəd, "ðæt weɪ, jə kən kip ən aɪ ɑn ʌs." nɪneɪiv meɪɾ ə saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt, vɛɹi kloʊs tə ə ɡɹoʊn. dɪd ʃi nɑt si ðəɾ i mʌs bi ɪntaɪst? ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæd pɹɑməs tə æktʃəli  əlaʊ hɪm tə kip ən aɪ ɑn ðɛm.

"Besides," Elayne added, "that way, you can keep an eye on us." Nynaeve made a sound in her throat, very close to a groan. Did she not see that he must be enticed? It was not as if she had promised to actually allow him to keep an eye on them.

hi sim nɑt tə hæv hɝɾ əɹ əɹ nɪneɪiv. hæɡɝɾ aɪz stɛɹd ɹaɪt θɹu hɝ. "waɪ dɪd ðeɪ blʌɾi wɛl əv tə stɑp naʊ?" hi moʊnd, soʊ sɔfli ʃi bɛɹli hɝd. wʌɾ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt dɪɾ i min baɪ ðæt?

He seemed not to have heard her or Nynaeve. Haggard eyes stared right through her. "Why did they bloody well have to stop now?" he moaned, so softly she barely heard. What under the Light did he mean by that?

"ðə ɹumz ɑɹ fɪt fəɹ ə kɪŋ, mæstɝ . . . mæt. taɪlɪn hɝsɛlf tʃoʊz ðɛm, dʒʌs daʊn fɹəm əɹ oʊn. ʃiz teɪkən ə vɛɹi pɝsənəl ɪntʃɹəst. mæt, jə wʊdn əv əs əfɛn ðə kwin, wəd ju?"

"The rooms are fit for a king, Master . . . Mat. Tylin herself chose them, just down from her own. She has taken a very personal interest. Mat, you wouldn't have us offend the Queen, would you?"

wʌn lʊk əɾ ɪz feɪs, ən ɪleɪn hɝidli tʃænəl tə pʊʃ oʊpən ðə wɪndoʊ ən ɛmpti ðə wɑʃbeɪsən θɹu ɪt. ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ə mæn əbaʊt tə luz ðə kɑntɛns ə hɪz stʌmək, hi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ɹɛd-aɪɾ əɾ əɹ ɹaɪt ðət mɪnət.

One look at his face, and Elayne hurriedly channeled to push open the window and empty the washbasin through it. If she had ever seen a man about to lose the contents of his stomach, he was staring red-eyed at her right that minute.

"aɪ doʊn si waɪ jəɹ meɪkɪŋ sətʃ ə fʌs," ʃi sɛd. æktʃəli , ʃi səpoʊzd ʃi dɪd. səm ə ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən hɪɹ pɹɑbli lɛɾ ɪm pɔ ðɛm, bʌt ʃi daʊɾɪd mɛni ɪn ðə pæləs wʊd, ɪf ɛni. hi wəd nɑt bi eɪbəl tə dʒɹɪŋk ən ɡæmbəl ɪz naɪts əweɪ, iðɝ. taɪlɪn ʃʊɹli wəd nɑɾ əlaʊ ə bæɾ ɪɡzæmpəl fəɹ bɛslən. "wi ɔl mʌs meɪk sækɹəfaɪsɪz." wɪð ən ɛfɝt ʃi stɑp ðɛɹ, nɑt tɛlɪŋ ɪm ðəɾ ɪz wɑz smɔl ən oʊnli ɹaɪt, ðɛɹz mɑnstʃɹəs ən əndʒʌst, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ eɪvinhə sɛd. nɪneɪiv hæd sɝɾənli ɹeɪld əɡɛnst ɛni sækɹəfaɪs.

"I don't see why you're making such a fuss," she said. Actually, she supposed she did. Some of the serving women here probably let him paw them, but she doubted many in the palace would, if any. He would not be able to drink and gamble his nights away, either. Tylin surely would not allow a bad example for Beslan. "We all must make sacrifices." With an effort she stopped there, not telling him that his was small and only right, theirs monstrous and unjust, no matter what Aviendha said. Nynaeve had certainly railed against any sacrifice.

hi pʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ɪz hænz əɡɛn, meɪkɪŋ stʃɹæŋɡəl nɔɪzɪz waɪl ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ʃʊk. hi wɑz læfɪŋ! ʃi hɛftəd ðə beɪsən ɑn ə floʊ ʌv ɛɹ, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ hɪɾɪŋ ɪm wɪð ɪt. wən i ɹeɪzd ɪz aɪz əɡɛn, ðoʊ, hi lʊkt aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ fəɹ səm ɹizən. "sækɹəfaɪsɪz?" hi snɑɹəld. "ɪf aɪ æsk jə tə meɪk ðə seɪm, jud bɑks ɛvɹi ɪɹ ɪn saɪɾ ən pʊl ðə ɹuf daʊn ɑn maɪ hɛd!" kəɾ i stɪl bi dʒɹʌŋk?

He put his head in his hands again, making strangled noises while his shoulders shook. He was laughing! She hefted the basin on a flow of Air, considering hitting him with it. When he raised his eyes again, though, he looked outraged for some reason. "Sacrifices?" he snarled. "If I asked you to make the same, you'd box every ear in sight and pull the roof down on my head!" Could he still be drunk?

ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɪz fɹaɪtfəl ɡlɛɹ. "spikɪŋ ə jəɹ hɛd, ɪf jə wəd laɪk hilɪŋ, aɪm ʃʊɹ nɪneɪiv wəɾ əblaɪdʒ." ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn æŋɡɹi ɪnʌf tə tʃænəl, ʃi wɑz naʊ.

She decided to ignore his frightful glare. "Speaking of your head, if you would like Healing, I'm sure Nynaeve would oblige." If she had ever been angry enough to channel, she was now.

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ə smɔl dʒɝk ən ɡlænst əɾ əɹ fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ʌv wʌn aɪ. "ʌv kɔɹs," ʃi sɛd hɝidli. "ɪf jə wɑnt." ðə kʌlɝ ɪn əɹ tʃiks kənfɝmd ɔl ʌv ɪleɪnz səspɪʃənz əbaʊt ðət mɔɹnɪŋ.

Nynaeve gave a small jerk and glanced at her from the corner of one eye. "Of course," she said hurriedly. "If you want." The color in her cheeks confirmed all of Elayne's suspicions about that morning.

ɡɹeɪʃəs əz ɛvɝ, hi snɪɹd. "ju dʒʌs fɝɡɛt maɪ hɛd. aɪ də vɛɹi wɛl wɪθaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ." ən ðɛn, dʒʌs tə kənfjuz mæɾɝz ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ, hi æɾəd ɪn ə hɛzɪɾənt vɔɪs, "aɪ θæŋk jə fəɹ æskɪŋ, ðoʊ." ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf i mɛn ɪt!

Gracious as ever, he sneered. "You just forget my head. I do very well without Aes Sedai." And then, just to confuse matters she was sure, he added in a hesitant voice, "I thank you for asking, though." Almost as if he meant it!

ɪleɪn mænədʒ nɑt tə ɡeɪp. hɝ nɑlədʒ ə mɛn wɑz lɪməɾəd tə ɹænd ən wʌt lini ən əɹ mʌðɝ hæd toʊl hɝ. wɑz ɹænd gɑnə bi əz kənfjuzɪŋ əz mæt kɔθən?

Elayne managed not to gape. Her knowledge of men was limited to Rand and what Lini and her mother had told her. Was Rand going to be as confusing as Mat Cauthon?

læs θɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ, ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd tə sɪkjʊɹ ə pɹɑməs ðəɾ i wəd stɑɹt muvɪŋ tə ðə pæləs ɪmiɾiətli. hi kɛpt ɪz wɝd wʌns ɡɪvən, soʊ nɪneɪiv hæd meɪd klɪɹ, haʊɛvɝ ɹɪlʌktənli, bʌt liv wʌn kɹæk, ən i kəd faɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd weɪz tə slɪp θɹu. ðət ʃi hæd bɪn ɔl tu iɡɝ tə ɛmfəsaɪz. hi ɡeɪv ɪz pɹɑməs wɪð ə blik, ɹɪzɛnfəl ɡɹɪmɑs; əɹ meɪbi ðət wɑz dʒʌst ɪz aɪz əɡɛn. wən ʃi sɛt ðə beɪsən daʊn əɾ ɪz fit, hi æktʃəli  lʊkt ɡɹeɪtfəl. ʃi wəd nɑt fil sɪmpəθi. ʃi wəd nɑt.

Last thing before going, she remembered to secure a promise that he would start moving to the palace immediately. He kept his word once given, so Nynaeve had made clear, however reluctantly, but leave one crack, and he could find a hundred ways to slip through. That she had been all too eager to emphasize. He gave his promise with a bleak, resentful grimace; or maybe that was just his eyes again. When she set the basin down at his feet, he actually looked grateful. She would not feel sympathy. She would not.

wʌns bæk ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, wɪð ðə dɔɹ tə mæts ɹum kloʊzd, nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ fɪst ət ðə silɪŋ. "ðæt mæn kəd tʃɹaɪ ðə peɪʃəns ʌv ə stoʊn! aɪm ɡlæɾ i wɑns tə kʌɾəl wɪð ɪz hɛd! dʒju hɪɹ mi? ɡlæd! hɪl meɪk tʃɹʌbəl. hi wɪl."

Once back in the corridor, with the door to Mat's room closed, Nynaeve shook her fist at the ceiling. "That man could try the patience of a stone! I'm glad he wants to cuddle with his head! Do you hear me? Glad! He will make trouble. He will."

"ju tu wɪl meɪk mɔɹ tʃɹʌbəl fəɹ ɪm ðən i ɛvɝ kʊd." ðə spikɝ stɔk daʊn ðə hɔl təwɔɹd ðɛm, ə wʊmən wɪð ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, ə stʃɹɔŋ feɪs ən ə kəmændɪŋ vɔɪs. ʃi ɔlsoʊ wɔɹ ə fɹaʊn lɪɾəl ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə skaʊl. dɪspaɪt ðə mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf hæŋɪŋ ɪndə hɝ klivədʒ, ʃi wɑz tu fɛɹ fəɹ ən ɛbu dɑɹi. "aɪ kʊdn bɪliv ɪt wən kɛɹə toʊl mi. aɪ daʊɾ aɪv ɛvɝ sin soʊ mʌtʃ fulɪʃnəs pɔɹɾ ɪndə dʒʌs tu dʒɹɛsəz."

"You two will make more trouble for him than he ever could." The speaker stalked down the hall toward them, a woman with a touch of gray in her hair, a strong face and a commanding voice. She also wore a frown little short of a scowl. Despite the marriage knife hanging into her cleavage, she was too fair for an Ebou Dari. "I couldn't believe it when Caira told me. I doubt I've ever seen so much foolishness poured into just two dresses."

ɪleɪn aɪd ðə wʊmən ʌp ən daʊn. nɑɾ ivən əz ə nɑvəs hæd ʃi ɡɑɾən juz tə biɪŋ ədʒɹɛst ɪn ðət toʊn. "æn u maɪt jə bi, maɪ ɡʊd wʊmən?"

Elayne eyed the woman up and down. Not even as a novice had she gotten used to being addressed in that tone. "And who might you be, my good woman?"

"aɪ maɪt bi ən æm sɛɾəl ɑnən, ði oʊnɝ ə ðɪs ɪn, tʃaɪld" wɑz ðə dʒɹaɪ ɹɪplaɪ, ən wɪð ðæt, ðə wʊmən flʌŋ oʊpən ə dɔɹ əkɹɔs ðə hɔlweɪ, sizd əm itʃ baɪ ən ɑɹm, ən hʌsəld əm θɹu soʊ fæst ɪleɪn θɔɾ əɹ slɪpɝz hæd lɛf ðə flɔɹ.

"I might be and am Setalle Anan, the owner of this inn, child" was the dry reply, and with that, the woman flung open a door across the hallway, seized them each by an arm, and hustled them through so fast Elayne thought her slippers had left the floor.

"ju sim ʌndɝ səm mɪsæpɹihɛnʃən, mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən," ʃi sɛd kuli əz ðə wʊmən ɹilist əm tə ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ.

"You seem under some misapprehension, Mistress Anan," she said coolly as the woman released them to shut the door.

nɪneɪiv wɑz ɪn noʊ mud fəɹ naɪsɪɾiz. hoʊldɪŋ əɹ hæn soʊ hɝ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ wɑz pleɪn, ʃi sɛd hiɾɪdli, "naʊ, jə lʊk hɪɹ - "

Nynaeve was in no mood for niceties. Holding her hand so her Great Serpent ring was plain, she said heatedly, "Now, you look here - "

"vɛɹi pɹɪɾi," ðə wʊmən sɛd, ən pʊʃt itʃ ə ðɛm soʊ hɑɹd ðeɪ faʊn ðɛmsɛlvz sɪɾɪŋ saɪd-baɪ-saɪɾ ɑn ðə bɛd. ɪleɪnz aɪz pɑpt ɪn dɪsbɪlif. ðɪs ɑnən wʊmən kənfɹʌntəd ðɛm, ɡɹɪm-feɪst, fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps, fəɹ ɔl ðə wɝld laɪk ə mʌðɝ əbaʊt tə kæstəɡeɪɾ əɹ dɔɾɝz. "flɔntɪŋ ðət dʒʌst ʃoʊz haʊ sɪli jə ɑɹ. ðət jʌŋ mæn wɪl dændəl jə ɑn ɪz ni - wʌn ɑn itʃ, aɪ ʃʊdnt wʌndɝ, ɪf jə əlaʊ - hɪl teɪk ə fju kɪsəz ən əz mʌtʃ ɛls əz jəɹ wɪlɪŋ tə ɡɪv, bʌɾ i woʊn hɑɹm ju. jə kən hɑɹm hɪm, ðoʊ, ɪf jə kip ɑn wɪð ðɪs."

"Very pretty," the woman said, and pushed each of them so hard they found themselves sitting side-by-side on the bed. Elayne's eyes popped in disbelief. This Anan woman confronted them, grim-faced, fists on her hips, for all the world like a mother about to castigate her daughters. "Flaunting that just shows how silly you are. That young man will dandle you on his knee - one on each, I shouldn't wonder, if you allow - he'll take a few kisses and as much else as you're willing to give, but he won't harm you. You can harm him, though, if you keep on with this."

hɑɹm hɪm? ðə wʊmən θɔt ðeɪ - ʃi θɔɾ i hæd dændəld - ʃi θɔt - ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ tə læf əɹ kɹaɪ, bʌt ʃi stʊɾ ʌp, stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ əɹ skɝts. "æz aɪ sɛd, mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən, jə ɑɹ ʌndɝ ə mɪsæpɹihɛnʃən." hɝ vɔɪs bɪkeɪm smuðɝ əz ʃi wɛn ɑn, kənfjuʒən ɡɪvɪŋ weɪ tə kɑm. "aɪ æm ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd, dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt jə θɪŋk - " hɝ aɪz nɪɹli kɹɔst əz mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən pʊʃt ə fɪŋɡɝ tə ðə tɪp ə hɝ noʊz.

Harm him? The woman thought they - she thought he had dandled - she thought - Elayne did not know whether to laugh or cry, but she stood up, straightening her skirts. "As I said, Mistress Anan, you are under a misapprehension." Her voice became smoother as she went on, confusion giving way to calm. "I am Elayne Trakand, Daughter-Heir of Andor and Aes Sedai of the Green Ajah. I don't know what you think - " Her eyes nearly crossed as Mistress Anan pushed a finger to the tip of her nose.

"ɪleɪn, ɪf ðəɾ ɪz jəɹ neɪm, ɔl ðət kips mi fɹəm dʒɹæɡɪŋ jə daʊn tə ðə kɪtʃən ən wɑʃɪŋ jəɹ maʊθ aʊt, jʊɹz ən ðəɾ ʌðɝ fulɪʃ ɡɝlz ðɛɹ, ɪz ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðət jə æktʃəli  kən tʃænəl sʌmwʌt. əɹ ɑɹ jə sɪli ɪnʌf tə wɛɹ ðət ɹɪŋ wən jə kæn ivən də ðæt? aɪ wɔɹn ɪɾəl wɪl meɪk noʊ dɪfɝəns tə ðə sɪstɝz oʊvɝ ɪn ðə tɛɹə-sɪn dʒju jə ivən noʊ əbaʊt ðɛm? ɪf jə du, fɹæŋkli, jə ɑɹ nɑt fulɪʃ, jəɹ blaɪn stupəd."

"Elayne, if that is your name, all that keeps me from dragging you down to the kitchen and washing your mouth out, yours and that other foolish girl's there, is the possibility that you actually can channel somewhat. Or are you silly enough to wear that ring when you can't even do that? I warn you, it will make no difference to the sisters over in the Tara-sin Palace. Do you even know about them? If you do, frankly, you are not foolish, you're blind stupid."

ɪleɪnz tɛmpɝ ɡɹu baɪ ðə wɝd. fulɪʃ ɡɝl? blaɪn stupəd? ʃi wəd nɑt pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɪt, ɪspɛʃli nɑt ɹaɪɾ æftɝ biɪŋ fɔɹs tə kɹɔl tə mæt kɔθən. dændəl? mæt kɔθən? ʃi meɪnteɪn əɹ aʊtwɝd kəmpoʊʒɝ, ðoʊ, bʌt nɑt soʊ nɪneɪiv.

Elayne's temper grew by the word. Foolish girl? Blind stupid? She would not put up with it, especially not right after being forced to crawl to Mat Cauthon. Dandle? Mat Cauthon? She maintained her outward composure, though, but not so Nynaeve.

ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ ɪn ə fjʊɹi, ən ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ ɛnvɛləpt əɹ əz ʃi baʊndəd tə hɝ fit. floʊz ʌv ɛɹ ɹæp mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən fɹəm ʃoʊldɝz tə æŋkəlz, kɹʌʃɪŋ əɹ skɝts ən pɛɾikoʊts əɡɛnst əɹ lɛɡz, dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ə taɪɾ ɪnʌf tə tɑpəl hɝ. "aɪ hæpən tə bi wʌn ə ðoʊz sɪstɝz ɪn ðə pæləs. nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə ʌv ðə jɛloʊ ədʒɑ, tə bi ɪɡzækt. naʊ wəd jə laɪk mi tə kæɹi jə daʊn tə ðə kɪtʃənz? aɪ noʊ sʌmθɪŋ ə haʊ tə wɑʃ aʊɾ ə maʊθ." ɪleɪn stɛpt əweɪ fɹəm ði ɪnkipɝz aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt ɑɹm.

She glared in a fury, and the glow of saidar enveloped her as she bounded to her feet. Flows of Air wrapped mistress Anan from shoulders to ankles, crushing her skirts and petticoats against her legs, just short of tight enough to topple her. "I happen to be one of those sisters in the palace. Nynaeve al'Meara of the Yellow Ajah, to be exact. Now would you like me to carry you down to the kitchens? I know something of how to wash out a mouth." Elayne stepped away from the innkeeper's outstretched arm.

ðə wʊmən hæd tə fil ðə pɹɛʃɝ ə ðə floʊz, ən ivən ə hæf-wɪt wʊɾə noʊn wʌt ðoʊz ɪnvɪzəbəl bɑnz mʌs bi, jɛt ʃi dɪd nɑt blɪŋk! hɝ ɡɹin-flɛkt aɪz nɛɹoʊd, noʊ mɔɹ. "soʊ wʌn ə jə kən tʃænəl, ət list," ʃi sɛd kɑmli. "aɪ ʃəd lɛt jə dʒɹæɡ mi daʊnstɛɹz, tʃaɪld. wʌtɛvɝ jə də tə mi, jə wəd bi ɪn ðə hænz ə ɹil ɛɛs sədaɪ baɪ nun; əl weɪdʒɝ ðæt."

The woman had to feel the pressure of the flows, and even a half-wit would have known what those invisible bonds must be, yet she did not blink! Her green-flecked eyes narrowed, no more. "So one of you can channel, at least," she said calmly. "I should let you drag me downstairs, child. Whatever you do to me, you would be in the hands of real Aes Sedai by noon; I'll wager that."

"dɪdn jə hɪɹ mi?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. "aɪ - !"

"Didn't you hear me?" Nynaeve demanded. "I - !"

ði ɑnən wʊmən dɪd nɑɾ ivən pɔz. "jul nɑɾ oʊnli spɛn ðə nɛks jɪɹ blʌbɝɪŋ, jəl də pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛniwʌn jə toʊl ðət jə ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. bi ʃʊɹ, ðəl meɪk jə tɛl. ðəl tɝn jəɹ lɪvɝ tə wɔɾɝ. aɪ ʃəd lɛt jə ɡoʊ blʌndɝɪŋ ɑn jəɹ weɪ, əɹ ɛls ɹʌn əkɹɔs tə ðə pæləs əz sun əz jə lus mi. ði oʊnli ɹizən aɪ doʊn ɪz ðət ðəl meɪk ən ɪɡzæmpəl ə lɔɹd mæt nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ əz ə ju, ɪf ðeɪ ivən səspɛk hiz hɛlp ju, ən əz aɪ sɛd, aɪ laɪk ðə jʌŋ mæn."

The Anan woman did not even pause. "You'll not only spend the next year blubbering, you will do part of it in front of anyone you told that you are Aes Sedai. Be sure, they'll make you tell. They will turn your liver to water. I should let you go blundering on your way, or else run across to the palace as soon as you loose me. The only reason I don't is that they'll make an example of Lord Mat nearly as much as of you, if they even suspect he's helped you, and as I said, I like the young man."

"aɪm tɛlɪŋ jə - " nɪneɪiv tʃɹaɪɾ əɡɛn, bʌt stɪl ði ɪnkipɝ ɡeɪv əɹ noʊ tʃæns tə tɛl ɛniθɪŋ. taɪd laɪk ə bʌndəl, ðə wʊmən wɑz ə boʊldɝ ɹoʊlɪŋ daʊnhɪl. ʃi wɑz ðə hoʊl hɪlsaɪd fɔlɪŋ, flæɾənɪŋ wʌtɛvɝ leɪ ɪn ɪts pæθ.

"I'm telling you - " Nynaeve tried again, but still the innkeeper gave her no chance to tell anything. Tied like a bundle, the woman was a boulder rolling downhill. She was the whole hillside falling, flattening whatever lay in its path.

"tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ʌp ðə laɪ dʌz noʊ ɡʊd, nɪneɪiv. jə lʊk tə bi, oʊ, twɛnti-wʌn ɡɪv əɹ teɪk ə jɪɹ, soʊ jə maɪt bi əz mʌtʃ əz tɛn jɪɹz oʊldɝ ɪf juv ɔlɹɛɾi ɹitʃt ðə sloʊɪŋ. jə maɪɾ ivən əv wɔɹn ðə ʃɔl fɔɹ əɹ faɪv jɪɹz. ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ." hɝ hɛd, ði oʊnli pɑɹɾ ə hɝ ʃi kəd muv, swɪvəl təwɔɹɾ ɪleɪn. "ju, tʃaɪld, ɑɹən oʊld ɪnʌf tə hæv sloʊd jɛt, ən noʊ wʊmən əz ɛvɝ wɔɹn ðə ʃɔl əz jʌŋ əz ju. nɛvɝ ɪn ðə hɪstɝi ʌv ðə taʊɝ. ɪf jə ɛvɝ wɝ ɪn ðə taʊɝ, əl weɪdʒɝ jə wɔɹ waɪɾ ən skwikt ɛvɹi taɪm ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz ɡlæns jəɹ weɪ. jə hæd səm ɡoʊldsmɪθ meɪk ðət ɹɪŋ fəɹ jə - ðəɹ ɑɹ səm ful ɪnʌf, aɪ hɪɹ - əɹ meɪbi nɪneɪiv stoʊl ɪt fəɹ ju, ɪf ʃiz ɛni ɹaɪt tə hɝz. iðɝ weɪ, sɪns jə kæn bi ə sɪstɝ, niðɝ kən ʃi. noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd tʃɹævəl wɪð ə wʊmən u wɑz pɹitɛndɪŋ."

"Trying to keep up the lie does no good, Nynaeve. You look to be, oh, twenty-one give or take a year, so you might be as much as ten years older if you've already reached the slowing. You might even have worn the shawl four or five years. Except for one thing." Her head, the only part of her she could move, swiveled toward Elayne. "You, child, aren't old enough to have slowed yet, and no woman has ever worn the shawl as young as you. Never in the history of the Tower. If you ever were in the Tower, I'll wager you wore white and squeaked every time the Mistress of Novices glanced your way. You had some goldsmith make that ring for you - there are some fool enough, I hear - or maybe Nynaeve stole it for you, if she has any right to hers. Either way, since you can't be a sister, neither can she. No Aes Sedai would travel with a woman who was pretending."

ɪleɪn fɹaʊnd, nɑt noʊɾɪsɪŋ ðət ʃi wɑz tʃuɪŋ əɹ loʊɝ lɪp. sloʊd. sloʊɪŋ. haʊ dɪɾ ən ɪnkipɝ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ noʊ ðoʊz wɝdz? meɪbi sɛɾəl ɑnən hæd ɡɔn tə ðə taʊɝ əz ə ɡɝl, ðoʊ ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv ɹɪmeɪn lɔŋ, sɪns ʃi klɪɹli kəd nɑt tʃænəl. ɪleɪn wʊɾə noʊn ivən ɪf əɹ əbɪləɾi hæd bɪn əz smɔl əz əɹ oʊn mʌðɝz, ən mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkən hæd hæɾ ən əbɪləɾi soʊ smɔl ʃi wʊɾə bɪn sɛn əweɪ ɪn ə mæɾɝ ʌv wiks pɹɑbli, hæd ʃi nɑt bɪn ɛɹ tə ə stʃɹɔŋ haʊs.

Elayne frowned, not noticing that she was chewing her lower lip. Slowed. Slowing. How did an innkeeper in Ebou Dar know those words? Maybe Setalle Anan had gone to the Tower as a girl, though she would not have remained long, since she clearly could not channel. Elayne would have known even if her ability had been as small as her own mother's, and Morgase Trakand had had an ability so small she would have been sent away in a matter of weeks probably, had she not been heir to a strong House.

"ɹilis hɝ, nɪneɪiv," ʃi sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ. ʃi tʃɹuli dɪd fil mɔɹ wɛl-dɪspoʊz təwɔɹd ðə wʊmən, naʊ. ɪt mʌst əv bɪn tɛɹəbəl tə meɪk ðət dʒɝni tə tɑɹ vəlɑn oʊnli tə bi tɝn əweɪ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹizən ðə wʊmən hæd tə bɪliv əm - sʌmθɪŋ tɪkəld ət ðæt, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt seɪ wʌt - noʊ ɹizən əɾ ɔl, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi hæd meɪd ðə tʃɹɪp tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, meɪbi ʃi wəd wɔk əkɹɔs ðə mɔl hɛɹə. mɛɝɪlɪl, əɹ ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz, kəd sɛɾ əɹ stʃɹeɪt.

"Release her, Nynaeve," she said, smiling. She truly did feel more well-disposed toward the woman, now. It must have been terrible to make that journey to Tar Valon only to be turned away. There was no reason the woman had to believe them - something tickled at that, but she could not say what - no reason at all, but if she had made the trip to Tar Valon, maybe she would walk across the Mol Hara. Merilille, or any of the other sisters, could set her straight.

"ɹilis hɝ?" nɪneɪiv jɛlpt. "ɪleɪn?"

"Release her?" Nynaeve yelped. "Elayne?"

"ɹilis hɝ. mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən, aɪ si ði oʊnli weɪ tə kənvɪns jə ɪz - "

"Release her. Mistress Anan, I see the only way to convince you is - "

"ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ən θɹi sɪɾɝz kʊdn kənvɪns mi, tʃaɪld." laɪt, dɪd ʃi ɛvɝ lɛɾ ɛniwʌn fɪnɪʃ ə sɛntəns? "naʊ, aɪ doʊn əv taɪm fəɹ ɛni mɔɹ ɡeɪmz. aɪ kən hɛlp ðə pɛɹ ə ju. aɪ noʊ ðoʊz u kæn, ɛniweɪ, səm wɪmən u teɪk ɪn stʃɹeɪz. jə kən θæŋk lɔɹd mæt ðəɾ aɪm wɪlɪŋ tə teɪk jə tə ðɛm, bʌɾ aɪ mʌs noʊ. wɝ jə ɛvɝ ɪn ðə taʊɝ, əɹ ɑɹ jə waɪldɝz? ɪf jə wɝ ðɛɹ, wɝ jə pʊɾ aʊt, əɹ dɪd jə ɹʌn əweɪ? ðə tʃɹuθ. ðeɪ hændəl itʃ ɪn ə dɪfɹənt weɪ."

"The Amyrlin Seat and three Sitters couldn't convince me, child." Light, did she ever let anyone finish a sentence? "Now, I don't have time for any more games. I can help the pair of you. I know those who can, anyway, some women who take in strays. You can thank Lord Mat that I'm willing to take you to them, but I must know. Were you ever in the Tower, or are you wilders? If you were there, were you put out, or did you run away? The truth. They handle each in a different way."

ɪleɪn ʃɹʌɡd. ðeɪ hæd dʌn wʌt ðeɪ keɪm fɔɹ; ʃi wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɹɛɾi tə stɑp weɪstɪŋ taɪm ən ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð wʌt niɾəd duɪŋ nɛkst. "ɪf jə woʊn bi kənvɪnst, ðən ðæts ɔl ðəɹ ɪz tə ɪt. nɪneɪiv? ɪts pæs taɪm wi wɝ ɑn əɹ weɪ."

Elayne shrugged. They had done what they came for; she was more than ready to stop wasting time and get on with what needed doing next. "If you won't be convinced, then that's all there is to it. Nynaeve? It is past time we were on our way."

ðə floʊz ɝaʊn ði ɪnkipɝ vænɪʃt, ən ðə ɡloʊ ɝaʊnd nɪneɪiv tu, bʌt nɪneɪiv stʊd ðəɹ wɑtʃɪŋ ðə wʊmən wɛɹəli, hoʊpfəli. ʃi wɛɾ əɹ lɪps. "ju noʊ ə ɡɹup ʌv wɪmən u kən hɛlp ʌs?"

The flows around the innkeeper vanished, and the glow around Nynaeve too, but Nynaeve stood there watching the woman warily, hopefully. She wet her lips. "You know a group of women who can help us?"

"nɪneɪiv?" ɪleɪn sɛd. "wi doʊnt niɾ ɛni hɛlp. wəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɹɪmɛmbɝ?"

"Nynaeve?" Elayne said. "We don't need any help. We are Aes Sedai, remember?"

wɪð ə ɹaɪ ɡlæns ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən, mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən ɡeɪv əɹ skɝts ə ʃeɪk tə stʃɹeɪɾən əm ən bɛn tə smuð əɹ ɪkspoʊz pɛɾikoʊts. hɝ ɹil ətɛnʃən wɑz ɑn nɪneɪiv; ɪleɪn hæd nɛvɝ fɛl soʊ kəmplitli ʃʌntɪɾ əsaɪɾ ɪn əɹ laɪf. "aɪ noʊ ə fju wɪmən u teɪk ɪn ði əkeɪʒənəl waɪldɝ əɹ ɹʌnəweɪ əɹ wʊmən u feɪld əɹ tɛs fəɹ æksɛptɪɾ əɹ ðə ʃɔl. ðəɹ mʌs bi ət lis fɪfti ʌv ðɛm, ɔltəɡɛðɝ, ðoʊ ðə nʌmbɝ tʃeɪnʒəz. ðeɪ kən hɛlp jə faɪn ə laɪf wɪθaʊt ðə ɹɪsk ʌv ə ɹil sɪstɝ meɪkɪŋ jə wɪʃ ʃid dʒʌst skɪn jə ən bi dʌn. naʊ, doʊn laɪ tə mi. wɝ jə ɛvɝ ɪn ðə taʊɝ? ɪf juv ɹʌn əweɪ, jə maɪɾ əz wɛl dɪsaɪd tə ɡoʊ bæk. ðə taʊɝ mænədʒ tə faɪn moʊst ɹʌnəweɪz ivən dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, soʊ jə nidn θɪŋk ðɪs lɪɾəl bɑðɝ naʊ wɪl stɑp ðɛm. ɪn tʃɹuθ, maɪ sədʒɛstʃən ðən wəd bi tə ɡoʊ əkɹɔs ðə skwɛɹ ən θɹoʊ jɝsɛlf ɑn ə sɪstɝz mɝsi. ɪɾəl bi ə smɔl mɝsi, aɪm əfɹeɪd, bʌt jə kən bɪliv mi, ɪts mɔɹ ðən jəl faɪn ɪf ðeɪv tə dʒɹæɡ jə bæk. jə woʊn ivən θɪŋk ə soʊ mʌtʃ əz livɪŋ ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən æftɝ ðæt."

With a wry glance in her direction, Mistress Anan gave her skirts a shake to straighten them and bent to smooth her exposed petticoats. Her real attention was on Nynaeve; Elayne had never felt so completely shunted aside in her life. "I know a few women who take in the occasional wilder or runaway or woman who failed her test for Accepted or the shawl. There must be at least fifty of them, altogether, though the number changes. They can help you find a life without the risk of a real sister making you wish she'd just skin you and be done. Now, don't lie to me. Were you ever in the Tower? If you've run away, you might as well decide to go back. The Tower managed to find most runaways even during the War of the Hundred Years, so you needn't think this little bother now will stop them. In truth, my suggestion then would be to go across the square and throw yourself on a sister's mercy. It will be a small mercy, I'm afraid, but you can believe me, it's more than you'll find if they have to drag you back. You won't even think of so much as leaving the Tower grounds without permission after that."

nɪneɪiv dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "wi wɝ toʊl tə liv ðə taʊɝ, mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən. əl swɛɹ tə ðət haʊɛvɝ jə æsk."

Nynaeve drew a deep breath. "We were told to leave the Tower, Mistress Anan. I will swear to that however you ask."

ɪleɪn stɛɹɾ ɪn dɪsbɪlif. "nɪneɪiv, wʌɾ ɑɹ jə seɪɪŋ? mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən, wəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Elayne stared in disbelief. "Nynaeve, what are you saying? Mistress Anan, we are Aes Sedai."

ði ɑnən wʊmən læft. "tʃaɪld, lemi tɔk wɪð nɪneɪiv, hu ət list simz oʊld ɪnʌf tə hæv sɛns. jə tɛl ðə sɝkəl ðæt, ən ðəl nɑt teɪk ɪt kaɪnli. ðeɪ woʊn kɛɹ jə kən tʃænəl; ðeɪ kæn, tu, ən ðəl smæk jəɹ bɑɾəm əɹ tɔs jə aʊɾ ɪn ðə stʃɹiɾ ɑn jəɹ noʊz ɪf jə pleɪ ðə ful."

The Anan woman laughed. "Child, let me talk with Nynaeve, who at least seems old enough to have sense. You tell the Circle that, and they will not take it kindly. They won't care you can channel; they can, too, and they'll smack your bottom or toss you out in the street on your nose if you play the fool."

"hu ɪz ðɪs sɝkəl?" ɪleɪn dɪmændəd. "wi ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. jə kʌm əkɹɔs tə ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, ən jəl si."

"Who is this Circle?" Elayne demanded. "We are Aes Sedai. You come across to the Tarasin Palace, and you will see."

"aɪl kip əɹ ɪn hænd," nɪneɪiv hæd ðə ɡɔl tə seɪ, ɔl ðə waɪl fɹaʊnɪŋ ən ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ əɾ ɪleɪn əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ðə wʌn u hæd ɡɔn mæd.

"I'll keep her in hand," Nynaeve had the gall to say, all the while frowning and grimacing at Elayne as if she were the one who had gone mad.

ði ɑnən wʊmən mɪɹli nɑɾəd. "ɡʊd. naʊ teɪk ɔf ðoʊz ɹɪŋz ən pʊɾ əm əweɪ. ðə sɝkəl dʌzn əlaʊ ðət sɔɹɾ ə pɹitɛndɪŋ. ðəl əv əm mɛltəd daʊn tə ɡɪv jə ə stɑɹt. ðoʊ baɪ ðə lʊk ə jəɹ dʒɹɛsəz, juv kɔɪn. ɪf jə stoʊl ɪt, doʊn lɛt ɹin noʊ. wʌn ə ðə fɝst ɹulz jəl əv tə lɝn ɪz, doʊn stil ivən ɪf jə ɑɹ stɑɹvɪŋ. ðeɪ doʊnt wɑnə dʒɹɔ ətɛnʃən."

The Anan woman merely nodded. "Good. Now take off those rings and put them away. The Circle doesn't allow that sort of pretending. They'll have them melted down to give you a start. Though by the look of your dresses, you have coin. If you stole it, don't let Reanne know. One of the first rules you'll have to learn is, don't steal even if you are starving. They don't want to draw attention."

ɪleɪn meɪɾ ə fɪst ən θɹʌst ɪt bɪhaɪn əɹ bæk. ən wɑtʃt nɪneɪiv mikli slɪp əɹ ɹɪŋ ɔf ən tʌk ɪɾ ɪndə hɝ bɛl paʊtʃ. nɪneɪiv, hu haʊld ɛvɹi taɪm mɛɝɪlɪl əɹ æɾɪliz əɹ ɛni ʌv əm fɝɡɑt ʃi wɑz ə fʊl sɪstɝ!

Elayne made a fist and thrust it behind her back. And watched Nynaeve meekly slip her ring off and tuck it into her belt pouch. Nynaeve, who howled every time Merilille or Adeleas or any of them forgot she was a full sister!

"tʃɹʌs mi, ɪleɪn," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"Trust me, Elayne," Nynaeve said.

wɪtʃ ɪleɪn wʊɾə hæɾ ən iziɝ taɪm ʌv ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɛni noʊʃən wʌt ðə wʊmən wɑz ʌp tə. stɪl, ʃi dɪd tʃɹʌs hɝ. moʊsli. "ə smɔl sækɹəfaɪs," ʃi mʌɾɝd. ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd ɡoʊ wɪθaʊt ðɛɹ ɹɪŋz wən ðə niɾ ɝoʊz, ən ʃi hæd tu, waɪl pæsɪŋ fəɹ ə sɪstɝ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hɝz baɪ ɹaɪt, naʊ. ɹimuvɪŋ ðət bæn ʌv ɡoʊld ɔlmoʊs hɝt fɪzɪkəli.

Which Elayne would have had an easier time of if she had any notion what the woman was up to. Still, she did trust her. Mostly. "A small sacrifice," she muttered. Aes Sedai did go without their rings when the need arose, and she had too, while passing for a sister, but it was hers by right, now. Removing that band of gold almost hurt physically.

"tɔk tə jəɹ fɹɛnd, tʃaɪld," ði ɑnən wʊmən toʊl nɪneɪiv ɪmpeɪʃənli. "ɹin kɔɹli woʊn pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɔl ðɪs sʌlki paʊɾɪŋ, ən ɪf jə meɪk mi weɪs maɪ mɔɹnɪŋ fəɹ nʌθɪŋ. . . . kʌm əlɔŋ, kʌm əlɔŋ. ɪts lʌki fəɹ jə aɪ laɪk lɔɹd mæt."

"Talk to your friend, child," the Anan woman told Nynaeve impatiently. "Reanne Corly won't put up with all this sulky pouting, and if you make me waste my morning for nothing. . . . Come along, come along. It's lucky for you I like Lord Mat."

ɪleɪn hɛld ɑn tə kul kəmpoʊʒɝ baɪ ə fɪŋɡɝneɪl. sʌlki paʊɾɪŋ? sʌlki paʊɾɪŋ? wən ʃi hæd ðə tʃæns, ʃi wɑz gɑnə kɪk nɪneɪiv wɛɹ ɪt hɝt!

Elayne held on to cool composure by a fingernail. Sulky pouting? Sulky pouting? When she had the chance, she was going to kick Nynaeve where it hurt!


tʃæptɝ twɛntiθɹi


CHAPTER 23

nɛks dɔɹ tə ə wivɝ


Next Door to a Weaver

nɪneɪiv dɪd wɑnə tɔk tə ɪleɪn, əweɪ fɹəm ði ɪnkipɝz ɪɹz, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt faɪn ðə tʃæns ɹaɪɾ əweɪ. ðə wʊmən mɑɹtʃt əm aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum duɪŋ ə faɪn ɪməteɪʃən ʌv ə ɡɑɹɾ ɑn pɹɪznɝz, hɝ stoʊni ɪmpeɪʃəns ʌndəntɪd baɪ ðə wɛɹi lʊk ʃi kæst ət mæts dɔɹ. ət ðə bæk ə ði ɪn ə sɛɾ ʌv ənɹeɪl stoʊn stɛps lɛd daʊn ɪndə ə lɑɹdʒ hɑt kɪtʃən fʊl ə beɪkɪŋ smɛlz, wɛɹ ðə ɹaʊndəst wʊmən nɪneɪiv hæɾ ɛvɝ sin wɑz wildɪŋ ə lɑɹdʒ wʊɾən spun laɪk ə sɛptɝ, dɝɛktɪŋ θɹi ʌðɝz ɪn slaɪɾɪŋ kɹʌsti bɹaʊn loʊvz fɹəm ði ʌvənz ən ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ əm wɪð ɹoʊlz ə peɪl doʊ. ə lɑɹdʒ pɑɾ ə ðə kɔɹs waɪt pɔɹədʒ ðət wɑz iɾən fəɹ bɹɛkfəs hɪɹəbaʊt bʌbəl dʒɛnli ɑn wʌn ə ðə waɪt-taɪl stoʊvz.

Nynaeve did want to talk to Elayne, away from the innkeeper's ears, but she did not find the chance right away. The woman marched them out of the room doing a fine imitation of a guard on prisoners, her stony impatience undented by the wary look she cast at Mat's door. At the back of the inn a set of unrailed stone steps led down into a large hot kitchen full of baking smells, where the roundest woman Nynaeve had ever seen was wielding a large wooden spoon like a scepter, directing three others in sliding crusty brown loaves from the ovens and replacing them with rolls of pale dough. A large pot of the coarse white porridge that was eaten for breakfast hereabout bubbled gently on one of the white-tiled stoves.

"inɪd," mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən ədʒɹɛs ðə ɹaʊnd wʊmən, "aɪ æm ɡoʊɪŋ aʊt fəɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl. aɪ nid tə teɪk ðiz tu tʃɪlʒɹən tə sʌmwʌn u hæz taɪm tə mʌðɝ əm pɹɑpɝli."

"Enid," Mistress Anan addressed the round woman, "I am going out for a little while. I need to take these two children to someone who has time to mother them properly."

waɪpɪŋ bɹɔd, flaʊɝi hænz ɑn ə pis ʌv waɪt taʊəlɪŋ, inɪd stʌɾid nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn dɪsəpɹuvɪŋli. ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ wɑz ɹaʊnd, hɝ swɛɾi ɑləv-skɪn feɪs, hɝ dɑɹk aɪz, ɔl ə hɝ; ʃi simd meɪɾ ə vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ bɔlz stʌft ɪndə ə dʒɹɛs. ðə mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf ʃi wɔɹ hæŋɪŋ aʊtsaɪɾ əɹ snoʊi eɪpɹən spɑɹkəld wɪð ə fʊl dʌzən stoʊnz. "ɪz ðɪs ðə pɛɹ ə bɑɹkɝz kɛɹə wɑz tʃæɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt, mɪstʃɹəs? fænsi bɪts fəɹ ðə jʌŋ lɔɹdz teɪst, aɪɾ əv sɛd. hi laɪks əm wɪð ə bɪɾ ʌv wɪɡəl." ðəɾ əmjuz hɝ, baɪ hɝ toʊn. ði ɪnkipɝ ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪn vɛkseɪʃən. "aɪ toʊl ðət ɡɝl tə hoʊld əɹ tʌŋ. aɪ woʊn lɛt ðət sɔɹɾ ə ɹumɝ tʌtʃ ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən. ɹimaɪn kɛɹə fəɹ mi, inɪd, ən juz jəɹ spun tə ɡɛɾ əɹ ətɛnʃən, ɪf nid bi." ðə ɡeɪz ʃi tɝn ɑn nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɑz soʊ dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋ ðət nɪneɪiv nɪɹli ɡæspt. "wʊɾ ɛniwʌn wɪð hæf ðɛɹ wɪts bɪliv ðiz tu wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ? spɛn ɔl ðɛɹ kɔɪn ɑn dʒɹɛsəz tə ɪmpɹɛs ðə mæn, ən naʊ ðeɪd stɑɹv ənlɛs ðeɪ smaɪl fəɹ hɪm. ɛɛs sədaɪ!" ɡɪvɪŋ inɪd noʊ tʃæns tə ænsɝ, ʃi siz nɪneɪivz ɪɹ wɪð əɹ ɹaɪt hænd, ɪleɪnz wɪð əɹ lɛft, ən ɪn θɹi kwɪk stɛps hæɾ əm aʊɾ ɪndə ðə steɪbliɑɹd.

Wiping broad, floury hands on a piece of white toweling, Enid studied Nynaeve and Elayne disapprovingly. Everything about her was round, her sweaty olive-skinned face, her dark eyes, all of her; she seemed made of very large balls stuffed into a dress. The marriage knife she wore hanging outside her snowy apron sparkled with a full dozen stones. "Is this the pair of barkers Caira was chattering about, Mistress? Fancy bits for the young Lord's taste, I'd have said. He likes them with a bit of wiggle." That amused her, by her tone. The innkeeper shook her head in vexation. "I told that girl to hold her tongue. I won't let that sort of rumor touch The Wandering Woman. Remind Caira for me, Enid, and use your spoon to get her attention, if need be." The gaze she turned on Nynaeve and Elayne was so disparaging that Nynaeve nearly gasped. "Would anyone with half their wits believe these two were Aes Sedai? Spent all their coin on dresses to impress the man, and now they'd starve unless they smile for him. Aes Sedai!" Giving Enid no chance to answer, she seized Nynaeve's ear with her right hand, Elayne's with her left, and in three quick steps had them out into the stableyard.

ðət wɑz əz lɔŋ əz nɪneɪivz ʃɑk hɛld. ðən ʃi pʊl fɹi, əɹ tʃɹaɪd tə, kəz ðə wʊmən lɛt ɡoʊ ət ðə seɪm ɪnstən ən ʃi stʌmbəl hæf ə dʌzən peɪsɪz, ɡlɛɹɪŋ ɪndɪɡnənli. ʃi hæd nɑt bɑɹɡən fəɹ biɪŋ dʒɹæɡd əbaʊt. ɪleɪnz tʃɪn ɹoʊz, hɝ blu aɪz soʊ koʊl nɪneɪiv wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn sɝpɹaɪz tə si fɹɔs fɔɹmɪŋ ɪn əɹ kɝlz.

That was as long as Nynaeve's shock held. Then she pulled free, or tried to, because the woman let go at the same instant and she stumbled half a dozen paces, glaring indignantly. She had not bargained for being dragged about. Elayne's chin rose, her blue eyes so cold Nynaeve would not have been surprised to see frost forming in her curls.

hænz ɑn hɪps, mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən sim nɑt tə noʊɾəs. əɹ pɝhæps ʃi sɪmpli dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. "aɪ kən hoʊp noʊ wʌn ɪn ðəɹ bɪlivz kɛɹə æftɝ ðæt," ʃi sɛd kɑmli. "ɪf aɪ cʊɾə bɪn ʃʊɹ jə hæd ðə wɪts tə kip jəɹ maʊðz ʃʌt, aɪɾ əv sɛɾ ən dʌn mɔɹ, ən meɪd sɝɾən." ʃi wɑz kɑm, bʌt nɑɾ əɾ ɔl plɛzən əɹ sɑft; ðeɪ hæd tʃɹʌbəld əɹ mɔɹnɪŋ. "naʊ fɑloʊ mi ən doʊnt ɡɛt lɔst. əɹ ɪf jə du, də nɑt ʃoʊ jəɹ feɪsəz ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ maɪ ɪn əɡɛn, əɹ əl sɛn sʌmbɑɾi tə ðə pæləs tə tɛl mɛɝɪlɪl ən tɛslɪn. ðeɪ ɑɹ tu ʌv ðə ɹil sɪstɝz, ən ðəl pɹɑbli ɹɪp jə itʃ daʊn ðə mɪɾəl ən ʃɛɹ jə aʊt."

Hands on hips, Mistress Anan seemed not to notice. Or perhaps she simply did not care. "I can hope no one in there believes Caira after that," she said calmly. "If I could have been sure you had the wits to keep your mouths shut, I'd have said and done more, and made certain." She was calm, but not at all pleasant or soft; they had troubled her morning. "Now follow me and don't get lost. Or if you do, do not show your faces anywhere near my inn again, or I'll send somebody to the palace to tell Merilille and Teslyn. They are two of the real sisters, and they'll probably rip you each down the middle and share you out."

ɪleɪn ʃɪftəɾ əɹ ɡeɪz fɹəm ði ɪnkipɝ tə nɪneɪiv. nɑɾ ə ɡlɛɹ, əɹ ə fɹaʊn, jɛɾ ə vɛɹi minɪŋ lʊk dʒʌs ðə seɪm. nɪneɪiv wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz gɑnə bi eɪbəl tə ɡoʊ θɹu wɪð ðɪs. ðə θɔɾ ə mæt kənvɪns hɝ; ɛni tʃæns wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən ðæt.

Elayne shifted her gaze from the innkeeper to Nynaeve. Not a glare, or a frown, yet a very meaning look just the same. Nynaeve wondered whether she was going to be able to go through with this. The thought of Mat convinced her; any chance was better than that.

"wi woʊn luz aʊɝsɛlvz, mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən," ʃi sɛd, stʃɹaɪvɪŋ fəɹ miknəs. ʃi θɔt ʃi dɪd fɛɹli wɛl, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ haʊ fɔɹən miknəs wɑz tə hɝ. "θæŋk jə fəɹ hɛlpɪŋ ʌs." smaɪlɪŋ ət ði ɪnkipɝ, ʃi dɪɾ əɹ bɛs tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɪleɪn, huz stɛɹ bɪkeɪm mɔɹ minɪŋfəl, hɑɹɾ əz ðət wɑz tə kɹɛɾət. lʊks əɹ noʊ lʊks, ʃi hæd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə wʊmən kəntɪnjud tə θɪŋk əm wɝθ ðə tʃɹʌbəl. "wi ɑɹ tʃɹuli ɡɹeɪtfəl, mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən."

"We won't lose ourselves, Mistress Anan," she said, striving for meekness. She thought she did fairly well, considering how foreign meekness was to her. "Thank you for helping us." Smiling at the innkeeper, she did her best to ignore Elayne, whose stare became more meaningful, hard as that was to credit. Looks or no looks, she had to make sure the woman continued to think them worth the trouble. "We are truly grateful, Mistress Anan."

mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən aɪɾ əɹ əskæns, ðən snɪft ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. wən ðɪs wɑz dʌn, nɪneɪiv dɪsaɪɾɪd, ʃi wɑz gɑnə dʒɹæɡ ði ɪn-kipɝ tə ðə pæləs, ɪf nid bi, ən meɪk ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz æknɑlɪdʒ əɹ ɪn mɪstʃɹəs ɑnənz pɹɛzəns.

Mistress Anan eyed her askance, then sniffed and shook her head. When this was done, Nynaeve decided, she was going to drag the inn-keeper to the palace, if need be, and make the other sisters acknowledge her in Mistress Anan's presence.

ðɪs ɝli, ðə steɪbliɑɹd wɑz ɛmpti seɪv fəɹ ə loʊn bɔɪ ʌv tɛn əɹ twɛlv wɪð ə bʌkəɾ ən ə sɪv u spɹɪŋkəld wɔɾɝ tə dæmpən ðə hɑɹd-pækt ɡɹaʊn əɡɛns dʌst. ðə waɪt plæstɝd steɪbəlz dɔɹz wɝ waɪɾ oʊpən, ən ə bæɹoʊ sæɾ ɪn fɹʌnt wɪð ə dʌŋ-fɔɹk ɹɛstɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪt. saʊnz laɪk ə hjudʒ fɹɑɡ biɪŋ stɛpt ɑn floʊɾəd aʊt; nɪneɪiv dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt wɑz ə mæn sɪŋɪŋ. wəd ðeɪv tə ɹaɪd tə ɹitʃ ðɛɹ dɛstəneɪʃən? ivən ə ʃɔɹt dʒɝni wəd nɑt bi plɛzənt; wɔkɪŋ oʊnli əkɹɔs ðə skwɛɹ ən minɪŋ tə bi bæk bɪfɔɹ ðə sʌn ɹoʊz vɛɹi haɪ, ðeɪ hæd bɹɔt niðɝ hæts nɔɹ pɛɹɑsəlz nɔɹ hʊɾɪd kloʊks.

This early, the stableyard was empty save for a lone boy of ten or twelve with a bucket and a sieve who sprinkled water to dampen the hard-packed ground against dust. The white plastered stable's doors were wide open, and a barrow sat in front with a dung-fork resting across it. Sounds like a huge frog being stepped on floated out; Nynaeve decided it was a man singing. Would they have to ride to reach their destination? Even a short journey would not be pleasant; walking only across the square and meaning to be back before the sun rose very high, they had brought neither hats nor parasols nor hooded cloaks.

mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən lɛɾ əm θɹu ðə steɪbliɑɹd, haʊɛvɝ, daʊn ə nɛɹoʊ æliweɪ bɪtwin ðə steɪbəl ən ə haɪ wɔl ðət hæd dʒɹaʊt-bɪdʒɹæɡəl tʃɹiz poʊkɪŋ əbʌv ðə tɑp. sʌmwʌnz ɡɑɹɾən, noʊ daʊt. ə smɔl ɡeɪɾ ət ði ɛn lɛɾ ɪndə ə dʌsti æli soʊ kɹæmp dɔn hæd nɑt kəmplitli ɹitʃt ɪt jɛt.

Mistress Anan led them through the stableyard, however, down a narrow alleyway between the stable and a high wall that had drought-bedraggled trees poking above the top. Someone's garden, no doubt. A small gate at the end let into a dusty alley so cramped dawn had not completely reached it yet.

"ju tʃɪlʒɹən kip ʌp naʊ, maɪn ju," ði ɪnkipɝ toʊl ðɛm, stɑɹɾɪŋ əweɪ daʊn ðə dɪm æli. "ju luz jʊɹsɛlvz, ən aɪ vaʊ əl ɡoʊ tə ðə pæləs maɪsɛlf."

"You children keep up now, mind you," the innkeeper told them, starting away down the dim alley. "You lose yourselves, and I vow I'll go to the palace myself."

nɪneɪiv tʊk ə ɡɹɪp ɑn əɹ bɹeɪd wɪð boʊθ hænz əz ʃi fɑloʊd, tə kip əm fɹəm ði ɑnən wʊmənz θɹoʊt. haʊ ʃi jɝn fəɹ əɹ fɝst ɡɹeɪ hɛɹz. fɝs ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðən ðə si foʊk - laɪt, ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðɛm! - ən naʊ ən ɪnkipɝ! noʊ wʌn tʊk jə sɪɹiəsli əntɪl jə hæɾ ət list ə lɪɾəl ɡɹeɪ; ivən ən ɛɛs sədaɪz eɪdʒləs feɪs kəd nɑt pɑsəbli də əz wɛl ɪn əɹ ɛstəmeɪʃən.

Nynaeve took a grip on her braid with both hands as she followed, to keep them from the Anan woman's throat. How she yearned for her first gray hairs. First the other Aes Sedai, then the Sea Folk - Light, she did not want to think about them! - and now an innkeeper! No one took you seriously until you had at least a little gray; even an Aes Sedai's ageless face could not possibly do as well in her estimation.

ɪleɪn wɑz lɪftɪŋ əɹ skɝts aʊɾ ə ðə dʌst, ðoʊ ðɛɹ slɪpɝz stɪl kɪkt ʌp lɪɾəl pʌfs ðət sɛɾəld ɑn ðə hɛmz ə ðɛɹ dʒɹɛsəz. "lɛt mi si," ɪleɪn sɛd sɔfli, lʊkɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd. sɔfli, bʌt kuli. vɛɹi kuli, ɪn fækt. ʃi hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv slæʃɪŋ sʌmwʌn tə tæɾɝz wɪθaʊt lɛɾɪŋ əɹ toʊn hit ðət nɪneɪiv ədmaɪɝd. juʒəwəli. naʊ, ɪt dʒʌs meɪɾ əɹ wɑnə bɑks ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz ɪɹz. "wi kəd bi bæk ɪn ðə pæləs dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ blubɛɹi ti ən ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ðə bɹizɪz waɪl wi weɪɾəd fəɹ mæstɝ kɔθən tə muv ɪz bɪlɔŋɪŋz. pɝhæps eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪt maɪt ɹɪtɝn wɪð sʌmθɪŋ jusfəl. wi kəd faɪnəli bi sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪɡzækli wʌt tə də wɪð ðə mæn. də wi sɪmpli fɑloʊ hɪm əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹits ə ðə ɹæhəɾ ən si wʌt hæpənz, əɹ teɪk ɪm ɪndə bɪldɪŋz ðət lʊk laɪkli, əɹ lɛɾ ɪm tʃuz? ðəɹ mʌs bi ə hʌnʒɹəd wɝθwaɪl jusəz fəɹ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ɪnkluɾɪŋ dəsaɪɾɪŋ wɛðɝ ɪts seɪf tə ɡoʊ bæk tə ɛɡwin - ɛvɝ - æftɝ ðət bɑɹɡən ðə si foʊk ɹʌŋ aʊɾ ʌv ʌs. wɪv tə tɔk əbaʊt ðət sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ; ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɪt woʊn hɛlp. ɪnstɛd, wəɹ ɔf ɑn ə wɔk ə hu noʊz wʌt lɛŋθ, skwɪntɪŋ ɪndə ðə sʌn ðə hoʊl weɪ ɪf wi kip ɑn əz wi ɑɹ, tə vɪzət wɪmən u fid ɹʌnəweɪz fɹəm ðə taʊɝ. maɪsɛlf, aɪ doʊn əv mʌtʃ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn kætʃɪŋ ɹʌnəweɪz ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ əɹ ɛni mɔɹnɪŋ. bʌɾ aɪm ʃʊɹ jə kən ɪkspleɪn ɪt soʊ əl ʌndɝstænd. aɪ də soʊ wɑnə ʌndɝstænd, nɪneɪiv. aɪ wəd heɪt tə θɪŋk aɪm gɑnə kɪk jə ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə mɔl hɛɹə fəɹ nʌθɪŋ."

Elayne was lifting her skirts out of the dust, though their slippers still kicked up little puffs that settled on the hems of their dresses. "Let me see," Elayne said softly, looking straight ahead. Softly, but coolly. Very coolly, in fact. She had a way of slashing someone to tatters without letting her tone heat that Nynaeve admired. Usually. Now, it just made her want to box the other woman's ears. "We could be back in the palace drinking blueberry tea and enjoying the breezes while we waited for Master Cauthon to move his belongings. Perhaps Aviendha and Birgitte might return with something useful. We could finally be settling exactly what to do with the man. Do we simply follow him along the streets of the Rahad and see what happens, or take him into buildings that look likely, or let him choose? There must be a hundred worthwhile uses for this morning, including deciding whether it's safe to go back to Egwene - ever - after that bargain the Sea Folk wrung out of us. We have to talk about that sooner or later; ignoring it won't help. Instead, we are off on a walk of who knows what length, squinting into the sun the whole way if we keep on as we are, to visit women who feed runaways from the Tower. Myself, I don't have much interest in catching runaways this morning or any morning. But I'm sure you can explain it so I will understand. I do so want to understand, Nynaeve. I would hate to think I'm going to kick you the length of the Mol Hara for nothing."

nɪneɪivz aɪbɹaʊz dʒɹu daʊn. kɪk hɝ? ɪleɪn ɹɪli wɑz bɪkʌmɪŋ vaɪələnt, spɛndɪŋ soʊ mʌtʃ taɪm wɪð eɪvinhə. sʌmwʌn ɔt tə slæp səm sɛns ɪndə ðət pɛɹ. "ðə sʌn ɪzən haɪ ɪnʌf tə meɪk əs skwɪn jɛt," ʃi mʌɾɝd. ɪt wəd bi sun, ənfɔɹtʃənətli. "θɪŋk, ɪleɪn. fɪfti wɪmən u kən tʃænəl, hɛlpɪŋ waɪldɝz ən wɪmən pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ." ʃi fɛlt ɡɪlti səmtaɪmz, juzɪŋ ðə tɝm waɪldɝz; ɪn ðə maʊðz ə moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪt wɑz ən ɪnsəlt, bʌt ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə meɪk əm spik ɪɾ əz ə bædʒ ə pɹaɪd wʌn deɪ. "ænd ʃi kɔld əm 'ðə sɝkəl.' ðət dʌzn saʊn laɪk ə fju fɹɛnz tə mi. ɪt saʊnz ɔɹɡənaɪzd." ði æli miændɝd bɪtwin haɪ wɔlz ən ðə bæks ə bɪldɪŋz, mɛni ʃoʊɪŋ bɛɹ bɹɪk θɹu ðə plæstɝ, bɪtwin pæləs ɡɑɹɾənz ən ʃɑps wɛɹ ən oʊpən bæk dɔɹ ɹɪvil sɪlvɝsmɪθs əɹ teɪlɝz əɹ wʊdkɑɹvɝz ət wɝk. ɛvɹi soʊ ɔfən mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən lʊkt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðeɪ stɪl fɑloʊd. nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv əɹ smaɪlz ən nɑdz ʃi hoʊpt wəd kənveɪ iɡɝnəs.

Nynaeve's eyebrows drew down. Kick her? Elayne really was becoming violent, spending so much time with Aviendha. Someone ought to slap some sense into that pair. "The sun isn't high enough to make us squint yet," she muttered. It would be soon, unfortunately. "Think, Elayne. Fifty women who can channel, helping wilders and women put out of the Tower." She felt guilty sometimes, using the term wilders; in the mouths of most Aes Sedai, it was an insult, but she intended to make them speak it as a badge of pride one day. "And she called them 'the Circle.' That doesn't sound like a few friends to me. It sounds organized." The alley meandered between high walls and the backs of buildings, many showing bare brick through the plaster, between palace gardens and shops where an open back door revealed silversmiths or tailors or woodcarvers at work. Every so often Mistress Anan looked over her shoulder to make sure they still followed. Nynaeve gave her smiles and nods she hoped would convey eagerness.

"nɪneɪiv, ɪf tu wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl meɪɾ ə səsaɪəɾi, ðə taʊɝ wəd fɔl ɑn əm laɪk ə pæk ʌv wʊlvz. haʊ wəd mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən noʊ wɛðɝ ðeɪ kən əɹ nɑt, ɛniweɪ? wɪmən u kən ən ɑɹən ɛɛs sədaɪ də nɑt ɡoʊ əbaʊt meɪkɪŋ ə ʃoʊ ʌv ðɛmsɛlvz, jə noʊ. nɑt fəɹ vɛɹi lɔŋ, ɛniweɪ. ɪn ɛni keɪs, aɪ kæn si ɪt meɪks ə dɪfɝəns. ɛɡwin maɪt wɑnə bɹɪŋ ɛvɹi wʊmən u kən tʃænəl ɪndə ðə taʊɝ sʌmhaʊ, bʌt ðəɾ ɪz nɑt wʌt wəɹ əbaʊt hɪɹ." ðə fɹɔsti peɪʃəns ɪn ɪleɪnz vɔɪs taɪɾənd nɪneɪivz hænz ɑn əɹ bɹeɪd. haʊ kəd ðə wʊmən bi soʊ dɛns? ʃi bɛɹɾ əɹ tiθ əɡɛn fəɹ mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən, ən mænədʒ nɑt tə skaʊl ət ði ɪnkipɝz bæk wən əɹ hɛd tɝn fɔɹwɝd wʌns mɔɹ.

"Nynaeve, if two women who could channel made a society, the Tower would fall on them like a pack of wolves. How would Mistress Anan know whether they can or not, anyway? Women who can and aren't Aes Sedai do not go about making a show of themselves, you know. Not for very long, anyway. In any case, I can't see it makes a difference. Egwene might want to bring every woman who can channel into the Tower somehow, but that is not what we are about here." The frosty patience in Elayne's voice tightened Nynaeve's hands on her braid. How could the woman be so dense? She bared her teeth again for Mistress Anan, and managed not to scowl at the innkeeper's back when her head turned forward once more.

"fɪfti wɪmən ɪzən tu," nɪneɪiv wɪspɝd fɪɹsli. ðeɪ kəd tʃænəl; ðeɪ mʌs bi eɪbəl tə; ɛvɹiθɪŋ hɪnʒd ɑn ðæt. "ɪts bɪɑn ɹizən ðət ðɪs sɝkəl kən bi ɪn ðə seɪm sɪɾi wɪð ə stɔɹɹum pæk fʊl ʌv æŋɡɹil ən sətʃ wɪθaʊɾ ət lis noʊɪŋ ʌv ɪt. ən ɪf ðeɪ də . . ." ʃi kəd nɑt kip sæɾəsfækʃən fɹəm hʌniɪŋ əɹ vɔɪs. ". . . wɪl əv faʊn ðə boʊl wɪθaʊt mæstɝ meɪtʃɹim kɔθən. wi kən fɝɡɛt ðoʊz əbsɝd pɹɑməsəz."

"Fifty women isn't two," Nynaeve whispered fiercely. They could channel; they must be able to; everything hinged on that. "It's beyond reason that this Circle can be in the same city with a storeroom packed full of angreal and such without at least knowing of it. And if they do . . ." She could not keep satisfaction from honeying her voice. ". . . we'll have found the Bowl without Master Matrim Cauthon. We can forget those absurd promises."

"ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ə bɹaɪb, nɪneɪiv," ɪleɪn sɛɾ æbsənli. "aɪ wɪl kip ðɛm, ən soʊ wɪl ju, ɪf juv ɛni ɑnɝ, ən aɪ noʊ jə du." ʃi wɑz spɛndɪŋ ɪntaɪɝli tu mʌtʃ taɪm wɪð eɪvinhə. nɪneɪiv wɪʃt ʃi nu waɪ ɪleɪn hæd bɪɡʌn θɪŋkɪŋ ðeɪ ɔl hæd tə fɑloʊ ðɪs pɹɪpɑstɝəs il dʒi-wʌtɛvɝ-ɪt-wɑz.

"They were not a bribe, Nynaeve," Elayne said absently. "I will keep them, and so will you, if you have any honor, and I know you do." She was spending entirely too much time with Aviendha. Nynaeve wished she knew why Elayne had begun thinking they all had to follow this preposterous Aiel ji-whatever-it-was.

ɪleɪn bɪɾ əɹ ʌndɝlɪp, fɹaʊnɪŋ. ɔl ðəɾ aɪsaɪnəs sim tə hæv vænɪʃt; ʃi wɑz hɝsɛlf əɡɛn, əpɛɹənli. faɪnəli ʃi sɛd, "wi wəd nɛvɝ əv ɡɔn tə ði ɪn wɪθaʊt mæstɝ kɔθən, soʊ wid nɛvɝ əv mɛt ðə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən əɹ bɪn teɪkən tə ðɪs sɝkəl. soʊ ɪf ðə sɝkəl dʌz lɛɾ əs tə ðə boʊl, wɪv tə seɪ hi wɑz ðə ɹut kɑz."

Elayne bit her underlip, frowning. All that iciness seemed to have vanished; she was herself again, apparently. Finally she said, "We would never have gone to the inn without Master Cauthon, so we'd never have met the remarkable Mistress Anan or been taken to this Circle. So if the Circle does lead us to the Bowl, we have to say he was the root cause."

mæt kɔθən; hɪz neɪm bɔɪld ɪn əɹ hɛd. nɪneɪiv stʌmbəld oʊvɝ əɹ oʊn fiɾ ən lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv əɹ bɹeɪd tə lɪft əɹ skɝts. ði æli wɑz hɑɹdli əz smuð əz ə peɪv skwɛɹ mʌtʃ lɛs ə pæləs flɔɹ. ət taɪmz, ɪleɪn ɪn ə teɪkɪŋ wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən ɪleɪn θɪŋkɪŋ klɪɹli. "ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "aɪl 'ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl' hɝ tɪl əɹ aɪz kɹɔs. noʊ wʌn əz ɛvɝ tʃɹiɾəd əs ðɪs weɪ, ɪleɪn, nɑɾ ivən pipəl u daʊɾɪd, nɑɾ ivən ðə si foʊk. moʊs pipəl wəd stɛp wɛɹi ɪf ə tɛn-jɪɹ-oʊl sɛd ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Mat Cauthon; his name boiled in her head. Nynaeve stumbled over her own feet and let go of her braid to lift her skirts. The alley was hardly as smooth as a paved square much less a palace floor. At times, Elayne in a taking was better than Elayne thinking clearly. "Remarkable," she muttered. "I'll 'remarkable' her till her eyes cross. No one has ever treated us this way, Elayne, not even people who doubted, not even the Sea Folk. Most people would step wary if a ten-year-old said she was Aes Sedai."

"moʊs pipəl doʊn ɹɪli noʊ wʌɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪz feɪs lʊks laɪk, nɪneɪiv. aɪ θɪŋk ʃi wɛn tə ðə taʊɝ wʌns; ʃi noʊz θɪŋz ʃi kʊdnt, ʌðɝwaɪz."

"Most people don't really know what an Aes Sedai's face looks like, Nynaeve. I think she went to the Tower once; she knows things she couldn't, otherwise."

nɪneɪiv snɔɹɾɪd, ɡlaʊɝɪŋ ət ðə bæk ə ðə wʊmən stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əhɛd. sɛɾəl ɑnən maɪɾ əv bɪn tə ðə taʊɝ tɛn taɪmz, ə hʌnʒɹəd, bʌt ʃi wɑz gɑnə æknɑlɪdʒ nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə əz ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən əpɑlədʒaɪz. ən lɝn wʌɾ ɪt wɑz laɪk tə bi hɔld əbaʊt baɪ hɝ ɪɹ, tu! mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən ɡlæns bæk, ən nɪneɪiv flæʃt əɹ ə ɹɪdʒəd smaɪl, nɑɾəd əz ɪf əɹ nɛk wɑz ə hɪnʒ. "ɪleɪn? ɪf ðiz wɪmən də noʊ wɛɹ ðə boʊl ɪz. . . . wi doʊn əv tə tɛl mæt haʊ wi faʊn ɪt." ðət wɑz nɑt kwaɪɾ ə kwɛstʃən.

Nynaeve snorted, glowering at the back of the woman striding ahead. Setalle Anan might have been to the Tower ten times, a hundred, but she was going to acknowledge Nynaeve al'Meara as Aes Sedai. And apologize. And learn what it was like to be hauled about by her ear, too! Mistress Anan glanced back, and Nynaeve flashed her a rigid smile, nodded as if her neck was a hinge. "Elayne? If these women do know where the Bowl is. . . . We don't have to tell Mat how we found it." That was not quite a question.

"aɪ də nɑt si waɪ," ɪleɪn ɹɪplaɪd, ðən dæʃt ɔl əɹ hoʊps baɪ æɾɪŋ, "bʌɾ əl əv tə æsk eɪvinhə tə bi ʃʊɹ."

"I do not see why," Elayne replied, then dashed all her hopes by adding, "But I'll have to ask Aviendha to be sure."

ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt θɔt ði ɑnən wʊmən maɪɾ əbændən əm ɑn ðə spɑt, nɪneɪiv wəɾ əv skɹimd.

If she had not thought the Anan woman might abandon them on the spot, Nynaeve would have screamed.

ðə wɑndɝɪŋ æli ɡeɪv weɪ tə ə stʃɹit, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tɔkɪŋ ðən tə əmaʊn tə ɛniθɪŋ. ðə sʌnz θɪn ɹɪm ɡlɛɹd blaɪndɪŋli əbʌv ðə ɹuftɑps əhɛd; ɪleɪn ʃeɪɾɪd əɹ aɪz wɪð wʌn hæn vɛɹi ɑstənteɪʃəsli. nɪneɪiv ɹəfjuz tə. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðət bæd. ʃi bɛɹli hæd tə skwɪn əɾ ɔl, ɹɪli. ə klɪɹ blu skaɪ mɑkt əɹ wɛðɝ sɛns, ðət stɪl toʊld əɹ ə stɔɹm wɑz ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə ðə sɪɾi.

The wandering alley gave way to a street, and there was no talking then to amount to anything. The sun's thin rim glared blindingly above the rooftops ahead; Elayne shaded her eyes with one hand very ostentatiously. Nynaeve refused to. It was not that bad. She barely had to squint at all, really. A clear blue sky mocked her weather sense, that still told her a storm was right on top of the city.

ivən ðɪs ɝli ə fju bɹaɪtli lækɝd koʊtʃɪz wɝ əbaʊɾ ɪn ðə waɪndɪŋ stʃɹits, ən ə dʌbəl fɪsfəl ə bɹaɪɾɝ sɪdæn tʃɛɹz, tu əɹ səmtaɪmz fɔɹ bɛɹfʊt bɛɹɝz ɪn ɡɹin-ænd-ɹɛd stʃɹaɪp vɛsts tə itʃ, tʃɹɑɾɪŋ kəz ðeɪ kæɹid pæsənʒɝz hɪɾən bɪhaɪn ðə ɡɹɪld wʊɾən skɹinz. kɑɹts ən wæɡənz ɹʌmbəld oʊvɝ ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz, ən pipəl bɪɡæn tə fɪl ðə stʃɹits əz ʃɑp dɔɹz oʊpən ən ɔnɪŋz wɛn ʌp, vɛstəɾ əpɹɛntəsɪz hɝiɪŋ ɑn ɛɹənz ən mɛn wɪð ɡɹeɪt ɹoʊl kɑɹpəts bælənst ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, tʌmblɝz ən dʒʌɡəlɝz ən mjuzɪʃənz ɹɛɾiɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ət laɪkli kɔɹnɝz ən hɔkɝz wɪð ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪz ə pɪnz əɹ ɹɪbənz əɹ ʃæbi fɹut. ði oʊpən-saɪɾəd fɪʃ-æn mit-mɑɹkəts hæd lɔŋ sɪns bɪn ɪn fʊl kɹaɪ; ɔl ðə fɪʃmɑŋɡɝz wɝ wɪmən, ən moʊst ə ðə bʊtʃɝz, tu, ɪksɛp ðoʊz dilɪŋ ɪn bif.

Even this early a few brightly lacquered coaches were about in the winding streets, and a double fistful of brighter sedan chairs, two or sometimes four barefoot bearers in green-and-red striped vests to each, trotting because they carried passengers hidden behind the grilled wooden screens. Carts and wagons rumbled over the paving stones, and people began to fill the streets as shop doors opened and awnings went up, vested apprentices hurrying on errands and men with great rolled carpets balanced on their shoulders, tumblers and jugglers and musicians readying themselves at likely corners and hawkers with their trays of pins or ribbons or shabby fruit. The open-sided fish-and meat-markets had long since been in full cry; all the fishmongers were women, and most of the butchers, too, except those dealing in beef.

dɑdʒɪŋ θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz, pæs ðə koʊtʃɪz ən sɪdæn tʃɛɹz ən wæɡənz ðət sim tə θɪŋk ðeɪ hæd noʊ ɹizən tə sloʊ, mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən sɛɾ ə fæs peɪs tə meɪk ʌp fəɹ ɪntɝʌpʃənz. ðəɹ wɝ plɛnti ʌv ðoʊz. ʃi sim tə bi ə wɛl-noʊn wʊmən, heɪl baɪ ʃɑpkipɝz ən kɹæfsmən ən ʌðɝ ɪnkipɝz stændɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ dɔɹweɪz. ðə ʃɑpkipɝz ən kɹæfsmən ɹəsivd ə fju wɝdz, ə plɛzənt nɑd, bʌt ʃi ɔlweɪz stɑp tə tʃæɾ ə moʊmənt wɪð ði ɪnkipɝz. æftɝ ðə fɝst, nɪneɪiv wɪʃt fɝvənli ðət ʃi wəd nɑɾ əɡɛn; æftɝ ðə sɛkənd, ʃi pɹeɪd fəɹ ɪt. æftɝ ðə θɝd ʃi stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛɾ ən tʃɹaɪɾ ɪn veɪn nɑt tə hɪɹ. ɪleɪnz feɪs ɡɹu taɪɾɝ ən taɪɾɝ, koʊldɝ ən koʊldɝ; hɝ tʃɪn ɹoʊz tɪl ɪt wɑz ə wʌndɝ ʃi kəd si tə wɔk.

Dodging through the crowds, past the coaches and sedan chairs and wagons that seemed to think they had no reason to slow, Mistress Anan set a fast pace to make up for interruptions. There were plenty of those. She seemed to be a well-known woman, hailed by shopkeepers and craftsmen and other innkeepers standing in their doorways. The shopkeepers and craftsmen received a few words, a pleasant nod, but she always stopped to chat a moment with the innkeepers. After the first, Nynaeve wished fervently that she would not again; after the second, she prayed for it. After the third she stared straight ahead and tried in vain not to hear. Elayne's face grew tighter and tighter, colder and colder; her chin rose till it was a wonder she could see to walk.

ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹizən, nɪneɪiv hæd tə ədmɪt ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli. ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, sʌmwʌn wɛɹɪŋ sɪlk maɪt stʃɹoʊl ðə lɛŋθ ʌv ə skwɛɹ, meɪbi, bʌt noʊ fɝðɝ. ɛvɹibɑɾi ɛls ɪn saɪt wɔɹ wʊl əɹ lɪnən, sɛldəm wɪð mʌtʃ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, ɪksɛp fəɹ ən əkeɪʒənəl bɛɡɝ u hæɾ əkwaɪɝɾ ə kæst-ɔf sɪlk ɡɑɹmənt, fɹeɪɾ ɑn ɛvɹi ɛdʒ ən mɔɹ hoʊl ðən klɔθ. ʃi dʒʌst wɪʃt mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən hæd tʃoʊzən səm ʌðɝ ɛkspləneɪʃən fəɹ waɪ ʃi wɑz liɾɪŋ ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm θɹu ðə stʃɹits. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə lɪsən wʌn mɔɹ taɪm tə ə teɪl ə tu flaɪɾi ɡɝlz u hæd spɛn ɔl ðɛɹ mʌni ɑn faɪn kloʊðz tə ɪmpɹɛs ə mæn. mæt keɪm aʊɾ ʌv ɪt wɛl, bɝn hɪm. ə faɪn jʌŋ fɛloʊ, ɪf mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən hæd nɑt bɪn mɛɹid, ə bjuɾəfəl dænsɝ wɪð dʒʌst ə tʌtʃ ə ðə ɹoʊɡ. ɔl ə ðə wɪmən læft. nɑɾ əɹ əɹ ɪleɪn, ðoʊ. nɑt ðə bɹeɪnləs lɪɾəl hʌnikɪsɝz - ðət wɑz ðə wɝd ʃi juzd; nɪneɪiv kəd ɡɛs wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt! - hʌnikɪsɝz pɛniləs fɹəm tʃeɪsɪŋ æftɝ ə mæn ən ðɛɹ pɝsɪz fʊl ə bɹæs bɪts ən tɪn tə ful fulz, wɪtləs lubiz u wʊɾə bɪn ɹədus tə bɛɝi əɹ θɛf hæd mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən nɑt noʊn sʌmwʌn u maɪt ɡɪv əm wɝk ɪn ðə kɪtʃən.

There was a reason, Nynaeve had to admit grudgingly. In Ebou Dar, someone wearing silk might stroll the length of a square, maybe, but no further. Everybody else in sight wore wool or linen, seldom with much embroidery, except for an occasional beggar who had acquired a cast-off silk garment, frayed on every edge and more hole than cloth. She just wished Mistress Anan had chosen some other explanation for why she was leading the pair of them through the streets. She wished she did not have to listen one more time to a tale of two flighty girls who had spent all their money on fine clothes to impress a man. Mat came out of it well, burn him. A fine young fellow, if Mistress Anan had not been married, a beautiful dancer with just a touch of the rogue. All of the women laughed. Not her or Elayne, though. Not the brainless little honeykissers - that was the word she used; Nynaeve could guess what it meant! - honeykissers penniless from chasing after a man and their purses full of brass bits and tin to fool fools, witless loobies who would have been reduced to beggary or theft had Mistress Anan not known someone who might give them work in the kitchen.

"ʃi dʌzn əv tə stɑp əɾ ɛvɹi ɪn ɪn ðə sɪɾi," nɪneɪiv ɡɹaʊld əz ʃi stɔkt əweɪ fɹəm ðə stʃɹændəd ɡus, θɹi bɹɔd stɔɹiz wɪð ən ɪnkipɝ u wɔɹ lɑɹdʒ ɡɑɹnəts əɾ əɹ ɪɹz dɪspaɪt ðə hʌmbəl neɪm. mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən hɑɹdli ivən ɡlæns bæk tə si ðeɪ fɑloʊd, naʊ. "du jə ɹilaɪz wɪl nɛvɝ bi eɪbəl tə ʃoʊ əɹ oʊn feɪsəz ɪn ɛni ʌv ðoʊz pleɪsəz!"

"She doesn't have to stop at every inn in the city," Nynaeve growled as she stalked away from The Stranded Goose, three broad stories with an innkeeper who wore large garnets at her ears despite the humble name. Mistress Anan hardly even glanced back to see they followed, now. "Do you realize we'll never be able to show our own faces in any of those places!"

"aɪ səspɛk ðəɾ ɪz ɪɡzækli ðə pɔɪnt." ɛvɹi wɝɾ aʊɾ ʌv ɪleɪnz maʊθ wɑz tʃɪp fɹəm aɪs. "nɪneɪiv, ɪf juv sɛn əs ɹʌnɪŋ æftɝ ə waɪl pɪɡ. . . ." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə kəmplit ðə θɹɛt. wɪð bɝdʒɪɾ ən eɪvinhə tə hɛlp, ən ðeɪ wʊd, ɪleɪn kəd meɪk əɹ laɪf mɪzɝəbəl əntɪl ʃi wɑz sæɾəsfaɪd.

"I suspect that is exactly the point." Every word out of Elayne's mouth was chipped from ice. "Nynaeve, if you've sent us running after a wild pig. . . ." There was no need to complete the threat. With Birgitte and Aviendha to help, and they would, Elayne could make her life miserable until she was satisfied.

"ðeɪ wɪl teɪk əs ɹaɪt tə ðə boʊl," ʃi ɪnsɪstəd, flæpɪŋ əɹ hænz tə ʃu ə bɛɡɝ wɪð ə hɔɹəbəl pɝpəl skɑɹ ðəɾ əblɪɾɝeɪtɪd wʌn aɪ; ʃi kəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz flaʊɝ peɪs daɪd wɪð bluwɝt wən ʃi sɔ ɪt. "aɪ noʊ ðeɪ wɪl." ɪleɪn snɪft ɪn ən əfɛnsɪvli ɪkspɹɛsɪv mænɝ.

"They will take us right to the Bowl," she insisted, flapping her hands to shoo a beggar with a horrible purple scar that obliterated one eye; she could recognize flour paste dyed with bluewort when she saw it. "I know they will." Elayne sniffed in an offensively expressive manner.

nɪneɪiv lɔs kaʊn ə ðə nʌmbɝ ə bɹɪdʒəz ðeɪ kɹɔst, lɑɹdʒ ən smɔl, wɪð bɑɹdʒəz poʊlɪŋ bɪniθ. ðə sʌn klaɪmd ɪts oʊn haɪɾ əbʌv ðə ɹuftɑps, ðən twaɪs. ði ɑnən wʊmən dɪd nɑt fɑloʊ ivən soʊ stʃɹeɪɾ ə laɪn əz ʃi maɪɾ əv - ʃi ɹɪli dɪd sim tə bi ɡoʊɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ weɪ tə faɪn ɪnz - bʌt ðeɪ kəntɪnjud dʒɛnɝəli ist, ən nɪneɪiv θɔt ðeɪ mʌs bi nɪɹɪŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ wən ðə heɪzəl-aɪd wʊmən sʌɾənli ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ðɛm.

Nynaeve lost count of the number of bridges they crossed, large and small, with barges poling beneath. The sun climbed its own height above the rooftops, then twice. The Anan woman did not follow even so straight a line as she might have - she really did seem to be going out of her way to find inns - but they continued generally east, and Nynaeve thought they must be nearing the river when the hazel-eyed woman suddenly rounded on them.

"ju wɑtʃ jəɹ tʌŋz, naʊ. spik wən jəɹ spoʊkən tə ən nɑɾ ɛls. jə ɪmbɛɹəs mi, ænd. . . ." wɪð ə faɪnəl fɹaʊn ən ə mʌɾɝ hæf ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ ðət ʃi wɑz pɹɑbli meɪkɪŋ ə mɪsteɪk, ʃi dʒɝkt əɹ hɛd fəɹ əm tə fɑloʊ əɡɛn, tə ə flæt-ɹuf haʊs ɹaɪɾ ɑpəzət.

"You watch your tongues, now. Speak when you're spoken to and not else. You embarrass me, and. . . ." With a final frown and a mutter half under her breath that she was probably making a mistake, she jerked her head for them to follow again, to a flat-roofed house right opposite.

ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə lɑɹdʒ haʊs, tu stɔɹiz wɪθaʊt wʌn bælkəni, kɹæk plæstɝ ən bɹɪk ʃoʊɪŋ ɪn sɛvɹəl pleɪsəz, ən hɑɹdli ɪn ən əɡɹiəbəl loʊkeɪʃən, wɪð ðə laʊd ɹætlɪŋ ʌv ə wivɝz lumz tə wʌn saɪɾ ən ði ækɹɪd stɪŋks ʌv ə daɪɝz ʃɑp tə ði ʌðɝ. ə meɪɾ ænsɝd ðə dɔɹ, ðoʊ, ə ɡɹeɪɪŋ wʊmən wɪð ə skwɛɹ dʒɔ, ʃoʊldɝz laɪk ə blæksmɪθ, ən ə stili aɪ ənsɑfən baɪ ðə swɛɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs. əz nɪneɪiv fɑloʊd mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən ɪn, ʃi smaɪld. sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðət haʊs, ə wʊmən wɑz tʃænəlɪŋ.

It was not a large house, two stories without one balcony, cracked plaster and brick showing in several places, and hardly in an agreeable location, with the loud rattling of a weaver's looms to one side and the acrid stinks of a dyer's shop to the other. A maid answered the door, though, a graying woman with a square jaw, shoulders like a blacksmith, and a steely eye unsoftened by the sweat on her face. As Nynaeve followed Mistress Anan in, she smiled. Somewhere in that house, a woman was channeling.

ðə skwɛɹ-dʒɔd meɪɾ ɑbviəsli nu sɛɾəl ɑnən ɑn saɪt, bʌɾ əɹ ɹiækʃən wɑz ɑd. ʃi kɝtsid wɪð ə vɛɹi ɹil ɹɪspɛkt, jɛt ʃi wɑz pleɪnli sɝpɹaɪz tə si hɝ, ən ɑbviəsli daʊtfəl əbaʊɾ əɹ biɪŋ ðɛɹ. ʃi ɔlmoʊs flʌɾɝd bɪfɔɹ lɛɾɪŋ əm ɪn. nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɝ ɡɹiɾəd wɪð noʊ æmbɪvələns, ðoʊ. ðeɪ wɝ ʃoʊn tə ə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum wʌn flaɪɾ ʌp, ən ðə meɪd toʊld əm fɝmli, "doʊn stɝ ə toʊ ən doʊn tʌtʃ ɛniθɪŋ, əɹ jəl kætʃ ði oʊld wʌt-fɔɹ," ðən vænɪʃt.

The square-jawed maid obviously knew Setalle Anan on sight, but her reaction was odd. She curtsied with a very real respect, yet she was plainly surprised to see her, and obviously doubtful about her being there. She almost fluttered before letting them in. Nynaeve and Elayne were greeted with no ambivalence, though. They were shown to a sitting room one flight up, and the maid told them firmly, "Don't stir a toe and don't touch anything, or you'll catch the old what-for," then vanished.

nɪneɪiv lʊkt əɾ ɪleɪn.

Nynaeve looked at Elayne.

"nɪneɪiv, wʌn wʊmən tʃænəlɪŋ dʌzn min - " ðə fil tʃeɪnʒd, swɛlɪŋ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən səbsaɪɾɪŋ, loʊɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ. "ivən tu wɪmən dʌzn min ɛniθɪŋ," ɪleɪn pɹətɛstəd, bʌt ʃi saʊndəd daʊtfəl. "ðæt wɑz ðə moʊst ɪl-mænɝd meɪɾ aɪv ɛvɝ sin." ʃi tʊk ə tɔl-bækt ɹɛd tʃɛɹ, ən æftɝ ə moʊmənt nɪneɪiv sæt tu, bʌt ʃi pɝtʃt ɑn ði ɛdʒ. fɹəm iɡɝnəs, nɑt nɝvz. nɑt nɝvz əɾ ɔl.

"Nynaeve, one woman channeling doesn't mean - " The feel changed, swelling for a moment, then subsiding, lower than before. "Even two women doesn't mean anything," Elayne protested, but she sounded doubtful. "That was the most ill-mannered maid I've ever seen." She took a tall-backed red chair, and after a moment Nynaeve sat too, but she perched on the edge. From eagerness, not nerves. Not nerves at all.

ðə ɹum wɑz nɑt ɡɹænd, bʌt ðə blu-ænd-waɪt flɔɹ taɪlz ɡlɪsənd, ən ðə peɪl ɡɹin wɔlz lʊk fɹɛʃli peɪntəd. noʊ tʃɹeɪs ʌv ɡɪlt ʃoʊɾ ɛniwɛɹ, ʌv kɔɹs, jɛt faɪn kɑɹvɪŋ kʌvɝd ðə ɹɛd tʃɛɹz ɝeɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz ən sɛvɹəl smɔl teɪbəlz ʌv ə dɑɹkɝ blu ðən ðə taɪlz. ðə læmps hæŋɪŋ fɹəm skɑnsɪz wɝ klɪɹli bɹæs, pɑlɪʃt tɪl ðeɪ ʃoʊn. kɛɹfəli ɝeɪnʒd ɛvɝɡɹin bɹæntʃəz fɪl ðə swɛp hɑɹθ, ən ðə lɪntəl əbʌv ðə faɪɝpleɪs wɑz kɑɹvd, nɑt pleɪn stoʊnwɝk. ðə kɑɹvɪŋ simd ən ɑd tʃɔɪs - wʌt pipəl ɝaʊn ɛbu dɑɹ kɔl ðə θɝtin sɪnz; ə mæn wɪð aɪz ðət nɪɹli fɪld ɪz hoʊl feɪs fəɹ ɛnvi, ə fɛloʊ wɪð ɪz tʌŋ hæŋɪŋ tə hɪz æŋkəlz fəɹ ɡɑsəp, ə snɑɹlɪŋ, ʃɑɹp-tuθ mæn klʌtʃɪŋ kɔɪnz tə hɪz tʃɛs fəɹ ɡɹid, ən soʊ ɑn - bʌɾ ɔl ɪn ɔl, ɪt sæɾəsfaɪd əɹ vɛɹi mʌtʃ. huɛvɝ kəɾ əfɔɹd ðət ɹum kəɾ əfɔɹd fɹɛʃ plæstɝ aʊtsaɪd, ən ði oʊnli ɹizən nɑt tə pʊɾ ɪɾ ʌp wɑz tə kip loʊ, əvɔɪɾɪŋ noʊɾəs.

The room was not grand, but the blue-and-white floor tiles glistened, and the pale green walls looked freshly painted. No trace of gilt showed anywhere, of course, yet fine carving covered the red chairs arrayed along the walls and several small tables of a darker blue than the tiles. The lamps hanging from sconces were clearly brass, polished till they shone. Carefully arranged evergreen branches filled the swept hearth, and the lintel above the fireplace was carved, not plain stonework. The carving seemed an odd choice - what people around Ebou Dar called the Thirteen Sins; a man with eyes that nearly filled his whole face for Envy, a fellow with his tongue hanging to his ankles for Gossip, a snarling, sharp-toothed man clutching coins to his chest for Greed, and so on - but all in all, it satisfied her very much. Whoever could afford that room could afford fresh plaster outside, and the only reason not to put it up was to keep low, avoiding notice.

ðə meɪd hæd lɛf ðə dɔɹ oʊpən, ən sʌɾənli vɔɪsəz kʌmɪŋ ʌp ðə hɔl dʒɹɪftəd θɹu.

The maid had left the door open, and suddenly voices coming up the hall drifted through.

"aɪ kænɑt bɪliv jə bɹɔɾ əm hɪɹ." ðə spikɝz toʊn wɑz taɪt wɪð ɪnkɹədulɪɾi ən æŋɡɝ. "ju noʊ haʊ kɛɹfəl wi ɑɹ, sɛɾəl. jə noʊ mɔɹ ðən jə ʃʊd, ən jə ʃʊɹli noʊ ðæt."

"I cannot believe you brought them here." The speaker's tone was tight with incredulity and anger. "You know how careful we are, Setalle. You know more than you should, and you surely know that."

"aɪ æm vɛɹi sɑɹi, ɹin," mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən ænsɝd stɪfli. "aɪ səpoʊz aɪ dɪdn θɪŋk. aɪ . . . səbmɪt maɪsɛlf, boʊθ tə stænd ʃʊɹəɾi fəɹ ðiz ɡɝlz' bɪheɪvjɝ ən tə jəɹ dʒʌdʒmənt."

"I am very sorry, Reanne," Mistress Anan answered stiffly. "I suppose I didn't think. I . . . submit myself, both to stand surety for these girls' behavior and to your judgment."

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt!" ɹinz toʊn wɑz haɪ wɪð ʃɑk, naʊ. "ðæɾ ɪz tə seɪ. . . . aɪ min, jə ʃʊdn hæv, bʌt. . . . sɛɾəl, aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz fəɹ ɹeɪzɪŋ maɪ vɔɪs. seɪ jə fɝɡɪv mi."

"Of course not!" Reanne's tone was high with shock, now. "That is to say. . . . I mean, you shouldn't have, but. . . . Setalle, I apologize for raising my voice. Say you forgive me."

"ju hæv noʊ ɹizən tə əpɑlədʒaɪz, ɹin." ði ɪnkipɝ mænədʒ tə saʊn ɹufəl ən ɹɪlʌktən ət ðə seɪm taɪm. "aɪ dɪd ɹɔŋ tə bɹɪŋ ðɛm."

"You have no reason to apologize, Reanne." The innkeeper managed to sound rueful and reluctant at the same time. "I did wrong to bring them."

"noʊ, noʊ, sɛɾəl. aɪ ʃʊdn əv spoʊkən tə jə soʊ. pliz, jə mʌs fɝɡɪv mi. pliz du."

"No, no, Setalle. I shouldn't have spoken to you so. Please, you must forgive me. Please do."

ði ɑnən wʊmən ən ɹin kɔɹli ɛntɝd ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, ən nɪneɪiv blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. fɹəm ði ɪkstʃeɪnʒ, ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd sʌmwʌn jʌŋɡɝ ðən sɛɾəl ɑnən, bʌt ɹin hæd hɛɹ mɔɹ ɡɹeɪ ðən nɑɾ ən ə feɪs fʊl ʌv wʌt maɪɾ əv bɪn smaɪl laɪnz, ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ kɹist ɪn wɝi naʊ. waɪ wəd ði oʊldɝ wʊmən hʌmbəl hɝsɛlf soʊ tə ðə jʌŋɡɝ, ən waɪ wəd ðə jʌŋɡɝ əlaʊ ɪt, haʊɛvɝ hæfhɑɹɾɪdli? kʌstəmz wɝ dɪfɹən hɪɹ, ðə laɪt nu, səm mɔɹ dɪfɹən ðən ʃi laɪk tə θɪŋk əbaʊt, jɛt nɑt ðɪs mʌtʃ, ʃʊɹli. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ɡɔn vɛɹi fɑɹ təwɔɹd biɪŋ hʌmbəl wɪð ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl bæk hoʊm, bʌt ðɪs. . . .

The Anan woman and Reanne Corly entered the sitting room, and Nynaeve blinked in surprise. From the exchange, she had expected someone younger than Setalle Anan, but Reanne had hair more gray than not and a face full of what might have been smile lines, though they were creased in worry now. Why would the older woman humble herself so to the younger, and why would the younger allow it, however halfheartedly? Customs were different here, the Light knew, some more different than she liked to think about, yet not this much, surely. Of course, she had never gone very far toward being humble with the Women's Circle back home, but this. . . .

ʌv kɔɹs, ɹin kəd tʃænəl - ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd ðæt; hoʊp fəɹ ɪt, ɛniweɪ - bʌt ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəd ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ. ɹin wɑz nɑɾ əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɪleɪn, əɹ ivən nɪkoʊlə - bɝn ðət ɹɛtʃɪd ɡɝl! - bʌt ʃi izəli ikwəld ʃɛɹiəm, seɪ, əɹ kweɪmɛsə əɹ kaɪɹunə. nɑt mɛni wɪmən pəzɛst soʊ mʌtʃ stʃɹɛŋkθ, ən fəɹ ɔl ʃi hɝsɛlf bɛɾɝd ɪt baɪ ə fɛɹ mɑɹdʒən, ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ɪt hɪɹ. ðə wʊmən mʌs bi wʌn ə ðə waɪldɝz; ðə taʊɝ wʊɾə faʊn ə weɪ tə kip ɪts hænz ɑn ə wʊmən laɪk ðɪs ɪf ðeɪ hæd tə hoʊld əɹ ɪn ə nɑvəs dʒɹɛs əɹ hoʊl laɪf.

Of course, Reanne could channel - she had expected that; hoped for it, anyway - but she had not expected the strength. Reanne was not as strong as Elayne, or even Nicola - burn that wretched girl! - but she easily equaled Sheriam, say, or Kwamesa or Kiruna. Not many women possessed so much strength, and for all she herself bettered it by a fair margin, she was surprised to find it here. The woman must be one of the wilders; the Tower would have found a way to keep its hands on a woman like this if they had to hold her in a novice dress her whole life.

nɪneɪiv ɹoʊz əz ðeɪ keɪm θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ, smuðɪŋ əɹ skɝts. nɑt fɹəm nɝvəsnəs, sɝɾənli; sɝɾənli nɑt. oʊ, bʌɾ ɪf oʊnli ðɪs keɪm aʊt ɹaɪt. . . .

Nynaeve rose as they came through the doorway, smoothing her skirts. Not from nervousness, certainly; certainly not. Oh, but if only this came out right. . . .

ɹinz ʃɑɹp blu aɪz stʌɾid ðə tu ʌv əm wɪð ði ɛɹ ə sʌmwʌn u hæd dʒʌs faʊn ə pɛɹ ə pɪɡz ɪn əɹ kɪtʃən, fɹɛʃ fɹəm ðə staɪ ən dʒɹɪpɪŋ mʌd. ʃi dæbd əɾ əɹ feɪs wɪð ə taɪni hæŋkɝtʃɪf, ðoʊ ði ɪntɪɹiɝ ə ðə haʊs wɑz kulɝ ðən aʊtsaɪd. "aɪ səpoʊz wɪl əv tə də sʌmθɪŋ wɪð ðɛm," ʃi mɝmɝd, "ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ wʌt ðeɪ kleɪm." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz kwaɪt haɪ ivən naʊ, mjuzɪkəl ən ɔlmoʊs juθfəl. əz ʃi fɪnɪʃt spikɪŋ ʃi ɡeɪv ə smɔl stɑɹt fəɹ səm ɹizən ən aɪd ði ɪn-kipɝ saɪdweɪz, wɪtʃ sɛɾ ɔf ənʌðɝ ɹaʊn ə mɪstʃɹəs ɑnənz ɹɪlʌktən əpɑlədʒiz ən mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹliz flʌstɝɾ ətɛmps tə dɪflɛk ðɛm. ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, wən foʊk wɝ tʃɹuli biɪŋ pəlaɪt, əpɑlədʒiz bæk ən fɔɹθ kəd floʊ fəɹ ən aʊɝ.

Reanne's sharp blue eyes studied the two of them with the air of someone who had just found a pair of pigs in her kitchen, fresh from the sty and dripping mud. She dabbed at her face with a tiny handkerchief, though the interior of the house was cooler than outside. "I suppose we'll have to do something with them," she murmured, "if they are what they claim." Her voice was quite high even now, musical and almost youthful. As she finished speaking she gave a small start for some reason and eyed the inn-keeper sideways, which set off another round of Mistress Anan's reluctant apologies and Mistress Corly's flustered attempts to deflect them. In Ebou Dar, when folk were truly being polite, apologies back and forth could flow for an hour.

ɪleɪn hæd ɹɪzən tu, wɛɹɪŋ ə slaɪtli fɪkst smaɪl. ʃi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət nɪneɪiv, kʌpt əɹ ɛlboʊ ɪn wʌn hæn ən leɪɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ əɡɛnst əɹ tʃik.

Elayne had risen too, wearing a slightly fixed smile. She raised an eyebrow at Nynaeve, cupped her elbow in one hand and laid a finger against her cheek.

nɪneɪiv klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt. "mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli, maɪ neɪm ɪz nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə, ən ðɪs ɪz ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd. wəɹ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ - "

Nynaeve cleared her throat. "Mistress Corly, my name is Nynaeve al'Meara, and this is Elayne Trakand. We are looking for - "

"sɛɾəl əz toʊl mi ɔl əbaʊt ju," ðə blu-aɪd wʊmən kʌɾ ɪn ɑmənəsli. haʊɛvɝ mɛni ɡɹeɪ hɛɹz ɑn əɹ hɛd, nɪneɪiv səspɛktəd ʃi wɑz ɔlsoʊ hɑɹɾ əz ə stoʊn fɛns. "əbaɪd wɪð peɪʃəns, ɡɝl, ən əl dil wɪð jə dɝɛkli." ʃi tɝn bæk tə sɛɾəl, blɑɾɪŋ əɹ tʃiks wɪð ðə hæŋkɝtʃɪf. bɛɹli səpɹɛs dɪfəɾəns wʌns mɔɹ tɪŋd əɹ vɔɪs. "sɛɾəl, ɪf jəl pliz ɪkskjuz mi, aɪ mʌs kwɛstʃən ðiz ɡɝlz, ən - "

"Setalle has told me all about you," the blue-eyed woman cut in ominously. However many gray hairs on her head, Nynaeve suspected she was also hard as a stone fence. "Abide with patience, girl, and I'll deal with you directly." She turned back to Setalle, blotting her cheeks with the handkerchief. Barely suppressed diffidence once more tinged her voice. "Setalle, if you will please excuse me, I must question these girls, and - "

"lʊk u ɪz ɹɪtɝn æftɝ ɔl ðiz jɪɹz," ə ʃɔɹt, staʊt wʊmən ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl jɪɹz blɝɾɪd əz ʃi bɑɹdʒd ɪndə ðə ɹum, nɑɾɪŋ əɾ əɹ kəmpænjən. dɪspaɪɾ əɹ ɹɛd-bɛltəɾ ɛbu dɑɹi dʒɹɛs ən ə tæn feɪs ðət ɡlɪsən dæmpli, hɝ æksɛns wɝ pjʊɹ kɛɹhinɪn. hɝ ikwəli swɛɾi kəmpænjən, ɪn ðə dɑɹk, pleɪnli kʌt wʊlənz ʌv ə mɝtʃənt, wɑz ə hɛd tɔlɝ, noʊ oʊldɝ ðən nɪneɪiv, wɪð dɑɹk tɪltəɾ aɪz, ə stʃɹɔŋli hʊk noʊz, ən ə waɪd maʊð. "ɪts ɡæɹiniə! ʃi - " ðə floʊ ʌv wɝdz tɝməneɪɾəd əbɹʌpli ɪn kənfjuʒən əz ðə staʊt wʊmən ɹilaɪzd ʌðɝz wɝ pɹɛzənt.

"Look who is returned after all these years," a short, stout woman in her middle years blurted as she barged into the room, nodding at her companion. Despite her red-belted Ebou Dari dress and a tanned face that glistened damply, her accents were pure Cairhienin. Her equally sweaty companion, in the dark, plainly cut woolens of a merchant, was a head taller, no older than Nynaeve, with dark tilted eyes, a strongly hooked nose, and a wide mouth. "It's Garenia! She - " The flow of words terminated abruptly in confusion as the stout woman realized others were present.

ɹin klæspt əɹ hænz əz ɪf ɪn pɹɛɹ, əɹ pɝhæps kəz ʃi wɑntəd tə hɪt sʌmwʌn. "bɛɹaʊɪn," ʃi sɛd wɪð ən ɛdʒ, "wʌn deɪ jəl ɹʌn ɹaɪɾ ɔf ə klɪf bɪfɔɹ jə si ɪɾ ʌndɝ jəɹ fit."

Reanne clasped her hands as if in prayer, or perhaps because she wanted to hit someone. "Berowin," she said with an edge, "one day you will run right off a cliff before you see it under your feet."

"aɪ æm sɑɹi, ɪld - " blʌʃɪŋ, ðə kɛɹhinɪn loʊɝɾ əɹ aɪz. ðə sɑldəiən bɪkeɪm ɪntɛn ɑn fɪdlɪŋ wɪð ə sɝkəl ə ɹɛd stoʊnz pɪn əɾ əɹ bɹɛst.

"I am sorry, Eld - " Blushing, the Cairhienin lowered her eyes. The Saldaean became intent on fiddling with a circle of red stones pinned at her breast.

fəɹ nɪneɪivz pɑɹt, ʃi ɡeɪv ɪleɪn ə tʃɹaɪʌmfən lʊk. boʊθ nukʌmɝz kəd tʃænəl, ən seɪaɪdɑɹ wɑz stɪl biɪŋ wildɪd sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə haʊs. tu mɔɹ, ən waɪl bɛɹaʊɪn wɑz nɑt vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ, ɡæɹiniə stʊɾ ivən əbʌv ɹin; ʃi kəd mætʃ ləleɪn əɹ ɹoʊmændə. nɑt ðət ðət mæɾɝd, ʌv kɔɹs, jɛt ðɪs meɪɾ ət lis faɪv. ɪleɪnz tʃɪn sɛt stʌbɝnli, bʌt ðən ʃi saɪɾ ən ɡeɪv ə smɔl nɑd. səmtaɪmz ɪt tʊk ðə moʊst ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl ɛfɝt tə kənvɪns əɹ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ.

For Nynaeve's part, she gave Elayne a triumphant look. Both newcomers could channel, and saidar was still being wielded somewhere in the house. Two more, and while Berowin was not very strong, Garenia stood even above Reanne; she could match Lelaine or Romanda. Not that that mattered, of course, yet this made at least five. Elayne's chin set stubbornly, but then she sighed and gave a small nod. Sometimes it took the most incredible effort to convince her of anything.

"jɔɹ neɪm ɪz ɡæɹiniə?" mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən sɛd sloʊli, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə wʊmən ɪn kwɛstʃən. "ju lʊk vɛɹi mʌtʃ laɪk sʌmwʌn aɪ mɛt wʌns. zɛɹjə ælkeɪis."

"Your name is Garenia?" Mistress Anan said slowly, frowning at the woman in question. "You look very much like someone I met once. Zarya Alkaese."

dɑɹk tɪltəɾ aɪz blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. plʌkɪŋ ə leɪs-tʃɹɪm hæŋkɝtʃɪf fɹəm əɹ sliv, ðə sɑldəiən mɝtʃən tʌtʃt əɹ tʃiks. "ðæɾ ɪz maɪ ɡɹændmʌðɝz sɪstɝz neɪm," ʃi sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt. "aɪm toʊld aɪ feɪvɝ əɹ stʃɹɔŋli. wɑz ʃi wɛl wən jə sɔ hɝ? ʃi fɝɡɑɾ əɹ fæmli kəmplitli æftɝ ʃi wɛn ɔf tə bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Dark tilted eyes blinked in surprise. Plucking a lace-trimmed handkerchief from her sleeve, the Saldaean merchant touched her cheeks. "That is my grandmother's sister's name," she said after a moment. "I'm told I favor her strongly. Was she well when you saw her? She forgot her family completely after she went off to become Aes Sedai."

"jɔɹ ɡɹændmʌðɝz sɪstɝ." ði ɪnkipɝ læf sɔfli. "ʌv kɔɹs. ʃi wɑz wɛl wən aɪ sɔ hɝ, bʌt ðət wɑz ə lɔŋ taɪm əɡoʊ. aɪ wɑz jʌŋɡɝ ðən jə ɑɹ naʊ."

"Your grandmother's sister." The innkeeper laughed softly. "Of course. She was well when I saw her, but that was a long time ago. I was younger than you are now."

ɹin hæd bɪn hʌvɝɪŋ əɾ əɹ saɪd, ɔl bʌt ɡɹæbɪŋ əɹ ɛlboʊ, ən naʊ ʃi lɛpt ɪn. "sɛɾəl, aɪ tʃɹuli æm sɑɹi, bʌɾ aɪ ɹɪli mʌst æsk jə tə ɪkskjuz ʌs. jəl fɝɡɪv mi nɑt ʃoʊɪŋ jə tə ðə dɔɹ?"

Reanne had been hovering at her side, all but grabbing her elbow, and now she leaped in. "Setalle, I truly am sorry, but I really must ask you to excuse us. You will forgive me not showing you to the door?"

mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən meɪɾ əɹ oʊn əpɑlədʒiz, əz ɪf ʃi wɑz ət fɔl kəz ði ʌðɝ wʊmən kəd nɑɾ ɛskɔɹɾ əɹ daʊn, ən dɪpɑɹɾəd wɪð ə læst, vɛɹi dubiəs lʊk ət nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn.

Mistress Anan made her own apologies, as if she was at fault because the other woman could not escort her down, and departed with a last, very dubious look at Nynaeve and Elayne.

"sɛɾəl!" ɡæɹiniə ɪkskleɪmd əz sun əz ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz ɡɔn. "ðæt wɑz sɛɾəl ɑnən? haʊ dɪd ʃi - ? laɪɾ ə hɛvən! ivən æftɝ sɛvənti jɪɹz, ðə taʊɝ wəd - "

"Setalle!" Garenia exclaimed as soon as the innkeeper was gone. "That was Setalle Anan? How did she - ? Light of Heaven! Even after seventy years, the Tower would - "

"ɡæɹiniə," mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli sɛɾ ɪn ən ɪkstʃɹimli ʃɑɹp toʊn. hɝ stɛɹ wɑz ʃɑɹpɝ stɪl, ən ðə sɑldəiənz feɪs ɹɛɾənd. "sɪns jə tu ɑɹ hɪɹ, wi kən meɪk ʌp ðə θɹi fəɹ kwɛstʃənɪŋ. jə ɡɝlz steɪ wɛɹ jə ɑɹ ən kip saɪlənt." ðət læst wɑz fəɹ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn. ði ʌðɝ wɪmən wɪθdʒɹu tə ə kɔɹnɝ ɪn ə hʌɾəl ən bɪɡæn kənvɝsɪŋ ɪn sɑf mɝmɝz.

"Garenia," Mistress Corly said in an extremely sharp tone. Her stare was sharper still, and the Saldaean's face reddened. "Since you two are here, we can make up the three for questioning. You girls stay where you are and keep silent." That last was for Nynaeve and Elayne. The other women withdrew to a corner in a huddle and began conversing in soft murmurs.

ɪleɪn muv nɪɹɝ nɪneɪiv. "aɪ dɪd nɑt laɪk biɪŋ tʃɹiɾəd əz ə nɑvəs wən aɪ wɑz ə nɑvəs. haʊ lɔŋ dʒju ɪntɛn tə kəntɪnju ðɪs fɑɹs?"

Elayne moved nearer Nynaeve. "I did not like being treated as a novice when I was a novice. How long do you intend to continue this farce?"

nɪneɪiv hɪst əɾ əɹ fəɹ kwaɪət. "aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɪsən, ɪleɪn," ʃi wɪspɝd.

Nynaeve hissed at her for quiet. "I'm trying to listen, Elayne," she whispered.

juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃən, ʌv kɔɹs. ðə θɹi wʊɾə noʊn ɑn ði ɪnstənt. fɔɹtʃənətli, ðeɪ woʊv noʊ bæɹiɝz, pɝhæps nɑt noʊɪŋ haʊ, ən səmtaɪmz ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz ɹoʊz dʒʌst ɪnʌf.

Using the Power was out of the question, of course. The three would have known on the instant. Fortunately, they wove no barriers, perhaps not knowing how, and sometimes their voices rose just enough.

". . . sɛd ðeɪ meɪ bi waɪldɝz," ɹin sɛd, ən ʃɑk ən ɹɪvʌlʃən blumd ɑn ði ʌðɝ wɪmənz feɪsəz.

". . . said they may be wilders," Reanne said, and shock and revulsion bloomed on the other women's faces.

"ðɛn wi ʃoʊ ðɛm ðə dɔɹ," bɛɹaʊɪn sɛd. "ðə bæk dɔɹ. waɪldɝz!"

"Then we show them the door," Berowin said. "The back door. Wilders!"

"aɪ stɪl wɑnə noʊ hu ðɪs sɛɾəl ɑnən ɪz," ɡæɹiniə pʊɾ ɪn.

"I still want to know who this Setalle Anan is," Garenia put in.

"ɪf jə kæn kip jəɹ maɪn ɑn ðə stʃɹeɪt," ɹin toʊl hɝ, "pɝhæps jə ʃəd spɛn ðɪs tɝn ɑn ðə fɑɹm. æləz noʊz haʊ tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ə maɪnd wʌndɝfəli. naʊ. . . ." ðə wɝdz dʒɹɑp bæk tə ə bʌz.

"If you can't keep your mind on the straight," Reanne told her, "perhaps you should spend this turn on the farm. Alise knows how to concentrate a mind wonderfully. Now. . . ." The words dropped back to a buzz.

ənʌðɝ meɪɾ əpɪɹd, ə slɛndɝ wʊmən, pɹɪɾi ɪksɛp fəɹ ə sʌlən ɪkspɹɛʃən, wɪð ə ɹʌf ɡɹeɪ wʊlən dʒɹɛs ən ə lɔŋ waɪɾ eɪpɹən. sɛɾɪŋ ə ɡɹin-lækɝd tʃɹeɪ ɑn wʌn ə ðə smɔl teɪbəlz, ʃi sɝəptɪʃəsli waɪpt əɹ tʃiks wɪð ə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ eɪpɹən ən bɪɡæn fʌsɪŋ wɪð blu-ɡleɪz kʌps ən ə mætʃɪŋ tipɑt. nɪneɪivz aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz. ðɪs wʊmən kəd tʃænəl, tu, ɪf nɑt tə ɛni haɪ dɪɡɹi. wʌt wɑz ʃi duɪŋ əz ə sɝvənt?

Another maid appeared, a slender woman, pretty except for a sullen expression, with a rough gray woolen dress and a long white apron. Setting a green-lacquered tray on one of the small tables, she surreptitiously wiped her cheeks with a corner of her apron and began fussing with blue-glazed cups and a matching teapot. Nynaeve's eyebrows rose. This woman could channel, too, if not to any high degree. What was she doing as a servant?

ɡæɹiniə ɡlænst oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. "wʌt dɪd dɛɹiz də tə ɝn pɛnəns? aɪ θɔt fɪʃ wəd sɪŋ ðə deɪ ʃi kɹækt ə ɹul, mʌtʃ lɛs bɹoʊk wʌn."

Garenia glanced over her shoulder, and gave a start. "What did Derys do to earn penance? I thought fish would sing the day she cracked a rule, much less broke one."

bɛɹaʊɪn snɪf laʊdli, bʌɾ əɹ ɹɪplaɪ wɑz bɛɹli ɑɾəbəl. "ʃi wɑntəd tə mɛɹi. ʃɪl ədvæns ə tɝn ən ɡoʊ wɪð kɛɹeɪl ðə deɪ æftɝ ðə fist ə ðə hæf mun. ðət wɪl sɛɾəl fəɹ mæstɝ dɪnəl."

Berowin sniffed loudly, but her reply was barely audible. "She wanted to marry. She will advance a turn and go with Keraille the day after the Feast of the Half Moon. That will settle for Master Denal."

"pɝhæps jə boʊθ wɪʃ tə hoʊ ðə filz fəɹ æləz?" ɹin spoʊk dʒɹaɪli, ən ðə vɔɪsəz fɛl əɡɛn.

"Perhaps you both wish to hoe the fields for Alise?" Reanne spoke dryly, and the voices fell again.

nɪneɪiv fɛlt ə ɹʌʃ ʌv ɪɡzʌlteɪʃən. ʃi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ mʌtʃ fəɹ ɹulz, ət lis fəɹ ʌðɝ pipəlz ɹulz - ʌðɝ pipəl ɹɛɹli sɔ ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən əz klɪɹli əz ʃi, ən ðʌs meɪd stupəd ɹulz; waɪ ʃəd ðət wʊmən, dɛɹiz, nɑt mɛɹi ɪf ʃi wɪʃt, fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl? - bʌt ɹulz ən pɛnənsɪz spoʊk ʌv ə səsaɪəɾi. ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt. ən ənʌðɝ θɪŋ. ʃi nʌdʒd ɪleɪn əntɪl ði ʌðɝ wʊmən bɛn əɹ hɛd.

Nynaeve felt a rush of exultation. She did not care much for rules, at least for other people's rules - other people rarely saw the situation as clearly as she, and thus made stupid rules; why should that woman, Derys, not marry if she wished, for example? - but rules and penances spoke of a society. She was right. And another thing. She nudged Elayne until the other woman bent her head.

"bɛɹaʊɪnz wɛɹɪŋ ə ɹɛd bɛlt," ʃi wɪspɝd. ðəɾ ɪndəkeɪɾəd ə waɪz wʊmən, wʌn ʌv ɛbu dɑɹz feɪbəl hilɝz, ðɛɹ kɛɹ noʊn fɑɹ ən waɪɾ əz ðə nɛks bɛs tə biɪŋ hil baɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, kjʊɹɪŋ dʒʌst əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ. səpoʊzədli ɪt wɑz ɔl dʌn wɪð ɝbz ən nɑlədʒ, bʌt. . . . "haʊ mɛni waɪz wɪmən əv wi sin, ɪleɪn? haʊ mɛni kəd tʃænəl? haʊ mɛni wɝ ɛbu dɑɹi, əɹ ivən ɔltɑɹən?"

"Berowin's wearing a red belt," she whispered. That indicated a Wise Woman, one of Ebou Dar's fabled healers, their care known far and wide as the next best to being Healed by an Aes Sedai, curing just about anything. Supposedly it was all done with herbs and knowledge, but. . . . "How many Wise Women have we seen, Elayne? How many could channel? How many were Ebou Dari, or even Altaran?"

"sɛvən, kaʊntɪŋ bɛɹaʊɪn" wɑz ðə sloʊ ænsɝ, "æn oʊnli wʌn aɪ wɑz ʃʊɹ wɑz fɹəm hɪɹ." hɑ! ði ʌðɝz pleɪnli hæd nɑt bɪn. ɪleɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðoʊ ʃi wɛn ɑn sɔfli. "nʌn hæɾ ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ ðiz wɪmənz stʃɹɛŋkθ, ðoʊ." ət list ʃi hæd nɑt sədʒɛstəd ðeɪ wɝ mɪsteɪkən sʌmhaʊ; ɔl ə ðoʊz waɪz wɪmən hæd bɪn eɪbəl. "nɪneɪiv, ɑɹ jə ɹɪli sədʒɛstɪŋ ðət ðə waɪz wɪmən . . . ɔl ðə waɪz wɪmən . . . ɑɹ . . . ? ðət wəd bi bɪɑn ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl."

"Seven, counting Berowin" was the slow answer, "and only one I was sure was from here." Hah! The others plainly had not been. Elayne took a deep breath, though she went on softly. "None had anywhere near these women's strength, though." At least she had not suggested they were mistaken somehow; all of those Wise Women had been able. "Nynaeve, are you really suggesting that the Wise Women . . . all the Wise Women . . . are . . . ? That would be beyond incredible."

"ɪleɪn, ðɪs sɪɾi hæz ə ɡɪl fəɹ ðə mɛn u swip ðə skwɛɹz ɛvɹi naɪt! aɪ θɪŋk wiv dʒʌs faʊn ði eɪntʃən mʌkəɾi-mʌk sɪstɝhʊɾ ʌv waɪz wɪmən."

"Elayne, this city has a guild for the men who sweep the squares every night! I think we've just found the Ancient Muckety-muck Sisterhood of Wise Women."

ðə stʌbɝn wʊmən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ðə taʊɝ wʊɾə hæɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd sɪstɝz hɪɹ jɪɹz əɡoʊ, nɪneɪiv. tu hʌnʒɹəd. ɛniθɪŋ ə ðə sɔɹt wʊɾə bɪn skwɑʃt flæɾ ɪn ʃɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ."

The stubborn woman shook her head. "The Tower would have had a hundred sisters here years ago, Nynaeve. Two hundred. Anything of the sort would have been squashed flat in short order."

"meɪbi ðə taʊɝ dʌznt noʊ," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "meɪbi ðə ɡɪl kips loʊ ɪnʌf ðət ðə taʊɝ nɛvɝ θɔt ðeɪ wɝ wɝθ tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ. ðɛɹz noʊ lɔ əɡɛns tʃænəlɪŋ ɪf jə ɑɹən ɛɛs sədaɪ, oʊnli əɡɛns kleɪmɪŋ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, əɹ mɪsjuzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. əɹ bɹɪŋɪŋ dɪskɹɛɾət." ðət mɛn duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ðət maɪt pɑsəbli kæst ə bæd laɪɾ ɑn ɹil ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃəɾ ɛniwʌn hæpən tə θɪŋk jə wɝ wʌn, wɪtʃ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ pɹɪɾi fɑɹ, tə hɝ weɪ ʌv θɪŋkɪŋ. ðə ɹil tʃɹʌbəl, ðoʊ, wɑz ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt. ðə taʊɝ sim tə noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ən ðeɪ pɹɑbli wəd bɹeɪk ʌp ə kwɪltɪŋ sɝkəl ɪf ðə wɪmən ɪn ɪt kəd tʃænəl. jɛt ðəɹ hæd tə bi səm ɛkspləneɪʃən fɔɹ. . . . oʊnli hæf-əwɛɹ, ʃi fɛl ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs biɪŋ ɛmbɹeɪst, bʌt sʌɾənli ʃi bɪkeɪm vɛɹi əwɛɹ. hɝ maʊθ fɛl oʊpən əz ə floʊ ʌv ɛɹ snɛɹɾ əɹ bɹeɪd ɹaɪɾ ət ðə beɪs ə hɝ skʌl ən ɹæn əɹ əkɹɔs ðə ɹum ɑn əɹ toʊz. ɪleɪn ɹæn ɹaɪt bɪsaɪd hɝ, ɹɛd-feɪst wɪð fjʊɹi. ðə wɝst ʌv ɪt wɑz, ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ ʃildɪd.

"Maybe the Tower doesn't know," Nynaeve said. "Maybe the guild keeps low enough that the Tower never thought they were worth troubling. There's no law against channeling if you aren't Aes Sedai, only against claiming to be Aes Sedai, or misusing the Power. Or bringing discredit." That meant doing anything that might possibly cast a bad light on real Aes Sedai, should anyone happen to think you were one, which was going pretty far, to her way of thinking. The real trouble, though, was that she did not believe it. The Tower seemed to know everything, and they probably would break up a quilting circle if the women in it could channel. Yet there had to be some explanation for. . . . Only half-aware, she felt the True Source being embraced, but suddenly she became very aware. Her mouth fell open as a flow of Air snared her braid right at the base of her skull and ran her across the room on her toes. Elayne ran right beside her, red-faced with fury. The worst of it was, they were both shielded.

ðə ʃɔɹt ɹʌn ɛndəd wən ðeɪ wɝ əlaʊd tə sɛɾəl ðɛɹ hilz ɪn fɹʌn ə mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli ən ði ʌðɝ tu, ɔl θɹi siɾəd əɡɛns ðə wɔl ɪn ɹɛd tʃɛɹz, ɔl sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ.

The short run ended when they were allowed to settle their heels in front of Mistress Corly and the other two, all three seated against the wall in red chairs, all surrounded by the glow of saidar.

"ju wɝ toʊl tə bi kwaɪət," ɹin sɛd fɝmli. "ɪf wi dɪsaɪd tə hɛlp ju, jəl əv tə lɝn ðət wi ɪkspɛk stʃɹɪkt oʊbiɾiəns noʊ lɛs ðən ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf." ʃi ɪmbjud ðoʊz læst wɝdz wɪð ə toʊn ə ɹɛvɝəns. "aɪ wɪl tɛl jə ðət jə wʊɾə bɪn tʃɹiɾəd mɔɹ dʒɛnli ɪf jə hæd nɑt kʌm tə əs ɪn ðɪs ɪɹɛɡjəlɝ fæʃən." ðə floʊ ɡɹɪpɪŋ nɪneɪivz bɹeɪd vænɪʃt. ɪleɪn tɔst əɹ hɛɾ æŋɡɹəli əz ʃi wɑz ɹilist.

"You were told to be quiet," Reanne said firmly. "If we decide to help you, you will have to learn that we expect strict obedience no less than the White Tower itself." She imbued those last words with a tone of reverence. "I will tell you that you would have been treated more gently if you had not come to us in this irregular fashion." The flow gripping Nynaeve's braid vanished. Elayne tossed her head angrily as she was released.

əpɔld əstɑnɪʃmən bɪkeɪm faɪɝi aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ əz nɪneɪiv ɹilaɪz ðət bɛɹaʊɪn hɛld əɹ ʃild. moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃi hæd mɛt stʊɾ əbʌv bɛɹaʊɪn; nɪɹli ɔl. ɡæðɝɪŋ hɝsɛlf, ʃi stʃɹeɪn tə ɹitʃ ðə sɔɹs, ɪkspɛktɪŋ ðə wivz tə ʃæɾɝ. ʃi wəɾ ət list ʃoʊ ðiz wɪmən ʃi wəd nɑt bi. . . . ðə wivz . . . stʃɹɛtʃt. ðə ɹaʊn kɛɹhinɪn wʊmən smaɪld, ən nɪneɪivz feɪs dɑɹkənd. ðə ʃil stʃɹɛtʃt fɝðɝ, fɝðɝ, bʌlʒɪŋ laɪk ə bɔl. ɪt wəd nɑt bɹeɪk. ðət wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl. ɛniwʌn kəd blɑk əɹ fɹəm ðə sɔɹs ɪf ðeɪ kɑɾ əɹ baɪ sɝpɹaɪz, ʌv kɔɹs, ən sʌmwʌn wikɝ kəd hoʊl ðə ʃild wʌns woʊvən, bʌt nɑt ðɪs mʌtʃ wikɝ. ən ə ʃil dɪd nɑt bɛn ðət fɑɹ wɪθaʊt bɹeɪkɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl!

Appalled astonishment became fiery outrage as Nynaeve realized that Berowin held her shield. Most Aes Sedai she had met stood above Berowin; nearly all. Gathering herself, she strained to reach the Source, expecting the weaves to shatter. She would at least show these women she would not be. . . . The weaves . . . stretched. The round Cairhienin woman smiled, and Nynaeve's face darkened. The shield stretched further, further, bulging like a ball. It would not break. That was impossible. Anyone could block her from the Source if they caught her by surprise, of course, and someone weaker could hold the shield once woven, but not this much weaker. And a shield did not bend that far without breaking. It was impossible!

"ju kəd bɝst ə blʌd vɛsəl ɪf jə kip ət ðæt," bɛɹaʊɪn sɛd, ɔlmoʊs kəmpænjənəbli. "wi də nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə ɹitʃ əbʌv əɹ steɪʃən, bʌt skɪlz ɑɹ hoʊnd wɪð taɪm, ən ðɪs wɑz ɔlweɪz nɪɹli ə tælənt wɪð mi. aɪ kəd hoʊld wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən."

"You could burst a blood vessel if you keep at that," Berowin said, almost companionably. "We do not try to reach above our station, but skills are honed with time, and this was always nearly a Talent with me. I could hold one of the Forsaken."

skaʊlɪŋ, nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv oʊvɝ. ʃi kəd weɪt. sɪns ʃi hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs, ʃi kʊd.

Scowling, Nynaeve gave over. She could wait. Since she had no choice, she could.

dɛɹiz keɪm bɛɹɪŋ əɹ tʃɹeɪ, dɪstʃɹɪbjuɾɪŋ kʌps ə dɑɹk ti. tə ðə θɹi siɾəd wɪmən. ʃi nɛvɝ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst ət nɪneɪiv əɹ ɪleɪn bɪfɔɹ meɪkɪŋ ə pɝfəkt kɝtsi ən ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə hɝ teɪbəl.

Derys came bearing her tray, distributing cups of dark tea. To the three seated women. She never so much as glanced at Nynaeve or Elayne before making a perfect curtsy and returning to her table.

"wi cʊɾə bɪn dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ blubɛɹi ti, nɪneɪiv," ɪleɪn sɛd, ʃuɾɪŋ sətʃ ə lʊk əɾ əɹ ðət ʃi keɪm kloʊs tə stɛpɪŋ bæk. meɪbi ɪt wəd bi bɛs nɑt tə weɪt tu lɔŋ.

"We could have been drinking blueberry tea, Nynaeve," Elayne said, shooting such a look at her that she came close to stepping back. Maybe it would be best not to wait too long.

"bi kwaɪət, ɡɝl." mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹliz toʊn maɪt bi kɑm, bʌt ʃi pæɾəd əɹ hæŋkɝtʃɪf tə hɝ feɪs æŋɡɹəli. "aʊɝ ɹipɔɹɾ ə jə sɛz jə boʊθ ɑɹ fɹoʊwɝɾ ən kəntɛnʃəs, ðət jə tʃeɪs æftɝ mɛn ən laɪ. tə wɪtʃ aɪ æd ðət jə kænɑt fɑloʊ sɪmpəl ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz. ɔl ʌv wɪtʃ mʌs tʃeɪnʒ ɪf jə sik əɹ hɛlp. ɔl ʌv ɪt. ðɪs ɪz moʊst ɪɹɛɡjəlɝ. bi ɡɹeɪtfəl wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə spik tə ju."

"Be quiet, girl." Mistress Corly's tone might be calm, but she patted her handkerchief to her face angrily. "Our report of you says you both are froward and contentious, that you chase after men and lie. To which I add that you cannot follow simple instructions. All of which must change if you seek our help. All of it. This is most irregular. Be grateful we're willing to speak to you."

"wi də sik jəɹ hɛlp," nɪneɪiv sɛd. ʃi wɪʃt ɪleɪn wəd stɑp ɡlɛɹɪŋ soʊ. ɪt wɑz wɝs ðən ðə kɔɹli wʊmənz hɑɹd stɛɹ. wɛl, əz bæd, ɛniweɪ. "wi dɛspɝətli nid tə faɪn ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil - "

"We do seek your help," Nynaeve said. She wished Elayne would stop glaring so. It was worse than the Corly woman's hard stare. Well, as bad, anyway. "We desperately need to find a ter'angreal - "

ɹin kɔɹli bɹoʊk ɪn əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn stændɪŋ ðəɹ saɪlənt. "juʒəwəli, wi noʊ ðə ɡɝlz bɹɔt tə əs bɪfɔɹhænd, bʌt wi mʌs meɪk sɝɾən jə ɑɹ wʌt jə seɪ. haʊ mɛni dɔɹz tə ðə taʊɝ laɪbɹɛɹi meɪ ə nɑvəs jus, ən wɪtʃ?" ʃi tʊk ə sɪp ə ti, weɪɾɪŋ.

Reanne Corly broke in as if she had been standing there silent. "Usually, we know the girls brought to us beforehand, but we must make certain you are what you say. How many doors to the Tower Library may a novice use, and which?" She took a sip of tea, waiting.

"tu." ðə wɝd dʒɹɪp vɛnəm fɹəm ɪleɪnz maʊð. "ðə meɪn dɔɹ tə ði ist, wən ə sɪstɝ sɛnz hɝ, əɹ ðə smɔl dɔɹ ət ðə saʊθwɛs kɔɹnɝ, kɔl ðə nɑvəs dɔɹ, wən ʃi ɡoʊz fəɹ hɝsɛlf. haʊ lɔŋ, nɪneɪiv?"

"Two." The word dripped venom from Elayne's mouth. "The main door to the east, when a sister sends her, or the small door at the southwest corner, called the Novice Door, when she goes for herself. How long, Nynaeve?"

ɡæɹiniə, hu hɛld ɪleɪnz ʃild, tʃænəld ənʌðɝ slɛndɝ floʊ ʌv ɛɹ, nɑt dʒɛnli. ɪleɪn kwɪvɝd, ðən əɡɛn, ən nɪneɪiv wɪnst, wʌndɝɪŋ ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡɹæb ət ðə bæk ə hɝ skɝt. "ə sɪvəl tʌŋ ɪz ənʌðɝ ɹɪkwaɪɹmənt," ɡæɹiniə mɝmɝd ɹaɪli ɪndə hɝ kʌp.

Garenia, who held Elayne's shield, channeled another slender flow of Air, not gently. Elayne quivered, then again, and Nynaeve winced, wondering that she did not grab at the back of her skirt. "A civil tongue is another requirement," Garenia murmured wryly into her cup.

"ðæɾ ɪz ðə ɹaɪɾ ænsɝ," mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli sɛd, əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ ɛls hæd hæpənd. ɔlðoʊ ʃi dɪɾ aɪ ðə sɑldəiən wʊmən bɹifli oʊvɝ əɹ ti. "naʊ, haʊ mɛni bɹɪdʒəz ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ ɡɑɹɾən?"

"That is the right answer," Mistress Corly said, as if nothing else had happened. Although she did eye the Saldaean woman briefly over her tea. "Now, how many bridges in the Water Garden?"

"θɹi," nɪneɪiv snæpt, meɪnli kəz ʃi nu. ʃi hæd nɑt noʊn əbaʊt ðə laɪbɹɛɹi, hævɪŋ nɛvɝ bɪn ə nɑvəs. "wi nid tə noʊ - " bɛɹaʊɪn kəd nɑt spɛɹ ɛniθɪŋ tə tʃænəl ə floʊ ʌv ɛɹ, bʌt mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli kʊd, ən dɪd. bɛɹli kipɪŋ əɹ feɪs smuð, nɪneɪiv nɑɾɪd əɹ hænz ɪn əɹ skɝts tə hoʊld əm stɪl. ɪleɪn hæd ðə ɡɔl tə ɡɪv əɹ ə smɔl, tʃɪli smaɪl. tʃɪli, bʌt sæɾəsfaɪd.

"Three," Nynaeve snapped, mainly because she knew. She had not known about the library, having never been a novice. "We need to know - " Berowin could not spare anything to channel a flow of Air, but Mistress Corly could, and did. Barely keeping her face smooth, Nynaeve knotted her hands in her skirts to hold them still. Elayne had the gall to give her a small, chilly smile. Chilly, but satisfied.

ə dʌzən mɔɹ kwɛstʃənz hæmɝɾ ət ðɛm, fɹəm haʊ mɛni flɔɹz ðə nɑvəs kɔɹɾɝz kənteɪnd - twɛlv - tə ʌndɝ wʌt sɝkəmstænsəz ə nɑvəs wɑz əlaʊɾ ɪndə ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ - tə kæɹi mɛsədʒəz əɹ tə bi ɪkspɛl fɹəm ðə taʊɝ fəɹ ə kɹaɪm; noʊ ʌðɝz - hæmɝd wɪθaʊt nɪneɪiv ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪn mɔɹ ðən tu wɝdz, ən ðoʊz tu ænsɝd saɪlənli baɪ ðə hɔɹəbəl kɔɹli wʊmən. ʃi bɪɡæn tə fil laɪk ə nɑvəs ɪn ðə hɔl; ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ əlaʊd tə spik ə wɝɾ iðɝ. ðət wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju ænsɝz ʃi nu, bʌt lʌkəli ɪleɪn ɹɪspɑndɪd pɹɑmpli wən ʃi dɪd nɑt. nɪneɪiv maɪɾ əv dʌn bɛɾɝ hæd ðeɪ æskt əbaʊɾ æksɛptɪd, ə lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ ət list, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz wʌɾ ə nɑvəs ʃəd noʊ ðəɾ ɪntʃɹəstəd ðɛm. ʃi wɑz dʒʌst ɡlæɾ ɪleɪn wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə ɡoʊ əlɔŋ, ðoʊ baɪ hɝ peɪl tʃiks ən ɹeɪz tʃɪn, ðət kəd nɑt læs mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ.

A dozen more questions hammered at them, from how many floors the novice quarters contained - twelve - to under what circumstances a novice was allowed into the Hall of the Tower - to carry messages or to be expelled from the Tower for a crime; no others - hammered without Nynaeve getting in more than two words, and those two answered silently by the horrible Corly woman. She began to feel like a novice in the Hall; they were not allowed to speak a word either. That was one of the few answers she knew, but luckily Elayne responded promptly when she did not. Nynaeve might have done better had they asked about Accepted, a little better at least, but it was what a novice should know that interested them. She was just glad Elayne was willing to go along, though by her pale cheeks and raised chin, that could not last much longer.

"aɪ səpoʊz nɪneɪiv wɑz ɹɪli ðɛɹ," ɹin sɛd faɪnəli, ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɡlænsɪz wɪð ði ʌðɝ tu. "ɪf ɪleɪn tɔɾ əɹ tə pæs, aɪ θɪŋk ʃi wʊɾə dʌn ə bɛɾɝ dʒɑb. səm pipəl lɪv ɪn pɝpɛtʃuəl fɑɡ." ɡæɹiniə snɪft, ðən nɑɾəd sloʊli. bɛɹaʊɪnz nɑd keɪm ɪntaɪɝli tu pɹɑmpli fəɹ nɪneɪivz laɪkɪŋ.

"I suppose Nynaeve was really there," Reanne said finally, exchanging glances with the other two. "If Elayne taught her to pass, I think she would have done a better job. Some people live in perpetual fog." Garenia sniffed, then nodded slowly. Berowin's nod came entirely too promptly for Nynaeve's liking.

"pliz," ʃi sɛd pəlaɪtli. ʃi kəd bi pəlaɪt wən ðəɹ wɑz ɹizən, wʌtɛvɝ ɛniwʌn sɛd. "wi tʃɹuli nid tə faɪn ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðə si foʊk kɔl ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz. ɪts ɪn ə dʌsti oʊl stɔɹɹum sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə ɹæhəd, ən aɪ θɪŋk jəɹ ɡɪld, jəɹ sɝkəl, mʌs noʊ wɛɹ. pliz hɛlp ʌs." θɹi sʌɾənli stoʊni feɪsəz stɛɹɾ ət hɝ.

"Please," she said politely. She could be polite when there was reason, whatever anyone said. "We truly need to find a ter'angreal the Sea Folk call the Bowl of the Winds. It's in a dusty old storeroom somewhere in the Rahad, and I think your guild, your Circle, must know where. Please help us." Three suddenly stony faces stared at her.

"ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ ɡɪld," mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli sɛd kuli, "oʊnli ə fju fɹɛnz u faʊnd noʊ pleɪs ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ . . ." əɡɛn, ðət ɹɛvɝɛntʃəl toʊn. ". . . ən u ɑɹ fulɪʃ ɪnʌf əkeɪʒənəli tə ɹitʃ aʊɾ ə hænd wɛɹ ɪts niɾəd. wɪv noʊ tʃɹʌk wɪð tɛɹæŋɡɹil, əɹ æŋɡɹil, əɹ sɑŋɡɹil iðɝ. wəɹ nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ." "ɛɛs sədaɪ" ɛkoʊd wɪð vɛnɝeɪʃən, əz wɛl. "ɪn ɛni keɪs, jə ɑɹ nɑt hɪɹ tə æsk kwɛstʃənz. wɪv mɔɹ fəɹ ju, tə si haʊ fɑɹ juv ɡɔn, æftɝ wɪtʃ jəl bi teɪkən tə ðə kʌntʃɹi ən ɡɪvən ɪndə ðə kɛɹ ʌv ə fɹɛnd. ʃɪl kip jə əntɪl wi dɪsaɪd wʌt tə də nɛkst. əntɪl wi kən bi ʃʊɹ ðə sɪstɝz ɑɹ nɑt lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ju. juv ə nu laɪf əhɛɾ ə ju, ə nu tʃæns, ɪf jə kən oʊnli lɛt jɝsɛlf si ɪt. wʌtɛvɝ hɛl jə bæk ɪn ðə taʊɝ dʌz nɑɾ əplaɪ hɪɹ, wɛðɝ ə læk ə dɛkstɛɹəɾi əɹ fɪɹ əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. noʊ wʌn wɪl pʊʃ jə tə lɝn əɹ də wʌt jə kænɑt. wʌt jə ɑɹ ɪz səfɪʃənt. naʊ."

"There is no guild," Mistress Corly said coolly, "only a few friends who found no place in the White Tower . . ." Again, that reverential tone. ". . . and who are foolish enough occasionally to reach out a hand where it's needed. We have no truck with ter'angreal, or angreal, or sa'angreal either. We are not Aes Sedai." "Aes Sedai" echoed with veneration, as well. "In any case, you are not here to ask questions. We have more for you, to see how far you've gone, after which you will be taken to the country and given into the care of a friend. She will keep you until we decide what to do next. Until we can be sure the sisters are not looking for you. You have a new life ahead of you, a new chance, if you can only let yourself see it. Whatever held you back in the Tower does not apply here, whether a lack of dexterity or fear or anything else. No one will push you to learn or do what you cannot. What you are is sufficient. Now."

"ɪnʌf," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə wɪntɝi vɔɪs. "lɔŋ ɪnʌf, nɪneɪiv. əɹ dʒju ɪntɛn tə weɪɾ ɪn ðə kʌntʃɹi fəɹ haʊɛvɝ lɔŋ? ðeɪ də nɑɾ əv ɪt, nɪneɪiv." ɹimuvɪŋ əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ fɹəm əɹ bɛl paʊtʃ, ʃi θɹʌs ðə sɝkəl ʌv ɡoʊld ɑntu hɝ fɪŋɡɝ. fɹəm ðə weɪ ʃi lʊkt ət ðə siɾəd wɪmən, noʊ wʌn wəd bɪliv əɹ ʃildɪd. ʃi wɑz ə kwin aʊɾ ə peɪʃəns. ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hɝ hɛɹ wɑz wʌt ʃi wɑz. "aɪ æm ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs tʃɹəkənd. aɪm dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ, ən aɪ dɪmæn jə ɹilis mi ɪmiɾiətli." nɪneɪiv ɡɹoʊnd.

"Enough," Elayne said in a wintery voice. "Long enough, Nynaeve. Or do you intend to wait in the country for however long? They do not have it, Nynaeve." Removing her Great Serpent ring from her belt pouch, she thrust the circle of gold onto her finger. From the way she looked at the seated women, no one would believe her shielded. She was a queen out of patience. She was Aes Sedai to her hair was what she was. "I am Elayne Trakand, High Seat of House Trakand. I am Daughter-Heir of Andor and Aes Sedai of the Green Ajah, and I demand you release me immediately." Nynaeve groaned.

ɡæɹiniə ɡɹɪməst wɪð dɪsɡʌst, ən bɛɹaʊɪnz aɪz waɪɾənd ɪn hɔɹɝ. ɹin kɔɹli ʃʊk əɹ hɛd ɹufəli, bʌt wən ʃi spoʊk, hɝ vɔɪs wɑz aɪɝn. "aɪ hæd hoʊp sɛɾəl hæd tʃeɪnʒd jəɹ maɪn kənsɝnɪŋ ðət pɝtɪkjəlɝ laɪ. aɪ noʊ haʊ hɑɹɾ ɪɾ ɪz, tə sɛɾ aʊt pɹaʊdli fəɹ ðə waɪt taʊɝ ðən faɪn jɝsɛlf feɪst wɪð ɹɪtɝnɪŋ hoʊm tə ədmɪt feɪljɝ. bʌt ðəɾ ɪz nɛvɝ sɛd, ivən ɪn dʒoʊk!"

Garenia grimaced with disgust, and Berowin's eyes widened in horror. Reanne Corly shook her head ruefully, but when she spoke, her voice was iron. "I had hoped Setalle had changed your mind concerning that particular lie. I know how hard it is, to set out proudly for the White Tower then find yourself faced with returning home to admit failure. But that is never said, even in joke!"

"aɪ meɪd noʊ dʒoʊk," ɪleɪn sɛd laɪtli. snoʊ wɑz laɪt.

"I made no joke," Elayne said lightly. Snow was light.

ɡæɹiniə lin fɔɹwɝd wɪð ə skaʊl, ə floʊ ʌv ɛɹ ɔlɹɛɾi fɔɹmɪŋ əntɪl mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli ɹeɪzd əɹ hænd. "æn ju, nɪneɪiv? dʒju pɝsɪst ɪn ðɪs . . . mædnəs, tu?"

Garenia leaned forward with a scowl, a flow of Air already forming until Mistress Corly raised her hand. "And you, Nynaeve? Do you persist in this . . . madness, too?"

nɪneɪiv fɪld əɹ lʌŋz. ðiz wɪmən hæd tə noʊ wɛɹ ðə boʊl wɑz; ðeɪ dʒʌs hæd tə!

Nynaeve filled her lungs. These women had to know where the Bowl was; they just had to!

"nɪneɪiv!" ɪleɪn sɛd pivɪʃli. ʃi wɑz nɑt gɑnə lɛɾ əɹ fɝɡɛt ðɪs ivən ɪf ðeɪ dɪɾ əv tə ɪfɛkt ən ɪskeɪp. ʃi hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv hɑɹpɪŋ ɑn ɛvɹi lɪɾəl mɪsstɛp ɪn ə mænɝ ðət kʌt ðə ɡɹaʊn ɹaɪt fɹəm ʌndɝ jəɹ fit.

"Nynaeve!" Elayne said peevishly. She was not going to let her forget this even if they did have to effect an escape. She had a way of harping on every little misstep in a manner that cut the ground right from under your feet.

"aɪ æm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə jɛloʊ ədʒɑ," nɪneɪiv sɛd wɛɹəli. "ðə tʃɹu æmɪɝlɪn sit, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ, ɹeɪzd əs tə ðə ʃɔl ɪn sɑlədɑɹ. ʃiz noʊ oʊldɝ ðən ɪleɪn; jə mʌst əv hɝd." nɑɾ ə ɡlɪmɝ ə tʃeɪnʒ ɪn ðoʊz θɹi hɑɹd feɪsəz. "ʃi sɛn əs tə faɪn ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz. wɪð ɪt, wi kən mɛn ðə wɛðɝ." nɑɾ ə flɪkɝ ə tʃeɪnʒ. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə hoʊld əɹ æŋɡɝ daʊn; ʃi tʃɹuli dɪd. ɪt dʒʌst uzd ʌp dɪspaɪt hɝ. "ju mʌst wɑn ðæt! lʊk ɝaʊn ju! ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz stʃɹæŋɡəlɪŋ ðə wɝld! ɪf juv ivən ə hɪn ʌv wɛɹ ðə boʊl maɪt bi, tɛl ʌs!"

"I am an Aes Sedai of the Yellow Ajah," Nynaeve said wearily. "The true Amyrlin Seat, Egwene al'Vere, raised us to the shawl in Salidar. She's no older than Elayne; you must have heard." Not a glimmer of change in those three hard faces. "She sent us to find the Bowl of the Winds. With it, we can mend the weather." Not a flicker of change. She tried to hold her anger down; she truly did. It just oozed up despite her. "You must want that! Look around you! The Dark One is strangling the world! If you have even a hint of where the Bowl might be, tell us!"

mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli moʊʃən fəɹ dɛɹiz, hu keɪm ən tʊk ðə kʌps, kæstɪŋ fɪɹfəl, waɪd-aɪd lʊks ət nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn. wən ʃi skɝiɾ əweɪ, aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum ɪn fækt, ðə θɹi wɪmən stʊd sloʊli, stændɪŋ laɪk ɡɹɪm mædʒɪstʃɹeɪts pɹənaʊnsɪŋ sɛntəns.

Mistress Corly motioned for Derys, who came and took the cups, casting fearful, wide-eyed looks at Nynaeve and Elayne. When she scurried away, out of the room in fact, the three women stood slowly, standing like grim magistrates pronouncing sentence.

"aɪ ɹəɡɹɛt ðət jəl nɑɾ æksɛpt əɹ hɛlp," mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli sɛd koʊldli. "aɪ ɹəɡɹɛt ðɪs hoʊl əfɛɹ." ɹitʃɪŋ ɪndə hɝ paʊtʃ, ʃi pɹɛs θɹi sɪlvɝ mɑɹks ɪndə nɪneɪivz hæn ən ənʌðɝ θɹi ɪndə ɪleɪnz. "ðiz wɪl teɪk jə ə lɪɾəl weɪ. jə kən ɔlsoʊ ɡɛt sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ ðoʊz dʒɹɛsəz, aɪ ʃəd θɪŋk, ɪf nɑt wʌt jə peɪd. ðoʊz ɑɹ hɑɹdli suɾəbəl ɡɑɹməns fəɹ ə dʒɝni. baɪ təmɑɹoʊ sʌnɹaɪz, jəl bi ɡɔn fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ."

"I regret that you will not accept our help," Mistress Corly said coldly. "I regret this whole affair." Reaching into her pouch, she pressed three silver marks into Nynaeve's hand and another three into Elayne's. "These will take you a little way. You can also get something for those dresses, I should think, if not what you paid. Those are hardly suitable garments for a journey. By tomorrow sunrise, you will be gone from Ebou Dar."

"wi ɑɹənt ɡoʊɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ," nɪneɪiv toʊl hɝ. "pliz, ɪf jə noʊ - " ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv kɛp saɪlənt. ðə mɛʒɝd floʊ ʌv wɝdz dɪd nɑt sloʊ.

"We aren't going anywhere," Nynaeve told her. "Please, if you know - " She might as well have kept silent. The measured flow of words did not slow.

"æt ðət taɪm wɪl bɪɡɪn sɝkjəleɪɾɪŋ jəɹ dɪskɹɪpʃənz, ən wɪl meɪk sɝɾən ðeɪ ɹitʃ ðə sɪstɝz ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs. ɪf jə ɑɹ sin æftɝ sʌnɹaɪz, wɪl si ðət ðə sɪstɝz noʊ wɛɹ jə ɑɹ, ən ðə waɪt-kloʊks əz wɛl. jəɹ tʃɔɪs ðən wɪl bi tə ɹʌn, sɝɛndɝ tə ðə sɪstɝz, əɹ daɪ. ɡoʊ, də nɑt ɹɪtɝn, ən jə ʃəd lɪv lɔŋ ɪf jə ɡɪv oʊvɝ ðɪs ɹipʌlsɪv ən deɪnʒɝəs ɹuz. wəɹ dʌn wɪð ju. bɛɹaʊɪn, si tə ðɛm, pliz." bɹʌʃɪŋ bɪtwin ðɛm, ʃi wɛn fɹəm ðə ɹum wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ bæk.

"At that time we will begin circulating your descriptions, and we will make certain they reach the sisters in the Tarasin Palace. If you are seen after sunrise, we will see that the sisters know where you are, and the White-cloaks as well. Your choice then will be to run, surrender to the sisters, or die. Go, do not return, and you should live long if you give over this repulsive and dangerous ruse. We are done with you. Berowin, see to them, please." Brushing between them, she went from the room without looking back.

sʌlənli, nɪneɪiv lɛt hɝsɛlf bi hɝɾɪd daʊn tə ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ. ə stʃɹʌɡəl wəd nɑɾ ətʃiv ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp meɪbi biɪŋ θɹoʊn aʊt bɑɾəli, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp. laɪt, ʃi dɪd nɑt! ɪleɪn mɑɹtʃt, fɹoʊzən dɪtɝməneɪʃən tə liv ən bi dʌn ʃaɪnɪŋ ɪn ɛvɹi laɪn ə hɝ.

Sullenly, Nynaeve let herself be herded down to the front door. A struggle would not achieve anything except maybe being thrown out bodily, but she did not like giving up. Light, she did not! Elayne marched, frozen determination to leave and be done shining in every line of her.

ɪn ðə smɔl ɛntʃɹi hɔl, nɪneɪiv dɪsaɪɾɪd tə tʃɹaɪ wʌns mɔɹ. "pliz, ɡæɹiniə, bɛɹaʊɪn, ɪf juv ɛni hɪnt, tɛl ʌs. ɛni klu əɾ ɔl. jə mʌst si haʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðɪs ɪz. jə mʌst!"

In the small entry hall, Nynaeve decided to try once more. "Please, Garenia, Berowin, if you have any hint, tell us. Any clue at all. You must see how important this is. You must!"

" 'ðə blaɪndəst ɑɹ ðoʊz u kip ðɛɹ aɪz ʃʌt,' " ɪleɪn kwoʊɾəd, nɑt kwaɪɾ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ.

" 'The blindest are those who keep their eyes shut,' " Elayne quoted, not quite under her breath.

bɛɹaʊɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, bʌt nɑt ɡæɹiniə. ʃi pʊɾ əɹ feɪs ɹaɪɾ ɪn nɪneɪivz. "du jə θɪŋk wɝ fulz, ɡɝl? əl tɛl jə ðɪs. ɪf aɪ hæd maɪ weɪ, wi wəd bʌndəl jə aʊt tə ðə fɑɹm noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt jə seɪ. ə fju mʌnθs ʌv æləzəz ətɛnʃənz, ən jud lɝn tə ɡɑɹd jəɹ tʌŋ ən bi ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ ðə hɛlp jə spɪɾ ɑn." nɪneɪiv kənsɪɾɝd hɪɾɪŋ əɹ ɑn ðə noʊz; ʃi dɪd nɑt nid seɪaɪdɑɹ tə juz əɹ fɪst.

Berowin hesitated, but not Garenia. She put her face right in Nynaeve's. "Do you think we're fools, girl? I'll tell you this. If I had my way, we would bundle you out to the farm no matter what you say. A few months of Alise's attentions, and you'd learn to guard your tongue and be grateful for the help you spit on." Nynaeve considered hitting her on the nose; she did not need saidar to use her fist.

"ɡæɹiniə," bɛɹaʊɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "əpɑlədʒaɪz! wi də nɑt hoʊld ɛniwʌn əɡɛnst əɹ wɪl, ən jə noʊ ɪt wɛl. əpɑlədʒaɪz ɪmiɾiətli!"

"Garenia," Berowin said sharply. "Apologize! We do not hold anyone against her will, and you know it well. Apologize immediately!"

ən wʌndɝ ʌv wʌndɝz, ðə wʊmən u wʊɾə stʊd vɛɹi kloʊs tə ðə tɑp hæd ʃi bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ lʊk saɪdweɪz ət ðə wʊmən u wʊɾə stʊd nɪɹ ðə bɑɾəm, ən blʌʃt kɹɪmzən. "aɪ æsk fɝɡɪvnəs," ɡæɹiniə mʌmbəld ət nɪneɪiv. "maɪ tɛmpɝ ɡɛts ðə bɛɾɝ ə mi səmtaɪmz, ən aɪ seɪ wʌɾ aɪ hæv noʊ ɹaɪt tə. aɪ hʌmbli æsk fɝɡɪvnəs." ənʌðɝ saɪd-lɔŋ ɡlæns ət bɛɹaʊɪn, hu nɑɾəd, pɹədusɪŋ ə saɪ ʌv oʊpən ɹɪlif.

And wonder of wonders, the woman who would have stood very close to the top had she been Aes Sedai looked sideways at the woman who would have stood near the bottom, and blushed crimson. "I ask forgiveness," Garenia mumbled at Nynaeve. "My temper gets the better of me sometimes, and I say what I have no right to. I humbly ask forgiveness." Another side-long glance at Berowin, who nodded, producing a sigh of open relief.

waɪl nɪneɪiv wɑz stɪl ɡeɪpɪŋ, ðə ʃilz wɝ ɹilist, ən ʃi ən ɪleɪn wɝ pʊʃt ɪndə ðə stʃɹit, ðə dɔɹ slæmɪŋ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

While Nynaeve was still gaping, the shields were released, and she and Elayne were pushed into the street, the door slamming shut behind them.


tʃæptɝ twɛntifɔɹ


CHAPTER 24

ðə kɪn


The Kin

ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl, ɹin θɔt, wɑtʃɪŋ fɹəm ə wɪndoʊ əz ðə tu stʃɹeɪnʒ ɡɝlz vænɪʃt daʊn ðə stʃɹiɾ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹeɪdzmən ən bɛɡɝz ən əkeɪʒənəl sɪdæn tʃɛɹz. ʃi hæd ɹɪtɝn tə ðə miɾɪŋ ɹum əz sun əz ðə pɛɹ wɑz ɛskɔɹɾɪd fɹəm ɪt. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt tə meɪk ə ðɛm, ən ðɛɹ pɝsɪstən kleɪmz ɪn ðə feɪs ʌv ɔl ɹizən wɝ oʊnli pɑɹɾ ə hɝ kənfjuʒən.

Incredible, Reanne thought, watching from a window as the two strange girls vanished down the street among the tradesmen and beggars and occasional sedan chairs. She had returned to the meeting room as soon as the pair was escorted from it. She did not know what to make of them, and their persistent claims in the face of all reason were only part of her confusion.

"ðeɪ dɪd nɑt pɝspaɪɹ," bɛɹaʊɪn wɪspɝɾ əɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. "jɛs?" ʃi wʊɾə ɝeɪnʒd fəɹ ðə nuz tə ɹitʃ ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs ɪn ðə nɛkst aʊɝ ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt ɡɪvən əɹ wɝd. ən ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðə deɪnʒɝ. fɪɹ bʌbəld ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl, ðə seɪm pænɪk ðət hæɾ oʊvɝteɪkən əɹ æftɝ wʌn pæsədʒ θɹu ðə sɪlvɝ ɑɹtʃəz wən ʃi wɛn tə tɛs fəɹ æksɛptɪd. dʒʌst əz ʃi hæɾ ɛvɹi taɪm ɪt hæd stɝɾ ɪn ðə jɪɹz sɪns, ʃi tʊk ə fɹɛʃ ɡɹɪp ɑn hɝsɛlf; ɪn tʃɹuθ, ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz ðət ðə fɪɹ ʃi maɪt ɹʌn skɹimɪŋ əɡɛn hæd lɔŋ sɪns kɑŋkɝɾ ɛni pɑsəbɪləɾi ðət ʃi wʊd. ʃi pɹeɪd ðət ðoʊz ɡɝlz wəɾ əbændən ðɛɹ ɪnsænəɾi. ʃi pɹeɪd ðəɾ ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt, ðeɪ wɝ kɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ ən iðɝ kɛp saɪlən əɹ wɝ nɑt bɪlivd. pɹikɔʃənz wəɾ əv tə bi teɪkən, seɪfɡɑɹdz kæɹiɾ aʊt ðət hæd nɑt bɪn juzd ɪn jɪɹz. ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ əz nɪɹ ɑmnɪpəɾənt əz meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns, ðoʊ. ðæt, ʃi nu ɪn əɹ boʊnz.

"They did not perspire," Berowin whispered at her shoulder. "Yes?" She would have arranged for the news to reach the Tarasin Palace in the next hour if she had not given her word. And if not for the danger. Fear bubbled in her middle, the same panic that had overtaken her after one passage through the silver arches when she went to test for Accepted. Just as she had every time it had stirred in the years since, she took a fresh grip on herself; in truth, she did not realize that the fear she might run screaming again had long since conquered any possibility that she would. She prayed that those girls would abandon their insanity. She prayed that if they did not, they were caught far from Ebou Dar and either kept silent or were not believed. Precautions would have to be taken, safeguards carried out that had not been used in years. Aes Sedai were as near omnipotent as made no difference, though. That, she knew in her bones.

"ɛldəst, kəɾ ɪt bi pɑsəbəl ðət ði oʊldɝ ə ðə tu ɹɪli ɪz . . . ? wi tʃænəld, ænd. . . ."

"Eldest, could it be possible that the older of the two really is . . . ? We channeled, and. . . ."

bɛɹaʊɪn tʃɹeɪld ɔf mɪzɝəbli, bʌt ɹin dɪd nɑt nid tə kənsɪɾɝ, nɑɾ ivən sɛɾɪŋ əsaɪd ðə jʌŋɡɝ ɡɝl. waɪ wəɾ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹitɛn tə bi lɛs, soʊ mʌtʃ lɛs? bɪsaɪdz, ɛni ɹil ɛɛs sədaɪ wʊɾə pʊɾ əm ɔl ɑn ðɛɹ niz bɛɡɪŋ mɝsi, nɑt stʊd ðəɹ soʊ səbmɪsɪvli.

Berowin trailed off miserably, but Reanne did not need to consider, not even setting aside the younger girl. Why would any Aes Sedai pretend to be less, so much less? Besides, any real Aes Sedai would have put them all on their knees begging mercy, not stood there so submissively.

"wi dɪd nɑt tʃænəl ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃi sɛd fɝmli. "wi bɹoʊk noʊ ɹul." ðoʊz ɹulz əplaɪd tə hɝ əz stʃɹɪkli əz ɛniwʌn ɛls; ðə vɛɹi fɝst wɑz ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɔl wʌn, ivən ðoʊz sɛɾ əbʌv fəɹ ə taɪm. haʊ kəɾ ɪɾ əv bɪn ʌðɝwaɪz, wən ðoʊz u wɝ əbʌv mʌst ɪvɛntʃəwəli stɛp daʊn? oʊnli θɹu muvmən ən tʃeɪnʒ kəd ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪn hɪɾən.

"We did not channel in front of an Aes Sedai," she said firmly. "We broke no rule." Those rules applied to her as strictly as anyone else; the very first was that they were all one, even those set above for a time. How could it have been otherwise, when those who were above must eventually step down? Only through movement and change could they remain hidden.

"bʌt səm ə ðə ɹumɝz də mɛnʃən ə ɡɝl əz æmɪɝlɪn, ɛldəst. ən ʃi nu - "

"But some of the rumors do mention a girl as Amyrlin, Eldest. And she knew - "

"ɹɛbəlz." ɹin pʊɾ ɪndə ðəɾ ɔl ði aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ dɪsbɪlif ʃi fɛlt. ðəɾ ɛniwʌn ʃəd dɛɹ tə ɹəbɛl əɡɛns ðə waɪt taʊɝ! ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli stʃɹeɪnʒ fəɹ ʌnbəlivəbəl teɪlz tə ətætʃ tə ɛniwʌn laɪk ðæt.

"Rebels." Reanne put into that all the outraged disbelief she felt. That anyone should dare to rebel against the White Tower! It was hardly strange for unbelievable tales to attach to anyone like that.

"wʌɾ əbaʊt lɑɡən, ən ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ?" ɡæɹiniə dɪmændəd, ən ɹeɪ-æn fɪkst əɹ wɪð ə stɛɹ. ðə wʊmən hæd ɡɑɾən hɝsɛlf ənʌðɝ kʌp ə ti bɪfɔɹ kʌmɪŋ bæk ʌp, ən ʃi mænədʒ tə sɪp dɪfaɪənli.

"What about Logain, and the Red Ajah?" Garenia demanded, and Re-anne fixed her with a stare. The woman had gotten herself another cup of tea before coming back up, and she managed to sip defiantly.

"wʌtɛvɝ ðə tʃɹuθ, ɡæɹiniə, ɪts nɑɾ əɹ pleɪs tə kɹɪɾɪsaɪz ɛniθɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪt du." ɹinz maʊθ taɪɾənd. ðət hɑɹdli skwɛɹd wɪð wʌt ʃi fɛl təwɔɹd ðə ɹɛbəlz, bʌt haʊ kəɾ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ də sətʃ ə θɪŋ?

"Whatever the truth, Garenia, it is not our place to criticize anything Aes Sedai might do." Reanne's mouth tightened. That hardly squared with what she felt toward the rebels, but how could any Aes Sedai do such a thing?

ðə sɑldəiən bɛn əɹ nɛk ɪn ækwiɛsəns, ðoʊ, ən pɝhæps tə haɪd ðə sʌlən twɪst ə hɝ maʊθ. ɹin saɪd. ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd ɡɪvən ʌp dʒɹimz ə ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ lɔŋ lɔŋ əɡoʊ, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ ðoʊz laɪk bɛɹaʊɪn u bɪlivd, sikɹɪtli ðeɪ θɔt, ðət sʌmhaʊ ðeɪ maɪt wʌn deɪ ɹɪtɝn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, sʌmhaʊ jɛt bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən ðən ðəɹ wɝ wɪmən laɪk ɡæɹiniə, ɔlmoʊst əz pʊɹ ət kipɪŋ ðɛɹ wɪʃɪz sikɹət, ðoʊ ðoʊz wɪʃɪz wɝ tɛn taɪmz əz fɔɹbɪɾən. ðeɪ æktʃəli wʊɾə əv æksɛptɪd waɪldɝz, ən ivən ɡɔn aʊt tə faɪnd ɡɝlz u kəd bi tɔt!

The Saldaean bent her neck in acquiescence, though, and perhaps to hide the sullen twist of her mouth. Reanne sighed. She herself had given up dreams of the Green Ajah long long ago, but there were those like Berowin who believed, secretly they thought, that somehow they might one day return to the White Tower, somehow yet become Aes Sedai. And then there were women like Garenia, almost as poor at keeping their wishes secret, though those wishes were ten times as forbidden. They actually would have accepted wilders, and even gone out to find girls who could be taught!

ɡæɹiniə wɑz nɑt dʌn; ʃi ɔlweɪz skɝɾɪd ði ɛdʒəz ə dɪsəplən, ən fɹikwənli stɛpt oʊvɝ. "wʌɾ ə ðɪs sɛɾəl ɑnən, ðɛn? ðoʊz ɡɝlz noʊ əbaʊt ðə sɝkəl. ði ɑnən wʊmən mʌst əv toʊl ðɛm, ðoʊ haʊ ʃi noʊz. . . ." ʃi ʃʌɾɝəd ɪn ə weɪ ðət wʊɾə bɪn ɪntaɪɝli tu ɑstənteɪʃəs fəɹ moʊst ʌðɝz, bʌt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn eɪbəl tə kənsil əɹ ɪmoʊʃənz. ivən wən ʃi ʃʊd. "huɛvɝ bɪtʃɹeɪɾ əs tə hɝ mʌs bi faʊnd, ən əɹ bɪtʃɹeɪəl pʌnɪʃt tu. ʃiz ən ɪnkipɝ, ən ʃi mʌs bi tɔt tə ɡɑɹɾ əɹ tʌŋ!" bɛɹaʊɪn ɡæspt, waɪd-aɪd wɪð ʃɑk, ən dʒɹɑpt ɪndə ə tʃɛɹ soʊ hɑɹd ʃi nɪɹli baʊnst.

Garenia was not done; she always skirted the edges of discipline, and frequently stepped over. "What of this Setalle Anan, then? Those girls know about the Circle. The Anan woman must have told them, though how she knows. . . ." She shuddered in a way that would have been entirely too ostentatious for most others, but she had never been able to conceal her emotions. Even when she should. "Whoever betrayed us to her must be found, and her betrayal punished too. She's an innkeeper, and she must be taught to guard her tongue!" Berowin gasped, wide-eyed with shock, and dropped into a chair so hard she nearly bounced.

"ɹɪmɛmbɝ u ʃi ɪz, ɡæɹiniə," ɹin sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "ɪf sɛɾəl hæd bɪtʃɹeɪɾ ʌs, wi wəd bi kɹɔlɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, bɛɡɪŋ fɝɡɪvnəs ðə hoʊl weɪ." wən ʃi fɝs keɪm tə ɛbu dɑɹ, ʃi hæd bɪn toʊl ðə stɔɹi ʌv ə wʊmən meɪd tə kɹɔl tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən nʌθɪŋ ʃi hæd sin sɪns ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪɾ əɹ kwɛstʃən ɪɾ ɪn ðə list. "ʃi hæz kɛp ðə fju sikɹəts ʃi noʊz fɹəm ɡɹæɾətud, ən aɪ daʊt ðəɾ əz feɪɾəd. ʃi wʊɾə daɪɾ ɪn əɹ fɝs tʃaɪldbɝθ ɪf ðə kɪn hæd nɑt hɛlp hɝ. wʌt ʃi noʊz kʌmz fɹəm kɛɹləs tʌŋz, wən ɪt wɑz θɔt ʃi kəd nɑt hɪɹ, ən ði oʊnɝz ə ðoʊz tʌŋz wɝ pʌnɪʃt mɔɹ ðən twɛnti jɪɹz əɡoʊ." stɪl, ʃi wɪʃt ðəɹ wɑz səm weɪ ʃi kəd bɹɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə æsk sɛɾəl tə bi mɔɹ sɝkəmspɛkt. ʃi mʌst əv spoʊkən kɛɹləsli ɪn fɹʌn ə ðoʊz ɡɝlz.

"Remember who she is, Garenia," Reanne said sharply. "If Setalle had betrayed us, we would be crawling to Tar Valon, begging forgiveness the whole way." When she first came to Ebou Dar, she had been told the story of a woman made to crawl to the White Tower, and nothing she had seen since of Aes Sedai made her question it in the least. "She has kept the few secrets she knows from gratitude, and I doubt that has faded. She would have died in her first childbirth if the Kin had not helped her. What she knows comes from careless tongues, when it was thought she could not hear, and the owners of those tongues were punished more than twenty years ago." Still, she wished there was some way she could bring herself to ask Setalle to be more circumspect. She must have spoken carelessly in front of those girls.

ðə wʊmən baʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ əɡɛn, bʌɾ əɹ maʊθ wɑz sɛt stʌbɝnli. ət lis pɑɹɾ ə ðɪs tɝn, ɹin dɪsaɪɾɪd, ɡæɹiniə wəd spɛn ət ðə ɹitʃɹit, ən ʃi wəɾ əv spɛʃəl ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz tə ɹileɪ wɪð əɹ oʊn stʌbɝn maʊθ. æləz sɛldəm ɹikwaɪɝd mɔɹ ðən ə wik tə meɪk ə wʊmən dɪsaɪd stʌbɝnnəs dɪd nɑt peɪ.

The woman bowed her head again, but her mouth was set stubbornly. At least part of this turn, Reanne decided, Garenia would spend at the retreat, and she would have special instructions to relay with her own stubborn mouth. Alise seldom required more than a week to make a woman decide stubbornness did not pay.

bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəɾ ɪnfɔɹm ɡæɹiniə, ðoʊ, dɛɹiz wɑz kɝtsiɪŋ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, ənaʊnsɪŋ sɹeɪnjə vɔstoʊvən. əz juʒəwəl, sɹeɪnjə swɛpt ɹaɪɾ ɪn bɪfɔɹ ɹin kəd seɪ tə ədmɪt hɝ. ɪn səm weɪz, ðə stʃɹaɪkɪŋli hænsəm wʊmən meɪd ɡæɹiniə əpɪɹ sʌpəl, dɪspaɪt kipɪŋ ðə fɔɹm ʌv ɛvɹi ɹul ɪɡzækli. ɹin wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi wʊɾə wɔɹn əɹ hɛɹ ɪn bɹeɪdz ən bɛlz ɡɪvən ðə tʃɔɪs, ən nɛvɝ maɪn haʊ ðət wʊɾə lʊkt wɪð əɹ ɹɛd bɛlt. bʌt ðɛn, ɡɪvən ðə tʃɔɪs ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv sɝvd ivən wʌn tɝn wɪð ðə bɛlt.

Before she could inform Garenia, though, Derys was curtsying in the doorway, announcing Sarainya Vostovan. As usual, Sarainya swept right in before Reanne could say to admit her. In some ways, the strikingly handsome woman made Garenia appear supple, despite keeping the form of every rule exactly. Reanne was sure she would have worn her hair in braids and bells given the choice, and never mind how that would have looked with her red belt. But then, given the choice she would not have served even one turn with the belt.

sɹeɪnjə dɪd kɝtsi ət ðə dɔɹ, ʌv kɔɹs, ən nil bɪfɔɹ hɝ, hɛd loʊɝd, bʌt fɪfti jɪɹz hæd nɑt meɪɾ əɹ fɝɡɛt ðət ʃi wʊɾə bɪn ə wʊmən ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl paʊɝ hæd ʃi bɪn eɪbəl tə meɪk hɝsɛlf ɹɪtɝn hoʊm tə ɝæfəl. kɝtsi ən ðə ɹɛst ɔl wɝ kənsɛʃənz. wən ʃi spoʊk, ɪn ðət hʌski, fɔɹsfəl vɔɪs, wɛðɝ ðə wʊmən wəɾ ɛvɝ ɹɛkənsaɪl hɝsɛlf ən ðə pɹɑbləm ʌv ɡæɹiniə lɛft ɹinz maɪnd!

Sarainya did curtsy at the door, of course, and kneel before her, head lowered, but fifty years had not made her forget that she would have been a woman of considerable power had she been able to make herself return home to Arafel. Curtsy and the rest all were concessions. When she spoke, in that husky, forceful voice, whether the woman would ever reconcile herself and the problem of Garenia left Reanne's mind!

"kɔli ɪz dɛd, ɛldəst sɪstɝ. hɝ θɹoʊt wɑz kʌɾ ən ʃi əpɛɹənli hæd bɪn ɹɑbd ivən ə hɝ stɑkɪŋz, bʌt sumeɪkoʊ sɛz ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ðə wʌn paʊɝ kɪl hɝ."

"Callie is dead, Eldest Sister. Her throat was cut and she apparently had been robbed even of her stockings, but Sumeko says that it was the One Power killed her."

"ðæɾ ɪz ɪmpɑsəbəl!" bɛɹaʊɪn bɝst aʊt. "noʊ kɪnswʊmən wəd də sətʃ ə θɪŋ!"

"That is impossible!" Berowin burst out. "No Kinswoman would do such a thing!"

"æn ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ɡæɹiniə sɛd, hɛzɪɾənt fəɹ wʌns. "bʌt haʊ? ðə θɹi oʊðz. sumeɪkoʊ mʌs bi ɹɔŋ."

"An Aes Sedai?" Garenia said, hesitant for once. "But how? The Three Oaths. Sumeko must be wrong."

ɹin ɹeɪzd ə hæn fəɹ saɪləns. sumeɪkoʊ wɑz nɛvɝ ɹɔŋ, nɑɾ ɪn ðɪs ɛɹiə. ʃi wʊɾə bɪn jɛloʊ ədʒɑ hæd ʃi nɑt bɹoʊkən daʊn kəmplitli waɪl tɛstɪŋ fəɹ ðə ʃɔl, ən ɔlðoʊ ɪt wɑz fɔɹbɪɾən, dɪspaɪt kaʊnləs pɛnənsɪz, ʃi wɝk tə lɝn mɔɹ wɛnɛvɝ ʃi θɔt noʊ wʌn wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ. noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ cʊɾə dʌn ðɪs, ɑbviəsli, ən noʊ kɪnz-wʊmən wəd hæv, bʌt. . . . ðoʊz ɡɝlz, soʊ ɪnsɪstənt, noʊɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ ʃəd nɑt. ðə sɝkəl hæd læstəd tu lɔŋ, ɔfɝd sʌkɝ tə tu mɛni wɪmən, tə bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd naʊ.

Reanne raised a hand for silence. Sumeko was never wrong, not in this area. She would have been Yellow Ajah had she not broken down completely while testing for the shawl, and although it was forbidden, despite countless penances, she worked to learn more whenever she thought no one was watching. No Aes Sedai could have done this, obviously, and no Kins-woman would have, but. . . . Those girls, so insistent, knowing what they should not. The Circle had lasted too long, offered succor to too many women, to be destroyed now.

"ðɪs ɪz wʌt mʌs bi dʌn," ʃi toʊl ðɛm. ðət flʌɾɝ ə fɪɹ bɪɡæn əɡɛn, bʌt fəɹ wʌns ʃi hɑɹdli noʊɾəst.

"This is what must be done," she told them. That flutter of fear began again, but for once she hardly noticed.

nɪneɪiv stɔkt əweɪ fɹəm ðə smɔl haʊs ɪn aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ. ɪt wɑz ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl! ðoʊz wɪmən dɪɾ əv ə ɡɪld; ʃi nu ðeɪ dɪd! wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ sɛd, ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ nu wɛɹ ðə boʊl wɑz, tu. ʃi wʊɾə dʌn wʌtɛvɝ wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi tə bɹɪŋ əm tə tɛl hɝ. pɹitɛndɪŋ dɑsɪləɾi bɪfɔɹ əm fəɹ ə fju aʊɝz wʊɾə bɪn ə dil iziɝ ðən pʊɾɪŋ ʌp wɪð mæt kɔθən fəɹ ðə laɪt nu haʊ mɛni deɪz.

Nynaeve stalked away from the small house in outrage. It was incredible! Those women did have a guild; she knew they did! Whatever they said, she was sure they knew where the Bowl was, too. She would have done whatever was necessary to bring them to tell her. Pretending docility before them for a few hours would have been a deal easier than putting up with Mat Cauthon for the Light knew how many days.

aɪ cʊɾə bɪn əz əkwiɛsən əz ðeɪ wɑntəd, ʃi θɔɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. ðeɪɾ əv θɔɾ aɪ wɑz ə plaɪəbəl oʊl slɪpɝ! aɪ kəd hæv. . . . ðət wɑz ə laɪ, ən ɪt dɪd nɑt teɪk ə faʊl, ɹɪmɛmbɝd teɪs tə kənvɪns hɝ. ɡɪvən hæf ə tʃæns, ʃi wʊɾə ʃeɪkən ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðoʊz wɪmən tɪl ðeɪ toʊld əɹ wʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə noʊ. ʃi wʊɾə ɡɪvən əm ɛɛs sədaɪ tɪl ðeɪ skwikt!

I could have been as acquiescent as they wanted, she thought irritably. They'd have thought I was a pliable old slipper! I could have. . . . That was a lie, and it did not take a foul, remembered taste to convince her. Given half a chance, she would have shaken every one of those women till they told her what she wanted to know. She would have given them Aes Sedai till they squeaked!

ʃi skaʊl saɪdweɪz əɾ ɪleɪn. ði ʌðɝ wʊmən sim lɔst ɪn θɔt. nɪneɪiv wɪʃt ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt ðə wʊmən wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt. ə weɪstəd mɔɹnɪŋ, ən nɑt fɑɹ ʃɔɹɾ ə kəmplit hjumɪlieɪʃən. ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk biɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ. ʃi wɑz nɑt jɛt juz tə ædmɪɾɪŋ ʃi wɑz, ɹɪli. ən naʊ ʃi wɑz gɑnə hæv tə əpɑlədʒaɪz tə ɪleɪn. ʃi tʃɹuli heɪɾəd əpɑlədʒaɪzɪŋ. wɛl, ɪt wəd bi bæɾ ɪnʌf bæk ɪn ðɛɹ ɹumz. wɪð bɝdʒɪɾ ən eɪvinhə stɪl aʊt, ɪt wɑz tə bi hoʊpt. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə bɪɡɪn ɪn ðə stʃɹit, wɪð u nu hu stʃɹimɪŋ baɪ. ðə θɹɔŋ hæd θɪkənd, ðoʊ ðə sʌn hɑɹdli simd mʌtʃ haɪɝ θɹu ðə wilɪŋ klaʊdz ə sibɝdz ðət kɹaɪɾ oʊvɝhɛd.

She scowled sideways at Elayne. The other woman seemed lost in thought. Nynaeve wished she did not know what the woman was thinking about. A wasted morning, and not far short of complete humiliation. She did not like being in the wrong. She was not yet used to admitting she was, really. And now she was going to have to apologize to Elayne. She truly hated apologizing. Well, it would be bad enough back in their rooms. With Birgitte and Aviendha still out, it was to be hoped. She was not about to begin in the street, with who knew who streaming by. The throng had thickened, though the sun hardly seemed much higher through the wheeling clouds of seabirds that cried overhead.

faɪndɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ wɑz nɑɾ izi, æftɝ ɔl ðoʊz twɪsts ən tɝnz. nɪneɪiv hæd tə æsk dɝɛkʃənz hæf ə dʌzən taɪmz, waɪl ɪleɪn stɛɹɾ ɪn ənʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən, pɹitɛndɪŋ ɪndɪfɝəns. ʃi stɔkt əlɔŋ əkɹɔs bɹɪdʒəz, dʌkt ɝaʊnd wæɡənz ən kɑɹts, dʒʌmpt aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ʌv ɹeɪsɪŋ sɪdæn tʃɛɹz ðət woʊv θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz, wɪʃt ɪleɪn wəd seɪ sʌmθɪŋ. nɪneɪiv nu haʊ tə nɝs ə ɡɹʌdʒ, ən ðə lɔŋɡɝ ʃi hɝsɛlf kɛp saɪlənt, ðə wɝs ɪt wɑz wən ʃi spoʊk, soʊ ðə lɔŋɡɝ ɪleɪn wɔkt wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ, ðə dɑɹkɝ bɪkeɪm ði ɪmədʒ ɪn əɹ maɪn ə haʊ ɪt wɑz gɑnə bi bæk ɪn ðɛɹ ɹumz. ðət meɪɾ əɹ fjʊɹiəs. ʃi hæɾ ədmɪɾəd ʃi wɑz ɹɔŋ, ɪf oʊnli tə hɝsɛlf. ɪleɪn hæd noʊ ɹaɪt tə meɪk əɹ sʌfɝ ðɪs weɪ. ʃi bɪɡæn wɛɹɪŋ sətʃ ə feɪs ðəɾ ivən pipəl u dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs ðɛɹ ɹɪŋz ɡeɪv əm ə klɪɹ pæθ. pipəl u dɪd noʊɾəs juʒəwəli sim tə faɪn ən ɝdʒənt nid tə bi ə stʃɹiɾ əweɪ. ivən səm sɪdæn-tʃɛɹ bɛɹɝz skɝɾɪd ɝaʊn hɝ.

Finding their way was not easy, after all those twists and turns. Nynaeve had to ask directions half a dozen times, while Elayne stared in another direction, pretending indifference. She stalked along across bridges, ducked around wagons and carts, jumped out of the way of racing sedan chairs that wove through the crowds, wished Elayne would say something. Nynaeve knew how to nurse a grudge, and the longer she herself kept silent, the worse it was when she spoke, so the longer Elayne walked without speaking, the darker became the image in her mind of how it was going to be back in their rooms. That made her furious. She had admitted she was wrong, if only to herself. Elayne had no right to make her suffer this way. She began wearing such a face that even people who did not notice their rings gave them a clear path. People who did notice usually seemed to find an urgent need to be a street away. Even some sedan-chair bearers skirted around her.

"haʊ oʊl dɪd ɹin lʊk tə ju?" ɪleɪn æsk sʌɾənli. nɪneɪiv nɪɹli dʒʌmpt. ðeɪ wɝ ɔlmoʊs bæk tə mɔl hɛɹə.

"How old did Reanne look to you?" Elayne asked suddenly. Nynaeve nearly jumped. They were almost back to Mol Hara.

"fɪfti jɪɹz. meɪbi sɪksti. aɪ doʊn si ɪt mæɾɝz." ʃi ɹæn əɹ aɪz oʊvɝ ðə kɹaʊd tə si ɪf ɛniwʌn wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ. ə pæsɪŋ hɔkɝ, hɝ tʃɹeɪ dɪspleɪɪŋ ə bɪɾɝ lɪɾəl jɛloʊ fɹut kɔld ə lɛmən, tʃɹaɪd tə swɑloʊ hɝ kɹaɪ ɪn mɪdʃaʊt wən nɪneɪivz ɡeɪz ɹɛstəɾ ɑn əɹ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, wɪð ðə ɹɪzʌl ðət ʃi dʌbəld oʊvɝ əɹ tʃɹeɪ kɑfɪŋ ən tʃoʊkɪŋ. nɪneɪiv snɪft. ðə wʊmən pɹɑbli hæd bɪn ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ, ɪf nɑt plænɪŋ tə kʌɾ ə pɝs. "ðeɪ ɑɹ ə ɡɪld, ɪleɪn, ən ðeɪ də noʊ wɛɹ ðə boʊl ɪz. aɪ dʒʌs noʊ ðeɪ du." ðət wɑz nɑt wʌt ʃi hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə seɪ əɾ ɔl. ɪf ʃi əpɑlədʒaɪz fəɹ dʒɹæɡɪŋ ɪleɪn ɪndə ðɪs naʊ, meɪbi ɪt wəd nɑt bi soʊ bæd.

"Fifty years. Maybe sixty. I don't see it matters." She ran her eyes over the crowd to see if anyone was close enough to hear. A passing hawker, her tray displaying a bitter little yellow fruit called a lemon, tried to swallow her cry in midshout when Nynaeve's gaze rested on her for a moment, with the result that she doubled over her tray coughing and choking. Nynaeve sniffed. The woman probably had been eavesdropping, if not planning to cut a purse. "They are a guild, Elayne, and they do know where the Bowl is. I just know they do." That was not what she had intended to say at all. If she apologized for dragging Elayne into this now, maybe it would not be so bad.

"aɪ səpoʊz ðeɪ ɑɹ," ɪleɪn sɛɾ æbsənli. "aɪ səpoʊz ðeɪ maɪt. haʊ ɪz ɪt ðət ʃi kən əv eɪdʒ soʊ?"

"I suppose they are," Elayne said absently. "I suppose they might. How is it that she can have aged so?"

nɪneɪiv stɑp dɛɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl stʃɹit. æftɝ ɔl ðəɾ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ, æftɝ ɡɛɾɪŋ əm θɹoʊn aʊt, ʃi səpoʊzd? "wɛl, aɪ səpoʊz ʃi eɪdʒ ðə seɪm weɪ əz ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs, ə deɪ əɾ ə taɪm. ɪleɪn, ɪf jə bɪlivd, waɪ dɪd jə ənaʊns u jə wɝ laɪk ɹiænən ət ðə taʊɝ?" ʃi ɹæðɝ laɪk ðæt; əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə stɔɹi, wʌt kwin ɹiænən ɡɑt wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm wʌt ʃi hæd wɑntəd.

Nynaeve stopped dead in the middle street. After all that arguing, after getting them thrown out, she supposed? "Well, I suppose she aged the same way as the rest of us, a day at a time. Elayne, if you believed, why did you announce who you were like Rhiannon at the Tower?" She rather liked that; according to the story, what Queen Rhiannon got was far from what she had wanted.

ðə kwɛstʃən dɪd nɑt sim tə ɹɛdʒɪstɝ wɪð ɪleɪn, fəɹ ɔl əɹ ɛdʒəkeɪʃən. ʃi pʊl nɪneɪiv tə wʌn saɪɾ əz ə kɝteɪnd ɡɹin kæɹɪdʒ ɹʌmbəl pæst - ðə stʃɹit wɑz nɑt vɛɹi waɪd ðəɹ - oʊvɝ tə ðə fɹʌn ʌv ə sim-stʃɹɛsəz ʃɑp wɪð ə waɪd dɔɹweɪ ʃoʊɪŋ sɛvɹəl dʒɹɛsmeɪkɝz fɔɹmz kloʊðd ɪn hæf-dʌn dʒɹɛsəz.

The question did not seem to register with Elayne, for all her education. She pulled Nynaeve to one side as a curtained green carriage rumbled past - the street was not very wide there - over to the front of a seam-stress's shop with a wide doorway showing several dressmaker's forms clothed in half-done dresses.

"ðeɪ wɝ nɑt gɑnə tɛl əs ɛniθɪŋ, nɪneɪiv, nɑɾ ɪf jə ɡɑt daʊn ɑn jəɹ niz ən bɛɡd." nɪneɪiv oʊpən əɹ maʊθ ɪndɪɡnənli, ðən snæpt ɪt ʃʌt. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt bɛɡɪŋ. ɛniweɪ, waɪ ʃəd ʃi hæv bɪn ði oʊnli wʌn? bɛɾɝ ɛni wʊmən əɾ ɔl ðən mæt kɔθən. ɪleɪn hæɾ ə flaɪ ʌp əɹ noʊz, ðoʊ, ən wɑz nɑt tə bi dɪstʃɹæktəd. "nɪneɪiv, ʃi mʌst əv sloʊd laɪk ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. haʊ oʊld ɪz ʃi, tə lʊk fɪfti əɹ sɪksti?"

"They were not going to tell us anything, Nynaeve, not if you got down on your knees and begged." Nynaeve opened her mouth indignantly, then snapped it shut. She had never said anything about begging. Anyway, why should she have been the only one? Better any woman at all than Mat Cauthon. Elayne had a fly up her nose, though, and was not to be distracted. "Nynaeve, she must have slowed like everyone else. How old is she, to look fifty or sixty?"

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?" wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ nɪneɪiv noʊɾəd ðə loʊkeɪʃən ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ maɪnd; ðə simstʃɹɪsəz wɝk lʊkt kwaɪt ɡʊd, wɝθ kloʊsɝ ɪɡzæməneɪʃən. "ʃi pɹɑbli dʌzn tʃænəl ɛni mɔɹ ðən ʃi kən hɛlp, əfɹeɪɾ əz ʃiz ə biɪŋ mɪsteɪkən fəɹ ə sɪstɝ. ʃi wʊdn əv wɑntəɾ əɹ feɪs tu smuð, æftɝ ɔl."

"What are you talking about?" Without thinking Nynaeve noted the location in a corner of her mind; the seamstress's work looked quite good, worth closer examination. "She probably doesn't channel any more than she can help, afraid as she is of being mistaken for a sister. She wouldn't have wanted her face too smooth, after all."

"ju nɛvɝ lɪsən ɪn klæs, dɪd ju?" ɪleɪn mɝmɝd. ʃi sɔ ðə plʌmp simstʃɹɪs bimɪŋ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, ən dʒɹu nɪneɪiv təwɔɹd ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə bɪldɪŋ. kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ði əmaʊn ə leɪs ðə simstʃɹɪs wɔɹ ɑn əɹ oʊn dʒɹɛs, ðə bɑɾəs bɛɹiɾ ɪn ɪɾ ən peɪsɪz ʌv ɪt dʒɹupɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ɪkspoʊz pɛɾikoʊts, ʃi wəd bɛɹ kloʊs wɑtʃɪŋ ɪf nɪneɪiv dɪɾ ɔɹɾɝ ɛniθɪŋ. "fɝɡɛt kloʊðz fəɹ wʌn moʊmənt, nɪneɪiv. hu ɪz ði oʊldəst æksɛptɪd jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ?"

"You never listened in class, did you?" Elayne murmured. She saw the plump seamstress beaming in the doorway, and drew Nynaeve toward the corner of the building. Considering the amount of lace the seamstress wore on her own dress, the bodice buried in it and paces of it drooping over her exposed petticoats, she would bear close watching if Nynaeve did order anything. "Forget clothes for one moment, Nynaeve. Who is the oldest Accepted you remember?"

ʃi ɡeɪv ɪleɪn ə vɛɹi lɛvəl lʊk. ðə wʊmən meɪɾ ɪt saʊn əz ɪf ʃi nɛvɝ θɔɾ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɛls! ən ʃi hæd tu lɪsənd. səmtaɪmz. "ɛlɪn wɔɹəl, aɪ θɪŋk. ʃiz ə fju jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən mi." ʌv kɔɹs, ðə simstʃɹɪsəz oʊn dʒɹɛs wəd lʊk faɪn wɪð ə mɔɹ mɑɾəst nɛklaɪn ən mʌtʃ lɛs leɪs. ɪn ɡɹin sɪlk. læn laɪkt ɡɹin, ðoʊ ʃi sɝɾənli wɑz nɑt gɑnə tʃuz əɹ dʒɹɛsəz fəɹ hɪm. hi laɪk blu, əz wɛl.

She gave Elayne a very level look. The woman made it sound as if she never thought of anything else! And she had too listened. Sometimes. "Elin Warrel, I think. She's a few years older than me." Of course, the seamstress's own dress would look fine with a more modest neckline and much less lace. In green silk. Lan liked green, though she certainly was not going to choose her dresses for him. He liked blue, as well.

ɪleɪn bɑɹk sətʃ ə læf ðət nɪneɪiv wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ʃi hæd spoʊkən əlaʊd. kʌlɝɪŋ fɪɹsli, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ɪkspleɪn - ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi kʊd; baɪ bɛl taɪn - bʌt ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ɡeɪv əɹ noʊ ɑpɝtunəɾi fəɹ ə wɝd. "ɛlɪnz sɪstɝ keɪm tə vɪzəɾ əɹ dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ jə fɝst ɝaɪvd ət ðə taʊɝ, nɪneɪiv. hɝ jʌŋɡɝ sɪstɝ. ðə wʊmən hæd ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ. wɛl, səm ʌv ɪt wɑz. ʃi mʌst əv bɪn oʊvɝ fɔɹɾi, nɪneɪiv."

Elayne barked such a laugh that Nynaeve wondered whether she had spoken aloud. Coloring fiercely, she tried to explain - she was sure she could; by Bel Tine - but the other woman gave her no opportunity for a word. "Elin's sister came to visit her just before you first arrived at the Tower, Nynaeve. Her younger sister. The woman had gray hair. Well, some of it was. She must have been over forty, Nynaeve."

ɛlɪn wɔɹəl wɑz pæs fɔɹɾi? bʌt . . . ! "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə seɪɪŋ, ɪleɪn?"

Elin Warrel was past forty? But . . . ! "What are you saying, Elayne?"

noʊ wʌn wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə lɪsən, ən noʊ wʌn sim tə bi ɡɪvɪŋ əm ə sɛkənd ɡlæns ɪksɛp ðə stɪl hoʊpfəl simstʃɹɪs, bʌɾ ɪleɪn loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs tə ə wɪspɝ. "wi sloʊ, nɪneɪiv. sʌmwɛɹ bɪtwin twɛnti ən twɛnti-faɪv, wi bɪɡɪn eɪdʒɪŋ mɔɹ sloʊli. haʊ mʌtʃ dɪpɛnz ɑn haʊ stʃɹɔŋ wi ɑɹ, bʌt wən dʌznt. ɛni wʊmən u kən tʃænəl dʌz ɪt. tɑkimə sɛd ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ʌv ətʃivɪŋ ði eɪdʒləs lʊk, ðoʊ aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ɛniwʌn əz ɛvɝ ɹitʃt ðəɾ əntɪl ðeɪv wɔɹn ðə ʃɔl ət list ə jɪɹ əɹ tu, səmtaɪmz faɪv əɹ mɔɹ. θɪŋk. jə noʊ ɛni sɪstɝ wɪð ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ ɪz oʊld, ivən ɪf jə ɑɹən səpoʊz tə mɛnʃən ɪt. soʊ ɪf ɹin sloʊd, ən ʃi mʌs hæv, haʊ oʊld ɪz ʃi?"

No one was close enough to listen, and no one seemed to be giving them a second glance except the still hopeful seamstress, but Elayne lowered her voice to a whisper. "We slow, Nynaeve. Somewhere between twenty and twenty-five, we begin aging more slowly. How much depends on how strong we are, but when doesn't. Any woman who can channel does it. Takima said she thought it was the beginning of achieving the ageless look, though I don't think anyone has ever reached that until they've worn the shawl at least a year or two, sometimes five or more. Think. You know any sister with gray hair is old, even if you aren't supposed to mention it. So if Reanne slowed, and she must have, how old is she?"

nɪneɪiv dɪd nɑt kɛɹ haʊ oʊld ɹin wɑz. ʃi wɑntəd tə kɹaɪ. noʊ wʌndɝ ɛvɹiwʌn ɹəfjuz tə bɪliv əɹ eɪdʒ. ɪɾ ɪkspleɪnd waɪ ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl bæk hoʊm hæd lʊkt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ əz ɪf ənʃʊɹ ʃi wɑz oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi tʃɹʌstɪd fʊli. ətʃivɪŋ ə sɪstɝz eɪdʒləs feɪs wɑz ɔl vɛɹi wɛl, bʌt haʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæɾ əɹ ɡɹeɪ hɛɹz?

Nynaeve did not care how old Reanne was. She wanted to cry. No wonder everyone refused to believe her age. It explained why the Women's Circle back home had looked over her shoulder as if unsure she was old enough to be trusted fully. Achieving a sister's ageless face was all very well, but how long before she had her gray hairs?

blɪŋkɪŋ, ʃi tɝn əweɪ æŋɡɹəli. ən sʌmθɪŋ stʃɹʌk əɹ ə ɡlænsɪŋ bloʊ ɑn ðə bæk ə ðə hɛd. stæɡɝɪŋ, ʃi ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ɪleɪn ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt. waɪ hæd ðə wʊmən hɪt hɝ? oʊnli, ɪleɪn leɪ ɪn ə hip, aɪz kloʊzd ən ə næsti pɝpəl lʌmp ɹaɪzɪŋ ɑn əɹ tɛmpəl. ɡɹɑdʒəli, nɪneɪiv fɛl tə hɝ niz ən ɡæðɝɾ əɹ fɹɛn ɪndə hɝ ɑɹmz.

Blinking, she turned away angrily. And something struck her a glancing blow on the back of the head. Staggering, she rounded on Elayne in astonishment. Why had the woman hit her? Only, Elayne lay in a heap, eyes closed and a nasty purple lump rising on her temple. Groggily, Nynaeve fell to her knees and gathered her friend into her arms.

"jɔɹ fɹɛn mʌs bi teɪkən ɪl," ə lɔŋ noʊzd wʊmən sɛd, nilɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðɛm, kɛɹləs ʌv ə jɛloʊ dʒɹɛs ðət ʃoʊd fɑɹ tu mʌtʃ bʊzəm ivən baɪ ɛbu dɑɹi stændɝdz. "lɛt mi hɛlp."

"Your friend must be taken ill," a long nosed woman said, kneeling beside them, careless of a yellow dress that showed far too much bosom even by Ebou Dari standards. "Let me help."

ə tɔl fɛloʊ, hænsəm ɪn ɪz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd sɪlk vɛst ɪksɛp fəɹ ə ɹæðɝ ɔɪli ɡɹɪn, bɛn tə teɪk nɪneɪivz ʃoʊldɝz. "hɪɹ, aɪ hæv ə kæɹɪdʒ. wɪl teɪk jə sʌmwɛɹ mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl ðən ə peɪvɪŋ stoʊn."

A tall fellow, handsome in his embroidered silk vest except for a rather oily grin, bent to take Nynaeve's shoulders. "Here, I have a carriage. We'll take you somewhere more comfortable than a paving stone."

"ɡoʊ əweɪ," nɪneɪiv toʊld əm pəlaɪtli. "wi doʊnt nid jəɹ hɛlp."

"Go away," Nynaeve told them politely. "We don't need your help."

ðə mæn kɛp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹeɪz əɹ tə hɝ fit, ðoʊ, tə ɡaɪɾ əɹ təwɔɹɾ ə ɹɛd kæɹɪdʒ, wɛɹ ə stɑɹɾəld-əpɪɹɪŋ wʊmən ɪn blu bɛkən vɪɡɝəsli. ðə lɔŋ-noʊzd wʊmən æktʃəli  tʃɹaɪd tə lɪft ɪleɪn, θæŋkɪŋ ðə mæn fəɹ ɪz hɛlp ən tʃæɾɝɪŋ haʊ hɪz kæɹɪdʒ saʊndəɾ ə faɪn aɪdiə. ə kɹaʊɾ ʌv ɔnlʊkɝz sim tə hæv ɡæðɝɾ aʊɾ ʌv ɛɹ ɪn ə sɛmɪsɝkəl, wɪmən mɝmɝɪŋ sɪmpəθi əbaʊt feɪntɪŋ fɹəm ðə hit, mɛn ɔfɝɪŋ tə hɛlp kæɹi ðə leɪɾiz. ə skɹɔni fɛloʊ, boʊld əz jə pliz, ɹitʃt fəɹ nɪneɪivz pɝs ɔlmoʊst ɹaɪɾ ʌndɝ əɹ noʊz.

The man kept trying to raise her to her feet, though, to guide her toward a red carriage, where a startled-appearing woman in blue beckoned vigorously. The long-nosed woman actually tried to lift Elayne, thanking the man for his help and chattering how his carriage sounded a fine idea. A crowd of onlookers seemed to have gathered out of air in a semicircle, women murmuring sympathy about fainting from the heat, men offering to help carry the ladies. A scrawny fellow, bold as you please, reached for Nynaeve's purse almost right under her nose.

hɝ hɛd stɪl swæm ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ dɪfəkəlt, bʌɾ ɪf ɔl ðoʊz næɾɝɪŋ foʊk hæd nɑt fjuəld əɹ tɛmpɝ, wʌt ʃi sɔ laɪɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹit wəd hæv. ən æɹoʊ wɪð ə blʌn stoʊn hɛd. ðə wʌn ðət hæd ɡɹeɪzd əɹ əɹ ðə wʌn ðət hæd stʃɹʌk ɪleɪn. ʃi tʃænəld, ən ðə skɹɔni kʌtpɝs dʌbəld oʊvɝ, klʌtʃɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ən skwilɪŋ laɪk ə pɪɡ ɪn bɹaɪɹz. ənʌðɝ floʊ, ən ðə lɔŋ-noʊzd wʊmən fɛl oʊvɝ bækwɝd wɪð ə ʃɹik twaɪs əz haɪ. ðə mæn ɪn ðə sɪlk vɛst əpɛɹənli dɪsaɪɾɪd ðeɪ dɪd nɑt niɾ ɪz hɛlp æftɝ ɔl, kəz i tɝn ən ɹæn fəɹ ðə kæɹɪdʒ, bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə doʊs ɛniweɪ. hi aʊt-bɛloʊɾ ɛni aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ bʊl əz ðə wʊmən ɪn ðə kæɹɪdʒ hɔld ɪm ɪn baɪ hɪz vɛst.

Her head still swam enough to make embracing saidar difficult, but if all those nattering folk had not fueled her temper, what she saw lying in the street would have. An arrow with a blunt stone head. The one that had grazed her or the one that had struck Elayne. She channeled, and the scrawny cutpurse doubled over, clutching himself and squealing like a pig in briars. Another flow, and the long-nosed woman fell over backward with a shriek twice as high. The man in the silk vest apparently decided they did not need his help after all, because he turned and ran for the carriage, but she gave him a dose anyway. He out-bellowed any outraged bull as the woman in the carriage hauled him in by his vest.

"θæŋk ju, bʌt wi doʊnt niɾ ɛni hɛlp," nɪneɪiv ʃaʊɾəd. pəlaɪtli.

"Thank you, but we don't need any help," Nynaeve shouted. Politely.

fju ɹɪmeɪn tə hɪɹ. wʌns ɪt bɪkeɪm klɪɹ ðət ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɑz biɪŋ juzd - ən foʊk sʌɾənli lipɪŋ əbaʊɾ ən jɛlɪŋ fəɹ noʊ vɪzəbəl kɑz meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ ɪnʌf tə moʊst - ðeɪ hɝiɾ ɛlswɛɹ. ðə lɔŋ-noʊzd wʊmən ɡæðɝd hɝsɛlf ʌp ən æktʃəli  dʒʌmpt ɑntu ðə bæk ə ðə ɹɛd kæɹɪdʒ, klɪŋɪŋ pɹɪkɛɹiəsli əz ðə dɑɹk-vɛstəd dʒɹaɪvɝ wɪp ðə hɔɹsəz əweɪ θɹu ðə kɹaʊd, pipəl lipɪŋ əsaɪd. ivən ðə kʌtpɝs hɑbəld ɔf əz fæst əz i kʊd.

Few remained to hear. Once it became clear that the One Power was being used - and folk suddenly leaping about and yelling for no visible cause made it clear enough to most - they hurried elsewhere. The long-nosed woman gathered herself up and actually jumped onto the back of the red carriage, clinging precariously as the dark-vested driver whipped the horses away through the crowd, people leaping aside. Even the cutpurse hobbled off as fast as he could.

nɪneɪiv kəd nɑɾ əv kɛɹd lɛs hæd ði ɝθ oʊpən ən swɑloʊd ðə hoʊl lɑt. tʃɛst eɪkɪŋ, ʃi ɹæn faɪn floʊz ʌv wɪn ən wɔɾɝ, ɝθ, faɪɝ ən spɪɹət mɪkst ən blɛndəd, θɹu ɪleɪn. ɪt wɑz ə sɪmpəl wiv, noʊ bɑðɝ dɪspaɪɾ əɹ feɪn dɪzinəs, ən ðə ɹɪzʌlt lɛɾ əɹ bɹið əɡɛn. ðə bɹuz wɑz nɑt sɪɹiəs; ðə boʊnz ʌv ɪleɪnz skʌl wɝ ənbɹoʊkən. nɔɹməli, ʃi wʊɾə ɹiɾɝɛktɪd ðoʊz seɪm floʊz ɪndə mʌtʃ mɔɹ kɑmplɛks wivz, ðə hilɪŋ ʃi hæd dɪskʌvɝd hɝsɛlf. ət ðə moʊmənt, sɪmpəlɝ wivz wɝ ɔl ʃi kəd mænədʒ, ðoʊ. wɪð dʒʌst spɪɹət, wɪn ən wɔɾɝ, ʃi woʊv ðə hilɪŋ ðət jɛloʊz hæd juz sɪns taɪm ɪməmɔɹiəl.

Nynaeve could not have cared less had the earth opened and swallowed the whole lot. Chest aching, she ran fine flows of Wind and Water, Earth, Fire and Spirit mixed and blended, through Elayne. It was a simple weave, no bother despite her faint dizziness, and the result let her breathe again. The bruise was not serious; the bones of Elayne's skull were unbroken. Normally, she would have redirected those same flows into much more complex weaves, the Healing she had discovered herself. At the moment, simpler weaves were all she could manage, though. With just Spirit, Wind and Water, she wove the Healing that Yellows had used since time immemorial.

ɪleɪnz aɪz ʃɑɾ oʊpən waɪd, ən wɪð ə ɡæsp ðət sim tə teɪk ɔl ði ɛɹ ɪn hɝ, ʃi kənvʌls laɪk ə nɛɾɪd tʃɹaʊt, slɪpɝd hilz dʒɹʌmɪŋ ɑn ðə peɪvmənt. ðəɾ oʊnli læstəɾ ə moʊmənt, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɪn ðət moʊmən ðə bɹuz ʃɹæŋk ən vænɪʃt.

Elayne's eyes shot open wide, and with a gasp that seemed to take all the air in her, she convulsed like a netted trout, slippered heels drumming on the pavement. That only lasted a moment, of course, but in that moment the bruise shrank and vanished.

nɪneɪiv hɛlpt əɹ tə hɝ fit - ən ə wʊmənz hæn əpɪɹd, hoʊldɪŋ ə pjuɾɝ kʌp fʊl ʌv wɔɾɝ. "ivən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪt bi θɝsti æftɝ ðæt," ðə simstʃɹɪs sɛd.

Nynaeve helped her to her feet - and a woman's hand appeared, holding a pewter cup full of water. "Even an Aes Sedai might be thirsty after that," the seamstress said.

ɪleɪn ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪt, bʌt nɪneɪiv leɪd fɪŋɡɝz ɑn əɹ ɹɪst. "noʊ, θæŋk ju." ðə wʊmən ʃɹʌɡd, ən əz ʃi tɝn əweɪ, nɪneɪiv æɾəd ɪn ə dɪfɹən toʊn, "θæŋk ju." ɪt sim tə kʌm iziɝ ðə mɔɹ jə sɛɾ ɪt; ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi laɪk ðæt.

Elayne reached for it, but Nynaeve laid fingers on her wrist. "No, thank you." The woman shrugged, and as she turned away, Nynaeve added in a different tone, "Thank you." It seemed to come easier the more you said it; she was not sure she liked that.

ðəɾ oʊʃən ə leɪs hivd əz ðə simstʃɹɪs ʃɹʌɡd əɡɛn. "aɪ meɪk dʒɹɛsəz fəɹ ɛniwʌn. aɪ kən də bɛɾɝ fəɹ jəɹ kʌlɝɪŋ ðən ðæt." ʃi vænɪʃt bæk ɪndə hɝ ʃɑp. nɪneɪiv fɹaʊn æftɝ hɝ.

That ocean of lace heaved as the seamstress shrugged again. "I make dresses for anyone. I can do better for your coloring than that." She vanished back into her shop. Nynaeve frowned after her.

"wʌt hæpənd?" ɪleɪn dɪmændəd. "waɪ wʊdn jə lemi teɪk ə dʒɹɪŋk? aɪm θɝsti ən hʌŋɡɹi."

"What happened?" Elayne demanded. "Why wouldn't you let me take a drink? I'm thirsty and hungry."

wɪð ə læs fɹaʊn fəɹ ðə simstʃɹɪs, nɪneɪiv bɛn tə pɪk ʌp ði æɹoʊ.

With a last frown for the seamstress, Nynaeve bent to pick up the arrow.

ði ʌðɝ wʊmən niɾəd noʊ ɛkspləneɪʃənz. seɪaɪdɑɹ ʃoʊn ɝaʊn əɹ ɪn ə flæʃ. "tɛslɪn ən dʒoʊlin?"

The other woman needed no explanations. Saidar shone around her in a flash. "Teslyn and Joline?"

nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd; ðə slaɪt wuzinəs sim tə bi feɪɾɪŋ. ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðoʊz tu wəd stup tə ðɪs. ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk soʊ. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ɹin?" ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. ðə simstʃɹɪs wɑz bæk ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, stɪl hoʊpfəl. "ʃi maɪt wɑnə meɪk ʃʊɹ wi liv. əɹ wɝs, meɪbi ɡæɹiniə." ðət wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz tʃɪlɪŋ əz tɛslɪn ən dʒoʊlin. ən twaɪs əz ɪnfjʊɹieɪɾɪŋ.

Nynaeve shook her head; the slight wooziness seemed to be fading. She did not think those two would stoop to this. She did not think so. "What about Reanne?" she said quietly. The seamstress was back in the doorway, still hopeful. "She might want to make sure we leave. Or worse, maybe Garenia." That was almost as chilling as Teslyn and Joline. And twice as infuriating.

sʌmhaʊ ɪleɪn mænədʒ tə lʊk pɹɪɾi waɪl skaʊlɪŋ. "huɛvɝ ɪt wɑz, wɪl sɛɾəl ðɛm. jəl si." ðə skaʊl feɪɾəd. "nɪneɪiv, ɪf ðə sɝkəl dʌz noʊ wɛɹ ðə boʊl ɪz, wi kən faɪn ɪt, bʌt. . . ." ʃi bɪɾ əɹ lɪp, hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ. "aɪ oʊnli noʊ wʌn weɪ tə bi ʃʊɹ."

Somehow Elayne managed to look pretty while scowling. "Whoever it was, we will settle them. You'll see." The scowl faded. "Nynaeve, if the Circle does know where the Bowl is, we can find it, but. . . ." She bit her lip, hesitating. "I only know one way to be sure."

nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd sloʊli, ðoʊ ʃi wəd ɹæðɝ əv iɾən ə hændfʊl ə dɝt. tədeɪ hæd sim soʊ bɹaɪt fəɹ ə taɪm, bʌt ðən ɪt hæd spaɪɹəld ɪndə dɑɹknəs, fɹəm ɹin tə. . . . oʊ, laɪt, haʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæɾ əɹ ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ?

Nynaeve nodded slowly, though she would rather have eaten a handful of dirt. Today had seemed so bright for a time, but then it had spiraled into darkness, from Reanne to. . . . Oh, Light, how long before she had her gray hair?

"doʊn kɹaɪ, nɪneɪiv. mæt kæn pɑsəbli bi ðət bæd. hɪl faɪn ɪt fəɹ əs ɪn ə fju deɪz, aɪ noʊ."

"Don't cry, Nynaeve. Mat can't possibly be that bad. He'll find it for us in a few days, I know."

nɪneɪiv oʊnli kɹaɪd hɑɹɾɝ.

Nynaeve only cried harder.


tʃæptɝ twɛntifaɪv


CHAPTER 25

maɪntʃɹæp


Mindtrap

mɑɡiɾin dɪd nɑt wɑnə dʒɹim ðə dʒɹim əɡɛn, bʌt wɑntɪŋ tə weɪk, wɑntɪŋ tə skɹim, dɪd noʊ ɡʊd. slip hɛld əɹ fæstɝ ðən ɛni mænəkəlz. ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ wɛn baɪ kwɪkli, ə skɛtʃi blɝ. noʊ mɝsi; ʃi wəɾ əv tə ɹilɪv ðə ɹɛs ðət mʌtʃ sunɝ.

Moghedien did not want to dream the dream again, but wanting to wake, wanting to scream, did no good. Sleep held her faster than any manacles. The beginning went by quickly, a sketchy blur. No mercy; she would have to relive the rest that much sooner.

ʃi bɛɹli ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə wʊmən u ɛntɝd ðə tɛnt wɛɹ ʃi wɑz hɛl pɹɪznɝ. hɑlimə, sɛkɹətɛɹi tə wʌn ə ðiz fulz u kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ɛɛs sədaɪ. fulz, jɛt ðeɪ hɛld əɹ taɪtli ɪnʌf baɪ ðə bæn ə sɪlvɝ mɛɾəl ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk, hɛld əɹ ən meɪɾ əɹ oʊbeɪ. fæs muvmənt, ðoʊ ʃi pɹeɪd fəɹ sloʊnəs. ðə wʊmən tʃænəl tə meɪk ə laɪt, ən mɑɡiɾin sɔ oʊnli ðə laɪt. ɪt hæd tə bi seɪɾɪn - əmʌŋ ðə lɪvɪŋ, oʊnli ðə tʃoʊzən nu haʊ tə tæp ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ - ðə paʊɝ ðət keɪm fɹəm ðə dɑɹk wʌn - ən fju wɝ ful ɪnʌf tə ɪksɛpt ɪn daɪɹəs nid - bʌt ðət wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl! blɝɪŋ kwɪknəs. ðə wʊmən neɪm hɝsɛlf ɝæŋɡɝ ən kɔl mɑɡiɾin baɪ neɪm, ʃi ɡeɪv sʌmənz tə ðə pɪɾ ə dum ən ɹimuv ði æɾəm nɛkləs, flɪntʃɪŋ ət peɪn noʊ wʊmən ʃəɾ əv fɛlt. əɡɛn - haʊ mɛni taɪmz hæd ʃi dʌn ðɪs? - əɡɛn mɑɡiɾin woʊv ə smɔl ɡeɪtweɪ ɪn ðə tɛnt. ʃi skɪm tə ɡɪv hɝsɛlf taɪm tə θɪŋk ɪn ði ɛnləs dɑɹk, bʌt noʊ sunɝ dɪd ʃi stɛp ɑntu hɝ plætfɔɹm, laɪk ə smɔl ɛnkloʊz mɑɹbəl bælkəni kəmplit wɪð ə kʌmftəɹbəl tʃɛɹ, ðən ʃi ɝaɪvd ɑn ðə blæk sloʊps ə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, fɝɛvɝ ʃɹaʊɾɪd ɪn twaɪlaɪt, wɛɹ vɛns ən tʌnəlz ɪmɪɾəd stim ən smoʊk ən hɑɹʃ veɪpɝz, ən ə mɹdʒɹɑl keɪm tə hɝ ɪn ɪts dɛd blæk ɡɑɹb, laɪk ə slʌɡ-waɪt, aɪləs mæn, bʌt tɔlɝ, mɔɹ mæsɪv ðən ɛni ʌðɝ hæfmən. ɪt ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əɹ ɛɹəɡənli, ən ɡeɪv ɪts ɑd neɪm ənbɪddən, ən kəmændəɾ əɹ tə kʌm; ðiz wɝ nɑt θɪŋz mɹdʒɹɑl dɪd wɪð ðə tʃoʊzən. naʊ ʃi skɹimd ɪn ðə dɛpθs ə hɝ maɪn fəɹ ðə dʒɹim tə muv fæstɝ, tə blɝ bɪɑn siɪŋ, bɪɑnd noʊɪŋ, bʌt naʊ, əz ʃi fɑloʊd ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹənz bæk ɪndə ði ɛntʃɹəns tə ðə pɪɾ ə dum, naʊ ɔl floʊɾ əɾ ɪts nɔɹməl peɪs ən simd mɔɹ ɹil ðən tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ əɹ ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld.

She barely recognized the woman who entered the tent where she was held prisoner. Halima, secretary to one of these fools who called themselves Aes Sedai. Fools, yet they held her tightly enough by the band of silver metal around her neck, held her and made her obey. Fast movement, though she prayed for slowness. The woman channeled to make a light, and Moghedien saw only the light. It had to be saidin - among the living, only the Chosen knew how to tap the True Power - the Power that came from the Dark One - and few were fool enough to except in direst need - but that was impossible! Blurring quickness. The woman named herself Aran'gar and called Moghedien by name, she gave summons to the Pit of Doom and removed the a'dam necklace, flinching at pain no woman should have felt. Again - how many times had she done this? - again Moghedien wove a small gateway in the tent. She Skimmed to give herself time to think in the endless dark, but no sooner did she step onto her platform, like a small enclosed marble balcony complete with a comfortable chair, than she arrived on the black slopes of Shayol Ghul, forever shrouded in twilight, where vents and tunnels emitted steam and smoke and harsh vapors, and a Myrddraal came to her in its dead black garb, like a slug-white, eyeless man, but taller, more massive than any other Halfman. It regarded her arrogantly, and gave its odd name unbidden, and commanded her to come; these were not things Myrddraal did with the Chosen. Now she screamed in the depths of her mind for the dream to move faster, to blur beyond seeing, beyond knowing, but now, as she followed Shaidar Haran's back into the entrance to the Pit of Doom, now all flowed at its normal pace and seemed more real than Tel'aran'rhiod or the waking world.

tɪɹz lik fɹəm mɑɡiɾinz aɪz, daʊn tʃiks ðəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡlɪsənd. ʃi twɪtʃt ɑn əɹ hɑɹd pælət, ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz dʒɝkɪŋ əz ʃi fɔt dɛspɝətli, fjuɾɪlli, tə weɪk. ʃi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əwɛɹ ðət ʃi dʒɹimd - ɔl simd ɹil - bʌt dip mɛmɹiz ɹɪmeɪnd, ən ɪn ðoʊz dɛpθs, ɪnstɪŋkt ʃɹikt ən klɔd fəɹ ɪskeɪp.

Tears leaked from Moghedien's eyes, down cheeks that already glistened. She twitched on her hard pallet, arms and legs jerking as she fought desperately, futilely, to wake. She was no longer aware that she dreamed - all seemed real - but deep memories remained, and in those depths, instinct shrieked and clawed for escape.

ʃi wɑz wɛl fəmɪljɝ wɪð ðə sloʊpɪŋ tʌnəl silɪŋɡd ɪn stoʊn dæɡɝz laɪk fæŋz, ðə wɔlz ɡloʊɪŋ wɪð peɪl laɪt. mɛni taɪmz ʃi hæd meɪd ðɪs daʊnwɝd dʒɝni sɪns ðə deɪ soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ wən ʃi fɝs keɪm tə meɪk oʊbaɪsəns tə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ən plɛdʒ əɹ soʊl, bʌt nɛvɝ əz naʊ, nɛvɝ wɪð əɹ feɪljɝ noʊn ɪn ɔl ɪts mæɡnətud. ɔlweɪz bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd mænədʒ tə haɪd feɪljɝz ivən fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. mɛni taɪmz. θɪŋz kəd bi dʌn hɪɹ ðət kəd bi dʌn noʊwɛɹ ɛls. θɪŋz kəd hæpən hɪɹ ðət kəd hæpən noʊwɛɹ ɛls.

She was well familiar with the sloping tunnel ceilinged in stone daggers like fangs, the walls glowing with pale light. Many times she had made this downward journey since the day so long ago when she first came to make obeisance to the Great Lord and pledge her soul, but never as now, never with her failure known in all its magnitude. Always before she had managed to hide failures even from the Great Lord. Many times. Things could be done here that could be done nowhere else. Things could happen here that could happen nowhere else.

ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əz wʌn ə ðə stoʊn fæŋz bɹʌʃt əɹ hɛɹ, ðən ɡæðɝd hɝsɛlf əz bɛst ʃi kʊd. ðoʊz spaɪks ən bleɪdz stɪl klɪɹd ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ, tu-tɔl mɹdʒɹɑl izəli, bʌt ðoʊ ɪɾ oʊvɝtɑpt əɹ baɪ hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz ən mɔɹ, ʃi wɑz fɔɹs tə muv əɹ hɛɾ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ pɔɪns naʊ. ɹiæləɾi wɑz kleɪ tə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd hɪɹ, ən i ɔfən meɪɾ ɪz dɪsplɛʒɝ noʊn soʊ. ə stoʊn tuθ stʃɹʌk əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ən ʃi dʌk tə ɡoʊ ʌndɝ ənʌðɝ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪnʌf haɪɾ ɪn ðə tʌnəl fəɹ əɹ tə stʃɹeɪɾən əz ʃi wɔkt. ʃi bɛn loʊɝ, skɝiɪŋ kɹaʊtʃt ɪn ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz weɪk, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛt kloʊsɝ. ɪts stʃɹaɪd nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd, bʌt noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ kwɪkli ʃi skʌɾəld, ði ɪntɝvəl bɪtwin əm dɪd nɑt lɛsən. ðə silɪŋ dɪsɛndəd, ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz fæŋz tə ɹɛn tʃɹeɪɾɝz ən fulz, ən mɑɡiɾin dʒɹɑp tə hænz ən niz, kɹɔlɪŋ, ðən flæɾənd tə ɛlboʊz ən niz. laɪt flɛɹɾ ən flɪkɝɾ ɪn ðə tʌnəl, kæs fɹəm ði ɛntʃɹəns tə ðə pɪɾ ɪtsɛlf, dʒʌst əhɛd, ən mɑɡiɾin slaɪðɝɾ ɑn əɹ bɛli, pʊl hɝsɛlf əlɔŋ wɪð əɹ hænz, pʊʃt wɪð əɹ fit. stoʊn pɔɪns dʌɡ əɾ əɹ flɛʃ, kɑɾ əɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs. pæntɪŋ, ʃi ɹɪəl ðə læs dɪstəns tə ðə saʊn ə ɹɪpɪŋ wʊl.

She gave a start as one of the stone fangs brushed her hair, then gathered herself as best she could. Those spikes and blades still cleared the strange, too-tall Myrddraal easily, but though it overtopped her by head and shoulders and more, she was forced to move her head around their points now. Reality was clay to the Great Lord here, and he often made his displeasure known so. A stone tooth struck her shoulder, and she ducked to go under another. There was no longer enough height in the tunnel for her to straighten as she walked. She bent lower, scurrying crouched in the Myrddraal's wake, trying to get closer. Its stride never changed, but no matter how quickly she scuttled, the interval between them did not lessen. The ceiling descended, the Great Lord's fangs to rend traitors and fools, and Moghedien dropped to hands and knees, crawling, then flattened to elbows and knees. Light flared and flickered in the tunnel, cast from the entrance to the Pit itself, just ahead, and Moghedien slithered on her belly, pulled herself along with her hands, pushed with her feet. Stone points dug at her flesh, caught at her dress. Panting, she wriggled the last distance to the sound of ripping wool.

stɛɹɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ʃi ʃɪvɝd kənvʌlsɪvli. wɛɹ ðə tʌnəl maʊθ ʃʊɾə bɪn stʊɾ ə smuð stoʊn wɔl. pɝhæps ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd hæd taɪmd ɪɾ ɔl ɪɡzækli, ən pɝhæps, hæd ʃi bɪn sloʊɝ. . . .

Staring back over her shoulder, she shivered convulsively. Where the tunnel mouth should have been stood a smooth stone wall. Perhaps the Great Lord had timed it all exactly, and perhaps, had she been slower. . . .

ðə lɛdʒ ɑn wɪtʃ ʃi leɪ pɹədʒɛktəɾ əbʌv ə blæk-mɑɾəld ɹɛd leɪk ə moʊltən ɹɑk wɛɹ fleɪmz ðə saɪz ə mɛn dænst ən daɪɾ ən ɹiəpɪɹd. oʊvɝhɛd, ðə kævɝn ɹoʊz ɹufləs θɹu ðə maʊntən tə ə skaɪ wɛɹ waɪl klaʊdz ɹeɪst, stʃɹieɪɾɪd ɹɛɾ ən jɛloʊ ən blæk, əz ɪf ɑn ðə wɪnz ə taɪm ðɛmsɛlvz. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə dɑɹk-klaʊɾəd skaɪ sin aʊtsaɪɾ ɑn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. nʌn ə ðəɾ ɝn ə sɛkənd ɡlæns, ən nɑt dʒʌs kəz ʃi hæd sin ɪt mɛni taɪmz. ðə bɔɹ ɪndə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz pleɪs ʌv ɪmpɹɪzənmənt wɑz noʊ kloʊsɝ hɪɹ ðən ɛniwɛɹ ɛls ɪn ðə wɝld, bʌt hɪɹ ʃi kəd fil ɪt, hɪɹ ʃi kəd beɪð ɪn ðə ɹeɪɾiənt ɡlɔɹi ʌv ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ wɑʃt ɝaʊn hɝ, soʊ stʃɹɔŋ hɪɹ ðəɾ ətɛmptɪŋ tə tʃænəl ɪt wəd fɹaɪ hɝ tə ə sɪndɝ. nɑt ðət ʃi hæɾ ɛni dɪzaɪɝ tə peɪ ðə pɹaɪs ɛlswɛɹ iðɝ.

The ledge on which she lay projected above a black-mottled red lake of molten rock where flames the size of men danced and died and reappeared. Overhead, the cavern rose roofless through the mountain to a sky where wild clouds raced, striated red and yellow and black, as if on the winds of time themselves. It was not the dark-clouded sky seen outside on Shayol Ghul. None of that earned a second glance, and not just because she had seen it many times. The Bore into the Great Lord's place of imprisonment was no closer here than anywhere else in the world, but here she could feel it, here she could bathe in the radiant glory of the Great Lord. The True Power washed around her, so strong here that attempting to channel it would fry her to a cinder. Not that she had any desire to pay the price elsewhere either.

ʃi stɑɹɾəd tə pʊʃ ʌp tə hɝ niz, ən sʌmθɪŋ stʃɹʌk əɹ bɪtwin ðə ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ əɹ daʊn hɑɹɾ ɑntu ðə stoʊn lɛdʒ, kɹʌʃɪŋ ði ɛɹ fɹəm əɹ lʌŋz. stʌnd, ʃi stʃɹʌɡəl fəɹ bɹɛθ, ðən stɛɹd bæk ʌp oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl stʊd wɪð wʌn mæsɪv but plæntəd fɝmli ɑn əɹ bæk. ɔlmoʊst, ʃi ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ, ðoʊ tʃænəlɪŋ hɪɹ wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspɹɛs pɝmɪʃən wɑz ə ɡʊd weɪ tə daɪ. ði ɛɹəɡəns ɑn ðə sloʊps əbʌv wɑz wʌn θɪŋ, bʌt ðɪs!

She started to push up to her knees, and something struck her between the shoulder blades, driving her down hard onto the stone ledge, crushing the air from her lungs. Stunned, she struggled for breath, then stared back up over her shoulder. The Myrddraal stood with one massive boot planted firmly on her back. Almost, she embraced saidar, though channeling here without express permission was a good way to die. The arrogance on the slopes above was one thing, but this!

"du jə noʊ hu aɪ æm?" ʃi dɪmændəd. "aɪ æm mɑɡiɾin!" ðəɾ aɪləs ɡeɪz wɑtʃt əɹ əz ɪt maɪɾ ən ɪnsɛkt; ʃi hæɾ ɔfən sin mɹdʒɹɑl lʊk əɾ ɔɹɾənɛɹi hjumənz ðət weɪ.

"Do you know who I am?" she demanded. "I am Moghedien!" That eyeless gaze watched her as it might an insect; she had often seen Myrddraal look at ordinary humans that way.

mɑɡiɾin. ðət vɔɪs ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ hɛd flʌʃt əweɪ ɔl θɔɾ ə ðə mɹdʒɹɑl; ɪt nɪɹli flʌʃt əweɪ ɔl θɔt. bɪsaɪd ðɪs, ɛni hjumən lʌvɝz dipəst ɛmbɹeɪs wɑz ə dʒɹɑp ʌv wɔɾɝ bɪsaɪd ði oʊʃən. haʊ dip ɪz jəɹ feɪljɝ, mɑɡiɾin? ðə tʃoʊzən ɑɹ ɔlweɪz ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst, bʌt jə lɛt jɝsɛlf bi kæptʃɝd. jə tɔt ðoʊz u wəɾ əpoʊz mi, mɑɡiɾin.

MOGHEDIEN. That voice inside her head flushed away all thought of the Myrddraal; it nearly flushed away all thought. Beside this, any human lover's deepest embrace was a drop of water beside the ocean. HOW DEEP IS YOUR FAILURE, MOGHEDIEN? THE CHOSEN ARE ALWAYS THE STRONGEST, BUT YOU LET YOURSELF BE CAPTURED. YOU TAUGHT THOSE WHO WOULD OPPOSE ME, MOGHEDIEN.

aɪlɪdz flʌɾɝɪŋ, ʃi fɔt fəɹ koʊhɪɹəns. "ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, aɪ tɔɾ əm oʊnli smɔl θɪŋz, ən aɪ fɔɾ əm əz aɪ kʊd. aɪ tɔɾ əm ə səpoʊzd weɪ tə dɪtɛkt ə mæn tʃænəlɪŋ." ʃi mænədʒ tə læf. "pɹæktəsɪŋ ɪt ɡɪvz əm sətʃ hɛdeɪks ðeɪ kænɑt tʃænəl fəɹ aʊɝz." saɪləns. pɝhæps əz wɛl. ðeɪ hæd ɡɪvən ʌp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɝn ðət lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ əɹ ɹɛskju, bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd dɪd nɑt nid tə noʊ ðæt. "ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, jə noʊ haʊ aɪ hæv sɝv ju. aɪ sɝv ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz, ən jəɹ ɛnəmiz nɛvɝ fil maɪ baɪɾ əntɪl maɪ vɛnəm ɪz wɝkɪŋ." ʃi dɪd nɑt kwaɪt dɛɹ seɪ ʃi hæd dɪlɪbɝətli lɛt hɝsɛlf bi kæptʃɝd, tə wɝk fɹəm wɪðɪn, bʌt ʃi kəd sədʒɛst. "ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, jə noʊ haʊ mɛni ʌv jəɹ ɛnəmiz aɪ bɹɔt daʊn ɪn ðə wɔɹ ə paʊɝ. fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz, ənsin, əɹ ɪf sin, ɪɡnɔɹd kəz aɪ kəd nɑt pɑsəbli bi ə θɹɛt." saɪləns. ən ðɛn. . . .

Eyelids fluttering, she fought for coherence. "Great Lord, I taught them only small things, and I fought them as I could. I taught them a supposed way to detect a man channeling." She managed to laugh. "Practicing it gives them such headaches they cannot channel for hours." Silence. Perhaps as well. They had given up trying to learn that long before her rescue, but the Great Lord did not need to know that. "Great Lord, you know how I have served you. I serve in the shadows, and your enemies never feel my bite until my venom is working." She did not quite dare say she had deliberately let herself be captured, to work from within, but she could suggest. "Great Lord, you know how many of your enemies I brought down in the War of Power. From the shadows, unseen, or if seen, ignored because I could not possibly be a threat." Silence. And then. . . .

maɪ tʃoʊzən ɑɹ ɔlweɪz ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst. maɪ hæn muvz.

MY CHOSEN ARE ALWAYS THE STRONGEST. MY HAND MOVES.

ðət vɔɪs ɹɪvɝbɝeɪɾɪŋ ɪn əɹ skʌl tɝn əɹ boʊnz tə bɔɪlɪŋ hʌni ən əɹ bɹeɪn tə faɪɝ. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl hæɾ əɹ tʃɪn ɪn ɪts hænd, fɔɹsɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ʌp bɪfɔɹ əɹ vɪʒən klɪɹɾ ɪnʌf tə si ðə naɪf ɪn ɪts ʌðɝ hænd. ɔl əɹ dʒɹimz wɝ tə ɛn hɪɹ ɪn ə slɪt θɹoʊt, hɝ bɑɾi gɑnə fid ðə tʃɹɑləks. pɝhæps ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹən wəd seɪv ə tʃɔɪs kʌt fəɹ ɪtsɛlf. pɝhæps. . . .

That voice reverberating in her skull turned her bones to boiling honey and her brain to fire. The Myrddraal had her chin in its hand, forcing her head up before her vision cleared enough to see the knife in its other hand. All her dreams were to end here in a slit throat, her body going to feed the Trollocs. Perhaps Shaidar Haran would save a choice cut for itself. Perhaps. . . .

noʊ. ʃi nu ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ, bʌt ðɪs mɹdʒɹɑl wəd nɑɾ it wʌn ʃɹɛɾ ə hɝ! ʃi ɹitʃt tə ɛmbɹeɪs seɪaɪdɑɹ, ən əɹ aɪz bʌlʒd. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ðɛɹ. nʌθɪŋ! ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn sɛvɝd! ʃi nu ʃi hæd nɑt - ɪt wɑz sɛd ðət tɛɹɪŋ wɑz ðə dipəs peɪn ɛniwʌn kəd noʊ, bɪɑn ɛni paʊɝ tə dɛɾən - bʌt - !

No. She knew she was going to die, but this Myrddraal would not eat one shred of her! She reached to embrace saidar, and her eyes bulged. There was nothing there. Nothing! It was as if she had been severed! She knew she had not - it was said that tearing was the deepest pain anyone could know, beyond any power to deaden - but - !

ɪn ðoʊz stʌn moʊməns, ðə mɹdʒɹɑl fɔɹst əɹ maʊθ oʊpən, skɹeɪp ðə bleɪɾ əlɔŋ əɹ tʌŋ, ðən nɪkt əɹ ɪɹ. ən əz ɪt stʃɹeɪɾənd wɪð əɹ blʌɾ ən səlaɪvə, ʃi nu, ivən bɪfɔɹ ɪt pɹədust wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ə taɪni, fɹædʒəl keɪdʒ ʌv ɡoʊld waɪɝ ən kɹɪstəl. səm θɪŋz kəɾ oʊnli bi dʌn hɪɹ, səm oʊnli tə ðoʊz u kəd tʃænəl, ən ʃi hæd bɹɔɾ ə nʌmbɝ ə mɛn ən wɪmən fəɹ ðɪs vɛɹi pɝpəs.

In those stunned moments, the Myrddraal forced her mouth open, scraped the blade along her tongue, then nicked her ear. And as it straightened with her blood and saliva, she knew, even before it produced what appeared to be a tiny, fragile cage of gold wire and crystal. Some things could only be done here, some only to those who could channel, and she had brought a number of men and women for this very purpose.

"noʊ," ʃi bɹiðd. hɝ aɪz kəd nɑt liv ðə kɔɹsvɹə. "noʊ, nɑt mi! nɑt meɪn!"

"No," she breathed. Her eyes could not leave the cour'souvra. "No, not me! NOT ME!"

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ hɝ, ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹən skɹeɪp ðə fluədz fɹəm ðə naɪf ɑntu ðə kɔɹsvɹə. ðə kɹɪstəl tɝn ə mɪlki pɪŋk, ðə fɝst sɛɾɪŋ. wɪð ə flɪk ʌv ɪts ɹɪst, ɪt tɔs ðə maɪnd-tʃɹæp aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə leɪk ə moʊltən stoʊn fəɹ ðə sɛkənd. ðə ɡoʊld-ænd-kɹɪstəl keɪdʒ ɑɹtʃt θɹu ði ɛɹ ən sʌɾənli stɑpt, floʊɾɪŋ ət ðə vɛɹi spɑt wɛɹ ɪt sim ðə bɔɹ wɑz, ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ðə pæɾɝn leɪ θɪnəst ʌv ɔl.

Ignoring her, Shaidar Haran scraped the fluids from the knife onto the cour'souvra. The crystal turned a milky pink, the first setting. With a flick of its wrist, it tossed the mind-trap out over the lake of molten stone for the second. The gold-and-crystal cage arched through the air and suddenly stopped, floating at the very spot where it seemed the Bore was, the place where the Pattern lay thinnest of all.

mɑɡiɾin fɝɡɑt ðə mɹdʒɹɑl. ʃi flʌŋ aʊɾ əɹ hænz təwɔɹd ðə bɔɹ. "mɝsi, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd!" ʃi hæd nɛvɝ noʊɾəst ðət ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk pəzɛst ɛni mɝsi, bʌt hæd ʃi bɪn baʊn ɪn ə sɛl wɪð ɹæbɪd wʊlvz əɹ wɪð ə dɑɹəθ ɪn moʊlt, ʃi wʊɾə bɛɡd ðə seɪm. ɪn ðə ɹaɪt sɝkəmstænsəz, jə bɛɡd ivən fəɹ ði ɪmpɑsəbəl. ðə kɔɹsvɹə hʌŋ ɪn mɪdɛɹ, tɝnɪŋ sloʊli, ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ɪn ðə laɪɾ ə lipɪŋ faɪɝz bɪloʊ. "aɪ hæv sɝv jə wɪð ɔl maɪ hɑɹt, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. aɪ bɛɡ mɝsi. aɪ bɛɡ! mɝsiiiiɪii!"

Moghedien forgot the Myrddraal. She flung out her hands toward the Bore. "Mercy, Great Lord!" She had never noticed that the Great Lord of the Dark possessed any mercy, but had she been bound in a cell with rabid wolves or with a darath in moult, she would have begged the same. In the right circumstances, you begged even for the impossible. The cour'souvra hung in midair, turning slowly, glittering in the light of leaping fires below. "I have served you with all my heart, Great Lord. I beg mercy. I beg! MERCYYYYYYY!"

jə meɪ sɝv mi stɪl.

YOU MAY SERVE ME STILL.

ðə vɔɪs flʌŋ əɹ ɪndə ɛkstəsi bɪɑnd noʊɪŋ, bʌɾ ət ðə seɪm ɪnstən ðə spɑɹklɪŋ maɪntʃɹæp sʌɾənli ɡloʊd laɪk ðə sʌn, ən ɪn ðə mɪdst ə ɹæptʃɝ, ʃi nu peɪn əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn ɪmɝst ɪn ðə faɪɝi leɪk. ðeɪ blɛndəd, ən ʃi haʊld, θɹæʃɪŋ laɪk ə mæd θɪŋ, θɹæʃɪŋ ɪn ɛnləs peɪn, ɛnləs, əntɪl æftɝ eɪdʒəz, æftɝ nʌθɪŋ ɹɪmeɪn bʌɾ æɡəni ən ðə mɛmɹi ʌv æɡəni, ðə taɪni mɝsi ʌv dɑɹknəs oʊvɝwɛlm hɝ.

The voice flung her into ecstasy beyond knowing, but at the same instant the sparkling mindtrap suddenly glowed like the sun, and in the midst of rapture, she knew pain as if she had been immersed in the fiery lake. They blended, and she howled, thrashing like a mad thing, thrashing in endless pain, endless, until after Ages, after nothing remained but agony and the memory of agony, the tiny mercy of darkness overwhelmed her.

mɑɡiɾin stɝɾ ɑn ðə pælət. nɑɾ əɡɛn. pliz.

Moghedien stirred on the pallet. Not again. Please.

ʃi bɛɹli ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə wʊmən u ɛntɝd ðə tɛnt wɛɹ ʃi wɑz hɛl pɹɪznɝ.

She barely recognized the woman who entered the tent where she was held prisoner.

pliz, ʃi ʃɹikt ɪn ðə dɛpθs ə hɝ maɪnd.

Please, she shrieked in the depths of her mind.

ðə wʊmən tʃænəl tə meɪk ə laɪt, ən mɑɡiɾin sɔ oʊnli ðə laɪt.

The woman channeled to make a light, and Moghedien saw only the light.

dip ɪn slip, ʃi kwɪvɝd, vaɪbɹeɪɾɪŋ fɹəm hɛd tə toʊ. pliz!

Deep in sleep, she quivered, vibrating from head to toe. Please!

ðə wʊmən neɪm hɝsɛlf ɝæŋɡɝ ən kɔl mɑɡiɾin baɪ neɪm, ʃi ɡeɪv sʌmənz tə ðə pɪɾ ə dum ən -  "weɪk, wʊmən," sɛɾ ə vɔɪs laɪk ɹɑɾɪd boʊn kɹʌmbəlɪŋ, ən mɑɡiɾinz aɪz pɑpt oʊpən. ʃi ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt fəɹ ðə dʒɹim bæk.

The woman named herself Aran'gar and called Moghedien by name, she gave summons to the Pit of Doom and -  "Wake, woman," said a voice like rotted bone crumbling, and Moghedien's eyes popped open. She almost wished for the dream back.

noʊ dɔɹ əɹ wɪndoʊ bɹoʊk ðə fitʃɝləs stoʊn wɔlz ə hɝ smɔl pɹɪzən, ən ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɡloʊbəlbz əɹ ivən læmps, bʌt laɪt keɪm fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ mɛni deɪz ʃi hæd bɪn ðɛɹ, oʊnli ðət teɪsləs fuɾ əpɪɹɾ əɾ ɪɹɛɡjəlɝ ɪntɝvəlz, ðət ðə sɪŋɡəl bʌkət sɝvɪŋ fəɹ sænəteɪʃən wɑz ɛmptiɾ əɾ ivən mɔɹ ɪɹɛɡjəlɝ taɪmz, ən soʊp ən ə bʌkəɾ ə pɝfjumd wɔɾɝ wɝ sʌmhaʊ lɛft fəɹ əɹ tə klin hɝsɛlf. ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ ðət wɑz ə mɝsi əɹ nɑt; ðə ɡlæd θɹɪl ət siɪŋ ə bʌkəɾ ʌv wɔɾɝ ɹimaɪndəɾ əɹ haʊ fɑɹ ʃi hæd fɔlən. ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹən wɑz ɪn ðə sɛl wɪð əɹ naʊ.

No door or window broke the featureless stone walls of her small prison, and there were no glowbulbs or even lamps, but light came from somewhere. She did not know how many days she had been there, only that tasteless food appeared at irregular intervals, that the single bucket serving for sanitation was emptied at even more irregular times, and soap and a bucket of perfumed water were somehow left for her to clean herself. She was not sure whether that was a mercy or not; the glad thrill at seeing a bucket of water reminded her how far she had fallen. Shaidar Haran was in the cell with her now.

hɝidli ɹoʊlɪŋ fɹəm əɹ pælət, ʃi nɛlt ən pʊɾ əɹ feɪs tə ðə bɛɹ stoʊn flɔɹ. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz dʌn wʌtɛvɝ wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi fəɹ sɝvaɪvəl, ən ðə mɹdʒɹɑl hæd bɪn ɔl tu ɡlæd tə titʃ əɹ wʌt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi. "aɪ ɡɹit jə iɡɝli, miɑkoʊvə." ðə læʃt-təɡɛðɝ taɪɾəl bɝn ɑn əɹ tʌŋ. "wʌn u oʊnz meɪn," ɪt mɛnt, əɹ sɪmpli, "maɪ oʊnɝ." ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ ʃild ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹən hæd juzd ɑn əɹ - mɹdʒɹɑl kəd nɑt, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd - ðə ʃild wɑz nɑɾ ɪn ɛvəɾəns, jɛt ʃi dɪd nɑt kənsɪɾɝ tʃænəlɪŋ. ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ wɑz dɪnaɪd hɝ, ʌv kɔɹs - ðət kəd bi dʒɹɔn oʊnli wɪð ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz blɛsɪŋ - bʌt ðə sɔɹs tæntəlaɪzd, ðoʊ ðə ɡloʊ dʒʌs bɪɑn saɪt sim sʌmhaʊ ɑd. ʃi stɪl dɪd nɑt kənsɪɾɝ ɪt. ɛvɹi taɪm ðə mɹdʒɹɑl vɪzəɾəd, ɪt dɪspleɪɾ əɹ maɪntʃɹæp. tʃænəlɪŋ tu nɪɹ jəɹ oʊn kɔɹsvɹə wɑz ɪkstʃɹimli peɪnfəl, ðə nɪɹɝ, ðə mɔɹ ðə peɪn; ðɪs kloʊs, ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi wəd sɝvaɪv ə sɪmpəl tʌtʃ ɑn ðə sɔɹs. ən ðət wɑz ðə list ə ðə maɪntʃɹæps deɪnʒɝz.

Hurriedly rolling from her pallet, she knelt and put her face to the bare stone floor. She had always done whatever was necessary for survival, and the Myrddraal had been all too glad to teach her what was necessary. "I greet you eagerly, Mia'cova." The lashed-together title burned on her tongue. "One Who Owns Me," it meant, or simply, "My Owner." The strange shield Shaidar Haran had used on her - Myrddraal could not, but it did - the shield was not in evidence, yet she did not consider channeling. The True Power was denied her, of course - that could be drawn only with the Great Lord's blessing - but the Source tantalized, though the glow just beyond sight seemed somehow odd. She still did not consider it. Every time the Myrddraal visited, it displayed her mindtrap. Channeling too near your own cour'souvra was extremely painful, the nearer, the more the pain; this close, she did not think she would survive a simple touch on the Source. And that was the least of the mindtrap's dangers.

ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹən tʃʌkəld, ə ɹæsp ə dʒɹaɪd, kɹæk lɛðɝ. ðət wɑz ənʌðɝ dɪfɝəns əbaʊt ðɪs mɹdʒɹɑl. fɑɹ mɔɹ kɹuəl ðən tʃɹɑləks, hu wɝ mɪɹli blʌdθɝsti, mɹdʒɹɑl wɝ koʊld ən dɪspæʃənəɾ ɪn ɪt. ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹən ɔfən ʃoʊɾ əmjuzmənt, ðoʊ. soʊ fɑɹ ʃi fɛlt lʌki tə hæv oʊnli bɹuzəz. moʊst wɪmən wʊɾə bɪn ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə mædnəs baɪ naʊ, ɪf nɑt bɪɑnd.

Shaidar Haran chuckled, a rasp of dried, cracked leather. That was another difference about this Myrddraal. Far more cruel than Trollocs, who were merely bloodthirsty, Myrddraal were cold and dispassionate in it. Shaidar Haran often showed amusement, though. So far she felt lucky to have only bruises. Most women would have been on the brink of madness by now, if not beyond.

"æn ɑɹ jə iɡɝ tə oʊbeɪ?" ðət ɹʌslɪŋ, ɡɹeɪɾɪŋ vɔɪs æskt.

"And are you eager to obey?" that rustling, grating voice asked.

"jɛs, aɪm iɡɝ tə oʊbeɪ, miɑkoʊvə." wʌtɛvɝ wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi tə sɝvaɪv. bʌt ʃi stɪl ɡæspt wən koʊl fɪŋɡɝz sʌɾənli tæŋɡəld ɪn əɹ hɛɹ. ʃi skɹæmbəl tə hɝ fiɾ ɑn əɹ oʊn əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl, bʌt stɪl wɑz hɔld ʌp. ət lis ðɪs taɪm əɹ fit ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl stʌɾid hɝ, ɪkspɹɛʃənləs. ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ pæs vɪzəts, ɪt ɹikwaɪɝɾ ən ɛfɝt nɑt tə flɪntʃ, əɹ skɹim, əɹ sɪmpli ɹitʃ fəɹ seɪaɪdɑɹ ən meɪk ən ɛnd.

"Yes, I am eager to obey, Mia'cova." Whatever was necessary to survive. But she still gasped when cold fingers suddenly tangled in her hair. She scrambled to her feet on her own as much as possible, but still was hauled up. At least this time her feet remained on the floor. The Myrddraal studied her, expressionless. Remembering past visits, it required an effort not to flinch, or scream, or simply reach for saidar and make an end.

"kloʊs jəɹ aɪz," ɪt toʊl hɝ, "æn kip əm kloʊzd əntɪl jə ɑɹ kəmændəd tə oʊpən ðɛm."

"Close your eyes," it told her, "and keep them closed until you are commanded to open them."

mɑɡiɾinz aɪz snæpt ʃʌt. wʌn ə ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹənz lɛsənz hæd bɪn ɪnstən oʊbiɾiəns. bɪsaɪdz, wɪð əɹ aɪz kloʊzd, ʃi kəd tʃɹaɪ tə pɹitɛn ðət ʃi wɑz sʌmwɛɹ ɛls. wʌtɛvɝ wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi.

Moghedien's eyes snapped shut. One of Shaidar Haran's lessons had been instant obedience. Besides, with her eyes closed, she could try to pretend that she was somewhere else. Whatever was necessary.

əbɹʌpli ðə hæn ɪn əɹ hɛɹ ɹʌʃt əɹ fɔɹwɝd, ən ʃi skɹimd ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl mɛn tə ɹʌn əɹ ɪndə ðə wɔl. hɝ hænz wɛn ʌp fəɹ pɹətɛkʃən, ən ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹən ɹilis hɝ. ʃi stæɡɝɾ ət lis tɛn stɛps - bʌɾ əɹ sɛl wɑz nɑt tɛn peɪsɪz kɔɹnɝ tə kɔɹnɝ. wʊd smoʊk; ʃi smɛld ə feɪn tʌtʃ ʌv wʊd smoʊk. ʃi kɛpt əɹ aɪlɪdz fɝmli kloʊzd, ðoʊ. ʃi mɛn tə kəntɪnju wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ðən bɹuzəz, ən əz fju bɹuzəz əz pɑsəbəl, fəɹ əz lɔŋ əz ʃi kəd mænədʒ.

Abruptly the hand in her hair rushed her forward, and she screamed in spite of herself. The Myrddraal meant to run her into the wall. Her hands went up for protection, and Shaidar Haran released her. She staggered at least ten steps - but her cell was not ten paces corner to corner. Wood smoke; she smelled a faint touch of wood smoke. She kept her eyelids firmly closed, though. She meant to continue with no more than bruises, and as few bruises as possible, for as long as she could manage.

"ju kən lʊk naʊ," ə dip vɔɪs sɛd.

"You can look now," a deep voice said.

ʃi dɪd, kɔʃəsli. ðə spikɝ wɑz ə tɔl, bɹɔd-ʃoʊldɝd jʌŋ mæn ɪn blæk buts ən bɹitʃɪz ən ə floʊɪŋ waɪt ʃɝɾ ənleɪst ət ðə tɑp, hu wɑtʃt əɹ wɪð stɑɹtlɪŋli blu aɪz fɹəm ə dip, kʊʃən ɑɹmtʃɛɹ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə mɑɹbəl faɪɝpleɪs wɛɹ fleɪmz dænst əlɔŋ lɔŋ lɔɡz. ʃi stʊɾ ɪn ə wʊd-pænəld ɹum ðət maɪɾ əv bɪlɔŋ tə ə wɛlθi mɝtʃən əɹ noʊbəl ə mɑɾɝət ɹæŋk ɪn ðɪs taɪm, ðə fɝnɪtʃɝ laɪtli kɑɹvd ən tʌtʃt wɪð ɡɪlt, ðə ɹʌɡz woʊvən ɪn ɹɛd-ænd-ɡoʊld ɹæbɛsks. ʃi dɪd nɑt daʊɾ ɪt wɑz sʌmwɛɹ kloʊz baɪ ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, ðoʊ; ɪt dɪd nɑɾ əv ðə fil ə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ði oʊnli ʌðɝ pɑsəbɪləɾi. swɪvəlɪŋ əɹ hɛd heɪstəli, ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɑz noʊwɛɹ tə bi sin. taɪt bænz ə kuɑn sim tə vænɪʃ fɹəm ɝaʊn əɹ tʃɛst.

She did, cautiously. The speaker was a tall, broad-shouldered young man in black boots and breeches and a flowing white shirt unlaced at the top, who watched her with startlingly blue eyes from a deep, cushioned armchair in front of a marble fireplace where flames danced along long logs. She stood in a wood-paneled room that might have belonged to a wealthy merchant or noble of moderate rank in this time, the furniture lightly carved and touched with gilt, the rugs woven in red-and-gold arabesques. She did not doubt it was somewhere close by Shayol Ghul, though; it did not have the feel of Tel'aran'rhiod, the only other possibility. Swiveling her head hastily, she drew a deep breath. The Myrddraal was nowhere to be seen. Tight bands of cuande seemed to vanish from around her chest.

"dɪd jə ɛndʒɔɪ jəɹ taɪm ɪn ðə vækwoʊl?"

"Did you enjoy your time in the vacuole?"

mɑɡiɾin fɛlt aɪsi fɪŋɡɝz dɪɡ ɪndə hɝ skælp. ʃi wɑz noʊ ɹisɝtʃɝ əɹ meɪkɝ, bʌt ʃi nu ðət wɝd. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən θɪŋk tə æsk haʊ ə jʌŋ mæn ə ðɪs taɪm dɪd, tu. səmtaɪmz ðəɹ wɝ bʌbəlz ɪn ðə pæɾɝn, ðoʊ sʌmwʌn laɪk mɛsænə wəd seɪ ðət wɑz tu sɪmpəl ən ɛkspləneɪʃən. vækwoʊlz kəd bi ɛntɝd, ɪf jə nu haʊ, ən mənɪpjəleɪɾɪd mʌtʃ laɪk ðə ɹɛst ə ðə wɝld - ɹisɝtʃɝz hæɾ ɔfən dʌn ɡɹeɪɾ ɪkspɛɹəməns ɪn vækwoʊlz, soʊ ʃi veɪɡli ɹɪmɛmbɝd hɪɹɪŋ - bʌt ðeɪ wɝ aʊtsaɪd ðə pæɾɝn ɹɪli, ən səmtaɪmz ðeɪ kloʊzd ʌp, əɹ pɝhæps bɹoʊk ɔf ən dʒɹɪftəɾ əweɪ. ivən mɛsænə kəd nɑt seɪ wʌt hæpənd - ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɪn əm ət ðə taɪm wɑz ɡɔn fɝɛvɝ.

Moghedien felt icy fingers dig into her scalp. She was no researcher or maker, but she knew that word. She did not even think to ask how a young man of this time did, too. Sometimes there were bubbles in the Pattern, though someone like Mesaana would say that was too simple an explanation. Vacuoles could be entered, if you knew how, and manipulated much like the rest of the world - researchers had often done great experiments in vacuoles, so she vaguely remembered hearing - but they were outside the Pattern really, and sometimes they closed up, or perhaps broke off and drifted away. Even Mesaana could not say what happened - except that anything in them at the time was gone forever.

"haʊ lɔŋ?" ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd əɹ vɔɪs wɑz soʊ stɛɾi. ʃi ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ðə jʌŋ mæn, hu sæt ðəɹ ʃoʊɪŋ əɹ waɪt tiθ. "aɪ sɛd, haʊ lɔŋ? əɹ doʊn jə noʊ?"

"How long?" She was surprised her voice was so steady. She rounded on the young man, who sat there showing her white teeth. "I said, how long? Or don't you know?"

"aɪ sɔ jə ɝaɪv. . . ." hi pɔzd, lɪftɪŋ ə sɪlvɝ ɡɑblət fɹəm ðə teɪbəl bɪsaɪɾ ɪz tʃɛɹ, aɪz smaɪlɪŋ əɾ əɹ oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪm əz i dʒɹæŋk. ". . . ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ læst."

"I saw you arrive. . . ." He paused, lifting a silver goblet from the table beside his chair, eyes smiling at her over the rim as he drank. ". . . the night before last."

ʃi kəd nɑt haɪɾ ə ɹɪlivd ɡæsp. ði oʊnli ɹizən ɛniwʌn wəd wɑnə ɛntɝ ə vækwoʊl wɑz ðət taɪm floʊd dɪfɹənli ðɛɹ, səmtaɪmz sloʊɝ, səmtaɪmz fæstɝ. səmtaɪmz mʌtʃ fæstɝ. ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ɪntaɪɝli sɝpɹaɪz tə lɝn ðət ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd hæd ɹɪli ɪmpɹɪzən əɹ fəɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, əɹ ə θaʊzənd, tə ɪmɝdʒ ɪndə ə wɝld ɔlɹɛɾi hɪz, tə meɪk əɹ weɪ fiɾɪŋ əmʌŋ kɛɹiən waɪl ði ʌðɝ tʃoʊzən stʊɾ ət ðə pɪnəkəl. ʃi wɑz stɪl wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən, ɪn əɹ oʊn maɪnd, ət list. əntɪl ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd hɪmsɛlf sɛd ʃi wɑz nɑt. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn biɪŋ ɹilist wʌns ə maɪntʃɹæp wɑz sɛt, bʌt ʃi wəd faɪn ə weɪ. ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ə weɪ fəɹ ðoʊz u wɝ kɔʃəs, waɪl ðoʊz fɛl u kɔl kɑʃən kaʊɝɾəs. ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd kæɹiɾ ə fju ʌv ðət soʊ-kɔl bɹeɪv sɔɹt tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl tə bi fɪɾəd wɪð kɔɹsvɹə.

She could not hide a relieved gasp. The only reason anyone would want to enter a vacuole was that time flowed differently there, sometimes slower, sometimes faster. Sometimes much faster. She would not have been entirely surprised to learn that the Great Lord had really imprisoned her for a hundred years, or a thousand, to emerge into a world already his, to make her way feeding among carrion while the other Chosen stood at the pinnacle. She was still one of the Chosen, in her own mind, at least. Until the Great Lord himself said she was not. She had never heard of anyone being released once a mindtrap was set, but she would find a way. There was always a way for those who were cautious, while those fell who called caution cowardice. She herself had carried a few of that so-called brave sort to Shayol Ghul to be fitted with cour'souvra.

sʌɾənli, ɪɾ əkɝd tə hɝ ðət ðɪs fɛloʊ nu ə ɡɹeɪt dil fəɹ ə fɹɛn ə ðə dɑɹk, ɪspɛʃli wʌn nɑt mɛni jɪɹz pæs twɛnti. hi swʌŋ wʌn lɛɡ oʊvɝ ən ɑɹm ə ðə tʃɛɹ, laʊnʒɪŋ ɪnsələnli ʌndɝ əɹ skɹuɾəni. ɡɹeɪndəl maɪɾ əv snætʃt hɪm, ɪf i hæɾ ɛni pəzɪʃən əɹ paʊɝ; oʊnli tu stʃɹɔŋ ə tʃɪn kɛpt ɪm fɹəm biɪŋ pɹɪɾi ɪnʌf. ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin aɪz soʊ blu. wɪð ɪz ɪnsələns ɪn əɹ vɛɹi feɪs ən wʌt ʃi hæd hæd tə ɛndʒjʊɹ ət ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹənz hænz soʊ fɹɛʃ, wɪð ðə sɔɹs kɔlɪŋ əɹ ən ðə mɹdʒɹɑl ɡɔn, ʃi kənsɪɾɝd titʃɪŋ ðɪs jʌŋ fɹɛn ə ðə dɑɹk ə ʃɑɹp lɛsən. ðə fæk ðəɾ əɹ kloʊðz wɝ ɡɹaɪmi æɾəd ðɛɹ pɑɹt; ʃi hɝsɛlf smɛl feɪnli ʌv ðə pɝfjum ɪn ðə wɑʃ wɔɾɝ, bʌt ʃi hæd hæd noʊ weɪ tə klin ðə ɹʌf wʊlən dʒɹɛs ɪn wɪtʃ ʃi flɛɾ ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ, wɪð ɪts ɹɪps fɹəm əɹ dʒɝni daʊn tə ðə pɪt. pɹuɾəns pɹɪveɪld - ðɪs ɹum mʌs bi kloʊs tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl - bʌt bɛɹli.

Suddenly, it occurred to her that this fellow knew a great deal for a Friend of the Dark, especially one not many years past twenty. He swung one leg over an arm of the chair, lounging insolently under her scrutiny. Graendal might have snatched him, if he had any position or power; only too strong a chin kept him from being pretty enough. She did not think she had ever seen eyes so blue. With his insolence in her very face and what she had had to endure at Shaidar Haran's hands so fresh, with the Source calling her and the Myrddraal gone, she considered teaching this young Friend of the Dark a sharp lesson. The fact that her clothes were grimy added their part; she herself smelled faintly of the perfume in the wash water, but she had had no way to clean the rough woolen dress in which she fled Egwene al'Vere, with its rips from her journey down to the Pit. Prudence prevailed - this room must be close to Shayol Ghul - but barely.

"wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ neɪm?" ʃi dɪmændəd. "du juv ɛni aɪdiə hu jə ɑɹ spikɪŋ tə?"

"What is your name?" she demanded. "Do you have any idea who you are speaking to?"

"jɛs, aɪ du, mɑɡiɾin. jə meɪ kɔl mi mɔɹaɪɾɪn."

"Yes, I do, Moghedien. You may call me Moridin."

mɑɡiɾin ɡæspt. nɑt fəɹ ðə neɪm; ɛni ful kəd kɔl hɪmsɛlf dɛθ. bʌɾ ə taɪni blæk flɛk, dʒʌs lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə si, floʊɾəd stʃɹeɪɾ əkɹɔs wʌn ə ðoʊz blu aɪz ən ðən əkɹɔs ði ʌðɝ ɪn ðə seɪm laɪn. ðɪs mɔɹaɪɾɪn hæd tæpt ɪndə ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ, ən mɔɹ ðən wʌns. mʌtʃ mɔɹ. ʃi nu ðət səm mɛn u kəd tʃænəl sɝvaɪvd ɪn ðɪs taɪm əsaɪd fɹəm ælθɹ - ðɪs fɛloʊ wɑz mʌtʃ ʌv ə saɪz wɪð ælθɹ - bʌt ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəd ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd tə əlaʊ wʌn ðət pɝtɪkjəlɝ ɑnɝ. ən ɑnɝ wɪð ə baɪt, əz ɛni ʌv ðə tʃoʊzən nu. ɪn ðə lɔŋ ɹʌn, ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ wɑz fɑɹ mɔɹ ədɪktɪv ðən ðə wʌn paʊɝ; ə stʃɹɔŋ wɪl kəd hoʊl daʊn ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə dʒɹɔ mɔɹ seɪaɪdɑɹ əɹ seɪɾɪn, bʌt ʃi hɝsɛlf dɪd nɑt bɪliv ðə wɪl ɪɡzɪstəd stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɹɪzɪs ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ, nɑt wʌns ðə sæɑ əpɪɹɾ ɪn jəɹ aɪz. ðə faɪnəl pɹaɪs wɑz dɪfɹənt, bʌt noʊ lɛs tɛɹəbəl.

Moghedien gasped. Not for the name; any fool could call himself Death. But a tiny black fleck, just large enough to see, floated straight across one of those blue eyes and then across the other in the same line. This Moridin had tapped into the True Power, and more than once. Much more. She knew that some men who could channel survived in this time aside from al'Thor - this fellow was much of a size with al'Thor - but she had not expected the Great Lord to allow one that particular honor. An honor with a bite, as any of the Chosen knew. In the long run, the True Power was far more addictive than the One Power; a strong will could hold down the desire to draw more saidar or saidin, but she herself did not believe the will existed strong enough to resist the True Power, not once the saa appeared in your eyes. The final price was different, but no less terrible.

"ju hæv bɪn ɡɪvən dɪstɪŋkʃən ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən jə noʊ," ʃi toʊl hɪm. əz ðoʊ hɝ fɪlθi dʒɹɛs wɑz ðə faɪnəst stʃɹaɪθ, ʃi tʊk ði ɑɹmtʃɛɹ ɑpəzət hɪm. "bɹɪŋ mi səm ə ðət waɪn, ən əl tɛl ju. oʊnli twɛnti-naɪn ʌðɝz əv ɛvɝ bɪn ɡɹæntəd - "

"You have been given distinction greater than you know," she told him. As though her filthy dress was the finest streith, she took the armchair opposite him. "Bring me some of that wine, and I will tell you. Only twenty-nine others have ever been granted - "

tə hɝ ʃɑk, hi læft. "ju mɪsəpɹɪhɛnd, mɑɡiɾin. jə stɪl sɝv ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, bʌt nɑt kwaɪɾ əz jə wʌns dɪd. ðə taɪm fəɹ pleɪɪŋ jəɹ oʊn ɡeɪmz əz pæst. ɪf jə hæd nɑt mænədʒ tə də səm ɡʊd baɪ æksəɾənt, jə wəd bi dɛd naʊ."

To her shock, he laughed. "You misapprehend, Moghedien. You still serve the Great Lord, but not quite as you once did. The time for playing your own games has passed. If you had not managed to do some good by accident, you would be dead now."

"aɪ æm wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən, bɔɪ," ʃi sɛd, fjʊɹi bɝnɪŋ θɹu kɑʃən. ʃi sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt, feɪsɪŋ ɪm wɪð ɔl ðə nɑlədʒ ʌv ən eɪdʒ ðət meɪɾ ɪz lɪɾəl dɪfɹən fɹəm taɪmz ə mʌd hʌts. əz mʌtʃ ə ðət nɑlədʒ əz ʃi hæd, ɛniweɪ, ən ɪn səm ɛɹiəz, kənsɝnɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ, noʊ wʌn aʊtstʃɹɪp hɝ. ʃi ɔlmoʊst ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ kloʊs ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl leɪ. "jɔɹ mʌðɝ pɹɑbli juz maɪ neɪm tə fɹaɪɾən jə nɑt soʊ mɛni jɪɹz ɡɔn, bʌt noʊ ðət ɡɹoʊn mɛn u kəd kɹʌmpəl jə laɪk ə ɹæɡ swɛɾɪd wən ðeɪ hɝɾ ɪt. jəl wɑtʃ jəɹ tʌŋ wɪð mi!"

"I am one of the Chosen, boy," she said, fury burning through caution. She sat up straight, facing him with all the knowledge of an Age that made his little different from times of mud huts. As much of that knowledge as she had, anyway, and in some areas, concerning the One Power, no one outstripped her. She almost embraced the Source no matter how close Shayol Ghul lay. "Your mother probably used my name to frighten you not so many years gone, but know that grown men who could crumple you like a rag sweated when they heard it. You will watch your tongue with me!"

hi ɹitʃt ɪndə ði oʊpən nɛk ə hɪz ʃɝt, ən əɹ oʊn tʌŋ kloʊv tə ðə ɹuf ə hɝ maʊð. hɝ aɪz fɪkst ɑn ðə smɔl keɪdʒ ʌv ɡoʊld waɪɝ ən blʌd-ɹɛd kɹɪstəl ðəɾ i dʒɹu aʊt dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɑn ə kɔɹd. ʃi θɔt veɪɡli ðəɾ i tʌkt ənʌðɝ dʒʌs laɪk ɪt bæk ɪn, bʌt ʃi hæɾ aɪz oʊnli fəɹ əɹ oʊn. ɪt dɛfənətli wɑz hɝz. hɪz θʌm stʃɹoʊkt, ən ʃi fɛl ðət kɝɛs əkɹɔs əɹ maɪnd, hɝ soʊl. bɹeɪkɪŋ ə maɪntʃɹæp dɪd nɑt ɹikwaɪɝ mʌtʃ mɔɹ pɹɛʃɝ ðən i wɑz juzɪŋ. ʃi kəd bi ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wɝld əɹ fɑɹðɝ, ən ɪt wəd nɑt mæɾɝ ə hɛɹ. ðə pɑɹɾ ə hɝ ðət wɑz əɹ wəd bi sɛpɝeɪɾəd; ʃi wəd stɪl si wɪð əɹ aɪz ən hɪɹ wɪð əɹ ɪɹz, teɪst wʌt kɹɔst əɹ tʌŋ ən fil wʌt tʌtʃt hɝ, bʌt hɛlpləs wɪðɪn ən ɔtɑmətɑn ðət wɑz ʌɾɝli oʊbiɾiənt tə huɛvɝ hɛl ðə kɔɹsvɹə. wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ðəɹ wɑz ɛni weɪ tə ɡɛt fɹi ʌv ɪt, ə maɪntʃɹæp wɑz dʒʌst wʌɾ ɪts neɪm ɪmplaɪd. ʃi kəd fil ðə blʌd dʒɹeɪnɪŋ fɹəm əɹ feɪs.

He reached into the open neck of his shirt, and her own tongue clove to the roof of her mouth. Her eyes fixed on the small cage of gold wire and blood-red crystal that he drew out dangling on a cord. She thought vaguely that he tucked another just like it back in, but she had eyes only for her own. It definitely was hers. His thumb stroked, and she felt that caress across her mind, her soul. Breaking a mindtrap did not require much more pressure than he was using. She could be on the other side of the world or farther, and it would not matter a hair. The part of her that was her would be separated; she would still see with her eyes and hear with her ears, taste what crossed her tongue and feel what touched her, but helpless within an automaton that was utterly obedient to whoever held the cour'souvra. Whether or not there was any way to get free of it, a mindtrap was just what its name implied. She could feel the blood draining from her face.

"ju ʌndɝstænd naʊ?" hi sɛd. "ju stɪl sɝv ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, bʌt naʊ ɪɾəl bi baɪ duɪŋ əz aɪ seɪ."

"You understand now?" he said. "You still serve the Great Lord, but now it will be by doing as I say."

"aɪ ʌndɝstænd, miɑkoʊvə," ʃi sɛɾ ɔɾəmætɪkli.

"I understand, Mia'cova," she said automatically.

əɡɛn i læft, ə dip ɹɪtʃ saʊn ðət mɑkt əɹ əz i pʊt ðə maɪntʃɹæp əweɪ bɪniθ ɪz ʃɝt. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ nid fəɹ ðæt, naʊ juv hæd jəɹ lɛsən. əl kɔl jə mɑɡiɾin, ən jəl kɔl mi mɔɹaɪɾɪn. jə ɑɹ stɪl wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən. hu ɪz ðəɹ tə ɹipleɪs ju?"

Again he laughed, a deep rich sound that mocked her as he put the mindtrap away beneath his shirt. "There is no need for that, now you've had your lesson. I will call you Moghedien, and you will call me Moridin. You are still one of the Chosen. Who is there to replace you?"

"jɛs, ʌv kɔɹs, mɔɹaɪɾɪn," ʃi sɛd toʊnləsli. wʌtɛvɝ i sɛd, ʃi nu ðət ʃi wɑz oʊnd.

"Yes, of course, Moridin," she said tonelessly. Whatever he said, she knew that she was owned.


tʃæptɝ twɛntisɪks


CHAPTER 26

ði ɪɹɛvəkəbəl wɝdz


The Irrevocable Words

mɔɹɡeɪs leɪ əweɪk, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə silɪŋ θɹu ðə munlɪt dɑɹknəs, ən tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk ə hɝ dɔɾɝ. ə sɪŋɡəl peɪl lɪnən ʃit kʌvɝd hɝ, bʌt dɪspaɪt ðə hit ʃi swɛɾɪd ɪn ə θɪk wʊlən slipɪŋ ɡaʊn, leɪs taɪtli tə ðə nɛk. swɛt hɑɹdli mæɾɝd; noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mɛni taɪmz ʃi beɪðd, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ hɑt ðə wɔɾɝ, ʃi dɪd nɑt fil klin. ɪleɪn mʌs bi seɪf ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ət taɪmz ɪt sim jɪɹz sɪns ʃi kəd meɪk hɝsɛlf tʃɹʌst ɛɛs sədaɪ, jɛt wʌtɛvɝ ðə pɛɹədɑks, ðə taʊɝ wɑz ʃʊɹli ðə seɪfəs pleɪs fəɹ ɪleɪn. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk ʌv ɡɔɪn - hi wəd bi ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪð ɪz sɪstɝ, fʊl ə hɪz pɹaɪd fəɹ hɝ, soʊ ɝnɪst ɪn ɪz dɪzaɪɝ tə bi hɝ ʃild wən ʃi niɾəd wʌn - ən ʌv ɡɑləd - waɪ wəd ðeɪ nɑt lɛɾ əɹ si hɪm? ʃi lʌvd ɪm əz mʌtʃ əz ɪf i hæd kʌm aʊɾ ə hɝ oʊn bɑɾi, ən ɪn soʊ mɛni weɪz i niɾəd ɪt mɔɹ ðən ði ʌðɝ tu. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk ə ðɛm. ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl tə θɪŋk ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛpt. . . . waɪɾ aɪz stɛɹɾ ʌp ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs, ɡlɪsnɪŋ wɪð ənʃt tɪɹz.

Morgase lay awake, staring at the ceiling through the moonlit darkness, and tried to think of her daughter. A single pale linen sheet covered her, but despite the heat she sweated in a thick woolen sleeping gown, laced tightly to the neck. Sweat hardly mattered; no matter how many times she bathed, no matter how hot the water, she did not feel clean. Elayne must be safe in the White Tower. At times it seemed years since she could make herself trust Aes Sedai, yet whatever the paradox, the Tower was surely the safest place for Elayne. She tried to think of Gawyn - he would be in Tar Valon with his sister, full of his pride for her, so earnest in his desire to be her shield when she needed one - and of Galad - why would they not let her see him? She loved him as much as if he had come out of her own body, and in so many ways he needed it more than the other two. She tried to think of them. It was difficult to think of anything except. . . . Wide eyes stared up into the darkness, glistening with unshed tears.

ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz θɔt ʃi wɑz bɹeɪv ɪnʌf tə də wʌtɛvɝ niɾəd duɪŋ, tə feɪs wʌtɛvɝ keɪm; ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪlivd ʃi kəd pɪk hɝsɛlf ʌp ən kəntɪnju tə faɪt. ɪn wʌn ɛnləs aʊɝ, wɪθaʊt livɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ə fju bɹuzəz ðət wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi feɪɾɪŋ, ɹɑɾəm əsunɑwə hæd bɪɡʌn titʃɪŋ əɹ dɪfɹənli. imən vɑldə hæd kəmpliɾəd əɹ ɛdʒəkeɪʃən wɪð wʌn kwɛstʃən. ðə bɹuz əɹ ænsɝ hæd lɛft ɑn əɹ hɑɹt hæd nɑt feɪɾəd. ʃi ʃʊɾə ɡɔn bæk tə əsunɑwə hɝsɛlf ən toʊld ɪm tə də hɪz wɝst. ʃi ʃəd hæv. . . . ʃi pɹeɪd ðəɾ ɪleɪn wɑz seɪf. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz nɑt fɛɹ tə hoʊp mɔɹ fəɹ ɪleɪn ðən fəɹ ɡɑləɾ əɹ ɡɔɪn, bʌɾ ɪleɪn wəd bi ðə nɛks kwin ʌv ændɝ. ðə taʊɝ wəd nɑt mɪs ðə tʃæns tə pʊɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑn ðə laɪən θɹoʊn. ɪf oʊnli ʃi kəd si ɪleɪn, si ɔl əɹ tʃɪlʒɹən wʌns mɔɹ.

She had always thought she was brave enough to do whatever needed doing, to face whatever came; she had always believed she could pick herself up and continue to fight. In one endless hour, without leaving more than a few bruises that were already fading, Rhadam Asunawa had begun teaching her differently. Eamon Valda had completed her education with one question. The bruise her answer had left on her heart had not faded. She should have gone back to Asunawa herself and told him to do his worst. She should have. . . . She prayed that Elayne was safe. Perhaps it was not fair to hope more for Elayne than for Galad or Gawyn, but Elayne would be the next Queen of Andor. The Tower would not miss the chance to put an Aes Sedai on the Lion Throne. If only she could see Elayne, see all her children once more.

sʌmθɪŋ ɹʌsəld ɪn ðə dɑɹk bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ, ən ʃi hɛld əɹ bɹɛθ, fɔɾ əɡɛns tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. ðə feɪn munlaɪt bɛɹli lɛɾ əɹ meɪk aʊt ðə bɪdpoʊsts. vɑldə hæd ɹɪɾən nɔɹθ fɹəm æmədɔɹ jɛstɝdeɪ, hɪm ən əsunɑwə, wɪð θaʊzənz ʌv waɪtkloʊks tə feɪs ðə pɹɑfət, bʌɾ ɪf i hæd kʌm bæk, ɪf hi. . . . ə ʃeɪp ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs ɹizɑlvd ɪndə ə wʊmən, tu ʃɔɹt fəɹ lini. "aɪ θɔt jə maɪt stɪl bi əweɪk," bɹinz vɔɪs sɛd sɔfli. "dʒɹɪŋk ðɪs; ɪɾəl hɛlp." ðə kɛɹhinɪn wʊmən tʃɹaɪd tə pʊɾ ə sɪlvɝi kʌp ɪndə mɔɹɡeɪsəz hænd. ɪt ɡeɪv ɔf ə slaɪtli saʊɝ smɛl.

Something rustled in the dark bedchamber, and she held her breath, fought against trembling. The faint moonlight barely let her make out the bedposts. Valda had ridden north from Amador yesterday, him and Asunawa, with thousands of Whitecloaks to face the Prophet, but if he had come back, if he. . . . A shape in the darkness resolved into a woman, too short for Lini. "I thought you might still be awake," Breane's voice said softly. "Drink this; it will help." The Cairhienin woman tried to put a silvery cup into Morgase's hand. It gave off a slightly sour smell.

"weɪɾ əntɪl jəɹ sʌmən tə bɹɪŋ mi dʒɹɪŋk," ʃi snæpt, pʊʃɪŋ ðə kʌp əweɪ. wɔɹm lɪkwəd spɪld ɑntu hɝ hænd, ɑntu ðə lɪnən ʃit. "aɪ wɑz ɔlmoʊst əslip wən jə keɪm stæmpɪŋ ɪn," ʃi laɪd. "liv mi!"

"Wait until you're summoned to bring me drink," she snapped, pushing the cup away. Warm liquid spilled onto her hand, onto the linen sheet. "I was almost asleep when you came stamping in," she lied. "Leave me!"

ɪnstɛɾ ʌv oʊbeɪɪŋ, ðə wʊmən stʊd lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət hɝ, feɪs ʃæɾoʊd. mɔɹɡeɪs dɪd nɑt laɪk bɹin tæbɔɹwɪn. wɛðɝ bɹin tʃɹuli wɑz nɑbli bɔɹn ən kʌm daʊn ɪn ðə wɝld, əz ʃi səmtaɪmz kleɪmd, əɹ mɪɹli ə sɝvən u hæd lɝn tə kaʊntɝfɪɾ əɹ bɛɾɝz, ʃi oʊbeɪd wən ən əz ʃi tʃoʊz ən lɛɾ əɹ tʌŋ ɹʌn ɪntaɪɝli tu fɹi. əz ʃi pɹuv naʊ.

Instead of obeying, the woman stood looking down at her, face shadowed. Morgase did not like Breane Taborwin. Whether Breane truly was nobly born and come down in the world, as she sometimes claimed, or merely a servant who had learned to counterfeit her betters, she obeyed when and as she chose and let her tongue run entirely too free. As she proved now.

"ju moʊn laɪk ə ʃip, mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənd." ivən kɛp loʊ, hɝ vɔɪs siðd ɪn æŋɡɝ. ʃi sɛt ðə kʌp ɑn ðə smɔl bɛdsaɪd teɪbəl wɪð ə θʌmp; mɔɹ ə ðə kɑntɛns splæʃt ɑntu ðə teɪbəltɑp. "bɑ! mɛni ʌðɝz əv sin fɑɹ wɝs. jə ɑɹ əlaɪv. nʌn ə jəɹ boʊnz ɑɹ bɹoʊkən; jəɹ wɪts ɑɹ hoʊl. ɛndʒjʊɹ; lɛt ðə pæs pæs, ən ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð jəɹ laɪf. juv bɪn soʊ mʌtʃ ɑn ɛdʒ ðət ðə mɛn wɔk ɑn ðɛɹ toʊz, ivən mæstɝ ɡɪl. læmɡwɪn əz hɑɹdli slɛpt ə wɪŋk ðiz θɹi naɪts."

"You moan like a sheep, Morgase Trakand." Even kept low, her voice seethed in anger. She set the cup on the small bedside table with a thump; more of the contents splashed onto the tabletop. "Bah! Many others have seen far worse. You are alive. None of your bones are broken; your wits are whole. Endure; let the past pass, and go on with your life. You have been so much on edge that the men walk on their toes, even Master Gill. Lamgwin has hardly slept a wink these three nights."

mɔɹɡeɪs flʌʃt wɪð ənɔɪəns; ivən ɪn ændɝ, sɝvəns dɪd nɑt spik soʊ. ʃi kɑt ðə wʊmənz ɑɹm ɪn ə taɪt ɡɹɪp, bʌɾ æŋzaɪəɾi wɔɹd wɪð dɪsplɛʒɝ. "ðeɪ doʊnt noʊ, də ðeɪ?" ɪf ðeɪ dɪd, ðeɪ wəd tʃɹaɪ tə əvɛnʒ hɝ, ɹɛskju hɝ. ðeɪ wəd daɪ. tɑlænvɝ wəd daɪ.

Morgase flushed with annoyance; even in Andor, servants did not speak so. She caught the woman's arm in a tight grip, but anxiety warred with displeasure. "They don't know, do they?" If they did, they would try to avenge her, rescue her. They would die. Tallanvor would die.

"lini ən aɪ dʒɹeɪp lɪnən oʊvɝ ðɛɹ aɪz fəɹ ju," bɹin snɪɹd, pʊlɪŋ əɹ hæn əweɪ ən flɪŋɪŋ ɪt bæk ət hɝ. "ɪf aɪ kəd seɪv læmɡwɪn, aɪ wəd lɛɾ əm noʊ jə fəɹ ðə bliɾɪŋ ʃip jə ɑɹ. hi siz ðə laɪt meɪd flɛʃ ɪn ju; aɪ si ə wʊmən wɪθaʊt kɝədʒ tə æksɛp ðə deɪ. əl nɑt lɛt jə dɪstʃɹɔɪ hɪm wɪð jəɹ kaʊɝɾəs."

"Lini and I drape linen over their eyes for you," Breane sneered, pulling her hand away and flinging it back at her. "If I could save Lamgwin, I would let them know you for the bleating sheep you are. He sees the Light made flesh in you; I see a woman without courage to accept the day. I will not let you destroy him with your cowardice."

kaʊɝɾəs. aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ wɛld ʌp ɪn mɔɹɡeɪs, jɛt noʊ wɝdz keɪm. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz nɑɾɪd ɪn ðə ʃit. ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi cʊɾə dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪn koʊl blʌd tə laɪ wɪð vɑldə, bʌt hæd ʃi, ʃi cʊɾə lɪvd wɪð ɪt. ʃi θɔt ʃi kʊd. ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ ɪntaɪɝli tə seɪ jɛs kəz ʃi fɪɹd feɪsɪŋ əsunɑwəz nɑɾɪd kɔɹdz ən niɾəlz əɡɛn, fɪɹd wɝs wʌɾ i wʊɾə ɡɑɾən tə ɪvɛntʃəwəli. haʊɛvɝ ʃi hæd skɹimd ʌndɝ əsunɑwəz mɪnəstʃɹeɪʃənz, vɑldə wɑz ðə wʌn u hæd ʃoʊɾ əɹ ðə tʃɹu bɔɹɾɝz ə hɝ kɝədʒ, soʊ fɑɹ ʃɔɹɾ ʌv wɛɹ ʃi hæd bɪlivd. vɑldəz tʌtʃ, hɪz bɛd, kəd bi fɝɡɑɾən, wɪð taɪm, bʌt ʃi wəd nɛvɝ bi eɪbəl tə wɑʃ ðə ʃeɪm ə ðət "jɛs" fɹəm əɹ lɪps. bɹin hɝl ðə tʃɹuθ ɪn əɹ feɪs, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ tə ɹɪplaɪ.

Cowardice. Outrage welled up in Morgase, yet no words came. Her fingers knotted in the sheet. She did not think she could have decided in cold blood to lie with Valda, but had she, she could have lived with it. She thought she could. Another matter entirely to say yes because she feared facing Asunawa's knotted cords and needles again, feared worse what he would have gotten to eventually. However she had screamed under Asunawa's ministrations, Valda was the one who had showed her the true borders of her courage, so far short of where she had believed. Valda's touch, his bed, could be forgotten, with time, but she would never be able to wash the shame of that "yes" from her lips. Breane hurled the truth in her face, and she did not know how to reply.

ʃi wɑz spɛɹd ðə nid baɪ ə ɹʌʃ ə buts ɪn ði aʊɾɝ ɹum. ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ dɔɹ flʌŋ oʊpən, ən ə ɹʌnɪŋ mæn stɑpt ə peɪs ɪnsaɪd.

She was spared the need by a rush of boots in the outer room. The bedchamber door flung open, and a running man stopped a pace inside.

"soʊ jəɹ əweɪk; ɡʊd," tɑlænvɝz vɔɪs sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt. wɪtʃ əlaʊɾ əɹ hɑɹt tə stɑɹt biɾɪŋ əɡɛn, əlaʊɾ əɹ tə bɹið. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹilis bɹinz hænd - ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ klæspɪŋ ɪt - bʌt tə hɝ sɝpɹaɪz, ðə wʊmən skwizd wʌns bɪfɔɹ lɛɾɪŋ ɡoʊ.

"So you're awake; good," Tallanvor's voice said after a moment. Which allowed her heart to start beating again, allowed her to breathe. She tried to release Breane's hand - she did not remember clasping it - but to her surprise, the woman squeezed once before letting go.

"sʌmθɪŋ ɪz hæpənɪŋ," tɑlænvɝ wɛn ɑn, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ tə ðə loʊn wɪndoʊ. stændɪŋ tə wʌn saɪɾ əz ɪf tə əvɔɪd biɪŋ sin, hi pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə naɪt. munlaɪɾ aʊtlaɪn ɪz tɔl fɔɹm. "mæstɝ ɡɪl, kʌm ən tɛl wʌt jə sɔ."

"Something is happening," Tallanvor went on, striding to the lone window. Standing to one side as if to avoid being seen, he peered into the night. Moonlight outlined his tall form. "Master Gill, come and tell what you saw."

ə hɛɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, bɔl tɑp ʃaɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. bɪhaɪnd, ɪn ði ʌðɝ ɹum, ə hʌlkɪŋ ʃædoʊ muvd; læmɡwɪn dɔɹn. wən bɑzəl ɡɪl ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz stɪl ɪn bɛd, ðət feɪnt ʃaɪnɪŋ fɹəm ɪz skælp dʒɝkt əz i dɝɛktəɾ ɪz aɪz ɛlswɛɹ, ðoʊ hi pɹɑbli hæd dɪfəkəlti meɪkɪŋ aʊt mɔɹ ðən ðə bɛɾ ɪtsɛlf. mæstɝ ɡɪl wɑz ivən waɪɾɝ ðən læmɡwɪn, bʌt nɑt nɪɹli əz tɔl. "fɝɡɪv mi, maɪ kwin. aɪ dɪdn min tə. . . ." hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt vaɪələnli, ən ɪz buts skɹeɪpt ɑn ðə flɔɹ, ʃɪftɪŋ. hæɾ i hæɾ ə kæp, hi wʊɾə bɪn tɝnɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn ɪz hænz, əɹ wɑɾɪŋ ɪt nɝvəsli. "aɪ wɑz ɪn ðə lɔŋ kɔɹəɾɝ, ɑn maɪ weɪ tə . . . tə. . . ." tə ðə dʒeɪks, wɑz wʌɾ i kəd nɑt bɹɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə seɪ tə hɝ. "ɛniweɪ, aɪ ɡlænst aʊt wʌn ə ðə wɪndoʊz, ən aɪ sɔ ə . . . ə bɪɡ bɝd, aɪ θɪŋk . . . læn ɑn tɑp ə ðə saʊθ bæɹəks."

A head appeared in the doorway, bald top shining in the darkness. Behind, in the other room, a hulking shadow moved; Lamgwin Dorn. When Basel Gill realized she was still in bed, that faint shining from his scalp jerked as he directed his eyes elsewhere, though he probably had difficulty making out more than the bed itself. Master Gill was even wider than Lamgwin, but not nearly as tall. "Forgive me, my Queen. I didn't mean to. . . ." He cleared his throat violently, and his boots scraped on the floor, shifting. Had he had a cap, he would have been turning it in his hands, or wadding it nervously. "I was in the Long Corridor, on my way to . . . to. . . ." To the jakes, was what he could not bring himself to say to her. "Anyway, I glanced out one of the windows, and I saw a . . . a big bird, I think . . . land on top of the South Barracks."

"ə bɝd!" liniz θɪn vɔɪs dʒɹoʊv mæstɝ ɡɪl tə lip ɪndə ðə ɹum, klɪɹɪŋ ðə dɔɹweɪ. əɹ meɪbi ɪt wɑz ə ʃɑɹp poʊk ɪn ɪz staʊt ɹɪbz. lini juʒəwəli tʊk ɛvɹi ædvæntɪdʒ əɹ ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ ɔfɝd. ʃi stɔk baɪ hɪm stɪl bɛltɪŋ əɹ naɪtʃɹoʊb. "fulz! ɑks-bɹeɪn lʌmɑksɪz! jə woʊk maɪ tʃ - !" ʃi stɑpt wɪð ə fɪɹs kɑf; lini nɛvɝ fɝɡɑt ðət ʃi hæd bɪn mɔɹɡeɪsəz nɝs, ən əɹ mʌðɝz əz wɛl, bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ slɪpt ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ʌðɝz. ʃi wəd bi kɹɔs ðət ʃi hæd naʊ, ən ɪt ʃoʊɾ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. "ju woʊk jəɹ kwin fəɹ ə bɝd!" pæɾɪŋ əɹ hɛɹnɛt, ʃi ɔɾəmætɪkli tʌkt ɪn ə fju stʃɹænz ðət hæɾ ɪskeɪpt ɪn əɹ slip. "hæv jə bɪn dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ, bɑzəl ɡɪl?" mɔɹɡeɪs wʌndɝd ðət hɝsɛlf.

"A bird!" Lini's thin voice drove Master Gill to leap into the room, clearing the doorway. Or maybe it was a sharp poke in his stout ribs. Lini usually took every advantage her gray hair offered. She stalked by him still belting her nightrobe. "Fools! Ox-brained lummoxes! You woke my ch - !" She stopped with a fierce cough; Lini never forgot that she had been Morgase's nurse, and her mother's as well, but she never slipped in front of others. She would be cross that she had now, and it showed in her voice. "You woke your Queen for a bird!" Patting her hairnet, she automatically tucked in a few strands that had escaped in her sleep. "Have you been drinking, Basel Gill?" Morgase wondered that herself.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪt wɑz ə bɝd," mæstɝ ɡɪl pɹətɛstəd. "ɪt dɪdn lʊk laɪk ɛni bɝd, bʌt wʌɾ ɛls flaɪz, ɪksɛp bæts? ɪt wɑz bɪɡ. mɛn klaɪmd ɔf ɪts bæk, ən ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ stɪl ɑn ɪts nɛk wən ɪt tʊk ɔf əɡɛn. waɪl aɪ wɑz slæpɪŋ maɪ feɪs tə weɪk ʌp, ənʌðɝ ə ðə . . . θɪŋz . . . lændəd, ən mɔɹ mɛn klaɪm daʊn, ən ðən ənʌðɝ keɪm, ən aɪ dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt wɑz taɪm tə tɛl lɔɹd tɑlænvɝ." lini dɪd nɑt snɪf, bʌt mɔɹɡeɪs kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil əɹ stɛɹ, ən ɪt wɑz nɑt dɝɛktəɾ ət hɝ. ðə mæn u hæɾ əbændən ɪz ɪn tə fɑloʊ hɝ sɝɾənli fɛlt ɪt. "ðə laɪts oʊn tʃɹuθ, maɪ kwin," hi ɪnsɪstəd.

"I don't know it was a bird," Master Gill protested. "It didn't look like any bird, but what else flies, except bats? It was big. Men climbed off its back, and there was another still on its neck when it took off again. While I was slapping my face to wake up, another of the . . . things . . . landed, and more men climbed down, and then another came, and I decided it was time to tell Lord Tallanvor." Lini did not sniff, but Morgase could almost feel her stare, and it was not directed at her. The man who had abandoned his inn to follow her certainly felt it. "The Light's own truth, my Queen," he insisted.

"laɪt!" tɑlænvɝ ənaʊns laɪk ən ɛkoʊ. "sʌmθɪŋ. . . . sʌmθɪŋ dʒʌs lændəɾ ətɑp ðə nɔɹθ bæɹəks." mɔɹɡeɪs hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ɪm saʊnd ʃeɪkən bɪfɔɹ. ɔl ʃi wɑntəd wɑz tə meɪk əm ɔl ɡoʊ əweɪ ən liv əɹ əloʊn ɪn əɹ mɪzɝi, bʌt ðəɹ sim noʊ hoʊp. tɑlænvɝ wɑz wɝs ðən bɹin ɪn mɛni weɪz. mʌtʃ wɝs.

"Light!" Tallanvor announced like an echo. "Something. . . . Something just landed atop the North Barracks." Morgase had never heard him sound shaken before. All she wanted was to make them all go away and leave her alone in her misery, but there seemed no hope. Tallanvor was worse than Breane in many ways. Much worse.

"maɪ ɹoʊb," ʃi sɛd, ən fəɹ wʌns bɹin wɑz kwɪk tə hæn əɹ wʌn. mæstɝ ɡɪl heɪstəli tɝn ɪz feɪs tə ðə wɔl waɪl ʃi klaɪm fɹəm ðə bɛɾ ən pʊɾ ɑn ðə sɪlk ɹoʊb.

"My robe," she said, and for once Breane was quick to hand her one. Master Gill hastily turned his face to the wall while she climbed from the bed and put on the silk robe.

ʃi stʃɹoʊd tə ðə wɪndoʊ, taɪɪŋ ðə sæʃ. ðə lɔŋ nɔɹθ bæɹəks lumd əkɹɔs ðə waɪd kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, fɔɹ hʌlkɪŋ flɔɹz ə flæt-ɹuf dɑɹk stoʊn. nɑɾ ə laɪt ʃoʊd, ðəɹ əɹ ɛniwɛɹ ɪn ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs. ɔl wɑz stɪlnəs ən saɪləns. "aɪ si nʌθɪŋ, tɑlænvɝ."

She strode to the window, tying the sash. The long North Barracks loomed across the wide courtyard, four hulking floors of flat-roofed dark stone. Not a light showed, there or anywhere in the Fortress. All was stillness and silence. "I see nothing, Tallanvor."

hi dʒɹu hɝ bæk. "dʒʌst wɑtʃ," hi sɛd.

He drew her back. "Just watch," he said.

ənʌðɝ taɪm ʃi wʊɾə ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd ɪz hæn livɪŋ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ən bɪn ɪɹəteɪɾəd əɾ əɹ oʊn ɹəɡɹɛɾ əz wɛl əz ɪz toʊn. naʊ, æftɝ vɑldə, ʃi fɛlt ɹɪlif. ən ɪɹɪteɪʃən ət ðə ɹɪlif əz wɛl əz ɪz toʊn. hi wɑz tu dɪsɹɪspɛkfəl baɪ maɪlz, fɑɹ tu stʌbɝn, tu jʌŋ. nɑt mʌtʃ oʊldɝ ðən ɡɑləd.

Another time she would have regretted his hand leaving her shoulder, and been irritated at her own regret as well as his tone. Now, after Valda, she felt relief. And irritation at the relief as well as his tone. He was too disrespectful by miles, far too stubborn, too young. Not much older than Galad.

ʃædoʊz muvd əz ðə mun dɪd, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ɛls stɝd. ɔf ɪn ðə sɪɾi ʌv æmədɔɹ, ə dɔɡ beɪd, ænsɝd baɪ mɔɹ. ðɛn, əz ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə dɪsmɪs tɑlænvɝ ən ɔl ə ðɛm, dɑɹknəs ətɑp ðə mæsɪv bæɹəks hʌmpt ʌp ən hɝld ɪtsɛlf ɔf ðə ɹuf.

Shadows moved as the moon did, but nothing else stirred. Off in the city of Amador, a dog bayed, answered by more. Then, as she opened her mouth to dismiss Tallanvor and all of them, darkness atop the massive barracks humped up and hurled itself off the roof.

sʌmθɪŋ, tɑlænvɝ hæd kɔld ɪt, ən ʃi hæd noʊ bɛɾɝ neɪm. ən ɪmpɹɛʃən ʌv ə lɔŋ bɑɾi ðət sim θɪkɝ ðən ə mæn wɑz tɔl; ɡɹeɪt ɹɪbd wɪŋz laɪk ə bæts swipɪŋ daʊn əz ðə kɹitʃɝ fɛl təwɔɹd ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd; ə fɪɡjɝ, ə mæn, sɪɾɪŋ dʒʌs bɪhaɪn ə sɪnwəs nɛk. ən ðən ðə wɪŋz kɑɾ ɛɹ, ən ðə . . . sʌmθɪŋ . . . sɔɹɾ ʌp, blɑkɪŋ ðə munlaɪɾ əz ɪt swɛpt oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd tʃɹeɪlɪŋ ə lɔŋ, θɪn teɪl.

Something, Tallanvor had called it, and she had no better name. An impression of a long body that seemed thicker than a man was tall; great ribbed wings like a bat's sweeping down as the creature fell toward the courtyard; a figure, a man, sitting just behind a sinuous neck. And then the wings caught air, and the . . . something . . . soared up, blocking the moonlight as it swept over her head trailing a long, thin tail.

mɔɹɡeɪs kloʊzd əɹ maʊθ sloʊli. ði oʊnli θɔt ðət keɪm tə hɝ wɑz ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. tʃɹɑləks ən mɹdʒɹɑl wɝ nɑt ði oʊnli ʃædoʊ-twɪstəd kɹitʃɝz ɪn ðə blaɪt. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn tɔɾ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs, bʌɾ əɹ tuɾɝz ɪn ðə taʊɝ sɛd ðət θɪŋz lɪv ðəɹ noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ sin klɪɹli ən lɪv tə dɪskɹaɪb. haʊ kəɾ ɪt bi soʊ fɑɹ saʊθ, ðoʊ?

Morgase closed her mouth slowly. The only thought that came to her was Shadowspawn. Trollocs and Myrddraal were not the only Shadow-twisted creatures in the Blight. She had never been taught of anything like this, but her tutors in the Tower said that things lived there no one had ever seen clearly and lived to describe. How could it be so far south, though?

əbɹʌpli ə flæʃ ə laɪt flɛɹd wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt bum ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə meɪn ɡeɪts, ən ðən əɡɛn, ət tu mɔɹ pleɪsəz əlɔŋ ðə ɡɹeɪɾ aʊɾɝ wɔl. ðoʊz wɝ ɡeɪts tu, ʃi bɪlivd.

Abruptly a flash of light flared with a great boom in the direction of the main gates, and then again, at two more places along the great outer wall. Those were gates too, she believed.

"wʌɾ ɪn ðə pɪɾ ə dum wɑz ðæt?" tɑlænvɝ mʌɾɝd ɪn ə moʊmən ə saɪləns bɪfɔɹ əlɑɹm ɡɔŋz bɪɡæn ɹisaʊndɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. ʃaʊts ɹoʊz, ən skɹimz, ən hɔɹs kɹaɪz laɪk səm sɔɹɾ ə hɔɹn. faɪɝ lɛpt wɪð ə kɹæʃ ə θʌndɝ, ðən əɡɛn ɛlswɛɹ.

"What in the Pit of Doom was that?" Tallanvor muttered in a moment of silence before alarm gongs began resounding in the darkness. Shouts rose, and screams, and hoarse cries like some sort of horn. Fire leaped with a crash of thunder, then again elsewhere.

"ðə wʌn paʊɝ," mɔɹɡeɪs bɹiðd. ʃi maɪt nɑt bi eɪbəl tə tʃænəl, əɹ əz wɛl əz nɑt, bʌt ʃi kəd tɛl ðæt. noʊʃənz ə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn flɛd. "ɪt . . . ɪt mʌs bi ɛɛs sədaɪ." ʃi hɝd sʌmwʌnz bɹɛθ kætʃ bɪhaɪn hɝ; lini əɹ bɹin. bɑzəl ɡɪl ɪksaɪɾədli mɝmɝd "ɛɛs sədaɪ," ən læmɡwɪn mɝmɝd bæk tu loʊ fəɹ əɹ tə ʌndɝstænd. ɔf ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, mɛɾəl klæʃt ɑn mɛɾəl; faɪɝ bɛloʊd, ən laɪtnɪŋ stʃɹik fɹəm ðə klaʊdləs skaɪ. feɪnli θɹu ðə dɪn keɪm əlɑɹm bɛlz fɹəm ðə sɪɾi ət læst, bʌt stʃɹeɪnʒli fju.

"The One Power," Morgase breathed. She might not be able to channel, or as well as not, but she could tell that. Notions of Shadowspawn fled. "It . . . it must be Aes Sedai." She heard someone's breath catch behind her; Lini or Breane. Basel Gill excitedly murmured "Aes Sedai," and Lamgwin murmured back too low for her to understand. Off in the darkness, metal clashed on metal; fire bellowed, and lightning streaked from the cloudless sky. Faintly through the din came alarm bells from the city at last, but strangely few.

"ɛɛs sədaɪ." tɑlænvɝ saʊndəd daʊtfəl. "waɪ naʊ? tə ɹɛskju ju, mɔɹɡeɪs? aɪ θɔt ðeɪ kʊdn juz ðə paʊɝ əɡɛns mɛn, oʊnli ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. bɪsaɪdz, ɪf ðət wɪŋ kɹitʃɝ wɑznt ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, əl nɛvɝ si wʌn."

"Aes Sedai." Tallanvor sounded doubtful. "Why now? To rescue you, Morgase? I thought they couldn't use the power against men, only Shadowspawn. Besides, if that winged creature wasn't Shadowspawn, I will never see one."

"ju doʊnt noʊ wʌt jə ɑɹ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt!" ʃi sɛd, kənfɹʌntɪŋ ɪm hiɾɪdli. "ju - !" ə kɹɔsboʊ boʊl klæʃt əɡɛns ðə wɪndoʊfɹeɪm ɪn ə spɹeɪ ʌv stoʊn tʃɪps; ɛɹ stɝɾ əɡɛnst əɹ feɪs əz ɪt ɹɪkəʃeɪd bɪtwin əm ən plæntəɾ ɪtsɛlf ɪn wʌn ə ðə bɪdpoʊsts wɪð ə sɑləd tʃʌŋk. ə fju ɪntʃəz tə ðə ɹaɪt, ən ɔl əɹ tʃɹʌbəlz wʊɾə bɪn ɛndəd.

"You don't know what you are talking about!" she said, confronting him heatedly. "You - !" A crossbow bolt clashed against the windowframe in a spray of stone chips; air stirred against her face as it ricocheted between them and planted itself in one of the bedposts with a solid tchunk. A few inches to the right, and all her troubles would have been ended.

ʃi dɪd nɑt muv, bʌt tɑlænvɝ pʊld əɹ əweɪ fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ wɪð ən oʊθ. ivən baɪ munlaɪt, ʃi kəd si hɪz fɹaʊn əz i stʌɾid hɝ. fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi θɔɾ i maɪt tʌtʃ əɹ feɪs; ɪf i dɪd, ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ ʃi wəd wip əɹ skɹim əɹ ɔɹɾɝ ɪm tə liv əɹ fɝɛvɝ ɔɹ. . . . ɪnstɛd, hi sɛd, "mɔɹ laɪkli ɪts səm ə ðoʊz mɛn, ðoʊz ʃeɪmən əɹ wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz." hi ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn æksɛptɪŋ ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ, ɪmpɑsəbəl teɪlz ðət hæd sipt ivən ɪndə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs. "aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kən ɡɛt jə aʊt, ɹaɪt naʊ; ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɪl bi kənfjuʒən. kʌm wɪð mi."

She did not move, but Tallanvor pulled her away from the window with an oath. Even by moonlight, she could see his frown as he studied her. For a moment she thought he might touch her face; if he did, she did not know whether she would weep or scream or order him to leave her forever or. . . . Instead, he said, "More likely it's some of those men, those Shamin or whatever they call themselves." He insisted on accepting the strange, impossible tales that had seeped even into the Fortress. "I think I can get you out, right now; everything will be confusion. Come with me."

ʃi dɪd nɑt kɝɛk hɪm; fju pipəl nu ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə wʌn paʊɝ, mʌtʃ lɛs ðə dɪfɝənsɪz bɪtwin seɪaɪdɑɹ ən seɪɾɪn. hɪz aɪdiə hæɾ ɪts ətʃɹækʃənz. ðeɪ maɪt bi eɪbəl tə ɪskeɪp ɪn ðə bɛdləm ʌv ə bæɾəl.

She did not correct him; few people knew anything about the One Power, much less the differences between saidar and saidin. His idea had its attractions. They might be able to escape in the bedlam of a battle.

"teɪk əɹ aʊɾ ɪndə ðæt!" lini skɹitʃt. flɛɹɪŋ laɪts dʒɹaʊn ðə mun ət ðə wɪndoʊ; kɹæʃɪz ən θʌndɝz dʒɹaʊn ðə dɪn ə mɛn ən sɔɹdz. "aɪ θɔt jə hæd mɔɹ wɪts, mɑɹɾɪn tɑlænvɝ. 'oʊnli fulz kɪs hɔɹnəts əɹ baɪt faɪɝ.' jə hɝɾ əɹ seɪ ɪts ɛɛs sədaɪ. dʒju θɪŋk ʃi dʌznt noʊ? də ju?"

"Take her out into that!" Lini screeched. Flaring lights drowned the moon at the window; crashes and thunders drowned the din of men and swords. "I thought you had more wits, Martyn Tallanvor. 'Only fools kiss hornets or bite fire.' You heard her say it's Aes Sedai. Do you think she doesn't know? Do you?"

"maɪ lɔɹd, ɪf ɪts ɛɛs sədaɪ. . . ." mæstɝ ɡɪl tʃɹeɪld ɔf.

"My Lord, if it is Aes Sedai. . . ." Master Gill trailed off.

tɑlænvɝz hænz fɛl əweɪ fɹəm hɝ, ən i ɡɹʌmbəld ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, wɪʃɪŋ i hæɾ ə sɔɹd. peɪdʒɹən naɪl hæɾ əlaʊɾ ɪm tə kip ɪz bleɪd; imən vɑldə wɑz nɑt soʊ tʃɹʌstɪŋ.

Tallanvor's hands fell away from her, and he grumbled under his breath, wishing he had a sword. Pedron Niall had allowed him to keep his blade; Eamon Valda was not so trusting.

fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, dɪsəpɔɪnmənt swɛld ɪn əɹ bɹɛst. ɪf oʊnli hi hæɾ ɪnsɪstəd, hæd dʒɹæɡd hɝ. . . . wʌt wɑz ðə mæɾɝ wɪð hɝ? hæɾ i tʃɹaɪd tə dʒɹæɡ hɝ ɛniwɛɹ fəɹ ɛni ɹizən, ʃi wʊɾə hæɾ ɪz haɪd. ʃi niɾəd tə teɪk hoʊld ə hɝsɛlf. vɑldə hæd dɛntɪɾ əɹ kɑnfəɾəns - noʊ, hi hæd kæʒəwəli ɹɪpt ɪt tə ʃɹɛdz - bʌt ʃi mʌs klɪŋ tə ðoʊz ʃɹɛdz ən nɪɾ əm ʌp əɡɛn. sʌmhaʊ. ɪf ðə tæɾɝz wɝ wɝθ nɪɾɪŋ ʌp əɡɛn.

For an instant, disappointment swelled in her breast. If only he had insisted, had dragged her. . . . What was the matter with her? Had he tried to drag her anywhere for any reason, she would have had his hide. She needed to take hold of herself. Valda had dented her confidence - no, he had casually ripped it to shreds - but she must cling to those shreds and knit them up again. Somehow. If the tatters were worth knitting up again.

"æt list aɪ kən faɪn aʊt wʌɾ ɪz hæpənɪŋ," tɑlænvɝ ɡɹaʊld, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə dɔɹ. "ɪf ɪɾ ɪzən jəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ - "

"At least I can find out what is happening," Tallanvor growled, striding for the door. "If it isn't your Aes Sedai - "

"noʊ! jəl ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ. pliz." ʃi wɑz vɛɹi ɡlæɾ ə ðə peɪl dɑɹknəs, haɪɾɪŋ əɹ fjʊɹiəsli flʌʃɪŋ feɪs. ʃi wʊɾə bɪɾən əɹ tʌŋ ɔf bɪfɔɹ seɪɪŋ ðət læst wɝd, bʌɾ ɪt hæd slɪpt aʊt bɪfɔɹ ʃi nu. ʃi wɛn ɑn ɪn fɝmɝ toʊnz. "ju wɪl ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ, ɡɑɹɾɪŋ jəɹ kwin əz jə ʃʊd."

"No! You will remain here. Please." She was very glad of the pale darkness, hiding her furiously flushing face. She would have bitten her tongue off before saying that last word, but it had slipped out before she knew. She went on in firmer tones. "You will remain here, guarding your Queen as you should."

ɪn ðə dɪm laɪt, ʃi kəd si hɪz feɪs, ən ɪz baʊ sim kwaɪt pɹɑpɝ, bʌt ʃi wʊɾə weɪdʒɝɾ əɹ læs kɑpɝ boʊθ wɝ æŋɡɹi. "aɪ wɪl bi ɪn jəɹ æntəɹum." wɛl, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊɾ əbaʊɾ ɪz vɔɪs. fəɹ wʌns, ðoʊ, ʃi kɛɹd niðɝ haʊ æŋɡɹi hi wɑz nɔɹ haʊ lɪɾəl i hɪɾ ɪt. vɛɹi pɑsəbli ʃi maɪt kɪl ði ɪnfjʊɹieɪɾɪŋ mæn wɪð əɹ oʊn hænz, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt gɑnə daɪ tənaɪt, kʌt daʊn baɪ soʊlʒɝz wɪð noʊ weɪ tə tɛl wɪtʃ saɪɾ i wɑz ɑn.

In the dim light, she could see his face, and his bow seemed quite proper, but she would have wagered her last copper both were angry. "I will be in your anteroom." Well, there was no doubt about his voice. For once, though, she cared neither how angry he was nor how little he hid it. Very possibly she might kill the infuriating man with her own hands, but he was not going to die tonight, cut down by soldiers with no way to tell which side he was on.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hoʊp ə slip naʊ ivən hæd ʃi bɪn eɪbəl. wɪθaʊt laɪɾɪŋ ɛni læmps, ʃi wɑʃt əɹ feɪs ən tiθ. bɹin ən lini hɛlpt əɹ dʒɹɛs, ɪn blu sɪlk slæʃt wɪð ɡɹin, wɪð spɪlz ə snoʊi leɪs əɾ əɹ ɹɪsts ən bɪniθ əɹ tʃɪn. ɪt wəd də vɛɹi wɛl fəɹ ɹəsivɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. seɪaɪdɑɹ ɹeɪdʒd ɪn ðə naɪt. ðeɪ hæd tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. hu ɛls kəɾ ɪt bi?

There was no hope of sleep now even had she been able. Without lighting any lamps, she washed her face and teeth. Breane and Lini helped her dress, in blue silk slashed with green, with spills of snowy lace at her wrists and beneath her chin. It would do very well for receiving Aes Sedai. Saidar raged in the night. They had to be Aes Sedai. Who else could it be?

wən ʃi dʒɔɪn ðə mɛn ɪn ði æntəɹum, ðeɪ wɝ sɪɾɪŋ ɪn dɑɹknəs ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə munlaɪt θɹu ðə wɪndoʊz, ən ði əkeɪʒənəl flæʃ ə paʊɝ-ɹɔt faɪɝ. ivən ə kændəl maɪɾ ətʃɹækt ənwɔntɪɾ ətɛnʃən. læmɡwɪn ən mæstɝ ɡɪl spɹæŋ fɹəm ðɛɹ tʃɛɹz ɹɪspɛkfəli; tɑlænvɝ stʊd mɔɹ sloʊli, ən ʃi niɾəd noʊ laɪt tə noʊ hi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əɹ wɪð ə sʌlən fɹaʊn. fjʊɹiəs ðət ʃi hæd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɪm - ʃi wɑz ɪz kwin! - fjʊɹiəs ən bɛɹli eɪbəl tə kip ɪt fɹəm əɹ vɔɪs, ʃi ɔɹɾɝd læmɡwɪn tə bɹɪŋ mɔɹ ə ðə tɔl wʊɾən tʃɛɹz fɝðɝ fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊz. ɪn saɪləns, ðeɪ sæɾ ən weɪɾəd. ət list, saɪləns ɑn ðɛɹ pɑɹt. aʊtsaɪd θʌndɝəs kɹæʃɪz ən ɹɔɹz stɪl ɛkoʊd, hɔɹnz kɹaɪɾ ən mɛn ʃaʊɾəd, ən θɹu ɪt ʃi fɛl seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝdʒ ən fɔl ən sɝdʒ əɡɛn.

When she joined the men in the anteroom, they were sitting in darkness except for the moonlight through the windows, and the occasional flash of Power-wrought fire. Even a candle might attract unwanted attention. Lamgwin and Master Gill sprang from their chairs respectfully; Tallanvor stood more slowly, and she needed no light to know he regarded her with a sullen frown. Furious that she had to ignore him - she was his Queen! - furious and barely able to keep it from her voice, she ordered Lamgwin to bring more of the tall wooden chairs further from the windows. In silence, they sat and waited. At least, silence on their part. Outside thunderous crashes and roars still echoed, horns cried and men shouted, and through it she felt saidar surge and fall and surge again.

sloʊli, æftɝ ət list ən aʊɝ, ðə bæɾəl dwɪndəld ən daɪd. vɔɪsəz stɪl ʃaʊɾəd ɪŋkɑmpɹəhɛnsɪbəl ɔɹɾɝz, wundəd skɹimd, ən səmtaɪmz ðoʊz stʃɹeɪnʒ hɔɹs hɔɹnz ɡeɪv vɔɪs, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ dɪd stil ɹɪŋ ɑn stil. seɪaɪdɑɹ feɪɾəd; ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ wɪmən stɪl hɛld ɪɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɛni tʃænəl naʊ. ɔl sim kloʊs tə pisfəl æftɝ ðə klæmɝ ən kəmoʊʃən.

Slowly, after at least an hour, the battle dwindled and died. Voices still shouted incomprehensible orders, wounded screamed, and sometimes those strange hoarse horns gave voice, but no more did steel ring on steel. Saidar faded; she was sure women still held it inside the Fortress, but she did not think any channeled now. All seemed close to peaceful after the clamor and commotion.

tɑlænvɝ stɝd, bʌt ʃi weɪvd ɪm bæk bɪfɔɹ i kəd ɹaɪz; fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi θɔɾ i wəd nɑɾ oʊbeɪ. naɪt wikənd, ən sʌnlaɪt kɹɛpt ɪn θɹu ðə wɪndoʊz, ʃaɪnɪŋ ɑn tɑlænvɝz ɡlaʊɝ. ʃi hɛld əɹ hænz stɪl ɪn əɹ læp. peɪʃəns wɑz bʌt wʌn ə ðə vɝtʃuz ðət jʌŋ mæn niɾəd tə lɝn. peɪʃəns stʊd sɛkən oʊnli tə kɝədʒ əz ə noʊbəl vɝtʃu. ðə sʌn ɹoʊz haɪɝ. lini ən bɹin bɪɡæn wɪspɝɪŋ təɡɛðɝ ɪn ɪnkɹisɪŋli wɝid toʊnz, ʃuɾɪŋ ɡlænsɪz ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən. tɑlænvɝ skaʊld, dɑɹk aɪz smoʊldɝɪŋ, sɪɾɪŋ ɹɪdʒəɾ ɪn ðət dɑɹk blu koʊt ðət fɪɾ ɪm soʊ wɛl. mæstɝ ɡɪl fɪdʒəɾɪd, ɹʌnɪŋ fɝst wʌn hæn ðən ði ʌðɝ əkɹɔs ɪz ɡɹeɪ-fɹɪn hɛd, mɑpɪŋ ɪz pɪŋk tʃiks wɪð ə hæŋkɝtʃɪf. læmɡwɪn slaʊtʃt ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ, ðə wʌntaɪm stʃɹit tʌfs hɛvi-lɪɾɪd aɪz meɪkɪŋ ɪm sim hæf əslip, bʌt wɛnɛvɝ i ɡlænst ət bɹin ə smaɪl flɪkɝɾ ɑn ɪz skɑɹd, bɹoʊkən-noʊz feɪs. mɔɹɡeɪs foʊkəst ɑn əɹ bɹiðɪŋ, ɔlmoʊs laɪk ði ɛksɝsaɪzəz ʃi hæd dʌn dʊɹɪŋ əɹ mʌnθs ɪn ðə taʊɝ. peɪʃəns. ɪf sʌmwʌn dɪd nɑt kʌm sun, ʃi wɑz gɑnə hæv ʃɑɹp wɝdz tə seɪ, ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ nɑt!

Tallanvor stirred, but she waved him back before he could rise; for a moment she thought he would not obey. Night weakened, and sunlight crept in through the windows, shining on Tallanvor's glower. She held her hands still in her lap. Patience was but one of the virtues that young man needed to learn. Patience stood second only to courage as a noble virtue. The sun rose higher. Lini and Breane began whispering together in increasingly worried tones, shooting glances in her direction. Tallanvor scowled, dark eyes smoldering, sitting rigid in that dark blue coat that fit him so well. Master Gill fidgeted, running first one hand then the other across his gray-fringed head, mopping his pink cheeks with a handkerchief. Lamgwin slouched in his chair, the onetime street tough's heavy-lidded eyes making him seem half asleep, but whenever he glanced at Breane a smile flickered on his scarred, broken-nosed face. Morgase focused on her breathing, almost like the exercises she had done during her months in the Tower. Patience. If someone did not come soon, she was going to have sharp words to say, Aes Sedai or not!

dɪspaɪt hɝsɛlf, ʃi dʒʌmpt əɾ ən əbɹʌpt paʊndɪŋ ɑn ðə dɔɹ tə ðə hɔlweɪ. bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd tɛl bɹin tə si hu wɑz ðɛɹ, ðə dɔɹ swʌŋ oʊpən, bæŋɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl. mɔɹɡeɪs stɛɹɾ əɾ u ɛntɝd.

Despite herself, she jumped at an abrupt pounding on the door to the hallway. Before she could tell Breane to see who was there, the door swung open, banging against the wall. Morgase stared at who entered.

ə tɔl, dɑɹk, hʊk-noʊz mæn stɛɹd bæk əɾ əɹ koʊldli, ðə lɔŋ hɪlt ʌv ə sɔɹd ɹaɪzɪŋ əbʌv ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. stʃɹeɪnʒ ɑɹmɝ kʌvɝɾ ɪz tʃɛst, oʊvɝlæpɪŋ pleɪts lækɝd ɡlɪsnɪŋ ɡoʊld ən blæk, ən i hɛld ə hɛlməɾ ɑn ɪz hɪp ðət lʊk laɪk ən ɪnsɛks hɛd, blæk ən ɡoʊld ən ɡɹin, wɪð θɹi lɔŋ, θɪn ɡɹin plumz. tu mɔɹ ɑɹmɝd laɪk ɪm keɪm əɾ ɪz hilz wɛɹɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛlməts, ðoʊ wɪθaʊt plumz; ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ sim peɪntəd ɹæðɝ ðən lækɝd, ən ðeɪ kæɹid kɹɔsboʊz ɹɛɾi. stɪl mɔɹ stʊɾ ɪn ðə hɔl aʊtsaɪd, wɪð ɡoʊld-ænd-blæk tæsɛl spɪɹz.

A tall, dark, hook-nosed man stared back at her coldly, the long hilt of a sword rising above his shoulder. Strange armor covered his chest, overlapping plates lacquered glistening gold and black, and he held a helmet on his hip that looked like an insect's head, black and gold and green, with three long, thin green plumes. Two more armored like him came at his heels wearing their helmets, though without plumes; their armor seemed painted rather than lacquered, and they carried crossbows ready. Still more stood in the hall outside, with gold-and-black tasseled spears.

tɑlænvɝ ən læmɡwɪn ən ivən staʊt mæstɝ ɡɪl skɹæmbəl tə ðɛɹ fit, pleɪsɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz bɪtwin əɹ ən əɹ pəkjuljɝ vɪzəɾɝz. ʃi hæd tə pʊʃ ə weɪ θɹu.

Tallanvor and Lamgwin and even stout Master Gill scrambled to their feet, placing themselves between her and her peculiar visitors. She had to push a way through.

ðə hʊk-noʊz mænz aɪz wɛn stʃɹeɪt tə hɝ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd dɪmæn ən ɛkspləneɪʃən. "ju ɑɹ mɔɹɡeɪs, kwin ʌv ændɝ?" hɪz vɔɪs wɑz hɑɹʃ, ən i dʒɹɔld ɪz wɝdz soʊ bædli ʃi bɛɹli ʌndɝstʊd.

The hook-nosed man's eyes went straight to her before she could demand an explanation. "You are Morgase, Queen of Andor?" His voice was harsh, and he drawled his words so badly she barely understood.

hi stɛpt ɑn əɹ ɹɪplaɪ. "ju wɪl kʌm wɪð mi. əloʊn," hi æɾəd əz tɑlænvɝ, ən læmɡwɪn, ən mæstɝ ɡɪl, ɔl muv fɔɹwɝd. ðə kɹɔs-boʊmən pɹizɛntəd ðɛɹ wɛpənz; ðə hɛvi kwɔɹəlz lʊk meɪd tə pʌntʃ hoʊlz ɪn ɑɹmɝ; ə mæn wəd hɑɹdli sloʊ wʌn daʊn.

He stepped on her reply. "You will come with me. Alone," he added as Tallanvor, and Lamgwin, and Master Gill, all moved forward. The cross-bowmen presented their weapons; the heavy quarrels looked made to punch holes in armor; a man would hardly slow one down.

"aɪ hæv noʊ əbdʒɛkʃən tə maɪ pipəl ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ hɪɹ əntɪl aɪ ɹɪtɝn," ʃi sɛɾ ə ɡʊd mɔɹ kɑmli ðən ʃi fɛlt. hu wɝ ðiz pipəl? ʃi wɑz fəmɪljɝ wɪð ði æksɛns ʌv ɛvɹi neɪʃən, fəmɪljɝ wɪð ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ. "aɪ æm ʃʊɹ jəl si tə maɪ seɪfti vɛɹi wɛl, kæptən . . . ?"

"I have no objection to my people remaining here until I return," she said a good more calmly than she felt. Who were these people? She was familiar with the accents of every nation, familiar with their armor. "I am sure you will see to my safety very well, Captain . . . ?"

hi dɪd nɑt səplaɪ ə neɪm, oʊnli moʊʃən kɝtli fəɹ əɹ tə fɑloʊ. tə hɝ væst ɹɪlif, tɑlænvɝ meɪd noʊ fʌs dɪspaɪɾ ɪz hɑt ɡeɪz. tə hɝ væst ɪɹɪteɪʃən, mæstɝ ɡɪl ən læmɡwɪn lʊk tə hɪm bɪfɔɹ stɛpɪŋ bæk.

He did not supply a name, only motioned curtly for her to follow. To her vast relief, Tallanvor made no fuss despite his hot gaze. To her vast irritation, Master Gill and Lamgwin looked to him before stepping back.

ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ, ðə soʊlʒɝz fɔɹmd ɝaʊn hɝ, ðə hʊk-noʊzd ɔfəsɝ ən ðə tu kɹɔsboʊmən ɪn ðə lɛd. ə ɡɑɹɾ ʌv ɑnɝ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə tɛl hɝsɛlf. ðɪs sun æftɝ ə bæɾəl, wɑndɝɪŋ ɝaʊn ʌnpɹətɛktɪd wɑz wɝs ðən fulɪʃ; ðəɹ maɪt bi hoʊldaʊts u wəd siz ə hɑstɪdʒ, əɹ kɪl ɛni hu sɔ ðɛm. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi bɪliv ðæt.

In the hallway, the soldiers formed around her, the hook-nosed officer and the two crossbowmen in the lead. A guard of honor, she tried to tell herself. This soon after a battle, wandering around unprotected was worse than foolish; there might be holdouts who would seize a hostage, or kill any who saw them. She wished she believed that.

ʃi tʃɹaɪd kwɛstʃənɪŋ ði ɔfəsɝ, bʌɾ i nɛvɝ spoʊk ə wɝd, nɛvɝ slækən ɪz stʃɹaɪɾ əɹ tɝn ɪz hɛd, ən ʃi stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ. nʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst ət hɝ; ðeɪ wɝ hɑɹd-aɪd mɛn ə ðə kaɪnd ʃi nu fɹəm əɹ oʊn kwinz ɡɑɹdz, mɛn u hæd sin faɪɾɪŋ bɪfɔɹ, mɔɹ ðən wʌns. bʌɾ u wɝ ðeɪ? ðɛɹ buts stʃɹʌk ðə flɔɹ-stoʊnz əz wʌn ɪn ən ɑmənəs dʒɹʌmbiɾ ɛmfəsaɪz baɪ ðə stɑɹk fɔɹtʃɹəs kɔɹɪɾɝz. ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl kʌlɝ, nʌθɪŋ fəɹ bjuɾi ɪksɛp skæɾɝd tæpəstʃɹiz ʃoʊɪŋ waɪtkloʊks ɪn blʌɾi bæɾəl.

She tried questioning the officer, but he never spoke a word, never slackened his stride or turned his head, and she stopped trying. None of the soldiers so much as glanced at her; they were hard-eyed men of the kind she knew from her own Queen's Guards, men who had seen fighting before, more than once. But who were they? Their boots struck the floor-stones as one in an ominous drumbeat emphasized by the stark Fortress corridors. There was little color, nothing for beauty except scattered tapestries showing Whitecloaks in bloody battle.

ʃi ɹilaɪz ðeɪ wɝ teɪkɪŋ əɹ təwɔɹd ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝz kɔɹɾɝz, ən ə kwizinəs sɛɾəld ɪn ðə pɪɾ ə hɝ stʌmək. ʃi hæd ɡɹoʊn ɔlmoʊs plɛzənli əkʌstəm tə ðə weɪ waɪl peɪdʒɹən naɪl lɪvd; ʃi hæd kʌm tə dʒɹɛɾ ɪɾ ɪn ðə fju deɪz sɪns i daɪd - bʌɾ əz ðeɪ ɹaʊndəɾ ə kɔɹnɝ, ʃi stɑɹɾəd ət ðə saɪɾ ə səm tu dʌzən ɑɹtʃɝz mɑɹtʃɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ oʊn ɔfəsɝ, mɛn ɪn bæɡi tʃɹaʊzɝz ən bɔɪld lɛðɝ bɹɛstpleɪts peɪntəɾ ɪn hɔɹəzɑntəl stʃɹaɪps ə blu ən blæk. itʃ mæn wɔɹ ə kɑnɪkəl stil kæp, wɪð ə veɪl ʌv ɡɹeɪ stil meɪl kʌvɝɪŋ ɪz feɪs tə ði aɪz; hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ði ɛnz ə mʌstæʃɪz dæŋɡəl bɪloʊ ðə veɪlz. ði ɑɹtʃɝz' ɔfəsɝ baʊd tə ðə wʌn liɾɪŋ əɹ ɡɑɹd, hu mɪɹli ɹeɪzd ɪz hæn ɪn ɹɪplaɪ.

She realized they were taking her toward the Lord Captain Commander's quarters, and a queasiness settled in the pit of her stomach. She had grown almost pleasantly accustomed to the way while Pedron Niall lived; she had come to dread it in the few days since he died - but as they rounded a corner, she started at the sight of some two dozen archers marching behind their own officer, men in baggy trousers and boiled leather breastplates painted in horizontal stripes of blue and black. Each man wore a conical steel cap, with a veil of gray steel mail covering his face to the eyes; here and there the ends of mustaches dangled below the veils. The archers' officer bowed to the one leading her guard, who merely raised his hand in reply.

tæɹɑbənɝz. ʃi hæd nɑt sin ə tæɹɑbənɝ soʊlʒɝ ɪn ə ɡʊd mɛni jɪɹz, bʌt ðoʊz mɛn wɝ tæɹɑbənɝz ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðoʊz stʃɹaɪps, əɹ ʃi wəɾ iɾ əɹ slɪpɝz. jɛt ðət meɪd noʊ sɛns. tæɹɑbən wɑz keɪɑs kʌm tə laɪf, ə hʌnʒɹəd-saɪdəd sɪvəl wɔɹ bɪtwin pɹitɛndɝz tə ðə θɹoʊn ən dʒɹæɡən-swɔɹn. tæɹɑbən kəd nɛvɝ əv lɔntʃt ðɪs ətæk ɑn æmədɔɹ ɪtsɛlf. ənlɛs, ɪnkɹɛɾəbli, wʌn kleɪmən hæd wʌn aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə ɹɛst, ən oʊvɝ ðə dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn, ænd. . . . ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl, ən ɪt dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspleɪn ðiz stʃɹeɪnʒli ɑɹmɝd soʊlʒɝz, əɹ ðət wɪŋ bist, ɔɹ. . . . ʃi θɔt ʃi hæd sin stʃɹeɪnʒnəs. ʃi θɔt ʃi hæd noʊn kwizinəs. ðən ʃi ən əɹ ɡɑɹd tɝn ənʌðɝ kɔɹnɝ ən ɪnkaʊntɝd tu wɪmən.

Taraboners. She had not seen a Taraboner soldier in a good many years, but those men were Taraboners in spite of those stripes, or she would eat her slippers. Yet that made no sense. Tarabon was chaos come to life, a hundred-sided civil war between pretenders to the throne and Dragon-sworn. Tarabon could never have launched this attack on Amador itself. Unless, incredibly, one claimant had won out over the rest, and over the Dragonsworn, and. . . . It was impossible, and it did not explain these strangely armored soldiers, or that winged beast, or. . . . She thought she had seen strangeness. She thought she had known queasiness. Then she and her guard turned another corner and encountered two women.

wʌn wɑz slɛndɝ, ʃɔɹɾ əz ɛni kɛɹhinɪn ən dɑɹkɝ ðən ɛni tɛɹən, ɪn ə blu dʒɹɛs ðət stɑpt wɛl ʃɔɹɾ ə hɝ æŋkəlz; sɪlvɝ laɪtnɪŋ fɔɹkt əkɹɔs ɹɛd pænəlz ɑn əɹ bɹɛst ən ðə saɪdz ə hɝ waɪd, dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts. ði ʌðɝ wʊmən, ɪn dʒɹæb dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ, stʊd tɔlɝ ðən moʊs mɛn, wɪð ɡoʊldən hɛɹ tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz ðət hæd bɪn bɹʌʃt tɪl ɪt ɡlɪsən ən fɹaɪɾənd ɡɹin aɪz. ə sɪlvɝ liʃ kənɛktəɾ ə sɪlvɝ bɹeɪsləɾ ɑn ðə ʃɔɹɾɝ wʊmənz ɹɪs tə ə nɛkləs wɔɹn baɪ ðə tɔlɝ.

One was slender, short as any Cairhienin and darker than any Tairen, in a blue dress that stopped well short of her ankles; silver lightning forked across red panels on her breast and the sides of her wide, divided skirts. The other woman, in drab dark gray, stood taller than most men, with golden hair to her shoulders that had been brushed till it glistened and frightened green eyes. A silver leash connected a silver bracelet on the shorter woman's wrist to a necklace worn by the taller.

ðeɪ stʊɾ əsaɪd fəɹ mɔɹɡeɪsəz ɡɑɹd, ən wən ðə hʊk-noʊzd ɔfəsɝ mɝmɝd "dɝsʌldəm" - mɔɹɡeɪs θɔt ðət wɑz ɪt; hɪz slɝɾ æksɛn meɪɾ ʌndɝstændɪŋ dɪfəkəlt - wən i mɝmɝɾ ɪn toʊnz nɪɹli bʌt nɑt kwaɪt tə ən ikwəl, ðə dɑɹk wʊmən baʊɾ əɹ hɛd slaɪtli, twɪtʃt ət ðə liʃ, ən ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən sæŋk tə ðə flɔɹ, foʊldɪŋ hɝsɛlf wɪð əɹ hɛɾ ɑn əɹ niz ən əɹ pɑmz flæɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹstoʊnz. əz mɔɹɡeɪs ən əɹ ɡɑɹdz pæs baɪ, ðə dɑɹk wʊmən bɛn tə pæt ði ʌðɝ fɑnli ɑn ðə hɛd, əz ʃi maɪɾ ə dɔɡ, ən wɝs, ðə nilɪŋ wʊmən lʊkt ʌp wɪð plɛʒɝ ən ɡɹæɾətud.

They stood aside for Morgase's guard, and when the hook-nosed officer murmured "Der'sul'dam" - Morgase thought that was it; his slurred accent made understanding difficult - when he murmured in tones nearly but not quite to an equal, the dark woman bowed her head slightly, twitched at the leash, and the golden-haired woman sank to the floor, folding herself with her head on her knees and her palms flat on the floorstones. As Morgase and her guards passed by, the dark woman bent to pat the other fondly on the head, as she might a dog, and worse, the kneeling woman looked up with pleasure and gratitude.

mɔɹɡeɪs meɪd ðə nɛsəsɛɹi ɛfɝt tə kip wɔkɪŋ, tə kip əɹ niz fɹəm foʊldɪŋ, tə kip əɹ stʌmək fɹəm ɛmptiɪŋ ɪtsɛlf. ðə ʃɪɹ sɝvɪləɾi wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf, bʌt ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ðə wʊmən biɪŋ pæɾəd ɑn ðə hɛd kəd tʃænəl. ɪmpɑsəbəl! ʃi wɔkt ɪn ə deɪz, wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ðɪs kəd bi ə dʒɹim, ə naɪtmɛɹ. pɹeɪɪŋ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz. ʃi hæɾ ə veɪɡ əwɛɹnəs ə stɑpɪŋ fəɹ mɔɹ soʊlʒɝz, ðiz ɪn ɹɛd-ænd-blæk ɑɹmɝ, ðɛn. . . . peɪdʒɹən naɪlz ɑɾiəns tʃeɪmbɝ - vɑldəz naʊ, əɹ ɹæðɝ huɛvɝ hæd teɪkən ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs - wɑz tʃeɪnʒd. ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡoʊldən sʌnbɝst ɹɪmeɪnd, sɛɾ ɪn ðə flɔɹ, bʌɾ ɔl naɪlz kæptʃɝd bænɝz, wɪtʃ vɑldə hæd kɛpt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ hɪz, wɝ ɡɔn, ən soʊ wɝ ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə pleɪnli kɑɹv haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹ naɪl ən ðən vɑldə hæd juzd, flæŋk naʊ baɪ tu tɔl, lʊɹɪdli peɪntəd skɹinz. wʌn ʃoʊɾ ə waɪt-kɹɛstəd blæk bɝɾ ə pɹeɪ wɪð ə kɹuəl bik, ɪts waɪt-tɪpt wɪŋz spɹɛd waɪd, ði ʌðɝ ə blæk-spɑɾəd jɛloʊ kæt wɪð wʌn pɔ ɑn ə dɛd, dɪɝlaɪk kɹitʃɝ hæf ɪts saɪz, wɪð lɔŋ, stʃɹeɪt hɔɹnz ən waɪt stʃɹaɪps.

Morgase made the necessary effort to keep walking, to keep her knees from folding, to keep her stomach from emptying itself. The sheer servility was bad enough, but she was certain the woman being patted on the head could channel. Impossible! She walked in a daze, wondering whether this could be a dream, a nightmare. Praying that it was. She had a vague awareness of stopping for more soldiers, these in red-and-black armor, then. . . . Pedron Niall's audience chamber - Valda's now, or rather whoever had taken the fortress - was changed. The great golden sunburst remained, set in the floor, but all Niall's captured banners, which Valda had kept as if they were his, were gone, and so were the furnishings, except for the plainly carved high-backed chair Niall and then Valda had used, flanked now by two tall, luridly painted screens. One showed a white-crested black bird of prey with a cruel beak, its white-tipped wings spread wide, the other a black-spotted yellow cat with one paw on a dead, deerlike creature half its size, with long, straight horns and white stripes.

ðəɹ wɝ ə nʌmbɝ ə pipəl ɪn ðə ɹum, bʌt ðət wɑz ɔl ʃi hæd taɪm tə noʊɾəs bɪfɔɹ ə ʃɑɹp-feɪst wʊmən ɪn blu ɹoʊbz stɛp fɔɹwɝd, wʌn saɪɾ ə hɝ hɛd ʃeɪvd ən ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ hɛɹ ɪn ə lɔŋ bɹaʊn bɹeɪd ðət hʌŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ ɹaɪt ʃoʊldɝ. hɝ blu aɪz, fʊl ə kəntɛmpt, cʊɾə dʌn fəɹ ði iɡəlz əɹ ðə kæts. "ju ɑɹ ɪn ðə pɹɛzəns ə ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ, hu lidz ðoʊz u kʌm bɪfɔɹ, ən səkɹz ðə ɹɪtɝn," ʃi ɪntoʊn ɪn ðət seɪm slɝɪŋ æksɛnt.

There were a number of people in the room, but that was all she had time to notice before a sharp-faced woman in blue robes stepped forward, one side of her head shaved and the remaining hair in a long brown braid that hung in front of her right shoulder. Her blue eyes, full of contempt, could have done for the eagle's or the cat's. "You are in the presence of the High Lady Suroth, who leads Those Who Come Before, and succors The Return," she intoned in that same slurring accent.

wɪθaʊt wɔɹnɪŋ, ðə hʊk-noʊzd ɔfəsɝ siz ðə bæk ə mɔɹɡeɪsəz nɛk ən bɔɹ əɹ daʊn pɹɑstʃɹeɪt bɪsaɪd hɪm. stʌnd, nɑt lis kəz ðə bɹɛθ wɑz nɑkt aʊɾ ə hɝ, ʃi sɔ hɪm kɪs ðə flɔɹ.

Without warning, the hook-nosed officer seized the back of Morgase's neck and bore her down prostrate beside him. Stunned, not least because the breath was knocked out of her, she saw him kiss the floor.

"ɹilis hɝ, ɛlbɑɹ," ənʌðɝ wʊmən dʒɹɔld æŋɡɹəli. "ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ ɪz nɑt tə bi tʃɹiɾəd soʊ."

"Release her, Elbar," another woman drawled angrily. "The Queen of Andor is not to be treated so."

ðə mæn, ɛlbɑɹ, ɹoʊz əz fɑɹ əz ɪz niz, hɛd bɛnt. "aɪ əbeɪs maɪsɛlf, haɪ leɪɾi. aɪ bɛɡ fɝɡɪvnəs." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz əz koʊld ən flæɾ əz ðəɾ æksɛn əlaʊd.

The man, Elbar, rose as far as his knees, head bent. "I abase myself, High Lady. I beg forgiveness." His voice was as cold and flat as that accent allowed.

"aɪ hæv smɔl fɝɡɪvnəs fəɹ ðɪs, ɛlbɑɹ." mɔɹɡeɪs lʊkt ʌp. sjuɹɔθ tʊk əɹ əbæk. ðə saɪdz ə hɝ hɛd wɝ ʃeɪvd, livɪŋ ə ɡlɔsi blæk kɹɛst əkɹɔs ðə tɑp ə hɝ hɛɾ ən ə meɪn ðət floʊd daʊn əɹ bæk. "pɝhæps wən jə ɑɹ pʌnɪʃt. ɹipɔɹt jɝsɛlf naʊ. liv mi! ɡoʊ!" ə swipɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝ flæʃt fɪŋɡɝneɪlz ət list ən ɪntʃ lɔŋ, ðə fɝs tu ɑn itʃ hæn ə ɡlɪsnɪŋ blu.

"I have small forgiveness for this, Elbar." Morgase looked up. Suroth took her aback. The sides of her head were shaved, leaving a glossy black crest across the top of her head and a mane that flowed down her back. "Perhaps when you are punished. Report yourself now. Leave me! Go!" A sweeping gesture flashed fingernails at least an inch long, the first two on each hand a glistening blue.

ɛlbɑɹ baʊɾ ɑn ɪz niz, ðən ɹoʊz smuðli, bækɪŋ əweɪ θɹu ðə dɔɹ. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm mɔɹɡeɪs ɹilaɪz nʌn ə ði ʌðɝ soʊlʒɝz hæd fɑloʊɾ əm ɪn. ʃi ɹilaɪz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, əz wɛl. hi ɡeɪv əɹ wʌn faɪnəl ɡlæns bɪfɔɹ i vænɪʃt, ən ɪnstɛɾ ə flɪkɝɪŋ ɹɪzɛnmənt fəɹ ðə wʌn u hæd kɑzd ɪz pʌnɪʃmənt, hi . . . kənsɪɾɝd. ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ pʌnɪʃmənt; ði ɪntaɪɝ ɪkstʃeɪnʒ hæd bɪn ɝeɪnʒd bɪfɔɹhænd.

Elbar bowed on his knees, then rose smoothly, backing away through the door. For the first time Morgase realized none of the other soldiers had followed them in. She realized something else, as well. He gave her one final glance before he vanished, and instead of flickering resentment for the one who had caused his punishment, he . . . considered. There would be no punishment; the entire exchange had been arranged beforehand.

sjuɹɔθ swɛp təwɔɹd mɔɹɡeɪs, kɛɹfəli hoʊldɪŋ əɹ peɪl blu ɹoʊb tə kip əɹ skɝts ɪkspoʊzd, snoʊ-waɪt, wɪð hʌnʒɹədz ə taɪni plits. ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd vaɪnz ən lʌʃ ɹɛɾ ən jɛloʊ flaʊɝz spɹɛɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɹoʊb. fəɹ ɔl əɹ swipɪŋ, mɔɹɡeɪs noʊɾəst ðə wʊmən dɪd nɑt ɹitʃ əɹ əntɪl ʃi hæd ɹiɡeɪn əɹ fiɾ ɑn əɹ oʊn.

Suroth swept toward Morgase, carefully holding her pale blue robe to keep her skirts exposed, snow-white, with hundreds of tiny pleats. Embroidered vines and lush red and yellow flowers spread across the robe. For all her sweeping, Morgase noticed the woman did not reach her until she had regained her feet on her own.

"ju ɑɹ ənhɑɹmd?" sjuɹɔθ æskt. "ɪf jə ɑɹ hɑɹmd, əl dʌbəl ɪz pʌnɪʃmənt."

"You are unharmed?" Suroth asked. "If you are harmed, I will double his punishment."

mɔɹɡeɪs bɹʌʃt əɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs soʊ ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv tə lʊk ət ðə fɔls smaɪl ðət nɛvɝ tʌtʃt ðə wʊmənz aɪz. ʃi tʊk ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə lʊk ɝaʊn ðə ɹum. fɔɹ mɛn ən fɔɹ wɪmən nɛlt əɡɛnst wʌn wɔl, ɔl jʌŋ ən mɔɹ ðən ɡʊd-lʊkɪŋ, ɔl wɛɹɪŋ. . . . ʃi dʒɝkt əɹ aɪz əweɪ. ðoʊz lɔŋ waɪt ɹoʊbz wɝ vɛɹi nɪɹli tʃɹænspɛɹənt! ət ðə fɑɹ saɪdz ə ðə skɹinz tu mɔɹ pɛɹz ʌv wɪmən nɛlt, wʌn ʌv itʃ ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛs, wʌn ɪn ðə blu ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð laɪtnɪŋ, baʊn baɪ ðə sɪlvɝi liʃ fɹəm ɹɪs tə nɛk. mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz nɑt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə seɪ fəɹ ʃʊɹ, bʌt ʃi hæd ðə sɪk-meɪkɪŋ sɝɾənti ðət ðə ɡɹeɪ-klæd wɪmən kəd tʃænəl. "aɪ æm kwaɪɾ ɔl ɹaɪt, θæŋk - " ə hjudʒ ɹɛɾɪʃ bɹaʊn ʃeɪp leɪ spɹɔld ɑn ðə flɔɹ - ə hip ə tæn kɔfskɪnz, pɝhæps. ðən ɪt hivd. "wʌɾ ɪz ðæt?" ʃi mænədʒ nɑt tə ɡeɪp, bʌt ðə kwɛstʃən pɑp fɹəm əɹ tʌŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd stɑp ɪt.

Morgase brushed at her dress so she would not have to look at the false smile that never touched the woman's eyes. She took the opportunity to look around the room. Four men and four women knelt against one wall, all young and more than good-looking, all wearing. . . . She jerked her eyes away. Those long white robes were very nearly transparent! At the far sides of the screens two more pairs of women knelt, one of each in the gray dress, one in the blue embroidered with lightning, bound by the silvery leash from wrist to neck. Morgase was not close enough to say for sure, but she had the sick-making certainty that the gray-clad women could channel. "I am quite all right, thank - " A huge reddish brown shape lay sprawled on the floor - a heap of tanned cowskins, perhaps. Then it heaved. "What is that?" She managed not to gape, but the question popped from her tongue before she could stop it.

"ju ædmaɪɹ maɪ loʊpɝ?" sjuɹɔθ swɛpt əweɪ ə ɡʊd dil kwɪkɝ ðən ʃi hæd kʌm. ði ɪnɔɹməs ʃeɪp ɹeɪzd ə ɡɹeɪt ɹaʊn hɛd fəɹ əɹ tə stʃɹoʊk ɪɾ ʌndɝ ðə tʃɪn wɪð ə nʌkəl. ðə kɹitʃɝ pʊt mɔɹɡeɪs ɪn maɪn ʌv ə bɛɹ, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz izəli hæf əɡɛn əz bɪɡ əz ðə lɑɹdʒəs bɛɹ ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝd tɛl ʌv, ən hɛɹləs tə but, wɪð noʊ mʌzəl tə spik ʌv ən hɛvi ɹɪdʒəz sɝaʊndɪŋ ɪts aɪz. "ælmændɑɹəɡəl wɑz ɡɪvən tə mi əz ə pʌp, fəɹ maɪ fɝs tʃɹu-neɪm deɪ; hi fɔɪl ðə fɝst ətɛmp tə kɪl mi ðət seɪm jɪɹ, wən i wɑz oʊnli ə kɔɹɾɝ ɡɹoʊn." ðəɹ wɑz ɹil əfɛkʃən ɪn ðə wʊmənz vɔɪs. ðə . . . loʊpɝz . . . lɪps pil bæk tə ɹɪvil θɪk pɔɪntəd tiθ əz ʃi stʃɹoʊkt; ɪts fɹpɔz flɛkst, klɔz ʃiðɪŋ ən ənʃiðɪŋ fɹəm sɪks lɔŋ toʊz ɑn itʃ. ən ɪt bɪɡæn tə pɝ, ə bæs ɹʌmbəl fɪt fəɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd kæts.

"You admire my lopar?" Suroth swept away a good deal quicker than she had come. The enormous shape raised a great round head for her to stroke it under the chin with a knuckle. The creature put Morgase in mind of a bear, though it was easily half again as big as the largest bear she had ever heard tell of, and hairless to boot, with no muzzle to speak of and heavy ridges surrounding its eyes. "Almandaragal was given to me as a pup, for my first true-name day; he foiled the first attempt to kill me that same year, when he was only a quarter grown." There was real affection in the woman's voice. The . . . lopar's . . . lips peeled back to reveal thick pointed teeth as she stroked; its forepaws flexed, claws sheathing and unsheathing from six long toes on each. And it began to purr, a bass rumble fit for a hundred cats.

"ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd feɪnli. tʃɹu-neɪm deɪ? haʊ mɛni ətɛmps hæd ðəɹ bɪn tə kɪl ðɪs wʊmən ðət ʃi kəd spik ʌv "ðə fɝst" soʊ kæʒəwəli?

"Remarkable," Morgase said faintly. True-name day? How many attempts had there been to kill this woman that she could speak of "the first" so casually?

ðə loʊpɝ waɪn bɹifli wən sjuɹɔθ lɛft ɪt, bʌt kwɪkli sɛɾəld wɪð ɪts hɛɾ ɑn ɪts pɔz. dɪskənsɝɾɪŋli, ɪts aɪz dɪd nɑt fɑloʊ hɝ, bʌt sɛɾəld meɪnli ɑn mɔɹɡeɪs, naʊ ən ðən flɪkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ əɹ ðə nɛɹoʊ, æɹoʊ-slɪt wɪndoʊz.

The lopar whined briefly when Suroth left it, but quickly settled with its head on its paws. Disconcertingly, its eyes did not follow her, but settled mainly on Morgase, now and then flicking toward the door or the narrow, arrow-slit windows.

"ʌv kɔɹs, haʊɛvɝ lɔɪəl ə loʊpɝ, ɪt kænɑt mætʃ deɪmeɪn." noʊ əfɛkʃən tʌtʃt sjuɹɔθs vɔɪs naʊ. "pʊɹə ən dʒɪnʒɪn kəd sleɪ ə hʌnʒɹəd əsæsənz bɪfɔɹ ælmændɑɹəɡəl blɪŋkt ɪz aɪ." ət ðə mɛnʃən ʌv itʃ neɪm, wʌn ə ðə blu-klæd wɪmən twɪtʃt əɹ sɪlvɝi liʃ, ən ðə wʊmən ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn dʌbəl hɝsɛlf əz ðə wʌn ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ hæd. "wi hæv mɛni mɔɹ deɪmeɪn sɪns ɹɪtɝnɪŋ ðən bɪfɔɹ. ðɪs ɪz ə ɹɪtʃ hʌntɪŋ ɡɹaʊn fəɹ mɛɹəθdəmeɪn. pʊɹə," ʃi æɾəd kæʒəwəli, "wɑz wʌns ə . . . wʊmən ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

"Of course, however loyal a lopar, it cannot match damane." No affection touched Suroth's voice now. "Pura and Jinjin could slay a hundred assassins before Almandaragal blinked his eye." At the mention of each name, one of the blue-clad women twitched her silvery leash, and the woman at the other end doubled herself as the one in the corridor had. "We have many more damane since returning than before. This is a rich hunting ground for marath'damane. Pura," she added casually, "was once a . . . woman of the White Tower."

mɔɹɡeɪsəz niz wɑbəld. ɛɛs sədaɪ? ʃi stʌɾid ðə bɛn bæk ə ðə wʊmən kɔl pʊɹə, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə bɪliv. noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd bi meɪd tə kɹɪnʒ laɪk ðæt. bʌɾ ɛni wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl, nɑt dʒʌst ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə teɪk ðət liʃ ən stʃɹæŋɡəl əɹ tɔɹmɛntɝ. ɛniwʌn əɾ ɔl ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə. noʊ, ðɪs pʊɹə kəd nɑt bi. mɔɹɡeɪs wʌndɝɾ ɪf ʃi dɛɹɾ æsk fəɹ ə tʃɛɹ. "ðæɾ ɪz vɛɹi . . . ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ." ət list əɹ vɔɪs wɑz stɛɾi. "bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk jə æsk mi hɪɹ tə spik ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ." ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn æskt. sjuɹɔθ stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, nɑɾ ə mʌsəl muvɪŋ ɪksɛp ðət ðə lɔŋ-neɪl fɪŋɡɝz ə hɝ lɛf hæn twɪtʃt.

Morgase's knees wobbled. Aes Sedai? She studied the bent back of the woman called Pura, refusing to believe. No Aes Sedai could be made to cringe like that. But any woman who could channel, not just an Aes Sedai, should be able to take that leash and strangle her tormentor. Anyone at all should be able to. No, this Pura could not be. Morgase wondered if she dared ask for a chair. "That is very . . . interesting." At least her voice was steady. "But I do not think you asked me here to speak of Aes Sedai." Of course, she had not been asked. Suroth stared at her, not a muscle moving except that the long-nailed fingers of her left hand twitched.

"θɛɹə!" ðə ʃɑɹp-feɪst wʊmən wɪð hæf əɹ hɛd ʃeɪv bɑɹk sʌɾənli. "kæf fəɹ ðə haɪ leɪɾi ən əɹ ɡɛst!"

"Thera!" the sharp-faced woman with half her head shaved barked suddenly. "Kaf for the High Lady and her guest!"

wʌn ə ðə wɪmən ɪn daɪəfənəs ɹoʊbz, ði ɛldəs bʌt stɪl jʌŋ, lɛpt ɡɹeɪsfəli tə hɝ fit. hɝ ɹoʊzbʌd maʊθ hæɾ ə pɛtʃələn lʊk tə ɪt, bʌt ʃi dɑɹɾɪd bɪhaɪn ðə tɔl skɹin peɪntəd wɪð ði iɡəl, ən ɪn moʊməns ɹiəpɪɹd bɛɹɪŋ ə sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ wɪð tu smɔl waɪt kʌps. nilɪŋ sɪnjuəsli bɪfɔɹ sjuɹɔθ, ʃi baʊɾ əɹ dɑɹk hɛɾ əz ʃi ɹeɪz ðə tʃɹeɪ, soʊ hɝ ɔfɝɪŋ stʊd haɪɝ ðən ʃi. mɔɹɡeɪs ʃʊk əɹ hɛd; ɛni sɝvən ɪn ændɝ æsk tə də ðət - əɹ wɛɹ ðət ɹoʊb! - wʊɾə stɔɹmd ɔf ɪn ə dʌdʒən.

One of the women in diaphanous robes, the eldest but still young, leaped gracefully to her feet. Her rosebud mouth had a petulant look to it, but she darted behind the tall screen painted with the eagle, and in moments reappeared bearing a silver tray with two small white cups. Kneeling sinuously before Suroth, she bowed her dark head as she raised the tray, so her offering stood higher than she. Morgase shook her head; any servant in Andor asked to do that - or wear that robe! - would have stormed off in a dudgeon.

"hu ɑɹ ju? wɛɹ dʒju kʌm fɹʌm?"

"Who are you? Where do you come from?"

sjuɹɔθ ɹeɪzd wʌn ə ðə kʌps ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝtɪps, ɪnheɪlɪŋ ðə stim ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ɪt. hɝ nɑd wɑz ɪntaɪɝli tu mʌtʃ pɝmɪʃən fəɹ mɔɹɡeɪsəz laɪkɪŋ, bʌt ʃi tʊk ə kʌp ɛniweɪ. wʌn sɪp, ən ʃi stɛɹɾ ɪndə hɝ dʒɹɪŋk ɪn əmeɪzmənt. blækɝ ðən ɛni ti, ðə lɪkwəd wɑz ɔlsoʊ mɔɹ bɪɾɝ. noʊ əmaʊn ə hʌni wəd meɪk ɪt dʒɹɪŋkəbəl. sjuɹɔθ pʊɾ əɹ oʊn kʌp tə hɝ lɪps ən saɪd wɪð ɛndʒɔɪmənt.

Suroth raised one of the cups on her fingertips, inhaling the steam rising from it. Her nod was entirely too much permission for Morgase's liking, but she took a cup anyway. One sip, and she stared into her drink in amazement. Blacker than any tea, the liquid was also more bitter. No amount of honey would make it drinkable. Suroth put her own cup to her lips and sighed with enjoyment.

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ mɛni θɪŋz wi mʌst spik ʌv, mɔɹɡeɪs, jɛɾ əl bi bɹif ət ðɪs fɝs tɔk. wi sintʃæn ɹɪtɝn tə ɹikleɪm wʌt wɑz stoʊlən fɹəm ði ɛɹz ə ðə haɪ kɪŋ, ɑɹɾɝ pɛndʒɹæɡ tænɹəl." plɛʒɝ oʊvɝ ðə kæf bɪkeɪm ə dɪfɹən plɛʒɝ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, boʊθ ɛkspɛkteɪʃən ən sɝɾənti, ən ʃi wɑtʃt mɔɹɡeɪsəz feɪs kloʊsli. mɔɹɡeɪs kəd nɑt teɪk əɹ aɪz əweɪ. "wʌt wɑz aʊɝz, wɪl bi aʊɝz əɡɛn. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ɪɾ ɔlweɪz əz bɪn; ə θif ɡeɪnz noʊ oʊnɝʃɪp. aɪ hæv bɪɡʌn ðə ɹəkʌvɝi ɪn tæɹɑbən. mɛni noʊbəlz ə ðət læn əv ɔlɹɛɾi swɔɹn tə oʊbeɪ, əweɪɾ ən sɝv; ɪɾəl nɑt bi lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ɔl hæv. ðɛɹ kɪŋ - aɪ kænɑt ɹikɔl ɪz neɪm - daɪɾ əpoʊzɪŋ mi. hæɾ i lɪvd, ɪn ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛns ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn ən nɑɾ ivən ə ðə blʌd, hi wʊɾə bɪn ɪmpeɪld. hɪz fæmli kəd nɑt bi faʊn tə bi meɪd pɹɑpɝɾi, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz ə nu kɪŋ ən ə nu pɑnɑɹtʃ u hæv swɔɹn ðɛɹ fiəlti tə ði ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, ən ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn. ðə bændəts wɪl bi ɪɹæɾəkeɪtɪd; noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɪl ðəɹ bi stʃɹaɪf əɹ hʌŋɡɝ ɪn tæɹɑbən, bʌt ðə pipəl wɪl ʃɛltɝ bɪniθ ðə wɪŋz ə ði ɛmpɹɛs. naʊ ðəfɝs bɪɡɪn ɪn ðɪs ɑmɑdɪʃiə. sun ɔl wɪl nil tə ði ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, ðə dɝɛk dɪsɛndən ə ðə ɡɹeɪɾ ɑɹɾɝ hɔk-wɪŋ."

"There are many things we must speak of, Morgase, yet I will be brief at this first talk. We Seanchan return to reclaim what was stolen from the heirs of the High King, Artur Paendrag Tanreall." Pleasure over the kaf became a different pleasure in her voice, both expectation and certainty, and she watched Morgase's face closely. Morgase could not take her eyes away. "What was ours, will be ours again. In truth, it always has been; a thief gains no ownership. I have begun the recovery in Tarabon. Many nobles of that land have already sworn to obey, await and serve; it will not be long before all have. Their king - I cannot recall his name - died opposing me. Had he lived, in rebellion against the Crystal Throne and not even of the Blood, he would have been impaled. His family could not be found to be made property, but there is a new King and a new Panarch who have sworn their fealty to the Empress, may she live forever, and the Crystal Throne. The bandits will be eradicated; no longer will there be strife or hunger in Tarabon, but the people will shelter beneath the wings of the Empress. Now I begin in this Amadicia. Soon all will kneel to the Empress, may she live forever, the direct descendant of the great Artur Hawk-wing."

ɪf ðə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən hæd nɑt ɡɔn wɪð ðə tʃɹeɪ, mɔɹɡeɪs wʊɾə pʊɾ əɹ kʌp bæk. noʊ tʃɹɛmɝ dɪstɝb ðə dɑɹk sɝfəs ə ðə kæf, bʌt mʌtʃ ʌv wʌt ðə wʊmən spaʊɾəd wɑz minɪŋləs tə hɝ. ɛmpɹɛs? ʃɔn-tʃæn? ðəɹ hæd bɪn waɪld ɹumɝz ə jɪɹ əɹ mɔɹ əɡoʊ əbaʊɾ ɑɹɾɝ hɔk-wɪŋz ɑɹmiz kʌm bæk fɹəm əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, bʌɾ oʊnli ðə moʊs kɹɛdʒjələs kəɾ əv bɪlivd, ən ʃi daʊɾɪd ðət ðə wɝst ɡɑsɪpmɑŋɡɝ ɪn ðə mɑɹkəts stɪl toʊl ðə teɪl. kəɾ ɪɾ əv bɪn tʃɹuθ? ɪn ɛni keɪs, wʌt ʃi dɪɾ ʌndɝstænd wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf.

If the serving woman had not gone with the tray, Morgase would have put her cup back. No tremor disturbed the dark surface of the kaf, but much of what the woman spouted was meaningless to her. Empress? Sean-chan? There had been wild rumors a year or more ago about Artur Hawk-wing's armies come back from across the Aryth Ocean, but only the most credulous could have believed, and she doubted that the worst gossipmonger in the markets still told the tale. Could it have been truth? In any case, what she did understand was more than enough.

"ɔl ɑnɝ ðə neɪm ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ, sjuɹɔθ. . . ." ðə ʃɑɹp-feɪst wʊmən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ æŋɡɹəli, səbsaɪɾɪŋ ət ðə muv ʌv ə blu-neɪl fɪŋɡɝ baɪ ðə haɪ leɪɾi. ". . . bʌɾ ɪz taɪm ɪz lɔŋ pæst. ɛvɹi neɪʃən hɪɹ əz ən eɪntʃən lɪniədʒ. noʊ lænd wɪl sɝɛndɝ tə jə əɹ jəɹ ɛmpɹɛs. ɪf juv teɪkən səm pɑɹɾ ə tæɹɑbən . . ." sjuɹɔθs ɪndʒɹɔn bɹɛθ hɪst, ən əɹ aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd, ". . . ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðəɾ ɪts ə tʃɹʌbəld lænd, dɪvaɪɾəd əɡɛnst ɪtsɛlf. ɑmɑdɪʃiə wɪl nɑt fɔl izəli, ən mɛni neɪʃənz wɪl ɹaɪd tə hɝ eɪd wən ðeɪ lɝn ə ju." kəɾ ɪt bi tʃɹu? "haʊɛvɝ mɛni jə ɑɹ, jəl faɪnd noʊ izi ɡeɪm fəɹ jəɹ spɪt. wɪv feɪst ɡɹeɪt θɹɛts bɪfɔɹ, ən oʊvɝkʌm ðɛm. aɪ ædvaɪz jə tə meɪk pis bɪfɔɹ jə ɑɹ kɹʌʃt." mɔɹɡeɪs ɹɪmɛmbɝd seɪaɪdɑɹ ɹeɪdʒɪŋ ɪn ðə naɪt, ən əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət ðə - deɪmeɪn, hæd ʃi kɔl ðɛm? baɪ stʃɹɔŋ ɛfɝt, ʃi mænədʒ nɑt tə wɛɾ əɹ lɪps.

"All honor the name of Artur Hawkwing, Suroth. . . ." The sharp-faced woman opened her mouth angrily, subsiding at the move of a blue-nailed finger by the High Lady. ". . . but his time is long past. Every nation here has an ancient lineage. No land will surrender to you or your Empress. If you have taken some part of Tarabon . . ." Suroth's indrawn breath hissed, and her eyes glittered, ". . . remember that it is a troubled land, divided against itself. Amadicia will not fall easily, and many nations will ride to her aid when they learn of you." Could it be true? "However many you are, you will find no easy game for your spit. We have faced great threats before, and overcome them. I advise you to make peace before you are crushed." Morgase remembered saidar raging in the night, and avoided looking at the - damane, had she called them? By strong effort, she managed not to wet her lips.

sjuɹɔθ smaɪl ðət mæsks smaɪl əɡɛn, aɪz ʃaɪnɪŋ laɪk pɑlɪʃt stoʊnz. "ɔl mʌs meɪk tʃɔɪsəz. səm wɪl tʃuz tə oʊbeɪ, əweɪɾ ən sɝv, ən wɪl ɹul ðɛɹ lænz ɪn ðə neɪm ə ði ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ."

Suroth smiled that mask's smile again, eyes shining like polished stones. "All must make choices. Some will choose to obey, await and serve, and will rule their lands in the name of the Empress, may she live forever."

ʃi tʊk ə hæn fɹəm əɹ kʌp tə dʒɛstʃɝ, ə slaɪt muvmən ə lɔŋ fɪŋɡɝneɪlz, ən ðə ʃɑɹp-feɪst wʊmən bɑɹkt, "θɛɹə! poʊzəz ə ðə swɑn!"

She took a hand from her cup to gesture, a slight movement of long fingernails, and the sharp-faced woman barked, "Thera! Poses of the Swan!"

fəɹ səm ɹizən, sjuɹɔθs maʊθ taɪɾənd. "nɑt ðə swɑn, ælwɪn, jə blaɪn ful!" ʃi hɪst, hæf ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, ðoʊ hɝ æksɛn meɪɾ ʌndɝstændɪŋ dɪfəkəlt. ðə fɹoʊzən smaɪl ɹɪtɝn ɪn ən ɪnstənt.

For some reason, Suroth's mouth tightened. "Not the Swan, Alwhin, you blind fool!" she hissed, half under her breath, though her accent made understanding difficult. The frozen smile returned in an instant.

ðə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən ɹoʊz fɹəm əɹ pleɪs ət ðə wɔl əɡɛn, ɹʌnɪŋ aʊt tə ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə flɔɹ ɪn ən ɑd weɪ, ɑn tɪptoʊ, wɪð əɹ ɑɹmz swɛp bæk. sloʊli, ətɑp ðə flɛɹɪŋ ɡoʊldən sʌn, sɪmbəl ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, ʃi bɪɡæn ə sɔɹɾ ə staɪlaɪz dæns. hɝ ɑɹmz ənfoʊldəd tə ðə saɪdz laɪk wɪŋz, ðən foʊldəd bæk. twɪstɪŋ, ʃi slɪɾ əɹ lɛft fʊɾ aʊt, loʊɝɪŋ hɝsɛlf oʊvɝ ðə bɛndɪŋ ni, boʊθ ɑɹmz aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt əz ɪf əpilɪŋ, əntɪl ɑɹmz ən bɑɾi ən ɹaɪt lɛɡ meɪɾ ə stʃɹeɪt, slæntəd laɪn. hɝ ʃɪɹ waɪt ɹoʊb meɪd ðə hoʊl θɪŋ skændələs. mɔɹɡeɪs fɛlt əɹ tʃiks ɡɹoʊɪŋ hɑɾ əz ðə dæns, ɪf ɪt kəd bi kɔl ðæt, kəntɪnjud.

The serving woman rose from her place at the wall again, running out to the middle of the floor in an odd way, on tiptoe, with her arms swept back. Slowly, atop the flaring golden sun, symbol of the Children of the Light, she began a sort of stylized dance. Her arms unfolded to the sides like wings, then folded back. Twisting, she slid her left foot out, lowering herself over the bending knee, both arms outstretched as if appealing, until arms and body and right leg made a straight, slanted line. Her sheer white robe made the whole thing scandalous. Morgase felt her cheeks growing hot as the dance, if it could be called that, continued.

"θɛɹə ɪz nu ən nɑt wɛl tʃɹeɪn jɛt," sjuɹɔθ mɝmɝd. "ðə poʊzəz ɑɹ moʊst ɔfən dʌn wɪð tɛn əɹ twɛnti dækoʊvæl təɡɛðɝ, mɛn ən wɪmən tʃoʊzən fəɹ ðə klin bjuɾi ʌv ðɛɹ laɪnz, bʌt səmtaɪmz ɪts plɛzən tə vju oʊnli wʌn. ɪts vɛɹi plɛzən tə oʊn bjuɾəfəl θɪŋz, ɪz ɪt nɑt?"

"Thera is new and not well trained yet," Suroth murmured. "The Poses are most often done with ten or twenty da'covale together, men and women chosen for the clean beauty of their lines, but sometimes it is pleasant to view only one. It is very pleasant to own beautiful things, is it not?"

mɔɹɡeɪs fɹaʊnd. haʊ kəɾ ɛniwʌn oʊn ə pɝsən? sjuɹɔθ hæd spoʊkən ɝliɝ əbaʊt "meɪkɪŋ sʌmwʌn pɹɑpɝɾi." ʃi nu ði oʊl tʌŋ, ən ðə wɝd dækoʊvæl wɑz nɑt fəmɪljɝ tə hɝ, bʌt θɪŋkɪŋ ɪɾ aʊt ʃi keɪm ʌp wɪð "pɝsən u ɪz oʊnd." ɪt wɑz dɪsɡʌstɪŋ. hɔɹɛndəs! "ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "pɝhæps aɪ ʃəd liv jə tə ɛndʒɔɪ ðə . . . dæns."

Morgase frowned. How could anyone own a person? Suroth had spoken earlier about "making someone property." She knew the Old Tongue, and the word da'covale was not familiar to her, but thinking it out she came up with "Person Who Is Owned." It was disgusting. Horrendous! "Incredible," she said dryly. "Perhaps I should leave you to enjoy the . . . dance."

"ɪn wʌn moʊmənt," sjuɹɔθ sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ ət ðə pɑstʃɝɪŋ θɛɹə. mɔɹɡeɪs əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ. "ɔl əv tʃɔɪsəz tə meɪk, əz aɪ sɛd. ði oʊl kɪŋ ə tæɹɑbən tʃoʊz tə ɹəbɛl, ən daɪd. ði oʊl pɑnɑɹtʃ wɑz kæptʃɝd, jɛt ɹəfjuz ði oʊθ. itʃ ʌv əs əz ə pleɪs wɛɹ wi bɪlɔŋ, ənlɛs ɹeɪz baɪ ði ɛmpɹɛs, bʌt ðoʊz u ɹɪdʒɛk ðɛɹ pɹɑpɝ pleɪs kən ɔlsoʊ bi kæs daʊn, ivən tə ðə dɛpθs. θɛɹə hæz ə sɝɾən ɡɹeɪs. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ælwɪn ʃoʊz ɡɹeɪt pɹɑməs ɪn titʃɪŋ, soʊ aɪ ɪkspɛk ðət bɪfɔɹ mɛni jɪɹz, θɛɹə wɪl lɝn ðə skɪl ɪn ðə poʊzəz tə ɡoʊ wɪð əɹ ɡɹeɪs." ðət smaɪl swɪvəl təwɔɹd mɔɹɡeɪs, ðət ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ɡeɪz.

"In one moment," Suroth said, smiling at the posturing Thera. Morgase avoided looking. "All have choices to make, as I said. The old King of Tarabon chose to rebel, and died. The old Panarch was captured, yet refused the Oath. Each of us has a place where we belong, unless raised by the Empress, but those who reject their proper place can also be cast down, even to the depths. Thera has a certain grace. Strangely, Alwhin shows great promise in teaching, so I expect that before many years, Thera will learn the skill in the Poses to go with her grace." That smile swiveled toward Morgase, that glittering gaze.

ə vɛɹi səɡnɪfɪkənt ɡeɪz, bʌt waɪ? sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə dænsɝ? hɝ neɪm, mɛnʃən soʊ ɔfən, əz ɪf tə haɪlaɪɾ ɪt. bʌt wʌt . . . ? mɔɹɡeɪsəz hɛd wɪpt ɝaʊnd, ən ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ðə wʊmən, ʌp ɑn əɹ toʊz ən sloʊli pɪvoʊɾɪŋ ɪn wʌn spɑt wɪð əɹ hænz flæt təɡɛðɝ ən ɑɹmz stʃɹɛtʃt ʌp əz haɪ əz ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ. "aɪ doʊn bɪliv ɪt," ʃi ɡæspt. "aɪ woʊnt!"

A very significant gaze, but why? Something to do with the dancer? Her name, mentioned so often, as if to highlight it. But what . . . ? Morgase's head whipped around, and she stared at the woman, up on her toes and slowly pivoting in one spot with her hands flat together and arms stretched up as high as they would go. "I don't believe it," she gasped. "I won't!"

"θɛɹə," sjuɹɔθ sɛd, "wʌt wɑz jəɹ neɪm bɪfɔɹ jə bɪkeɪm maɪ pɹɑpɝɾi? wʌt taɪɾəl dɪd jə hoʊld?"

"Thera," Suroth said, "what was your name before you became my property? What title did you hold?"

θɛɹə fɹoʊz ɪn əɹ ʌp-stʃɹɛtʃt pɑstʃɝ, kwɪvɝɪŋ, ʃuɾɪŋ ə lʊk hæf pænɪk, hæf tɛɹɝ ət ʃɑɹp-feɪst ælwɪn, ə lʊk ə pjʊɹ tɛɹɝ ət sjuɹɔθ. "θɛɹə wɑz kɔld æməðɛɹə, ɪf ɪt plizɪz ðə haɪ leɪɾi," ʃi sɛd bɹɛθəli. "θɛɹə wɑz ðə pɑnɑɹtʃ ə tæɹɑbən, ɪf ɪt plizɪz ðə haɪ leɪɾi."

Thera froze in her up-stretched posture, quivering, shooting a look half panic, half terror at sharp-faced Alwhin, a look of pure terror at Suroth. "Thera was called Amathera, if it pleases the High Lady," she said breathily. "Thera was the Panarch of Tarabon, if it pleases the High Lady."

ðə kʌp dʒɹɑp fɹəm mɔɹɡeɪsəz hænd, smæʃɪŋ tə bɪts ɑn ðə flɔɹ, spɹeɪɪŋ ðə blæk kæf. ɪt hæd tə bi ə laɪ. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ mɛɾ æməðɛɹə, bʌt ʃi hæd hɝɾ ə dɪskɹɪpʃən, wʌns. noʊ. mɛni wɪmən ə ðə ɹaɪɾ eɪdʒ kəɾ əv lɑɹdʒ dɑɹk aɪz ən ə pɛtʃələn maʊθ. pʊɹə hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðɪs wʊmən. . . . "poʊz!" ælwɪn snæpt, ən θɛɹə floʊɾ ɑn wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz wʌn mɔɹ ɡlæns ət sjuɹɔθ əɹ ɛniwʌn. huɛvɝ ʃi wɑz, klɪɹli ðə fɔɹmoʊs θɔɾ ɪn əɹ hɛd naʊ wɑz ən ɝdʒən dɪzaɪɝ nɑt tə meɪk ə mɪsteɪk. mɔɹɡeɪs kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn nɑt vɑməɾɪŋ.

The cup dropped from Morgase's hand, smashing to bits on the floor, spraying the black kaf. It had to be a lie. She had never met Amathera, but she had heard a description, once. No. Many women of the right age could have large dark eyes and a petulant mouth. Pura had never been Aes Sedai, and this woman. . . . "Pose!" Alwhin snapped, and Thera flowed on without so much as one more glance at Suroth or anyone. Whoever she was, clearly the foremost thought in her head now was an urgent desire not to make a mistake. Morgase concentrated on not vomiting.

sjuɹɔθ stɛp vɛɹi kloʊs, feɪs koʊld əz mɪdwɪntɝ. "ɔl kənfɹʌn tʃɔɪsəz," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. hɝ vɔɪs cʊɾə mɑɹk stil. "sʌm ə maɪ pɹɪznɝz seɪ ðət jə spɛn taɪm ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. baɪ lɔ, noʊ mɛɹəθdəmeɪn meɪ ɪskeɪp ðə liʃ, bʌɾ aɪ plɛdʒ tə jə ðət ju, hu neɪmd mi tə maɪ aɪz ən kɔld laɪ ɑn maɪ wɝd, jəl nɑt feɪs ðət feɪt." ði ɛmfəsəs meɪd kwaɪt klɪɹ ðəɾ əɹ plɛdʒ kʌvɝd noʊ ʌðɝ pɑsəbəl feɪt. ðə smaɪl ðət nɛvɝ ɹitʃt əɹ aɪz ɹɪtɝnd. "aɪ hoʊp ðət jəl tʃuz tə swɛɹ ði oʊθ, mɔɹɡeɪs, ən ɹul ændɝ ɪn ðə neɪm ə ði ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ." fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz æbsəlutli sɝɾən ðə wʊmən laɪd. "aɪ wɪl spik tə jə əɡɛn təmɑɹoʊ, əɹ pɝhæps ðə nɛks deɪ, ɪf aɪ hæv taɪm."

Suroth stepped very close, face cold as midwinter. "All confront choices," she said quietly. Her voice could have marked steel. "Some of my prisoners say that you spent time in the White Tower. By law, no marath'damane may escape the leash, but I pledge to you that you, who named me to my eyes and called lie on my word, you will not face that fate." The emphasis made quite clear that her pledge covered no other possible fate. The smile that never reached her eyes returned. "I hope that you will choose to swear the oath, Morgase, and rule Andor in the name of the Empress, may she live forever." For the first time, Morgase was absolutely certain the woman lied. "I will speak to you again tomorrow, or perhaps the next day, if I have time."

tɝnɪŋ əweɪ, sjuɹɔθ ɡlaɪɾɪd pæs ðə loʊn dænsɝ tə ðə haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹ. əz ʃi sæt, spɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ ɹoʊb ɡɹeɪsfəli, ælwɪn bɑɹkt əɡɛn. ʃi dɪd nɑt sim tə hæv ɛni ʌðɝ vɔɪs. "ɔl! poʊzəz ə ðə swɑn!" ðə jʌŋ mɛn ən wɪmən nilɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl lɛp fɔɹwɝd tə dʒɔɪn θɛɹə, dʒɔɪnɪŋ əɹ muvməns ɪɡzækli ɪn ə laɪn bɪfɔɹ sjuɹɔθs tʃɛɹ. oʊnli ðə loʊpɝz ɡeɪz stɪl æknɑlɪdʒ mɔɹɡeɪsəz ɛɡzɪstəns. ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn dɪsmɪst soʊ θɝoʊli ɪn əɹ laɪf. ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ dɪɡnəɾi wɪð əɹ skɝts, ʃi lɛft.

Turning away, Suroth glided past the lone dancer to the high-backed chair. As she sat, spreading her robe gracefully, Alwhin barked again. She did not seem to have any other voice. "All! Poses of the Swan!" The young men and women kneeling against the wall leaped forward to join Thera, joining her movements exactly in a line before Suroth's chair. Only the lopar's gaze still acknowledged Morgase's existence. She did not believe she had ever been dismissed so thoroughly in her life. Gathering her dignity with her skirts, she left.

ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ fɑɹ əloʊn ə kɔɹs. ðoʊz ɹɛd-ænd-blæk ɑɹmɝd soʊlʒɝz stʊɾ ɪn ði æntəɹum laɪk stætʃuz wɪð ɹɛd-ænd-blæk tæsɛl spɪɹz, feɪsəz ɪmpæsɪv ɪn ðɛɹ lækɝd hɛlməts, hɑɹɾ aɪz simɪŋ tə stɛɹ fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə mændəbəlz ə mɑnstʃɹəs ɪnsɛks. wʌn, nɑt mʌtʃ tɔlɝ ðən ʃi, fɛl ɪn əɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝɾ ən ɛskɔɹɾɪd əɹ bæk tə hɝ ɹumz, wɛɹ tu tæɹɑbənɝz wɪð sɔɹdz flæŋkt əɹ dɔɹ, ðiz ɪn stil bɹɛst-pleɪts, bʌt stɪl peɪntəɾ ɪn hɔɹəzɑntəl stʃɹaɪps. ðeɪ baʊd loʊ, hænz ɑn ðɛɹ niz, ən ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz fəɹ əɹ əntɪl əɹ ɛskɔɹt spoʊk fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm.

She did not go far alone of course. Those red-and-black armored soldiers stood in the anteroom like statues with red-and-black tasseled spears, faces impassive in their lacquered helmets, hard eyes seeming to stare from behind the mandibles of monstrous insects. One, not much taller than she, fell in at her shoulder without a word and escorted her back to her rooms, where two Taraboners with swords flanked her door, these in steel breast-plates, but still painted in horizontal stripes. They bowed low, hands on their knees, and she thought it was for her until her escort spoke for the first time.

"ɑnɝ mɛt," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə hɑɹʃ, dʒɹaɪ vɔɪs, ən ðə tæɹɑbənɝz stʃɹeɪɾənd, nɛvɝ ɡlænsɪŋ əɾ əɹ əntɪl i sɛd, "wɑtʃ əɹ wɛl. ʃiz nɑt ɡɪvən ði oʊθ." dɑɹk aɪz flɪkɝd təwɔɹɾ əɹ əbʌv stil veɪlz, bʌt ðɛɹ ʃɔɹt baʊz ʌv əsɛnt wɝ fəɹ ðə sintʃæn.

"Honor met," he said in a harsh, dry voice, and the Taraboners straightened, never glancing at her until he said, "Watch her well. She has not given the Oath." Dark eyes flickered toward her above steel veils, but their short bows of assent were for the Seanchan.

ʃi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə hɝi ɪnsaɪd, bʌt wʌns ðə dɔɹ wɑz kloʊz bɪhaɪn hɝ, ʃi lin əɡɛnst ɪɾ ətɛmptɪŋ tə sɛɾəl əɹ wɝlɪŋ θɔts. sintʃæn ən deɪmeɪn, ɛmpɹɛsəz ən oʊðz ən pipəl oʊnd. lini ən bɹin stʊɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ.

She tried not to hurry inside, but once the door was closed behind her, she leaned against it attempting to settle her whirling thoughts. Seanchan and damane, Empresses and oaths and people owned. Lini and Breane stood in the middle of the room looking at her.

"wʌt dɪd jə lɝn?" lini æsk peɪʃənli, ɪn mʌtʃ ðə toʊn ɪn wɪtʃ ʃi hæd kwɛstʃən ðə tʃaɪl mɔɹɡeɪs əbaʊɾ ə bʊk ɹɛd.

"What did you learn?" Lini asked patiently, in much the tone in which she had questioned the child Morgase about a book read.

"naɪtmɛɹz ən mædnəs," mɔɹɡeɪs saɪd. sʌɾənli ʃi stʊɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt, lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə ɹum æŋkʃəsli. "wɛɹ ɪz - ? wɛɹ ɑɹ ðə mɛn?"

"Nightmares and madness," Morgase sighed. Suddenly she stood up straight, looking around the room anxiously. "Where is - ? Where are the men?"

bɹin ænsɝd ði ʌnəskt kwɛstʃən ɪn ə dʒɹaɪli mɑkɪŋ toʊn. "tɑlænvɝ wɛn tə si wʌɾ i kəd faɪn aʊt." hɝ fɪsts plæntəd ðɛmsɛlvz ɑn əɹ hɪps, ən əɹ feɪs bɪkeɪm dɛdli sɪɹiəs. "læmɡwɪn wɛnt wɪð hɪm, ən mæstɝ ɡɪl. wʌd jə faɪn aʊt? hu ɑɹ ðiz . . . sintʃæn?" ʃi sɛd ðə neɪm ɔkwɝdli, fɹaʊnɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪt. "wi hɝd ðət mʌtʃ fəɹ aʊɝsɛlvz." ʃi əfɛktəd nɑt tə noʊɾəs liniz baɪɾɪŋ stɛɹ. "wʌɾ ɑɹ wi tə də naʊ, mɔɹɡeɪs?"

Breane answered the unasked question in a dryly mocking tone. "Tallanvor went to see what he could find out." Her fists planted themselves on her hips, and her face became deadly serious. "Lamgwin went with him, and Master Gill. What did you find out? Who are these . . . Seanchan?" She said the name awkwardly, frowning around it. "We heard that much for ourselves." She affected not to notice Lini's biting stare. "What are we to do now, Morgase?"

mɔɹɡeɪs bɹʌʃt bɪtwin ðə wɪmən, kɹɔsɪŋ tə ðə nɪɹəst wɪndoʊ. nɑɾ əz nɛɹoʊ əz ðoʊz ɪn ði ɑɾiəns tʃeɪmbɝ, ɪt lʊk daʊn twɛnti fiɾ əɹ mɔɹ tə ðə stoʊn peɪvɪŋ ə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. ə dɪspɪɹəɾɪd kɑləm ə bæɹhɛɾɪd, dɪʃɛvəl mɛn, səm wɪð blʌd-steɪn bændədʒəz, ʃæmbəld əkɹɔs ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹɾ ʌndɝ ðə wɑtʃfəl ɡeɪz ə tæɹɑbənɝz kæɹiɪŋ spɪɹz. sɛvɹəl sintʃæn stʊɾ ətɑp ə nɪɹbaɪ taʊɝ, piɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə dɪstəns bɪtwin ðə kɹɛnɛleɪʃənz. wʌn wɔɹ ə hɛlmət dɛkɝeɪɾəd wɪð θɹi slɛndɝ plumz. ə wʊmən əpɪɹɾ ɪn ə wɪndoʊ əkɹɔs ðə kɔɹt, ðə laɪtnɪŋ-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɹɛd pænəl pleɪn ɑn əɹ bɹɛst, fɹaʊnɪŋ daʊn ət ðə waɪt-kloʊk pɹɪznɝz. ðoʊz stʌmbəlɪŋ mɛn lʊk stʌnd, əneɪbəl tə bɪliv wʌt hæd hæpənd.

Morgase brushed between the women, crossing to the nearest window. Not as narrow as those in the audience chamber, it looked down twenty feet or more to the stone paving of the courtyard. A dispirited column of bareheaded, disheveled men, some with blood-stained bandages, shambled across the courtyard under the watchful gaze of Taraboners carrying spears. Several Seanchan stood atop a nearby tower, peering into the distance between the crenellations. One wore a helmet decorated with three slender plumes. A woman appeared in a window across the court, the lightning-embroidered red panel plain on her breast, frowning down at the White-cloak prisoners. Those stumbling men looked stunned, unable to believe what had happened.

wʌt wɝ ðeɪ tə du? ə dɪsɪʒən mɔɹɡeɪs dʒɹɛɾɪd. ɪt sim ðət ʃi hæd nɑt meɪd soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə dɪsɪʒən ɑn fɹut fəɹ bɹɛkfəst ɪn mʌnθs wɪθaʊɾ ɪt liɾɪŋ tə dɪzæstɝ. ə tʃɔɪs, sjuɹɔθ hæd sɛd. eɪd ðiz sintʃæn ɪn teɪkɪŋ ændɝ, ɔɹ. . . . wʌn læst sɝvəs ʃi kəd də fəɹ ændɝ. ðə teɪl ɛn ə ðə kɑləm əpɪɹd, fɑloʊd baɪ mɔɹ tæɹɑbənɝz, hu wɝ dʒɔɪn baɪ ðɛɹ kʌntʃɹimɪn ðeɪ pæst. ə twɛnti-fʊt fɔl, ən sjuɹɔθ lɔst əɹ lɛvɝ. meɪbi ɪt wɑz ðə kaʊɝdz weɪ aʊt, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi pɹuv hɝsɛlf ðæt. stɪl, ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ ʃəd nɑt daɪ soʊ.

What were they to do? A decision Morgase dreaded. It seemed that she had not made so much as a decision on fruit for breakfast in months without it leading to disaster. A choice, Suroth had said. Aid these Seanchan in taking Andor, or. . . . One last service she could do for Andor. The tail end of the column appeared, followed by more Taraboners, who were joined by their countrymen they passed. A twenty-foot fall, and Suroth lost her lever. Maybe it was the coward's way out, but she had already proved herself that. Still, the Queen of Andor should not die so.

ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, ʃi spoʊk ði ɪɹɛvəkəbəl wɝdz ðət hæd bɪn juzd oʊnli twaɪs bɪfɔɹ ɪn ðə θaʊzənd-jɪɹ hɪstɝi ʌv ændɝ. "ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, aɪ ɹɪlɪŋkwɪʃ ðə haɪ siɾ ə haʊs tʃɹəkən tə ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd. ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, aɪ ɹɪnaʊns ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn ən æbdəkeɪt ðə laɪən θɹoʊn tə ɪleɪn, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs tʃɹəkənd. ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, aɪ səbmɪt maɪsɛlf tə ðə wɪl ʌv ɪleɪn ʌv ændɝ, hɝ oʊbiɾiənt sʌbʒɪkt." nʌn ə ðət meɪɾ ɪleɪn kwin, tʃɹu, bʌɾ ɪt klɪɹd ðə weɪ.

Under her breath, she spoke the irrevocable words that had been used only twice before in the thousand-year history of Andor. "Under the Light, I relinquish the High Seat of House Trakand to Elayne Trakand. Under the Light, I renounce the Rose Crown and abdicate the Lion Throne to Elayne, High Seat of House Trakand. Under the Light, I submit myself to the will of Elayne of Andor, her obedient subject." None of that made Elayne Queen, true, but it cleared the way.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə smaɪlɪŋ æt?" lini æskt.

"What are you smiling at?" Lini asked.

mɔɹɡeɪs tɝn sloʊli. "aɪ wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɪleɪn." ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk əɹ oʊl nɝs hæd bɪn kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ wʌt noʊ wʌn ɹɪli niɾəd tə.

Morgase turned slowly. "I was thinking of Elayne." She did not think her old nurse had been close enough to hear what no one really needed to.

liniz aɪz waɪɾənd, ðoʊ, ən əɹ bɹɛθ kɑt. "ju kʌm əweɪ fɹəm ðəɹ naʊ!" ʃi snæpt, ən suɾɪŋ ækʃənz tə wɝdz, sizd əɹ ɑɹm ən fɪzɪkəli pʊld əɹ fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ.

Lini's eyes widened, though, and her breath caught. "You come away from there now!" she snapped, and suiting actions to words, seized her arm and physically pulled her from the window.

"lini, jə fɝɡɛt jɝsɛlf! jə stɑp biɪŋ maɪ nɝs ə lɔŋ - !" mɔɹɡeɪs dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən sɔfən əɹ toʊn. miɾɪŋ ðoʊz fɹaɪɾənd aɪz wɑz nɑɾ izi; nʌθɪŋ fɹaɪɾənd lini. "wʌɾ aɪ də ɪz fəɹ ðə bɛst, bɪliv mi," ʃi toʊld əɹ dʒɛnli. "ðɛɹz noʊ ʌðɝ weɪ - "

"Lini, you forget yourself! You stopped being my nurse a long - !" Morgase drew a deep breath and softened her tone. Meeting those frightened eyes was not easy; nothing frightened Lini. "What I do is for the best, believe me," she told her gently. "There's no other way - "

"noʊ ʌðɝ weɪ?" bɹin bɹoʊk ɪn æŋɡɹəli, ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ skɝts tɪl əɹ hænz ʃʊk. klɪɹli ʃi wəd ɹæðɝ əv hæɾ əm ɹæpt ɝaʊn mɔɹɡeɪsəz θɹoʊt. "wʌt ful nɑnsɛns ɑɹ jə spaʊɾɪŋ naʊ? wʌɾ ɪf ðiz sintʃæn θɪŋk wi kɪl ju?" mɔɹɡeɪs kəmpɹɛst əɹ lɪps; hæd ʃi bɪkʌm soʊ tʃɹænspɛɹənt?

"No other way?" Breane broke in angrily, gripping her skirts till her hands shook. Clearly she would rather have had them wrapped around Morgase's throat. "What fool nonsense are you spouting now? What if these Seanchan think we killed you?" Morgase compressed her lips; had she become so transparent?

"ʃʌɾ ʌp, wʊmən!" lini nɛvɝ ɡɑɾ æŋɡɹi, iðɝ, əɹ ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs, bʌt ʃi dɪd boʊθ naʊ, hɝ wɪðɝd tʃiks ɹɛd. ʃi ɹeɪzd ə boʊni hænd. "ju hoʊl jəɹ maʊθ, əɹ əl slæp jə sɪliɝ ðən jə ɑɹ!"

"Shut up, woman!" Lini never got angry, either, or raised her voice, but she did both now, her withered cheeks red. She raised a bony hand. "You hold your mouth, or I'll slap you sillier than you are!"

"slæp əɹ ɪf jə wɑnə slæp sʌmwʌn!" bɹin ʃaʊɾəd bæk soʊ fɪɹsli ðət spɪɾəl flu. "kwin mɔɹɡeɪs! ʃɪl sɛn jə ən mi ən maɪ læmɡwɪn tə ðə ɡæloʊz, ən əɹ pɹɛʃəs tɑlænvɝ tu, kəz ʃi læks ðə bɛli ʌv ə maʊs!"

"Slap her if you want to slap someone!" Breane shouted back so fiercely that spittle flew. "Queen Morgase! She will send you and me and my Lamgwin to the gallows, and her precious Tallanvor too, because she lacks the belly of a mouse!"

ðə dɔɹ oʊpən tə ədmɪt tɑlænvɝ ən pʊɾ ən əbɹʌpt ɛn tə ɪt. noʊ wʌn wɑz əbaʊt tə ʃaʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. lini pɹitɛndəd tə ɪɡzæmɪn mɔɹɡeɪsəz sliv əz ðoʊ ɪt maɪt nid mɛndɪŋ əz mæstɝ ɡɪl ən læmɡwɪn fɑloʊd tɑlænvɝ ɪn. bɹin pʊɾ ɑn ə bɹaɪt smaɪl ən smuðd əɹ skɝts. ðə mɛn noʊɾəst nʌθɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs.

The door opened to admit Tallanvor and put an abrupt end to it. No one was about to shout in front of him. Lini pretended to examine Morgase's sleeve as though it might need mending as Master Gill and Lamgwin followed Tallanvor in. Breane put on a bright smile and smoothed her skirts. The men noticed nothing, of course.

mɔɹɡeɪs noʊɾəst ə ɡɹeɪt dil. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, tɑlænvɝ hæɾ ə sɔɹd bɛltəɾ ɑn, ən soʊ dɪd mæstɝ ɡɪl, ən ivən læmɡwɪn, ðoʊ hɪz wɑz ə ʃɔɹt-sɔɹd. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz hæd ðə filɪŋ i wɑz mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl wɪð ɪz fɪsts ðən ɛni ʌðɝ wɛpənz. bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəɾ æsk haʊ, ðə skɪni lɪɾəl mæn u bɹɔɾ ʌp ðə ɹɪɹ kloʊz ðə dɔɹ kɛɹfəli bɪhaɪn hɪm.

Morgase noticed a great deal. For one thing, Tallanvor had a sword belted on, and so did Master Gill, and even Lamgwin, though his was a short-sword. She had always had the feeling he was more comfortable with his fists than any other weapons. Before she could ask how, the skinny little man who brought up the rear closed the door carefully behind him.

"mædʒəsti," sɛbæn beɪlwɝ sɛd, "fɝɡɪv ði ɪntʃɹuʒən." ivən ɪz baʊ ən ɪz smaɪl sim dʒɹaɪ ən pɹɪsaɪs, bʌɾ əz ɪz aɪz flɪk fɹəm əɹ tə ði ʌðɝ wɪmən, mɔɹɡeɪs dɪsaɪɾɪd ðət wɛðɝ ði ʌðɝ mɛn noʊɾəst ði ætməsfɪɹ ɪn ðə ɹum əɹ nɑt, peɪdʒɹən naɪlz wʌntaɪm sɛkɹətɛɹi dɪd.

"Majesty," Sebban Balwer said, "forgive the intrusion." Even his bow and his smile seemed dry and precise, but as his eyes flicked from her to the other women, Morgase decided that whether the other men noticed the atmosphere in the room or not, Pedron Niall's onetime secretary did.

"aɪ æm sɝpɹaɪz tə si ju, mæstɝ beɪlwɝ," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ hɝd ðəɹ wɑz səm ənplɛzəntnəs wɪð imən vɑldə." wʌt ʃi hæd hɝd wɑz ðət vɑldə hæd sɛɾ ɪf i leɪɾ aɪz ɑn beɪlwɝ, hi wəd kɪk ɪm oʊvɝ wʌn ə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs wɔlz. beɪlwɝz smaɪl taɪɾənd; hi nu wʌt vɑldə hæd sɛd.

"I am surprised to see you, Master Balwer," she said. "I heard there was some unpleasantness with Eamon Valda." What she had heard was that Valda had said if he laid eyes on Balwer, he would kick him over one of the Fortress walls. Balwer's smile tightened; he knew what Valda had said.

"hi hæz ə plæn tə teɪk əs ɔl aʊɾ ə hɪɹ," tɑlænvɝ bɹoʊk ɪn. "tədeɪ. naʊ." hi ɡeɪv əɹ ə lʊk nɑt ðəɾ ə sʌbʒɪkt tə kwin. "wi ɑɹ æksɛptɪŋ ɪz ɔfɝ."

"He has a plan to take us all out of here," Tallanvor broke in. "Today. Now." He gave her a look not that of subject to queen. "We are accepting his offer."

"haʊ?" ʃi sɛd sloʊli, fɔɹsɪŋ əɹ lɛɡz tə ɹɪmeɪn stʃɹeɪt. wʌt hɛlp kəd ðɪs pɹɪsi lɪɾəl stɪk ʌv ə mæn ɔfɝ? ɪskeɪp. ʃi wɑntəd vɛɹi mʌtʃ tə sɪt daʊn, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ tə, nɑt wɪð tɑlænvɝ lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ ɪn ðət fæʃən. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɪz kwin, naʊ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt noʊ ðæt. ənʌðɝ kwɛstʃən əkɝd. "waɪ? mæstɝ beɪlwɝ, əl nɑt ʃʌn ɛni tʃɹu ɔfɝ ə hɛlp, bʌt waɪ wəd jə ɹɪsk jɝsɛlf? ðiz sintʃæn wɪl meɪk jə ɹəɡɹɛɾ ɪt, ʃəd ðeɪ faɪn aʊt."

"How?" she said slowly, forcing her legs to remain straight. What help could this prissy little stick of a man offer? Escape. She wanted very much to sit down, but she was not going to, not with Tallanvor looking at her in that fashion. Of course, she was not his Queen, now, but he did not know that. Another question occurred. "Why? Master Balwer, I'll not shun any true offer of help, but why would you risk yourself? These Seanchan will make you regret it, should they find out."

"aɪ leɪd maɪ plænz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ keɪm," hi sɛd kɛɹfəli. "ɪt simd . . . ɪmpɹuɾənt . . . tə liv ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ ɪn vɑldəz hænz. kənsɪɾɝ ɪt maɪ weɪ ʌv ɹipeɪɪŋ hɪm. aɪ noʊ aɪm nɑt mʌtʃ tə lʊk æt, mædʒəsti . . ." hi hɪɾ ə sɛlf-dɛpɹəkeɪɾɪŋ kɑf bɪhaɪn ɪz hænd. ". . . bʌt ðə plæn wɪl wɝk. ðiz sintʃæn æktʃəli  meɪk ɪɾ iziɝ; aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ɹɛɾi fəɹ deɪz jɛt wɪθaʊt ðɛm. fəɹ ə nuli kɑŋkɝd sɪɾi, ðeɪ əlaʊ ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl fɹiɾəm tə ɛniwʌn wɪlɪŋ tə seɪ ðɛɹ oʊθ. nɑɾ ən aʊɝ æftɝ sʌnɹaɪz, aɪ əbteɪn ə pæs əlaʊɪŋ maɪsɛlf ən ʌp tə tɛn mɔɹ u hæv teɪkən ði oʊθ tə dɪpɑɹɾ æmədɔɹ. ðeɪ bɪliv aɪ ɪntɛn tə baɪ waɪn, ən wæɡənz tə kæɹi ɪt, ɪn ði ist."

"I laid my plans before they came," he said carefully. "It seemed . . . imprudent . . . to leave the Queen of Andor in Valda's hands. Consider it my way of repaying him. I know I am not much to look at, Majesty . . ." He hid a self-deprecating cough behind his hand. ". . . but the plan will work. These Seanchan actually make it easier; I would not have been ready for days yet without them. For a newly conquered city, they allow remarkable freedom to anyone willing to say their Oath. Not an hour after sunrise, I obtained a pass allowing myself and up to ten more who have taken the Oath to depart Amador. They believe I intend to buy wine, and wagons to carry it, in the east."

"ɪt mʌs bi ə tʃɹæp." ðə wɝdz teɪstəd bɪɾɝ. bɛɾɝ ðə wɪndoʊ ðən fɔlɪŋ ɪndə səm snɛɹ. "ðeɪ woʊn əlaʊ jə tə kæɹi wɝɾ ə ðɛm əhɛɾ ə ðɛɹ ɑɹmi."

"It must be a trap." The words tasted bitter. Better the window than falling into some snare. "They won't allow you to carry word of them ahead of their army."

beɪlwɝz hɛd tɪltəd tə wʌn saɪd, ən i bɪɡæn dʒɹaɪ-wɑʃɪŋ ɪz hænz, ðən stɑpt əbɹʌpli. "ɪn tʃɹuθ, mædʒəsti, aɪ kənsɪɾɝd ðæt. ði ɔfəsɝ u ɡeɪv mi ðə pæs sɛɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. hɪz ɪɡzækt wɝdz: 'tɛl u jəl wʌt juv sin, ən lɛɾ əm noʊ ðeɪ kænɑt stæn əɡɛnst ʌs. jəɹ lænz wɪl noʊ sun ɪnʌf ɛniweɪ.' aɪ hæv sin sɛvɹəl mɝtʃəns teɪk ði oʊθ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ ən dɪpɑɹt wɪð ðɛɹ wæɡənz."

Balwer's head tilted to one side, and he began dry-washing his hands, then stopped abruptly. "In truth, Majesty, I considered that. The officer who gave me the pass said it did not matter. His exact words: 'Tell who you will what you have seen, and let them know they cannot stand against us. Your lands will know soon enough anyway.' I have seen several merchants take the Oath this morning and depart with their wagons."

tɑlænvɝ muv kloʊs tə hɝ. tu kloʊs. ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil ɪz bɹɛθ. ʃi kəd fil ɪz aɪz. "wi ɑɹ æksɛptɪŋ ɪz ɔfɝ," hi sɛd fəɹ əɹ ɪɹz əloʊn. "ɪf aɪ mʌs baɪn ən ɡæɡ ju, aɪ θɪŋk i kən faɪn ə weɪ ivən soʊ. hi simz ə vɛɹi ɹisɔɹsfəl lɪɾəl fɛloʊ."

Tallanvor moved close to her. Too close. She could almost feel his breath. She could feel his eyes. "We are accepting his offer," he said for her ears alone. "If I must bind and gag you, I think he can find a way even so. He seems a very resourceful little fellow."

ʃi mɛɾ ɪm stɛɹ fəɹ stɛɹ. ðə wɪndoʊ əɹ . . . ə tʃæns. ɪf tɑlænvɝ hæɾ oʊnli hɛld ɪz tʌŋ ɪt wʊɾə bɪn mʌtʃ iziɝ tə seɪ, "aɪ æksɛpt wɪð ɡɹæɾətud, mæstɝ beɪlwɝ," bʌt ʃi sɛɾ ɪt. ʃi stɛpt əweɪ əz ɪf tə si beɪlwɝ wɪθaʊt hævɪŋ tə kɹeɪn pæs tɑlænvɝ. ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz dɪstɝbɪŋ biɪŋ soʊ nɪɹ tə hɪm. hi wɑz tu jʌŋ. "wʌɾ ɪz tə də fɝst? aɪ daʊt ðoʊz ɡɑɹdz ət ðə dɔɹ wɪl æksɛp jəɹ pæs fəɹ ʌs."

She met him stare for stare. The window or . . . a chance. If Tallanvor had only held his tongue it would have been much easier to say, "I accept with gratitude, Master Balwer," but she said it. She stepped away as if to see Balwer without having to crane past Tallanvor. It was always disturbing being so near to him. He was too young. "What is to do first? I doubt those guards at the door will accept your pass for us."

beɪlwɝ baʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ əz ɪf æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ əɹ fɔɹsaɪt. "aɪ fɪɹ ðeɪ mʌs mit wɪð æksəɾənts, mædʒəsti." tɑlænvɝ izd ɪz dæɡɝ ɪn ɪts skæbɝd, ən læmɡwɪn flɛkst ɪz hænz laɪk ðə loʊpɝ flɛksɪŋ ɪts klɔz.

Balwer bowed his head as if acknowledging her foresight. "I fear they must meet with accidents, Majesty." Tallanvor eased his dagger in its scabbard, and Lamgwin flexed his hands like the lopar flexing its claws.

ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt kəd bi soʊ izi, ivən æftɝ ðeɪ hæd pækt ʌp wʌt ðeɪ kəd kæɹi ən ðə tu tæɹɑbənɝz hæd bɪn stʌf bɪniθ əɹ bɛd. ət ðə meɪn ɡeɪts, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ lɪnən dʌst-kloʊk kloʊs ɔkwɝdli kəz ə ðə bʌndəl ɑn əɹ bæk, ʃi baʊd, hænz ɑn əɹ niz ðə weɪ beɪlwɝ hæd ʃoʊn hɝ, waɪl i toʊl ðə ɡɑɹdz ðət ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl swɔɹn tə oʊbeɪ, əweɪɾ ən sɝv. ʃi θɔɾ ə haʊ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ʃi wɑz nɑt teɪkən əlaɪv. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ æktʃəli  ɹaɪɾɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv æmədɔɹ, pæs ðə læst ɡɑɹdz, ɑn ðə hɔɹsəz beɪlwɝ hæd hæd weɪɾɪŋ, ðət ʃi bɪɡæn tə bɪliv. ʌv kɔɹs, beɪlwɝ pɹɑbli ɪkspɛktəd səm faɪn ɹɪwɔɹd fəɹ ɹɛskjuɪŋ ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ. ʃi hæd nɑt toʊld ɛniwʌn ðət ðət wɑz dʌn wɪð bɪɑnd ɡoʊɪŋ bæk; ʃi nu ʃi hæd spoʊkən ðə wɝdz, ən noʊ wʌn ɛls niɾəd tə noʊ. ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ əm wɑz jusləs. naʊ ʃi wəd si wʌt sɔɹɾ ə laɪf ʃi kəd faɪnd wɪθaʊɾ ə θɹoʊn. ə laɪf fɑɹ fɹəm ə mæn u wɑz mʌtʃ tu jʌŋ ən mʌtʃ tu dɪstɝbɪŋ.

She did not believe it could be so easy, even after they had packed up what they could carry and the two Taraboners had been stuffed beneath her bed. At the main gates, holding her linen dust-cloak close awkwardly because of the bundle on her back, she bowed, hands on her knees the way Balwer had shown her, while he told the guards that they had all sworn to obey, await and serve. She thought of how to make sure she was not taken alive. It was not until they were actually riding out of Amador, past the last guards, on the horses Balwer had had waiting, that she began to believe. Of course, Balwer probably expected some fine reward for rescuing the Queen of Andor. She had not told anyone that that was done with beyond going back; she knew she had spoken the words, and no one else needed to know. Regretting them was useless. Now she would see what sort of life she could find without a throne. A life far from a man who was much too young and much too disturbing.

"waɪ ɪz jəɹ smaɪl soʊ sæd?" lini æskt, ɹeɪnɪŋ əɹ slæb-saɪɾəd bɹaʊn mɛɹ kloʊsɝ. ði ænəməl lʊk mʌðiəɾən. mɔɹɡeɪsəz beɪ wɑz noʊ bɛɾɝ; nʌn ə ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ. ðə sintʃæn maɪɾ əv bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə lɛt beɪlwɝ ɡoʊ wɪð ɪz pæs, bʌt nɑt wɪð disən maʊns.

"Why is your smile so sad?" Lini asked, reining her slab-sided brown mare closer. The animal looked motheaten. Morgase's bay was no better; none of the horses were. The Seanchan might have been willing to let Balwer go with his pass, but not with decent mounts.

"ðɛɹ ɪz ə lɔŋ ɹoʊɾ əhɛd, jɛt," mɔɹɡeɪs toʊl hɝ, ən θʌmpt əɹ mɛɹ ɪndə səm sɛmbləns ʌv ə tʃɹɑɾ æftɝ tɑlænvɝ.

"There is a long road ahead, yet," Morgase told her, and thumped her mare into some semblance of a trot after Tallanvor.


tʃæptɝ twɛntisɛvən


CHAPTER 27

tə bi əloʊn


To Be Alone

slɪpɪŋ ðə hæft ə hɪz æks θɹu ðə lup ɑn ɪz bɛlt ɑpəzəɾ ɪz kwɪvɝ, pɛɹɪn tʊk ɪz ənstʃɹʌŋ lɔŋboʊ fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ, slʌŋ ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ən lɛf ðə ɹumz i hæd ʃɛɹd wɪð feɪl wɪθaʊɾ ə bækwɝd lʊk. ðeɪ hæd bɪn hæpi ðəɹ - moʊst ə ðə taɪm. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i wəɾ ɛvɝ bi bæk. səmtaɪmz i wʌndɝd wɛðɝ biɪŋ hæpi sʌmwɛɹ wɪð feɪl mɛn i wəd nɛvɝ ɹɪtɝn ðɛɹ. hi hoʊp nɑt.

Slipping the haft of his axe through the loop on his belt opposite his quiver, Perrin took his unstrung longbow from the corner, slung his saddlebags over his shoulder and left the rooms he had shared with Faile without a backward look. They had been happy there - most of the time. He did not think he would ever be back. Sometimes he wondered whether being happy somewhere with Faile meant he would never return there. He hoped not.

ðə sɝvəns i sɔ ɪn ðə pæləs kɔɹɪɾɝz wɔɹ ʌnɹiliv blæk lɪvɝi; pɝhæps ɹænd hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd ɪt, ən pɝhæps ðə sɝvəns ðɛmsɛlvz hæd sɪmpli ədɑptəɾ ɪt. ðeɪ hæd bɪn ənizi wɪθaʊt lɪvɝi, əz ðoʊ ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ bɪlɔŋd, ən blæk sim seɪf əz ɹændz kʌlɝ kəz ə ði æʃəmən. ðoʊz u sɔ pɛɹɪn skæmpɝɾ əweɪ əz fæst əz ðeɪ kʊd, nɑt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɛni baʊz əɹ kɝtsiz. fɪɹ sɛn dʒɹɪftəd bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

The servants he saw in the palace corridors wore unrelieved black livery; perhaps Rand had ordered it, and perhaps the servants themselves had simply adopted it. They had been uneasy without livery, as though they did not know where they belonged, and black seemed safe as Rand's color because of the Asha'man. Those who saw Perrin scampered away as fast as they could, not waiting for any bows or curtsies. Fear scent drifted behind them.

fəɹ wʌns ɪz jɛloʊ aɪz hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɛniwʌn biɪŋ əfɹeɪd. ɪt maɪt nɑt bi seɪf tə lɔɪɾɝ nɪɹ ə mæn ət hum ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hæɾ ənliʃt ɪz ɹeɪdʒ soʊ pʌblɪkli ðɪs vɛɹi mɔɹnɪŋ. pɛɹɪn iz ðə ʃoʊldɝ ʌndɝ ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz. ə lɔŋ waɪl hæd pæst sɪns ɛniwʌn hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə pɪk ɪm ʌp ən θɹoʊ hɪm. ʌv kɔɹs, noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ juz ðə paʊɝ tə tʃɹaɪ, bɪfɔɹ. wʌn moʊmən ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ stʌk wɪð hɪm.

For once his yellow eyes had nothing to do with anyone being afraid. It might not be safe to loiter near a man at whom the Dragon Reborn had unleashed his rage so publicly this very morning. Perrin eased the shoulder under his saddlebags. A long while had passed since anyone had been able to pick him up and throw him. Of course, no one had ever used the Power to try, before. One moment in particular stuck with him.

hi pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf ʌp hoʊldɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, slaɪɾɪŋ ɪz bæk ʌp ðə skwɛɹ kɑləm ðət hæd stɑpt ɪz flaɪt. hi θɔɾ ə fju ɹɪbz maɪɾ əv kɹækt. ɝaʊn ðə ɡɹæn hɔl ə ðə sʌn, ə skæɾɝɪŋ ə noʊbəlz u hæd kʌm tə əpil wʌn θɪŋ əɹ ənʌðɝ tə ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə lʊk ɛniwɛɹ ɛls, tʃɹaɪd tə pɹitɛn ðeɪ wɝ ɛniwɛɹ ɛls. oʊnli dɑbɹeɪn wɑtʃt, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz ɡɹeɪ hɛd, əz ɹænd stɔkt əkɹɔs ðə θɹoʊn ɹum. "aɪ wɪl dil wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əz aɪ tʃuz!" ɹænd ʃaʊɾəd. "du jə hɪɹ mi, pɛɹɪn? əz aɪ tʃuz!"

He pushed himself up holding his shoulder, sliding his back up the square column that had stopped his flight. He thought a few ribs might have cracked. Around the Grand Hall of the Sun, a scattering of nobles who had come to appeal one thing or another to Rand tried to look anywhere else, tried to pretend they were anywhere else. Only Dobraine watched, shaking his gray head, as Rand stalked across the throne room. "I will deal with the Aes Sedai as I choose!" Rand shouted. "Do you hear me, Perrin? As I choose!"

"juv dʒʌs hændəɾ əm oʊvɝ tə ðə waɪz wʌnz," hi ɡɹaʊl bæk, ʃʌvɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə kɑləm. "ju doʊnt noʊ wɛðɝ ðəɹ slipɪŋ ɑn sɪlk əɹ hæd ðɛɹ θɹoʊts kʌt! jə ɑɹ nɑt ðə kɹieɪɾɝ!"

"You've just handed them over to the Wise Ones," he growled back, shoving away from the column. "You don't know whether they're sleeping on silk or had their throats cut! You are not the Creator!"

wɪð ə snɑɹl ə ɹeɪdʒ, ɹænd θɹu hɪz hɛd bæk. "aɪ æm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn!" hi kɹaɪd. "aɪ doʊn kɛɹ haʊ ðəɹ tʃɹiɾəd! ðeɪ dɪzɝv ə dʌnʒən!" pɛɹɪnz hækəlz stɝɾ əz ɹændz aɪz loʊɝd fɹəm ðə vɔltəd silɪŋ. blu aɪs wʊɾə bɪn wɔɹm ən sɑf bɪsaɪd ðɛm, ðə mɔɹ soʊ kəz ðeɪ stɛɹd fɹəm ə feɪs twɪstəd wɪð peɪn. "ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə maɪ saɪt, pɛɹɪn. dʒju hɪɹ mi? ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə kɛɹhin! tədeɪ! naʊ! aɪ nɛvɝ wɑnə si jə əɡɛn!" pɪvoʊɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz hil, hi stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ wɪð noʊbəlz ɔl bʌt θɹoʊɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz tə ðə flɔɹ əz i pæst.

With a snarl of rage, Rand threw his head back. "I am the Dragon Reborn!" he cried. "I don't care how they're treated! They deserve a dungeon!" Perrin's hackles stirred as Rand's eyes lowered from the vaulted ceiling. Blue ice would have been warm and soft beside them, the more so because they stared from a face twisted with pain. "Get out of my sight, Perrin. Do you hear me? Get out of Cairhien! Today! Now! I never want to see you again!" Pivoting on his heel, he strode away with nobles all but throwing themselves to the floor as he passed.

pɛɹɪn θʌmd ə tʃɹɪkəl ə blʌd fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz maʊθ. fəɹ wʌn moʊmən ðɛɹ, hi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ɹænd wɑz gɑnə kɪl hɪm.

Perrin thumbed a trickle of blood from the corner of his mouth. For one moment there, he had been sure Rand was going to kill him.

ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd tə ɹɪd hɪmsɛlf ə ðə θɔt, hi ɹaʊndəɾ ə kɔɹnɝ ən nɪɹli ɹæn ɪndə lɔɪəl. wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ bʌndəl stʃɹæp tə hɪz bæk ən ə skɹɪp bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə hoʊld ə ʃip slʌŋ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ði oʊɡiɝ wɑz juzɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ-hændəld æks əz ə wɔkɪŋ stæf. ðə kəpeɪʃəs pɑkəts ə hɪz koʊt bʌlʒd wɪð ðə ʃeɪps ə bʊks.

Shaking his head to rid himself of the thought, he rounded a corner and nearly ran into Loial. With a large bundle strapped to his back and a scrip big enough to hold a sheep slung on his shoulder, the Ogier was using his long-handled axe as a walking staff. The capacious pockets of his coat bulged with the shapes of books.

lɔɪəlz tʌftəɾ ɪɹz pɝkt ʌp ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɪm, ðən sʌɾənli dʒɹupt. hɪz hoʊl feɪs dʒɹupt, aɪbɹaʊz hæŋɪŋ ɑn ɪz tʃiks. "aɪ hɝd, pɛɹɪn," hi bum sædli. "ɹænd ʃəd nɑɾ əv dʌn ðæt. kwɪk wɝdz meɪk lɔŋ tʃɹʌbəlz. aɪ noʊ hɪl ɹikənsɪɾɝ. təmɑɹoʊ, meɪbi."

Loial's tufted ears perked up at the sight of him, then suddenly drooped. His whole face drooped, eyebrows hanging on his cheeks. "I heard, Perrin," he boomed sadly. "Rand should not have done that. Quick words make long troubles. I know he'll reconsider. Tomorrow, maybe."

"ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt," pɛɹɪn toʊl hɪm. "kɛɹhin ɪz tu . . . pɑlɪʃt . . . fəɹ mi, ɛniweɪ. ɪm ə blæksmɪθ, nɑɾ ə kɔɹɾiɝ. baɪ təmɑɹoʊ, əl bi ə lɔŋ weɪ ɡɔn."

"It's all right," Perrin told him. "Cairhien is too . . . polished . . . for me, anyway. I'm a blacksmith, not a courtier. By tomorrow, I'll be a long way gone."

"ju ən feɪl kəd kʌm wɪð mi. kɑɹldɪn ən aɪ ɑɹ gɑnə vɪzət ðə stɛɾɪŋ, pɛɹɪn. ɔl ə ðɛm, əbaʊt ðə weɪɡeɪts." ə nɛɹoʊ-feɪst, peɪl-hɛɹd jʌŋ fɛloʊ stændɪŋ bɪhaɪn lɔɪəl stɑp fɹaʊnɪŋ ət pɛɹɪn tə fɹaʊn ət ði oʊɡiɝ. hi hæɾ ə skɹɪp ən ə bʌndəl, tu, ən ə sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz hɪp. dɪspaɪt ðə blu koʊt, pɛɹɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd wʌn ə ði æʃəmən. kɑɹldɪn dɪd nɑt lʊk pliz tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz pɛɹɪn; bɪsaɪdz, hɪz smɛl wɑz koʊld ən æŋɡɹi. lɔɪəl pɪɹd daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ bɪhaɪn pɛɹɪn. "wɛɹ ɪz feɪl?"

"You and Faile could come with me. Karldin and I are going to visit the stedding, Perrin. All of them, about the Waygates." A narrow-faced, pale-haired young fellow standing behind Loial stopped frowning at Perrin to frown at the Ogier. He had a scrip and a bundle, too, and a sword on his hip. Despite the blue coat, Perrin recognized one of the Asha'man. Karldin did not look pleased to recognize Perrin; besides, his smell was cold and angry. Loial peered down the hallway behind Perrin. "Where is Faile?"

"ʃiz . . . miɾɪŋ mi ɪn ðə steɪbəlz. wi hæd wɝdz." ðət wɑz sɪmpəl tʃɹuθ; feɪl sim tə laɪk ʃaʊɾɪŋ, səmtaɪmz. hi loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs. "lɔɪəl, aɪ wʊdn tɔk əbaʊt ðət wɛɹ ɛniwʌn kəd hɪɹ. ðə weɪɡeɪts, aɪ min."

"She's . . . meeting me in the stables. We had words." That was simple truth; Faile seemed to like shouting, sometimes. He lowered his voice. "Loial, I wouldn't talk about that where anyone could hear. The Waygates, I mean."

lɔɪəl snɔɹɾɪd hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ə bʊl dʒʌmp, bʌɾ i dɪd dʒɹɑp ɪz toʊn. "aɪ doʊn si ɛniwʌn bʌɾ ʌs," hi ɹʌmbəld. noʊ wʌn mɔɹ ðən tu əɹ θɹi peɪsɪz bɪɑn kɑɹldɪn cʊɾə hɝd klɪɹli. hɪz ɪɹz . . . læʃt wɑz ði oʊnli wɝd . . . ən leɪd bæk æŋɡɹəli. "ɛvɹiwʌnz əfɹeɪd tə bi sin nɪɹ ju. æftɝ ɔl juv dʌn fəɹ ɹænd."

Loial snorted hard enough to make a bull jump, but he did drop his tone. "I don't see anyone but us," he rumbled. No one more than two or three paces beyond Karldin could have heard clearly. His ears . . . lashed was the only word . . . and laid back angrily. "Everyone's afraid to be seen near you. After all you've done for Rand."

kɑɹldɪn tʌɡd ət lɔɪəlz sliv. "wi hæv tə ɡoʊ," hi sɛd, ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət pɛɹɪn. ɛniwʌn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ʃaʊɾəd ət wɑz aʊtsaɪd ðə ɡeɪts soʊ fɑɹ əz i wɑz kənsɝnd. pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ i wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ðə paʊɝ ɹaɪt ðɛn.

Karldin tugged at Loial's sleeve. "We have to go," he said, glaring at Perrin. Anyone the Dragon Reborn shouted at was outside the gates so far as he was concerned. Perrin wondered whether he was holding the Power right then.

"jɛs, jɛs," lɔɪəl mɝmɝd, weɪvɪŋ ə hæm-saɪz hænd, bʌɾ i lin ɑn ɪz æks, fɹaʊnɪŋ pɛnsɪvli. "aɪ doʊn laɪk ðɪs, pɛɹɪn. ɹænd tʃeɪsəz jə əweɪ. hi sɛnz mi ɔf. haʊ aɪm tə fɪnɪʃ maɪ bʊk. . . ." hɪz ɪɹz twɪtʃt, ən i kɔft. "wɛl, ðæts niðɝ hɪɹ nɔɹ ðɛɹ. bʌt ju, mi, ən ðə laɪɾ oʊnli noʊz wɛɹ mæt ɪz. hɪl sɛn mɪn əweɪ nɛkst. hi hɪd fɹəm hɝ, ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. hi sɛn mi aʊt tə tɛl əɹ i wɑzn ðɛɹ. aɪ θɪŋk ʃi nu aɪ wɑz laɪɪŋ. hɪl bi əloʊn, ðɛn, pɛɹɪn. 'ɪts tɛɹəbəl tə bi əloʊn.' ðæts wʌɾ i sɛd tə mi. hiz plænɪŋ tə sɛn ɔl ə hɪz fɹɛnz əweɪ."

"Yes, yes," Loial murmured, waving a ham-sized hand, but he leaned on his axe, frowning pensively. "I don't like this, Perrin. Rand chases you away. He sends me off. How I'm to finish my book. . . ." His ears twitched, and he coughed. "Well, that's neither here nor there. But you, me, and the Light only knows where Mat is. He'll send Min away next. He hid from her, this morning. He sent me out to tell her he wasn't there. I think she knew I was lying. He'll be alone, then, Perrin. 'It's terrible to be alone.' That's what he said to me. He is planning to send all of his friends away."

"ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz," pɛɹɪn sɛd. lɔɪəl blɪŋkt ət ðəɾ ɛkoʊ ʌv mɔɪɹeɪn. pɛɹɪn hæd bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ə hɝ ə lɑt ɹisənli; ʃi hæd bɪn ə ɹistʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪnfluəns ɑn ɹænd. "fɛɹwɛl, lɔɪəl. kip seɪf, ən doʊn tʃɹʌst ɛniwʌn jə doʊn əv tə." hi dɪd nɑt kwaɪt lʊk ət kɑɹldɪn.

"The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills," Perrin said. Loial blinked at that echo of Moiraine. Perrin had been thinking of her a lot recently; she had been a restraining influence on Rand. "Farewell, Loial. Keep safe, and don't trust anyone you don't have to." He did not quite look at Karldin.

"ju doʊn min ðæt, pɛɹɪn." lɔɪəl saʊndəd ʃɑkt; hi sim tə tʃɹʌst ɛvɹiwʌn. "ju kænɑt. kʌm wɪð mi, jə ən feɪl."

"You don't mean that, Perrin." Loial sounded shocked; he seemed to trust everyone. "You cannot. Come with me, you and Faile."

"wil miɾ əɡɛn, wʌn deɪ," pɛɹɪn toʊld ɪm dʒɛnli, ən hɝid pæs bɪfɔɹ i hæd tə seɪ mɔɹ. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk laɪɪŋ, ɪspɛʃli nɑt tə ə fɹɛnd.

"We'll meet again, one day," Perrin told him gently, and hurried past before he had to say more. He did not like lying, especially not to a friend.

ɪn ðə nɔɹθ steɪbəl θɪŋz wɝ mʌtʃ ðə seɪm əz ɪnsaɪd ðə pæləs. ɡɹumz sɔ hɪm wɔk ɪn, ən dʒɹɑp dʌŋ fɔɹks ən kʌɹi koʊmz, kɹaʊɾɪŋ aʊt θɹu smɔl dɔɹz ət ðə bæk. ɹʌsəlz ɪn ðə lɔf haɪ əbʌv ðət maɪɾ əv ɪskeɪpt ənʌðɝz ɪɹz toʊld ə foʊk haɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ; hi kəd hɪɹ æŋkʃəs, fɪɹfəl bɹɛθs. hi bɹɔt stɛpɝ aʊɾ ʌv ə ɡɹin-stʃɹik mɑɹbəl stɔl, slɪpt ɑn ɪz bɹaɪɾəl ən taɪd ðə dʌn stæljən tə ə ɡɪldɪd hɪtʃɪŋ ɹɪŋ. hi wɛn tə fɛtʃ blæŋkəɾ ən sæɾəl fɹəm ə mɑɹbəl tæk ɹum wɛɹ hæf ðə sæɾəlz wɝ maʊntəd wɪð sɪlvɝ əɹ ɡoʊld. ðə steɪbəl fɪt vɛɹi wɛl ɪn ə pæləs, wɪð tɔl skwɛɹ mɑɹbəl kɑləmz ən ə mɑɹbəl flɔɹ, ivən ʌndɝ ðə stʃɹɔ ɪn ðə stɔlz. hi ɹoʊɾ aʊt ɡlæd tə si ðə bæk ʌv ɡɹænduɹ.

In the north stable things were much the same as inside the palace. Grooms saw him walk in, and dropped dung forks and curry combs, crowding out through small doors at the back. Rustles in the loft high above that might have escaped another's ears told of folk hiding there; he could hear anxious, fearful breaths. He brought Stepper out of a green-streaked marble stall, slipped on his bridle and tied the dun stallion to a gilded hitching ring. He went to fetch blanket and saddle from a marble tack room where half the saddles were mounted with silver or gold. The stable fit very well in a palace, with tall square marble columns and a marble floor, even under the straw in the stalls. He rode out glad to see the back of grandeur.

nɔɹθ ə ðə sɪɾi hi fɑloʊd ðə ɹoʊɾ i hæd kʌm daʊn soʊ dɛspɝətli wɪð ɹænd dʒʌst ə fju deɪz bɪfɔɹ, ɹoʊɾ əntɪl foʊlz ɪn ðə læn hɪd kɛɹhin. ðən i tɝn ɔf tə ði ist, wɛɹ ə fɛɹ pætʃ ə fɔɹəst ɹɪmeɪnd, ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn wʌn tɔl hɪl ən oʊvɝ ðə nɛkst, tɔlɝ wʌn. dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə tʃɹiz, feɪl buɾɪd swɑloʊ tə mit hɪm, ɛɹæm hilɪŋ əɹ laɪk ə haʊn ɑn ɪz oʊn hɔɹs. ɛɹæmz feɪs bɹaɪɾənd ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɪm, ðoʊ ðət wɑz nɑt seɪɪŋ mʌtʃ; hi mɪɹli dɪvaɪɾəd ɪz feɪθfəl haʊn lʊks bɪtwin ɪm ən feɪl.

North of the city he followed the road he had come down so desperately with Rand just a few days before, rode until folds in the land hid Cairhien. Then he turned off to the east, where a fair patch of forest remained, running down one tall hill and over the next, taller one. Just inside the trees, Faile booted Swallow to meet him, Aram heeling her like a hound on his own horse. Aram's face brightened at the sight of him, though that was not saying much; he merely divided his faithful hound looks between him and Faile.

"hʌzbənd," ʃi sɛd. nɑt tu kuli, bʌt ɹeɪzɝ-ʃɑɹp æŋɡɝ ən spaɪki dʒɛləsi stɪl θɹɛɾəd θɹu ðə klin sɛn ə hɝ ən əɹ ɝbəl soʊp. ʃi wɑz ɡɑɹb fəɹ tʃɹævəl, wɪð ə θɪn dʌst-kloʊk hæŋɪŋ daʊn əɹ bæk ən ɹɛd ɡlʌvz ðət mætʃt ðə buts pikɪŋ aʊt bɪniθ ðə dɑɹk nɛɹoʊ ɹaɪɾɪŋ skɝts ʃi feɪvɝd. noʊ fjuɝ ðən fɔɹ ʃið dæɡɝz wɝ tʌk bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt.

"Husband," she said. Not too coolly, but razor-sharp anger and spiky jealousy still threaded through the clean scent of her and her herbal soap. She was garbed for travel, with a thin dust-cloak hanging down her back and red gloves that matched the boots peeking out beneath the dark narrow riding skirts she favored. No fewer than four sheathed daggers were tucked behind her belt.

muvmən bɪhaɪn əɹ tɝn ɪndə beɪn ən kiæd. ən səlɪn, wɪð ə dʌzən mɔɹ meɪɾənz. pɛɹɪnz aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz. hi wʌndɝd wʌt ɡɔl θɔɾ ə ðæt; ði il mæn hæd sɛɾ i wɑz lʊkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə ɡɛɾɪŋ beɪn ən kiæɾ əloʊn. ivən mɔɹ sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ wɝ feɪlz ʌðɝ kəmpænjənz.

Movement behind her turned into Bain and Chiad. And Sulin, with a dozen more Maidens. Perrin's eyebrows rose. He wondered what Gaul thought of that; the Aiel man had said he was looking forward to getting Bain and Chiad alone. Even more surprising were Faile's other companions.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ duɪŋ hɪɹ?" hi nɑɾəd təwɔɹɾ ə smɔl klʌstɝ u hɛl ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz bæk. hi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz sɛlən ən kɑmɛl ən ðə tɔl tɛɹən wʊmən, ɔl stɪl ɪn mɛnz kloʊðz ən wɛɹɪŋ sɔɹdz. ðə blɑki fɛloʊ ɪn ə fæt-sliv koʊɾ u hæd kɛpt ɪz bɪɹɾ ɔɪld ən tʃɹɪm tə ə pɔɪn dɪspaɪt wɛɹɪŋ ɪz hɛɹ taɪd bæk wɪð ə ɹɪbən ɔlsoʊ lʊk fəmɪljɝ. ði ʌðɝ tu mɛn, boʊθ kɛɹhinɪn, hi dɪd nɑt noʊ, bʌɾ i kəd ɡɛs, baɪ ðɛɹ juθ ən ðə ɹɪbən taɪɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛɹ ɪf nʌθɪŋ ɛls, ðət ðeɪ wɝ pɑɹɾ ə sɛlənz "səsaɪəɾi."

"What are they doing here?" He nodded toward a small cluster who held their horses back. He recognized Selande and Camaille and the tall Tairen woman, all still in men's clothes and wearing swords. The blocky fellow in a fat-sleeved coat who had kept his beard oiled and trimmed to a point despite wearing his hair tied back with a ribbon also looked familiar. The other two men, both Cairhienin, he did not know, but he could guess, by their youth and the ribbon tying their hair if nothing else, that they were part of Selande's "society."

"aɪ tʊk sɛlən ən ə fju ʌv əɹ fɹɛnz ɪndə maɪ sɝvəs." feɪl spoʊk laɪtli, bʌt sʌɾənli ʃi ɡeɪv ɔf fɑɡi weɪvz ə kɑʃən. "ðeɪ wʊɾə ɡɑɾən ðɛmsɛlvz ɪndə tʃɹʌbəl ɪn ðə sɪɾi, sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ. ðeɪ nid sʌmwʌn tə ɡɪv əm dɝɛkʃən. θɪŋk ə ðɛm əz tʃɛɹɪɾi. aɪ woʊn lɛɾ əm ɡɛɾ ʌndɝ jəɹ fit."

"I took Selande and a few of her friends into my service." Faile spoke lightly, but suddenly she gave off foggy waves of caution. "They would have gotten themselves into trouble in the city, sooner or later. They need someone to give them direction. Think of them as charity. I won't let them get under your feet."

pɛɹɪn saɪɾ ən skɹætʃt ɪz bɪɹd. ə waɪz mæn dɪd nɑt tɛl ɪz waɪf tə hɝ feɪs ðət ʃi wɑz haɪɾɪŋ θɪŋz. ɪspɛʃli wən ðət waɪf wɑz feɪl; ʃi wɑz gɑnə bi əz fɔɹməɾəbəl əz əɹ mʌðɝ. ɪf ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. ʌndɝ ɪz fit? haʊ mɛni ʌv ðiz . . . pʌpiz . . . hæd ʃi teɪkən ɑn? "ɪz ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹɛɾi? pɹɪɾi sun səm ɪɾiət bæk ðəɹ wɪl dɪsaɪɾ i kən kʌɹi feɪvɝ baɪ bɹɪŋɪŋ ɹænd maɪ hɛd. aɪd laɪk tə bi ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ ðæt." ɛɹæm ɡɹaʊld ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt.

Perrin sighed and scratched his beard. A wise man did not tell his wife to her face that she was hiding things. Especially when that wife was Faile; she was going to be as formidable as her mother. If she was not already. Under his feet? How many of these . . . puppies . . . had she taken on? "Is everything ready? Pretty soon some idiot back there will decide he can curry favor by bringing Rand my head. I'd like to be gone before that." Aram growled in his throat.

"noʊ wʌn ɪz gɑnə teɪk jəɹ hɛd, hʌzbənd." feɪl ʃoʊd waɪt tiθ, ən wɛn ɑn ɪn ə wɪspɝ ʃi nu hi wəd kætʃ. "ɪksɛpt pɝhæps mi." ɪn ə nɔɹməl vɔɪs, ʃi sɛd, "ɔl ɪz ɹɛɾi."

"No one is going to take your head, husband." Faile showed white teeth, and went on in a whisper she knew he would catch. "Except perhaps me." In a normal voice, she said, "All is ready."

ɪn ə klɪɹ, fɛɹli flæt hɑloʊ bɪɑn ðə tʃɹiz, ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn stʊd bɪsaɪd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, ə kɑləm ə tuz ðət waʊn aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə hɪl. pɛɹɪn saɪɾ əɡɛn. ðə ɹɛd wʊlfhɛd bænɝ ən ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl ə meɪnɛðɝən stɝd slaɪtli ɪn ə hɑt bɹiz ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə kɑləm. meɪbi ənʌðɝ dʌzən meɪɾənz skwɑɾɪd ɑn ðɛɹ hilz nɪɹ ðə bænɝz; ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, ɡɔl wɔɹ əz kloʊs tə ə sʌlən ɪkspɹɛʃən əz pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ɑn ən il.

In a clear, fairly flat hollow beyond the trees, the Two Rivers men stood beside their horses, a column of twos that wound out of sight around the side of the hill. Perrin sighed again. The red wolfhead banner and the Red Eagle of Manetheren stirred slightly in a hot breeze at the head of the column. Maybe another dozen Maidens squatted on their heels near the banners; on the other side, Gaul wore as close to a sullen expression as Perrin had ever seen on an Aiel.

əz i dɪsmaʊntɪd, tu blæk-koʊɾəd mɛn keɪm tə hɪm, səluɾɪŋ wɪð fɪs pɹɛs tə hɑɹt. "lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," dʒɝ ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd. "wiv bɪn hɪɹ sɪns læs naɪt. wəɹ ɹɛɾi."

As he dismounted, two black-coated men came to him, saluting with fist pressed to heart. "Lord Perrin," Jur Grady said. "We've been here since last night. We are ready."

ɡɹeɪɾiz wɛðɝd fɑɹmɝz feɪs meɪd pɛɹɪn ɔlmoʊs kʌmftəɹbəl wɪð hɪm, bʌt feɪɡɝ nild wɑz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ. meɪbi tɛn jɪɹz jʌŋɡɝ ðən ɡɹeɪɾi, hi maɪɾ əv bɪn ə fɑɹmɝ tu fəɹ ɔl pɛɹɪn nu, bʌɾ i əfɛktəɾ ɛɹz ən ɡɹeɪsɪz, ən wɔɹ ɪz pɪɾəfəl mʌstæʃ wæks tə ə sɛmbləns ə pɔɪns. wɛɹ ɡɹeɪɾi wɑz wʌn ə ðə dɛɾəkeɪtəd, hi wɑz ə soʊlʒɝ, wɪθaʊt ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹd pɪn tə hɪz kɑlɝ, bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt hoʊld ɪm bæk fɹəm spikɪŋ. "lɔɹd pɛɹɪn, ɪz ɪt ɹɪli nɛsəsɛɹi tə teɪk ðoʊz wɪmən wɪð ʌs? ðəl bi nʌθɪŋ bʌt tʃɹʌbəl, ðeɪ wɪl, ðə hoʊl lɑɾ ə ðɛm, ən jə noʊ ɪt wɛl."

Grady's weathered farmer's face made Perrin almost comfortable with him, but Fager Neald was another matter. Maybe ten years younger than Grady, he might have been a farmer too for all Perrin knew, but he affected airs and graces, and wore his pitiful mustache waxed to a semblance of points. Where Grady was one of the Dedicated, he was a Soldier, without the silver sword pinned to his collar, but that did not hold him back from speaking. "Lord Perrin, is it really necessary to take those women with us? They'll be nothing but trouble, they will, the whole lot of them, and you know it well."

səm ə ðə wɪmən i wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt stʊd nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, ʃɔlz lupt oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ɑɹmz. ɛdʒɹə əpɪɹd ði ɛldəst ə ðə sɪks waɪz wʌnz ɪmpæsɪvli wɑtʃɪŋ ðə tu wɪmən nil hæd nɑɾəd tə. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ðət pɛɹ wɝid pɛɹɪn əz wɛl. siɑnɪd tʃɹeɪɡən, ɔl kulnəs ən ɹɪzɝv ɪn ɡɹin sɪlk, hæd bɪn hɔɾəli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪɡnɔɹ ði ilwɪmən - moʊs kɛɹhinɪn u wɝ nɑt pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi il dɪspaɪzd əm - bʌt wən ʃi sɔ pɛɹɪn, ʃi ʃɪftəɾ əɹ beɪz ɹeɪnz tə ði ʌðɝ hæn ən ɡeɪv mɑsʊɝi soʊkɑwə ə nʌdʒ ɪn ðə ɹɪbz. mɑsʊɝi stɑɹɾəd - bɹaʊnz sim tə ɡoʊ ɔf ɪn deɪdʒɹimz fɛɹli ɔfən - stɛɹɾ ət ðə ɡɹin sɪstɝ blæŋkli, ðən dɝɛktəɾ əɹ stɛɹ ət pɛɹɪn. ðɪs wʌn wɑz mɔɹ ðə sɔɹt ʃi maɪɾ əv ɡɪvən səm pəkjuljɝ ən pɝhæps deɪnʒɝəs ænəməl, wʌn ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə bi ʃʊɹ ə bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz dʌn. ðeɪ hæd swɔɹn tə oʊbeɪ ɹænd ælθɹ, bʌt haʊ wəd ðeɪ də oʊbeɪɪŋ pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə? ɡɪvɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz tə ɛɛs sədaɪ simd ənnætʃɹəl. bʌt bɛɾɝ ðən ði ʌðɝ weɪ ɝaʊnd, ət list.

Some of the women he was talking about stood not far from the Two Rivers men, shawls looped over their arms. Edarra appeared the eldest of the six Wise Ones impassively watching the two women Neald had nodded to. In truth, that pair worried Perrin as well. Seonid Traighan, all coolness and reserve in green silk, had been haughtily trying to ignore the Aielwomen - most Cairhienin who were not pretending to be Aiel despised them - but when she saw Perrin, she shifted her bay's reins to the other hand and gave Masuri Sokawa a nudge in the ribs. Masuri started - Browns seemed to go off in daydreams fairly often - stared at the Green sister blankly, then directed her stare at Perrin. This one was more the sort she might have given some peculiar and perhaps dangerous animal, one she intended to be sure of before she was done. They had sworn to obey Rand al'Thor, but how would they do obeying Perrin Aybara? Giving orders to Aes Sedai seemed unnatural. But better than the other way around, at least.

"ɛvɹibɑɾi kʌmz," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "lɛts bi ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ wəɹ sin." feɪl snɪft.

"Everybody comes," Perrin said. "Let's be gone before we are seen." Faile sniffed.

ɡɹeɪɾi ən nil səluɾəd əɡɛn ən stʃɹoʊɾ aʊt tə ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə tʃɹiləs ɛɹiə. pɛɹɪn hæd noʊ aɪdiə wɪtʃ ə ðɛm dɪd wʌt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi, bʌt sʌɾənli ðə naʊ-fəmɪljɝ sɪlvɝi vɝɾɪkəl flæʃ ɪn ði ɛɹ ɹoʊteɪɾɪd ɪndə ə ɡeɪtweɪ nɑt kwaɪt tɔl ɪnʌf tə ɹaɪd θɹu. tʃɹiz ʃoʊd bɪɑn ði oʊpənɪŋ, nɑt ðət mʌtʃ dɪfɹən fɹəm ðoʊz ɑn ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ hɪlz. ɡɹeɪɾi stʃɹoʊd θɹu ɪmiɾiətli, bʌɾ ivən soʊ hi wɑz nɪɹli nɑk daʊn baɪ səlɪn ən ə smɔl hɔɹɾ ə veɪl meɪɾənz. ðeɪ sim tə hæv teɪkən ði ɑnɝ ə biɪŋ fɝs θɹu ə ɡeɪtweɪ fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz, ən wɝ nɑɾ əbaʊt tə lɛɾ ɛniwʌn jusɝp ɪt.

Grady and Neald saluted again and strode out to the middle of the treeless area. Perrin had no idea which of them did what was necessary, but suddenly the now-familiar silvery vertical flash in the air rotated into a gateway not quite tall enough to ride through. Trees showed beyond the opening, not that much different from those on the surrounding hills. Grady strode through immediately, but even so he was nearly knocked down by Sulin and a small horde of veiled Maidens. They seemed to have taken the honor of being first through a gateway for themselves, and were not about to let anyone usurp it.

fɔɹsiɪŋ ə hʌnʒɹəd pɹɑbləmz i hæd nɑt θɔɾ ʌv, pɛɹɪn lɛd stɛpɝ θɹu ɪndə ə lænd nɑt soʊ hɪli. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ klɪɹɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt soʊ θɪkli tʃɹiɾ əz ðə hɑloʊ bæk ɪn kɛɹhin, iðɝ. ðə skæɾɝd tʃɹiz wɝ tɔlɝ, bʌt dʒʌst əz sɪɹ, ivən ðə paɪnz. hi dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz mʌtʃ ɛls ɪksɛp fəɹ oʊk ən lɛðɝlif. ði ɛɹ simd ə lɪɾəl hɑɾɝ.

Foreseeing a hundred problems he had not thought of, Perrin led Stepper through into a land not so hilly. There was no clearing, but it was not so thickly treed as the hollow back in Cairhien, either. The scattered trees were taller, but just as sere, even the pines. He did not recognize much else except for oak and leatherleaf. The air seemed a little hotter.

feɪl fɑloʊd hɪm, bʌt wən i tɝn tə ðə lɛft, ʃi tʊk swɑloʊ ɹaɪt. ɛɹæmz hɛd swʌŋ wɝidli bɪtwin əm əntɪl pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd təwɔɹɾ ɪz waɪf. ðə wʌntaɪm tɪŋkɝ hɔld ɪz ɡɛldɪŋ æftɝ hɝ, bʌt kwɪk əz i wɑz, hi wɑz nɑt bɪfɔɹ beɪn ən kiæd, stɪl veɪld, ænd, fəɹ ɔl pɛɹɪnz ɔɹɾɝz ðət ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn wɝ tə bi nɛkst, sɛlən ən ə ɡʊd tu dʌzən jʌŋ kɛɹhinɪn ən tɛɹənz pɔɹɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ dʒɹɔɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz əlɔŋ. tu dʌzən! ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd, pɛɹɪn stɑp bɪsaɪd ɡɹeɪɾi, hu tɝn ðɪs weɪ ən ðæt, stʌɾiɪŋ ðə spɑɹs wʊdlænd.

Faile followed him, but when he turned to the left, she took Swallow right. Aram's head swung worriedly between them until Perrin nodded toward his wife. The onetime Tinker hauled his gelding after her, but quick as he was, he was not before Bain and Chiad, still veiled, and, for all Perrin's orders that the Two Rivers men were to be next, Selande and a good two dozen young Cairhienin and Tairens poured out of the gateway drawing their horses along. Two dozen! Shaking his head, Perrin stopped beside Grady, who turned this way and that, studying the sparse woodland.

ɡɔl keɪm stɔkɪŋ ʌp əz dænɪl faɪnəli bɪɡæn liɾɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn aʊɾ əɾ ə ɹʌn, pʊlɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. ðoʊz blʌɾi bænɝz əpɪɹd ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn dænɪl, ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp əz sun əz ðeɪ wɝ klɪɹ. ðə mæn ɔt tə ʃeɪv ðoʊz ful mʌstæʃɪz.

Gaul came stalking up as Dannil finally began leading the Two Rivers men out at a run, pulling their horses. Those bloody banners appeared right behind Dannil, going up as soon as they were clear. The man ought to shave those fool mustaches.

"wɪmən ɑɹ bɪɑn ɛni bɪlif," ɡɔl mʌɾɝd.

"Women are beyond any belief," Gaul muttered.

pɛɹɪn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə dɪfɛn feɪl bɪfɔɹ i ɹilaɪzd ɪt mʌs bi beɪn ən kiæd ðə mæn wɑz ɡlɛɹɪŋ æt. tə kʌvɝ, hi sɛd, "du juv ə waɪf, ɡɹeɪɾi?"

Perrin opened his mouth to defend Faile before he realized it must be Bain and Chiad the man was glaring at. To cover, he said, "Do you have a wife, Grady?"

"sɔɹə," ɡɹeɪɾi ænsɝɾ æbsənli, hɪz ətɛnʃən stɪl ɑn ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ tʃɹiz. pɛɹɪn wʊɾə weɪdʒɝɾ i hɛl ðə paʊɝ naʊ, fəɹ ʃʊɹ. ɛniwʌn kəd si ə lɔŋ weɪ ɪn ðɪs, kəmpɛɹd tə ɛni wʊdz bæk hoʊm, bʌt sʌmwʌn kəd stɪl snik ʌp ɑn ju. "ʃiz mɪsɪŋ mi," ɡɹeɪɾi wɛn ɑn, ɔlmoʊs tə hɪmsɛlf. "ju lɝn tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðət wʌn ɹaɪɾ ɔf. aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu waɪ hɝ ni hɝts, ðoʊ."

"Sora," Grady answered absently, his attention still on the surrounding trees. Perrin would have wagered he held the Power now, for sure. Anyone could see a long way in this, compared to any woods back home, but someone could still sneak up on you. "She's missing me," Grady went on, almost to himself. "You learn to recognize that one right off. I wish I knew why her knee hurts, though."

"hɝ ni hɝts," pɛɹɪn sɛd flætli. "ɹaɪt ðɪs mɪnət, ɪt hɝts."

"Her knee hurts," Perrin said flatly. "Right this minute, it hurts."

ɡɹeɪɾi sim tə ɹilaɪz i wɑz stɛɹɪŋ, ən ɡɔl wɑz tu. hi blɪŋkt, bʌt wɛn ɹaɪt bæk tə hɪz stʌɾi. "fɝɡɪv mi, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn. aɪ nid tə kip ə wɑtʃ." fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmən i sɛd nʌθɪŋ, ðən bɪɡæn sloʊli, "ɪts sʌmθɪŋ ə fɛloʊ neɪm kænlɝ wɝkt aʊt. ðə l dʌzn laɪk əs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɪɡjɝ aʊt θɪŋz ɑn əɹ oʊn, bʌt wʌns ɪt wɑz dʌn. . . ." hɪz slaɪt ɡɹɪmɑs sɛd pɝhæps teɪm hæd nɑt bɪn ɔl ðəɾ izi əbaʊɾ ɪɾ ivən ðɛn. "wi θɪŋk meɪbi ɪts sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðə bɑn bɪtwin wɔɹɾɝz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. meɪbi wʌn ɪn θɹi ʌv əs ɪz mɛɹid; ɛniweɪ, ðæts haʊ mɛni waɪvz steɪɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf wən ðeɪ lɝnd wʌt ðɛɹ hʌzbənz wɝ. ðɪs weɪ, wən jəɹ əpɑɹt fɹəm hɝ, jə noʊ ʃiz ɔl ɹaɪt, ən ʃi noʊz jə ɑɹ. ə mæn laɪks tə noʊ hɪz waɪfs seɪf."

Grady seemed to realize he was staring, and Gaul was too. He blinked, but went right back to his study. "Forgive me, Lord Perrin. I need to keep a watch." For a long moment he said nothing, then began slowly, "It's something a fellow named Canler worked out. The M'Hael doesn't like us trying to figure out things on our own, but once it was done. . . ." His slight grimace said perhaps Taim had not been all that easy about it even then. "We think maybe it's something like the bond between Warders and Aes Sedai. Maybe one in three of us is married; anyway, that's how many wives stayed instead of running off when they learned what their husbands were. This way, when you're apart from her, you know she's all right, and she knows you are. A man likes to know his wife's safe."

"ðæɾ i dʌz," pɛɹɪn sɛd. wʌt wɑz feɪl ʌp tə wɪð ðoʊz fulz? ʃi wɑz maʊntəɾ ɑn swɑloʊ naʊ, ən ðeɪ wɝ ɔl stændɪŋ kloʊs ɝaʊnd, lʊkɪŋ ʌp ət hɝ. hi wəd nɑt pʊɾ ɪt pæst əɹ tə lip ɪndə ðɪs dʒiɾoʊ nɑnsɛns hɝsɛlf.

"That he does," Perrin said. What was Faile up to with those fools? She was mounted on Swallow now, and they were all standing close around, looking up at her. He would not put it past her to leap into this ji'e'toh nonsense herself.

siɑnɪɾ ən mɑsʊɝi ɡlaɪɾɪd bɪhaɪn ðə læst ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn wɪð ðə θɹi wɔɹɾɝz ðeɪ hæd bɪtwin ðɛm, ən ðə waɪz wʌnz ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn ðɛm, wɪtʃ wɑz noʊ sɝpɹaɪz. ðeɪ wɝ əlɔŋ tə kip ən aɪ ɑn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. siɑnɪd ɡæðɝɾ əɹ ɹeɪnz əz ɪf tə maʊnt, bʌɾ ɛdʒɹə sɛd sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs, pɔɪntɪŋ tə ə fæt lɑpsaɪɾɪd oʊk, ən ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ lʊkt ət hɝ, hɛdz swɪvəlɪŋ əz wʌn, ðən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz ən lɛd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz tə ðə tʃɹi. mæɾɝz wəd ɡoʊ ə dil smuðɝ ɪf ðət pɛɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz soʊ mik - wɛl, nɑt mik ɪɡzækli; siɑnɪdz nɛk wɑz stɪf əz ə ɹɑd.

Seonid and Masuri glided behind the last of the Two Rivers men with the three Warders they had between them, and the Wise Ones right behind them, which was no surprise. They were along to keep an eye on the Aes Sedai. Seonid gathered her reins as if to mount, but Edarra said something in a low voice, pointing to a fat lopsided oak, and the two Aes Sedai looked at her, heads swiveling as one, then exchanged glances and led their horses to the tree. Matters would go a deal smoother if that pair was always so meek - well, not meek exactly; Seonid's neck was stiff as a rod.

æftɝ ðət keɪm ðə ɹimaʊns, ə hɝɾ ə spɛɹ hɔɹsəz taɪd tɛn tə ə lɛd, ʌndɝ ðə wɑtʃfəl aɪz ə foʊk fɹəm dɑbɹeɪnz ɪsteɪts u səpoʊzədli nu wʌt ðeɪ wɝ əbaʊt. pɛɹɪn ɔɾəmætɪkli pɪkt aʊt steɪɝ, ɑn ə lɛd baɪ hɪmsɛlf; ðə wʊmən teɪkɪŋ kɛɹ ə hɪm bɛɾɝ noʊ wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ. ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni haɪ-wil səplaɪ kɑɹts keɪm θɹu, dʒɹaɪvɝz tʌɡɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ əz ɪf ðeɪ fɪɹd ðə ɡeɪtweɪ maɪt kloʊz ɑn əm - ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni kəz kɑɹts kəd nɑt kæɹi əz mʌtʃ əz wæɡənz, ən kɑɹts kəz ə wæɡən ən tim wəd nɑt fɪt θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. ɪt sim niðɝ nil nɔɹ ɡɹeɪɾi kəd meɪk wʌn əz bɪɡ əz ɹænd kʊd, əɹ dæʃivə.

After that came the remounts, a herd of spare horses tied ten to a lead, under the watchful eyes of folk from Dobraine's estates who supposedly knew what they were about. Perrin automatically picked out Stayer, on a lead by himself; the woman taking care of him better know what she was doing. A great many high-wheeled supply carts came through, drivers tugging the horses and shouting as if they feared the gateway might close on them - a great many because carts could not carry as much as wagons, and carts because a wagon and team would not fit through the gateway. It seemed neither Neald nor Grady could make one as big as Rand could, or Dashiva.

wən ðə læs kɑɹt faɪnəli tʃɹʌndəld aʊɾ ɑn ə skwilɪŋ æksəl, pɛɹɪn kənsɪɾɝd ɔɹɾɝɪŋ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ kloʊzd ɹaɪt ðɛn, bʌt nild wɑz ðə mæn hoʊldɪŋ ðə θɪŋ oʊpən, ən ɪm ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ʌv ɪt bæk ɪn kɛɹhin. ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ, ɪt wɑz tu leɪt.

When the last cart finally trundled out on a squealing axle, Perrin considered ordering the gateway closed right then, but Neald was the man holding the thing open, and him on the other side of it back in Cairhien. A moment later, it was too late.

bɹəleɪn stʃɹoʊd θɹu liɾɪŋ ə mɛɹ əz waɪɾ əz swɑloʊ wɑz blæk, ən i ɔfɝɾ ʌp smɔl θæŋks ðəɾ əɹ ɡɹeɪ ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs hæɾ ə nɛk ɹaɪt tə hɝ tʃɪn. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, fɹəm ðə weɪst ʌp, ɪt fɪɾ əz snʌɡli əz ɛni tæɹɑbənɝ dʒɹɛs. pɛɹɪn ɡɹoʊnd. wɪð əɹ keɪm nɹɛl ən bɝteɪn ɡælɛn, ðə lɔɹd kæptən ə hɝ wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz, ə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd fɛloʊ hu wɔɹ ɪz ɹɛɾ aɪpætʃ əz ənʌðɝ mæn maɪɾ ə plum ɪn ɪz hæt, ən ðən ðə ɹɛd-ɑɹmɝd wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz ðɛmsɛlvz, mɔɹ ðən naɪn hʌnʒɹəd ə ðɛm. nɹɛl ən ðə ɹɛst u hæd bɪn ət dəməaɪz wɛlz wɔɹ ə jɛloʊ kɔɹd taɪd haɪ ɑn ðə lɛft ɑɹm.

Berelain strode through leading a mare as white as Swallow was black, and he offered up small thanks that her gray riding dress had a neck right to her chin. On the other hand, from the waist up, it fit as snugly as any Taraboner dress. Perrin groaned. With her came Nurelle and Bertain Gallenne, the Lord Captain of her Winged Guards, a gray-haired fellow who wore his red eyepatch as another man might a plume in his hat, and then the red-armored Winged Guards themselves, more than nine hundred of them. Nurelle and the rest who had been at Dumai's Wells wore a yellow cord tied high on the left arm.

klaɪmɪŋ ɑntu hɝ mɛɹ, bɹəleɪn ɹoʊɾ ɔf tə wʌn saɪd wɪð ɡælɛn waɪl nɹɛl fɔɹm ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz. ðəɹ mʌst əv bɪn fɪfti peɪsɪz bɪtwin əɹ ən feɪl, ən dʌzənz ə tʃɹiz, bʌt ʃi pleɪs hɝsɛlf wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd stɛɹ əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ. stɛɹ wɪð soʊ lɪɾəl ɪkspɹɛʃən ðət pɛɹɪnz skɪn kɹɔld. pʊɾɪŋ bɹəleɪn ət ðə ɹɪɹ, əz fɑɹ fɹəm feɪl əz i kəd mænədʒ, hæd simd ə ɡʊd noʊʃən, bʌɾ i wɑz gɑnə feɪs ðɪs ɛvɹi blʌɾi ivnɪŋ. bɝn ɹænd!

Climbing onto her mare, Berelain rode off to one side with Gallenne while Nurelle formed the Winged Guards among the trees. There must have been fifty paces between her and Faile, and dozens of trees, but she placed herself where they could stare at each other. Stare with so little expression that Perrin's skin crawled. Putting Berelain at the rear, as far from Faile as he could manage, had seemed a good notion, but he was going to face this every bloody evening. Burn Rand!

naʊ nil pɑpt aʊɾ ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs mʌstæʃ ən pɹinɪŋ fəɹ ɛniwʌn u maɪt bi wɑtʃɪŋ əz ði oʊpənɪŋ vænɪʃt. noʊ wʌn wɑz, ən i klaɪmd ɑntu hɪz hɔɹs wɪð ə dɪsɡɹʌntəld ɪkspɹɛʃən.

Now Neald popped out of the gateway, stroking his ridiculous mustache and preening for anyone who might be watching as the opening vanished. No one was, and he climbed onto his horse with a disgruntled expression.

maʊntɪŋ stɛpɝ, pɛɹɪn ɹoʊd tə ə slaɪt ɹaɪz. nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn kəd si hɪm kəz ə ðə tʃɹiz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf ðeɪ kəd hɪɹ. ə stɝ ɹæn θɹu ði əsɛmblədʒ əz i ɹeɪn ɪn, pipəl ʃɪftɪŋ fəɹ ə bɛɾɝ lʊk.

Mounting Stepper, Perrin rode to a slight rise. Not everyone could see him because of the trees, but it was enough they could hear. A stir ran through the assemblage as he reined in, people shifting for a better look.

"æz fɑɹ əz ɛniwʌnz aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz bæk ɪn kɛɹhin noʊ," hi sɛd laʊdli, "aɪv bɪn bænɪʃt, ðə fɝst ə min ɪz ɑn əɹ weɪ bæk hoʊm, ən ðə ɹɛst ə juv dʒʌs dɪsəpɪɹd laɪk fɑɡ ɪn ðə sʌn."

"As far as anyone's eyes-and-ears back in Cairhien know," he said loudly, "I've been banished, the First of Mayene is on her way back home, and the rest of you have just disappeared like fog in the sun."

tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ðeɪ læft. ə kɹaɪ ʌv "pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldən-aɪz" wɛn ʌp, ən nɑt dʒʌs fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk. hi weɪɾəd fəɹ ɪt tə kwaɪət; ðət tʊk ə waɪl. feɪl niðɝ læf nɔɹ ʃaʊɾəd, nɔɹ dɪd bɹəleɪn. itʃ wʊmən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd; niðɝ bɪlivd i ʃəd tɛl əz mʌtʃ əz i ɪntɛndəd tə. ðən ðeɪ sɔ itʃ ʌðɝ, ən ðoʊz ʃeɪkɪŋ hɛdz fɹoʊz əz ɪf tʃɹæpt ɪn æmbɝ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt laɪk əɡɹiɪŋ. ɪt wɑz noʊ sɝpɹaɪz wən ðɛɹ aɪz swʌŋ tə hɪm wɪð aɪdɛntɪkəl ɪkspɹɛʃənz. ðəɹ wɑz ən oʊl seɪɪŋ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ðoʊ haʊ jə sɛɾ ɪɾ ən wʌt jə mɛn dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn sɝkəmstæns ən u jə wɝ. "ɪts ɔlweɪz ə mænz fɔlt." wʌn θɪŋ, hi hæd lɝnd, wɪmən wɝ bɛɾɝ ət ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls: titʃɪŋ ə mæn tə saɪ.

To his surprise, they laughed. A cry of "Perrin Golden-eyes" went up, and not just from the Two Rivers folk. He waited for it to quiet; that took a while. Faile neither laughed nor shouted, nor did Berelain. Each woman shook her head; neither believed he should tell as much as he intended to. Then they saw each other, and those shaking heads froze as if trapped in amber. They did not like agreeing. It was no surprise when their eyes swung to him with identical expressions. There was an old saying in the Two Rivers, though how you said it and what you meant depended on circumstance and who you were. "It's always a man's fault." One thing, he had learned, women were better at than anything else: teaching a man to sigh.

"sʌm ə jə meɪ bi wʌndɝɪŋ wɛɹ wi ɑɹ, ən waɪ," hi wɛn ɑn wən saɪləns fɛl ət læst. ə smɔlɝ ɹɪpəl ə læftɝ. "ðɪs ɪz ɡildən." mɝmɝz ʌv ɑ, ən meɪbi dɪsbɪlif, ət hævɪŋ kɹɔs fɪftin hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz əɹ mɔɹ ɪn ə stɛp. "ðə fɝs θɪŋ wɪv tə də ɪz kənvɪns kwin æliændɝ wi ɑɹən hɪɹ tə ɪnveɪd." bɹəleɪn wɑz səpoʊz tə tɔk tə æli-ɑndʒɹeɪ, ən feɪl wɑz gɑnə ɡɪv ɪm fɪts fəɹ ɪt. "ðɛn wɝ gɑnə faɪn ə fɛloʊ hu kɔlz hɪmsɛlf ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən." ðət wəd nɑt bi mʌtʃ plɛʒɝ, iðɝ; mæsimə hæd bɪn noʊ dʒɔɪ bɪfɔɹ i tɪpt oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ. "ðɪs pɹɑfəɾ əz bɪn kɑzɪŋ səm pɹɑbləmz, bʌt wɝ gɑnə lɛɾ ɪm noʊ ɹænd ælθɹ dʌznt wɑn ɛnibəɾi fɹaɪɾənd ɪndə fɑloʊɪŋ hɪm, ən wɪl teɪk ɪm ən ɛni ʌv ɪz pipəl u wɑnə kʌm bæk tə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən." ən wɪl fɹaɪɾən ðə bɹitʃɪz ɔf mæsimə tə də ɪɾ ɪf nid bi, hi ðoʊ ɹaɪli.

"Some of you may be wondering where we are, and why," he went on when silence fell at last. A smaller ripple of laughter. "This is Ghealdan." Murmurs of awe, and maybe disbelief, at having crossed fifteen hundred miles or more in a step. "The first thing we have to do is convince Queen Alliandre we aren't here to invade." Berelain was supposed to talk to Alli-andre, and Faile was going to give him fits for it. "Then we're going to find a fellow who calls himself the Prophet of the Lord Dragon." That would not be much pleasure, either; Masema had been no joy before he tipped over the edge. "This Prophet has been causing some problems, but we're going to let him know Rand al'Thor doesn't want anybody frightened into following him, and we'll take him and any of his people who want to come back to the Lord Dragon." And we'll frighten the breeches off Masema to do it if need be, he though wryly.

ðeɪ tʃɪɹd. ðeɪ wupt ən ʃaʊɾəd ðət ðeɪ wəd mɑɹtʃ ðɪs pɹɑfət bæk tə kɛɹhin fəɹ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən tɪl pɛɹɪn hoʊp ðɪs spɑt wɑz ivən fɑɹðɝ fɹəm ɛni vɪlədʒ ðən ɪt wɑz səpoʊz tə bi. ivən ðə kɑɹt dʒɹaɪvɝz ən hɔɹs hænlɝz dʒɔɪn ɪn. mɔɹ ðən ðæt, hi pɹeɪd ðəɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɛn smuðli, ən kwɪkli. ðə sunɝ i kəd pʊɾ əz mʌtʃ dɪstəns əz pɑsəbəl bɪtwin bɹəleɪn ən hɪmsɛlf ən feɪl, ðə bɛɾɝ. noʊ sɝpɹaɪzəz, ðət wɑz wʌɾ i wɑntəd wʌns ðeɪ ɹoʊd saʊθ. ɪt wɑz əbaʊt taɪm ɪz biɪŋ tɑvɝən ʃoʊɾ ɪtsɛlf ɡʊd fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ.

They cheered. They whooped and shouted that they would march this Prophet back to Cairhien for the Lord Dragon till Perrin hoped this spot was even farther from any village than it was supposed to be. Even the cart drivers and horse handlers joined in. More than that, he prayed that everything went smoothly, and quickly. The sooner he could put as much distance as possible between Berelain and himself and Faile, the better. No surprises, that was what he wanted once they rode south. It was about time his being ta'veren showed itself good for something.


tʃæptɝ twɛntieɪt


CHAPTER 28

bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz


Bread and Cheese

mæt nu hi wɑz ɪn tʃɹʌbəl fɹəm ðə deɪ hi muvd ɪndə ðə tɛɹə-sɪn pæləs. hi kəɾ əv ɹəfjuzd. dʒʌs kəz ðə fleɪmɪŋ daɪs stɑɹɾəd əɹ stɑp dɪd nɑt min i hæd tə də ɛniθɪŋ; juʒəwəli wən ðeɪ stɑp spɪnɪŋ, ɪt wɑz tu leɪt nɑt tə də sʌmθɪŋ. ðə pɹɑbləm wɑz, hi wɑntəd tə noʊ waɪ. bɪfɔɹ vɛɹi mɛni deɪz, hi wɪʃt i hæd teɪkən ɪz kjʊɹiɑsəɾi baɪ ðə θɹoʊɾ ən θɹɑɾəld ɪt.

Mat knew he was in trouble from the day he moved into the Tara-sin Palace. He could have refused. Just because the flaming dice started or stopped did not mean he had to do anything; usually when they stopped spinning, it was too late not to do something. The problem was, he wanted to know why. Before very many days, he wished he had taken his curiosity by the throat and throttled it.

æftɝ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn lɛft ɪz ɹum, wʌns i kəd mænədʒ tə ɹitʃ ɪz fit wɪθaʊɾ ɪz hɛd fɔlɪŋ ɔf, hi spɹɛd ðə wɝɾ əmʌŋ ɪz mɛn. noʊbɑdi sim tə si ðə dɪsədvæntɪdʒɪz. hi dʒʌst wɑntəd tə pɹipɛɹ ðɛm, bʌt noʊbɑdi lɪsənd.

After Nynaeve and Elayne left his room, once he could manage to reach his feet without his head falling off, he spread the word among his men. Nobody seemed to see the disadvantages. He just wanted to prepare them, but nobody listened.

"vɛɹi ɡʊd, maɪ lɔɹd," nɹɪm mɝmɝd, tʌɡɪŋ mæts buɾ ɑntu hɪz fʊt. "maɪ lɔɹd wɪl faɪnəli hæv disən ɹumz. oʊ, vɛɹi ɡʊd." fəɹ ə moʊmənt, hi sim tə luz ɪz mɔɹnfəl ɪkspɹɛʃən. fəɹ dʒʌst ə moʊmənt. "aɪ wɪl bɹʌʃ ðə ɹɛd sɪlk koʊt fəɹ maɪ lɔɹd; maɪ lɔɹɾ əz steɪn ðə blu ɹæðɝ bædli wɪð waɪn." mæt weɪɾəd ɪmpeɪʃənli, pʊɾ ɑn ðə koʊt, ən hɛɾəd daʊn ðə hɔl.

"Very good, my Lord," Nerim murmured, tugging Mat's boot onto his foot. "My Lord will finally have decent rooms. Oh, very good." For a moment, he seemed to lose his mournful expression. For just a moment. "I will brush the red silk coat for my Lord; my Lord has stained the blue rather badly with wine." Mat waited impatiently, put on the coat, and headed down the hall.

"ɛɛs sədaɪ?" neɪlzin mʌɾɝd əz ɪz hɛd pɑpt aʊɾ ət ðə tɑp ʌv ə klin ʃɝt. hɪz ɹaʊnd-bɛlid mænsɝvənt, ləpɪn, wɑz hʌvɝɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm. "bɝn maɪ soʊl, aɪ doʊn mʌtʃ laɪk ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt. . . . ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, mæt." mæt wɪnst; bæɾ ɪnʌf ðə mæn kəd dʒɹɪŋk ə bæɹəl ə bɹændi wɪð noʊ ɪfɛk ðə nɛks mɔɹnɪŋ, bʌt dɪɾ i hæv tə ɡɹɪn soʊ? "ɑ, mæt, naʊ wi kən fɝɡɛt daɪs, ən pleɪ kɑɹdz wɪð əɹ oʊn kaɪnd." hi mɛnt noʊbəlz, ði oʊnli wʌnz u kəɾ əfɔɹd tə pleɪ ɪksɛp fəɹ wɛl-tə-du mɝtʃəns u wəd nɑt ɹɪmeɪn wɛl-tə-du lɔŋ ɪf ðeɪ bɪɡæn bɛɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə steɪks noʊbəlz dɪd. neɪlzin ɹʌbd ɪz hænz bɹɪskli waɪl ləpɪn tʃɹaɪd tə sɛɾəl ɪz leɪsəz; ivən ɪz bɪɹd simd iɡɝ. "sɪlk ʃits," hi mɝmɝd. huɛvɝ hɝɾ ə sɪlk ʃits? ðoʊz oʊl mɛmɹiz nʌdʒd, bʌt mæt ɹəfjuz tə lɪsən.

"Aes Sedai?" Nalesean muttered as his head popped out at the top of a clean shirt. His round-bellied manservant, Lopin, was hovering behind him. "Burn my soul, I don't much like Aes Sedai, but. . . . The Tarasin Palace, Mat." Mat winced; bad enough the man could drink a barrel of brandy with no effect the next morning, but did he have to grin so? "Ah, Mat, now we can forget dice, and play cards with our own kind." He meant nobles, the only ones who could afford to play except for well-to-do merchants who would not remain well-to-do long if they began betting for the stakes nobles did. Nalesean rubbed his hands briskly while Lopin tried to settle his laces; even his beard seemed eager. "Silk sheets," he murmured. Whoever heard of silk sheets? Those old memories nudged, but Mat refused to listen.

"fʊl ə noʊbəlz," veɪnɪn ɡɹaʊl daʊnstɛɹz, pɝsɪŋ ɪz lɪps tə spɪt. hɪz ɡlæns sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən wɑz ɔɾəmætɪk naʊ; hi dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪnstɛd tə swɑloʊ fɹəm ðə mʌɡ ʌv ɹʌf waɪn ðət wɑz ɪz bɹɛkfəst. "bi ɡʊd tə si ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn əɡɛn, ðoʊ," hi mjuzd. hɪz fɹi hæn ɹoʊz əz ɪf tə nʌkəl ɪz fɔɹhɛd; hi dɪd nɑt sim əwɛɹ ə ðə dʒɛstʃɝ. mæt ɡɹoʊnd. ðət wʊmən hæd ɹuən ə ɡʊd mæn. "ju wɑn mi tə lʊk ɪn ɑn kæɹaɪɾɪn əɡɛn?" veɪnɪn wɛn ɑn əz ɪf ðə ɹɛst wɑz ənɪmpɔɹɾənt. "hɪz stʃɹits soʊ fʊl ə bɛɡɝz, ɪts hɑɹd tə si ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt hiz ən ɑfəl lɑɾ ə foʊk kʌm tə kɔl." mæt toʊld ɪm ðət wəd bi faɪn. noʊ wʌndɝ veɪnɪn dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wɛðɝ ðə pæləs wɑz fʊl ə noʊbəlz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ; hi wəd spɛn ðə deɪ swɛɾɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn ən dʒɑsəl baɪ ðə kɹaʊdz. mʌtʃ mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl.

"Full of nobles," Vanin growled downstairs, pursing his lips to spit. His glance searching for Mistress Anan was automatic now; he decided instead to swallow from the mug of rough wine that was his breakfast. "Be good to see the Lady Elayne again, though," he mused. His free hand rose as if to knuckle his forehead; he did not seem aware of the gesture. Mat groaned. That woman had ruined a good man. "You want me to look in on Carridin again?" Vanin went on as if the rest was unimportant. "His street's so full of beggars, it's hard to see anything, but he has an awful lot of folk come to call." Mat told him that would be fine. No wonder Vanin did not care whether the palace was full of nobles and Aes Sedai; he would spend the day sweating in the sun and jostled by the crowds. Much more comfortable.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɔɹn hɑɹnən ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz, ɔl ʃʌvlɪŋ daʊn waɪt pɔɹədʒ ən taɪni blæk sɔsɪdʒɪz waɪl ðeɪ nʌdʒd wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn ðə ɹɪbz ən læft əbaʊt ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən ɪn ðə pæləs, hu, ðeɪ hæd hɝd, wɝ ɔl tʃoʊzən fəɹ ðɛɹ bjuɾi ən ɹɪmɑɹkəbli fɹi wɪð ðɛɹ feɪvɝz. ə tʃɹu fækt, ðeɪ kɛpt əʃʊɹɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz.

There was no point trying to warn Harnan and the rest of the Redarms, all shoveling down white porridge and tiny black sausages while they nudged one another in the ribs and laughed about the serving women in the palace, who, they had heard, were all chosen for their beauty and remarkably free with their favors. A true fact, they kept assuring themselves.

θɪŋz dɪd nɑt ɡɛɾ ɛni bɛɾɝ wən i wɛn ɪndə ðə kɪtʃənz sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən tə sɛɾəl ðə bɪl. kɛɹə wɑz ðɛɹ, bʌt wɪð ɔl əɹ bæd tɛmpɝ ə ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ dʌbəld; ʃi stʌk aʊɾ əɹ loʊɝ lɪp, ɡlaʊɝɪŋ ət hɪm, ən stɔkt aʊt ðə dɔɹ tə ðə steɪbliɑɹd ɹʌbɪŋ ðə bæk ə hɝ skɝt. meɪbi ʃi hæd ɡɑɾən hɝsɛlf ɪndə səm mɪzɝi əɹ ʌðɝ, bʌt haʊ ʃi kəd bleɪm mæt kɔθən wɑz bɪɑn hɪm.

Things did not get any better when he went into the kitchens searching for Mistress Anan to settle the bill. Caira was there, but with all her bad temper of the night before doubled; she stuck out her lower lip, glowering at him, and stalked out the door to the stableyard rubbing the back of her skirt. Maybe she had gotten herself into some misery or other, but how she could blame Mat Cauthon was beyond him.

mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən wɑz aʊt, ɪt simd - ʃi wɑz ɔlweɪz ɔɹɡənaɪzɪŋ sup kɪtʃənz fəɹ ɹɛfjudʒiz əɹ lipɪŋ ɪndə səm ʌðɝ ɡʊd wɝk - bʌɾ inɪd wɑz weɪvɪŋ ə lɔŋ wʊɾən spun əɾ əɹ skɝiɪŋ hɛlpɝz ən ɹɛɾi tə teɪk ɪz kɔɪn ɪn əɹ staʊt hænd. "ju skwiz tu mɛni mɛlənz, maɪ jʌŋ lɔɹd, ən jə ʃʊdn bi sɝpɹaɪzd wən ə ɹɑɾən wʌn bɹeɪks ɪn jəɹ hænd," ʃi sɛd dɑɹkli fəɹ səm ɹizən. "ɔɹ tu," ʃi æɾəd æftɝ ə moʊmənt, nɑɾɪŋ. ʃi lin kloʊs, tɪltɪŋ ʌp əɹ swɛɾɪŋ ɹaʊn feɪs wɪð ən ɪntɛn stɛɹ. "jul oʊnli meɪk tʃɹʌbəl fəɹ jɝsɛlf ɪf jə seɪ ə wɝd. jə woʊnt." ðət dɪd nɑt saʊn laɪk ə kwɛstʃən.

Mistress Anan was out, it seemed - she was always organizing soup kitchens for refugees or leaping into some other good work - but Enid was waving a long wooden spoon at her scurrying helpers and ready to take his coin in her stout hand. "You squeeze too many melons, my young Lord, and you shouldn't be surprised when a rotten one breaks in your hand," she said darkly for some reason. "Or two," she added after a moment, nodding. She leaned close, tilting up her sweating round face with an intent stare. "You'll only make trouble for yourself if you say a word. You won't." That did not sound like a question.

"nɑɾ ə wɝd," mæt sɛd. wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪt wɑz ʃi tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt? ɪt sim ðə ɹaɪt ɹɪspɑns, ðoʊ, kəz ʃi nɑɾəd ən wɑɾəld əweɪ weɪvɪŋ ðət spun twaɪs əz vɪɡɝəsli əz bɪfɔɹ. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, hi hæd θɔt ʃi mɛn tə θʌmp ɪm wɪð ɪt. ðə pjʊɹ tʃɹuθ wɑz, wɪmən ɔl hæɾ ə vaɪələn stʃɹik, nɑt dʒʌst səm ə ðɛm.

"Not a word," Mat said. What in the Light was she talking about? It seemed the right response, though, because she nodded and waddled away waving that spoon twice as vigorously as before. For a moment, he had thought she meant to thump him with it. The pure truth was, women all had a violent streak, not just some of them.

wʌn θɪŋ ən ənʌðɝ, ɪt wɑz ə ɹɪlif wən nɹɪm ən ləpɪn ɡɑɾ ɪndə ə ʃaʊɾɪŋ mætʃ oʊvɝ huz mæstɝz bæɡədʒ wəd bi kæɹiɾ oʊvɝ fɝst. smuðɪŋ ðɛɹ fɛðɝz ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə ɡʊd hæf ən aʊɝ fɹəm ɪm ən neɪlzin boʊθ. ə mænsɝvənt wɪð ɪz dændɝ ɹʌfəl kəd meɪk jəɹ laɪf mɪzɝəbəl. ðən i hæd tə sɛɾəl wɪtʃ ə ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz wɝ tə hæv ði ɑnɝ ə lʌɡɪŋ ðə tʃɛst ʌv ɡoʊld əkɹɔs ən wɪtʃ wɝ tə teɪk ðə hɔɹsəz. ɛniweɪ, ɪt wɑz ðət mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ aʊtsaɪd ðə blʌɾi tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs.

One thing and another, it was a relief when Nerim and Lopin got into a shouting match over whose master's baggage would be carried over first. Smoothing their feathers required a good half an hour from him and Nalesean both. A manservant with his dander ruffled could make your life miserable. Then he had to settle which of the Redarms were to have the honor of lugging the chest of gold across and which were to take the horses. Anyway, it was that much longer outside the bloody Tarasin Palace.

wʌns i wɑz ɪnskɑnst ɪn ɪz nu ɹumz, ðoʊ, hi ɔlmoʊs fɝɡɑt tʃɹʌbəlz ət fɝst. hi hæɾ ə lɑɹdʒ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum ən ə smɔl, wʌt ðeɪ kɔld ə sʌlkɪŋ ɹum hɪɹəbaʊts, ən ən ɪmɛns bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ wɪð ðə bɪɡəs bɛɾ i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin, ðə mæsɪv bɪdpoʊsts kɑɹvd wɪð ɛntwaɪn flaʊɝz ʌv ɔl θɪŋz, ən peɪntəd ɹɛd. moʊst ə ðə fɝnɪtʃɝ wɑz bɹaɪt ɹɛɾ əɹ bɹaɪt blu, wɛɹ ɪt wɑz nɑt leɪɝd wɪð ɡɪlt. ə smɔl dɔɹ nɪɹ ðə bɛd lɛd tə ə kɹæmpt ɹum fəɹ nɹɪm, wɪtʃ ðə fɛloʊ sim tə θɪŋk wɑz ɛksələn dɪspaɪɾ ə nɛɹoʊ bɛɾ ən noʊ wɪndoʊ. mæts ɹumz ɔl hæd tɔl ɑɹtʃt wɪndoʊz lɛɾɪŋ ɑntu waɪt ɹɔt-aɪɝn bælkəniz ðəɾ oʊvɝlʊk ðə mɔl hɛɹə. ðə stænd-læmps wɝ ɡɪldɪd, ən soʊ wɝ ðə mɪɹɝ fɹeɪmz; ðəɹ wɝ tu mɪɹɝz ɪn ðə sʌlkɪŋ ɹum, θɹi ɪn ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, ən fɔɹ ɪn ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ. ðə klɑk - ə klɑk! - ɑn ðə mɑɹbəl mæntəl əbʌv ðə faɪɝpleɪs ɪn ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum spɑɹkəld wɪð ɡɪlt, əz wɛl. ðə wɑʃbeɪsən ən pɪtʃɝ wɝ ɹɛd si foʊk pɔɹsələn. hi wɑz ɔlmoʊs dɪsəpɔɪntɪd tə dɪskʌvɝ ðət ðə tʃeɪmbɝ pɑɾ ʌndɝ ðə bɛd wɑz oʊnli pleɪn waɪt pɑɾɝi. ðəɹ wɑz ivən ə ʃɛlf ɪn ðə lɑɹdʒ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum wɪð ə fʊl dʌzən bʊks. nɑt ðəɾ i ɹɛd mʌtʃ.

Once he was ensconced in his new rooms, though, he almost forgot troubles at first. He had a large sitting room and a small, what they called a sulking room hereabouts, and an immense bedchamber with the biggest bed he had ever seen, the massive bedposts carved with entwined flowers of all things, and painted red. Most of the furniture was bright red or bright blue, where it was not layered with gilt. A small door near the bed led to a cramped room for Nerim, which the fellow seemed to think was excellent despite a narrow bed and no window. Mat's rooms all had tall arched windows letting onto white wrought-iron balconies that overlooked the Mol Hara. The stand-lamps were gilded, and so were the mirror frames; there were two mirrors in the sulking room, three in the sitting room, and four in the bedchamber. The clock - a clock! - on the marble mantel above the fireplace in the sitting room sparkled with gilt, as well. The washbasin and pitcher were red Sea Folk porcelain. He was almost disappointed to discover that the chamber pot under the bed was only plain white pottery. There was even a shelf in the large sitting room with a full dozen books. Not that he read much.

ivən ɡɪvən ðə dʒɑɹɪŋ kʌlɝz ʌv wɔlz ən silɪŋz ən flɔɹ taɪlz, ðə ɹumz ʃaʊɾəd ɹɪtʃ. ɛni ʌðɝ taɪm, hi wʊɾə dænst ə dʒɪɡ. ɛni taɪm wən i wɑz nɑɾ əwɛɹ ðəɾ ə wʊmən wɪð tʃeɪmbɝz ɹaɪt daʊn ðə hɔl wɑntəd tə stɪk ɪm ɪn hɑt wɔɾɝ ən pʊɾ ə bɛloʊz tə ðə faɪɝ. ɪf tɛslɪn əɹ mɛɝɪlɪl əɹ wʌn ə ðət lɑt dɪd nɑt mænədʒ ɪt fɝs dɪspaɪɾ ɪz mədæljən. waɪ hæd ðə daɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd stɑp tʌmbəlɪŋ əz sun əz ɪleɪn mɛnʃən ðiz blʌɾi ɹumz? kjʊɹiɑsəɾi. hi hæd hɝɾ ə seɪɪŋ ɑn sɛvɹəl wɪmənz lɪps bæk hoʊm, juʒəwəli wən i hæd dʌn sʌmθɪŋ ðət lʊk fʌn ət ðə taɪm. "mɛn titʃ kæts kjʊɹiɑsəɾi, bʌt kæts kip sɛns fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz."

Even given the jarring colors of walls and ceilings and floor tiles, the rooms shouted rich. Any other time, he would have danced a jig. Any time when he was not aware that a woman with chambers right down the hall wanted to stick him in hot water and put a bellows to the fire. If Teslyn or Merilille or one of that lot did not manage it first despite his medallion. Why had the dice in his head stopped tumbling as soon as Elayne mentioned these bloody rooms? Curiosity. He had heard a saying on several women's lips back home, usually when he had done something that looked fun at the time. "Men teach cats curiosity, but cats keep sense for themselves."

"ɪm noʊ blʌɾi kæt," hi mʌɾɝd, stɔkɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ ɪndə ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum. hi dʒʌs hæd tə noʊ; ðət wɑz ɔl.

"I'm no bloody cat," he muttered, stalking out of the bedchamber into the sitting room. He just had to know; that was all.

"ʌv kɔɹs jəɹ nɑɾ ə kæt," taɪlɪn sɛd. "jɔɹ ə sʌkjəlɪn lɪɾəl dʌklɪŋ, ɪz wʌt jə ɑɹ."

"Of course you're not a cat," Tylin said. "You're a succulent little duckling, is what you are."

mæt ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən stɛɹd. dʌklɪŋ? ən ə lɪɾəl dʌklɪŋ, ət ðæt! ðə wʊmən stʊd wɛl ʃɔɹɾ ə hɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ɪndɪɡneɪʃən əɹ noʊ ɪndɪɡneɪʃən, hi mænədʒd ən ɛləɡən baʊ ɛniweɪ. ʃi wɑz ðə kwin; hi hæd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt. "mædʒəsti, θæŋk jə fəɹ ðiz wʌndɝfəl əpɑɹtməns. aɪd lʌv tə tɔk wɪð ju, bʌɾ aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ aʊɾ ən - "

Mat gave a start and stared. Duckling? And a little duckling, at that! The woman stood well short of his shoulder. Indignation or no indignation, he managed an elegant bow anyway. She was the Queen; he had to remember that. "Majesty, thank you for these wonderful apartments. I'd love to talk with you, but I have to go out and - "

smaɪlɪŋ, ʃi ədvænst əkɹɔs ðə ɹɛd-ænd-ɡɹin flɔɹ taɪlz, leɪɝd blu ən waɪt sɪlk pɛɾikoʊts swɪʃɪŋ, lɑɹdʒ dɑɹk aɪz fɪkst ɑn hɪm. hi hæd noʊ dɪzaɪɝ əɾ ɔl tə lʊk ət ðə mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf nɛsəld ɪn əɹ dʒɛnɝəs klivədʒ. əɹ ðə lɑɹdʒɝ, dʒɛm-stʌɾɪd dæɡɝ θɹʌs bɪhaɪn ən ikwəli dʒɛm-stʌɾɪd bɛlt. hi bækt əweɪ.

Smiling, she advanced across the red-and-green floor tiles, layered blue and white silk petticoats swishing, large dark eyes fixed on him. He had no desire at all to look at the marriage knife nestled in her generous cleavage. Or the larger, gem-studded dagger thrust behind an equally gem-studded belt. He backed away.

"mædʒəsti, aɪ hæv ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt - "

"Majesty, I have an important - "

ʃi stɑɹɾəd hʌmɪŋ. hi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə tun; hi hæd hʌmd ɪt tə ə fju ɡɝlz leɪtli. hi wɑz waɪz ɪnʌf nɑt tə tʃɹaɪ æktʃəli  sɪŋɪŋ wɪð ɪz vɔɪs, ən bɪsaɪdz, ðə wɝdz ðeɪ juzd ɪn ɛbu wʊɾə əv sɪŋʒd ɪz ɪɹz. ɝaʊn hɪɹ, ðeɪ kɔld ɪt "aɪ wɪl stil jəɹ bɹɛθ wɪð kɪsəz."

She started humming. He recognized the tune; he had hummed it to a few girls lately. He was wise enough not to try actually singing with his voice, and besides, the words they used in Ebou Dar would have singed his ears. Around here, they called it "I Will Steal Your Breath with Kisses."

læfɪŋ nɝvəsli, hi tʃɹaɪd tə pʊɾ ə læpəs-ɪnleɪd teɪbəl bɪtwin ðɛm, bʌt ʃi sʌmhaʊ ɡɑɾ ɝaʊn ɪt fɝst wɪθaʊt simɪŋ tə ɪnkɹis əɹ spid. "mædʒəsti, aɪ - "

Laughing nervously, he tried to put a lapis-inlaid table between them, but she somehow got around it first without seeming to increase her speed. "Majesty, I - "

ʃi leɪɾ ə hæn flæɾ ɑn ɪz tʃɛst, bæk-hild ɪm ɪndə ə haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹ, ən plʌmp hɝsɛlf daʊn ɑn ɪz læp. bɪtwin əɹ ən ðə tʃɛɹ ɑɹmz, hi wɑz tʃɹæpt. oʊ, hi cʊɾə pɪkt əɹ ʌp ən sɛɾ əɹ ɑn əɹ fit kwaɪɾ izəli. ɪksɛp ðət ʃi dɪɾ əv ðət blʌɾi bɪɡ dæɡɝ ɪn əɹ bɛlt, ən i daʊɾɪd ɪz mænhænlɪŋ əɹ wəd bi əz æksɛptəbəl tə hɝ əz əɹ mænhænlɪŋ ɪm sim tə bi. ðɪs wɑz ɛbu dɑɹ, æftɝ ɔl, wɛɹ ə wʊmən kɪlɪŋ ə mæn wɑz dʒʌstəfaɪɾ əntɪl pɹuvən ʌðɝwaɪz. hi cʊɾə pɪkt əɹ ʌp izəli, ɪksɛpt. . . .

She laid a hand flat on his chest, back-heeled him into a high-backed chair, and plumped herself down on his lap. Between her and the chair arms, he was trapped. Oh, he could have picked her up and set her on her feet quite easily. Except that she did have that bloody big dagger in her belt, and he doubted his manhandling her would be as acceptable to her as her manhandling him seemed to be. This was Ebou Dar, after all, where a woman killing a man was justified until proven otherwise. He could have picked her up easily, except. . . .

hi hæd sin fɪʃmɑŋɡɝz ɪn ðə sɪɾi sɛlɪŋ pəkjuljɝ kɹitʃɝz kɔl skwɪɾ ən ɑktəpʊs - ɛbu dɑɹi æktʃəli  eɪt ðə θɪŋz! - bʌt ðeɪ hæd nʌθɪŋ ɑn taɪlɪn. ðə wʊmən pəzɛs tɛn hænz. hi θɹæʃt əbaʊt, veɪnli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɛn əɹ ɔf, ən ʃi læf sɔfli. bɪtwin kɪsəz, hi bɹɛθləsli pɹətɛstəd ðət sʌmwʌn maɪt wɔk ɪn, ən ʃi dʒʌs tʃʌkəld. hi bæbəld ɪz ɹɪspɛk fəɹ əɹ kɹaʊn, ən ʃi tʃɔɹɾəld. hi kleɪm bɪtʃɹɑθɔl tə ə ɡɝl bæk hoʊm u hɛld ɪz hɑɹɾ ɪn əɹ hænz. ʃi ɹɪli læft ət ðæt.

He had seen fishmongers in the city selling peculiar creatures called squid and octopus - Ebou Dari actually ate the things! - but they had nothing on Tylin. The woman possessed ten hands. He thrashed about, vainly trying to fend her off, and she laughed softly. Between kisses, he breathlessly protested that someone might walk in, and she just chuckled. He babbled his respect for her crown, and she chortled. He claimed betrothal to a girl back home who held his heart in her hands. She really laughed at that.

"wʌt ʃi dʌz nɑt noʊ kænɑt hɑɹm hɝ," ʃi mɝmɝd, hɝ twɛnti hænz nɑt sloʊɪŋ fəɹ ən ɪnstənt.

"What she does not know cannot harm her," she murmured, her twenty hands not slowing for an instant.

sʌmwʌn nɑkt ət ðə dɔɹ.

Someone knocked at the door.

pɹaɪɪŋ ɪz maʊθ fɹi, hi ʃaʊɾəd, "hu ɪz ɪt?" wɛl, ɪt wɑz ə ʃaʊt. ə haɪ-pɪtʃt ʃaʊt. hi wɑz aʊɾ ə bɹɛθ, æftɝ ɔl.

Prying his mouth free, he shouted, "Who is it?" Well, it was a shout. A high-pitched shout. He was out of breath, after all.

taɪlɪn wɑz ɔf ɪz læp ən θɹi peɪsɪz əweɪ soʊ fæst ɪt simd ʃi wɑz dʒʌs hɪɹ ðən ðɛɹ. ðə wʊmən hæd ðə nɝv tə ɡɪv ɪm ə ɹipɹoʊtʃfəl lʊk! ən ðən ʃi meɪɾ ə kɪs ət hɪm.

Tylin was off his lap and three paces away so fast it seemed she was just here then there. The woman had the nerve to give him a reproachful look! And then she made a kiss at him.

ðət bɛɹli lɛft əɹ lɪps bɪfɔɹ ðə dɔɹ oʊpənd, ən tɑm stʌk ɪz hɛɾ ɪn. "mæt? aɪ wɑznt ʃʊɹ ðət wɑz ju. oʊ! mædʒəsti." fəɹ ə skɹɔni oʊld ɡlimən wɪð pɹətɛnʃənz, tɑm kəd flɝɪʃ ə baʊ wɪð ðə bɛst ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪz lɪmp. dʒulɪn kəd nɑt, bʌɾ i snætʃt ɔf ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs ɹɛd hæɾ ən dɪd wʌɾ i kʊd. "fɝɡɪv ʌs. wi woʊn dɪstɝb - " tɑm bɪɡæn, bʌt mæt bɹoʊk ɪn hɝidli.

That barely left her lips before the door opened, and Thom stuck his head in. "Mat? I wasn't sure that was you. Oh! Majesty." For a scrawny old gleeman with pretensions, Thom could flourish a bow with the best in spite of his limp. Juilin could not, but he snatched off his ridiculous red hat and did what he could. "Forgive us. We won't disturb - " Thom began, but Mat broke in hurriedly.

"kʌm ɪn, tɑm!" snætʃɪŋ ɪz koʊt bæk ɔl ðə weɪ ɑn, hi stɑɹɾəd tə stænd, ðən ɹilaɪz ðət sʌmhaʊ ðə blʌɾi wʊmən hæɾ əntaɪd ðə weɪst ə hɪz bɹitʃɪz wɪθaʊɾ ɪm noʊɾɪsɪŋ. ðiz tu maɪt mɪs ðəɾ ɪz ʃɝt wɑz əndʌn tə hɪz bɛli, bʌt ðeɪ wəd nɑt mɪs ɪz bɹitʃɪz fɔlɪŋ ɔf. taɪlɪnz blu dʒɹɛs wɑz nɑt mʌst əɾ ɔl! "dʒulɪn, kʌm ɪn!"

"Come in, Thom!" Snatching his coat back all the way on, he started to stand, then realized that somehow the bloody woman had untied the waist of his breeches without him noticing. These two might miss that his shirt was undone to his belly, but they would not miss his breeches falling off. Tylin's blue dress was not mussed at all! "Juilin, come in!"

"aɪ æm ɡlæd jə faɪn ðə ɹumz æksɛptəbəl, mæstɝ kɔθən," taɪlɪn sɛd, dɪɡnəɾi ɪnkɑɹnət. ɪksɛp fəɹ əɹ aɪz, ɛniweɪ, wən ʃi stʊd soʊ tɑm ən dʒulɪn kəd nɑt si ðɛm. hɝ aɪz leɪst ɪnɑkjuəs wɝdz wɪð æɾəd minɪŋ. "aɪ lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə hævɪŋ jəɹ kʌmpəni wɪð plɛʒɝ; aɪ ʃæl faɪn ɪɾ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ, hævɪŋ ə tɑvɝən wɛɹ aɪ kən ɹitʃ aʊɾ ən tʌtʃ ɪm ət wɪl. bʌɾ aɪ mʌs liv jə tə jəɹ fɹɛnz, naʊ. noʊ, də nɑt stænd; pliz." ðət wɪð dʒʌs ðə hɪn ʌv ə mɑkɪŋ smaɪl.

"I am glad you find the rooms acceptable, Master Cauthon," Tylin said, dignity incarnate. Except for her eyes, anyway, when she stood so Thom and Juilin could not see them. Her eyes laced innocuous words with added meaning. "I look forward to having your company with pleasure; I shall find it interesting, having a ta'veren where I can reach out and touch him at will. But I must leave you to your friends, now. No, do not stand; please." That with just the hint of a mocking smile.

"wɛl, bɔɪ," tɑm sɛd, nʌklɪŋ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz wən ʃi wɑz ɡɔn, "ðɛɹz lʌk fəɹ ju, biɪŋ wɛlkəmd wɪð oʊpən ɑɹmz baɪ ðə kwin hɝsɛlf." dʒulɪn bɪkeɪm vɛɹi ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ɪz kæp.

"Well, boy," Thom said, knuckling his mustaches when she was gone, "there's luck for you, being welcomed with open arms by the Queen herself." Juilin became very interested in his cap.

mæt aɪɾ əm wɛɹəli, mɛntəli dɛɹɪŋ əm tə seɪ ə wɝd mɔɹ - dʒʌst wʌn wɝd! - bʌt wʌns i æskt æftɝ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn, hi kwɪt wɝiɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ səspɛktəd. ðə wɪmən wɝ nɑt bæk. hi ɔlmoʊs lɛpt ʌp, bɹitʃɪz əɹ noʊ. ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɪɡəl aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ əɡɹimən ɔlɹɛɾi; hi hæd tə ɪkspleɪn wʌɾ i mɛn ɪn bɪtwin ðɛɹ aʊtbɝsts ʌv ɪnkɹədulɪɾi, ɪn bɪtwin ɪkspɹɛsɪŋ ɪz əpɪnjənz ə nɪneɪiv blʌɾi ɑlmɹə ən ɪleɪn blʌɾi dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ. nɑt mʌtʃ tʃæns ðeɪ wʊɾə ɡɔn ɔf tə ðə ɹæhəd wɪθaʊt hɪm, bʌɾ i wəd nɑt pʊɾ ɪt pæst əm tə tʃɹaɪ ðɛɹ hæn spaɪɪŋ ɑn kæɹaɪɾɪn. ɪleɪn wəd dɪmæn ə kənfɛʃən ən ɪkspɛk ðə mæn tə bɹeɪk daʊn; nɪneɪiv wəd tʃɹaɪ tə bit wʌn aʊɾ ə hɪm.

Mat eyed them warily, mentally daring them to say a word more - just one word! - but once he asked after Nynaeve and Elayne, he quit worrying what they suspected. The women were not back. He almost leaped up, breeches or no. They were trying to wiggle out of their agreement already; he had to explain what he meant in between their outbursts of incredulity, in between expressing his opinions of Nynaeve bloody al'Meara and Elayne bloody Daughter-Heir. Not much chance they would have gone off to the Rahad without him, but he would not put it past them to try their hand spying on Carridin. Elayne would demand a confession and expect the man to break down; Nynaeve would try to beat one out of him.

"aɪ daʊt ðeɪ ɑɹ bɑðɝɪŋ kæɹaɪɾɪn," dʒulɪn sɛd, skɹætʃɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz ɪɹ. "aɪ bɪliv eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪɾ ɑɹ teɪkɪŋ ə lʊk ət hɪm, fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ hɝd. wi dɪdn si ðɛm ɡoʊ. aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk jə nid tə wɝi əbaʊɾ ɪm noʊɪŋ wʌt hiz siɪŋ ivən ɪf i wɔks ɹaɪt baɪ ðɛm." tɑm, pɔɹɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ə ɡoʊldən ɡɑbləɾ ə ðə waɪn pʌntʃ ðət mæt hæd faʊnd weɪɾɪŋ, tʊk ʌp ði ɛkspləneɪʃən.

"I doubt they are bothering Carridin," Juilin said, scratching behind his ear. "I believe Aviendha and Birgitte are taking a look at him, from what I heard. We didn't see them go. I do not think you need to worry about him knowing what he's seeing even if he walks right by them." Thom, pouring himself a golden goblet of the wine punch that Mat had found waiting, took up the explanation.

mæt pʊɾ ə hæn oʊvɝ ɪz aɪz. dɪsɡaɪzɪz meɪd wɪð ðə paʊɝ; noʊ wʌndɝ ðeɪ hæd slɪpt əweɪ laɪk sneɪks wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ wɑntəd. ðoʊz wɪmən wɝ gɑnə meɪk tʃɹʌbəl. ðət wɑz wʌt wɪmən dɪd bɛst. ɪt hɑɹdli sɝpɹaɪzd ɪm tə lɝn ðət tɑm ən dʒulɪn nu lɛs əbaʊt ðɪs boʊl ə ðə wɪnz ðən i dɪd.

Mat put a hand over his eyes. Disguises made with the Power; no wonder they had slipped away like snakes whenever they wanted. Those women were going to make trouble. That was what women did best. It hardly surprised him to learn that Thom and Juilin knew less about this Bowl of the Winds than he did.

æftɝ ðeɪ lɛf tə ɹɛɾi ðɛmsɛlvz fəɹ ə tʃɹɪp tə ðə ɹæhəd, hi hæd taɪm tə sɛɾ ɪz kloʊðz tə ɹaɪts bɪfɔɹ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn keɪm bæk. hi hæd taɪm tə tʃɛk ɑn oʊlvɝ, ɪn ɪz ɹum wʌn flɔɹ daʊn. ðə bɔɪz skɪni fɹeɪm hæd flɛʃt aʊt sʌmwʌt, wɪð inɪɾ ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə kʊks ət ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən stʌfɪŋ hɪm, bʌɾ i wəɾ ɔlweɪz bi ʃɔɹɾ ivən fəɹ ə kɛɹhinɪn, ən ɪf ɪz ɪɹz ʃɹæŋk tə hæf ðɛɹ saɪz ən ɪz maʊθ tə hæf ɪts wɪdθ, hɪz noʊz wəd stɪl stɑp ɪm wɛl ʃɔɹɾ ə hænsəm. noʊ fjuɝ ðən θɹi sɝvɪŋ wɪmən fʌst oʊvɝ ɪm waɪl i sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ɪz bɛd.

After they left to ready themselves for a trip to the Rahad, he had time to set his clothes to rights before Nynaeve and Elayne came back. He had time to check on Olver, in his room one floor down. The boy's skinny frame had fleshed out somewhat, with Enid and the rest of the cooks at The Wandering Woman stuffing him, but he would always be short even for a Cairhienin, and if his ears shrank to half their size and his mouth to half its width, his nose would still stop him well short of handsome. No fewer than three serving women fussed over him while he sat cross-legged on his bed.

"mæt, dʌzn hɛsəl əv ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl aɪz?" oʊlvɝ sɛd, bimɪŋ ət ðə bɪɡ-aɪd jʌŋ wʊmən mæt hæd mɛt ðə læs taɪm i keɪm tə ðə pæləs. ʃi bim bæk ən ɹʌfəl ðə bɔɪz hɛɹ. "oʊ, bʌɾ æləs ən lɔɪə ɑɹ soʊ swit, aɪ kəd nɛvɝ tʃuz." ə plʌmp wʊmən dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ə hɝ mɪɾəl jɪɹz lʊkt ʌp fɹəm ənpækɪŋ oʊlvɝz sæɾəlbæɡz tə ɡɪv ɪm ə bɹɔd ɡɹɪn, ən ə slɛndɝ ɡɝl wɪð bi-stʌŋ lɪps pæɾəd ðə taʊəl ʃi hæd dʒʌs pʊɾ ɑn ɪz wɑʃstænd, ðən flʌŋ hɝsɛlf ɑntu ðə bɛd tə tɪkəl oʊlvɝz ɹɪbz tɪl i fɛl oʊvɝ læfɪŋ hɛlpləsli.

"Mat, doesn't Haesel have the most beautiful eyes?" Olver said, beaming at the big-eyed young woman Mat had met the last time he came to the palace. She beamed back and ruffled the boy's hair. "Oh, but Alis and Loya are so sweet, I could never choose." A plump woman just short of her middle years looked up from unpacking Olver's saddlebags to give him a broad grin, and a slender girl with bee-stung lips patted the towel she had just put on his washstand, then flung herself onto the bed to tickle Olver's ribs till he fell over laughing helplessly.

mæt snɔɹɾɪd. hɑɹnən ən ðət lɑt wɝ bæɾ ɪnʌf, bʌt naʊ ðiz wɪmən wɝ ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋ ðə bɔɪ! haʊ wɑz i ɛvɝ gɑnə lɝn tə bɪheɪv ɪf wɪmən dɪd ðæt? oʊlvɝ ɔt tə bi pleɪɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹits laɪk ɛni ʌðɝ tɛn-jɪɹ-oʊld. hi hæd hæd noʊ sɝvɪŋ wɪmən fɔlɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪm ɪn ɪz ɹumz. taɪlɪn hæd sin tə ðæt, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ.

Mat snorted. Harnan and that lot were bad enough, but now these women were encouraging the boy! How was he ever going to learn to behave if women did that? Olver ought to be playing in the streets like any other ten-year-old. He had had no serving women falling over him in his rooms. Tylin had seen to that, he was sure.

hi hæd taɪm tə tʃɛk ɑn oʊlvɝ, ən tə lʊk ɪn ɑn hɑɹnən ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz, ʃɛɹɪŋ ə lɔŋ ɹum laɪnd wɪð bɛdz nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðə steɪbəlz, ən tə sɔntɝ daʊn tə ðə kɪtʃənz fəɹ səm bɹɛɾ ən bif - hi hæd nɑt bɪn eɪbəl tə feɪs ðət pɔɹədʒ bæk ət ði ɪn. stɪl nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn hæd nɑt ɹɪtɝnd. hi faɪnəli lʊkt oʊvɝ ðə bʊks ɪn ɪz sɪɾɪŋ ɹum ən bɪɡæn ɹiɾɪŋ ðə tʃɹævəlz ə dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ, ðoʊ hi bɛɹli meɪɾ aʊɾ ə wɝd fəɹ wɝiɪŋ. tɑm ən dʒulɪn keɪm ɪn dʒʌst əz ðə wɪmən faɪnəli bʌsəld ɪn ɪkskleɪmɪŋ oʊvɝ faɪndɪŋ ɪm ðɛɹ, əz ɪf ðeɪ θɔɾ i wəd nɑt kip ɪz wɝd.

He had time to check on Olver, and to look in on Harnan and the rest of the Redarms, sharing a long room lined with beds not far from the stables, and to saunter down to the kitchens for some bread and beef - he had not been able to face that porridge back at the inn. Still Nynaeve and Elayne had not returned. He finally looked over the books in his sitting room and began reading The Travels of Jain Farstrider, though he barely made out a word for worrying. Thom and Juilin came in just as the women finally bustled in exclaiming over finding him there, as if they thought he would not keep his word.

hi kloʊz ðə bʊk dʒɛnli, sɛɾ ɪt dʒɛnli ɑn ðə teɪbəl bɪsaɪɾ ɪz tʃɛɹ. "wɛɹ əv jə bɪn?"

He closed the book gently, set it gently on the table beside his chair. "Where have you been?"

"waɪ, wi wɛn fəɹ ə wɔk," ɪleɪn sɛd bɹaɪtli, blu aɪz waɪɾɝ ðən i ɹɪmɛmbɝd siɪŋ bɪfɔɹ. tɑm fɹaʊn ən pɹədust ə naɪf fɹəm ɪz sliv, ɹoʊlɪŋ ɪt bæk ən fɔɹθ θɹu hɪz fɪŋɡɝz. hi vɛɹi mɑɹkədli dɪd nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlæns əɾ ɪleɪn.

"Why, we went for a walk," Elayne said brightly, blue eyes wider than he remembered seeing before. Thom frowned and produced a knife from his sleeve, rolling it back and forth through his fingers. He very markedly did not so much as glance at Elayne.

"wi hæd ti wɪð səm wɪmən jəɹ ɪnkipɝ noʊz," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "aɪ woʊn bɔɹ jə wɪð tɔk əbaʊt niɾəlwɝk." dʒulɪn stɑɹɾəd tə ʃeɪk ɪz hɛd, ðən stɑp bɪfɔɹ ʃi noʊɾəst.

"We had tea with some women your innkeeper knows," Nynaeve said. "I won't bore you with talk about needlework." Juilin started to shake his head, then stopped before she noticed.

"pliz, doʊn bɔɹ mi," mæt sɛd dʒɹaɪli. hi səpoʊzd ʃi nu wʌn ɛn ʌv ə niɾəl fɹəm ði ʌðɝ, bʌɾ i səspɛktəd ʃi wəɾ əz sun stɪk wʌn θɹu hɝ tʌŋ əz tɔk əbaʊt niɾəlwɝk. niðɝ wʊmən kɹækt əɹ tiθ əbaʊt səvɪləɾi, kənfɝmɪŋ ɪz wɝs səspɪʃənz. "aɪv toʊld ɔf tu fɛloʊz tə wɔk aʊt wɪð itʃ ə jə ðɪs æftɝnun, ən ðəɹ wɪl bi tu mɔɹ təmɑɹoʊ ən ɛvɹi deɪ. ɪf jəɹ nɑɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə pæləs əɹ ʌndɝ maɪ noʊz, jəl əv bɑɾiɡɑɹdz. ðeɪ noʊ ðɛɹ tɝnz ɔlɹɛɾi. ðəl steɪ wɪð jə əɾ ɔl taɪmz - ɔl taɪmz - ən jəl lemi noʊ wɛɹ jəɹ hɛɾəd. noʊ mɔɹ meɪkɪŋ mi wɝi tɪl maɪ hɛɹ fɔlz aʊt."

"Please, don't bore me," Mat said dryly. He supposed she knew one end of a needle from the other, but he suspected she would as soon stick one through her tongue as talk about needlework. Neither woman cracked her teeth about civility, confirming his worse suspicions. "I've told off two fellows to walk out with each of you this afternoon, and there will be two more tomorrow and every day. If you're not inside the palace or under my nose, you'll have bodyguards. They know their turns already. They'll stay with you at all times - all times - and you will let me know where you're headed. No more making me worry till my hair falls out."

hi ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪndɪɡneɪʃən ən ɑɹɡjəmənt. hi ɪkspɛktəd wizəlɪŋ oʊvɝ wʌt ðeɪ hæɾ əɹ hæd nɑt pɹɑməst. hi ɪkspɛktəd ðət dɪmændɪŋ ðɪs hoʊl loʊf maɪt ɡɛɾ ɪm ə slaɪs ət ði ɛnd; ə bʌt slaɪs, ɪf ɪz lʌk wɑz ɪn. nɪneɪiv lʊkt əɾ ɪleɪn; ɪleɪn lʊkt ət nɪneɪiv.

He expected indignation and argument. He expected weaseling over what they had or had not promised. He expected that demanding this whole loaf might get him a slice at the end; a butt slice, if his luck was in. Nynaeve looked at Elayne; Elayne looked at Nynaeve.

"waɪ, bɑɾiɡɑɹdz ɑɹ ə wʌndɝfəl aɪdiə, mæt," ɪleɪn ɪkskleɪmd, hɝ tʃik dɪmplɪŋ ɪn ə smaɪl. "aɪ səpoʊz jə wɝ ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt ðæt. ɪts vɛɹi smɑɹɾ ə jə tə hæv jəɹ mɛn ɔlɹɛɾi tə ə skɛdʒʊl."

"Why, bodyguards are a wonderful idea, Mat," Elayne exclaimed, her cheek dimpling in a smile. "I suppose you were right about that. It's very smart of you to have your men already to a schedule."

"ɪɾ ɪz ə wʌndɝfəl noʊʃən," nɪneɪiv sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ ɪnθuziæstɪkli. "vɛɹi smɑɹɾ ə ju, mæt."

"It is a wonderful notion," Nynaeve said, nodding enthusiastically. "Very smart of you, Mat."

tɑm dʒɹɑp ðə naɪf wɪð ə mʌfəl kɝs ən sæt sʌkɪŋ ɑn ə nɪk fɪŋɡɝ, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə wɪmən.

Thom dropped the knife with a muffled curse and sat sucking on a nicked finger, staring at the women.

mæt saɪd. tʃɹʌbəl; hi hæd noʊn ɪt. ən ðət wɑz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ toʊld ɪm tə fɝɡɛt ðə ɹæhəd fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ.

Mat sighed. Trouble; he had known it. And that was before they told him to forget the Rahad for the time being.

wɪtʃ wɑz haʊ hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɑn ə bɛntʃ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə tʃip tævɝn nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝfɹʌn kɔl ðə ɹoʊz ə ði ɪldɑɹ, dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ fɹəm wʌn ə ðə dɛntɪd tɪn kʌps tʃeɪn tə ðə bɛntʃ. ət lis ðeɪ wɑʃt ðə kʌps aʊt fəɹ itʃ nu peɪtʃɹən. ðə stɪŋk fɹəm ə daɪɝz ʃɑp əkɹɔs ðə weɪ oʊnli ɹeɪz ðə staɪl ə ðə ɹoʊz. nɑt ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə ʃæbi neɪbɝhʊd ɹɪli, ðoʊ ðə stʃɹit wɑz tu nɛɹoʊ fəɹ kæɹɪdʒɪz. ə fɛɹ nʌmbɝ ə bɹaɪtli lækɝd sɪdæn tʃɛɹz sweɪd θɹu ðə kɹaʊd. ɪf fɑɹ mɔɹ pæsɝzbi wɔɹ wʊl ən pɝhæps ə ɡɪl vɛs ðən sɪlk, ðə wʊl wɑz əz ɔfən wɛl kʌɾ əz fɹeɪd. ðə haʊsəz ən ʃɑps wɝ ðə juʒəwəl ɝeɪ ʌv waɪt plæstɝ, ən ɪf moʊst wɝ smɔl ən ivən ɹʌn-daʊn, ðə tɔl haʊs ʌv ə wɛlθi mɝtʃən stʊɾ ɑn ə kɔɹnɝ tə hɪz ɹaɪɾ ən ɑn ðə lɛft ə dɪmɪnjəɾɪv pæləs - smɔlɝ ðən ðə mɝtʃəns haʊs, ət list - wɪð ə sɪŋɡəl ɡɹin-bændɪd doʊm ən noʊ spaɪɹ. ə pɛɹ ə tævɝnz ən ən ɪn ɪn pleɪn saɪt lʊkt kul ən ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ðə ɹoʊz wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn wɛɹ ə mæn kəd sɪɾ aʊtsaɪd, ði oʊnli wʌn ɪn dʒʌs ðə ɹaɪt spɑt. ənfɔɹtʃənətli.

Which was how he found himself on a bench in front of a cheap tavern not far from the riverfront called The Rose of the Eldar, drinking from one of the dented tin cups chained to the bench. At least they washed the cups out for each new patron. The stink from a dyer's shop across the way only raised the style of the Rose. Not that it was a shabby neighborhood really, though the street was too narrow for carriages. A fair number of brightly lacquered sedan chairs swayed through the crowd. If far more passersby wore wool and perhaps a guild vest than silk, the wool was as often well cut as frayed. The houses and shops were the usual array of white plaster, and if most were small and even run-down, the tall house of a wealthy merchant stood on a corner to his right and on the left a diminutive palace - smaller than the merchant's house, at least - with a single green-banded dome and no spire. A pair of taverns and an inn in plain sight looked cool and inviting. Unfortunately, the Rose was the only one where a man could sit outside, the only one in just the right spot. Unfortunately.

"aɪ daʊɾ aɪv ɛvɝ sin sətʃ splɛndəd flaɪz," neɪlzin ɡɹʌmbəld, weɪvɪŋ əweɪ sɛvɹəl tʃɔɪs spɛsəmənz fɹəm ɪz kʌp. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt wɝ duɪŋ əɡɛn?"

"I doubt I've ever seen such splendid flies," Nalesean grumbled, waving away several choice specimens from his cup. "What is it we're doing again?"

"ju ɑɹ swɪlɪŋ ðət faʊl ɪkskjus fəɹ waɪn ən swɛɾɪŋ laɪk ə ɡoʊt," mæt mʌɾɝd, tʌɡɪŋ ɪz hæt tə ʃeɪɾ ɪz aɪz bɛɾɝ. "aɪm biɪŋ tɑvɝən." hi ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðə dəlæpədeɪɾɪd haʊs, bɪtwin ðə daɪɝz ən ə nɔɪzi wivɝz ɪstæblɪʃmənt, ðəɾ i hæd bɪn toʊl tə wɑtʃ. nɑɾ æskt - toʊld - ðət wɑz wʌɾ ɪt keɪm tə, haʊɛvɝ ðeɪ fɹeɪzd ɪt, skwɝmɪŋ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ plɛdʒɪz. oʊ, ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪt saʊn laɪk æskɪŋ, meɪɾ ɪt saʊn laɪk pliɾɪŋ ət ði ɛnd, wɪtʃ i wəd bɪliv wən dɑɡz dænst, bʌɾ i nu wən i hæd bɪn bʊlid. "dʒʌs bi tɑvɝən, mæt," hi mɪmɪkt. "aɪ noʊ jəl dʒʌs noʊ wʌt tə du. bɑ!" meɪbi ɪleɪn blʌɾi dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ən əɹ blʌɾi dɪmpəl nu, əɹ nɪneɪiv wɪð əɹ blʌɾi hænz twɪtʃɪŋ tə jæŋk əɹ blʌɾi bɹeɪd, bʌɾ i wəd bi bɝn ɪf i dɪd. "ɪf ðə pɪɡ-kɪsɪŋ boʊl ɪz ɪn ðə ɹæhəd, haʊ æm aɪ səpoʊz tə faɪn ɪɾ ɑn ðɪs fleɪmɪŋ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ?"

"You are swilling that foul excuse for wine and sweating like a goat," Mat muttered, tugging his hat to shade his eyes better. "I'm being ta'veren." He glared at the dilapidated house, between the dyer's and a noisy weaver's establishment, that he had been told to watch. Not asked - told - that was what it came to, however they phrased it, squirming around their pledges. Oh, they made it sound like asking, made it sound like pleading at the end, which he would believe when dogs danced, but he knew when he had been bullied. "Just be ta'veren, Mat," he mimicked. "I know you'll just know what to do. Bah!" Maybe Elayne bloody Daughter-Heir and her bloody dimple knew, or Nynaeve with her bloody hands twitching to yank her bloody braid, but he would be burned if he did. "If the pig-kissing Bowl is in the Rahad, how am I supposed to find it on this flaming side of the river?"

"aɪ də nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ əm seɪɪŋ," dʒulɪn sɛd ɹaɪli, ən tʊk ə lɔŋ swɑloʊ ʌv səm dʒɹɪŋk meɪd fɹəm ə jɛloʊ fɹut ɡɹoʊn ɪn ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd. "juv æsk ðət fɪfti taɪmz, ət list." hi kleɪm ðə peɪl dʒɹɪŋk wɑz ɹɪfɹɛʃɪŋ ɪn ðə hit, bʌt mæt hæd teɪkən ə baɪɾ ʌv wʌn ə ðoʊz lɛmənz, ən i wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə swɑloʊ ɛniθɪŋ meɪd fɹəm ðɛm. wɪð ɪz hɛd stɪl θɹɑbɪŋ feɪnli, hi hɪmsɛlf dʒɹæŋk ti. ɪt teɪstəɾ əz ɪf ðə tɑvɝŋkipɝ, ə skɹɔni fɛloʊ wɪð biɾi səspɪʃəs aɪz, hæd bɪn dʌmpɪŋ nu livz ən wɔɾɝ ɪn jɛstɝdeɪz livɪŋz sɪns ðə faʊndɪŋ ə ðə sɪɾi. ðə teɪst suɾəd ɪz mud.

"I do not remember them saying," Juilin said wryly, and took a long swallow of some drink made from a yellow fruit grown in the countryside. "You've asked that fifty times, at least." He claimed the pale drink was refreshing in the heat, but Mat had taken a bite of one of those lemons, and he was not about to swallow anything made from them. With his head still throbbing faintly, he himself drank tea. It tasted as if the tavernkeeper, a scrawny fellow with beady suspicious eyes, had been dumping new leaves and water in yesterday's leavings since the founding of the city. The taste suited his mood.

"wʌɾ ɪntʃɹəsts mi," tɑm mɝmɝɾ oʊvɝ stipəl fɪŋɡɝz, "ɪz waɪ ðeɪ æsk soʊ mɛni kwɛstʃənz əbaʊt jəɹ ɪnkipɝ." hi dɪd nɑt sim vɛɹi əpsɛɾ ət ðə wɪmən stɪl kipɪŋ sikɹəts; səmtaɪmz, hi wɑz dɪsaɪɾədli ɑd. "wʌt də sɛɾəl ɑnən ən ðiz wɪmən əv tə də wɪð ðə boʊl?"

"What interests me," Thom murmured over steepled fingers, "is why they asked so many questions about your innkeeper." He did not seem very upset at the women still keeping secrets; sometimes, he was decidedly odd. "What do Setalle Anan and these women have to do with the Bowl?"

wɪmən dɪd pæs ɪn ən aʊɾ ə ðə dəlæpədeɪɾɪd haʊs. ə stɛɾi stʃɹim ʌv wɪmən, dʒʌst əbaʊt, səm wɛl dʒɹɛst ɪf nʌn ɪn sɪlks, ən nɑt wʌn mæn. θɹi əɹ fɔɹ wɔɹ ðə ɹɛd bɛlt ʌv ə waɪz wʊmən. mæt hæd kənsɪɾɝd fɑloʊɪŋ səm ə ðɛm wən ðeɪ lɛft, bʌɾ ɪt fɛl tu plænd. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ tɑvɝən wɝkt - hi hæd nɛvɝ ɹɪli sin ɛni saɪn ʌv ɪɾ ɪn hɪmsɛlf - bʌɾ ɪz lʌk wɑz ɔlweɪz bɛst wən ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz ɹændəm. laɪk wɪð daɪs. moʊst ə ðoʊz lɪɾəl aɪɝn tævɝn pʌzəlz ɪluɾɪd hɪm, haʊɛvɝ lʌki hi fɛlt.

Women did pass in and out of the dilapidated house. A steady stream of women, just about, some well dressed if none in silks, and not one man. Three or four wore the red belt of a Wise Woman. Mat had considered following some of them when they left, but it felt too planned. He did not know how ta'veren worked - he had never really seen any sign of it in himself - but his luck was always best when everything was random. Like with dice. Most of those little iron tavern puzzles eluded him, however lucky he felt.

hi ɪɡnɔɹd tɑmz kwɛstʃən; tɑm hæɾ æskt ɪɾ ət list əz ɔfən əz mæt hæɾ æsk haʊ hi wɑz tə faɪn ðə boʊl hɪɹ. nɪneɪiv hæd toʊld ɪm tə hɪz feɪs ʃi hæd nɑt pɹɑməs tə tɛl ɪm ɛvɹi læs θɪŋ ʃi nu; ʃi sɛd ʃi wəd tɛl ɪm wʌtɛvɝ i niɾəd tə noʊ; ʃi sɛd. . . . wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ nɪɹli tʃoʊk fɹəm nɑt kɔlɪŋ ɪm neɪmz wɑz nɑt nɪɹli ɪnʌf vɛnʒəns.

He ignored Thom's question; Thom had asked it at least as often as Mat had asked how he was to find the Bowl here. Nynaeve had told him to his face she had not promised to tell him every last thing she knew; she said she would tell him whatever he needed to know; she said. . . . Watching her nearly choke from not calling him names was not nearly enough vengeance.

"aɪ səpoʊz aɪ ʃəd teɪk ə wɔk daʊn ði æli," neɪlzin saɪd. "ɪn keɪs wʌn ə ðoʊz wɪmən dɪsaɪdz tə klaɪm oʊvɝ ðə ɡɑɹɾən wɔl." ðə nɛɹoʊ ɡæp bɪtwin ðə haʊs ən ðə daɪɝ leɪ ɪn fʊl vju fəɹ ɪts hoʊl lɛŋθ, bʌɾ ənʌðɝ æliweɪ ɹæn əlɔŋ bɪhaɪn ðə ʃɑps ən haʊsəz. "mæt, tɛl mi əɡɛn waɪ wɝ duɪŋ ðɪs ɪnstɛɾ ə pleɪɪŋ kɑɹdz."

"I suppose I should take a walk down the alley," Nalesean sighed. "In case one of those women decides to climb over the garden wall." The narrow gap between the house and the dyer lay in full view for its whole length, but another alleyway ran along behind the shops and houses. "Mat, tell me again why we're doing this instead of playing cards."

"aɪl də ɪt," mæt sɛd. meɪbi hi wəd faɪn aʊt haʊ tɑvɝən wɝk bɪhaɪn ðə ɡɑɹɾən wɔl. hi wɛnt, ən faʊn aʊt nʌθɪŋ.

"I'll do it," Mat said. Maybe he would find out how ta'veren worked behind the garden wall. He went, and found out nothing.

baɪ ðə taɪm twaɪlaɪt bɪɡæn kɹipɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə stʃɹiɾ ən hɑɹnən keɪm wɪð ə bɔld-hɛɾəd, nɛɹoʊ-aɪɾ ændɔɝən neɪmd wɔt, ði oʊnli pɑsəbəl ɪfɛkt ə biɪŋ tɑvɝən i hæd sin wɑz ðət ðə tɑvɝŋkipɝ bɹuɾ ə fɹɛʃ pɑɾ ə ti. ɪt teɪstəɾ ɔlmoʊst əz bæɾ əz ði oʊld.

By the time twilight began creeping over the street and Harnan came with a bald-headed, narrow-eyed Andoran named Wat, the only possible effect of being ta'veren he had seen was that the tavernkeeper brewed a fresh pot of tea. It tasted almost as bad as the old.

bæk ɪn ɪz ɹumz ɪn ðə pæləs, hi faʊn ə noʊt, ən ɪnvɪteɪʃən ə sɔɹts, ɛlɪɡənli lɛɾɝd ɑn θɪk waɪt peɪpɝ ðət smɛld laɪk ə ɡɑɹɾən ə flaʊɝz.

Back in his rooms in the palace, he found a note, an invitation of sorts, elegantly lettered on thick white paper that smelled like a garden of flowers.

maɪ lɪɾəl ɹæbət, aɪ ɪkspɛk tə hæv jə fəɹ dɪnɝ tənaɪɾ ɪn maɪ əpɑɹtməns.

My little rabbit, I expect to have you for dinner tonight in my apartments.

noʊ sɪɡnətʃɝ, bʌɾ i hɑɹdli niɾəd wʌn. laɪt! ðə wʊmən hæd noʊ ʃeɪm əɾ ɔl! ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹɛd-peɪntəɾ aɪɝn lɑk ɑn ðə dɔɹ tə ðə kɔɹəɾɝ; hi faʊn ðə ki ən lɑkt ɪt. ðɛn, fəɹ ɡʊd mɛʒɝ, hi dʒæmd ə tʃɛɹ ʌndɝ ðə lætʃ ɑn ðə dɔɹ tə nɹɪmz ɹum. hi kəd də wɛl ɪnʌf wɪθaʊt dɪnɝ. dʒʌst əz i wɑz əbaʊt tə klaɪm ɪndə bɛd, ðə lɑk ɹæɾəld; aʊɾ ɪn ðə hɔl, ə wʊmən læft ət faɪndɪŋ ðə dɔɹ sɪkjʊɹd.

No signature, but he hardly needed one. Light! The woman had no shame at all! There was a red-painted iron lock on the door to the corridor; he found the key and locked it. Then, for good measure, he jammed a chair under the latch on the door to Nerim's room. He could do well enough without dinner. Just as he was about to climb into bed, the lock rattled; out in the hall, a woman laughed at finding the door secured.

hi ʃʊɾə bɪn eɪbəl tə slip saʊnli ðɛn, bʌt fəɹ səm ɹizən i leɪ ðəɹ lɪsnɪŋ tə hɪz bɛli ɡɹʌmbəl. waɪ wɑz ʃi duɪŋ ðɪs? wɛl, hi nu waɪ, bʌt waɪ hɪm? ʃʊɹli ʃi hæd nɑt dɪsaɪɾɪd tə tɔs ɔl disənsi oʊvɝ ðə bɑɹn dʒʌs tə bɛɾ ə tɑvɝən. hi wɑz seɪf naʊ, ɛniweɪ. taɪlɪn wəd nɑt bæɾɝ daʊn ðə dɔɹ, æftɝ ɔl. wəd ʃi? nɑɾ ivən moʊs bɝdz kəd ɡɛɾ ɪn θɹu ðə ɹɔt-aɪɝn ɹæbɛsks skɹinɪŋ ðə bælkəniz. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi wəd niɾ ə lɔŋ læɾɝ tə ɹitʃ ðət haɪ. ən mɛn tə kæɹi ɪt. ənlɛs ʃi klaɪm daʊn fɹəm ðə ɹuf ɑn ə ɹoʊp. əɹ ʃi kʊd. . . . ðə naɪt pæst, hɪz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld, ðə sʌn ɹoʊz, ən i nɛvɝ kloʊzd ɪz aɪz əɹ hæɾ ə disən θɔt. ɪksɛp ðəɾ i dɪd meɪk ə dɪsɪʒən. hi θɔɾ ʌv ə jus fəɹ ðə sʌlkɪŋ ɹum. hi sɝɾənli nɛvɝ sʌlkt.

He should have been able to sleep soundly then, but for some reason he lay there listening to his belly grumble. Why was she doing this? Well, he knew why, but why him? Surely she had not decided to toss all decency over the barn just to bed a ta'veren. He was safe now, anyway. Tylin would not batter down the door, after all. Would she? Not even most birds could get in through the wrought-iron arabesques screening the balconies. Besides, she would need a long ladder to reach that high. And men to carry it. Unless she climbed down from the roof on a rope. Or she could. . . . The night passed, his stomach rumbled, the sun rose, and he never closed his eyes or had a decent thought. Except that he did make a decision. He thought of a use for the sulking room. He certainly never sulked.

ət fɝs laɪt, hi snikt aʊɾ ə hɪz ɹumz ən faʊn ənʌðɝ ə ðə pæləs sɝvəns i ɹɪmɛmbɝd, ə bɔldɪŋ fɛloʊ neɪmd mæɾɪk, wɪð ə smʌɡ, sɛlf-sæɾəsfaɪd ɛɹ ən ə ʃaɪ twɪs tə hɪz maʊθ ðət sɛɾ i wɑz nɑt sæɾəsfaɪd əɾ ɔl. ə mæn u kəd bi bɑt. ðoʊ ðə stɑɹɾəld lʊk ðət flæʃt əkɹɔs ɪz skwɛɹ feɪs, ən ðə smɝk i bɛɹli bɑðɝd tə haɪd, sɛɾ i nu ɪɡzækli waɪ mæt wɑz slɪpɪŋ ɡoʊld ɪndə hɪz hænd. blʌɾ ən æʃəz! haʊ mɛni pipəl nu wʌt taɪlɪn wɑz ʌp tə?

At first light, he sneaked out of his rooms and found another of the palace servants he remembered, a balding fellow named Madic, with a smug, self-satisfied air and a shy twist to his mouth that said he was not satisfied at all. A man who could be bought. Though the startled look that flashed across his square face, and the smirk he barely bothered to hide, said he knew exactly why Mat was slipping gold into his hand. Blood and ashes! How many people knew what Tylin was up to?

nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt sim tə, θæŋk ðə laɪt. ðoʊ ðət dɪd min ðeɪ tʃaɪɾɪd ɪm əbaʊt mɪsɪŋ dɪnɝ wɪð ðə kwin, wɪtʃ ðeɪ hæd lɝn əbaʊt wən taɪlɪn ɪnkwaɪɝd wɛðɝ i wɑz ɪl. ən wɝs. . . . "pliz," ɪleɪn sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ðə wɝd dɪd nɑt peɪn hɝ, "ju mʌs pʊt jəɹ bɛs fʊt fɔɹwɝd wɪð ðə kwin. doʊn bi nɝvəs. jəl ɛndʒɔɪ ən ivnɪŋ wɪð hɝ."

Nynaeve and Elayne did not seem to, thank the Light. Though that did mean they chided him about missing dinner with the Queen, which they had learned about when Tylin inquired whether he was ill. And worse. . . . "Please," Elayne said, smiling almost as if the word did not pain her, "you must put your best foot forward with the Queen. Don't be nervous. You'll enjoy an evening with her."

"dʒʌs doʊn də ɛniθɪŋ tə əfɛn hɝ," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊt wɪð əɹ ðət biɪŋ sɪvəl hɝt; hɝ bɹaʊz dʒɹu daʊn ɪn kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən, hɝ dʒɔ taɪɾənd, ən əɹ hænz tʃɹɛmbəl tə pʊl əɹ bɹeɪd. "bi əkɑmədeɪɾɪŋ fəɹ wʌns ɪn jəɹ - aɪ min tə seɪ, ɹɪmɛmbɝ ʃiz ə disənt wʊmən, ən doʊn tʃɹaɪ ɛni ʌv jəɹ - laɪt, jə noʊ wʌɾ aɪ min."

"Just don't do anything to offend her," Nynaeve muttered. There was no doubt with her that being civil hurt; her brows drew down in concentration, her jaw tightened, and her hands trembled to pull her braid. "Be accommodating for once in your - I mean to say, remember she's a decent woman, and don't try any of your - Light, you know what I mean."

nɝvəs. hɑ! disənt wʊmən. hɑ!

Nervous. Ha! Decent woman. Ha!

niðɝ sim ðə lis kənsɝn ðəɾ i hæd weɪstəɾ ə hoʊl æftɝnun. ɪleɪn pæɾəd ɪz ʃoʊldɝ sɪmpəθɛɾɪkəli ən æskt ɪm pliz tə tʃɹaɪ ənʌðɝ deɪ əɹ tu; ɪt sɝɾənli wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən tʃɹæmpɪŋ θɹu ðə ɹæhəɾ ɪn ðɪs hit. nɪneɪiv sɛd ði ɪɡzæk seɪm θɪŋ, ðə weɪ wɪmən dɪd, bʌt wɪθaʊt ðə ʃoʊldɝ pæt. ðeɪ ədmɪɾəd ɹaɪɾ aʊt ðət ðeɪ ɪntɛndəd tə spɛn ðə deɪ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə spaɪ ɑn kæɹaɪɾɪn wɪð eɪvinhə, ðoʊ ðeɪ ɪveɪɾɪd ɪz kwɛstʃən ə hu ɪt wɑz ðeɪ θɔt ðeɪ maɪt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz. nɪneɪiv lɛt ðət slɪp, ən ɪleɪn ɡeɪv əɹ sətʃ ə lʊk i θɔɾ i maɪt si nɪneɪivz ɪɹz bɑks fəɹ wʌns. ðeɪ mikli æksɛptɪɾ ɪz stʃɹɪktʃɝ nɑt tə luz saɪɾ ə ðɛɹ bɑɾiɡɑɹdz, ən mikli lɛɾ ɪm si ðə dɪsɡaɪzɪz ðeɪ ɪntɛndəd tə wɛɹ. ivən æftɝ tɑmz dɪskɹɪpʃən, siɪŋ ðə pɛɹ sʌɾənli tɝn ɪndə ɛbu dɑɹi wɪmən ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz aɪz wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz bɪɡ ə ʃɑk əz ðɛɹ miknəs. wɛl, nɪneɪiv meɪɾ ə sɪkli stæb ət miknəs, ɡɹoʊlɪŋ wən ʃi ɹilaɪzd i hæd mɛnt wʌɾ i sɛɾ əbaʊt ði ilwʊmən niɾɪŋ noʊ bɑɾiɡɑɹd, bʌt ʃi keɪm kloʊs. iðɝ wʌn ə ðiz wɪmən foʊldɪŋ əɹ hænz ən ænsɝɪŋ səbmɪsɪvli meɪɾ ɪm nɝvəs. boʊθ ə ðɛm təɡɛðɝ - wɪð eɪvinhə nɑɾɪŋ əpɹuvɪŋli! - ən i wɑz hæpi tə sɛn əm ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ. dʒʌs tə bi ʃʊɹ, ðoʊ, hi ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛɹ sʌɾənli flæt maʊðz ən meɪɾ əm dɛmənstʃɹeɪt ðɛɹ dɪsɡaɪzɪz fəɹ ðə mɛn i wɑz sɛndɪŋ əlɔŋ fɝst. veɪnɪn lɛpt ət ðə tʃæns tə bi wʌn ʌv ɪleɪnz ɡɑɹdz, nʌklɪŋ ɪz fɔɹhɛd ɹaɪɾ ən lɛf laɪk ə ful.

Neither seemed the least concerned that he had wasted a whole afternoon. Elayne patted his shoulder sympathetically and asked him please to try another day or two; it certainly was better than tramping through the Rahad in this heat. Nynaeve said the exact same thing, the way women did, but without the shoulder pat. They admitted right out that they intended to spend the day trying to spy on Carridin with Aviendha, though they evaded his question of who it was they thought they might recognize. Nynaeve let that slip, and Elayne gave her such a look he thought he might see Nynaeve's ears boxed for once. They meekly accepted his stricture not to lose sight of their bodyguards, and meekly let him see the disguises they intended to wear. Even after Thom's description, seeing the pair suddenly turn into Ebou Dari women in front of his eyes was almost as big a shock as their meekness. Well, Nynaeve made a sickly stab at meekness, growling when she realized he had meant what he said about the Aielwoman needing no bodyguard, but she came close. Either one of these women folding her hands and answering submissively made him nervous. Both of them together - with Aviendha nodding approvingly! - and he was happy to send them on their way. Just to be sure, though, he ignored their suddenly flat mouths and made them demonstrate their disguises for the men he was sending along first. Vanin leaped at the chance to be one of Elayne's guards, knuckling his forehead right and left like a fool.

ðə fæt mæn hæd nɑt lɝn mʌtʃ wɑtʃɪŋ ɑn ɪz oʊn. dʒʌst əz ɑn ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ, ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ nʌmbɝ ə pipəl hæd kʌm tə kɔl ɑn kæɹaɪɾɪn, ɪnkluɾɪŋ səm ɪn sɪlk, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt pɹuf ðeɪ wɝ ɔl dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ɔl sɛɾ ən dʌn, ðə mæn wɑz ðə waɪtkloʊk æmbæsəɾɝ; mɔɹ foʊk u wɑntəd tə tʃɹeɪɾ ɪndə ɑmɑdɪʃiə pɹɑbli wɛn tə hɪm ðən tə ði ɑmɑdɪʃən æmbæsəɾɝ, huɛvɝ i əɹ ʃi wɑz. veɪnɪn dɪd seɪ tu wɪmən hæd dɛfənətli bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ kæɹaɪɾɪnz pæləs, tu - ðə lʊk ɑn ɪz feɪs wən eɪvinhə sʌɾənli tɝn ɪndə ə θɝɾ ɛbu dɑɹi wʊmən wɑz ə wʌndɝ - ən ɔlsoʊ ən oʊl mæn, hi θɔt, ðoʊ ðə fɛloʊ pɹuv sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli spɹaɪ. veɪnɪn hæd nɑt mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ ə ɡʊd lʊk əɾ ɪm dɪspaɪt spɑɾɪŋ ɪm θɹi taɪmz. wʌns veɪnɪn ən ðə wɪmən lɛft, mæt sɛn ɔf tɑm ən dʒulɪn tə si wʌt ðeɪ kəɾ ənkʌvɝ kənsɝnɪŋ dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn ən ə bɛnt, waɪt-hɛɹɾ oʊl mæn wɪð ən ɪntʃɹəst ɪn dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ɪf ðə θif-kætʃɝ kəd nɑt dɪskʌvɝ ə weɪ tə tʃɹɪp kæɹaɪɾɪn ɑn ɪz feɪs, ɪt dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst, ən tɑm sim tə hæv ə weɪ ʌv pʊɾɪŋ təɡɛðɝ ɔl ðə ɡɑsəp ən ɹumɝ ɪn ə pleɪs ən fɪltɝɪŋ aʊt ðə tʃɹuθ. ɔl ðət wɑz ði izi pɑɹt, ʌv kɔɹs.

The fat man had not learned much watching on his own. Just as on the day before, a surprising number of people had come to call on Carridin, including some in silk, but that was not proof they were all Darkfriends. All said and done, the man was the Whitecloak ambassador; more folk who wanted to trade into Amadicia probably went to him than to the Amadician ambassador, whoever he or she was. Vanin did say two women had definitely been watching Carridin's palace, too - the look on his face when Aviendha suddenly turned into a third Ebou Dari woman was a wonder - and also an old man, he thought, though the fellow proved surprisingly spry. Vanin had not managed to get a good look at him despite spotting him three times. Once Vanin and the women left, Mat sent off Thom and Juilin to see what they could uncover concerning Jaichim Carridin and a bent, white-haired old man with an interest in Darkfriends. If the thief-catcher could not discover a way to trip Carridin on his face, it did not exist, and Thom seemed to have a way of putting together all the gossip and rumor in a place and filtering out the truth. All that was the easy part, of course.

fəɹ tu deɪz i swɛɾɪd ɑn ðət bɛntʃ, wɪð ən əkeɪʒənəl stʃɹoʊl daʊn ði æli bɪsaɪd ðə daɪɝz, ən ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðət tʃeɪnʒd wɑz ðət ðə ti ɡɑt wɝs əɡɛn. ðə waɪn wɑz soʊ bæd, neɪlzin bɪɡæn dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ eɪl. ðə fɝs deɪ, ðə tɑvɝŋkipɝ ɔfɝd fɪʃ fəɹ ə mɪddeɪ mil, bʌt baɪ ðə smɛl ðeɪ hæd bɪn kɑt læst wik. ðə sɛkən deɪ, hi ɔfɝɾ ə stu ʌv ɔɪstɝz; mæt eɪt faɪv boʊlz ə ðət dɪspaɪt ðə bɪts ə ʃɛl. bɝdʒɪt dɪklaɪn boʊθ.

For two days he sweated on that bench, with an occasional stroll down the alley beside the dyer's, and the only thing that changed was that the tea got worse again. The wine was so bad, Nalesean began drinking ale. The first day, the tavernkeeper offered fish for a midday meal, but by the smell they had been caught last week. The second day, he offered a stew of oysters; Mat ate five bowls of that despite the bits of shell. Birgitte declined both.

hi hæd bɪn sɝpɹaɪzd wən ʃi kɑɾ ʌp tə hɪm ən neɪlzin hɝiɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə mɔl hɛɹə ðət fɝs mɔɹnɪŋ. ðə sʌn bɛɹli meɪɾ ə ɹɪm əbʌv ðə ɹuftɑps, bʌɾ ɔlɹɛɾi pipəl ən kɑɹts dɑɾəd ðə skwɛɹ. "aɪ mʌst əv blɪŋkt," ʃi læft. "aɪ wɑz weɪɾɪŋ ðə weɪ aɪ θɔt jud kʌm aʊt. ɪf jə doʊn maɪn kʌmpəni."

He had been surprised when she caught up to him and Nalesean hurrying across the Mol Hara that first morning. The sun barely made a rim above the rooftops, but already people and carts dotted the square. "I must have blinked," she laughed. "I was waiting the way I thought you'd come out. If you don't mind company."

"wi muv fæst səmtaɪmz," hi sɛɾ ɪvæsɪvli. neɪlzin lʊkt əɾ ɪm saɪdweɪz; ʌv kɔɹs, hi hæd noʊ aɪdiə waɪ ðeɪ hæd kɹɛpt aʊt θɹu ə taɪni saɪd dɔɹ nɪɹ ðə steɪbəlz. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðət mæt θɔt taɪlɪn wəɾ æktʃəli  lip ɑn ɪm ɪn ðə hɔlz ɪn bɹɔd deɪlaɪt, bʌt ðən əɡɛn, ɪt nɛvɝ hɝt tə bi kɛɹfəl. "jɔɹ kʌmpəni ɪz wɛlkəm ɛni taɪm. ʌ. θæŋks." ʃi dʒʌst ʃɹʌɡd ən mɝmɝd sʌmθɪŋ i dɪd nɑt kætʃ ən fɛl ɪn ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm.

"We move fast sometimes," he said evasively. Nalesean looked at him sideways; of course, he had no idea why they had crept out through a tiny side door near the stables. It was not that Mat thought Tylin would actually leap on him in the halls in broad daylight, but then again, it never hurt to be careful. "Your company is welcome any time. Uh. Thanks." She just shrugged and murmured something he did not catch and fell in on the other side of him.

ðət wɑz ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ wɪð hɝ. ɛni ʌðɝ wʊmən i hæɾ ɛvɝ noʊn wʊɾə dɪmændəd tə noʊ θæŋks fəɹ wʌt, ən ðən ɪkspleɪnd waɪ nʌn wɝ nɛsəsɛɹi ət sətʃ lɛŋθ ðəɾ i wɑntəd tə kʌvɝ ɪz ɪɹz, əɹ əpbɹeɪɾɪd ɪm əɾ ikwəl lɛŋθ fəɹ θɪŋkɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ, əɹ səmtaɪmz meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ ʃi ɪkspɛktəd sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ səbstæntʃəl ðən wɝdz. bɝdʒɪt dʒʌst ʃɹʌɡd, ən oʊvɝ ðə nɛks tu deɪz, sʌmθɪŋ stɑɹtlɪŋ əkɝɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd.

That was the beginning with her. Any other woman he had ever known would have demanded to know thanks for what, and then explained why none were necessary at such length that he wanted to cover his ears, or upbraided him at equal length for thinking they were, or sometimes made it clear she expected something more substantial than words. Birgitte just shrugged, and over the next two days, something startling occurred in his head.

nɔɹməli, tə hɪm, wɪmən wɝ tə ædmaɪɹ ən smaɪl æt, tə dæns wɪð ən kɪs ɪf ðeɪ wəɾ əlaʊ, tə snʌɡəl wɪð ɪf i wɑz lʌki. dəsaɪɾɪŋ wɪtʃ wɪmən tə tʃeɪs wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ fʌn əz tʃeɪsɪŋ ðɛm, ɪf nɑt nɪɹli soʊ mʌtʃ əz kætʃɪŋ ðɛm. səm wɪmən wɝ dʒʌs fɹɛnz, ʌv kɔɹs. ə fju. ɛɡwin, fəɹ wʌn, ðoʊ hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ ðət fɹɛndʃɪp wəd sɝvaɪv əɹ bɪkʌmɪŋ æmɪɝlɪn. nɪneɪiv wɑz sɔɹɾ ʌv ə fɹɛnd, ɪn ə weɪ; ɪf ʃi kəd fɝɡɛt fəɹ wʌn aʊɝ ðət ʃi hæd swɪtʃt ɪz bɑɾəm mɔɹ ðən wʌns ən ɹɪmɛmbɝ i wɑz nɑɾ ə bɔɪ ɛnimɔɹ. bʌɾ ə wʊmən fɹɛnd wɑz dɪfɹən fɹəm ə mæn; jə ɔlweɪz nu hɝ maɪn ɹæn əlɔŋ ʌðɝ pæðz ðən jʊɹz, ðət ʃi sɔ ðə wɝld wɪð dɪfɹən aɪz.

Normally, to him, women were to admire and smile at, to dance with and kiss if they would allow, to snuggle with if he was lucky. Deciding which women to chase was almost as much fun as chasing them, if not nearly so much as catching them. Some women were just friends, of course. A few. Egwene, for one, though he was not sure how that friendship would survive her becoming Amyrlin. Nynaeve was sort of a friend, in a way; if she could forget for one hour that she had switched his bottom more than once and remember he was not a boy anymore. But a woman friend was different from a man; you always knew her mind ran along other paths than yours, that she saw the world with different eyes.

bɝdʒɪt lin təwɔɹɾ ɪm ɑn ðə bɛntʃ. "bɛs bi wɛɹi," ʃi mɝmɝd. "ðæt wɪɾoʊ ɪz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ə nu hʌzbənd; ðə ʃiθ ɑn əɹ mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf ɪz blu. bɪsaɪdz, ðə haʊs ɪz oʊvɝ ðɛɹ."

Birgitte leaned toward him on the bench. "Best be wary," she murmured. "That widow is looking for a new husband; the sheath on her marriage knife is blue. Besides, the house is over there."

hi blɪŋkt, luzɪŋ saɪɾ ə ðə switli plʌmp wʊmən u ɹoʊld əɹ hɪps soʊ ɛkstʃɹævəɡənli əz ʃi wɔkt, ən bɝdʒɪɾ ænsɝɾ ɪz ʃipɪʃ ɡɹɪn wɪð ə læf. nɪneɪiv wʊɾə fleɪɾ ɪm wɪð əɹ tʌŋ fəɹ lʊkɪŋ, ən ivən ɛɡwin wʊɾə bɪn kuli dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ. baɪ ði ɛn ə ðə sɛkən deɪ ɑn ðət bɛntʃ, hi ɹilaɪzd i hæd sæɾ ɔl ðət taɪm wɪð ɪz hɪp pɹɛst əɡɛns bɝdʒɪts ən nɛvɝ wʌns θɔɾ ə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪs hɝ. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi kɪs baɪ hɪm - fɹæŋkli, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðə dɔɡ-ʌɡli mɛn ʃi sim tə ɛndʒɔɪ lʊkɪŋ æt, hi maɪɾ əv bɪn ɪnsʌltɪɾ ɪf ʃi hæd - ən ʃi wɑz ə hɪɹoʊ aʊɾ ə lɛdʒən hum i stɪl hæf-ɪkspɛktəd tə lip oʊvɝ ə haʊs ən ɡɹæb ə kʌpəl ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən baɪ ðə nɛk ɑn ðə weɪ. bʌt ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɪt: hi wəɾ əz sun əv θɔɾ ə kɪsɪŋ neɪlzin. ðə seɪm əz ðə tɛɹən, dʒʌst ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm æz, hi laɪk bɝdʒɪt.

He blinked, losing sight of the sweetly plump woman who rolled her hips so extravagantly as she walked, and Birgitte answered his sheepish grin with a laugh. Nynaeve would have flayed him with her tongue for looking, and even Egwene would have been coolly disapproving. By the end of the second day on that bench, he realized he had sat all that time with his hip pressed against Birgitte's and never once thought of trying to kiss her. He was sure she did not want to be kissed by him - frankly, considering the dog-ugly men she seemed to enjoy looking at, he might have been insulted if she had - and she was a hero out of legend whom he still half-expected to leap over a house and grab a couple of the Forsaken by the neck on the way. But that was not it: He would as soon have thought of kissing Nalesean. The same as the Tairen, just exactly the same as, he liked Birgitte.

tu deɪz ɑn ðət bɛntʃ, ʌp ən daʊn tə tʃɹɑt daʊn ði æli bɪsaɪd ðə daɪɝ ən stɛɹ ət ðə tɔl wɔl ə bɛɹ bɹɪk ət ðə bæk ə ðə haʊsəz ɡɑɹɾən. bɝdʒɪt cʊɾə klaɪmd ɪt, bʌɾ ivən ʃi maɪɾ əv bɹoʊkən əɹ nɛk ɪf ʃi tʃɹaɪd wɛɹɪŋ ə dʒɹɛs. θɹi taɪmz i dɪsaɪɾɪd ɑn ðə spɝ ə ðə moʊmən tə fɑloʊ ə wʊmən kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə haʊs, tu wɛɹɪŋ ðə ɹɛd bɛlt ʌv ə waɪz wʊmən. ɹændəm tʃæns dɪd sim tə ɪnvoʊk ɪz lʌk.

Two days on that bench, up and down to trot down the alley beside the dyer and stare at the tall wall of bare brick at the back of the house's garden. Birgitte could have climbed it, but even she might have broken her neck if she tried wearing a dress. Three times he decided on the spur of the moment to follow a woman coming out of the house, two wearing the red belt of a Wise Woman. Random chance did seem to invoke his luck.

wʌn ə ðə waɪz wɪmən wɛn ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ ən bɑɾ ə bʌntʃ ə ʃɹɪvəl tɝnəps bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ bæk; ði ʌðɝ wɔk tu stʃɹits oʊvɝ tə baɪ ə pɛɹ ə bɪɡ, ɡɹin-stʃɹaɪp fɪʃ. ðə θɝd wʊmən, tɔl ən dɑɹk ɪn nit ɡɹeɪ wʊl, meɪbi ə tɛɹən, kɹɔs tu bɹɪdʒəz bɪfɔɹ ɛntɝɪŋ ə lɑɹdʒ ʃɑp wɛɹ ʃi wɑz ɡɹiɾəd wɪð smaɪlz baɪ ə skɪni boʊɪŋ fɛloʊ ən bɪɡæn supɝvaɪzɪŋ ðə loʊɾɪŋ ə lækɝd bɑksəz ən tʃɹeɪz ɪndə sɔdʌst-fɪl bæskəts ðət wɝ ðən loʊɾəd ɪndə ə wæɡən. baɪ wʌɾ i hɝd, ʃi hoʊp tə fɛtʃ ə pɹɪɾi pis ə sɪlvɝ wɪð əm ɪn ændɝ. mæt bɛɹli mænədʒ tə ɪskeɪp wɪθaʊt baɪɪŋ ə bɑks. soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ ɹændəm lʌk. noʊ wʌn ɛls hæɾ ɛni iðɝ. nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə meɪd ðɛɹ pɪlɡɹəmɪdʒɪz tə ðə stʃɹits ɝaʊn kæɹaɪɾɪnz smɔl pæləs wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ɛniwʌn ðeɪ ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd, wɪtʃ fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd əm noʊ ɛnd. ðeɪ stɪl ɹəfjuz tə seɪ hu; ɪt hɑɹdli mæɾɝd, sɪns ðə pipəl wɝ nɑt tə bi sin. ðət wɑz wʌt ðeɪ sɛd, ʃoʊɪŋ ɪm ɪnʌf tiθ fəɹ sɪks wɪmən. ðə ɡɹɪməsɪz wɝ səpoʊz tə bi smaɪlz, hi θɔt. ɪt wɑz ə ʃeɪm eɪvinhə sim tə hæv fɔlən ɪn wɪð ði ʌðɝ tu soʊ θɝoʊli, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə moʊmənt wən i wɑz pɹɛsɪŋ əm fəɹ ən ænsɝ, ən ɪleɪn snæpt ət hɪm, stɛɹɪŋ daʊn əɹ noʊz, ən ði il wʊmən wɪspɝd sʌmθɪŋ ɪn əɹ ɪɹ.

One of the Wise Women went around the corner and bought a bunch of shriveled turnips before going back; the other walked two streets over to buy a pair of big, green-striped fish. The third woman, tall and dark in neat gray wool, maybe a Tairen, crossed two bridges before entering a large shop where she was greeted with smiles by a skinny bowing fellow and began supervising the loading of lacquered boxes and trays into sawdust-filled baskets that were then loaded into a wagon. By what he heard, she hoped to fetch a pretty piece of silver with them in Andor. Mat barely managed to escape without buying a box. So much for random luck. No one else had any either. Nynaeve and Elayne and Aviendha made their pilgrimages to the streets around Carridin's small palace without seeing anyone they recognized, which frustrated them no end. They still refused to say who; it hardly mattered, since the people were not to be seen. That was what they said, showing him enough teeth for six women. The grimaces were supposed to be smiles, he thought. It was a shame Aviendha seemed to have fallen in with the other two so thoroughly, but there was a moment when he was pressing them for an answer, and Elayne snapped at him, staring down her nose, and the Aiel woman whispered something in her ear.

"fɝɡɪv mi, mæt," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɝnəsli, hɝ feɪs ɡoʊɪŋ soʊ ɹɛɾ əɹ hɛɹ sim tə peɪl. "aɪ hʌmbli bɛɡ pɑɹɾən fəɹ spikɪŋ soʊ. aɪ . . . wɪl bɛɡ ɑn maɪ niz, ɪf jə wɪʃ." noʊ sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ əɹ vɔɪs fɔltɝɾ ət ði ɛnd.

"Forgive me, Mat," Elayne said earnestly, her face going so red her hair seemed to pale. "I humbly beg pardon for speaking so. I . . . will beg on my knees, if you wish." No surprise that her voice faltered at the end.

"noʊ nid fəɹ ðæt," hi sɛd feɪnli, tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə ɡɑɡəl. "jɔɹ fɝɡɪvən; ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ." ði ɑɾəst θɪŋ, ðoʊ; ɪleɪn lʊkt əɾ eɪvinhə ðə hoʊl taɪm ʃi spoʊk tə hɪm ən dɪd nɑt twɪtʃ ən aɪləd wən i ɹɪplaɪd, bʌt ʃi hivd ə ɡɹeɪt saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif wən eɪvinhə nɑɾəd. wɪmən wɝ dʒʌst stʃɹeɪnʒ.

"No need for that," he said faintly, trying not to goggle. "You're forgiven; it was nothing." The oddest thing, though; Elayne looked at Aviendha the whole time she spoke to him and did not twitch an eyelid when he replied, but she heaved a great sigh of relief when Aviendha nodded. Women were just strange.

tɑm ɹipɔɹɾəd ðət kæɹaɪɾɪn ɡeɪv tə bɛɡɝz fɹikwənli, ən əsaɪd fɹəm ðæt, ɛvɹi skɹæp ʌv wɝɾ əbaʊɾ ɪm ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ wɑz ðə kaɪn tə bi ɪkspɛktəd, dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn wɛðɝ ðə spikɝ θɔt waɪtkloʊks wɝ mɝɾɝəs mɑnstɝz əɹ ðə tʃɹu seɪvjɝz ə ðə wɝld. dʒulɪn lɝn ðət kæɹaɪɾɪn hæd pɝtʃəst ə plæn ə ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, wɪtʃ maɪɾ ɪndəkeɪt səm waɪtkloʊk ɪntɛntʃən təwɔɹɾ ɛbu dɑɹ ən maɪɾ ɪndəkeɪt ðət peɪdʒɹən naɪl wɑntəɾ ə pæləs fəɹ hɪmsɛlf ən ɪntɛndəd tə kɑpi ðə tɑɹɑsɪn. ɪf i stɪl lɪvd; ɹumɝz hæd spɹʌŋ ʌp ɪn ðə sɪɾi ðəɾ i wɑz dɛd, bʌt ðɛn, hæf sɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd kɪld ɪm ən hæf sɛd ɹænd hæd, wɪtʃ ʃoʊd ðɛɹ wɝθ. niðɝ dʒulɪn əɹ tɑm hæd skʌft ʌp ə pɛbəl kənsɝnɪŋ ə waɪt-hɛɹɾ oʊl mæn wɪð ə mʌtʃ-wɔɹn feɪs.

Thom reported that Carridin gave to beggars frequently, and aside from that, every scrap of word about him in Ebou Dar was the kind to be expected, depending on whether the speaker thought Whitecloaks were murderous monsters or the true saviors of the world. Juilin learned that Carridin had purchased a plan of the Tarasin Palace, which might indicate some Whitecloak intention toward Ebou Dar and might indicate that Pedron Niall wanted a palace for himself and intended to copy the Tarasin. If he still lived; rumors had sprung up in the city that he was dead, but then, half said Aes Sedai had killed him and half said Rand had, which showed their worth. Neither Juilin or Thom had scuffed up a pebble concerning a white-haired old man with a much-worn face.

fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən wɪð kæɹaɪɾɪn, fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən wɪð wɑtʃɪŋ ðə blʌɾi haʊs, ən əz fɑɹ əz ðə pæləs wɛnt. . . .

Frustration with Carridin, frustration with watching the bloody house, and as far as the palace went. . . .

mæt faʊn aʊt haʊ θɪŋz wɝ tə ɡoʊ ðət fɝs naɪt wən i faɪnəli ɡɑt bæk tə hɪz ɹumz. oʊlvɝ wɑz ðɛɹ, ɔlɹɛɾi fɛɾ ən kɝld ʌp ɪn ə tʃɛɹ wɪð ðə tʃɹævəlz ə dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ baɪ ðə laɪɾ ə ðə stænd-læmps, ən nɑɾ əɾ ɔl əpsɛɾ oʊvɝ biɪŋ muvd aʊɾ ə hɪz oʊn ɹum. mæɾɪk hæd bɪn əz ɡʊɾ əz ɪz wɝd; əz ɡʊɾ əz ðə ɡoʊld i stʌft ɪn ɪz paʊtʃ, ɛniweɪ. ðə sʌlkɪŋ ɹum naʊ hɛld oʊlvɝz bɛd. dʒʌs lɛt taɪlɪn tʃɹaɪ ɛniθɪŋ wɪð ə tʃaɪld wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ! ðə kwin hæd nɑt bɪn aɪɾəl iðɝ, ðoʊ. hi snik daʊn tə ðə kɪtʃənz laɪk ə fɑks, slɪpɪŋ fɹəm kɔɹnɝ tə kɔɹnɝ, flæʃɪŋ daʊn stɛɹz - ən faʊn ðəɹ wɑz noʊ fud tə bi hæd.

Mat found out how things were to go that first night when he finally got back to his rooms. Olver was there, already fed and curled up in a chair with The Travels of Jain Farstrider by the light of the stand-lamps, and not at all upset over being moved out of his own room. Madic had been as good as his word; as good as the gold he stuffed in his pouch, anyway. The sulking room now held Olver's bed. Just let Tylin try anything with a child watching her! The Queen had not been idle either, though. He sneaked down to the kitchens like a fox, slipping from corner to corner, flashing down stairs - and found there was no food to be had.

oʊ, ðə smɛl ə kʊkɪŋ pɝmieɪɾɪd ði ɛɹ, ɹoʊsts tɝnɪŋ ɑn spɪts ɪn ðə bɪɡ faɪɝpleɪsəz, pɑts bʌbəlɪŋ ətɑp ðə waɪt-taɪl stoʊvz, ən kʊks kɛpt pɑpɪŋ oʊpən ʌvənz tə pɹɑd ðɪs əɹ ðæt. ðəɹ wɑz dʒʌs noʊ fud fəɹ mæt kɔθən. smaɪlɪŋ wɪmən ɪn pɹɪstin waɪɾ eɪpɹənz ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪz oʊn smaɪlz ən pʊt ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn ɪz weɪ soʊ hi kəd nɑt ɡɛt nɪɹ ðə sɔɹsəz ə ðoʊz wʌndɝfəl smɛlz. ðeɪ smaɪld ən ɹæpt ɪz nʌkəlz wən i tʃɹaɪd tə snætʃ ə loʊf ə bɹɛɾ əɹ dʒʌst ə bɪɾ ə hʌni-ɡleɪz tɝnəp. ðeɪ smaɪld ən toʊld ɪm i mʌs nɑt spɔɪl ɪz æpətaɪɾ ɪf i wɑz tə it wɪð ðə kwin. ðeɪ nu. ɛvɹi læst wʌn ə ðɛm nu! hɪz oʊn blʌʃəz əz mʌtʃ əz ɛniθɪŋ ɛls dʒɹoʊv ɪm bæk tə hɪz ɹumz, bɪɾɝli ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ ðəɾ oʊɾɝəs fɪʃ ət mɪddeɪ. hi lɑk ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɪm. ə wʊmən u wəd stɑɹv ə mæn maɪt tʃɹaɪ ɛniθɪŋ.

Oh, the smell of cooking permeated the air, roasts turning on spits in the big fireplaces, pots bubbling atop the white-tiled stoves, and cooks kept popping open ovens to prod this or that. There was just no food for Mat Cauthon. Smiling women in pristine white aprons ignored his own smiles and put themselves in his way so he could not get near the sources of those wonderful smells. They smiled and rapped his knuckles when he tried to snatch a loaf of bread or just a bit of honey-glazed turnip. They smiled and told him he must not spoil his appetite if he was to eat with the Queen. They knew. Every last one of them knew! His own blushes as much as anything else drove him back to his rooms, bitterly regretting that odorous fish at midday. He locked the door behind him. A woman who would starve a man might try anything.

hi wɑz laɪɪŋ ɑn ə ɡɹin sɪlk kɑɹpət pleɪɪŋ sneɪks ən fɑksəz wɪð oʊlvɝ wən ðə sɛkənd noʊt wɑz slɪpt ʌndɝ ɪz dɔɹ.

He was lying on a green silk carpet playing Snakes and Foxes with Olver when the second note was slipped under his door.

aɪ hæv bɪn toʊld ɪts mɔɹ spɔɹɾɪŋ tə teɪk ə pɪdʒən ɑn ðə wɪŋ, tə wɑtʃ ɪt flʌɾɝ, bʌt sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ə hʌŋɡɹi bɝd wɪl flaɪ tə ðə hænd.

I have been told it is more sporting to take a pigeon on the wing, to watch it flutter, but sooner or later, a hungry bird will fly to the hand.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt, mæt?" oʊlvɝ æskt.

"What is it, Mat?" Olver asked.

"nʌθɪŋ." mæt kɹʌmpəl ðə noʊt. "ənʌðɝ ɡeɪm?"

"Nothing." Mat crumpled the note. "Another game?"

"oʊ, jɛs." ðə bɔɪ wəd pleɪ ðə ful ɡeɪm ɔl deɪ, ɡɪvən ə tʃæns. "mæt, dɪd jə tʃɹaɪ ɛni ʌv ðət hæm ðeɪ kʊk tənaɪt? aɪ nɛvɝ teɪstəɾ ɛniθɪŋ - "

"Oh, yes." The boy would play the fool game all day, given a chance. "Mat, did you try any of that ham they cooked tonight? I never tasted anything - "

"dʒʌs θɹoʊ ðə daɪs, oʊlvɝ. dʒʌs θɹoʊ ðə blʌɾi daɪs."

"Just throw the dice, Olver. Just throw the bloody dice."

kʌmɪŋ bæk fəɹ ɪz θɝd naɪɾ ɪn ðə pæləs, hi bɑt bɹɛɾ ən ɑlɪvz ən uz mɪlk tʃiz ɑn ðə weɪ, wɪtʃ wɑz dʒʌst əz wɛl. ðə kɪtʃən stɪl hæɾ ɪts ɔɹɾɝz. ðə blʌɾi wɪmən æktʃəli  læft aʊt laʊd waɪl ðeɪ wɑftɪd stimɪŋ plæɾɝz ə mits ən fɪʃəz dʒʌs bɪɑn ɪz ɹitʃ ən toʊld ɪm nɑt tə spɔɪl ɪz blʌɾi æpətaɪt.

Coming back for his third night in the palace, he bought bread and olives and ewe's milk cheese on the way, which was just as well. The kitchen still had its orders. The bloody women actually laughed out loud while they wafted steaming platters of meats and fishes just beyond his reach and told him not to spoil his bloody appetite.

hi meɪnteɪn ɪz dɪɡnəɾi. hi dɪd nɑt ɡɹæb ə plæɾɝ ən ɹʌn. hi meɪɾ ɪz faɪnəs lɛɡ, flɝɪʃɪŋ ən ɪmædʒənɛɹi kloʊk. "ɡɹeɪʃəs leɪɾiz, jəɹ wɔɹmθ ən hɑspətæləɾi oʊvɝwɛlm mi."

He maintained his dignity. He did not grab a platter and run. He made his finest leg, flourishing an imaginary cloak. "Gracious ladies, your warmth and hospitality overwhelm me."

hɪz wɪðdʒɹɔəl wʊɾə ɡɔn ə dil bɛɾɝ ɪf wʌn ə ðə kʊks hæd nɑt kækəld əɾ ɪz bæk, "ðə kwin wɪl fist ɑn ɹoʊs dʌklɪŋ sun ɪnʌf, læd." vɛɹi dʒɹoʊl. ði ʌðɝ wɪmən ɹɔɹd soʊ hɑɹd, ðeɪ mʌst əv bɪn ɹoʊlɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. vɛɹi blʌɾi dʒɹoʊl.

His withdrawal would have gone a deal better if one of the cooks had not cackled at his back, "The Queen will feast on roast duckling soon enough, lad." Very droll. The other women roared so hard, they must have been rolling on the floor. Very bloody droll.

bɹɛɾ ən ɑlɪvz ən sɔlti tʃiz meɪɾ ə faɪn mil, wɪð ə lɪɾəl wɔɾɝ fɹəm ɪz wɑʃstæn tə wɑʃ ɪt daʊn. ðəɹ hæd nɑt bɪn ɛni waɪn pʌntʃ ɪn ɪz ɹum sɪns ðət fɝs deɪ. oʊlvɝ tʃɹaɪd tə tɛl ɪm əbaʊt səm sɔɹɾ ə ɹoʊstəd fɪʃ wɪð mʌstɝd sɔs ən ɹeɪzənz; mæt toʊld ɪm tə pɹæktəs ɪz ɹɛɾɪŋ.

Bread and olives and salty cheese made a fine meal, with a little water from his washstand to wash it down. There had not been any wine punch in his room since that first day. Olver tried to tell him about some sort of roasted fish with mustard sauce and raisins; Mat told him to practice his reading.

noʊbɑdi slɪpt ə noʊɾ ʌndɝ ɪz dɔɹ ðət naɪt. noʊbɑdi ɹæɾəld ðə lɑk. hi bɪɡæn tə θɪŋk θɪŋz maɪt tɝn fəɹ ðə bɛɾɝ. təmɑɹoʊ wɑz ðə fɛstəvəl ə bɝdz. fɹəm wʌɾ i hæd hɝɾ ə ðə kɑstumz səm pipəl wɔɹ, mɛn ən wɪmən boʊθ, ɪt maɪt bi pɑsəbəl taɪlɪn wəd faɪn hɝsɛlf ə nu dʌklɪŋ tə tʃeɪs æftɝ. sʌmbɑɾi maɪt kʌm aʊɾ ə ðət blʌɾi haʊs əkɹɔs fɹəm ðə ɹoʊz ə ði ɪldɑɹ ən hæn ɪm ðə blʌɾi boʊl ə ðə wɪnz. θɪŋz dʒʌs hæd tə tɝn fəɹ ðə bɛɾɝ.

Nobody slipped a note under his door that night. Nobody rattled the lock. He began to think things might turn for the better. Tomorrow was the Festival of Birds. From what he had heard of the costumes some people wore, men and women both, it might be possible Tylin would find herself a new duckling to chase after. Somebody might come out of that bloody house across from The Rose of the Eldar and hand him the bloody Bowl of the Winds. Things just had to turn for the better.

wən i woʊk fəɹ ɪz θɝd mɔɹnɪŋ ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, ðə daɪs wɝ ɹoʊlɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd.

When he woke for his third morning in the Tarasin Palace, the dice were rolling in his head.


tʃæptɝ twɛntinaɪn


CHAPTER 29

ðə fɛstəvəl ə bɝdz


The Festival of Birds

weɪkɪŋ tə ðə daɪs, mæt kənsɪɾɝd ɡoʊɪŋ bæk tə slip əntɪl ðeɪ wɛn əweɪ, bʌɾ ət læst i ɡɑɾ ʌp filɪŋ ɡɹʌmpi. əz ɪf i dɪd nɑɾ əv mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf ɑn ɪz pleɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. hi tʃeɪs nɹɪm əweɪ ən dʒɹɛs hɪmsɛlf, iɾɪŋ ðə læst ə ðə bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz fɹəm ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ waɪl i dɪd, ðən wɛn tə tʃɛk ɑn oʊlvɝ. ðə bɔɪ flæʃt bɪtwin bɝsts ə jæŋkɪŋ ɑn ɪz kloʊðz ɪn ə hɝi tə bi aʊɾ ən stɑpɪŋ ɪntaɪɝli wɪð buɾ əɹ ʃɝɾ ɪn hæn tə spaʊt dʌzənz ə kwɛstʃənz ðət mæt ænsɝd wɪð hæf ə maɪnd. noʊ, ðeɪ wəd nɑt ɡoʊ ɹeɪsɪŋ tədeɪ, ən nɛvɝ maɪn ðə ɹɪtʃ ɹeɪsəz ət ðə sɝkəɾ ə hɛvən, nɔɹθ ə ðə sɪɾi. meɪbi ðeɪ kəd ɡoʊ si ðə mənædʒɝi. jɛs, mæt wəd baɪ hɪm ə fɛðɝd mæsk fəɹ ðə fɛstəvəl. ɪf i ɛvɝ ɡɑt dʒɹɛst. ðət sɛn ɪm ɪndə ə flɝi.

Waking to the dice, Mat considered going back to sleep until they went away, but at last he got up feeling grumpy. As if he did not have more than enough on his plate already. He chased Nerim away and dressed himself, eating the last of the bread and cheese from the night before while he did, then went to check on Olver. The boy flashed between bursts of yanking on his clothes in a hurry to be out and stopping entirely with boot or shirt in hand to spout dozens of questions that Mat answered with half a mind. No, they would not go racing today, and never mind the rich races at the Circuit of Heaven, north of the city. Maybe they could go see the menagerie. Yes, Mat would buy him a feathered mask for the festival. If he ever got dressed. That sent him into a flurry.

wʌt ɹɪli ɑkjəpaɪd mæts θɔts wɝ ðoʊz blʌɾi daɪs. waɪ hæd ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd ʌp əɡɛn? hi stɪl dɪd nɑt noʊ waɪ ðeɪ hæd bɪfɔɹ!

What really occupied Mat's thoughts were those bloody dice. Why had they started up again? He still did not know why they had before!

wən oʊlvɝ wɑz faɪnəli kloʊðd, hi fɑloʊd mæt ɪndə ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum bʌbəlɪŋ wɪð hæf-hɝd kwɛstʃənz - ən bʌmpt ɪm fɹəm bɪhaɪnd wən i stɑp dɛd. taɪlɪn ɹipleɪs ðə bʊk oʊlvɝ hæd bɪn ɹiɾɪŋ ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ ɑn ðə teɪbəl.

When Olver was finally clothed, he followed Mat into the sitting room bubbling with half-heard questions - and bumped him from behind when he stopped dead. Tylin replaced the book Olver had been reading the night before on the table.

"mædʒəsti!" mæts aɪz dɑɹɾɪd tə ðə dɔɹ i hæd lɑk læs naɪt, naʊ stændɪŋ waɪɾ oʊpən. "wʌɾ ə sɝpɹaɪz." hi pʊld oʊlvɝ ɝaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, bɪtwin ɪm ən ðə wʊmənz mɑkɪŋ smaɪl. wɛl, meɪbi ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹɪli mɑkɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt ʃʊɹli sim soʊ ɹaɪt ðɛn. ʃi wɑz sɝɾənli plizd wɪð hɝsɛlf. "aɪ wɑz əbaʊt tə teɪk oʊlvɝ aʊt. tə si ðə fɛstəvəl. ən səm tʃɹævlɪŋ mənædʒɝi. hi wɑns ə fɛðɝd mæsk." hi snæpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt tə stɑp bæbəlɪŋ ən stɑɹɾəd ɛdʒɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ, juzɪŋ ðə bɔɪ əz ə ʃild.

"Majesty!" Mat's eyes darted to the door he had locked last night, now standing wide open. "What a surprise." He pulled Olver around in front of him, between him and the woman's mocking smile. Well, maybe it was not really mocking, but it surely seemed so right then. She was certainly pleased with herself. "I was about to take Olver out. To see the festival. And some traveling menagerie. He wants a feathered mask." He snapped his mouth shut to stop babbling and started edging toward the door, using the boy as a shield.

"jɛs," taɪlɪn mɝmɝd, wɑtʃɪŋ θɹu hɝ aɪlæʃɪz. ʃi meɪd noʊ muv tə ɪntɝvin, bʌɾ əɹ smaɪl dipənd, əz ɪf ʃi wɑz dʒʌst weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪz fʊt tə læn ɪn ðə snɛɹ. "mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ɪf hiz ə kəmpænjən, ɪnstɛɾ ə ɹʌnɪŋ wɪð ði ɝtʃənz, əz aɪ hɪɹ i dʌz. wʌn hɪɹz ə ɡʊd dil əbaʊt jəɹ læd. ɹaɪzɛl?"

"Yes," Tylin murmured, watching through her eyelashes. She made no move to intervene, but her smile deepened, as if she was just waiting for his foot to land in the snare. "Much better if he has a companion, instead of running with the urchins, as I hear he does. One hears a good deal about your lad. Riselle?"

ə wʊmən əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, ən mæt ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. ə fænsɪfəl mæsk ə swɝlɪŋ blu ən ɡoʊldən fɛðɝz hɪd moʊst ə ɹaɪzɛlz feɪs, bʌt ðə fɛðɝz ɑn ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ kɑstum dɪd nɑt haɪd vɛɹi mʌtʃ ɛls. ʃi pəzɛs ðə moʊst spɛktækjəlɝ bʊzəm i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin.

A woman appeared in the doorway, and Mat gave a start. A fanciful mask of swirling blue and golden feathers hid most of Riselle's face, but the feathers on the rest of her costume did not hide very much else. She possessed the most spectacular bosom he had ever seen.

"oʊlvɝ," ʃi sɛd, sɪŋkɪŋ tə hɝ niz, "wʊd jə laɪk tə wɔk aʊt wɪð mi ət fɛstəvəl?" ʃi hɛld ʌp ə mæsk laɪk ə ɹɛd-ænd-ɡɹin hɔk, dʒʌs ðə ɹaɪt saɪz fəɹ ə bɔɪ.

"Olver," she said, sinking to her knees, "would you like to walk out with me at festival?" She held up a mask like a red-and-green hawk, just the right size for a boy.

bɪfɔɹ mæt kəɾ oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, oʊlvɝ bɹoʊk fɹi ən ɹʌʃt tə hɝ. "oʊ, jɛs, pliz. θæŋk ju." ði ənɡɹeɪtfəl lɪɾəl laʊt læft əz ʃi taɪd ðə hɔk mæsk ɑn ɪz feɪs ən hʌɡd ɪm tə hɝ bʊzəm. hæn ɪn hænd, ðeɪ ɹæn aʊt, livɪŋ mæt ɡeɪpɪŋ.

Before Mat could open his mouth, Olver broke free and rushed to her. "Oh, yes, please. Thank you." The ungrateful little lout laughed as she tied the hawk mask on his face and hugged him to her bosom. Hand in hand, they ran out, leaving Mat gaping.

hi ɹəkʌvɝd hɪmsɛlf kwɪkli ɪnʌf wən taɪlɪn sɛd, "wɛl fəɹ jə aɪm nɑɾ ə dʒɛləs wʊmən, maɪ swit." ʃi pɹədus ðə lɔŋ aɪɝn ki tə hɪz dɔɹ fɹəm bɪhaɪn əɹ ɡoʊld-ænd-sɪlvɝ bɛlt, ən ðən ənʌðɝ dʒʌs laɪk ɪt, wæɡəlɪŋ ðə pɛɹ ət hɪm. "pipəl ɔlweɪz kip kiz ɪn ə bɑks nɪɹ ðə dɔɹ." ðət wɑz wɛɹ i hæd lɛf hɪz. "ænd noʊ wʌn ɛvɝ θɪŋks ðəɹ maɪt bi ə sɛkən ki." wʌn ki wɛn bæk bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt; ði ʌðɝ wɑz tɝn ɪn ðə lɑk wɪð ə laʊd klɪk bɪfɔɹ dʒɔɪnɪŋ ɪts fɛloʊ. "naʊ, læmbkɪn." ʃi smaɪld.

He recovered himself quickly enough when Tylin said, "Well for you I am not a jealous woman, my sweet." She produced the long iron key to his door from behind her gold-and-silver belt, and then another just like it, waggling the pair at him. "People always keep keys in a box near the door." That was where he had left his. "And no one ever thinks there might be a second key." One key went back behind her belt; the other was turned in the lock with a loud click before joining its fellow. "Now, lambkin." She smiled.

ɪt wɑz tu mʌtʃ. ðə wʊmən haʊndɪd hɪm, tʃɹaɪd tə stɑɹv hɪm; naʊ ʃi lɑkt əm ɪn təɡɛðɝ laɪk . . . laɪk i dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt. læmbkɪn! ðoʊz blʌɾi daɪs wɝ baʊnsɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪn ɪz skʌl. bɪsaɪdz, hi hæɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt bɪznəs tə si tə. ðə daɪs hæd nɛvɝ hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð faɪndɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ, bʌt. . . . hi ɹitʃt əɹ ɪn tu lɔŋ stʃɹaɪdz, sizd əɹ ɑɹm, ən bɪɡæn fʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn əɹ bɛl fəɹ ðə kiz. "aɪ doʊn əv blʌɾi taɪm fəɹ - " hɪz bɹɛθ fɹoʊz əz ðə ʃɑɹp pɔɪn ə hɝ dæɡɝ bɪniθ ɪz tʃɪn ʃʌɾ ɪz maʊθ ən dʒɹoʊv ɪm ɹaɪɾ ʌp ɑntu hɪz toʊz.

It was too much. The woman hounded him, tried to starve him; now she locked them in together like . . . like he did not know what. Lambkin! Those bloody dice were bouncing around in his skull. Besides, he had important business to see to. The dice had never had anything to do with finding something, but. . . . He reached her in two long strides, seized her arm, and began fumbling in her belt for the keys. "I don't have bloody time for - " His breath froze as the sharp point of her dagger beneath his chin shut his mouth and drove him right up onto his toes.

"ɹimuv jəɹ hænd," ʃi sɛd koʊldli. hi mænədʒ tə lʊk daʊn ɪz noʊz əɾ əɹ feɪs. ʃi wɑz nɑt smaɪlɪŋ naʊ. hi lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv əɹ ɑɹm kɛɹfəli. ʃi dɪd nɑt lɛsən ðə pɹɛʃɝ ə hɝ bleɪd, ðoʊ. ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "sk, tsk. aɪ də tʃɹaɪ tə meɪk əlaʊənsɪz fəɹ jə biɪŋ ən aʊtləndɝ, ɡɑsəlɪŋ, bʌt sɪns jə wɪʃ tə pleɪ ɹʌfli. . . . hænz ət jəɹ saɪdz. muv." ðə naɪfpɔɪnt ɡeɪv ə dɝɛkʃən. hi ʃʌfəl bækwɝɾ ɑn tɪptoʊ ɹæðɝ ðən əv ɪz nɛk slaɪst.

"Remove your hand," she said coldly. He managed to look down his nose at her face. She was not smiling now. He let go of her arm carefully. She did not lessen the pressure of her blade, though. She shook her head. "Tsk, tsk. I do try to make allowances for you being an outlander, gosling, but since you wish to play roughly. . . . Hands at your sides. Move." The knifepoint gave a direction. He shuffled backward on tiptoe rather than have his neck sliced.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ tə du?" hi mʌmbəl θɹu hɪz tiθ. ə stʃɹɛtʃt nɛk pʊɾ ə stʃɹeɪn ɪn ɪz vɔɪs. ə stʃɹɛtʃt nɛk əmʌŋ ʌðɝ θɪŋz. "wɛl?" hi kəd tʃɹaɪ ɡɹæbɪŋ əɹ ɹɪst; hi wɑz kwɪk wɪð ɪz hænz. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ tə du?" kwɪk ɪnʌf, wɪð ðə naɪf ɔlɹɛɾi əɾ ɪz θɹoʊt? ðət wɑz ðə kwɛstʃən. ðæt, ən ðə wʌn i æsk hɝ. ɪf ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə kɪl hɪm, ə ʃʌv ə hɝ ɹɪst ɹaɪt ðəɹ wəd dʒɹaɪv ðə dæɡɝ stʃɹeɪɾ ʌp ɪndə hɪz bɹeɪn. "wɪl jə ænsɝ mi!" ðət wɑz nɑt pænɪk ɪn ɪz vɔɪs. hi wɑz nɑɾ ɪn ə pænɪk. "mædʒəsti? taɪlɪn?" wɛl, meɪbi hi wɑz ɪn ə bɪɾ ʌv ə pænɪk, tə juz əɹ neɪm. jə kəd kɔl ɛni wʊmən ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ "dʌklɪŋ" əɹ "pʊɾɪŋ" ɔl deɪ, ən ʃi wəd smaɪl, bʌt juz əɹ neɪm bɪfɔɹ ʃi sɛd jə kʊd, ən jə faʊn ə hɑɾɝ ɹɪsɛpʃən ðən jə wəd fəɹ ɡuzɪŋ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ wʊmən ɑn ðə stʃɹiɾ ɛniwɛɹ ɛls. ə fju kɪsəz ɪkstʃeɪnʒd wɝ nɛvɝ ɪnʌf fəɹ pɝmɪʃən, iðɝ.

"What are you going to do?" he mumbled through his teeth. A stretched neck put a strain in his voice. A stretched neck among other things. "Well?" He could try grabbing her wrist; he was quick with his hands. "What are you going to do?" Quick enough, with the knife already at his throat? That was the question. That, and the one he asked her. If she intended to kill him, a shove of her wrist right there would drive the dagger straight up into his brain. "Will you answer me!" That was not panic in his voice. He was not in a panic. "Majesty? Tylin?" Well, maybe he was in a bit of a panic, to use her name. You could call any woman in Ebou Dar "duckling" or "pudding" all day, and she would smile, but use her name before she said you could, and you found a hotter reception than you would for goosing a strange woman on the street anywhere else. A few kisses exchanged were never enough for permission, either.

taɪlɪn dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ, oʊnli kɛpt ɪm tɪptoʊɪŋ bækwɝd, əntɪl sʌɾənli hɪz ʃoʊldɝz bʌmpt əɡɛnst sʌmθɪŋ ðət stɑp hɪm. wɪð ðət fleɪmɪŋ dæɡɝ nɛvɝ izɪŋ ə hɛɹ, hi kəd nɑt muv ɪz hɛd, bʌɾ aɪz ðət hæd bɪn foʊkəst ɑn əɹ feɪs dɑɹɾɪd. ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ, ə flaʊɝ-kɑɹvd ɹɛd bɪdpoʊs hɑɹd bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz. waɪ wəd ʃi bɹɪŋ ɪm . . . ? hɪz feɪs wɑz sʌɾənli əz kɹɪmzən əz ðə bɪdpoʊst. noʊ. ʃi kəd nɑt min tə. . . . ɪt wɑz nɑt disənt! ɪt wɑz nɑt pɑsəbəl!

Tylin did not answer, only kept him tiptoeing backward, until suddenly his shoulders bumped against something that stopped him. With that flaming dagger never easing a hair, he could not move his head, but eyes that had been focused on her face darted. They were in the bedchamber, a flower-carved red bedpost hard between his shoulder blades. Why would she bring him . . . ? His face was suddenly as crimson as the bedpost. No. She could not mean to. . . . It was not decent! It was not possible!

"ju kæn də ðɪs tə mi," hi mʌmbəld ət hɝ, ən ɪf ɪz vɔɪs wɑz ə tʌtʃ bɹɛθi ən ʃɹɪl, hi ʃʊɹli hæd kɑz.

"You can't do this to me," he mumbled at her, and if his voice was a touch breathy and shrill, he surely had cause.

"wɑtʃ ən lɝn, maɪ kɪɾən," taɪlɪn sɛd, ən dʒɹu hɝ mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf.

"Watch and learn, my kitten," Tylin said, and drew her marriage knife.

æftɝwɝd, ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl taɪm leɪɾɝ, hi ɪɹɪɾəbli pʊl ðə ʃiɾ ʌp tə hɪz tʃɛst. ə sɪlk ʃit; neɪlzin hæd bɪn ɹaɪt. ðə kwin ʌv ɔltɑɹə hʌm hæpəli bɪsaɪd ðə bɛd, ɑɹmz twɪstəd bɪhaɪn əɹ tə də ʌp ðə bʌɾənz ə hɝ dʒɹɛs. ɔl i hæɾ ɑn wɑz ðə fɑkshɛd mədæljən ɑn ɪts kɔɹd - mʌtʃ ɡʊd ðət hæd dʌn - ən ðə blæk skɑɹf taɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk. ə ɹɪbən ɑn əɹ pɹizɛnt, ðə blʌɾi wʊmən kɔld ɪt. hi ɹoʊld oʊvɝ ən snætʃt ɪz sɪlvɝ-maʊntəd paɪp ən təbæk paʊtʃ fɹəm ðə smɔl teɪbəl ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd fɹəm hɝ. ɡoʊldən tɑŋz ən ə hɑt koʊl ɪn ə ɡoʊldən boʊl ə sæn pɹəvaɪɾəd ðə minz fəɹ laɪɾɪŋ. foʊldɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz, hi pʌft əweɪ əz fɪɹsli əz i fɹaʊnd.

Afterward, a considerable time later, he irritably pulled the sheet up to his chest. A silk sheet; Nalesean had been right. The Queen of Altara hummed happily beside the bed, arms twisted behind her to do up the buttons of her dress. All he had on was the foxhead medallion on its cord - much good that had done - and the black scarf tied around his neck. A ribbon on her present, the bloody woman called it. He rolled over and snatched his silver-mounted pipe and tabac pouch from the small table on the other side from her. Golden tongs and a hot coal in a golden bowl of sand provided the means for lighting. Folding his arms, he puffed away as fiercely as he frowned.

"ju ʃəd nɑt flaʊns, dʌklɪŋ, ən jə ʃʊdn paʊt." ʃi jæŋkt əɹ dæɡɝ fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt wɑz dʒɹɪvən ɪndə ə bɪdpoʊs bɪsaɪɾ əɹ mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf, ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ðə pɔɪn bɪfɔɹ ʃiðɪŋ ɪt. "wʌɾ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ? jə noʊ jə ɛndʒɔɪd jɝsɛlf əz mʌtʃ əz aɪ dɪd, ən aɪ. . . ." ʃi læf sʌɾənli, ən oʊ soʊ ɹɪtʃli, ɹiʃiðɪŋ ðə mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf əz wɛl. "ɪf ðəɾ ɪz pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt biɪŋ tɑvɝən minz, jə mʌs bi vɛɹi pɑpjəlɝ." mæt flʌʃt laɪk faɪɝ.

"You should not flounce, duckling, and you shouldn't pout." She yanked her dagger from where it was driven into a bedpost beside her marriage knife, examining the point before sheathing it. "What is the matter? You know you enjoyed yourself as much as I did, and I. . . ." She laughed suddenly, and oh so richly, resheathing the marriage knife as well. "If that is part of what being ta'veren means, you must be very popular." Mat flushed like fire.

"ɪɾ ɪzənt nætʃɹəl," hi bɝst aʊt, jæŋkɪŋ ðə paɪpɛstəm fɹəm bɪtwin ɪz tiθ. "ɪm ðə wʌn huz səpoʊz tə də ðə tʃeɪsɪŋ!" hɝ əstɑnɪʃt aɪz ʃʊɹli mɪɹɝɾ ɪz oʊn. hæd taɪlɪn bɪn ə tævɝn meɪɾ u smaɪl ðə ɹaɪt weɪ, hi maɪɾ əv tʃɹaɪɾ ɪz lʌk - wɛl, ɪf ðə tævɝn meɪd lækt ə sʌn u laɪk poʊkɪŋ hoʊlz ɪn pipəl - bʌɾ i wɑz ðə wʌn u tʃeɪst. hi hæd dʒʌs nɛvɝ θɔɾ ʌv ɪt ðət weɪ bɪfɔɹ. hi hæd nɛvɝ hæd ðə nid tə, bɪfɔɹ.

"It isn't natural," he burst out, yanking the pipestem from between his teeth. "I'm the one who's supposed to do the chasing!" Her astonished eyes surely mirrored his own. Had Tylin been a tavern maid who smiled the right way, he might have tried his luck - well, if the tavern maid lacked a son who liked poking holes in people - but he was the one who chased. He had just never thought of it that way before. He had never had the need to, before.

taɪlɪn bɪɡæn læfɪŋ, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ən waɪpɪŋ əɾ əɹ aɪz wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. "oʊ, pɪdʒən. aɪ də kip fɝɡɛɾɪŋ. jə ɑɹ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, naʊ. aɪ lɛft ə lɪɾəl pɹɛzən fəɹ jə ɪn ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum." ʃi pæɾəd ɪz fʊt θɹu ðə ʃit. "it wɛl tədeɪ. jə ɑɹ gɑnə nid jəɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ."

Tylin began laughing, shaking her head and wiping at her eyes with her fingers. "Oh, pigeon. I do keep forgetting. You are in Ebou Dar, now. I left a little present for you in the sitting room." She patted his foot through the sheet. "Eat well today. You are going to need your strength."

mæt pʊɾ ə hæn oʊvɝ ɪz aɪz ən tʃɹaɪd vɛɹi hɑɹd nɑt tə wip. wən i ənkʌvɝd ðɛm, ʃi wɑz ɡɔn.

Mat put a hand over his eyes and tried very hard not to weep. When he uncovered them, she was gone.

klaɪmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə bɛd, hi tʌk ðə ʃiɾ ɝaʊn hɪm; fəɹ səm ɹizən, ðə noʊʃən ʌv wɔkɪŋ ɝaʊn bɛɹ fɛlt ənkʌmftəɹbəl. ðə blʌɾi wʊmən maɪt lip aʊɾ ə ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb. ðə ɡɑɹməns i hæd bɪn wɛɹɪŋ leɪ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. waɪ bɑðɝ wɪð leɪsəz, hi θɔt saʊɝli, wən jə kən dʒʌs kʌt sʌmbɑɾiz kloʊðz ɔf! ʃi hæd noʊ kɔl tə slaɪs ʌp ɪz ɹɛd koʊt ðət weɪ, ðoʊ. ʃi hæd dʒʌst ɛndʒɔɪd pilɪŋ ɪm wɪð əɹ naɪf.

Climbing out of the bed, he tucked the sheet around him; for some reason, the notion of walking around bare felt uncomfortable. The bloody woman might leap out of the wardrobe. The garments he had been wearing lay on the floor. Why bother with laces, he thought sourly, when you can just cut somebody's clothes off! She had no call to slice up his red coat that way, though. She had just enjoyed peeling him with her knife.

nɑt kwaɪt hoʊldɪŋ ɪz bɹɛθ, hi pʊld oʊpən ðə tɔl ɹɛd-ænd-ɡɪlt wɔɹdʒɹoʊb. ʃi wɑz nɑt haɪɾɪŋ ɪnsaɪd. hɪz tʃɔɪsəz wɝ lɪməɾəd; nɹɪm hæd moʊst ə hɪz koʊts fəɹ klinɪŋ əɹ mɛndɪŋ. dʒɹɛsɪŋ kwɪkli, hi tʃoʊz ə pleɪn koʊɾ ə dɑɹk bɹɑnz sɪlk, ðən stʌf ðə slaɪst ɹæɡz əz fɑɹ ʌndɝ ðə bɛɾ əz i kəd ɹitʃ əntɪl i kəd dɪspoʊz ə ðɛm wɪθaʊt nɹɪm siɪŋ. əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. tu mɛni pipəl ɔlɹɛɾi nu ɪntaɪɝli tu mʌtʃ ʌv wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn bɪtwin ɪm ən taɪlɪn; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ hi kəd feɪs ɛnibəɾi noʊɪŋ ðɪs.

Not quite holding his breath, he pulled open the tall red-and-gilt wardrobe. She was not hiding inside. His choices were limited; Nerim had most of his coats for cleaning or mending. Dressing quickly, he chose a plain coat of dark bronze silk, then stuffed the sliced rags as far under the bed as he could reach until he could dispose of them without Nerim seeing. Or anyone else, for that matter. Too many people already knew entirely too much of what was going on between him and Tylin; there was no way he could face anybody knowing this.

ɪn ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, hi lɪftəd ðə lɪɾ ə ðə lækɹwɛɹ bɑks baɪ ðə dɔɹ, ðən lɛɾ ɪt fɔl wɪð ə saɪ; hi hæd nɑt ɹɪli ɪkspɛktəd taɪlɪn tə ɹipleɪs ðə ki. hi lin əɡɛns ðə dɔɹ. ði ənlɑk dɔɹ. laɪt, wʌt wɑz i ɡoʊɪŋ tə du? muv bæk tə ði ɪn? bɝn waɪ ðə daɪs hæd stɑp bɪfɔɹ. oʊnli, hi wəd nɑt pʊɾ ɪt pæs taɪlɪn tə bɹaɪb mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən ən inɪd, əɹ ði ɪnkipɝ wɛɹɛvɝ i wɛnt. hi wəd nɑt pʊɾ ɪt pæs nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn tə kleɪm i hæd bɹoʊkən səm əɡɹimən ən pʊɾ ən ɛn tə ðɛɹ pɹɑməsəz. bɝn ɔl wɪmən!

In the sitting room, he lifted the lid of the lacquerware box by the door, then let it fall with a sigh; he had not really expected Tylin to replace the key. He leaned against the door. The unlocked door. Light, what was he going to do? Move back to the inn? Burn why the dice had stopped before. Only, he would not put it past Tylin to bribe Mistress Anan and Enid, or the innkeeper wherever he went. He would not put it past Nynaeve and Elayne to claim he had broken some agreement and put an end to their promises. Burn all women!

ə lɑɹdʒ pɑɹsəl ɪlæbɹətli ɹæpt ɪn ɡɹin peɪpɝ sæɾ ɑn wʌn ə ðə teɪbəlz. ɪt kənteɪn ən iɡəl mæsk ɪn blæk ən ɡoʊld ən ə koʊt kʌvɝd wɪð fɛðɝz tə mætʃ. ðəɹ wɑz ɔlsoʊ ə ɹɛd sɪlk pɝs hoʊldɪŋ twɛnti ɡoʊl kɹaʊnz ən ə noʊt ðət smɛld ə flaʊɝz.

A large parcel elaborately wrapped in green paper sat on one of the tables. It contained an eagle mask in black and gold and a coat covered with feathers to match. There was also a red silk purse holding twenty gold crowns and a note that smelled of flowers.

aɪ wʊɾə bɑt jə ən ɪɹɪŋ, paɪɡlɛt, bʌɾ aɪ noʊɾəst jəɹ ɪɹ ɪz nɑt pɪɹst. hæv ɪt dʌn, ən baɪ jɝsɛlf sʌmθɪŋ naɪs.

I would have bought you an earring, piglet, but I noticed your ear is not pierced. Have it done, and buy yourself something nice.

hi nɪɹli wɛpt əɡɛn. hi ɡeɪv wɪmən pɹizɛns. ðə wɝld wɑz stændɪŋ ɑn ɪts hɛd! paɪɡlɛt? oʊ, laɪt! æftɝ ə mɪnət, hi dɪd teɪk ðə mæsk; ʃi oʊɾ ɪm ðət mʌtʃ, fəɹ ɪz koʊɾ əloʊn.

He nearly wept again. He gave women presents. The world was standing on its head! Piglet? Oh, Light! After a minute, he did take the mask; she owed him that much, for his coat alone.

wən i faɪnəli ɹitʃt ðə smɔl, ʃeɪɾɪd kɔɹtʃjɑɹd wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn miɾɪŋ itʃ mɔɹnɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ə taɪni ɹaʊn pul ə lɪli pædz ən bɹaɪtli spɑɾəd waɪt fɪʃ, hi faʊnd neɪlzin ən bɝdʒɪt ɹɛɾi fəɹ ðə fɛstəvəl ə bɝdz, tu. ðə tɛɹən hæd kəntɛntəd hɪmsɛlf wɪð ə pleɪn ɡɹin mæsk, bʌt bɝdʒɪts wɑz ə spɹeɪ ʌv jɛloʊ-ænd-ɹɛd wɪð ə kɹɛst ə plumz, hɝ ɡoʊldən hɛɹ hʌŋ lus, wɪð fɛðɝz taɪɾ ɔl daʊn ɪts lɛŋθ, ən ʃi wɔɹ ə dʒɹɛs wɪð ə waɪd jɛloʊ bɛlt, daɪəfənəs bɪniθ mɔɹ ɹɛɾ ən jɛloʊ fɛðɝz. ɪt dɪd nɑt ɹɪvil nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ əz ɹaɪzɛlz, jɛɾ ɪt simd əbaʊt tə ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi muvd. hi hæd nɛvɝ θɔɾ ə hɝ wɛɹɪŋ ə dʒɹɛs laɪk ʌðɝ wɪmən.

When he finally reached the small, shaded courtyard where they had been meeting each morning beside a tiny round pool of lily pads and brightly spotted white fish, he found Nalesean and Birgitte ready for the Festival of Birds, too. The Tairen had contented himself with a plain green mask, but Birgitte's was a spray of yellow-and-red with a crest of plumes, her golden hair hung loose, with feathers tied all down its length, and she wore a dress with a wide yellow belt, diaphanous beneath more red and yellow feathers. It did not reveal nearly as much as Riselle's, yet it seemed about to every time she moved. He had never thought of her wearing a dress like other women.

"səmtaɪmz ɪts fʌn tə bi lʊkt æt," ʃi sɛd, poʊkɪŋ ɪm ɪn ðə ɹɪbz, wən i kɑmɛntəd. hɝ ɡɹɪn wʊɾə dʌn fəɹ neɪlzin seɪɪŋ haʊ mʌtʃ fʌn ɪt wɑz tə pɪntʃ sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz. "ðɛɹz ə lɑt mɔɹ tə ɪt ðən fɛðɝ dænsɝz wɔɹ, bʌt nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə ɪt tə sloʊ mi daʊn, ən ɛniweɪ, aɪ kænɑt si wɪl əv tə muv kwɪkli ɑn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ." ðə daɪs ɹæɾəld ɪn ɪz hɛd. "wʌt kɛp ju?" ʃi wɛn ɑn. "ju dɪdn meɪk əs weɪt soʊ jə kəd tɪkəl ə pɹɪɾi ɡɝl, aɪ hoʊp." hi hoʊpt i wɑz nɑt blʌʃɪŋ.

"Sometimes it's fun to be looked at," she said, poking him in the ribs, when he commented. Her grin would have done for Nalesean saying how much fun it was to pinch serving girls. "There's a lot more to it than feather dancers wore, but not enough to it to slow me down, and anyway, I cannot see we'll have to move quickly on this side of the river." The dice rattled in his head. "What kept you?" she went on. "You didn't make us wait so you could tickle a pretty girl, I hope." He hoped he was not blushing.

"aɪ - " hi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən wʌɾ ɪkskjus i wəɾ əv meɪd, bʌt dʒʌs ðən hæf ə dʌzən mɛn wɛɹɪŋ fɛðɝd koʊts stʃɹoʊld ɪndə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, ɔl wɪð ðoʊz nɛɹoʊ sɔɹdz ɑn ðɛɹ hɪps, ɔl bʌt wʌn wɛɹɪŋ ən ɪlæbɹət mæsk wɪð kʌlɝfəl kɹɛst ən bik ðət ɹɛpɹəzɛntəd noʊ bɝɾ ɛvɝ sin baɪ hjumən aɪz. ði ɪksɛpʃən wɑz bɛslən, twɝlɪŋ ɪz mæsk baɪ ɪts ɹɪbən. "oʊ, blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz, wʌts i duɪŋ hɪɹ?"

"I - " He was not certain what excuse he would have made, but just then half a dozen men wearing feathered coats strolled into the courtyard, all with those narrow swords on their hips, all but one wearing an elaborate mask with colorful crest and beak that represented no bird ever seen by human eyes. The exception was Beslan, twirling his mask by its ribbon. "Oh, blood and bloody ashes, what's he doing here?"

"bɛslən?" neɪlzin foʊldəɾ ɪz hænz ɑn ðə pɑməl ə hɪz sɔɹɾ ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ɪn dɪsbɪlif. "waɪ, bɝn maɪ soʊl, hi sɛz i ɪntɛnz tə spɛn ðə fɛstəvəl ɪn jəɹ kʌmpəni. səm pɹɑməs jə tu meɪd, hi sɛz. aɪ toʊld ɪm ɪt wəd bi dɛdli bɔɹɪŋ, bʌɾ i wʊdn bɪliv mi."

"Beslan?" Nalesean folded his hands on the pommel of his sword and shook his head in disbelief. "Why, burn my soul, he says he intends to spend the festival in your company. Some promise you two made, he says. I told him it would be deadly boring, but he wouldn't believe me."

"aɪ kænɑt θɪŋk ɪts ɛvɝ bɔɹɪŋ ɝaʊn mæt," taɪlɪnz sʌn sɛd; hɪz baʊ tʊk əm ɔl ɪn, bʌɾ ɪz dɑɹk aɪz ɪspɛʃli lɪŋɡɝɾ ɑn bɝdʒɪt. "aɪv nɛvɝ hæd soʊ mʌtʃ fʌn əz aɪ dɪd dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ wɪð ɪm ən ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪnz wɔɹɾɝ ɑn swʊvən naɪt, ðoʊ tʃɹuθ, aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ lɪɾəl." hi dɪd nɑt sim tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðət wɔɹɾɝ. stʃɹeɪnʒli, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðə teɪst ʃi hæd ʃoʊn ɪn mɛn - bɛslən wɑz faɪn-lʊkɪŋ, meɪbi ə lɪɾəl tu faɪn, nɑɾ əɾ ɔl əɹ sɔɹt - stʃɹeɪnʒli, ʃi smaɪl slaɪtli, ən pɹin ʌndɝ ɪz skɹuɾəni.

"I cannot think it is ever boring around Mat," Tylin's son said; his bow took them all in, but his dark eyes especially lingered on Birgitte. "I've never had so much fun as I did drinking with him and the Lady Elayne's Warder on Swovan Night, though truth, I remember little." He did not seem to recognize that Warder. Strangely, considering the taste she had shown in men - Beslan was fine-looking, maybe a little too fine, not at all her sort - strangely, she smiled slightly, and preened under his scrutiny.

ɹaɪt ðɛn, mæt dɪd nɑt kɛɹ haʊ aʊɾ ə kɛɹɪktɝ ʃi bɪheɪvd. ɑbviəsli bɛslən səspɛktəd nʌθɪŋ, əɹ ðət sɔɹɾ ə hɪz laɪkli wəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bi aʊt, bʌt ðə læs θɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt mæt wɑntəd wɑz ə deɪ ɪn kʌmpəni wɪð ðə mæn. ɪt wəd bi ɪkskɹuʃieɪɾɪŋ. hi hæd səm sɛns ə disənsi, ivən ɪf bɛslənz mʌðɝ dɪd nɑt.

Right then, Mat did not care how out of character she behaved. Obviously Beslan suspected nothing, or that sword of his likely would already be out, but the last thing under the Light Mat wanted was a day in company with the man. It would be excruciating. He had some sense of decency, even if Beslan's mother did not.

ði oʊnli pɹɑbləm wɑz bɛslən, hu tʊk ðət blʌɾi pɹɑməs tə ətɛn ɔl ðə fɛstəvəlz ən fistdeɪz təɡɛðɝ vɛɹi sɪɹiəsli. ðə mɔɹ mæt əɡɹid wɪð neɪlzin ðət ðə deɪ ðeɪ hæd plænd wəd bi dʌl bɪɑn bɪlif, ðə mɔɹ dɪtɝmən bɛslən ɡɹu. æftɝ ə bɪt, hɪz feɪs bɪɡæn tə dɑɹkən, ən mæt bɪɡæn tə θɪŋk ðət sɔɹd maɪt bi ənʃið jɛt. wɛl, ə pɹɑməs wɑz ə pɹɑməs. wən i ən neɪlzin ən bɝdʒɪt lɛf ðə pæləs, hæf ə dʌzən fɛðɝd fulz stʃɹʌɾɪd əlɔŋ. mæt wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wəd nɑɾ əv hæpən hæd bɝdʒɪt bɪn wɛɹɪŋ əɹ pɹɑpɝ kloʊðz. ðə hoʊl lɑɾ ə ðɛm kɛpt aɪɪŋ əɹ ən smaɪlɪŋ.

The only problem was Beslan, who took that bloody promise to attend all the festivals and feastdays together very seriously. The more Mat agreed with Nalesean that the day they had planned would be dull beyond belief, the more determined Beslan grew. After a bit, his face began to darken, and Mat began to think that sword might be unsheathed yet. Well, a promise was a promise. When he and Nalesean and Birgitte left the palace, half a dozen feathered fools strutted along. Mat was sure it would not have happened had Birgitte been wearing her proper clothes. The whole lot of them kept eyeing her and smiling.

"wʌt wɑz ɔl ðət twɪstɪŋ ɝaʊnd waɪl i wɑz spɪlɪŋ ɪz aɪz ɔl oʊvɝ ju?" hi mʌɾɝd əz ðeɪ kɹɔs ðə mɔl hɛɹə. hi tʌɡd ðə ɹɪbən hoʊldɪŋ ði iɡəl mæsk taɪɾɝ.

"What was all that twisting around while he was spilling his eyes all over you?" he muttered as they crossed the Mol Hara. He tugged the ribbon holding the eagle mask tighter.

"aɪ dɪd nɑt twɪst, aɪ muvd." hɝ pɹɪmnəs wɑz soʊ bleɪɾəntli fɔls, hi wʊɾə læf səm ʌðɝ taɪm. "slaɪtli." əbɹʌpli hɝ ɡɹɪn wɑz bæk, ən ʃi loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs fəɹ ɪz ɪɹ əloʊn. "aɪ toʊl jə səmtaɪmz ɪts fʌn tə bi lʊkt æt; dʒʌs kəz ðəɹ ɔl tu pɹɪɾi dʌzn min aɪ kænɑɾ ɛndʒɔɪ ðɛm lʊkɪŋ. oʊ, jəl wɑnə lʊk ət hɝ," ʃi æɾəd, pɔɪntɪŋ tə ə slɛndɝ wʊmən u wɛn ɹʌnɪŋ baɪ ɪn ə blu aʊl mæsk ən ɹæðɝ fjuɝ fɛðɝz ðən ɹaɪzɛl hæd wɔɹn.

"I did not twist, I moved." Her primness was so blatantly false, he would have laughed some other time. "Slightly." Abruptly her grin was back, and she lowered her voice for his ear alone. "I told you sometimes it's fun to be looked at; just because they're all too pretty doesn't mean I cannot enjoy them looking. Oh, you'll want to look at her," she added, pointing to a slender woman who went running by in a blue owl mask and rather fewer feathers than Riselle had worn.

ðət wɑz wʌn ə ðə θɪŋz əbaʊt bɝdʒɪt; ʃi wəd nʌdʒ ɪm ɪn ðə ɹɪbz ən pɔɪn aʊɾ ə pɹɪɾi ɡɝl fəɹ ɪz aɪ əz ɹɛɾəli əz ɛni mæn i hæɾ ɛvɝ noʊn, ən ɪkspɛkt ɪm tə pɔɪn aʊɾ ɪn tɝn wʌt ʃi laɪk tə si, wɪtʃ wɑz dʒɛnɝəli ði ʌɡliəs mæn ɪn saɪt. wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ʃi tʃoʊz tə ɡoʊ hæf-neɪkəd tədeɪ - ə kɔɹɾɝ, ɛniweɪ - ʃi wɑz . . . wɛl, ə fɹɛnd. ə stʃɹeɪnʒ wɝld, ɪt wɑz tɝnɪŋ aʊt tə bi. wʌn wʊmən i wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə θɪŋk ʌv əz ə dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ kəmpænjən, ən ənʌðɝ æftɝ ɪm əz ɪntɛnli əz i hæɾ ɛvɝ pɝsuɾ ɛni pɹɪɾi wʊmən, ɪn ðoʊz oʊl mɛmɹiz əɹ ɪz oʊn. mɔɹ ɪntɛnli; hi hæd nɛvɝ tʃeɪst ɛni wʊmən u lɛɾ ɪm noʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi tʃeɪst. ə vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ wɝld.

That was one of the things about Birgitte; she would nudge him in the ribs and point out a pretty girl for his eye as readily as any man he had ever known, and expect him to point out in turn what she liked to see, which was generally the ugliest man in sight. Whether or not she chose to go half-naked today - a quarter, anyway - she was . . . well, a friend. A strange world, it was turning out to be. One woman he was beginning to think of as a drinking companion, and another after him as intently as he had ever pursued any pretty woman, in those old memories or his own. More intently; he had never chased any woman who let him know she did not want to be chased. A very strange world.

ðə sʌn stʊd lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən hæfweɪ tə ɪts pik, bʌɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sɛləbɹəns fɪl ðə stʃɹits ən skwɛɹz ən bɹɪdʒəz. tʌmblɝz ən dʒʌɡəlɝz ən mjuzɪʃənz wɪð fɛðɝz soʊn əbaʊt ðɛɹ kloʊðz pɝfɔɹmd əɾ ɛvɹi stʃɹit kɔɹnɝ, ðə mjuzɪk ɔfən dʒɹaʊn ɪn læftɝ ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ. fəɹ ðə pʊɹɝ foʊk ə fju fɛðɝz leɪst ɪndə ðɛɹ hɛɹ səfaɪst, pɪdʒən fɛðɝz ɡæðɝd fɹəm ðə peɪvmən fəɹ ðə stʃɹit tʃɪlʒɹən dɑdʒɪŋ əbaʊɾ ən ðə bɛɡɝz, bʌt mæsks ən kɑstumz ɡɹu mɔɹ ɪlæbɹəɾ əz pɝsɪz ɡɹu hɛviɝ. mɔɹ ɪlæbɹət, ən fɹikwənli mɔɹ skændələs. mɛn ən wɪmən əlaɪk wɝ ɔfən dɛkt ɪn fɛðɝz ðət ɹɪvil mɔɹ skɪn ðən ɹaɪzɛl əɹ ðət wʊmən bæk ɪn ðə mɔl hɛɹə. noʊ kɑmɝs muvd ɪn ðə stʃɹits əɹ kənælz tədeɪ, ðoʊ ə nʌmbɝ ə ʃɑps sim tə bi oʊpən - əlɔŋ wɪð ɛvɹi tævɝn ən ɪn, ʌv kɔɹs - bʌt hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ə wæɡən meɪɾ ɪts weɪ θɹu ðə θɹɔŋ əɹ ə bɑɹdʒ wɑz poʊld əlɔŋ səpɔɹɾɪŋ ə plætfɔɹm wɛɹ jʌŋ mɛn ən wɪmən poʊzd ɪn bɹaɪt bɝd mæsks ðət kʌvɝd ðɛɹ ɪntaɪɝ hɛdz, wɪð spɹɛɾɪŋ kɹɛsts səmtaɪmz ɹaɪzɪŋ ə fʊl peɪs, muvɪŋ lɔŋ kʌlɝfəl wɪŋz ɪn sətʃ ə weɪ ðət ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛɹ kɑstumz wɝ ɪkspoʊzd oʊnli ɪn flæʃɪz. wɪtʃ wɑz dʒʌst əz wɛl, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ.

The sun stood little more than halfway to its peak, but already celebrants filled the streets and squares and bridges. Tumblers and jugglers and musicians with feathers sewn about their clothes performed at every street corner, the music often drowned in laughter and shouting. For the poorer folk a few feathers laced into their hair sufficed, pigeon feathers gathered from the pavement for the street children dodging about and the beggars, but masks and costumes grew more elaborate as purses grew heavier. More elaborate, and frequently more scandalous. Men and women alike were often decked in feathers that revealed more skin than Riselle or that woman back in the Mol Hara. No commerce moved in the streets or canals today, though a number of shops seemed to be open - along with every tavern and inn, of course - but here and there a wagon made its way through the throng or a barge was poled along supporting a platform where young men and women posed in bright bird masks that covered their entire heads, with spreading crests sometimes rising a full pace, moving long colorful wings in such a way that the rest of their costumes were exposed only in flashes. Which was just as well, considering.

əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə bɛslən, ðiz sɛɾɪŋz, əz ðeɪ wɝ kɔld, wɝ juʒəwəli pɹizɛntəɾ ɪn ɡɪl hɔlz ən pɹaɪvət pæləsəz ən haʊzɪz. ði ɪntaɪɝ fɛstəvəl nɔɹməli tʊk pleɪs ɪndɔɹz fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt. ɪt dɪd nɑt snoʊ pɹɑpɝli ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ ivən wən ðə wɛðɝ wɑz əz ɪt ʃəd bi - bɛslən sɛɾ i wəd laɪk tə si ðɪs snoʊ, wʌn deɪ - bʌɾ əpɛɹənli ɔɹɾənɛɹi wɪntɝ wɑz koʊld ɪnʌf tə kip pipəl fɹəm ɹʌnɪŋ ɝaʊn aʊtdɔɹz ɔl bʌɾ ʌn-kloʊðd. wɪð ðə hit, ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz spɪlɪŋ ɪndə ðə stʃɹits. weɪɾ əntɪl naɪt fɛl, bɛslən sɛd; ðən mæt wəd ɹɪli si sʌmθɪŋ. əz sʌnlaɪt feɪɾəd, soʊ dɪɾ ɪnhəbɪʃənz.

According to Beslan, these settings, as they were called, were usually presented in guild halls and private palaces and houses. The entire festival normally took place indoors for the most part. It did not snow properly in Ebou Dar even when the weather was as it should be - Beslan said he would like to see this snow, one day - but apparently ordinary winter was cold enough to keep people from running around outdoors all but un-clothed. With the heat, everything was spilling into the streets. Wait until night fell, Beslan said; then Mat would really see something. As sunlight faded, so did inhibitions.

stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ə tɔl slɛndɝ wʊmən ɡlaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ θɹu ðə kɹaʊɾ ɪn mæsk ən fɛðɝd kloʊk ən bɪɑn ðæt, sɪks əɹ sɛvən fɛðɝz, mæt wʌndɝd wʌɾ ɪnhəbɪʃənz səm ə ðiz foʊk hæd lɛf tə ʃɛd. hi ɔlmoʊst ʃaʊɾəd əɾ əɹ tə kʌvɝ hɝsɛlf wɪð ðət kloʊk. ʃi wɑz pɹɪɾi, bʌɾ aʊɾ ɪn ðə stʃɹit, bɪfɔɹ ðə laɪɾ ən ɛvɹibɑɾi?

Staring at a tall slender woman gliding along through the crowd in mask and feathered cloak and beyond that, six or seven feathers, Mat wondered what inhibitions some of these folk had left to shed. He almost shouted at her to cover herself with that cloak. She was pretty, but out in the street, before the Light and everybody?

ðoʊz wæɡənz kæɹiɪŋ ðə sɛɾɪŋz ətʃɹæktəd fɑloʊɝz, ʌv kɔɹs, θɪk nɑts ə mɛn ən wɪmən u ʃaʊɾəd ən læft əz ðeɪ tɔs kɔɪnz, ən səmtaɪmz foʊldəd noʊts, ɑntu ðə wæɡənz ən skwizd ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ɪn ðə stʃɹiɾ əsaɪd. hi bɪkeɪm juz tə fliɪŋ əhɛɾ əntɪl ðeɪ kəd dʌk daʊn ə kɹɔsɪŋ stʃɹit, əɹ weɪɾɪŋ əntɪl ðə sɛɾɪŋ wɛn baɪ tə kɹɔs ən ɪntɝsɛkʃən əɹ bɹɪdʒ. waɪl weɪɾɪŋ, bɝdʒɪɾ ən neɪlzin tɔs kɔɪnz tə fɪlθi ɝtʃənz ən dɝɾiɝ bɛɡɝz. wɛl, neɪlzin tɔst; bɝdʒɪt kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, ən pɹɛst itʃ kɔɪn ɪndə ə ɡɹʌbi hæn laɪk ə ɡɪft.

Those wagons carrying the settings attracted followers, of course, thick knots of men and women who shouted and laughed as they tossed coins, and sometimes folded notes, onto the wagons and squeezed everyone else in the street aside. He became used to fleeing ahead until they could duck down a crossing street, or waiting until the setting went by to cross an intersection or bridge. While waiting, Birgitte and Nalesean tossed coins to filthy urchins and dirtier beggars. Well, Nalesean tossed; Birgitte concentrated on the children, and pressed each coin into a grubby hand like a gift.

ɪn wʌn ə ðoʊz weɪts, bɛslən sʌɾənli pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn neɪlzinz ɑɹm, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs əbʌv ðə kɹaʊɾ ən ə kækɑfəni ʌv mjuzɪk kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ət list sɪks dɪfɹən pleɪsəz. "fɝɡɪv mi, tɛɹən, bʌt nɑt hɪm." ə ɹæɡəd mæn ɛdʒ bæk ɪndə ðə θɹɔŋ, wɛɹəli; ɡɔnt-tʃikt ən boʊni, hi sim tə hæv lɔst wʌtɛvɝ pɪɾəfəl fɛðɝz i maɪɾ əv faʊn fəɹ ɪz hɛɹ.

In one of those waits, Beslan suddenly put a hand on Nalesean's arm, raising his voice above the crowd and a cacophony of music coming from at least six different places. "Forgive me, Tairen, but not him." A ragged man edged back into the throng, warily; gaunt-cheeked and bony, he seemed to have lost whatever pitiful feathers he might have found for his hair.

"waɪ nɑt?" neɪlzin dɪmændəd.

"Why not?" Nalesean demanded.

"noʊ bɹæs ɹɪŋ ɑn ɪz lɪɾəl fɪŋɡɝ," bɛslən ɹɪplaɪd. "hiz nɑɾ ɪn ðə ɡɪld."

"No brass ring on his little finger," Beslan replied. "He's not in the guild."

"laɪt," mæt sɛd, "ə mæn kæn ivən bɛɡ ɪn ðɪs sɪɾi wɪθaʊt bɪlɔŋɪŋ tə ə ɡɪld?" meɪbi ɪt wɑz ɪz toʊn. ðə bɛɡɝ lɛp fəɹ ɪz θɹoʊt, ə naɪf əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɡɹaɪmi fɪst.

"Light," Mat said, "a man can't even beg in this city without belonging to a guild?" Maybe it was his tone. The beggar leaped for his throat, a knife appearing in his grimy fist.

wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, mæt ɡɹæb ðə mænz ɑɹm ən spʌn, slɪŋɪŋ ɪm əweɪ ɪndə ðə kɹaʊd; səm pipəl kɝst ət mæt, səm ət ðə spɹɔlɪŋ bɛɡɝ. səm tɔs ðə fɛloʊ ə kɔɪn.

Without thinking, Mat grabbed the man's arm and spun, slinging him away into the crowd; some people cursed at Mat, some at the sprawling beggar. Some tossed the fellow a coin.

fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, mæt sɔ ə sɛkən skɪni mæn ɪn ɹæɡz tʃɹaɪ tə pʊʃ bɝdʒɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ tə ɹitʃ ɪm wɪð ə lɔŋ naɪf. ɪt wɑz ə fulɪʃ mɪsteɪk tə ʌndɝɛstəmeɪt ðə wʊmən kəz ə hɝ kɑstum; fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ əmʌŋ ðoʊz fɛðɝz ʃi pɹədust ə naɪf ən stæbd ɪm bɪniθ ði ɑɹm.

From the corner of his eye, Mat saw a second skinny man in rags try to push Birgitte out of the way to reach him with a long knife. It was a foolish mistake to underestimate the woman because of her costume; from somewhere among those feathers she produced a knife and stabbed him beneath the arm.

"lʊk aʊt!" mæt ʃaʊɾəd ət hɝ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ wɔɹnɪŋz; ivən əz i ʃaʊɾəd, hi dʒɹu fɹəm ɪz koʊt-sliv ən θɹu saɪdɪɹmd. ðə bleɪd stʃɹik pæst əɹ feɪs tə sɪŋk ɪndə ðə θɹoʊɾ ə jɛɾ ənʌðɝ bɛɡɝ flɔntɪŋ stil bɪfɔɹ i kəd plæn ɪɾ ɪn əɹ ɹɪbz.

"Look out!" Mat shouted at her, but there was no time for warnings; even as he shouted, he drew from his coat-sleeve and threw sidearmed. The blade streaked past her face to sink into the throat of yet another beggar flaunting steel before he could plant it in her ribs.

sʌɾənli ðəɹ wɝ bɛɡɝz ɛvɹiwɛɹ wɪð naɪvz, ən klʌbz stʌɾɪd wɪð spaɪks; skɹimz ən ʃaʊts ɹoʊz əz pipəl ɪn mæsks ən kɑstumz skɹæmbəl tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ. neɪlzin slæʃt ə mæn ɪn ɹæɡz əkɹɔs ðə feɪs, sɛndɪŋ ɪm ɹilɪŋ; bɛslən ɹæn ənʌðɝ θɹu ðə mɪɾəl, waɪl ɪz kɔstum kɹoʊniz fɔt stɪl ʌðɝz.

Suddenly there were beggars everywhere with knives, and clubs studded with spikes; screams and shouts rose as people in masks and costumes scrambled to get out of the way. Nalesean slashed a man in rags across the face, sending him reeling; Beslan ran another through the middle, while his costumed cronies fought still others.

mæt hæd noʊ taɪm tə si mɔɹ; hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf bæk-tə-bæk wɪð bɝdʒɪɾ ən feɪsɪŋ ɪz oʊn ædvɝsɛɹiz. hi kəd fil əɹ ʃɪftɪŋ əɡɛns hɪm, hɪɹ əɹ mʌɾɝ kɝsɪz, bʌɾ i wɑz bɛɹli kɑnʃəs ʌv ɪt; bɝdʒɪt kəd teɪk kɛɹ ə hɝsɛlf, ən wɑtʃɪŋ ðə tu mɛn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i kəd də ðə seɪm. ðə hʌlkɪŋ fɛloʊ wɪð ðə tuθləs snɪɹ hæɾ oʊnli wʌn ɑɹm ən ə pʌkɝd sɑkət wɛɹ ɪz lɛft aɪ hæd bɪn, bʌɾ ɪz fɪs hɛld ə klʌb tu fit lɔŋ, ɪnsɝkəl baɪ aɪɝn bænz ðət spɹaʊɾəd spaɪks laɪk stil θɔɹnz. hɪz ɹæt-feɪs lɪɾəl kəmpænjən stɪl hæd boʊθ aɪz ən sɛvɹəl tiθ, ən dɪspaɪt sʌŋkən tʃiks ən ɑɹmz ðət simd ɔl boʊn ən sɪnu, hi muv laɪk ə sneɪk, lɪkɪŋ ɪz lɪps ən flɪkɪŋ ə ɹʌsti dæɡɝ fɹəm hæn tə hænd. mæt eɪm ðə ʃɔɹɾɝ naɪf ɪn ɪz oʊn hæn fɝst ət wʌn, ðən ði ʌðɝ. ɪt wɑz stɪl lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɹitʃ ə mænz vaɪɾəlz, ən ðeɪ dænst ən ʃʌfəld, itʃ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ði ʌðɝ tə lip əɾ ɪm fɝst.

Mat had no time to see more; he found himself back-to-back with Birgitte and facing his own adversaries. He could feel her shifting against him, hear her mutter curses, but he was barely conscious of it; Birgitte could take care of herself, and watching the two men in front of him, he was not sure he could do the same. The hulking fellow with the toothless sneer had only one arm and a puckered socket where his left eye had been, but his fist held a club two feet long, encircled by iron bands that sprouted spikes like steel thorns. His rat-faced little companion still had both eyes and several teeth, and despite sunken cheeks and arms that seemed all bone and sinew, he moved like a snake, licking his lips and flicking a rusty dagger from hand to hand. Mat aimed the shorter knife in his own hand first at one, then the other. It was still long enough to reach a man's vitals, and they danced and shuffled, each waiting for the other to leap at him first.

"oʊl kʌli woʊn laɪk ðɪs, spɑɹ," ðə bɪɡɝ mæn ɡɹaʊld, ən ɹæt-feɪs dɑɹɾɪd fɔɹwɝd, ɹʌsti bleɪd flæʃɪŋ fɹəm hæn tə hænd.

"Old Cully won't like this, Spar," the bigger man growled, and rat-face darted forward, rusty blade flashing from hand to hand.

hi dɪd nɑt kaʊn ɑn ðə naɪf ðət sʌɾənli əpɪɹɾ ɪn mæts lɛf hæn ən slaɪst əkɹɔs ɪz ɹɪst. ðə dæɡɝ klæɾɝd tə ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz, bʌt ðə fɛloʊ flʌŋ hɪmsɛlf ət mæt ɛniweɪ. əz mæts ʌðɝ bleɪd stæbd ɪndə hɪz tʃɛst, hi skwild, aɪz ɡoʊɪŋ waɪd, ɑɹmz ɹæpɪŋ ɝaʊn mæt kənvʌlsɪvli. ðə bɔl fɛloʊz snɪɹ waɪɾənd, hɪz klʌb ɹaɪzɪŋ əz i stɛpt ɪn.

He did not count on the knife that suddenly appeared in Mat's left hand and sliced across his wrist. The dagger clattered to the paving stones, but the fellow flung himself at Mat anyway. As Mat's other blade stabbed into his chest, he squealed, eyes going wide, arms wrapping around Mat convulsively. The bald fellow's sneer widened, his club rising as he stepped in.

ðə ɡɹɪn vænɪʃt əz tu bɛɡɝz swɔɹmd oʊvɝ hɪm, snɑɹlɪŋ ən stæbɪŋ.

The grin vanished as two beggars swarmed over him, snarling and stabbing.

stɛɹɪŋ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli, mæt ʃʌvd ɹæt-feɪsəz kɔɹps əweɪ. ðə stʃɹit wɑz klɪɹ fəɹ fɪfti peɪsɪz ɪksɛp fəɹ kəmbæɾənts, ən ɛvɹiwɛɹ bɛɡɝz ɹoʊld ɑn ðə peɪvmənt, tu əɹ θɹi əɹ səmtaɪmz fɔɹ stæbɪŋ ət wʌn, biɾɪŋ ɪm wɪð klʌbz əɹ ɹɑks.

Staring incredulously, Mat shoved rat-face's corpse away. The street was clear for fifty paces except for combatants, and everywhere beggars rolled on the pavement, two or three or sometimes four stabbing at one, beating him with clubs or rocks.

bɛslən kɑt mæts ɑɹm. ðəɹ wɑz blʌɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs, bʌɾ i wɑz ɡɹɪnɪŋ. "lɛts ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ ən lɛt ðə fɛloʊʃɪp ʌv ɑlmz fɪnɪʃ ɪts bɪznəs. ðɛɹz noʊ ɑnɝ ɪn faɪɾɪŋ bɛɡɝz, ən bɪsaɪdz, ðə ɡɪld woʊn liv ɛni ʌv ðiz ɪntɝloʊpɝz əlaɪv. fɑloʊ mi." neɪlzin wɑz skaʊlɪŋ - daʊtləs i sɔ noʊ ɑnɝ ɪn faɪɾɪŋ bɛɡɝz iðɝ - ən bɛslənz fɹɛnz, sɛvɹəl wɪð ðɛɹ kɑstumz ɝaɪ ən wʌn wɪð ɪz mæsk ɔf soʊ ənʌðɝ kəd dæb əɾ ə kʌɾ əkɹɔs ɪz fɔɹhɛd. ðə mæn wɪð ðə kʌt wɑz ɡɹɪnɪŋ, tu. bɝdʒɪt bɔɹ nɑɾ ə skɹætʃ ðət mæt kəd si, ən əɹ kɑstum lʊkt əz niɾ əz ɪt hæd bæk ɪn ðə pæləs. ʃi meɪɾ əɹ naɪf dɪsəpɪɹ; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ ʃi kəd haɪɾ ə bleɪɾ ʌndɝ ðoʊz fɛðɝz, bʌt ʃi dɪd.

Beslan caught Mat's arm. There was blood on his face, but he was grinning. "Let's get out of here and let the Fellowship of Alms finish its business. There's no honor in fighting beggars, and besides, the guild won't leave any of these interlopers alive. Follow me." Nalesean was scowling - doubtless he saw no honor in fighting beggars either - and Beslan's friends, several with their costumes awry and one with his mask off so another could dab at a cut across his forehead. The man with the cut was grinning, too. Birgitte bore not a scratch that Mat could see, and her costume looked as neat as it had back in the palace. She made her knife disappear; there was no way she could hide a blade under those feathers, but she did.

mæt meɪd noʊ pɹoʊɾɛst ət biɪŋ dʒɹɔn əweɪ, bʌɾ i dɪd ɡɹaʊl, "du bɛɡɝz ɔlweɪz ɡoʊ ɝaʊn ətækɪŋ pipəl ɪn ðɪs . . . ðɪs sɪɾi?" bɛslən maɪt nɑɾ əpɹiʃieɪt hɪɹɪŋ ɪt kɔld ə blʌɾi sɪɾi.

Mat made no protest at being drawn away, but he did growl, "Do beggars always go around attacking people in this . . . this city?" Beslan might not appreciate hearing it called a bloody city.

ðə mæn læft. "ju ɑɹ tɑvɝən, mæt. ðɛɹz ɔlweɪz ɪksaɪtmən ɝaʊn tɑvɝən."

The man laughed. "You are ta'veren, Mat. There's always excitement around ta'veren."

mæt smaɪl bæk wɪð ɡɹɪɾɪd tiθ. blʌɾi ful, blʌɾi sɪɾi, ən blʌɾi tɑvɝən. wɛl, ɪf ə bɛɡɝ slɪɾ ɪz θɹoʊt, hi wəd nɑɾ əv tə ɡoʊ bæk tə ðə pæləs ən lɛt taɪlɪn pil ɪm laɪk ə ɹaɪp pɛɹ. kʌm tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪt, ʃi hæd kɔld ɪm əɹ lɪɾəl pɛɹ. blʌɾi ɛvɹiθɪŋ! ðə stʃɹit bɪtwin ðə daɪɝz ʃɑp ən ðə ɹoʊz ə ði ɪldɑɹ hæɾ ɪts ʃɛɹ ə ɹɛvəlɝz, ðoʊ nɑt mɛni skæntəli klæd. əpɛɹənli jə hæd tə hæv kɔɪn tə ɡoʊ nɪɹ neɪkəd. ðoʊ ði ækɹəbæts ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə mɝtʃəns haʊs ɑn ðə kɔɹnɝ keɪm kloʊz, ðə mɛn bɛɹfʊɾ ən bɛɹ-tʃɛstəɾ ɪn taɪt, bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd bɹitʃɪz, ðə wɪmən ɪn ivən taɪɾɝ bɹitʃɪz ən θɪn blaʊsəz. ðeɪ ɔl hæɾ ə fju fɛðɝz ɪn ðɛɹ hɛɹ, əz dɪd ðə keɪpɝɪŋ mjuzɪʃənz pleɪɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə smɔl pæləs ət ðə fɑɹ kɔɹnɝ, ə wʊmən wɪð ə flut, ənʌðɝ bloʊɪŋ ɑn ə tɔl, twɪstəd blæk tub kʌvɝd wɪð lɛvɝz, ən ə fɛloʊ biɾɪŋ ə tæmbɝ fəɹ ɔl i wɑz wɝθ. ðə haʊs ðeɪ hæd kʌm tə wɑtʃ lʊkt ʃʌɾ ʌp taɪt.

Mat smiled back with gritted teeth. Bloody fool, bloody city, and bloody ta'veren. Well, if a beggar slit his throat, he would not have to go back to the palace and let Tylin peel him like a ripe pear. Come to think of it, she had called him her little pear. Bloody everything! The street between the dyer's shop and The Rose of the Eldar had its share of revelers, though not many scantily clad. Apparently you had to have coin to go near naked. Though the acrobats in front of the merchant's house on the corner came close, the men barefoot and bare-chested in tight, brightly colored breeches, the women in even tighter breeches and thin blouses. They all had a few feathers in their hair, as did the capering musicians playing in front of the small palace at the far corner, a woman with a flute, another blowing on a tall, twisted black tube covered with levers, and a fellow beating a tambour for all he was worth. The house they had come to watch looked shut up tight.

ðə ti ət ðə ɹoʊz wɑz əz bæɾ əz ɛvɝ, wɪtʃ mɛn ɪt wɑz mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ðən ðə waɪn. neɪlzin stʌk tə ðə saʊɝ loʊkəl eɪl. bɝdʒɪt sɛd θæŋks wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ fəɹ wʌt, ən mæt ʃɹʌɡd ɪɾ ɔf saɪlənli; ðeɪ ɡɹɪn əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ ən tæp kʌps. ðə sʌn ɹoʊz, ən bɛslən sæt bælənsɪŋ fɝst wʌn buɾ ɑn ðə toʊ ʌv ði ʌðɝ, ðən ði ʌðɝ weɪ ɝaʊnd, bʌɾ ɪz kəmpænjənz bɪɡæn ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɹɛstɪv, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɔfən i pɔɪntəɾ aʊt ðət mæt wɑz tɑvɝən. ə skʌfəl wɪð bɛɡɝz wɑz hɑɹdli pɹɑpɝ ɪksaɪtmənt, ðə stʃɹit wɑz tu nɛɹoʊ fəɹ ɛni sɛɾɪŋz tə pæs, ðə wɪmən wɝ nɑɾ əz pɹɪɾi əz ɛlswɛɹ, ən ivən lʊkɪŋ ət bɝdʒɪt sim tə pɑl wʌns ðeɪ ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə kɪs ivən wʌn ə ðɛm. wɪð pɹoʊtɛsteɪʃənz ə ɹəɡɹɛt ðət bɛslən wəd nɑt kʌm, ðeɪ hɝiɾ ɔf tə faɪn sʌmwɛɹ mɔɹ ɪɡzɪlɝeɪɾɪŋ. neɪlzin tʊk ə stʃɹoʊl daʊn ði æli bɪsaɪd ðə daɪɝz, ən bɝdʒɪt vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə ɹoʊzəz mɝki ɪntɪɹiɝ tə faɪnd, ʃi sɛd, wɛðɝ ðəɹ wɑz ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl fɪt tə dʒɹɪŋk hɪɾən ɪn səm fɝɡɑɾən kɔɹnɝ.

The tea at The Rose was as bad as ever, which meant it was much better than the wine. Nalesean stuck to the sour local ale. Birgitte said thanks without saying for what, and Mat shrugged it off silently; they grinned at each other and tapped cups. The sun rose, and Beslan sat balancing first one boot on the toe of the other, then the other way around, but his companions began growing restive, no matter how often he pointed out that Mat was ta'veren. A scuffle with beggars was hardly proper excitement, the street was too narrow for any settings to pass, the women were not as pretty as elsewhere, and even looking at Birgitte seemed to pall once they realized that she did not intend to kiss even one of them. With protestations of regret that Beslan would not come, they hurried off to find somewhere more exhilarating. Nalesean took a stroll down the alley beside the dyer's, and Birgitte vanished into The Rose's murky interior to find, she said, whether there was anything at all fit to drink hidden in some forgotten corner.

"aɪ nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə si ə wɔɹɾɝ ɡɑɹb laɪk ðæt," bɛslən sɛd, tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɪz buts ɝaʊnd.

"I never expected to see a Warder garbed like that," Beslan said, changing his boots around.

mæt blɪŋkt. ðə fɛloʊ hæd ʃɑɹp aɪz. ʃi hæd nɑt ɹimuvd əɹ mæsk wʌns. wɛl, əz lɔŋ əz i dɪd nɑt noʊ əbaʊt -  "aɪ θɪŋk jəl bi ɡʊd fəɹ maɪ mʌðɝ, mæt."

Mat blinked. The fellow had sharp eyes. She had not removed her mask once. Well, as long as he did not know about -  "I think you will be good for my Mother, Mat."

tʃoʊkɪŋ, mæt spɹeɪd ti ɪndə ðə pæsɝzbi. sɛvɹəl ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm æŋɡɹəli, ən wʌn slɛndɝ wʊmən wɪð ə naɪs lɪɾəl bʊzəm ɡeɪv ɪm ə kɔɪ smaɪl fɹəm bɪniθ ə blu mæsk i θɔt wɑz mɛn tə bi ə ɹɛn. ʃi stæmpt ə fʊɾ ən stɔkt ɔf wən i dɪd nɑt smaɪl bæk. lʌkəli, noʊ wʌn wɑz æŋɡɹi ɪnʌf tə teɪk ɪt bɪɑnd ɡlɛɹz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ tu wɛn ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ. əɹ meɪbi ənlʌkəli. hi wəd nɑɾ əv maɪndəɾ ɪf sɪks əɹ eɪt paɪld ɑn ɪm ɹaɪt ðɛn.

Choking, Mat sprayed tea into the passersby. Several glared at him angrily, and one slender woman with a nice little bosom gave him a coy smile from beneath a blue mask he thought was meant to be a wren. She stamped a foot and stalked off when he did not smile back. Luckily, no one was angry enough to take it beyond glares before they too went on their way. Or maybe unluckily. He would not have minded if six or eight piled on him right then.

"wʌt dʒju min?" hi sɛd hɔɹsli.

"What do you mean?" he said hoarsely.

bɛslənz hɛd wɪpt ɝaʊn ɪn waɪd-aɪd sɝpɹaɪz. "waɪ, hɝ tʃuzɪŋ jə fəɹ əɹ pɹɪɾi, ʌv kɔɹs. waɪ ɪz jəɹ feɪs soʊ ɹɛd? ɑɹ jə æŋɡɹi? waɪ - ?" sʌɾənli hi slæpt ɪz fɔɹhɛɾ ən læft. "ju θɪŋk əl bi æŋɡɹi. fɝɡɪv mi, aɪ fɝɡɛt jəɹ ən aʊtləndɝ. mæt, ʃiz maɪ mʌðɝ, nɑt maɪ waɪf. fɑðɝ daɪd tɛn jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ən ʃiz ɔlweɪz kleɪm tə bi tu bɪzi. aɪm dʒʌst ɡlæd ʃi tʃoʊz sʌmwʌn aɪ laɪk. wɛɹ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ?"

Beslan's head whipped around in wide-eyed surprise. "Why, her choosing you for her pretty, of course. Why is your face so red? Are you angry? Why - ?" Suddenly he slapped his forehead and laughed. "You think I will be angry. Forgive me, I forget you're an outlander. Mat, she's my mother, not my wife. Father died ten years ago, and she has always claimed to be too busy. I am just glad she chose someone I like. Where are you going?"

hi dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz i wɑz ɑn ɪz fiɾ əntɪl bɛslən spoʊk. "aɪ dʒʌst . . . nid tə klɪɹ maɪ hɛd."

He did not realize he was on his feet until Beslan spoke. "I just . . . need to clear my head."

"bʌt jəɹ dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ti, mæt."

"But you're drinking tea, Mat."

dɑdʒɪŋ ɝaʊn ə ɡɹin sɪdæn tʃɛɹ, hi hæf sɔ ðə dɔɹ ə ðə haʊs oʊpən ən ə wʊmən wɪð ə blu-fɛðɝd kloʊk oʊvɝ əɹ dʒɹɛs slɪp aʊt. ənθɪŋkɪŋli - hɪz hɛd wɑz spɪnɪŋ tu mʌtʃ tə θɪŋk klɪɹli - hi fɛl ɪn bɪhaɪn hɝ. bɛslən nu! hi əpɹuvd! hɪz oʊn mʌðɝ, ən hi. . . .

Dodging around a green sedan chair, he half saw the door of the house open and a woman with a blue-feathered cloak over her dress slip out. Unthinkingly - his head was spinning too much to think clearly - he fell in behind her. Beslan knew! He approved! His own mother, and he. . . .

"mæt?" neɪlzin ʃaʊɾəd bɪhaɪn hɪm. "wɛɹ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ?"

"Mat?" Nalesean shouted behind him. "Where are you going?"

"ɪf aɪm nɑt bæk baɪ təmɑɹoʊ," mæt ʃaʊɾəd bæk æbsənli oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, "tɛl əm ðəl əv tə faɪn ɪt fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz!" hi wɔkt ɑn æftɝ ðə wʊmən ɪn ə deɪz, nɑt hɪɹɪŋ ɪf neɪlzin əɹ bɛslən ʃaʊɾəd əɡɛn. ðə mæn nu! hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd wʌns θɪŋkɪŋ ðət bɛslən ən ɪz mʌðɝ wɝ boʊθ mæd. ðeɪ wɝ wɝs! ɔl ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ wɑz mæd! hi wɑz hɑɹdli əwɛɹ ə ðə daɪs stɪl spɪnɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz skʌl.

"If I'm not back by tomorrow," Mat shouted back absently over his shoulder, "tell them they'll have to find it for themselves!" He walked on after the woman in a daze, not hearing if Nalesean or Beslan shouted again. The man knew! He remembered once thinking that Beslan and his mother were both mad. They were worse! All of Ebou Dar was mad! He was hardly aware of the dice still spinning inside his skull.

fɹəm ə wɪndoʊ ʌv ðə miɾɪŋ ɹum, ɹin wɑtʃt soʊlən dɪsəpɪɹ daʊn ðə stʃɹit təwɔɹd ðə ɹɪvɝ. səm fɛloʊ ɪn ə bɹɑnz koʊt fɑloʊɾ ɪn əɹ weɪk, bʌɾ ɪf i tʃɹaɪd tə ɪmpid hɝ, hi wəd faɪn aʊt sun ɪnʌf ðət soʊlən hæd noʊ taɪm fəɹ mɛn, ən noʊ peɪʃəns wɪð ðɛm.

From a window of the meeting room, Reanne watched Solain disappear down the street toward the river. Some fellow in a bronze coat followed in her wake, but if he tried to impede her, he would find out soon enough that Solain had no time for men, and no patience with them.

ɹin wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ waɪ ði ɝdʒ hæd ɡɹoʊn soʊ stʃɹɔŋ tədeɪ. fəɹ deɪz ɪt hæd kʌm ɑn ɔlmoʊst wɪð ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ən feɪɾəd wɪð ðə sʌn, ən fəɹ deɪz ʃi hæd fɔt - baɪ ðə stʃɹɪkt ɹulz ðeɪ dɪd nɑt kwaɪt dɛɹ kɔl lɔz, ðəɾ ɔɹɾɝ wɑz ɡɪvən ət ðə hæf mun, stɪl faɪv naɪts ɔf - bʌt tədeɪ. . . . ʃi hæd spoʊkən ði ɔɹɾɝ bɪfɔɹ ʃi θɔɾ ən bɪn əneɪbəl tə meɪk hɝsɛlf ɹitʃɹækt əntɪl ðə pɹɑpɝ taɪm. ɪt wəd bi wɛl. noʊ wʌn hæd sin ɛni saɪn ə ðoʊz tu jʌŋ fulz kɔlɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv ɛniwɛɹ ɪn ðə sɪɾi; θæŋk ðə laɪt, ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ nid tə teɪk deɪnʒɝəs tʃænsəz.

Reanne was not sure why the urge had grown so strong today. For days it had come on almost with the morning and faded with the sun, and for days she had fought - by the strict rules they did not quite dare call laws, that order was given at the half moon, still five nights off - but today. . . . She had spoken the order before she thought and been unable to make herself retract until the proper time. It would be well. No one had seen any sign of those two young fools calling themselves Elayne and Nynaeve anywhere in the city; thank the Light, there had been no need to take dangerous chances.

saɪɪŋ, ʃi tɝn tə ði ʌðɝz, hu weɪɾəd əntɪl ʃi tʊk əɹ tʃɛɹ bɪfɔɹ siɾɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz. ɪt wəd bi wɛl, əz ɪɾ ɔlweɪz hæd bɪn. sikɹəts wəd bi kɛpt, əz ðeɪ ɔlweɪz hæd bɪn. bʌt, stɪl. . . . ʃi hæd noʊ tʌtʃ ə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ə ðət sɔɹt, jɛt pɝhæps ðəɾ oʊvɝwɛlmɪŋ ɝdʒ hæd bɪn tɛlɪŋ əɹ sʌmθɪŋ. twɛlv wɪmən wɑtʃt əɹ ɪkspɛktənli. "aɪ θɪŋk wi ʃəd kənsɪɾɝ muvɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn u dʌz nɑt wɛɹ ðə bɛl tə ðə fɑɹm fəɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl." ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl dɪskʌʃən; ðeɪ wɝ ði ɛldɝz, bʌt ʃi wɑz ði ɛldəst. ɪn ðæt, ət list, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hɑɹm ɪn bɪheɪvɪŋ əz ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd.

Sighing, she turned to the others, who waited until she took her chair before seating themselves. It would be well, as it always had been. Secrets would be kept, as they always had been. But, still. . . . She had no touch of Foretelling or anything of that sort, yet perhaps that overwhelming urge had been telling her something. Twelve women watched her expectantly. "I think we should consider moving everyone who does not wear the belt to the farm for a little while." There was little discussion; they were the Elders, but she was the Eldest. In that, at least, there was no harm in behaving as Aes Sedai did.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾi


CHAPTER 30

ðə fɝs kʌp


The First Cup

aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðɪs," ɪleɪn pɹətɛstəd. ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn ɔfɝɾ ə tʃɛɹ; ɪn fækt, wən ʃi stɑɹɾəd tə sɪt, ʃi hæd bɪn toʊl kɝtli tə ɹɪmeɪn stændɪŋ. faɪv sɛts ʌv aɪz wɝ foʊkəst ɑn hɝ, faɪv wɪmən wɪð sɛt, ɡɹɪm feɪsəz. "ju ɑɹ bɪheɪvɪŋ əz ɪf wiv dʌn sʌmθɪŋ tɛɹəbəl wən wʌt wɪv dʌn ɪz faɪn ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz!" ət lis ðeɪ wɝ ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ʌv ɪt, ʃi hoʊpt; ðə mɛsədʒ neɪlzin hæd kʌm ɹʌnɪŋ bæk wɪð wɑz nʌn tu klɪɹ. mæt hæd ɡɔn ɔf ʃaʊɾɪŋ ðəɾ i hæd faʊn ɪt. əɹ sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi laɪk, neɪlzin əlaʊd; ðə lɔŋɡɝ i tɔkt, ðə mɔɹ i baʊns bɪtwin æbsəlut sɝɾənti ən daʊt. bɝdʒɪt hæd ɹɪmeɪnd wɑtʃɪŋ ɹinz haʊs; ʃi sim tə bi swɛɾi ən bɔɹd. ɪn ɛni keɪs, mæɾɝz wɝ ɪn moʊʃən. ɪleɪn wʌndɝd haʊ nɪneɪiv wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ ɑn. bɛɾɝ ðən hɝsɛlf, ʃi hoʊpt. ʃi hæd sɝɾənli nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd ðɪs wən ʃi ɹɪvil ðɛɹ səksɛs.

I do not understand this," Elayne protested. She had not been offered a chair; in fact, when she started to sit, she had been told curtly to remain standing. Five sets of eyes were focused on her, five women with set, grim faces. "You are behaving as if we've done something terrible when what we have done is find the Bowl of the Winds!" At least they were on the brink of it, she hoped; the message Nalesean had come running back with was none too clear. Mat had gone off shouting that he had found it. Or something very like, Nalesean allowed; the longer he talked, the more he bounced between absolute certainty and doubt. Birgitte had remained watching Reanne's house; she seemed to be sweaty and bored. In any case, matters were in motion. Elayne wondered how Nynaeve was getting on. Better than herself, she hoped. She had certainly never expected this when she revealed their success.

"ju hæv ɛndeɪnʒɝd ə sikɹət kɛp kloʊs baɪ ɛvɹi wʊmən tə wɛɹ ðə ʃɔl fəɹ oʊvɝ tu θaʊzən jɪɹz." mɛɝɪlɪl sæt stɪf-bækt, sɝɛnəɾi ɔlmoʊst əbændən ɑn ðə taɪt-lɪp bɹɪŋk ʌv æpəplɛksi. "ju mʌst əv bɪn ɪnseɪn! oʊnli mædnəs kəɾ ɪkskjuz ðɪs!"

"You have endangered a secret kept close by every woman to wear the shawl for over two thousand years." Merilille sat stiff-backed, serenity almost abandoned on the tight-lipped brink of apoplexy. "You must have been insane! Only madness could excuse this!"

"wʌt sikɹət?" ɪleɪn dɪmændəd.

"What secret?" Elayne demanded.

vændin, flæŋkɪŋ mɛɝɪlɪl wɪð əɹ sɪstɝ, ədʒʌstəd peɪl ɡɹin sɪlk skɝts ɪɹɪɾəbli ən sɛd, "taɪm ɪnʌf fəɹ ðət wən juv bɪn pɹɑpɝli ɹeɪzd, tʃaɪld. aɪ θɔt jə hæd səm sɛns." æɾɪliz, ɪn ə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ wʊl wɪð dip bɹaʊn tʃɹɪm, nɑɾəd, mɪɹɝɪŋ vændinz dɪsəpɹuvəl.

Vandene, flanking Merilille with her sister, adjusted pale green silk skirts irritably and said, "Time enough for that when you've been properly raised, child. I thought you had some sense." Adeleas, in a dark gray wool with deep brown trim, nodded, mirroring Vandene's disapproval.

"ðə tʃaɪl kænɑt bi fɔltɪd fəɹ ɹɪvilɪŋ ə sikɹət ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ," kɛɝin fɹænzi sɛd fɹəm ɪleɪnz lɛft, ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ bʌlk ɪn əɹ ɡɹin-ænd-ɡɪlt ɑɹmtʃɛɹ. ʃi wɑz nɑt staʊt, bʌɾ ɔlmoʊst, wɪð ʃoʊldɝz əz waɪɾ ən ɑɹmz əz θɪk əz moʊs mɛn.

"The child cannot be faulted for revealing a secret she did not know," Careane Fransi said from Elayne's left, shifting her bulk in her green-and-gilt armchair. She was not stout, but almost, with shoulders as wide and arms as thick as most men.

"taʊɝ lɔ dʌz nɑɾ əlaʊ fəɹ ɪkskjusɪz," sɝaɪðə pʊɾ ɪn kwɪkli, ɪn sʌmwʌt sɛlf-ɪmpɔɹɾənt toʊnz, hɝ nɔɹməli ɪnkwɪzɪɾɪv bɹaʊn aɪz stɝn. "wʌns mɪɹ ɪkskjusɪz ɑɹ əlaʊd, ɪnɛvəɾəbli lɛsɝ ən lɛsɝ ɪkskjusɪz wɪl bɪkʌm æksɛptəbəl, əntɪl lɔ ɪtsɛlf ɪz ɡɔn." hɝ haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹ stʊd tə ðə ɹaɪt. oʊnli ʃi wɔɹ əɹ ʃɔl, bʌt mɛɝɪlɪlz sɪɾɪŋ ɹum hæd bɪn ɝeɪnʒd əz ə kɔɹt, ðoʊ noʊ wʌn kɔld ɪt ðæt. soʊ fɑɹ, noʊ wʌn hæd. mɛɝɪlɪl, æɾɪliz ən vændin kənfɹʌntəɾ ɪleɪn laɪk dʒʌdʒɪz, sɝaɪðəz tʃɛɹ wɑz pleɪst wɛɹ ðə siɾ ə ɹibjuk wəd bi, ən kɛɝinz ðə siɾ ə pɑɹɾən, bʌt ðə dəmɑni ɡɹin u wʊɾə bɪn əɹ dɪfɛndɝ nɑɾəd θɔtfəli əz ðə tɛɹən bɹaʊn u wʊɾə bɪn əɹ pɹɑsɪkjuɾɝ kəntɪnjud. "ʃi hæz ədmɪɾəd ɡɪl fɹəm əɹ oʊn maʊθ. aɪ ɹɛkəmɛn ðət ðə tʃaɪl bi kənfaɪn tə ðə pæləs əntɪl wi liv, wɪð səm ɡʊd hɑɹd wɝk tə ɑkjəpaɪ hɝ maɪn ən əɹ hænz. aɪ ɔlsoʊ ɹɛkəmɛn ə fɝm doʊs ə ðə slɪpɝ ət ɹɛɡjəlɝ ɪntɝvəlz tə ɹimaɪn əɹ nɑt tə ɡoʊ bɪhaɪn sɪstɝz' bæks. ən ðə seɪm fəɹ nɪneɪiv, əz sun əz ʃi kən bi faʊnd."

"Tower law does not allow for excuses," Sareitha put in quickly, in somewhat self-important tones, her normally inquisitive brown eyes stern. "Once mere excuses are allowed, inevitably lesser and lesser excuses will become acceptable, until law itself is gone." Her high-backed chair stood to the right. Only she wore her shawl, but Merilille's sitting room had been arranged as a court, though no one called it that. So far, no one had. Merilille, Adeleas and Vandene confronted Elayne like judges, Sareitha's chair was placed where the Seat of Rebuke would be, and Careane's the Seat of Pardon, but the Domani Green who would have been her defender nodded thoughtfully as the Tairen Brown who would have been her prosecutor continued. "She has admitted guilt from her own mouth. I recommend that the child be confined to the palace until we leave, with some good hard work to occupy her mind and her hands. I also recommend a firm dose of the slipper at regular intervals to remind her not to go behind sisters' backs. And the same for Nynaeve, as soon as she can be found."

ɪleɪn swɑloʊd. kənfaɪnd? pɝhæps ðeɪ dɪd nɑt nid tə neɪm ðɪs ə tʃɹaɪəl fəɹ ɪt tə bi wʌn. sɝaɪðə maɪt nɑt jɛɾ əv ətʃiv ði eɪdʒləs feɪs, bʌt ðə weɪɾ ə ði ʌðɝ wɪmənz jɪɹz pɹɛst əɾ ɪleɪn. æɾɪliz ən vændin wɪð ðɛɹ hɛɹ nɪɹli ɔl waɪt, ivən ðɛɹ eɪdʒləs feɪsəz ɛkoʊɪŋ jɪɹz. mɛɝɪlɪlz hɛɹ wɑz ɡlɔsi blæk, jɛɾ ɪleɪn wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn sɝpɹaɪz tə lɝn ʃi hæd wɔɹn ðə ʃɔl əz lɔŋ əɹ lɔŋɡɝ ðən moʊst wɪmən nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ lɪvd. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, kɛɝin maɪt hæv, əz wɛl. nɑt wʌn ə ðɛm əpɹoʊtʃt əɹ oʊn stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə paʊɝ, bʌt. . . . ɔl ðəɾ ɪkspɪɹiəns əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɔl ðət nɑlədʒ. ɔl ðət . . . əθɔɹəɾi. ə hɛvi ɹimaɪndɝ ðət ʃi wɑz oʊnli eɪtin ən hæd bɪn ɪn nɑvəs waɪɾ ə jɪɹ əɡoʊ.

Elayne swallowed. Confined? Perhaps they did not need to name this a trial for it to be one. Sareitha might not yet have achieved the ageless face, but the weight of the other women's years pressed at Elayne. Adeleas and Vandene with their hair nearly all white, even their ageless faces echoing years. Merilille's hair was glossy black, yet Elayne would not have been surprised to learn she had worn the shawl as long or longer than most women not Aes Sedai lived. For that matter, Careane might have, as well. Not one of them approached her own strength in the Power, but. . . . All that experience as Aes Sedai, all that knowledge. All that . . . authority. A heavy reminder that she was only eighteen and had been in novice white a year ago.

kɛɝin meɪd noʊ muv tə ɹɪbʌt sɝaɪðəz sədʒɛstʃənz. pɝhæps ʃi bɛst ɡoʊ ɑn dɪfɛndɪŋ hɝsɛlf. "pleɪnli ðɪs sikɹət jə spik ə hæz sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə sɝkəl, bʌt - "

Careane made no move to rebut Sareitha's suggestions. Perhaps she best go on defending herself. "Plainly this secret you speak of has something to do with the Circle, but - "

"ðə kɪn ɑɹ noʊ kənsɝn ə jʊɹz, tʃaɪld," mɛɝɪlɪl bɹoʊk ɪn ʃɑɹpli. dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ʃi smuðd ɡoʊld-slæʃt skɝts ə sɪlvɝi ɡɹeɪ. "aɪ pɹəpoʊz tə pæs sɛntəns," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə koʊl vɔɪs.

"The Kin are no concern of yours, child," Merilille broke in sharply. Drawing a deep breath, she smoothed gold-slashed skirts of silvery gray. "I propose to pass sentence," she said in a cold voice.

"aɪ kənkɝ, ən dɪfɝ tə jəɹ dɪsɪʒən," æɾɪliz sɛd. ʃi ɡeɪv ɪleɪn ə dɪsəpɔɪntɪd fɹaʊn ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd.

"I concur, and defer to your decision," Adeleas said. She gave Elayne a disappointed frown and shook her head.

vændin weɪvd əɹ hæn dɪsmɪsɪvli. "aɪ kənkɝ ən dɪfɝ. bʌɾ aɪ əɡɹi wɪð ðə siɾ ə ɹibjuk." kɛɝinz lʊk maɪɾ əv kənteɪn ə slɪvɝ ə sɪmpəθi. meɪbi ə slɪvɝ.

Vandene waved her hand dismissively. "I concur and defer. But I agree with the Seat of Rebuke." Careane's look might have contained a sliver of sympathy. Maybe a sliver.

mɛɝɪlɪl oʊpən əɹ maʊθ.

Merilille opened her mouth.

ðə tɪmɪd nɑk ət ðə dɔɹ saʊndəd kwaɪt laʊɾ ɪn ðə moʊməntɛɹi, θʌndɝəs saɪləns.

The timid knock at the door sounded quite loud in the momentary, thunderous silence.

"wʌɾ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt?" mɛɝɪlɪl mʌɾɝd æŋɡɹəli. "aɪ toʊl pɔl nɑt tə lɛɾ ɛniwʌn dɪstɝb ʌs. kɛɝin?"

"What under the Light?" Merilille muttered angrily. "I told Pol not to let anyone disturb us. Careane?"

nɑt ðə jʌŋɡəst, bʌt ðə loʊəst ɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ, kɛɝin stʊɾ ən ɡlaɪɾɪd tə ðə dɔɹ. dɪspaɪɾ əɹ hɛft, ʃi ɔlweɪz muv laɪk ə swɑn.

Not the youngest, but the lowest in strength, Careane stood and glided to the door. Despite her heft, she always moved like a swan.

ɪt wɑz pɔl hɝsɛlf, mɛɝɪlɪlz meɪd, hu pɑpt ɪn kɝtsiɪŋ lɛft ən ɹaɪt. ə slɛndɝ, ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən juʒəwəli pəzɛst ʌv ə dɪɡnəɾi tə ɹaɪvəl ðəɾ ə hɝ mɪstʃɹəs, ʃi wɔɹ ən æŋkʃəs fɹaʊn naʊ, əz wɛl ʃi maɪt, bɑɹdʒɪŋ ɪn æftɝ mɛɝɪlɪlz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz. ɪleɪn hæd nɑt bɪn soʊ ɡlæd tə si ɛniwʌn sɪns . . . sɪns mæt kɔθən əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ. ə hɔɹɛndəs θɔt. ɪf eɪvinhə dɪd nɑt seɪ ʃi hæd mɛt toʊ səfɪʃənli sun, ʃi maɪt dʒʌst si ɪf æskɪŋ ðə mæn tə biɾ əɹ æftɝ ɔl kəɾ ɛn ði æɡəni.

It was Pol herself, Merilille's maid, who popped in curtsying left and right. A slender, gray-haired woman usually possessed of a dignity to rival that of her mistress, she wore an anxious frown now, as well she might, barging in after Merilille's instructions. Elayne had not been so glad to see anyone since . . . since Mat Cauthon appeared in the Stone of Tear. A horrendous thought. If Aviendha did not say she had met toh sufficiently soon, she might just see if asking the man to beat her after all could end the agony.

"ðə kwin bɹɔt ðɪs hɝsɛlf," pɔl ənaʊns bɹɛθəli, pɹɑfɝɪŋ ə lɛɾɝ sild wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ ɹɛd lʌmp ʌv wæks. "ʃi sɛɾ ɪf aɪ dɪdnt ɡɪv ɪt tə ɪleɪn ɹaɪɾ əweɪ, ʃid bɹɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn hɝsɛlf. ʃi sɛɾ ɪts əbaʊt ðə tʃaɪlz mʌðɝ." ɪleɪn ɔlmoʊst ɡɹaʊn əɹ tiθ. ðə sɪstɝz' sɝvɪŋ wɪmən hæɾ ɔl pɪkt ʌp ðɛɹ mɪstʃɹəsəz' weɪ ʌv tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt nɪneɪiv ən hɝ, ɪf sɛldəm wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd hɪɹ.

"The Queen brought this herself," Pol announced breathily, proffering a letter sealed with a large red lump of wax. "She said if I didn't give it to Elayne right away, she'd bring it in herself. She said it's about the child's mother." Elayne almost ground her teeth. The sisters' serving women had all picked up their mistresses' way of talking about Nynaeve and her, if seldom where they could hear.

fjʊɹiəs, ʃi snætʃt ðə lɛɾɝ wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ mɛɝɪlɪl tə seɪ ʃi kəd - ɪf ðət wɑz wʌt ʃi wʊɾə sɛd - ən bɹoʊk ðə sil wɪð əɹ θʌm.

Furious, she snatched the letter without waiting for Merilille to say she could - if that was what she would have said - and broke the seal with her thumb.

maɪ leɪɾi ɪleɪn, aɪ ɡɹit ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ wɪð dʒɔɪəs nuz. aɪ hæv bʌt dʒʌs lɝn ðət jəɹ mʌðɝ, kwin mɔɹɡeɪs, laɪvz ən ɪz ət pɹizɛn ðə ɡɛst ə peɪdʒɹən naɪl ɪn æmədɔɹ, ən wɪʃɪz əbʌv ɔl tə bi ɹiunaɪɾɪd wɪð jə soʊ ðət jə meɪ ɹɪtɝn tə ændɝ təɡɛðɝ ɪn tʃɹaɪəmf. aɪ ɔfɝ ɛskɔɹt θɹu ðə bændəts naʊ ɪnfɛstɪŋ ɔltɑɹə, soʊ ðət jə meɪ ɹitʃ jəɹ mʌðɝz saɪɾ ɪn seɪfti ən ɔl spid. fɝɡɪv ðiz fju pʊɹ wɝdz, skɹɪbəld ɪn heɪst, bʌɾ aɪ noʊ jə wəd wɪʃ tə lɝn ðə wʌnʒɹəs nuz əz sun əz pɑsəbəl. əntɪl aɪ kən liv jə ət jəɹ mʌðɝz saɪd.

My Lady Elayne, I greet the Daughter-Heir of Andor with joyous news. I have but just learned that your mother, Queen Morgase, lives and is at present the guest of Pedron Niall in Amador, and wishes above all to be reunited with you so that you may return to Andor together in triumph. I offer escort through the bandits now infesting Altara, so that you may reach your mother's side in safety and all speed. Forgive these few poor words, scribbled in haste, but I know you would wish to learn the wondrous news as soon as possible. Until I can leave you at your mother's side.

sild ɪn ðə laɪt, dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn ðə peɪpɝ kɹʌmpəld ɪn əɹ fɪst. haʊ dɛɹ hi? ðə peɪn ə hɝ mʌðɝz dɛθ, wɪθaʊɾ ivən ə bɑɾi tə bi bɛɹid, wɑz oʊnli bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə feɪd, ən kæɹaɪɾɪn dɛɹd mɑk əɹ ðɪs weɪ? ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, ʃi hɝl ðə faʊl laɪz əweɪ fɹəm əɹ ən tʃænəld; faɪɝ flɛɹɾ ɪn mɪdɛɹ, soʊ hɑt ðəɾ oʊnli ə dʌst ʌv æʃ fɛl tə ðə blu-ænd-ɡoʊl flɔɹ taɪlz. ðət fəɹ dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn. ən əz fəɹ ðiz . . . wɪmən! ðə pɹaɪɾ ʌv ə θaʊzən jɪɹz ʌv ændɔɝən kwinz pʊt stil ɪndə hɝ bækboʊn.

Sealed in the Light, Jaichim Carridin The paper crumpled in her fist. How dare he? The pain of her mother's death, without even a body to be buried, was only beginning to fade, and Carridin dared mock her this way? Embracing the True Source, she hurled the foul lies away from her and channeled; fire flared in midair, so hot that only a dust of ash fell to the blue-and-gold floor tiles. That for Jaichim Carridin. And as for these . . . women! The pride of a thousand years of Andoran queens put steel into her backbone.

mɛɝɪlɪl sɝdʒ tə hɝ fit. "ju wɝ nɑt ɡɪvən pɝmɪʃən tə tʃænəl! jəl ɹilis ðə - !"

Merilille surged to her feet. "You were not given permission to channel! You will release the - !"

"liv ʌs, pɔl," ɪleɪn sɛd. "naʊ." ðə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən stɛɹd, bʌɾ ɪleɪnz mʌðɝ hæd tɔɾ əɹ wɛl ðə vɔɪs ə kəmænd, ðə vɔɪs ʌv ə kwin fɹəm əɹ θɹoʊn. pɔl bɑbd ə kɝtsi ən wɑz muvɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹilaɪzd. wʌns ʌndɝ weɪ, ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ən ɪnstən bɪfɔɹ hɝiɪŋ aʊɾ ən kloʊzɪŋ ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɝ. wʌtɛvɝ wɑz əbaʊt tə hæpən pleɪnli wɑz fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ əloʊn.

"Leave us, Pol," Elayne said. "Now." The serving woman stared, but Elayne's mother had taught her well the voice of command, the voice of a Queen from her throne. Pol bobbed a curtsy and was moving before she realized. Once under way, she hesitated only an instant before hurrying out and closing the door behind her. Whatever was about to happen plainly was for Aes Sedai alone.

"wʌɾ əz ɡɑɾən ɪndə ju, tʃaɪld?" pjʊɹ fjʊɹi səbmɝdʒ ðə ɹɛmnəns ə mɛɝɪlɪlz ɹiɡɑðɝd kɑm. "ɹilis ðə sɔɹs ɪmiɾiətli, əɹ aɪ vaʊ, əl fɛtʃ ə slɪpɝ maɪsɛlf ðɪs mɪnət!"

"What has gotten into you, child?" Pure fury submerged the remnants of Merilille's regathered calm. "Release the Source immediately, or I vow, I'll fetch a slipper myself this minute!"

"aɪ æm ɛɛs sədaɪ." ðə wɝdz keɪm aʊt laɪk wɪntɝ stoʊn, ən ɪleɪn mɛn əm tə. kæɹaɪɾɪnz laɪz, ən ðiz wɪmən. mɛɝɪlɪl θɹɛɾənd tə slɪpɝ hɝ? ðeɪ wəɾ æknɑlɪdʒ əɹ ɹaɪtfəl pleɪs əz ə sɪstɝ. ʃi ən nɪneɪiv hæd faʊn ðə boʊl! əz ɡʊɾ æz, ɛniweɪ, ən ði ɝeɪnʒmənts fəɹ ɪts jus wɝ ʌndɝ weɪ. "ju pɹəpoʊz tə pʌnɪʃ mi fəɹ ɛndeɪnʒɝɪŋ ə sikɹəɾ əpɛɹənli noʊn oʊnli tə sɪstɝz, bʌt noʊ wʌn bɑðɝd tə tɛl mi ðɪs sikɹət wən aɪ əteɪn ðə ʃɔl. jə sədʒɛs pʌnɪʃɪŋ mi laɪk ə nɑvəs əɹ æksɛptɪd, bʌɾ aɪm ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ wɑz ɹeɪz tə ðə ʃɔl baɪ ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ, ði æmɪɝlɪn jə kleɪm tə sɝv. ɪf jə dɪnaɪ ðət nɪneɪiv ən aɪ ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðən jə dɪnaɪ ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ u sɛn mi tə faɪn ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz, wɪtʃ wɪv dʌn. əl nɑɾ əv ɪt! aɪ kɔl jə tə əkaʊnt, mɛɝɪlɪl ʃiændɪvɪn. səbmɪt tə ðə wɪl ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, əɹ əl kɔl dʒʌdʒmən ɑn jə əz ə ɹɪbɛljəs tʃɹeɪɾɝ!"

"I am Aes Sedai." The words came out like winter stone, and Elayne meant them to. Carridin's lies, and these women. Merilille threatened to slipper her? They would acknowledge her rightful place as a sister. She and Nynaeve had found the Bowl! As good as, anyway, and the arrangements for its use were under way. "You propose to punish me for endangering a secret apparently known only to sisters, but no one bothered to tell me this secret when I attained the shawl. You suggest punishing me like a novice or Accepted, but I am Aes Sedai. I was raised to the shawl by Egwene al'Vere, the Amyrlin you claim to serve. If you deny that Nynaeve and I are Aes Sedai, then you deny the Amyrlin Seat who sent me to find the Bowl of the Winds, which we have done. I will not have it! I call you to account, Merilille Ceandevin. Submit to the will of the Amyrlin Seat, or I will call judgment on you as a rebellious traitor!"

mɛɝɪlɪlz aɪz bʌlʒd, ən əɹ maʊθ hʌŋ oʊpən, bʌt ʃi əpɪɹd kəmpoʊz bɪsaɪd kɛɝin əɹ sɝaɪðə, hu lʊkt əbaʊt tə tʃoʊk tə dɛθ ɑn ɪnkɹədulɪɾi. vændin simd maɪldli teɪkən əbæk, ə θɔtfəl fɪŋɡɝ pɹɛs tə hɝ lɪps bɪniθ slaɪtli waɪɾənd aɪz, waɪl æɾɪliz sæt fɔɹwɝd, stʌɾiɪŋ ɪleɪn əz ɪf siɪŋ əɹ fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm.

Merilille's eyes bulged, and her mouth hung open, but she appeared composed beside Careane or Sareitha, who looked about to choke to death on incredulity. Vandene seemed mildly taken aback, a thoughtful finger pressed to her lips beneath slightly widened eyes, while Adeleas sat forward, studying Elayne as if seeing her for the first time.

tʃænəlɪŋ, ɪleɪn floʊɾəd wʌn ə ðə tɔl ɑɹmtʃɛɹz tə hɝ ən sæt, kəmpoʊzɪŋ əɹ skɝts. "ju meɪ əz wɛl sɪt, tu, mɛɝɪlɪl." ʃi stɪl juz ðə vɔɪs ə kəmænd - əpɛɹənli ɪt wɑz ði oʊnli weɪ tə meɪk əm lɪsən - bʌt ʃi wɑz stɑɹɾəld wən mɛɝɪlɪl æktʃəli  sæŋk bæk daʊn sloʊli, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ pɑp-aɪd.

Channeling, Elayne floated one of the tall armchairs to her and sat, composing her skirts. "You may as well sit, too, Merilille." She still used the voice of command - apparently it was the only way to make them listen - but she was startled when Merilille actually sank back down slowly, staring at her pop-eyed.

aʊtsaɪd, ʃi meɪnteɪn ə kɑm, kul fəsɑd, bʌɾ ɪnsaɪd, æŋɡɝ bʌbəld. noʊ, ɪt bɔɪld. sikɹəts. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz θɔɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kɛp tu mɛni sikɹəts, ivən fɹəm itʃ ʌðɝ. ɪspɛʃli fɹəm itʃ ʌðɝ. tʃɹu, ʃi kɛp səm hɝsɛlf, bʌɾ oʊnli ət nəsɛsəɾi, ən nɑt fɹəm ɛniwʌn u niɾəd tə noʊ. ən ðiz wɪmən hæd θɔt tə pʌnɪʃ hɝ! "jɔɹ əθɔɹəɾi kʌmz fɹəm ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, mɛɝɪlɪl; nɪneɪivz ən maɪn fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. aʊɝz supɝsidz jʊɹz. fɹəm naʊ ɑn, jəl teɪk jəɹ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz fɹəm nɪneɪiv əɹ mi. wɪl ə kɔɹs lɪsən kɛɹfəli tə ɛni ædvaɪs jə maɪɾ ɔfɝ." ʃi hæd θɔt mɛɝɪlɪlz aɪz bʌlʒd bɪfɔɹ, bʌt naʊ. . . .

Outside, she maintained a calm, cool facade, but inside, anger bubbled. No, it boiled. Secrets. She had always thought Aes Sedai kept too many secrets, even from each other. Especially from each other. True, she kept some herself, but only at necessity, and not from anyone who needed to know. And these women had thought to punish her! "Your authority comes from the Hall of the Tower, Merilille; Nynaeve's and mine from the Amyrlin Seat. Ours supersedes yours. From now on, you will take your instructions from Nynaeve or me. We will of course listen carefully to any advice you might offer." She had thought Merilille's eyes bulged before, but now. . . .

"ɪmpɑsəbəl," ðə ɡɹeɪ spləɾɝd. "ju ɑɹ - "

"Impossible," the Gray spluttered. "You are - "

"mɛɝɪlɪl!" ɪleɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. "du jə stɪl dɪnaɪ ði əθɔɹəɾi ʌv jəɹ æmɪɝlɪn? dʒju stɪl dɛɹ?" mɛɝɪlɪlz maʊθ wɝk saʊnləsli. ʃi wɛɾ əɹ lɪps. ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd dʒɝkəli. ɪleɪn fɛlt ə θɹɪl ʌv ɪɡzʌlteɪʃən; ɔl ðəɾ əbaʊt mɛɝɪlɪl teɪkɪŋ dɝɛkʃən wɑz stʌf ən nɑnsɛns, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ʃi wəd bi æknɑlɪdʒd. tɑm ən əɹ mʌðɝ boʊθ sɛd jə mʌs bɪɡɪn baɪ æskɪŋ fəɹ tɛn tə ɡɛt wʌn. stɪl, ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə dæmp əɹ æŋɡɝ. ʃi hæd hæf ə maɪn tə fɛtʃ ə slɪpɝ hɝsɛlf ən si haʊ fɑɹ ʃi kəd pʊʃ ðɪs. ɪksɛpt, ðət wəd ʃæɾɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ðeɪ wəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ əɹ eɪdʒ fæst ɪnʌf ðɛn, ən haʊ ʃɔɹɾ ə taɪm əɡoʊ ʃi hæd pʊɾ ɔf ə nɑvəs dʒɹɛs; ðeɪ maɪɾ ivən bɪɡɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ə hɝ əz ə fulɪʃ tʃaɪld əɡɛn. wɪtʃ θɔt stoʊkt əɹ fjʊɹi ənu. bʌt ʃi kəntɛntəd hɝsɛlf wɪð, "waɪl jə θɪŋk kwaɪətli ɑn wʌɾ ɛls aɪ ʃəd bi toʊld əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, mɛɝɪlɪl, æɾɪliz ən vændin wɪl ɪnstʃɹʌk mi ɪn ðɪs sikɹəɾ aɪ ɛndeɪnʒɝd. dʒju min tə tɛl mi ðə taʊɝ əz noʊn ə ðə sɝkəl - ðiz kɪn, əz jə kɔl əm - ɔl əlɔŋ?" pʊɹ ɹin ən əɹ hoʊps tə əvɔɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ noʊɾəs.

"Merilille!" Elayne said sharply, leaning forward. "Do you still deny the authority of your Amyrlin? Do you still dare?" Merilille's mouth worked soundlessly. She wet her lips. She shook her head jerkily. Elayne felt a thrill of exultation; all that about Merilille taking direction was stuff and nonsense, of course, but she would be acknowledged. Thom and her mother both said you must begin by asking for ten to get one. Still, that was not enough to damp her anger. She had half a mind to fetch a slipper herself and see how far she could push this. Except, that would shatter everything. They would remember her age fast enough then, and how short a time ago she had put off a novice dress; they might even begin thinking of her as a foolish child again. Which thought stoked her fury anew. But she contented herself with, "While you think quietly on what else I should be told as Aes Sedai, Merilille, Adeleas and Vandene will instruct me in this secret I endangered. Do you mean to tell me the Tower has known of the Circle - these Kin, as you call them - all along?" Poor Reanne and her hopes to avoid Aes Sedai notice.

"æz nɪɹ əz ðeɪ kəd meɪk ðɛmsɛlvz kʌm tə sɪstɝz, aɪ səpoʊz," vændin ɹɪplaɪd. kɛɹfəli. ʃi stʌɾid ɪleɪn əz ɪntɛnli əz əɹ sɪstɝ dɪd, naʊ. ðoʊ ə ɡɹin, ʃi hæd mɛni ʌv ðə seɪm mænɝɪzəmz əz æɾɪliz. kɛɝin ən sɝaɪðə lʊk stʌnd, dɪsbɪlivɪŋ aɪz swɪŋɪŋ fɹəm ə saɪlənt, ɹɛd-tʃik mɛɝɪlɪl tə ɪleɪn ən bæk.

"As near as they could make themselves come to sisters, I suppose," Vandene replied. Carefully. She studied Elayne as intently as her sister did, now. Though a Green, she had many of the same mannerisms as Adeleas. Careane and Sareitha looked stunned, disbelieving eyes swinging from a silent, red-cheeked Merilille to Elayne and back.

"ivən dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, wɪmən feɪl ðɛɹ tɛsts, əɹ læk ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ, əɹ wɝ sɛn əweɪ fɹəm ðə taʊɝ fəɹ ɛni ʌv ðə juʒəwəl ɹizənz." æɾɪliz hæɾ ədɑptəɾ ə lɛktʃɝɪŋ toʊn, bʌt nɑɾ əfɛnsɪvli. bɹaʊnz ɔfən dɪd wən ɪkspaʊndɪŋ. "ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz, ɪts hɑɹdli sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ ðəɾ ə nʌmbɝ fɪɹd tə ɡoʊ ɔf ɪndə ðə wɝld əloʊn, nɔɹ ðət ðeɪ maɪt fli tə bɑɹɑʃtə, əz ðə sɪɾi ðəɾ ɪɡzɪstəd hɪɹ ðən wɑz kɔld. ðoʊ ðə meɪn pɑɹɾ ə bɑɹɑʃtə wɑz, ʌv kɔɹs, wɛɹ ðə ɹæhəd naʊ stænz. nɑt ðəɾ ə stoʊn ə bɑɹɑʃtə ɹɪmeɪnz. ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz dɪd nɑt tʃɹuli ɛnvəloʊp ɛɹən əntɪl leɪt, bʌɾ ɪn ði ɛnd, bɑɹɑʃtə fɛl əz kəmplitli əz bɑɹsaɪn, əɹ ʃmɑl, ɔɹ. . . ."

"Even during the Trolloc Wars, women failed their tests, or lacked the strength, or were sent away from the Tower for any of the usual reasons." Adeleas had adopted a lecturing tone, but not offensively. Browns often did when expounding. "Under the circumstances, it is hardly surprising that a number feared to go off into the world alone, nor that they might flee to Barashta, as the city that existed here then was called. Though the main part of Barashta was, of course, where the Rahad now stands. Not that a stone of Barashta remains. The Trolloc Wars did not truly envelope Eharon until late, but in the end, Barashta fell as completely as Barsine, or Shaemal, or. . . ."

"ðə kɪn . . ." vændin bɹoʊk ɪn dʒɛnli; æɾɪliz blɪŋkt ət hɝ, ðən nɑɾəd. ". . . ðə kɪn pɝsɪstəɾ ivən æftɝ bɑɹɑʃtə fɛl, ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ ðeɪ hæd bɪfɔɹ, teɪkɪŋ ɪn waɪldɝz ən wɪmən pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ." ɪleɪn fɹaʊnd; mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən hæd sɛd ðə kɪn tʊk ɪn waɪldɝz, tu, bʌt ɹinz bɪɡəst æŋzaɪəɾi hæd sim tə bi meɪkɪŋ əɹ ən nɪneɪiv pɹuv ðeɪ wɝ nɑt.

"The Kin . . ." Vandene broke in gently; Adeleas blinked at her, then nodded. ". . . The Kin persisted even after Barashta fell, in the same way they had before, taking in wilders and women put out of the Tower." Elayne frowned; Mistress Anan had said the Kin took in wilders, too, but Reanne's biggest anxiety had seemed to be making her and Nynaeve prove they were not.

"nʌn ɛvɝ ɹɪmeɪn lɔŋ," æɾɪliz æɾəd. "faɪv jɪɹz, pɝhæps tɛn; ðɛn, aɪ səpoʊz, əz naʊ. wʌns ðeɪ ɹilaɪz ðət ðɛɹ lɪɾəl ɡɹup ɪz noʊ ɹɪpleɪsmən fəɹ ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ðeɪ ɡoʊ ɔf ən bɪkʌm vɪlədʒ hilɝz əɹ wɪsdəmz əɹ ðə laɪk, əɹ səmtaɪmz sɪmpli fɝɡɛt ðə paʊɝ, stɑp tʃænəlɪŋ, ən teɪk ʌp ə kɹæft əɹ tʃɹeɪd. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðeɪ vænɪʃ, soʊ tə spik." ɪleɪn wʌndɝd haʊ ɛniwʌn kəd fɝɡɛt ðə wʌn paʊɝ ðət weɪ; ði ɝdʒ tə tʃænəl, ðə tɛmteɪʃən ə ðə sɔɹs, wɑz ɔlweɪz ðɛɹ, wʌns jə lɝn haʊ. ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd sim tə bɪliv səm wɪmən kəd dʒʌs pʊɾ ɪt bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ðoʊ, wʌns ðeɪ faʊn aʊt ðeɪ wəd nɑt bi ɛɛs sədaɪ.

"None ever remained long," Adeleas added. "Five years, perhaps ten; then, I suppose, as now. Once they realize that their little group is no replacement for the White Tower, they go off and become village Healers or Wisdoms or the like, or sometimes simply forget the Power, stop channeling, and take up a craft or trade. In any case, they vanish, so to speak." Elayne wondered how anyone could forget the One Power that way; the urge to channel, the temptation of the Source, was always there, once you learned how. Aes Sedai did seem to believe some women could just put it behind them, though, once they found out they would not be Aes Sedai.

vændin tʊk ʌp ði ɛkspləneɪʃən əɡɛn; ðə sɪstɝz fɹikwənli spoʊk ɔlmoʊst ɪn ɔltɝneɪɾɪŋ sɛntənsəz, itʃ kæɹiɪŋ ɑn smuðli wɛɹ ði ʌðɝ lɛft ɔf. "ðə taʊɝ əz noʊn ə ðə kɪn fɹəm nɪɹli ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, pɝhæps fɹəm ðə vɛɹi bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ət fɝst, noʊ daʊt, ðə wɔɹz tʊk pɹɛsəɾəns. ən dɪspaɪt kɔlɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ðə kɪn, ðeɪv dʌn dʒʌst wʌt wi wɑn sətʃ wɪmən tə du. ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪn hɪɾən, ivən ðə fæk ðət ðeɪ kən tʃænəl, dʒɹɔ noʊ ətɛnʃən wʌtsoʊɛvɝ tə ðɛmsɛlvz. oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz, ðeɪv ivən pæst əlɔŋ wɝd - sikɹɪtli, ʌv kɔɹs; kɛɹfəli - wən wʌn ə ðɛm faʊn ə wʊmən fɔlsli kleɪmɪŋ ðə ʃɔl. jə sɛd sʌmθɪŋ?"

Vandene took up the explanation again; the sisters frequently spoke almost in alternating sentences, each carrying on smoothly where the other left off. "The Tower has known of the Kin from nearly the beginning, perhaps from the very beginning. At first, no doubt, the Wars took precedence. And despite calling themselves the Kin, they have done just what we want such women to do. They remain hidden, even the fact that they can channel, draw no attention whatsoever to themselves. Over the years, they have even passed along word - secretly, of course; carefully - when one of them found a woman falsely claiming the shawl. You said something?"

ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "kɛɝin, ɪz ðəɹ ɛni ti ɪn ðət pɑt?" kɛɝin ɡeɪv ə smɔl stɑɹt. "aɪ θɪŋk æɾɪliz ən vændin maɪt laɪk tə wɛt ðɛɹ θɹoʊts." ðə dəmɑni wʊmən dɪd nɑt kwaɪt lʊk əɾ ə stɪl-stɛɹɪŋ mɛɝɪlɪl bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə teɪbəl wɛɹ ðə sɪlvɝ tipɑɾ ən kʌps wɝ. "ðæt dʌzn ɪkspleɪn waɪ," ɪleɪn wɛn ɑn. "waɪ ɪz nɑlədʒ ə ðɛm sətʃ ə dip sikɹət? waɪ hævən ðeɪ bɪn skæɾɝd lɔŋ əɡoʊ?"

Elayne shook her head. "Careane, is there any tea in that pot?" Careane gave a small start. "I think Adeleas and Vandene might like to wet their throats." The Domani woman did not quite look at a still-staring Merilille before going to the table where the silver teapot and cups were. "That doesn't explain why," Elayne went on. "Why is knowledge of them such a deep secret? Why haven't they been scattered long ago?"

"waɪ, ðə ɹʌnəweɪz, ʌv kɔɹs." æɾɪliz meɪɾ ɪt saʊn ðə moʊst ɑbviəs θɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld. "ɪɾ ɪz ə fæk ðəɾ ʌðɝ ɡæðɝɪŋz əv bɪn bɹoʊkən ʌp əz sun əz faʊnd - ðə læst əbaʊt tu hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɡoʊ - bʌt ðə kɪn də kip ðɛmsɛlvz smɔl, ən kwaɪət. ðət læst ɡɹup kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ðə dɔɾɝz ə saɪləns, jɛt ðeɪ wɝ hɑɹdli saɪlənt. oʊnli twɛnti-θɹi ʌv əm ɔltəɡɛðɝ, waɪldɝz ɡæðɝɾ ən tʃɹeɪn æftɝ ə fæʃən baɪ ə pɛɹ ə fɔɹmɝ æksɛptɪd, bʌt ðeɪ - "

"Why, the runaways, of course." Adeleas made it sound the most obvious thing in the world. "It is a fact that other gatherings have been broken up as soon as found - the last about two hundred years ago - but the Kin do keep themselves small, and quiet. That last group called themselves the Daughters of Silence, yet they were hardly silent. Only twenty-three of them altogether, wilders gathered and trained after a fashion by a pair of former Accepted, but they - "

"ɹʌnəweɪz," ɪleɪn pɹɑmptəd, teɪkɪŋ ə kʌp fɹəm kɛɝin wɪð ə smaɪl ə θæŋks. ʃi hæd nɑɾ æskt wʌn fəɹ hɝsɛlf, bʌt ʃi ɹilaɪzd æbsənli ðət ðə wʊmən hæɾ ɔfɝɾ əɹ ðə fɝst. vændin ən əɹ sɪstɝ hæd tɔkt kwaɪɾ ə bɪɾ əbaʊt ɹʌnəweɪz ɑn ðə weɪ tə ɛbu dɑɹ.

"Runaways," Elayne prompted, taking a cup from Careane with a smile of thanks. She had not asked one for herself, but she realized absently that the woman had offered her the first. Vandene and her sister had talked quite a bit about runaways on the way to Ebou Dar.

æɾɪliz blɪŋkt, ən pʊl hɝsɛlf bæk tə ðə tɑpɪk. "ðə kɪn hɛlp ɹʌnəweɪz. ðeɪ ɔlweɪz əv tu əɹ θɹi wɪmən ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn kipɪŋ wɑtʃ. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃ ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi wʊmən pʊɾ aʊt, ɪn ə vɛɹi sɝkəmspɛkt weɪ, ən fəɹ ənʌðɝ, ðeɪ mænədʒ tə faɪn ɛvɹi ɹʌnəweɪ, wɛðɝ nɑvəs əɹ æksɛptɪd. ət list, nʌn əz meɪɾ ɪɾ ɔf ði aɪlənd wɪθaʊt ðɛɹ hɛlp sɪns ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz."

Adeleas blinked, and pulled herself back to the topic. "The Kin help runaways. They always have two or three women in Tar Valon keeping watch. For one thing, they approach almost every woman put out, in a very circumspect way, and for another, they manage to find every runaway, whether novice or Accepted. At least, none has made it off the island without their help since the Trolloc Wars."

"oʊ, jɛs," vændin sɛɾ əz æɾɪliz pɔz tə teɪk ə kʌp fɹəm kɛɝin. ɪt hæd bɪn ɔfɝd tə mɛɝɪlɪl fɝst, bʌt mɛɝɪlɪl sæt slʌmpt ən stɛɹɪŋ blikli ət nʌθɪŋ. "ɪf ɛniwʌn dʌz mænədʒ tə ɪskeɪp, waɪ, wi noʊ ɹaɪt wɛɹ tə lʊk, ən ʃi nɪɹli ɔlweɪz ɛnz ʌp bæk ɪn ðə taʊɝ wɪʃɪŋ əɹ fit hæd nɛvɝ ɪtʃt. əz lɔŋ əz ðə kɪn doʊnt noʊ wi noʊ, ɛniweɪ. wʌns ðət hæpənz, ɪɾəl bi bæk tə ðə deɪz bɪfɔɹ ðə kɪn, wən ə wʊmən ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ðə taʊɝ maɪt ɡoʊ ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən. ðə nʌmbɝz wɝ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən - ɛɛs sədaɪ, æksɛptɪd, nɑvəsɪz ən ɹʌnəweɪz - ən səm jɪɹz tu aʊɾ ə θɹi ɪskeɪp klin, ʌðɝz θɹi aʊɾ ə fɔɹ. juzɪŋ ðə kɪn, wi ɹiteɪk ət lis naɪn ə tɛn. jə kən si waɪ ðə taʊɝ əz pɹəzɝv ðə kɪn ən ðɛɹ sikɹət laɪk pɹɛʃəs dʒuəlz."

"Oh, yes," Vandene said as Adeleas paused to take a cup from Careane. It had been offered to Merilille first, but Merilille sat slumped and staring bleakly at nothing. "If anyone does manage to escape, why, we know right where to look, and she nearly always ends up back in the Tower wishing her feet had never itched. As long as the Kin don't know we know, anyway. Once that happens, it will be back to the days before the Kin, when a woman running from the Tower might go in any direction. The numbers were larger then - Aes Sedai, Accepted, novices and runaways - and some years two out of three escaped clean, others three out of four. Using the Kin, we retake at least nine of ten. You can see why the Tower has preserved the Kin and their secret like precious jewels."

ɪleɪn kʊd. ə wʊmən wɑz nɑt dʌn wɪð ðə waɪt taʊɝ əntɪl ɪt wɑz dʌn wɪð hɝ. bɪsaɪdz, ɪt kəd nɑt hɝt ðə taʊɝz ɹɛpjəteɪʃən fəɹ ɪnfælɪbɪlɪɾi ðəɾ ɪɾ ɔlweɪz kɑt ɹʌnəweɪz. ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz. wɛl, naʊ ʃi nu.

Elayne could. A woman was not done with the White Tower until it was done with her. Besides, it could not hurt the Tower's reputation for infallibility that it always caught runaways. Almost always. Well, now she knew.

ʃi stʊd, ən tə hɝ əstɑnɪʃmənt, æɾɪliz dɪɾ ɔlsoʊ, ən vændin, weɪvɪŋ əweɪ kɛɝinz ɔfɝd ti, ən sɝaɪðə. ivən mɛɝɪlɪl, æftɝ ə moʊmənt. ðeɪ ɔl lʊkt əɾ əɹ ɪkspɛktənli, ivən mɛɝɪlɪl.

She stood, and to her astonishment, Adeleas did also, and Vandene, waving away Careane's offered tea, and Sareitha. Even Merilille, after a moment. They all looked at her expectantly, even Merilille.

vændin noʊɾəst əɹ sɝpɹaɪz, ən smaɪld. "ənʌðɝ θɪŋ jə maɪt nɑt noʊ. wəɹ ə kəntɛnʃəs lɑɾ ɪn mɛni weɪz, wi ɛɛs sədaɪ, itʃ dʒɛləs ə hɝ pleɪs ən pɹɪɹɑɡəɾɪvz, bʌt wən sʌmwʌn ɪz pleɪst əbʌv əs əɹ stænz əbʌv ʌs, wi tɛn tə fɑloʊ hɝ fɛɹli mikli fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt. haʊɛvɝ wi maɪt ɡɹʌmbəl əbaʊɾ əɹ dɪsɪʒənz ɪn pɹaɪvət."

Vandene noticed her surprise, and smiled. "Another thing you might not know. We are a contentious lot in many ways, we Aes Sedai, each jealous of her place and prerogatives, but when someone is placed above us or stands above us, we tend to follow her fairly meekly for the most part. However we might grumble about her decisions in private."

"waɪ, soʊ wi du," æɾɪliz mɝmɝd hæpəli, əz ɪf ʃi hæd dʒʌs dɪskʌvɝd sʌmθɪŋ.

"Why, so we do," Adeleas murmured happily, as if she had just discovered something.

mɛɝɪlɪl tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, əbzɔɹbɪŋ hɝsɛlf fəɹ ə moʊmən ɪn stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ əɹ skɝts. "vændin ɪz ɹaɪt," ʃi sɛd. "ju stæn əbʌv əs ɪn jɝsɛlf, ən aɪ mʌst ədmɪt, jə əpɛɹənli hæv bɪn pleɪst əbʌv ʌs. ɪf əɹ bɪheɪvjɝ kɔlz fəɹ pɛnəns. . . . wɛl, jəl tɛl əs ɪf ɪt dʌz. wɛɹ ɑɹ wi tə fɑloʊ ju? ɪf aɪ meɪ æsk?" ðəɹ wɑz noʊ sɑɹkæzəm ɪn ɛni ʌv ðæt; ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, hɝ toʊn wɑz mɔɹ pəlaɪt ðən ɪleɪn hæd hɝɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ bɪfɔɹ.

Merilille took a deep breath, absorbing herself for a moment in straightening her skirts. "Vandene is right," she said. "You stand above us in yourself, and I must admit, you apparently have been placed above us. If our behavior calls for penance. . . . Well, you will tell us if it does. Where are we to follow you? If I may ask?" There was no sarcasm in any of that; if anything, her tone was more polite than Elayne had heard out of her before.

ʃi θɔɾ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ hu ɛvɝ lɪvd wʊɾə bɪn pɹaʊd tə kəntʃɹoʊl əɹ fitʃɝz əz wɛl əz ʃi dɪd ɹaɪt ðɛn. ɔl ʃi hæd wɑntəd wɑz fəɹ əm tə ədmɪt ʃi ɹɪli wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi fɔɾ ə moʊməntɛɹi ɝdʒ tə pɹoʊtɛs ðət ʃi wɑz tu jʌŋ, tu ɪnɪkspɪɹiənst. "ju kən nɛvɝ pʊt hʌni bæk ɪn ðə koʊm," soʊ lini juz tə seɪ wən ʃi wɑz ə ɡɝl. ɛɡwin wɑz noʊ oʊldɝ.

She thought any Aes Sedai who ever lived would have been proud to control her features as well as she did right then. All she had wanted was for them to admit she really was Aes Sedai. She fought a momentary urge to protest that she was too young, too inexperienced. "You can never put honey back in the comb," so Lini used to say when she was a girl. Egwene was no older.

dʒɹɔɪŋ bɹɛθ, ʃi smaɪld wɔɹmli. "ðə fɝs θɪŋ tə ɹikɔl ɪz ðət wəɹ ɔl sɪstɝz, ɪn ɛvɹi minɪŋ ə ðə wɝd. wi mʌst wɝk təɡɛðɝ; ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz ɪz tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ lɛs." ʃi hoʊp ðeɪ wəɾ ɔl nɑd soʊ ɪnθuziæstɪkli wən ʃi toʊld əm wʌɾ ɛɡwin ɪntɛndəd. "pɝhæps wi ʃəd sɪɾ əɡɛn." ðeɪ weɪɾəd fəɹ əɹ bɪfɔɹ foʊldɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz bæk ɪndə ðɛɹ sits. ʃi hoʊp nɪneɪiv wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ ɑn ə tɛnθ soʊ wɛl. wən ʃi faʊn aʊɾ əbaʊt ðɪs, nɪneɪiv wɑz gɑnə feɪn fɹəm ʃɑk. "aɪ hæv sʌmθɪŋ ə maɪ oʊn tə tɛl jə əbaʊt ðə kɪn."

Drawing breath, she smiled warmly. "The first thing to recall is that we are all sisters, in every meaning of the word. We must work together; the Bowl of the Winds is too important for anything less." She hoped they would all nod so enthusiastically when she told them what Egwene intended. "Perhaps we should sit again." They waited for her before folding themselves back into their seats. She hoped Nynaeve was getting on a tenth so well. When she found out about this, Nynaeve was going to faint from shock. "I have something of my own to tell you about the Kin."

fɛɹli sun ɪt wɑz mɛɝɪlɪl u lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə feɪn fɹəm ʃɑk, ən ivən æɾɪliz ən vændin wɝ nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ɪt. bʌt ðeɪ wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn seɪɪŋ, "jɛs, ɪleɪn," ən "ɪf jə seɪ soʊ, ɪleɪn." pɝhæps ɪt wəɾ ɔl ɡoʊ smuðli fɹəm naʊ ɑn.

Fairly soon it was Merilille who looked ready to faint from shock, and even Adeleas and Vandene were not far from it. But they went right on saying, "Yes, Elayne," and "If you say so, Elayne." Perhaps it would all go smoothly from now on.

ðə sɪdæn tʃɛɹ wɑz ɹɑkɪŋ θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz ə ɹɛvəlɝz əlɔŋ ðə ki wən mɑɡiɾin spɑɾəd ðə wʊmən. ʃi wɑz biɪŋ hændəd daʊn fɹəm ə koʊtʃ ət wʌn ə ðə boʊt lændɪŋz baɪ ə fʊtmən ɪn ɡɹin ən waɪt. ə waɪd fɛðɝd mæsk kʌvɝɾ əɹ feɪs mɔɹ kəmplitli ðən mɑɡiɾinz dɪd, bʌt ʃi wʊɾə noʊn ðət dɪtɝmən stʃɹaɪd, noʊn ðət wʊmən, fɹəm ɛni æŋɡəl ɪn ɛni laɪt. ðə kɑɹv skɹinz ðət sɝvd əz wɪndoʊz ɪn ðə kloʊz tʃɛɹ wɝ sɝɾənli noʊ hɪnʒɹəns. tu fɛloʊz wɪð sɔɹdz ɑn ðɛɹ hɪps skɹæmbəl fɹəm ðə koʊtʃ ɹuf tə fɑloʊ ðə mæskt wʊmən.

The sedan chair was rocking through the crowds of revelers along the quay when Moghedien spotted the woman. She was being handed down from a coach at one of the boat landings by a footman in green and white. A wide feathered mask covered her face more completely than Moghedien's did, but she would have known that determined stride, known that woman, from any angle in any light. The carved screens that served as windows in the closed chair were certainly no hindrance. Two fellows with swords on their hips scrambled from the coach roof to follow the masked woman.

mɑɡiɾin θʌmpt ə fɪst əɡɛns ðə saɪɾ ə ðə tʃɛɹ, ʃaʊɾɪŋ, "stɑp!" ðə bɛɹɝz hɔltəd soʊ kwɪkli ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊs flʌŋ fɔɹwɝd.

Moghedien thumped a fist against the side of the chair, shouting, "Stop!" The bearers halted so quickly she was almost flung forward.

ðə kɹaʊd dʒɑsəl pæst, səm ʃaʊɾɪŋ kɝsɪz əɾ əɹ bɛɹɝz fəɹ blɑkɪŋ ðə weɪ, səm ʃaʊɾɪŋ mɔɹ ɡʊd neɪtʃɝdli. daʊn hɪɹ baɪ ðə ɹɪvɝ, ðə θɹɔŋ ɹæn θɪn ɪnʌf fəɹ əɹ tə wɑtʃ θɹu ðə ɡæps. ðə boʊt ðət pʊld əweɪ fɹəm ðə lændɪŋ sim kwaɪt dɪstɪŋktɪv; ðə ɹuf ə ðə loʊ kæbən ɪn ðə ɹɪɹ wɑz peɪntəd ɹɛd; ʃi dɪd nɑt si ðəɾ æfɛkteɪʃən ɑn ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz weɪɾɪŋ ət ðə lɔŋ stoʊn dɑk.

The crowd jostled past, some shouting curses at her bearers for blocking the way, some shouting more good naturedly. Down here by the river, the throng ran thin enough for her to watch through the gaps. The boat that pulled away from the landing seemed quite distinctive; the roof of the low cabin in the rear was painted red; she did not see that affectation on any of the others waiting at the long stone dock.

ʃi wɛɾ əɹ lɪps, ʃɪvɝɪŋ. mɔɹaɪɾɪnz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz hæd bɪn ɪksplɪsət, ðə pɹaɪs ə dɪsəbiɾiəns meɪɾ ɛkskɹusieɪɾɪŋli klɪɹ. bʌɾ ə slaɪt dɪleɪ wəd nɑt hɝt. nɑɾ ɪf i nɛvɝ lɝn ʌv ɪt, ɛniweɪ.

She wet her lips, shivering. Moridin's instructions had been explicit, the price of disobedience made excruciatingly clear. But a slight delay would not hurt. Not if he never learned of it, anyway.

flɪŋɪŋ oʊpən ðə dɔɹ, ʃi klaɪmd aʊɾ ɪndə ðə stʃɹiɾ ən lʊkt əbaʊt heɪstəli. ðɛɹ; ðəɾ ɪn, ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ ðə dɑks. ən ðə ɹɪvɝ. lɪftɪŋ əɹ skɝts, ʃi hɝiɾ əweɪ wɪθaʊt ðə slaɪɾəst fɪɹ ɛniwʌn maɪt haɪɝ əɹ tʃɛɹ; əntɪl ʃi əntaɪd ðə wɛbz ə kəmpʌlʃən ɑn ðɛm, ðə bɛɹɝz wəd tɛl ɛniwʌn u æsk ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɛnɡeɪdʒd, ən stæn ðəɹ əntɪl ðeɪ daɪɾ ə hʌŋɡɝ. ə pæθ oʊpən əhɛɾ ə hɝ, mɛn ən wɪmən ɪn fɛðɝd mæsks lipɪŋ əsaɪd bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹitʃt ðɛm, lipɪŋ wɪð skwilz ən kɹaɪz əz ðeɪ klʌtʃt wɛɹ ðeɪ θɔt ðeɪ hæd bɪn stæbd. əz ðeɪ hæd; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm tə spɪn sʌɾəl wɛbz ɑn soʊ mɛni maɪnz, bʌɾ ə flɝi ʌv niɾəlz woʊvən ʌv ɛɹ dɪɾ əz wɛl hɪɹ.

Flinging open the door, she climbed out into the street and looked about hastily. There; that inn, right overlooking the docks. And the river. Lifting her skirts, she hurried away without the slightest fear anyone might hire her chair; until she untied the webs of Compulsion on them, the bearers would tell anyone who asked that they were engaged, and stand there until they died of hunger. A path opened ahead of her, men and women in feathered masks leaping aside before she reached them, leaping with squeals and cries as they clutched where they thought they had been stabbed. As they had; there was no time to spin subtle webs on so many minds, but a flurry of needles woven of Air did as well here.

ðə staʊɾ ɪnkipɝ ət ði ɔɹzmənz pɹaɪd nɪɹli lɛpt, tu, ət ðə saɪɾ ə mɑɡiɾin stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪndə hɝ kɑmən ɹum ɪn ɡlɔɹiəsli skɑɹlət sɪlk wɝkt wɪð θɹɛd-ʌv-ɡoʊld ən blæk sɪlk ðət ɡlɪsən əz ɹɪtʃli əz ðə ɡoʊld. hɝ mæsk wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt spɹeɪ ʌv pɪtʃ blæk fɛðɝz wɪð ə ʃɑɹp blæk bik; ə ɹeɪvən. ðət wɑz mɔɹaɪɾɪnz dʒoʊk, hɪz kəmænd, əz wɑz ðə dʒɹɛs, ɪn fækt. hɪz kʌlɝz wɝ blæk ən ɹɛd, hi sɛd, ən ʃi wəd wɛɹ əm waɪl ʃi sɝv hɪm. ʃi wɑz ɪn lɪvɝi, haʊɛvɝ ɛləɡənt, ən ʃi cʊɾə kɪld ɛvɹiwʌn u sɔ hɝ.

The stout innkeeper at The Oarsman's Pride nearly leaped, too, at the sight of Moghedien striding into her common room in gloriously scarlet silk worked with thread-of-gold and black silk that glistened as richly as the gold. Her mask was a great spray of pitch black feathers with a sharp black beak; a raven. That was Moridin's joke, his command, as was the dress, in fact. His colors were black and red, he said, and she would wear them while she served him. She was in livery, however elegant, and she could have killed everyone who saw her.

ɪnstɛd, ʃi spʌn ə heɪsti wɛb ɑn ðə ɹaʊnd-tʃikt ɪnkipɝ ðət dʒɝkt əɹ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾ ən meɪɾ əɹ aɪz pɑp. noʊ taɪm fəɹ sʌɾəlti. ət mɑɡiɾinz kəmæn tə ʃoʊ hɝ ðə ɹuf, ðə wʊmən ɹæn ʌp ðə ɹeɪləs stɛɹz ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum. ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli ɛni ʌv ðə fɛðɝ-dʒɹeɪp dʒɹɪŋkɝz sɔ ɛniθɪŋ ənjuʒəwəl ɪn ði ɪnkipɝz bɪheɪvjɝ, mɑɡiɾin θɔt wɪð ə smɔl læf. ði ɔɹzmənz pɹaɪd pɹɑbli hæd nɛvɝ sin ə peɪtʃɹən ə hɝ kwɑləɾi bɪfɔɹ.

Instead, she spun a hasty web on the round-cheeked innkeeper that jerked her up straight and made her eyes pop. No time for subtlety. At Moghedien's command to show her the roof, the woman ran up the railless stairs at the side of the room. It was unlikely any of the feather-draped drinkers saw anything unusual in the innkeeper's behavior, Moghedien thought with a small laugh. The Oarsman's Pride probably had never seen a patron of her quality before.

ɑn ðə flæt ɹuf, ʃi kwɪkli weɪd ðə deɪnʒɝz ə lɛɾɪŋ ði ɪn-kipɝ lɪv vɝsəs ðoʊz ə kɪlɪŋ hɝ. kɔɹpsəz hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv pɔɪntɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ, ɪvɛntʃəwəli. ɪf jə wɪʃt tə ɹɪmeɪn kwaɪətli hɪɾən ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz, jə dɪd nɑt kɪl ənlɛs jə æbsəlutli hæd tə. heɪstəli, ʃi ədʒʌstəd ðə wɛb ə kəmpʌlʃən, toʊl ðə wʊmən tə ɡoʊ daʊn tə hɝ ɹum, tə ɡoʊ tə slip ən fɝɡɛɾ ɛvɝ hævɪŋ sin hɝ. wɪð ðə heɪst, ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl ði ɪnkipɝ maɪt luz ðə hoʊl deɪ, əɹ weɪk sʌmwʌt sloʊɝ ʌv wɪts ðən ʃi hæd bɪn - soʊ mʌtʃ ɪn mɑɡiɾinz laɪf wʊɾə bɪn soʊ mʌtʃ iziɝ hæd ʃi pəzɛst ə bɛɾɝ tælən fəɹ kəmpʌlʃən - bʌɾ ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðə wʊmən skɝiɾ əweɪ, iɡɝ tə oʊbeɪ, ən lɛft əɹ əloʊn.

On the flat roof, she quickly weighed the dangers of letting the inn-keeper live versus those of killing her. Corpses had a way of pointing a finger, eventually. If you wished to remain quietly hidden in the shadows, you did not kill unless you absolutely had to. Hastily, she adjusted the web of Compulsion, told the woman to go down to her room, to go to sleep and forget ever having seen her. With the haste, it was possible the innkeeper might lose the whole day, or wake somewhat slower of wits than she had been - so much in Moghedien's life would have been so much easier had she possessed a better Talent for Compulsion - but in any case, the woman scurried away, eager to obey, and left her alone.

əz ðə dɔɹ θʌmp daʊn flæɾ ɪndə ðə dɝɾi waɪt-taɪld ɹuf, mɑɡiɾin ɡæspt ət ðə sʌɾən fil ə fɪŋɡɝz stʃɹoʊkɪŋ əɹ maɪnd, pælpɪŋ əɹ soʊl. mɔɹaɪɾɪn dɪd ðət səmtaɪmz; ə ɹimaɪndɝ, hi sɛd, əz ɪf ʃi niɾəd ɛni mɔɹ. ʃi ɔlmoʊs lʊkt ɝaʊn fəɹ hɪm; hɝ skɪn pɛbəld əz ðoʊ əɾ ə sʌɾən aɪsi bɹiz. ðə tʌtʃ vænɪʃt, ən ʃi ʃɪvɝɾ əɡɛn. kʌmɪŋ əɹ ɡoʊɪŋ, ɪt dɪd ɹimaɪn hɝ. mɔɹaɪɾɪn hɪmsɛlf kəɾ əpɪɹ ɛniwɛɹ əɾ ɛni taɪm. heɪst.

As the door thumped down flat into the dirty white-tiled roof, Moghedien gasped at the sudden feel of fingers stroking her mind, palping her soul. Moridin did that sometimes; a reminder, he said, as if she needed any more. She almost looked around for him; her skin pebbled as though at a sudden icy breeze. The touch vanished, and she shivered again. Coming or going, it did remind her. Moridin himself could appear anywhere at any time. Haste.

spiɾɪŋ tə ðə loʊ wɔl ðət sɝaʊndəd ðə ɹuf, ʃi sɝtʃt ðə ɹɪvɝ spɹɛɾ aʊt bɪloʊ. skɔɹz ə boʊts ʌv ɛvɹi saɪz swɛpt əlɔŋ ɑn ðɛɹ ɔɹz bɪtwin lɑɹdʒɝ vɛsəlz, æŋkɝɾ əɹ ʌndɝ seɪl. moʊst ə ðə kæbənz ə ðə sɔɹt ʃi sɔt wɝ pleɪn wʊd, bʌt ðəɹ ʃi sɔ ə jɛloʊ ɹuf, ən ðəɹ ə blu, ən ðɛɹ, ɪn mɪdʒɹaɪvɝ ən hɛɾɪŋ saʊθwɝd fæst. . . . ɹɛd. ɪt hæd tə bi ðə ɹaɪt wʌn; ʃi kəd nɑt teɪk ɛni mɔɹ taɪm hɪɹ.

Speeding to the low wall that surrounded the roof, she searched the river spread out below. Scores of boats of every size swept along on their oars between larger vessels, anchored or under sail. Most of the cabins of the sort she sought were plain wood, but there she saw a yellow roof, and there a blue, and there, in midriver and heading southward fast. . . . Red. It had to be the right one; she could not take any more time here.

ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ hænz, bʌɾ əz bɑlfaɪɝ lɔntʃt ɪtsɛlf, sʌmθɪŋ flæʃt ɝaʊn əɹ ən ʃi dʒɝkt. mɔɹaɪɾɪn hæd kʌm; hi wɑz ðɛɹ, ən i wʊd. . . . ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ðə pɪdʒənz flʌɾɝɪŋ əweɪ. pɪdʒənz! ʃi nɪɹli spjud ðə kɑntɛns ə hɝ stʌmək əkɹɔs ðə ɹuf. ə ɡlæns ət ðə ɹɪvɝ, meɪɾ əɹ snɑɹl.

She raised her hands, but as balefire launched itself, something flashed around her and she jerked. Moridin had come; he was there, and he would. . . . She stared at the pigeons fluttering away. Pigeons! She nearly spewed the contents of her stomach across the roof. A glance at the river, made her snarl.

kəz ʃi hæd dʒɝkt, ðə bɑlfaɪɝ ʃi mɛn tə slaɪs θɹu kæbən ən pæsənʒɝ ɪnstɛd hæd slaɪs daɪæɡənəli θɹu ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə boʊt, əbaʊt wɛɹ ði ɔɹsmɪn hæd stʊd, ən ðə bɑɾiɡɑɹdz. kəz ðə ɹoʊɝz hæd bɪn bɝn aʊɾ ə ðə pæɾɝn bɪfɔɹ ðə bɑlfaɪɝ stʃɹʌk, ðə tu hævz ə ðə kɹæft wɝ naʊ ə ɡʊd hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz bæk ʌp ðə ɹɪvɝ. ðən əɡɛn, pɝhæps ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə kəmplit dɪzæstɝ. kəz ðət slaɪs fɹəm ðə boʊts sɛntɝ hæd ɡɔn ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðə boʊtmən ɹɪli daɪd, ðə ɹɪvɝ hæd hæd mɪnəts tə ɹʌʃ ɪn. ðə tu pɑɹts ə ðə boʊt sæŋk aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ɪn ə ɡɹeɪt fɹɔθ ə bʌbəlz ivən əz əɹ aɪz ʃɪftəd tə ðɛm, kæɹiɪŋ ðɛɹ pæsənʒɝ tə ðə dɛpθs.

Because she had jerked, the balefire she meant to slice through cabin and passenger instead had sliced diagonally through the middle of the boat, about where the oarsmen had stood, and the bodyguards. Because the rowers had been burned out of the Pattern before the balefire struck, the two halves of the craft were now a good hundred paces back up the river. Then again, perhaps it was not a complete disaster. Because that slice from the boat's center had gone at the same time the boatmen really died, the river had had minutes to rush in. The two parts of the boat sank out of sight in a great froth of bubbles even as her eyes shifted to them, carrying their passenger to the depths.

sʌɾənli, wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn stʃɹʌk hɝ. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz muvd ɪn ðə dɪm pleɪsəz, ɔlweɪz kɛp hɝsɛlf hɪɾən, ɔlweɪz. . . . ɛni wʊmən ɪn ðə sɪɾi hu kəd tʃænəl wəd noʊ sʌmwʌn hæd dʒɹɔn ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə seɪaɪdɑɹ, ɪf nɑt fəɹ wʌt, ən ɛni aɪ wɑtʃɪŋ hæd sin ðət bɑɹ ə lɪkwəd waɪt faɪɝ sɪɹ əkɹɔs ði æftɝnun. fɪɹ ɡeɪv əɹ wɪŋz. nɑt fɪɹ. tɛɹɝ.

Suddenly, what she had done struck her. She had always moved in the dim places, always kept herself hidden, always. . . . Any woman in the city who could channel would know someone had drawn a great deal of saidar, if not for what, and any eye watching had seen that bar of liquid white fire sear across the afternoon. Fear gave her wings. Not fear. Terror.

ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ skɝts, ʃi ɹæn bæk daʊn ðə stɛɹz, ɹæn θɹu ðə kɑmən ɹum bʌmpɪŋ ɪndə teɪbəlz ən kɝɪɹɪŋ ɔf pipəl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ əɹ weɪ, ɹæn ɪndə ðə stʃɹit tu fɹaɪɾənd tə θɪŋk, bæɾɝɪŋ ə pæθ θɹu ðə kɹaʊd wɪð əɹ hænz.

Gathering her skirts, she ran back down the stairs, ran through the common room bumping into tables and careering off people trying to get out her way, ran into the street too frightened to think, battering a path through the crowd with her hands.

"ɹʌn!" ʃi ʃɹikt, hɝlɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɪndə ðə sɪdæn tʃɛɹ. hɝ skɝts kɑɾ ɪn ðə dɔɹ; ʃi ɹɪpt əm fɹi. "ɹʌn!"

"Run!" she shrieked, hurling herself into the sedan chair. Her skirts caught in the door; she ripped them free. "Run!"

ðə bɛɹɝz flʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ɪndə moʊʃən, tɔsɪŋ əɹ əbaʊt, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. ʃi bɹeɪs hɝsɛlf wɪð fɪŋɡɝz leɪs θɹu ðə kɑɹvd wɪndoʊ skɹinz, ən ʃʊk ʌnkəntʃɹoʊləbli. hi hæd nɑt fɔɹbɪɾən ðɪs. hi maɪt fɝɡɪv, əɹ ivən ɪɡnɔɹ əɹ ɪndɪpɛndən ækʃən hɪɹ, ɪf ʃi kæɹiɾ aʊɾ ɪz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz swɪfli, ɪfɪʃənli. ðət wɑz əɹ oʊnli hoʊp. ʃi wɑz gɑnə meɪk fæljən ən ɪspæn kɹɔl!

The bearers flung themselves into motion, tossing her about, but she did not care. She braced herself with fingers laced through the carved window screens, and shook uncontrollably. He had not forbidden this. He might forgive, or even ignore her independent action here, if she carried out his instructions swiftly, efficiently. That was her only hope. She was going to make Falion and Ispan crawl!


tʃæptɝ θɝɾiwʌn


CHAPTER 31

mæʃiɑɹə


Mashiara

əz ðə boʊt swɛpt əweɪ fɹəm ðə lændɪŋ, nɪneɪiv tɔst əɹ mæsk daʊn bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ɑn ðə kʊʃən bɛntʃ ən slʌmp bæk wɪð ɑɹmz foʊldəɾ ən bɹeɪd ɡɹɪp fɝmli, skaʊlɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ. skaʊlɪŋ əɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə wɪn stɪl toʊld əɹ ə fɪɹs stɔɹm wɑz ɑn ðə weɪ, ðə kaɪn ðət tɔɹ ɔf ɹufs ən flæɾənd bɑɹnz, ən ʃi ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt ðə ɹɪvɝ wəd bɪɡɪn tə kɪk ʌp ɪn weɪvz ɹaɪt ðət mɪnət.

As the boat swept away from the landing, Nynaeve tossed her mask down beside her on the cushioned bench and slumped back with arms folded and braid gripped firmly, scowling at nothing. Scowling at everything. Listening to the Wind still told her a fierce storm was on the way, the kind that tore off roofs and flattened barns, and she almost wished the river would begin to kick up in waves right that minute.

"ɪf ɪɾ ɪzən ðə wɛðɝ, nɪneɪiv," ʃi mɪmɪkt, "ðɛn jə ʃəd bi ðə wʌn tə ɡoʊ. ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps maɪt bi ɪnsʌltɪɾ ɪf wi dɪdn sɛn ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ʌv ʌs. ðeɪ noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ pʊt ɡɹeɪt stɔɹ ɪn ðæt. bɑ!" ðət hæd bɪn ɪleɪn. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə "bɑ." ɪleɪn dʒʌs θɔt pʊɾɪŋ ʌp wɪð ɛni əmaʊn ə nɑnsɛns fɹəm mɛɝɪlɪl wəd bi pɹɛfɝəbəl tə feɪsɪŋ nɛstə əɡɛn. wʌns jə bɪɡæn bædli wɪð sʌmwʌn, ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə ɹɪkʌvɝ - mæt kɔθən wɑz pɹuf ɪnʌf ə ðæt! - ən ɪf ðeɪ hæd ɡɑɾən ɔf ɛni wɝs wɪð nɛstə dɪn ɹiz tu munz, ʃi wəd bi sɛndɪŋ ðə lɑɾ ə ðɛm tə fɛtʃ ən kæɹi.

"If it isn't the weather, Nynaeve," she mimicked, "then you should be the one to go. The Mistress of the Ships might be insulted if we didn't send the strongest of us. They know Aes Sedai put great store in that. Bah!" That had been Elayne. Except for the "bah." Elayne just thought putting up with any amount of nonsense from Merilille would be preferable to facing Nesta again. Once you began badly with someone, it was hard to recover - Mat Cauthon was proof enough of that! - and if they had gotten off any worse with Nesta din Reas Two Moons, she would be sending the lot of them to fetch and carry.

"hɔɹəbəl wʊmən!" ʃi ɡɹʌmbəld, ʃɪftɪŋ ɝaʊn ɑn ðə sit kʊʃənz. eɪvinhə hæd bɪn noʊ bɛɾɝ wən nɪneɪiv sədʒɛstəd ʃi ɡoʊ tə ðə si foʊk; ðoʊz pipəl hæd bɪn fæsəneɪɾəd baɪ hɝ. ʃi pɪtʃt əɹ vɔɪs haɪ ən fɪnəki, nɑɾ əɾ ɔl laɪk eɪvinhəz, bʌt ðə mud fɪt. "wi wɪl lɝn ə ðɪs tʃɹʌbəl wən wi lɝn, nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə. pɝhæps əl lɝn sʌmθɪŋ wɑtʃɪŋ dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn tədeɪ." ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðə fæk ðət nʌθɪŋ wʌtsoʊɛvɝ fɹaɪɾənd ði il wʊmən, ʃi wʊɾə θɔɾ eɪvinhə fɪɹfəl fɹəm əɹ iɡɝnəs tə spaɪ ɑn kæɹaɪɾɪn. ə deɪ stændɪŋ ɪn ə hɑt stʃɹit dʒɑsəl baɪ kɹaʊdz wɑz nɑɾ əmjuzɪŋ, ən tədeɪ wəd bi wɝs, wɪð ðə fɛstəvəl. nɪneɪiv wʊɾə θɔt ðə wʊmən wəɾ ɛndʒɔɪ ə naɪs ɹɪfɹɛʃɪŋ boʊt ɹaɪd.

"Horrible woman!" she grumbled, shifting around on the seat cushions. Aviendha had been no better when Nynaeve suggested she go to the Sea Folk; those people had been fascinated by her. She pitched her voice high and finicky, not at all like Aviendha's, but the mood fit. "We will learn of this trouble when we learn, Nynaeve al'Meara. Perhaps I will learn something watching Jaichim Carridin today." If not for the fact that nothing whatsoever frightened the Aiel woman, she would have thought Aviendha fearful from her eagerness to spy on Carridin. A day standing in a hot street jostled by crowds was not amusing, and today would be worse, with the festival. Nynaeve would have thought the woman would enjoy a nice refreshing boat ride.

ðə boʊt lɝtʃt. ə naɪs ɹɪfɹɛʃɪŋ boʊt ɹaɪd, ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf. naɪs kul bɹizɪz ɑn ðə beɪ. mɔɪs bɹizɪz, nɑt dʒɹaɪ. ðə boʊt ɹoʊld. "oʊ, blʌɾ ən æʃəz!" ʃi moʊnd. əpɔld, ʃi klæpt ə hæn oʊvɝ əɹ maʊθ ən dʒɹʌmd əɹ hilz əɡɛns ðə fɹʌn ə ðə bɛntʃ ɪn ɹaɪtʃəs aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ. ɪf ʃi hæd tə ɛndʒjʊɹ ðoʊz si foʊk fəɹ lɔŋ, ʃi wəɾ əv əz mʌtʃ fɪlθ kʌmɪŋ ɔf ə hɝ tʌŋ əz mæt dɪd. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt hɪm. wʌn mɔɹ deɪ foʊldɪŋ əɹ hænz fəɹ ðət . . . ðət mæn . . . ən ʃi wəd jæŋk ɛvɹi hɛɹ aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd! nɑt ðəɾ i hæd dɪmændəɾ ɛniθɪŋ ənɹiznəbəl soʊ fɑɹ, bʌt ʃi kɛpt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə, ən ɪz mænɝ . . . !

The boat lurched. A nice refreshing boat ride, she told herself. Nice cool breezes on the bay. Moist breezes, not dry. The boat rolled. "Oh, blood and ashes!" she moaned. Appalled, she clapped a hand over her mouth and drummed her heels against the front of the bench in righteous outrage. If she had to endure those Sea Folk for long, she would have as much filth coming off of her tongue as Mat did. She did not want to think about him. One more day folding her hands for that . . . that man . . . and she would yank every hair out of her head! Not that he had demanded anything unreasonable so far, but she kept waiting for him to, and his manner . . . !

"noʊ!" ʃi sɛd fɝmli. "aɪ wɑnə sɛɾəl maɪ stʌmək, nɑt ɹaɪl ɪt." ðə boʊt hæd bɪɡʌn ə sloʊ ɹɑkɪŋ. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn əɹ kloʊðz. ʃi wɑz nɑt fɪkseɪɾɪd ɑn kloʊðz ðə weɪ ɪleɪn səmtaɪmz sim tə bi, bʌt θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt sɪlks ən leɪsəz wɑz suðɪŋ.

"No!" she said firmly. "I want to settle my stomach, not rile it." The boat had begun a slow rocking. She tried to concentrate on her clothes. She was not fixated on clothes the way Elayne sometimes seemed to be, but thinking about silks and laces was soothing.

ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæd bɪn tʃoʊzən tə ɪmpɹɛs ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps, tə tʃɹaɪ ɹɪɡeɪnɪŋ ə lɪɾəl lɔst ɡɹaʊnd, fəɹ ɔl ðə ɡʊɾ ɪt maɪt du. ɡɹin sɪlk slæʃt wɪð jɛloʊ ɪn ðə skɝts, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn ɡoʊl daʊn ðə slivz ən əkɹɔs ðə bɑɾəs, wɪð ɡoʊldən leɪs əlɔŋ ðə hɛm, ən əɾ əɹ ɹɪsts, ən dʒʌs bɔɹɾɝɪŋ ðə nɛklaɪn. pɝhæps ðət ʃʊɾə bɪn haɪɝ, tə bi teɪkən sɪɹiəsli, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ oʊn ɛniθɪŋ haɪɝ. kənsɪɾɝɪŋ si foʊk kʌstəmz, ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən mɑɾəst. nɛstə wəɾ əv tə teɪk əɹ əz ʃi wɑz; nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ tʃeɪnʒɪŋ hɝsɛlf fəɹ ɛniwʌn.

Everything had been chosen to impress the Mistress of the Ships, to try regaining a little lost ground, for all the good it might do. Green silk slashed with yellow in the skirts, embroidered in gold down the sleeves and across the bodice, with golden lace along the hem, and at her wrists, and just bordering the neckline. Perhaps that should have been higher, to be taken seriously, but she did not own anything higher. Considering Sea Folk customs, it was more than modest. Nesta would have to take her as she was; Nynaeve al'Meara did not go changing herself for anyone.

ðə jɛloʊ oʊpəl pɪnz stʌk ɪn əɹ bɹeɪd wɝ əɹ oʊn - ə pɹɛzən fɹəm ðə pɑnɑɹtʃ ə tæɹɑbən, noʊ lɛs - bʌt taɪlɪn hæd pɹəvaɪɾəd ðə ɡoʊl nɛkləs ðət fæn ɛmɹəlz ən pɝlz daʊn tə hɝ bʊzəm. ə ɹɪtʃɝ pis ðən ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ dʒɹimd ʌv oʊnɪŋ; ə ɡɪft fəɹ bɹɪŋɪŋ mæt, taɪlɪn hæd kɔld ɪt, wɪtʃ meɪd noʊ sɛns əɾ ɔl, bʌt meɪbi ðə kwin θɔt ʃi niɾəd səm ɪkskjus fəɹ sətʃ ə væljəbəl pɹizɛnt. boʊθ ɡoʊld-ænd-aɪvɝi bɹeɪslɪts keɪm fɹəm eɪvinhə, hu hæɾ ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ lɪɾəl stɑk ə dʒuəlɹi fəɹ ə wʊmən u soʊ sɛldəm wɔɹ mɔɹ ðən ðət wʌn sɪlvɝ nɛkləs. nɪneɪiv hæɾ æsk tə bɑɹoʊ ðət pɹɪɾi ɹoʊzɪz-ænd-θɔɹnz aɪvɝi bɹeɪslət ðət ði il wʊmən nɛvɝ wɔɹ; sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, eɪvinhə hæd snætʃt ɪt tə hɝ bʊzəm əz ɪf ɪt wɑz əɹ moʊs pɹɛʃəs pəzɛʃən, ən ʌv ɔl θɪŋz, ɪleɪn bɪɡæn kʌmfɝɾɪŋ hɝ. nɪneɪiv wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn sɝpɹaɪz tə si ðə pɛɹ fɔl wipɪŋ ɑn wʌn ənʌðɝz ʃoʊldɝ.

The yellow opal pins stuck in her braid were her own - a present from the Panarch of Tarabon, no less - but Tylin had provided the gold necklace that fanned emeralds and pearls down to her bosom. A richer piece than she had ever dreamed of owning; a gift for bringing Mat, Tylin had called it, which made no sense at all, but maybe the Queen thought she needed some excuse for such a valuable present. Both gold-and-ivory bracelets came from Aviendha, who had a surprising little stock of jewelry for a woman who so seldom wore more than that one silver necklace. Nynaeve had asked to borrow that pretty roses-and-thorns ivory bracelet that the Aiel woman never wore; surprisingly, Aviendha had snatched it to her bosom as if it was her most precious possession, and of all things, Elayne began comforting her. Nynaeve would not have been surprised to see the pair fall weeping on one another's shoulder.

ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɑd ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ, ən ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt noʊn ðoʊz tu wɝ tu sɛnsəbəl fəɹ sətʃ nɑnsɛns, ʃi wʊɾə səspɛktəɾ ə mæn ət ðə ɹuɾ ʌv ɪt. wɛl, eɪvinhə wɑz tu sɛnsəbəl; ɪleɪn dɪd stɪl jɝn fəɹ ɹænd, ðoʊ nɪneɪiv kəd hɑɹdli fɔlt əɹ fəɹ -  sʌɾənli ʃi fɛlt wivz ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ɔlmoʊst ətɑp əɹ ɪn hjudʒ əmaʊns, ən . . .

There was something odd going on there, and if she had not known those two were too sensible for such nonsense, she would have suspected a man at the root of it. Well, Aviendha was too sensible; Elayne did still yearn for Rand, though Nynaeve could hardly fault her for -  Suddenly she felt weaves of saidar almost atop her in huge amounts, and . . .

. . . ʃi flaʊndɝɾ ɪn sɔlti wɔɾɝ oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd, fleɪlɪŋ ʌpwɝd tə faɪn ɛɹ, tæŋɡəld ɪn əɹ skɝts, fleɪlɪŋ. hɝ hɛd bɹoʊk sɝfəs, ən ʃi ɡæsp fəɹ bɹɛθ əmɪd floʊɾɪŋ kʊʃənz, stɛɹɪŋ ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə slæntɪŋ ʃeɪp əbʌv əɹ əz wʌn ə ðə kæbən sits, ən ə bɪɾ ə ðə kæbən wɔl. ʃi wɑz ɪnsaɪɾ ə tʃɹæpt pɑkəɾ ʌv ɛɹ. nɑt lɑɹdʒ; ʃi cʊɾə tʌtʃt boʊθ saɪdz wɪθaʊt stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz aʊt fʊli. bʌt haʊ . . . ? ən ɑɾəbəl θʌɾ ənaʊns ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə ɹɪvɝ; ði ʌpsaɪd-daʊn kæbən, lɝtʃt, tɪltəd. ʃi θɔt ði ɛɹ pɑkət ʃɹæŋk ə lɪɾəl.

. . . she floundered in salty water over her head, flailing upward to find air, tangled in her skirts, flailing. Her head broke surface, and she gasped for breath amid floating cushions, staring in astonishment. After a moment, she recognized the slanting shape above her as one of the cabin seats, and a bit of the cabin wall. She was inside a trapped pocket of air. Not large; she could have touched both sides without stretching her arms out fully. But how . . . ? An audible thud announced the bottom of the river; the upside-down cabin, lurched, tilted. She thought the air pocket shrank a little.

ðə fɝst ɔɹɾɝ ə bɪznəs, bɪfɔɹ wʌndɝɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ, wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊt bɪfɔɹ ʃi juzd ʌp ði ɛɹ. ʃi nu haʊ tə swɪm - ʃi hæd splæʃt ɪn ðə wɔɾɝwʊd pɑnz ɔfən ɪnʌf bæk hoʊm - ɪt wɑz dʒʌst wən ðə wɔɾɝ stɑɹɾəd ɹɑkɪŋ əɹ əbaʊt ðət ʃi maɪndəd. fɪlɪŋ əɹ lʌŋz, ʃi dʌbəld oʊvɝ ən swæm daʊn təwɔɹd wɛɹ ðə dɔɹ mʌs bi, kɪkɪŋ ɔkwɝdli kəz ə hɝ skɝts. ɪt maɪt hɛlp tə ʃɛd ðə dʒɹɛs, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə bɑb tə ðə sɝfəs ə ðə ɹɪvɝ ɪn nʌθɪŋ bʌt ʃɪft ən stɑkɪŋz ən dʒuəlz. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə liv ðoʊz bɪhaɪnd, iðɝ. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi kəd nɑt ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə dʒɹɛs wɪθaʊt lusɪŋ əɹ bɛl paʊtʃ, ən ʃi wəd dʒɹaʊn bɪfɔɹ luzɪŋ wʌt wɑz ɪn ðɛɹ.

The first order of business, before wondering about anything, was getting out before she used up the air. She knew how to swim - she had splashed in the Waterwood ponds often enough back home - it was just when the water started rocking her about that she minded. Filling her lungs, she doubled over and swam down toward where the door must be, kicking awkwardly because of her skirts. It might help to shed the dress, but she was not about to bob to the surface of the river in nothing but shift and stockings and jewels. She was not about to leave those behind, either. Besides, she could not get out of the dress without loosing her belt pouch, and she would drown before losing what was in there.

ðə wɔɾɝ wɑz blæk, laɪtləs. hɝ aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt fɪŋɡɝz stʃɹʌk wʊd, ən ʃi fɛlt əkɹɔs ðə pɪɹswɝk kɑɹvɪŋ əntɪl ʃi faʊn ðə dɔɹ, skɹæb-blɛd daʊn ði ɛdʒ ə ðət - ən faʊn ə hɪnʒ. mʌɾɝɪŋ ɪmpɹəkeɪʃənz ɪn əɹ hɛd, ʃi kɔʃəsli fɛlt əɹ weɪ tə ði ʌðɝ saɪd. jɛs! ðə lætʃ hændəl! ʃi lɪftəɾ ɪt, pʊʃt aʊtwɝd. ðə dɔɹ muv meɪbi tu ɪntʃəz - ən stɑpt.

The water was black, lightless. Her outstretched fingers struck wood, and she felt across the piercework carving until she found the door, scrab-bled down the edge of that - and found a hinge. Muttering imprecations in her head, she cautiously felt her way to the other side. Yes! The latch handle! She lifted it, pushed outward. The door moved maybe two inches - and stopped.

lʌŋz stʃɹeɪnɪŋ, ʃi swæm bæk ʌp tə ðə pɑkət, bʌɾ oʊnli lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə fɪl əm əɡɛn. ðɪs taɪm, faɪndɪŋ ðə dɔɹ keɪm fæstɝ. ʃi stʌk əɹ fɪŋɡɝz θɹu ðə kɹæk tə faɪnd wʌt hɛl ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt. ðeɪ sæŋk ɪndə mʌd. meɪbi ʃi kəd dɪɡ əweɪ ə lɪɾəl hɪlək, ɔɹ. . . . ʃi fɛl haɪɝ. mɔɹ mʌd. ɪnkɹisɪŋli fɹæntɪk, ʃi wɝkt əɹ fɪŋɡɝz fɹəm ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə kɹæk tə ðə tɑp, ən ðɛn, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə bɪliv, fɹəm ðə tɑp tə ðə bɑɾəm. mʌd, sɑləd ɡui mʌd, ɔl ðə weɪ.

Lungs straining, she swam back up to the pocket, but only long enough to fill them again. This time, finding the door came faster. She stuck her fingers through the crack to find what held the door shut. They sank into mud. Maybe she could dig away a little hillock, or. . . . She felt higher. More mud. Increasingly frantic, she worked her fingers from the bottom of the crack to the top, and then, refusing to believe, from the top to the bottom. Mud, solid gooey mud, all the way.

ðɪs taɪm wən ʃi swæm bæk ʌp tə ðə pɑkət, ʃi ɡɹæb hoʊld ə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə siɾ əbʌv əɹ ən hʌŋ fɹəm ɪt, pæntɪŋ, hɑɹt biɾɪŋ waɪldli. ði ɛɹ fɛlt . . . θɪkɝ.

This time when she swam back up to the pocket, she grabbed hold of the edge of the seat above her and hung from it, panting, heart beating wildly. The air felt . . . thicker.

"aɪ wɪl nɑt daɪ hɪɹ," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "aɪ wɪl nɑt daɪ hɪɹ!"

"I will not die here," she muttered. "I will not die here!"

ʃi hæmɝɾ ə fɪst əɡɛns ðə siɾ əntɪl ʃi fɛlt ɪt bɹuz, faɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ði æŋɡɝ ðət wəɾ əlaʊ hɝ tə tʃænəl. ʃi wəd nɑt daɪ. nɑt hɪɹ. əloʊn. noʊ wʌn wəd noʊ wɛɹ ʃi hæd daɪd. noʊ ɡɹeɪv, dʒʌst ə kɔɹps ɹɑɾɪŋ ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə ɹɪvɝ. hɝ ɑɹm fɛl wɪð ə splæʃ. ʃi leɪbɝd fəɹ bɹɛθ. flɛks ə blæk ən sɪlvɝ dænst ɪn əɹ aɪz; ʃi sim tə bi lʊkɪŋ daʊn ə tub. noʊ æŋɡɝ, ʃi ɹilaɪz dɪmli. ʃi kɛp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹitʃ fəɹ seɪaɪdɑɹ, bʌt wɪθaʊɾ ɛni bɪlif ðət ʃi wəd tʌtʃ ɪt, naʊ. ʃi wɑz gɑnə daɪ hɪɹ æftɝ ɔl. noʊ hoʊp. noʊ læn. ən wɪð hoʊp ɡɔn, flɪkɝɪŋ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə kɑnʃəsnəs laɪk ə ɡʌɾɝɪŋ kændəl fleɪm, ʃi dɪd sʌmθɪŋ ʃi hæd nɛvɝ dʌn bɪfɔɹ ɪn əɹ laɪf. ʃi sɝɛndɝd kəmplitli.

She hammered a fist against the seat until she felt it bruise, fighting for the anger that would allow her to channel. She would not die. Not here. Alone. No one would know where she had died. No grave, just a corpse rotting at the bottom of the river. Her arm fell with a splash. She labored for breath. Flecks of black and silver danced in her eyes; she seemed to be looking down a tube. No anger, she realized dimly. She kept trying to reach for saidar, but without any belief that she would touch it, now. She was going to die here after all. No hope. No Lan. And with hope gone, flickering on the edge of consciousness like a guttering candle flame, she did something she had never done before in her life. She surrendered completely.

seɪaɪdɑɹ floʊɾ ɪndə hɝ, fɪl hɝ.

Saidar flowed into her, filled her.

ʃi wɑz oʊnli hæf-əwɛɹ ə ðə wʊɾ əbʌv əɹ sʌɾənli bʌlʒɪŋ aʊtwɝd, bɝstɪŋ. ɪn ɹʌʃɪŋ bʌbəlz ʌv ɛɹ ʃi dʒɹɪftəɾ ʌp, aʊt θɹu ðə hoʊl ɪn ðə hʌl ɪndə dɑɹknəs. veɪɡli, ʃi nu ʃi ʃəd də sʌmθɪŋ. ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt. jɛs. hɝ fit kɪkt wikli; ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə muv əɹ ɑɹmz tə swɪm. ðeɪ sim tə dʒʌs floʊt.

She was only half-aware of the wood above her suddenly bulging outward, bursting. In rushing bubbles of air she drifted up, out through the hole in the hull into darkness. Vaguely, she knew she should do something. She could almost remember what. Yes. Her feet kicked weakly; she tried to move her arms to swim. They seemed to just float.

sʌmθɪŋ sizd əɹ dʒɹɛs, ən pænɪk ɹaʊzd əɹ ɪn θɔts ə ʃɑɹks, ən laɪənfɪʃ, ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wʌɾ ɛls ðət maɪɾ ɪnhæbət ðiz blæk dɛpθs. ə spɑɹk ə kɑnʃəsnəs spoʊk ə ðə paʊɝ, bʌt ʃi fleɪl dɛspɝətli wɪð fɪsts ən fit, fɛlt əɹ nʌkəlz læn sɑlədli. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ʃi ɔlsoʊ skɹimd, əɹ tʃɹaɪd tə. ə ɡɹeɪt kwɑntəɾi ʌv wɔɾɝ ɹʌʃɪŋ daʊn əɹ θɹoʊt wɑʃt əweɪ skɹim, seɪaɪdɑɹ, ən vɛɹi nɪɹli hɝ faɪnəl skɹæps ʌv əwɛɹnəs.

Something seized her dress, and panic roused her in thoughts of sharks, and lionfish, and the Light alone knew what else that might inhabit these black depths. A spark of consciousness spoke of the Power, but she flailed desperately with fists and feet, felt her knuckles land solidly. Unfortunately, she also screamed, or tried to. A great quantity of water rushing down her throat washed away scream, saidar, and very nearly her final scraps of awareness.

sʌmθɪŋ tʌɡd ɑn əɹ bɹeɪd, ðən əɡɛn, ən ʃi wɑz biɪŋ toʊd . . . sʌmwɛɹ. ʃi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ kɑnʃəs ɪnʌf tə stʃɹʌɡəl, əɹ ivən tə bi vɛɹi mʌtʃ əfɹeɪɾ ə biɪŋ iɾən.

Something tugged on her braid, then again, and she was being towed . . . somewhere. She was no longer conscious enough to struggle, or even to be very much afraid of being eaten.

əbɹʌpli hɝ hɛd bɹoʊk sɝfəs. hænz ɪnsɝkəld əɹ fɹəm bɪhaɪnd - hænz; nɑɾ ə ʃɑɹk, æftɝ ɔl - skwiz hɑɹɾ əɡɛnst əɹ ɹɪbz ɪn ə moʊs fəmɪljɝ weɪ. ʃi kɔft - wɔɾɝ spjud fɹəm əɹ noʊz - kɔft əɡɛn, peɪnfəli. ən dʒɹu ə ʃʌɾɝɪŋ bɹɛθ. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ teɪstəɾ ɛniθɪŋ soʊ swiɾ ɪn əɹ laɪf.

Abruptly her head broke surface. Hands encircled her from behind - hands; not a shark, after all - squeezed hard against her ribs in a most familiar way. She coughed - water spewed from her nose - coughed again, painfully. And drew a shuddering breath. She had never tasted anything so sweet in her life.

ə hæn kʌpt əɹ tʃɪn, ən sʌɾənli ʃi wɑz biɪŋ toʊɾ əɡɛn. læsətud wɑʃt θɹu hɝ. ɔl ʃi kəd də wɑz floʊɾ ɑn əɹ bæk, ən bɹið, ən stɛɹ ʌp ət ðə skaɪ. soʊ blu. soʊ bjuɾəfəl. ðə stɪŋɪŋ ɪn əɹ aɪz wɑz nɑɾ ɔl fɹəm ðə sɔlti ɹɪvɝ.

A hand cupped her chin, and suddenly she was being towed again. Lassitude washed through her. All she could do was float on her back, and breathe, and stare up at the sky. So blue. So beautiful. The stinging in her eyes was not all from the salty river.

ən ðən ʃi wɑz biɪŋ pʊʃt ʌpwɝɾ əɡɛns ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə boʊt, ə ɹud hæn bɪniθ əɹ bɑɾəm ʃʌvɪŋ əɹ haɪɝ, əntɪl tu læŋki fɛloʊz wɪð bɹæs ɹɪŋz ɪn ðɛɹ ɪɹz kəd ɹitʃ daʊn ən hɔl əɹ əbɔɹd. ðeɪ hɛlpt əɹ wɔk ə stɛp əɹ tu, bʌɾ əz sun əz ðeɪ lɛt ɡoʊ tə hɛlp əɹ ɹɛskjuɝ, hɝ lɛɡz kəlæps laɪk taʊɝz ə sɑɡi mʌʃ.

And then she was being pushed upward against the side of a boat, a rude hand beneath her bottom shoving her higher, until two lanky fellows with brass rings in their ears could reach down and haul her aboard. They helped her walk a step or two, but as soon as they let go to help her rescuer, her legs collapsed like towers of soggy mush.

ɑn ənstɛɾi hænz ən niz, ʃi stɛɹd blæŋkli əɾ ə sɔɹɾ ən buts ən ɡɹin koʊt sʌmwʌn hæd θɹoʊn daʊn ɑn ðə dɛk. ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ - ən ɛmptid hɝsɛlf ə ðə ɹɪvɝ ɪldɑɹ. ði ɪntaɪɝ ɹɪvɝ, ɪt simd, plʌs əɹ mɪddeɪ mil, ən əɹ bɹɛkfəst; ɪt wəd nɑɾ əv sɝpɹaɪzd əɹ əɾ ɔl tə si ə fju fɪʃ, əɹ əɹ slɪpɝz. ʃi wɑz waɪpɪŋ əɹ lɪps wɪð ðə bæk ə hɝ hænd wən ʃi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə vɔɪsəz.

On unsteady hands and knees, she stared blankly at a sword and boots and green coat someone had thrown down on the deck. She opened her mouth - and emptied herself of the River Eldar. The entire river, it seemed, plus her midday meal, and her breakfast; it would not have surprised her at all to see a few fish, or her slippers. She was wiping her lips with the back of her hand when she became aware of voices.

"maɪ lɔɹɾ ɪz ɔl ɹaɪt? maɪ lɔɹd wɑz daʊn fəɹ ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm."

"My Lord is all right? My Lord was down for a very long time."

"fɝɡɛt mi, mæn," sɛɾ ə dip vɔɪs. "ɡɛt sʌmθɪŋ tə ɹæp ɝaʊn ðə leɪɾi." lænz vɔɪs, ðət ʃi dʒɹimd ɛvɹi naɪɾ ə hɪɹɪŋ.

"Forget me, man," said a deep voice. "Get something to wrap around the lady." Lan's voice, that she dreamed every night of hearing.

waɪd-aɪd, nɪneɪiv bɛɹli bɪt bæk ə weɪl; ðə hɔɹɝ ʃi hæd fɛlt wən ʃi θɔt ʃi wɑz gɑnə daɪ wɑz nʌθɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪd wʌt flæʃt θɹu hɝ naʊ. nʌθɪŋ! ðɪs wɑz ə naɪtmɛɹ. nɑt naʊ! nɑt laɪk ðɪs! nɑt wən ʃi wɑz ə dʒɹaʊn ɹæt, nilɪŋ wɪð ðə kɑntɛns ə hɝ stʌmək spɹɛɾ aʊt bɪfɔɹ hɝ!

Wide-eyed, Nynaeve barely bit back a wail; the horror she had felt when she thought she was going to die was nothing alongside what flashed through her now. Nothing! This was a nightmare. Not now! Not like this! Not when she was a drowned rat, kneeling with the contents of her stomach spread out before her!

wɪθaʊt θɔt ʃi ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ ən tʃænəld. wɔɾɝ fɛl əweɪ fɹəm əɹ kloʊðz, hɝ hɛɹ, ɪn ə ɹʌʃ ən wɑʃt ɔl ɛvəɾəns ə hɝ lɪɾəl mɪshæp aʊt θɹu ə skʌpɝ hoʊl. skɹæmbəlɪŋ tə hɝ fit, ʃi hɝidli pʊld əɹ nɛkləs æɹaɪɾ ən dɪɾ əɹ bɛs tə stʃɹeɪɾən əɹ dʒɹɛs ən hɛɹ, bʌt ðə soʊkɪŋ ɪn sɔlt wɔɾɝ ən ðən ðə ɹæpəd dʒɹaɪɪŋ hæd lɛf sɛvɹəl steɪnz ɑn ðə sɪlk ən ə nʌmbɝ ə kɹisɪz ðət wəd ɹikwaɪɝ ə nɑlədʒəbəl hænd wɪð ə hɑɾ aɪɝn tə ɹimuv. wɪsps ə hɛɹ wɑntəd tə flaɪ əweɪ fɹəm əɹ skælp, ən ði oʊpəlz ɪn əɹ bɹeɪd sim tə dɑt ðə bɹɪsəlɪŋ teɪl ʌv ən æŋɡɹi kæt.

Without thought she embraced saidar and channeled. Water fell away from her clothes, her hair, in a rush and washed all evidence of her little mishap out through a scupper hole. Scrambling to her feet, she hurriedly pulled her necklace aright and did her best to straighten her dress and hair, but the soaking in salt water and then the rapid drying had left several stains on the silk and a number of creases that would require a knowledgeable hand with a hot iron to remove. Wisps of hair wanted to fly away from her scalp, and the opals in her braid seemed to dot the bristling tail of an angry cat.

ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. ʃi wɑz kɑmnəs ɪtsɛlf, kul əz ən ɝli spɹɪŋ bɹiz, sɛlf-pəzɛst æz. . . . ʃi spʌn ɝaʊn bɪfɔɹ i kəd kʌm ɑn əɹ fɹəm bɪhaɪn ən stɑɹɾəl əɹ ɪndə dɪsɡɹeɪsɪŋ hɝsɛlf kəmplitli.

It did not matter. She was calmness itself, cool as an early spring breeze, self-possessed as. . . . She spun around before he could come on her from behind and startle her into disgracing herself completely.

ʃi oʊnli ɹilaɪz haʊ kwɪkli ʃi hæd muvd wən ʃi sɔ ðət læn wɑz dʒʌs ðən teɪkɪŋ ɪz sɛkən stɛp fɹəm ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ. hi wɑz ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl mæn ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. soʊkɪŋ wɛɾ ɪn ʃɝɾ ən bɹitʃɪz ən stɑkɪŋz, hi wɑz ɡɔɹdʒəs, wɪð ɪz dʒɹɪpɪŋ hɛɹ klɪŋɪŋ tə ði æŋɡəlz ə hɪz feɪs, ænd. . . . ə splɪt pɝpəl bɹuz wɑz ɹaɪzɪŋ ɑn ɪz feɪs, əz fɹəm ə bloʊ. ʃi klæpt ə hæn tə hɝ maʊθ, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ əɹ fɪs kənɛktɪŋ.

She only realized how quickly she had moved when she saw that Lan was just then taking his second step from the railing. He was the most beautiful man she had ever seen. Soaking wet in shirt and breeches and stockings, he was gorgeous, with his dripping hair clinging to the angles of his face, and. . . . A split purple bruise was rising on his face, as from a blow. She clapped a hand to her mouth, remembering her fist connecting.

"oʊ, noʊ! oʊ, læn, aɪm soʊ sɑɹi! aɪ dɪdn min tə!" ʃi wɑz nɑt ɹɪli əwɛɹ ə kɹɔsɪŋ ðə speɪs bɪtwin ðɛm; ʃi wɑz dʒʌs ðɛɹ, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ ʌp ɑn toʊɾəps tə leɪ fɪŋɡɝz dʒɛnli ɑn ɪz ɪnʒɝi. ə dɛft wiv ʌv ɔl faɪv paʊɝz, ən ɪz tæn tʃik wɑz ənblɛmɪʃt. bʌɾ i maɪɾ əv bɪn hɝɾ ɛlswɛɹ. ʃi spʌn ðə wivz tə dɛlv hɪm; nu skɑɹz meɪɾ əɹ wɪns ɪnsaɪd, ən ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɑd, bʌɾ i sim hɛlθi əz ə pɹaɪm bʊl. hi wɑz ɔlsoʊ vɛɹi wɛt, fɹəm seɪvɪŋ hɝ. ʃi dʒɹaɪɾ ɪm əz ʃi hæd hɝsɛlf; wɔɾɝ splæʃt ɝaʊn ɪz fit. ʃi kəd nɑt stɑp tʌtʃɪŋ hɪm. boʊθ hænz tʃɹeɪst ɪz hɑɹd tʃiks, hɪz wʌndɝfəl blu aɪz, hɪz stʃɹɔŋ noʊz, hɪz fɝm lɪps, hɪz ɪɹz. ʃi koʊm ðət sɪlki blæk hɛɹ ɪndə pleɪs wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz, ədʒʌstəd ðə bɹeɪɾɪd lɛðɝ bæn ðət hɛld ɪt. hɝ tʌŋ sim tə hæv ə laɪf ʌv ɪts oʊn, tu. "oʊ, læn," ʃi mɝmɝd. "ju ɹɪli ɑɹ hɪɹ." sʌmbɑɾi ɡɪɡəld. nɑɾ əɹ - nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə dɪd nɑt ɡɪɡəl - bʌt sʌmbɑɾi dɪd. "ɪɾ ɪzən ə dʒɹim. oʊ, laɪt, jəɹ hɪɹ. haʊ?"

"Oh, no! Oh, Lan, I'm so sorry! I didn't mean to!" She was not really aware of crossing the space between them; she was just there, stretching up on toetips to lay fingers gently on his injury. A deft weave of all Five Powers, and his tanned cheek was unblemished. But he might have been hurt elsewhere. She spun the weaves to Delve him; new scars made her wince inside, and there was something odd, but he seemed healthy as a prime bull. He was also very wet, from saving her. She dried him as she had herself; water splashed around his feet. She could not stop touching him. Both hands traced his hard cheeks, his wonderful blue eyes, his strong nose, his firm lips, his ears. She combed that silky black hair into place with her fingers, adjusted the braided leather band that held it. Her tongue seemed to have a life of its own, too. "Oh, Lan," she murmured. "You really are here." Somebody giggled. Not her - Nynaeve al'Meara did not giggle - but somebody did. "It isn't a dream. Oh, Light, you're here. How?"

"ə sɝvən ət ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs toʊl mi jud ɡɔn tə ðə ɹɪvɝ, ən ə fɛloʊ ət ðə lændɪŋ sɛd wʌt boʊt jə hæd teɪkən. ɪf mændɑɹb hædn lɔst ə ʃu, aɪ wʊɾə bɪn hɪɹ jɛstɝdeɪ."

"A servant at the Tarasin Palace told me you'd gone to the river, and a fellow at the landing said what boat you had taken. If Mandarb hadn't lost a shoe, I would have been here yesterday."

"aɪ doʊn kɛɹ. jəɹ hɪɹ naʊ. jəɹ hɪɹ." ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡɪɡəl.

"I don't care. You're here now. You're here." She did not giggle.

"meɪbi ʃiz ɛɛs sədaɪ," wʌn ə ðə boʊtmən mɝmɝd, nɑt kwaɪt loʊ ɪnʌf, "bʌɾ aɪ stɪl seɪ ʃiz wʌn dʌklɪŋ u minz tə stʌf hɝsɛlf ɪn ðət wʊlfs dʒɔz."

"Maybe she is Aes Sedai," one of the boatmen murmured, not quite low enough, "but I still say she's one duckling who means to stuff herself in that wolf's jaws."

nɪneɪivz feɪs flæʃt pjʊɹ skɑɹlət, ən ʃi snætʃt əɹ hænz tə hɝ saɪdz, hɝ hilz θʌmpɪŋ tə ðə dɛk. ənʌðɝ taɪm, ʃi wʊɾə ɡɪvən ðə fɛloʊ wʌt fɔɹ, ən noʊ mɪsteɪk. ənʌðɝ taɪm, wən ʃi kəd θɪŋk. læn kɹaʊɾəd ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd. ʃi sizd ɪz ɑɹm. "wi kən tɔk mɔɹ pɹaɪvətli ɪn ðə kæbən." hæd wʌn ə ði ɔɹsmɪn snɪkɝd?

Nynaeve's face flashed pure scarlet, and she snatched her hands to her sides, her heels thumping to the deck. Another time, she would have given the fellow what for, and no mistake. Another time, when she could think. Lan crowded everything else out of her head. She seized his arm. "We can talk more privately in the cabin." Had one of the oarsmen snickered?

"maɪ sɔɹɾ ən - "

"My sword and - "

"aɪl bɹɪŋ ɪt," ʃi sɛd, snætʃɪŋ ʌp ɪz θɪŋz fɹəm ðə dɛk ɑn floʊz ʌv ɛɹ. wʌn ə ðoʊz laʊts hæd snɪkɝd. ənʌðɝ floʊ ʌv ɛɹ pʊld oʊpən ðə kæbən dɔɹ, ən ʃi hʌsəld læn ən ɪz sɔɹɾ ən ðə ɹɛst ɪnsaɪɾ ən slæmd ɪt bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

"I'll bring it," she said, snatching up his things from the deck on flows of Air. One of those louts had snickered. Another flow of Air pulled open the cabin door, and she hustled Lan and his sword and the rest inside and slammed it behind them.

laɪt, ʃi daʊɾɪd ɪf ivən keɪl kɑplɪn bæk hoʊm hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn əz boʊld əz ðɪs, ən əz mɛni mɝtʃəns' ɡɑɹdz nu keɪlz bɝθmɑɹk əz nu hɝ feɪs. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə seɪm əɾ ɔl. nɑɾ əɾ ɔl! stɪl, noʊ hɑɹm ɪn biɪŋ dʒʌst ə tæd lɛs . . . iɡɝ. hɝ hænz wɛn bæk tə hɪz feɪs - oʊnli tə stʃɹeɪɾən ɪz hɛɹ səm mɔɹ; dʒʌs ðət - ən i kɑɾ əɹ ɹɪsts dʒɛnli ɪn ɪz bɪɡ hænz.

Light, she doubted if even Calle Coplin back home had ever been as bold as this, and as many merchants' guards knew Calle's birthmark as knew her face. But it was not the same at all. Not at all! Still, no harm in being just a tad less . . . eager. Her hands went back to his face - only to straighten his hair some more; just that - and he caught her wrists gently in his big hands.

"maɪɹɛl hoʊlz maɪ bɑnd, naʊ," hi sɛd kwaɪətli. "ʃi ɪz lɛndɪŋ mi tə jə əntɪl jə faɪn ə wɔɹɾɝ ə jəɹ oʊn."

"Myrelle holds my bond, now," he said quietly. "She is lending me to you until you find a Warder of your own."

kɑmli pʊlɪŋ əɹ ɹaɪt hæn fɹi, ʃi slæpt ɪz feɪs əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kəd swɪŋ. hɪz hɛd hɑɹdli muvd, soʊ ʃi fɹid ði ʌðɝ hæn ən slæpt ɪm hɑɹɾɝ wɪð ðæt. "haʊ kəd ju?" fəɹ ɡʊd mɛʒɝ, ʃi pʌŋktʃueɪɾɪd ðə kwɛstʃən wɪð ənʌðɝ slæp. "ju nu aɪ wɑz weɪɾɪŋ!" wʌn mɔɹ sim kɔl fɔɹ, dʒʌs tə dʒɹaɪv ðə pɔɪn hoʊm. "haʊ kəd jə də sətʃ ə θɪŋ? haʊ kəd jə lɛt hɝ?" ənʌðɝ slæp. "bɝn ju, læn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən! bɝn ju! bɝn ju! bɝn jə tə ðə pɪɾ ə dum! bɝn ju!"

Calmly pulling her right hand free, she slapped his face as hard as she could swing. His head hardly moved, so she freed the other hand and slapped him harder with that. "How could you?" For good measure, she punctuated the question with another slap. "You knew I was waiting!" One more seemed called for, just to drive the point home. "How could you do such a thing? How could you let her?" Another slap. "Burn you, Lan Mandragoran! Burn you! Burn you! Burn you to the Pit of Doom! Burn you!"

ðə mæn - ðə blʌɾi mæn! - dɪd nɑt seɪ wʌn wɝd. nɑt ðəɾ i kʊd, ʌv kɔɹs; wʌt dɪfɛns kəɾ i ɔfɝ? hi dʒʌst stʊd ðəɹ waɪl ʃi ɹeɪn bloʊz ət hɪm, meɪkɪŋ noʊ muv, ənblɪŋkɪŋ aɪz lʊkɪŋ pəkjuljɝ, əz wɛl ðeɪ maɪt wɪð ðə weɪ ʃi ɹɛɾənd ɪz tʃiks fəɹ hɪm. ɪf əɹ slæps meɪd lɪɾəl ɪmpɹɛʃən ɑn hɪm, ðoʊ, ðə pɑmz ə hɝ hænz bɪɡæn tə stɪŋ laɪk fjʊɹi.

The man - the bloody man! - did not say one word. Not that he could, of course; what defense could he offer? He just stood there while she rained blows at him, making no move, unblinking eyes looking peculiar, as well they might with the way she reddened his cheeks for him. If her slaps made little impression on him, though, the palms of her hands began to sting like fury.

ɡɹɪmli, ʃi klɛntʃt ə fɪst ən pʌntʃt ɪm ɪn ðə bɛli wɪð ɔl əɹ maɪt. hi ɡɹʌntɪd. slaɪtli.

Grimly, she clenched a fist and punched him in the belly with all her might. He grunted. Slightly.

"wi wɪl tɔk ðɪs oʊvɝ kɑmli ən ɹæʃənəli," ʃi sɛd, stɛpɪŋ bæk fɹəm hɪm. "æz ədʌls." læn dʒʌs nɑɾəd ən sæt daʊn ən pʊld ɪz buts oʊvɝ tə hɪm! pʊʃɪŋ bɪts ə hɛɹ aʊɾ ə hɝ feɪs wɪð əɹ lɛf hænd, ʃi stʌk ðə ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn əɹ soʊ ʃi kəd flɛks əɹ sɔɹ fɪŋɡɝz wɪθaʊɾ ɪm siɪŋ. hi hæd noʊ ɹaɪt biɪŋ ðət hɑɹd, nɑt wən ʃi wɑntəd tə hɪt hɪm. tu mʌtʃ tə hoʊp ʃi hæd kɹækt ə ɹɪb ɪn hɪm.

"We will talk this over calmly and rationally," she said, stepping back from him. "As adults." Lan just nodded and sat down and pulled his boots over to him! Pushing bits of hair out of her face with her left hand, she stuck the right behind her so she could flex her sore fingers without him seeing. He had no right being that hard, not when she wanted to hit him. Too much to hope she had cracked a rib in him.

"ju ʃəd θæŋk hɝ, nɪneɪiv." haʊ kəd ðə mæn saʊn soʊ kɑm! stæmpɪŋ ɪz fʊt fɝmli ɪndə wʌn but, hi bɛn tə pɪk ʌp ði ʌðɝ, nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ. "ju wʊdnt wɑn mi bɑndəd tə ju."

"You should thank her, Nynaeve." How could the man sound so calm! Stamping his foot firmly into one boot, he bent to pick up the other, not looking at her. "You wouldn't want me bonded to you."

ðə floʊ ʌv ɛɹ sizd ə hændfʊl ə hɪz hɛɹ ən bɛn ɪz hɛɾ ʌp peɪnfəli. "ɪf jə dɛɹ - ɪf jə ivən dɛɹ - tə spaʊt ðət dʒɹɪvəl əbaʊt nɑt wɑntɪŋ tə ɡɪmi ə wɪɾoʊz widz, læn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən, əl . . . aɪl. . . ." ʃi kəd nɑt θɪŋk ʌv ɛniθɪŋ stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf. kɪkɪŋ ɪm wɑz nɑt nɪɹ ɪnʌf. maɪɹɛl. maɪɹɛl ən əɹ wɔɹɾɝz. bɝn hɪm! ɹimuvɪŋ ɪz haɪɾ ɪn stʃɹɪps wəd nɑt bi ɪnʌf!

The flow of Air seized a handful of his hair and bent his head up painfully. "If you dare - if you even dare - to spout that drivel about not wanting to give me a widow's weeds, Lan Mandragoran, I'll . . . I'll. . . ." She could not think of anything strong enough. Kicking him was not near enough. Myrelle. Myrelle and her Warders. Burn him! Removing his hide in strips would not be enough!

hi maɪɾ əz wɛl nɑɾ əv bɪn bɛn oʊvɝ wɪð ɪz nɛk kɹeɪnd. hi dʒʌst ɹɛstəɾ ɪz fɹɑɹmz əkɹɔs ɪz niz, ən wɑtʃt əɹ wɪð ðəɾ ɑd lʊk ɪn ɪz aɪz, ən sɛd, "aɪ θɔɾ əbaʊt nɑt tɛlɪŋ ju, bʌt juv ə ɹaɪt tə noʊ." ivən soʊ, hɪz toʊn bɪkeɪm hɛzɪɾənt; læn wɑz nɛvɝ hɛzɪɾənt. "wɛn mɔɪɹeɪn daɪd - wən ə wɔɹɾɝz bɑn tə hɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz snæpt - ðəɹ ɑɹ tʃeɪnʒəz. . . ."

He might as well not have been bent over with his neck craned. He just rested his forearms across his knees, and watched her with that odd look in his eyes, and said, "I thought about not telling you, but you have a right to know." Even so, his tone became hesitant; Lan was never hesitant. "When Moiraine died - when a Warder's bond to his Aes Sedai is snapped - there are changes. . . ."

əz i kəntɪnjud, hɝ ɑɹmz sneɪkt ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf, hʌɡɪŋ taɪtli tə kip əɹ fɹəm ʃɪvɝɪŋ. hɝ dʒɔ ætʃt, fəɹ ʃi kɛpt ɪt klæmpt ʃʌt. ʃi ɹilis ðə floʊ hoʊldɪŋ ɪm əz ɪf ə hæn spɹɪŋɪŋ əweɪ, ɹilist seɪaɪdɑɹ, bʌɾ i oʊnli stʃɹeɪɾənd ən wɛn ɑn ɹɪleɪɾɪŋ ðɪs hɔɹɝ wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə flɪntʃ, wɛn ɑn wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ. sʌɾənli ʃi ʌndɝstʊɾ ɪz aɪz, koʊldɝ ðən wɪntɝz hɑɹt. ði aɪz ʌv ə mæn u nu hi wɑz dɛɾ ən kəd nɑt meɪk hɪmsɛlf kɛɹ, ə mæn weɪɾɪŋ, ɔlmoʊst iɡɝ, fəɹ ðət lɔŋ slip. hɝ oʊn aɪz stʌŋ wɪð nɑt wipɪŋ.

As he continued, her arms snaked around herself, hugging tightly to keep her from shivering. Her jaw ached, for she kept it clamped shut. She released the flow holding him as if a hand springing away, released saidar, but he only straightened and went on relating this horror without so much as a flinch, went on watching her. Suddenly she understood his eyes, colder than winter's heart. The eyes of a man who knew he was dead and could not make himself care, a man waiting, almost eager, for that long sleep. Her own eyes stung with not weeping.

"soʊ jə si," hi kənkluɾəd wɪð ə smaɪl ðət tʌtʃt oʊnli hɪz maʊð; ən æksɛptɪŋ smaɪl, "wɛn ɪts dʌn, ʃɪl əv ə jɪɹ əɹ mɔɹ ə peɪn, ən əl stɪl bi dɛd. jə ɑɹ spɛɹd ðæt. maɪ læst ɡɪf tə ju, mæʃiɑɹə." mæʃiɑɹə. hɪz lɔs lʌv.

"So you see," he concluded with a smile that touched only his mouth; an accepting smile, "when it's done, she will have a year or more of pain, and I will still be dead. You are spared that. My last gift to you, Mashiara." Mashiara. His lost love.

"ju ɑɹ tə bi maɪ wɔɹɾɝ əntɪl aɪ faɪnd wʌn?" hɝ vɔɪs stɑɹɾəld əɹ wɪð ɪts lɛvlnəs. ʃi kəd nɑt bɹeɪk daʊn ɪn tɪɹz naʊ. ʃi wəd nɑt. naʊ, mɔɹ ðən ɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ, ʃi hæd tə ɡæðɝ ɔl əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ.

"You are to be my Warder until I find one?" Her voice startled her with its levelness. She could not break down in tears now. She would not. Now, more than ever before, she had to gather all her strength.

"jɛs," hi sɛd kɔʃəsli, tʌɡɪŋ ɑn ɪz ʌðɝ but. hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz sim sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə hæf-teɪm wʊlf, ən ɪz aɪz meɪɾ ɪm sim mʌtʃ lɛs ðən hæf teɪm naʊ.

"Yes," he said cautiously, tugging on his other boot. He had always seemed something of a half-tame wolf, and his eyes made him seem much less than half tame now.

"ɡʊd." ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ skɝts, ʃi ɹɪzɪstɪd ði ɝdʒ tə kɹɔs ðə kæbən tə hɪm. ʃi kəd nɑt lɛɾ ɪm si hɝ fɪɹ. "bɪkɔz aɪ hæv faʊn hɪm. ju. aɪ weɪɾəd ən wɪʃt wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn; aɪ woʊnt wɪð maɪɹɛl. ʃiz gɑnə ɡɪmi jəɹ bɑnd." maɪɹɛl wʊd, ɪf ʃi hæd tə dʒɹæɡ ðə wʊmən tə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən bæk baɪ hɝ hɛɹ. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ʃi maɪt dʒɹæɡ hɝ dʒʌs fəɹ ðə pɹɪnsəpəl ʌv ɪt. "doʊn seɪ ɛniθɪŋ," ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli wən i oʊpən ɪz maʊð. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz bɹʌʃt əɹ bɛl paʊtʃ, wɛɹ ɪz hɛvi ɡoʊl sɪɡnɪt ɹɪŋ leɪ ɹæpt ɪn ə sɪlk hæŋkɝtʃɪf. wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ʃi mɑɾɝeɪtɪd əɹ toʊn; hi wɑz ɪl, ən hɑɹʃ wɝdz nɛvɝ hɛlp sɪknəs. ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt, ðoʊ; ʃi wɑntəd tə bɪɹeɪɾ ɪm ʌp wʌn saɪɾ ən daʊn ði ʌðɝ, wɑntəd tə pʊl əɹ bɹeɪɾ aʊt baɪ ðə ɹuts ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi θɔɾ ə hɪm ən ðət wʊmən. faɪɾɪŋ tə kip əɹ vɔɪs kɑm, ʃi wɛn ɑn.

"Good." Adjusting her skirts, she resisted the urge to cross the cabin to him. She could not let him see her fear. "Because I have found him. You. I waited and wished with Moiraine; I won't with Myrelle. She is going to give me your bond." Myrelle would, if she had to drag the woman to Tar Valon and back by her hair. For that matter, she might drag her just for the principle of it. "Don't say anything," she said sharply when he opened his mouth. Her fingers brushed her belt pouch, where his heavy gold signet ring lay wrapped in a silk handkerchief. With an effort, she moderated her tone; he was ill, and harsh words never helped sickness. It was an effort, though; she wanted to berate him up one side and down the other, wanted to pull her braid out by the roots every time she thought of him and that woman. Fighting to keep her voice calm, she went on.

"ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, læn, wən sʌmbɑɾi ɡɪvz ənʌðɝ ə ɹɪŋ, ðeɪ ɑɹ bɪtʃɹɑθd." ðət wɑz ə laɪ, ən ʃi hæf-ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪm tə dʒʌmp tə hɪz fiɾ ɪn aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ, bʌɾ i oʊnli blɪŋkt wɛɹəli. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi hæd ɹɛɾ əbaʊt ðə noʊʃən ɪn ə stɔɹi. "wi hæv bɪn bɪtʃɹɑθ lɔŋ ɪnʌf. wəɹ gɑnə bi mɛɹid tədeɪ."

"In the Two Rivers, Lan, when somebody gives another a ring, they are betrothed." That was a lie, and she half-expected him to jump to his feet in outrage, but he only blinked warily. Besides, she had read about the notion in a story. "We have been betrothed long enough. We are going to be married today."

"aɪ juz tə pɹeɪ fəɹ ðæt," hi sɛd sɔfli, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ju noʊ waɪ ɪt kæn bi, nɪneɪiv. ən ivən ɪf ɪt kʊd, maɪɹɛl - "

"I used to pray for that," he said softly, then shook his head. "You know why it can't be, Nynaeve. And even if it could, Myrelle - "

dɪspaɪɾ ɔl əɹ pɹɑməsəz tə kip əɹ tɛmpɝ, tə bi dʒɛntəl, ʃi ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ ən stʌft ə ɡæɡ ʌv ɛɹ ɪndə hɪz maʊθ bɪfɔɹ i kəd kənfɛs wʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə hɪɹ. soʊ lɔŋ əz i dɪd nɑt kənfɛs, ʃi kəd pɹitɛnd nʌθɪŋ hæd hæpənd. wən ʃi ɡɑt hoʊld ə maɪɹɛl, ðoʊ! oʊpəlz pɹɛs hɑɹɾ ɪndə hɝ pɑm, ən əɹ hæn lɛp fɹəm əɹ bɹeɪɾ əz ɪf bɝnd. ʃi ɑkjəpaɪɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz wɪð bɹʌʃɪŋ ɪz hɛɹ əɡɛn waɪl i ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ ɪndɪɡnənli əbʌv ɪz ɡeɪpɪŋ maʊð. "ə smɔl lɛsən fəɹ jə ɪn ðə dɪfɝəns bɪtwin waɪvz ən ʌðɝ wɪmən," ʃi sɛd laɪtli. sətʃ ə stʃɹʌɡəl. "aɪ wəɾ əpɹiʃieɪɾ ɪt vɛɹi mʌtʃ ɪf jə dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən maɪɹɛlz neɪm əɡɛn ɪn maɪ pɹɛzəns. dʒju ʌndɝstænd?"

Despite all her promises to keep her temper, to be gentle, she embraced saidar and stuffed a gag of Air into his mouth before he could confess what she did not want to hear. So long as he did not confess, she could pretend nothing had happened. When she got hold of Myrelle, though! Opals pressed hard into her palm, and her hand leaped from her braid as if burned. She occupied her fingers with brushing his hair again while he glared at her indignantly above his gaping mouth. "A small lesson for you in the difference between wives and other women," she said lightly. Such a struggle. "I would appreciate it very much if you did not mention Myrelle's name again in my presence. Do you understand?"

hi nɑɾəd, ən ʃi ɹilis ðə floʊ, bʌɾ əz sun əz i hæd wɝkt ɪz dʒɔ ə moʊmənt, hi sɛd, "neɪmɪŋ noʊ neɪmz, nɪneɪiv, jə noʊ ʃiz əwɛɹ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ fil, θɹu ðə bɑnd. ɪf wi wɝ mæn ən waɪf. . . ."

He nodded, and she released the flow, but as soon as he had worked his jaw a moment, he said, "Naming no names, Nynaeve, you know she's aware of everything I feel, through the bond. If we were man and wife. . . ."

ʃi θɔɾ əɹ feɪs maɪt bɝst ɪndə fleɪm. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ θɔɾ ə ðæt! blʌɾi maɪɹɛl! "ɪz ðəɹ ɛni weɪ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ʃi noʊz ɪts mi?" ʃi sɛd faɪnəli, ən əɹ tʃiks nɪɹli dɪd flæʃ tə faɪɝ. ɪspɛʃli wən i fɛl bæk əɡɛns ðə kæbən wɔl læfɪŋ ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt.

She thought her face might burst into flame. She had never thought of that! Bloody Myrelle! "Is there any way to make sure she knows it is me?" she said finally, and her cheeks nearly did flash to fire. Especially when he fell back against the cabin wall laughing in astonishment.

"laɪt, nɪneɪiv, jə ɑɹ ə hɔk! laɪt! aɪ hævən læf sɪns. . . ." hɪz mɝθ feɪɾəd, ðə koʊlnəs ðət hæd dɪmd ɪn ɪz aɪz fəɹ ən ɪnstən ɹɪtɝnɪŋ. "aɪ də wɪʃ ɪt kəd bi, nɪneɪiv, bʌt - "

"Light, Nynaeve, you are a hawk! Light! I haven't laughed since. . . ." His mirth faded, the coldness that had dimmed in his eyes for an instant returning. "I do wish it could be, Nynaeve, but - "

"ɪt kən ən wɪl," ʃi bɹoʊk ɪn. mɛn ɔlweɪz sim tə ɡɛt ði ʌpɝ hæn ɪf jə lɛɾ əm tɔk tu lɔŋ. ʃi plʌmp hɝsɛlf daʊn ɑn ɪz niz. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt mɛɹid jɛt, tʃɹu, bʌɾ i wɑz sɑftɝ ðən ði ənpəɾəd bɛntʃɪz ɑn ðɪs boʊt. ʃi ʃɪftəɾ ə bɪt tə meɪk hɝsɛlf mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl. wɛl, noʊ hɑɹɾɝ ðən ðə bɛntʃɪz, ɛniweɪ. "ju maɪɾ əz wɛl ɹɛkənsaɪl jɝsɛlf, læn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən. maɪ hɑɹt bɪlɔŋz tə ju, ən juv ədmɪɾəd jʊɹz bɪlɔŋz tə mi. jə bɪlɔŋ tə mi, ən əl nɑt lɛt jə ɡoʊ. jəl bi maɪ wɔɹɾɝ, ən maɪ hʌzbənd, ən fəɹ ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm. əl nɑt lɛt jə daɪ. dʒju ʌndɝstæn ðæt? aɪ kən bi əz stʌbɝn əz aɪ hæv tə bi."

"It can and will," she broke in. Men always seemed to get the upper hand if you let them talk too long. She plumped herself down on his knees. They were not married yet, true, but he was softer than the unpadded benches on this boat. She shifted a bit to make herself more comfortable. Well, no harder than the benches, anyway. "You might as well reconcile yourself, Lan Mandragoran. My heart belongs to you, and you've admitted yours belongs to me. You belong to me, and I will not let you go. You will be my Warder, and my husband, and for a very long time. I will not let you die. Do you understand that? I can be as stubborn as I have to be."

"aɪ hædnt noʊɾəst," hi sɛd, ən əɹ aɪz nɛɹoʊd. hɪz toʊn saʊndəɾ ɑfli . . . dʒɹaɪ.

"I hadn't noticed," he said, and her eyes narrowed. His tone sounded awfully . . . dry.

"æz lɔŋ əz jə də naʊ," ʃi sɛd fɝmli. twɪstɪŋ əɹ nɛk, ʃi pɪɹd θɹu ðə pɪɹswɝk ɪn ðə hʌl bɪhaɪn hɪm, ðən kɹeɪn ɝaʊn tə pɪɹ θɹu ðə kɑɹvɪŋ ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə kæbən. lɔŋ stoʊn dɑks θɹʌstɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ðə stoʊn ki pæs baɪ; ɔl ʃi kəd si əhɛd wɝ mɔɹ dɑks, ən ðə sɪɾi ɡlimɪŋ waɪɾ ɪn ði æftɝnun sʌn. "wɛɹ ɑɹ wi ɡoʊɪŋ?" ʃi mʌɾɝd.

"As long as you do now," she said firmly. Twisting her neck, she peered through the piercework in the hull behind him, then craned around to peer through the carving at the front of the cabin. Long stone docks thrusting out from the stone quay passed by; all she could see ahead were more docks, and the city gleaming white in the afternoon sun. "Where are we going?" she muttered.

"aɪ toʊld əm tə pʊɾ əs əʃɔɹ əz sun əz aɪ hæd jə əbɔɹd," læn sɛd. "ɪt sim bɛs tə ɡɛɾ ɔf ðə ɹɪvɝ əz fæst əz pɑsəbəl."

"I told them to put us ashore as soon as I had you aboard," Lan said. "It seemed best to get off the river as fast as possible."

"ju . . . ?" ʃi klæmpt əɹ tiθ ʃʌt. hi hæd nɑt noʊn wɛɹ ʃi wɑz hɛɾəd əɹ waɪ; hi hæd dʌn ðə bɛst i kəd wɪð wʌɾ i dɪd noʊ. ən i hæd seɪvd əɹ laɪf. "aɪ kænt ɡoʊ bæk tə ðə sɪɾi jɛt, læn." klɪɹɪŋ əɹ θɹoʊt, ʃi tʃeɪnʒd əɹ toʊn. haʊɛvɝ dʒɛntəl ʃi hæd tə bi wɪð hɪm, ðət mʌtʃ sɝəp wəd meɪk əɹ sɪk ʌp ɔl oʊvɝ əɡɛn. "aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ tə ðə si foʊk ʃɪps, tə wɪndʒɹʌnɝ" mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ; laɪt, bʌt nɑt tu laɪt, ən fɝm.

"You . . . ?" She clamped her teeth shut. He had not known where she was headed or why; he had done the best he could with what he did know. And he had saved her life. "I can't go back to the city yet, Lan." Clearing her throat, she changed her tone. However gentle she had to be with him, that much syrup would make her sick up all over again. "I have to go to the Sea Folk ships, to Windrunner" Much better; light, but not too light, and firm.

"nɪneɪiv, aɪ wɑz ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn jəɹ boʊt. aɪ sɔ wʌt hæpənd. jə wɝ fɪfti peɪsɪz əhɛɾ ə mi, ən ðən fɪfti peɪsɪz bɪhaɪnd, sɪŋkɪŋ. ɪt hæd tə bi bɑlfaɪɝ." hi dɪd nɑt nid tə seɪ mɔɹ; ʃi sɛɾ ɪt fəɹ hɪm, ən wɪð mɔɹ nɑlədʒ ðən i hæd.

"Nynaeve, I was right behind your boat. I saw what happened. You were fifty paces ahead of me, and then fifty paces behind, sinking. It had to be balefire." He did not need to say more; she said it for him, and with more knowledge than he had.

"mɑɡiɾin," ʃi bɹiðd. oʊ, ɪt cʊɾə bɪn ənʌðɝ ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, əɹ wʌn ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ pɝhæps, bʌt ʃi nu. wɛl, ʃi hæd biɾən mɑɡiɾin nɑt wʌns, bʌt twaɪs. ʃi kəd də soʊ ə θɝd taɪm, ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi. hɝ feɪs mʌs nɑɾ əv ʃɛɹɾ əɹ kɑnfəɾəns.

"Moghedien," she breathed. Oh, it could have been another of the Forsaken, or one of the Black Ajah perhaps, but she knew. Well, she had beaten Moghedien not once, but twice. She could do so a third time, if necessary. Her face must not have shared her confidence.

"doʊn bi əfɹeɪd," læn sɛd, tʌtʃɪŋ əɹ tʃik. "doʊn ɛvɝ bi əfɹeɪd waɪl aɪm nɪɹ. ɪf juv tə feɪs mɑɡiɾin, əl meɪk ʃʊɹ jə ɑɹ æŋɡɹi ɪnʌf tə tʃænəl. aɪ sim tə hæv səm tælən ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən."

"Don't be afraid," Lan said, touching her cheek. "Don't ever be afraid while I'm near. If you have to face Moghedien, I'll make sure you are angry enough to channel. I seem to have some talent in that direction."

"jul nɛvɝ meɪk mi æŋɡɹi əɡɛn," ʃi bɪɡæn, ən stɑpt, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm waɪd-aɪd. "aɪm nɑɾ æŋɡɹi," ʃi sɛd sloʊli.

"You'll never make me angry again," she began, and stopped, staring at him wide-eyed. "I'm not angry," she said slowly.

"nɑt naʊ, bʌt wən jə nid tə bi - "

"Not now, but when you need to be - "

"aɪm nɑɾ æŋɡɹi," ʃi læft. ʃi kɪkt əɹ fiɾ ɪn dɪlaɪt, ən paʊndɪɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn ɪz tʃɛst, læfɪŋ, seɪaɪdɑɹ fɪl hɝ, nɑt dʒʌst wɪð laɪf ən dʒɔɪ, bʌt ðɪs taɪm, wɪð ɑ. wɪð fɛðɝi floʊz ʌv ɛɹ, ʃi stʃɹoʊkt ɪz tʃiks. "aɪ æm nɑɾ æŋɡɹi, læn," ʃi wɪspɝd.

"I'm not angry," she laughed. She kicked her feet in delight, and pounded her fists on his chest, laughing, Saidar filled her, not just with life and joy, but this time, with awe. With feathery flows of Air, she stroked his cheeks. "I am not angry, Lan," she whispered.

"jɔɹ blɑk ɪz ɡɔn." hi ɡɹɪnd, ʃɛɹɪŋ əɹ dɪlaɪt, bʌt ðə ɡɹɪn pʊt noʊ wɔɹmθ ɪndə hɪz aɪz.

"Your block is gone." He grinned, sharing her delight, but the grin put no warmth into his eyes.

əl teɪk kɛɹ ə ju, læn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən, ʃi pɹɑməst saɪlənli. əl nɑt lɛt jə daɪ. linɪŋ ɑn ɪz tʃɛst, ʃi θɔɾ ə kɪsɪŋ hɪm, ən ivən. . . . jə ɑɹ nɑt keɪl kɑplɪn, ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf fɝmli.

I will take care of you, Lan Mandragoran, she promised silently. I will not let you die. Leaning on his chest, she thought of kissing him, and even. . . . You are not Calle Coplin, she told herself firmly.

ə sʌɾən, hɔɹəbəl θɔt stʃɹʌk hɝ. ɔl ðə mɔɹ hɔɹəbəl kəz ɪt hæd nɑt kʌm ɝliɝ. "ðə boʊtmən?" ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. "maɪ bɑɾiɡɑɹdz?" wɝdləsli, hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ən ʃi saɪd. bɑɾiɡɑɹdz. laɪt, ðeɪ hæd niɾəd əɹ pɹətɛkʃən, nɑt ði ʌðɝ weɪ ɝaʊnd. fɔɹ mɔɹ dɛθs tə leɪ ət mɑɡiɾinz fit. fɔɹ ɑn tɑp ə θaʊzənz, bʌt ðiz wɝ pɝsənəl, əz fɑɹ ʃi wɑz kənsɝnd. wɛl, ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə sɛɾəl mɑɡiɾin ðɪs moʊmənt.

A sudden, horrible thought struck her. All the more horrible because it had not come earlier. "The boatmen?" she said quietly. "My bodyguards?" Wordlessly, he shook his head, and she sighed. Bodyguards. Light, they had needed her protection, not the other way around. Four more deaths to lay at Moghedien's feet. Four on top of thousands, but these were personal, as far she was concerned. Well, she was not about to settle Moghedien this moment.

ɡɛɾɪŋ tə hɝ fit, ʃi bɪɡæn siɪŋ wʌt ʃi kəd də əbaʊɾ əɹ kloʊðz. "læn, wɪl jə tɝn ðə boʊtmən ɝaʊnd? tɛl əm tə ɹoʊ fəɹ ɔl ðeɪ hæv." əz ɪt wɑz, ʃi wəd nɑt si ðə pæləs əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ naɪtfɔl. "æn faɪn aʊɾ ɪf wʌn ə ðɛm əz sətʃ ə θɪŋ əz ə koʊm." ʃi kəd nɑt feɪs nɛstə laɪk ðɪs.

Getting to her feet, she began seeing what she could do about her clothes. "Lan, will you turn the boatmen around? Tell them to row for all they have." As it was, she would not see the palace again before nightfall. "And find out if one of them has such a thing as a comb." She could not face Nesta like this.

hi pɪkt ʌp ɪz koʊɾ ən sɔɹɾ ən ɡeɪv əɹ ə baʊ. "æz jə kəmænd, ɛɛs sədaɪ."

He picked up his coat and sword and gave her a bow. "As you command, Aes Sedai."

pɝsɪŋ əɹ lɪps, ʃi wɑtʃt ðə dɔɹ kloʊs bɪhaɪn hɪm. læfɪŋ ət hɝ, wɑz hi? ʃi wəd weɪdʒɝ sʌmwʌn ɑn wɪndʒɹʌnɝ kəd pɝfɔɹm ə mɛɹɪdʒ. ən fɹəm wʌt ʃi hæd sin ə ðə si foʊk, ʃi wəd weɪdʒɝ læn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən wəd faɪn hɪmsɛlf pɹɑməsɪŋ tə də əz i wɑz toʊld. ðeɪ wəd si hu læf ðɛn.

Pursing her lips, she watched the door close behind him. Laughing at her, was he? She would wager someone on Windrunner could perform a marriage. And from what she had seen of the Sea Folk, she would wager Lan Mandragoran would find himself promising to do as he was told. They would see who laughed then.

lɝtʃɪŋ ən ɹoʊlɪŋ, ðə boʊt bɪɡæn tə swɪŋ ɝaʊnd, ən əɹ stʌmək lɝtʃt wɪð ɪt.

Lurching and rolling, the boat began to swing around, and her stomach lurched with it.

"oʊ, laɪt!" ʃi ɡɹoʊnd, sɪŋkɪŋ ɑntu ðə bɛntʃ. waɪ kəd ʃi nɑɾ əv lɔs ðəɾ əlɔŋ wɪð əɹ blɑk? hoʊldɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ, əwɛɹ ʌv ɛvɹi tʌtʃ ə ði ɛɹ ɑn əɹ skɪn, oʊnli meɪɾ ɪt wɝs. lɛɾɪŋ ɡoʊ dɪd nɑt hɛlp. ʃi wɑz nɑt gɑnə sɪk ʌp əɡɛn. ʃi wɑz gɑnə meɪk læn hɝz wʌns ən fəɹ ɔl. ðɪs wɑz gɑnə bi ə wʌndɝfəl deɪ jɛt. ɪf oʊnli ʃi kəd stɑp filɪŋ ðət stɔɹm ɑn ðə weɪ.

"Oh, Light!" she groaned, sinking onto the bench. Why could she not have lost that along with her block? Holding saidar, aware of every touch of the air on her skin, only made it worse. Letting go did not help. She was not going to sick up again. She was going to make Lan hers once and for all. This was going to be a wonderful day yet. If only she could stop feeling that storm on the way.

ðə sʌn sæt lʊɹɪdli dʒʌst əbʌv ðə ɹuftɑps baɪ ðə taɪm ɪleɪn ɹæpt ɑn ðə dɔɹ wɪð əɹ nʌkəlz. ɹɛvəlɝz dænst ən kəvɔɹɾɪd ɪn ðə stʃɹit bɪhaɪn hɝ, fɪlɪŋ ði ɛɹ wɪð læftɝ ən sɔŋ ən ðə sɛn ə pɝfjum. aɪdli, ʃi wɪʃt ʃi hæd hæɾ ə tʃæns ɹɪli tə ɛndʒɔɪ ðə fɛstəvəl. ə kɑstum laɪk bɝdʒɪts maɪɾ əv bɪn fʌn. əɹ ivən wʌn laɪk ðət ʃi hæd sin ɑn ðə leɪɾi ɹaɪzɛl, wʌn ə taɪlɪnz ətɛndəns, fɝs θɪŋ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. əz lɔŋ əz ʃi cʊɾə kɛpt əɹ mæsk ɑn. ʃi ɹæpt əɡɛn, hɑɹɾɝ.

The sun sat luridly just above the rooftops by the time Elayne rapped on the door with her knuckles. Revelers danced and cavorted in the street behind her, filling the air with laughter and song and the scent of perfume. Idly, she wished she had had a chance really to enjoy the festival. A costume like Birgitte's might have been fun. Or even one like that she had seen on the Lady Riselle, one of Tylin's attendants, first thing this morning. As long as she could have kept her mask on. She rapped again, harder.

ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd, skwɛɹ-dʒɔd meɪɾ oʊpən ðə dɔɹ, fjʊɹi sʌɾənli peɪntɪŋ əɹ feɪs wən ɪleɪn loʊɝɾ əɹ ɡɹin mæsk. "ju! wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ bæk - ?" fjʊɹi tɝn tə ɡæsli pælnəs əz mɛɝɪlɪl ɹimuvd əɹ mæsk, ən æɾɪliz ən ði ʌðɝz dɪd ðə seɪm. ðə wʊmən dʒɝkt wɪð itʃ eɪdʒləs feɪs ɹɪvild, ən ivən wɪð sɝaɪðəz. baɪ ðət taɪm, meɪbi ʃi sɔ wʌt ʃi ɪkspɛktəd tə si.

The gray-haired, square-jawed maid opened the door, fury suddenly painting her face when Elayne lowered her green mask. "You! What are you doing back - ?" Fury turned to ghastly paleness as Merilille removed her mask, and Adeleas and the others did the same. The woman jerked with each ageless face revealed, and even with Sareitha's. By that time, maybe she saw what she expected to see.

wɪð ə sʌɾən kɹaɪ, ðə meɪd tʃɹaɪd tə pʊʃ ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt, bʌt bɝdʒɪt dɑɹɾɪd pæst ɪleɪn, hɝ fɛðɝd ʃoʊldɝ nɑkɪŋ ɪt bæk oʊpən. ðə sɝvən stæɡɝɾ ə fju stɛps, ðən ɡæðɝd hɝsɛlf, bʌt wɛðɝ tə ɹʌn əɹ ʃaʊt, bɝdʒɪt wɑz ðəɹ bɪfɹtaɪm, ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ ɑɹm dʒʌs bɪloʊ ðə ʃoʊldɝ.

With a sudden cry, the maid tried to push the door shut, but Birgitte darted past Elayne, her feathered shoulder knocking it back open. The servant staggered a few steps, then gathered herself, but whether to run or shout, Birgitte was there beforetime, gripping her arm just below the shoulder.

"izi," bɝdʒɪt sɛd fɝmli. "wi doʊnt wɑn ɛni fʌs əɹ ʃaʊɾɪŋ, naʊ də wi?" ɪt dɪd sim ʃi wɑz oʊnli hoʊldɪŋ ðə wʊmənz ɑɹm, ɔlmoʊst səpɔɹɾɪŋ hɝ, bʌt ðə meɪd stʊd vɛɹi stʃɹeɪɾ ɪndiɾ ən vɛɹi stɪl. stɛɹɪŋ waɪd-aɪɾ əɾ əɹ kæptɝz plum-kɹɛstəd mæsk, ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd sloʊli.

"Easy," Birgitte said firmly. "We don't want any fuss or shouting, now do we?" It did seem she was only holding the woman's arm, almost supporting her, but the maid stood very straight indeed and very still. Staring wide-eyed at her captor's plume-crested mask, she shook her head slowly.

"wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ neɪm?" ɪleɪn æskt, əz ɛvɹiwʌn kɹaʊɾəd ɪndə ði ɛntʃɹi hɔl bɪhaɪn hɝ. ðə kloʊzɪŋ dɔɹ mjuɾɪd ðə nɔɪz fɹəm aʊtsaɪd. ðə meɪdz aɪz dɑɹɾɪd fɹəm wʌn feɪs tə ðə nɛkst əz ɪf ʃi kəd nɑt bɛɹ tə ɡeɪz əɾ ɛni wʌn fəɹ lɔŋ.

"What is your name?" Elayne asked, as everyone crowded into the entry hall behind her. The closing door muted the noise from outside. The maid's eyes darted from one face to the next as if she could not bear to gaze at any one for long.

"si-si-sidɔɹə."

"C-c-cedora."

"ju wɪl teɪk əs tə ɹin, sidɔɹə." ðɪs taɪm, sidɔɹə nɑɾəd; ʃi lʊkt əbaʊt tə kɹaɪ.

"You will take us to Reanne, Cedora." This time, Cedora nodded; she looked about to cry.

sidɔɹə stɪfli lɛd ðə weɪ əpstɛɹz wɪð bɝdʒɪt stɪl hoʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹm. ɪleɪn kənsɪɾɝd tɛlɪŋ əɹ tə ɹilis ðə wʊmən, bʌt ðə læs θɪŋ ʃi wɑntəd wɑz ə ʃaʊɾəd əlɑɹm ən ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə haʊs fliɪŋ ɪn ɔl dɝɛkʃənz. ðət wɑz waɪ bɝdʒɪt juz mʌsəl ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɪleɪn hɝsɛlf tʃænəlɪŋ. ʃi θɔt sidɔɹə wɑz mɔɹ fɹaɪɾənd ðən hɝt, ən ɛvɹibɑɾi wɑz tə bi ət list ə lɪɾəl fɹaɪɾənd ðɪs ivnɪŋ.

Cedora stiffly led the way upstairs with Birgitte still holding her arm. Elayne considered telling her to release the woman, but the last thing she wanted was a shouted alarm and everyone in the house fleeing in all directions. That was why Birgitte used muscle instead of Elayne herself channeling. She thought Cedora was more frightened than hurt, and everybody was to be at least a little frightened this evening.

"ɪn tieɪtʃ-ðɛɹ," sidɔɹə sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ tə ə ɹɛd dɔɹ. ðə dɔɹ tə ðə ɹum wɛɹ nɪneɪiv ən ʃi hæd hæd ðəɾ ənfɔɹtʃənəɾ ɪntɝvju. ʃi oʊpən ɪɾ ən wɛn ɪn.

"In th-there," Cedora said, nodding to a red door. The door to the room where Nynaeve and she had had that unfortunate interview. She opened it and went in.

ɹin wɑz ðɛɹ, siɾəd wɪð ðə faɪɝpleɪs kɑɹvd wɪð ðə θɝtin sɪnz əɾ əɹ bæk, ən soʊ wɝ ənʌðɝ dʌzən wɪmən ɪleɪn hæd nɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ, ɑkjəpaɪɪŋ ɔl ə ðə tʃɛɹz əɡɛns ðə peɪl ɡɹin wɔlz, swɛɾɪŋ wɪð ðə wɪndoʊz taɪɾ ən kɝɾənz dʒɹɔn. moʊst wɔɹ ɛbu dɑɹi dʒɹɛsəz, ðoʊ oʊnli wʌn pəzɛs ði ɑləv skɪn; moʊs hæd laɪnz ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz ən ət list ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪ; ən ɛvɹi læst wʊmən ə ðɛm kəd tʃænəl tə wʌn dɪɡɹi əɹ ənʌðɝ. sɛvən wɔɹ ðə ɹɛd bɛlt. ʃi saɪɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf. wən nɪneɪiv wɑz ɹaɪt, ʃi lɛt jə noʊ ɪɾ əntɪl jə wɑntəd tə skɹim.

Reanne was there, seated with the fireplace carved with the Thirteen Sins at her back, and so were another dozen women Elayne had never seen before, occupying all of the chairs against the pale green walls, sweating with the windows tight and curtains drawn. Most wore Ebou Dari dresses, though only one possessed the olive skin; most had lines on their faces and at least a touch of gray; and every last woman of them could channel to one degree or another. Seven wore the red belt. She sighed in spite of herself. When Nynaeve was right, she let you know it until you wanted to scream.

ɹin baʊndəd tə hɝ fiɾ ɪn ðə seɪm ɹɛd-feɪs fjʊɹi sidɔɹə hæd ʃoʊn, ən əɹ fɝst wɝdz wɝ ɔlmoʊst aɪdɛntɪkəl əz wɛl. "ju! haʊ dɛɹ jə ʃoʊ jəɹ feɪs . . . ?" wɝdz ən fjʊɹi dʒɹeɪn əweɪ təɡɛðɝ fəɹ ðə seɪm ɹizən, tu, əz mɛɝɪlɪl ən ði ʌðɝz ɛntɝɾ ɑn ɪleɪnz hilz. ə jɛloʊ-hɛɹd wʊmən ɪn ɹɛd bɛlt ən plʌnʒɪŋ nɛklaɪn meɪɾ ə feɪn saʊn əz əɹ aɪz ɹoʊld ʌp ɪn əɹ hɛɾ ən ʃi slɪd boʊnləsli fɹəm əɹ ɹɛd tʃɛɹ. noʊ wʌn muv tə hɛlp hɝ. noʊ wʌn ivən ɡlænst ət bɝdʒɪɾ əz ʃi ɛskɔɹɾɪd sidɔɹə tə ə kɔɹnɝ ən plæntəɾ əɹ ðɛɹ. noʊ wʌn sim tə bɹið. ɪleɪn fɛlt ə ɡɹeɪt dɪzaɪɝ tə ʃaʊt "bu" dʒʌs tə si wʌt wəd hæpən.

Reanne bounded to her feet in the same red-faced fury Cedora had shown, and her first words were almost identical as well. "You! How dare you show your face . . . ?" Words and fury drained away together for the same reason, too, as Merilille and the others entered on Elayne's heels. A yellow-haired woman in red belt and plunging neckline made a faint sound as her eyes rolled up in her head and she slid bonelessly from her red chair. No one moved to help her. No one even glanced at Birgitte as she escorted Cedora to a corner and planted her there. No one seemed to breathe. Elayne felt a great desire to shout "boo" just to see what would happen.

ɹin sweɪd, waɪt-feɪst, ən vɪzəbli tʃɹaɪd tə ɡæðɝ hɝsɛlf wɪð slaɪt səksɛs. ɪt tʊk əɹ oʊnli ə moʊmən tə skæn ðə faɪv kul-feɪst ɛɛs sədaɪ laɪn ʌp bɪfɔɹ ðə dɔɹ ən dɪsaɪɾ u mʌs bi ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ. ʃi wɑbəld əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹtaɪlz tə mɛɝɪlɪl ən sæŋk tə hɝ niz, hɛd baʊd. "fɝɡɪv ʌs, ɛɛs sədaɪ." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz wɝʃəpfəl, ən oʊnli ə lɪɾəl stɛɾiɝ ðən əɹ niz hæd bɪn. ʃi bæbəld, ɪn fækt. "wi ɑɹ oʊnli ə fju fɹɛnz. wɪv dʌn nʌθɪŋ, sɝɾənli nʌθɪŋ tə bɹɪŋ dɪskɹɛɾət tə ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ swɛɹ ðæt, wʌtɛvɝ ðɪs ɡɝl əz toʊl ju. wi wʊɾə toʊl jə ʌv hɝ, bʌt wi wɝ əfɹeɪd. wi oʊnli mit tə tɔk. ʃiz ə fɹɛnd, ɛɛs sədaɪ. dɪd jə kætʃ hɝ, tu? aɪ kən dɪskɹaɪb əɹ fəɹ ju, ɛɛs sədaɪ. wʌtɛvɝ jə wɪʃ, wɪl du. aɪ swɛɹ, wi - "

Reanne swayed, white-faced, and visibly tried to gather herself with slight success. It took her only a moment to scan the five cool-faced Aes Sedai lined up before the door and decide who must be in charge. She wobbled across the floortiles to Merilille and sank to her knees, head bowed. "Forgive us, Aes Sedai." Her voice was worshipful, and only a little steadier than her knees had been. She babbled, in fact. "We are only a few friends. We have done nothing, certainly nothing to bring discredit to Aes Sedai. I swear that, whatever this girl has told you. We would have told you of her, but we were afraid. We only meet to talk. She has a friend, Aes Sedai. Did you catch her, too? I can describe her for you, Aes Sedai. Whatever you wish, we will do. I swear, we - "

mɛɝɪlɪl klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt laʊdli. "jɔɹ neɪm ɪz ɹin kɔɹli, aɪ bɪliv?" ɹin flɪntʃt ən wɪspɝd ðəɾ ɪt wɑz, stɪl piɹɪŋ ət ðə flɔɹ ət ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝz fit. "aɪ fɪɹ jə mʌst ædʒɹɛs jɝsɛlf tə ɪleɪn sədaɪ, ɹin."

Merilille cleared her throat loudly. "Your name is Reanne Corly, I believe?" Reanne flinched and whispered that it was, still peering at the floor at the Gray sister's feet. "I fear you must address yourself to Elayne Sedai, Reanne."

ɹinz hɛd dʒɝkt ʌp ɪn ə moʊst sæɾəsfæktʃɹi weɪ. ʃi stɛɹɾ ət mɛɝɪlɪl, ðən baɪ sloʊ ɪŋkɹəməns tɝn aɪz əz bɪɡ əz əɹ feɪs tə ɪleɪn. ʃi lɪkt əɹ lɪps. ʃi dʒɹu ə dip, lɔŋ bɹɛθ. twɪstɪŋ ɝaʊn ɑn əɹ niz tə feɪs ɪleɪn, ʃi baʊɾ əɹ hɛd wʌns mɔɹ. "aɪ bɛɡ jəɹ fɝɡɪvnəs, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃi sɛd liɾənli. "aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ. aɪ kəd nɑt - " ənʌðɝ lɔŋ, hoʊpləs bɹɛθ. "wʌtɛvɝ pʌnɪʃmən jə dɪkɹi, wi æksɛp hʌmbli, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt pliz, aɪ bɛɡ jə tə bɪliv ðət - "

Reanne's head jerked up in a most satisfactory way. She stared at Merilille, then by slow increments turned eyes as big as her face to Elayne. She licked her lips. She drew a deep, long breath. Twisting around on her knees to face Elayne, she bowed her head once more. "I beg your forgiveness, Aes Sedai," she said leadenly. "I did not know. I could not - " Another long, hopeless breath. "Whatever punishment you decree, we accept humbly, of course, but please, I beg you to believe that - "

"oʊ, stæn ʌp," ɪleɪn bɹoʊk ɪn ɪmpeɪʃənli. ʃi hæd wɑntəd tə meɪk ðɪs wʊmən æknɑlɪdʒ əɹ əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi hæd mɛɝɪlɪl əɹ ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz, bʌt ðə ɡɹɔvəlɪŋ sɪkən hɝ. "ðæts ɹaɪt. stæn ɑn jəɹ fit." ʃi weɪɾəd əntɪl ɹin kəmplaɪd, ðən wɔkt oʊvɝ ən sæɾ ɪn ðə wʊmənz tʃɛɹ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ kɹɪŋɪŋ, bʌt ʃi wɑntəd noʊ daʊts u wɑz ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ. "du jə stɪl dɪnaɪ nɑlədʒ ə ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz, ɹin?"

"Oh, stand up," Elayne broke in impatiently. She had wanted to make this woman acknowledge her as much as she had Merilille or any of the others, but the groveling sickened her. "That's right. Stand on your feet." She waited until Reanne complied, then walked over and sat in the woman's chair. There was no need for cringing, but she wanted no doubts who was in charge. "Do you still deny knowledge of the Bowl of the Winds, Reanne?"

ɹin spɹɛɾ əɹ hænz. "ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃi sɛd ɡaɪlləsli, "nʌn ʌv əs wəɾ ɛvɝ juz ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, mʌtʃ lɛs ən æŋɡɹil əɹ sɑŋɡɹil." ɡaɪlləs, ən wɛɹi əz ə fɑks ɪn ə sɪɾi. "aɪ əʃʊɹ ju, wi meɪk noʊ pɹitɛns ə biɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ivən nɪɹ tə ɛɛs sədaɪ. wəɹ dʒʌs ðiz fju fɹɛnz jə si, taɪd təɡɛðɝ baɪ wʌns hævɪŋ bɪn əlaʊd tə ɛntɝ ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðəɾ ɪz ɔl."

Reanne spread her hands. "Aes Sedai," she said guilelessly, "none of us would ever use a ter'angreal, much less an angreal or sa'angreal." Guileless, and wary as a fox in a city. "I assure you, we make no pretense of being anything even near to Aes Sedai. We are just these few friends you see, tied together by once having been allowed to enter the White Tower. That is all."

"dʒʌs ðiz fju fɹɛnz," ɪleɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli oʊvɝ stipəl fɪŋɡɝz. "ænd ɡæɹiniə, ʌv kɔɹs. ən bɛɹaʊɪn, ən dɛɹiz, ən æləz."

"Just these few friends," Elayne said dryly over steepled fingers. "And Garenia, of course. And Berowin, and Derys, and Alise."

"jɛs," ɹin sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli. "æn ðɛm."

"Yes," Reanne said reluctantly. "And them."

ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd vɛɹi sloʊli. "ɹin, ðə waɪt taʊɝ noʊz əbaʊt jəɹ kɪn. ðə taʊɝ əz ɔlweɪz noʊn." ə dɑɹk wʊmən wɪð ə tɛɹən lʊk tə hɝ, ðoʊ wɛɹɪŋ ə blu-ænd-waɪt sɪlk vɛst wɪð ðə sɪdʒəl ə ðə ɡoʊldsmɪθs ɡɪld, ɡeɪv ə stʃɹæŋɡəl skɹim ən pɹɛs boʊθ plʌmp hænz tə hɝ maʊð. ə lin, ɡɹeɪɪŋ sɑldəiən wɛɹɪŋ ðə ɹɛd bɛl kɹʌmpəld wɪð ə saɪ tə dʒɔɪn ðə jɛloʊ-hɛɹd wʊmən ɑn ðə flɔɹ, ən tu mɔɹ sweɪɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ maɪt.

Elayne shook her head very slowly. "Reanne, the White Tower knows about your Kin. The Tower has always known." A dark woman with a Tairen look to her, though wearing a blue-and-white silk vest with the sigil of the goldsmith's guild, gave a strangled scream and pressed both plump hands to her mouth. A lean, graying Saldaean wearing the red belt crumpled with a sigh to join the yellow-haired woman on the floor, and two more swayed as if they might.

fəɹ əɹ pɑɹt, ɹin lʊk tə ðə sɪstɝz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə dɔɹ fəɹ kɑnfɝmeɪʃən, ən sɔ ɪt, əz ʃi θɔt. mɛɝɪlɪlz feɪs wɑz mɔɹ aɪsi ðən sɝin, ən sɝaɪðə ɡɹɪməs bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd stɑp hɝsɛlf. vændin ən kɛɝin wɝ boʊθ taɪt-lɪpt, ən ivən æɾɪliz simd ɪnkluɾəd, tɝnɪŋ əɹ hɛd ðɪs weɪ ən ðət tə stʌɾi ðə wɪmən əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz əz ʃi maɪɾ əv ɪnsɛks pɹiviəsli ənnoʊn tə hɝ. ʌv kɔɹs, wʌt ɹin sɔ ən wʌt wɑz wɝ nɑt ðə seɪm. ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl æksɛptɪɾ ɪleɪnz dɪsɪʒən, bʌt noʊ əmaʊn ʌv "jɛs, ɪleɪn . . ." kəd meɪk əm laɪk ɪt. ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn hɪɹ tu aʊɝz əɡoʊ ɪf nɑt fəɹ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv "bʌt, ɪleɪn . . ." tɔst ɪn. səmtaɪmz liɾɪŋ mɛn hɝɾɪŋ.

For her part, Reanne looked to the sisters in front of the door for confirmation, and saw it, as she thought. Merilille's face was more icy than serene, and Sareitha grimaced before she could stop herself. Vandene and Careane were both tight-lipped, and even Adeleas seemed included, turning her head this way and that to study the women along the walls as she might have insects previously unknown to her. Of course, what Reanne saw and what was were not the same. They had all accepted Elayne's decision, but no amount of "Yes, Elayne . . ." could make them like it. They would have been here two hours ago if not for a great deal of "But, Elayne . . ." tossed in. Sometimes leading meant herding.

ɹin dɪd nɑt feɪnt, bʌt fɪɹ fɪld əɹ feɪs, ən ʃi ɹeɪz pliɾɪŋ hænz. "du jə min tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə kɪn? waɪ naʊ, æftɝ soʊ lɔŋ? wʌɾ əv wi dʌn ðət jə ʃəd kʌm daʊn ɑn əs naʊ?"

Reanne did not faint, but fear filled her face, and she raised pleading hands. "Do you mean to destroy the Kin? Why now, after so long? What have we done that you should come down on us now?"

"noʊ wʌn wɪl dɪstʃɹɔɪ ju," ɪleɪn toʊl hɝ. "kɛɝin, sɪns noʊbɑdi ɛls ɪz gɑnə hɛlp ðoʊz tu, wəd ju, pliz?" dʒʌmps ən blʌʃəz ɹæn ɝaʊn ðə ɹum, ən bɪfɔɹ kɛɝin kəd muv, tu wɪmən wɝ kɹaʊtʃɪŋ oʊvɝ itʃ wʌn u hæd feɪntɪd, lɪftɪŋ əɹ ʌp ən weɪvɪŋ smɛlɪŋ sɔls ʌndɝ əɹ noʊz. "ði æmɪɝlɪn sit dɪzaɪɝz ɛvɹi wʊmən u kən tʃænəl tə bi kənɛktəd tə ðə taʊɝ," ɪleɪn wɛn ɑn. "ði ɔfɝ ɪz oʊpən tə ɛni ʌv ðə kɪn u wɪʃ tə æksɛpt."

"No one will destroy you," Elayne told her. "Careane, since nobody else is going to help those two, would you, please?" Jumps and blushes ran around the room, and before Careane could move, two women were crouching over each one who had fainted, lifting her up and waving smelling salts under her nose. "The Amyrlin Seat desires every woman who can channel to be connected to the Tower," Elayne went on. "The offer is open to any of the Kin who wish to accept."

hæd ʃi woʊvən floʊz ʌv ɛɹ ɝaʊn ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðoʊz wɪmən, ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv fɹoʊzən əm mɔɹ stɪl. hæd ʃi skwiz ðoʊz floʊz taɪt, ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv pɹədus mɔɹ bʌlʒɪŋ aɪz. wʌn ə ðə wɪmən u hæd feɪntɪd sʌɾənli ɡæspt ən kɔft, pʊʃɪŋ əweɪ ðə taɪni vaɪəl ə sɔls ðət hæd bɪn hɛl stɪl tu lɔŋ. ðət bɹoʊk ɛvɹiwʌn fɹi ɪn ə dɛljudʒ ə vɔɪsəz.

Had she woven flows of Air around every one of those women, she could not have frozen them more still. Had she squeezed those flows tight, she could not have produced more bulging eyes. One of the women who had fainted suddenly gasped and coughed, pushing away the tiny vial of salts that had been held still too long. That broke everyone free in a deluge of voices.

"wi kən bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ æftɝ ɔl?" ðə tɛɹən ɪn ðə ɡoʊldsmɪθs vɛst æskt ɪksaɪɾədli, ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðəɾ ə ɹaʊnd-feɪst wʊmən wɪð ə ɹɛd bɛlt ət lis twaɪs əz lɔŋ əz ɛniwʌn ɛlsəz bɝst aʊt wɪð, "ðeɪ wɪl lɛɾ əs lɝn? ðəl titʃ əs əɡɛn?" ə dɛljudʒ ə peɪnfəli iɡɝ vɔɪsəz. "wi kən ɹɪli . . . ?" ən "ðeɪ wɪl lɛɾ əs . . . ?" fɹəm ɛvɹi saɪd.

"We can become Aes Sedai after all?" the Tairen in the goldsmith's vest asked excitedly, at the same time that a round-faced woman with a red belt at least twice as long as anyone else's burst out with, "They will let us learn? They will teach us again?" A deluge of painfully eager voices. "We can really . . . ?" and "They will let us . . . ?" from every side.

ɹin ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn əm fɪɹsli. "ɪvɑɹə, sumeɪkoʊ, ɔl ə ju, jə fɝɡɛt jʊɹsɛlvz! jə spik ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ! jə spik ɪn - fɹʌn ʌv - ɛɛs sədaɪ." ʃi pæst ə hæn oʊvɝ əɹ feɪs, tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. ən ɪmbɛɹəst saɪləns dɪsɛndəd. aɪz fɛl ən blʌʃəz ɹoʊz. wɪð ɔl ðoʊz laɪn feɪsəz, ɔl ðət ɡɹeɪ ən waɪt hɛɹ, ɪleɪn stɪl wɑz maɪndəɾ ə nʌθɪŋ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə ɡɹup ə nɑvəsɪz hævɪŋ ə pɪloʊ-faɪɾ æftɝ læs hæd tɑld wən ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz wɔkt ɪn.

Reanne rounded on them fiercely. "Ivara, Sumeko, all of you, you forget yourselves! You speak in front of Aes Sedai! You speak in - front of - Aes Sedai." She passed a hand over her face, trembling. An embarrassed silence descended. Eyes fell and blushes rose. With all those lined faces, all that gray and white hair, Elayne still was minded of nothing so much as a group of novices having a pillow-fight after Last had tolled when the Mistress of Novices walked in.

hɛzɪɾəntli, ɹin lʊkt əɾ əɹ əkɹɔs əɹ fɪŋɡɝtɪps. "wi tʃɹuli wɪl bi əlaʊd tə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə taʊɝ?" ʃi mʌmbəld ɪndə hɝ hænd.

Hesitantly, Reanne looked at her across her fingertips. "We truly will be allowed to return to the Tower?" she mumbled into her hand.

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd. "ðoʊz u kən lɝn tə bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪl əv ðə tʃæns, ən ðəɹ wɪl bi ə pleɪs fəɹ ɔl. fəɹ ɛni wʊmən u tʃænəlz."

Elayne nodded. "Those who can learn to become Aes Sedai will have the chance, and there will be a place for all. For any woman who channels."

ənʃt tɪɹz ʃoʊn ɪn ɹinz aɪz. ɪleɪn wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ, bʌt ʃi θɔt ðə wʊmən wɪspɝd, "aɪ kən bi ɡɹin." ɪt wɑz hɑɹd nɑt tə ɹʌʃ oʊvɝ ən θɹoʊ hɝ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɝ.

Unshed tears shone in Reanne's eyes. Elayne was not sure, but she thought the woman whispered, "I can be Green." It was hard not to rush over and throw her arms around her.

nʌn ə ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃoʊɾ ɛni saɪnz ʌv ɡɪvɪŋ weɪ tə ɪmoʊʃən, ən mɛɝɪlɪl sɝɾənli wɑz ə stɝnɝ stʌf. "ɪf aɪ meɪ æsk ə kwɛstʃən, ɪleɪn? ɹin, haʊ mɛni . . . ʌv jəl wi bi teɪkɪŋ ɪn?" daʊtləs ðət pɔz kʌvɝɾ ə tʃeɪnʒ fɹəm "haʊ mɛni waɪldɝz ən feɪljɝz."

None of the other Aes Sedai showed any signs of giving way to emotion, and Merilille certainly was of sterner stuff. "If I may ask a question, Elayne? Reanne, how many . . . of you will we be taking in?" Doubtless that pause covered a change from "how many wilders and failures."

ɪf ɹin noʊɾəst əɹ səspɛktəd, ʃi ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪɾ əɹ dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. "aɪ kænɑt bɪliv ðəɹ ɑɹ ɛni hu wəd ɹəfjuz ði ɔfɝ," ʃi sɛd bɹɛθləsli. "ɪt meɪ teɪk səm taɪm tə sɛnd wɝd tə ɛvɹiwʌn. wi ɹɪmeɪn spɹɛɾ aʊt, jə si, soʊ. . . ." ʃi læft, ə tʌtʃ nɝvəsli ən stɪl nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm tɪɹz. ". . . soʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd nɑt noʊɾəs ʌs. ət pɹɛzən ðəɹ ɑɹ wʌn θaʊzən sɛvən hʌnʒɹəd ən eɪɾi-θɹi neɪmz ɑn ðə ɹoʊl."

If Reanne noticed or suspected, she ignored it or did not care. "I cannot believe there are any who would refuse the offer," she said breathlessly. "It may take some time to send word to everyone. We remain spread out, you see, so. . . ." She laughed, a touch nervously and still not far from tears. ". . . so Aes Sedai would not notice us. At present there are one thousand seven hundred and eighty-three names on the roll."

moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ lɝn tə kʌvɝ ʃɑk wɪð ən aʊtwɝd ʃoʊ ʌv kɑm, ən oʊnli sɝaɪðə əlaʊɾ əɹ aɪz tə waɪɾən. ʃi ɔlsoʊ maʊð saɪlənt wɝdz, bʌɾ ɪleɪn nu hɝ wɛl ɪnʌf tə ɹiɾ əɹ lɪps. tu θaʊzənd waɪldɝz! laɪt hɛlp ʌs! ɪleɪn meɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪt ʃoʊ ʌv ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ skɝts əntɪl ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ əɹ oʊn feɪs wɑz ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl. laɪt hɛlp ðɛm, ɪndid.

Most Aes Sedai learned to cover shock with an outward show of calm, and only Sareitha allowed her eyes to widen. She also mouthed silent words, but Elayne knew her well enough to read her lips. Two thousand wilders! Light help us! Elayne made a great show of adjusting her skirts until she was sure her own face was under control. Light help them, indeed.

ɹin mɪsəndɝstʊd ðə saɪləns. "ju ɪkspɛktəd mɔɹ? æksəɾənts də teɪk səm ɛvɹi jɪɹ, əɹ nætʃɹəl dɛθs, əz wɪð ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, ən aɪ fɪɹ ðə kɪn əv ɡɹoʊn fjuɝ ɪn ðə læs θaʊzən jɪɹz. pɝhæps wɪv bɪn tu kɔʃəs ɪn əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ wɪmən wən ðeɪ liv ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌt ðəɹ əz ɔlweɪz bɪn ðə fɪɹ ðət wʌn ə ðɛm maɪt ɹipɔɹt biɪŋ kwɛstʃənd, ən . . . ænd. . . ."

Reanne misunderstood the silence. "You expected more? Accidents do take some every year, or natural deaths, as with everyone else, and I fear the Kin have grown fewer in the last thousand years. Perhaps we have been too cautious in approaching women when they leave the White Tower, but there has always been the fear that one of them might report being questioned, and . . . and. . . ."

"wi ɑɹ nɑt dɪsəpɔɪntɪɾ ɪn ðə list," ɪleɪn əʃʊɹd hɝ, meɪkɪŋ suðɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝz. dɪsəpɔɪntɪd? ʃi vɛɹi nɪɹli ɡɪɡəl hɪstɛɹɪkli. ðəɹ wɝ nɪɹli twaɪs əz mɛni kɪnswɪmən əz ðəɹ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ! ɛɡwin kəd nɛvɝ seɪ ʃi hæd nɑt dʌn əɹ pɑɹt tə bɹɪŋ wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl tə ðə taʊɝ. bʌɾ ɪf ðə kɪn ɹəfjuzd waɪldɝz. . . . ʃi mʌst stɪk tə ðə pɔɪnt; kɑnskɹɪptɪŋ ðə kɪn hæɾ oʊnli bɪn ɪnsɪdɛntəl. "ɹin," ʃi sɛd dʒɛnli, "du jə θɪŋk pɝhæps jə maɪt hæpən tə ɹikɔl wɛɹ ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz ɪz, naʊ?"

"We are not disappointed in the least," Elayne assured her, making soothing gestures. Disappointed? She very nearly giggled hysterically. There were nearly twice as many Kinswomen as there were Aes Sedai! Egwene could never say she had not done her part to bring women who could channel to the Tower. But if the Kin refused wilders. . . . She must stick to the point; conscripting the Kin had only been incidental. "Reanne," she said gently, "do you think perhaps you might happen to recall where the Bowl of the Winds is, now?"

ɹin blʌʃt ə sʌnsɛt. "wiv nɛvɝ tʌtʃt ðɛm, ɪleɪn sədaɪ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ ðeɪ wɝ ɡæðɝd. aɪv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə ðɪs boʊl ə ðə wɪnz, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz ə stɔɹɹum sətʃ əz jə dɪskɹaɪb oʊvɝ - "

Reanne blushed a sunset. "We've never touched them, Elayne Sedai. I don't know why they were gathered. I've never heard of this Bowl of the Winds, but there is a storeroom such as you describe over - "

bɛləstɛɹz, ə wʊmən tʃænəl bɹifli. sʌmwʌn skɹimd ɪn pjʊɹəs tɛɹɝ.

Belowstairs, a woman channeled briefly. Someone screamed in purest terror.

ɪleɪn wɑz ɑn əɹ fiɾ ɪn ə flæʃ, əz wɝ ðeɪ ɔl. fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðət fɛðɝd dʒɹɛs, bɝdʒɪt pɹədust ə dæɡɝ.

Elayne was on her feet in a flash, as were they all. From somewhere in that feathered dress, Birgitte produced a dagger.

"ðæt mʌst əv bɪn dɛɹiz," ɹin sɛd. "ʃiz ði oʊnli ʌðɝ wʌn hɪɹ."

"That must have been Derys," Reanne said. "She's the only other one here."

ɪleɪn dɑɹɾɪd fɔɹwɝɾ ən kɑɾ əɹ ɑɹm əz ʃi stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ. "ju ɑɹənt ɡɹin jɛt," ʃi mɝmɝd, ən wɑz ɹɪwɔɹɾɪd wɪð ə lʌvli dɪmpəl smaɪl, sɝpɹaɪzd ən plizd ən dɪfəɾənt ɔl ət wʌns. "wi wɪl hændəl ðɪs, ɹin."

Elayne darted forward and caught her arm as she started for the door. "You aren't Green yet," she murmured, and was rewarded with a lovely dimpled smile, surprised and pleased and diffident all at once. "We will handle this, Reanne."

mɛɝɪlɪl ən ði ʌðɝz ɝeɪd ðɛmsɛlvz tə iðɝ saɪd, ɹɛɾi tə fɑloʊ ɪleɪn aʊt, bʌt bɝdʒɪt wɑz ət ðə dɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ɛni ʌv ðɛm, ɡɹɪnɪŋ əz ʃi pʊt hæn tə lætʃ. ɪleɪn swɑloʊɾ ən sɛd nʌθɪŋ. ðət wɑz ðə wɔɹɾɝz ɑnɝ, soʊ ðə ɡeɪɾɪn sɛd; fɝs tə ɡoʊ ɪn, læs tə kʌm aʊt. bʌt ʃi stɪl fɪl hɝsɛlf wɪð seɪaɪdɑɹ, ɹɛɾi tə kɹʌʃ ɛniθɪŋ ðət θɹɛɾənd əɹ wɔɹɾɝ.

Merilille and the others arrayed themselves to either side, ready to follow Elayne out, but Birgitte was at the door before any of them, grinning as she put hand to latch. Elayne swallowed and said nothing. That was the Warder's honor, so the Gaidin said; first to go in, last to come out. But she still filled herself with saidar, ready to crush anything that threatened her Warder.

ðə dɔɹ oʊpən bɪfɔɹ bɝdʒɪt kəd lɪf ðə lætʃ.

The door opened before Birgitte could lift the latch.

mæt sɔntɝɾ ɪn, pʊʃɪŋ ðə slɛndɝ meɪɾ ɪleɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əhɛɾ ə hɪm. "aɪ θɔt jə maɪt bi hɪɹ." hi ɡɹɪn ɪnsələnli, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ dɛɹiz' ɡlɛɹz, ən wɛn ɑn, "wɛn aɪ faʊn ə blʌɾi ɡɹeɪt lɑɾ ʌv wɔɹɾɝz dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ət maɪ lis feɪvɹɪt tævɝn. aɪv dʒʌs kʌm bæk fɹəm fɑloʊɪŋ ə wʊmən tə ðə ɹæhəd. tə ðə tɑp flɔɹ ʌv ə haʊs wɪð noʊbɑdi lɪvɪŋ ɑn ɪt, tə bi pɹɪsaɪs. æftɝ ʃi lɛft, ðə flɔɹ wɑz soʊ dʌsti, aɪ kəd si ɹaɪɾ əweɪ wɪtʃ ɹum ʃid ɡɔn tə. ðɛɹz ə fleɪmɪŋ bɪɡ ɹʌstəd lɑk ɑn ðə dɔɹ, bʌɾ əl bɛɾ ə θaʊzən kɹaʊnz tə ə kɪk ɪn ðə bɑɾəm, jəɹ boʊl ɪz bɪhaɪn ɪt." dɛɹiz eɪmd ə kɪk ət hɪm, ən i pʊʃt əɹ əweɪ, pʊlɪŋ ə smɔl naɪf fɹəm ɪz bɛl tə baʊns ɑn ɪz pɑm. "wɪl wʌn ə jə tɛl ðɪs waɪldkæt wɑtʃdɔɡ huz saɪɾ aɪm ɑn? wɪmən wɪð naɪvz meɪk mi ənizi, ðiz deɪz."

Mat sauntered in, pushing the slender maid Elayne remembered ahead of him. "I thought you might be here." He grinned insolently, ignoring Derys' glares, and went on, "When I found a bloody great lot of Warders drinking at my least favorite tavern. I've just come back from following a woman to the Rahad. To the top floor of a house with nobody living on it, to be precise. After she left, the floor was so dusty, I could see right away which room she'd gone to. There's a flaming big rusted lock on the door, but I'll bet a thousand crowns to a kick in the bottom, your Bowl is behind it." Derys aimed a kick at him, and he pushed her away, pulling a small knife from his belt to bounce on his palm. "Will one of you tell this wildcat watchdog whose side I'm on? Women with knives make me uneasy, these days."

"wi ɔlɹɛɾi noʊ ɔl əbaʊt ðæt, mæt," ɪleɪn sɛd. wɛl, ðeɪ hæd bɪn dʒʌst əbaʊt tə lɝn ɔl əbaʊɾ ɪt, ən ðə stʌn lʊk ɑn ɪz feɪs wɑz pɹaɪsləs. ʃi fɛl sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm bɝdʒɪt. ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ɡeɪzd əɾ əɹ wɪθaʊɾ ɛni pɝtɪkjəlɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən, bʌt ðət lɪɾəl nɑɾ ʌv ɪmoʊʃən ɪn ðə bæk ʌv ɪleɪnz hɛd ɹeɪɾieɪtəd dɪsəpɹuvəl. eɪvinhə pɹɑbli wəd nɑt θɪŋk mʌtʃ ʌv ɪt, iðɝ. oʊpənɪŋ əɹ maʊθ wɑz wʌn ə ðə moʊs dɪfəkəl θɪŋz ɪleɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ dʌn. "aɪ mʌs θæŋk ju, ðoʊ, mæt. ɪts ɪntaɪɝli du tə jə ðət wɪv faʊnd wʌt wi wɝ lʊkɪŋ fɔɹ." hɪz ɡeɪpɪŋ əstɑnɪʃmənt wɑz ɔlmoʊst wɝθ ði æɡəni.

"We already know all about that, Mat," Elayne said. Well, they had been just about to learn all about it, and the stunned look on his face was priceless. She felt something from Birgitte. The other woman gazed at her without any particular expression, but that little knot of emotion in the back of Elayne's head radiated disapproval. Aviendha probably would not think much of it, either. Opening her mouth was one of the most difficult things Elayne had ever done. "I must thank you, though, Mat. It is entirely due to you that we have found what we were looking for." His gaping astonishment was almost worth the agony.

hi kloʊzd ɪz maʊθ kwɪkli, ðoʊ oʊpənɪŋ ɪɾ əɡɛn tə seɪ, "ðɛn lɛts haɪɝ ə boʊɾ ən fɛtʃ ðɪs blʌɾi boʊl. wɪð ɛni lʌk, wi kən liv ɛbu dɑɹ tənaɪt."

He closed his mouth quickly, though opening it again to say, "Then let's hire a boat and fetch this bloody Bowl. With any luck, we can leave Ebou Dar tonight."

"ðæɾ ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs, mæt. ən doʊn tɛl mi aɪm dɪminɪŋ ju. wəɹ nɑt kɹɔlɪŋ əbaʊt ðə ɹæhəɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk, ən wəɹ nɑt livɪŋ ɛbu dɑɹ əntɪl wɪv juz ðə boʊl."

"That is ridiculous, Mat. And don't tell me I'm demeaning you. We are not crawling about the Rahad in the dark, and we are not leaving Ebou Dar until we have used the Bowl."

hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɑɹɡju, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt dɛɹiz tʊk ði ɑpɝtunəɾi ʌv ɪz ətɛnʃən biɪŋ ɛlswɛɹ tə tʃɹaɪ kɪkɪŋ ɪm əɡɛn. hi dɑdʒd ɝaʊn bɝdʒɪt, jɛlpɪŋ fəɹ sʌmbɑɾi tə hɛlp hɪm, waɪl ðə slɛndɝ wʊmən dɑɹɾɪd æftɝ hɪm.

He tried to argue, of course, but Derys took the opportunity of his attention being elsewhere to try kicking him again. He dodged around Birgitte, yelping for somebody to help him, while the slender woman darted after him.

"hi ɪz jəɹ wɔɹɾɝ, ɪleɪn sədaɪ?" ɹin æsk daʊtfəli.

"He is your Warder, Elayne Sedai?" Reanne asked doubtfully.

"laɪt, noʊ! bɝdʒɪɾ ɪz." ɹinz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən. hævɪŋ ænsɝɾ ə kwɛstʃən, ɪleɪn æskt wʌn, ə kwɛstʃən ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv bɹɔt hɝsɛlf tə æsk ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ. "ɹin, ɪf jə doʊn maɪn tɛlɪŋ mi, haʊ oʊld ɑɹ ju?"

"Light, no! Birgitte is." Reanne's mouth fell open. Having answered a question, Elayne asked one, a question she could not have brought herself to ask another sister. "Reanne, if you don't mind telling me, how old are you?"

ðə wʊmən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ɡlænsɪŋ ət mæt, bʌɾ i wɑz stɪl dɑdʒɪŋ tə kip ə ɡɹɪnɪŋ bɝdʒɪt bɪtwin ɪm ən dɛɹiz. "maɪ nɛks neɪmɪŋ deɪ," ɹin sɛɾ əz ɪf ɪt wɑz ðə moʊst ɔɹɾənɛɹi θɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld, "wɪl bi maɪ fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd ən twɛlfθ."

The woman hesitated, glancing at Mat, but he was still dodging to keep a grinning Birgitte between him and Derys. "My next naming day," Reanne said as if it was the most ordinary thing in the world, "will be my four hundred and twelfth."

mɛɝɪlɪl feɪntɪd dɛɾ əweɪ.

Merilille fainted dead away.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾitu


CHAPTER 32

sil tə ðə fleɪm


Sealed to the Flame

ɪleɪɾə də əvɹaɪni ɹɔɪhən sæt ɹiɡəli ɪn ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ðə tɔl vɪnkɑɹv tʃɛɹ peɪntəd naʊ ɪn oʊnli sɪks kʌlɝz ɪnstɛɾ ə sɛvən, ə sɪks-stʃɹaɪp stoʊl ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ən ɹæn əɹ ɡeɪz ɝaʊn ðə sɝkjəlɝ hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ. ðə sɪɾɝz' peɪntəd tʃɛɹz hæd bɪn ɹiɝeɪnʒd əlɔŋ ðə stɛɹ-fɹʌntɪd deɪz ðəɾ ɪnsɝkəl ðə tʃeɪmbɝ bɪniθ ðə ɡɹeɪt doʊm, speɪst aʊt tə əkaʊn fəɹ oʊnli sɪks ədʒəz ɪnstɛɾ ə sɛvən naʊ, ən eɪtin sɪɾɝz stʊɾ oʊbiɾiəntli. jʌŋ ælθɹ nɛl kwaɪətli bɪsaɪd ði æmɪɝlɪn sit; hi wəd nɑt spik ənlɛs ɡɪvən liv, wɪtʃ i wəd nɑt ɹəsiv tədeɪ. tədeɪ, hi wɑz mɪɹli ənʌðɝ sɪmbəl ə hɝ paʊɝ, ən ðə twɛlv moʊs feɪvɝd sɪɾɝz ɡloʊd wɪð ðə lɪŋk ðət ʃi hɝsɛlf kəntʃɹoʊl tə kip ɪm seɪf.

Elaida do Avriny a'Roihan sat regally in the Amyrlin Seat, the tall vinecarved chair painted now in only six colors instead of seven, a six-striped stole on her shoulders, and ran her gaze around the circular Hall of the Tower. The Sitters' painted chairs had been rearranged along the stair-fronted dais that encircled the chamber beneath the great dome, spaced out to account for only six Ajahs instead of seven now, and eighteen Sitters stood obediently. Young al'Thor knelt quietly beside the Amyrlin Seat; he would not speak unless given leave, which he would not receive today. Today, he was merely another symbol of her power, and the twelve most favored Sitters glowed with the link that she herself controlled to keep him safe.

"ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ kənsɛnsəs ɪz ətʃivd, mʌðɝ," ɑlviɛɝɪn sɛd mikli əɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, boʊɪŋ hʌmbli əɡɛns ðə fleɪm-tɑp stæf.

"The greater consensus is achieved, Mother," Alviarin said meekly at her shoulder, bowing humbly against the Flame-topped staff.

daʊn ɑn ðə flɔɹ, bɪloʊ ðə deɪz, ʃɛɹiəm skɹimd waɪldli ən hæd tə bi ɹistʃɹeɪn baɪ ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹɾ əɾ əɹ saɪd. ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ ʃildɪŋ əɹ snɪɹɾ ɪn kəntɛmpt. ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn klʌŋ tə ə koʊld aʊtwɝd dɪɡnəɾi, bʌt moʊst ə ði ʌðɝz ʃildɪɾ ən ɡɑɹɾəd ɑn ðə flɔɹ wɛp kwaɪətli, pɝhæps ɪn ɹɪlif ðəɾ oʊnli fɔɹ wɪmən hæd bɪn ɡɪvən ði ʌltəmət pɛnəlti, pɝhæps ɪn fɪɹ ʌv wʌɾ ɛls wɑz tə kʌm. ðə moʊst æʃən feɪsəz bɪlɔŋ tə ðə θɹi hu hæd dɛɹd sɪɾ ɪn ə ɹɛbəl hɔl fəɹ ðə naʊ-dɪzɑlv blu. ɛvɹi ɹɛbəl hæd bɪn kæst aʊt fɹəm əɹ ədʒɑ əntɪl ɪleɪɾə ɡɹæntəd pɝmɪʃən tə ɹɪkwɛst ɹiksɛptəns, bʌt ðə wʌntaɪm bluz nu ðeɪ kənfɹʌntəd dɪfəkəl jɪɹz wɝkɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ ɪndə hɝ ɡʊd ɡɹeɪsɪz, jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wəd bi əlaʊd tə ɛntɝ ɛni ədʒɑ əɾ ɔl. əntɪl ðɛn, ðeɪ leɪ ɪn ðə pɑm ə hɝ hænd.

Down on the floor, below the dais, Sheriam screamed wildly and had to be restrained by the Tower Guard at her side. The Red sister shielding her sneered in contempt. Romanda and Lelaine clung to a cold outward dignity, but most of the others shielded and guarded on the floor wept quietly, perhaps in relief that only four women had been given the ultimate penalty, perhaps in fear of what else was to come. The most ashen faces belonged to the three who had dared sit in a rebel Hall for the now-dissolved Blue. Every rebel had been cast out from her Ajah until Elaida granted permission to request reacceptance, but the onetime Blues knew they confronted difficult years working their way into her good graces, years before they would be allowed to enter any Ajah at all. Until then, they lay in the palm of her hand.

ʃi stʊd, ən ɪt sim ðə wʌn paʊɝ floʊɪŋ θɹu hɝ fɹəm ðə sɝkəl wɑz ə mænəfɛsteɪʃən ə hɝ paʊɝ. "ðə hɔl kənkɝz wɪð ðə wɪl ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. lɛt ɹoʊmændə bi ðə fɝs tə bi bɝtʃt." ɹoʊmændəz hɛd dʒɝkt; lɛɾ əɹ si haʊ mʌtʃ dɪɡnəɾi ʃi kəd ɹɪteɪn əntɪl əɹ stɪlɪŋ. ɪleɪɾə dʒɛstʃɝd kɝtli. "teɪk ðə pɹɪznɝz əweɪ, ən bɹɪŋ ɪn ðə fɝst ə ðə pʊɹ dɪluɾɪd sɪstɝz u fɑloʊd ðɛm. əl æksɛp ðɛɹ səbmɪʃən."

She stood, and it seemed the One Power flowing through her from the circle was a manifestation of her power. "The Hall concurs with the will of the Amyrlin Seat. Let Romanda be the first to be birched." Romanda's head jerked; let her see how much dignity she could retain until her stilling. Elaida gestured curtly. "Take the prisoners away, and bring in the first of the poor deluded sisters who followed them. I will accept their submission."

ðəɹ wɑz ə kɹaɪ əmʌŋ ðə pɹɪznɝz, ən wʌn tɔɹ fɹi fɹəm ðə ɡɑɹd ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ ɑɹm. ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ θɹu hɝsɛlf ɑntu ðə stɛps əɾ ɪleɪɾəz fit, hænz aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt, tɪɹz stʃɹimɪŋ daʊn əɹ tʃiks.

There was a cry among the prisoners, and one tore free from the guard gripping her arm. Egwene al'Vere threw herself onto the steps at Elaida's feet, hands outstretched, tears streaming down her cheeks.

"fɝɡɪv mi, mʌðɝ!" ðə ɡɝl wɛpt. "aɪ ɹɪpɛnt! əl səbmɪt; aɪ də səbmɪt. pliz, də nɑt stɪl mi!" bɹoʊkənli, ʃi sæɡd feɪsdaʊn, ʃoʊldɝz ʃeɪkɪŋ wɪð sɑbz. "pliz, mʌðɝ! aɪ ɹɪpɛnt! aɪ du!"

"Forgive me, Mother!" the girl wept. "I repent! I will submit; I do submit. Please, do not still me!" Brokenly, she sagged facedown, shoulders shaking with sobs. "Please, Mother! I repent! I do!"

"ði æmɪɝlɪn sit kən ʃoʊ mɝsi," ɪleɪɾə sɛɾ ɪɡzʌltənli. ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæd tə luz ləleɪn ən ɹoʊmændə ən ʃɛɹiəm əz ɪɡzæmpəlz, bʌt ʃi kəd kip ðɪs ɡɝlz stʃɹɛŋkθ. ʃi wɑz ðə waɪt taʊɝ. "ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ, juv ɹɪbɛld əɡɛns jəɹ æmɪɝlɪn, bʌɾ əl ʃoʊ mɝsi. jəl bi dʒɹɛst ɪn nɑvəs waɪɾ əɡɛn, əntɪl aɪ maɪsɛlf dʒʌdʒ jə ɹɛɾi tə bi ɹeɪz fɝðɝ, bʌt ðɪs vɛɹi deɪ jə ʃæl bi ðə fɝs tə teɪk ə fɔɹθ oʊθ ɑn ði oʊθ ɹɑd, ʌv fiəlti ən oʊbiɾiəns tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit."

"The Amyrlin Seat can show mercy," Elaida said exultantly. The White Tower had to lose Lelaine and Romanda and Sheriam as examples, but she could keep this girl's strength. She was the White Tower. "Egwene al'Vere, you have rebelled against your Amyrlin, but I will show mercy. You will be dressed in novice white again, until I myself judge you ready to be raised further, but this very day you shall be the first to take a Fourth Oath on the Oath Rod, of fealty and obedience to the Amyrlin Seat."

ðə pɹɪznɝz bɪɡæn fɔlɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ niz, kɹaɪɪŋ aʊt tə bi əlaʊd tə teɪk ðəɾ oʊθ, tə pɹuv ðɛɹ tʃɹu səbmɪʃən. ləleɪn wɑz wʌn ə ðə fɝst, ən niðɝ ɹoʊmændə nɔɹ ʃɛɹiəm ðə læst. ɛɡwin kɹɔld ʌp ðə stɛps tə kɪs ðə hɛm ʌv ɪleɪɾəz dʒɹɛs.

The prisoners began falling on their knees, crying out to be allowed to take that oath, to prove their true submission. Lelaine was one of the first, and neither Romanda nor Sheriam the last. Egwene crawled up the steps to kiss the hem of Elaida's dress.

"aɪ jil maɪsɛlf tə jəɹ wɪl, mʌðɝ," ʃi mɝmɝd θɹu hɝ tɪɹz. "θæŋk ju. oʊ, θæŋk ju!"

"I yield myself to your will, Mother," she murmured through her tears. "Thank you. Oh, thank you!"

ɑlviɛɝɪn sizd ɪleɪɾəz ʃoʊldɝ, ʃʊk hɝ. "weɪk ʌp, jə ful wʊmən!" ʃi ɡɹaʊld.

Alviarin seized Elaida's shoulder, shook her. "Wake up, you fool woman!" she growled.

ɪleɪɾəz aɪz pɑpt oʊpən tə ðə dɪm laɪɾ ʌv ə sɪŋɡəl læmp hɛl baɪ ɑlviɛɝɪn, bɛndɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ bɛd wɪð ə hæn ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. stɪl oʊnli hæf-əweɪk, ʃi mʌmbəld, "wʌt dɪd jə seɪ?"

Elaida's eyes popped open to the dim light of a single lamp held by Alviarin, bending over her bed with a hand on her shoulder. Still only half-awake, she mumbled, "What did you say?"

"aɪ sɛd, 'pliz weɪk ʌp, mʌðɝ,' " ɑlviɛɝɪn ɹɪplaɪd kuli. "koʊvɑɹlə bɑldin əz ɹɪtɝn fɹəm kɛɹhin."

"I said, 'Please wake up, Mother,' " Alviarin replied coolly. "Covarla Baldene has returned from Cairhien."

ɪleɪɾə ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə klɪɹ əweɪ ðə tæɡ ɛn ə ðə dʒɹim. "soʊ sun? aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt əm fəɹ ənʌðɝ wik ət list. koʊvɑɹlə, jə seɪ? wɛɹ ɪz ɡəlinə?" fulɪʃ kwɛstʃənz; ɑlviɛɝɪn wəd nɑt noʊ wʌt ʃi mɛnt.

Elaida shook her head, trying to clear away the tag end of the dream. "So soon? I did not expect them for another week at least. Covarla, you say? Where is Galina?" Foolish questions; Alviarin would not know what she meant.

bʌɾ ɪn ðət kul kɹɪstəlaɪn toʊn, ðə wʊmən sɛd, "ʃi bɪlivz ɡəlinə dɛɾ əɹ ə pɹɪznɝ. aɪ fɪɹ ðə nuz ɪz . . . nɑt ɡʊd."

But in that cool crystalline tone, the woman said, "She believes Galina dead or a prisoner. I fear the news is . . . not good."

wʌɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn ʃəɾ əɹ ʃəd nɑt noʊ ɹʌʃt aʊɾ ʌv ɪleɪɾəz hɛd. "tɛl mi," ʃi dɪmændəd, θɹoʊɪŋ ɔf ðə sɪlk ʃit, bʌɾ əz ʃi ɹoʊz ən bɛltəɾ ə sɪlk ɹoʊb oʊvɝ əɹ naɪtdʒɹɛs, ʃi hɝɾ oʊnli snætʃɪz. ə bæɾəl. hɔɹdz ʌv il wɪmən tʃænəlɪŋ. ælθɹ ɡɔn. dɪzæstɝ. dɪstʃɹæktɪdli, ʃi noʊɾəst ðəɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn wɑz nitli ɡɑɹbd ɪn ə sɪlvɝ-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd waɪt dʒɹɛs, wɪð ðə kipɝz stoʊl ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk. ðə wʊmən hæd weɪɾəd tɪl ʃi kloʊð hɝsɛlf tə bɹɪŋ əɹ ðɪs!

What Alviarin should or should not know rushed out of Elaida's head. "Tell me," she demanded, throwing off the silk sheet, but as she rose and belted a silk robe over her nightdress, she heard only snatches. A battle. Hordes of Aiel women channeling. Al'Thor gone. Disaster. Distractedly, she noticed that Alviarin was neatly garbed in a silver-embroidered white dress, with the Keeper's stole around her neck. The woman had waited till she clothed herself to bring her this!

ðə keɪs klɑk ɪn əɹ stʌɾi sɔfli tʃaɪm sɛkən loʊ əz ʃi ɛntɝd ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum. ðə smɔl aʊɝz ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ; ðə wɝs taɪm tə ɹəsiv daɪɹ nuz. koʊvɑɹlə ɹoʊz heɪstəli fɹəm wʌn ə ðə ɹɛd-kʊʃən ɑɹmtʃɛɹz, hɝ ɪmplækəbəl feɪs sæɡɪŋ wɪð wɪɹinəs ən wɝi, ən nɛl tə kɪs ɪleɪɾəz ɹɪŋ. hɝ dɑɹk ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs stɪl bɔɹ ðə dʌst ə tʃɹævəl, ən əɹ peɪl hɛɹ niɾəd ə bɹʌʃ, bʌt ʃi hæd dɑn ðə ʃɔl ʃi hæd wɔɹn əz lɔŋ əz ɪleɪɾə hæd bɪn əlaɪv.

The case clock in her study softly chimed Second Low as she entered the sitting room. The small hours of the morning; the worst time to receive dire news. Covarla rose hastily from one of the red-cushioned armchairs, her implacable face sagging with weariness and worry, and knelt to kiss Elaida's ring. Her dark riding dress still bore the dust of travel, and her pale hair needed a brush, but she had donned the shawl she had worn as long as Elaida had been alive.

ɪleɪɾə bɛɹli weɪɾəd fəɹ ðə wʊmənz lɪps tə tʌtʃ ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən bɪfɔɹ pʊlɪŋ əɹ hæn əweɪ. "waɪ wɝ jə sɛnt?" ʃi sɛd kɝtli. snætʃɪŋ ʌp əɹ nɪɾɪŋ fɹəm wɛɹ ʃi hæd lɛft ɪɾ ɪn ə tʃɛɹ, ʃi sæɾ ən bɪɡæn tə wɝk ðə lɔŋ aɪvɝi niɾəlz. nɪɾɪŋ sɝv mɛni ʌv ðə seɪm pɝpəsəz əz fɑndəlɪŋ əɹ kɑɹvd aɪvɝi mɪniətʃɝz, ən ʃi ʃʊɹli niɾəd suðɪŋ naʊ. nɪɾɪŋ hɛlpt əɹ θɪŋk, tu. ʃi hæd tə θɪŋk. "wɛɹ ɪz keɪɾɝin?" ɪf ɡəlinə wɑz dɛd, keɪɾɝin ʃʊɾə teɪkən tʃɑɹdʒ əhɛɾ ə kɔɪɹən; ɪleɪɾə hæd meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ ðət wʌns ælθɹ wɑz teɪkən, ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ wɑz ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ.

Elaida barely waited for the woman's lips to touch the Great Serpent before pulling her hand away. "Why were you sent?" she said curtly. Snatching up her knitting from where she had left it in a chair, she sat and began to work the long ivory needles. Knitting served many of the same purposes as fondling her carved ivory miniatures, and she surely needed soothing now. Knitting helped her think, too. She had to think. "Where is Katerine?" If Galina was dead, Katerine should have taken charge ahead of Coiren; Elaida had made it clear that once al'Thor was taken, the Red Ajah was in charge.

koʊvɑɹlə stʊd sloʊli, əz ɪf ənsɝɾən ʃi ʃʊd. hɝ hænz taɪɾənd ɑn ðə ɹɛd-fɹɪnd ʃɔl lupt oʊvɝ əɹ ɑɹmz. "keɪɾɝin ɪz əmʌŋ ðə mɪsɪŋ, mʌðɝ. aɪ stæn haɪəst əmʌŋ ðoʊz hu. . . ." hɝ wɝdz tʃɹeɪld ɔf əz ɪleɪɾə stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, fɪŋɡɝz fɹoʊzən ɪn ði ækt ə pæsɪŋ wʊl oʊvɝ wʌn ə ðə niɾəlz. koʊvɑɹlə swɑloʊɾ ən ʃɪftəɾ əɹ fit.

Covarla stood slowly, as if uncertain she should. Her hands tightened on the red-fringed shawl looped over her arms. "Katerine is among the missing, Mother. I stand highest among those who. . . ." Her words trailed off as Elaida stared at her, fingers frozen in the act of passing wool over one of the needles. Covarla swallowed and shifted her feet.

"haʊ mɛni, dɔɾɝ?" ɪleɪɾə æsk faɪnəli. ʃi kəd nɑt bɪliv əɹ vɔɪs wɑz soʊ kɑm.

"How many, daughter?" Elaida asked finally. She could not believe her voice was so calm.

"aɪ kænɑt seɪ haʊ mɛni ɪskeɪpt, mʌðɝ," koʊvɑɹlə sɛd hɛzɪɾəntli. "wi dɛɹd nɑt weɪt tə meɪk ə θɝoʊ sɝtʃ, ən - "

"I cannot say how many escaped, Mother," Covarla said hesitantly. "We dared not wait to make a thorough search, and - "

"haʊ mɛni?" ɪleɪɾə ʃaʊɾəd. wɪð ə ʃʌɾɝ, ʃi meɪd hɝsɛlf kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn əɹ nɪɾɪŋ; ɡɪvɪŋ weɪ tə æŋɡɝ wɑz wiknəs. lup ðə jɑɹn, pʊl θɹu ən pʊʃ daʊn. suðɪŋ moʊʃənz.

"How many?" Elaida shouted. With a shudder, she made herself concentrate on her knitting; giving way to anger was weakness. Loop the yarn, pull through and push down. Soothing motions.

"aɪ - aɪ bɹɔɾ ɪlɛvən ʌðɝ sɪstɝz wɪð mi, mʌðɝ." ðə wʊmən pɔzd, bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹd, ən ðɛn, wən ɪleɪɾə sɛd nʌθɪŋ, ɹʌʃt ɑn. "ʌðɝz meɪ bi meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ bæk, mʌðɝ. ɡɔɪn ɹəfjuz tə weɪt lɔŋɡɝ, ən wi dɛɹd nɑt ɹɪmeɪn wɪθaʊɾ ɪm ən ɪz jʌŋɡəlɪŋz, nɑt wɪð soʊ mɛni il əbaʊt, ən ðə. . . ."

"I - I brought eleven other sisters with me, Mother." The woman paused, breathing hard, and then, when Elaida said nothing, rushed on. "Others may be making their way back, Mother. Gawyn refused to wait longer, and we dared not remain without him and his Younglings, not with so many Aiel about, and the. . . ."

ɪleɪɾə dɪd nɑt hɪɹ. twɛlv ɹɪtɝnd. hæɾ ɛni mɔɹ ɪskeɪpt, ðeɪ wʊɾə spɛd bæk tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, wʊɾə bɪn hɪɹ əz sun əz koʊvɑɹlə, ʃʊɹli. ivən ɪf wʌn əɹ tu wɝ ɪnʒɝd, tʃɹævlɪŋ sloʊli. . . . twɛlv aʊɾ ə θɝɾi-naɪn. ðə taʊɝ hæd nɑt sʌfɝɾ ə dɪzæstɝ ə ðɪs mæɡnətuɾ ivən dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz.

Elaida did not hear. Twelve returned. Had any more escaped, they would have sped back to Tar Valon, would have been here as soon as Covarla, surely. Even if one or two were injured, traveling slowly. . . . Twelve out of thirty-nine. The Tower had not suffered a disaster of this magnitude even during the Trolloc Wars.

"ðiz il waɪldɝz mʌs bi tɔɾ ə lɛsən," ʃi sɛd, tʃɹæmplɪŋ oʊvɝ wʌtɛvɝ koʊvɑɹlə wɑz bæbəlɪŋ. ɡəlinə hæd θɔt ʃi kəd juz il tə daɪvɝɾ il; wʌɾ ə ful ðə wʊmən hæd bɪn! "wi wɪl ɹɛskju ðə sɪstɝz ðeɪ hoʊl pɹɪznɝ, ən titʃ əm wʌɾ ɪt minz tə dɪfaɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ! ən wɪl teɪk ælθɹ əɡɛn." ʃi wəd nɑt lɛɾ ɪm ɡɛɾ əweɪ, nɑɾ ɪf ʃi hæd tə pɝsənəli lɛd ði ɪntaɪɝ waɪt taʊɝ tə teɪk hɪm! ðə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ hæd bɪn sɝɾən. ʃi wəd tʃɹaɪəmf!

"These Aiel wilders must be taught a lesson," she said, trampling over whatever Covarla was babbling. Galina had thought she could use Aiel to divert Aiel; what a fool the woman had been! "We will rescue the sisters they hold prisoner, and teach them what it means to defy Aes Sedai! And we will take al'Thor again." She would not let him get away, not if she had to personally lead the entire White Tower to take him! The Foretelling had been certain. She would triumph!

kæstɪŋ ən ənizi ɡlæns əɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn, koʊvɑɹlə ʃɪftəɾ əɹ fiɾ əɡɛn. "mʌðɝ, ðoʊz mɛn - aɪ θɪŋk - "

Casting an uneasy glance at Alviarin, Covarla shifted her feet again. "Mother, those men - I think - "

"du nɑt θɪŋk!" ɪleɪɾə snæpt. hɝ hænz klæsp ðə nɪɾɪŋ niɾəlz kənvʌlsɪvli, ən ʃi lin fɔɹwɝd soʊ fɪɹsli ðət koʊvɑɹlə æktʃəli  ɹeɪzd ə hæn əz ðoʊ tə fɛn ɔf ən ətæk. ɑlviɛɝɪnz pɹɛzəns hæd slɪp fɹəm ɪleɪɾəz maɪnd. wɛl, ðə wʊmən nu wʌt ʃi nu, naʊ; ðət kəd bi dɛlt wɪð leɪɾɝ. "ju hæv meɪnteɪn sikɹəsi, koʊvɑɹlə? əsaɪd fɹəm ɪnfɔɹmɪŋ ðə kipɝ?"

"Do not think!" Elaida snapped. Her hands clasped the knitting needles convulsively, and she leaned forward so fiercely that Covarla actually raised a hand as though to fend off an attack. Alviarin's presence had slipped from Elaida's mind. Well, the woman knew what she knew, now; that could be dealt with later. "You have maintained secrecy, Covarla? Aside from informing the Keeper?"

"oʊ, jɛs, mʌðɝ," koʊvɑɹlə sɛd heɪstəli. hɝ hɛd bɑbd wɪð iɡɝnəs, ɡlæd ðət ʃi hæd dʌn sʌmθɪŋ ɹaɪt. "aɪ ɛntɝd ðə sɪɾi əloʊn, ən hɪd maɪ feɪs əntɪl aɪ ɹitʃt ɑlviɛɝɪn. ɡɔɪn mɛn tə əkʌmpəni mi, bʌt ðə bɹɪdʒ ɡɑɹdz ɹəfjuz tə lɛɾ ɛni mɛmbɝ ə ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz pæs."

"Oh, yes, Mother," Covarla said hastily. Her head bobbed with eagerness, glad that she had done something right. "I entered the city alone, and hid my face until I reached Alviarin. Gawyn meant to accompany me, but the bridge guards refused to let any member of the Younglings pass."

"fɝɡɛt ɡɔɪn tʃɹəkənd," ɪleɪɾə ɔɹɾɝd saʊɝli. ðət jʌŋ mæn ɹɪmeɪn əlaɪv tə tʃɹʌbəl əɹ plænz, ɪt simd. ɪf ɡəlinə dɪd tɝn aʊt tə bi əlaɪv stɪl, ʃi wəd peɪ fəɹ feɪlɪŋ ɪn ðæt, ɑn tɑp ə lɛɾɪŋ ælθɹ ɪskeɪp. "ju wɪl liv ðə sɪɾi əz sɝkəmspɛkli əz jə ɛntɝd, dɔɾɝ, ən kip jɝsɛlf ən ði ʌðɝz wɛl hɪɾən ɪn wʌn ə ðə vɪlədʒəz bɪɑn ðə bɹɪdʒ taʊnz əntɪl aɪ sɛn fəɹ ju. dɔɹlən wɪl də naɪsli." ðeɪ wəɾ əv tə slip ɪn bɑɹnz ɪn ðət taɪni hæmlət, wɪtʃ hæd noʊ ɪn; ðə lis ðɛɹ bʌŋɡəlɪŋ dɪzɝvd. "ɡoʊ, naʊ. ən pɹeɪ ðət sʌmwʌn əbʌv jə dʌz ɝaɪv sun. ðə hɔl wɪl dɪmæn əmɛnz fəɹ ðɪs ənpɛɹəlɛl kətæstʃɹəfi, ən ət ðə moʊmənt, ɪt simz jə stæn haɪəst əmʌŋ ðoʊz ət fɔlt. ɡoʊ!"

"Forget Gawyn Trakand," Elaida ordered sourly. That young man remained alive to trouble her plans, it seemed. If Galina did turn out to be alive still, she would pay for failing in that, on top of letting al'Thor escape. "You will leave the city as circumspectly as you entered, daughter, and keep yourself and the others well hidden in one of the villages beyond the bridge towns until I send for you. Dorlan will do nicely." They would have to sleep in barns in that tiny hamlet, which had no inn; the least their bungling deserved. "Go, now. And pray that someone above you does arrive soon. The Hall will demand amends for this unparalleled catastrophe, and at the moment, it seems you stand highest among those at fault. Go!"

koʊvɑɹləz feɪs wɛnt waɪt. ʃi tɑɾɝd soʊ meɪkɪŋ əɹ kɝtsi tə liv, ɪleɪɾə θɔt ʃi maɪt fɔl. bʌŋɡlɝz! ʃi wɑz sɝaʊndəd baɪ fulz, tʃɹeɪɾɝz ən bʌŋɡlɝz!

Covarla's face went white. She tottered so making her curtsy to leave, Elaida thought she might fall. Bunglers! She was surrounded by fools, traitors and bunglers!

əz sun əz ɪleɪɾə hɝd ði aʊɾɝ dɔɹ kloʊs, ʃi hɝl daʊn əɹ nɪɾɪŋ ən spɹæŋ tə hɝ fit, ɹaʊndɪŋ ɑn ɑlviɛɝɪn. "waɪ hæv aɪ nɑt hɝɾ ə ðɪs bɪfɔɹ? ɪf ælθɹ ɪskeɪpt - wʌt wɑz ɪt jə sɛd? sɛvən deɪz əɡoʊ? - ɪf i ɪskeɪp sɛvən deɪz əɡoʊ, sʌmwʌnz aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz mʌst əv sin hɪm. waɪ wɑz aɪ nɑɾ ɪnfɔɹmd?"

As soon as Elaida heard the outer door close, she hurled down her knitting and sprang to her feet, rounding on Alviarin. "Why have I not heard of this before? If al'Thor escaped - what was it you said? seven days ago? - if he escaped seven days ago, someone's eyes-and-ears must have seen him. Why was I not informed?"

"aɪ kən oʊnli pæs ɑn tə jə wʌt ði ədʒəz pæs tə mi, mʌðɝ." ɑlviɛɝɪn ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ stoʊl kɑmli, nɑɾ ə wɪt ɹʌfəld. "du jə ɹɪli min tə kɔɹɾ ə θɝd dəbɑkəl baɪ ətɛmptɪŋ tə ɹɛskju ðə kæptɪvz?"

"I can only pass on to you what the Ajahs pass to me, Mother." Alviarin adjusted her stole calmly, not a whit ruffled. "Do you really mean to court a third debacle by attempting to rescue the captives?"

ɪleɪɾə snɪf dɪsmɪsɪvli. "du jə ɹɪli bɪliv waɪldɝz kən stæn bɪfɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ? ɡəlinə lɛt hɝsɛlf bi sɝpɹaɪzd; ʃi mʌs hæv." ʃi fɹaʊnd. "wʌt dʒju min, ə θɝd dəbɑkəl?"

Elaida sniffed dismissively. "Do you really believe wilders can stand before Aes Sedai? Galina let herself be surprised; she must have." She frowned. "What do you mean, a third debacle?"

"ju dɪdn lɪsən, mʌðɝ." ʃɑkɪŋli, ɑlviɛɝɪn sæt wɪθaʊt biɪŋ ɡɪvən pɝmɪʃən, kɹɔsɪŋ əɹ niz ən sɝinəli ɝeɪnʒɪŋ əɹ skɝts. "koʊvɑɹlə θɔt ðeɪ maɪɾ əv hɛld aʊɾ əɡɛns ðə waɪldɝz - ðoʊ aɪ bɪliv ʃiz noʊwɛɹ nɪɹ əz sɝɾən əz ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə pɹitɛnd - bʌt ðə mɛn wɝ ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ. sɛvɹəl hʌnʒɹəd ə ðɛm ɪn blæk koʊts, ɔl tʃænəlɪŋ. ʃi wɑz vɛɹi sɝɾən ə ðæt, ən soʊ ɑɹ ði ʌðɝz, əpɛɹənli. lɪvɪŋ wɛpənz, ʃi kɔl ðɛm. aɪ θɪŋk ʃi nɪɹli sɔɪl hɝsɛlf dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ."

"You didn't listen, Mother." Shockingly, Alviarin sat without being given permission, crossing her knees and serenely arranging her skirts. "Covarla thought they might have held out against the wilders - though I believe she is nowhere near as certain as she tried to pretend - but the men were another matter. Several hundred of them in black coats, all channeling. She was very certain of that, and so are the others, apparently. Living weapons, she called them. I think she nearly soiled herself just remembering."

ɪleɪɾə stʊɾ əz ɪf pɑliækst. sɛvɹəl hʌnʒɹəd? "ɪmpɑsəbəl. ðəɹ kæn bi mɔɹ ðən - " ʃi wɔk tə ə teɪbəl ðət simd ɔl aɪvɝi ən ɡɪlt, ən pɔɹd hɝsɛlf ə ɡɑbləɾ ʌv waɪn pʌntʃ. ðə lɪp ə ðə kɹɪstəl pɪtʃɝ ɹæɾəld əɡɛns ðə kɹɪstəl ɡɑblət, ən ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ pʌntʃ wɛn ɑntu ðə ɡoʊldən tʃɹeɪ.

Elaida stood as if poleaxed. Several hundred? "Impossible. There can't be more than - " She walked to a table that seemed all ivory and gilt, and poured herself a goblet of wine punch. The lip of the crystal pitcher rattled against the crystal goblet, and almost as much punch went onto the golden tray.

"sɪns ælθɹ kən tʃɹævəl," ɑlviɛɝɪn sɛd sʌɾənli, "ɪt simz lɑdʒɪkəl ət lis ðət səm ə ðiz mɛn kæn, tu. koʊvɑɹlə ɪz kwaɪt ʃʊɹ ðət wɑz haʊ ðeɪ ɝaɪvd. aɪ səpoʊz hiz ɹæðɝ əpsɛɾ əɾ ɪz tʃɹitmənt. koʊvɑɹlə sim sʌmwʌɾ ənizi əbaʊɾ ɪt; ʃi ɪmplaɪd ðəɾ ə nʌmbɝ ə ðə sɪstɝz wɝ. hi maɪt fil i oʊz jə sʌmθɪŋ. ɪt wəd nɑt bi plɛzən tə hæv ðoʊz mɛn sʌɾənli stɛpɪŋ aʊɾ ə θɪn ɛɹ ɹaɪt hɪɹ ɪn ðə taʊɝ, wəɾ ɪt?"

"Since al'Thor can Travel," Alviarin said suddenly, "it seems logical at least that some of these men can, too. Covarla is quite sure that was how they arrived. I suppose he is rather upset at his treatment. Covarla seemed somewhat uneasy about it; she implied that a number of the sisters were. He might feel he owes you something. It would not be pleasant to have those men suddenly stepping out of thin air right here in the Tower, would it?"

ɪleɪɾə pɹæktəkli tɔs ðə pʌntʃ daʊn əɹ θɹoʊt. ɡəlinə hæd bɪn ɪnstʃɹʌktəd tə bɪɡɪn meɪkɪŋ ælθɹ sʌpəl. ɪf i keɪm fəɹ ɹivɛnʒ. . . . ɪf ðəɹ ɹɪli wɝ hʌnʒɹədz ə mɛn u kəd tʃænəl, əɹ ivən wʌn hʌnʒɹəd. . . . ʃi hæd tə θɪŋk!

Elaida practically tossed the punch down her throat. Galina had been instructed to begin making al'Thor supple. If he came for revenge. . . . If there really were hundreds of men who could channel, or even one hundred. . . . She had to think!

"ʌv kɔɹs, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ kʌmɪŋ, aɪ bɪliv ðeɪ wəɾ əv baɪ naʊ. ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv weɪstəd sɝpɹaɪz. pɝhæps ivən ælθɹ dʌznt wɪʃ tə kənfɹʌn ðə fʊl taʊɝ. aɪ səpoʊz ðeɪv ɔl ɹɪtɝn tə keɪɛmlɪn, tə ðɛɹ blæk taʊɝ. wɪtʃ minz, aɪ fɪɹ, ðət tʌvaɪn əz ə moʊst ənplɛzənt ʃɑk əweɪɾɪŋ hɝ."

"Of course, if they were coming, I believe they would have by now. They would not have wasted surprise. Perhaps even al'Thor doesn't wish to confront the full Tower. I suppose they have all returned to Caemlyn, to their Black Tower. Which means, I fear, that Toveine has a most unpleasant shock awaiting her."

"pɛn ən ɔɹɾɝ fəɹ əɹ tə ɹɪtɝn ɪmiɾiətli," ɪleɪɾə sɛd hɔɹsli. ðə pʌntʃ dɪd nɑt sim tə hɛlp. ʃi tɝnd, ən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt tə faɪn ɑlviɛɝɪn ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. meɪbi ðəɹ wɝ nɑɾ ivən wʌn hʌnʒɹəd - nɑɾ ivən wʌn hʌnʒɹəd? ət sʌnsɛt, tɛn wʊɾə simd mædnəs - bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt teɪk ðə tʃæns. "ɹaɪɾ ɪɾ aʊt jɝsɛlf, ɑlviɛɝɪn. naʊ; ɹaɪt naʊ."

"Pen an order for her to return immediately," Elaida said hoarsely. The punch did not seem to help. She turned, and gave a start to find Alviarin right in front of her. Maybe there were not even one hundred - not even one hundred? at sunset, ten would have seemed madness - but she could not take the chance. "Write it out yourself, Alviarin. Now; right now."

"æn haʊ ɪz ɪt tə bi ɡɑɾən tə hɝ?" ɑlviɛɝɪn tɪltəɾ əɹ hɛd, aɪsɪli kjʊɹiəs. fəɹ səm ɹizən, ʃi wɔɹ ə feɪn smaɪl. "nʌn ʌv əs kən tʃɹævəl. ðə ʃɪps wɪl pʊt tʌvaɪn ən əɹ pɑɹɾi əʃɔɹ ɪn ændɝ ɛni deɪ naʊ, ɪf ðeɪv nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. jə toʊld əɹ tə dɪvaɪɾ ɪndə smɔl ɡɹups ən əvɔɪd vɪlədʒəz, soʊ əz tə ɡɪv noʊ wɔɹnɪŋ. noʊ, ɪleɪɾə, aɪm əfɹeɪd tʌvaɪn wɪl ɹiɡɑðɝ əɹ fɔɹsɪz nɪɹ keɪɛmlɪn ən ətæk ðə blæk taʊɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɛni wɝd fɹəm əs ɹitʃɪŋ hɝ."

"And how is it to be gotten to her?" Alviarin tilted her head, icily curious. For some reason, she wore a faint smile. "None of us can Travel. The ships will put Toveine and her party ashore in Andor any day now, if they have not already. You told her to divide into small groups and avoid villages, so as to give no warning. No, Elaida, I am afraid Toveine will regather her forces near Caemlyn and attack the Black Tower without any word from us reaching her."

ɪleɪɾə ɡæspt. ðə wʊmən hæd dʒʌs kɔld əɹ baɪ neɪm! ən bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd bɪɡɪn tə spləɾɝ wɪð aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ, wɝs keɪm.

Elaida gasped. The woman had just called her by name! And before she could begin to splutter with outrage, worse came.

"aɪ θɪŋk jə ɑɹ ɪn ɡɹeɪt tʃɹʌbəl, ɪleɪɾə." koʊld aɪz stɛɹɾ ɪndə ɪleɪɾəz ən koʊld wɝdz slɪd smuðli fɹəm ɑlviɛɝɪnz smaɪlɪŋ lɪps. "sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ðə hɔl wɪl lɝn ə ðə dɪzæstɝ wɪð ælθɹ. ɡəlinə maɪɾ əv sæɾəsfaɪd ðə hɔl, pɑsəbli, bʌɾ aɪ daʊt koʊvɑɹlə wɪl; ðəl wɑn sʌmwʌn . . . haɪɝ . . . tə peɪ. ən sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, wɪl ɔl lɝn tʌvaɪnz feɪt. ɪɾəl bi dɪfəkəl tə kip ðɪs ɑn jəɹ ʃoʊldɝz ðɛn." kæʒəwəli, ʃi ədʒʌstəd ði æmɪɝlɪnz stoʊl ɝaʊn ɪleɪɾəz nɛk. "ɪn fækt, ɪɾəl bi ɪmpɑsəbəl ɪf ðeɪ lɝn ɛni taɪm sun. jəl bi stɪld, meɪɾ ən ɪɡzæmpəl, ðə weɪ jə wɑntəd tə meɪk sɪuən sɑntʃ. bʌt ðəɹ maɪt bi taɪm tə ɹɪkʌvɝ, ɪf jə lɪsən tə jəɹ kipɝ. jə mʌs teɪk ɡʊɾ ædvaɪs."

"I think you are in great trouble, Elaida." Cold eyes stared into Elaida's and cold words slid smoothly from Alviarin's smiling lips. "Sooner or later, the Hall will learn of the disaster with al'Thor. Galina might have satisfied the Hall, possibly, but I doubt Covarla will; they will want someone . . . higher . . . to pay. And sooner or later, we will all learn Toveine's fate. It will be difficult to keep this on your shoulders then." Casually, she adjusted the Amyrlin's stole around Elaida's neck. "In fact, it will be impossible if they learn any time soon. You will be stilled, made an example, the way you wanted to make Siuan Sanche. But there might be time to recover, if you listen to your Keeper. You must take good advice."

ɪleɪɾəz tʌŋ fɛl fɹoʊzən. ðə θɹɛt kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn klɪɹɝ. "wʌt juv hɝd tənaɪɾ ɪz sil tə ðə fleɪm," ʃi sɛd θɪkli, bʌt ʃi nu ðət ðə wɝdz wɝ jusləs bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ aʊɾ ə hɝ maʊθ.

Elaida's tongue felt frozen. The threat could not have been clearer. "What you have heard tonight is Sealed to the Flame," she said thickly, but she knew that the words were useless before they were out of her mouth.

"ɪf jə min tə ɹɪdʒɛk maɪ ædvaɪs. . . ." ɑlviɛɝɪn pɔzd, ðən bɪɡæn tə tɝn əweɪ.

"If you mean to reject my advice. . . ." Alviarin paused, then began to turn away.

"weɪt!" ɪleɪɾə pʊl daʊn ðə hænd ʃi hæd stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ʌnəwɛɹ. stʃɹɪpt ə ðə stoʊl. stɪld. ivən æftɝ ðæt, ðeɪ wəd meɪk əɹ haʊl. "wʌt - ?" ʃi hæd tə stɑp ən swɑloʊ. "wʌɾ ædvaɪs dʌz maɪ kipɝ ɔfɝ?" ðəɹ hæd tə bi səm weɪ tə stɑp ðɪs.

"Wait!" Elaida pulled down the hand she had stretched out unaware. Stripped of the stole. Stilled. Even after that, they would make her howl. "What - ?" She had to stop and swallow. "What advice does my Keeper offer?" There had to be some way to stop this.

saɪɪŋ, ɑlviɛɝɪn keɪm kloʊs əɡɛn. kloʊsɝ, ɪn fækt; mʌtʃ tu nɪɹ fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə stæn tə ði æmɪɝlɪn, ðɛɹ skɝts ɔlmoʊs tʌtʃɪŋ. "fɝst, aɪ fɪɹ jə mʌst əbændən tʌvaɪn tə wʌtɛvɝ kʌmz, fəɹ ðə moʊmən ət list. ən ɔlsoʊ ɡəlinə ən huɛvɝ ɛls wɑz teɪkən pɹɪznɝ, wɛðɝ baɪ ði il əɹ ði æʃəmən. ɛni ətɛmptəd ɹɛskju naʊ mʌs min dɪskʌvɝi."

Sighing, Alviarin came close again. Closer, in fact; much too near for anyone to stand to the Amyrlin, their skirts almost touching. "First, I fear you must abandon Toveine to whatever comes, for the moment at least. And also Galina and whoever else was taken prisoner, whether by the Aiel or the Asha'man. Any attempted rescue now must mean discovery."

ɪleɪɾə nɑɾəd sloʊli. "jɛs. aɪ kən si ðæt." ʃi kəd nɑt teɪk əɹ hɔɹəfaɪɾ aɪz əweɪ fɹəm ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz dɪmændɪŋ ɡeɪz. ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ! ðɪs kəd nɑt bi hæpənɪŋ!

Elaida nodded slowly. "Yes. I can see that." She could not take her horrified eyes away from the other woman's demanding gaze. There had to be a way! This could not be happening!

"æn aɪ θɪŋk ɪts taɪm tə ɹikənsɪɾɝ jəɹ dɪsɪʒən əbaʊt ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd. doʊn jə ɹɪli θɪŋk ðə ɡɑɹd ʃəd bi ɪnkɹist æftɝ ɔl?"

"And I think it is time to reconsider your decision about the Tower Guard. Don't you really think the Guard should be increased after all?"

"aɪ - kən si maɪ weɪ klɪɹ tə də ðæt." laɪt, ʃi hæd tə θɪŋk!

"I - can see my way clear to do that." Light, she had to think!

"soʊ ɡʊd," ɑlviɛɝɪn mɝmɝd, ən ɪleɪɾə flʌʃt wɪð hɛlpləs ɹeɪdʒ. "təmɑɹoʊ, jəl pɝsənəli sɝtʃ dʒoʊseɪnz ɹumz, ən ædlɔɹnəz."

"So good," Alviarin murmured, and Elaida flushed with helpless rage. "Tomorrow, you will personally search Josaine's rooms, and Adelorna's."

"waɪ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt wəɾ aɪ - ?"

"Why under the Light would I - ?"

ðə wʊmən tʌɡd əɹ stʃɹaɪp stoʊl əɡɛn, ɹʌfli ðɪs taɪm, ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf tə jæŋk ɪɾ ɔf əɹ sɔ θɹu hɝ nɛk wɪð ɪt. "ɪt simz ðət dʒoʊseɪn faʊn ən æŋɡɹil səm jɪɹz əɡoʊ ən nɛvɝ tɝn ɪɾ ɪn. ædlɔɹnə dɪd wɝs, aɪ fɪɹ. ʃi ɹimuvd ən æŋɡɹil fɹəm wʌn ə ðə stɔɹɹumz wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən. wən juv faʊn ðɛm, jəl ənaʊns ðɛɹ pʌnɪʃmən ɪmiɾiətli. sʌmθɪŋ kwaɪt stɪf. ən ət ðə seɪm taɪm jəl hoʊld ʌp dɝeɪz, kɪjoʊʃi ən fɑɹɛliən əz mɑɾəlz ə pɹəzɝvɪŋ ðə lɔ. jəl ɡɪv itʃ ə pɹɛzənt; ə faɪn nu hɔɹs wɪl du."

The woman tugged her striped stole again, roughly this time, almost as if to yank it off or saw through her neck with it. "It seems that Josaine found an angreal some years ago and never turned it in. Adelorna did worse, I fear. She removed an angreal from one of the storerooms without permission. When you have found them, you will announce their punishment immediately. Something quite stiff. And at the same time you will hold up Doraise, Kiyoshi and Farellien as models of preserving the law. You will give each a present; a fine new horse will do."

ɪleɪɾə wʌndɝd wɛðɝ əɹ aɪz wɝ gɑnə pɑp ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ feɪs. "waɪ?" fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm ə sɪstɝ kɛpt ən æŋɡɹil tə hɝsɛlf ɪn dɪfaɪəns ə ðə lɔ, bʌt ðə pɛnəns wɑz sɛldəm mɔɹ ðən ə stɝn slæp ɑn ðə nʌkəlz. ɛvɹi sɪstɝ nu ðə tɛmteɪʃən. ən ðə ɹɛst! ði ɪfɛkt wɑz ɑbviəs. ɛvɹiwʌn wəd bɪliv dɝeɪz ən kɪjoʊʃi ən fɑɹɛliən hæɾ ɪkspoʊz ði ʌðɝ tu. dʒoʊseɪn ən ædlɔɹnə wɝ ɡɹin, ði ʌðɝz bɹaʊn, ɡɹeɪ ən jɛloʊ ɹɪspɛktɪvli. ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ wəd bi fjʊɹiəs. ðeɪ maɪɾ ivən tʃɹaɪ tə ɡɛt bæk ət ði ʌðɝz, wɪtʃ wəɾ ɪnsaɪt ðoʊz ədʒəz, ænd. . . . "waɪ dʒju wɑnə də ðɪs, ɑlviɛɝɪn?"

Elaida wondered whether her eyes were going to pop right out of her face. "Why?" From time to time a sister kept an angreal to herself in defiance of the law, but the penance was seldom more than a stern slap on the knuckles. Every sister knew the temptation. And the rest! The effect was obvious. Everyone would believe Doraise and Kiyoshi and Farellien had exposed the other two. Josaine and Adelorna were Green, the others Brown, Gray and Yellow respectively. The Green Ajah would be furious. They might even try to get back at the others, which would incite those Ajahs, and. . . . "Why do you want to do this, Alviarin?"

"ɪleɪɾə, ɪt ʃəd bi ɪnʌf fəɹ jə ðəɾ ɪts maɪ ædvaɪs." mɑkɪŋ, hʌniɾ aɪs sʌɾənli tɝn tə koʊld aɪɝn. "aɪ wɑnə hɪɹ jə seɪ ðət jəl də əz jə ɑɹ toʊld. ðɛɹz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn mi wɝkɪŋ tə kip ðə stoʊl ɑn jəɹ nɛk, ʌðɝwaɪz. seɪ ɪt!"

"Elaida, it should be enough for you that it is my advice." Mocking, honeyed ice suddenly turned to cold iron. "I want to hear you say that you will do as you are told. There's no point in me working to keep the stole on your neck, otherwise. Say it!"

"aɪ - " ɪleɪɾə tʃɹaɪd tə lʊk əweɪ. oʊ, laɪt, ʃi hæd tə θɪŋk! hɝ bɛli wɑz klɛntʃt ɪn ə nɑt. "aɪ wɪl - də - əz aɪ - æm toʊld."

"I - " Elaida tried to look away. Oh, Light, she had to think! Her belly was clenched in a knot. "I will - do - as I - am told."

ɑlviɛɝɪn smaɪl ðət tʃɪli smaɪl. "ju si, ðət dɪd nɑt hɝt vɛɹi mʌtʃ." sʌɾənli ʃi stɛp bæk, spɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ skɝts ɪn ə mɑɾɝət kɝtsi. "wɪð jəɹ pɝmɪʃən, əl wɪðdʒɹɔ ən lɛt jə faɪn səm slip ɪn wʌt ɹɪmeɪnz ə ðə naɪt. juv ən ɝli mɔɹnɪŋ əhɛd, wɪð ɔɹɾɝz tə ɪʃu fəɹ haɪ kæptən tʃʌbn ən əpɑɹtməns tə sɝtʃ. wɪv tə dɪsaɪd wən tə lɛt ðə taʊɝ noʊ əbaʊt ði æʃəmən, tu." hɝ toʊn meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ ðət ʃi wəd dɪsaɪd. "æn pɝhæps wi ʃəd bɪɡɪn plænɪŋ əɹ nɛks muv əɡɛnst ælθɹ. ɪts əbaʊt taɪm ðə taʊɝ stʊɾ oʊpənli ən kɔld ɪm tə hil, doʊn jə θɪŋk? θɪŋk wɛl. aɪ ɡɪv jə ɡʊd naɪt, ɪleɪɾə."

Alviarin smiled that chilly smile. "You see, that did not hurt very much." Suddenly she stepped back, spreading her skirts in a moderate curtsy. "With your permission, I will withdraw and let you find some sleep in what remains of the night. You have an early morning ahead, with orders to issue for High Captain Chubain and apartments to search. We have to decide when to let the Tower know about the Asha'man, too." Her tone made it clear that she would decide. "And perhaps we should begin planning our next move against al'Thor. It is about time the Tower stood openly and called him to heel, don't you think? Think well. I give you good night, Elaida."

deɪzd, wɑntɪŋ tə sɪk ʌp, ɪleɪɾə wɑtʃt əɹ ɡoʊ. stæn oʊpənli? ðət wəɾ ɪnvaɪɾ ətæk baɪ ðiz - wʌt hæd ðə wʊmən kɔl ðɛm? - ðiz æʃəmən. ðɪs kəd nɑt bi hæpənɪŋ tə hɝ. nɑt tə hɝ! bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹilaɪzd wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, ʃi hɝl ðə ɡɑbləɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɹum tə ʃæɾɝ əɡɛnst ə tæpəstʃɹi ʌv flaʊɝz. sizɪŋ ðə pɪtʃɝ wɪð boʊθ hænz, ʃi ɹeɪzd ɪɾ oʊvɝhɛd wɪð ə ʃɹik ə fjʊɹi ən flʌŋ ðət tu, ɪn ə spɹeɪ ʌv pʌntʃ. ðə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ hæd bɪn soʊ sɝɾən! ʃi wəd . . . !

Dazed, wanting to sick up, Elaida watched her go. Stand openly? That would invite attack by these - what had the woman called them? - these Asha'man. This could not be happening to her. Not to her! Before she realized what she was doing, she hurled the goblet across the room to shatter against a tapestry of flowers. Seizing the pitcher with both hands, she raised it overhead with a shriek of fury and flung that too, in a spray of punch. The Foretelling had been so certain! She would . . . !

əbɹʌpli ʃi stɑpt, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə taɪni ʃɑɹdz ə kɹɪstəlz klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə tæpəstʃɹi, ðə lɑɹdʒɝ pisəz skæɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ. ðə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ. ʃʊɹli ðət hæd spoʊkən ə hɝ tʃɹaɪəmf. hɝ tʃɹaɪəmf! ɑlviɛɝɪn maɪɾ əv əɹ maɪnɝ vɪktɝi, bʌt ðə fjutʃɝ bɪlɔŋ tə ɪleɪɾə. əz lɔŋ əz ɑlviɛɝɪn kəd bi ɡɑɾən ɹɪɾ ʌv. bʌɾ ɪt hæd tə bi dʌn kwaɪətli, ɪn səm weɪ soʊ ðəɾ ivən ðə hɔl wəd wɑn saɪləns. ə weɪ ðət wəd nɑt pɔɪn tə ɪleɪɾə əntɪl ɪt wɑz tu leɪt, ʃəɾ ɑlviɛɝɪnz seɪlz ɡeɪn wɪnd. ən sʌɾənli ðə waɪ keɪm tə hɝ. ɑlviɛɝɪn wəd nɑt bɪliv ɪf ʃi wɑz toʊld. noʊ wʌn wʊd.

Abruptly she stopped, frowning at the tiny shards of crystals clinging to the tapestry, the larger pieces scattered across the floor. The Foretelling. Surely that had spoken of her triumph. Her triumph! Alviarin might have her minor victory, but the future belonged to Elaida. As long as Alviarin could be gotten rid of. But it had to be done quietly, in some way so that even the Hall would want silence. A way that would not point to Elaida until it was too late, should Alviarin's sails gain wind. And suddenly the why came to her. Alviarin would not believe if she was told. No one would.

kəɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn əv sin əɹ smaɪl ðɛn, ðə wʊmənz niz wʊɾə tɝn tə dʒɛli. bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz dʌn, ɑlviɛɝɪn wəɾ ɛnvi ɡəlinə, əlaɪv əɹ dɛd.

Could Alviarin have seen her smile then, the woman's knees would have turned to jelly. Before she was done, Alviarin would envy Galina, alive or dead.

pɔzɪŋ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ aʊtsaɪɾ ɪleɪɾəz əpɑɹtməns, ɑlviɛɝɪn stʌɾid əɹ hænz baɪ ðə laɪɾ ə ðə stænd-læmps. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ʃeɪk, wɪtʃ sɝpɹaɪz hɝ. ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd ðə wʊmən tə faɪt hɑɹɾɝ, tə ɹɪzɪs lɔŋɡɝ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɪɡʌn, ən ʃi hæd nʌθɪŋ tə fɪɹ. ənlɛs ɪleɪɾə lɝn ðət noʊ fjuɝ ðən faɪv ədʒəz hæd pæs mɛnʃən ʌv ælθɹ tə hɝ ɪn ðə læs fju deɪz; ðə dəpoʊzɪŋ ə koʊləveɪɪɹ hæd sɛn ɛvɹi ədʒɑz eɪdʒən ɪn kɛɹhin flaɪɪŋ fəɹ ə pɛn. noʊ, ɪf ɪleɪɾə dɪd lɝn, ʃi wɑz seɪf ɪnʌf, wɪð ðə hoʊld ʃi hæɾ ɑn ðə wʊmən naʊ. ən wɪð mɛsænə əz peɪtʃɹən. ɪleɪɾə, ðoʊ, wɑz fɪnɪʃt wɛðɝ ʃi ɹilaɪzd əɹ nɑt. ivən ɪf ði æʃəmən feɪl tə tʃɹʌmpət ðɛɹ kɹʌʃɪŋ ə tʌvaɪnz ɛkspədɪʃən - ən ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wəd kɹʌʃ ɪt, æftɝ wʌt mɛsænə hæd toʊld əɹ ʌv ɪvɛns ə dəməaɪz wɛlz - ɔl ði aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn tʃɹuli wəd ɡeɪn wɪŋz wʌns ðeɪ lɝnd. lækɪŋ ə mɪɹəkəl, sətʃ əz ðə ɹɛbəlz əpɪɹɪŋ ət ðə ɡeɪts, ɪleɪɾə wəd sʌfɝ sɪuən sɑntʃəz feɪɾ ɪn ə mæɾɝ ʌv wiks. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ɪt hæd bɪɡʌn, ən ɪf ʃi wɪʃt ʃi nu wʌt "ɪt" wɑz, ɔl ʃi ɹɪli hæd tə də wɑz oʊbeɪ. ən wɑtʃ. ən lɝn. pɝhæps ʃi wəd wɛɹ ðə sɛvən-stʃɹaɪp stoʊl hɝsɛlf wən ɔl wɑz dʌn.

Pausing in the hallway outside Elaida's apartments, Alviarin studied her hands by the light of the stand-lamps. They did not shake, which surprised her. She had expected the woman to fight harder, to resist longer. But it was begun, and she had nothing to fear. Unless Elaida learned that no fewer than five Ajahs had passed mention of al'Thor to her in the last few days; the deposing of Colavaere had sent every Ajah's agent in Cairhien flying for a pen. No, if Elaida did learn, she was safe enough, with the hold she had on the woman now. And with Mesaana as patron. Elaida, though, was finished whether she realized or not. Even if the Asha'man failed to trumpet their crushing of Toveine's expedition - and she was sure they would crush it, after what Mesaana had told her of events of Dumai's Wells - all the eyes-and-ears in Caemlyn truly would gain wings once they learned. Lacking a miracle, such as the rebels appearing at the gates, Elaida would suffer Siuan Sanche's fate in a matter of weeks. In any case, it had begun, and if she wished she knew what "it" was, all she really had to do was obey. And watch. And learn. Perhaps she would wear the seven-striped stole herself when all was done.

ɪn ði ɝli mɔɹnɪŋ sʌnlaɪt stʃɹimɪŋ θɹu hɝ wɪndoʊz, sin dɪp ðə pɛn, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd ɹaɪt ðə nɛkst wɝd, ðə dɔɹ tə ðə hɔl oʊpən ən ði æmɪɝlɪn swɛpt ɪn. sinz θɪk blæk aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz; ʃi wʊɾə ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls əɾ ɔl bɪfɔɹ ɪleɪɾə, pɝhæps nɑɾ ɪkskluɾɪŋ ɹænd ælθɹ hɪmsɛlf. stɪl, ʃi sɛt ðə pɛn daʊn ən ɹoʊz smuðli, pʊlɪŋ daʊn ðə sɪlvɝ-waɪt slivz ʃi hæd pʊʃt ʌp tə kip klɪɹ ə ði ɪŋk. ʃi meɪd ðə dɪɡɹi ʌv kɝtsi pɹɑpɝ tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit fɹəm ə sɪɾɝ ɪn əɹ oʊn əpɑɹtməns.

In the early morning sunlight streaming through her windows, Seaine dipped the pen, but before she could write the next word, the door to the hall opened and the Amyrlin swept in. Seaine's thick black eyebrows rose; she would have expected anyone else at all before Elaida, perhaps not excluding Rand al'Thor himself. Still, she set the pen down and rose smoothly, pulling down the silver-white sleeves she had pushed up to keep clear of the ink. She made the degree of curtsy proper to the Amyrlin Seat from a Sitter in her own apartments.

"aɪ də hoʊp jə hævən faʊn ɛni waɪt sɪstɝz haɪɾɪŋ əweɪ æŋɡɹil, mʌðɝ." ʃi dɪd hoʊp ɪt, kwaɪt fɝvənli. ɪleɪɾəz dɪsɛn ɑn ðə ɡɹinz ə fju aʊɝz əɡoʊ, waɪl moʊst ə ðɛm slɛpt, wɑz pɹɑbli stɪl pɹədusɪŋ weɪlz ən næʃɪŋ ə tiθ. ɪn lɪvɪŋ mɛmɹi noʊ wʌn hæd bɪn ɔɹɾɝd bɝtʃt fəɹ kipɪŋ bæk ən æŋɡɹil, ən naʊ ðəɹ wɝ tə bi tu. ði æmɪɝlɪn mʌst əv bɪn ɪn wʌn ə hɝ ɪnfəməs koʊl fʊɹiz.

"I do hope you haven't found any White sisters hiding away angreal, Mother." She did hope it, quite fervently. Elaida's descent on the Greens a few hours ago, while most of them slept, was probably still producing wails and gnashing of teeth. In living memory no one had been ordered birched for keeping back an angreal, and now there were to be two. The Amyrlin must have been in one of her infamous cold furies.

bʌɾ ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn ðɛn, noʊ saɪn ʌv ɪt ɹɪmeɪnd naʊ. fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd sin saɪlənli, kul əz ə wɪntɝ pɑn ɪn əɹ ɹɛd-slæʃt sɪlks, ðən ɡlaɪɾɪd tə ðə kɑɹv saɪdbɔɹd wɛɹ peɪntəɾ aɪvɝi mɪniətʃɝz ə sinz fæmli stʊd. ɔl jɪɹz dɛd, bʌt ʃi stɪl lʌvd ɛvɹi wʌn.

But if she had been then, no sign of it remained now. For a moment she regarded Seaine silently, cool as a winter pond in her red-slashed silks, then glided to the carved sideboard where painted ivory miniatures of Seaine's family stood. All years dead, but she still loved every one.

"ju dɪd nɑt stæn tə ɹeɪz mi æmɪɝlɪn," ɪleɪɾə sɛd, pɪkɪŋ ʌp ðə pɪktʃɝ ə sinz fɑðɝ. ʃi sɛɾ ɪt daʊn heɪstəli ən tʊk ʌp əɹ mʌðɝ ɪnstɛd.

"You did not stand to raise me Amyrlin," Elaida said, picking up the picture of Seaine's father. She set it down hastily and took up her mother instead.

sinz aɪbɹaʊz ɔlmoʊst ɹoʊz əɡɛn, bʌt ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɪɾ ə ɹul nɑt tə lɛt hɝsɛlf bi sɝpɹaɪz mɔɹ ðən wʌns ɪn ə deɪ. "aɪ wɑz nɑɾ ɪnfɔɹm ðət ðə hɔl wɑz sɪɾɪŋ əntɪl æftɝwɝd, mʌðɝ." æftɝ ɔl ðiz jɪɹz, ə tʌtʃ ə luɡɹd stɪl klʌŋ tə hɝ vɔɪs.

Seaine's eyebrows almost rose again, but she tried to make it a rule not to let herself be surprised more than once in a day. "I was not informed that the Hall was sitting until afterward, Mother." After all these years, a touch of Lugard still clung to her voice.

"jɛs, jɛs." əbændənɪŋ ðə peɪntɪŋz, ɪleɪɾə ɡlaɪɾɪd tə ðə faɪɝpleɪs. sin hæɾ ɔlweɪz hæɾ ə fɑndnəs fəɹ kæts, ən kɑɹvd wʊɾən kæts ʌv ɛvɹi sɔɹt kɹaʊɾəd ðə mæntəlpis, səm ɪn əmjuzɪŋ poʊzəz. ði æmɪɝlɪn fɹaʊn ət ðə dɪspleɪ, ðən skwizd əɹ aɪz ʃʌɾ ən ɡeɪv əɹ hɛɾ ə taɪni ʃeɪk. "bʌt jə ɹɪmeɪnd," ʃi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ kwɪkli. "ɛvɹi sɪɾɝ u wɑz nɑɾ ɪnfɔɹm flɛd ðə taʊɝ ən dʒɔɪn ðə ɹɛbəlz. ɪksɛp ju. waɪ?"

"Yes, yes." Abandoning the paintings, Elaida glided to the fireplace. Seaine had always had a fondness for cats, and carved wooden cats of every sort crowded the mantelpiece, some in amusing poses. The Amyrlin frowned at the display, then squeezed her eyes shut and gave her head a tiny shake. "But you remained," she said, turning quickly. "Every Sitter who was not informed fled the Tower and joined the rebels. Except you. Why?"

sin spɹɛɾ əɹ hænz. "wʌɾ ɛls kəɾ aɪ də bʌt steɪ, mʌðɝ? ðə taʊɝ mʌs bi hoʊl." huɛvɝ ði æmɪɝlɪn, ʃi æɾəd tə hɝsɛlf. ən wʌts ɹɔŋ wɪð maɪ kæts, ɪf aɪ meɪ æsk? nɑt ðət ʃi ɛvɝ wəɾ əlaʊd, ʌv kɔɹs. sɛɝl beɪɡən hæd bɪn ə fɪɹs mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz bɪfɔɹ biɪŋ ɹeɪzd æmɪɝlɪn sit, ðə vɛɹi jɪɹ ʃi hɝsɛlf ɝn ðə ʃɔl, ən ə fɪɹsɝ æmɪɝlɪn ðən ɪleɪɾə kəd bi wɪð ə sɔɹ tuθ. sin hæd hæd ðə pɹəpɹaɪəɾiz dʒɹɪvən ɪndə hɝ tu hɑɹɾ ən dip fəɹ mɪɹ jɪɹz tə ʃɪft, əɹ ɛni dɪslaɪk fəɹ ðə wʊmən u wɔɹ ðə stoʊl. wʌn dɪd nɑɾ əv tə laɪk ən æmɪɝlɪn.

Seaine spread her hands. "What else could I do but stay, Mother? The Tower must be whole." Whoever the Amyrlin, she added to herself. And what's wrong with my cats, if I may ask? Not that she ever would aloud, of course. Sereille Bagand had been a fierce Mistress of Novices before being raised Amyrlin Seat, the very year she herself earned the shawl, and a fiercer Amyrlin than Elaida could be with a sore tooth. Seaine had had the proprieties driven into her too hard and deep for mere years to shift, or any dislike for the woman who wore the stole. One did not have to like an Amyrlin.

"ðə taʊɝ mʌs bi hoʊl," ɪleɪɾə əɡɹid, ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ. "ɪt mʌs bi hoʊl." naʊ, waɪ wɑz ʃi nɝvəs? ʃi hæd naɪnti-naɪn kaɪnz ə tɛmpɝ, ɔl hɑɹɾ əz ə naɪf ən twaɪs əz ʃɑɹp, bʌt nɝvəs ðə wʊmən wɑz nɑt. "wʌɾ aɪ seɪ tə jə naʊ ɪz sil tə ðə fleɪm, sin." hɝ maʊθ twɪstəd ɹaɪli, ən ʃi ʃɹʌɡd, ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ stoʊl ən ɪɹəɾəbəl twɪtʃ. "ɪf aɪ nu haʊ tə meɪk ðə sil stʃɹɔŋɝ, aɪ wʊd," ʃi sɛd, dʒɹaɪ əz jɛstɝdeɪz dʌst.

"The Tower must be whole," Elaida agreed, rubbing her hands together. "It must be whole." Now, why was she nervous? She had ninety-nine kinds of temper, all hard as a knife and twice as sharp, but nervous the woman was not. "What I say to you now is Sealed to the Flame, Seaine." Her mouth twisted wryly, and she shrugged, giving her stole an irritable twitch. "If I knew how to make the seal stronger, I would," she said, dry as yesterday's dust.

"aɪ wɪl hoʊl jəɹ wɝdz ɪn maɪ hɑɹt, mʌðɝ."

"I will hold your words in my heart, Mother."

"aɪ wɑn jə - aɪ kəmæn jə - tə ʌndɝteɪk ən ɪnkwaɪɹi. ən jə mʌst ɪndid hoʊld ɪɾ ɪn jəɹ hɑɹt. ðə ɹɔŋ ɪɹ hɪɹɪŋ ʌv ɪt maɪt min dɛθ, ən dɪzæstɝ fəɹ ðə hoʊl taʊɝ."

"I want you - I command you - to undertake an inquiry. And you must indeed hold it in your heart. The wrong ear hearing of it might mean death, and disaster for the whole Tower."

sinz aɪbɹaʊz twɪtʃt. dɛθ ən dɪzæstɝ fəɹ ðə hoʊl taʊɝ? "ɪn maɪ hɑɹt," ʃi sɛɾ əɡɛn. "wɪl jə sɪt jɝsɛlf, mʌðɝ?" ðət wɑz pɹɑpɝ, ɪn əɹ oʊn əpɑɹtməns. "meɪ aɪ pɔɹ jə səm mɪn ti? əɹ plʌm pʌntʃ?"

Seaine's eyebrows twitched. Death and disaster for the whole Tower? "In my heart," she said again. "Will you sit yourself, Mother?" That was proper, in her own apartments. "May I pour you some mint tea? Or plum punch?"

weɪvɪŋ əweɪ ði ɔfɝ ə ɹəfɹɛʃmənt, ɪleɪɾə tʊk ðə moʊs kʌmftəɹbəl tʃɛɹ, kɑɹv baɪ sinz fɑðɝ əz ə ɡɪft wən ʃi ɹəsiv ðə ʃɔl, ðoʊ ʌv kɔɹs ðə kʊʃənz hæd bɪn ɹipleɪs mɛni taɪmz sɪns. ði æmɪɝlɪn meɪd ðə kʌntʃɹi tʃɛɹ sim ə θɹoʊn, ɔl stɪf bæk ən aɪɝn kaʊntənəns. moʊst ənɡɹeɪʃəsli, ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡɪv pɝmɪʃən fəɹ sin tə sɪt, tu, soʊ sin foʊldəɾ əɹ hænz ən ɹɪmeɪn stændɪŋ.

Waving away the offer of refreshment, Elaida took the most comfortable chair, carved by Seaine's father as a gift when she received the shawl, though of course the cushions had been replaced many times since. The Amyrlin made the country chair seem a throne, all stiff back and iron countenance. Most ungraciously, she did not give permission for Seaine to sit, too, so Seaine folded her hands and remained standing.

"aɪ hæv θɔt lɔŋ ən hɑɹɾ ɑn tʃɹizən, sin, sɪns maɪ pɹɛɾəsɛsɝ ən əɹ kipɝ wɝ əlaʊd tə ɪskeɪp. hɛlp tə ɪskeɪp. tʃɹizən mʌst əv bɪn ət ðə kɔɹ ə ðæt, ən aɪ fɪɹ oʊnli ə sɪstɝ, əɹ sɪstɝz, cʊɾə ɪfɛktəɾ ɪt."

"I have thought long and hard on treason, Seaine, since my predecessor and her Keeper were allowed to escape. Helped to escape. Treason must have been at the core of that, and I fear only a sister, or sisters, could have effected it."

"ðæt wəd sɝɾənli bi ə pɑsəbɪləɾi, mʌðɝ."

"That would certainly be a possibility, Mother."

ɪleɪɾə fɹaʊn ət ði ɪntɝʌpʃən. "wi kən nɛvɝ bi ʃʊɹ u hæz ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv tʃɹizən ɪn əɹ hɑɹt, sin. waɪ, aɪ səspɛk ðət sʌmwʌn ɝeɪnʒd fəɹ ən ɔɹɾɝ ə maɪn tə bi kaʊntɝmændɪd. ən aɪ hæv ɹizən tə bɪliv ðət sʌmwʌn əz kəmjunəkeɪɾɪd pɹaɪvətli wɪð ɹænd ælθɹ; tə wʌɾ ɛnd, aɪ kænɑt seɪ, bʌt ðət ʃʊɹli ɪz tʃɹizən əɡɛns mi, ən əɡɛns ðə taʊɝ."

Elaida frowned at the interruption. "We can never be sure who has the shadow of treason in her heart, Seaine. Why, I suspect that someone arranged for an order of mine to be countermanded. And I have reason to believe that someone has communicated privately with Rand al'Thor; to what end, I cannot say, but that surely is treason against me, and against the Tower."

sin weɪɾəd fəɹ mɔɹ, bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn oʊnli lʊk bæk ət hɝ, sloʊli smuðɪŋ əɹ ɹɛd-slæʃt skɝts. "ɪɡzækli wʌɾ ɪnkwaɪɹi dʒju wɪʃ mi tə meɪk, mʌðɝ?" ʃi æskt kɔʃəsli.

Seaine waited for more, but the Amyrlin only looked back at her, slowly smoothing her red-slashed skirts. "Exactly what inquiry do you wish me to make, Mother?" she asked cautiously.

ɪleɪɾə baʊndəd tə hɝ fit. "aɪ tʃɑɹdʒ jə tə fɑloʊ ðə stɛntʃ ə tʃɹizən, noʊ mæɾɝ wɛɹ ɪt lidz əɹ haʊ haɪ, ivən tə ðə kipɝ hɝsɛlf. jɛs, ivən tə hɝ. wʌt jə faɪnd, huɛvɝ ɪt lidz tə, jəl bɹɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ əloʊn, sin. noʊ wʌn ɛls mʌs noʊ. dʒju ʌndɝstæn mi?"

Elaida bounded to her feet. "I charge you to follow the stench of treason, no matter where it leads or how high, even to the Keeper herself. Yes, even to her. What you find, whoever it leads to, you will bring before the Amyrlin Seat alone, Seaine. No one else must know. Do you understand me?"

"aɪ ʌndɝstæn jəɹ kəmænz, mʌðɝ."

"I understand your commands, Mother."

wɪtʃ, ʃi θɔt, wʌns ɪleɪɾə hæd dɪpɑɹɾəd ivən mɔɹ swɪfli ðən ʃi hæd kʌm, wɑz əbaʊɾ ɔl ʃi dɪɾ ʌndɝstænd. ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə θɪŋk ʃi tʊk ðə tʃɛɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd veɪkeɪɾəd, fɪsts pɹɛs bɪniθ əɹ tʃɪn ɪn dʒʌs ðə weɪ hɝ fɑðɝ hæɾ ɔlweɪz sæt θɪŋkɪŋ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ fɛl tə lɑdʒɪk, ɪvɛntʃəwəli.

Which, she thought, once Elaida had departed even more swiftly than she had come, was about all she did understand. In order to think she took the chair the Amyrlin had vacated, fists pressed beneath her chin in just the way her father had always sat thinking. Everything fell to logic, eventually.

ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv stʊɾ əɡɛnst sɪuən sɑntʃ - ʃi hæd pɹəpoʊz ðə ɡɝl əz æmɪɝlɪn ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs! - bʌt wʌns ɪt wɑz dʌn ən ɔl ðə fɔɹmz wɝ fɑloʊd, haʊɛvɝ spɑɹli, eɪɾɪŋ əɹ ɪskeɪp sɝɾənli hæd bɪn tʃɹizən, ən dɪlɪbɝətli kaʊntɝməndɪŋ ən æmɪɝlɪnz ɔɹɾɝ dʒʌst əz mʌtʃ. pɑsəbli kəmjunəkeɪɾɪŋ wɪð ælθɹ wɑz, tu; ðət dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn wʌt wɑz kəmjunəkeɪɾɪd, wɪð wʌɾ ɪntɛnt. faɪndɪŋ u hæd tʃeɪnʒd ði æmɪɝlɪnz kəmænd wəd bi dɪfəkəlt wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ wʌt kəmænd. ət ðɪs leɪt deɪt lɝnɪŋ u maɪɾ əv hɛlp sɪuən ɪskeɪp stʊɾ əbaʊɾ əz mʌtʃ tʃæns ə səksɛs əz lɝnɪŋ u maɪt bi ɹaɪɾɪŋ tə ælθɹ. soʊ mɛni pɪdʒənz flu ɪndə ən aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ koʊts ɛvɹi deɪ ðəɾ ət taɪmz ðə skaɪ sim tə bi ɹeɪnɪŋ fɛðɝz. ɪf ɪleɪɾə nu mɔɹ ðən ʃi hæd sɛd, ʃi hæd sɝɾənli ɡɔn ɝaʊn ðə bɑɹn. ðɪs ɔl meɪd vɛɹi lɪɾəl sɛns. tʃɹizən ɔt tə meɪk ɪleɪɾə bɔɪl wɪð ɹeɪdʒ, bʌt ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn æŋɡɹi. ʃi hæd bɪn nɝvəs. ən æŋkʃəs tə bi ɡɔn. ən sikɹəɾɪv, əz ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə tɛl ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi nu əɹ səspɛktəd. ɔlmoʊst əz ðoʊ ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪd tə. wʌt kaɪndə tʃɹizən wəd meɪk ɪleɪɾə nɝvəs əɹ əfɹeɪd? dɛθ ən dɪzæstɝ fəɹ ðə hoʊl taʊɝ.

She would not have stood against Siuan Sanche - she had proposed the girl as Amyrlin in the first place! - but once it was done and all the forms were followed, however sparely, aiding her escape certainly had been treason, and deliberately countermanding an Amyrlin's order just as much. Possibly communicating with al'Thor was, too; that depended on what was communicated, with what intent. Finding who had changed the Amyrlin's command would be difficult without knowing what command. At this late date learning who might have helped Siuan escape stood about as much chance of success as learning who might be writing to al'Thor. So many pigeons flew into and out of the Tower cotes every day that at times the sky seemed to be raining feathers. If Elaida knew more than she had said, she had certainly gone around the barn. This all made very little sense. Treason ought to make Elaida boil with rage, but she had not been angry. She had been nervous. And anxious to be gone. And secretive, as if she did not want to tell everything she knew or suspected. Almost as though she was afraid to. What kind of treason would make Elaida nervous or afraid? Death and disaster for the whole Tower.

laɪk ðə pisəz ʌv ə blæksmɪθs pʌzəl, ɔl fɛl ɪndə pleɪs, ən sinz aɪbɹaʊz tʃɹaɪd tə klaɪm ɑntu hɝ skælp. ɪt fɪt; ɪɾ ɔl fɪt. ʃi fɛl ðə blʌd dʒɹeɪnɪŋ fɹəm əɹ feɪs; hɝ hænz ən fit wɝ sʌɾənli aɪsi. sil tə ðə fleɪm. ʃi hæd sɛd ʃi wəd kip ðɪs ɪn əɹ hɑɹt, bʌɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæd tʃeɪnʒd sɪns ʃi spoʊk ðoʊz wɝdz. ʃi oʊnli lɛt hɝsɛlf bi əfɹeɪd wən ɪt wɑz lɑdʒɪkəl tə bi, ən ɹaɪt ðɛn, ʃi wɑz tɛɹəfaɪd. ʃi kəd nɑt feɪs ðɪs əloʊn. bʌt hu? ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz, hu? ðɪs ænsɝ keɪm mʌtʃ mɔɹ izəli. ɡæðɝɪŋ hɝsɛlf tʊk ə lɪɾəl taɪm, bʌt ʃi hɝid fɹəm əɹ ɹumz ən aʊɾ ə ðə waɪt kɔɹɾɝz wɔkɪŋ ə ɡʊd dil fæstɝ ðən ʃi juʒəwəli dɪd.

Like the pieces of a blacksmith's puzzle, all fell into place, and Seaine's eyebrows tried to climb onto her scalp. It fit; it all fit. She felt the blood draining from her face; her hands and feet were suddenly icy. Sealed to the Flame. She had said she would keep this in her heart, but everything had changed since she spoke those words. She only let herself be afraid when it was logical to be, and right then, she was terrified. She could not face this alone. But who? Under the circumstances, who? This answer came much more easily. Gathering herself took a little time, but she hurried from her rooms and out of the White quarters walking a good deal faster than she usually did.

sɝvəns skɝid θɹu ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz əz ɔlweɪz, ðoʊ ʃi wɔk soʊ kwɪkli ðət ʃi wɑz pæs moʊs bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd bɪɡɪn baʊ əɹ kɝtsi, bʌt ðəɹ sim fjuɝ sɪstɝz əbaʊt ðən ði ɝli aʊɝ kəɾ əkaʊn fɔɹ. mɛni fjuɝ. jɛɾ ɪf moʊst wɝ steɪɪŋ kloʊz tə ðɛɹ kɔɹɾɝz fəɹ səm ɹizən, ðə fju ʃi sɔ meɪɾ ʌp fəɹ ɪɾ ɪn wʌn weɪ. sɪstɝz swɑn əlɔŋ ðə tæpəstʃɹi-hʌŋ hɔlweɪz, feɪsəz ɔl sɝɛnəɾi, ən ðɛɹ aɪz sim tə hæv stim bɪhaɪn ðɛm. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ tu əɹ θɹi wɪmən spoʊk təɡɛðɝ, wɪð ʃɑɹp aɪz dɑɹɾɪŋ tə si hu maɪt bi lɪsnɪŋ. ɔlweɪz tu əɹ θɹi ʌv ðə seɪm ədʒɑ. ivən jɛstɝdeɪ, ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi hæd stɪl sin wɪmən ʃɛɹɪŋ fɹɛndʃɪp bɪtwin ədʒəz. waɪts wɝ səpoʊz tə pʊɾ ɪmoʊʃən əweɪ ɪntaɪɝli, bʌt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin ðə ɹizən fəɹ blaɪndɪŋ hɝsɛlf, əz səm dɪd. səspɪʃən meɪd ði ɛɹ ɪn ðə taʊɝ laɪk hɑt dʒɛli. nɑɾ ə nu θɪŋ, ənfɔɹtʃənətli - ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd bɪɡʌn ɪt wɪð əɹ hɑɹʃ mɛʒɝz, ən ðə ɹumɝz əbaʊt lɑɡən hæɾ oʊnli ɪɡzæsɝbeɪɾəd ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən - bʌt ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ simd wɝs ðən ɛvɝ.

Servants scurried through the corridors as always, though she walked so quickly that she was past most before they could begin bow or curtsy, but there seemed fewer sisters about than the early hour could account for. Many fewer. Yet if most were staying close to their quarters for some reason, the few she saw made up for it in one way. Sisters swanned along the tapestry-hung hallways, faces all serenity, and their eyes seemed to have steam behind them. Here and there two or three women spoke together, with sharp eyes darting to see who might be listening. Always two or three of the same Ajah. Even yesterday, she was sure she had still seen women sharing friendship between Ajahs. Whites were supposed to put emotion away entirely, but she had never seen the reason for blinding herself, as some did. Suspicion made the air in the Tower like hot jelly. Not a new thing, unfortunately - the Amyrlin had begun it with her harsh measures, and the rumors about Logain had only exacerbated the situation - but this morning seemed worse than ever.

tælin mɪnli keɪm ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ əhɛɾ ə hɝ, hɝ ʃɔl nɑt dʒʌst əkɹɔs əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, bʌt spɹɛd daʊn əɹ ɑɹmz əz ðoʊ tə dɪspleɪ ðə ɡɹin fɹɪnʒ. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ʃi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɛvɹi ɡɹin ʃi hæd sin ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ wɔɹ əɹ ʃɔl. tælin, ɡoʊldən-hɛɹɾ ən stætʃuɛsk ən lʌvli, hæd stʊd tə dɪpoʊz sɪuən, bʌt ʃi hæd kʌm tə ðə taʊɝ waɪl sin wɑz æksɛptɪd, ən ðət dɪsɪʒən hæd nɑt dɛntɪd ðɛɹ lɔŋ fɹɛndʃɪp. tælin hæd hæd ɹizənz sin æksɛptɪɾ ɪf nɑɾ əɡɹid wɪð. tədeɪ, hɝ fɹɛn stɑpt, wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ wɛɹəli. soʊ mɛni sɪstɝz sim tə wɑtʃ wʌn ənʌðɝ ðət weɪ ʌv leɪt. ənʌðɝ taɪm, ʃi wəɾ əv stɑpt, bʌt nɑt wɪð wʌt meɪɾ əɹ hɛd wɑnə bɝst oʊpən laɪk ə spɔɪl mɛlən. tælin wɑz ə fɹɛnd, ən ʃi θɔt ʃi kəd bi ʃʊɹ ə hɝ, bʌt θɪŋkɪŋ wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ðɪs. leɪɾɝ, ɪf pɑsəbəl, ʃi wəɾ əpɹoʊtʃ tælin. hoʊpɪŋ ɪt wəd bi pɑsəbəl, ʃi hɝid pæst wɪð oʊnli ə nɑd.

Talene Minly came around a corner ahead of her, her shawl not just across her shoulders, but spread down her arms as though to display the green fringe. For that matter, she realized that every Green she had seen this morning wore her shawl. Talene, golden-haired and statuesque and lovely, had stood to depose Siuan, but she had come to the Tower while Seaine was Accepted, and that decision had not dented their long friendship. Talene had had reasons Seaine accepted if not agreed with. Today, her friend stopped, watching her warily. So many sisters seemed to watch one another that way of late. Another time, she would have stopped, but not with what made her head want to burst open like a spoiled melon. Talene was a friend, and she thought she could be sure of her, but thinking was not enough for this. Later, if possible, she would approach Talene. Hoping it would be possible, she hurried past with only a nod.

ɪn ðə ɹɛd kɔɹɾɝz, ðə mud wɑz ivən wɝs, ði ɛɹ θɪkɝ. əz wɪð ði ʌðɝ ədʒəz, ðəɹ wɝ mɛni mɔɹ ɹumz ðən ðəɹ wɝ sɪstɝz tə fɪl əm naʊ - ðət hæd bɪn soʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə fɝst ɹɛbəl flɛd - bʌt ðə ɹɛd wɑz ðə lɑɹdʒəst ə ði ədʒəz, ən sɪstɝz fɪl ðə lɛvəlz stɪl ɪn jus. ɹɛdz fɹikwənli wɔɹ ðɛɹ ʃɔlz wən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid, bʌt naʊ ɛvɹi læst wʊmən spɔɹɾɪd əɹ ɹɛd fɹɪnʒ laɪk ə bænɝ. kɑnvɝseɪʃənz stɑpt əz sin əpɹoʊtʃt, ən koʊld aɪz fɑloʊɾ əɹ ɪn ə bʌbəl ʌv aɪsi saɪləns. ʃi fɛlt ən ɪnveɪɾɝ dip ɪn ɛnəmi kʌntʃɹi əz ʃi kɹɔs ðoʊz pəkjuljɝ flɔɹ taɪlz, waɪt wɪð ðə tɪɹdʒɹɑp fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪn ɹɛd. bʌt ðɛn, ɛni pɑɹɾ ə ðə taʊɝ maɪt bi ɛnəmi kʌntʃɹi. lʊkɪŋ ənʌðɝ weɪ, ðoʊz skɑɹlət fleɪmz maɪt bi teɪkən fəɹ ɹɛd dʒɹæɡənz fæŋz. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪliv ðoʊz ɪɹæʃənəl teɪlz əbaʊt ðə ɹɛdz ən fɔls dʒɹæɡənz, bʌt. . . . waɪ wəd nʌn ə ðɛm dɪnaɪ ɪt?

In the Red quarters, the mood was even worse, the air thicker. As with the other Ajahs, there were many more rooms than there were sisters to fill them now - that had been so long before the first rebel fled - but the Red was the largest of the Ajahs, and sisters filled the levels still in use. Reds frequently wore their shawls when there was no need, but now every last woman sported her red fringe like a banner. Conversations stopped as Seaine approached, and cold eyes followed her in a bubble of icy silence. She felt an invader deep in enemy country as she crossed those peculiar floor tiles, white with the teardrop Flame of Tar Valon in red. But then, any part of the Tower might be enemy country. Looking another way, those scarlet flames might be taken for red Dragon's Fangs. She had never believed those irrational tales about the Reds and false Dragons, but. . . . Why would none of them deny it?

ʃi hæd tə æsk dɝɛkʃənz. "aɪ wɪl nɑt dɪstɝb əɹ ɪf ʃiz bɪzi," ʃi sɛd. "wi wɝ kloʊs fɹɛnz, wʌns, ən aɪ wəd laɪk əs tə bi əɡɛn. naʊ mɔɹ ðən ɛvɝ, ði ədʒəz kænɑɾ əfɔɹd tə dʒɹɪft əpɑɹt." ɔl tʃɹu, ðoʊ ði ədʒəz sim tə splɪɾɪŋ əpɑɹt ɹæðɝ ðən dʒɹɪftɪŋ, bʌt ðə dəmɑni wʊmən lɪsənd wɪð ə feɪs ðət cʊɾə bɪn kæst ɪn kɑpɝ. ðəɹ wɝ nɑt mɛni dəmɑni ɹɛdz, ən ðoʊz fju juʒəwəli minɝ ðən sneɪks kɑɾ ɪn ə fɛns.

She had to ask directions. "I will not disturb her if she is busy," she said. "We were close friends, once, and I would like us to be again. Now more than ever, the Ajahs cannot afford to drift apart." All true, though the Ajahs seemed to splitting apart rather than drifting, but the Domani woman listened with a face that could have been cast in copper. There were not many Domani Reds, and those few usually meaner than snakes caught in a fence.

"aɪ wɪl ʃoʊ ju, sɪɾɝ," ðə wʊmən sɛɾ ət læst, ən nɑt vɛɹi ɹɪspɛkfəli. ʃi lɛd ðə weɪ, ðən wɑtʃt waɪl sin nɑkt ɑn ðə dɔɹ, əz ðoʊ ʃi kəd nɑt bi tʃɹʌstɪd hɪɹ əloʊn. ðə dɔɹ pænəlz wɝ kɑɹvd wɪð ðə fleɪm, tu, lækɝd ðə kʌlɝ ə fɹɛʃ blʌd.

"I will show you, Sitter," the woman said at last, and not very respectfully. She led the way, then watched while Seaine knocked on the door, as though she could not be trusted here alone. The door panels were carved with the Flame, too, lacquered the color of fresh blood.

"kʌm!" ə bɹɪsk vɔɪs kɔl fɹəm wɪðɪn. sin oʊpən ðə dɔɹ hoʊpɪŋ ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt.

"Come!" a brisk voice called from within. Seaine opened the door hoping she was right.

"sin!" pɛvɑɹə ɪkskleɪm tʃɪɹfəli. "wʌt bɹɪŋz jə hɪɹ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ? kʌm! ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ ən sɪt!" ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ɔl ðə jɪɹz sɪns ðeɪ wɝ nɑvəs ən æksɛptɪd təɡɛðɝ hæd mɛltəɾ əweɪ. kwaɪt plʌmp ən nɑt tɔl - ɪn tʃɹuθ, fəɹ ə kændɔɹi, ʃi wɑz ʃɔɹt - pɛvɑɹə wɑz ɔlsoʊ kwaɪt pɹɪɾi, wɪð ə mɛɹi twɪŋkəl ɪn əɹ dɑɹk aɪz ən ə ɹɛɾi smaɪl. ɪt wɑz sæd ðət ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən ɹɛd, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɡʊɾ əɹ ɹizənz, kəz ʃi stɪl laɪk mɛn. ðə ɹɛd dɪɾ ətʃɹækt wɪmən u wɝ nætʃɹəli səspɪʃəs ə mɛn, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ʌðɝz tʃoʊz ɪt kəz ðə tæsk ə faɪndɪŋ mɛn u kəd tʃænəl wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. wɛðɝ ðeɪ laɪk mɛn, əɹ dɪslaɪk ðɛm, əɹ dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wʌn weɪ əɹ ði ʌðɝ ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, haʊɛvɝ, nɑt mɛni wɪmən kəd bɪlɔŋ tə ðə ɹɛd fəɹ lɔŋ wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ ə dʒɔndɪs vju ʌv ɔl mɛn. sin hæd ɹizən tə bɪliv pɛvɑɹə hæd sɝvd ə pɛnəns ʃɔɹtli æftɝ əteɪnɪŋ ðə ʃɔl fəɹ seɪɪŋ ðət ʃi wɪʃt ʃi hæɾ ə wɔɹɾɝ; sɪns ɹitʃɪŋ ðə seɪfɝ haɪts ə ðə hɔl, ʃi hæɾ oʊpənli sɛd wɔɹɾɝz wəd meɪk ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑz wɝk iziɝ. nɑt ðət ðət hæɾ ɛni pɑɹɾ ɪn sin tʃɹʌstɪŋ hɝ. ʌv ɔl ðə sɪstɝz ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ðoʊ, pɛvɑɹə wɑz ðə wʌn ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi kəd tʃɹʌst wɪð ðɪs.

"Seaine!" Pevara exclaimed cheerfully. "What brings you here this morning? Come! Shut the door and sit!" It was as if all the years since they were novice and Accepted together had melted away. Quite plump and not tall - in truth, for a Kandori, she was short - Pevara was also quite pretty, with a merry twinkle in her dark eyes and a ready smile. It was sad that she had chosen Red, no matter how good her reasons, because she still liked men. The Red did attract women who were naturally suspicious of men, of course, but others chose it because the task of finding men who could channel was important. Whether they liked men, or disliked them, or did not care one way or the other in the beginning, however, not many women could belong to the Red for long without taking a jaundiced view of all men. Seaine had reason to believe Pevara had served a penance shortly after attaining the shawl for saying that she wished she had a Warder; since reaching the safer heights of the Hall, she had openly said Warders would make the Red Ajah's work easier. Not that that had any part in Seaine trusting her. Of all the sisters in the Tower, though, Pevara was the one she was sure she could trust with this.

"aɪ kænɑt tɛl jə haʊ hæpi aɪm tə si ju," pɛvɑɹə sɛd wʌns ðeɪ wɝ ɪnskɑnst ɪn ɑɹmtʃɛɹz kɑɹvd ɪn ðə spaɪɹəlz pɑpjəlɝ ɪn kændɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɡoʊ, wɪð dɛləkət, bʌɾɝflaɪ-peɪntəd kʌps ə blubɛɹi ti ɪn hænd. "aɪv ɔfən θɔt haʊ aɪ ʃəd ɡoʊ tə ju, bʌɾ aɪ ədmɪt tə fɪɹɪŋ wʌt jə wəd seɪ æftɝ aɪ ɡeɪv jə ðə kʌt dɝɛk soʊ mɛni jɪɹz əɡoʊ. swɔɹn ɑn ðə bleɪd, sin, aɪd nɑɾ əv dʌn ɪt, ɪksɛp tɛsin dʒɔɹhəl pɹæktəkli hæd mi baɪ ðə skɹʌf ə maɪ nɛk, ən aɪ wɑz tu nu tə ðə ʃɔl tə hæv mʌtʃ bækboʊn jɛt. kən jə fɝɡɪv mi?"

"I cannot tell you how happy I am to see you," Pevara said once they were ensconced in armchairs carved in the spirals popular in Kandor a hundred years ago, with delicate, butterfly-painted cups of blueberry tea in hand. "I've often thought how I should go to you, but I admit to fearing what you would say after I gave you the cut direct so many years ago. Sworn on the blade, Seaine, I'd not have done it, except Tesien Jorhald practically had me by the scruff of my neck, and I was too new to the shawl to have much backbone yet. Can you forgive me?"

"ʌv kɔɹs, aɪ kæn," sin ɹɪplaɪd. "aɪ ʌndɝstʊd." ðə ɹɛd fɝmli dɪskɝədʒ fɹɛndʃɪps aʊtsaɪd ði ədʒɑ. kwaɪt fɝmli, ən kwaɪɾ ɪfɪʃənli. "wi kænɑt ɡoʊ əɡɛnst əɹ ədʒəz wən wəɹ jʌŋ, ən leɪɾɝ, ɪt simz ɪmpɑsəbəl tə ɹitʃɹeɪs əɹ stɛps. ə θaʊzən taɪmz aɪv ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əs wɪspɝɪŋ təɡɛðɝ æftɝ læst - oʊ, ən ðə pɹæŋks! dʒju ɹikɔl wən wi dʌstɪd sɹæntʃəz ʃɪft wɪð paʊɾɝd ɪtʃhoʊk? - bʌɾ aɪm ʃeɪm tə seɪ ɪt tʊk biɪŋ tɛɹəfaɪɾ aʊɾ ə maɪ wɪts tə stɝ maɪ fit. aɪ də wɑn əs tə bi fɹɛnz əɡɛn, bʌɾ aɪ nid jəɹ hɛlp, tu. jə ɑɹ ði oʊnli wʌn aɪm ʃʊɹ aɪ kən tʃɹʌst."

"Of course, I can," Seaine replied. "I understood." The Red firmly discouraged friendships outside the Ajah. Quite firmly, and quite efficiently. "We cannot go against our Ajahs when we are young, and later, it seems impossible to retrace our steps. A thousand times I've remembered us whispering together after Last - oh, and the pranks! do you recall when we dusted Serancha's shift with powdered itchoak? - but I'm shamed to say it took being terrified out of my wits to stir my feet. I do want us to be friends again, but I need your help, too. You are the only one I'm sure I can trust."

"sɹæntʃə wɑz ə pɹɪɡ ðɛn, ən stɪl ɪz." pɛvɑɹə læft. "ðə ɡɹeɪ ɪz ə ɡʊd pleɪs fəɹ hɝ. bʌɾ aɪ kæn bɪliv jə tɛɹəfaɪɾ əɾ ɛniθɪŋ. waɪ, jə nɛvɝ dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt wɑz lɑdʒɪkəl tə bi əfɹeɪɾ əntɪl wi wɝ bæk ɪn əɹ bɛdz. ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə pɹɑməs tə stæn ɪn ðə hɔl wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ wʌt fɔɹ, wʌtɛvɝ hɛlp aɪ kən ɡɪv ɪz jʊɹz, sin. wʌt dʒju nid?"

"Serancha was a prig then, and still is." Pevara laughed. "The Gray is a good place for her. But I can't believe you terrified at anything. Why, you never decided it was logical to be afraid until we were back in our beds. Short of a promise to stand in the Hall without knowing what for, whatever help I can give is yours, Seaine. What do you need?"

bɹɔt tə ðə pɔɪnt, sin hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, sɪpɪŋ əɹ ti. nɑt ðət ʃi hæɾ ɛni daʊts əbaʊt pɛvɑɹə, bʌt pʊʃɪŋ ðə wɝdz aʊɾ ə hɝ maʊθ wɑz . . . dɪfəkəlt. "ði æmɪɝlɪn keɪm tə si mi ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "ʃi ɪnstʃɹʌktəd mi tə meɪk ən ɪnkwaɪɹi, sil tə ðə fleɪm." pɛvɑɹə fɹaʊn slaɪtli, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt seɪ ðəɾ ɪn ðət keɪs sin ʃəd nɑt bi spikɪŋ ʌv ɪt. sin maɪɾ əv plæn haʊ tə kæɹi aʊt moʊst ə ðɛɹ pɹæŋks əz ɡɝlz, bʌt pɛvɑɹə hæd bɪn ðə wʌn wɪð ði ɑdæsəɾi tə θɪŋk moʊst ə ðɛm ʌp, ən ʃi hæd pɹəvaɪɾəd moʊst ə ðə nɝv tə ɡoʊ θɹu wɪð ðɛm. "ʃi wɑz vɛɹi sɝkəmspɛkt, bʌɾ æftɝ ə lɪɾəl θɔt, ɪt wɑz klɪɹ tə mi wʌt ʃi wɑntəd. aɪm tə hʌn aʊt . . ." ət ðə læst, kɝədʒ feɪld əɹ tʌŋ. ". . . dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪn ðə taʊɝ."

Brought to the point, Seaine hesitated, sipping her tea. Not that she had any doubts about Pevara, but pushing the words out of her mouth was . . . difficult. "The Amyrlin came to see me this morning," she said finally. "She instructed me to make an inquiry, Sealed to the Flame." Pevara frowned slightly, but she did not say that in that case Seaine should not be speaking of it. Seaine might have planned how to carry out most of their pranks as girls, but Pevara had been the one with the audacity to think most of them up, and she had provided most of the nerve to go through with them. "She was very circumspect, but after a little thought, it was clear to me what she wanted. I am to hunt out . . ." At the last, courage failed her tongue. ". . . Darkfriends in the Tower."

pɛvɑɹəz aɪz, əz dɑɹk əz əɹ oʊn wɝ blu, bɪkeɪm stoʊn, ən swɛp tə ðə mæntəl əbʌv əɹ faɪɝpleɪs, wɛɹ mɪniətʃɝz ə hɝ oʊn fæmli meɪɾ ə pɹɪsaɪs laɪn. ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl daɪd waɪl ʃi wɑz ə nɑvəs, pɛɹəns, bɹʌðɝz ən sɪstɝz, æns, ʌŋkəlz ən ɔl, mɝɾɝd ɪn ə kwɪkli səpɹɛst əpɹaɪzɪŋ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz u hæd bɪkʌm kənvɪns ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑz əbaʊt tə bɹeɪk fɹi. ðət wɑz waɪ sin hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ʃi kəd tʃɹʌs hɝ. ðət wɑz waɪ pɛvɑɹə hæd tʃoʊzən ɹɛd - ðoʊ sin stɪl θɔt ʃi cʊɾə dʌn əz wɛl ən bɪn hæpiɝ əz ə ɡɹin - kəz ʃi bɪlivd ə ɹɛd hʌntɪŋ mɛn u kəd tʃænəl hæd ðə bɛs tʃæns ə faɪndɪŋ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ʃi hæd bɪn vɛɹi ɡʊɾ əɾ ɪt; ðət plʌmp ɪkstɪɹiɝ kʌvɝɾ ə kɔɹ ə stil. ən ʃi pəzɛs ðə kɝədʒ tə seɪ kɑmli wʌt sin hæd bɪn əneɪbəl tə bɹɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə ʌɾɝ.

Pevara's eyes, as dark as her own were blue, became stone, and swept to the mantel above her fireplace, where miniatures of her own family made a precise line. They had all died while she was a novice, parents, brothers and sisters, aunts, uncles and all, murdered in a quickly suppressed uprising of Darkfriends who had become convinced the Dark One was about to break free. That was why Seaine had been sure she could trust her. That was why Pevara had chosen Red - though Seaine still thought she could have done as well and been happier as a Green - because she believed a Red hunting men who could channel had the best chance of finding Darkfriends. She had been very good at it; that plump exterior covered a core of steel. And she possessed the courage to say calmly what Seaine had been unable to bring herself to utter.

"ðə blæk ədʒɑ. wɛl. noʊ wʌndɝ ɪleɪɾə wəd bi sɝkəmspɛkt."

"The Black Ajah. Well. No wonder Elaida would be circumspect."

"pɛvɑɹə, aɪ noʊ ʃiz ɔlweɪz dɪnaɪɾ ɪts ɛɡzɪstəns hɑɹɾɝ ðən ɛni θɹi ʌðɝ sɪstɝz kəmbaɪnd, bʌɾ aɪm sɝɾən ʃʊɹ ðæts wʌt ʃi mɛnt, ən ɪf ʃiz kənvɪnst. . . ."

"Pevara, I know she's always denied its existence harder than any three other sisters combined, but I'm certain sure that's what she meant, and if she is convinced. . . ."

hɝ fɹɛnd weɪvd əɹ ɔf. "ju hæv noʊ nid tə kənvɪns mi, sin. aɪ hæv bɪn ʃʊɹ ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɪɡzɪsts fɔɹ. . . ." stʃɹeɪnʒli, pɛvɑɹə bɪkeɪm hɛzɪɾənt, piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɝ tikʌp laɪk ə fɔɹtʃən-tɛlɝ əɾ ə fɛɹ. "wʌt dʒju noʊ ʌv ɪvɛns ɹaɪɾ æftɝ ði il wɔɹ?"

Her friend waved her off. "You have no need to convince me, Seaine. I have been sure the Black Ajah exists for. . . ." Strangely, Pevara became hesitant, peering into her teacup like a fortune-teller at a fair. "What do you know of events right after the Aiel War?"

"tu æmɪɝlənz daɪɪŋ sʌɾənli ɪn ðə speɪs ə faɪv jɪɹz," sin sɛd kɛɹfəli. ʃi əsum ði ʌðɝ wʊmən mɛn ɪvɛns ɪn ðə taʊɝ. tʃɹuθ tə tɛl, əntɪl biɪŋ ɹeɪzd ə sɪɾɝ nɪɹli fɪftin jɪɹz əɡoʊ, dʒʌst ə jɪɹ æftɝ pɛvɑɹə, ʃi hæd nɑt ɡɪvən mʌtʃ ətɛnʃən tə ɛniθɪŋ aʊtsaɪd ðə taʊɝ. ən nɑt ðət mʌtʃ ɪnsaɪd, ɹɪli. "ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni sɪstɝz daɪɾ ɪn ðoʊz jɪɹz, əz aɪ ɹikɔl. dʒju min tə seɪ jə θɪŋk ðə . . . ðə blæk ədʒɑ hæɾ ə hæn ɪn ðæt?" ðɛɹ; ʃi hæd sɛɾ ɪt, ən ðə neɪm hæd nɑt bɝn əɹ tʌŋ.

"Two Amyrlins dying suddenly in the space of five years," Seaine said carefully. She assumed the other woman meant events in the Tower. Truth to tell, until being raised a Sitter nearly fifteen years ago, just a year after Pevara, she had not given much attention to anything outside the Tower. And not that much inside, really. "A great many sisters died in those years, as I recall. Do you mean to say you think the . . . the Black Ajah had a hand in that?" There; she had said it, and the name had not burned her tongue.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," pɛvɑɹə sɛd sɔfli, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd. "juv dʌn wɛl tə ɹæp jɝsɛlf dip ɪn fəlɑsəfi. ðəɹ wɝ . . . θɪŋz . . . dʌn ðɛn, ən sil tə ðə fleɪm." ʃi dʒɹu ə tʃɹʌbəl bɹɛθ.

"I don't know," Pevara said softly, shaking her head. "You've done well to wrap yourself deep in philosophy. There were . . . things . . . done then, and Sealed to the Flame." She drew a troubled breath.

sin dɪd nɑt pɹɛs hɝ; ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd kəmɪɾəd sʌmθɪŋ əkɪn tə tʃɹizən baɪ bɹeɪkɪŋ ðət seɪm sil, ən pɛvɑɹə wəɾ əv tə dɪsaɪɾ ɑn əɹ oʊn. "lʊkɪŋ ət ɹɪpɔɹts wɪl bi seɪfɝ ðən æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz wɪð noʊ aɪdiə hu wɝ ɹɪli æskɪŋ. lɑdʒɪkli, ə blæk sɪstɝ mʌs bi eɪbəl tə laɪ dɪspaɪt ði oʊðz." ʌðɝwaɪz, ðə blæk ədʒɑ wʊɾə bɪn ɹɪvild lɔŋ sɪns. ðət neɪm sim tə bi kʌmɪŋ mɔɹ izəli wɪð jus. "ɪf ɛni sɪstɝ ɹoʊt ðət ʃi dɪd wʌn θɪŋ wən wi kən pɹuv ʃi dɪɾ ənʌðɝ, ðən wɪv faʊn ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

Seaine did not press her; she herself had committed something akin to treason by breaking that same seal, and Pevara would have to decide on her own. "Looking at reports will be safer than asking questions with no idea who we're really asking. Logically, a Black sister must be able to lie despite the Oaths." Otherwise, the Black Ajah would have been revealed long since. That name seemed to be coming more easily with use. "If any sister wrote that she did one thing when we can prove she did another, then we have found a Darkfriend."

pɛvɑɹə nɑɾəd. "jɛs. pɝhæps ðə blæk ədʒɑ hæz noʊ hæn ɪn ðə ɹɪbɛljən, bʌɾ aɪ kænɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ wəd lɛt ðɪs tɝmɔɪl pæs wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ ædvæntɪdʒ. wi mʌs lʊk kloʊsli ət ðɪs læs jɪɹ, aɪ θɪŋk."

Pevara nodded. "Yes. Perhaps the Black Ajah has no hand in the rebellion, but I cannot think they would let this turmoil pass without taking advantage. We must look closely at this last year, I think."

tə ðæt, sin əɡɹid ɹɪlʌktənli. ðəɹ wəd bi fjuɝ pisəz ə peɪpɝ tə ɹiɾ ən mɔɹ kwɛstʃənz tə æsk kənsɝnɪŋ ɹisən mʌnθs. dəsaɪɾɪŋ u ɛls tə meɪk pɑɹɾ ə ði ɪnkwaɪɹi wɑz ivən hɑɹɾɝ. ɪspɛʃli æftɝ pɛvɑɹə sɛd, "ju wɝ vɛɹi bɹeɪv kʌmɪŋ tə mi, sin. aɪv noʊn dɑɹk-fɹɛnz tə kɪl bɹʌðɝz, sɪstɝz, pɛɹəns, tə tʃɹaɪ haɪɾɪŋ u ðeɪ ɑɹ ən wʌt ðeɪv dʌn. aɪ lʌv jə fəɹ ɪt, bʌt jə wɝ vɛɹi bɹeɪv ɪndid."

To that, Seaine agreed reluctantly. There would be fewer pieces of paper to read and more questions to ask concerning recent months. Deciding who else to make part of the inquiry was even harder. Especially after Pevara said, "You were very brave coming to me, Seaine. I've known Dark-friends to kill brothers, sisters, parents, to try hiding who they are and what they've done. I love you for it, but you were very brave indeed."

sin ʃɪvɝɾ əz ɪf ə ɡus hæd wɔkt ɑn əɹ ɡɹeɪv. hæd ʃi wɑntəd tə bi bɹeɪv, ʃi wʊɾə tʃoʊzən ɡɹin. ʃi ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt ɪleɪɾə hæd ɡɔn tə sʌmwʌn ɛls. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tɝnɪŋ bæk naʊ, ðoʊ.

Seaine shivered as if a goose had walked on her grave. Had she wanted to be brave, she would have chosen Green. She almost wished Elaida had gone to someone else. There was no turning back now, though.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾiθɹi


CHAPTER 33

eɪ bæθ


A Bath

ðə deɪz æftɝ sɛndɪŋ pɛɹɪn əweɪ simd ɛnləs tə ɹænd, ən ðə naɪts lɔŋɡɝ. hi ɹitʃɹiɾəd tə hɪz ɹumz ən steɪd ðɛɹ, tɛlɪŋ ðə meɪɾənz tə əlaʊ noʊ wʌn tə ɛntɝ. oʊnli nændɛɹə wɑz əlaʊd pæs ðə dɔɹz wɪð ðə ɡɪldɪd sʌnz, bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪz milz. ðə sɪnjui meɪɾən wəd sɛt daʊn ə kʌvɝd tʃɹeɪ ən lɪs ðoʊz u hæɾ æsk tə si hɪm, ðən ɡɪv ɪm ə lʊk ə ɹibjuk wən i ɹɪpiɾɪd ðəɾ i wəd si noʊ wʌn. ɔfən i hɝd dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ kɑmɛns fɹəm ðə meɪɾənz aʊtsaɪd bɪfɔɹ ʃi pʊl ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɝ; hi wɑz ɪntɛndəd tə hɪɹ, ɛls ðeɪ wʊɾə juz hæntɔk. bʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ θɔt tə tʃɪvi hɪm aʊt baɪ kleɪmɪŋ ðəɾ i wɑz sʌlkɪŋ. . . . ðə meɪɾənz dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, ən maɪt nɑɾ ɪf i ɪkspleɪnd. ɪf i cʊɾə bɹɔt hɪmsɛlf tə.

The days after sending Perrin away seemed endless to Rand, and the nights longer. He retreated to his rooms and stayed there, telling the Maidens to allow no one to enter. Only Nandera was allowed past the doors with the gilded suns, bringing his meals. The sinewy Maiden would set down a covered tray and list those who had asked to see him, then give him a look of rebuke when he repeated that he would see no one. Often he heard disapproving comments from the Maidens outside before she pulled the door shut behind her; he was intended to hear, else they would have used handtalk. But if they thought to chivy him out by claiming that he was sulking. . . . The Maidens did not understand, and might not if he explained. If he could have brought himself to.

hi pɪkt ət ðə milz wɪθaʊɾ æpətaɪt, ən tʃɹaɪd tə ɹid, bʌɾ ɪz feɪvɹɪt bʊks kəd daɪvɝɾ ɪm fəɹ oʊnli ə fju peɪdʒəz ivən ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ət list wʌns ɛvɹi deɪ, ðoʊ hi hæd pɹɑməs hɪmsɛlf i wəd nɑt, hi lɪftəd ðə mæsɪv wɔɹdʒɹoʊb ə pɑlɪʃt blækwʊɾ ən aɪvɝi ɪn ɪz bɛd-tʃeɪmbɝ, floʊɾəd ɪɾ əsaɪɾ ɑn floʊz ʌv ɛɹ ən kɛɹfəli ənɹævəl ðə tʃɹæps i hæd sɛɾ ən ðə mɪɹɝ ə mɪsts ðət meɪd ðə wɔl sim smuð, ɔl ɪnvɝɾɪd soʊ noʊ ʌðɝ aɪz bʌɾ ɪz kəd si. ðɛɹ, ɪn ə nɪtʃ hɑloʊɾ aʊt wɪð ðə paʊɝ, stʊd tu smɔl stætʃuz ʌv waɪt stoʊn əbaʊɾ ə fʊt tɔl, ə wʊmən ən ə mæn, itʃ ɪn floʊɪŋ ɹoʊbz ən hoʊldɪŋ ə klɪɹ kɹɪstəl sfɪɹ oʊvɝhɛɾ ɪn wʌn hænd. ðə naɪɾ i sɛt ði ɑɹmi ɪn moʊʃən təwɔɹɾ ɪljən i hæd ɡɔn tə ɹɪɾiən əloʊn tə fɛtʃ ðiz tɛɹæŋɡɹil: ɪf i niɾəd ðɛm, hi maɪt nɑɾ əv mʌtʃ taɪm. ðət wɑz wʌɾ i hæd toʊl hɪmsɛlf. hɪz hænd wəd stʃɹɛtʃ təwɔɹd ðə bɪɹɾəd mæn, ði oʊnli wʌn ə ðə pɛɹ ə mæn kəd juz, stʃɹɛtʃ aʊɾ ən stɑp, ʃeɪkɪŋ. wʌn fɪŋɡɝ tʌtʃɪŋ, ən mɔɹ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ðən i kəɾ ɪmædʒən kəd bi hɪz. wɪð ðæt, noʊ wʌn kəd dɪfit hɪm, noʊ wʌn stæn əɡɛns hɪm. wɪð ðæt, lænfɝ hæd sɛd wʌns, hi kəd tʃælənʒ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ.

He picked at the meals without appetite, and tried to read, but his favorite books could divert him for only a few pages even in the beginning. At least once every day, though he had promised himself he would not, he lifted the massive wardrobe of polished blackwood and ivory in his bed-chamber, floated it aside on flows of Air and carefully unraveled the traps he had set and the Mirror of Mists that made the wall seem smooth, all inverted so no other eyes but his could see. There, in a niche hollowed out with the Power, stood two small statues of white stone about a foot tall, a woman and a man, each in flowing robes and holding a clear crystal sphere overhead in one hand. The night he set the army in motion toward Illian he had gone to Rhuidean alone to fetch these ter'angreal: if he needed them, he might not have much time. That was what he had told himself. His hand would stretch toward the bearded man, the only one of the pair a man could use, stretch out and stop, shaking. One finger touching, and more of the One Power than he could imagine could be his. With that, no one could defeat him, no one stand against him. With that, Lanfear had said once, he could challenge the Creator.

"ɪɾ ɪz maɪn baɪ ɹaɪt," hi mʌɾɝd itʃ taɪm, wɪð ɪz hæn tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə fɪɡjɝ. "maɪn! aɪm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn!"

"It is mine by right," he muttered each time, with his hand trembling just short of the figure. "Mine! I am the Dragon Reborn!"

ən itʃ taɪm i meɪd hɪmsɛlf dʒɹɔ bæk, ɹiivɪŋ ðə mɪɹɝ ə mɪsts, ɹiivɪŋ ði ɪnvɪzəbəl tʃɹæps ðət wəd bɝn ɛniwʌn tə ə sɪndɝ u tʃɹaɪd tə pæs əm wɪθaʊt ðə ki. ðə hjudʒ wɔɹdʒɹoʊb wɑftɪd bæk ɪndə pleɪs laɪk ə fɛðɝ. hi wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. bʌt wɑz ðəɾ ɪnʌf? ɪt wəɾ əv tə bi.

And each time he made himself draw back, reweaving the Mirror of Mists, reweaving the invisible traps that would burn anyone to a cinder who tried to pass them without the key. The huge wardrobe wafted back into place like a feather. He was the Dragon Reborn. But was that enough? It would have to be.

"aɪ æm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," hi wɪspɝɾ ət ðə wɔlz səmtaɪmz, ən səmtaɪmz ʃaʊɾəd ət ðɛm. "aɪ æm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn!" saɪlənli ən əlaʊɾ i ɹeɪdʒd ət ðoʊz u əpoʊz hɪm, ðə blaɪn fulz u kəd nɑt si ən ðoʊz u ɹəfjuz tə si, fəɹ æmbɪʃən əɹ ævɝəs əɹ fɪɹ. hi wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ði oʊnli hoʊp ə ðə wɝld əɡɛns ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ən ðə laɪt hɛlp ðə wɝl fəɹ ɪt.

"I am the Dragon Reborn," he whispered at the walls sometimes, and sometimes shouted at them. "I am the Dragon Reborn!" Silently and aloud he raged at those who opposed him, the blind fools who could not see and those who refused to see, for ambition or avarice or fear. He was the Dragon Reborn, the only hope of the world against the Dark One. And the Light help the world for it.

bʌɾ ɪz ɹeɪdʒɪz ən θɔts ə juzɪŋ ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɝ oʊnli ətɛmps tə ɪskeɪp ʌðɝ θɪŋz, ən i nu ɪt. əloʊn, hi pɪkt əɾ ɪz milz, ðoʊ lɛs ɛvɹi deɪ, ən tʃɹaɪd tə ɹid, ðoʊ sɛldəm, ən ətɛmptəd tə faɪn slip. ðəɾ i tʃɹaɪd mɔɹ ɔfən əz ðə deɪz pæst, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ wɛðɝ ðə sʌn wɑz daʊn əɹ haɪ. slip keɪm ɪn fɪtfəl snætʃɪz, ən wʌt hɛɹɹoʊɾ ɪz weɪkɪŋ θɔts ɔlsoʊ stɔkt ɪz dʒɹimz ən tʃeɪst ɪm əweɪk tu sun fəɹ ɛni ɹɛst. noʊ əmaʊn ə ʃildɪŋ kəd kip aʊt wʌt wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɪnsaɪd. hi hæd ðə fɔɹseɪkən tə feɪs, ən sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf. hi hæd fulz u fɔɾ ɪm əɹ ɹæn əweɪ wən ðɛɹ oʊnli hoʊp wɑz tə stæn bɪhaɪn hɪm. waɪ wəɾ ɪz dʒɹimz nɑt lɛɾ ɪm bi? fɹəm wʌn dʒɹim i ɔlweɪz spɹæŋ əweɪk bɪfɔɹ ɪt mɔɹ ðən bɪɡæn, tə laɪ ðəɹ fɪld wɪð sɛlf-loʊθɪŋ ən mʌɾəld wɪð læk ə slip, bʌt ði ʌðɝz. . . . hi dɪzɝvd əm ɔl, hi nu.

But his rages and thoughts of using the ter'angreal were only attempts to escape other things, and he knew it. Alone, he picked at his meals, though less every day, and tried to read, though seldom, and attempted to find sleep. That he tried more often as the days passed, not caring whether the sun was down or high. Sleep came in fitful snatches, and what harrowed his waking thoughts also stalked his dreams and chased him awake too soon for any rest. No amount of shielding could keep out what was already inside. He had the Forsaken to face, and sooner or later the Dark One himself. He had fools who fought him or ran away when their only hope was to stand behind him. Why would his dreams not let him be? From one dream he always sprang awake before it more than began, to lie there filled with self-loathing and muddled with lack of sleep, but the others. . . . He deserved them all, he knew.

koʊləveɪɪɹ kənfɹʌntəɾ ɪm slipɪŋ, hɝ feɪs blæk ən ðə skɑɹf ʃi hæd juz tə hæŋ hɝsɛlf stɪl bɛɹiɾ ɪn ðə swoʊlən flɛʃ ə hɝ nɛk. koʊləveɪɪɹ, saɪlən ən əkjuzɪŋ, wɪð ɔl ðə meɪɾənz u hæd daɪd fəɹ ɪm ɝeɪd bɪhaɪn əɹ ɪn saɪlən stɛɹɪŋ ɹæŋks, ɔl ðə wɪmən u daɪd kəz ə hɪm. hi nu ɛvɹi feɪs əz wɛl əz ɪz oʊn, ən ɛvɹi neɪm bʌt wʌn. fɹəm ðoʊz dʒɹimz, hi woʊk wipɪŋ.

Colavaere confronted him sleeping, her face black and the scarf she had used to hang herself still buried in the swollen flesh of her neck. Colavaere, silent and accusing, with all the Maidens who had died for him arrayed behind her in silent staring ranks, all the women who died because of him. He knew every face as well as his own, and every name but one. From those dreams, he woke weeping.

ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz i hɝl pɛɹɪn əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹæn hɔl ə ðə sʌn, ən ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz i wɑz oʊvɝwɛlm baɪ bleɪzɪŋ fɪɹ ən ɹeɪdʒ. ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz, hi kɪl pɛɹɪn ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz ən woʊk tə hɪz oʊn skɹimz. waɪ hæd ðə mæn tʃoʊzən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹɪznɝz tə juz fəɹ ðɛɹ ɑɹɡjəmənt? ɹænd tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðɛm; hi hæd dʌn ɪz bɛs tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðɛɹ ɛɡzɪstəns fɹəm ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ðeɪ wɝ tu deɪnʒɝəs tə kip lɔŋ əz kæptɪvz, ən i hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌt tə də wɪð ðɛm. ðeɪ fɹaɪɾənd hɪm. səmtaɪmz i dʒɹimd ə biɪŋ baʊn ɪnsaɪd ðə bɑks əɡɛn, ʌv ɡəlinə ən ɛɹiən ən keɪɾɝin ən ðə ɹɛs teɪkɪŋ ɪm aʊt tə bit hɪm, dʒɹimd ən woʊk wɪmpɝɪŋ ivən æftɝ i kənvɪns hɪmsɛlf ɪz aɪz wɝ oʊpən ən i wɑz aʊtsaɪd. ðeɪ fɹaɪɾənd ɪm kəz i fɪɹɾ i maɪt ɡɪv weɪ tə ðə fɪɹ ən ði æŋɡɝ, ən ðɛn. . . . hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk ʌv wʌɾ i maɪt də ðɛn, bʌt səmtaɪmz i dʒɹimd ɪt, ən woʊk ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪn ə koʊl swɛt. hi wəd nɑt də ðæt. wʌtɛvɝ i hæd dʌn, hi wəd nɑt də ðæt.

A hundred times he hurled Perrin across the Grand Hall of the Sun, and a hundred times he was overwhelmed by blazing fear and rage. A hundred times, he killed Perrin in his dreams and woke to his own screams. Why had the man chosen the Aes Sedai prisoners to use for their argument? Rand tried not to think about them; he had done his best to ignore their existence from the beginning. They were too dangerous to keep long as captives, and he had no idea what to do with them. They frightened him. Sometimes he dreamed of being bound inside the box again, of Galina and Erian and Katerine and the rest taking him out to beat him, dreamed and woke whimpering even after he convinced himself his eyes were open and he was outside. They frightened him because he feared he might give way to the fear and the anger, and then. . . . He tried not to think of what he might do then, but sometimes he dreamed it, and woke shaking in a cold sweat. He would not do that. Whatever he had done, he would not do that.

ɪn dʒɹimz i ɡæðɝd ði æʃəmən tə ətæk ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən pʌnɪʃ ɪleɪɾə; hi lɛp fɹəm ə ɡeɪtweɪ fɪld wɪð ɹaɪtʃəs æŋɡɝ ən seɪɾɪn - ən lɝn ðəɾ ɑlviɛɝɪnz lɛɾɝ hæd bɪn ə laɪ, sɔ hɝ stæn əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɪleɪɾə, sɔ ɛɡwin bɪsaɪd hɝ, tu, ən nɪneɪiv, ən ivən ɪleɪn, ɔl wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪsəz, kəz i wɑz tu deɪnʒɝəs tə lɛt ɹʌn fɹi. hi wɑtʃt ði æʃəmən dɪstʃɹɔɪd baɪ wɪmən u hæd jɪɹz ə stʌɾiɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, nɑt dʒʌst ə fju mʌnθs ə hɑɹʃ tuɾɝɪŋ, ən fɹəm ðoʊz dʒɹimz, hi kəd nɛvɝ weɪk əntɪl ɛvɹi mæn ɪn ə blæk koʊt wɑz dɛd, ən i stʊɾ əloʊn tə feɪs ðə maɪɾ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. əloʊn.

In dreams he gathered the Asha'man to attack the White Tower and punish Elaida; he leaped from a gateway filled with righteous anger and saidin - and learned that Alviarin's letter had been a lie, saw her stand alongside Elaida, saw Egwene beside her, too, and Nynaeve, and even Elayne, all with Aes Sedai faces, because he was too dangerous to let run free. He watched the Asha'man destroyed by women who had years of studying the One Power behind them, not just a few months of harsh tutoring, and from those dreams, he could never wake until every man in a black coat was dead, and he stood alone to face the might of the Aes Sedai. Alone.

əɡɛn ən əɡɛn kædzueɪn spoʊk ðoʊz wɝdz əbaʊt mædmən hɪɹɪŋ vɔɪsəz, tɪl i flɪntʃt əɾ əm əz ət bloʊz ʌv ə wɪp, flɪntʃt ɪn ɪz slip wən ʃi əpɪɹd. ɪn dʒɹimz ən weɪkɪŋ, hi kɔl tə luz θɝɪn, ʃaʊɾəd ət hɪm, skɹim fəɹ hɪm, ən oʊnli saɪləns ænsɝd. əloʊn. ðət smɔl bʌndəl ə sɛnseɪʃənz ən ɪmoʊʃənz ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd, ðə sɛns ʌv ɑlɑnəz ɔlmoʊs tʌtʃ, sloʊli bɪkeɪm ə kʌmfɝt. ɪn mɛni weɪz, ðət fɹaɪɾənd ɪm moʊst ʌv ɔl.

Again and again Cadsuane spoke those words about madmen hearing voices, till he flinched at them as at blows of a whip, flinched in his sleep when she appeared. In dreams and waking, he called to Lews Therin, shouted at him, screamed for him, and only silence answered. Alone. That small bundle of sensations and emotions in the back of his head, the sense of Alanna's almost touch, slowly became a comfort. In many ways, that frightened him most of all.

ɑn ðə fɔɹθ mɔɹnɪŋ, hi woʊk ɡɹɑdʒəli fɹəm ə dʒɹim ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, flɪŋɪŋ ʌp ə hæn tə ʃild ɡɹeɪni aɪz fɹəm wʌɾ i θɔt wɑz ə flɛɹ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ-ɹɔt faɪɝ. dʌs moʊts spɑɹkəld ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪt stʃɹimɪŋ θɹu ðə wɪndoʊ tə ɹitʃ ɪz bɛd, wɪð ɪts ɡɹeɪt skwɛɹ blækwʊd bɪdpoʊsts ɪnleɪd wɪð aɪvɝi wɛdʒəz. ɛvɹi pis ə fɝnɪʃɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹum wɑz pɑlɪʃt blækwʊɾ ən aɪvɝi, skwɛɹ ən stɑɹk ən hɛvi ɪnʌf tə suɾ ɪz mud. fəɹ ə moʊmən i leɪ ðɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪf slip ɹɪtɝnd, ɪt wəɾ oʊnli bɹɪŋ ənʌðɝ dʒɹim.

On the fourth morning, he woke groggily from a dream of the White Tower, flinging up a hand to shield grainy eyes from what he thought was a flare of saidar-wrought fire. Dust motes sparkled in the sunlight streaming through the window to reach his bed, with its great square blackwood bedposts inlaid with ivory wedges. Every piece of furnishing in the room was polished blackwood and ivory, square and stark and heavy enough to suit his mood. For a moment he lay there, but if sleep returned, it would only bring another dream.

ɑɹ jə ðɛɹ, luz θɝɪn? hi θɔt wɪθaʊɾ ɛni hoʊp ʌv ænsɝ, ən wɛɹəli pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf tə hɪz fit, tʌɡɪŋ ɪz ɹɪŋkəl koʊt stʃɹeɪt. hi hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd ɪz kloʊðz sɪns fɝst ʃʌɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf əweɪ.

Are you there, Lews Therin? he thought without any hope of answer, and wearily pushed himself to his feet, tugging his wrinkled coat straight. He had not changed his clothes since first shutting himself away.

wən i stæɡɝɾ ɪndə ði æntəɹum, ət fɝst i θɔɾ i wɑz dʒɹimɪŋ əɡɛn, ðə dʒɹim ðəɾ ɔlweɪz woʊk ɪm stʃɹeɪɾ ɔf ɪn ʃeɪm ən ɡɪlt ən loʊθɪŋ, bʌt mɪn lʊkt ʌp əɾ ɪm fɹəm wʌn ə ðə tɔl ɡɪldɪd tʃɛɹz, ə lɛðɝ-baʊn bʊk ɑn əɹ niz, ən i dɪd nɑt weɪk. dɑɹk ɹɪŋləts fɹeɪmd əɹ feɪs, bɪɡ dɑɹk aɪz soʊ ɪntɛn i ɔlmoʊs fɛlt əɹ tʌtʃ. hɝ bɹitʃɪz ə bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd ɡɹin sɪlk fɪɾ əɹ laɪk ə sɛkən skɪn, ən əɹ koʊɾ ə mætʃɪŋ sɪlk hʌŋ oʊpən, ə kɹim-kʌlɝd blaʊs ɹaɪzɪŋ ən fɔlɪŋ wɪð əɹ bɹɛθ. hi pɹeɪd tə weɪk. ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn fɪɹ, əɹ æŋɡɝ, əɹ ɡɪlt oʊvɝ koʊləveɪɪɹ, əɹ luz θɝɪnz dɪsəpɪɹəns ðət dʒɹoʊv ɪm tə ʃʌt hɪmsɛlf əweɪ.

When he staggered into the anteroom, at first he thought he was dreaming again, the dream that always woke him straight off in shame and guilt and loathing, but Min looked up at him from one of the tall gilded chairs, a leather-bound book on her knees, and he did not wake. Dark ringlets framed her face, big dark eyes so intent he almost felt her touch. Her breeches of brocaded green silk fit her like a second skin, and her coat of matching silk hung open, a cream-colored blouse rising and falling with her breath. He prayed to wake. It had not been fear, or anger, or guilt over Colavaere, or Lews Therin's disappearance that drove him to shut himself away.

"ðɛɹz ə fist ə sɔɹts ɪn fɔɹ deɪz," ʃi sɛd bɹaɪtli, "æt ðə hæf mun. ðə deɪ ʌv ɹɪpɛntəns, ðeɪ kɔl ɪt fəɹ səm ɹizən, bʌt ðəɹ wɪl bi dænsɪŋ ðət naɪt. sɪdeɪt dænsɪŋ, aɪ hɪɹ, bʌɾ ɛni dænsɪŋ ɪz bɛɾɝ ðən nʌn." kɛɹfəli tʌkɪŋ ə θɪn stʃɹɪp ə lɛðɝ ɪndə ðə bʊk, ʃi pleɪst ɪɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ bɪsaɪd hɝ. "ðæts dʒʌs taɪm tə hæv ə dʒɹɛs meɪd, ɪf aɪ sɛt ðə simstʃɹɪs tə wɝk tədeɪ. ðəɾ ɪz, ɪf jə min tə dæns wɪð mi."

"There's a feast of sorts in four days," she said brightly, "at the half moon. The Day of Repentance, they call it for some reason, but there will be dancing that night. Sedate dancing, I hear, but any dancing is better than none." Carefully tucking a thin strip of leather into the book, she placed it on the floor beside her. "That's just time to have a dress made, if I set the seamstress to work today. That is, if you mean to dance with me."

hi pʊld ɪz ɡeɪz əweɪ fɹəm hɝ, ən ɪt fɛl ɑn ə klɔθ-kʌvɝd tʃɹeɪ bɪsaɪd ðə tɔl dɔɹz. dʒʌs ðə θɔɾ ə fud meɪɾ ɪm kwizi. nændɛɹə wɑz nɑt səpoʊz tə lɛɾ ɛniwʌn ɪn, bɝn hɝ! list ʌv ɔl mɪn. hi hæd nɑt mɛnʃən əɹ baɪ neɪm, bʌɾ i hæd sɛd noʊ wʌn! "mɪn, aɪ - aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt tə seɪ. aɪ - "

He pulled his gaze away from her, and it fell on a cloth-covered tray beside the tall doors. Just the thought of food made him queasy. Nandera was not supposed to let anyone in, burn her! Least of all Min. He had not mentioned her by name, but he had said no one! "Min, I - I don't know what to say. I - "

"ʃifɝɾɝ, jə lʊk laɪk wʌt ðə dɑɡz fɔɾ oʊvɝ. naʊ aɪ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ɑlɑnə wɑz soʊ fɹæntɪk, ivən ɪf aɪ doʊn si haʊ ʃi nu. ʃi pɹæktəkli bɛɡd mi tə spik tə ju, æftɝ ðə meɪɾənz tɝn əɹ əweɪ fəɹ əbaʊt ðə fɪfθ taɪm. nændɛɹə wʊdn əv lemi ɪn ɪf ʃi wɑzn ɪn ə læðɝ əbaʊt jə nɑɾ iɾɪŋ, ən ivən soʊ, aɪ hæd tə də ə lɪɾəl bɛɡɪŋ maɪsɛlf. jə oʊ mi, kʌntʃɹi bɔɪ."

"Sheepherder, you look like what the dogs fought over. Now I understand why Alanna was so frantic, even if I don't see how she knew. She practically begged me to speak to you, after the Maidens turned her away for about the fifth time. Nandera wouldn't have let me in if she wasn't in a lather about you not eating, and even so, I had to do a little begging myself. You owe me, country boy."

ɹænd flɪntʃt. ɪmədʒəz ə hɪmsɛlf flæʃt ɪn ɪz hɛd; hɪm tɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ kloʊðz, fɔɹsɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɑn əɹ laɪk ə maɪnləs bist. hi oʊɾ əɹ mɔɹ ðən i kəɾ ɛvɝ peɪ. ɹeɪkɪŋ ə hæn θɹu hɪz hɛɹ, hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf tɝn tə feɪs hɝ. ʃi hæd tʌkt əɹ fiɾ ʌp soʊ ʃi sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ, linɪŋ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ niz. haʊ kəd ʃi lʊk əɾ ɪm soʊ kɑmli? "mɪn, ðɛɹz noʊ ɪkskjus fəɹ wʌɾ aɪ dɪd. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛni dʒʌstəs, aɪd ɡoʊ tə ðə ɡæloʊz. ɪf aɪ kʊd, aɪd pʊt ðə ɹoʊp ɝaʊn maɪ nɛk maɪsɛlf. ɑn oʊθ, aɪ wʊd." ðə wɝdz teɪstəd bɪɾɝ. hi wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən ʃi wəɾ əv tə weɪɾ ɑn dʒʌstəs əntɪl ðə læs bæɾəl. wʌɾ ə ful i hæd bɪn tə wɑnə lɪv pæs tɑɹmən ɡdən. hi dɪd nɑt dɪzɝv tə.

Rand flinched. Images of himself flashed in his head; him tearing at her clothes, forcing himself on her like a mindless beast. He owed her more than he could ever pay. Raking a hand through his hair, he made himself turn to face her. She had tucked her feet up so she sat cross-legged in the chair, leaning her fists on her knees. How could she look at him so calmly? "Min, there's no excuse for what I did. If there was any justice, I'd go to the gallows. If I could, I'd put the rope around my neck myself. On oath, I would." The words tasted bitter. He was the Dragon Reborn, and she would have to wait on justice until the Last Battle. What a fool he had been to want to live past Tarmon Gai'don. He did not deserve to.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, ʃifɝɾɝ?" ʃi sɛd sloʊli.

"What are you talking about, sheepherder?" she said slowly.

"aɪm tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt wʌɾ aɪ dɪd tə ju," hi ɡɹoʊnd. haʊ kəɾ i hæv dʌn ðæt, tə ɛniwʌn, bʌt moʊst ʌv ɔl tə hɝ? "mɪn, aɪ noʊ haʊ hɑɹɾ ɪts fəɹ jə tə bi ɪn ðə seɪm ɹum wɪð mi." haʊ kəɾ i ɹikɔl ðə sɑft fil ə hɝ soʊ, ðə sɪlkənəs ə hɝ skɪn? æftɝ i hæd tɔɹn əɹ kloʊðz ɔf. "aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ aɪ wɑz ən ænəməl, ə mɑnstɝ." bʌɾ i wɑz. hi loʊð hɪmsɛlf fəɹ wʌɾ i hæd dʌn. ən loʊð hɪmsɛlf wɝs kəz i wɑntəd tə də ɪɾ əɡɛn. "ði oʊnli ɪkskjus aɪ hæv ɪz mædnəs. kædzueɪn wɑz ɹaɪt. aɪ dɪd hɪɹ vɔɪsəz. luz θɝɪnz vɔɪs, aɪ θɔt. kən jə - ? noʊ. noʊ, aɪ hæv noʊ ɹaɪt tə æsk jə tə fɝɡɪv mi. bʌt juv tə noʊ haʊ sɑɹi aɪ æm, mɪn." hi wɑz sɑɹi. ən ɪz hænz ætʃt tə ɹʌn daʊn əɹ bɛɹ bæk, oʊvɝ əɹ hɪps. hi wɑz ə mɑnstɝ. "bɪɾɝli sɑɹi. ət lis noʊ ðæt."

"I'm talking about what I did to you," he groaned. How could he have done that, to anyone, but most of all to her? "Min, I know how hard it is for you to be in the same room with me." How could he recall the soft feel of her so, the silkiness of her skin? After he had torn her clothes off. "I never thought I was an animal, a monster." But he was. He loathed himself for what he had done. And loathed himself worse because he wanted to do it again. "The only excuse I have is madness. Cadsuane was right. I did hear voices. Lews Therin's voice, I thought. Can you - ? No. No, I have no right to ask you to forgive me. But you have to know how sorry I am, Min." He was sorry. And his hands ached to run down her bare back, over her hips. He was a monster. "Bitterly sorry. At least know that."

ʃi sæt ðəɹ moʊʃənləs, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm əz ɪf ʃi nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ hæd sin ɪz laɪk. naʊ, ʃi kəd stɑp pɹitɛndɪŋ. naʊ, ʃi kəd seɪ wʌt ʃi ɹɪli θɔɾ ə hɪm, ən haʊɛvɝ vaɪl ɪt wɑz, ɪt wəd nɑt bi hæf vaɪl ɪnʌf.

She sat there motionless, staring at him as if she never before had seen his like. Now, she could stop pretending. Now, she could say what she really thought of him, and however vile it was, it would not be half vile enough.

"soʊ ðæts waɪ juv bɪn kipɪŋ mi əweɪ," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "ju lɪsən tə mi, jə wʊɾən-hɛdəd nʌmskʌl. aɪ wɑz ɹɛɾi tə kɹaɪ maɪsɛlf tə dʌs kəz aɪd sin wʌn dɛθ tu mɛni, ən ju, jə wɝ əbaʊt tə də ðə seɪm fəɹ ðə seɪm ɹizən. wʌt wi dɪd, maɪ ɪnəsən læm, wɑz kʌmfɝt wʌn ənʌðɝ. fɹɛnz kʌmfɝt wʌn ənʌðɝ ət taɪmz laɪk ðæt. kloʊs jəɹ maʊθ, jə tu ɹɪvɝz heɪ-hɛɹ."

"So that's why you've been keeping me away," she said finally. "You listen to me, you wooden-headed numbskull. I was ready to cry myself to dust because I'd seen one death too many, and you, you were about to do the same for the same reason. What we did, my innocent lamb, was comfort one another. Friends comfort one another at times like that. Close your mouth, you Two Rivers hay-hair."

hi dɪd, bʌɾ oʊnli tə swɑloʊ. hi θɔɾ ɪz aɪz wɝ gɑnə fɔl ɑntu ðə flɔɹstoʊnz. hi nɪɹli spləɾɝd ɡɛɾɪŋ wɝdz aʊt. "kʌmfɝɾɪd? mɪn, ɪf ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl bæk hoʊm hɝd wʌt wi dɪd kɔl kʌmfɝɾɪŋ, ðeɪd bi laɪnɪŋ ʌp tə pil əɹ haɪdz ɪf wi wɝ fɪfti!"

He did, but only to swallow. He thought his eyes were going to fall onto the floorstones. He nearly spluttered getting words out. "Comforted? Min, if the Women's Circle back home heard what we did called comforting, they'd be lining up to peel our hides if we were fifty!"

"æt list ɪts 'wi,' naʊ, ɪnstɛɾ ʌv 'aɪ,' " ʃi sɛd ɡɹɪmli. ɹaɪzɪŋ smuðli, ʃi ədvæns təwɔɹɾ ɪm ʃeɪkɪŋ ə fjʊɹiəs fɪŋɡɝ. "du jə θɪŋk ɪm ə dɑl, fɑɹmbɔɪ? dʒju θɪŋk aɪm tu dɪmwɪɾɪd tə lɛt jə noʊ ɪf aɪ dɪdnt wɑn jəɹ tʌtʃ? dʒju θɪŋk aɪ kʊdn lɛt jə noʊ ɪn noʊ ənsɝɾən tɝmz?" hɝ fɹi hæn pɹədust ə naɪf fɹəm ʌndɝ əɹ koʊt, ɡeɪv ɪɾ ə flɝɪʃ ən tʌkt ɪt bæk wɪθaʊt sloʊɪŋ ðə tɔɹənt. "aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɹɪpɪŋ jəɹ ʃɝɾ ɔf jəɹ bæk kəz jə kʊdn pʊl ɪɾ oʊvɝ jəɹ hɛd fæst ɪnʌf tə sut mi. ðæts haʊ lɪɾəl aɪ wɑntəd jəɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn mi! aɪ dɪd wɪð jə wʌɾ aɪv nɛvɝ dʌn wɪð ɛni mæn - ən doʊn jə θɪŋk aɪ wɑz nɛvɝ tɛmptəd! - ən jə seɪ ɪt wɑz ɔl ju! əz ɪf aɪ wɑzn ivən ðɛɹ!"

"At least it's 'we,' now, instead of 'I,' " she said grimly. Rising smoothly, she advanced toward him shaking a furious finger. "Do you think I'm a doll, farmboy? Do you think I am too dimwitted to let you know if I didn't want your touch? Do you think I couldn't let you know in no uncertain terms?" Her free hand produced a knife from under her coat, gave it a flourish and tucked it back without slowing the torrent. "I remember ripping your shirt off your back because you couldn't pull it over your head fast enough to suit me. That's how little I wanted your arms around me! I did with you what I've never done with any man - and don't you think I was never tempted! - and you say it was all you! As if I wasn't even there!"

ðə bæk ə hɪz lɛɡz hɪɾ ə tʃɛɹ, ən i ɹilaɪzd i hæd bɪn bækɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm hɝ. fɹaʊnɪŋ ʌp ət hɪm, ʃi mʌɾɝd, "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk aɪ laɪk jə lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət mi ɹaɪt naʊ." əbɹʌpli ʃi kɪkt ɪm hɑɹɾ ɑn ðə ʃɪn, plæntəd boʊθ hænz ɑn ɪz tʃɛst, ən ʃʌvd. hi tɑpəld ɪndə ðə tʃɛɹ soʊ hɑɹɾ ɪt nɪɹli wɛn oʊvɝ bækwɝd. ɹɪŋləts sweɪɾ əz ʃi ɡeɪv əɹ hɛɾ ə tɔs ən ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd koʊt.

The back of his legs hit a chair, and he realized he had been backing away from her. Frowning up at him, she muttered, "I don't think I like you looking down at me right now." Abruptly she kicked him hard on the shin, planted both hands on his chest, and shoved. He toppled into the chair so hard it nearly went over backward. Ringlets swayed as she gave her head a toss and adjusted her brocaded coat.

"ðæts əz meɪ bi, mɪn, bʌt - "

"That's as may be, Min, but - "

"ðæts əz ɪz, ʃifɝɾɝ," ʃi kʌɾ ɪn fɝmli, "æn ɪf jə seɪ dɪfɹən əɡɛn, jə hæd bɛst ʃaʊt fəɹ ðə meɪɾənz ən tʃænəl fəɹ ɔl jəɹ wɝθ, kəz əl θʌmp jə ɝaʊn ðɪs ɹum tɪl jə skwil fəɹ mɝsi. jə niɾ ə ʃeɪv. ən ə bæθ."

"That's as is, sheepherder," she cut in firmly, "and if you say different again, you had best shout for the Maidens and channel for all you're worth, because I'll thump you around this room till you squeal for mercy. You need a shave. And a bath."

ɹænd tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. pɛɹɪn hæd sətʃ ə sɝin mɛɹɪdʒ, wɪð ə smaɪlɪŋ, dʒɛntəl waɪf. waɪ wɑz ɪt ðəɾ i ɔlweɪz sim dʒɹɔn tə wɪmən u spʌn ɪz hɛd laɪk ə tɑp? ɪf oʊnli hi nu ðə tɛnθ pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt mæt dɪɾ əbaʊt wɪmən, hi wʊɾə noʊn wʌt tə seɪ tə ɔl ðæt, bʌɾ əz ɪt wɑz, ɔl i kəd də wɑz blʌndɝ ɑn. "ɪn ɛni keɪs," hi sɛd kɔʃəsli, "ðɛɹz oʊnli wʌn θɪŋ aɪ kən du."

Rand took a deep breath. Perrin had such a serene marriage, with a smiling, gentle wife. Why was it that he always seemed drawn to women who spun his head like a top? If only he knew the tenth part of what Mat did about women, he would have known what to say to all that, but as it was, all he could do was blunder on. "In any case," he said cautiously, "there's only one thing I can do."

"ænd wʌt maɪt ðət bi?" ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz taɪt bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts, ən əɹ fʊt bɪɡæn tæpɪŋ ɑmənəsli, bʌɾ i nu ðɪs wɑz ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ tə du.

"And what might that be?" She folded her arms tight beneath her breasts, and her foot began tapping ominously, but he knew this was the right thing to do.

"sɛn jə əweɪ." dʒʌst əz i hæɾ ɪleɪn, ən eɪvinhə. "ɪf aɪ hæɾ ɛni sɛlf-kəntʃɹoʊl, aɪ wʊdn əv - " ðət fʊt stɑɹɾəd tæpɪŋ fæstɝ. meɪbi bɛɾɝ tə liv ðəɾ əloʊn. kʌmfɝɾɪd? laɪt! "mɪn, ɛniwʌn kloʊs tə mi ɪz ɪn deɪnʒɝ. ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹən ði oʊnli wʌnz u wəd hɑɹm sʌmbɑɾi nɪɹ mi dʒʌst ɑn ðə tʃæns ɪt maɪt hɑɹm mi, tu. ən naʊ ðɛɹz mi, əz wɛl. aɪ kæn kəntʃɹoʊl maɪ tɛmpɝ ɛnimɔɹ. mɪn, aɪ nɪɹli kɪl pɛɹɪn! kædzueɪn wɑz ɹaɪt. ɪm ɡoʊɪŋ mæd, əɹ ðəɹ ɔlɹɛɾi. aɪ hæv tə sɛn jə əweɪ soʊ jəl bi seɪf."

"Send you away." Just as he had Elayne, and Aviendha. "If I had any self-control, I wouldn't have - " That foot started tapping faster. Maybe better to leave that alone. Comforted? Light! "Min, anyone close to me is in danger. The Forsaken aren't the only ones who would harm somebody near me just on the chance it might harm me, too. And now there's me, as well. I can't control my temper anymore. Min, I nearly killed Perrin! Cadsuane was right. I'm going mad, or there already. I have to send you away so you'll be safe."

"hu ɪz ðɪs kædzueɪn?" ʃi sɛd, soʊ kɑmli ðəɾ i ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ət noʊɾɪsɪŋ ðəɾ əɹ fʊt wɑz stɪl tæpɪŋ. "ɑlɑnə mɛnʃən ðət neɪm əz ɪf ʃi wɑz ðə kɹieɪɾɝz sɪstɝ. noʊ, doʊn tɛl mi; aɪ doʊn kɛɹ." nɑt ðət ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm wʌn hɛɹ ʌv ə ɡæp tə tɛl ɛniθɪŋ. "aɪ doʊn kɛɹ əbaʊt pɛɹɪn, iðɝ. jə wəd hɝt mi əz sun əz hɪm. aɪ θɪŋk ðət ɡɹeɪt pʌblɪk faɪɾ ə jʊɹz wɑz ə feɪk, ɪz wʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk. aɪ doʊn kɛɹ əbaʊt jəɹ tɛmpɝ, ən aɪ doʊn kɛɹ wɛðɝ jəɹ mæd. jə kæn bi vɛɹi mæd, əɹ jud nɑt bi wɝiɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt soʊ. wʌɾ aɪ də kɛɹ əbaʊt. . . ."

"Who is this Cadsuane?" she said, so calmly that he gave a start at noticing that her foot was still tapping. "Alanna mentioned that name as if she was the Creator's sister. No, don't tell me; I don't care." Not that she gave him one hair of a gap to tell anything. "I don't care about Perrin, either. You would hurt me as soon as him. I think that great public fight of yours was a fake, is what I think. I don't care about your temper, and I don't care whether you're mad. You can't be very mad, or you'd not be worrying about it so. What I do care about. . . ."

ʃi bɛn əntɪl ðoʊz vɛɹi bɪɡ, vɛɹi dɑɹk aɪz wɝ lɛvəl wɪð hɪz, nɑɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dɪstəns əweɪ, ən sʌɾənli ðəɹ wɑz sətʃ ə laɪt ɡlɛɹɪŋ ɪn əm ðəɾ i siz seɪɾɪn, ɹɛɾi tə dɪfɛn hɪmsɛlf. "sɛn mi əweɪ tə bi seɪf?" ʃi ɡɹaʊld. "haʊ dɛɹ ju? wʌt ɹaɪt dʒju θɪŋk juv tə sɛn mi ɛniwɛɹ? jə nid mi, ɹænd ælθɹ! ɪf aɪ toʊl jə hæf ðə vjuɪŋz aɪv hæɾ əbaʊt ju, hæf jəɹ hɛɹ wəd kɝl ən ðə ɹɛs fɔl aʊt! jə dɛɹ! jə lɛt ðə meɪɾənz feɪs ɛni ɹɪsk ðeɪ wɑnt, ən jə wɑnə sɛn mi əweɪ laɪk ə tʃaɪld?"

She bent until those very big, very dark eyes were level with his, not a great distance away, and suddenly there was such a light glaring in them that he seized saidin, ready to defend himself. "Send me away to be safe?" she growled. "How dare you? What right do you think you have to send me anywhere? You need me, Rand al'Thor! If I told you half the viewings I've had about you, half your hair would curl and the rest fall out! You dare! You let the Maidens face any risk they want, and you want to send me away like a child?"

"aɪ doʊn lʌv ðə meɪɾənz." floʊɾɪŋ dip ɪn ði ɪmoʊʃənləs vɔɪd, hi hɝd ðoʊz wɝdz spɹɪŋ fɹəm ɪz tʌŋ, ən ʃɑk ʃæɾɝd ði ɛmptinəs ən sɛn seɪɾɪn flaɪɪŋ.

"I don't love the Maidens." Floating deep in the emotionless Void, he heard those words spring from his tongue, and shock shattered the emptiness and sent saidin flying.

"wɛl," mɪn sɛd, stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ. ə smɔl smaɪl æɾəd mɔɹ kɝv tə hɝ lɪps. "ðæts aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ." ən ʃi sæt daʊn ɑn ɪz læp.

"Well," Min said, straightening. A small smile added more curve to her lips. "That's out of the way." And she sat down on his lap.

ʃi hæd sɛɾ i wəd nɑt hɝt pɛɹɪn ɛni mɔɹ ðən i wəd hɝ, bʌɾ i hæd tə hɝɾ əɹ naʊ. hi hæd tə, fəɹ əɹ oʊn ɡʊd. "aɪ lʌv ɪleɪn, tu," hi sɛd bɹuɾəli. "æn eɪvinhə. jə si wʌɾ aɪ æm?" fəɹ səm ɹizən, ðət dɪd nɑt sim tə feɪz əɹ əɾ ɔl.

She had said he would not hurt Perrin any more than he would her, but he had to hurt her now. He had to, for her own good. "I love Elayne, too," he said brutally. "And Aviendha. You see what I am?" For some reason, that did not seem to faze her at all.

"ɹəɑɹk lʌvz mɔɹ ðən wʌn wʊmən," ʃi sɛd. hɝ smaɪl simd ɔlmoʊst ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi. "soʊ dʌz beɪl, ən aɪ nɛvɝ noʊɾəst ɛni tʃɹɑlɑks hɔɹnz ɑn iðɝ. noʊ, ɹænd, jə lʌv mi, ən jə kæn bæk aʊɾ ə ðæt. aɪ ɔt tə stʃɹɪŋ jə ʌp ɑn tɛntɝhʊks fəɹ wʌt juv pʊt mi θɹu, bʌt. . . . dʒʌst soʊ jəl noʊ, aɪ lʌv ju, tu." ðə smaɪl feɪɾəd ɪn ə fɹaʊn ʌv ɪntɝnəl stʃɹʌɡəl, ən faɪnəli ʃi saɪd. "laɪf wəd bi ə dil iziɝ səmtaɪmz ɪf maɪ æns hædn bɹɔt mi ʌp tə bi fɛɹ," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "æn tə bi fɛɹ, ɹænd, aɪ hæv tə tɛl jə ðəɾ ɪleɪn lʌvz ju, tu. soʊ dʌz eɪvinhə. ɪf boʊθ ə mændələnz waɪvz kən lʌv hɪm, aɪ səpoʊz θɹi wɪmən kən mænədʒ tə lʌv ju. bʌɾ aɪm hɪɹ, ən ɪf jə tʃɹaɪ tə sɛn mi əweɪ, əl taɪ maɪsɛlf tə jəɹ lɛɡ." hɝ noʊz ɹɪŋkəld. "wʌns jə stɑɹt beɪðɪŋ əɡɛn, ɛniweɪ. bʌɾ aɪ woʊnt ɡoʊ, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt."

"Rhuarc loves more than one woman," she said. Her smile seemed almost of Aes Sedai serenity. "So does Bael, and I never noticed any Trolloc's horns on either. No, Rand, you love me, and you can't back out of that. I ought to string you up on tenterhooks for what you've put me through, but. . . . Just so you'll know, I love you, too." The smile faded in a frown of internal struggle, and finally she sighed. "Life would be a deal easier sometimes if my aunts hadn't brought me up to be fair," she muttered. "And to be fair, Rand, I have to tell you that Elayne loves you, too. So does Aviendha. If both of Mandelain's wives can love him, I suppose three women can manage to love you. But I'm here, and if you try to send me away, I'll tie myself to your leg." Her nose wrinkled. "Once you start bathing again, anyway. But I won't go, no matter what."

dʒʌst ɪɡzækli laɪk ə tɑp, hɪz hɛd spʌn. "ju - lʌv mi?" hi sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. "haʊ dʒju noʊ wʌɾ ɪleɪn filz? haʊ jə noʊ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊɾ eɪvinhə? laɪt! mændələn kən də wʌɾ i laɪks, mɪn; aɪm nɑɾ il." hi fɹaʊnd. "wʌt wɑz ðət jə sɛɾ əbaʊt tɛlɪŋ mi hæf ʌv wʌt jə si? aɪ θɔt jə toʊl mi ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ən aɪm tu sɛndɪŋ jə sʌmwɛɹ seɪf. ən stɑp duɪŋ jəɹ noʊz laɪk ðæt! aɪ doʊn smɛl!" hi dʒɝk ðə hæn i hæd bɪn skɹætʃɪŋ wɪð fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt.

Just exactly like a top, his head spun. "You - love me?" he said incredulously. "How do you know what Elayne feels? How you know anything about Aviendha? Light! Mandelain can do what he likes, Min; I'm not Aiel." He frowned. "What was that you said about telling me half of what you see? I thought you told me everything. And I am too sending you somewhere safe. And stop doing your nose like that! I don't smell!" He jerked the hand he had been scratching with from under his coat.

hɝ ɑɹtʃt aɪbɹaʊ spoʊk vɑljumz, bʌɾ ə kɔɹs əɹ tʌŋ hæd tə hæv ɪts bɪt, tu. "ju dɛɹ teɪk ðət toʊn? laɪk jə doʊn bɪliv ɪt?" sʌɾənli hɝ vɔɪs bɪɡæn tə ɹaɪz baɪ ðə wɝd, ən ʃi ɔɡjɝɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst əz ðoʊ ʃi mɛn tə dʒɹaɪv ɪt θɹu hɪm. "du jə θɪŋk aɪd ɡoʊ tə bɛd wɪð ə mæn aɪ dɪd nɑt lʌv? də ju? əɹ meɪbi jə θɪŋk jə ɑɹənt wɝθ lʌvɪŋ? ɪz ðəɾ ɪt?" ʃi meɪɾ ə saʊn laɪk ə stɛpt-ɑn kæt. "soʊ ɪm səm lɪɾəl bɪɾ ə flʌf wɪθaʊɾ ə bɹeɪn ɪn əɹ hɛd, fɔlɪŋ ɪn lʌv wɪð ə wɝθləs laʊt, æm aɪ? jə sɪt ðəɹ ɡeɪpɪŋ laɪk ə sɪk ɑks ən slændɝ maɪ wɪts, maɪ teɪst, maɪ - "

Her arched eyebrow spoke volumes, but of course her tongue had to have its bit, too. "You dare take that tone? Like you don't believe it?" Suddenly her voice began to rise by the word, and she augured a finger against his chest as though she meant to drive it through him. "Do you think I'd go to bed with a man I did not love? Do you? Or maybe you think you aren't worth loving? Is that it?" She made a sound like a stepped-on cat. "So I'm some little bit of fluff without a brain in her head, falling in love with a worthless lout, am I? You sit there gaping like a sick ox and slander my wits, my taste, my - "

"ɪf jə doʊn kwaɪət daʊn ən tɔk sɛns," hi ɡɹaʊld, "aɪ swɛɹ, əl smæk jəɹ bɑɾəm!" ðət lɛpt aʊɾ ə noʊwɛɹ, aʊɾ ə slipləs naɪts ən kənfjuʒən, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i kəd bɪɡɪn tə fɔɹm ən əpɑlədʒi, ʃi smaɪld. ðə wʊmən smaɪld!

"If you don't quiet down and talk sense," he growled, "I swear, I'll smack your bottom!" That leaped out of nowhere, out of sleepless nights and confusion, but before he could begin to form an apology, she smiled. The woman smiled!

"æt lis jəɹ nɑt sʌlkɪŋ ɛnimɔɹ," ʃi sɛd. "doʊn ɛvɝ waɪn, ɹænd; jə ɑɹ noʊ ɡʊɾ əɾ ɪt. naʊ, ðɛn. jə wɑn sɛns? aɪ lʌv ju, ən əl nɑt ɡoʊ. ɪf jə tʃɹaɪ tə sɛn mi əweɪ, əl tɛl ðə meɪɾənz jə ɹuən mi ən kæs mi əsaɪd. əl tɛl ɛvɹibɑɾi hu wɪl lɪsən. əl - "

"At least you're not sulking anymore," she said. "Don't ever whine, Rand; you are no good at it. Now, then. You want sense? I love you, and I will not go. If you try to send me away, I'll tell the Maidens you ruined me and cast me aside. I'll tell everybody who will listen. I will - "

hi ɹeɪzd ɪz ɹaɪt hæn ən stʌɾid ðə flæɾ ə hɪz pɑm, wɛɹ ðə bɹændɪd hɛɹən stʊd klɪɹ, ðən lʊkt ət hɝ. ʃi aɪɾ ɪz hænd wɛɹəli ən ʃɪftəd hɝsɛlf ɑn ɪz niz, ðən kənspɪkjuəsli ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪksɛpt ɪz feɪs.

He raised his right hand and studied the flat of his palm, where the branded heron stood clear, then looked at her. She eyed his hand warily and shifted herself on his knees, then conspicuously ignored everything except his face.

"aɪ woʊnt ɡoʊ, ɹænd," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. "ju nid mi."

"I won't go, Rand," she said quietly. "You need me."

"haʊ dʒju də ɪt?" hi saɪd, slʌmpɪŋ bæk ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ. "ivən wən jə stæn mi ɑn maɪ hɛd, jə meɪk ɔl maɪ tʃɹʌbəlz ʃɹɪŋk."

"How do you do it?" he sighed, slumping back in the chair. "Even when you stand me on my head, you make all my troubles shrink."

mɪn snɪft. "ju nid tə bi stʊɾ ɑn jəɹ hɛd mɔɹ ɔfən. tɛl mi. ðɪs eɪvinhə. aɪ doʊn səpoʊz ðəɹ ɪz ɛni tʃæns ʃiz boʊni ən skɑɹd, laɪk nændɛɹə."

Min sniffed. "You need to be stood on your head more often. Tell me. This Aviendha. I don't suppose there is any chance she's bony and scarred, like Nandera."

hi læft ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf. laɪt, haʊ lɔŋ sɪns i hæd læft wɪð plɛʒɝ? "mɪn, aɪd seɪ ʃiz əz pɹɪɾi əz ju, bʌt haʊ kən jə kəmpɛɹ tu sʌnɹaɪsəz?"

He laughed in spite of himself. Light, how long since he had laughed with pleasure? "Min, I'd say she is as pretty as you, but how can you compare two sunrises?"

fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm wɪð ə smɔl smaɪl, əz ɪf ʃi kəd nɑt dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ tə bi sɝpɹaɪzd əɹ dɪlaɪɾəd. "ju ɑɹ ə vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs mæn, ɹænd ælθɹ," ʃi mɝmɝd, linɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ɪm sloʊli. hi θɔɾ i maɪt fɔl ɪndə hɝ aɪz ən bi lɔst. ɔl ðoʊz taɪmz bɪfɔɹ wən ʃi sæɾ ɑn ɪz læp ən kɪs hɪm, ɔl ðoʊz taɪmz i hæd θɔt ʃi wɑz oʊnli tizɪŋ ə kʌntʃɹi bɔɪ, hi hæd nɪɹli kɹɔld aʊɾ ə hɪz skɪn wɑntɪŋ tə kɪs əɹ fɝɛvɝ. naʊ, ɪf ʃi kɪst ɪm əɡɛn naʊ. . . .

For a moment she stared at him with a small smile, as if she could not decide whether to be surprised or delighted. "You are a very dangerous man, Rand al'Thor," she murmured, leaning toward him slowly. He thought he might fall into her eyes and be lost. All those times before when she sat on his lap and kissed him, all those times he had thought she was only teasing a country boy, he had nearly crawled out of his skin wanting to kiss her forever. Now, if she kissed him again now. . . .

teɪkɪŋ əɹ fɝmli baɪ ði ɑɹmz, hi stʊɾ ən sɛɾ əɹ ɑn əɹ fit. hi lʌv hɝ, ən ʃi lʌv hɪm, bʌɾ i hæd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðəɾ i wɑntəd tə kɪs ɪleɪn fɝɛvɝ wən i θɔɾ əbaʊt hɝ, ən eɪvinhə. wʌtɛvɝ mɪn sɛɾ əbaʊt ɹəɑɹk əɹ ɛni il mæn, ʃi hæd meɪɾ ə pʊɹ bɑɹɡən ðə deɪ ʃi fɛl ɪn lʌv wɪð hɪm. "ju sɛd hæf, mɪn," hi sɛd kwaɪətli. "wʌt vjuɪŋz hævən jə toʊl mi?"

Taking her firmly by the arms, he stood and set her on her feet. He loved her, and she loved him, but he had to remember that he wanted to kiss Elayne forever when he thought about her, and Aviendha. Whatever Min said about Rhuarc or any Aiel man, she had made a poor bargain the day she fell in love with him. "You said half, Min," he said quietly. "What viewings haven't you told me?"

ʃi lʊkt ʌp əɾ ɪm wɪð wʌɾ ɔlmoʊs maɪɾ əv bɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən, ɪksɛpt ə kɔɹs ðəɾ ɪt kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn. "jɔɹ ɪn lʌv wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, mɪn fɑɹʃɔ," ʃi ɡɹʌmbəld, "æn bɛs jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt. bɛs jə dɪd, tu, ɹænd," ʃi æɾəd, pʊlɪŋ əweɪ. hi lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ ɹɪlʌktənli, iɡɝli; hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɪtʃ. "juv bɪn bæk ɪn kɛɹhin hæf ə wik, ən jə stɪl əv dʌn nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə si foʊk. bɹəleɪn θɔt jə maɪt dʒɹæɡ jəɹ fiɾ əɡɛn. ʃi lɛf mi ə lɛɾɝ, æskɪŋ mi tə kip ɹimaɪndɪŋ ju, oʊnli jə wʊdn lemi - wɛl, nɛvɝ maɪn ðæt. bɹəleɪn θɪŋks ðəɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə jə sʌmhaʊ; ʃi sɛz jəɹ ðə fʊlfɪlmən ə səm pɹɑfəsi ʌv ðɛɹz."

She looked up at him with what almost might have been frustration, except of course that it could not have been. "You're in love with the Dragon Reborn, Min Farshaw," she grumbled, "and best you remember it. Best you did, too, Rand," she added, pulling away. He let her go reluctantly, eagerly; he did not know which. "You've been back in Cairhien half a week, and you still have done nothing about the Sea Folk. Berelain thought you might drag your feet again. She left me a letter, asking me to keep reminding you, only you wouldn't let me - Well, never mind that. Berelain thinks they're important to you somehow; she says you're the fulfillment of some prophecy of theirs."

"aɪ noʊ ɔl əbaʊt ðæt, mɪn. aɪ - " hi hæd θɔt tə liv ðə si foʊk aʊɾ ə biɪŋ tæŋɡəld wɪð hɪm; ðeɪ wɝ nɑt mɛnʃən ɪn ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ðəɾ i kəd faɪnd. bʌɾ ɪf i wɑz gɑnə lɛt mɪn steɪ nɪɹ hɪm, lɛɾ əɹ ɹɪsk ðə deɪnʒɝz. . . . ʃi hæd wʌn, hi ɹilaɪzd. hi hæd wɑtʃt ɪleɪn wɔk əweɪ wɪð ɪz hɑɹt sɪŋkɪŋ, wɑtʃt eɪvinhə ɡoʊ wɪð ɪz stʌmək ɪn nɑts. hi kəd nɑt də ɪɾ əɡɛn. mɪn stʊd ðəɹ weɪɾɪŋ. "aɪl ɡoʊ tə ðɛɹ ʃɪp. əl ɡoʊ tədeɪ. ðə si foʊk kən nil tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪn ɔl ɪz splɛndɝ. aɪ doʊn səpoʊz ðəɹ wɑz ɛvɝ ɛni hoʊp fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. iðɝ ðəɹ maɪn, əɹ ðəɹ maɪ ɛnəmiz. ðəɾ ɪz haʊ ɪɾ ɔlweɪz simz tə bi. wɪl jə tɛl mi əbaʊt ðoʊz vjuɪŋz, naʊ?"

"I know all about that, Min. I - " He had thought to leave the Sea Folk out of being tangled with him; they were not mentioned in the Prophecies of the Dragon that he could find. But if he was going to let Min stay near him, let her risk the dangers. . . . She had won, he realized. He had watched Elayne walk away with his heart sinking, watched Aviendha go with his stomach in knots. He could not do it again. Min stood there waiting. "I'll go to their ship. I'll go today. The Sea Folk can kneel to the Dragon Reborn in all his splendor. I don't suppose there was ever any hope for anything else. Either they're mine, or they're my enemies. That is how it always seems to be. Will you tell me about those viewings, now?"

"ɹænd, jə ʃəd stʌɾi wʌt ðəɹ laɪk bɪfɔɹ jə - "

"Rand, you should study what they're like before you - "

"ðə vjuɪŋz?"

"The viewings?"

ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz ən fɹaʊn ʌp əɾ ɪm θɹu hɝ læʃɪz. ʃi tʃuɾ əɹ lɪp ən fɹaʊn ət ðə dɔɹ. ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ən mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. ət læst ʃi sɛd, "ðɛɹ ɪz oʊnli wʌn, ɹɪli. aɪ wɑz ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾɪŋ. aɪ sɔ jə ən ənʌðɝ mæn. aɪ kʊdn meɪk aʊɾ iðɝ feɪs, bʌɾ aɪ nu wʌn wɑz ju. jə tʌtʃt, ən sim tə mɝdʒ ɪndə wʌn ənʌðɝ, ænd. . . ." hɝ maʊθ taɪɾənd wɝidli, ən ʃi wɛn ɑn ɪn ə vɛɹi smɔl vɔɪs. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt minz, ɹænd, ɪksɛp ðət wʌn ə jə daɪz, ən wʌn dʌznt. aɪ - waɪ ɑɹ jə ɡɹɪnɪŋ? ðɪs ɪzən ə dʒoʊk, ɹænd. aɪ də nɑt noʊ wɪtʃ ə jə daɪz."

She folded her arms and frowned up at him through her lashes. She chewed her lip and frowned at the door. She shook her head and muttered under her breath. At last she said, "There is only one, really. I was exaggerating. I saw you and another man. I couldn't make out either face, but I knew one was you. You touched, and seemed to merge into one another, and. . . ." Her mouth tightened worriedly, and she went on in a very small voice. "I don't know what it means, Rand, except that one of you dies, and one doesn't. I - Why are you grinning? This isn't a joke, Rand. I do not know which of you dies."

"aɪm ɡɹɪnɪŋ kəz juv ɡɪvən mi vɛɹi ɡʊd nuz," hi sɛd, tʌtʃɪŋ əɹ tʃik. ði ʌðɝ mæn hæd tə bi luz θɝɪn. aɪm nɑt dʒʌst ɪnseɪn ən hɪɹɪŋ vɔɪsəz, hi θɔt, dʒubələnt. wʌn lɪvd ən wʌn daɪd, bʌɾ i hæd noʊn fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm ðəɾ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ. ət list i wɑz nɑt mæd. əɹ nɑɾ əz fɑɹ mæɾ əz i hæd fɪɹd. ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ðə tɛmpɝ i kəd bɛɹli kəntʃɹoʊl. "ju si, aɪ - "

"I'm grinning because you've given me very good news," he said, touching her cheek. The other man had to be Lews Therin. I'm not just insane and hearing voices, he thought, jubilant. One lived and one died, but he had known for a long time that he was going to die. At least he was not mad. Or not as far mad as he had feared. There was still the temper he could barely control. "You see, I - "

sʌɾənli hi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i hæd ɡɔn fɹəm tʌtʃɪŋ əɹ tʃik tə kʌpɪŋ əɹ feɪs ɪn boʊθ hænz. hi pʊld əm əweɪ əz ɪf bɝnd. mɪn pɝst əɹ lɪps ən ɡeɪv ɪm ə ɹipɹoʊvɪŋ lʊk, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt gɑnə teɪk ædvæntɪdʒ ə hɝ. ɪt wəd nɑt bi fɛɹ tə hɝ. lʌkəli, hɪz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld laʊdli.

Suddenly he realized that he had gone from touching her cheek to cupping her face in both hands. He pulled them away as if burned. Min pursed her lips and gave him a reproving look, but he was not going to take advantage of her. It would not be fair to her. Luckily, his stomach rumbled loudly.

"aɪ nid sʌmθɪŋ tə it, ɪf aɪm gɑnə si ðə si foʊk. aɪ sɔ ə tʃɹeɪ. . . ."

"I need something to eat, if I'm going to see the Sea Folk. I saw a tray. . . ."

mɪn meɪɾ ə saʊn mɔɹ snɔɹt ðən snɪf əz i tɝn əweɪ, bʌt ðə nɛks moʊmənt ʃi wɑz seɪlɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə tɔl dɔɹz. "ju niɾ ə bæθ, ɪf wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə si foʊk."

Min made a sound more snort than sniff as he turned away, but the next moment she was sailing toward the tall doors. "You need a bath, if we're going to the Sea Folk."

nændɛɹə wɑz dɪlaɪɾəd, nɑɾɪŋ ɪnθuziæstɪkli ən sɛndɪŋ meɪɾənz ɹʌnɪŋ. ðoʊ ʃi dɪd lin kloʊs tə mɪn ən seɪ, "aɪ ʃəɾ əv lɛt jə ɪn ðə fɝs deɪ. aɪ wɑntəd tə kɪk hɪm, bʌɾ ɪts nɑt dʌn, kɪkɪŋ ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn." baɪ hɝ toʊn, ɪt ʃʊɾə bɪn dʌn. ʃi spoʊk sɔfli, jɛt nɑt soʊ sɔfli hi kəd nɑt hɪɹ. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət wɑz dɪlɪbɝɪt; ʃi dɝɛktəd tu ʃɑɹp ə ɡlɛɹ əɾ ɪm fəɹ ɪt nɑt tə bi.

Nandera was delighted, nodding enthusiastically and sending Maidens running. Though she did lean close to Min and say, "I should have let you in the first day. I wanted to kick him, but it is not done, kicking the Car'a'carn." By her tone, it should have been done. She spoke softly, yet not so softly he could not hear. He was sure that was deliberate; she directed too sharp a glare at him for it not to be.

meɪɾənz lʌɡd ɪn ðə bɪɡ kɑpɝ tʌb ðɛmsɛlvz, flæʃɪŋ hæntɔk wʌns ðeɪ sɛɾ ɪt daʊn, læfɪŋ ən tu ɪksaɪɾəd tə lɛt ðə sʌn pæləs sɝvəns də ðə wɝk, əɹ bɹɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹim ə bʌkəts fɪld wɪð hɑt wɔɾɝ, iðɝ. ɹænd hæɾ ə hɑɹd taɪm teɪkɪŋ ɪz oʊn kloʊðz ɔf. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, hi hæɾ ə hɑɹd taɪm wɑʃɪŋ hɪmsɛlf, ən i kəd nɑɾ ɪskeɪp nændɛɹə læðɝɪŋ ɪz hɛɹ. fleɪksən-hɛɹd soʊmɑɹə ən faɪɝi-hɛɹɾ ɪneɪlə ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn ʃeɪvɪŋ ɪm əz i sæt tʃɛst-dip ɪn ðə tʌb, kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ soʊ ɪntɛnli ðeɪ simd əfɹeɪd ðeɪ maɪt kʌɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. hi wɑz juz tə ðət fɹəm ʌðɝ taɪmz ðeɪ hæd ɹəfjuz tə lɛɾ ɪm hændəl bɹʌʃ ən ɹeɪzɝ hɪmsɛlf. hi wɑz juz tə ðə meɪɾənz u stʊɾ ɝaʊnd wɑtʃɪŋ, ɔfɝɪŋ tə skɹʌb ɪz bæk əɹ ɪz fit, hænz flɪkɝɪŋ ɪn saɪlən tʃæɾɝ ən stɪl mɔɹ ðən hæf-skændəlaɪzd ət ðə saɪɾ ə sʌmwʌn sɪɾɪŋ ɪn wɔɾɝ. bɪsaɪdz, hi mænədʒ tə ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə sʌm, ət list, baɪ sɛndɪŋ əm ɔf kæɹiɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz.

Maidens lugged in the big copper tub themselves, flashing handtalk once they set it down, laughing and too excited to let the Sun Palace servants do the work, or bring in the stream of buckets filled with hot water, either. Rand had a hard time taking his own clothes off. For that matter, he had a hard time washing himself, and he could not escape Nandera lathering his hair. Flaxen-haired Somara and fiery-haired Enaila insisted on shaving him as he sat chest-deep in the tub, concentrating so intently they seemed afraid they might cut his throat. He was used to that from other times they had refused to let him handle brush and razor himself. He was used to the Maidens who stood around watching, offering to scrub his back or his feet, hands flickering in silent chatter and still more than half-scandalized at the sight of someone sitting in water. Besides, he managed to get rid of some, at least, by sending them off carrying orders.

wʌɾ i wɑz nɑt juz tə wɑz mɪn, sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə bɛd wɪð əɹ tʃɪn ɑn əɹ hænz, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə hoʊl θɪŋ ɪn vɛɹi ɛvəɾənt fæsəneɪʃən. ɪn ɔl ðə kɹaʊɾ ə meɪɾənz, hi hæd nɑt ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz ðəɹ əntɪl i wɑz neɪkəd, ən ɔl ðəɹ wɑz tə də ðən wɑz sɪt daʊn əz fæst əz i kʊd, splæʃɪŋ wɔɾɝ oʊvɝ ðə saɪdz ə ðə tʌb. ðə wʊmən wʊɾə dʌn vɛɹi wɛl əz ə meɪɾən hɝsɛlf. ʃi dɪskʌst ɪm wɪð ðə meɪɾənz kwaɪɾ oʊpənli, wɪð nɛvɝ ə blʌʃ! hi wɑz ðə wʌn u blʌʃt.

What he was not used to was Min, sitting cross-legged on the bed with her chin on her hands, watching the whole thing in very evident fascination. In all the crowd of Maidens, he had not realized she was there until he was naked, and all there was to do then was sit down as fast as he could, splashing water over the sides of the tub. The woman would have done very well as a Maiden herself. She discussed him with the Maidens quite openly, with never a blush! He was the one who blushed.

"jɛs, hiz vɛɹi mɑɾəst," ʃi sɛd, əɡɹiɪŋ wɪð mɑlindɛɹ, ə wʊmən mɔɹ ɹaʊndəd ðən moʊs meɪɾənz, wɪð ðə dɑɹkəs hɛɹ ɹænd hæd sin ɑn ɛni il. "mɑɾəsti ɪz ə mænz kɹaʊnɪŋ ɡlɔɹi." mɑlindɛɹ nɑɾəd soʊbɝli, bʌt mɪn wɔɹ ə ɡɹɪn ðət nɪɹli splɪɾ əɹ tʃiks.

"Yes, he is very modest," she said, agreeing with Malindare, a woman more rounded than most Maidens, with the darkest hair Rand had seen on any Aiel. "Modesty is a man's crowning glory." Malindare nodded soberly, but Min wore a grin that nearly split her cheeks.

ænd, "oʊ, noʊ, doʊmil; ɪt wəd bi ə ʃeɪm tə spɔɪl sətʃ ə pɹɪɾi feɪs wɪð ə skɑɹ." doʊmil, ɡɹeɪɝ ðən nændɛɹə, linɝ, ən wɪð ə θɹʌstɪŋ tʃɪn, ɪnsɪstəd ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt pɹɪɾi ɪnʌf tə də wɪθaʊɾ ə skɑɹ tə sɛɾ ɔf wʌt bjuɾi hi hæd. hɝ wɝdz. ðə ɹɛst wɑz wɝs. ðə meɪɾənz hæɾ ɔlweɪz sim tə ɛndʒɔɪ meɪkɪŋ ɪz feɪs ɹɛd. mɪn sɝɾənli dɪd.

And, "Oh, no, Domeille; it would be a shame to spoil such a pretty face with a scar." Domeille, grayer than Nandera, leaner, and with a thrusting chin, insisted that he was not pretty enough to do without a scar to set off what beauty he had. Her words. The rest was worse. The Maidens had always seemed to enjoy making his face red. Min certainly did.

"ju hæv tə dʒɹaɪ ɔf sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ɹænd," ʃi sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ə lɔŋ pis ʌv waɪt taʊəlɪŋ wɪð boʊθ hænz. ʃi stʊɾ ə ɡʊd θɹi peɪsɪz fɹəm ðə tʌb, ən ðə meɪɾənz hæɾ ɔl bækt ɪndə ə wɑtʃɪŋ ɹɪŋ. mɪnz smaɪl wɑz soʊ ɪnəsən ɛni mædʒəstʃɹeɪt wʊɾə faʊn əɹ ɡɪlti ɑn ðəɾ əloʊn. "kʌm ən ɡɛt dʒɹaɪ, ɹænd."

"You have to dry off sooner or later, Rand," she said, holding up a long piece of white toweling with both hands. She stood a good three paces from the tub, and the Maidens had all backed into a watching ring. Min's smile was so innocent any magistrate would have found her guilty on that alone. "Come and get dry, Rand."

hi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn soʊ ɹɪliv tə pʊl ɑn kloʊðz ɪn ɪz laɪf.

He had never been so relieved to pull on clothes in his life.

baɪ ðət taɪm, ɔl ɪz ɔɹɾɝz hæd bɪn kæɹiɾ aʊt, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz ɪn ɹɛɾinəs. ɹænd ælθɹ maɪɾ əv bɪn ɹuɾəd ɪn ə bæθtəb, bʌt ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə si foʊk ɪn ə staɪl ðət wəd sɛn əm plʌməɾɪŋ tə ðɛɹ niz wɪð ɑ.

By that time, all his orders had been carried out, and everything was in readiness. Rand al'Thor might have been routed in a bathtub, but the Dragon Reborn was going to the Sea Folk in a style that would send them plummeting to their knees with awe.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾifɔɹ


CHAPTER 34

tɑvɝən


Ta'veren

ɔl wɑz ɹɛɾi əz ɹænd hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹɾ ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə sʌn pæləs. əɹ ɔlmoʊst ɔl. ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sʌn slæntəd ʃædoʊz fɹəm ðə stɛp taʊɝz, soʊ oʊnli tɛn peɪsɪz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə tɔl bɹɑnz ɡeɪts leɪ ɪn fʊl laɪt. dæʃivə ən flɪn ən nɛɹɪʃmə, ðə θɹi æʃəmən i hæd ɹɪteɪnd, weɪɾəd bɪsaɪd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, ivən dæʃivə ɹisplɛndənt wɪð ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹɾ ən ɹɛd-ænd-ɡoʊl dʒɹæɡən ɑn ɪz blæk kɑlɝ, ðoʊ hi stɪl tʌtʃt ðə sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪz hɪp əz ɪf kɑnstənli sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ɪt ðɛɹ. ə hʌnʒɹəd ə dɑbɹeɪnz ɑɹmmɪn sæt ðɛɹ maʊns bɪhaɪn dɑbɹeɪn hɪmsɛlf wɪð tu lɔŋ bænɝz ðət hʌŋ daʊn ɪn ðə stɪl ɛɹ, ðɛɹ dɑɹk ɑɹmɝ nuli lækɝd soʊ ɪt ɡlɪsən ɪn ðə sʌn, ən sɪlk stʃɹimɝz ə ɹɛɾ ən waɪɾ ən blæk taɪd bɪloʊ ðə hɛdz ə ðɛɹ lænsɪz. ðeɪ ɹeɪzd ə tʃɪɹ wən ɹænd əpɪɹd, hɪz sɔɹd bɛlt wɪð ɪts ɡɪldɪd dʒɹæɡən bʌkəl stʃɹæpt oʊvɝ ə ɹɛd koʊt hɛvi wɪð ɡoʊld.

All was ready as Rand had ordered in the courtyard at the front of the Sun Palace. Or almost all. The morning sun slanted shadows from the stepped towers, so only ten paces in front of the tall bronze gates lay in full light. Dashiva and Flinn and Narishma, the three Asha'man he had retained, waited beside their horses, even Dashiva resplendent with the silver sword and red-and-gold Dragon on his black collar, though he still touched the sword at his hip as if constantly surprised to find it there. A hundred of Dobraine's armsmen sat their mounts behind Dobraine himself with two long banners that hung down in the still air, their dark armor newly lacquered so it glistened in the sun, and silk streamers of red and white and black tied below the heads of their lances. They raised a cheer when Rand appeared, his sword belt with its gilded Dragon buckle strapped over a red coat heavy with gold.

"ælθɹ! ælθɹ! ælθɹ!" fɪl ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. pipəl kɹaʊɾɪŋ ði ɑɹtʃɝz' bælkəniz dʒɔɪn ɪn, tɛɹən ən kɛɹhinɪn ɪn ðɛɹ sɪlks ən leɪsəz u dʒʌst ə wik bɪfɔɹ hæd noʊ daʊt tʃɪɹd koʊləveɪɪɹ əz laʊdli. mɛn ən wɪmən u wəɾ əz sun i hæd nɛvɝ ɹɪtɝn tə kɛɹhin, səm ə ðɛm, weɪvɪŋ ðɛɹ ɑɹmz ən ɡɪvɪŋ vɔɪs. hi ɹeɪz ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ tə æknɑlɪdʒ ðɛm, ən ðeɪ ɹɔɹd laʊɾɝ.

"Al'Thor! Al'Thor! Al'Thor!" filled the courtyard. People crowding the archers' balconies joined in, Tairen and Cairhienin in their silks and laces who just a week before had no doubt cheered Colavaere as loudly. Men and women who would as soon he had never returned to Cairhien, some of them, waving their arms and giving voice. He raised the Dragon Scepter to acknowledge them, and they roared louder.

ə θʌndɝəs ɹoʊl ə dʒɹʌmz ən ə blɛɹ ə tʃɹʌmpəts ɹoʊz θɹu ðə tʃɪɹz, pɹədus baɪ ə dʌzən mɔɹ ə dɑbɹeɪnz mɛn u wɔɹ kɹɪmzən tɑbɝdz wɪð ðə blæk-ænd-waɪt dɪsk ɑn ðə tʃɛst, hæf kæɹiɪŋ lɔŋ tʃɹʌmpəts dʒɹeɪpt ɪn aɪdɛntɪkəl klɔθs, ði ʌðɝ hæf wɪð kɛɾəl dʒɹʌmz ɔlsoʊ dɛkɝeɪɾəd slʌŋ ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə hɔɹsəz. faɪv ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðɛɹ ʃɔlz keɪm tə miɾ ɪm əz i dɪsɛndəd ðə bɹɔd stɛɹz. ət list, ðeɪ ɡlaɪɾɪd təwɔɹd hɪm. ɑlɑnə ɡeɪv ɪm wʌn sɝtʃɪŋ lʊk wɪð ðoʊz bɪɡ dɑɹk pɛnətʃɹeɪɾɪŋ aɪz; ðə taɪni nɑɾ ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz ɪn ɪz skʌl sɛd ʃi wɑz kɑmɝ, mɔɹ ɹɪlækst, ðən i ɛvɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝd. ðən ʃi meɪɾ ə smɔl moʊʃən, ən mɪn tʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm ən wɛn əsaɪd wɪð hɝ. bɛɹə ən ði ʌðɝz meɪd smɔl kɝtsiz, ɪnklaɪnɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛdz slaɪtli, əz il stʃɹimd aʊɾ ə ðə pæləs bɪhaɪn hɪm. nændɛɹə lɛd tu hʌnʒɹəd meɪɾənz - ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ əbaʊt tə bi aʊtʃoʊn baɪ ði "oʊθbɹeɪkɝz" - ən kɑmɑɹ, ə ɹeɪnʒi bɛn pik dɛɹn ɡɹeɪɝ ðən nændɛɹə ən hæf ə hɛd tɔlɝ ðən ɹænd, lɛd tu hʌnʒɹəd siə dun u wəd nɑt bi aʊtʃoʊn baɪ fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ, lɛɾ əloʊn kɛɹhinɪn. ðeɪ swʌŋ pæst ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ɹɪŋ ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. bɛɹə laɪk ə pɹaʊd fɑɹmwaɪf ən ɑlɑnə laɪk səm dɑɹkli bjuɾəfəl kwin, ɪn ðɛɹ ɡɹin-fɹɪnd ʃɔlz, ən plʌmp ɹæfɛlə, ivən dɑɹkɝ ɹæpt ɪn əɹ blu, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm æŋkʃəsli, ən kul-aɪd feɪlʒɹɪn, jɛɾ ənʌðɝ ɡɹin, hɝ θɪn bɹeɪdz wɝkt wɪð kʌlɝd bidz, ən slɪm mɛɹænə ɪn əɹ ɡɹeɪ, huz fɹaʊn meɪd ɹæfɛlə sim ə pɪktʃɝ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi. faɪv.

A thunderous roll of drums and a blare of trumpets rose through the cheers, produced by a dozen more of Dobraine's men who wore crimson tabards with the black-and-white disc on the chest, half carrying long trumpets draped in identical cloths, the other half with kettle drums also decorated slung on either side of the horses. Five Aes Sedai in their shawls came to meet him as he descended the broad stairs. At least, they glided toward him. Alanna gave him one searching look with those big dark penetrating eyes; the tiny knot of emotions in his skull said she was calmer, more relaxed, than he ever remembered. Then she made a small motion, and Min touched his arm and went aside with her. Bera and the others made small curtsies, inclining their heads slightly, as Aiel streamed out of the palace behind him. Nandera led two hundred Maidens - they were not about to be outshone by the "oathbreakers" - and Camar, a rangy Bent Peak Daryne grayer than Nandera and half a head taller than Rand, led two hundred Seia Doon who would not be outshone by Far Dareis Mai, let alone Cairhienin. They swung past on either side of him and the Aes Sedai to ring the courtyard. Bera like a proud farmwife and Alanna like some darkly beautiful queen, in their green-fringed shawls, and plump Rafela, even darker wrapped in her blue, watching him anxiously, and cool-eyed Faeldrin, yet another Green, her thin braids worked with colored beads, and slim Merana in her gray, whose frown made Rafela seem a picture of Aes Sedai serenity. Five.

"wɛɹ ɑɹ kaɪɹunə ən vɛɹɪn?" hi dɪmændəd. "aɪ kɔl fəɹ ɔl ə ju."

"Where are Kiruna and Verin?" he demanded. "I called for all of you."

"soʊ jə dɪd, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," bɛɹə ænsɝd smuðli. ʃi meɪɾ ənʌðɝ kɝtsi, tu; oʊnli ðə slaɪɾəst dɪp, bʌɾ ɪt tʊk ɪm əbæk. "wi kəd nɑt faɪn vɛɹɪn; ʃiz sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ði il tɛns. kwɛstʃənɪŋ ðə . . ." hɝ smuð toʊn fɔltɝd fəɹ wʌn ɪnstənt. ". . . ðə pɹɪznɝz, aɪ bɪliv, ɪn ən ətɛmp tə lɝn wʌt wɑz plænd wʌns ðeɪ ɹitʃt tɑɹ vəlɑn." wʌns i ɹitʃt tɑɹ vəlɑn; ʃi nu ɪnʌf nɑt tə blɝt ðət wɛɹ ɛniwʌn kəd hɪɹ. "æn kaɪɹunə ɪz . . . kənsʌltɪŋ wɪð sɔɹɪliə ɑn ə mæɾɝ ə pɹoʊɾəkɑl. bʌɾ aɪm kwaɪt sɝɾən ʃɪl bi mɔɹ ðən hæpi tə dʒɔɪn əs ɪf jə sɛn ə pɝsənəl sʌmənz tə sɔɹɪliə. aɪ kəd ɡoʊ maɪsɛlf, ɪf jə - "

"So you did, my Lord Dragon," Bera answered smoothly. She made another curtsy, too; only the slightest dip, but it took him aback. "We could not find Verin; she is somewhere in the Aiel tents. Questioning the . . ." Her smooth tone faltered for one instant. ". . . the prisoners, I believe, in an attempt to learn what was planned once they reached Tar Valon." Once he reached Tar Valon; she knew enough not to blurt that where anyone could hear. "And Kiruna is . . . consulting with Sorilea on a matter of protocol. But I'm quite certain she will be more than happy to join us if you send a personal summons to Sorilea. I could go myself, if you - "

hi weɪv ðəɾ əweɪ. faɪv ʃəd bi ɪnʌf. pɝhæps vɛɹɪn kəd lɝn sʌmθɪŋ. dɪɾ i wɑnə noʊ? ən kaɪɹunə. ə mæɾɝ ə pɹoʊɾəkɑl? "aɪm ɡlæd jə ɑɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ ɑn wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz." bɛɹə stɑɹɾəd tə spik, ðən kloʊzd əɹ maʊθ fɝmli. wʌtɛvɝ ɑlɑnə wɑz seɪɪŋ tə mɪn, skɑɹlət spɑts hæd flɛɹɾ ɪn mɪnz tʃiks ən ʃi hæd ɹeɪzd əɹ tʃɪn, ðoʊ ɑdli, ʃi sim tə bi ɹɪplaɪɪŋ kɑmli ɪnʌf. hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ʃi wəd tɛl hɪm. wʌn θɪŋ i wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv əbaʊt wɪmən wɑz ðəɾ ɛvɹi læst wʌn hæd sikɹət pleɪsəz ɪn əɹ hɑɹt, səmtaɪmz ʃɛɹd wɪð ənʌðɝ wʊmən bʌt nɛvɝ wɪð ə mæn. ði oʊnli θɪŋ i wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv əbaʊt wɪmən.

He waved that away. Five should be enough. Perhaps Verin could learn something. Did he want to know? And Kiruna. A matter of protocol? "I'm glad you are getting on with the Wise Ones." Bera started to speak, then closed her mouth firmly. Whatever Alanna was saying to Min, scarlet spots had flared in Min's cheeks and she had raised her chin, though oddly, she seemed to be replying calmly enough. He wondered whether she would tell him. One thing he was sure of about women was that every last one had secret places in her heart, sometimes shared with another woman but never with a man. The only thing he was sure of about women.

"aɪ dɪdn kʌm aʊt hɪɹ tə stæn ɔl deɪ," hi sɛɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ ɝeɪnʒd ðɛmsɛlvz wɪð bɛɹə ɪn ðə lɛd, ði ʌðɝz hæf ə stɛp bæk. ɪf ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn hɝ, ɪt wʊɾə bɪn kaɪɹunə. ðɛɹ oʊn ɝeɪnʒmənts, nɑt hɪz. hi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli kɛɹ soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ hɛl tə ðɛɹ oʊðz, ən i maɪɾ əv lɛft ɪɾ əloʊn ɪf nɑt fəɹ mɪn ən ɑlɑnə. "mɛɹænə wɪl spik fəɹ jə fɹəm naʊ ɑn; jəl teɪk jəɹ ɔɹɾɝz fɹəm hɝ."

"I didn't come out here to stand all day," he said irritably. The Aes Sedai had arranged themselves with Bera in the lead, the others half a step back. If it had not been her, it would have been Kiruna. Their own arrangements, not his. He did not really care so long as they held to their oaths, and he might have left it alone if not for Min and Alanna. "Merana will speak for you from now on; you will take your orders from her."

baɪ ðə sʌɾənli waɪɾənd aɪz, jə wʊɾə θɔɾ i hæd slæpt ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm. ɪnkluɾɪŋ mɛɹænə. ivən ɑlɑnəz hɛd wɪpt ɝaʊnd. waɪ ʃəd ðeɪ bi stɑɹɾəld? tʃɹu, bɛɹə əɹ kaɪɹunə hæd dʌn ɔlmoʊst ɔl ðə tɔkɪŋ sɪns dəməaɪz wɛlz, bʌt mɛɹænə hæd bɪn ði æmbæsəɾɝ sɛn tə hɪm ət keɪɛmlɪn.

By the suddenly widened eyes, you would have thought he had slapped every one of them. Including Merana. Even Alanna's head whipped around. Why should they be startled? True, Bera or Kiruna had done almost all the talking since Dumai's Wells, but Merana had been the ambassador sent to him at Caemlyn.

"ɪf jə ɑɹ ɹɛɾi, mɪn?" hi sɛd, ən wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ə ɹɪplaɪ stʃɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. ðə bɪɡ, faɪɝi-aɪd blæk ɡɛldɪŋ i hæd ɹɪɾən bæk fɹəm dəməaɪz wɛlz hæd bɪn bɹɔɾ aʊt fəɹ hɪm, wɪð ə haɪ-kæntəl sæɾəl ɔl wɝkt ɪn ɡoʊld ən ə kɹɪmzən sæɾələklɔθ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð ðə dɪsk ə blæk-ænd-waɪɾ əɾ itʃ kɔɹnɝ. ðə tʃɹæpɪŋz suɾəd ði ænəməl, ən ɪz neɪm. teɪdeɪʃɝ; ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, lɔɹɾ ʌv ɡlɔɹi. hɔɹs ən tʃɹæpɪŋz boʊθ suɾəd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

"If you are ready, Min?" he said, and without waiting for a reply strode out into the courtyard. The big, fiery-eyed black gelding he had ridden back from Dumai's Wells had been brought out for him, with a high-cantled saddle all worked in gold and a crimson saddlecloth embroidered with the disc of black-and-white at each corner. The trappings suited the animal, and his name. Tai'daishar; in the Old Tongue, Lord of Glory. Horse and trappings both suited the Dragon Reborn.

əz i maʊntəd, mɪn lɛɾ ʌp ðə maʊs-kʌlɝd mɛɹ ʃi hæd ɹɪɾən bæk, snʌɡɪŋ ɑn əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌvz bɪfɔɹ swɪŋɪŋ ɪndə ðə sæɾəl. "saɪɹəz ə faɪn ænəməl," ʃi sɛd, pæɾɪŋ ðə mɛɹz ɑɹtʃt nɛk. "aɪ wɪʃ ʃi wɑz maɪn. aɪ laɪk əɹ neɪm, tu. wi kɔl ðə flaʊɝ ə blu-aɪ ɝaʊn bɛɹlən, ən ðeɪ ɡɹoʊ ɛvɹiwɛɹ ɪn ðə spɹɪŋ."

As he mounted, Min led up the mouse-colored mare she had ridden back, snugging on her riding gloves before swinging into the saddle. "Seiera's a fine animal," she said, patting the mare's arched neck. "I wish she was mine. I like her name, too. We call the flower a blue-eye around Baerlon, and they grow everywhere in the spring."

"ʃiz jʊɹz," ɹænd sɛd. wɪtʃɛvɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ðə mɛɹ bɪlɔŋ tə wəd nɑt ɹəfjuz tə sɛl tə hɪm. hi wəd ɡɪv kaɪɹunə ə θaʊzən kɹaʊnz fəɹ teɪdeɪʃɝ; ʃi kəd nɑt kəmpleɪn ðɛn; ðə faɪnəst stæljən ə tɛɹən blʌd stɑk nɛvɝ kɑst ə tɛnθ ə ðæt. "dɪd juv ən ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɪð ɑlɑnə?"

"She's yours," Rand said. Whichever Aes Sedai the mare belonged to would not refuse to sell to him. He would give Kiruna a thousand crowns for Tai'daishar; she could not complain then; the finest stallion of Tairen blood stock never cost a tenth of that. "Did you have an interesting conversation with Alanna?"

"nʌθɪŋ ðət wəɾ ɪntʃɹəs ju," ʃi sɛɾ ɑfhændɪdli. bʌɾ ə feɪn tʌtʃ ə ɹɛd steɪn əɹ tʃiks.

"Nothing that would interest you," she said offhandedly. But a faint touch of red stained her cheeks.

hi snɔɹɾɪd sɔfli, ðən ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs. "lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪn, aɪv kɛp ðə si foʊk weɪɾɪŋ lɔŋ ɪnʌf, aɪ θɪŋk."

He snorted softly, then raised his voice. "Lord Dobraine, I've kept the Sea Folk waiting long enough, I think."

ðə pɹəsɛʃən dʒɹu kɹaʊdz əlɔŋ ðə bɹɔɾ ævənuz ən fɪl ðə wɪndoʊz ən ɹuftɑps əz wɝd ɹeɪst əhɛd. twɛnti ʌv dɑbɹeɪnz lænsɝz lɛd, tə klɪɹ ðə weɪ, əlɔŋ wɪð θɝɾi meɪɾənz ən əz mɛni blæk aɪz, ðən dʒɹʌmɝz, bumɪŋ əweɪ - dʒɹum, dʒɹum, dʒɹum, dʒɹum-dʒɹum - ən ðə tʃɹʌmpəɾɝz pʌŋktʃueɪɾɪŋ ðət wɪð flɝɪʃəz. ʃaʊts fɹəm ði ɔnlʊkɝz nɪɹli dʒɹaʊn dʒɹʌmz ən tʃɹʌmpəts əlaɪk, ə wɝdləs ɹɔɹ ðət cʊɾə bɪn ɹeɪdʒ əz izəli əz æpɹəbeɪʃən. ðə bænɝz stʃɹimd aʊt, dʒʌst əhɛɾ ə dɑbɹeɪn ən bɪhaɪn ɹænd, ðə waɪt dʒɹæɡən bænɝ ən ðə skɑɹlət bænɝ ə ðə laɪt, ən veɪld il tʃɹɑɾəd əlɔŋsaɪd ðə lænsɝz, huz stʃɹimɝz ɔlsoʊ floʊɾəd ɪn ði ɛɹ. naʊ ən ðən ə fju flaʊɝz wɝ hɝld ət hɪm. meɪbi ðeɪ dɪd nɑt heɪt hɪm. meɪbi ðeɪ oʊnli fɪɹd. ɪt hæd tə du.

The procession drew crowds along the broad avenues and filled the windows and rooftops as word raced ahead. Twenty of Dobraine's lancers led, to clear the way, along with thirty Maidens and as many Black Eyes, then drummers, booming away - droom, droom, droom, DROOM-DROOM - and the trumpeters punctuating that with flourishes. Shouts from the onlookers nearly drowned drums and trumpets alike, a wordless roar that could have been rage as easily as approbation. The banners streamed out, just ahead of Dobraine and behind Rand, the white Dragon Banner and the scarlet Banner of the Light, and veiled Aiel trotted alongside the lancers, whose streamers also floated in the air. Now and then a few flowers were hurled at him. Maybe they did not hate him. Maybe they only feared. It had to do.

"ə tʃɹeɪn wɝði ʌv ɛni kɪŋ," mɛɹænə sɛd laʊdli, tə bi hɝd.

"A train worthy of any king," Merana said loudly, to be heard.

"ðɛn ɪts ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," hi ɹɪplaɪd ʃɑɹpli. "wɪl jə steɪ bæk? ən ju, tu, mɪn." ʌðɝ ɹuftɑps hæd hɛld əsæsənz. ði æɹoʊ əɹ kɹɔsboʊ boʊl mɛn fəɹ ɪm wəd nɑt faɪn ɪts tɑɹɡəɾ ɪn ə wʊmən tədeɪ.

"Then it's enough for the Dragon Reborn," he replied sharply. "Will you stay back? And you, too, Min." Other rooftops had held assassins. The arrow or crossbow bolt meant for him would not find its target in a woman today.

ðeɪ dɪd fɔl bɪhaɪn ɪz bɪɡ blæk, fəɹ ɔl ə θɹi peɪsɪz, ən ðən ðeɪ wɝ ɹaɪt bɪsaɪɾ ɪm əɡɛn, mɪn tɛlɪŋ ɪm wʌt bɹəleɪn hæd ɹɪɾən əbaʊt ðə si foʊk ɑn ðə ʃɪps, əbaʊt ðə dʒɛndaɪ pɹɑfəsi ən ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ, ən mɛɹænə æɾɪŋ wʌt ʃi nu ʌv ðə pɹɑfəsi, ðoʊ ʃi ədmɪɾəd ðət wɑz nɑt vɛɹi mʌtʃ, lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən mɪn.

They did fall behind his big black, for all of three paces, and then they were right beside him again, Min telling him what Berelain had written about the Sea Folk on the ships, about the Jendai Prophecy and the Coramoor, and Merana adding what she knew of the prophecy, though she admitted that was not very much, little more than Min.

wɑtʃɪŋ ðə ɹuftɑps, hi lɪsənd wɪð hæf ən ɪɹ. hi dɪd nɑt hoʊl seɪɾɪn, bʌɾ i kəd fil ɪɾ ɪn dæʃivə ən ði ʌðɝ tu, ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn hɪm. hi dɪd nɑt fil ðə tɪŋɡəl ðət wəɾ ənaʊns ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə sɔɹs, bʌɾ i hæd toʊld əm nɑt tə, wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən. pɝhæps i ʃəd tʃeɪnʒ ðæt. ðeɪ dɪd sim tə bi kipɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊθ. haʊ kəd ðeɪ nɑt? ðeɪ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ə faɪn θɪŋ ɪf i tʊk ən əsæsənz bleɪd waɪl wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz tʃɹaɪd tə dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ sɝvɪŋ mɛn seɪvɪŋ ɪm əɹ oʊbeɪɪŋ mɛnt nɑt tʃænəlɪŋ.

Watching the rooftops, he listened with half an ear. He did not hold saidin, but he could feel it in Dashiva and the other two, right behind him. He did not feel the tingle that would announce the Aes Sedai embracing the Source, but he had told them not to, without permission. Perhaps he should change that. They did seem to be keeping their oath. How could they not? They were Aes Sedai. A fine thing if he took an assassin's blade while one of the sisters tried to decide whether serving meant saving him or obeying meant not channeling.

"waɪ ɑɹ jə læfɪŋ?" mɪn wɑntəd tə noʊ. saɪɹə pɹæns kloʊsɝ, ən ʃi smaɪld ʌp ət hɪm.

"Why are you laughing?" Min wanted to know. Seiera pranced closer, and she smiled up at him.

"ðɪs ɪz noʊ læfɪŋ mæɾɝ, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," mɛɹænə sɛɾ æsədli ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. "ði æθɑn maɪɹ kən bi vɛɹi pɝtɪkjəlɝ. ɛni pipəl ɡɹoʊ fæstɪɾiəs wən ɪt kʌmz tə ðɛɹ pɹɑfəsiz."

"This is no laughing matter, my Lord Dragon," Merana said acidly on the other side. "The Atha'an Miere can be very particular. Any people grow fastidious when it comes to their prophecies."

"ðə wɝld ɪz ə læfɪŋ mæɾɝ," hi toʊl hɝ. mɪn læft əlɔŋ wɪð hɪm, bʌt mɛɹænə snɪft ən wɛn ɹaɪt bæk tə ðə si foʊk əz sun əz i stɑpt.

"The world is a laughing matter," he told her. Min laughed along with him, but Merana sniffed and went right back to the Sea Folk as soon as he stopped.

ət ðə ɹɪvɝ, ðə haɪ sɪɾi wɔlz ɹæn aʊɾ ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝ, flæŋkɪŋ lɔŋ ɡɹeɪ stoʊn dɑks ðət stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt fɹəm ðə ki. ɹɪvɝʃɪps ən boʊts ən bɑɹdʒəz ʌv ɛvɹi kaɪn ən saɪz wɝ taɪɾ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ðə kɹuz ɑn dɛk tə si ðə kəmoʊʃən, bʌt ðə vɛsəl ɹænd sɔt stʊd ɹɛɾi ən weɪɾɪŋ, læʃt ɛnd-ɑn tə ði ɛn ʌv ə dɑk wɛɹ ɔl ðə leɪbɝɝz hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn klɪɹɾ ɔf. ə lɔŋboʊt, ɪt wɑz kɔld, ə loʊ nɛɹoʊ splɪntɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɛni mæsts, dʒʌst wʌn stæf ɪn ðə baʊ, fɔɹ peɪsɪz tɔl, tɑp baɪ ə læntɝn, ən ənʌðɝ ət ðə stɝn. nɪɹli θɝɾi peɪsɪz ɪn lɛŋθ ən laɪnd wɪð əz mɛni lɔŋ ɔɹz, ɪt kəd nɑt kæɹi ðə kɑɹɡoʊ ə seɪlɪŋ vɛsəl ðə seɪm saɪz wʊd, bʌɾ ɪt hæd noʊ niɾ ə ðə wɪnd, iðɝ, ən wɪð ə ʃæloʊ dʒɹæft, ɪt kəd tʃɹævəl deɪ ən naɪt, juzɪŋ ɹoʊɝz ɪn ʃɪfs. lɔŋboʊts ɹæn ðə ɹɪvɝz wɪð kɑɹɡoʊz ʌv ɪmpɔɹɾəns ən ɝdʒənsi. ɪt hæd simd əpɹoʊpɹiət.

At the river, the high city walls ran out into the water, flanking long gray stone docks that stretched out from the quay. Riverships and boats and barges of every kind and size were tied everywhere, the crews on deck to see the commotion, but the vessel Rand sought stood ready and waiting, lashed end-on to the end of a dock where all the laborers had already been cleared off. A longboat, it was called, a low narrow splinter without any masts, just one staff in the bow, four paces tall, topped by a lantern, and another at the stern. Nearly thirty paces in length and lined with as many long oars, it could not carry the cargo a sailing vessel the same size would, but it had no need of the wind, either, and with a shallow draft, it could travel day and night, using rowers in shifts. Longboats ran the rivers with cargoes of importance and urgency. It had seemed appropriate.

ðə kæptən baʊd ɹɪpiɾɪdli əz ɹænd keɪm daʊn ðə bɔɹɾɪŋ ɹæmp wɪð mɪn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən æʃəmən əɾ ɪz hilz. ɛlvɝ ʃeɪin wɑz ivən skɪniɝ ðən ɪz kɹæft ɪn ə jɛloʊ koʊɾ ə mʊɹændiən kʌt ðət hʌŋ tə hɪz niz. "ɪts ən ɑnɝ tə bi kæɹiɪŋ ju, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," hi mɝmɝd, mɑpɪŋ ɪz bɔl hɛd wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ hæŋkɝtʃɪf. "æn ɑnɝ, ɪɾ ɪz. ən ɑnɝ, ɪndid. ən ɑnɝ."

The captain bowed repeatedly as Rand came down the boarding ramp with Min on his arm and the Aes Sedai and Asha'man at his heels. Elver Shaene was even skinnier than his craft in a yellow coat of Murandian cut that hung to his knees. "It's an honor to be carrying you, my Lord Dragon," he murmured, mopping his bald head with a large handkerchief. "An honor, it is. An honor, indeed. An honor."

pleɪnli ðə mæn wəd ɹæðɝ əv hæɾ ɪz ʃɪp bɹɪm fʊl ə laɪv vaɪpɝz. hi blɪŋkt ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ʃɔlz ən stɛɹɾ ət ðɛɹ eɪdʒləs feɪsəz ən lɪkt ɪz lɪps, aɪz flɪkɝɪŋ bæk tə ɹænd ənizəli. ði æʃəmən dʒɹɑpt ɪz maʊθ oʊpən wʌns i pʊt ðɛɹ blæk koʊts təɡɛðɝ wɪð ɹumɝ, ən ðɛɹæftɝ i əvɔɪɾəd soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə ɡlæns ɪn ðɛɹ dɝɛkʃən. ʃeɪin wɑtʃt dɑbɹeɪn lɛd ðə mɛn wɪð ðə bænɝz əbɔɹd, ən ðə tʃɹʌmpəɾɝz, ən ðə dʒɹʌmɝz lʌɡɪŋ ðɛɹ dʒɹʌmz, ðən aɪd ðə hɔɹsmən laɪnɪŋ ðə dɑk əz ɪf i səspɛktəd ðeɪ maɪt wɑnə bɔɹd, tu. nændɛɹə, wɪð twɛnti meɪɾənz, ən kɑmɑɹ wɪð twɛnti blæk aɪz, ɔl wɪð ʃoʊufə ɹæpt ɝaʊn ðɛɹ hɛdz ðoʊ ənveɪld, meɪd ðə kæptən stɛp heɪstəli tə pʊt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪtwin ɪm ən ðɛm. ði il wɔɹ skaʊlz, fəɹ ðə hɑɹtbit ðət niɾɪŋ tə veɪl maɪt sloʊ ðɛm, bʌt ðə si foʊk maɪt wɛl noʊ wʌɾ ə veɪl mɛnt, ən ɪt wəd hɑɹdli də fəɹ əm tə θɪŋk ðeɪ wɝ ʌndɝ ətæk. ɹænd θɔt ʃeɪinz hæŋkɝtʃɪf maɪt jɛt ɹʌb əweɪ wʌt θɪn ɡɹeɪ fɹɪnʒ ə hɛɹ i hæd lɛft.

Plainly the man would rather have had his ship brim full of live vipers. He blinked at the Aes Sedai's shawls and stared at their ageless faces and licked his lips, eyes flickering back to Rand uneasily. The Asha'man dropped his mouth open once he put their black coats together with rumor, and thereafter he avoided so much as a glance in their direction. Shaene watched Dobraine lead the men with the banners aboard, and the trumpeters, and the drummers lugging their drums, then eyed the horsemen lining the dock as if he suspected they might want to board, too. Nandera, with twenty Maidens, and Camar with twenty Black Eyes, all with shoufa wrapped around their heads though unveiled, made the captain step hastily to put the Aes Sedai between him and them. The Aiel wore scowls, for the heartbeat that needing to veil might slow them, but the Sea Folk might well know what a veil meant, and it would hardly do for them to think they were under attack. Rand thought Shaene's handkerchief might yet rub away what thin gray fringe of hair he had left.

ðə lɔŋboʊt swɛpt əweɪ fɹəm ðə dɑk ɑn ɪts lɔŋ ɔɹz, ðə tu bænɝz ɹɪpəlɪŋ ɪn ðə baʊz, ən ðə dʒɹʌmz paʊndɪŋ, ən ðə tʃɹʌmpəts blɛɹɪŋ. aʊɾ ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ, pipəl əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə dɛks ə ʃɪps tə wɑtʃ, ivən klaɪmd ɪndə ðə ɹɪɡɪŋ. ɑn ðə si foʊk ʃɪp ðeɪ keɪm aʊt, tu, mɛni ɪn bɹaɪt kʌlɝz ənlaɪk ðə dʒɹæb kloʊðɪŋ ɑn kɹuz ə ði ʌðɝ vɛsəlz. ðə waɪt spɹeɪ wɑz ə lɑɹdʒɝ kɹæf ðən moʊst ə ðə ɹɛst, jɛt sʌmhaʊ slikɝ əz wɛl, wɪð tu tɔl mæsts ɹeɪk bæk ʃɑɹpli ən spɑɹz leɪɾ əkɹɔs əm skwɛɹli wɛɹ nɪɹli ɔl ði ʌðɝ ʃɪps hæd slæntɪŋ spɑɹz lɔŋɡɝ ðən ðə mæsts tə hoʊl moʊst ə ðɛɹ seɪlz. ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt spoʊk ə dɪfɝəns, bʌɾ ɪn wʌn θɪŋ, ɹænd nu, ði æθɑn maɪɹ hæd tə bi laɪk ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. ðeɪ kəɾ iðɝ əɡɹi tə fɑloʊ hɪm ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn əɹ bi fɔɹs tə ɪt; ðə pɹɑfəsiz sɛɾ i wəd baɪn təɡɛðɝ ðə pipəl ʌv ɛvɹi lænd - "ðə nɔɹθ ʃæl i taɪ tə ði ist, ən ðə wɛst ʃæl bi baʊn tə ðə saʊθ," ɪt sɛd - ən noʊ wʌn kəd bi əlaʊd tə stæn əsaɪd. hi nu ðæt, naʊ.

The longboat swept away from the dock on its long oars, the two banners rippling in the bows, and the drums pounding, and the trumpets blaring. Out in the river, people appeared on the decks of ships to watch, even climbed into the rigging. On the Sea Folk ship they came out, too, many in bright colors unlike the drab clothing on crews of the other vessels. The White Spray was a larger craft than most of the rest, yet somehow sleeker as well, with two tall masts raked back sharply and spars laid across them squarely where nearly all the other ships had slanting spars longer than the masts to hold most of their sails. Everything about it spoke of difference, but in one thing, Rand knew, the Atha'an Miere had to be like everyone else. They could either agree to follow him on their own or be forced to it; the Prophecies said he would bind together the people of every land - "The north shall he tie to the east, and the west shall be bound to the south," it said - and no one could be allowed to stand aside. He knew that, now.

sɛndɪŋ aʊɾ ɔɹɾɝz fɹəm ɪz bæθ, hi hæd nɑt hæɾ ən ɑpɝtunəɾi tə ɡɪv dɪteɪlz ʌv wʌɾ i ɪntɛndəɾ ɑn ɹitʃɪŋ waɪt spɹeɪ, soʊ hi ənaʊnst əm naʊ. ðə dɪteɪlz pɹədust ɡɹɪnz əmʌŋ ði æʃəmən, əz ɪkspɛktəd - wɛl, flɪn ən nɛɹɪʃmə ɡɹɪnd; dæʃivə blɪŋkt æbsənli - ən fɹaʊnz əmʌŋ ði il, ɔlsoʊ əz ɪkspɛktəd. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt laɪk biɪŋ lɛf bɪhaɪnd. dɑbɹeɪn mɪɹli nɑɾəd; hi nu hi wɑz oʊnli hɪɹ fəɹ ʃoʊ tədeɪ. wʌt ɹænd dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt wɑz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹiækʃən.

Sending out orders from his bath, he had not had an opportunity to give details of what he intended on reaching White Spray, so he announced them now. The details produced grins among the Asha'man, as expected - well, Flinn and Narishma grinned; Dashiva blinked absently - and frowns among the Aiel, also as expected. They did not like being left behind. Dobraine merely nodded; he knew he was only here for show today. What Rand did not expect was the Aes Sedai reaction.

"ɪt ʃæl bi əz jə kəmænd, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," mɛɹænə sɛd, meɪkɪŋ wʌn ə ðoʊz smɔl kɝtsiz. ði ʌðɝ fɔɹ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ kɝtsiɪŋ ən mɝmɝɪŋ "æz jə kəmænd" ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn hɝ. nɑt wʌn pɹoʊɾɛst, nɑt wʌn fɹaʊn, nɑɾ ə sɪŋɡəl hɔɾi stɛɹ əɹ ɹəsaɪɾəl ʌv waɪ ɪt ʃəd bi dʌn ɛni weɪ bʌt wʌɾ i wɑntəd. kəɾ i bɪɡɪn tə tʃɹʌs ðɛm? əɹ wəd ðeɪ faɪn səm ɛɛs sədaɪ weɪ tə ɹɪɡəl ɝaʊn ðɛɹ oʊθ əz sun əz ɪz bæk wɑz tɝnd?

"It shall be as you command, my Lord Dragon," Merana said, making one of those small curtsies. The other four exchanged glances, but they were curtsying and murmuring "as you command" right behind her. Not one protest, not one frown, not a single haughty stare or recital of why it should be done any way but what he wanted. Could he begin to trust them? Or would they find some Aes Sedai way to wriggle around their oath as soon as his back was turned?

"ðeɪ wɪl kip ðɛɹ wɝd," mɪn mɝmɝɾ əbɹʌpli, dʒʌst əz ɪf ʃi hæd ɹɛɾ ɪz θɔts. wɪð ən ɑɹm ɹæpt ɝaʊn ɪz ən boʊθ hænz hoʊldɪŋ ɪz sliv, ʃi kɛpt əɹ vɔɪs fəɹ ɪz ɪɹz əloʊn. "aɪ dʒʌst sɔ ðiz faɪv ɪn jəɹ hænd," ʃi æɾəd ɪn keɪs i dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i kəd fɪks ɪz maɪn ɝaʊn ðæt, ivən ɪf ʃi hæd sin ɪɾ ɪn ə vjuɪŋ.

"They will keep their word," Min murmured abruptly, just as if she had read his thoughts. With an arm wrapped around his and both hands holding his sleeve, she kept her voice for his ears alone. "I just saw these five in your hand," she added in case he did not understand. He was not sure he could fix his mind around that, even if she had seen it in a viewing.

hi dɪd nɑɾ əv lɔŋ tə tʃɹaɪ. ðə lɔŋboʊt flu θɹu ðə wɔɾɝ, ən ɪn noʊ taɪm əɾ ɔl wɑz bækɪŋ ɔɹz səm twɛnti peɪsɪz fɹəm ðə mʌtʃ tɔlɝ waɪt spɹeɪ. dʒɹʌmz ən tʃɹʌmpəts fɛl saɪlənt, ən ɹænd tʃænəld, meɪkɪŋ ə bɹɪdʒ ʌv ɛɹ leɪst wɪð faɪɝ ðət kənɛktəd ðə lɔŋboʊts ɹeɪlɪŋ tə ðəɾ ə ðə si foʊk ʃɪp. wɪð mɪn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm, hi stɑɹɾəd əkɹɔs, tə ɛvɹi aɪ bʌt ðəɾ ʌv ən æʃəmən, wɔkɪŋ ʌpwɝɾ ɑn nʌθɪŋ.

He did not have long to try. The longboat flew through the water, and in no time at all was backing oars some twenty paces from the much taller White Spray. Drums and trumpets fell silent, and Rand channeled, making a bridge of Air laced with Fire that connected the longboat's railing to that of the Sea Folk ship. With Min on his arm, he started across, to every eye but that of an Asha'man, walking upward on nothing.

hi hæf ɪkspɛktəd mɪn tə fɔltɝ, ət list ət fɝst, bʌt ʃi sɪmpli wɔkt əɾ ɪz saɪɾ əz ðoʊ ðəɹ wɝ stoʊn bɪniθ əɹ ɡɹin-hil buts.

He half expected Min to falter, at least at first, but she simply walked at his side as though there were stone beneath her green-heeled boots.

"aɪ tʃɹʌs ju," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. ʃi smaɪld, tu, pɑɹtli ə kʌmfɝɾɪŋ smaɪl, ən pɑɹtli, hi θɔt, kəz ʃi wɑz əmjuzd ət ɹiɾɪŋ ɪz maɪnd wʌns mɔɹ.

"I trust you," she said quietly. She smiled, too, partly a comforting smile, and partly, he thought, because she was amused at reading his mind once more.

hi wʌndɝd haʊ mʌtʃ ʃi wəd tʃɹʌst ɪf ʃi nu ðət ðɪs wɑz əz fɑɹ əz i kəd wiv ə bɹɪdʒ laɪk ðɪs. wʌn peɪs fɑɹðɝ, wʌn fʊt, ən ðə hoʊl θɪŋ wʊɾə ɡɪvən weɪ ət ðə fɝst stɛp. ət ðət pɔɪn ɪt bɪkeɪm laɪk tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɪf jɝsɛlf wɪð ðə paʊɝ, ən ɪmpɔsɪbɪlɪɾi; ivən ðə fɔɹseɪkən dɪd nɑt noʊ waɪ, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ nu waɪ ə wʊmən kəd meɪk ə lɔŋɡɝ bɹɪdʒ ðən ə mæn ivən ɪf ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əz stʃɹɔŋ. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə mæɾɝ ʌv weɪt; ɛni əmaʊn ʌv weɪt kəd kɹɔs ɛni bɹɪdʒ.

He wondered how much she would trust if she knew that this was as far as he could weave a bridge like this. One pace farther, one foot, and the whole thing would have given way at the first step. At that point it became like trying to lift yourself with the Power, an impossibility; even the Forsaken did not know why, any more than they knew why a woman could make a longer bridge than a man even if she was not as strong. It was not a matter of weight; any amount of weight could cross any bridge.

dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ʌv waɪt spɹeɪz ɹeɪlɪŋ, hi stɑpt, stændɪŋ ɪn mɪdɛɹ. fəɹ ɔl mɛɹænəz dɪskɹɪpʃənz, ðə pipəl stɛɹɪŋ bæk əɾ ɪm wɝ ə ʃɑk. dɑɹk wɪmən ən bɛɹ-tʃɛstəd mɛn wɪð kʌlɝfəl sæʃɪz ðət dæŋɡəl tə ðə ni, ən ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ tʃeɪnz ɝaʊn ðɛɹ nɛks ən ɹɪŋz ɪn ðɛɹ ɪɹz, ɪn ðɛɹ noʊzɪz ʌv ɔl pleɪsəz ɑn səm ə ðə wɪmən, hu wɔɹ ə ɹeɪnboʊ ʌv blaʊsəz əbʌv ðɛɹ dɑɹk, bæɡi bɹitʃɪz. nʌn hæɾ ɛni mɔɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən ðən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ hɑɹd. fɔɹ ə ðə wɪmən, dɪspaɪt biɪŋ bɛɹfʊt laɪk ðə ɹɛst, wɔɹ bɹaɪt sɪlks, tu ʌv əm bɹoʊkeɪdz, ən ðeɪ hæd mɔɹ nɛkləsɪz ən ɪɹɪŋz ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls əz wɛl, wɪð ə tʃeɪn stʃɹʌŋ wɪð ɡoʊl mədæljənz ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ən ɪɹɪŋ tə ə ɹɪŋ ɪn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə noʊz. ðeɪ sɛd nʌθɪŋ, oʊnli stʊd təɡɛðɝ wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, snɪfɪŋ ət smɔl, leɪsi ɡoʊldən bɑksəz ðət hʌŋ fɹəm tʃeɪnz ɝaʊn ðɛɹ nɛks. hi ədʒɹɛs hɪmsɛlf tə ðɛm.

Just short of White Spray's railing, he stopped, standing in midair. For all Merana's descriptions, the people staring back at him were a shock. Dark women and bare-chested men with colorful sashes that dangled to the knee, and gold or silver chains around their necks and rings in their ears, in their noses of all places on some of the women, who wore a rainbow of blouses above their dark, baggy breeches. None had any more expression than an Aes Sedai who was trying hard. Four of the women, despite being barefoot like the rest, wore bright silks, two of them brocades, and they had more necklaces and earrings than anyone else as well, with a chain strung with gold medallions running from an earring to a ring in the side of the nose. They said nothing, only stood together watching him, sniffing at small, lacy golden boxes that hung from chains around their necks. He addressed himself to them.

"aɪ æm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. aɪm ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ."

"I am the Dragon Reborn. I am the Coramoor."

ə kəlɛktɪv saɪ ɹæn θɹu ðə kɹu. nɑɾ əmʌŋ ðə fɔɹ wɪmən, ðoʊ.

A collective sigh ran through the crew. Not among the four women, though.

"aɪ æm hɑɹɪn dɪn toʊɡɑɹə tu wɪnz, weɪvməstʃɹəs tə klæn ʃoʊdaɪn," ənaʊns ðə wʌn wɪð ðə moʊst ɪɹɪŋz, ə hænsəm, fʊl-maʊðd wʊmən ɪn ɹɛd bɹoʊkeɪd wɛɹɪŋ faɪv fæt lɪɾəl ɡoʊld ɹɪŋz ɪn itʃ ɪɹ. ðəɹ wɝ waɪt stʃɹiks θɹu hɝ stʃɹeɪt blæk hɛɹ, ən faɪn laɪnz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ aɪz. ʃi hæɾ ən ɪmpɹɛsɪv dɪɡnəɾi. "aɪ spik hɪɹ fəɹ ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps. ɪf ɪt plizɪz ðə laɪt, ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ meɪ kʌm əbɔɹd." fəɹ səm ɹizən ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, ən soʊ dɪd ðə θɹi wɪð hɝ, bʌt ðət saʊndəɾ ɪntaɪɝli tu mʌtʃ laɪk pɝmɪʃən. ɹænd stɛpt ɑntu ðə dɛk wɪð mɪn wɪʃɪŋ i hæd nɑt weɪɾəd.

"I am Harine din Togara Two Winds, Wavemistress to Clan Shodein," announced the one with the most earrings, a handsome, full-mouthed woman in red brocade wearing five fat little gold rings in each ear. There were white streaks through her straight black hair, and fine lines at the corners of her eyes. She had an impressive dignity. "I speak here for the Mistress of the Ships. If it pleases the Light, the Coramoor may come aboard." For some reason she gave a start, and so did the three with her, but that sounded entirely too much like permission. Rand stepped onto the deck with Min wishing he had not waited.

hi lɛt ðə bɹɪdʒ ɡoʊ, ən seɪɾɪn, bʌɾ ɪmiɾiətli fɛlt ənʌðɝ bɹɪdʒ ɹipleɪs ɪt. ɪn ʃɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ ði æʃəmən ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ wɪð hɪm, ðə sɪstɝz noʊ mɔɹ flʌstɝd ðən mɪn hæd bɪn, ðoʊ pɝhæps wʌn əɹ tu dɪd stʃɹeɪɾən əɹ skɝts ə bɪt mɔɹ ðən nɛsəsɛɹi. ðeɪ wɝ stɪl nɑt soʊ izi ɝaʊn ði æʃəmən əz ðeɪ pɹitɛndəd.

He let the bridge go, and saidin, but immediately felt another bridge replace it. In short order the Asha'man and the Aes Sedai were with him, the sisters no more flustered than Min had been, though perhaps one or two did straighten her skirts a bit more than necessary. They were still not so easy around the Asha'man as they pretended.

ðə fɔɹ si foʊk wɪmən tʊk wʌn lʊk ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɪmiɾiətli ɡæðɝɾ ɪn ə kloʊs hʌɾəl, wɪspɝɪŋ. hɑɹɪn dɪɾ ə lɑɾ ə ðə tɔkɪŋ, ən soʊ dɪɾ ə jʌŋ, pɹɪɾi wʊmən ɪn ɡɹin bɹoʊkeɪd wɪð eɪɾ ɪɹɪŋz ɔltəɡɛðɝ, bʌt ðə pɛɹ ɪn pleɪn sɪlk pʊɾ ɪn əkeɪʒənəl kɑmɛns.

The four Sea Folk women took one look at the Aes Sedai and immediately gathered in a close huddle, whispering. Harine did a lot of the talking, and so did a young, pretty woman in green brocade with eight earrings altogether, but the pair in plain silk put in occasional comments.

mɛɹænə kɔf dɛləkətli, ən spoʊk sɔfli ɪndə ðə hænd ʃi juz tə kʌvɝ ɪt. "aɪ hɝɾ əɹ neɪm jə ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ. ði æθɑn maɪɹ ɑɹ ɡɹeɪt bɑɹɡɪnɝz, aɪv hɝd, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ʃi ɡeɪv əweɪ sʌmθɪŋ, ðɛn." nɑɾɪŋ, ɹænd ɡlæns daʊn ət mɪn. ʃi wɑz skwɪntɪŋ ət ðə si foʊk wɪmən, bʌɾ əz sun əz ʃi noʊɾəst ɪz lʊk, ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd ɹufəli; ʃi sɔ nʌθɪŋ jɛt ðət maɪt hɛlp hɪm.

Merana coughed delicately, and spoke softly into the hand she used to cover it. "I heard her name you the Coramoor. The Atha'an Miere are great bargainers, I've heard, but I think she gave away something, then." Nodding, Rand glanced down at Min. She was squinting at the Sea Folk women, but as soon as she noticed his look, she shook her head ruefully; she saw nothing yet that might help him.

hɑɹɪn tɝn soʊ kɑmli ðəɹ maɪt nɛvɝ əv bɪn ɛni heɪsti kɑnfɝəns. "ðɪs ɪz ʃələn dɪn toʊɡɑɹə mɔɹnɪŋ taɪd, wɪndfɪndɝ tə klæn ʃoʊdaɪn," ʃi sɛd wɪð ə smɔl baʊ təwɔɹd ðə wʊmən ɪn ɡɹin bɹoʊkeɪd, "æn ðɪs ɪz dɪɹə dɪn sɛlɑn ɹaɪzɪŋ weɪv, seɪlməstʃɹəs ʌv waɪt spɹeɪ." itʃ wʊmən baʊd slaɪtli əz ʃi wɑz neɪmd, ən tʌtʃt fɪŋɡɝz tə hɝ lɪps.

Harine turned so calmly there might never have been any hasty conference. "This is Shalon din Togara Morning Tide, Windfinder to Clan Shodein," she said with a small bow toward the woman in green brocade, "and this is Derah din Selaan Rising Wave, Sailmistress of White Spray." Each woman bowed slightly as she was named, and touched fingers to her lips.

dɪɹə, ə hænsəm wʊmən ə lɪɾəl ʃɔɹɾ ə hɝ mɪɾəl jɪɹz, wɔɹ pleɪn blu ən ɔlsoʊ eɪɾ ɪɹɪŋz, ðoʊ hɝ ɪɹɪŋz, noʊz ɹɪŋ, ən ðə tʃeɪn ðət ɹæn bɪtwin wɑz faɪnɝ ðən hɑɹɪnz əɹ ʃələnz. "ðə wɛlkəm ə maɪ ʃɪp tə ju," dɪɹə sɛd, "æn ðə ɡɹeɪs ə ðə laɪt bi əpɑn jə əntɪl jə liv ɪz dɛks." ʃi meɪɾ ə smɔl baʊ təwɔɹd ðə fɔɹθ wʊmən, ɪn jɛloʊ. "ðɪs ɪz tɑvəl dɪn tʃənɑi naɪn ɡʌlz, wɪndfɪndɝ ʌv waɪt spɹeɪ." oʊnli θɹi ɹɪŋz hʌŋ fɹəm itʃ ə tɑvəlz ɪɹz, faɪn laɪk ðoʊz ə ðə seɪl-mɪstʃɹəs. ʃi lʊk jʌŋɡɝ ðən ʃələn, noʊ oʊldɝ ðən hɪmsɛlf.

Derah, a handsome woman a little short of her middle years, wore plain blue and also eight earrings, though her earrings, nose ring, and the chain that ran between was finer than Harine's or Shalon's. "The welcome of my ship to you," Derah said, "and the grace of the Light be upon you until you leave his decks." She made a small bow toward the fourth woman, in yellow. "This is Taval din Chanai Nine Gulls, Windfinder of White Spray." Only three rings hung from each of Taval's ears, fine like those of the Sail-mistress. She looked younger than Shalon, no older than himself.

hɑɹɪn tʊk ɪɾ ʌp əɡɛn, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɹeɪz stɝn ə ðə ʃɪp. "wi wɪl spik ɪn maɪ kæbən, ɪf ɪt plizɪz ju. ə sɔɹɝ ɪz nɑɾ ə lɑɹdʒ vɛsəl, ɹænd ælθɹ, ən ðə kæbən ɪz smɔl. ɪf ɪt plizɪz jə tə kʌm əloʊn, ɔl hɪɹ stænd ʃʊɹəɾi fəɹ jəɹ seɪfti." soʊ. fɹəm ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ tə pleɪn ɹænd ælθɹ. ʃi wəd teɪk bæk wʌt ʃi hæd ɡɪvən, ɪf ʃi kʊd.

Harine took it up again, gesturing toward the raised stern of the ship. "We will speak in my cabin, if it pleases you. A soarer is not a large vessel, Rand al'Thor, and the cabin is small. If it pleases you to come alone, all here stand surety for your safety." So. From the Coramoor to plain Rand al'Thor. She would take back what she had given, if she could.

hi wɑz əbaʊt tə oʊpən ɪz maʊθ ən əɡɹi - ɛniθɪŋ tə ɡɛt ðɪs dʌn; hɑɹɪn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi muvɪŋ ðət weɪ, stɪl dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə fɑloʊ, ði ʌðɝ wɪmən wɪð əɹ - wən mɛɹænə ɡeɪv ənʌðɝ taɪni kɑf.

He was about to open his mouth and agree - anything to get this done; Harine was already moving that way, still gesturing for him to follow, the other women with her - when Merana gave another tiny cough.

"ðə wɪndfɪndɝz kən tʃænəl," ʃi mɝmɝd heɪstəli ɪndə hɝ hænd. "ju ʃəd teɪk tu sɪstɝz wɪð ju, əɹ ðəl fil ðeɪv ɡeɪn ði ʌpɝ hænd."

"The Windfinders can channel," she murmured hastily into her hand. "You should take two sisters with you, or they'll feel they've gained the upper hand."

ɹænd fɹaʊnd. ði ʌpɝ hænd? hi wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, æftɝ ɔl. stɪl. . . . "aɪ wɪl bi pliz tə kʌm, weɪvməstʃɹəs, bʌt mɪn hɪɹ ɡoʊz ɛvɹiwɛɹ wɪð mi." hi pæɾəd mɪnz hæn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm - ʃi hæd nɑt lɛt ɡoʊ ən ɪnstənt - ən hɑɹɪn nɑɾəd. tɑvəl wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi hoʊldɪŋ ðə dɔɹ oʊpən; dɪɹə meɪd wʌn ə ðoʊz smɔl baʊz, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ ɪm təwɔɹɾ ɪt.

Rand frowned. The upper hand? He was the Dragon Reborn, after all. Still. . . . "I will be pleased to come, Wavemistress, but Min here goes everywhere with me." He patted Min's hand on his arm - she had not let go an instant - and Harine nodded. Taval was already holding the door open; Derah made one of those small bows, gesturing him toward it.

"æn dæʃivə, ʌv kɔɹs." ðə mæn ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əɾ ɪz neɪm, əz ɪf i hæd bɪn əslip. ət list i wɑz nɑt stɛɹɪŋ waɪd-aɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə dɛk laɪk flɪn ən nɛɹɪʃmə. stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə wɪmən. stɔɹiz spoʊk ə ði əlʊɹɪŋ bjuɾi ən ɡɹeɪs ə si foʊk wɪmən, ən ɹænd kəd sɝɾənli si ðət - ðeɪ wɔkt əz ɪf ðeɪ wəd bɪɡɪn dænsɪŋ ɑn ðə nɛkst stɛp, sweɪɪŋ sɪnjuəsli - bʌɾ i hæd nɑt bɹɔt ðə mɛn hɪɹ tə oʊɡəl. "kip jəɹ aɪz oʊpən!" hi toʊld əm hɑɹʃli. nɛɹɪʃmə kʌlɝd, dʒɝkɪŋ hɪmsɛlf stɪfli ɪɹɛkt, ən pɹɛs fɪs tə tʃɛst. flɪn sɪmpli səluɾəd, bʌt boʊθ simd mɔɹ əlɝt. fəɹ səm ɹizən, mɪn lʊkt ʌp əɾ ɪm wɪð ðə taɪniəst ɹaɪ smaɪl.

"And Dashiva, of course." The man gave a start at his name, as if he had been asleep. At least he was not staring wide-eyed around the deck like Flinn and Narishma. Staring at the women. Stories spoke of the alluring beauty and grace of Sea Folk women, and Rand could certainly see that - they walked as if they would begin dancing on the next step, swaying sinuously - but he had not brought the men here to ogle. "Keep your eyes open!" he told them harshly. Narishma colored, jerking himself stiffly erect, and pressed fist to chest. Flinn simply saluted, but both seemed more alert. For some reason, Min looked up at him with the tiniest wry smile.

hɑɹɪn nɑɾəd ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ɪmpeɪʃənli. ə mæn stɛpt aʊt fɹəm ðə kɹu, ɪn bæɡi ɡɹin sɪlk bɹitʃɪz ən wɪð ən aɪvɝi-hɪltɪd sɔɹɾ ən dæɡɝ θɹʌs bɪhaɪn ɪz sæʃ. mɔɹ waɪt-hɛɹd ðən ʃi, hi ɔlsoʊ wɔɹ faɪv fæt lɪɾəl ɹɪŋz ɪn itʃ ɪɹ. ʃi weɪvd ɪm əweɪ ivən mɔɹ ɪmpeɪʃənli. "æz ɪt pliz ju, ɹænd ælθɹ," ʃi sɛd.

Harine nodded a little more impatiently. A man stepped out from the crew, in baggy green silk breeches and with an ivory-hilted sword and dagger thrust behind his sash. More white-haired than she, he also wore five fat little rings in each ear. She waved him away even more impatiently. "As it please you, Rand al'Thor," she said.

"æn ə kɔɹs," ɹænd æɾəd, əz ðoʊ ən æftɝθɑt, "aɪ mʌst əv mɛɹænə, ən ɹæfɛlə." hi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən waɪ hi tʃoʊz ðə sɛkənd neɪm - pɝhæps kəz ðə plʌmp tɛɹən sɪstɝ wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn nɑt ɡɹin ɪksɛp mɛɹænə - bʌt tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, mɛɹænə smaɪld ɪn əpɹuvəl. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, bɛɹə nɑɾəd, ən soʊ dɪd feɪlʒɹɪn, ən ɑlɑnə.

"And of course," Rand added, as though an afterthought, "I must have Merana, and Rafela." He was not certain why he chose the second name - perhaps because the plump Tairen sister was the only one not Green except Merana - but to his surprise, Merana smiled in approval. For that matter, Bera nodded, and so did Faeldrin, and Alanna.

hɑɹɪn dɪd nɑɾ əpɹuv. hɝ maʊθ taɪɾənd bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt. "æz ɪt plizɪz ju," ʃi sɛd, nɑt kwaɪt soʊ plɛzənli əz bɪfɔɹ.

Harine did not approve. Her mouth tightened before she could control it. "As it pleases you," she said, not quite so pleasantly as before.

wʌns i wɑz ɪnsaɪd ðə stɝn kæbən, wɛɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪksɛpt ə fju bɹæs-baʊn tʃɛsts sim bɪlt ɪndə ðə wɔlz, ɹænd wɑz nɑt soʊ ʃʊɹ ðə wʊmən hæd nɑt ɡeɪnd wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɑntəd dʒʌs bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪm ðɛɹ. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, hi wɑz fɔɹs tə stæn hʌntʃt oʊvɝ, ivən bɪtwin ðə ɹuf bimz, əɹ wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ kɔld ɑn ə ʃɪp. hi hæd ɹɛd sɛvɹəl bʊks əbaʊt ʃɪps, bʌt nʌn mɛnʃən ðæt. ðə tʃɛɹ i wɑz ɔfɝɾ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə nɛɹoʊ teɪbəl wəd nɑt pʊl aʊt, biɪŋ fæsən tə ðə dɛk, ən wʌns mɪn ʃoʊɾ ɪm haʊ tə ənlætʃ ðə tʃɛɹ ɑɹm ən swɪŋ ɪɾ aʊt soʊ hi kəd sɪt, hɪz niz hɪt ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə teɪbəl. ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli eɪt tʃɛɹz. hɑɹɪn sæɾ ət ðə fɑɹ ɛnd, hɝ bæk tə ðə stɝnz ɹɛd-ʃʌɾɝd wɪndoʊz, wɪð əɹ wɪndfɪndɝ tə hɝ lɛft ən ðə seɪlməstʃɹəs tə hɝ ɹaɪɾ ən tɑvəl bɪloʊ hɝ. mɛɹænə ən ɹæfɛlə tʊk ðə tʃɛɹz bɪloʊ ʃələn, waɪl mɪn sæt tə ɹændz lɛft. dæʃivə, wɪð noʊ tʃɛɹ, tʊk ə pleɪs bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ, stændɪŋ əpɹaɪt kwaɪɾ izəli, ðoʊ ðə ɹuf bimz ɔlmoʊs bɹʌʃt ɪz hɛd, tu. ə jʌŋ wʊmən ɪn ə bɹaɪt blu blaʊs, wɪð wʌn θɪn ɪɹɪŋ ɪn itʃ ɪɹ, bɹɔt θɪk kʌps ə ti, bɹud blæk ən bɪɾɝ.

Once he was inside the stern cabin, where everything except a few brass-bound chests seemed built into the walls, Rand was not so sure the woman had not gained whatever she wanted just bringing him there. For one thing, he was forced to stand hunched over, even between the roof beams, or whatever they were called on a ship. He had read several books about ships, but none mentioned that. The chair he was offered at the foot of the narrow table would not pull out, being fastened to the deck, and once Min showed him how to unlatch the chair arm and swing it out so he could sit, his knees hit the bottom of the table. There were only eight chairs. Harine sat at the far end, her back to the stern's red-shuttered windows, with her Windfinder to her left and the Sailmistress to her right and Taval below her. Merana and Rafela took the chairs below Shalon, while Min sat to Rand's left. Dashiva, with no chair, took a place beside the door, standing upright quite easily, though the roof beams almost brushed his head, too. A young woman in a bright blue blouse, with one thin earring in each ear, brought thick cups of tea, brewed black and bitter.

"lɛts bi dʌn wɪð ðɪs," ɹænd sɛd tɛstəli əz sun əz ðə wʊmən lɛft wɪð əɹ tʃɹeɪ. hi lɛft ɪz kʌp ɑn ðə teɪbəl æftɝ wʌn sɪp. hi kəd nɑt stʃɹɛtʃ aʊɾ ɪz lɛɡz. hi heɪɾəd biɪŋ kənfaɪnd. θɔts ə biɪŋ dʌbəld ɪnsaɪd ðə tʃɛs flæʃt ɪn ɪz hɛd, ən ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də tə ɹeɪn ɪz tɛmpɝ. "ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ əz fɔlən, ði il əv kʌm oʊvɝ ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl, ɔl ðə pɑɹts ə jəɹ dʒɛndaɪ pɹɑfəsi hæv kʌm tə pæs. aɪm ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ."

"Let's be done with this," Rand said testily as soon as the woman left with her tray. He left his cup on the table after one sip. He could not stretch out his legs. He hated being confined. Thoughts of being doubled inside the chest flashed in his head, and it was all he could do to rein his temper. "The Stone of Tear has fallen, the Aiel have come over the Dragonwall, all the parts of your Jendai Prophecy have come to pass. I am the Coramoor."

hɑɹɪn smaɪld əkɹɔs əɹ kʌp, ə kul smaɪl wɪð noʊ əmjuzmən ɪn ɪt. "ðæt meɪ bi soʊ, əz ɪt plizɪz ðə laɪt, bʌt - "

Harine smiled across her cup, a cool smile with no amusement in it. "That may be so, as it pleases the Light, but - "

"ɪɾ ɪz soʊ," ɹænd snæp dɪspaɪɾ ə wɔɹnɪŋ ɡlæns fɹəm mɛɹænə. ʃi wɛn soʊ fɑɹ tə nʌdʒ ɪz lɛɡ wɪð əɹ fʊt. hi ɪɡnɔɹd ðæt, tu. ðə kæbən wɔlz sim kloʊsɝ, sʌmhaʊ. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt ðət jə doʊn bɪliv, weɪv-mɪstʃɹəs? ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝv mi? ɹæfɛlə, mɛɹænə." hi dʒɛstʃɝd ʃɑɹpli.

"It is so," Rand snapped despite a warning glance from Merana. She went so far to nudge his leg with her foot. He ignored that, too. The cabin walls seemed closer, somehow. "What is it that you don't believe, Wave-mistress? That Aes Sedai serve me? Rafela, Merana." He gestured sharply.

ɔl i wɑntəd wɑz fəɹ əm tə kʌm tə hɪm ən bi sin tə kʌm, bʌt ðeɪ sɛt daʊn ðɛɹ kʌps ən ɹoʊz ɡɹeɪsfəli, ɡlaɪɾɪd tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm - ən nɛlt. itʃ tʊk wʌn ə hɪz hænz ɪn boʊθ ə hɝz ən pɹɛst əɹ lɪps tə ðə bæk ʌv ɪt, ɹaɪɾ ɑn ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ ɡoʊldən-meɪn hɛɾ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ðət waʊn ɝaʊn ɪz fɔɹɑɹm. hi dʒʌs mænədʒ tə kənsil ɪz ʃɑk, nɑt teɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz fɹəm hɑɹɪn. hɝ feɪs wɛn ə lɪɾəl ɡɹeɪ.

All he wanted was for them to come to him and be seen to come, but they set down their cups and rose gracefully, glided to either side of him - and knelt. Each took one of his hands in both of hers and pressed her lips to the back of it, right on the shining golden-maned head of the Dragon that wound around his forearm. He just managed to conceal his shock, not taking his eyes from Harine. Her face went a little gray.

"ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝv mi, ən soʊ wɪl ðə si foʊk." hi moʊʃən ðə sɪstɝz bæk tə ðɛɹ sits. ɑdli, ðeɪ lʊkt ə tʌtʃ sɝpɹaɪzd. "ðæɾ ɪz wʌt ðə dʒɛndaɪ pɹɑfəsi sɛz. ðə si foʊk wɪl sɝv ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ. aɪm ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ."

"Aes Sedai serve me, and so will the Sea Folk." He motioned the sisters back to their seats. Oddly, they looked a touch surprised. "That is what the Jendai Prophecy says. The Sea Folk will serve the Coramoor. I am the Coramoor."

"jɛs, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ ə ðə bɑɹɡən." ðət wɝd wɑz pleɪnli kæpɪɾəlaɪzd ɪn hɑɹɪnz toʊn. "ðə dʒɛndaɪ pɹɑfəsi sɛz jəl bɹɪŋ əs tə ɡlɔɹi, ən ɔl ðə siz ə ðə wɝld wɪl bi aʊɝz. əz wi ɡɪv tə ju, jə mʌst ɡɪv tə ʌs. ɪf aɪ də nɑt meɪk ðə bɑɹɡən wɛl, nɛstə wɪl hæŋ mi neɪkəɾ ɪn ðə ɹɪɡɪŋ baɪ maɪ æŋkəlz ən kɔl ðə fɝs twɛlv ə klæn ʃoʊdaɪn tə neɪm ə nu weɪvməstʃɹəs." ə lʊk ʌv ʌɾɝ hɔɹɝ stoʊl əkɹɔs əɹ feɪs əz ðoʊz wɝdz keɪm aʊɾ ə hɝ maʊθ, ən əɹ blæk aɪz wɛnt waɪɾɝ ən waɪɾɝ baɪ ðə wɝd wɪð dɪsbɪlif. hɝ wɪndfɪndɝ ɡɑɡəld ət hɝ, ən dɪɹə ən tɑvəl tʃɹaɪd soʊ hɑɹd nɑt tə, ðɛɹ aɪz fæsən tə ðə teɪbəl, ðəɾ ɪt sim ðɛɹ feɪsəz maɪt bɹeɪk.

"Yes, but there is the matter of the Bargain." That word was plainly capitalized in Harine's tone. "The Jendai Prophecy says you will bring us to glory, and all the seas of the world will be ours. As we give to you, you must give to us. If I do not make the Bargain well, Nesta will hang me naked in the rigging by my ankles and call the First Twelve of Clan Shodein to name a new Wavemistress." A look of utter horror stole across her face as those words came out of her mouth, and her black eyes went wider and wider by the word with disbelief. Her Windfinder goggled at her, and Derah and Taval tried so hard not to, their eyes fastened to the table, that it seemed their faces might break.

ən sʌɾənli, ɹænd ʌndɝstʊd. tɑvɝən. hi hæd sin ði ɪfɛks, ðə sʌɾən moʊməns wən ðə lis laɪkli θɪŋ hæpən kəz i wɑz nɪɹ, bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ noʊn wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn bɪfɔɹ əntɪl ɪt wɑz fɪnɪʃt. izɪŋ ɪz lɛɡz əz bɛst i kʊd, hi lin ɪz ɑɹmz ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɪl sɝv mi, hɑɹɪn. ðəɾ ɪz ɡɪvən."

And suddenly, Rand understood. Ta'veren. He had seen the effects, the sudden moments when the least likely thing happened because he was near, but he had never known what was going on before until it was finished. Easing his legs as best he could, he leaned his arms on the table. "The Atha'an Miere will serve me, Harine. That is given."

"jɛs, wɪl sɝv ju, bʌt - " hɑɹɪn hæf-ɹɪɹɾ aʊɾ əɹ tʃɛɹ, spɪlɪŋ əɹ ti. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ tə mi, ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ʃi kɹaɪd, tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. "ðɪs ɪz nɑt fɛɹ bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ!"

"Yes, we will serve you, but - " Harine half-reared out her chair, spilling her tea. "What are you doing to me, Aes Sedai?" she cried, trembling. "This is not fair bargaining!"

"wi də nʌθɪŋ," mɛɹænə sɛd kɑmli. ʃi æktʃəli  mænədʒ tə dʒɹɪŋk ə swɑloʊ ʌv ðət ti wɪθaʊt wɪnsɪŋ.

"We do nothing," Merana said calmly. She actually managed to drink a swallow of that tea without wincing.

"ju ɑɹ ɪn ðə pɹɛzəns ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," ɹæfɛlə æɾəd. "ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ jəɹ pɹɑfəsi kɔlz jə tə sɝv, əz aɪ bɪliv." ʃi leɪɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ tə wʌn ɹaʊn tʃik. "ju sɛd jə spik fəɹ ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps. dʌz ðət min jəɹ wɝɾ ɪz baɪndɪŋ ɑn ði æθɑn maɪɹ?"

"You are in the presence of the Dragon Reborn," Rafela added. "The Coramoor your prophecy calls you to serve, as I believe." She laid a finger to one round cheek. "You said you speak for the Mistress of the Ships. Does that mean your word is binding on the Atha'an Miere?"

"jɛs," hɑɹɪn wɪspɝd hɔɹsli, fɔlɪŋ bæk ɪn əɹ sit. "wʌɾ aɪ seɪ baɪnz ɛvɹi ʃɪp, ən ɔl tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps hɝsɛlf." ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl fəɹ wʌn ə ðə si foʊk tə ɡoʊ waɪɾ ɪn ðə feɪs, jɛt stɛɹɪŋ ət ɹænd, ʃi keɪm əz nɪɹ əz ʃi kʊd.

"Yes," Harine whispered hoarsely, falling back in her seat. "What I say binds every ship, and all to the Mistress of the Ships herself." It was impossible for one of the Sea Folk to go white in the face, yet staring at Rand, she came as near as she could.

hi smaɪld ət mɪn, tə ʃɛɹ ðə moʊmənt. ət læst ə pipəl wəd kʌm tə hɪm wɪθaʊt faɪɾɪŋ ɛvɹi stɛp ə ðə weɪ, əɹ splɪɾɪŋ əpɑɹt laɪk ði il. meɪbi mɪn θɔɾ i wɑntəɾ əɹ hɛlp tə klɪntʃ mæɾɝz, əɹ meɪbi ɪt wɑz tɑvɝən. ʃi lin təwɔɹd ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs. "ju wɪl bi pʌnɪʃt fəɹ wʌt hæpənz hɪɹ tədeɪ, hɑɹɪn, bʌt nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz jə fɪɹ, aɪ θɪŋk. ət list, wʌn deɪ jəl bi ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps."

He smiled at Min, to share the moment. At last a people would come to him without fighting every step of the way, or splitting apart like the Aiel. Maybe Min thought he wanted her help to clinch matters, or maybe it was ta'veren. She leaned toward the Wavemistress. "You will be punished for what happens here today, Harine, but not so much as you fear, I think. At least, one day you will be the Mistress of the Ships."

hɑɹɪn fɹaʊn ət hɝ, ðən ɡlæns tə hɝ wɪndfɪndɝ.

Harine frowned at her, then glanced to her Windfinder.

"ʃi ɪz nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃələn sɛd, ən hɑɹɪn sim kɑt bɪtwin ɹɪlif ən dɪsəpɔɪnmənt. əntɪl ɹæfɛlə spoʊk.

"She is not Aes Sedai," Shalon said, and Harine seemed caught between relief and disappointment. Until Rafela spoke.

"sɛvɹəl jɪɹz əɡoʊ, aɪ hɝd ɹɪpɔɹts ʌv ə ɡɝl wɪð ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl əbɪləɾi tə si θɪŋz. ɑɹ jə ʃi, mɪn?"

"Several years ago, I heard reports of a girl with a remarkable ability to see things. Are you she, Min?"

mɪn ɡɹɪməst ɪndə hɝ kʌp, ðən nɑɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli; ʃi ɔlweɪz sɛd ðət ðə mɔɹ pipəl nu wʌt ʃi kəd du, ðə lɛs ɡʊd keɪm ʌv ɪt. ɡlænsɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃi saɪd. ɹæfɛlə oʊnli nɑɾəd, bʌt mɛɹænə wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət hɝ, heɪzəl aɪz ævəɾ ɪn ə mæsk ə sɝɛnəɾi. noʊ daʊt ʃi ɪkspɛktəd tə kɔɹnɝ mɪn əz sun əz pɑsəbəl ən faɪn aʊt wʌt ðɪs tælənt wɑz ən haʊ ɪt wɝkt, ən noʊ daʊt mɪn ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪt tu. ɹænd fɛlt ə pɹɪkəl ʌv ɪɹɪteɪʃən; ʃi ʃʊɾə noʊn i wəd pɹətɛkt əɹ fɹəm biɪŋ bɑðɝd. ə pɹɪkəl ʌv ɪɹɪteɪʃən, ən ə wɔɹmθ ðəɾ i kəd pɹətɛkt əɹ fɹəm ðæt, ət list.

Min grimaced into her cup, then nodded reluctantly; she always said that the more people knew what she could do, the less good came of it. Glancing across the table at the Aes Sedai, she sighed. Rafela only nodded, but Merana was staring at her, hazel eyes avid in a mask of serenity. No doubt she expected to corner Min as soon as possible and find out what this talent was and how it worked, and no doubt Min expected it too. Rand felt a prickle of irritation; she should have known he would protect her from being bothered. A prickle of irritation, and a warmth that he could protect her from that, at least.

"ju meɪ tʃɹʌst wʌt mɪn sɛz, hɑɹɪn," ɹæfɛlə sɛd. "ðə ɹɪpɔɹts aɪ hɝd seɪ ðət wʌt ʃi siz ɔlweɪz simz tə kʌm tʃɹu. ən ivən ɪf ʃi dʌz nɑt ɹilaɪz ɪt, ʃiz sin sʌmθɪŋ ɛls." hɝ ɹaʊn feɪs tɪltəd tə wʌn saɪd, ən ə smaɪl kɝvd əɹ maʊθ. "ɪf jəl bi pʌnɪʃt fəɹ wʌt hæpənz hɪɹ, ðən ɪt mʌs min jəl əɡɹi tə wʌtɛvɝ jəɹ kɔɹəmʊɹ wɑns."

"You may trust what Min says, Harine," Rafela said. "The reports I heard say that what she sees always seems to come true. And even if she does not realize it, she has seen something else." Her round face tilted to one side, and a smile curved her mouth. "If you will be punished for what happens here, then it must mean you will agree to whatever your Coramoor wants."

"ənlɛs aɪ əɡɹi tə nʌθɪŋ," hɑɹɪn blʌstɝd. "ɪf aɪ meɪk noʊ bɑɹɡən. . . ." hɝ fɪsts klɛntʃt ɑn ðə teɪbəltɑp. ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ədmɪɾəd ʃi hæd tə meɪk ðə bɑɹɡən. ʃi hæɾ ədmɪɾəd ðə si foʊk wəd sɝv.

"Unless I agree to nothing," Harine blustered. "If I make no Bargain. . . ." Her fists clenched on the tabletop. She had already admitted she had to make the Bargain. She had admitted the Sea Folk would serve.

"wʌɾ aɪ ɹikwaɪɝ ə jə ɪz nɑɾ oʊnɝəs," ɹænd sɛd. hi hæd θɔɾ əbaʊt ðɪs sɪns dəsaɪɾɪŋ tə kʌm. "wɛn aɪ wɑnt ʃɪps tə kæɹi mɛn əɹ səplaɪz, ðə si foʊk wɪl ɡɪv ðɛm. aɪ wɑnə noʊ wʌɾ ɪz hæpənɪŋ ɪn tæɹɑbən ən ɑɹæd dumən, ən ɪn ðə lænz bɪtwin. jəɹ ʃɪps kən lɝn - wɪl lɝn - wʌɾ aɪ wɑnə noʊ; ðeɪ kɔl ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ ən bændɑɹ ɛbən ən ə hʌnʒɹəd fɪʃɪŋ vɪlədʒəz ən taʊnz bɪtwin. jəɹ ʃɪps kən tʃɹævəl fɑɹðɝ aʊt tə si ðən ɛniwʌn ɛlsəz. ðə si foʊk wɪl kip wɑtʃ əz fɑɹ wɛst ɪn ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən əz ðeɪ kən seɪl. ðəɹ ɪz ə pipəl, ðə ʃɔn-tʃæn, hu lɪv bɪɑn ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, ən wʌn deɪ, ðəl kʌm tə tʃɹaɪ tə kɑŋkɝ ʌs. ðə si foʊk wɪl lemi noʊ wən ðeɪ kʌm."

"What I require of you is not onerous," Rand said. He had thought about this since deciding to come. "When I want ships to carry men or supplies, the Sea Folk will give them. I want to know what is happening in Tarabon and Arad Doman, and in the lands between. Your ships can learn - will learn - what I want to know; they call in Tanchico and Bandar Eban and a hundred fishing villages and towns between. Your ships can travel farther out to sea than anyone else's. The Sea Folk will keep watch as far west in the Aryth Ocean as they can sail. There is a people, the Sean-chan, who live beyond the Aryth Ocean, and one day, they will come to try to conquer us. The Sea Folk will let me know when they come."

"ju ɹikwaɪɝ mʌtʃ," hɑɹɪn mʌɾɝd bɪɾɝli. "wi noʊ ʌv ðiz sintʃæn, hu kʌm fɹəm ði aɪlənz ə ðə dɛd, ɪt simz, fɹəm wɪtʃ noʊ ʃɪp ɹɪtɝnz. səm ʌv əɹ ʃɪps əv ɪnkaʊntɝd ðɛɹz; ðeɪ juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən. jə ɹikwaɪɝ mɔɹ ðən jə noʊ, kɔɹəmʊɹ." fəɹ wʌns, ʃi dɪd nɑt pɔz ət ðə taɪɾəl. "sʌm dɑɹk ivəl əz dɪsɛndəɾ əpɑn ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən. noʊ ʃɪp ʌv aʊɝz əz kʌm fɹəm ðəɹ ɪn mɛni mʌnθs. ʃɪps ðət seɪl wɛst, vænɪʃ."

"You require much," Harine muttered bitterly. "We know of these Seanchan, who come from the Islands of the Dead, it seems, from which no ship returns. Some of our ships have encountered theirs; they use the One Power as a weapon. You require more than you know, Coramoor." For once, she did not pause at the title. "Some dark evil has descended upon the Aryth Ocean. No ship of ours has come from there in many months. Ships that sail west, vanish."

ɹænd fɛlt ə tʃɪl. hi tɝn ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ, meɪd fɹəm pɑɹɾ ʌv ə sintʃæn spɪɹ, ɪn ɪz hænz. kəd ðeɪv ɹɪtɝn ɔlɹɛɾi? ðeɪ hæd bɪn dʒɹɪvən bæk wʌns, ət fɑlm. hi kæɹid ðə spɪɹhɛd tə ɹimaɪn ɪm ðət ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ ɛnəmiz ɪn ðə wɝl ðən ðoʊz i kəd si, bʌɾ i hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ɪt wəd teɪk ðə sintʃæn jɪɹz tə ɹɪkʌvɝ fɹəm ðɛɹ dɪfit, dʒɹɪvən ɪndə ðə si baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ən ðə dɛd hɪɹoʊz kɔl bæk baɪ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. wɑz ðə hɔɹn stɪl ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ? hi nu ɪt hæd bɪn teɪkən ðɛɹ.

Rand felt a chill. He turned the Dragon Scepter, made from part of a Seanchan spear, in his hands. Could they have returned already? They had been driven back once, at Falme. He carried the spearhead to remind him that there were more enemies in the world than those he could see, but he had been sure it would take the Seanchan years to recover from their defeat, driven into the sea by the Dragon Reborn and the dead heroes called back by the Horn of Valere. Was the Horn still in the White Tower? He knew it had been taken there.

sʌɾənli hi kəd nɑt bɛɹ ðə kɑnfaɪnz ə ðə kæbən ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. hi fʌmbəld wɪð ðə lætʃ ɑn ðə tʃɛɹ ɑɹm. ɪt wəd nɑɾ oʊpən. ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə smuð wʊd, hi tɔɹ ði ɑɹm ɔf ɪn splɪntɝz wɪð wʌn kənvʌlsɪv hiv. "wiv əɡɹid ðə si foʊk wɪl sɝv mi," hi sɛd, pʊʃɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ʌp. ðə loʊ silɪŋ meɪɾ ɪm hʌntʃ oʊvɝ ðə teɪbəl θɹɛɾənɪŋli. ðə kæbən dɪd fil smɔlɝ. "ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ɛni mɔɹ tə jəɹ bɑɹɡən, mɛɹænə ən ɹæfɛlə hɪɹ wɪl si tə ɪt wɪð ju." wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ən ænsɝ, hi spʌn fəɹ ðə dɔɹ, wɛɹ dæʃivə əpɪɹd tə bi mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf əɡɛn.

Suddenly he could not bear the confines of the cabin any longer. He fumbled with the latch on the chair arm. It would not open. Gripping the smooth wood, he tore the arm off in splinters with one convulsive heave. "We've agreed the Sea Folk will serve me," he said, pushing himself up. The low ceiling made him hunch over the table threateningly. The cabin did feel smaller. "If there is any more to your Bargain, Merana and Rafela here will see to it with you." Without waiting for an answer, he spun for the door, where Dashiva appeared to be muttering to himself again.

mɛɹænə kɑɾ ɪm ðɛɹ, kɑɾ ɪz sliv ən spoʊk swɪfli ən loʊ. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, ɪt wəd bi fəɹ ðə bɛst ɪf jə ɹɪmeɪnd. juv sin wʌt jəɹ biɪŋ tɑvɝən əz dʌn ɔlɹɛɾi. wɪð jə hɪɹ, aɪ bɪliv ʃɪl kəntɪnju tə ɹɪvil wʌt ʃi wɑns tə haɪɾ ən ɡɪv əɡɹimən bɪfɔɹ wi ɡɪv ɛniθɪŋ."

Merana caught him there, caught his sleeve and spoke swiftly and low. "My Lord Dragon, it would be for the best if you remained. You have seen what your being ta'veren has done already. With you here, I believe she will continue to reveal what she wants to hide and give agreement before we give anything."

"ju ɑɹ ɡɹeɪ ədʒɑ," hi toʊld əɹ hɑɹʃli. "nəɡoʊʃieɪt! dæʃivə, kʌm wɪð mi."

"You are Gray Ajah," he told her harshly. "Negotiate! Dashiva, come with me."

ɑn dɛk, hi dʒɹu dip bɹɛθs. ðə klaʊdləs skaɪ wɑz oʊpən oʊvɝhɛd. oʊpən.

On deck, he drew deep breaths. The cloudless sky was open overhead. Open.

ɪt tʊk ɪm ə moʊmən tə noʊɾəs bɛɹə ən ði ʌðɝ tu sɪstɝz, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm ɪkspɛktənli. flɪn ən nɛɹɪʃmə kɛp tə wʌt ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə du, ə kɔɹɾɝ ʌv ən aɪ ɑn ðə ʃɪp ən ðə ɹɛst ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝbɑŋks, ðə sɪɾi ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ən ðə hæf-ɹibɪlt ɡɹænɛɝiz ɑn ði ʌðɝ. ə ʃɪp ɪn mɪd-ɹɪvɝ wɑz ə vʌlnɝəbəl pleɪs tə bi ɪf wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən dɪsaɪɾɪd tə stʃɹaɪk. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ɛniwɛɹ wɑz ə deɪnʒɝəs pleɪs ðɛn. ɹænd kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ wʌn ə ðɛm hæd nɑɾ ət lis tʃɹaɪd tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə sʌn pæləs ɝaʊn ɪz ɪɹz.

It took him a moment to notice Bera and the other two sisters, watching him expectantly. Flinn and Narishma kept to what they were supposed to do, a quarter of an eye on the ship and the rest on the riverbanks, the city on one side and the half-rebuilt granaries on the other. A ship in mid-river was a vulnerable place to be if one of the Forsaken decided to strike. For that matter, anywhere was a dangerous place then. Rand could not understand why one of them had not at least tried to destroy the Sun Palace around his ears.

mɪn tʊk ɪz ɑɹm, ən i ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt.

Min took his arm, and he gave a start.

"aɪm sɑɹi," hi sɛd. "aɪ ʃʊdn əv lɛf ju."

"I'm sorry," he said. "I shouldn't have left you."

"ðæts ɔl ɹaɪt," ʃi læft. "mɛɹænə ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi sɛɾɪŋ tə wɝk. aɪ θɪŋk ʃi minz tə ɡɛt jə hɑɹɪnz bɛs blaʊs, ən meɪbi hɝ sɛkən bɛst əz wɛl. ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs lʊk laɪk ə ɹæbət kɑt bɪtwin tu fɛɹəts."

"That's all right," she laughed. "Merana is already setting to work. I think she means to get you Harine's best blouse, and maybe her second best as well. The Wavemistress looked like a rabbit caught between two ferrets."

ɹænd nɑɾəd. ðə si foʊk wɝ hɪz, əɹ əz ɡʊɾ æz. wʌt mæɾɝ wɛðɝ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ wɑz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ? hi wɑz tɑvɝən. hi wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ. ðə ɡoʊldən sʌn stɪl bɝnd wɛl ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ɪts nun pik. "ðə deɪ ɪz jʌŋ jɛt, mɪn." hi kəd də ɛniθɪŋ. "wʊd jə laɪk tə si mi sɛɾəl ðə ɹɛbəlz? ə θaʊzən kɹaʊnz tə ə kɪs, ðəɹ maɪn bɪfɔɹ sʌnsɛt."

Rand nodded. The Sea Folk were his, or as good as. What matter whether the Horn of Valere was in the White Tower? He was ta'veren. He was the Dragon Reborn, and the Coramoor. The golden sun still burned well short of its noon peak. "The day is young yet, Min." He could do anything. "Would you like to see me settle the rebels? A thousand crowns to a kiss, they're mine before sunset."


tʃæptɝ θɝɾifaɪv


CHAPTER 35

ɪndə ðə wʊdz


Into the Woods

sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ɹændz bɛd, mɪn wɑtʃt hɪm, ɪn ɪz ʃɝt-slivz, ɹuɾɪŋ θɹu ðə koʊts ɪn ðə hjudʒ aɪvɝi-ɪnleɪd wɔɹdʒɹoʊb. haʊ kəɾ i slip ɪn ðɪs ɹum, wɪð ɔl ɪts blæk, hɛvi fɝnɪtʃɝ? ə pɑɹɾ ə hɝ θɔɾ æbsənli əbaʊt muvɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ aʊt, ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ ɪt wɪð səm kɑɹv pisəz ʃi hæd sin ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, laɪtli tʌtʃt wɪð ɡɪldɪŋ, ən peɪl dʒɹeɪpɝiz ən lɪnənz ðəɾ i wəd faɪn lɛs əpɹɛsɪv. ɑd; ʃi hæd nɛvɝ kɛɹd wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ əbaʊt fɝnɪtʃɝ, əɹ lɪnənz. bʌt ðət wʌn tæpəstʃɹi ʌv ə bæɾəl, ʌv ə loʊn sɔɝdzmən sɝaʊndəd baɪ ɛnəmiz ən əbaʊt tə bi oʊvɝwɛlmd - ðət dɛfənətli hæd tə ɡoʊ. moʊsli, ðoʊ, ʃi dʒʌst wɑtʃt hɪm.

Sitting cross-legged on Rand's bed, Min watched him, in his shirt-sleeves, rooting through the coats in the huge ivory-inlaid wardrobe. How could he sleep in this room, with all its black, heavy furniture? A part of her thought absently about moving everything out, replacing it with some carved pieces she had seen in Caemlyn, lightly touched with gilding, and pale draperies and linens that he would find less oppressive. Odd; she had never cared one way or another about furniture, or linens. But that one tapestry of a battle, of a lone swordsman surrounded by enemies and about to be overwhelmed - that definitely had to go. Mostly, though, she just watched him.

ðəɹ wɑz sətʃ ən ɪntɛn lʊk ɪn ɪz mɔɹnɪŋ-blu aɪz, ən ðə snoʊi ʃɝt taɪɾənd əkɹɔs ðə bɹɔɾ ə hɪz bæk wən i tɝn tə ɹitʃ dip ɪndə ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊbz ɪntɪɹiɝ. hi hæd vɛɹi ɡʊd lɛɡz, ən mɑɹvələs kævz, ʃoʊn ɔf wɛl ɪn dɑɹk kloʊs-fɪɾɪŋ bɹitʃɪz, wɪð ɪz buts tɝn daʊn. səmtaɪmz i fɹaʊnd, koʊmɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz θɹu dɑɹk ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ; noʊ əmaʊn ə bɹʌʃɪŋ kəd meɪk ɪt ɹuli; ɪɾ ɔlweɪz kɝl slaɪtli ɝaʊn ɪz ɪɹz ən ɑn ðə neɪp ə hɪz nɛk. ʃi wɑz nɑt wʌn ə ðoʊz ful wɪmən u tɔs ðɛɹ bɹeɪnz əɾ ə mænz fiɾ əlɔŋ wɪð ðɛɹ hɑɹts. ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðət səmtaɪmz, nɪɹ hɪm, θɪŋkɪŋ klɪɹli bɪkeɪm ə tʃɹaɪfəl dɪfəkəlt. ðət wɑz ɔl.

There was such an intent look in his morning-blue eyes, and the snowy shirt tightened across the broad of his back when he turned to reach deep into the wardrobe's interior. He had very good legs, and marvelous calves, shown off well in dark close-fitting breeches, with his boots turned down. Sometimes he frowned, combing fingers through dark reddish hair; no amount of brushing could make it ruly; it always curled slightly around his ears and on the nape of his neck. She was not one of those fool women who tossed their brains at a man's feet along with their hearts. It was just that sometimes, near him, thinking clearly became a trifle difficult. That was all.

koʊɾ æftɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd sɪlk koʊt keɪm aʊɾ ən wɑz tɔs tə ðə flɔɹ ətɑp ðə wʌn i hæd wɔɹn tə ðə si foʊk ʃɪp. kəd ðə nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz stɪl bi ɡoʊɪŋ hæf soʊ wɛl wɪθaʊɾ ɪz tɑvɝən pɹɛzəns? ɪf oʊnli ʃi hæɾ ə ɹɪli jusfəl vjuɪŋ ə ðə si foʊk. əz ɔlweɪz tə hɝ aɪz, ɪmədʒəz ən kʌlɝfəl ɔʊɹəz flɪkɝɾ ɝaʊn hɪm, moʊst ɡɔn tu kwɪkli tə meɪk aʊt, ɔl bʌt wʌn minɪŋləs tə hɝ ət ðə moʊmənt. ðət wʌn vjuɪŋ keɪm ən wɛn ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz ə deɪ, ən wɛnɛvɝ mæt əɹ pɛɹɪn wɝ pɹɛzənt, ɪɾ ɛnkʌmpəs ðɛm, tu, ən səmtaɪmz ʌðɝz. ə væst ʃædoʊ lɝkt oʊvɝ hɪm, swɑloʊɪŋ ʌp θaʊzənz əpɑn θaʊzənz ə taɪni laɪts laɪk faɪɝəfliz ðət hɝl ðɛmsɛlvz ɪndə ɪɾ ɪn ən ətɛmp tə fɪl ʌp ðə dɑɹknəs. tədeɪ, ðəɹ sim tə bi kaʊnləs tɛnz ə θaʊzənz ə faɪɝəfliz, bʌt ðə ʃædoʊ sim lɑɹdʒɝ, tu. sʌmhaʊ ðət vjuɪŋ ɹɛpɹəzɛntəɾ ɪz bæɾəl wɪð ðə ʃædoʊ, bʌɾ i ɔlmoʊs nɛvɝ wɑntəd tə noʊ haʊ ɪt stʊd. nɑt ðət ʃi kəd ɹɪli seɪ, ɪksɛp ðət ðə ʃædoʊ ɔlweɪz sim tə bi wɪnɪŋ, tə wʌn dɪɡɹi əɹ ənʌðɝ. ʃi saɪd wɪð ɹɪlif tə si ði ɪmədʒ ɡoʊ.

Coat after embroidered silk coat came out and was tossed to the floor atop the one he had worn to the Sea Folk ship. Could the negotiations still be going half so well without his ta'veren presence? If only she had a really useful viewing of the Sea Folk. As always to her eyes, images and colorful auras flickered around him, most gone too quickly to make out, all but one meaningless to her at the moment. That one viewing came and went a hundred times a day, and whenever Mat or Perrin were present, it encompassed them, too, and sometimes others. A vast shadow lurked over him, swallowing up thousands upon thousands of tiny lights like fireflies that hurled themselves into it in an attempt to fill up the darkness. Today, there seemed to be countless tens of thousands of fireflies, but the shadow seemed larger, too. Somehow that viewing represented his battle with the Shadow, but he almost never wanted to know how it stood. Not that she could really say, except that the shadow always seemed to be winning, to one degree or another. She sighed with relief to see the image go.

ə taɪni stæb ʌv ɡɪl meɪɾ əɹ ʃɪft əɹ siɾ ɑn ðə kʌvɝlət. ʃi hæd nɑt ɹɪli laɪd wən i æskt wʌt vjuɪŋz ʃi hæd kɛp bæk. nɑt ɹɪli. wʌt ɡʊd tə tɛl ɪm i wəɾ ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli feɪl wɪθaʊɾ ə wʊmən u wɑz dɛɾ ən ɡɔn? hi bɪkeɪm blik tu izəli əz ɪt wɑz. ʃi hæd tə kip ɪz spɪɹəts ʌp, meɪk ɪm ɹɪmɛmbɝ tə læf. ɪksɛpt. . . .

A tiny stab of guilt made her shift her seat on the coverlet. She had not really lied when he asked what viewings she had kept back. Not really. What good to tell him he would almost certainly fail without a woman who was dead and gone? He became bleak too easily as it was. She had to keep his spirits up, make him remember to laugh. Except. . . .

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðɪs ɪz ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə, ɹænd." seɪɪŋ ðət maɪt bi ə mɪsteɪk. mɛn wɝ stʃɹeɪnʒ kɹitʃɝz ɪn soʊ mɛni weɪz; wʌn mɪnət ðeɪ tʊk ɹizənəbəl ædvaɪs, ən ðə nɛks dɪd dʒʌs ði ɑpəzət. dɪlɪbɝətli dɪd ði ɑpəzət, ɪt simd. fəɹ səm ɹizən, ðoʊ, ʃi fɛlt . . . pɹətɛktɪv . . . təwɔɹd ðɪs taʊɝɪŋ mæn u kəd pɹɑbli lɪft əɹ wɪð iðɝ hænd. ən ðət wɪθaʊɾ ɪz tʃænəlɪŋ.

"I don't think this is a good idea, Rand." Saying that might be a mistake. Men were strange creatures in so many ways; one minute they took reasonable advice, and the next did just the opposite. Deliberately did the opposite, it seemed. For some reason, though, she felt . . . protective . . . toward this towering man who could probably lift her with either hand. And that without his channeling.

"ɪɾ ɪz ə wʌndɝfəl aɪdiə," hi sɛd, tɔsɪŋ daʊn ə blu koʊt wɪð sɪlvɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. "aɪm tɑvɝən, ən tədeɪ ɪt simz tə bi wɝkɪŋ ɪn maɪ feɪvɝ fəɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ." ə ɡɹin koʊt wɪð ɡoʊld ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi wɛn tə ðə flɔɹ.

"It is a wonderful idea," he said, tossing down a blue coat with silver embroidery. "I'm ta'veren, and today it seems to be working in my favor for a change." A green coat with gold embroidery went to the floor.

"wʊdn jə ɹæðɝ kʌmfɝt mi əɡɛn?"

"Wouldn't you rather comfort me again?"

hi stɑp dɛd, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ wɪð ə sɪlvɝ-wɝkt ɹɛd koʊt hæŋɪŋ fɝɡɑɾən ɪn ɪz hænz. ʃi hoʊpt ʃi wɑz nɑt blʌʃɪŋ. kʌmfɝɾɪŋ. wɛɹ dɪd ðəɾ aɪdiə ɛvɝ kʌm fɹʌm? ʃi wʌndɝd saɪlənli. ði æns u hæd ɹeɪzd əɹ wɝ dʒɛntəl, kaɪnd wɪmən, bʌt ðeɪ hæd stʃɹɔŋ noʊʃənz ə pɹɑpɝ bɪheɪvjɝ. ðeɪ hæd dɪsəpɹuvd ə hɝ wɛɹɪŋ bɹitʃɪz, dɪsəpɹuvd ə hɝ wɝkɪŋ ɪn steɪbəlz, ðə dʒɑb ʃi lʌv bɛst, sɪns ɪt bɹɔɾ əɹ ɪndə kɑntækt wɪð hɔɹsəz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ kwɛstʃən wʌt ðeɪ wəd θɪŋk ə kʌmfɝɾɪŋ, wɪð ə mæn ʃi wɑz nɑt mɛɹid tə. ɪf ðeɪ ɛvɝ faʊn aʊt, ðeɪ wəd ɹaɪɾ ɔl ðə weɪ fɹəm bɛɹlən dʒʌs tə skɪn hɝ. ən hɪm, tu, ʌv kɔɹs.

He stopped dead, staring at her with a silver-worked red coat hanging forgotten in his hands. She hoped she was not blushing. Comforting. Where did that idea ever come from? she wondered silently. The aunts who had raised her were gentle, kind women, but they had strong notions of proper behavior. They had disapproved of her wearing breeches, disapproved of her working in stables, the job she loved best, since it brought her into contact with horses. There was no question what they would think of comforting, with a man she was not married to. If they ever found out, they would ride all the way from Baerlon just to skin her. And him, too, of course.

"aɪ . . . nid tə kip muvɪŋ waɪl aɪm ʃʊɹ ɪts stɪl wɝkɪŋ," hi sɛd sloʊli, ðən tɝn kwaɪt kwɪkli bæk tə ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb. "ðɪs wɪl du," hi ɪkskleɪmd, pʊlɪŋ aʊɾ ə pleɪn koʊɾ ʌv ɡɹin wʊl. "aɪ dɪdnt noʊ ðɪs wɑz ɪn ðɛɹ."

"I . . . need to keep moving while I'm sure it is still working," he said slowly, then turned quite quickly back to the wardrobe. "This will do," he exclaimed, pulling out a plain coat of green wool. "I didn't know this was in there."

ɪt wɑz ðə koʊɾ i hæd wɔɹn kʌmɪŋ bæk fɹəm dəməaɪz wɛlz, ən ʃi kəd si hɪz hænz tʃɹɛmbəl əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bi kæʒəwəl, ʃi ɡɑɾ ʌp ən wɛn tə pʊɾ əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɪm, kɹʌʃɪŋ ðə koʊt bɪtwin əm əz ʃi leɪɾ əɹ hɛɾ əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst.

It was the coat he had worn coming back from Dumai's Wells, and she could see his hands tremble as he remembered. Trying to be casual, she got up and went to put her arms around him, crushing the coat between them as she laid her head against his chest.

"aɪ lʌv ju" wɑz ɔl ʃi sɛd. θɹu hɪz ʃɝt ʃi kəd fil ðə ɹaʊnd, hæf-hil skɑɹ ɑn ɪz lɛf saɪd. ʃi kəd ɹikɔl wən i ɡɑɾ ɪɾ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ jɛstɝdeɪ. ðət hæd bɪn ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi ɛvɝ hɛld ɪm ɪn əɹ ɑɹmz, waɪl i leɪ ʌnkɑnʃəs ən nɪɹ dɛθ.

"I love you" was all she said. Through his shirt she could feel the round, half-healed scar on his left side. She could recall when he got it as if it were yesterday. That had been the first time she ever held him in her arms, while he lay unconscious and near death.

hɪz hænz pɹɛst əɡɛnst əɹ bæk, skwizɪŋ əɹ taɪt, skwizɪŋ ðə bɹɛθ aʊɾ ə hɝ, bʌt ðɛn, dɪsəpɔɪntɪŋli, ðeɪ fɛl əweɪ. ʃi θɔɾ i mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt "nɑt fɛɹ" ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. wɑz i θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə si foʊk waɪl ʃi hʌɡd hɪm? hi ʃəd bi, ɹɪli. mɛɹænə wɑz ə ɡɹeɪ, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz sɛd ðə si foʊk kəd meɪk ə dəmɑni swɛt. hi ʃəd bi, bʌt. . . . ʃi θɔɾ əbaʊt kɪkɪŋ ɪz æŋkəl. dʒɛnli hi muvd əɹ əweɪ ən bɪɡæn pʊlɪŋ ɑn ðə koʊt.

His hands pressed against her back, squeezing her tight, squeezing the breath out of her, but then, disappointingly, they fell away. She thought he muttered something about "not fair" under his breath. Was he thinking about the Sea Folk while she hugged him? He should be, really. Merana was a Gray, yet it was said the Sea Folk could make a Domani sweat. He should be, but. . . . She thought about kicking his ankle. Gently he moved her away and began pulling on the coat.

"ɹænd," ʃi sɛd fɝmli, "ju kæn bi ʃʊɹ ɪɾəl əv ɛni ɪfɛkt, dʒʌs kəz ɪt dɪɾ ɑn hɑɹɪn. ɪf jə biɪŋ tɑvɝən ɔlweɪz əfɛktəɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, juɾ əv ɛvɹi ɹulɝ nilɪŋ ət jəɹ fit baɪ naʊ, ən ðə waɪtkloʊks, tu."

"Rand," she said firmly, "you can't be sure it will have any effect, just because it did on Harine. If you being ta'veren always affected everything, you'd have every ruler kneeling at your feet by now, and the Whitecloaks, too."

"ɪm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," hi ɹɪplaɪd hɔɾəli, "æn tədeɪ aɪ kən də ɛniθɪŋ." skupɪŋ ʌp ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt, hi fæsən ɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz weɪst. ɪt bɔɹ ə pleɪn bɹæs bʌkəl, naʊ. ðə ɡɪldɪd dʒɹæɡən leɪ ətɑp ðə kʌvɝləɾ ɑn ðə bɛd. ɡlʌvz ə θɪn blæk lɛðɝ wɛn ɑn tə kʌvɝ ðə ɡoʊldən-meɪn hɛdz ɑn ðə bæks ə hɪz hænz ən ðə hɛɹənz bɹændɪɾ ɑn ɪz pɑmz. "bʌɾ aɪ doʊn lʊk laɪk hɪm, də aɪ?" hi spɹɛɾ ɪz ɑɹmz, smaɪlɪŋ. "ðeɪ woʊnt noʊ əntɪl ɪts tu leɪt."

"I'm the Dragon Reborn," he replied haughtily, "and today I can do anything." Scooping up his sword belt, he fastened it around his waist. It bore a plain brass buckle, now. The gilded Dragon lay atop the coverlet on the bed. Gloves of thin black leather went on to cover the golden-maned heads on the backs of his hands and the herons branded on his palms. "But I don't look like him, do I?" He spread his arms, smiling. "They won't know until it's too late."

ʃi ɔlmoʊs θɹu ʌp əɹ hænz. "ju doʊn lʊk mʌtʃ laɪk ə ful, iðɝ." ən lɛɾ ɪm teɪk ðət haʊ hi wʊd. ði ɪɾiət aɪɾ əɹ əskæns, əz ɪf i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ. "ɹænd, əz sun əz ðeɪ si ði il, ðəl iðɝ ɹʌn əɹ stɑɹt faɪɾɪŋ. ɪf jə woʊn teɪk ɛni ʌv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ət lis teɪk ðoʊz æʃəmən. wʌn æɹoʊ, ən jəɹ dɛd, wɛðɝ jəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əɹ ə ɡoʊðɝd!"

She almost threw up her hands. "You don't look much like a fool, either." And let him take that how he would. The idiot eyed her askance, as if he was not sure. "Rand, as soon as they see the Aiel, they will either run or start fighting. If you won't take any of the Aes Sedai, at least take those Asha'man. One arrow, and you're dead, whether you're the Dragon Reborn or a goatherd!"

"bʌɾ aɪm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, mɪn," hi sɛd sɪɹiəsli. "æn tɑvɝən. wəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ əloʊn; dʒʌs jə ən mi. ðəɾ ɪz, ɪf jə stɪl wɑnə kʌm."

"But I am the Dragon Reborn, Min," he said seriously. "And ta'veren. We are going alone; just you and me. That is, if you still want to come."

"jɔɹ nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ wɪθaʊt mi, ɹænd ælθɹ." ʃi stɑp hɝsɛlf fɹəm seɪɪŋ i wəd tʃɹɪp oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn fiɾ ɪf i dɪd. ðɪs jufɔɹiə wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz bæɾ əz ðə dɑɹk bliknəs. "nændɛɹə woʊn laɪk ðɪs." ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪɡzækli wʌt wɛn ɑn bɪtwin ɪm ən ðə meɪɾənz - sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi pəkjuljɝ ɪndid, baɪ ðə θɪŋz ʃi hæd sin - bʌɾ ɛni hoʊp ðət ðət maɪt stɑp ɪm ɡʌɾɝd aʊt wən i ɡɹɪn laɪk ə smɔl bɔɪ ɪveɪɾɪŋ ɪz mʌðɝ.

"You're not going anywhere without me, Rand al'Thor." She stopped herself from saying he would trip over his own feet if he did. This euphoria was almost as bad as the dark bleakness. "Nandera won't like this." She did not know exactly what went on between him and the Maidens - something very peculiar indeed, by the things she had seen - but any hope that that might stop him guttered out when he grinned like a small boy evading his mother.

"ʃi woʊnt noʊ, mɪn." hi ivən hæɾ ə twɪŋkəl ɪn ɪz aɪ! "aɪ də ðɪs ɔl ðə taɪm, ən ðeɪ nɛvɝ noʊ." hi hɛld aʊɾ ə ɡlʌv hænd, ɪkspɛktɪŋ əɹ tə dʒʌmp wən i kɔld.

"She won't know, Min." He even had a twinkle in his eye! "I do this all the time, and they never know." He held out a gloved hand, expecting her to jump when he called.

ðəɹ ɹɪli wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə də bʌt stʃɹeɪɾən əɹ ɡɹin koʊt, ɡlæns ɪndə ðə stænd-mɪɹɝ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ə hɝ hɛɹ - ən teɪk ɪz hænd. ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɑz, ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə lip ɪf i kɹʊkəɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ; ʃi dʒʌst wɑntəd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ i nɛvɝ faʊn aʊt.

There really was nothing to do but straighten her green coat, glance into the stand-mirror to make sure of her hair - and take his hand. The trouble was, she was ready to leap if he crooked a finger; she just wanted to make sure he never found out.

ɪn ði æntəɹum, hi meɪɾ ə ɡeɪtweɪ ətɑp ðə ɡoʊldən ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn sɛɾ ɪn ðə flɔɹ, ən ʃi lɛɾ ɪm lɛɾ əɹ θɹu ɑntu ə hɪli fɔɹəs flɔɹ kɑɹpəɾɪd wɪð dɛd livz. ə bɝd flæʃt əweɪ, flɛɹɪŋ ɹɛd wɪŋz. ə skwɝəl əpɪɹɾ ɑn ə bɹæntʃ ən tʃɪɾɝd ət ðɛm, læʃɪŋ ə fɝi waɪt-tɪp teɪl.

In the anteroom, he made a gateway atop the golden Rising Sun set in the floor, and she let him lead her through onto a hilly forest floor carpeted with dead leaves. A bird flashed away, flaring red wings. A squirrel appeared on a branch and chittered at them, lashing a furry white-tipped tail.

ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli ðə sɔɹɾ ʌv wʊdz ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd fɹəm nɪɹ bɛɹlən; ðəɹ wɝ nɑt mɛni ɹil fɔɹəsts ɛniwɛɹ kloʊs tə ðə sɪɾi ʌv kɛɹhin. moʊst ə ðə tʃɹiz stʊd fɔɹ əɹ faɪv əɹ ivən tɛn peɪsɪz əpɑɹt, tɔl lɛðɝlifs ən paɪnz, tɔlɝ oʊks ən tʃɹiz ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ, ɹʌnɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə flæt ʃi ən ɹænd stʊɾ ɑn ən ʌp ə sloʊp ðət bɪɡæn oʊnli ə fju spænz ɔf. ivən ði ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ sim θɪnɝ ðən bæk hoʊm, ðə bʊʃəz ən vaɪnz ən bɹaɪɹz spɹɛɾ aʊɾ ɪn pætʃəz, ðoʊ səm ə ðoʊz wɝ nɑt smɔl. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz bɹaʊn ən dʒɹaɪ. ʃi plʌkt ə leɪs-ɛdʒ hæŋkɝtʃɪf fɹəm əɹ sliv ən dæbd ət ðə swɛt ðət sʌɾənli sim tə pɑp aʊɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs.

It was hardly the sort of woods she remembered from near Baerlon; there were not many real forests anywhere close to the city of Cairhien. Most of the trees stood four or five or even ten paces apart, tall leatherleafs and pines, taller oaks and trees she did not know, running across the flat she and Rand stood on and up a slope that began only a few spans off. Even the undergrowth seemed thinner than back home, the bushes and vines and briars spread out in patches, though some of those were not small. Everything was brown and dry. She plucked a lace-edged handkerchief from her sleeve and dabbed at the sweat that suddenly seemed to pop out on her face.

"wɪtʃ weɪ də wi ɡoʊ?" ʃi æskt. baɪ ðə sʌn, nɔɹθ leɪ oʊvɝ ðə sloʊp, ðə dɝɛkʃən ʃi wəd tʃuz. ðə sɪɾi ʃəd laɪ əbaʊt sɛvən əɹ eɪt maɪlz ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən. wɪð lʌk, ðeɪ kəd wɔk ɔl ðə weɪ bæk wɪθaʊɾ ɛnkaʊntɝɪŋ ɛniwʌn. əɹ bɛɾɝ, ɡɪvən əɹ hil buts ən ðə tɝeɪn, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə hit, ɹænd kəd dɪsaɪd tə ɡɪv ʌp ən meɪk ənʌðɝ ɡeɪtweɪ bæk tə ðə sʌn pæləs. ðə pæləs ɹumz wɝ kul kəmpɛɹd tə ðɪs.

"Which way do we go?" she asked. By the sun, north lay over the slope, the direction she would choose. The city should lie about seven or eight miles in that direction. With luck, they could walk all the way back without encountering anyone. Or better, given her heeled boots and the terrain, not to mention the heat, Rand could decide to give up and make another gateway back to the Sun Palace. The palace rooms were cool compared to this.

bɪfɔɹ i kəɾ ænsɝ, kɹæklɪŋ bɹʌʃ ən livz ənaʊnst sʌmwʌn kʌmɪŋ. ðə ɹaɪɾɝ u əpɪɹɾ ɑn ə lɔŋ-lɛɡəd ɡɹeɪ ɡɛldɪŋ wɪð bɹaɪt-fɹɪn bɹaɪɾəl ən ɹeɪnz wɑz ə kɛɹhinɪn wʊmən, ʃɔɹɾ ən slɛndɝ ɪn ə dɑɹk blu, nɪɹli blæk, sɪlk ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs, hɔɹəzɑntəl slæʃɪz ə ɹɛɾ ən ɡɹin ən waɪt ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm əɹ nɛk tə bɪloʊ hɝ niz. ðə swɛɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs kəd nɑt dɪmɪnɪʃ əɹ peɪl bjuɾi, əɹ meɪk əɹ aɪz lɛs ðən lɑɹdʒ dɑɹk pulz. ə smɔl klɪɹ ɡɹin stoʊn hʌŋ ɑn əɹ fɔɹhɛd fɹəm ə faɪn ɡoʊldən tʃeɪn fæsən ɪn blæk hɛɹ ðət fɛl ɪn weɪvz tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz.

Before he could answer, crackling brush and leaves announced someone coming. The rider who appeared on a long-legged gray gelding with bright-fringed bridle and reins was a Cairhienin woman, short and slender in a dark blue, nearly black, silk riding dress, horizontal slashes of red and green and white running from her neck to below her knees. The sweat on her face could not diminish her pale beauty, or make her eyes less than large dark pools. A small clear green stone hung on her forehead from a fine golden chain fastened in black hair that fell in waves to her shoulders.

mɪn ɡæspt, ən nɑt fəɹ ðə hʌntɪŋ kɹɔsboʊ ðə wʊmən kæɹid kæʒəwəli ɹeɪzd ɪn wʌn ɡɹin-ɡlʌv hænd. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz mɔɪɹeɪn. bʌt. . . .

Min gasped, and not for the hunting crossbow the woman carried casually raised in one green-gloved hand. For a moment, she was sure it was Moiraine. But. . . .

"aɪ də nɑt ɹikɔl siɪŋ iðɝ ə jə ɪn ðə kæmp," ðə wʊmən sɛɾ ɪn ə θɹoʊɾi, ɔlmoʊst sʌltʃɹi, vɔɪs. mɔɪɹeɪnz vɔɪs hæd bɪn kɹɪstəl. ðə kɹɔs-baʊ loʊɝd, stɪl kwaɪt kæʒəwəli, əntɪl ɪt pɔɪntəd ɹɑk-stɛɾi ət ɹændz tʃɛst.

"I do not recall seeing either of you in the camp," the woman said in a throaty, almost sultry, voice. Moiraine's voice had been crystal. The cross-bow lowered, still quite casually, until it pointed rock-steady at Rand's chest.

hi ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪt. "aɪ θɔɾ aɪ maɪt laɪk tə teɪk ə lʊk ət jəɹ kæmp," hi sɛd wɪð ə slaɪt baʊ. "aɪ bɪliv jə ɑɹ ðə leɪɾi kæɹɑlin dəmədʒɹd?" ðə slɛndɝ wʊmən ɪnklaɪn əɹ hɛd, æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ ðə neɪm.

He ignored it. "I thought I might like to take a look at your camp," he said with a slight bow. "I believe you are the Lady Caraline Damodred?" The slender woman inclined her head, acknowledging the name.

mɪn saɪd ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæd ɹɪli ɪkspɛktəd mɔɪɹeɪn tə tɝn ʌp əlaɪv. mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz ði oʊnli vjuɪŋ ə hɝz ðət hæɾ ɛvɝ feɪld. bʌt kæɹɑlin dəmədʒɹd hɝsɛlf, wʌn ə ðə liɾɝz ə ðə ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛnst ɹænd hɪɹ ɪn kɛɹhin, ən ə kleɪmən tə ðə sʌn θɹoʊn. . . . hi ɹɪli wɑz pʊlɪŋ ɔl ðə θɹɛdz ə ðə pæɾɝn ɝaʊn hɪm, tə hæv əɹ əpɪɹ.

Min sighed regretfully, but it was not as if she had really expected Moiraine to turn up alive. Moiraine was the only viewing of hers that had ever failed. But Caraline Damodred herself, one of the leaders of the rebellion against Rand here in Cairhien, and a claimant to the Sun Throne. . . . He really was pulling all the threads of the Pattern around him, to have her appear.

leɪɾi kæɹɑlin sloʊli ɹeɪz ðə kɹɔsboʊ tə wʌn saɪd; ðə kɔɹd meɪɾ ə laʊd snæp, lɔntʃɪŋ ðə bɹɔdhɛd boʊlt ɪndə ði ɛɹ.

Lady Caraline slowly raised the crossbow to one side; the cord made a loud snap, launching the broadhead bolt into the air.

"aɪ daʊt wʌn wəd də ɛni ɡʊɾ əɡɛns ju," ʃi sɛd, wɔkɪŋ əɹ ɡɛldɪŋ sloʊli təwɔɹd ðɛm, "æn aɪ wəd nɑt laɪk jə tə θɪŋk aɪ wɑz θɹɛɾənɪŋ ju." ʃi lʊkt wʌns ət mɪn - dʒʌst ə ɡlæns ðət ɹæn hɛd tə toʊ, ðoʊ mɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ wɑz faɪld əweɪ - bʌɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ðæt, leɪɾi kæɹɑlin kɛpt əɹ aɪz ɑn ɹænd. ʃi dʒɹu ɹeɪn θɹi peɪsɪz əweɪ, dʒʌs fɑɹ ɪnʌf soʊ hi kəd nɑt ɹitʃ əɹ əfʊt bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd dɪɡ ɪn əɹ hilz. "aɪ kən oʊnli θɪŋk ʌv wʌn ɡɹeɪ-aɪd mæn wɪð jəɹ haɪɾ u maɪt sʌɾənli əpɪɹ aʊɾ ə noʊwɛɹ, ənlɛs pɝhæps jə ɑɹ ən il ɪn dɪsɡaɪz, bʌt pɝhæps jəl bi soʊ kaɪn əz tə səplaɪ ə neɪm?"

"I doubt one would do any good against you," she said, walking her gelding slowly toward them, "and I would not like you to think I was threatening you." She looked once at Min - just a glance that ran head to toe, though Min was sure everything about her was filed away - but aside from that, Lady Caraline kept her eyes on Rand. She drew rein three paces away, just far enough so he could not reach her afoot before she could dig in her heels. "I can only think of one gray-eyed man with your height who might suddenly appear out of nowhere, unless perhaps you are an Aiel in disguise, but perhaps you will be so kind as to supply a name?"

"aɪ æm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," ɹænd sɛd, ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz ɛɹəɡən əz i hæd bɪn wɪð ðə si foʊk, jɛɾ ɪf ɛni tɑvɝən swɝlɪŋ ə ðə pæɾɝn wɑz ət wɝk, ðə wʊmən ɑn ðə hɔɹs ɡeɪv noʊ ɛvəɾəns.

"I am the Dragon Reborn," Rand said, every bit as arrogant as he had been with the Sea Folk, yet if any ta'veren swirling of the Pattern was at work, the woman on the horse gave no evidence.

ɹæðɝ ðən lipɪŋ daʊn tə fɔl tə hɝ niz, ʃi mɪɹli nɑɾəd, pɝsɪŋ əɹ lɪps. "aɪ hæv hɝd soʊ vɛɹi mʌtʃ əbaʊt ju. aɪ hæv hɝd jə wɛn tə ðə taʊɝ tə səbmɪt tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. aɪ hæv hɝd jə min tə ɡɪv ðə sʌn θɹoʊn tə ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd. aɪ hæv ɔlsoʊ hɝd ðət jə kɪld ɪleɪn, ən əɹ mʌðɝ."

Rather than leaping down to fall to her knees, she merely nodded, pursing her lips. "I have heard so very much about you. I have heard you went to the Tower to submit to the Amyrlin Seat. I have heard you mean to give the Sun Throne to Elayne Trakand. I have also heard that you killed Elayne, and her mother."

"aɪ səbmɪt tə noʊ wʌn," ɹænd ɹɪplaɪd ʃɑɹpli. hi stɛɹɾ ʌp əɾ əɹ wɪð aɪz fɪɹs ɪnʌf tə snætʃ əɹ aʊɾ ə ðə sæɾəl baɪ ðɛmsɛlvz. "ɪleɪn ɪz ɑn əɹ weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn əz wi spik, tə teɪk ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ. æftɝ wɪtʃ, ʃɪl əv ðə θɹoʊn ə kɛɹhin əz wɛl." mɪn wɪnst. dɪɾ i hæv tə saʊn laɪk ə pɪloʊ stʌft fʊl ə hɔɾi? ʃi hæd hoʊpt i hæd kɑm daʊn ə bɪɾ æftɝ ðə si foʊk.

"I submit to no one," Rand replied sharply. He stared up at her with eyes fierce enough to snatch her out of the saddle by themselves. "Elayne is on her way to Caemlyn as we speak, to take the throne of Andor. After which, she will have the throne of Cairhien as well." Min winced. Did he have to sound like a pillow stuffed full of haughty? She had hoped he had calmed down a bit after the Sea Folk.

leɪɾi kæɹɑlin leɪɾ əɹ kɹɔsboʊ əkɹɔs ðə sæɾəl ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ɹʌnɪŋ ə ɡlʌv hæn əlɔŋ ɪt. pɝhæps ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ ðət lus boʊlt? "aɪ kəɾ æksɛp maɪ jʌŋ kʌzən ɑn ðə θɹoʊn - bɛɾɝ ʃi ðən sʌm, ət list - bʌt. . . ." ðoʊz bɪɡ dɑɹk aɪz ðət hæd sim soʊ lɪkwəd sʌɾənli bɪkeɪm stoʊn. "bʌɾ aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ aɪ kæn, æksɛp jə ɪn kɛɹhin, ən aɪ də nɑt min oʊnli jəɹ tʃeɪnʒəz tə lɔz ən kʌstəmz. jə . . . tʃeɪnʒ feɪt baɪ jəɹ vɛɹi pɹɛzəns. ɛvɹi deɪ sɪns jə keɪm, pipəl daɪ ɪn æksəɾənts soʊ bəzɑɹ noʊ wʌn kən bɪliv ðɛm. soʊ mɛni hʌzbənz əbændən ðɛɹ waɪvz, ən waɪvz ðɛɹ hʌzbənz, ðət noʊ wʌn ivən kɑmɛns əpɑn ɪt naʊ. jəl tɛɹ kɛɹhin əpɑɹt dʒʌs baɪ ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ hɪɹ."

Lady Caraline laid her crossbow across the saddle in front of her, running a gloved hand along it. Perhaps regretting that loosed bolt? "I could accept my young cousin on the throne - better she than some, at least - but. . . ." Those big dark eyes that had seemed so liquid suddenly became stone. "But I am not sure I can, accept you in Cairhien, and I do not mean only your changes to laws and customs. You . . . change fate by your very presence. Every day since you came, people die in accidents so bizarre no one can believe them. So many husbands abandon their wives, and wives their husbands, that no one even comments upon it now. You will tear Cairhien apart just by remaining here."

"bæləns," mɪn bɹoʊk ɪn heɪstəli. ɹændz feɪs wɑz soʊ dɑɹk, hi lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə bɝst. meɪbi hi hæd bɪn ɹaɪt tə kʌm æftɝ ɔl. sɝɾənli ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn lɛɾɪŋ ɪm θɹoʊ ðɪs miɾɪŋ əweɪ ɪn ə tæntʃɹəm. ʃi ɡeɪv noʊ wʌn ə tʃæns tə spik. "ðɛɹ ɪz ɔlweɪz ə bæləns ʌv ɡʊɾ əɡɛns bæd. ðæts haʊ ðə pæɾɝn wɝks. ivən i dʌzn tʃeɪnʒ ðæt. əz naɪt bælənsəz deɪ, ɡʊd bælənsəz hɑɹm. sɪns i keɪm, ðəɹ hæzən bɪn ə sɪŋɡəl stɪlbɝθ ɪn ðə sɪɾi, nɑt wʌn tʃaɪl bɔɹn dɪfɔɹmd. ðəɹ ɑɹ mɔɹ mɛɹɪdʒɪz səm deɪz ðən juz tə bi ɪn ə wik, ən fəɹ ɛvɹi mæn u tʃoʊks tə dɛθ ɑn ə fɛðɝ, ə wʊmən tʌmbəlz hɛɾ oʊvɝ hilz daʊn θɹi flaɪts ə stɛɹz ænd, ɪnstɛɾ ə bɹeɪkɪŋ əɹ nɛk, stænz ʌp wɪθaʊɾ ə bɹuz. neɪm ði ivəl, ən jə kən pɔɪn tə ðə ɡʊd. ðə tɝnɪŋ ə ðə wil ɹikwaɪɝz bæləns, ən i oʊnli ɪnkɹisəz ðə tʃænsəz ʌv wʌt maɪɾ əv hæpən ɛniweɪ ɪn neɪtʃɝ." sʌɾənli ʃi kʌlɝd, ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ. stɛɹɪŋ, mɔɹ laɪk.

"Balance," Min broke in hastily. Rand's face was so dark, he looked ready to burst. Maybe he had been right to come after all. Certainly there was no point letting him throw this meeting away in a tantrum. She gave no one a chance to speak. "There is always a balance of good against bad. That's how the Pattern works. Even he doesn't change that. As night balances day, good balances harm. Since he came, there hasn't been a single stillbirth in the city, not one child born deformed. There are more marriages some days than used to be in a week, and for every man who chokes to death on a feather, a woman tumbles head over heels down three flights of stairs and, instead of breaking her neck, stands up without a bruise. Name the evil, and you can point to the good. The turning of the Wheel requires balance, and he only increases the chances of what might have happened anyway in nature." Suddenly she colored, realizing they were both looking at her. Staring, more like.

"bæləns?" ɹænd mɝmɝd, aɪbɹaʊz lɪftɪŋ.

"Balance?" Rand murmured, eyebrows lifting.

"aɪv bɪn ɹiɾɪŋ səm ə mæstɝ fɛlz bʊks," ʃi sɛd feɪnli. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn ɛniwʌn tə θɪŋk ʃi wɑz pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi ə fəlɑsəfɝ. leɪɾi kæɹɑlin smaɪld əɾ əɹ tɔl sæɾəlboʊ ən tɔɪd wɪð əɹ ɹeɪnz. ðə wʊmən wɑz læfɪŋ ət hɝ. ʃi wəd ʃoʊ ðɪs wʊmən wʌt ʃi kəd læf æt!

"I've been reading some of Master Fel's books," she said faintly. She did not want anyone to think she was pretending to be a philosopher. Lady Caraline smiled at her tall saddlebow and toyed with her reins. The woman was laughing at her. She would show this woman what she could laugh at!

əbɹʌpli ə tɔl blæk ɡɛldɪŋ wɪð ðə lʊk ʌv ə wɔɹhɔɹs keɪm kɹæʃɪŋ θɹu ði ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ, ɹɪɾən baɪ ə mæn wɛl ɪndə hɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz, wɪð kloʊs-kɹɑp hɛɹ ən ə pɔɪntəd bɪɹd. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz jɛloʊ tɛɹən koʊt, ðə fæt slivz stʃɹaɪpt wɪð ɡɹin sæɾən, aɪz ʌv ə stɑɹtlɪŋ pɹɪɾi blu lʊkt aʊɾ ə hɪz dæmp, dɑɹk feɪs, laɪk peɪl pɑlɪʃt sæfaɪɝz. nɑɾ ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli pɹɪɾi mæn, bʌt ðoʊz aɪz meɪɾ ʌp fəɹ ə tu-lɔŋ noʊz. hi kæɹiɾ ə kɹɔsboʊ ɪn wʌn lɛðɝ-ɡɔntələɾəd hænd, ən bɹændɪʃt ə bɹɔd-hɛd boʊlt ɪn ði ʌðɝ.

Abruptly a tall black gelding with the look of a warhorse came crashing through the undergrowth, ridden by a man well into his middle years, with close-cropped hair and a pointed beard. Despite his yellow Tairen coat, the fat sleeves striped with green satin, eyes of a startling pretty blue looked out of his damp, dark face, like pale polished sapphires. Not a particularly pretty man, but those eyes made up for a too-long nose. He carried a crossbow in one leather-gauntleted hand, and brandished a broad-head bolt in the other.

"ðɪs keɪm daʊn ɪntʃəz fɹəm maɪ feɪs, kæɹɑlin, ən ɪts jəɹ mɑɹkɪŋz! dʒʌs kəz ðɛɹz noʊ ɡeɪm ɪz noʊ ɹizən - " hi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə ɹænd ən mɪn dʒʌs ðɛn, ən ɪz dʒɹɔn kɹɔsboʊ loʊɝd təwɔɹd ðɛm. "ɑɹ ðiz stʃɹeɪz, kæɹɑlin, əɹ dɪd jə faɪn spaɪz fɹəm ðə sɪɾi? aɪv nɛvɝ bɪlivd ælθɹ wəd kəntɪnju tə lɛɾ əs sɪt hɪɹ ənhɪndɝd."

"This came down inches from my face, Caraline, and it has your markings! Just because there's no game is no reason - " He became aware of Rand and Min just then, and his drawn crossbow lowered toward them. "Are these strays, Caraline, or did you find spies from the city? I've never believed al'Thor would continue to let us sit here unhindered."

hæf ə dʌzən mɔɹ ɹaɪɾɝz əpɪɹd bɪhaɪn hɪm, swɛɾɪŋ mɛn ɪn fæt-sliv koʊts wɪð sæɾən stʃɹaɪps ən pɝspaɪɹɪŋ wɪmən ɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛsəz wɪð waɪd, θɪk leɪs kɑlɝz. ɔl kæɹiɪŋ kɹɔsboʊz. ðə læst ə ðoʊz ɹaɪɾɝz hæd nɑt hɔltəd, hɔɹsəz stæmpɪŋ ən tɔsɪŋ hɛdz, bɪfɔɹ twaɪs əz mɛni keɪm stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ θɹu ðə bɹʌʃ fɹəm ənʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən ən pʊld ʌp nɪɹ kæɹɑlin, slaɪt, peɪl mɛn ən wɪmən ɪn dɑɹk kloʊðz wɪð stʃɹaɪps ə kʌlɝ səmtaɪmz tə bɪloʊ ðə weɪst. ɔl wɪð kɹɔsboʊz. sɝvəns əfʊt keɪm æftɝ, leɪbɝɪŋ ən pæntɪŋ wɪð ðə hit, ðə mɛn u wəd dʒɹɛs ən kæɹi ɛni daʊnd ɡeɪm. ɪt hɑɹdli sim tə mæɾɝ ðət nʌn hæd mɔɹ ðən ə skɪnɪŋ naɪf əɾ ɪz bɛlt. mɪn swɑloʊd, ən ʌnkɑnʃəsli bɪɡæn pæɾɪŋ əɹ tʃiks wɪð əɹ hæŋkɝtʃɪf ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ vɪɡɝəsli. ɪf ivən wʌn pɝsən ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɹænd bɪfɔɹ i nu ɪt. . . .

Half a dozen more riders appeared behind him, sweating men in fat-sleeved coats with satin stripes and perspiring women in riding dresses with wide, thick lace collars. All carrying crossbows. The last of those riders had not halted, horses stamping and tossing heads, before twice as many came struggling through the brush from another direction and pulled up near Caraline, slight, pale men and women in dark clothes with stripes of color sometimes to below the waist. All with crossbows. Servants afoot came after, laboring and panting with the heat, the men who would dress and carry any downed game. It hardly seemed to matter that none had more than a skinning knife at his belt. Min swallowed, and unconsciously began patting her cheeks with her handkerchief a little more vigorously. If even one person recognized Rand before he knew it. . . .

leɪɾi kæɹɑlin dɪd nɑt hɛzəteɪt. "nɑt spaɪz, dɑɹlɪn," ʃi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ əɹ hɔɹs tə feɪs ðə tɛɹən nukʌmɝz. ðə haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪn sɪsnɛɹə! ɔl ðət wɑz niɾəd naʊ wɑz lɔɹd tɔɹæm ɹieɪɾən. mɪn wɪʃt ɹændz tɑvɝən tʌɡɪŋ ət ðə pæɾɝn kəd bi dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl lɛs kəmplit. "ə kʌzən ən ɪz waɪf," kæɹɑlin wɛn ɑn, "kʌm fɹəm ændɝ tə si mi. meɪ aɪ pɹɛzən toʊmɑs tʃɹəkənd - fɹəm ə maɪnɝ bɹæntʃ ə ðə haʊs - ən ɪz waɪf dʒeɪɪzi." mɪn ɔlmoʊst ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɝ; ði oʊnli dʒeɪɪzi ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ noʊn hæd bɪn ə dʌsti pɹun bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz twɛnti, ən saʊɝ ən bæd-tɛmpɝd tə but.

Lady Caraline did not hesitate. "Not spies, Darlin," she said, turning her horse to face the Tairen newcomers. The High Lord Darlin Sisnera! All that was needed now was Lord Toram Riatin. Min wished Rand's ta'veren tugging at the Pattern could be just a little less complete. "A cousin and his wife," Caraline went on, "come from Andor to see me. May I present Tomas Trakand - from a minor branch of the House - and his wife Jaisi." Min almost glared at her; the only Jaisi she had ever known had been a dusty prune before she was twenty, and sour and bad-tempered to boot.

dɑɹlɪnz ɡeɪz swɛpt oʊvɝ ɹænd əɡɛn, lɪŋɡɝɾ ə moʊmən ɑn mɪn. hi loʊɝɾ ɪz kɹɔsboʊ ən baʊɾ ɪz hɛd dʒʌst ə hɛɹ, ə haɪ lɔɹɾ ə tiɹ tə ə maɪnɝ noʊbəl. "ju ɑɹ wɛlkəm, lɔɹd toʊmɑs. ɪt teɪks ə bɹeɪv mæn tə dʒɔɪn əs ɪn əɹ pɹɛzən sɝkəmstænsəz. ælθɹ meɪ lus ðə sævədʒəz ɑn əs ɛni deɪ." ðə leɪɾi kæɹɑlin ɡeɪv ɪm ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd lʊk ðəɾ i meɪɾ ə ʃoʊ ʌv nɑt siɪŋ.

Darlin's gaze swept over Rand again, lingered a moment on Min. He lowered his crossbow and bowed his head just a hair, a High Lord of Tear to a minor noble. "You are welcome, Lord Tomas. It takes a brave man to join us in our present circumstances. Al'Thor may loose the savages on us any day." The Lady Caraline gave him an exasperated look that he made a show of not seeing.

hi noʊɾəd ðət ɹændz ɹɪtɝn baʊ wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðən hɪz, haʊɛvɝ; noʊɾəd, ən fɹaʊnd. ə dɑɹkli hænsəm wʊmən ɪn ɪz ɹɛɾənu mʌɾɝd æŋɡɹəli ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ - ʃi hæɾ ə lɔŋ hɑɹd feɪs, wɛl-pɹæktəst ɪn æŋɡɝ - ən ə staʊt fɛloʊ, skaʊlɪŋ ən swɛɾɪŋ ɪn ə ɹɛd-stʃɹaɪp koʊɾ ə peɪl ɡɹin, hild ɪz hɔɹs fɔɹwɝɾ ə fju stɛps əz ɪf θɪŋkɪŋ tə ɹaɪd ɹænd daʊn.

He noted that Rand's return bow was no more than his, however; noted, and frowned. A darkly handsome woman in his retinue muttered angrily under her breath - she had a long hard face, well-practiced in anger - and a stout fellow, scowling and sweating in a red-striped coat of pale green, heeled his horse forward a few steps as if thinking to ride Rand down.

"ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz," ɹænd sɛd kuli, əz ðoʊ hi noʊɾəst nʌθɪŋ. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn tə. . . . ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn tə dʒʌst əbaʊɾ ɛnibəɾi, wɑz wʌɾ ɪt wɑz. ɛɹəɡəns ɑn ə maʊntəntɑp. "nɑt mʌtʃ hæpənz əz wi ɪkspɛkt. fəɹ ɪnstəns, aɪ hɝd jə wɝ ɪn tiɹ, ɪn hæɾən mɝk."

"The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills," Rand said coolly, as though he noticed nothing. The Dragon Reborn to. . . . The Dragon Reborn to just about anybody, was what it was. Arrogance on a mountaintop. "Not much happens as we expect. For instance, I heard you were in Tear, in Haddon Mirk."

mɪn wɪʃt ʃi dɛɹd spik ʌp, dɛɹd seɪ sʌmθɪŋ tə suð hɪm. ʃi sɛɾəld fəɹ stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ɪz ɑɹm. kæʒəwəli. ə waɪf - naʊ ðəɹ wɑz ə wɝd ðət sʌɾənli saʊndəd faɪn - ə waɪf aɪdli pæɾɪŋ əɹ hʌzbənd. ənʌðɝ faɪn wɝd. laɪt, ɪt wɑz hɑɹd biɪŋ fɛɹ! ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli fɛɹ, hævɪŋ tə bi fɛɹ.

Min wished she dared speak up, dared say something to soothe him. She settled for stroking his arm. Casually. A wife - now there was a word that suddenly sounded fine - a wife idly patting her husband. Another fine word. Light, it was hard being fair! It was hardly fair, having to be fair.

"ðə haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪn ɪz bʌt leɪtli kʌm baɪ lɔŋboʊt wɪð ə fju ʌv ɪz kloʊs fɹɛnz, toʊmɑs." kæɹɑlinz θɹoʊɾi toʊn nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd, bʌɾ əɹ ɡɛldɪŋ sʌɾənli pɹænst, noʊ daʊɾ əɾ ə ʃɑɹp hil, ən ʌndɝ kʌvɝ ə ɹɪɡeɪnɪŋ kəntʃɹoʊl ʃi tɝn əɹ bæk tə dɑɹlɪn ən ʃɑt ɹænd ə bɹif wɔɹnɪŋ fɹaʊn. "du nɑt tʃɹʌbəl ðə haɪ lɔɹd, toʊmɑs."

"The High Lord Darlin is but lately come by longboat with a few of his close friends, Tomas." Caraline's throaty tone never changed, but her gelding suddenly pranced, no doubt at a sharp heel, and under cover of regaining control she turned her back to Darlin and shot Rand a brief warning frown. "Do not trouble the High Lord, Tomas."

"aɪ də nɑt maɪnd, kæɹɑlin," dɑɹlɪn sɛd, slɪŋɪŋ ɪz kɹɔsboʊ fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl baɪ ə lup. hi ɹoʊɾ ə lɪɾəl kloʊsɝ ən ɹɛstəɾ ən ɑɹm ɑn ɪz tɔl sæɾəl-baʊ. "ə mæn ʃəd noʊ wʌt hiz stɛpɪŋ ɪntu. jə meɪ hæv hɝd ðə teɪlz əbaʊɾ ælθɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə taʊɝ, toʊmɑs. aɪ keɪm kəz ɛɛs sədaɪ əpɹoʊtʃt mi mʌnθs əɡoʊ wɪð sədʒɛstʃənz ðət maɪt hæpən, ən jəɹ kʌzən ɪnfɔɹmd mi ʃi hæd ɹəsiv ðə seɪm. wi θɔt wi maɪt pʊɾ əɹ ɑn ðə sʌn θɹoʊn bɪfɔɹ koʊləveɪɪɹ kəd teɪk ɪt. wɛl, ælθɹ ɪz noʊ ful; nɛvɝ bɪliv i ɪz. maɪsɛlf, aɪ θɪŋk i pleɪd ðə taʊɝ laɪk ə hɑɹp. koʊləveɪɪɹ ɪz hæŋd, hi sɪts sɪkjʊɹ bɪhaɪn kɛɹhinz wɔlz - wɪθaʊɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hɔltɝ, əl weɪdʒɝ, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ɹumɝ sɛz - ən əntɪl wi faɪn səm weɪ tə ɛkstʃɹəkeɪɾ aʊɝsɛlvz, wi sɪɾ ɪn ɪz hænd, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə meɪk ə fɪst."

"I do not mind, Caraline," Darlin said, slinging his crossbow from his saddle by a loop. He rode a little closer and rested an arm on his tall saddle-bow. "A man should know what he is stepping into. You may have heard the tales about al'Thor going to the Tower, Tomas. I came because Aes Sedai approached me months ago with suggestions that might happen, and your cousin informed me she had received the same. We thought we might put her on the Sun Throne before Colavaere could take it. Well, al'Thor is no fool; never believe he is. Myself, I think he played the Tower like a harp. Colavaere is hanged, he sits secure behind Cairhien's walls - without an Aes Sedai halter, I'll wager, no matter what rumor says - and until we find some way to extricate ourselves, we sit in his hand, waiting for him to make a fist."

"ə ʃɪp bɹɔt ju," ɹænd sɛd sɪmpli. "ə ʃɪp kəd teɪk jə əweɪ." əbɹʌpli mɪn ɹilaɪzd i wɑz dʒɛnli pæɾɪŋ əɹ hæn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə suð hɝ!

"A ship brought you," Rand said simply. "A ship could take you away." Abruptly Min realized he was gently patting her hand on his arm. Trying to soothe her!

stɑɹtlɪŋli, dɑɹlɪn θɹu bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən læft. ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni wɪmən wəd fɝɡɛɾ ɪz noʊz fəɹ ðoʊz aɪz ən ðət læf. "soʊ ɪt wʊd, toʊmɑs, bʌɾ aɪv æsk jəɹ kʌzən tə mɛɹi mi. ʃɪl nɑt seɪ jɛs əɹ noʊ, bʌɾ ə mæn kænɑɾ əbændən ivən ə pɑsəbəl waɪf tə ðə mɝsiz ə ði il, ən ʃɪl nɑt liv."

Startlingly, Darlin threw back his head and laughed. A great many women would forget his nose for those eyes and that laugh. "So it would, Tomas, but I've asked your cousin to marry me. She will not say yes or no, but a man cannot abandon even a possible wife to the mercies of the Aiel, and she will not leave."

kæɹɑlin dəmədʒɹd dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp ɑn əɹ sæɾəl, feɪs koʊld ɪnʌf tə ʃeɪm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt sʌɾənli ɔʊɹəz ə ɹɛɾ ən waɪt flæʃt ɝaʊn əɹ ən dɑɹlɪn, ən mɪn nu. ðə kʌlɝz nɛvɝ sim tə mæɾɝ, bʌt ʃi nu ðət ðeɪ wəd mɛɹi - æftɝ kæɹɑlin hæd lɛɾ ɪm ə mɛɹi tʃeɪs. mɔɹ, tə hɝ aɪz ə kɹaʊn sʌɾənli əpɪɹɾ ɑn dɑɹlɪnz hɛd, ə sɪmpəl ɡoʊldən sɝklət wɪð ə slaɪtli kɝv sɔɹd laɪɪŋ ɑn ɪts saɪɾ əbʌv ɪz bɹaʊz. ðə kɪŋz kɹaʊn i wəd wɛɹ wʌn deɪ, ðoʊ ʌv wʌt kʌntʃɹi, ʃi kəd nɑt seɪ. tiɹ hæd haɪ lɔɹdz ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə kɪŋ.

Caraline Damodred drew herself up on her saddle, face cold enough to shame an Aes Sedai, but suddenly auras of red and white flashed around her and Darlin, and Min knew. The colors never seemed to matter, but she knew that they would marry - after Caraline had led him a merry chase. More, to her eyes a crown suddenly appeared on Darlin's head, a simple golden circlet with a slightly curved sword lying on its side above his brows. The king's crown he would wear one day, though of what country, she could not say. Tear had High Lords instead of a king.

ɪmədʒ ən ɔʊɹəz vænɪʃt əz dɑɹlɪn pʊld ɪz hɔɹs ɝaʊn tə feɪs kæɹɑlin. "ðɛɹz noʊ ɡeɪm tə bi faʊn tədeɪ. tɔɹæm əz ɔlɹɛɾi ɹɪtɝn tə kæmp. aɪ sədʒɛst wi də ðə seɪm." ðoʊz blu aɪz skæn ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ tʃɹiz kwɪkli. "ɪt simz jəɹ kʌzən ən ɪz waɪf əv lɔs ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. ðəl wɑndɝ, ɪn ə kɛɹləs moʊmənt," hi æɾəd tə ɹænd, ɪn ə kaɪnli toʊn. hi nu vɛɹi wɛl ðeɪ hæd noʊ hɔɹsəz. "bʌɾ aɪm ʃʊɹ ɹoʊvɛɹ ən ɪnɪs wɪl ɡɪv ʌp ðɛɹ maʊns. ə wɔk ɪn ði ɛɹ wɪl də ðɛm ɡʊd."

Image and auras vanished as Darlin pulled his horse around to face Caraline. "There's no game to be found today. Toram has already returned to camp. I suggest we do the same." Those blue eyes scanned the surrounding trees quickly. "It seems your cousin and his wife have lost their horses. They will wander, in a careless moment," he added to Rand, in a kindly tone. He knew very well they had no horses. "But I'm sure Rovair and Ines will give up their mounts. A walk in the air will do them good."

ðə staʊt mæn ɪn ðə ɹɛd-stʃɹaɪp koʊt swʌŋ daʊn fɹəm ɪz tɔl beɪ ɪmiɾiətli, wɪð ə toʊɾiɪŋ smaɪl fəɹ dɑɹlɪn ən wʌn mɑɹkədli lɛs wɔɹm ɪf dʒʌst əz ɡɹisi fəɹ ɹænd. ði æŋɡɹi-feɪst wʊmən wɑz ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ ɪn klaɪmɪŋ stɪfli fɹəm əɹ sɪlvɝ-ɡɹeɪ mɛɹ. ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk plizd.

The stout man in the red-striped coat swung down from his tall bay immediately, with a toadying smile for Darlin and one markedly less warm if just as greasy for Rand. The angry-faced woman was a moment later in climbing stiffly from her silver-gray mare. She did not look pleased.

niðɝ wɑz mɪn. "ju min tə ɡoʊ ɪndə ðɛɹ kæmp?" ʃi wɪspɝɾ əz ɹænd lɛɾ əɹ tə ðə hɔɹsəz. "ɑɹ jə mæd?" ʃi æɾəd bɪfɔɹ θɪŋkɪŋ.

Neither was Min. "You mean to go into their camp?" she whispered as Rand led her to the horses. "Are you mad?" she added before thinking.

"nɑt jɛt," hi sɛd sɔfli, tʌtʃɪŋ əɹ noʊz wɪð ðə tɪp ʌv wʌn fɪŋɡɝ. "θæŋks tə ju, aɪ noʊ ðæt." ən i bustɪɾ əɹ ɑntu ðə mɛɹ, ðən klaɪmd ɪndə ðə beɪz sæɾəl ən hil ði ænəməl ʌp bɪsaɪd dɑɹlɪn.

"Not yet," he said softly, touching her nose with the tip of one finger. "Thanks to you, I know that." And he boosted her onto the mare, then climbed into the bay's saddle and heeled the animal up beside Darlin.

hɛɾɪŋ nɔɹθ ən ə lɪɾəl təwɔɹd ðə wɛst, əkɹɔs ðə sloʊp, ðeɪ lɛft ɹoʊvɛɹ ən ɪnɪs stændɪŋ bɪniθ ðə tʃɹiz fɹaʊnɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ saʊɝli. əz ðeɪ fɛl ɪn bɪhaɪnd wɪð ðə kɛɹhinɪn, ði ʌðɝ tɛɹənz ʃaʊɾəd læfɪŋ wɪʃɪz ðət ðə pɛɹ wəɾ ɛndʒɔɪ ðə wɔk.

Heading north and a little toward the west, across the slope, they left Rovair and Ines standing beneath the trees frowning at one another sourly. As they fell in behind with the Cairhienin, the other Tairens shouted laughing wishes that the pair would enjoy the walk.

mɪn wʊɾə ɹɪɾən əlɔŋsaɪd ɹænd, bʌt kæɹɑlin pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ɑɹm, dʒɹɔɪŋ əɹ ɪn bæk ə ðə tu mɛn. "aɪ wɑnə si wʌɾ i dʌz," kæɹɑlin sɛd kwaɪətli. wɪtʃ wʌn, mɪn wʌndɝd. "ju ɑɹ ɪz lʌvɝ?" kɛɹə-laɪn æskt.

Min would have ridden alongside Rand, but Caraline put a hand on her arm, drawing her in back of the two men. "I want to see what he does," Caraline said quietly. Which one, Min wondered. "You are his lover?" Cara-line asked.

"jɛs," mɪn toʊld əɹ dɪfaɪənli, wʌns ʃi kəd kætʃ ə bɹɛθ. hɝ tʃiks fɛlt laɪk faɪɝ. bʌt ðə wʊmən oʊnli nɑɾəd, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ðə moʊs nætʃɹəl θɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld. meɪbi ɪt wɑz, ɪn kɛɹhin. səmtaɪmz ʃi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɔl ðə səfɪstəkeɪʃən ʃi hæd pɪkt ʌp tɔkɪŋ tə wɝldli pipəl wɑz əbaʊɾ əz θɪk əz əɹ blaʊs.

"Yes," Min told her defiantly, once she could catch a breath. Her cheeks felt like fire. But the woman only nodded, as if it were the most natural thing in the world. Maybe it was, in Cairhien. Sometimes she realized that all the sophistication she had picked up talking to worldly people was about as thick as her blouse.

ɹænd ən dɑɹlɪn ɹoʊd ni tə ni dʒʌst əhɛd, ðə jʌŋɡɝ mæn hæf ə hɛd tɔlɝ ðən ði oʊldɝ, itʃ ɹæpt ɪn pɹaɪd laɪk ə kloʊk. bʌt tɔkɪŋ, dʒʌs ðə seɪm. lɪsnɪŋ wɑz nɑɾ izi. ðeɪ spoʊk kwaɪətli, ən ðə dɛd livz ɹʌslɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz, fɔlən bɹæntʃəz kɹækɪŋ, ɔfən wɑz ɪnʌf tə mʌfəl ðɛɹ wɝdz. ðə kɹaɪ ʌv ə hɔk oʊvɝhɛɾ əɹ ðə tʃæɾɝɪŋ ʌv ə skwɝəl ɪn ə tʃɹi dʒɹaʊn ðɛm. stɪl, ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl tə oʊvɝhɪɹ snætʃɪz.

Rand and Darlin rode knee to knee just ahead, the younger man half a head taller than the older, each wrapped in pride like a cloak. But talking, just the same. Listening was not easy. They spoke quietly, and the dead leaves rustling under the horses' hooves, fallen branches cracking, often was enough to muffle their words. The cry of a hawk overhead or the chattering of a squirrel in a tree drowned them. Still, it was possible to overhear snatches.

"ɪf aɪ meɪ seɪ soʊ, toʊmɑs," dɑɹlɪn sɛɾ ət wʌn pɔɪnt, əz ðeɪ hɛɾəd daʊn æftɝ ðə fɝst ɹaɪz, "æn ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ aɪ ɔfɝ noʊ dɪsɹɪspɛkt, jə ɑɹ fɔɹtʃənəɾ ɪn hævɪŋ ə bjuɾəfəl waɪf. ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ, əl əv wʌn əz bjuɾəfəl maɪsɛlf."

"If I may say so, Tomas," Darlin said at one point, as they headed down after the first rise, "and under the Light I offer no disrespect, you are fortunate in having a beautiful wife. The Light willing, I will have one as beautiful myself."

"waɪ də ðeɪ nɑt spik ə sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt?" kæɹɑlin mʌɾɝd.

"Why do they not speak of something important?" Caraline muttered.

mɪn tɝn əɹ hɛd tə haɪɾ ə smɔl smaɪl. ðə leɪɾi kæɹɑlin dɪd nɑt lʊk hæf əz dɪsplizd əz ʃi saʊndəd. ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd nɛvɝ kɛɹd wɛðɝ ɛniwʌn θɔɾ əɹ pɹɪɾi əɹ nɑt. wɛl, əntɪl ʃi mɛt ɹænd, ɛniweɪ. meɪbi dɑɹlɪnz noʊz wɑz nɑɾ ɔl ðət lɔŋ.

Min turned her head to hide a small smile. The Lady Caraline did not look half as displeased as she sounded. She herself had never cared whether anyone thought her pretty or not. Well, until she met Rand, anyway. Maybe Darlin's nose was not all that long.

"aɪ wʊɾə lɛɾ ɪm teɪk kælændɝ fɹəm ðə stoʊn," dɑɹlɪn sɛd səm taɪm leɪɾɝ, əz ðeɪ klaɪmd ə spɑɹsli tʃɹid sloʊp, "bʌɾ aɪ kəd nɑt stæn əsaɪd wən i bɹɔɾ il ɪnveɪɾɝz ɪndə tiɹ."

"I would have let him take Callandor from the Stone," Darlin said some time later, as they climbed a sparsely treed slope, "but I could not stand aside when he brought Aiel invaders into Tear."

"aɪv ɹɛd ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən," ɹænd sɛd, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ɑn ðə beɪz nɛk ən ɝdʒɪŋ ði ænəməl ɑn. ə faɪn ɡlɔsi əpɪɹəns ðə hɔɹs hæd, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ bɑɾəm ðən ɪz oʊnɝ, mɪn səspɛktəd. "ðə stoʊn hæd tə fɔl bɪfɔɹ i kəd teɪk kælændɝ," ɹænd kəntɪnjud. "ʌðɝ tɛɹən lɔɹdz fɑloʊ hɪm, soʊ aɪ hɪɹ."

"I've read the Prophecies of the Dragon," Rand said, leaning forward on the bay's neck and urging the animal on. A fine glossy appearance the horse had, but no more bottom than his owner, Min suspected. "The Stone had to fall before he could take Callandor," Rand continued. "Other Tairen lords follow him, so I hear."

dɑɹlɪn snɔɹɾɪd. "ðeɪ kɹɪnʒ ən lɪk ɪz buts! aɪ kəɾ əv fɑloʊd, ɪf ðət wɑz wʌɾ i wɑntəd, ɪf. . . ." wɪð ə saɪ, hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "tu mɛni ɪfs, toʊmɑs. ðəɹ ɪz ə seɪɪŋ ɪn tɛɹ. 'ɛni kwɔɹəl kən bi fɝɡɪvən, bʌt kɪŋz nɛvɝ fɝɡɛt.' tiɹ əz nɑt bɪn ʌndɝ ə kɪŋ sɪns ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz vɛɹi laɪk ə kɪŋ. noʊ, hiz əɾəntɪd mi wɪð tʃɹizən, əz i kɔlz ɪt, ən aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ ɑn əz aɪ bɪɡæn. ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ, aɪ meɪ si tɛɹ sɑvɹən ɑn ɪts oʊn lænd wʌns mɔɹ bɪfɔɹ aɪ daɪ."

Darlin snorted. "They cringe and lick his boots! I could have followed, if that was what he wanted, if. . . ." With a sigh, he shook his head. "Too many ifs, Tomas. There is a saying in Tear. 'Any quarrel can be forgiven, but kings never forget.' Tear has not been under a king since Artur Hawkwing, but I think the Dragon Reborn is very like a king. No, he has attainted me with treason, as he calls it, and I must go on as I began. The Light willing, I may see Tear sovereign on its own land once more before I die."

ɪt hæd tə bi tɑvɝən wɝk, mɪn nu. ðə mæn wəd nɛvɝ əv spoʊkən ðɪs weɪ tə sʌmwʌn kæʒəwəli mɛt, kæɹɑlin dəmədʒɹdz səpoʊz kʌzən əɹ nɑt. bʌt wʌd ɹænd θɪŋk? ʃi kəd hɑɹdli weɪt tə tɛl ɪm əbaʊt ðə kɹaʊn.

It had to be ta'veren work, Min knew. The man would never have spoken this way to someone casually met, Caraline Damodred's supposed cousin or not. But what did Rand think? She could hardly wait to tell him about the crown.

tɑpɪŋ ðət hɪl, ðeɪ sʌɾənli keɪm ɑn ə nɑɾ ə spɹmən, səm wɪð ə dɛntɪd bɹɛstpleɪɾ əɹ hɛlmət, moʊst wɪθaʊɾ iðɝ, hu baʊɾ əz sun ðeɪ sɔ ðə pɑɹɾi. tə lɛft ən ɹaɪt θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, mɪn kəd si ʌðɝ ɡɹups ə sɛntʃɹiz. bɪloʊ, ðə kæmp leɪ spɹɛɾ aʊɾ ɪn wʌt simd ə pɝmənən heɪz ə dʌst, daʊn ə nɪɹli tʃɹiləs sloʊp ən əkɹɔs ðə hɪlvəli ən ʌp ðə nɛks hɪl. itʃ ə ðə fju tɛns wɑz lɑɹdʒ, wɪð səm noʊbəlz bænɝ hæŋɪŋ lɪmpli ɑn ə stæf əbʌv ðə pik. ɔlmoʊst əz mɛni hɔɹsəz stʊd taɪd tə pɪkət laɪnz əz ðəɹ wɝ pipəl, ən θaʊzənz ə mɛn ən ə hændfʊl ʌv wɪmən wɑndɝɾ əmʌŋ ðə kʊkfaɪɝz ən wæɡənz. nʌn ɹeɪzd ə tʃɪɹ əz ðɛɹ liɾɝz ɹoʊɾ ɪn.

Topping that hill, they suddenly came on a knot of spearmen, some with a dented breastplate or helmet, most without either, who bowed as soon they saw the party. To left and right through the trees, Min could see other groups of sentries. Below, the camp lay spread out in what seemed a permanent haze of dust, down a nearly treeless slope and across the hillvalley and up the next hill. Each of the few tents was large, with some noble's banner hanging limply on a staff above the peak. Almost as many horses stood tied to picket lines as there were people, and thousands of men and a handful of women wandered among the cookfires and wagons. None raised a cheer as their leaders rode in.

mɪn stʌɾid əm oʊvɝ ðə hæŋkɝtʃɪf ʃi pɹɛs tə hɝ noʊz əɡɛns ðə dʌst, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ wɛðɝ kæɹɑlin sɔ wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ. dɪspɪɹəɾɪd feɪsəz wɑtʃt əm pæs, ən ɡɹɪm feɪsəz, pipəl u nu ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ə tʃɹæp. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ə haʊsəz kɑn stʊd stɪfli əbʌv səm mænz hɛd, jɛt moʊst sim tə bi wɛɹɪŋ wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ kəd faɪnd, bɪts ən pisəz ʌv ɑɹmɝ ðəɾ ɔfən niðɝ mætʃt nɔɹ fɪɾəd vɛɹi wɛl. ə ɡʊd mɛni, ðoʊ, mɛn tu tɔl fəɹ kɛɹhin, wɔɹ ɹɛd koʊts ʌndɝ ðɛɹ bæɾɝd bɹɛstpleɪts. mɪn aɪɾ ə nɪɹli əbskjʊɹd waɪt laɪən wɝkt ɑn ə fɪlθi ɹɛd sliv. dɑɹlɪn kəɾ oʊnli hæv bɹɔɾ ə fju pipəl wɪð ɪm ɑn ə lɔŋboʊt, pɝhæps noʊ mɔɹ ðən ɪz hʌntɪŋ pɑɹɾi. kæɹɑlin lʊk tə niðɝ saɪɾ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd θɹu ðə kæmp, bʌt wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ keɪm nɪɹ ðoʊz mɛn ɪn ɹɛd koʊts, hɝ maʊθ taɪɾənd.

Min studied them over the handkerchief she pressed to her nose against the dust, not caring whether Caraline saw what she was doing. Dispirited faces watched them pass, and grim faces, people who knew they were in a trap. Here and there a House's con stood stiffly above some man's head, yet most seemed to be wearing whatever they could find, bits and pieces of armor that often neither matched nor fitted very well. A good many, though, men too tall for Cairhien, wore red coats under their battered breastplates. Min eyed a nearly obscured white lion worked on a filthy red sleeve. Darlin could only have brought a few people with him on a longboat, perhaps no more than his hunting party. Caraline looked to neither side as they rode through the camp, but whenever they came near those men in red coats, her mouth tightened.

dɑɹlɪn dɪsmaʊntɪd bɪfɔɹ ə tʃɹəmɛndəs tɛnt, ðə lɑɹdʒəs mɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ sin, lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ɛni ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ ɪmædʒənd, ə ɡɹeɪt ɹɛd-stʃɹaɪpt oʊvəl, ʃaɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪt laɪk sɪlk, wɪð noʊ fjuɝ ðən fɔɹ haɪ kɑnɪkəl piks, itʃ wɪð ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn ə kɛɹhin stɝɪŋ əbʌv ɪn ə leɪzi bɹiz, ɡoʊld ɑn blu. ðə stʃɹʌmɪŋ ə hɑɹps dʒɹɪftəɾ aʊɾ əmɪd ðə mɝmɝ ə vɔɪsəz, laɪk ðə saʊnz ʌv ɡis. əz sɝvəns tʊk əweɪ ðə hɔɹsəz, dɑɹlɪn ɔfɝɾ ɪz ɑɹm tə kæɹɑlin. æftɝ ə vɛɹi lɔŋ pɔz, ʃi leɪɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz laɪtli ɑn ɪz ɹɪst wɪð noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən wʌtsoʊɛvɝ, lɛɾɪŋ ɪm ɛskɔɹɾ əɹ ɪnsaɪd.

Darlin dismounted before a tremendous tent, the largest Min had ever seen, larger than any she had ever imagined, a great red-striped oval, shining in the sunlight like silk, with no fewer than four high conical peaks, each with the Rising Sun of Cairhien stirring above in a lazy breeze, gold on blue. The strumming of harps drifted out amid the murmur of voices, like the sounds of geese. As servants took away the horses, Darlin offered his arm to Caraline. After a very long pause, she laid her fingers lightly on his wrist with no expression whatsoever, letting him escort her inside.

"maɪ leɪɾi waɪf?" ɹænd mɝmɝd wɪð ə smaɪl, ɪkstɛndɪŋ ɪz ɑɹm.

"My Lady wife?" Rand murmured with a smile, extending his arm.

mɪn snɪft ən pʊɾ əɹ hæn ətɑp hɪz. ʃi wəd ɹæðɝ əv hɪt hɪm. hi hæd noʊ ɹaɪt tə meɪk ə dʒoʊk ə ðæt. hi hæd noʊ ɹaɪt tə bɹɪŋ əɹ hɪɹ, tɑvɝən əɹ noʊ tɑvɝən. hi kəd bi kɪl hɪɹ, bɝn hɪm! bʌt dɪɾ i kɛɹ ɪf ʃi spɛn ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ laɪf wipɪŋ? ʃi tʌtʃt wʌn ə ðə stʃɹaɪp dɔɹ-flæps əz ðeɪ wɛn ɪn, ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪn wʌndɝ. ɪt wɑz sɪlk. ə sɪlk tɛnt!

Min sniffed and put her hand atop his. She would rather have hit him. He had no right to make a joke of that. He had no right to bring her here, ta'veren or no ta'veren. He could be killed here, burn him! But did he care if she spent the rest of her life weeping? She touched one of the striped door-flaps as they went in, and shook her head in wonder. It was silk. A silk tent!

noʊ sunɝ wɝ ðeɪ ɪnsaɪd ðən ʃi fɛlt ɹænd stɪfən. dɑɹlɪnz ʃɹʌŋkən ɹɛɾənu, ən kæɹɑlinz, dʒɑsəld ɝaʊn əm wɪð ɪnsɪnsɪɹ mɝmɝz ʌv əpɑlədʒi. bɪtwin ðə fɔɹ meɪn tɛntpoʊlz, lɔŋ tʃɹɛsəl teɪbəlz ɡɹoʊnɪŋ wɪð fuɾ ən dʒɹɪŋk stʊɾ əbaʊt ðə kʌlɝfəl kɑɹpəts ðət hæd bɪn leɪd fəɹ ə flɔɹ, ən ðəɹ wɝ pipəl ɛvɹiwɛɹ, kɛɹhinɪn noʊbəlz ɪn ðɛɹ faɪnɝi, ə fju soʊlʒɝz wɪð ðə fɹʌns ə ðə hɛdz ʃeɪvd ən paʊɾɝd, pleɪnli mɛn ə haɪ ɹæŋk baɪ ðə faɪn kʌɾ ə ðɛɹ koʊts. ə hændfʊl ə bɑɹdz stʃɹoʊl pleɪɪŋ θɹu ðə kɹaʊd, pɪkt aʊɾ əz mʌtʃ baɪ ə lɔftiɝ ɛɹ ðən ɛni noʊbəl əz baɪ ðə kɑɹvd ən ɡɪldɪd hɑɹps ðeɪ kæɹid. jɛt mɪnz aɪz flu əz ɪf pʊl tə ðə ʃʊɹ sɔɹs ə ɹændz wɝi, θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ tɔkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ ɪn ʃɔlz fɹɪnd ɡɹin ən jɛloʊ ən ɡɹeɪ. ɪmədʒəz ən kʌlɝz flæʃt ɝaʊn ðɛm, bʌt nɑɾ ə θɪŋ ʃi kəd meɪk sɛns ʌv. ə swɝl ɪn ðə kɹaʊd ɹɪvild ənʌðɝ, ə kʌmfɝɾəbli ɹaʊnd-feɪst wʊmən. mɔɹ ɪmədʒəz, mɔɹ flɛɹɪŋ kʌlɝz, bʌɾ ɔl mɪn niɾəd wɑz ðə ɹɛd-fɹɪnd ʃɔl lupt oʊvɝ əɹ plʌmp ɑɹmz.

No sooner were they inside than she felt Rand stiffen. Darlin's shrunken retinue, and Caraline's, jostled around them with insincere murmurs of apology. Between the four main tentpoles, long trestle tables groaning with food and drink stood about the colorful carpets that had been laid for a floor, and there were people everywhere, Cairhienin nobles in their finery, a few soldiers with the fronts of the heads shaved and powdered, plainly men of high rank by the fine cut of their coats. A handful of bards strolled playing through the crowd, picked out as much by a loftier air than any noble as by the carved and gilded harps they carried. Yet Min's eyes flew as if pulled to the sure source of Rand's worry, three Aes Sedai talking together in shawls fringed green and yellow and gray. Images and colors flashed around them, but not a thing she could make sense of. A swirl in the crowd revealed another, a comfortably round-faced woman. More images, more flaring colors, but all Min needed was the red-fringed shawl looped over her plump arms.

ɹænd tʌkt əɹ hæn ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm ən pæɾəd ɪt. "doʊnt wɝi," hi sɛd sɔfli. "ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ wɛl." ʃi wʊɾə æskt ɪm wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ ðɛɹ, bʌt ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪɾ i wəd tɛl hɝ.

Rand tucked her hand under his arm and patted it. "Don't worry," he said softly. "Everything is going well." She would have asked him what they were doing there, but she was afraid he would tell her.

dɑɹlɪn ən kæɹɑlin hæd vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə kɹaʊɾ əlɔŋ wɪð ðɛɹ fɑloʊɝz, jɛɾ əz ə boʊɪŋ sɝvɪŋ mæn wɪð stʃɹaɪps ə ɹɛd, ɡɹin ən waɪɾ ɑn ɪz dɑɹk kʌfs ɔfɝɾ ə tʃɹeɪ ʌv sɪlvɝ ɡoʊbləts tə ɹænd ən mɪn, ʃi ɹiəpɪɹd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɔf ði ɪmpɹtunɪŋz ʌv ə hætʃət-feɪs fɛloʊ ɪn wʌn ə ðoʊz ɹɛd koʊts. hi ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ bæk əz ʃi tʊk ə ɡɑbləɾ ə pʌntʃ ən weɪv ðə sɝvən əweɪ, ən mɪnz bɹɛθ kɑɾ ət ði ɔɹə ðət sʌɾənli flæʃt ɝaʊn hɪm, bɹuz hjuz soʊ dɑɹk ðeɪ sim nɪɹli blæk.

Darlin and Caraline had vanished into the crowd along with their followers, yet as a bowing serving man with stripes of red, green and white on his dark cuffs offered a tray of silver goblets to Rand and Min, she reappeared, shaking off the importunings of a hatchet-faced fellow in one of those red coats. He glared at her back as she took a goblet of punch and waved the servant away, and Min's breath caught at the aura that suddenly flashed around him, bruised hues so dark they seemed nearly black.

"doʊn tʃɹʌs ðət mæn, leɪɾi kæɹɑlin." ʃi kəd nɑt stɑp hɝsɛlf. "hi wɪl mɝɾɝ ɛniwʌn i θɪŋks ɪz ɪn ɪz weɪ; hɪl kɪl fəɹ ə wɪm, kɪl ɛnibəɾi." ʃi klæmpt əɹ tiθ ʃʌt bɪfɔɹ seɪɪŋ mɔɹ.

"Don't trust that man, Lady Caraline." She could not stop herself. "He will murder anyone he thinks is in his way; he'll kill for a whim, kill anybody." She clamped her teeth shut before saying more.

kæɹɑlin ɡlænst oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ əz ðə hætʃət-feɪs mæn tɝn əweɪ əbɹʌpli. "aɪ kəd bɪliv ɪɾ izəli ʌv dɑv hænlən," ʃi sɛd ɹaɪli. "hɪz waɪt laɪənz faɪt fəɹ ɡoʊld, nɑt kɛɹhin, ən lut wɝs ðən ði il. ændɝ bɪkeɪm tu hɑt fəɹ ðɛm, ɪt simz." ðət wɪð ən ɑɹtʃ ɡlæns ət ɹænd. "tɔɹæm əz pɹɑməst ɪm ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv ɡoʊld, aɪ θɪŋk, ən ɪsteɪts aɪ noʊ." ʃi tɪltəɾ əɹ aɪz ʌp tə mɪn. "du jə noʊ ðə mæn, dʒeɪɪzi?"

Caraline glanced over her shoulder as the hatchet-faced man turned away abruptly. "I could believe it easily of Daved Hanlon," she said wryly. "His White Lions fight for gold, not Cairhien, and loot worse than the Aiel. Andor became too hot for them, it seems." That with an arch glance at Rand. "Toram has promised him a great deal of gold, I think, and estates I know." She tilted her eyes up to Min. "Do you know the man, Jaisi?"

mɪn kəɾ oʊnli ʃeɪk əɹ hɛd. haʊ tə ɪkspleɪn wʌt ʃi dɪd noʊ əbaʊt hænlən naʊ, ðəɾ ɪz hænz wəd bi ɹɛd wɪð mɔɹ ɹeɪps ən mɝɾɝz bɪfɔɹ i daɪd? ɪf ʃi hæd noʊn wən əɹ hu. . . . bʌɾ ɔl ʃi nu wɑz ðəɾ i wʊd. ɛniweɪ, tɛlɪŋ əbaʊɾ ə vjuɪŋ nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd ɪt; wʌt ʃi sɔ hæpənd, noʊ mæɾɝ u ʃi wɔɹnd. səmtaɪmz, bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd lɝn bɛɾɝ, ɪt hæd hæpən kəz ʃi wɔɹnd.

Min could only shake her head. How to explain what she did know about Hanlon now, that his hands would be red with more rapes and murders before he died? If she had known when or who. . . . But all she knew was that he would. Anyway, telling about a viewing never changed it; what she saw happened, no matter who she warned. Sometimes, before she had learned better, it had happened because she warned.

"aɪv hɝɾ ə ðə waɪt laɪənz," ɹænd sɛd koʊldli. "lʊk əmʌŋ əm fəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ən jə woʊn bi dɪsəpɔɪntɪd." ðeɪ hæd bɪn səm ʌv ɡeɪbɹəlz soʊlʒɝz; mɪn nu ðət mʌtʃ, ən lɪɾəl mɔɹ, ɪksɛp ðət lɔɹd ɡeɪbɹəl hæd ɹɪli bɪn ɹɑvɪn. ɪt stʊd tə ɹizən ðət soʊlʒɝz sɝvɪŋ wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən wəɾ ɪnklud dɑɹkfɹɛnz.

"I've heard of the White Lions," Rand said coldly. "Look among them for Darkfriends, and you won't be disappointed." They had been some of Gaebril's soldiers; Min knew that much, and little more, except that Lord Gaebril had really been Rahvin. It stood to reason that soldiers serving one of the Forsaken would include Darkfriends.

"wʌɾ ə hɪm?" ɹænd nɑɾəd təwɔɹɾ ə mæn əkɹɔs ðə tɛn huz lɔŋ dɑɹk koʊt hæɾ əz mɛni stʃɹaɪps əz kæɹɑlinz dʒɹɛs. vɛɹi tɔl fəɹ ə kɛɹhinɪn, pɝhæps lɛs ðən ə fʊl hɛd ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ɹænd, hi wɑz slɛndɝ ɪksɛp fəɹ bɹɔd ʃoʊldɝz, ən stʃɹaɪkɪŋli ɡʊd-lʊkɪŋ, wɪð ə stʃɹɔŋ tʃɪn ən dʒʌst ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪ əɾ ɪz dɑɹk tɛmpəlz. fəɹ səm ɹizən, mɪnz aɪz wɝ dʒɹɔn tə hɪz kəmpænjən, ə skɪni lɪɾəl fɛloʊ wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ noʊz ən waɪɾ ɪɹz, ɪn ə ɹɛd sɪlk koʊt ðət dɪd nɑt fɪɾ ɪm vɛɹi wɛl. hi kɛp fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ə kɝv dæɡɝ əɾ ɪz bɛlt, ə fænsi pis wɪð ə ɡoʊldən ʃiθ ən ə lɑɹdʒ ɹɛd stoʊn kæpɪŋ ðə hɪl ðət sim tə kætʃ ðə laɪt dɑɹkli. ʃi sɔ noʊ ɔʊɹəz ɝaʊn hɪm. hi sim veɪɡli fəmɪljɝ. ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ ən ɹænd.

"What of him?" Rand nodded toward a man across the tent whose long dark coat had as many stripes as Caraline's dress. Very tall for a Cairhienin, perhaps less than a full head shorter than Rand, he was slender except for broad shoulders, and strikingly good-looking, with a strong chin and just a touch of gray at his dark temples. For some reason, Min's eyes were drawn to his companion, a skinny little fellow with a large nose and wide ears, in a red silk coat that did not fit him very well. He kept fingering a curved dagger at his belt, a fancy piece with a golden sheath and a large red stone capping the hilt that seemed to catch the light darkly. She saw no auras around him. He seemed vaguely familiar. They were both looking at her and Rand.

"ðæt," kæɹɑlin bɹiðd ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs, "ɪz lɔɹd tɔɹæm ɹieɪɾən hɪmsɛlf. ən ɪz kɑnstən kəmpænjən ðiz pæs deɪz, mæstɝ dʒɛɹɑl mɔɹɾɪθ. oʊɾiəs lɪɾəl mæn. hɪz aɪz meɪk mi wɑnə teɪk ə bæθ. ðeɪ boʊθ meɪk mi fil ənklin." ʃi blɪŋkt, sɝpɹaɪzd ət wʌt ʃi hæd sɛd, bʌt ɹəkʌvɝd kwɪkli. mɪn hæd ðə filɪŋ lɪɾəl pʊt kæɹɑlin dəmədʒɹɾ ɔf əɹ stʃɹaɪd fəɹ lɔŋ. ɪn ðæt, ʃi wɑz vɛɹi laɪk mɔɪɹeɪn. "aɪ wəd bi kɛɹfəl wɝ aɪ ju, kʌzən toʊmɑs," ʃi wɛn ɑn. "ju meɪ hæv ɹɔt səm mɪɹəkəl əɹ tɑvɝən-wɝk ɑn mi - ən pɝhæps ivən ɑn dɑɹlɪn - ðoʊ aɪ kænɑt seɪ wʌɾ ɪt maɪt kʌm tə - aɪ meɪk noʊ pɹɑməsəz - bʌt tɔɹæm heɪts jə wɪð ə pæʃən. ɪt wɑz nɑt soʊ bæd bɪfɔɹ mɔɹɾɪθ dʒɔɪn hɪm, jɛt sɪns. . . . tɔɹæm wəɾ əv əs ətæk ðə sɪɾi ɪmiɾiətli, ɪn ðə naɪt. wɪð jə dɛd, hi sɛz, ði il wəd ɡoʊ, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ɪts jə dɛɾ i siks naʊ ivən mɔɹ ðən i dʌz ðə θɹoʊn."

"That," Caraline breathed in a tight voice, "is Lord Toram Riatin himself. And his constant companion these past days, Master Jeraal Mordeth. Odious little man. His eyes make me want to take a bath. They both make me feel unclean." She blinked, surprised at what she had said, but recovered quickly. Min had the feeling little put Caraline Damodred off her stride for long. In that, she was very like Moiraine. "I would be careful were I you, Cousin Tomas," she went on. "You may have wrought some miracle or ta'veren-work on me - and perhaps even on Darlin - though I cannot say what it might come to - I make no promises - but Toram hates you with a passion. It was not so bad before Mordeth joined him, yet since. . . . Toram would have us attack the city immediately, in the night. With you dead, he says, the Aiel would go, but I think it is you dead he seeks now even more than he does the throne."

"mɔɹɾɪθ," ɹænd sɛd. hɪz aɪz wɝ lɑk tə tɔɹæm ɹieɪɾən ən ðə skɪni fɛloʊ. "hɪz neɪm ɪz pdən feɪn, ən ðəɹ ɑɹ wʌn hʌnʒɹəd θaʊzənd ɡoʊldən kɹaʊnz ɑn ɪz hɛd."

"Mordeth," Rand said. His eyes were locked to Toram Riatin and the skinny fellow. "His name is Padan Fain, and there are one hundred thousand golden crowns on his head."

kæɹɑlin nɪɹli dʒɹɑpt əɹ ɡɑblət. "kwinz əv bɪn ɹænsəm fəɹ lɛs. wʌɾ i du?"

Caraline nearly dropped her goblet. "Queens have been ransomed for less. What did he do?"

"hi ɹævɪdʒ maɪ hoʊm kəz ɪt wɑz maɪ hoʊm." ɹændz feɪs wɑz fɹoʊzən, hɪz vɔɪs aɪs. "hi bɹɔt tʃɹɑləks tə kɪl maɪ fɹɛnz kəz ðeɪ wɝ maɪ fɹɛnz. hiz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ən ə dɛd mæn." ðoʊz læst wɝdz keɪm θɹu klɛntʃt tiθ. pʌntʃ splæʃt tə ðə kɑɹpəɾ əz ðə sɪlvɝ ɡɑblət bɛn ɪn ɪz ɡlʌv fɪst.

"He ravaged my home because it was my home." Rand's face was frozen, his voice ice. "He brought Trollocs to kill my friends because they were my friends. He is a Darkfriend, and a dead man." Those last words came through clenched teeth. Punch splashed to the carpet as the silver goblet bent in his gloved fist.

mɪn fɛl sɪk fəɹ hɪm, fəɹ ɪz peɪn - ʃi hæd hɝd wʌt feɪn hæd dʌn ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz - bʌt ʃi pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ɹændz tʃɛst ɪn nɪɹ pænɪk. ɪf i ɡeɪv weɪ naʊ, tʃænəld wɪð u nu haʊ mɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ ɝaʊnd. . . . "fɔɹ ðə laɪts seɪk, teɪk hoʊld ə jɝsɛlf," ʃi bɪɡæn, ən ə wʊmənz vɔɪs spoʊk plɛzənli bɪhaɪn hɝ.

Min felt sick for him, for his pain - she had heard what Fain had done in the Two Rivers - but she put a hand on Rand's chest in near panic. If he gave way now, channeled with who knew how many Aes Sedai around. . . . "For the Light's sake, take hold of yourself," she began, and a woman's voice spoke pleasantly behind her.

"wɪl jə pɹɛzən mi tə jəɹ tɔl jʌŋ fɹɛnd, kæɹɑlin?"

"Will you present me to your tall young friend, Caraline?"

mɪn lʊkt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ɹaɪɾ ɪndə ən eɪdʒləs feɪs, kul-aɪd bɪniθ aɪɝn-ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ pʊld ʌp ɪndə ə bʌn fɹəm wɪtʃ dæŋɡəl smɔl ɡoʊldən ɔɹnəməns. swɑloʊɪŋ ə skwik, mɪn kɔft. ʃi hæd θɔt kæɹɑlin hæd teɪkən əɹ ɪn ɪn wʌn ɡlæns, bʌt ðiz kul aɪz sim tə noʊ θɪŋz əbaʊɾ əɹ ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd fɝɡɑɾən. ði ɛɛs sədaɪz smaɪl, əz ʃi ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ɡɹin-fɹɪnd ʃɔl, wɑz nɑt nɪɹli soʊ plɛzən əz əɹ vɔɪs.

Min looked over her shoulder, right into an ageless face, cool-eyed beneath iron-gray hair pulled up into a bun from which dangled small golden ornaments. Swallowing a squeak, Min coughed. She had thought Caraline had taken her in in one glance, but these cool eyes seemed to know things about her she herself had forgotten. The Aes Sedai's smile, as she adjusted her green-fringed shawl, was not nearly so pleasant as her voice.

"ʌv kɔɹs, kædzueɪn sədaɪ." kæɹɑlin saʊndəd ʃeɪkən, bʌt ʃi smuðd əɹ toʊn wɛl bɪfɔɹ ʃi fɪnɪʃt ɪntʃɹədusɪŋ əɹ vɪzəɾɪŋ "kʌzən" ən ɪz "waɪf." "bʌɾ aɪ fɪɹ kɛɹhin ɪz noʊ pleɪs fəɹ əm ət pɹɛzənt," ʃi sɛd, ɔl sɛlf-pəzɛʃən wʌns mɔɹ, smaɪlɪŋ ɹəɡɹɛt ðət ʃi kəd nɑt kip ɹænd ən mɪn lɔŋɡɝ. "ðeɪ hæv əɡɹid tə teɪk maɪ ædvaɪs ən ɹɪtɝn tə ændɝ."

"Of course, Cadsuane Sedai." Caraline sounded shaken, but she smoothed her tone well before she finished introducing her visiting "cousin" and his "wife." "But I fear Cairhien is no place for them at present," she said, all self-possession once more, smiling regret that she could not keep Rand and Min longer. "They have agreed to take my advice and return to Andor."

"hæv ðeɪ?" kædzueɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli. mɪnz hɑɹt sæŋk. ivən ɪf ɹænd hæd nɑt spoʊkən ə hɝ, ɪt wɑz klɪɹ fɹəm ðə weɪ ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɪm ðət ʃi nu hɪm. taɪni ɡoʊldən bɝdz ən munz ən stɑɹz sweɪɾ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "moʊs bɔɪz lɝn nɑt tə stɪk ðɛɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɪndə ðə pɹɪɾi faɪɝ ðə fɝs taɪm ðeɪ ɑɹ bɝnd, toʊmɑs. ʌðɝz nid tə bi spæŋkt, tə lɝn. bɛɾɝ ə tɛndɝ bɑɾəm ðən ə sɪɹd hænd."

"Have they?" Cadsuane said dryly. Min's heart sank. Even if Rand had not spoken of her, it was clear from the way she looked at him that she knew him. Tiny golden birds and moons and stars swayed as she shook her head. "Most boys learn not to stick their fingers into the pretty fire the first time they are burned, Tomas. Others need to be spanked, to learn. Better a tender bottom than a seared hand."

"ju noʊ ɪm noʊ tʃaɪld," ɹænd toʊld əɹ ʃɑɹpli.

"You know I'm no child," Rand told her sharply.

"du aɪ?" ʃi aɪɾ ɪm fɹəm hɛd tə toʊ, ən meɪɾ ɪt sim noʊ vɛɹi ɡɹeɪt dɪstəns. "wɛl, ɪt simz aɪ ʃæl sun si wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt jə nid spæŋkɪŋ." ðoʊz kul aɪz dʒɹɪftəd tə mɪn, tə kæɹɑlin, ən wɪð ə faɪnəl hɪtʃ tə hɝ ʃɔl, kædzueɪn hɝsɛlf dʒɹɪftəɾ əweɪ ɪndə ðə kɹaʊd.

"Do I?" She eyed him from head to toe, and made it seem no very great distance. "Well, it seems I shall soon see whether or not you need spanking." Those cool eyes drifted to Min, to Caraline, and with a final hitch to her shawl, Cadsuane herself drifted away into the crowd.

mɪn swɑloʊd ðə lʌmp ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt, ən wɑz pliz tə si kæɹɑlin də ðə seɪm, sɛlf-pəzɛʃən əɹ noʊ. ɹænd - ðə blaɪn ful! - stɛɹɾ æftɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əz ðoʊ ɪntɛndɪŋ tə ɡoʊ æftɝ hɝ. ðɪs taɪm ɪt wɑz kæɹɑlin u leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn ɹændz tʃɛst.

Min swallowed the lump in her throat, and was pleased to see Caraline do the same, self-possession or no. Rand - the blind fool! - stared after the Aes Sedai as though intending to go after her. This time it was Caraline who laid a hand on Rand's chest.

"aɪ teɪk ɪt jə noʊ kædzueɪn," ʃi sɛd bɹɛθəli. "bi kɛɹfəl ə hɝ; ivən ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz stæn ɪn ɑ ʌv hɝ." hɝ θɹoʊɾi toʊnz tʊk ɑn ə noʊɾ ʌv ɡɹævəɾi. "aɪ hæv noʊ aɪdiə wʌt wɪl kʌm ə tədeɪ, bʌt wʌtɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz, aɪ θɪŋk ɪts taɪm jə wɝ ɡɔn, 'kʌzən toʊmɑs.' pæs taɪm. əl əv hɔɹsəz - "

"I take it you know Cadsuane," she said breathily. "Be careful of her; even the other sisters stand in awe of her." Her throaty tones took on a note of gravity. "I have no idea what will come of today, but whatever it is, I think it is time you were gone, 'Cousin Tomas.' Past time. I will have horses - "

"ðɪs ɪz jəɹ kʌzən, kæɹɑlin?" sɛɾ ə dip, ɹɪtʃ mænz vɔɪs, ən mɪn dʒʌmpt ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf.

"This is your cousin, Caraline?" said a deep, rich man's voice, and Min jumped in spite of herself.

tɔɹæm ɹieɪɾən wɑz ivən bɛɾɝ-lʊkɪŋ kloʊs ʌp ðən əɾ ə dɪstəns, wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ meɪl bjuɾi ən ɛɹ ʌv wɝldli nɑlədʒ ðət wʊɾə ətʃɹæktəd mɪn bɪfɔɹ ʃi mɛt ɹænd. wɛl, ʃi stɪl faʊn əm ətʃɹæktɪv, dʒʌs nɑɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi dɪd ɹænd. hɪz fɝm-lɪp smaɪl wɑz kwaɪɾ əpilɪŋ.

Toram Riatin was even better-looking close up than at a distance, with the sort of strong male beauty and air of worldly knowledge that would have attracted Min before she met Rand. Well, she still found them attractive, just not as much as she did Rand. His firm-lipped smile was quite appealing.

tɔɹæmz ɡeɪz fɛl tə kæɹɑlinz hænd, stɪl ɑn ɹændz tʃɛst. "ðə leɪɾi kæɹɑlin ɪz tə bi maɪ waɪf," hi sɛd læzəli. "dɪd jə noʊ ðæt?"

Toram's gaze fell to Caraline's hand, still on Rand's chest. "The Lady Caraline is to be my wife," he said lazily. "Did you know that?"

kæɹɑlinz tʃiks ɹɛɾənd æŋɡɹəli. "du nɑt seɪ ðæt, tɔɹæm! aɪ hæv toʊl jə əl nɑt, ən əl nɑt!"

Caraline's cheeks reddened angrily. "Do not say that, Toram! I have told you I will not, and I will not!"

tɔɹæm smaɪld ət ɹænd. "aɪ θɪŋk wɪmən nɛvɝ noʊ ðɛɹ maɪnz əntɪl jə ʃoʊ ðɛm. wʌt dʒju θɪŋk, dʒɛɹɑl? dʒɛɹɑl?" hi lʊkt ɝaʊnd, skaʊlɪŋ. mɪn stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm ɪn əmeɪzmənt. ən i wɑz soʊ pɹɪɾi, wɪð dʒʌs ðə ɹaɪɾ ɛɹ ʌv. . . . ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd kɔl ʌp vjuɪŋz ət wɪl. ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ wɑntəd tə noʊ wʌt ðə fjutʃɝ hɛl fəɹ ðɪs mæn.

Toram smiled at Rand. "I think women never know their minds until you show them. What do you think, Jeraal? Jeraal?" He looked around, scowling. Min stared at him in amazement. And he was so pretty, with just the right air of. . . . She wished she could call up viewings at will. She very much wanted to know what the future held for this man.

"aɪ sɔ jəɹ fɹɛn skɝi ɔf ðət weɪ, tɔɹæm." maʊθ twɪstəd wɪð dɪsteɪst, kæɹɑlin ɡeɪv ə veɪɡ weɪv ə hɝ hænd. "ju wɪl faɪn ɪm nɪɹ ðə dʒɹɪŋk, aɪ θɪŋk, əɹ ɛls bɑðɝɪŋ ðə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz."

"I saw your friend scurry off that way, Toram." Mouth twisted with distaste, Caraline gave a vague wave of her hand. "You will find him near the drink, I think, or else bothering the serving girls."

"leɪɾɝ, maɪ pɹɛʃəs." hi tʃɹaɪd tə tʌtʃ əɹ tʃik, ən lʊkt əmjuzd wən ʃi stɛp bæk. wɪθaʊɾ ə pɔz i tʃɹænsfɝɾ ɪz əmjuzmən tə ɹænd. ən ðə sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪz saɪd. "wʊd jə kɛɹ fəɹ ə lɪɾəl spɔɹt, kʌzən? aɪ kɔl jə ðət kəz wɪl bi kʌzənz, wʌns kæɹɑlin ɪz maɪ waɪf. wɪð pɹæktəs sɔɹdz, ʌv kɔɹs."

"Later, my precious." He tried to touch her cheek, and looked amused when she stepped back. Without a pause he transferred his amusement to Rand. And the sword at his side. "Would you care for a little sport, cousin? I call you that because we will be cousins, once Caraline is my wife. With practice swords, of course."

"sɝɾənli nɑt," kæɹɑlin læft. "hi ɪz ə bɔɪ, tɔɹæm, ən skɛɹs noʊz wʌn ɛn ə ðət θɪŋ fɹəm ði ʌðɝ. hɪz mʌðɝ wəd nɛvɝ fɝɡɪv mi, ɪf aɪ əlaʊd - "

"Certainly not," Caraline laughed. "He is a boy, Toram, and scarce knows one end of that thing from the other. His mother would never forgive me, if I allowed - "

"spɔɹt," ɹænd sɛɾ əbɹʌpli. "aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl si wɛɹ ðɪs lidz. aɪ əɡɹi."

"Sport," Rand said abruptly. "I might as well see where this leads. I agree."


tʃæptɝ θɝɾisɪks


CHAPTER 36

bleɪdz


Blades

mɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ tə ɡɹoʊn əɹ ʃaʊɾ əɹ sɪt daʊn ən kɹaɪ. kæɹɑlin, stɛɹɪŋ waɪd-aɪɾ ət ɹænd, simd ɪn ðə seɪm kwɑndɝi.

Min did not know whether to groan or shout or sit down and cry. Caraline, staring wide-eyed at Rand, seemed in the same quandary.

wɪð ə læf, tɔɹæm bɪɡæn ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hænz təɡɛðɝ. "lɪsən, ɛvɹiwʌn," hi ʃaʊɾəd. "ju ɑɹ gɑnə si səm spɔɹt. klɪɹ ə speɪs. klɪɹ ə speɪs." hi stʃɹoʊɾ ɔf, weɪvɪŋ pipəl əweɪ fɹəm ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə tɛnt.

With a laugh, Toram began rubbing his hands together. "Listen, everyone," he shouted. "You are going to see some sport. Clear a space. Clear a space." He strode off, waving people away from the center of the tent.

"ʃifɝɾɝ," mɪn ɡɹaʊld, "jɔɹ nɑt wʊl-bɹeɪnd. jə doʊn əv ɛni bɹeɪnz!"

"Sheepherder," Min growled, "you're not wool-brained. You don't have any brains!"

"aɪ wəd nɑt pʊɾ ɪt kwaɪt soʊ," kæɹɑlin sɛɾ ɪn ə vɛɹi dʒɹaɪ vɔɪs, "bʌɾ aɪ sədʒɛs jə liv, naʊ. wʌtɛvɝ . . . tʃɹɪks . . . jə θɪŋk jə maɪt juz, ðəɹ ɑɹ sɛvən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðɪs tɛnt, fɔɹ ə ðɛm ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ leɪtli ɝaɪv fɹəm ðə saʊθ ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ʃəd wʌn ə ðɛm soʊ mʌtʃ əz səspɛkt, aɪ vɛɹi mʌtʃ fɪɹ ðət wʌtɛvɝ maɪɾ əv kʌm ə tədeɪ, nɛvɝ wɪl. liv."

"I would not put it quite so," Caraline said in a very dry voice, "but I suggest you leave, now. Whatever . . . tricks . . . you think you might use, there are seven Aes Sedai in this tent, four of them Red Ajah lately arrived from the south on their way to Tar Valon. Should one of them so much as suspect, I very much fear that whatever might have come of today, never will. Leave."

"aɪ woʊn juz ɛni . . . tʃɹɪks." ɹænd ənbəkəld ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt ən hændəɾ ɪt tə mɪn. "ɪf aɪv tʌtʃt jə ən dɑɹlɪn ɪn wʌn weɪ, meɪbi aɪ kən tʌtʃ tɔɹæm ɪn ənʌðɝ." ðə kɹaʊd wɑz pʊʃɪŋ bæk, oʊpənɪŋ ʌp ən ɛɹiə twɛnti peɪsɪz əkɹɔs bɪtwin tu ʌv ðə ɡɹeɪt sɛntɝpoʊlz. səm lʊk tə ɹænd, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə ɹɪb nʌdʒɪŋ ən slaɪ læftɝ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ɔfɝd pɹaɪɾ ə pleɪs, ʌv kɔɹs, kædzueɪn ən əɹ tu fɹɛnz ɑn wʌn saɪd, fɔɹ eɪdʒləs wɪmən ɪn ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ ʃɔlz ɑn ði ʌðɝ. kædzueɪn ən əɹ kəmpænjənz wɝ aɪɪŋ ɹænd wɪð oʊpən dɪsəpɹuvəl ən əz kloʊs tə ɪɹɪteɪʃən əz ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛvɝ lɛt ʃoʊ, bʌt ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝz lʊk mɔɹ kənsɝnd wɪð ðoʊz θɹi. ət list, ɔlðoʊ ðeɪ stʊd dɝɛkli ɑpəzət, ðeɪ mænədʒ tə sim əblɪviəs ə ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ɛni ʌðɝ sɪstɝz. noʊ wʌn kəd bi ðət blaɪnd wɪθaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ.

"I won't use any . . . tricks." Rand unbuckled his sword belt and handed it to Min. "If I've touched you and Darlin in one way, maybe I can touch Toram in another." The crowd was pushing back, opening up an area twenty paces across between two of the great centerpoles. Some looked to Rand, and there was a great deal of rib nudging and sly laughter. The Aes Sedai were offered pride of place, of course, Cadsuane and her two friends on one side, four ageless women in Red Ajah shawls on the other. Cadsuane and her companions were eyeing Rand with open disapproval and as close to irritation as any Aes Sedai ever let show, but the Red sisters looked more concerned with those three. At least, although they stood directly opposite, they managed to seem oblivious of the presence of any other sisters. No one could be that blind without trying.

"lɪsən tə mi, kʌzən." kæɹɑlinz loʊ vɔɪs ɔlmoʊs kɹækəld wɪð ɝdʒənsi. ʃi stʊd vɛɹi kloʊs, hɝ nɛk kɹeɪn tə lʊk ʌp ət hɪm. bɛɹli ɹitʃɪŋ ɪz tʃɛst, ʃi simd ɹɛɾi tə bɑks ɪz ɪɹz. "ɪf jə jus nʌn ə jəɹ spɛʃəl tʃɹɪks," kæɹɑlin wɛn ɑn, "hi kən hɝt jə bædli, ivən wɪð pɹæktəs sɔɹdz, ən i wɪl. hiz nɛvɝ laɪkt ənʌðɝ tʌtʃɪŋ wʌɾ i θɪŋks ɪz hɪz, ən i səspɛks ɛvɹi pɹɪɾi jʌŋ mæn u spiks tə mi ʌv biɪŋ maɪ lʌvɝ. wən wi wɝ tʃɪlʒɹən, hi pʊʃt ə fɹɛnd - ə fɹɛnd! - daʊn ðə stɛɹz ən bɹoʊk ɪz bæk kəz dɛɹaʊɪn ɹoʊɾ ɪz poʊni wɪθaʊɾ æskɪŋ. ɡoʊ, kʌzən. noʊ wʌn wɪl θɪŋk lɛs; noʊ wʌn ɪkspɛks ə bɔɪ tə feɪs ə bleɪd-mæstɝ. dʒeɪɪzi . . . wʌtɛvɝ jəɹ ɹil neɪm ɪz . . . hɛlp mi kənvɪns hɪm!"

"Listen to me, cousin." Caraline's low voice almost crackled with urgency. She stood very close, her neck craned to look up at him. Barely reaching his chest, she seemed ready to box his ears. "If you use none of your special tricks," Caraline went on, "he can hurt you badly, even with practice swords, and he will. He has never liked another touching what he thinks is his, and he suspects every pretty young man who speaks to me of being my lover. When we were children, he pushed a friend - a friend! - down the stairs and broke his back because Derowin rode his pony without asking. Go, cousin. No one will think less; no one expects a boy to face a blade-master. Jaisi . . . whatever your real name is . . . help me convince him!"

mɪn oʊpən əɹ maʊθ - ən ɹænd leɪɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ əkɹɔs əɹ lɪps. "aɪ æm u aɪ æm," hi smaɪld. "æn aɪ doʊn θɪŋk aɪ kəd ɹʌn fɹəm ɪm ɪf aɪ wɑznt. soʊ, hiz ə bleɪdmæstɝ." ənbʌtoʊnɪŋ ɪz koʊt, hi stʃɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə klɪɹɾ ɛɹiə.

Min opened her mouth - and Rand laid a finger across her lips. "I am who I am," he smiled. "And I don't think I could run from him if I wasn't. So, he's a blademaster." Unbuttoning his coat, he strode out into the cleared area.

"waɪ mʌs ðeɪ bi soʊ stʌbɝn wən jə list wɪʃ ɪt?" kæɹɑlin wɪspɝɾ ɪn toʊnz ə fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. mɪn kəɾ oʊnli nɑɾ ɪn əɡɹimənt.

"Why must they be so stubborn when you least wish it?" Caraline whispered in tones of frustration. Min could only nod in agreement.

tɔɹæm hæd stʃɹɪp tə ʃɝɾ ən bɹitʃɪz, ən kæɹid tu pɹæktəs sɔɹdz, ðɛɹ "bleɪdz" bʌndəlz ə θɪn leɪðz taɪd təɡɛðɝ. hi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət ðə saɪɾ ə ɹænd wɪð ɪz koʊt sɪmpli hæŋɪŋ oʊpən. "ju wɪl bi kənfaɪn ɪn ðæt, kʌzən." ɹænd ʃɹʌɡd.

Toram had stripped to shirt and breeches, and carried two practice swords, their "blades" bundles of thin lathes tied together. He raised an eyebrow at the sight of Rand with his coat simply hanging open. "You will be confined in that, cousin." Rand shrugged.

wɪθaʊt wɔɹnɪŋ, tɔɹæm tɔst wʌn ə ðə sɔɹdz; ɹænd kɑɾ ɪɾ aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ baɪ ðə lɔŋ hɪlt.

Without warning, Toram tossed one of the swords; Rand caught it out of the air by the long hilt.

"ðoʊz ɡlʌvz wɪl slɪp, kʌzən. jə wɑn ə fɝm ɡɹɪp."

"Those gloves will slip, cousin. You want a firm grip."

ɹænd tʊk ðə hɪlt ɪn boʊθ hænz ən tɝn slaɪtli saɪdweɪz, bleɪd daʊn ən lɛft fʊt fɔɹwɝd.

Rand took the hilt in both hands and turned slightly sideways, blade down and left foot forward.

tɔɹæm spɹɛɾ ɪz hænz əz ɪf tə seɪ hi hæd dʌn ɔl i kʊd. "wɛl, ət list i noʊz haʊ tə stænd," hi læft, ən ɑn ðə læst wɝd dɑɹɾɪd fɔɹwɝd, pɹæktəs sɔɹd stʃɹikɪŋ fəɹ ɹændz hɛd wɪð ɔl ɪz maɪt bɪhaɪn ɪt.

Toram spread his hands as if to say he had done all he could. "Well, at least he knows how to stand," he laughed, and on the last word darted forward, practice sword streaking for Rand's head with all his might behind it.

wɪð ə laʊd klæk, bʌndəld leɪðz mɛt bʌndəld leɪðz. ɹænd hæd muv nʌθɪŋ ɪksɛpt ɪz sɔɹd. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, tɔɹæm stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, ən ɹænd lʊk bæk kɑmli. ðən ðeɪ bɪɡæn tə dæns.

With a loud clack, bundled lathes met bundled lathes. Rand had moved nothing except his sword. For a moment, Toram stared at him, and Rand looked back calmly. Then they began to dance.

ðət wɑz ɔl mɪn kəd kɔl ɪt, ðət ɡlaɪɾɪŋ, floʊɪŋ muvmənt, wʊɾən bleɪdz flɪkɝɪŋ ən spɪnɪŋ. ʃi hæd wɑtʃt ɹænd pɹæktəs ðə sɔɹɾ əɡɛns ðə bɛst i kəd faɪnd, ɔfən əɡɛns tu əɹ θɹi əɹ fɔɹ ət wʌns, bʌt ðət hæd bɪn nʌθɪŋ tə ðɪs. soʊ bjuɾəfəl, ən soʊ izi tə fɝɡɛt ðət hæd ðoʊz leɪðz bɪn stil, blʌd kəɾ əv floʊd. ɪksɛp ðət noʊ bleɪd, stil əɹ leɪðz, tʌtʃt flɛʃ. bæk ən fɔɹθ ðeɪ dænst, sɝkəlɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ, sɔɹdz naʊ pɹoʊbɪŋ, naʊ slæʃɪŋ, ɹænd ətækɪŋ, naʊ dɪfɛndɪŋ, ən ɛvɹi muvmən pʌŋktʃueɪɾɪd baɪ ðoʊz laʊd klæks.

That was all Min could call it, that gliding, flowing movement, wooden blades flickering and spinning. She had watched Rand practice the sword against the best he could find, often against two or three or four at once, but that had been nothing to this. So beautiful, and so easy to forget that had those lathes been steel, blood could have flowed. Except that no blade, steel or lathes, touched flesh. Back and forth they danced, circling one another, swords now probing, now slashing, Rand attacking, now defending, and every movement punctuated by those loud clacks.

kæɹɑlin ɡɹɪp mɪnz ɑɹm hɑɹd wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ əɹ aɪz fɹəm ðə kɑntɛst. "hi ɪz ɔlsoʊ ə bleɪdmæstɝ," ʃi bɹiðd. "hi mʌs bi. lʊk ət hɪm!"

Caraline gripped Min's arm hard without taking her eyes from the contest. "He is also a blademaster," she breathed. "He must be. Look at him!"

mɪn wɑz lʊkɪŋ, ən hʌɡɪŋ ɹændz sɔɹd bɛlt ən skæbɑɹɾɪd bleɪɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ hɪm. bæk ən fɔɹθ ɪn bjuɾi, ən wʌtɛvɝ ɹænd θɔt, tɔɹæm klɪɹli wɪʃt ɪz bleɪd wɑz stil. koʊld ɹeɪdʒ bɝn ɑn ɪz feɪs, ən i pɹɛs hɑɹɾɝ, hɑɹɾɝ. stɪl noʊ bleɪd tʌtʃt ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ ənʌðɝ, jɛt naʊ ɹænd bækt əweɪ kɑnstənli, sɔɹd dɑɹɾɪŋ tə dɪfɛnd, ən tɔɹæm muv fɔɹwɝd, ətækɪŋ, aɪz ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ wɪð aɪsi fjʊɹi.

Min was looking, and hugging Rand's sword belt and scabbarded blade as if they were him. Back and forth in beauty, and whatever Rand thought, Toram clearly wished his blade was steel. Cold rage burned on his face, and he pressed harder, harder. Still no blade touched anything but another, yet now Rand backed away constantly, sword darting to defend, and Toram moved forward, attacking, eyes glittering with icy fury.

aʊtsaɪd, sʌmwʌn skɹimd, ə weɪl ʌv ʌɾɝ hɔɹɝ, ən sʌɾənli ðə hjudʒ tɛn snæpt ʌp ɪndə ði ɛɹ, vænɪʃɪŋ ɪndə ə θɪk ɡɹeɪnəs ðət hɪd ðə skaɪ. fɑɡ bɪloʊɾ ɑn ɛvɹi saɪd, fɪld wɪð dɪstənt ʃɹiks ən bɛloʊz. θɪn tɛnʒɹəlz wɑftɪɾ ɪndə ðə klɪɹ ɪnvɝɾɪd boʊl lɛf baɪ ðə tɛnt. ɛvɹiwʌn stɛɹɾ ɪn əmeɪzmənt. ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn.

Outside, someone screamed, a wail of utter horror, and suddenly the huge tent snapped up into the air, vanishing into a thick grayness that hid the sky. Fog billowed on every side, filled with distant shrieks and bellows. Thin tendrils wafted into the clear inverted bowl left by the tent. Everyone stared in amazement. Almost everyone.

tɔɹæmz leɪð bleɪd smæʃt ɪndə ɹændz saɪd wɪð ə boʊn-kɹæk saʊnd, dʌbəlɪŋ ɪm oʊvɝ. "ju ɑɹ dɛd, kʌzən," tɔɹæm snɪɹd, lɪftɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd haɪ tə stʃɹaɪk əɡɛn - ən fɹoʊz, stɛɹɪŋ, əz pɑɹɾ ə ðə hɛvi ɡɹeɪ mɪst oʊvɝhɛd . . . səlɪɾəfaɪd. ə tɛntəkəl ə fɑɡ, ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn, ə θɪk θɹi-toʊɾ ɑɹm, ɹitʃɪŋ daʊn, kloʊzd ɝaʊn ðə staʊt ɹɛd sɪstɝ, snætʃɪŋ əɹ ɪndə ði ɛɹ bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn hæɾ ə tʃæns tə muv.

Toram's lathe blade smashed into Rand's side with a bone-crack sound, doubling him over. "You are dead, cousin," Toram sneered, lifting his sword high to strike again - and froze, staring, as part of the heavy gray mist overhead . . . solidified. A tentacle of fog, it might have been, a thick three-toed arm, reaching down, closed around the stout Red sister, snatching her into the air before anyone had a chance to move.

kædzueɪn wɑz ðə fɝs tə oʊvɝkʌm ʃɑk. hɝ ɑɹmz ɹoʊz, ʃeɪkɪŋ bæk əɹ ʃɔl, hɝ hænz meɪɾ ə twɪst, ən ə bɔl ə faɪɝ sim tə ʃuɾ ʌpwɝd fɹəm itʃ pɑm, stʃɹikɪŋ ɪndə ðə mɪst. əbʌv, sʌmθɪŋ sʌɾənli bɝst ɪndə fleɪm, wʌn vaɪələnt ɡaʊt ðət vænɪʃt ɪmiɾiətli, ən ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ fɛl bæk ɪndə saɪt, dʒɹɑpɪŋ wɪð ə θʌd feɪsdaʊn ɑn ðə kɑɹpəts nɪɹ wɛɹ ɹænd nɛlt ɑn wʌn ni klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz saɪd. ət list, ʃi wʊɾə bɪn feɪsdaʊn hæɾ əɹ hɛd nɑt bɪn twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn soʊ hɝ dɛɾ aɪz stɛɹɾ ʌp ɪndə ðə fɑɡ.

Cadsuane was the first to overcome shock. Her arms rose, shaking back her shawl, her hands made a twist, and a ball of fire seemed to shoot upward from each palm, streaking into the mist. Above, something suddenly burst into flame, one violent gout that vanished immediately, and the Red sister fell back into sight, dropping with a thud facedown on the carpets near where Rand knelt on one knee clutching his side. At least, she would have been facedown had her head not been twisted around so her dead eyes stared up into the fog.

wʌtɛvɝ skɹæps ə kəmpoʊʒɝ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə tɛn flɛd wɪð ðæt. ðə ʃædoʊ hæd bɪn ɡɪvən flɛʃ. skɹimɪŋ pipəl flɛɾ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, nɑkɪŋ oʊvɝ teɪbəlz, noʊbəlz klɔɪŋ pæst sɝvəns ən sɝvəns pæs noʊbəlz. bəfeɪd, mɪn fɔɾ əɹ weɪ tə ɹænd wɪð fɪsts ən ɛlboʊz ən ɪz sɔɹɾ əz ə klʌb.

whatever scraps of composure remained in the tent fled with that. The Shadow had been given flesh. Screaming people fled in every direction, knocking over tables, nobles clawing past servants and servants past nobles. Buffeted, Min fought her way to Rand with fists and elbows and his sword as a club.

"ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt?" ʃi æskt, pʊlɪŋ ɪm tə hɪz fit. ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si kæɹɑlin ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, hɛlpɪŋ hɪm, tu. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, kæɹɑlin lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd.

"Are you all right?" she asked, pulling him to his feet. She was surprised to see Caraline on the other side, helping him, too. For that matter, Caraline looked surprised.

hi tʊk ɪz hæn fɹəm bɪniθ ɪz koʊt, fɪŋɡɝz θæŋkfəli fɹi ʌv blʌd. ðət hæf-hil skɑɹ, soʊ tɛndɝ, hæd nɑt bɹoʊkən oʊpən. "aɪ θɪŋk wi bɛs muv," hi sɛd, teɪkɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt. "wi hæv tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðɪs." ði ɪnvɝɾɪd boʊl ə klɪɹ ɛɹ wɑz noʊɾɪsəbli smɔlɝ. ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls hæd flɛd. aʊɾ ɪn ðə fɑɡ, skɹimz ɹoʊz, moʊs kʌɾɪŋ ɔf əbɹʌpli bʌɾ ɔlweɪz ɹipleɪs baɪ nu.

He took his hand from beneath his coat, fingers thankfully free of blood. That half-healed scar, so tender, had not broken open. "I think we best move," he said, taking his sword belt. "We have to get out of this." The inverted bowl of clear air was noticeably smaller. Almost everyone else had fled. Out in the fog, screams rose, most cutting off abruptly but always replaced by new.

"aɪ əɡɹi, toʊmɑs," dɑɹlɪn sɛd. sɔɹɾ ɪn hænd, hi plæntəd hɪmsɛlf wɪð ɪz bæk tə kæɹɑlin, bɪtwin əɹ ən ðə fɑɡ. "ðə kwɛstʃən ɪz, ɪn wɪtʃ dɝɛkʃən? ən ɔlsoʊ, haʊ fɑɹ də wɪv tə ɡoʊ?"

"I agree, Tomas," Darlin said. Sword in hand, he planted himself with his back to Caraline, between her and the fog. "The question is, in which direction? And also, how far do we have to go?"

"ðɪs ɪz ɪz wɝk," tɔɹæm spæt. "ælθɹz." hɝlɪŋ daʊn ɪz pɹæktəs sɔɹd, hi stɔk tə hɪz dɪskɑɹɾɪd koʊɾ ən kɑmli dɑn ɪt. wʌtɛvɝ ɛls i wɑz, hi wɑz noʊ kaʊɝd. "dʒɛɹɑl?" hi ʃaʊɾəd ət ðə fɑɡ əz i fæsən ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt. "dʒɛɹɑl, ðə laɪt bɝn ju, mæn, wɛɹ ɑɹ ju? dʒɛɹɑl!" mɔɹɾɪθ - feɪn - dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ, ən i wɛn ɑn ʃaʊɾɪŋ.

"This is his work," Toram spat. "Al'Thor's." Hurling down his practice sword, he stalked to his discarded coat and calmly donned it. Whatever else he was, he was no coward. "Jeraal?" he shouted at the fog as he fastened his sword belt. "Jeraal, the Light burn you, man, where are you? Jeraal!" Mordeth - Fain - did not answer, and he went on shouting.

ði oʊnli ʌðɝz stɪl ðəɹ wɝ kædzueɪn ən əɹ tu kəmpænjənz, feɪsəz kɑm bʌt hænz ɹʌnɪŋ nɝvəsli oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃɔlz. kædzueɪn hɝsɛlf maɪɾ əv bɪn sɛɾɪŋ aʊt fəɹ ə stʃɹoʊl. "aɪ ʃəd θɪŋk nɔɹθ," ʃi sɛd. "ðə sloʊp laɪz kloʊsɝ ðət weɪ, ən klaɪmɪŋ meɪ teɪk əs əbʌv ðɪs. stɑp ðət keɪtɛɝwɔlɪŋ, tɔɹæm! iðɝ jəɹ mænz dɛd, əɹ i kæn hɪɹ." tɔɹæm ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɝ, bʌɾ i dɪd stɑp ʃaʊɾɪŋ. kædzueɪn dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə noʊɾəs əɹ kɛɹ, soʊ lɔŋ əz i wɑz saɪlənt. "nɔɹθ, ðɛn. wi θɹi wɪl teɪk kɛɹ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ jəɹ stil kæn hændəl." ʃi lʊk stʃɹeɪɾ ət ɹænd wən ʃi sɛd ðæt, ən i ɡeɪv ə wɪskɝ ʌv ə nɑd bɪfɔɹ bʌklɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt ən dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪz bleɪd. tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə ɡɑɡəl, mɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz wɪð kæɹɑlin; ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz aɪz lʊkt əz lɑɹdʒ əz tikəps. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ nu hu hi wɑz, ən ʃi wɑz gɑnə kip ɛniwʌn ɛls fɹəm noʊɪŋ.

The only others still there were Cadsuane and her two companions, faces calm but hands running nervously over their shawls. Cadsuane herself might have been setting out for a stroll. "I should think north," she said. "The slope lies closer that way, and climbing may take us above this. Stop that caterwauling, Toram! Either your man's dead, or he can't hear." Toram glared at her, but he did stop shouting. Cadsuane did not appear to notice or care, so long as he was silent. "North, then. We three will take care of anything your steel can't handle." She looked straight at Rand when she said that, and he gave a whisker of a nod before buckling his sword belt and drawing his blade. Trying not to goggle, Min exchanged glances with Caraline; the other woman's eyes looked as large as teacups. The Aes Sedai knew who he was, and she was going to keep anyone else from knowing.

"aɪ wɪʃ wi hæd nɑt lɛft əɹ wɔɹɾɝz bæk ɪn ðə sɪɾi," ðə slɪm jɛloʊ sɪstɝ sɛd. taɪni sɪlvɝ bɛlz ɪn əɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ tʃaɪmd əz ʃi tɔst əɹ hɛd. ʃi hæɾ ɔlmoʊst əz kəmændɪŋ ən ɛɹ əz kædzueɪn, ɪnʌf ðət jə dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz haʊ pɹɪɾi ʃi wɑz ət fɝst, ɪksɛp ðət ðət tɔs ə hɝ hɛd simd . . . wɛl . . . ə tʌtʃ pɛtʃələnt. "aɪ wɪʃ aɪ hæd ɹɑʃən hɪɹ."

"I wish we had not left our Warders back in the city," the slim Yellow sister said. Tiny silver bells in her dark hair chimed as she tossed her head. She had almost as commanding an air as Cadsuane, enough that you did not realize how pretty she was at first, except that that toss of her head seemed . . . well . . . a touch petulant. "I wish I had Roshan here."

"ə sɝkəl, kædzueɪn?" ðə ɡɹeɪ æskt. hɛd tɝnɪŋ ðɪs weɪ ən ðət tə pɪɹ ət ðə fɑɡ, ʃi lʊk laɪk ə plʌmp, peɪl-hɛɹd spɛɹoʊ wɪð əɹ ʃɑɹp noʊz ən ɪnkwɪzɪɾɪv aɪz. nɑɾ ə fɹaɪɾənd spɛɹoʊ, bʌt wʌn dɛfənətli ɹɛɾi tə teɪk wɪŋ. "ʃʊd wi lɪŋk?"

"A circle, Cadsuane?" the Gray asked. Head turning this way and that to peer at the fog, she looked like a plump, pale-haired sparrow with her sharp nose and inquisitive eyes. Not a frightened sparrow, but one definitely ready to take wing. "Should we link?"

"noʊ, niɑnd," kædzueɪn saɪd. "ɪf jə si sʌmθɪŋ, jə mʌs bi bi eɪbəl tə stʃɹaɪk əɾ ɪt wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ tə pɔɪn ɪɾ aʊt fəɹ mi. sæmɪtsu, stɑp wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ɹɑʃən. wɪv θɹi faɪn sɔɹdz hɪɹ, tu ʌv əm hɛɹən-mɑɹk, aɪ si. ðəl du."

"No, Niande," Cadsuane sighed. "If you see something, you must be B able to strike at it without waiting to point it out for me. Samitsu, stop worrying about Roshan. We have three fine swords here, two of them heron-mark, I see. They will do."

tɔɹæm ʃoʊɾ ɪz tiθ ɑn siɪŋ ðə hɛɹən ɪnɡɹeɪvd ɑn ðə bleɪd ɹænd hæɾ ənʃiðd. ɪf ɪt wɑz ə smaɪl, ɪt hɛl noʊ mɝθ. hɪz oʊn bɛɹd bleɪd bɔɹ ə hɛɹən, tu. dɑɹlɪnz dɪd nɑt, bʌɾ i ɡeɪv ɹænd ən ɪz sɔɹɾ ə weɪɪŋ lʊk, ðən ə ɹɪspɛkfəl nɑd ðət wɑz kənsɪɾɝəbli dipɝ ðən i hæɾ ɔfɝd pleɪn toʊmɑs tʃɹəkənd, ʌv ə maɪnɝ bɹæntʃ ə ðə haʊs.

Toram showed his teeth on seeing the heron engraved on the blade Rand had unsheathed. If it was a smile, it held no mirth. His own bared blade bore a heron, too. Darlin's did not, but he gave Rand and his sword a weighing look, then a respectful nod that was considerably deeper than he had offered plain Tomas Trakand, of a minor branch of the House.

ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd ɡɹin hæd teɪkən tʃɑɹdʒ, klɪɹli, ən ʃi kɛpt ɪt dɪspaɪɾ ətɛmptəd pɹoʊɾɛsts fɹəm dɑɹlɪn, hu laɪk mɛni tɛɹənz sim nɑt tə ɹɛlɪʃ ɛɛs sədaɪ ə ɡɹeɪt dil, ən tɔɹæm, hu dʒʌst sim tə dɪslaɪk ɛniwʌn ɡɪvɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz bʌt hɪmsɛlf. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, soʊ dɪd kæɹɑlin, bʌt kædzueɪn ɪɡnɔɹɾ əɹ fɹaʊnz əz kəmplitli əz ʃi dɪd ðə mɛnz vɔɪs kəmpleɪns. ənlaɪk ðɛm, kæɹɑlin əpɪɹd tə ɹilaɪz kəmpleɪns wəd də noʊ ɡʊd. wʌndɝ ʌv wʌndɝz, ɹænd mikli lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi pleɪs tə kædzueɪnz ɹaɪɾ əz ʃi kwɪkli ɝeɪnʒd ɛvɹiwʌn. wɛl, nɑɾ ɪɡzækli mikli - hi stɛɹd daʊn ɪz noʊz əɾ əɹ ɪn ə weɪ ðət wʊɾə meɪd mɪn slæp ɪm ɪf i dɪɾ ɪt tə hɝ; kædzueɪn dʒʌst ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ən mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ðət ɹɛɾənd ɪz feɪs - bʌɾ ət list i kɛpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt. ɹaɪt ðɛn, mɪn ɔlmoʊs θɔɾ i wəɾ ənaʊns u hi wɑz. ən meɪbi ɪkspɛk ðə fɑɡ tə vænɪʃ ɪn fɪɹ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hi smaɪld əɾ əɹ əz ðoʊ fɑɡ ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ wɑz nʌθɪŋ, ivən ə fɑɡ ðət snætʃt tɛns ən pipəl.

The gray-haired Green had taken charge, clearly, and she kept it despite attempted protests from Darlin, who like many Tairens seemed not to relish Aes Sedai a great deal, and Toram, who just seemed to dislike anyone giving orders but himself. For that matter, so did Caraline, but Cadsuane ignored her frowns as completely as she did the men's voiced complaints. Unlike them, Caraline appeared to realize complaints would do no good. Wonder of wonders, Rand meekly let himself be placed to Cadsuane's right as she quickly arranged everyone. Well, not exactly meekly - he stared down his nose at her in a way that would have made Min slap him if he did it to her; Cadsuane just shook her head and muttered something that reddened his face - but at least he kept his mouth shut. Right then, Min almost thought he would announce who he was. And maybe expect the fog to vanish in fear of the Dragon Reborn. He smiled at her as though fog in this weather was nothing, even a fog that snatched tents and people.

ðeɪ muvd ɪndə ðə θɪk mɪst ɪn ə fɔɹmeɪʃən laɪk ə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ, kædzueɪn hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə lɛd, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əɾ itʃ ə tu ʌðɝ pɔɪns, ə mæn wɪð ə sɔɹɾ ət θɹi. tɔɹæm, ʌv kɔɹs, pɹətɛstəd laʊdli ət bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹɪɹ əntɪl kædzueɪn mɛnʃən ði ɑnɝ ə ðə ɹɪɹ ɡɑɹɾ əɹ səm sʌtʃ. ðət kwaɪəɾəd ɪm daʊn. mɪn hæd noʊ əbdʒɛkʃən wʌtsoʊɛvɝ tə hɝ oʊn pəzɪʃən wɪð kæɹɑlin ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə stɑɹ. ʃi kæɹiɾ ə naɪf ɪn iðɝ hænd, ən wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðeɪ wəd bi ɛni jus. ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə ɹɪlif tə si ðə dæɡɝ ɪn kæɹɑlinz fɪs tʃɹɛmbəl. ət list əɹ oʊn hænz wɝ stɛɾi. ðən əɡɛn, ʃi θɔt ʃi maɪt bi tu fɹaɪɾənd tə ʃeɪk.

They moved into the thick mist in a formation like a six-pointed star, Cadsuane herself in the lead, an Aes Sedai at each of two other points, a man with a sword at three. Toram, of course, protested loudly at bringing up the rear until Cadsuane mentioned the honor of the rear guard or some such. That quieted him down. Min had no objection whatsoever to her own position with Caraline in the center of the star. She carried a knife in either hand, and wondered whether they would be any use. It was something of a relief to see the dagger in Caraline's fist tremble. At least her own hands were steady. Then again, she thought she might be too frightened to shake.

ðə fɑɡ wɑz koʊld əz wɪntɝ. ɡɹeɪnəs kloʊzd ɝaʊn əm ɪn swɝlz, soʊ hɛvi ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl tə si ði ʌðɝz klɪɹli. hɪɹɪŋ wɑz ɔl tu izi, ðoʊ. ʃɹiks dʒɹɪftəd θɹu ðə mɝk, mɛn ən wɪmən kɹaɪɪŋ aʊt, hɔɹsəz skɹimɪŋ. ðə fɑɡ sim tə dɛɾən saʊnd, meɪk ɪt hɑloʊ, soʊ ðət θæŋkfəli, ðoʊz ɑfəl saʊnz sim dɪstənt. ðə mɪst əhɛd bɪɡæn tə θɪkən, bʌt faɪɝbɔlz ɪmiɾiətli ʃɑt fɹəm kædzueɪnz hænz, sɪzəlɪŋ θɹu ði aɪsi ɡɹeɪ, ən ðə θɪkənɪŋ ɪɹʌptəɾ ɪn wʌn ɹɔɹɪŋ flɛɹ ə fleɪm. ɹɔɹz bɪhaɪnd, laɪt flæʃɪŋ əɡɛns ðə fɑɡ laɪk laɪtnɪŋ əɡɛns klaʊdz, spoʊk ə ði ʌðɝ tu sɪstɝz ət wɝk. mɪn hæd noʊ dɪzaɪɝ tə lʊk bæk. wʌt ʃi kəd si wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf.

The fog was cold as winter. Grayness closed around them in swirls, so heavy it was difficult to see the others clearly. Hearing was all too easy, though. Shrieks drifted through the murk, men and women crying out, horses screaming. The fog seemed to deaden sound, make it hollow, so that thankfully, those awful sounds seemed distant. The mist ahead began to thicken, but fireballs immediately shot from Cadsuane's hands, sizzling through the icy gray, and the thickening erupted in one roaring flare of flame. Roars behind, light flashing against the fog like lightning against clouds, spoke of the other two sisters at work. Min had no desire to look back. What she could see was more than enough.

pæs tʃɹæmpəl tɛns hæf əbskjʊɹd baɪ ɡɹeɪ heɪz ðeɪ muvd, pæs bɑɾiz ən səmtaɪmz pɑɹts ə bɑɾiz nɑt nɪɹli əbskjʊɹɾ ɪnʌf. ə lɛɡ. ən ɑɹm. ə mæn u wɑz nɑt ðəɹ fɹəm ðə weɪs daʊn. wʌns ə wʊmənz hɛd ðət sim tə ɡɹɪn fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt sæɾ ɑn ðə kɔɹnɝ ʌv ən oʊvɝtɝnd wæɡən. ðə læn bɪɡæn tə sloʊp ʌpwɝd, stipɝ. mɪn sɔ hɝ fɝs lɪvɪŋ soʊl bɪsaɪdz ðɛm, ən wɪʃt ʃi hæd nɑt. ə mæn wɛɹɪŋ wʌn ə ðə ɹɛd koʊts stæɡɝd təwɔɹd ðɛm, weɪvɪŋ ɪz lɛft ɑɹm fibli. ði ʌðɝ wɑz ɡɔn, ən wɛt waɪt boʊn ʃoʊd wɛɹ hæf ɪz feɪs hæd bɪn. sʌmθɪŋ ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn wɝdz bʌbəl ðoʊ hɪz tiθ; ən i kəlæpst. sæmɪtsu nɛl bɹifli bɪsaɪd hɪm, pʊɾɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz əɡɛns ðə blʌɾi ɹuən ə hɪz fɔɹhɛd. ɹaɪzɪŋ, ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ən ðeɪ muvd ɑn. ʌpsloʊp, ən ʌp, əntɪl mɪn bɪɡæn wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɝ klaɪmɪŋ ə maʊntən ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə hɪl.

Past trampled tents half obscured by gray haze they moved, past bodies and sometimes parts of bodies not nearly obscured enough. A leg. An arm. A man who was not there from the waist down. Once a woman's head that seemed to grin from where it sat on the corner of an overturned wagon. The land began to slope upward, steeper. Min saw her first living soul besides them, and wished she had not. A man wearing one of the red coats staggered toward them, waving his left arm feebly. The other was gone, and wet white bone showed where half his face had been. Something that might have been words bubbled though his teeth; and he collapsed. Samitsu knelt briefly beside him, putting her fingers against the bloody ruin of his forehead. Rising, she shook her head, and they moved on. Upslope, and up, until Min began wondering whether they were climbing a mountain instead of a hill.

ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə dɑɹlɪn, ðə fɑɡ sʌɾənli bɪɡæn tə teɪk ɑn fɔɹm, ə mæn-haɪ ʃeɪp, bʌɾ ɔl tɛntəkəlz ən ɡeɪpɪŋ maʊðz fʊl ə ʃɑɹp tiθ. ðə haɪ lɔɹd maɪɾ əv bɪn noʊ bleɪdmæstɝ, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt sloʊ iðɝ. hɪz bleɪd slaɪs θɹu ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə stɪl-koʊəlɛsɪŋ ʃeɪp, lupt ən slæʃt ɪt tɑp tə bɑɾəm. fɔɹ klaʊdz ə fɑɡ, θɪkɝ ðən ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ mɪst, sɛɾəld tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "wɛl," hi sɛd, "æt list wi noʊ stil kən kʌt ðiz . . . kɹitʃɝz."

Right in front of Darlin, the fog suddenly began to take on form, a man-high shape, but all tentacles and gaping mouths full of sharp teeth. The High Lord might have been no blademaster, but he was not slow either. His blade sliced through the middle of the still-coalescing shape, looped and slashed it top to bottom. Four clouds of fog, thicker than the surrounding mist, settled to the ground. "Well," he said, "at least we know steel can cut these . . . creatures."

ðə θɪkɝ tʃʌŋks ə fɑɡ uz təɡɛðɝ, bɪɡæn tə ɹaɪz wʌns mɔɹ.

The thicker chunks of fog oozed together, began to rise once more.

kædzueɪn stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ə hænd, dʒɹɑpləts ə faɪɝ fɔlɪŋ fɹəm əɹ fɪŋɡɝtɪps; wʌn bɹaɪt flæʃ ə fleɪm sɪɹd ðə səlɪɾəfaɪɪŋ fɑɡ fɹəm ɛɡzɪstəns. "bʌt noʊ mɔɹ ðən kʌt, soʊ ɪt simz," ʃi mɝmɝd.

Cadsuane stretched out a hand, droplets of fire falling from her fingertips; one bright flash of flame seared the solidifying fog from existence. "But no more than cut, so it seems," she murmured.

əhɛd tə ðɛɹ ɹaɪt, ə wʊmən sʌɾənli əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə swɝlɪŋ ɡɹeɪ, sɪlk skɝts hɛl haɪ əz ʃi hæf ɹæn, hæf fɛl daʊn ðə sloʊp təwɔɹd ðɛm. "θæŋk ðə laɪt!" ʃi skɹimd. "θæŋk ðə laɪt! aɪ θɔɾ aɪ wɑz əloʊn!" ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn əɹ ðə fɑɡ dʒɹu təɡɛðɝ, ə naɪtmɛɹ ɔl tiθ ən klɔz, lumɪŋ əbʌv hɝ. hæɾ ɪt bɪn ə mæn, mɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ ɹænd wəɾ əv weɪɾəd.

Ahead to their right, a woman suddenly appeared in the swirling gray, silk skirts held high as she half ran, half fell down the slope toward them. "Thank the Light!" she screamed. "Thank the Light! I thought I was alone!" Right behind her the fog drew together, a nightmare all teeth and claws, looming above her. Had it been a man, Min was sure Rand would have waited.

hɪz hæn ɹoʊz bɪfɔɹ kædzueɪn kəd muv, ən ə bɑɹ ʌv . . . sʌmθɪŋ . . . lɪkwəd waɪt faɪɝ bɹaɪɾɝ ðən ðə sʌn . . . ʃɑɾ aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə ɹʌnɪŋ wʊmənz hɛd. ðə kɹitʃɝ sɪmpli vænɪʃt. fəɹ ə moʊmən ðəɹ wɑz klɪɹ ɛɹ wɛɹ ɪt hæd bɪn, ən əlɔŋ ðə laɪn ðət ðə bɑɹ hæd bɝnd, əntɪl ðə fɑɡ bɪɡæn kloʊzɪŋ ɪn. ə moʊmənt waɪl ðə wʊmən fɹoʊz wɛɹ ʃi stʊd. ðɛn, ʃɹikɪŋ ət ðə tɑp ə hɝ lʌŋz, ʃi tɝn ən ɹæn fɹəm ðɛm, stɪl daʊnsloʊp, fliɪŋ wʌt ʃi fɪɹd mɔɹ ðən naɪtmɛɹz ɪn ðiz mɪsts.

His hand rose before Cadsuane could move, and a bar of . . . something . . . liquid white fire brighter than the sun . . . shot out over the running woman's head. The creature simply vanished. For a moment there was clear air where it had been, and along the line that the bar had burned, until the fog began closing in. A moment while the woman froze where she stood. Then, shrieking at the top of her lungs, she turned and ran from them, still downslope, fleeing what she feared more than nightmares in these mists.

"ju!" tɔɹæm ɹɔɹd, soʊ laʊdli ðət mɪn spʌn tə feɪs ɪm wɪð əɹ naɪvz ɹeɪzd. hi stʊd pɔɪntɪŋ ɪz sɔɹɾ ət ɹænd. "ju ɑɹ hɪm! aɪ wɑz ɹaɪt! ðɪs ɪz jəɹ wɝk! jəl nɑt tʃɹæp mi, ælθɹ!" sʌɾənli hi bɹoʊk əweɪ əɾ ən æŋɡəl, skɹæmbəlɪŋ waɪldli ʌp ðə sloʊp. "ju wɪl nɑt tʃɹæp mi!"

"You!" Toram roared, so loudly that Min spun to face him with her knives raised. He stood pointing his sword at Rand. "You are him! I was right! This is your work! You will not trap me, al'Thor!" Suddenly he broke away at an angle, scrambling wildly up the slope. "You will not trap me!"

"kʌm bæk!" dɑɹlɪn ʃaʊɾəd æftɝ hɪm. "wi mʌst stɪk təɡɛðɝ! wi mʌst. . . ." hi tʃɹeɪld ɔf, stɛɹɪŋ ət ɹænd. "ju ɑɹ hɪm. ðə laɪt bɝn mi, jə ɑɹ!" hi hæf-muvd əz ɪf tə pleɪs hɪmsɛlf bɪtwin ɹænd ən kæɹɑlin, bʌɾ ət list i dɪd nɑt ɹʌn.

"Come back!" Darlin shouted after him. "We must stick together! We must. . . ." He trailed off, staring at Rand. "You are him. The Light burn me, you are!" He half-moved as if to place himself between Rand and Caraline, but at least he did not run.

kɑmli, kædzueɪn pɪkt əɹ weɪ əkɹɔs ðə sloʊp tə ɹænd. ən slæpt ɪz feɪs soʊ hɑɹɾ ɪz hɛd dʒɝkt. mɪnz bɹɛθ kɑɾ ɪn ʃɑk. "ju wɪl nɑt də ðəɾ əɡɛn," kædzueɪn sɛd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hiɾ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, dʒʌst aɪɝn. "du jə hɪɹ mi? nɑt bɑlfaɪɝ. nɑɾ ɛvɝ."

Calmly, Cadsuane picked her way across the slope to Rand. And slapped his face so hard his head jerked. Min's breath caught in shock. "You will not do that again," Cadsuane said. There was no heat in her voice, just iron. "Do you hear me? Not balefire. Not ever."

sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ɹænd oʊnli ɹʌbd ɪz tʃik. "ju wɝ ɹɔŋ, kædzueɪn. hiz ɹil. aɪm sɝɾən ʌv ɪt. aɪ noʊ hi ɪz." ivən mɔɹ sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, hi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i vɛɹi mʌtʃ wɑntəɾ əɹ tə bɪliv.

Surprisingly, Rand only rubbed his cheek. "You were wrong, Cadsuane. He's real. I'm certain of it. I know he is." Even more surprisingly, he sounded as if he very much wanted her to believe.

mɪnz hɑɹt wɛn aʊt tə hɪm. hi hæd mɛnʃən hɪɹɪŋ vɔɪsəz; hi mʌs min ðæt. ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ ɹaɪt hæn təwɔɹd hɪm, fɝɡɛɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə moʊmən ðəɾ ɪt hɛld ə naɪf, ən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ kʌmfɝɾɪŋ. ðoʊ ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli ʃʊɹ ʃi wəɾ ɛvɝ bi eɪbəl tə juz ðət pɝtɪkjəlɝ wɝɾ ɪnɑkwəsli əɡɛn. ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ - ən pdən feɪn sim tə lip aʊɾ ə ðə mɪsts bɪhaɪn ɹænd, stil ɡlimɪŋ ɪn ɪz fɪst.

Min's heart went out to him. He had mentioned hearing voices; he must mean that. She raised her right hand toward him, forgetting for the moment that it held a knife, and opened her mouth to say something comforting. Though she was not entirely sure she would ever be able to use that particular word innocuously again. She opened her mouth - and Padan Fain seemed to leap out of the mists behind Rand, steel gleaming in his fist.

"bɪhaɪn ju!" mɪn skɹimd, pɔɪntɪŋ wɪð ðə naɪf ɪn əɹ aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt ɹaɪt hæn əz ʃi θɹu ðə wʌn ɪn əɹ lɛft. ɛvɹiθɪŋ sim tə hæpən ət wʌns, hæf-sin ɪn wɪntɝi fɑɡ.

"Behind you!" Min screamed, pointing with the knife in her outstretched right hand as she threw the one in her left. Everything seemed to happen at once, half-seen in wintery fog.

ɹænd bɪɡæn tə tɝn, twɪstɪŋ əsaɪd, ən feɪn ɔlsoʊ twɪstəd, tə lʌnʒ fəɹ hɪm. fəɹ ðət twɪst, hɝ naɪf mɪst, bʌt feɪnz dæɡɝ skɔɹɾ əlɔŋ ɹændz lɛf saɪd. ɪt hɑɹdli sim tə mɔɹ ðən slaɪs ɪz koʊt, jɛɾ i skɹimd. hi skɹimd, ə saʊn tə meɪk mɪnz hɑɹt klɛntʃ, ən klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz saɪd, hi fɛl əɡɛns kædzueɪn, kætʃɪŋ əɾ əɹ tə hoʊl hɪmsɛlf ʌp, pʊlɪŋ boʊθ ə ðɛm daʊn.

Rand began to turn, twisting aside, and Fain also twisted, to lunge for him. For that twist, her knife missed, but Fain's dagger scored along Rand's left side. It hardly seemed to more than slice his coat, yet he screamed. He screamed, a sound to make Min's heart clench, and clutching his side, he fell against Cadsuane, catching at her to hold himself up, pulling both of them down.

"muv aʊɾ ə maɪ weɪ!" wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz ʃaʊɾəd - sæmɪtsu, mɪn θɔt - ən sʌɾənli, mɪnz fit dʒɝkt aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ hɝ. ʃi lændəd hɛvəli, ɡɹʌntɪŋ əz ʃi hɪt ðə sloʊp təɡɛðɝ wɪð kæɹɑlin, hu snæpt ə bɹɛθləs, "blʌɾ ən faɪɝ!"

"Move out of my way!" one of the other sisters shouted - Samitsu, Min thought - and suddenly, Min's feet jerked out from under her. She landed heavily, grunting as she hit the slope together with Caraline, who snapped a breathless, "Blood and fire!"

ɛvɹiθɪŋ ət wʌns.

Everything at once.

"muv!" sæmɪtsu ʃaʊɾəd əɡɛn, əz dɑɹlɪn lʌnʒd fəɹ feɪn wɪð ɪz sɔɹd. ðə boʊni mæn muvd wɪð ʃɑkɪŋ spid, θɹoʊɪŋ hɪmsɛlf daʊn ən ɹoʊlɪŋ bɪɑn dɑɹlɪnz ɹitʃ. stʃɹeɪnʒli, hi kækəld wɪð læftɝ əz i skæmpɝd tə hɪz fiɾ ən ɹæn ɔf, swɑloʊɾ ɪn ðə mɝk ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli.

"Move!" Samitsu shouted again, as Darlin lunged for Fain with his sword. The bony man moved with shocking speed, throwing himself down and rolling beyond Darlin's reach. Strangely, he cackled with laughter as he scampered to his feet and ran off, swallowed in the murk almost immediately.

mɪn pʊʃt hɝsɛlf ʌp ʃeɪkɪŋ.

Min pushed herself up shaking.

kæɹɑlin wɑz mʌtʃ mɔɹ vɪɡɝəs. "aɪ wɪl tɛl jə naʊ, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə koʊl vɔɪs, bɹʌʃɪŋ əɾ əɹ skɝts vaɪələnli, "aɪ wɪl nɑt bi tʃɹiɾəd soʊ. aɪm kæɹɑlin dəmədʒɹd, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs. . . ."

Caraline was much more vigorous. "I will tell you now, Aes Sedai," she said in a cold voice, brushing at her skirts violently, "I will not be treated so. I am Caraline Damodred, High Seat of House. . . ."

mɪn stɑp lɪsnɪŋ. kædzueɪn wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə sloʊp əbʌv, hoʊldɪŋ ɹændz hɛɾ ɪn əɹ læp. ɪt hæɾ oʊnli bɪn ə kʌt. feɪnz dæɡɝ kəd nɑɾ əv mɔɹ ðən tʌtʃt. . . . wɪð ə kɹaɪ, mɪn θɹu hɝsɛlf fɔɹwɝd. ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ noʊ, ʃi pʊʃt ðə wʊmən əweɪ fɹəm ɹænd ən kɹæɾəld ɪz hɛɾ ɪn əɹ ɑɹmz. hɪz aɪz wɝ kloʊzd, hɪz bɹiðɪŋ ɹæɡəd. hɪz feɪs fɛl hɑt.

Min stopped listening. Cadsuane was sitting on the slope above, holding Rand's head in her lap. It had only been a cut. Fain's dagger could not have more than touched. . . . With a cry, Min threw herself forward. Aes Sedai or no, she pushed the woman away from Rand and cradled his head in her arms. His eyes were closed, his breathing ragged. His face felt hot.

"hɛlp hɪm!" ʃi skɹimd ət kædzueɪn, laɪk ən ɛkoʊ ʌv ðə dɪstən skɹimz ɪn ðə mɪst. "hɛlp hɪm!" ə pɑɹɾ ə hɝ sɛd ðət dɪd nɑt meɪk mʌtʃ sɛns æftɝ pʊʃɪŋ əɹ əweɪ, bʌɾ ɪz feɪs sim tə bɝn əɹ hænz, tə bɝn sɛns.

"Help him!" she screamed at Cadsuane, like an echo of the distant screams in the mist. "Help him!" A part of her said that did not make much sense after pushing her away, but his face seemed to burn her hands, to burn sense.

"sæmɪtsu, kwɪkli," kædzueɪn sɛd, stændɪŋ ən ɹiɝeɪnʒɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl. "hiz bɪɑn maɪ tælən fəɹ hilɪŋ." ʃi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn ðə tɑp ə mɪnz hɛd. "ɡɝl, əl hɑɹdli lɛt ðə bɔɪ daɪ wən aɪ hævən tɔɾ ɪm mænɝz, jɛt. stɑp kɹaɪɪŋ, naʊ."

"Samitsu, quickly," Cadsuane said, standing and rearranging her shawl. "He's beyond my Talent for Healing." She laid a hand on the top of Min's head. "Girl, I will hardly let the boy die when I haven't taught him manners, yet. Stop crying, now."

ɪt wɑz vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ. mɪn wɑz fɛɹli ʃʊɹ ðə wʊmən hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ tə hɝ wɪð ðə paʊɝ, jɛt ʃi bɪlivd. titʃ ɪm mænɝz? ə faɪn tʌsəl ðət wəd bi. ənfoʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz fɹəm ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd, nɑt wɪθaʊt ɹɪlʌktəns, mɪn bækt əweɪ ɑn əɹ niz. vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ. ʃi hæd nɑɾ ivən ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi wɑz kɹaɪɪŋ, jɛt kædzueɪnz ɹiəʃʊɹəns wɑz ɪnʌf tə stɑp ðə floʊ ʌv tɪɹz. snɪfɪŋ, ʃi skɹʌbd əɾ əɹ tʃiks wɪð ðə hil ə hɝ hæn əz sæmɪtsu nɛl bɪsaɪd hɪm, pleɪsɪŋ fɪŋɡɝtɪps ɑn ɪz fɔɹhɛd. mɪn wʌndɝd waɪ ʃi dɪd nɑt teɪk ɪz hɛɾ ɪn boʊθ hænz, ðə weɪ mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd.

It was very strange. Min was fairly sure the woman had done nothing to her with the Power, yet she believed. Teach him manners? A fine tussle that would be. Unfolding her arms from around his head, not without reluctance, Min backed away on her knees. Very strange. She had not even realized that she was crying, yet Cadsuane's reassurance was enough to stop the flow of tears. Sniffing, she scrubbed at her cheeks with the heel of her hand as Samitsu knelt beside him, placing fingertips on his forehead. Min wondered why she did not take his head in both hands, the way Moiraine did.

əbɹʌpli ɹænd kənvʌlsd, ɡæspɪŋ ən θɹæʃɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ ə fleɪlɪŋ ɑɹm nɑk ðə jɛloʊ oʊvɝ ɑn əɹ bæk. əz sun əz əɹ fɪŋɡɝz lɛf hɪm, hi səbsaɪɾɪd. mɪn kɹɔl nɪɹɝ. hi bɹið mɔɹ izəli, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz wɝ stɪl kloʊzd. ʃi tʌtʃt ɪz tʃik. kulɝ ðən ɪt hæd bɪn, bʌt stɪl tu wɔɹm. ən peɪl.

Abruptly Rand convulsed, gasping and thrashing so hard that a flailing arm knocked the Yellow over on her back. As soon as her fingers left him, he subsided. Min crawled nearer. He breathed more easily, but his eyes were still closed. She touched his cheek. Cooler than it had been, but still too warm. And pale.

"sʌmθɪŋ ɪz əmɪs," sæmɪtsu sɛd pivɪʃli əz ʃi sæɾ ʌp. pʊlɪŋ ɹændz koʊɾ əsaɪd, ʃi ɡɹɪp ðə slaɪs ɪn ɪz blʌdsteɪnd ʃɝɾ ən ɹɪpt ə waɪd ɡæp ɪn ðə lɪnən.

"Something is amiss," Samitsu said peevishly as she sat up. Pulling Rand's coat aside, she gripped the slice in his bloodstained shirt and ripped a wide gap in the linen.

ðə kʌt fɹəm feɪnz dæɡɝ, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðən əɹ hæn ən nɑt dip, ɹæn ɹaɪɾ əkɹɔs ði oʊld ɹaʊn skɑɹ. ivən ɪn ðə dɪm laɪt, mɪn kəd si ðət ði ɛdʒəz ə ðə ɡæʃ lʊk swoʊlən ən æŋɡɹi, əz ɪf ðə waʊn hæd ɡɔn ʌntɛndəd fəɹ deɪz. ɪt wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bliɾɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt ʃʊɾə bɪn ɡɔn. ðət wɑz wʌt hilɪŋ dɪd: wunz nɪɾəd ðɛmsɛlvz ʌp ɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ jəɹ aɪz.

The cut from Fain's dagger, no longer than her hand and not deep, ran right across the old round scar. Even in the dim light, Min could see that the edges of the gash looked swollen and angry, as if the wound had gone untended for days. It was no longer bleeding, but it should have been gone. That was what Healing did: wounds knitted themselves up right before your eyes.

"ðɪs," sæmɪtsu sɛɾ ɪn ə lɛktʃɝɪŋ toʊn, laɪtli tʌtʃɪŋ ðə skɑɹ, "simz laɪk ə sɪst, bʌt fʊl ʌv ivəl ɪnstɛɾ ə pʌs. ən ðɪs . . ." ʃi dʒɹu ðə fɪŋɡɝ daʊn ðə ɡæʃ. ". . . simz fʊl ʌv ə dɪfɹən ivəl." sʌɾənli ʃi fɹaʊn ət ðə ɡɹin stændɪŋ oʊvɝ hɝ, ən əɹ vɔɪs bɪkeɪm sʌlən ən dɪfɛnsɪv. "ɪf aɪ hæd ðə wɝdz, kædzueɪn, aɪ wəd juz ðɛm. aɪ hæv nɛvɝ sin ðə laɪk. nɛvɝ. bʌɾ əl tɛl jə ðɪs. aɪ θɪŋk ɪf aɪ hæd bɪn wʌn moʊmən sloʊɝ, pɝhæps ɪf jə hæd nɑt tʃɹaɪd fɝst, hi wəd bi dɛd naʊ. əz ɪɾ ɪz. . . ." wɪð ə saɪ, ðə jɛloʊ sɪstɝ sim tə dɪfleɪt, hɝ feɪs sæɡɪŋ. "æz ɪɾ ɪz, aɪ bɪliv hɪl daɪ."

"This," Samitsu said in a lecturing tone, lightly touching the scar, "seems like a cyst, but full of evil instead of pus. And this . . ." She drew the finger down the gash. ". . . seems full of a different evil." Suddenly she frowned at the Green standing over her, and her voice became sullen and defensive. "If I had the words, Cadsuane, I would use them. I have never seen the like. Never. But I will tell you this. I think if I had been one moment slower, perhaps if you had not tried first, he would be dead now. As it is. . . ." With a sigh, the Yellow sister seemed to deflate, her face sagging. "As it is, I believe he will die."

mɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə seɪ noʊ, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt sim tə meɪk əɹ tʌŋ muv. ʃi hɝd kæɹɑlin mɝmɝɪŋ ə pɹɛɹ. ðə wʊmən stʊd ɡɹɪpɪŋ wʌn ə dɑɹlɪnz koʊtslivz wɪð boʊθ hænz. dɑɹlɪn hɪmsɛlf fɹaʊn daʊn ət ɹænd əz ðoʊ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk sɛns ʌv wʌɾ i sɔ.

Min shook her head, trying to say no, but she could not seem to make her tongue move. She heard Caraline murmuring a prayer. The woman stood gripping one of Darlin's coatsleeves with both hands. Darlin himself frowned down at Rand as though trying to make sense of what he saw.

kædzueɪn bɛn tə pæt sæmɪtsuz ʃoʊldɝ. "ju ɑɹ ðə bɛs lɪvɪŋ, pɝhæps ðə bɛst ɛvɝ," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. "noʊ wʌn əz ðə hilɪŋ tə kəmpɛɹ wɪð ju." wɪð ə nɑd, sæmɪtsu stʊd, ən bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz ɑn əɹ fit, ʃi wɑz ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi wʌns mɔɹ. kædzueɪn, skaʊlɪŋ daʊn ət ɹænd wɪð əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ hɪps, wɑz nɑt. "fɔ! əl nɑɾ əlaʊ jə tə daɪ ɑn mi, bɔɪ," ʃi ɡɹaʊld, saʊndɪŋ əz ðoʊ ɪt wɝ ɪz fɔlt. ðɪs taɪm, ɪnstɛɾ ə tʌtʃɪŋ ðə tɑp ə mɪnz hɛd, ʃi ɹæpt ɪt wɪð ə nʌkəl. "ɡɛt tə jəɹ fit, ɡɝl. jəɹ noʊ mɪlksɑp - ɛni ful kən si ðət - soʊ stɑp pɹitɛndɪŋ. dɑɹlɪn, jəl kæɹi hɪm. bændədʒəz mʌst weɪt. ðɪs fɑɡ ɪz nɑt livɪŋ ʌs, soʊ wi hæd bɛɾɝ liv ɪt."

Cadsuane bent to pat Samitsu's shoulder. "You are the best living, perhaps the best ever," she said quietly. "No one has the Healing to compare with you." With a nod, Samitsu stood, and before she was on her feet, she was all Aes Sedai serenity once more. Cadsuane, scowling down at Rand with her hands on her hips, was not. "Phaw! I will not allow you to die on me, boy," she growled, sounding as though it were his fault. This time, instead of touching the top of Min's head, she rapped it with a knuckle. "Get to your feet, girl. You're no milksop - any fool can see that - so stop pretending. Darlin, you will carry him. Bandages must wait. This fog is not leaving us, so we had better leave it."

dɑɹlɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. meɪbi ɪt wɑz kædzueɪnz pɝɛmptɝi fɹaʊn, ən meɪbi ðə hæn kæɹɑlin hæf-ɹeɪz tə hɪz feɪs, bʌɾ əbɹʌpli, hi ʃiðd ɪz sɔɹd, mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, ən hɔɪstəd ɹænd əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝz wɪð ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz dæŋɡəlɪŋ.

Darlin hesitated. Maybe it was Cadsuane's peremptory frown, and maybe the hand Caraline half-raised to his face, but abruptly, he sheathed his sword, muttering under his breath, and hoisted Rand across his shoulders with arms and legs dangling.

mɪn tʊk ʌp ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪɾ ən kɛɹfəli slɪɾ ɪɾ ɪndə ðə skæbɝd hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ɹændz weɪst. "hi wɪl niɾ ɪt," ʃi toʊl dɑɹlɪn, ən æftɝ ə moʊmənt, hi nɑɾəd. ə lʌki θɪŋ fəɹ ɪm i dɪd; ʃi hæd bʌndəld ɔl əɹ kɑnfəɾəns ɪndə ðə ɡɹin sɪstɝ, ən ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə lɛɾ ɛniwʌn θɪŋk dɪfɹənli.

Min took up the heron-mark blade and carefully slid it into the scabbard hanging from Rand's waist. "He will need it," she told Darlin, and after a moment, he nodded. A lucky thing for him he did; she had bundled all her confidence into the Green sister, and she was not about to let anyone think differently.

"naʊ bi kɛɹfəl, dɑɹlɪn," kæɹɑlin sɛɾ ɪn ðət θɹoʊɾi vɔɪs wʌns kædzueɪn meɪd ðɛɹ mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɔɹɾɝ klɪɹ. "bi ʃʊɹ tə steɪ bɪhaɪn mi, ən əl pɹətɛk ju."

"Now be careful, Darlin," Caraline said in that throaty voice once Cadsuane made their marching order clear. "Be sure to stay behind me, and I will protect you."

dɑɹlɪn læf tɪl i wizd, ən wɑz stɪl tʃʌklɪŋ wən ðeɪ bɪɡæn klaɪmɪŋ θɹu ðə koʊl fɑɡ ən ðə dɪstənt ʃɹiks wʌns mɔɹ, wɪð ɪm kæɹiɪŋ ɹænd ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ən ðə wɪmən ɪn ə sɝkəl ɝaʊn hɪm.

Darlin laughed till he wheezed, and was still chuckling when they began climbing through the cold fog and the distant shrieks once more, with him carrying Rand in the center and the women in a circle around him.

mɪn nu ʃi wɑz oʊnli ənʌðɝ pɛɹ ʌv aɪz, dʒʌs laɪk kæɹɑlin ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə kædzueɪn, ən ʃi nu ðə naɪf ʃi kæɹiɾ ənʃiðd wɑz noʊ jus əɡɛns ðə mɪst-ʃeɪps, bʌt pdən feɪn maɪt stɪl bi əlaɪv aʊt ðɛɹ. ʃi wəd nɑt mɪs əɡɛn. kæɹɑlin kæɹiɾ əɹ dæɡɝ tu, ən baɪ ðə lʊks ʃi kæst oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət dɑɹlɪn stæɡɝɪŋ ʌphɪl ʌndɝ ɹændz weɪt, meɪbi ʃi ɔlsoʊ ɪntɛndəd tə pɹətɛk ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ən ðən əɡɛn, meɪbi ɪt wɑz nɑt hɪm. ə wʊmən kəd fɝɡɪv ɛni əmaʊn ə noʊz fəɹ ðət læf.

Min knew she was only another pair of eyes, just like Caraline on the other side of Cadsuane, and she knew the knife she carried unsheathed was no use against the mist-shapes, but Padan Fain might still be alive out there. She would not miss again. Caraline carried her dagger too, and by the looks she cast over her shoulder at Darlin staggering uphill under Rand's weight, maybe she also intended to protect the Dragon Reborn. And then again, maybe it was not him. A woman could forgive any amount of nose for that laugh.

ʃeɪps stɪl fɔɹmd ɪn ðə mɪst ən daɪd baɪ faɪɝ, ən wʌns ə hjudʒ sʌmθɪŋ tɔɹ ə ʃɹikɪŋ hɔɹs ɪn tu ɔf tə ðɛɹ ɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd sleɪ ɪt. mɪn wɑz kwaɪt nɔɪzəli sɪk æftɝ ðæt, ən nɑɾ ə bɪɾ əʃeɪmd; pipəl wɝ daɪɪŋ, bʌɾ ət lis ðə pipəl hæd kʌm hɪɹ baɪ ðɛɹ oʊn tʃɔɪs. ðə minəst soʊlʒɝ cʊɾə ɹʌn əweɪ jɛstɝdeɪ hæɾ i tʃoʊzən, bʌt nɑt ðət hɔɹs. ʃeɪps fɔɹmd ən daɪd, ən pipəl daɪd, skɹimɪŋ ɔlweɪz ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ɪt simd, ðoʊ ðeɪ stɪl stʌmbəl pæs tɔɹn kɛɹiən ðət hæd bɪn hjumən ən aʊɝ ɡɔn. mɪn bɪɡæn tə wʌndɝ wɛðɝ ðeɪ wəɾ ɛvɝ si deɪlaɪɾ əɡɛn.

Shapes still formed in the mist and died by fire, and once a huge something tore a shrieking horse in two off to their right before any Aes Sedai could slay it. Min was quite noisily sick after that, and not a bit ashamed; people were dying, but at least the people had come here by their own choice. The meanest soldier could have run away yesterday had he chosen, but not that horse. Shapes formed and died, and people died, screaming always in the distance, it seemed, though they still stumbled past torn carrion that had been human an hour gone. Min began to wonder whether they would ever see daylight again.

wɪð ʃɑkɪŋ sʌɾənnəs ən noʊ wɔɹnɪŋ, ʃi stʌmbəld ɪndə ɪt, wʌn moʊmən sɝaʊndəd baɪ ɡɹeɪ, ðə nɛkst wɪð ðə sʌn bɝnɪŋ ɡoʊldən haɪ oʊvɝhɛɾ ɪn ə blu skaɪ, ɔl soʊ bɹaɪt ʃi hæd tə ʃeɪɾ əɹ aɪz. ən ðɛɹ, pɝhæps faɪv maɪlz əkɹɔs ɔl bʌt tʃɹiləs hɪlz, kɛɹhin ɹoʊz sɑləɾ ən skwɛɹ ɑn ɪts oʊn pɹɑmənənsəz. sʌmhaʊ, ɪt dɪd nɑt lʊk kwaɪt ɹil ɛnimɔɹ.

With shocking suddenness and no warning, she stumbled into it, one moment surrounded by gray, the next with the sun burning golden high overhead in a blue sky, all so bright she had to shade her eyes. And there, perhaps five miles across all but treeless hills, Cairhien rose solid and square on its own prominences. Somehow, it did not look quite real anymore.

stɛɹɪŋ bæk ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə fɑɡ, ʃi ʃɪvɝd. ɪt wɑz ən ɛdʒ, ə bɪloʊɪŋ wɔl, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz ɑn ðɪs hɪltɑp, ən fɑɹ tu stʃɹeɪt, wɪð noʊ ɛɾiz əɹ θɪnɪŋ. dʒʌs klɪɹ ɛɹ hɪɹ, ən ðɛɹ, θɪk ɡɹeɪ. ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ʌv ə tʃɹi ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ bɪkeɪm vɪzəbəl, ən ʃi ɹilaɪz ðə mɪst wɑz kɹipɪŋ bæk, pɝhæps biɪŋ bɝn ɔf baɪ ðə sʌn. bʌt fɑɹ tu sloʊli tə meɪk ðə ɹitʃɹit nætʃɹəl. ði ʌðɝz stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪt dʒʌst əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi, ivən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Staring back at the edge of the fog, she shivered. It was an edge, a billowing wall, stretching through the trees on this hilltop, and far too straight, with no eddies or thinning. Just clear air here, and there, thick gray. A little more of a tree right in front of her became visible, and she realized the mist was creeping back, perhaps being burned off by the sun. But far too slowly to make the retreat natural. The others stared at it just as hard as she, even the Aes Sedai.

twɛnti peɪsɪz ɔf tə ðɛɹ lɛft, ə mæn sʌɾənli skɹæmbəld ɪndə ðə klɪɹ ɛɹ ɑn ɔl fɔɹz. ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz hɛd wɑz ʃeɪvd, ən baɪ ðə bæɾɝd blæk bɹɛstpleɪɾ i wɔɹ, hi wɑz ə kɑmən soʊlʒɝ. stɛɹɪŋ əbaʊt waɪldli, hi dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə si ðɛm, ən wɛn skɹæmbəlɪŋ ɑn daʊn ðə hɪlsaɪd, stɪl ɑn hænz ən niz. fɑɹðɝ tə ðə ɹaɪt, tu mɛn ən ə wʊmən əpɪɹd, ɔl ɹʌnɪŋ. ʃi hæd stʃɹaɪps ə kʌlɝ əkɹɔs ðə fɹʌn ə hɝ dʒɹɛs, bʌt haʊ mɛni wɑz hɑɹd tə seɪ sɪns ʃi hæd ɡæðɝɾ əɹ skɝts əz haɪ əz ʃi kəd tə ɹʌn fæstɝ, ən ʃi mætʃt ðə mɛn stʃɹaɪd fəɹ stʃɹaɪd. nʌn ə ðɛm lʊk tə iðɝ saɪd, oʊnli lɔntʃt ðɛmsɛlvz daʊn ðə hɪl, fɔlɪŋ, tʌmbəlɪŋ ən kʌmɪŋ bæk tə ðɛɹ fit ɹʌnɪŋ əɡɛn.

Twenty paces off to their left, a man suddenly scrambled into the clear air on all fours. The front of his head was shaved, and by the battered black breastplate he wore, he was a common soldier. Staring about wildly, he did not appear to see them, and went scrambling on down the hillside, still on hands and knees. Farther to the right, two men and a woman appeared, all running. She had stripes of color across the front of her dress, but how many was hard to say since she had gathered her skirts as high as she could to run faster, and she matched the men stride for stride. None of them looked to either side, only launched themselves down the hill, falling, tumbling and coming back to their feet running again.

kæɹɑlin stʌɾid ðə slɪm bleɪɾ ə hɝ dæɡɝ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən θɹʌst ɪt hɑɹɾ ɪndə ɪt ʃiθ. "soʊ vænɪʃɪz maɪ ɑɹmi," ʃi saɪd.

Caraline studied the slim blade of her dagger for a moment, then thrust it hard into it sheath. "So vanishes my army," she sighed.

dɑɹlɪn, wɪð ɹænd stɪl ʌnkɑnʃəs əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, lʊkt ət hɝ. "ðɛɹ ɪz ən ɑɹmi ɪn tiɹ, ɪf jə kɔl."

Darlin, with Rand still unconscious across his shoulders, looked at her. "There is an army in Tear, if you call."

ʃi ɡlænst ət ɹænd, hæŋɪŋ laɪk ə sæk. "pɝhæps," ʃi sɛd. dɑɹlɪn tɝn ɪz hɛd təwɔɹd ɹændz feɪs wɪð ə tʃɹʌbəl fɹaʊn.

She glanced at Rand, hanging like a sack. "Perhaps," she said. Darlin turned his head toward Rand's face with a troubled frown.

kædzueɪn wɑz ɔl pɹæktɪkæləɾi. "ðə ɹoʊd laɪz ðət weɪ," ʃi sɛd pɔɪntɪŋ wɛst. "ɪt wɪl bi fæstɝ ðən wɔkɪŋ kɹɔs-kʌntʃɹi. ən izi stʃɹoʊl."

Cadsuane was all practicality. "The road lies that way," she said pointing west. "It will be faster than walking cross-country. An easy stroll."

izi wɑz nɑt wʌt mɪn wʊɾə kɔld ɪt. ði ɛɹ sim twaɪs əz hɑɾ æftɝ ðə fɑɡz koʊld; swɛt ɹoʊld aʊɾ ə hɝ, ən sim tə dʒɹeɪn əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ. hɝ lɛɡz wɑbəld. ʃi tʃɹɪpt oʊvɝ ɪkspoʊzd ɹuts ən fɛl flæɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs. ʃi tʃɹɪpt oʊvɝ ɹɑks ən fɛl. ʃi tʃɹɪpt oʊvɝ əɹ oʊn hil buts ən fɛl. wʌns əɹ fit dʒʌst wɛn aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ, ən ʃi slɪɾ ə ɡʊd fɔɹɾi peɪsɪz daʊn ðə hɪlsaɪɾ ɑn ðə siɾ ə hɝ bɹitʃɪz, ɑɹmz fleɪlɪŋ əntɪl ʃi mænədʒ tə snæɡ ə sæpəlɪŋ. kæɹɑlin wɛn spɹɔlɪŋ əz mɛni taɪmz, ən meɪbi mɔɹ; dʒɹɛsəz wɝ nɑt meɪd fəɹ ðɪs sɔɹɾ ə tʃɹævəl, ən bɪfɔɹ lɔŋ - æftɝ ə tʌmbəl hɛɾ oʊvɝ hilz ɛndəd wɪð əɹ skɝts ɝaʊn əɹ ɪɹz - ʃi wɑz æskɪŋ mɪn ðə neɪm ə ðə simstʃɹɪs u meɪɾ əɹ koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz. dɑɹlɪn dɪd nɑt fɔl. oʊ, hi stʌmbəld ən tʃɹɪpt ən skɪɾəd ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ, bʌt wɛnɛvɝ i stɑɹɾəd tə fɔl, sʌmθɪŋ sim tə kætʃ hɪm, tə stɛɾi hɪm ɑn ɪz fit. ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ i ɡlɛɹɾ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɔl pɹaʊd tɛɹən haɪ lɔɹɾ u wəd kæɹi ɹænd aʊt wɪθaʊɾ ɛni hɛlp. kædzueɪn ən ði ʌðɝz əfɛktəd nɑt tə si. ðeɪ nɛvɝ fɛl; ðeɪ sɪmpli wɔkt əlɔŋ, tʃæɾɪŋ kwaɪətli əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, ən kɑt dɑɹlɪn bɪfɔɹ i kʊd. baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə ɹoʊd, hi lʊk boʊθ ɡɹeɪtfəl ən hʌntəd.

Easy was not what Min would have called it. The air seemed twice as hot after the fog's cold; sweat rolled out of her, and seemed to drain her strength. Her legs wobbled. She tripped over exposed roots and fell flat on her face. She tripped over rocks and fell. She tripped over her own heeled boots and fell. Once her feet just went out from under, and she slid a good forty paces down the hillside on the seat of her breeches, arms flailing until she managed to snag a sapling. Caraline went sprawling as many times, and maybe more; dresses were not made for this sort of travel, and before long - after a tumble head over heels ended with her skirts around her ears - she was asking Min the name of the seamstress who made her coat and breeches. Darlin did not fall. Oh, he stumbled and tripped and skidded every bit as much as they, but whenever he started to fall, something seemed to catch him, to steady him on his feet. In the beginning he glared at the Aes Sedai, all proud Tairen High Lord who would carry Rand out without any help. Cadsuane and the others affected not to see. They never fell; they simply walked along, chatting quietly among themselves, and caught Darlin before he could. By the time they reached the road, he looked both grateful and hunted.

stændɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə bɹɔd ɹoʊɾ ə hɑɹd-pækt ɝθ, ɪn saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ, kædzueɪn flʌŋ ʌp ə hæn tə stɑp ðə fɝs kənveɪəns ðəɾ əpɪɹd, ə ɹɪkəɾi wæɡən dʒɹɔn baɪ tu mɔθ-iɾən mjulz ən dʒɹɪvən baɪ ə skɪni fɑɹmɝ ɪn ə pætʃt koʊɾ u hɔld ɑn ɪz ɹeɪnz wɪð əlækɹəɾi. wʌd ðə tuθləs fɛloʊ θɪŋk i hæd ɹʌn ɪntu? θɹi eɪdʒləs ɛɛs sədaɪ, kəmplit wɪð ʃɔlz, hu maɪɾ əv stɛp daʊn fɹəm ə koʊtʃ ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ. ə swɛt-soʊkt kɛɹhinɪn wʊmən, ʌv haɪ ɹæŋk baɪ ðə stʃɹaɪps ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛs; əɹ meɪbi ə bɛɡɝ u hæd kloʊð hɝsɛlf fɹəm ə noʊbəlwʊmənz ɹæɡ klɑzət, baɪ ðə steɪɾ ə ðət dʒɹɛs. ən ɑbviəs tɛɹən noʊbəlmən, wɪð swɛt dʒɹɪpɪŋ fɹəm ɪz noʊz ən pɔɪntəd bɪɹɾ ən kæɹiɪŋ ənʌðɝ mæn əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝz laɪk ə sæk ʌv ɡɹeɪn. ən hɝsɛlf. boʊθ niz aʊɾ ə hɝ bɹitʃɪz, ən ənʌðɝ tiɹ ɪn ðə sit ðəɾ əɹ koʊt kʌvɝd, θæŋk ðə laɪt, ðoʊ wʌn sliv hʌŋ baɪ ə fju θɹɛdz. mɔɹ steɪnz ən dʌs ðən ʃi wɑntəd tə θɪŋk əbaʊt.

Standing in the middle of the broad road of hard-packed earth, in sight of the river, Cadsuane flung up a hand to stop the first conveyance that appeared, a rickety wagon drawn by two moth-eaten mules and driven by a skinny farmer in a patched coat who hauled on his reins with alacrity. What did the toothless fellow think he had run into? Three ageless Aes Sedai, complete with shawls, who might have stepped down from a coach a moment before. A sweat-soaked Cairhienin woman, of high rank by the stripes on her dress; or maybe a beggar who had clothed herself from a noblewoman's rag closet, by the state of that dress. An obvious Tairen nobleman, with sweat dripping from his nose and pointed beard and carrying another man across his shoulders like a sack of grain. And herself. Both knees out of her breeches, and another tear in the seat that her coat covered, thank the Light, though one sleeve hung by a few threads. More stains and dust than she wanted to think about.

nɑt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls, ʃi dʒɹu ə naɪf fɹəm əɹ sliv - pɑpɪŋ moʊst ə ðoʊz fju θɹɛdz - ən ɡeɪv ɪɾ ə flɝɪʃ ðə weɪ tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn hæd tɔt hɝ, hɪl sneɪkɪŋ θɹu hɝ fɪŋɡɝz soʊ ðə bleɪd flæʃt ɪn ðə sʌn. "wi ɹikwaɪɝ ə ɹaɪd tə ðə sʌn pæləs," ʃi ənaʊnst, ən ɹænd hɪmsɛlf kəd nɑɾ əv dʌn bɛɾɝ. ðəɹ wɝ taɪmz wən biɪŋ pɝɛmptɝi seɪvd ɑɹɡjəmənt.

Not waiting for anyone else, she drew a knife from her sleeve - popping most of those few threads - and gave it a flourish the way Thom Merrilin had taught her, hilt snaking through her fingers so the blade flashed in the sun. "We require a ride to the Sun Palace," she announced, and Rand himself could not have done better. There were times when being peremptory saved argument.

"tʃaɪld," kædzueɪn sɛd tʃaɪɾɪŋli, "aɪm ʃʊɹ kaɪɹunə ən əɹ fɹɛnz wəd də ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðeɪ kʊd, bʌt ðəɹ ɪzən ə jɛloʊ əmʌŋ ðɛm. sæmɪtsu ən kɔɹəl ɹɪli ɑɹ tu ʌv ðə bɛst ɛvɝ. leɪɾi ɑɹɪlɪn əz vɛɹi kaɪnli lɛn əs əɹ pæləs ɪn ðə sɪɾi, soʊ wɪl teɪk ɪm - "

"Child," Cadsuane said chidingly, "I'm sure Kiruna and her friends would do everything they could, but there isn't a Yellow among them. Samitsu and Corele really are two of the best ever. Lady Arilyn has very kindly lent us her palace in the city, so we will take him - "

"noʊ." mɪn hæd noʊ aɪdiə wɛɹ ʃi faʊn ðə kɝədʒ tə seɪ ðət wɝd tə ðɪs wʊmən. ɪksɛpt. . . . ɪt wɑz ɹænd, ðeɪ wɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt. "ɪf i weɪks. . . ." ʃi stɑp tə swɑloʊ; hi wəd weɪk. "ɪf i weɪks ɪn ə stʃɹeɪnʒ pleɪs sɝaʊndəd baɪ stʃɹeɪnʒ ɛɛs sədaɪ əɡɛn, aɪ kæn ɪmædʒən wʌɾ i maɪt du. jə doʊnt wɑnə ɪmædʒən ɪt." fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt ʃi mɛt ðət kul ɡeɪz, ən ðən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ nɑɾəd.

"No." Min had no idea where she found the courage to say that word to this woman. Except. . . . It was Rand, they were talking about. "If he wakes. . . ." She stopped to swallow; he would wake. "If he wakes in a strange place surrounded by strange Aes Sedai again, I can't imagine what he might do. You don't want to imagine it." For a long moment she met that cool gaze, and then the Aes Sedai nodded.

"ðə sʌn pæləs," kædzueɪn toʊl ðə fɑɹmɝ. "æn əz fæst əz jə meɪk ðiz fləbæɡz muv."

"The Sun Palace," Cadsuane told the farmer. "And as fast as you make these fleabags move."

ʌv kɔɹs, ɪt wɑz nɑt kwaɪt soʊ sɪmpəl, ivən fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ændɝ tɑl hæɾ ə wæɡoʊnloʊɾ ə skɹæɡli tɝnəps i ɪntɛndəd tə sɛl ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ən noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ ðə sʌn pæləs, wɛɹ, hi toʊl ðɛm, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn eɪt pipəl, hu wɝ kʊkt ɑn spɪts baɪ il wɪmən tɛn fit tɔl. nɑt fəɹ ɛni nʌmbɝ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ wəɾ i vɛntʃɝ wɪðɪn ə maɪl ə ðə pæləs. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, kædzueɪn tɔst ɪm ə pɝs ðət meɪɾ ɪz aɪz pɑp wən i lʊkt ɪnsaɪd, ðən toʊld ɪm ʃi hæd dʒʌs bɑɾ ɪz tɝnəps ən haɪɝɾ ɪm ən ɪz wæɡən. ɪf i dɪd nɑt laɪk ðə noʊʃən, hi kəd ɡɪv ðə pɝs bæk. ðət wɪð əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps ən ə lʊk ɑn əɹ feɪs ðət sɛɾ i maɪt dʒʌst iɾ ɪz wæɡən ɑn ðə spɑɾ ɪf i tʃɹaɪd ɡɪvɪŋ ðə pɝs bæk. ændɝ tɑl wɑz ə ɹizənəbəl mæn, ɪt tɝn aʊt. sæmɪtsu ən niɑn ənloʊɾəd ðə wæɡən, tɝnəps sɪmpli flaɪɪŋ ɪndə ði ɛɹ tə læn ɪn ə taɪɾi paɪl baɪ ðə ɹoʊdsaɪd. baɪ ðɛɹ aɪsi ɪkspɹɛʃənz, ðɪs wɑz ɪn noʊ weɪ ə jus tə wɪtʃ ðeɪ hæɾ ɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə pʊt ðə wʌn paʊɝ. baɪ dɑɹlɪnz ɪkspɹɛʃən, stændɪŋ ðəɹ wɪð ɹænd stɪl ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, hi wɑz ɹɪliv ðeɪ hæd nɑt kɔld ɑn ɪm tə də ɪt. ændɝ tɑl sæɾ ɪn ðə wæɡən sit wɪð ɪz dʒɔ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹitʃ ɪz niz, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə pɝs əz ðoʊ wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf æftɝ ɔl.

Of course, it was not quite so simple, even for Aes Sedai. Ander Tol had a wagonload of scraggly turnips he intended to sell in the city, and no intention of going anywhere near the Sun Palace, where, he told them, the Dragon Reborn ate people, who were cooked on spits by Aiel women ten feet tall. Not for any number of Aes Sedai would he venture within a mile of the palace. On the other hand, Cadsuane tossed him a purse that made his eyes pop when he looked inside, then told him she had just bought his turnips and hired him and his wagon. If he did not like the notion, he could give the purse back. That with her fists on her hips and a look on her face that said he might just eat his wagon on the spot if he tried giving the purse back. Ander Tol was a reasonable man, it turned out. Samitsu and Niande unloaded the wagon, turnips simply flying into the air to land in a tidy pile by the roadside. By their icy expressions, this was in no way a use to which they had ever expected to put the One Power. By Darlin's expression, standing there with Rand still on his shoulders, he was relieved they had not called on him to do it. Ander Tol sat in the wagon seat with his jaw trying to reach his knees, fingering the purse as though wondering whether it was enough after all.

wʌns ðeɪ wɝ sɛɾəld ɪn ðə wæɡən bɛd, wɪð ðə stʃɹɔ ðət hæd bɪn bɪniθ ðə tɝnəps ɔl ɡæðɝd tə meɪk ə bɛd fəɹ ɹænd, kædzueɪn feɪs mɪn əkɹɔs hɪm. mæstɝ tɑl wɑz flæpɪŋ ɪz ɹeɪnz ən faɪndɪŋ ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ tɝn ə spiɾ ɪn ðoʊz mjulz. ðə wæɡən lɝtʃt ən dʒaʊns hɔɹəbli, ðə wilz nɑɾ oʊnli ʃeɪkɪŋ bʌɾ əpɛɹənli aʊɾ ə ɹaʊnd. wɪʃɪŋ ʃi hæd kɛp dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl ə ðə stʃɹɔ fəɹ hɝsɛlf, mɪn wɑz əmjuz tə si sæmɪtsu ən niɑnd ɡɹoʊɪŋ taɪɾɝ ɪn ðə feɪs əz ðeɪ wɝ baʊnst ʌp ən daʊn. kæɹɑlin smaɪld əɾ əm kwaɪɾ oʊpənli, ðə haɪ siɾ ə haʊs dəmədʒɹd nɑt bɑðɝɪŋ tə haɪɾ əɹ plɛʒɝ ðət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ fəɹ wʌns ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɹʌf. ðoʊ ɪn tʃɹuθ, slaɪɾ əz ʃi wɑz, ʃi baʊns haɪɝ ən keɪm daʊn wɪð hɑɹɾɝ θʌmps ðən ðeɪ. dɑɹlɪn, hoʊldɪŋ ɑn tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə wæɡən, əpɪɹɾ ʌnəfɛktɪd haʊɛvɝ hɑɹɾ i wɑz ʃeɪkən; hi kɛp fɹaʊnɪŋ ən lʊkɪŋ fɹəm kæɹɑlin tə ɹænd.

Once they were settled in the wagon bed, with the straw that had been beneath the turnips all gathered to make a bed for Rand, Cadsuane faced Min across him. Master Tol was flapping his reins and finding a surprising turn of speed in those mules. The wagon lurched and jounced horribly, the wheels not only shaking but apparently out of round. Wishing she had kept just a little of the straw for herself, Min was amused to see Samitsu and Niande growing tighter in the face as they were bounced up and down. Caraline smiled at them quite openly, the High Seat of House Damodred not bothering to hide her pleasure that the Aes Sedai were for once riding rough. Though in truth, slight as she was, she bounced higher and came down with harder thumps than they. Darlin, holding on to the side of the wagon, appeared unaffected however hard he was shaken; he kept frowning and looking from Caraline to Rand.

kædzueɪn wɑz ənʌðɝ u əpɛɹənli dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wɛðɝ əɹ tiθ ɹæɾəld. "aɪ ɪkspɛk tə bi ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ naɪtfɔl, mæstɝ tɑl," ʃi kɔld, pɹədusɪŋ mɔɹ flæpɪŋ ɪf noʊ mɔɹ spid. "naʊ tɛl mi," ʃi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ tə mɪn. "ɪɡzækli wʌt hæpən ðə læs taɪm ðɪs bɔɪ woʊk sɝaʊndəd baɪ stʃɹeɪnʒ ɛɛs sədaɪ?" hɝ aɪz kɑt mɪnz ən hɛl ðɛm.

Cadsuane was another who apparently did not care whether her teeth rattled. "I expect to be there before nightfall, Master Tol," she called, producing more flapping if no more speed. "Now tell me," she said, turning to Min. "Exactly what happened the last time this boy woke surrounded by strange Aes Sedai?" Her eyes caught Min's and held them.

hi wɑntəɾ ɪt kɛp sikɹət, ɪf ɪt kəd bi, fəɹ əz lɔŋ əz ɪt kəd bi. bʌɾ i wɑz daɪɪŋ, ən ði oʊnli tʃæns i hæd ðət mɪn sɔ ɹɛstəɾ ɪn ðiz θɹi wɪmən. meɪbi noʊɪŋ kəd nɑt hɛlp. meɪbi noʊɪŋ kəɾ ət lis meɪk əm ʌndɝstæn sʌmθɪŋ ə hɪm. "ðeɪ pʊɾ ɪm ɪn ə bɑks," ʃi bɪɡæn.

He wanted it kept secret, if it could be, for as long as it could be. But he was dying, and the only chance he had that Min saw rested in these three women. Maybe knowing could not help. Maybe knowing could at least make them understand something of him. "They put him in a box," she began.

ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ ʃi wɛn ɑn - ɪksɛp ðət ʃi hæd tə - əɹ haʊ ʃi kɛp fɹəm bɝstɪŋ ɪndə tɪɹz - ɪksɛp ðət ʃi wɑz nɑt gɑnə bɹeɪk daʊn əɡɛn wən ɹænd niɾəd əɹ - bʌt sʌmhaʊ ʃi kəntɪnjud θɹu ðə kənfaɪnmən ən ðə biɾɪŋz wɪθaʊɾ ə tʃɹɛmɝ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, ɹaɪt tə kaɪɹunə ən ðə ɹɛs nilɪŋ tə swɛɹ fiəlti. dɑɹlɪn ən kæɹɑlin lʊk stʌnd. sæmɪtsu ən niɑn lʊk hɔɹəfaɪd. ðoʊ nɑt fəɹ ðə ɹizən ʃi wəɾ əv səpoʊzd, ɪt tɝn aʊt.

She was not sure how she went on - except that she had to - or how she kept from bursting into tears - except that she was not going to break down again when Rand needed her - but somehow she continued through the confinement and the beatings without a tremor in her voice, right to Kiruna and the rest kneeling to swear fealty. Darlin and Caraline looked stunned. Samitsu and Niande looked horrified. Though not for the reason she would have supposed, it turned out.

"hi . . . stɪl θɹi sɪstɝz?" sæmɪtsu sɛd ʃɹɪli. sʌɾənli ʃi slæpt ə hæn oʊvɝ əɹ maʊθ ən twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn tə lin oʊvɝ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə sweɪɪŋ wæɡən ən ɹɛtʃ laʊdli. niɑn dʒɔɪn əɹ ɔlmoʊs bɪfɔɹ ʃi bɪɡæn, ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm hæŋɪŋ ðɛɹ, ɛmptiɪŋ ðɛɹ bɛliz.

"He . . . stilled three sisters?" Samitsu said shrilly. Suddenly she slapped a hand over her mouth and twisted around to lean over the side of the swaying wagon and retch loudly. Niande joined her almost before she began, the pair of them hanging there, emptying their bellies.

ən kædzueɪn. . . . kædzueɪn tʌtʃt ɹændz peɪl feɪs, bɹʌʃt stʃɹænz ə hɛɹ fɹəm ɪz fɔɹhɛd. "du nɑt bi əfɹeɪd, bɔɪ," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "ðeɪ meɪd maɪ tæsk hɑɹɾɝ, ən jʊɹz, bʌɾ əl nɑt hɝt jə mɔɹ ðən aɪ mʌst." mɪn tɝn tə aɪs ɪnsaɪd.

And Cadsuane. . . . Cadsuane touched Rand's pale face, brushed strands of hair from his forehead. "Do not be afraid, boy," she said softly. "They made my task harder, and yours, but I will not hurt you more than I must." Min turned to ice inside.

ɡɑɹdz ət ðə sɪɾi ɡeɪts ʃaʊɾəd ət ðə ɹeɪsɪŋ wæɡən, bʌt kædzueɪn toʊl mæstɝ tɑl nɑt tə stɑp, ən i fleɪld əɾ ɪz mjulz ɔl ðə hɑɹɾɝ. pipəl ɪn ðə stʃɹits lɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ tə əvɔɪd biɪŋ ɹʌn daʊn, ən ðə wæɡənz pɹɑɡɹɛs lɛf bɪhaɪnd ʃaʊts ən kɝsɪz, oʊvɝtɝn sɪdæn tʃɛɹz, ən koʊtʃɪz ɹʌn ɪndə stʃɹit vɛndɝz' stɔlz. θɹu ðə stʃɹits ən ʌp ðə bɹɔd ɹæmp tə ðə sʌn pæləs, wɛɹ ɡɑɹdz ɪn lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪnz kʌlɝz spɪld aʊɾ əz ðoʊ pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə faɪɾ ɔf hɔɹdz. waɪl mæstɝ tɑl wɑz skwilɪŋ ət ðə tɑp ə lʌŋz ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪɾ ɪm də ɪt, ðə soʊlʒɝz sɔ mɪn. ðən ðeɪ sɔ ɹænd. mɪn hæd θɔt ʃi wɑz ɪn ə wɝlwɪn bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ʃi hæd bɪn ɹɔŋ.

Guards at the city gates shouted at the racing wagon, but Cadsuane told Master Tol not to stop, and he flailed at his mules all the harder. People in the streets leaped out of the way to avoid being run down, and the wagon's progress left behind shouts and curses, overturned sedan chairs, and coaches run into street vendors' stalls. Through the streets and up the broad ramp to the Sun Palace, where guards in Lord Dobraine's colors spilled out as though preparing to fight off hordes. While Master Tol was squealing at the top of lungs that Aes Sedai made him do it, the soldiers saw Min. Then they saw Rand. Min had thought she was in a whirlwind before, but she had been wrong.

tu dʌzən mɛn tʃɹaɪd tə ɹitʃ ɪndə ðə wæɡən ət wʌns tə lɪft ɹænd aʊt, ən ðoʊz u mænədʒ tə leɪ hænz ɑn hɪm, hændəld ɪm əz dʒɛnli əz ə beɪb, fɔɹ tə iðɝ saɪd wɪð ðɛɹ ɑɹmz bɪniθ. kædzueɪn mʌst əv ɹɪpiɾɪd ə θaʊzən taɪmz ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt dɛɾ əz ðeɪ hɝiɾ ɪndə ðə pæləs ən əlɔŋ kɔɹɪɾɝz ðət sim lɔŋɡɝ ðən mɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝd, wɪð mɔɹ kɛɹhinɪn soʊlʒɝz kɹaʊɾɪŋ əlɔŋ bɪhaɪnd. noʊbəlz bɪɡæn əpɪɹɪŋ fɹəm ɛvɹi dɔɹweɪ ən kɹɔsɪŋ hɔl, ɪt simd, feɪsəz blʌdləs, stɛɹɪŋ əz ɹænd pæst. ʃi lɔs tʃɹæk ə kæɹɑlin ən dɑɹlɪn, ɹilaɪzd ʃi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ siɪŋ əm sɪns ðə wæɡən, ænd, wɪʃɪŋ əm wɛl, fɝɡɑt ðɛm. ɹænd wɑz ði oʊnli θɪŋ ʃi kɛɹɾ əbaʊt. ði oʊnli θɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld.

Two dozen men tried to reach into the wagon at once to lift Rand out, and those who managed to lay hands on him, handled him as gently as a babe, four to either side with their arms beneath. Cadsuane must have repeated a thousand times that he was not dead as they hurried into the palace and along corridors that seemed longer than Min remembered, with more Cairhienin soldiers crowding along behind. Nobles began appearing from every doorway and crossing hall, it seemed, faces bloodless, staring as Rand passed. She lost track of Caraline and Darlin, realized she could not remember seeing them since the wagon, and, wishing them well, forgot them. Rand was the only thing she cared about. The only thing in the world.

nændɛɹə wɑz wɪð ðə fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə dɔɹz tə ɹændz ɹumz, wɪð ðɛɹ ɡɪldɪd ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌnz. wən ðə ɡɹeɪɪŋ meɪɾən sɔ ɹænd, stoʊn-feɪst il kəmpoʊʒɝ ʃæɾɝd. "wʌɾ əz hæpən tə hɪm?" ʃi weɪld, aɪz ɡoʊɪŋ waɪd. "wʌɾ əz hæpənd?" səm ə ði ʌðɝ meɪɾənz bɪɡæn tə moʊn, ə loʊ, hɛɹ-ɹeɪzɪŋ saʊn laɪk ə dɝdʒ.

Nandera was with the Far Dareis Mai guarding the doors to Rand's rooms, with their gilded Rising Suns. When the graying Maiden saw Rand, stone-faced Aiel composure shattered. "What has happened to him?" she wailed, eyes going wide. "What has happened?" Some of the other Maidens began to moan, a low, hair-raising sound like a dirge.

"bi kwaɪət!" kædzueɪn ɹɔɹd, slæpɪŋ əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ ɪn ə θʌndɝ-kɹæk. "ju, ɡɝl. hi nidz ɪz bɛd. hɑp!" nændɛɹə hɑpt. ɹænd wɑz stʃɹɪpt ən ɪn ɪz bɛɾ ɪn ə twɪŋkəlɪŋ, wɪð sæmɪtsu ən niɑn boʊθ hʌvɝɪŋ oʊvɝ hɪm, ðə kɛɹhinɪn tʃeɪst aʊɾ ən nændɛɹə ət ðə dɔɹ ɹɪpiɾɪŋ kædzueɪnz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt tə bi dɪstɝbd baɪ ɛniwʌn, ɔl soʊ fæs mɪn fɛl dɪzi. ʃi hoʊpt wʌn deɪ tə si ðə kɑnfɹənteɪʃən bɪtwin kædzueɪn ən ðə waɪz wʌn sɔɹɪliə; ɪt hæd tə kʌm, ən ɪt wəd bi mɛmɝəbəl.

"Be quiet!" Cadsuane roared, slapping her hands together in a thunder-crack. "You, girl. He needs his bed. Hop!" Nandera hopped. Rand was stripped and in his bed in a twinkling, with Samitsu and Niande both hovering over him, the Cairhienin chased out and Nandera at the door repeating Cadsuane's instructions that he was not to be disturbed by anyone, all so fast Min felt dizzy. She hoped one day to see the confrontation between Cadsuane and the Wise One Sorilea; it had to come, and it would be memorable.

jɛɾ ɪf kædzueɪn θɔɾ əɹ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz wɝ ɹɪli gɑnə kip ɛvɹiwʌn aʊt, ʃi wɑz mɪsteɪkən. bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd mɔɹ ðən muvd ə tʃɛɹ, floʊɾɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn ðə paʊɝ, tə sɪt bɪsaɪd ɹændz bɛd, kaɪɹunə ən bɛɹə stʃɹoʊɾ ɪn laɪk ðə tu feɪsəz ə pɹaɪd, ɹulɝ ʌv ə kɔɹɾ ən ɹulɝ ə hɝ fɑɹmhaʊs.

Yet if Cadsuane thought her instructions were really going to keep everyone out, she was mistaken. Before she had more than moved a chair, floating it on the Power, to sit beside Rand's bed, Kiruna and Bera strode in like the two faces of pride, ruler of a court and ruler of her farmhouse.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs aɪ hɪɹ əbaʊt - ?" kaɪɹunə bɪɡæn fjʊɹiəsli. ʃi sɔ kædzueɪn. bɛɹə sɔ kædzueɪn. tə mɪnz əmeɪzmənt, ðeɪ stɑp ðəɹ wɪð ðɛɹ maʊðz hæŋɪŋ oʊpən.

"What is this I hear about - ?" Kiruna began furiously. She saw Cadsuane. Bera saw Cadsuane. To Min's amazement, they stopped there with their mouths hanging open.

"hi ɪz ɪn ɡʊd hænz," kædzueɪn sɛd. "ənlɛs wʌn ə jə hæz sʌɾənli faʊn mɔɹ tælən fəɹ hilɪŋ ðən aɪ ɹikɔl?"

"He is in good hands," Cadsuane said. "Unless one of you has suddenly found more Talent for Healing than I recall?"

"jɛs, kædzueɪn," ðeɪ sɛd mikli. "noʊ, kædzueɪn." mɪn kloʊzd əɹ oʊn maʊθ.

"Yes, Cadsuane," they said meekly. "No, Cadsuane." Min closed her own mouth.

sæmɪtsu tʊk ən aɪvɝi-ɪnleɪd tʃɛɹ əɡɛns ðə wɔl, spɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ dɑɹk jɛloʊ skɝts, ən sæt wɪð əɹ hænz foʊldəd, wɑtʃɪŋ ɹændz tʃɛst ɹaɪz ən fɔl bɪniθ ðə ʃit. niɑnd wɛn tə ɹændz bʊkʃɛlf ən səlɛktəɾ ə bʊk bɪfɔɹ ʃi sæt nɪɹ ðə wɪndoʊz. ɹɛɾɪŋ! kaɪɹunə ən bɛɹə stɑɹɾəd tə sɪt, ðən æktʃəli  lʊk tə kædzueɪn ən weɪɾəd fəɹ əɹ ɪmpeɪʃənt nɑd bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ sæt daʊn.

Samitsu took an ivory-inlaid chair against the wall, spreading her dark yellow skirts, and sat with her hands folded, watching Rand's chest rise and fall beneath the sheet. Niande went to Rand's bookshelf and selected a book before she sat near the windows. Reading! Kiruna and Bera started to sit, then actually looked to Cadsuane and waited for her impatient nod before they sat down.

"waɪ ɑɹən jə duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ?" mɪn ʃaʊɾəd.

"Why aren't you doing something?" Min shouted.

"ðæɾ ɪz wʌɾ aɪ maɪɾ æsk," æmɪz sɛd, wɔkɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum. ðə juθfəl, waɪt-hɛɹd waɪz wʌn stɛɹɾ ət ɹænd fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən ʃɪftəɾ əɹ dip bɹaʊn ʃɔl ən tɝn tə kaɪɹunə ən bɛɹə. "ju meɪ ɡoʊ," ʃi sɛd. "æn kaɪɹunə, sɔɹɪliə wɪʃɪz tə si jə əɡɛn."

"That is what I might ask," Amys said, walking into the room. The youthful, white-haired Wise One stared at Rand for a moment, then shifted her deep brown shawl and turned to Kiruna and Bera. "You may go," she said. "And Kiruna, Sorilea wishes to see you again."

kaɪɹunəz dɑɹk feɪs peɪld, bʌt ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm ɹoʊz ən kɝtsid, mɝmɝɪŋ, "jɛs, æmɪz," ivən mɔɹ mikli ðən fəɹ kædzueɪn bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ wɪð ɪmbɛɹəst ɡlænsɪz ət ðə ɡɹin sɪstɝ.

Kiruna's dark face paled, but the pair of them rose and curtsied, murmuring, "Yes, Amys," even more meekly than for Cadsuane before leaving with embarrassed glances at the Green sister.

"ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ," kædzueɪn sɛd wən ðeɪ wɝ ɡɔn. hɝ dɑɹk aɪz lɑkt wɪð æmɪz' blu, ən kædzueɪn, ət list, sim tə laɪk wʌt ʃi sɔ. əɾ ɛni ɹeɪt, ʃi smaɪld. "aɪ ʃəd laɪk tə mit ðɪs sɔɹɪliə. ʃiz ə stʃɹɔŋ wʊmən?" ʃi sim tə ɛmfəsaɪz ðə wɝd "stʃɹɔŋ."

"Interesting," Cadsuane said when they were gone. Her dark eyes locked with Amys' blue, and Cadsuane, at least, seemed to like what she saw. At any rate, she smiled. "I should like to meet this Sorilea. She is a strong woman?" She seemed to emphasize the word "strong."

"ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst aɪ hæv ɛvɝ noʊn," æmɪz sɛd sɪmpli. kɑmli. jə wəd nɛvɝ əv θɔt ɹænd leɪ sɛnsləs ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ jəɹ hilɪŋ, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ tʃɹʌs ðət juv dʌn wʌt kən bi dʌn?" hɝ toʊn wɑz flæt; mɪn daʊɾɪd haʊ mʌtʃ æmɪz dɪd tʃɹʌst.

"The strongest I have ever known," Amys said simply. Calmly. You would never have thought Rand lay senseless in front of her. "I do not know your Healing, Aes Sedai. I trust that you have done what can be done?" Her tone was flat; Min doubted how much Amys did trust.

"wʌt kən bi dʌn, hæz bɪn," kædzueɪn saɪd. "ɔl wi kən də naʊ ɪz weɪt."

"What can be done, has been," Cadsuane sighed. "All we can do now is wait."

"waɪl i daɪz?" ə mænz hɑɹʃ vɔɪs sɛd, ən mɪn dʒʌmpt.

"While he dies?" a man's harsh voice said, and Min jumped.

dæʃivə stʃɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum, hɪz pleɪn feɪs kəntɔɹɾəd ɪn ə skaʊl. "flɪn!" hi snæpt.

Dashiva strode into the room, his plain face contorted in a scowl. "Flinn!" he snapped.

niɑnz bʊk θʌddɪd tə ðə flɔɹ fɹəm əpɛɹənli nɝvləs fɪŋɡɝz; ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ðə θɹi mɛn ɪn blæk koʊts əz ʃi wəɾ əv ət ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf. peɪl-feɪst, sæmɪtsu mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ðət saʊndəd laɪk ə pɹɛɹ.

Niande's book thudded to the floor from apparently nerveless fingers; she stared at the three men in black coats as she would have at the Dark One himself. Pale-faced, Samitsu muttered something that sounded like a prayer.

ət dæʃivəz kəmænd, ðə ɡɹɪzəld æʃəmən lɪmp tə ðə bɛɾ ɑn ði ɑpəzət saɪd fɹəm kædzueɪn ən bɪɡæn ɹʌnɪŋ ɪz hænz əlɔŋ ðə lɛŋθ ə ɹændz stɪl bɑɾi ə fʊɾ əbʌv ðə ʃit. jʌŋ nɛɹɪʃmə stʊd fɹaʊnɪŋ baɪ ðə dɔɹ, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd, ðoʊz bɪɡ dɑɹk aɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɑtʃ ɔl θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ ət wʌns. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən æmɪz. hi dɪd nɑt lʊk əfɹeɪd; dʒʌst ə mæn kɑnfəɾəntli weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðoʊz wɪmən tə ʃoʊ ðɛmsɛlvz ɪz ɛnəmiz. ənlaɪk ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, æmɪz ɪɡnɔɹd ði æʃəmən ɪksɛp fəɹ flɪn. hɝ aɪz fɑloʊd hɪm, smuð feɪs ʌɾɝli ɪkspɹɛʃənləs. bʌɾ əɹ θʌm ɹæn əlɔŋ ðə hæft ə hɝ bɛl naɪf ɪn ə vɛɹi ɪkspɹɛsɪv mænɝ.

At Dashiva's command, the grizzled Asha'man limped to the bed on the opposite side from Cadsuane and began running his hands along the length of Rand's still body a foot above the sheet. Young Narishma stood frowning by the door, fingering the hilt of his sword, those big dark eyes trying to watch all three Aes Sedai at once. The Aes Sedai, and Amys. He did not look afraid; just a man confidently waiting for those women to show themselves his enemies. Unlike the Aes Sedai, Amys ignored the Asha'man except for Flinn. Her eyes followed him, smooth face utterly expressionless. But her thumb ran along the haft of her belt knife in a very expressive manner.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ?" sæmɪtsu dɪmændəd, lipɪŋ ʌp fɹəm əɹ tʃɛɹ. wʌtɛvɝ əɹ əniz əbaʊɾ æʃəmən, kənsɝn fəɹ əɹ ʌnkɑnʃəs peɪʃən hæɾ oʊvɝkʌm ɪt. "ju, flɪn əɹ huɛvɝ jə ɑɹ." ʃi stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ðə bɛd, ən nɛɹɪʃmə floʊd tə blɑk hɝ. fɹaʊnɪŋ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ɡoʊ ɝaʊnd, ən i pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ɑɹm.

"What are you doing?" Samitsu demanded, leaping up from her chair. Whatever her unease about Asha'man, concern for her unconscious patient had overcome it. "You, Flinn or whoever you are." She started toward the bed, and Narishma flowed to block her. Frowning, she tried to go around, and he put a hand on her arm.

"ənʌðɝ bɔɪ wɪð noʊ mænɝz," kædzueɪn mɝmɝd. ʌv ðə θɹi sɪstɝz, oʊnli ʃi dɪspleɪd noʊ əlɑɹm wʌtsoʊɛvɝ ət ði æʃəmən. ɪnstɛd, ʃi stʌɾid əm oʊvɝ stipəl fɪŋɡɝz.

"Another boy with no manners," Cadsuane murmured. Of the three sisters, only she displayed no alarm whatsoever at the Asha'man. Instead, she studied them over steepled fingers.

nɛɹɪʃmə flʌʃt əɾ əɹ kɑmɛn ən ɹimuvd ɪz hænd, bʌt wən sæmɪtsu tʃɹaɪd tə ɡoʊ ɝaʊn ɪm əɡɛn, hi wʌns mɔɹ stɛpt ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ.

Narishma flushed at her comment and removed his hand, but when Samitsu tried to go around him again, he once more stepped in front of her.

ʃi sɛɾəld fəɹ ɡlɛɹɪŋ pæst ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "ju, flɪn, wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ? aɪ woʊn əv jə kɪlɪŋ ɪm wɪð jəɹ ɪɡnɝəns! dʒju hɪɹ mi?" mɪn pɹæktəkli dæns fɹəm fʊt tə fʊt. ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ən æʃəmən wəd kɪl ɹænd, nɑɾ ɑn pɝpəs, bʌt. . . . hi tʃɹʌstɪd ðɛm, bʌt. . . . laɪt, ivən æmɪz dɪd nɑt sim ʃʊɹ, fɹaʊnɪŋ fɹəm flɪn tə ɹænd.

She settled for glaring past his shoulder. "You, Flinn, what are you doing? I won't have you killing him with your ignorance! Do you hear me?" Min practically danced from foot to foot. She did not think an Asha'man would kill Rand, not on purpose, but. . . . He trusted them, but. . . . Light, even Amys did not seem sure, frowning from Flinn to Rand.

flɪn stʃɹɪp ðə ʃit daʊn tə ɹændz weɪst, ɪkspoʊzɪŋ ðə waʊnd. ðə ɡæʃ lʊk niðɝ bɛɾɝ nɔɹ wɝs ðən ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd, ə ɡeɪpɪŋ, æŋɡɹi, blʌdləs waʊn slaɪsɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɹaʊn skɑɹ. hi əpɪɹd tə bi slipɪŋ.

Flinn stripped the sheet down to Rand's waist, exposing the wound. The gash looked neither better nor worse than she remembered, a gaping, angry, bloodless wound slicing across the round scar. He appeared to be sleeping.

"hi kæn də ɛni wɝs ðən ɹænd ɔlɹɛɾi ɪz," mɪn sɛd. noʊbɑdi peɪɾ əɹ ɛni maɪnd.

"He can't do any worse than Rand already is," Min said. Nobody paid her any mind.

dæʃivə meɪɾ ə ɡʌɾɝəl saʊnd, ən flɪn lʊkt ət hɪm. "ju si sʌmθɪŋ, æʃəmən?"

Dashiva made a guttural sound, and Flinn looked at him. "You see something, Asha'man?"

"aɪ hæv noʊ tælən fəɹ hilɪŋ," dæʃivə sɛd, twɪstɪŋ ɪz maʊθ ɹaɪli. "jɔɹ ðə wʌn u tʊk maɪ sədʒɛstʃən ən lɝnd."

"I have no Talent for Healing," Dashiva said, twisting his mouth wryly. "You're the one who took my suggestion and learned."

"wʌt sədʒɛstʃən?" sæmɪtsu dɪmændəd. "aɪ ɪnsɪs ðət jə - "

"What suggestion?" Samitsu demanded. "I insist that you - "

"bi kwaɪət, sæmɪtsu," kædzueɪn sɛd. ʃi sim tə bi ði oʊnli wʌn ɪn ðə ɹum u wɑz kɑm əsaɪd fɹəm æmɪz, ən fɹəm ðə weɪ ðə waɪz wʌn kɛp stʃɹoʊkɪŋ əɹ naɪf hɪlt, mɪn wɑz nɑt sɝɾən əbaʊt hɝ. "aɪ θɪŋk ðə læs θɪŋ i wɑns tə də ɪz hɑɹm ðə bɔɪ."

"Be quiet, Samitsu," Cadsuane said. She seemed to be the only one in the room who was calm aside from Amys, and from the way the Wise One kept stroking her knife hilt, Min was not certain about her. "I think the last thing he wants to do is harm the boy."

"bʌt, kædzueɪn," niɑn bɪɡæn ɝdʒənli, "ðæt mæn ɪz - "

"But, Cadsuane," Niande began urgently, "that man is - "

"aɪ sɛd, bi kwaɪət," ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ toʊld əɹ fɝmli.

"I said, be quiet," the gray-haired Aes Sedai told her firmly.

"aɪ əʃʊɹ ju," dæʃivə sɛd, mænɪdʒɪŋ tə saʊn ɔɪli ən hɑɹʃ ət ðə seɪm taɪm, "flɪn noʊz wʌt hiz əbaʊt. ɔlɹɛɾi hi kən də θɪŋz jə ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛvɝ dʒɹimd ʌv." sæmɪtsu snɪft; laʊdli. kædzueɪn mɪɹli nɑɾəd ən sæt bæk ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ.

"I assure you," Dashiva said, managing to sound oily and harsh at the same time, "Flinn knows what he is about. Already he can do things you Aes Sedai never dreamed of." Samitsu sniffed; loudly. Cadsuane merely nodded and sat back in her chair.

flɪn tʃɹeɪst ɪz fɪŋɡɝ əlɔŋ ðə pʌfi ɡæʃ ɪn ɹændz saɪɾ ən əkɹɔs ði oʊl skɑɹ. ðət dɪd sim mɔɹ tɛndɝ. "ðiz ɑɹ əlaɪk, bʌt dɪfɹənt, əz ɪf ðɛɹz tu kaɪnz ʌv ɪnfɛkʃən ət wɝk. oʊnli ɪɾ ɪzən ɪnfɛkʃən; ɪts . . . dɑɹknəs. aɪ kæn θɪŋk ʌv ə bɛɾɝ wɝd." hi ʃɹʌɡd, aɪɪŋ sæmɪtsuz jɛloʊ-fɹɪnd ʃɔl əz ʃi fɹaʊn ət hɪm, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə kənsɪɾɝɪŋ lʊk ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm naʊ.

Flinn traced his finger along the puffy gash in Rand's side and across the old scar. That did seem more tender. "These are alike, but different, as if there's two kinds of infection at work. Only it isn't infection; it's . . . darkness. I can't think of a better word." He shrugged, eyeing Samitsu's Yellow-fringed shawl as she frowned at him, but it was a considering look she gave him now.

"ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð ɪt, flɪn," dæʃivə mʌɾɝd. "ɪf i daɪz. . . ." noʊz ɹɪŋkəld əz ðoʊ əɾ ə bæd smɛl, hi simd əneɪbəl tə lʊk əweɪ fɹəm ɹænd. hɪz lɪps muvd əz i tɔk tə hɪmsɛlf, ən wʌns i meɪɾ ə saʊnd, hæf sɑb, hæf bɪɾɝ læf, wɪθaʊɾ ɪz feɪs tʃeɪnʒɪŋ wʌn laɪn.

"Get on with it, Flinn," Dashiva muttered. "If he dies. . . ." Nose wrinkled as though at a bad smell, he seemed unable to look away from Rand. His lips moved as he talked to himself, and once he made a sound, half sob, half bitter laugh, without his face changing one line.

dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, flɪn lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə ɹum, ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, əɾ æmɪz. wən i kɑt saɪɾ ə mɪn, hi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, ən ɪz lɛðɝi feɪs ɹɛɾənd. heɪstəli hi ɹiɝeɪnʒd ðə ʃit tə kʌvɝ ɹænd tə hɪz nɛk, livɪŋ oʊnli ði oʊld waʊn ən ðə nu ɪkspoʊzd.

Drawing a deep breath, Flinn looked around the room, at the Aes Sedai, at Amys. When he caught sight of Min, he gave a start, and his leathery face reddened. Hastily he rearranged the sheet to cover Rand to his neck, leaving only the old wound and the new exposed.

"aɪ hoʊp noʊbɑdi maɪnz ɪf aɪ tɔk," hi sɛd, bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə muv kælʌz hænz əbʌv ɹændz saɪd. "tɔkɪŋ simz tə hɛlp ə maɪt." hi skwɪntɪd, foʊkəsɪŋ ɑn ði ɪnʒɝiz, ən ɪz fɪŋɡɝz ɹɪθ sloʊli. vɛɹi mʌtʃ əz ðoʊ hi wɑz wivɪŋ θɹɛdz, mɪn ɹilaɪzd. hɪz toʊn wɑz ɔlmoʊst əbsɛnt, oʊnli pɑɹɾ ə hɪz maɪn ɑn ðə wɝdz. "ɪt wɑz hilɪŋ meɪd mi ɡoʊ tə ðə blæk taʊɝ, jə maɪt seɪ. aɪ wɑz ə soʊlʒɝ, tɪl aɪ tʊk ə læns ɪn maɪ θaɪ; kʊdnt ɡɹɪp ə sæɾəl pɹɑpɝ æftɝ ðæt, əɹ ivən wɔk fɑɹ. ðət wɑz ðə fɪftinθ waʊn aɪ tʊk ɪn nɪɹ fɔɹɾi jɪɹz ɪn ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz. fɪftin ðət kaʊntəd, ɛniweɪ; ɪt doʊn ɪf jə kən wɔk əɹ ɹaɪd, æftɝ. aɪ sin ə lɑɾ ə fɹɛnz daɪ ɪn əm fɔɹɾi jɪɹz. soʊ aɪ wɛnt, ən ðə l tɔt mi hilɪŋ. ən ʌðɝ θɪŋz. ə ɹʌf sɔɹɾ ə hilɪŋ; aɪ wɑz hil baɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wʌns - oʊ, naɪ ɑn θɝɾi jɪɹz bæk naʊ - ən ðɪs hɝts, kəmpɛɹd tə ðæt. wɝks əz wɛl, ðoʊ. ðən wʌn deɪ, dæʃivə hɪɹ - pɑɹɾən; æʃəmən dæʃivə - sɛz i wʌndɝz waɪ ɪts ɔl ðə seɪm, noʊ mæɾɝ ɪf ə mænz ɡɑɾ ə bɹoʊk lɛɡ əɹ ə koʊld, ən wi ɡɑt tə tɔkɪŋ, ænd. . . . wɛl, hiz ɡɑt noʊ fil fəɹ ɪt, hɪmsɛlf, bʌt mi, simz aɪ ɡɑt ðə næk jə maɪt seɪ. ðə tælənt. soʊ aɪ stɑɹɾəd θɪŋkɪŋ, wʌɾ ɪf aɪ . . . ? ðɛɹ. bɛst aɪ kən du."

"I hope nobody minds if I talk," he said, beginning to move callused hands above Rand's side. "Talking seems to help a mite." He squinted, focusing on the injuries, and his fingers writhed slowly. Very much as though he was weaving threads, Min realized. His tone was almost absent, only part of his mind on the words. "It was Healing made me go to the Black Tower, you might say. I was a soldier, till I took a lance in my thigh; couldn't grip a saddle proper after that, or even walk far. That was the fifteenth wound I took in near forty years in the Queen's Guards. Fifteen that counted, anyway; it don't if you can walk or ride, after. I seen a lot of friends die in them forty years. So I went, and the M'Hael taught me Healing. And other things. A rough sort of Healing; I was Healed by an Aes Sedai once - oh, nigh on thirty years back now - and this hurts, compared to that. Works as well, though. Then one day, Dashiva here - pardon; Asha'man Dashiva - says he wonders why it's all the same, no matter if a man's got a broke leg or a cold, and we got to talking, and. . . . Well, he's got no feel for it, himself, but me, seems I got the knack you might say. The Talent. So I started thinking, what if I . . . ? There. Best I can do."

dæʃivə ɡɹʌntɪɾ əz flɪn əbɹʌpli sæt bæk ɑn ɪz hilz ən waɪp ðə bæk ə hɪz hæn əkɹɔs ɪz fɔɹhɛd. swɛt biɾɪd ɑn ɪz feɪs, ðə fɝs taɪm mɪn hæd sin ən æʃəmən pɝspaɪɹ. ðə slæʃ ɪn ɹændz saɪd wɑz nɑt ɡɔn, jɛɾ ɪt simd ə lɪɾəl smɔlɝ, lɛs ɹɛɾ ən æŋɡɹi. hi stɪl slɛpt, bʌɾ ɪz feɪs sim lɛs peɪl.

Dashiva grunted as Flinn abruptly sat back on his heels and wiped the back of his hand across his forehead. Sweat beaded on his face, the first time Min had seen an Asha'man perspire. The slash in Rand's side was not gone, yet it seemed a little smaller, less red and angry. He still slept, but his face seemed less pale.

sæmɪtsu dɑɹɾɪd pæs nɛɹɪʃmə soʊ kwɪkli hi hæd noʊ tʃæns tə ɪntɝvin. "wʌt dɪd jə du?" ʃi dɪmændəd, leɪɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ɹændz fɔɹhɛd. wʌtɛvɝ ʃi faʊnd wɪð ðə paʊɝ, hɝ aɪbɹaʊz klaɪm hæfweɪ tə hɝ hɛɹ, ən əɹ toʊn lɛp fɹəm ɪmpɪɹiəs tə ɪnkɹɛdʒələs. "wʌt dɪd jə du?"

Samitsu darted past Narishma so quickly he had no chance to intervene. "What did you do?" she demanded, laying fingers on Rand's forehead. Whatever she found with the Power, her eyebrows climbed halfway to her hair, and her tone leaped from imperious to incredulous. "What did you do?"

flɪn ʃɹʌɡd ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli. "nɑt mʌtʃ. aɪ kʊdn ɹɪli tʌtʃ wʌts ɹɔŋ. aɪ sɔɹɾ ə sild əm əweɪ fɹəm hɪm, fəɹ ə taɪm, ɛnihaʊ. ɪt woʊn læst. ðəɹ faɪɾɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ, naʊ. meɪbi ðəl kɪl ɔf itʃ ʌðɝ, waɪl i hilz hɪmsɛlf ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ." saɪɪŋ, hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, aɪ kæn seɪ ðət ðeɪ woʊn kɪl hɪm. bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk hiz ə bɛɾɝ tʃæns ðən i dɪd."

Flinn shrugged his shoulders regretfully. "Not much. I couldn't really touch what's wrong. I sort of sealed them away from him, for a time, anyhow. It won't last. They're fighting each other, now. Maybe they'll kill off each other, while he heals himself the rest of the way." Sighing, he shook his head. "On the other hand, I can't say that they won't kill him. But I think he has a better chance than he did."

dæʃivə nɑɾəd sɛlf-ɪmpɔɹɾəntli. "jɛs; hiz ə tʃæns, naʊ." jə wʊɾə θɔɾ i hæd dʌn ðə hilɪŋ hɪmsɛlf.

Dashiva nodded self-importantly. "Yes; he has a chance, now." You would have thought he had done the Healing himself.

tə flɪnz ɛvəɾənt sɝpɹaɪz, sæmɪtsu ɹaʊndəd ðə bɛd tə hɛlp ɪm ɹaɪz. "ju wɪl tɛl mi wʌt jə dɪd," ʃi sɛd, ɹiɡəl toʊn ət stʃɹɔŋ ɑdz wɪð ðə weɪ hɝ kwɪk fɪŋɡɝz stʃɹeɪɾənd ði oʊl mænz kɑlɝ ən smuðd ɪz ləpɛlz. "ɪf oʊnli ðəɹ wɑz səm weɪ jə kəd ʃoʊ mi! bʌt jəl dɪskɹaɪb ɪt. jə mʌst! əl ɡɪv jə ɔl ðə ɡoʊld aɪ pəzɛs, bɛɹ jəɹ tʃaɪld, wʌtɛvɝ jə wɪʃ, bʌt jəl tɛl mi ɔl ðət jə kæn." əpɛɹənli nɑt ʃʊɹ hɝsɛlf wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz kəmændɪŋ əɹ bɛɡɪŋ, ʃi lɛɾ ə vɛɹi bi-mjuz flɪn oʊvɝ baɪ ðə wɪndoʊz. hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ mɔɹ ðən wʌns, bʌt ʃi wɑz tu bɪzi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ɪm tɔk tə si ɪt.

To Flinn's evident surprise, Samitsu rounded the bed to help him rise. "You will tell me what you did," she said, regal tone at strong odds with the way her quick fingers straightened the old man's collar and smoothed his lapels. "If only there was some way you could show me! But you will describe it. You must! I will give you all the gold I possess, bear your child, whatever you wish, but you will tell me all that you can." Apparently not sure herself whether she was commanding or begging, she led a very be-mused Flinn over by the windows. He opened his mouth more than once, but she was too busy trying to make him talk to see it.

nɑt kɛɹɪŋ wʌɾ ɛniwʌn θɔt, mɪn klaɪmd ɑntu ðə bɛɾ ən leɪ soʊ ʃi kəd tʌk ɹændz hɛɾ ʌndɝ əɹ tʃɪn ən ɹæp əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɪm. ə tʃæns. fɝɾɪvli ʃi stʌɾid ðə θɹi pipəl ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ðə bɛd. kædzueɪn ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ, æmɪz stændɪŋ ɑpəzət, dæʃivə linɪŋ əɡɛnst wʌn ə ðə skwɛɹ bɪdpoʊsts ət ðə fʊt, ɔl wɪð ənɹiɾəbəl ɔʊɹəz ən ɪmədʒəz dænsɪŋ ɝaʊn ðɛm. ɔl wɪð ðɛɹ aɪz ɪntɛn ɑn ɹænd. noʊ daʊɾ æmɪz sɔ səm dɪzæstɝ fəɹ ði il ɪf ɹænd daɪd, ən dæʃivə, ði oʊnli wʌn wɪð ɛni ɪkspɹɛʃən, ə dɑɹk jɛt wɝid skaʊl, dɪzæstɝ fəɹ ði æʃəmən. ən kædzueɪn. . . . kædzueɪn, hu wɑz nɑɾ oʊnli noʊn tə bɛɹə ən kaɪɹunə, bʌt meɪɾ əm dʒʌmp laɪk ɡɝlz fəɹ ɔl ðɛɹ oʊðz tə ɹænd. kædzueɪn, hu wəd nɑt hɝt ɹænd "ɛni mɔɹ ðən ʃi hæd tə."

Not caring what anyone thought, Min climbed onto the bed and lay so she could tuck Rand's head under her chin and wrap her arms around him. A chance. Furtively she studied the three people gathered around the bed. Cadsuane in her chair, Amys standing opposite, Dashiva leaning against one of the square bedposts at the foot, all with unreadable auras and images dancing around them. All with their eyes intent on Rand. No doubt Amys saw some disaster for the Aiel if Rand died, and Dashiva, the only one with any expression, a dark yet worried scowl, disaster for the Asha'man. And Cadsuane. . . . Cadsuane, who was not only known to Bera and Kiruna, but made them jump like girls for all their oaths to Rand. Cadsuane, who would not hurt Rand "any more than she had to."

kædzueɪnz ɡeɪz mɛt mɪnz fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ən mɪn ʃɪvɝd. sʌmhaʊ, ʃi wəd pɹətɛkt ɪm waɪl i kəd nɑt pɹətɛk hɪmsɛlf, fɹəm æmɪz, ən dæʃivə, ən kædzueɪn. sʌmhaʊ. ʌnkɑnʃəsli, ʃi bɪɡæn tə hʌm ə lʌləbaɪ, ɹɑkɪŋ ɹænd dʒɛnli. sʌmhaʊ.

Cadsuane's gaze met Min's for a moment, and Min shivered. Somehow, she would protect him while he could not protect himself, from Amys, and Dashiva, and Cadsuane. Somehow. Unconsciously, she began to hum a lullaby, rocking Rand gently. Somehow.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾisɛvən


CHAPTER 37

eɪ noʊt fɹəm ðə pæləs


A Note from the Palace

ðə deɪ æftɝ ðə fɛstəvəl ə bɝdz dɔn tə stʃɹɔŋ wɪnz ɔf ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz ðəɾ æktʃəli  kʌt ðə hiɾ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. ə skaɪ wɪθaʊɾ ə klaʊɾ ən ðə ɹɛd-ɡoʊl doʊm ə ðə sʌn ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən ɡeɪv pɹɑməsəz fəɹ wʌns ðə wɪn daɪd, ðoʊ. mæt hɝid daʊn θɹu ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs wɪð ɪz ɡɹin koʊɾ əndʌn ən ɪz ʃɝɾ oʊnli hæf-leɪst ɪn æntɪsəpeɪʃən. hi dɪd nɑt kwaɪt dʒʌmp əɾ ɛvɹi saʊnd, bʌɾ i dɪd ɡɪv ə stɑɹt, kənsɪɾɝəbli mɔɹ waɪd-aɪd ðən i laɪkt, wɛnɛvɝ wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən pæst, swɪʃɪŋ əɹ pɛɾikoʊts ən smaɪlɪŋ ət hɪm. ɛvɹi læst wʌn ə ðɛm smaɪld, ɪn ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli . . . noʊɪŋ . . . weɪ. ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də nɑt tə ɹʌn.

The day after the Festival of Birds dawned to strong winds off the Sea of Storms that actually cut the heat in Ebou Dar. A sky without a cloud and the red-gold dome of the sun on the horizon gave promises for once the wind died, though. Mat hurried down through the Tarasin Palace with his green coat undone and his shirt only half-laced in anticipation. He did not quite jump at every sound, but he did give a start, considerably more wide-eyed than he liked, whenever one of the serving women passed, swishing her petticoats and smiling at him. Every last one of them smiled, in a particularly . . . knowing . . . way. It was all he could do not to run.

ət ðə læst, hi sloʊd, izɪŋ ɑntu ðə ʃeɪɾɪd wɔk bɔɹɾɝɪŋ ðə steɪbliɑɹɾ ɔlmoʊst ɑn tɪptoʊ. bɪtwin ðə fluɾəd kɑləmz ə ðə wɔk, jɛloʊɪʃ ɹiɾi plæns ɪn bɪɡ ɹɛd pɑɾɝi boʊlz ən vaɪnz wɪð waɪd, ɹɛd-stʃɹaɪp livz dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm mɛɾəl bæskəts ɑn tʃeɪnz fɔɹmd ə θɪn skɹin. ʌnkɑnʃəsli, hi tʌɡd ɪz hæt loʊɝ tə əbskjʊɹ ɪz feɪs. hɪz hænz ɹæn əlɔŋ ɪz spɪɹ - ən æʃhændʒɹeɪ, bɝdʒɪt kɔld ɪt - ənθɪŋkɪŋli fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə hæft əz ɪf i maɪt nid tə dɪfɛn hɪmsɛlf. ðə daɪs tʌmbəld ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd fɪɹsli, jɛt ðət hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɪz ʌnizinəs. ðə sɔɹs ə ðət wɑz taɪlɪn.

At the last, he slowed, easing onto the shaded walk bordering the stableyard almost on tiptoe. Between the fluted columns of the walk, yellowish reedy plants in big red pottery bowls and vines with wide, red-striped leaves dangling from metal baskets on chains formed a thin screen. Unconsciously, he tugged his hat lower to obscure his face. His hands ran along his spear - an ashandarei, Birgitte called it - unthinkingly fingering the haft as if he might need to defend himself. The dice tumbled inside his head fiercely, yet that had nothing to do with his uneasiness. The source of that was Tylin.

sɪks kloʊz koʊtʃɪz wɪð ðə ɡɹin æŋkɝ ən sɔɹɾ ə haʊs mɪtsoʊbɑɹ lækɝɾ ɑn ðə dɔɹz ɔlɹɛɾi weɪɾəd ɪn laɪn bɪfɔɹ ðə tɔl ɑɹtʃt aʊɾɝ ɡeɪts wɪð timz hɪtʃt ən lɪvɹid dʒɹaɪvɝz maʊntəd. hi kəd si neɪlzin jɔnɪŋ ɪn ə jɛloʊ-stʃɹaɪp koʊɾ ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðɛm, ən veɪnɪn sæt slʌmpt ətɑp ən ʌpɛndəd bæɹəl nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðə steɪbəl dɔɹz, əpɛɹənli əslip. moʊst ə ði ʌðɝ ɹɛdʒɹmz wɝ skwɑɾɪŋ peɪʃənli ɑn ðə steɪbliɑɹd flæɡstoʊnz; ə fju tɔs daɪs ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ðə hjudʒ waɪt steɪbəlz. ɪleɪn stʊd bɪtwin mæt ən ðə koʊtʃɪz, dʒʌs ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə skɹin ə plæns. ɹin kɔɹli wɑz wɪð hɝ, ən kloʊs baɪ, sɛvən mɔɹ ə ðə wɪmən u wɝ ət ðət pəkjuljɝ miɾɪŋ i hæd bɝst ɪndə ði ivnɪŋ bɪfɔɹ; ɹin wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ðə ɹɛd bɛlt ʌv ə waɪz wʊmən. hi hæd hæf-ɪkspɛktəɾ əm nɑt tə əpɪɹ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. ðeɪ hæd ðə fitʃɝz ʌv wɪmən juz tə ɔɹɾɝɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn laɪvz ən ʌðɝz, ən moʊs hæɾ ət list ə bɪɾ ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn ðɛɹ hɛɹ, jɛt ðeɪ wɑtʃt fɹɛʃ-feɪst ɪleɪn wɪð ən ɛɹ ʌv ɛkspɛkteɪʃən, simɪŋli ɑn ðɛɹ toʊz, əz ðoʊ ɹɛɾi tə dʒʌmp əɾ əɹ kəmænd. ðə hoʊl lɑt kɑt lɛs ðən hæf ɪz ətɛnʃən, ðoʊ; nʌn ə ðɛm wɑz ðə wʊmən u hæɾ ɪm ɹɛɾi tə dʒʌmp aʊɾ ə hɪz skɪn. taɪlɪn meɪɾ ɪm fil . . . wɛl . . . hɛlpləs wɑz ði oʊnli wɝd ðət sim tə fɪt, haʊɛvɝ ɹɪdɪkjələs ɪt simd.

Six closed coaches with the green Anchor and Sword of House Mitsobar lacquered on the doors already waited in line before the tall arched outer gates with teams hitched and liveried drivers mounted. He could see Nalesean yawning in a yellow-striped coat on the far side of them, and Vanin sat slumped atop an upended barrel not far from the stable doors, apparently asleep. Most of the other Redarms were squatting patiently on the stableyard flagstones; a few tossed dice in the shadow of the huge white stables. Elayne stood between Mat and the coaches, just the other side of the screen of plants. Reanne Corly was with her, and close by, seven more of the women who were at that peculiar meeting he had burst into the evening before; Reanne was the only one not wearing the red belt of a Wise Woman. He had half-expected them not to appear this morning. They had the features of women used to ordering their own lives and other's, and most had at least a bit of gray in their hair, yet they watched fresh-faced Elayne with an air of expectation, seemingly on their toes, as though ready to jump at her command. The whole lot caught less than half his attention, though; none of them was the woman who had him ready to jump out of his skin. Tylin made him feel . . . well . . . helpless was the only word that seemed to fit, however ridiculous it seemed.

"wi də nɑt nid ðɛm, mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli," ɪleɪn sɛd. ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ saʊndəd laɪk ə wʊmən pæɾɪŋ ə tʃaɪld ɑn ðə hɛd. "aɪv toʊld əm tə ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ əntɪl wi ɹɪtɝn. wɪl ətʃɹæk lɛs ətɛnʃən, ɪspɛʃli əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ, wɪθaʊɾ ɛniwʌn ɹɛkəɡnaɪzəbli ɛɛs sədaɪ." hɝ noʊʃən ʌv wʌt tə wɛɹ vɪzəɾɪŋ ðə ɹʌfəs pɑɹɾ ə ðə sɪɾi wɪθaʊɾ ətʃɹæktɪŋ ətɛnʃən wɑz ə waɪd ɡɹin hæt wɪð ɡɹin-daɪd plumz, ə laɪt dʌstkloʊk ʌv ɡɹin lɪnən wɝkt ɪn ɡoʊldən skɹoʊlz hæŋɪŋ daʊn əɹ bæk, ən ə haɪ-nɛkt ɡɹin sɪlk ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs wɪð ɡoʊld ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi klaɪmɪŋ ðə dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts ən θɪkli ɛmfəsaɪzɪŋ ði oʊvəl ðəɾ ɪkspoʊz hæf əɹ bʊzəm. ʃi ivən wɔɹ wʌn ə ðoʊz nɛkləsɪz fəɹ ə mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf. ðət bɹɔd bæn ʌv woʊvən ɡoʊld wəd meɪk ɛvɹi θifs hæn ɪn ðə ɹæhəɾ ɪtʃ. ʃi kæɹid noʊ wɛpən bɪɑn ə smɔl bɛl naɪf. bʌɾ əz tə ðæt, wʌt wɛpən dɪɾ ə wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl nid? ʌv kɔɹs, ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðoʊz ɹɛd bɛls hæɾ ə kɝv dæɡɝ tʌk bɪhaɪn ɪt. soʊ dɪd ɹinz bɛlt ə pleɪn wɝk lɛðɝ.

"We do not need them, Mistress Corly," Elayne said. The Daughter-Heir sounded like a woman patting a child on the head. "I've told them to remain here until we return. We will attract less attention, especially across the river, without anyone recognizably Aes Sedai." Her notion of what to wear visiting the roughest part of the city without attracting attention was a wide green hat with green-dyed plumes, a light dustcloak of green linen worked in golden scrolls hanging down her back, and a high-necked green silk riding dress with gold embroidery climbing the divided skirts and thickly emphasizing the oval that exposed half her bosom. She even wore one of those necklaces for a marriage knife. That broad band of woven gold would make every thief's hand in the Rahad itch. She carried no weapon beyond a small belt knife. But as to that, what weapon did a woman who could channel need? Of course, every one of those red belts had a curved dagger tucked behind it. So did Reane's belt of plain worked leather.

ɹin ɹimuvd ə lɑɹdʒ blu stʃɹɔ hæt, fɹaʊn əɾ ɪt, ðən pʊɾ ɪt bæk ɑn ən ɹɛtaɪd ðə ɹɪbənz. ɪleɪnz toʊn dɪd nɑt sim tə bi wʌt wɑz bɑðɝɪŋ hɝ. ʃi pʊɾ ɑn ə dɪfəɾənt smaɪl wɪð ðə hæt, ən ə tɪmɪd toʊn. "bʌt waɪ dʌz mɛɝɪlɪl sədaɪ θɪŋk wəɹ laɪɪŋ, ɪleɪn sədaɪ?"

Reanne removed a large blue straw hat, frowned at it, then put it back on and retied the ribbons. Elayne's tone did not seem to be what was bothering her. She put on a diffident smile with the hat, and a timid tone. "But why does Merilille Sedai think we are lying, Elayne Sedai?"

"ðeɪ ɔl du," wʌn ə ðə ɹɛd-bɛls sɛd bɹɛθləsli. ɔl ə ðɛm wɔɹ ɛbu dɑɹi dʒɹɛsəz ɪn soʊbɝ kʌlɝz, wɪð nɛɹoʊ plʌnʒɪŋ nɛklinz ən skɝts soʊn ʌp ɑn wʌn saɪd tə ɪkspoʊz leɪɝd pɛɾikoʊts, bʌɾ oʊnli ðɪs wʌn, boʊn-lin ən wɪð mɔɹ waɪt ðən blæk ɪn əɹ lɔŋ hɛɹ, hæd ði ɑləv skɪn ən dɑɹk aɪz ʌv ən ɛbu dɑɹi. "sɝaɪðə sədaɪ kɔl mi laɪɝ tə maɪ feɪs, əbaʊɾ əɹ nʌmbɝz, əbaʊt - " ʃi kʌɾ ɔf ʃɔɹɾ əɾ ə fɹaʊn ən ə "bi kwaɪət, tæmɑɹlə" fɹəm ɹin; mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli maɪt bi ɹɛɾi tə kɝtsi ən sɪmpɝ fəɹ ə tʃaɪld ɪf ðə tʃaɪld wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ʃi kɛpt ə taɪt ɹeɪn ɑn əɹ kəmpænjənz.

"They all do," one of the red-belts said breathlessly. All of them wore Ebou Dari dresses in sober colors, with narrow plunging necklines and skirts sewn up on one side to expose layered petticoats, but only this one, bone-lean and with more white than black in her long hair, had the olive skin and dark eyes of an Ebou Dari. "Sareitha Sedai called me liar to my face, about our numbers, about - " She cut off short at a frown and a "Be quiet, Tamarla" from Reanne; Mistress Corly might be ready to curtsy and simper for a child if the child was Aes Sedai, but she kept a tight rein on her companions.

mæt fɹaʊn ʌp ət ðə wɪndoʊz oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ ðə steɪbliɑɹd, ðoʊz i kəd si fɹəm wɛɹ i stʊd. ɪlæbɹət waɪt ɹɔt-aɪɝn skɹinz kʌvɝd sʌm, waɪt wʊɾən skɹinz ʌv ɪntʃɹəkətli kɑɹv pɪɹswɝk ʌðɝz. nɑt laɪkli taɪlɪn wɑz ʌp ðɛɹ; nɑt laɪkli ʃi wəɾ əpɪɹ ɪn ðə steɪbəl-jɑɹd. hi hæd bɪn vɛɹi kɛɹfəl nɑt tə weɪk əɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ dʒɹɛst. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi wəd nɑt tʃɹaɪ ɛniθɪŋ hɪɹ. ət list, hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi wʊd. ðən əɡɛn, wɑz ɛniθɪŋ pæs ðə wʊmən u hæd hæd hæf ə dʌzən sɝvɪŋ wɪmən siz ɪm ɪn ðə hɔlz læs naɪɾ ən dʒɹæɡ hɪm ɪndə hɝ əpɑɹtməns? ðə blʌɾi wʊmən tʃɹiɾəd ɪm laɪk ə tɔɪ! hi wɑz nɑt gɑnə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɪɾ ɛnimɔɹ. hi wɑz nɑt. laɪt, hu wɑz i tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ful? ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ɡɹæb ðɪs boʊl ə ðə wɪnz ən ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ, taɪlɪn wəd bi pɪntʃɪŋ ɪz bɑɾəm ən kɔlɪŋ ɪm əɹ lɪɾəl pɪdʒən əɡɛn tənaɪt.

Mat frowned up at the windows overlooking the stableyard, those he could see from where he stood. Elaborate white wrought-iron screens covered some, white wooden screens of intricately carved piercework others. Not likely Tylin was up there; not likely she would appear in the stable-yard. He had been very careful not to wake her getting dressed. Besides, she would not try anything here. At least, he did not think she would. Then again, was anything past the woman who had had half a dozen serving women seize him in the halls last night and drag him into her apartments? The bloody woman treated him like a toy! He was not going to put up with it anymore. He was not. Light, who was he trying to fool? If they did not grab this Bowl of the Winds and get out of Ebou Dar, Tylin would be pinching his bottom and calling him her little pigeon again tonight.

"ɪts jəɹ eɪdʒəz, ɹin." ɪleɪn dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzækli saʊn hɛzɪɾənt - ʃi nɛvɝ dɪd ðət - bʌɾ əɹ toʊn bɪkeɪm vɛɹi kɛɹfəl. "ɪɾ ɪz kənsɪɾɝd ɹuɾ əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə spik ʌv eɪdʒ, bʌt. . . . ɹin, əpɛɹənli noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ əz lɪvd əz lɔŋ əz ɛni ʌv jə ɪn ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl kleɪm." ðət wɑz ði ɑd neɪm ðiz kɪn ɡeɪv ðɛɹ ɹulɪŋ kaʊnsəl. "ɪn jəɹ oʊn keɪs, nɑt baɪ oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz." ðə ɹɛd-bɛls ɡæspt, ɡoʊɪŋ waɪd-aɪd. ə slɛndɝ bɹaʊn-aɪd wʊmən wɪð peɪl hʌni hɛɹ ɡeɪv ə nɝvəs ɡɪɡəl ən ɪnstənli kʌvɝɾ əɹ maʊθ ət ɹinz wɪp-kwɪk "feɪmɛl!"

"It's your ages, Reanne." Elayne did not exactly sound hesitant - she never did that - but her tone became very careful. "It is considered rude among Aes Sedai to speak of age, but. . . . Reanne, apparently no Aes Sedai since the Breaking has lived as long as any of you in the Knitting Circle claim." That was the odd name these Kin gave their ruling council. "In your own case, not by over a hundred years." The red-belts gasped, going wide-eyed. A slender brown-eyed woman with pale honey hair gave a nervous giggle and instantly covered her mouth at Reanne's whip-quick "Famelle!"

"ðæt kæn bi pɑsəbəl," ɹin sɛd feɪnli tə ɪleɪn. "ʃʊɹli, ɛɛs sədaɪ mʌst - "

"That can't be possible," Reanne said faintly to Elayne. "Surely, Aes Sedai must - "

"ɡʊd mɔɹnɪŋ," mæt sɛd, stɛpɪŋ pæs ðə skɹin ə plæns. ðə hoʊl dɪskʌʃən wɑz ɪɾiɑtɪk; ɛvɹiwʌn nu ɛɛs sədaɪ lɪv lɔŋɡɝ ðən ɛnibəɾi ɛls. ɪnstɛɾ ʌv weɪstɪŋ taɪm, ðeɪ ʃəd bi ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə ðə ɹæhəd. "wɛɹ ɑɹ tɑm ən dʒulɪn? ən nɪneɪiv." ʃi hæd tə hæv kʌm bæk læs naɪt, əɹ ɪleɪn wʊɾə bɪn ɪn ə swɪvət. "blʌɾ ən æʃəz, aɪ doʊn si bɝdʒɪɾ iðɝ. wi nid tə bi ɑn əɹ weɪ, ɪleɪn, nɑt stændɪŋ ɝaʊnd. ɪz eɪvinhə kʌmɪŋ?"

"Good morning," Mat said, stepping past the screen of plants. The whole discussion was idiotic; everyone knew Aes Sedai lived longer than anybody else. Instead of wasting time, they should be on their way to the Rahad. "Where are Thom and Juilin? And Nynaeve." She had to have come back last night, or Elayne would have been in a swivet. "Blood and ashes, I don't see Birgitte either. We need to be on our way, Elayne, not standing around. Is Aviendha coming?"

ʃi fɹaʊn əɾ ɪm slaɪtli, wɪð dʒʌst ə flɪkɝ ə hɝ aɪz təwɔɹd ɹin, ən i nu ʃi wɑz dəsaɪɾɪŋ wʌt pɝfɔɹməns tə ɡɪv hɪm. waɪd-aɪɾ ɪnəsəns maɪt dæmədʒ əɹ stændɪŋ wɪð ðiz wɪmən əz mʌtʃ əz flæʃɪŋ əɹ dɪmpəl əɾ ɪm wʊd; ɪleɪn ɔlweɪz ɪkspɛktəd ðət dɪmpəl tə wɝk wɛɹ ɔl ɛls feɪld. hɝ tʃɪn ɹoʊz slaɪtli. "tɑm ən dʒulɪn ɑɹ hɛlpɪŋ eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪt wɑtʃ kæɹaɪɾɪnz pæləs, mæt." ɪt wɑz tə bi ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ɪn nɪɹ fʊl-blum. nɑt ðə hoʊl flaʊɝɪŋ, sɪns ʃi ʃʊɹli nu haʊ hi wəd ɹiæk tə ðæt, bʌɾ ə vɔɪs fʊl ə sɝɾənti, kul blu aɪz dɪmændɪŋ, ən ðət pɹɪɾi feɪs tʃɪl ɪf nɑɾ ɪɡzækli fɹoʊzən wɪð ɛɹəɡəns. wɑz ðəɹ ɛni wʊmən ɪn ðə wɝld u wɑz dʒʌst wʌn pɝsən? "nɪneɪiv wɪl bi daʊn ʃɔɹtli, aɪm ʃʊɹ. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ ɹizən fəɹ jə tə kʌm, jə noʊ, mæt. neɪlzin ən jəɹ soʊlʒɝz ɑɹ ə mɔɹ ðən æɾəkwət bɑɾiɡɑɹd. jə kəɾ ɛndʒɔɪ jɝsɛlf ɹaɪt hɪɹ ɪn ðə pæləs əntɪl wi ɹɪtɝn."

She frowned at him slightly, with just a flicker of her eyes toward Reanne, and he knew she was deciding what performance to give him. Wide-eyed innocence might damage her standing with these women as much as flashing her dimple at him would; Elayne always expected that dimple to work where all else failed. Her chin rose slightly. "Thom and Juilin are helping Aviendha and Birgitte watch Carridin's palace, Mat." It was to be the Daughter-Heir in near full-bloom. Not the whole flowering, since she surely knew how he would react to that, but a voice full of certainty, cool blue eyes demanding, and that pretty face chill if not exactly frozen with arrogance. Was there any woman in the world who was just one person? "Nynaeve will be down shortly, I'm sure. There is no reason for you to come, you know, Mat. Nalesean and your soldiers are a more than adequate bodyguard. You could enjoy yourself right here in the palace until we return."

"kæɹaɪɾɪn!" hi kɹaɪd. "ɪleɪn, wi ɑɹən steɪɪŋ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ tə sɛɾəl dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn. wəɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə boʊl, ðən jə əɹ nɪneɪiv ɪz gɑnə meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ, ən wəɹ livɪŋ. ɪz ðət klɪɹ? ən aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ wɪð jə tə ðə ɹæhəd." ɛndʒɔɪ hɪmsɛlf! ðə laɪɾ oʊnli nu wʌt taɪlɪn wəd ɡɛɾ ʌp tə ɪf i ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə pæləs ɔl deɪ. ðə vɛɹi θɔt meɪɾ ɪm wɑnə læf hɪstɛɹɪkli.

"Carridin!" he cried. "Elayne, we aren't staying in Ebou Dar to settle Jaichim Carridin. We are getting the Bowl, then you or Nynaeve is going to make a gateway, and we are leaving. Is that clear? And I'm going with you to the Rahad." Enjoy himself! The Light only knew what Tylin would get up to if he remained in the palace all day. The very thought made him want to laugh hysterically.

aɪsi stɛɹz stæbd əɾ ɪm fɹəm ðə waɪz wɪmən; staʊt sumeɪkoʊ pɝst əɹ lɪps æŋɡɹəli, ən məlɹ, ə plʌmp dəmɑni ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl jɪɹz huz bʊzəm i hæɾ ɛndʒɔɪɾ aɪɪŋ jɛstɝdeɪ, plæntəd fɪsts ɑn hɪps wɪð ə feɪs laɪk ə θʌndɝhɛd. ðeɪ ʃʊɾə noʊn fɹəm jɛstɝdeɪ ðəɾ i wɑz nɑɾ ɪntɪmɪdeɪɾɪd baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ, jɛɾ ivən ɹin ɡeɪv ɪm sətʃ ə skaʊl i hæf θɔt ʃi maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə bɑks ɪz ɪɹz. əpɛɹənli, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ gɑnə fɔl ɔl oʊvɝ ðɛmsɛlvz ɝaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðən ɛvɹibɑɾi ɛls hæd tə əz wɛl.

Icy stares stabbed at him from the Wise Women; stout Sumeko pursed her lips angrily, and Melore, a plump Domani in her middle years whose bosom he had enjoyed eyeing yesterday, planted fists on hips with a face like a thunderhead. They should have known from yesterday that he was not intimidated by Aes Sedai, yet even Reanne gave him such a scowl he half thought she might try to box his ears. Apparently, if they were going to fall all over themselves around Aes Sedai, then everybody else had to as well.

ɪleɪn stʃɹʌɡəld wɪð hɝsɛlf vɪzəbli. hɝ lɪps kəmpɹɛst, bʌt wʌn θɪŋ i hæd tə ɡɪv hɝ; ʃi wɑz tu smɑɹt tə ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð wʌɾ ɑbviəsli wəd nɑt wɝk. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ʃi wɑz snuɾi tə ðə boʊn haʊɛvɝ ʃi tʃɹaɪd. ən ði ʌðɝ wɪmən wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ. "mæt, jə noʊ wi kænɑt liv əntɪl wɪv juz ðə boʊl." ðət hɔɾi tʃɪn ɹɪmeɪn haɪ, ən əɹ toʊn wɑz ət bɛs hæfweɪ bɪtwin ɪkspleɪnɪŋ ən tɛlɪŋ. "ɪt maɪt ɹikwaɪɝ deɪz fəɹ əs tə bi ʃʊɹ ə haʊ tə juz ɪt, pɝhæps ivən hæf ə wik əɹ mɔɹ, ən wi maɪɾ əz wɛl fɪnɪʃ kæɹaɪɾɪn ɪf wi kən ɪn ðət taɪm." sətʃ ə kɹækəl ɛntɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs ɑn ðə waɪtkloʊks neɪm ðət jə maɪɾ əv θɔt ʃi bɔɹ ðə mæn ə pɝsənəl ɡɹʌdʒ, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ ɛls lɛpt aʊɾ ən klæmpt ə fɪst ɑn ɪz θɔts.

Elayne struggled with herself visibly. Her lips compressed, but one thing he had to give her; she was too smart to go on with what obviously would not work. On the other hand, she was snooty to the bone however she tried. And the other women were watching. "Mat, you know we cannot leave until we have used the Bowl." That haughty chin remained high, and her tone was at best halfway between explaining and telling. "It might require days for us to be sure of how to use it, perhaps even half a week or more, and we might as well finish Carridin if we can in that time." Such a crackle entered her voice on the Whitecloak's name that you might have thought she bore the man a personal grudge, but something else leaped out and clamped a fist on his thoughts.

"hæf ə wik!" filɪŋ stʃɹæŋɡəld, hi pʊɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ bɪhaɪn ðə skɑɹf nɑɾɪd ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk ən tʌɡd tə iz ɪt. taɪlɪn hæd juz ðət lɛŋθ ə blæk sɪlk tə taɪ hɪz hænz læs naɪt bɪfɔɹ i nu wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ. hæf ə wik. əɹ mɔɹ! dɪspaɪɾ ɪz bɛst ɛfɝts, hɪz vɔɪs bɪkeɪm ə tʌtʃ fɹæntɪk. "ɪleɪn, ʃʊɹli jə kən juz ðə boʊl ɛniwɛɹ. ɪt dʌzn əv tə bi hɪɹ. ɛɡwin mʌst wɑn jə bæk əz sun əz pɑsəbəl; ʃi kən juz ə fɹɛn əɹ tu, əl weɪdʒɝ." baɪ ðə læst i hæd sin, ʃi kəd juz ə fju hʌnʒɹəd. meɪbi wʌns i ɡɑt ðiz wɪmən bæk, ɛɡwin wəd bi ɹɛɾi tə ɡɪv ʌp ðət nɑnsɛns əbaʊt biɪŋ æmɪɝlɪn ən lɛɾ ɪm teɪk əɹ tə ɹænd əlɔŋ wɪð ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv ən eɪvinhə. "ænd wʌɾ əbaʊt ɹænd, ɪleɪn? keɪɛmlɪn. ðə laɪən θɹoʊn. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, jə noʊ jə wɑnə ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn kwɪk əz jə kən soʊ ɹænd kən ɡɪv jə ðə laɪən θɹoʊn." fəɹ səm ɹizən, hɝ feɪs ɡɹu dɑɹkɝ ɔlmoʊs baɪ ðə wɝd, ən əɹ aɪz flæʃt. hi wʊɾə sɛd ʃi wɑz ɪndɪɡnənt, ɪksɛpt ə kɔɹs ðət ʃi hæd noʊ kɑz.

"Half a week!" Feeling strangled, he put a finger behind the scarf knotted around his neck and tugged to ease it. Tylin had used that length of black silk to tie his hands last night before he knew what she was doing. Half a week. Or more! Despite his best efforts, his voice became a touch frantic. "Elayne, surely you can use the Bowl anywhere. It doesn't have to be here. Egwene must want you back as soon as possible; she can use a friend or two, I'll wager." By the last he had seen, she could use a few hundred. Maybe once he got these women back, Egwene would be ready to give up that nonsense about being Amyrlin and let him take her to Rand along with Elayne and Nynaeve and Aviendha. "And what about Rand, Elayne? Caemlyn. The Lion Throne. Blood and ashes, you know you want to reach Caemlyn quick as you can so Rand can give you the Lion Throne." For some reason, her face grew darker almost by the word, and her eyes flashed. He would have said she was indignant, except of course that she had no cause.

ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ æŋɡɹəli tə ɑɹɡju əz sun əz i fɪnɪʃt, ən i sɛt hɪmsɛlf, ɹɛɾi tə lɪst əɹ pɹɑməsəz ən tə ðə pɪɾ ə dum wɪð wʌt ðət dɪd tə hɝ ɪn ði aɪz ə ɹin ən ðə ɹɛst. baɪ ðɛɹ feɪsəz, ðeɪ wʊɾə snʌbd ɪm ʃɔɹɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn əɹ pleɪs.

She opened her mouth angrily to argue as soon as he finished, and he set himself, ready to list her promises and to the Pit of Doom with what that did to her in the eyes of Reanne and the rest. By their faces, they would have snubbed him short already in her place.

bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn kəd seɪ ɛniθɪŋ, ðoʊ, ə ɹaʊnd ɡɹeɪɪŋ wʊmən ɪn haʊs mɪtsoʊbɑɹ lɪvɝi wɑz kɝtsiɪŋ, fɝs tə ɪleɪn, ðən tə ðə wɪmən wɛɹɪŋ ɹɛd bɛls, ən faɪnəli tə hɪm. "kwin taɪlɪn sɛnz ðɪs, mæstɝ kɔθən," lɹən sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ aʊɾ ə bæskət wɪð ə stʃɹaɪp klɔθ oʊvɝ ðə kɑntɛns ən smɔl ɹɛd flaʊɝz woʊvən ɝaʊn ðə hændəl. "ju dɪd nɑt bɹɛkfəst, ən jə mʌs meɪnteɪn jəɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ."

Before anyone could say anything, though, a round graying woman in House Mitsobar livery was curtsying, first to Elayne, then to the women wearing red belts, and finally to him. "Queen Tylin sends this, Master Cauthon," Laren said, holding out a basket with a striped cloth over the contents and small red flowers woven around the handle. "You did not breakfast, and you must maintain your strength."

mæts tʃiks wɔɹmd. ðə wʊmən mɪɹli lʊkt ət hɪm, bʌt ʃi hæd sin kənsɪɾɝəbli mɔɹ ə hɪm ðən wən ʃi fɝst ʃoʊɾ ɪm ɪndə taɪlɪnz pɹɛzəns. kənsɪɾɝəbli mɔɹ. ʃi hæd bɹɔt sʌpɝ ɑn ə tʃɹeɪ læs naɪt, waɪl i tʃɹaɪd tə haɪɾ ʌndɝ ðə sɪlk bɛdʃit. hi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪt. ðiz wɪmən hæɾ ɪm dʒʌmpɪŋ əbaʊɾ ən blʌʃɪŋ laɪk ə ɡɝl. hi dʒʌs kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd.

Mat's cheeks warmed. The woman merely looked at him, but she had seen considerably more of him than when she first showed him into Tylin's presence. Considerably more. She had brought supper on a tray last night, while he tried to hide under the silk bedsheet. He did not understand it. These women had him jumping about and blushing like a girl. He just could not understand.

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ jə wʊdn ɹæðɝ ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ?" ɪleɪn æskt. "aɪm ʃʊɹ taɪlɪn wəɾ ɛndʒɔɪ jəɹ kʌmpəni fəɹ bɹɛkfəst. ðə kwin sɛd ʃi faɪnz jə wʌndɝfəli ɛntɝteɪnɪŋ ən kɔɝɾiəsli kəmplaɪənt," ʃi æɾəd ɪn ə daʊtfəl toʊn.

"Are you sure you wouldn't rather remain here?" Elayne asked. "I'm sure Tylin would enjoy your company for breakfast. The Queen said she finds you wonderfully entertaining and courteously compliant," she added in a doubtful tone.

mæt flɛd fəɹ ðə koʊtʃɪz wɪð ðə bæskəɾ ɪn wʌn hæn ən ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ ɪn ði ʌðɝ.

Mat fled for the coaches with the basket in one hand and his ashandarei in the other.

"ɑɹ ɔl nɔɹðɝn mɛn soʊ ʃaɪ?" lɹən sɛd.

"Are all northern men so shy?" Laren said.

hi ɹɪskt ə ɡlæns oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ wɪθaʊt stɑpɪŋ, ən hivd ə saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif. ðə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ skɝts, tɝnɪŋ tə wɔk ðoʊ ðə skɹin ə plæns, ən ɪleɪn wɑz moʊʃənɪŋ ɹin ən ðə waɪz wɪmən ɪndə ə sɝkəl kloʊs ɝaʊn hɝ. ivən soʊ, hi ʃɪvɝd. wɪmən wɝ gɑnə bi ðə dɛθ ə hɪm jɛt.

He risked a glance over his shoulder without stopping, and heaved a sigh of relief. The serving woman was already gathering her skirts, turning to walk though the screen of plants, and Elayne was motioning Reanne and the Wise Women into a circle close around her. Even so, he shivered. Women were going to be the death of him yet.

ɹaʊndɪŋ ðə nɪɹəs koʊtʃ, hi nɪɹli dʒɹɑp ðə bæskəɾ ət ðə saɪɾ ə bɛslən siɾəd ɑn ðə koʊtʃ stɛp, sʌnlaɪt ɡlimɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə nɛɹoʊ bleɪɾ ə hɪz sɔɹɾ əz i ɪɡzæmən ði ɛdʒ. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ?" mæt ɪkskleɪmd.

Rounding the nearest coach, he nearly dropped the basket at the sight of Beslan seated on the coach step, sunlight gleaming along the narrow blade of his sword as he examined the edge. "What are you doing here?" Mat exclaimed.

bɛslən slɪd ðə sɔɹɾ ɪndə ɪts ʃiθ, ə ɡɹɪn splɪɾɪŋ ɪz feɪs. "kʌmɪŋ wɪð jə tə ðə ɹæhəd. aɪ səspɛk jəl faɪn mɔɹ fʌn fəɹ ʌs."

Beslan slid the sword into its sheath, a grin splitting his face. "Coming with you to the Rahad. I suspect you'll find more fun for us."

"ðɛɹ hæd bɛɾɝ bi səm fʌn," neɪlzin jɔn ɪndə hɪz hænd. "aɪ dɪdnt ɡɛt vɛɹi mʌtʃ slip læs naɪt, ən naʊ jə dʒɹæɡ mi ɔf wən ðəɹ ɑɹ si foʊk wɪmən əbaʊt." veɪnɪn sæɾ ʌp ɑn ɪz bæɹəl, lʊkt ɝaʊnd, faʊnd nʌθɪŋ muvɪŋ, ən sɛɾəld hɪmsɛlf bæk əɡɛn wɪð ɪz aɪz ʃʌt.

"There had better be some fun," Nalesean yawned into his hand. "I didn't get very much sleep last night, and now you drag me off when there are Sea Folk women about." Vanin sat up on his barrel, looked around, found nothing moving, and settled himself back again with his eyes shut.

"ðɛɹəl bi noʊ fʌn ɪf aɪ kən hɛlp ɪt," mæt mʌɾɝd. neɪlzin hæd nɑt ɡɑɾən mʌtʃ slip? hɑ! ðə hoʊl lɑɾ ə ðɛm hæd bɪn aʊɾ ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ət ðə fɛstəvəl. nɑt ðəɾ i hæd nɑɾ ɛndʒɔɪd hɪmsɛlf ɪn pætʃəz, bʌɾ oʊnli wən i kəd fɝɡɛɾ i wɑz wɪð ə wʊmən u θɔɾ i wɑz səm sɔɹɾ ə blʌɾi dɑl. "wʌt si foʊk wɪmən?"

"There'll be no fun if I can help it," Mat muttered. Nalesean had not gotten much sleep? Hah! The whole lot of them had been out enjoying themselves at the festival. Not that he had not enjoyed himself in patches, but only when he could forget he was with a woman who thought he was some sort of bloody doll. "What Sea Folk women?"

"wɛn nɪneɪiv sədaɪ ɹɪtɝn læs naɪt, ʃi bɹɔɾ ə dʌzən əɹ mɔɹ, mæt." bɛslən blu aʊɾ ɪz bɹɛθ, ən ɪz hænz meɪd sweɪɪŋ moʊʃənz. "ðə weɪ ðeɪ muv, mæt. . . ."

"When Nynaeve Sedai returned last night, she brought a dozen or more, Mat." Beslan blew out his breath, and his hands made swaying motions. "The way they move, Mat. . . ."

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi wɑz nɑt θɪŋkɪŋ klɪɹli; taɪlɪn wɑz skɹæmbəlɪŋ ɪz bɹeɪnz. nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn hæd toʊld ɪm əbaʊt ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, ɹɪlʌktənli ən ɪn swɔɹn sikɹəsi, æftɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hoʊl bæk ivən wɛɹ nɪneɪiv wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ, mʌtʃ lɛs waɪ. ən nɑɾ ə sɪŋɡəl blʌʃ ət ði ɛfɝt, iðɝ. "wɪmən kip pɹɑməsəz ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn weɪ," soʊ ðə seɪɪŋ wɛnt. kʌm tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪt, lɔɾɪn ən bɛlvɪn wɝ nɑt wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ɹɛd-ɑɹmz. meɪbi nɪneɪiv θɔt tə meɪk ʌp fəɹ ði ʌðɝ baɪ kipɪŋ əm wɪð əɹ naʊ. ". . . ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn weɪ." bʌɾ ɪf ʃi hæd ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðə pæləs, ʃʊɹli ɪt wəd nɑt teɪk hæf ə wik tə juz ðə boʊl. laɪt, pliz nɑt!

Mat shook his head. He was not thinking clearly; Tylin was scrambling his brains. Nynaeve and Elayne had told him about the Windfinders, reluctantly and in sworn secrecy, after trying to hold back even where Nynaeve wanted to go, much less why. And not a single blush at the effort, either. "Women keep promises in their own way," so the saying went. Come to think of it, Lawtin and Belvyn were not with the rest of the Red-arms. Maybe Nynaeve thought to make up for the other by keeping them with her now. ". . . In their own way." But if she had the Windfinders already in the palace, surely it would not take half a week to use the Bowl. Light, please not!

əz ɪf θɪŋkɪŋ ə hɝ hæd bɪn ə sʌmənz, nɪneɪiv keɪm stʃɹoʊlɪŋ θɹu ðə skɹin ə plæns ɪndə ðə steɪbliɑɹd. mæts dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt. ðə tɔl mæn ɪn ə dɑɹk ɡɹin koʊɾ ɑn əɹ ɑɹm wɑz læn! əɹ ɹæðɝ, ʃi wɑz ɑn hɪz, klɪŋɪŋ tə ɪt wɪð boʊθ hænz, smaɪlɪŋ ʌp ət hɪm. wɪð ɛni ʌðɝ wʊmən, mæt wʊɾə sɛd ʃi wɑz mun-aɪɾ ən dʒɹimɪŋ, bʌt ðɪs wɑz nɪneɪiv.

As if thinking of her had been a summons, Nynaeve came strolling through the screen of plants into the stableyard. Mat's jaw dropped. The tall man in a dark green coat on her arm was Lan! Or rather, she was on his, clinging to it with both hands, smiling up at him. With any other woman, Mat would have said she was moon-eyed and dreaming, but this was Nynaeve.

ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt wʌns ʃi ɹilaɪzd wɛɹ ʃi wɑz, ən tʊk ə heɪsti stɛp tə wʌn saɪd, ðoʊ ʃi stɪl hɛld ɑn tə lænz hæn fəɹ ə moʊmənt. hɝ tʃɔɪs ə dʒɹɛsəz wɑz noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən ɪleɪnz, ɔl blu sɪlk ən ɡɹin ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, kʌt loʊ ɪnʌf tə ʃoʊ ə hɛvi ɡoʊld ɹɪŋ ðət wʊɾə ɹæɾəld ɑn əɹ tu θʌmz təɡɛðɝ, dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɪndə hɝ klivədʒ ɑn ə θɪn ɡoʊl tʃeɪn. ðə waɪd hæt ʃi kæɹid baɪ ɪts ɹɪbənz wɑz tʃɹɪmd wɪð blu plumz, hɝ dʌstkloʊk ɡɹin lɪnən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn blu. ʃi ən ɪleɪn meɪd ði ʌðɝ wɪmən dʒɹæb baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən ɪn ðɛɹ wʊlənz.

She gave a start once she realized where she was, and took a hasty step to one side, though she still held on to Lan's hand for a moment. Her choice of dresses was no better than Elayne's, all blue silk and green embroidery, cut low enough to show a heavy gold ring that would have rattled on her two thumbs together, dangling into her cleavage on a thin gold chain. The wide hat she carried by its ribbons was trimmed with blue plumes, her dustcloak green linen embroidered in blue. She and Elayne made the other women drab by comparison in their woolens.

ɪn ɛni keɪs, wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ʃi hæd bɪn kæf-aɪz ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ, ʃi wɑz ɔl hɝsɛlf naʊ, ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ bɹeɪɾ ɝaʊnd. "dʒɔɪn ði ʌðɝ mɛn naʊ, læn," ʃi sɛd pɝɛmptɔɹəli, "ænd wi kən ɡoʊ. ðə læs fɔɹ koʊtʃɪz ɑɹ fəɹ ðə mɛn."

In any case, whether or not she had been calf-eyes a moment before, she was all herself now, shifting her braid around. "Join the other men now, Lan," she said peremptorily, "and we can go. The last four coaches are for the men."

"æz jə seɪ," læn ɹɪplaɪd, boʊɪŋ wɪð ə hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt.

"As you say," Lan replied, bowing with a hand on his sword hilt.

ʃi wɑtʃt ɪm stʃɹaɪd təwɔɹd mæt wɪð ən ɪkspɹɛʃən ʌv wʌndɝ, pɹɑbli əneɪbəl tə bɪliv i wɑz oʊbeɪɪŋ soʊ mikli, ðən ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk ən ɹəkʌvɝɾ əɹ bɹɪsli sɛlf əɡɛn. ɡæðɝɪŋ ʌp ɪleɪn ən ði ʌðɝ wɪmən, ʃi hɝɾɪd əm təwɔɹd ðə fɝs tu koʊtʃɪz laɪk ə wʊmən ʃuɪŋ ɡis. baɪ ðə weɪ ʃi ʃaʊɾəd fəɹ sʌmwʌn tə oʊpən ðə steɪbliɑɹd ɡeɪts, noʊ wʌn wʊɾə noʊn ʃi hæd bɪn ðə wʌn dɪleɪɪŋ ðɛɹ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ. ʃi ʃaʊɾəd ət ðə dʒɹaɪvɝz, tu, sɛɾɪŋ əm tə snætʃɪŋ ʌp ðɛɹ ɹeɪnz ən flɝɪʃɪŋ ðɛɹ lɔŋ wɪps; ɪt wɑz ə mɑɹvəl ðeɪ weɪɾəd fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə klaɪm əbɔɹd.

She watched him stride toward Mat with an expression of wonder, probably unable to believe he was obeying so meekly, then gave herself a shake and recovered her bristly self again. Gathering up Elayne and the other women, she herded them toward the first two coaches like a woman shooing geese. By the way she shouted for someone to open the stableyard gates, no one would have known she had been the one delaying their departure. She shouted at the drivers, too, setting them to snatching up their reins and flourishing their long whips; it was a marvel they waited for anyone to climb aboard.

skɹæmbəlɪŋ ɔkwɝdli æftɝ læn ən neɪlzin ən bɛslən ɪndə ðə θɝd koʊtʃ, mæt pɹɑpt ɪz spɪɹ əkɹɔs ðə dɔɹ ən sæt daʊn hɑɹd wɪð ðə bæskəɾ ɑn ɪz læp əz ðə koʊtʃ lɝtʃt fɔɹwɝd. "wɛɹ dɪd jə kʌm fɹʌm, læn?" hi bɝst aʊɾ əz sun əz ɪntʃɹədʌkʃənz wɝ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ. "jɔɹ ðə læs mæn aɪ ɪkspɛktəd tə si. wɛɹ əv jə bɪn? laɪt, aɪ θɔt jə wɝ dɛd. aɪ noʊ ɹændz əfɹeɪd jə ɑɹ. ən lɛɾɪŋ nɪneɪiv ɔɹɾɝ jə ɝaʊnd. waɪ ɪn ðə laɪt wəd jə də ðæt?"

Scrambling awkwardly after Lan and Nalesean and Beslan into the third coach, Mat propped his spear across the door and sat down hard with the basket on his lap as the coach lurched forward. "Where did you come from, Lan?" he burst out as soon as introductions were out of the way. "You're the last man I expected to see. Where have you been? Light, I thought you were dead. I know Rand's afraid you are. And letting Nynaeve order you around. Why in the Light would you do that?"

ðə stoʊn-feɪst wɔɹɾɝ sim tə kənsɪɾɝ wɪtʃ kwɛstʃən tə ænsɝ. "nɪneɪiv ən aɪ wɝ mɛɹid læs naɪt baɪ ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "ði æθɑn maɪɹ əv sɛvɹəl . . . ənjuʒəwəl . . . mɛɹɪdʒ kʌstəmz. ðəɹ wɝ sɝpɹaɪzəz fəɹ boʊθ ʌv ʌs." ə smɔl smaɪl tʌtʃt ɪz maʊθ, ɪf nʌθɪŋ ɛls. hi ʃɹʌɡd slaɪtli; simɪŋli ðət wɑz ɔl ði ænsɝ i ɪntɛndəd tə ɡɪv.

The stone-faced Warder seemed to consider which question to answer. "Nynaeve and I were married last night by the Mistress of the Ships," he said finally. "The Atha'an Miere have several . . . unusual . . . marriage customs. There were surprises for both of us." A small smile touched his mouth, if nothing else. He shrugged slightly; seemingly that was all the answer he intended to give.

"ðə blɛsɪŋ ə ðə laɪt bi əpɑn jə ən jəɹ bɹaɪd," bɛslən mɝmɝd pəlaɪtli wɪð əz mʌtʃ ʌv ə baʊ əz ðə kɑnfaɪnz ə ðə koʊtʃ wəɾ əlaʊ, ən neɪlzin mʌmbəl sʌmθɪŋ, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz pleɪn fɹəm ɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən ðəɾ i θɔt læn mʌs bi mæd. neɪlzin hæd hæɾ ə ɡʊd bɪɾ ə nɪneɪivz kʌmpəni.

"The blessing of the Light be upon you and your bride," Beslan murmured politely with as much of a bow as the confines of the coach would allow, and Nalesean mumbled something, though it was plain from his expression that he thought Lan must be mad. Nalesean had had a good bit of Nynaeve's company.

mæt dʒʌst sæt ðəɹ sweɪɪŋ wɪð ðə koʊtʃəz moʊʃən ən stɛɹɪŋ. nɪneɪiv mɛɹid? læn mɛɹid tə nɪneɪiv? ðə mæn wɑz mæd. noʊ wʌndɝ ɪz aɪz lʊk soʊ blik. mæt wəɾ əz sun əv stʌft ə ɹæbɪd fɑks daʊn ɪz oʊn ʃɝt. oʊnli ə ful mɛɹid, ən oʊnli ə mædmæn wəd mɛɹi nɪneɪiv.

Mat just sat there swaying with the coach's motion and staring. Nynaeve married? Lan married to Nynaeve? The man was mad. No wonder his eyes looked so bleak. Mat would as soon have stuffed a rabid fox down his own shirt. Only a fool married, and only a madman would marry Nynaeve.

ɪf læn noʊɾəst ðət nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz oʊvɝdʒɔɪd, hi ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn. ɪksɛp fəɹ ɪz aɪz, hi lʊk noʊ dɪfɹən ðən mæt ɹɪmɛmbɝd. meɪbi ə lɪɾəl hɑɹɾɝ, ɪf ðət wɑz pɑsəbəl. "ðɛɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt," læn sɛd. "nɪneɪiv dʌznt wɑn jə tə noʊ, mæt, bʌt jə nid tə hɪɹ ɪt. jəɹ tu mɛn ɑɹ dɛd, kɪl baɪ mɑɡiɾin. aɪm sɑɹi, bʌɾ ɪf ɪts ɛni kɑnsəleɪʃən, ðeɪ tʃɹuli wɝ dɛd bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ nu. nɪneɪiv θɪŋks mɑɡiɾin mʌs bi ɡɔn, əɹ ʃiɾ əv tʃɹaɪɾ əɡɛn, bʌɾ aɪm nɑt soʊ sɝɾən. ɪt simz ʃiz ə pɝsənəl ɛnməɾi təwɔɹd nɪneɪiv, ɔlðoʊ nɪneɪiv mænədʒ tə əvɔɪd tɛlɪŋ mi waɪ." əɡɛn ðə smaɪl; læn simd ʌnəwɛɹ ʌv ɪt. "nɑɾ ɔl ʌv ɪt, ət list, ən ɪt dʌz nɑt mæɾɝ. bɛs jə noʊ wʌt maɪt bi feɪsɪŋ əs bɪɑn ðə ɹɪvɝ, ðoʊ."

If Lan noticed that not everyone was overjoyed, he gave no sign. Except for his eyes, he looked no different than Mat remembered. Maybe a little harder, if that was possible. "There is something more important," Lan said. "Nynaeve doesn't want you to know, Mat, but you need to hear it. Your two men are dead, killed by Moghedien. I am sorry, but if it is any consolation, they truly were dead before they knew. Nynaeve thinks Moghedien must be gone, or she'd have tried again, but I am not so certain. It seems she has a personal enmity toward Nynaeve, although Nynaeve managed to avoid telling me why." Again the smile; Lan seemed unaware of it. "Not all of it, at least, and it does not matter. Best you know what might be facing us beyond the river, though."

"mɑɡiɾin," bɛslən bɹiðd, aɪz ʃaɪnɪŋ. ðə mæn wɑz pɹɑbli siɪŋ fʌn.

"Moghedien," Beslan breathed, eyes shining. The man was probably seeing fun.

"mɑɡiɾin," neɪlzin bɹiðd, bʌɾ ɪn ɪz keɪs, ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ʌv ə ɡɹoʊn, ən i ɡeɪv ɪz pɔɪntəd bɪɹɾ ə fɪtfəl dʒɝk.

"Moghedien," Nalesean breathed, but in his case, it was more of a groan, and he gave his pointed beard a fitful jerk.

"ðoʊz blʌɾi fleɪmɪŋ wɪmən," mæt mʌɾɝd.

"Those bloody flaming women," Mat muttered.

"aɪ hoʊp jə doʊn ɪnklud maɪ waɪf," læn sɛd koʊldli, wʌn hænd ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd, ən mæt kwɪkli ɹeɪzd ɪz oʊn hænz.

"I hope you don't include my wife," Lan said coldly, one hand gripping the hilt of his sword, and Mat quickly raised his own hands.

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt. dʒʌst ɪleɪn ən . . . ən ðə kɪn."

"Of course not. Just Elayne and . . . and the Kin."

æftɝ ə moʊmənt, læn nɑɾəd, ən mæt bɹiðd ə smɔl saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif. ɪt wəd bi dʒʌs laɪk nɪneɪiv tə ɡɛɾ ɪm kɪl baɪ hɝ hʌzbənd - hɝ hʌzbənd! - wən ʃʊɹ əz bɹɛd wɑz bɹaʊn, ʃi wʊɾə hɪɾən ðə fæk ðət wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən maɪt bi ɪn ðə sɪɾi. ivən mɑɡiɾin dɪd nɑt ɹɪli fɹaɪɾən hɪm, nɑt soʊ lɔŋ əz i hæd ðə fɑkshɛɾ ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk, bʌt ðə mədæljən kəd nɑt pɹətɛk neɪlzin əɹ ɛni ʌv ðə ɹɛst. noʊ daʊt nɪneɪiv θɔt ʃi ən ɪleɪn wəd də ðæt. ðeɪ lɛɾ ɪm bɹɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz, ɔl ðə waɪl læfɪŋ ʌp ðɛɹ slivz əɾ ɪm waɪl ðeɪ -  "ɑɹən jə gɑnə ɹid maɪ mʌðɝz noʊt, mæt?"

After a moment, Lan nodded, and Mat breathed a small sigh of relief. It would be just like Nynaeve to get him killed by her husband - her husband! - when sure as bread was brown, she would have hidden the fact that one of the Forsaken might be in the city. Even Moghedien did not really frighten him, not so long as he had the foxhead around his neck, but the medallion could not protect Nalesean or any of the rest. No doubt Nynaeve thought she and Elayne would do that. They let him bring along the Redarms, all the while laughing up their sleeves at him while they -  "Aren't you going to read my mother's note, Mat?"

əntɪl bɛslən mɛnʃən ɪt, hi hæd nɑt ɹilaɪz ðəɹ wɑz ə ʃiɾ ə peɪpɝ, foʊldəd smɔl, tʌkt ɪn bɪtwin ðə bæskəɾ ən ðə stʃɹaɪp klɔθ. dʒʌst ɪnʌf ʃoʊd tə ɹɪvil ðə ɡɹin sil ɪmpɹɛst wɪð ði æŋkɝ ən sɔɹd.

Until Beslan mentioned it, he had not realized there was a sheet of paper, folded small, tucked in between the basket and the striped cloth. Just enough showed to reveal the green seal impressed with the Anchor and Sword.

hi bɹoʊk ðə wæks wɪð ɪz θʌm ən ənfoʊldəd ðə peɪdʒ, hoʊldɪŋ ɪt soʊ bɛslən kəd nɑt si wʌt wɑz ɹɪɾən. əz wɛl i dɪd; əɹ ðən əɡɛn, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ haʊ ði ʌðɝ mæn sɔ θɪŋz, meɪbi ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. iðɝ weɪ, mæt wɑz dʒʌst əz ɡlæd noʊ aɪz bʌɾ ɪz sɔ ðoʊz wɝdz. hɪz hɑɹt sæŋk dipɝ baɪ ðə laɪn.

He broke the wax with his thumb and unfolded the page, holding it so Beslan could not see what was written. As well he did; or then again, considering how the other man saw things, maybe it did not matter. Either way, Mat was just as glad no eyes but his saw those words. His heart sank deeper by the line.

mæt, maɪ swit, aɪm hævɪŋ jəɹ θɪŋz muv tə maɪ əpɑɹtməns. soʊ mʌtʃ mɔɹ kənvinjənt. baɪ ðə taɪm jə ɹɪtɝn, ɹaɪzɛl wɪl bi ɪn jəɹ oʊld ɹumz tə lʊk æftɝ jʌŋ oʊlvɝ. hi simz tə ɛndʒɔɪ hɝ kʌmpəni.

Mat, my sweet, I am having your things moved to my apartments. So much more convenient. By the time you return, Riselle will be in your old rooms to look after young Olver. He seems to enjoy her company.

aɪ hæv simstʃɹəsəz kʌmɪŋ tə mɛʒɝ ju. əl ɛndʒɔɪ wɑtʃɪŋ ðæt. jə mʌst wɛɹ ʃɔɹɾɝ koʊts. ən nu bɹitʃɪz, ʌv kɔɹs. juv ə dɪlaɪtfəl bɑɾəm. dʌklɪŋ, hu ɪz ðɪs dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz aɪ meɪd jə θɪŋk ʌv? aɪ hæv θɔɾ ə sɛvɹəl dɪlɪʃəs weɪz tə meɪk jə tɛl mi.

I have seamstresses coming to measure you. I will enjoy watching that. You must wear shorter coats. And new breeches, of course. You have a delightful bottom. Duckling, who is this Daughter of the Nine Moons I made you think of? I have thought of several delicious ways to make you tell me.

taɪlɪn ði ʌðɝz wɝ ɔl lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm ɪkspɛktənli. wɛl, læn wɑz sɪmpli lʊkɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪz ɡeɪz wɑz mɔɹ ənɝvɪŋ ðən ðə ɹɛst; ðət stɛɹ simd ɔlmoʊst . . . dɛd.

Tylin The others were all looking at him expectantly. Well, Lan was simply looking, but his gaze was more unnerving than the rest; that stare seemed almost . . . dead.

"ðə kwin θɪŋks ðəfɝs nid nu kloʊðz," mæt sɛd, stʌfɪŋ ðə noʊɾ ɪndə hɪz koʊt pɑkət. "aɪ θɪŋk əl teɪk ə næp." hi pʊl ðə bɹɪm ə hɪz hæt daʊn oʊvɝ ɪz aɪz, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt kloʊs ðɛm, stɛɹɪŋ aʊt ðə wɪndoʊ, wɛɹ ðə taɪd-bæk kɝɾən lɛɾ ɪn əkeɪʒənəl ɛɾiz ə dʌst. ɪɾ ɔlsoʊ lɛɾ ɪn ðə wɪnd, ðoʊ, wɪtʃ wɑz kənsɪɾɝəbli bɛɾɝ ðən ðə hiɾ ʌv ə kloʊz koʊtʃ.

"The Queen thinks I need new clothes," Mat said, stuffing the note into his coat pocket. "I think I'll take a nap." He pulled the brim of his hat down over his eyes, but he did not close them, staring out the window, where the tied-back curtain let in occasional eddies of dust. It also let in the wind, though, which was considerably better than the heat of a closed coach.

mɑɡiɾin ən taɪlɪn. ʌv ðə tu, hi wəd ɹæðɝ kənfɹʌn mɑɡiɾin. hi tʌtʃt ðə fɑkshɛd hæŋɪŋ ɪn ði oʊpən nɛk ə hɪz ʃɝt. ət list i hæd səm pɹətɛkʃən əɡɛns mɑɡiɾin. əɡɛns taɪlɪn, hi hæd noʊ mɔɹ ðən i dɪɾ əɡɛns ðə dɔɾɝ ə ðə blʌɾi naɪn munz, huɛvɝ ʃi wɑz. ənlɛs i kəd faɪn səm weɪ tə meɪk nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn liv ɛbu dɑɹ bɪfɔɹ tənaɪt, ɛvɹibɑɾi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə noʊ. sʌlənli, hi tʌɡd ɪz hæt loʊɝ. ðiz fleɪmɪŋ wɪmən ɹɪli wɝ meɪkɪŋ ɪm æk laɪk ə ɡɝl. ɪn ənʌðɝ mɪnət, hi wɑz əfɹeɪd, hi maɪt dʒʌst stɑɹt kɹaɪɪŋ.

Moghedien and Tylin. Of the two, he would rather confront Moghedien. He touched the foxhead hanging in the open neck of his shirt. At least he had some protection against Moghedien. Against Tylin, he had no more than he did against the Daughter of the bloody Nine Moons, whoever she was. Unless he could find some way to make Nynaeve and Elayne leave Ebou Dar before tonight, everybody was going to know. Sullenly, he tugged his hat lower. These flaming women really were making him act like a girl. In another minute, he was afraid, he might just start crying.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾieɪt


CHAPTER 38

sɪks stɔɹiz


Six Stories

mæt wʊɾə ɡɑɾən aʊɾ ən pʊl ðə koʊtʃ hɪmsɛlf, ɪf i kʊd. hi θɔt ðeɪ maɪɾ əv muv fæstɝ. ðə stʃɹits wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi fʊl wɪð ðə sʌn nɑɾ ɔl ðə weɪ ʌp, wæɡənz ən kɑɹts wɛndɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ nɑsəli θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz ən wɪnbloʊn dʌs tə ʃaʊts ən kɝsɪz boʊθ fɹəm dʒɹaɪvɝz ən ðoʊz fɔɹs tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ. soʊ mɛni bɑɹdʒəz slɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə kənælz ɑn ðə bɑɹɡmənz poʊlz ðəɾ ə mæn ɔlmoʊst cʊɾə wɔk ðə kənælz laɪk stʃɹits, stɛpɪŋ fɹəm wʌn bɑɹdʒ tə ðə nɛkst. ə nɔɪzi hʌm hʌŋ oʊvɝ ðə ɡlimɪŋ waɪt sɪɾi. ɛbu dɑɹ sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ʌp fəɹ taɪm lɔs jɛstɝdeɪ, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ət haɪ tʃeɪsəlin ən ðə fist ə laɪts, ən wɛl ɪt maɪt, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðət təmɑɹoʊ naɪt wɑz ðə fist ʌv ɛmbɝz, wɪð mæɾɪnz deɪ, sɛləbɹeɪɾɪŋ ðə faʊndɝ ʌv ɔltɑɹə, tu deɪz æftɝ ðæt, ən ðə fist ə ðə hæf mun ðə fɑloʊɪŋ naɪt. sʌðɝnɝz hæɾ ə ɹɛpjəteɪʃən fəɹ ɪndəstʃɹi, bʌɾ i θɔɾ ɪt wɑz kəz ðeɪ hæd tə wɝk soʊ hɑɹd tə meɪk ʌp fəɹ ɔl ðə fɛstəvəlz ən fistdeɪz. ðə wʌndɝ wɑz ðət ðeɪ hæd ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ fəɹ ɪt.

Mat would have gotten out and pulled the coach himself, if he could. He thought they might have moved faster. The streets were already full with the sun not all the way up, wagons and carts wending their way nosily through the crowds and windblown dust to shouts and curses both from drivers and those forced to get out of the way. So many barges slid along the canals on the bargemen's poles that a man almost could have walked the canals like streets, stepping from one barge to the next. A noisy hum hung over the gleaming white city. Ebou Dar seemed to be trying to make up for time lost yesterday, not to mention at High Chasaline and the Feast of Lights, and well it might, considering that tomorrow night was the Feast of Embers, with Maddin's Day, celebrating the founder of Altara, two days after that, and the Feast of the Half Moon the following night. Southerners had a reputation for industry, but he thought it was because they had to work so hard to make up for all the festivals and feastdays. The wonder was that they had the strength for it.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðə koʊtʃɪz dɪd ɹitʃ ðə ɹɪvɝ, dʒɹɔɪŋ ʌp ət wʌn ə ðə lɔŋ stoʊn lændɪŋz ðət dʒʌɾɪd aʊɾ ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝ, ɔl laɪnd wɪð stɛps fəɹ bɔɹɾɪŋ ðə boʊts taɪɾ əlɔŋsaɪd. stɪkɪŋ ə wɛdʒ ə dɑɹk jɛloʊ tʃiz ən ə bʌɾ ɛn ə bɹɛɾ ɪndə hɪz pɑkət, hi stʌf ðə bæskət wɛl ʌndɝ ðə sit. hi wɑz hʌŋɡɹi, bʌt sʌmwʌn ɪn ðə kɪtʃənz hæd bɪn ɪn tu mʌtʃ ʌv ə hɝi; moʊst ə ðə bæskət wɑz fɪl baɪ ə kleɪ pɑt fʊl ʌv ɔɪstɝz, bʌt ðə kɪtʃənz hæd fɝɡɑɾən tə kʊk ðɛm.

Eventually the coaches did reach the river, drawing up at one of the long stone landings that jutted out into the water, all lined with steps for boarding the boats tied alongside. Sticking a wedge of dark yellow cheese and a butt end of bread into his pocket, he stuffed the basket well under the seat. He was hungry, but someone in the kitchens had been in too much of a hurry; most of the basket was filled by a clay pot full of oysters, but the kitchens had forgotten to cook them.

skɹæmbəlɪŋ daʊn bɪhaɪn læn, hi lɛf neɪlzin ən bɛslən tə hɛlp veɪnɪn ən ði ʌðɝz daʊn fɹəm ðə læs koʊtʃɪz. nɪɹli ə dʌzən mɛn, ən nɑɾ ivən ðə kɛɹhinɪn ɹɪli smɔl, ðeɪ hæd bɪn dʒæmd ɪn laɪk æpəlz ɪn ə bæɹəl ən klæmbɝɾ aʊt stɪfli. mæt stʃɹoʊɾ əhɛɾ ə ðə wɔɹɾɝ təwɔɹd ðə lɛd koʊtʃ, ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ slæntəɾ əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɝ boʊθ gɑnə ɡɛɾ ə pis ə hɪz maɪnd noʊ mæɾɝ u wɑz lɪsnɪŋ. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip mɑɡiɾin hɪɾən! nɑt tə mɛnʃən tu ʌv ɪz mɛn dɛd! hi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə - ! sʌɾənli vɛɹi kɑnʃəs ə læn taʊɝɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪm laɪk ə stoʊn stætʃu wɪð ðət sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz hɪp, hi əmɛndəɾ ɪz θɔts. ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ət list wɑz gɑnə hɪɹ əbaʊt kipɪŋ ðət sɔɹɾ ə sikɹət.

Scrambling down behind Lan, he left Nalesean and Beslan to help Vanin and the others down from the last coaches. Nearly a dozen men, and not even the Cairhienin really small, they had been jammed in like apples in a barrel and clambered out stiffly. Mat strode ahead of the Warder toward the lead coach, the ashandarei slanted across his shoulder. Nynaeve and Elayne were both going to get a piece of his mind no matter who was listening. Trying to keep Moghedien hidden! Not to mention two of his men dead! He was going to - ! Suddenly very conscious of Lan towering behind him like a stone statue with that sword on his hip, he amended his thoughts. The Daughter-Heir at least was going to hear about keeping that sort of secret.

nɪneɪiv wɑz stændɪŋ ɑn ðə lændɪŋ, taɪɪŋ ɑn əɹ blu-plum hæɾ ən tɔkɪŋ bæk ʌp ɪndə ðə koʊtʃ wən i ɹitʃt ɪt. ". . . wɪl wɝk aʊt, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ u wəd θɪŋk ðə si foʊk, ʌv ɔl pipəl, wəd dɪmæn sətʃ ə θɪŋ, ivən dʒʌst ɪn pɹaɪvət?"

Nynaeve was standing on the landing, tying on her blue-plumed hat and talking back up into the coach when he reached it. ". . . Will work out, of course, but who would think the Sea Folk, of all people, would demand such a thing, even just in private?"

"bʌt, nɪneɪiv," ɪleɪn sɛɾ əz ʃi stɛp daʊn wɪð əɹ ɡɹin-plum hæɾ ɪn əɹ hænd, "ɪf læs naɪt wɑz əz ɡlɔɹiəs əz jə seɪ, haʊ kən jə kəmpleɪn əbaʊt - ?"

"But, Nynaeve," Elayne said as she stepped down with her green-plumed hat in her hand, "if last night was as glorious as you say, how can you complain about - ?"

ðət wɑz wən ðeɪ bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə hɪm ən læn. ʌv læn, ɹɪli. nɪneɪivz aɪz oʊpənd waɪɾɝ ən waɪɾɝ, fɪlɪŋ əɹ feɪs əz ɪt ɹɛɾənd tə ʃeɪm tu sʌnsɛts. meɪbi θɹi. ɪleɪn fɹoʊz wɪð wʌn fʊt stɪl ɑn ðə koʊtʃ stɛp, ɡɪvɪŋ ðə wɔɹɾɝ sətʃ ə fɹaʊn jə wʊɾə θɔɾ i hæd snikt ʌp ɑn ðɛm. læn ɡeɪz daʊn ət nɪneɪiv, ðoʊ, wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən ðən ə fɛns poʊst, ən fəɹ ɔl nɪneɪiv əpɪɹd ɹɛɾi tə kɹɔl ʌndɝ ðə koʊtʃ ən haɪd, ʃi stɛɹɾ ʌp ət læn əz ɪf noʊ wʌn ɛls ɪɡzɪstəɾ ɪn ðə wɝld. ɹilaɪzɪŋ əɹ fɹaʊn wɑz weɪstəd ðɛɹ, ɪleɪn tʊk əɹ fʊɾ ɔf ðə stɛp ən muvd aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ʌv ɹin ən ðə tu waɪz wɪmən u hæd ʃɛɹd ðə koʊtʃ, tæmɑɹlə ən ə ɡɹeɪɪŋ sɑldəiən wʊmən neɪm dʒənɪɹə, bʌt ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ dɪd nɑt ɡɪv ʌp; oʊ, noʊ. ʃi tʃɹænsfɝd ðət skaʊl tə mæt kɔθən, ən ɪf ɪɾ ɔltɝɾ ə wɪt, ɪt wɑz tə dipən. hi snɔɹɾɪd ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. juʒəwəli wən ə wʊmən wɑz ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ, ʃi kəd faɪn soʊ mɛni θɪŋz tə bleɪm ɑn ðə nɪɹəs mæn ðəɾ i waʊn ʌp θɪŋkɪŋ meɪbi hi ɹɪli wɑz ət fɔlt. ɪn ɪz ɪkspɪɹiəns, oʊl mɛmɹiz əɹ nu, ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli tu taɪmz ə wʊmən ədmɪɾəd ʃi wɑz ɹɔŋ: wən ʃi wɑntəd sʌmθɪŋ, ən wən ɪt snoʊɾ ət mɪdsʌmɝ.

That was when they became aware of him and Lan. Of Lan, really. Nynaeve's eyes opened wider and wider, filling her face as it reddened to shame two sunsets. Maybe three. Elayne froze with one foot still on the coach step, giving the Warder such a frown you would have thought he had sneaked up on them. Lan gazed down at Nynaeve, though, with no more expression than a fence post, and for all Nynaeve appeared ready to crawl under the coach and hide, she stared up at Lan as if no one else existed in the world. Realizing her frown was wasted there, Elayne took her foot off the step and moved out of the way of Reanne and the two Wise Women who had shared the coach, Tamarla and a graying Saldaean woman named Janira, but the Daughter-Heir did not give up; oh, no. She transferred that scowl to Mat Cauthon, and if it altered a whit, it was to deepen. He snorted and shook his head. Usually when a woman was in the wrong, she could find so many things to blame on the nearest man that he wound up thinking maybe he really was at fault. In his experience, old memories or new, there were only two times a woman admitted she was wrong: when she wanted something, and when it snowed at midsummer.

nɪneɪiv sizd əɾ əɹ bɹeɪd, bʌt nɑɾ əz ɪf əɹ hɑɹt wɑz ɪn ɪt. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz fʌmbəld ən fɛl əweɪ, ən ʃi stɑɹɾəd ɹɪŋɪŋ əɹ hænz ɪnstɛd. "læn," ʃi bɪɡæn ənstɛɾəli, "ju mʌsnt θɪŋk aɪ wəd tɔk əbaʊt - "

Nynaeve seized at her braid, but not as if her heart was in it. Her fingers fumbled and fell away, and she started wringing her hands instead. "Lan," she began unsteadily, "you mustn't think I would talk about - "

ðə wɔɹɾɝ kʌɾ ɪn smuðli, boʊɪŋ ən ɔfɝɪŋ əɹ ɪz ɑɹm. "wi ɑɹ ɪn pʌblɪk, nɪneɪiv. wʌtɛvɝ jə wɑnə seɪ ɪn pʌblɪk, jə meɪ. meɪ aɪ ɛskɔɹt jə tə ðə boʊt?"

The Warder cut in smoothly, bowing and offering her his arm. "We are in public, Nynaeve. Whatever you want to say in public, you may. May I escort you to the boat?"

"jɛs," ʃi sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ soʊ vɪɡɝəsli ðəɾ əɹ hæt nɪɹli fɛl ɔf. ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd ɪt hɝidli wɪð boʊθ hænz. "jɛs. ɪn pʌblɪk. jəl ɛskɔɹt mi." teɪkɪŋ ɪz ɑɹm, ʃi ɹiɡeɪn səm mɛʒɝ ə kəmpoʊʒɝ, ət list ɪnsəfɑɹ əz əɹ feɪs wɛnt. ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ dʌst-kloʊk ɪn əɹ fɹi hænd, ʃi pɹæktəkli dʒɹæɡd ɪm əkɹɔs ðə ki təwɔɹd ðə lændɪŋ.

"Yes," she said, nodding so vigorously that her hat nearly fell off. She straightened it hurriedly with both hands. "Yes. In public. You will escort me." Taking his arm, she regained some measure of composure, at least insofar as her face went. Gathering her dust-cloak in her free hand, she practically dragged him across the quay toward the landing.

mæt wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ʃi maɪt bi ɪl. hi ɹæðɝ ɛndʒɔɪd siɪŋ nɪneɪiv dʒɹɑpt ə pɛɡ əɹ sɪks, bʌt ʃi hɑɹdli ɛvɝ lɛɾ ɪt læs tu bɹɛθs. ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd nɑt hil ðɛmsɛlvz. meɪbi hi ʃəd sədʒɛs tə ɪleɪn ðət ʃi dil wɪð wʌtɛvɝ wɑz ɹɔŋ wɪð nɪneɪiv. hi əvɔɪɾəd hilɪŋ laɪk dɛθ əɹ mɛɹɪdʒ hɪmsɛlf, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz dɪfɹən fəɹ ʌðɝ pipəl əz i sɔ ɪt. fɝst, ðoʊ, hi hæɾ ə fju tʃɔɪs wɝdz tə seɪ əbaʊt sikɹəts.

Mat wondered whether she might be ill. He rather enjoyed seeing Nynaeve dropped a peg or six, but she hardly ever let it last two breaths. Aes Sedai could not Heal themselves. Maybe he should suggest to Elayne that she deal with whatever was wrong with Nynaeve. He avoided Healing like death or marriage himself, but it was different for other people as he saw it. First, though, he had a few choice words to say about secrets.

oʊpənɪŋ ɪz maʊθ, hi ɹeɪzd ən ædmənətɔɹi fɪŋɡɝ . . . .

Opening his mouth, he raised an admonitory finger . . . .

. . . ən ɪleɪn poʊkt ɪm ɪn ðə tʃɛst wɪð hɝz, hɝ skaʊl bɪniθ ðət plum hæt soʊ koʊld ɪt meɪɾ ɪz toʊz hɝt. "mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ði aɪsi vɔɪs ʌv ə kwin pɹənaʊnsɪŋ dʒʌdʒmənt, "ɪkspleɪn tə nɪneɪiv ən mi ðə səɡnɪfɪkəns ə ðoʊz ɹɛd flaʊɝz ɑn ðə bæskət, wɪtʃ aɪ si jə ət list əv ʃeɪm ɪnʌf tə hæv hɪɾən."

. . . and Elayne poked him in the chest with hers, her scowl beneath that plumed hat so cold it made his toes hurt. "Mistress Corly," she said in the icy voice of a queen pronouncing judgment, "explained to Nynaeve and me the significance of those red flowers on the basket, which I see you at least have shame enough to have hidden."

hɪz feɪs wɛn ɹɛɾɝ ðən nɪneɪivz hæd θɔɾ ʌv. ə fju peɪsɪz əweɪ, ɹin kɔɹli ən ði ʌðɝ tu wɝ taɪɪŋ ɑn hæts ən ədʒʌstɪŋ dʒɹɛsəz ðə weɪ wɪmən dɪɾ ɛvɹi taɪm ðeɪ stʊɾ ʌp, sæt daʊn əɹ muv θɹi stɛps. jɛt dɪspaɪt ɡɪvɪŋ ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən tə ðɛɹ kloʊðz, ðeɪ hæɾ ɪnʌf lɛft oʊvɝ fəɹ ɡlænsɪz ɪn ɪz dɝɛkʃən, ən fəɹ wʌns ðeɪ wɝ niðɝ dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ nɔɹ stɑɹɾəld. hi hæd nɑt noʊn ðə blʌɾi flaʊɝz mɛn ɛniθɪŋ! tɛn sʌnsɛts wəd nɑɾ əv dʌn fəɹ ɪz feɪs.

His face went redder than Nynaeve's had thought of. A few paces away, Reanne Corly and the other two were tying on hats and adjusting dresses the way women did every time they stood up, sat down or moved three steps. Yet despite giving their attention to their clothes, they had enough left over for glances in his direction, and for once they were neither disapproving nor startled. He had not known the bloody flowers meant anything! Ten sunsets would not have done for his face.

"soʊ!" ɪleɪnz vɔɪs wɑz loʊ, fəɹ ɪz ɪɹz əloʊn, bʌɾ ɪt dʒɹɪp dɪsɡʌst ən kəntɛmpt. ʃi ɡeɪv əɹ kloʊk ə twɪtʃ, tə kip ɪt fɹəm tʌtʃɪŋ hɪm. "ɪts tʃɹu! aɪ kəd nɑt bɪliv ɪɾ ə ju, nɑɾ ivən ju! aɪm ʃʊɹ nɪneɪiv kʊdnt. ɛni pɹɑməs aɪ meɪd tə jə ɪz əbɑlɪʃt! əl nɑt kip ɛni pɹɑməs tə ə mæn u kəd fɔɹs ɪz ətɛnʃənz ɑn ə wʊmən, ɑn ɛni wʊmən, bʌɾ ɪspɛʃli ɑn ə kwin u hæz ɔfɝɾ ɪm - "

"So!" Elayne's voice was low, for his ears alone, but it dripped disgust and contempt. She gave her cloak a twitch, to keep it from touching him. "It's true! I could not believe it of you, not even you! I'm sure Nynaeve couldn't. Any promise I made to you is abolished! I will not keep any promise to a man who could force his attentions on a woman, on any woman, but especially on a Queen who has offered him - "

"mi fɔɹs maɪ ətɛnʃənz ɑn hɝ!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. əɹ ɹæðɝ, hi tʃɹaɪd tə ʃaʊt; tʃoʊkɪŋ meɪɾ ɪt kʌm aʊɾ ɪn ə wiz.

"Me force my attentions on her!" he shouted. Or rather, he tried to shout; choking made it come out in a wheeze.

sizɪŋ ɪleɪnz ʃoʊldɝz, hi pʊld əɹ əweɪ fɹəm ðə kæɹɪdʒɪz ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns. ʃɝtləs dɑkmən ɪn steɪnd ɡɹin lɛðɝ vɛsts hɝid baɪ, kæɹiɪŋ sæks ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz əɹ ɹoʊlɪŋ bæɹəlz əlɔŋ ðə ki, səm pʊʃɪŋ loʊ bæɹoʊz loʊɾəd wɪð kɹeɪts, ɔl ɡɪvɪŋ ðə koʊtʃɪz ə waɪd bɝθ. ðə kwin ʌv ɔltɑɹə maɪt nɑɾ əv mʌtʃ paʊɝ, bʌɾ əɹ sɪdʒəl ɑn ə koʊtʃ dɔɹ ɛnʃʊɹd ðət kɑmənɝz wəd ɡɪv ɪt ɹum. neɪlzin ən bɛslən wɝ tʃæɾɪŋ əz ðeɪ lɛd ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz ɑntu ðə lændɪŋ, veɪnɪn bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹɪɹ ən stɛɹɪŋ ɡluməli ət ðə tʃɑpi ɹɪvɝ; hi kleɪm tə hæv ə tɛndɝ bɛli wən ɪt keɪm tə boʊts. ðə waɪz wɪmən fɹəm boʊθ koʊtʃɪz hæd ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ɹin, wɑtʃɪŋ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ nɑt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝhɪɹ. hi wɪspɝd hɔɹsli dʒʌs ðə seɪm.

Seizing Elayne's shoulders, he pulled her away from the carriages a little distance. Shirtless dockmen in stained green leather vests hurried by, carrying sacks on their shoulders or rolling barrels along the quay, some pushing low barrows loaded with crates, all giving the coaches a wide berth. The Queen of Altara might not have much power, but her sigil on a coach door ensured that commoners would give it room. Nalesean and Beslan were chatting as they led the Redarms onto the landing, Vanin bringing up the rear and staring gloomily at the choppy river; he claimed to have a tender belly when it came to boats. The Wise Women from both coaches had gathered around Reanne, watching, but they were not close enough to overhear. He whispered hoarsely just the same.

"ju lɪsən tə mi! ðət wʊmən woʊn teɪk noʊ fəɹ ən ænsɝ; aɪ seɪ noʊ, ən ʃi læfs ət mi. ʃiz stɑɹv mi, bʊlid mi, tʃeɪs mi daʊn laɪk ə stæɡ! ʃiz mɔɹ hænz ðən ɛni sɪks wɪmən aɪ ɛvɝ mɛt. ʃi θɹɛɾənd tə hæv ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən əndʒɹɛs mi ɪf aɪ dɪdn lɛɾ əɹ - " əbɹʌpli, wʌɾ i wɑz seɪɪŋ hɪt hɪm. ən u hi wɑz seɪɪŋ ɪt tə. hi mænədʒ tə kloʊz ɪz maʊθ bɪfɔɹ i swɑloʊɾ ə flaɪ. hi bɪkeɪm vɛɹi ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn wʌn ə ðə dɑɹk mɛɾəl ɹeɪvənz ɪnleɪɾ ɪn ðə hæft ə ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ, soʊ hi wəd nɑɾ əv tə miɾ əɹ aɪz. "wʌɾ aɪ min tə seɪ ɪz, jə doʊn ʌndɝstænd," hi mʌɾɝd. "ju hæv ɪɾ ɔl bækwɝdz." hi ɹɪskt ə ɡlæns əɾ əɹ ʌndɝ ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz hætbɹəm.

"You listen to me! That woman won't take no for an answer; I say no, and she laughs at me. She's starved me, bullied me, chased me down like a stag! She has more hands than any six women I ever met. She threatened to have the serving women undress me if I didn't let her - " Abruptly, what he was saying hit him. And who he was saying it to. He managed to close his mouth before he swallowed a fly. He became very interested in one of the dark metal ravens inlaid in the haft of the ashandarei, so he would not have to meet her eyes. "What I mean to say is, you don't understand," he muttered. "You have it all backwards." He risked a glance at her under the edge of his hatbrim.

ə feɪn blʌʃ kɹɛpt ɪndə hɝ tʃiks, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs bɪkeɪm sɑləm əz ə mɑɹbəl bʌst. "ɪt . . . əpɪɹz ðəɾ aɪ meɪ hæv mɪsəndɝstʊd," ʃi sɛd soʊbɝli. "ðæɾ ɪz . . . vɛɹi bæɾ ə taɪlɪn." hi θɔɾ əɹ lɪps twɪtʃt. "hæv jə kənsɪɾɝd pɹæktəsɪŋ dɪfɹən smaɪlz ɪn ə mɪɹɝ, mæt?"

A faint blush crept into her cheeks, but her face became solemn as a marble bust. "It . . . appears that I may have misunderstood," she said soberly. "That is . . . very bad of Tylin." He thought her lips twitched. "Have you considered practicing different smiles in a mirror, Mat?"

stɑɹɾəld, hi blɪŋkt. "wʌt?"

Startled, he blinked. "What?"

"aɪ hæv hɝd ɹɪlaɪəbli ðət ðəɾ ɪz wʌt jʌŋ wɪmən də hu ətʃɹæk ði aɪz ə kɪŋz." sʌmθɪŋ kɹæk ðə səbɹaɪəɾi ʌv əɹ vɔɪs, ən ðɪs taɪm əɹ lɪps dɛfənətli twɪtʃt. "ju maɪt tʃɹaɪ bæɾɪŋ jəɹ aɪlæʃɪz, tu." kætʃɪŋ əɹ loʊɝ lɪp wɪð əɹ tiθ, ʃi tɝn əweɪ, ʃoʊldɝz ʃeɪkɪŋ, dʌst-kloʊk stʃɹimɪŋ bɪhaɪn əz ʃi hɝid təwɔɹd ðə lændɪŋ. bɪfɔɹ ʃi dɑɹɾɪd bɪɑn hɪɹɪŋ, hi hɝɾ əɹ kɔɹɾəl sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt "ə teɪst ə hɪz oʊn mɛɾəsən." ɹin ən ðə waɪz wɪmən skɝiɾ ɪn əɹ weɪk, ə flɑk ə hɛnz fɑloʊɪŋ ə tʃɪk ɪnstɛɾ ə ði ʌðɝ weɪ ɝaʊnd. ðə fju bɛɹ-tʃɛstəd boʊtmən ʌp aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ boʊts stɑp kɔɪlɪŋ laɪnz əɹ wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ ən baʊd ðɛɹ hɛdz ɹɪspɛkfəli əz ðə pɹəsɛʃən wɛn baɪ.

"I have heard reliably that that is what young women do who attract the eyes of kings." Something cracked the sobriety of her voice, and this time her lips definitely twitched. "You might try batting your eyelashes, too." Catching her lower lip with her teeth, she turned away, shoulders shaking, dust-cloak streaming behind as she hurried toward the landing. Before she darted beyond hearing, he heard her chortle something about "a taste of his own medicine." Reanne and the Wise Women scurried in her wake, a flock of hens following a chick instead of the other way around. The few bare-chested boatmen up out of their boats stopped coiling lines or whatever they were doing and bowed their heads respectfully as the procession went by.

snætʃɪŋ ɔf ɪz hæt, mæt kənsɪɾɝd θɹoʊɪŋ ɪt daʊn ən dʒʌmpɪŋ ɑn ɪt. wɪmən! hi ʃʊɾə noʊn bɛɾɝ ðən tə ɪkspɛk sɪmpəθi. hi wəd laɪk tə θɹɑɾəl ðə blʌɾi dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ. ən nɪneɪiv, tu, ɑn dʒɛnɝəl pɹɪnsəpəl. ɪksɛpt, ʌv kɔɹs, ðəɾ i kəd nɑt. hi hæd meɪd pɹɑməsəz. ən ðoʊz daɪs wɝ stɪl juzɪŋ ɪz skʌl fəɹ ə daɪs kʌp. ən wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən maɪt bi ɝaʊn sʌmwɛɹ. sɛɾəlɪŋ ðə hæt skwɛɹli bæk ɑn ɪz hɛd, hi mɑɹtʃt daʊn ðə lændɪŋ, bɹʌʃt pæs ðə waɪz wɪmən ən kɑɾ ʌp tə ɪleɪn. ʃi wɑz stɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪt daʊn ɡɪɡəlz, bʌɾ ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi kʌɾ əɹ aɪz ɪz weɪ, ðə kʌlɝ ɪn əɹ tʃiks ɹɪnuɾ ɪtsɛlf ən soʊ dɪd ðə ɡɪɡəlz.

Snatching off his hat, Mat considered throwing it down and jumping on it. Women! He should have known better than to expect sympathy. He would like to throttle the bloody Daughter-Heir. And Nynaeve, too, on general principle. Except, of course, that he could not. He had made promises. And those dice were still using his skull for a dice cup. And one of the Forsaken might be around somewhere. Settling the hat squarely back on his head, he marched down the landing, brushed past the Wise Women and caught up to Elayne. She was still trying to fight down giggles, but every time she cut her eyes his way, the color in her cheeks renewed itself and so did the giggles.

hi stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd. blʌɾi wɪmən! blʌɾi pɹɑməsəz. ɹimuvɪŋ ɪz hæt lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə pʊl ðə lɛðɝ kɔɹd fɹəm ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk, hi ɹɪlʌktənli ʃʌvd ɪɾ ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən. ðə sɪlvɝ fɑkshɛd dæŋɡəl bɪniθ ɪz fɪst. "ju ən nɪneɪiv wɪl əv tə dɪsaɪd wɪtʃ ə jə wɛɹz ðɪs. bʌɾ aɪ wɑn ɪt bæk wən wi liv ɛbu dɑɹ. jə ʌndɝstænd? ðə moʊmənt wi liv - "

He stared straight ahead. Bloody women! Bloody promises. Removing his hat long enough to pull the leather cord from around his neck, he reluctantly shoved it in her direction. The silver foxhead dangled beneath his fist. "You and Nynaeve will have to decide which of you wears this. But I want it back when we leave Ebou Dar. You understand? The moment we leave - "

sʌɾənli hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz wɔkɪŋ əloʊn. tɝnɪŋ, hi faʊn ɪleɪn stændɪŋ stɑk stɪl tu peɪsɪz bæk, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm wɪð ɹin ən ðə ɹɛs klʌstɝd bɪhaɪn hɝ.

Suddenly he realized he was walking alone. Turning, he found Elayne standing stock still two paces back, staring at him with Reanne and the rest clustered behind her.

"wʌts ðə mæɾɝ naʊ?" hi dɪmændəd. "oʊ. jɛs, aɪ noʊ ɔl əbaʊt mɑɡiɾin." ə skɪni fɛloʊ wɪð ɹɛd stoʊnz ɑn ɪz bɹæs-hup ɪɹɪŋz, bɛndɪŋ oʊvɝ ə mʊɹɪŋ laɪn, dʒɝkt ɝaʊn soʊ fæst ət ðət neɪm ðəɾ i pɪtʃt oʊvɝ ðə saɪd wɪð ə laʊd jɛl ən ə laʊɾɝ splæʃ. mæt dɪd nɑt kɛɹ u hɝd. "tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip əɹ sikɹət - ən tu ʌv maɪ mɛn dɛd! - æftɝ jə pɹɑməst. wɛl, wɪl tɔk əbaʊt ðət leɪɾɝ. aɪ meɪɾ ə pɹɑməs, tu; aɪ pɹɑməs tə kip ðə pɛɹ ə jə əlaɪv. ɪf mɑɡiɾin ʃoʊz ʌp, ʃɪl ɡoʊ æftɝ jə tu. naʊ, hɪɹ." hi pʊʃt ðə mədæljən əɾ əɹ əɡɛn.

"What's the matter now?" he demanded. "Oh. Yes, I know all about Moghedien." A skinny fellow with red stones on his brass-hoop earrings, bending over a mooring line, jerked around so fast at that name that he pitched over the side with a loud yell and a louder splash. Mat did not care who heard. "Trying to keep her secret - and two of my men dead! - after you promised. Well, we'll talk about that later. I made a promise, too; I promised to keep the pair of you alive. If Moghedien shows up, she'll go after you two. Now, here." He pushed the medallion at her again.

ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd sloʊli ɪn pʌzəlmənt, ðən tɝn tə mɝmɝ tə ɹin. oʊnli æftɝ ði oʊldɝ wɪmən wɝ ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ təwɔɹd wɛɹ nɪneɪiv stʊd bɛkənɪŋ əm ət ðə hɛɾ ʌv ə flaɪɾ ə boʊt stɛɹz dɪɾ ɪleɪn teɪk ðə fɑkshɛd, tɝnɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz.

She shook her head slowly in puzzlement, then turned to murmur to Reanne. Only after the older women were on their way toward where Nynaeve stood beckoning them at the head of a flight of boat stairs did Elayne take the foxhead, turning it over in her fingers.

"du juv ɛni noʊʃən wʌɾ aɪ wʊɾə dʌn tə hæv ðɪs fəɹ stʌɾi?" ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. "ɛni noʊʃən əɾ ɔl?" ʃi wɑz tɔl fəɹ ə wʊmən, bʌt ʃi stɪl hæd tə lʊk ʌp ət hɪm. ʃi maɪt nɛvɝ əv sin ɪm bɪfɔɹ. "ju ɑɹ ə tʃɹʌbəlsəm mæn, mæt kɔθən. lini wəd seɪ aɪ wɑz ɹɪpiɾɪŋ maɪsɛlf, bʌt jə . . . !" ɪkspɛlɪŋ əɹ bɹɛθ, ɪleɪn ɹitʃt ʌp tə pʊl ɪz hæɾ ɔf ən slɪp ðə kɔɹɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd. ʃi æktʃəli  tʌk ðə fɑkshɛɾ ɪndə hɪz ʃɝɾ ən pæɾəd ɪt bɪfɔɹ hændɪŋ ɪm ɪz hæt. "aɪ woʊnt wɛɹ ðət waɪl nɪneɪiv dʌzn əv wʌn, əɹ eɪvinhə, ən aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ fil ðə seɪm. jə wɛɹ ɪt. æftɝ ɔl, jə kən hɑɹdli kip jəɹ pɹɑməs ɪf mɑɡiɾin kɪlz ju. nɑt ðəɾ aɪ θɪŋk ʃiz stɪl hɪɹ. aɪ θɪŋk ʃi bɪlivz ʃi kɪl nɪneɪiv, ən aɪ wəd nɑt bi sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf ðət wɑz ɔl ʃi keɪm fɔɹ. jə mʌs bi kɛɹfəl, ðoʊ. nɪneɪiv sɛz ðɛɹz ə stɔɹm kʌmɪŋ, ən ʃi dʌzn min ðɪs wɪnd. aɪ. . . ." ðət feɪn blʌʃ ɹɪtɝn tə hɝ tʃiks. "aɪ æm sɑɹi aɪ læft ət ju." ʃi klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt, lʊkɪŋ əweɪ. "səmtaɪmz aɪ fɝɡɛt maɪ duɾi tə maɪ sʌbʒɪkts. jə ɑɹ ə wɝði sʌbʒɪkt, meɪtʃɹim əl wɪl si ðət nɪneɪiv ʌndɝstænz ðə ɹaɪɾ ʌv . . . ʌv jə ən taɪlɪn. pɝhæps wi kən hɛlp."

"Do you have any notion what I would have done to have this for study?" she said quietly. "Any notion at all?" She was tall for a woman, but she still had to look up at him. She might never have seen him before. "You are a troublesome man, Mat Cauthon. Lini would say I was repeating myself, but you . . . !" Expelling her breath, Elayne reached up to pull his hat off and slip the cord over his head. She actually tucked the foxhead into his shirt and patted it before handing him his hat. "I won't wear that while Nynaeve doesn't have one, or Aviendha, and I think they feel the same. You wear it. After all, you can hardly keep your promise if Moghedien kills you. Not that I think she's still here. I think she believes she killed Nynaeve, and I would not be surprised if that was all she came for. You must be careful, though. Nynaeve says there's a storm coming, and she doesn't mean this wind. I. . . ." That faint blush returned to her cheeks. "I am sorry I laughed at you." She cleared her throat, looking away. "Sometimes I forget my duty to my subjects. You are a worthy subject, Matrim Cauthon. I will see that Nynaeve understands the right of . . . of you and Tylin. Perhaps we can help."

"noʊ," hi spləɾɝd. "aɪ min, jɛs. aɪ min. . . . ðəɾ ɪz. . . . oʊ, kɪs ə fleɪmɪŋ ɡoʊɾ ɪf aɪ noʊ wʌɾ aɪ min. aɪ ɔlmoʊst wɪʃ jə dɪdnt noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ." nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn sɪɾɪŋ daʊn tə dɪskʌs ɪm wɪð taɪlɪn oʊvɝ ti. kəɾ i ɛvɝ lɪv ðət daʊn? kəɾ i ɛvɝ əɡɛn lʊk ɛni ʌv əm ɪn ði aɪ æftɝwɝd? bʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt. . . . hi wɑz bɪtwin ðə wʊlf ən ðə bɛɹ wɪð noʊwɛɹ tə ɹʌn. "oʊ, ʃip swɑləp! ʃip swɑləp ən blʌɾi bʌɾɝd ʌnjənz!" hi nɪɹli wɪʃt ʃi wəd kɔl ɪm daʊn fəɹ ɪz læŋɡwədʒ ðə weɪ nɪneɪiv wʊd, dʒʌs tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə sʌbʒɪkt.

"No," he spluttered. "I mean, yes. I mean. . . . That is. . . . Oh, kiss a flaming goat if I know what I mean. I almost wish you didn't know the truth." Nynaeve and Elayne sitting down to discuss him with Tylin over tea. Could he ever live that down? Could he ever again look any of them in the eye afterward? But if they did not. . . . He was between the wolf and the bear with nowhere to run. "Oh, sheep swallop! Sheep swallop and bloody buttered onions!" He nearly wished she would call him down for his language the way Nynaeve would, just to change the subject.

hɝ lɪps muv saɪlənli, ən fəɹ ən ɪnstən i hæd ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪmpɹɛʃən ðət ʃi wɑz ɹɪpiɾɪŋ wʌɾ i hæd dʒʌst sɛd. ʌv kɔɹs nɑt. hi wɑz siɪŋ θɪŋz; ðət wɑz ɔl. əlaʊd, ʃi sɛd, "aɪ ʌndɝstænd." saʊndɪŋ dʒʌst əz ɪf ʃi dɪd. "kʌm əlɔŋ, naʊ, mæt. wi kænt weɪs taɪm stændɪŋ ɪn wʌn spɑt."

Her lips moved silently, and for an instant he had the strange impression that she was repeating what he had just said. Of course not. He was seeing things; that was all. Aloud, she said, "I understand." Sounding just as if she did. "Come along, now, Mat. We can't waste time standing in one spot."

ɡeɪpɪŋ, hi wɑtʃt əɹ lɪf skɝts ən kloʊk tə meɪk əɹ weɪ əlɔŋ ðə lændɪŋ. ʃi ʌndɝstʊd? ʃi ʌndɝstʊd, ən nɑt wʌn æsəd lɪɾəl kɑmɛnt, nɑt wʌn kʌɾɪŋ ɹɪmɑɹk? ən i wɑz əɹ səbdʒɛkt. hɝ wɝði sʌbʒɪkt. fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə mədæljən, hi fɑloʊd. hi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ðə faɪt wəd bi tə ɛvɝ ɡɛɾ ɪt bæk. ɪf i lɪvd əz lɔŋ əz tu ɛɛs sədaɪ, hi stɪl wəd nɛvɝ ʌndɝstænd wɪmən, ən noʊbəlwɪmən wɝ pjʊɹli ðə wɝst.

Gaping, he watched her lift skirts and cloak to make her way along the landing. She understood? She understood, and not one acid little comment, not one cutting remark? And he was her subject. Her worthy subject. Fingering the medallion, he followed. He had been sure the fight would be to ever get it back. If he lived as long as two Aes Sedai, he still would never understand women, and noblewomen were purely the worst.

wən i ɹitʃt ðə stɛps ɪleɪn hæd ɡɔn daʊn, ðə boʊts tu bɹæs-ɪɹɪn ɔɹsmɪn wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi juzɪŋ ðɛɹ lɔŋ swips tə pʊʃ ðə vɛsəl əweɪ. ɪleɪn wɑz hɝɾɪŋ ɹin ən ðə læst ə ðə waɪz wɪmən ɪndə ðə kæbən, ən læn stʊɾ ʌp ɪn ðə baʊz wɪð nɪneɪiv. ə ʃaʊt fɹəm bɛslən kɔld ɪm ɑn tə ðə nɛks boʊt, wɪtʃ hɛld ɔl ə ðə mɛn ɪksɛp ðə wɔɹɾɝ.

When he reached the steps Elayne had gone down, the boat's two brass-earringed oarsmen were already using their long sweeps to push the vessel away. Elayne was herding Reanne and the last of the Wise Women into the cabin, and Lan stood up in the bows with Nynaeve. A shout from Beslan called him on to the next boat, which held all of the men except the Warder.

"nɪneɪiv sɛd ðəɹ wɑzn ɹum fəɹ ɛni ʌv ʌs," neɪlzin sɛɾ əz ðə boʊt ɹɑkt ɪts weɪ aʊɾ ɪndə ði ɪldɑɹ. "ʃi sɛd wid kɹaʊd ðɛm." bɛslən læft, lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ oʊn boʊt. veɪnɪn sæt bɪsaɪd ðə kæbən dɔɹ wɪð ɪz aɪz kloʊzd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹitɛn i wɑz sʌmwɛɹ ɛls. hɑɹnən ən tæd kændəl, ən ændɔɝən dɪspaɪt biɪŋ əz dɑɹk əz iðɝ ə ðə boʊtmən, hæd klaɪmd ətɑp ðə kæbən; ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz hʌŋkɝɾ əbaʊt ðə dɛk, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ʌv ðə ɹoʊɝz. noʊbɑdi wɛn ɪndə ðə kæbən, ɔl əpɛɹənli weɪɾɪŋ tə si wɛðɝ mæt ən neɪlzin ən bɛslən wɑntəɾ ɪt.

"Nynaeve said there wasn't room for any of us," Nalesean said as the boat rocked its way out into the Eldar. "She said we'd crowd them." Beslan laughed, looking around their own boat. Vanin sat beside the cabin door with his eyes closed, trying to pretend he was somewhere else. Harnan and Tad Kandel, an Andoran despite being as dark as either of the boatmen, had climbed atop the cabin; the rest of the Redarms hunkered about the deck, trying to keep out of the way of the rowers. Nobody went into the cabin, all apparently waiting to see whether Mat and Nalesean and Beslan wanted it.

mæt pʊt hɪmsɛlf bɪsaɪd ðə tɔl boʊpoʊst, piɹɪŋ æftɝ ði ʌðɝ boʊt, kɹɔlɪŋ ɑn ɪts swips dʒʌst əhɛd. ðə wɪnd wɪp ðə dɑɹk tʃɑpi wɔɾɝz, ən ɪz skɑɹf əz wɛl, ən i hæd tə hoʊld ɑn tə hɪz hæt. wʌt wɑz nɪneɪiv ʌp tə? ði ʌðɝ naɪn wɪmən ɑn ðə sɛkən boʊt wɝ ɔl ɪn ðə kæbən, livɪŋ ðə dɛk tə hɝ ən læn. ðeɪ stʊɾ ʌp ɪn ðə baʊz, læn wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz foʊldəd, nɪneɪiv dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ əz ðoʊ ɪkspleɪnɪŋ. ɪksɛp ðət nɪneɪiv sɛldəm ɪkspleɪn ɛniθɪŋ. bɛɾɝ seɪ nɛvɝ ðən sɛldəm.

Mat put himself beside the tall bowpost, peering after the other boat, crawling on its sweeps just ahead. The wind whipped the dark choppy waters, and his scarf as well, and he had to hold on to his hat. What was Nynaeve up to? The other nine women on the second boat were all in the cabin, leaving the deck to her and Lan. They stood up in the bows, Lan with his arms folded, Nynaeve gesturing as though explaining. Except that Nynaeve seldom explained anything. Better say never than seldom.

wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, ɪt dɪd nɑt læs lɔŋ. ðəɹ wɝ waɪtkæps aʊɾ ɪn ðə beɪ, wɛɹ si foʊk ɹeɪkɝz ən skɪmɝz ən sɔɹɝz hivd ət ðɛɹ æŋkɝz. ðə ɹɪvɝ wɑz nɑt soʊ bæd, bʌt ðə boʊt stɪl wɑloʊd mɔɹ ðən mæt ɹɪmɛmbɝd fɹəm ɛni pɹiviəs tʃɹɪp. bɪfɔɹ lɔŋ, nɪneɪiv wɑz dʒɹeɪpt oʊvɝ ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ, luzɪŋ əɹ bɹɛkfəst waɪl læn hɛl hɝ. ðət ɹimaɪndəd mæt ə hɪz oʊn bɛli; tʌkɪŋ ɪz hæɾ ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm soʊ ɪt kəd nɑt bloʊ əweɪ, hi pʊld aʊt ðə wɛdʒ ə tʃiz.

whatever she was doing, it did not last long. There were whitecaps out in the bay, where Sea Folk rakers and skimmers and soarers heaved at their anchors. The river was not so bad, but the boat still wallowed more than Mat remembered from any previous trip. Before long, Nynaeve was draped over the railing, losing her breakfast while Lan held her. That reminded Mat of his own belly; tucking his hat under his arm so it could not blow away, he pulled out the wedge of cheese.

"bɛslən, ɪz ðɪs stɔɹm laɪkli tə bɹeɪk bɪfɔɹ wi kən kʌm bæk fɹəm ðə ɹæhəd?" hi tʊk ə baɪɾ ə ðə ʃɑɹp-teɪstɪŋ tʃiz; ðeɪ hæd fɪfti dɪfɹən sɔɹts ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ɔl ɡʊd. nɪneɪiv wɑz stɪl hæŋɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə saɪd. haʊ mʌtʃ hæd ðə wʊmən iɾən ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ? "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛɹ wɪl ʃɛltɝ ɪf wɝ kɑt." hi kəd nɑt θɪŋk ʌv ə sɪŋɡəl ɪn i hæd sin ɪn ðə ɹæhəd ðəɾ i wəd teɪk ðə wɪmən ɪntu.

"Beslan, is this storm likely to break before we can come back from the Rahad?" He took a bite of the sharp-tasting cheese; they had fifty different sorts in Ebou Dar, all good. Nynaeve was still hanging over the side. How much had the woman eaten this morning? "I don't know where we'll shelter if we're caught." He could not think of a single inn he had seen in the Rahad that he would take the women into.

"noʊ stɔɹm," bɛslən sɛd, siɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɑn ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ. "ðiz ɑɹ ðə wɪntɝ tʃɹeɪd wɪnz. ðə tʃɹeɪdz kʌm twaɪs ə jɪɹ, ɪn leɪt wɪntɝ ən leɪt sʌmɝ, bʌt ðeɪv tə bloʊ mʌtʃ hɑɹɾɝ bɪfɔɹ ɪt kʌmz tə stɔɹm." hi dɝɛktəɾ ə saʊɝ lʊk aʊt təwɔɹd ðə beɪ. "ɛvɹi jɪɹ ðoʊz wɪnz bɹɪŋ - bɹɔt - ʃɪps fɹəm tæɹɑbən, ən ɑɹæd dumən. aɪ wʌndɝ wɛðɝ ðeɪ ɛvɝ wɪl əɡɛn."

"No storm," Beslan said, seating himself on the railing. "These are the winter trade winds. The trades come twice a year, in late winter and late summer, but they have to blow much harder before it comes to storm." He directed a sour look out toward the bay. "Every year those winds bring - brought - ships from Tarabon, and Arad Doman. I wonder whether they ever will again."

"ðə wil wivz," mæt bɪɡæn, ən tʃoʊkt ɑn ə kɹʌm ə tʃiz. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, hi wɑz stɑɹɾɪŋ tə saʊn laɪk səm ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹ ɹɛstɪŋ ɪz eɪkɪŋ dʒɔɪns ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs. wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt teɪkɪŋ ðə wɪmən ɪndə ə ɹʌf ɪn. ə jɪɹ əɡoʊ, hæf ə jɪɹ, hi wʊɾə teɪkən ðɛm, ən læft wən ðɛɹ aɪz pɑpt, læft əɾ ɛvɹi pɹɪm snɪf. "wɛl, meɪbi wɪl faɪn jə səm fʌn ɪn ðə ɹæhəd, ɛniweɪ. ət ðə list, sʌmbɑɾi wɪl tʃɹaɪ tə kʌɾ ə pɝs, əɹ pʊl ɪleɪnz nɛkləs ɔf." meɪbi ðət wɑz wʌɾ i niɾəd tə klin ðə teɪst ə səbɹaɪəɾi fɹəm ɪz tʌŋ. səbɹaɪəɾi. laɪt, wʌɾ ə wɝd tə əplaɪ tə mæt kɔθən! taɪlɪn mʌs bi skɛɹɪŋ ɪm mɔɹ ðən i θɔt, ɪf i wɑz ʃɹɪvəlɪŋ ʌp ðɪs weɪ. meɪbi hi niɾəd səm ə bɛslənz sɔɹɾ ə fʌn. ðət wɑz kɹeɪzi - hi hæd nɛvɝ sin ðə faɪɾ i wəd nɑt ɹæðɝ wɔk ɝaʊnd - bʌt meɪbi. . . .

"The Wheel weaves," Mat began, and choked on a crumb of cheese. Blood and ashes, he was starting to sound like some gray-hair resting his aching joints in front of the fireplace. Worrying about taking the women into a rough inn. A year ago, half a year, he would have taken them, and laughed when their eyes popped, laughed at every prim sniff. "Well, maybe we'll find you some fun in the Rahad, anyway. At the least, somebody will try to cut a purse, or pull Elayne's necklace off." Maybe that was what he needed to clean the taste of sobriety from his tongue. Sobriety. Light, what a word to apply to Mat Cauthon! Tylin must be scaring him more than he thought, if he was shriveling up this way. Maybe he needed some of Beslan's sort of fun. That was crazy - he had never seen the fight he would not rather walk around - but maybe. . . .

bɛslən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ɪf ɛniwʌn kən faɪn ɪt, jə kæn, bʌt. . . . wɪl bi wɪð sɛvən waɪz wɪmən, mæt. sɛvən. wɪð dʒʌst wʌn ət jəɹ saɪd, jə kəd slæp ə mæn, ivən ɪn ðə ɹæhəd, ən i wəd swɑloʊ hɪz tʌŋ ən wɔk əweɪ. ən ðə wɪmən. wʌts ðə fʌn ə kɪsɪŋ ə wʊmən wɪθaʊt ðə ɹɪsk ʃɪl dɪsaɪd tə stɪk ə naɪf ɪn ju?"

Beslan shook his head. "If anyone can find it, you can, but. . . . We'll be with seven Wise Women, Mat. Seven. With just one at your side, you could slap a man, even in the Rahad, and he would swallow his tongue and walk away. And the women. What's the fun of kissing a woman without the risk she'll decide to stick a knife in you?"

"bɝn maɪ soʊl," neɪlzin mʌɾɝd ɪndə hɪz bɪɹd. "ɪt saʊnz əz ðoʊ aɪv dʒɹæɡd maɪsɛlf fɹəm bɛd fəɹ ə dʌl mɔɹnɪŋ."

"Burn my soul," Nalesean muttered into his beard. "It sounds as though I've dragged myself from bed for a dull morning."

bɛslən nɑɾəd ɪn kəməzɝeɪʃən. "ɪf wɝ lʌki, ðoʊ. . . . ðə sɪvəl ɡɑɹd dʌz sɛn pətʃɹoʊlz tə ðə ɹæhəɾ əkeɪʒənəli, ən ɪf ðəɹ æftɝ smʌɡəlɝz, ðeɪ ɔlweɪz dʒɹɛs laɪk ɛniwʌn ɛls. ðeɪ sim tə θɪŋk noʊbɑdi wɪl noʊɾəs ə dʌzən əɹ soʊ mɛn təɡɛðɝ kæɹiɪŋ sɔɹdz, wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ wɛɹ, ən ðəɹ ɔlweɪz sɝpɹaɪzd wən ðə smʌɡəlɝz æmbʊʃ ðɛm, wɪtʃ ɪz wʌt nɪɹli ɔlweɪz hæpənz. ɪf mæts tɑvɝən lʌk wɝks fəɹ ʌs, wi maɪt bi teɪkən fəɹ ðə sɪvəl ɡɑɹd, ən səm smʌɡəlɝz maɪɾ ətæk əs bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ si ðə ɹɛd bɛls." neɪlzin bɹaɪɾənd ən bɪɡæn ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hænz təɡɛðɝ.

Beslan nodded in commiseration. "If we're lucky, though. . . . The Civil Guard does send patrols to the Rahad occasionally, and if they're after smugglers, they always dress like anyone else. They seem to think nobody will notice a dozen or so men together carrying swords, whatever they wear, and they're always surprised when the smugglers ambush them, which is what nearly always happens. If Mat's ta'veren luck works for us, we might be taken for the Civil Guard, and some smugglers might attack us before they see the red belts." Nalesean brightened and began rubbing his hands together.

mæt ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðɛm. meɪbi bɛslənz sɔɹɾ ə fʌn wɑz nɑt wʌɾ i niɾəd. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, hi hæd mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf ʌv wɪmən wɪð naɪvz. nɪneɪiv stɪl hʌŋ oʊvɝ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə boʊɾ əhɛd; ðət wəd titʃ əɹ tə ɡɔɹdʒ hɝsɛlf. wʊlfɪŋ daʊn ðə læst ə ðə tʃiz, hi bɪɡæn ɑn ðə bɹɛɾ ən tʃɹaɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə daɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd. ən izi tʃɹɪp wɪð noʊ tʃɹʌbəl dɪd nɑt saʊn bæɾ əɾ ɔl. ə kwɪk tʃɹɪp, wɪð ə kwɪk dɪpɑɹtʃɝ fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ.

Mat glared at them. Maybe Beslan's sort of fun was not what he needed. For one thing, he had more than enough of women with knives. Nynaeve still hung over the side of the boat ahead; that would teach her to gorge herself. Wolfing down the last of the cheese, he began on the bread and tried to ignore the dice in his head. An easy trip with no trouble did not sound bad at all. A quick trip, with a quick departure from Ebou Dar.

ðə ɹæhəd wɑz ɛvɹiθɪŋ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ bɛslən fɪɹd. ðə wɪn meɪd klaɪmɪŋ ðə kɹækt ɡɹeɪ stoʊn stɛps ət ðə boʊt lændɪŋ ɪndə ə pɛɹələs fit, ən æftɝ ðæt, ɪt ɡɹu wɝs. kənælz ɹæn ɛvɹiwɛɹ, dʒʌst əz əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ, bʌt hɪɹ ðə bɹɪdʒəz wɝ pleɪn, ðə ɡɹaɪmi stoʊn pɛɹəpəts bɹoʊkən ən kɹʌmbəlɪŋ; hæf ðə kənælz wɝ soʊ sɪltɪd ðət bɔɪz weɪɾɪd weɪst-dip ɪn ðɛm, ən hɑɹdli ə bɑɹdʒ wɑz tə bi sin. tɔl bɪldɪŋz stʊd kɹaʊɾəd təɡɛðɝ, blɑki stʃɹʌktʃɝz wɪð skəbɹəs wʌns-waɪt plæstɝ ɡɔn ɪn hjudʒ pætʃəz tə ɹɪvil ɹɑɾɪŋ ɹɛd bɹɪk, bɔɹɾɝɪŋ nɛɹoʊ stʃɹits wɪð bɹoʊkən peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz. ɪn ðoʊz stʃɹits wɛɹ ivən ðə fɹæɡməns hæd nɑt bɪn ɹɪpt ʌp. mɔɹnɪŋ dɪd nɑt ɹɪli ɹitʃ ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊz ə ðə bɪldɪŋz. dɪnʒi lɔnʒɹi hʌŋ dʒɹaɪɪŋ fɹəm ɛvɹi θɝd wɪndoʊ, ɪksɛpt wɛɹ ə stʃɹʌktʃɝ stʊɾ ɛmpti. səm dɪd, ən ðoʊz wɪndoʊz ɡeɪp laɪkt aɪ sɑkəts ɪn ə skʌl. ə saʊɝ-swit smɛl ə dəkeɪ pɝmieɪɾɪd ði ɛɹ, læs mʌnθs tʃeɪmbɝ pɑts ən eɪntʃən ɹɛfjus moʊldɝɪŋ wɛɹɛvɝ ɪt hæd bɪn flʌŋ, ən fəɹ ɛvɹi flaɪ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ði ɪldɑɹ, ə hʌnʒɹəd bʌz hɪɹ ɪn klaʊdz ʌv ɡɹin ən blu. hi spɑɾəd ðə pilɪŋ blu dɔɹ ə ðə ɡoʊldən kɹaʊn ə hɛvən ən ʃʌɾɝəd ət ðə θɔɾ ə teɪkɪŋ ðə wɪmən ɪn ðəɹ ɪf ðə stɔɹm bɹoʊk, dɪspaɪt wʌt bɛslən sɛd. ðən i ʃʌɾɝəd əɡɛn fəɹ hævɪŋ ʃʌɾɝəd. sʌmθɪŋ wɑz hæpənɪŋ tə hɪm, ən i dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪt.

The Rahad was everything he remembered, and everything Beslan feared. The wind made climbing the cracked gray stone steps at the boat landing into a perilous feat, and after that, it grew worse. Canals ran everywhere, just as across the river, but here the bridges were plain, the grimy stone parapets broken and crumbling; half the canals were so silted that boys waded waist-deep in them, and hardly a barge was to be seen. Tall buildings stood crowded together, blocky structures with scabrous once-white plaster gone in huge patches to reveal rotting red brick, bordering narrow streets with broken paving stones. In those streets where even the fragments had not been ripped up. Morning did not really reach into the shadows of the buildings. Dingy laundry hung drying from every third window, except where a structure stood empty. Some did, and those windows gaped liked eye sockets in a skull. A sour-sweet smell of decay permeated the air, last month's chamber pots and ancient refuse moldering wherever it had been flung, and for every fly on the other side of the Eldar, a hundred buzzed here in clouds of green and blue. He spotted the peeling blue door of The Golden Crown of Heaven and shuddered at the thought of taking the women in there if the storm broke, despite what Beslan said. Then he shuddered again for having shuddered. Something was happening to him, and he did not like it.

nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn teɪkɪŋ ðə lɛd, wɪð ɹin bɪtwin əm ən ðə waɪz wɪmən kloʊs bɪhaɪnd. læn steɪɾ ət nɪneɪivz ʃoʊldɝ laɪk ə wʊlfhnd, hæn ɑn sɔɹd hɪlt, aɪz kɑnstənli sɝtʃɪŋ, ɹeɪɾieɪtɪŋ mɛnəs. ɪn tʃɹuθ, hi wɑz pɹɑbli ɪnʌf pɹətɛkʃən fəɹ tu dʌzən pɹɪɾi sɪkstin-jɪɹ-oʊld ɡɝlz kæɹiɪŋ sæks ʌv ɡoʊld, ivən hɪɹ, bʌt mæt ɪnsɪstəd ðət veɪnɪn ən ðə ɹɛs kip ðɛɹ aɪz oʊpən. ɪn fækt, ðə fɔɹmɝ hɔɹsɛθif ən poʊtʃɝ kɛp soʊ kloʊs tə ɪleɪn ðəɾ ɛniwʌn cʊɾə bɪn fɝɡɪvən fəɹ θɪŋkɪŋ i wɑz əɹ wɔɹɾɝ, ɪf ə ɹæðɝ fæɾ ən ɹʌmpəld wʌn. bɛslən ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz ɪkspɹɛsɪvli ət mæts ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz, ən neɪlzin ɪɹɪɾəbli stʃɹoʊkt ɪz bɪɹɾ ən mʌɾɝd ðəɾ i kəd stɪl bi ɪn bɛd.

Nynaeve and Elayne insisted on taking the lead, with Reanne between them and the Wise Women close behind. Lan stayed at Nynaeve's shoulder like a wolfhound, hand on sword hilt, eyes constantly searching, radiating menace. In truth, he was probably enough protection for two dozen pretty sixteen-year-old girls carrying sacks of gold, even here, but Mat insisted that Vanin and the rest keep their eyes open. In fact, the former horsethief and poacher kept so close to Elayne that anyone could have been forgiven for thinking he was her Warder, if a rather fat and rumpled one. Beslan rolled his eyes expressively at Mat's instructions, and Nalesean irritably stroked his beard and muttered that he could still be in bed.

mɛn stʃɹʌɾɪd ɛɹəɡənli əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹits wɪð ɔfən ɹæɡəd vɛsts ən noʊ ʃɝts, wɛɹɪŋ ɡɹeɪt bɹæs hups ɪn ðɛɹ ɪɹz ən bɹæs fɪŋɡɝ ɹɪŋz sɛt wɪð kʌlɝd ɡlæs, wʌn naɪf əɹ səmtaɪmz tu stʌk bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ bɛls. hænz hʌvɝɪŋ nɪɹ ðoʊz naɪvz, ðeɪ stɛɹɾ əz ðoʊ dɛɹɪŋ sʌmwʌn tə ɡɪv ðə ɹɔŋ twɪs tə ə lʊk. ʌðɝz skʌlk fɹəm kɔɹnɝ tə kɔɹnɝ, dɔɹweɪ tə dɔɹweɪ wɪð hʊɾɪd aɪz, ɪməteɪɾɪŋ ðə slæt-ɹɪb dɑɡz ðət səmtaɪmz snɑɹəl fɹəm ə dɑɹk æliweɪ bɛɹli waɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə mæn tə skwiz ɪntu. ðoʊz mɛn hʌntʃt oʊvɝ ðɛɹ naɪvz, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə tɛl wɪtʃ wəd ɹʌn ən wɪtʃ stæb. baɪ ən lɑɹdʒ, ðə wɪmən meɪɾ ɛni ʌv ðə mɛn əpɪɹ hʌmbəl, pɝeɪɾɪŋ ɪn wɔɹn dʒɹɛsəz ən twaɪs əz mʌtʃ bɹæs dʒuəlɹi əz ðə mɛn. ðeɪ kæɹid naɪvz tu, ʌv kɔɹs, ən ðɛɹ boʊl dɑɹk aɪz sɛn tɛn sɔɹts ə tʃælənʒ ɪn ɛvɹi ɡlæns. ɪn ʃɔɹt, ðə ɹæhəd wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə pleɪs wɛɹ ɛniwʌn wɛɹɪŋ sɪlk kəd hɑɹdli hoʊp tə wɔk tɛn stɛps wɪθaʊt biɪŋ kɹækt oʊvɝ ðə hɛd. æftɝ wɪtʃ ðeɪ hæd bɛs hoʊp tə weɪk stʃɹɪp tə ðə skɪn ən tɔst ɑntu ə paɪl ə ɹʌbɪʃ ɪn ən æli, sɪns ði ɔltɝnəɾɪv wɑz nɑt tə weɪk əɾ ɔl. bʌt. . . .

Men strutted arrogantly along the streets with often ragged vests and no shirts, wearing great brass hoops in their ears and brass finger rings set with colored glass, one knife or sometimes two stuck behind their belts. Hands hovering near those knives, they stared as though daring someone to give the wrong twist to a look. Others skulked from corner to corner, doorway to doorway with hooded eyes, imitating the slat-ribbed dogs that sometimes snarled from a dark alleyway barely wide enough for a man to squeeze into. Those men hunched over their knives, and there was no way to tell which would run and which stab. By and large, the women made any of the men appear humble, parading in worn dresses and twice as much brass jewelry as the men. They carried knives too, of course, and their bold dark eyes sent ten sorts of challenge in every glance. In short, the Rahad was the sort of place where anyone wearing silk could hardly hope to walk ten steps without being cracked over the head. After which they had best hope to wake stripped to the skin and tossed onto a pile of rubbish in an alley, since the alternative was not to wake at all. But. . . .

tʃɪlʒɹən dɑɹɾɪd fɹəm ɛvɹi sɛkən dɔɹ wɪð tʃɪpt pɑɾɝi kʌps ʌv wɔɾɝ, sɛn baɪ ðɛɹ mʌðɝz ɪn keɪs ðə waɪz wɪmən wɪʃt ə dʒɹɪŋk. mɛn wɪð skɑɹd feɪsəz ən mɝɾɝ ɛtʃt ɪndə ðɛɹ aɪz stɛɹɾ oʊpənməðd ət sɛvən waɪz wɪmən təɡɛðɝ, ðən bɑb dʒɝki baʊz ən ɪnkwaɪɝd pəlaɪtli ɪf ðeɪ kəd bi ʌv əsɪstəns, wɑz ðəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ðət ɹikwaɪɝd kæɹiɪŋ? wɪmən, səmtaɪmz wɪð əz mɛni skɑɹz ən ɔlweɪz aɪz tə meɪk taɪlɪn flɪntʃ, kɝtsiɾ ɔkwɝdli ən bɹɛθləsli æskt wɛðɝ ðeɪ maɪt səplaɪ dɝɛkʃənz, hæɾ ɛniwʌn meɪɾ ə bɑðɝ ə ðɛmsɛlvz tə bɹɪŋ soʊ mɛni waɪz wɪmən? ɪf soʊ, ðə stʃɹɔŋ ɪmpləkeɪʃən wɑz, tæmɑɹlə ən ðə ɹɛs hæd noʊ niɾ ə tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ɪf ðeɪ wəd dʒʌst səplaɪ ðə neɪm.

Children darted from every second door with chipped pottery cups of water, sent by their mothers in case the Wise Women wished a drink. Men with scarred faces and murder etched into their eyes stared openmouthed at seven Wise Women together, then bobbed jerky bows and inquired politely if they could be of assistance, was there anything that required carrying? Women, sometimes with as many scars and always eyes to make Tylin flinch, curtsied awkwardly and breathlessly asked whether they might supply directions, had anyone made a bother of themselves to bring so many Wise Women? If so, the strong implication was, Tamarla and the rest had no need of troubling themselves if they would just supply the name.

oʊ, ðeɪ ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðə soʊlʒɝz əz hɑtli əz ɛvɝ, ðoʊ ivən ðə hɑɹɾəst flɪntʃt əweɪ fɹəm læn æftɝ ə sɪŋɡəl lʊk. ænd, ɑdli ɪnʌf, fɹəm veɪnɪn. ə fju ʌv ðə mɛn ɡɹaʊld ət bɛslən ən neɪlzin wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ ɡeɪz tu lɔŋ əɾ ə wʊmənz dip nɛklaɪn. səm ɡɹaʊld ət mæt, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ; ənlaɪk ðoʊz tu, hi wɑz nɛvɝ ɪn deɪnʒɝ ə hɪz aɪbɔlz fɔlɪŋ daʊn ðə fɹʌn ʌv ə wʊmənz dʒɹɛs. hi nu haʊ tə lʊk dɪskɹitli. nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɝ ɪɡnɔɹd, fəɹ ɔl ðɛɹ faɪnɝi, ən soʊ wɑz ɹin ɪn əɹ ɹɛd wʊl dʒɹɛs; ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ əv ðə ɹɛd bɛlt. bʌt ðeɪ dɪɾ əv ðə pɹətɛkʃən ə ðoʊz bɛls. mæt ɹilaɪz ðət bɛslən hæd bɪn ɹaɪt. hi kəɾ ɛmpti hɪz pɝs ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən noʊ wʌn wəd pɪk ʌp ə kɑpɝ, ət list soʊ lɔŋ əz ðə waɪz wɪmən ɹɪmeɪnd. hi kəd pɪntʃ ðə bɑɾəm ʌv ɛvɹi wʊmən ɪn saɪt, ən ivən ɪf ʃi hæɾ æpəplɛksi, ʃi wəd wɔk əweɪ.

Oh, they glared at the soldiers as hotly as ever, though even the hardest flinched away from Lan after a single look. And, oddly enough, from Vanin. A few of the men growled at Beslan and Nalesean whenever they gazed too long at a woman's deep neckline. Some growled at Mat, though he could not understand why; unlike those two, he was never in danger of his eyeballs falling down the front of a woman's dress. He knew how to look discreetly. Nynaeve and Elayne were ignored, for all their finery, and so was Reanne in her red wool dress; they did not have the red belt. But they did have the protection of those belts. Mat realized that Beslan had been right. He could empty his purse on the ground, and no one would pick up a copper, at least so long as the Wise Women remained. He could pinch the bottom of every woman in sight, and even if she had apoplexy, she would walk away.

"wʌɾ ə plɛzənt wɔk," neɪlzin sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "wɪð sətʃ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ saɪts ən smɛlz. dɪɾ aɪ tɛl jə aɪ dɪdnt ɡɛt mʌtʃ slip læs naɪt, mæt?"

"What a pleasant walk," Nalesean said dryly, "with such interesting sights and smells. Did I tell you I didn't get much sleep last night, Mat?"

"du jə wɑnə daɪ ɪn bɛd?" mæt ɡɹʌmbəld. ðeɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl ɔl əv steɪɾ ɪn bɛd; ðeɪ wɝ blʌɾi jusləs hɪɹ, ðət wɑz fəɹ ʃʊɹ. ðə tɛɹən snɔɹɾɪd ɪndɪɡnənli. bɛslən læft, bʌɾ i pɹɑbli θɔt mæt mɛn sʌmθɪŋ ɛls.

"Do you want to die in bed?" Mat grumbled. They might as well all have stayed in bed; they were bloody useless here, that was for sure. The Tairen snorted indignantly. Beslan laughed, but he probably thought Mat meant something else.

əkɹɔs ðə ɹæhəd ðeɪ mɑɹtʃt, əntɪl ɹin faɪnəli stɑpt ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə bɪldɪŋ ɪɡzækli laɪk ɛvɹi ʌðɝ, ɔl fleɪkɪŋ plæstɝ ən kɹʌmbəlɪŋ bɹɪk, ðə seɪm mæt hæd fɑloʊɾ ənʌðɝ wʊmən tə jɛstɝdeɪ. noʊ lɔnʒɹi hʌŋ fɹəm ðiz wɪndoʊz; oʊnli ɹæts lɪvd ɪn ðɛɹ. "ɪn hɪɹ," ʃi sɛd.

Across the Rahad they marched, until Reanne finally stopped in front of a building exactly like every other, all flaking plaster and crumbling brick, the same Mat had followed another woman to yesterday. No laundry hung from these windows; only rats lived in there. "In here," she said.

ɪleɪnz aɪz klaɪm sloʊli tə ðə flæt ɹuf. "sɪks," ʃi mɝmɝɾ ɪn toʊnz ʌv ɡɹeɪt sæɾəsfækʃən.

Elayne's eyes climbed slowly to the flat roof. "Six," she murmured in tones of great satisfaction.

"sɪks," nɪneɪiv saɪd, ən ɪleɪn pæɾəd əɹ ɑɹm əz ðoʊ sɪmpəθaɪzɪŋ wɪð hɝ.

"Six," Nynaeve sighed, and Elayne patted her arm as though sympathizing with her.

"aɪ wɑzn ɹɪli ʃʊɹ," ʃi sɛd. soʊ nɪneɪiv smaɪld ən pæɾəd hɝ. mæt dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ə wɝɾ ʌv ɪt. soʊ ðə bɪldɪŋ hæd sɪks flɔɹz. wɪmən bɪheɪvd vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒli səmtaɪmz. wɛl, moʊst ə ðə taɪm.

"I wasn't really sure," she said. So Nynaeve smiled and patted her. Mat did not understand a word of it. So the building had six floors. Women behaved very strangely sometimes. Well, most of the time.

ɪnsaɪd, ə lɔŋ hɔlweɪ kɑɹpəɾɪd wɪð dʌst ɹæn dɪmli tə ðə bæk, ðə fɑɹ ɛn lɔst ɪn ʃædoʊz. fju ʌv ðə dɔɹweɪz hɛl dɔɹz, ən ðoʊz wɝ ɹʌf plæŋks. wʌn oʊpənɪŋ, ɔlmoʊst ə θɝɾ ə ðə weɪ daʊn ðə hɔl, lɛd tə ə nɛɹoʊ flaɪɾ ə stip stoʊn-feɪst stɛps klaɪmɪŋ ʌpwɝd. ðət wɑz ðə weɪ hi hæd ɡɔn ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ, fɑloʊɪŋ fʊtpɹɪns ɪn ðə dʌst, bʌɾ i θɔt səm ə ðoʊz ʌðɝ oʊpənɪŋz mʌs bi kɹɔsɪŋ kɔɹɪɾɝz. hi hæd nɑt teɪkən taɪm tə lʊk ɝaʊn ðɛn, bʌt ðə bɪldɪŋ wɑz tu dip ən tu waɪd fəɹ ðɪs flɔɹ tə bi sɝv baɪ oʊnli ðə wʌn ðeɪ sɔ. ɪt wɑz tu bɪɡ fəɹ oʊnli wʌn weɪ ɪn.

Inside, a long hallway carpeted with dust ran dimly to the back, the far end lost in shadows. Few of the doorways held doors, and those were rough planks. One opening, almost a third of the way down the hall, led to a narrow flight of steep stone-faced steps climbing upward. That was the way he had gone the day before, following footprints in the dust, but he thought some of those other openings must be crossing corridors. He had not taken time to look around then, but the building was too deep and too wide for this floor to be served by only the one they saw. It was too big for only one way in.

"ɹɪli, mæt," nɪneɪiv sɛd wən i toʊld ɔf hɑɹnən ən hæf ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz tə faɪn ɛni bæk weɪ ɪn ən ɡɑɹɾ ɪt. læn kɛp soʊ kloʊs tə hɝ saɪd, hi maɪɾ əv bɪn ɡlud ðɛɹ. "doʊn jə si baɪ naʊ ðɛɹz noʊ nid?"

"Really, Mat," Nynaeve said when he told off Harnan and half the Redarms to find any back way in and guard it. Lan kept so close to her side, he might have been glued there. "Don't you see by now there's no need?"

hɝ toʊn wɑz soʊ maɪl ðəɾ ɪleɪn mʌst əv pæst ɑn ðə tʃɹuθ əbaʊt taɪlɪn, bʌɾ ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ðəɾ oʊnli saʊɝɾ ɪz mud fɝðɝ. hi dɪd nɑt wɑn ɛniwʌn tə noʊ. blʌɾi jusləs! bʌt ðoʊz daɪs wɝ stɪl ɹætlɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪn ɪz hɛd. "meɪbi mɑɡiɾin laɪks bæk dɔɹz," hi sɛd dʒɹaɪli. sʌmθɪŋ tʃɪɾɝd ɪn ðə dɑɹk ɛn ə ðə hɔl, ən wʌn ə ðə mɛn wɪð hɑɹnən kɝs laʊdli əbaʊt ɹæts.

Her tone was so mild that Elayne must have passed on the truth about Tylin, but if anything, that only soured his mood further. He did not want anyone to know. Bloody useless! But those dice were still rattling around in his head. "Maybe Moghedien likes back doors," he said dryly. Something chittered in the dark end of the hall, and one of the men with Harnan cursed loudly about rats.

"ju toʊl hɪm," nɪneɪiv bɹið fjʊɹiəsli ət læn, wʌn hæn snæpɪŋ ʃʌɾ ɑn əɹ bɹeɪd.

"You told him," Nynaeve breathed furiously at Lan, one hand snapping shut on her braid.

ɪleɪn meɪɾ ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd saʊnd. "ðɪs ɪz noʊ taɪm tə stɑp fəɹ ən ɑɹɡjəmənt, nɪneɪiv. ðə boʊl ɪz əpstɛɹz! ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz!" ə smɔl bɔl ə laɪt sʌɾənli əpɪɹd, floʊɾɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ən wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ tə si wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt nɪneɪiv wɑz kʌmɪŋ, ʃi ɡæðɝɾ əɹ skɝts ən dɑɹɾɪd ʌp ðə stɛɹz. veɪnɪn dæʃt æftɝ əɹ wɪð ə stɑɹtlɪŋ tɝn ə spid fəɹ ɪz bʌlk, fɑloʊd baɪ ɹin ən moʊst ə ðə waɪz wɪmən. ɹaʊnd-feɪst sumeɪkoʊ ən iin, tɔl ən dɑɹk ən pɹɪɾi dɪspaɪt ðə laɪnz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ aɪz, hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən ɹɪmeɪnd wɪð nɪneɪiv.

Elayne made an exasperated sound. "This is no time to stop for an argument, Nynaeve. The Bowl is upstairs! The Bowl of the Winds!" A small ball of light suddenly appeared, floating in front of her, and without waiting to see whether or not Nynaeve was coming, she gathered her skirts and darted up the stairs. Vanin dashed after her with a startling turn of speed for his bulk, followed by Reanne and most of the Wise Women. Round-faced Sumeko and Ieine, tall and dark and pretty despite the lines at the corners of her eyes, hesitated, then remained with Nynaeve.

mæt wəɾ əv ɡɔn, tu, ɪf nɪneɪiv ən læn hæd nɑt bɪn ɪn ɪz weɪ. "wʊd jə lemi baɪ, nɪneɪiv?" hi æskt. hi dɪzɝv tə bi ðɛɹ, ət list, wən ðɪs fæbjələs blʌɾi boʊl wɑz ənkʌvɝd. "nɪneɪiv?" ʃi wɑz soʊ foʊkəst ɑn læn ʃi sim tə hæv fɝɡɑɾən ɛniwʌn ɛls. mæt ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz wɪð bɛslən, hu ɡɹɪn ən skwɑɾɪd izəli wɪð kɔɹɪvən ən ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ ɹɛdʒɹmz. neɪlzin lin əɡɛns ðə wɔl ən jɔn ɑstənteɪʃəsli. wɪtʃ wɑz ə mɪsteɪk wɪð ɔl ðət dʌst əbaʊt; ðə jɔn tɝn ɪndə ə kɑfɪŋ fɪt ðət dɑɹkən ɪz feɪs ən dʌbəld ɪm oʊvɝ.

Mat would have gone, too, if Nynaeve and Lan had not been in his way. "Would you let me by, Nynaeve?" he asked. He deserved to be there, at least, when this fabulous bloody Bowl was uncovered. "Nynaeve?" She was so focused on Lan she seemed to have forgotten anyone else. Mat exchanged glances with Beslan, who grinned and squatted easily with Corevin and the remaining Redarms. Nalesean leaned against the wall and yawned ostentatiously. Which was a mistake with all that dust about; the yawn turned into a coughing fit that darkened his face and doubled him over.

ivən ðət dɪd nɑt dɪstʃɹæk nɪneɪiv. kɛɹfəli, ʃi tʊk əɹ hæn əweɪ fɹəm əɹ bɹeɪd. "aɪ æm nɑɾ æŋɡɹi, læn," ʃi sɛd.

Even that did not distract Nynaeve. Carefully, she took her hand away from her braid. "I am not angry, Lan," she said.

"jɛs, jə ɑɹ," hi ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli. "bʌɾ i hæd tə bi toʊld."

"Yes, you are," he replied calmly. "But he had to be told."

"nɪneɪiv?" mæt sɛd. "læn?" niðɝ wʌn soʊ mʌtʃ əz flɪkɝɾ ən aɪ hɪz weɪ.

"Nynaeve?" Mat said. "Lan?" Neither one so much as flickered an eye his way.

"aɪ wʊɾə toʊld ɪm wən aɪ wɑz ɹɛɾi, læn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən!" hɝ maʊθ klæmpt ʃʌt, bʌɾ əɹ lɪps ɹɪθd əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ tɔkɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. "aɪ wɪl nɑt bi æŋɡɹi wɪð ju," ʃi wɛn ɑn ɪn ə mʌtʃ maɪldɝ toʊn, ən ðət saʊndəɾ ədʒɹɛs tə hɝsɛlf əz wɛl. vɛɹi dɪlɪbɝətli ʃi tɔst əɹ bɹeɪd bæk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, dʒɝk ðət blu-plum hæt stʃɹeɪt, ən klæspt əɹ hænz əɾ əɹ weɪst.

"I would have told him when I was ready, Lan Mandragoran!" Her mouth clamped shut, but her lips writhed as though she were talking to herself. "I will not be angry with you," she went on in a much milder tone, and that sounded addressed to herself as well. Very deliberately she tossed her braid back over her shoulder, jerked that blue-plumed hat straight, and clasped her hands at her waist.

"ɪf jə seɪ soʊ," læn sɛd maɪldli.

"If you say so," Lan said mildly.

nɪneɪiv kwɪvɝd. "doʊn jə teɪk ðət toʊn wɪð mi!" ʃi ʃaʊɾəd. "aɪ tɛl ju, aɪm nɑɾ æŋɡɹi! dʒju hɪɹ mi?"

Nynaeve quivered. "Don't you take that tone with me!" she shouted. "I tell you, I'm not angry! Do you hear me?"

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz, nɪneɪiv," mæt ɡɹaʊld. "hi dʌzn θɪŋk jəɹ æŋɡɹi. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk jəɹ æŋɡɹi." ə ɡʊd θɪŋ wɪmən hæd tɔɾ ɪm tə laɪ wɪð ə stʃɹeɪt feɪs. "naʊ kəd wi ɡoʊ əpstɛɹz ən fɛtʃ ðɪs blʌɾi boʊl ə ðə wɪnz?"

"Blood and ashes, Nynaeve," Mat growled. "He doesn't think you're angry. I don't think you're angry." A good thing women had taught him to lie with a straight face. "Now could we go upstairs and fetch this bloody Bowl of the Winds?"

"ə mɑɹvələs aɪdiə," sɛɾ ə wʊmənz vɔɪs fɹəm ðə dɔɹ tə ðə stʃɹit. "ʃæl wi ɡoʊ ʌp təɡɛðɝ ən sɝpɹaɪz ɪleɪn?" mæt hæd nɛvɝ sin ðə tu wɪmən u wɔkt ɪndə ðə hɔl bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ðɛɹ feɪsəz wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪsəz. ðə spikɝz wɑz lɔŋ ən koʊld əz əɹ vɔɪs, hɝ kəmpænjənz fɹeɪm baɪ skɔɹz ə θɪn dɑɹk bɹeɪdz wɝkt wɪð kʌlɝd bidz. nɪɹli tu dʌzən mɛn kɹaʊɾəd ɪn bɪhaɪn ðɛm, bʌlki fɛloʊz wɪð hɛvi ʃoʊldɝz, klʌbz ən naɪvz ɪn hænd. mæt ʃɪftəɾ ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ; hi nu tʃɹʌbəl wən i sɔ ɪt, ən ðə fɑkshɛɾ ɑn ɪz tʃɛst wɑz kul, ɔlmoʊs koʊld əɡɛnst ɪz skɪn. sʌmbɑɾi wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ.

"A marvelous idea," said a woman's voice from the door to the street. "Shall we go up together and surprise Elayne?" Mat had never seen the two women who walked into the hall before, but their faces were Aes Sedai faces. The speaker's was long and cold as her voice, her companion's framed by scores of thin dark braids worked with colored beads. Nearly two dozen men crowded in behind them, bulky fellows with heavy shoulders, clubs and knives in hand. Mat shifted his grip on the ashandarei; he knew trouble when he saw it, and the foxhead on his chest was cool, almost cold against his skin. Somebody was holding the One Power.

ðə tu waɪz wɪmən nɪɹli fɛl oʊvɝ dʒɹɑpɪŋ kɝtsiz əz sun əz ðeɪ sɔ ðoʊz eɪdʒləs fitʃɝz, bʌt nɪneɪiv sɝɾənli nu tʃɹʌbəl, tu. hɝ maʊθ wɝk saʊnləsli əz ðə pɛɹ keɪm daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ, hɝ feɪs ɔl kɑnstɝneɪʃən ən sɛlf-ɹɪkɹɪmɪneɪʃən. bɪhaɪn hɪm, mæt hɝɾ ə sɔɹd livɪŋ ɪts skæbɝd, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə lʊk bæk tə si huz. læn dʒʌst stʊd ðɛɹ, wɪtʃ mɛn ə kɔɹs ðəɾ i lʊk laɪk ə lɛpɝd ɹɛɾi tə paʊns.

The two Wise Women nearly fell over dropping curtsies as soon as they saw those ageless features, but Nynaeve certainly knew trouble, too. Her mouth worked soundlessly as the pair came down the hallway, her face all consternation and self-recrimination. Behind him, Mat heard a sword leaving its scabbard, but he was not about to look back to see whose. Lan just stood there, which meant of course that he looked like a leopard ready to pounce.

"ðeɪɹ blæk ədʒɑ," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ət læst. hɝ vɔɪs stɑɹɾəd feɪn ən ɡeɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ əz ʃi wɛn ɑn. "fæljən boʊɾə ən ɪspæn ʃɛfɹ. ðeɪ kəmɪɾəd mɝɾɝ ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ən wɝs sɪns. ðəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ən . . ." hɝ vɔɪs fɔltɝd fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. ". . . ðeɪv mi ʃildɪd."

"They're Black Ajah," Nynaeve said at last. Her voice started faint and gained strength as she went on. "Falion Bhoda and Ispan Shefar. They committed murder in the Tower, and worse since. They're Darkfriends, and . . ." Her voice faltered for an instant. ". . . they have me shielded."

ðə nukʌmɝz kəntɪnjud tə ədvæns sɝinəli. "hæv jə ɛvɝ hɝd sətʃ nɑnsɛns, ɪspæn?" ðə lɔŋ-feɪst ɛɛs sədaɪ æskt əɹ kəmpænjən, hu stɑpt ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ ət ðə dʌs lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə smɝk ət nɪneɪiv. "ɪspæn ən aɪ kʌm fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ, waɪl nɪneɪiv ən əɹ fɹɛnz ɑɹ ɹɛbəlz əɡɛns ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ðəl bi pʌnɪʃt səvɪɹli fəɹ ðæt, ən soʊ wɪl ɛniwʌn u hɛlps ðɛm." wɪð ə ʃɑk, mæt ɹilaɪz ðə wʊmən dɪd nɑt noʊ; ʃi θɔt ðəɾ i ən læn ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ dʒʌs haɪɝd stʃɹɔŋɡɑɝmz. fæljən dɝɛktəɾ ə smaɪl ət nɪneɪiv; ɪt meɪɾ ə blɪzɝd wɔɹm baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən. "ðɛɹz sʌmwʌn u wɪl bi oʊvɝdʒɔɪd tə si jə wən wi teɪk jə bæk, nɪneɪiv. ʃi θɪŋks jə ɑɹ dɛd. bɛɾɝ ðə ɹɛst ə jə ɡoʊ naʊ. jə doʊnt wɑnə mɛɾəl ɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ əfɛɹz. maɪ mɛn wɪl si jə tə ðə ɹɪvɝ." wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ əɹ aɪz fɹəm nɪneɪiv, fæljən moʊʃən fəɹ ðə mɛn bɪhaɪn əɹ tə kʌm fɔɹwɝd.

The newcomers continued to advance serenely. "Have you ever heard such nonsense, Ispan?" the long-faced Aes Sedai asked her companion, who stopped grimacing at the dust long enough to smirk at Nynaeve. "Ispan and I come from the White Tower, while Nynaeve and her friends are rebels against the Amyrlin Seat. They'll be punished severely for that, and so will anyone who helps them." With a shock, Mat realized the woman did not know; she thought that he and Lan and the others were just hired strongarms. Falion directed a smile at Nynaeve; it made a blizzard warm by comparison. "There's someone who will be overjoyed to see you when we take you back, Nynaeve. She thinks you are dead. Better the rest of you go now. You don't want to meddle in Aes Sedai affairs. My men will see you to the river." Without taking her eyes from Nynaeve, Falion motioned for the men behind her to come forward.

læn muvd. hi dɪd nɑt dʒɹɔ hɪz sɔɹd, ən əɡɛnst ɛɛs sədaɪ hi ʃʊɾə hæd noʊ tʃæns ɪf i hæd, noʊ tʃæns ɪn ɛni keɪs, bʌt wʌn moʊmən i wɑz stændɪŋ stɪl ən ðə nɛkst i hæd θɹoʊn hɪmsɛlf ət ðə pɛɹ. dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ i stʃɹʌk, hi ɡɹʌntɪɾ əz ðoʊ hɪt hɑɹd, bʌɾ i kɹæʃt ɪndə ðɛm, kæɹiɪŋ boʊθ blæk sɪstɝz tə ðə dʌsti flɔɹ. ðəɾ oʊpən ðə sluətʃəɡeɪts waɪd.

Lan moved. He did not draw his sword, and against Aes Sedai he should have had no chance if he had, no chance in any case, but one moment he was standing still and the next he had thrown himself at the pair. Just before he struck, he grunted as though hit hard, but he crashed into them, carrying both Black sisters to the dusty floor. That opened the sluicegates wide.

læn pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf tə hænz ən niz, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd ɡɹɑdʒəli, ən wʌn ə ðə bʌlki fɛloʊz ɹeɪzd ən aɪɝn-stʃɹæp klʌb tə smæʃ ɪz skʌl. mæt stæb ðə fɛloʊ ɪn ðə bɛli wɪð ɪz spɪɹ əz bɛslən ən neɪlzin ən ðə faɪv ɹɛdʒɹmz ɹʌʃt tə mit ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz' ʃaʊɾɪŋ tʃɑɹdʒ. læn stæɡɝd tə hɪz fit, sɔɹd swipɪŋ aʊt tə oʊpən ə dɑɹkfɹɛn fɹəm kɹɑtʃ tə nɛk. ðəɹ wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ ɹum tə wɝk sɔɹɾ əɹ æʃhændʒɹeɪ ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, bʌt ðə taɪt kɔɹɾɝz wɝ wʌɾ əlaʊɾ əm tə feɪs ɑdz ə tu tə wʌn əɹ wɝs wɪθaʊt biɪŋ oʊvɝkʌm ɪn ðə fɝs moʊmənt. ɡɹʌntɪŋ mɛn stʃɹʌɡəld wɪð əm feɪs-tə-feɪs, ɛlboʊɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ fəɹ ɹum tə stæb əɹ swɪŋ ə klʌb ət ðɛm.

Lan pushed himself to hands and knees, shaking his head groggily, and one of the bulky fellows raised an iron-strapped club to smash his skull. Mat stabbed the fellow in the belly with his spear as Beslan and Nalesean and the five Redarms rushed to meet the Darkfriends' shouting charge. Lan staggered to his feet, sword sweeping out to open a Darkfriend from crotch to neck. There was not much room to work sword or ashandarei in the corridor, but the tight quarters were what allowed them to face odds of two to one or worse without being overcome in the first moment. Grunting men struggled with them face-to-face, elbowing each other for room to stab or swing a club at them.

smɔl speɪsəz ɹɪmeɪn klɪɹ ɝaʊn ðə blæk sɪstɝz, ən ɝaʊnd nɪneɪiv; ðeɪ sɔ tə ðət ðɛmsɛlvz. ə wɪɹi ændɔɝən ɹɛdɑɹm ɔlmoʊs bʌmpt ɪndə fæljən, bʌɾ ət ðə læst ɪnstən i dʒɝkt ɪndə ði ɛɹ ən flu əkɹɔs ðə hɔlweɪ, nɑkɪŋ daʊn tu ʌv ðə hɛvi-ʃoʊldɝd dɑɹk-fɹɛnz ɪn ɪz flaɪt bɪfɔɹ smækɪŋ ɪndə ðə wɔl ən slaɪɾɪŋ daʊn, ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd livɪŋ ə blʌɾi smɪɹ ɑn ðə kɹækt, dʌsti plæstɝ. ə bɔld-hɛɾəd dɑɹkfɹɛn skwiz θɹu ðə laɪn ə dɪfɛndɝz ən ɹʌʃt ət nɪneɪiv wɪð aʊt-stʃɹɛtʃt naɪf; hi jɛld əz ɪz fit wɝ sʌɾənli dʒɝk bæk fɹəm hɪm, ə jɛl ðət kʌɾ ɔf wən ɪz feɪs hɪt ðə flɔɹ soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ ɪz hɛd baʊnst.

Small spaces remained clear around the Black sisters, and around Nynaeve; they saw to that themselves. A wiry Andoran Redarm almost bumped into Falion, but at the last instant he jerked into the air and flew across the hallway, knocking down two of the heavy-shouldered Dark-friends in his flight before smacking into the wall and sliding down, the back of his head leaving a bloody smear on the cracked, dusty plaster. A bald-headed Darkfriend squeezed through the line of defenders and rushed at Nynaeve with out-stretched knife; he yelled as his feet were suddenly jerked back from him, a yell that cut off when his face hit the floor so hard that his head bounced.

ɑbviəsli nɪneɪiv wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ʃildɪd, ən ɪf ðə tʃɪli sɪlvɝ fɑks-hɛd slaɪɾɪŋ ɝaʊn mæts tʃɛst əz i fɔt wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf ɪndəkeɪʃən ðət ʃi ən ðə blæk sɪstɝz wɝ ɪn səm sɔɹɾ ə stʃɹʌɡəl, ðə weɪ ðeɪ ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ ən ʃi ət ðɛm, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə bæɾəl ɝaʊn ðɛm, ʃaʊɾəd ðə fækt. ðə tu waɪz wɪmən lʊkt ɑn ɪn hɔɹɝ; ðeɪ hæd ðɛɹ kɝv naɪvz ɪn ðɛɹ fɪsts, bʌt ðeɪ hʌɾəld əɡɛns ðə wɔl, stɛɹɪŋ fɹəm nɪneɪiv tə ði ʌðɝ tu wɪð aɪz waɪɾ ən maʊðz hæŋɪŋ oʊpən.

Obviously Nynaeve was no longer shielded, and if the chilly silver fox-head sliding around Mat's chest as he fought was not enough indication that she and the Black sisters were in some sort of struggle, the way they glared at her and she at them, ignoring the battle around them, shouted the fact. The two Wise Women looked on in horror; they had their curved knives in their fists, but they huddled against the wall, staring from Nynaeve to the other two with eyes wide and mouths hanging open.

"faɪt," nɪneɪiv snæpt ət ðɛm. ʃi tɝn əɹ hɛd dʒʌst ə fɹækʃən, soʊ ʃi kəd si ðɛm əz wɛl əz fæljən ən ɪspæn. "aɪ kænɑt də ɪɾ əloʊn; ðəɹ lɪŋkt. ɪf jə doʊn faɪt ðɛm, ðəl kɪl ju. jə noʊ əbaʊt ðɛm, naʊ!" ðə waɪz wɪmən ɡeɪpt əɾ əɹ əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd sədʒɛstəd spɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə kwinz feɪs. ɪn ðə mɪdst ə ʃaʊts ən ɡɹʌns, ɪspæn læf mɛloʊɾiəsli. ɪn ðə mɪdst ə ʃaʊts ən ɡɹʌns, ə ʃɹɪl skɹim ɛkoʊd daʊn ðə stɛɹz.

"Fight," Nynaeve snapped at them. She turned her head just a fraction, so she could see them as well as Falion and Ispan. "I cannot do it alone; they're linked. If you don't fight them, they will kill you. You know about them, now!" The Wise Women gaped at her as though she had suggested spitting in the Queen's face. In the midst of shouts and grunts, Ispan laughed melodiously. In the midst of shouts and grunts, a shrill scream echoed down the stairs.

nɪneɪivz hɛd swʌŋ ðət weɪ. sʌɾənli ʃi stæɡɝd, ən əɹ hɛd swʌŋ bæk laɪk ə wundəd bædʒɝz, wɪð ə skaʊl ðət ʃʊɾə meɪd fæljən ən ɪspæn liv ɹaɪt ðən ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ɛni sɛns. nɪneɪiv spɛɹɾ ən æɡənaɪzd ɡlæns fəɹ mæt, ðoʊ. "ðɛɹ wɑz tʃænəlɪŋ əpstɛɹz," ʃi sɛd θɹu hɝ tiθ. "ðɛɹz tʃɹʌbəl."

Nynaeve's head swung that way. Suddenly she staggered, and her head swung back like a wounded badger's, with a scowl that should have made Falion and Ispan leave right then if they had any sense. Nynaeve spared an agonized glance for Mat, though. "There was channeling upstairs," she said through her teeth. "There's trouble."

mæt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. mɔɹ laɪkli, ɪleɪn hæd sin ə ɹæt. mɔɹ laɪkli. . . . hi mænədʒ tə nɑk əsaɪɾ ə dæɡɝ θɹʌst əɾ ɪz ɹɪbz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹum tə stæb bæk wɪð ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ əɹ juz ðə hæf laɪk ə kɔɹɾɝstæf. bɛslən stæb pæst ɪm ən tʊk ɪz ətækɝ θɹu ðə hɑɹt.

Mat hesitated. More likely, Elayne had seen a rat. More likely. . . . He managed to knock aside a dagger thrust at his ribs, but there was no room to stab back with the ashandarei or use the haft like a quarterstaff. Beslan stabbed past him and took his attacker through the heart.

"pliz, mæt," nɪneɪiv sɛd taɪtli. ʃi nɛvɝ bɛɡd. ʃi wəd kʌɾ əɹ oʊn θɹoʊt fɝst. "pliz."

"Please, Mat," Nynaeve said tightly. She never begged. She would cut her own throat first. "Please."

wɪð ə kɝs, mæt pʊl hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ə ðə faɪɾ ən dæʃt ʌp ðə stip, nɛɹoʊ stɛɹz, teɪkɪŋ ɔl sɪks flaɪts ɪn ðə dɑɹk stɛɹwɛl əɾ ə dɛd ɹʌn. ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə sɪŋɡəl wɪndoʊ tə ɡɪv laɪt. ɪf ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə ɹæt, hi wɑz gɑnə ʃeɪk ɪleɪn tɪl əɹ tiθ. . . . hi bɝst aʊɾ ɑntu ðə tɑp flɔɹ, nɑt mʌtʃ bɹaɪɾɝ ðən ðə stɛɹwɛl wɪð oʊnli wʌn wɪndoʊ ət ðə stʃɹiɾ ɛnd, bɝst ɪndə ə sin fɹəm naɪtmɛɹ.

With a curse, Mat pulled himself out of the fight and dashed up the steep, narrow stairs, taking all six flights in the dark stairwell at a dead run. There was not a single window to give light. If it was just a rat, he was going to shake Elayne till her teeth. . . . He burst out onto the top floor, not much brighter than the stairwell with only one window at the street end, burst into a scene from nightmare.

wɪmən leɪ spɹɔld ɛvɹiwɛɹ. ɪleɪn wɑz wʌn, hæf ɑn əɹ bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl, aɪz kloʊzd. veɪnɪn kɹaʊtʃt ɑn ɪz niz, blʌd stʃɹimɪŋ fɹəm noʊz ən ɪɹz, fibli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊl hɪmsɛlf ʌp əɡɛns ðə wɔl. ðə læst wʊmən ɑn əɹ fit, dʒənɪɹə, flɛd təwɔɹd mæt əz sun əz ʃi sɔ hɪm. hi hæd θɔɾ ə hɝ əz ə hɔk, wɪð əɹ hʊk bik ʌv ə noʊz ən ʃɑɹp tʃikboʊnz, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs wɑz pjʊɹ tɛɹɝ naʊ, ðoʊz dɑɹk aɪz waɪɾ ən stɑɹk.

Women lay sprawled everywhere. Elayne was one, half on her back against the wall, eyes closed. Vanin crouched on his knees, blood streaming from nose and ears, feebly trying to pull himself up against the wall. The last woman on her feet, Janira, fled toward Mat as soon as she saw him. He had thought of her as a hawk, with her hooked beak of a nose and sharp cheekbones, but her face was pure terror now, those dark eyes wide and stark.

"hɛlp mi!" ʃi skɹimd ət hɪm, ən ə mæn kɑɾ əɹ fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. hi wɑz ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi-lʊkɪŋ fɛloʊ, meɪbi ə lɪɾəl oʊldɝ ðən mæt, ʌv ðə seɪm haɪɾ ən slɛndɝ ɪn ə pleɪn ɡɹeɪ koʊt. smaɪlɪŋ, hi tʊk dʒənɪɹəz hɛd bɪtwin ɪz hænz ən twɪstəd ʃɑɹpli. ðə saʊn ə hɝ nɛk bɹeɪkɪŋ wɑz laɪk ə dʒɹaɪ bɹæntʃ snæpɪŋ. hi lɛɾ əɹ dʒɹɑp ɪn ə boʊnləs hip ən ɡeɪz daʊn ət hɝ. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, hɪz smaɪl lʊkt . . . ɹæptʃɝəs.

"Help me!" she screamed at him, and a man caught her from behind. He was an ordinary-looking fellow, maybe a little older than Mat, of the same height and slender in a plain gray coat. Smiling, he took Janira's head between his hands and twisted sharply. The sound of her neck breaking was like a dry branch snapping. He let her drop in a boneless heap and gazed down at her. For a moment, his smile looked . . . rapturous.

baɪ ðə laɪɾ ʌv ə pɛɹ ə læntɝnz, ə smɔl nɑɾ ə mɛn dʒʌs bɪɑn veɪnɪn wɝ pɹaɪɪŋ oʊpən ə dɔɹ tə ðə skwil ə ɹʌstəd hɪnʒɪz, bʌt mæt hɑɹdli noʊɾəst. hɪz aɪz wɛn fɹəm dʒənɪɹəz kɹʌmpəl kɔɹps tə ɪleɪn. hi hæd pɹɑməs tə kip əɹ seɪf fəɹ ɹænd. hi hæd pɹɑməst. wɪð ə kɹaɪ, hi lɔntʃt hɪmsɛlf ət ðə kɪlɝ, æʃhændʒɹeɪ ɪkstɛndəd.

By the light of a pair of lanterns, a small knot of men just beyond Vanin were prying open a door to the squeal of rusted hinges, but Mat hardly noticed. His eyes went from Janira's crumpled corpse to Elayne. He had promised to keep her safe for Rand. He had promised. With a cry, he launched himself at the killer, ashandarei extended.

mæt hæd sin mɹdʒɹɑl muv, bʌt ðɪs fɛloʊ wɑz kwɪkɝ, hɑɹɾ əz ðət wɑz tə bɪliv. hi dʒʌst sim tə floʊ fɹəm ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə spɪɹ, ən sizɪŋ ðə hæft, hi pɪvəɾəd, flɪŋɪŋ mæt pæst ɪm faɪv peɪsɪz daʊn ðə hɔl.

Mat had seen Myrddraal move, but this fellow was quicker, hard as that was to believe. He just seemed to flow from in front of the spear, and seizing the haft, he pivoted, flinging Mat past him five paces down the hall.

bɹɛθ lɛft wən i hɪt ðə flɔɹ ɪn ə smɔl klaʊɾ ə dʌst. soʊ dɪd ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ. stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ fəɹ ɛɹ, hi pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf ʌp, fɑkshɛd dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm ɪz oʊpən ʃɝt. dʒɹæɡɪŋ ə naɪf fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt, hi flʌŋ hɪmsɛlf ət ðə mæn əɡɛn dʒʌst əz neɪlzin əpɪɹɾ ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə stɛɹz, sɔɹɾ ɪn hænd. naʊ ðeɪ hæd hɪm, haʊɛvɝ kwɪk hi. . . .

Breath left when he hit the floor in a small cloud of dust. So did the ashandarei. Struggling for air, he pushed himself up, foxhead dangling from his open shirt. Dragging a knife from under his coat, he flung himself at the man again just as Nalesean appeared at the head of the stairs, sword in hand. Now they had him, however quick he. . . .

ðə mæn meɪɾ ə mɹdʒɹɑl sim stɪf. hi slɪɾ ɝaʊnd neɪlzinz θɹʌst əz ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə boʊn ɪn ɪz bɑɾi, ɹaɪt hænd ʃuɾɪŋ aʊt tə siz neɪlzinz θɹoʊt. hɪz hæn keɪm əweɪ wɪð ə lɪkwəd, ɹɪpɪŋ saʊnd. blʌd faʊnteɪn pæs neɪlzinz bɪɹd. hɪz sɔɹd dʒɹɑpt, ɹɪŋɪŋ ɑn ðə dʌsti stoʊn flɔɹ, ən i klʌtʃt boʊθ hænz tə hɪz ɹuənd nɛk, ɹɛd ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu hɪz fɪŋɡɝz əz i fɛl.

The man made a Myrddraal seem stiff. He slid around Nalesean's thrust as though there was not a bone in his body, right hand shooting out to seize Nalesean's throat. His hand came away with a liquid, ripping sound. Blood fountained past Nalesean's beard. His sword dropped, ringing on the dusty stone floor, and he clutched both hands to his ruined neck, red running through his fingers as he fell.

mæt kɹæʃt ɪndə ðə kɪlɝz bæk, ən ðeɪ ɔl θɹi hɪt ðə flɔɹ təɡɛðɝ. hi hæd noʊ kəmpjuŋkʃənz əɡɛnst stæbɪŋ ə mæn ɪn ðə bæk wən ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi, ɪspɛʃli ə mæn u kəd tɛɹ sʌmbɑɾiz θɹoʊɾ aʊt. hi ʃʊɾə lɛt neɪlzin steɪ ɪn bɛd. ðə θɔt keɪm sædli əz i dʒɹoʊv ðə bleɪd hoʊm hɑɹd, ðən ə sɛkən taɪm, ə θɝd.

Mat crashed into the killer's back, and they all three hit the floor together. He had no compunctions against stabbing a man in the back when it was necessary, especially a man who could tear somebody's throat out. He should have let Nalesean stay in bed. The thought came sadly as he drove the blade home hard, then a second time, a third.

ðə mæn twɪstəɾ ɪn ɪz ɡɹɪp. ɪt ʃəd nɑɾ əv bɪn pɑsəbəl, bʌt sʌmhaʊ ðə fɛloʊ ɹoʊld oʊvɝ bɪniθ hɪm, pʊlɪŋ ðə naɪf hɪlt aʊɾ ə hɪz hænd. neɪlzinz stɛɹɪŋ aɪz ən blʌɾi θɹoʊt wɝ ə ɹimaɪndɝ ɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ ɪz aɪz. dɛspɝətli hi ɡɹæb ðə mænz ɹɪsts, wʌn hæn slɪpɪŋ ə lɪɾəl ɪn ðə blʌd ðət ɹæn daʊn ðə fɛloʊz hænd.

The man twisted in his grip. It should not have been possible, but somehow the fellow rolled over beneath him, pulling the knife hilt out of his hand. Nalesean's staring eyes and bloody throat were a reminder right before his eyes. Desperately he grabbed the man's wrists, one hand slipping a little in the blood that ran down the fellow's hand.

ðə mæn smaɪld ət hɪm. wɪð ə naɪf stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz saɪd, hi smaɪld! "hi wɑns jə dɛɾ əz mʌtʃ əz i wɑns hɝ," hi sɛd sɔfli. ən əz ɪf mæt wɑz nɑt hoʊldɪŋ ɪm əɾ ɔl, hɪz hænz muv təwɔɹd mæts hɛd, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ mæts ɑɹmz bæk.

The man smiled at him. With a knife sticking out of his side, he smiled! "He wants you dead as much as he wants her," he said softly. And as if Mat was not holding him at all, his hands moved toward Mat's head, driving Mat's arms back.

mæt pʊʃt fɹæntəkəli, θɹu ɔl ə hɪz weɪɾ əɡɛns ðə fɛloʊz ɑɹmz tə noʊ əveɪl. laɪt, hi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ə tʃaɪl faɪɾɪŋ ə ɡɹoʊn mæn. ðə fɛloʊ wɑz meɪkɪŋ ə ɡeɪm ʌv ɪt, teɪkɪŋ ɪz blʌɾi taɪm. hænz tʌtʃt ɪz hɛd. wɛɹ wɑz ɪz fleɪmɪŋ lʌk? hi ɡeɪv ə hiv wɪð wʌt simd ɪz læst stʃɹɛŋkθ - ən ðə mədæljən fɛl əɡɛns ðə mænz tʃik. ðə mæn skɹimd. smoʊk ɹoʊz ɝaʊn ði ɛdʒəz ə ðə fɑkshɛd, ən ə sɪzəl laɪk beɪkən fɹaɪɪŋ. kənvʌlsɪvli, hi hɝl mæt əweɪ wɪð hænz ən fit boʊθ. ðɪs taɪm, mæt flu tɛn peɪsɪz ən slɪd.

Mat pushed frantically, threw all of his weight against the fellow's arms to no avail. Light, he might as well have been a child fighting a grown man. The fellow was making a game of it, taking his bloody time. Hands touched his head. Where was his flaming luck? He gave a heave with what seemed his last strength - and the medallion fell against the man's cheek. The man screamed. Smoke rose around the edges of the foxhead, and a sizzle like bacon frying. Convulsively, he hurled Mat away with hands and feet both. This time, Mat flew ten paces and slid.

wən i skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fit, hæf-deɪzd, ðə mæn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ʌp, hænz tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ əɾ ɪz feɪs. ə ɹɔ ɹɛd bɹæn mɑɹkt wɛɹ ðə fɑkshɛd hæd fɔlən. dʒɪnʒɝli, mæt fɪŋɡɝd ðə mədæljən. ɪt wɑz kul. nɑt ðə kul ə sʌmwʌn tʃænəlɪŋ nɪɹbaɪ - meɪbi ðeɪ wɝ stɪl əɾ ɪt bɪloʊ, bʌt ðət wɑz tu fɑɹ ɔf - dʒʌs ðə kul ə sɪlvɝ. hi hæd noʊ noʊʃən wʌt ðɪs fɛloʊ wɑz, ɪksɛp ðəɾ i sɝɾənli wɑz nɑt hjumən, bʌt bɪtwin ðət bɝn ən θɹi stæb wunz, wɪð ðə naɪf hɪl stɪl dʒʌɾɪŋ aʊt bɪniθ ɪz ɑɹm, hi hæd tə bi sloʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ mæt tə ɡɛt pæst ɪm tə ðə stɛɹz. əvɛnʒɪŋ ɪleɪn wɑz ɔl vɛɹi wɛl, ən neɪlzin tu, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt gɑnə hæpən tədeɪ, əpɛɹənli, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ kɔl tə səplaɪ ə ɹizən fəɹ əvɛnʒɪŋ mæt kɔθən.

When he scrambled to his feet, half-dazed, the man was already up, hands trembling at his face. A raw red brand marked where the foxhead had fallen. Gingerly, Mat fingered the medallion. It was cool. Not the cool of someone channeling nearby - maybe they were still at it below, but that was too far off - just the cool of silver. He had no notion what this fellow was, except that he certainly was not human, but between that burn and three stab wounds, with the knife hilt still jutting out beneath his arm, he had to be slowed enough for Mat to get past him to the stairs. Avenging Elayne was all very well, and Nalesean too, but it was not going to happen today, apparently, and there was no call to supply a reason for avenging Mat Cauthon.

dʒɝkɪŋ ðə naɪf aʊɾ ə hɪz saɪd, ðə mæn hɝld ɪɾ ət hɪm. mæt snæɡd ɪɾ aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ. tɑm hæd tɔɾ ɪm tə dʒʌɡəl, ən tɑm sɛɾ i hæd ðə kwɪkɪs hænz i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. flɪpɪŋ ðə naɪf ɝaʊn soʊ hi hɛld ɪt pɹɑpɝli, pɔɪntəd slæntəɾ ʌp, hi noʊɾəst ðə ɡlimɪŋ bleɪd, ən ɪz hɑɹt sæŋk. noʊ blʌd. ðəɹ ʃʊɾə bɪn ət list ə smɪɹ ə ɹɛd, bʌt ðə stil ʃoʊn, bɹaɪɾ ən klin. meɪbi ivən θɹi stæb wunz wɝ nɑt gɑnə sloʊ ðɪs - wʌtɛvɝ i wɑz.

Jerking the knife out of his side, the man hurled it at him. Mat snagged it out of the air without thinking. Thom had taught him to juggle, and Thom said he had the quickest hands he had ever seen. Flipping the knife around so he held it properly, pointed slanted up, he noticed the gleaming blade, and his heart sank. No blood. There should have been at least a smear of red, but the steel shone, bright and clean. Maybe even three stab wounds were not going to slow this - whatever he was.

hi ɹɪskt ə ɡlæns oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ði ʌðɝ mɛn wɝ stʃɹimɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðət dɔɹ ðeɪ hæd pɹaɪɾ oʊpən, ðə dɔɹ ðoʊz fʊtpɹɪns hæd lɛɾ ɪm tə jɛstɝdeɪ, bʌt ðɛɹ ɑɹmz sim fʊl ə ɹʌbɪʃ, smɔl hæf-ɹɑɾɪd tʃɛsts, ə kæsk wɪð klɔθ-ɹæpt ɑbʒɛkts bʌlʒɪŋ θɹu mɪsɪŋ steɪvz, ivən ə bɹoʊkən tʃɛɹ ən ə kɹæk mɪɹɝ. ðeɪ mʌst əv hæɾ ɔɹɾɝz tə teɪk ɛvɹiθɪŋ. peɪɪŋ noʊ ətɛnʃən wʌtɛvɝ tə mæt, ðeɪ hɝid təwɔɹd ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə hɔl ən vænɪʃt ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ. ðəɹ hæd tə bi ənʌðɝ sɛɾ ə stɛɹz bæk ðɛɹ. meɪbi hi kəd fɑloʊ ðɛm daʊn əɾ ə dɪstəns. meɪbi. . . . dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ðə dɔɹweɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm aʊɾ ʌv, veɪnɪn meɪɾ ənʌðɝ ɛfɝt tə stænd, ən fɛl bæk. mæt bɪt bæk ə kɝs. lʌɡɪŋ veɪnɪn wɑz gɑnə sloʊ hɪm, bʌɾ ɪf ɪz lʌk wɑz ɪn. . . . ɪt hæd nɑt seɪvd ɪleɪn, bʌt meɪbi. . . . fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, hi sɔ hɝ muv, lɪftɪŋ ə hæn tə hɝ hɛd.

He risked a glance over his shoulder. The other men were streaming out of that door they had pried open, the door those footprints had led him to yesterday, but their arms seemed full of rubbish, small half-rotted chests, a cask with cloth-wrapped objects bulging through missing staves, even a broken chair and a cracked mirror. They must have had orders to take everything. Paying no attention whatever to Mat, they hurried toward the far end of the hall and vanished around a corner. There had to be another set of stairs back there. Maybe he could follow them down at a distance. Maybe. . . . Just before the doorway they had come out of, Vanin made another effort to stand, and fell back. Mat bit back a curse. Lugging Vanin was going to slow him, but if his luck was in. . . . It had not saved Elayne, but maybe. . . . From the corner of his eye, he saw her move, lifting a hand to her head.

ðə mæn ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ koʊt sɔ ɪt, tu. wɪð ə smaɪl, hi tɝn təwɔɹd hɝ.

The man in the gray coat saw it, too. With a smile, he turned toward her.

saɪɪŋ, mæt tʌk ðə jusləs naɪf ɪndə ɪts skæbɝd. "ju kæn əv hɝ," hi sɛd laʊdli. pɹɑməsəz. wʌn dʒɝk bɹoʊk ðə lɛðɝ kɔɹɾ ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk; ðə sɪlvɝ fɑkshɛd dæŋɡəld ə fʊt bɪloʊ hɪz fɪst. ɪt meɪɾ ə loʊ hʌm əz i wɝld ɪɾ ɪn ə dʌbəl lup. "ju kæn blʌɾi hæv hɝ." hi stɑɹɾəd fɔɹwɝd, kipɪŋ ðə mədæljən spɪnɪŋ. ðə fɝst stɛp wɑz ðə hɑɹɾəst, bʌɾ i hæɾ ə pɹɑməs tə kip.

Sighing, Mat tucked the useless knife into its scabbard. "You can't have her," he said loudly. Promises. One jerk broke the leather cord around his neck; the silver foxhead dangled a foot below his fist. It made a low hum as he whirled it in a double loop. "You can't bloody have her." He started forward, keeping the medallion spinning. The first step was the hardest, but he had a promise to keep.

ðə fɛloʊz smaɪl feɪɾəd. wɑtʃɪŋ ðə flæʃɪŋ fɑkshɛd wɛɹəli, hi bækt əweɪ ɑn ɪz toʊz. ðə seɪm laɪt ðət ɡlɪɾɝd ɑn ðə wɝlɪŋ sɪlvɝ, fɹəm ðə sɪŋɡəl wɪndoʊ, meɪɾ ə heɪloʊ ɝaʊn hɪm. ɪf mæt kəd dʒɹaɪv ɪm ðət fɑɹ, meɪbi hi kəd si wɛðɝ ə sɪks-stɔɹi dʒɹɑp wəd də wʌɾ ə naɪf kəd nɑt.

The fellow's smile faded. Watching the flashing foxhead warily, he backed away on his toes. The same light that glittered on the whirling silver, from the single window, made a halo around him. If Mat could drive him that far, maybe he could see whether a six-story drop would do what a knife could not.

bɹæn lɪvɪɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs, ðə fɛloʊ bækt əweɪ, səmtaɪmz hæf-ɹitʃɪŋ əz ɪf tə tʃɹaɪ ɡɹæbɪŋ pæs ðə mədæljən. ən sʌɾənli, hi dɑɹɾɪd tə wʌn saɪd, ɪndə wʌn ə ðə ɹumz. ðɪs wʌn hæɾ ə dɔɹ ðəɾ i pʊld ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɪm. mæt hɝd ðə bɑɹ dʒɹɑp.

Brand livid on his face, the fellow backed away, sometimes half-reaching as if to try grabbing past the medallion. And suddenly, he darted to one side, into one of the rooms. This one had a door that he pulled shut behind him. Mat heard the bar drop.

meɪbi hi ʃʊɾə lɛft ɪt ðɛɹ, bʌt wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, hi ɹeɪzd ə fʊɾ ən slæm ðə hil ə hɪz buɾ əɡɛns ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə dɔɹ. dʌs lɛpt ɔf ðə ɹʌf wʊd. ə sɛkən kɪk, ən ɹɑɾən bɑɹ-kætʃəz ɡeɪv weɪ, əlɔŋ wɪð ə ɹʌstəd hɪnʒ. ðə dɔɹ fɛl ɪn, hæŋɪŋ əɾ ə slæntəɾ æŋɡəl.

Maybe he should have left it there, but without thinking, he raised a foot and slammed the heel of his boot against the center of the door. Dust leaped off the rough wood. A second kick, and rotten bar-catches gave way, along with a rusted hinge. The door fell in, hanging at a slanted angle.

ðə ɹum wɑz nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli dɑɹk. ə lɪɾəl laɪt ɹitʃt ɪt fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ ət ði ɛn ə ðə hɔl, dʒʌst wʌn dɔɹ əweɪ, ən ə bɹoʊkən tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl ə mɪɹɝ linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə fɑɹ wɔl spɹɛɾ ə feɪn ɪluməneɪʃən. ðət mɪɹɝ lɛɾ ɪm si ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɪθaʊt ɡoʊɪŋ ɪn. əsaɪd fɹəm ðəɾ ən ə pis ʌv ə tʃɛɹ, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɛls tə si. ði oʊnli oʊpənɪŋz wɝ ðə dɔɹweɪ ən ə ɹæθhoʊl bɪsaɪd ðə mɪɹɝ, bʌt ðə mæn ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ koʊt wɑz ɡɔn.

The room was not entirely dark. A little light reached it from the window at the end of the hall, just one door away, and a broken triangle of mirror leaning against the far wall spread a faint illumination. That mirror let him see everything without going in. Aside from that and a piece of a chair, there was nothing else to see. The only openings were the doorway and a rathole beside the mirror, but the man in the gray coat was gone.

"mæt," ɪleɪn kɔl feɪnli. hi hɝiɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹum əz mʌtʃ əz təwɔɹd hɝ. ðəɹ wɑz ʃaʊɾɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ bɪloʊ, bʌt nɪneɪiv ən ðə ɹɛst wəɾ əv tə teɪk kɛɹ ə ðɛmsɛlvz fəɹ ðə moʊmənt.

"Mat," Elayne called faintly. He hurried away from the room as much as toward her. There was shouting somewhere below, but Nynaeve and the rest would have to take care of themselves for the moment.

ɪleɪn wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ʌp, wɝkɪŋ əɹ dʒɔ ən wɪnsɪŋ, wən i nɛl bɪsaɪd hɝ. dʌs kʌvɝɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs, hɝ hæt hʌŋ əskju, səm ə ðə plumz bɹoʊkən, ən əɹ ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn dʒɹæɡd baɪ ɪt. "hi hɪt mi soʊ hɑɹd," ʃi sɛd peɪnfəli. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ɛniθɪŋ ɪz bɹoʊkən, bʌt. . . ." hɝ aɪz lætʃt ɑn tə hɪz, ən ɪf i hæɾ ɛvɝ θɔt ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɪm əz ɪf i wɝ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ, hi sɔ ɪt fəɹ tʃɹu naʊ. "aɪ sɔ wʌt jə dɪd, mæt. wɪð hɪm. wi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn tʃɪkənz ɪn ə bɑks wɪð ə wizəl. tʃænəlɪŋ wʊdn tʌtʃ hɪm; ðə floʊz mɛltəd ðə weɪ ðeɪ də wɪð jɔɹ. . . ." ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðə mədæljən stɪl hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ɪz fɪst, ʃi dʒɹu ə bɹɛθ ðət dɪɾ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ θɪŋz tə ðəɾ oʊvəl kʌt-aʊt. "θæŋk ju, mæt. aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz fəɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ ɛvɝ dɪɾ əɹ θɔt." ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi ɹɪli mɛn ɪt. "aɪ kip bɪldɪŋ ʌp toʊ təwɔɹd ju," ʃi smaɪld ɹufəli, "bʌɾ aɪm nɑt gɑnə lɛt jə bit mi. jə ɑɹ gɑnə hæv tə lemi seɪv jə ət list wʌns tə bæləns mæɾɝz."

Elayne was sitting up, working her jaw and wincing, when he knelt beside her. Dust covered her dress, her hat hung askew, some of the plumes broken, and her red-gold hair looked as if she had been dragged by it. "He hit me so hard," she said painfully. "I don't think anything is broken, but. . . ." Her eyes latched on to his, and if he had ever thought she looked at him as if he were a stranger, he saw it for true now. "I saw what you did, Mat. With him. We might as well have been chickens in a box with a weasel. Channeling wouldn't touch him; the flows melted the way they do with your. . . ." Glancing at the medallion still hanging from his fist, she drew a breath that did interesting things to that oval cut-out. "Thank you, Mat. I apologize for everything I ever did or thought." She sounded as though she really meant it. "I keep building up toh toward you," she smiled ruefully, "but I am not going to let you beat me. You are going to have to let me save you at least once to balance matters."

"aɪl si wʌɾ aɪ kən ɝeɪnʒ," hi sɛd dʒɹaɪli, stʌfɪŋ ðə mədæljən ɪndə ə koʊt pɑkət. toʊ? bit hɝ? laɪt! ðə wʊmən wɑz dɛfənətli spɛndɪŋ tu mʌtʃ taɪm wɪð eɪvinhə.

"I'll see what I can arrange," he said dryly, stuffing the medallion into a coat pocket. Toh? Beat her? Light! The woman was definitely spending too much time with Aviendha.

wʌns i hɛlpt əɹ tə hɝ fit, ʃi lʊkt ət ðə hɔlweɪ, ət veɪnɪn wɪð ɪz blʌd-smɪɹd feɪs, ən ðə wɪmən laɪɪŋ wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd fɔlən, ən ʃi ɡɹɪməst. "oʊ, laɪt!" ʃi bɹiðd. "oʊ, blʌɾ ən blʌɾi fleɪmɪŋ æʃəz!" dɪspaɪt ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən, hi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. ɪt wɑz nɑt dʒʌs ðəɾ i hæd nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə hɪɹ ðoʊz wɝdz aʊɾ ə hɝ maʊθ; ðeɪ sim pəkjuljɝ, əz ɪf ʃi nu ðə saʊnz bʌt nɑt ðə minɪŋz. sʌmhaʊ, ðeɪ meɪɾ əɹ saʊn jʌŋɡɝ ðən ʃi lʊkt.

Once he helped her to her feet, she looked at the hallway, at Vanin with his blood-smeared face, and the women lying where they had fallen, and she grimaced. "Oh, Light!" she breathed. "Oh, blood and bloody flaming ashes!" Despite the situation, he gave a start. It was not just that he had never expected to hear those words out of her mouth; they seemed peculiar, as if she knew the sounds but not the meanings. Somehow, they made her sound younger than she looked.

ʃeɪkɪŋ ɔf ɪz ɑɹm, ʃi dɪskɑɹɾɪd əɹ hæt, dʒʌs tɔsɪŋ ɪɾ əsaɪd, ən hɝid tə nil bɪsaɪd ðə nɪɹəst waɪz wʊmən, ɹin, ən teɪk əɹ hɛɾ ɪn boʊθ hænz. ðə wʊmən leɪ lɪmp, feɪs daʊn ən ɑɹmz stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd bɪn tʃɹɪpt ʌp ɹʌnɪŋ. təwɔɹd ðə ɹum ɛvɹiwʌn hæd bɪn æftɝ, təwɔɹɾ əɹ ətækɝ, nɑɾ əweɪ.

Shaking off his arm, she discarded her hat, just tossing it aside, and hurried to kneel beside the nearest Wise Woman, Reanne, and take her head in both hands. The woman lay limp, face down and arms stretched out as though she had been tripped up running. Toward the room everyone had been after, toward her attacker, not away.

"ðɪs ɪz bɪɑn mi," ɪleɪn mʌɾɝd. "wɛɹ ɪz nɪneɪiv? waɪ dɪdnt ʃi kʌm ʌp wɪð ju, mæt? nɪneɪiv!" ʃi ʃaʊɾəd təwɔɹd ðə stɛɹz.

"This is beyond me," Elayne muttered. "Where is Nynaeve? Why didn't she come up with you, Mat? Nynaeve!" she shouted toward the stairs.

"noʊ nid tə ʃɹik laɪk ə kæt," nɪneɪiv ɡɹaʊld, əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðə stɛɹwɛl. ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ daʊn ðə stɛɹz, ðoʊ. "ju hoʊld əɹ taɪt, jə hɪɹ mi?" ʃi ʃɹik laɪk ə kæt. ʃi kæɹiɾ əɹ hæt, ən ʃʊk ɪɾ ət huɛvɝ ʃi wɑz ʃaʊɾɪŋ æt. "ju lɛɾ əɹ ɡɛɾ əweɪ, tu, ən əl bɑks jəɹ ɪɹz tɪl jə hɪɹ bɛlz nɛks jɪɹ!"

"No need to shriek like a cat," Nynaeve growled, appearing in the stairwell. She was looking back over her shoulder down the stairs, though. "You hold her tight, you hear me?" she shrieked like a cat. She carried her hat, and shook it at whoever she was shouting at. "You let her get away, too, and I'll box your ears till you hear bells next year!"

ʃi tɝnd, ðɛn, ən əɹ aɪz nɪɹli bʌlʒd aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd. "ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ʌs," ʃi bɹiðd, hɝiɪŋ tə bɛn oʊvɝ dʒənɪɹə. wʌn tʌtʃ, ən ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd, wɪnsɪŋ peɪnfəli. hi cʊɾə toʊld əɹ ðə wʊmən wɑz dɛd. nɪneɪiv sim tə teɪk dɛθ pɝsənəli. ɡɪvɪŋ hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk, ʃi wɛn ɑn tə ðə nɛkst, tæmɑɹlə, ən ðɪs taɪm ɪɾ əpɪɹd ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʃi kəd hil. ɪɾ ɔlsoʊ əpɪɹd tæmɑɹləz ɪnʒɝiz wɝ nɑt sɪmpəl, kəz ʃi nɛlt oʊvɝ hɝ, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "wʌt hæpən hɪɹ, mæt?" ʃi dɪmændəd wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn ət hɪm. hɝ toʊn meɪɾ ɪm saɪ; hi maɪɾ əv noʊn ʃi wəd dɪsaɪɾ ɪt wɑz ɪz fɔlt. "wɛl, mæt? wʌt hæpənd? wɪl jə spik ʌp, mæn, əɹ də aɪ hæv tə - " hi nɛvɝ lɝnd wʌt θɹɛt ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə ɔfɝ.

She turned, then, and her eyes nearly bulged out of her head. "The Light shine on us," she breathed, hurrying to bend over Janira. One touch, and she straightened, wincing painfully. He could have told her the woman was dead. Nynaeve seemed to take death personally. Giving herself a shake, she went on to the next, Tamarla, and this time it appeared there was something she could Heal. It also appeared Tamarla's injuries were not simple, because she knelt over her, frowning. "What happened here, Mat?" she demanded without looking around at him. Her tone made him sigh; he might have known she would decide it was his fault. "Well, Mat? What happened? Will you speak up, man, or do I have to - " He never learned what threat she intended to offer.

læn hæd fɑloʊd nɪneɪiv aʊɾ ə ðə stɛɹwɛl, ʌv kɔɹs, wɪð sumeɪkoʊ ɹaɪɾ əɾ ɪz hilz. ðə staʊt waɪz wʊmən tʊk wʌn lʊk ət ðə hɔl ən ɪmiɾiətli lɪftəɾ əɹ skɝts ən ɹæn tə ɹin. ʃi dɪd ɡɪv ɪleɪn wʌn wɝid ɡlæns bɪfɔɹ loʊɝɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə hɝ niz ən bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə muv əɹ hænz oʊvɝ ɹin ɪn ən ɑd weɪ. ðət wɑz wʌt pʊl nɪneɪiv ʌp ʃɔɹt.

Lan had followed Nynaeve out of the stairwell, of course, with Sumeko right at his heels. The stout Wise Woman took one look at the hall and immediately lifted her skirts and ran to Reanne. She did give Elayne one worried glance before lowering herself to her knees and beginning to move her hands over Reanne in an odd way. That was what pulled Nynaeve up short.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ?" ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli. nɑt hɔltɪŋ wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ tə tæmɑɹlə, ʃi spɛɹd ðə ɹaʊnd-feɪst wʊmən oʊnli ʃɔɹt ɡlænsɪz, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ əz pɪɹsɪŋ əz əɹ vɔɪs. "wɛɹ dɪd jə lɝn ðæt?"

"What are you doing?" she said sharply. Not halting what she was doing to Tamarla, she spared the round-faced woman only short glances, but they were as piercing as her voice. "Where did you learn that?"

sumeɪkoʊ ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, bʌɾ əɹ hænz dɪd nɑt stɑp. "fɝɡɪv mi, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə bɹɛθləs, dɪsdʒɔɪntɪd ɹʌʃ. "aɪ noʊ aɪm nɑt səpoʊz tə. . . . ʃɪl daɪ ɪf aɪ doʊnt. . . . aɪ noʊ aɪ wɑzn səpoʊz tə kip tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə. . . . aɪ dʒʌst wɑntəd tə lɝn, ɛɛs sədaɪ. pliz."

Sumeko gave a start, but her hands did not stop. "Forgive me, Aes Sedai," she said in a breathless, disjointed rush. "I know I'm not supposed to. . . . She'll die if I don't. . . . I know I wasn't supposed to keep trying to. . . . I just wanted to learn, Aes Sedai. Please."

"noʊ, noʊ, ɡoʊ ɑn," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ æbsənli. moʊst ə hɝ ətɛnʃən wɑz fɪkst ɑn ðə wʊmən ʌndɝ əɹ hænz, bʌt nɑɾ ɔl. "ju sim tə noʊ ə fju θɪŋz ivən aɪ - ðəɾ ɪz tə seɪ, juv ə vɛɹi ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ weɪ wɪð ðə floʊz. aɪ səspɛk jəl faɪn ðəɾ ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni sɪstɝz wɑnə lɝn fɹəm ju." hæf ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, ʃi æɾəd, "meɪbi naʊ ðəl liv mi əloʊn." sumeɪkoʊ kəd nɑɾ əv hɝd ðət læst, bʌt wʌt ʃi dɪd hɪɹ dʒɹɑpt əɹ tʃɪn tə hɝ kənsɪɾɝəbəl tʃɛst. hɝ hænz bɛɹli pɔzd, ðoʊ.

"No, no, go on," Nynaeve said absently. Most of her attention was fixed on the woman under her hands, but not all. "You seem to know a few things even I - That is to say, you have a very interesting way with the flows. I suspect you'll find that a great many sisters want to learn from you." Half under her breath, she added, "Maybe now they'll leave me alone." Sumeko could not have heard that last, but what she did hear dropped her chin to her considerable chest. Her hands barely paused, though.

"ɪleɪn," nɪneɪiv wɛn ɑn, "wʊd jə lʊk fəɹ ðə boʊl, pliz? aɪ səspɛk ðət dɔɹ ɪz ðə wʌn." ʃi nɑɾəd tə ðə kɝɛk dɔɹ, stændɪŋ oʊpən laɪk hæf ə dʌzən ʌðɝz. ðət meɪd mæt blɪŋk əntɪl i sɔ tu taɪni klɔθ-ɹæp bʌndəlz laɪɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɪt wɛɹ ðə luɾɝz mʌst əv dʒɹɑp ðɛm.

"Elayne," Nynaeve went on, "would you look for the Bowl, please? I suspect that door is the one." She nodded to the correct door, standing open like half a dozen others. That made Mat blink until he saw two tiny cloth-wrapped bundles lying in front of it where the looters must have dropped them.

"jɛs," ɪleɪn mʌɾɝd. "jɛs, aɪ kən də ðət mʌtʃ, ət list." hæf-ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hæn təwɔɹd veɪnɪn, stɪl ɑn ɪz niz, ʃi lɛɾ ɪt fɔl wɪð ə saɪ ən stʃɹoʊd θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ, wɪtʃ ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli ɪmɪɾəd ə klaʊɾ ə dʌst ən ðə saʊn ə kɑfɪŋ.

"Yes," Elayne muttered. "Yes, I can do that much, at least." Half-raising a hand toward Vanin, still on his knees, she let it fall with a sigh and strode through the doorway, which almost immediately emitted a cloud of dust and the sound of coughing.

ðə mɔɹ-ðæn-plʌmp waɪz wʊmən hæd nɑt bɪn ði oʊnli wʌn fɑloʊɪŋ nɪneɪiv ən læn. iin stɔkt aʊɾ ə ðə stɛɹwɛl, fɔɹsɪŋ ðə tæɹɑbənɝ dɑɹkfɹɛn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ baɪ minz ʌv ən ɑɹm twɪstəɾ ʌp ɪndə hɝ bæk ən ə fɪs klʌtʃɪŋ ðə bæk ə hɝ nɛk. iinz dʒɔ wɑz sɛt, hɝ maʊθ taɪt; hɝ feɪs wɑz hæf fɹaɪɾənd sɝɾənti ðət ʃi wəd bi skɪn əlaɪv fəɹ mænhænlɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən hæf dɪtɝməneɪʃən tə hoʊld ɑn noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt. nɪneɪiv hæd ðəɾ ɪfɛkt ɑn pipəl, səmtaɪmz. ðə blæk sɪstɝ wɑz waɪd-aɪd wɪð tɛɹɝ, sæɡɪŋ soʊ ʃi ʃʊɹli wʊɾə fɔlən ɪksɛp fəɹ iinz ɡɹɪp. ʃi mʌst əv bɪn ʃildɪd, sɝɾənli, ən wɪð ikwəl ʃʊɹəɾi ʃi pɹɑbli wʊɾə tʃoʊzən biɪŋ skɪn tə wʌtɛvɝ wɑz gɑnə hæpən tə hɝ. tɪɹz bɪɡæn likɪŋ fɹəm əɹ aɪz, ən əɹ maʊθ sæɡd ɪn saɪlən sɑbz.

The more-than-plump Wise Woman had not been the only one following Nynaeve and Lan. Ieine stalked out of the stairwell, forcing the Taraboner Darkfriend in front of her by means of an arm twisted up into her back and a fist clutching the back of her neck. Ieine's jaw was set, her mouth tight; her face was half frightened certainty that she would be skinned alive for manhandling an Aes Sedai, and half determination to hold on no matter what. Nynaeve had that effect on people, sometimes. The Black sister was wide-eyed with terror, sagging so she surely would have fallen except for Ieine's grip. She must have been shielded, certainly, and with equal surety she probably would have chosen being skinned to whatever was going to happen to her. Tears began leaking from her eyes, and her mouth sagged in silent sobs.

bɪhaɪn əm keɪm bɛslən, hu ɡeɪv ə sæd saɪ ət ðə saɪɾ ə neɪlzin ən ə sæɾɝ fəɹ ðə wɪmən, ən ðən hɑɹnən ən θɹi ʌv ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz, fɝdʒɪn ən ɡɔɹɾɝən ən mɛtwɪn. θɹi hu hæd bɪn ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə bɪldɪŋ. hɑɹnən ən tu ʌv ði ʌðɝz hæd blʌɾi ɡæʃəz ɪn ðɛɹ koʊts, bʌt nɪneɪiv mʌst əv hild əm bɪloʊ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt muv əz ɪf ðeɪ stɪl hæɾ ɪnʒɝiz. ðeɪ lʊk vɛɹi səbdud, ðoʊ.

Behind them came Beslan, who gave a sad sigh at the sight of Nalesean and a sadder for the women, and then Harnan and three of the Redarms, Fergin and Gorderan and Metwyn. Three who had been at the front of the building. Harnan and two of the others had bloody gashes in their coats, but Nynaeve must have Healed them below. They did not move as if they still had injuries. They looked very subdued, though.

"wʌt hæpən ət ðə bæk?" mæt æskt kwaɪətli.

"What happened at the back?" Mat asked quietly.

"bɝn mi ɪf aɪ noʊ," hɑɹnən ɹɪplaɪd. "wi wɔkt ɹaɪɾ ɪndə ə nɑɾ ə ʃoʊldɝθʌmpɝz wɪð naɪvz ɪn ðə dɑɹk. ðəɹ wɑz wʌn, muv laɪk ə sneɪk. . . ." hi ʃɹʌɡd, tʌtʃɪŋ ðə blʌdsteɪn hoʊl ɪn ɪz koʊɾ æbsəntmaɪndɪdli. "wʌn ə ðɛm ɡɑɾ ə naɪf ɪndə mi, ən ðə nɛkst aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪz oʊpənɪŋ maɪ aɪz wɪð nɪneɪiv sədaɪ bɛndɪŋ oʊvɝ mi ən mɛndɛɹ ən ði ʌðɝz dɛɾ əz jɛstɝdeɪz mʌɾən."

"Burn me if I know," Harnan replied. "We walked right into a knot of shoulderthumpers with knives in the dark. There was one, moved like a snake. . . ." He shrugged, touching the bloodstained hole in his coat absentmindedly. "One of them got a knife into me, and the next I remember is opening my eyes with Nynaeve Sedai bending over me and Mendair and the others dead as yesterday's mutton."

mæt nɑɾəd. wʌn u muv laɪk ə sneɪk. ən ɡɑɾ aʊɾ ə ɹumz laɪk wʌn, tu. hi lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə hɔlweɪ. ɹin ən tæmɑɹlə wɝ ɑn ðɛɹ fit - stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ ðɛɹ dʒɹɛsəz, ʌv kɔɹs - ən veɪnɪn, piɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum wɛɹ ɪleɪn wɑz əpɛɹənli tʃɹaɪɪŋ aʊt səm mɔɹ kɝsɪz, simɪŋli wɪð noʊ mɔɹ səksɛs ðən ɝliɝ. ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə tɛl kəz ə ðə kɑfɪŋ. nɪneɪiv stʊd, hɛlpɪŋ ʌp sɪbɛlə, ə skɹɔni jɛloʊ-hɛɹd wʊmən, ən sumeɪkoʊ wɑz stɪl wɝkɪŋ ɑn feɪmɛl, wɪð əɹ peɪl-hʌni hɛɹ ən bɪɡ bɹaʊn aɪz. bʌɾ i wɑz nɛvɝ gɑnə ædmaɪɹ məlɹz bʊzəm əɡɛn; ɹin nɛl tə stʃɹeɪɾən əɹ lɪmz ən kloʊs əɹ aɪz, waɪl tæmɑɹlə pɝfɔɹm ðə seɪm sɝvəs fəɹ dʒənɪɹə. tu waɪz wɪmən dɛd, ən sɪks ə hɪz ɹɛdʒɹmz. kɪl baɪ ə . . . mæn . . . ðə paʊɝ wəd nɑt tʌtʃ.

Mat nodded. One who moved like a snake. And got out of rooms like one, too. He looked around the hallway. Reanne and Tamarla were on their feet - straightening their dresses, of course - and Vanin, peering into the room where Elayne was apparently trying out some more curses, seemingly with no more success than earlier. It was hard to tell because of the coughing. Nynaeve stood, helping up Sibella, a scrawny yellow-haired woman, and Sumeko was still working on Famelle, with her pale-honey hair and big brown eyes. But he was never going to admire Melore's bosom again; Reanne knelt to straighten her limbs and close her eyes, while Tamarla performed the same service for Janira. Two Wise Women dead, and six of his Redarms. Killed by a . . . man . . . the Power would not touch.

"aɪv faʊn ɪt!" ɪleɪn ʃaʊɾəd ɪksaɪɾədli. ʃi stʃɹoʊd bæk aʊɾ ɪndə ðə hɔl hoʊldɪŋ ə waɪd ɹaʊn bʌndəl ə ɹɑɾɪd klɔθ ʃi wəd nɑt lɛt veɪnɪn teɪk fɹəm hɝ. koʊɾəd ɪn ɡɹeɪ fɹəm hɛd tə toʊ, ʃi lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi hæd leɪn daʊn ən ɹoʊld ɪn ðə dʌst. "wi hæv ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz, nɪneɪiv!"

"I've found it!" Elayne shouted excitedly. She strode back out into the hall holding a wide round bundle of rotted cloth she would not let Vanin take from her. Coated in gray from head to toe, she looked as if she had lain down and rolled in the dust. "We have the Bowl of the Winds, Nynaeve!"

"ɪn ðət keɪs," mæt ənaʊnst, "wi ɑɹ blʌɾi wɛl ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ naʊ." noʊbɑdi ɑɹɡjud. oʊ, nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn ɔl ðə mɛn meɪkɪŋ sæks aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ dʒækɪts fəɹ θɪŋz ðeɪ ɹuɾəd aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum - ðeɪ ivən loʊɾəd ðə waɪz wɪmən daʊn, ən ðɛmsɛlvz - ən ɹin hæd tə ɡoʊ daʊn ən ɹəkɹut mɛn tə kæɹi ðɛɹ dɛd daʊn ðə boʊt lændɪŋ, bʌt noʊbɑdi ɑɹɡjud. hi daʊɾɪd ɪf ðə ɹæhəd hæɾ ɛvɝ sin əz ɑɾ ə pɹəsɛʃən əz meɪɾ ɪts weɪ tə ðə ɹɪvɝ, əɹ wʌn ðət muv mɔɹ kwɪkli.

"In that case," Mat announced, "we are bloody well getting out of here now." Nobody argued. Oh, Nynaeve and Elayne insisted on all the men making sacks out of their jackets for things they rooted out of the room - they even loaded the Wise Women down, and themselves - and Reanne had to go down and recruit men to carry their dead down the boat landing, but nobody argued. He doubted if the Rahad had ever seen as odd a procession as made its way to the river, or one that moved more quickly.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾinaɪn


CHAPTER 39

pɹɑməsəz tə kip


Promises to Keep

wəɹ blʌɾi wɛl ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ naʊ," mæt sɛɾ əɡɛn leɪɾɝ, ən ðɪs taɪm ðəɹ wɑz ɑɹɡjəmənt. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɑɹɡjəmən fəɹ ðə pæs hæf-aʊɝ, nɪɹ ɪnʌf. aʊtsaɪd, ðə sʌn wɑz pæst ɪts nun pik. ðə tʃɹeɪd wɪnz kʌt ðə hiɾ ə lɪɾəl; stɪf jɛloʊ kɝɾənz fæsən oʊvɝ ðə tɔl wɪndoʊz bʌlʒd ən snæpt ət ɡʌsts. θɹi aʊɝz bæk ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, ðə daɪs stɪl baʊnsɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd, ən i wɑntəd tə kɪk sʌmθɪŋ. əɹ sʌmbɑɾi. hi tʌɡd ət ðə skɑɹf taɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk; ɪt fɛlt əz ðoʊ ðə ɹoʊp ðət hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ðə skɑɹ ʌndɝ ðət skɑɹf wɑz bæk ən taɪɾənɪŋ sloʊli. "lʌv ə ðə laɪt, ɑɹ jə ɔl blaɪnd? əɹ dʒʌs dɛf?"

We are bloody well getting out of here now," Mat said again later, and this time there was argument. There had been argument for the past half-hour, near enough. Outside, the sun was past its noon peak. The trade winds cut the heat a little; stiff yellow curtains fastened over the tall windows bulged and snapped at gusts. Three hours back in the Tarasin Palace, the dice still bouncing in his head, and he wanted to kick something. Or somebody. He tugged at the scarf tied around his neck; it felt as though the rope that had given him the scar under that scarf was back and tightening slowly. "Love of the Light, are you all blind? Or just deaf?"

ðə ɹum taɪlɪn hæd pɹəvaɪɾəd wɑz lɑɹdʒ, wɪð ɡɹin wɔlz ən haɪ blu silɪŋ, ən noʊ fɝnɪʃɪŋz bʌt ɡɪldɪd tʃɛɹz ən smɔl teɪbəlz sɛt wɪð pɝlʃɛl, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz kɹaʊɾəd ivən soʊ. ɪt sim soʊ, ɛniweɪ. taɪlɪn hɝsɛlf sæt bɪfɔɹ wʌn ə ðə θɹi mɑɹbəl faɪɝpleɪsəz wɪð əɹ niz kɹɔst, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm wɪð ðoʊz dɑɹk iɡəlz aɪz ən ə smɔl smaɪl, aɪdli kɪkɪŋ əɹ leɪɝd blu ən jɛloʊ pɛɾikoʊts, aɪdli tɔɪɪŋ wɪð ðə dʒuəl hɪlt ə hɝ kɝv naɪf. hi səspɛktəɾ ɪleɪn əɹ nɪneɪiv hæd spoʊkən tə hɝ. ðeɪ wɝ ðɛɹ, tu, siɾəd tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə kwin, sʌmhaʊ ɪn klin dʒɹɛsəz ən əpɛɹənli ivən beɪðd, ðoʊ ðeɪ hæɾ oʊnli bɪn aʊɾ ə hɪz saɪt fəɹ mɪnəts əɾ ə stʃɹɛtʃ sɪns ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə pæləs. ðeɪ ɔlmoʊs mætʃt taɪlɪn fəɹ ɹiɡəl dɪɡnəɾi ɪn ðɛɹ bɹaɪt sɪlks; hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ u ðeɪ wɑntəd tə ɪmpɹɛs, wɪð ɔl ðət leɪs ən ɪlæbɹəɾ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. ðeɪ lʊkt ɹɛɾi fəɹ ə ɹɔɪəl bɔl, nɑɾ ə dʒɝni. hi hɪmsɛlf wɑz stɪl ɪn ɪz mʌk, wɪð ɪz dʌsti ɡɹin koʊt hæŋɪŋ oʊpən ən ðə sɪlvɝ fɑkshɛd kɑɾ ɪn ðə nɛk ə hɪz hæf-əndʌn ʃɝt. nɑɾɪŋ ðə lɛðɝ kɔɹd hæd ʃɔɹɾənd ɪt, bʌɾ i wɑntəd ðə mədæljən tʌtʃɪŋ ɪz skɪn. hi wɑz ɝaʊnd wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl, æftɝ ɔl.

The room Tylin had provided was large, with green walls and high blue ceiling, and no furnishings but gilded chairs and small tables set with pearlshell, yet it was crowded even so. It seemed so, anyway. Tylin herself sat before one of the three marble fireplaces with her knees crossed, watching him with those dark eagle's eyes and a small smile, idly kicking her layered blue and yellow petticoats, idly toying with the jeweled hilt of her curved knife. He suspected Elayne or Nynaeve had spoken to her. They were there, too, seated to either side of the Queen, somehow in clean dresses and apparently even bathed, though they had only been out of his sight for minutes at a stretch since returning to the palace. They almost matched Tylin for regal dignity in their bright silks; he was not sure who they wanted to impress, with all that lace and elaborate embroidery. They looked ready for a royal ball, not a journey. He himself was still in his muck, with his dusty green coat hanging open and the silver foxhead caught in the neck of his half-undone shirt. Knotting the leather cord had shortened it, but he wanted the medallion touching his skin. He was around women who could channel, after all.

tʃɹuθ, ðoʊz θɹi wɪmən kəd pɹɑbli hæv kɹaʊɾəd ðə ɹum baɪ ðɛmsɛlvz. taɪlɪn cʊɾə dʌn ɪt baɪ hɝsɛlf, soʊ fɑɹ əz i wɑz kənsɝnd; ɪf nɪneɪiv əɹ ɪleɪn hæd spoʊkən tə hɝ, ɪt wɑz ə vɛɹi ɡʊd θɪŋ ðəɾ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ. ðeɪ θɹi cʊɾə dʌn ɪɾ əloʊn, bʌt. . . .

Truth, those three women could probably have crowded the room by themselves. Tylin could have done it by herself, so far as he was concerned; if Nynaeve or Elayne had spoken to her, it was a very good thing that he was going. They three could have done it alone, but. . . .

"ðɪs ɪz pɹɪpɑstɝəs," mɛɝɪlɪl ənaʊnst. "aɪv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɛni ʃæɾoʊzpɔn kɔld ə ɡoʊləm. hæv ɛni ʌv ju?" ðət wɑz dɝɛktəd tə æɾɪliz ən vændin, sɝaɪðə ən kɛɝin. feɪsɪŋ taɪlɪn, ðə kul-aɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi ʌv ɔl faɪv meɪɾ ə fɛɹ dʒɑb ə tɝnɪŋ ðɛɹ haɪ-bækt ɑɹmtʃɛɹz ɪndə θɹoʊnz. hi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn dʒʌst sæt laɪk lʌmps, kuli sɝin tu, bʌɾ æbsəlutli saɪlənt. ðeɪ nu, ðeɪ ʌndɝstʊd, ən fəɹ səm ɹizən, mɛɝɪlɪl ən ðət lɑt slæðɝd ðɛɹ tʌŋz wɪð miknəs fəɹ ðɛm, naʊ. mæt kɔθən, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, wɑz ə hɛɹi-ɪɹd laʊɾ u niɾəd tə bi kɪkt, ən fɹəm mɛɝɪlɪl ɑn daʊn, ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ɹɛɾi tə də ðə kɪkɪŋ.

"This is preposterous," Merilille announced. "I've never heard of any Shadowspawn called a gholam. Have any of you?" That was directed to Adeleas and Vandene, Sareitha and Careane. Facing Tylin, the cool-eyed Aes Sedai serenity of all five made a fair job of turning their high-backed armchairs into thrones. He could not understand why Nynaeve and Elayne just sat like lumps, coolly serene too, but absolutely silent. They knew, they understood, and for some reason, Merilille and that lot slathered their tongues with meekness for them, now. Mat Cauthon, on the other hand, was a hairy-eared lout who needed to be kicked, and from Merilille on down, they were all ready to do the kicking.

"aɪ sɔ ðə θɪŋ," hi snæpt, "ɪleɪn sɔ ðə θɪŋ, ɹin ən ðə waɪz wɪmən sɔ ɪt. æsk ɛni ʌv ðɛm!"

"I saw the thing," he snapped, "Elayne saw the thing, Reanne and the Wise Women saw it. Ask any of them!"

ɡæðɝɾ ət wʌn ɛn ə ðə ɹum, ɹin ən ðə faɪv sɝvaɪvɪŋ waɪz wɪmən ʃɹæŋk bæk laɪk hʌɾəlɪŋ hɛnz, əfɹeɪɾ ʌv æktʃəwəl kwɛstʃənz. ɔl bʌt sumeɪkoʊ, ɛniweɪ; θʌmz tʌk bɪhaɪn əɹ lɔŋ ɹɛd bɛlt, ðə ɹaʊnd wʊmən kɛp fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðən ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ, ðən ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd. nɪneɪiv hæd hæɾ ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl tɔk wɪð əɹ ɪn ðə pɹaɪvəsi ʌv ðə kæbən ɑn ðə boʊt kʌmɪŋ bæk, ən mæt θɔt ðət hæd sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð əɹ nufaʊn æɾətud. hi hæd kɑt mɛnʃən ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ mɔɹ ðən wʌns; nɑt ðəɾ i hæd bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ivzdʒɹɑp. ðə ɹɛst sim tə bi wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ðeɪ ʃəɾ ɔfɝ tə fɛtʃ ti. oʊnli sumeɪkoʊ hæɾ ivən əpɪɹd tə kənsɪɾɝ ði ɔfɝ ʌv ə tʃɛɹ. sɪbɛlə, flæpɪŋ boʊni ɑɹmz ɪn ʃɑk, hæd nɪɹli feɪntɪd.

Gathered at one end of the room, Reanne and the five surviving Wise Women shrank back like huddling hens, afraid of actual questions. All but Sumeko, anyway; thumbs tucked behind her long red belt, the round woman kept frowning at the Aes Sedai, then shaking her head, frowning, then shaking her head. Nynaeve had had a considerable talk with her in the privacy of the cabin on the boat coming back, and Mat thought that had something to do with her newfound attitude. He had caught mention of Aes Sedai more than once; not that he had been trying to eavesdrop. The rest seemed to be wondering whether they should offer to fetch tea. Only Sumeko had even appeared to consider the offer of a chair. Sibella, flapping bony arms in shock, had nearly fainted.

"noʊ wʌn dɪnaɪz ðə wɝɾ ʌv ɪleɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ, mæstɝ kɔθən," sɛd ɹɪneɪl dɪn kəlɑn blu stɑɹ ɪn ə kul dip vɔɪs. ivən hæd ðə dɪɡnəfaɪd wʊmən ɪn sɪlks tə mætʃ ðə ɹɛd-ænd-jɛloʊ flɔɹ taɪlz nɑt bɪn neɪm tə hɪm ɝliɝ, ði oʊl mɛmɹiz mɛʃt ɪndə hɪz oʊn wʊɾə aɪdɛntəfaɪɾ əɹ əz wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps baɪ ðə tɛn fæt ɡoʊld ɹɪŋz ɪn əɹ ɝloʊbz, ðoʊz ɪn itʃ ɪɹ kənɛktəd baɪ ə ɡoʊldən tʃeɪn ən hæf-hɪɾən baɪ ðə nɛɹoʊ wɪŋz ʌv waɪɾ ɪn əɹ stʃɹeɪt blæk hɛɹ. ðə mədæljənz klʌstɝɾ əlɔŋ ðə faɪnɝ tʃeɪn ðət ɹæn tə hɝ noʊz ɹɪŋ wəd tɛl ɪm wʌt klæn ʃi keɪm fɹəm əmʌŋ ʌðɝ θɪŋz. soʊ wəd ðə tætuz ɑn əɹ slɪm dɑɹk hænz. "wʌt wi kwɛstʃən ɪz ðə deɪnʒɝ," ʃi kəntɪnjud. "wi də nɑt laɪk livɪŋ ðə wɔɾɝ wɪθaʊt ɡʊd kɑz."

"No one denies the word of Elayne Aes Sedai, Master Cauthon," said Renaile din Calon Blue Star in a cool deep voice. Even had the dignified woman in silks to match the red-and-yellow floor tiles not been named to him earlier, the old memories meshed into his own would have identified her as Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships by the ten fat gold rings in her earlobes, those in each ear connected by a golden chain and half-hidden by the narrow wings of white in her straight black hair. The medallions clustered along the finer chain that ran to her nose ring would tell him what clan she came from among other things. So would the tattoos on her slim dark hands. "What we question is the danger," she continued. "We do not like leaving the water without good cause."

nɪɹli twɛnti si foʊk wɪmən stʊd ɡæðɝd bɪhaɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ, ə ɹaɪəɾ ə kʌlɝfəl sɪlks ən ɪɹɪŋz ən mədæljənz ɑn tʃeɪnz fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt. ðə fɝst ɑd θɪŋ i hæd noʊɾəst əbaʊɾ əm wɑz ðɛɹ æɾətud təwɔɹd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðeɪ wɝ pɝfəkli ɹɪspɛkfəl, ɑn ðə sɝfəs əɾ ɛni ɹeɪt, bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ sin ɛniwʌn lʊk əɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ smʌɡli. ðə sɛkən ɑd θɪŋ keɪm fɹəm ðoʊz ʌðɝ mɛnz mɛmɹiz; hi dɪd nɑt noʊ ə ɡɹeɪt dil əbaʊt ðə si foʊk fɹəm ðɛm, bʌɾ ɪnʌf. ɛvɹi æθɑn maɪɹ, mæn əɹ wʊmən, bɪɡæn əz ðə loʊəs dɛkhænd wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɝ dɛstɪnd wʌn deɪ tə bɪkʌm ðə mæstɝ ə ðə bleɪdz əɹ ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps hɝsɛlf, ən ɛvɹi stɛp ə ðə weɪ bɪtwin, ðə si foʊk wɝ stɪklɝz fəɹ ɹæŋk tə meɪk ɛni kɪŋ əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ lʊk ə sloʊvən. ðə wɪmən bɪhaɪn ɹɪneɪl wɝ ə pəkjuljɝ lɑt baɪ ɛni mɛʒɝ - wɪndfɪndɝz tə weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz ɹʌbɪŋ ʃoʊldɝz wɪð wɪndfɪndɝz fɹəm sɔɹɝz, baɪ ðɛɹ mədæljənz - bʌt tu wɔɹ bɹaɪt blaʊsəz ə pleɪn wʊl əbʌv ðə dɑɹk ɔɪli bɹitʃɪz ə dɛk-hænz, itʃ wɪð ə sɪŋɡəl θɪn ɹɪŋ ɪn əɹ lɛft ɪɹ. ə sɛkən ən θɝd ɹɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹaɪɾ ɪndəkeɪɾəd ðeɪ wɝ biɪŋ tʃɹeɪn əz wɪndfɪndɝz, bʌt wɪð tu mɔɹ tə ɝn, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə noʊz ɹɪŋ, ɪt wəd bi ə lɔŋ waɪl jɛt ðəɾ iðɝ wəd faɪn hɝsɛlf kɔl tə hɔl seɪl wɛnɛvɝ ðə dɛkmæstɝ niɾəd hɝ, ən faɪn ðə dɛkmæstɝz fleɪl əkɹɔs əɹ ɹʌmp ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt muv kwɪkli ɪnʌf. ðoʊz tu dɪd nɑt bɪlɔŋ ɪn ðɪs ɡæðɝɪŋ baɪ ɛni mɛmɹi hi hæd; nɔɹməli, ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps wəd nɑɾ ivən əv spoʊkən tə wʌn ə ðɛm.

Nearly twenty Sea Folk women stood gathered behind her chair, a riot of colorful silks and earrings and medallions on chains for the most part. The first odd thing he had noticed about them was their attitude toward the Aes Sedai. They were perfectly respectful, on the surface at any rate, but he had never before seen anyone look at Aes Sedai smugly. The second odd thing came from those other men's memories; he did not know a great deal about the Sea Folk from them, but enough. Every Atha'an Miere, man or woman, began as the lowest deckhand whether they were destined one day to become the Master of the Blades or the Mistress of the Ships herself, and every step of the way between, the Sea Folk were sticklers for rank to make any king or Aes Sedai look a sloven. The women behind Renaile were a peculiar lot by any measure - Windfinders to Wavemistresses rubbing shoulders with Windfinders from soarers, by their medallions - but two wore bright blouses of plain wool above the dark oily breeches of deck-hands, each with a single thin ring in her left ear. A second and third ring in the right indicated they were being trained as Windfinders, but with two more to earn, not to mention the nose ring, it would be a long while yet that either would find herself called to haul sail whenever the deckmaster needed her, and find the deckmaster's flail across her rump if she did not move quickly enough. Those two did not belong in this gathering by any memory he had; normally, the Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships would not even have spoken to one of them.

"vɛɹi mʌtʃ əz aɪ sɛd, ɹɪneɪl," mɛɝɪlɪl sɛd, aɪsɪli kɑndɪsɛndɪŋ. ʃi hæd sɝɾənli noʊɾəst ðoʊz smʌɡ ɡlænsɪz. ðət toʊn dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ əz ʃi ʃɪftəɾ əɹ ətɛnʃən tə hɪm. "du nɑt ɡɹoʊ pɛtʃələnt, mæstɝ kɔθən. wəɹ wɪlɪŋ tə lɪsən tə ɹizən. ɪf juv ɛni."

"Very much as I said, Renaile," Merilille said, icily condescending. She had certainly noticed those smug glances. That tone did not change as she shifted her attention to him. "Do not grow petulant, Master Cauthon. We are willing to listen to reason. If you have any."

mæt ɡæðɝd peɪʃəns; hi hoʊpt i kəd faɪn ɪnʌf. meɪbi ɪf i juz boʊθ hænz ən boʊθ fit. "ɡoʊləm wɝ kɹieɪɾəd ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə paʊɝ, dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz," hi bɪɡæn fɹəm ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ɔlmoʊs fɹəm ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ʌv wʌt bɝdʒɪt hæd toʊl hɪm. hi tɝnd, feɪsɪŋ itʃ ɡɹup ʌv wɪmən əz i spoʊk. bɝn ɪm ɪf i wɑz gɑnə lɛt wʌn bʌntʃ θɪŋk ðeɪ wɝ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. əɹ ðəɾ i wɑz blʌɾi pliɾɪŋ wɪð ðɛm. ɪspɛʃli sɪns i wɑz. "ðeɪ wɝ meɪd tə əsæsəneɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. noʊ ʌðɝ ɹizən. tə kɪl pipəl u kəd tʃænəl. ðə wʌn paʊɝ woʊn hɛlp ju; ðə paʊɝ woʊn tʌtʃ ə ɡoʊləm. ɪn fækt, ðeɪ kən sɛns ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl, ɪf ðəɹ wɪðɪn, seɪ, fɪfti peɪsɪz ə ju. ðeɪ kən fil ðə paʊɝ ɪn ju, tu. jə woʊnt noʊ ðə ɡoʊləm əntɪl ɪts tu leɪt. ðeɪ lʊk dʒʌs laɪk ɛnibəɾi ɛls. ɑn ði aʊtsaɪd. ɪnsaɪd. . . . ɡoʊləm əv noʊ boʊnz; ðeɪ kən skwiz ðɛmsɛlvz ʌndɝ ə dɔɹ. ən ðəɹ stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɹɪp ə dɔɹ ɔf stil hɪnʒɪz wɪð wʌn hænd." əɹ ɹɪp aʊɾ ə θɹoʊt. laɪt, hi ʃʊɾə lɛt neɪlzin steɪ ɪn bɛd.

Mat gathered patience; he hoped he could find enough. Maybe if he used both hands and both feet. "Gholam were created in the middle of the War of the Power, during the Age of Legends," he began from the beginning. Almost from the beginning of what Birgitte had told him. He turned, facing each group of women as he spoke. Burn him if he was going to let one bunch think they were more important. Or that he was bloody pleading with them. Especially since he was. "They were made to assassinate Aes Sedai. No other reason. To kill people who could channel. The One Power won't help you; the Power won't touch a gholam. In fact, they can sense the ability to channel, if they're within, say, fifty paces of you. They can feel the power in you, too. You won't know the gholam until it's too late. They look just like anybody else. On the outside. Inside. . . . Gholam have no bones; they can squeeze themselves under a door. And they're strong enough to rip a door off steel hinges with one hand." Or rip out a throat. Light, he should have let Nalesean stay in bed.

səpɹɛsɪŋ ə ʃɪvɝ, hi pɹɛst ɑn. ðə wɪmən, ɔl ə ðɛm, wɑtʃt hɪm, ɔlmoʊs nɑɾ əpɪɹɪŋ tə blɪŋk. hi wəd nɑt lɛɾ əm si hɪm ʃɪvɝ. "ðɛɹ wɝ oʊnli sɪks ɡoʊləm meɪd - θɹi meɪl ən θɹi fimeɪl; ət list, ðæts wʌt ðeɪ lʊk laɪk. əpɛɹənli ivən ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɝ ə lɪɾəl ənizi əbaʊt ðɛm. əɹ meɪbi ðeɪ dʒʌs dɪsaɪɾɪd sɪks wɑz ɪnʌf. iðɝ weɪ, wi noʊ wʌn ɪz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, pɹɑbli kɛpt əlaɪv sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪn ə stəsəs-bɑks. wi doʊnt noʊ ɪf ɛni ʌðɝz wɝ pʊɾ ɪndə ðət bɑks, bʌt wʌn ɪz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf. huɛvɝ sɛn ɪm - ən ɪt hæd tə bi wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən - nu tə fɑloʊ əs əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ. hi hæd tə hæv bɪn sɛn æftɝ ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz, ən baɪ wʌɾ i sɛd tə mi, tə kɪl nɪneɪiv əɹ ɪleɪn, meɪbi boʊθ." hi spɛɹɾ əm ə kwɪk lʊk, suðɪŋ ən sɪmpəθɛɾɪk; noʊbɑdi kəd fil izi noʊɪŋ ðət θɪŋ wɑz æftɝ ðɛm. ɪn ɹɪtɝn i ɹəsivd ə pʌzəl fɹaʊn fɹəm ɪleɪn, dʒʌs ðə smɔləst ɹɪŋkəlɪŋ ə hɝ fɔɹhɛd, ən fɹəm nɪneɪiv ə slaɪt weɪv ə ðə hænd, ən ɪmpeɪʃənt weɪv, tə ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð ɪt.

Suppressing a shiver, he pressed on. The women, all of them, watched him, almost not appearing to blink. He would not let them see him shiver. "There were only six gholam made - three male and three female; at least, that's what they look like. Apparently even the Forsaken were a little uneasy about them. Or maybe they just decided six was enough. Either way, we know one is in Ebou Dar, probably kept alive since the Breaking in a stasis-box. We don't know if any others were put into that box, but one is more than enough. Whoever sent him - and it had to be one of the Forsaken - knew to follow us across the river. He had to have been sent after the Bowl of the Winds, and by what he said to me, to kill Nynaeve or Elayne, maybe both." He spared them a quick look, soothing and sympathetic; nobody could feel easy knowing that thing was after them. In return he received a puzzled frown from Elayne, just the smallest wrinkling of her forehead, and from Nynaeve a slight wave of the hand, an impatient wave, to get on with it.

"tə kəntɪnju," hi sɛd, ʃuɾɪŋ ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm ə ɡlɛɹ. ɪt wɑz vɛɹi hɑɹd nɑt tə saɪ, dilɪŋ wɪð wɪmən. "huɛvɝ sɛn ðə ɡoʊləm əz tə noʊ ðə boʊl ɪz hɪɹ ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, naʊ. ɪf hi, əɹ ʃi, sɛnz ðə ɡoʊləm hɪɹ, səm ə jə ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ. meɪbi ə lɑɾ ə ju. aɪ kæn pɹətɛkt ɔl ə jə ət wʌns. meɪbi hɪl ɡɛt ðə boʊl, tu. ən ðæts ɑn tɑp ə fæljən boʊɾə; smɔl tʃæns ʃiz əloʊn, ivən wɪð ɪspæn ə pɹɪznɝ, soʊ ðət minz wɪv ðə blæk ədʒɑ tə wɝi əbaʊt, əz wɛl. dʒʌst ɪn keɪs ðə fɔɹseɪkən ən ɡoʊləm ɑɹən ɪnʌf fəɹ ju." ɹin ən ðə waɪz wɪmən dʒɹu ðɛmsɛlvz ʌp ivən mɔɹ ɪndɪɡnənli ðən mɛɝɪlɪl ən əɹ fɹɛnz ət mɛnʃən ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, stɪfənɪŋ ən ɡæðɝɪŋ skɝts, lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə stɔk aʊɾ ɪn ə hʌf. pɹɛs ɑn; ðət wɑz ɔl i kəd du. "naʊ. naʊ dʒju si waɪ jə ɔl əv tə liv ðə pæləs ən teɪk ðə boʊl sʌmwɛɹ ðə ɡoʊləm dʌznt noʊ əbaʊt? sʌmwɛɹ ðə blæk ədʒɑ dʌznt noʊ? dʒju si waɪ ɪts tə bi dʌn naʊ?"

"To continue," he said, shooting the pair of them a glare. It was very hard not to sigh, dealing with women. "Whoever sent the gholam has to know the Bowl is here in the Tarasin Palace, now. If he, or she, sends the gholam here, some of you are going to die. Maybe a lot of you. I can't protect all of you at once. Maybe he'll get the Bowl, too. And that's on top of Falion Bhoda; small chance she's alone, even with Ispan a prisoner, so that means we have the Black Ajah to worry about, as well. Just in case the Forsaken and gholam aren't enough for you." Reanne and the Wise Women drew themselves up even more indignantly than Merilille and her friends at mention of the Black Ajah, and the Aes Sedai, stiffening and gathering skirts, looked ready to stalk out in a huff. Press on; that was all he could do. "Now. Now do you see why you all have to leave the palace and take the Bowl somewhere the gholam doesn't know about? Somewhere the Black Ajah doesn't know? Do you see why it has to be done now?"

ɹɪneɪlz snɪf wʊɾə stɑɹɾəld ɡis ɪn ðə nɛkst ɹum. "ju mɪɹli ɹɪpit jɝsɛlf, mæstɝ kɔθən. mɛɝɪlɪl sədaɪ sɛz ʃiz nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə ðɪs ɡoʊləm. ɪleɪn sədaɪ sɛz ðəɹ wɑz ə stʃɹeɪnʒ mæn, ə kɹitʃɝ, bʌt lɪɾəl ɛls. wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs . . . stəsəs-bɑks? juv nɑɾ ɪkspleɪn ðæt. haʊ dʒju noʊ wʌt jə kleɪm tə noʊ? waɪ ʃəd wi ɡoʊ ɛni fɝðɝ fɹəm ðə wɔɾɝ ðən wəɹ ɑn ðə wɝɾ ʌv ə mæn u kɹieɪts feɪbəlz fɹəm ɛɹ?"

Renaile's sniff would have startled geese in the next room. "You merely repeat yourself, Master Cauthon. Merilille Sedai says she has never heard of this gholam. Elayne Sedai says there was a strange man, a creature, but little else. What is this . . . stasis-box? You have not explained that. How do you know what you claim to know? Why should we go any further from the water than we are on the word of a man who creates fables from air?"

mæt lʊk tə nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn, ðoʊ wɪð lɪɾəl hoʊp. ɪf ðeɪ wəɾ oʊnli oʊpən ðɛɹ maʊðz, ðɪs kəd bɪn əv bɪn fɪnɪʃt lɔŋ sɪns, bʌt ðeɪ ɡeɪz bæk ət hɪm, pɹæktəsɪŋ ɪkspɹɛʃənləs ɛɛs sədaɪ mæsks tɪl ðɛɹ dʒɔz mʌs bi kɹikɪŋ. hi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðɛɹ saɪləns. ə bɛɹ-boʊnz əkaʊn ʌv ɪvɛns ɪn ðə ɹæhəd hæd bɪn ɔl ðeɪ ɡeɪv, ən i wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə bɛt ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv mɛnʃən ðə blæk ədʒɑ əɾ ɔl hæd ðəɹ bɪn ɛni ʌðɝ weɪ tə ɪkspleɪn ʃoʊɪŋ ʌp ɪn ðə pæləs wɪð ən ɛɛs sədaɪ baʊn ən ʃildɪd. ɪspæn wɑz biɪŋ hɛld ɪn ənʌðɝ pɑɹɾ ə ðə pæləs, hɝ pɹɛzəns noʊn oʊnli tə ə hændfʊl. nɪneɪiv hæd fɔɹst səm kənkɑkʃən daʊn əɹ θɹoʊt, ə faʊl-smɛlɪŋ mɪks ə ɝbz ðət bʌlʒd ðə wʊmənz aɪz ɡoʊɪŋ daʊn ən hæɾ əɹ ɡɪɡəlɪŋ ən stʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn ʃɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ, ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl ɑkjəpaɪd ðə ɹum wɪð əɹ fəɹ ɡɑɹdz. ənwɪlɪŋ ɡɑɹdz, bʌt vɛɹi əsɪdwəs; nɪneɪiv hæd meɪɾ ɪɾ ɪkstʃɹimli klɪɹ ðət ʃəd ðeɪ lɛɾ ɪspæn ɡɛɾ əweɪ, ðeɪ hæd bɛst stɑɹt ɹʌnɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi leɪd hænz ɑn əm əɡɛn.

Mat looked to Nynaeve and Elayne, though with little hope. If they would only open their mouths, this could been have been finished long since, but they gazed back at him, practicing expressionless Aes Sedai masks till their jaws must be creaking. He could not understand their silence. A bare-bones account of events in the Rahad had been all they gave, and he was willing to bet they would not have mentioned the Black Ajah at all had there been any other way to explain showing up in the palace with an Aes Sedai bound and shielded. Ispan was being held in another part of the palace, her presence known only to a handful. Nynaeve had forced some concoction down her throat, a foul-smelling mix of herbs that bulged the woman's eyes going down and had her giggling and stumbling in short order, and the rest of the Knitting Circle occupied the room with her for guards. Unwilling guards, but very assiduous; Nynaeve had made it extremely clear that should they let Ispan get away, they had best start running before she laid hands on them again.

hi vɛɹi kɛɹfəli dɪd nɑt lʊk təwɔɹd bɝdʒɪt, stændɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ wɪð eɪvinhə. ði il wʊmən wɔɹ ən ɛbu dɑɹi dʒɹɛs; nɑt ðə pleɪn wʊl ʃi hæd ɹɪtɝn ɪn, bʌɾ ə sɪlvɝ-ɡɹeɪ sɪlk ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs ðət dʒɑɹd wɪð əɹ pleɪn-ʃið hɔɹn-hændəl bɛl naɪf. bɝdʒɪt hæd bɪn kwɪk tə ʃɛɾ əɹ oʊn dʒɹɛs fəɹ əɹ juʒəwəl ʃɔɹt koʊɾ ən waɪd tʃɹaʊzɝz, ðiz dɑɹk blu ən dɑɹk ɡɹin. ə kwɪvɝ ɔlɹɛɾi hʌŋ əɾ əɹ hɪp. ʃi wɑz ðə sɔɹs ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ i nu əbaʊt ɡoʊləm - ən stəsəs-bɑksəz - ɪksɛpt wʌɾ ɪz aɪz hæd sin ɪn ðə ɹæhəd. ən i wəd nɑɾ əv ɹɪvil ðəɾ ɑn ə hɑt ɡɹɪl.

He very carefully did not look toward Birgitte, standing beside the door with Aviendha. The Aiel woman wore an Ebou Dari dress; not the plain wool she had returned in, but a silver-gray silk riding dress that jarred with her plain-sheathed horn-handled belt knife. Birgitte had been quick to shed her own dress for her usual short coat and wide trousers, these dark blue and dark green. A quiver already hung at her hip. She was the source of everything he knew about gholam - and stasis-boxes - except what his eyes had seen in the Rahad. And he would not have revealed that on a hot grill.

"aɪ ɹɛɾ ə bʊk wʌns ðət tɔkt əbaʊt - " hi bɪɡæn, ən ɹɪneɪl kʌɾ ɪm ɔf.

"I read a book once that talked about - " he began, and Renaile cut him off.

"ə bʊk," ʃi snɪɹd. "aɪ wɪl nɑɾ əbændən ðə sɔl fəɹ ə bʊk ɛɛs sədaɪ də nɑt noʊ."

"A book," she sneered. "I will not abandon the salt for a book Aes Sedai do not know."

sʌɾənli ɪt stʃɹʌk mæt ðəɾ i wɑz ði oʊnli mæn pɹɛzənt. læn hæd ɡɔn ɔf ət nɪneɪivz kəmænd, ɡɔn əz teɪmli əz bɛslən hæɾ əɾ ɪz mʌðɝz. tɑm ən dʒulɪn wɝ pækɪŋ tə liv. hæd pɹɑbli fɪnɪʃt pækɪŋ baɪ naʊ. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛni jus tə ɪt; ɪf ðeɪ ɛvɝ dɪd liv. ði oʊnli mæn, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ə wɔl ʌv wɪmən u əpɛɹənli ɪntɛndəd tə lɛɾ ɪm biɾ ɪz hɛɾ əɡɛns ðət wɔl tɪl ɪz bɹeɪnz wɝ skɹæmbəld. ɪt meɪd noʊ sɛns. nʌn. ðeɪ lʊkt ət hɪm, weɪɾɪŋ.

Suddenly it struck Mat that he was the only man present. Lan had gone off at Nynaeve's command, gone as tamely as Beslan had at his mother's. Thom and Juilin were packing to leave. Had probably finished packing by now. If there was any use to it; if they ever did leave. The only man, surrounded by a wall of women who apparently intended to let him beat his head against that wall till his brains were scrambled. It made no sense. None. They looked at him, waiting.

nɪneɪiv, ɪn jɛloʊ-slæʃt leɪs-tʃɹɪm blu, hæd pʊld əɹ bɹeɪɾ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ soʊ ɪt hʌŋ daʊn bɪtwin əɹ bɹɛsts, bʌt ðət hɛvi ɡoʊld ɹɪŋ - lænz ɹɪŋ, hi hæd lɝnd - wɑz kɛɹfəli pəzɪʃən tə ʃoʊ ɛniweɪ. hɝ feɪs wɑz smuð, ən əɹ hænz ɹɛstəɾ ɪn əɹ læp, jɛt səmtaɪmz əɹ fɪŋɡɝz twɪtʃt. ɪleɪn, ɪn ɡɹin ɛbu dɑɹi sɪlk ðət meɪd nɪneɪiv sim kʌvɝɾ ʌp dɪspaɪt ðə smoʊki leɪs kɑlɝ ʌndɝ əɹ tʃɪn, ɡeɪz bæk əɾ ɪm wɪð aɪz laɪk kul pulz ə dip blu wɔɾɝ. hɝ hænz leɪ ɪn əɹ læp tu, bʌt naʊ ən əɡɛn ʃi wəd bɪɡɪn tə tʃɹeɪs ðə θɹɛd-ʌv-ɡoʊld ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ðət kʌvɝɾ əɹ skɝts, ðən ɪmiɾiətli stɑp. waɪ dɪd ðeɪ nɑt seɪ sʌmθɪŋ? wɝ ðeɪ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛt bæk ət hɪm? wɑz ɪt dʒʌst ə keɪs ʌv "mæt wɑns tə bi ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ soʊ mʌtʃ, lɛɾ ɪm si haʊ wɛl i kən də wɪθaʊɾ ʌs"? hi maɪɾ əv bɪlivd ɪɾ ə nɪneɪiv, ɛni taɪm bʌt ðɪs ɛniweɪ, bʌt nɑɾ ʌv ɪleɪn, nɑɾ ɛnimɔɹ. soʊ waɪ?

Nynaeve, in yellow-slashed lace-trimmed blue, had pulled her braid over her shoulder so it hung down between her breasts, but that heavy gold ring - Lan's ring, he had learned - was carefully positioned to show anyway. Her face was smooth, and her hands rested in her lap, yet sometimes her fingers twitched. Elayne, in green Ebou Dari silk that made Nynaeve seem covered up despite the smoky lace collar under her chin, gazed back at him with eyes like cool pools of deep blue water. Her hands lay in her lap too, but now and again she would begin to trace the thread-of-gold embroidery that covered her skirts, then immediately stop. Why did they not say something? Were they trying to get back at him? Was it just a case of "Mat wants to be in charge so much, let him see how well he can do without us"? He might have believed it of Nynaeve, any time but this anyway, but not of Elayne, not anymore. So why?

ɹin ən ðə waɪz wɪmən dɪd nɑt hʌɾəl əweɪ fɹəm ɪm əz ðeɪ dɪd fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ðɛɹ mænɝ təwɔɹɾ ɪm hæd tʃeɪnʒd. tæmɑɹlə ɡeɪv ɪm ə disənli ɹɪspɛkfəl nɑd. hʌni-hɛɹd feɪmɛl wɛn soʊ fɑɹ əz ə fɹɛnli smaɪl. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ɹin blʌʃt, ə peɪl steɪn. bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt kaʊn əz ɑpəzɪʃən, ɹɪli. ðə sɪks wɪmən hæd nɑt sɛɾ ə dʌzən ʌnpɹmptəd wɝdz bɪtwin əm sɪns ɛntɝɪŋ ðɪs ɹum. ɛvɹi wʌn wəd dʒʌmp ɪf nɪneɪiv əɹ ɪleɪn snæpt əɹ fɪŋɡɝz, ən kip dʒʌmpɪŋ əntɪl toʊl tə stɑp.

Reanne and the Wise Women did not huddle away from him as they did from the Aes Sedai, but their manner toward him had changed. Tamarla gave him a decently respectful nod. Honey-haired Famelle went so far as a friendly smile. Strangely, Reanne blushed, a pale stain. But they did not count as opposition, really. The six women had not said a dozen unprompted words between them since entering this room. Every one would jump if Nynaeve or Elayne snapped her fingers, and keep jumping until told to stop.

hi tɝn tə ðə ɹɛst ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. feɪsəz ɪnfənətli kɑm, ɪnfənətli peɪʃənt. ɪksɛpt. . . . mɛɝɪlɪlz aɪz flɪkɝd pæst ɪm təwɔɹd nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn fəɹ wʌn ɪnstənt. sɝaɪðə bɪɡæn sloʊli smuðɪŋ əɹ skɝts ʌndɝ ɪz ɡeɪz, simɪŋli ʌnəwɛɹ ə duɪŋ soʊ. ə dɑɹk səspɪʃən blumd ɪn ɪz maɪnd. hænz muvɪŋ ɑn skɝts. ɹinz blʌʃ. bɝdʒɪts ɹɛɾi kwɪvɝ. ə mɝki səspɪʃən. hi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli noʊ ʌv wʌt. dʒʌs ðəɾ i hæd bɪn ɡoʊɪŋ əbaʊt ðɪs ðə ɹɔŋ weɪ. hi ɡeɪv nɪneɪiv ə stɝn lʊk, ən ɪleɪn ə stɝnɝ. bʌɾɝ wəd nɑɾ əv mɛltəɾ ɑn ðɛɹ blʌɾi tʌŋz.

He turned to the rest of the Aes Sedai. Faces infinitely calm, infinitely patient. Except. . . . Merilille's eyes flickered past him toward Nynaeve and Elayne for one instant. Sareitha began slowly smoothing her skirts under his gaze, seemingly unaware of doing so. A dark suspicion bloomed in his mind. Hands moving on skirts. Reanne's blush. Birgitte's ready quiver. A murky suspicion. He did not really know of what. Just that he had been going about this the wrong way. He gave Nynaeve a stern look, and Elayne a sterner. Butter would not have melted on their bloody tongues.

sloʊli hi wɔk təwɔɹd ðə si foʊk. hi dʒʌst wɔkt, bʌɾ i hɝd sʌmwʌn wɪð mɛɝɪlɪl snɪf, ən sɝaɪðə mʌɾɝd, "sʌtʃ ɪnsələns!" wɛl, hi wɑz əbaʊt tə ʃoʊ ðɛm ɪnsələns. ɪf nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪt, ðeɪ ʃʊɾə teɪkən ɪm ɪndə ðɛɹ kɑnfəɾəns. laɪt, bʌɾ i heɪɾəd biɪŋ juzd. ɪspɛʃli wən i dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ, əɹ waɪ.

Slowly he walked toward the Sea Folk. He just walked, but he heard someone with Merilille sniff, and Sareitha muttered, "Such insolence!" Well, he was about to show them insolence. If Nynaeve and Elayne did not like it, they should have taken him into their confidence. Light, but he hated being used. Especially when he did not know how, or why.

stɑpɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ɹɪneɪlz tʃɛɹ, hi stʌɾid ðə dɑɹk feɪsəz ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɪmən bɪhaɪn ɪt bɪfɔɹ lʊkɪŋ daʊn tə hɝ. ʃi fɹaʊnd, stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ə naɪf sɛt wɪð munstoʊnz θɹʌs bɪhaɪn əɹ sæʃ. ʃi wɑz ə hænsəm wʊmən ɹæðɝ ðən pɹɪɾi, sʌmwɛɹ ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl jɪɹz, ən ʌndɝ dɪfɹən sɝkəmstænsəz i maɪɾ əv ɛndʒɔɪd lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ aɪz. ðeɪ wɝ lɑɹdʒ blæk pulz ə mæn kəd spɛn ən ivnɪŋ dʒʌst ɡeɪzɪŋ ɪntu. ʌndɝ dɪfɹən sɝkəmstænsəz. sʌmhaʊ, ðə si foʊk wɝ ðə flaɪ ɪn ðə kɹim pɪtʃɝ, ən i hæd nɑɾ ə klu haʊ tə plʌk ɪɾ aʊt. hi mænədʒ tə kip ɪz ɪɹɪteɪʃən ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl. bɛɹli. wʌt tə blʌɾi du?

Stopping in front of Renaile's chair, he studied the dark faces of the Atha'an Miere women behind it before looking down to her. She frowned, stroking a knife set with moonstones thrust behind her sash. She was a handsome woman rather than pretty, somewhere in her middle years, and under different circumstances he might have enjoyed looking at her eyes. They were large black pools a man could spend an evening just gazing into. Under different circumstances. Somehow, the Sea Folk were the fly in the cream pitcher, and he had not a clue how to pluck it out. He managed to keep his irritation under control. Barely. What to bloody do?

"ju kən ɔl tʃænəl, aɪ ʌndɝstænd," hi sɛd kwaɪətli, "bʌt ðət dʌzn min mʌtʃ tə mi." əz wɛl bi stʃɹeɪt fɹəm ðə stɑɹt. "ju kən æsk æɾɪliz əɹ vændin haʊ mʌtʃ aɪ kɛɹ wɛðɝ ə wʊmən kən tʃænəl."

"You can all channel, I understand," he said quietly, "but that doesn't mean much to me." As well be straight from the start. "You can ask Adeleas or Vandene how much I care whether a woman can channel."

ɹɪneɪl lʊk pæst ɪm təwɔɹd taɪlɪn, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt tə ðə kwin ʃi spoʊk. "nɪneɪiv sədaɪ," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "aɪ bɪliv ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɛnʃən ɪn jəɹ bɑɹɡən ə maɪ hævɪŋ tə lɪsən tə ðɪs jʌŋ oʊkəm pɪkɝ. aɪ - "

Renaile looked past him toward Tylin, but it was not to the Queen she spoke. "Nynaeve Sedai," she said dryly, "I believe there was no mention in your bargain of my having to listen to this young oakum picker. I - "

"aɪ doʊn blʌɾi kɛɹ əbaʊt jəɹ bɑɹɡənz wɪð ɛnibəɾi ɛls, jə dɔɾɝ ə ðə sænz," mæt snæpt. soʊ hɪz ɪɹɪteɪʃən wɑz nɑt ðət wɛl ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl. ə mæn kəɾ oʊnli teɪk soʊ mʌtʃ.

"I don't bloody care about your bargains with anybody else, you daughter of the sands," Mat snapped. So his irritation was not that well under control. A man could only take so much.

ɡæsps ɹoʊz əmʌŋ ðə wɪmən bɪhaɪn hɝ. sʌmθɪŋ oʊvɝ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz əɡoʊ ə si foʊk wʊmən hæd kɔld ə ʃiəɾən soʊlʒɝ ə sʌn ə ðə sænz dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə plæn ə bleɪɾ ɪn ɪz ɹɪbz; ðə mɛmɹi leɪ tʌkt ɪnsaɪd mæt kɔθənz hɛd, naʊ. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə wɝst ɪnsəlt əmʌŋ ði æθɑn maɪɹ, bʌɾ ɪt keɪm kloʊs. ɹɪneɪlz feɪs ɡɔɹdʒd wɪð blʌd; hɪsɪŋ, aɪz bʌlʒɪŋ ɪn fjʊɹi, ʃi lɛp tə hɝ fit, ðət munstoʊn-stʌɾɪd dæɡɝ flæʃɪŋ ɪn əɹ fɪst.

Gasps rose among the women behind her. Something over a thousand years ago a Sea Folk woman had called a Shiotan soldier a son of the sands just before trying to plant a blade in his ribs; the memory lay tucked inside Mat Cauthon's head, now. It was not the worst insult among the Atha'an Miere, but it came close. Renaile's face gorged with blood; hissing, eyes bulging in fury, she leaped to her feet, that moonstone-studded dagger flashing in her fist.

mæt snætʃt ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ hæn bɪfɔɹ ðə bleɪd kəd ɹitʃ ɪz tʃɛst ən ʃʌvd əɹ bæk ɪndə hɝ tʃɛɹ. hi dɪɾ əv kwɪk hænz. hi kəd stɪl hoʊld ɑn tə hɪz tɛmpɝ, tu. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mɛni wɪmən θɔt ðeɪ kəd dæns ɪm fəɹ ə pʌpət, hi kəd - "ju lɪsən tə mi, jə bɪlʒ stoʊn." ɔl ɹaɪt; meɪbi hi kəd nɑt hoʊld ɪt. "nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn nid ju, əɹ aɪd liv jə fəɹ ðə ɡoʊləm tə kɹæk jəɹ boʊnz ən ðə blæk ədʒɑ tə pɪk oʊvɝ wʌts lɛft. wɛl, əz fɑɹ əz jəɹ kənsɝnd, ɪm ðə mæstɝ ə ðə bleɪdz, ən maɪ bleɪdz ɑɹ bɛɹ." wʌt ðət mɛn ɪɡzækli, hi hæd noʊ aɪdiə, ɪksɛp fəɹ hævɪŋ wʌns hɝd, "wɛn ðə bleɪdz ɑɹ bɛɹ, ivən ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps baʊz tə ðə mæstɝ ə ðə bleɪdz." "ðɪs ɪz ðə bɑɹɡən bɪtwin jə ən mi. jə ɡoʊ wɛɹ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɑnt, ən ɪn ɹɪtɝn, aɪ woʊn taɪ ðə lɑɾ ə jə əkɹɔs hɔɹsəz laɪk pæksæɾəlz ən hɔl jə ðɛɹ!"

Mat snatched it out of her hand before the blade could reach his chest and shoved her back into her chair. He did have quick hands. He could still hold on to his temper, too. No matter how many women thought they could dance him for a puppet, he could - "You listen to me, you bilge stone." All right; maybe he could not hold it. "Nynaeve and Elayne need you, or I'd leave you for the gholam to crack your bones and the Black Ajah to pick over what's left. Well, as far as you're concerned, I'm the Master of the Blades, and my blades are bare." What that meant exactly, he had no idea, except for having once heard, "When the blades are bare, even the Mistress of the Ships bows to the Master of the Blades." "This is the bargain between you and me. You go where Nynaeve and Elayne want, and in return, I won't tie the lot of you across horses like packsaddles and haul you there!"

ðət wɑz noʊ weɪ tə ɡoʊ ɑn, nɑt wɪð ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps. nɑt wɪð ə bɪlʒəbɔɪ ɔf ə bɹoʊkən-bæk dɑɹɾɝ, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. ɹɪneɪl kwɪvɝd wɪð ði ɛfɝɾ ə nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ fəɹ ɪm wɪð əɹ bɛɹ hænz, ən nɛvɝ maɪn əɹ dæɡɝ ɪn ɪz hænd. "ɪɾ ɪz əɡɹid, ʌndɝ ðə laɪt!" ʃi ɡɹaʊld. hɝ aɪz nɪɹli stɑɹɾəd aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd. hɝ maʊθ wɝkt, kənfjuʒən ən dɪsbɪlif sʌɾənli tʃeɪsɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ əkɹɔs əɹ feɪs. ðɪs taɪm, ðə ɡæsps saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ðə wɪn hæd ɹɪp ðə kɝɾənz daʊn.

That was no way to go on, not with the Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships. Not with a bilgeboy off a broken-backed darter, for that matter. Renaile quivered with the effort of not going for him with her bare hands, and never mind her dagger in his hand. "It is agreed, under the Light!" she growled. Her eyes nearly started out of her head. Her mouth worked, confusion and disbelief suddenly chasing one another across her face. This time, the gasps sounded as if the wind had ripped the curtains down.

"ɪɾ ɪz əɡɹid," mæt sɛd kwɪkli, ən tʌtʃɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz tə hɪz lɪps, hi pɹɛst əm tə hɝz.

"It is agreed," Mat said quickly, and touching fingers to his lips, he pressed them to hers.

æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃi dɪd ðə seɪm, fɪŋɡɝz tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ əɡɛnst ɪz maʊθ. hi hɛld aʊt ðə dæɡɝ, ən ʃi stɛɹd dʌli əɾ ɪt bɪfɔɹ teɪkɪŋ ɪt fɹəm hɪm. ðə bleɪd wɛn bæk ɪndə ɪts dʒuəld ʃiθ. ɪt wɑz nɑt pəlaɪt tə kɪl sʌmwʌn jə hæd sild ə bɑɹɡən wɪð. ət list, nɑɾ əntɪl ðə tɝmz wɝ fʊlfɪld. mɝmɝz bɪɡæn əmʌŋ ðə wɪmən bɪhaɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ, ɹaɪzɪŋ, ən ɹɪneɪl stɝd hɝsɛlf tə klæp əɹ hænz wʌns. ðət saɪlənst wɪndfɪndɝz tə weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz əz kwɪkli əz ðə tu dɛkhənz ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ.

After a moment, she did the same, fingers trembling against his mouth. He held out the dagger, and she stared dully at it before taking it from him. The blade went back into its jeweled sheath. It was not polite to kill someone you had sealed a bargain with. At least, not until the terms were fulfilled. Murmurs began among the women behind her chair, rising, and Renaile stirred herself to clap her hands once. That silenced Windfinders to Wavemistresses as quickly as the two deckhands in training.

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ hæv dʒʌs meɪɾ ə bɑɹɡən wɪð ə tɑvɝən," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ðət kul, dip vɔɪs. ðə wʊmən kəd titʃ ɛɛs sədaɪ haʊ tə pʊl ðɛmsɛlvz təɡɛðɝ kwɪkli. "bʌt wʌn deɪ, mæstɝ kɔθən, ɪf ɪt plizɪz ðə laɪt, aɪ θɪŋk jəl wɔk ə ɹoʊp fəɹ mi."

"I think I have just made a bargain with a ta'veren," she said in that cool, deep voice. The woman could teach Aes Sedai how to pull themselves together quickly. "But one day, Master Cauthon, if it pleases the Light, I think you will walk a rope for me."

hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt ðət mɛnt, ɪksɛp ðət ʃi meɪɾ ɪt saʊn ənplɛzənt. hi meɪɾ ɪz bɛs lɛɡ. "ɔl θɪŋz ɑɹ pɑsəbəl, ɪf ɪt plizɪz ðə laɪt," hi mɝmɝd. kɝɾəsi peɪd, æftɝ ɔl. bʌɾ əɹ smaɪl wɑz dɪstɝbɪŋli hoʊpfəl.

He did not know what that meant, except that she made it sound unpleasant. He made his best leg. "All things are possible, if it pleases the Light," he murmured. Courtesy paid, after all. But her smile was disturbingly hopeful.

wən i tɝn bæk tə ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ɹum, jə wʊɾə θɔɾ i hæd hɔɹnz ən wɪŋz, fəɹ ðə stɛɹz. "ɪz ðəɹ ɛni fɝðɝ ɑɹɡjəmənt?" hi æskt ɪn ə ɹaɪ toʊn, ən dɪd nɑt weɪt fəɹ ænsɝz. "aɪ θɔt nɑt. ɪn ðət keɪs, aɪ sədʒɛs jə pɪk aʊt səm spɑt wɛl əweɪ fɹəm hɪɹ, ən wi kən bi ɑn əɹ weɪ əz sun əz jə bʌndəl ʌp jəɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz."

When he turned back to the rest of the room, you would have thought he had horns and wings, for the stares. "Is there any further argument?" he asked in a wry tone, and did not wait for answers. "I thought not. In that case, I suggest you pick out some spot well away from here, and we can be on our way as soon as you bundle up your belongings."

ðeɪ meɪɾ ə ʃoʊ ʌv dɪskʌʃən. ɪleɪn mɛnʃən keɪɛmlɪn, saʊndɪŋ ət lis hæf-sɪɹiəs, ən kɛɝin sədʒɛstəd sɛvɹəl ɹɪmoʊt vɪlədʒəz ɪn ðə blæk hɪlz, ɔl izəli ɹitʃt baɪ ɡeɪtweɪ. laɪt, ɛniwɛɹ wɑz izəli ɹitʃt baɪ ɡeɪtweɪ. vændin spoʊk ə ɝæfəl, ən eɪvinhə sədʒɛstəd ɹɪɾiən, ɪn ði il weɪst, wɪð ðə si foʊk wɪmən ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɡlʌmɝ ðə fɑɹðɝ fɹəm ðə si wɝ ðə pleɪsəz neɪmd. ɔl ə ʃoʊ. tə mæt, ət list, ðət wɑz klɪɹ baɪ nɪneɪivz ɪmpeɪʃən fɪdlɪŋ wɪð əɹ bɹeɪd dɪspaɪt ðə sədʒɛstʃənz kʌmɪŋ hɑɾ ən fæst.

They made a show of discussion. Elayne mentioned Caemlyn, sounding at least half-serious, and Careane suggested several remote villages in the Black Hills, all easily reached by gateway. Light, anywhere was easily reached by gateway. Vandene spoke of Arafel, and Aviendha suggested Rhuidean, in the Aiel Waste, with the Sea Folk women growing glummer the farther from the sea were the places named. All a show. To Mat, at least, that was clear by Nynaeve's impatient fiddling with her braid despite the suggestions coming hot and fast.

"ɪf aɪ meɪ spik, ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ɹin sɛd tɪmədli ət læst. ʃi ivən ɹeɪzd əɹ hænd. "ðə kɪn meɪnteɪn ə fɑɹm ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ, ə fju maɪlz nɔɹθ. ɛvɹiwʌn noʊz ɪts ə ɹitʃɹit fəɹ wɪmən u nid kɑntəmpleɪʃən ən kwaɪət, bʌt noʊ wʌn kənɛks ɪt tə ʌs. ðə bɪldɪŋz ɑɹ lɑɹdʒ ən kwaɪt kʌmftəɹbəl, ɪf ðɛɹz ɛni nid tə steɪ lɔŋ, ən - "

"If I may speak, Aes Sedai?" Reanne said timidly at last. She even raised her hand. "The Kin maintain a farm on the other side of the river, a few miles north. Everyone knows it is a retreat for women who need contemplation and quiet, but no one connects it to us. The buildings are large and quite comfortable, if there's any need to stay long, and - "

"jɛs," nɪneɪiv bɹoʊk ɪn. "jɛs, aɪ θɪŋk ðət saʊnz dʒʌs ðə θɪŋ. wʌt dʒju seɪ, ɪleɪn?"

"Yes," Nynaeve broke in. "Yes, I think that sounds just the thing. What do you say, Elayne?"

"aɪ θɪŋk ɪt saʊnz wʌndɝfəl, nɪneɪiv. aɪ noʊ ɹɪneɪl wɪl əpɹiʃieɪt steɪɪŋ kloʊs tə ðə si." ði ʌðɝ faɪv sɪstɝz pɹæktəkli paɪld ɑn tɑp ə hɝ seɪɪŋ haʊ əɡɹiəbəl ɪt saʊndəd, haʊ supɪɹiɝ tə ɛni ʌðɝ sədʒɛstʃən.

"I think it sounds wonderful, Nynaeve. I know Renaile will appreciate staying close to the sea." The other five sisters practically piled on top of her saying how agreeable it sounded, how superior to any other suggestion.

mæt ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz tə ðə hɛvənz. taɪlɪn wɑz ə stʌɾi ɪn nɑt siɪŋ wʌt leɪ ʌndɝ əɹ noʊz, bʌt ɹɪneɪl snæpt əɾ ɪt laɪk ə tʃɹaʊt teɪkɪŋ ə leɪsɪŋ. wɪtʃ wɑz ðə pɔɪnt, ʌv kɔɹs. fəɹ səm ɹizən ʃi wɑz nɑt tə noʊ ðət nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn hæd hæɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɝeɪnʒd bɪfɔɹhænd. ʃi lɛd ðə ɹɛst ə ðə si foʊk wɪmən aʊt tə ɡæðɝ wʌtɛvɝ bɪlɔŋɪŋz ðeɪ hæd bɹɔt bɪfɔɹ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn kəd tʃeɪnʒ ðɛɹ maɪnz.

Mat rolled his eyes to the heavens. Tylin was a study in not seeing what lay under her nose, but Renaile snapped at it like a trout taking a lacewing. Which was the point, of course. For some reason she was not to know that Nynaeve and Elayne had had everything arranged beforehand. She led the rest of the Sea Folk women out to gather whatever belongings they had brought before Nynaeve and Elayne could change their minds.

ðoʊz tu wʊɾə fɑloʊd mɛɝɪlɪl ən ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ i kɹʊkəɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ ət ðɛm. ðeɪ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz - hi wʊɾə hæd tə tɔk ən aʊɝ tə seɪ əz mʌtʃ əz pæst ɪn ðoʊz lʊks - ðɛn, sʌmwʌt tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, keɪm tə hɪm. eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪt wɑtʃt fɹəm ðə dɔɹ, taɪlɪn fɹəm əɹ tʃɛɹ.

Those two would have followed Merilille and the other Aes Sedai, but he crooked a finger at them. They exchanged glances - he would have had to talk an hour to say as much as passed in those looks - then, somewhat to his surprise, came to him. Aviendha and Birgitte watched from the door, Tylin from her chair.

"aɪ æm vɛɹi sɑɹi tə hæv juz ju," ɪleɪn sɛd bɪfɔɹ i kəd ɡɛɾ ə wɝɾ aʊt. hɝ smaɪl flæʃt ðət dɪmpəl ət hɪm. "wi dɪɾ əv ɹizənz, mæt; jə mʌs bɪliv ðæt."

"I am very sorry to have used you," Elayne said before he could get a word out. Her smile flashed that dimple at him. "We did have reasons, Mat; you must believe that."

"wɪtʃ jə də nɑt nid tə noʊ," nɪneɪiv pʊɾ ɪn fɝmli, flɪpɪŋ əɹ bɹeɪd bæk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ wɪð ə pɹæktəs tɔs ə hɝ hɛd ðət meɪd ðə ɡoʊld ɹɪŋ baʊns ɑn əɹ bʊzəm. læn mʌs bi ɪnseɪn. "aɪ mʌst seɪ, aɪ nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd jə tə də wʌt jə dɪd. wʌtɛvɝ ɪn ðə wɝl meɪd jə θɪŋk ə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bʊli ðɛm? jə cʊɾə ɹuən ɛvɹiθɪŋ."

"Which you do not need to know," Nynaeve put in firmly, flipping her braid back over her shoulder with a practiced toss of her head that made the gold ring bounce on her bosom. Lan must be insane. "I must say, I never expected you to do what you did. Whatever in the world made you think of trying to bully them? You could have ruined everything."

"wʌts laɪf ɪf jə doʊn teɪk ə tʃæns naʊ ən ðɛn?" hi sɛd blaɪθli. əz wɛl baɪ hɪm ɪf ðeɪ θɔɾ ɪt wɑz plæn ɪnstɛɾ ə tɛmpɝ. bʌt ðeɪ hæd juzd ɪm əɡɛn wɪθaʊt tɛlɪŋ hɪm, ən i wɑntəɾ ə bɪt bæk fəɹ ðæt. "nɛks taɪm juv tə meɪk ə bɑɹɡən wɪð ðə si foʊk, lemi meɪk ɪt fəɹ ju. meɪbi ðət weɪ, ɪt woʊn tɝn aʊɾ əz bædli əz ðə læst wʌn." spɑts ə kʌlɝ blumɪŋ ɪn nɪneɪivz tʃiks toʊld ɪm i hæd hɪt ðə mɑɹk skwɛɹli. nɑt bæd ʃuɾɪŋ blaɪndfoʊldɪd.

"What's life if you don't take a chance now and then?" he said blithely. As well by him if they thought it was planned instead of temper. But they had used him again without telling him, and he wanted a bit back for that. "Next time you have to make a bargain with the Sea Folk, let me make it for you. Maybe that way, it won't turn out as badly as the last one." Spots of color blooming in Nynaeve's cheeks told him he had hit the mark squarely. Not bad shooting blindfolded.

ɪleɪn, ðoʊ, dʒʌs mɝmɝd "ə moʊst əbzɝvən sʌbʒɪkt" ɪn toʊnz ə ɹufəl əmjuzmənt. biɪŋ ɪn əɹ ɡʊd bʊks maɪt tɝn aʊt lɛs kʌmftəɹbəl ðən biɪŋ ɪn əɹ bæd.

Elayne, though, just murmured "A most observant subject" in tones of rueful amusement. Being in her good books might turn out less comfortable than being in her bad.

ðeɪ swɛp təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ wɪθaʊt lɛɾɪŋ ɪm seɪ mɔɹ. wɛl, hi hæd nɑt ɹɪli θɔt ðeɪ wəɾ ɪkspleɪn ɛniθɪŋ. boʊθ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ðə boʊn. ə mæn lɝn tə lɪv wɪð wʌɾ i hæd tə.

They swept toward the door without letting him say more. Well, he had not really thought they would explain anything. Both were Aes Sedai to the bone. A man learned to live with what he had to.

taɪlɪn hæɾ ɔl bʌt slɪp fɹəm ɪz maɪnd, bʌɾ i hæd nɑt fɹəm hɝz. ʃi kɑɾ ɪm ʌp bɪfɔɹ i tʊk tu stɛps. nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn pɔzd ət ðə dɔɹ wɪð eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪt, wɑtʃɪŋ. soʊ ðeɪ sɔ wən taɪlɪn pɪntʃt ɪz bɑɾəm. səm θɪŋz, noʊbɑdi kəd lɝn tə lɪv wɪð. ɪleɪn pʊɾ ɑn ə feɪs ə kəməzɝeɪʃən, nɪneɪiv ʌv ɡlaʊɝɪŋ dɪsəpɹuvəl. eɪvinhə fɔt læftɝ nʌn tu səksɛsfəli, waɪl bɝdʒɪt wɔɹ əɹ ɡɹɪn oʊpənli. ðeɪ ɔl blʌɾi nu.

Tylin had all but slipped from his mind, but he had not from hers. She caught him up before he took two steps. Nynaeve and Elayne paused at the door with Aviendha and Birgitte, watching. So they saw when Tylin pinched his bottom. Some things, nobody could learn to live with. Elayne put on a face of commiseration, Nynaeve of glowering disapproval. Aviendha fought laughter none too successfully, while Birgitte wore her grin openly. They all bloody knew.

"nɪneɪiv θɪŋks jə ɑɹ ə lɪɾəl bɔɪ niɾɪŋ pɹətɛkʃən," taɪlɪn bɹiðd ʌp ət hɪm. "aɪ noʊ jə ɑɹ ə ɡɹoʊn mæn." hɝ smoʊki tʃʌkəl meɪd ðət ðə dɝɾiəst kɑmɛn i hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝd. ðə fɔɹ wɪmən baɪ ðə dɔɹ ɡɑt tə wɑtʃ ɪz feɪs tɝn bit ɹɛd. "aɪ wɪl mɪs ju, pɪdʒən. wʌt jə dɪd wɪð ɹɪneɪl wɑz mæɡnɪfəsənt. aɪ də soʊ ædmaɪɹ mæstɝfəl mɛn."

"Nynaeve thinks you are a little boy needing protection," Tylin breathed up at him. "I know you are a grown man." Her smoky chuckle made that the dirtiest comment he had ever heard. The four women by the door got to watch his face turn beet red. "I will miss you, pigeon. What you did with Renaile was magnificent. I do so admire masterful men."

"aɪl mɪs ju, tu," hi mʌɾɝd. tə hɪz ʃɑk, ðət wɑz sɪmpəl tʃɹuθ. hi wɑz livɪŋ ɛbu dɑɹ dʒʌst ɪn taɪm. "bʌɾ ɪf wi miɾ əɡɛn, əl də ðə tʃeɪsɪŋ."

"I'll miss you, too," he muttered. To his shock, that was simple truth. He was leaving Ebou Dar just in time. "But if we meet again, I'll do the chasing."

ʃi tʃɔɹɾəld ət hɪm, ən ðoʊz dɑɹk iɡəlz aɪz ɔlmoʊst ɡloʊd. "aɪ ædmaɪɹ mæstɝfəl mɛn, dʌklɪŋ. bʌt nɑt wən ðeɪ tʃɹaɪ biɪŋ mæstɝfəl wɪð mi." sizɪŋ ɪz ɪɹz, ʃi pʊld ɪz hɛd daʊn wɛɹ ʃi kəd kɪs hɪm.

She chortled at him, and those dark eagle's eyes almost glowed. "I admire masterful men, duckling. But not when they try being masterful with me." Seizing his ears, she pulled his head down where she could kiss him.

hi nɛvɝ sɔ nɪneɪiv ən ði ʌðɝz ɡoʊ, ən i wɔkt aʊɾ ɑn ənstɛɾi lɛɡz, tʌkɪŋ ɪz ʃɝt bæk ɪn. hi hæd tə ɹɪtɝn tə fɛtʃ ɪz spɪɹ fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ, ən ɪz hæt. ðə wʊmən hæd noʊ ʃeɪm. nɑɾ ə skɹæp ʌv ɪt.

He never saw Nynaeve and the others go, and he walked out on unsteady legs, tucking his shirt back in. He had to return to fetch his spear from the corner, and his hat. The woman had no shame. Not a scrap of it.

hi faʊn tɑm ən dʒulɪn, kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə taɪlɪnz əpɑɹtməns, fɑloʊd baɪ nɹɪm ən ləpɪn, neɪlzinz staʊt mæn, hu itʃ lʌɡd ə lɑɹdʒ wɪkɝ pæniɝ meɪd fəɹ ə pæksæɾəl. loʊɾəd wɪð ɪz bɪlɔŋɪŋz, hi ɹilaɪzd. dʒulɪn kæɹid mæts ənstʃɹʌŋ baʊ ən hæɾ ɪz kwɪvɝ slʌŋ ɑn wʌn ʃoʊldɝ. wɛl, ʃi hæd sɛd ʃi wɑz muvɪŋ hɪm.

He found Thom and Juilin, coming out of Tylin's apartments, followed by Nerim and Lopin, Nalesean's stout man, who each lugged a large wicker pannier made for a packsaddle. Loaded with his belongings, he realized. Juilin carried Mat's unstrung bow and had his quiver slung on one shoulder. Well, she had said she was moving him.

"aɪ faʊn ðɪs ɑn jəɹ pɪloʊ," tɑm sɛd, tɔsɪŋ ɪm ðə ɹɪŋ i hæd bɑt wʌt simd ə jɪɹ əɡoʊ. "ə pɑɹɾɪŋ ɡɪft, ɪt simz; ðəɹ wɝ lʌvɝz-nɑts ən səm ʌðɝ flaʊɝz stʃɹun oʊvɝ boʊθ pɪloʊz."

"I found this on your pillow," Thom said, tossing him the ring he had bought what seemed a year ago. "A parting gift, it seems; there were lovers-knots and some other flowers strewn over both pillows."

mæt dʒæm ðə ɹɪŋ ɑntu hɪz fɪŋɡɝ. "ɪts maɪn, bɝn ju. aɪ peɪd fəɹ ɪt maɪsɛlf."

Mat jammed the ring onto his finger. "It's mine, burn you. I paid for it myself."

ði oʊld ɡlimən nʌkəld ɪz mʌstæʃɪz ən kɔft ɪn ə feɪld ɛfɝt tə staɪfəl ə sʌɾən waɪd ɡɹɪn. dʒulɪn snætʃt ɔf ðət ɹɪdɪkjələs tæɹɑbənɝ hæɾ ən bɪkeɪm ɪnɡɹoʊst ɪn stʌɾiɪŋ ði ɪnsaɪɾ ʌv ɪt.

The old gleeman knuckled his mustaches and coughed in a failed effort to stifle a sudden wide grin. Juilin snatched off that ridiculous Taraboner hat and became engrossed in studying the inside of it.

"blʌɾ ən fleɪmɪŋ - !" mæt dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "aɪ hoʊp jə tu spɛɹɾ ə moʊmən fəɹ jəɹ oʊn bɪlɔŋɪŋz," hi sɛd lɛvəli, "bɪkɔz əz sun əz aɪ ɡɹæb oʊlvɝ, wɝ ɑn əɹ weɪ, ivən ɪf wi hæpən tə liv ə moʊldi hɑɹp əɹ ə ɹʌsti sɔɹd-bɹeɪkɝ bɪhaɪnd." dʒulɪn tʌɡd ət ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ wɪð wʌn fɪŋɡɝ, wʌtɛvɝ ðət wɑz səpoʊz tə min, bʌt tɑm æktʃəli  fɹaʊnd. ɪnsʌls tə tɑmz fluɾ əɹ ɪz hɑɹp wɝ ɪnsʌls tə hɪmsɛlf.

"Blood and flaming - !" Mat drew a deep breath. "I hope you two spared a moment for your own belongings," he said levelly, "because as soon as I grab Olver, we're on our way, even if we happen to leave a moldy harp or a rusty sword-breaker behind." Juilin tugged at the corner of his eye with one finger, whatever that was supposed to mean, but Thom actually frowned. Insults to Thom's flute or his harp were insults to himself.

"maɪ lɔɹd," ləpɪn sɛd mɔɹnfəli. hi wɑz ə dɑɹk, bɔldɪŋ mæn, ɹaʊndɝ ðən sumeɪkoʊ, ən ɪz blæk tɛɹən kɑmənɝz koʊt, taɪt tə ðə weɪs ðən flɛɹɪŋ, laɪk dʒulɪnz, fɪt vɛɹi taɪtli ɪndid. nɔɹməli ɔlmoʊst əz sɑləm əz nɹɪm, naʊ hi hæd ɹɛɾənd aɪz, əz ðoʊ hi hæd bɪn wipɪŋ. "maɪ lɔɹd, ɪz ðəɹ ɛni tʃæns aɪ maɪt ɹɪmeɪn tə si lɔɹd neɪlzin bɛɹid? hi wɑz ə ɡʊd mæstɝ."

"My Lord," Lopin said mournfully. He was a dark, balding man, rounder than Sumeko, and his black Tairen commoner's coat, tight to the waist then flaring, like Juilin's, fit very tightly indeed. Normally almost as solemn as Nerim, now he had reddened eyes, as though he had been weeping. "My Lord, is there any chance I might remain to see Lord Nalesean buried? He was a good master."

mæt heɪɾəd seɪɪŋ noʊ. "ɛnibəɾi lɛf bɪhaɪn maɪt bi lɛft fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm, ləpɪn," hi sɛd dʒɛnli. "lɪsən, əl nid sʌmwʌn tə hɛlp lʊk æftɝ oʊlvɝ. nɹɪm əz ɪz hænz fʊl wɪð mi. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, nɹɪm wɪl ɡoʊ bæk tə tælmɑnz, jə noʊ. ɪf jud laɪk, əl teɪk jə ɑn maɪsɛlf." hi hæd ɡɹoʊn juz tə hævɪŋ ə mænsɝvənt, ən ðiz wɝ hɑɹd taɪmz fəɹ ə mæn hʌntɪŋ wɝk.

Mat hated saying no. "Anybody left behind might be left for a long time, Lopin," he said gently. "Listen, I'll need someone to help look after Olver. Nerim has his hands full with me. For that matter, Nerim will go back to Talmanes, you know. If you'd like, I will take you on myself." He had grown used to having a manservant, and these were hard times for a man hunting work.

"aɪ wəd laɪk ðət vɛɹi mʌtʃ, maɪ lɔɹd," ðə fɛloʊ sɛd luɡʌbɹiəsli. "jʌŋ oʊlvɝ ɹimaɪnz mi mʌtʃ ə maɪ jʌŋɡəst sɪstɝz sʌn."

"I would like that very much, my Lord," the fellow said lugubriously. "Young Olver reminds me much of my youngest sister's son."

oʊnli, wən ðeɪ ɛntɝd mæts fɔɹmɝ ɹumz, ðə leɪɾi ɹaɪzɛl wɑz ðɛɹ, mʌtʃ mɔɹ disənli kloʊðd ðən wən i hæd læst sin hɝ, ən kwaɪɾ əloʊn.

Only, when they entered Mat's former rooms, the Lady Riselle was there, much more decently clothed than when he had last seen her, and quite alone.

"waɪ ʃəɾ aɪ hæv kɛpt ɪm taɪd tə mi?" ʃi sɛd, ðət tʃɹuli mɑɹvələs bʊzəm hivɪŋ wɪð ɪmoʊʃən əz ʃi plæntəɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps. ðə kwinz dʌklɪŋ, ɪt simd, wɑz nɑt səpoʊz tə teɪk ə snæpɪʃ toʊn wɪð ðə kwinz ətɛndəns. "klɪp ə bɔɪz wɪŋz tu fɑɹ, ən hɪl nɛvɝ ɡɹoʊ tə ə pɹɑpɝ mæn. hi ɹɛɾ ɪz peɪdʒəz əlaʊd sɪɾɪŋ ɑn maɪ ni - hi maɪɾ əv ɹɛɾ ɔl deɪ, hæɾ aɪ əlaʊɾ ɪt - ən dɪɾ ɪz nʌmbɝz, soʊ aɪ lɛɾ ɪm ɡoʊ. waɪ ɑɹ jə ɪn sətʃ ə bɑðɝ? hi pɹɑməs tə ɹɪtɝn baɪ sʌnsɛt, ən i simz tə sɛɾ ə ɡɹeɪt stɔɹ baɪ hɪz pɹɑməsəz."

"Why should I have kept him tied to me?" she said, that truly marvelous bosom heaving with emotion as she planted her fists on her hips. The Queen's duckling, it seemed, was not supposed to take a snappish tone with the Queen's attendants. "Clip a boy's wings too far, and he will never grow to a proper man. He read his pages aloud sitting on my knee - he might have read all day, had I allowed it - and did his numbers, so I let him go. Why are you in such a bother? He promised to return by sunset, and he seems to set a great store by his promises."

pɹɑpɪŋ ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ ɪn ɪts oʊl kɔɹnɝ, mæt toʊl ði ʌðɝ mɛn tə dʒɹɑp ðɛɹ bɝɾənz ən ɡoʊ faɪn veɪnɪn ən ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ ɹɛdʒɹmz. ðən i lɛft ɹaɪzɛlz spɛktækjəlɝ bʊzəm ən ɹæn ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə ɹumz nɪneɪiv ən ði ʌðɝ wɪmən ʃɛɹd. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ðɛɹ, ɪn ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, ən soʊ wɑz læn, wɪð ɪz wɔɹɾɝz kloʊk ɔlɹɛɾi dʒɹeɪp daʊn ɪz bæk ən sæɾəlbæɡz ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz, ən nɪneɪivz, ɪt simd. ə ɡʊd mɛni bʌndəlz ə dʒɹɛsəz ən nɑt-soʊ-smɔl tʃɛsts stʊɾ əbaʊt ðə flɔɹ. mæt wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðeɪ wəd meɪk læn kæɹi ðoʊz, tu.

Propping the ashandarei in its old corner, Mat told the other men to drop their burdens and go find Vanin and the remaining Redarms. Then he left Riselle's spectacular bosom and ran all the way to the rooms Nynaeve and the other women shared. They were all there, in the sitting room, and so was Lan, with his Warder's cloak already draped down his back and saddlebags on his shoulders. His saddlebags, and Nynaeve's, it seemed. A good many bundles of dresses and not-so-small chests stood about the floor. Mat wondered if they would make Lan carry those, too.

"ʌv kɔɹs juv tə ɡoʊ faɪn hɪm, mæt kɔθən," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "du jə θɪŋk wi wəd dʒʌst əbændən ðə tʃaɪld?" tə hɪɹ hɝ, jə wʊɾə θɔt ðət wɑz ɪɡzækli wʌɾ i hæɾ ɪntɛndəd.

"Of course you have to go find him, Mat Cauthon," Nynaeve said. "Do you think we would just abandon the child?" To hear her, you would have thought that was exactly what he had intended.

sʌɾənli hi wɑz dɛljudʒd wɪð ɔfɝz ə hɛlp, nɑt dʒʌs nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn pɹəpoʊzɪŋ tə pʊɾ ɔf ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə fɑɹm, bʌt læn ən bɝdʒɪɾ ən eɪvinhə ɔfɝɪŋ tə dʒɔɪn ðə sɝtʃ. læn wɑz stoʊn koʊld əbaʊɾ ɪt, ɡɹɪm əz ɛvɝ, bʌt bɝdʒɪɾ ən eɪvinhə. . . .

Suddenly he was deluged with offers of help, not just Nynaeve and Elayne proposing to put off going to the farm, but Lan and Birgitte and Aviendha offering to join the search. Lan was stone cold about it, grim as ever, but Birgitte and Aviendha. . . .

"maɪ hɑɹt wəd bɹeɪk ɪf ɛniθɪŋ hæpən tə ðət bɔɪ," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, ən eɪvinhə æɾəd, dʒʌst əz wɔɹmli, "aɪ hæv ɔlweɪz sɛd jə də nɑt kɛɹ fəɹ ɪm pɹɑpɝli." mæt ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ. ɪn ðə stʃɹits ə ðə sɪɾi, oʊlvɝ maɪt wɛl ɪluɾ eɪt mɛn əntɪl i əpɪɹd bæk ət ðə pæləs ət sʌnsɛt. hi dɪd kip ɪz pɹɑməsəz, bʌt smɔl tʃæns i wəd ɡɪv ʌp wʌn moʊmən ə fɹiɾəm i dɪd nɑɾ əv tə. mɔɹ aɪz wəd min ə kwɪkɝ sɝtʃ, ɪspɛʃli ɪf ɔl ə ðə waɪz wɪmən wɝ bɹɔɾ ɪndə ɪt. fəɹ ðə speɪs ə θɹi hɑɹtbits i hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. hi hæɾ ɪz oʊn pɹɑməsəz tə kip, ðoʊ hi wɑz waɪz ɪnʌf nɑt tə pʊɾ ɪt ðət weɪ.

"My heart would break if anything happened to that boy," Birgitte said, and Aviendha added, just as warmly, "I have always said you do not care for him properly." Mat ground his teeth. In the streets of the city, Olver might well elude eight men until he appeared back at the palace at sunset. He did keep his promises, but small chance he would give up one moment of freedom he did not have to. More eyes would mean a quicker search, especially if all of the Wise Women were brought into it. For the space of three heartbeats he hesitated. He had his own promises to keep, though he was wise enough not to put it that way.

"ðə boʊl ɪz tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt," hi toʊl ðɛm. "ðæt ɡoʊləm ɪz stɪl aʊt ðɛɹ, ən meɪbi mɑɡiɾin, ən ðə blæk ədʒɑ fəɹ ʃʊɹ." ðə daɪs θʌndɝɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd. eɪvinhə wəd nɑɾ əpɹiʃieɪt biɪŋ lʌmpt ɪn wɪð nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt kɛɹ ɹaɪt ðɛn. hi ədʒɹɛs læn ən bɝdʒɪt. "kip əm seɪf əntɪl aɪ kən ɹitʃ ju. kip ɔl ə ðɛm seɪf."

"The Bowl is too important," he told them. "That gholam is still out there, and maybe Moghedien, and the Black Ajah for sure." The dice thundered in his head. Aviendha would not appreciate being lumped in with Nynaeve and Elayne, but he did not care right then. He addressed Lan and Birgitte. "Keep them safe until I can reach you. Keep all of them safe."

stɑɹtlɪŋli, eɪvinhə sɛd, "wi wɪl. aɪ pɹɑməs." ʃi fɪŋɡɝd ðə hɪlt ə hɝ naɪf. əpɛɹənli ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd ʃi wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz tə bi kɛp seɪf.

Startlingly, Aviendha said, "We will. I promise." She fingered the hilt of her knife. Apparently she did not understand she was one of those to be kept safe.

nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn dɪd. nɪneɪivz sʌɾən ɡlɛɹ tʃɹaɪd tə bɔɹ ə hoʊl θɹu hɪz skʌl; hi ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ tə jæŋk ɑn əɹ bɹeɪd, bʌt stʃɹeɪnʒli, hɝ hæn oʊnli flʌɾɝd təwɔɹɾ ɪt bɪfɔɹ biɪŋ pʊt fɝmli tə hɝ saɪd. ɪleɪn kəntɛntəd hɝsɛlf wɪð ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ tʃɪn, ðoʊz bɪɡ blu aɪz fɹɔsti. noʊ dɪmpəl hɪɹ.

Nynaeve and Elayne did. Nynaeve's sudden glare tried to bore a hole through his skull; he expected her to yank on her braid, but strangely, her hand only fluttered toward it before being put firmly to her side. Elayne contented herself with raising her chin, those big blue eyes frosty. No dimple here.

læn ən bɝdʒɪɾ ʌndɝstʊd, tu.

Lan and Birgitte understood, too.

"nɪneɪiv ɪz maɪ laɪf," læn sɛd sɪmpli, pʊɾɪŋ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ði ɑd θɪŋ wɑz, ʃi sʌɾənli lʊk vɛɹi sæd, ən ðən dʒʌst əz sʌɾənli, hɝ dʒɔ sɛɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi wɑz pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə wɔk θɹu ə stoʊn wɔl ən meɪk ə lɑɹdʒ hoʊl.

"Nynaeve is my life," Lan said simply, putting a hand on her shoulder. The odd thing was, she suddenly looked very sad, and then just as suddenly, her jaw set as though she was preparing to walk through a stone wall and make a large hole.

bɝdʒɪt ɡeɪv ɪleɪn ə fɑn lʊk, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tə mæt ʃi spoʊk. "aɪ wɪl," ʃi sɛd. "ɑnɝz tʃɹuθ."

Birgitte gave Elayne a fond look, but it was to Mat she spoke. "I will," she said. "Honor's truth."

mæt tʌɡd əɾ ɪz koʊɾ ənkʌmftəbli. hi stɪl wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ mʌtʃ i hæd toʊld əɹ waɪl dʒɹʌŋk. laɪt, bʌt ðə wʊmən kəd soʊk ɪɾ ʌp laɪk dʒɹaɪ sænd. ivən soʊ, hi ɡeɪv ðə pɹɑpɝ ɹɪspɑns fəɹ ə bɑɹɑʃhændən lɔɹd, æksɛptɪŋ əɹ plɛdʒ. "ði ɑnɝ ə blʌd; ðə tʃɹuθ ə blʌd." bɝdʒɪt nɑɾəd, ən fɹəm ðə stɑɹɾəld lʊks i ɹəsiv fɹəm nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn, ʃi stɪl kɛpt ɪz sikɹəts kloʊs. laɪt, ɪf ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛvɝ faʊn aʊɾ əbaʊt ðoʊz mɛmɹiz, ðeɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl noʊ hi hæd bloʊn ðə hɔɹn əz wɛl; fɑkshɛɾ əɹ noʊ fɑkshɛd, ðeɪ wəd stʃɹɛtʃ ɪm aʊt tɪl ðeɪ dʌɡ aʊɾ ɛvɹi læst waɪ ən haʊ.

Mat tugged at his coat uncomfortably. He still was not sure how much he had told her while drunk. Light, but the woman could soak it up like dry sand. Even so, he gave the proper response for a Barashandan lord, accepting her pledge. "The honor of blood; the truth of blood." Birgitte nodded, and from the startled looks he received from Nynaeve and Elayne, she still kept his secrets close. Light, if any Aes Sedai ever found out about those memories, they might as well know he had blown the Horn as well; foxhead or no foxhead, they would stretch him out till they dug out every last why and how.

əz i wɑz tɝnɪŋ tə ɡoʊ, nɪneɪiv kɑɾ ɪz sliv. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə stɔɹm, mæt. ɪts gɑnə bɹeɪk sun; aɪ noʊ ɪt. jə teɪk kɛɹ ə jɝsɛlf, mæt kɔθən. dʒju hɪɹ mi? taɪlɪn əz dɝɛkʃənz fəɹ ðə fɑɹm, wən jə ɡɛt bæk wɪð oʊlvɝ."

As he was turning to go, Nynaeve caught his sleeve. "Remember the storm, Mat. It's going to break soon; I know it. You take care of yourself, Mat Cauthon. Do you hear me? Tylin has directions for the farm, when you get back with Olver."

nɑɾɪŋ, hi meɪɾ ɪz ɪskeɪp, ðə daɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd laɪk ɛkoʊz ə hɪz ɹʌnɪŋ buts. wɑz ɪt dʊɹɪŋ ðə sɝtʃ ðəɾ i wɑz səpoʊz tə teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪmsɛlf, əɹ waɪl ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə dɝɛkʃənz fɹəm taɪlɪn? nɪneɪiv ən əɹ lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə wɪnd. dɪd ʃi θɪŋk ə lɪɾəl ɹeɪn wɑz gɑnə mɛl hɪm? kʌm tə θɪŋk, wʌns ðeɪ juz ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz, ɪt wəd ɹeɪn əɡɛn. ɪt sim jɪɹz sɪns ɹeɪn læs fɛl. sʌmθɪŋ tʌɡd əɾ ɪz θɔts, sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə wɛðɝ, ən ɪleɪn, wɪtʃ meɪd noʊ sɛns, bʌɾ i ʃɹʌɡd ɪɾ ɔf. wʌn θɪŋ əɾ ə taɪm, ən ðə wʌn θɪŋ ɹaɪt naʊ wɑz oʊlvɝ.

Nodding, he made his escape, the dice in his head like echoes of his running boots. Was it during the search that he was supposed to take care of himself, or while getting the directions from Tylin? Nynaeve and her Listening to the Wind. Did she think a little rain was going to melt him? Come to think, once they used the Bowl of the Winds, it would rain again. It seemed years since rain last fell. Something tugged at his thoughts, something about the weather, and Elayne, which made no sense, but he shrugged it off. One thing at a time, and the one thing right now was Olver.

ðə mɛn wɝ ɔl weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz' lɔŋ ɹum nɪɹ ðə steɪbəlz, ɛvɹiwʌn ɑn ðɛɹ fiɾ ɪksɛp veɪnɪn, hu leɪ spɹɔld ɑn wʌn ə ðə bɛdz wɪð ɪz fɪŋɡɝz leɪst oʊvɝ ɪz bɛli. veɪnɪn sɛɾ ə mæn hæd tə teɪk ɹɛst wən i kʊd. hi swʌŋ ɪz buts oʊvɝ ən sæɾ ʌp wən mæt ɛntɝd, ðoʊ. hi kɛɹɾ əbaʊɾ oʊlvɝ əz mʌtʃ əz ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz; mæt wɑz dʒʌst əfɹeɪd ðə mæn wɑz gɑnə stɑɹt titʃɪŋ ɪm haʊ tə stil hɔɹsəz ən poʊtʃ fɛzəns. sɛvən sɛts ʌv aɪz foʊkəst ɑn mæt ɪntɛnli.

The men were all waiting in the Redarms' long room near the stables, everyone on their feet except Vanin, who lay sprawled on one of the beds with his fingers laced over his belly. Vanin said a man had to take rest when he could. He swung his boots over and sat up when Mat entered, though. He cared about Olver as much as any of the others; Mat was just afraid the man was going to start teaching him how to steal horses and poach pheasants. Seven sets of eyes focused on Mat intently.

"ɹaɪzɛl sɛɾ oʊlvɝz wɛɹɪŋ ɪz ɹɛd koʊt," hi toʊl ðɛm. "hi ɡɪvz əm əweɪ, səmtaɪmz, bʌɾ ɛni ɝtʃən jə si ɪn ə ɡʊd ɹɛd koʊt pɹɑbli noʊz wɛɹ oʊlvɝ læst wɑz. ɛvɹibɑɾi ɡoʊz ɪn ə dɪfɹən dɝɛkʃən. meɪk lups aʊt fɹəm ðə mɔl hɛɹə, ən tʃɹaɪ tə bi bæk æftɝ əbaʊɾ ən aʊɝ. weɪt tɪl ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪz bæk bɪfɔɹ jə ɡoʊ aʊɾ əɡɛn. ðət weɪ, ɪf sʌmbɑɾi faɪnz hɪm, ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs woʊn stɪl bi lʊkɪŋ təmɑɹoʊ. dʌz ɛvɹibɑɾi ʌndɝstænd?" ðeɪ nɑɾəd.

"Riselle said Olver's wearing his red coat," he told them. "He gives them away, sometimes, but any urchin you see in a good red coat probably knows where Olver last was. Everybody goes in a different direction. Make loops out from the Mol Hara, and try to be back after about an hour. Wait till everybody is back before you go out again. That way, if somebody finds him, the rest of us won't still be looking tomorrow. Does everybody understand?" They nodded.

səmtaɪmz ɪɾ əmeɪz hɪm. læŋki tɑm wɪð ɪz waɪt hɛɹ ən mʌstæʃɪz, hu hæd bɪn ə kwinz lʌvɝ wʌns, ən mɔɹ wɪlɪŋli ðən hɪmsɛlf, nɑt tə mɛnʃən mɔɹ ðən ə lʌvɝ, ɪf jə bɪliv hæf i sɛd. skwɛɹ-dʒɔd hɑɹnən wɪð ðət tætu ɑn ɪz tʃik ən mɔɹ ɛlswɛɹ, hu hæd bɪn ə soʊlʒɝ ɔl ɪz laɪf. dʒulɪn wɪð ɪz bæmbu stæf ən ɪz sɔɹd-bɹeɪkɝ ɑn ɪz hɪp, hu θɔt hɪmsɛlf əz ɡʊɾ əz ɛni lɔɹɾ ivən ɪf ði aɪdiə ʌv kæɹiɪŋ ə sɔɹd hɪmsɛlf stɪl meɪɾ ɪm ənizi, ən fæt veɪnɪn, hu meɪd dʒulɪn lʊk ə butlɪkɝ baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən. skɪni fɝdʒɪn, ən ɡɔɹɾɝən, nɪɹli əz waɪɾ ɪn ðə ʃoʊldɝz əz pɛɹɪn, ən mɛtwɪn, huz peɪl kɛɹhinɪn feɪs stɪl lʊk laɪk ə bɔɪz dɪspaɪt biɪŋ jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən mæt. səm ə ðɛm fɑloʊd mæt kɔθən kəz ðeɪ θɔɾ i wɑz lʌki, kəz ɪz lʌk maɪt kip əm əlaɪv wən ðə sɔɹdz wɝ aʊt, ən səm fəɹ ɹizənz i wɑz nɑt ɹɪli ʃʊɹ ʌv, bʌt ðeɪ fɑloʊd. nɑɾ ivən tɑm hæɾ ɛvɝ mɔɹ ðən pɹətɛstəɾ ən ɔɹɾɝ ə hɪz. meɪbi ɹɪneɪl hæd bɪn mɔɹ ðən lʌk. meɪbi hɪz biɪŋ tɑvɝən dɪd mɔɹ ðən dʌmp ɪm ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə tʃɹʌbəl. sʌɾənli hi fɛlt . . . ɹispɑnsəbəl . . . fəɹ ðiz mɛn. ɪt wɑz ən ənkʌmftəɹbəl filɪŋ. mæt kɔθən ən ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ təɡɛðɝ. ɪt wɑz ənnætʃɹəl.

Sometimes it amazed him. Lanky Thom with his white hair and mustaches, who had been a Queen's lover once, and more willingly than himself, not to mention more than a lover, if you believed half he said. Square-jawed Harnan with that tattoo on his cheek and more elsewhere, who had been a soldier all his life. Juilin with his bamboo staff and his sword-breaker on his hip, who thought himself as good as any lord even if the idea of carrying a sword himself still made him uneasy, and fat Vanin, who made Juilin look a bootlicker by comparison. Skinny Fergin, and Gorderan, nearly as wide in the shoulders as Perrin, and Metwyn, whose pale Cairhienin face still looked like a boy's despite being years older than Mat. Some of them followed Mat Cauthon because they thought he was lucky, because his luck might keep them alive when the swords were out, and some for reasons he was not really sure of, but they followed. Not even Thom had ever more than protested an order of his. Maybe Renaile had been more than luck. Maybe his being ta'veren did more than dump him in the middle of trouble. Suddenly he felt . . . responsible . . . for these men. It was an uncomfortable feeling. Mat Cauthon and responsibility did not go together. It was unnatural.

"teɪk kɛɹ ə jʊɹsɛlvz, ən lʊk ʃɑɹp," hi sɛd. "ju noʊ wʌts aʊt ðɛɹ. ðɛɹz ə stɔɹm kʌmɪŋ." naʊ waɪ hæɾ i sɛd ðæt? "muv. wɝ weɪstɪŋ laɪt."

"Take care of yourselves, and look sharp," he said. "You know what's out there. There's a storm coming." Now why had he said that? "Move. We're wasting light."

ðə wɪn stɪl blu stʃɹɔŋli, swipɪŋ dʌst əkɹɔs ðə mɔl hɛɹə skwɛɹ wɪð ɪts stætʃu ʌv ə lɔŋ-dɛd kwin poʊzɪŋ əbʌv ðə faʊntən, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ʌðɝ saɪn ʌv ə stɔɹm. nɑɹaɪn hæd bɪn noʊɾəd fəɹ əɹ ɑnəsti, bʌt nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə hæv bɪn dɪpɪktəd kəmplitli bɛɹ-tʃɛstəd. ði æftɝnun sʌn bɝn haɪ ɪn ə skaɪ wɪθaʊɾ ə klaʊd, bʌt pipəl ɹʌʃt θɹu ðə skwɛɹ əz kwɪkli əz ðeɪ hæɾ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ kul. ðət wɑz ɡɔn, wɪn əɹ noʊ, daʊn hɪɹ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz simd ə ɡɹɪɾəl ʌndɝ ɪz buts.

The wind still blew strongly, sweeping dust across the Mol Hara Square with its statue of a long-dead queen posing above the fountain, but there was no other sign of a storm. Nariene had been noted for her honesty, but not enough to have been depicted completely bare-chested. The afternoon sun burned high in a sky without a cloud, but people rushed through the square as quickly as they had in the morning cool. That was gone, wind or no, down here on the ground. The paving stones seemed a griddle under his boots.

ɡlɛɹɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə skwɛɹ ət ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən, mæt hɛɾəd təwɔɹd ðə ɹɪvɝ. oʊlvɝ hæd nɑt ɡɔn ɔf wɪð ðə stʃɹiɾ ɝtʃənz hæf əz ɔfən waɪl ðeɪ wɝ steɪɪŋ ət ði ɪn; hi hæd bɪn tu kɑntɛn ɑɡəlɪŋ ðə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz ən sɛɾəl ɑnənz dɔɾɝz. soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ ðə daɪs tɛlɪŋ ɪm i hæd tə muv ɪndə ðə pæləs. ɛniθɪŋ i hæd dʌn sɪns livɪŋ - ɛniθɪŋ i wɑntəd tə du, hi əmɛndəd, θɪŋkɪŋ ə taɪlɪn ən əɹ aɪz; ən əɹ hænz - ɛni ʌv ɪt cʊɾə bɪn dʌn dʒʌst əz wɛl fɹəm ðɛɹ. ðoʊz daɪs spʌn naʊ, ən i wɪʃt ðeɪ wəd dʒʌst ɡoʊ əweɪ.

Glaring across the square at The Wandering Woman, Mat headed toward the river. Olver had not gone off with the street urchins half as often while they were staying at the inn; he had been too content ogling the serving girls and Setalle Anan's daughters. So much for the dice telling him he had to move into the palace. Anything he had done since leaving - anything he wanted to do, he amended, thinking of Tylin and her eyes; and her hands - any of it could have been done just as well from there. Those dice spun now, and he wished they would just go away.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə muv kwɪkli, dɑdʒɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃənli ɝaʊn tʃɹʌnlɪŋ kɑɹts ən wæɡənz, kɝsɪŋ ət lækɝd sɪdæn tʃɛɹz ən koʊtʃɪz ðət nɪɹli ɹæn ɪm daʊn, aɪz dɑɹɾɪŋ ɪn sɝtʃ ʌv ə ɹɛd koʊt kloʊs tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, bʌt ðə bʌsəl ɪn ðə stʃɹits sloʊɾ ɪm tə ə miændɝ. wɪtʃ wɑz dʒʌst əz wɛl, ɪn tʃɹuθ. noʊ pɔɪn dæʃɪŋ baɪ ðə bɔɪ wɪθaʊt siɪŋ hɪm. wɪʃɪŋ i hæd bɹɔt pɪps aʊɾ ə ðə pæləs steɪbəlz, hi fɹaʊn ət ðə pipəl stʃɹimɪŋ pæst; ə mæn ɑn hɔɹsbæk cʊɾə muv noʊ fæstɝ ɪn ðə θɹɔŋ, bʌɾ ʌp ɪn ðə sæɾəl, hi cʊɾə sin fɑɹðɝ. ðən əɡɛn, æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz fɹəm ə sæɾəl wʊɾə bɪn ɑkwɝd; nɑt mɛni foʊk æktʃəli  ɹoʊɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə sɪɾi, ən səm pipəl hæɾ ə tɛndənsi tə ʃaɪ əweɪ fɹəm ɛniwʌn ɑn ə hɔɹs.

He tried to move quickly, dodging impatiently around trundling carts and wagons, cursing at lacquered sedan chairs and coaches that nearly ran him down, eyes darting in search of a red coat close to the ground, but the bustle in the streets slowed him to a meander. Which was just as well, in truth. No point dashing by the boy without seeing him. Wishing he had brought Pips out of the palace stables, he frowned at the people streaming past; a man on horseback could have moved no faster in the throng, but up in the saddle, he could have seen farther. Then again, asking questions from a saddle would have been awkward; not many folk actually rode inside the city, and some people had a tendency to shy away from anyone on a horse.

ɔlweɪz ðə seɪm kwɛstʃən. ðə fɝs taɪm i æskt wɑz əɾ ə bɹɪdʒ dʒʌs bɪloʊ ðə mɔl hɛɹə, ʌv ə fɛloʊ sɛlɪŋ hʌni-beɪkt æpəlz fɹəm ə tʃɹeɪ hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ə stʃɹæp ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk. "hæv jə sin ə bɔɪ, əbaʊt soʊ haɪ, ɪn ə ɹɛd koʊt?" oʊlvɝ laɪk swits.

Always the same question. The first time he asked was at a bridge just below the Mol Hara, of a fellow selling honey-baked apples from a tray hanging from a strap around his neck. "Have you seen a boy, about so high, in a red coat?" Olver liked sweets.

"bɔɪ, maɪ lɔɹd?" ðə fɛloʊ sɛd, sʌkɪŋ ɪz fju ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ tiθ. "sin ə θaʊzən bɔɪz. doʊn ɹɪmɛmbɝ noʊ koʊt, ðoʊ. wəd maɪ lɔɹd laɪk wʌn æpəl, əɹ tu?" hi skupt ʌp tu wɪð boʊni fɪŋɡɝz ən pʊʃt əm ət mæt; ðə weɪ ðeɪ ɡeɪv ʌndɝ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz, ðeɪ wɝ sɑftɝ ðən ɛni beɪkɪŋ kəɾ əkaʊn fɔɹ. "dɪd maɪ lɔɹd hɪɹ əbaʊt ðə ɹaɪət?"

"Boy, my Lord?" the fellow said, sucking his few remaining teeth. "Seen a thousand boys. Don't remember no coat, though. Would my Lord like one apple, or two?" He scooped up two with bony fingers and pushed them at Mat; the way they gave under his fingers, they were softer than any baking could account for. "Did my Lord hear about the riot?"

"noʊ," mæt sɛd saʊɝli, ən pʊʃt ɑn. ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə ðə bɹɪdʒ, hi stɑpt ə plʌmp wʊmən wɪð ə tʃɹeɪ ʌv ɹɪbənz. ɹɪbənz hɛl noʊ fæsəneɪʃən fəɹ oʊlvɝ, bʌɾ əɹ ɹɛd pɛɾikoʊts flæʃt bɪniθ ə skɝt soʊn ʌp nɪɹli tə hɝ lɛf hɪp, ən ðə kʌɾ ə hɝ bɑɾəs ɹɪvild ɹaʊndəd klivədʒ tə ikwəl ɹaɪzɛlz. "hæv jə sin ə bɔɪ . . . ?"

"No," Mat said sourly, and pushed on. At the other end of the bridge, he stopped a plump woman with a tray of ribbons. Ribbons held no fascination for Olver, but her red petticoats flashed beneath a skirt sewn up nearly to her left hip, and the cut of her bodice revealed rounded cleavage to equal Riselle's. "Have you seen a boy . . . ?"

hi hɝɾ əbaʊt ðə ɹaɪət fɹəm hɝ, tu, ən fɹəm hæf ðə pipəl i æskt. ðət ɹumɝ, hi səspɛktəd hæd bɪɡʌn wɪð ɪvɛns əɾ ə sɝɾən haʊs ɪn ðə ɹæhəd ðət vɛɹi mɔɹnɪŋ. ə wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝ wɪð əɹ lɔŋ wɪp kɔɪld ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk ivən toʊld ɪm ðə ɹaɪət hæd bɪn əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ, wʌns ʃi əlaʊɾ əz haʊ ʃi nɛvɝ noʊɾəst bɔɪz ənlɛs ðeɪ ɹæn ʌndɝ əɹ mjulz. ə skwɛɹ-feɪs mæn u soʊl hʌnikoʊm - ɪnkɹɛɾəbli dʒɹaɪ-lʊkɪŋ hʌnikoʊm - sɛd ðə ɹaɪət hæd bɪn daʊn nɪɹ ðə laɪt taʊɝ ət ði ɛn ə ðə beɪ ɹoʊd, ɑn ði istɝn saɪɾ ə ðə maʊθ ə ðə beɪ, wɪtʃ wɑz əbaʊɾ əz laɪkli ə pleɪs fəɹ ɹaɪəɾɪŋ əz ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə beɪ ɪtsɛlf. ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz ə θaʊzən ɹumɝz ɪn ɛni sɪɾi, ɪf jə lɪsənd, ən i wɑz fɔɹs tə lɪsən tə snætʃɪz ʌv ɔl ə ðɛm, ɪt simd. wʌn ə ðə moʊst ɹɪmɑɹkəbli pɹɪɾi wɪmən i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin, stændɪŋ aʊtsaɪɾ ə tævɝn - meɪlɪn wɑz ə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl ət ði oʊld ʃip, bʌɾ əɹ oʊnli tæsk sim tə bi stændɪŋ aʊtsaɪd tə ətʃɹækt kʌstəmɝz, wɪtʃ ʃi sɝɾənli dɪd - toʊld ɪm ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə bæɾəl ðət mɔɹnɪŋ, ɪn ðə kɔɹdiz hɪlz wɛst ə ðə sɪɾi, ʃi θɔt. əɹ meɪbi ɪn ðə ɹænən hɪlz, əkɹɔs ðə beɪ. əɹ meɪbi. . . . ɹɪmɑɹkəbli pɹɪɾi, meɪlɪn, bʌt nɑt vɛɹi bɹaɪt; oʊlvɝ maɪɾ əv wɑtʃt əɹ fəɹ aʊɝz, soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi nɛvɝ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ. bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ siɪŋ ɛni bɔɪ ɪn eɪ. . . . wʌt kʌlɝ koʊt hæɾ i sɛd, əɡɛn? hi hɝɾ əbaʊt ɹaɪəts ən bæɾəlz, hi hɝɾ əbaʊɾ ɪnʌf stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz sin ɪn ðə skaɪ əɹ ðə hɪlz tə pɑpjəleɪt ðə blaɪt. hi hɝd ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑz əbaʊt tə dɪsɛn ɑn ðə sɪɾi wɪð θaʊzənz ə mɛn u kəd tʃænəl, ðət ði il wɝ kʌmɪŋ, ən ɑɹmi ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ - noʊ, ɪt wɑz ən ɑɹmi ʌv waɪtkloʊks; peɪdʒɹən naɪl wɑz dɛd, ən ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɪntɛndəd tə əvɛnʒ hɪm, ðoʊ waɪ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ wɑz nɑɾ ɪɡzækli klɪɹ. jə maɪɾ əv θɔt ðə sɪɾi wəd bi hɪp-dip ɪn pænɪk wɪð ɔl ðə teɪlz floʊɾɪŋ ɝaʊnd, bʌt ðə fækt wɑz, ivən ðoʊz u toʊld ə teɪl juʒəwəli oʊnli hæf-bɪlivd ɪt. soʊ, hi hɝɾ ɔl sɔɹts ə nɑnsɛns, bʌt nɑɾ ə wɝɾ əbaʊɾ ɛni bɔɪ ɪn ə ɹɛd koʊt.

He heard about the riot from her, too, and from half the people he asked. That rumor, he suspected had begun with events at a certain house in the Rahad that very morning. A wagon driver with her long whip coiled around her neck even told him the riot had been across the river, once she allowed as how she never noticed boys unless they ran under her mules. A square-faced man who sold honeycomb - incredibly dry-looking honeycomb - said the riot had been down near the light tower at the end of the Bay Road, on the eastern side of the mouth of the bay, which was about as likely a place for rioting as the middle of the bay itself. There were always a thousand rumors in any city, if you listened, and he was forced to listen to snatches of all of them, it seemed. One of the most remarkably pretty women he had ever seen, standing outside a tavern - Maylin was a serving girl at The Old Sheep, but her only task seemed to be standing outside to attract customers, which she certainly did - told him there had been a battle that morning, in the Cordese Hills west of the city, she thought. Or maybe in the Rhannon Hills, across the bay. Or maybe. . . . Remarkably pretty, Maylin, but not very bright; Olver might have watched her for hours, so long as she never opened her mouth. But she could not remember seeing any boy in a. . . . What color coat had he said, again? He heard about riots and battles, he heard about enough strange things seen in the sky or the hills to populate the Blight. He heard that the Dragon Reborn was about to descend on the city with thousands of men who could channel, that the Aiel were coming, an army of Aes Sedai - no, it was an army of Whitecloaks; Pedron Niall was dead, and the Children intended to avenge him, though why in Ebou Dar was not exactly clear. You might have thought the city would be hip-deep in panic with all the tales floating around, but the fact was, even those who told a tale usually only half-believed it. So, he heard all sorts of nonsense, but not a word about any boy in a red coat.

ə fju stʃɹits fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ, hi bɪɡæn hɪɹɪŋ θʌndɝ, ɡɹeɪt hɑloʊ bumz ðət sim tə ɹoʊl ɪn fɹəm ðə si. pipəl lʊkt ʌp kjʊɹiəsli ət ðə klaʊdləs skaɪ, skɹætʃt ðɛɹ hɛdz, ən wɛn ɑn əbaʊt ðɛɹ bɪznəs. soʊ dɪd hi, kwɛstʃənɪŋ ɛvɹi sɛlɝ ə swits əɹ fɹuɾ i sɔ, ən ɛvɹi pɹɪɾi wʊmən əfʊt. ɔl tə noʊ əveɪl. ɹitʃɪŋ ðə lɔŋ stoʊn ki ðət ɹæn ðə hoʊl lɛŋθ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ saɪɾ ə ðə sɪɾi, hi pɔzd, stʌɾiɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪ dɑks stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ ən ðə ʃɪps taɪd tə ðɛm. ðə wɪn blu stʃɹɔŋ, hivɪŋ vɛsəlz ət ðɛɹ mʊɹɪŋ laɪnz, ɡɹaɪndɪŋ əm əɡɛns ðə stoʊn dɑks dɪspaɪt ðə bæɡz stʌft wɪð wʊl hʌŋ daʊn bɪtwin fəɹ fɛndɝz. ənlaɪk hɔɹsəz, ʃɪps dɪd nɑɾ ɪntʃɹəst oʊlvɝ ɪksɛpt əz ə weɪ tə ɡoʊ fɹəm hɪɹ tə ðɛɹ, ən ʃɪps wɝ mɛnz bɪznəs ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ ivən ɪf ðə leɪɾɪŋ ðeɪ kæɹiɾ ɔfən wɑz nɑt. wɪmən ɑn ðiz dɑks wəɾ iðɝ bi mɝtʃəns kipɪŋ ən aɪ ɑn ðɛɹ ɡʊdz əɹ hɑɹd-ɑɹmd mɛmbɝz ə ðə kɑɹɡoʊ-loʊɾɝz ɡɪld, ən ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ swit-sɛlɝz hɪɹ.

A few streets from the river, he began hearing thunder, great hollow booms that seemed to roll in from the sea. People looked up curiously at the cloudless sky, scratched their heads, and went on about their business. So did he, questioning every seller of sweets or fruit he saw, and every pretty woman afoot. All to no avail. Reaching the long stone quay that ran the whole length of the river side of the city, he paused, studying the gray docks stretching out into the river and the ships tied to them. The wind blew strong, heaving vessels at their mooring lines, grinding them against the stone docks despite the bags stuffed with wool hung down between for fenders. Unlike horses, ships did not interest Olver except as a way to go from here to there, and ships were men's business in Ebou Dar even if the lading they carried often was not. Women on these docks would either be merchants keeping an eye on their goods or hard-armed members of the cargo-loader's guild, and there would be no sweet-sellers here.

əbaʊt tə tɝn əweɪ, hi ɹilaɪzd ɔlmoʊs noʊ wʌn wɑz muvɪŋ. ðə dɑks juʒəwəli bʌsəld, jɛɾ ɑn ɛvɹi ʃɪp i kəd si, kɹumɪn laɪn ðə ɹeɪlz ən hæd klaɪmd ɪndə ðə ɹɪɡɪŋ tə stɛɹ təwɔɹd ðə beɪ. bæɹəlz ən kɹeɪts stʊɾ əbændənd waɪl ʃɝtləs mɛn ən wɪɹi wɪmən ɪn ɡɹin lɛðɝ vɛsts kɹaʊɾəd təɡɛðɝ ət ði ɛnz ə ðə dɑks tə pɪɹ bɪtwin ðə ʃɪps, saʊθ, təwɔɹd ðə θʌndɝ. daʊn ðət weɪ, blæk smoʊk ɹoʊz ɪn θɪk taʊɝɪŋ kɑləmz, slæntɪŋ ʃɑɹpli nɔɹθ ɑn ðə wɪnd.

About to turn away, he realized almost no one was moving. The docks usually bustled, yet on every ship he could see, crewmen lined the rails and had climbed into the rigging to stare toward the bay. Barrels and crates stood abandoned while shirtless men and wiry women in green leather vests crowded together at the ends of the docks to peer between the ships, south, toward the thunder. Down that way, black smoke rose in thick towering columns, slanting sharply north on the wind.

hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ oʊnli ə moʊmənt, hi tʃɹɑɾəd aʊɾ əlɔŋ ðə nɪɹəs dɑk. ət fɝst, ʃɪps taɪd tə ðə lɔŋ fɪŋɡɝz ə stoʊn tə ðə saʊθ blɑkt ɪz vju ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðə smoʊk. kəz ə ðə weɪ ðə ʃɔɹlaɪn leɪ, ðoʊ, itʃ dɑk stʌk aʊt fɑɹðɝ ðən ðə nɛks daʊn; wʌns i pʊʃt ɪndə ðə mɝmɝɪŋ kɹaʊɾ ət ði ɛnd, ðə bɹɔd ɹɪvɝ meɪɾ ən oʊpən pæθ ə tʃɑpi ɡɹin wɔɾɝ tə ðə weɪv-tɔs beɪ.

Hesitating only a moment, he trotted out along the nearest dock. At first, ships tied to the long fingers of stone to the south blocked his view of anything except the smoke. Because of the way the shoreline lay, though, each dock stuck out farther than the next down; once he pushed into the murmuring crowd at the end, the broad river made an open path of choppy green water to the wave-tossed bay.

ət lis tu dʌzən ʃɪps wɝ bɝnɪŋ aʊɾ ɑn ðə waɪɾ ɪkspæns ə ðə beɪ, meɪbi mɔɹ, ɪnɡʌlft ɪn fleɪm fɹəm ɛn tə ɛnd. ə nʌmbɝ ʌv ʌðɝz hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sɛɾəld, oʊnli ə baʊ əɹ stɝn stɪl əbʌv wɔɾɝ ən ðət slaɪɾɪŋ ʌndɝ. ivən əz i lʊkt, ðə baʊ ʌv ə bɹɔd tu-mæstəd ʃɪp flaɪɪŋ ə lɑɹdʒ bænɝ ə ɹɛɾ ən blu ən ɡoʊld, ðə bænɝ ʌv ɔltɑɹə, sʌɾənli flu əpɑɹt wɪð ə ɹɔɹ, ə bum laɪk θʌndɝ, ən fæst-θɪkənɪŋ tɛnʒɹəlz ə smoʊk wɑftɪɾ əweɪ ɑn ðə wɪn əz ðə vɛsəl bɪɡæn sɛɾəlɪŋ baɪ ðə hɛd. hʌnʒɹədz ə vɛsəlz wɝ ɪn moʊʃən, ɛvɹi kɹæft ɪn ðə beɪ, θɹi-mæstəd si foʊk ɹeɪkɝz ən skɪmɝz ən tu-mæstəd sɔɹɝz, koʊstəl ʃɪps wɪð ðɛɹ tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ seɪlz, ɹɪvɝʃɪps ʌndɝ seɪl əɹ swip, səm fliɪŋ ʌpɹɪvɝ, moʊs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə biɾ aʊt tə si. skɔɹz ʌv ʌðɝ ʃɪps swɑn ɪndə ðə beɪ bɪfɔɹ ðə wɪnd, ɡɹeɪt blʌf-baʊd vɛsəlz əz tɔl əz ɛni ʌv ðə ɹeɪkɝz, kɹæʃɪŋ θɹu ðə ɹoʊlɪŋ weɪvz, θɹoʊɪŋ əsaɪd spɹeɪ. hɪz bɹɛθ kɑɾ əz i sʌɾənli meɪɾ aʊt skwɛɹ, ɹɪb seɪlz.

At least two dozen ships were burning out on the wide expanse of the bay, maybe more, engulfed in flame from end to end. A number of others had already settled, only a bow or stern still above water and that sliding under. Even as he looked, the bow of a broad two-masted ship flying a large banner of red and blue and gold, the banner of Altara, suddenly flew apart with a roar, a boom like thunder, and fast-thickening tendrils of smoke wafted away on the wind as the vessel began settling by the head. Hundreds of vessels were in motion, every craft in the bay, three-masted Sea Folk rakers and skimmers and two-masted soarers, coastal ships with their triangular sails, riverships under sail or sweep, some fleeing upriver, most trying to beat out to sea. Scores of other ships swanned into the bay before the wind, great bluff-bowed vessels as tall as any of the rakers, crashing through the rolling waves, throwing aside spray. His breath caught as he suddenly made out square, ribbed sails.

"blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz," hi mʌɾɝd ɪn ʃɑk. "ɪts ðə fleɪmɪŋ sintʃæn!"

"Blood and bloody ashes," he muttered in shock. "It's the flaming Seanchan!"

"hu?" dɪmændəɾ ə stɝn-feɪst wʊmən kɹaʊɾəd nɛks tə hɪm. ə dɑɹk blu wʊlən dʒɹɛs ə faɪn kʌt mɑɹkt əɹ ə mɝtʃən əz mʌtʃ əz dɪd ðə lɛðɝ foʊldɝ ʃi kæɹid fəɹ əɹ bɪlz ə leɪɾɪŋ əɹ ðə ɡɪl pɪn oʊvɝ wʌn bɹɛst, ə sɪlvɝ kwɪl pɛn. "ɪts ði ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃi ənaʊnst ɪn toʊnz ə kənvɪkʃən. "aɪ noʊ tʃænəlɪŋ wən aɪ si ɪt. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt wɪl də fəɹ ðɛm, dʒʌst əz sun əz ðeɪ ɝaɪv. jəl si."

"Who?" demanded a stern-faced woman crowded next to him. A dark blue woolen dress of fine cut marked her a merchant as much as did the leather folder she carried for her bills of lading or the guild pin over one breast, a silver quill pen. "It's the Aes Sedai," she announced in tones of conviction. "I know channeling when I see it. The Children of the Light will do for them, just as soon as they arrive. You'll see."

ə læŋki, ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən ɪn ə ɡɹaɪmi ɡɹin vɛs twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn tə kənfɹʌn hɝ, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə wʊɾən hɪlt ə hɝ dæɡɝ. "hoʊl jəɹ tʌŋ əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, jə fleɪmɪŋ pɛni-ɡɹʌbɝ, əɹ əl pil jə ən stʌf ə waɪtkloʊk daʊn jəɹ bliɾɪŋ ɡʌlət!"

A lanky, gray-haired woman in a grimy green vest twisted around to confront her, fingering the wooden hilt of her dagger. "Hold your tongue about Aes Sedai, you flaming penny-grubber, or I'll peel you and stuff a Whitecloak down your bleeding gullet!"

mæt lɛft əm weɪvɪŋ ðɛɹ ɑɹmz ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ, ən pʊʃt klɪɹ ə ðə kɹaʊd, ɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ ðə ki. ɔlɹɛɾi hi kəd si θɹi - noʊ, fɔɹ - hjudʒ kɹitʃɝz sɝkəlɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə sɪɾi tə ðə saʊθ ɑn ɡɹeɪt pɪnjənz laɪk ðoʊz ʌv ə bæt. fɪɡjɝz klʌŋ tə ðə kɹitʃɝz' bæks, əpɛɹənli ɪn səm sɔɹɾ ə sæɾəlz. ənʌðɝ flaɪɪŋ kɹitʃɝ əpɪɹd, ən mɔɹ. bɪloʊ ðɛm, fleɪm sʌɾənli faʊnteɪn əbʌv ðə ɹuftɑps wɪð ə ɹɔɹ.

Mat left them waving their arms and shouting at one another, and pushed clear of the crowd, running for the quay. Already he could see three - no, four - huge creatures circling over the city to the south on great pinions like those of a bat. Figures clung to the creatures' backs, apparently in some sort of saddles. Another flying creature appeared, and more. Below them, flame suddenly fountained above the rooftops with a roar.

pipəl ɹæn naʊ, bəfeɪɪŋ mæt əz i stʃɹʌɡəl θɹu ðə stʃɹits. "oʊlvɝ!" hi ʃaʊɾəd, hoʊpɪŋ tə bi hɝɾ əbʌv ʌðɝ ʃaʊts fɹəm ɛvɹi saɪd, ən ðə skɹimz. "oʊlvɝ!"

People ran now, buffeting Mat as he struggled through the streets. "Olver!" he shouted, hoping to be heard above other shouts from every side, and the screams. "Olver!"

əbɹʌpli, ɛvɹibɑɾi sim tə bi hɛɾɪŋ ði ʌðɝ weɪ, bæɾɝɪŋ pæs hɪm. stʌbɝnli hi fɔɹst ɑn əɡɛns ðə taɪd. ən keɪm tə ə stʃɹit wɛɹ wʌɾ ɔl ðoʊz foʊk flɛd fɹəm wɑz meɪd pleɪn.

Abruptly, everybody seemed to be heading the other way, battering past him. Stubbornly he forced on against the tide. And came to a street where what all those folk fled from was made plain.

eɪ sintʃæn kɑləm ɹʌʃt baɪ, ə hʌnʒɹəd əɹ mɔɹ mɛn ɪn hɛlməts laɪk ɪnsɛks' hɛdz ən ɑɹmɝ ʌv oʊvɝlæpɪŋ pleɪts, ɔl ɹaɪɾɪŋ ænəməlz laɪk kæts ðə saɪz ə hɔɹsəz, bʌt kʌvɝɾ ɪn bɹɑnz skeɪlz ɹæðɝ ðən fɝ. linɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, blu-stʃɹimɝd lænsɪz slæntəd, ðeɪ ɡæləp təwɔɹd ðə mɔl hɛɹə wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ tə iðɝ saɪd. ðoʊ "ɡæləp" wɑz nɑt kwaɪt ðə wɝd fəɹ ðə weɪ ðoʊz kɹitʃɝz muvd; ðə spid wɑz ɹaɪt, bʌt ðeɪ . . . floʊd. ɪt wɑz taɪm tə bi ɡɔn; pæs taɪm. əz sun əz i faʊnd -  əz ði ɛn ə kɑləm wɛn baɪ ə flæʃ ə ɹɛd, weɪs haɪ, kɑɾ ɪz aɪ əmʌŋ ðə kɹaʊɾ ɪn ðə stʃɹit bɪɑn ði ɪntɝsɛkʃən. "oʊlvɝ!" hi dɑɹɾɪd əkɹɔs ɔlmoʊst ɑn ðə hilz ə ðə læst skeɪl kɹitʃɝ, pʊʃɪŋ ɪndə ðə kɹaʊɾ ɪn taɪm tə si ə waɪd-aɪd wʊmən snætʃ ʌp ə lɪɾəl ɡɝl ɪn ə ɹɛd dʒɹɛs ən ɹʌn wɪð ðə tʃaɪl klʌtʃt tə hɝ bʊzəm. waɪldli, mæt pɹɛst əhɛd, ʃoʊldɝɪŋ pipəl əsaɪd wən ðeɪ bʌmpt ɪndə hɪm, bʌmpɪŋ ɪndə mɔɹ ðən ə fju hɪmsɛlf. "oʊlvɝ! oʊlvɝ!"

A Seanchan column rushed by, a hundred or more men in helmets like insects' heads and armor of overlapping plates, all riding animals like cats the size of horses, but covered in bronze scales rather than fur. Leaning forward in their saddles, blue-streamered lances slanted, they galloped toward the Mol Hara without looking to either side. Though "gallop" was not quite the word for the way those creatures moved; the speed was right, but they . . . flowed. It was time to be gone; past time. As soon as he found -  As the end of column went by a flash of red, waist high, caught his eye among the crowd in the street beyond the intersection. "Olver!" He darted across almost on the heels of the last scaled creature, pushing into the crowd in time to see a wide-eyed woman snatch up a little girl in a red dress and run with the child clutched to her bosom. Wildly, Mat pressed ahead, shouldering people aside when they bumped into him, bumping into more than a few himself. "Olver! Olver!"

twaɪs mɔɹ i sɔ ə kɑləm ə faɪɝ ɹaɪz bɹifli əbʌv ðə ɹuftɑps, ən smoʊk dʒɹɪftəd tə ðə skaɪ ɪn ə dʌzən pleɪsəz. sɛvɹəl taɪmz i hɝd ðoʊz bumɪŋ ɹɔɹz, mʌtʃ kloʊsɝ ðən ðə beɪ, naʊ. ɪnsaɪd ðə sɪɾi, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ; mɔɹ ðən wʌns ðə ɡɹaʊn kwɪvɝd bɪniθ ɪz buts.

Twice more he saw a column of fire rise briefly above the rooftops, and smoke drifted to the sky in a dozen places. Several times he heard those booming roars, much closer than the bay, now. Inside the city, he was sure; more than once the ground quivered beneath his boots.

ən ðən ðə stʃɹit wɑz klɪɹɪŋ əɡɛn, pipəl fliɪŋ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, daʊn æliz ən ɪndə haʊsəz ən ʃɑps, fəɹ sintʃæn ɑn hɔɹsəz wɝ kʌmɪŋ. nɑɾ ɔl wɝ ɑɹmɝd mɛn; nɪɹ ðə hɛɾ ə ðət smɔl θɪkɪɾ ə lænsɪz ɹoʊɾ ə dɑɹk wʊmən ɪn ə blu dʒɹɛs. mæt nu ðə lɑɹdʒ ɹɛd pænəlz ɑn əɹ skɝts ən bʊzəm wɝ wɝkt wɪð sɪlvɝ laɪtnɪŋ. ə sɪlvɝ liʃ, ɡlimɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn, ɹæn fɹəm əɹ lɛft ɹɪs tə ðə nɛk ʌv ə wʊmən ɪn ɡɹeɪ, ə deɪmeɪn, hu tʃɹɑɾəd bɪsaɪd ðə sʌldəmz hɔɹs laɪk ə pɛt dɔɡ. hi hæd sin mɔɹ ə sintʃæn ət fɑlm ðən i wɑntəd tə, bʌɾ ʌnkɑnʃəsli hi pɔzd ət ðə maʊθ ʌv ən æliweɪ, wɑtʃɪŋ. ðə ɹɔɹz ən faɪɝz hæd ʃoʊd ðət sʌmbɑɾi ɪn ðə sɪɾi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪt bæk, ət list, ən naʊ hi wɑz gɑnə si sətʃ ən ətɛmpt.

And then the street was clearing again, people fleeing in every direction, down alleys and into houses and shops, for Seanchan on horses were coming. Not all were armored men; near the head of that small thicket of lances rode a dark woman in a blue dress. Mat knew the large red panels on her skirts and bosom were worked with silver lightning. A silver leash, gleaming in the sun, ran from her left wrist to the neck of a woman in gray, a damane, who trotted beside the sul'dam's horse like a pet dog. He had seen more of Seanchan at Falme than he wanted to, but unconsciously he paused at the mouth of an alleyway, watching. The roars and fires had showed that somebody in the city was trying to fight back, at least, and now he was going to see such an attempt.

ðə sintʃæn wɝ nɑt ði oʊnli ɹizən ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls hæd ɡɑɾən aʊɾ ə saɪt. ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə ðə stʃɹit, ə ɡʊd hʌnʒɹəd maʊntəd mɛn swʌŋ lɔŋ-pɔɪntəd lænsɪz daʊn. ðeɪ wɔɹ bæɡi waɪt bɹitʃɪz ən ɡɹin koʊts, ən ðə ɡoʊl kɔɹdz ɑn ði ɔfəsɝz hɛlmət ɡlɪɾɝd. wɪð ə kəlɛktɪv ʃaʊt, ə hʌnʒɹəd əɹ mɔɹ ə taɪlɪnz soʊlʒɝz hɝl ðɛmsɛlvz təwɔɹd ðə sɪɾiz ətækɝz. ðeɪ aʊtnʌmbɝd ðə sintʃæn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm baɪ ət lis tu tə wʌn.

The Seanchan were not the only reason everyone else had gotten out of sight. At the other end of the street, a good hundred mounted men swung long-pointed lances down. They wore baggy white breeches and green coats, and the gold cords on the officer's helmet glittered. With a collective shout, a hundred or more of Tylin's soldiers hurled themselves toward the city's attackers. They outnumbered the Seanchan in front of them by at least two to one.

"blʌɾi fulz," mæt mʌɾɝd. "nɑt laɪk ðæt. ðət sʌldəm wɪl - "

"Bloody fools," Mat muttered. "Not like that. That sul'dam will - "

ði oʊnli muvmən əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn wɑz ðə wʊmən ɪn ðə laɪtnɪŋ-mɑɹk dʒɹɛs ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ hæn tə pɔɪnt, əz wʌn maɪt lɔntʃ ə hɔk, əɹ sɛn ɔf ə haʊnd. ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə ðə sɪlvɝi liʃ tʊk ə smɔl stɛp fɔɹwɝd. ðə fɑkshɛd mədæljən kuld əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst.

The only movement among the Seanchan was the woman in the lightning-marked dress raising her hand to point, as one might launch a hawk, or send off a hound. The golden-haired woman at the other end of the silvery leash took a small step forward. The foxhead medallion cooled against his chest.

ʌndɝniθ ðə hɛɾ ə ði ɛbu dɑɹi tʃɑɹdʒ, ðə stʃɹit sʌɾənli ɪɹʌptəd, peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ən mɛn ən hɔɹsəz flaɪɪŋ ɪndə ði ɛɹ wɪð ə dɛfənɪŋ ɹɔɹ. ðə kənkʌʃən nɑk mæt flæɾ ɑn ɪz bæk, əɹ meɪbi ɪt wɑz ðə weɪ ðə ɡɹaʊn sim tə lip fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz fit. hi pʊl hɪmsɛlf ʌp ɪn taɪm tə si ðə fɹʌn ʌv ən ɪn əkɹɔs ðə weɪ sʌɾənli kəlæps ɪndə ðə stʃɹiɾ ɪn ə klaʊɾ ə dʌst, ɪkspoʊzɪŋ ðə ɹumz wɪðɪn.

Underneath the head of the Ebou Dari charge, the street suddenly erupted, paving stones and men and horses flying into the air with a deafening roar. The concussion knocked Mat flat on his back, or maybe it was the way the ground seemed to leap from under his feet. He pulled himself up in time to see the front of an inn across the way suddenly collapse into the street in a cloud of dust, exposing the rooms within.

mɛn ən hɔɹsəz leɪ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, pisəz ə mɛn ən hɔɹsəz, ðoʊz stɪl əlaɪv θɹæʃɪŋ, ɝaʊn ə hoʊl ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊn hæf əz waɪɾ əz ðə stʃɹit. skɹimz fɹəm ðə wundəd fɪl ði ɛɹ. fjuɝ ðən hæf ði ɛbu dɑɹi stæɡɝd tə ðɛɹ fit, deɪzd ən stʌmbəlɪŋ. səm sizd ʌp ðə ɹeɪnz ə hɔɹsəz əz wɑbəli-lɛɡəɾ əz ðeɪ, hivɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ɪndə sæɾəlz, kɪkɪŋ ði ænəməlz ɪndə səm sɛmbləns ʌv ə ɹʌn. ʌðɝz dʒʌst ɹæn əfʊt. ɔl əweɪ fɹəm ðə sintʃæn. stil ðeɪ kəd feɪs, bʌt nɑt ðɪs.

Men and horses lay everywhere, pieces of men and horses, those still alive thrashing, around a hole in the ground half as wide as the street. Screams from the wounded filled the air. Fewer than half the Ebou Dari staggered to their feet, dazed and stumbling. Some seized up the reins of horses as wobbly-legged as they, heaving themselves into saddles, kicking the animals into some semblance of a run. Others just ran afoot. All away from the Seanchan. Steel they could face, but not this.

ɹʌnɪŋ, mæt ɹilaɪzd, simd ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli faɪn aɪdiə ɹaɪt ðɛn. ə ɡlæns bæk daʊn ði æli ʃoʊd dʌst ən ɹʌbəl paɪld ət list ə stɔɹi haɪ. hi dɑɹɾɪd daʊn ðə stʃɹiɾ əhɛɾ ə ðə fliɪŋ ɛbu dɑɹi, kipɪŋ əz kloʊs tə ðə wɔlz əz pɑsəbəl, hoʊpɪŋ nʌn ə ðə sintʃæn wəd θɪŋk i wɑz wʌn ə taɪlɪnz soʊlʒɝz. hi ʃəd nɛvɝ əv wɔɹn ə ɡɹin koʊt.

Running, Mat realized, seemed a particularly fine idea right then. A glance back down the alley showed dust and rubble piled at least a story high. He darted down the street ahead of the fleeing Ebou Dari, keeping as close to the walls as possible, hoping none of the Seanchan would think he was one of Tylin's soldiers. He should never have worn a green coat.

ðə sʌldəm əpɛɹənli wɑz nɑt sæɾəsfaɪd. ðə fɑkshɛd wɛn kul əɡɛn, ən fɹəm bɪhaɪn ənʌðɝ ɹɔɹ hæmɝɾ ɪm tə ðə peɪvmənt, peɪvmən ðət dʒʌmpt ʌp tə mit hɪm. θɹu ðə ɹɪŋɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz, hi hɝd meɪsənɹi ɡɹoʊn. əbʌv hɪm, ðə waɪt-plæstɝd bɹɪk wɔl bɪɡæn linɪŋ aʊtwɝd.

The sul'dam apparently was not satisfied. The foxhead went cool again, and from behind another roar hammered him to the pavement, pavement that jumped up to meet him. Through the ringing in his ears, he heard masonry groan. Above him, the white-plastered brick wall began leaning outward.

"wʌt hæpən tə maɪ blʌɾi lʌk?" hi ʃaʊɾəd. hi hæd taɪm fəɹ ðæt. ən dʒʌs taɪm tə ɹilaɪz, əz bɹɪk ən tɪmbɝz kɹæʃt daʊn ɑn hɪm, ðət ðə daɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd hæd dʒʌst stɑp dɛd.

"What happened to my bloody luck?" he shouted. He had time for that. And just time to realize, as brick and timbers crashed down on him, that the dice in his head had just stopped dead.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾi


CHAPTER 40

spɪɹz


Spears

maʊntənz ɹoʊz ɔl ɝaʊnd ɡəlinə kæsbən, lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən lɑɹdʒ hɪlz bɪhaɪn bʌt snoʊkæpt piks əhɛɾ ən haɪɝ piks bɪɑn ðoʊz, jɛt ʃi ɹɪli sɔ nʌn ə ðɛm. ðə stoʊnz ə ðə sloʊp bɹuzd əɹ bɛɹ fit. ʃi pæntɪd, lʌŋz leɪbɝɪŋ ɔlɹɛɾi. ðə sʌn beɪkt oʊvɝhɛɾ əz ɪt hæd fəɹ simɪŋli ɛnləs deɪz, bɝnɪŋ ðə swɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ ɪn ɹɪvɝz. ɛniθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən pʊɾɪŋ wʌn fʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ʌðɝ sim bɪɑn hɝ. stʃɹeɪnʒ ðət wɪð ɔl ðə swɛt kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ, ʃi kəd nɑt faɪn ɛni mɔɪstʃɝ ɪn əɹ maʊθ.

Mountains rose all around Galina Casban, little more than large hills behind but snowcapped peaks ahead and higher peaks beyond those, yet she really saw none of them. The stones of the slope bruised her bare feet. She panted, lungs laboring already. The sun baked overhead as it had for seemingly endless days, burning the sweat out of her in rivers. Anything other than putting one foot in front of the other seemed beyond her. Strange that with all the sweat coming out of her, she could not find any moisture in her mouth.

ʃi hæd bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ fjuɝ ðən naɪnti jɪɹz, hɝ lɔŋ blæk hɛɹ əntʌtʃt əz jɛt baɪ ɡɹeɪ, bʌt fəɹ nɪɹli twɛnti ʌv ðoʊz ʃi hæd bɪn hɛɾ ə ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ - kɔl ðə haɪəs baɪ ʌðɝ ɹɛd sɪstɝz, ɪn pɹaɪvət; kənsɪɾɝd baɪ ʌðɝ ɹɛdz ikwəl tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit - ən fəɹ ɔl bʌt faɪv ə ðə jɪɹz ʃi hæd wɔɹn ðə ʃɔl, ʃi hæd bɪn ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ, ɪn tʃɹuθ. nɑt tə ði ɪkskluʒən ə hɝ duɾiz əz ə ɹɛd, bʌt supɪɹiɝ tə ðɛm. hɝ pleɪs ɑn ðə səpɹim kaʊnsəl ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ wɑz nɛks tə ðəɾ ʌv ɑlviɛɝɪn hɝsɛlf, ən ʃi wɑz wʌn ʌv oʊnli θɹi hu nu ðə neɪm ə ðə wʊmən u lɛd ðɛɹ hʊɾɪd miɾɪŋz. ʃi kəd spik ɛni neɪm ɪn ðoʊz miɾɪŋz - ə kɪŋz - ən noʊ ðət neɪm bɪlɔŋ tə ðə dɛd. ɪt hæd hæpənd, wɪð ə kɪŋ ən wɪð ə kwin. ʃi hæd hɛlp tə bɹeɪk tu æmɪɝlənz, twaɪs hɛlp tɝn ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl wʊmən ɪn ðə wɝld ɪndə ə skwilɪŋ ɹɛtʃ iɡɝ tə tɛl ɔl ʃi nu, hæd hɛlp meɪk ɪt sim ðət wʌn ə ðoʊz hæd daɪɾ ɪn əɹ slip ən hæd sin ði ʌðɝ dɪpoʊzd ən stɪld. sətʃ θɪŋz wɝ ə duɾi, laɪk ðə nid tə ɪkstɝməneɪt mɛn wɪð ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl, nɑɾ ækʃənz ʃi tʊk plɛʒɝ ɪn bɪɑn ðəɾ ə tæsks wɛl dʌn, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ɛndʒɔɪd liɾɪŋ ðə sɝkəl ðət stɪl sɪuən sɑntʃ. ʃʊɹli ɔl ðoʊz θɪŋz mɛn ðət ɡəlinə kæsbən wɑz hɝsɛlf əmʌŋ ðə maɪɾiəst ə ðə wɝld, əmʌŋ ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl. ʃʊɹli ðeɪ dɪd. ðeɪ mʌst. hɝ lɛɡz weɪvɝd laɪk spɹɪŋz ðət hæd lɔs ðɛɹ tɛmpɝɪŋ, ən ʃi fɛl hɛvəli, əneɪbəl tə kætʃ hɝsɛlf wɪð ɑɹmz ən ɛlboʊz taɪtli baʊn bɪhaɪn hɝ. ðə wʌns-waɪt sɪlk ʃɪft, ði oʊnli ɡɑɹmən lɛf tə hɝ, tɔɹ əɡɛn əz ʃi slɪɾ ɑn ðə lus ɹɑks, skɹeɪpɪŋ əɹ wɛls. ə tʃɹi stɑp hɝ. feɪs pɹɛst əɡɛns ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ʃi bɪɡæn tə sɑb. "haʊ?" ʃi moʊn ɪn ə θɪk vɔɪs. "haʊ kən ðɪs hæpən tə mi?"

She had been Aes Sedai fewer than ninety years, her long black hair untouched as yet by gray, but for nearly twenty of those she had been head of the Red Ajah - called the Highest by other Red sisters, in private; considered by other Reds equal to the Amyrlin Seat - and for all but five of the years she had worn the shawl, she had been of the Black Ajah, in truth. Not to the exclusion of her duties as a Red, but superior to them. Her place on the Supreme Council of the Black Ajah was next to that of Alviarin herself, and she was one of only three who knew the name of the woman who led their hooded meetings. She could speak any name in those meetings - a king's - and know that name belonged to the dead. It had happened, with a king and with a queen. She had helped to break two Amyrlins, twice helped turn the most powerful woman in the world into a squealing wretch eager to tell all she knew, had helped make it seem that one of those had died in her sleep and had seen the other deposed and stilled. Such things were a duty, like the need to exterminate men with the ability to channel, not actions she took pleasure in beyond that of tasks well done, but she had enjoyed leading the circle that stilled Siuan Sanche. Surely all those things meant that Galina Casban was herself among the mightiest of the world, among the most powerful. Surely they did. They must. Her legs wavered like springs that had lost their tempering, and she fell heavily, unable to catch herself with arms and elbows tightly bound behind her. The once-white silk shift, the only garment left to her, tore again as she slid on the loose rocks, scraping her welts. A tree stopped her. Face pressed against the ground, she began to sob. "How?" she moaned in a thick voice. "How can this happen to me?"

æftɝ ə taɪm ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn pʊl tə hɝ fit; noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɔfən ʃi fɛl, ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ bɪn əlaʊɾ ə moʊməns ɹɛspɪt. blɪŋkɪŋ əweɪ tɪɹz, ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd.

After a time she realized that she had not been pulled to her feet; no matter how often she fell, she had never before been allowed a moment's respite. Blinking away tears, she raised her head.

il wɪmən kʌvɝd ðə maʊntənsaɪd, sɛvɹəl hʌnʒɹəd ə ðɛm skæɾɝd əmʌŋ ðə bæɹən tʃɹiz wɪð ðɛɹ spɪɹz, ðə veɪlz ðeɪ kəd ɹeɪz ɪn ən ɪnstən hæŋɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ tʃɛsts. ɡəlinə wɑntəd tə læf. meɪɾənz; ðeɪ kɔl ðiz mɑnstʃɹəs wɪmən meɪɾənz. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd læf. ət lis ðəɹ wɝ noʊ mɛn pɹizɛnt, ə smɔl mɝsi. mɛn meɪɾ əɹ skɪn kɹɔl, ən ɪf wʌn kəd si hɝ naʊ, lɛs ðən hæf-kloʊðd. . . .

Aiel women covered the mountainside, several hundred of them scattered among the barren trees with their spears, the veils they could raise in an instant hanging down their chests. Galina wanted to laugh. Maidens; they called these monstrous women Maidens. She wished she could laugh. At least there were no men present, a small mercy. Men made her skin crawl, and if one could see her now, less than half-clothed. . . .

æŋkʃəsli, hɝ aɪz sɔt fəɹ θɛɝɑvə, bʌt moʊst ə ðə sɛvənti əɹ soʊ waɪz wʌnz stʊd təɡɛðɝ lʊkɪŋ ət sʌmθɪŋ fɑɹðɝ ʌp ðə sloʊp, blɑkɪŋ əɹ vju. ðəɹ sim tə bi ə mɝmɝ ə vɔɪsəz fɹəm ðə fɹʌn ə ðɛm. meɪbi ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ kənfɝɪŋ əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ. waɪz wʌnz. ðeɪ hæd bɪn bɹuɾəli ɪfɪʃən ɪn titʃɪŋ əɹ ðə kɝɛk neɪmz; nɛvɝ dʒʌst il wʊmən, ən nɛvɝ waɪldɝ. ðeɪ kəd smɛl kəntɛmp haʊɛvɝ ʃi hɪɾ ɪt. ʌv kɔɹs, jə dɪd nɑɾ əv tə tʃɹaɪ haɪɾɪŋ wʌt hæd bɪn sɪɹɾ aʊɾ ə ju.

Anxiously, her eyes sought for Therava, but most of the seventy or so Wise Ones stood together looking at something farther up the slope, blocking her view. There seemed to be a murmur of voices from the front of them. Maybe the Wise Ones were conferring about something. Wise Ones. They had been brutally efficient in teaching her the correct names; never just Aiel woman, and never wilder. They could smell contempt however she hid it. Of course, you did not have to try hiding what had been seared out of you.

moʊst ə ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ lʊkɪŋ əweɪ, bʌt nɑɾ ɔl. ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəɾ ə jʌŋ, pɹɪɾi, ɹɛd-hɛɹd wʊmən wɪð ə dɛləkət maʊθ u wɑtʃt ɡəlinə wɪð lɑɹdʒ, ɪntɛn blu aɪz. pɝhæps əz ə saɪn ə ðɛɹ oʊn dɪsdeɪn, ðeɪ hæd tʃoʊzən ðə wikəst ə ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ tə ʃild əɹ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. mɪkɑɹə wɑz nɑt tʃɹuli wik ɪn ðə paʊɝ - nʌn ə ðɛm wɝ ðət - bʌɾ ivən smɑɹɾɪŋ fɹəm ʃoʊldɝz tə niz əz ʃi wɑz, ɡəlinə cʊɾə bɹoʊkən mɪkɑɹəz ʃild wɪð lɪɾəl ɛfɝt. ə mʌsəl ɪn əɹ tʃik spæzmd ʌnkəntʃɹoʊləbli; ɪɾ ɔlweɪz dɪd wən ʃi θɔɾ ʌv ənʌðɝ ɪskeɪp ətɛmpt. ðə fɝs hæd bɪn bæɾ ɪnʌf. ðə sɛkənd. . . . ʃʌɾɝɪŋ, ʃi fɔt nɑt tə sɑb əɡɛn. ʃi wəd nɑt meɪk ði ətɛmpt əɡɛn əntɪl ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ə kəmplit səksɛs. vɛɹi ʃʊɹ. æbsəlutli ʃʊɹ.

Most of the Wise Ones were looking away, but not all. The glow of saidar surrounded a young, pretty, red-haired woman with a delicate mouth who watched Galina with large, intent blue eyes. Perhaps as a sign of their own disdain, they had chosen the weakest of their number to shield her this morning. Micara was not truly weak in the Power - none of them were that - but even smarting from shoulders to knees as she was, Galina could have broken Micara's shield with little effort. A muscle in her cheek spasmed uncontrollably; it always did when she thought of another escape attempt. The first had been bad enough. The second. . . . Shuddering, she fought not to sob again. She would not make the attempt again until she was sure of complete success. Very sure. Absolutely sure.

ðə mæs ʌv waɪz wʌnz pɑɹɾəd, tɝnɪŋ tə fɑloʊ θɛɝɑvə wɪð ðɛɹ aɪz əz ðə hɔk-feɪst wʊmən stʃɹoʊd təwɔɹd ɡəlinə. sʌɾənli pæntɪŋ wʌns mɔɹ, wɪð æpɹɪhɛnʃən, ɡəlinə tʃɹaɪd tə stʃɹʌɡəl tə hɝ fit. hænz baʊn ən mʌsəlz wɔɾɝi, ʃi hæɾ oʊnli ɹitʃt əɹ niz wən θɛɝɑvə bɛn oʊvɝ hɝ, nɛkləsɪz ʌv aɪvɝi ən ɡoʊl klæɾɝɪŋ sɔfli. sizɪŋ ə hændfʊl ʌv ɡəlinəz hɛɹ, θɛɝɑvə fɔɹst əɹ hɛd bæk ʃɑɹpli. tɔlɝ ðən moʊs mɛn, ðə wʊmən dɪd ðəɾ ivən wən ðeɪ wɝ stændɪŋ, kɹænɪŋ ɡəlinəz nɛk peɪnfəli tə meɪk əɹ lʊk ʌp ɪndə ðə waɪz wʌnz feɪs. θɛɝɑvə wɑz sʌmwʌt stʃɹɔŋɝ ɪn ðə paʊɝ ðən ʃi, wɪtʃ ɹɛləɾɪvli fju wɪmən wɝ, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt wʌt meɪd ɡəlinə tʃɹɛmbəl. koʊl dip blu aɪz stæbd ɪndə hɝ oʊn, hɛld əɹ mɔɹ taɪtli ðən θɛɝɑvəz ɹʌf hænd; ðeɪ sim tə stʃɹɪp əɹ soʊl neɪkəɾ əz izəli əz ðə waɪz wʌn hændəl hɝ. ʃi hæd nɑt bɛɡd jɛt, nɑt wən ðeɪ meɪɾ əɹ wɔk ɔl deɪ wɪð hɑɹdli ə dʒɹɑp ʌv wɔɾɝ, nɑt wən ðeɪ fɔɹst əɹ tə kip ʌp əz ðeɪ ɹæn fəɹ aʊɝz, nɑɾ ivən wən ðɛɹ swɪtʃəz meɪɾ əɹ haʊl. θɛɝɑvəz kɹuəl hɑɹd feɪs, stɛɹɪŋ daʊn əɾ əɹ ɪmpæsɪvli, meɪɾ əɹ wɑnə bɛɡ. səmtaɪmz ʃi woʊk ət naɪt, stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt taɪt bɪtwin ðə fɔɹ steɪks wɛɹ ðeɪ baʊn hɝ, woʊk wɪmpɝɪŋ fɹəm dʒɹimz ðəɾ əɹ hoʊl laɪf wəd bi lɪvd ʌndɝ θɛɝɑvəz hænz.

The mass of Wise Ones parted, turning to follow Therava with their eyes as the hawk-faced woman strode toward Galina. Suddenly panting once more, with apprehension, Galina tried to struggle to her feet. Hands bound and muscles watery, she had only reached her knees when Therava bent over her, necklaces of ivory and gold clattering softly. Seizing a handful of Galina's hair, Therava forced her head back sharply. Taller than most men, the woman did that even when they were standing, craning Galina's neck painfully to make her look up into the Wise One's face. Therava was somewhat stronger in the Power than she, which relatively few women were, but that was not what made Galina tremble. Cold deep blue eyes stabbed into her own, held her more tightly than Therava's rough hand; they seemed to strip her soul naked as easily as the Wise One handled her. She had not begged yet, not when they made her walk all day with hardly a drop of water, not when they forced her to keep up as they ran for hours, not even when their switches made her howl. Therava's cruel hard face, staring down at her impassively, made her want to beg. Sometimes she woke at night, stretched out tight between the four stakes where they bound her, woke whimpering from dreams that her whole life would be lived under Therava's hands.

"ʃi ɪz kəlæpsɪŋ ɔlɹɛɾi," ðə waɪz wʌn sɛɾ ɪn ə vɔɪs laɪk stoʊn. "wɔɾɝ hɝ, ən bɹɪŋ hɝ." tɝnɪŋ əweɪ, ʃi ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ʃɔl, ɡəlinə kæsbən fɝɡɑɾən əntɪl ðəɹ wɑz nid tə ɹikɔl hɝ; tə θɛɝɑvə, ɡəlinə kæsbən wɑz lɛs ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ə stʃɹeɪ dɔɡ.

"She is collapsing already," the Wise One said in a voice like stone. "Water her, and bring her." Turning away, she adjusted her shawl, Galina Casban forgotten until there was need to recall her; to Therava, Galina Casban was less important than a stray dog.

ɡəlinə dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə ɹaɪz; ʃi hæd bɪn "wɔɾɝd" ɔfən ɪnʌf baɪ naʊ. ɪt wɑz ði oʊnli weɪ ðeɪ lɛɾ əɹ dʒɹɪŋk. eɪkɪŋ fəɹ mɔɪstʃɝ, ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɪzɪst wən ə blɑki meɪɾən tʊk əɹ baɪ ðə hɛɹ əz θɛɝɑvə hæɾ ən pʊld əɹ hɛd bæk. ʃi dʒʌst oʊpən əɹ maʊθ əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kʊd. ənʌðɝ meɪɾən, wɪð ə pʌkɝd skɑɹ slæntɪŋ əkɹɔs noʊz ən tʃik, tɪltəɾ ə wɔɾɝskɪn ən sloʊli pɔɹɾ ə tʃɹɪkəl ɪndə ɡəlinəz weɪɾɪŋ maʊð. ðə wɔɾɝ wɑz flæɾ ən wɔɹm; ɪt wɑz dɪlɪʃəs. ʃi swɑloʊd kənvʌlsɪvli, ɔkwɝdli, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ dʒɔz waɪd. ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz wɔɾɝ tə dʒɹɪŋk, ʃi wɑntəd tə muv əɹ feɪs ʌndɝ ðət θɪn stʃɹim, tə lɛɾ ɪt ɹʌn oʊvɝ əɹ tʃiks ən fɔɹhɛd. ɪnstɛd ʃi kɛpt əɹ hɛd vɛɹi stɛɾi, soʊ ðəɾ ɛvɹi dʒɹɑp wɛn daʊn əɹ θɹoʊt. spɪlɪŋ wɔɾɝ wɑz kɑz fəɹ ənʌðɝ biɾɪŋ; ðeɪ hæd θɹæʃt əɹ ɪn saɪɾ ʌv ə kɹik sɪks peɪsɪz waɪd fəɹ spɪlɪŋ ə maʊθfʊl oʊvɝ əɹ tʃɪn.

Galina did not try to rise; she had been "watered" often enough by now. It was the only way they let her drink. Aching for moisture, she did not resist when a blocky Maiden took her by the hair as Therava had and pulled her head back. She just opened her mouth as far as she could. Another Maiden, with a puckered scar slanting across nose and cheek, tilted a waterskin and slowly poured a trickle into Galina's waiting mouth. The water was flat and warm; it was delicious. She swallowed convulsively, awkwardly, holding her jaws wide. Almost as much as water to drink, she wanted to move her face under that thin stream, to let it run over her cheeks and forehead. Instead she kept her head very steady, so that every drop went down her throat. Spilling water was cause for another beating; they had thrashed her in sight of a creek six paces wide for spilling a mouthful over her chin.

wən ðə wɔɾɝskɪn wɑz faɪnəli teɪkən əweɪ, ðə blɑki meɪɾən hɔld əɹ tə hɝ fit baɪ hɝ baʊn ɛlboʊz. ɡəlinə ɡɹoʊnd. ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ ɡæðɝɪŋ ðɛɹ skɝts oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ɑɹmz, ɪkspoʊzɪŋ ðɛɹ lɛɡz wɛl əbʌv sɑf ni-haɪ buts. ðeɪ kəd nɑt bi ɡoʊɪŋ tə ɹʌn. nɑɾ əɡɛn. nɑɾ ɪn ðiz maʊntənz.

When the waterskin was finally taken away, the blocky Maiden hauled her to her feet by her bound elbows. Galina groaned. The Wise Ones were gathering their skirts over their arms, exposing their legs well above soft knee-high boots. They could not be going to run. Not again. Not in these mountains.

ðə waɪz wʌnz loʊp fɔɹwɝɾ əz izəli əz ɪf ɑn lɛvəl ɡɹaʊnd. ən ənsin meɪɾən kʌt ɡəlinə əkɹɔs ðə bæk ə hɝ θaɪz wɪð ə swɪtʃ, ən ʃi stʌmbəl tə ə sɛmbləns ʌv ə ɹʌn, hæf-dʒɹæɡd baɪ ðə blɑki meɪɾən. ðə swɪtʃ slæʃt əɹ lɛɡz wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ fɔltɝd. ɪf ðɪs ɹʌn kəntɪnjud ðə ɹɛst ə ðə deɪ, ðeɪ wəd teɪk tɝnz, wʌn meɪɾən wildɪŋ ðə stɪk ən ənʌðɝ dʒɹæɡɪŋ. leɪbɝɪŋ ʌp sloʊps ən nɪɹli slaɪɾɪŋ daʊn, ɡəlinə ɹæn. ə tɔni maʊntən kæt, stʃɹaɪpt ɪn ʃeɪdz ə bɹaʊn ən hɛviɝ ðən ə mæn, snɑɹəld əɾ əm fɹəm ə ɹɑki lɛdʒ əbʌv; ə fimeɪl, lækɪŋ ðə tʌfs ɑn əɹ ɪɹz ən ðə waɪd tʃiks. ɡəlinə wɑntəd tə ʃaʊɾ əɾ əɹ tə fli, tə ɹʌn bɪfɔɹ θɛɝɑvə kɑt hɝ. ði il ɹæn ɑn baɪ ðə snɑɹlɪŋ ænəməl, ʌnkənsɝnd, ən ɡəlinə wɛpt wɪð dʒɛləsi fəɹ ðə kæts fɹiɾəm.

The Wise Ones loped forward as easily as if on level ground. An unseen Maiden cut Galina across the back of her thighs with a switch, and she stumbled to a semblance of a run, half-dragged by the blocky Maiden. The switch slashed her legs whenever they faltered. If this run continued the rest of the day, they would take turns, one Maiden wielding the stick and another dragging. Laboring up slopes and nearly sliding down, Galina ran. A tawny mountain cat, striped in shades of brown and heavier than a man, snarled at them from a rocky ledge above; a female, lacking the tufts on her ears and the wide cheeks. Galina wanted to shout at her to flee, to run before Therava caught her. The Aiel ran on by the snarling animal, unconcerned, and Galina wept with jealousy for the cat's freedom.

ʃi wəd bi ɹɛskjuɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ʌv kɔɹs; ʃi nu ðæt. ðə taʊɝ wəd nɑɾ əlaʊ ə sɪstɝ tə ɹɪmeɪn ɪn kæptɪvəɾi. ɪleɪɾə wəd nɑɾ əlaʊ ə ɹɛd tə bi hɛld. ʃʊɹli ɑlviɛɝɪn wəd sɛn ɹɛskju. sʌmwʌn wʊd, ɛniwʌn, tə seɪv əɹ fɹəm ðiz mɑnstɝz, ɪspɛʃli fɹəm θɛɝɑvə. ʃi wəd pɹɑməs ɛniθɪŋ fəɹ ðət dɪlɪvɝəns. ʃi wəɾ ivən kip ðoʊz pɹɑməsəz. ʃi hæd bɪn bɹoʊkən fɹi ʌv ðə θɹi oʊðz ɑn dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðə blæk ədʒɑ, ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ əm wɪð ə nu tʃɹɪnəɾi, bʌɾ ət ðət moʊmənt ʃi tʃɹuli bɪlivd ʃi wəd kip əɹ wɝd, ɪf ɪt bɹɔt ɹɛskju. ɛni pɹɑməs, tə ɛniwʌn u wəd fɹi hɝ. ivən ə mæn.

She would be rescued eventually, of course; she knew that. The Tower would not allow a sister to remain in captivity. Elaida would not allow a Red to be held. Surely Alviarin would send rescue. Someone would, anyone, to save her from these monsters, especially from Therava. She would promise anything for that deliverance. She would even keep those promises. She had been broken free of the Three Oaths on joining the Black Ajah, replacing them with a new trinity, but at that moment she truly believed she would keep her word, if it brought rescue. Any promise, to anyone who would free her. Even a man.

baɪ ðə taɪm loʊ tɛns əpɪɹd, ðɛɹ dɑɹk kʌlɝz feɪɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə fɔɹəstəd maʊntənsaɪdz əz wɛl əz ðə kæt hæd, ɡəlinə hæd tu meɪɾənz səpɔɹɾɪŋ hɝ, pʊlɪŋ əɹ əlɔŋ. ʃaʊts ɹoʊz fɹəm ɛvɹi saɪd, ɡlæd kɹaɪz ʌv ɡɹiɾɪŋ, bʌt ɡəlinə wɑz dʒɹæɡd ɑn bɪhaɪn ðə waɪz wʌnz, dipɝ ɪndə ðə kæmp, stɪl ɹʌnɪŋ, stʌmbəlɪŋ.

By the time low tents appeared, their dark colors fading into the forested mountainsides as well as the cat had, Galina had two Maidens supporting her, pulling her along. Shouts rose from every side, glad cries of greeting, but Galina was dragged on behind the Wise Ones, deeper into the camp, still running, stumbling.

wɪθaʊt wɔɹnɪŋ ðə hænz lɛft əɹ ɑɹmz. ʃi pɪtʃt fɔɹwɝɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs ən leɪ ðəɹ wɪð əɹ noʊz ɪn ðə dɝɾ ən dɛd livz, sʌkɪŋ ɛɹ θɹu hɝ ɡeɪpɪŋ maʊθ. ʃi kɔft ɑn ə pis ə lif, bʌt ʃi wɑz tu wik tə tɝn əɹ hɛd. ðə blʌd paʊndɪɾ əɹ ɪɹz, bʌt vɔɪsəz keɪm tə hɝ ən sloʊli bɪɡæn tə meɪk sɛns.

Without warning the hands left her arms. She pitched forward on her face and lay there with her nose in the dirt and dead leaves, sucking air through her gaping mouth. She coughed on a piece of leaf, but she was too weak to turn her head. The blood pounded her ears, but voices came to her and slowly began to make sense.

". . . tʊk jəɹ taɪm, θɛɝɑvə," ə fəmɪljɝ-saʊndɪŋ wʊmənz vɔɪs sɛd. "naɪn deɪz. wɪv bɪn bæk lɔŋ sɪns."

". . . Took your time, Therava," a familiar-sounding woman's voice said. "Nine days. We have been back long since."

naɪn deɪz? ɡəlinə ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, skɹʌbɪŋ əɹ feɪs ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. sɪns ði il hæd ʃɑɾ əɹ hɔɹs fɹəm ʌndɝ hɝ, mɛmɹi blɛndəɾ ɔl ðə deɪz ɪndə ə mɛlæŋ ə θɝst ən ɹʌnɪŋ ən biɪŋ biɾən, bʌt ʃʊɹli ɪt hæd bɪn lɔŋɡɝ əɡoʊ ðən naɪn deɪz. wiks, sɝɾənli. ə mʌnθ əɹ mɔɹ.

Nine days? Galina shook her head, scrubbing her face on the ground. Since the Aiel had shot her horse from under her, memory blended all the days into a melange of thirst and running and being beaten, but surely it had been longer ago than nine days. Weeks, certainly. A month or more.

"bɹɪŋ əɹ ɪn," ðə fəmɪljɝ vɔɪs sɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli.

"Bring her in," the familiar voice said impatiently.

hænz pʊld əɹ ʌp, ʃʌvd əɹ fɔɹwɝd, bɛndɪŋ əɹ tə ɡoʊ ʌndɝ ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ tɛnt wɪð ðə saɪdz ɹeɪzd ɔl ɝaʊnd. ʃi wɑz θɹoʊn daʊn ɑn leɪɝd kɑɹpəts, ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə ɹɛd-ænd-blu tɛɹən meɪz oʊvɝlæpɪŋ ɡɔɾi flaʊɝz bɪniθ əɹ noʊz. wɪð dɪfəkəlti, ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd.

Hands pulled her up, shoved her forward, bending her to go under the edge of a large tent with the sides raised all around. She was thrown down on layered carpets, the edge of a red-and-blue Tairen maze overlapping gaudy flowers beneath her nose. With difficulty, she raised her head.

ət fɝst, ʃi sɔ nʌθɪŋ bʌt sɪvænə, siɾəd ɑn ə lɑɹdʒ jɛloʊ-tæsɛl kʊʃən ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. sɪvænə wɪð əɹ hɛɹ laɪk faɪn spʌn ɡoʊld, hɝ klɪɹ ɛmɹəld aɪz. tʃɹɛtʃɝəs sɪvænə, hu hæd ɡɪvən əɹ wɝd tə dɪstʃɹækt ətɛnʃən baɪ ɹeɪɾɪŋ ɪndə kɛɹhin, ðən bɹoʊkən əɹ plɛdʒ baɪ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɹi ælθɹ. sɪvænə, hu ət ðə lis maɪt teɪk əɹ fɹəm θɛɝɑvəz klʌtʃəz.

At first, she saw nothing but Sevanna, seated on a large yellow-tasseled cushion in front of her. Sevanna with her hair like fine spun gold, her clear emerald eyes. Treacherous Sevanna, who had given her word to distract attention by raiding into Cairhien, then broken her pledge by trying to free al'Thor. Sevanna, who at the least might take her from Therava's clutches.

ʃi stʃɹʌɡəld ʌp ɑntu hɝ niz, ən fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɹilaɪz ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝz ɪn ðə tɛnt. θɛɝɑvə sæɾ ɑn ə kʊʃən tə sɪvænəz ɹaɪt, ət ðə hɛɾ ʌv ə kɝvɪŋ laɪn ʌv waɪz wʌnz, fɔɹtin wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl ɪn ɔl, ðoʊ mɪkɑɹə, hu stɪl hɛl ðə ʃild ɑn hɝ, stʊɾ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə laɪn ɹæðɝ ðən sɪɾɪŋ. hæf ə ðɛm hæd bɪn əmʌŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz u kæptʃɝɾ əɹ wɪð sətʃ skɔɹnfəl iz. ʃi wəd nɛvɝ əɡɛn bi soʊ kɛɹləs əbaʊt waɪz wʌnz; nɛvɝ əɡɛn. ʃɔɹt, peɪl-feɪs mɛn ən wɪmən ɪn waɪt ɹoʊbz muv bɪhaɪn ðə waɪz wʌnz, wɝdləsli ɔfɝɪŋ tʃɹeɪz ʌv ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ wɪð smɔl kʌps, ən mɔɹ dɪd ðə seɪm ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə tɛnt, wɛɹ ə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən ɪn ən il koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz ə bɹaʊn ən ɡɹeɪ sæt tə sɪvænəz lɛft, ət ðə hɛɾ ʌv ə laɪn ə twɛlv stoʊn-feɪst ilmɛn. mɛn. ən ʃi wɔɹ nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ əɹ ʃɪft, ɹɪpt ən ɡeɪpɪŋ ɪn ə nʌmbɝ ə pleɪsəz. ɡəlinə klæmpt əɹ tiθ ʃʌt tə staɪfəl ə skɹim. ʃi fɔɹst əɹ bæk stɪf tə kip fɹəm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɝoʊ ɪndə ðə ɹʌɡz ən haɪd fɹəm ðoʊz koʊl meɪl aɪz.

She struggled up onto her knees, and for the first time realized there were others in the tent. Therava sat on a cushion to Sevanna's right, at the head of a curving line of Wise Ones, fourteen women who could channel in all, though Micara, who still held the shield on her, stood at the foot of the line rather than sitting. Half of them had been among the Wise Ones who captured her with such scornful ease. She would never again be so careless about Wise Ones; never again. Short, pale-faced men and women in white robes moved behind the Wise Ones, wordlessly offering trays of gold or silver with small cups, and more did the same on the other side of the tent, where a gray-haired woman in an Aiel coat and breeches of brown and gray sat to Sevanna's left, at the head of a line of twelve stone-faced Aielmen. Men. And she wore nothing but her shift, ripped and gaping in a number of places. Galina clamped her teeth shut to stifle a scream. She forced her back stiff to keep from trying to burrow into the rugs and hide from those cold male eyes.

"ɪt simz ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kən laɪ," sɪvænə sɛd, ən ðə blʌd dʒɹeɪn fɹəm ɡəlinəz feɪs. ðə wʊmən kəd nɑt noʊ; ʃi kəd nɑt. "ju meɪd plɛdʒɪz, ɡəlinə kæsbən, ən bɹoʊk ðɛm. dɪd jə θɪŋk jə kəd mɝɾɝ ə waɪz wʌn ən ðən ɹʌn bɪɑn ðə ɹitʃ ʌv əɹ spɪɹz?"

"It seems that Aes Sedai can lie," Sevanna said, and the blood drained from Galina's face. The woman could not know; she could not. "You made pledges, Galina Casban, and broke them. Did you think you could murder a Wise One and then run beyond the reach of our spears?"

fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɹɪlif fɹoʊz ɡəlinəz tʌŋ. sɪvænə dɪd nɑt noʊ əbaʊt ðə blæk ədʒɑ. hæd ʃi nɑɾ əbændən ðə laɪt lɔŋ əɡoʊ, ʃi wʊɾə θæŋk ðə laɪt. ɹɪlif stɪld əɹ tʌŋ, ən ə taɪni spɑɹk ʌv ɪndɪɡneɪʃən. ðeɪ ətækt ɛɛs sədaɪ ən wɝ æŋɡɹi wən səm ə ðɛm daɪd? ə taɪni spɑɹk wɑz ɔl ʃi kəd mænədʒ. æftɝ ɔl, wʌt wɑz sɪvænəz twɪstɪŋ fæks əlɔŋsaɪd deɪz ə biɾɪŋz ən θɛɝɑvəz aɪz? ə peɪnd, kɹoʊkɪŋ læf bʌbəld ʌp ət ði əbsɝɾəti ʌv ɪt. hɝ θɹoʊt wɑz soʊ dʒɹaɪ.

For a moment, relief froze Galina's tongue. Sevanna did not know about the Black Ajah. Had she not abandoned the Light long ago, she would have thanked the Light. Relief stilled her tongue, and a tiny spark of indignation. They attacked Aes Sedai and were angry when some of them died? A tiny spark was all she could manage. After all, what was Sevanna's twisting facts alongside days of beatings and Therava's eyes? A pained, croaking laugh bubbled up at the absurdity of it. Her throat was so dry.

"bi θæŋkfəl səm ə jə stɪl laɪv," ʃi mænədʒ pæst əɹ læftɝ. "ivən naʊ ɪts nɑt tu leɪt tə ɹɛktəfaɪ jəɹ mɪsteɪks, sɪvænə." wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ʃi swɑloʊd ɹufəl mɝθ bɪfɔɹ ɪt tɝn tə tɛɹz. dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ. "wɛn aɪ ɹɪtɝn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, əl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðoʊz u əsɪs mi, ivən naʊ." ʃi wəɾ əv æɾəd, "æn ðoʊz u də ʌðɝwaɪz," bʌt θɛɝɑvəz ənweɪvɝɪŋ stɛɹ sɛt fɪɹ flʌɾɝɪŋ ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl. fəɹ ɔl ʃi nu, θɛɝɑvə stɪl maɪt bi əlaʊd tə də wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɪʃt. ðəɹ hæd tə bi səm weɪ tə ɪndus sɪvænə tə . . . teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ ə hɝ. ðət teɪstəd bɪɾɝ, jɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən θɛɝɑvə. sɪvænə wɑz æmbɪʃəs, ən ɡɹiɾi. ɪn ðə mɪdst ə fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ɡəlinə, ʃi hæd kɑt saɪɾ ə hɝ oʊn hæn ən dɝɛktəɾ ə bɹif, ædmaɪɹɪŋ smaɪl ət ɹɪŋz sɛt wɪð lɑɹdʒ ɛmɹəlz ən faɪɝdʒɹɑps. ʃi wɔɹ ɹɪŋz ɑn hæf əɹ fɪŋɡɝz, ən nɛkləsɪz ə pɝlz ən ɹubiz ən daɪmənz fɪt fəɹ ɛni kwin dʒɹeɪpt əkɹɔs ðə swɛl ə hɝ bʊzəm. sɪvænə kəd nɑt bi tʃɹʌstɪd, bʌt pɝhæps ʃi kəd bi bɑt. θɛɝɑvə wɑz ə fɔɹs ə neɪtʃɝ; əz wɛl tʃɹaɪ tə baɪ ə flʌɾ əɹ ən ævəlæntʃ. "aɪ tʃɹʌs ðət jəl də wʌɾ ɪz ɹaɪt, sɪvænə," ʃi fɪnɪʃt. "ðə ɹɪwɔɹdz ə fɹɛndʃɪp wɪð ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɑɹ ɡɹeɪt."

"Be thankful some of you still live," she managed past her laughter. "Even now it is not too late to rectify your mistakes, Sevanna." With an effort, she swallowed rueful mirth before it turned to tears. Just before. "When I return to the White Tower, I will remember those who assist me, even now." She would have added, "and those who do otherwise," but Therava's unwavering stare set fear fluttering in her middle. For all she knew, Therava still might be allowed to do whatever she wished. There had to be some way to induce Sevanna to . . . take charge of her. That tasted bitter, yet anything was better than Therava. Sevanna was ambitious, and greedy. In the midst of frowning at Galina, she had caught sight of her own hand and directed a brief, admiring smile at rings set with large emeralds and firedrops. She wore rings on half her fingers, and necklaces of pearls and rubies and diamonds fit for any queen draped across the swell of her bosom. Sevanna could not be trusted, but perhaps she could be bought. Therava was a force of nature; as well try to buy a flood or an avalanche. "I trust that you will do what is right, Sevanna," she finished. "The rewards of friendship with the White Tower are great."

fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt, ðəɹ wɑz saɪləns ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə wɪspɝ ə ðə waɪt ɹoʊbz əz ðə sɝvəns muvd wɪð ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪz. ðɛn. . . .

For a long moment, there was silence except for the whisper of the white robes as the servants moved with their trays. Then. . . .

"ju ɑɹ dætsæŋ," sɪvænə sɛd. ɡəlinə blɪŋkt. ʃi wɑz ə dɪspaɪzd wʌn? sɝɾənli ðeɪ hæd dɪspleɪd ðɛɹ kəntɛmpt pleɪnli, bʌt waɪ - ?

"You are da'tsang," Sevanna said. Galina blinked. She was a despised one? Certainly they had displayed their contempt plainly, but why - ?

"ju ɑɹ dætsæŋ," ə ɹaʊnd-feɪst waɪz wʌn ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪntoʊnd, ən ə wʊmən ə hæn tɔlɝ ðən θɛɝɑvə ɹɪpiɾɪd, "ju ɑɹ dætsæŋ."

"You are da'tsang," a round-faced Wise One she did not know intoned, and a woman a hand taller than Therava repeated, "You are da'tsang."

θɛɝɑvəz hɔklaɪk feɪs maɪɾ əv bɪn kɑɹv fɹəm wʊd, jɛɾ əɹ aɪz, fɪkst ɑn ɡəlinə, ɡlɪɾɝd əkjuzɪŋli. ɡəlinə fɛl neɪl tə ðə spɑt wɛɹ ʃi nɛlt, əneɪbəl tə muv ə mʌsəl. ə hɪpnətaɪz bɝd wɑtʃɪŋ ə sɝpən slaɪðɝ nɪɹɝ. noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ meɪɾ əɹ fil ðət weɪ. noʊ wʌn.

Therava's hawklike face might have been carved from wood, yet her eyes, fixed on Galina, glittered accusingly. Galina felt nailed to the spot where she knelt, unable to move a muscle. A hypnotized bird watching a serpent slither nearer. No one had ever made her feel that way. No one.

"θɹi waɪz wʌnz əv spoʊkən." sɪvænəz sæɾəsfaɪd smaɪl wɑz ɔlmoʊst wɛlkəmɪŋ. θɛɝɑvəz feɪs wɑz stɑɹk. ðə wʊmən dɪd nɑt laɪk wʌtɛvɝ hæd dʒʌs hæpənd. sʌmθɪŋ hæd hæpənd, ivən ɪf ɡəlinə dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt. ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪɾ əpɪɹd tə hæv dɪlɪvɝɾ əɹ fɹəm θɛɝɑvə. ðət wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf.

"Three Wise Ones have spoken." Sevanna's satisfied smile was almost welcoming. Therava's face was stark. The woman did not like whatever had just happened. Something had happened, even if Galina did not know what. Except that it appeared to have delivered her from Therava. That was more than enough for the moment. More than enough.

wən meɪɾənz kʌɾ əɹ baʊnz ən stʌft əɹ ɪndə ə blæk wʊl ɹoʊb, ʃi wɑz soʊ ɡɹeɪtfəl ʃi ɔlmoʊs dɪd nɑt kɛɹ ðət ðeɪ tɔɹ ɔf ðə ɹɛmnəns ə hɝ ʃɪft fɝst, ɪn fɹʌn ə ðoʊz aɪs-aɪd mɛn. ðə θɪk wʊl wɑz hɑɾ ən ɪtʃi ən skɹætʃi ɑn əɹ wɛls, ən ʃi wɛlkəmd ɪɾ əz ðoʊ ɪt wɝ sɪlk. dɪspaɪt mɪkɑɹə stɪl ʃildɪŋ hɝ, ʃi cʊɾə læft əz ðə meɪɾənz lɛɾ əɹ aʊɾ ə ðə tɛnt. ɪt dɪd nɑt teɪk lɔŋ fəɹ ðət dɪzaɪɝ tə vænɪʃ ɪntaɪɝli. ɪt dɪd nɑt teɪk əɹ lɔŋ tə bɪɡɪn wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ bɛɡɪŋ ɑn əɹ niz bɪfɔɹ sɪvænə wəd də ɛni ɡʊd. ʃi wʊɾə dʌn ɪt, kəd ʃi hæv ɡɑɾən tə ðə wʊmən, ɪksɛp ðət mɪkɑɹə meɪɾ ɪt pleɪn ʃi wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ ʃi wɑz nɑt toʊl tə ɡoʊ, əɹ spik ə wɝɾ ənlɛs spoʊkən tə.

When Maidens cut her bounds and stuffed her into a black wool robe, she was so grateful she almost did not care that they tore off the remnants of her shift first, in front of those ice-eyed men. The thick wool was hot and itchy and scratchy on her welts, and she welcomed it as though it were silk. Despite Micara still shielding her, she could have laughed as the Maidens led her out of the tent. It did not take long for that desire to vanish entirely. It did not take her long to begin wondering whether begging on her knees before Sevanna would do any good. She would have done it, could she have gotten to the woman, except that Micara made it plain she was not going anywhere she was not told to go, or speak a word unless spoken to.

ɑɹmz foʊldəd, sɪvænə wɑtʃt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə dætsæŋ, stæɡɝ daʊn ðə maʊntənsaɪɾ ən stɑp, bɪsaɪɾ ə meɪɾən skwɑɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ hilz wɪð ə swɪtʃ, tə dʒɹɑp ðə hɛd-ʃeɪp stoʊn ʃi hæd bɪn kæɹiɪŋ ɪn əɹ hænz. ðə blæk hʊd tɝn ɪn sɪvænəz dɝɛkʃən fəɹ ə moʊmənt, bʌt ðə dætsæŋ kwɪkli bɛn tə pɪk ʌp ənʌðɝ lɑɹdʒ stoʊn ən tɝn tə leɪbɝ bæk ʌp ðə fɪfti peɪsɪz tə wɛɹ mɪkɑɹə weɪɾəd wɪð ənʌðɝ meɪɾən. ðəɹ ʃi dʒɹɑp ðət stoʊn, pɪkt ʌp ənʌðɝ, ən stɑɹɾəd bæk daʊn. dætsæŋ wɝ ɔlweɪz ʃeɪmd wɪð jusləs leɪbɝ; ənlɛs ðəɹ wɑz ɡɹeɪt nid, ðə wʊmən wəd nɑt bi əlaʊd tə kæɹi ivən ə kʌp ʌv wɔɾɝ, jɛt tɔɪl wɪθaʊt pɝpəs wəd fɪl əɹ aʊɝz tɪl ʃi bɝst ə ʃeɪm. ðə sʌn hæɾ ə lɔŋ weɪ tə klaɪm jɛt, ən mɛni mɔɹ deɪz leɪ əhɛd.

Arms folded, Sevanna watched the Aes Sedai, the da'tsang, stagger down the mountainside and stop, beside a Maiden squatting on her heels with a switch, to drop the head-shaped stone she had been carrying in her hands. The black hood turned in Sevanna's direction for a moment, but the da'tsang quickly bent to pick up another large stone and turned to labor back up the fifty paces to where Micara waited with another Maiden. There she dropped that stone, picked up another, and started back down. Da'tsang were always shamed with useless labor; unless there was great need, the woman would not be allowed to carry even a cup of water, yet toil without purpose would fill her hours till she burst of shame. The sun had a long way to climb yet, and many more days lay ahead.

"aɪ dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi wəd kəndɛm hɝsɛlf aʊɾ ə hɝ oʊn maʊθ," ɹiɑli sɛɾ ət sɪvænəz ʃoʊldɝ. "ɛfɑlɪn ən ði ʌðɝz ɑɹ ɔl bʌt ʃʊɹ ʃi oʊpənli ədmɪɾəd kɪlɪŋ deɪseɪn."

"I did not think she would condemn herself out of her own mouth," Rhiale said at Sevanna's shoulder. "Efalin and the others are all but sure she openly admitted killing Desaine."

"ʃi ɪz maɪn, sɪvænə." θɛɝɑvəz dʒɔ taɪɾənd. ʃi maɪɾ əv teɪkən ðə wʊmən, bʌt dætsæŋ bɪlɔŋ tə noʊ wʌn. "aɪ ɪntɛndəd tə dʒɹɛs əɹ ɪn ɡeɪʃeɪn ɹoʊbz ə sɪlk," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "wʌɾ ɪz ðə pɝpəs ə ðɪs, sɪvænə? aɪ ɪkspɛktəd tə hæv tə ɑɹɡju əɡɛns kʌɾɪŋ əɹ θɹoʊt, nɑt ðɪs."

"She is mine, Sevanna." Therava's jaw tightened. She might have taken the woman, but da'tsang belonged to no one. "I intended to dress her in gai'shain robes of silk," she muttered. "What is the purpose of this, Sevanna? I expected to have to argue against cutting her throat, not this."

ɹiɑli tɔst əɹ hɛd, kæstɪŋ ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlæns ət sɪvænə. "sɪvænə ɪntɛnz tə bɹeɪk hɝ. wɪv hæd lɔŋ tɔks ʌv wʌt tə də ʃəd wi kæptʃɝ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ. sɪvænə wɑns ə teɪm ɛɛs sədaɪ tə wɛɹ waɪɾ ən sɝv hɝ. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn blæk wɪl də wɛl ɪnʌf, ðoʊ."

Rhiale tossed her head, casting a sidelong glance at Sevanna. "Sevanna intends to break her. We have had long talks of what to do should we capture any Aes Sedai. Sevanna wants a tame Aes Sedai to wear white and serve her. An Aes Sedai in black will do well enough, though."

sɪvænə ʃɪftəɾ əɹ ʃɔl, ɪɹəteɪɾəd baɪ ðə wʊmənz toʊn. nɑt kwaɪt mɑkɪŋ, bʌɾ ɔl tu əwɛɹ ðət ʃi wɑntəd sʌmhaʊ tə juz ði ɛɛs sədaɪz tʃænəlɪŋ əz ðoʊ ɪt wɝ sɪvænəz oʊn. ɪt wəd bi pɑsəbəl. tu ɡeɪʃeɪn pæs ðə θɹi waɪz wʌnz, kæɹiɪŋ ə lɑɹdʒ bɹæs-stʃɹæp tʃɛs bɪtwin ðɛm. ʃɔɹɾ ən peɪl-feɪst, hʌzbən ən waɪf, ðeɪ hæd bɪn lɔɹɾ ən leɪɾi ɪn ðə tʃɹikɪlɝz' lænz. ðə pɛɹ baʊd ðɛɹ hɛdz mɔɹ mikli ðən ɛni il ɪn waɪɾ ɛvɝ kəɾ əv mænədʒd; ðɛɹ dɑɹk aɪz wɝ taɪt wɪð fɪɹ ʌv ə hɑɹʃ wɝd, mʌtʃ lɛs ə swɪtʃ. wɛtləndɝz kəd bi teɪm laɪk hɔɹsəz.

Sevanna shifted her shawl, irritated by the woman's tone. Not quite mocking, but all too aware that she wanted somehow to use the Aes Sedai's channeling as though it were Sevanna's own. It would be possible. Two gai'shain passed the three Wise Ones, carrying a large brass-strapped chest between them. Short and pale-faced, husband and wife, they had been Lord and Lady in the treekillers' lands. The pair bowed their heads more meekly than any Aiel in white ever could have managed; their dark eyes were tight with fear of a harsh word, much less a switch. Wetlanders could be tamed like horses.

"ðə wʊmən ɪz teɪmd ɔlɹɛɾi," θɛɝɑvə ɡɹʌmbəld. "aɪ hæv lʊkt ɪndə hɝ aɪz. ʃiz ə bɝd flʌɾɝɪŋ ɪn ðə hæn ən əfɹeɪd tə flaɪ."

"The woman is tamed already," Therava grumbled. "I have looked into her eyes. She is a bird fluttering in the hand and afraid to fly."

"ɪn naɪn deɪz?" ɹiɑli sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli, ən sɪvænə ʃʊk əɹ hɛd vɪɡɝəsli.

"In nine days?" Rhiale said incredulously, and Sevanna shook her head vigorously.

"ʃi ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ, θɛɝɑvə. jə sɔ hɝ feɪs ɡoʊ peɪl wɪð fjʊɹi wən aɪ əkjuz hɝ. jə hɝɾ əɹ læf əz ʃi spoʊk ə kɪlɪŋ waɪz wʌnz." ʃi meɪɾ ə vɛkst, æŋɡɹi saʊnd. "æn jə hɝɾ əɹ θɹɛɾən ʌs." ðə wʊmən hæd bɪn əz slɪpɝi əz ðə tʃɹikɪlɝz, spikɪŋ ə ɹɪwɔɹdz ən lɛɾɪŋ ðə θɹɛɾ ɪf noʊ ɹɪwɔɹdz keɪm ʃaʊt saɪlənli. bʌt wʌɾ ɛls kəd bi ɪkspɛktəɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ? "ɪt wɪl teɪk lɔŋ tə bɹeɪk hɝ, bʌt ðɪs ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪl bɛɡ tə oʊbeɪ ɪf ɪt teɪks ə jɪɹ." wʌns ʃi dɪd ðæt. . . . ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd nɑt laɪ, ʌv kɔɹs; ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd ɡəlinə tə dɪnaɪ hɝ ækjəzeɪʃən. wʌns ʃi swɔɹ tə oʊbeɪ. . . .

"She is Aes Sedai, Therava. You saw her face go pale with fury when I accused her. You heard her laugh as she spoke of killing Wise Ones." She made a vexed, angry sound. "And you heard her threaten us." The woman had been as slippery as the treekillers, speaking of rewards and letting the threat if no rewards came shout silently. But what else could be expected of Aes Sedai? "It will take long to break her, but this Aes Sedai will beg to obey if it takes a year." Once she did that. . . . Aes Sedai could not lie, of course; she had expected Galina to deny her accusation. Once she swore to obey. . . .

"ɪf jə wɑnə meɪk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ oʊbeɪ ju," ə mænz vɔɪs sɛd bɪhaɪn hɝ, "ðɪs maɪt hɛlp."

"If you want to make an Aes Sedai obey you," a man's voice said behind her, "this might help."

ɪnkɹɛdʒələs, sɪvænə spʌn əbaʊt tə faɪn kædɑɝ stændɪŋ ðɛɹ, ən bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ðə wʊmən - ði ɛɛs sədaɪ - mzə, boʊθ dʒɹɛst ɪn dɑɹk sɪlk ən faɪn leɪs əz ðeɪ hæd bɪn sɪks deɪz əɡoʊ, itʃ wɪð ə bʌlʒɪŋ sæk hæŋɪŋ ɪŋkɔŋɹuəsli fɹəm wʌn ʃoʊldɝ baɪ ə stʃɹæp. kædɑɝ hɛld aʊɾ ə smuð waɪt ɹɑɾ əbaʊɾ ə fʊt lɔŋ ɪn wʌn dɑɹk hænd.

Incredulous, Sevanna spun about to find Caddar standing there, and beside him the woman - the Aes Sedai - Maisia, both dressed in dark silk and fine lace as they had been six days ago, each with a bulging sack hanging incongruously from one shoulder by a strap. Caddar held out a smooth white rod about a foot long in one dark hand.

"haʊ dɪd jə kʌm hɪɹ?" ʃi dɪmændəd, ðən kəmpɹɛst əɹ lɪps ɪn æŋɡɝ. pleɪnli hi hæd kʌm əz i hæd bɪfɔɹ; ʃi wɑz dʒʌst sɝpɹaɪzd əɾ ɪm əpɪɹɪŋ hɪɹ, ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə kæmp. ʃi snætʃt ðə waɪt ɹɑɾ i ɔfɝd, ən əz ɔlweɪz i stɛp bæk bɪɑn ɑɹmz ɹitʃ. "waɪ hæv jə kʌm?" ʃi əmɛndəd. "wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs?" ə lɪɾəl slɪmɝ ðən əɹ ɹɪst, ðə ɹɑd wɑz smuð ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju ɑd, floʊɪŋ sɪmbəlz ɪnsaɪzd ɑn wʌn flæɾ ɛnd. ɪt fɛl nɑt kwaɪt laɪk aɪvɝi, nɑt kwaɪt laɪk ɡlæs. vɛɹi kul tə ðə tʌtʃ.

"How did you come here?" she demanded, then compressed her lips in anger. Plainly he had come as he had before; she was just surprised at him appearing here, in the middle of the camp. She snatched the white rod he offered, and as always he stepped back beyond arm's reach. "Why have you come?" she amended. "What is this?" A little slimmer than her wrist, the rod was smooth except for a few odd, flowing symbols incised on one flat end. It felt not quite like ivory, not quite like glass. Very cool to the touch.

"ju maɪt kɔl ɪɾ ən oʊθ ɹɑd," kædɑɝ sɛd, ʃoʊɪŋ tiθ ɪn wʌt wɑz daʊtləs mɛn fəɹ ə smaɪl. "ɪɾ oʊnli keɪm ɪndə maɪ hænz jɛstɝdeɪ, ən aɪ ɪmiɾiətli θɔɾ ə ju."

"You might call it an Oath Rod," Caddar said, showing teeth in what was doubtless meant for a smile. "It only came into my hands yesterday, and I immediately thought of you."

sɪvænə klæmpt əɹ hænz taɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə ɹɑd tə kip fɹəm hɝlɪŋ ɪɾ əweɪ. ɛvɹiwʌn nu wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪz oʊθ ɹɑd dɪd. tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑɾ ivən tə θɪŋk, mʌtʃ lɛs spik, ʃi θɹʌst ɪt bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt ən tʊk əɹ hænz əweɪ.

Sevanna clamped her hands tight around the rod to keep from hurling it away. Everyone knew what the Aes Sedai's Oath Rod did. Trying not even to think, much less speak, she thrust it behind her belt and took her hands away.

ɹiɑli fɹaʊn ət ðə ɹɑɾ ət sɪvænəz weɪst, ən əɹ aɪz ɹoʊz sloʊli, koʊldli, tə sɪvænəz feɪs. θɛɝɑvə ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ʃɔl ɪn ə klæɾɝ ə bɹeɪslɪts, ən ɡeɪv ə hɑɹd, θɪn smaɪl. ðəɹ wəd nɛvɝ bi ɛni tʃæns ʌv wʌn ə ðɛm tʌtʃɪŋ ðə ɹɑɾ ən meɪbi noʊ tʃæns ʌv ɛni ʌðɝ waɪz wʌn duɪŋ soʊ iðɝ. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ɡəlinə kæsbən. wʌn deɪ ʃi wəd bɹeɪk.

Rhiale frowned at the rod at Sevanna's waist, and her eyes rose slowly, coldly, to Sevanna's face. Therava adjusted her shawl in a clatter of bracelets, and gave a hard, thin smile. There would never be any chance of one of them touching the rod and maybe no chance of any other Wise One doing so either. But there was still Galina Casban. One day she would break.

ɹeɪvən-aɪd mzə, ə lɪɾəl bɪhaɪn kædɑɝ, smaɪld ɔlmoʊst əz feɪnli əz θɛɝɑvə. ʃi hæd sin, ən ʌndɝstʊd. ʃi wɑz əbzɝvənt, fəɹ ə wɛtləndɝ.

Raven-eyed Maisia, a little behind Caddar, smiled almost as faintly as Therava. She had seen, and understood. She was observant, for a wetlander.

"kʌm," sɪvænə toʊl kædɑɝ. "wi wɪl dʒɹɪŋk ti ɪn maɪ tɛnt." ʃi sɝɾənli wəd nɑt ʃɛɹ wɔɾɝ wɪð hɪm. lɪftɪŋ əɹ skɝts, ʃi stɑɹɾəd ʌp ðə sloʊp.

"Come," Sevanna told Caddar. "We will drink tea in my tent." She certainly would not share water with him. Lifting her skirts, she started up the slope.

tə hɝ sɝpɹaɪz, kædɑɝ wɑz ɔlsoʊ əbzɝvənt. "ɔl jə nid də ɪz əv jəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ" - wɔkɪŋ izəli bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ɑn ɪz lɔŋ lɛɡz, hi ɡɹɪn sʌɾənli, tuthəli, ət ɹiɑli ən θɛɝɑvə - "ɔɹ ɛni wʊmən u kən tʃænəl hoʊl ðə ɹɑɾ ən spik wʌtɛvɝ pɹɑməsəz jə wɪʃ waɪl sʌmwʌn tʃænəlz ə lɪɾəl spɪɹəɾ ɪndə ðə nʌmbɝ. ðə mɑɹks ɑn ði ɛn ə ðə ɹɑd?" hi æɾəd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz aɪbɹaʊz ɪnsʌltɪŋli. "ju kən juz ɪt tə ɹilis hɝ, tu, bʌt ðəɾ ɪz mɔɹ peɪnfəl. əɹ soʊ aɪ ʌndɝstænd."

To her surprise, Caddar was also observant. "All you need do is have your Aes Sedai" - walking easily beside her on his long legs, he grinned suddenly, toothily, at Rhiale and Therava - "or any woman who can channel hold the rod and speak whatever promises you wish while someone channels a little Spirit into the number. The marks on the end of the rod?" he added, raising his eyebrows insultingly. "You can use it to release her, too, but that is more painful. Or so I understand."

sɪvænəz fɪŋɡɝz tʌtʃt ðə ɹɑd laɪtli. mɔɹ ɡlæs ðən aɪvɝi, ən vɛɹi kul. "ɪɾ oʊnli wɝks ɑn wɪmən?" ʃi dʌkt ɪndə ðə tɛn əhɛɾ ə hɪm. ðə waɪz wʌnz ən ðə liɾɝz ə ðə wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz wɝ ɡɔn, bʌt ðə dʌzən tʃɹikɪlɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn ɹɪmeɪnd, nilɪŋ peɪʃənli tə wʌn saɪd. noʊ wʌn pɝsən hæɾ ɛvɝ kɛpt ə dʌzən ɡeɪʃeɪn bɪfɔɹ, ən ʃi pəzɛs mɔɹ. ðəɹ wəɾ əv tə bi ə nu neɪm fəɹ ðɛm, ðoʊ, sɪns ðeɪ wəd nɛvɝ pʊɾ ɔf ðə waɪt.

Sevanna's fingers touched the rod lightly. More glass than ivory, and very cool. "It only works on women?" She ducked into the tent ahead of him. The Wise Ones and the leaders of the warrior societies were gone, but the dozen treekiller gai'shain remained, kneeling patiently to one side. No one person had ever kept a dozen gai'shain before, and she possessed more. There would have to be a new name for them, though, since they would never put off the white.

"wɪmən u kən tʃænəl, sɪvænə," kædɑɝ sɛd, fɑloʊɪŋ əɹ ɪn. ðə mænz toʊn wɑz ɪnkɹɛɾəbli ɪnsələnt. hɪz dɑɹk aɪz ʃoʊn wɪð oʊpən əmjuzmənt. "ju wɪl əv tə weɪɾ əntɪl juv ælθɹ bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɡɪv jə wʌt wɪl kəntʃɹoʊl hɪm."

"Women who can channel, Sevanna," Caddar said, following her in. The man's tone was incredibly insolent. His dark eyes shone with open amusement. "You will have to wait until you have al'Thor before I give you what will control him."

ɹimuvɪŋ ðə sæk fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, hi sæt. nɑɾ ɑn ə kʊʃən nɪɹ hɝz, ʌv kɔɹs. mzə wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ə bleɪɾ ɪn əɹ ɹɪbz; ʃi laʊnʒd ɑn ən ɛlboʊ ɔlmoʊst ət sɪvænəz saɪd. sɪvænə aɪɾ əɹ saɪdweɪz, ðən kæʒəwəli əndɪɾ ənʌðɝ leɪs ə hɝ oʊn blaʊs. ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹikɔl ðə wʊmənz bʊzəm biɪŋ əz ɹaʊn əz ðæt. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, hɝ feɪs simd ivən mɔɹ bjuɾəfəl, əz wɛl. sɪvænə tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə ɡɹaɪn əɹ tiθ.

Removing the sack from his shoulder, he sat. Not on a cushion near hers, of course. Maisia was not afraid of a blade in her ribs; she lounged on an elbow almost at Sevanna's side. Sevanna eyed her sideways, then casually undid another lace of her own blouse. She did not recall the woman's bosom being as round as that. For that matter, her face seemed even more beautiful, as well. Sevanna tried not to grind her teeth.

"ʌv kɔɹs," kædɑɝ wɛn ɑn, "ɪf jə min səm ʌðɝ mæn - ðəɹ ɪz ə θɪŋ kɔld ə baɪndɪŋ tʃɛɹ. baɪndɪŋ pipəl u kænɑt tʃænəl ɪz mɔɹ dɪfəkəl ðən baɪndɪŋ ðoʊz u kæn. pɝhæps ə baɪndɪŋ tʃɛɹ sɝvaɪv ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, bʌt jəl əv tə weɪt waɪl aɪ faɪn ɪt."

"Of course," Caddar went on, "if you mean some other man - There is a thing called a binding chair. Binding people who cannot channel is more difficult than binding those who can. Perhaps a binding chair survived the Breaking, but you will have to wait while I find it."

sɪvænə tʌtʃt ðə ɹɑɾ əɡɛn, ðən ɪmpeɪʃənli ɔɹɾɝd wʌn ə ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn tə bɹɪŋ ti. ʃi kəd weɪt. kædɑɝ wɑz ə ful. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ i wəd ɡɪv əɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi wɑntəɾ ə hɪm. ən naʊ ðə ɹɑd kəd bɹeɪk mzə fɹi ʌv hɪm. ʃʊɹli ðən ðə wʊmən wəd nɑt pɹətɛk hɪm. fəɹ ɪz ɪnsʌls, hi wəd wɛɹ blæk. sɪvænə tʊk ə smɔl ɡɹin pɔɹsələn kʌp fɹəm ðə tʃɹeɪ ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn hɛld ən ɡeɪv ɪt tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð əɹ oʊn hænz. "ɪɾ ɪz fleɪvɝd wɪð mɪnt, mzə. jəl faɪn ɪt ɹɪfɹɛʃɪŋ."

Sevanna touched the rod again, then impatiently ordered one of the gai'shain to bring tea. She could wait. Caddar was a fool. Sooner or later he would give her everything she wanted of him. And now the rod could break Maisia free of him. Surely then the woman would not protect him. For his insults, he would wear black. Sevanna took a small green porcelain cup from the tray the gai'shain held and gave it to the Aes Sedai with her own hands. "It is flavored with mint, Maisia. You will find it refreshing."

ðə wʊmən smaɪld, bʌt ðoʊz blæk aɪz. . . . wɛl, wʌt kəd bi dʌn tə wʌn ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd bi dʌn tə tu. əɹ mɔɹ.

The woman smiled, but those black eyes. . . . Well, what could be done to one Aes Sedai could be done to two. Or more.

"wʌɾ ə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ bɑksəz?" sɪvænə dɪmændəd kɝtli.

"What of the traveling boxes?" Sevanna demanded curtly.

kædɑɝ weɪv ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn əweɪ ən pæɾəd ðə sæk bɪsaɪd hɪm. "aɪ bɹɔɾ əz mɛni nɑɹbɑhə - ðəɾ ɪz wʌt ðeɪ wɝ kɔld - əz mɛni əz aɪ kəd faɪnd. ɪnʌf tə tʃɹænspɔɹɾ ɔl ə jə baɪ naɪtfɔl, ɪf jə hɝi. ən aɪ wʊd, ɪf aɪ wɝ ju. ælθɹ minz tə fɪnɪʃ ju, ɪt simz. tu klænz ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ðə saʊθ, ən tu mɔɹ ɑɹ muvɪŋ tə kʌm daʊn fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ. wɪð ðɛɹ waɪz wʌnz, ɔl ɹɛɾi tə tʃænəl. ðɛɹ ɔɹɾɝz ɑɹ tə steɪ əntɪl ɛvɹi læst wʌn ə jə ɪz dɛɾ əɹ ə pɹɪznɝ."

Caddar waved the gai'shain away and patted the sack beside him. "I brought as many nar'baha - that is what they were called - as many as I could find. Enough to transport all of you by nightfall, if you hurry. And I would, if I were you. Al'Thor means to finish you, it seems. Two clans are coming up from the south, and two more are moving to come down from the north. With their Wise Ones, all ready to channel. Their orders are to stay until every last one of you is dead or a prisoner."

θɛɝɑvə snɪft. "ə ɹizən tə muv, sɝɾənli, wɛtləndɝ, bʌt nɑt tə ɹʌn. ivən fɔɹ klænz kænɑt swip kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ ɪn ə deɪ."

Therava sniffed. "A reason to move, certainly, wetlander, but not to run. Even four clans cannot sweep Kinslayer's Dagger in a day."

"dɪdn aɪ seɪ?" kædɑɝz smaɪl wɑz nɑɾ əɾ ɔl plɛzənt. "ɪt simz ælθɹ əz baʊn səm ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hɪm, tu, ən ðeɪv tɔt ðə waɪz wʌnz haʊ tə tʃɹævəl wɪθaʊɾ ə nɑɹbɑhə, oʊvɝ ʃɔɹt dɪstənsəz, ət list. twɛnti əɹ θɝɾi maɪlz. ə ɹisən ɹiɾɪskʌvɹi, ɪt simz. ðeɪ kəd bi hɪɹ - wɛl, tədeɪ. ɔl fɔɹ klænz."

"Didn't I say?" Caddar's smile was not at all pleasant. "It seems al'Thor has bound some Aes Sedai to him, too, and they have taught the Wise Ones how to Travel without a nar'baha, over short distances, at least. Twenty or thirty miles. A recent rediscovery, it seems. They could be here - well, today. All four clans."

meɪbi hi laɪd, jɛt ðə ɹɪsk. . . . sɪvænə kəɾ ɪmædʒən ɔl tu wɛl biɪŋ ɪn sɔɹɪliəz ɡɹɪp. nɑɾ əlaʊɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə ʃɪvɝ, ʃi sɛn ɹiɑli tə ɪnfɔɹm ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz. hɝ vɔɪs bɪtʃɹeɪd nʌθɪŋ.

Maybe he lied, yet the risk. . . . Sevanna could imagine all too well being in Sorilea's grip. Not allowing herself to shiver, she sent Rhiale to inform the other Wise Ones. Her voice betrayed nothing.

ɹitʃɪŋ ɪndə hɪz bæɡ, kædɑɝ dʒɹu aʊɾ ə ɡɹeɪ stoʊn kjub, smɔlɝ ðən ðə kælbɑks ʃi hæd juz tə sʌmən hɪm, ən mʌtʃ pleɪnɝ, wɪð noʊ mɑɹkɪŋ bʌɾ ə bɹaɪt ɹɛd dɪsk sɛɾ ɪn wʌn feɪs. "ðɪs ɪz ə nɑɹbɑhə," hi sɛd. "ɪt juzɪz seɪɾɪn, soʊ nʌn ə jəl si ɛniθɪŋ, ən ɪts lɪməts. ɪf ə wʊmən tʌtʃəz ɪt, ɪt woʊnt wɝk fəɹ deɪz æftɝwɝd, soʊ əl əv tə hæn əm aʊt maɪsɛlf, ən ɪts ʌðɝ lɪməts. wʌns oʊpənd, ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɪl ɹɪmeɪn fəɹ ə fɪks taɪm, səfɪʃən fəɹ ə fju θaʊzən tə ɡoʊ θɹu ɪf ðeɪ doʊnt weɪs taɪm, ən ðə nɑɹbɑhə nidz θɹi deɪz tə ɹɪkʌvɝ æftɝwɝd. aɪ hæv ɪnʌf ɛkstʃɹə tə kæɹi əs wɛɹ wi nid tə ɡoʊ tədeɪ, bʌt. . . ."

Reaching into his bag, Caddar drew out a gray stone cube, smaller than the callbox she had used to summon him, and much plainer, with no marking but a bright red disc set in one face. "This is a nar'baha," he said. "It uses saidin, so none of you will see anything, and it has limits. If a woman touches it, it won't work for days afterward, so I will have to hand them out myself, and it has other limits. Once opened, the gateway will remain for a fixed time, sufficient for a few thousand to go through if they don't waste time, and the nar'baha needs three days to recover afterward. I have enough extra to carry us where we need to go today, but. . . ."

θɛɝɑvə lin fɔɹwɝd soʊ ɪntɛnli ʃi lʊkt əbaʊt tə fɔl oʊvɝ, bʌt sɪvænə hɑɹdli lɪsənd. ʃi dɪd nɑt daʊt kædɑɝ, ɪɡzækli; hi wəd nɑt dɛɹ bɪtʃɹeɪ ðɛm, nɑt waɪl i hʌŋɡɝd fəɹ ðə ɡoʊl ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wəd ɡɪv hɪm. ðəɹ wɝ smɔl θɪŋz, ðoʊ. mzə sim tə stʌɾi hɪm oʊvɝ əɹ ti. waɪ? ən ɪf ðəɹ wɑz sətʃ nid fəɹ spid, waɪ wɑz ðəɹ noʊ ɝdʒənsi ɪn ɪz vɔɪs? hi wəd nɑt bɪtʃɹeɪ, bʌt ʃi wəd teɪk pɹikɔʃənz ɛniweɪ.

Therava leaned forward so intently she looked about to fall over, but Sevanna hardly listened. She did not doubt Caddar, exactly; he would not dare betray them, not while he hungered for the gold the Shaido would give him. There were small things, though. Maisia seemed to study him over her tea. Why? And if there was such need for speed, why was there no urgency in his voice? He would not betray, but she would take precautions anyway.

mɛɹɪk fɹaʊn ət ðə stoʊn kjub ðə wɛtləndɝ hæd ɡɪvən hɪm, ðən ət ðə . . . hoʊl . . . ðət hæɾ əpɪɹd wən i pɹɛs ðə ɹɛd spɑt. ə hoʊl, faɪv peɪsɪz waɪɾ ən θɹi haɪ, ɪn mɪdɛɹ. bɪɑn leɪ ɹoʊlɪŋ hɪlz, nɑt loʊ, kʌvɝd wɪð bɹaʊn ɡɹæs. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk θɪŋz tə də wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ɪspɛʃli wɪð ðə meɪl pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. sɪvænə stɛp θɹu ənʌðɝ, smɔlɝ, hoʊl wɪð ðə wɛtləndɝ ən ə dɑɹk wʊmən, fɑloʊɪŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz sɪvænə ən ɹiɑli hæd tʃoʊzən aʊt. oʊnli ə hændfʊl ʌv waɪz wʌnz ɹɪmeɪnd wɪð ðə mɑʃeɪn ʃeɪɾoʊ. θɹu ðət sɛkən hoʊl, hi kəd si sɪvænə tɔkɪŋ wɪð bɛnhuən. ðə ɡɹin sɔls sɛpt wəd faɪn ðɛmsɛlvz wɪð fju waɪz wʌnz, tu; mɛɹɪk wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt.

Maeric frowned at the stone cube the wetlander had given him, then at the . . . hole . . . that had appeared when he pressed the red spot. A hole, five paces wide and three high, in midair. Beyond lay rolling hills, not low, covered with brown grass. He did not like things to do with the One Power, especially with the male part of it. Sevanna stepped through another, smaller, hole with the wetlander and a dark woman, following the Wise Ones Sevanna and Rhiale had chosen out. Only a handful of Wise Ones remained with the Moshaine Shaido. Through that second hole, he could see Sevanna talking with Bendhuin. The Green Salts sept would find themselves with few Wise Ones, too; Maeric was sure of it.

dɪɹəl tʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm. "hʌzbənd," ʃi mɝmɝd, "sɪvænə sɛɾ ɪt wəɾ oʊnli ɹɪmeɪn oʊpən ə ʃɔɹt waɪl."

Dyrele touched his arm. "Husband," she murmured, "Sevanna said it would only remain open a short while."

mɛɹɪk nɑɾəd. dɪɹəl ɔlweɪz sɔ stʃɹeɪt tə ðə pɔɪnt. veɪlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf, hi ɹæn fɔɹwɝɾ ən lɛp θɹu ðə hoʊl i hæd meɪd. wʌtɛvɝ sɪvænə ən ðə wɛtləndɝ sɛd, hi wəd sɛnd nʌn ə hɪz mɑʃeɪn θɹu bɪfɔɹ i nu ɪt wɑz seɪf.

Maeric nodded. Dyrele always saw straight to the point. Veiling himself, he ran forward and leaped through the hole he had made. Whatever Sevanna and the wetlander said, he would send none of his Moshaine through before he knew it was safe.

hi lændəd hɛvəli ɑn ə sloʊp kʌvɝd wɪð dɛd ɡɹæs ən nɪɹli pɪtʃt hɛd-oʊvɝ-hilz daʊn ðə hɪl bɪfɔɹ i kɑt hɪmsɛlf. fəɹ ə moʊmən i stɛɹd bæk ʌp ət ðə hoʊl. ɑn ðɪs saɪd, ɪt hʌŋ mɔɹ ðən ə fʊɾ əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

He landed heavily on a slope covered with dead grass and nearly pitched head-over-heels down the hill before he caught himself. For a moment he stared back up at the hole. On this side, it hung more than a foot above the ground.

"waɪf!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə dʒɹɑp!"

"Wife!" he shouted. "There is a drop!"

blæk aɪz lɛp θɹu, veɪld ən spɪɹz ɹɛɾi, ən meɪɾənz, ɔlsoʊ. əz wɛl tʃɹaɪ tə dʒɹɪŋk sæn əz tʃɹaɪ tə kip meɪɾənz fɹəm biɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə fɝst. ðə ɹɛst ə ðə mɑʃeɪn fɑloʊɾ əɾ ə ɹʌn, ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ ən waɪvz ən tʃɪlʒɹən, dʒʌmpɪŋ daʊn ɑn ðə flaɪ, kɹæftsfoʊk ən tʃɹeɪɾɝz ən ɡeɪʃeɪn, moʊs pʊlɪŋ hɛvəli loʊɾəd pækhɔɹsɪz ən mjulz, nɪɹ tə sɪks θaʊzən ɔltəɡɛðɝ. hɪz sɛpt, hɪz pipəl. ðeɪ stɪl wəd bi wʌns i wɛn tə ɹɪɾiən; sɪvænə kəd nɑt kip ɪm fɹəm bɪkʌmɪŋ klæn tʃif fəɹ mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ.

Black Eyes leaped through, veiled and spears ready, and Maidens, also. As well try to drink sand as try to keep Maidens from being among the first. The rest of the Moshaine followed at a run, algai'd'siswai and wives and children, jumping down on the fly, craftsfolk and traders and gai'shain, most pulling heavily loaded packhorses and mules, near to six thousand altogether. His sept, his people. They still would be once he went to Rhuidean; Sevanna could not keep him from becoming clan chief for much longer.

skaʊts bɪɡæn spɹɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ɪmiɾiətli, waɪl ðə sɛp stɪl ɹʌʃt aʊɾ ə ðə hoʊl. loʊɝɪŋ ɪz veɪl, mɛɹɪk ʃaʊɾəd ɔɹɾɝz ðət sɛn ə skɹin ʌv ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ təwɔɹd ðə kɹɛsts ə ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ hɪlz waɪl ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ɹɪmeɪn kənsil bɪloʊ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tɛlɪŋ u əɹ wʌt leɪ bɪɑn ðoʊz hɪlz. ɹɪtʃ lænz, ðə wɛtləndɝ kleɪmd, bʌt ðɪs pɑɹt dɪd nɑt lʊk ɹɪtʃ tə hɪm.

Scouts began spreading out immediately, while the sept still rushed out of the hole. Lowering his veil, Maeric shouted orders that sent a screen of algai'd'siswai toward the crests of the surrounding hills while everyone else remained concealed below. There was no telling who or what lay beyond those hills. Rich lands, the wetlander claimed, but this part did not look rich to him.

ðə ɹʌʃ ə hɪz sɛp bɪkeɪm ə flʌɾ ʌv ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ hi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli tʃɹʌst, mɛn u hæd flɛd ðɛɹ oʊn klænz kəz ðeɪ dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɹænd ælθɹ wɑz tʃɹuli ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn. mɛɹɪk wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ i hɪmsɛlf bɪlivd, bʌɾ ə mæn dɪd nɑɾ əbændən sɛpt ən klæn. ðiz mɛn kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz mɛɝeɪɾɪn, ðə bɹʌðɝləs, ə fɪɾɪŋ neɪm, ən i hæd tu hʌndɝ -  ðə hoʊl sʌɾənli snæpt ɪndə ə vɝɾɪkəl slæʃ ə sɪlvɝ ðət slaɪs θɹu tɛn ə ðə bɹʌðɝləs. pisəz ə ðɛm fɛl ɑntu ðə sloʊp, ɑɹmz, lɛɡz. ðə fɹʌn hæf ʌv ə mæn slɪɾ ɔlmoʊs tə mɛɹɪks fit.

The rush of his sept became a flood of algai'd'siswai he did not really trust, men who had fled their own clans because they did not believe Rand al'Thor was truly the Car'a'carn. Maeric was not sure what he himself believed, but a man did not abandon sept and clan. These men called themselves Mera'din, the Brotherless, a fitting name, and he had two hundr -  The hole suddenly snapped into a vertical slash of silver that sliced through ten of the Brotherless. Pieces of them fell onto the slope, arms, legs. The front half of a man slid almost to Maeric's feet.

stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ðə hoʊl hæd bɪn, hi stæbd ət ðə ɹɛd spɑt wɪð ɪz θʌm. jusləs, hi nu, bʌt. . . . dæɹɪn, hɪz ɛldəst sʌn, wɑz wʌn ə ðə stoʊn dɑɡz weɪɾɪŋ əz ə ɹɪɹ ɡɑɹd. ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn ðə læs θɹu. sɹeɪl, hɪz ɛldəs dɔɾɝ, hæd ɹɪmeɪnd wɪð ðə stoʊn dɔɡ fəɹ hum ʃi wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp ðə spɪɹ.

Staring at the place where the hole had been, he stabbed at the red spot with his thumb. Useless, he knew, but. . . . Darin, his eldest son, was one of the Stone Dogs waiting as a rear guard. They would have been the last through. Suraile, his eldest daughter, had remained with the Stone Dog for whom she was thinking of giving up the spear.

hɪz aɪz mɛt dɪɹəlz, əz ɡɹin ən bjuɾəfəl əz ðə deɪ ʃi hæd leɪd ðə ɹiθ əɾ ɪz fit. ən θɹɛɾənd tə kʌɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ɪf i dɪd nɑt pɪk ɪɾ ʌp. "wi kən weɪt," hi sɛd sɔfli. ðə wɛtləndɝ hæd sɛd θɹi deɪz, bʌt meɪbi hi wɑz ɹɔŋ. hɪz θʌm stæb ðə ɹɛd spɑɾ əɡɛn. dɪɹəl nɑɾəd kɑmli; hi hoʊp ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ nid tə kɹaɪ ɪn wʌn ənʌðɝz ɑɹmz wʌns ðeɪ kəd bi əloʊn.

His eyes met Dyrele's, as green and beautiful as the day she had laid the wreath at his feet. And threatened to cut his throat if he did not pick it up. "We can wait," he said softly. The wetlander had said three days, but maybe he was wrong. His thumb stabbed the red spot again. Dyrele nodded calmly; he hoped there would be no need to cry in one another's arms once they could be alone.

eɪ meɪɾən keɪm skɪɾɝɪŋ daʊn ðə sloʊp fɹəm əbʌv, hɝidli loʊɝɪŋ əɹ veɪl, ən æktʃəli  bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹd. "mɛɹɪk," nɑaɪs sɛd, nɑɾ ivən weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə si hɝ, "ðɛɹ ɑɹ spɪɹz tə ði ist, oʊnli ə fju maɪlz ən ɹʌnɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əɾ ʌs. aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹn. ət list sɛvən əɹ eɪt θaʊzən ə ðɛm."

A Maiden came skittering down the slope from above, hurriedly lowering her veil, and actually breathing hard. "Maeric," Naeise said, not even waiting for him to see her, "there are spears to the east, only a few miles and running straight at us. I think they are Reyn. At least seven or eight thousand of them."

hi kəd si ʌðɝ ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ ɹʌnɪŋ təwɔɹd hɪm. ə jʌŋ bɹʌðɝ tə ði iɡəl, kɛɹɾɪn, slɪd tə ə stɑp, spikɪŋ əz sun əz mɛɹɪk sɔ hɪm. "aɪ si ju, mɛɹɪk. ðəɹ ɑɹ spɪɹz noʊ mɔɹ ðən faɪv maɪlz tə ðə nɔɹθ, ən wɛtləndɝz ɑn hɔɹsəz. pɝhæps tɛn θaʊzən ʌv itʃ. aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ɛni ʌv əs bɹoʊk ðə kɹɛst, bʌt səm ə ðə spɪɹz əv tɝn təwɔɹɾ ʌs."

He could see other algai'd'siswai running toward him. A young Brother to the Eagle, Cairdin, slid to a stop, speaking as soon as Maeric saw him. "I see you, Maeric. There are spears no more than five miles to the north, and wetlanders on horses. Perhaps ten thousand of each. I do not think any of us broke the crest, but some of the spears have turned toward us."

mɛɹɪk nu bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡɹɪzəld wɔɾɝ sikɝ neɪm lɝəɾ oʊpən ɪz maʊθ. "spɪɹz kʌmɪŋ oʊvɝ ə hɪl θɹi əɹ fɔɹ maɪlz tə ðə saʊθ. eɪt θaʊzən əɹ mɔɹ. səm ə ðɛm sɔ wʌn ə ðə bɔɪz." lɝəd nɛvɝ weɪstəd wɝdz, ən i wəd nɛvɝ seɪ wɪtʃ bɔɪ, hu ɪn tʃɹuθ kəd bi ɛniwʌn wɪθaʊt ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ, tə lɝəd.

Maeric knew before the grizzled Water Seeker named Laerad opened his mouth. "Spears coming over a hill three or four miles to the south. Eight thousand or more. Some of them saw one of the boys." Laerad never wasted words, and he would never say which boy, who in truth could be anyone without gray hair, to Laerad.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ weɪstɪŋ wɝdz, mɛɹɪk nu. "heɪməl!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. noʊ taɪm fəɹ pɹɑpɝ kɝɾəsi tə ə blæksmɪθ, iðɝ.

There was no time for wasting words, Maeric knew. "Hamal!" he shouted. No time for proper courtesy to a blacksmith, either.

ðə bɪɡ mæn nu sʌmθɪŋ wɑz ɹɔŋ; hi skɹæmbəld ʌp ðə sloʊp, laɪkli muvɪŋ fæstɝ ðən i hæd sɪns fɝs pɪkɪŋ ʌp ə hæmɝ.

The big man knew something was wrong; he scrambled up the slope, likely moving faster than he had since first picking up a hammer.

mɛɹɪk hændəɾ ɪm ðə stoʊn kjub. "ju mʌs pɹɛs ðə ɹɛd spɑɾ ən kip pɹɛsɪŋ ɪt, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt hæpənz, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ lɔŋ ɪt teɪks fəɹ ðət hoʊl tə oʊpən. ðəɾ ɪz ði oʊnli weɪ aʊt fəɹ ɛni ʌv ju." heɪməl nɑɾəd, bʌt mɛɹɪk dɪd nɑɾ ivən weɪt fəɹ ɪm tə seɪ ðəɾ i wʊd. heɪməl wəɾ ʌndɝstænd. mɛɹɪk tʌtʃt dɪɹəlz tʃik, kɛɹləs ə haʊ mɛni aɪz wɝ ɑn ðɛm. "ʃeɪɾ ə maɪ hɑɹt, jə mʌs pɹipɛɹ tə pʊɾ ɑn waɪt." hɝ hæn stʃɹeɪd təwɔɹd ðə hɪlt ə hɝ bɛl naɪf - ʃi hæd bɪn ə meɪɾən wən ʃi meɪɾ ɪz ɹiθ - bʌɾ i ʃʊk ɪz hɛd fɝmli. "ju mʌs lɪv, waɪf, ɹufməstʃɹəs, tə hoʊl təɡɛðɝ wʌt ɹɪmeɪnz." nɑɾɪŋ, ʃi pɹɛs fɪŋɡɝz tə hɪz tʃik. hi wɑz əstɑnɪʃt; ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn vɛɹi ɹɪzɝvd ɪn pʌblɪk.

Maeric handed him the stone cube. "You must press the red spot and keep pressing it, no matter what happens, no matter how long it takes for that hole to open. That is the only way out for any of you." Hamal nodded, but Maeric did not even wait for him to say that he would. Hamal would understand. Maeric touched Dyrele's cheek, careless of how many eyes were on them. "Shade of my heart, you must prepare to put on white." Her hand strayed toward the hilt of her belt knife - she had been a Maiden when she made his wreath - but he shook his head firmly. "You must live, wife, roofmistress, to hold together what remains." Nodding, she pressed fingers to his cheek. He was astonished; she had always been very reserved in public.

ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz veɪl, mɛɹɪk ʃʌvd wʌn spɪɹ haɪ əbʌv ɪz hɛd. "mɑʃeɪn!" hi ɹɔɹd. "wi dæns!"

Raising his veil, Maeric shoved one spear high above his head. "Moshaine!" he roared. "We dance!"

ʌp ðə sloʊp ðeɪ fɑloʊd hɪm, mɛn ən meɪɾənz, nɪɹli ə θaʊzən stʃɹɔŋ kaʊntɪŋ ðə bɹʌðɝləs. pɝhæps ðeɪ kəd bi kaʊntəɾ əmʌŋ ðə sɛpt. ʌp ðə sloʊp ən wɛst; ðət weɪ leɪ ðə nɪɹəst ən ðə fjuəst. pɝhæps ðeɪ maɪt baɪ ɪnʌf taɪm, ðoʊ hi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli bɪliv ðæt. hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ sɪvænə hæd noʊn ə ðɪs. ɑ, ðə wɝl hæd ɡɹoʊn vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ sɪns ɹænd ælθɹ keɪm. səm θɪŋz kəd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, ðoʊ. læfɪŋ, hi bɪɡæn tə sɪŋ.

Up the slope they followed him, men and Maidens, nearly a thousand strong counting the Brotherless. Perhaps they could be counted among the sept. Up the slope and west; that way lay the nearest and the fewest. Perhaps they might buy enough time, though he did not really believe that. He wondered whether Sevanna had known of this. Ah, the world had grown very strange since Rand al'Thor came. Some things could not change, though. Laughing, he began to sing.

"wɑʃ ðə spɪɹz, waɪl ðə sʌn klaɪmz haɪ.

"Wash the spears, while the sun climbs high.

wɑʃ ðə spɪɹz, waɪl ðə sʌn klaɪmz haɪ.

Wash the spears, while the sun climbs high.

wɑʃ ðə spɪɹz, waɪl ðə sʌn fɔlz loʊ.

Wash the spears, while the sun falls low.

wɑʃ ðə spɪɹz; hu fɪɹz tə daɪ?

Wash the spears; who fears to die?

wɑʃ ðə spɪɹz; noʊ wʌn aɪ noʊ!"

Wash the spears; no one I know!"

sɪŋɪŋ, ðə mɑʃeɪn ʃeɪɾoʊ ɹæn tə dæns ðɛɹ dɛθs.

Singing, the Moshaine Shaido ran to dance their deaths.

fɹaʊnɪŋ, ɡɹeɪndəl wɑtʃt ðə ɡeɪtweɪ kloʊs bɪhaɪn ðə læst ə ðə dʒuməaɪ ʃeɪɾoʊ. ðə dʒuməaɪ ən ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni waɪz wʌnz. ənlaɪk wɪð ði ʌðɝz, sɑmaɪl hæd nɑt sɪmpli nɑɾɪd ðɪs wɛb soʊ ɪt wəd fɔl əpɑɹɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli. ət list, ʃi əsumd i hɛld ɪt tə ðə læst; ðə kloʊzɪŋ, ɹaɪɾ ɑn ðə hilz ə ðə læs bɹaʊn-ænd-ɡɹeɪ-klæd mɛn, wɑz tu fɔɹtuɪɾəs ʌðɝwaɪz. læfɪŋ, sɑmaɪl tɔst əweɪ ðə bæɡ, stɪl hoʊldɪŋ ə fju ʌv ðoʊz jusləs bɪts ə stoʊn. hɝ oʊn ɛmpti sæk wɑz lɔŋ sɪns dɪskɑɹɾɪd. ðə sʌn sæt loʊ bɪhaɪn ðə maʊntənz tə ðə wɛst, hæf ʌv ə ɡloʊɪŋ ɹɛd bɔl.

Frowning, Graendal watched the gateway close behind the last of the Jumai Shaido. The Jumai and a great many Wise Ones. Unlike with the others, Sammael had not simply knotted this web so it would fall apart eventually. At least, she assumed he held it to the last; the closing, right on the heels of the last brown-and-gray-clad men, was too fortuitous otherwise. Laughing, Sammael tossed away the bag, still holding a few of those useless bits of stone. Her own empty sack was long since discarded. The sun sat low behind the mountains to the west, half of a glowing red ball.

"wʌn ə ðiz deɪz," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "ju wɪl bi tu smɑɹt fəɹ jəɹ oʊn ɡʊd. ə ful bɑks, sɑmaɪl? səpoʊz wʌn ə ðɛm hæɾ ʌndɝstʊd?"

"One of these days," she said dryly, "you will be too smart for your own good. A fool box, Sammael? Suppose one of them had understood?"

"nʌn dɪd," hi sɛd sɪmpli, bʌɾ i kɛpt ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hænz təɡɛðɝ ən stɛɹɪŋ ət wɛɹ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ hæd bɪn. əɹ meɪbi ət sʌmθɪŋ bɪɑnd. hi stɪl hɛl ðə mɪɹɝ ə mɪsts, ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm ði ɪluʒən ʌv æɾəd haɪt. ʃi hæd dʒɹɑp hɝz əz sun əz ðə ɡeɪtweɪ kloʊzd.

"None did," he said simply, but he kept rubbing his hands together and staring at where the gateway had been. Or maybe at something beyond. He still held the Mirror of Mists, giving him the illusion of added height. She had dropped hers as soon as the gateway closed.

"wɛl, jə sɝɾənli mænədʒ tə pʊɾ ə pænɪk ɪndə ðɛm." ɝaʊn əm leɪ ði ɛvəɾəns: ə fju loʊ tɛns stɪl stændɪŋ, blæŋkəts, ə kʊkpɑt, ə ɹæɡ dɑl, ɔl sɔɹts ə ɹʌbɪʃ laɪɪŋ wɛɹ ɪt hæd fɔlən. "wɛɹ dɪd jə sɛn ðɛm? sʌmwɛɹ əhɛɾ ʌv ælθɹz ɑɹmi, aɪ səpoʊz?"

"Well, you certainly managed to put a panic into them." Around them lay the evidence: a few low tents still standing, blankets, a cookpot, a rag doll, all sorts of rubbish lying where it had fallen. "Where did you send them? Somewhere ahead of al'Thor's army, I suppose?"

"sʌm," hi sɛɾ æbsənli. "ɪnʌf." hɪz stɛɹɪŋ ɪntʃɹəspɛkʃən vænɪʃt əbɹʌpli, ən ɪz dɪsɡaɪz əz wɛl. ðə skɑɹ əkɹɔs ɪz feɪs simd ɪspɛʃli lɪvɪd. "ɪnʌf tə kɑz tʃɹʌbəl, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli wɪð ðɛɹ waɪz wʌnz tʃænəlɪŋ, bʌt nɑt soʊ mɛni ðəɾ ɛniwʌn wɪl səspɛk mi. ðə ɹɛst ɑɹ skæɾɝd fɹəm ɪljən tə ɡildən. əz tə haʊ əɹ waɪ? meɪbi ælθɹ dɪɾ ɪt, fəɹ ɪz oʊn ɹizənz, bʌɾ aɪ sɝɾənli wʊdn əv weɪstəd moʊst ə ðɛm ɪf ɪt wɑz maɪ wɝk, naʊ wəɾ aɪ?" hi læft əɡɛn; kɑɾ ʌp ɪn ɪz oʊn bɹɪljəns.

"Some," he said absently. "Enough." His staring introspection vanished abruptly, and his disguise as well. The scar across his face seemed especially livid. "Enough to cause trouble, particularly with their Wise Ones channeling, but not so many that anyone will suspect me. The rest are scattered from Illian to Ghealdan. As to how or why? Maybe al'Thor did it, for his own reasons, but I certainly wouldn't have wasted most of them if it was my work, now would I?" He laughed again; caught up in his own brilliance.

ʃi ədʒʌstəd ðə bɑɾəs ə hɝ dʒɹɛs tə kʌvɝ ə stɑɹt. kəmpiɾɪŋ ðət weɪ wɑz ɹɪmɑɹkəbli sɪli - ʃi hæd toʊl hɝsɛlf ðət tɛn θaʊzən taɪmz, ən nɛvɝ lɪsənd wʌns - ɹɪmɑɹkəbli sɪli, ən naʊ ðə dʒɹɛs fɛlt əz ɪf ɪt maɪt fɔl ɔf. wɪtʃ hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð əɹ stɑɹt. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ sɪvænə hæd teɪkən ɛvɹi ʃeɪɾoʊ wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl wɪð hɝ. wɑz ɪt faɪnəli taɪm tə əbændən hɪm? ɪf ʃi θɹu hɝsɛlf ɑn dɪmɑndɝdz mɝsi. . . .

She adjusted the bodice of her dress to cover a start. Competing that way was remarkably silly - she had told herself that ten thousand times, and never listened once - remarkably silly, and now the dress felt as if it might fall off. Which had nothing to do with her start. He did not know Sevanna had taken every Shaido woman who could channel with her. Was it finally time to abandon him? If she threw herself on Demandred's mercy. . . .

əz ɪf ɹiɾɪŋ əɹ θɔts, hi sɛd, "jɔɹ taɪd tə mi əz taɪtli əz maɪ bɛlt, ɡɹeɪndəl." ə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpənd, ɹɪvilɪŋ ɪz pɹaɪvət ɹumz ɪn ɪljən. "ðə tʃɹuθ dʌzn mæɾɝ ɛnimɔɹ, ɪf ɪɾ ɛvɝ hæz. jə ɹaɪz wɪð mi, əɹ fɔl wɪð mi. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd ɹɪwɔɹdz səksɛs, ən hiz nɛvɝ kɛɹd haʊ ɪt wɑz ətʃivd."

As if reading her thoughts, he said, "You're tied to me as tightly as my belt, Graendal." A gateway opened, revealing his private rooms in Illian. "The truth doesn't matter anymore, if it ever has. You rise with me, or fall with me. The Great Lord rewards success, and he's never cared how it was achieved."

"æz jə seɪ," ʃi toʊl hɪm. dɪmɑndɝd hæd noʊ mɝsi. ən sɛmi-ɹədʒ. . . . "aɪ ɹaɪz əɹ fɔl wɪð ju." stɪl, sʌmθɪŋ wəɾ əv tə bi wɝkt aʊt. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd ɹɪwɔɹɾɪd səksɛs, bʌt ʃi wəd nɑt bi pʊl daʊn ɪf sɑmaɪl feɪld. ʃi oʊpən ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə hɝ pæləs ɪn ɑɹæd dumən, tə ðə lɔŋ kɑləmd ɹum wɛɹ ʃi kəd si hɝ pɛts fɹɑlɪkɪŋ ɪn ðə pul. "bʌt wʌɾ ɪf ælθɹ kʌmz æftɝ jə hɪmsɛlf? wʌt ðɛn?"

"As you say," she told him. Demandred had no mercy. And Semi-rhage. . . . "I rise or fall with you." Still, something would have to be worked out. The Great Lord rewarded success, but she would not be pulled down if Sammael failed. She opened a gateway to her palace in Arad Doman, to the long columned room where she could see her pets frolicking in the pool. "But what if al'Thor comes after you himself? What then?"

"ælθɹ ɪzənt ɡoʊɪŋ æftɝ ɛniwʌn," sɑmaɪl læft. "ɔl aɪ hæv tə də ɪz weɪt." stɪl læfɪŋ, hi stɛpt ɪndə hɪz ɡeɪtweɪ ən lɛɾ ɪt kloʊs.

"Al'Thor isn't going after anyone," Sammael laughed. "All I have to do is wait." Still laughing, he stepped into his gateway and let it close.

ðə mɹdʒɹɑl muv fɹəm ðə dipɝ ʃædoʊz, bɪkʌmɪŋ vɪzəbəl. ɪn ɪts aɪz, ðə ɡeɪtweɪz hæd lɛft ə ɹɛzədu - θɹi pætʃəz ʌv ɡloʊɪŋ mɪst. ɪt kəd nɑt tɛl wʌn floʊ fɹəm ənʌðɝ, bʌɾ ɪt kəd dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃ seɪɾɪn fɹəm seɪaɪdɑɹ baɪ ðə smɛl. seɪɾɪn smɛld laɪk ðə ʃɑɹp ɛdʒ ʌv ə naɪf, ðə pɔɪn ʌv ə θɔɹn. seɪaɪdɑɹ smɛl sɑft, bʌt laɪk sʌmθɪŋ ðət wəd ɡɹoʊ hɑɹɾɝ ðə hɑɹɾɝ ɪt wɑz pɹɛst. noʊ ʌðɝ mɹdʒɹɑl kəd smɛl ðət dɪfɝəns. ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹən wɑz laɪk noʊ ʌðɝ mɹdʒɹɑl.

The Myrddraal moved from the deeper shadows, becoming visible. In its eyes, the gateways had left a residue - three patches of glowing mist. It could not tell one flow from another, but it could distinguish saidin from saidar by the smell. Saidin smelled like the sharp edge of a knife, the point of a thorn. Saidar smelled soft, but like something that would grow harder the harder it was pressed. No other Myrddraal could smell that difference. Shaidar Haran was like no other Myrddraal.

pɪkɪŋ ʌp ə dɪskɑɹɾɪd spɪɹ, ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹən juzd ɪt tə ʌpɛn ðə bæɡ sɑmaɪl hæd dɪskɑɹɾɪd, ən ðən tə stɝ ðə bɪts ə stoʊn ðət fɛl aʊt. mʌtʃ wɑz hæpənɪŋ aʊtsaɪd ðə plæn. wəd ðiz ɪvɛns tʃɝn keɪɑs, ɔɹ. . . .

Picking up a discarded spear, Shaidar Haran used it to upend the bag Sammael had discarded, and then to stir the bits of stone that fell out. Much was happening outside the plan. Would these events churn chaos, or. . . .

æŋɡɹi blæk fleɪmz ɹeɪs daʊn ðə spɪɹ hæft fɹəm ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹənz hænd, ðə hæn ə ðə hæn ə ðə ʃædoʊ. ɪn ən ɪnstən ðə wʊɾən hæft wɑz tʃɑɹɾ ən twɪstəd; ðə spɪɹhɛd dʒɹɑpt ɔf. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl lɛt ðə blækən stɪk fɔl ən dʌstɪd sʊt fɹəm ɪts pɑm. ɪf sɑmaɪl sɝv keɪɑs, ðən ɔl wɑz wɛl. ɪf nɑt. . . .

Angry black flames raced down the spear haft from Shaidar Haran's hand, the hand of the Hand of the Shadow. In an instant the wooden haft was charred and twisted; the spearhead dropped off. The Myrddraal let the blackened stick fall and dusted soot from its palm. If Sammael served chaos, then all was well. If not. . . .

ə sʌɾən eɪk klaɪm ðə bæk ʌv ɪts nɛk; ə feɪnt wiknəs wɑʃt əlɔŋ ɪts lɪmz. tu lɔŋ əweɪ fɹəm ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. ðət taɪ hæd tə bi sɛvɝd sʌmhaʊ. wɪð ə snɑɹl, ɪt tɝn tə faɪn ði ɛdʒ ə ʃædoʊ ðəɾ ɪt niɾəd. ðə deɪ wɑz kʌmɪŋ. ɪt wəd kʌm.

A sudden ache climbed the back of its neck; a faint weakness washed along its limbs. Too long away from Shayol Ghul. That tie had to be severed somehow. With a snarl, it turned to find the edge of shadow that it needed. The day was coming. It would come.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾiwʌn


CHAPTER 41

eɪ kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz


A Crown of Swords

tɔsɪŋ, ɹænd dʒɹimd, waɪl dʒɹimz wɛɹ i ɑɹɡjud wɪð pɛɹɪn ən bɛɡd mæt tə faɪn ɪleɪn, wɛɹ kʌlɝz flæʃt dʒʌs bɪɑn saɪɾ ən pdən feɪn lɛpt əɾ ɪm wɪð ə flæʃɪŋ bleɪd, ən səmtaɪmz i θɔɾ i hɝɾ ə vɔɪs moʊnɪŋ fəɹ ə dɛd wʊmən ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ə fɑɡ, dʒɹimz wɛɹ i tʃɹaɪd tə ɪkspleɪn hɪmsɛlf tə ɪleɪn, tə eɪvinhə, tə mɪn, tə ɔl θɹi ət wʌns, ən ivən mɪn lʊkt əɾ ɪm wɪð skɔɹn.

Tossing, Rand dreamed, wild dreams where he argued with Perrin and begged Mat to find Elayne, where colors flashed just beyond sight and Padan Fain leaped at him with a flashing blade, and sometimes he thought he heard a voice moaning for a dead woman in the heart of a fog, dreams where he tried to explain himself to Elayne, to Aviendha, to Min, to all three at once, and even Min looked at him with scorn.

". . . nɑt tə bi dɪstɝbd!" kædzueɪnz vɔɪs. pɑɹɾ ə hɪz dʒɹimz?

". . . not to be disturbed!" Cadsuane's voice. Part of his dreams?

ðə vɔɪs fɹaɪɾənd hɪm; ɪn ɪz dʒɹim i ʃaʊɾəd fəɹ luz θɝɪn, ən ðə saʊn ɛkoʊd θɹu ə θɪk mɪst wɛɹ ʃeɪps muvd ən pipəl ən hɔɹsəz daɪd skɹimɪŋ, ə fɑɡ wɛɹ kædzueɪn fɑloʊɾ ɪm ɪmplækəbli waɪl i ɹæn, pæntɪŋ. ɑlɑnə tʃɹaɪd tə suð hɪm, bʌt ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪɾ ə kædzueɪn, tu; hi kəd fil əɹ fɪɹ əz stʃɹɔŋli əz ɪz oʊn. hɪz hɛd hɝt. ən ɪz saɪd; ði oʊl skɑɹ wɑz faɪɝ. hi fɛl seɪɾɪn. sʌmwʌn hɛl seɪɾɪn. wɑz ɪt hɪm? hi dɪd nɑt noʊ. hi stʃɹʌɡəl tə weɪk.

The voice frightened him; in his dream he shouted for Lews Therin, and the sound echoed through a thick mist where shapes moved and people and horses died screaming, a fog where Cadsuane followed him implacably while he ran, panting. Alanna tried to soothe him, but she was afraid of Cadsuane, too; he could feel her fear as strongly as his own. His head hurt. And his side; the old scar was fire. He felt saidin. Someone held saidin. Was it him? He did not know. He struggled to wake.

"jul kɪl hɪm!" mɪn ʃaʊɾəd. "aɪ woʊn lɛt jə kɪl hɪm!"

"You'll kill him!" Min shouted. "I won't let you kill him!"

hɪz aɪz oʊpənd, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp əɾ əɹ feɪs. nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ʃi hæɾ ɪz hɛd ɹæpt ɪn əɹ ɑɹmz ən wɑz ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət sʌmwʌn əweɪ fɹəm ðə bɛd. hɝ aɪz wɝ ɹɛd. ʃi hæd bɪn kɹaɪɪŋ, bʌt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ. jɛs, hi wɑz ɪn ɪz oʊn bɛd, ɪn ɪz ɹumz ɪn ðə sʌn pæləs. hi kəd si ə hɛvi skwɛɹ blækwʊd bɪdpoʊst sɛt wɪð wɛdʒəz ʌv aɪvɝi. koʊtləs ɪn ə kɹim sɪlk blaʊs, mɪn leɪ kɝld ɝaʊn ɪm pɹoʊtɛktɪvli, ətɑp ðə lɪnən ʃit ðət kʌvɝɾ ɪm tə ðə nɛk. ɑlɑnə wɑz əfɹeɪd; ðət leɪ ʃɪvɝɪŋ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd. əfɹeɪd fəɹ hɪm. fəɹ səm ɹizən, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ə ðæt.

His eyes opened, staring up at her face. Not looking at him, she had his head wrapped in her arms and was glaring at someone away from the bed. Her eyes were red. She had been crying, but no longer. Yes, he was in his own bed, in his rooms in the Sun Palace. He could see a heavy square blackwood bedpost set with wedges of ivory. Coatless in a cream silk blouse, Min lay curled around him protectively, atop the linen sheet that covered him to the neck. Alanna was afraid; that lay shivering in the back of his head. Afraid for him. For some reason, he was sure of that.

"aɪ θɪŋk hiz əweɪk, mɪn," æmɪz sɛd dʒɛnli.

"I think he is awake, Min," Amys said gently.

mɪn lʊk daʊn, ən əɹ feɪs, fɹeɪmd ɪn dɑɹk ɹɪŋləts, bimd wɪð ə sʌɾən smaɪl.

Min looked down, and her face, framed in dark ringlets, beamed with a sudden smile.

kɛɹfəli - kəz i fɛlt wik - hi ɹimuvd əɹ ɑɹmz ən sæɾ ʌp. hɪz hɛd wɝl dɪtsəli, bʌɾ i fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf nɑt tə laɪ bæk əɡɛn. hɪz bɛd wɑz ɹɪŋd.

Carefully - because he felt weak - he removed her arms and sat up. His head whirled dizzily, but he forced himself not to lie back again. His bed was ringed.

tə wʌn saɪd stʊɾ æmɪz, flæŋk baɪ bɛɹə ən kaɪɹunə. æmɪz' tu-juθfəl fitʃɝz bɔɹ noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən əɾ ɔl, bʌt ʃi bɹʌʃt bæk əɹ lɔŋ waɪt hɛɹ ən ʃɪftəɾ əɹ dɑɹk ʃɔl əz ðoʊ taɪɾiɪŋ hɝsɛlf æftɝ ə stʃɹʌɡəl. aʊtwɝdli ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ sɝin, jɛt wɪð dɪtɝmən sɝɛnəɾi, ə kwin ɹɛɾi tə faɪt fəɹ əɹ θɹoʊn, ə kʌntʃɹi wʊmən ɹɛɾi tə faɪt fəɹ əɹ fɑɹm. ɑdli, ɪf i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin θɹi pipəl stæn təɡɛðɝ - ən nɑt dʒʌs fɪzɪkəli - ɪt wɑz ðoʊz θɹi, ʃoʊldɝ-tə-ʃoʊldɝ əz wʌn.

To one side stood Amys, flanked by Bera and Kiruna. Amys' too-youthful features bore no expression at all, but she brushed back her long white hair and shifted her dark shawl as though tidying herself after a struggle. Outwardly the two Aes Sedai were serene, yet with determined serenity, a queen ready to fight for her throne, a country woman ready to fight for her farm. Oddly, if he had ever seen three people stand together - and not just physically - it was those three, shoulder-to-shoulder as one.

ɑn ði ɑpəzət saɪɾ ə ðə bɛd, sæmɪtsu, wɪð ðoʊz sɪlvɝ bɛlz ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, ən ə slɛndɝ sɪstɝ wɪð θɪk blæk aɪbɹaʊz ən ə waɪld lʊk tə hɝ ɹeɪvən hɛɹ stʊd wɪð kædzueɪn, hu hæɾ əɹ fɪsts plæntəɾ ɑn əɹ hɪps. sæmɪtsu ən ðə ɹeɪvən-hɛɹɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɔɹ jɛloʊ-fɹɪnd ʃɔlz ən hæd dʒɔz sɛɾ ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz fɝmli əz bɛɹə əɹ kaɪɹunə, jɛt kædzueɪnz stɝn stɛɹ meɪɾ ɔl fɔɹ əpɪɹ hɛzɪɾənt. ðə tu ɡɹups ʌv wɪmən wɝ nɑt stɛɹɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ, bʌɾ ət ðə mɛn.

On the opposite side of the bed, Samitsu, with those silver bells in her hair, and a slender sister with thick black eyebrows and a wild look to her raven hair stood with Cadsuane, who had her fists planted on her hips. Samitsu and the raven-haired Aes Sedai wore yellow-fringed shawls and had jaws set every bit as firmly as Bera or Kiruna, yet Cadsuane's stern stare made all four appear hesitant. The two groups of women were not staring at one another, but at the men.

ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə bɛd wɝ dæʃivə wɪð ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹɾ ən ɹɛd-ænd-ɡoʊl dʒɹæɡən ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ɪz kɑlɝ, ən flɪn ən nɛɹɪʃmə, ɔl ɡɹɪm-feɪst, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɑtʃ ðə wɪmən ɑn boʊθ saɪdz ə ðə bɛɾ ət wʌns. dʒoʊnən ædli stʊd bɪsaɪd ðɛm, hɪz blæk koʊt lʊkɪŋ sɪŋʒd ɑn wʌn sliv. seɪɾɪn fɪld ɔl fɔɹ mɛn, tə oʊvɝfloʊɪŋ ɪt simd. dæʃivə hɛld ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz ɹænd kəd hæv. ɹænd lʊk tə ædli, hu nɑɾəd slaɪtli.

At the foot of the bed were Dashiva with the silver sword and red-and-gold Dragon glittering his collar, and Flinn and Narishma, all grim-faced, trying to watch the women on both sides of the bed at once. Jonan Adley stood beside them, his black coat looking singed on one sleeve. Saidin filled all four men, to overflowing it seemed. Dashiva held almost as much as Rand could have. Rand looked to Adley, who nodded slightly.

əbɹʌpli, ɹænd ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ bɪniθ ðə ʃit ðət hæd fɔlən tə hɪz weɪst, ən nʌθɪŋ əbʌv ɪksɛpt ə bændɪdʒ waʊn ɝaʊn ɪz mɪɾəl. "haʊ lɔŋ əv aɪ bɪn əslip?" hi æskt. "haʊ ɪz ɪɾ ɪm əlaɪv?" hi tʌtʃt ðə peɪl bændɪdʒ dʒɪnʒɝli. "feɪnz dæɡɝ keɪm fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. wʌns aɪ sɔ ɪt kɪl ə mæn ɪn moʊməns wɪð ə skɹætʃ. hi daɪd fæst, ən i daɪd hɑɹd." dæʃivə mʌɾɝd ə kɝs wɪð pdən feɪnz neɪm ɪn ɪt.

Abruptly, Rand realized that he was not wearing anything beneath the sheet that had fallen to his waist, and nothing above except a Bandage wound around his middle. "How long have I been asleep?" he asked. "How is it I'm alive?" He touched the pale Bandage gingerly. "Fain's dagger came from Shadar Logoth. Once I saw it kill a man in moments with a scratch. He died fast, and he died hard." Dashiva muttered a curse with Padan Fain's name in it.

sæmɪtsu ən ði ʌðɝ jɛloʊ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd stɑɹɾəld lʊks, bʌt kædzueɪn mɪɹli nɑɾəd, ðə ɡoʊldən ɔɹnəməns ɝaʊn əɹ aɪɝn-ɡɹeɪ bʌn sweɪɪŋ. "jɛs; ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ; ðət wəɾ ɪkspleɪn sɛvɹəl mæɾɝz. jə kən θæŋk sæmɪtsu ðət jəɹ əlaɪv, ən mæstɝ flɪn." ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡlæns təwɔɹd ði ə ɡɹɪzəl mæn wɪð ɪz fɹɪnʒ ʌv waɪt hɛɹ, bʌɾ i ɡɹɪn əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ə baʊ; ɪn tʃɹuθ, sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ðə jɛloʊz dɪd nɑd tə hɪm. "æn kɔɹəl, hɪɹ, ʌv kɔɹs," kædzueɪn wɛn ɑn. "itʃ əz dʌn ə pɑɹt, ɪnkluɾɪŋ səm θɪŋz aɪ θɪŋk əv nɑt bɪn dʌn sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ." hɝ vɔɪs tɝnd ɡɹɪm. "wɪθaʊɾ ɔl θɹi, jə wəd bi dɛd baɪ naʊ. jə stɪl meɪ daɪ ənlɛs jə lɛt jɝsɛlf bi ɡaɪɾəd. jə mʌst ɹɛst, wɪθaʊɾ ɪɡzɝʃən." hɪz stʌmək ɹʌmbəl sʌɾənli, laʊdli, ən ʃi æɾəd, "wiv oʊnli bɪn eɪbəl tə ɡɛɾ ə lɪɾəl wɔɾɝ ən bɹɔθ daʊn jə sɪns jə wɝ hɝt. tu deɪz ɪz ə lɔŋ taɪm wɪθaʊt fud fəɹ ə sɪk mæn."

Samitsu and the other Yellow exchanged startled looks, but Cadsuane merely nodded, the golden ornaments around her iron-gray bun swaying. "Yes; Shadar Logoth; that would explain several matters. You can thank Samitsu that you're alive, and Master Flinn." She did not glance toward the A grizzled man with his fringe of white hair, but he grinned as though she had given him a bow; in truth, surprisingly, the Yellows did nod to him. "And Corele, here, of course," Cadsuane went on. "Each has done a part, including some things I think have not been done since the Breaking." Her voice turned grim. "Without all three, you would be dead by now. You still may die unless you let yourself be guided. You must rest, without exertion." His stomach rumbled suddenly, loudly, and she added, "We've only been able to get a little water and broth down you since you were hurt. Two days is a long time without food for a sick man."

tu deɪz. oʊnli tu. hi əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ əɾ ædli. "aɪm ɡɛɾɪŋ ʌp," hi sɛd.

Two days. Only two. He avoided looking at Adley. "I'm getting up," he said.

"aɪ woʊn lɛɾ əm kɪl ju, ʃifɝɾɝ," mɪn sɛd wɪð ən ɑbstənət ɡlɪn ɪn əɹ aɪz, "æn aɪ woʊn lɛt jə kɪl ju, iðɝ." ʃi pʊɾ əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz əz ɪf tə hoʊld ɪm wɛɹ i wɑz.

"I won't let them kill you, sheepherder," Min said with an obstinate glint in her eyes, "and I won't let you kill you, either." She put her arms around his shoulders as if to hold him where he was.

"ɪf ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn wɪʃɪz tə ɹaɪz," æmɪz sɛd flætli, "aɪ wɪl əv nændɛɹə bɹɪŋ ɪn ðə meɪɾənz fɹəm ðə kɔɹəɾɝ. soʊmɑɹə ən ɪneɪlə wɪl bi ɪspɛʃli hæpi tə ɡɪv ɪm dʒʌs ði əsɪstəns i nidz." ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ maʊθ twɪtʃt təwɔɹɾ ə smaɪl. wʌns ə meɪɾən hɝsɛlf, ʃi nu kloʊs ɪnʌf tə ɛvɹiθɪŋ ə ðət sɪtʃueɪʃən. niðɝ kaɪɹunə nɔɹ bɛɹə smaɪld; ðeɪ fɹaʊn əɾ ɪm əz əɾ ən æbsəlut ful.

"If the Car'a'carn wishes to rise," Amys said flatly, "I will have Nandera bring in the Maidens from the corridor. Somara and Enaila will be especially happy to give him just the assistance he needs." The corners of her mouth twitched toward a smile. Once a Maiden herself, she knew close enough to everything of that situation. Neither Kiruna nor Bera smiled; they frowned at him as at an absolute fool.

"bɔɪ," kædzueɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "aɪv ɔlɹɛɾi sin mɔɹ ə jəɹ hɛɹləs bɑtɑmtʃiks ðən aɪ wɪʃ tə, bʌɾ ɪf jə wɑnə flɔn əm ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɔl sɪks ʌv ʌs, pɝhæps sʌmwʌn wɪl ɛndʒɔɪ ðə ʃoʊ. ɪf jə fɔl ɑn jəɹ feɪs, ðoʊ, aɪ meɪ dʒʌst spæŋk jə bɪfɔɹ aɪ pʊt jə bæk tə bɛd." baɪ sæmɪtsuz feɪs, ən kɔɹəlz, ðeɪ wəd bi hæpi tə əsɪs hɝ.

"Boy," Cadsuane said dryly, "I've already seen more of your hairless bottomcheeks than I wish to, but if you want to flaunt them in front of all six of us, perhaps someone will enjoy the show. If you fall on your face, though, I may just spank you before I put you back to bed." By Samitsu's face, and Corele's, they would be happy to assist her.

nɛɹɪʃmə ən ædli stɛɹɾ ət kædzueɪn ɪn ʃɑk, waɪl flɪn tʌɡd əɾ ɪz koʊɾ əz ðoʊ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð hɪmsɛlf. dæʃivə, ðoʊ, bɑɹkt ə ɹʌf læf. "ɪf jə wɑn əs tə klɪɹ ðə wɪmən aʊt. . . ." ðə pleɪn-feɪs mæn bɪɡæn pɹipɛɹɪŋ floʊz; nɑt ʃilz, bʌt kɑmplɛks wivz ə spɪɹəɾ ən faɪɝ ðət ɹænd səspɛktəd wəd pʊɾ ɛniwʌn ðeɪ wɝ leɪɾ ɑn ɪn tu mʌtʃ peɪn tə θɪŋk ə tʃænəlɪŋ.

Narishma and Adley stared at Cadsuane in shock, while Flinn tugged at his coat as though arguing with himself. Dashiva, though, barked a rough laugh. "If you want us to clear the women out. . . ." The plain-faced man began preparing flows; not shields, but complex weaves of Spirit and Fire that Rand suspected would put anyone they were laid on in too much pain to think of channeling.

"noʊ," hi sɛd kwɪkli. bɛɹə ən kaɪɹunə wəɾ oʊbeɪ ə sɪmpəl ɔɹɾɝ tə ɡoʊ, ən ɪf kɔɹəl ən sæmɪtsu hæd hɛlp kip ɪm əlaɪv, hi oʊɾ əm mɔɹ ðən peɪn. bʌɾ ɪf kædzueɪn θɔt neɪkədnəs wəd hoʊld ɪm wɛɹ i wɑz, ʃi wɑz ɪn fəɹ ə sɝpɹaɪz. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ðə meɪɾənz hæd lɛft ɪm ɛni mɑɾəsti əɾ ɔl. wɪð ə smaɪl fəɹ mɪn, hi ənwaʊn əɹ ɑɹmz, tɔs bæk ðə ʃit, ən klaɪmd aʊɾ ə ðə bɛɾ ɑn æmɪz' saɪd.

"No," he said quickly. Bera and Kiruna would obey a simple order to go, and if Corele and Samitsu had helped keep him alive, he owed them more than pain. But if Cadsuane thought nakedness would hold him where he was, she was in for a surprise. He was not sure the Maidens had left him any modesty at all. With a smile for Min, he unwound her arms, tossed back the sheet, and climbed out of the bed on Amys' side.

ðə waɪz wʌnz maʊθ taɪɾənd; hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊst si hɝ kənsɪɾɝɪŋ wɛðɝ tə kɔl fəɹ ðə meɪɾənz. bɛɹə ɡeɪv æmɪz ən æɡənaɪzd, ənsɝɾən lʊk, waɪl kaɪɹunə hɝidli tɝn əɹ bæk, hɝ tʃiks dɑɹkənɪŋ. sloʊli hi wɔk tə ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb. sloʊli kəz i ɪkspɛktəɾ i maɪt ɡɪv kædzueɪn əɹ tʃæns ɪf i tʃɹaɪd tə muv kwɪkli.

The Wise One's mouth tightened; he could almost see her considering whether to call for the Maidens. Bera gave Amys an agonized, uncertain look, while Kiruna hurriedly turned her back, her cheeks darkening. Slowly he walked to the wardrobe. Slowly because he expected he might give Cadsuane her chance if he tried to move quickly.

"fɔ!" ʃi mʌɾɝd bɪhaɪn hɪm. "aɪ vaʊ, aɪ ʃəd smæk ðə stʌbɝn bɔɪz bɑɾəm." sʌmwʌn ɡɹʌntɪd wʌt maɪɾ əv bɪn əɡɹimənt, əɹ dʒʌs dɪsəpɹuvəl ʌv wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ.

"Phaw!" she muttered behind him. "I vow, I should smack the stubborn boy's bottom." Someone grunted what might have been agreement, or just disapproval of what he was doing.

"ɑ, bʌɾ ɪts sətʃ ə pɹɪɾi bɑɾəm, naʊ ɪzən ɪt ðæt?" sʌmwʌn ɛls sɛɾ ɪn ə lɪltɪŋ mʊɹændiən æksɛnt. ðət mʌst əv bɪn kɔɹəl.

"Ah, but it's such a pretty bottom, now isn't it that?" someone else said in a lilting Murandian accent. That must have been Corele.

ə ɡʊd θɪŋ i hæɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb. meɪbi ðə meɪɾənz hæd nɑt pild əweɪ əz mʌtʃ mɑɾəsti əz i θɔt. laɪt! hɪz feɪs fɛl hɑɾ əz ə fɝnəs. hoʊpɪŋ ðə moʊʃənz ə dʒɹɛsɪŋ wəd kʌvɝ ɛni wɑbəlz, hi klaɪmd ɪndə hɪz kloʊðz hɝidli. hɪz sɔɹd stʊd pɹɑpt ɪn ðə bæk ə ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb, sɔɹd bɛlt waʊn ɝaʊn ðə dɑɹk bɔɹhaɪd skæbɝd. hi tʌtʃt ðə lɔŋ hɪlt, ðən tʊk ɪz hæn əweɪ.

A good thing he had his head inside the wardrobe. Maybe the Maidens had not peeled away as much modesty as he thought. Light! His face felt hot as a furnace. Hoping the motions of dressing would cover any wobbles, he climbed into his clothes hurriedly. His sword stood propped in the back of the wardrobe, sword belt wound around the dark boarhide scabbard. He touched the long hilt, then took his hand away.

bɛɹfʊt, hi tɝn bæk tə ði ʌðɝz waɪl stɪl taɪɪŋ ðə leɪsəz ə hɪz ʃɝt. mɪn stɪl sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə bɛɾ ɪn əɹ snʌɡ ɡɹin sɪlk bɹitʃɪz, baɪ hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən əneɪbəl tə dɪsaɪd bɪtwin əpɹuvəl ən fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. "aɪ nid tə tɔk wɪð dæʃivə ən ði ʌðɝ æʃəmən," hi sɛd. "əloʊn."

Barefoot, he turned back to the others while still tying the laces of his shirt. Min still sat cross-legged on the bed in her snug green silk breeches, by her expression unable to decide between approval and frustration. "I need to talk with Dashiva and the other Asha'man," he said. "Alone."

mɪn skɹæmbəld ɔf ðə bɛɾ ən ɹæn tə hʌɡ hɪm. nɑt taɪtli; ʃi wɑz vɛɹi kɛɹfəl ə hɪz bændədʒ saɪd. "aɪv weɪɾəd tu lɔŋ tə si jə əweɪk əɡɛn," ʃi sɛd, slaɪɾɪŋ ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn ɪz weɪst. "aɪ nid tə bi wɪð ju." ʃi ɛmfəsaɪz ðət dʒʌst ə tæd; ʃi mʌst əv hæɾ ə vjuɪŋ. əɹ meɪbi ʃi dʒʌst wɑntəd tə hɛlp stɛɾi hɪz lɛɡz; ðəɾ ɑɹm sim tə ɔfɝ səpɔɹt. iðɝ weɪ, hi nɑɾəd; hi wɑz nɑɾ ɔl ðət stɛɾi. leɪɪŋ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, hi sʌɾənli ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt wɑn ði æʃəmən tə noʊ haʊ wik i wɑz ɛni mɔɹ ðən kædzueɪn əɹ æmɪz.

Min scrambled off the bed and ran to hug him. Not tightly; she was very careful of his Bandaged side. "I've waited too long to see you awake again," she said, sliding an arm around his waist. "I need to be with you." She emphasized that just a tad; she must have had a viewing. Or maybe she just wanted to help steady his legs; that arm seemed to offer support. Either way, he nodded; he was not all that steady. Laying a hand on her shoulder, he suddenly realized that he did not want the Asha'man to know how weak he was any more than Cadsuane or Amys.

bɛɹə ən kaɪɹunə meɪd ɹɪlʌktən kɝtsiz ən stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ, ðən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd wən æmɪz dɪd nɑt muv ɹaɪɾ əweɪ. "soʊ lɔŋ əz jə də nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə liv ðiz ɹumz," ðə waɪz wʌn sɛd, nɑɾ ɪn ðə slaɪɾəst əz ðoʊ spikɪŋ tə hɝ kɑɹəkɑɹn.

Bera and Kiruna made reluctant curtsies and started for the door, then hesitated when Amys did not move right away. "So long as you do not intend to leave these rooms," the Wise One said, not in the slightest as though speaking to her Car'a'carn.

ɹænd ɹeɪzd ə neɪkəd fʊt. "du aɪ lʊk əz ðoʊ aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ?" æmɪz snɪft, bʌt wɪð ə ɡlæns əɾ ædli, ʃi ɡæðɝɾ ʌp bɛɹə ən kaɪɹunə ən dɪpɑɹɾəd.

Rand raised a naked foot. "Do I look as though I'm going anywhere?" Amys sniffed, but with a glance at Adley, she gathered up Bera and Kiruna and departed.

kædzueɪn ən ði ʌðɝ tu wɝ oʊnli ə moʊmən mɔɹ ɪn ɡoʊɪŋ. ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd ɡɹin ɡlænst əɾ ædli, tu. ɪt kəd nɑt bi mʌtʃ ə sikɹət ðəɾ i hæd bɪn ɡɔn fɹəm kɛɹhin fəɹ deɪz. ət ðə dɔɹ, ʃi pɔzd. "doʊn də ɛniθɪŋ fulɪʃ, bɔɪ." ʃi saʊndəd laɪk ə stɝn æn kɔʃənɪŋ ə ʃɪfləs nɛfju, wɪθaʊt mʌtʃ ɛkspɛkteɪʃən i wəd lɪsən. sæmɪtsu ən kɔɹəl fɑloʊɾ əɹ aʊt, dɪvaɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ fɹaʊnz bɪtwin ɪm ən ði æʃəmən. əz ðeɪ vænɪʃt, dæʃivə læft, ə ʃɑɹp wiz, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd; hi æktʃəli  saʊndəɾ əmjuzd.

Cadsuane and the other two were only a moment more in going. The gray-haired Green glanced at Adley, too. It could not be much of secret that he had been gone from Cairhien for days. At the door, she paused. "Don't do anything foolish, boy." She sounded like a stern aunt cautioning a shiftless nephew, without much expectation he would listen. Samitsu and Corele followed her out, dividing their frowns between him and the Asha'man. As they vanished, Dashiva laughed, a sharp wheeze, shaking his head; he actually sounded amused.

ɹænd stɛpt əweɪ fɹəm mɪn tə fɛtʃ ɪz buts fɹəm bɪsaɪd ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb ən teɪk ə ɹoʊl pɛɹ ə stɑkɪŋz fɹəm ɪnsaɪd. "aɪl dʒɔɪn jə ɪn ði æntəɹum əz sun əz aɪm buɾɪd, dæʃivə."

Rand stepped away from Min to fetch his boots from beside the wardrobe and take a rolled pair of stockings from inside. "I'll join you in the anteroom as soon as I'm booted, Dashiva."

ðə pleɪn-feɪst æʃəmən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. hi hæd bɪn fɹaʊnɪŋ əɾ ædli. "æz jə kəmænd, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," hi sɛd, pɹɛsɪŋ fɪs tə hɑɹt.

The plain-faced Asha'man gave a start. He had been frowning at Adley. "As you command, my Lord Dragon," he said, pressing fist to heart.

weɪɾɪŋ əntɪl ðə fɔɹ mɛn wɝ ɡɔn, ɹænd sæt daʊn ɪn ə tʃɛɹ wɪð ə filɪŋ ə ɹɪlif ən bɪɡæn pʊlɪŋ ɑn ɪz stɑkɪŋz. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪz lɛɡz fɛl stʃɹɔŋɝ dʒʌs fəɹ biɪŋ ʌp ən muvɪŋ. stʃɹɔŋɝ, bʌt ðeɪ stɪl dɪd nɑt wɑnə səpɔɹɾ ɪm vɛɹi wɛl.

Waiting until the four men were gone, Rand sat down in a chair with a feeling of relief and began pulling on his stockings. He was sure his legs felt stronger just for being up and moving. Stronger, but they still did not want to support him very well.

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ðɪs ɪz waɪz?" mɪn sɛd, nilɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪz tʃɛɹ, ən i ɡeɪv əɹ ə stɑɹɾəld lʊk. ɪf i hæd tɔkt ɪn ɪz slip dʊɹɪŋ ðoʊz tu deɪz, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəɾ əv noʊn. æmɪz wʊɾə hæɾ ɪneɪlə ən soʊmɑɹə ən fɪfti mɔɹ meɪɾənz weɪɾɪŋ wən i woʊk.

"Are you sure this is wise?" Min said, kneeling beside his chair, and he gave her a startled look. If he had talked in his sleep during those two days, the Aes Sedai would have known. Amys would have had Enaila and Somara and fifty more Maidens waiting when he woke.

hi tʌɡd ðə stɑkɪŋ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ ʌp. "du juv ə vjuɪŋ?"

He tugged the stocking the rest of the way up. "Do you have a viewing?"

mɪn sæt bæk ɑn əɹ hilz, foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts ən ɡeɪv ɪm ə fɝm lʊk. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt wɑz nɑt wɝkɪŋ ən saɪd. "ɪts kædzueɪn. ʃiz gɑnə titʃ jə sʌmθɪŋ, jə ən ði æʃəmən. ɔl ði æʃəmən, aɪ min. ɪts sʌmθɪŋ juv tə lɝn, bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz, ɪksɛp ðət nʌn ə jəl laɪk lɝnɪŋ ɪt fɹəm hɝ. jə ɑɹən gɑnə laɪk ɪɾ əɾ ɔl."

Min sat back on her heels, folded her arms beneath her breasts and gave him a firm look. After a moment, she decided it was not working and sighed. "It's Cadsuane. She is going to teach you something, you and the Asha'man. All the Asha'man, I mean. It's something you have to learn, but I don't know what it is, except that none of you will like learning it from her. You aren't going to like it at all."

ɹænd pɔzd wɪð ə buɾ ɪn hænd, ðən stʌft ɪz fʊɾ ɪn. wʌt kəd kædzueɪn, əɹ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ, titʃ ði æʃəmən? wɪmən kəd nɑt titʃ mɛn, əɹ mɛn wɪmən; ðət wɑz əz hɑɹɾ ə fækt əz ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪtsɛlf. "wi wɪl si" wɑz ɔl i sɛd.

Rand paused with a boot in hand, then stuffed his foot in. What could Cadsuane, or any Aes Sedai, teach the Asha'man? Women could not teach men, or men women; that was as hard a fact as the One Power itself. "We will see" was all he said.

pleɪnli ðət dɪd nɑt sæɾəsfaɪ mɪn. ʃi nu ɪt wəd hæpən, ən soʊ dɪd hi; ʃi wɑz nɛvɝ ɹɔŋ. bʌt wʌt kəd kædzueɪn pɑsəbli titʃ hɪm? wʌt wəɾ i lɛɾ əɹ titʃ hɪm? ðə wʊmən meɪɾ ɪm ənʃʊɹ ə hɪmsɛlf, ənizi ɪn ə weɪ hi hæd nɑt fɛl sɪns bɪfɔɹ ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ fɛl.

Plainly that did not satisfy Min. She knew it would happen, and so did he; she was never wrong. But what could Cadsuane possibly teach him? What would he let her teach him? The woman made him unsure of himself, uneasy in a way he had not felt since before the Stone of Tear fell.

stæmpɪŋ ɪz fʊt tə sɛɾəl ɪɾ ɪn ðə sɛkən but, hi fɛtʃt ɪz sɔɹd bɛl fɹəm ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb, ən ə ɹɛd koʊt wɝkt ɪn ɡoʊld, ðə seɪm i hæd wɔɹn tə ðə si foʊk. "wʌt bɑɹɡən dɪd mɛɹænə meɪk fəɹ mi?" hi æskt, ən ʃi meɪɾ ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt.

Stamping his foot to settle it in the second boot, he fetched his sword belt from the wardrobe, and a red coat worked in gold, the same he had worn to the Sea Folk. "What bargain did Merana make for me?" he asked, and she made an exasperated sound in her throat.

"nʌn, əz ə ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli. "ʃi ən ɹæfɛlə hævən lɛf ðə ʃɪp sɪns wi dɪd, bʌt ðeɪv sɛn hæf ə dʌzən mɛsədʒəz æskɪŋ ɪf jəɹ wɛl ɪnʌf tə ɹɪtɝn. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðə bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ əz ɡɔn wɛl fəɹ əm wɪθaʊt ju. aɪ səpoʊz ɪts tu mʌtʃ tə hoʊp ðæts wɛɹ jəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ."

"None, as of this morning," she said impatiently. "She and Rafela haven't left the ship since we did, but they've sent half a dozen messages asking if you're well enough to return. I don't think the bargaining has gone well for them without you. I suppose it's too much to hope that's where you're going."

"nɑt jɛt," hi toʊl hɝ. mɪn sɛd nʌθɪŋ, bʌt ʃi sɛɾ ɪt vɛɹi laʊdli, fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps ən wʌn aɪbɹaʊ ɹeɪz haɪ. wɛl, ʃi wəd noʊ moʊst ʌv ɪt sun ɪnʌf.

"Not yet," he told her. Min said nothing, but she said it very loudly, fists on her hips and one eyebrow raised high. Well, she would know most of it soon enough.

ɪn ði æntəɹum, ɔl ði æʃəmən ɪksɛp dæʃivə spɹæŋ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ tʃɛɹz wən ɹænd əpɪɹd wɪð mɪn. stɛɹɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ ən tɔkɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, dæʃivə dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs əntɪl ɹænd ɹitʃt ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn sɛɾ ɪn ðə flɔɹ, ən ðən i blɪŋk sɛvɹəl taɪmz bɪfɔɹ ɹaɪzɪŋ.

In the anteroom, all the Asha'man except Dashiva sprang out of their chairs when Rand appeared with Min. Staring at nothing and talking to himself, Dashiva did not notice until Rand reached the Rising Sun set in the floor, and then he blinked several times before rising.

ɹænd ədʒɹɛs hɪmsɛlf tə ædli waɪl fæsənɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən-ʃeɪp bʌkəl ə hɪz sɔɹd bɛlt. "ði ɑɹmiz ɹitʃt ðə hɪlfɔɹts ɪn ɪljən ɔlɹɛɾi?" hi wɑntəd tə teɪk wʌn ə ðə ɡɪldɪɾ ɑɹmtʃɛɹz, bʌt wəd nɑt lɛt hɪmsɛlf. "haʊ? ɪt ʃʊɾə bɪn sɛvɹəl mɔɹ deɪz ət ðə bɛst. ət bɛst." flɪn ən nɛɹɪʃmə lʊkt əz stɑɹɾəld əz dæʃivə; nʌn ə ðɛm hæd noʊn wɛɹ ædli ən hɑpwəl hæd ɡɔn - əɹ mɔɹ. dəsaɪɾɪŋ u tə tʃɹʌst wɑz ɔlweɪz ðə dɪfəkəlti, ən tʃɹʌst ə ɹeɪzɝz ɛdʒ.

Rand addressed himself to Adley while fastening the Dragon-shaped buckle of his sword belt. "The army's reached the hillforts in Illian already?" He wanted to take one of the gilded armchairs, but would not let himself. "How? It should have been several more days at the best. At best." Flinn and Narishma looked as startled as Dashiva; none of them had known where Adley and Hopwil had gone - or Morr. Deciding who to trust was always the difficulty, and trust a razor's edge.

ædli dʒɹu hɪmsɛlf ʌp. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪz aɪz, bɪniθ ðoʊz θɪk aɪbɹaʊz. hi hæd sin ðə wʊlf, əz ðeɪ sɛɾ ɪn kɛɹhin. "ðə haɪ lɔɹd wɪɹɑmɑn lɛf ðə fʊt bɪhaɪn ən pɹɛs fɔɹwɝd wɪð ðə hɔɹs," hi sɛd, ɹipɔɹɾɪŋ stɪfli. "ði il kɛpt ʌp, ʌv kɔɹs." hi fɹaʊnd. "wi ɪnkaʊntɝɾ il jɛstɝdeɪ. ʃeɪɾoʊ; aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ ðeɪ ɡɑt ðɛɹ. ðəɹ wɝ meɪbi naɪn əɹ tɛn θaʊzənd, ɔltəɡɛðɝ, bʌt ðeɪ dɪdn sim tə hæv ɛni waɪz wʌnz u kəd tʃænəl wɪð ðɛm, ən ðeɪ dɪdn ɹɪli sloʊ əs daʊn. wi ɹitʃt ðə hɪlfɔɹts ət nun tədeɪ."

Adley drew himself up. There was something about his eyes, beneath those thick eyebrows. He had seen the wolf, as they said in Cairhien. "The High Lord Weiramon left the foot behind and pressed forward with the horse," he said, reporting stiffly. "The Aiel kept up, of course." He frowned. "We encountered Aiel yesterday. Shaido; I don't know how they got there. There were maybe nine or ten thousand, altogether, but they didn't seem to have any Wise Ones who could channel with them, and they didn't really slow us down. We reached the hillforts at noon today."

ɹænd wɑntəd tə snɑɹl. livɪŋ ðə fʊt bɪhaɪnd! dɪd wɪɹɑmɑn θɪŋk i wɑz gɑnə teɪk pælɪseɪɾɪd fɔɹts ɑn hɪltɑps wɪð hɔɹsmən? pɹɑbli. ðə mæn pɹɑbli wʊɾə lɛf ði il bɪhaɪn tu, ɪf i cʊɾə aʊtʃɹʌn ðɛm. ful noʊbəlz ən ðɛɹ ful ɑnɝ! stɪl, ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. ɪksɛp tə ðə mɛn u daɪd kəz ðə haɪ lɔɹd wɪɹɑmɑn wɑz kəntɛmptʃuəs ʌv ɛniwʌn u dɪd nɑt faɪt fɹəm hɔɹsbæk.

Rand wanted to snarl. Leaving the foot behind! Did Weiramon think he was going to take palisaded forts on hilltops with horsemen? Probably. The man probably would have left the Aiel behind too, if he could have outrun them. Fool nobles and their fool honor! Still, it did not matter. Except to the men who died because the High Lord Weiramon was contemptuous of anyone who did not fight from horseback.

"ɛbən ən aɪ bɪɡæn dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ ðə fɝs pælɪseɪdz sun əz wi ɝaɪvd," ædli wɛn ɑn. "wɪɹɑmɑn dɪdn mʌtʃ laɪk ðæt; aɪ θɪŋk i wʊɾə stɑpt ʌs, bʌɾ i wɑz əfɹeɪd tə. ɛniweɪ, wi bɪɡæn sɛɾɪŋ faɪɝ tə ðə lɔɡz ən bloʊɪŋ hoʊlz ɪn ðə wɔlz, bʌt bɪfɔɹ wi mɔɹ ðən stɑɹɾəd, sɑmaɪl keɪm. ə mæn tʃænəlɪŋ seɪɾɪn, ət list, ən ə lɑt stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɛbən əɹ mi. əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ju, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, aɪd seɪ."

"Eben and I began destroying the first palisades soon as we arrived," Adley went on. "Weiramon didn't much like that; I think he would have stopped us, but he was afraid to. Anyway, we began setting fire to the logs and blowing holes in the walls, but before we more than started, Sammael came. A man channeling saidin, at least, and a lot stronger than Eben or me. As strong as you, my Lord Dragon, I'd say."

"hi wɑz ðəɹ ɹaɪɾ əweɪ?" ɹænd sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli, bʌt ðən i ʌndɝstʊd. hi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ sɑmaɪl wəd steɪ seɪf ɪn ɪljən bɪhaɪn dɪfɛnsəz woʊvən ə ðə paʊɝ ɪf i θɔɾ i hæd tə feɪs ɹænd; tu mɛni ʌv ðə fɔɹseɪkən hæd tʃɹaɪd, ən moʊst wɝ dɛd naʊ. ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf, ɹænd læft - ən hæd tə hʌɡ hɪz saɪd; læfɪŋ hɝt. ɔl ðəɾ ɪlæbɹət dɪsɛpʃən tə kənvɪns sɑmaɪl i wəd bi ɛniwɛɹ bʌt wɪð ði ɪnveɪɾɪŋ ɑɹmi, tə bɹɪŋ ðə mæn aʊɾ ʌv ɪljən, ən ɔl meɪɾ ənnɛsəsɛɹi baɪ ə naɪf ɪn pdən feɪnz hænd. tu deɪz. baɪ ðɪs taɪm, ɛvɹibɑɾi hu hæɾ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ɪn kɛɹhin - wɪtʃ sɝɾənli ɪnkluɾəd ðə fɔɹseɪkən - nu ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn leɪ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə dɛθ. əz wɛl tɔs wɛt wʊɾ ɑn ðə faɪɝ əz θɪŋk ʌðɝwaɪz. "mɛn skim ən wɪmən plɑt, bʌt ðə wil wivz əz ɪt wɪl"; ðət wɑz haʊ ðeɪ sɛɾ ɪɾ ɪn tɛɹ. "ɡoʊ ɑn," hi sɛd. "mɔɹ wɑz wɪð jə læs naɪt?"

"He was there right away?" Rand said incredulously, but then he understood. He had been sure Sammael would stay safe in Illian behind defenses woven of the Power if he thought he had to face Rand; too many of the Forsaken had tried, and most were dead now. In spite of himself, Rand laughed - and had to hug his side; laughing hurt. All that elaborate deception to convince Sammael he would be anywhere but with the invading army, to bring the man out of Illian, and all made unnecessary by a knife in Padan Fain's hand. Two days. By this time, everybody who had eyes-and-ears in Cairhien - which certainly included the Forsaken - knew that the Dragon Reborn lay on the edge of death. As well toss wet wood on the fire as think otherwise. "Men scheme and women plot, but the Wheel weaves as it will"; that was how they said it in Tear. "Go on," he said. "Morr was with you last night?"

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən; fɛdwɪn kʌmz ɛvɹi naɪt, dʒʌs laɪk hiz səpoʊz tə. læs naɪt, ɪt wɑz pleɪn əz ɛbənz noʊz wid ɹitʃ ðə fɔɹts tədeɪ."

"Yes, my Lord Dragon; Fedwin comes every night, just like he's supposed to. Last night, it was plain as Eben's nose we'd reach the forts today."

"aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn ɛni ʌv ðɪs." dæʃivə saʊndəɾ əpsɛt; ə mʌsəl ɪn ɪz tʃik wɑz twɪtʃɪŋ. "juv lʊɹɾ ɪm aʊt, bʌt tə wʌt pɝpəs? əz sun əz i filz ə mæn tʃænəl wɪð ɛniθɪŋ nɪɹ jəɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ, hɪl fli bæk tə ɪljən ən wʌtɛvɝ tʃɹæps ən əlɑɹmz hiz woʊvən. jə woʊnt ɡɛɾ əɾ ɪm ðɛɹ; hɪl noʊ əz sun əz ə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpənz wɪðɪn ə maɪl ə ðə sɪɾi."

"I don't understand any of this." Dashiva sounded upset; a muscle in his cheek was twitching. "You've lured him out, but to what purpose? As soon as he feels a man channel with anything near your strength, he'll flee back to Illian and whatever traps and alarms he has woven. You won't get at him there; he will know as soon as a gateway opens within a mile of the city."

"wi kən seɪv ði ɑɹmi," ædli bɝst aʊt, "ðæts wʌt wi kən du. wɪɹɑmɑn wɑz stɪl sɛndɪŋ tʃɑɹdʒəz əɡɛns ðət fɔɹt wən aɪ lɛft, ən sɑmaɪl kʌts ɛvɹi wʌn tə ɹæɡz dɪspaɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛbən əɹ aɪ kən du." hi ʃɪftəd ði ɑɹm wɪð ðə sɪŋʒd sliv. "wi hæv tə stʃɹaɪk bæk ən ɹʌn ɪmiɾiətli, ən ivən soʊ, hi nɪɹli bɝn əs wɛɹ wi stʊd, mɔɹ ðən wʌns. ði il ɑɹ teɪkɪŋ kæʒəwəltiz tu. ðəɹ oʊnli faɪɾɪŋ ði ɪliɑnɝz u kʌm aʊt - ði ʌðɝ hɪlfɔɹts mʌs bi ɛmptiɪŋ, soʊ mɛni wɝ kʌmɪŋ wən aɪ lɛft - bʌɾ ɛni taɪm sɑmaɪl siz fɪfti ʌv əs təɡɛðɝ, il əɹ ɛnibəɾi, hi ɹɪps əm əpɑɹt. ɪf ðəɹ wɝ θɹi ʌv hɪm, əɹ ivən tu, aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ aɪd faɪn ɛnibəɾi əlaɪv wən aɪ ɡoʊ bæk." dæʃivə stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm əz ɪf əɾ ə mædmæn, ən ædli ʃɹʌɡd sʌɾənli, əz ðoʊ filɪŋ ðə laɪtnəs ə hɪz bɛɹ blæk kɑlɝ kəmpɛɹd wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ ən dʒɹæɡən ɑn ði oʊldɝ mænz. "fɝɡɪv mi, æʃəmən," hi mʌɾɝd, əbæʃt, ðən æɾəd ɪn ə stɪl loʊɝ vɔɪs, "bʌt wi kən ət list seɪv ðɛm."

"We can save the army," Adley burst out, "that's what we can do. Weiramon was still sending charges against that fort when I left, and Sammael cuts every one to rags despite anything Eben or I can do." He shifted the arm with the singed sleeve. "We have to strike back and run immediately, and even so, he nearly burned us where we stood, more than once. The Aiel are taking casualties too. They're only fighting the Illianers who come out - the other hillforts must be emptying, so many were coming when I left - but any time Sammael sees fifty of us together, Aiel or anybody, he rips them apart. If there were three of him, or even two, I'm not sure I'd find anybody alive when I go back." Dashiva stared at him as if at a madman, and Adley shrugged suddenly, as though feeling the lightness of his bare black collar compared with the sword and Dragon on the older man's. "Forgive me, Asha'man," he muttered, abashed, then added in a still lower voice, "But we can at least save them."

"wi wɪl," ɹænd əʃʊɹd hɪm. dʒʌs nɑt ðə weɪ ædli ɪkspɛktəd. "jɔɹ ɔl gɑnə hɛlp mi kɪl sɑmaɪl tədeɪ." oʊnli dæʃivə lʊk stɑɹɾəld; ði ʌðɝ mɛn dʒʌs nɑɾəd. nɑɾ ivən ðə fɔɹseɪkən fɹaɪɾənd əm ɛnimɔɹ.

"We will," Rand assured him. Just not the way Adley expected. "You're all going to help me kill Sammael today." Only Dashiva looked startled; the other men just nodded. Not even the Forsaken frightened them anymore.

ɹænd ɪkspɛktəɾ ɑɹɡjəmən aʊɾ ə mɪn, meɪbi ə dɪmæn tə kʌm əlɔŋ, bʌt ʃi sɝpɹaɪz hɪm. "aɪ ɪkspɛk jə wəɾ əz sun noʊ wʌn faʊn aʊt jəɹ ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪv tə, ʃifɝɾɝ." hi nɑɾəd ən ʃi saɪd. pɝhæps ðə fɔɹseɪkən hæd tə dɪpɛn ɑn pɪdʒənz ən aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz dʒʌs laɪk ɛniwʌn ɛls, bʌt biɪŋ tu ʃʊɹ kəd bi feɪɾəl.

Rand expected argument out of Min, maybe a demand to come along, but she surprised him. "I expect you would as soon no one found out you're gone before they have to, sheepherder." He nodded and she sighed. Perhaps the Forsaken had to depend on pigeons and eyes-and-ears just like anyone else, but being too sure could be fatal.

"ðə meɪɾənz wɪl wɑnə kʌm ɪf ðeɪ noʊ, mɪn." ðeɪ wəd wɑn tə, ən i wəd bi hɑɹd-pɹɛs tə ɹəfjuz. ɪf i kəd ɹəfjuz. jɛt ðə dɪsəpɪɹəns ivən ə nændɛɹə ən huɛvɝ ʃi hæɾ ɑn ɡɑɹd maɪt bi tu mʌtʃ.

"The Maidens will want to come if they know, Min." They would want to, and he would be hard-pressed to refuse. If he could refuse. Yet the disappearance even of Nandera and whoever she had on guard might be too much.

mɪn saɪɾ əɡɛn. "aɪ səpoʊz aɪ kəd ɡoʊ tɔk tə nændɛɹə. aɪ maɪt bi eɪbəl tə kip əm aʊɾ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ fəɹ ən aʊɝ, bʌt ðeɪ woʊn bi plizd wɪð mi wən ðeɪ faɪn aʊt." hi ɔlmoʊs læft əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪz saɪd; ðeɪ dɛfənətli wəd nɑt bi plizd wɪð hɝ, əɹ wɪð hɪm. "mɔɹ tə ðə pɔɪnt, fɑɹmbɔɪ, æmɪz woʊn bi plizd. əɹ sɔɹɪliə. ðə θɪŋz aɪ lɛt jə ɡɛt mi ɪntu."

Min sighed again. "I suppose I could go talk to Nandera. I might be able to keep them out in the hallway for an hour, but they won't be pleased with me when they find out." He almost laughed again before he remembered his side; they definitely would not be pleased with her, or with him. "More to the point, farmboy, Amys won't be pleased. Or Sorilea. The things I let you get me into."

hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə tɛl əɹ i hæd nɑɾ æskt əɹ tə də ɛniθɪŋ, jɛt bɪfɔɹ i kəɾ ʌɾɝ ə wɝd, ʃi muvd vɛɹi kloʊs. lʊkɪŋ ʌp əɾ ɪm θɹu lɔŋ læʃɪz, ʃi pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz tʃɛst, tæpɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ʃi smaɪld wɔɹmli ən kɛpt əɹ vɔɪs sɑft, bʌt ðə fɪŋɡɝz wɝ ə ɡɪvəweɪ. "ɪf jə lɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ hæpən tə ju, ɹænd ælθɹ, əl ɡɪv kædzueɪn ə hænd wɛðɝ ʃi nidz wʌn əɹ nɑt." hɝ smaɪl bɹaɪɾənd fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɔlmoʊs tʃiɹəli, bɪfɔɹ ʃi tɝn fəɹ ðə dɔɹz. hi wɑtʃt əɹ ɡoʊ; ʃi maɪt meɪk ɪz hɛd spɪn səmtaɪmz - nɪɹli ɛvɹi wʊmən i hæɾ ɛvɝ mɛt hæd dʌn ðəɾ ət list ə taɪm əɹ tu - bʌt ʃi dɪɾ əv ə weɪ ʌv wɔkɪŋ ðət meɪɾ ɪm wɑnə wɑtʃ.

He opened his mouth to tell her he had not asked her to do anything, yet before he could utter a word, she moved very close. Looking up at him through long lashes, she put a hand on his chest, tapping her fingers. She smiled warmly and kept her voice soft, but the fingers were a giveaway. "If you let anything happen to you, Rand al'Thor, I'll give Cadsuane a hand whether she needs one or not." Her smile brightened for a moment, almost cheerily, before she turned for the doors. He watched her go; she might make his head spin sometimes - nearly every woman he had ever met had done that at least a time or two - but she did have a way of walking that made him want to watch.

əbɹʌpli hi ɹilaɪz dæʃivə wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ əz wɛl. ən lɪkɪŋ ɪz lɪps. ɹænd klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt laʊdli ɪnʌf tə bi hɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə saʊn ə ðə dɔɹ kloʊzɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ. fəɹ səm ɹizən, ðə pleɪn-feɪs mæn ɹeɪzd ɪz hænz dɪfɛnsɪvli. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz ðoʊ ɹænd ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm; hi kəd nɑt ɡoʊ ɝaʊnd ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət mɛn dʒʌs kəz mɪn wɔɹ taɪt bɹitʃɪz. sɝaʊndɪŋ hɪmsɛlf wɪð ði ɛmptinəs ə ðə vɔɪd, hi siz seɪɾɪn ən fɔɹs fɹoʊzən faɪɝ ən moʊltən fɪlθ ɪndə ðə wivz fəɹ ə ɡeɪtweɪ. dæʃivə lɛp bæk əz ɪɾ oʊpənd. meɪbi hævɪŋ ə hæn slaɪst ɔf wəd titʃ ðə mæn nɑt tə lɪk ɪz lɪps laɪk ə ɡoʊt. sʌmθɪŋ kɹʊkəɾ ən ɹɛd spaɪɾɝwɪbɛd əkɹɔs ði aʊtsaɪɾ ə ðə vɔɪd.

Abruptly he realized Dashiva was watching as well. And licking his lips. Rand cleared his throat loudly enough to be heard over the sound of the door closing behind her. For some reason, the plain-faced man raised his hands defensively. It was not as though Rand glared at him; he could not go around glaring at men just because Min wore tight breeches. Surrounding himself with the emptiness of the Void, he seized saidin and forced frozen fire and molten filth into the weaves for a gateway. Dashiva leaped back as it opened. Maybe having a hand sliced off would teach the man not to lick his lips like a goat. Something crooked and red spiderwebbed across the outside of the Void.

hi stɛp θɹu ɑntu bɛɹ dɝt, wɪð dæʃivə ən ði ʌðɝz ɹaɪt bɪhaɪnd, ɹilisɪŋ ðə sɔɹs əz sun əz ðə læst stɛp klɪɹ. ə sɛns ə lɔs ɹʌʃt ɪn əz seɪɾɪn lɛft, əz əwɛɹnəs ʌv ɑlɑnə dwɪndəld. ðə lɔs hæd nɑt sim soʊ ɡɹeɪt waɪl luz θɝɪn wɑz ðɛɹ; nɑt soʊ hjudʒ.

He stepped through onto bare dirt, with Dashiva and the others right behind, releasing the Source as soon as the last stepped clear. A sense of loss rushed in as saidin left, as awareness of Alanna dwindled. The loss had not seemed so great while Lews Therin was there; not so huge.

oʊvɝhɛd, ðə ɡoʊldən sʌn wɑz mɔɹ ðən hæfweɪ daʊn tə ðə hɝaɪzən. ə ɡʌst ʌv wɪn swɛp dʌs fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz buts wɪθaʊt livɪŋ ɛni kulnəs bɪhaɪnd. ðə ɡeɪtweɪ hæɾ oʊpən ɪn ə klɪɹɾ ɛɹiə, mɑɹkt ɔf baɪ ə ɹoʊp stʃɹʌŋ bɪtwin fɔɹ wʊɾən poʊsts. əɾ itʃ kɔɹnɝ stʊɾ ə pɛɹ ʌv ɡɑɹdz ɪn ʃɔɹt koʊts ən bæɡi tʃɹaʊzɝz stʌft ɪndə ðɛɹ buts, sɔɹdz ðəɾ əpɪɹd slaɪtli sɝpəntaɪn hæŋɪŋ ət ðɛɹ saɪdz. səm hæd hɛvi mʌstæʃɪz ðət hʌŋ tə ðɛɹ tʃɪnz əɹ θɪk bɪɹdz, ən ɔl hæd boʊl noʊzɪz ən dɑɹk aɪz ðət sim tɪltəd. əz sun əz ɹænd əpɪɹd, wʌn ə ðɛm wɛn ɹʌnɪŋ.

Overhead, the golden sun was more than halfway down to the horizon. A gust of wind swept dust from under his boots without leaving any coolness behind. The gateway had opened in a cleared area, marked off by a rope strung between four wooden posts. At each corner stood a pair of guards in short coats and baggy trousers stuffed into their boots, swords that appeared slightly serpentine hanging at their sides. Some had heavy mustaches that hung to their chins or thick beards, and all had bold noses and dark eyes that seemed tilted. As soon as Rand appeared, one of them went running.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ wi duɪŋ hɪɹ?" dæʃivə sɛd, lʊkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli.

"What are we doing here?" Dashiva said, looking about incredulously.

ɝaʊn əm stʃɹɛtʃt hʌnʒɹədz ə ʃɑɹp-pik tɛns, ɡɹeɪ ən dʌsti waɪt, tɛns ən pɪkət-laɪnz ʌv ɔlɹɛɾi sæɾəld hɔɹsəz. keɪɛmlɪn leɪ nɑt mɛni maɪlz əweɪ, hɪɾən bɪhaɪn ðə tʃɹiz, ən ðə blæk taʊɝ nɑt mʌtʃ fɑɹðɝ, bʌt teɪm wəd nɑt noʊ ʌv ðɪs ənlɛs i hæɾ ə spaɪ wɑtʃɪŋ. wʌn ə fɛdwɪn mɔɹz tæsks hæd bɪn tə lɪsən - tə fil - fəɹ ɛniwʌn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə spaɪ. ɪn ə ɹɪpəl ə mɝmɝz spɹɛɾɪŋ aʊtwɝd fɹəm ðə ɹoʊps, mɛn wɪð boʊl noʊzɪz ən sɝpəntaɪn sɔɹdz ɹoʊz fɹəm ðɛɹ hilz ən tɝn tə stɛɹ ɪkspɛktənli təwɔɹd ɹænd. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ wɪmən stʊɾ əz wɛl; sɑldəiən wɪmən ɔfən ɹoʊd tə ðə wɔɹz wɪð ðɛɹ hʌzbənz, ət list əmʌŋ ðə noʊbəlz ən ɔfəsɝz. ðəɹ wəd bi nʌn ə ðət tədeɪ, ðoʊ.

Around them stretched hundreds of sharp-peaked tents, gray and dusty white, tents and picket-lines of already saddled horses. Caemlyn lay not many miles away, hidden behind the trees, and the Black Tower not much farther, but Taim would not know of this unless he had a spy watching. One of Fedwin Morr's tasks had been to listen - to feel - for anyone trying to spy. In a ripple of murmurs spreading outward from the ropes, men with bold noses and serpentine swords rose from their heels and turned to stare expectantly toward Rand. Here and there women stood as well; Saldaean women often rode to the wars with their husbands, at least among the nobles and officers. There would be none of that today, though.

dʌkɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə ɹoʊp, ɹænd stʃɹoʊd dɝɛkli tə ə tɛnt noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə bænɝ ɑn ðə stæf ɪn fɹʌnt, θɹi sɪmpəl ɹɛd blɑsəmz ɑn ə fild ə blu. ðə kɪŋspɛni dɪd nɑt daɪ bæk ivən ɪn sɑldəiən wɪntɝz, ən wən faɪɝz blækən ðə fɔɹəsts, ðoʊz ɹɛd flaʊɝz wɝ ɔlweɪz ðə fɝs tə ɹiəpɪɹ. ə blɑsəm nʌθɪŋ kəd kɪl: ðə saɪn ə haʊs bæʃɪɹ.

Ducking under the rope, Rand strode directly to a tent no different from any other except for the banner on the staff in front, three simple red blossoms on a field of blue. The kingspenny did not die back even in Saldaean winters, and when fires blackened the forests, those red flowers were always the first to reappear. A blossom nothing could kill: the sign of House Bashere.

ɪnsaɪd ðə tɛnt, bæʃɪɹ hɪmsɛlf wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi buɾɪd ən spɝd, ən ɪz sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz hɪp. ɑmənəsli, dʒɹə wɑz wɪð hɪm, ɪn ə ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs ðə seɪm ʃeɪɾ əz əɹ hʌzbənz ɡɹeɪ koʊt, ən ɪf ʃi wɔɹ noʊ sɔɹd, ðə lɔŋ dæɡɝ əɾ əɹ bɛlt ə hɛvi sɪlvɝ ɹɑndəlz wəd də tə ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð. ðə lɛðɝ ɡɔnləts tʌk bɪhaɪn ðət bɛl spoʊk ə sʌmwʌn minɪŋ tə ɹaɪd hɑɹd.

Inside the tent, Bashere himself was already booted and spurred, and his sword on his hip. Ominously, Deira was with him, in a riding dress the same shade as her husband's gray coat, and if she wore no sword, the long dagger at her belt of heavy silver rondels would do to go on with. The leather gauntlets tucked behind that belt spoke of someone meaning to ride hard.

"aɪ hædn ɪkspɛktəd ðɪs fəɹ deɪz jɛt," bæʃɪɹ sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ə foʊldɪŋ kæmp tʃɛɹ. "wiks, aɪ hoʊpt, ɪn tʃɹuθ. aɪ hæd hoʊp tə hæv moʊst ə teɪmz livɪŋz ɑɹm ðə weɪ jʌŋ mæt ən aɪ plænd - aɪv ɡæðɝɾ ɛvɹi meɪkɝ ə kɹɔsboʊz aɪ kəd faɪn ɪndə ə mænjəfæktɝi, ən ðəɹ stɑɹɾɪŋ tə pɹədus əm laɪk ə saʊ dʒɹɑpɪŋ paɪɡələts - bʌɾ əz ɪɾ ɪz, noʊ mɔɹ ðən fɪftin θaʊzən əv kɹɔsboʊz ən noʊ wʌt tə də wɪð ðɛm." wɪð ə kwɛstʃənɪŋ lʊk, hi lɪftəɾ ə sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ fɹəm ətɑp ðə mæps spɹɛɾ aʊɾ ɑn ɪz foʊldɪŋ teɪbəl. "du wɪv taɪm fəɹ pʌntʃ?"

"I hadn't expected this for days yet," Bashere said, rising from a folding camp chair. "Weeks, I hoped, in truth. I had hoped to have most of Taim's leavings armed the way young Mat and I planned - I've gathered every maker of crossbows I could find into a manufactory, and they're starting to produce them like a sow dropping piglets - but as it is, no more than fifteen thousand have crossbows and know what to do with them." With a questioning look, he lifted a silver pitcher from atop the maps spread out on his folding table. "Do we have time for punch?"

"noʊ pʌntʃ," ɹænd sɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli. bæʃɪɹ hæd spoʊkən bɪfɔɹ əbaʊt ðə mɛn teɪm faʊn u kəd nɑt lɝn tə tʃænəl, bʌɾ i hæd skɛɹsli lɪsənd. ɪf bæʃɪɹ θɔɾ i hæd tʃɹeɪn əm wɛl ɪnʌf, ðət wɑz ɔl ðət mæɾɝd. "dæʃivə ən θɹi mɔɹ æʃəmən ɑɹ weɪɾɪŋ aʊtsaɪd; əz sun əz mɔɹ dʒɔɪnz ðɛm, wɪl bi ɹɛɾi." hi aɪd dʒɹə ni ɡeɪlin tæʃɪɹ, taʊɝɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ dɪmɪnjəɾɪv hʌzbənd wɪð əɹ hɔks bik ʌv ə noʊz ən əɹ aɪz ðət meɪɾ ə hɔks lʊk maɪld. "noʊ pʌntʃ, lɔɹd bæʃɪɹ. ən noʊ waɪvz. nɑt tədeɪ."

"No punch," Rand said impatiently. Bashere had spoken before about the men Taim found who could not learn to channel, but he had scarcely listened. If Bashere thought he had trained them well enough, that was all that mattered. "Dashiva and three more Asha'man are waiting outside; as soon as Morr joins them, we'll be ready." He eyed Deira ni Ghaline t'Bashere, towering over her diminutive husband with her hawk's beak of a nose and her eyes that made a hawk's look mild. "No punch, Lord Bashere. And no wives. Not today."

dʒɹə oʊpən əɹ maʊð, hɝ dɑɹk aɪz ɔl bʌt ɡloʊɪŋ sʌɾənli.

Deira opened her mouth, her dark eyes all but glowing suddenly.

"noʊ waɪvz," bæʃɪɹ sɛd, nʌklɪŋ ɪz hɛvi ɡɹeɪ-stʃɹik mʌstæʃɪz. "aɪ wɪl pæs ði ɔɹɾɝ." tɝnɪŋ tə dʒɹə, hi hɛld aʊɾ ɪz hænd. "waɪf," hi sɛd maɪldli. ɹænd wɪnst, maɪl toʊn əɹ noʊ, ən weɪɾəd fəɹ ði ɪɹʌpʃən.

"No wives," Bashere said, knuckling his heavy gray-streaked mustaches. "I will pass the order." Turning to Deira, he held out his hand. "Wife," he said mildly. Rand winced, mild tone or no, and waited for the eruption.

dʒɹəz maʊθ θɪnd. ʃi skaʊl daʊn əɾ əɹ hʌzbənd, ə hɔk ɹɛɾi tə stup ɑn ə maʊs. nɑt ðət bæʃɪɹ lʊkt ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ə maʊs, ʌv kɔɹs; dʒʌst ə mʌtʃ smɔlɝ hɔk. ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ; dʒɹə kəd meɪk dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ sim ə θɪŋ ðət ʃəd kɑz ði ɝθ tə tʃɹɛmbəl. ən ənhʊkɪŋ əɹ ʃið dæɡɝ fɹəm əɹ bɛlt, ʃi leɪɾ ɪɾ ɪn əɹ hʌzbənz hænd. "wi wɪl tɔk ə ðɪs leɪɾɝ, dævɹæm," ʃi sɛd. "æt lɛŋθ."

Deira's mouth thinned. She scowled down at her husband, a hawk ready to stoop on a mouse. Not that Bashere looked anything like a mouse, of course; just a much smaller hawk. She drew a deep breath; Deira could make drawing a deep breath seem a thing that should cause the earth to tremble. And unhooking her sheathed dagger from her belt, she laid it in her husband's hand. "We will talk of this later, Davram," she said. "At length."

wʌn deɪ wən i hæd taɪm, ɹænd dɪsaɪɾɪd, hi wɑz gɑnə meɪk bæʃɪɹ ɪkspleɪn haʊ hi dɪd ðæt. ɪf ðəɹ ɛvɝ wɑz taɪm.

One day when he had time, Rand decided, he was going to make Bashere explain how he did that. If there ever was time.

"æt lɛŋθ," bæʃɪɹ əɡɹid, ɡɹɪnɪŋ θɹu hɪz mʌstæʃɪz əz i stʌf ðə dæɡɝ bɪhaɪn ɪz oʊn bɛlt. meɪbi ðə mæn wɑz sɪmpli suəsaɪɾəl.

"At length," Bashere agreed, grinning through his mustaches as he stuffed the dagger behind his own belt. Maybe the man was simply suicidal.

ðə ɹoʊp hæd bɪn teɪkən daʊn aʊtsaɪd, ən ɹænd stʊd weɪɾɪŋ wɪð dæʃivə ən ði ʌðɝ æʃəmən waɪl naɪn θaʊzən sɑldəiən laɪt hɔɹs ɝeɪd ðɛmsɛlvz bɪhaɪn bæʃɪɹ ɪn ə kɑləm ə θɹiz. sʌmwɛɹ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, fɪftin θaʊzən mɛn u kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ðə lidʒən ə ðə dʒɹæɡən wəd bi ɡæðɝɪŋ əfʊt. ɹænd hæd ɡlɪmps ðɛm, ɛvɹi wʌn ɪn ə blu koʊt meɪd tə bʌɾən ʌp ðə saɪd soʊ ðə ɹɛd-ænd-ɡoʊl dʒɹæɡən əkɹɔs ðə tʃɛst wəd nɑt bi bɹoʊkən. moʊs kæɹid stil-ɑɹm kɹɔsboʊz; səm bɔɹ hɛvi ənwildi ʃilz ɪnstɛd, bʌt nɑt wʌn kæɹiɾ ə paɪk. wʌtɛvɝ ɑd noʊʃən mæt ən bæʃɪɹ hæd kʊkt ʌp, ɹænd hoʊpt ɪt wəd nɑt lɛɾ ə lɑɾ ə ðɪs lidʒən tə dɛθ.

The rope had been taken down outside, and Rand stood waiting with Dashiva and the other Asha'man while nine thousand Saldaean light horse arrayed themselves behind Bashere in a column of threes. Somewhere behind them, fifteen thousand men who called themselves the Legion of the Dragon would be gathering afoot. Rand had glimpsed them, every one in a blue coat made to button up the side so the red-and-gold Dragon across the chest would not be broken. Most carried steel-armed crossbows; some bore heavy unwieldy shields instead, but not one carried a pike. Whatever odd notion Mat and Bashere had cooked up, Rand hoped it would not lead a lot of this legion to death.

mɔɹ ɡɹɪn iɡɝli waɪl i weɪɾəd, ɔl bʌt baʊnsɪŋ ɑn ɪz toʊz. pɝhæps i wɑz sɪmpli ɡlæd tə bi bæk ɪn ɪz blæk koʊt wɪð ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz kɑlɝ, jɛɾ ædli ən nɛɹɪʃmə wɔɹ ɔlmoʊst aɪdɛntɪkəl ɡɹɪnz, ən fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, flɪnz wɑz nɑt fɑɹ ɔf. ðeɪ nu wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ naʊ, ən wʌt tə də ðɛɹ. dæʃivə skaʊld ət nʌθɪŋ əz juʒəwəl, hɪz lɪps muvɪŋ saɪlənli. əz juʒəwəl. ɔlsoʊ saɪlənt, skaʊlɪŋ, wɝ ðə sɑldəiən wɪmən ɡæðɝd bɪhaɪn dʒɹə, wɑtʃɪŋ fɹəm wʌn saɪd. iɡəlz ən fælkənz, fɛðɝz ɹʌfəld ən fjʊɹiəs. ɹænd dɪd nɑt kɛɹ haʊ ðeɪ ɡɹɪməst ən fɹaʊnd; ɪf i kəd feɪs nændɛɹə ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə meɪɾənz æftɝ kipɪŋ əm bæk fɹəm ðɪs, ðən ðə sɑldəiən mɛn kəd pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɛni nʌmbɝ ə lɛŋθi dɪskʌʃənz. tədeɪ, ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ, noʊ wɪmən wəd daɪ kəz ə hɪm.

Morr grinned eagerly while he waited, all but bouncing on his toes. Perhaps he was simply glad to be back in his black coat with the silver sword on his collar, yet Adley and Narishma wore almost identical grins, and for that matter, Flinn's was not far off. They knew where they were going now, and what to do there. Dashiva scowled at nothing as usual, his lips moving silently. As usual. Also silent, scowling, were the Saldaean women gathered behind Deira, watching from one side. Eagles and falcons, feathers ruffled and furious. Rand did not care how they grimaced and frowned; if he could face Nandera and the rest of the Maidens after keeping them back from this, then the Saldaean men could put up with any number of lengthy discussions. Today, the Light willing, no women would die because of him.

soʊ mɛni mɛn kəd nɑt bi laɪn ʌp ɪn ə mɪnət, ivən wən ðeɪ hæd bɪn əweɪɾɪŋ ði ɔɹɾɝ, bʌɾ ɪn ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbli ʃɔɹt taɪm, bæʃɪɹ ɹeɪzd ɪz sɔɹɾ ən kɔld, "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən!"

So many men could not be lined up in a minute, even when they had been awaiting the order, but in a remarkably short time, Bashere raised his sword and called, "My Lord Dragon!"

ə ʃaʊt ɹɪpəl daʊn ðə ɡɹeɪt kɑləm bɪhaɪn hɪm. "ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən!"

A shout rippled down the great column behind him. "The Lord Dragon!"

sizɪŋ ðə sɔɹs, ɹænd meɪɾ ə ɡeɪtweɪ bɪtwin ðə poʊsts, fɔɹ peɪsɪz baɪ fɔɹ, ən ɹæn θɹu əz i taɪɾ ɔf ðə wiv, fɪld wɪð seɪɾɪn ən ði æʃəmən ɑn ɪz hilz, ɪndə ə ɡɹeɪɾ oʊpən skwɛɹ sɝaʊndəd baɪ hjudʒ waɪt kɑləmz, itʃ tɑpt wɪð ə mɑɹbəl ɹiθ ʌv ɑləv bɹæntʃəz. ət ðə tu ɛnz ə ðə skwɛɹ stʊd nɪɹli aɪdɛntɪkəl pɝpəl-ɹuf pæləsəz ə kɑləmd wɔks ən haɪ bælkəniz ən slɛndɝ spaɪɹz. ðoʊz wɝ ðə kɪŋz pæləs ən ðə slaɪtli smɔlɝ ɡɹeɪt hɔl ə ðə kaʊnsəl, ən ðɪs wɑz ðə skwɛɹ ə tæməz, ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ɪljən.

Seizing the Source, Rand made a gateway between the posts, four paces by four, and ran through as he tied off the weave, filled with saidin and the Asha'man on his heels, into a great open square surrounded by huge white columns, each topped with a marble wreath of olive branches. At the two ends of the square stood nearly identical purple-roofed palaces of columned walks and high balconies and slender spires. Those were the King's Palace and the slightly smaller Great Hall of the Council, and this was the Square of Tammaz, in the heart of Illian.

ə skɪni mæn ɪn ə blu koʊt, wɪð ə bɪɹd ðət lɛft ɪz ʌpɝ lɪp bɛɹ, stʊd ɡeɪpɪŋ ət ðə saɪɾ ə ɹænd ən ðə blæk-koʊɾəd æʃəmən lipɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə hoʊl ɪn mɪdɛɹ, ən ə staʊt wʊmən, ɪn ə ɡɹin dʒɹɛs kʌt haɪ ɪnʌf tə ʃoʊ ɡɹin slɪpɝz ən əɹ æŋkəlz ɪn ɡɹin stɑkɪŋz, pɹɛs boʊθ hænz tə hɝ feɪs ən stʊd ɹuɾəd ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm, hɝ dɑɹk aɪz pɑpɪŋ. ɔl ðə pipəl wɝ stɑpɪŋ tə stɛɹ, hɔkɝz wɪð ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪz, kɑɹɾɝz hɔltɪŋ ðɛɹ ɑksən, mɛn ən wɪmən ən tʃɪlʒɹən wɪð ðɛɹ maʊðz hæŋɪŋ oʊpən.

A skinny man in a blue coat, with a beard that left his upper lip bare, stood gaping at the sight of Rand and the black-coated Asha'man leaping out of a hole in midair, and a stout woman, in a green dress cut high enough to show green slippers and her ankles in green stockings, pressed both hands to her face and stood rooted right in front of them, her dark eyes popping. All the people were stopping to stare, hawkers with their trays, carters halting their oxen, men and women and children with their mouths hanging open.

ɹænd θɹʌst ɪz hænz haɪ ən tʃænəld. "aɪ æm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn!" ðə wɝdz bumd əkɹɔs ðə skwɛɹ, æmpləfaɪd baɪ ɛɹ ən faɪɝ, ən fleɪmz ʃɑɾ ʌp fɹəm ɪz hænz ə hʌnʒɹəd fit. bɪhaɪn hɪm, ði æʃəmən fɪl ðə skaɪ wɪð bɔlz ə faɪɝ stʃɹikɪŋ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən. ɔl seɪv dæʃivə, hu meɪd blu laɪtnɪŋz kɹækəl ɪn ə dʒæɡd wɛb əbʌv ðə skwɛɹ.

Rand thrust his hands high and channeled. "I am the Dragon Reborn!" The words boomed across the square, amplified by Air and Fire, and flames shot up from his hands a hundred feet. Behind him, the Asha'man filled the sky with balls of fire streaking in every direction. All save Dashiva, who made blue lightnings crackle in a jagged web above the square.

noʊ mɔɹ wɑz niɾəd. ə ʃɹikɪŋ flʌɾ ə hjumænɪɾi flɛɾ ɪn ɔl dɝɛkʃənz, əweɪ fɹəm ðə skwɛɹ ə tæməz. ðeɪ flɛd dʒʌst ɪn taɪm. ɹænd ən ði æʃəmən dɑɹɾɪd əsaɪd fɹəm ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ən dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ lɛɾ ɪz waɪldli skɹimɪŋ sɑldəiənz ɪndə ɪljən, ə flʌɾ ə hɔɹsmən weɪvɪŋ ðɛɹ sɔɹdz əz ðeɪ pɔɹɾ aʊt. stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd bæʃɪɹ lɛd ðə sɛntɝ laɪn ə ðə kɑləm, dʒʌst əz ðeɪ hæd plænd wʌt sim soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ, waɪl ði ʌðɝ tu laɪnz pild ɔf tə iðɝ saɪd. ðeɪ stʃɹimd əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, bɹeɪkɪŋ əpɑɹɾ ɪndə smɔlɝ ɡɹups, ɡæləpɪŋ ɪndə ðə stʃɹits liɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə skwɛɹ.

No more was needed. A shrieking flood of humanity fled in all directions, away from the Square of Tammaz. They fled just in time. Rand and the Asha'man darted aside from the gateway, and Davram Bashere led his wildly screaming Saldaeans into Illian, a flood of horsemen waving their swords as they poured out. Straight ahead Bashere led the center line of the column, just as they had planned what seemed so long ago, while the other two lines peeled off to either side. They streamed away from the gateway, breaking apart into smaller groups, galloping into the streets leading out of the square.

ɹænd dɪd nɑt weɪt tə si ðə læst ə ðə hɔɹsmən ɛɡzɪt. wɪð wɛl ʌndɝ ə θɝɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, hi ɪmiɾiətli woʊv ənʌðɝ, smɔlɝ oʊpənɪŋ. jə dɪd nɑt nid tə noʊ ə pleɪs əɾ ɔl tə tʃɹævəl ɪf jə oʊnli ɪntɛndəd tə ɡoʊ ə vɛɹi ʃɔɹt dɪstəns. ɝaʊn ɪm i fɛl dæʃivə ən ðə ɹɛst wivɪŋ ðɛɹ ɡeɪtweɪz, bʌɾ i wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi stɛpɪŋ θɹu hɪz oʊn, lɛɾɪŋ ɪt kloʊs bɪhaɪn ɪm ətɑp wʌn ə ðə slɛndɝ taʊɝz ə ðə kɪŋz pæləs. æbsənli hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ mæɾɪn stɛpeɪnəoʊz dɛn bɑlɡɝ, ðə kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən, wɑz sʌmwɛɹ bɪloʊ hɪm ət ðət moʊmənt.

Rand did not wait to see the last of the horsemen exit. With well under a third out of the gateway, he immediately wove another, smaller opening. You did not need to know a place at all to Travel if you only intended to go a very short distance. Around him he felt Dashiva and the rest weaving their gateways, but he was already stepping through his own, letting it close behind him atop one of the slender towers of the King's Palace. Absently he wondered whether Mattin Stepaneos den Balgar, the King of Illian, was somewhere below him at that moment.

ðə tɑp ə ðə spaɪɹ stʃɹɛtʃt noʊ mɔɹ ðən faɪv peɪsɪz əkɹɔs, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ə wɔl ə ɹɛd stoʊn nɑt kwaɪt tʃɛst-haɪ ɑn hɪm. ət fɪfti peɪsɪz, ɪt wɑz ðə haɪəs pɔɪn ɪn ɔl ə ðə sɪɾi. fɹəm ðəɹ i kəd si əkɹɔs ɹuftɑps ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ bɪniθ ði æftɝnun sʌn, ɹɛɾ ən ɡɹin ən ɛvɹi kʌlɝ, tə ðə lɔŋ ɝθən kɔzweɪz ðət kʌt θɹu ðə væs tɔl-ɡɹæs mɑɹʃ sɝaʊndɪŋ sɪɾi ən hɑɹbɝ. ə ʃɑɹp tæŋ ə sɔl hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. ɪljən hæd noʊ niɾ ʌv wɔlz, wɪð ðəɾ ɔl-ɪnvɛləpɪŋ mɑɹʃ tə stɑp ən ətækɝ. ɛni ətækɝ u kəd nɑt meɪk hoʊlz ɪn ði ɛɹ. bʌt ðɛn, wɔlz wʊɾə dʌn noʊ ɡʊɾ iðɝ.

The top of the spire stretched no more than five paces across, surrounded by a wall of red stone not quite chest-high on him. At fifty paces, it was the highest point in all of the city. From there he could see across rooftops glittering beneath the afternoon sun, red and green and every color, to the long earthen causeways that cut through the vast tall-grass marsh surrounding city and harbor. A sharp tang of salt hung in the air. Illian had no need of walls, with that all-enveloping marsh to stop an attacker. Any attacker who could not make holes in the air. But then, walls would have done no good either.

ɪt wɑz ə pɹɪɾi sɪɾi, ðə bɪldɪŋz meɪnli ʌv peɪl dʒɹɛst stoʊn, ə sɪɾi kɹɪskɹɔs baɪ əz mɛni kənælz əz stʃɹits, laɪk tʃɹeɪsɝiz ə blu-ɡɹin fɹəm ðɪs haɪt, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt stɑp tə ædmaɪɹ ɪt. loʊ əkɹɔs ðə ɹufs ə tævɝnz ən ʃɑps ən spaɪɝd pæləsəz i dɝɛktəd floʊz ʌv ɛɹ ən wɔɾɝ, faɪɝ ən ɝθ ən spɪɹət, tɝnɪŋ əz i dɪd soʊ. hi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə wiv ðə floʊz, sɪmpli swɛpt əm aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə sɪɾi ən ə ɡʊd maɪl aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə mɑɹʃ. fɹəm faɪv ʌðɝ taʊɝz keɪm floʊz swipɪŋ loʊ, ən wɛɹ ðeɪ tʌtʃt wʌn ənʌðɝ ʌnkəntʃɹoʊld, laɪt flæʃt ən spɑɹks flɛɹɾ ən klaʊdz ə kʌlɝd stim bɝst, ə dɪspleɪ ɛni ɪluməneɪɾɝ maɪɾ əv ɛnvid. ə bɛɾɝ weɪ tə fɹaɪɾən pipəl ʌndɝ ðɛɹ bɛdz ən aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ʌv bæʃɪɹz soʊlʒɝz, hi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən, ðoʊ ðət wɑz nɑt ðə ɹizən fəɹ ɪt.

It was a pretty city, the buildings mainly of pale dressed stone, a city crisscrossed by as many canals as streets, like traceries of blue-green from this height, but he did not stop to admire it. Low across the roofs of taverns and shops and spired palaces he directed flows of Air and Water, Fire and Earth and Spirit, turning as he did so. He did not try to weave the flows, simply swept them out over the city and a good mile out over the marsh. From five other towers came flows sweeping low, and where they touched one another uncontrolled, light flashed and sparks flared and clouds of colored steam burst, a display any Illuminator might have envied. A better way to frighten people under their beds and out of the way of Bashere's soldiers, he could not imagine, though that was not the reason for it.

lɔŋ əɡoʊ hi hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd ðət sɑmaɪl mʌst əv wɔɹdz woʊvən θɹuaʊt ðə sɪɾi, sɛt tə ɡɪv ən əlɑɹm ʃəɾ ɛniwʌn tʃænəl seɪɾɪn. wɔɹdz ɪnvɝɾɪd soʊ noʊ wʌn ɪksɛp sɑmaɪl hɪmsɛlf kəd faɪn ðɛm, wɔɹdz ðət wəd tɛl sɑmaɪl ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ðət mæn wɑz tʃænəlɪŋ soʊ hi kəd bi dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɑn ði ɪnstənt. wɪð lʌk, ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðoʊz wɔɹdz wɑz biɪŋ tʃɹɪɡɝd naʊ. luz θɝɪn hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ sɑmaɪl wəd sɛns əm wɛɹɛvɝ i wɑz, ivən əɾ ə dɪstəns. ðət wɑz waɪ ðə wɔɹɾɪŋz ʃəd bi jusləs naʊ; ðət sɔɹt hæd tə bi ɹimeɪd wʌns tʃɹɪɡɝd. sɑmaɪl wəd kʌm. nɛvɝ ɪn ɪz laɪf hæɾ i ɹɪlɪŋkwɪʃt ɛniθɪŋ i kənsɪɾɝd hɪz, haʊɛvɝ ʃeɪki hɪz kleɪm, nɑt wɪθaʊɾ ə faɪt. ɔl ðət fɹəm luz θɝɪn. ɪf i wɑz ɹil. hi hæd tə bi. ðoʊz mɛmɹiz hæd tu mʌtʃ dɪteɪl. bʌt kəd nɑɾ ə mædmæn dʒɹim ɪz fænsiz ɪn dɪteɪl, tu?

Long ago he had decided that Sammael must have wards woven throughout the city, set to give an alarm should anyone channel saidin. Wards inverted so no one except Sammael himself could find them, wards that would tell Sammael exactly where that man was channeling so he could be destroyed on the instant. With luck, every one of those wards was being triggered now. Lews Therin had been sure Sammael would sense them wherever he was, even at a distance. That was why the wardings should be useless now; that sort had to be remade once triggered. Sammael would come. Never in his life had he relinquished anything he considered his, however shaky his claim, not without a fight. All that from Lews Therin. If he was real. He had to be. Those memories had too much detail. But could not a madman dream his fancies in detail, too?

luz θɝɪn! hi kɔl saɪlənli. ðə wɪn bloʊɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪljən ænsɝd.

Lews Therin! he called silently. The wind blowing across Illian answered.

bɪloʊ, ðə skwɛɹ ə tæməz stʊd dɪzɝɾɪd ən saɪlənt, ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju əbændən kɑɹts. ɛdʒ-ɑn, ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɑz ɪnvɪzəbəl ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə wivz.

Below, the Square of Tammaz stood deserted and silent, empty except for a few abandoned carts. Edge-on, the gateway was invisible except for the weaves.

ɹitʃɪŋ daʊn tə ðoʊz wivz, ɹænd əntaɪd ðə nɑɾ ænd, əz ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɪŋk fɹəm ɛɡzɪstəns, ɹɪlʌktənli ɹilist seɪɾɪn. ɔl ðə floʊz vænɪʃt fɹəm ðə skaɪ. meɪbi səm ə ði æʃəmən stɪl hɛld ɑn tə ðə sɔɹs, bʌɾ i hæd toʊld əm nɑt tə. hi hæd toʊld əm ðəɾ ɛni mæn i fɛl tʃænəlɪŋ ɪn ɪljən wʌns i hɪmsɛlf stɑpt, hi ɪntɛndəd tə kɪl wɪθaʊt wɔɹnɪŋ. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə faɪn aʊɾ æftɝwɝd ðət ðə tʃænlɝ hæd bɪn wʌn ə ðɛm. hi lin ɑn ðə wɔl, weɪɾɪŋ, wɪʃɪŋ i kəd sɪt. hɪz lɛɡz ætʃt ən ɪz saɪd bɝn haʊɛvɝ i stʊd, jɛɾ i maɪt nid tə si əz wɛl əz fil ə wiv.

Reaching down to those weaves, Rand untied the knot and, as the gateway winked from existence, reluctantly released saidin. All the flows vanished from the sky. Maybe some of the Asha'man still held on to the Source, but he had told them not to. He had told them that any man he felt channeling in Illian once he himself stopped, he intended to kill without warning. He did not want to find out afterward that the channeler had been one of them. He leaned on the wall, waiting, wishing he could sit. His legs ached and his side burned however he stood, yet he might need to see as well as feel a weave.

ðə sɪɾi wɑz nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli kwaɪət. fɹəm sɛvɹəl dɝɛkʃənz i kəd hɪɹ dɪstənt ʃaʊts, ðə feɪn klæʃ ə mɛɾəl. ivən muvɪŋ soʊ mɛni mɛn tə ðə bɔɹɾɝ, sɑmaɪl hæd nɑt lɛft ɪljən ɪntaɪɝli ʌnpɹətɛktɪd. ɹænd tɝnd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɑtʃ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən. hi θɔt sɑmaɪl wəd kʌm tə ðə kɪŋz pæləs əɹ ðəɾ ʌðɝ ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə skwɛɹ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt bi sɝɾən. daʊn wʌn stʃɹiɾ i sɔ ə bæn ə sɑldəiənz klæʃɪŋ wɪð ən ikwəl nʌmbɝ ə maʊntəd mɛn ɪn ʃaɪnɪŋ bɹɛstpleɪts; mɔɹ sɑldəiənz sʌɾənli ɡæləpt ɪn fɹəm wʌn saɪd, ən ðə faɪt vænɪʃt fɹəm ɪz saɪt bɪhaɪn bɪldɪŋz. ɪn ənʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən i spɑɾəd səm ə ðə lidʒən ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, mɑɹtʃɪŋ əkɹɔs ə kənælz loʊ bɹɪdʒ. ən ɔfəsɝ mɑɹk baɪ ə tɔl ɹɛd plum ɑn ɪz hɛlmət stʃɹoʊɾ əhɛɾ ə səm twɛnti mɛn kæɹiɪŋ waɪd ʃilz əz tɔl əz ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, fɑloʊd baɪ pɝhæps tu hʌnʒɹəd mɔɹ wɪð hɛvi kɹɔsboʊz. haʊ wəd ðeɪ faɪt? ʃaʊts ən stil ɹɪŋɪŋ ɑn stil ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ðə feɪn skɹimz ə daɪɪŋ mɛn.

The city was not entirely quiet. From several directions he could hear distant shouts, the faint clash of metal. Even moving so many men to the border, Sammael had not left Illian entirely unprotected. Rand turned, trying to watch in every direction. He thought Sammael would come to the King's Palace or that other at the far end of the square, but he could not be certain. Down one street he saw a band of Saldaeans clashing with an equal number of mounted men in shining breastplates; more Saldaeans suddenly galloped in from one side, and the fight vanished from his sight behind buildings. In another direction he spotted some of the Legion of the Dragon, marching across a canal's low bridge. An officer marked by a tall red plume on his helmet strode ahead of some twenty men carrying wide shields as tall as their shoulders, followed by perhaps two hundred more with heavy crossbows. How would they fight? Shouts and steel ringing on steel in the distance, the faint screams of dying men.

ðə sʌn slɪd daʊnwɝd, ən ʃædoʊz lɛŋθən əkɹɔs ðə sɪɾi. twaɪlaɪt, ən ðə sʌn ə loʊ kɹɪmzən doʊm ɪn ðə wɛst. ə fju stɑɹz əpɪɹd. hæɾ i bɪn ɹɔŋ? wəd sɑmaɪl sɪmpli ɡoʊ ɛlswɛɹ, faɪn ənʌðɝ læn tə mæstɝ? hæɾ i bɪn lɪsnɪŋ tə ɛniθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən ɪz oʊn mæd ɹæmbəlɪŋz?

The sun slid downward, and shadows lengthened across the city. Twilight, and the sun a low crimson dome in the west. A few stars appeared. Had he been wrong? Would Sammael simply go elsewhere, find another land to master? Had he been listening to anything other than his own mad ramblings?

ə mæn tʃænəld. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɹænd fɹoʊz, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ɡɹeɪt hɔl ə ðə kaʊnsəl. ðət hæd bɪn ɪnʌf ə seɪɾɪn fəɹ ə ɡeɪtweɪ; hi maɪt nɑɾ əv fɛlt ə mʌtʃ smɔlɝ tʃænəlɪŋ, ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə skwɛɹ. ɪt hæd tə bi sɑmaɪl.

A man channeled. For a moment, Rand froze, staring at the Great Hall of the Council. That had been enough of saidin for a gateway; he might not have felt a much smaller channeling, the length of the square. It had to be Sammael.

ɪn ən ɪnstən i hæd siz ðə sɔɹs, woʊvən ə ɡeɪtweɪ ən lɛp θɹu wɪð laɪtnɪŋ ɹɛɾi tə flaɪ fɹəm ɪz hænz. ɪt wɑz ə lɑɹdʒ ɹum, lɪt baɪ hjudʒ mɪɹɝd ɡoʊldən stænd-læmps ən ʌðɝz hæŋɪŋ ɑn tʃeɪnz fɹəm ðə silɪŋ, wɪð snoʊi mɑɹbəl wɔlz kɑɹvd ɪn fɹizɪz ʃoʊɪŋ bæɾəlz, ən ʃɪps kɹaʊɾɪŋ ðə mɑɹʃ-bɔɹɾɝd hɑɹbɝ ʌv ɪljən ɪtsɛlf. ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə ɹum, naɪn hɛvəli kɑɹvd ən ɡɪldɪɾ ɑɹmtʃɛɹz stʊd laɪk θɹoʊnz ətɑp ə haɪ stɛɹ-fɹʌntɪd waɪt deɪz, ðə sɛntɝ tʃɛɹ wɪð ə bæk haɪɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ. bɪfɔɹ i kəd ɹilis ðə ɡeɪtweɪ bɪhaɪn hɪm, ðə taʊɝtɑp wɛɹ i hæd stʊɾ ɪksploʊɾəd. hi fɛl ðə wɑʃ ə faɪɝ ən ɝθ ivən əz ə stɔɹm ə stoʊn fɹæɡməns ən dʌst stʃɹʌk θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, nɑkɪŋ ɪm daʊn ɑn ɪz feɪs. peɪn stæbd ɪz saɪɾ əz i lændəd, ə ʃɑɹp ɹɛd læns dɪɡɪŋ ɪndə ðə vɔɪd wɛɹ i floʊɾəd, ən ðəɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ɛniθɪŋ ɛls meɪɾ ɪm ɹilis ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. sʌmwʌn ɛlsəz peɪn; sʌmwʌn ɛlsəz wiknəs. hi kəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ ðɛm, ɪn ðə vɔɪd.

In an instant he had seized the Source, woven a gateway and leaped through with lightning ready to fly from his hands. It was a large room, lit by huge mirrored golden stand-lamps and others hanging on chains from the ceiling, with snowy marble walls carved in friezes showing battles, and ships crowding the marsh-bordered harbor of Illian itself. At the far end of the room, nine heavily carved and gilded armchairs stood like thrones atop a high stair-fronted white dais, the center chair with a back higher than any other. Before he could release the gateway behind him, the towertop where he had stood exploded. He felt the wash of Fire and Earth even as a storm of stone fragments and dust struck through the gateway, knocking him down on his face. Pain stabbed his side as he landed, a sharp red lance digging into the Void where he floated, and that as much as anything else made him release the gateway. Someone else's pain; someone else's weakness. He could ignore them, in the Void.

hi muvd, fɔɹsɪŋ ənʌðɝ mænz mʌsəlz tə wɝk, pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf ʌp ən skɹæmbəld əweɪ ɪn ə lɝtʃɪŋ ɹʌn təwɔɹd ðə deɪz dʒʌst əz hʌnʒɹədz ə ɹɛd fɪləməns bɝn daʊn θɹu ðə silɪŋ, bɝn θɹu ðə si-blu mɑɹbəl flɔɹ ɪn ə waɪd sɝkəl ɔl ɝaʊnd wɛɹ ðə ɹɛzədu ʌv ɪz ɡeɪtweɪ wɑz stɪl feɪɾɪŋ. wʌn stæb θɹu ðə hil ə hɪz but, θɹu hɪz hil, ən i hɝd hɪmsɛlf kɹaɪ aʊɾ əz i fɛl. nɑɾ ɪz peɪn, ɪn saɪɾ əɹ fʊt. nɑt hɪz.

He moved, forcing another man's muscles to work, pushed himself up and scrambled away in a lurching run toward the dais just as hundreds of red filaments burned down through the ceiling, burned through the sea-blue marble floor in a wide circle all around where the residue of his gateway was still fading. One stabbed through the heel of his boot, through his heel, and he heard himself cry out as he fell. Not his pain, in side or foot. Not his.

ɹoʊlɪŋ ɑntu hɪz bæk, hi kəd si ðə ɹɛmnəns ə ðoʊz bɝnɪŋ ɹɛd waɪɝz stɪl, fɹɛʃ ɪnʌf tə meɪk aʊt faɪɝ ən ɛɹ woʊvən ɪn ə weɪ hi hæd nɑt noʊn. ɪnʌf tə meɪk aʊɾ ɪɡzækli ðə dɝɛkʃən ðeɪ hæd kʌm fɹʌm. blæk hoʊlz ɪn ðə flɔɹ ən ɔɹnətli wɝkt waɪt plæstɝ silɪŋ haɪ oʊvɝhɛd hɪst ən kɹækəld laʊdli ət ðə tʌtʃ ə ði ɛɹ.

Rolling onto his back, he could see the remnants of those burning red wires still, fresh enough to make out Fire and Air woven in a way he had not known. Enough to make out exactly the direction they had come from. Black holes in the floor and ornately worked white plaster ceiling high overhead hissed and crackled loudly at the touch of the air.

hɪz hænz ɹoʊz, ən i woʊv bɑlfaɪɝ. bɪɡæn tə wiv ɪt. sʌmwʌn ɛlsəz tʃik stʌŋ fɹəm ə ɹɪmɛmbɝd slæp, ən kædzueɪnz vɔɪs hɪst ən kɹækəld ɪn ɪz hɛd laɪk ðə hoʊlz ðə ɹɛd fɪləməns hæd meɪd. nɛvɝ əɡɛn, bɔɪ; jə wɪl nɛvɝ də ðəɾ əɡɛn. ɪt sim ðəɾ i hɝd luz θɝɪn wɪmpɝɪŋ ɪn dɪstən fɪɹ ʌv wʌɾ i wɑz əbaʊt tə lus, wʌt hæɾ ɔlmoʊs dɪstʃɹɔɪd ðə wɝld wʌns. ɛvɹi floʊ bʌt faɪɝ ən ɛɹ fɛl əweɪ, ən i woʊv əz i hæd sin. ə θaʊzən faɪn hɛɹz ə ɹɛd blɑsəm bɪtwin ɪz hænz, fænɪŋ aʊt slaɪtli ðeɪ ʃɑɾ ʌpwɝd. ə sɝkəl ə ðə silɪŋ tu fiɾ əkɹɔs fɛl ɪn stoʊn tʃɪps ən plæstɝ dʌst.

His hands rose, and he wove balefire. Began to weave it. Someone else's cheek stung from a remembered slap, and Cadsuane's voice hissed and crackled in his head like the holes the red filaments had made. Never again, boy; you wilt never do that again. It seemed that he heard Lews Therin whimpering in distant fear of what he was about to loose, what had almost destroyed the world once. Every flow but Fire and Air fell away, and he wove as he had seen. A thousand fine hairs of red blossomed between his hands, fanning out slightly they shot upward. A circle of the ceiling two feet across fell in stone chips and plaster dust.

oʊnli æftɝ i hæd dʌn ɪt dɪɾ i θɪŋk ðət ðəɹ maɪt bi sʌmwʌn bɪtwin ɪm ən sɑmaɪl. hi ɪntɛndəd tə si sɑmaɪl dɛd ðɪs deɪ, bʌɾ ɪf i kəd də ɪt wɪθaʊt kɪlɪŋ ɛniwʌn ɛls. . . . ðə wivz vænɪʃt əz i pʊl hɪmsɛlf tə hɪz fit wʌns mɔɹ ən lɪmp hɝidli tə ðə dɔɹz ɪn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə hɔl, tɔl θɪŋz wɪð ɛvɹi pænəl sɛt wɪð naɪn ɡoʊldən biz ðə saɪz ə hɪz fɪst.

Only after he had done it did he think that there might be someone between him and Sammael. He intended to see Sammael dead this day, but if he could do it without killing anyone else. . . . The weaves vanished as he pulled himself to his feet once more and limped hurriedly to the doors in the side of the hall, tall things with every panel set with nine golden bees the size of his fist.

ə smɔl floʊ ʌv ɛɹ pʊʃt wʌn dɔɹ oʊpən bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ɪt, tu smɔl tə bi dɪtɛktəɾ əɾ ɛni dɪstəns. hɑbəlɪŋ ɪndə ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, hi sæŋk tə wʌn ni. ðəɾ ʌðɝ mænz saɪd wɑz faɪɝ, hɪz hil æɡəni. ɹænd pʊld ɪz sɔɹɾ ʌp ən lin ɑn ɪt, weɪɾɪŋ. ə klin-ʃeɪvən fɛloʊ wɪð plʌmp pɪŋk tʃiks pɪɹɾ ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ daʊn ðə weɪ; ɪnʌf ə hɪz koʊt ʃoʊd tə neɪm ɪm ə sɝvənt. ət list, ə koʊt ɡɹin ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ən jɛloʊ ɑn ði ʌðɝ lʊk laɪk lɪvɝi. ðə fɛloʊ sɔ ɹænd ænd, vɛɹi sloʊli, əz ðoʊ hi maɪt nɑt bi noʊɾəst ɪf i muv sloʊli ɪnʌf, slɪd bæk aʊɾ ə saɪt. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, sɑmaɪl wəɾ əv tə. . . .

A small flow of Air pushed one door open before he reached it, too small to be detected at any distance. Hobbling into the corridor, he sank to one knee. That other man's side was fire, his heel agony. Rand pulled his sword up and leaned on it, waiting. A clean-shaven fellow with plump pink cheeks peered around a corner down the way; enough of his coat showed to name him a servant. At least, a coat green on one side and yellow on the other looked like livery. The fellow saw Rand and, very slowly, as though he might not be noticed if he moved slowly enough, slid back out of sight. Sooner or later, Sammael would have to. . . .

"ɪljən bɪlɔŋz tə mi!" ðə vɔɪs bumd ɪn ði ɛɹ, fɹəm ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, ən ɹænd kɝst. ðət hæd tə bi ðə seɪm wiv i hɪmsɛlf hæd juzd ɪn ðə skwɛɹ, əɹ sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi laɪk; ɪt ɹikwaɪɝd soʊ lɪɾəl ə ðə paʊɝ i maɪt nɑɾ əv fɛl ði æktʃəwəl floʊz hæɾ i bɪn wɪðɪn tɛn peɪsɪz ə ðə mæn. "ɪljən ɪz maɪn! aɪ woʊn dɪstʃɹɔɪ wʌt bɪlɔŋz tə mi kɪlɪŋ ju, ən aɪ woʊn lɛt jə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɪt, iðɝ. jə hæd ðə nɝv tə kʌm æftɝ mi hɪɹ? juv ðə kɝədʒ tə fɑloʊ mi əɡɛn?" ə slaɪ mɑkɪŋ toʊn ɛntɝɪŋ ðət θʌndɝɪŋ vɔɪs. "du juv ðə kɝədʒ?" sʌmwɛɹ əbʌv, ə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpən ən kloʊzd; ɹænd hæd noʊ daʊt ðət wɑz wʌɾ ɪt wɑz.

"Illian belongs to me!" The voice boomed in the air, from every direction, and Rand cursed. That had to be the same weave he himself had used in the square, or something very like; it required so little of the Power he might not have felt the actual flows had he been within ten paces of the man. "Illian is mine! I won't destroy what belongs to me killing you, and I won't let you destroy it, either. You had the nerve to come after me here? Do you have the courage to follow me again?" A sly mocking tone entering that thundering voice. "Do you have the courage?" Somewhere above, a gateway opened and closed; Rand had no doubt that was what it was.

ðə kɝədʒ? dɪɾ i hæv ðə kɝədʒ? "ɪm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," hi mʌɾɝd, "æn aɪm gɑnə kɪl ju." wivɪŋ ə ɡeɪtweɪ, hi stɛp θɹu, tə ə pleɪs flɔɹz əbʌv.

The courage? Did he have the courage? "I'm the Dragon Reborn," he muttered, "and I'm going to kill you." Weaving a gateway, he stepped through, to a place floors above.

ɪt wɑz ənʌðɝ hɔlweɪ, laɪnd wɪð wɔl hæŋʒɪŋz ʃoʊɪŋ ʃɪps ət si. ət ðə fɑɹ ɛnd, ðə læs kɹɪmzən slɪvɝ ə ðə sʌn ʃoʊn θɹu ə koʊlən-neɪɾɪd wɔk. ðə ɹɛzədu ʌv sɑmaɪlz ɡeɪtweɪ hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ðə dɪsəpeɪɾɪŋ floʊz laɪk feɪnli ɡloʊɪŋ ɡoʊsts. nɑt soʊ feɪn ɹænd kəd nɑt meɪk əm aʊt, ðoʊ. hi bɪɡæn tə wiv, ðən stɑpt. hi hæd lɛpt ʌp hɪɹ wɪθaʊɾ ə θɔɾ ʌv ə tʃɹæp. ɪf i kɑpid wʌɾ i sɔ ɪɡzækli, hi wəd stɛp aʊt wɛɹɛvɝ sɑmaɪl hæd, əɹ soʊ kloʊs əz meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns. bʌt wɪð dʒʌst ə slaɪɾ ɔltɝeɪʃən; noʊ weɪ tə bi ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ ðə tʃeɪnʒ wɑz fɪfti fiɾ əɹ faɪv hʌnʒɹəd, jɛɾ iðɝ wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf.

It was another hallway, lined with wall hangings showing ships at sea. At the far end, the last crimson sliver of the sun shone through a colon-naded walk. The residue of Sammael's gateway hung in the air, the dissipating flows like faintly glowing ghosts. Not so faint Rand could not make them out, though. He began to weave, then stopped. He had leaped up here without a thought of a trap. If he copied what he saw exactly, he would step out wherever Sammael had, or so close as made no difference. But with just a slight alteration; no way to be sure whether the change was fifty feet or five hundred, yet either was close enough.

ðə vɝɾɪkəl sɪlvɝ slæʃ bɪɡæn tə ɹoʊteɪɾ oʊpən, ɹɪvilɪŋ ðə ʃædoʊ-kloʊkt ɹuənz ʌv ɡɹeɪtnəs, nɑt kwaɪɾ əz dɑɹk əz ðə hɔlweɪ. sin θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ðə sʌn wɑz ə slaɪtli θɪkɝ slaɪs ə ɹɛd, hæf-hɪɾən baɪ ə ʃæɾɝd doʊm. hi nu ðət pleɪs. ðə læs taɪm i hæd ɡɔn ðɛɹ, hi hæɾ æɾəd ə neɪm tə ðət lɪst ə meɪɾənz ɪn ɪz hɛd; ðə fɝs taɪm, pdən feɪn hæd fɑloʊɾ ən bɪkʌm mɔɹ ðən ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, wɝs ðən ə dɑɹk-fɹɛnd. ðət sɑmaɪl hæd flɛd tə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ sim laɪk kʌmɪŋ fʊl sɝkəl ɪn mɔɹ weɪz ðət wʌn. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm tə weɪs naʊ ðəɾ i wɑz oʊpənɪŋ ðə weɪ. bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ stɑpt waɪɾənɪŋ, hi ɹæn θɹu ɪndə ðə ɹævɪdʒ sɪɾi ðət wʌns hæd bɪn kɔld ɑɹɪdhɔl, ɹæn lɪmpɪŋ, lɛɾɪŋ ðə wiv ɡoʊ əz i ɹæn, buts kɹʌntʃɪŋ ɑn bɹoʊkən peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ən dɛd widz.

The vertical silver slash began to rotate open, revealing the shadow-cloaked ruins of greatness, not quite as dark as the hallway. Seen through the gateway, the sun was a slightly thicker slice of red, half-hidden by a shattered dome. He knew that place. The last time he had gone there, he had added a name to that list of Maidens in his head; the first time, Padan Fain had followed and become more than a Darkfriend, worse than a Dark-friend. That Sammael had fled to Shadar Logoth seemed like coming full circle in more ways that one. There was no time to waste now that he was opening the way. Before the gateway stopped widening, he ran through into the ravaged city that once had been called Aridhol, ran limping, letting the weave go as he ran, boots crunching on broken paving stones and dead weeds.

ðə fɝs kɔɹnɝ i keɪm tə, hi dʌkt ɝaʊnd. ðə ɡɹaʊnd ʃʊk ʌndɝ ɪz fiɾ əz ɹɔɹz saʊndəd bæk ðə weɪ hi hæd kʌm, laɪt flæʃɪŋ ətɑp flæʃ ɪn ðə twaɪlaɪt dɑɹknəs; hi fɛl ðə wɑʃ ə ɝθ ən faɪɝ ən ɛɹ. ʃɹiks ən bɛloʊz ɹoʊz θɹu ðə θʌndɝəs kɹæʃɪz. seɪɾɪn pʌlsɪŋ ɪnsaɪd hɪm, hi hɑbəld əweɪ wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ bæk. hi ɹæn, ən wɪð ðə paʊɝ fɪlɪŋ hɪm, ivən ɪn ðə dɑɹk ʃædoʊz i kəd si klɪɹli.

The first corner he came to, he ducked around. The ground shook under his feet as roars sounded back the way he had come, light flashing atop flash in the twilight darkness; he felt the wash of Earth and Fire and Air. Shrieks and bellows rose through the thunderous crashes. Saidin pulsing inside him, he hobbled away without looking back. He ran, and with the Power filling him, even in the dark shadows he could see clearly.

ɔl ɝaʊn ðə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾi leɪ hjudʒ mɑɹbəl pæləsəz itʃ wɪð fɔɹ ən faɪv doʊmz ə dɪfɹənt ʃeɪps peɪntəd kɹɪmzən baɪ ðə sɛɾɪŋ sʌn, bɹɑnz faʊntənz ən stætʃuz əɾ ɛvɹi ɪntɝsɛkʃən, ɡɹeɪt stʃɹɛtʃəz ə kɑləmz ɹʌnɪŋ tə taʊɝz ðət sɔɹɾ əkɹɔs ðə sʌn. ðeɪ sɔɹd wən ɪntækt, ət list; mɔɹ ɛndəɾ ɪn əbɹʌp dʒæədnəs ðən nɑt. fəɹ ɛvɹi doʊm ðət stʊd hoʊl, tɛn wɝ bɹoʊkən ɛɡʃəlz wɪð ðə tɑp hækt ɔf əɹ wʌn saɪd ɡɔn. stætʃuz leɪ tɑpəld ɪn fɹæɡməns, əɹ stʊd wɪð mɪsɪŋ ɑɹmz, əɹ hɛdz. swɪfli dipənɪŋ dɑɹknəs ɹeɪst əkɹɔs spɹɔlɪŋ hɪlz ə ɹʌbəl, ðə fju stʌntɪd tʃɹiz klɪŋɪŋ tə ðɛɹ sloʊps twɪstəd ʃeɪps laɪk bɹoʊkən fɪŋɡɝz əɡɛns ðə skaɪ.

All around the great city lay huge marble palaces each with four and five domes of different shapes painted crimson by the setting sun, bronze fountains and statues at every intersection, great stretches of columns running to towers that soared across the sun. They soared when intact, at least; more ended in abrupt jaggedness than not. For every dome that stood whole, ten were broken eggshells with the top hacked off or one side gone. Statues lay toppled in fragments, or stood with missing arms, or heads. Swiftly deepening darkness raced across sprawling hills of rubble, the few stunted trees clinging to their slopes twisted shapes like broken fingers against the sky.

ə fæn ə bɹɪks ən stoʊn spɹɛɾ əkɹɔs ðə weɪ fɹəm wʌt maɪɾ əv bɪn ə smɔl pæləs; hæf ɪts fɹʌn mɪsɪŋ, ðə ɹɛst ə ðə kɑləm fəsɑd lin dʒɹʌŋkənli təwɔɹd ðə stʃɹit. hi stɑpt ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə stʃɹit, dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə fæn, weɪɾɪŋ, filɪŋ fəɹ ənʌðɝ tə juz seɪɾɪn. klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə saɪdz ə ðə stʃɹit wɑz nɑɾ ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə, ən nɑt sɪmpli kəz ɛni bɪldɪŋ maɪt fɔl əɾ ɛni taɪm. ə θaʊzən ənsin aɪz sim tə wɑtʃ fɹəm wɪndoʊz laɪk ɡaʊdʒd aɪ sɑkəts, tə wɑtʃ wɪð ə nɪɹli pælpəbəl sɛns ʌv æntɪsəpeɪʃən. dɪstənli hi fɛl ðə nu waʊn ɪn ɪz saɪd θɹɑbɪŋ, ə slæʃ ə fleɪm, ɛkoʊɪŋ ði ivəl ðət klʌŋ tə ðə vɛɹi dʌst ə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. ði oʊl skɑɹ klɛntʃt laɪk ə fɪst. ðə peɪn ə hɪz fʊt sim vɛɹi dɪstən ɪndid. kloʊsɝ, ðə vɔɪɾ ɪtsɛlf pʊlseɪɾɪd ɝaʊn hɪm, ðə dɑɹk wʌnz teɪn ɑn seɪɾɪn biɾɪŋ ɪn taɪm wɪð ðə naɪf slæʃ əkɹɔs ɪz ɹɪbz. ə deɪnʒɝəs pleɪs baɪ deɪlaɪt, ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. baɪ naɪt. . . .

A fan of bricks and stone spread across the way from what might have been a small palace; half its front missing, the rest of the columned facade leaned drunkenly toward the street. He stopped in the middle of the street, just short of the fan, waiting, feeling for another to use saidin. Clinging to the sides of the street was not a good idea, and not simply because any building might fall at any time. A thousand unseen eyes seemed to watch from windows like gouged eye sockets, to watch with a nearly palpable sense of anticipation. Distantly he felt the new wound in his side throbbing, a slash of flame, echoing the evil that clung to the very dust of Shadar Logoth. The old scar clenched like a fist. The pain of his foot seemed very distant indeed. Closer, the Void itself pulsated around him, the Dark One's taint on saidin beating in time with the knife slash across his ribs. A dangerous place by daylight, Shadar Logoth. By night. . . .

daʊn ðə stʃɹit, bɪɑn ə spaɪɝd mɑnjəmən mɝækjələsli stændɪŋ stʃɹeɪt, sʌmθɪŋ muvd, ə ʃæɾoʊd ʃeɪp dɑɹɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə weɪ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. ɹænd ɔlmoʊs tʃænəld, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt bɪliv sɑmaɪl wəd ɡoʊ skʌɾəlɪŋ ðət weɪ. wən i fɝst stɛpt ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, wən sɑmaɪl tʃɹaɪd tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪz ɡeɪtweɪ, hi hæd hɝd hɔɹəbəl skɹimz. ðeɪ hæd bɛɹli ɹɛdʒəstɝd, ðɛn. nʌθɪŋ lɪvd ɪn ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, nɑɾ ivən ɹæts. sɑmaɪl mʌst əv bɹɔt hɛntʃmən, fɛloʊz i dɪd nɑt maɪn kɪlɪŋ ɪn ən ətɛmp tə ɹitʃ ɹænd. meɪbi wʌn ə ðɛm kəd lid ɹænd tə sɑmaɪl. hi hɝid fɔɹwɝɾ əz fæst əz i kʊd, əz saʊnləsli əz i kʊd. ʃæɾɝd peɪvmən kɹʌntʃt ʌndɝ ɪz buts wɪð ə saʊn laɪk boʊnz snæpɪŋ. hi hoʊpt ɪt wɑz laʊɾ oʊnli tə hɪz seɪɾɪn-ɛnhænst ɪɹz.

Down the street, beyond a spired monument miraculously standing straight, something moved, a shadowed shape darting across the way in the darkness. Rand almost channeled, but he could not believe Sammael would go scuddling that way. When he first stepped into the city, when Sammael tried to destroy everything around his gateway, he had heard horrible screams. They had barely registered, then. Nothing lived in Shadar Logoth, not even rats. Sammael must have brought henchmen, fellows he did not mind killing in an attempt to reach Rand. Maybe one of them could lead Rand to Sammael. He hurried forward as fast as he could, as soundlessly as he could. Shattered pavement crunched under his boots with a sound like bones snapping. He hoped it was loud only to his saidin-enhanced ears.

stɑpɪŋ ət ðə beɪs ə ðə spaɪɹ, ə θɪk stoʊn niɾəl kʌvɝd wɪð floʊɪŋ skɹɪpt, hi pɪɹɾ əhɛd. huɛvɝ hæd muvd wɑz ɡɔn; oʊnli fulz əɹ ðə mædli bɹeɪv wɛn ɪnsaɪɾ ɪn ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ ət naɪt. ði ivəl ðət steɪnd ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, ði ivəl ðət hæd mɝɾɝd ɑɹɪdhɔl, hæd nɑt daɪd wɪð ɑɹɪdhɔl. fɑɹðɝ əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹit, ə tɛnʒɹɪl ə sɪlvɝ-ɡɹeɪ fɑɡ weɪvɝɾ aʊɾ ʌv ə wɪndoʊ, kɹipɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ənʌðɝ ðət keɪm tə miɾ ɪt fɹəm ə waɪd ɡæp ɪn ə haɪ stoʊn wɔl. ðə dɛpθs ə ðət ɡæp ʃoʊn əz ðoʊ ə fʊl mun leɪ ɪnsaɪd. wɪð ðə naɪt, mɑʃəɾɝ ɹoʊmd ɪts sɪɾi pɹɪzən, ə væs pɹɛzəns ðət kəɾ əpɪɹ ɪn ə dʌzən pleɪsəz ət wʌns, ə hʌnʒɹəd. mɑʃəɾɝz tʌtʃ wɑz nɑɾ ə plɛzənt weɪ tə daɪ. ɪnsaɪd ɹænd, ðə teɪn ɑn seɪɾɪn bit hɑɹɾɝ; ðə dɪstən faɪɝ ɪn ɪz saɪd flɪkɝd laɪk tɛn θaʊzən laɪtnɪŋz, wʌn ɑn tɑp ə ðə læst. ivən ðə ɡɹaʊn sim tə paʊn bɪniθ ɪz buts.

Stopping at the base of the spire, a thick stone needle covered with flowing script, he peered ahead. Whoever had moved was gone; only fools or the madly brave went inside in Shadar Logoth at night. The evil that stained Shadar Logoth, the evil that had murdered Aridhol, had not died with Aridhol. Farther along the street, a tendril of silver-gray fog wavered out of a window, creeping toward another that came to meet it from a wide gap in a high stone wall. The depths of that gap shone as though a full moon lay inside. With the night, Mashadar roamed its city prison, a vast presence that could appear in a dozen places at once, a hundred. Mashadar's touch was not a pleasant way to die. Inside Rand, the taint on saidin beat harder; the distant fire in his side flickered like ten thousand lightnings, one on top of the last. Even the ground seemed to pound beneath his boots.

hi tɝnd, hæf-θɪŋkɪŋ tə liv naʊ. vɛɹi laɪkli, sɑmaɪl hæd ɡɔn, naʊ ðət mɑʃəɾɝ wɑz aʊt. vɛɹi laɪkli ðə mæn hæd lʊɹɾ ɪm hɪɹ ɪn ðə hoʊp i wəd sɝtʃ ðə ɹuənz əntɪl mɑʃəɾɝ kɪl hɪm. hi tɝnd, ən stɑpt, kɹaʊtʃɪŋ əɡɛns ðə spaɪɹ. tu tʃɹɑləks wɝ kɹipɪŋ daʊn ðət stʃɹit, bʌlki ʃeɪps ɪn blæk meɪl, hæf əɡɛn əz tɔl əz hi, əɹ mɔɹ. spaɪks stʊɾ aʊɾ ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝz ən ɛlboʊz ə ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ, ən ðeɪ kæɹid spɪɹz wɪð lɔŋ blæk pɔɪns ən wɪkəd hʊks. tə hɪz seɪɾɪn-fɪld aɪz, ðɛɹ feɪsəz stʊɾ aʊt klɪɹli, wʌn dɪstɔɹɾəd baɪ ən iɡəlz bik wɛɹ maʊθ ən noʊz ʃəɾ əv bɪn, ði ʌðɝ baɪ ə bɔɹz tʌsk snaʊt. ɛvɹi laɪn ə ðɛɹ kɹipɪŋ ʃaʊɾəd fɪɹ; tʃɹɑləks lʌv kɪlɪŋ, lʌv blʌd, bʌt ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ tɛɹəfaɪd ðɛm. ðəɹ wəd bi mɹdʒɹɑl əbaʊt; noʊ tʃɹɑlɑk wʊɾə ɛntɝd ðɪs sɪɾi wɪθaʊt mɹdʒɹɑl tə dʒɹaɪv ɪt. noʊ mɹdʒɹɑl wʊɾə ɛntɝd wɪθaʊt sɑmaɪl dʒɹaɪvɪŋ. ɔl ʌv wɪtʃ mɛn sɑmaɪl mʌst stɪl bi hɪɹ, əɹ ðiz tʃɹɑləks wəd bi ɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ ðə ɡeɪts, nɑt hʌntɪŋ. ən ðeɪ wɝ hʌntɪŋ. ðət bɔɹz snaʊt wɑz snʌf-flɪŋ ði ɛɹ fəɹ ə sɛnt.

He turned, half-thinking to leave now. Very likely, Sammael had gone, now that Mashadar was out. Very likely the man had lured him here in the hope he would search the ruins until Mashadar killed him. He turned, and stopped, crouching against the spire. Two Trollocs were creeping down that street, bulky shapes in black mail, half again as tall as he, or more. Spikes stood out on the shoulders and elbows of their armor, and they carried spears with long black points and wicked hooks. To his saidin-filled eyes, their faces stood out clearly, one distorted by an eagle's beak where mouth and nose should have been, the other by a boar's tusked snout. Every line of their creeping shouted fear; Trollocs loved killing, loved blood, but Shadar Logoth terrified them. There would be Myrddraal about; no Trolloc would have entered this city without Myrddraal to drive it. No Myrddraal would have entered without Sammael driving. All of which meant Sammael must still be here, or these Trollocs would be running for the gates, not hunting. And they were hunting. That boar's snout was snuf-fling the air for a scent.

əbɹʌpli ə fɪɡjɝ ɪn ɹæɡz lɛp fɹəm ə wɪndoʊ əbʌv ðə tʃɹɑləks, fɔlɪŋ ɑn əm wɪð spɪɹ ɔlɹɛɾi stæbɪŋ. ən il, ə wʊmən, ʃoʊufə ɹæpt ɝaʊn əɹ hɛd bʌt veɪl hæŋɪŋ. ði iɡəl-bik tʃɹɑlɑk ʃɹikt əz əɹ spɪɹpɔɪn stæb dip ɪndə ɪts saɪd, stæbd əɡɛn. əz ɪts kəmpænjən fɛl, kɪkɪŋ, bɔɹ-snaʊt spʌn wɪð snɑɹl, θɹʌstɪŋ vɪʃəsli, bʌt ʃi dʌk loʊ ʌndɝ ðə blæk hʊk pɔɪn ən stæbd ʌp ɪndə ðə kɹitʃɝz stʌmək, ən ɪt wɛn daʊn ɪn ə θɹæʃɪŋ hip wɪð ði ʌðɝ.

Abruptly a figure in rags leaped from a window above the Trollocs, falling on them with spear already stabbing. An Aiel, a woman, shoufa wrapped around her head but veil hanging. The eagle-beaked Trolloc shrieked as her spearpoint stabbed deep into its side, stabbed again. As its companion fell, kicking, boar-snout spun with snarl, thrusting viciously, but she ducked low under the black hooked point and stabbed up into the creature's stomach, and it went down in a thrashing heap with the other.

ɹænd wɑz ɑn ɪz fiɾ ən ɹʌnɪŋ bɪfɔɹ i θɔt. "laɪæ!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. hi hæd θɔɾ əɹ dɛd, əbændən hɪɹ baɪ hɪm, dɛd fəɹ hɪm. laɪæ, ʌv ðə koʊseɪɾə tʃɑɝin; ðət neɪm bleɪzd ɑn ðə lɪst ɪn ɪz hɛd.

Rand was on his feet and running before he thought. "Liah!" he shouted. He had thought her dead, abandoned here by him, dead for him. Liah, of the Cosaida Chareen; that name blazed on the list in his head.

ʃi wɝl tə kənfɹʌn hɪm, spɪɹ ɹɛɾi ɪn wʌn hænd, ɹaʊn bʊl-haɪd bʌkəlɝ ɪn ði ʌðɝ. ðə feɪs i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əz pɹɪɾi dɪspaɪt skɑɹz ɑn boʊθ tʃiks wɑz kəntɔɹɾəd wɪð ɹeɪdʒ. "maɪn!" ʃi hɪs θɹɛɾənɪŋli θɹu hɝ tiθ. "maɪn! noʊ wʌn meɪ kʌm hɪɹ! noʊ wʌn!"

She whirled to confront him, spear ready in one hand, round bull-hide buckler in the other. The face he remembered as pretty despite scars on both cheeks was contorted with rage. "Mine!" she hissed threateningly through her teeth. "Mine! No one may come here! No one!"

hi stɑpt ɪn ɪz tʃɹæks. ðət spɪɹ weɪɾəd, iɡɝ tə sik ɪz ɹɪbz tu. "laɪæ, jə noʊ mi," hi sɛd sɔfli. "ju noʊ mi. əl teɪk jə bæk tə ðə meɪɾənz, bæk tə jəɹ spɪɹ-sɪstɝz." hi hɛld aʊɾ ɪz hænd.

He stopped in his tracks. That spear waited, eager to seek his ribs too. "Liah, you know me," he said softly. "You know me. I'll take you back to the Maidens, back to your spear-sisters." He held out his hand.

hɝ ɹeɪdʒ mɛltəɾ ɪndə ə twɪstəd fɹaʊn. ʃi tɪltəɾ əɹ hɛd tə wʌn saɪd. "ɹæn ælθɹ?" ʃi sɛd sloʊli. hɝ aɪz waɪɾənd, fɔlɪŋ tə ðə dɛd tʃɹɑləks, ən ə lʊk ə hɔɹɝ spɹɛɾ əkɹɔs əɹ feɪs. "ɹæn ælθɹ," ʃi wɪspɝd, fʌmbəlɪŋ ðə blæk veɪl ɪndə pleɪs əkɹɔs əɹ feɪs wɪð ðə hæn ðət hɛld əɹ spɪɹ. "ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn!" ʃi weɪld. ən flɛd.

Her rage melted into a twisted frown. She tilted her head to one side. "Rand al'Thor?" she said slowly. Her eyes widened, falling to the dead Trollocs, and a look of horror spread across her face. "Rand al'Thor," she whispered, fumbling the black veil into place across her face with the hand that held her spear. "The Car'a'carn!" she wailed. And fled.

hi hɑbəld æftɝ hɝ, skɹæmbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ paɪlz ə ɹʌbəl spɹɛɾ əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit, fɔlɪŋ, ɹɪpɪŋ ɪz koʊt, fɔlɪŋ əɡɛn ən nɪɹli ɹɪpɪŋ ɪɾ ɔf, ɹoʊlɪŋ ən pɪkɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ʌp ɑn ðə ɹʌn. ðə wiknəs ə hɪz bɑɾi wɑz dɪstənt, ən ðə peɪn ʌv ɪt, bʌɾ ivən floʊɾɪŋ dip ɪn ðə vɔɪd, hi kəɾ oʊnli pʊʃ ðət bɑɾi soʊ hɑɹd. laɪæ vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə naɪt. ɝaʊn ðə nɛks blæk-ʃæɾoʊd kɔɹnɝ, hi θɔt.

He hobbled after her, scrambling over piles of rubble spread across the street, falling, ripping his coat, falling again and nearly ripping it off, rolling and picking himself up on the run. The weakness of his body was distant, and the pain of it, but even floating deep in the Void, he could only push that body so hard. Liah vanished into the night. Around the next black-shadowed corner, he thought.

hi lɪmpt ɝaʊn ðəɾ əz fæst əz i kʊd. ən nɪɹli ɹæn ɪndə fɔɹ blæk-meɪl tʃɹɑləks ən ə mɹdʒɹɑl, ɪŋki kloʊk hæŋɪŋ ənnətʃɝəli stɪl daʊn ɪts bæk əz ðə feɪd muvd. ðə tʃɹɑləks snɑɹəld ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, jɛt ʃɑk læstəd lɛs ðən ə hɑɹtbit. hʊk spɪɹz ən saɪð-kɝv sɔɹdz ɹoʊz; ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz dɛd-blæk bleɪd wɑz ɪn ɪts fɪst, ə bleɪd ðət ɡeɪv wunz ɔlmoʊst əz dɛdli əz feɪnz dæɡɝ.

He limped around that as fast as he could. And nearly ran into four black-mailed Trollocs and a Myrddraal, inky cloak hanging unnaturally still down its back as the Fade moved. The Trollocs snarled in surprise, yet shock lasted less than a heartbeat. Hooked spears and scythe-curved swords rose; the Myrddraal's dead-black blade was in its fist, a blade that gave wounds almost as deadly as Fain's dagger.

ɹænd dɪd nɑɾ ivən tʃɹaɪ tə dʒɹɔ ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪz saɪd. dɛθ ɪn ə tæɾɝd ɹɛd koʊt, hi tʃænəld, ən ə sɔɹɾ ə faɪɝ wɑz ɪn ɪz hænz, pʌlsɪŋ dɑɹkli wɪð ðə θɹəb ə seɪɾɪn, swipɪŋ ən aɪləs hɛd fɹəm ɪts ʃoʊldɝz. sɪmpəlɝ tə hæv dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ əm ɔl ðə weɪ hi hæd sin ði æʃəmən kɪl ət dəməaɪz wɛlz, bʌt tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ðə wivz naʊ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃeɪnʒ, maɪt teɪk ə feɪɾəl moʊmənt. ðoʊz sɔɹdz kəd kɪl ivən hɪm. hi dæns ðə fɔɹmz ɪn ə dɑɹknəs lɪt baɪ ðə fleɪm ɪn ɪz hænz, ʃædoʊz flaɪɪŋ əkɹɔs feɪsəz əbʌv hɪm, feɪsəz wɪð wʊlvz' mʌzəlz ən ɡoʊts', feɪsəz kəntɔɹɾəd ɪn skɹimz əz ɪz faɪɝi bleɪd slaɪs θɹu blæk meɪl ən ðə flɛʃ bɪniθ əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ wɔɾɝ. tʃɹɑləks dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn nʌmbɝz ən oʊvɝwɛlmɪŋ fɝɑsəɾi; feɪsɪŋ hɪm, ən ðət sɔɹɾ ə ðə paʊɝ, ðeɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl əv stʊd stɑk-stɪl, ənɑɹmd.

Rand did not even try to draw the heron-mark sword at his side. Death in a tattered red coat, he channeled, and a sword of fire was in his hands, pulsing darkly with the throb of saidin, sweeping an eyeless head from its shoulders. Simpler to have destroyed them all the way he had seen the Asha'man kill at Dumai's Wells, but changing the weaves now, trying to change, might take a fatal moment. Those swords could kill even him. He danced the forms in a darkness lit by the flame in his hands, shadows flying across faces above him, faces with wolves' muzzles and goats', faces contorted in screams as his fiery blade sliced through black mail and the flesh beneath as if they were water. Trollocs depended on numbers and overwhelming ferocity; facing him, and that sword of the Power, they might as well have stood stock-still, unarmed.

ðə sɔɹd vænɪʃt fɹəm ɪz hænz. stɪl pɔɪzd ət ði ɛn ə ðə fɔɹm kɔl twɪstɪŋ ðə wɪnd, hi stʊɾ əmʌŋ dɛθ. ðə læs tʃɹɑlɑk tə fɔl stɪl θɹæʃt, ɡoʊt hɔɹnz skɹeɪpɪŋ ɑn ðə fɹæɡməntɪd peɪvmənt. ðə hɛdləs mɹdʒɹɑl jɛt flʌŋ ɪts ɑɹmz əbaʊt, ʌv kɔɹs, buɾɪd fit skɹæbəlɪŋ waɪldli; hæfmən dɪd nɑt daɪ kwɪkli, ivən hɛdləs.

The sword vanished from his hands. Still poised at the end of the form called Twisting the Wind, he stood among death. The last Trolloc to fall still thrashed, goat horns scraping on the fragmented pavement. The headless Myrddraal yet flung its arms about, of course, booted feet scrabbling wildly; Halfmen did not die quickly, even headless.

noʊ sunɝ dɪd ðə sɔɹd dɪsəpɪɹ ðən sɪlvɝ laɪtnɪŋ læns daʊn fɹəm ðə klaʊdləs, stɑɹi skaɪ.

No sooner did the sword disappear than silver lightning lanced down from the cloudless, starry sky.

ðə fɝs boʊl stʃɹʌk wɪð ə dɛfənɪŋ ɹɔɹ nɑt fɔɹ peɪsɪz əweɪ. ðə wɝl tɝnd waɪt, ən ðə vɔɪd kəlæpst. ðə ɡɹaʊn baʊnst ʌndɝ ɪm əz ənʌðɝ boʊl stʃɹʌk, ən ənʌðɝ. hi hæd nɑt ɹilaɪzd i wɑz ɑn ɪz feɪs əntɪl ðɛn. ði ɛɹ kɹækəld. deɪzd, hi pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf ʌp, hæf fɔlɪŋ əz i ɹæn fɹəm ə heɪl ə laɪtnɪŋ ðət ɹɪp ðə stʃɹiɾ əpɑɹt tə ə θʌndɝ ə kəlæpsɪŋ bɪldɪŋz. stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛɾ i stæɡɝd, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ wɛɹ, soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪt wɑz əweɪ.

The first bolt struck with a deafening roar not four paces away. The world turned white, and the Void collapsed. The ground bounced under him as another bolt struck, and another. He had not realized he was on his face until then. The air crackled. Dazed, he pushed himself up, half falling as he ran from a hail of lightning that ripped the street apart to a thunder of collapsing buildings. Straight ahead he staggered, not caring where, so long as it was away.

sʌɾənli hɪz hɛd klɪɹɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪm tə si wɛɹ i wɑz, ɹilɪŋ əkɹɔs ə væst stoʊn flɔɹ kʌvɝd wɪð tʌmbəl tʃʌŋks ə stoʊn, səm əz bɪɡ əz hi. hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ, dɑɹk ənivən hoʊlz ɡeɪpt ɪn ðə flɔɹstoʊnz. ɔl ɝaʊn ɹoʊz haɪ wɔlz, ən tiɹ əpɑn tiɹ ə dip bælkəniz ðət ɹæn ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊnd. oʊnli ə smɔl pɔɹʃən ʌv wʌt hæd wʌns bɪn ə væst ɹuf ɹɪmeɪnd, ət wʌn kɔɹnɝ. stɑɹz ʃoʊn bɹaɪɾ oʊvɝhɛd.

Suddenly his head cleared enough for him to see where he was, reeling across a vast stone floor covered with tumbled chunks of stone, some as big as he. Here and there, dark uneven holes gaped in the floorstones. All around rose high walls, and tier upon tier of deep balconies that ran all the way around. Only a small portion of what had once been a vast roof remained, at one corner. Stars shone bright overhead.

hi lɝtʃt ənʌðɝ stɛp, ən ðə flɔɹ ɡeɪv weɪ bɪniθ hɪm. dɛspɝətli hi flʌŋ aʊɾ ɪz hænz; wɪð ə dʒoʊlt, ðə ɹaɪt hæn kɑt hoʊld ʌv ə ɹʌf ɛdʒ. hi dæŋɡəld ɪndə pɪtʃ blæknəs. ðə fɔl bɪniθ ɪz buts maɪt bi ə fju spænz ɪndə ə beɪsmənt, əɹ ə maɪl fəɹ ɔl i kəd tɛl. hi kəd lætʃ bænz ʌv ɛɹ tə ðə dʒæɡd ɹɪm ə ðə hoʊl əbʌv ɪz hɛd tə hɛlp pʊl hɪmsɛlf aʊt, ɪksɛpt. . . . sʌmhaʊ, sɑmaɪl hæd sɛns ðə ɹɛləɾɪvli smɔl əmaʊn ə seɪɾɪn juzd ɪn ðə sɔɹd. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə dɪleɪ bɪfɔɹ ðə laɪtnɪŋz stʃɹʌk, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt seɪ haʊ lɔŋ i hæd teɪkən kɪlɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks. ə mɪnət? sɛkənz?

He lurched another step, and the floor gave way beneath him. Desperately he flung out his hands; with a jolt, the right hand caught hold of a rough edge. He dangled into pitch blackness. The fall beneath his boots might be a few spans into a basement, or a mile for all he could tell. He could latch bands of Air to the jagged rim of the hole above his head to help pull himself out, except. . . . Somehow, Sammael had sensed the relatively small amount of saidin used in the sword. There had been a delay before the lightnings struck, but he could not say how long he had taken killing the Trollocs. A minute? Seconds?

wɪð ə hiv, hi swʌŋ ɪz lɛft ɑɹm ʌp, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kætʃ ði ɛdʒ ə ðə hoʊl. peɪn noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bʌfɝd baɪ ðə vɔɪd stæb θɹu hɪz saɪd laɪk ə dæɡɝ ɡoʊɪŋ ɪn. spɑts dænst ɪn ɪz vɪʒən. wɝs, hɪz ɹaɪt hæn slɪpt ɑn kɹʌmbəlɪŋ stoʊn, ən i kəd fil ɪz fɪŋɡɝz wikənɪŋ. hi wɑz gɑnə hæv tə. . . .

With a heave, he swung his left arm up, trying to catch the edge of the hole. Pain no longer buffered by the Void stabbed through his side like a dagger going in. Spots danced in his vision. Worse, his right hand slipped on crumbling stone, and he could feel his fingers weakening. He was going to have to. . . .

ə hænd ɡɹæbd ɪz ɹaɪt ɹɪst. "ju ɑɹ ə ful," ə mænz dip vɔɪs sɛd. "kaʊn jɝsɛlf lʌki aɪ doʊn kɛɹ tə si jə daɪ tədeɪ." ðə hæn bɪɡæn dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪm ʌp. "ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ tə hɛlp?" ðə vɔɪs dɪmændəd. "aɪ doʊn ɪntɛn tə kæɹi jə ɑn maɪ ʃoʊldɝz, əɹ kɪl sɑmaɪl fəɹ ju."

A hand grabbed his right wrist. "You are a fool," a man's deep voice said. "Count yourself lucky I don't care to see you die today." The hand began drawing him up. "Are you going to help?" the voice demanded. "I don't intend to carry you on my shoulders, or kill Sammael for you."

ʃeɪkɪŋ ɔf ɪz ʃɑk, ɹænd ɹitʃt ʌp ən ɡɹæb ðə ɹɪm ə ðə hoʊl, pʊlɪŋ dɪspaɪt ði æɡəni ʌv ɪz saɪd. dɪspaɪt ði æɡəni, hi mænədʒ tə əkwaɪɝ ðə vɔɪɾ əɡɛn, tu, ən siz seɪɾɪn. hi dɪd nɑt tʃænəl, bʌɾ i wɑntəd tə bi ɹɛɾi.

Shaking off his shock, Rand reached up and grabbed the rim of the hole, pulling despite the agony of his side. Despite the agony, he managed to acquire the Void again, too, and seize saidin. He did not channel, but he wanted to be ready.

hɪz hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz keɪm əbʌv ðə flɔɹ, ən i kəd si ði ʌðɝ mæn, ə bɪɡ fɛloʊ lɪɾəl oʊldɝ ðən hi, wɪð hɛɹ blæk əz ðə naɪɾ ən ə koʊt blæk əz ən æʃəmənz. ɹænd hæd nɛvɝ sin ɪm bɪfɔɹ. ət list i wɑz nɑt wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən; ðoʊz feɪsəz i nu. hi θɔɾ i dɪd, ɛniweɪ. "hu ɑɹ ju?" hi dɪmændəd.

His head and shoulders came above the floor, and he could see the other man, a big fellow little older than he, with hair black as the night and a coat black as an Asha'man's. Rand had never seen him before. At least he was not one of the Forsaken; those faces he knew. He thought he did, anyway. "Who are you?" he demanded.

stɪl hivɪŋ, ðə mæn bɑɹkt ə læf. "dʒʌst seɪ ɪm ə wɑndɝɝ pæsɪŋ θɹu. dʒju ɹɪli wɑnə tɔk naʊ?"

Still heaving, the man barked a laugh. "Just say I'm a wanderer passing through. Do you really want to talk now?"

seɪvɪŋ ɪz bɹɛθ, ɹænd stʃɹʌɡəld ʌpwɝd, ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪz tʃɛst oʊvɝ ðə lɪp, hɪz weɪst. əbɹʌpli hi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ə ɡloʊ beɪðd ðə flɔɹ ɝaʊn əm laɪk ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ə fʊl mun.

Saving his breath, Rand struggled upward, getting his chest over the lip, his waist. Abruptly he realized that a glow bathed the floor around them like the glow of a full moon.

twɪstɪŋ tə lʊk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, hi sɔ mɑʃəɾɝ. nɑɾ ə tɛnʒɹɪl, bʌɾ ə ʃaɪnɪŋ sɪlvɝ-ɡɹeɪ weɪv ɹoʊlɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv wʌn ə ðə bælkəniz, ɑɹtʃɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ hɛdz. dɪsɛndɪŋ.

Twisting to look over his shoulder, he saw Mashadar. Not a tendril, but a shining silver-gray wave rolling out of one of the balconies, arching over their heads. Descending.

wɪθaʊɾ ə θɔt, hɪz fɹi hæn ɹoʊz, ən bɑlfaɪɝ ʃɑɾ ʌpwɝd, ə bɑɹ ə lɪkwəd waɪt faɪɝ slaɪsɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə weɪv sɪŋkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðɛm. dɪmli hi wɑz əwɛɹ ʌv ənʌðɝ bɑɹ ə peɪl sɑləd faɪɝ ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ði ʌðɝ mænz hæn ðət wɑz nɑt klæspɪŋ hɪz, ə bɑɹ slæʃɪŋ ði ɑpəzət weɪ fɹəm hɪz. ðə tu tʌtʃt.

Without a thought, his free hand rose, and balefire shot upward, a bar of liquid white fire slicing across the wave sinking toward them. Dimly he was aware of another bar of pale solid fire rising from the other man's hand that was not clasping his, a bar slashing the opposite way from his. The two touched.

hɛd ɹɪŋɪŋ laɪk ə stʃɹʌk ɡɔŋ, ɹænd kənvʌlsd, seɪɾɪn ən ðə vɔɪd ʃæɾɝɪŋ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz dʌbəld ɪn ɪz aɪz, ðə bælkəniz, ðə tʃʌŋks ə stoʊn laɪɪŋ əbaʊt ðə flɔɹ. ðəɹ sim tə bi ə pɛɹ ə ði ʌðɝ mæn oʊvɝlæpɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ, itʃ klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz hɛd bɪtwin tu hænz. blɪŋkɪŋ, ɹænd sɝtʃt fəɹ mɑʃəɾɝ. ðə weɪv ə ʃaɪnɪŋ mɪst wɑz ɡɔn; ə ɡloʊ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə bælkəniz əbʌv, bʌt dɪmɪŋ, ɹɪsiɾɪŋ, əz ɹændz aɪz bɪɡæn tə klɪɹ. ivən maɪnləs mɑʃəɾɝ flɛd bɑlfaɪɝ, ɪt simd.

Head ringing like a struck gong, Rand convulsed, saidin and the Void shattering. Everything was doubled in his eyes, the balconies, the chunks of stone lying about the floor. There seemed to be a pair of the other man overlapping one another, each clutching his head between two hands. Blinking, Rand searched for Mashadar. The wave of shining mist was gone; a glow remained in the balconies above, but dimming, receding, as Rand's eyes began to clear. Even mindless Mashadar fled balefire, it seemed.

ənstɛɾəli, hi ɡɑt tə hɪz fiɾ ən ɔfɝɾ ə hænd. "aɪ θɪŋk wi bɛs muv kwɪkli. wʌt hæpən ðɛɹ?"

Unsteadily, he got to his feet and offered a hand. "I think we best move quickly. What happened there?"

ði ʌðɝ mæn pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf ʌp wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs ət ɹændz pɹɑfɝd hænd. hi wɑz izəli əz tɔl əz ɹænd, ɹɛɹ ɪksɛpt əmʌŋ ði il. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt hæpənd," hi snɑɹəld. "ɹʌn, ɪf jə wɑnə lɪv." hi suɾəd ɪz oʊn wɝdz ɪmiɾiətli, dæʃɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ə ɹoʊ ʌv oʊpən ɑɹtʃəz. nɑɾ ɪn ðə nɪɹəst wɔl. mɑʃəɾɝ hæd kʌm fɹəm ðət wʌn.

The other man pushed himself up with a grimace at Rand's proffered hand. He was easily as tall as Rand, rare except among the Aiel. "I don't know what happened," he snarled. "Run, if you want to live." He suited his own words immediately, dashing toward a row of open arches. Not in the nearest wall. Mashadar had come from that one.

fʌmbəlɪŋ fəɹ ðə vɔɪd, ɹænd lɪmpt æftɝ ɪm əz fæst əz i kʊd, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ kəmplitli əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ, ðə laɪtnɪŋz fɛl əɡɛn, ə stɔɹm ə sɪlvɝ æɹoʊz. ðə tu ʌv əm dɑɹɾɪd θɹu ði ɑɹtʃweɪz pɝsud baɪ ðə θʌndɝ ʌv wɔlz ən flɔɹ kəlæpsɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, baɪ klaʊdz ə dʌst ən ə heɪl ə stoʊnz. ʃoʊldɝz hʌntʃt ən ən ɑɹm əkɹɔs ɪz feɪs, ɹænd ɹæn kɑfɪŋ θɹu ə bɹɔd ɹum wɛɹ tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ ɑɹtʃəz səpɔɹɾəd ðə silɪŋ ən bɪts ə stoʊn ɹeɪn daʊn.

Fumbling for the Void, Rand limped after him as fast as he could, but before they were completely across the floor, the lightnings fell again, a storm of silver arrows. The two of them darted through the archways pursued by the thunder of walls and floor collapsing behind them, by clouds of dust and a hail of stones. Shoulders hunched and an arm across his face, Rand ran coughing through a broad room where trembling arches supported the ceiling and bits of stone rained down.

hi bɝst aʊɾ ɪndə ə stʃɹit bɪfɔɹ i nu ɪt, stʌmbəlɪŋ θɹi stɛps bɪfɔɹ stɑpɪŋ. ðə peɪn ɪn ɪz saɪd meɪɾ ɪm wɑnə bɛn oʊvɝ, bʌɾ i θɔɾ ɪz lɛɡz maɪt ɡɪv weɪ ɪf i dɪd. hɪz wundəd fʊt θɹɑbd; ɪt simd ə jɪɹ əɡoʊ ðət ðət ɹɛd waɪɝ ə faɪɝ ən ɛɹ hæd stæbd ɪz hil. hɪz ɹɛskjuɝ stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm; kʌvɝd wɪð dʌs hɛd tə toʊ, ðə fɛloʊ mænədʒ tə lʊk ə kɪŋ.

He burst out into a street before he knew it, stumbling three steps before stopping. The pain in his side made him want to bend over, but he thought his legs might give way if he did. His wounded foot throbbed; it seemed a year ago that that red wire of Fire and Air had stabbed his heel. His rescuer stood watching him; covered with dust head to toe, the fellow managed to look a king.

"hu ɑɹ ju?" ɹænd æskt əɡɛn. "wʌn ə teɪmz mɛn? əɹ dɪd jə titʃ jɝsɛlf? jə kən ɡoʊ tə keɪɛmlɪn, jə noʊ, tə ðə blæk taʊɝ. jə doʊn əv tə lɪv əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ." fəɹ səm ɹizən, seɪɪŋ ðət meɪɾ ɪm fɹaʊn; hi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ.

"Who are you?" Rand asked again. "One of Taim's men? Or did you teach yourself? You can go to Caemlyn, you know, to the Black Tower. You don't have to live afraid of Aes Sedai." For some reason, saying that made him frown; he could not understand why.

"aɪ hæv nɛvɝ bɪn əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ," ðə mæn snæpt, ðən dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "ju pɹɑbli ʃəd liv hɪɹ naʊ, bʌɾ ɪf jə ɪntɛn tə steɪ ən kɪl sɑmaɪl, jə hæd bɛɾɝ tʃɹaɪ θɪŋkɪŋ laɪk hɪm. juv ʃoʊn jə kæn. hi ɔlweɪz laɪk dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ ə mæn ɪn saɪɾ ʌv wʌn ə ðət mænz tʃɹaɪəmfs, ɪf i kʊd. lækɪŋ ðæt, sʌmwɛɹ ðə mæn hæd mɑɹkt əz ɪz wəd du."

"I have never been afraid of Aes Sedai," the man snapped, then drew a deep breath. "You probably should leave here now, but if you intend to stay and kill Sammael, you had better try thinking like him. You have shown you can. He always liked destroying a man in sight of one of that man's triumphs, if he could. Lacking that, somewhere the man had marked as his would do."

"ðə weɪɡeɪt," ɹænd sɛd sloʊli. ɪf i kəd bi sɛd tə hæv mɑɹkt ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, ɪt hæd tə bi ðə weɪɡeɪt. "hiz weɪɾɪŋ nɪɹ ðə weɪɡeɪt. ən hiz tʃɹæps sɛt." wɔɹdz əz wɛl, ɪt simd, laɪk ðoʊz ɪn ɪljən, tə dɪtɛkt ə mæn tʃænəlɪŋ. sɑmaɪl hæd plæn ðɪs wɛl.

"The Waygate," Rand said slowly. If he could be said to have marked anything in Shadar Logoth, it had to be the Waygate. "He's waiting near the Waygate. And he has traps set." Wards as well, it seemed, like those in Illian, to detect a man channeling. Sammael had planned this well.

ðə mæn læft ɹaɪli. "ju kən faɪn ðə weɪ, ɪt simz. ɪf jəɹ lɛd baɪ ðə hænd. tʃɹaɪ nɑt tə stʌmbəl. ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni plænz wɪl əv tə bi ɹɪleɪɾ ɪf jə lɛt jɝsɛlf bi kɪl naʊ." tɝnɪŋ, hi stɑɹɾəd əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit fəɹ ən æliweɪ dʒʌst əhɛɾ ə ðɛm.

The man laughed wryly. "You can find the way, it seems. If you're led by the hand. Try not to stumble. A great many plans will have to be relaid if you let yourself be killed now." Turning, he started across the street for an alleyway just ahead of them.

"weɪt," ɹænd kɔld. ðə fɛloʊ kɛpt ɑn, nɑt lʊkɪŋ bæk. "hu ɑɹ ju? wʌt plænz?" ðə mæn vænɪʃt ɪndə ði æli.

"Wait," Rand called. The fellow kept on, not looking back. "Who are you? What plans?" The man vanished into the alley.

ɹænd tiɾɝd æftɝ hɪm, bʌt wən i ɹitʃt ðə maʊθ ə ðə nɛɹoʊ æli, ɪt wɑz ɛmpti. ənbɹoʊkən wɔlz ɹæn ə ɡʊd hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz tə ənʌðɝ stʃɹit, wɛɹ ə ɡloʊ toʊld ə jɛɾ ənʌðɝ pɑɹɾ ə mɑʃəɾɝ əbɹɔd, bʌt ðə mæn wɑz ɡɔn. wɪtʃ wɑz pjʊɹli ɪmpɑsəbəl. ðə fɛloʊ hæd hæd taɪm tə meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪf i nu haʊ, bʌt ðə ɹɛzədu wʊɾə bɪn vɪzəbəl, ən bɪsaɪdz, ðət mʌtʃ ə seɪɾɪn biɪŋ woʊvən soʊ nɪɹ wʊɾə ʃaʊɾəd ət hɪm.

Rand teetered after him, but when he reached the mouth of the narrow alley, it was empty. Unbroken walls ran a good hundred paces to another street, where a glow told of yet another part of Mashadar abroad, but the man was gone. Which was purely impossible. The fellow had had time to make a gateway, of course, if he knew how, but the residue would have been visible, and besides, that much of saidin being woven so near would have shouted at him.

sʌɾənli hi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i hæd nɑt fɛl seɪɾɪn wən ðə mæn meɪd bɑlfaɪɝ, iðɝ. dʒʌs θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðæt, ʌv ðə tu stʃɹimz tʌtʃɪŋ, meɪɾ ɪz vɪʒən dʌbəl əɡɛn. dʒʌs fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, hi kəd si ðə mænz feɪs əɡɛn, ʃɑɹp wɛɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls blɝd. hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ əntɪl ɪt klɪɹd. "hu ɪn ðə laɪɾ ɑɹ ju?" hi wɪspɝd. ən æftɝ ə moʊmənt, "wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪɾ ɑɹ ju?"

Suddenly he realized that he had not felt saidin when the man made balefire, either. Just thinking of that, of the two streams touching, made his vision double again. Just for an instant, he could see the man's face again, sharp where everything else blurred. He shook his head until it cleared. "Who in the Light are you?" he whispered. And after a moment, "What in the Light are you?"

huɛvɝ əɹ wʌtɛvɝ, ðə mæn wɑz ɡɔn, ðoʊ. sɑmaɪl wɑz stɪl ɪn ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. wɪð ən ɛfɝɾ i mænədʒ tə ɹɪɡeɪn ðə vɔɪd wʌns mɔɹ. ðə teɪn ɑn seɪɾɪn vaɪbɹeɪɾɪd naʊ, hʌmɪŋ ɪts weɪ dip ɪndə hɪm; ðə vɔɪɾ ɪtsɛlf vaɪbɹeɪɾɪd. bʌt ðə wiknəs ʌv wɔɾɝi mʌsəlz ən ðə peɪn ʌv ɪnʒɝiz feɪɾəd. hi wɑz gɑnə kɪl wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən bɪfɔɹ ðɪs naɪt wɑz dʌn.

Whoever or whatever, the man was gone, though. Sammael was still in Shadar Logoth. With an effort he managed to regain the Void once more. The taint on saidin vibrated now, humming its way deep into him; the Void itself vibrated. But the weakness of watery muscles and the pain of injuries faded. He was going to kill one of the Forsaken before this night was done.

lɪmpɪŋ, hi ɡɑstɪd θɹu ðə dɑɹk stʃɹits, pleɪsɪŋ ɪz fit wɪð ɡɹeɪt kɛɹ. hi stɪl meɪd nɔɪz, bʌt ðə naɪt wɑz fʊl ə nɔɪz naʊ. ʃɹiks ən ɡʌɾɝəl kɹaɪz saʊndəɾ ɪn ðə dɪstəns. maɪnləs mɑʃəɾɝ kɪld wʌtɛvɝ ɪt faʊnd, ən tʃɹɑləks wɝ daɪɪŋ ɪn ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ tənaɪɾ əz ðeɪ hæd wʌns lɔŋ, lɔŋ əɡoʊ. səmtaɪmz daʊn ə kɹɔsɪŋ stʃɹiɾ i sɔ tʃɹɑləks, tu əɹ faɪv əɹ ə dʌzən, əkeɪʒənəli wɪð ə hæfmən bʌt moʊst ɔfən nɑt. nʌn sɔ hɪm, ən i dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ ðɛm. nɑt sɪmpli kəz sɑmaɪl wəd dɪtɛkt ɛni tʃænəlɪŋ. ðoʊz tʃɹɑləks ən mɹdʒɹɑl ðət mɑʃəɾɝ dɪd nɑt kɪl wɝ stɪl dɛd. sɑmaɪl hæɾ ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli bɹɔɾ əm baɪ ðə weɪz, bʌɾ əpɛɹənli hi dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz dʒʌs haʊ ɹænd hæd mɑɹk ðə weɪɡeɪt hɪɹ.

Limping, he ghosted through the dark streets, placing his feet with great care. He still made noise, but the night was full of noise now. Shrieks and guttural cries sounded in the distance. Mindless Mashadar killed whatever it found, and Trollocs were dying in Shadar Logoth tonight as they had once long, long ago. Sometimes down a crossing street he saw Trollocs, two or five or a dozen, occasionally with a Halfman but most often not. None saw him, and he did not bother them. Not simply because Sammael would detect any channeling. Those Trollocs and Myrddraal that Mashadar did not kill were still dead. Sammael had almost certainly brought them by the Ways, but apparently he did not realize just how Rand had marked the Waygate here.

wɛl ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə skwɛɹ wɛɹ ðə weɪɡeɪt leɪ, ɹænd stɑpt ən lʊkt ɝaʊnd. nɪɹbaɪ, ə taʊɝ stʊd simɪŋli hoʊl. nɑt nɪɹli əz tɔl əz sʌm, ɪts tɑp stɪl ɹoʊz mɔɹ ðən fɪfti peɪsɪz əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðə dɑɹk dɔɹweɪ əɾ ɪts beɪs wɑz ɛmpti, ðə wʊd lɔŋ ɹɑɾɪd əweɪ ən ðə hɪnʒɪz ɡɔn tə dʌst. θɹu blæknəs ɹɪlivd oʊnli baɪ feɪn stɑɹlaɪt θɹu ðə wɪndoʊz, hi klaɪm ðə waɪndɪŋ stɛɹz sloʊli, smɔl klaʊdz pʌfɪŋ ʌp bɪniθ ɪz buts, ɛvɹi sɛkən stɛp ə stæb ə peɪn ʌp ɪz lɛɡ. dɪstən peɪn. ɑn ðə taʊɝtɑp, hi lin əɡɛns ðə smuð pɛɹəpət tə kætʃ ɪz bɹɛθ. ði aɪɾəl θɔt keɪm ðəɾ i wəd nɛvɝ hɪɹ ði ɛn ɪf mɪn lɝn ə ðɪs. mɪn, əɹ æmɪz, əɹ kædzueɪn fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ.

Well short of the square where the Waygate lay, Rand stopped and looked around. Nearby, a tower stood seemingly whole. Not nearly as tall as some, its top still rose more than fifty paces above the ground. The dark doorway at its base was empty, the wood long rotted away and the hinges gone to dust. Through blackness relieved only by faint starlight through the windows, he climbed the winding stairs slowly, small clouds puffing up beneath his boots, every second step a stab of pain up his leg. Distant pain. On the towertop, he leaned against the smooth parapet to catch his breath. The idle thought came that he would never hear the end if Min learned of this. Min, or Amys, or Cadsuane for that matter.

əkɹɔs mɪsɪŋ ɹuftɑps, hi kəd si ðə ɡɹeɪt skwɛɹ ðət hæd bɪn wʌn ə ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪn ɑɹɪdhɔl. wʌns ən oʊɡiɝ ɡɹoʊv hæd kʌvɝd ðɪs pɑɹɾ ə ðə lænd, bʌt wɪðɪn θɝɾi jɪɹz æftɝ ði oʊɡiɝ u hæd bɪl ði oʊldəs pɑɹts ə ðə sɪɾi dɪpɑɹɾəd, ðə ɹɛzəɾənts hæd kʌt daʊn ðə tʃɹiz tə meɪk ɹum fəɹ ɪkspændɪŋ ɑɹɪdhɔl. pæləsəz ən ðə ɹɪmeɪnz ə pæləsəz sɝaʊndəd ðə hjudʒ skwɛɹ, ðə ɡloʊ ʌv mɑʃəɾɝ ʃaɪnɪŋ dip ɪnsaɪɾ ə fju wɪndoʊz, ən ə hjudʒ maʊn ə ɹʌbəl kʌvɝd wʌn ɛnd, bʌɾ ɪn ðə sɛntɝ stʊd ðə weɪɡeɪt, əpɛɹənli ə tɔl bɹɔd pis ə stoʊn. hi wɑz nɑt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si ðə dɛləkətli kɑɹv livz ən vaɪnz ðət kʌvɝɾ ɪt, bʌɾ i kəd meɪk aʊt ðə tɑpəl pisəz ə haɪ fɛns ðət hæd wʌns sɝaʊndəɾ ɪt. paʊɝ-ɹɔt mɛɾəl laɪɪŋ ɪn ə hip, ðeɪ ɡlimd əntɑɹnɪʃt ɪn ðə naɪt. hi kəɾ ɔlsoʊ si ðə tʃɹæp i hæd woʊvən ɝaʊn ðə weɪɡeɪt, ɪnvɝɾɪd soʊ noʊ aɪ bʌɾ ɪz kəd si ɪt. noʊ weɪ tə tɛl baɪ lʊkɪŋ wɛðɝ ðə tʃɹɑləks ən hæfmən ɹɪli hæd pæs θɹu ɪt, jɛɾ ɪf ðeɪ hæd, ðeɪ wəd daɪ bɪfɔɹ lɔŋ. ə næsti θɪŋ. wʌtɛvɝ tʃɹæps sɑmaɪl hæd meɪd daʊn ðəɹ wɝ ɪnvɪzəbəl tə hɪm, bʌt ðət wɑz ɪkspɛktəd. laɪkli ðeɪ wɝ nɑt vɛɹi plɛzən iðɝ.

Across missing rooftops, he could see the great square that had been one of the most important in Aridhol. Once an Ogier grove had covered this part of the land, but within thirty years after the Ogier who had built the oldest parts of the city departed, the residents had cut down the trees to make room for expanding Aridhol. Palaces and the remains of palaces surrounded the huge square, the glow of Mashadar shining deep inside a few windows, and a huge mound of rubble covered one end, but in the center stood the Waygate, apparently a tall broad piece of stone. He was not close enough to see the delicately carved leaves and vines that covered it, but he could make out the toppled pieces of high fence that had once surrounded it. Power-wrought metal lying in a heap, they gleamed untarnished in the night. He could also see the trap he had woven around the Waygate, inverted so no eye but his could see it. No way to tell by looking whether the Trollocs and Halfmen really had passed through it, yet if they had, they would die before long. A nasty thing. Whatever traps Sammael had made down there were invisible to him, but that was expected. Likely they were not very pleasant either.

ət fɝst, hi kəd nɑt si sɑmaɪl, bʌt ðən sʌmwʌn muvd əmʌŋ ðə fluɾəd, flɛɹɪŋ kɑləmz ʌv ə pæləs. ɹænd weɪɾəd. hi wɑntəd tə bi ʃʊɹ; hi hæɾ oʊnli wʌn tʃæns. ðə fɪɡjɝ stɛp fɔɹwɝd, aʊɾ ə ðə kɑləmz ən ə peɪs ɪndə ðə skwɛɹ, hɛd swɪŋɪŋ ðɪs weɪ ən ðæt. sɑmaɪl, wɪð snoʊi leɪs ʃaɪnɪŋ əɾ ɪz θɹoʊt, weɪɾɪŋ tə si ɹænd wɔk ɪndə ðə skwɛɹ, ɪndə ðə tʃɹæps. bɪhaɪn hɪm, ðə ɡloʊ ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz ə ðə pæləs bɹaɪɾənd. sɑmaɪl pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs laɪɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə skwɛɹ, ən mɑʃəɾɝ uzd aʊɾ ə ðə wɪndoʊz, θɪk bɪloʊz ə sɪlvɝ-ɡɹeɪ fɑɡ slaɪɾɪŋ təɡɛðɝ, mɝdʒɪŋ əz ðeɪ lumd əbʌv ɪz hɛd. sɑmaɪl wɔkt ə lɪɾəl tə wʌn saɪd, ən ðə weɪv bɪɡæn tə dɪsɛnd, sloʊli pɪkɪŋ ʌp spiɾ əz ɪt fɛl.

At first, he could not see Sammael, but then someone moved among the fluted, flaring columns of a palace. Rand waited. He wanted to be sure; he had only one chance. The figure stepped forward, out of the columns and a pace into the square, head swinging this way and that. Sammael, with snowy lace shining at his throat, waiting to see Rand walk into the square, into the traps. Behind him, the glow in the windows of the palace brightened. Sammael peered into the darkness lying across the square, and Mashadar oozed out of the windows, thick billows of silver-gray fog sliding together, merging as they loomed above his head. Sammael walked a little to one side, and the wave began to descend, slowly picking up speed as it fell.

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. sɑmaɪl wɑz hɪz. ðə floʊz niɾəd fəɹ bɑlfaɪɝ sim tə ɡæðɝ ðɛmsɛlvz, dɪspaɪt ðə fɑɹ ɛkoʊ ʌv kædzueɪnz vɔɪs. hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hænd.

Rand shook his head. Sammael was his. The flows needed for balefire seemed to gather themselves, despite the far echo of Cadsuane's voice. He raised his hand.

ə skɹim tɔɹ ðə dɑɹknəs, ə wʊmən ʃɹikɪŋ ɪn æɡəni bɪɑnd noʊɪŋ. ɹænd sɔ sɑmaɪl tɝn tə stɛɹ təwɔɹd ðə ɡɹeɪt maʊn ə ɹʌbəl ivən əz ɪz oʊn aɪz flæʃt ðət weɪ. ətɑp ðə maʊn ə ʃeɪp stʊɾ aʊtlaɪn əɡɛns ðə naɪt skaɪ ɪn koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz, ə sɪŋɡəl θɪn tɛnʒɹɪl ə mɑʃəɾɝ tʌtʃɪŋ əɹ lɛɡ. ɑɹmz aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt, ʃi θɹæʃt əbaʊt, əneɪbəl tə muv fɹəm ðə spɑt, ən əɹ wɝdləs weɪl sim tə kɔl ɹændz neɪm.

A scream tore the darkness, a woman shrieking in agony beyond knowing. Rand saw Sammael turn to stare toward the great mound of rubble even as his own eyes flashed that way. Atop the mound a shape stood outlined against the night sky in coat and breeches, a single thin tendril of Mashadar touching her leg. Arms outstretched, she thrashed about, unable to move from the spot, and her wordless wail seemed to call Rand's name.

"laɪæ," hi wɪspɝd. ʌnkɑnʃəsli hi ɹitʃt aʊt, əz ðoʊ hi kəd stʃɹɛtʃ ɪz ɑɹm əkɹɔs ði ɪntɝvinɪŋ dɪstəns ən pʊl əɹ əweɪ. nʌθɪŋ kəd seɪv wʌt mɑʃəɾɝ tʌtʃt, ðoʊ, noʊ mɔɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ cʊɾə seɪvd ɪm hæd feɪnz dæɡɝ plʌnʒd ɪndə hɪz hɑɹt. "laɪæ," hi wɪspɝd. ən bɑlfaɪɝ lɛp fɹəm ɪz hænd.

"Liah," he whispered. Unconsciously he reached out, as though he could stretch his arm across the intervening distance and pull her away. Nothing could save what Mashadar touched, though, no more than anything could have saved him had Fain's dagger plunged into his heart. "Liah," he whispered. And balefire leaped from his hand.

fəɹ lɛs ðən ə hɑɹtbit, ðə ʃeɪp ə hɝ stɪl sim tə bi ðɛɹ, ɔl ɪn stɑɹk blæks ən snoʊi waɪts, ən ðən ʃi wɑz ɡɔn, dɛd bɪfɔɹ əɹ æɡəni bɪɡæn.

For less than a heartbeat, the shape of her still seemed to be there, all in stark blacks and snowy whites, and then she was gone, dead before her agony began.

skɹimɪŋ, ɹænd swɛp ðə bɑlfaɪɝ daʊn təwɔɹd ðə skwɛɹ, ðə ɹʌbəl kəlæpsɪŋ ɑn ɪtsɛlf, swɛp daʊn dɛθ aʊɾ ə taɪm - ən lɛt seɪɾɪn ɡoʊ bɪfɔɹ ðə bɑɹ ʌv waɪt tʌtʃt ðə leɪk ə mɑʃəɾɝ ðət naʊ ɹoʊld əkɹɔs ðə skwɛɹ, bɪloʊɪŋ pæs ðə weɪɡeɪt təwɔɹd ɹɪvɝz ʌv ɡloʊɪŋ ɡɹeɪ ðət floʊɾ aʊt fɹəm ənʌðɝ pæləs ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. sɑmaɪl hæd tə bi dɛd. hi hæd tə bi. ðəɹ hæd nɑt bɪn taɪm fəɹ ɪm tə ɹʌn, noʊ taɪm tə wiv ə ɡeɪtweɪ, ən ɪf i hæd, ɹænd wʊɾə fɛl seɪɾɪn biɪŋ wɝkt. sɑmaɪl wɑz dɛd, kɪl baɪ ən ivəl ɔlmoʊst əz ɡɹeɪɾ əz hɪmsɛlf. ɪmoʊʃən ɹeɪst əkɹɔs ði aʊtsaɪɾ ə ðə vɔɪd; ɹænd wɑntəd tə læf, əɹ pɝhæps kɹaɪ. hi hæd kʌm hɪɹ tə kɪl wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, bʌɾ ɪnstɛɾ i hæd kɪld ə wʊmən i hæɾ əbændən hɪɹ tə hɝ feɪt.

Screaming, Rand swept the balefire down toward the square, the rubble collapsing on itself, swept down death out of time - and let saidin go before the bar of white touched the lake of Mashadar that now rolled across the square, billowing past the Waygate toward rivers of glowing gray that flowed out from another palace on the other side. Sammael had to be dead. He had to be. There had not been time for him to run, no time to weave a gateway, and if he had, Rand would have felt saidin being worked. Sammael was dead, killed by an evil almost as great as himself. Emotion raced across the outside of the Void; Rand wanted to laugh, or perhaps cry. He had come here to kill one of the Forsaken, but instead he had killed a woman he had abandoned here to her fate.

fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm i stʊɾ ɑn ðə taʊɝtɑp waɪl ðə weɪnɪŋ mun kɹɔs ðə skaɪ, ɔlmoʊst əɾ ɪts hæf, stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ mɑʃəɾɝ fɪl ðə skwɛɹ kəmplitli, tɪl oʊnli ðə vɛɹi tɑp ə ðə weɪɡeɪt ɹoʊz əbʌv ðə sɝfəs ə ðə fɑɡ. sloʊli ɪt bɪɡæn tə ɛb əweɪ, hʌntɪŋ ɛlswɛɹ. ɪf sɑmaɪl hæd bɪn əlaɪv, hi cʊɾə kɪl ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn izəli ðɛn. ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ðəɾ i wəɾ əv kɛɹd. faɪnəli hi oʊpən ə ɡeɪtweɪ fəɹ skɪmɪŋ ən meɪɾ ə plætfɔɹm, ə ɹeɪləs dɪsk, hæf waɪɾ ən hæf blæk. skɪmɪŋ wɑz sloʊɝ ðən tʃɹævlɪŋ; ɪt tʊk ɪm ət lis hæf ən aʊɝ tə ɹitʃ ɪljən, ən ðə hoʊl weɪ, hi bɝn laɪæz neɪm ɪndə hɪz maɪn əɡɛn ən əɡɛn, fleɪlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf wɪð ɪt. hi wɪʃt i kəd kɹaɪ. hi θɔɾ i hæd fɝɡɑɾən haʊ.

For a long time he stood on the towertop while the waning moon crossed the sky, almost at its half, stood watching Mashadar fill the square completely, till only the very top of the Waygate rose above the surface of the fog. Slowly it began to ebb away, hunting elsewhere. If Sammael had been alive, he could have killed the Dragon Reborn easily then. Rand was not sure that he would have cared. Finally he opened a gateway for Skimming and made a platform, a railless disc, half white and half black. Skimming was slower than Traveling; it took him at least half an hour to reach Illian, and the whole way, he burned Liah's name into his mind again and again, flailing himself with it. He wished he could cry. He thought he had forgotten how.

ðeɪ wɝ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm ɪn ðə kɪŋz pæləs, ɪn ðə θɹoʊn ɹum. bæʃɪɹ, ən dæʃivə ən ði æʃəmən. ɪt wɑz ɪɡzækli laɪk ðə ɹum i hæd sin ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə ðə skwɛɹ, daʊn tə ðə stænd-læmps ən ðə sinz kɑɹvd ɪndə ðə mɑɹbəl wɔlz ən ðə lɔŋ waɪt deɪz. ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm ɪksɛp fəɹ biɪŋ slaɪtli lɑɹdʒɝ ɪn ɛvɹi dɪmɛnʃən, ən ɪnstɛɾ ə naɪn tʃɛɹz ɑn ðə deɪz, ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ə ɡɹeɪt ɡɪldɪd θɹoʊn wɪð lɛpɝdz fəɹ ɪts ɑɹmz ən naɪn fɪst-saɪzd ɡoʊldən biz ðət wəd stæn əbʌv ðə hɛɾ ə huɛvɝ sæɾ ɪn ɪt. wɛɹəli ɹænd sæt hɪmsɛlf daʊn ɑn ðə stɛps ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə deɪz.

They were waiting for him in the King's Palace, in the throne room. Bashere, and Dashiva and the Asha'man. It was exactly like the room he had seen at the other end of the square, down to the stand-lamps and the scenes carved into the marble walls and the long white dais. Exactly the same except for being slightly larger in every dimension, and instead of nine chairs on the dais, there was only a great gilded throne with leopards for its arms and nine fist-sized golden bees that would stand above the head of whoever sat in it. Wearily Rand sat himself down on the steps at the front of the dais.

"aɪ teɪk ɪt sɑmaɪl ɪz dɛd," bæʃɪɹ sɛd, lʊkɪŋ ɪm ʌp ən daʊn ɪn ɪz ɹæɡəd koʊɾ ən dʌst.

"I take it Sammael is dead," Bashere said, looking him up and down in his ragged coat and dust.

"hiz dɛd," ɹænd sɛd. dæʃivə saɪd laʊdli wɪð ɹɪlif.

"He's dead," Rand said. Dashiva sighed loudly with relief.

"ðə sɪɾi ɪz aʊɝz," bæʃɪɹ wɛn ɑn. "ɔɹ aɪ ʃəd seɪ, jʊɹz." hi læf sʌɾənli. "ðə faɪɾɪŋ stɑp kwɪk ɪnʌf wʌns ðə ɹaɪt pipəl faʊn aʊɾ ɪt wɑz ju. nɑt mʌtʃ tə ɪt, ɪn ði ɛnd." dʒɹaɪd blʌd meɪɾ ə blæk steɪn daʊn wʌn tɔɹn sliv ə hɪz koʊt. "ðə kaʊnsəl əz bɪn weɪɾɪŋ iɡɝli fəɹ jə tə kʌm bæk. æŋkʃəsli, jə maɪt seɪ," hi æɾəd wɪð ə ɹaɪ ɡɹɪn.

"The city is ours," Bashere went on. "Or I should say, yours." He laughed suddenly. "The fighting stopped quick enough once the right people found out it was you. Not much to it, in the end." Dried blood made a black stain down one torn sleeve of his coat. "The Council has been waiting eagerly for you to come back. Anxiously, you might say," he added with a wry grin.

eɪt swɛɾɪŋ mɛn hæd bɪn stændɪŋ ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə θɹoʊn ɹum sɪns ɹænd keɪm ɪn. ðeɪ wɔɹ dɑɹk sɪlk koʊts wɪð ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ɑn ðə ləpɛlz ən slivz, ən fɔlz ə leɪs ət ðɛɹ θɹoʊts ən ɹɪsts. səm wɔɹ ə bɪɹd ðət lɛf ði ʌpɝ lɪp ʃeɪv klin, bʌɾ ɛvɹi wʌn hæɾ ə bɹɔd sæʃ ʌv ɡɹin sɪlk slæntəɾ əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst, wɪð naɪn ɡoʊldən biz mɑɹtʃɪŋ ʌp ɪt.

Eight sweating men had been standing at the far end of the throne room since Rand came in. They wore dark silk coats with gold or silver embroidery on the lapels and sleeves, and falls of lace at their throats and wrists. Some wore a beard that left the upper lip shaved clean, but every one had a broad sash of green silk slanted across his chest, with nine golden bees marching up it.

ət bæʃɪɹz dʒɛstʃɝ ðeɪ keɪm fɔɹwɝd, boʊɪŋ tə ɹænd əɾ əbaʊɾ ɛvɹi θɝd stɛp, fəɹ ɔl ðə wɝld əz ðoʊ hi wɔɹ ðə faɪnəst ɡɑɹməns soʊn. ə tɔl mæn sim tə bi ðə liɾɝ, ə ɹaʊnd-feɪs fɛloʊ wɪð wʌn ə ðoʊz bɪɹdz, wɪð ə nætʃɹəl dɪɡnəɾi ðəɾ əpɪɹd stʃɹeɪn baɪ wɝi. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," hi sɛd, boʊɪŋ əɡɛn ən pɹɛsɪŋ boʊθ hænz tə hɪz hɑɹt. "fɝɡɪv mi, bʌt lɔɹd bɹɛn də bi noʊwɛɹ tə bi faʊnd, ən - "

At Bashere's gesture they came forward, bowing to Rand at about every third step, for all the world as though he wore the finest garments sewn. A tall man seemed to be the leader, a round-faced fellow with one of those beards, with a natural dignity that appeared strained by worry. "My Lord Dragon," he said, bowing again and pressing both hands to his heart. "Forgive me, but Lord Brend do be nowhere to be found, and - "

"hi woʊn bi," ɹænd sɛd flætli.

"He won't be," Rand said flatly.

ə mʌsəl ɪn ðə mænz feɪs dʒʌmpt ət ɹændz toʊn, ən i swɑloʊd. "æz jə də seɪ, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," hi mɝmɝd. "aɪ də bi lɔɹd ɡɹɛɡɹɪn dɛn lʌʃɪnoʊz, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. ɪn lɔɹd bɹɛnz æbsəns, aɪ də spik fəɹ ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn. wi də ɔfɝ ju. . . ." ə hæn əɾ ɪz saɪd weɪvd vɪɡɝəsli əɾ ə ʃɔɹɾɝ, bɪɹdləs mæn, hu stɛp fɔɹwɝd bɛɹɪŋ ə kʊʃən dʒɹeɪpt wɪð ə lɛŋθ ʌv ɡɹin sɪlk. ". . . wi də ɔfɝ jə ɪljən." ðə ʃɔɹɾɝ mæn wɪp ðə klɔθ əweɪ, ɹɪvilɪŋ ə hɛvi ɡoʊl sɝklət, tu ɪntʃəz waɪd, ʌv lɔɹəl livz. "ðə sɪɾi də bi jʊɹz, ʌv kɔɹs," ɡɹɛɡɹɪn wɛn ɑn æŋkʃəsli. "wi dɪd pʊɾ ən ɛn tə ɔl ɹɪzɪstəns. wi də ɔfɝ jə ðə kɹaʊn, ən ðə θɹoʊn, ən ɔl ʌv ɪljən."

A muscle in the man's face jumped at Rand's tone, and he swallowed. "As you do say, my Lord Dragon," he murmured. "I do be Lord Gregorin den Lushenos, my Lord Dragon. In Lord Brend's absence, I do speak for the Council of Nine. We do offer you. . . ." A hand at his side waved vigorously at a shorter, beardless man, who stepped forward bearing a cushion draped with a length of green silk. ". . . we do offer you Illian." The shorter man whipped the cloth away, revealing a heavy gold circlet, two inches wide, of laurel leaves. "The city do be yours, of course," Gregorin went on anxiously. "We did put an end to all resistance. We do offer you the crown, and the throne, and all of Illian."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət ðə kɹaʊn ɑn ɪts kʊʃən, nɑt muvɪŋ ə mʌsəl. pipəl hæd θɔɾ i mɛn tə meɪk hɪmsɛlf ə kɪŋ ɪn tɛɹ, fɪɹɾ i wəɾ ɪn kɛɹhin ən ændɝ, bʌt noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɔfɝɾ ɪm ə kɹaʊn bɪfɔɹ. "waɪ? ɪz mæɾɪn stɛpeɪnəoʊz soʊ wɪlɪŋ tə ɡɪv ʌp ɪz θɹoʊn?"

Rand stared at the crown on its cushion, not moving a muscle. People had thought he meant to make himself a king in Tear, feared he would in Cairhien and Andor, but no one had offered him a crown before. "Why? Is Mattin Stepaneos so willing to give up his throne?"

"kɪŋ mæɾɪn dɪd dɪsəpɪɹ tu deɪz əɡoʊ," ɡɹɛɡɹɪn sɛd. "sʌm ʌv əs də fɪɹ. . . . wi də fɪɹ lɔɹd bɹɛn meɪ hæv sʌmθɪŋ tə wɪð ɪt. bɹɛn dʌz hæv. . . ." hi stɑp tə swɑloʊ. "bɹɛn dɪɾ əv ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv ɪnfluəns wɪð ðə kɪŋ, səm maɪt seɪ tu mʌtʃ, bʌɾ i dɪd bi dɪstʃɹæktəɾ ɪn ɹisən mʌnθs, ən mæɾɪn hæd bɪɡʌn tə ɹiəsɝt hɪmsɛlf."

"King Mattin did disappear two days ago," Gregorin said. "Some of us do fear. . . . We do fear Lord Brend may have something to with it. Brend does have. . . ." He stopped to swallow. "Brend did have a great deal of influence with the king, some might say too much, but he did be distracted in recent months, and Mattin had begun to reassert himself."

stʃɹɪps ʌv ɡɹaɪmi koʊtsliv ən pisəz ə ʃɝtsliv dæŋɡəld əz ɹænd ɹitʃt tə pɪk ʌp ðə lɔɹəl kɹaʊn. ðə dʒɹæɡən waʊn ɝaʊn ɪz fɔɹɑɹm ɡlɪɾɝd ɪn ðə læmplaɪɾ əz bɹaɪtli əz ðə ɡoʊldən kɹaʊn. hi tɝn ɪɾ ɪn ɪz hænz. "ju stɪl hævən sɛd waɪ. kəz aɪ kɑŋkɝd ju?" hi hæd kɑŋkɝd tiɹ, ən kɛɹhin tu, bʌt səm tɝn ɑn ɪm ɪn boʊθ lænz stɪl. jɛɾ ɪt sim tə bi ði oʊnli weɪ.

Strips of grimy coatsleeve and pieces of shirtsleeve dangled as Rand reached to pick up the Laurel Crown. The Dragon wound around his forearm glittered in the lamplight as brightly as the golden crown. He turned it in his hands. "You still haven't said why. Because I conquered you?" He had conquered Tear, and Cairhien too, but some turned on him in both lands still. Yet it seemed to be the only way.

"ðæt də bi pɑɹt," ɡɹɛɡɹɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "ivən soʊ, wi maɪɾ əv tʃoʊzən wʌn ʌv əɹ oʊn; kɪŋz əv kʌm fɹəm ðə kaʊnsəl bɪfɔɹ. bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪn jə dɪɾ ɔɹɾɝ sɛn fɹəm tiɹ əz jəɹ neɪm ɑn ɛvɹi lɪp wɪð ðə laɪt. wɪθaʊt ðæt, mɛni wəd bi dɛɾ ə stɑɹveɪʃən. bɹɛn dɪd si ɛvɹi stɪk ə bɹɛd ɡoʊ tə ði ɑɹmi."

"That do be part," Gregorin said dryly. "Even so, we might have chosen one of our own; kings have come from the Council before. But the grain you did order sent from Tear has your name on every lip with the Light. Without that, many would be dead of starvation. Brend did see every stick of bread go to the army."

ɹænd blɪŋkt, ən snætʃt wʌn hæn fɹəm ðə kɹaʊn tə sʌk ɑn ə pɹɪk fɪŋɡɝ. ɔlmoʊs bɛɹiɾ əmʌŋ ðə lɔɹəl livz ə ðə kɹaʊn wɝ ðə ʃɑɹp pɔɪns ə sɔɹdz. haʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ hæɾ i kəmændəd ðə tɛɹənz tə sɛl ɡɹeɪn tə ðɛɹ eɪntʃən ɛnəmi, sɛl ɪɾ əɹ daɪ fəɹ ɹəfjuzɪŋ? hi hæd nɑt ɹilaɪz ðeɪ kɛpt ɑn æftɝ i bɪɡæn pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz tə ɪnveɪɾ ɪljən. meɪbi ðeɪ fɪɹd tə bɹɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp, bʌt ðeɪ hæd fɪɹd tə stɑp, tu. meɪbi hi hæɾ ɝn səm ɹaɪt tə ðɪs kɹaʊn.

Rand blinked, and snatched one hand from the crown to suck on a pricked finger. Almost buried among the laurel leaves of the crown were the sharp points of swords. How long ago had he commanded the Tairens to sell grain to their ancient enemy, sell it or die for refusing? He had not realized they kept on after he began preparations to invade Illian. Maybe they feared to bring it up, but they had feared to stop, too. Maybe he had earned some right to this crown.

dʒɪnʒɝli hi sɛt ðə sɝkəl ə lɔɹəl livz ɑn ɪz hɛd. hæf ðoʊz sɔɹdz pɔɪntəɾ ʌp, hæf daʊn. noʊ hɛd wəd wɛɹ ðɪs kɹaʊn kæʒəwəli əɹ izəli.

Gingerly he set the circle of laurel leaves on his head. Half those swords pointed up, half down. No head would wear this crown casually or easily.

ɡɹɛɡɹɪn baʊd smuðli. "ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ɹænd ælθɹ, kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən," hi ɪntoʊnd, ən ðə sɛvən ʌðɝ lɔɹdz baʊd wɪð hɪm, mɝmɝɪŋ, "ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ɹænd ælθɹ, kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən."

Gregorin bowed smoothly. "The Light illumine Rand al'Thor, King of Illian," he intoned, and the seven other lords bowed with him, murmuring, "The Light illumine Rand al'Thor, King of Illian."

bæʃɪɹ kəntɛntəd hɪmsɛlf wɪð ə baʊ ʌv ɪz hɛd - hi wɑz ʌŋkəl tə ə kwin, æftɝ ɔl - bʌt dæʃivə kɹaɪɾ aʊt, "ɔl heɪl ɹænd ælθɹ, kɪŋ ə ðə wɝld!" flɪn ən ði ʌðɝ æʃəmən tʊk ɪɾ ʌp.

Bashere contented himself with a bow of his head - he was uncle to a queen, after all - but Dashiva cried out, "All hail Rand al'Thor, King of the World!" Flinn and the other Asha'man took it up.

"ɔl heɪl ɹænd ælθɹ, kɪŋ ə ðə wɝld!"

"All hail Rand al'Thor, King of the World!"

"ɔl heɪl ðə kɪŋ ə ðə wɝld!"

"All hail the King of the World!"

ðət hæɾ ə ɡʊd saʊn tə ɪt.

That had a good sound to it.

ðə stɔɹi spɹɛɾ əz stɔɹiz wɪl, ən tʃeɪnʒd əz stɔɹiz tʃeɪnʒ wɪð taɪm ən dɪstəns, spɹɛɾɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ɪljən baɪ koʊstɪŋ ʃɪps, ən mɝtʃən tʃɹeɪnz ʌv wæɡənz, ən pɪdʒənz sɛn ɪn sikɹət, spɹɛɾɪŋ ɪn ɹɪpəlz ðət dænst wɪð ʌðɝ ɹɪpəlz ən meɪd nu. ən ɑɹmi hæd kʌm tə ɪljən, ðə stɔɹiz sɛd, ən ɑɹmi ʌv il, ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ əpɪɹɪŋ fɹəm θɪn ɛɹ, ʌv mɛn u kəd tʃænəl ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɪŋ bists, ivən ən ɑɹmi ʌv sɑldəiənz, ðoʊ nɑt mɛni bɪliv ðət wʌn. səm teɪlz sɛd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hæd bɪn pɹizɛntəd ðə lɔɹəl kɹaʊn ʌv ɪljən baɪ ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn, ən ʌðɝz baɪ mæɾɪn stɛpeɪnəoʊz hɪmsɛlf ɑn bɛndɪd ni. səm sɛd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hæd ɹɛntʃt ðə kɹaʊn fɹəm mæɾɪnz hɛd, ðən stʌk ðət hɛɾ ɑn ə spaɪk. noʊ, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hæd ɹeɪzd ɪljən tə ðə ɡɹaʊn ən bɛɹid ði oʊl kɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹʌbəl. noʊ, hi ən ɪz ɑɹmi ʌv æʃəmən hæd bɝn ɪljən aʊɾ ə ði ɝθ. noʊ, ɪt wɑz ɛbu dɑɹ i hæd dɪstʃɹɔɪd, æftɝ ɪljən.

The story spread as stories will, and changed as stories change with time and distance, spreading out from Illian by coasting ships, and merchant trains of wagons, and pigeons sent in secret, spreading in ripples that danced with other ripples and made new. An army had come to Illian, the stories said, an army of Aiel, of Aes Sedai appearing from thin air, of men who could channel riding winged beasts, even an army of Saldaeans, though not many believed that one. Some tales said the Dragon Reborn had been presented the Laurel Crown of Illian by the Council of Nine, and others by Mattin Stepaneos himself on bended knee. Some said the Dragon Reborn had wrenched the crown from Mattin's head, then stuck that head on a spike. No, the Dragon Reborn had razed Illian to the ground and buried the old king in the rubble. No, he and his army of Asha'man had burned Illian out of the earth. No, it was Ebou Dar he had destroyed, after Illian.

wʌn fækt, ðoʊ, tɝn ʌp əɡɛn ən əɡɛn ɪn ðoʊz teɪlz. ðə lɔɹəl kɹaʊn ʌv ɪljən hæd bɪn ɡɪvən ə nu neɪm. ðə kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz.

One fact, though, turned up again and again in those tales. The Laurel Crown of Illian had been given a new name. The Crown of Swords.

ən fəɹ səm ɹizən, mɛn ən wɪmən u toʊl ðə teɪlz ɔfən faʊn ə nid tə æɾ ɔlmoʊst aɪdɛntɪkəl wɝdz. ðə stɔɹm ɪz kʌmɪŋ, ðeɪ sɛd, stɛɹɪŋ saʊθwɝɾ ɪn wɝi. ðə stɔɹm ɪz kʌmɪŋ.

And for some reason, men and women who told the tales often found a need to add almost identical words. The storm is coming, they said, staring southward in worry. The storm is coming.

mæstɝ ə ðə laɪtnɪŋz, ɹaɪɾɝ ɑn ðə stɔɹm, wɛɹɝ ʌv ə kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz, spɪnɝ-aʊɾ ə feɪt.

Master of the lightnings, rider on the storm, wearer of a crown of swords, spinner-out of fate.

hu θɪŋks i tɝnz ðə wil ə taɪm, meɪ lɝn ðə tʃɹuθ tu leɪt.

Who thinks he turns the Wheel of Time, may learn the truth too late.

 - fɹəm ə fɹæɡməntɛɹi tʃɹænzleɪʃən ə ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, ətʃɹɪbjəɾəd tə lɔɹd mæŋɡɹ kɹəmən, sɔɹd-bɑɹɾ ʌv ɛɹæmeɪɛl ən wɔɹɾɝ tə kæɹeɪɡən mɑkɑnɝ, ɪndə wʌt wɑz ðən kɔl ðə vʌlɡɝ tʌŋ (sɝkə θɹihʌnʒɹəd æb).

 - From a fragmentary translation of The Prophecies of the Dragon, attributed to Lord Mangore Kiramin, Sword-bard of Aramaelle and Warder to Caraighan Maconar, into what was then called the vulgar tongue (circa 300 AB).

ði ɛn ə ðə sɛvənθ bʊk ə ðə wil ə taɪm ɡlɔsɝi eɪ noʊɾ ɑn deɪts ɪn ðɪs ɡlɔsɝi. ðə toʊmən kæləndɝ (dɪvaɪz baɪ toʊmə dɝ ɑməd) wɑz ədɑptəɾ əpɹɑksəmətli tu sɛntʃɝiz æftɝ ðə dɛθ ə ðə læs meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɹəkɔɹɾɪŋ jɪɹz æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld (æb). soʊ mɛni ɹɛkɝdz wɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz ðəɾ ət ðɛɹ ɛn ðəɹ wɑz ɑɹɡjəmən əbaʊt ði ɪɡzæk jɪɹ ʌndɝ ði oʊl sɪstəm. ə nu kæləndɝ, pɹəpoʊz baɪ tiəm ʌv ɡɑzɹ, sɛləbɹeɪɾəd fɹiɾəm fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑlɑk θɹɛɾ ən ɹəkɔɹɾəd itʃ jɪɹ əz ə fɹi jɪɹ (fi). ðə ɡɑzɝən kæləndɝ ɡeɪnd waɪɾ æksɛptəns wɪðɪn twɛnti jɪɹz æftɝ ðə wɔɹz' ɛnd. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ətɛmptəd tə ɪstæblɪʃ ə nu kæləndɝ beɪst ɑn ðə faʊndɪŋ ə hɪz ɛmpaɪɝ (, fɹəm ðə faʊndɪŋ), bʌɾ oʊnli hɪstɔɹiənz naʊ ɹəfɝ tə ɪt. æftɝ ðə dɛθ ən dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, ə θɝd kæləndɝ wɑz dɪvaɪz baɪ ɝɛn dɪn dʒubaɪ sɔɹɪŋ ɡʌl, ə skɑlɝ ə ðə si foʊk, ən pɹɑməlɡeɪɾəd baɪ ðə pɑnɑɹtʃ fɛɹiɾ ə tæɹɑbən. ðə fɛɹid kæləndɝ, deɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ði ɑɹbɪtʃɹɛɹəli dɪsaɪɾɪd ɛn ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ən ɹəkɔɹɾɪŋ jɪɹz ə ðə nu ɛɹə (nəbɹæskə), ɪz kɝənli ɪn jus.

The End of the Seventh Book of The Wheel of Time GLOSSARY A Note on Dates in This Glossary. The Toman Calendar (devised by Toma dur Ahmid) was adopted approximately two centuries after the death of the last male Aes Sedai, recording years After the Breaking of the World (AB). So many records were destroyed in the Trolloc Wars that at their end there was argument about the exact year under the old system. A new calendar, proposed by Tiam of Gazar, celebrated freedom from the Trolloc threat and recorded each year as a Free Year (FY). The Gazaran Calendar gained wide acceptance within twenty years after the Wars' end. Artur Hawkwing attempted to establish a new calendar based on the founding of his empire (FF, From the Founding), but only historians now refer to it. After the death and destruction of the War of the Hundred Years, a third calendar was devised by Uren din Jubai Soaring Gull, a scholar of the Sea Folk, and promulgated by the Panarch Farede of Tarabon. The Farede Calendar, dating from the arbitrarily decided end of the War of the Hundred Years and recording years of the New Era (NE), is currently in use.

æɾəm (aɪ-dæm): ə dɪvaɪs fəɹ kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ ə wʊmən u kən tʃænəl, juzəbəl oʊnli baɪ iðɝ ə wʊmən u kən tʃænəl əɹ ə wʊmən u kən bi tɔt tə tʃænəl, ən hævɪŋ noʊ ɪfɛkt ɑn ɛni wʊmən u kænɑt tʃænəl. ɪt kɹieɪts ə lɪŋk bɪtwin ðə tu wɪmən. ðə sintʃæn vɝʒən kənsɪsts ʌv ə kɑlɝ ən bɹeɪslət kənɛktəd baɪ ə liʃ, ɔl ə sɪlvɝi mɛɾəl, bʌt wʌn ɪɡzæmpəl ʌv ə vɝʒən wɪθaʊt ðə liʃ əz bɪn meɪd, ən ənʌðɝ, junik, vɛɹiən ɪz bɪliv tə ɪɡzɪst wɪtʃ əlaʊz ə wʊmən tə kəntʃɹoʊl ə mæn u kən tʃænəl. ɪf sətʃ ə mæn ɪz lɪŋk baɪ ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi æɾəm tə ə wʊmən u kən tʃænəl, ðə laɪkli ɹɪzʌlt ɪz dɛθ fəɹ boʊθ. wən ən æɾəm ɪz wɔɹn baɪ ə wʊmən u kən tʃænəl, sɪmpli tʌtʃɪŋ ði æɾəm ɹɪzʌls ɪn peɪn fəɹ ə mæn u ɔlsoʊ kæn. si ɔlsoʊ lɪŋkɪŋ, sintʃæn.

a'dam (AYE-dam): A device for controlling a woman who can channel, usable only by either a woman who can channel or a woman who can be taught to channel, and having no effect on any woman who cannot channel. It creates a link between the two women. The Seanchan version consists of a collar and bracelet connected by a leash, all of silvery metal, but one example of a version without the leash has been made, and another, unique, variant is believed to exist which allows a woman to control a man who can channel. If such a man is linked by an ordinary a'dam to a woman who can channel, the likely result is death for both. When an a'dam is worn by a woman who can channel, simply touching the a'dam results in pain for a man who also can. See also linking, Seanchan.

eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz: eɪdʒ ɛndəd baɪ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ ən ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ə taɪm wən ɛɛs sədaɪ pɝfɔɹmd wʌndɝz naʊ oʊnli dʒɹimd ʌv.

Age of Legends: Age ended by the War of the Shadow and the Breaking of the World. A time when Aes Sedai performed wonders now only dreamed of.

il wɔɹ (naɪnsɛvənsɪkssɛvəneɪt ni): wən kɪŋ leɪmən (leɪ-mæn) ʌv kɛɹhin kʌt daʊn ɑvɛndɔɹɑldɛɹə, fɔɹ klænz ə ði il kɹɔs ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld. ðeɪ luɾəd ən bɝn ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv kɛɹhin əz wɛl əz mɛni ʌðɝ sɪɾiz ən taʊnz, ən ðə kɑnflɪkt ɪkstɛndəɾ ɪndə ændɝ ən tiɹ. baɪ ðə kənvɛnʃənəl vju, ði il wɝ faɪnəli dɪfiɾəd ət ðə bæɾəl ə ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz, bɪfɔɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn; ɪn fækt, leɪmən wɑz kɪld ɪn ðət bæɾəl, ən hævɪŋ dʌn wʌt ðeɪ keɪm fɔɹ, ði il ɹɛkɹɔs ðə spaɪn. si ɔlsoʊ kɛɹhin; spaɪn ə ðə wɝld.

Aiel War (97678 NE): When King Laman (LAY-mahn) of Cairhien cut down Avendoraldera, four clans of the Aiel crossed the Spine of the World. They looted and burned the capital city of Cairhien as well as many other cities and towns, and the conflict extended into Andor and Tear. By the conventional view, the Aiel were finally defeated at the Battle of the Shining Walls, before Tar Valon; in fact, Laman was killed in that battle, and having done what they came for, the Aiel recrossed the Spine. See also Cairhien; Spine of the World.

ədʒɑ (ɑ-dʒɑ): səsaɪəɾiz əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, sɛvən ɪn nʌmbɝ ən dɛzɪɡneɪɾɪd baɪ kʌlɝz: blu, ɹɛd, waɪt, ɡɹin, bɹaʊn, jɛloʊ ən ɡɹeɪ. ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪksɛp ði æmɪɝlɪn sit bɪlɔŋ tə wʌn. itʃ fɑloʊz ə spəsɪfɪk fəlɑsəfi ʌv ðə jus ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ən ðə pɝpəsəz ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ bɛnz ɪts ɛnɝdʒiz tə faɪndɪŋ mɛn u kən tʃænəl, ən tə dʒɛntəlɪŋ ðɛm. ðə bɹaʊn fɔɹseɪks ðə məndeɪn wɝld ən dɛɾɪkeɪts ɪtsɛlf tə sikɪŋ nɑlədʒ, waɪl ðə waɪt, lɑɹdʒli ɛʃuɪŋ boʊθ ðə wɝld ən ðə vælju ʌv wɝldli nɑlədʒ, dɪvoʊts ɪtsɛlf tə kwɛstʃənz ə fəlɑsəfi ən tʃɹuθ. ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ (kɔl ðə bæɾəl ədʒɑ dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz) hoʊlz ɪtsɛlf ɹɛɾi fəɹ tɑɹmən ɡdən, ðə jɛloʊ kɑnsəntʃɹeɪts ɑn ðə stʌɾi ʌv hilɪŋ, ən blu sɪstɝz ɪnvɑlv ðɛmsɛlvz wɪð kɑzəz ən dʒʌstəs. ðə ɡɹeɪ ɑɹ miɾieɪtɝz, sikɪŋ hɑɹməni ən kənsɛnsəs. eɪ blæk ədʒɑ, dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə sɝvɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ɪz əfɪʃəli ən viəmənli dɪnaɪd.

Ajah (AH-jah): Societies among the Aes Sedai, seven in number and designated by colors: Blue, Red, White, Green, Brown, Yellow and Gray. All Aes Sedai except the Amyrlin Seat belong to one. Each follows a specific philosophy of the use of the One Power and the purposes of the Aes Sedai. The Red Ajah bends its energies to finding men who can channel, and to gentling them. The Brown forsakes the mundane world and dedicates itself to seeking knowledge, while the White, largely eschewing both the world and the value of worldly knowledge, devotes itself to questions of philosophy and truth. The Green Ajah (called the Battle Ajah during the Trolloc Wars) holds itself ready for Tarmon Gai'don, the Yellow concentrates on the study of Healing, and Blue sisters involve themselves with causes and justice. The Gray are mediators, seeking harmony and consensus. A Black Ajah, dedicated to serving the Dark One, is officially and vehemently denied.

ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "faɪɾɝz ə ðə spɪɹ," əɹ "spɪɹ faɪɾɝz." ðə neɪm ɡɪvən tə ðoʊz il u kæɹi ðə spɪɹ ən ɹɛɡjəlɝli teɪk pɑɹɾ ɪn bæɾəl əz əpoʊz tə ðoʊz u fɑloʊ kɹæfs.

algai'd'siswai: In the Old Tongue, "fighters of the spear," or "spear fighters." The name given to those Aiel who carry the spear and regularly take part in battle as opposed to those who follow crafts.

ɔltɑɹə (æl-tɑ-ɹɑ): ə neɪʃən ɑn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, ðoʊ ɪn tʃɹuθ lɪɾəl junəfaɪz ɪɾ ɪksɛpt ə neɪm. ðə pipəl ʌv ɔltɑɹə θɪŋk ə ðɛmsɛlvz əz ɪnhæbəɾənts ʌv ə taʊn əɹ vɪlədʒ, əɹ əz ðɪs lɔɹdz əɹ ðət leɪɾiz pipəl, fɝst, ən oʊnli sɛkən ɪf əɾ ɔl əz ɔltɑɹən. fju noʊbəlz peɪ tæksəz tə ðə kɹaʊn əɹ ɔfɝ mɔɹ ðən lɪp sɝvəs, ən ðəɾ ɔfən slaɪt. ðə ɹulɝ ʌv ɔltɑɹə (kɝənli kwin taɪlɪn kwɪntɑɹə ʌv haʊs mɪtsoʊbɑɹ; taɪ-lɪn kwɪn-tɑɹ-ɑ; -soʊ-bɛɹ) ɪz sɛldəm mɔɹ ðən ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl noʊbəl ɪn ðə lænd, ən ət taɪmz əz nɑɾ ivən ɹɪli bɪn ðæt. ðə θɹoʊn ə ðə wɪnz hoʊlz soʊ lɪɾəl paʊɝ ðət mɛni paʊɝfəl noʊbəlz əv skɔɹn tə teɪk ɪt wən ðeɪ kəd hæv. ðə bænɝ ʌv ɔltɑɹə ɪz tu ɡoʊldən lɛpɝdz ɑn ə fil tʃɛk fɔɹ-baɪ-fɔɹ ɪn ɹɛɾ ən blu. ðə sɪdʒəl ə haʊs mɪtsoʊbɑɹ ɪz ə ɡɹin æŋkɝ ən sɔɹd, kɹɔst. si ɔlsoʊ waɪz wʊmən.

Altara (al-TAH-rah): A nation on the Sea of Storms, though in truth little unifies it except a name. The people of Altara think of themselves as inhabitants of a town or village, or as this lord's or that lady's people, first, and only second if at all as Altaran. Few nobles pay taxes to the crown or offer more than lip service, and that often slight. The ruler of Altara (currently Queen Tylin Quintara of House Mitsobar; TIE-lihn quin-TAHR-ah; MIHT-soh-bahr) is seldom more than the most powerful noble in the land, and at times has not even really been that. The Throne of the Winds holds so little power that many powerful nobles have scorned to take it when they could have. The banner of Altara is two golden leopards on a field checked four-by-four in red and blue. The sigil of House Mitsobar is a green anchor and sword, crossed. See also Wise Woman.

æmɪz (ɑ-mis): waɪz wʌn ə koʊld ɹɑks hoʊld, ən ə dʒɹimwɔkɝ. ən il ə ðə naɪn væliz sɛpt ə ðə tɑɹdæɾ il. waɪf ə ɹəɑɹk (ɹɔɹk), sɪstɝ-waɪf tə ljɑn (li-æn), hu ɪz ɹufməstʃɹəs ə koʊld ɹɑks hoʊld. æmɪz ɪz sɪstɝ-mʌðɝ tə eɪvinhə.

Amys (ah-MEESE): Wise One of Cold Rocks Hold, and a dreamwalker. An Aiel of the Nine Valleys sept of the Taardad Aiel. Wife of Rhuarc (ROARK), sister-wife to Lian (lee-AHN), who is roofmistress of Cold Rocks Hold. Amys is sister-mother to Aviendha.

æŋɡɹil (æn-ɡɹi-ɑl): ɹɛmnəns ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ðəɾ əlaʊ ɛniwʌn keɪpəbəl ə tʃænəlɪŋ tə hændəl ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ əmaʊn ə ðə paʊɝ ðən ɪz seɪf əɹ ivən pɑsəbəl əneɪɾɪd. səm wɝ meɪd fəɹ jus baɪ wɪmən, ʌðɝz baɪ mɛn. ɹumɝz ʌv æŋɡɹil juzəbəl baɪ boʊθ mɛn ən wɪmən əv nɛvɝ bɪn kənfɝmd. ðɛɹ meɪkɪŋ ɪz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ noʊn, ən fju ɑɹ noʊn tə ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ɛɡzɪstəns. si ɔlsoʊ sɑŋɡɹil; tɛɹæŋɡɹil.

angreal (ahn-gree-AHL): Remnants of the Age of Legends that allow anyone capable of channeling to handle a greater amount of the Power than is safe or even possible unaided. Some were made for use by women, others by men. Rumors of angreal usable by both men and women have never been confirmed. Their making is no longer known, and few are known to remain in existence. See also sa'angreal; ter'angreal.

æʃəmən (ɑ-ʃɑ-mæn): (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ɡɑɹɾiən" əɹ "dɪfɛndɝ," wɪð ə stʃɹɔŋ ɪmpləkeɪʃən ðət ðɪs ɪz ə dɪfɛndɝ ə tʃɹuθ ən dʒʌstəs. (tu) ðə neɪm teɪkən baɪ fɑloʊɝz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, mɛn u hæv kʌm tə wʌɾ ɪz naʊ biɪŋ kɔl ðə blæk taʊɝ ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə lɝn haʊ tə tʃænəl. səm əv dʒɹimd ə tʃænəlɪŋ dɪspaɪɾ ɔl ðə daɪɹ ɹɪsks, waɪl ʌðɝz ɹɪmeɪn oʊnli kəz pæsɪŋ ðə tɛs fəɹ ði əbɪləɾi tə lɝn əz ɪtsɛlf stɑɹɾəd əm ɑn ðə ɹoʊd tə tʃænəlɪŋ, ən ðeɪ naʊ mʌs lɝn tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt bɪfɔɹ ɪt kɪlz ðɛm. ðeɪ tʃɹeɪn nɑɾ oʊnli ɪn juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ, bʌɾ ɪn ðə jus ə ðə sɔɹɾ ən ɪn faɪɾɪŋ wɪð hænz ən fit. ði æʃəmən, hu wɛɹ dɪstɪŋktɪv blæk koʊts, ɑɹ dɪvaɪɾəd əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə lɛvəl ə nɑlədʒ ðeɪv ətʃivd, ðə loʊəs biɪŋ ə soʊlʒɝ. ðə nɛks lɛvəl ɪz ə dɛɾəkeɪtəd, mɑɹk baɪ ə pɪn ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə sɪlvɝ sɔɹd wɔɹn ɑn ðə koʊt kɑlɝ. ðə haɪəs lɛvəl ɪz kɔl sɪmpli ən æʃəmən, mɑɹk baɪ ə ɹɛd-ænd-ɡoʊld ɪnæməl pɪn ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə dʒɹæɡən wɔɹn ɑn ðə koʊt kɑlɝ ɑpəzət ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹd. ənlaɪk ɛɛs sədaɪ, hu ɡoʊ tə ɡɹeɪt lɛŋθs tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðət ðoʊz ðeɪ tʃɹeɪn ɑɹ nɑɾ əlaʊd tə muv deɪnʒɝəsli fæst, ði æʃəmən ɑɹ pʊʃt hɑɹd fɹəm ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, moʊst ɪspɛʃli ɪn lɝnɪŋ tə juz ðə paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən. əz ə ɹɪzʌlt, wɛɹ ðə dɛθ əɹ stɪlɪŋ ʌv ə nɑvəs ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ dʊɹɪŋ əɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ wəd bi sʌmθɪŋ spoʊkən ʌv wɪð hɔɹɝ fəɹ jɪɹz, ət ðə blæk taʊɝ ɪts ɪkspɛktəd ðəɾ ə sɝɾən nʌmbɝ ʌv æʃəmən soʊlʒɝz wɪl daɪ əɹ bi bɝn aʊɾ ətɛmptɪŋ tə lɝn. ði ɛɡzɪstəns ə ði æʃəmən, ən ðɛɹ kənɛkʃən tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, hæz kɑzd ə ɹiɪvæljueɪʃən əmʌŋ səm ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ði ɪmiɾiət nəsɛsəɾi fəɹ dʒɛntəlɪŋ, bʌt mɛni hæv nɑt tʃeɪnʒd ðɛɹ vju əɾ ɔl. si ɔlsoʊ dʒɛntəlɪŋ, stɪlɪŋ.

Asha'man (AH-shah-mahn): (1) In the Old Tongue, "Guardian" or "Defender," with a strong implication that this is a defender of truth and justice. (2) The name taken by followers of the Dragon Reborn, men who have come to what is now being called the Black Tower in order to learn how to channel. Some have dreamed of channeling despite all the dire risks, while others remain only because passing the test for the ability to learn has itself started them on the road to channeling, and they now must learn to control it before it kills them. They train not only in using the One Power, but in the use of the sword and in fighting with hands and feet. The Asha'man, who wear distinctive black coats, are divided according to the level of knowledge they have achieved, the lowest being a Soldier. The next level is a Dedicated, marked by a pin in the shape of a silver sword worn on the coat collar. The highest level is called simply an Asha'man, marked by a red-and-gold enameled pin in the shape of a Dragon worn on the coat collar opposite the silver sword. Unlike Aes Sedai, who go to great lengths to make sure that those they train are not allowed to move dangerously fast, the Asha'man are pushed hard from the beginning, most especially in learning to use the Power as a weapon. As a result, where the death or stilling of a novice of the White Tower during her training would be something spoken of with horror for years, at the Black Tower it is expected that a certain number of Asha'man Soldiers will die or be burned out attempting to learn. The existence of the Asha'man, and their connection to the Dragon Reborn, has caused a reevaluation among some Aes Sedai of the immediate necessity for gentling, but many have not changed their view at all. See also gentling, stilling.

əsunɑwə, ɹɑɾəm (ɑ-su-nɑ-wɑ, ɹɑ-dæm): haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ ə ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt. ɪn ɪz aɪz, mɛɾəlɪŋ wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪz jusɝpɪŋ ðə kɹieɪɾɝz paʊɝ ən ɪz ðə kɑz ʌv ɔl ðə wɝlz ɪlz. hi wɑns mɔɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɛniwʌn ən ɛvɹiwʌn u kən tʃænəl əɹ ivən wɪʃɪz tə; ðeɪ mʌs kənfɛs ðɛɹ sɪn ʌndɝ ðə mɪnəstʃɹeɪʃənz ə ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt, ən ðən daɪ. si ɔlsoʊ kwɛstʃənɝz.

Asunawa, Rhadam (ah-soo-NAH-wah, RAH-dam): High Inquisitor of the Hand of the Light. In his eyes, meddling with the One Power is usurping the Creator's power and is the cause of all the world's ills. He wants more than anything else to destroy anyone and everyone who can channel or even wishes to; they must confess their sin under the ministrations of the Hand of the Light, and then die. See also Questioners.

æθɑn maɪɹ (ɑ-θɑ-æn mi-ɛɹ): si si foʊk.

Atha'an Miere (ah-thah-AHN mee-EHR): See Sea Folk.

bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd: (wʌn) ə lɛdʒəndɛɹi bæn ə hɪɹoʊz (ʃɛn ən kɑlhɑɹ) fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz u daɪɾ ət ðə bæɾəl ʌv æɛmənz fild, wən meɪnɛðɝən fɛl. (tu) ə mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən wɪtʃ ɡæðɝd tə fɑloʊ mæt kɔθən, ən wɪtʃ ɪz kɝənli ʃæɾoʊɪŋ ðə ɹɛbəl ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðɛɹ ɑɹmi wɪð ɔɹɾɝz tə kæɹi ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ tə ɹænd ælθɹ ən seɪfti, ʃəd ʃi ɪkspɹɛs ə wɪʃ tə fli fɹəm əɹ kɝən sɪtʃueɪʃən, ən ɔlsoʊ ɛni ʌðɝ sɪstɝz u maɪt wɪʃ tə dʒɔɪn hɝ.

Band of the Red Hand: (1) A legendary band of heroes (Shen an Calhar) from the Trolloc Wars who died at the Battle of Aemon's Field, when Manetheren fell. (2) A military formation which gathered to follow Mat Cauthon, and which is currently shadowing the rebel Aes Sedai and their army with orders to carry Egwene al'Vere to Rand al'Thor and safety, should she express a wish to flee from her current situation, and also any other sisters who might wish to join her.

bɹəleɪn sɝ pɛndʒɹæɡ (bɛ-ɹɛ-leɪn sʊɹ peɪ-ɛn-dʒɹæɡ): fɝst ə min, blɛsɪɾ ə ðə laɪt, dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə weɪvz, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs pɹən (peɪ-ɛ-ɹɑn). ə bjuɾəfəl ən wɪlfəl jʌŋ wʊmən, ən ə skɪlfəl ɹulɝ. si ɔlsoʊ min.

Berelain sur Paendrag (BEH-reh-lain suhr PAY-ehn-DRAG): First of Mayene, Blessed of the Light, Defender of the Waves, High Seat of House Paeron (pay-eh-ROHN). A beautiful and willful young woman, and a skillful ruler. See also Mayene.

bɝdʒɪt (bɝ-dʒit-tɛ): wɔɹɾɝ tə ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd, bɪliv tə bi pɑsəbli ðə fɝs fimeɪl wɔɹɾɝ ɛvɝ, ə fæk ðət kɑzəz ə nʌmbɝ ə dɪfəkəltiz, fju ʌv əm ɪkspɛktəd. bɝdʒɪɾ ɪz ɪn tʃɹuθ ðə lɛdʒəndɛɹi hɪɹoʊ ʌv ðət neɪm, hu wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz baʊn tə bi kɔl bæk baɪ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɹɪpt aʊɾ ə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ ɪndə ðə wɝld ə ðə flɛʃ dʊɹɪŋ ə stʃɹʌɡəl wɪð mɑɡiɾin ən wɑz oʊnli seɪv fɹəm dɛθ baɪ biɪŋ bɑndəd baɪ ɪleɪn. ɪksɛp fəɹ əɹ bjuɾi ən skɪl wɪð ə baʊ, ʃiz lɪɾəl laɪk ðə stɔɹiz ə hɝ. si ɔlsoʊ fɔɹseɪkən; hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ; wɔɹɾɝ.

Birgitte (ber-GEET-teh): Warder to Elayne Trakand, believed to be possibly the first female Warder ever, a fact that causes a number of difficulties, few of them expected. Birgitte is in truth the legendary hero of that name, who was one of those bound to be called back by the Horn of Valere, but she was ripped out of Tel'aran'rhiod into the world of the flesh during a struggle with Moghedien and was only saved from death by being bonded by Elayne. Except for her beauty and skill with a bow, she is little like the stories of her. See also Forsaken; Horn of Valere; Warder.

bɹaɪn, ɡɛɹɪθ (bɹɪn, ɡɑ-ɹɛθ): wʌns kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz ɪn ændɝ, naʊ kəmændɪŋ ən ɑɹmi fəɹ ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛns ði əθɔɹəɾi ʌv ɪleɪɾə də əvɹaɪni ɹɔɪhən. kənsɪɾɝd wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst dʒɛnɝəlz lɪvɪŋ. hɪz ɹileɪʃənʃɪp wɪð sɪuən sɑntʃ tʃɹʌbəlz ɪm nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ əz ɪt dʌz hɝ. ðə sɪdʒəl ə haʊs bɹaɪn ɪz ə waɪl bʊl, ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn ʌv ændɝ ɝaʊn ɪts nɛk. ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪnz pɝsənəl sɪdʒəl ɪz θɹi ɡoʊldən stɑɹz, itʃ ə faɪv ɹeɪz.

Bryne, Gareth (BRIHN, GAH-rehth): Once Captain-General of the Queen's Guards in Andor, now commanding an army for those Aes Sedai in rebellion against the authority of Elaida do Avriny a'Roihan. Considered one of the greatest generals living. His relationship with Siuan Sanche troubles him nearly as much as it does her. The sigil of House Bryne is a wild bull, the rose crown of Andor around its neck. Gareth Bryne's personal sigil is three golden stars, each of five rays.

keɪɾɪnsɝ (kɑ-dɪn-sɔɹ): ɡɑɹb ʌv il ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ: koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz ɪn bɹaʊnz ən ɡɹeɪz ðət feɪɾ ɪndə ɹɑk əɹ ʃædoʊ, əlɔŋ wɪð sɑft, leɪs ni-haɪ buts. ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "wɝkɪŋ kloʊðz," ðoʊ ðɪs ɪz ə kɔɹs ən ɪmpɹəsaɪs tʃɹænzleɪʃən. si ɔlsoʊ ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ.

cadin'sor (KAH-dihn-sohr): Garb of Aiel algai'd'siswai: coat and breeches in browns and grays that fade into rock or shadow, along with soft, laced knee-high boots. In the Old Tongue, "working clothes," though this is of course an imprecise translation. See also algai'd'siswai.

kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn (kæd-su-eɪn mɛ-laɪ-dʒɹɪn): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ hu hæz əpɹoʊtʃt lɛdʒəndɛɹi stæɾəs əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ waɪl stɪl əlaɪv, ðoʊ ɪn tʃɹuθ moʊst sɪstɝz bɪliv ʃi mʌs bi jɪɹz dɛd baɪ naʊ. θɔt tə hæv bɪn bɔɹn ɝaʊn sɛvənhʌnʒɹədfaɪv ni ɪn ɡildən, wɪtʃ wəd meɪk əɹ ði oʊldəs lɪvɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃi wɑz ɔlsoʊ ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ɪn ðə paʊɝ faʊn fəɹ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz əɹ mɔɹ əntɪl ði ædvɛn ə nɪneɪiv, ɪleɪn ən ɛɡwin ən ivən ðeɪ də nɑt fɑɹ aʊt-stɛp hɝ. ɔlðoʊ ə ɡɹin, oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz ʃiz kənfɹʌntəɾ ən kæptʃɝd mɔɹ mɛn u kəd tʃænəl baɪ fɑɹ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ lɪvɪŋ sɪstɝ; ə lɪɾəl-noʊn ɑɾəti ɪz ðət ðə mɛn ʃi bɹɔt tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ tɛndəd tə lɪv mɑɹkədli lɔŋɡɝ æftɝ biɪŋ dʒɛntəl ðən ðoʊz bɹɔt baɪ ʌðɝ sɪstɝz.

Cadsuane Melaidhrin (CAD-soo-ain meh-LIE-drihn): An Aes Sedai of the Green Ajah who has approached legendary status among Aes Sedai while still alive, though in truth most sisters believe she must be years dead by now. Thought to have been born around 705 NE in Ghealdan, which would make her the oldest living Aes Sedai, she was also the strongest in the Power found for a thousand years or more until the advent of Nynaeve, Elayne and Egwene and even they do not far out-step her. Although a Green, over the years she has confronted and captured more men who could channel by far than any other living sister; a little-known oddity is that the men she brought to the White Tower tended to live markedly longer after being gentled than those brought by other sisters.

kɛɹhin (kaɪ-ɹi-ɛn): boʊθ ə neɪʃən əlɔŋ ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld ən ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ðət neɪʃən. sævɪdʒ dʊɹɪŋ ði il wɔɹ, ðə neɪʃən ə kɛɹhin wɑz ɪn noʊ weɪ fʊli ɹəkʌvɝd wən ði əsæsəneɪʃən ə kɪŋ ɡɔlʒɹiən (naɪnhʌnʒɹədnaɪntieɪt ni) plʌnʒd ðə kʌntʃɹi ɪndə ə wɔɹ fəɹ ðə səksɛʃən wɪtʃ wɑz ɪtsɛlf ɪntɝʌptɪd baɪ ði ɪnveɪʒən ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ il ɪn wʌt mɛni kɔl ðə sɛkən il wɔɹ, ɔlðoʊ ðə sɪɾi ɪtsɛlf wɑz seɪv baɪ il ɪntɝvɛntʃən ʌndɝ ɹænd ælθɹ. sʌbsəkwənli moʊs noʊbəlz ə kɛɹhin, əlɔŋ wɪð mɛni fɹəm tɛɹ, swɔɹ fiəlti tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bʌɾ ɪn ə lænd wɛɹ ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz əz bɪn ɹeɪz tə ən ɑɹt, ɪts hɑɹdli sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ ðəɾ ivən mɛni hu swɔɹ ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə mənuvɝ fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ ædvæntɪdʒ ðeɪ kən faɪnd. ðə bænɝ ə kɛɹhin ɪz ə mɛni-ɹeɪd ɡoʊldən sʌn ɹaɪzɪŋ ɑn ə fild ə skaɪ blu. kæləndɝ: ðəɹ ɑɹ tɛn deɪz tə ðə wik, twɛntieɪt deɪz tə ðə mʌnθ ən θɝtin mʌnθs tə ðə jɪɹ. sɛvɹəl fistdeɪz ɑɹ nɑt pɑɹɾ ʌv ɛni mʌnθ; ðiz ɪnklud sʌndeɪ (ðə lɔŋɡəs deɪ ʌv ðə jɪɹ), ðə fist ə θæŋksɡɪvɪŋ (wʌns ɛvɹi fɔɹ jɪɹz ət ðə spɹɪŋ ikwənɑks), ən ðə fist ʌv ɔl soʊlz sælveɪʃən, ɔlsoʊ kɔld ɔl soʊlz deɪ (wʌns ɛvɹi tɛn jɪɹz ət ði ɔɾəm ikwənɑks). waɪl mɛni fists ən fɛstəvəlz ɑɹ sɛləbɹeɪɾəd ɛvɹiwɛɹ (sʌtʃ əz ðə fist ə ðə laɪts, wɪtʃ ɛnz ði oʊl jɪɹ ən bɪɡɪnz ðə nu), ɛvɹi læn əz ɪts oʊn əz wɛl, ən ɪn mɛni ɪnstənsəz soʊ də ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl taʊnz ən vɪlədʒəz. ɪn dʒɛnɝəl, ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz əv ðə fjuəs fɛstəvəlz ən fistdeɪz, waɪl ðə sɪɾiz ʌv ɪljən ən ɛbu dɑɹ əv ðə moʊst.

Cairhien (KEYE-ree-EHN): Both a nation along the Spine of the World and the capital city of that nation. Savaged during the Aiel War, the nation of Cairhien was in no way fully recovered when the assassination of King Galldrian (998 NE) plunged the country into a war for the succession which was itself interrupted by the invasion of the Shaido Aiel in what many call the Second Aiel War, although the city itself was saved by Aiel intervention under Rand al'Thor. Subsequently most nobles of Cairhien, along with many from Tear, swore fealty to the Dragon Reborn, but in a land where the Game of Houses has been raised to an art, it is hardly surprising that even many who swore are ready to maneuver for whatever advantage they can find. The banner of Cairhien is a many-rayed golden sun rising on a field of sky blue. calendar: There are 10 days to the week, 28 days to the month and 13 months to the year. Several feastdays are not part of any month; these include Sunday (the longest day of the year), the Feast of Thanksgiving (once every four years at the spring equinox), and the Feast of All Souls Salvation, also called All Souls Day (once every ten years at the autumn equinox). While many feasts and festivals are celebrated everywhere (such as the Feast of the Lights, which ends the old year and begins the new), every land has its own as well, and in many instances so do individual towns and villages. In general, the Borderlands have the fewest festivals and feastdays, while the cities of Illian and Ebou Dar have the most.

kæɹeɪɡən mɑkɑnɝ (kɑ-ɹaɪ-dʒɪn mɑ-kɑn-ɑɹ): lɛdʒəndɛɹi ɡɹin sɪstɝ (tuhʌnʒɹədtwɛlv æbθɹisɛvəntiθɹi æb), ðə hɛɹoʊən ʌv ə hʌnʒɹəd ædvɛntʃɝz, kɹɛɾətəd wɪð ɛksplɔɪts ðəɾ ivən səm ɛɛs sədaɪ kənsɪɾɝ ɪmpɹɑbəbəl dɪspaɪt ðɛɹ ɪnkluʒən ɪn ðə ɹɛkɝdz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, sətʃ əz sɪŋɡəl-hændɪdli pʊɾɪŋ daʊn ə ɹɪbɛljən ɪn məsədʒɹɪn ən kwɛlɪŋ ðə koʊmeɪɾɪn ɹaɪəts əɾ ə taɪm wən ʃi hæd noʊ wɔɹɾɝz. kənsɪɾɝd baɪ ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ tə bi ði ɑɹkɪtaɪp ʌv ə ɡɹin sɪstɝ. si ɔlsoʊ ədʒɑ.

Caraighan Maconar (kah-RYE-gihn mah-CON-ahr): Legendary Green sister (212 AB373 AB), the heroine of a hundred adventures, credited with exploits that even some Aes Sedai consider improbable despite their inclusion in the records of the White Tower, such as single-handedly putting down a rebellion in Mosadorin and quelling the Comaidin Riots at a time when she had no Warders. Considered by the Green Ajah to be the archetype of a Green sister. See also Ajah.

tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt: səsaɪəɾi ʌv stʃɹɪkt əsɛɾɪk bɪlifs, oʊɪŋ əlidʒəns tə noʊ neɪʃən ən dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə ðə dɪfiɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ʌv ɔl dɑɹkfɹɛnz. faʊndəd dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz tə pɹɑsələtaɪz əɡɛnst ən ɪnkɹis ɪn dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ðeɪ ɪvɑlv dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ɪndə ə kəmplitli mɪlətɛɹi səsaɪəɾi. ɪkstʃɹimli ɹɪdʒəɾ ɪn bɪlifs, ən sɝɾən ðəɾ oʊnli ðeɪ noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ ən ðə ɹaɪt. kənsɪɾɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɛni hu səpɔɹɾ əm tə bi dɑɹkfɹɛnz. noʊn dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋli əz waɪtkloʊks. ðɛɹ saɪn ɪz ə ɡoʊldən sʌnbɝst ɑn ə fild ʌv waɪt. si ɔlsoʊ kwɛstʃənɝz.

Children of the Light: Society of strict ascetic beliefs, owing allegiance to no nation and dedicated to the defeat of the Dark One and the destruction of all Darkfriends. Founded during the War of the Hundred Years to proselytize against an increase in Darkfriends, they evolved during the war into a completely military society. Extremely rigid in beliefs, and certain that only they know the truth and the right. Consider Aes Sedai and any who support them to be Darkfriends. Known disparagingly as Whitecloaks. Their sign is a golden sunburst on a field of white. See also Questioners.

dɑɹkfɹɛnz: ædhɪɹəns ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ðeɪ bɪliv ðəl ɡeɪn ɡɹeɪt paʊɝ ən ɹɪwɔɹdz, ivən ɪmɔɹtælɪɾi, wən hiz fɹid. sikɹəɾɪv ə nəsɛsəɾi, ðeɪ ɔɹɡənaɪz ɪndə ɡɹups kɔld "sɝkəlz," wɪð mɛmbɝz ʌv wʌn sɝkəl ɹɛɹli ɪf ɛvɝ noʊn tə mɛmbɝz ʌv ənʌðɝ. ɹæŋk ɪn ði aʊtsaɪd wɝld əz noʊ bɛɹɪŋ ɑn ɹæŋk wɪð ðə sɝkəlz; ə kɪŋ əɹ kwin u wɑz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd wəd bi ɪkspɛktəd tə oʊbeɪ ə bɛɡɝ u ɡeɪv ðə pɹɑpɝ saɪnz. əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, ðeɪ səmtaɪmz juz ði eɪntʃənt neɪm fɹɛnz ə ðə dɑɹk.

Darkfriends: Adherents of the Dark One. They believe they will gain great power and rewards, even immortality, when he is freed. Secretive of necessity, they organize into groups called "circles," with members of one circle rarely if ever known to members of another. Rank in the outside world has no bearing on rank with the circles; a king or queen who was a Darkfriend would be expected to obey a beggar who gave the proper signs. Among themselves, they sometimes use the ancient name Friends of the Dark.

dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn: dʒɛnɝəl tɝm juz fəɹ səpɔɹɾɝz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, juʒəwəli baɪ ðoʊz u iðɝ əpoʊz ɪm əɹ ət lis θɪŋk tə ɹɪmeɪn nutʃɹəl. ɪn fækt, mɛni ɡɪvən ðət neɪm əv nɛvɝ swɔɹn ɛni sɔɹɾ ʌv oʊθ, ən ɪts fɹikwənli əplaɪd tə bɹɪɡænz əz wɛl, səm ə hum kleɪm ðə neɪm ɪn ðə hoʊp ðəɾ ɪɾəl kwɛl ɹɪzɪstəns. ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni ətʃɹɑsəɾiz əv bɪn kəmɪɾəd baɪ pipəl kleɪmɪŋ tə bi dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn.

Dragonsworn: General term used for supporters of the Dragon Reborn, usually by those who either oppose him or at least think to remain neutral. In fact, many given that name have never sworn any sort of oath, and it is frequently applied to brigands as well, some of whom claim the name in the hope that it will quell resistance. A great many atrocities have been committed by people claiming to be Dragonsworn.

ɛbu dɑɹ: ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ɔltɑɹə. wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪt pɔɹts, ən ə sɪɾi wɪð mɛni ɑd kʌstəmz fəɹ ən aʊtsaɪɾɝ tə əsɪməleɪt. si ɔlsoʊ ɔltɑɹə.

Ebou Dar: The capital city of Altara. One of the great ports, and a city with many odd customs for an outsider to assimilate. See also Altara.

ɪleɪɾə də əvɹaɪni ɹɔɪhən (ɛ-laɪ-dɑ doʊ -ɹɪ-ni ɑ-ɹɔɪ-hɑn): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, fɔɹmɝli ʌv ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ, naʊ ɹeɪz tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ðoʊ əpoʊz baɪ ənʌðɝ kleɪmɪŋ ðət taɪɾəl. wʌns ædvaɪzɝ tə kwin mɔɹɡeɪs ʌv ændɝ. ʃi səmtaɪmz əz ðə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ.

Elaida do Avriny a'Roihan (eh-LY-da doh AHV-rih-nee ah-ROY-han): An Aes Sedai, formerly of the Red Ajah, now raised to the Amyrlin Seat, though opposed by another claiming that title. Once advisor to Queen Morgase of Andor. She sometimes has the Foretelling.

fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn: sɪmbəl ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ə staɪlaɪzd ɹɛpɹəzɛnteɪʃən ʌv ə fleɪm; ə waɪt tɪɹdʒɹɑp, pɔɪn ʌpwɝd.

Flame of Tar Valon: Symbol of Tar Valon, the Amyrlin Seat, and the Aes Sedai. A stylized representation of a flame; a white teardrop, point upward.

fɔɹseɪkən, ðə: neɪm ɡɪvən tə θɝtin ə ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ðʌs əmʌŋ ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ɛvɝ noʊn, hu wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ ɪn ɹɪtɝn fəɹ ðə pɹɑməs ʌv ɪmɔɹtælɪɾi ən wɝ ɪmpɹɪzən əlɔŋ wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn wən ɪz pɹɪzən wɑz ɹisild. ðɛɹ oʊn neɪm fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz wɑz "ðə tʃoʊzən." ðə neɪmz ɡɪvən tə ðɛm ɑɹ stɪl juz tə fɹaɪɾən tʃɪlʒɹən. ðeɪ wɝ: eɪdʒɪnɝ (æɡ-ɪ-nɔɹ), æzmɑɾiən (ɑz-moʊ-di-æn), bælθəməl (bɑl-θɑ-mɛl), bɛləl (bɛ-lɑl), dɪmɑndɝd (di-mæn-dʒɹɛd), ɡɹeɪndəl (ɡɹɛn-dɑl), ɪʃəml (ɪ-ʃɑ-meɪ-ɛl), lænfɝ (læn-fɪɹ), mɛsænə (mɛ-sɑ-nɑ), mɑɡiɾin (moʊ-ɡɛ-di-ɛn), ɹɑvɪn (ɹɑv-ɪn), sɑmaɪl (sæm-meɪ-ɛl), ən sɛmɝhɪdʒ (sɛ-mɪ-ɹæɡ). ɪts bɪliv baɪ ðoʊz wɪð səm kɝənt nɑlədʒ ðəɾ oʊnli dɪmɑndɝɾ ən sɑmaɪl sɝvaɪv əmʌŋ ðə mɛn, ən oʊnli ɡɹeɪndəl, mɛsænə, mɑɡiɾin ən sɛmɝhɪdʒ əmʌŋ ðə wɪmən. ə nʌmbɝ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪnkaʊntɝz, haʊɛvɝ, sədʒɛs ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi iðɝ ðət sɛvɹəl nu tʃoʊzən əv bɪn səlɛktəd baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn əɹ ðət lɔɹɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪv əz ɪn səm keɪsəz ɹitʃt bɪɑn dɛθ.

Forsaken, the: Name given to thirteen of the most powerful Aes Sedai of the Age of Legends, thus among the most powerful ever known, who went over to the Dark One during the War of the Shadow in return for the promise of immortality and were imprisoned along with the Dark One when his prison was resealed. Their own name for themselves was "the Chosen." The names given to them are still used to frighten children. They were: Aginor (AGH-ih-nohr), Asmodean (ahs-MOH-dee-an), Balthamel (BAAL-thah-mell), Be'lal (BEH-lahl), Demandred (DEE-man-drehd), Graendal (GREHN-dahl), Ishamael (ih-SHAH-may-EHL), Lanfear (LAN-feer), Mesaana (meh-SAH-nah), Moghedien (moh-GHEH-dee-ehn), Rahvin (RAAV-ihn), Sammael (SAHM-may-EHL), and Semirhage (SEH-mih-RHAHG). It is believed by those with some current knowledge that only Demandred and Sammael survive among the men, and only Graendal, Mesaana, Moghedien and Semirhage among the women. A number of strange encounters, however, suggest the possibility either that several new Chosen have been selected by the Dark One or that Lord of the Grave has in some cases reached beyond death.

ɡeɪɾɪn (ɡaɪ-din): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "bɹʌðɝ tə bæɾəlz." ə taɪɾəl juz baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ ðə wɔɹɾɝz. si ɔlsoʊ wɔɹɾɝ.

Gaidin (GYE-deen): In the Old Tongue, "Brother to Battles." A title used by Aes Sedai for the Warders. See also Warder.

ɡeɪʃeɪn (ɡaɪ-ʃeɪn): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "plɛdʒ tə pis ɪn bæɾəl" ɪz əz kloʊz ə tʃɹænzleɪʃən əz ɪz pɑsəbəl. ən il teɪkən pɹɪznɝ baɪ ʌðɝ il dʊɹɪŋ ɹeɪɾ əɹ bæɾəl ɪz ɹikwaɪɝd baɪ dʒiɾoʊ tə sɝv ɪz əɹ əɹ kæptɝ hʌmbli ən oʊbiɾiəntli fəɹ wʌn jɪɹ ən ə deɪ, tʌtʃɪŋ noʊ wɛpən ən duɪŋ noʊ vaɪələns. eɪ waɪz wʌn, ə blæksmɪθ, ə tʃaɪld, əɹ ə wʊmən wɪð ə tʃaɪld ʌndɝ ði eɪdʒ ə tɛn meɪ nɑt bi meɪd ɡeɪʃeɪn. sɪns ðə ɹɛvəleɪʃən ðət ði ænsɛstɝz ə ði il wɝ ɪn fæk pæsɪfɪs fɑloʊɝz ə ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif, ə ɡʊd mɛni ɡeɪʃeɪn ɹəfjuz tə pʊɾ ɔf waɪt wən ðɛɹ taɪm ɛnz. ədɪʃənəli, ɔlðoʊ baɪ tʃɹədɪʃən əz stʃɹɔŋ əz lɔ noʊ wʌn u dʌz nɑt fɑloʊ dʒiɾoʊ kən bi meɪd ɡeɪʃeɪn, ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ il əv bɪɡʌn pʊɾɪŋ kɛɹhinɪn ən ʌðɝ pɹɪznɝz ɪndə ɡeɪʃeɪn ɹoʊbz, ən mɛni hæv kʌm tə bɪliv ðət sɪns ðiz pipəl də nɑt fɑloʊ dʒiɾoʊ, ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə ɹilis əm ət ði ɛn ə ðə jɪɹ ən ə deɪ.

gai'shain (GYE-shain): In the Old Tongue, "Pledged to Peace in Battle" is as close a translation as is possible. An Aiel taken prisoner by other Aiel during raid or battle is required by ji'e'toh to serve his or her captor humbly and obediently for one year and a day, touching no weapon and doing no violence. A Wise One, a blacksmith, a child, or a woman with a child under the age of ten may not be made gai'shain. Since the revelation that the ancestors of the Aiel were in fact pacifist followers of the Way of the Leaf, a good many gai'shain refuse to put off white when their time ends. Additionally, although by tradition as strong as law no one who does not follow ji'e'toh can be made gai'shain, the Shaido Aiel have begun putting Cairhienin and other prisoners into gai'shain robes, and many have come to believe that since these people do not follow ji'e'toh, there is no need to release them at the end of the year and a day.

ɡɔɪn (ɡɑ-wɪn) ʌv haʊs tʃɹəkənd (tʃɹɑ-kænd): kwin mɔɹɡeɪsəz sʌn, ən ɪleɪnz bɹʌðɝ, hu wɪl bi fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹd wən ɪleɪn əsɛnz tə ðə θɹoʊn. hæf-bɹʌðɝ tə ɡɑləd dəmədʒɹd. ə mæn kɑɾ ɪn mɔɹ ðən wʌn klf stɪk; hi dɪpaɪzɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ jɛɾ əz swɔɹn tə sɝv ðɛm, ən i heɪts ɹænd ælθɹ jɛɾ əz swɔɹn nɑt tə ɹeɪz ə hæn əɡɛns hɪm, ɔl kəz i lʌvz ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ bɪɑn ɹizən. hi dʌz nɑt noʊ ðəɾ ɛɡwin hɝsɛlf əz nɑɾ oʊnli bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ əpoʊzɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪn i ɹɛkəɡnaɪzəz. hɪz saɪn ɪz ə waɪt bɔɹ.

Gawyn (GAH-wihn) of House Trakand (trah-KAND): Queen Morgase's son, and Elayne's brother, who will be First Prince of the Sword when Elayne ascends to the throne. Half-brother to Galad Damodred. A man caught in more than one cleft stick; he depises Aes Sedai yet has sworn to serve them, and he hates Rand al'Thor yet has sworn not to raise a hand against him, all because he loves Egwene al'Vere beyond reason. He does not know that Egwene herself has not only become Aes Sedai, but the Amyrlin Seat opposing the Amyrlin he recognizes. His sign is a white boar.

dʒɛntəlɪŋ: ðə ɹɪmuvəl ʌv ə mænz əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl. kənsɪɾɝd nɛsəsɛɹi baɪ moʊs pipəl kəz ɛni mæn u tʃænəlz wɪl ɡoʊ ɪnseɪn fɹəm ðə teɪn ɑn seɪɾɪn ən ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli kəmɪɾ ətʃɹɑsəɾiz wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪn ɪz mædnəs bɪfɔɹ ðə teɪn kɪlz hɪm. wʌn u hæz bɪn dʒɛntəl kən stɪl sɛns ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, bʌt kænɑt tʌtʃ ɪt. wʌtɛvɝ mædnəs əz kʌm bɪfɔɹ dʒɛntəlɪŋ ɪz ɝɛstəd bʌt nɑt kjʊɹd, ən ɪf ɪts dʌn sun ɪnʌf, ðə ɹɑɾɪŋ dɛθ bɹɔt baɪ ðə teɪn kən bi əvɝɾəd. ə mæn u ɪz dʒɛntəld, haʊɛvɝ, ɪnɛvəɾəbli stɑps wɑntɪŋ tə lɪv; ðoʊz u də nɑt səksiɾ ɪn kəmɪɾɪŋ suəsaɪd juʒəwəli daɪ ɛniweɪ wɪðɪn ə jɪɹ əɹ tu. wʌns bɪliv pɝmənənt, dʒɛntəlɪŋ ɪz naʊ noʊn baɪ səm tə bi səsɛptəbəl tə ə haɪli spɛʃəlaɪz fɔɹm ə hilɪŋ. si ɔlsoʊ stɪlɪŋ.

gentling: The removal of a man's ability to channel. Considered necessary by most people because any man who channels will go insane from the taint on saidin and almost certainly commit atrocities with the Power in his madness before the taint kills him. One who has been gentled can still sense the True Source, but cannot touch it. Whatever madness has come before gentling is arrested but not cured, and if it is done soon enough, the rotting death brought by the taint can be averted. A man who is gentled, however, inevitably stops wanting to live; those who do not succeed in committing suicide usually die anyway within a year or two. Once believed permanent, gentling is now known by some to be susceptible to a highly specialized form of Healing. See also stilling.

ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk: neɪm baɪ wɪtʃ dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɹəfɝ tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, kleɪmɪŋ ðət tə spik ɪz tʃɹu neɪm wəd bi blæsfəməs.

Great Lord of the Dark: Name by which Darkfriends refer to the Dark One, claiming that to speak his true name would be blasphemous.

hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, ðə: ðə lɛdʒəsleɪɾɪv bɑɾi ʌv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, tʃɹədɪʃənəli kənsɪstɪŋ ə θɹi sɪɾɝz ɪn ðə hɔl fɹəm itʃ ə ðə sɛvən ədʒəz. ət pɹɛzənt, ðəɹ ɪz ə hɔl sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, wɪtʃ kənteɪnz noʊ sɪɾɝz fəɹ ðə blu, ən ə hɔl əmʌŋ ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ hu əpoʊz ɪleɪɾə də əvɹaɪni ɹɔɪhən. ðɪs ɹɛbəl hɔl kənteɪnz noʊ ɹɛd sɪɾɝz. waɪl ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪz baɪ lɔ ði æbsəlut paʊɝ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ɪn fækt əɹ paʊɝ əz ɔlweɪz dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn haʊ wɛl ʃi kəd lid, mænədʒ əɹ ɪntɪmɪdeɪt ðə hɔl, əz ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛni weɪz ðət ðə hɔl kən bɔk ɛni æmɪɝlɪnz plænz. ðəɹ ɑɹ tu lɛvəlz ʌv əɡɹimən ðət meɪ bi ɹikwaɪɝd fəɹ aɪɾəmz tə pæs ðə hɔl, ðə lɛsɝ kənsɛnsəs ən ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ kənsɛnsəs. ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ kənsɛnsəs ɹikwaɪɝz ðəɾ ɛvɹi sɪstɝ u ɪz pɹɛzən mʌst stænd, ən ðəɾ ə mɪnəməm ʌv ɪlɛvən sɪɾɝz bi pɹizɛnt; ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ət list wʌn sɪɾɝ fɹəm itʃ ədʒɑ ɪz ɔlsoʊ ɹikwaɪɝd, ɪksɛpt wən ðə mæɾɝ bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl ɪz ðə ɹɪmuvəl ʌv ən æmɪɝlɪn əɹ kipɝ, ɪn wɪtʃ keɪs ði ədʒɑ fɹəm wɪtʃ ʃi wɑz ɹeɪzd wɪl nɑt bi ɪnfɔɹmd ə ðə voʊɾ əntɪl æftɝ ɪts bɪn teɪkən. ðə lɛsɝ kənsɛnsəs ɔlsoʊ ɹikwaɪɝz ə kwɔɹəm ʌv ɪlɛvən sɪɾɝz, bʌɾ oʊnli tu-θɝdz ə ðoʊz pɹɛzənt nid stæn fəɹ ən aɪɾəm tə pæs. ənʌðɝ dɪfɝəns ɪz ðət ðəɹ ɪz noʊ ɹɪkwaɪɹmən fəɹ ɔl ədʒəz tə bi ɹɛpɹəzɛntəɾ ɪn ðə lɛsɝ kənsɛnsəs ɪksɛpt ɪn ðə keɪs ʌv ə dɛklɝeɪʃən ʌv wɔɹ baɪ ðə waɪt taʊɝ, wʌn ə sɛvɹəl mæɾɝz lɛf tə ðə lɛsɝ kənsɛnsəs wɪtʃ mɛni maɪt θɪŋk wəd ɹikwaɪɝ ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit meɪ kɔl fəɹ ɛni sɪɾɝ tə ɹɪzaɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ, əɹ ɪndid fəɹ ɔl tə, ən ðət kɔl mʌs bi hiɾəd. ðɪs ɪz sɛldəm dʌn, haʊɛvɝ, əz nʌθɪŋ stɑps ən ədʒɑ fɹəm ɹɪtɝnɪŋ ðə seɪm sɪɾɝ əɹ sɪɾɝz ɪksɛpt ə kʌstəm ðət sɪstɝz nɑt sɝv əɡɛn ɪn ðə hɔl æftɝ livɪŋ ɪt. əz ən ɪndəkeɪʃən ə haʊ sɪɹiəs sətʃ ə kɔl fəɹ ə mæs ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən wəd bi, ɪts ɹɪlaɪəbli bɪliv ðəɾ ɪts hæpən ɪɡzækli fɔɹ taɪmz ɪn ðə mɔɹ ðən θɹi-θaʊzənd-jɪɹ hɪstɝi ʌv ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ðət waɪl tu ʌv ðoʊz ɹɪzʌltɪɾ ɪn ðə səlɛkʃən ʌv ən ɪntaɪɝli, əɹ nɪɹli, nu hɔl, ði ʌðɝ tu ɹɪzʌltɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən ən ɛɡzaɪl ə ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪnvɑlvd.

Hall of the Tower, the: The legislative body of the Aes Sedai, traditionally consisting of three Sitters in the Hall from each of the seven Ajahs. At present, there is a Hall sitting in the White Tower, which contains no Sitters for the Blue, and a Hall among those Aes Sedai who oppose Elaida do Avriny a'Roihan. This rebel Hall contains no Red Sitters. While the Amyrlin Seat is by law the absolute power in the White Tower, in fact her power has always depended on how well she could lead, manage or intimidate the Hall, as there are many ways that the Hall can balk any Amyrlin's plans. There are two levels of agreement that may be required for items to pass the Hall, the lesser consensus and the greater consensus. The greater consensus requires that every sister who is present must stand, and that a minimum of eleven Sitters be present; the presence of at least one Sitter from each Ajah is also required, except when the matter before the Hall is the removal of an Amyrlin or Keeper, in which case the Ajah from which she was raised will not be informed of the vote until after it has been taken. The lesser consensus also requires a quorum of eleven Sitters, but only two-thirds of those present need stand for an item to pass. Another difference is that there is no requirement for all Ajahs to be represented in the lesser consensus except in the case of a declaration of war by the White Tower, one of several matters left to the lesser consensus which many might think would require the greater. The Amyrlin Seat may call for any Sitter to resign her chair, or indeed for all to, and that call must be heeded. This is seldom done, however, as nothing stops an Ajah from returning the same Sitter or Sitters except a custom that sisters not serve again in the Hall after leaving it. As an indication of how serious such a call for a mass resignation would be, it is reliably believed that it has happened exactly four times in the more than three-thousand-year history of the White Tower, and that while two of those resulted in the selection of an entirely, or nearly, new Hall, the other two resulted in the resignation and exile of the Amyrlin involved.

hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ (vɑ-lɪɹ): ðə lɛdʒəndɛɹi əbdʒɛkt ə ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn, ɪt kən kɔl bæk dɛd hɪɹoʊz fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv tə faɪɾ əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ. ə nu hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn əz bɪn kɔld, ən swɔɹn hʌntɝz fəɹ ðə hɔɹn kən naʊ bi faʊn ɪn mɛni neɪʃənz. fju ivən əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ noʊ ðət ðə hɔɹn əz æktʃəli  bɪn faʊn ən juzd, əɹ ɪts ɪz naʊ hɪɾən ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

Horn of Valere (vah-LEER): The legendary object of the Great Hunt of the Horn, it can call back dead heroes from the grave to fight against the Shadow. A new Hunt of the Horn has been called, and sworn Hunters for the Horn can now be found in many nations. Few even among Aes Sedai know that the Horn has actually been found and used, or that it is now hidden in the White Tower.

ɪljən (ɪl-li-æn): ə ɡɹeɪt pɔɹɾ ɑn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ðə neɪʃən ə ðə seɪm neɪm. ən eɪntʃən ɛnəmi ʌv tɛɹ. ðə bænɝ ʌv ɪljən ɪz naɪn ɡoʊldən biz ɑn ə fild ʌv ɡɹin.

Illian (IHL-lee-an): A great port on the Sea of Storms, capital city of the nation of the same name. An ancient enemy of Tear. The banner of Illian is nine golden bees on a field of green.

dʒulɪn sændɑɹ (dʒaɪ-lɪn sæn-dɑɹ): ə θif-kætʃɝ fɹəm tɛɹ. ə mæn ɪn lʌv wɪð pɝhæps ðə vɛɹi læst wʊmən i wəɾ ɛvɝ əv θɔɾ i kəd bi.

Juilin Sandar (JUY-lihn sahn-DAHR): A thief-catcher from Tear. A man in love with perhaps the very last woman he would ever have thought he could be.

lɛŋθ, junəts ʌv: tɛn ɪntʃəz ikwəlz wʌn fʊt; θɹi fiɾ ikwəlz wʌn peɪs; tu peɪsɪz ikwəlz wʌn spæn; wʌnθaʊzən spænz ikwəlz wʌn maɪl; fɔɹ maɪlz ikwəlz wʌn liɡ.

length, units of: 10 inches = 1 foot; 3 feet = 1 pace; 2 paces = 1 span; 1000 spans = 1 mile; 4 miles = 1 league.

lini (lɪn-ni): tʃaɪldhʊd nɝs tə ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn, ən bɪfɔɹ əɹ tə ɪleɪnz mʌðɝ, mɔɹɡeɪs, əz wɛl əz tə mɔɹɡeɪsəz mʌðɝ. ə wʊmən ə væst ɪnɝ stʃɹɛŋkθ, kənsɪɾɝəbəl pɝsɛpʃən, ən ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni seɪɪŋz, hu hæz nɛvɝ kwaɪɾ ədmɪɾəd ðəɾ ɛni ʌv əɹ tʃɑɹdʒəz əz ɡɹoʊn ʌp kəmplitli.

Lini (LIHN-nee): Childhood nurse to the Lady Elayne, and before her to Elayne's mother, Morgase, as well as to Morgase's mother. A woman of vast inner strength, considerable perception, and a great many sayings, who has never quite admitted that any of her charges has grown up completely.

lɪŋkɪŋ: ði əbɪləɾi ʌv wɪmən u kən tʃænəl tə kəmbaɪn ðɛɹ floʊz ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ. waɪl ðə kəmbaɪn floʊ ɪz nɑɾ əz ɡɹeɪɾ əz ðə sʌm toʊɾəl ə ði ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl floʊz, ɪts dɝɛktəd baɪ ðə pɝsən u lidz ðə lɪŋk ən kən bi juz mʌtʃ mɔɹ pɹɪsaɪsli ən tə fɑɹ ɡɹeɪɾɝ ɪfɛk ðən ði ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl floʊz kəd bi. mɛn kænɑt lɪŋk ðɛɹ əbɪləɾiz wɪθaʊt ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ə wʊmən əɹ wɪmən ɪn ðə sɝkəl. ɛntɝɪŋ ə lɪŋk ɪz nɔɹməli ə vɑləntɛɹi ækt, ɹikwaɪɝɪŋ ət list əkwiɛsəns, bʌɾ ʌndɝ sɝɾən sɝkəmstænsəz, ə səfɪʃən sɝkəl ɔlɹɛɾi fɔɹm kən bɹɪŋ ənʌðɝ wʊmən fɔɹsəbli ɪndə ðə sɝkəl əz lɔŋ əz noʊ mæn ɪz pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. ɪnsəfɑɹ əz ɪz noʊn, ə mæn kænɑt bi fɔɹst ɪndə ə sɝkəl, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ lɑɹdʒ. ʌp tə θɝtin wɪmən kən lɪŋk wɪθaʊt ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ə mæn. wɪð ði ədɪʃən ʌv wʌn mæn, ðə sɝkəl kən ɪnkɹis tə twɛnti-sɪks wɪmən. tu mɛn kən teɪk ðə sɝkəl tə ɪnklud fɔɹɾi-θɹi wɪmən, ən soʊ ɑn əntɪl ðə lɪməɾ ə sɪks mɛn ən sɪksti-sɪks wɪmən ɪz ɹitʃt. ðəɹ ɑɹ lɪŋks ðəɾ ɪnklud mɔɹ mɛn ən fjuɝ wɪmən, bʌɾ ɪksɛpt ɪn ðə lɪŋkɪŋ ʌv wʌn mæn ən wʌn wʊmən, tu mɛn ən wʌn wʊmən əɹ tu mɛn ən tu wɪmən, ðəɹ mʌst ɔlweɪz bi ət list wʌn mɔɹ wʊmən ɪn ðə sɝkəl ðən ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛn. ɪn moʊst sɝkəlz, iðɝ ə mæn əɹ ə wʊmən kən kəntʃɹoʊl ðə lɪŋk, bʌɾ ə mæn mʌs kəntʃɹoʊl ɪn ðə sɝkəl ə sɛvənti-tu əz wɛl əz ɪn mɪkst sɝkəlz ə fjuɝ ðən θɝtin bʌt mɔɹ ðən fɔɹ. ɔlðoʊ mɛn ɑɹ ɪn dʒɛnɝəl stʃɹɔŋɝ ɪn ðə paʊɝ ðən wɪmən, ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst sɝkəlz ɑɹ ðoʊz wɪtʃ kənteɪn əz nɪɹ əz pɑsəbəl tə ikwəl nʌmbɝz ə mɛn ən wɪmən.

linking: The ability of women who can channel to combine their flows of the One Power. While the combined flow is not as great as the sum total of the individual flows, it is directed by the person who leads the link and can be used much more precisely and to far greater effect than the individual flows could be. Men cannot link their abilities without the presence of a woman or women in the circle. Entering a link is normally a voluntary act, requiring at least acquiesence, but under certain circumstances, a sufficent circle already formed can bring another woman forcibly into the circle as long as no man is part of it. Insofar as is known, a man cannot be forced into a circle, no matter how large. Up to thirteen women can link without the presence of a man. With the addition of one man, the circle can increase to twenty-six women. Two men can take the circle to include forty-three women, and so on until the limit of six men and sixty-six women is reached. There are links that include more men and fewer women, but except in the linking of one man and one woman, two men and one woman or two men and two women, there must always be at least one more woman in the circle than there are men. In most circles, either a man or a woman can control the link, but a man must control in the circle of seventy-two as well as in mixed circles of fewer than thirteen but more than four. Although men are in general stronger in the Power than women, the strongest circles are those which contain as near as possible to equal numbers of men and women.

lɑɡən əblɝ (loʊ-ɡeɪn): bɔɹn naɪnhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntitu ni ɪn ɡildən, wʌns kleɪm tə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. kæptʃɝɾ æftɝ kæɹiɪŋ wɔɹ əkɹɔs ɡildən, ɔltɑɹə ən mʊɹændi, hi wɑz teɪkən tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən dʒɛntəld, leɪɾɝ ɪskeɪpɪŋ ɪn ðə kənfjuʒən æftɝ sɪuən sɑntʃ wɑz dɪpoʊzd. ði æksədɛntəl ɹɛstɝeɪʃən ə hɪz əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl wɑz ðə fɝst ɪndəkeɪʃən ðət sətʃ ə lɔs wɑz nɑt pɝmənənt. kənfaɪn æftɝ ɪz hilɪŋ, hi ɪskeɪpt əɡɛn, ən ɪz pɹɛzənt wɛɹəbaʊts ɑɹ ənnoʊn. si ɔlsoʊ dʒɛntəlɪŋ; stɪlɪŋ.

Logain Ablar (loh-GAIN): Born 972 NE in Ghealdan, once claimed to be the Dragon Reborn. Captured after carrying war across Ghealdan, Altara and Murandy, he was taken to the White Tower and gentled, later escaping in the confusion after Siuan Sanche was deposed. The accidental restoration of his ability to channel was the first indication that such a loss was not permanent. Confined after his Healing, he escaped again, and his present whereabouts are unknown. See also gentling; stilling.

min (meɪ-ɛn): sɪɾi-steɪt ɑn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, hɛmd ɪn ən hɪstɔɹɪkəli əpɹɛs baɪ tɛɹ. ðə ɹulɝ ə min ɪz staɪl ðə fɝst, wɪtʃ taɪɾəl wɑz wʌns ðə fɝs lɔɹɾ əɹ leɪɾi; fɝsts kleɪm tə bi dɪsɛndəns ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ. ðə bænɝ ə min ɪz ə ɡoʊldən hɔk ɪn flaɪɾ ɑn ə fild ə blu.

Mayene (may-EHN): City-state on the Sea of Storms, hemmed in and historically oppressed by Tear. The ruler of Mayene is styled the First, which title was once the First Lord or Lady; Firsts claim to be descendants of Artur Hawkwing. The banner of Mayene is a golden hawk in flight on a field of blue.

mæzɹim teɪm (-ɹɪm tɑ-im): ə mæn u ɹeɪz hævək ɪn sɑldɑiə əntɪl i wɑz dɪfiɾəd ən kæptʃɝd, ɔlðoʊ hi leɪɾɝ ɪskeɪpt, əpɛɹənli wɪð ði eɪɾ ə səm ə hɪz fɑloʊɝz. nɑɾ oʊnli eɪbəl tə tʃænəl, bʌɾ ʌv ɡɹeɪt stʃɹɛŋkθ, hiz naʊ ðə l (mækeɪl; "liɾɝ," ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ) ʌv ði æʃəmən. si ɔlsoʊ æʃəmən.

Mazrim Taim (MAHZ-rihm tah-EEM): A man who raised havoc in Saldaea until he was defeated and captured, although he later escaped, apparently with the aid of some of his followers. Not only able to channel, but of great strength, he is now the M'Hael (MA'kHAIL; "leader," in the Old Tongue) of the Asha'man. See also Asha'man.

məleɪn (mɛ-leɪn): eɪ waɪz wʌn ə ði ɪɹæd sɛpt ʌv ɡoʊʃin il. ə dʒɹimwɔkɝ. mɑɾɝətli stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə wʌn paʊɝ. mɛɹid tə beɪl (beɪl), klæn tʃif ə ðə ɡoʊʃin. sɪstɝ-waɪf tə dɔɹinhə (dɔɹ-ɪn-dɑ), ɹuf-mɪstʃɹəs ə smoʊk spɹɪŋz hoʊld.

Melaine (meh-LAYN): A Wise One of the Jhirad sept of Goshien Aiel. A dreamwalker. Moderately strong in the One Power. Married to Bael (BAYL), clan chief of the Goshien. Sister-wife to Dorindha (dohr-IHN-dah), roof-mistress of Smoke Springs Hold.

mɔɪɹeɪn dəmədʒɹd (mwɑ-ɹeɪn dæm-oʊ-dʒɹɛd): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə blu ədʒɑ, bɔɹn ɪndə ðə ðɛn-ɹeɪnɪŋ haʊs ə kɛɹhin, hu vænɪʃt ɪndə ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɪn kɛɹhin waɪl bæɾəlɪŋ lænfɝ, əpɛɹənli kɪlɪŋ boʊθ hɝsɛlf ən ðə fɔɹseɪkən. sɪns ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi loʊkeɪɾəd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ən kɪl ðə fɔɹseɪkən bɛləl, ʃiz ɔlɹɛɾi lʊkt əpɑn əz wʌn ə ðoʊz nɪɹ-mɪθəkəl sɪstɝz u ɑɹ hɛld əz lɛdʒəndɛɹi hɪɹoʊz. si ɔlsoʊ fɔɹseɪkən.

Moiraine Damodred (mwah-RAIN DAHM-oh-drehd): An Aes Sedai of the Blue Ajah, born into the then-reigning House of Cairhien, who vanished into a ter'angreal in Cairhien while battling Lanfear, apparently killing both herself and the Forsaken. Since she had already located the Dragon Reborn and killed the Forsaken Be'lal, she is already looked upon as one of those near-mythical sisters who are held as legendary heroes. See also Forsaken.

mɔɹɡeɪs (mʊɹ-ɡeɪz): baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪs ə ðə laɪt, kwin ʌv ændɝ, dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə ɹɛlm, pɹətɛktɝ ə ðə pipəl, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs tʃɹəkənd. naʊ ɪn ɛɡzaɪl ən bɪliv dɛd, mɝɾɝd baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, əɹ soʊ mɛni θɪŋk. hɝ saɪn ɪz θɹi ɡoʊldən kiz. ðə saɪn ə haʊs tʃɹəkən ɪz ə sɪlvɝ kistoʊn.

Morgase (moor-GAYZ): By the Grace of the Light, Queen of Andor, Defender of the Realm, Protector of the People, High Seat of House Trakand. Now in exile and believed dead, murdered by the Dragon Reborn, or so many think. Her sign is three golden keys. The sign of House Trakand is a silver keystone.

nɪɹ-sɪstɝ; nɪɹ-bɹʌðɝ: il kɪnʃɪp tɝmz minɪŋ fɹɛnz əz kloʊs əz fɝst-sɪstɝz əɹ fɝst-bɹʌðɝz. nɪɹ-sɪstɝz ɔfən ədɑpt wʌn ənʌðɝ fɔɹməli əz fɝst-sɪstɝz ɪn ən ɪlæbɹət sɛɹəmoʊni kæɹiɾ aʊt bɪfɔɹ waɪz wʌnz, æftɝ wɪtʃ ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹɛkəɡnaɪz baɪ ʌðɝ il əz tʃɹuli bɔɹn twɪnz, ðoʊ ə pɛɹ ə twɪnz wɪð tu mʌðɝz. nɪɹ-bɹʌðɝz ɔlmoʊs nɛvɝ də ðɪs.

near-sister; near-brother: Aiel kinship terms meaning friends as close as first-sisters or first-brothers. Near-sisters often adopt one another formally as first-sisters in an elaborate ceremony carried out before Wise Ones, after which they are recognized by other Aiel as truly born twins, though a pair of twins with two mothers. Near-brothers almost never do this.

oʊðz, θɹi: ði oʊðz teɪkən baɪ ən æksɛptɪɾ ɑn biɪŋ ɹeɪz tə ɛɛs sədaɪ. spoʊkən waɪl hoʊldɪŋ ði oʊθ ɹɑd, ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðət meɪks oʊðz baɪndɪŋ. ðeɪ ɑɹ: (wʌn) tə spik noʊ wɝd ðəɾ ɪz nɑt tʃɹu. (tu) tə meɪk noʊ wɛpən wɪð wɪtʃ wʌn mæn meɪ kɪl ənʌðɝ. (θɹi) nɛvɝ tə juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən ɪksɛpt əɡɛns dɑɹkfɹɛnz əɹ ʃædoʊ-spɑn, əɹ ɪn ðə læst ɪkstʃɹim ə dɪfɛns ə hɝ oʊn laɪf, əɹ ðəɾ ə hɝ wɔɹɾɝ əɹ ənʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə sɛkən oʊθ wɑz ðə fɝst ədɑptəɾ æftɝ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ. ðə fɝst oʊθ, waɪl hɛl tə ðə lɛɾɝ, ɪz ɔfən sɝkəmvɛntɪd baɪ kɛɹfəl spikɪŋ. ɪts bɪliv ðət ðə læs tu ɑɹ ɪnvaɪələbəl.

Oaths, Three: The oaths taken by an Accepted on being raised to Aes Sedai. Spoken while holding the Oath Rod, a ter'angreal that makes oaths binding. They are: (1) To speak no word that is not true. (2) To make no weapon with which one man may kill another. (3) Never to use the One Power as a weapon except against Darkfriends or Shadow-spawn, or in the last extreme of defense of her own life, or that of her Warder or another Aes Sedai. The second oath was the first adopted after the War of the Shadow. The first oath, while held to the letter, is often circumvented by careful speaking. It is believed that the last two are inviolable.

oʊl tʌŋ: ðə læŋɡwədʒ spoʊkən dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ɪts dʒɛnɝəli ɪkspɛktəd ðət noʊbəlz ən ði ɛdʒəkeɪɾəd kən spik ɪt, bʌt moʊst æktʃəli  noʊ oʊnli ə fju wɝdz. tʃɹænzleɪʃən ɪz ɔfən dɪfəkəlt, ɪts ɪz ə læŋɡwədʒ keɪpəbəl ə mɛni sʌɾəli dɪfɹən minɪŋz. si ɔlsoʊ eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz.

Old Tongue: The language spoken during the Age of Legends. It is generally expected that nobles and the educated can speak it, but most actually know only a few words. Translation is often difficult, as it is a language capable of many subtly different meanings. See also Age of Legends.

pdən feɪn (pæd-æn feɪn): wʌns ə pɛdlɝ tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ən ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, hi wɑz tʃɹænsfɔɹmd ət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, nɑɾ oʊnli tə ɛneɪbəl ɪm tə faɪn ðə jʌŋ mæn u wəd bɪkʌm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əz ə haʊn faɪnz pɹeɪ fəɹ ðə hʌntɝ, bʌt tə ɪnɡɹeɪn ðə nid tə faɪn hɪm. ðə peɪn ə ðɪs tʃɹænsfɝmeɪʃən ɪndust ɪn feɪn ə heɪtʃɹəd boʊθ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ə ɹænd ælθɹ. waɪl fɑloʊɪŋ ælθɹ, hi ɪnkaʊntɝd ðə tʃɹæp soʊl ə mɔɹɾɪθ ɪn ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, ən ðɪs soʊl tʃɹaɪd tə teɪk feɪnz bɑɾi. kəz ʌv wʌt hæd bɪn meɪɾ ə feɪn, ðoʊ, ðə ɹɪzʌlt wɑz ən əmælɡəmeɪʃən ðət wɑz moʊsli feɪn ən ðəɾ əz əbɪləɾiz bɪɑnd wʌɾ iðɝ mæn hæɾ ɝɪdʒənəli, ðoʊ feɪn dʌz nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn əm fʊli jɛt. moʊs mɛn fil fɪɹ əɾ ə mɹdʒɹɑlz aɪləs ɡeɪz; mɹdʒɹɑl fil fɪɹ ət feɪnz ɡeɪz.

Padan Fain (PAD-an FAIN): Once a peddler trading into the Two Rivers, and a Darkfriend, he was transformed at Shayol Ghul, not only to enable him to find the young man who would become the Dragon Reborn as a hound finds prey for the hunter, but to ingrain the need to find him. The pain of this transformation induced in Fain a hatred both of the Dark One and of Rand al'Thor. While following al'Thor, he encountered the trapped soul of Mordeth in Shadar Logoth, and this soul tried to take Fain's body. Because of what had been made of Fain, though, the result was an amalgamation that was mostly Fain and that has abilities beyond what either man had originally, though Fain does not understand them fully yet. Most men feel fear at a Myrddraal's eyeless gaze; Myrddraal feel fear at Fain's gaze.

pɹɑfət, ðə: mɔɹ ɪlæbɹətli, ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. taɪɾəl kleɪm baɪ mæsimə dɑɡɝ, ə wʌntaɪm ʃaɪnɝən soʊlʒɝ, hu pɹitʃɪz ðə ɹibɝθ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hiz ətʃivd ə ɡɹeɪt fɑloʊɪŋ ɪn ɡildən ən nɔɹðɝn ɑmɑdɪʃiə, ɪn pɑɹt kəz ə spɹɛɾɪŋ nɑlədʒ ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən əz ɪndid bɪn ɹibɔɹn ən ɪn pɑɹt kəz ə ði ɪkstʃɹim bɹutæləɾi hɪz fɑloʊɝz vɪzət nɑɾ oʊnli ɑn ɛniwʌn u ɹəfjuzəz tə æknɑlɪdʒ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bʌɾ ɑn ðoʊz u ɹəfjuz tə æknɑlɪdʒ ði əθɔɹəɾi ʌv ðə pɹɑfəɾ əz ðə hæn ən vɔɪs ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

Prophet, the: More elaborately, the Prophet of the Lord Dragon. Title claimed by Masema Dagar, a onetime Shienaran soldier, who preaches the rebirth of the Dragon Reborn. He has achieved a great following in Ghealdan and northern Amadicia, in part because of spreading knowledge that the Dragon has indeed been Reborn and in part because of the extreme brutality his followers visit not only on anyone who refuses to acknowledge the Dragon Reborn, but on those who refuse to acknowledge the authority of the Prophet as the hand and voice of the Dragon Reborn.

kwɛstʃənɝz, ðə: ən ɔɹɾɝ wɪðɪn ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. əvaʊd pɝpəsəz ɑɹ tə dɪskʌvɝ ðə tʃɹuθ ɪn dɪspjəteɪʃənz ən ənkʌvɝ dɑɹk-fɹɛnz. ɪn ðə sɝtʃ fəɹ tʃɹuθ ən ðə laɪt, ðɛɹ nɔɹməl mɛθəɾ ʌv ɪnkwaɪɹi ɪz tɔɹtʃɝ; ðɛɹ nɔɹməl mænɝ ðət ðeɪ noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ ɔlɹɛɾi ən mʌst oʊnli meɪk ðɛɹ vɪktəm kənfɛs tə ɪt. ðeɪ ɹəfɝ tə ðɛmsɛlvz əz ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt, ðə hæn ðət dɪɡz aʊt tʃɹuθ, ən ət taɪmz ækt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɪntaɪɝli sɛpɹət fɹəm ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ən ðə kaʊnsəl ə ði ənɔɪntəd, wɪtʃ kəmænz ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ðə hɛɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃənɝz ɪz ðə haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ, hu sɪts ɑn ðə kaʊnsəl ə ði ənɔɪntəd. ðɛɹ saɪn ɪz ə blʌd-ɹɛd ʃɛpɝdz kɹʊk. si ɔlsoʊ tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Questioners, the: An order within the Children of the Light. Avowed purposes are to discover the truth in disputations and uncover Dark-friends. In the search for truth and the Light, their normal method of inquiry is torture; their normal manner that they know the truth already and must only make their victim confess to it. They refer to themselves as the Hand of the Light, the Hand that digs out truth, and at times act as if they were entirely separate from the Children and the Council of the Anointed, which commands the Children. The head of the Questioners is the High Inquisitor, who sits on the Council of the Anointed. Their sign is a blood-red shepherd's crook. See also Children of the Light.

ɹɪɾiən (ɹʌaɪ-di-æn): ə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾi, ði oʊnli wʌn ɪn ði il weɪst ən toʊɾəli ənnoʊn tə ði aʊtsaɪd wɝld. əbændən fəɹ nɪɹli θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz. wʌns mɛn əmʌŋ ði il wɝ əlaʊd tə ɛntɝ ɹɪɾiən oʊnli wʌns, ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə bi tɛstəɾ ɪnsaɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪt tɛɹæŋɡɹil fəɹ fɪtnəs tə bɪkʌm klæn tʃif (oʊnli wʌn ɪn θɹi sɝvaɪvd), ən wɪmən oʊnli twaɪs, fəɹ tɛstɪŋ tə bɪkʌm waɪz wʌnz, ðə sɛkən taɪm ɪn ðə seɪm tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ðoʊ wɪð ə kənsɪɾɝəbli haɪɝ sɝvaɪvəl ɹeɪt ðən ðə mɛn. naʊ ðə sɪɾi ɪz ɪnhæbəɾəd əɡɛn, baɪ il, ən ə ɡɹeɪt leɪk ɑkjəpaɪz wʌn ɛn ə ðə væli ʌv ɹɪɾiən, fɛd baɪ ən ʌndɝɡɹaʊn oʊʃən ə fɹɛʃ wɔɾɝ ən ɪn tɝn fiɾɪŋ ði oʊnli ɹɪvɝ ɪn ðə weɪst.

Rhuidean (RHUY-dee-ahn): A great city, the only one in the Aiel Waste and totally unknown to the outside world. Abandoned for nearly three thousand years. Once men among the Aiel were allowed to enter Rhuidean only once, in order to be tested inside a great ter'angreal for fitness to become clan chief (only one in three survived), and women only twice, for testing to become Wise Ones, the second time in the same ter'angreal, though with a considerably higher survival rate than the men. Now the city is inhabited again, by Aiel, and a great lake occupies one end of the valley of Rhuidean, fed by an underground ocean of fresh water and in turn feeding the only river in the Waste.

sɑŋɡɹil (sɑ-æn-ɡɹi-ɑl): ɹɛmnəns ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ðəɾ əlaʊ tʃænəlɪŋ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ðən ɪz ʌðɝwaɪz pɑsəbəl əɹ seɪf. ə sɑŋɡɹil ɪz sɪməlɝ tə, bʌt mɔɹ paʊɝfəl ðæn, ən æŋɡɹil. ði əmaʊn ə ðə paʊɝ ðət kən bi wildɪd wɪð ə sɑŋɡɹil kəmpɛɹz tə ði əmaʊn ðət kən bi hændəld wɪð ən æŋɡɹil əz ðə paʊɝ wildɪd wɪð ði eɪɾ ʌv ən æŋɡɹil dʌz tə ði əmaʊn ðət kən bi hændəld əneɪɾɪd. ðə meɪkɪŋ ə ðɛm ɪz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ noʊn. əz wɪð æŋɡɹil, ðəɹ ɑɹ meɪl ən fimeɪl sɑŋɡɹil. oʊnli ə hændfʊl ɹɪmeɪn, fɑɹ fjuɝ ivən ðən æŋɡɹil.

sa'angreal (SAH-ahn-GREE-ahl): Remnants of the Age of Legends that allow channeling much more of the One Power than is otherwise possible or safe. A sa'angreal is similar to, but more powerful than, an angreal. The amount of the Power that can be wielded with a sa'angreal compares to the amount that can be handled with an angreal as the Power wielded with the aid of an angreal does to the amount that can be handled unaided. The making of them is no longer known. As with angreal, there are male and female sa'angreal. Only a handful remain, far fewer even than angreal.

si foʊk, ðə: mɔɹ pɹɑpɝli, ði æθɑn maɪɹ (ɑ-θɑ-æn mi-ɛɹ), ðə pipəl ə ðə si. ðeɪ lɪv moʊst ə ðɛɹ laɪvz ɑn ðɛɹ ʃɪps ən stʃɹɔŋli dɪslaɪk ɡoʊɪŋ ɛni dɪstəns fɹəm ði oʊʃən. ɹɛləɾɪvli lɪɾəl ɪz noʊn ə ðɛɹ kʌstəmz, ɡɪvɪŋ ɹaɪz tə ən ɛɹ ʌv ɪɡzɑɾɪk mɪstɝi ən ɔfən tə fænsɪfəl teɪlz. moʊst sibɔɹn tʃɹeɪɾ ɪz kæɹid baɪ si foʊk ʃɪps, wɪtʃ ɪnklud ðə fæstəs baɪ fɑɹ ən moʊst ə ðə lɑɹdʒəst, ən ðeɪ ɑɹ kənsɪɾɝd baɪ ði ɪnhæbəɾənts ə pɔɹt sɪɾiz tə bi bɑɹɡɪnɝz u aʊtstʃɹɪp ðə mɔɹ waɪdli noʊn dəmɑni. əz sɝvaɪvəl ət si ɔfən dɪpɛnz ɑn ɪnstən oʊbiɾiəns, ɪt ʃəd bi noʊ sɝpɹaɪz ðət ði æθɑn maɪɹ stɪk stʃɹɪkli tə ðɛɹ haɪɝɑɹki, ðoʊ ðəɹ ɑɹ sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ fluɪɾətiz ət səm pɔɪns. ði æθɑn maɪɹ ɑɹ dɪvaɪɾəd ɪndə numɝəs klænz, boʊθ lɑɹdʒ ən smɔl, itʃ hɛɾəd baɪ ə weɪvməstʃɹəs. bɪloʊ hɝ ɑɹ ðə seɪlməstʃɹɛsəz, ðə ʃɪps' kæptənz ə ðə klæn. eɪ weɪvməstʃɹəs əz væst əθɔɹəɾi, jɛt ʃiz ɪlɛktəd tə ðət pəzɪʃən baɪ ðə twɛlv sinjɝ klæn seɪlməstʃɹɛsəz, hu ɑɹ ɹəfɝd tə əz ðə fɝs twɛlv ə ðət klæn, ən ʃi kən bi ɹimuv baɪ ði ɔɹɾɝ ə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ. ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps əz ə lɛvəl ʌv əθɔɹəɾi ɛni ʃɔɹbaʊn kɪŋ əɹ kwin wəɾ ɛnvi, jɛt ʃi ɔlsoʊ ɪz ɪlɛktəd, fəɹ laɪf, baɪ junænəməs voʊɾ ə ðə twɛlv sinjɝ weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz, hu ɑɹ kɔl ðə fɝs twɛlv ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ. (ðə tɝm "ðə fɝs twɛlv" ɪz ɔlsoʊ juz fəɹ ðə twɛlv sinjɝ weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz əɹ seɪlmɪs-tʃɹɛsɪz pɹɛzən ɪn ɛni ɡæðɝɪŋ.) ðə pəzɪʃən ə mæstɝ ə ðə bleɪdz ɪz hɛl baɪ ə mæn u meɪ əɹ meɪ nɑt bi ðə hʌzbən ə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps. hɪz ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾiz ɑɹ ðə dɪfɛns ən ðə tʃɹeɪɾ ə ðə si foʊk, ən bɪloʊ hɪm ɑɹ ðə sɔɹdmæstɝz ʌv weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz ən ðə kɑɹɡəmæstɝz ə seɪlməstʃɹɛsəz, hu hoʊld laɪk pəzɪʃənz ən duɾiz; fəɹ itʃ ə ðɛm, ɛni əθɔɹəɾi aʊtsaɪd ðiz ɛɹiəz ɪz hɛld oʊnli əz dɛləɡeɪɾəd baɪ ðə wʊmən i sɝvz. wɛɹ ɛni vɛsəl seɪlz ən wən ɪz ɔlweɪz ʌp tə ðə seɪlməstʃɹəs, bʌt sɪns tʃɹeɪɾ ən fɪnænsɪz ɑɹ toʊɾəli ɪn ðə hænz ə ðə kɑɹɡəmæstɝ (ɔɹ, ət haɪɝ lɛvəlz, ʌv ðə sɔɹdmæstɝ əɹ ðə mæstɝ ə ðə bleɪdz), ə kloʊs dɪɡɹi ʌv koʊɑpɝeɪʃən ɪz ɹikwaɪɝd. ɛvɹi si foʊk vɛsəl, haʊɛvɝ smɔl, ən ɔlsoʊ ɛvɹi weɪvməstʃɹəs, hæz ə wɪndfɪndɝ, ə wʊmən u ɪz ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz eɪbəl tə tʃænəl ən skɪld ɪn wivɪŋ ðə wɪnz, əz ði æθɑn maɪɹ kɔl ðə mənɪpjəleɪʃən ʌv wɛðɝ. ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps əz əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz tə ðə weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz, hu ɪn tɝn əv əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ wɪndfɪndɝz tə ðə seɪlməstʃɹɛsəz ə ðɛɹ klænz. wʌn pɪkjuliɛɹəɾi ʌv ðə si foʊk ɪz ðəɾ ɔl mʌs bɪɡɪn ət ðə vɛɹi loʊəst ɹæŋk ən wɝk ðɛɹ weɪ ʌp, ən ðəɾ ɛniwʌn ʌðɝ ðən ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps kən bi dɪmoʊɾɪd baɪ ðoʊz əbʌv, ivən tə ðə vɛɹi bɑɾəm əɡɛn ɪn ɪkstʃɹim ɪnstənsəz.

Sea Folk, the: More properly, the Atha'an Miere (AH-thah-AHN MEE-air), the People of the Sea. They live most of their lives on their ships and strongly dislike going any distance from the ocean. Relatively little is known of their customs, giving rise to an air of exotic mystery and often to fanciful tales. Most seaborne trade is carried by Sea Folk ships, which include the fastest by far and most of the largest, and they are considered by the inhabitants of port cities to be bargainers who outstrip the more widely known Domani. As survival at sea often depends on instant obedience, it should be no surprise that the Atha'an Miere stick strictly to their hierarchy, though there are surprising fluidities at some points. The Atha'an Miere are divided into numerous clans, both large and small, each headed by a Wavemistress. Below her are the Sailmistresses, the ships' captains of the clan. A Wavemistress has vast authority, yet she is elected to that position by the twelve senior clan Sailmistresses, who are referred to as the First Twelve of that clan, and she can be removed by the order of the Mistress of the Ships to the Atha'an Miere. The Mistress of the Ships has a level of authority any shorebound king or queen would envy, yet she also is elected, for life, by unanimous vote of the twelve senior Wavemistresses, who are called the First Twelve of the Atha'an Miere. (The term "the First Twelve" is also used for the twelve senior Wavemistresses or Sailmis-tresses present in any gathering.) The position of Master of the Blades is held by a man who may or may not be the husband of the Mistress of the Ships. His responsibilities are the defense and the trade of the Sea Folk, and below him are the Swordmasters of Wavemistresses and the Cargomasters of Sailmistresses, who hold like positions and duties; for each of them, any authority outside these areas is held only as delegated by the woman he serves. Where any vessel sails and when is always up to the Sailmistress, but since trade and finances are totally in the hands of the Cargomaster (or, at higher levels, of the Swordmaster or the Master of the Blades), a close degree of cooperation is required. Every Sea Folk vessel, however small, and also every Wavemistress, has a Windfinder, a woman who is almost always able to channel and skilled in Weaving the Winds, as the Atha'an Miere call the manipulation of weather. The Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships has authority over the Windfinders to the Wavemistresses, who in turn have authority over Windfinders to the Sailmistresses of their clans. One peculiarity of the Sea Folk is that all must begin at the very lowest rank and work their way up, and that anyone other than the Mistress of the Ships can be demoted by those above, even to the very bottom again in extreme instances.

sintʃæn (ʃɔn-tʃæn): (wʌn) dɪsɛndəns ə ði ɑɹmiz ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ sɛn əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, hu kɑŋkɝd ðə lænz ðɛɹ. ðeɪ bɪliv ðəɾ ɛni wʊmən u kən tʃænəl mʌs bi kəntʃɹoʊl fəɹ ðə seɪfti ʌv ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, ən ɛni mæn u kən tʃænəl mʌs bi kɪl fəɹ ðə seɪm ɹizən. (tu) ðə læn fɹəm wɪtʃ ðə ʃɔn-tʃæn kʌm.

Seanchan (SHAWN-CHAN): (1) Descendants of the armies Artur Hawkwing sent across the Aryth Ocean, who conquered the lands there. They believe that any woman who can channel must be controlled for the safety of everyone else, and any man who can channel must be killed for the same reason. (2) The land from which the Sean-chan come.

ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl (ʃeɪ-əl ɡul): ə maʊntən ɪn ðə blæstəd lænz, bɪɑn ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt. saɪɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən.

Shayol Ghul (SHAY-ol GHOOL): A mountain in the Blasted Lands, beyond the Great Blight. Site of the Dark One's prison.

sɪstɝ-waɪf: il kɪnʃɪp tɝm. il wɪmən u ɑɹ nɪɹ-sɪstɝz əɹ fɝst-sɪstɝz, ən u dɪskʌvɝ ðeɪ lʌv ðə seɪm mæn əɹ sɪmpli də nɑt wɑn ə mæn tə kʌm bɪtwin ðɛm, wɪl boʊθ mɛɹi hɪm, ðʌs bɪkʌmɪŋ sɪstɝ-waɪvz. wɪmən u lʌv ðə seɪm mæn wɪl səmtaɪmz tʃɹaɪ tə faɪn aʊt wɛðɝ ðeɪ kən bɪkʌm nɪɹ-sɪstɝz ən ədɑptəd fɝst-sɪstɝz, ə fɝst stɛp tə bɪkʌmɪŋ sɪstɝ-waɪvz. ən il mæn feɪst wɪð ðɪs sɪtʃueɪʃən əz ðə tʃɔɪs ə mɛɹiɪŋ boʊθ wɪmən əɹ niðɝ; ɪf hiz ə waɪf u dɪsaɪdz tə teɪk ə sɪstɝ-waɪf, hi faɪnz hɪmsɛlf wɪð ə sɛkənd waɪf.

sister-wife: Aiel kinship term. Aiel women who are near-sisters or first-sisters, and who discover they love the same man or simply do not want a man to come between them, will both marry him, thus becoming sister-wives. Women who love the same man will sometimes try to find out whether they can become near-sisters and adopted first-sisters, a first step to becoming sister-wives. An Aiel man faced with this situation has the choice of marrying both women or neither; if he has a wife who decides to take a sister-wife, he finds himself with a second wife.

sɪswaɪəmən: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ: "spɪɹz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən," wɪð ə stʃɹɔŋ ɪmpləkeɪʃən ʌv oʊnɝʃɪp. ðə neɪm teɪkən baɪ ə ɡʊd mɛni mɛn əmʌŋ ði il, bʌt noʊ wɪmən. ðiz mɛn də nɑɾ æktʃəli  æknɑlɪdʒ ðə neɪm - nɔɹ də ɛni ʌðɝz, ɪn fækt - bʌt ðeɪ wɛɹ ə stʃɹɪp ə ɹɛd klɔθ waʊn ɝaʊn ðə fɔɹhɛd wɪð ə dɪsk, hæf blæk ən hæf waɪt, əbʌv ðə bɹaʊz. ɔlðoʊ ɡeɪʃeɪn nɔɹməli ɑɹ pɹoʊhɪbəɾəd fɹəm wɛɹɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ðət wəd bi wɔɹn baɪ ən ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ, ə lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝ ʌv ɡeɪʃeɪn əv teɪkən tə wɛɹɪŋ ðə hɛdbænd. si ɔlsoʊ ɡeɪʃeɪn.

siswai'aman: In the Old Tongue: "spears of the dragon," with a strong implication of ownership. The name taken by a good many men among the Aiel, but no women. These men do not actually acknowledge the name - nor do any others, in fact - but they wear a strip of red cloth wound around the forehead with a disc, half black and half white, above the brows. Although gai'shain normally are prohibited from wearing anything that would be worn by an algai'd'siswai, a large number of gai'shain have taken to wearing the headband. See also gai'shain.

sɔɹɪliə (soʊ-ɹɪ-li-ɑ): ðə waɪz wʌn ə ʃɛn hoʊld, ə dʒɹə tʃɑɝin. bɛɹli eɪbəl tə tʃænəl, ʃiz ɔlsoʊ ði oʊldəs lɪvɪŋ waɪz wʌn, ðoʊ nɑt baɪ əz mʌtʃ əz mɛni θɪŋk.

Sorilea (soh-rih-LEE-ah): The Wise One of Shende Hold, a Jarra Chareen. Barely able to channel, she is also the oldest living Wise One, though not by as much as many think.

spaɪn ə ðə wɝld: ə taʊɝɪŋ maʊntən ɹeɪnʒ, wɪð fju pæsəz, wɪtʃ sɛpɝeɪts ði il weɪs fɹəm ðə lænz tə ðə wɛst. ɔlsoʊ kɔl ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl.

Spine of the World: A towering mountain range, with few passes, which separates the Aiel Waste from the lands to the west. Also called the Dragonwall.

stɪlɪŋ: ðə ɹɪmuvəl ʌv ə wʊmənz əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl. ə wʊmən u hæz bɪn stɪl kən sɛns bʌt nɑt tʌtʃ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. əfɪʃəli, stɪlɪŋ ɪz ðə ɹɪzʌlt ə tʃɹaɪəl ən sɛntəns fəɹ ə kɹaɪm, ən wɑz læs kæɹiɾ aʊɾ ɪn eɪthʌnʒɹədfɪftinaɪn ni. nɑvəsɪz əv ɔlweɪz bɪn ɹikwaɪɝd tə lɝn ðə neɪm ən kɹaɪmz ʌv ɔl wɪmən u hæv sʌfɝd dʒudɪʃəl stɪlɪŋ. wən ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl ɪz lɔst æksədɛntəli, ɪts kɔl biɪŋ bɝn aʊt, ðoʊ "stɪlɪŋ" ɪz ɔfən juz fəɹ ðəɾ ɔlsoʊ. wɪmən u ɑɹ stɪld, haʊɛvɝ ɪɾ əkɝz, sɛldəm sɝvaɪv lɔŋ; ðeɪ sim tə sɪmpli ɡɪv ʌp ən daɪ ənlɛs ðeɪ faɪn sʌmθɪŋ tə ɹipleɪs ði ɛmptinəs lɛf baɪ ðə wʌn paʊɝ. waɪl ɪts ɔlweɪz bɪn bɪliv ðət stɪlɪŋ wɑz pɝmənənt, leɪtli ə mɛθəɾ ə hilɪŋ ɪts bɪn dɪskʌvɝd, ðoʊ ðəɹ əpɪɹ tə bi lɪməts tə ðɪs wɪtʃ ɑɹ jɛt tə bi ɪksplɔɹd.

stilling: The removal of a woman's ability to channel. A woman who has been stilled can sense but not touch the True Source. Officially, stilling is the result of trial and sentence for a crime, and was last carried out in 859 NE. Novices have always been required to learn the name and crimes of all women who have suffered judicial stilling. When the ability to channel is lost accidentally, it is called being burned out, though "stilling" is often used for that also. Women who are stilled, however it occurs, seldom survive long; they seem to simply give up and die unless they find something to replace the emptiness left by the One Power. While it has always been believed that stilling was permanent, lately a method of Healing it has been discovered, though there appear to be limits to this which are yet to be explored.

stoʊn ə tɛɹ: ə ɡɹeɪt fɔɹtʃɹəs ɪn ðə sɪɾi ʌv tɛɹ, sɛd tə hæv bɪn meɪd wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ sun æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ətækt ən bɪsidʒd ʌnsəksɛsfəli kaʊnləs taɪmz, ɪt fɛl ɪn ə sɪŋɡəl naɪt tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ən ə fju hʌnʒɹəd il, ðʌs fʊlfɪlɪŋ tu pɑɹts ə ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən.

Stone of Tear: A great fortress in the city of Tear, said to have been made with the One Power soon after the Breaking of the World. Attacked and besieged unsuccessfully countless times, it fell in a single night to the Dragon Reborn and a few hundred Aiel, thus fulfilling two parts of the Prophecies of the Dragon.

tæləns: əbɪləɾiz ɪn ðə jus ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪn spəsɪfɪk ɛɹiəz. æptətuɾ ɪn vɛɹiəs tæləns vɛɹiz waɪdli fɹəm ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl tə ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl ən ɪz sɛldəm ɹɪleɪɾɪd tə ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə ði ɪndəvɪdʒəwəlz əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl. ðəɹ ɑɹ meɪdʒɝ tæləns, ðə bɛst-noʊn ən moʊst waɪdspɹɛɾ ʌv wɪtʃ ɪz hilɪŋ. ʌðɝ ɪɡzæmpəlz ɑɹ klaʊd dænsɪŋ, ðə kəntʃɹoʊl ʌv wɛðɝ, ən ɝθ sɪŋɪŋ, wɪtʃ ɪnvɑlvz kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ muvməns ə ði ɝθ, fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl pɹɪvɛntɪŋ, əɹ kɑzɪŋ, ɝθkweɪks əɹ ævələntʃɪz. ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔlsoʊ maɪnɝ tæləns, sɛldəm ɡɪvən ə neɪm, sətʃ əz ði əbɪləɾi tə si tɑvɝən əɹ tə dupləkeɪt ðə tʃæns-twɪstɪŋ ɪfɛkt ə tɑvɝən, ðoʊ ɪn ə vɛɹi smɔl ən loʊkəlaɪzd ɛɹiə ɹɛɹli kʌvɝɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ə fju skwɛɹ fit. mɛni tæləns ɑɹ naʊ noʊn oʊnli baɪ ðɛɹ neɪmz ən səmtaɪmz veɪɡ dɪskɹɪpʃənz. sʌm, sətʃ əz tʃɹævlɪŋ (ði əbɪləɾi tə ʃɪft fɹəm wʌn pleɪs tə ənʌðɝ wɪθaʊt kɹɔsɪŋ ði ɪntɝvinɪŋ speɪs) ɑɹ oʊnli naʊ biɪŋ ɹiɾɪskʌvɝd. ʌðɝz, sətʃ əz fɔɹtɛlɪŋ (ði əbɪləɾi tə fɔɹtɛl fjutʃɝ ɪvɛns, bʌɾ ɪn ə dʒɛnɝəl weɪ), ən dɛlvɪŋ (ðə loʊkeɪʃən ʌv ɔɹz ən pɑsəbli ðɛɹ ɹɪmuvəl fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɔlðoʊ ðə tɝm ɪz naʊ ɔlsoʊ juz fəɹ ðə vɛɹiən ə hilɪŋ wɪtʃ ɪz juz tə ɪɡzæmɪn sʌmwʌnz hɛlθ ən fɪzɪkəl kəndɪʃən) ɑɹ faʊn ɹɛɹli. ənʌðɝ tælən lɔŋ θɔt lɔst ɪz dʒɹimɪŋ, ɪntɝpɹɛɾɪŋ ðə dʒɹimɝz dʒɹimz tə fɔɹtɛl fjutʃɝ ɪvɛns ɪn mɔɹ spəsɪfɪk fæʃən ðən fɔɹtɛlɪŋ. səm dʒɹimɝz hæd ði əbɪləɾi tə ɛntɝ tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz, ən (ɪɾ ɪz sɛd) ivən ʌðɝ pipəlz dʒɹimz. ðə læst æknɑlɪdʒ dʒɹimɝ pɹiviəsli wɑz kɔɹiənɪn nɪdil (koʊ-ɹi-æn-ɪn nɛ-di-ɑl), hu daɪɾ ɪn faɪvhʌnʒɹədtwɛntisɪks ni, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz naʊ ənʌðɝ.

Talents: Abilities in the use of the One Power in specific areas. Aptitude in various Talents varies widely from individual to individual and is seldom related to the strength of the individual's ability to channel. There are major Talents, the best-known and most widespread of which is Healing. Other examples are Cloud Dancing, the control of weather, and Earth Singing, which involves controlling movements of the earth, for example preventing, or causing, earthquakes or avalanches. There are also minor Talents, seldom given a name, such as the ability to see ta'veren or to duplicate the chance-twisting effect of ta'veren, though in a very small and localized area rarely covering more than a few square feet. Many Talents are now known only by their names and sometimes vague descriptions. Some, such as Traveling (the ability to shift from one place to another without crossing the intervening space) are only now being rediscovered. Others, such as Foretelling (the ability to foretell future events, but in a general way), and Delving (the location of ores and possibly their removal from the ground, although the term is now also used for the variant of Healing which is used to examine someone's health and physical condition) are found rarely. Another Talent long thought lost is Dreaming, interpreting the Dreamer's dreams to foretell future events in more specific fashion than Foretelling. Some Dreamers had the ability to enter Tel'aran'rhiod, the World of Dreams, and (it is said) even other people's dreams. The last acknowledged Dreamer previously was Corianin Nedeal (coh-ree-AHN-ihn neh-dee-AHL), who died in 526 NE, but there is now another.

tɑlænvɝ, mɑɹɾɪn (tæl-læn-vɔɹ, mɑɹ-tin): fɔɹmɝ ɡɑɹdzmæn-lutɛnən ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz, hu lʌvz mɔɹɡeɪs mɔɹ ðən laɪf əɹ ɑnɝ. si ɔlsoʊ mɔɹɡeɪs.

Tallanvor, Martyn (TAL-lahn-vohr, mahr-TEEN): Former Guardsman-Lieutenant of the Queen's Guards, who loves Morgase more than life or honor. See also Morgase.

tɑvɝən (tɑ-vɪɹ-ɛn): ə pɝsən ɝaʊn hum ðə wil ə taɪm wivz ɔl sɝaʊndɪŋ laɪf-θɹɛdz, pɝhæps ɔl laɪf-θɹɛdz. ðɪs wivɪŋ ɪz lɪɾəl ʌndɝstʊɾ ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪt simz ɪn mɛni weɪz ən ɔltɝeɪʃən ə tʃæns; wʌt maɪt hæpən, bʌɾ oʊnli ɹɛɹli, dʌz. ði ɪfɛkt kən ət taɪmz bi kwaɪt loʊkəlaɪzd. sʌmwʌn ɪnfluəns baɪ ə tɑvɝən meɪ seɪ əɹ də wʌt ðeɪ wəɾ oʊnli hæv sɛɾ əɹ dʌn wʌn taɪm ɪn ə mɪljən ʌndɝ ðoʊz sɝkəmstænsəz. ɪvɛns əkɝ ə simɪŋ ɪmpɔsɪbɪlɪɾi, sətʃ əz ə tʃaɪl fɔlɪŋ ə hʌnʒɹəd fit fɹəm ə taʊɝ ənhɑɹmd. əɾ ʌðɝ taɪmz ði ɪfɛk simz tə ɪkstɛn tə ɪnfluənsɪŋ hɪstɝi ɪtsɛlf, ðoʊ ɔfən baɪ minz ə ðə loʊkəlaɪzd ɪfɛks. ðɪs, ɪts bɪlivd, ɪz ðə ɹil ɹizən ðət tɑvɝən ɑɹ bɔɹn, ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə ʃɪf hɪstɝi ən ɹɪstɔɹ ə bæləns tə ðə tɝnɪŋ ə ðə wil.

ta'veren (tah-VEER-ehn): A person around whom the Wheel of Time weaves all surrounding life-threads, perhaps ALL life-threads. This weaving is little understood except that it seems in many ways an alteration of chance; what might happen, but only rarely, does. The effect can at times be quite localized. Someone influenced by a ta'veren may say or do what they would only have said or done one time in a million under those circumstances. Events occur of seeming impossibility, such as a child falling a hundred feet from a tower unharmed. At other times the effect seems to extend to influencing history itself, though often by means of the localized effects. This, it is believed, is the real reason that ta'veren are born, in order to shift history and restore a balance to the turning of the Wheel.

tɛɹ (tɪɹ): ə neɪʃən ɑn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz. ɔlsoʊ ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ðət neɪʃən, ə ɡɹeɪt sipɔɹt. ðə bænɝ ə tiɹ ɪz θɹi waɪt kɹɛsən munz slæntɪŋ əkɹɔs ə fil hæf ɹɛd, hæf ɡoʊld. si ɔlsoʊ stoʊn ə tiɹ.

Tear (TEER): A nation on the Sea of Storms. Also the capital city of that nation, a great seaport. The banner of Tear is three white crescent moons slanting across a field half red, half gold. See also Stone of Tear.

tɛɹæŋɡɹil (tɪɹ-æn-ɡɹi-ɑl): ɹɛmnəns ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ðət juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ənlaɪk æŋɡɹil ən sɑŋɡɹil, itʃ tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɑz meɪd tə də ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ θɪŋ. səm tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɑɹ juz baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ði ɝɪdʒənəl pɝpəsəz ə mɛni ɑɹ ənnoʊn. səm ɹikwaɪɝ tʃænəlɪŋ, waɪl ʌðɝz meɪ bi juz baɪ ɛniwʌn. səm wɪl kɪl, əɹ dɪstʃɹɔɪ ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl ʌv ɛni wʊmən u juzɪz ðɛm. laɪk æŋɡɹil ən sɑŋɡɹil, ðə meɪkɪŋ ə ðɛm əz bɪn lɔst sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. si ɔlsoʊ æŋɡɹil; sɑŋɡɹil.

ter'angreal (TEER-ahn-GREE-ahl): Remnants of the Age of Legends that use the One Power. Unlike angreal and sa'angreal, each ter'angreal was made to do a particular thing. Some ter'angreal are used by Aes Sedai, but the original purposes of many are unknown. Some require channeling, while others may be used by anyone. Some will kill, or destroy the ability to channel of any woman who uses them. Like angreal and sa'angreal, the making of them has been lost since the Breaking of the World. See also angreal; sa'angreal.

tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn (tɑm mɛɹ-ɹɪ-lɪn): ə nɑt-soʊ-sɪmpəl ɡlimən ən tʃɹævəlɝ.

Thom Merrilin (TOM MER-rih-lihn): A not-so-simple gleeman and traveler.

tɪŋkɝz: pɹɑpɝli, ðə tuætɑn (tu-ɑ-θɑ-æn), ɔlsoʊ kɔl ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl. ə wɑndɝɪŋ foʊk u fɑloʊ ə toʊɾəli pæsɪfɪs fəlɑsəfi kɔl ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif, wɪtʃ əlaʊz noʊ vaɪələns fəɹ ɛni ɹizən. tuætɑn u fɔl əweɪ fɹəm ðɪs bɪlif ɑɹ kɔld "ðə lɔst," ən ɑɹ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ æknɑlɪdʒ baɪ ɛni ʌðɝz.

Tinkers: Properly, the Tuatha'an (too-AH-thah-AHN), also called the Traveling People. A wandering folk who follow a totally pacifist philosophy called the Way of the Leaf, which allows no violence for any reason. Tuatha'an who fall away from this belief are called "the Lost," and are no longer acknowledged by any others.

tʃɹikɪlɝz: dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋ tɝm juz baɪ ði il fəɹ kɛɹhinɪn, əlɔŋ wɪð "oʊθbɹeɪkɝz." boʊθ ɹəfɝ tə kɪŋ leɪmənz kʌɾɪŋ daʊn ʌv ɑvɛndɔɹɑldɛɹə, ə ɡɪft fɹəm ði il, ən ækt wɪtʃ vaɪəleɪɾɪd ði oʊðz ɡɪvən ət ðə taɪm ðə ɡɪft wɑz ɡɪvən. tə ði il, boʊθ tɝmz ɹæŋk wɪð ðə wɝs ðəɾ ɛniwʌn kən bi kɔld. si ɔlsoʊ il wɔɹ.

treekillers: Disparaging term used by the Aiel for Cairhienin, along with "oathbreakers." Both refer to King Laman's cutting down of Avendoraldera, a gift from the Aiel, an act which violated the oaths given at the time the gift was given. To the Aiel, both terms rank with the worst that anyone can be called. See also Aiel War.

vɑldə, imən (vɑl-dɑ, eɪ-moʊn): ən ɪmpeɪʃən lɔɹd kæptən ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, ə mæn u bɪlivz jə kæn meɪk dɪnɝ wɪθaʊt bɹeɪkɪŋ ɛɡz ən səmtaɪmz ɪts nɛsəsɛɹi tə bɝn daʊn ðə bɑɹn tə ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə ðə ɹæts. hi siz hɪmsɛlf əz ə pɹæɡməɾɪst, ən wɪl teɪk wʌtɛvɝ ædvæntɪdʒ ɔfɝz ɪtsɛlf. hiz ʃʊɹ ðət ɹænd ælθɹ ɪz oʊnli ə pʌpəɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən vɛɹi laɪkli kænɑɾ ivən tʃænəl. heɪtʃɹəɾ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz (wɪtʃ ə kɔɹs ɪnkluɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ) ɪz ðə sɛntʃɹəl pɪlɝ ə hɪz laɪf. si ɔlsoʊ tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Valda, Eamon (VAHL-dah, AY-mon): An impatient Lord Captain of the Children of the Light, a man who believes you can't make dinner without breaking eggs and sometimes it is necessary to burn down the barn to get rid of the rats. He sees himself as a pragmatist, and will take whatever advantage offers itself. He is sure that Rand al'Thor is only a puppet of the White Tower and very likely cannot even channel. Hatred of Darkfriends (which of course include Aes Sedai) is the central pillar of his life. See also Children of the Light.

wɔɹɾɝ: ə wɔɹiɝ bɑndəd tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə bɑndɪŋ ɪz ə θɪŋ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ: baɪ ɪɾ i ɡeɪnz sətʃ ɡɪfs əz kwɪk hilɪŋ, ði əbɪləɾi tə ɡoʊ lɔŋ pɪɹiədz wɪθaʊt fud, wɔɾɝ, əɹ ɹɛst, ən ði əbɪləɾi tə sɛns ðə teɪn ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn əɾ ə dɪstəns. wɔɹɾɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃɛɹ sɝɾən fɪzɪkəl ən ɪmoʊʃənəl nɑlədʒ ʌv wʌn ənʌðɝ θɹu ðə bɑnd. soʊ lɔŋ əz ə wɔɹɾɝ lɪvz, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hum hiz bɑndəd noʊz hiz əlaɪv haʊɛvɝ fɑɹ əweɪ hi ɪz, ən wən i daɪz ʃɪl noʊ ðə moʊmən ən mænɝ ə hɪz dɛθ. waɪl moʊst ədʒəz bɪliv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ hæv wʌn wɔɹɾɝ bɑndəd tə hɝ əɾ ə taɪm, ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ ɹəfjuzəz tə bɑn ɛni wɔɹɾɝz əɾ ɔl, ən ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ bɪlivz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ bɑn əz mɛni əz ʃi wɪʃɪz. ɛθɪkəli ðə wɔɹɾɝ mʌst æksid tə ðə bɑndɪŋ vɑləntɛɹəli, bʌɾ ɪts bɪn noʊn tə hæpən əɡɛns ðə wɔɹɾɝz wɪl. wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪn fɹəm ðə bɑndɪŋ ɪz ə kloʊsli hɛl sikɹət. baɪ ɔl noʊn hɪstɔɹɪkəl ɹɛkɝdz, wɔɹɾɝz əv ɔlweɪz bɪn mɛn, bʌt ɹisənli ə wʊmən əz bɪn bɑndəd, ɹɪvilɪŋ sɝɾən dɪfɝənsɪz ɪn ði ɪfɛks. si ɔlsoʊ bɝdʒɪt.

Warder: A warrior bonded to an Aes Sedai. The bonding is a thing of the One Power: by it he gains such gifts as quick healing, the ability to go long periods without food, water, or rest, and the ability to sense the taint of the Dark One at a distance. Warder and Aes Sedai share certain physical and emotional knowledge of one another through the bond. So long as a Warder lives, the Aes Sedai to whom he is bonded knows he is alive however far away he is, and when he dies she will know the moment and manner of his death. While most Ajahs believe an Aes Sedai may have one Warder bonded to her at a time, the Red Ajah refuses to bond any Warders at all, and the Green Ajah believes an Aes Sedai may bond as many as she wishes. Ethically the Warder must accede to the bonding voluntarily, but it has been known to happen against the Warder's will. What the Aes Sedai gain from the bonding is a closely held secret. By all known historical records, Warders have always been men, but recently a woman has been bonded, revealing certain differences in the effects. See also Birgitte.

weɪt, junəts ʌv: tɛn aʊnsəz ikwəlz wʌn paʊnd; tɛn paʊnz ikwəlz wʌn stoʊn; tɛn stoʊn ikwəlz wʌn hʌnʒɹədweɪt; tɛn hʌnʒɹədweɪt ikwəlz wʌn tʌn.

weight, units of: 10 ounces = 1 pound; 10 pounds = 1 stone; 10 stone = 1 hundredweight; 10 hundredweight = 1 ton.

waɪldɝ: ə wʊmən u hæz lɝn tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɑn əɹ oʊn; oʊnli wʌn ɪn fɔɹ sɝvaɪv ðɪs. sətʃ wɪmən juʒəwəli bɪl bæɹiɝz əɡɛns noʊɪŋ wʌɾ ɪts ðeɪ ɑɹ duɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪf ðiz kən bi bɹoʊkən daʊn, waɪldɝz ɑɹ fɹikwənli əmʌŋ ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ə tʃænlɝz. ðə tɝm ɪz ɔfən juzd ɪn dɝɑɡətɔɹi fæʃən.

wilder: A woman who has learned to channel the One Power on her own; only one in four survive this. Such women usually build barriers against knowing what it is they are doing, but if these can be broken down, wilders are frequently among the most powerful of channelers. The term is often used in derogatory fashion.

waɪz wʌn: əmʌŋ ði il, waɪz wʌnz ɑɹ wɪmən tʃoʊzən baɪ ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz ən tʃɹeɪn ɪn hilɪŋ, ɝbz ən ʌðɝ θɪŋz. ðeɪv ɡɹeɪɾ əθɔɹəɾi ən ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi, əz wɛl əz ɡɹeɪɾ ɪnfluəns wɪð sɛpt ən klæn tʃifs, ðoʊ ðiz mɛn ɔfən əkjuz əm ə mɛɾəlɪŋ. ə ɡʊd mɛni waɪz wʌnz kən tʃænəl tə wʌn dɪɡɹi əɹ ənʌðɝ; ðeɪ faɪn ɛvɹi il wʊmən bɔɹn wɪð ðə spɑɹk ɪn əɹ ən moʊst ə ðoʊz u kən lɝn. ðə fæk ðət waɪz wʌnz kən tʃænəl ɪz nɑt spoʊkən ʌv əmʌŋ il, baɪ kʌstəm; əz ə ɹɪzʌl mɛni il də nɑt noʊ fəɹ ʃʊɹ wɪtʃ waɪz wʌnz kən ən wɪtʃ kænɑt. ɔlsoʊ baɪ kʌstəm, waɪz wʌnz əvɔɪɾ ɔl kɑntækt wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, ivən mɔɹ soʊ ðən ʌðɝ il. tʃɹədɪʃənəli, waɪz wʌnz əv stʊɾ aʊtsaɪɾ ɔl fjudz ən bæɾəl, bʌt ðɪs kʌstəm əz ɹisənli bɪn ʃæɾɝd, pɝhæps bɪɑn mɛndɪŋ. wʌt ðɪs meɪ də tə ðə pɹətɛkʃənz əkɔɹɾɪd waɪz wʌnz ʌndɝ ði il bɪlif ə dʒiɾoʊ hæz jɛt tə bi sin.

Wise One: Among the Aiel, Wise Ones are women chosen by other Wise Ones and trained in healing, herbs and other things. They have great authority and responsibility, as well as great influence with sept and clan chiefs, though these men often accuse them of meddling. A good many Wise Ones can channel to one degree or another; they find every Aiel woman born with the spark in her and most of those who can learn. The fact that Wise Ones can channel is not spoken of among Aiel, by custom; as a result many Aiel do not know for sure which Wise Ones can and which cannot. Also by custom, Wise Ones avoid all contact with Aes Sedai, even more so than other Aiel. Traditionally, Wise Ones have stood outside all feuds and battle, but this custom has recently been shattered, perhaps beyond mending. What this may do to the protections accorded Wise Ones under the Aiel belief of ji'e'toh has yet to be seen.

waɪz wʊmən: wʌn ə ðə feɪbəl hilɝz ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ, dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt baɪ ðə wɛɹɪŋ ʌv ə ɹɛd bɛlt. ðɛɹ əbɪləɾiz wɪð ɝbz ən ðɛɹ mɛɾəkəl nɑlədʒ ɑɹ spoʊkən ʌv əz fɑɹ əweɪ əz ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz əz biɪŋ ðə nɛks bɛs tə æktʃəwəl hilɪŋ baɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɔlðoʊ ɛbu dɑɹ ɪz ə kɑzməpɑləɾən sɪɾi wɛɹ aʊtləndɝz fɹikwənli dʒɔɪn ðə sɪɾiz mɛni ɡɪlz, ði ɑɾəti hæz bɪn noʊɾəd ðət waɪz wɪmən u æktʃəli  ɑɹ ɛbu dɑɹi ɑɹ ɪn tʃɹuθ kwaɪt ɹɛɹ.

Wise Woman: One of the fabled healers of Ebou Dar, distinguished by the wearing of a red belt. Their abilities with herbs and their medical knowledge are spoken of as far away as the Borderlands as being the next best to actual Healing by an Aes Sedai. Although Ebou Dar is a cosmopolitan city where outlanders frequently join the city's many guilds, the oddity has been noted that Wise Women who actually are Ebou Dari are in truth quite rare.

əbaʊt ði ɔθɝ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən wɑz bɔɹn ɪn naɪntinfɔɹɾieɪt ɪn tʃɑɹlstən, saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə. hi tɔt hɪmsɛlf tə ɹid wən i wɑz fɔɹ wɪð ði ɪnsɪdɛntəl eɪɾ ʌv ə twɛlv-jɪɹz-oʊldɝ bɹʌðɝ, ən wɑz tæklɪŋ mɑɹk tweɪn ən dʒulz vɝn baɪ faɪv. hi wɑz ə ɡɹædʒəwəɾ ə ðə sɪɾədɛl, ðə mɪlətɛɹi kɑlɪdʒ ə saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə, wɪð ə dɪɡɹi ɪn fɪzɪks. hi sɝv tu tʊɹz ɪn viɛtnɑm wɪð ðə juɛs. ɑɹmi; əmʌŋ ɪz dɛkɝeɪʃənz ɑɹ ðə dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt flaɪɪŋ kɹɔs wɪð bɹɑnz oʊk lif klʌstɝ, ðə bɹɑnz stɑɹ wɪð "vi" ən bɹɑnz oʊk lif klʌstɝ, ən tu viɛtnɑmis ɡæləntʃɹi kɹɔsɪz wɪð pɑm. ə hɪstɝi bʌf, hi ɔlsoʊ ɹoʊt dæns ən θiəɾɝ kɹɪɾɪsɪzəm. hi ɛndʒɔɪd ði aʊtdɔɹ spɔɹts ə hʌntɪŋ, fɪʃɪŋ, ən seɪlɪŋ, ən ði ɪndɔɹ spɔɹts ə poʊkɝ, tʃɛs, pul, ən paɪp kəlɛktɪŋ. hi bɪɡæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn naɪntinsɛvəntisɛvən ən kəntɪnjuɾ əntɪl ɪz dɛθ ɑn sɛptɛmbɝ sɪkstinθ, tuθaʊzənsɛvən.

About the Author Robert Jordan was born in 1948 in Charleston, South Carolina. He taught himself to read when he was four with the incidental aid of a twelve-years-older brother, and was tackling Mark Twain and Jules Verne by five. He was a graduate of The Citadel, The Military College of South Carolina, with a degree in physics. He served two tours in Vietnam with the U.S. Army; among his decorations are the Distinguished Flying Cross with bronze oak leaf cluster, the Bronze Star with "V" and bronze oak leaf cluster, and two Vietnamese Gallantry Crosses with Palm. A history buff, he also wrote dance and theater criticism. He enjoyed the outdoor sports of hunting, fishing, and sailing, and the indoor sports of poker, chess, pool, and pipe collecting. He began writing in 1977 and continued until his death on September 16, 2007.

