teɪbəl ə kɑntɛns taɪɾəl kɑpiɹaɪt dɛɾəkeɪʃən kɑntɛns mæps pɹoʊlɑɡ: snoʊ wʌn livɪŋ ðə pɹɑfət tu teɪkən θɹi kʌstəmz fɔɹ ɔfɝz faɪv flæɡz sɪks ðə sɛn ə mædnəs sɛvən ðə stʃɹits ə keɪɛmlɪn eɪt si foʊk ən kɪn naɪn eɪ kʌp ə ti tɛn eɪ plæn səksidz ɪlɛvən aɪdiəz ʌv ɪmpɔɹɾəns twɛlv eɪ lɪli ɪn wɪntɝ θɝtin wʌndɝfəl nuz fɔɹtin wʌɾ ə veɪl haɪdz fɪftin ɪn niɾ ʌv ə bɛlfndɝ sɪkstin ən ʌnɪkspɛktɪɾ ɪnkaʊntɝ sɛvəntin pɪŋk ɹɪbənz eɪtin ən ɔfɝ naɪntin θɹi wɪmən twɛnti kwɛstʃənz ə tʃɹizən twɛntiwʌn eɪ mæɾɝ ə pɹɑpɝɾi twɛntiɾu aʊɾ ə θɪn ɛɹ twɛntiθɹi tə luz ðə sʌn twɛntifɔɹ əmʌŋ ðə kaʊnsəlz twɛntifaɪv bɑnz twɛntisɪks ɛkspɛkteɪʃən twɛntisɛvən tə sɝpɹaɪz kwinz ən kɪŋz twɛntieɪt nuz ɪn ə klɔθ sæk twɛntinaɪn ənʌðɝ plæn θɝɾi koʊld, fæt ɹeɪndʒɹɑps θɝɾiwʌn wʌt ði æɛlfɪn sɛd θɝɾitu eɪ pɔɹʃən ʌv wɪzdəm θɝɾiθɹi blu kɑɹp stʃɹit θɝɾifɔɹ ðə hʌmɪŋbɝdz sikɹət θɝɾifaɪv wɪð ðə tʃoʊɾən kæl ɡlɔsɝi əbaʊt ði ɔθɝ ðɪs ɪz ʌnkɝɛktɪd pɹi-ɹilis.

Table of Contents Title Copyright Dedication Contents Maps Prologue: Snow 1 Leaving the Prophet 2 Taken 3 Customs 4 Offers 5 Flags 6 The Scent of Madness 7 The Streets of Caemlyn 8 Sea Folk and Kin 9 A Cup of Tea 10 A Plan Succeeds 11 Ideas of Importance 12 A Lily in Winter 13 Wonderful News 14 What a Veil Hides 15 In Need of a Bellfounder 16 An Unexpected Encounter 17 Pink Ribbons 18 An Offer 19 Three Women 20 Questions of Treason 21 A Matter of Property 22 Out of Thin Air 23 To Lose the Sun 24 Among the Counsels 25 Bonds 26 Expectation 27 To Surprise Queens and Kings 28 News in a Cloth Sack 29 Another Plan 30 Cold, Fat Raindrops 31 What the Aelfinn Said 32 A Portion of Wisdom 33 Blue Carp Street 34 The Hummingbird's Secret 35 With the Choedan Kal Glossary About the Author THIS IS UNCORRECTED PRE-RELEASE.

kɹɔsɹoʊdz ə twaɪlaɪt bʊk tɛn ə ðə wil ə taɪm ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ən ɪt ʃæl kʌm tə pæs, ɪn ðə deɪz wən ðə dɑɹk hʌn ɹaɪdz, wən ðə ɹaɪt hæn fɔltɝz ən ðə lɛf hæn stʃɹeɪz, ðət mænkaɪnd ʃæl kʌm tə ðə kɹɔsɹoʊdz ə twaɪlaɪɾ ən ɔl ðəɾ ɪz, ɔl ðət wɑz, ən ɔl ðət wɪl bi ʃæl bæləns ɑn ðə pɔɪn ʌv ə sɔɹd, waɪl ðə wɪnz ə ðə ʃædoʊ ɡɹoʊ.

CROSSROADS OF TWILIGHT Book Ten of The Wheel of Time ROBERT JORDAN And it shall come to pass, in the days when the Dark Hunt rides, when the right hand falters and the left hand strays, that mankind shall come to the Crossroads of Twilight and all that is, all that was, and all that will be shall balance on the point of a sword, while the winds of the Shadow grow.

- fɹəm ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən tʃɹænzleɪʃən bɪliv dʌn baɪ dʒaɪn tʃɛɝɪn, noʊn əz dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ, ʃɔɹtli bɪfɔɹ ɪz dɪsəpɪɹəns pɹoʊlɑɡ ɡlɪmɝz ə ðə pæɾɝn ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi heɪɾəd weɪɾɪŋ, ðoʊ hi wɛl nu ɪt wɑz ðə lɑɹdʒəs pɑɹɾ ə biɪŋ ə soʊlʒɝ.

- From The Prophecies of the Dragon translation believed done by Jain Charin, known as Jain Farstrider, shortly before his disappearance Prologue Glimmers of the Pattern Rodel Ituralde hated waiting, though he well knew it was the largest part of being a soldier.

weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə nɛks bæɾəl, fəɹ ði ɛnəmi tə muv, tə meɪk ə mɪsteɪk. hi wɑtʃt ðə wɪntɝ fɔɹəst ən wɑz əz stɪl əz ðə tʃɹiz. ðə sʌn stʊd hæfweɪ tə ɪts pik ən ɡeɪv noʊ wɔɹmθ. hɪz bɹɛθ mɪstɪd waɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz feɪs, fɹɔstɪŋ ɪz nitli tʃɹɪmd mʌstæʃ ən ðə blæk fɑks-fɝ laɪnɪŋ ɪz hʊd. hi wɑz ɡlæd ðəɾ ɪz hɛlmət hʌŋ əɾ ɪz pɑməl. hɪz bɹɛstpleɪt hɛl ðə koʊld ən ɹeɪɾieɪtəd ɪt θɹu hɪz koʊɾ ən ɔl ðə leɪɝz ʌv wʊl, sɪlk ən lɪnən bɪniθ. ivən dɑɹts sæɾəl fɛl koʊld, əz ðoʊ ðə waɪt ɡɛldɪŋ wɝ meɪɾ ə fɹoʊzən mɪlk. ðə hɛlmət wʊɾə æɾəld ɪz bɹeɪn.

Waiting for the next battle, for the enemy to move, to make a mistake. He watched the winter forest and was as still as the trees. The sun stood halfway to its peak and gave no warmth. His breath misted white in front of his face, frosting his neatly trimmed mustache and the black fox-fur lining his hood. He was glad that his helmet hung at his pommel. His breastplate held the cold and radiated it through his coat and all the layers of wool, silk and linen beneath. Even Dart's saddle felt cold, as though the white gelding were made of frozen milk. The helmet would have addled his brain.

wɪntɝ hæd kʌm leɪt tə ɑɹæd dumən vɛɹi leɪt, bʌt wɪð ə vɛnʒəns. fɹəm sʌmɝ hit ðət lɪŋɡɝɾ ənnətʃɝəli ɪndə fɔl tə wɪntɝz hɑɹɾ ɪn lɛs ðən ə mʌnθ. ðə livz ðət hæd sɝvaɪv ðə lɔŋ sʌmɝz dʒɹaʊt hæd bɪn fɹoʊzən bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd tʃeɪnʒ kʌlɝ, ən naʊ ðeɪ ɡlɪsən laɪk stʃɹeɪnʒ, aɪs-kʌvɝɾ ɛmɹəlz ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sʌn. ðə hɔɹsəz ə ðə twɛnti-ɑɾ ɑɹmmɪn ɝaʊn ɪm əkeɪʒənəli stæmpt ə huf ɪn ðə ni-dip snoʊ. ɪt hæd bɪn ə lɔŋ ɹaɪd ðɪs fɑɹ, ən ðeɪ hæd fɝðɝ tə ɡoʊ wɛðɝ ðɪs deɪ tɝn aʊt ɡʊɾ əɹ ɪl. dɑɹk klaʊdz ɹɔɪl ðə skaɪ tə nɔɹθwɝd. hi dɪd nɑt niɾ ɪz wɛðɝ-waɪz ðəɹ tə tɛl ɪm ðə tɛmpɹətʃɝ wəd plʌmət bɪfɔɹ naɪtfɔl. ðeɪ hæd tə bi ʌndɝ ʃɛltɝ baɪ ðɛn.

Winter had come late to Arad Doman very late, but with a vengeance. From summer heat that lingered unnaturally into fall to winter's heart in less than a month. The leaves that had survived the long summer's drought had been frozen before they could change color, and now they glistened like strange, ice-covered emeralds in the morning sun. The horses of the twenty-odd armsmen around him occasionally stamped a hoof in the knee-deep snow. It had been a long ride this far, and they had further to go whether this day turned out good or ill. Dark clouds roiled the sky to northward. He did not need his weather-wise there to tell him the temperature would plummet before nightfall. They had to be under shelter by then.

"nɑɾ əz ɹʌf əz wɪntɝ bɪfɔɹ læst, ɪz ɪt, maɪ lɔɹd" dʒæləm sɛd kwaɪətli. ðə tɔl jʌŋ ɔfəsɝ hæɾ əweɪ ʌv ɹiɾɪŋ ɪɾɝɑldiz maɪn ən ɪz vɔɪs wɑz pɪtʃt fəɹ ði ʌðɝz tə hɪɹ. "ivən soʊ, aɪ səpoʊz səm mɛn wəd bi dʒɹimɪŋ ə mʌld waɪn əbaʊt naʊ. nɑt ðɪs lɑt, ʌv kɔɹs. ɹɪmɑɹkəbli əbstimiəs. ðeɪ ɔl dʒɹɪŋk ti, aɪ bɪliv. koʊl ti. ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ə fju bɝtʃ swɪtʃəz, ðeɪd bi stʃɹɪpɪŋ daʊn fəɹ snoʊ-bæθs."

"Not as rough as winter before last, is it, my Lord" Jaalam said quietly. The tall young officer had away of reading Ituralde's mind and his voice was pitched for the others to hear. "Even so, I suppose some men would be dreaming of mulled wine about now. Not this lot, of course. Remarkably abstemious. They all drink tea, I believe. Cold tea. If they had a few birch switches, they'd be stripping down for snow-baths."

'ðeɪl əv tə kip ðɛɹ kloʊðz ɑn fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ," ɪɾɝɑldi ɹɪplaɪd dʒɹaɪli, "bʌt ðeɪ maɪt ɡɛt səm koʊl ti tənaɪt, ɪf ðəɹ lʌki." ðət bɹɔɾ ə fju tʃʌkəlz. kwaɪət tʃʌkəlz. hi hæd tʃoʊzən ðiz mɛn wɪð kɛɹ, ən ðeɪ nu əbaʊt nɔɪz ət ðə ɹɔŋ taɪm.

'They'll have to keep their clothes on for the time being," Ituralde replied dryly, "but they might get some cold tea tonight, if they're lucky." That brought a few chuckles. Quiet chuckles. He had chosen these men with care, and they knew about noise at the wrong time.

hi hɪmsɛlf cʊɾə dʌn wɪð ə stimɪŋ kʌp ə spaɪst waɪn, əɹ ivən ti. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə lɔŋ taɪm sɪns mɝtʃəns hæd bɹɔt ti tə ɑɹæd dumən. ə lɔŋ taɪm sɪns ɛni aʊtlæn mɝtʃən hæd vɛntʃɝd fɝðɝ ðən ðə bɔɹɾɝ wɪð sɑldɑiə. baɪ ðə ɹaɪm nuz ə ði aʊtsaɪd wɝld ɹitʃt hɪm, ɪt wɑz əz steɪl əz læs mʌnθs bɹɛd, ɪf ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɹumɝ tə bɪɡɪn. ðət hɑɹdli mæɾɝd, ðoʊ. ɪf ðə waɪt taʊɝ tʃɹuli wɑz dɪvaɪɾəd əɡɛnst ɪtsɛlf, əɹ mɛn u kəd tʃænəl ɹɪli wɝ biɪŋ kɔl tə keɪɛmlɪn, wɛl, ðə wɝld wəɾ əv tə də wɪθaʊt ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi əntɪl ɑɹæd dumən wɑz hoʊl əɡɛn.

He himself could have done with a steaming cup of spiced wine, or even tea. But it was a long time since merchants had brought tea to Arad Doman. A long time since any outland merchant had ventured further than the border with Saldaea. By the rime news of the outside world reached him, it was as stale as last month's bread, if it was more than rumor to begin. That hardly mattered, though. If the White Tower truly was divided against itself, or men who could channel really were being called to Caemlyn, well, the world would have to do without Rodel Ituralde until Arad Doman was whole again.

fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, ɑɹæd dumən wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛni seɪn mæn tə ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð. wʌns əɡɛn laɪ ɹivjud ði ɔɹɾɝz i hæd sɛnt, kæɹid baɪ ðə fæstəst ɹaɪɾɝz i hæd, tə ɛvɹi noʊbəl lɔɪəl tə ðə kɪŋ-dɪvaɪɾəd əz ðeɪ wɝ baɪ bæd blʌɾ ən oʊl fjudz, ðeɪ stɪl ʃɛɹd ðət mʌtʃ. ðeɪ wəd ɡæðɝ ðɛɹ ɑɹmiz ən ɹaɪd wən ɔɹɾɝz keɪm fɹəm ðə wʊlf; ət list, soʊ lɔŋ əz i hɛl ðə kɪŋz feɪvɝ. ðeɪ wəɾ ivən haɪɾ ɪn ðə maʊntənz ən weɪt, fəɹ ɪz ɔɹɾɝ. oʊ, ðeɪ wəd tʃeɪf, ən səm wəd kɝs ɪz neɪm, bʌt ðeɪ wəɾ oʊbeɪ. ðeɪ nu ðə wʊlf wʌn bæɾəlz. mɔɹ, ðeɪ nu hi wʌn wɔɹz. ðə lɪɾəl wʊlf, ðeɪ kɔld ɪm wən ðeɪ θɔɾ i kəd nɔɹ hɪɹ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wɛðɝ ðeɪ dʒɹu ətɛnʃən tə hɪz stætʃɝ-wɛl, nɑt mʌtʃ-soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd wən ən wɛɹ i sɛd.

For the moment, Arad Doman was more than enough for any sane man to go on with. Once again lie reviewed the orders he had sent, carried by the fastest riders he had, to every noble loyal to the King-Divided as they were by bad blood and old feuds, they still shared that much. They would gather their armies and ride when orders came from the Wolf; at least, so long as he held the King's favor. They would even hide in the mountains and wait, for his order. Oh, they would chafe, and some would curse his name, but they would obey. They knew the Wolf won battles. More, they knew he won wars. The Little Wolf, they called him when they thought he could nor hear, but he did not care whether they drew attention to his stature-well, not much-so long as they rode when and where he said.

vɛɹi sun ðeɪ wəd bi ɹaɪɾɪŋ hɑɹd, muvɪŋ tə sɛɾ ə tʃɹæp ðət wəd nɑt spɹɪŋ fəɹ mʌnθs. ɪt wɑz ə lɔŋ tʃæns i wɑz teɪkɪŋ. kɑmplɛks plænz hæd mɛni weɪz tə fɔl əpɑɹt, ən ðɪs plæn hæd leɪɝz ɪnsaɪd leɪɝz. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wəd bi ɹuən bɪfɔɹ ɪt bɪɡæn ɪf i feɪl tə pɹəvaɪd ðə beɪt. əɹ ɪf sʌmwʌn ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪz ɔɹɾɝ tə ɪveɪd kɝiɝz fɹəm ðə kɪŋ. ðeɪ ɔl nu hɪz ɹizənz, ðoʊ, ən ivən ðə moʊst stɪf-nɛkt ʃɛɹd ðɛm, ðoʊ fju wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə spik ə ðə mæɾɝ əlaʊd. hi hɪmsɛlf hæd muv laɪk ə ɹeɪθ ɹeɪsɪŋ ɑn ə stɔɹm sɪns i ɹəsivd ælsələmz leɪɾəst kəmænd. ɪn ɪz sliv ðə foʊldəd peɪpɝ leɪ tʌkt əbʌv ðə peɪl leɪs ðət fɛl ɑntu hɪz stil-bækt ɡɔnlət. ðeɪ hæd wʌn læs tʃæns, wʌn vɛɹi smɔl tʃæns, tə seɪv ɑɹæd dumən. pɝhæps ivən tə seɪv ælsələm fɹəm hɪmsɛlf bɪfɔɹ ðə kaʊnsəl ə mɝtʃəns dɪsaɪɾɪd tə pʊɾ ənʌðɝ mæn ɑn ðə θɹoʊn ɪn ɪz pleɪs. hi hæd bɪn ə ɡʊd ɹulɝ, fəɹ oʊvɝ twɛnti jɪɹz. ðə laɪt sɛn ðəɾ i kəd bi əɡɛn.

Very soon they would be riding hard, moving to set a trap that would not spring for months. It was a long chance he was taking. Complex plans had many ways to fall apart, and this plan had layers inside layers. Everything would be ruined before it began if he failed to provide the bait. Or if someone ignored his order to evade couriers from the King. They all knew his reasons, though, and even the most stiff-necked shared them, though few were willing to speak of the matter aloud. He himself had moved like a wraith racing on a storm since he received Alsalam's latest command. In his sleeve the folded paper lay tucked above the pale lace that fell onto his steel-backed gauntlet. They had one last chance, one very small chance, to save Arad Doman. Perhaps even to save Alsalam from himself before the Council of Merchants decided to put another man on the throne in his place. He had been a good ruler, for over twenty years. The Light send that he could be again.

ə laʊd kɹæk tə ðə saʊθ sɛn ɪɾɝɑldiz hæn tə daɪ hɪlt ə hɪz lɔŋzɔɝd. ðəɹ wɑz ə feɪn kɹik ə lɛðɝ ən mɛɾəl əz ʌðɝz iz ðɛɹ wɛpənz. fəɹ ðə ɹɛst, saɪləns. ðə fɔɹəst wɑz əz stɪl əz ə fɹoʊzən tum. oʊnli ə lɪm bɹeɪkɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə weɪɾ ə snoʊ. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, hi lɛt hɪmsɛlf ɹɪlæks əz mʌtʃ əz i hæd ɹɪlækst sɪns ðə teɪlz keɪm nɔɹθ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðə skaɪ ət fɑlm.

A loud crack to the south sent Ituralde's hand to die hilt of his longsword. There was a faint creak of leather and metal as others eased their weapons. For the rest, silence. The forest was as still as a frozen tomb. Only a limb breaking under the weight of snow. After a moment, he let himself relax as much as he had relaxed since the tales came north of the Dragon Reborn appearing in the sky at Falme.

pɝhæps ðə mæn ɹɪli wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, pɝhæps i ɹɪli hæɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə skaɪ, bʌt wʌtɛvɝ ðə tʃɹuθ, ðoʊz teɪlz hæd sɛɾ ɑɹæd dumən ɑn faɪɝ.

Perhaps the man really was the Dragon Reborn, perhaps he really had appeared in the sky, but whatever the truth, those tales had set Arad Doman on fire.

ɪɾɝɑldi wɑz ʃʊɹ i cʊɾə pʊɾ aʊt ðət faɪɝ, ɡɪvən ə fɹiɝ hænd. ɪt wɑz nɑt boʊstɪŋ tə θɪŋk soʊ. hi nu wʌɾ i kəd du, wɪð ə bæɾəl, ə kæmpeɪn, əɹ ə wɔɹ. bʌɾ ɛvɝ sɪns ðə kaʊnsəl hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd ðə kɪŋ wəd bi seɪfɝ smʌɡəld aʊɾ ə bændɑɹ ɛbən, ælsələm sim tə hæv teɪkən ɪndə hɪz hɛd ðəɾ i wɑz ðə ɹibɝθ ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ. hɪz sɪɡnətʃɝ ən sil hæd mɑɹk skɔɹz ə bæɾəl ɔɹɾɝz sɪns, hɛɾɪŋ aʊt fɹəm wɛɹɛvɝ ðə kaʊnsəl hæɾ ɪm hɪɾən. ðeɪ wəd nɑt: seɪ wɛɹ ðət wɑz, ivən tə ɪɾɝɑldi hɪmsɛlf. ɛvɹi wʊmən ɑn ðə kaʊnsəl ðəɾ i kənfɹʌntəd wɛn flæt-aɪɾ ən ɪveɪsɪv əɾ ɛni mɛnʃən ə ðə kɪŋ. hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs bɪliv ðeɪ dɪd nɔɹ noʊ wɛɹ ælsələm wɑz. ə ɹɪdɪkjələs θɔt, ʌv kɔɹs. ðə kaʊnsəl kɛpt ən ənblɪŋkɪŋ aɪ ɑn ðə kɪŋ. ɪɾɝɑldi hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪliv ðə mɝtʃən haʊsəz ɪntɝfɪɹd tu mʌtʃ, jɛɾ i wɪʃt ðeɪ wəɾ ɪntɝfɪɹ naʊ. waɪ ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪn saɪlənt wɑz ə mɪstɝi, fəɹ ə kɪŋ u dæmədʒ tʃɹeɪd dɪd nɑt ɹɪmeɪn lɔŋ ɑn ðə θɹoʊn. hi wɑz lɔɪəl tə hɪz oʊðz, ən ælsələm wɑz ə fɹɛnd, bɪsaɪdz, bʌt ði ɔɹɾɝz ðə kɪŋ sɛn kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn bɛɾɝ ɹɪɾən tə ətʃiv keɪɑs. nɔɹ kəd ðeɪ bi ɪɡnɔɹd. ælsələm wɑz ðə kɪŋ. bʌɾ i hæd kəmændəɾ ɪɾɝɑldi tə mɑɹtʃ nɔɹθ wɪð ɔl pɑsəbəl spiɾ əɡɛnst ə ɡɹeɪt ɡæðɝɪŋ ə dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn ðəɾ ælsələm səpoʊzədli nu ʌv fɹəm sikɹət spaɪz; ðən tɛn deɪz leɪɾɝ, wɪð noʊ dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn jɛɾ ɪn saɪt, ən ɔɹɾɝ keɪm tə muv saʊθ əɡɛn, wɪð ɔl pɑsəbəl spid, əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ ɡæðɝɪŋ ðət nɛvɝ mətɪɹiəlaɪzd. hi hæd bɪn kəmændəd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɪz fɔɹsɪz tə dɪfɛn bændɑɹ ɛbən wən ə θɹi-pɹɔŋd ətæk maɪɾ əv ɛndəɾ ɪɾ ɔl ən tə dɪvaɪɾ əm wən ə hæmɝ bloʊ cʊɾə dʌn ðə seɪm, tə hɛɹi ɡɹaʊn i nu ðə dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn hæɾ əbændənd, ən tə mɑɹtʃ əweɪ fɹəm wɛɹ i nu ðeɪ kæmpt. wɝs, ælsələmz ɔɹɾɝz ɔfən hæd ɡɔn dɝɛkli tə ðə paʊɝfəl noʊbəlz u wɝ səpoʊz tə bi fɑloʊɪŋ ɪɾɝɑldi, sɛndɪŋ mətʃɹ ɪn ðɪs dɝɛkʃən, tikəl ɪn ðæt, ɹɑmən ɪn ə θɝd.

Ituralde was sure he could have put out that fire, given a freer hand. It was not boasting to think so. He knew what he could do, with a battle, a campaign, or a war. But ever since the Council had decided the King would be safer smuggled out of Bandar Eban, Alsalam seemed to have taken into his head that he was the rebirth of Artur Hawkwing. His signature and seal had marked scores of battle orders since, heading out from wherever the Council had him hidden. They would not: say where that was, even to Ituralde himself. Every woman on the Council that he confronted went flat-eyed and evasive at any mention of the King. He could almost believe they did nor know where Alsalam was. A ridiculous thought, of course. The Council kept an unblinking eye on the King. Ituralde had always believed the merchant Houses interfered too much, yet he wished they would interfere now. Why they remained silent was a mystery, for a king who damaged trade did not remain long on the throne. He was loyal to his oaths, and Alsalam was a friend, besides, but the orders the King sent could not have been better written to achieve chaos. Nor could they be ignored. Alsalam was the King. But he had commanded Ituralde to march north with all possible speed against a great gathering of Dragonsworn that Alsalam supposedly knew of from secret spies; then ten days later, with no Dragonsworn yet in sight, an order came to move south again, with all possible speed, against another gathering that never materialized. He had been commanded to concentrate his forces to defend Bandar Eban when a three-pronged attack might have ended it all and to divide them when a hammer blow could have done the same, to harry ground he knew the Dragonsworn had abandoned, and to march away from where he knew they camped. Worse, Alsalam's orders often had gone directly to the powerful nobles who were supposed to be following Ituralde, sending Machir in this direction, Teacal in that, Rahman in a third.

fɔɹ ɹaɪmz, pɪtʃt bæɾəlz hæd ɹɪzʌltɪd fɹəm pɑɹts ə ði ɑɹmi blʌndɝɪŋ ɪndə wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn ðə naɪt waɪl muvɪŋ tə ðə kɪŋz ɪkspɹɛs kəmæn ən ɪkspɛktɪŋ nʌn bʌɾ ɛnəmiz əhɛd. ən ɔl ðə waɪl ðə dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn ɡeɪnd nʌmbɝz, ən kɑnfəɾəns, ɪɾɝɑldi hæd hæɾ ɪz tʃɹaɪəmfs-æt soʊlɑnʒ ən mæsin, ət leɪk səmɑl ən kændəlmɝ, ðə lɔɹdz ə kɑɾɝ hæd lɝnd nɔɹ tə sɛl ðə pɹɑɾəkts ə ðɛɹ maɪnz ən fɔɹdʒɪz tə ði ɛnəmiz ʌv ɑɹæd dumən-bʌɾ ɔlweɪz, ælsələmz ɔɹɾɝz weɪstəɾ ɪz ɡeɪnz.

Four rimes, pitched battles had resulted from parts of the army blundering into one another in the night while moving to the King's express command and expecting none but enemies ahead. And all the while the Dragonsworn gained numbers, and confidence, Ituralde had had his triumphs-at Solanje and Maseen, at Lake Somal and Kandelmar, the Lords of Katar had learned nor to sell the products of their mines and forges to the enemies of Arad Doman-but always, Alsalam's orders wasted his gains.

ðɪs læst ɔɹɾɝ wɑz dɪfɹənt, ðoʊ. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ə ɡɹeɪ mæn hæd kɪld leɪɾi tuvə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɑp ɪt fɹəm ɹitʃɪŋ hɪm. waɪ ðə ʃædoʊ maɪt fɪɹ ðɪs ɔɹɾɝ mɔɹ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ wɑz ə mɪstɝi, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz ɔl ðə mɔɹ ɹizən tə muv swɪfli. bɪfɔɹ ælsələm ɹitʃt ɪm wɪð ənʌðɝ. ðɪs ɔɹɾɝ oʊpən mɛni pɑsəbɪləɾiz, ən i hæd kənsɪɾɝd ɛvɹi læst wʌn i kəd si. bʌt ɡʊd wʌnz ɔl stɑɹɾəd hɪɹ, tədeɪ. wən smɔl tʃænsəz ə səksɛs wɝ ɔl ðət ɹɪmeɪnd, jə hæd tə siz ðɛm.

This last order was different, though. For one thing, a Gray Man had killed Lady Tuva trying to stop it from reaching him. Why the Shadow might fear this order more than any other was a mystery, yet it was all the more reason to move swiftly. Before Alsalam reached him with another. This order opened many possibilities, and he had considered every last one he could see. But good ones all started here, today. When small chances of success were all that remained, you had to seize them.

ə snoʊdʒəz stʃɹaɪɾənt kɹaɪ ɹæŋ aʊɾ ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ðən ə sɛkən taɪm, ə θɝd. kʌpɪŋ ɪz hænz ɝaʊn ɪz maʊθ, ɪɾɝɑldi ɹɪpiɾɪd ðə θɹi hɑɹʃ kɔlz. moʊməns leɪɾɝ ə ʃæɡi, peɪl dæpəl ɡɛldɪŋ əpɪɹɾ aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz, hɪz ɹaɪɾɝ ɪn ə waɪt kloʊk stʃɹikt wɪð blæk. mæn ən hɔɹs əlaɪk wʊɾə bɪn hɑɹd tə si ɪn ðə snoʊi fɔɹəs hæd ðeɪ bɪn stændɪŋ stɪl. ðə ɹaɪɾɝ pʊld ʌp bɪsaɪɾ ɪɾɝɑldi. ə stɑki mæn, hi wɔɹ oʊnli ə sɪŋɡəl sɔɹd, wɪð ə ʃɔɹt bleɪd, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə keɪs baʊ ən ə kwɪvɝ fæsən tə hɪz sæɾəl.

A snowjay's strident cry rang out in the distance, then a second time, a third. Cupping his hands around his mouth, Ituralde repeated the three harsh calls. Moments later a shaggy, pale dapple gelding appeared out of the trees, his rider in a white cloak streaked with black. Man and horse alike would have been hard to see in the snowy forest had they been standing still. The rider pulled up beside Ituralde. A stocky man, he wore only a single sword, with a short blade, and there was a cased bow and a quiver fastened to his saddle.

"lʊks laɪk ðeɪ ɔl keɪm, maɪ lɔɹd," hi sɛɾ ɪn ɪz pɝmənənli hɔɹs vɔɪs, pʊʃɪŋ ɪz kaʊl bæk fɹəm ɪz hɛd. sʌmwʌn hæd kɹaɪd tə hæŋ doʊnʒəl wən i wɑz jʌŋ, ðoʊ ðə ɹizən wɑz lɔst ɪn ðə jɪɹz. wʌt ɹɪmeɪn ə hɪz ʃɔɹt-kɹɑp hɛɹ wɑz aɪɝn ɡɹeɪ. ðə dɑɹk lɛðɝ pɑɹtʃ kʌvɝɪŋ ðə sɑkəɾ ə hɪz ɹaɪɾ aɪ wɑz ə ɹɛmnən ʌv ənʌðɝ juθfəl skɹeɪp. wʌn aɪ əɹ tu, ðoʊ, hi wɑz ðə bɛst skaʊɾ ɪɾɝɑldi hæɾ ɛvɝ noʊn. "moʊst ɛniweɪz," hi wɛn ɑn. "ðeɪ pʊt tu ɹɪŋz ə sɛntʃɹiz ɝaʊn ðə lɑdʒ, wʌn ɪnsaɪd ði ʌðɝ. jə kən si ðɛm ə maɪl ə bʌt noʊbɑdi wɪl ɡɛt kloʊs wɪθaʊɾ əm ət ðə lɑdʒ hɪɹɪŋ ʌv ɪɾ ɪn taɪm tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ. baɪ ðə tʃɹæks, ðeɪ dɪdn bɹɪŋ noʊ mɔɹ mɛn ðən jə sɛd ðeɪ kʊd, nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə kaʊnt. kɔɹs," hi æɾəd ɹaɪli "ðæt stɪl livz jə aʊtnʌmbɝɾ ə fɛɹ bɪt." ɪɾɝɑldi nɑɾəd. hi hæɾ ɔfɝd ðə waɪt ɹɪbən, ən ðə mɛn i wɑz tə mit hæɾ æksɛptɪd.

"Looks like they all came, my Lord," he said in his permanently hoarse voice, pushing his cowl back from his head. Someone had cried to hang Donjel when he was young, though the reason was lost in the years. What remained of his short-cropped hair was iron gray. The dark leather parch covering the socket of his right eye was a remnant of another youthful scrape. One eye or two, though, he was the best scout Ituralde had ever known. "Most anyways," he went on. "They put two rings of sentries around the lodge, one inside the other. You can see them a mile of but nobody will get close without them at the lodge hearing of it in time to get away. By the tracks, they didn't bring no more men than you said they could, not enough to count. Course," he added wryly "that still leaves you outnumbered a fair bit." Ituralde nodded. He had offered the White Ribbon, and the men he was to meet had accepted.

θɹi deɪz wən mɛn plɛdʒd ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, baɪ ðɛɹ soʊlz ən hoʊp ə sælveɪʃən, nɑt tə dʒɹɔ ə wɛpən əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ əɹ ʃɛd blʌd. ðə waɪt ɹɪbən hæd nɑt bɪn tɛstəɾ ɪn ðɪs wɔɹ, haʊɛvɝ, ən ðiz deɪz, səm mɛn hæd stʃɹeɪnʒ aɪdiəz ʌv wɛɹ sælveɪʃən leɪ. ðoʊz u kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn, fəɹ ɪnstəns. hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn kɔld ə ɡæmblɝ, ðoʊ hi wɑz nɑt. ðə tʃɹɪk wɑz ɪn noʊɪŋ wʌt ɹɪsks jə kəd teɪk. ən səmtaɪmz, ɪn noʊɪŋ wɪtʃ wʌnz jə hæd tə teɪk.

Three days when men pledged under the Light, by their souls and hope of salvation, not to draw a weapon against another or shed blood. The White Ribbon had not been tested in this war, however, and these days, some men had strange ideas of where salvation lay. Those who called themselves Dragonsworn, for instance. He had always been called a gambler, though he was not. The trick was in knowing what risks you could take. And sometimes, in knowing which ones you had to take.

pʊlɪŋ ə pækət soʊn ɪndə ɔɪl sɪlk fɹəm ɪz butɑp, hi hændəɾ ɪt tə doʊnʒəl. ɪf aɪ doʊn ɹitʃ kɔɹən fɔɹɾ ɪn tu deɪz, teɪk ðɪs tə maɪ waɪf."

Pulling a packet sewn into oiled silk from his boottop, he handed it to Donjel. If I don't reach Coran Ford in two days, take this to my wife."

ðə skaʊɝ tʌk ðə pækət sʌmwɛɹ bɪniθ ɪz kloʊk, tʌtʃt ɪz fɔɹhɛd, ən tɝn ɪz hɔɹs wɛst. hi hæd kæɹiɾ ɪts laɪk fəɹ ɪɾɝɑldi bɪfɔɹ, juʒəwəli ɑn ði iv ə bæɾəl. ðə laɪt sɛn ðɪs wɑz nɑt ðə taɪm tæmsən wəɾ əv tə oʊpən ðət pækət. ʃi wəd kʌm æftɝ hɪm-ʃi hæd toʊld ɪm soʊ-ðə fɝst ɪnsəɾənt ɛvɝ ə ðə lɪvɪŋ hɔntɪŋ ðə dɛd, "dʒæləm," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd, "lɛɾ əs si wʌt weɪts ət leɪɾi oʊsænəz hʌntɪŋ lɑdʒ." əz i hil dɑɹt fɔɹwɝd, ði ʌðɝ fɛl ɪn bɪhaɪn hɪm.

The scour tucked the packet somewhere beneath his cloak, touched his forehead, and turned his horse west. He had carried its like for Ituralde before, usually on the eve of battle. The Light send this was not the time Tamsin would have to open that packet. She would come after him-she had told him so-the first incident ever of the living haunting the dead, "Jaalam," Ituralde said, "let us see what waits at Lady Osana's hunting lodge." As he heeled Dart forward, the other fell in behind him.

ðə sʌn ɹoʊz tə ɪts haɪɾ ən bɪɡæn əɡɛn tə dɪsɛn əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd. ðə dɑɹk klaʊdz ɪn ðə nɔɹθ muv kloʊsɝ, ən ðə tʃɪl bɪt dipɝ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saʊn bʌt ðə kɹʌntʃ ə hʊvz bɹeɪkɪŋ θɹu ðə snoʊkɹʌst. ðə fɔɹəst simd ɛmpti seɪv fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz. hi dɪd nɑt si ɛni ʌv ðə sɛntʃɹiz doʊnʒəl hæd spoʊkən ʌv. ðə mænz əpɪnjən ʌv wʌt kəd bi sin fɹəm ə maɪl dɪfɝd fɹəm ðəɾ ə moʊst. ðeɪ wəd bi ɪkspɛktɪŋ hɪm, ʌv kɔɹs. ən wɑtʃɪŋ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ i wɑz nɑt fɑloʊd baɪ ən ɑɹmi, waɪt ɹɪbən əɹ noʊ waɪt ɹɪbən. ə ɡʊd mɛni ʌv əm laɪkli hæd ɹizənz ðeɪ fɛl səfɪʃən tə fɛðɝ ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi wɪð æɹoʊz. ə lɔɹd maɪt plɛdʒ ðə waɪt ɹɪbən fəɹ ɪz mɛn, bʌt wəɾ ɔl ə ðoʊz fil baʊnd? səmtaɪmz, ðəɹ wɝ tʃænsəz jə dʒʌs hæd tə teɪk. əbaʊt mɪd-æftɝnun, oʊsænəz soʊ-kɔl hʌntɪŋ lɑdʒ lum sʌɾənli aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz, ə mæs ə peɪl taʊɝz ən slɛndɝ, pɔɪntəd doʊmz ðət wʊɾə fɪɾəd wɛl əmʌŋ ðə pæləsəz ə bændɑɹ ɛbən ɪtsɛlf. hɝ hʌntɪŋ hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn fəɹ mɛn əɹ paʊɝ, hɝ tʃɹoʊfiz numɝəs ən noʊt-wɝði dɪspaɪɾ əɹ ɹɛləɾɪv juθ, ən ðə "hʌns" ðət hæd teɪkən pleɪs hɪɹ wʊɾə ɹeɪzd aɪbɹaʊz ivən ɪn ðə kæpəɾəl. ðə lɑdʒ leɪ dɛsələt, naʊ.

The sun rose to its height and began again to descend as they rode. The dark clouds in the north moved closer, and the chill bit deeper. There was no sound but the crunch of hooves breaking through the snowcrust. The forest seemed empty save for themselves. He did not see any of the sentries Donjel had spoken of. The man's opinion of what could be seen from a mile differed from that of most. They would be expecting him, of course. And watching to make sure he was not followed by an army, White Ribbon or no White Ribbon. A good many of them likely had reasons they felt sufficient to feather Rodel Ituralde with arrows. A lord might pledge the White Ribbon for his men, but would all of those feel bound? Sometimes, there were chances you just had to take. About mid-afternoon, Osana's so-called hunting lodge loomed suddenly out of the trees, a mass of pale towers and slender, pointed domes that would have fitted well among the palaces of Bandar Eban itself. Her hunting had always been for men or power, her trophies numerous and note-worthy despite her relative youth, and the "hunts" that had taken place here would have raised eyebrows even in the capital. The lodge lay desolate, now.

bɹoʊkən wɪndoʊz ɡeɪp laɪk maʊðz wɪð dʒæɡd tiθ. nʌn ʃoʊɾ ə ɡlɪmɝ ə laɪɾ əɹ muvmənt.

Broken windows gaped like mouths with jagged teeth. None showed a glimmer of light or movement.

ðə snoʊ kʌvɝɪŋ ðə klɪɹd ɡɹaʊn ɝaʊn ðə lɑdʒ hæd bɪn wɛl tʃɹæmpəl baɪ hɔɹsəz, haʊɛvɝ. ði ɔɹneɪt bɹæsbaʊnd ɡeɪts ə ðə meɪn kɔɹtʃjɑɹd stʊɾ oʊpən, ən i ɹoʊd θɹu wɪθaʊt sloʊɪŋ, fɑloʊd baɪ hɪz mɛn. ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz klæɾɝd ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz, wɛɹ ðə snoʊ hæd bɪn biɾən tə slʌʃ. noʊ sɝvəns keɪm aʊt tə ɡɹit hɪm, nɑt ðəɾ i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛni. oʊsænə hæd vænɪʃt ɝli ɪn ðə tʃɹʌbəlz ðət naʊ ʃʊk ɑɹæd dumən laɪk ə dɔɡ ʃeɪkɪŋ ə ɹæt, ən əɹ sɝvəns hæd dʒɹɪftəd kwɪkli tə ʌðɝz ə hɝ haʊs, teɪkɪŋ wʌtɛvɝ pleɪsəz ðeɪ kəd faɪnd. ðiz deɪz, ðə mæstɝləs stɑɹvd, əɹ tɝn bændət. əɹ dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn. dɪsmaʊntɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə bɹɔd mɑɹbəl stɛɹweɪ ət ði ɛn ə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, hi hændəd dɑɹts ɹeɪnz tə wʌn ə hɪz ɑɹmmɪn, ən dʒæləm ɔɹɾɝd ðə mɛn tə teɪk ʃɛltɝ wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd faɪn ɪt fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz ən ði ænəməlz. aɪɪŋ ðə mɑɹbəl bælkəniz ən waɪd wɪndoʊz ðət sɝaʊndəd ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, ðeɪ muvd əz ɪf ɪkspɛktɪŋ ə kɹɔsboʊ boʊl bɪtwin ðə ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz. wʌn sɛɾ ə steɪbəl dɔɹz stʊd slaɪtli ədʒɑɹ, bʌɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə koʊld, ðeɪ dɪvaɪɾəd ðɛmsɛlvz bɪtwin ðə kɔɹnɝz ə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, hʌɾəlɪŋ wɪð ðə hɔɹsəz wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd kip wɑtʃ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən. ɪf ðə wɝs keɪm, pɝhæps ə fju maɪt meɪk ɪɾ aʊt, ɹimuvɪŋ ɪz ɡɔnləts, hi tʌkt əm bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛlt ən tʃɛkt ɪz leɪs əz i klaɪm ðə stɛɹz wɪð dʒæləm. snoʊ ðət hæd bɪn tʃɹɑɾən ʌndɝfʊɾ ən fɹoʊzən əɡɛn kɹækəl bɪniθ ɪz buts. hi ɹɪfɹeɪn fɹəm lʊkɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ bʌt stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd. hi mʌst əpɪɹ supɹiməli əʃʊɹd, əz ðoʊ ðəɹ wɝ noʊ pɑsəbɪləɾi ɪvɛns ʃəd ɡoʊ ʌðɝ ðən i ɪkspɛktəd. kɑnfəɾəns wɑz wʌn ki tə vɪktɝi. ði ʌðɝ saɪd bɪlivɪŋ jə wɝ kɑnfəɾənt wɑz səmtaɪmz ɔlmoʊst əz ɡʊɾ əz æktʃəli  biɪŋ kɑnfəɾənt. ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə stɛɹz, dʒæləm pʊld oʊpən wʌn ə ðə tɔl, kɑɹv dɔɹz baɪ ɪts ɡɪldɪd ɹɪŋ. ɪɾɝɑldi tʌtʃt ɪz bjuɾi spɑt wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ɪn pleɪs-hɪz tʃiks wɝ tu koʊl tə fil ðə blæk vɛlvət stɑɹ klɪŋɪŋ-bɪfɔɹ i stɛpt ɪnsaɪd. əz sɛlf-əʃʊɹɾ əz wʊɾə əv bɪn əɾ ə bɔl.

The snow covering the cleared ground around the lodge had been well trampled by horses, however. The ornate brassbound gates of the main courtyard stood open, and he rode through without slowing, followed by his men. The horses' hooves clattered on the paving stones, where the snow had been beaten to slush. No servants came out to greet him, not that he had expected any. Osana had vanished early in the troubles that now shook Arad Doman like a dog shaking a rat, and her servants had drifted quickly to others of her house, taking whatever places they could find. These days, the masterless starved, or turned bandit. Or Dragonsworn. Dismounting in front of the broad marble stairway at the end of the courtyard, he handed Dart's reins to one of his armsmen, and Jaalam ordered the men to take shelter where they could find it for themselves and the animals. Eyeing the marble balconies and wide windows that surrounded the courtyard, they moved as if expecting a crossbow bolt between the shoulder blades. One set of stable doors stood slightly ajar, but in spite of the cold, they divided themselves between the corners of the courtyard, huddling with the horses where they could keep watch in every direction. If the worst came, perhaps a few might make it out, removing his gauntlets, he tucked them behind his belt and checked his lace as he climbed the stairs with Jaalam. Snow that had been trodden underfoot and frozen again crackled beneath his boots. He refrained from looking anywhere but straight ahead. He must appear supremely assured, as though there were no possibility events should go other than he expected. Confidence was one key to victory. The other side believing you were confident was sometimes almost as good as actually being confident. At the head of the stairs, Jaalam pulled open one of the tall, carved doors by its gilded ring. Ituralde touched his beauty spot with a finger to make sure it was in place-his cheeks were too cold to feel the black velvet star clinging-before he stepped inside. As self-assured as he would have been at a ball.

ðə kævɝnəs ɛntʃɹi hɔl wɑz əz aɪsi əz ði aʊtsaɪd. ðɛɹ bɹɛθ meɪd fɛðɝd mɪsts. ənlɪt, ðə speɪs simd ɔlɹɛɾi ɹɛðd ɪn twaɪlaɪt. ðə flɔɹ wɑz ə kʌlɝfəl moʊzeɪɪk ə hʌntɝz ən ænəməlz, ðə taɪlz tʃɪpt ɪn pleɪsəz, əz ðoʊ hɛvi weɪts hæd bɪn dʒɹæɡd oʊvɝ ðɛm, əɹ pɝhæps dʒɹɑpt. əsaɪd fɹəm ə sɪŋɡəl tɑpəl plɪnθ ðət maɪt wʌns əv hɛld ə lɑɹdʒ veɪs əɹ ə smɔl stætʃu, ðə hɔl wɑz bɛɹ.

The cavernous entry hall was as icy as the outside. Their breath made feathered mists. Unlit, the space seemed already wreathed in twilight. The floor was a colorful mosaic of hunters and animals, the tiles chipped in places, as though heavy weights had been dragged over them, or perhaps dropped. Aside from a single toppled plinth that might once have held a large vase or a small statue, the hall was bare.

wʌt ðə sɝvəns hæd nɑt teɪkən wən ðeɪ flɛd hæd lɔŋ sɪns bɪn luɾəd baɪ bændəts. ə sɪŋɡəl mæn əweɪɾəd ðɛm, waɪt-hɛɹɾ ən mɔɹ ɡɔn ðən wən ɪɾɝɑldi hæd læst sin hɪm. hɪz bɹɛstpleɪt wɑz bæɾɝd, ən ɪz ɪɹɪŋ wɑz dʒʌst ə smɔl ɡoʊl hup, bʌɾ ɪz feɪs wɑz ɪmækjulɪt, ən ðə spɑɹklɪŋ ɹɛd kɔɹɾɝ mun bɪsaɪɾ ɪz lɛft aɪ wʊɾə ɡɔn wɛl ət kɔɹt, ɪn bɛɾɝ taɪmz. "baɪ ðə laɪt, bi wɛlkəm ʌndɝ ðə waɪt ɹɪbən, lɔɹɾ ɪɾɝɑldi," hi sɛd fɔɹməli, wɪð ə slaɪt baʊ. "baɪ ðə laɪt, aɪ kʌm ʌndɝ ðə waɪt ɹɪbən, lɔɹd ʃɪmɹɑn," ɪɾɝɑldi ɹɪplaɪd, meɪkɪŋ ɪz kɝɾəsi ɪn ɹɪtɝn. ʃɪmɹɑn hæd bɪn wʌn ʌv ælsələmz moʊs tʃɹʌstɪɾ ædvaɪzɝz. əntɪl i dʒɔɪn ðə dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn, ət list. naʊ hi stʊd haɪ ɪn ðɛɹ kaʊnsəlz. "maɪ ɑɹmsmən ɪz dʒæləm niʃɝ, ɑnɝ-baʊn tə haʊs ɪɾɝɑldi əz ɑɹ ɔl u keɪm wɪð mi." ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ haʊs ɪɾɝɑldi bɪfɔɹ ɹoʊɾəl, bʌt ʃɪmɹɑn ænsɝd dʒæləmz baʊ, hæn tə hɑɹt. "ɑnɝ bi tə ɑnɝ. wɪl jə əkʌmpəni mi, lɔɹɾ ɪɾɝɑldi" hi sɛɾ əz i stʃɹeɪɾənd.

What the servants had not taken when they fled had long since been looted by bandits. A single man awaited them, white-haired and more gaunt than when Ituralde had last seen him. His breastplate was battered, and his earring was just a small gold hoop, but his face was immaculate, and the sparkling red quarter moon beside his left eye would have gone well at court, in better times. "By the Light, be welcome under the White Ribbon, Lord Ituralde," he said formally, with a slight bow. "By the Light, I come under the White Ribbon, Lord Shimron," Ituralde replied, making his courtesy in return. Shimron had been one of Alsalam's most trusted advisers. Until he joined the Dragonsworn, at least. Now he stood high in their councils. "My armsman is Jaalam Nishur, honor-bound to House Ituralde as are all who came with me." There had been no House Ituralde before Rodel, but Shimron answered Jaalam's bow, hand to heart. "Honor be to honor. Will you accompany me, Lord Ituralde" he said as he straightened.

ðə ɡɹeɪt dɔɹz tə ðə bɔlɹum wɝ ɡɔn fɹəm ðɛɹ hɪnʒɪz, ðoʊ ɪɾɝɑldi kəd hɑɹdli ɪmædʒən bændəts luɾɪŋ ðoʊz, fəɹ ðeɪ lɛft ə tɔl pɔɪntəɾ ɑɹtʃ waɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ tɛn mɛn tə pæs. wɪðɪn ðə wɪndoʊləs oʊvəl ɹum, hæf ə hʌnʒɹəd læntɝnz ʌv ɛvɹi saɪz ən sɔɹt biɾ ət ʃædoʊz, ðoʊ ðə laɪt bɛɹli ɹitʃt ðə doʊm silɪŋ. sɛpɝeɪɾəd baɪ ə waɪɾ ɪkspæns ə flɔɹ, tu ɡɹups ə mɛn stʊɾ əɡɛns ðə peɪntəd wɔlz, ən ɪf ðə waɪt ɹɪbən hæɾ ɪndust əm tə liv ɔf hɛlməts, ɔl tu hʌnʒɹəd əɹ mɔɹ wɝ ɑɹmɝɾ ʌðɝwaɪz, ən sɝɾənli noʊ wʌn hæd pʊɾ əsaɪɾ ɪz sɔɹdz. tə wʌn saɪd wɝ ə fju dəmɑni lɔɹdz əz paʊɝfəl əz ʃɪmɹɑn-ɹədʒɑbi, weɪkeɪɾə, æŋkɑɹ-itʃ sɝaʊndəd baɪ hɪz klʌstɝ ə lɛsɝ lɔɹdz ən swɔɹn kɑmənɝz, ən smɔlɝ klʌstɝz, əz fju əz tu əɹ θɹi, mɛni kənteɪnɪŋ noʊ noʊbəlz əɾ ɔl. ðə dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn hæd kaʊnsəlz, bʌt noʊ wʌn kəmændɝ. stɪl, itʃ ə ðoʊz mɛn wɑz ə liɾɝ ɪn ɪz oʊn ɹaɪt, səm kaʊntɪŋ ðɛɹ fɑloʊɝz ɪn skɔɹz, ə fju ɪn θaʊzənz. nʌn əpɪɹd hæpi tə bi wɛɹ i wɑz, ən wʌn əɹ tu ʃɑt ɡlɛɹz əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ, tə wɛɹ fɪfti əɹ sɪksti tæɹɑbənɝz stʊɾ ɪn wʌn sɑləd mæs ən skaʊl bæk. dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn ðeɪ maɪɾ ɔl bi jɛt ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl lʌv lɔs bɪtwin dəmɑni ən tæɹɑbənɝz. ɪɾɝɑldi ɔlmoʊst smaɪld ət ðə saɪɾ ə ði aʊtləndɝz, ðoʊ.

The great doors to the ballroom were gone from their hinges, though Ituralde could hardly imagine bandits looting those, for they left a tall pointed arch wide enough for ten men to pass. Within the windowless oval room, half a hundred lanterns of every size and sort beat at shadows, though the light barely reached the domed ceiling. Separated by a wide expanse of floor, two groups of men stood against the painted walls, and if the White Ribbon had induced them to leave off helmets, all two hundred or more were armored otherwise, and certainly no one had put aside his swords. To one side were a few Domani lords as powerful as Shimron-Rajabi, Wakeda, Ankaer-each surrounded by his cluster of lesser lords and sworn commoners, and smaller clusters, as few as two or three, many containing no nobles at all. The Dragonsworn had councils, but no one commander. Still, each of those men was a leader in his own right, some counting their followers in scores, a few in thousands. None appeared happy to be where he was, and one or two shot glares across the floor, to where fifty or sixty Taraboners stood in one solid mass and scowled back. Dragonsworn they might all be yet there was little love lost between Domani and Taraboners. Ituralde almost smiled at the sight of the outlanders, though.

hi hæd nɑt dɛɹd tə kaʊn ɑn hæf soʊ mɛni əpɪɹɪŋ tədeɪ.

He had not dared to count on half so many appearing today.

"lɔɹd ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi kʌmz ʌndɝ ðə waɪt ɹɪbən." ʃɪmɹɑnz vɔɪs ɹæŋ θɹu ðə læntɝn ʃædoʊz. "lɛt huɛvɝ meɪ θɪŋk ə vaɪələns sɝtʃ ɪz hɑɹt, ən kənsɪɾɝ ɪz soʊl." ən ðət wɑz ði ɛn ə fɔɹmæləɾi.

"Lord Rodel Ituralde comes under the White Ribbon." Shimron's voice rang through the lantern shadows. "Let whoever may think of violence search his heart, and consider his soul." And that was the end of formality.

"waɪ dʌz lɔɹɾ ɪɾɝɑldi ɔfɝ ðə waɪt ɹɪbən?" weɪkeɪɾə dɪmændəd, wʌn hænd ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə hɪlt ə hɪz lɔŋzɔɝɾ ən ði ʌðɝ ɪn ə fɪst əɾ ɪz saɪd. hi wɑz nɑɾ ə tɔl mæn, ðoʊ kɔlɝ ðən ɪɾɝɑldi bʌɾ əz hɔɾi əz ɪf i hɛl ðə θɹoʊn hɪmsɛlf. wɪmən hæd kɔld ɪm bjuɾəfəl wʌns. naʊ ə slæntɪŋ blæk skɑɹf kʌvɝd ðə sɑkəɾ ə hɪz mɪsɪŋ ɹaɪɾ aɪ, ən ɪz bjuɾi-spɑt wɑz ə blæk æɹoʊhɛd pɔɪntɪŋ ət ðə θɪk skɑɹ ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ɪz tʃik ʌp ɑntu hɪz fɔɹhɛd. "dʌz i ɪntɛn tə dʒɔɪn ʌs? əɹ æsk əs tə sɝɛndɝ? ɔl noʊ ðə wʊlf ɪz boʊld əz wɛl əz diviəs. ɪz i ðət boʊld?" ə ɹʌmbəl ɹoʊz əmʌŋ ðə mɛn ɑn ɪz saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum, pɑɹt mɝθ, pɑɹɾ æŋɡɝ.

"Why does Lord Ituralde offer the White Ribbon?" Wakeda demanded, one hand gripping the hilt of his longsword and the other in a fist at his side. He was not a tall man, though caller than Ituralde but as haughty as if he held the throne himself. Women had called him beautiful once. Now a slanting black scarf covered the socket of his missing right eye, and his beauty-spot was a black arrowhead pointing at the thick scar running from his cheek up onto his forehead. "Does he intend to join us? Or ask us to surrender? All know the Wolf is bold as well as devious. Is he that bold?" A rumble rose among the men on his side of the room, part mirth, part anger.

ɪɾɝɑldi klæspt ɪz hænz bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk tə kip fɹəm fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə ɹubi ɪn ɪz lɛft ɪɹ. ðət wɑz waɪdli noʊn əz ə saɪn ðət laɪ wɑz æŋɡɹi, ən səmtaɪmz i dɪɾ ɪɾ ɑn pɝpəs, bʌɾ i niɾəd tə pɹizɛn ə kɑm feɪs, naʊ. ivən waɪl ðə mæn spoʊk pæst ɪz ɪɹ! noʊ. kɑm. duəlz wɝ ɛntɝɾ ɪndə ɪn æŋɡɝ, bʌɾ i wɑz hɪɹ tə taɪɾ ə duəl, ən ðət ɹikwaɪɝd kɑm. "ɛvɹi mæn hɪɹ noʊz wɪv ənʌðɝ ɛnəmi tə ðə saʊθ," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə stɛɾi vɔɪs. "ðə sintʃæn əv swɑloʊd tæɹɑbən." hi ɹæn ɪz ɡeɪz oʊvɝ ðə tæɹɑbənɝz, ən mɛt flæt stɛɹz. hi nɛvɝ hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə ɹid tæɹɑbənɝz' feɪsəz.

Ituralde clasped his hands behind his back to keep from fingering the ruby in his left ear. That was widely known as a sign that lie was angry, and sometimes he did it on purpose, but he needed to present a calm face, now. Even while the man spoke past his ear! No. Calm. Duels were entered into in anger, but he was here to tight a duel, and that required calm. "Every man here knows we have another enemy to the south," he said in a steady voice. "The Seanchan have swallowed Tarabon." He ran his gaze over the Taraboners, and met flat stares. He never had been able to read Taraboners' faces.

bɪtwin ðoʊz pɹɪpɑstɝəs mʌstæʃɪz-laɪk hɛɹi tʌsks, wɝs ðən ə sɑldəiənz! -æn ðoʊz ɹɪdɪkjələs veɪlz, ðeɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl wɛɹ mæsks, ən ðə pʊɹ laɪt fɹəm ðə læntɝnz dɪd nɑt hɛlp. bʌɾ i hæd sin əm veɪld ɪn meɪl, ən i niɾəd ðɛm. "ðeɪ hæv flʌɾəd ɑntu ɑlməθ pleɪn, ən muvd ɛvɝ nɔɹθ.

Between those preposterous mustaches-like hairy tusks, worse than a Saldaean's! -And those ridiculous veils, they might as well wear masks, and the poor light from the lanterns did not help. But he had seen them veiled in mail, and he needed them. "They have flooded onto Almoth Plain, and moved ever north.

ðɛɹ ɪntɛn ɪz klɪɹ. ðeɪ min tə hæv ɑɹæd dumən, tu. ðeɪ min tə hæv ðə hoʊl wɝld, aɪ fɪɹ."

Their intent is clear. They mean to have Arad Doman, too. They mean to have the whole world, I fear."

"dʌz lɔɹɾ ɪɾɝɑldi wɑnə noʊ hu wɪl səpɔɹɾ ɪf ðiz sintʃæn ɪnveɪɾ ʌs." weɪkeɪɾə dɪmændəd.

"Does Lord Ituralde want to know who we will support if these Seanchan invade us." Wakeda demanded.

"aɪ hæv tʃɹu feɪθ jəl faɪt fəɹ ɑɹæd dumən, lɔɹd weɪkeɪɾə," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd maɪldli. weɪkeɪɾə wɛn pɝpəl ət hævɪŋ ðə dɝɛkt ɪnsəl flʌŋ ɪn ɪz tiθ, ən ɪz oʊθ-mɛnz hænz wɛn tə hɪls.

"I have true faith you will fight for Arad Doman, Lord Wakeda," Ituralde said mildly. Wakeda went purple at having the direct insult flung in his teeth, and his oath-men's hands went to hilts.

"ɹɛfjudʒiz əv bɹɔt wɝd ðət ðəɹ ɑɹ il ɑn ðə pleɪn, naʊ," ʃɪmɹɑn pʊɾ ɪn kwɪkli, əz ðoʊ hi fɪɹd weɪkeɪɾə maɪt bɹeɪk ðə waɪt ɹɪbən. nʌn ʌv weɪkeɪɾəz oʊθ-mɛn wəd dʒɹɔ stil ənlɛs i dɪd, əɹ kəmændəɾ əm tə, "ðeɪ faɪt fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, soʊ seɪ ðə ɹɪpɔɹts. hi mʌst əv sɛn ðɛm, pɝhæps əz ən eɪd tə ʌs. noʊ wʌn əz ɛvɝ dɪfiɾəd ən il ɑɹmi, nɑɾ ivən ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ. jə ɹikɔl ðə blʌd snoʊ, lɔɹɾ ɪɾɝɑldi, wən wi wɝ jʌŋɡɝ? aɪ bɪliv jə əɡɹi wɪð mi ðət wi dɪd nɑt dɪfiɾ əm ðɛɹ, wʌtɛvɝ ðə hɪstɝiz meɪ seɪ ən aɪ kænɑt bɪliv ðə sintʃæn əv ðə nʌmbɝz wi dɪd ðɛn. aɪ maɪsɛlf əv hɝɾ ə sintʃæn muvɪŋ saʊθ, əweɪ fɹəm ðə bɔɹɾɝ.

"Refugees have brought word that there are Aiel on the plain, now," Shimron put in quickly, as though he feared Wakeda might break the White Ribbon. None of Wakeda's oath-men would draw steel unless he did, or commanded them to, "They fight for the Dragon Reborn, so say the reports. He must have sent them, perhaps as an aid to us. No one has ever defeated an Aiel army, not even Artur Hawkwing. You recall the Blood Snow, Lord Ituralde, when we were younger? I believe you agree with me that we did not defeat them there, whatever the histories may say and I cannot believe the Seanchan have the numbers we did then. I myself have heard of Seanchan moving south, away from the border.

noʊ, aɪ səspɛk ðə nɛkst wi hɪɹ wɪl bi ʌv əm ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə pleɪn, nɑɾ ədvænsɪŋ ɑn ʌs." hi wɑz nɑɾ ə bæd kəmændɝ ɪn ðə fild, bʌɾ i hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn pədæntɪk.

No, I suspect the next we hear will be of them retreating from the plain, not advancing on us." He was not a bad commander in the field, but he had always been pedantic.

ɪɾɝɑldi smaɪld. wɝd keɪm mɔɹ swɪfli fɹəm ðə saʊθ ðən fɹəm ɛniwɛɹ ɛls, bʌɾ i hæd bɪn əfɹeɪɾ i wəɾ əv tə bɹɪŋ ʌp ði il, ən ðeɪ maɪɾ əv θɔɾ i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃɹɪk ðɛm.

Ituralde smiled. Word came more swiftly from the south than from anywhere else, but he had been afraid he would have to bring up the Aiel, and they might have thought he was trying to trick them.

hi kəd hɑɹdli bɪliv ɪt hɪmsɛlf, il ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn. hi dɪd nɑt pɔɪn aʊt ðəɾ il sɛn tə hɛlp ðə dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn wɝ mɔɹ laɪkli tə hæv əpɪɹɾ ɪn ɑɹæd dumən ɪtsɛlf." aɪv kwɛstʃən ɹɛfjudʒiz, tu, ən ðeɪ spik ʌv il ɹeɪdz, nɑɾ ɑɹmiz. wʌtɛvɝ ði il ɑɹ duɪŋ ɑn ðə pleɪn meɪ hæv sloʊd ðə sintʃæn, bʌɾ ɪt hæzən tɝn əm bæk. ðɛɹ flaɪɪŋ bists əv bɪɡʌn skaʊɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ saɪɾ ə ðə bɔɹɾɝ. ðət dʌz nɑt smæk ə ɹitʃɹit."

He could hardly believe it himself, Aiel on Almoth Plain. He did not point out that Aiel sent to help the Dragonsworn were more likely to have appeared in Arad Doman itself." I've questioned refugees, too, and they speak of Aiel raids, not armies. Whatever the Aiel are doing on the plain may have slowed the Seanchan, but it hasn't turned them back. Their flying beasts have begun scouting on our side of the border. That does not smack of retreat."

pɹədusɪŋ ðə peɪpɝ fɹəm ɪz sliv wɪð ə flɝɪʃ, hi hɛld ɪɾ ʌp soʊ ɔl kəd si ðə sɔɹɾ ən hæn ɪmpɹɛst ɪn ɡɹin-ænd-blu wæks. əz ɔlweɪz ə leɪt, hi hæd juzd ə hɑt bleɪd tə sɛpɝeɪt ðə ɹɔɪəl sil ɑn wʌn saɪd waɪl livɪŋ ɪt hoʊl, soʊ hi kəd ʃoʊ ɪɾ ənbɹoʊkən tə daʊɾɝz. ðəɹ hæd bɪn plɛnti ʌv ðoʊz, wən ðeɪ hɝd səm ʌv ælsələmz ɔɹɾɝz-"aɪ hæv ɔɹɾɝz fɹəm kɪŋ ælsələm tə ɡæðɝ əz mɛni mɛn əz aɪ kæn, fɹəm wɛɹɛvɝ aɪ kən faɪn ðɛm, ən stʃɹaɪk əz hɑɹɾ əz aɪ kən ət ðə sintʃæn." hi tʊk ə dip bɹitʃ. hɪɹ, hi tʊk ənʌðɝ tʃæns-æn ælsələm maɪɾ əv ɪz hɛɾ ɑn daɪ blɑk ənlɛs ðə daɪs fɛl ðə ɹaɪt weɪ. "aɪ ɔfɝ ə tʃɹus-aɪ plɛdʒ ɪn ðə kɪŋz neɪm nɑt tə muv əɡɛns jə ɪn ɛni weɪ soʊ lɔŋ əz ðə sintʃæn ɹɪmeɪn ə θɹɛt tə ɑɹæd dumən, ɪf jəl ɔl plɛdʒ ðə seɪm ən faɪt bɪsaɪd mi əɡɛnst əm əntɪl ðeɪ ɑɹ biɾən bæk." ə stʌn saɪləns ænsɝd hɪm. bʊl-nɛkt ɹədʒɑbi əpɪɹd pɑliækst. weɪkeɪɾə tʃuɾ ɪz lɪp laɪk ə stɑɹɾəld ɡɝl ðən ʃɪmɹɑn mʌɾɝd, "kæn ðeɪ bi biɾən bæk, lɔɹɾ ɪɾɝɑldi? aɪ feɪs ðɛɹ . . . ðɛɹ tʃeɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn, əz dɪd ju." buts skɹeɪp ðə flɔɹ əz mɛn ʃɪftəd ðɛɹ fiɾ ən feɪsəz dɑɹkən ɪn blik æŋɡɝ. noʊ mæn laɪk tə θɪŋk i wɑz hɛlpləs bɪfɔɹ ən ɛnəmi, bʌɾ ɪnʌf hæd bɪn ðəɹ ɪn ði ɝli deɪz, wɪð ɪɾɝɑldi ən ʃɪmɹɑn, fəɹ ɔl tə noʊ wʌt ðɪs ɛnəmi wɑz laɪk.

Producing the paper from his sleeve with a flourish, he held it up so all could see the Sword and Hand impressed in green-and-blue wax. As always of late, he had used a hot blade to separate the Royal Seal on one side while leaving it whole, so he could show it unbroken to doubters. There had been plenty of those, when they heard some of Alsalam's orders-"I have orders from King Alsalam to gather as many men as I can, from wherever I can find them, and strike as hard as I can at the Seanchan." He took a deep breach. Here, he took another chance-and Alsalam might have his head on die block unless the dice fell the right way. "I offer a truce-I pledge in the King's name not to move against you in any way so long as the Seanchan remain a threat to Arad Doman, if you will all pledge the same and fight beside me against them until they are beaten back." A stunned silence answered him. Bull-necked Rajabi appeared poleaxed. Wakeda chewed his lip like a startled girl Then Shimron muttered, "Can they be beaten back, Lord Ituralde? I faced their . . . their chained Aes Sedai on Almoth Plain, as did you." Boots scraped the floor as men shifted their feet and faces darkened in bleak anger. No man liked to think he was helpless before an enemy, but enough had been there in the early days, with Ituralde and Shimron, for all to know what this enemy was like.

"ðeɪ kən bi dɪfiɾəd. lɔɹd ʃɪmɹɑn," ɪɾɝɑldi ɹɪplaɪd, "ivən wɪð ðɛɹ . . . lɪɾəl sɝpɹaɪzəz." ə stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋ tə kɔl ði ɝθ ɪɹʌptɪŋ ʌndɝ jəɹ fit, ən skaʊts ðət ɹoʊd wʌt lʊk laɪk ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, bʌɾ i hæd tə saʊn əʃʊɹɾ əz wɛl əz lʊk ɪt. bɪsaɪdz, wən jə nu wʌt ði ɛnəmi kʊd, du, jə ədæptəd. ðət hæd bɪn wʌn kɔɹ ʌv wɔɹfɛɹ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə sintʃæn əpɪɹd. dɑɹknəs kʌt ðə sintʃæn ædvæntɪdʒɪz, ən soʊ dɪd stɔɹmz, ən ə wɛðɝ-waɪz kəɾ ɔlweɪz tɛl jɑn wən ə stɔɹm wɑz kʌmɪŋ. "ə waɪz mæn stɑps tʃuɪŋ wən i ɹitʃəz boʊn," hi kəntɪnjud, "bʌt soʊ fɑɹ, ðə sintʃæn əv hæd ðɛɹ mit slaɪs θɪn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪt. aɪ ɪntɛn tə ɡɪv əm ə tʌf ɹoʊs tə nɔ. mɔɹ, aɪ hæv ə plæn tə meɪk əm snæp soʊ hɑɹd ðəl bɹeɪk ðɛɹ tiθ ɑn boʊn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪv ə maʊθfʊl ə mit. naʊ. aɪ hæv plɛdʒd. wɪl ju?"

"They can be defeated. Lord Shimron," Ituralde replied, "even with their . . . little surprises." A strange thing to call the earth erupting under your feet, and scouts that rode what looked like Shadowspawn, but he had to sound assured as well as look it. Besides, when you knew what the enemy could, do, you adapted. That had been one core of warfare long before the Seanchan appeared. Darkness cut the Seanchan advantages, and so did storms, and a weather-wise could always tell yon when a storm was coming. "A wise man stops chewing when he reaches bone," he continued, "but so far, the Seanchan have had their meat sliced thin before they reached for it. I intend to give them a tough roast to gnaw. More, I have a plan to make them snap so hard they'll break their teeth on bone before they have a mouthful of meat. Now. I have pledged. Will you?"

ɪt wɑz hɑɹd nɔɹ tə hoʊld ɪz bɹɛθ. itʃ mæn sim tə bi lʊkɪŋ ɪnwɝd. hi kəɾ ɔl bʌtsi ðɛm mʌlɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ. ðə wʊlf hæɾ ə plæn. ðə sintʃæn hæd tʃeɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ ən flaɪɪŋ bists ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wʌɾ ɛls. bʌt ðə wʊlf hæɾ ə plæn. ðə sintʃæn. ðə wʊlf. "ɪf ɛni mæn kən dɪfit ðɛm," ʃɪmɹɑn sɛd faɪnəli "ju kæn, lɔɹɾ ɪɾɝɑldi. əl soʊ plɛdʒ."

It was hard nor to hold his breath. Each man seemed to be looking inward. He could all butsee them mulling it over. The Wolf had a plan. The Seanchan had chained Aes Sedai and flying beasts and the Light alone knew what else. But the Wolf had a plan. The Seanchan. The Wolf. "If any man can defeat them," Shimron said finally "you can, Lord Ituralde. I will so pledge."

"aɪ də soʊ plɛdʒ!" ɹədʒɑbi ʃaʊɾəd. "wil tʃeɪs əm bæk əkɹɔs ði oʊʃən wɛɹ ðeɪ keɪm fɹʌm!" hi hæɾ ə bʊlz tɛmpɹəmən əz wɛl əz ɪts nɛk.

"I do so pledge!" Rajabi shouted. "We'll chase them back across the ocean where they came from!" He had a bull's temperament as well as its neck.

sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli weɪkeɪɾə θʌndɝɾ ɪz əɡɹimənt wɪð ikwəl ɪnθuziæzəm, ən ðən ə stɔɹm ə vɔɪsəz bɹoʊk, kɔlɪŋ ðət ðeɪ wəd mætʃ ðə kɪŋz plɛdʒ, ðət ðeɪ wəd smæʃ ðə sintʃæn, ivən səm ðət wəd fɑloʊ ðə wʊlf ɪndə ðə pɪɾ ə dum. ɔl vɛɹi ɡɹæɾəfaɪɪŋ bʌt nɑɾ ɔl ɪɾɝɑldi hæd kʌm fɔɹ.

Surprisingly Wakeda thundered his agreement with equal enthusiasm, and then a storm of voices broke, calling that they would match the King's pledge, that they would smash the Seanchan, even some that would follow the Wolf into the Pit of Doom. All very gratifying but not all Ituralde had come for.

"ɪf jə æsk əs tə faɪt fəɹ ɑɹæd dumən," wʌn vɔɪs ʃaʊɾəd əbʌv ðə ɹɛst, "ðɛn æsk ʌs!" ðə mɛn u hæd bɪn kɔlɪŋ ðɛɹ plɛdʒɪz fɛl tə æŋɡɹi mʌɾɝz ən hæf-hɝd kɝsɪz.

"If you ask us to fight for Arad Doman," one voice shouted above the rest, "then ask us!" The men who had been calling their pledges fell to angry mutters and half-heard curses.

haɪɾɪŋ ɪz plɛʒɝ bɪhaɪn ə blæn ɪkspɹɛʃən, ɪɾɝɑldi tɝn tə feɪs ðə spikɝ, ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum, ðə tæɹɑbənɝ wɑz ə lin mæn, wɪð ə ʃɑɹp noʊz ðət meɪɾ ə tɛn ə hɪz veɪl. hɪz aɪz wɝ hɑɹd, ðoʊ, ən kin. səm ə ði ʌðɝ tæɹɑbənɝz fɹaʊn əz ɪf dɪsplizd i hæd spoʊkən, soʊ ɪɾ əpɪɹd ðeɪ hæd noʊ wʌn liɾɝ ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðə dəmɑni, bʌɾ i hæd spoʊkən, ɪɾɝɑldi hæd hoʊp fəɹ ðə plɛdʒɪz i hæd ɹəsivd, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ nɔɹ nɛsəsɛɹi tə hɪz plæn. ðə tæɹɑbənɝz wɝ. ət list, ðeɪ wəd meɪk ɪɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz mɔɹ laɪkli tə wɝk. hi ədʒɹɛs ðə mæn kɔɝɾiəsli, wɪð ə baʊ.

Hiding his pleasure behind a bland expression, Ituralde turned to face the speaker, on the other side of the room, The Taraboner was a lean man, with a sharp nose that made a tent of his veil. His eyes were hard, though, and keen. Some of the other Taraboners frowned as if displeased he had spoken, so it appeared they had no one leader any more than the Domani, but he had spoken, Ituralde had hoped for the pledges he had received, but they were nor necessary to his plan. The Taraboners were. At least, they would make it a hundred times more likely to work. He addressed the man courteously, with a bow.

"aɪ ɔfɝ jə ðə tʃæns tə faɪt fəɹ tæɹɑbən, maɪ ɡʊd lɔɹd. ði il ɑɹ meɪkɪŋ səm kənfjuʒən ɑn ðə pleɪn; ðə ɹɛfjudʒiz spik ʌv ɪt. tɛl mi, kəɾ ə smɔl kʌmpəni ʌv jəɹ mɛn-ə hʌnʒɹəd, pɝhæps tu-kɹɔs ðə pleɪn ɪn ðət dɪsɔɹɾɝ ən ɛntɝ tæɹɑbən, ɪf ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ wɑz mɑɹkt wɪð stʃɹaɪps, əz ðoʊz u ɹaɪd fəɹ ðə sintʃæn."

"I offer you the chance to fight for Tarabon, my good Lord. The Aiel are making some confusion on the plain; the refugees speak of it. Tell me, could a small company of your men-a hundred, perhaps two-cross the plain in that disorder and enter Tarabon, if their armor was marked with stripes, as those who ride for the Seanchan."

ɪt simd ɪmpɑsəbəl ðə tæɹɑbənɝz feɪs kəd ɡɹoʊ ɛni taɪɾɝ, jɛɾ ɪt dɪd, ən ɪt wɑz ðə tɝn ə ðə mɛn ɑn ɪz saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum tə mʌɾɝ æŋɡɹəli ən kɝs. ɪnʌf wɝd hæd kʌm nɔɹθ fəɹ əm tə noʊ ʌv ə kɪŋ ən pɑnɑɹtʃ pʊɾ ɑn ðɛɹ θɹoʊnz baɪ ðə sintʃæn ən swɛɹɪŋ fiəlti tə ən ɛmpɹɛs ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən. ðeɪ kəd nɑt laɪk ɹimaɪndɝz ə haʊ mɛni ʌv ðɛɹ kʌntʃɹimɪn naʊ ɹoʊd fəɹ ðɪs ɛmpɹɛs. moʊst ə ðə "sintʃæn" ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn wɝ tæɹɑbənɝz.

It seemed impossible the Taraboners face could grow any tighter, yet it did, and it was the turn of the men on his side of the room to mutter angrily and curse. Enough word had come north for them to know of a King and Panarch put on their thrones by the Seanchan and swearing fealty to an Empress on the other side of the Aryth Ocean. They could not like reminders of how many of their countrymen now rode for this Empress. Most of the "Seanchan" on Almoth Plain were Taraboners.

"wʌt ɡʊd kəd wʌn smɔl kʌmpəni du?" ðə lin mæn ɡɹaʊld, kəntɛmptʃuəs.

"What good could one small company do?" the lean man growled, contemptuous.

"lɪɾəl ɡʊd," ɪɾɝɑldi ɹɪplaɪd. "bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ wɝ fɪfti sətʃ kʌmpəniz? ə hʌnʒɹəd?" ðiz tæɹɑbənɝz maɪɾ əv ðət mɛni mɛn bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ɔl toʊld. "ɪf ðeɪ ɔl stʃɹʌk ɑn ðə seɪm deɪ, ɔl əkɹɔs tæɹɑbən? aɪ maɪsɛlf wəd ɹaɪd wɪð ðɛm, ən əz mɛni ʌv maɪ mɛn əz kən bi aʊtfɪɾɪd ɪn tæɹɑbənɝ ɑɹmɝ. dʒʌst soʊ jəl noʊ ðɪs ɪz nɑt sɪmpli ə stʃɹæɾədʒɪm tə ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə ju." bɪhaɪn hɪm, ðə dəmɑni bɪɡæn pɹətɛstɪŋ laʊdli. weɪkeɪɾə ðə laʊɾəst ʌv ɔl, ɪf ɪt kəd bi bɪlivd! ðə wʊlfs plæn wɑz ɔl vɛɹi wɛl, bʌt ðeɪ wɑntəd ðə wʊlf hɪmsɛlf ət ðɛɹ hɛd. moʊst ə ðə tæɹɑbənɝz bɪɡæn ɑɹɡjuɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, oʊvɝ wɛðɝ soʊ mɛni mɛn kəd kɹɔs ðə pleɪn wɪθaʊt biɪŋ dɪskʌvɝd, ivən ɪn sətʃ smɔl bænz, oʊvɝ wʌt ɡʊd, ɪf ɛni, ðeɪ kəd də ɪn tæɹɑbən ɪn smɔl kʌmpəniz, oʊvɝ wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə wɛɹ ɑɹmɝ mɑɹkt wɪð sintʃæn stʃɹaɪps. tæɹɑbənɝz ɑɹɡjuɾ əz izəli əz sɑldəiənz, ən əz hɑtli. nɑt ðə ʃɑɹp-noʊz mæn. hi mɛɾ ɪɾɝɑldiz ɡlɛɹ stɛɾəli.

"Little good," Ituralde replied. "But if there were fifty such companies? A hundred?" These Taraboners might have that many men behind them, all told. "If they all struck on the same day, all across Tarabon? I myself would ride with them, and as many of my men as can be outfitted in Taraboner armor. Just so you will know this is not simply a stratagem to get rid of you." Behind him, the Domani began protesting loudly. Wakeda the loudest of all, if it could be believed! The Wolf's plan was all very well, but they wanted the Wolf himself at their head. Most of the Taraboners began arguing among themselves, over whether so many men could cross the plain without being discovered, even in such small bands, over what good, if any, they could do in Tarabon in small companies, over whether they were willing to wear armor marked with Seanchan stripes. Taraboners argued as easily as Saldaeans, and as hotly. Not the sharp-nosed man. He met Ituralde's glare steadily.

ðən ɡeɪv ə slaɪt nɑd. ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə tɛl, bɪhaɪn ðoʊz θɪk mʌstæʃɪz, bʌɾ ɪɾɝɑldi θɔɾ i smaɪld.

Then gave a slight nod. It was hard to tell, behind those thick mustaches, but Ituralde thought he smiled.

ðə læs tɛnʃən feɪɾəd fɹəm ɪɾɝɑldiz ʃoʊldɝz. ðə fɛloʊ wəd nɑɾ əv əɡɹid waɪl ði ʌðɝz ɑɹɡjuɾ ɪf i wɝ nɑt mɔɹ ʌv ə liɾɝ əmʌŋ əm ðən i simd. ði ʌðɝz wəd kʌm tu, hi wɑz sɝɾən. ðeɪ wəd ɹaɪd saʊθ wɪð ɪm ɪndə ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt ðə sintʃæn kənsɪɾɝd ðɛɹ oʊn, ən slæp əm hɑɹɾ ən fʊl əkɹɔs ðə feɪs. ðə tæɹɑbənɝz wəd wɑnə steɪ æftɝwɝdz, ʌv kɔɹs, ən kəntɪnju ðə faɪɾ ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn hoʊmlænd. hi kəd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ. wɪtʃ wəd liv ɪm ən ðə tu θaʊzən mɛn i kəd teɪk wɪð ɪm tə bi haʊndɪd bæk nɔɹθ əɡɛn, ɔl ðə lɔŋ weɪ əkɹɔs ɑlməθ pleɪn. ɪf ðə laɪt ʃoʊn ɑn hɪm, haʊndɪd wɪð fjʊɹi. hi ɹɪtɝn ðə tæɹɑbənɝz smaɪl, ɪf smaɪl ɪt wɑz. wɪð ɛni lʌk, fjʊɹiəs dʒɛnɝəlz wəd nɑt si wɛɹ i wɑz liɾɪŋ ðɛm, əntɪl ɪt wɑz tu leɪt. ən ɪf ðeɪ dɪd... wɛl i hæɾ ə sɛkən plæn.

The last tension faded from Ituralde's shoulders. The fellow would not have agreed while the others argued if he were not more of a leader among them than he seemed. The others would come too, he was certain. They would ride south with him into the heart of what the Seanchan considered their own, and slap them hard and full across the face. The Taraboners would want to stay afterwards, of course, and continue the fight in their own homeland. He could not expect anything more. Which would leave him and the two thousand men he could take with him to be hounded back north again, all the long way across Almoth Plain. If the Light shone on him, hounded with fury. He returned the Taraboners smile, if smile it was. With any luck, furious generals would not see where he was leading them, until it was too late. And if they did... Well he had a second plan.

imən vɑldə hɛld ɪz kloʊk taɪɾ ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf əz laɪ tʃɹæmp θɹu ðə snoʊ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz. koʊld ən stɛɾi, ðə wɪn saɪd θɹu ðə snoʊ-leɪɾən bɹæntʃəz, ə dɪsɛptɪvli kwaɪət saʊn ɪn ðə dæmp ɡɹeɪ laɪt. ɪt slaɪs θɹu ðə θɪk waɪt wʊl əz θɹu ɡɔz, tʃɪlɪŋ ɪm tə ðə boʊn. ðə kæmp spɹɔlɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪm θɹu ðə fɔɹəst wɑz tu kwaɪət. muvmən pɹəvaɪɾəd ə lɪɾəl wɔɹmθ, bʌɾ ɪn ðɪs, mɛn hʌɾəld təɡɛðɝ ənlɛs dʒɹɪvən tə muv.

Eamon Valda held his cloak tight around himself as lie tramped through the snow among the trees. Cold and steady, the wind sighed through the snow-laden branches, a deceptively quiet sound in the damp gray light. It sliced through the thick white wool as through gauze, chilling him to the bone. The camp sprawling around him through the forest was too quiet. Movement provided a little warmth, but in this, men huddled together unless driven to move.

əbɹʌpli hi stɑpt ɪn ɪz tʃɹæks, ɹɪŋkəlɪŋ ɪz noʊz əɾ ə sʌɾən stɛntʃ, ə ɡæɡɪŋ faʊlnəs laɪk twɛnti mɪɾən hips kɹɔlɪŋ wɪð mæɡəts. hi dɪd nɑt ɡæɡ; ɪnstɛd, hi skaʊld. ðə kæmp læk ðə pɹisɪʒən i pɹəfɝd. ðə tɛns wɝ klʌstɝd hæfəzɝdli wɛɹɛvɝ ðə lɪmz oʊvɝhɛd ɡɹu θɪkəst, ðə hɔɹsəz tɛðɝd kloʊs baɪ ɹæðɝ ðən pɹɑpɝli pɪkəɾɪd. ɪt wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə slæknəs ðət lɛd tə fɪlθ.

Abruptly he stopped in his tracks, wrinkling his nose at a sudden stench, a gagging foulness like twenty midden heaps crawling with maggots. He did not gag; instead, he scowled. The camp lacked the precision he preferred. The tents were clustered haphazardly wherever the limbs overhead grew thickest, the horses tethered close by rather than properly picketed. It was the sort of slackness that led to filth.

ənwɑtʃt, ðə mɛn wəd bɛɹi hɔɹs-dʌŋ ʌndɝ ə fju ʃʌvəlz ə dɝt tə bi dʌn wɪð ɪt kwɪkɝ, ən dɪɡ lætʃɹinz wɛɹ ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv tə wɔk fɑɹ ɪn ðə koʊld. ɛni ɔfəsɝ ə hɪz u əlaʊd ðət wəd sis tə bi ən ɔfəsɝ, ən lɝn fɝsthæn haʊ tə juz ə ʃʌvəl.

Unwatched, the men would bury horse-dung under a few shovels of dirt to be done with it quicker, and dig latrines where they would not have to walk far in the cold. Any officer of his who allowed that would cease to be an officer, and learn firsthand how to use a shovel.

hi wɑz skænɪŋ ðə kæmp fəɹ ðə sɔɹs ə ðə smɛl, wən sʌɾənli ðəɹ wɑz noʊ smɛl. ðə wɪn dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ; ðə stɪŋk dʒʌs vænɪʃt. hi wɑz stɑɹɾəld fəɹ oʊnli ə moʊmənt. wɔkɪŋ ɑn, hi skaʊld ɔl ðə hɑɹɾɝ. ðə stɛntʃ hæd kʌm fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ. hi wəd faɪn huɛvɝ θɔt dɪsəplən hæd slækənd, ən meɪk ɪɡzæmpəlz ə ðɛm. dɪsəplən hæd tə bi taɪt, naʊ; taɪɾɝ ðən ɛvɝ.

He was scanning the camp for the source of the smell, when suddenly there was no smell. The wind did not change; the stink just vanished. He was startled for only a moment. Walking on, he scowled all the harder. The stench had come from somewhere. He would find whoever thought discipline had slackened, and make examples of them. Discipline had to be tight, now; tighter than ever.

ət ði ɛdʒ ʌv əbɹɔd klɪɹɪŋ, hi pɔzd əɡɛn. ðə snoʊ ɪn ðə klɪɹɪŋ wɑz smuð ən ənmɑɹk dɪspaɪt ðə kæmp hɪɾən ɔl ɝaʊn ɪf. steɪdʒɪŋ bæk əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, laɪ skæn ðə skaɪ.

At the edge of abroad clearing, he paused again. The snow in the clearing was smooth and unmarked despite the camp hidden all around if. Staging back among the trees, lie scanned the sky.

skəɪŋ ɡɹeɪ klaʊdz hɪd ðə nundeɪ sʌn. ə flɪkɝ ə moʊʃən meɪɾ ɪz bɹɛθ kætʃ bɪfɔɹ i ɹilaɪzd ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə bɝd, səm smɔl bɹaʊn θɪŋ wɛɹi ʌv hɔks ən steɪɪŋ loʊ. hi bɑɹkt .ə læf ðət wɑz mɔɹ ðən tʌtʃt wɪð bɪɾɝnəs. lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə mʌnθ sɪns ðə laɪt-kɝst sintʃæn hæd swɑloʊɾ æmədɔɹ ən ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs ə laɪɾ ɪn wʌn ʌnbəlivəbəl ɡʌlp, bʌɾ i hæd lɝnd nu ɪnstɪŋks.

Scudding gray clouds hid the noonday sun. A flicker of motion made his breath catch before he realized it was just a bird, some small brown thing wary of hawks and staying low. He barked .a laugh that was more than touched with bitterness. Little more than a month since the Light-cursed Seanchan had swallowed Amador and the Fortress of Light in one unbelievable gulp, but he had learned new instincts.

waɪz mɛn lɝnd, waɪl fulz ... eɪlɹən hæd bɪn ə ful pʌft ʌp wɪð oʊl teɪlz ʌv ɡlɔɹi bɹaɪɾənd baɪ eɪdʒ ən nu hoʊp ʌv wɪnɪŋ ɹil paʊɝ tə ɡoʊ wɪð ɪz kɹaʊn. hi ɹəfjuz tə si ðə ɹiæləɾi ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz aɪz, ən eɪlɹənz dɪzæstɝ hæd bɪn ðə ɹɪzʌlt. vɑldə hæd hɝɾ ɪt neɪm ðə bæɾəl ə dʒɹəməl, bʌɾ oʊnli baɪ səm ə ðə bɛɹ hændfʊl ʌv ɑmɑdɪʃən noʊbəlz u ɪskeɪpt, deɪzd əz pɑliækst stɪɹz jɛt stɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ məkænɪkli tə pʊt ðə bɛs feɪs ɑn ɪvɛns. hi wʌndɝd wʌɾ eɪlɹən hæd kɔld ɪt wən ðə sintʃænz teɪm wɪtʃəz bɪɡæn tɛɹɪŋ ɪz ɔɹɾɝli ɹæŋks tə blʌɾi ɹæɡz. hi kəd stɪl si ðəɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd, ði ɝθ tɝnɪŋ tə faʊntənz ə faɪɝ. hi sɔ ɪɾ ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz-wɛl, eɪlɹən wɑz dɛd, kʌt daʊn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fli ðə fild ən ɪz hɛd dɪspleɪst ɑn ə tæɹɑbənɝz læns. ə suɾəbəl dɛθ fəɹ ə ful. hi, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, hæɾ oʊvɝ naɪn θaʊzən ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn hɪm. ə mæn u sɔ klɪɹli kəd meɪk mʌtʃ aʊɾ ə ðəɾ ɪn taɪmz laɪk ðiz.

Wise men learned, while fools ... Ailron had been a fool puffed up with old tales of glory brightened by age and new hope of winning real power to go with his crown. He refused to see the reality in front of his eyes, and Ailron's Disaster had been the result. Valda had heard it named the Battle of Jeramel, but only by some of the bare handful of Amadician nobles who escaped, dazed as poleaxed steers yet still trying mechanically to put the best face on events. He wondered what Ailron had called it when the Seanchan's tame witches began tearing his orderly ranks to bloody rags. He could still see that in his head, the earth turning to fountains of fire. He saw it in his dreams-Well, Ailron was dead, cut down trying to flee the field and his head displaced on a Taraboner's lance. A suitable death for a fool. He, on the other hand, had over nine thousand of the Children gathered around him. A man who saw clearly could make much out of that in times like these.

ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə klɪɹɪŋ, dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə tʃɹilaɪn, wɑz ə ɹud haʊs ðət hæd wʌns bɪlɔŋ tə ə tʃɑɹkoʊl bɝnɝ, ə sɪŋɡəl ɹum wɪð wɪntɝ-bɹɔn widz θɪk ɪn ðə ɡæps bɪtwin ðə stoʊnz. baɪ ɔl əpɪɹənsəz, ðə mæn hæɾ əbændən ðə pleɪs səm taɪm əɡoʊ; pɑɹts ə ðə θætʃ ɹuf sæɡd deɪnʒɝəsli, ən wʌtɛvɝ hæd wʌns fɪl ðə nɛɹoʊ wɪndoʊz wɑz lɔŋ sɪns ɡɔn, ɹipleɪs naʊ baɪ dɑɹk blæŋkəts. tu ɡɑɹdz stʊd bɪsaɪd ði ɪl-fɪɾɪŋ wʊɾən dɔɹ-bɪɡ mɛn wɪð ðə skɑɹlət ʃɛpɝdz kɹʊk bɪhaɪn ðə ɡoʊldən sʌnflɛɹ ɑn ðɛɹ kloʊks. ðeɪ hæd ðɛɹ ɑɹmz ɹæpt ɝaʊn ðɛmsɛlvz ən wɝ stæmpɪŋ ðɛɹ buts əɡɛns ðə koʊld. niðɝ cʊɾə ɹitʃt ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪn taɪm tə də ɛni ɡʊd, hæd vɑldə bɪn ən ɛnəmi. kwɛstʃənɝz laɪk tə wɝk ɪndɔɹz.

On the far side of the clearing, just inside the treeline, was a rude house that had once belonged to a charcoal burner, a single room with winter-brawn weeds thick in the gaps between the stones. By all appearances, the man had abandoned the place some time ago; parts of the thatch roof sagged dangerously, and whatever had once filled the narrow windows was long since gone, replaced now by dark blankets. Two guards stood beside the ill-fitting wooden door-big men with the scarlet shepherd's crook behind the golden sunflare on their cloaks. They had their arms wrapped around themselves and were stamping their boots against the cold. Neither could have reached his sword in time to do any good, had Valda been an enemy. Questioners liked to work indoors.

ðɛɹ feɪsəz maɪɾ əv bɪn kɑɹv stoʊn əz ðeɪ wɑtʃt ɪm əpɹoʊtʃ. niðɝ ɔfɝd mɔɹ ðən ə hæfhɑɹɾɪd səlut. nɑt fəɹ ə mæn wɪθaʊt ðə ʃɛpɝdz kɹʊk, ivən ɪf i wɑz lɔɹd-kæptən kəmændɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. wʌn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ əz ɪf tə kwɛstʃən vɑldəz pɝpəs, bʌt vɑldə wɔk baɪ ðɛm ən pʊʃt oʊpən ðə ɹʌf dɔɹ. ət lis ðeɪ dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp hɪm. hi wʊɾə kɪld əm boʊθ, ɪf ðeɪ hæd.

Their faces might have been carved stone as they watched him approach. Neither offered more than a halfhearted salute. Not for a man without the shepherd's crook, even if he was Lord-Captain Commander of the Children. One opened his mouth as if to question Valda's purpose, but Valda walked by them and pushed open the rough door. At least they did not try to stop him. He would have killed them both, if they had.

əɾ ɪz ɛntʃɹəns, əsunɑwə lʊkt ʌp fɹəm ðə kɹʊkəd teɪbəl wɛɹ i wɑz pɝuzɪŋ ə smɔl bʊk, wʌn boʊni hæn kʌpt ɝaʊn ə stimɪŋ pjuɾɝ kʌp ðət ɡeɪv ɔf ði oʊɾɝ ə spaɪsəz. hɪz læɾɝ-bækt tʃɛɹ, ði oʊnli ʌðɝ pis ə fɝnɪtʃɝ ɪn ðə ɹum, əpɪɹd ɹɪkəɾi, bʌt sʌmwʌn hæd stʃɹɛŋθən ɪt wɪð ɹɔhaɪd læʃɪŋz. vɑldə taɪɾənd ɪz maʊθ tə stɑp ə snɪɹ. ðə haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ ə ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt dɪmændəɾ ə ɹil ɹuf, nɑɾ ə tɛnt, ivən ɪf ɪt wɑz θætʃ sɔɹli ɪn niɾ ə pætʃɪŋ, ən mʌld waɪn wən noʊ wʌn ɛls hæd teɪstəd, waɪn ʌv ɛni sɔɹɾ ɪn ə wik. ə smɔl faɪɝ bɝn ɑn ðə stoʊn hɑɹθ, tu, ɡɪvɪŋ ə miɡɝ wɔɹmθ. ivən kʊk faɪɝz hæd bɪn bæn sɪns bɪfɔɹ ðə dɪzæstɝ, tə pɹɪvɛn smoʊk fɹəm ɡɪvɪŋ əm əweɪ. stɪl, ɔlðoʊ moʊs tʃɪlʒɹən dɪspaɪz ðə kwɛstʃənɝz, ðeɪ hɛld əsunɑwə ɪn ə stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪstim, əz ɪf ɪz ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ ən ɡɔn mɑɹɾɝz feɪs ɡɹeɪst ɪm wɪð ɔl ði aɪdilz ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. ðət hæd bɪn ə sɝpɹaɪz, wən vɑldə fɝs lɝn ʌv ɪt; hi wɑz ənʃʊɹ wɛðɝ əsunɑwə hɪmsɛlf nu. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðəɹ wɝ ɪnʌf kwɛstʃənɝz tə meɪk tʃɹʌbəl. nʌθɪŋ i kəd nɑt hændəl, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɛs tə əvɔɪd ðət sɔɹɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl. fəɹ naʊ.

At his entrance, Asunawa looked up from the crooked table where he was perusing a small book, one bony hand cupped around a steaming pewter cup that gave off the odor of spices. His ladder-backed chair, the only other piece of furniture in the room, appeared rickety, but someone had strengthened it with rawhide lashings. Valda tightened his mouth to stop a sneer. The High Inquisitor of the Hand of the Light demanded a real roof, not a tent, even if it was thatch sorely in need of patching, and mulled wine when no one else had tasted, wine of any sort in a week. A small fire burned on the stone hearth, too, giving a meager warmth. Even cook fires had been banned since before the Disaster, to prevent smoke from giving them away. Still, although most Children despised the Questioners, they held Asunawa in a strange esteem, as if his gray hair and gaunt martyr's face graced him with all the ideals of the Children of the Light. That had been a surprise, when Valda first learned of it; he was unsure whether Asunawa himself knew. In any case, there were enough Questioners to make trouble. Nothing he could not handle, but it was best to avoid that sort of trouble. For now.

"ɪɾ ɪz ɔlmoʊs taɪm," hi sɛd, ʃʌɾɪŋ ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɪm. "ɑɹ jə ɹɛɾi?" əsunɑwə meɪd noʊ muv tə ɹaɪz əɹ ɹitʃ fəɹ ðə waɪt kloʊk foʊldəɾ əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl bɪsaɪd hɪm.

"It is almost time," he said, shutting the door behind him. "Are you ready?" Asunawa made no move to rise or reach for the white cloak folded across the table beside him.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ sʌn-flɛɹ ɑn ðæt, dʒʌs ðə skɑɹlət kɹʊk. ɪnstɛd, hi foʊldəɾ ɪz hænz oʊvɝ ðə bʊk, haɪɾɪŋ ðə peɪdʒəz. vɑldə θɔɾ ɪt wɑz mæntəlɝz ðə weɪ ʌv ðə laɪt. ɑd ɹɛɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ.

There was no sun-flare on that, just the scarlet crook. Instead, he folded his hands over the book, hiding the pages. Valda thought it was Mantelar's The Way of the Light. Odd reading for the High Inquisitor.

mɔɹ suɾəd tə nu ɹəkɹuts; ðoʊz u kəd nɑt ɹɛd wən ðeɪ swɔɹ wɝ tɔt soʊ ðət kəd stʌɾi mæntəlɝz wɝdz. "aɪ hæv ɹɪpɔɹts ʌv ən ændɔɝən ɑɹmi ɪn mʊɹændi, maɪ sʌn," əsunɑwə sɛd. "dip ɪn mʊɹændi, pɝhæps."

More suited to new recruits; those who could not read when they swore were taught so that could study Mantelar's words. "I have reports of an Andoran army in Murandy, my son," Asunawa said. "Deep in Murandy, perhaps."

"mʊɹændi ɪz ə lɔŋ weɪ fɹəm hɪɹ," vɑldə sɛɾ əz ðoʊ hi dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ən oʊld ɑɹɡjəmən stɑɹɾɪŋ ənu. ən ɑɹɡjəmən ðəɾ əsunɑwə ɔfən sim tə fɝɡɛɾ i hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi lɔst. bʌt wʌt wɝ ændɔɹənz duɪŋ ɪn mʊɹændi? ɪf ðə ɹɪpɔɹts wɝ tʃɹu; soʊ mɛni wɝ tʃɹævəlɝz fæntəsiz ɹæpt ɪn laɪz.

"Murandy is a long way from here," Valda said as though he did not recognize an old argument starting anew. An argument that Asunawa often seemed to forget he had already lost. But what were Andorans doing in Murandy? If the reports were true; so many were travelers fantasies wrapped in lies.

ændɝ. ðə vɛɹi neɪm ɹæŋkəld ɪn vɑldəz mɛmɹi. mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz dɛd, əɹ ɛls ə sɝvən tə səm sintʃæn. ðeɪ hæd lɪɾəl ɹɪspɛk fəɹ taɪɾəlz ʌðɝ ðən ðɛɹ oʊn. dɛɾ əɹ ə sɝvənt, ʃi wɑz lɔs tə hɪm, ən mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾəntli baɪ fɑɹ, hɪz plænz fəɹ ændɝ wɝ lɔst. ɡɑleɪdɛdʒɹəd hæd ɡɔn fɹəm ə jusfəl lɛvɝ tə dʒʌst ənʌðɝ jʌŋ ɔfəsɝ, ən wʌn u wɑz tu pɑpjəlɝ wɪð ðə kɑmən soʊlʒɝz. ɡʊɾ ɔfəsɝz wɝ nɛvɝ pɑpjəlɝ. bʌt vɑldə wɑz ə pɹæɡmæɾɪk mæn. ðə pæst wɑz ðə pæst. nu plænz hæd ɹipleɪst ændɝ.

Andor. The very name rankled in Valda's memory. Morgase was dead, or else a servant to some Seanchan. They had little respect for titles other than their own. Dead or a servant, she was lost to him, and more importantly by far, his plans for Andor were lost. Galadedrid had gone from a useful lever to just another young officer, and one who was too popular with the common soldiers. Good officers were never popular. But Valda was a pragmatic man. The past was the past. New plans had replaced Andor.

"nɔɹ soʊ fɑɹ ɪf wi muv ist, əkɹɔs ɔltɑɹə maɪ sʌn, əkɹɔs ðə nɔɹθ ʌv ɔltɑɹə. ðə sintʃæn kænɑɾ əv muv fɑɹ fɹəm ɛbən dɑɹ jɛt.

"Nor so far if we move east, across Altara my son, across the north of Altara. The Seanchan cannot have moved far from Ebon Dar yet.

spɹɛɾɪŋ ɪz hænz tə kætʃ ðə hɑɹθfaɪɝz smɔl wɔɹmθ, vɑldə saɪd. ðeɪ hæɾ ədvæns laɪk ə pleɪɡ ɪn tæɹɑbən, ən hɪɹ ɪn ɑmɑdɪʃiə. waɪ dɪd ðə mæn θɪŋk ɔltɑɹə wɑz dɪfɹənt? ɑɹ jə fɝɡɛɾɪŋ ðə wɪtʃəz ɪn ɔltɑɹə? wɪð ən ɑɹmi ʌv ðɛɹ oʊn, niɾ aɪ ɹimaɪn ju? ənlɛs ðəɹ ɪndə mʊɹændi baɪ naʊ." ðoʊz ɹɪpɔɹts i bɪlivd, ʌv ðə wɪtʃəz ɑn ðə muv. ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf, hɪz vɔɪs ɹoʊz. "meɪbi ðɪs soʊ-kɔld ændɔɝən ɑɹmi juv hɝɾ əbaʊɾ ɪz ðə wɪtʃəz, ən ðɛɹ ɑɹmi! ðeɪ ɡeɪv keɪɛmlɪn tə ælθɹ, ɹɪmɛmbɝ! ən ɪljən, ən hæf ði ist. dʒju ɹɪli bɪliv ðə wɪtʃəz ɑɹ dɪvaɪɾəd? də ju!" sloʊli hi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, kɑmɪŋ hɪmsɛlf. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə. ɛvɹi teɪl aʊɾ ə ði ist wɑz wɝs ðən ðə læst. ə ɡʌst ʌv wɪn daʊn ðə tʃɪmni blu spɑɹks ɪndə ðə ɹum, ən i stɛp bæk wɪð ə kɝs. blʌɾi pɛzən hʌvəl! ivən ðə tʃɪmni wɑz ɪl-meɪd!

Spreading his hands to catch the hearthfire's small warmth, Valda sighed. They had advanced like a plague in Tarabon, and here in Amadicia. Why did the man think Altara was different? Are you forgetting the witches in Altara? With an army of their own, need I remind you? Unless they're into Murandy by now." Those reports he believed, of the witches on the move. In spite of himself, his voice rose. "Maybe this so-called Andoran army you've heard about is the witches, and their army! They gave Caemlyn to al'Thor, remember! And Illian, and half the east. Do you really believe the witches are divided? Do you!" Slowly he drew a deep breath, calming himself. Trying to. Every tale out of the east was worse than the last. A gust of wind down the chimney blew sparks into the room, and he stepped back with a curse. Bloody peasant hovel! Even the chimney was ill-made!

əsunɑwə snæp ðə smɔl bʊk ʃʌt bɪtwin ɪz pɑmz. hɪz hænz wɝ foʊldəɾ əz ɪn pɹɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪz dip-sɛɾ aɪz sʌɾənli sim hɑɾɝ ðən ðə faɪɝ. "aɪ bɪliv ðə wɪtʃəz mʌs bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd!

Asunawa snapped the small book shut between his palms. His hands were folded as in prayer, but his deep-set eyes suddenly seemed hotter than the fire. "I believe the witches must be destroyed!

ðəɾ ɪz wʌɾ aɪ bɪliv!"

That is what I believe!"

"aɪd sɛɾəl fəɹ noʊɪŋ haʊ ðə sintʃæn teɪm ðɛm." wɪð ɪnʌf feɪm wɪtʃəz, hi kəd dʒɹaɪv ælθɹ aʊɾ ʌv ændɝ, aʊɾ ʌv ɪljən ən ɛvɹiwɛɹ ɛls i hæd sɛɾəld laɪk ðə ʃædoʊ ɪtsɛlf. hi kəd bɛɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ hɪmsɛlf!

"I'd settle for knowing how the Seanchan tame them." With enough fame witches, he could drive al'Thor out of Andor, out of Illian and everywhere else he had settled like the Shadow itself. He could better Hawkwing himself!

"ðeɪ mʌs bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd" əsunɑwə əsɝɾəd stʌbɝnli.

"They must be destroyed" Asunawa asserted stubbornly.

"æn əs wɪð ðɛm?" vɑldə dɪmændəd.

"And us with them?" Valda demanded.

ə nɑk keɪm ət ðə dɔɹ, ən əɾ əsunɑwəz kɝt sʌmənz wʌn ə ðə ɡɑɹdz fɹəm aʊtsaɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə dɔɹ-weɪ, stændɪŋ ɹɪdʒɪdli ɪɹɛkt, ɑɹm snæpɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst ɪn ə kɹɪsp səlut. "maɪ lɔɹd haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ," hi sɛd ɹɪspɛkt-fʊli, "ðə kaʊnsəl ə ði ənɔɪntəɾ ɪz hɪɹ." vɑldə weɪɾəd. wəd ði oʊl ful kəntɪnju tə bi stʌbɝn wɪð ɔl tɛn sɝvaɪvɪŋ lɔɹdz kæptən aʊtsaɪd, maʊntəɾ ən ɹɛɾi tə ɹaɪd? wʌt wɑz dʌn, wɑz dʌn. wʌt hæd tə bi dʌn.

A knock came at the door, and at Asunawa's curt summons one of the guards from outside appeared in the door-way, standing rigidly erect, arm snapping across his chest in a crisp salute. "My Lord High Inquisitor," he said respect-fully, "the Council of the Anointed is here." Valda waited. Would the old fool continue to be stubborn with all ten surviving Lords Captain outside, mounted and ready to ride? What was done, was done. What had to be done.

"ɪf ɪt bɹɪŋz daʊn ðə waɪt taʊɝ," əsunɑwə sɛd faɪnəli, "aɪ kən bi kəntɛnt. fəɹ naʊ. əl kʌm tə ðɪs miɾɪŋ."

"If it brings down the White Tower," Asunawa said finally, "I can be content. For now. I will come to this meeting."

vɑldə smaɪl θɪnli. "ðɛn aɪm kɑntɛnt. wɪl si ðə wɪtʃəz feɪl təɡɛðɝ." sɝɾənli, hi wəd si ðɛm fɔl, "aɪ sədʒɛs juv jəɹ hɔɹs ɹɛɾid. wɪv ə lɔŋ weɪ tə ɹaɪd baɪ naɪtfɔl." wɛðɝ əsunɑwə wəd si ɪt wɪð ɪm wɑz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ.

Valda smiled thinly. "Then I am content. We will see the witches fail together." Certainly, he would see them fall, "I suggest you have your horse readied. We have a long way to ride by nightfall." Whether Asunawa would see it with him was another matter.

ɡɑbɹɛl ɛndʒɔɪɾ əɹ ɹaɪdz θɹu ðə wɪntʃɹi wʊdz wɪð lɑɡən ən tʌvaɪn. hi ɔlweɪz lɛt tʌvaɪn ən əɹ fɑloʊ ət ðɛɹ oʊn peɪs ɪn ə sɛmbləns ə pɹaɪvəsi, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ dɪd nɑt læɡ tu fɑɹ bɪhaɪnd.

Gabrelle enjoyed her rides through the wintry woods with Logain and Toveine. He always let Toveine and her follow at their own pace in a semblance of privacy, so long as they did not lag too far behind.

ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛldəm spoʊk mɔɹ ðən æbsəlutli nɛsəsɛɹi ðoʊ, ivən wən ðeɪ tʃɹuli wɝ pɹaɪvət. ðeɪ wɝ fɑɹ fɹəm fɹɛnz. ɪn fækt, ɡɑbɹɛl ɔfən wɪʃt tʌvaɪn wəɾ æsk tə steɪ bɪhaɪnd wən lɑɡən ɔfɝd ðiz aʊɾɪŋz. ɪt wʊɾə bɪn vɛɹi plɛzən tə bi ɹɪli əloʊn.

The two Aes Sedai seldom spoke more than absolutely necessary though, even when they truly were private. They were far from friends. In fact, Gabrelle often wished Toveine would ask to stay behind when Logain offered these outings. It would have been very pleasant to be really alone.

hoʊldɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz ɪn wʌn ɡɹin-ɡlʌv hæn ən kipɪŋ əɹ fɑks-laɪn kloʊk ʃʌt wɪð ði ʌðɝ, ʃi lɛt hɝsɛlf fil ðə koʊld, dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl, fɝs fəɹ ðə ɹɪfɹɛʃɪŋ vɪɡɝ ʌv ɪt. ðə snoʊ wɑz nɑt dip, bʌt ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ɛɹ wɑz kɹɪsp. dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ klaʊdz pɹɑməs mɔɹ snoʊ, sun. haɪ oʊvɝhɛd flu ə lɔŋ-wɪndɪd bɝɾ ə səm sɔɹt. ən iɡəl, pɝhæps; bɝdz wɝ nɑɾ əɹ stʃɹɔŋ pɔɪnt. plæns ən mɪnɝəlz steɪɾ ɪn wʌn pleɪs waɪl jə stʌɾid ðɛm, ən soʊ dɪd bʊks ən mænjəskɹɪps, ðoʊ ðoʊz maɪt kɹʌmbəl ʌndɝ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ oʊld ɪnʌf. ʃi kəd bɛɹli meɪk ðə bɝɾ aʊɾ ət ðət haɪt, ɪn ɛni keɪs, bʌɾ ən iɡəl fɪt ðə lændskeɪp-wʊdlæn sɝaʊndəd ðɛm, smɔl dɛns θɪkəts dɑɾəd əmʌŋ mɔɹ waɪdli speɪs tʃɹiz. ɡɹeɪɾ oʊks ən taʊɝɪŋ paɪnz ən fɹz hæd kɪld ə moʊst ə ði ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ, ðoʊ hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ðə θɪk bɹaʊn ɹɪmeɪnz ʌv ə hɑɹɾi vaɪn, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ə stɪl dɪstən spɹɪŋ, klʌŋ tə ə boʊldɝ əɹ ə loʊ ɡɹeɪ lɛdʒ ə stoʊn. ʃi kɛɹfəli hɛl ðət lændskeɪp ɪn əɹ maɪn laɪk ə nɑvəs ɛksɝsaɪz, tʃɪl ən ɛmpti. wɪð noʊ wʌn ɪn saɪɾ ɪksɛpt əɹ tu kəmpænjənz, ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɪmædʒən ʃi wɑz sʌmwɛɹ ʌðɝ ðən ðə blæk taʊɝ. ðət hɔɹəd neɪm keɪm ɔl tu izəli tə maɪnd, naʊ. ə θɪŋ əz ɹil əz ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ "soʊ-kɔld" fəɹ ɛniwʌn u leɪɾ aɪz ɑn ðə ɡɹeɪt stoʊn bæɹəks, bɪldɪŋz ðət hɛl hʌnʒɹədz ə mɛn ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, ən ðə vɪlədʒ ðət hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp ɝaʊn ðɛm. ʃi hæd lɪvd ɪn ðət vɪlədʒ fəɹ nɪɹli tu wiks, ən ðəɹ wɝ pɑɹts ə ðə blæk taʊɝ ʃi stɪl hæd nɑt sin. ɪts ɡɹaʊnz kʌvɝd maɪlz, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋz ʌv ə wɔl ə blæk stoʊn. stɪl, ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fɝɡɛt, hɪɹ ɪn ðə wʊdz.

Holding her reins in one green-gloved hand and keeping her fox-lined cloak shut with the other, she let herself feel the cold, just a little, first for the refreshing vigor of it. The snow was not deep, but the morning air was crisp. Dark gray clouds promised more snow, soon. High overhead flew a long-winded bird of some sort. An eagle, perhaps; birds were not her strong point. Plants and minerals stayed in one place while you studied them, and so did books and manuscripts, though those might crumble under her fingers, if they were old enough. She could barely make the bird out at that height, in any case, but an eagle fit the landscape-Woodland surrounded them, small dense thickets dotted among more widely spaced trees. Great oaks and towering pines and firs had killed of most of the undergrowth, though here and there the thick brown remains of a hardy vine, waiting for a still distant spring, clung to a boulder or a low gray ledge of stone. She carefully held that landscape in her mind like a novice exercise, chill and empty. With no one in sight except her two companions, she could almost imagine she was somewhere other than the Black Tower. That horrid name came all too easily to mind, now. A thing as real as the White Tower, and no longer "so-called" for anyone who laid eyes on the great stone barracks, buildings that held hundreds of men in training, and the village that had grown up around them. She had lived in that village for nearly two weeks, and there were parts of the Black Tower she still had not seen. Its grounds covered miles, surrounded by the beginnings of a wall of black stone. Still, she could almost forget, here in the woods.

ɔlmoʊst, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə bʌndəl ə sɛnseɪʃən ən ɪmoʊʃən, ði ɛsəns ə lɑɡən əblɝ, ðəɾ ɔlweɪz ɹoʊɾ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ maɪnd, ə kɑnstən fil ə kəntʃɹoʊld wɛɹinɪs, ʌv mʌsəlz ɔlweɪz ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə tɛnsɪŋ. ə hʌntɪŋ wʊlf maɪt fil ðət weɪ, əɹ pɝhæps ə laɪən. ðə mænz hɛd muv kɑnstənli; ivən hɪɹ i wɑtʃt ɪz sɝaʊndɪŋz əz ðoʊ ɪkspɛktɪŋ ətæk.

Almost, except for the bundle of sensation and emotion, the essence of Logain Ablar, that always rode in the back of her mind, a constant feel of controlled wariness, of muscles always on the edge of tensing. A hunting wolf might feel that way, or perhaps a lion. The man's head moved constantly; even here he watched his surroundings as though expecting attack.

ʃi hæd nɛvɝ hæɾ ə wɔɹɾɝ-ðeɪ wɝ nidləs flæmbɔɪəns fəɹ bɹaʊnz: ə haɪɝd sɝvən kəd də ɔl ʃi niɾəd-ænd ɪt fɛl pəkjuljɝ tə bi nɑɾ oʊnli pɑɹɾ ʌv ə bɑnd, bʌɾ ət ðə ɹɔŋ ɛn ʌv ɪt, soʊ tə spik.

She had never had a Warder-they were needless flamboyance for Browns: a hired servant could do all she needed-and it felt peculiar to be not only part of a bond, but at the wrong end of it, so to speak.

wɝs ðən sɪmpli ðə ɹɔŋ ɛnd; ðɪs bɑn ɹikwaɪɝɾ əɹ tə oʊbeɪ, ən ʃi wɑz hɛdʒd əbaʊt wɪð pɹoʊəbɪʃənz. soʊ ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə seɪm əz ə wɔɹɾɝ bɑnd, ɹɪli. sɪstɝz dɪd nɑt fɔɹs ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz tə oʊbiɾiəns. wɛl, nɑt vɛɹi ɔfən. ən sɪstɝz hæd nɑt bɑndəd mɛn əɡɛns ðɛɹ wɪl fəɹ sɛntʃɝiz. stɪl, ɪt dɪd pɹəvaɪɾ ə fæsəneɪɾɪŋ stʌɾi. ʃi hæd wɝkt əɾ ɪntɝpɹɛɾɪŋ wʌt ʃi sɛnst. ət taɪmz, ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɹɛɾ ɪz maɪnd. ʌðɝ taɪmz, ɪt wɑz laɪk fʌmbəlɪŋ θɹu ə maɪnʃæft wɪð noʊ læmp. ʃi səpoʊzd ʃi wəd tʃɹaɪ tə stʌɾi ɪf əɹ nɛk wɝ stʃɹɛtʃt ɑn ðə hɛdzmənz blɑk. wɪtʃ, ɪn ə vɛɹi ɹil weɪ, ɪt wɑz. hi kəd sɛns əɹ əz wɛl əz ʃi kəd hɪm.

Worse than simply the wrong end; this bond required her to obey, and she was hedged about with prohibitions. So it was not the same as a Warder bond, really. Sisters did not force their Warders to obedience. Well, not very often. And sisters had not bonded men against their will for centuries. Still, it did provide a fascinating study. She had worked at interpreting what she sensed. At times, she could almost read his mind. Other times, it was like fumbling through a mineshaft with no lamp. She supposed she would try to study if her neck were stretched on the headsman's block. Which, in a very real way, it was. He could sense her as well as she could him.

ʃi mʌst ɔlweɪz ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt. səm ə ði æʃəmən maɪt bɪliv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ɹɪzaɪn tə ðɛɹ kæptɪvəɾi, bʌɾ oʊnli ə ful kəd θɪŋk fɪfti-wʌn sɪstɝz u hæd bɪn fɔɹsəbli bɑndəd wəɾ ɔl ɛmbɹeɪs ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən, ən lɑɡən wɑz noʊ ful. bɪsaɪdz, hi nu ðeɪ hæd bɪn sɛn tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə blæk taʊɝ. jɛɾ ɪf i səspɛktəd ðət ðeɪ wɝ stɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ə weɪ tə ɛn ðə θɹɛɾ ə hʌnʒɹədz ə mɛn u kəd tʃænəl. laɪt, kənstʃɹeɪn əz ðeɪ wɝ, wʌn ɔɹɾɝ kəd hɔlt əm ɪn ðɛɹ tʃɹæks! jəl də noʊ θɪŋ tə hɑɹm ðə blæk taʊɝ. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ðət kəmæn hæd nɑt bɪn ɡɪvən əz ə sɪmpəl pɹikɔʃən. ðeɪ mʌst səksid. feɪl, ən ðə wɝld wɑz dumd, lɑɡən tɝn ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, ən ɪmpoʊzɪŋ, bɹɔd-ʃoʊldɝd fɪɡjɝ ɪn ə wɛl-fɪɾɪŋ koʊt dɑɹk əz pɪtʃ, wɪθaʊɾ ə tʌtʃ ə kʌlɝ seɪv fəɹ ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹɾ ən ðə ɹɛd-ænd-ɡoʊl dʒɹæɡən ɑn ɪz haɪ kɑlɝ. hɪz blæk kloʊk wɑz θɹoʊn bæk, əz ðoʊ hi wɝ ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə lɛt ðə koʊl tʌtʃ hɪm. hi maɪt bi; ðiz mɛn sim tə bɪliv ðeɪ hæd tə faɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɔl ðə taɪm. hi smaɪld ət hɝ-ɹiəʃɝɪŋli ən ʃi blɪŋkt. hæd ʃi lɛt tu mʌtʃ æŋzaɪəɾi slɪp ɪndə hɝ ɛn ə ðə bɑnd? ɪt wɑz sətʃ ə dɛləkət dæns, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kəntʃɹoʊl əɹ ɪmoʊʃənz, tə pɹizɛn dʒʌs ðə ɹaɪt ɹɪspɑnsɪz. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊs laɪk teɪkɪŋ ðə tɛs fəɹ ðə ʃɔl, wɛɹ ɛvɹi wiv hæd tə bi meɪɾ ɪɡzækli soʊ, wɪθaʊt ðə slaɪɾəst fɔltɝ, dɪspaɪɾ ɛvɹi mænɝ ə dɪstʃɹækʃən, oʊnli ðɪs tɛst wɛn ɑn ən ɑn ən ɑn.

She must always remember that. Some of the Asha'man might believe the Aes Sedai were resigned to their captivity, but only a fool could think fifty-one sisters who had been forcibly bonded would all embrace resignation, and Logain was no fool. Besides, he knew they had been sent to destroy the Black Tower. Yet if he suspected that they were still trying to find a way to end the threat of hundreds of men who could channel. Light, constrained as they were, one order could halt them in their tracks! You will do no thing to harm the Black Tower. She could not understand why that command had not been given as a simple precaution. They must succeed. Fail, and the world was doomed, Logain turned in his saddle, an imposing, broad-shouldered figure in a well-fitting coat dark as pitch, without a touch of color save for the silver Sword and the red-and-gold Dragon on his high collar. His black cloak was thrown back, as though he were refusing to let the cold touch him. He might be; these men seemed to believe they had to fight everything, all the time. He smiled at her-reassuringly and she blinked. Had she let too much anxiety slip into her end of the bond? It was such a delicate dance, trying to control her emotions, to present just the right responses. It was almost like taking the test for the shawl, where every weave had to be made exactly so, without the slightest falter, despite every manner of distraction, only this test went on and on and on.

hi tɝn ɪz ətɛnʃən ɑn tʌvaɪn, ən ɡɑbɹɛl ɛksheɪl sɔfli. dʒʌst ə smaɪl, ðɛn. ə kəmpænjənəbəl dʒɛstʃɝ. hi wɑz ɔfən kəndʒinjəl. hi maɪɾ əv bɪn laɪkəbəl ɪf i wɝ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt wʌɾ i wɑz.

He turned his attention on Toveine, and Gabrelle exhaled softly. Just a smile, then. A companionable gesture. He was often congenial. He might have been likable if he were anything but what he was.

tʌvaɪn bim bæk ət hɪm, ən ɡɑbɹɛl hæd tə stɑp hɝsɛlf fɹəm ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ɪn wʌndɝmənt, nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. pʊlɪŋ əɹ hʊɾ ə lɪɾəl fɔɹwɝɾ əz ðoʊ əɡɛns ðə koʊld, soʊ ɪt ʃɛltɝɾ əɹ feɪs waɪl ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ ən ɛdʒ tə pik ɝaʊnd, ʃi stʌɾid ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ sɝəptɪʃəsli.

Toveine beamed back at him, and Gabrelle had to stop herself from shaking her head in wonderment, not for the first time. Pulling her hood a little forward as though against the cold, so it sheltered her face while giving her an edge to peek around, she studied the Red sister surreptitiously.

ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi nu ʌv ði ʌðɝ wʊmən sɛd ʃi bɛɹiɾ əɹ heɪts ɪn ʃæloʊ ɡɹeɪvz, ɪf əɾ ɔl, ən tʌvaɪn loʊð mɛn u kəd tʃænəl əz dipli əz ɛni ɹɛd ɡɑbɹɛl hæɾ ɛvɝ mɛt. ɛni ɹɛd mʌs dɪspaɪz lɑɡən əblɝ, æftɝ ðə kleɪmz i hæd meɪd, ðət ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ ɪtsɛlf hæd sɛɾ ɪm ʌp tə bɪkʌm ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. hi maɪɾ i hoʊldɪŋ ɪz saɪləns naʊ, bʌt ðə dæmədʒ wɑz dʌn. ðəɹ wɝ sɪstɝz kæptɪv wɪð əm u lʊkt ət ɹɛdz əz ðoʊ θɪŋkɪŋ ðeɪ, ət list wɝ kɑɾ ɪn ə tʃɹæp ə ðɛɹ meɪkɪŋ.

Everything she knew of the other woman said she buried her hates in shallow graves, if at all, and Toveine loathed men who could channel as deeply as any Red Gabrelle had ever met. Any Red must despise Logain Ablar, after the claims he had made, that the Red Ajah itself had set him up to become a false Dragon. He might he holding his silence now, but the damage was done. There were sisters captive with them who looked at Reds as though thinking they, at least were caught in a trap of their making.

jɛt tʌvaɪn ɔl bʌt sɪmpɝɾ ət hɪm.

Yet Toveine all but simpered at him.

ɡɑbɹɛl bɪɾ əɹ ʌndɝlɪp ɪn pɝplɛks θɔt. tʃɹu, deɪsɑndɝ ən ləməaɪ hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd ɛvɹiwʌn tə ətʃiv kɔɹdʒəl ɹileɪʃənz wɪð ði æʃəmən u hɛl ðɛɹ bɑnz-ðə mɛn mʌs bi lʌl bɪfɔɹ ðə sɪstɝz kəd də ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl-bʌt tʌvaɪn bɹɪsəld oʊpənli əɾ ɛvɹi kəmæn fɹəm iðɝ sɪstɝ. ʃi hæd dɪtɛstɪd jildɪŋ tə ðɛm, ən maɪɾ əv ɹəfjuzd ɪf ləməaɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɔlsoʊ ɹɛd, noʊ mæɾɝ ðət ʃi hæɾ ədmɪɾəd ɪt mʌs bi soʊ. əɹ ðət noʊ wʌn hæd ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd əɹ əθɔɹəɾi wʌns ʃi lɛɾ əm ɪndə kæptɪvəɾi.

Gabrelle bit her underlip in perplexed thought. True, Desandre and Lemai had ordered everyone to achieve cordial relations with the Asha'man who held their bonds-the men must be lulled before the sisters could do anything useful-but Toveine bristled openly at every command from either sister. She had detested yielding to them, and might have refused if Lemai were not also Red, no matter that she had admitted it must be so. Or that no one had recognized her authority once she led them into captivity.

ʃi heɪɾəd ðæt, tu. jɛt ðət wɑz wən ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn smaɪlɪŋ ət lɑɡən.

She hated that, too. Yet that was when she had begun smiling at Logain.

fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, haʊ kəd lɑɡən sɪɾ ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə hɝ bɑn ən teɪk ðət smaɪl əz ɛniθɪŋ bʌt fɹɔd? ɡɑbɹɛl hæd pɪkt ət ðət nɑt bɪfɔɹ, tu, wɪθaʊt kʌmɪŋ kloʊs tə əntiɪŋ ɪt. hi nu tu mʌtʃ əbaʊt tʌvaɪn. noʊɪŋ əɹ ədʒɑ ʃʊɾə bɪn ɪnʌf. jɛt ɡɑbɹɛl fɛlt əz lɪɾəl səspɪʃən ɪn ɪm wən i lʊkt ət ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ əz wən i lʊkt ət hɝ. hi wɑz hɑɹdli fɹi ʌv səspɪʃən; ðə mæn wɑz dɪstʃɹʌsfəl ʌv ɛvɹiwʌn, ɪt simd. bʌt lɛs ʌv ɛni sɪstɝ ðən ə səm æʃəmən. ðət meɪd noʊ sɛns, iðɝ.

For that matter, how could Logain sit at the other end of her bond and take that smile as anything but fraud? Gabrelle had picked at that knot before, too, without coming close to untying it. He knew too much about Toveine. Knowing her Ajah should have been enough. Yet Gabrelle felt as little suspicion in him when he looked at the Red sister as when he looked at her. He was hardly free of suspicion; the man was distrustful of everyone, it seemed. But less of any sister than of some Asha'man. That made no sense, either.

hiz noʊ ful, ʃi ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf. soʊ, waɪ? ən waɪ fəɹ tʌvaɪn, əz wɛl? wʌɾ ɪz ʃi skimɪŋ æt?

He's no fool, she reminded herself. So, why? And why for Toveine, as well? What is she scheming at?

əbɹʌpli, tʌvaɪn flæʃt ðət simɪŋli wɔɹm smaɪl ət hɝ, ən spoʊk əz ɪf ʃi hæd vɔɪst ət list wʌn ə hɝ kwɛstʃənz əlaʊd. "wɪð jə nɪɹ," ʃi mɝmɝɾ ɪn ə mɪst ə bɹɛθ, "hiz bɛɹli əwɛɹ ə mi. juv meɪɾ ɪm jəɹ kæptɪv, sɪstɝ."

Abruptly, Toveine flashed that seemingly warm smile at her, and spoke as if she had voiced at least one of her questions aloud. "With you near," she murmured in a mist of breath, "he's barely aware of me. You've made him your captive, sister."

kɑt baɪ sɝpɹaɪz, ɡɑbɹɛl flʌʃt ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf. tʌvaɪn nɛvɝ meɪd kɑnvɝseɪʃən, ən tə seɪ ʃi dɪsəpɹuvd ʌv ɡɑbɹɛlz sɪtʃueɪʃən wɪð lɑɡən wɑz tə ʌndɝsteɪt dʒɹæstɪkli. sɪdusɪŋ ɪm hæd sim sətʃ ən ɑbviəs weɪ tə ɡɛt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə lɝn ɪz plænz, hɪz wiknəsəz. æftɝ ɔl, ivən ɪf i wɑz ən æʃəmən, ʃi hæd bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ i wɑz bɔɹn, ən ʃi wɑz hɑɹdli ə toʊɾəl ɪnəsənt wən ɪt keɪm tə mɛn. hi hæd bɪn soʊ sɝpɹaɪzd wən i ɹilaɪzd wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ ðət ʃi ɔlmoʊs θɔɾ ə hɪm əz ði ɪnəsənt. mɔɹ ful ʃi. pleɪɪŋ ðə dəmɑni tɝn aʊt tə haɪd mɛni sɝpɹaɪzəz, ən ə fju pɪtfɔlz. wɝst ʌv ɔl, ə tʃɹæp ʃi kəd nɛvɝ ɹɪvil tə ɛniwʌn. sʌmθɪŋ ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ fɪɹd ðət tʌvaɪn nu, ðoʊ, ət list ɪn pɑɹt. bʌt ðɛn, ɛni sɪstɝ u hæd fɑloʊɾ əɹ lɛd mʌs noʊ, tu, ən ʃi θɔt sɛvɹəl hæd. nʌn hæd spoʊkən ə ðə pɹɑbləm, ən nʌn wɑz laɪkli tə, ʌv kɔɹs.

Caught by surprise, Gabrelle flushed in spite of herself. Toveine never made conversation, and to say she disapproved of Gabrelle's situation with Logain was to understate drastically. Seducing him had seemed such an obvious way to get close enough to learn his plans, his weaknesses. After all, even if he was an Asha'man, she had been Aes Sedai long before he was born, and she was hardly a total innocent when it came to men. He had been so surprised when he realized what she was doing that she almost thought of him as the innocent. More fool she. Playing the Domani turned out to hide many surprises, and a few pitfalls. Worst of all, a trap she could never reveal to anyone. Something she very much feared that Toveine knew, though, at least in part. But then, any sister who had followed her lead must know, too, and she thought several had. None had spoken of the problem, and none was likely to, of course.

lɑɡən kəd mæsk ðə bɑnd, ɪn ə kɹud weɪ ʃi bɪlivd wəd stɪl əlaʊ hɝ tə faɪn ɪm haʊɛvɝ wɛl ɪt hɪɾ ɪz ɪmoʊʃənz, bʌt səmtaɪmz wən ðeɪ ʃɛɹɾ ə pɪloʊ, hi lɛt ðə mæskɪŋ slɪp. tə seɪ ðə list, ðə ɹɪzʌls wɝ ... dɛvəsteɪɾɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ kɑm ɹɪstʃɹeɪnt, ðɛn, noʊ kul stʌɾi. nɑt mʌtʃ ə ɹizən əɾ ɔl.

Logain could mask the bond, in a crude way she believed would still allow her to find him however well it hid his emotions, but sometimes when they shared a pillow, he let the masking slip. To say the least, the results were ... devastating. There was no calm restraint, then, no cool study. Not much of reason at all.

hɝidli ʃi sʌmən ði ɪmədʒ ə ðə snoʊi lændskeɪp ən fɪkst ɪɾ ɪn əɹ maɪnd. tʃɹiz ən boʊldɝz ən smuð, waɪt snoʊ. smuð, koʊl snoʊ.

Hurriedly she summoned the image of the snowy landscape and fixed it in her mind. Trees and boulders and smooth, white snow. Smooth, cold snow.

lɑɡən dɪd nɔɹ lʊk bæk ət hɝ, əɹ ɡɪv ɛni aʊtwɝd saɪn, bʌt ðə bɑn toʊld əɹ ðəɾ i wɑz əwɛɹ ə hɝ moʊməntɛɹi lɔs ə kəntʃɹoʊl. ðə mæn bɹɪmd wɪð smʌɡnəs! ən sæɾəsfækʃən! ɪt wɑz ɔl ʃi kəd də nɔɹ tə sið. bʌɾ i wəɾ ɪkspɛkt əɹ tə sið, bɝn hɪm! hi hæd tə noʊ wʌt ʃi fɛl fɹəm hɪm. lɛɾɪŋ əɹ æŋɡɝ ɹaɪz, ðoʊ, oʊnli fɪl ðə fɛloʊ wɪð əmjuzmənt! ən i wɑz nɑɾ ivən ətɛmptɪŋ tə haɪɾ ɪt!

Logain did nor look back at her, or give any outward sign, but the bond told her that he was aware of her momentary loss of control. The man brimmed with smugness! And satisfaction! It was all she could do nor to seethe. But he would expect her to seethe, burn him! He had to know what she felt from him. Letting her anger rise, though, only filled the fellow with amusement! And he was not even attempting to hide it!

tʌvaɪn wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ə smɔl, sæɾəsfaɪd smaɪl, ɡɑbɹɛl noʊɾəst, bʌt ʃi hæɾ oʊnli ə moʊmən tə wʌndɝ waɪ.

Toveine was wearing a small, satisfied smile, Gabrelle noticed, but she had only a moment to wonder why.

ðeɪ hæd ðə mɔɹnɪŋ tə ðɛmsɛlvz, bʌt naʊ ənʌðɝ ɹaɪɾɝ əpɪɹd θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, ə kloʊɑkləs mæn ɪn blæk u æŋɡəld ɪz hɔɹs ɪn ðɛɹ dɝɛkʃən wən i sɔ ðɛm, ən dʌɡ hɪz buθilz ɪndə hɪz ænəməlz flæŋks fəɹ spid dɪspaɪt ðə snoʊ. lɑɡən ɹeɪn ɪn tə weɪt, ði ɪmədʒ ə kɑm, ən ɡɑbɹɛl stɪfən əz ʃi hɔltəɾ əɹ maʊn bɪsaɪd hɪm. ðə filɪŋz kæɹid baɪ ðə bɑn hæd ʃɪftəd.

They had the morning to themselves, but now another rider appeared through the trees, a cloakless man in black who angled his horse in their direction when he saw them, and dug his bootheels into his animal's flanks for speed despite the snow. Logain reined in to wait, the image of calm, and Gabrelle stiffened as she halted her mount beside him. The feelings carried by the bond had shifted.

naʊ ðeɪ wɝ ðə tɛnʃən ʌv ə wʊlf weɪɾɪŋ tə spɹɪŋ. ʃi ɪkspɛktəd tə si hɪz ɡɔntələɾəd hænz ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt ɹæðɝ ðən ɹɛstɪŋ əɾ iz ɑn ðə tɔl pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl.

Now they were the tension of a wolf waiting to spring. She expected to see his gauntleted hands on his sword hilt rather than resting at ease on the tall pommel of his saddle.

ðə nukʌmɝ wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz tɔl əz lɑɡən, wɪð weɪvz ʌv ɡoʊldən hɛɹ tə hɪz waɪd ʃoʊldɝz ən ə wɪnɪŋ smaɪl. ʃi səspɛktəɾ i nu ɪt wɑz ə wɪnɪŋ smaɪl. hi wɑz tu pɹɪɾi nɑt tə noʊ, mʌtʃ mɔɹ bjuɾəfəl ðən lɑɡən. laɪfs fɔɹdʒɪz hæd hɑɹɾənd lɑɡənz feɪs, ən lɛft ɛdʒəz. ðɪs jʌŋ mæn wɑz smuð, jɛt. stɪl, ðə sɔɹɾ ən ðə dʒɹæɡən dɛkɝeɪɾəd ɪz koʊt kɑlɝ. hi stʌɾid ðə tu sɪstɝz wɪð bɹaɪt blu aɪz. "ɑɹ jə bɛɾɪŋ boʊθ ə ðɛm, lɑɡən?" hi sɛɾ ɪn ə dip vɔɪs. "ðə plʌmp wʌn lʊks koʊld-aɪd, tə mi, bʌt ði ʌðɝ əpɪɹz wɔɹm ɪnʌf," tʌvaɪn hɪst æŋɡɹəli ən ɡɑbɹɛlz dʒɔ klɛntʃt. ʃi hæd meɪd noʊ ɹil sikɹəɾ ʌv wʌt ʃi dɪd-ʃi wɑz noʊ kɛɹhinɪn, tə kloʊk ɪn pɹaɪvəsi wʌt ʃi wɑz əʃeɪmd ʌv ɪn pʌblɪk-bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt min ʃi ɪkspɛktəd tə hæv ɪt bæntɝɾ əbaʊt-wɝs, ðə mæn spoʊk əz ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ tævɝn laɪtskɝts!

The newcomer was almost as tall as Logain, with waves of golden hair to his wide shoulders and a winning smile. She suspected he knew it was a winning smile. He was too pretty not to know, much more beautiful than Logain. Life's forges had hardened Logain's face, and left edges. This young man was smooth, yet. Still, the Sword and the Dragon decorated his coat collar. He studied the two sisters with bright blue eyes. "Are you bedding both of them, Logain?" he said in a deep voice. "The plump one looks cold-eyed, to me, but the other appears warm enough," Toveine hissed angrily and Gabrelle's jaw clenched. She had made no real secret of what she did-she was no Cairhienin, to cloak in privacy what she was ashamed of in public-but that did not mean she expected to have it bantered about-Worse, the man spoke as though they were tavern lightskirts!

"doʊn ɛvɝ lemi hɪɹ ðəɾ əɡɛn, mɪʃɹeɪl," lɑɡən sɛd kwaɪətli, ən ʃi ɹilaɪz ðə bɑn hæd tʃeɪnʒd əɡɛn. ɪt wɑz koʊld, naʊ; koʊl tə meɪk ðə snoʊ sim wɔɹm. koʊl tə meɪk ə ɡɹeɪv sim wɔɹm.

"Don't ever let me hear that again, Mishraile," Logain said quietly, and she realized the bond had changed again. It was cold, now; cold to make the snow seem warm. Cold to make a grave seem warm.

ʃi hæd hɝd ðət neɪm bɪfɔɹ, ɑɹəl mɪʃɹeɪl, ən fɛl dɪstʃɹʌst ɪn lɑɡən wən i spoʊk ɪt-sɝɾənli mɔɹ ðən i fɛl fəɹ əɹ əɹ tʌvaɪn-bʌt ðɪs wɑz ðə fil ə kɪlɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊs læfəbəl. ðə mæn hɛld əɹ pɹɪznɝ, jɛɾ i wɑz ɹɛɾi tə də vaɪələns tə dɪfɛn əɹ ɹɛpjəteɪʃən? pɑɹɾ ə hɝ dɪd wɑnə læf, bʌt ʃi tʌk ði ɪnfɝmeɪʃən əweɪ. ɛni skɹæp maɪt bi jusfəl. ðə jʌŋɡɝ fɛloʊ ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ə hɪɹɪŋ ə θɹɛt. hɪz smaɪl nɛvɝ fɔltɝd. "ðə l sɛz jə kən ɡoʊ, ɪf jə wɑnt. kæn si waɪ jud wɑnə teɪk ɑn ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ."

She had heard that name before, Aral Mishraile, and felt distrust in Logain when he spoke it-certainly more than he felt for her or Toveine-but this was the feel of killing. It was almost laughable. The man held her prisoner, yet he was ready to do violence to defend her reputation? Part of her did want to laugh, but she tucked the information away. Any scrap might be useful. The younger fellow gave no sign of hearing a threat. His smile never faltered. "The M'Hael says you can go, if you want. Can't see why you'd want to take on recruiting."

"sʌmwʌn əz tə," lɑɡən ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪn ə lɛvəl toʊn.

"Someone has to," Logain replied in a level tone.

ɡɑbɹɛl ɪkstʃeɪnʒd pʌzəld ɡlænsɪz wɪð tʌvaɪn. waɪ wəd lɑɡən wɑnə ɡoʊ ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ?

Gabrelle exchanged puzzled glances with Toveine. Why would Logain want to go recruiting?

ðeɪ hæd sin pɑɹɾiz ʌv æʃəmən ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ðæt, ən ðeɪ wɝ ɔlweɪz taɪɝd fɹəm tʃɹævlɪŋ lɔŋ dɪstənsəz, ən juʒəwəli dɝɾi ən snæpɪʃ bɪsaɪdz. mɛn bɛɹɪŋ ðə dʒɹʌm fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz ɡɛt ðə wɔɹməst wɛlkəm; ɪt simd ivən bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn lɝnd wʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɹɪli æftɝ.

They had seen parties of Asha'man return from that, and they were always tired from Traveling long distances, and usually dirty and snappish besides. Men bearing the drum for the Dragon Reborn did not always get the warmest welcome; it seemed even before anyone learned what they were really after.

ən waɪ wɝ ʃi ən tʌvaɪn dʒʌs hɪɹɪŋ ʌv ɪt. ʃi wʊɾə swɔɹn i toʊld əɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ wən ðeɪ wɝ laɪɪŋ təɡɛðɝ.

And why were she and Toveine just hearing of it. She would have sworn he told her everything when they were lying together.

mɪʃɹeɪl ʃɹʌɡd. "plɛnti ʌv dɛɾəkeɪtəd ən soʊlʒɝz tə də ðət sɔɹɾ ʌv wɝk. ʌv kɔɹs, aɪ səpoʊz ɪt bɔɹz jə lʊkɪŋ æftɝ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɔl ðə taɪm. titʃɪŋ fulz tə snik ɝaʊn ɪn ðə wʊdz ən klaɪm klɪfs əz ɪf ðeɪ kʊdn tʃænəl ə wɪskɝ. ivən ə flaɪspɛk vɪlədʒ maɪt lʊk bɛɾɝ." hɪz smaɪl slɪɾ ɪndə ə smɝk, dɪsdeɪnfəl ən nɑɾ əɾ eɪl wɪnɪŋ. "meɪbi ɪf" jə æsk ðə l hɪl lɛt jə dʒɔɪn ɪz klæsəz ət ðə pæləs. jə wʊdn bi bɔɹd ðɛn."

Mishraile shrugged. "Plenty of Dedicated and Soldiers to do that sort of work. Of course, I suppose it bores you looking after training all the time. Teaching fools to sneak around in the woods and climb cliffs as if they couldn't channel a whisker. Even a flyspeck village might look better." His smile slid into a smirk, disdainful and not at ail winning. "Maybe if" you ask the M'Hael he'll let you join his classes at the palace. You wouldn't be bored then."

lɑɡənz feɪs nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd, bʌt ɡɑbɹɛl fɛlt wʌn ʃɑɹp boʊlt ə fjʊɹi θɹu ðə bɑnd. ʃi hæɾ oʊvɝhɝd tɪdbɪts əbaʊt mæzɹim teɪm ən ɪz pɹaɪvət klæsəz, bʌɾ ɔl ɛni ʌv ðə sɪstɝz ɹɪli nu wɑz ðət lɑɡən ən ɪz kɹoʊniz dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌs teɪm əɹ ɛni hu ətɛndəɾ ɪz lɛsənz, ən teɪm əpɪɹd nɑt tə tʃɹʌs lɑɡən. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, wʌt ðə sɪstɝz kəd lɝn ə ðə klæsəz wɑz lɪməɾəd; noʊ wʌn wɑz bɑndəd tə ə mæn ə teɪmz fækʃən. səm θɔt ðə mɪstʃɹʌst wɑz kəz boʊθ mɛn hæd kleɪm tə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əɹ ivən ə saɪn ə ðə mædnəs ðət tʃænəlɪŋ bɹɔt tə mɛn. ʃi hæd nɑt dɪtɛktəɾ ɛni ɛvəɾəns ʌv ɪnsænəɾi ɪn lɑɡən, ən ʃi wɑtʃt fəɹ ɪɾ əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi wɑtʃt fəɹ saɪnz i wɑz əbaʊt tə tʃænəl. ɪf ʃi wɝ stɪl baʊn tə hɪm wən i wɛn mæd, ɪt maɪt siz əɹ maɪnd, tu. wʌtɛvɝ kɑzd ə kɹæk ɪn ði æʃəmənz ɹæŋks mʌs bi ɛksplɔɪɾəd ðoʊ.

Logain's face never changed, but Gabrelle felt one sharp bolt of fury through the bond. She had overheard tidbits about Mazrim Taim and his private classes, but all any of the sisters really knew was that Logain and his cronies did not trust Taim or any who attended his lessons, and Taim appeared not to trust Logain. Unfortunately, what the sisters could learn of the classes was limited; no one was bonded to a man of Taim's faction. Some thought the mistrust was because both men had claimed to be the Dragon Reborn or even a sign of the madness that channeling brought to men. She had not detected any evidence of insanity in Logain, and she watched for it as hard as she watched for signs he was about to channel. If she were still bound to him when he went mad, it might seize her mind, too. Whatever caused a crack in the Asha'man's ranks must be exploited though.

mɪʃɹeɪlz smaɪl feɪɾəd əz lɑɡən mɪɹli lʊkt ət hɪm.

Mishraile's smile faded as Logain merely looked at him.

"ɛndʒɔɪ jəɹ flaɪspɛks," hi sɛd faɪnəli pʊlɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs ɝaʊnd-ə θʌɾ ə hɪz hil meɪd ði ænəməl spɹɪŋ əweɪ əz i kɔld oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, "ɡlɔɹi weɪts fəɹ səm ʌv ʌs, lɑɡən."

"Enjoy your flyspecks," he said finally pulling his horse around-A thud of his heel made the animal spring away as he called over his shoulder, "Glory waits for some of us, Logain."

"hi meɪ nɔɹ ɛndʒɔɪ hɪz dʒɹæɡən lɔŋ," lɑɡən mɝmɝd, wɑtʃɪŋ ði ʌðɝ mæn ɡæləp ɔf- "hiz tu fɹi wɪð ɪz tʌŋ." ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i mɛn ðə kɑmɛn əbaʊɾ əɹ ən tʌvaɪn, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt fæðəm wʌɾ ɛls i kəd min. ən waɪ wɑz i sʌɾənli wɝid? haɪɾɪŋ ɪt vɛɹi wɛl, ɪspɛʃli kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðə bɑnd, bʌt stɪl, hi wɑz wɝid. laɪt, səmtaɪmz ɪt sim ðət noʊɪŋ wʌt wɑz ɪn ə mænz hɛd meɪd ðə kənfjuʒən wɝs!

"He may nor enjoy his Dragon long," Logain murmured, watching the other man gallop off- "He's too free with his tongue." She did not think he meant the comment about her and Toveine, but she could not fathom what else he could mean. And why was he suddenly worried? Hiding it very well, especially considering the bond, but still, he was worried. Light, sometimes it seemed that knowing what was in a man's head made the confusion worse!

əbɹʌpli hi tɝn ɪz ɡeɪz ɑn əɹ ən tʌvaɪn, stʌɾiɪŋ. ə nu θɹɛɾ ə kənsɝn slɪp θɹu ðə bɑnd. əbaʊt ðɛm? ɔɹ-æn ɑd θɔt- fəɹ ðɛm?

Abruptly he turned his gaze on her and Toveine, studying. A new thread of concern slipped through the bond. About them? Or-an odd thought- for them?

"aɪ fɪɹ wi mʌs kʌt ʃɔɹɾ əɹ ɹaɪd," hi sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt. "aɪ hæv pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz tə meɪk." hi dɪd nɑt bɹeɪk ɪndə ə ɡæləp, bʌɾ i stɪl sɛɾ ə kwɪkɝ peɪs bæk təwɔɹd ðə vɪlədʒ ə ðə mɛn ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ðən i hæd kʌmɪŋ aʊt. hi wɑz kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn sʌmθɪŋ, naʊ; θɪŋkɪŋ hɑɹd, ɡɑbɹɛl səspɛktəd. ðə bɑn pɹæktəkli hʌmd wɪð ɪt. hi mʌst əv bɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ baɪ ɪnstɪŋkt.

"I fear we must cut short our ride," he said after a moment. "I have preparations to make." He did not break into a gallop, but he still set a quicker pace back toward the village of the men in training than he had coming out. He was concentrating on something, now; thinking hard, Gabrelle suspected. The bond practically hummed with it. He must have been riding by instinct.

bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn vɛɹi fɑɹ, tʌvaɪn muvd əɹ hɔɹs kloʊs tə ɡɑbɹɛlz. linɪŋ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə fɪks ɡɑbɹɛl wɪð ən ɪntɛn stɛɹ waɪl dɑɹɾɪŋ kwɪk ɡlænsɪz ət lɑɡən əz ɪf əfɹeɪɾ i maɪt lʊk bæk ən si ðɛm tɔkɪŋ. ʃi nɛvɝ sim tə peɪ ətɛnʃən tə wʌt ðə bɑn koʊl hɝ. ðə dɪvaɪɾəd ɛfɝt meɪɾ əɹ bɑb əbaʊt laɪk ə pʌpət, ɪn deɪnʒɝ ə fɔlɪŋ.

Before they had gone very far, Toveine moved her horse close to Gabrelle's. Leaning in her saddle, she tried to fix Gabrelle with an intent stare while darting quick glances at Logain as if afraid he might look back and see them talking. She never seemed to pay attention to what the bond cold her. The divided effort made her bob about like a puppet, in danger of falling.

"wi mʌst ɡoʊ wɪð hɪm" ðə ɹɛd wɪspɝd. "wʌtɛvɝ ɪt teɪks, jə mʌst si tə ɪt." ɡɑbɹɛl ɹeɪzd əɹ aɪbɹaʊz, ən tʌvaɪn hæd ðə ɡɹeɪs tə kʌlɝ, bʌt ʃi lɔs nʌθɪŋ ə hɝ ɪnsɪstəns, "wi kænɑɾ əfɔɹd tə bi lɛf bɪhaɪnd" ʃi bɹið hɝidli. "ðə mæn dɪdn əbændən ɪz æmbɪʃənz wən i keɪm hɪɹ. wʌtɛvɝ vɪlnəs i plænz, wi kən də nʌθɪŋ ɪf wi ɑɹən ɹaɪt ðəɹ wən i tʃɹaɪz."

"We must go with him" the Red whispered. "Whatever it takes, you must see to it." Gabrelle raised her eyebrows, and Toveine had the grace to color, but she lost nothing of her insistence, "We cannot afford to be left behind" she breathed hurriedly. "The man didn't abandon his ambitions when he came here. Whatever vileness he plans, we can do nothing if we aren't right there when he tries."

"aɪ kən si wʌts ɪn fɹʌn ə maɪ noʊz," ɡɑbɹɛl sɛd ʃɑɹpli, ən fɛlt ɹɪlif wən tʌvaɪn sɪmpli nɑɾəd ən fɛl saɪlənt. ɪt wɑz ɔl ɡɑbɹɛl kəd də tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðə fɪɹ ðət wɑz ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn hɝ. dɪd tʌvaɪn nɛvɝ θɪŋk əbaʊt wʌt ʃi mʌst sɛns θɹu ðə bɑnd? sʌmθɪŋ ðət hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ðəɹ ɪn ðə kənɛkʃən wɪð lɑɡən-dɪtɝməneɪʃən-naʊ leɪ hɑɹɾ ən ʃɑɹp əz ə naɪf. ʃi θɔt ʃi nu wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt, ðɪs taɪm, ən noʊɪŋ meɪɾ əɹ maʊθ dʒɹaɪ. əɡɛns hum, ʃi kəd nɑt seɪ bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət lɑɡən əblɝ wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ tə wɔɹ.

"I can see what's in front of my nose," Gabrelle said sharply, and felt relief when Toveine simply nodded and fell silent. It was all Gabrelle could do to control the fear that was rising in her. Did Toveine never think about what she must sense through the bond? Something that had always been there in the connection with Logain-determination-now lay hard and sharp as a knife. She thought she knew what it meant, this time, and knowing made her mouth dry. Against whom, she could not say but she was sure that Logain Ablar was riding to war.

sloʊli dɪsɛndɪŋ wʌn ə ðə waɪd hɔlweɪz ðət spaɪɹəl dʒɛnli θɹu ðə waɪt taʊɝ, jukɪɝi fɛl pɹɪkli əz ə stɑɹv kæt. ʃi kəd bɛɹli meɪk hɝsɛlf lɪsən tə wʌt ðə sɪstɝ ɡlaɪɾɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ əɹ wɑz seɪɪŋ. ðə mɔɹnɪŋ wɑz stɪl dɪm, fɝs laɪt dɑɹkən baɪ ðə snoʊ fɔlɪŋ hɛvəli ɑn tɑɹ vəlɑn ən ðə mɪɾəl lɛvəlz ə ðə taʊɝ wɝ əz aɪsi əz ə bɔɹɾɝlənd wɪntɝ. wɛl, pɝhæps nɑt soʊ koʊld əz ðæt, ʃi əlaʊɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt. ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn ðət fɑɹ nɔɹθ ɪn ə nʌmbɝ ə jɪɹz, ən mɛmɹi ɪkspændəd wʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt ʃɹɪŋk. ðət wɑz ðə ɹizən ɹɪɾən ɹɛkɝdz wɝ soʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ɪksɛpt wən jə dɪd nɑt dɛɹ ɹaɪt daʊn ɛniθɪŋ, ət list. stɪl, ɪt wɑz tʃɪl ɪnʌf. fəɹ ɔl ði eɪntʃən bɪldɝz' klɛvɝnəs ən skɪl, hit fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪt fɝnəsəz ɪn ðə beɪsmənt nɛvɝ ɹitʃt ðɪs haɪ. dʒɹæfs meɪd ðə fleɪmz dæns ɑn ðə ɡɪldɪd stændlæmps, ən səm wɝ stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə stɝ ðə hɛvi tæpəstʃɹiz speɪst əlɔŋ ðə waɪt wɔlz, spɹɪŋ flaʊɝz ən wʊdlænz ən ɪɡzɑɾɪk ænəməlz ən bɝdz ɔltɝneɪɾɪŋ wɪð sinz ə taʊɝ tʃɹaɪəmfs ðət wəd nɛvɝ bi dɪspleɪɾ ɪn ðə pʌblɪk ɛɹiəz bɪloʊ. hɝ oʊn ɹumz, wɪð ðɛɹ wɔɹm faɪɝpleɪsəz wəd wʌns əv bɪn mʌtʃ mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl.

Slowly descending one of the wide hallways that spiraled gently through the White Tower, Yukiri felt prickly as a starved cat. She could barely make herself listen to what the sister gliding beside her was saying. The morning was still dim, first light darkened by the snow falling heavily on Tar Valon and the middle levels of the Tower were as icy as a Borderland winter. Well, perhaps not so cold as that, she allowed after a moment. She had not been that far north in a number of years, and memory expanded what it did not shrink. That was the reason written records were so important. Except when you did not dare write down anything, at least. Still, it was chill enough. For all the ancient builders' cleverness and skill, heat from the great furnaces in the basement never reached this high. Drafts made the flames dance on the gilded standlamps, and some were strong enough to stir the heavy tapestries spaced along the white walls, spring flowers and woodlands and exotic animals and birds alternating with scenes of Tower triumphs that would never be displayed in the public areas below. Her own rooms, with their warm fireplaces would once have been much more comfortable.

nuz fɹəm ði aʊtsaɪd wɝl tʃɝn θɹu hɝ hɛd dɪspaɪɾ əɹ ɛfɝts tə əvɔɪɾ ɪt. əɹ ɹæðɝ, mɔɹ ɔfən, ðə læk ə sɑləd nuz. wʌɾ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ɹipɔɹɾəd fɹəm ɔltɑɹə ən ɑɹæd dumən wɑz ɔl kənfjuʒən, ən ðə fju ɹɪpɔɹts bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə sip aʊɾ ə tæɹɑbən əɡɛn wɝ fɹaɪɾənɪŋ. ɹumɝ pʊt ðə bɔɹɾɝlənd ɹulɝz ɛvɹiwɛɹ fɹəm ðə blaɪt tə ændɝ tə ɑmɑdɪʃiə tə ði il weɪst; ði oʊnli kənfɝm fækt wɑz ðət nʌn wɝ wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə bi, ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə blaɪtbɔɹɾɝ. ði il wɝ ɛvɹiwɛɹ ən faɪnəli aʊɾ ʌv ælθɹz kəntʃɹoʊl, ɪɾ əpɪɹd, ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn ɪn ɪt. ðə leɪɾəst nuz fɹəm mʊɹændi meɪɾ əɹ wɑnə ɡɹaɪn əɹ tiθ ən wip ət ðə seɪm taɪm, waɪl kɛɹhin...!

News from the outside world churned through her head despite her efforts to avoid it. Or rather, more often, the lack of solid news. What eyes-and-ears reported from Altara and Arad Doman was all confusion, and the few reports beginning to seep out of Tarabon again were frightening. Rumor put the Borderland rulers everywhere from the Blight to Andor to Amadicia to the Aiel Waste; the only confirmed fact was that none were where they were supposed to be, guarding the Blightborder. The Aiel were everywhere and finally out of al'Thor's control, it appeared, if they had ever been in it. The latest news from Murandy made her want to grind her teeth and weep at the same time, while Cairhien...!

sɪstɝz ɔl oʊvɝ ðə sʌn pæləs, səm səspɛktəɾ ə biɪŋ ɹɛbəlz ən nʌn noʊn tə bi lɔɪəl, ən stɪl noʊ wɝɾ ə kɔɪɹən ən əɹ ɛmbəsi sɪns ðeɪ dɪpɑɹɾəd ðə sɪɾi, ðoʊ ðeɪ ʃʊɾə bɪn bæk ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn lɔŋ sɪns. ən əz ɪf ðət wɝ nɔɹ ɪnʌf, ælθɹ hɪmsɛlf hæd vænɪʃt laɪk ə soʊp bʌbəl jɛɾ əɡɛn. kəd ðə teɪlz ðəɾ i hæd hæf-dɪstʃɹɔɪd ðə sʌn pæləs bi tʃɹu? laɪt, ðə mæn kəd nɑt ɡoʊ mæd jɛt! əɹ hæɾ ɪleɪɾəz wɪtləs ɔfɝ ʌv "pɹətɛkʃən" fɹaɪɾənd ɪm ɪndə haɪɾɪŋ? dɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ fɹaɪɾən hɪm? hi fɹaɪɾənd hɝ. hi fɹaɪɾənd ðə ɹɛst ə ðə hɔl, tu, lɛɾ əm pʊt wʌtɛvɝ feɪs ɑn ɪt ðeɪ wɑntəd.

Sisters all over the Sun Palace, some suspected of being rebels and none known to be loyal, and still no word of Coiren and her embassy since they departed the city, though they should have been back in Tar Valon long since. And as if that were nor enough, al'Thor himself had vanished like a soap bubble yet again. Could the tales that he had half-destroyed the Sun Palace be true? Light, the man could not go mad yet! Or had Elaida's witless offer of "protection" frightened him into hiding? Did anything frighten him? He frightened her. He frightened the rest of the Hall, too, let them put whatever face on it they wanted.

ði oʊnli θɪŋ tʃɹuli sɝɾən wɑz ðət nʌn ə ðət mæɾɝd ə spɪɾ ɪn ə ɹeɪnstɔɹm. noʊɪŋ soʊ dɪd nɑt hɛlp əɹ muɾ ɪn ðə slaɪɾəst. wɝi oʊvɝ biɪŋ kɑɾ ɪn ə tæŋɡəl ə ɹoʊzɪz, ivən ɪf ðə θɔɹnz maɪt kɪl jə ɪvɛntʃəwəli, wɑz ə lʌɡʒɝi wən jə hæɾ ə naɪf pɔɪn pɹɛs tə jəɹ ɹɪbz.

The only thing truly certain was that none of that mattered a spit in a rainstorm. Knowing so did not help her mood in the slightest. Worry over being caught in a tangle of roses, even if the thorns might kill you eventually, was a luxury when you had a knife point pressed to your ribs.

"ɛvɹi taɪm ʃiz lɛf ðə taʊɝ ɪn ðə læs tɛn jɪɹz, ɪts bɪn ɑn əɹ oʊn əfɛɹz, soʊ ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ ɹisən ɹɛkɝdz tə tʃɛk," hɝ kəmpænjən mɝmɝd. "ɪts dɪfəkəl tə lɝn ɪɡzækli wən ʃiz bɪn aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ən ɹɪmeɪn ... dɪskɹit." hɝ dɑɹk ɡoʊldən hɛɹ hɛl bæk baɪ aɪvɝi koʊmz, maɪdɑni wɑz tɔl, ən slɛndɝ ɪnʌf tə lʊk oʊvɝ-bæləns baɪ hɝ bʊzəm, ən ɪfɛkt ɛmfəsaɪz baɪ boʊθ ðə fɪɾ ə hɝ dɑɹk sɪlvɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd bɑɾəs ən ðə weɪ ʃi wɔkt ɪn ə stup tə pʊɾ əɹ maʊθ mɔɹ ɑn ðə lɛvəl ə jukɪɝiz ɪɹ. hɝ ʃɔl wɑz kɑɾ ɑn əɹ ɹɪsts, ðə lɔŋ ɡɹeɪ fɹɪnʒ dʒɹæɡɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹtaɪlz.

"Every time she's left the Tower in the last ten years, it has been on her own affairs, so there are no recent records to check," her companion murmured. "It's difficult to learn exactly when she has been out of the Tower and remain ... discreet." Her dark golden hair held back by ivory combs, Meidani was tall, and slender enough to look over-balanced by her bosom, an effect emphasized by both the fit of her dark silver embroidered bodice and the way she walked in a stoop to put her mouth more on the level of Yukiri's ear. Her shawl was caught on her wrists, the long gray fringe dragging on the floortiles.

"stʃɹeɪɾən jəɹ bækboʊn," jukɪɝi ɡɹaʊl kwaɪətli. "maɪ ɪɹz ɑɹən klɔɡd wɪð dɝt." ði ʌðɝ wʊmən dʒɝk hɝsɛlf əpɹaɪt, feɪn splæʃəz ə kʌlɝ ɪn əɹ tʃiks. pʊlɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl haɪɝ ɑn əɹ ɑɹmz. maɪdɑni hæf ɡlænst oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ kaʊɝɾ əɹ wɔɹɾɝ lɛoʊnɪn, hu wɑz fɑloʊɪŋ əɾ ə dɪskɹit dɪstəns. ɪf ðeɪ kəd bɛɹli hɪɹ ðə feɪn tɪŋkəl ə ðə sɪlvɝ bɛlz ɪn ðə lin mænz blæk bɹeɪdz, ðoʊ, hi kəd hɪɹ nʌθɪŋ sɛɾ ɪn ə mɑɾɝət toʊn. ðə mæn nu noʊ mɔɹ ðən nɛsəsɛɹi-pɹɛʃəs lɪɾəl, ɪn fækt, ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑntəd sɝɾən θɪŋz ə hɪm: ðət wɑz ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛni ɡʊd wɔɹɾɝ-ænd i maɪt kɑz pɹɑbləmz ɪf i lɝn tu mʌtʃ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ wɪspɝɪŋ. pipəl u sɔ wɪspɝɪŋ wɑntəd tə noʊ wʌt ðə sikɹət wɑz.

"Straighten your backbone," Yukiri growled quietly. "My ears aren't clogged with dirt." The other woman jerked herself upright, faint splashes of color in her cheeks. Pulling her shawl higher on her arms. Meidani half glanced over her shoulder coward her Warder Leonin, who was following at a discreet distance. If they could barely hear the faint tinkle of the silver bells in the lean man's black braids, though, he could hear nothing said in a moderate tone. The man knew no more than necessary-precious little, in fact, except that his Aes Sedai wanted certain things of him: that was enough for any good Warder-and he might cause problems if he learned too much, but there was no need for whispering. People who saw whispering wanted to know what the secret was.

ði ʌðɝ ɡɹeɪ wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðə sɔɹs ə hɝ ɪɹɪteɪʃən ðən ði aʊtsaɪd wɝld, haʊɛvɝ, ivən ɪf ðə wʊmən wɑz ə dʒækdɔ ɪn swɑnz fɛðɝz. nɑt ðə meɪn sɔɹs, ɛniweɪ. ə dɪsɡʌstɪŋ θɪŋ, ə ɹɛbəl pɹitɛndɪŋ lɔɪəlti, jɛt jukɪɝi wɑz æktʃəli  ɡlæd ðət sɹɪn ən pɛvɑɹə hæd kənvɪnst əɹ ðət ðeɪ ʃəd nɑt jɛt tɝn maɪdɑni ən əɹ sɪstɝ dʒækdɔz oʊvɝ tə taʊɝ lɔ. ðɛɹ wɪŋz wɝ klɪpt, naʊ, ən ðeɪ wɝ jusfəl. ðeɪ maɪɾ ivən ɡeɪn ə mɛʒɝ ə klɛmənsi, fəɹ wən ðeɪ dɪd feɪs dʒʌstəs. ʌv kɔɹs, wən ði oʊθ ðət hæd klɪp maɪdɑniz wɪŋz keɪm aʊt; jukɪɝi maɪɾ izəli ɹaɪn hɝsɛlf wɪʃɪŋ fəɹ klɛmənsi. ɹɛbəlz əɹ nɑt, wʌt ʃi ən ði ʌðɝz hæd dʌn wɪð maɪdɑni ən əɹ kənfɛɾɝeɪts wɑz əz fɑɹ aʊtsaɪd ðə lɔ əz mɝɾɝ. əɹ tʃɹizən. ən oʊθ ə pɝsənəl oʊbiɾiəns-swɔɹn ɑn ði oʊθ ɹɑɾ ɪtsɛlf; swɔɹn ʌndɝ dʊɹɛs-wɑz ɔl tu kloʊs tə kəmpʌlʃən, wɪtʃ wɑz klɪɹli pɹoʊhɪbəɾəd ɪf nɑt ɹɪli dɪfaɪnd. stɪl, səmtaɪmz jə hæd tə smʌdʒ ðə plæstɝ tə smoʊk aʊt hɔɹnəts, ən ðə blæk ədʒɑ wɝ hɔɹnəts wɪð vɛnəməs stɪŋz. ðə lɔ wəɾ əv ɪts kɔɹs ɪn du taɪm-wɪθaʊt ðə lɔ ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ-bʌt ʃi niɾəd tə bi mɔɹ kənsɝnd wɪð wɛðɝ ʃi wəd sɝvaɪv ðə smoʊkɪŋ aʊt ðən wɪð wʌt pɛnəltiz ðə lɔ wəɾ ɪɡzækt. kɔɹpsəz hæd noʊ nid tə wɝi əbaʊt pʌnɪʃmənt.

The other Gray was no more the source of her irritation than the outside world, however, even if the woman was a jackdaw in swan's feathers. Not the main source, anyway. A disgusting thing, a rebel pretending loyalty, yet Yukiri was actually glad that Saerin and Pevara had convinced her that they should not yet turn Meidani and her sister jackdaws over to Tower Law. Their wings were clipped, now, and they were useful. They might even gain a measure of clemency, for when they did face justice. Of course, when the oath that had clipped Meidani's wings came out; Yukiri might easily rind herself wishing for clemency. Rebels or not, what she and the others had done with Meidani and her confederates was as far outside the law as murder. Or treason. An oath of personal obedience-sworn on the Oath Rod itself; sworn under duress-was all too close to Compulsion, which was clearly prohibited if not really defined. Still, sometimes you had to smudge the plaster to smoke out hornets, and the Black Ajah were hornets with venomous stings. The law would have its course in due time-without the law there was nothing-but she needed to be more concerned with whether she would survive the smoking out than with what penalties the law would exact. Corpses had no need to worry about punishment.

ʃi moʊʃən kɝtli fəɹ maɪdɑni tə ɡoʊ ɑn, bʌt noʊ sunɝ hæd ði ʌðɝ wʊmən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ ðən θɹi bɹaʊnz ɹaʊndəɾ ə kɔɹnɝ fɹəm ənʌðɝ hɔlweɪ ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm, flɔntɪŋ ðɛɹ ʃɔlz laɪk ɡɹinz. jukɪɝi nu mæɹɪs θɔɹnhɪl ən dɝeɪz mɛsiənz slaɪtli, ɪn ðə mænɝ sɪɾɝz nu sɪstɝz fɹəm ʌðɝ ədʒəz u spɛn lɔŋ pɪɹiədz ɪn ðə taʊɝ, wɪtʃ wɑz tə seɪ ɪnʌf tə ətætʃ neɪmz tə feɪsəz ən nɑt mʌtʃ mɔɹ. maɪld ən əbzɔɹbd ɪn ðɛɹ stʌɾiz wɑz haʊ ʃi wʊɾə dɪskɹaɪb ðɛm, ɪf pɹɛst. ɛlɪn wɔɹəl wɑz soʊ nuli ɹeɪz tə ðə ʃɔl, ʃi stɪl ʃʊɾə bɪn bɑbɪŋ kɝtsiz ɑn ɪnstɪŋkt. ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɔfɝɪŋ kɝɾəsiz tə ə sɪɾɝ, ðoʊ, ɔl θɹi stɛɹɾ ət jukɪɝi ən maɪdɑni ðə weɪ kæts stɛɹɾ ət stʃɹeɪnʒ dɑɡz. əɹ meɪbi dɑɡz ət stʃɹeɪnʒ kæts. noʊ maɪlnəs, ðɛɹ.

She motioned curtly for Meidani to go on, but no sooner had the other woman opened her mouth than three Browns rounded a corner from another hallway right in front of them, flaunting their shawls like Greens. Yukiri knew Marris Thornhill and Doraise Mesianes slightly, in the manner Sitters knew sisters from other Ajahs who spent long periods in the Tower, which was to say enough to attach names to faces and not much more. Mild and absorbed in their studies was how she would have described them, if pressed. Elin Warrel was so newly raised to the shawl, she still should have been bobbing curtsies on instinct. Instead of offering courtesies to a Sitter, though, all three stared at Yukiri and Meidani the way cats stared at strange dogs. Or maybe dogs at strange cats. No mildness, there.

"meɪ aɪ æsk əbaʊɾ ə pɔɪn ə ɝæfɛlən lɔ sɪɾɝ?" maɪdɑni sɛd, əz smuðli əz ɪf ðət wɑz wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn ɪntɛndɪŋ tə seɪ ɔl əlɔŋ.

"May I ask about a point of Arafellan law Sitter?" Meidani said, as smoothly as if that was what she had been intending to say all along.

jukɪɝi nɑɾəd, ən maɪdɑni bɪɡæn ɹæmblɪŋ əbaʊt fɪʃɪŋ ɹaɪts ɑn ɹɪvɝz vɝsəs leɪks, hɑɹdli ən ɪnspaɪɝd tʃɔɪs. ə mædʒəstʃɹeɪt maɪɾ æsk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə lɪsən tə ə keɪs ə fɪʃɪŋ ɹaɪts, bʌɾ oʊnli tə boʊlstɝ əɹ oʊn əpɪnjən ɪf paʊɝfəl pipəl wɝ ɪnvɑlvd ən ʃi wɑz wɝiɾ əbaʊɾ ən əpil tə ðə θɹoʊn.

Yukiri nodded, and Meidani began rambling about fishing rights on rivers versus lakes, hardly an inspired choice. A magistrate might ask an Aes Sedai to listen to a case of fishing rights, but only to bolster her own opinion if powerful people were involved and she was worried about an appeal to the throne.

ə sɪŋɡəl wɔɹɾɝ tʃɹeɪl ðə bɹaʊnz-jukɪɝi kəd nɑt ɹikɔl wɛðɝ i bɪlɔŋ tə mæɹɪs əɹ dɝeɪz-ə hɛvi-sɛt fɛloʊ wɪð ə hɑɹd ɹaʊn feɪs ən ə dɑɹk tɑp-nɑɾ u aɪd lɛoʊnɪn ən ðə sɔɹdz ɑn ɪz bæk wɪð ə dɪstʃɹʌst ʃʊɹli pɪkt ʌp fɹəm ɪz sɪstɝ. ðət pɛɹ stɔk baɪ ʌp ðə sloʊli spaɪɹəlɪŋ kɔɹəɾɝ wɪð plʌmp tʃɪnz haɪ, ðə skɪni nulɪŋ lipɪŋ æŋkʃəsli tə kip ʌp. ðə wɔɹɾɝ stʃɹoʊɾ æftɝ əm ɹeɪɾieɪtɪŋ ði ɛɹ ʌv ə mæn ɪn hɑstəl kʌntʃɹi.

A single Warder trailed the Browns-Yukiri could not recall whether he belonged to Marris or Doraise-a heavy-set fellow with a hard round face and a dark top-knot who eyed Leonin and the swords on his back with a distrust surely picked up from his sister. That pair stalked by up the slowly spiraling corridor with plump chins high, the skinny newling leaping anxiously to keep up. The Warder strode after them radiating the air of a man in hostile country.

hɑstɪləɾi wɑz ɔl tu juʒəwəl, naʊədeɪz. ði ɪnvɪzəbəl wɔlz bɪtwin ði ədʒəz, wʌns bɛɹli θɪk ɪnʌf tə haɪɾ itʃ ədʒɑz oʊn mɪstɝiz, hæd bɪkʌm hɑɹd stoʊn ɹæmpɑɹts wɪð moʊts. noʊ, nɑt moʊts; tʃæzəmz, dip ən waɪd. sɪstɝz nɛvɝ lɛf ðɛɹ oʊn ədʒɑz kɔɹɾɝz əloʊn, ɔfən tʊk ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz ivən tə ðə laɪbɹɛɹi ən ðə daɪnɪŋ ɹumz, ən ɔlweɪz wɔɹ ðɛɹ ʃɔlz, əz ðoʊ sʌmwʌn maɪt mɪsteɪk ðɛɹ ədʒɑ, ʌðɝwaɪz. jukɪɝi hɝsɛlf wɑz wɛɹɪŋ əɹ bɛst, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn sɪlvɝ ən θɹɛd-ʌv-ɡoʊld, wɪð ðə lɔŋ sɪlk fɹɪnʒ ðət hʌŋ tə hɝ æŋkəlz. soʊ ʃi səpoʊzd ʃi wɑz flɔntɪŋ əɹ ədʒɑ ə bɪt, tu.

Hostility was all too usual, nowadays. The invisible walls between the Ajahs, once barely thick enough to hide each Ajah's own mysteries, had become hard stone ramparts with moats. No, not moats; chasms, deep and wide. Sisters never left their own Ajah's quarters alone, often took their Warders even to the library and the dining rooms, and always wore their shawls, as though someone might mistake their Ajah, otherwise. Yukiri herself was wearing her best, embroidered in silver and thread-of-gold, with the long silk fringe that hung to her ankles. So she supposed she was flaunting her Ajah a bit, too.

ən leɪtli, ʃi hæd bɪn kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðəɾ ə dʌzən jɪɹz wɑz lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɡoʊ wɪθaʊɾ ə wɔɹɾɝ. ə hɔɹəbəl θɔt, wʌns ʃi sɪftɪɾ aʊt ðə sɔɹs. noʊ sɪstɝ ʃəɾ əv niɾ ʌv ə wɔɹɾɝ ɪnsaɪd ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

And lately, she had been considering that a dozen years was long enough to go without a Warder. A horrible thought, once she sifted out the source. No sister should have need of a Warder inside the White Tower.

nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, ðə θɔt hɪɾ əɹ hɑɹd ðət sʌmwʌn hæd tə miɾieɪt əmʌŋ ði ədʒəz, ən sun, əɹ ðə ɹɛbəlz wəd dæns ɪn θɹu ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ, boʊld əz θivz, ən ɛmpti ðə haʊs waɪl ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm skwɑbəld oʊvɝ u ɡɑt ɡɹeɪt-æn sumiz pjuɾɝ. bʌt ði oʊnli ɛn ə ðə θɹɛd ʃi kəd si tə bɪɡɪn wɝkɪŋ aʊt ðə snɑɹl wɑz tə hæv maɪdɑni ən tiɹ fɹɛnz pʌblɪkli ədmɪt ðət ðeɪ hæd bɪn sɛn tə ðə taʊɝ baɪ ðə ɹɛbəlz tə spɹɛd ɹumɝz-teɪlz ðeɪ stɪl ɪnsɪstəd wɝ tʃɹu! -ðæt ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ hæd kɹieɪɾəd lɑɡən əz ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. kəɾ ɪt bi tʃɹu. wɪθaʊt pɛvɑɹə noʊɪŋ? ɪmpɑsəbəl tə θɪŋk ðəɾ ə sɪɾɝ, ɪspɛʃli pɛvɑɹə, cʊɾə bɪn fuld. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðət bɪɾ ə ðə tæŋɡəl hæd bɪn oʊvɝleɪd wɪð soʊ mɛni ʌðɝz baɪ naʊ ðəɾ ɪt skɛɹsli kəd meɪk ɛni dɪfɝəns baɪ ɪtsɛlf. bɪsaɪdz, ɪt wəd θɹoʊ əweɪ ði eɪɾ ə tɛn aʊɾ ə ðə fɔɹtin wɪmən ʃi kəd bi ʃʊɹ wɝ nɑt blæk ədʒɑ, nɑt tə mɛnʃən laɪkli ɪkspoʊzɪŋ wʌt ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm wɝ duɪŋ, bɪfɔɹ ðə stɔɹm oʊvɝ ɪt blu aʊt.

Not for the first time, the thought hit her hard that someone had to mediate among the Ajahs, and soon, or the rebels would dance in through the front door, bold as thieves, and empty the house while the rest of them squabbled over who got great-aunt Sumi's pewter. But the only end of the thread she could see to begin working out the snarl was to have Meidani and tier friends publicly admit that they had been sent to the Tower by the rebels to spread rumors-tales they still insisted were true! -That the Red Ajah had created Logain as a false Dragon. Could it be true. Without Pevara knowing? Impossible to think that a Sitter, especially Pevara, could have been fooled. In any case, that bit of the tangle had been overlaid with so many others by now that it scarcely could make any difference by itself. Besides, it would throw away the aid of ten out of the fourteen women she could be sure were not Black Ajah, not to mention likely exposing what the rest of them were doing, before the storm over it blew out.

ʃi ʃɪvɝd, ən ɪt hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð dʒɹæfs ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ. ʃi ən ɛvɹi ʌðɝ wʊmən u maɪt ɹɪvil ðə tʃɹuθ wəd daɪ bɪfɔɹ ðət stɔɹm ɛndəd, baɪ soʊ-kɔld æksəɾənt əɹ ɪn bɛd. əɹ ʃi maɪt dʒʌs vænɪʃ, əpɛɹənli ɡɔn aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ nɛvɝ tə bi sin əɡɛn. ʃi hæd noʊ daʊɾ ə ðæt.

She shivered, and it had nothing to do with drafts in the corridor. She and every other woman who might reveal the truth would die before that storm ended, by so-called accident or in bed. Or she might just vanish, apparently gone out of the Tower never to be seen again. She had no doubt of that.

ɛni ɛvəɾəns wəd bi bɛɹid, soʊ dip; ən ɑɹmi wɪð ʃʌvəlz kəd nɛvɝ dɪɡ ɪɾ ʌp. ivən ɹumɝz wəd bi plæstɝɾ oʊvɝ. ɪt hæd hæpən bɪfɔɹ. ðə wɝld ən moʊst sɪstɝz stɪl bɪliv tæmɹə ɑspɪnjə hæd daɪɾ ɪn əɹ bɛd. ʃi hæd bɪlivd ɪt. ðeɪ hæd tə hæv ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɹæpt ʌp ən taɪɾ əz nɪɹ əz pɑsəbəl, bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ dɛɹd ɹɪsk ɡoʊɪŋ pʌblɪk.

Any evidence would be buried, so deep; an army with shovels could never dig it up. Even rumors would be plastered over. It had happened before. The world and most sisters still believed Tamra Ospenya had died in her bed. She had believed it. They had to have the Black Ajah wrapped up and tied as near as possible, before they dared risk going public.

maɪdɑni tʊk ʌp əɹ ɹipɔɹɾ əɡɛn wʌns ðə bɹaʊnz wɝ seɪfli pæst, bʌt fɛl saɪlən oʊnli moʊməns leɪɾɝ wɛn, dʒʌst əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, ə bɪɡ hɛɹi hæn sʌɾənli θɹʌst əsaɪɾ ə tæpəstʃɹi fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. ən aɪsi dʒɹæf swɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə dɔɹweɪ ðət hæd bɪn hɪɾən baɪ ðə tæpəstʃɹiz bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd bɝdz fɹəm ðə dʒɹaʊn lænz, ən ə hɛvi fɛloʊ ɪn ə θɪk bɹaʊn wɝk koʊt bækt ɪndə ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, pʊlɪŋ ə hændkɑɹt stæk haɪ wɪð splɪt hɪkɝi ðəɾ ənʌðɝ sɝvɪŋ mæn ɪn ə ɹʌf koʊt wɑz pʊʃɪŋ fɹəm bɪhaɪnd.

Meidani took up her report again once the Browns were safely past, but fell silent only moments later when, just ahead of them, a big hairy hand suddenly thrust aside a tapestry from behind. An icy draft swept out of the doorway that had been hidden by the tapestry's brightly colored birds from the Drowned Lands, and a heavy fellow in a thick brown work coat backed into the corridor, pulling a handcart stacked high with split hickory that another serving man in a rough coat was pushing from behind.

kɑmən leɪbɝɝz; niðɝ hæd ðə waɪt fleɪm ɑn ɪz tʃɛst.

Common laborers; neither had the white Flame on his chest.

ət saɪɾ ə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ ðə mɛn heɪstəli lɛt ðə tæpəstʃɹi fɔl bæk ɪndə pleɪs ən ɹɛsəl ðɛɹ kɑɹɾ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ əɡɛns ðə wɔl waɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ðɛɹ baʊz, ɔlmoʊs tɑpəlɪŋ ðə loʊd, wɪtʃ sɛɾ əm ɡɹæbɪŋ ət ðə slaɪɾɪŋ faɪɝ-wʊd fɹæntəkəli. noʊ daʊt ðeɪ hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd tə fɪnɪʃ ðɛɹ wɝk wɪθaʊɾ ɛnkaʊntɝɪŋ ɛni sɪstɝz. jukɪɝi ɔlweɪz fɛl sɪmpəθi fəɹ ðə pipəl u hæd tə hɔl wʊɾ ən wɔɾɝ ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls ʌp ðə sɝvəns' ɹæmps ɔl ðə weɪ fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd, bʌt ʃi stʃɹoʊd pæst əm wɪð ə skaʊl. tɔk waɪl wɔkɪŋ wɑz nɛvɝ oʊvɝhɝd, ən ðə hɔlweɪz ɪn ðə kɑmən ɛɹiəz hæd simd ə ɡʊd pleɪs tə bi pɹaɪvət wɪð maɪdɑni. mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ðən əɹ oʊn əpɑɹtməns, wɛɹ ɛni wɔɹɾ əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ wəɾ oʊnli ənaʊns tə ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ kɔɹɾɝ ðət ʃi wɑz dɪskʌsɪŋ sikɹəts, ən fɑɹ wɝs, wɪð hum. ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli tu hʌnʒɹəd əɹ soʊ sɪstɝz ɪn ðə taʊɝ ət ðə moʊmənt, ə nʌmbɝ ðə waɪt taʊɝ kəd swɑloʊ ən sim veɪkənt, ən wɪð ɛvɹiwʌn kipɪŋ tə ðɛmsɛlvz, ðə kɑmən ɛɹiəz ʃʊɾə bɪn ɛmpti. soʊ ʃi hæd θɔt.

At sight of two Aes Sedai the men hastily let the tapestry fall back into place and wrestled their cart out of the way against the wall while trying to make their bows, almost toppling the load, which set them grabbing at the sliding fire-wood frantically. No doubt they had expected to finish their work without encountering any sisters. Yukiri always felt sympathy for the people who had to haul wood and water and everything else up the servants' ramps all the way from the ground, but she strode past them with a scowl. Talk while walking was never overheard, and the hallways in the common areas had seemed a good place to be private with Meidani. Much better than her own apartments, where any ward against eavesdropping would only announce to everyone in the Gray quarter that she was discussing secrets, and far worse, with whom. There were only two hundred or so sisters in the Tower at the moment, a number the White Tower could swallow and seem vacant, and with everyone keeping to themselves, the common areas should have been empty. So she had thought.

ʃi hæd teɪkən ɪndə əkaʊn ðə laɪvən sɝvəns ɹʌʃɪŋ əbaʊt tə tʃɛk læmpwɪks ən ɔɪl lɛvəlz ən ə dʌzən ʌðɝ θɪŋz, ən ðə pleɪn-klæd wɝkɝz kæɹiɪŋ wɪkɝ bæskəts ə ðə laɪt nu wʌɾ ɑn ðɛɹ bæks. ðeɪ wɝ ɔlweɪz əbaʊɾ ɪn ði ɝli aʊɝz, ɹɛɾiɪŋ ðə taʊɝ fəɹ ðə deɪ, bʌt ðeɪ meɪd heɪsti baʊz ən kɝtsiz ən skɝid tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ʌv ə sɪstɝz weɪ. aʊɾ ə hɪɹɪŋ. taʊɝ sɝvəns nu haʊ tə bi tækfəl, ɪspɛʃli sɪns ɛniwʌn ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ ɑn ə sɪstɝ wəd bi ʃoʊn ðə dɔɹ. ɡɪvən ðə pɹɛzən muɾ ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ðə sɝvəns wɝ pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli kwɪk tə əvɔɪd soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə tʃæns ʌv oʊvɝhɪɹɪŋ θɪŋz ðeɪ ʃəd nɑt.

She had taken into account the livened servants rushing about to check lampwicks and oil levels and a dozen other things, and the plain-clad workers carrying wicker baskets of the Light knew what on their backs. They were always about in the early hours, readying the Tower for the day, but they made hasty bows and curtsies and scurried to get out of a sister's way. Out of hearing. Tower servants knew how to be tactful, especially since anyone eavesdropping on a sister would be shown the door. Given the present mood in the Tower, the servants were particularly quick to avoid so much as a chance of overhearing things they should not.

wʌt ʃi hæd feɪl tə ɹɛkən ɑn wɑz haʊ mɛni sɪstɝz wəd tʃuz tə wɔk aʊtsaɪd ðə kɔɹɾɝz, baɪ tuz ən θɹiz, dɪspaɪt ði aʊɝ ən ðə koʊld, ɹɛdz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɛɹ daʊn ɛniwʌn ðeɪ ɪnkaʊntɝɾ ɪksɛpt ʌðɝ ɹɛdz. ɡɹinz ən jɛloʊz kəmpiɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə kɹaʊn ə hɔɾi ən bɹaʊnz duɪŋ ðɛɹ bɛs tə aʊtdu boʊθ. ə fju waɪts, ɔl bʌt wʌn wɔɹɾɝləs, ətɛmptəd tə meɪnteɪn ə fəsɑɾ ə kul ɹizən waɪl dʒʌmpɪŋ ət ðɛɹ oʊn fʊtfɔlz. wʌn lɪɾəl ɡɹup wɑz nɑɾ aʊɾ ə saɪt fəɹ mɔɹ ðən mɪnəts; ɪt simd, bɪfɔɹ ənʌðɝ əpɪɹd, soʊ maɪdɑni spɛnt nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ taɪm tʃæɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt pɔɪns ə lɔ əz ʃi dɪd ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ ɹipɔɹt.

What she had failed to reckon on was how many sisters would choose to walk outside the quarters, by twos and threes, despite the hour and the cold, Reds trying to stare down anyone they encountered except other Reds. Greens and Yellows competing for the crown of haughty and Browns doing their best to outdo both. A few Whites, all but one Warderless, attempted to maintain a facade of cool reason while jumping at their own footfalls. One little group was not out of sight for more than minutes; it seemed, before another appeared, so Meidani spent nearly as much time chattering about points of law as she did giving her report.

wɝst ʌv ɔl, twaɪs ɡɹeɪz smaɪld ɪn wʌt lʊk laɪk ɹɪlif ɑn siɪŋ ʌðɝz ə ðɛɹ ədʒɑ, ən wʊɾə dʒɔɪn əm hæd jukɪɝi nɔɹ ʃeɪkən əɹ hɛd. wɪtʃ ɪnfjʊɹieɪɾəd əɹ noʊ ɛn kəz ɪt lɛɾ ɔl u sɔ noʊ ʃi hæd spɛʃəl ɹizən tə bi əloʊn wɪð maɪdɑni. ivən ɪf ðə blæk ədʒɑ tʊk noʊ noʊɾəs, ən ðə laɪt sɛn ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹizən ðeɪ ʃʊd, tu mɛni sɪstɝz spaɪɾ ɑn ʌðɝ ədʒəz ðiz deɪz, ən ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə θɹi oʊðz, ðə teɪlz ðeɪ kæɹid sʌmhaʊ ɡɹu ɪn ðə kæɹiɪŋ. wɪð ɪleɪɾə əpɛɹənli daɪɪŋ tə fɔɹs ði ədʒəz ɪndə laɪn baɪ bɹut fɔɹs, ðoʊz teɪlz tu ɔfən ɹɪzʌltɪɾ ɪn pɛnənsɪz, ən ðə bɛs tə bi hoʊp fəɹ wɑz ðət jə kəd pɹitɛn tə hæv tʃoʊzən tə ɹeɪk ɪɾ ɑn fəɹ ɹizənz ə jəɹ oʊn. jukɪɝi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sʌfɝd θɹu wʌn sʌtʃ, ən ʃi hæd noʊ dɪzaɪɝ tə weɪs deɪz skɹʌbɪŋ flɔɹz əɡɛn, ɪspɛʃli naʊ ðət ʃi hæd mɔɹ ɑn əɹ pleɪt ðən ʃi nu wʌt tə də wɪð. ən teɪkɪŋ ði ɔltɝnəɾɪv, ə pɹaɪvət vɪzət tə sɪlviænə, wɑz noʊ bɛɾɝ, ivən ɪf ɪt dɪd seɪv taɪm! ɪleɪɾə sim fɪɹsɝ ðən ɛvɝ sɪns ʃi sʌmən sɪlviænə fəɹ əɹ oʊn səpoʊzədli pɹaɪvət pɛnəns. ðə hoʊl taʊɝ wɑz stɪl bʌzɪŋ wɪð ðæt.

Worst of all, twice Grays smiled in what looked like relief on seeing others of their Ajah, and would have joined them had Yukiri nor shaken her head. Which infuriated her no end because it let all who saw know she had special reason to be alone with Meidani. Even if the Black Ajah took no notice, and the Light send there was no reason they should, too many sisters spied on other Ajahs these days, and in spite of the Three Oaths, the tales they carried somehow grew in the carrying. With Elaida apparently dying to force the Ajahs into line by brute force, those tales too often resulted in penances, and the best to be hoped for was that you could pretend to have chosen to rake it on for reasons of your own. Yukiri had already suffered through one such, and she had no desire to waste days scrubbing floors again, especially now that she had more on her plate than she knew what to do with. And taking the alternative, a private visit to Silviana, was no better, even if it did save time! Elaida seemed fiercer than ever since she summoned Silviana for her own supposedly private penance. The whole Tower was still buzzing with that.

əz mʌtʃ əz jukɪɝi heɪɾəd ædmɪɾɪŋ ɪɾ ɔl ðət meɪɾ əɹ kɛɹfəl haʊ ʃi lʊkt ət ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz ʃi sɔ. lʊk tu lɔŋ, ən jə maɪt sim tə bi spaɪɪŋ jɝsɛlf. ʃɪf jəɹ ɡeɪz əweɪ tu fæst, ən jə lʊk fɝɾɪv, wɪð ðə seɪm ɹɪzʌlt. ivən soʊ, ʃi kəd bɛɹli kip əɹ aɪz fɹəm lɪŋɡɝɪŋ ɑn wʌn pɛɹ ə jɛloʊz u ɡlaɪɾɪd əlɔŋ ə kɹɔsɪŋ kɔɹəɾɝ laɪk kwinz ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn pæləs.

As much as Yukiri hated admitting it all that made her careful how she looked at the other sisters she saw. Look too long, and you might seem to be spying yourself. Shift your gaze away too fast, and you looked furtive, with the same result. Even so, she could barely keep her eyes from lingering on one pair of Yellows who glided along a crossing corridor like queens in their own palace.

ðə dɑɹk stɑki wɔɹɾɝ fɑloʊɪŋ dʒʌs fɑɹ ɪnʌf bɪhaɪn tə ɡɪv əm pɹaɪvəsi mʌst əv bɪlɔŋ tə pɹaɪɾəl nɝbaɪdʒɑn, ə ɡɹin-aɪd wʊmən u hæd lɑɹdʒli ɪskeɪp ðə sɑldəiən noʊz, kəz əɾəən lɹɪsɪt hæd noʊ wɔɹɾɝ. jukɪɝi nu lɪɾəl əbaʊt pɹaɪɾəl, bʌt ʃi wəd lɝn mɔɹ æftɝ siɪŋ əɹ ɪn kloʊs kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɪð əɾəən. ɪn haɪ-nɛkt ɡɹeɪ slæʃt wɪð jɛloʊ ən ə sɪlk-fɹɪnd ʃɔl, ðə tæɹɑbənɝ wɑz stʃɹaɪkɪŋ. hɝ dɑɹk hɛɹ, ɪn θɪn, bɹaɪtli biɾɪd bɹeɪdz ðət hʌŋ tə hɝ weɪst, fɹeɪmd ə feɪs ðət sʌmhaʊ sim pɝfəkt əz ɪt wɑz wɪθaʊt biɪŋ bjuɾəfəl. ʃi wɑz ivən fɛɹli mɑɾəst, ət list əz jɛloʊz wɛnt. bʌt ʃi wɑz ðə wʊmən maɪdɑni ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stʌɾi wɪθaʊt biɪŋ kɑɾ aʊt. ðə wʊmən huz neɪm ðeɪ wɝ əfɹeɪd tə spik əlaʊɾ ɪksɛp bɪhaɪn stʃɹɔŋ wɔɹdz, əɾəən lɹɪsɪt wɑz wʌn ʌv oʊnli θɹi blæk sɪstɝz tælin nu. ðət wɑz haʊ ðeɪ ɔɹɡənaɪz ðɛmsɛlvz; θɹi wɪmən u nu itʃ ʌðɝ, wɪð itʃ noʊɪŋ wʌn mɔɹ ði ʌðɝ tu dɪd nɑt.

The dark stocky Warder following just far enough behind to give them privacy must have belonged to Pritalle Nerbaijan, a green-eyed woman who had largely escaped the Saldaean nose, because Atuan Larisett had no Warder. Yukiri knew little about Pritalle, but she would learn more after seeing her in close conversation with Atuan. In high-necked gray slashed with yellow and a silk-fringed shawl, the Taraboner was striking. Her dark hair, in thin, brightly beaded braids that hung to her waist, framed a face that somehow seemed perfect as it was without being beautiful. She was even fairly modest, at least as Yellows went. But she was the woman Meidani and the others were trying to study without being caught out. The woman whose name they were afraid to speak aloud except behind strong wards, Atuan Larisett was one of only three Black sisters Talene knew. That was how they organized themselves; three women who knew each other, with each knowing one more the other two did not.

əɾəən hæd bɪn tælinz "wʌn mɔɹ," soʊ ðəɹ wɑz səm hoʊp ʃi kəd bi fɑloʊd tə tu ʌðɝz.

Atuan had been Talene's "one more," so there was some hope she could be followed to two others.

dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ðə pɛɹ pæst aʊɾ ə vju bɪɑn ðə kɔɹnɝ, əɾəən ɡlænst ʌp ðə spaɪɹəl hɔlweɪ.

Just before the pair passed out of view beyond the corner, Atuan glanced up the spiral hallway.

hɝ ɡeɪz oʊnli bɹʌʃt baɪ jukɪɝi, jɛt ðət wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk jukɪɝiz hɑɹt lip ɪndə hɝ θɹoʊt. ʃi kɛpt wɔkɪŋ, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ feɪs kɑm wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ən ɹɪskt ə kwɪk ɡlæns ə hɝ oʊn wən ʃi ɹitʃt ðə kɔɹnɝ. əɾəən ən pɹaɪɾəl wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi wɛl əlɔŋ ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, hɛɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ði aʊɾɝ ɹɪŋ. ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz ɪn ðə weɪ, bʌt niðɝ wɑz lʊkɪŋ bæk. pɹaɪɾəl wɑz ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd-tə sʌmθɪŋ əɾəən wɑz seɪɪŋ? ðeɪ wɝ tu fɑɹ fəɹ jukɪɝi tə hɪɹ ɛni saʊn ʌðɝ ðən ðə feɪn klɪk ə ðə dɑɹk wɔɹɾɝz buθilz ɑn ðə flɔɹ-taɪlz. ɪt hæd dʒʌs bɪn ə ɡlæns. ʌv kɔɹs, ɪt hæd. ʃi kwɪkən əɹ stɛp tə teɪk əɹ bɪɑn saɪɾ ɪf wʌn ə ðɛm dɪd lʊk oʊvɝ ə ʃoʊldɝ, ən lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ ʃi hæd nɑt ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz hoʊldɪŋ. maɪdɑni ɛkoʊɾ əɹ feɪnli hɝ ʃoʊldɝz sæɡɪŋ.

Her gaze only brushed by Yukiri, yet that was enough to make Yukiri's heart leap into her throat. She kept walking, holding her face calm with an effort, and risked a quick glance of her own when she reached the corner. Atuan and Pritalle were already well along the corridor, heading toward the outer ring. The Warder was in the way, but neither was looking back. Pritalle was shaking her head-To something Atuan was saying? They were too far for Yukiri to hear any sound other than the faint click of the dark Warder's bootheels on the floor-tiles. It had just been a glance. Of course, it had. She quickened her step to take her beyond sight if one of them did look over a shoulder, and let out a long breath she had not realized she was holding. Meidani echoed her faintly her shoulders sagging.

stʃɹeɪnʒ, haʊ ɪt teɪks ʌs, jukɪɝi θɔt, skwɛɹɪŋ əɹ oʊn ʃoʊldɝz. wən ðeɪ fɝs lɝn tælin wɑz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd; tælin hæd bɪn ə ʃildɪd pɹɪznɝ. ən ʃi stɪl skɛɹd spɪtləs, ʃi ədmɪɾəd tə hɝsɛlf. wɛl, wʌt ðeɪ dɪd tə meɪk əɹ kənfɛs hæd skɛɹɾ əm spɪtləs fɝst, bʌt lɝnɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ tɝn ðɛɹ tʌŋz tə dʌst. naʊ tælin wɑz tɛðɝd taɪɾɝ ðən maɪdɑni, kloʊsli ɡɑɹɾəd ivən ɪf ʃi dɪɾ əpɪɹ tə wɔk fɹi-haʊ tə kip ə sɪɾɝ pɹɪznɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɛniwʌn noʊɾɪsɪŋ hæd bɪn bɪɑn ivən sɹɪn-ænd ʃi wɑz pəθɛɾɪkəli iɡɝ tə ɔfɝ ʌp ɛvɹi skɹæp ʃi nu əɹ ivən səspɛktəɾ ɪn hoʊp ɪt maɪt seɪv əɹ laɪf nɑt ðət ʃi hæɾ ɛni tʃɔɪs. hɑɹdli ən əbdʒɛkt ə fɪɹ. əz fəɹ ðə ɹɛst...

Strange, how it takes us, Yukiri thought, squaring her own shoulders. When they first learned Talene was a Darkfriend; Talene had been a shielded prisoner. And she still scared spitless, she admitted to herself. Well, what they did to make her confess had scared them spitless first, but learning the truth turned their tongues to dust. Now Talene was tethered tighter than Meidani, closely guarded even if she did appear to walk free-how to keep a Sitter prisoner without anyone noticing had been beyond even Saerin-and she was pathetically eager to offer up every scrap she knew or even suspected in hope it might save her life not that she had any choice. Hardly an object of fear. As for the rest...

pɛvɑɹə hæd tʃɹaɪd tə meɪnteɪn ðət tælin mʌs bi ɹɔŋ əbaʊt ɡəlinə kæsbən, ən wɛn ɪndə ə ɹeɪdʒ ðət læstəɾ ə fʊl deɪ wən ʃi faɪnəli wɑz kənvɪns ðəɾ əɹ ɹɛd sɪstɝ wɑz ɹɪli blæk. ʃi stɪl spoʊk ə stʃɹæŋɡəlɪŋ ɡəlinə wɪð əɹ oʊn hænz. jukɪɝi hɝsɛlf hæd fɛlt ə koʊl dɪtætʃmənt wən təmeɪl kɪndɝəd wɑz neɪmd. ɪf ðəɹ wɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ɪt stʊd tə ɹizən səm hæd tə bi ɡɹeɪz, ðoʊ pɝhæps dɪsləkɪŋ təmeɪl hɛlpt. ʃi ɹɪmeɪn kul ivən æftɝ ʃi dɪd daɪ sʌmz ən ɹilaɪz ðət təmeɪl hæd lɛf ðə taʊɝ ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðət θɹi sɪstɝz wɝ mɝɾɝd. ðət pɹəvaɪɾəd mɔɹ neɪmz fəɹ səspɪʃən, ʌðɝ sɪstɝz u hæd ɡɔn ðɛn, tu, bʌt ɡəlinə ən təmeɪl ən ðə ɹɛst wɝ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ, bɪɑn ɹitʃ fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, ən oʊnli ðə tu kəd bi pɹuvən dɑɹkfɹɛnz.

Pevara had tried to maintain that Talene must be wrong about Galina Casban, and went into a rage that lasted a full day when she finally was convinced that her Red sister was really Black. She still spoke of strangling Galina with her own hands. Yukiri herself had felt a cold detachment when Temaile Kinderode was named. If there were Darkfriends in the Tower, it stood to reason some had to be Grays, though perhaps disliking Temaile helped. She remained cool even after she did die sums and realized that Temaile had left the Tower at the same time that three sisters were murdered. That provided more names for suspicion, other sisters who had gone then, too, but Galina and Temaile and the rest were out of the Tower, beyond reach for the moment, and only the two could be proven Darkfriends.

əɾəən wɑz ɹaɪt ðɛɹ, blæk ədʒɑ wɪθaʊt daʊt, wɔkɪŋ ðə taʊɝ əz ʃi wɪʃt, ʌnɹistʃɹeɪn ən ənbaʊn ə ðə θɹi oʊðz. ən əntɪl dʌsin kəɾ ɝeɪnʒ fəɹ əɹ tə bi kwɛstʃən ɪn sikɹət-ə dɪfəkəl mæɾɝ, ivən fəɹ ə sɪɾɝ ʌv əɾəənz ədʒɑ, sɪns ɪt hæd tə bi sikɹət fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn-əntɪl ðɛn, ɔl ðeɪ kəd də wɑz wɑtʃ. ə dɪstənt, kɛɹfəli sɝkəmspɛkt wɑtʃɪŋ. ɪt wɑz laɪk lɪvɪŋ wɪð ə ɹɛɾ æɾɝ, nɛvɝ noʊɪŋ wən jə wəd faɪn jɝsɛlf aɪ-tə-aɪ wɪð ɪt, nɛvɝ noʊɪŋ wən ɪt maɪt baɪt. laɪk lɪvɪŋ ɪn ə dɛn ə ɹɛɾ æɝz, ən oʊnli biɪŋ eɪbəl tə si wʌn.

Atuan was right there, Black Ajah without doubt, walking the Tower as she wished, unrestrained and unbound of the Three Oaths. And until Doesine could arrange for her to be questioned in secret-a difficult matter, even for a Sitter of Atuan's Ajah, since it had to be secret from everyone-until then, all they could do was watch. A distant, carefully circumspect watching. It was like living with a red adder, never knowing when you would find yourself eye-to-eye with it, never knowing when it might bite. Like living in a den of red adders, and only being able to see one.

sʌɾənli, jukɪɝi ɹilaɪz ðət ðə waɪd, kɝvɪŋ kɔɹəɾɝ wɑz ɛmpti əhɛɾ əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kəd si, ən ə ɡlæns bæk ʃoʊɾ oʊnli lɛoʊnɪn bɪhaɪnd. ðə taʊɝ maɪɾ əv bɪn ɛmpti seɪv ə ðə θɹi ʌv ðɛm. nʌθɪŋ ɪn saɪt muvd ɪksɛp ðə flɪkɝɪŋ fleɪmz ɑn ðə stæn læmps. saɪləns. maɪdɑni ɡeɪv ə smɔl stɑɹt. "fɝɡɪv mi, sɪɾɝ. siɪŋ əɹ soʊ sʌɾənli tʊk mi əbæk. wɛɹ wɑz aɪ? oʊ, jɛs. aɪ ʌndɝstæn ðət sɛlɪstɪn ən ænhɛɹiɾ ɑɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn aʊɾ əɹ kloʊs fɹɛnz ɪn ðə jɛloʊ." sɛlɪstɪn ən ænhɛɹid wɝ maɪdɑniz fɛloʊ kənspɪɹəɾɝz, boʊθ jɛloʊ. ðəɹ wɝ tu fɹəm itʃ ədʒɑ-ɪksɛp ðə ɹɛɾ ən ðə blu, ʌv kɔɹs-wɪtʃ hæd pɹuvən vɛɹi jusfəl "aɪ fɪɹ ðət woʊn bi mʌtʃ hɛlp. ʃiz ə waɪd sɝkəl ə fɹɛnz, əɹ dɪd bɪfɔɹ ðə... kɝən sɪtʃueɪʃən ɹoʊz bɪtwin ði ədʒəz." ə tʌtʃ ə sæɾəsfækʃən tɪŋd əɹ vɔɪs, haʊɛvɝ smuð əɹ feɪs; ʃi wɑz stɪl ə ɹɛbəl, ɪn spaɪɾ ə ði æɾəd oʊθ.

Suddenly, Yukiri realized that the wide, curving corridor was empty ahead as far as she could see, and a glance back showed only Leonin behind. The Tower might have been empty save of the three of them. Nothing in sight moved except the flickering flames on the stand lamps. Silence. Meidani gave a small start. "Forgive me, Sitter. Seeing her so suddenly took me aback. Where was I? Oh, yes. I understand that Celestin and Annharid are trying to find out her close friends in the Yellow." Celestin and Annharid were Meidani's fellow conspirators, both Yellow. There were two from each Ajah-except the Red and the Blue, of course-which had proven very useful "I fear that won't be much help. She has a wide circle of friends, or did before the... current situation rose between the Ajahs." A touch of satisfaction tinged her voice, however smooth her face; she was still a rebel, in spite of the added oath.

"ɪnvɛstəɡeɪɾɪŋ ɔl ə ðɛm wɪl bi dɪfəkəlt, ɪf nɑɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl."

"Investigating all of them will be difficult, if not impossible."

"fɝɡɛɾ əɹ fəɹ ðə moʊmənt." ɪt tʊk ən ɛfɝt fəɹ jukɪɝi nɑt tə kɹeɪn əɹ nɛk tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk ɛvɹi weɪ ət wʌns. ə tæpəstʃɹi wɝkt wɪð lɑɹdʒ waɪt flaʊɝz ɹɪpəl slaɪtli, ən ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd əntɪl ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ə dʒɹæft ən nɑɾ ənʌðɝ sɝvən kʌmɪŋ əɹ ʌv ə sɝvəns ɹæmp. ʃi nɛvɝ kəd ɹɛkəlɛkt wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ loʊkeɪɾəd. hɝ nu tɑpɪk wɑz əz deɪnʒɝəs əz dɪskʌsɪŋ əɾəən, ɪn ɪts oʊn weɪ.

"Forget her for the moment." It took an effort for Yukiri not to crane her neck trying to look every way at once. A tapestry worked with large white flowers rippled slightly, and she hesitated until she was sure it was a draft and not another servant coming our of a servant's ramp. She never could recollect where they were located. Her new topic was as dangerous as discussing Atuan, in its own way.

"læs naɪt, aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝd jə wɝ ə nɑvəs wɪð ɪleɪɾə, ən kloʊs fɹɛnz əz aɪ ɹikɔl ɪt wəd bi ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə fəɹ jə tə ɹɪnu ðət fɹɛndʃɪp.'

"Last night, I remembered you were a novice with Elaida, and close friends as I recall It would be a good idea for you to renew that friendship.'

"ðæt wɑz səm jɪɹz əɡoʊ," ðə tɔlɝ wʊmən ɹɪplaɪd stɪfli, lɪftɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz ən ɹæpɪŋ ɪɾ ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf əz tʃ ʃi sʌɾənli fɛl ðə koʊld. "ɪleɪɾə vɛɹi pɹɑpɝli bɹoʊk ɪɾ ɔf wən ʃi wɑz ɹeɪzd æksɛptɪd. ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn əkjuzd ə feɪvɝɪtɪzəm ɪf aɪ wɝ ɪn ə klæs ʃi wɑz ɡɪvən tə titʃ."

"That was some years ago," the taller woman replied stiffly, lifting her shawl to her shoulders and wrapping it around herself as chough she suddenly felt the cold. "Elaida very properly broke it off when she was raised Accepted. She might have been accused of favoritism if I were in a class she was given to teach."

"æz wɛl fəɹ jə ðət jə wɝn ə feɪvɹɪt," jukɪɝi sɛd dʒɹaɪli. ɪleɪɾəz kɝən fɝɑsəɾi hæɾ ɪts pɹɛsɪɾənt. bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɛn ɔf tə ændɝ jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ʃi hæd pʊʃt ðoʊz ʃi feɪvɝd soʊ hɑɹd ðət sɪstɝz hæd niɾəd tə stɛp ɪn mɔɹ ðən wʌns. sɪuən sɑntʃ hæd bɪn wʌn ə ðɛm, stʃɹeɪnʒ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ðoʊ sɪuən hæd nɛvɝ niɾəd ɹɛskjuɪŋ fɹəm stændɝdz ʃi kəd nɑt mit. stʃɹeɪnʒ ən sæd. "ivən soʊ, jəl də ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn jəɹ paʊɝ tə ɹɪnu ðət fɹɛndʃɪp."

"As well for you that you weren't a favorite," Yukiri said dryly. Elaida's current ferocity had its precedent. Before she went off to Andor years ago, she had pushed those she favored so hard that sisters had needed to step in more than once. Siuan Sanche had been one of them, strange to remember, though Siuan had never needed rescuing from standards she could not meet. Strange and sad. "Even so, you will do everything in your power to renew that friendship."

maɪdɑni wɔk tu dʌzən peɪsɪz əlɔŋ ðə kɔɹəɾɝ oʊpənɪŋ ən kloʊzɪŋ əɹ maʊθ, ədʒʌstɪŋ ən ɹiədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl, twɪtʃɪŋ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz əz ðoʊ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʃɹʌɡ ɔf ə hɔɹsfli, lʊkɪŋ ɛvɹiwɛɹ bʌɾ ət jukɪɝi. haʊ hæd ðə wʊmən ɛvɝ fʌŋkʃən əz ə ɡɹeɪ wɪð soʊ lɪɾəl sɛlf-kəntʃɹoʊl? "aɪ dɪd tʃɹaɪ," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli, ɪn ə bɹɛθi toʊn. ʃi stɪl əvɔɪɾəd jukɪɝi ɛs aɪ." sɛvɹəl taɪmz. ðə kipɝ . .

Meidani walked two dozen paces along the corridor opening and closing her mouth, adjusting and readjusting her shawl, twitching her shoulders as though trying to shrug off a horsefly, looking everywhere but at Yukiri. How had the woman ever functioned as a Gray with so little self-control? "I did try," she said finally, in a breathy tone. She still avoided Yukiri s eye." Several times. The Keeper . .

. ɑlviɛɝɪn ɔlweɪz pʊt mi ɔf. ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz bɪzi, ʃi hæɾ əpɔɪnmənts, ʃi niɾəd ɹɛst. ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz səm ɪkskjus. aɪ tʃɪŋk ɪleɪɾə dʒʌs dʌznt wɑnə teɪk ʌp ə fɹɛndʃɪp ʃi dʒɹɑp mɔɹ ðən θɝɾi jɪɹz əɡoʊ."

. Alviarin always put me off. The Amyrlin was busy, she had appointments, she needed rest. There was always some excuse. I chink Elaida just doesn't want to take up a friendship she dropped more than thirty years ago."

soʊ ðə ɹɛbəlz hæd ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət fɹɛndʃɪp, tu. haʊ hæd ðeɪ θɔt tə juz ɪt? spaɪɪŋ, moʊs laɪkli. ʃi wəɾ əv tə mɪɾ aʊt haʊ maɪdɑni wɑz səpoʊz tə pæs ɑn wʌt ʃi lɝnd. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðə ɹɛbəlz hæd pɹəvaɪɾəd ðə tul, ən jukɪɝi wəd juz ɪt. "ɑlviɛɝɪn ɪz aʊɾ ə jəɹ weɪ. ʃi lɛf ðə taʊɝ jɛstɝdeɪ, əɹ meɪbi ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ. noʊ wʌn ɪz kwaɪt sɝɾən. bʌt ðə meɪdz seɪ ʃi tʊk spɛɹ kloʊðz, soʊ ɪts ənlaɪkli ʃɪl ɹɪtɝn fəɹ ə fju deɪz ət ðə sunəst."

So the rebels had remembered that friendship, too. How had they thought to use it? Spying, most likely. She would have to mid out how Meidani was supposed to pass on what she learned. In any case, the rebels had provided the tool, and Yukiri would use it. "Alviarin is out of your way. She left the Tower yesterday, or maybe the day before. No one is quite certain. But the maids say she took spare clothes, so it's unlikely she'll return for a few days at the soonest."

"wɛɹ kəd ʃi hæv ɡɔn ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ?" maɪdɑni fɹaʊnd. "ɪts bɪn snoʊɪŋ sɪns jɛstɝdeɪ mɔɹnɪŋ, ən ɪt wɑz θɹɛɾənɪŋ bɪfɔɹ."

"Where could she have gone in this weather?" Meidani frowned. "It's been snowing since yesterday morning, and it was threatening before."

jukɪɝi stɑpt ən juz boʊθ hænz tə tɝn ði ʌðɝ wʊmən tə feɪs hɝ. "ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðət nid kənsɝn ju, maɪdɑni, ɪz ðət ʃiz ɡɔn," ʃi sɛd fɝmli. wɛɹ hæɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn ɡɔn ɪn ðɪs? "ju hæv ə klɪɹ pæθ tə ɪleɪɾə, ən jəl teɪk ɪt. ən jəl kip ə kloʊs wɑtʃ tə si ɪf ɛni-wʌn maɪt bi ɹiɾɪŋ ɪleɪɾəz peɪpɝz, dʒʌs bi ʃʊɹ noʊ wʌn siz jə wɑtʃɪŋ." tælin sɛd ðə blæk ədʒɑ nu ɛvɹi-θɪŋ ðət keɪm aʊɾ ə ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi bɪfɔɹ ɪt wɑz ənaʊnst, ən ðeɪ niɾəd sʌmwʌn kloʊs tə ɪleɪɾə ɪf ðeɪ wɝ tə faɪn aʊt haʊ ɪt wɑz dʌn. ʌv kɔɹs, ɑlviɛɝɪn sɔ ɛvɹiθɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ɪleɪɾə saɪnd, ən ðə wʊmən hæd teɪkən ɑn mɔɹ əθɔɹəɾi ðən ɛni kipɝ ɪn mɛmɹi, bʌt ðət wɑz noʊ ɹizən tə əkjuz əɹ ə biɪŋ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd. noʊ ɹizən nɑt tə, iðɝ. hɝ pæst wɑz biɪŋ ɪnvɛstəɡeɪɾəd, tu. "wɑtʃ ɑlviɛɝɪn, əz wɛl əz mʌtʃ əz jə kæn, bʌɾ ɪleɪɾəz peɪpɝz ɑɹ ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ." maɪdɑni saɪɾ ən ɡeɪv ə ɹɪlʌktənt nɑd. ʃi maɪɾ əv tə oʊbeɪ, bʌt ʃi nu ði æɾəd deɪnʒɝ ʃi wəd bi ɪn ɪf ɑlviɛɝɪn dɪd tɝn aʊɾ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd. jɛɾ ɪleɪɾə hɝsɛlf stɪl maɪt bi blæk, wʌtɛvɝ sɹɪn ən pɛvɑɹə ɪnsɪstəd. eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛn əz æmɪɝlɪn sit. naʊ ðət wɑz ə θɔt tə pɪkəl jəɹ hɑɹt.

Yukiri stopped and used both hands to turn the other woman to face her. "The only thing that need concern you, Meidani, is that she's gone," she said firmly. Where had Alviarin gone in this? "You have a clear path to Elaida, and you will take it. And you will keep a close watch to see if any-one might be reading Elaida's papers, just be sure no one sees you watching." Talene said the Black Ajah knew every-thing that came out of the Amyrlin's study before it was announced, and they needed someone close to Elaida if they were to find out how it was done. Of course, Alviarin saw everything before Elaida signed, and the woman had taken on more authority than any Keeper in memory, but that was no reason to accuse her of being a Darkfriend. No reason not to, either. Her past was being investigated, too. "Watch Alviarin, as well as much as you can, but Elaida's papers are the important thing." Meidani sighed and gave a reluctant nod. She might have to obey, but she knew the added danger she would be in if Alviarin did turn out a Darkfriend. Yet Elaida herself still might be Black, whatever Saerin and Pevara insisted. A Darkfriend as Amyrlin Seat. Now that was a thought to pickle your heart.

"jukɪɝi!" ə wʊmənz vɔɪs kɔl fɹəm bæk ʌp ðə hɔlweɪ. eɪ sɪɾɝ ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ dɪd nɑt dʒʌmp laɪk ə stɑɹɾəld ɡoʊɾ ət hɪɹɪŋ əɹ oʊn neɪm, bʌt jukɪɝi dɪd. ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn hoʊldɪŋ ɑntu maɪdɑni, ʃi maɪɾ əv fɔlən, ən əz ɪt wɑz, ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm stæɡɝd laɪk dʒɹʌŋkən fɑɹmɝz əɾ ə hɑɹvəs dæns.

"Yukiri!" a woman's voice called from back up the hallway. A Sitter in the Hall of the Tower did not jump like a startled goat at hearing her own name, but Yukiri did. If she had not been holding onto Meidani, she might have fallen, and as it was, the pair of them staggered like drunken farmers at a harvest dance.

ɹəkʌvɝɪŋ, jukɪɝi dʒɝkt əɹ ʃɔl stʃɹeɪɾ ən sɛɾ əɹ feɪs ɪn ə skaʊl ðət dɪd nɑt dɪmɪnɪʃ wən ʃi sɔ hu wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ təwɔɹd hɝ. sin wɑz səpoʊz tə bi kipɪŋ kloʊz tə hɝ oʊn ɹumz, wɪð əz mɛni waɪt sɪstɝz ɝaʊn əɹ əz ʃi kəd mænədʒ, wən ʃi wɑz nɑt wɪð jukɪɝi əɹ wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ sɪɾɝz u nu əbaʊt tælin ən ðə blæk ədʒɑ, bʌt hɪɹ ʃi wɑz skɝiɪŋ daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ wɪð oʊnli bɝneɪl ɡɛlbɑɹn, ə stɑki tæɹɑbənɝ ən ənʌðɝ ə maɪdɑniz dʒækdɔz, fəɹ kʌmpəni.

Recovering, Yukiri jerked her shawl straight and set her face in a scowl that did not diminish when she saw who was running toward her. Seaine was supposed to be keeping close to her own rooms, with as many White sisters around her as she could manage, when she was not with Yukiri or one of the other Sitters who knew about Talene and the Black Ajah, but here she was scurrying down the hallway with only Bernaile Gelbarn, a stocky Taraboner and another of Meidani's jackdaws, for company.

lɛoʊnɪn stɛpt əsaɪd, ən ɡeɪv sin ə fɔɹməl baʊ, fɪŋɡɝtɪps pɹɛs tə hɪz hɑɹt. maɪdɑni ən bɝneɪl wɝ fulɪʃ ɪnʌf tə ɪkstʃeɪnʒ smaɪlz. ðeɪ wɝ fɹɛnz, bʌt ðeɪ ʃəd noʊ bɛɾɝ, wən ðeɪ kəd nɑt tɛl u maɪt si.

Leonin stepped aside, and gave Seaine a formal bow, fingertips pressed to his heart. Meidani and Bernaile were foolish enough to exchange smiles. They were friends, but they should know better, when they could not tell who might see.

jukɪɝi wɑz ɪn noʊ mud fəɹ smaɪlz. "teɪkɪŋ ði ɛɹ, sin?" ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "sɹɪn woʊn bi plizd, wən aɪ tɛl hɝ. nɑɾ əɾ ɔl plizd. aɪm nɑt plizd, sin." maɪdɑni meɪɾ ə smɔl saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt, ən bɝneɪlz hɛd twɪtʃt, hɝ mʌltətuɾ ə nɛɹoʊ biɾɪd bɹeɪdz ɹætlɪŋ əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ.

Yukiri was in no mood for smiles. "Taking the air, Seaine?" she said sharply. "Saerin won't be pleased, when I tell her. Not at all pleased. I'm not pleased, Seaine." Meidani made a small sound in her throat, and Bernaile's head twitched, her multitude of narrow beaded braids rattling against one another.

ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm tʊk tə stʌɾiɪŋ ə tæpəstʃɹi ðət səpoʊzədli ʃoʊd ðə hʌmbəlɪŋ ə kwin ɹiænən, ən fəɹ ɔl ðɛɹ smuð feɪsəz, klɪɹli ðeɪ wɪʃt ðeɪ wɝ sʌmwɛɹ ɛls. ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz, sɪɾɝz wɝ səpoʊz tə bi ikwəlz. ən soʊ ðeɪ wɝ. nɔɹməli. æftɝ ə fæʃən. lɛoʊnɪn ʃəd nɑɾ əv bɪn eɪbəl tə hɪɹ ə wɝd, bʌɾ i kəd fil maɪdɑni ɛs mud, ʌv kɔɹs, ən i muvd ə stɛp fɝðɝ əweɪ. waɪl stɪl kipɪŋ wɑtʃ əlɔŋ ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, ʌv kɔɹs. ə ɡʊd mæn. ə waɪz mæn. sin hæd sɛns ɪnʌf tə lʊk əbæʃt. ʌnkɑnʃəsli, ʃi smuðd əɹ dʒɹɛs, kʌvɝd wɪð snoʊi ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi əlɔŋ ðə hɛm ən əkɹɔs ðə bɑɾəs, bʌɾ ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli hɝ hænz nɑɾɪd ɪn əɹ ʃɔl ən əɹ aɪbɹaʊz dʒɹu daʊn stʌbɝnli. sin hæd bɪn stʃɹɔŋ-wɪl fɹəm ðə deɪ ʃi fɝs keɪm tə ðə taʊɝ, ə fɝnɪtʃɝ-meɪkɝz dɔɾɝ fɹəm luɡɹɾ u hæd tɔkt əɹ fɑðɝ ɪndə baɪɪŋ pæsədʒ fəɹ əɹ ən əɹ mʌðɝ.

The pair of them took to studying a tapestry that supposedly showed the humbling of Queen Rhiannon, and for all their smooth faces, clearly they wished they were somewhere else. In their eyes, Sitters were supposed to be equals. And so they were. Normally. After a fashion. Leonin should not have been able to hear a word, but he could feel Meidani s mood, of course, and he moved a step further away. While still keeping watch along the corridor, of course. A good man. A wise man. Seaine had sense enough to look abashed. Unconsciously, she smoothed her dress, covered with snowy embroidery along the hem and across the bodice, but almost immediately her hands knotted in her shawl and her eyebrows drew down stubbornly. Seaine had been strong-willed from the day she first came to the Tower, a furniture-maker's daughter from Lugard who had talked her father into buying passage for her and her mother.

pæsədʒ fəɹ tu ʌpɹɪvɝ, bʌɾ oʊnli wʌn daʊn. stʃɹɔŋ-wɪld ən kɑnfəɾənt. ən fɹikwənli əz blaɪn tə ðə wɝld ɝaʊn əɹ əz ɛni bɹaʊn. waɪts wɝ ɔfən laɪk ðæt, ɔl lɑdʒɪk ən noʊ dʒʌdʒmənt. "ðɛɹz noʊ nid fəɹ mi tə haɪd fɹəm ðə blæk ədʒɑ, jukɪɝi," ʃi sɛd.

Passage for two upriver, but only one down. Strong-willed and confident. And frequently as blind to the world around her as any Brown. Whites were often like that, all logic and no judgment. "There's no need for me to hide from the Black Ajah, Yukiri," she said.

jukɪɝi wɪnst. ful wʊmən, neɪmɪŋ ðə blæk ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn ði oʊpən. ðə kɔɹəɾɝ wɑz stɪl ɛmpti ɪn boʊθ dɝɛkʃənz əz fɑɹ əz ðə kɝv əlaʊd saɪt, bʌt kɛɹləsnəs lɛd tə mɔɹ kɛɹləsnəs. ʃi kəd bi stʌbɝn hɝsɛlf, wən ðəɹ wɑz nid, bʌɾ ət list ʃi ʃoʊd mɔɹ bɹeɪn ðən ə ɡus əbaʊt wən ən wɛɹ. ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə ɡɪv sin ə pis ə hɝ maɪnd, ə ʃɑɹp pis, bʌt ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ɹʌʃt ɑn bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd spik.

Yukiri winced. Fool woman, naming the Black right out in the open. The corridor was still empty in both directions as far as the curve allowed sight, but carelessness led to more carelessness. She could be stubborn herself, when there was need, but at least she showed more brain than a goose about when and where. She opened her mouth to give Seaine a piece of her mind, a sharp piece, but the other woman rushed on before she could speak.

"sɹɪn toʊl mi aɪ kəd faɪn ju." sinz maʊθ taɪɾənd ən spɑts ə kʌlɝ flɛɹɾ ɪn əɹ tʃiks, ət hævɪŋ æsk pɝmɪʃən əɹ ət hævɪŋ tə æsk. ɪt wɑz ʌndɝstændəbəl fəɹ əɹ tə ɹɪzɛn əɹ sɪtʃueɪʃən, ʌv kɔɹs. dʒʌst wɪtləs fəɹ əɹ nɑt tə æksɛpt ɪt. aɪ nid tə tɔk tə jə əloʊn, jukɪɝi. əbaʊt ðə sɛkən mɪstɝi."

"Saerin told me I could find you." Seaine's mouth tightened and spots of color flared in her cheeks, at having asked permission or at having to ask. It was understandable for her to resent her situation, of course. Just witless for her not to accept it. I need to talk to you alone, Yukiri. About the second mystery."

fəɹ ə moʊmənt, jukɪɝi wɑz əz pʌzəld əz maɪdɑni ən bɝneɪl lʊkt. ðeɪ kəd ʃæm nɑt lɪsnɪŋ, bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt ʃʌt ðɛɹ ɪɹz. sɛkən mɪstɝi? wʌd sin min? ənlɛs . . . kəd ʃi min ðə θɪŋ ðət hæd bɹɔt jukɪɝi ɪndə ðə hʌn fəɹ ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs? wʌndɝɪŋ waɪ ðə hɛdz ə ði ədʒəz wɝ miɾɪŋ ɪn sikɹət hæd lɔst ɪts ɝdʒənsi kəmpɛɹd tə faɪndɪŋ dɑɹkfɹɛnz əmʌŋ ðə sɪstɝz.

For a moment, Yukiri was as puzzled as Meidani and Bernaile looked. They could sham not listening, but that did not shut their ears. Second mystery? What did Seaine mean? Unless . . . Could she mean the thing that had brought Yukiri into the hunt for the Black Ajah in the first place? Wondering why the heads of the Ajahs were meeting in secret had lost its urgency compared to finding Darkfriends among the sisters.

"vɛɹi wɛl, sin," jukɪɝi sɛd, mɔɹ kɑmli ðən ʃi fɛlt. "maɪdɑni, teɪk lɛoʊnɪn daʊn ðə hɔl əntɪl jə kən dʒʌst si sin ən mi ɝaʊn ðə kɝv. kip ə ʃɑɹp aɪ fəɹ ɛniwʌn kʌmɪŋ ðɪs weɪ.

"Very well, Seaine," Yukiri said, more calmly than she felt. "Meidani, take Leonin down the hall until you can just see Seaine and me around the curve. Keep a sharp eye for anyone coming this way.

bɝneɪl, də ðə seɪm ʌp ðə hɔl." ðeɪ wɝ muvɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi fɪnɪʃt spikɪŋ, ən əz sun əz ðeɪ wɝ aʊɾ ʌv ɪɹʃɑt, ʃi tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən tə sin. "wɛl?" tə hɝ sɝpɹaɪz, ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ spɹæŋ ʌp ɝaʊn ðə waɪt sɪɾɝ, hu woʊv ə wɔɹɾ əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm. ɪt wɑz ə klɪɹ saɪn ə sikɹəts tə ɛni wʌn u sɔ. ðɪs hæd bɛɾɝ bi ɪmpɔɹɾənt.

Bernaile, do the same up the hall." They were moving before she finished speaking, and as soon as they were out of earshot, she turned her attention to Seaine. "Well?" To her surprise, the glow of saidar sprang up around the White Sitter, who wove a ward against eavesdropping around the pair of them. It was a clear sign of secrets to any one who saw. This had better be important.

"θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt lɑdʒɪkli." sinz vɔɪs wɑz kɑm, bʌɾ əɹ hænz stɪl ɡɹɪpt əɹ ʃɔl ɪn fɪsts.

"Think about it logically." Seaine's voice was calm, but her hands still gripped her shawl in fists.

ʃi stʊd vɛɹi stʃɹeɪt, taʊɝɪŋ oʊvɝ jukɪɝi ðoʊ ʃi wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ əbʌv ævɝɪdʒ haɪt hɝsɛlf.

She stood very straight, towering over Yukiri though she was not much above average height herself.

"ɪts mɔɹ ðən ə mʌnθ, ɔlmoʊs tu, sɪns ɪleɪɾə keɪm tə mi, ən nɪɹli tu wiks sɪns jə faʊn pɛvɑɹə ən mi. ɪf ðə blæk ədʒɑ nu əbaʊt mi, aɪ wəd bi dɛd baɪ naʊ. pɛvɑɹə ən aɪ wʊɾə bɪn dɛd bɪfɔɹ jə ən dʌsin ən sɹɪn ɛvɝ wɔkt ɪn ɑn ʌs, ðɛɹfɔɹ, ðeɪ doʊnt noʊ. əbaʊɾ ɛni ʌv ʌs. aɪ ədmɪɾ aɪ wɑz fɹaɪɾənd, ət fɝst, bʌɾ aɪ hæv kəntʃɹoʊl ə maɪsɛlf, naʊ. ðɛɹz noʊ ɹizən fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə jə tə kip tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃɹit mi laɪk ə nɑvəs," ə lɪɾəl hiɾ ɪnveɪɾəd ðə kɑmnəs, "æn ə bɹeɪnləs wʌn, ət ðæt."

"It's more than a month, almost two, since Elaida came to me, and nearly two weeks since you found Pevara and me. If the Black Ajah knew about me, I would be dead by now. Pevara and I would have been dead before you and Doesine and Saerin ever walked in on us, Therefore, they don't know. About any of us. I admit I was frightened, at first, but I have control of myself, now. There's no reason for the rest of you to keep trying to treat me like a novice," a little heat invaded the calmness, "and a brainless one, at that."

"jul əv tə tɔk tə sɹɪn," jukɪɝi sɛd kɝtli. sɹɪn hæd teɪkən tʃɑɹdʒ fɹəm ðə stɑɹt. æftɝ fɔɹɾi jɪɹz ɪn ðə hɔl fəɹ ðə bɹaʊn, sɹɪn wɑz vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ət teɪkɪŋ tʃɑɹdʒ ən jukɪɝi hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ əɡɛnst əɹ ənlɛs ʃi mʌst, nɑt wɪθaʊt ðə sɪɾɝz pɹɪvlədʒ ʃi kəd hɑɹdli kleɪm ɪn ðə sɝkəmstænsəz. əz wɛl tʃɹaɪ tə kætʃ ə fɔlɪŋ boʊldɝ. ɪf sɹɪn kəd bi kənvɪnst, pɛvɑɹə ən dʌsin wəd kʌm ɝaʊnd, ən ʃi hɝsɛlf wəd hɑɹdli tʃɹaɪ tə stæn ɪn ðə weɪ. "naʊ, wʌɾ əbaʊt ðɪs sɛkən sikɹət? jə də min ði ədʒɑ hɛdz miɾɪŋ?"

"You'll have to talk to Saerin," Yukiri said curtly. Saerin had taken charge from the start. After forty years in the Hall for the Brown, Saerin was very good at taking charge and Yukiri had no intention of going against her unless she must, not without the Sitter's privilege she could hardly claim in the circumstances. As well try to catch a falling boulder. If Saerin could be convinced, Pevara and Doesine would come around, and she herself would hardly try to stand in the way. "Now, what about this second secret? You do mean the Ajah heads meeting?"

sinz feɪs tʊk ɑn ə mjuli ɪkspɹɛʃən. jukɪɝi ɔlmoʊst ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ ɪɹz tə laɪ bæk. ðən ʃi ɛksheɪld. "dɪd ðə hɛɾ ə jəɹ ədʒɑ hæv ə hæn ɪn tʃuzɪŋ ændaɪə fəɹ ðə hɔl? mɔɹ ðən juʒəwəl, aɪ min?"

Seaine's face took on a muley expression. Yukiri almost expected her ears to lie back. Then she exhaled. "Did the head of your Ajah have a hand in choosing Andaya for the Hall? More than usual, I mean?"

"ʃi dɪd," jukɪɝi ɹɪplaɪd kɛɹfəli. ɛvɹiwʌn hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ændaɪə wəd ɡoʊ ɪndə ðə hɔl wʌn deɪ pɝhæps ɪn ənʌðɝ fɔɹɾi əɹ fɪfti jɪɹz, jɛt sɹæntʃə hæɾ ɔl bʌɾ ənɔɪntəd hɝ, wən ðə kʌstəmɛɹi mɛθəd wɑz dɪskʌʃən əntɪl ə kənsɛnsəs kəɾ i ɹitʃt ɑn tu əɹ θɹi kændəɾeɪts, ðən ə sikɹət bælət. ðət wɑz ədʒɑ bɪznəs, ðoʊ, əz sikɹəɾ əz sɹæntʃəz neɪm ən taɪɾəl.

"She did," Yukiri replied carefully. Everyone had been sure Andaya would go into the Hall one day perhaps in another forty or fifty years, yet Serancha had all but anointed her, when the customary method was discussion until a consensus could he reached on two or three candidates, then a secret ballot. That was Ajah business, though, as secret as Serancha's name and title.

"aɪ nu ɪt." sin nɑɾəd ɪksaɪɾədli, nɑɾ əɾ ɔl əɹ nɔɹməl mænɝ. "sɹɪn sɛz ðət dʒuleɪn wɑz hænd-pɪk fəɹ ðə bɹaʊn, tu, əpɛɹənli nɑt ðɛɹ juʒəwəl weɪ, ən dʌsin sɛz ðə seɪm əbaʊt swænə, ðoʊ ʃi wɑz hɛzɪɾənt əbaʊt seɪɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ. aɪ θɪŋk swænə meɪbi ðə hɛɾ ə ðə jɛloʊ hɝsɛlf. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃi wɑz ə sɪɾɝ fəɹ fɔɹɾi jɪɹz ðə fɝs taɪm, ən jə noʊ ɪɾ ɪzən kɑmən tə teɪk ə tʃɛɹ æftɝ jə wɝ ə sɪɾɝ ðət lɔŋ. ən fɛɹən stɛp daʊn fəɹ ðə waɪt lɛs ðən tɛn jɪɹz əɡoʊ; noʊ wʌn əz ɛvɝ ɛntɝd ðə hɔl əɡɛn soʊ sun. tə kæp ɪɾ ɔf, tælin sɛz ðə ɡɹinz nɑmənət tʃɔɪsəz ən ðɛɹ kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl tʃuzəz wʌn, bʌɾ ædlɔɹnə tʃoʊz ɹinə wɪθaʊɾ ɛni nɑməneɪʃənz." jukɪɝi mænədʒ tə staɪfəl ə ɡɹɪmɑs, bʌɾ oʊnli baɪ ə hɛɹ. ɛvɹiwʌn hæd ðɛɹ səspɪʃənz əbaʊɾ u hɛɾəd ʌðɝ ədʒəz, ɛls noʊ wʌn wəɾ ɛvɝ əv noʊɾəst ðə miɾɪŋz ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs, jɛt spikɪŋ ðoʊz neɪmz əlaʊd wɑz ɹuɾ ət bɛst. ɛniwʌn bʌɾ ə sɪɾɝ maɪt feɪs pɛnəns fəɹ ɪt. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi ən sin boʊθ nu wən ɪt keɪm tə ædlɔɹnə. ɪn əɹ ətɛmps tə kʌɹi feɪvɝ, tælin pɔɹɾ əɹ ɔl ðə sikɹəts ə ðə ɡɹin wɪθaʊt biɪŋ æskt. ɪɾ ɪmbɛɹəst ɔl ə ðɛm, ɪksɛp tælin hɝsɛlf. ət list ɪɾ ɪkspleɪnd waɪ ðə ɡɹinz hæd bɪn ɪn sətʃ ən aʊtstændɪŋ ɹeɪdʒ wən ædlɔɹnə wɑz bɝtʃt. stɪl, kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl wɑz ə ɹɪdɪkjələs taɪɾəl, bæɾəl ədʒɑ əɹ noʊ bæɾəl ədʒɑ. ət lis hɛd klɝk ɹɪli dɪskɹaɪbd wʌt sɹæntʃə dɪd, ɪn ə mænɝ ə spikɪŋ. daʊn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, maɪdɑni ən əɹ wɔɹɾɝ wɝ stændɪŋ dʒʌst ɪn saɪɾ ɑn ðə kɝv, əpɛɹənli tɔkɪŋ kwaɪətli. wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ ɔlweɪz wɑtʃt fɝðɝ daʊn ɝaʊn ðə kɝv, ðoʊ. ɪn ði ɑpəzət dɝɛkʃən, bɝneɪl wɑz dʒʌst ɪn saɪt, tu. hɝ hɛd wɑz swɪvəlɪŋ kɑnstənli əz ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə wɑtʃ jukɪɝi ən sin waɪl kipɪŋ ən aɪ aʊt fəɹ ɛniwʌn əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ. ðə weɪ ʃi kɛpt ʃɪftɪŋ fɹəm wʌn fʊt tə ði ʌðɝ wəɾ ətʃɹækt ətɛnʃən, tu, bʌt ðiz deɪz ə sɪstɝ əloʊn aʊtsaɪɾ əɹ ədʒɑ kɔɹɾɝ wɑz æskɪŋ fəɹ tʃɹʌbəl, ən ʃi nu ɪt. ðɪs kɑnvɝseɪʃən hæd tə ɛn sun.

"I knew it." Seaine nodded excitedly, not at all her normal manner. "Saerin says that Juilaine was hand-picked for the Brown, too, apparently not their usual way, and Doesine says the same about Suana, though she was hesitant about saying anything. I think Suana maybe the head of the Yellow herself. In any case, she was a Sitter for forty years the first time, and you know it isn't common to take a chair after you were a Sitter that long. And Ferane stepped down for the White less than ten years ago; no one has ever entered the Hall again so soon. To cap it off, Talene says the Greens nominate choices and their Captain-General chooses one, but Adelorna chose Rina without any nominations." Yukiri managed to stifle a grimace, but only by a hair. Everyone had their suspicions about who headed other Ajahs, else no one would ever have noticed the meetings in the first place, yet speaking those names aloud was rude at best. Anyone but a Sitter might face penance for it. Of course, she and Seaine both knew when it came to Adelorna. In her attempts to curry favor, Talene poured our all the secrets of the Green without being asked. It embarrassed all of them, except Talene herself. At least it explained why the Greens had been in such an outstanding rage when Adelorna was birched. Still, Captain-General was a ridiculous title, Battle Ajah or no Battle Ajah. At least Head Clerk really described what Serancha did, in a manner of speaking. Down the corridor, Meidani and her Warder were standing just in sight on the curve, apparently talking quietly. One or the other always watched further down around the curve, though. In the opposite direction, Bernaile was just in sight, too. Her head was swiveling constantly as she tried to watch Yukiri and Seaine while keeping an eye out for anyone approaching. The way she kept shifting from one foot to the other would attract attention, too, but these days a sister alone outside her Ajah quarter was asking for trouble, and she knew it. This conversation had to end soon.

jukɪɝi ɹeɪzd wʌn fɪŋɡɝ. "faɪv ədʒəz hæd tə tʃuz nu sɪɾɝz æftɝ wɪmən ðeɪ hæɾ ɪn ðə hɔl dʒɔɪn ðə ɹɛbəlz.' sin nɑɾəd, ən jukɪɝi ɹeɪzd ə sɛkən fɪŋɡɝ. "itʃ ə ðoʊz ədʒəz tʃoʊz ə wʊmən əz sɪɾɝ u wɑzn ðə . . . lɑdʒɪkəl... tʃɔɪs." sin nɑɾəd əɡɛn. ə θɝd ɹɪŋɝ dʒɔɪn ðə fɝs tu. "ðə bɹaʊn hæd tə tʃuz tu nu sɪɾɝz, bʌt jə dɪdn mɛnʃən ʃɛvən. ɪz ðəɹ ɛniθɪŋ..." jukɪɝi smaɪld ɹaɪli, "ɑd . . . əbaʊt hɝ?"

Yukiri raised one finger. "Five Ajahs had to choose new Sitters after women they had in the Hall joined the rebels.' Seaine nodded, and Yukiri raised a second finger. "Each of those Ajahs chose a woman as Sitter who wasn't the . . . logical... choice." Seaine nodded again. A third ringer joined the first two. "The Brown had to choose two new Sitters, but you didn't mention Shevan. Is there anything..." Yukiri smiled wryly, "odd . . . about her?"

"noʊ; əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə sɹɪn, ʃɛvən wəd laɪkli hæv bɪn əɹ ɹɪpleɪsmənt: wən ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə stɛp daʊn, bʌt-"

"No; according to Saerin, Shevan would likely have been her replacement: when she decided to step down, but-"

"sin, ɪf jəɹ æktʃəli  ɪmplaɪɪŋ ði ədʒɑ hɛdz kənspaɪɝɾ oʊvɝ u wəd ɡoʊ ɪndə ðə hɔl-æn aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ə mɔɹ kɹækt-bɹeɪnd noʊʃən! -ɪf ðæts wʌt jəɹ sədʒɛstɪŋ, waɪ wəd ðeɪ tʃuz faɪv ɑd wɪmən ən wʌn u ɪzənt?'

"Seaine, if you're actually implying the Ajah heads conspired over who would go into the Hall-and I never heard of a more cracked-brained notion! -If that's what you're suggesting, why would they choose five odd women and one who isn't?'

"jɛs, aɪm sədʒɛstɪŋ ɪt. wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə jə kipɪŋ mi pɹæktəkli ʌndɝ lɑk ən ki, aɪv hæd mɔɹ taɪm fəɹ θɪŋkɪŋ ðən aɪ noʊ wʌt tə də wɪð. dʒuleɪn ən ɹinə ən ændaɪə ɡeɪv mi ə hɪnt, ən fɛɹən meɪd mi dɪsaɪd tə tʃɛk." wʌd sin min əbaʊɾ ændaɪə ən ði ʌðɝ tu ɡɪvɪŋ ə hɪnt? oʊ. ʌv kɔɹs; ɹinə ən ændaɪə wɝ nɑt ɹɪli oʊld ɪnʌf tə hi ɪn ðə hɔl jɛt, iðɝ. ðə kʌstəm ə nɑt tɔkɪŋ əbaʊɾ eɪdʒ sun ɪnʌf bɪkeɪm ðə hæbəɾ ə nɑt θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt, iðɝ.

"Yes, I am suggesting it. With the rest of you keeping me practically under lock and key, I've had more time for thinking than I know what to do with. Juilaine and Rina and Andaya gave me a hint, and Ferane made me decide to check." What did Seaine mean about Andaya and the other two giving a hint? Oh. Of course; Rina and Andaya were not really old enough to he in the Hall yet, either. The custom of not talking about age soon enough became the habit of not thinking about it, either.

"tu maɪɾ əv bɪn koʊɪnsɪɾəns," sin wɛn ɑn, "ivən θɹi, ðoʊ ðət stʃɹeɪnz kɹɪduləɾi, bʌt faɪv meɪks ə pæɾɝn. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə blu, ðə bɹaʊn wɑz ði oʊnli ədʒɑ tə hæv tu sɪɾɝz dʒɔɪn ðə ɹɛbəlz. meɪbi ðɛɹz ə ɹizən ɪn ðət waɪ ðeɪ tʃoʊz wʌn ɑd sɪstɝ ən wʌn nɑt, ɪf aɪ kən fɪɡjɝ ɪɾ aʊt.

"Two might have been coincidence," Seaine went on, "even three, though that strains credulity, but five makes a pattern. Except for the Blue, the Brown was the only Ajah to have two Sitters join the rebels. Maybe there's a reason in that why they chose one odd sister and one not, if I can figure it out.

bʌt ðəɹ ɪz ə pæɾɝn, jukɪɝi-ə pʌzəl-ænd wɛðɝ ɪts ɹæʃənəl əɹ nɑt, sʌmθɪŋ tɛlz mi wi hæd bɛɾɝ sɑlv ɪt bɪfɔɹ ðə ɹɛbəlz ɡɛt hɪɹ. ɪt meɪks mi fil əz ðoʊ sʌm-bɑɾiz hæn ɪz ɑn maɪ ʃoʊldɝ, bʌt wən aɪ lʊk, ðəɹ ɪzən ɛniwʌn ðɛɹ."

But there is a pattern, Yukiri-a puzzle-and whether it's rational or not, something tells me we had better solve it before the rebels get here. It makes me feel as though some-body's hand is on my shoulder, but when I look, there isn't anyone there."

wʌt stʃɹeɪn kɹɪduləɾi wɑz ði aɪdiə ʌv ði ədʒɑ hɛdz kənspaɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. bʌt ðɛn, jukɪɝi θɔt, ə kənspɪɹəsi ʌv sɪɾɝz ɪz bɪɑn fɑɹ-fɛtʃt, ən aɪm ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv wʌn. ən ðəɹ wɑz ðə sɪmpəl fæk ðət noʊ wʌn aʊtsaɪɾ ən ədʒɑ wɑz səpoʊz tə noʊ ði ədʒɑz hɛd, bʌt ði ʌðɝ ədʒɑ hɛdz əɡɛnst ɔl kʌstəm dɪd. "ɪf ðɛɹz ə pʌzəl" ʃi sɛd wɛɹəli, "ju hæv ə lɔŋ taɪm tə sɑlv ɪt. ðə ɹɛbəlz kæn liv mʊɹændi bɪfɔɹ spɹɪŋ, wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪv toʊl pipəl, ən ðə mɑɹtʃ ʌpɹɪvɝ wɪl teɪk mʌnθs, ɪf ðeɪ hoʊl ðɛɹ ɑɹmi təɡɛðɝ ðət lɔŋ." ʃi dɪd nɑt daʊt ðeɪ wʊd, ðoʊ, nɑɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. "ɡoʊ bæk tə jəɹ ɹumz bɪfɔɹ sʌmwʌn siz əs stændɪŋ hɪɹ wɔɹɾɪd, ən θɪŋk ɑn jəɹ pʌzəl," ʃi sɛd, nɑɾ əŋkinli, ɹɛstɪŋ ə hæn ɑn sinz sliv. "jul əv tə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð biɪŋ lʊkt æftɝ əntɪl wɝ ɔl ʃʊɹ jə ɑɹ seɪf."

What strained credulity was the idea of the Ajah heads conspiring in the first place. But then, Yukiri thought, a conspiracy of Sitters is beyond far-fetched, and I'm in the middle of one. And there was the simple fact that no one outside an Ajah was supposed to know the Ajah's head, but the other Ajah heads against all custom did. "If there's a puzzle" she said wearily, "you have a long time to solve it. The rebels can't leave Murandy before spring, whatever they've told people, and the march upriver will take months, if they hold their army together that long." She did not doubt they would, though, not any longer. "Go back to your rooms before someone sees us standing here warded, and think on your puzzle," she said, not unkindly, resting a hand on Seaine's sleeve. "You'll have to put up with being looked after until we're all sure you are safe."

ði ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn sinz feɪs wʊɾə bɪn kɔl sʌlən ɑn ɛniwʌn bʌɾ ə sɪɾɝ. "aɪl spik tə sɹɪn əɡɛn," ʃi sɛd, bʌt ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ɝaʊn əɹ vænɪʃt.

The expression on Seaine's face would have been called sullen on anyone but a Sitter. "I'll speak to Saerin again," she said, but the light of saidar around her vanished.

wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ dʒɔɪn bɝneɪl ən ðə tu ʌv əm ɡlaɪɾ ʌp ðə kɝvɪŋ hɔlweɪ təwɔɹd ði ədʒɑ kɔɹɾɝz; boʊθ əz wɛɹi əz fɔnz wən wʊlvz wɝ aʊt, jukɪɝi fɛlt ə hɛvi hɑɹt. ɪt wɑz ə pɪɾi ðə ɹɛbəlz kəd nɑt ɡɛt ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ sʌmɝ. ət lis ðət maɪt meɪk ði ədʒəz kʌm təɡɛðɝ əɡɛn, soʊ sɪstɝz wɝ nɑt fɔɹs tə slɪŋk əbaʊt ðə waɪt taʊɝ. əz wɛl wɪʃ fəɹ wɪŋz, ʃi θɔt sædli.

Watching her join Bernaile and the two of them glide up the curving hallway toward the Ajah quarters; both as wary as fawns when wolves were out, Yukiri felt a heavy heart. It was a pity the rebels could not get there before summer. At least that might make the Ajahs come together again, so sisters were not forced to slink about the White Tower. As well wish for wings, she thought sadly.

dɪtɝmən tə kip əɹ muɾ ɪn tʃɛk, ʃi wɛn tə ɡæðɝ ʌp maɪdɑni ən lɛoʊnɪn. ʃi hæɾ ə blæk sɪstɝ tə ɪnvɛstəɡeɪt, ən ət list ɪnvɛstəɡeɪʃən wɑz ə pʌzəl ʃi nu haʊ tə wɝk.

Determined to keep her mood in check, she went to gather up Meidani and Leonin. She had a Black sister to investigate, and at least investigation was a puzzle she knew how to work.

ɡɔɪnz aɪz pɑpt oʊpən ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs əz ə nu weɪv ə koʊld ɹoʊz ɪndə ðə heɪlɔft. ðə bɑɹnz θɪk stoʊnwɔlz nɔɹməli kɛpt aʊt ðə wɝst ə ðə naɪts tʃɪl, ɪf oʊnli ðə wɝst. vɔɪsəz mɝmɝd bɪloʊ; noʊ wʌn saʊndəɾ ɪksaɪɾəd. hi tʊk ɪz hæn əweɪ fɹəm ðə sɔɹd laɪɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ən tʌɡd ɪz ɡɔnləts taɪɾɝ. laɪk ɔl ðə ɹɛst ə ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz, hi slɛpt ɪn ɛvɹi stɪtʃ i kəd pʊɾ ɑn. pɹɑbli ɪt wɑz dʒʌs taɪm tə weɪk səm ə ðə mɛn ɝaʊn ɪm fəɹ ðɛɹ sɛntʃɹi tɝnz, bʌɾ i wɑz fʊli əweɪk naʊ hɪmsɛlf ən i daʊɾɪd i wəd faɪn slip əɡɛn sun. ɪn ɛni keɪs, hɪz slip wɑz ɔlweɪz fɹɛtfəl tʃɹʌbəl baɪ dɑɹk dʒɹimz, hɔntəd baɪ ðə wʊmən i lʌvd. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛɹ ɛɡwin wɑz, əɹ wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz əlaɪv.

Gawyn's eyes popped open in the darkness as a new wave of cold rose into the hayloft. The barn's thick stonewalls normally kept out the worst of the nights chill, if only the worst. Voices murmured below; no one sounded excited. He took his hand away from the sword lying beside him and tugged his gauntlets tighter. Like all the rest of the Younglings, he slept in every stitch he could put on. Probably it was just time to wake some of the men around him for their sentry turns, but he was fully awake now himself and he doubted he would find sleep again soon. In any case, his sleep was always fretful troubled by dark dreams, haunted by the woman he loved. He did not know where Egwene was, or whether she was alive.

əɹ wɛðɝ ʃi kəd fɝɡɪv hɪm. hi stʊɾ ʌp; lɛɾɪŋ ðə lus heɪ hi hæd pʊld oʊvɝ hɪmsɛlf slaɪɾ ɔf ɪz kloʊk, ən bʌkəld ɑn ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt.

Or whether she could forgive him. He stood up; letting the loose hay he had pulled over himself slide off his cloak, and buckled on his sword belt.

əz i pɪkt ɪz weɪ əmʌŋ ðə ʃæɾoʊi maʊnz ə mɛn slipɪŋ ətɑp ðə stæk beɪlz ə heɪ, ðə feɪn skɹeɪp ə buts ɑn wʊɾən ɹʌŋz toʊld ɪm sʌmwʌn wɑz klaɪmɪŋ ðə læɾɝ tə ðə lɔft. ə dɪm fɪɡjɝ əpɪɹɾ ət ðə tɑp ə ðə læɾɝ, ðən stɑp tə weɪt fəɹ hɪm.

As he picked his way among the shadowy mounds of men sleeping atop the stacked bales of hay, the faint scrape of boots on wooden rungs told him someone was climbing the ladder to the loft. A dim figure appeared at the top of the ladder, then stopped to wait for him.

"lɔɹd ɡɔɪn!" ɹeɪjɹz dip vɔɪs sɛd sɔfli ɪn ə dəmɑni æksɛn ənɔltɝd baɪ sɪks jɪɹz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðə fɝs lutɛnəns ɹʌmbəlɪŋ vɔɪs wɑz ɔlweɪz ə sɝpɹaɪz, kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ə slaɪt mæn u stʊd bɛɹli haɪɝ ðən ɡɔɪnz ʃoʊldɝ. ivən soʊ, hæd taɪmz bɪn dɪfɹənt, ɹeɪjɹ ʃʊɹli wʊɾə bɪn ə wɔɹɾɝ baɪ ðɪs taɪm. "aɪ θɔɾ aɪɾ əv tə weɪk ju. ə sɪstɝ dʒʌst ɝaɪvd, ɑn fʊt. ə mɛsənʒɝ fɹəm ðə taʊɝ, ʃi wɑntəd ðə sɪstɝ ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ hɪɹ. aɪ toʊl tɑməl ən ɪz bɹʌðɝ tə teɪk əɹ tə ðə meɪɝz haʊs bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ tɝn ɪn fəɹ ðə naɪt."

"Lord Gawyn!" Rajar's deep voice said softly in a Domani accent unaltered by six years training in Tar Valon. The First Lieutenant's rumbling voice was always a surprise, coming from a slight man who stood barely higher than Gawyn's shoulder. Even so, had times been different, Rajar surely would have been a Warder by this time. "I thought I'd have to wake you. A sister just arrived, on foot. A messenger from the Tower, She wanted the sister in charge here. I told Tomil and his brother to take her to the Mayor's house before they turned in for the night."

ɡɔɪn saɪd. hi ʃʊɾə ɡɔn hoʊm wən i ɹɪtɝn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən faʊn ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz ɪkspɛl fɹəm ðə sɪɾi, ɪnstɛɾ ə lɛɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf bi kɑt hɪɹ baɪ wɪntɝ. ɪspɛʃli wən i wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪleɪɾə wɑntəɾ əm ɔl dɛd. hɪz sɪstɝ ɪleɪn wəd kʌm tə keɪməln ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ɪf ʃi wɑz nɔɹ ɔlɹɛɾi ðɛɹ. sɝɾənti ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd si ðət ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ ɹitʃt keɪɛmlɪn ɪn taɪm tə kleɪm ðə θɹoʊn bɪfɔɹ sʌmwʌn ɛls kʊd. ðə waɪt taʊɝ wəd nɑt ɡɪv ʌp ði ædvæntɪdʒ ʌv ə kwin u wəɾ ɔlsoʊ bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ɪleɪn kəd bi ɑn əɹ weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, tu, əɹ ɹɪzaɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɹaɪt ðət mɪnət. hi dɪd nɔɹ haʊ ʃi hæd bɪkʌm ɛntæŋɡəld wɪð sɪuən sɑntʃ, əɹ haʊ dipli-ʃi ɔlweɪz dʌv ɪndə ə pɑnd wɪθaʊt tʃɛkɪŋ ðə dɛpθ-bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə ən ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ maɪt wɑnə kwɛstʃən əɹ kloʊsli, dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ əɹ nɑt. kwin əɹ nɑt. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi kəd nɑt bi hɛld əkaʊntəbəl, ðoʊ. ʃi wɑz stɪl oʊnli wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd. hi hæd tə tɛl hɪmsɛlf ðət fɹikwənli.

Gawyn sighed. He should have gone home when he returned to Tar Valon and found the Younglings expelled from the city, instead of letting himself be caught here by winter. Especially when he was sure Elaida wanted them all dead. His sister Elayne would come to Caemyln eventually, if she was nor already there. Certainty any Aes Sedai would see that the Daughter-Heir of Andor reached Caemlyn in time to claim the throne before someone else could. The White Tower would not give up the advantage of a queen who would also be Aes Sedai. On the other hand, Elayne could be on her way to Tar Valon, too, or residing in the White Tower right that minute. He did nor how she had become entangled with Siuan Sanche, or how deeply-she always dove into a pond without checking the depth-but Elaida and the Hall of the Tower might want to question her closely, Daughter-Heir or not. Queen or not. He was sure she could not be held accountable, though. She was still only one of the Accepted. He had to tell himself that frequently.

ðə nuəs pɹɑbləm wɑz ðəɾ ən ɑɹmi leɪ bɪtwin ɪm ən tɑɹ vəlɑn, naʊ. ət lis twɛnti-faɪv θaʊzən soʊlʒɝz ɑn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn ænd, hi hæd tə bɪliv, əz mɛni ɑn ðə wɛs bæŋk. ðeɪ hæd tə bi səpɔɹɾɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu ɪleɪɾə kɔld ɹɛbəlz. hu ɛls wəd dɛɹ bɪsidʒ tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪtsɛlf? ðə weɪ ðəɾ ɑɹmi hæɾ əpɪɹd, ðoʊ, simɪŋ tə mətɪɹiəlaɪz aʊɾ ə noʊwɛɹ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə snoʊstɔɹm, wɑz ɪnʌf tə ɹeɪz pɹɪkəlz ɑn ɪz bæk stɪl. ɹumɝ ən əlɑɹmz ɔlweɪz flu əhɛɾ ʌv ɛni lɑɹdʒ fɔɹs ʌndɝ ɑɹmz ɑn ðə mɑɹtʃ. ɔlweɪz. ðɪs wʌn hæɾ ɝaɪv laɪk spɪɹəts, ɪn saɪləns. ði ɑɹmi wɑz əz ɹil əz stoʊn, haʊɛvɝ, soʊ hi kəd niðɝ ɛntɝ tɑɹ vəlɑn tə faɪnd wɛðɝ ɪleɪn wɑz ɪn ðə taʊɝ, nɔɹ ɹaɪd saʊθ. ɛni ɑɹmi wəd teɪk noʊɾəs ʌv ʌpwɝdz ə θɹi hʌnʒɹəd mɛn ɑn ðə muv, ən ðə ɹɛbəlz wəɾ əv noʊ ɡʊd wɪl təwɔɹd ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz. ivən ɪf i wɛn əloʊn, tʃɹævəl ɪn wɪntɝ wɑz vɛɹi sloʊ, ən i kəd ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn əz kwɪkli ɪf i weɪɾəd əntɪl spɹɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hoʊp ə faɪndɪŋ pæsədʒ ɑn ə ʃɪp, iðɝ. ðə sidʒ wəd maɪɹ ɹɪvɝ tʃɹæfɪk ɪn ə hoʊpləs snɑɹl. hi wɑz maɪɹɾ ɪn ə hoʊpləs snɑɹl.

The newest problem was that an army lay between him and Tar Valon, now. At least twenty-five thousand soldiers on this side of the River Erinin and, he had to believe, as many on the west bank. They had to be supporting the Aes Sedai who Elaida called rebels. Who else would dare besiege Tar Valon itself? The way that army had appeared, though, seeming to materialize out of nowhere in the middle of a snowstorm, was enough to raise prickles on his back still. Rumor and alarms always flew ahead of any large force under arms on the march. Always. This one had arrived like spirits, in silence. The army was as real as stone, however, so he could neither enter Tar Valon to find whether Elayne was in the Tower, nor ride south. Any army would take notice of upwards of three hundred men on the move, and the rebels would have no good will toward the Younglings. Even if he went alone, travel in winter was very slow, and he could reach Caemlyn as quickly if he waited until spring. There was no hope of finding passage on a ship, either. The siege would mire river traffic in a hopeless snarl. He was mired in a hopeless snarl.

ən naʊ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd kʌm ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪt. ʃi wəd nɑt sɪmpləfaɪ mæɾɝz ɛni.

And now an Aes Sedai had come in the middle of the night. She would not simplify matters any.

"lɛts faɪn əɹ wʌt nuz ʃi bɹɔt," hi sɛd kwaɪətli, moʊʃənɪŋ ɹeɪjɹ daʊn ðə læɾɝ əhɛɾ ə hɪm, twɛnti hɔɹsəz ən ðɛɹ stæk sæɾəlz kɹaʊɾəd nɪɹli ɛvɹi ɪntʃ ə ðə dɑɹk bɑɹn nɔɹ teɪkən baɪ mɪstʃɹəs mɪlənz tu dʌzən əɹ soʊ mɪlk kaʊz ɪn ðɛɹ stɔlz, soʊ hi ən ɹeɪjɹ hæd tə θɹɛd ðɛɹ weɪ tə ðə waɪd dɔɹz. ði oʊnli wɔɹmθ keɪm fɹəm ðə slipɪŋ ænəməlz. ðə tu mɛn ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ saɪlənt ʃædoʊz, bʌt ɡɔɪn kəd fil əm wɑtʃɪŋ ɹeɪjɹ ən ɪm slɪp aʊɾ ɪndə ði aɪsi naɪt. ðeɪ wəd noʊ əbaʊt ðə mɛsənʒɝ, ən bi wʌndɝɪŋ.

"Let's find our what news she brought," he said quietly, motioning Rajar down the ladder ahead of him, Twenty horses and their stacked saddles crowded nearly every inch of the dark barn nor taken by Mistress Millin's two dozen or so milk cows in their stalls, so he and Rajar had to thread their way to the wide doors. The only warmth came from the sleeping animals. The two men guarding the horses were silent shadows, but Gawyn could feel them watching Rajar and him slip out into the icy night. They would know about the messenger, and be wondering.

ðə skaɪ wɑz klɪɹ, ən ðə weɪnɪŋ mun stɪl ɡeɪv ə fɛɹ laɪt. ðə vɪlədʒ ə dɔɹiən ʃoʊn wɪð snoʊ. hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ kloʊks kloʊz, ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm tʃɹʌdʒ ni-dip θɹu ðə vɪlədʒ ɪn saɪləns, əlɔŋ wʌt hæd wʌns bɪn ðə ɹoʊd tə tɑɹ vəlɑn fɹəm ə sɪɾi ðət hæd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪstəd fəɹ hʌnʒɹədz ə jɪɹz.

The sky was clear, and the waning moon still gave a fair light. The village of Dorian shone with snow. Holding their cloaks close, the pair of them trudged knee-deep through the village in silence, along what had once been the road to Tar Valon from a city that had not existed for hundreds of years.

naʊədeɪz, noʊbɑdi tʃɹævəld ɪn ðɪs dɝɛkʃən fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪksɛp tə kʌm tə dɔɹiən, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹizən tə kʌm ɪn wɪntɝ. baɪ tʃɹədɪʃən, ðə vɪlədʒ səplaɪd tʃizɪz tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən tə noʊ wʌn ɛls. ɪt wɑz ə taɪni pleɪs, dʒʌs fɪftin sleɪt-ɹuft, ɡɹeɪ stoʊn haʊsəz wɪð dʒɹɪfs ə snoʊ paɪld ʌp əz haɪ əz ðə bɑɾəmz ə ðə fɝst-flɔɹ wɪndoʊz. ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns bɪhaɪn itʃ haʊs stʊɾ ɪts kaʊ bɑɹn eɪl kɹaʊɾəd wɪð mɛn ən hɔɹsəz naʊ, əz wɛl əz kaʊz. moʊst ə tɑɹ vəlɑn maɪt wɛl əv fɝɡɑɾən dɔɹiən ɪɡzɪstəd. hu θɔɾ əbaʊt wɛɹ tʃiz keɪm fɹʌm? ɪt hæd simd ə vɛɹi ɡʊd pleɪs fəɹ kipɪŋ aʊɾ ə saɪt. əntɪl naʊ. ɔl ðə haʊsəz bʌt wʌn ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ wɝ dɑɹk. laɪt lik θɹu ðə ʃʌɾɝz ɑn sɛvɹəl wɪndoʊz ə mæstɝ bɝloʊz dwɛlɪŋ, əpstɛɹz ən daʊn. ɡɑɹɔn bɝloʊ hæd ðə mɪsfɔɹtʃən tə oʊn ðə lɑɹdʒəs haʊs ɪn dɔɹiən, ɪn ədɪʃən tə biɪŋ meɪɝ. ɛni vɪlɪdʒɝ u hæd ʃɪftəd slipɪŋ ɝeɪnʒmənts tə faɪn ə bɛd fəɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ mʌs bi ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ ɪt baɪ naʊ; ən mæstɝ bɝloʊ hæd hæd tu ɹumz ɔlɹɛɾi ɛmpti.

Nowadays, nobody traveled in this direction from Tar Valon except to come to Dorian, and there was no reason to come in winter. By tradition, the village supplied cheeses to the White Tower and to no one else. It was a tiny place, just fifteen slate-roofed, gray stone houses with drifts of snow piled up as high as the bottoms of the first-floor windows. A little distance behind each house stood its cow barn ail crowded with men and horses now, as well as cows. Most of Tar Valon might well have forgotten Dorian existed. Who thought about where cheese came from? It had seemed a very good place for keeping out of sight. Until now. All the houses but one in the village were dark. Light leaked through the shutters on several windows of Master Burlow's dwelling, upstairs and down. Garon Burlow had the misfortune to own the largest house in Dorian, in addition to being Mayor. Any villager who had shifted sleeping arrangements to find a bed for an Aes Sedai must be regretting it by now; and Master Burlow had had two rooms already empty.

stæmpɪŋ ðə snoʊ fɹəm ɪz buts ɑn ðə stoʊn stɛp, ɡɔɪn ɹæpt ɑn ðə meɪɝz staʊt dɔɹ wɪð ə ɡɔntələɾəd fɪst. noʊ wʌn ænsɝd, ən æftɝ ə moʊmən i lɪftəd ðə lætʃ ən lɛd ɹeɪjɹ ɪn.

Stamping the snow from his boots on the stone step, Gawyn rapped on the Mayor's stout door with a gauntleted fist. No one answered, and after a moment he lifted the latch and led Rajar in.

ðə bim-silɪŋɡd fɹʌn ɹum wɑz fɛɹli lɑɹdʒ fəɹ ə fɑɹmhaʊs, ən dɑməneɪɾəd baɪ sɛvɹəl kɔl oʊpən-fɹʌn kæbənəts, fʊl ə pjuɾɝ ən ɡleɪz kɹɑkɝi ən ə lɔŋ, pɑlɪʃt teɪbəl laɪnd wɪð haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹz. ɔl ə ði ɔɪl læmps hæd bɪn lɪt, ən ɪkstʃɹævəɡəns ɪn wɪntɝ, wən ə fju tæloʊ kændəlz wəd du, bʌt ðə fleɪmz ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪs hæd meɪd lɪɾəl ɪmpɹɛʃən ɑn ðə splɪt lɔɡz, jɛt, əɹ ɑn ðə tɛmpɹətʃɝ ə ðə ɹum. ivən soʊ, ðə tu sɪstɝz u hæd ɹumz əbʌv wɝ bɛɹfʊɾ ɑn ðə ɹʌɡələs wʊɾən flɔɹ, wɪð fɝ-laɪn kloʊks hʌŋ heɪstəli oʊvɝ ðɛɹ lɪnən naɪtdʒɹɛsəz. keɪɾɝin ɔlɹuɾɪn ən tɑɹnə fiɹ wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ə smɔl wʊmən ɪn ə dɑɹk jɛloʊ-slæʃt ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs ən kloʊk ðət wɝ snoʊ dæmp tə hɝ hɪps. ʃi stʊɾ əz nɪɹ ðə waɪd hɑɹθ əz ʃi wʊd, taɪɹədli wɔɹmɪŋ əɹ hænz ən ʃɪvɝɪŋ. əfʊɾ ɪn ðə snoʊ, ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv meɪd ðə tʃɹɪp fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪn lɛs ðən tu əɹ θɹi deɪz, ən ivən ɛɛs sədaɪ fɛl ðə koʊld ɪvɛntʃəwəli. ʃi hæd tə bi ðə sɪstɝ ɹeɪjɹ hæd spoʊkən ʌv, jɛt kəmpɛɹd tə ði ʌðɝz, ði eɪɡləsnəs wɑz hɑɹdli noʊɾəsəbəl ɪn hɝ. kəmpɛɹd tə ði ʌðɝ tu, ʃi wɑz hɑɹdli noʊɾəsəbəl əɾ ɔl.

The beam-ceilinged front room was fairly large for a farmhouse, and dominated by several call open-front cabinets, full of pewter and glazed crockery and a long, polished table lined with high-back chairs. All of the oil lamps had been lit, an extravagance in winter, when a few tallow candles would do, but the flames in the fireplace had made little impression on the split logs, yet, or on the temperature of the room. Even so, the two sisters who had rooms above were barefoot on the rugless wooden floor, with fur-lined cloaks hung hastily over their linen nightdresses. Katerine Alruddin and Tarna Feir were watching a small woman in a dark yellow-slashed riding dress and cloak that were snow damp to her hips. She stood as near the wide hearth as she would, tiredly warming her hands and shivering. Afoot in the snow, she could not have made the trip from Tar Valon in less than two or three days, and even Aes Sedai felt the cold eventually. She had to be the sister Rajar had spoken of, yet compared to the others, the agelessness was hardly noticeable in her. Compared to the other two, she was hardly noticeable at all.

ði æbsəns ə ðə meɪɝ ən ɪz waɪf pʊɾ ən ɛkstʃɹə nɑɾ ɪn ɡɔɪnz mɪɾəl, ðoʊ hi hæd hæf ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪt. ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn ðəɹ meɪkɪŋ oʊvɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɔfɝɪŋ hɑt dʒɹɪŋks ən fud, noʊ mæɾɝ ði aʊɝ, ənlɛs ðeɪ hæd bɪn sɛn bæk tə ðɛɹ bɛdz tə ɡɪv keɪɾɝin ən tɑɹnə pɹaɪvəsi wɪð ðə mɛsənʒɝ. wɪtʃ laɪkli mɛn i wɑz ə ful tə wɑnə noʊ ðə mɛsədʒ. bʌɾ i hæd noʊn ðət bɪfɔɹ i lɛf ðə bɑɹn.

The absence of the Mayor and his wife put an extra knot in Gawyn's middle, though he had half expected it. They would have been there making over the Aes Sedai, offering hot drinks and food, no matter the hour, unless they had been sent back to their beds to give Katerine and Tarna privacy with the messenger. Which likely meant he was a fool to want to know the message. But he had known that before he left the barn.

"... boʊtmən sɛɾ i wəd steɪ wɛɹ wi lændəɾ əntɪl ðə sidʒ lɪftəd," ðə smɔl wʊmən wɑz seɪɪŋ ɪn wɪɹi toʊnz əz ɡɔɪn ɛntɝd., "bʌɾ i wɑz soʊ fɹaɪɾənd, hi kəd bi liɡz daʊnɹɪvɝ baɪ naʊ." əz ðə koʊl fɹəm ðə dɔɹweɪ ɹitʃt hɝ, ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊnd., ən səm ə ðə fətiɡ dʒɹeɪn fɹəm əɹ skwɛɹ feɪs. "ɡɔɪn tʃɹəkənd" ʃi sɛd. "aɪ hæv ɔɹɾɝz fəɹ jə fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, lɔɹd ɡɔɪn."

"... boatman said he would stay where we landed until the siege lifted," the small woman was saying in weary tones as Gawyn entered., "but he was so frightened, he could be leagues downriver by now." As the cold from the doorway reached her, she looked around., and some of the fatigue drained from her square face. "Gawyn Trakand" she said. "I have orders for you from the Amyrlin Seat, Lord Gawyn."

"ɔɹɾɝz?" ɡɔɪn sɛd, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɔft ɪz ɡɔnləts ən tʌkɪŋ əm bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛl tə ɡeɪn taɪm.

"Orders?" Gawyn said, drawing oft his gauntlets and tucking them behind his belt to gain time.

blʌn tʃɹuθ maɪt bi ɪn ɔɹɾɝ fəɹ wʌns, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd, "waɪ wəɾ ɪleɪɾə sɛn mi ɔɹɾɝz? waɪ ʃəɾ aɪ oʊbeɪ ɪf ʃi dɪd? ʃi dɪsoʊn mi, ən ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz." ɹeɪjɹ hæd teɪkən ə ɹɪspɛkfəl stæns fəɹ ðə sɪstɝz, hænz foʊldəd bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk, ən i ɡeɪv ɡɔɪn ə kwɪk saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlæns. hi wəd nɑt spik aʊɾ ə tɝn, wʌtɛvɝ ɡɔɪn sɛd, bʌt ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz dɪd nɑt ʃɛɹ ɡɔɪnz bɪlif. ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd wʌt ðeɪ dɪd, ən noʊ mæn kəd noʊ waɪ əntɪl ə sɪstɝ toʊl hɪm. ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz hæd kæs ðɛɹ lɑts wɪð ðə waɪt taʊɝ hoʊl-hɑɹɾɪdli, ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ feɪt.

Blunt truth might be in order for once, he decided, "Why would Elaida send me orders? Why should I obey if she did? She disowned me, and the Younglings." Rajar had taken a respectful stance for the sisters, hands folded behind his back, and he gave Gawyn a quick sidelong glance. He would not speak out of turn, whatever Gawyn said, but the Younglings did not share Gawyn's belief. Aes Sedai did what they did, and no man could know why until a sister told him. The Younglings had cast their lots with the White Tower whole-heartedly, embracing fate.

"ðæt kən weɪt, nɛɹənwɪn," keɪɾɝin snæpt, dʒɝkɪŋ əɹ kloʊk taɪɾɝ. hɝ blæk hɛɹ spɪld ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz hæf ɪn tæŋɡəlz, əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd teɪkən ə fju heɪsti swaɪps wɪð ə koʊm ən ɡɪvən ʌp. ðəɹ wɑz ən ɪntɛnsəɾi əbaʊɾ əɹ ðət ɹimaɪndəd ɡɔɪn ʌv ə hʌntɪŋ lɪŋks. əɹ meɪbi wʌn wɛɹi ʌv tʃɹæps. ʃi spɛɹd hæf ə ɡlæns fəɹ ɪm ən ɹeɪjɹ; noʊ mɔɹ, "aɪ hæv pɹɛsɪŋ bɪznəs ɪn ðə taʊɝ. tɛl mi haʊ tə faɪn ðɪs neɪmləs fɪʃɪŋ vɪlədʒ. wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt jəɹ boʊtmən ɪz stɪl ðɛɹ, əl faɪn sʌmwʌn tə teɪk mi əkɹɔs."

"That can wait, Narenwin," Katerine snapped, jerking her cloak tighter. Her black hair spilled around her shoulders half in tangles, as though she had taken a few hasty swipes with a comb and given up. There was an intensity about her that reminded Gawyn of a hunting lynx. Or maybe one wary of traps. She spared half a glance for him and Rajar; no more, "I have pressing business in the Tower. Tell me how to find this nameless fishing village. Whether or not your boatman is still there, I'll find someone to take me across."

"æn mi," tɑɹnə pʊɾ ɪn, hɝ stʃɹɔŋ dʒɔ stʌbɝn ən əɹ blu aɪz ʃɑɹp əz spɪɹz. ɪn kɑntʃɹæs tə keɪɾɝin, tɑɹnəz lɔŋ, peɪl jɛloʊ hɛɹ wɑz əz niɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæd hæɾ ə meɪɾ ətɛndɪŋ əɹ bɪfɔɹ kʌmɪŋ daʊnstɛɹz. ʃi wɑz ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz foʊkəst, ðoʊ, dʒʌs mɔɹ kəntʃɹoʊld, "aɪ ɔlsoʊ hæv ɝdʒən ɹizən tə ɹitʃ ðə taʊɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɛni fɝðɝ dɪleɪ." ʃi ɡeɪv ɡɔɪn ə nɑɾ ən ɹeɪjɹ ə lɛsɝ, kul əz ðə mɑɹbəl ʃi sim kɑɹv fɹʌm. jɛt, mɔɹ fɹɛnli ðən ðə feɪs ʃi ʃoʊd keɪɾɝin əɹ ɡɑɾ ɪn ɹɪtɝn. ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ə stɪfnəs bɪtwin ðə tu wɪmən, ðoʊ ðeɪ ʃɛɹd ðə seɪm ədʒɑ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt laɪk wʌn ənʌðɝ, pɝhæps ivən dɪslaɪkt itʃ ʌðɝ. wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə bi ʃʊɹ.

"And me," Tarna put in, her strong jaw stubborn and her blue eyes sharp as spears. In contrast to Katerine, Tarna's long, pale yellow hair was as neat as if she had had a maid attending her before coming downstairs. She was every bit as focused, though, just more controlled, "I also have urgent reason to reach the Tower without any further delay." She gave Gawyn a nod and Rajar a lesser, cool as the marble she seemed carved from. Yet, more friendly than the face she showed Katerine or got in return. There was always a stiffness between the two women, though they shared the same Ajah. They did not like one another, perhaps even disliked each other. With Aes Sedai, it was hard to be sure.

ɡɔɪn wəd nɑt bi sɑɹi tə si iðɝ liv. tɑɹnə hæd ɹɪɾən ɪndə dɔɹiən bɛɹli ə deɪ æftɝ ðə mɪstɪɹiəs ɑɹmi ɝaɪvd, ən haʊɛvɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪtɝmən ðiz θɪŋz, ʃi ɪmiɾiətli dɪspleɪs lusoʊniə koʊl fɹəm əɹ ɹum əpstɛɹz ən koʊvɑɹlə bɪldin fɹəm kəmæn ə ði ɪlɛvən ʌðɝ sɪstɝz ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ. ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn ə ɡɹin fɹəm ðə weɪ ʃi tʊk tʃɑɹdʒ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ, kwɛstʃənɪŋ ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz əbaʊt ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən, ivən ɪnspɛktɪŋ ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz kloʊsli ɛvɹi deɪ əz ðoʊ sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ pɑsəbəl wɔɹɾɝz. hævɪŋ ə ɹɛd stʌɾi ðɛm ðət weɪ meɪd ðə mɛn stɑɹt lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. wɝs, tɑɹnə spɛn lɔŋ aʊɝz aʊt ɹaɪɾɪŋ, noʊ mæɾɝ ðə wɛðɝ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn səm loʊkəl u kəd ʃoʊ hɝ ə weɪ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi pæs ðə bɪsiɡɝz. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ʃi wəd lɛd ðɛɹ skaʊts bæk tə dɔɹiən. keɪɾɝin hæd kʌm oʊnli jɛstɝdeɪ, ɪn ə fjʊɹi ət hævɪŋ əɹ pæθ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn blɑkt, ən stʃɹeɪɾəweɪ tʊk kəmæn fɹəm tɑɹnə ən əɹ ɹum fɹəm koʊvɑɹlə. nɑt ðət ʃi juzd əɹ əθɔɹəɾi ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ. ʃi əvɔɪɾəd ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə tɛl ɛniwʌn waɪ ʃi hæd dɪsəpɪɹɾ ət dəməaɪz wɛlz əɹ wɛɹ ʃi hæd bɪn. bʌt ʃi, tu, hæɾ ɪnspɛktɪd ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz. wɪð ən ɛɹ ʌv ə wʊmən ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ən æks ʃi hæɾ ə maɪn tə juz, ən nɑɾ ə kɛɹ haʊ mʌtʃ blʌd wɑz ʃɛd.

Gawyn would not be sorry to see either leave. Tarna had ridden into Dorian barely a day after the mysterious army arrived, and however Aes Sedai determined these things, she immediately displaced Lusonia Cole from her room upstairs and Covarla Bildene from command of the eleven other sisters already in the village. She might have been a Green from the way she took charge of everything, questioning the other sisters about the situation, even inspecting the Younglings closely every day as though searching for possible Warders. Having a Red study them that way made the men start looking over their shoulders. Worse, Tarna spent long hours out riding, no matter the weather, trying to find some local who could show her a way into the city past the besiegers. Sooner or later, she would lead their scouts back to Dorian. Katerine had come only yesterday, in a fury at having her path to Tar Valon blocked, and straightaway took command from Tarna and her room from Covarla. Not that she used her authority in the same way. She avoided the other sisters, refusing to tell anyone why she had disappeared at Dumai's Wells or where she had been. But she, too, had inspected the Younglings. With an air of a woman examining an axe she had a mind to use, and not a care how much blood was shed.

hi wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə bʊli hɪm ɪndə kʌt-tɪŋ ə weɪ tə ðə bɹɪdʒəz ɪndə ðə sɪɾi fəɹ hɝ. hi wəd bi mɔɹ ðən hæpi tə si ðɛm ɡoʊ, ɪn fækt. bʌt ðɛn, wən ðeɪ lɛft, hi wəɾ əv tə dil wɪð nɛɹənwɪn. ən wɪð ɪleɪɾəz ɔɹɾɝz.

He would not have been surprised if she had tried to bully him into cut-ting a way to the bridges into the city for her. He would be more than happy to see them go, in fact. But then, when they left, he would have to deal with Narenwin. And with Elaida's orders.

"ɪts hɑɹdli ə vɪlədʒ, keɪɾɝin," ðə ʃɪvɝɪŋ sɪstɝ sɛd, "dʒʌs θɹi əɹ fɔɹ skwɑləd lɪɾəl fɪʃɝmænz haʊzɪz ə hɪl deɪ daʊnɹɪvɝ baɪ lænd. mɔɹ ðən ðət fɹəm hɪɹ." plʌkɪŋ əɾ əɹ dæmp skɝts, ʃi hɛld əm nɪɹɝ ðə faɪɝ. "wi meɪ bi eɪbəl tə faɪn ə weɪ tə sɛn mɛsədʒəz ɪndə ðə sɪɾi bʌt jə tu ɑɹ niɾəd hɪɹ. ɔl ðət stɑpt ɪleɪɾə sɛndɪŋ fɪfti sɪstɝz, əɹ mɔɹ, ɹæðɝ ðən dʒʌs mi, wɑz ðə dɪfəkəlti ʌv ɡɛɾɪŋ ivən wʌn taɪni boʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ ənsin, ivən ɪn dɑɹknəs. aɪ mʌst seɪ, aɪ wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə lɝn ðəɹ wɝ ɛni sɪstɝz ðɪs kloʊs tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz, ɛvɹi sɪstɝ u ɪz aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi mʌst-"

"It's hardly a village, Katerine," the shivering sister said, "just three or four squalid little fisherman's houses a hill day downriver by land. More than that from here." Plucking at her damp skirts, she held them nearer the fire. "We may be able to find a way to send messages into the city but you two are needed here. All that stopped Elaida sending fifty sisters, or more, rather than just me, was the difficulty of getting even one tiny boat across the river unseen, even in darkness. I must say, I was surprised to learn there were any sisters this close to Tar Valon. Under the circumstances, every sister who is outside the city must-"

tɑɹnə kʌɾ əɹ ɔf fɝmli wɪð ə ɹeɪz hænd. "ɪleɪɾə kænɑɾ ivən noʊ aɪm hɪɹ." keɪɾɝin kloʊzd əɹ maʊθ ən fɹaʊnd, hɝ tʃɪn lɪftɪŋ, bʌt ʃi lɛt ði ʌðɝ ɹɛd kəntɪnju. "wʌt wɝ əɹ ɔɹɾɝz tə jə ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə sɪstɝz ɪn dɔɹiən, nɛɹənwɪn?" ɹeɪjɹ tʊk tə stʌɾiɪŋ ðə flɔɹbɔɹdz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz bʊɹz. hi hæd feɪs bæɾəl wɪθaʊt flɪntʃɪŋ, jɛɾ oʊnli ə ful wɑntəd tə bi ɝaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ hu wɝ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ.

Tarna cut her off firmly with a raised hand. "Elaida cannot even know I am here." Katerine closed her mouth and frowned, her chin lifting, but she let the other Red continue. "What were her orders to you regarding the sisters in Dorian, Narenwin?" Rajar took to studying the floorboards in front of his boors. He had faced battle without flinching, yet only a fool wanted to be around Aes Sedai who were arguing.

ðə ʃɔɹt wʊmən fʌst wɪð əɹ dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ. "aɪ wɑz ɔɹɾɝd tə teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ ə ðə sɪstɝz aɪ faʊn hɪɹ," ʃi sɛd stʌfəli, "æn də wʌɾ aɪ kʊd." æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃi saɪd, ən əmɛndəd hɝsɛlf ɹɪlʌktənli. "ðə sɪstɝz aɪ faʊn hɪɹ ʌndɝ koʊvɑɹlə. bʌt, ʃʊɹli-" ðɪs taɪm, keɪɾɝin bɹoʊk ɪn "aɪ wɑz nɛvɝ ʌndɝ koʊvɑɹlə, nɛɹənwɪn, soʊ ðoʊz ɔɹɾɝz kænɑɾ əplaɪ tə mi. ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, əl sɛɾ aʊt tə faɪn ðiz θɹi əɹ fɔɹ fɪʃɝmænz hʌts."

The short woman fussed with her divided skirts a moment longer. "I was ordered to take charge of the sisters I found here," she said stuffily, "and do what I could." After a moment, she sighed, and amended herself reluctantly. "The sisters I found here under Covarla. But, surely-" This time, Katerine broke in "I was never under Covarla, Narenwin, so those orders cannot apply to me. In the morning, I will set out to find these three or four fisherman's huts."

"bʌt-"

"But-"

"ɪnʌf, nɛɹənwɪn," keɪɾɝin sɛɾ ɪn ən aɪsi vɔɪs. "ju kən meɪk jəɹ ɝeɪnʒmənts wɪð koʊvɑɹlə." ðə blæk-hɛɹd wʊmən ɡeɪv əɹ ədʒɑ sɪstɝ ə ɡlæns fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ. "aɪ səpoʊz jə meɪ əkʌmpəni mi, tɑɹnə. ə fɪʃɪŋ boʊt ʃəɾ əv ɹum fəɹ tu." tɑɹnə bɛn əɹ hɛd ðə slaɪɾəst fɹækʃən, pɑsəbli ɪn θæŋks.

"Enough, Narenwin," Katerine said in an icy voice. "You can make your arrangements with Covarla." The black-haired woman gave her Ajah sister a glance from the corner of her eye. "I suppose you may accompany me, Tarna. A fishing boat should have room for two." Tarna bent her head the slightest fraction, possibly in thanks.

ðɛɹ bɪznəs kənkluɾəd, ðə pɛɹ ə ɹɛdz ɡæðɝd ðɛɹ kloʊks ɝaʊn əm ən ɡlaɪɾɪd təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ dipɝ ɪndə ðə haʊs. nɛɹənwɪn ʃɑɾ ə vɛks lʊk ət ðɛɹ bæks ən tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən tə ɡɔɪn, hɝ feɪs sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪndə ðə sɛmbləns ʌv ə kɑm mæsk.

Their business concluded, the pair of Reds gathered their cloaks around them and glided toward the door deeper into the house. Narenwin shot a vexed look at their backs and turned her attention to Gawyn, her face settling into the semblance of a calm mask.

"hæv jə ɛni wɝɾ ə maɪ sɪstɝ?" hi æsk bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəɾ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ. "du jə noʊ wɛɹ ʃi ɪz?" ðə wʊmən ɹɪli wɑz taɪɝd. ʃi blɪŋkt, ən i kəɾ ɔlmoʊst si hɝ fɔɹmɪŋ ən ænsɝ ðət wəd tɛl ɪm nʌθɪŋ.

"Have you any word of my sister?" he asked before she could open her mouth. "Do you know where she is?" The woman really was tired. She blinked, and he could almost see her forming an answer that would tell him nothing.

stɑpɪŋ hæfweɪ tə ðə dɔɹ, tɑɹnə sɛd, "ɪleɪn wɑz wɪð ðə ɹɛbəlz wən aɪ sɔ hɝ læst." ɛvɹi hɛd dʒɝk təwɔɹd hɝ. "bʌt jəɹ sɪstɝ ɪz seɪf fɹəm ɹɛtʃɹəbjuʃən," ʃi wɛn ɑn kɑmli "soʊ pʊt ðəɾ əɹ ə jəɹ maɪnd. æksɛptɪd kæn tʃuz wɪtʃ sɪstɝz tə oʊbeɪ. aɪ ɡɪv jə maɪ wɝd; ʌndɝ ðə lɔ, ʃi kən sʌfɝ noʊ læstɪŋ hɑɹm ʌv ɪt.' ʃi simd ʌnəwɛɹ ə keɪɾɝinz fɹoʊzən stɛɹ, əɹ nɛɹənwɪnz pɑpɪŋ aɪz.

Stopping halfway to the door, Tarna said, "Elayne was with the rebels when I saw her last." Every head jerked toward her. "But your sister is safe from retribution," she went on calmly "so put that our of your mind. Accepted can't choose which sisters to obey. I give you my word; under the law, she can suffer no lasting harm of it.' She seemed unaware of Katerine's frozen stare, or Narenwin's popping eyes.

"ju cʊɾə toʊl mi bɪfɔɹ ðɪs," ɡɔɪn sɛd ɹʌfli. noʊ wʌn spoʊk ɹʌfli tə ɛɛs sədaɪ, nɑt mɔɹ ðən wʌns bʌɾ i wɑz pæs kɛɹɪŋ. wɝ ði ʌðɝ tu sɝpɹaɪz ðət tɑɹnə nu ði ænsɝ, əɹ sɝpɹaɪz ðət ʃi hæd ɡɪvən ɪt? "wʌt dʒju min baɪ noʊ læstɪŋ hɑɹm?" ðə peɪl-hɛɹd sɪstɝ bɑɹkt ə læf. "aɪ kən hɑɹdli pɹɑməs ʃi woʊn sʌfɝ ə fju wɛls ɪf ʃi pʊts əɹ fit tu fɑɹ ɹɔŋ. ɪleɪn ɪz wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd, nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. jɛt ðət pɹətɛks əɹ fɹəm ɡɹeɪɾɝ hɑɹm ɪf ʃiz lɛɾ əstʃɹeɪ baɪ ə sɪstɝ. ən jə nɛvɝ æskt. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi dʌznt nid ɹɛskjuɪŋ, ivən ɪf jə kəd mænədʒ ɪt. ʃiz wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ. naʊ jə noʊ əz mʌtʃ əz aɪ kən tɛl jə ʌv hɝ, ən aɪm gɑnə faɪn ə fju aʊɝz mɔɹ slip bɪfɔɹ deɪlaɪt. əl liv jə tə nɛɹənwɪn." keɪɾɝin wɑtʃt əɹ ɡoʊ wɪθaʊɾ ɔltɝɪŋ əɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən baɪ ən aɪlæʃ, ə wʊmən ʌv aɪs wɪð ði aɪz ʌv ə hʌntɪŋ kæt, bʌt ðən ʃi hɝsɛlf stʃɹoʊd fɹəm ðə ɹum soʊ kwɪkli ðəɾ əɹ kloʊk flɛɹd bɪhaɪn hɝ.

"You could have told me before this," Gawyn said roughly. No one spoke roughly to Aes Sedai, not more then once but he was past caring. Were the other two surprised that Tarna knew the answer, or surprised that she had given it? "What do you mean by no lasting harm?" The pale-haired sister barked a laugh. "I can hardly promise she won't suffer a few welts if she puts her feet too far wrong. Elayne is one of the Accepted, not Aes Sedai. Yet that protects her from greater harm if she is led astray by a sister. And you never asked. Besides, she doesn't need rescuing, even if you could manage it. She is with Aes Sedai. Now you know as much as I can tell you of her, and I am going to find a few hours more sleep before daylight. I will leave you to Narenwin." Katerine watched her go without altering her expression by an eyelash, a woman of ice with the eyes of a hunting cat, but then she herself strode from the room so quickly that her cloak flared behind her.

"tɑɹnə ɪz kɝɛkt," nɛɹənwɪn sɛd wʌns ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn keɪɾɝin. ðə smɔl wʊmən maɪt nɑt meɪk ə ɡʊd ʃoʊ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi ən mɪstɝi əlɔŋsaɪd ði ʌðɝ tu, bʌɾ əloʊn ʃi mænədʒ vɛɹi wɛl. "ɪleɪn ɪz sil tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. soʊ ɑɹ ju, fəɹ ɔl jəɹ tɔk ə dɪsaʊnɪŋ.

"Tarna is correct," Narenwin said once the door closed behind Katerine. The small woman might not make a good show of Aes Sedai serenity and mystery alongside the other two, but alone she managed very well. "Elayne is sealed to the White Tower. So are you, for all your talk of disowning.

ðə hɪstɝi ʌv ændɝ silz jə tə ðə taʊɝ."

The history of Andor seals you to the Tower."

"ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz ɑɹ ɔl sil tə ðə taʊɝ baɪ əɹ oʊn tʃɔɪs, nɛɹənwɪn sədaɪ," ɹeɪjɹ sɛd, meɪkɪŋ ə lɛɡ fɔɹməli. nɛɹənwɪnz ɡeɪz ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ɡɔɪn. hi kloʊzd ɪz aɪz, ən ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də nɔɹ tə skɹʌb əɾ əm wɪð ðə hilz əɹ ɪz hænz. ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz wɝ sil tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. noʊ wʌn wəɾ ɛvɝ fɔɹdʒɝ ðət ðeɪ hæd fɔt, ɑn ðə vɛɹi ɡɹaʊnz ə ðə taʊɝ, tə stɑp ðə ɹɛskju ʌv ə dɪpoʊzd æmɪɝlɪn. fəɹ ɡʊɾ əɹ ɪl, ðə teɪl wəd fɑloʊ ðɛm tə ðɛɹ ɡɹeɪvz. hi wɑz mɑɹk baɪ ðæt, əz wɛl, ən baɪ hɪz oʊn sikɹəts. æftɝ ɔl ðət blʌdʃɛd, hi wɑz ðə mæn u hæd lɝ sɪuən sɑntʃ wɔk fɹi. mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾəntli, ðoʊ, ɪleɪn baʊn ɪm tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən soʊ dɪɾ ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ, ən i dɪd nɑt noʊ wɪtʃ taɪd ðə taɪɾɝ nɑt, ðə lʌv ə hɪz sɪstɝ əɹ ðə lʌv ə hɪz hɑɹt. tə əbændən wʌn wɑz tə əbændən ɔl θɹi, ən waɪl i bɹiðd, hi kəd nɑɾ əbændən ɪleɪn əɹ ɛɡwin.

"The Younglings are all sealed to the Tower by our own choice, Narenwin Sedai," Rajar said, making a leg formally. Narenwin's gaze remained on Gawyn. He closed his eyes, and it was all he could do nor to scrub at them with the heels or his hands. The Younglings were sealed to the White Tower. No one would ever forger that they had fought, on the very grounds of the Tower, to stop the rescue of a deposed Amyrlin. For good or ill, the tale would follow them to their graves. He was marked by that, as well, and by his own secrets. After all that bloodshed, he was the man who had ler Siuan Sanche walk free. More importantly, though, Elayne bound him to the White Tower, and so did Egwene al'Vere, and he did not know which tied the tighter knot, the love of his sister or the love of his heart. To abandon one was to abandon all three, and while he breathed, he could not abandon Elayne or Egwene.

"ju hæv maɪ wɝd ðəɾ əl də ɔl aɪ kæn," hi sɛd wɛɹəli.' wʌt dʌz ɪleɪɾə wɑn ə mi?" ðə skaɪ əbʌv keɪɛmlɪn wɑz klɪɹ, ðə sʌn ə peɪl ɡoʊldən bɔl nɪɹ ɪts nundeɪ pik. ɪt ʃɛɾ ə bɹɪljən laɪɾ ɑn ðə blæŋkəɾ ʌv waɪt kʌvɝɪŋ ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ kʌntʃɹisaɪd, bʌt ɡeɪv noʊ wɔɹmθ. stɪl, ðə wɛðɝ wɑz wɔɹmɝ ðən dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ wʊɾə ɪkspɛktəd bæk hoʊm ɪn sɑldɑiə, ðoʊ hi dɪd nɑt ɹəɡɹɛt ðə mɑɹɾən-fɝ laɪnɪŋ ɪz nu kloʊk. koʊld ɪnʌf ɪn ɛni keɪs fəɹ ɪz bɹɛθ tə hæv fɹɔstəɾ ɪz θɪk mʌstæʃɪz wɪð mɔɹ waɪt ðən ðə jɪɹz hæd pʊɾ ɪn ðɛm. stændɪŋ ɪn æŋkəl-dip snoʊ əmʌŋ ðə lifləs tʃɹiz ɑn ə ɹaɪz pɝhæps ə liɡ nɔɹθ ə keɪɛmlɪn, hi hɛld ə lɔŋ, ɡoʊld-maʊntəd lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs tə hɪz aɪ, stʌɾiɪŋ ði æktɪvəɾi ɑn loʊɝ ɡɹaʊn əbaʊɾ ə maɪl saʊθ ə hɪm. kwɪk noʊzd ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ɪmpeɪʃənli fɹəm bɪhaɪnd, bʌɾ i ɪɡnɔɹd ðə beɪ. kwɪk dɪslaɪk stændɪŋ stɪl, bʌt səmtaɪmz jə hæd tə, wʌtɛvɝ jə wɑntəd.

"You have my word that I will do all I can," he said wearily.' What does Elaida want of me?" The sky above Caemlyn was clear, the sun a pale golden ball near its noonday peak. It shed a brilliant light on the blanket of white covering the surrounding countryside, but gave no warmth. Still, the weather was warmer than Davram Bashere would have expected back home in Saldaea, though he did not regret the marten-fur lining his new cloak. Cold enough in any case for his breath to have frosted his thick mustaches with more white than the years had put in them. Standing in ankle-deep snow among the leafless trees on a rise perhaps a league north of Caemlyn, he held a long, gold-mounted looking glass to his eye, studying the activity on lower ground about a mile south of him. Quick nosed his shoulder impatiently from behind, but he ignored the bay. Quick disliked standing still, but sometimes you had to, whatever you wanted.

ə spɹɔlɪŋ kæmp wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp daʊn ðəɹ əmʌŋ ðə skæɾɝd tʃɹiz, əstʃɹaɪd ðə ɹoʊd tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, soʊlʒɝz ənloʊɾɪŋ səplaɪ wæɡənz, dɪɡɪŋ lætʃɹinz, ɪɹɛktɪŋ tɛns ən bɪldɪŋ lin-tɑz ə bɹʌʃ ən tʃɹi-lɪmz skæɾɝd ɪn klʌmps ə vɛɹiɪŋ saɪz, itʃ lɔɹɾ ən leɪɾi kipɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn mɛn kloʊs.

A sprawling camp was going up down there among the scattered trees, astride the road to Tar Valon, soldiers unloading supply wagons, digging latrines, erecting tents and building lean-tos of brush and tree-limbs scattered in clumps of varying size, each lord and lady keeping their own men close.

ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəd tə bi ɪn pleɪs fəɹ səm taɪm. fɹəm ðə hɔɹs-laɪnz ən ðə dʒɛnɝəl ɪkstɛn ə ðə kæmp, hi ɛstəmeɪɾəd kloʊs tə faɪv θaʊzən mɛn, ɡɪv əɹ teɪk ə fju hʌnʒɹəd. faɪɾɪŋ mɛn: flɛtʃɝz, fɛɹiɝz, ɑɹmɔɹɝz, lɔnʒɹəsəz, wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz ən ʌðɝ kæmp fɑloʊɝz əz ɡʊɾ əz dʌbəl ðæt, ðoʊ əz juʒəwəl ðeɪ wɝ meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn kæmp ɑn ðə fɹɪnʒɪz. moʊst ə ðə kæmp fɑloʊɝz spɛn mɔɹ taɪm stɛɹɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɹaɪz wɛɹ bæʃɪɹ stʊd ðən ðeɪ dɪd wɝkɪŋ. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ə soʊlʒɝ pɔzd ɪn ɪz leɪbɝz tə pɪɹ təwɔɹd ðə haɪɝ ɡɹaʊnd, tu, bʌt bænɝmɪn ən skwədmən kwɪkli dʒɹoʊv əm bæk tə ðɛɹ wɝk. ðə noʊbəlz ən ɔfəsɝz ɹaɪɾɪŋ əbaʊt ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ kæmp nɛvɝ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlæns nɔɹθ, ðət bæʃɪɹ sɔ. ə foʊld ə læn hɪɾ əm fɹəm ðə sɪɾi, ðoʊ hi kəd si ðə sɪlvɝ-stʃɹikt ɡɹeɪ wɔlz fɹəm ɪz ɹaɪz. ðə sɪɾi nu ðeɪ wɝ ðɛɹ, ʌv kɔɹs; ðeɪ hæɾ ənaʊns ðɛmsɛlvz ðət mɔɹnɪŋ wɪð tʃɹʌmpəts ən bænɝz ɪn saɪɾ ə ðə wɔlz. wɛl aʊɾ ə baʊʃɑt, ðoʊ-leɪɪŋ sidʒ tə ə sɪɾi wɪð haɪ, stʃɹɔŋ wɔlz ðət stʃɹɛtʃt mɔɹ ðən sɪks liɡz ɪn sɝkʌmfɹəns wɑz noʊ izi mæɾɝ, ən kɑmpləkeɪɾəd ɪn ðɪs ɪnstəns baɪ loʊ keɪɛmlɪn, ðə wɔɹən ə bɹɪk ən stoʊn haʊsəz ən ʃɑps, wɪndoʊləs wɛɹhaʊzɪz ən lɔŋ mɑɹkəts, ðət leɪ aʊtsaɪd keɪɛmlɪnz wɔlz. sɛvən mɔɹ laɪk kæmps wɝ biɪŋ meɪd, ðoʊ, speɪst ɝaʊn ðə sɪɾi wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd kʌvɝ ɛvɹi ɹoʊd, ɛvɹi ɡeɪt ðət wəɾ əlaʊ ə saɪzəbəl, sɔɹɾi. ðeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi hæd pətʃɹoʊlz aʊt, ən laɪkli wɑtʃɝz lɝkt ɪn ðə naʊ-dɪzɝɾɪd bɪldɪŋz ə loʊ keɪɛmlɪn. smɔl pɑɹɾiz maɪt ɡɛt pæst ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, meɪbi ə fju pæk ænəməlz baɪ naɪt, bʌt nɑt nɪɹ ɪnʌf tə fid wʌn ə ðə wɝlz ɡɹeɪt sɪɾiz. hʌŋɡɝ ən dɪziz ɛndəd mɔɹ sidʒəz ðən sɔɹdz əɹ sidʒ-ɛnʒənz ɛvɝ dɪd. ði oʊnli kwɛstʃən wɑz wɛðɝ ðeɪ bɹɔt daʊn bɪsidʒd əɹ bɪsiɡɝ fɝst.

They expected to be in place for some time. From the horse-lines and the general extent of the camp, he estimated close to five thousand men, give or take a few hundred. Fighting men: fletchers, farriers, armorers, laundresses, wagon drivers and other camp followers as good as doubled that, though as usual they were making their own camp on the fringes. Most of the camp followers spent more time staring toward the rise where Bashere stood than they did working. Here and there a soldier paused in his labors to peer toward the higher ground, too, but bannermen and squadmen quickly drove them back to their work. The nobles and officers riding about the rising camp never so much as glanced north, that Bashere saw. A fold of land hid them from the city, though he could see the silver-streaked gray walls from his rise. The city knew they were there, of course; they had announced themselves that morning with trumpets and banners in sight of the walls. Well out of bowshot, though-Laying siege to a city with high, strong walls that stretched more than six leagues in circumference was no easy matter, and complicated in this instance by Low Caemlyn, the warren of brick and stone houses and shops, windowless warehouses and long markets, that lay outside Caemlyn's walls. Seven more like camps were being made, though, spaced around the city where they could cover every road, every gate that would allow a sizable, sortie. They already had patrols out, and likely watchers lurked in the now-deserted buildings of Low Caemlyn. Small parties might get past into the city, maybe a few pack animals by night, but not near enough to feed one of the world's great cities. Hunger and disease ended more sieges than swords or siege-engines ever did. The only question was whether they brought down besieged or besieger first.

ðə plæn simɪŋli hæɾ ɔl bɪn wɛl θɔt-aʊt baɪ sʌmwʌn, bʌt wʌt kənfjuzd ɪm wɝ ðə bænɝz ɪn ðə kæmp bɪloʊ. ɪt wɑz ə stʃɹɔŋ lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs, kɹæftɪd baɪ ə kɛɹhinɪn neɪm tʌvɪɹ, ə ɡɪft fɹəm ɹænd ælθɹ, ən i kəd meɪk aʊt moʊst ə ðə bænɝz wɛnɛvɝ ə bɹiz stʃɹeɪɾənd ðɛm. hi nu ɪnʌf ʌv ændɔɝən sɪɡəlz tə pɪk aʊt ði oʊk ən æks ə dɔlɪn, ɑɹmɑɡn ən ðə faɪv sɪlvɝ stɑɹz ə dɛɝɪlə ɹænd ən sɛvɹəl mɔɹ bænɝz ə lɛsɝ noʊbəlz u səpɔɹɾəd nɑiən ɑɝɔnz kleɪm tə ðə laɪən θɹoʊn ən ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn ʌv ændɝ. jɛt dʒeɪlɪn mɑɹɑnz kɹɔs-lɝtʃt ɹɛd wɔl wɑz daʊn ðɛɹ, ku, ən kɑɹliz əŋkɝɪnz pɛɹd waɪt lɛpɝdz, ən ɛɹeɪn tɔkɛnz ɡoʊldən wɪŋ hænd. baɪ ɔl ɹɪpɔɹts, ðeɪ wɝ oʊθ-swɔɹn tə nɑiənz ɹaɪvəl ɛləniə sɑɝənd. siɪŋ əm wɪð ði ʌðɝz wɑz laɪk siɪŋ wʊlvz ən wʊlfhnz ʃɛɹɪŋ ə mil. wɪð ə kæsk ʌv ɡʊd waɪn oʊpən ɪn ðə bɑɹɡən-tu ʌðɝ bænɝz, ɡoʊld-fɹɪn ən ət lis twaɪs ðə saɪz ʌv ɛni ʌðɝz, wɝ ɑn dɪspleɪ əz wɛl, ðoʊ boʊθ wɝ tu hɛvi fəɹ ði əkeɪʒənəl ɡʌs tə meɪk əm mɔɹ ðən stɝ. ðeɪ ʃoʊn wɪð ðə ɡlɪsən ə θɪk sɪlk. hi hæd sin ðə pɛɹ klɪɹli ɪnʌf ɝliɝ, haʊɛvɝ, wən ðə bænɝ-mɛn ɹoʊd bæk ən fɔɹθ ətɑp ðə ɹaɪz ðət hɪd ðɛɹ kæmp, ðə bænɝz spɹɛɾ aʊɾ əbʌv əm ɪn ðə bɹiz ə ðɛɹ ɡæləp.

The plan seemingly had all been well thought-out by someone, but what confused him were the banners in the camp below. It was a strong looking glass, crafted by a Cairhienin named Tovere, a gift from Rand al'Thor, and he could make out most of the banners whenever a breeze straightened them. He knew enough of Andoran sigils to pick out the Oak and Axe of Dawlin, Armaghn and the five Silver Stars of Daerilla Raned and several more banners of lesser nobles who supported Naean Arawn's claim to the Lion Throne and the Rose Crown of Andor. Yet Jailin Maran's cross-lurched Red Wall was down there, coo, and Carlys Ankerin's paired White Leopards, and Erain Talkend's golden Winged Hand. By all reports, they were oath-sworn to Naean's rival Elenia Sarand. Seeing them with the others was like seeing wolves and wolfhounds sharing a meal. With a cask of good wine opened in the bargain-Two other banners, gold-fringed and at least twice the size of any others, were on display as well, though both were too heavy for the occasional gust to make them more than stir. They shone with the glisten of thick silk. He had seen the pair clearly enough earlier, however, when the banner-men rode back and forth atop the rise that hid their camp, the banners spread out above them in the breeze of their gallop.

wʌn wɑz ðə laɪən ʌv ændɝ, waɪɾ ɑn ɹɛd, ðə seɪm əz flu fɹəm ðə tɔl ɹaʊn taʊɝz dɑɾəd əlɔŋ ðə sɪɾi wɔl. ɪn boʊθ keɪsəz ɪt wɑz ə dɛklɝeɪʃən ə sʌmwʌnz ɹaɪt tə ðə θɹoʊn ən kɹaʊn. ðə sɛkən lɑɹdʒ bænɝ bɪloʊ hɪm pɹoʊkleɪm ðə wʊmən θɹoʊɪŋ əɹ kleɪm əɡɛns ðəɾ ʌv ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd. fɔɹ sɪlvɝ munz ɑn ə fild ə twaɪlaɪt blu, ðə saɪn ə haʊs mɑɹn. ɔl ðɪs wɑz ɪn səpɔɹɾ ʌv ɛɹəmɪlə mɑɹn? ə mʌnθ əɡoʊ, ʃi wʊɾə bɪn lʌki ɪf ɛniwʌn ɪksɛpt əɹ oʊn haʊs əɹ ðət hæf-wɪɾɪd næsən kɝən ɡeɪv əɹ ə bɛd fəɹ ðə naɪt!

One was the Lion of Andor, white on red, the same as flew from the tall round towers dotted along the city wall. In both cases it was a declaration of someone's right to the throne and crown. The second large banner below him proclaimed the woman throwing her claim against that of Elayne Trakand. Four silver moons on a field of twilight blue, the sign of House Marne. All this was in support of Arymilla Marne? A month ago, she would have been lucky if anyone except her own House or that half-witted Nasin Caeren gave her a bed for the night!

"ðeɪ ɪɡnɔɹ ʌs," beɪl ɡɹaʊld. aɪ kəd bɹeɪk əm bɪfɔɹ sʌnsɛt, ən liv nɑt wʌn əlaɪv tə si ðə sʌn ɹaɪz əɡɛn, jɛt ðeɪ ɪɡnɔɹ ʌs."

"They ignore us," Bael growled. I could break them before sunset, and leave not one alive to see the sun rise again, yet they ignore us."

bæʃɪɹ lʊk saɪdweɪz ət ði ilmən. saɪdweɪz ən ʌp. ðə mæn taʊɝɾ əbʌv ɪm baɪ wɛl oʊvɝ ə fʊt. oʊnli beɪlz ɡɹeɪ aɪz ən ə stʃɹɪp ə sʌn-dɑɹk skɪn wɝ vɪzəbəl əbʌv ðə blæk veɪl dʒɹɔn əkɹɔs ɪz feɪs. bæʃɪɹ hoʊp ðə mæn wɑz dʒʌst ʃildɪŋ ɪz maʊθ ən noʊz fɹəm ðə koʊld-hi wɑz kæɹiɪŋ ɪz ʃɔɹt spɪɹz ən bʊl-haɪd bʌkəlɝ, ən i hæɾ ə keɪs baʊ ɑn ɪz bæk ən ə kwɪvɝ əɾ ɪz hɪp, bʌɾ oʊnli ðə veɪl mæɾɝd. ðɪs wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ ði il tə stɑɹt kɪlɪŋ. twɛnti peɪsɪz daʊn sloʊp təwɔɹd ðə kæmp, θɝɾi mɔɹ ilmɛn wɝ skwɑɾɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ hilz, hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ wɛpənz kæʒəwəli.

Bashere looked sideways at the Aielman. Sideways and up. The man towered above him by well over a foot. Only Bael's gray eyes and a strip of sun-dark skin were visible above the black veil drawn across his face. Bashere hoped the man was just shielding his mouth and nose from the cold-He was carrying his short spears and bull-hide buckler, and he had a cased bow on his back and a quiver at his hip, but only the veil mattered. This was no time for the Aiel to start killing. Twenty paces down slope toward the camp, thirty more Aielmen were squatting on their heels, holding their weapons casually.

wʌn ɪn θɹi hæɾ ɪz feɪs bɛɹ, soʊ meɪbi ɪt wɑz ðə koʊld. wɪð il, jə kəd nɛvɝ bi ʃʊɹ, ðoʊ.

One in three had his face bare, so maybe it was the cold. With Aiel, you could never be sure, though.

kwɪkli kənsɪɾɝɪŋ sɛvɹəl əpɹoʊtʃɪz, bæʃɪɹ dɪsaɪɾɪd ɑn laɪtnəs. "ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd wəd nɑt laɪk ðæt, beɪl, ən ɪf juv fɝɡɑɾən wʌɾ ɪts laɪk biɪŋ ə jʌŋ mæn, ðət minz ɹænd ælθɹ woʊn laɪk ɪt."

Quickly considering several approaches, Bashere decided on lightness. "Elayne Trakand would not like that, Bael, and if you've forgotten what it's like being a young man, that means Rand al'Thor won't like it."

beɪl ɡɹʌntɪd saʊɝli. "məleɪn toʊl mi wʌɾ ɪleɪn tʃɹəkən sɛd. wi mʌs də nʌθɪŋ ɑn əɹ pɑɹt. ðəɾ ɪz sɪmpəl-maɪndəd. wən ən ɛnəmi kʌmz əɡɛns ju, jə meɪk jus ə huɛvɝ wɪl dæns ðə spɪɹz baɪ jəɹ saɪd. də ðeɪ pleɪ ət wɔɹ ðə weɪ ðeɪ pleɪ ət ðɛɹ ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz?" "wi ɑɹ aʊtləndɝz, beɪl. ðət kaʊns ɪn ændɝ."

Bael grunted sourly. "Melaine told me what Elayne Trakand said. We must do nothing on her part. That is simple-minded. When an enemy comes against you, you make use of whoever will dance the spears by your side. Do they play at war the way they play at their Game of Houses?" "We are outlanders, Bael. That counts in Andor."

ðə hjudʒ ilmən ɡɹʌntɪɾ əɡɛn.

The huge Aielman grunted again.

ðəɹ sim noʊ pɔɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪkspleɪn ðə pɑlətɪks ɪnvɑlvd. aʊtlæn hɛlp kəd kɑst ɪleɪn wʌt ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡeɪn, ən əɹ ɛnəmiz nu ɪɾ ən nu ʃi nu ɪt, soʊ ðeɪ hæd noʊ fɪɹ ə bæʃɪɹ əɹ beɪl əɹ ðə lidʒən ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, wʌtɛvɝ ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz. ɪn fækt, dɪspaɪt ðə sidʒ, boʊθ saɪdz wəd ɡoʊ tə ɡɹeɪɾ ɛfɝt tə əvɔɪd pɪtʃt bæɾəl. ɪt wɑz ə wɔɹ, bʌɾ ə mənuvɝ ən skɝmɪʃɪz ənlɛs sʌmwʌn blʌndɝd, ən ðə wɪnɝ wəd bi huɛvɝ ɡeɪn ən ʌnəseɪləbəl pəzɪʃən əɹ fɔɹs ði ʌðɝ ɪndə wʌn ðət kəd nɑt bi dɪfɛndəd. beɪl laɪkli wəd si ɪɾ əz noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm deɪz'

There seemed no point trying to explain the politics involved. Outland help could cost Elayne what she was trying to gain, and her enemies knew it and knew she knew it, so they had no fear of Bashere or Bael or the Legion of the Dragon, whatever their numbers. In fact, despite the siege, both sides would go to great effort to avoid pitched battle. It was a war, but of maneuver and skirmishes unless someone blundered, and the winner would be whoever gained an unassailable position or forced the other into one that could not be defended. Bael likely would see it as no different from Daes'

deɪmɑɹ. ɪn ɔl tʃɹuθ, bæʃɪɹ sɔ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə sɪməlɛɹəɾi hɪmsɛlf. wɪð ðə blaɪɾ ɑn ɪts dɔɹstɛp, sɑldɑiə kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd kɑntɛsts fəɹ ðə θɹoʊn-taɪɹəns kəd bi ɛndʒjʊɹd, ən ðə blaɪt sun kɪl ðə stupəɾ ən ðə ɡɹiɾi, bʌɾ ivən ðɪs pəkjuljɝ sɔɹɾ ə sɪvəl wɔɹ wəɾ əlaʊ ðə blaɪt tə kɪl sɑldɑiə.

Dae'mar. In all truth, Bashere saw a great deal of similarity himself. With the Blight on its doorstep, Saldaea could not afford contests for the throne-Tyrants could be endured, and the Blight soon killed the stupid and the greedy, but even this peculiar sort of civil war would allow the Blight to kill Saldaea.

hi ɹɪtɝn tə stʌɾiɪŋ ðə kæmp θɹu hɪz lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʌzəl aʊt haʊ ən ʌɾɝ ful laɪk ɛɹəmɪlə mɑɹn cʊɾə ɡeɪn ðə bækɪŋ ə nɑiən ɑɝɔnən ən ɛləniə sɑɝənd. ðət pɛɹ wɑz ɡɹiɾi ən æmbɪʃəs, itʃ ʌɾɝli kənvɪnst ə hɝ oʊn ɹaɪt tə ðə θɹoʊn, ən ɪf i ʌndɝstʊd ðə tæŋɡəld wɛb ændɔɹənz juz tə dɪsaɪd ðiz mæɾɝz, itʃ hæd fɑɹ bɛɾɝ kleɪm ðən ɛɹəmɪlə. wʊlvz ən wʊlfhnz wɝ nɔɹ ɪn ɪt. ðɪs wɑz wʊlvz dəsaɪɾɪŋ tə fɑloʊ ə læpdɔɡ. pɝhæps ɪleɪn nu ðə ɹizən, bʌt ʃi wəd bɛɹli ivən ɪkstʃeɪnʒ noʊts wɪð hɪm, bɹif ən ənɪnfɔɹməɾɪv.

He returned to studying the camp through his looking glass, trying to puzzle out how an utter fool like Arymilla Marne could have gained the backing of Naean Arawnand and Elenia Sarand. That pair was greedy and ambitious, each utterly convinced of her own right to the throne, and if he understood the tangled web Andorans used to decide these matters, each had far better claim than Arymilla. Wolves and wolfhounds were nor in it. This was wolves deciding to follow a lapdog. Perhaps Elayne knew the reason, but she would barely even exchange notes with him, brief and uninformative.

tu mʌtʃ tʃæns sʌmwʌn wəd lɝn ʌv ɪɾ ən θɪŋk ʃi wɑz plɑɾɪŋ wɪð hɪm. ɪt wɑz vɛɹi laɪk ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz.

Too much chance someone would learn of it and think she was plotting with him. it was very like the Game of Houses.

"sʌmwʌn ɪz gɑnə dæns ðə spɪɹz, ɪt simz," beɪl sɛd, ən bæʃɪɹ loʊɝd ði ɔɹneɪt tub lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə faɪnd wɛɹ ði ilmən wɑz pɔɪntɪŋ.

"Someone is going to dance the spears, it seems," Bael said, and Bashere lowered the ornate tube long enough to find where the Aielman was pointing.

ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə stɛɾi stʃɹim ə pipəl fliɪŋ ðə sɪɾi əhɛɾ ə ðə sidʒ fəɹ deɪz, bʌt sʌmwʌn hæd lɛft ɪt tu leɪd. hæf ə dʌzən kænvəs-tɑpt wæɡənz stʊd hɔldɪɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɹoʊd dʒʌst aʊtsaɪd ði ɛdʒ ə loʊ keɪməln, sɝaʊndəd baɪ fɪfti hɔɹsmən ʌndɝ ə blu-ænd-waɪt kɔɹɾɝd bænɝ ðəɾ əpɪɹd tə ʃoʊ ə ɹʌnɪŋ bɛɹ, əɹ meɪbi səm sɔɹɾ ə θɪk-bɑɾid haʊnd, wən ɪt ɹɪpəld ɪn ə sʌɾən wɪnd. dɪspɪɹəɾɪd foʊk hʌɾəld tə wʌn saɪd, klʌtʃɪŋ kloʊks ɝaʊn ðɛmsɛlvz, mɛn wɪð ðɛɹ hɛdz daʊn, tʃɪlʒɹən klɪŋɪŋ tə wɪmənz skɝts. səm ə ðə hɔɹsmən hæd dɪsmaʊntɪd tə ɹænsæk ðə wæɡənz; tʃɛsts ən bɑksəz ən ivən wʌt lʊk tə bi kloʊðz ɔlɹɛɾi dɑɾəd ðə snoʊ.

There had been a steady stream of people fleeing the city ahead of the siege for days, but someone had left it too lade. Half a dozen canvas-topped wagons stood halded in the middle of the Tar Valon road just outside the edge of Low Caemyln, surrounded by fifty horsemen under a blue-and-white quartered banner that appeared to show a running bear, or maybe some sort of thick-bodied hound, when it rippled in a sudden wind. Dispirited folk huddled to one side, clutching cloaks around themselves, men with their heads down, children clinging to women's skirts. Some of the horsemen had dismounted to ransack the wagons; chests and boxes and even what looked to be clothes already dotted the snow.

laɪkli ðeɪ wɝ sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ kɔɪn əɹ dʒɹɪŋk ðoʊ ɛni ʌðɝ væljəbəl ðət tɝn ʌp wəd ɡoʊ ɪndə sʌmwʌnz sæɾəlbæɡz tu. sun ɪnʌf sʌmwʌn wəd kʌt fɹi ðə wæɡən timz, əɹ pɝhæps ðeɪ wəd dʒʌs teɪk ðə wæɡənz. wæɡənz ən hɔɹsəz wɝ ɔlweɪz jusfəl fəɹ ən ɑɹmi, ən ðə pəkjuljɝ ɹulz ə ðɪs vɛɹi pəkjuljɝ ændɔɝən sɪvəl wɔɹ dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə ɡɪv mʌtʃ pɹətɛkʃən tə ðoʊz u wɝ ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ pleɪs ət ðə ɹɔŋ taɪm. bʌt ðə sɪɾi ɡeɪts wɝ swɪŋɪŋ oʊpən, ən əz sun əz ðə ɡæp wɑz waɪɾ ɪnʌf, ɹɛd-koʊɾəd lænsɝz pɔɹɾ aʊɾ ə ðə twɛnti-fʊt haɪ ɑɹtʃ əɾ ə ɡæləp, sʌnlaɪt ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ɑn læns-pɔɪns ən bɹɛstpleɪts ən hɛlməts, θʌndɝɪŋ daʊn ðə ɹoʊd bɪtwin ðə lɔŋ, ɛmpti mɑɹkəts.

Likely they were searching for coin or drink though any other valuable that turned up would go into someone's saddlebags too. Soon enough someone would cut free the wagon teams, or perhaps they would just take the wagons. Wagons and horses were always useful for an army, and the peculiar rules of this very peculiar Andoran civil war did not appear to give much protection to those who were in the wrong place at the wrong time. But the city gates were swinging open, and as soon as the gap was wide enough, red-coated lancers poured out of the twenty-foot high arch at a gallop, sunlight glittering on lance-points and breastplates and helmets, thundering down the road between the long, empty markets.

ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz wɝ kʌmɪŋ aʊt. ɪnʌf ə ðɛm, ɛniweɪ. bæʃɪɹ swʌŋ ɪz ɡlæs bæk tə ðə wæɡənz.

The Queen's Guards were coming out. Enough of them, anyway. Bashere swung his glass back to the wagons.

əpɛɹənli ði ɔfəsɝ ʌndɝ ðə bɛɹ, ɪf ə bɛɹ ɪt wɑz, hæd dʌn ɪz sʌmz ɔlɹɛɾi. fɪfti əɡɛns tu hʌnʒɹəd meɪd vɛɹi pʊɹ ɑdz, wɪð oʊnli ə fju wæɡənz ət steɪk. ðə mɛn u hæd dɪsmaʊntɪd wɝ bæk ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, ən ivən əz bæʃɪɹ faʊn ðɛm, ðə lɑɾ ə ðɛm ɡæləpt əweɪ nɔɹθ təwɔɹd hɪm, ðə blu-ænd-waɪt bænɝ stʃɹimɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪts stæf-moʊst ə ðə pipəl hʌɾəld bɪsaɪd ðə ɹoʊd stɛɹɾ æftɝ ðə dɪpɑɹɾɪŋ soʊlʒɝz, ðɛɹ kənfjuʒən əz klɪɹ əz ɪf i hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə meɪk aʊt ðɛɹ feɪsəz, bʌɾ ə fju ɪmiɾiətli ɹʌʃt tə bɪɡɪn ɡæðɝɪŋ ʌp ðɛɹ skæɾɝd bɪlɔŋɪŋz aʊɾ ə ðə snoʊ ən paɪlɪŋ əm bæk ɪndə ðə wæɡənz.

Apparently the officer under the bear, if a bear it was, had done his sums already. Fifty against two hundred made very poor odds, with only a few wagons at stake. The men who had dismounted were back in their saddles, and even as Bashere found them, the lot of them galloped away north toward him, the blue-and-white banner streaming behind its staff-Most of the people huddled beside the road stared after the departing soldiers, their confusion as clear as if he had been able to make out their faces, but a few immediately rushed to begin gathering up their scattered belongings out of the snow and piling them back into the wagons.

ði ɝaɪvəl ə ðə ɡɑɹdzmɪn, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɹeɪn ɝaʊn ðə wæɡənz ə fju mɪnəts leɪɾɝ, pʊɾ ə kwɪk ɛn tə ðæt. ɡɑɹdzmɪn kwɪkli bɪɡæn hɝɾɪŋ pipəl təwɔɹd ðə wæɡənz-sʌm stɪl tʃɹaɪd tə dɑɹt pæst əm fəɹ səm pɹaɪz bɪlɔŋɪŋ, ən wʌn mæn bɪɡæn weɪvɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz ɪn pɹoʊɾɛst əɾ ə ɡɑɹdzmæn, ən ɑbviəs ɔfəsɝ wɪð waɪt plumz ɑn ɪz hɛlməɾ ən ə ɹɛd sæʃ əkɹɔs ɪz bɹɛstpleɪt, bʌt ði ɔfəsɝ lin fɹəm ðə sæɾəl ən bækhændəd ðə pɹoʊtɛstɝ ɪn ðə feɪs. ðə fɛloʊ wɛn daʊn ɑn ɪz bæk laɪk ə stoʊn, ən æftɝ wʌn fɹoʊzən moʊmənt, ɛvɹiwʌn u wɑz nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi skɹæmbəlɪŋ ɑntu ðə wæɡənz wɛn skɝiɪŋ, ɪksɛpt ə pɛɹ ə mɛn u pɔz tə pɪk ʌp ðə fɔlən mæn baɪ hɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən hilz, ən ðeɪ hɝiɾ əz bɛs ðeɪ kəd kæɹiɪŋ ɪz lɪmp weɪt, ə wʊmən ʌp ɑn ðə læst wæɡən ɪn laɪn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi læʃɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz tə ɡɛɾ əɹ tim tɝn ɝaʊn ən hɛɾəd bæk təwɔɹd ðə sɪɾi.

The arrival of the Guardsmen, drawing rein around the wagons a few minutes later, put a quick end to that. Guardsmen quickly began herding people toward the wagons-Some still tried to dart past them for some prized belonging, and one man began waving his arms in protest at a Guardsman, an obvious officer with white plumes on his helmet and a red sash across his breastplate, but the officer leaned from the saddle and backhanded the protester in the face. The fellow went down on his back like a stone, and after one frozen moment, everyone who was not already scrambling onto the wagons went scurrying, except a pair of men who paused to pick up the fallen man by his shoulders and heels, and they hurried as best they could carrying his limp weight, A woman up on the last wagon in line was already lashing her reins to get her team turned around and headed back toward the city.

bæʃɪɹ loʊɝd ðə ɡlæs tə stʌɾi ðə kæmp, ðən pɹɛst ɪt bæk tə hɪz aɪ fəɹ ə kloʊsɝ lʊk.

Bashere lowered the glass to study the camp, then pressed it back to his eye for a closer look.

mɛn wɝ stɪl dɪɡɪŋ əweɪ wɪð ʃʌvəl ən mætɑk, ən ʌðɝz ɹɛslɪŋ sæks ən bæɹəlz daʊn fɹəm wæɡənz. noʊbəlz ən ɔfəsɝz wɔk ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz əbaʊt ðə kæmp, kipɪŋ ən aɪ ɑn ðə wɝk. ɔl kɑm əz kæɾəl ɪn pæstʃɝ. faɪnəli, sʌmwʌn pɔɪntəd kaʊɝd ðə ɹaɪz bɪtwin əm ən ðə sɪɾi, ðən ənʌðɝ ən ənʌðɝ, ən maʊntəd mɛn bɪɡæn tə tʃɹɑt, pleɪnli ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz. ðə bɛɹ-bænɝ wɑz dʒʌs kʌmɪŋ ɪndə saɪɾ ə ðə kæmp ɑn ðə haɪt.

Men were still digging away with shovel and mattock, and others wrestling sacks and barrels down from wagons. Nobles and officers walked their horses about the camp, keeping an eye on the work. All calm as cattle in pasture. Finally, someone pointed coward the rise between them and the city, then another and another, and mounted men began to trot, plainly shouting orders. The bear-banner was just coming into sight of the camp on the height.

tʌkɪŋ ðə ɡlæs bɪniθ ɪz ɑɹm, bæʃɪɹ fɹaʊnd. ðeɪ hæd noʊ ɡɑɹdz ɑn ðə haɪ ɡɹaʊn tə wɔɹn əm ʌv wʌt maɪt bi hæpənɪŋ bɪɑn ðɛɹ saɪt. ivən ɪn ðə sɝɾənti noʊ wʌn wɑz gɑnə ɔfɝ bæɾəl ðət wɑz stupəd. ɪt maɪɾ ɔlsoʊ bi jusfəl, ɪf ði ʌðɝ kæmps wɝ əz kɛɹləs, ən ɪf noʊ wʌn kɝɛktəd ðə mɪsteɪk. hi pʌft ɪɹɪɾəbli θɹu hɪz mʌstæʃɪz. ɪf i hæd bɪn gɑnə faɪt ðə bɪsiɡɝz.

Tucking the glass beneath his arm, Bashere frowned. They had no guards on the high ground to warn them of what might be happening beyond their sight. Even in the certainty no one was going to offer battle that was stupid. It might also be useful, if the other camps were as careless, and if no one corrected the mistake. He puffed irritably through his mustaches. If he had been going to fight the besiegers.

ə ɡlæns ʃoʊɾ ɪm ðə wæɡənz hæfweɪ bæk tə ðə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɡeɪt wɪð ðɛɹ ɛskɔɹɾ ʌv ɡɑɹdzmɪn, ðə wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz læʃɪŋ ðɛɹ timz əz ɪt pɝsut wɝ bɹiðɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ nɛks. əɹ meɪbi ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ði ɔfəsɝ wɪð ðə sæʃ, hu wɑz weɪvɪŋ ɪz sɔɹɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd fəɹ səm ɹizən.

A glance showed him the wagons halfway back to the Tar Valon Gate with their escort of Guardsmen, the wagon drivers lashing their teams as it pursuit were breathing down their necks. Or maybe it was just the officer with the sash, who was waving his sword over his head for some reason.

"ðɛɹəl bi noʊ dænsɪŋ tədeɪ," hi sɛd.

"There'll be no dancing today," he said.

"ðɛn aɪ hæv bɛɾɝ tə də wɪð maɪ deɪ ðən wɑtʃ wɛtləndɝz dɪɡ hoʊlz," beɪl ɹɪplaɪd, "meɪ jə ɔlweɪz faɪnd wɔɾɝ ən ʃeɪd, dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ"

"Then I have better to do with my day than watch wetlanders dig holes," Bael replied, "May you always find water and shade, Davram Bashere"

"æt ðə moʊmənt, aɪd ɹæðɝ əv dʒɹaɪ fiɾ ən ə wɔɹm faɪɝ," bæʃɪɹ mʌɾɝd wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ!

"At the moment, I'd rather have dry feet and a warm fire," Bashere muttered without thinking!

ðən wɪʃt i hæd nɑt. stɛp ɑn ə mænz fɔɹmæləɾi ən i maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə kɪl ju, ən ði il wɝ fɔɹməl ən stʃɹeɪnʒ bɪsaɪdz.

Then wished he had not. Step on a man's formality and he might try to kill you, and the Aiel were formal and strange besides.

bʌt beɪl θɹu bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən læft. "ðə wɛt-lænz tɝn ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɑn ɪts hɛd dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ." ə kjʊɹiəs dʒɛstʃɝ ə hɪz ɹaɪt hæn bɹɔt ði ʌðɝ il tə ðɛɹ fit, ən ðeɪ loʊpt ɔf istwɝɾ ɪn lɔŋ, izi stʃɹaɪdz. ðə snoʊ dɪd nɑt sim tə ɡɪv əm ɛni dɪfəkəlti.

But Bael threw back his head and laughed. "The wet-lands turn everything on its head Davram Bashere." A curious gesture of his right hand brought the other Aiel to their feet, and they loped off eastward in long, easy strides. The snow did not seem to give them any difficulty.

slaɪɾɪŋ ɪz lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs ɪndə ðə lɛðɝ keɪs hæŋɪŋ fɹəm kwɪks sæɾəlboʊ, bæʃɪɹ maʊntəɾ ən tɝn ðə beɪ wɛst. hɪz oʊn ɛskɔɹt hæd bɪn weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝs sloʊp, ən ðeɪ fɛl ɪn bɪhaɪn ɪm wɪð oʊnli ðə feɪn kɹik ə lɛðɝ ən nɛvɝ ə dʒɪŋɡəl ʌv ʌnsɪkjʊɹd mɛɾəl. ðeɪ nʌmbɝd fjuɝ ðən beɪlz ɛskɔɹt, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ tʌf mɛn fɹəm ɪz ɪsteɪts ət tɪɹ, ən i hæd lɛɾ əm ɪndə ðə blaɪt mɛni taɪmz bɪfɔɹ bɹɪŋɪŋ əm saʊθ. ɛvɹi mæn hæɾ ɪz əsaɪn pɑɹɾ ə ðə tʃɹeɪl tə wɑtʃ, əhɛɾ əɹ bɪhaɪnd, lɛft əɹ ɹaɪt, haɪ əɹ loʊ, ən ðɛɹ hɛdz swɪvəl kɑnstənli. hi hoʊp ðeɪ wɝ nɑt dʒʌst ɡoʊɪŋ θɹu ðə moʊʃənz. ðə fɔɹəst wɑz spɑɹs hɪɹ, ɛvɹi bɹæntʃ bɛɹ ɪksɛpt ɑn oʊk ən lɛðɝlif paɪn ən fɝ, bʌt ðə snoʊ-kʌvɝd læn ɹoʊl soʊ ðəɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd maʊntəd mɛn kəd bi fɪfti peɪsɪz əweɪ ən ənsin. nɑt ðəɾ i ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛni sətʃ θɪŋ, bʌt ðɛn, wʌt kɪl jə wɑz ɔlweɪz wʌt jə nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd. ʌnkɑnʃəsli, hi izd ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪts skæbɝd. jə dʒʌs hæd tə ɪkspɛk ði ʌnɪkspɛktɪd.

Sliding his looking glass into the leather case hanging from Quick's saddlebow, Bashere mounted and turned the bay west. His own escort had been waiting on the reverse slope, and they fell in behind him with only the faint creak of leather and never a jingle of unsecured metal. They numbered fewer than Bael's escort, but they were tough men from his estates at Tyr, and he had led them into the Blight many times before bringing them south. Every man had his assigned part of the trail to watch, ahead or behind, left or right, high or low, and their heads swiveled constantly. He hoped they were not just going through the motions. The forest was sparse here, every branch bare except on oak and leatherleaf pine and fir, but the snow-covered land rolled so that a hundred mounted men could be fifty paces away and unseen. Not that he expected any such thing, but then, what killed you was always what you never expected. Unconsciously, he eased his sword in its scabbard. You just had to expect the unexpected.

tuməd hæd kəmæn ə ði ɛskɔɹt, əz i dɪd moʊs deɪz bæʃɪɹ dɪd nɑɾ əv sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt fəɹ ðə jʌŋ lutɛnən tə du. hi kəd θɪŋk klɪɹli ən si bɪɑnd wʌt wɑz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm; hi wɑz dɛstɪn fəɹ haɪɝ ɹæŋk, ɪf i lɪv lɔŋ ɪnʌf. ə tɔl mæn, ɪf ə kʌpəl ə hænz ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən beɪl, tədeɪ hi wɔɹ dɪsɡɹʌntəlmən ɑn ɪz feɪs laɪk ə sɛkənd noʊz.

Tumad had command of the escort, as he did most days Bashere did not have something more important for the young lieutenant to do. He could think clearly and see beyond what was in front of him; he was destined for higher rank, if he lived long enough. A tall man, if a couple of hands shorter than Bael, today he wore disgruntlement on his face like a second nose.

"wʌt tʃɹʌbəlz ju, tuməd?"

"What troubles you, Tumad?"

"ði ilmən wɑz ɹaɪt, maɪ lɔɹd." tuməd tʌɡd æŋɡɹəli əɾ ɪz θɪk blæk bɪɹd wɪð ə ɡɔntələɾəd fɪst, "ðiz ændɔɹənz spɪɾ əɾ əɹ fit. aɪ də nɑt laɪk hævɪŋ tə ɹaɪɾ əweɪ waɪl ðeɪ θʌm ən ɪɹ əɾ ʌs" wɛl i wɑz stɪl jʌŋ.

"The Aielman was right, my Lord." Tumad tugged angrily at his thick black beard with a gauntleted fist, "These Andorans spit at our feet. I do not like having to ride away while they thumb an ear at us" Well he was still young.

"ju faɪn əɹ sɪtʃueɪʃən bɔɹɪŋ, pɝhæps?" bæʃɪɹ læft. "ju nid mɔɹ ɪksaɪtmənt?

"You find our situation boring, perhaps?" Bashere laughed. "You need more excitement?

tɛnoʊbiə ɪz oʊnli fɪfti liɡz nɔɹθ ʌv ʌs, ən ɪf ɹumɝ kən bi bɪlivd, ʃi bɹɔɾ ɛθɛniɛl ə kændɝ ən peɪɾə ʌv ɝæfəl ən ivən ðət ʃaɪnɝən isɑɹ wɪð hɝ. ɔl ðə maɪɾ ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz kʌm lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ʌs, tuməd. ðoʊz ændɔɹənz daʊn ɪn mʊɹændi doʊn laɪk əs biɪŋ ɪn ændɝ, iðɝ, soʊ aɪ hɪɹ, ən ɪf ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹmi ðəɹ feɪsɪŋ dʌzn tʃɑp əm tə pisəz, əɹ hæzən ɔlɹɛɾi ðeɪ meɪ kʌm lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ʌs. soʊ meɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ. wiv ɹɪɾən fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən aɪ kæn si ɛni sɪstɝ fɝɡɛɾɪŋ ðæt. ən ðən ðəɹ ɑɹ ðə sintʃæn, tuməd. dʒju ɹɪli θɪŋk wiv sin ðə læst ə ðɛm? ðəl kʌm tə ʌs, əɹ wɪl əv tə ɡoʊ tə ðɛm; wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ ɪz ʃʊɹ. jə jʌŋ mɛn doʊnt noʊ ɪksaɪtmənt wən ɪts kɹɔlɪŋ ɪn jəɹ mʌstæʃ!" kwaɪət tʃʌkəlz ɹɪpəl θɹu ðə mɛn fɑloʊɪŋ, mɛn əz oʊld əz bæʃɪɹ hɪmsɛlf fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, ən ivən tuməd flæʃt waɪt tiθ θɹu hɪz bɪɹɾ ɪn ə ɡɹɪn. ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl bɪn ɑn kæmpeɪn bɪfɔɹ, ɪf nɛvɝ wʌn soʊ ɑɾ əz ðɪs. stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ ɝaʊnd, bæʃɪɹ wɑtʃt ðə weɪ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, bʌt wɪð oʊnli hæf ɪz ətɛnʃən.

Tenobia is only fifty leagues north of us, and if rumor can be believed, she brought Ethenielle of Kandor and Paita of Arafel and even that Shienaran Easar with her. All the might of the Borderlands come looking for us, Tumad. Those Andorans down in Murandy don't like us being in Andor, either, so I hear, and if that Aes Sedai army they're facing doesn't chop them to pieces, or hasn't already they may come looking for us. So may the Aes Sedai, for that matter, sooner or later. We've ridden for the Dragon Reborn, and I can't see any sister forgetting that. And then there are the Seanchan, Tumad. Do you really think we've seen the last of them? They will come to us, or we will have to go to them; one or the other is sure. You young men don't know excitement when it's crawling in your mustache!" Quiet chuckles rippled through the men following, men as old as Bashere himself for the most part, and even Tumad flashed white teeth through his beard in a grin. They had all been on campaign before, if never one so odd as this. Straightening around, Bashere watched the way through the trees, but with only half his attention.

ɪn ɔl tʃɹuθ, tɛnoʊbiə dɪd wɝi hɪm. ðə laɪɾ oʊnli nu waɪ isɑɹ ən ði ʌðɝz hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə liv ðə blaɪtbɔɹɾɝ təɡɛðɝ, mʌtʃ lɛs stʃɹɪp əweɪ əz mɛni soʊlʒɝz əz hɪɹseɪ sɛd ðeɪ hæd bɹɔt saʊθ. ivən hɪɹseɪ dɪvaɪɾəd baɪ hæf. daʊtləs ðeɪ hæd ɹizənz ðeɪ kənsɪɾɝd ɡʊɾ ən səfɪʃənt, ən daʊtləs tɛnoʊbiə ʃɛɹd ðɛm. bʌɾ i nu hɝ; hi hæd tɔɾ əɹ tə ɹaɪd, wɑtʃt əɹ ɡɹoʊ ʌp, pɹizɛntəɾ əɹ ðə bɹoʊkən kɹaʊn wən ʃi tʊk ðə θɹoʊn. ʃi wɑz ə ɡʊd ɹulɝ, niðɝ tu hɛvi-hændəd nɔɹ ku laɪt, ɪntɛlədʒən ɪf nɑɾ ɔlweɪz waɪz, bɹeɪv wɪθaʊt biɪŋ fulhɑɹɾi, bʌɾ ɪmpʌlsɪv wɑz ə maɪl dɪskɹɪpʃən ə hɝ. səmtaɪmz "hɑt-hɛɾəd" wɑz maɪld. ən i wɑz əz ʃʊɹ əz i kəd bi ðət ʃi hæɾ əɹ oʊn ɡoʊl əsaɪd fɹəm wʌtɛvɝ ði ʌðɝz eɪmd æt. ðə hɛɾ ə dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ. ɪf ðət wɑz soʊ, ʃi wɑz ənlaɪkli tə sɛɾəl fəɹ ənʌðɝ pɪɹiəɾ ʌv ɛɡzaɪl, æftɝ kʌmɪŋ ðɪs fɑɹ. ðə lɔŋɡɝ tɛnoʊbiə wɝiɾ ə boʊn ɪn əɹ tiθ, ðə hɑɹɾɝ ɪt wɑz tə kənvɪns əɹ tə ɡɪv ɪɾ ʌp. ɪt wɑz ə nit pɹɑbləm. ʃi ʃəd bi ɪn sɑldɑiə ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə blaɪtbɔɹɾɝ, bʌt soʊ ʃəd hi. ʃi kəd kənvɪkt ɪm ə tʃɹizən twaɪs oʊvɝ ət lis fəɹ wʌɾ i hæd dʌn sɪns kʌmɪŋ saʊθ, bʌɾ i stɪl kəd si noʊ ʌðɝ weɪ tə hæv ɡɔn. ɹɪbɛljən-tɛnoʊbiə kəd dɪfaɪn ðət lusli wən ʃi tʃoʊz-ɹɪbɛljən wɑz hɔɹəbəl tə kɑntəmpleɪt, jɛɾ i wɑntəɾ ɪz hɛd fɝmli ətætʃt tə hɪz nɛk ə waɪl lɔŋɡɝ. ə niɾ ən θɔɹni pɹɑbləm.

In all truth, Tenobia did worry him. The Light only knew why Easar and the others had decided to leave the Blightborder together, much less strip away as many soldiers as hearsay said they had brought south. Even hearsay divided by half. Doubtless they had reasons they considered good and sufficient, and doubtless Tenobia shared them. But he knew her; he had taught her to ride, watched her grow up, presented her the Broken Crown when she took the throne. She was a good ruler, neither too heavy-handed nor coo light, intelligent if not always wise, brave without being foolhardy, but impulsive was a mild description of her. Sometimes "hot-headed" was mild. And he was as sure as he could be that she had her own goal aside from whatever the others aimed at. The head of Davram Bashere. If that was so, she was unlikely to settle for another period of exile, after coming this far. The longer Tenobia worried a bone in her teeth, the harder it was to convince her to give it up. It was a neat problem. She should be in Saldaea guarding the Blightborder, but so should he. She could convict him of treason twice over at least for what he had done since coming south, but he still could see no other way to have gone. Rebellion-Tenobia could define that loosely when she chose-rebellion was horrible to contemplate, yet he wanted his head firmly attached to his neck a while longer. A neat and thorny problem.

ði ɛnkæmpmən kənteɪnɪŋ ði eɪt θaʊzənd-ɑd laɪt kævəlɹi hi hæd lɛft æftɝ ɪljən ən ðə sintʃæn spɹɛd waɪɾɝ ðən ðə kæmp bæk ɑn ðə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɹoʊd, bʌɾ ɪt kəd nɑt bi sɛd tə spɹɔl.

The encampment containing the eight thousand-odd light cavalry he had left after Illian and the Seanchan spread wider than the camp back on the Tar Valon Road, but it could not be said to sprawl.

ðə hɔɹslaɪnz wɝ junəfɔɹm ɹoʊz wɪð ə fɛɹiɝz fɔɹdʒ əɾ iðɝ ɛnd, stʃɹɛtʃt bɪtwin ikwəli stʃɹeɪt ɹoʊz ə lɑɹdʒ ɡɹeɪ əɹ ʃɛl-waɪt tɛns, ðoʊ ðoʊz ʃoʊɾ ə ɡʊd mɛni pætʃəz, naʊ. ɛvɹi mæn kəd bi maʊntəɾ ən ɹɛɾi tə ɹaɪɾ ɪnsaɪɾ ə kaʊn ə fɪfti fɹəm ə tʃɹʌmpət sɪɡnəl, ən ɪz sɛntʃɹiz wɝ pleɪs tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðeɪ hæd ðət kaʊn ən mɔɹ. ivən ðə kæmp-fɑloʊɝz' tɛns ən wæɡənz, ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz saʊθ ə ðə ɹɛst, wɝ mɔɹ ɔɹɾɝli ðən ðə soʊlʒɝz' bɪsidʒɪŋ ðə sɪɾi əz ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd fɑloʊd ði ɪɡzæmpəl ə ðə sɑldəiənz. sʌmwʌt, ət list.

The horselines were uniform rows with a farrier's forge at either end, stretched between equally straight rows of large gray or shell-white tents, though those showed a good many patches, now. Every man could be mounted and ready to ride inside a count of fifty from a trumpet signal, and his sentries were placed to make sure they had that count and more. Even the camp-followers' tents and wagons, a hundred paces south of the rest, were more orderly than the soldiers' besieging the city as though they had followed the example of the Saldaeans. Somewhat, at least.

əz i ɹoʊɾ ɪn wɪð ɪz ɛskɔɹt, mɛn muv kwɪkli ən ɡɹɪmli əmʌŋ ðə hɔɹslaɪnz, ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ðə sɪɡnəl tə maʊn hæd bɪn saʊndəd. mɔɹ ðən wʌn hæɾ ɪz sɔɹd dʒɹɔn. vɔɪsəz kɔl tə hɪm, bʌɾ ət ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ kɹaʊɾ ə mɛn ən wɪmən, moʊsli wɪmən, ɡæðɝɾ ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə kæmp, hi fɛlt ə sʌɾən nʌmnəs ɪnsaɪd. hi dʌɡ ɪn ɪz hilz, ən kwɪk spɹæŋ fɔɹwɝɾ əɾ ə ɡæləp. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ ɛniwʌn fɑloʊɾ ɪm əɹ nɑt. hi hɝd nʌθɪŋ bʌt ðə blʌd paʊndɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz, sɔ noʊ θɪŋ bʌt ðə kɹaʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz oʊn ʃɑɹp-pik tɛnt. ðə tɛn i ʃɛɹd wɪð dʒɹə.

As he rode in with his escort, men moved quickly and grimly among the horselines, almost as if the signal to mount had been sounded. More than one had his sword drawn. Voices called to him, but at the sight of a large crowd of men and women, mostly women, gathered in the center of the camp, he felt a sudden numbness inside. He dug in his heels, and Quick sprang forward at a gallop. He did not know whether anyone followed him or not. He heard nothing but the blood pounding in his ears, saw no thing but the crowd in front of his own sharp-peaked tent. The tent he shared with Deira.

hi dɪd nɑt ɹeɪn ɪn ɑn ɹitʃɪŋ ðə kɹaʊd, dʒʌs θɹu hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ə ðə sæɾəl ən hɪt ðə ɡɹaʊn ɹʌnɪŋ. hi hɝd pipəl spik wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ ɪn wʌt ðeɪ wɝ seɪɪŋ. ðeɪ pɑɹɾəd ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, oʊpənɪŋ ə pæθ tə hɪz tɛnt, əɹ i wʊɾə ɹʌn əm oʊvɝ.

He did not rein in on reaching the crowd, just threw himself out of the saddle and hit the ground running. He heard people speak without taking in what they were saying. They parted in front of him, opening a path to his tent, or he would have run them over.

dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə tɛntflæps, hi hɔltəd. ðə tɛnt, lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf fəɹ twɛnti soʊlʒɝz tə slip ɪn, wɑz kɹaʊɾəd tə ðə wɔlz wɪð wɪmən, waɪvz ə noʊbəlz ən ɔfəsɝz, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz kwɪkli faʊn ɪz oʊn waɪf, dʒɹə, siɾəd ɑn ə foʊldɪŋ tʃɛɹ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə kɑɹpəts ðət sɝvd əz ə flɔɹ, ən ðə nʌmnəs feɪɾəd. hi nu ʃi wəd daɪ wʌn deɪ-ðeɪ boʊθ wʊd-bʌt ði oʊnli θɪŋ i fɪɹd wɑz lɪvɪŋ wɪθaʊt hɝ. ðən i ɹilaɪz ðət səm ə ðə wɪmən wɝ hɛlpɪŋ əɹ tə loʊɝ əɹ dʒɹɛs tə hɝ weɪst. ənʌðɝ wɑz pɹɛsɪŋ ə foʊldəd klɔθ tə dʒɹəz lɛft ɑɹm, ən ðə klɔθ wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɹɛɾ əz blʌd ɹæn daʊn əɹ ɑɹm ɪn ə ʃiɾ ən dʒɹɪp fɹəm əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɪndə ə boʊl sɛɾ ɑn ðə kɑɹpət. ðəɹ wɑz ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl əmaʊn ə dɑɹk blʌɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðə boʊl.

Just inside the tentflaps, he halted. The tent, large enough for twenty soldiers to sleep in, was crowded to the walls with women, wives of nobles and officers, but his eyes quickly found his own wife, Deira, seated on a folding chair in the middle of the carpets that served as a floor, and the numbness faded. He knew she would die one day-they both would-but the only thing he feared was living without her. Then he realized that some of the women were helping her to lower her dress to her waist. Another was pressing a folded cloth to Deira's left arm, and the cloth was growing red as blood ran down her arm in a sheet and dripped from her fingers into a bowl set on the carpet. There was a considerable amount of dark blood already in the bowl.

ʃi sɔ hɪm ət ðə seɪm ɪnstənt, ən əɹ aɪz flæʃt ɪn ə feɪs ðət wɑz mʌtʃ tu peɪl. "ɪt kʌmz fɹəm haɪɹɪŋ aʊtləndɝz, hʌzbənd," ʃi sɛd fɪɹsli, hɝ ɹaɪt hænd ʃeɪkɪŋ ə lɔŋ dæɡɝ ət hɪm.

She saw him at the same instant, and her eyes flashed in a face that was much too pale. "It comes from hiring outlanders, husband," she said fiercely, her right hand shaking a long dagger at him.

əz tɔl əz moʊs mɛn, ɪntʃəz kɔlɝ ðən hi, ən bjuɾəfəl, hɝ feɪs fɹeɪmd wɪð ɹeɪvən hɛɹ wɪŋd wɪð waɪt, ʃi hæɾ ə kəmændɪŋ pɹɛzəns ðət kəd bɪkʌm ɪmpɪɹiəs wən ʃi wɑz æŋɡɹi. ivən wən ʃi ɑbviəsli kəd bɛɹli sɪɾ əpɹaɪt. moʊst wɪmən wʊɾə bɪn flʌstɝɾ ət biɪŋ bɛɹ tə ðə weɪst ɪn fɹʌn ə soʊ mɛni, wɪð əɹ hʌzbən pɹɛzənt. nɑt dʒɹə. "ɪf jə dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz ɪnsɪst ɑn muvɪŋ laɪk ðə wɪnd, wi kəɾ əv ɡʊd mɛn fɹəm əɹ oʊn ɪsteɪts tə də wʌtɛvɝ wɑz nidfəl."

As tall as most men, inches caller than he, and beautiful, her face framed with raven hair winged with white, she had a commanding presence that could become imperious when she was angry. Even when she obviously could barely sit upright. Most women would have been flustered at being bare to the waist in front of so many, with her husband present. Not Deira. "If you did not always insist on moving like the wind, we could have good men from our own estates to do whatever was needful."

"ə dɪspjut wɪð sɝvəns, dʒɹə?" hi sɛd, kɑkɪŋ ən aɪbɹaʊ. "aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt jud stɑɹt teɪkɪŋ naɪvz tə ðɛm." sɛvɹəl ə ðə wɪmən ɡeɪv ɪm kul, saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlænsɪz. nɑɾ ɛvɹi mæn ən waɪf dɛl təɡɛðɝ əz i ən dʒɹə dɪd. səm θɔɾ əm ɑd sɪns ðeɪ sɛldəm ʃaʊɾəd.

"A dispute with servants, Deira?" he said, cocking an eyebrow. "I never thought you'd start taking knives to them." Several of the women gave him cool, sidelong glances. Not every man and wife dealt together as he and Deira did. Some thought them odd since they seldom shouted.

dʒɹə skaʊld ət hɪm, ðən ɡɹʌntɪɾ ə ʃɔɹt, ɪnvɑləntɛɹi læf. "aɪ wɪl stɑɹɾ ət ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ dævɹæm. ən ɡoʊ sloʊli, soʊ jə kən ʌndɝstænd, ʃi æɾəd wɪð ə smɔl smaɪl, pɔzɪŋ tə θæŋk ðə wɪmən u dʒɹeɪpt ə waɪt lɪnən ʃiɾ ɝaʊn əɹ bɛɹ tɔɹsoʊ. "aɪ ɹɪtɝn fɹəm maɪ ɹaɪd tə faɪn tu stʃɹeɪnʒ mɛn ɹænsækɪŋ əɹ tɛnt. ðeɪ dʒɹu dæɡɝz, soʊ nætʃɹəli, aɪ hɪt wʌn ə ðɛm wɪð ə tʃɛɹ ən stæb ði ʌðɝ." ʃi dɝɛktəɾ ə ɡɹɪmɑs əɾ əɹ kʌɾ ɑɹm. "nɑt wɛl ɪnʌf, sɪns i mænədʒ tə tʌtʃ mi. ðən zæviən ən səm ə ði ʌðɝz keɪm ɪn, ən ðə pɛɹ flɛd θɹu ə slɪt ðeɪ hæd meɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹɪɹ ə ðə tɛnt."

Deira scowled at him, then grunted a short, involuntary laugh. "I will start at the beginning Davram. And go slowly, so you can understand, she added with a small smile, pausing to thank the women who draped a white linen sheet around her bare torso. "I returned from my ride to find two strange men ransacking our tent. They drew daggers, so naturally, I hit one of them with a chair and stabbed the other." She directed a grimace at her cut arm. "Not well enough, since he managed to touch me. Then Zavion and some of the others came in, and the pair fled through a slit they had made in the rear of the tent."

sɛvɹəl ə ðə wɪmən nɑɾəd ɡɹɪmli ən ɡɹɪp ðə hɪls ə ðə dæɡɝz ðeɪ ɔl wɔɹ. əntɪl dʒɹə sɛd dɑɹkli "aɪ toʊld əm tə ɡɪv tʃeɪs, bʌt ðeɪ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn tɛndɪŋ maɪ skɹætʃ." hænz dʒɹɑpt əweɪ fɹəm hɪls, ən feɪsəz kʌlɝd, ðoʊ nʌn lʊkt ɪn ðə list əpɑlədʒɛɾɪk fəɹ dɪsəbɪŋ. ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɪn ə tɪkəlɪʃ pəzɪʃən. dʒɹə wɑz ðɛɹ lidʒ leɪɾi əz i wɑz ðɛɹ lidʒ lɔɹd, bʌt wɛðɝ əɹ nɔɹ ʃi kɔld ɪɾ ə skɹætʃ, ʃi cʊɾə blɛd tə dɛθ ɪf ðeɪ hæd lɛft əɹ tə ɡoʊ tʃeɪsɪŋ ðə θivz. "ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt," ʃi wɛn ɑn, "aɪ ɔɹɾɝd ə sɝtʃ. ðeɪ woʊn bi hɑɹd tə faɪnd. wʌn əz ə lʌmp ɑn ɪz hɛd, ən ði ʌðɝ ɪz bliɾɪŋ." ʃi ɡeɪv ə ʃɑɹp, sæɾəsfaɪd nɑd.

Several of the women nodded grimly and gripped the hilts of the daggers they all wore. Until Deira said darkly "I told them to give chase, but they insisted on tending my scratch." Hands dropped away from hilts, and faces colored, though none looked in the least apologetic for disobeying. They had been in a ticklish position. Deira was their liege lady as he was their liege lord, but whether or nor she called it a scratch, she could have bled to death if they had left her to go chasing the thieves. "In any event," she went on, "I ordered a search. They won't be hard to find. One has a lump on his head, and the other is bleeding." She gave a sharp, satisfied nod.

zæviən, ðə sɪnjui, ɹɛd-hɛɹd leɪɾi ʌv ɡəhɔɹ, hɛld ʌp ə θɹɛɾəd niɾəl "ənlɛs juv teɪkən ʌp ən ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ɪmbɹɔɪɾɝ maɪ lɔɹd," ʃi sɛd kuli, "meɪ aɪ sədʒɛs ðət jə wɪðdʒɹɔ." bæʃɪɹ ækwiɛst wɪð ə smɔl baʊ ʌv ɪz hɛd. dʒɹə nɛvɝ laɪkt ɪm tə wɑtʃ əɹ biɪŋ soʊn ʌp. hi nɛvɝ laɪkt wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ biɪŋ soʊn ʌp. aʊtsaɪd ðə tɛnt, hi pɔz tə ənaʊns ɪn ə laʊd vɔɪs ðəɾ ɪz leɪɾi waɪf wɑz wɛl ən biɪŋ tɛndəd, ən ðət ðeɪ ʃəɾ ɔl ɡoʊ ɑn əbaʊt ðɛɹ bɪznəs.

Zavion, the sinewy, red-haired Lady of Gahaur, held up a threaded needle "Unless you have taken up an interest in embroider my Lord," she said coolly, "may I suggest that you withdraw." Bashere acquiesced with a small bow of his head. Deira never liked him to watch her being sewn up. He never liked watching her being sewn up. Outside the tent, he paused to announce in a loud voice that his lady wife was well and being tended, and that they should all go on about their business.

ðə mɛn dɪpɑɹɾəd wɪð wɪʃɪz fəɹ dʒɹəz wɛl biɪŋ, bʌt nʌn ə ðə wɪmən stɝɾ ə fʊt. hi dɪd nɑt pɹɛs ðɛm. ðeɪ wəd ɹɪmeɪn əntɪl dʒɹə hɝsɛlf əpɪɹd, wʌtɛvɝ i sɛd, ən ə waɪz mæn tʃɹaɪd tə əvɔɪd bæɾəlz i wəd nɑɾ oʊnli luz, bʌt lʊk fulɪʃ luzɪŋ.

The men departed with wishes for Deira's well being, but none of the women stirred a foot. He did not press them. They would remain until Deira herself appeared, whatever he said, and a wise man tried to avoid battles he would not only lose, but look foolish losing.

tuməd wɑz weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə kɹaʊd, ən i fɛl ɪn bɪsaɪd bæʃɪɹ, hu wɔkt wɪð ɪz hænz klæsp taɪtli bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. hi hæd bɪn ɪkspɛktɪŋ ðɪs, əɹ sʌmθɪŋ laɪk, fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm, bʌɾ i hæɾ ɔlmoʊs bɪɡʌn tə θɪŋk ɪt wəd nɑt hæpən. ən i hæd nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd dʒɹə tə nɪɹli daɪ kəz ʌv ɪt.

Tumad was waiting on the edge of the crowd, and he fell in beside Bashere, who walked with his hands clasped tightly behind his back. He had been expecting this, or something like, for a long time, but he had almost begun to think it would not happen. And he had never expected Deira to nearly die because of it.

"ðə tu mɛn əv bɪn faʊn maɪ lɔɹd," tuməd sɛd. "æt list, ðeɪ əpɛɹənli mit ðə dɪskɹɪpʃən ðə leɪɾi dʒɹə ɡeɪv." bæʃɪɹz hɛd dʒɝkt ɝaʊnd, mɝɾɝ ɑn ɪz feɪs, ən ðə jʌŋɡɝ mæn kwɪkli æɾəd, "ðeɪ wɝ dɛd, maɪ lɔɹd, dʒʌst aʊtsaɪd ðə kæmp. itʃ ɡɑt wʌn θɹʌst wɪð ə nɛɹoʊ bleɪd." hi stæbd ə ɹɪŋɝ ət ðə beɪs ə hɪz skʌl, dʒʌs bɪhaɪn ði ɪɹ. "ɪt hæd tə bi mɔɹ ðən wʌn dɪɾ ɪt, ənlɛs i wɑz fæstɝ ðən ə ɹɑk vaɪpɝ."

"The two men have been found my Lord," Tumad said. "At least, they apparently meet the description the Lady Deira gave." Bashere's head jerked around, murder on his face, and the younger man quickly added, "They were dead, my Lord, just outside the camp. Each got one thrust with a narrow blade." He stabbed a ringer at the base of his skull, just behind the ear. "It had to be more than one did it, unless he was faster than a rock viper."

bæʃɪɹ nɑɾəd. ðə pɹaɪs ə feɪljɝ ɔfən wɑz dɛθ. tu tə sɝtʃ, ən haʊ mɛni tə saɪləns ðɛm? haʊ mɛni ɹɪmeɪnd, ən haʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ tʃɹaɪɾ əɡɛn? wɝst ʌv ɔl, hu wɑz bɪhaɪn ɪt? ðə waɪt taʊɝ? ðə fɔɹseɪkən? ɪt simd ə dɪsɪʒən hæd bɪn ɹitʃt fəɹ hɪm. noʊ wʌn ɪksɛpt: tuməd wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ hɪm, bʌɾ i spoʊk sɔfli ɛniweɪ, ən tʃoʊz ɪz wɝdz kɔʃəsli. səmtaɪmz, ðə pɹaɪs ə kɛɹləsnəs wɑz dɛθ, tu. "ju noʊ wɛɹ tə faɪn ðə mæn u keɪm tə mi jɛstɝdeɪ?

Bashere nodded. The price of failure often was death. Two to search, and how many to silence them? How many remained, and how long before they tried again? Worst of all, who was behind it? The White Tower? The Forsaken? It seemed a decision had been reached for him. No one except: Tumad was close enough to hear him, but he spoke softly anyway, and chose his words cautiously. Sometimes, the price of carelessness was death, too. "You know where to find the man who came to me yesterday?

faɪn hɪm, ən tɛl ɪm aɪ əɡɹi, bʌt ðəɹ wɪl bi ə fju mɔɹ ðən wi tɔkt əbaʊt." ðə laɪt fɛðɝi snoʊ fɔlɪŋ ɑn ðə sɪɾi ʌv kɛɹhin dɪm ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sʌnlaɪɾ oʊnli ə lɪɾəl, dʒʌs mjuɾɪŋ ðə bɹaɪtnəs. fɹəm ðə tɔl nɛɹoʊ wɪndoʊ ɪn ðə sʌn pæləs, fɪɾəd wɪð ə keɪsmən ʌv ɡʊd ɡlæs peɪnz əɡɛns ðə koʊld, sæmɪtsu kəd si klɪɹli ðə wʊɾən skæfəldɪŋ ɪɹɛktəɾ ɝaʊn ðə ɹuən sɛkʃən ə ðə pæləs, bɹoʊkən kjubz ə dɑɹk stoʊn stɪl lɪɾɝd wɪð ɹʌbəl ən stɛp taʊɝz ðət stɑpt əbɹʌpli ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ikwəlɪŋ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə pæləsəz taʊɝz. wʌn, ðə taʊɝ ə ðə ɹɪzən sʌn, wɑz sɪmpli noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðɛɹ. sɛvɹəl ə ðə sɪɾiz feɪbəld "tɑpləs" taʊɝz lum θɹu ðə dʒɹɪftɪŋ waɪt fleɪks, ɪnɔɹməs skwɛɹ spaɪɹz wɪð hjudʒ bʌtʃɹəsəz, mʌtʃ tɔlɝ baɪ fɑɹ ðən ɛni ɪn ðə pæləs dɪspaɪɾ ɪts loʊkeɪʃən ɑn ðə haɪəs hɪl ɪn ə sɪɾi ʌv hɪlz. ðeɪ wɝ ɹæpt ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn skæfəlz ən stɪl nɑt kəmplitli ɹibɪl twɛnti jɪɹz æftɝ ði il hæd bɝn ðɛm; ənʌðɝ twɛnti maɪt si ðɛm dʌn.

Find him, and tell him I agree, but there will be a few more than we talked about." The light feathery snow falling on the city of Cairhien dimmed the morning sunlight only a little, just muting the brightness. From the tall narrow window in the Sun Palace, fitted with a casement of good glass panes against the cold, Samitsu could see clearly the wooden scaffolding erected around the ruined section of the palace, broken cubes of dark stone still littered with rubble and stepped towers that stopped abruptly short of equaling the rest of the palace's towers. One, the Tower of the Risen Sun, was simply no longer there. Several of the city's fabled "topless" towers loomed through the drifting white flakes, enormous square spires with huge buttresses, much taller by far than any in the palace despite its location on the highest hill in a city of hills. They were wrapped in their own scaffolds and still not completely rebuilt twenty years after the Aiel had burned them; another twenty might see them done.

ðəɹ wɝ noʊ wɝkmɪn klæmbɝɪŋ; əlɔŋ ðə plæŋks ɑn ɛni ʌv ðə skæfəldɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, nɑɾ ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ. ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf wɪʃɪŋ ðə snoʊ kəd ɡɪv əɹ ə ɹɛspɪt, tu.

There were no workmen clambering; along the planks on any of the scaffolding, of course, not in this weather. She found herself wishing the snow could give her a respite, too.

wən kædzueɪn dɪpɑɹɾəd ə wik pæst, livɪŋ əɹ ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ, hɝ tæsk hæɾ əpɪɹd stʃɹeɪtfɔɹwɝd. meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə kɛɹhinɪn pɑt dɪd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə bɔɪl əɡɛn. ðət hæɾ əpɪɹɾ ə sɪmpəl tæsk ət ðə taɪm, ðoʊ ʃi hæd sɛldəm dæbəld ɪn pɑlətɪks tə spik ʌv oʊnli wʌn noʊbəl ɹɪteɪn saɪzəbəl fɔɹsɪz ʌndɝ ɑɹmz, ən dɑbɹeɪn wɑz koʊɑpɝeɪɾɪv, fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, simɪŋ tə wɑn ɛvɹiθɪŋ kɛp kwaɪət. ʌv kɔɹs, hi hæɾ æksɛptɪd ðət ful əpɔɪnmənt əz 'stuɝɾ ə kɛɹhin fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn." ðə bɔɪ hæd neɪmd ə "stuɝd" ʌv tɛɹ, tu, ə mæn u hæd bɪn ɪn ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛnst ɪm ə mʌnθ ɡɔn! ɪf i hæd dʌn əz mʌtʃ ɪn ɪljən... ɪt simd ɔl tu pɹɑbəbəl. ðoʊz əpɔɪnmənts wəd kɑz noʊ ɛn ə tʃɹʌbəl fəɹ sɪstɝz tə sɔɹɾ aʊt bɪfɔɹ ɔl wɑz sɛɾ ən dʌn! ðə bɔɪ bɹɔt nʌθɪŋ bʌt tʃɹʌbəl!

When Cadsuane departed a week past, leaving her in charge, her task had appeared straightforward. Make sure the Cairhienin pot did not begin to boil again. That had appeared a simple task at the time, though she had seldom dabbled in politics to speak of only one noble retained sizable forces under arms, and Dobraine was cooperative, for the most part, seeming to want everything kept quiet. Of course, he had accepted that fool appointment as 'Steward of Cairhien for the Dragon Reborn." The boy had named a "Steward" of Tear, too, a man who had been in rebellion against him a month gone! If he had done as much in Illian... It seemed all too probable. Those appointments would cause no end of trouble for sisters to sort out before all was said and done! The boy brought nothing but trouble!

jɛt soʊ fɑɹ dɑbɹeɪn sim tə bi juzɪŋ ɪz nu poʊst oʊnli tə ɹʌn ðə sɪɾi. ən tə kwaɪətli ɹæli səpɔɹt fəɹ ɪleɪn tʃɹəkən ɛs kleɪm tə ðə sʌn θɹoʊn, ɪf ʃi ɛvɝ meɪd wʌn. sæmɪtsu wɑz sæɾəsfaɪd tə liv ɪɾ ət ðæt, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ u tʊk ðə sʌn θɹoʊn. ʃi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ mʌtʃ fəɹ kɛɹhin əɾ ɔl.

Yet so far Dobraine seemed to be using his new post only to run the city. And to quietly rally support for Elayne Trakand s claim to the Sun Throne, if she ever made one. Samitsu was satisfied to leave it at that, not caring one way or another who took the Sun Throne. She did not care much for Cairhien at all.

ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ bɪɑn əɹ wɪndoʊ swɝld ɪn ə ɡʌst ʌv wɪn laɪk ə waɪt kəlaɪɾəskoʊp. soʊ...

The falling snow beyond her window swirled in a gust of wind like a white kaleidoscope. So...

tʃɹæŋkwəl. hæd ʃi ɛvɝ væljud tʃɹæŋkwɪlɪɾi bɪfɔɹ? ʃi sɝɾənli kəd nɑt ɹikɔl ɪt, ɪf ʃi hæd.

tranquil. Had she ever valued tranquility before? She certainly could not recall it, if she had.

niðɝ ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv ɪleɪn tʃɹəkən teɪkɪŋ ðə θɹoʊn nɔɹ dɑbɹeɪnz nu taɪɾəl hæd bɹɔt nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ kɑnstɝneɪʃən əz ðə ɹɪdɪkjələs, ən ɹədɪkjələsli pɝsɪstənt, ɹumɝz əbaʊt ði ælθɹ bɔɪ ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn tə səbmɪt tə ɪleɪɾə, ðoʊ ʃi hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ tə kwɛl ðoʊz. ðət teɪl hæɾ ɛvɹiwʌn fɹəm noʊbəlz tə steɪbəlmən hæf əfɹeɪd tə bɹið wɪtʃ wɑz vɛɹi wɛl ən ɡʊd fəɹ meɪnteɪnɪŋ ðə pis. ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz hæd ɡɹaʊn tə ə hɔlt; wɛl, kəmpɛɹd tə haʊ mæɾɝz nɔɹməli wɝ ɪn kɛɹhin. ði il u keɪm ɪndə ðə sɪɾi fɹəm ðɛɹ hjudʒ kæmp ə fju maɪlz is vɛɹi laɪkli hɛlpt, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ðeɪ wɝ heɪɾəd baɪ ðə dʒɛnɝəl ɹʌn ə foʊk. ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðeɪ fɑloʊd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən noʊ wʌn wɑntəd tə ɹɪsk faɪndɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ɑn ðə ɹɔŋ ɛn ə θaʊzənz ʌv il spɪɹz.

Neither the possibility of Elayne Trakand taking the throne nor Dobraine's new title had brought nearly as much consternation as the ridiculous, and ridiculously persistent, rumors about the al'Thor boy going to Tar Valon to submit to Elaida, though she had done nothing to quell those. That tale had everyone from nobles to stablemen half afraid to breathe which was very well and good for maintaining the peace. The Game of Houses had ground to a halt; well, compared to how matters normally were in Cairhien. The Aiel who came into the city from their huge camp a few miles east very likely helped, however much they were hated by the general run of folk. Everyone knew they followed the Dragon Reborn, and no one wanted to risk finding themselves on the wrong end of thousands of Aiel spears.

jʌŋ ælθɹ wɑz mʌtʃ mɔɹ jusfəl æbsən ðən pɹɛzənt. ɹumɝz aʊɾ ə ðə wɛst ʌv il ɹeɪɾɪŋ ɛlswɛɹ-luɾɪŋ, bɝnɪŋ, kɪlɪŋ ɪndɪskɹɪmənətli, soʊ mɝtʃəns' hɪɹseɪ kleɪmd-ɡeɪv pipəl ənʌðɝ ɹizən tə stɛp dʒɪnʒɝli wɪð ðoʊz hɪɹ.

Young al'Thor was much more useful absent than present. Rumors out of the west of Aiel raiding elsewhere-looting, burning, killing indiscriminately, so merchants' hearsay claimed-gave people another reason to step gingerly with those here.

ɪn fækt, ðəɹ sim tə bi noʊ bɝz tə pɹɪk kɛɹhin aʊɾ ʌv ɪts kwaɪət, əsaɪd fɹəm ði əkeɪʒənəl stʃɹit bɹɔl bɪtwin fɔɹɡeɪɾɝz ən sɪɾi foʊk u kənsɪɾɝd ðə nɔɪzi, bɹaɪtli klæd fɔɹɡeɪɾɝz əz eɪliən əz ði il ən ə ɡʊd dil seɪfɝ tə faɪt. ðə sɪɾi wɑz kɹaʊɾəd tə ði æɾɪks, wɪð pipəl slipɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ ðeɪ kəd faɪnd ʃɛltɝ fɹəm ðə koʊld, jɛt fud səplaɪz wɝ mɔɹ ðən æɾəkwət ɪf nɑɾ oʊvɝəbʌndənt, ən tʃɹeɪd wɑz æktʃəli  bɛɾɝ ðən ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪn wɪntɝ-ɔl ɪn ɔl, ʃʊɾə əv fɛl kɑntɛn ðət ʃi wɑz kæɹiɪŋ aʊt kædzueɪnz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz əz wɛl əz ðə ɡɹin kəd wɪʃ fɔɹ. ɪksɛp ðət kædzueɪn wəɾ ɪkspɛk mɔɹ. ʃi ɔlweɪz dɪd.

In fact, there seemed to be no burrs to prick Cairhien out of its quiet, aside from the occasional street brawl between Foregaters and city folk who considered the noisy, brightly clad Foregaters as alien as the Aiel and a good deal safer to fight. The city was crowded to the attics, with people sleeping anywhere they could find shelter from the cold, yet food supplies were more than adequate if not overabundant, and trade was actually better than expected in winter-All in all, she should have felt content that she was carrying out Cadsuane's instructions as well as the Green could wish for. Except that Cadsuane would expect more. She always did.

'ɑɹ jə lɪsnɪŋ tə mi, sæmɪtsu!"

'Are you listening to me, Samitsu!"

saɪɪŋ, sæmɪtsu tɝn fɹəm ðə pisfəl vju θɹu ðə wɪndoʊ, teɪkɪŋ peɪnz nɑt tə smuð əɹ jɛloʊ-slæʃt skɝts. ðə dʒɑkændə-meɪd sɪlvɝ bɛlz ɪn əɹ hɛɹ tɪŋkəl feɪnli, bʌt tədeɪ ðə saʊn feɪl tə suð hɝ. ət ðə bɛst ə taɪmz ʃi dɪd nɑt fil ɪntaɪɝli kʌmftəɹbəl ɪn əɹ əpɑɹtməns ɪn ðə pæləs, ðoʊ ə bleɪzɪŋ faɪɝ ɪn ðə waɪd mɑɹbəl faɪɝpleɪs ɡeɪv ə ɡʊd wɔɹmθ ən ðə bɛɾ ɪn ðə nɛkst ɹum hæd ðə bɛst-kwɑləɾi fɛðɝ mætʃɹəsəz ən ɡus-daʊn pɪloʊz. ɔl θɹi ʌv əɹ ɹumz wɝ oʊvɝli ɔɹneɪɾ ɪn ðə səvɪɹ kɛɹhinɪn fæʃən, ðə waɪt silɪŋ plæstɝ wɝkt ɪn ɪntɝlɑkɪŋ skwɛɹz, ðə waɪd bɑɹ-kɔɹnɪsəz hɛvəli ɡɪldɪd, ən ðə wʊɾən wɔl-pænəlz pɑlɪʃt tə ə sɑft ɡloʊ jɛt dɑɹk ivən soʊ. ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz wɝ dɑɹkɝ stɪl ən mæsɪvli kənstʃɹʌktəd, ɛdʒd wɪð θɪn laɪnz ʌv ɡoʊld lif ən ɪnleɪd wɪð pæɾɝnd aɪvɝi wɛdʒəz. ðə flaʊɝd tɛɹən kɑɹpəɾ ɪn ðɪs ɹum simd ɡɛɹɪʃli dɪsɔɹɾɝd kəmpɛɹd tə ɛvɹi θɪŋ ɛls, ən ɛmfəsaɪz ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ stɪfnəs. ɪɾ ɔl sim tu mʌtʃ laɪk ə keɪdʒ ə leɪt.

Sighing, Samitsu turned from the peaceful view through the window, taking pains not to smooth her yellow-slashed skirts. The Jakanda-made silver bells in her hair tinkled faintly, but today the sound failed to soothe her. At the best of times she did not feel entirely comfortable in her apartments in the palace, though a blazing fire in the wide marble fireplace gave a good warmth and the bed in the next room had the best-quality feather mattresses and goose-down pillows. All three of her rooms were overly ornate in the severe Cairhienin fashion, the white ceiling plaster worked in interlocking squares, the wide bar-cornices heavily gilded, and the wooden wall-panels polished to a soft glow yet dark even so. The furnishings were darker still and massively constructed, edged with thin lines of gold leaf and inlaid with patterned ivory wedges. The flowered Tairen carpet in this room seemed garishly disordered compared to every thing else, and emphasized the surrounding stiffness. It all seemed too much like a cage of late.

wʌt ɹɪli dəskɑmfəɾəd hɝ, ðoʊ, wɑz ðə wʊmən wɪð əɹ hɛɹ ɪn ɹɪŋləts tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz stændɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə kɑɹpət, fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps, ə bəlɪdʒɝən sɛt tə hɝ tʃɪn, ən ə fɹaʊn nɛɹoʊɪŋ əɹ blu aɪz. sæʃəl wɔɹ ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, ɑn əɹ ɹaɪt hænd, bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ ən il nɛkləs ən bɹeɪslət, fæt bidz ə sɪlvɝ ən aɪvɝi ɪntʃɹəkətli wɝkt ən kɑɹvd, ɡɔɾi əɡɛnst əɹ haɪ-nɛk dʒɹɛs ə bɹaʊn wʊl, wɪtʃ wɑz pleɪn ɪf faɪn ən wɛl-kʌt. nɑt kɹud pisəz, sɝɾənli, bʌt... flæmbɔɪənt, ən hɑɹdli ðə sɔɹɾ ə sɪstɝ wəd wɛɹ. ði ɑɾəti ʌv ðət dʒuəlɹi maɪt hoʊl ðə ki tə mʌtʃ, ɪf sæmɪtsu kəɾ ɛvɝ faɪn ðə ɹizən bɪhaɪn ɪt. ðə waɪz wʌnz, ɪspɛʃli sɔɹɪliə, lʊkt əɾ əɹ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ə ful fəɹ nɑt noʊɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ æskɪŋ, ən ɹəfjuz tə bi bɑðɝd wɪð ænsɝɪŋ.

What really discomfited her, though, was the woman with her hair in ringlets to her shoulders standing in the middle of the carpet, fists on her hips, a belligerent set to her chin, and a frown narrowing her blue eyes. Sashalle wore the Great Serpent ring, of course, on her right hand, but also an Aiel necklace and bracelet, fat beads of silver and ivory intricately worked and carved, gaudy against her high-necked dress of brown wool, which was plain if fine and well-cut. Not crude pieces, certainly, but... flamboyant, and hardly the sort a sister would wear. The oddity of that jewelry might hold the key to much, if Samitsu could ever find the reason behind it. The Wise Ones, especially Sorilea, looked at her as if she were a fool for not knowing without asking, and refused to be bothered with answering.

ðeɪ dɪd ðəɾ ɔl tu ɔfən. moʊst ɪspɛʃli sɔɹɪliə. sæmɪtsu wɑz ənjuz tə biɪŋ θɔɾ ə ful, ən ʃi dɪslaɪkt ɪɾ ɪmɛnsli.

They did that all too often. Most especially Sorilea. Samitsu was unused to being thought a fool, and she disliked it immensely.

nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, ʃi faʊn ɪt dɪfəkəl tə mit ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz ɡeɪz. sæʃəl wɑz ðə meɪdʒɝ ɹizən kəntɛnmənt ɪluɾɪd hɝ, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ wɛl ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ʌðɝwaɪz. moʊs mæɾənɪŋ, sæʃəl wɑz ə ɹɛd, jɛt dɪspaɪɾ əɹ ədʒɑ, ʃi wɑz oʊθswɔɹn tə jʌŋ ælθɹ. haʊ kəɾ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ swɛɹ fiəlti tə ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl? meɪbi vɛɹɪn hæd bɪn ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt tɑvɝən twɪstɪŋ tʃæns. sæmɪtsu kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə θɪŋk ʌv ɛni ʌðɝ ɹizən fəɹ θɝɾi-wʌn sɪstɝz, faɪv, ʌv əm ɹɛd, tə teɪk sətʃ ən oʊθ.

Not for the first time, she found it difficult to meet the other sister's gaze. Sashalle was the major reason contentment eluded her, no matter how well everything was going otherwise. Most maddening, Sashalle was a Red, yet despite her Ajah, she was oathsworn to young al'Thor. How could any Aes Sedai swear fealty to a man who could channel? Maybe Verin had been right about ta'veren twisting chance. Samitsu could not begin to think of any other reason for thirty-one sisters, five, of them Red, to take such an oath.

"ðə leɪɾi eɪlɪl əz bɪn əpɹoʊtʃt baɪ lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz u ɹɛpɹəzɛn moʊst ə haʊs ɹieɪɾənz stʃɹɛŋkθ" ʃi ɹɪplaɪd, mʌtʃ mɔɹ peɪʃənli ðən ʃi fɛlt. "ðeɪ wɑn əɹ tə teɪk ðə haɪ siɾ ə ɹieɪɾən, ən ʃi wɑns waɪt taʊɝ əpɹuvəl. ɛɛs sədaɪ əpɹuvəl, ət list." fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə də bɪsaɪdz mætʃ stɛɹz-æn laɪkli luz-ʃi muv tə ə blækwʊd teɪbəl wɛɹ ə ɡoʊld-wɝk sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ sɪɾɪŋ; ɑn ə sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ stɪl ɡeɪv ɔf ðə feɪn sɛn ə spaɪsəz. fɪlɪŋ ə kʌp wɪð mʌld waɪn pɹəvaɪɾəd ən ɪkskjus tə bɹeɪk ðə flɪɹɪŋ aɪ kɑntækt. niɾɪŋ ən ɪkskjus meɪɾ əɹ ɹipleɪs ðə pɪtʃɝ ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ wɪð ə ʃɑɹp klɪŋk. ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf əvɔɪɾɪŋ lʊkɪŋ ət sæʃəl tu ɔfən. ivən naʊ, ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət ði ʌðɝ wʊmən saɪdweɪz. tə hɝ fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən, ʃi kəd nɑt kwaɪt meɪk hɝsɛlf tɝn kəmplitli tə miɾ əɹ stɛɹ.

"The Lady Ailil has been approached by lords and ladies who represent most of House Riatin's strength" she replied, much more patiently than she felt. "They want her to take the High Seat of Riatin, and she wants White Tower approval. Aes Sedai approval, at least." For something to do besides match stares-and likely lose-she moved to a blackwood table where a gold-worked silver pitcher sitting; on a silver tray still gave off the faint scent of spices. Filling a cup with mulled wine provided an excuse to break the fleering eye contact. Needing an excuse made her replace the pitcher on the tray with a sharp clink. She found herself avoiding looking at Sashalle too often. Even now, she realized she was looking at the other woman sideways. To her frustration, she could not quite make herself turn completely to meet her stare.

'tɛl əɹ noʊ, sæʃəl. hɝ bɹʌðɝ wɑz stɪl əlaɪv wən læst sin, ən ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛns ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz nʌθɪŋ ðət nid kənsɝn ðə taʊɝ; sɝɾənli nɑt naʊ ɪts dʌn wɪð." ðə mɛmɹi ɝoʊz ə tɔɹæm ɹieɪɾən əz læst sin, ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf ɪndə ə stʃɹeɪnʒ fɑɡ ðət kəd teɪk ɑn sɑləd fɔɹm ən kɪl, ə fɑɡ ðət ɹɪzɪstɪd ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ðə ʃædoʊ hæd wɔkt aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔlz ə kɛɹhin ðət deɪ.

'Tell her no, Sashalle. Her brother was still alive when last seen, and rebellion against the Dragon Reborn is nothing that need concern the Tower; certainly not now it's done with." The memory arose of Toram Riatin as last seen, running off into a strange fog that could take on solid form and kill, a fog that resisted the One Power. The Shadow had walked outside the walls of Cairhien that day.

sæmɪtsuz vɔɪs taɪɾənd fɹəm ði ɛfɝt tə stɑp ɪt ʃɔɹɾ ə tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. nɑt wɪð fɪɹ, bʌɾ æŋɡɝ. ðət hæd bɪn ðə deɪ ʃi feɪld ət hilɪŋ jʌŋ ælθɹ. ʃi heɪɾəd feɪljɝz, heɪɾəd ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðɛm. ən ʃi ʃəd nɑɾ əv tə ɪkspleɪn hɝsɛlf. "moʊst ə ɹieɪɾənz stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪz noʊ tɔl. ðoʊz stɪl taɪd tə tɔɹæm wɪl əpoʊz hɝ, wɪð fɔɹs ʌv ɑɹmz ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi, ən ɪn ɛni keɪs, fɑstɝɪŋ əphivəl ɪnsaɪd ðə haʊsəz ðɛmsɛlvz ɪz noʊ weɪ tə meɪnteɪn ðə pis. ðəɹ ɪz ə pɹikɛɹiəs bæləns ɪn kɛɹhin naʊ, sæʃəl, bʌɾ ɪts ə bæləns, ən wi mʌsnt dɪstɝb ɪt." ʃi mænədʒ tə stɑp ʃɔɹɾ ə seɪɪŋ kædzueɪn wəd bi dɪsplizd ɪf ðeɪ dɪd. ðət wəd hɑɹdli kæɹi weɪt wɪð sæʃəl.

Samitsu's voice tightened from the effort to stop it short of trembling. Not with fear, but anger. That had been the day she failed at Healing young al'Thor. She hated failures, hated remembering them. And she should not have to explain herself. "Most of Riatin's strength is no tall. Those still tied to Toram will oppose her, with force of arms if necessary, and in any case, fostering upheaval inside the Houses themselves is no way to maintain the peace. There is a precarious balance in Cairhien now, Sashalle, but it is a balance, and we mustn't disturb it." She managed to stop short of saying Cadsuane would be displeased if they did. That would hardly carry weight with Sashalle.

"əphivəl wɪl kʌm wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt wi fɑstɝ ɪt," ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝ sɛd fɝmli. hɝ fɹaʊn hæd feɪɾəd əz sun əz sæmɪtsu ʃoʊd ʃi hæd bɪn lɪsnɪŋ, ðoʊ ðə sɛɾ ə hɝ dʒɔ ɹɪmeɪnd. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz stʌbɝnnəs ɹæðɝ ðən bəlɪdʒɝəns, jɛt ðət hɑɹdli mæɾɝd. ðə wʊmən wɑz nɑɾ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ əɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɪns hɝ, dʒʌst steɪɾɪŋ əɹ oʊn pəzɪʃən. ən moʊst ɡɔlɪŋ ʌv ɔl, pleɪnli duɪŋ ðət mʌtʃ əz ə kɝɾəsi. "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz ðə hɛɹəld ʌv əphivəl ən tʃeɪnʒ, sæmɪtsu. ðə hɛɹəl fɔɹtoʊld.

"Upheaval will come whether or not we foster it," the other sister said firmly. Her frown had faded as soon as Samitsu showed she had been listening, though the set of her jaw remained. Perhaps it was stubbornness rather than belligerence, yet that hardly mattered. The woman was not arguing or trying to convince her, just stating her own position. And most galling of all, plainly doing that much as a courtesy. "The Dragon Reborn is the herald of upheaval and change, Samitsu. The herald foretold.

ən ɪf i wɝnt, ðɪs ɪz kɛɹhin. dʒju θɪŋk ðeɪv ɹɪli stɑpt pleɪɪŋ ət deɪz deɪmɑɹ? ðə sɝfəs ə ðə wɔɾɝ meɪ bi stɪl, bʌt ðə fɪʃ nɛvɝ stɑp swɪmɪŋ." eɪ ɹɛd pɹitʃɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn laɪk ə stʃɹit kɔɹnɝ dɛməɡɑɡ! laɪt! "æn ɪf jə ɑɹ ɹɔŋ:" ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf, sæmɪtsu bɪɾ ɔf ðə wɝdz. sæʃəl-bɝn hɝ! -meɪnteɪn ə pɝfək sɝɛnəɾi.

And if he weren't, this is Cairhien. Do you think they have really stopped playing at Daes Dae'mar? The surface of the water may be still, but the fish never stop swimming." A Red preaching the Dragon Reborn like a street corner demagogue! Light! "And if you are wrong:" In spite of herself, Samitsu bit off the words. Sashalle-burn her! -maintained a perfect serenity.

"eɪlɪl əz fɔɹswɔɹn ɛni kleɪm tə ðə sʌn θɹoʊn ɪn feɪvɝ ʌv ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd wɪtʃ ɪz wʌt ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn dɪzaɪɝz, ən ʃiz ɹɛɾi tə swɛɹ fiəlti tə hɪm, ɪf aɪ æsk ɪt. tɔɹæm lɛɾ ən ɑɹmi əɡɛnst ɹænd ælθɹ. aɪ seɪ ðə tʃeɪnʒ ɪz wɝθ meɪkɪŋ ən ðə tʃæns wɝθ teɪkɪŋ, ən əl tɛl əɹ soʊ." ðə bɛlz ɪn sæmɪtsuz hɛɹ tʃaɪmd əɾ ən ɪɹəteɪɾəd ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛd, ən ʃi bɛɹli mænədʒ tə stɑp hɝsɛlf fɹəm saɪɪŋ əɡɛn. eɪtin ə ðoʊz dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn sɪstɝz ɹɪmeɪn ɪn kɛɹhin. kædzueɪn hæd kæɹid səm əweɪ wɪð hɝ, ðən sɛn ɑlɑnə bæk tə teɪkɔf stɪl mɔɹ-æn ʌðɝz ə ði eɪtin bɪsaɪdz sæʃəl stʊd haɪɝ ðən ʃi, bʌt ði il waɪz wʌnz kɛpt əm aʊɾ ə hɝ weɪ. ɪn pɹɪnsəpəl, ʃi dɪsəpɹuvd ə haʊ ðət wɑz dʌn-ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd nɑt bi əpɹɛntəsɪz, nɑt tə ɛniwʌn! ɪt wɑz aʊtʃɹeɪdʒəs! -bʌɾ ɪn pɹæktəs, ɪt dɪd meɪk əɹ dʒɑb iziɝ. ðeɪ kəd nɑt mɛɾəl əɹ tʃɹaɪ tə teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ wɪð waɪz wʌnz ɹʌnɪŋ ðɛɹ laɪvz ən wɑtʃɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ɛvɹi aʊɝ. ənfɔɹtʃənətli fəɹ səm ɹizən ʃi kəd nɑt lɝn, ðə waɪz wʌnz lʊk dɪfɹənli ɑn sæʃəl ən ði ʌðɝ tu sɪstɝz u hæd bɪn seɪld ət dəməaɪz wɛlz. stɪld. ʃi fɛlt ə feɪnt ʃɪvɝ ət ðə θɔt, bʌɾ oʊnli feɪnt! ən ɪt wəd bi lɛs ɪf ʃi ɛvɝ mænədʒ tə wɝk aʊt haʊ deɪmɝ flɪn hæd hild wʌt kəd nɑt bi hild. ət list sʌmwʌn kəd hil stɪlɪŋ, ivən ɪf ɪt wɑz ə mæn. ə mæn tʃænəlɪŋ. laɪt, haʊ ðə hɔɹɝ ə jɛstɝdeɪ bɪkeɪm mɪɹli ði ʌnizinəs ə tədeɪ, wʌns jə ɡɹu əkʌstəmd.

"Ailil has forsworn any claim to the Sun Throne in favor of Elayne Trakand which is what the Dragon Reborn desires, and she is ready to swear fealty to him, if I ask it. Toram led an army against Rand al'Thor. I say the change is worth making and the chance worth taking, and I will tell her so." The bells in Samitsu's hair chimed at an irritated shake of her head, and she barely managed to stop herself from sighing again. Eighteen of those Dragonsworn sisters remained in Cairhien. Cadsuane had carried some away with her, then sent Alanna back to takeoff still more-and others of the eighteen besides Sashalle stood higher than she, but the Aiel Wise Ones kept them out of her way. In principle, she disapproved of how that was done-Aes Sedai could not be apprentices, not to anyone! It was outrageous! -but in practice, it did make her job easier. They could not meddle or try to take charge with Wise Ones running their lives and watching over their every hour. Unfortunately for some reason she could not learn, the Wise Ones Looked differently on Sashalle and the other two sisters who had been sailed at Dumai's Wells. Stilled. She felt a faint shiver at the thought, but only faint! and it would be less if she ever managed to work out how Damer Flinn had Healed what could not be Healed. At least someone could Heal stilling, even if it was a man. A man channeling. Light, how the horror of yesterday became merely the uneasiness of today, once you grew accustomed.

ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət kædzueɪn wʊɾə ɝeɪnʒd mæɾɝz wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ hæd ʃi noʊn əbaʊt ðə dɪfɝəns wɪð sæʃəl ən ɝɡən ən ɹɑneɪl. ət list, ʃi θɔt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ. ðɪs wɑz nɑt ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi hæd bɪn pʊld ɪndə wʌn ə ðə lɛdʒəndɛɹi ɡɹinz dɪzaɪnz.

She was sure that Cadsuane would have arranged matters with the Wise Ones before leaving had she known about the difference with Sashalle and Irgain and Ronaille. At least, she thought she was sure. This was not the first time she had been pulled into one of the legendary Green's designs.

kædzueɪn kəd bi mɔɹ diviəs ðən ə blu, skimz ɪnsaɪd plɑts ɹæpt ɪn stʃɹæɾədʒəmz ən ɔl hɪɾən bɪhaɪn stɪl ʌðɝz. səm wɝ plæn tə feɪl ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə hɛlp ʌðɝz səksid, ən oʊnli kædzueɪn nu wɪtʃ wɝ wɪtʃ, nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ə kʌmfɝɾɪŋ θɔt. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðoʊz θɹi sɪstɝz wɝ fɹi tə kʌm ən ɡoʊ, əz ðeɪ dɪzaɪɝd, də əz ðeɪ dɪzaɪɝd. ən ðeɪ sɝɾənli fɛl noʊ nid tə fɑloʊ ðə ɡaɪɾəns kædzueɪn hæd lɛf bɪhaɪn əɹ tə fɑloʊ ðə sɪstɝ ʃi hæd neɪm tə lid. oʊnli ðɛɹ mæɾ oʊθ tə ælθɹ ɡaɪɾəd əɹ kənstʃɹeɪn ðɛm.

Cadsuane could be more devious than a Blue, schemes inside plots wrapped in stratagems and all hidden behind still others. Some were planned to fail in order to help others succeed, and only Cadsuane knew which were which, not at all a comforting thought. In any case, those three sisters were free to come and go, as they desired, do as they desired. And they certainly felt no need to follow the guidance Cadsuane had left behind or to follow the sister she had named to lead. Only their mad oath to al'Thor guided or constrained them.

sæmɪtsu hæd nɛvɝ fɛlt wik əɹ ɪnəfɛktʃuəl ɪn əɹ laɪf ɪksɛpt wən əɹ tælən feɪl hɝ, jɛt ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ wɪʃt ðət kædzueɪn wəd ɹɪtɝn ən teɪk mæɾɝz aʊɾ ə hɝ hænz. ə fju wɝdz dɪlɪvɝɾ ɪn eɪlɪlz ɪɹ wəd kwɛntʃ ɛni dɪzaɪɝ ðə leɪɾi bæd tə maʊn ðə haɪ sit, ʌv kɔɹs, jɛɾ ɪt wəd kʌm tə nʌθɪŋ ənlɛs ʃi faʊn səm weɪ tə dɪflɛk sæʃəl fɹəm əɹ pɝpəs. noʊ mæɾɝ ðəɾ eɪlɪl fɪɹd hævɪŋ əɹ sɪli sikɹəts ɛɹɾ əbɹɔd, ɪnkənsɪstənsi ɪn wʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ toʊld əɹ kəd wɛl meɪk əɹ dɪsaɪɾ ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ tə tʃɹaɪ vænɪʃɪŋ tə hɝ kʌntʃɹi ɪsteɪts ɹæðɝ ðən ɹɪsk əfɛndɪŋ ə sɪstɝ wʌtɛvɝ ʃi dɪd. kædzueɪn wəd bi əpsɛɾ oʊvɝ luzɪŋ eɪlɪl. sæmɪtsu hɝsɛlf wəd bi ʌpsɛt. eɪlɪl wɑz ə kɑnduɪɾ ɪndə hæf ðə plɑts bɹuɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə noʊbəlz, ə ɡeɪdʒ tə bi ʃʊɹ ðoʊz ɪntʃɹiɡz wɝ ɔl stɪl pɛɾi ən ənlaɪkli tə bɹɪŋ ɛni meɪdʒɝ dɪstɝbəns. ðə kɝst ɹɛd nu ðæt. ən wʌns sæʃəl ɡeɪv eɪlɪl ðɪs pɝmɪʃən, ɪt wəd bi hɝ ðə wʊmən keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ tə wɪð əɹ nuz, nɑt sæmɪtsu tɑmɑɡoʊə.

Samitsu had never felt weak or ineffectual in her life except when her Talent failed her, yet she very much wished that Cadsuane would return and take matters out of her hands. A few words delivered in Ailil's ear would quench any desire the lady bad to mount the High Seat, of course, yet it would come to nothing unless she found some way to deflect Sashalle from her purpose. No matter that Ailil feared having her silly secrets aired abroad, inconsistency in what Aes Sedai told her could well make her decide it was better to try vanishing to her country estates rather than risk offending a sister whatever she did. Cadsuane would be upset over losing Ailil. Samitsu herself would be upset. Ailil was a conduit into half the plots brewing among the nobles, a gauge to be sure those intrigues were all still petty and unlikely to bring any major disturbance. The cursed Red knew that. And once Sashalle gave Ailil this permission, it would be her the woman came running to with her news, not Samitsu Tamagowa.

waɪl sæmɪtsu wɑz flaʊndɝɪŋ ɪn əɹ kwɑndɝi, ðə dɔɹ tə ðə hɔlweɪ oʊpən tə ədmɪɾ ə peɪl, stɝn-feɪs kɛɹhinɪn wʊmən, ə hænd ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən iðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. hɝ hɛɹ wɑz ɪn ə θɪk ɡɹeɪ ɹoʊl ɑn ðə neɪp ə hɝ nɛk, ən ʃi wɔɹ ən ʌnədɔɹnd ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛs soʊ dɑɹk ɪt wɑz nɪɹli blæk, ðə kɝən lɪvɝi ʌv ə sʌn pæləs sɝvənt. sɝvəns nɛvɝ ənaʊns ðɛmsɛlvz əɹ æskt ədmɪɾəns, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt kɔɹɡeɪd mɑɹɛndɪvɪn wɑz hɑɹdli dʒʌst ənʌðɝ sɝvənt; ðə hɛvi sɪlvɝi ɹɪŋ ə lɔŋ kiz əɾ əɹ weɪst wɑz ə bædʒ ʌv ɔfəs. huɛvɝ ɹul kɛɹhin, ðə hoʊldɝ ə ðə kiz ɹul ðə sʌn pæləs ɪn sɪmpəl fækt, ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ səbmɪsɪv ɪn kɔɹɡeɪdz mænɝ. ʃi meɪɾ ə mɪnəməl kɝtsi kɛɹfəli eɪm hæfweɪ bɪtwin sæmɪtsu ən sæʃəl.

While Samitsu was floundering in her quandary, the door to the hallway opened to admit a pale, stern-faced Cairhienin woman, a hand shorter than either Aes Sedai. Her hair was in a thick gray roll on the nape of her neck, and she wore an unadorned gray dress so dark it was nearly black, the current livery of a Sun Palace servant. Servants never announced themselves or asked admittance, of course, but Corgaide Marendevin was hardly just another servant; the heavy silvery ring of long keys at her waist was a badge of office. Whoever ruled Cairhien, the Holder of the Keys ruled the Sun Palace in simple fact, and there was nothing submissive in Corgaide's manner. She made a minimal curtsy carefully aimed halfway between Samitsu and Sashalle.

"aɪ wɑz æsk tə ɹipɔɹɾ ɛniθɪŋ ənjuʒəwəl," ʃi sɛd tə ði ɛɹ, ðoʊ ɪt hæd bɪn sæmɪtsu hu æskt-vɛɹi laɪkli, ʃi hæd noʊn ə ðə paʊɝ stʃɹʌɡəl bɪtwin əm əz sun əz ðeɪ dɪd ðɛmsɛlvz.

"I was asked to report anything unusual," she said to the air, though it had been Samitsu who asked-Very likely, she had known of the power struggle between them as soon as they did themselves.

lɪɾəl ɪn ðə pæləs ɪskeɪp hɝ. "aɪ æm koʊl ðəɹ ɪz ən oʊɡiɝ ɪn ðə kɪtʃənz. hi ən ə jʌŋ mæn səpoʊzədli ɑɹ lʊkɪŋ æftɝ wɝk, əz meɪsənz, bʌɾ aɪ hæv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv oʊɡiɝ ən hjumən meɪsənz wɝkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ. ən stɛɾɪŋ tsəfu sɛnt wɝd noʊ meɪsənz wəd bi əveɪləbəl fɹəm ɛni stɛɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə fɔɹsiəbəl fjutʃɝ, wən wi ɪnkwaɪɝɾ æftɝ . . . ði ɪnsəɾənt." ðə pɔz wɑz bɛɹli pɝsɛptəbəl, ən əɹ ɡɹeɪv ɪkspɹɛʃən dɪd nɑɾ ɔltɝ, bʌt hɔl ðə ɡɑsəp əbaʊt ði ətæk ɑn ðə sʌn pæləs leɪɾ ɪt tə ælθɹz duɪŋ, ði ʌðɝ hæf tə ɛɛs sədaɪ. ə fju teɪlz mɛnʃən ðə fɔɹseɪkən, bʌɾ oʊnli tə pɛɹ əm wɪð iðɝ ælθɹ əɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Little in the palace escaped her. "I am cold there is an Ogier in the kitchens. He and a young man supposedly are looking after work, as masons, but I have never heard of Ogier and human masons working together. And Stedding Tsofu sent word no masons would be available from any stedding for the foreseeable future, when we inquired after . . . the incident." The pause was barely perceptible, and her grave expression did not alter, but hall the gossip about the attack on the Sun Palace laid it to al'Thor's doing, the other half to Aes Sedai. A few tales mentioned the Forsaken, but only to pair them with either al'Thor or the Aes Sedai.

pɝsɪŋ əɹ lɪps ɪn θɔt, sæmɪtsu sɛɾ əsaɪd ðə kɝs tæŋɡəl kɛɹhinɪn meɪɾ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðeɪ tʌtʃt. dɪnaɪəlz ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪnvɑlvmənt: dɪd lɪɾəl ɡʊd; ðə θɹi oʊðz oʊnli wɛn soʊ fɑɹ ɪn ə sɪɾi wɛɹ ə sɪmpəl jɛs əɹ noʊ kəd ɡɪv ɹaɪz tə sɪks kɑntʃɹədɪktɝi ɹumɝz. bʌt, oʊɡiɝ . . . ðə pæləs kɪtʃənz skɛɹsli tʊk ɪn stʃɹeɪ pæsɝzbi, jɛt ðə kʊks vɛɹi laɪkli wəd ɡɪv ən oʊɡiɝ ə hɑt mil dʒʌs fəɹ ðə stʃɹeɪnʒnəs ə siɪŋ hɪm. oʊɡiɝ wɝ ivən mɔɹ ənkɑmən ðən juʒəwəl, ðɪs læs jɪɹ əɹ soʊ. ə fju wɝ stɪl sin naʊ ən ðɛn, bʌt wɔkɪŋ əz fæst əz oʊnli ən oʊɡiɝ kʊd, ən sɛldəm stɑpɪŋ ɪn wʌn pleɪs mɔɹ ðən lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə slip. ðeɪ ɹɛɹli tʃɹævəld wɪð hjumənz, haʊɛvɝ, mʌtʃ lɛs wɝkt wɪð ðɛm. ðə pɛɹɪŋ tɪkəl sʌmθɪŋ ɪn əɹ maɪnd, ðoʊ. hoʊpɪŋ tə tiz wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz ɪndə ði oʊpən, ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə æsk ə fju kwɛstʃənz.

Pursing her lips in thought, Samitsu set aside the cursed tangle Cairhienin made of everything they touched. Denials of Aes Sedai involvement: did little good; the Three Oaths only went so far in a city where a simple yes or no could give rise to six contradictory rumors. But, Ogier . . . The palace kitchens scarcely took in stray passersby, yet the cooks very likely would give an Ogier a hot meal just for the strangeness of seeing him. Ogier were even more uncommon than usual, this last year or so. A few were still seen now and then, but walking as fast as only an Ogier could, and seldom stopping in one place more than long enough to sleep. They rarely traveled with humans, however, much less worked with them. The pairing tickled something in her mind, though. Hoping to tease whatever it was into the open, she opened her mouth to ask a few questions.

'θæŋk ju, kɔɹɡeɪd," sæʃəl sɛd wɪð ə smaɪl. "juv bɪn moʊs hɛlpfəl. bʌɾ ɪf jəl liv ʌs, naʊ?" biɪŋ əbɹʌpt wɪð ðə hoʊldɝ ə ðə kiz wɑz ə ɡʊd weɪ tə faɪn jɝsɛlf wɪð dɝɾi bɛd-lɪnənz ən pʊɹli spaɪs milz, ʌn ɛmptid tʃeɪmbɝpəts ən mɛsədʒəz ðət wɛn əstʃɹeɪ, ə θaʊzən ənɔɪənsɪz ðət kəd meɪk faɪɝ ə mɪzɝi ən liv jə weɪɾɪŋ ɪn mʌd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əkɑmplɪʃ ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl, jɛt sʌmhaʊ ðət smaɪl əpɪɹd tə teɪk ðə stɪŋ aʊɾ oʊ hɝ wɝdz fəɹ kɔɹɡeɪd. ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən baʊɾ əɹ hɛd slaɪtli ɪn əsɛn ən əɡɛn meɪd ðə smɔləs pɑsəbəl kɝtsi. ðɪs taɪm, ɑbviəsli tə sæʃəl.

'Thank you, Corgaide," Sashalle said with a smile. "You've been most helpful. But if you will leave us, now?" Being abrupt with the Holder of the Keys was a good way to find yourself with dirty bed-linens and poorly spiced meals, un emptied chamberpots and messages that went astray, a thousand annoyances that could make fire a misery and leave you wading in mud trying to accomplish anything at all, yet somehow that smile appeared to take the sting out o her words for Corgaide. The gray-haired woman bowed her head slightly in assent and again made the smallest possible curtsy. This time, obviously to Sashalle.

noʊ sunɝ hæd ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən ðən sæmɪtsu θʌmpt əɹ sɪlvɝ kʌp bæk ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə splæʃ wɔɹm waɪn oʊvɝ əɹ ɹɪst ən ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ. ʃi wɑz ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə luzɪŋ kəntʃɹoʊl ʌv eɪlɪl, ən naʊ ðə sʌn pæləs ɪtsɛlf əpɪɹd tə bi slɪpɪŋ θɹu hɝ fɪŋɡɝz! ɪt wɑz əz laɪkli kɔɹɡeɪd wəd spɹaʊt wɪŋz ən flaɪ əz kip saɪlən əbaʊt wʌt ʃi hæd sin hɪɹ, ən wʌtɛvɝ ʃi sɛd wəd flæʃ θɹu ðə pæləs ən ɪnfɛkt ɛvɹi sɝvən daʊn tə ðə mɛn u mʌkt aʊt ðə steɪbəlz-ðæt faɪnəl kɝtsi hæd meɪɾ ɪt kwaɪt klɪɹ wʌt ʃi θɔt. laɪt, bʌt sæmɪtsu heɪɾəd kɛɹhin! ðə kʌstəmz ə səvɪləɾi bɪtwin sɪstɝz wɝ dipli ɪnɡɹeɪnd, bʌt sæʃəl dɪd nɑt stæn haɪ ɪnʌf tə meɪk əɹ hoʊld əɹ tʌŋ ɪn ðə feɪs ə ðɪs dɪzæstɝ, ən ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə dɪlɪvɝ ðə ɹʌf saɪɾ ʌv ɪt.

No sooner had the door closed behind the gray-haired woman than Samitsu thumped her silver cup back on the tray hard enough to splash warm wine over her wrist and rounded on the Red sister. She was on the brink of losing control of Ailil, and now the Sun Palace itself appeared to be slipping through her fingers! It was as likely Corgaide would sprout wings and fly as keep silent about what she had seen here, and whatever she said would flash through the palace and infect every servant down to the men who mucked out the stables-That final curtsy had made it quite clear what she thought. Light, but Samitsu hated Cairhien! The customs of civility between sisters were deeply ingrained, but Sashalle did not stand high enough to make her hold her tongue in the face of this disaster, and she intended to deliver the rough side of it.

fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ði ʌðɝ wʊmən, ðoʊ, ʃi sɔ sæʃəlz feɪs-ɹɪli sɔ ɪt, pɝhæps fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm-æn sʌɾənli ʃi nu waɪ ɪt tʃɹʌbəld əɹ soʊ, pɝhæps ivən waɪ ʃi hæd faʊn ɪt dɪfəkəl tə lʊk dɝɛkli ət ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ. ɪt wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪs, aʊtsaɪɾ ə taɪm ən stændɪŋ əpɑɹt fɹəm eɪdʒ. moʊs pipəl wɝ ənʃʊɹ ə ðə lʊk əntɪl ɪt wɑz pɔɪntəɾ aʊt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ʌnmɪsteɪkəbəl tə ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ. pɝhæps səm bɪts ɹɪmeɪnd, skɹæps ðət meɪd sæʃəl əpɪɹ kloʊsɝ tə bjuɾəfəl ðən ʃi ɹɪli wɑz, vɛɾ ɛniwʌn əɾ ɔl wəd pʊɾ ən eɪdʒ tə hɝ, sʌmwɛɹ ʃɔɹɾ ə hɝ mɪɾəl jɪɹz. ðə ɹiləzeɪʃən fɹoʊz sæmɪtsuz tʌŋ.

Frowning at the other woman, though, she saw Sashalle's face-really saw it, perhaps for the first time-and suddenly she knew why it troubled her so, perhaps even why she had found it difficult to look directly at the Red sister. It was no longer an Aes Sedai face, outside of time and standing apart from age. Most people were unsure of the look until it was pointed out, but it was unmistakable to another sister. Perhaps some bits remained, scraps that made Sashalle appear closer to beautiful than she really was, vet anyone at all would put an age to her, somewhere short of her middle years. The realization froze Samitsu's tongue.

wʌt wɑz noʊn əbaʊt wɪmən u hæd bɪn stɪld wɑz lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ ðən ɹumɝ. ðeɪ ɹæn əweɪ ən hɪd fɹəm ʌðɝ sɪstɝz; ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ðeɪ daɪd. juʒəwəli, ðeɪ daɪd sun ɹæðɝ ðən leɪt. ðə lɔs ə seɪaɪdɑɹ wɑz mɔɹ ðən moʊst wɪmən kəd bɛɹ fəɹ vɛɹi lɔŋ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔl ɹɪli tɪɾəl-tætəl; əz fɑɹ əz ʃi nu, noʊ wʌn ɪn ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm hæd hæd ðə nɝv tə tʃɹaɪ lɝnɪŋ mɔɹ. ðə ɹɛɹli æknɑlɪdʒ fɪɹ ɪn ðə dɑɹkəs kɔɹnɝ ʌv ɛvɹi sɪstɝz hɛd, ðət ðə seɪm feɪt maɪt kʌm tə hɝ wʌn deɪ ɪn ə kɛɹləs moʊmənt, kɛpt ɛniwʌn fɹəm wɑntɪŋ tə noʊ tu mʌtʃ. ivən ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd haɪd ðɛɹ aɪz wən ðeɪ dɪd nɑt wɑnə si. ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz ðoʊz ɹumɝz, ðoʊ, ɔlmoʊs nɛvɝ mɛnʃən ən soʊ veɪɡ jə kəd nɛvɝ ɹikɔl wɛɹ jə hɝɾ əm fɝst, wɪspɝz ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɪɹɪŋ, jɛt fɝɛvɝ floʊɾɪŋ əbaʊt. wʌn ðət sæmɪtsu hæɾ oʊnli hæf ɹɪmɛmbɝd; tɪl naʊ, sɛd ðəɾ ə wʊmən u wɑz stɪld ɡɹu jʌŋ əɡɛn, ɪf ʃi lɪvd. ɪt hæɾ ɔlweɪz sim luɾəkɹəs, tɪl naʊ. ɹɪɡeɪnɪŋ ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl hæd nɑt ɡɪvən sæʃəl bæk ɛvɹiθɪŋ. wʌns mɔɹ ʃi wəɾ əv tə wɝk wɪð ðə paʊɝ fəɹ jɪɹz tə ɡeɪn ðə feɪs ðət wəd pɹoʊkleɪm əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ɛni sɪstɝ u kəd si hɝ klɪɹli. əɹ . . . wəd ʃi ɹɪɡeɪn ɪt. ɪt simd ɪnɛvəɾəbəl, jɛt ðɪs wɑz ənmæp tɝeɪn. ən ɪf əɹ feɪs wɑz tʃeɪnʒd, wɑz ɛniθɪŋ ɛls əbaʊɾ əɹ tʃeɪnʒd əz wɛl: sæmɪtsu ʃɪvɝd, hɑɹɾɝ ðən ʃi hæd fəɹ ðə θɔɾ ə stɪlɪŋ. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz əz wɛl ʃi hæd ɡɔn sloʊ ɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʌzəl aʊt dɑɹnɝz weɪ ʌv hilɪŋ.

What was known about women who had been stilled was little better than rumor. They ran away and hid from other sisters; eventually, they died. Usually, they died soon rather than late. The loss of saidar was more than most women could bear for very long. But it was all really tittle-tattle; as far as she knew, no one in a very long time had had the nerve to try learning more. The rarely acknowledged fear in the darkest corner of every sister's head, that the same fate might come to her one day in a careless moment, kept anyone from wanting to know too much. Even Aes Sedai could hide their eyes when they did not want to see. There were always those rumors, though, almost never mentioned and so vague you could never recall where you heard them first, whispers on the edge of hearing, yet forever floating about. One that Samitsu had only half remembered; till now, said that a woman who was stilled grew young again, if she lived. It had always seemed ludicrous, till now. Regaining the ability to channel had not given Sashalle back everything. Once more she would have to work with the Power for years to gain the face that would proclaim her Aes Sedai to any sister who could see her clearly. Or . . . would she regain it. It seemed inevitable, yet this was unmapped terrain. And if her face was changed, was anything else about her changed as well: Samitsu shivered, harder than she had for the thought of stilling. Perhaps it was as well she had gone slow in trying to puzzle out Darner's way of Healing.

fɪŋɡɝɪŋ əɹ il nɛkləs, sæʃəl simd ʌnəwɛɹ ðət sæmɪtsu hæɾ ɛni ɡɹivəns oʊvɝ əɹ bɪheɪvjɝ, ʌnəwɛɹ ə sæmɪtsu ɛs skɹuɾəni-"ðɪs meɪbi nʌθɪŋ, əɹ ɪt meɪ wɔɹən lʊkɪŋ ɪntu," ʃi sɛd, "bʌt kɔɹɡeɪd wɑz oʊnli ɹipɔɹɾɪŋ wʌt ʃi hɝd. ɪf wi wɑnə lɝn ɛniθɪŋ, wi mʌst ɡoʊ ən si fəɹ aʊɝsɛlvz." wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝd, ʃi ɡæðɝɾ əɹ skɝts ən stɑɹɾəd aʊɾ ə ði əpɑɹtməns, livɪŋ sæmɪtsu oʊnli ə tʃɔɪs bɪtwin fɑloʊɪŋ əɹ ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ bɪhaɪnd. ɪt wɑz ɪntɑlɝəbəl! jɛt ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ wɑz ənθɪŋkəbəl.

Fingering her Aiel necklace, Sashalle seemed unaware that Samitsu had any grievance over her behavior, unaware of Samitsu s scrutiny-"This maybe nothing, or it may warrant looking into," she said, "but Corgaide was only reporting what she heard. If we want to learn anything, we must go and see for ourselves." Without another word, she gathered her skirts and started out of the apartments, leaving Samitsu only a choice between following or remaining behind. It was intolerable! Yet remaining was unthinkable.

sæʃəl wɑz noʊ tɔlɝ ðən ʃi, nɑt tə spik ʌv, bʌt ʃi hæd tə hɝi tə kip ʌp əz ðə ɹɛd ɡlaɪɾɪd swɪfli əlɔŋ waɪd, skwɛɹ-vɔltəd kɔɹɪɾɝz. teɪkɪŋ ðə lɛd wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃən, ənlɛs ʃi tʃoʊz tə ɹʌn. ʃi fjumd ɪn saɪləns, ðoʊ ɪt ɹikwaɪɝd ɡɹɪɾɪŋ əɹ tiθ. ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ ɪn pʌblɪk wɑz ɪmpɹɑpɝ ət bɛst. wɝs, wɪθaʊɾ ɛni daʊt, ɪt wəd bi fjuɾəl. ən ðət wəɾ oʊnli dɪɡ ðə hoʊl ʃi wɑz ɪn dipɝ. ʃi fɛlt ə vɛɹi ɡɹeɪt dɪzaɪɝ tə kɪk sʌmθɪŋ.

Sashalle was no taller than she, not to speak of, but she had to hurry to keep up as the Red glided swiftly along wide, square-vaulted corridors. Taking the lead was out of the question, unless she chose to run. She fumed in silence, though it required gritting her teeth. Arguing with another sister in public was improper at best. Worse, without any doubt, it would be futile. And that would only dig the hole she was in deeper. She felt a very great desire to kick something.

stændlæmps ət ɹɛɡjəlɝ ɪntɝvəlz ɡeɪv plɛnti ʌv laɪɾ ivən ɪn ðə dɑɹkəst stʃɹɛtʃəz ə hɔlweɪ bʌt ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl kʌlɝ əɹ dɛkɝeɪʃən bɪɑn ði əkeɪʒənəl tæpəstʃɹi wɪð ɛvɹi-θɪŋ ɪn ɪɾ ɝeɪnʒd ɪn ɔɹɾɝli fæʃən, wɛðɝ ænəməlz biɪŋ hʌntəɾ əɹ noʊbəlz faɪɾɪŋ ɡæənli ɪn bæɾəl. ə fju nɪtʃɪz ɪn ðə wɔlz hɛld ɔɹnəməns ʌv ɡoʊld əɹ si foʊk pɔɹsələn, ən ɪn səm kɔɹɪɾɝz ðə kɔɹnɪsəz wɝ wɝkt ɪn fɹizɪz, moʊs lɛft ənpeɪntɪd. ðət wɑz ɔl. kɛɹhinɪn hɪd ðɛɹ ɑpjələns aʊɾ ə pʌblɪk vju; əz ðeɪ dɪd wɪð soʊ mʌtʃ. ðə sɝvɪŋ mɛn ən wɪmən u hɝiɾ ɪndʌstʃɹiəsli əlɔŋ ðə hɔlz laɪk stʃɹimz ʌv æns wɔɹ lɪvɝi ðə kʌlɝ ə tʃɑɹkoʊl, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðoʊz ɪn sɝvəs tə noʊbəlz ɹɛzəɾənt ɪn ðə pæləs, hu sim bɹaɪt bɪsaɪd ðə ɹɛst, wɪð ðɛɹ haʊs bædʒɪz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɑn ðɛɹ bɹɛsts, ən ðɛɹ kɑlɝz ən səmtaɪmz slivz mɑɹkt ɪn haʊs kʌlɝz. wʌn əɹ tu ivən hæɾ ə koʊɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs ɔl ɪn haʊs kʌlɝz, ən əpɪɹɾ ɔlmoʊst ən aʊtləndɝ əmʌŋ ði ʌðɝz. bʌt ðeɪ ɔl kɛp ðɛɹ aɪz daʊn ən bɛɹli pɔz lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɔfɝ kwɪk baʊz əɹ kɝtsiz tə ðə tu sɪstɝz əz ðeɪ pæst. ðə sʌn pæləs ɹikwaɪɝd kaʊnləs hʌnʒɹədz ə sɝvəns, ən ɪt sim ðeɪ wɝ ɔl skɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ tɛndɪŋ ðɛɹ tʃɔɹz.

Standlamps at regular intervals gave plenty of light even in the darkest stretches of hallway but there was little color or decoration beyond the occasional tapestry with every-thing in it arranged in orderly fashion, whether animals being hunted or nobles fighting gallantly in battle. A few niches in the walls held ornaments of gold or Sea Folk porcelain, and in some corridors the cornices were worked in friezes, most left unpainted. That was all. Cairhienin hid their opulence out of public view; as they did with so much. The serving men and women who hurried industriously along the halls like streams of ants wore livery the color of charcoal, except for those in service to nobles resident in the palace, who seemed bright beside the rest, with their House badges embroidered on their breasts, and their collars and sometimes sleeves marked in House colors. One or two even had a coat or dress all in House colors, and appeared almost an outlander among the others. But they all kept their eyes down and barely paused long enough to offer quick bows or curtsies to the two sisters as they passed. The Sun Palace required countless hundreds of servants, and it seemed they were all scurrying about this morning tending their chores.

noʊbəlz stʃɹoʊl ðə hɔlweɪz, tu, ɔfɝɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn kɔʃəs kɝɾəsiz tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əz ðeɪ pæst, pɝhæps wɪð ə ɡɹiɾɪŋ kɛɹfəli bæləns bɪtwin ən ɪluʒən ʌv ɪkwɑləɾi ən ðə tʃɹu steɪɾ ʌv əfɛɹz, spoʊkən ɪn loʊ vɔɪsəz ðət dɪd nɔɹ kæɹi fɑɹ. ðeɪ pɹuv ði oʊl seɪɪŋ ðət stʃɹeɪnʒ taɪmz meɪk fəɹ stʃɹeɪnʒ tʃɹævlɪŋ kəmpænjənz. oʊld ɛnməɾiz hæd bɪn pʊɾ əweɪ ɪn ðə feɪs ə nu deɪnʒɝz. fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. hɪɹ, tu əɹ θɹi peɪl kɛɹhinɪn lɔɹdz ɪn dɑɹk sɪlk koʊts wɪð θɪn stʃɹaɪps ə kʌlɝ əkɹɔs ðə fɹʌnt, səm wɪð ðə fɹʌns ə ðɛɹ hɛdz ʃeɪvd ən paʊɾɝd soʊlʒɝ-fæʃən, pɹɑməneɪɾɪd əlɔŋsaɪɾ ən ikwəl nʌmbɝ ə dɑɹk tɛɹənz, tɔlɝ ɪn ðɛɹ bɹaɪt koʊts wɪð fæt, stʃɹaɪp slivz. ðɛɹ, ə tɛɹən noʊbəlwʊmən ɪn ə snʌɡ pɝl-soʊn kæp, kʌlɝfli bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd ɡaʊn, ən peɪl leɪs ɹʌf wɔkt ɑɹm-ɪn-ɑɹm bɪsaɪɾ ə ʃɔɹɾɝ kɛɹhinɪn noʊbəl wɪð əɹ hɛɹ ɪn ən ɪlæbɹət taʊɝ ðət ɹɛɾid wɛl əbʌv əɹ kəmpænjənz hɛd, smoʊki ɡɹeɪ leɪs ʌndɝ əɹ tʃɪn, ən nɛɹoʊ stʃɹaɪps ə hɝ haʊs kʌlɝz kæskeɪɾɪŋ daʊn ðə fɹʌn ə hɝ waɪd-skɝɾɪd dɑɹk sɪlk. ɔl laɪk bʊzəm-fɹɛnz ən tʃɹʌstɪd kɑnfədæns.

Nobles strolled the hallways, too, offering their own cautious courtesies to the Aes Sedai as they passed, perhaps with a greeting carefully balanced between an illusion of equality and the true state of affairs, spoken in low voices that did nor carry far. They proved the old saying that strange times make for strange traveling companions. Old enmities had been put away in the face of new dangers. For the moment. Here, two or three pale Cairhienin lords in dark silk coats with thin stripes of color across the front, some with the fronts of their heads shaved and powdered soldier-fashion, promenaded alongside an equal number of dark Tairens, taller in their bright coats with fat, striped sleeves. There, a Tairen noblewoman in a snug pearl-sewn cap, colorfully brocaded gown, and pale lace ruff walked arm-in-arm beside a shorter Cairhienin noble with her hair in an elaborate tower that readied well above her companion's head, smoky gray lace under her chin, and narrow stripes of her House colors cascading down the front of her wide-skirted dark silk. All like bosom-friends and trusted confidants.

səm pɛɹɪŋz dɪd lʊk ɑɾɝ ðən ʌðɝz. ə nʌmbɝ ʌv wɪmən hæd bɪɡʌn wɛɹɪŋ aʊtlændɪʃ kloʊðz ə leɪt, əpɛɹənli nɛvɝ noʊɾɪsɪŋ haʊ ðeɪ dʒɹu mɛnz aɪz ən meɪɾ ivən ðə sɝvəns stʃɹʌɡəl nɑt tə stɛɹ. taɪt bɹitʃɪz ən ə koʊt bɛɹli lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə kʌvɝ ðə hɪps wɝ nɑt suɾəbəl ɡɑɹməns fəɹ ə wʊmən, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mʌtʃ ɛfɝt wɛn ɪndə ɹɪtʃ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi əɹ pæɾɝnɪŋ ðə koʊt wɪð dʒɛmstoʊnz, dʒuəl nɛkləsɪz ən bɹeɪslɪts ən pɪnz wɪð spɹeɪz ə kʌlɝfəl fɛðɝz oʊnli pɔɪntəɾ ʌp ði ɑɾəti. ən ðoʊz bɹaɪtli daɪd buts, wɪð ðɛɹ hilz ðəɾ æɾəd əz mʌtʃ əz ə hæn tə ə wʊmənz haɪt meɪɾ əm əpɪɹ ɪn deɪnʒɝ ə fɔlɪŋ daʊn wɪð ɛvɹi sweɪɪŋ stɛp.

Some pairings did look odder than others. A number of women had begun wearing outlandish clothes of late, apparently never noticing how they drew men's eyes and made even the servants struggle not to stare. Tight breeches and a coat barely long enough to cover the hips were not suitable garments for a woman, no matter how much effort went into rich embroidery or patterning the coat with gemstones, jeweled necklaces and bracelets and pins with sprays of colorful feathers only pointed up the oddity. And those brightly dyed boots, with their heels that added as much as a hand to a woman's height made them appear in danger of falling down with every swaying step.

"skændələs." sæʃəl mʌɾɝd, aɪɪŋ wʌn sətʃ pɛɹ ʌv wɪmən ən twɪtʃɪŋ əɹ skɝts ɪn dɪsplɛʒɝ.

"Scandalous." Sashalle muttered, eyeing one such pair of women and twitching her skirts in displeasure.

"skændələs," sæmɪtsu mɝmɝd bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd stɑp hɝsɛlf, ðən snæpt əɹ maʊθ ʃʌt soʊ hɑɹɾ əɹ tiθ klɪkt. ʃi niɾəd tə kəntʃɹoʊl əɹ tʌŋ. vɔɪsɪŋ əɡɹimən dʒʌs kəz ʃi əɡɹid wɑz ə hæbət ʃi kəɾ ɪl-əfɔɹd wɪð sæʃəl.

"Scandalous," Samitsu murmured before she could stop herself, then snapped her mouth shut so hard her teeth clicked. She needed to control her tongue. Voicing agreement just because she agreed was a habit she could ill-afford with Sashalle.

stɪl ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp ɡlænsɪŋ bæk ət ðə pɛɹ ɪn dɪsəpɹuvəl. ən ə bɪɾ ʌv wʌndɝ. ə jɪɹ əɡoʊ, əleɪn tʃulɪliændɝɾ ən fioʊndə ænɹɪz wʊɾə bɪn əɾ itʃ ʌðɝz θɹoʊts. əɹ ɹæðɝ əv hæd ðɛɹ ɑɹmmɪn ət wʌn ənʌðɝz θɹoʊts. bʌt ðɛn, hu wʊɾə ɪkspɛktəd tə si bɝtoʊm seɪɡən wɔkɪŋ pisfəli wɪð wɪɹɑmɑn sɑniəɡoʊ, niðɝ mæn ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə dæɡɝ əɾ ɪz bɛlt? stʃɹeɪnʒ taɪmz ən stʃɹeɪnʒ tʃɹævlɪŋ kəmpænjənz. daʊtləs ðeɪ wɝ pleɪɪŋ ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz, mənuvɝɪŋ fəɹ ædvæntɪdʒ əz ðeɪ ɔlweɪz hæd, jɛt dɪvaɪɾɪŋ laɪnz ðət wʌns wɝ ɡɹeɪvən ɪn stoʊn naʊ tɝn aʊt tə hæv bɪn dʒɹɔn ɑn wɔɾɝ ɪnstɛd. vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ taɪmz.

Still she could not help glancing back at the pair in disapproval. And a bit of wonder. A year ago, Alaine Chuliliandred and Fionnda Annariz would have been at each other's throats. Or rather have had their armsmen at one another's throats. But then, who would have expected to see Bertome Saighan walking peacefully with Weiramon Saniago, neither man reaching for the dagger at his belt? Strange times and strange traveling companions. Doubtless they were playing the Game of Houses, maneuvering for advantage as they always had, yet dividing lines that once were graven in stone now turned out to have been drawn on water instead. Very strange times.

ðə kɪtʃənz wɝ ɑn ðə loʊəs lɛvəl ə ðə sʌn pæləs əbʌv ɡɹaʊnd., ət ðə bæk, ə klʌstɝ ə stoʊn-wɔl bim-silɪŋ ɹumz sɛntɝɾ ɝaʊn ə lɔŋ wɪndoʊləs ɹum fʊl ʌv aɪɝn stoʊvz ən bɹɪk ʌvənz ən dʒɹɛst-stoʊn faɪɝpleɪsəz, ən ðə hit wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɛniwʌn fɝɡɛt ðə snoʊ aʊtsaɪd, əɹ ivən ðəɾ ɪt wɑz wɪntɝ. nɔɹməli, swɛɾi-feɪst kʊks ən ʌndɝ-kʊks, əz dɑɹkli klæɾ əz ɛni ʌðɝ pæləs sɝvəns bɪniθ ðɛɹ waɪɾ eɪpɹənz, wʊɾə bɪn skɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ɡɛɾɪŋ ɹɛɾi tə pɹipɛɹ ðə mɪddeɪ mil, niɾɪŋ loʊvz ɑn lɔŋ flaʊɝ-stʃɹun teɪbəlz tɑpt wɪð mɑɹbəl, bæstɪŋ ðə dʒɔɪns ən faʊl ðət wɝ tɝnɪŋ ɑn spɪts ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪsəz. naʊ oʊnli ðə tʃɹɑɾɪŋ spɪt-dɑɡz wɝ muvɪŋ, iɡɝ tə ɝn ðɛɹ bɪts fɹəm ðə dʒɔɪns. bæskəts ə tɝnəps ən kæɹəts stʊɾ ənpild ən əŋtʃɑpt, ən smɛlz swiɾ ən spaɪsi keɪm fɹəm ʌntɛndəd pɑts ə sɔsəz. ivən ðə skʌljənz, bɔɪz ən ɡɝlz sɝəptɪʃəsli waɪpɪŋ ðɛɹ feɪsəz ɑn ðɛɹ eɪpɹənz, stʊɾ ɑn ðə fɹɪnʒ ʌv ə ɡɹup ʌv wɪmən klʌstɝɾ ɝaʊnd wʌn ə ðə teɪbəlz. fɹəm ðə dɔɹ-weɪ, sæmɪtsu kəd si ðə bæk ʌv ən oʊɡiɝz hɛd ɹaɪzɪŋ əbʌv əm wɛɹ i wɑz siɾəd ət ðə teɪbəl, tɔlɝ ðən moʊs mɛn wʊɾə bɪn stændɪŋ ʌp, ən bɹɔd wɪð ɪt. ʌv kɔɹs, kɛɹhinɪn wɝ ʃɔɹt baɪ ən lɑɹdʒ, ən ðət hɛlpt. ʃi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn sæʃəlz ɑɹm, ən fəɹ ə wʌndɝ, ðə wʊmən stɑpt wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ wɪθaʊt pɹoʊɾɛst.

The kitchens were on the lowest level of the Sun Palace above ground., at the back, a cluster of stone-walled beam-ceiling rooms centered around a long windowless room full of iron stoves and brick ovens and dressed-stone fireplaces, and the heat was enough to make anyone forget the snow outside, or even that it was winter. Normally, sweaty-faced cooks and under-cooks, as darkly clad as any other palace servants beneath their white aprons, would have been scurrying about getting ready to prepare the midday meal, kneading loaves on long flour-strewn tables topped with marble, basting the joints and fowl that were turning on spits in the fireplaces. Now only the trotting spit-dogs were moving, eager to earn their bits from the joints. Baskets of turnips and carrots stood unpeeled and unchopped, and smells sweet and spicy came from untended pots of sauces. Even the scullions, boys and girls surreptitiously wiping their faces on their aprons, stood on the fringe of a group of women clustered around one of the tables. From the door-way, Samitsu could see the back of an Ogier's head rising above them where he was seated at the table, taller than most men would have been standing up, and broad with it. Of course, Cairhienin were short by and large, and that helped. She laid a hand on Sashalle's arm, and for a wonder, the woman stopped where they were without protest.

" . . . vænɪʃt wɪθaʊt livɪŋ ə klu wɛɹ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ?" ði oʊɡiɝ wɑz æskɪŋ ɪn ə dip ɹʌmbəl laɪk ði ɝθ ʃɪftɪŋ. hɪz lɔŋ, tʌftəɾ ɪɹz, stɪkɪŋ ʌp θɹu dɑɹk hɛɹ ðət hʌŋ tə hɪz haɪ kɑlɝ, flɪk bæk ən fɔɹθ ənizəli.

" . . . vanished without leaving a clue where he was going?" the Ogier was asking in a deep rumble like the earth shifting. His long, tufted ears, sticking up through dark hair that hung to his high collar, flicked back and forth uneasily.

"oʊ, də stɑp tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt hɪm, mæstɝ lɛɾɝ," ə wʊmənz vɔɪs ænsɝɾ ɪn ə kweɪvɝ ðət simd wɛl pɹæktəst. "wɪkəd, hi wɑz. tɔɹ hæf ðə pæləs əpɑɹt wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, hi dɪd. hi kəd tɝn jəɹ blʌd tə aɪs dʒʌs lʊkɪŋ ət ju, ən kɪl jə əz sun əz lʊk. θaʊzənz əv daɪd baɪ hɪz oʊn hænd. tɛnz ə θaʊzənz! oʊ aɪ nɛvɝ laɪk tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt hɪm."

"Oh, do stop talking about him, Master Ledar," a woman's voice answered in a quaver that seemed well practiced. "Wicked, he was. Tore half the palace apart with the One Power, he did. He could turn your blood to ice just looking at you, and kill you as soon as look. Thousands have died by his own hand. Tens of thousands! Oh I never like talking about him."

"fɔɹ sʌmwʌn əz nɛvɝ laɪks tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ, ɛlʒɹəd mɛθən ənʌðɝ wʊmən sɛd ʃɑɹpli "ju ʃʊɹli tɔk ə lɪɾəl ɛls." staʊɾ ən kwaɪt tɔl fəɹ ə kɛɹhinɪn, nɪɹli əz tɔl əz sæmɪtsu hɝsɛlf wɪð ə fju stʃɹænz ʌv ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ ɪskeɪpɪŋ əɹ waɪt pleɪn-leɪs kæp, ʃi mʌst əv bɪn ðə tʃif kʊk ɑn duɾi kəz ɛvɹiwʌn sæmɪtsu kəd si kwɪkli nɑɾəd əɡɹimən ən twɪɾɝd wɪð læftɝ ən sɛd, "oʊ, ɹaɪt jə ɑɹ, mɪstʃɹəs bɛldɛɹ," ɪn ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli sɪkəfæntɪk weɪ. sɝvəns hæd ðɛɹ oʊn haɪɹɑɹkiz, əz ɹɪdʒɪdli meɪnteɪn əz ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf.

"For someone as never likes talking about something, Eldrid Methin another woman said sharply "you surely talk of little else." Stout and quite tall for a Cairhienin, nearly as tall as Samitsu herself with a few strands of gray hair escaping her white plain-lace cap, she must have been the chief cook on duty because everyone Samitsu could see quickly nodded agreement and twittered with laughter and said, "Oh, right you are, Mistress Beldair," in a particularly sycophantic way. Servants had their own hierarchies, as rigidly maintained as the Tower itself.

"bʌt ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ ɹɪli ɪz nɑt fəɹ əs tə bi ɡɑsəpɪŋ oʊvɝ, mæstɝ lɛɾɝ," ðə staʊt wʊmən wɛn ɑn ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪznəs, ðəɾ ɪz, ən nɑt fəɹ ðə laɪks ə jə ən mi. tɛl əs mɔɹ əbaʊt ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. hæv jə ɹɪli sin tʃɹɑləks?"

"But that sort of thing really is not for us to be gossiping over, Master Ledar," the stout woman went on Aes Sedai business, that is, and not for the likes of you and me. Tell us more about the Borderlands. Have you really seen Trollocs?"

"ɛɛs sədaɪ," ə mæn mʌɾɝd. hɪɾən baɪ ðə kɹaʊɾ ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl, hi hæd tə bi lɛɾɝz kəmpænjən. sæmɪtsu kəd si noʊ ɡɹoʊn mɛn əmʌŋ ðə kɪtʃən-foʊk ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. "tɛl mi, dʒju ɹɪli θɪŋk ðeɪ bɑndəd ðoʊz mɛn jə wɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, ðoʊz æʃəmən? əz wɔɹɾɝz? ən wʌɾ əbaʊt ðə wʌn u daɪd? jə nɛvɝ sɛd haʊ."

"Aes Sedai," a man muttered. Hidden by the crowd around the table, he had to be Ledar's companion. Samitsu could see no grown men among the kitchen-folk this morning. "Tell me, do you really think they bonded those men you were talking about, those Asha'man? As Warders? And what about the one who died? You never said how."

"waɪ, ɪt wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əz kɪl hɪm," ɛlʒɹəd paɪpt ʌp. "ænd wʌɾ ɛls wəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ bɑn ə mæn æz? oʊ, tɛɹəbəl, ðeɪ wɑz, ðɛm æʃəmən. tɝn jə tə stoʊn wɪð ə lʊk, ðeɪ kʊd.

"Why, it was the Dragon Reborn as killed him," Eldrid piped up. "And what else would Aes Sedai bond a man as? Oh, terrible, they was, them Asha'man. Turn you to stone with a look, they could.

jə kən tɛl wʌn dʒʌs baɪ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, jə noʊ. fɹaɪtfəl ɡloʊɪŋ aɪz, ðeɪ hæv."

You can tell one just by looking at him, you know. Frightful glowing eyes, they have."

"bi kwaɪət, ɛlʒɹəd," mɪstʃɹəs bɛldɛɹ sɛd fɝmli. "meɪbi ðeɪ wɑz æʃəmən ən meɪbi nɑt, mæstɝ ʌndɝhɪl. meɪbi ðeɪ wɑz bɑndəɾ ən meɪbi nɑt. ɔl aɪ əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls kən seɪ ɪz ðeɪ wɑz wɪð hɪm," ði ɛmfəsəs ɪn əɹ vɔɪs meɪd pleɪn u ʃi wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt; ɛlʒɹəd maɪt kənsɪɾɝ ɹænd ælθɹ fɪɹfəl bʌt ðɪs wʊmən dɪd nɑt wɑnə soʊ mʌtʃ əz neɪm hɪm, "æn sun æftɝ i lɛft, sʌɾənli ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz tɛlɪŋ əm wʌt tə də ən ðeɪ wɑz duɪŋ ɪt. ʌv kɔɹs ɛni ful noʊz tə də əz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛz. ɛniweɪ ðoʊz fɛloʊz ɑɹ ɔl ɡɔn ɔf, naʊ. waɪ ɑɹ jə soʊ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn əm mæstɝ ʌndɝhɪl? ɪz ðəɾ ən ændɔɝən neɪm?"

"Be quiet, Eldrid," Mistress Beldair said firmly. "Maybe they was Asha'man and maybe not, Master Underhill. Maybe they was bonded and maybe not. All I or anyone else can say is they was with him," the emphasis in her voice made plain who she was talking about; Eldrid might consider Rand al'Thor fearful but this woman did not want to so much as name him, "and soon after he left, suddenly the Aes Sedai was telling them what to do and they was doing it. Of course any fool knows to do as an Aes Sedai says. Anyway those fellows are all gone off, now. Why are you so interested in them Master Underhill? Is that an Andoran name?"

lɛɾɝ θɹu bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən læft, ə bumɪŋ saʊn ðət fɪl ðə ɹum. hɪz ɪɹz twɪtʃt vaɪələnli. "oʊ, wi wɑnə noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə pleɪsəz wi vɪzət, mɪstʃɹəs bɛldɛɹ. ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, jə seɪ? jə maɪt θɪŋk ɪts koʊl hɪɹ, bʌt wiv sin tʃɹiz kɹæk oʊpən laɪk nʌts ɑn ðə faɪɝ fɹəm ðə koʊld ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. juv blɑks ʌv aɪs ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝ, floʊɾɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ʌpstʃɹim, bʌt wiv sin ɹɪvɝz əz waɪɾ əz ði ɑlɡnjə fɹoʊzən soʊ mɝtʃəns kən dʒɹaɪv loʊɾəd tʃɹeɪnz ʌv wæɡənz əkɹɔs ðɛm, ən mɛn fɪʃɪŋ θɹu hoʊlz kʌɾ ɪn aɪs nɪɹli ə spæn θɪk. ət naɪt, ðəɹ ɑɹ ʃits ə laɪɾ ɪn ðə skaɪ ðət sim tə kɹækəl, bɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf tə dɪm ðə stɑɹz, ən " ivən mɪstʃɹəs bɛldɛɹ wɑz linɪŋ təwɔɹdz ði oʊɡiɝ kɑɾ ʌp, bʌt wʌn ə ðə jʌŋ skʌljənz, tu ʃɔɹt tə si pæs ði ədʌls, ɡlæns bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən ɪz aɪz wɛnt waɪd wən ðeɪ lɪɾ ɑn sæmɪtsu ən sæʃəl. hɪz ɡeɪz steɪd fɪkst ɑn əm əz ɪf tʃɹæpt, bʌɾ i fʌmbəld wɪð wʌn hæn tɪl i kəd tʌɡ ət mɪstʃɹəs bɛldɛɹz sliv. ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi ʃʊk ɪm ɔf wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊnd. əɾ ə sɛkən tʌɡ, ʃi hɝ hɛd wɪð ə skaʊl ðət vænɪʃt ɪn ə blɪŋk wən ʃi, tu, sɔ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Ledar threw back his head and laughed, a booming sound that filled the room. His ears twitched violently. "Oh, we want to know everything about the places we visit, Mistress Beldair. The borderlands, you say? You might think its cold here, but we've seen trees crack open like nuts on the fire from the cold in the borderlands. You have blocks of ice on the river, floating down from upstream, but we've seen rivers as wide as the Alguenya frozen so merchants can drive loaded trains of wagons across them, and men fishing through holes cut in ice nearly a span thick. At night, there are sheets of light in the sky that seem to crackle, bright enough to dim the stars, and " Even Mistress Beldair was leaning towards the Ogier caught up, but one of the young scullions, too short to see past the adults, glanced behind him, and his eyes went wide when they lit on Samitsu and Sashalle. His gaze stayed fixed on them as if trapped, but he fumbled with one hand till he could tug at Mistress Beldair's sleeve. The first time she shook him off without looking around. At a second tug, she her head with a scowl that vanished in a blink when she, too, saw the Aes Sedai.

"ɡɹeɪs feɪvɝ ju, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃi sɛd, heɪstəli tʌkɪŋ stʃɹeɪ hɛɹ bæk ʌndɝ əɹ kæp əz ʃi bɑbd əɹ kɝtsi. "haʊ meɪ aɪ sɝv ju?" lɛɾɝ bɹoʊk ɔf ʃɔɹɾ ɪn mɪd-sɛntəns, ən ɪz ɪɹz stɪfən fəɹ ə moʊmənt. hi dɪd nɑt lʊk təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹweɪ.

"Grace favor you, Aes Sedai," she said, hastily tucking stray hair back under her cap as she bobbed her curtsy. "How may I serve you?" Ledar broke off short in mid-sentence, and his ears stiffened for a moment. He did not look toward the doorway.

"wi wɪʃ tə spik wɪð jəɹ vɪzəɾɝz" sæʃəl sɛd, muvɪŋ ɪndə ðə kɪtʃən. "wi woʊn dɪsɹʌp jəɹ kɪtʃən fəɹ lɔŋ."

"We wish to speak with your visitors" Sashalle said, moving into the kitchen. "We won't disrupt your kitchen for long."

"ʌv kɔɹs, ɛɛs sədaɪ." ɪf ðə staʊt wʊmən fɛlt ɛni sɝpɹaɪz ət tu sɪstɝz wɑntɪŋ tə tɔk tə kɪtʃən vɪzəɾɝz, ʃi ʃoʊd nʌn. hɛd swɪŋɪŋ fɹəm saɪd tə saɪd tə teɪk ɪn ɛvɹiwʌn, ʃi klæpt əɹ plʌmp hænz ən bɪɡæn spaʊɾɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz. "ɛlʒɹəd, ðoʊz tɝnəps wɪl nɛvɝ pil ðɛmsɛlvz. hu wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ðə fɪɡ sɔs? dʒɹaɪd fɪɡz ɑɹ hɑɹd tə kʌm baɪ! wɛɹ ɪz jəɹ bæstɪŋ spun, kɑsi? ændɪl, ɹʌn fɛtʃ sʌm...' kʊks ən skʌljənz skæɾɝd ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, ən ə klæɾɝ ə pɑts ən spunz kwɪkli fɪl ðə kɪtʃən, ðoʊ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz pleɪnli meɪkɪŋ ən ɛfɝt tə bi əz kwaɪəɾ əz pɑsəbəl soʊ əz nɑt tə dɪstɝb ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðeɪ wɝ pleɪnli meɪkɪŋ ən ɛfɝt nɑt tə ivən lʊk ɪn ðɛɹ dɝɛkʃən, ðoʊ ðəɾ ɪnvɑlv səm kəntɔɹʃən.

"Of course, Aes Sedai." If the stout woman felt any surprise at two sisters wanting to talk to kitchen visitors, she showed none. Head swinging from side to side to take in everyone, she clapped her plump hands and began spouting orders. "Eldrid, those turnips will never peel themselves. Who was watching the fig sauce? Dried figs are hard to come by! Where is your basting spoon, Kasi? Andil, run fetch some...' Cooks and scullions scattered in every direction, and a clatter of pots and spoons quickly filled the kitchen, though everyone was plainly making an effort to be as quiet as possible so as not to disturb the Aes Sedai. They were plainly making an effort not to even look in their direction, though that involved some contortion.

ði oʊɡiɝ ɹoʊz tə hɪz fit smuðli hɪz hɛd kʌmɪŋ nɪɹ ðə θɪk silɪŋ bimz. hɪz kloʊðɪŋ wɑz wʌt sæmɪtsu ɹɪmɛmbɝd fɹəm miɾɪŋ oʊɡiɝ bɪfɔɹ, ə lɔŋ dɑɹk koʊt ðət flɛɹɾ oʊvɝ tɝnd-daʊn buts. steɪnz ɑn ɪz koʊt sɛɾ i hæd bɪn tʃɹævlɪŋ hɑɹd; oʊɡiɝ wɝ ə fæstɪɾiəs pipəl. hi oʊnli hæf tɝn tə feɪs əɹ ən sæʃəl ivən əz laɪ meɪɾ ə baʊ, ən laɪ ɹʌbd əɾ ɪz waɪd noʊz əz ɪf ɪɾ ɪtʃt. pɑɹʃəli haɪɾɪŋ ɪz bɹɔd feɪs, bʌɾ i əpɪɹd jʌŋ, fəɹ ən oʊɡiɝ. "fɝɡɪv ʌs, ɛɛs sədaɪ," hi mɝmɝd, "bʌt wi ɹɪli mʌs bi muvɪŋ ɑn." bɛndɪŋ tə ɡæðɝ ə hjudʒ lɛðɝ skɹɪp ðət hæɾ ə lɑɹdʒ ɹoʊl blæŋkɝ taɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə tɑp ən ʃoʊd ði ɪmpɹɛʃənz ə sɛvɹəl skwɛɹ ʃeɪps pækt ɝaʊnd wʌtɛvɝ ɛls wɑz stʌft ɪnsaɪd, hi hɔɪstəd ðə bɹɔd stʃɹæp oʊvɝ wʌn ʃoʊldɝ. hɪz kəpeɪʃəs koʊt pɑkəts bʌlʒd wɪð æŋɡjəlɝ ʃeɪps, tu. "wi hæv ə lɔŋ weɪ tə ɡoʊ bɪfɔɹ naɪtfɔl." hɪz kəmpænjən ɹɪmeɪn siɾəd, ðoʊ, hɪz hænz spɹɛɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəltɑp, ə peɪl-hɛɹd jʌŋ mæn wɪð ə wiks ɡɹoʊθ ə bɪɹɾ u sim tə hæv slɛp mɔɹ ðən wʌn naɪɾ ɪn ɪz ɹʌmpəl bɹaʊn koʊt. hi wɑtʃt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛɹəli, wɪð dɑɹk aɪz ðət bɪlɔŋd ɑn ə kɔɹnɝd fɑks.

The Ogier rose to his feet smoothly his head coming near the thick ceiling beams. His clothing was what Samitsu remembered from meeting Ogier before, a long dark coat that flared over turned-down boots. Stains on his coat said he had been traveling hard; Ogier were a fastidious people. He only half turned to face her and Sashalle even as lie made a bow, and lie rubbed at his wide nose as if it itched. Partially hiding his broad face, but he appeared young, for an Ogier. "Forgive us, Aes Sedai," he murmured, "but we really must be moving on." Bending to gather a huge leather scrip that had a large rolled blanker tied across the top and showed the impressions of several square shapes packed around whatever else was stuffed inside, he hoisted the broad strap over one shoulder. His capacious coat pockets bulged with angular shapes, too. "We have a long way to go before nightfall." His companion remained seated, though, his hands spread on the tabletop, a pale-haired young man with a week's growth of beard who seemed to have slept more than one night in his rumpled brown coat. He watched the Aes Sedai warily, with dark eyes that belonged on a cornered fox.

"wɛɹ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ ðət jə kən ɹitʃ baɪ naɪtfɔl?" sæʃəl dɪd nɑt stɑp əntɪl ʃi wɑz stændɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə jʌŋ oʊɡiɝ, kloʊs ɪnʌf tə nid tə kɹeɪn əɹ nɛk tə lʊk ʌp ət hɪm, ðoʊ ʃi meɪɾ ɪt sim ɡɹeɪsfəl ɹæðɝ ðən ɑkwɝd, əz ɪt ʃəɾ əv bɪn. "ɑɹ jə ɑn jəɹ weɪ tə ðə miɾɪŋ wiv hɝɾ əbaʊt, ɪn slɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ mæstɝ . . . lɛɾɝ, ɪz ɪt?" hɪz tɔl ɪɹz twɪtʃt vaɪələnli, ðən wɝ stɪl, ən ɪz tikʌp-saɪzd aɪz nɛɹoʊɾ ɔlmoʊst əz wɛɹəli əz ðə jʌŋ mænz, tɪl ðə dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɛnz ə hɪz aɪbɹaʊz tʃɹeɪld ɑntu hɪz tʃiks-"lɛɾɝ, sʌn ə ʃændɪn sʌn ə kɔɪməl, ɛɛs sədaɪ," hi sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli. "bʌɾ aɪm sɝɾənli nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹæn stʌmp. waɪ, ði ɛldɝz wʊdn lemi kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ wʌt wɑz biɪŋ sɛd." hi ɡeɪv ə dip bæs tʃʌkəl ðət saʊndəd fɔɹst.

"Where are you going that you can reach by nightfall?" Sashalle did not stop until she was standing in front of the young Ogier, close enough to need to crane her neck to look up at him, though she made it seem graceful rather than awkward, as it should have been. "Are you on your way to the meeting we've heard about, in Sledding Shangtai Master . . . Ledar, is it?" His tall ears twitched violently, then were still, and his teacup-sized eyes narrowed almost as warily as the young man's, till the dangling ends of his eyebrows trailed onto his cheeks-"Ledar, son of Shandin son of Koimal, Aes Sedai," he said reluctantly. "But I'm certainly not going to the Grand Stump. Why, the Elders wouldn't let me close enough to hear what was being said." He gave a deep bass chuckle that sounded forced.

"wi kænt ɡɛt wɛɹ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tənaɪt, ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ ɛvɹi liɡ bɪhaɪn əs ɪz ə liɡ wi doʊn əv tə wɔk təmɑɹoʊ. wi nid tə bi ɑn əɹ weɪ." ði ənʃeɪvən jʌŋ mæn stʊɾ ʌp, ɹʌnɪŋ ə hænd nɝvəsli əlɔŋ ðə lɔŋ hɪlt ə ðə sɔɹd bʌkəld əɾ ɪz weɪst, jɛɾ i meɪd noʊ muv tə pɪk ʌp ðə skɹɪp ən blæŋkət-ɹoʊl əɾ ɪz fiɾ ən fɑloʊ əz ði oʊɡiɝ stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ ðət lɛd tə ðə stʃɹit, ivən wən ði oʊɡiɝ sɛɾ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, "wi nid tə ɡoʊ naʊ, kɑɹldɪn." sæʃəl ɡlaɪɾɪd fludli ɪndə ði oʊɡiɝz pæθ, ðoʊ ʃi hæd tə teɪk θɹi stʃɹaɪdz tə hɪz wʌn, "ju wɝ æskɪŋ æftɝ wɝk əz ə meɪsən, mæstɝ lɛɾɝ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn toʊnz bɹʊkɪŋ noʊ nɑnsɛns, "bʌt jəɹ hænz ɑɹ nɑɾ əz kælʌzd əz ɛni meɪsənz aɪv ɛvɝ sin. ɪt wəd bi bɛs fəɹ jə tə ænsɝ maɪ kwɛstʃənz."

"We can't get where we're going tonight, Aes Sedai, but every league behind us is a league we don't have to walk tomorrow. We need to be on our way." The unshaven young man stood up, running a hand nervously along the long hilt of the sword buckled at his waist, yet he made no move to pick up the scrip and blanket-roll at his feet and follow as the Ogier started toward the door that led to the street, even when the Ogier said over his shoulder, "We need to go now, Karldin." Sashalle glided fluidly into the Ogier's path, though she had to take three strides to his one, "You were asking after work as a mason, Master Ledar," she said in tones brooking no nonsense, "but your hands are not as callused as any mason's I've ever seen. It would be best for you to answer my questions."

səpɹɛsɪŋ ə tʃɹaɪʌmfən smaɪl, sæmɪtsu muvd ʌp bɪsaɪd ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ. soʊ sæʃəl θɔt ʃi kəd sɪmpli pʊʃ əɹ əsaɪɾ ən fɛɹəɾ aʊt wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn, dɪd ʃi? ðə wʊmən wɑz ɪn fəɹ ə sɝpɹaɪz. "ju ɹɪli mʌst steɪ ə waɪl lɔŋɡɝ," ʃi sɛd tə ði oʊɡiɝ ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs; ðə nɔɪz ɪn ðə kɪtʃən ʃəd kip ɛniwʌn fɹəm oʊvɝhɪɹɪŋ, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə teɪk tʃænsəz. "wɛn aɪ keɪm tə ðə sʌn pæləs, aɪ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hɝɾ ʌv ə jʌŋ oʊɡiɝ, ə fɹɛn ə ɹænd ælθɹ. hi lɛf kɛɹhin səm mʌnθs pæst, ɪn kʌmpəni wɪð ə jʌŋ mæn neɪm kɑɹldɪn, ɪzən ðət ɹaɪt, lɔɪəl?' ði oʊɡiɝz ɪɹz wɪltɪd.

Suppressing a triumphant smile, Samitsu moved up beside the Red sister. So Sashalle thought she could simply push her aside and ferret out what was going on, did she? The woman was in for a surprise. "You really must stay a while longer," she said to the Ogier in a low voice; the noise in the kitchen should keep anyone from overhearing, yet there was no need to take chances. "When I came to the Sun Palace, I had already heard of a young Ogier, a friend of Rand al'Thor. He left Cairhien some months past, in company with a young man named Karldin, Isn't that right, Loial?' The Ogier's ears wilted.

ðə jʌŋ mæn bɪɾ ɔf ə kɔɹs kɝs i ʃʊɾə noʊn bɛɾɝ ðən tə maʊð ɪn fɹʌn ə sɪstɝz. "aɪ liv wən aɪ wɑnə liv, ɛɛs sədaɪ," hi sɛd hɑɹʃli", bʌɾ ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs. fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, laɪ dɪvaɪɾəd ɪz ɡeɪz bɪtwin əɹ ən sæʃəl, jɛɾ i wɑz wɑtʃfəl fəɹ ɛni ʌv ðə kɪtʃən wɝkɝz u maɪt kʌm nɪɹ. hi dɪd nɔɹ wɪʃ tə bi oʊvɝhɝd, iðɝ. "bɪfɔɹ aɪ du, aɪ wɑn səm ænsɝz. wʌt hæpən tə ... maɪ fɹɛnz? ən hɪm. dɪɾ i ɡoʊ mæd?" lɔɪəl saɪd hɛvəli, ən meɪɾ ə pæsəfaɪɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝ wɪð wʌn hjudʒ hænd, "bi izi. kɑɹldɪn," bi mɝmɝd, "ɹænd wʊdn laɪk jə stɑɹɾɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ. bi izi." kɑɹldɪnz skaʊl oʊnli dipənd.

The young man bit off a coarse curse he should have known better than to mouth in front of sisters. "I leave when I want to leave, Aes Sedai," he said harshly", but in a low voice. For the most part, lie divided his gaze between her and Sashalle, yet he was watchful for any of the kitchen workers who might come near. He did nor wish to be overheard, either. "Before I do, I want some answers. What happened to ... my friends? And him. Did he go mad?" Loial sighed heavily, and made a pacifying gesture with one huge hand, "Be easy. Karldin," be murmured, "Rand wouldn't like you starting trouble with Aes Sedai. Be easy." Karldin's scowl only deepened.

əbɹʌpli ɪɾ əkɝd tə sæmɪtsu ðət ʃi cʊɾə hændəl ðɪs bɛɾɝ. ðoʊz wɝ nɔɹ ði aɪz ʌv ə kɔɹnɝd fɑks, bʌɾ ə wʊlf. ʃi bæd ɡɹoʊn tu əkʌstəm tə deɪmɝ ən dʒɑhɹ ən ɛbən, seɪfli bɑndəɾ ən teɪmd. ðət maɪt bi ən oʊvɝsteɪtmənt, ðoʊ mɛɹaɪs wɑz meɪkɪŋ ən ɛfɝt wɪð dʒɑhɹ-ðæt wɑz mɛɹaɪsəz weɪ-jɛɾ ɪt sim ðə hɔɹɝ ə jɛstɝdeɪ kəd bɪkʌm ðə kəmpleɪsənsi ʌv tədeɪ æftɝ lɔŋ ɪnʌf ɪkspoʊʒɝ. kɑɹldɪn mænfɝ wɑz ən æʃəmən, tu, ən niðɝ bɑndəd nɔɹ teɪm. wɑz i ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə paʊɝ? ʃi ɔlmoʊs læft. dɪd bɝdz flaɪ?

Abruptly it occurred to Samitsu that she could have handled this better. Those were nor the eyes of a cornered fox, but a wolf. She bad grown too accustomed to Damer and Jahar and Eben, safely bonded and tamed. That might be an overstatement, though Merise was making an effort with Jahar-that was Merise's way-yet it seemed the horror of yesterday could become the complacency of today after long enough exposure. Karldin Manfor was an Asha'man, too, and neither bonded nor tame. Was he embracing the male half of the Power? She almost laughed. Did birds fly?

sæʃəl wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ðə jʌŋ mæn wɪð ə stʌɾiɪŋ fɹaʊn, hɝ hænz mʌtʃ tu stɪl ɑn əɹ skɝts, bʌt sæmɪtsu wɑz ɡlæd nɑt tə si ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ɝaʊn hɝ. æʃəmən kəd fil wən ə wʊmən hɛl ðə paʊɝ, ən ðət maɪt meɪk ɪm ækt . . . pɹɪsɪpɪɾətli. sɝɾənli ʃi ən sæmɪtsu təɡɛðɝ kəd hændəl hɪm-kʊd ðeɪ, ɪf i ɔlɹɛɾi hɛl ðə paʊɝ? ʌv kɔɹs, ðeɪ kʊd-ʌv kɔɹs! - bʌɾ ɪt wəd bi mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ əv tə.

Sashalle was watching the young man with a studying frown, her hands much too still on her skirts, but Samitsu was glad not to see the light of saidar around her. Asha'man could feel when a woman held the Power, and that might make him act . . . precipitately. Certainly she and Samitsu together could handle him-could they, if he already held the Power? Of course, they could-Of course! - but it would be much better if they did not have to.

sæʃəl sɝɾənli wɑz meɪkɪŋ noʊ muv tə teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ, naʊ, soʊ sæmɪtsu leɪɾ ə hæn laɪtli ɑn ɪz lɛft ɑɹm. θɹu hɪz koʊt sliv, ɪt fɛlt laɪk ə bɑɹ ʌv aɪɝn. soʊ hi wɑz əz ənizi əz ʃi. əz ənizi əz ʃi?

Sashalle certainly was making no move to take charge, now, so Samitsu laid a hand lightly on his left arm. Through his coat sleeve, it felt like a bar of iron. So he was as uneasy as she. As uneasy as she?

laɪt, bʌt deɪmɝ ən ðoʊz ʌðɝ tu hæd spɔɪld ɔl əɹ ɪnstɪŋks!

Light, but Damer and those other two had spoiled all her instincts!

"hi sim seɪn əz moʊs mɛn wən aɪ læst sɔ hɪm," ʃi sɛd sɔfli, wɪð dʒʌst ə slaɪɾ ɛmfəsəs.

"He seemed sane as most men when I last saw him," she said softly, with just a slight emphasis.

nʌn ə ðə kɪtʃən-foʊk wɝ nɪɹbaɪ, bʌɾ ə fju hæd bɪɡʌn snikɪŋ piks təwɔɹd ðə teɪbəl. lɔɪəl ɛksheɪl hɛvəli ɪn ɹɪlif ə saʊn laɪk wɪn ɹʌʃɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə maʊθ ʌv ə keɪv, bʌt ʃi kɛpt əɹ ətɛnʃən ɑn kɑɹldɪn. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛɹ i ɪz, bʌɾ i wɑz əlaɪv əz ʌv ə fju deɪz əɡoʊ." ɑlɑnə hæd bɪn kloʊsəməðd əz ə mʌsəl bɪɑn ðæt, ən oʊvɝ-bɛɹɪŋ, tu, wɪð kædzueɪnz noʊɾ ɪn əɹ fɪst. "fɛdwɪn mɔɹ daɪɾ ə pɔɪzən, aɪ fɪɹ, bʌɾ aɪ hæv noʊ aɪdiə hu ɡeɪv ɪt tə hɪm." tə hɝ sɝpɹaɪz, kɑɹldɪn mɪɹli ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, wɪð ə ɹufəl ɡɹɪmɑs, ən mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ɪŋkɑmpɹəhɛnsɪbəl əbaʊt waɪn. "æz fəɹ ði ʌðɝz, ðeɪ bɪkeɪm wɔɹɾɝz ə ðɛɹ oʊn fɹi wɪl." əz mʌtʃ əz ɛni mæn dɪɾ ɛni θɪŋ ə hɪz fɹi wɪl. hɝ ɹɑʃən sɝɾənli hæd nɑt wɑntəd tə bi ə wɔɹɾɝ, əntɪl ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪm fəɹ wʌn. ivən ə wʊmən u wɑz nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd juʒəwəli meɪk ə mæn dɪsaɪd ðə weɪ ʃi wɑntəd. 'ðeɪ' θɔɾ ɪɾ ə bɛɾɝ tʃɔɪs, seɪfɝ, ðən ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ... ði ʌðɝz laɪk ju. jə si, ðə dæmədʒ hɪɹ wɑz dʌn wɪð seɪɾɪn. jə ʌndɝstæn u mʌst əv bɪn bɪhaɪn ɪt? ɪt wɑz ən ətɛmp tə kɪl ðə wʌn huz sænəɾi jə fɪɹ fɔɹ."

None of the kitchen-folk were nearby, but a few had begun sneaking peeks toward the table. Loial exhaled heavily in relief a sound like wind rushing across the mouth of a cave, but she kept her attention on Karldin. "I don't know where he is, but he was alive as of a few days ago." Alanna had been closemouthed as a mussel beyond that, and over-bearing, too, with Cadsuane's note in her fist. "Fedwin Morr died of poison, I fear, but I have no idea who gave it to him." To her surprise, Karldin merely shook his head, with a rueful grimace, and muttered something incomprehensible about wine. "As for the others, they became Warders of their own free will." As much as any man did any thing of his free will. Her Roshan certainly had not wanted to be a Warder, until she decided she wanted him for one. Even a woman who was not Aes Sedai could usually make a man decide the way she wanted. 'They' thought it a better choice, safer, than returning to ... the others like you. You see, the damage here was done with saidin. You understand who must have been behind it? It was an attempt to kill the one whose sanity you fear for."

ðət dɪd nɑt sim tə sɝpɹaɪz hɪm, iðɝ. wʌt sɔɹɾ ə mɛn wɝ ðiz æʃəmən? wɑz ðɛɹ soʊ-kɔl blæk taʊɝ ə mɝɾɝ-pɪt? ðə taɪtnəs wɛn aʊɾ ə hɪz ɑɹm, ðoʊ, ən sʌɾənli hi wɑz dʒʌst ə ɹoʊd-wɪɹi jʌŋ mæn u niɾəd ə ʃeɪv. "laɪt!" hi bɹiðd. "wʌt də wi də naʊ, lɔɪəl? wɛɹ də wi ɡoʊ?"

That did not seem to surprise him, either. What sort of men were these Asha'man? Was their so-called Black Tower a murder-pit? The tightness went out of his arm, though, and suddenly he was just a road-weary young man who needed a shave. "Light!" he breathed. "What do we do now, Loial? Where do we go?"

"aɪ ... doʊnt noʊ" lɔɪəl ɹɪplaɪd, hɪz ʃoʊldɝz sæɡɪŋ taɪɹədli ən ɪz lɔŋ ɪɹz dʒɹupɪŋ. "aɪ  wɪv tə faɪn hɪm, kɑɹldɪn. sʌmhaʊ. wi kæn': ɡɪv ʌp naʊ. wɪv tə lɝ ɪm noʊ wi dɪd wʌɾ i æskt. əz mʌtʃ əz wi kʊd."

"I ... don't know" Loial replied, his shoulders sagging tiredly and his long ears drooping. "I  We have to find him, Karldin. Somehow. We can': give up now. We have to ler him know we did what he asked. As much as we could."

ən wʌt wɑz ɪɾ ælθɹ hæɾ æskt, sæmɪtsu wʌndɝd. wɪð ə lɪɾəl lʌk, ʃi kəd lɝn ə ɡɹeɪt dil fɹəm ðiz tu. ə taɪɝd mæn, əɹ oʊɡiɝ, filɪŋ lɔst ən əloʊn, wɑz ɹaɪp fəɹ ænsɝɪŋ kwɛstʃənz.

And what was it al'Thor had asked, Samitsu wondered. With a little luck, she could learn a great deal from these two. A tired man, or Ogier, feeling lost and alone, was ripe for answering questions.

kɑɹldɪn ɡeɪv ə smɔl dʒʌmp, hɪz hæn taɪɾənɪŋ ɑn ɪz sɔɹdhɪlt, ən ʃi bɪt bæk ə kɝs ə hɝ oʊn əz ə pæləs sɝvɪŋ wʊmən keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum wɪð əɹ skɝts ɡæðɝɾ ɔlmoʊs tə hɝ niz.

Karldin gave a small jump, his hand tightening on his swordhilt, and she bit back a curse of her own as a palace serving woman came running into the room with her skirts gathered almost to her knees.

"lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪnz bɪn mɝɾɝd!" ðə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən skwild. "wi wɪl ɔl bi kɪld ɪn əɹ bɛdz! maɪ aɪz əv sin ðə dɛd wɔkɪŋ, oʊl mɹɪŋɡəl hɪmsɛlf, ən maɪ mæm sɛz spɪɹəts wɪl kɪl jə ɪf ðəɹ əz bɪn ə mɝɾɝ dʌn! ðeɪ-!" hɝ maʊθ fɹoʊz oʊpən wən ʃi kɑt ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ʃi skɪɾəd tə ə hɔl stɪl klʌtʃɪŋ əɹ skɝts. ðə kɪtʃən foʊk sim fɹoʊzən, tu, ɔl wɑtʃɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝz ə ðɛɹ aɪz tə si wʌt ðeɪ wəd du.

"Lord Dobraine's been murdered!" the serving woman squealed. "We will all be killed in our beds! My eyes have seen the dead walking, old Maringil himself, and my Mam says spirits will kill you if there has been a murder done! They-!" Her mouth froze open when she caught the presence of Aes Sedai, and she skidded to a halt still clutching her skirts. The kitchen folk seemed frozen, too, all watching the Aes Sedai from the corners of their eyes to see what they would do.

"nɑt dɑbɹeɪn," lɔɪəl moʊnd, ɪɹz laɪɪŋ flæɾ əɡɛnst ɪz hɛd. "nɑt hɪm." hi lʊkt əz mʌtʃ æŋɡɹi əz sæɾənd, hɪz feɪs stoʊni. sæmɪtsu dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ən oʊɡiɝ æŋɡɹi.

"Not Dobraine," Loial moaned, ears lying flat against his head. "Not him." He looked as much angry as saddened, his face stony. Samitsu did not think she had ever seen an Ogier angry.

"wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ neɪm?" sæʃəl dɪmændəɾ ə ðə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən bɪfɔɹ sæmɪtsu kəɾ ivən pɑɹɾ əɹ lɪps. "haʊ dʒju noʊ hi wɑz mɝɾɝd? haʊ dʒju noʊ hiz dɛd?" ðə wʊmən swɑloʊd, hɝ aɪz hɛl baɪ sæʃəlz kul ɡeɪz. "sɛɹə, ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ʃi sɛd hɛzɪɾəntli, bɛndɪŋ əɹ niz ɪn ə kɝtsi ən oʊnli ðən ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðət ʃi stɪl hæɾ əɹ skɝts ɡæðɝɾ ʌp. heɪstəli smuðɪŋ əm daʊn oʊnli sim tə flʌstɝ əɹ mɔɹ. "sɛɹə dɑfnəl? ðeɪ seɪ . . . ɛvɹibɑɾi sɛz lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪn ɪz... aɪ min, hi wɑz ... aɪ min . . ." ʃi swɑloʊɾ əɡɛn, hɑɹd. "ðeɪ ɔl seɪ hɪz ɹumz ɑɹ kʌvɝd wɪð blʌd. hi wɑz faʊn laɪɪŋ ɪn ə ɡɹeɪt pul ʌv ɪt. wɪð ɪz hɛd kɝ ɔf, ðeɪ seɪ."

"What is your name?" Sashalle demanded of the serving woman before Samitsu could even part her lips. "How do you know he was murdered? How do you know he's dead?" The woman swallowed, her eyes held by Sashalle's cool gaze. "Cera, Aes Sedai?" she said hesitantly, bending her knees in a curtsy and only then realizing that she still had her skirts gathered up. Hastily smoothing them down only seemed to fluster her more. "Cera Dofnal? They say . . . Everybody says Lord Dobraine is... I mean, he was ... I mean . . ." She swallowed again, hard. "They all say his rooms are covered with blood. He was found lying in a great pool of it. With his head cur off, they say."

"ðeɪ seɪ ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni θɪŋz," sæʃəl sɛd ɡɹɪmli, "æn juʒəwəli ðəɹ ɹɔŋ. sæmɪtsu, jəl kʌm wɪð mi. ɪf lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪn əz bɪn ɪnʒɝd, jə meɪ bi eɪbəl tə də sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ hɪm. lɔɪəl, kɑɹldɪn, jə kʌm, tu, aɪ doʊnt wɑn jə aʊɾ ə maɪ saɪt bɪfɔɹ aɪ hæv ə tʃæns tə æsk ə fju kwɛstʃənz."

"They say a great many things," Sashalle said grimly, "and usually they're wrong. Samitsu, you will come with me. If Lord Dobraine has been injured, you may be able to do something for him. Loial, Karldin, you come, too, I don't want you out of my sight before I have a chance to ask a few questions."

"bɝn jəɹ kwɛstʃənz!" ðə jʌŋ æʃəmən ɡɹaʊld, ʃoʊldɝɪŋ ɪz bɪlɔŋɪŋz. "aɪm livɪŋ!" "noʊ, kɑɹldɪn," lɔɪəl sɛd dʒɛnli, leɪɪŋ ə hjudʒ hæn ɑn ɪz kəmpænjənz ʃoʊldɝ. "wi kænt ɡoʊ bɪfɔɹ wi noʊ əbaʊt dɑbɹeɪn. hiz ə fɹɛnd, ɹændz fɹɛnd, ən maɪn. wi kænt. ɛniweɪ, wɛɹ ɑɹ wi hɝiɪŋ tə?" kɑɹldɪn lʊkt əweɪ.

"Burn your questions!" the young Asha'man growled, shouldering his belongings. "I'm leaving!" "No, Karldin," Loial said gently, laying a huge hand on his companion's shoulder. "We can't go before we know about Dobraine. He's a friend, Rand's friend, and mine. We cant. Anyway, where are we hurrying to?" Karldin looked away.

hi hæd noʊ ænsɝ, sæmɪtsu skwizd əɹ aɪz ʃʌt, ən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hɛlp fəɹ ɪt. ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf fɑloʊɪŋ sæʃəl aʊɾ ə ðə kɪtʃənz, wʌns mɔɹ hɝiɪŋ tə kip ʌp wɪð ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz kwɪk, ɡlaɪɾɪŋ stʃɹaɪd. ɪn fækt ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf hæf-ɹʌnɪŋ; sæʃəl sɛɾ ən ivən mɔɹ ɹæpəd peɪs ðən bɪfɔɹ.

He had no answer, Samitsu squeezed her eyes shut, and took a deep breath, but there was no help for it. She found herself following Sashalle out of the kitchens, once more hurrying to keep up with the other woman's quick, gliding stride. In fact she found herself half-running; Sashalle set an even more rapid pace than before.

ðə bæbəlɪŋ ə vɔɪsəz ɹoʊz bɪhaɪn əm əz sun əz ðeɪ wɝ aʊt ðə dɔɹ. ðə kɪtʃən foʊk pɹɑbli ɔl wɝ pɹɛsɪŋ ðə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən fəɹ pɝtɪkjəlɝz, dɪteɪlz ʃi vɛɹi laɪkli wəɾ ɪnvɛnt wɛɹ əɹ nɑlədʒ feɪld. tɛn dɪfɹən vɝʒənz ʌv ɪvɛns wəd faɪn ðɛɹ weɪ aʊɾ ə ðət kɪtʃən, ɪf nɑɾ əz mɛni əz ðəɹ wɝ kɪtʃən foʊk. wɝst ʌv ɔl, tɛn dɪfɹən vɝʒənz ʌv ɪvɛns ɪn ðə kɪtʃən wəd faɪn ðɛɹ weɪ aʊt, ɛvɹi wʌn æɾɪŋ tə ðə ɹumɝz kɔɹɡeɪd, daʊtləs wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi stɑɹɾɪŋ. ʃi kəd hɑɹdli ɹikɔl ə deɪ ðət hæd ɡɔn soʊ bædli fəɹ hɝ, soʊ sʌɾənli laɪk slɪpɪŋ ɑn wʌn pætʃ ʌv aɪs oʊnli tə faɪn ənʌðɝ ʌndɝ əɹ fit, ðən ənʌðɝ. kædzueɪn wəɾ əv əɹ haɪd tə meɪk ɡlʌvz æftɝ ðɪs!

The babbling of voices rose behind them as soon as they were out the door. The kitchen folk probably all were pressing the serving woman for particulars, details she very likely would invent where her knowledge failed. Ten different versions of events would find their way out of that kitchen, if not as many as there were kitchen folk. Worst of all, ten different versions of events in the kitchen would find their way out, every one adding to the rumors Corgaide, doubtless was already starting. She could hardly recall a day that had gone so badly for her, so suddenly like slipping on one patch of ice only to find another under her feet, then another. Cadsuane would have her hide to make gloves after this!

ət lis lɔɪəl ən kɑɹldɪn tʃɹeɪld æftɝ sæʃəl əz wɛl. wʌtɛvɝ ʃi lɝn fɹəm əm maɪt stɪl bi pʊt tə ædvæntɪdʒ, ə weɪ tə sælvədʒ sʌmθɪŋ. skɝiɪŋ əlɔŋ ət sæʃəlz saɪd, ʃi stʌɾid əm ɪn bɹif ɡlænsɪz oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. teɪkɪŋ ʃɔɹt stʃɹaɪdz tə kip fɹəm oʊvɝ-ɹʌnɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ði oʊɡiɝ wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ ɪn wɝi. oʊvɝ dɑbɹeɪn, vɛɹi laɪkli bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ pɝhæps oʊvɝ oʊnli kəmpliɾɪŋ ɪz mɪstɪɹiəs tæsk "æz wɛl əz i kʊd? ðət wɑz ə mɪstɝi ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə sɑlv. ðə jʌŋ æʃəmən hæd noʊ dɪfəkəlti kipɪŋ ʌp ðoʊ hi wɔɹ ən ɪkspɹɛʃən ə stʌbɝn ɹɪlʌktəns ən ɪz hæn kɝɛst ɪz sɔɹdhɪlt. ðə deɪnʒɝ ɪn ɪm dɪd nɑt laɪ ɪn stil. hi stɛɹd səspɪʃəsli ət ðə bæks ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əhɛd, wʌns miɾɪŋ sæmɪtsuz ɡlæns wɪð ə dɑɹk ɡlaʊɝ. hi hæd ðə sɛns tə kip ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt, ðoʊ. ʃi wəɾ əv tə faɪn ə weɪ tə pɹaɪ ɪɾ oʊpən leɪɾɝ fəɹ mɔɹ ðən snɑɹlɪŋ.

At least Loial and Karldin trailed after Sashalle as well. Whatever she learned from them might still be put to advantage, a way to salvage something. Scurrying along at Sashalle's side, she studied them in brief glances over her shoulder. Taking short strides to keep from over-running the Aes Sedai, the Ogier was frowning in worry. Over Dobraine, very likely but also perhaps over only completing his mysterious task "as well as he could? That was a mystery she intended to solve. The young Asha'man had no difficulty keeping up though he wore an expression of stubborn reluctance and his hand caressed his swordhilt. The danger in him did not lie in steel. He stared suspiciously at the backs of the Aes Sedai ahead, once meeting Samitsu's glance with a dark glower. He had the sense to keep his mouth shut, though. She would have to find a way to pry it open later for more than snarling.

sæʃəl nɛvɝ ɡlæns bɪhaɪn tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə pɛɹ wɝ fɑloʊɪŋ, bʌt ðɛn, ʃi hæd tə hɪɹ ðə θʌɾ ə ði oʊɡiɝz buts ɑn ðə flɔɹ taɪlz. hɝ feɪs wɑz θɔtfəl ən sæmɪtsu wʊɾə ɡɪvən ə ɡɹeɪt dil tə noʊ wʌt ʃi wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ. sæʃəl maɪt bi oʊθswɔɹn tə ɹænd ælθɹ, bʌt wʌt pɹətɛkʃən dɪd ðət ɡɪv tə ən æʃəmən? ʃi wɑz ɹɛd, æftɝ ɔl. ðət hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd wɪð əɹ feɪs.

Sashalle never glanced behind to make sure the pair were following, but then, she had to hear the thud of the Ogier's boots on the floor tiles. Her face was thoughtful and Samitsu would have given a great deal to know what she was thinking. Sashalle might be oathsworn to Rand al'Thor, but what protection did that give to an Asha'man? She was Red, after all. That had not changed with her face.

laɪt, ðɪs kəd bi ðə wɝs pætʃ ʌv aɪs ʌv ɔl!

Light, this could be the worst patch of ice of all!

ɪt wɑz ə lɔŋ ɑɹdʒuəs klaɪm fɹəm ðə kɪtʃənz tə lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪnz əpɑɹtməns ɪn ðə taʊɝ ə ðə fʊl mun, wɪtʃ wɑz juʒəwəli sɛɾ əsaɪd fəɹ vɪzəɾɪŋ noʊbɪləɾi ʌv haɪ ɹæŋk, ən ɔl əlɔŋ ðə weɪ, sæmɪtsu sɔ ði ɛvəɾəns ðət sɛɹə hæd bɪn fɑɹ fɹəm ðə fɝs tə hɪɹ wʌt ði ɛvɝ-ənɑnəməs ðeɪ hæd tə seɪ.

It was a long arduous climb from the kitchens to Lord Dobraine's apartments in the Tower of the Full Moon, which was usually set aside for visiting nobility of high rank, and all along the way, Samitsu saw the evidence that Cera had been far from the first to hear what the ever-anonymous they had to say.

ɹæðɝ ðən ɛnləs stʃɹimz ə sɝvəns boʊɪŋ əlɔŋ daɪ kɔɹɪɾɝz, smɔl ɪksaɪɾəd nɑts stʊd wɪspɝɪŋ æŋkʃəsli. ət saɪɾ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðeɪ spɹæŋ əpɑɹɾ ən skɝiɾ əweɪ. ə hændfʊl dɪd ɡeɪp ət siɪŋ ən oʊɡiɝ stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ θɹu ðə pæləs, jɛt fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, ðeɪ ɔl bʌt flɛd. ðə noʊbəlz ðət hæd bɪn əbaʊt bɪfɔɹ hæɾ ɔl vænɪʃt, daʊtləs bæk tə ðɛɹ oʊn ɹumz tə mʌl oʊvɝ wʌɾ ɑpɝtunəɾiz ən hæzɝdz dɑbɹeɪnz dɛθ əfɔɹɾəd ðɛm. wʌtɛvɝ sæʃəl θɔt, sæmɪtsu noʊ lɔŋɡɝ daʊɾɪd. ɪf dɑbɹeɪn hæd bɪn əlaɪv, hɪz oʊn sɝvəns wʊɾə pʊt peɪd tə ðə ɹumɝ ɔlɹɛɾi, fəɹ fɝðɝ kɑnfɝmeɪʃən, ðə hɔlweɪz aʊtsaɪd dɑbɹeɪnz ɹumz wɝ kɹaʊɾəd wɪð æʃən-feɪst sɝvəns, ðɛɹ slivz ɹɪŋ tə ði ɛlboʊz ɪn ðə blu-ænd-waɪɾ ə haʊs tæbɔɹwɪn. səm wɛpt, ən ʌðɝz lʊk lɔst, ðɛɹ faʊndeɪʃən stoʊn pʊld aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ðɛm. əɾ ə wɝd fɹəm sæʃəl, ðeɪ stʊɾ əsaɪd fəɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, muvɪŋ dʒɹʌŋkənli əɹ məkænɪkli. deɪzd aɪz swɛp baɪ ði oʊɡiɝ wɪθaʊɾ æktʃəli  ɹɛdʒɪstɝɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ sɔ. fju ɹɪmɛmbɝd tə meɪk ivən hæfhɑɹɾɪd kɝɾəsiz.

Rather than endless streams of servants Bowing along die corridors, small excited knots stood whispering anxiously. At sight of the Aes Sedai, they sprang apart and scurried away. A handful did gape at seeing an Ogier striding through the palace, yet for the most part, they all but fled. The nobles that had been about before had all vanished, doubtless back to their own rooms to mull over what opportunities and hazards Dobraine's death afforded them. Whatever Sashalle thought, Samitsu no longer doubted. If Dobraine had been alive, his own servants would have put paid to the rumor already, For further confirmation, the hallways outside Dobraine's rooms were crowded with ashen-faced servants, their sleeves ringed to the elbows in the blue-and-white of House Taborwin. Some wept, and others looked lost, their foundation stone pulled out from under them. At a word from Sashalle, they stood aside for the Aes Sedai, moving drunkenly or mechanically. Dazed eyes swept by the Ogier without actually registering what they saw. Few remembered to make even halfhearted courtesies.

ɪnsaɪd, ði æntəɹum wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz fʊl ə dɑbɹeɪnz sɝvəns, moʊst stɛɹɪŋ əz ɪf pɑliækst.

Inside, the anteroom was almost as full of Dobraine's servants, most staring as if poleaxed.

dɑbɹeɪn hɪmsɛlf leɪ moʊʃənləs ɑn ə lɪɾɝ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə lɑɹdʒ ɹum, hɪz hɛd stɪl ətætʃt tə hɪz bɑɾi bʌɾ ɪz aɪz kloʊzd ən ə dʒɹaɪɪŋ ʃiɾ ə blʌd, fɹəm ə lɔŋ kʌɾ ɪn ɪz skælp, spɹɛɾ əkɹɔs ɪz stɪl fitʃɝz. ə dɑɹk tʃɹɪkəl hæd lik fɹəm ɪz slæk maʊθ. tu sɝvɪŋ mɛn wɪð tɪɹz stʃɹimɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ tʃiks pɔzd ɪn ði ækt ə leɪɪŋ ə waɪt klɔθ oʊvɝ ɪz feɪs ət ði ɛntʃɹəns ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Dobraine himself lay motionless on a litter in the middle of the large room, his head still attached to his body but his eyes closed and a drying sheet of blood, from a long cut in his scalp, spread across his still features. A dark trickle had leaked from his slack mouth. Two serving men with tears streaming down their cheeks paused in the act of laying a white cloth over his face at the entrance of the Aes Sedai.

dɑbɹeɪn dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə bi bɹiðɪŋ, ən ðəɹ wɝ blʌdsteɪnd ɡæʃəz ɪn ðə tʃɛst ə hɪz koʊt, wɪð ɪts θɪn stʃɹaɪps ə kʌlɝ ðət mɑɹtʃt daʊn tə hɪz niz. bɪsaɪd ðə lɪɾɝ, ə dɑɹk blɑt lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ə mænz bɑɾi mɑɹd ðə ɡɹin-ænd-jɛloʊ tɛɹən meɪz ə ðə fɹɪn kɑɹpət. ɛniwʌn u lɔs ðət mʌtʃ blʌd hæd tə bi dɛd. tu ʌðɝ mɛn leɪ spɹɔld ɑn ðə flɔɹ, wʌn wɪð dɛθ-ɡleɪzd aɪz ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət ðə silɪŋ, ði ʌðɝ ɑn ɪz saɪd, ən aɪvɝi naɪf hɪl stɪkɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ɪz ɹɪbz wɛɹ ðə bleɪd hæd ʃʊɹli ɹitʃt ɪz hɑɹt. ʃɔɹt, peɪl-skɪn kɛɹhinɪn, boʊθ wɔɹ ðə lɪvɝi ʌv pæləs sɝvəns, bʌɾ ə sɝvənt nɛvɝ kæɹid ðə lɔŋ, wʊɾən-hændəld dæɡɝ ðət leɪ bɪsaɪɾ itʃ kɔɹps. eɪ haʊs tæbɔɹwɪn mæn, hɪz fʊt dʒɹɔn bæk tə kɪk wʌn ə ðə kɔɹpsəz, hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ɑn siɪŋ ðə tu sɪstɝz, ðən plæntəɾ ɪz but hɑɹɾ ɪn ðə dɛd mænz ɹɪbz ɛniweɪ. klɪɹli, pɹɑpɝ dɪkɔɹəm leɪ fɑɹ fɹəm ɛniwʌnz maɪn ət ðə moʊmənt.

Dobraine did not appear to be breathing, and there were bloodstained gashes in the chest of his coat, with its thin stripes of color that marched down to his knees. Beside the litter, a dark blot larger than a man's body marred the green-and-yellow Tairen maze of the fringed carpet. Anyone who lost that much blood had to be dead. Two other men lay sprawled on the floor, one with death-glazed eyes glaring at the ceiling, the other on his side, an ivory knife hilt sticking up from his ribs where the blade had surely reached his heart. Short, pale-skinned Cairhienin, both wore the Livery of palace servants, but a servant never carried the long, wooden-handled dagger that lay beside each corpse. A House Taborwin man, his foot drawn back to kick one of the corpses, hesitated on seeing the two sisters, then planted his boot hard in the dead man's ribs anyway. Clearly, proper decorum lay far from anyone's mind at the moment.

"muv ðət klɔθ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ," sæʃəl toʊl ðə mɛn baɪ ðə lɪɾɝ. "sæmɪtsu, si wɛðɝ jə kən stɪl hɛlp lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪn."

"Move that cloth out of the way," Sashalle told the men by the litter. "Samitsu, see whether you can still help Lord Dobraine."

wʌtɛvɝ ʃi bɪlivd, ɪnstɪŋk hæd muv sæmɪtsu təwɔɹd dɑbɹeɪn, bʌt ðət kəmænd-ɪt wɑz dɛflaɪ ə kəmænd! -pʊɾ ə stʌɾɝ ɪn əɹ stɛp. ɡɹɪɾɪŋ əɹ tiθ, ʃi kɛp muvɪŋ, ən nɛl kɛɹfəli bɪsaɪd ðə lɪɾɝ, ɑn ðə saɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə stɪl dæmp blɑt, tə pʊɾ əɹ hænz ɑn dɑbɹeɪnz blʌd-soʊk hɛd. ʃi nɛvɝ maɪndəd ɡɛɾɪŋ blʌɾ ɑn əɹ hænz, bʌt blʌdsteɪnz wɝ ɪmpɑsəbəl tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə sɪlk ənlɛs jə tʃænəld, ən ʃi stɪl fɛlt ə pæŋ ʌv ɡɪlt ət ðə weɪst wən ʃi juz ðə paʊɝ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ soʊ məndeɪn.

Whatever she believed, instinct had moved Samitsu toward Dobraine, but that command-it was deafly a command! -put a stutter in her step. Gritting her teeth, she kept moving, and knelt carefully beside the litter, on the side away from the still damp blot, to put her hands on Dobraine's blood-soaked head. She never minded getting blood on her hands, but bloodstains were impossible to get out of silk unless you channeled, and she still felt a pang of guilt at the waste when she used the Power for something so mundane.

ðə nɛsəsɛɹi wivz wɝ sɛkənd neɪtʃɝ tə hɝ, soʊ mʌtʃ soʊ ðət ʃi ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs ən dɛlv ðə kɛɹhinɪn lɔɹd wɪθaʊɾ ə θɔt. ən blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. ɪnstɪŋk hæd meɪɾ əɹ ɡoʊ əhɛd, ðoʊ ʃi hæd bɪn sɝɾən ðəɹ wɝ θɹi kɔɹpsəz ɪn ðə ɹum, jɛt laɪf stɪl flɪkɝɾ ɪn dɑbɹeɪn. ə taɪni ɡʌɾɝɪŋ fleɪm ðət ðə ʃɑk ə hilɪŋ maɪt wɛl ɪkstɪŋɡwɪʃ. ðə ʃɑk ə ðə hilɪŋ ʃi nu. hɝ aɪz sɝtʃt aʊt ðə peɪl-hɛɹɾ æʃəmən. hi wɑz kɹaʊtʃt bɪsaɪd wʌn ə ðə dɛd sɝvəns, kɑmli sɝtʃɪŋ ðə mæn, əblɪviəs tə ðə ʃɑk stɛɹz ə ðə lɪvɪŋ sɝvəns. wʌn ə ðə wɪmən sʌɾənli noʊɾəst lɔɪəl, stændɪŋ dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə dɔɹ, ən ɡɑɡəld əz ɪf i hæd lɛpt aʊɾ ə θɪn ɛɹ. wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz foʊldəɾ əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst ən ə ɡɹɪm ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn ɪz bɹɔd feɪs, ði oʊɡiɝ lʊkt əz ðoʊ hi wɝ stændɪŋ ɡɑɹd.

The necessary weaves were second nature to her, so much so that she embraced the Source and delved the Cairhienin lord without a thought. And blinked in surprise. Instinct had made her go ahead, though she had been certain there were three corpses in the room, yet life still flickered in Dobraine. A tiny guttering flame that the shock of Healing might well extinguish. The shock of the Healing she knew. Her eyes searched out the pale-haired Asha'man. He was crouched beside one of the dead servants, calmly searching the man, oblivious to the shocked stares of the living servants. One of the women suddenly noticed Loial, standing just inside the door, and goggled as if he had leapt out of thin air. With his arms folded across his chest and a grim expression on his broad face, the Ogier looked as though he were standing guard.

"kɑɹldɪn, dʒju noʊ ðə kaɪndə hilɪŋ ðət deɪmɝ flɪn juzd," sæmɪtsu æskt. "ðə kaɪn ðət juzɪz ɔl ə ðə faɪv paʊɝz?"

"Karldin, do you know the kind of Healing that Damer Flinn used," Samitsu asked. "The kind that uses all of the Five Powers?"

hi pɔz fəɹ ə moʊmənt, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət hɝ. "flɪn! aɪ doʊn ivən noʊ wʌt jəɹ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, aɪ doʊn əv mʌtʃ tælən fəɹ hilɪŋ ɛniweɪ." aɪɪŋ dɑbɹeɪn, hi æɾəd, "hi lʊks dɛd tə mi, bʌɾ aɪ hoʊp jə kən seɪv hɪm. hi wɑz ət ðə wɛlz." ən i bɛn bæk tə ɹʌmɪdʒɪŋ θɹu ðə dɛd sɝvəns koʊt.

He paused for a moment, frowning at her. "Flinn! I don't even know what you're talking about, I don't have much Talent for Healing anyway." Eyeing Dobraine, he added, "He looks dead to me, but I hope you can save him. He was at the Wells." And he bent back to rummaging through the dead servant's coat.

sæmɪtsu lɪkt əɹ lɪps. ðə θɹɪl ə biɪŋ fɪld wɪð seɪaɪdɑɹ ɔlweɪz sim dɪmɪnɪʃt tə hɝ, ɪn sɪtʃueɪʃənz laɪk ðɪs. sɪtʃueɪʃənz wən ɔl ə hɝ pɑsəbəl tʃɔɪsəz wɝ bæd. kɛɹfəli, ʃi ɡæðɝd floʊz ʌv ɛɹ, spɪɹəɾ ən wɔɾɝ, wivɪŋ əm dʒʌst soʊ, ðə beɪsɪk wiv ə hilɪŋ ðəɾ ɛvɹi sɪstɝ nu. noʊ wʌn ɪn lɪvɪŋ mɛmɹi hæd ðə tælən fəɹ hilɪŋ əz stʃɹɔŋli əz ʃi, ən moʊst sɪstɝz wɝ lɪməɾəd ɪn wʌt ðeɪ kəd hil, səm tə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən bɹuzəz. baɪ hɝsɛlf, ʃi kəd hil ɔlmoʊst əz wɛl əz ə lɪŋk sɝkəl. moʊst sɪstɝz kəd nɑt ɹɛɡjəleɪt ðə wiv tə ɛni dɪɡɹi əɾ ɔl; moʊs dɪd nɑɾ ivən tʃɹaɪ tə lɝn. ʃi hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə fɹəm ðə stɑɹt. oʊ, ʃi kəd nɑt hil wʌn pɝtɪkjəlɝ θɪŋ ən liv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls əz ɪt wɑz, ðə weɪ deɪmɝ kʊd; wʌt ʃi dɪd wəɾ əfɛkt ɛvɹiθɪŋ fɹəm ðə stæb wunz tə ðə stʌf noʊz dɑbɹeɪn wɑz ɔlsoʊ sʌfɝɪŋ fɹʌm. dɛlvɪŋ hæd toʊld əɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðəɾ eɪl hɪm. bʌt ʃi kəd wɑʃ əweɪ ðə wɝst ɪnʒɝiz əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ bɪn, əɹ hil soʊ huɛvɝ ʃi hild əpɪɹd tə hæv spɛn deɪz ɹəkʌvɝɪŋ ɑn əɹ oʊn, əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɪn bɪtwin. itʃ tʊk noʊ lɛs ə hɝ stʃɹɛŋkθ, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd ɹikwaɪɝ lɛs fɹəm ðə peɪʃənt. ðə smɔlɝ ði əmaʊn ə tʃeɪnʒ ɪn ðə bɑɾi, ðə smɔlɝ ði əmaʊn ə ðə bɑɾiz stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪt dʒɹeɪnd. oʊnli, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə ɡæʃ ɪn ɪz skælp, dɑbɹeɪnz wunz wɝ ɔl sɪɹiəs, fɔɹ dip pʌŋktʃɝz ɪn ɪz lʌŋz, tu ʌv əm ɡæʃɪŋ ðə hɑɹɾ əz wɛl. ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəs hilɪŋ wəd kɪl ɪm bɪfɔɹ ɪz wunz fɪnɪʃt kloʊzɪŋ, waɪl ðə wikəst wəd ɹɪvaɪv ɪm lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə dʒɹaʊn ɪn ɪz oʊn blʌd. ʃi hæd tə tʃuz sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ən hoʊp ðət ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt.

Samitsu licked her lips. The thrill of being filled with Saidar always seemed diminished to her, in situations like this. Situations when all of her possible choices were bad. Carefully, she gathered flows of Air, Spirit and Water, weaving them just so, the basic weave of Healing that every sister knew. No one in living memory had the Talent for Healing as strongly as she, and most sisters were limited in what they could Heal, some to little more than bruises. By herself, she could Heal almost as well as a linked circle. Most sisters could not regulate the weave to any degree at all; most did not even try to learn. She had been able to from the start. Oh, she could not Heal one particular thing and leave everything else as it was, the way Damer could; what she did would affect everything from the stab wounds to the stuffed nose Dobraine was also suffering from. Delving had told her everything that ailed him. But she could wash away the worst injuries as if they had never been, or Heal so whoever she Healed appeared to have spent days recovering on her own, or anything in between. Each took no less of her strength, but they did require less from the patient. The smaller the amount of change in the body, the smaller the amount of the body's strength it drained. Only, except for the gash in his scalp, Dobraine's wounds were all serious, four deep punctures in his lungs, two of them gashing the heart as well. The strongest Healing would kill him before his wounds finished closing, while the weakest would revive him long enough to drown in his own blood. She had to choose somewhere in the middle and hope that she was right.

aɪm ðə bɛs ðəɾ ɛvɝ əz bɪn, ʃi θɔt ɡɹɪmli. kædzueɪn hæd toʊld əɹ ðæt, aɪm ðə bɛst.

I am the best that ever has been, she thought grimly. Cadsuane had told her that, I am the best.

ɔltɝɪŋ ðə wiv slaɪtli, ʃi lɛɾ ɪt sɪŋk ɪndə ðə moʊʃənləs mæn, səm ə ðə sɝvəns kɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn əlɑɹm əz dɑbɹeɪnz bɑɾi kənvʌlsd. hi hæf sæɾ ʌp, dip-sɛɾ aɪz oʊpənɪŋ waɪd, lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ wʌt saʊndəɾ ɔl tu mʌtʃ laɪk ə lɔŋ dɛθ ɹæɾəl tə ɹʌʃ aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ. ðən ɪz aɪz ɹoʊl bæk ɪn ɪz hɛd, ən i slɪp fɹəm əɹ ɡɹæsp, θəɾɪŋ bæk daʊn ɑntu ðə lɪɾɝ. heɪstəli, ʃi ɹiədʒʌstɪd ðə wiv ən dɛlvd ɪm əɡɛn, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ bɹɛθ. hi lɪvd. baɪ ə hɛɹ, ən soʊ wik i maɪt jɛt daɪ, bʌɾ ɪt wəd nɑt bi ðoʊz stæbz ðət kɪl hɪm, ɪksɛpt ɪndɝɛkli. ivən θɹu daɪ dʒɹaɪɪŋ blʌd ðət mæɾɪd ɪz hɛɹ, ʃeɪvən əweɪ fɹəm ɪz fɔɹhɛd, ʃi kəd si ðə pʌkɝd pɪŋk laɪn ʌv ə fɹɛʃ, ɹɛndɝ skɑɹ əkɹɔs ɪz skælp. hi wəɾ əv ðə seɪm bɪniθ ɪz koʊt, ən i maɪt bi tʃɹʌbəl baɪ ʃɔɹtnəs ə bɹɛθ wən i ɪɡzɝɾɪd hɪmsɛlf, ɪf i pʊl θɹu, jɛt fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, hi dɪd lɪv, ən ðət wɑz ɔl ðət mæɾɝd. fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ðə mæɾɝ ə hu hæd wɑntəɾ ɪm dɛd, ən waɪ.

Altering the weave slightly, she let it sink into the motionless man, Some of the servants cried out in alarm as Dobraine's body convulsed. He half sat up, deep-set eyes opening wide, long enough for what sounded all too much like a long death rattle to rush out of his mouth. Then his eyes rolled back in his head, and he slipped from her grasp, thudding back down onto the litter. Hastily, she readjusted the weave and delved him again, holding her breath. He lived. By a hair, and so weak he might yet die, but it would not be those stabs that killed him, except indirectly. Even through die drying blood that matted his hair, shaven away from his forehead, she could see the puckered pink line of a fresh, render scar across his scalp. He would have the same beneath his coat, and he might be troubled by shortness of breath when he exerted himself, if he pulled through, yet for the moment, he did live, and that was all that mattered. For the moment. There was still the matter of who had wanted him dead, and why.

ɹilisɪŋ ðə paʊɝ, ʃi stʊɾ ənstɛɾəli. seɪaɪdɑɹ dʒɹeɪnɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ ɔlweɪz meɪɾ əɹ fil taɪɝd.

Releasing the Power, she stood unsteadily. Saidar draining out of her always made her feel tired.

wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ mɛn, ɡeɪpɪŋ, hɛzɪɾəntli hændəɾ əɹ ðə klɔθ i hæd bɪn gɑnə leɪ ɑn ɪz lɔɹdz feɪs, ən ʃi juzd ɪt tə waɪp əɹ hænz. "teɪk ɪm tə hɪz bɛd "ʃi sɛd. "ɡɛɾ əz mʌtʃ maɪl hʌni-wɔɾɝ daʊn ɪm əz jə kæn. hi nidz tə ɡeɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ kwɪkli. ən faɪn ə waɪz wʊmən ... ə ɹiɾɝ, jɛs, ə ɹiɾɝ. hɪl nid hɝ, tu." hi wɑz aʊɾ ə hɝ hænz, naʊ, ən ɝbz maɪt hɛlp. ət list, ðeɪ wɝ ənlaɪkli tə hɑɹm, kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ə ɹiɾɝ, ən ət wɝs ðə wʊmən wəd meɪk ʃʊɹ ðeɪ ɡeɪv ɪm ɪnʌf hʌni-wɔɾɝ ən nɑt tu mʌtʃ.

One of the serving men, gaping, hesitantly handed her the cloth he had been going to lay on his lord's face, and she used it to wipe her hands. "Take him to his bed "she said. "Get as much mild honey-water down him as you can. He needs to gain strength quickly. And find a Wise Woman ... a Reader, Yes, a Reader. He will need her, too." He was out of her hands, now, and herbs might help. At least, they were unlikely to harm, coming from a Reader, and at worst the woman would make sure they gave him enough honey-water and not too much.

wɪð mʌtʃ boʊɪŋ ən mɛni mɝmɝz ə θæŋks, fɔɹ ə ðə sɝvɪŋ mɛn tʊk ʌp ðə lɪɾɝ ən kæɹid dɑbɹeɪn dipɝ ɪndə ði əpɑɹtməns. moʊst ə ði ʌðɝ sɝvəns fɑloʊd hɝidli, wɛɹɪŋ ɪkspɹɛʃənz ə ɹɪlif, ən ðə ɹɛs dæʃt aʊɾ ɪndə ðə kɔɹəɾɝ. ən ɪnstən leɪɾɝ, ɡlæd ʃaʊts ən tʃɪɹz bɹoʊk aʊt, ən ʃi hɝɾ əɹ neɪm nɪɹli əz ɔfən əz dɑbɹeɪnz. vɛɹi ɡɹæɾəfaɪɪŋ. ɪt wʊɾə bɪn mɔɹ sæɾɪsfaɪɪŋ ɪf sæʃəl hæd nɑt smaɪld ən ɡɪvən əɹ ən əpɹuvɪŋ nɑd. əpɹuvɪŋ! ən waɪ nɑɾ ə pæɾ ɑn ðə hɛd, waɪl ʃi wɑz əbaʊɾ ɪt?

With much bowing and many murmurs of thanks, four of the serving men took up the litter and carried Dobraine deeper into the apartments. Most of the other servants followed hurriedly, wearing expressions of relief, and the rest dashed out into the corridor. An instant later, glad shouts and cheers broke out, and she heard her name nearly as often as Dobraine's. Very gratifying. It would have been more satisfying if Sashalle had not smiled and given her an approving nod. Approving! And why not a pat on the head, while she was about it?

kɑɹldɪn hæd peɪd noʊ maɪn əɾ ɔl tə daɪ hilɪŋ, ɪnsəfɑɹ əz sæmɪtsu hæd noʊɾəst. fɪnɪʃɪŋ ɪz sɝtʃ ə ðə sɛkən kɔɹps, hi ɹoʊz ən kɹɔs ðə ɹum tə lɔɪəl, ətɛmptɪŋ tə ʃoʊ ði oʊɡiɝ sʌmθɪŋ, ʃildɪd baɪ hɪz bɑɾi, wɪθaʊt lɛɾɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ noʊɾəs. lɔɪəl plʌkt ɪt-ə ʃiɾ ə kɹim-kʌlɝd peɪpɝ, kɹis fɹəm foʊldɪŋ-aʊɾ ə ði æʃəmənz hæn ən hɛld ɪɾ ʌp ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz feɪs oʊpən aʊɾ ɪn ɪz θɪk ɹɪŋɝz, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ kɑɹldɪnz skaʊl "bʌt ðɪs meɪks noʊ sɛns," ði oʊɡiɝ mʌɾɝd, fɹaʊnɪŋ əz i ɹɛd. "noʊ sɛns əɾ ɔl. ənlɛs-!" hi kʌɾ ɔf əbɹʌpli, lɔŋ ɪɹz flɪkɝɪŋ, ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə tɛns lʊk wɪð ðə peɪl-hɛɹd fɛloʊ, hu ɡeɪv ə kɝt nɑd. "oʊ, ðɪs ɪz vɛɹi bæd," lɔɪəl, sɛd. "ɪf ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ ðən tu, kɑɹldɪn, ɪf ðeɪ faʊnd- !" hi tʃoʊkt ɔf ɪz wɝdz əɡɛn əɾ ə fɹæntɪk hɛdʃeɪk fɹəm ðə jʌŋ mæn.

Karldin had paid no mind at all to die Healing, insofar as Samitsu had noticed. Finishing his search of the second corpse, he rose and crossed the room to Loial, attempting to show the Ogier something, shielded by his body, without letting the Aes Sedai notice. Loial plucked it-a sheet of cream-colored paper, creased from folding-out of the Asha'man's hand and held it up in front of his face opened out in his thick ringers, ignoring Karldin's scowl "But this makes no sense," the Ogier muttered, frowning as he read. "No sense at all. Unless-!" He cut off abruptly, long ears flickering, and exchanged a tense look with the pale-haired fellow, who gave a curt nod. "Oh, this is very bad," Loial, said. "If there were more than two, Karldin, if they found- !" He choked off his words again at a frantic headshake from the young man.

"aɪ wɪl si ðæt, pliz," sæʃəl sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ aʊɾ əɹ hænd, ən pliz əɹ noʊ pliz, ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə ɹɪkwɛst. kɑɹldɪn ətɛmptəd tə snætʃ ðə peɪpɝ fɹəm lɔɪəl ɛs hænd-bʌt ði oʊɡiɝ kɑmli hændəɾ ɪt tə sæʃəl u ɪnspɛktɪɾ ɪt wɪθaʊɾ ɛni tʃeɪnʒ ʌv ɪkspɹɛʃən, ðən hændəɾ ɪt tə sæmɪtsu. ɪt wɑz θɪk peɪpɝ, smuð ən ɪkspɛnsɪv, ən nu lʊkɪŋ. sæmɪtsu hæd tə kəntʃɹoʊl əɹ aɪbɹaʊz' dɪzaɪɝ tə klaɪm əz ʃi ɹɛd.

"I will see that, please," Sashalle said, holding out her hand, and please or no please, it was not a request. Karldin attempted to snatch the paper from Loial s hand-but the Ogier calmly handed it to Sashalle who inspected it without any change of expression, then handed it to Samitsu. It was thick paper, smooth and expensive, and new looking. Samitsu had to control her eyebrows' desire to climb as she read.

ət maɪ kəmænd, ðə bɛɹɝz ə ðɪs ɑɹ tə ɹimuv sɝɾən aɪɾəmz, wɪtʃ ðəl noʊ, fɹəm maɪ əpɑɹtməns ən teɪk əm aʊɾ ə ðə sʌn pæləs-meɪk əm pɹaɪvəɾ ə maɪ ɹumz, ɡɪv əm wʌtɛvɝ eɪd ðeɪ ɹikwaɪɝ ən kip saɪlən ɑn ðɪs mæɾɝ, ɪn ðə neɪm ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ən ɑn peɪn ə hɪz dɪsplɛʒɝ.

At my command, the bearers of this are to remove certain items, which they will know, from my apartments and take them out of the Sun Palace-Make them private of my rooms, give them whatever aid they require and keep silent on this matter, in the name of the Dragon Reborn and on pain of his displeasure.

dɑbɹeɪn tæbɔɹwɪn ʃi hæd sin dɑbɹeɪnz ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɔfən ɪnʌf tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə ɹaʊndəd hæn əz hɪz. "ɑbviəsli sʌmwʌn ɛmplɔɪz ə vɛɹi ɡʊd fɔɹdʒɝ," ʃi sɛd, ɝnɪŋ ə kwɪk, kəntɛmptʃuəs ɡlæns fɹəm sæʃəl.

Dobraine Taborwin She had seen Dobraine's writing often enough to recognize the rounded hand as his. "Obviously someone employs a very good forger," she said, earning a quick, contemptuous glance from Sashalle.

"ɪt dɪd sim ənlaɪkli hi ɹoʊɾ ɪt hɪmsɛlf ən wɑz stæbd baɪ hɪz oʊn mɛn ɪn mɪsteɪk," ðə ɹɛd sɛɾ ɪn kʌɾɪŋ toʊnz. hɝ ɡeɪz swʌŋ tə lɔɪəl ən ði æʃəmən. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt ðeɪ maɪɾ əv faʊnd:" ʃi dɪmændəd. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə ɑɹ əfɹeɪd ðeɪ faʊnd?" kɑɹldɪn stɛɹd bæk əɾ əɹ blænli.

"It did seem unlikely he wrote it himself and was stabbed by his own men in mistake," the Red said in cutting tones. Her gaze swung to Loial and the Asha'man. "What is it they might have found:" she demanded. "What is it you are afraid they found?" Karldin stared back at her blandly.

"aɪ dʒʌs mɛnt wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ lʊkɪŋ fɔɹ," lɔɪəl ænsɝd. "ðeɪ hæd tə bi hɪɹ tə stil sʌmθɪŋ." bʌɾ ɪz tʌftəɾ ɪɹz twɪtʃt soʊ hɑɹd ðeɪ ɔlmoʊs vaɪbɹeɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ i kəd mæstɝ ðɛm. moʊst oʊɡiɝ meɪd vɛɹi pʊɹ laɪɝz, ət list waɪl jʌŋ.

"I just meant whatever they were looking for," Loial answered. "They had to be here to steal something." But his tufted ears twitched so hard they almost vibrated before he could master them. Most Ogier made very poor liars, at least while young.

sæʃəlz ɹɪŋləts swʌŋ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd dɪlɪbɝətli. "wʌt jə noʊ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ðə pɛɹ ə jə ɑɹ nɑt livɪŋ əntɪl aɪ noʊ ɪt, tu."

Sashalle's ringlets swung as she shook her head deliberately. "What you know is important. The pair of you are not leaving until I know it, too."

'æn haʊ ɑɹ jə gɑnə stɑp ʌs?" ðə vɛɹi kwaɪətnəs ə kɑɹldɪnz wɝdz meɪɾ əm mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs. hi mɛt sæʃəlz ɡeɪz lɛvəli, əz ɪɾ i hæd nɑɾ ə wɝi ɪn ðə wɝld. oʊ, jɛs, vɛɹi mʌtʃ ə wʊlf, nɑɾ ə fɑks.

'And how are you going to stop us?" The very quietness of Karldin's words made them more dangerous. He met Sashalle's gaze levelly, as it he had not a worry in the world. Oh, yes, very much a wolf, not a fox.

"aɪ θɔɾ aɪd nɛvɝ faɪn ju," ɹoʊzɑɹə mɛdʒɹɑnoʊ ənaʊnst, mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɪndə ðət moʊmən ə pɛɹələs saɪləns stɪl wɛɹɪŋ əɹ ɹɛd ɡlʌvz ən fɝ-laɪn kloʊk, wɪð ðə hʊd θɹoʊn bæk tə ɹɪvil ðə kɑɹvd aɪvɝi koʊmz ɪn əɹ blæk hɛɹ. ðəɹ wɝ dæmp pætʃəz ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝz ə ðə kloʊk fɹəm mɛltəd snoʊ. ə tɔl wʊmən, əz bɹaʊn əz ə sʌn-dɑɹk il, ʃi hæd ɡɔn aʊɾ ət fɝs laɪt tə tʃɹaɪ faɪndɪŋ spaɪsəz fəɹ səm sɔɹɾ ə fɪʃ stu fɹəm əɹ neɪɾɪv tɛɹ. ʃi spɛɹɾ oʊnli ðə bɹifɛst ɡlæns fəɹ lɔɪəl ən kɑɹldɪn, ən dɪd nɑt weɪst ə moʊmən ɪnkwaɪɝɪŋ æftɝ dɑbɹeɪn. "ə pɑɹɾi ʌv sɪstɝz əz ɛntɝd ðə sɪɾi, sæmɪtsu. aɪ ɹoʊd laɪk ə mædwʊmən tə ɡɛt hɪɹ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, bʌt ðeɪ kəd bi ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn ət ðɪs moʊmənt.

"I thought I'd never find you," Rosara Medrano announced, marching into that moment of perilous silence still wearing her red gloves and fur-lined cloak, with the hood thrown back to reveal the carved ivory combs in her black hair. There were damp patches on the shoulders of the cloak from melted snow. A tall woman, as brown as a sun-dark Aiel, she had gone out at first light to try finding spices for some sort of fish stew from her native Tear. She spared only the briefest glance for Loial and Karldin, and did not waste a moment inquiring after Dobraine. "A party of sisters has entered the city, Samitsu. I rode like a madwoman to get here ahead of them, but they could be riding in at this moment.

ðəɹ ɑɹ æʃəmən wɪð ðɛm, ən wʌn ə ði æʃəmən ɪz lɑɡən!" kɑɹldɪn bɑɹkt ə ɹʌf læf. ən sʌɾənli sæmɪtsu wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz gɑnə lɪv lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ kædzueɪn tə hæv əɹ haɪd.

There are Asha'man with them, and one of the Asha'man is Logain!" Karldin barked a rough laugh. and suddenly Samitsu wondered whether she was going to live long enough for Cadsuane to have her hide.

tʃæptɝ wʌn

CHAPTER 1

taɪm tə bi ɡɔn ðə wil ə taɪm tɝnz, ən eɪdʒəz kʌm ən pæs, livɪŋ mɛmɹiz ðət bɪkʌm lɛdʒənd.

Time to Be Gone The Wheel of Time turns, and Ages come and pass, leaving memories that become legend.

lɛdʒən feɪdz tə mɪθ, ən ivən mɪθ ɪz lɔŋ fɝɡɑɾən wən ði eɪdʒ ðət ɡeɪv ɪt bɝθ kʌmz əɡɛn. ɪn wʌn eɪdʒ, kɔl ðə θɝɾ eɪdʒ baɪ sʌm, ən eɪdʒ jɛt tə kʌm, ən eɪdʒ lɔŋ pæst, ə wɪn ɹoʊz ɪn ðə ɹiænən hɪlz. ðə wɪnd wɑz nɑt ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ðəɹ ɑɹ niðɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋz nɔɹ ɛndɪŋz tə ðə tɝnɪŋ ə ðə wil ə taɪm. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə bɪɡɪnɪŋ.

Legend fades to myth, and even myth is long forgotten when the Age that gave it birth comes again. In one Age, called the Third Age by some, an Age yet to come, an Age long past, a wind rose in the Rhiannon Hills. The wind was not the beginning. There are neither beginnings nor endings to the turning of the Wheel of Time. But it was a beginning.

bɔɹn əmʌŋ ðə ɡɹoʊvz ən vɪnjɝdz ðət kʌvɝd mʌtʃ ə ðə ɹʌɡəd hɪlz, ði ɑləv tʃɹiz ɪn ɛvɝɡɹin ɹoʊz, ði ɔɹɾɝd vaɪnz lifləs tɪl spɹɪŋ, ðə koʊld wɪn blu wɛst ən nɔɹθ əkɹɔs ðə pɹɑspɝəs fɑɹmz dɑɾɪŋ ðə læn bɪtwin ðə hɪlz ən ðə ɡɹeɪt hɑɹbɝ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ. ðə læn leɪ wɪntɝ fæloʊ stɪl, bʌt mɛn ən wɪmən wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɔɪlɪŋ plaʊʃɛɹz ən tɛndɪŋ hɑɹnəs, pɹipɛɹɪŋ fəɹ ðə plæntɪŋ tə kʌm. ðeɪ peɪd lɪɾəl maɪn tə ðə tʃɹeɪnz ə hɛvəli leɪɾən wæɡənz muvɪŋ ist əlɔŋ ðə dɝt ɹoʊdz kæɹiɪŋ pipəl u wɔɹ ɑd kloʊðz ən spoʊk wɪð ɑɾ æksɛns. mɛni ʌv ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz sim tə bi fɑɹmɝz ðɛmsɛlvz, fəmɪljɝ ɪmpləməns læʃt tə ðɛɹ wæɡən bɑksəz, ən ɪn ðɛɹ wæɡənz ʌnfəmɪljɝ sæplɪŋz wɪð ɹuts bɔld ɪn ɹʌf klɔθ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ hɛɾɪŋ ɑn təwɔɹd mɔɹ dɪstən lænd.

Born among the groves and vineyards that covered much of the rugged hills, the olive trees in evergreen rows, the ordered vines leafless till spring, the cold wind blew west and north across the prosperous farms dotting the land between the hills and the great harbor of Ebou Dar. The land lay winter fallow still, but men and women were already oiling plowshares and tending harness, preparing for the planting to come. They paid little mind to the trains of heavily laden wagons moving east along the dirt roads carrying people who wore odd clothes and spoke with odd accents. Many of the strangers seemed to be farmers themselves, familiar implements lashed to their wagon boxes, and in their wagons unfamiliar saplings with roots balled in rough cloth, but they were heading on toward more distant land.

nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð laɪf hɪɹ ən naʊ. ðə sintʃæn hæn leɪ laɪtli ɑn ðoʊz u dɪd nɑt kəntɛst sintʃæn ɹul, ən ðə fɑɹmɝz ə ðə ɹiænən hɪlz hæd sin noʊ tʃeɪnʒəz ɪn ðɛɹ laɪvz. fəɹ ðɛm, ɹeɪn əɹ ðə læk ʌv ɪt hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ðə tʃɹu ɹulɝ.

Nothing to do with life here and now. The Seanchan hand lay lightly on those who did not contest Seanchan rule, and the farmers of the Rhiannon Hills had seen no changes in their lives. For them, rain or the lack of it had always been the true ruler.

wɛst ən nɔɹθ ðə wɪn blu, əkɹɔs ðə bɹɔd blu-ɡɹin ɪkspæns ə ðə hɑɹbɝ, wɛɹ hʌnʒɹədz ə hjudʒ ʃɪps sæt ɹɑkɪŋ əɾ æŋkɝ ɑn tʃɑpi swɛlz, səm blʌf-baʊɾ ən ɹɪɡd wɪð ɹɪb seɪlz, ʌðɝz lɔŋ ən ʃɑɹp-pɹaʊd, wɪð mɛn leɪbɝɪŋ tə mætʃ ðɛɹ seɪlz ən ɹɪɡɪŋ tə ðoʊz ə ðə waɪɾɝ vɛsəlz. nɑt nɪɹli soʊ mɛni ʃɪps stɪl floʊɾəd ðəɹ əz hæɾ oʊnli ə fju deɪz bɪfɔɹ, ðoʊ.

West and north the wind blew, across the broad blue-green expanse of the harbor, where hundreds of huge ships sat rocking at anchor on choppy swells, some bluff-bowed and rigged with ribbed sails, others long and sharp-prowed, with men laboring to match their sails and rigging to those of the wider vessels. Not nearly so many ships still floated there as had only a few days before, though.

mɛni naʊ leɪ ɪn ðə ʃæloʊz, tʃɑɹd ɹɛks hild oʊvɝ ɑn ðɛɹ saɪdz, ən bɝn fɹeɪmz sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪn ðə dip ɡɹeɪ mʌd laɪk blækən skɛləɾənz. smɔlɝ kɹæf skɪɾɝd əbaʊt ðə hɑɹbɝ, slæntɪŋ ʌndɝ tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ seɪlz əɹ kɹɔlɪŋ ɑn ɔɹz laɪk mɛni-lɛɡəd wɔɾɝbəɡz, moʊs kæɹiɪŋ wɝkɝz ən səplaɪz tə ðə ʃɪps ðət stɪl floʊɾəd. ʌðɝ smɔl vɛsəlz ən bɑɹdʒəz ɹoʊd tɛðɝd tə wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi tʃɹitʃɹəŋks ʃɔɹn ə bɹæntʃəz, ɹaɪzɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə blu-ɡɹin wɔɾɝ, ən fɹəm ðoʊz mɛn dʌv hoʊldɪŋ stoʊnz tə kæɹi ðɛm daʊn swɪfli tə sʌŋkən ʃɪps bɪloʊ, wɛɹ ðeɪ taɪd ɹoʊps tə wʌtɛvɝ kəd bi hɔld ʌp fəɹ sælvədʒ. sɪks naɪts əɡoʊ dɛθ hæd wɔkt əkɹɔs ðə wɔɾɝ hɪɹ, ðə wʌn paʊɝ kɪlɪŋ mɛn ən wɪmən ən ʃɪps ɪn dɑɹknəs splɪt baɪ sɪlvɝ laɪtnɪŋz ən hɝtlɪŋ bɔlz ə faɪɝz. naʊ, ðə ɹʌf ɹoʊlɪŋ hɑɹbɝ, fɪld wɪð fjʊɹiəs æktɪvəɾi, simd ət pis baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən, ðə tʃɑp ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp spɹeɪ tə ðə wɪn ðət blu nɔɹθ ən wɛst əkɹɔs ðə maʊθ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ ɪldɑɹ, wɛɹ ɪt waɪɾənd ɪndə ðə hɑɹbɝ, nɔɹθ ən wɛst ən ɪnlænd.

Many now lay in the shallows, charred wrecks heeled over on their sides, and burned frames settling in the deep gray mud like blackened skeletons. Smaller craft skittered about the harbor, slanting under triangular sails or crawling on oars like many-legged waterbugs, most carrying workers and supplies to the ships that still floated. Other small vessels and barges rode tethered to what appeared to be treetrunks shorn of branches, rising out of the blue-green water, and from those men dove holding stones to carry them down swiftly to sunken ships below, where they tied ropes to whatever could be hauled up for salvage. Six nights ago death had walked across the water here, the One Power killing men and women and ships in darkness split by silver lightnings and hurtling balls of fires. Now, the rough rolling harbor, filled with furious activity, seemed at peace by comparison, the chop giving up spray to the wind that blew north and west across the mouth of the River Eldar, where it widened into the harbor, north and west and inland.

sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ətɑp ə boʊldɝ kʌvɝd wɪð bɹaʊn mɔs, ɑn ðə ɹid-fɹɪn bæŋk ə ðə ɹɪvɝ, mæt hʌntʃt ɪz ʃoʊldɝz əɡɛns ðə wɪn ən kɝst saɪlənli. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɡoʊl tə bi faʊn hɪɹ, noʊ wɪmən əɹ dænsɪŋ, noʊ fʌn. plɛnti ʌv dɪskʌmfɝt, ðoʊ. ɪn ʃɔɹt, ɪt wɑz ðə læst sɔɹɾ ə pleɪs i wəd tʃuz, nɔɹməli. ðə sʌn stʊd bɛɹli ɪts oʊn haɪɾ əbʌv ðə hɝaɪzən, ðə skaɪ oʊvɝhɛd wɑz peɪl sleɪt ɡɹeɪ, ən θɪk pɝpəl klaʊdz muvɪŋ ɪn fɹəm ðə si θɹɛɾənd ɹeɪn. wɪntɝ hɑɹdli simd wɪntɝ wɪθaʊt snoʊ  hi hæd jɛt tə si ə sɪŋɡəl fleɪk ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ  bʌɾ ə koʊl dæmp mɔɹnɪŋ wɪn ɔf ðə wɔɾɝ kəd sɝv əz wɛl əz snoʊ tə tʃɪl ə mæn tə ðə boʊn. fɔɹ naɪts sɪns i hæd ɹɪɾən aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi ɪn ə stɔɹm, jɛɾ ɪz θɹɑbɪŋ hɪp sim tə θɪŋk i wɑz stɪl soʊk tə ðə skɪn ən klɪŋɪŋ tə ə sæɾəl. ðɪs wɑz noʊ wɛðɝ əɹ taɪm ə deɪ fəɹ ə mæn tə bi aʊt baɪ hɪz oʊn tʃɔɪs. hi wɪʃt i hæd θɔt tə bɹɪŋ ə kloʊk. hi wɪʃt i hæd steɪɾ ɪn bɛd.

Sitting cross-legged atop a boulder covered with brown moss, on the reed-fringed bank of the river, Mat hunched his shoulders against the wind and cursed silently. There was no gold to be found here, no women or dancing, no fun. Plenty of discomfort, though. In short, it was the last sort of place he would choose, normally. The sun stood barely its own height above the horizon, the sky overhead was pale slate gray, and thick purple clouds moving in from the sea threatened rain. Winter hardly seemed winter without snow  he had yet to see a single flake in Ebou Dar  but a cold damp morning wind off the water could serve as well as snow to chill a man to the bone. Four nights since he had ridden out of the city in a storm, yet his throbbing hip seemed to think he was still soaked to the skin and clinging to a saddle. This was no weather or time of day for a man to be out by his own choice. He wished he had thought to bring a cloak. He wished he had stayed in bed.

ɹɪpəlz ɪn ðə læn hɪɾ ɛbu dɑɹ, dʒʌst oʊvɝ ə maɪl tə ðə saʊθ, ən hɪɾ ɪm fɹəm ðə sɪɾi, əz wɛl, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə tʃɹi əɹ ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən skɹʌb bɹʌʃ ɪn saɪt. biɪŋ ɪn ði oʊpən ðɪs weɪ meɪɾ ɪm fil əz ðoʊ æns wɝ kɹɔlɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz skɪn. hi ʃəd bi seɪf, ðoʊ. hɪz pleɪn bɹaʊn wʊlən koʊɾ ən kæp wɝ nʌθɪŋ laɪk ðə kloʊðz i wɑz noʊn baɪ ɪn ðə sɪɾi. ɪnstɛɾ ə blæk sɪlk, ə dʒɹæb wʊlən skɑɹf hɪd ðə skɑɹ ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk, ən ðə kɑlɝ ə hɪz koʊt wɑz tɝn ʌp tə haɪd ðæt, əz wɛl. nɑɾ ə bɪɾ ə leɪs əɹ ə θɹɛɾ ʌv ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. dʌl ɪnʌf fəɹ ə fɑɹmɝ mɪlkɪŋ kaʊz. noʊ wʌn i niɾəd tə əvɔɪd wəd noʊ hɪm tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɪf ðeɪ sɔ hɪm. nɑɾ ənlɛs ðeɪ wɝ kloʊs. dʒʌs ðə seɪm, hi tʌɡd ðə kæp ə bɪt loʊɝ.

Ripples in the land hid Ebou Dar, just over a mile to the south, and hid him from the city, as well, but there was not a tree or anything more than scrub brush in sight. Being in the open this way made him feel as though ants were crawling under his skin. He should be safe, though. His plain brown woolen coat and cap were nothing like the clothes he was known by in the city. Instead of black silk, a drab woolen scarf hid the scar around his neck, and the collar of his coat was turned up to hide that, as well. Not a bit of lace or a thread of embroidery. Dull enough for a farmer milking cows. No one he needed to avoid would know him to recognize if they saw him. Not unless they were close. Just the same, he tugged the cap a bit lower.

"ju ɪntɛn tə steɪ aʊt hɪɹ mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ, mæt?" noʊlz tæɾɝd dɑɹk blu koʊt hæd sin bɛɾɝ deɪz, bʌt ðən soʊ hæd hi. stupt ən waɪt-hɛɹd, ðə bɹoʊkən-noʊzd oʊl fɛloʊ wɑz skwɑɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz hilz bɪloʊ ðə boʊldɝ, fɪʃɪŋ ɔf ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk wɪð ə bæmbu poʊl. moʊst ə hɪz tiθ wɝ mɪsɪŋ, ən səmtaɪmz i fɛlt əɾ ə ɡæp wɪð ɪz tʌŋ əz ðoʊ sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ði ɛmpti speɪs. "ɪts koʊld, ɪn keɪs jə hævənt noʊɾəst. ɛvɹibɑɾi ɔlweɪz θɪŋks ɪts wɔɹm ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, bʌt wɪntɝ ɪz koʊld ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ivən pleɪsəz ðət meɪk ɛbu dɑɹ fil laɪk ʃaɪnɝ. maɪ boʊnz kɹeɪv ə faɪɝ. əɹ ə blæŋkət, ɛniweɪ. ə mæn kən bi snʌɡ wɪð ə blæŋkət, ɪf hiz aʊɾ ə ðə wɪnd. ɑɹ jə gɑnə də ɛniθɪŋ bʌt stɛɹ daʊnɹɪvɝ?"

"You intend to stay out here much longer, Mat?" Noal's tattered dark blue coat had seen better days, but then so had he. Stooped and white-haired, the broken-nosed old fellow was squatting on his heels below the boulder, fishing off the riverbank with a bamboo pole. Most of his teeth were missing, and sometimes he felt at a gap with his tongue as though surprised to find the empty space. "It's cold, in case you haven't noticed. Everybody always thinks it's warm in Ebou Dar, but winter is cold everywhere, even places that make Ebou Dar feel like Shienar. My bones crave a fire. Or a blanket, anyway. A man can be snug with a blanket, if he's out of the wind. Are you going to do anything but stare downriver?"

wən mæt oʊnli ɡlænst ət hɪm, noʊl ʃɹʌɡd ən wɛn bæk tə piɹɪŋ ət ðə tɑɹd wʊɾən floʊt bɑbɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə spɑɹs ɹidz. naʊ ən ðən i wɝkt wʌn nɑɹl hæn əz ðoʊ hɪz kɹʊkəd fɪŋɡɝz fɛl ðə tʃɪl pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli, bʌɾ ɪf soʊ, ɪt wɑz ɪz oʊn fɔlt. ði oʊl ful hæd ɡɔn weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃæloʊz tə skup ʌp mɪnoʊz fəɹ beɪt wɪð ə bæskət ðət naʊ sæt hæf-səbmɝdʒd ən æŋkɝd baɪ ə smuð stoʊn ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə wɔɾɝ. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz kəmpleɪns əbaʊt ðə wɛðɝ, noʊl hæd kʌm əlɔŋ tə ðə ɹɪvɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɝdʒɪŋ əɹ ɪnvɪteɪʃən. fɹəm θɪŋz i hæd sɛd, ɛvɹiwʌn i kɛɹɾ əbaʊt wɑz lɔŋ jɪɹz dɛd, ən ðə tʃɹuθ ʌv ɪt wɑz, hi simd ɔlmoʊs dɛspɹɪt fəɹ ɛni sɔɹɾ ə kʌmpəni. dɛspɹɪt, ɪndid, tə tʃuz mæts kʌmpəni wən i kəd bi faɪv deɪz fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ baɪ naʊ. ə mæn kəd kʌvɝ ə lɑɾ ʌv ɡɹaʊn ɪn faɪv deɪz ɪf i hæd ɹizən tə ən ə ɡʊd hɔɹs. mæt hæd θɔɾ ɑn ðət vɛɹi sʌbʒɪkt ɔfən ɪnʌf hɪmsɛlf.

When Mat only glanced at him, Noal shrugged and went back to peering at the tarred wooden float bobbing among the sparse reeds. Now and then he worked one gnarled hand as though his crooked fingers felt the chill particularly, but if so, it was his own fault. The old fool had gone wading in the shallows to scoop up minnows for bait with a basket that now sat half-submerged and anchored by a smooth stone at the edge of the water. Despite his complaints about the weather, Noal had come along to the river without urging or invitation. From things he had said, everyone he cared about was long years dead, and the truth of it was, he seemed almost desperate for any sort of company. Desperate, indeed, to choose Mat's company when he could be five days from Ebou Dar by now. A man could cover a lot of ground in five days if he had reason to and a good horse. Mat had thought on that very subject often enough himself.

ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ði ɪldɑɹ, hæf-hɪɾən baɪ wʌn ə ðə mɑɹʃi aɪlənz ðət dɑɾəd ðə ɹɪvɝ, ə bɹɔd-bimd ɹoʊboʊt bækt ɔɹz, ən wʌn ə ðə kɹu stʊɾ ʌp ən fɪʃt ɪn ðə ɹidz wɪð ə lɔŋ boʊtʊk. ənʌðɝ ɔɹzmən hɛlpt ɪm hiv wʌɾ i hæd kɑɾ ɪndə ðə boʊt. ət ðɪs dɪstəns, ɪt lʊk laɪk ə lɑɹdʒ sæk. mæt wɪnst ən ʃɪftəɾ ɪz aɪz daʊnɹɪvɝ. ðeɪ wɝ stɪl faɪndɪŋ bɑɾiz, ən i wɑz ɹispɑnsəbəl. ði ɪnəsən daɪɾ əlɔŋ wɪð ðə ɡɪlti. ən ɪf jə dɪd nʌθɪŋ, ðən oʊnli ði ɪnəsən daɪd. əɹ əz bæɾ əz daɪd. meɪbi wɝs ðæn, dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn haʊ jə lʊkt əɾ ɪt.

On the far side of the Eldar, half-hidden by one of the marshy islands that dotted the river, a broad-beamed rowboat backed oars, and one of the crew stood up and fished in the reeds with a long boathook. Another oarsman helped him heave what he had caught into the boat. At this distance, it looked like a large sack. Mat winced and shifted his eyes downriver. They were still finding bodies, and he was responsible. The innocent died along with the guilty. And if you did nothing, then only the innocent died. Or as bad as died. Maybe worse than, depending on how you looked at it.

hi skaʊld ɪɹɪɾəbli. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, hi wɑz tɝnɪŋ ɪndə ə blʌɾi fəlɑsəfɝ! teɪkɪŋ ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi dʒɹeɪn ɔl ðə dʒɔɪ aʊɾ ə laɪf ən dʒɹaɪɾ ə mæn tə dʌst. wʌɾ i wɑntəd ɹaɪt ðən wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə mʌld waɪn ɪn ə snʌɡ kɑmən ɹum fʊl ə mjuzɪk, ən ə plʌmp, pɹɪɾi sɝvɪŋ meɪɾ ɑn ɪz ni, sʌmwɛɹ fɑɹ fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ. vɛɹi fɑɹ. wʌɾ i hæd wɝ ɑbləɡeɪʃənz i kəd nɑt wɔk əweɪ fɹəm ən ə fjutʃɝ i dɪd nɑt fænsi. ðəɹ sim noʊ hɛlp əɾ ɔl ɪn biɪŋ tɑvɝən, nɑɾ ɪf ðɪs wɑz haʊ ðə pæɾɝn ʃeɪpt ɪtsɛlf tə ju. hi stɪl hæɾ ɪz lʌk, ɛniweɪ. ət list, hi wɑz əlaɪv ən nɑt tʃeɪn ɪn ə sɛl. ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz, ðət kaʊntəɾ əz lʌk.

He scowled irritably. Blood and ashes, he was turning into a bloody philosopher! Taking responsibility drained all the joy out of life and dried a man to dust. What he wanted right then was a great deal of mulled wine in a snug common room full of music, and a plump, pretty serving maid on his knee, somewhere far from Ebou Dar. Very far. What he had were obligations he could not walk away from and a future he did not fancy. There seemed no help at all in being ta'veren, not if this was how the Pattern shaped itself to you. He still had his luck, anyway. At least, he was alive and not chained in a cell. Under the circumstances, that counted as luck.

fɹəm ɪz pɝtʃ, hi hæɾ ə fɛɹli klɪɹ vju daʊn pæs ðə læs loʊ mɑɹʃi ɹɪvɝ aɪlənz. wɪnd-kɑt spɹeɪ dʒɹɪftəɾ ʌp ðə hɑɹbɝ laɪk bæŋks ə faɪn mɪst, bʌt nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə haɪd wʌɾ i niɾəd tə si.

From his perch, he had a fairly clear view down past the last low marshy river islands. Wind-caught spray drifted up the harbor like banks of fine mist, but not enough to hide what he needed to see.

hi wɑz ətɛmptɪŋ tə də sʌmz ɪn ɪz hɛd, kaʊntɪŋ ʃɪps əfloʊt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kaʊn ɹɛks. hi kɛp luzɪŋ ɪz pleɪs, ðoʊ, θɪŋkɪŋ i hæd kaʊntəd vɛsəlz twaɪs ən stɑɹɾɪŋ oʊvɝ. ðə si foʊk u hæd bɪn ɹikæptʃɝɾ ɪntʃɹuɾəd ɑn ɪz θɔts, tu. hi hæd hɝd ðət ɡɪbɪts ɪn ðə ɹæhəd, əkɹɔs ðə hɑɹbɝ, dɪspleɪd mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd kɔɹpsəz, wɪð plækɝdz lɪstɪŋ 'mɝɾɝ' ən 'ɹɪbɛljən' əz ðɛɹ kɹaɪmz.

He was attempting to do sums in his head, counting ships afloat, trying to count wrecks. He kept losing his place, though, thinking he had counted vessels twice and starting over. The Sea Folk who had been recaptured intruded on his thoughts, too. He had heard that gibbets in the Rahad, across the harbor, displayed more than a hundred corpses, with placards listing 'murder' and 'rebellion' as their crimes.

nɔɹməli, ðə sintʃæn juz ðə hɛdzmənz æks ən ði ɪmpəlɪŋ steɪk, waɪl ðə blʌd ɡɑt ðə stʃɹæŋɡəlɪŋ kɔɹd, bʌt pɹɑpɝɾi hæd tə sɛɾəl fəɹ biɪŋ hæŋd.

Normally, the Seanchan used the headsman's axe and the impaling stake, while the Blood got the strangling cord, but property had to settle for being hanged.

bɝn mi, aɪ dɪd wʌɾ aɪ kʊd, hi θɔt saʊɝli. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ jus filɪŋ ɡɪlti ðət ðət wɑz ɔl i kəd du. nɑɾ ə bɪɾ ə jus. nʌn! hi hæd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ðə pipəl u ɪskeɪpt.

Burn me, I did what I could, he thought sourly. There was no use feeling guilty that that was all he could do. Not a bit of use. None! He had to concentrate on the people who escaped.

ði æθɑn maɪɹ u ɡɑɾ əweɪ hæd teɪkən ʃɪps ɪn ðə hɑɹbɝ fəɹ ðɛɹ flaɪt, ən waɪl ðeɪ maɪɾ əv siz səm smɔlɝ kɹæft, ɛniθɪŋ ðeɪ kəd bɔɹɾ ən oʊvɝwɛlm ɪn ðə naɪt, ðeɪ hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə kæɹi ɔf əz mɛni ʌv ðɛɹ pipəl əz pɑsəbəl. wɪð θaʊzənz ə ðɛm leɪbɝɪŋ əz pɹɪznɝz ɪn ðə ɹæhəd, ðət wʊɾə mɛn bɪɡ ʃɪps, baɪ tʃɔɪs, ən ðət mɛn sintʃæn ɡɹieɪtʃɪps. mɛni ʌv ðə si foʊks oʊn vɛsəlz wɝ lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf, fəɹ sɝɾən, bʌt ðeɪ ɔl hæd bɪn stʃɹɪpt ə ðɛɹ seɪlz ən ɹɪɡɪŋ baɪ ðət taɪm, tə bi fɪɾəd aʊɾ ɪn ðə sintʃæn fæʃən. ɪf i kəd kælkjəleɪt haʊ mɛni ɡɹieɪtʃɪps ɹɪmeɪnd, hi maɪɾ əv səm noʊʃən ə haʊ mɛni æθɑn maɪɹ hæɾ æktʃəli  ɹitʃt fɹiɾəm. fɹiɪŋ ðə si foʊk wɪndfɪndɝz hæd bɪn ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ tə du, ði oʊnli θɪŋ i kəd du, bʌɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ðə hæŋʒɪŋz, hʌnʒɹədz ən hʌnʒɹədz ə bɑɾiz hæd bɪn fɪʃt aʊɾ ə ðə hɑɹbɝ ɪn ðə læs faɪv deɪz, ən ðə laɪɾ oʊnli nu haʊ mɛni hæd wɑʃt aʊt tə si wɪð ðə taɪdz. ðə ɡɹeɪvɛdɪɝz leɪbɝd fɹəm sʌnʌp tə sʌndaʊn, ən ðə ɡɹeɪvjɑɹdz wɝ fɪld wɪð wipɪŋ wɪmən ən tʃɪlʒɹən. mɛn, tu. mɔɹ ðən ə fju ʌv ðoʊz dɛd hæd bɪn æθɑn maɪɹ, wɪð noʊ wʌn tə wip waɪl ðeɪ wɝ dʌmpt ɪndə mæs ɡɹeɪvz, ən i wɑntəd səm aɪdiə ʌv ðə nʌmbɝ i hæd seɪv tə bæləns ɪz blik səspɪʃənz ə ðə nʌmbɝ i hæd kɪld.

The Atha'an Miere who got away had taken ships in the harbor for their flight, and while they might have seized some smaller craft, anything they could board and overwhelm in the night, they had intended to carry off as many of their people as possible. With thousands of them laboring as prisoners in the Rahad, that would have meant big ships, by choice, and that meant Seanchan greatships. Many of the Sea Folk's own vessels were large enough, for certain, but they all had been stripped of their sails and rigging by that time, to be fitted out in the Seanchan fashion. If he could calculate how many greatships remained, he might have some notion of how many Atha'an Miere had actually reached freedom. Freeing the Sea Folk Windfinders had been the right thing to do, the only thing he could do, but aside from the hangings, hundreds and hundreds of bodies had been fished out of the harbor in the last five days, and the Light only knew how many had washed out to sea with the tides. The gravediggers labored from sunup to sundown, and the graveyards were filled with weeping women and children. Men, too. More than a few of those dead had been Atha'an Miere, with no one to weep while they were dumped into mass graves, and he wanted some idea of the number he had saved to balance his bleak suspicions of the number he had killed.

ɛstəmeɪɾɪŋ haʊ mɛni ʃɪps hæd meɪɾ ɪɾ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz wɑz dɪfəkəlt, ðoʊ, kwaɪɾ əpɑɹt fɹəm luzɪŋ ðə kaʊnt. ənlaɪk ɛɛs sədaɪ, wɪndfɪndɝz hæd noʊ stʃɹɪktʃɝz əɡɛns juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən, nɑt wən ðə seɪfti ʌv ðɛɹ pipəl wɑz ət steɪk, ən ðeɪ wʊɾə wɑntəd tə hɔl pɝsut bɪfɔɹ ɪt bɪɡæn. noʊ wʌn ɡeɪv tʃeɪs ɪn ə bɝnɪŋ ʃɪp. ðə sintʃæn, wɪð ðɛɹ deɪmeɪn, hæɾ ivən lɛs kəmpʌŋkʃən əɡɛns faɪɾɪŋ bæk. laɪtnɪŋ boʊls lɑsɪŋ θɹu ðə ɹeɪn əz numɝəs əz bleɪdz ʌv ɡɹæs ən bɔlz ə faɪɝ stʃɹikɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ, səm ðə saɪz ə hɔɹsəz, ən ðə hɑɹbɝ simd əfleɪm fɹəm wʌn saɪd tə ði ʌðɝ, tɪl ivən ɪn ə stɔɹm ðə naɪt meɪɾ ɛni ɪluməneɪɾɝz ʃoʊ lʊk stɑɹk.

Estimating how many ships had made it out into the Sea of Storms was difficult, though, quite apart from losing the count. Unlike Aes Sedai, Windfinders had no strictures against using the Power as a weapon, not when the safety of their people was at stake, and they would have wanted to halt pursuit before it began. No one gave chase in a burning ship. The Seanchan, with their damane, had even less compunction against fighting back. Lightning bolts lacing through the rain as numerous as blades of grass and balls of fire streaking across the sky, some the size of horses, and the harbor seemed aflame from one side to the other, till even in a storm the night made any Illuminator's show look stark.

wɪθaʊt tɝnɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ i kəd kaʊn ə dʌzən pleɪsəz wɛɹ ðə tʃɑɹd ɹɪbz ʌv ə ɡɹieɪtʃɪp stʌk ʌp aʊɾ ə ʃæloʊ wɔɾɝ əɹ ə hjudʒ blʌf-baʊd hʌl leɪ ɑn ɪts saɪd wɪð ðə hɑɹbɝ weɪvz lɪkɪŋ əɡɛns ðə tɪltəd dɛk, ən twaɪs əz mɛni wɛɹ ðə laɪnz ə blækən tɪmbɝz wɝ faɪnɝ, ðə ɹɪmeɪnz ə si foʊk ɹeɪkɝz. əpɛɹənli ðeɪ hæd dɪslaɪk livɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn vɛsəlz tə pipəl u hæd pʊɾ əm ɪn tʃeɪnz.

Without turning his head he could count a dozen places where the charred ribs of a greatship stuck up out of shallow water or a huge bluff-bowed hull lay on its side with the harbor waves licking against the tilted deck, and twice as many where the lines of blackened timbers were finer, the remains of Sea Folk rakers. Apparently they had disliked leaving their own vessels to people who had put them in chains.

θɹi dʌzən ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, ən ðət wɪθaʊɾ æɾɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌŋkən ɹɛks ðət hæd sælvədʒ boʊts wɝkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛm. pɝhæps ə sifɛɹɝ kəd tɛl ɡɹieɪtʃɪp fɹəm ɹeɪkɝ baɪ ðə tɑps ə mæsts stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə wɔɾɝ, bʌt ðə tæsk wɑz bɪɑn hɪm.

Three dozen right in front of him, and that without adding in the sunken wrecks that had salvage boats working over them. Perhaps a seafarer could tell greatship from raker by the tops of masts sticking out of the water, but the task was beyond him.

sʌɾənli ən oʊl mɛmɹi tʌɡd ət hɪm, ʌv leɪɾɪŋ ʃɪps fəɹ ən ətæk fɹəm ðə si, ən haʊ mɛni mɛn kəd bi kɹaʊɾəd ɪndə haʊ mʌtʃ speɪs fəɹ haʊ lɔŋ. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪz mɛmɹi, ɹɪli, fɹəm ən eɪntʃənt wɔɹ bɪtwin fɝɡənsiə ən mɔɹinə, jɛɾ ɪt sim hɪz. ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðəɾ i hæd nɑɾ æktʃəli  lɪvd wʌn ə ðoʊz eɪntʃən bɪts ʌv ʌðɝ mɛnz lɪvz ðət wɝ stʌk ɪn ɪz hɛɾ ɔlweɪz tʊk ɪm ə lɪɾəl baɪ sɝpɹaɪz naʊ, soʊ meɪbi ðeɪ wɝ hɪz, ɪn ə weɪ. ðeɪ wɝ sɝɾənli ʃɑɹpɝ ðən səm stʃɹɛtʃəz ə hɪz oʊn laɪf. ðə vɛsəlz i ɹɪkɔl hæd bɪn smɔlɝ ðən moʊst ɪn ðə hɑɹbɝ, jɛt ðə pɹɪnsəpəlz wɝ ðə seɪm.

Suddenly an old memory tugged at him, of lading ships for an attack from the sea, and how many men could be crowded into how much space for how long. It was not his memory, really, from an ancient war between Fergansea and Moreina, yet it seemed his. Realizing that he had not actually lived one of those ancient bits of other men's lives that were stuck in his head always took him a little by surprise now, so maybe they were his, in a way. They were certainly sharper than some stretches of his own life. The vessels he recalled had been smaller than most in the harbor, yet the principles were the same.

"ðeɪ doʊn əv ɪnʌf ʃɪps," hi mʌɾɝd. ðə sintʃæn hæɾ ivən mɔɹ ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ ðən hæd kʌm hɪɹ, bʌt ðə lɔsəz hɪɹ wɝ səfɪʃən tə meɪk ðə dɪfɝəns.

"They don't have enough ships," he muttered. The Seanchan had even more in Tanchico than had come here, but the losses here were sufficient to make the difference.

"ɪnʌf ʃɪps fəɹ wʌt?" noʊl sɛd. "aɪ nɛvɝ sɔ soʊ mɛni ɪn wʌn pleɪs bɪfɔɹ." ðət wɑz kwaɪɾ ə steɪtmənt, kʌmɪŋ fɹəm hɪm. tə hɪɹ noʊl tɛl ɪt, hi hæd sin ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ən nɪɹli ɔlweɪz bɪɡɝ əɹ ɡɹændɝ ðən wʌt wɑz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz noʊz. bæk hoʊm, ðeɪ wʊɾə sɛɾ i kɛp taɪt pɝs-stʃɹɪŋz ɑn ðə tʃɹuθ.

"Enough ships for what?" Noal said. "I never saw so many in one place before." That was quite a statement, coming from him. To hear Noal tell it, he had seen everything, and nearly always bigger or grander than what was in front of his nose. Back home, they would have said he kept tight purse-strings on the truth.

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ðeɪ doʊn əv ɪnʌf ʃɪps lɛf tə teɪk əm ɔl bæk hoʊm."

Mat shook his head. "They don't have enough ships left to take them all back home."

"wi doʊn əv tə ɡoʊ hoʊm," ə wʊmən dʒɹɔl bɪhaɪn hɪm. "wiv kʌm hoʊm." hi dɪd nɑt kwaɪt dʒʌmp ət ðə slɝd sintʃæn æksɛnt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə nɪɹ θɪŋ bɪfɔɹ i ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd u wɑz spikɪŋ.

"We don't have to go home," a woman drawled behind him. "We've come home." He did not quite jump at the slurred Seanchan accent, but it was a near thing before he recognized who was speaking.

ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz skaʊlɪŋ, hɝ aɪz laɪk blu dæɡɝz, bʌt nɑt fəɹ hɪm. ət list, hi θɔt nɑt. ʃi wɑz tɔl ən lin, wɪð ə hɑɹd feɪs ðət wɑz peɪl skɪn dɪspaɪɾ ə laɪf ət si. hɝ ɡɹin dʒɹɛs wɑz bɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə tɪŋkɝ, əɹ kloʊs tə ɪt, ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð ə mæs ə taɪni jɛloʊ ən waɪt blɑsəmz ɑn ðə haɪ nɛk ən daʊn ðə slivz. ə flaʊɝd skɑɹf taɪd taɪtli ʌndɝ əɹ tʃɪn hɛld ə lɔŋ blæk wɪɡ ɑn əɹ hɛd, spɪlɪŋ hæfweɪ daʊn əɹ bæk ən oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ʃi heɪɾəd ðə skɑɹf ən ðə dʒɹɛs, wɪtʃ dɪd nɑt kwaɪt fɪt, bʌɾ əɹ hænz tʃɛkt ɛvɹi ʌðɝ mɪnət tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə wɪɡ wɑz stʃɹeɪt.

Egeanin was scowling, her eyes like blue daggers, but not for him. At least, he thought not. She was tall and lean, with a hard face that was pale skinned despite a life at sea. Her green dress was bright enough for a Tinker, or close to it, and embroidered with a mass of tiny yellow and white blossoms on the high neck and down the sleeves. A flowered scarf tied tightly under her chin held a long black wig on her head, spilling halfway down her back and over her shoulders. She hated the scarf and the dress, which did not quite fit, but her hands checked every other minute to make sure the wig was straight.

ðət kənsɝn əɹ mɔɹ ðən əɹ kloʊðz, ðoʊ kənsɝn wɑz nɑt nɪɹli ə stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf wɝd.

That concerned her more than her clothes, though concern was not nearly a strong enough word.

ʃi hæɾ oʊnli saɪɾ oʊvɝ kʌɾɪŋ əɹ lɔŋ fɪŋɡɝneɪlz ʃɔɹt, bʌt ʃi ɔlmoʊs hæɾ ə fɪt, ɹɛd-feɪst ən pɑp-aɪd, wən i toʊld əɹ ʃi mʌst ʃeɪv əɹ hɛd kəmplitli. ðə weɪ hɝ hɛɹ hæd bɪn kʌt bɪfɔɹ, ʃeɪvd əbʌv əɹ ɪɹz wɪð oʊnli ə boʊl-laɪk kæp ən ə waɪd ʃoʊldɝ-lɛŋθ teɪl ɪn ðə bæk ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ, ʃaʊɾəd ðət ʃi wɑz ə ðə sintʃæn blʌd, ə lɛsɝ noʊbəl. ivən sʌmwʌn u hæd nɛvɝ leɪɾ aɪz ɑn ə sintʃæn wʊɾə ɹɪmɛmbɝd siɪŋ hɝ. ʃi hæɾ əɡɹid, ɹɪlʌktənli, bʌɾ æftɝwɝdz ʃi wɑz kloʊs tə hɪstɛɹɪkəl əntɪl ʃi wɑz eɪbəl tə kʌvɝ əɹ skælp. nɑt fəɹ ðə ɹizənz moʊst wɪmən wʊɾə ɡɔn oʊvɝ ðə mun, ðoʊ. noʊ, əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, oʊnli ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli ʃeɪv ðɛɹ hɛdz. mɛn u wɛn bɔl bɪɡæn wɛɹɪŋ wɪɡz əz sun əz ðɛɹ hɛɹ stɑɹɾəd fɔlɪŋ aʊt tə ɛni noʊɾəsəbəl dɪɡɹi. ɛdʒiənɪn wʊɾə daɪd bɪfɔɹ lɛɾɪŋ ɛniwʌn θɪŋk ʃi wɑz pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bɪlɔŋ tə ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli, ivən pipəl u wəd nɛvɝ əv hæd ðə θɔɾ ɪn ðɛɹ lɪvz. wɛl, ðət sɔɹɾ ə pɹitɛns dɪd kæɹi ə dɛθ pɛnəlti əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, bʌɾ i wəd nɛvɝ əv bɪlivd ʃi wəd ɡoʊ ɑn əbaʊɾ ɪt soʊ. wʌt wɑz wʌn mɔɹ dɛθ pɛnəlti wən jəɹ nɛk wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi biɪŋ stʃɹɛtʃt fəɹ ði æks? ðə stʃɹæŋɡəlɪŋ kɔɹd, ɪn əɹ keɪs. ðə nus wəd bi fəɹ hɪm.

She had only sighed over cutting her long fingernails short, but she almost had a fit, red-faced and pop-eyed, when he told her she must shave her head completely. The way her hair had been cut before, shaved above her ears with only a bowl-like cap and a wide shoulder-length tail in the back remaining, shouted that she was of the Seanchan Blood, a lesser noble. Even someone who had never laid eyes on a Seanchan would have remembered seeing her. She had agreed, reluctantly, but afterwards she was close to hysterical until she was able to cover her scalp. Not for the reasons most women would have gone over the moon, though. No, among the Seanchan, only the Imperial family shaved their heads. Men who went bald began wearing wigs as soon as their hair started falling out to any noticeable degree. Egeanin would have died before letting anyone think she was pretending to belong to the Imperial family, even people who would never have had the thought in their lives. Well, that sort of pretense did carry a death penalty among the Seanchan, but he would never have believed she would go on about it so. What was one more death penalty when your neck was already being stretched for the axe? The strangling cord, in her case. The noose would be for him.

slɪpɪŋ ðə hæf-dʒɹɔn naɪf bæk ʌp ɪz lɛf sliv, hi slɪd daʊn fɹəm ðə boʊldɝ. hi lændəd pʊɹli ən ɔlmoʊs fɛl, bɛɹli haɪɾɪŋ ə wɪns ət ðə stæbɪŋ dʒɑɹ tə hɪz hɪp. hi dɪd haɪɾ ɪt, ðoʊ. ʃi wɑz ə noʊbəlwʊmən ən ə ʃɪp kæptən, ən ʃi meɪɾ ɪnʌf tʃɹaɪz ət teɪkɪŋ tʃɑɹdʒ wɪθaʊɾ ɪm ʃoʊɪŋ ɛni mɔɹ wiknəs tə ɡɪv əɹ ən oʊpənɪŋ ðən i hæd tə. ʃi hæd kʌm tə hɪm fəɹ hɛlp, nɑt ði ʌðɝ weɪ ɹaʊnd, bʌt ðət bʌɾɝd noʊ bɹɛd wɪð hɝ. linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə boʊldɝ wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz foʊldəd, hi pɹitɛndəɾ i wɑz laʊnʒɪŋ, aɪdli kɪkɪŋ ət tʌfs ə dɛd ɡɹæs tə wɝk ðə peɪn aʊt. ðət wɑz ʃɑɹp ɪnʌf tə pʊt swɛɾ ɑn ɪz fɔɹhɛd dɪspaɪt ðə koʊld wɪnd. fliɪŋ ɪn ðət stɔɹm hæd kɑst ɪm ɡɹaʊnd wɪð ɪz hɪp, ən i hæd nɑt meɪɾ ɪɾ ʌp jɛt.

Slipping the half-drawn knife back up his left sleeve, he slid down from the boulder. He landed poorly and almost fell, barely hiding a wince at the stabbing jar to his hip. He did hide it, though. She was a noblewoman and a ship captain, and she made enough tries at taking charge without him showing any more weakness to give her an opening than he had to. She had come to him for help, not the other way round, but that buttered no bread with her. Leaning against the boulder with his arms folded, he pretended he was lounging, idly kicking at tufts of dead grass to work the pain out. That was sharp enough to put sweat on his forehead despite the cold wind. Fleeing in that storm had cost him ground with his hip, and he had not made it up yet.

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ əbaʊt ðə si foʊk?" hi æsk hɝ. noʊ pɔɪn ɪn mɛnʃənɪŋ ðə læk ə ʃɪps əɡɛn.

"Are you sure about the Sea Folk?" he asked her. No point in mentioning the lack of ships again.

tu mɛni sintʃæn sɛtlɝz hæd spɹɛɾ aʊt fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ ɛniweɪ, ən əpɛɹənli ivən mɔɹ fɹəm tæntʃəkoʊ. haʊɛvɝ mɛni ʃɪps ðeɪ hæd, noʊ paʊɝ ɑn ɝθ wəɾ ɛvɝ ɹuɾ ɔl ðə sintʃæn aʊt, naʊ.

Too many Seanchan settlers had spread out from Ebou Dar anyway, and apparently even more from Tanchico. However many ships they had, no power on earth would ever root all the Seanchan out, now.

ɹitʃɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə wɪɡ əɡɛn, ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, fɹaʊnɪŋ əɾ əɹ ʃɔɹt fɪŋɡɝneɪlz, ən ɪnstɛd tʌkt əɹ hænz ʌndɝ əɹ ɑɹmz. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ðɛm?" ʃi nu hi hæd bɪn bɪhaɪn ðə wɪndfɪndɝz'

Reaching toward the wig again, she hesitated, frowning at her short fingernails, and instead tucked her hands under her arms. "What about them?" She knew he had been behind the Windfinders'

bɹeɪk fəɹ fɹiɾəm, bʌt niðɝ ə ðɛm hæd mɛnʃən ɪt spəsɪfɪkli. ʃi ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪd tə əvɔɪd tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ði æθɑn maɪɹ. kwaɪɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ɔl ðə sʌŋkən ʃɪps ən dɛd, fɹiɪŋ deɪmeɪn wɑz ənʌðɝ dɛθ pɛnəlti tʃɑɹdʒ, ən dɪsɡʌstɪŋ bɪsaɪdz, ɪn ðə sintʃæn vju, əz bæɾ əz ɹeɪp əɹ məlɛstɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən.

break for freedom, but neither of them had mentioned it specifically. She always tried to avoid talking about the Atha'an Miere. Quite aside from all the sunken ships and dead, freeing damane was another death penalty charge, and disgusting besides, in the Seanchan view, as bad as rape or molesting children.

ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi hæd hɛlp fɹi səm deɪmeɪn hɝsɛlf, ðoʊ tə hɝ weɪ ʌv lʊkɪŋ, ðət wɑz əmʌŋ ðə list ə hɝ kɹaɪmz. stɪl, ʃi əvɔɪɾəd ðət tɑpɪk, tu. ðəɹ wɝ kwaɪɾ ə fju sʌbʒɪkts ʃi hɛl saɪlən ɑn.

Of course, she had helped free some damane herself, though to her way of looking, that was among the least of her crimes. Still, she avoided that topic, too. There were quite a few subjects she held silent on.

"ɑɹ jə sɝɾən əbaʊt ðə wɪndfɪndɝz u wɝ kɑt? aɪv hɝd tɔk əbaʊt kʌɾɪŋ ɔf hænz, əɹ fit." mæt swɑloʊɾ ə saʊɝ teɪst. hi hæd sin mɛn daɪ, hæd kɪl mɛn wɪð ɪz oʊn hænz.

"Are you certain about the Windfinders who were caught? I've heard talk about cutting off hands, or feet." Mat swallowed a sour taste. He had seen men die, had killed men with his own hands.

ðə laɪt sɛn ɪm mɝsi, hi hæd kɪld ə wʊmən, wʌns! nɑɾ ivən ðə dɑɹkəst ə ðoʊz ʌðɝ mɛnz mɛmɹiz bɝn soʊ hɑɾ əz ðæt, ən ə fju ʌv ðoʊz wɝ dɑɹk ɪnʌf tə nid dʒɹaʊnɪŋ ɪn waɪn wən ðeɪ floʊɾəd tə ðə sɝfəs. bʌt ðə θɔɾ ə dɪlɪbɝətli kʌɾɪŋ ɔf sʌmbɑɾiz hænz kɝɾəld ɪz stʌmək.

The Light send him mercy, he had killed a woman, once! Not even the darkest of those other men's memories burned so hot as that, and a few of those were dark enough to need drowning in wine when they floated to the surface. But the thought of deliberately cutting off somebody's hands curdled his stomach.

ɛdʒiənɪnz hɛd dʒɝkt, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən i θɔt ʃi wəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ ɪz kwɛstʃən. "tɔk fɹəm ɹɛnə, əl weɪdʒɝ," ʃi sɛd, wɪð ə dɪsmɪsɪv dʒɛstʃɝ. "sʌm sʌldəm tɔk əbaʊt ðət nɑnsɛns tə fɹaɪɾən ɹɪkælsɪtʃɹən deɪmeɪn wən ðəɹ nu-liʃt, bʌt noʊbɑdiz dʌn ɪɾ ɪn, oʊ, sɪks əɹ sɛvən hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. nɑt mɛni, ɛniweɪ, ən pipəl u kæn kəntʃɹoʊl ðɛɹ pɹɑpɝɾi wɪθaʊtmjuɾəleɪʃənɑɹ siməsiv tə stɑɹt." hɝ maʊθ twɪstəɾ ɪn loʊθɪŋ, ðoʊ wɛðɝ fəɹ mjuɾəleɪʃən əɹ siməsiv wɑz ənklɪɹ.

Egeanin's head jerked, and for a moment he thought she would ignore his question. "Talk from Renna, I'll wager," she said, with a dismissive gesture. "Some sul'dam talk about that nonsense to frighten recalcitrant damane when they're new-leashed, but nobody's done it in, oh, six or seven hundred years. Not many, anyway, and people who can't control their property without...mutilation...are sei'mosiev to start." Her mouth twisted in loathing, though whether for mutilation or sei'mosiev was unclear.

"ʃeɪmd əɹ nɑt, ðeɪ də ɪt," hi snæpt. siməsiv wɛn bɪɑn biɪŋ ʃeɪmd, tə ə sintʃæn, bʌɾ i daʊɾɪd ðəɾ ɛniwʌn u dɪlɪbɝətli kʌɾ ɔf ə wʊmənz hæn kəd bi hjumɪlieɪɾɪd ɪnʌf tə kɪl ðɛmsɛlvz. "ɪz sjuɹɔθ wʌn ə ðət 'nɑt mɛni?'"

"Shamed or not, they do it," he snapped. Sei'mosiev went beyond being shamed, to a Seanchan, but he doubted that anyone who deliberately cut off a woman's hand could be humiliated enough to kill themselves. "Is Suroth one of that 'not many?'"

ðə sintʃæn wʊmən ɡlɛɹd tə mætʃ ɪz ən plæntəɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd wɪð əɹ fiɾ əstʃɹaɪɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ ɑn ðə dɛk ʌv ə ʃɪp ən əbaʊt tə bɪɹeɪɾ ə fʌmbəl-wɪɾɪd seɪlɝ. "ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ dʌzn oʊn ðiz deɪmeɪn, jə lʌmp-bɹeɪn fɑɹmɝ! ðəɹ pɹɑpɝɾi ʌv ði ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ. sjuɹɔθ maɪɾ əz wɛl slɪɾ əɹ oʊn ɹɪsts stʃɹeɪɾəweɪ əz ɔɹɾɝ sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðət fəɹ ɪmpɪɹiəl deɪmeɪn. ðæts ivən ɪf ʃi wʊd; aɪv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə hɝ mɪstʃɹiɾɪŋ əɹ oʊn. əl tʃɹaɪ tə pʊt ðɪs ɪn tɝmz jə kən ʌndɝstænd. ɪf jəɹ dɔɡ ɹʌnz əweɪ, jə doʊn meɪm ɪt. jə swɪtʃ ðə dɔɡ soʊ ɪt noʊz nɑt tə də ðəɾ əɡɛn, ən jə pʊɾ ɪt bæk ɪn ðə kɛnəl. bɪsaɪdz, deɪmeɪn ɑɹ dʒʌs tu "

The Seanchan woman glared to match his and planted her fists on her hips, leaning forward with her feet astride as though she were on the deck of a ship and about to berate a fumble-witted sailor. "The High Lady Suroth doesn't own these damane, you lump-brained farmer! They're property of the Empress, may she live forever. Suroth might as well slit her own wrists straightaway as order something like that for Imperial damane. That's even if she would; I've never heard of her mistreating her own. I'll try to put this in terms you can understand. If your dog runs away, you don't maim it. You switch the dog so it knows not to do that again, and you put it back in the kennel. Besides, damane are just too "

"tu væljəbəl," mæt fɪnɪʃt fəɹ əɹ dʒɹɪli. hi hæd hɝd ðət tɪl i wɑz sɪk ʌv ɪt.

"Too valuable," Mat finished for her drily. He had heard that till he was sick of it.

ʃi dɪsɹɪɡɑɹɾɪd ɪz sɑɹkæzəm, əɹ meɪbi dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs. ɪn ɪz ɪkspɪɹiəns, ɪf ə wʊmən dɪd nɑt wɑnə hɪɹ sʌmθɪŋ, ʃi kəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ ɪt tɪl jə jɝsɛlf stɑɹɾəd tə daʊt jə hæd spoʊkən. "jɔɹ faɪnəli bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ʌndɝstænd," ʃi dʒɹɔld, nɑɾɪŋ. "ðoʊz deɪmeɪn jəɹ soʊ wɝiɾ əbaʊt pɹɑbli doʊn ivən əv wɛls lɛf baɪ ðɪs taɪm." hɝ ɡeɪz wɛn tə ðə ʃɪps ɪn ðə hɑɹbɝ, ən sloʊli tʊk ɑn ə lʊk ə lɔs, meɪd dipɝ baɪ ðə hɑɹdnəs ə hɝ feɪs. hɝ θʌmz ɹæn əkɹɔs əɹ fɪŋɡɝtɪps. "ju wʊdn bɪliv wʌt maɪ deɪmeɪn kɑs mi," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə kwaɪət vɔɪs, "hɝ ən haɪɹɪŋ ðə sʌldəm fəɹ hɝ. wɝθ ɛvɹi θɹoʊn aɪ peɪd, ʌv kɔɹs. hɝ neɪmz sɛɹisə. wɛl-tʃɹeɪnd, ɹɪspɑnsɪv. ʃɪl ɡɔɹdʒ hɝsɛlf ɑn hʌnid nʌts, ɪf jə lɛt hɝ, bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ ɡɛts sisɪk əɹ ðə sʌlks, ðə weɪ səm du. ə pɪɾi aɪ hæd tə liv əɹ ɪn kæntʃɹɪn. aɪ səpoʊz əl nɛvɝ si hɝ əɡɛn." ʃi saɪd ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli.

She disregarded his sarcasm, or maybe did not notice. In his experience, if a woman did not want to hear something, she could ignore it till you yourself started to doubt you had spoken. "You're finally beginning to understand," she drawled, nodding. "Those damane you're so worried about probably don't even have welts left by this time." Her gaze went to the ships in the harbor, and slowly took on a look of loss, made deeper by the hardness of her face. Her thumbs ran across her fingertips. "You wouldn't believe what my damane cost me," she said in a quiet voice, "her and hiring the sul'dam for her. Worth every throne I paid, of course. Her name's Serrisa. Well-trained, responsive. She'll gorge herself on honeyed nuts, if you let her, but she never gets seasick or the sulks, the way some do. A pity I had to leave her in Cantorin. I suppose I'll never see her again." She sighed regretfully.

"aɪm ʃʊɹ ʃi mɪsəz jə əz mʌtʃ əz jə mɪs hɝ," noʊl sɛd, flæʃɪŋ ə ɡæp-tuθ smaɪl, ən fəɹ ɔl ðə wɝld, hi saʊndəd sənsɪɹ. meɪbi hi wɑz. hi kəntɛndɪd ðəɾ i hæd sin wɝs ðən deɪmeɪn ən dækoʊvæl, fəɹ wʌt ðət wɑz wɝθ.

"I'm sure she misses you as much as you miss her," Noal said, flashing a gap-toothed smile, and for all the world, he sounded sincere. Maybe he was. He contended that he had seen worse than damane and da'covale, for what that was worth.

ɛdʒiənɪnz bæk stɪfənd, ən ʃi fɹaʊn əz ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪz sɪmpəθi. əɹ ɛls ʃi hæd dʒʌst ɹilaɪz haʊ ʃi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ʃɪps ɪn ðə hɑɹbɝ. sɝɾənli, ʃi tɝn əweɪ fɹəm ðə wɔɾɝ vɛɹi dɪlɪbɝətli. "aɪ ɡeɪv ɔɹɾɝz ðət noʊ wʌn wɑz tə liv ðə wæɡənz," ʃi sɛd fɝmli. laɪkli, kɹumɪn ɑn əɹ ʃɪps hæd dʒʌmpt ət ðət toʊn. ʃi dʒɝkt əɹ hɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ əz ðoʊ ʃi ɪkspɛktəd mæt ən noʊl tə dʒʌmp wɛɹ ʃi ɪndəkeɪɾəd, tu.

Egeanin's back stiffened, and she frowned as if she did not believe his sympathy. Or else she had just realized how she was staring at the ships in the harbor. Certainly, she turned away from the water very deliberately. "I gave orders that no one was to leave the wagons," she said firmly. Likely, crewmen on her ships had jumped at that tone. She jerked her head away from the river as though she expected Mat and Noal to jump where she indicated, too.

"dɪd ju, naʊ?" mæt ɡɹɪnd, ʃoʊɪŋ əɹ tiθ. hi kəd mænədʒ ən ɪnsələnt ɡɹɪn ðət sɛn moʊs pʌft-ʌp fulz ɪndə æpəplɛksi. ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm ə ful, moʊs taɪmz, bʌt pʌft-ʌp ʃi wɑz.

"Did you, now?" Mat grinned, showing her teeth. He could manage an insolent grin that sent most puffed-up fools into apoplexy. Egeanin was far from a fool, most times, but puffed-up she was.

ʃɪp kæptən ən noʊbəlwʊmən. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɪtʃ wɑz wɝs. bɑ fəɹ boʊθ! "wɛl, aɪ wɑz əbaʊt ɹɛɾi tə hɛd ðət weɪ. ənlɛs jəɹ nɑt dʌn fɪʃɪŋ, noʊl. wi kən weɪt hɪɹ ə waɪl, ɪf jəɹ nɑt." bʌt ði oʊl mæn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɛmptiɪŋ ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ sɪlvɝ-ɡɹeɪ mɪnoʊz aʊɾ ə hɪz bæskəɾ ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝ. hɪz hænz hæd bɪn bɹoʊkən bædli, meɪbi mɔɹ ðən wʌns baɪ ðɛɹ lʌmpi əpɪɹəns, jɛt ðeɪ wɝ dɛft ɪn waɪndɪŋ ɪz laɪn ɝaʊn ðə bæmbu poʊl. ɪn ðə ʃɔɹt taɪm i hæd bɪn fɪʃɪŋ, hi hæd kɑt nɪɹli ə dʌzən fɪʃ, ðə lɑɹdʒəs lɛs ðən ə fʊt lɔŋ, stʃɹʌŋ θɹu ðə ɡɪlz ɑn ə lupt ɹid, ən i muv ðoʊz tə ðə bæskət bɪfɔɹ pɪkɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp. hi kleɪm ðəɾ ɪf i kəd faɪn ðə ɹaɪt pɛpɝz, hi wɑz gɑnə meɪk ə fɪʃ stu  fɹəm ʃɑɹə, ʌv ɔl pleɪsəz! əz wɛl seɪ fɹəm ðə mun!  ə stu ðət wəd meɪk mæt fɝɡɛɾ ɔl əbaʊɾ ɪz hɪp. ðə weɪ noʊl wɛn ɑn əbaʊt ðə pɛpɝz, mæt səspɛktəɾ ɛni fɝɡɛɾɪŋ wəd bi kəz i wɑz foʊkəst ɑn faɪndɪŋ ɪnʌf eɪl tə kul ɪz tʌŋ.

Ship captain and noblewoman. He did not know which was worse. Bah for both! "Well, I was about ready to head that way. Unless you're not done fishing, Noal. We can wait here a while, if you're not." But the old man was already emptying the remaining silver-gray minnows out of his basket into the water. His hands had been broken badly, maybe more than once by their lumpy appearance, yet they were deft in winding his line around the bamboo pole. In the short time he had been fishing, he had caught nearly a dozen fish, the largest less than a foot long, strung through the gills on a looped reed, and he moved those to the basket before picking it up. He claimed that if he could find the right peppers, he was going to make a fish stew  from Shara, of all places! As well say from the moon!  a stew that would make Mat forget all about his hip. The way Noal went on about the peppers, Mat suspected any forgetting would be because he was focused on finding enough ale to cool his tongue.

ɛdʒiənɪn, weɪɾɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃənli, wɑz peɪɪŋ noʊ ətɛnʃən tə mæts ɡɹɪn, iðɝ, soʊ hi slɪpt ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn hɝ. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ hɛɾɪŋ bæk, ðeɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl ɡɛt stɑɹɾəd. ʃi nɑkt ɪz hæn əweɪ fɹəm əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ðə wʊmən meɪd səm meɪɾən æns i hæd noʊn lʊk laɪk tævɝn ɡɝlz.

Egeanin, waiting impatiently, was paying no attention to Mat's grin, either, so he slipped an arm around her. If they were heading back, they might as well get started. She knocked his hand away from her shoulder. The woman made some maiden aunts he had known look like tavern girls.

"wɝ səpoʊz tə bi lʌvɝz, jə ən aɪ," hi ɹimaɪndəd hɝ.

"We're supposed to be lovers, you and I," he reminded her.

"ðɛɹz noʊbɑdi hɪɹ tə si," ʃi ɡɹaʊld.

"There's nobody here to see," she growled.

"haʊ mɛni taɪmz də aɪ hæv tə tɛl ju, laɪlwɪn?" ðət wɑz ðə neɪm ʃi wɑz juzɪŋ. ʃi kleɪmd ɪt wɑz tæɹɑbənɝ. əɾ ɛni ɹeɪt, ɪt dɪd nɑt saʊn sintʃæn. "ɪf wi doʊn ivən hoʊl hænz ənlɛs wi si sʌmbɑɾi wɑtʃɪŋ, wɝ gɑnə lʊk ə pɹɪɾi stʃɹeɪnʒ pɛɹ ə lʌvɝz tə ɛnibəɾi wi doʊn si."

"How many times do I have to tell you, Leilwin?" That was the name she was using. She claimed it was Taraboner. At any rate, it did not sound Seanchan. "If we don't even hold hands unless we see somebody watching, we're going to look a pretty strange pair of lovers to anybody we don't see."

ʃi snɔɹɾɪd ɪn dɝɪʒən, jɛt ʃi lɛɾ ɪm pʊɾ ɪz ɑɹm bæk ɝaʊn hɝ, ən slɪp hɝz ɝaʊn hɪm. bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə wɔɹnɪŋ stɛɹ ət ðə seɪm taɪm.

She snorted in derision, yet she let him put his arm back around her, and slipped hers around him. But she gave him a warning stare at the same time.

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. ʃi wɑz kɹeɪzi əz ə spɹɪŋ hɛɹ ɪf ʃi θɔɾ i ɛndʒɔɪd ðɪs. moʊst wɪmən hæɾ ə lɪɾəl pæɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ mʌsəlz, ət lis ðə wɪmən i laɪkt, bʌt hʌɡɪŋ ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz laɪk hʌɡɪŋ ə fɛns poʊst. ɔlmoʊst əz hɑɹd, ən dɛfənətli əz stɪf. hi kəd nɑt pʌzəl aʊt wʌt doʊmən sɔ ɪn hɝ. meɪbi ʃi hæd nɑt ɡɪvən ði ɪliɑnɝ ɛni tʃɔɪs. ʃi hæd bɑt ðə mæn, æftɝ ɔl, seɪm əz baɪɪŋ ə hɔɹs. bɝn mi, əl nɛvɝ ʌndɝstæn ðiz sintʃæn, hi θɔt. nɑt ðəɾ i wɑntəd tə. ði oʊnli θɪŋ wɑz, hi hæd tə.

Mat shook his head. She was crazy as a spring hare if she thought he enjoyed this. Most women had a little padding over their muscles, at least the women he liked, but hugging Egeanin was like hugging a fence post. Almost as hard, and definitely as stiff. He could not puzzle out what Domon saw in her. Maybe she had not given the Illianer any choice. She had bought the man, after all, same as buying a horse. Burn me, I'll never understand these Seanchan, he thought. Not that he wanted to. The only thing was, he had to.

əz ðeɪ wɝ tɝnɪŋ əweɪ, hi tʊk wʌn læst ɡlæns bæk ət ðə hɑɹbɝ, ən ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt i hæd nɑt. tu smɔl seɪlɪŋ kɹæf bɹoʊk θɹu ə waɪd wɔl ə mɪs ðət wɑz dʒɹɪftɪŋ sloʊli daʊn ðə hɑɹbɝ.

As they were turning away, he took one last glance back at the harbor, and almost wished he had not. Two small sailing craft broke through a wide wall of mist that was drifting slowly down the harbor.

dʒɹɪftɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɪnd. taɪm tə bi ɡɔn ən pæs taɪm.

Drifting against the wind. Time to be gone and past time.

ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən tu maɪlz fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ tə ðə ɡɹeɪt nɔɹθ ɹoʊd, əkɹɔs ɹoʊlɪŋ kʌntʃɹisaɪd kʌvɝɾ ɪn wɪntɝ-bɹaʊn ɡɹæsəz ən widz ən dɑɾəd wɪð klʌmps ə vaɪn-tæŋɡəl bʊʃəz tu θɪk tə pʊʃ θɹu ivən wɪð moʊst ə ðə livz ɡɔn. ðə ɹaɪzəz hɑɹdli dɪzɝv ðə neɪm ə hɪl, nɑt fəɹ ɛniwʌn u hæd klaɪmd ɪn ðə sæn hɪlz ən ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst əz ə bɔɪ  ðəɹ wɝ ɡæps ɪn ɪz oʊn mɛmɹiz, bʌt mæt kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ səm ə ðæt  jɛt bɪfɔɹ lɔŋ, hi wɑz ɡlæɾ i hæɾ ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn sʌmbɑɾi. hi hæd sæt moʊʃənləs ɑn ðət blʌɾi ɹɑk fəɹ tu lɔŋ. ðə θɹəb ɪn ɪz hɪp hæd feɪɾəd tə ə dʌl eɪk, bʌɾ ɪt stɪl meɪɾ ɪm lɪmp, ən wɪθaʊt səm sɔɹɾ ə səpɔɹt, hi wʊɾə bɪn stæɡɝɪŋ ɑn ðə sloʊps. nɑt ðəɾ i lin ɑn ɛdʒiənɪn, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt hoʊldɪŋ ɑn hɛlp stɛɾi hɪm.

It was better than two miles from the river to the Great North Road, across rolling countryside covered in winter-brown grasses and weeds and dotted with clumps of vine-tangled bushes too thick to push through even with most of the leaves gone. The rises hardly deserved the name of hill, not for anyone who had climbed in the Sand Hills and the Mountains of Mist as a boy  there were gaps in his own memories, but Mat could remember some of that  yet before long, he was glad he had an arm around somebody. He had sat motionless on that bloody rock for too long. The throb in his hip had faded to a dull ache, but it still made him limp, and without some sort of support, he would have been staggering on the slopes. Not that he leaned on Egeanin, of course, but holding on helped steady him.

ðə wʊmən fɹaʊn əɾ ɪm əz ðoʊ ʃi θɔɾ i wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə teɪk ædvæntɪdʒ.

The woman frowned at him as though she thought he were trying to take advantage.

"ɪf jə dɪɾ əz jə wɝ toʊld," ʃi ɡɹaʊld, "aɪ wʊdnt nid tə kæɹi ju." hi ʃoʊɾ ɪz tiθ əɡɛn, ðɪs taɪm nɑt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsɡaɪz ɪɾ əz ə smaɪl. ðə weɪ noʊl skæmpɝɾ əlɔŋ bɪsaɪɾ əm izəli, nɛvɝ mɪsɪŋ ə stɛp dɪspaɪt bælənsɪŋ ɪz bæskəɾ ə fɪʃ ɑn ɪz hɪp wɪð wʌn hæn ən kæɹiɪŋ ɪz fɪʃɪŋ poʊl ɪn ði ʌðɝ, wɑz ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ. fəɹ ɔl i lʊk hɑɹd-wɔɹn, ði oʊl mæn wɑz spɹaɪ ɪnʌf. tu spɹaɪ baɪ hæf, ət taɪmz.

"If you did as you were told," she growled, "I wouldn't need to carry you." He showed his teeth again, this time not trying to disguise it as a smile. The way Noal scampered along beside them easily, never missing a step despite balancing his basket of fish on his hip with one hand and carrying his fishing pole in the other, was embarrassing. For all he looked hard-worn, the old man was spry enough. Too spry by half, at times.

ðɛɹ ɹut slæntəd nɔɹθ ə ðə sɝkəɾ ə hɛvən, wɪð ɪts lɔŋ, oʊpən-ɛndəd tiɹz ə pɑlɪʃt stoʊn sits wɛɹ, ɪn wɔɹmɝ wɛðɝ, wɛlθi peɪtʃɹənz sæɾ ɑn kʊʃənz bɪniθ kʌlɝfəl kænvəs ɔnɪŋz tə wɑtʃ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ɹeɪs. naʊ, ði ɔnɪŋz ən poʊlz wɝ stoʊɾ əweɪ, ðə hɔɹsəz ɔl ɪn ðɛɹ kʌntʃɹi steɪbəlz, ðoʊz ðə sintʃæn hæd nɑt teɪkən, ən ðə sits wɝ ɛmpti seɪv fəɹ ə hændfʊl ə smɔl bɔɪz dɑɹɾɪŋ ʌp ən daʊn ðə tiɹz ɪn ə ɡeɪm ə kip-əweɪ. mæt wɑz fɑn ə hɔɹsəz, ən ɹeɪsɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz slɪd pæs ðə sɝkət təwɔɹɾ ɛbu dɑɹ. wɛnɛvɝ i tɑpt ə ɹaɪz, ðə sɪɾiz mæsɪv waɪt ɹæmpɑɹts wɝ vɪzəbəl, dip ɪnʌf ðət ðeɪ səpɔɹɾəd ə ɹoʊɾ ɛnsɝkəlɪŋ ðə sɪɾi ɑn tɑp, ən lʊkɪŋ ɡeɪv ɪm ən ɪkskjus tə pɔz ə moʊmənt. ful wʊmən! ə skɹæp ʌv ə lɪmp dɪd nɑt min ʃi wɑz kæɹiɪŋ hɪm! hi mænədʒ tə kip ə ɡʊd tɛmpɝ, teɪk ðə ɹʌf wɪð ðə smuð ən noʊ kəmpleɪnɪŋ. waɪ kəd ʃi nɑt?

Their route slanted north of the Circuit of Heaven, with its long, open-ended tiers of polished stone seats where, in warmer weather, wealthy patrons sat on cushions beneath colorful canvas awnings to watch their horses race. Now, the awnings and poles were stowed away, the horses all in their country stables, those the Seanchan had not taken, and the seats were empty save for a handful of small boys darting up and down the tiers in a game of keep-away. Mat was fond of horses, and racing, but his eyes slid past the Circuit toward Ebou Dar. Whenever he topped a rise, the city's massive white ramparts were visible, deep enough that they supported a road encircling the city on top, and looking gave him an excuse to pause a moment. Fool woman! A scrap of a limp did not mean she was carrying him! He managed to keep a good temper, take the rough with the smooth and no complaining. Why could she not?

ɪnsaɪd ðə sɪɾi waɪt ɹufs ən wɔlz, waɪt doʊmz ən spaɪɹz, ɹɪŋd ɪn θɪn bænz ə kʌlɝ, ɡlimd ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ mɔɹnɪŋ laɪt, ə pɪktʃɝ ə sɝɛnəɾi. hi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt ðə ɡæps wɛɹ bɪldɪŋz hæd bɝn tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ə lɔŋ laɪn ə fɑɹmɝz' haɪ-wild ɑks-kɑɹts wɑz tʃɹʌnlɪŋ θɹu ðə waɪɾ ɑɹtʃt ɡeɪtweɪ ðəɾ oʊpən ɑn ðə ɡɹeɪt nɔɹθ ɹoʊd, mɛn ən wɪmən ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə ðə sɪɾi mɑɹkəts wɪð wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ hæd lɛf tə sɛl ðɪs leɪɾ ɪn wɪntɝ, ən ɪn ðɛɹ mɪdst ə mɝtʃəns tʃɹeɪn ə bɪɡ, kænvəs-tɑpt wæɡənz bɪhaɪn sɪks ən eɪt-hɔɹs timz, kæɹiɪŋ ɡʊdz fɹəm ðə laɪt nu wɛɹ. sɛvən mɔɹ tʃɹeɪnz, ɹeɪnʒɪŋ fɹəm fɔɹ wæɡənz tə tɛn, stʊɾ ɪn laɪn ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd tə weɪt fəɹ ðə ɡeɪtɛɡɑɹdz tə fɪnɪʃ ðɛɹ ɪnspɛkʃənz. tʃɹeɪd nɛvɝ stɑpt ɪntaɪɝli waɪl ðə sʌn ʃoʊn, noʊ mæɾɝ u ɹuld ə sɪɾi, ənlɛs ðəɹ wɑz æktʃəwəl faɪɾɪŋ. səmtaɪmz ɪt dɪd nɑt stɑp kəmplitli ðɛn. ðə stʃɹim ə pipəl floʊɪŋ ði ʌðɝ weɪ wɑz moʊsli sintʃæn, soʊlʒɝz ɪn ɔɹɾɝd ɹæŋks wɪð ðɛɹ sɛɡmɛntɪɾ ɑɹmɝ peɪntəɾ ɪn stʃɹaɪps ən hɛlməts ðət lʊk laɪk ðə hɛdz ə hjudʒ ɪnsɛks, səm mɑɹtʃɪŋ ən səm maʊntəd, noʊbəlz u wɝ ɔlweɪz maʊntəd, wɛɹɪŋ ɔɹneɪt kloʊks, pliɾɪd ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛsəz ən leɪs veɪlz, əɹ vəlumənəs tʃɹaʊzɝz ən lɔŋ koʊts. sintʃæn sɛtlɝz wɝ stɪl dɪpɑɹɾɪŋ ðə sɪɾi, tu, wæɡən əpɑn wæɡən fɪld wɪð fɑɹmɝz ən kɹæfsmən ən ðə tulz ə ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪdz. ðə sɛtlɝz hæd bɪɡʌn livɪŋ əz sun əz ðeɪ keɪm ɔf ðə ʃɪps, bʌɾ ɪt wəd bi wiks bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ɡɔn. ɪt wɑz ə pisfəl sin, wɝkədeɪ ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi ɪf jə ɪɡnɔɹd wʌt leɪ bɪhaɪn ɪt, jɛɾ ɛvɹi taɪm ðeɪ ɹitʃt ə pleɪs wɛɹ i kəd si ðə ɡeɪts, hɪz maɪn flæʃt bæk tə sɪks naɪts əɡoʊ, ən i wɑz ðəɹ əɡɛn, ət ðoʊz seɪm ɡeɪts.

Inside the city white roofs and walls, white domes and spires, ringed in thin bands of color, gleamed in the gray morning light, a picture of serenity. He could not make out the gaps where buildings had burned to the ground. A long line of farmers' high-wheeled ox-carts was trundling through the wide arched gateway that opened on the Great North Road, men and women on their way to the city markets with whatever they had left to sell this late in winter, and in their midst a merchant's train of big, canvas-topped wagons behind six and eight-horse teams, carrying goods from the Light knew where. Seven more trains, ranging from four wagons to ten, stood in line at the side of the road to wait for the gateguards to finish their inspections. Trade never stopped entirely while the sun shone, no matter who ruled a city, unless there was actual fighting. Sometimes it did not stop completely then. The stream of people flowing the other way was mostly Seanchan, soldiers in ordered ranks with their segmented armor painted in stripes and helmets that looked like the heads of huge insects, some marching and some mounted, nobles who were always mounted, wearing ornate cloaks, pleated riding dresses and lace veils, or voluminous trousers and long coats. Seanchan settlers were still departing the city, too, wagon upon wagon filled with farmers and craftsmen and the tools of their trades. The settlers had begun leaving as soon as they came off the ships, but it would be weeks before they were all gone. It was a peaceful scene, workaday and ordinary if you ignored what lay behind it, yet every time they reached a place where he could see the gates, his mind flashed back to six nights ago, and he was there again, at those same gates.

ðə stɔɹm hæd ɡɹoʊn wɝs əz ðeɪ kɹɔs ðə sɪɾi fɹəm ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs. ɹeɪn fɛl baɪ bʌkəts, paʊndɪŋ ðə dɑɹkən sɪɾi ən slɪkɪŋ ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ʌndɝ ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz, ən wɪn haʊld ɔf ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ðə ɹeɪn laɪk stoʊnz fɹəm slɪŋz ən dʒɝkɪŋ ət kloʊks soʊ ðət kipɪŋ əɾ ɔl dʒɹaɪ wɑz ə lɔs kɑz. klaʊdz hɪd ðə mun, ən ðə dɛljudʒ sim tə soʊk ʌp ðə laɪɾ ə ðə poʊl-læntɝnz kæɹid baɪ blɹɪk ən fɛn, ɑn fʊɾ əhɛɾ ə ðə ɹɛst. ðən ðeɪ ɛntɝd ðə lɔŋ pæsədʒweɪ θɹu ðə sɪɾi wɔl, ən ɡeɪn ə bɪɾ ə ʃɛltɝ, ət lis fɹəm ðə ɹeɪn. ðə wɪn meɪd ðə haɪ-silɪŋɡd tʌnəl kin laɪk ə flut. ðə ɡeɪt ɡɑɹdz wɝ weɪɾɪŋ dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə pæsədʒ, fɔɹ ə ðɛm ɔlsoʊ bɛɹɪŋ poʊl-læntɝnz. ə dʌzən mɔɹ, hæf ə ðɛm sintʃæn, kæɹid hælbɝdz ðət kəd stʃɹaɪk əɾ ə mæn ɪn ðə sæɾəl əɹ pʊl ɪm aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. tu sintʃæn wɪð ðɛɹ hɛlməts ɔf wɝ piɹɪŋ fɹəm ðə laɪɾəd dɔɹweɪ ʌv ðə ɡɑɹdhaʊs bɪlt ɪndə ðə waɪt-plæstɝd wɔl, ən ʃɪftɪŋ ʃædoʊz bɪhaɪn əm toʊld ʌv ʌðɝz ɪnsaɪd. tu mɛni tə faɪt pæs kwaɪətli, meɪbi tu mɛni tə faɪt pæst əɾ ɔl. nɑt wɪθaʊɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɡoʊɪŋ ɔf laɪk ən ɪluməneɪɾɝz faɪɝwɝk bɝstɪŋ ɪn ɪz hænd.

The storm had grown worse as they crossed the city from the Tarasin Palace. Rain fell by buckets, pounding the darkened city and slicking the paving stones under the horses' hooves, and wind howled off the Sea of Storms, driving the rain like stones from slings and jerking at cloaks so that keeping at all dry was a lost cause. Clouds hid the moon, and the deluge seemed to soak up the light of the pole-lanterns carried by Blaeric and Fen, on foot ahead of the rest. Then they entered the long passageway through the city wall, and gained a bit of shelter, at least from the rain. The wind made the high-ceilinged tunnel keen like a flute. The gate guards were waiting just inside the far end of the passage, four of them also bearing pole-lanterns. A dozen more, half of them Seanchan, carried halberds that could strike at a man in the saddle or pull him out of it. Two Seanchan with their helmets off were peering from the lighted doorway of the guardhouse built into the white-plastered wall, and shifting shadows behind them told of others inside. Too many to fight past quietly, maybe too many to fight past at all. Not without everything going off like an Illuminator's firework bursting in his hand.

ðə ɡɑɹdz wɝ nɑt ðə deɪnʒɝ, ɛniweɪ, nɑt ðə meɪn deɪnʒɝ. ə tɔl, plʌmp-feɪst wʊmən ɪn dɑɹk blu, hɝ dɪvaɪɾəd æŋkəl-lɛŋθ skɝts bɛɹɪŋ ɹɛd pænəlz wɝkt wɪð sɪlvɝ laɪtnɪŋ boʊls, stɛpt pæs ðə mɛn ɪn ðə ɡɑɹdhaʊs dɔɹ. ə lɔŋ sɪlvɝi mɛɾəl liʃ wɑz kɔɪld ɪn ðə sʌldəmz lɛf hænd, ðə fɹi ɛn kənɛktɪŋ əɹ tə ðə ɡɹeɪɪŋ wʊmən ɪn ə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛs u fɑloʊɾ əɹ aʊt wɪð ən iɡɝ ɡɹɪn. mæt hæd noʊn ðeɪ wəd bi ðɛɹ. ðə sintʃæn hæd sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn əɾ ɔl ðə ɡeɪts, naʊ. ðəɹ kəɾ ivən bi ənʌðɝ pɛɹ ɪnsaɪd, əɹ tu. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt min tə lɛt wʌn wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl ɪskeɪp ðɛɹ nɛts. ðə sɪlvɝ fɑkshɛd mədæljən bɪniθ ɪz ʃɝt leɪ koʊld əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst; nɑt ðə koʊl ðət sɪɡnəl sʌmwʌn ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə sɔɹs nɪɹbaɪ, dʒʌs ði əkjumjəleɪɾəd tʃɪl ə ðə naɪɾ ən ɪz flɛʃ tu aɪsi tə wɔɹm ɪt, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt stɑp weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ði ʌðɝ. laɪt, hi wɑz dʒʌɡəlɪŋ faɪɹwɝks tənaɪt, wɪð ðə fjuzəz lɪt!

The guards were not the danger, anyway, not the main danger. A tall, plump-faced woman in dark blue, her divided ankle-length skirts bearing red panels worked with silver lightning bolts, stepped past the men in the guardhouse door. A long silvery metal leash was coiled in the sul'dam's left hand, the free end connecting her to the graying woman in a dark gray dress who followed her out with an eager grin. Mat had known they would be there. The Seanchan had sul'dam and damane at all the gates, now. There could even be another pair inside, or two. They did not mean to let one woman who could channel escape their nets. The silver foxhead medallion beneath his shirt lay cold against his chest; not the cold that signaled someone embracing the Source nearby, just the accumulated chill of the night and his flesh too icy to warm it, but he could not stop waiting for the other. Light, he was juggling fireworks tonight, with the fuses lit!

ðə ɡɑɹdz maɪɾ əv bɪn pʌzəl baɪ ə noʊbəlwʊmən livɪŋ ɛbu dɑɹ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪɾ ən ðət wɛðɝ, wɪð oʊvɝ ə dʌzən sɝvəns ən stʃɹɪŋz ə pækhɔɹsɪz ɪndəkeɪɾɪŋ ə dʒɝni ʌv səm dɪstəns, bʌɾ ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz ə ðə blʌd, hɝ kloʊk ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn ən iɡəl wɪð spɹɛd blæk-ænd-waɪt wɪŋz, ən lɔŋ fɪŋɡɝz ɑn əɹ ɹɛd ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌvz tə əkɑmədeɪɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝneɪlz. ɔɹɾənɛɹi soʊlʒɝz dɪd nɑt kwɛstʃən wʌt ðə blʌd tʃoʊz tə du, ivən ðə loʊ blʌd. wɪtʃ dɪd nɑt min ðəɹ wɝ noʊ fɔɹmæləɾiz. ɛniwʌn wɑz fɹi tə liv ðə sɪɾi wən ðeɪ wɪʃt, bʌt ðə sintʃæn ɹəkɔɹɾəd ðə muvmən ə deɪmeɪn, ən θɹi ɹoʊɾ ɪn ði ɑntʊɹɑʒ, hɛdz daʊn ən feɪsəz kʌvɝd baɪ ðə hʊdz ə ðɛɹ ɡɹeɪ kloʊks, itʃ lɪŋk tə ə maʊntəd sʌldəm baɪ ðə sɪlvɝi lɛŋθ ʌv ən æɾəm.

The guards might have been puzzled by a noblewoman leaving Ebou Dar in the middle of the night and that weather, with over a dozen servants and strings of packhorses indicating a journey of some distance, but Egeanin was of the Blood, her cloak embroidered in an eagle with spread black-and-white wings, and long fingers on her red riding gloves to accommodate her fingernails. Ordinary soldiers did not question what the Blood chose to do, even the low Blood. Which did not mean there were no formalities. Anyone was free to leave the city when they wished, but the Seanchan recorded the movement of damane, and three rode in the entourage, heads down and faces covered by the hoods of their gray cloaks, each linked to a mounted sul'dam by the silvery length of an a'dam.

ðə plʌmp-feɪst sʌldəm wɔk baɪ ðɛm wɪð bɛɹli ə ɡlæns, stʃɹoʊlɪŋ daʊn ðə tʌnəl. hɝ deɪmeɪn pɪɹɾ ɪntɛnli əɾ ɛvɹi wʊmən ðeɪ pæst, ðoʊ, sɛnsɪŋ wɛðɝ ʃi kəd tʃænəl, ən mæt hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ wən ʃi pɔz bɪsaɪd ðə læs maʊntəd deɪmeɪn wɪð ə slaɪt fɹaʊn. ivən wɪð ɪz lʌk, hi wəd nɑt bɛɾ əɡɛns ðə sintʃæn ɹɛkəɡnaɪzɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪz eɪdʒləs feɪs ɪf ðeɪ lʊkt ɪnsaɪd ðət hʊd. ðəɹ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ hɛld əz deɪmeɪn, bʌt wʌt wɝ ði ɑdz ðəɾ ɔl θɹi ʌv ɛdʒiənɪnz wəd bi? laɪt, wʌt wɝ ði ɑdz wʌn ə ðə loʊ blʌd wəɾ oʊn θɹi?

The plump-faced sul'dam walked by them with barely a glance, strolling down the tunnel. Her damane peered intently at every woman they passed, though, sensing whether she could channel, and Mat held his breath when she paused beside the last mounted damane with a slight frown. Even with his luck, he would not bet against the Seanchan recognizing an Aes Sedai's ageless face if they looked inside that hood. There were Aes Sedai held as damane, but what were the odds that all three of Egeanin's would be? Light, what were the odds one of the low Blood would own three?

ðə plʌmp-feɪst wʊmən meɪɾ ə klɪkɪŋ saʊnd, əz jə maɪt tə ə pɛt dɔɡ, ən twɪtʃt ði æɾəm, ən ðə deɪmeɪn fɑloʊɾ əɹ ɑn. ðeɪ wɝ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mɛɹəθdəmeɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪskeɪp ðə liʃ, nɑt deɪmeɪn. mæt stɪl θɔɾ i maɪt tʃoʊk. ðə saʊn ə daɪs ɹoʊlɪŋ hæd stɑɹɾəd ʌp əɡɛn ɪn ɪz hɛd, laʊɾ ɪnʌf tə ɹaɪvəl ði əkeɪʒənəl ɹʌmbəl ə dɪstən θʌndɝ. sʌmθɪŋ wɑz gɑnə ɡoʊ ɹɔŋ; hi nu ɪt.

The plump-faced woman made a clicking sound, as you might to a pet dog, and twitched the a'dam, and the damane followed her on. They were looking for marath'damane trying to escape the leash, not damane. Mat still thought he might choke. The sound of dice rolling had started up again in his head, loud enough to rival the occasional rumble of distant thunder. Something was going to go wrong; he knew it.

ði ɔfəsɝ ə ðə ɡɑɹdz, ə bɝli sintʃæn wɪð tɪltəɾ aɪz laɪk ə sɑldəiən bʌɾ ə peɪl hʌni-bɹaʊn skɪn, baʊd kɔɝɾiəsli ən ɪnvaɪɾəd ɛdʒiənɪn ɪndə ðə ɡɑɹdhaʊs, tə hæv ə kʌp ə spaɪst waɪn waɪl ə klɝk ɹoʊt daʊn ði ɪnfɝmeɪʃən əbaʊt ðə deɪmeɪn. ɛvɹi ɡɑɹdhaʊs mæt hæɾ ɛvɝ sin wɑz ə stɑɹk pleɪs, jɛt ðə læmplaɪt ɡloʊɪŋ ɪn ði æɹoʊslɪts meɪd ðɪs wʌn sim ɔlmoʊst ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ. ə pɪtʃɝplæn pɹɑbli lʊkt ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ tə ə flaɪ, tu. hi hæd bɪn ɡlæɾ ə ðə ɹeɪn dʒɹɪpɪŋ fɹəm ðə hʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊk ən ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn ɪz feɪs. ɪt dɪsɡaɪz ðə swɛɾ ə nɝvz. hi hɛld wʌn ə hɪz θɹoʊɪŋ naɪvz, ɹɛstɪŋ flæɾ ətɑp ðə lɔŋ bʌndəl dʒɹeɪpt ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz sæɾəl. laɪɪŋ flæt laɪk ðæt, nʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz ʃəd noʊɾəs. hi kəd fil ðə wʊmən ɪnsaɪd ðə klɔθ bɹiðɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz hænz, ən ɪz ʃoʊldɝz wɝ nɑɾɪd fɹəm weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ əɹ tə kɹaɪ aʊt fəɹ hɛlp. sɪlutʃə kɛpt əɹ maʊn kloʊs tə hɪm, piɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm fɹəm ðə ʃɛltɝ ə hɝ hʊd wɪð əɹ ɡoʊldən bɹeɪd tʌkt aʊɾ ə saɪt, nɛvɝ ivən ɡlænsɪŋ əweɪ wən ðə sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn wɔk baɪ. ə ʃaʊt fɹəm sɪlutʃə wʊɾə pʊt ðə wizəl ɪn ðə tʃɪkən ɹʌn əz mʌtʃ əz wʌn fɹəm tuɑn. hi θɔt ðə θɹɛɾ ə ðə naɪf hæd hɛl boʊθ wɪmən saɪlənt  ðeɪ hæd tə bɪliv i wɑz dɛspɹɪɾ ɪnʌf əɹ kɹeɪzi ɪnʌf tə juz ɪt  bʌɾ i stɪl kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ. ðəɹ wɑz soʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt naɪɾ i kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ ʌv, soʊ mʌtʃ ɔf-bæləns ən əskju.

The officer of the guards, a burly Seanchan with tilted eyes like a Saldaean but a pale honey-brown skin, bowed courteously and invited Egeanin into the guardhouse, to have a cup of spiced wine while a clerk wrote down the information about the damane. Every guardhouse Mat had ever seen was a stark place, yet the lamplight glowing in the arrowslits made this one seem almost inviting. A pitcherplant probably looked inviting to a fly, too. He had been glad of the rain dripping from the hood of his cloak and running down his face. It disguised the sweat of nerves. He held one of his throwing knives, resting flat atop the long bundle draped in front of his saddle. Lying flat like that, none of the soldiers should notice. He could feel the woman inside the cloth breathing under his hands, and his shoulders were knotted from waiting for her to cry out for help. Selucia kept her mount close to him, peering at him from the shelter of her hood with her golden braid tucked out of sight, never even glancing away when the sul'dam and damane walked by. A shout from Selucia would have put the weasel in the chicken run as much as one from Tuon. He thought the threat of the knife had held both women silent  they had to believe he was desperate enough or crazy enough to use it  but he still could not be sure. There was so much about night he could not be sure of, so much off-balance and askew.

hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd hoʊldɪŋ ɪz bɹɛθ, wʌndɝɪŋ wən sʌmwʌn wəd noʊɾəs ðət ðə bʌndəl i kæɹid wɑz ɹɪtʃli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ən kwɛstʃən waɪ hi wɑz lɛɾɪŋ ɪt ɡɛt soʊkt wɪð ɹeɪn, wʌndɝɪŋ ən kɝsɪŋ hɪmsɛlf fəɹ ɡɹæbɪŋ ə wɔlhænʒɪŋ kəz ɪt hæd bɪn kloʊz tə hænd. ɪn mɛmɹi, ɛvɹiθɪŋ sloʊd. ɛdʒiənɪn stɛp daʊn, tɔsɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz tə doʊmən, hu tʊk əm wɪð ə baʊ fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl.

He remembered holding his breath, wondering when someone would notice that the bundle he carried was richly embroidered and question why he was letting it get soaked with rain, wondering and cursing himself for grabbing a wallhanging because it had been close to hand. In memory, everything slowed. Egeanin stepped down, tossing her reins to Domon, who took them with a bow from his saddle.

doʊmənz hʊd wɑz pʊʃt bæk dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə ʃoʊ ðəɾ ɪz hɛd wɑz ʃeɪvd ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ən ɪz ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ hɛɹ ɡæðɝɾ ɪn ə bɹeɪd ðət hʌŋ tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ɹeɪndʒɹɑps dʒɹɪp fɹəm ðə stɑki ɪliɑnɝz ʃɔɹt bɪɹd, jɛɾ i mænədʒ ðə pɹɑpɝ stɪf-nɛkt ɛɹəɡəns ʌv ə sɔɪhɪn, hɝɛɾətɛɹi ʌpɝ sɝvən tə wʌn ə ðə blʌɾ ən ðʌs ɔlmoʊst ikwəl tə ðə blʌd. dɛfənətli haɪɝ ðən ɛni kɑmən soʊlʒɝ. ɛdʒiənɪn ɡlæns bæk təwɔɹd mæt ən ɪz bɝɾən, hɝ feɪs ə fɹoʊzən mæsk ðət kəd pæs fəɹ hoʊtʊɹ ɪf jə dɪd nɑt noʊ ʃi wɑz hɔɹəfaɪd baɪ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ. ðə tɔl sʌldəm ən əɹ deɪmeɪn tɝn bɹɪskli bæk ʌp ðə tʌnəl, fɪnɪʃt wɪð ðɛɹ ɪnspɛkʃən. veɪnɪn, dʒʌs bɪhaɪn mæt liɾɪŋ wʌn ə ðə stʃɹɪŋz ə pækhɔɹsɪz ən əz ɔlweɪz sɪɾɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs laɪk ə sæk ə sut, lin fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl ən spæt. mæt dɪd nɑt noʊ waɪ ðət hʌŋ ɪn ɪz mɛmɹi, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd. veɪnɪn spæt, ən tʃɹʌmpəts saʊndəd, θɪn ən ʃɑɹp ɪn ðə dɪstəns fɑɹ bɪhaɪn ðɛm. fɹəm saʊθ ə ðə sɪɾi, wɛɹ mɛn hæd bɪn plænɪŋ tə faɪɝ sintʃæn səplaɪz stɔɹɾ əlɔŋ ðə beɪ ɹoʊd.

Domon's hood was pushed back just enough to show that his head was shaved on one side and his remaining hair gathered in a braid that hung to his shoulder. Raindrops dripped from the stocky Illianer's short beard, yet he managed the proper stiff-necked arrogance of a so'jhin, hereditary upper servant to one of the Blood and thus almost equal to the Blood. Definitely higher than any common soldier. Egeanin glanced back toward Mat and his burden, her face a frozen mask that could pass for hauteur if you did not know she was horrified by what they were doing. The tall sul'dam and her damane turned briskly back up the tunnel, finished with their inspection. Vanin, just behind Mat leading one of the strings of packhorses and as always sitting his horse like a sack of suet, leaned from his saddle and spat. Mat did not know why that hung in his memory, but it did. Vanin spat, and trumpets sounded, thin and sharp in the distance far behind them. From south of the city, where men had been planning to fire Seanchan supplies stored along the Bay Road.

ði ɔfəsɝ ə ðə ɡɑɹd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ət ðə saʊn ə ðə tʃɹʌmpəts, bʌt sʌɾənli ə bɛl pild laʊdli ɪn ðə sɪɾi ɪtsɛlf, ðən ənʌðɝ, ən ðən ɪt sim hʌnʒɹədz wɝ klæŋɪŋ əlɑɹm ɪn ðə naɪɾ əz ðə blæk skaɪ splɪt wɪð mɔɹ laɪtnɪŋ ðən ɛni stɔɹm hæɾ ɛvɝ bɝθɛd, sɪlvɝ-blu stʃɹiks stæbɪŋ daʊn ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz. ðeɪ beɪðd ðə tʌnəl ɪn flɪkɝɪŋ laɪt. ðət wɑz wən ðə ʃaʊɾɪŋ stɑɹɾəd, əmɪd ði ɪksploʊʒənz bæk ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ən ðə skɹimɪŋ.

The officer of the guard hesitated at the sound of the trumpets, but suddenly a bell pealed loudly in the city itself, then another, and then it seemed hundreds were clanging alarm in the night as the black sky split with more lightning than any storm had ever birthed, silver-blue streaks stabbing down inside the walls. They bathed the tunnel in flickering light. That was when the shouting started, amid the explosions back in the city, and the screaming.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt, mæt hæd kɝs ðə wɪndfɪndɝz fəɹ muvɪŋ sunɝ ðən i hæd bɪn pɹɑməst.

For a moment, Mat had cursed the Windfinders for moving sooner than he had been promised.

bʌt ðə daɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd hæd stɑpt, hi ɹilaɪzd. waɪ? ɪt meɪɾ ɪm wɑnə kɝs ɔl oʊvɝ əɡɛn, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ ivən ðæt. ɪn ðə nɛkst ɪnstən ði ɔfəsɝ wɑz hɝidli ɝdʒɪŋ ɛdʒiənɪn bæk ɪndə hɝ sæɾəl ən ɑn əɹ weɪ, hɝidli ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz tə ðə mɛn bɔɪlɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɑɹdhaʊs, dɝɛktɪŋ wʌn ɪndə ðə sɪɾi əɾ ə ɹʌn tə si wʌt ði əlɑɹm wɑz waɪl i ɝeɪd ðə ɹɛst əɡɛnst ɛni θɹɛt fɹəm ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ aʊt. ðə plʌmp-feɪst wʊmən ɹæn tə pleɪs hɝsɛlf ən əɹ deɪmeɪn wɪð ðə soʊlʒɝz, əlɔŋ wɪð ənʌðɝ pɛɹ ʌv wɪmən lɪŋk baɪ ən æɾəm, hu keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ðə ɡɑɹdhaʊs. ən mæt ən ði ʌðɝz ɡæləpt aʊɾ ɪndə ðə stɔɹm, kæɹiɪŋ wɪð əm θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ, tu ʌv əm ɪskeɪp deɪmeɪn, ən ðə kɪdnæpt ɛɹ tə ðə sintʃæn kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn, waɪl bɪhaɪn əm ə fɑɹ wɝs stɔɹm bɹoʊk oʊvɝ ɛbu dɑɹ. laɪtnɪŋ boʊls mɔɹ numɝəs ðən bleɪdz ʌv ɡɹæs....

But the dice in his head had stopped, he realized. Why? It made him want to curse all over again, but there was no time for even that. In the next instant the officer was hurriedly urging Egeanin back into her saddle and on her way, hurriedly shouting orders to the men boiling out of the guardhouse, directing one into the city at a run to see what the alarm was while he arrayed the rest against any threat from inside or out. The plump-faced woman ran to place herself and her damane with the soldiers, along with another pair of women linked by an a'dam, who came running from the guardhouse. And Mat and the others galloped out into the storm, carrying with them three Aes Sedai, two of them escaped damane, and the kidnaped heir to the Seanchan Crystal Throne, while behind them a far worse storm broke over Ebou Dar. Lightning bolts more numerous than blades of grass....

wɪð ə ʃɪvɝ, mæt pʊl hɪmsɛlf bæk tə ðə pɹɛzənt. ɛdʒiənɪn skaʊld ət hɪm, ən ɡeɪv ɪm ən ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾəd pʊl. "lʌvɝz ɑɹm-ɪn-ɑɹm doʊn hɝi," hi mʌɾɝd. "ðeɪstʃɹoʊl." ʃi snɪɹd. doʊmən hæd tə bi blaɪndɪd baɪ lʌv. ðæt, əɹ i hæd teɪkən tu mɛni θʌmps ɑn ðə hɛd.

With a shiver, Mat pulled himself back to the present. Egeanin scowled at him, and gave him an exaggerated pull. "Lovers arm-in-arm don't hurry," he muttered. "They...stroll." She sneered. Domon had to be blinded by love. That, or he had taken too many thumps on the head.

ðə wɝst wɑz oʊvɝ ən dʌn, ɪn ɛni keɪs. mæt hoʊp ðət ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi hæd bɪn ðə wɝst. hi hæd nɑt fɛl ðə daɪs sɪns. ðeɪ wɝ ɔlweɪz ə bæd saɪn. hɪz bæktʃɹeɪl wɑz əz mʌɾəld əz i kəd mænədʒ, ən i wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wəd teɪk sʌmwʌn əz lʌki əz i tə sɛpɝeɪt ðə ɡoʊl fɹəm ðə dʒɹɔs.

The worst was over and done, in any case. Mat hoped that getting out of the city had been the worst. He had not felt the dice since. They were always a bad sign. His backtrail was as muddled as he could manage, and he was sure it would take someone as lucky as he to separate the gold from the dross.

ðə sikɝz hæd bɪn ɑn ɛdʒiənɪnz sɛn bɪfɔɹ ðət naɪt, ən ʃi wəd bi wɑntəɾ ɑn tʃɑɹdʒəz ə stilɪŋ deɪmeɪn naʊ, əz wɛl, bʌt ði əθɔɹəɾiz wəɾ ɪkspɛkt əɹ tə bi ɹaɪɾɪŋ əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kəɾ ən ɔlɹɛɾi liɡz fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ, nɑt sɪɾɪŋ dʒʌst aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi. nʌθɪŋ ɪksɛpt ə koʊɪnsɪɾəns ə taɪmɪŋ kənɛktəɾ əɹ tə tuɑn. əɹ tə mæt, ən ðət wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. taɪlɪn sɝɾənli wʊɾə lɛvəld əɹ oʊn tʃɑɹdʒəz əɡɛns hɪm  noʊ wʊmən wɑz gɑnə fɝɡɪv ə mæn taɪɪŋ əɹ ʌp ən ʃʌvɪŋ əɹ ʌndɝ ə bɛd, ivən wən ʃi hæd sədʒɛstəɾ ɪt  jɛt wɪð ɛni lʌk, hi wɑz bɪniθ səspɪʃən fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ðət hæd hæpən ðət naɪt. wɪð ɛni lʌk, noʊ wʌn ɪksɛp taɪlɪn hæɾ ə θɔt fəɹ ɪm əɾ ɔl. tʃɹʌsɪŋ ə kwin laɪk ə pɪɡ fəɹ mɑɹkət wəd bi ɪnʌf tə ɡɛɾ ə mæn dɛd juʒəwəli, bʌɾ ɪt hæd tə kaʊn fəɹ moʊldi ʌnjənz əlɔŋsaɪd ðə dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ, ən wʌt kəd taɪlɪnz tɔɪ hæv tə də wɪð ðæt? ɪt stɪl ɪɹəteɪɾəd ɪm ðəɾ i hæd bɪn sin əz ə hæŋɝ-ɑn  wɝs, ə pɛt!  bʌt ðəɹ wɝ ædvæntɪdʒɪz.

The Seekers had been on Egeanin's scent before that night, and she would be wanted on charges of stealing damane now, as well, but the authorities would expect her to be riding as hard as she could and already leagues from Ebou Dar, not sitting just outside the city. Nothing except a coincidence of timing connected her to Tuon. Or to Mat, and that was important. Tylin certainly would have leveled her own charges against him  no woman was going to forgive a man tying her up and shoving her under a bed, even when she had suggested it  yet with any luck, he was beneath suspicion for anything else that had happened that night. With any luck, no one except Tylin had a thought for him at all. Trussing a queen like a pig for market would be enough to get a man dead usually, but it had to count for moldy onions alongside the Daughter of the Nine Moons disappearing, and what could Tylin's Toy have to do with that? It still irritated him that he had been seen as a hanger-on  worse, a pet!  but there were advantages.

hi θɔɾ i wɑz seɪf  fɹəm ðə sintʃæn, ɛniweɪ  jɛt wʌn pɔɪnt wɝiɾ ɪm laɪk ə θɔɹn bɛɹiɾ ɪn ɪz hil. wɛl, sɛvɹəl dɪd, moʊst ɡɹoʊɪŋ aʊɾ ə tuɑn hɝsɛlf, bʌt ðɪs wʌn hæɾ ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli lɔŋ pɔɪnt. tuɑnz dɪsəpɪɹəns ʃʊɾə bɪn əz ʃɑkɪŋ əz ðə sʌn vænɪʃɪŋ ət nun, bʌt noʊ əlɑɹm hæd bɪn ɹeɪzd. nʌn! noʊ ənaʊnsməns ə ɹɪwɔɹdz əɹ ɔfɝz ə ɹænsəm, noʊ hɑt-aɪd soʊlʒɝz sɝtʃɪŋ ɛvɹi wæɡən ən kɑɹt wɪðɪn maɪlz, ɡæləpɪŋ θɹu ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd tə ɹuɾ aʊɾ ɛvɹi kʌbihoʊl ən nɪtʃ wɛɹ ə wʊmən maɪt bi hɪɾən. ðoʊz oʊl mɛmɹiz toʊld ɪm sʌmθɪŋ ə hʌntɪŋ fəɹ kɪdnæpt ɹɔɪəlti, jɛɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə hæŋʒɪŋz ən ðə bɝnd ʃɪps ɪn ðə hɑɹbɝ, fɹəm ði aʊtsaɪɾ ɛbu dɑɹ simd əntʃeɪnʒd fɹəm ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ ðə kɪdnæpɪŋ. ɛdʒiənɪn əlɛdʒ ðət ðə sɝtʃ wəd bi ɪn ʌɾɝ sikɹəsi, ðət mɛni ʌv ðə sintʃæn ðɛmsɛlvz maɪt stɪl nɑt noʊ tuɑn wɑz mɪsɪŋ.

He thought he was safe  from the Seanchan, anyway  yet one point worried him like a thorn buried in his heel. Well, several did, most growing out of Tuon herself, but this one had a particularly long point. Tuon's disappearance should have been as shocking as the sun vanishing at noon, but no alarm had been raised. None! No announcements of rewards or offers of ransom, no hot-eyed soldiers searching every wagon and cart within miles, galloping through the countryside to root out every cubbyhole and niche where a woman might be hidden. Those old memories told him something of hunting for kidnapped royalty, yet except for the hangings and the burned ships in the harbor, from the outside Ebou Dar seemed unchanged from the day before the kidnaping. Egeanin alleged that the search would be in utter secrecy, that many of the Seanchan themselves might still not know Tuon was missing.

hɝ ɛkspləneɪʃən ɪnvɑlv ðə ʃɑk tə ði ɛmpaɪɝ ən ɪl oʊmənz fəɹ ðə ɹɪtɝn ən ðə lɔs ə seɪaɪtɑɹ, ən ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi bɪlivd ɛvɹi wɝd, bʌt mæt ɹəfjuz tə baɪ ə pɛniz wɝθ. ðə sintʃæn wɝ stʃɹeɪnʒ foʊk, bʌt noʊ wʌn kəd bi ðət stʃɹeɪnʒ. ðə saɪləns ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ meɪɾ ɪz skɪn pɹɪkəl. hi fɛlt ə tʃɹæp ɪn ðət saɪləns. wən ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə ɡɹeɪt nɔɹθ ɹoʊd, hi wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl ðət ðə sɪɾi wɑz hɪɾən bɪhaɪn ðə loʊ hɪlz.

Her explanation involved the shock to the Empire and ill omens for the Return and the loss of sei'taer, and she sounded as if she believed every word, but Mat refused to buy a penny's worth. The Seanchan were strange folk, but no one could be that strange. The silence of Ebou Dar made his skin prickle. He felt a trap in that silence. When they reached the Great North Road, he was grateful that the city was hidden behind the low hills.

ðə ɹoʊd wɑz ə bɹɔd haɪweɪ, ə meɪdʒɝ ævənu ʌv tʃɹeɪd, waɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ faɪv əɹ sɪks wæɡənz əbɹɛst ʌnkɹaʊɾəd, wɪð ə sɝfəs ə dɝɾ ən kleɪ ðət hʌnʒɹədz ə jɪɹz ə jus hæd pæk nɪɹli əz hɑɹɾ əz ði əkeɪʒənəl eɪntʃən peɪvɪŋ stoʊn ðət stʌk ən ɛdʒ əɹ kɔɹnɝ ɪntʃəz ɪndə ði ɛɹ. mæt ən ɛdʒiənɪn hɝiɾ əkɹɔs tə ðə vɝdʒ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd wɪð noʊl dɔɡɪŋ ðɛɹ hilz, bɪtwin ə mɝtʃəns tʃɹeɪn ɹʌmbəlɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə sɪɾi, ɡɑɹɾəd baɪ ə skɑɹ-feɪst wʊmən ən tɛn hɑɹd-aɪd mɛn ɪn lɛðɝ vɛsts kʌvɝd wɪð mɛɾəl dɪsks, ən ə stʃɹɪŋ ə ðə sɛtlɝz' ɑdli ʃeɪpt wæɡənz, ɹaɪzɪŋ tə piks ət ði ɛnz, ðət wɝ hɛɾɪŋ nɔɹθ, səm pʊl baɪ hɔɹsəz əɹ mjulz, ʌðɝz baɪ ɑksən. klʌstɝd bɪtwin ðə wæɡənz, bɛɹfʊt bɔɪz juz swɪtʃəz tə hɝd fɔɹ-hɔɹnd ɡoʊts wɪð lɔŋ blæk hɛɹ ən bɪɡ, dulæpt waɪt kaʊz. wʌn mæn ət ðə ɹɪɹ ə ðə wæɡənz, ɪn bæɡi blu bɹitʃɪz ən ə ɹaʊn ɹɛd kæp, wɑz liɾɪŋ ə mæsɪv hʌmp-bæk bʊl baɪ ə θɪk kɔɹd taɪd tə ə ɹɪŋ ɪn ɪts noʊz. ɪksɛp fəɹ ɪz kloʊðz, hi cʊɾə bɪn fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. hi aɪd mæt ən ði ʌðɝz, wɔkɪŋ ɪn ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən, əz ɪf i maɪt spik, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ən plɑɾəd ɑn wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ əɾ əm əɡɛn. kəntɛndɪŋ wɪð mæts lɪmp, ðeɪ wɝ nɑt muvɪŋ fæst, ən ðə sɛtlɝz fɔɹdʒd əhɛd sloʊli bʌt stɛɾəli.

The road was a broad highway, a major avenue of trade, wide enough for five or six wagons abreast uncrowded, with a surface of dirt and clay that hundreds of years of use had packed nearly as hard as the occasional ancient paving stone that stuck an edge or corner inches into the air. Mat and Egeanin hurried across to the verge on the other side with Noal dogging their heels, between a merchant's train rumbling toward the city, guarded by a scar-faced woman and ten hard-eyed men in leather vests covered with metal discs, and a string of the settlers' oddly shaped wagons, rising to peaks at the ends, that were heading north, some pulled by horses or mules, others by oxen. Clustered between the wagons, barefoot boys used switches to herd four-horned goats with long black hair and big, dewlapped white cows. One man at the rear of the wagons, in baggy blue breeches and a round red cap, was leading a massive hump-backed bull by a thick cord tied to a ring in its nose. Except for his clothes, he could have been from the Two Rivers. He eyed Mat and the others, walking in the same direction, as if he might speak, then shook his head and plodded on without looking at them again. Contending with Mat's limp, they were not moving fast, and the settlers forged ahead slowly but steadily.

hʌntʃ-ʃoʊldɝɾ ən klʌtʃɪŋ ðə skɑɹf bɪniθ əɹ tʃɪn wɪð əɹ fɹi hænd, ɛdʒiənɪn lɛɾ aʊɾ ə bɹɛθ ən lusən fɪŋɡɝz ðət hæd bɪɡʌn tə ɡɹɪp mæts saɪɾ ɔlmoʊs peɪnfəli. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd ən ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðə fɑɹmɝz dɪpɑɹɾɪŋ bæk əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ ɹɛɾi tə tʃeɪs æftɝ ɪm ən bɑks ɪz ɪɹz ən ɪz bʊlz. ɪf ðət wɝ nɑt bæɾ ɪnʌf, wʌns ðə fɑɹmɝ wɑz twɛnti əɹ soʊ peɪsɪz əweɪ, ʃi ʃɪftəɾ əɹ skaʊl tə ə kʌmpəni ʌv sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz mɑɹtʃɪŋ daʊn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹoʊɾ əɾ ə peɪs ðət wəd sun oʊvɝteɪk ðə sɛtlɝz, pɝhæps tu hʌnʒɹəd mɛn ɪn ə kɑləm fɔɹ əbɹɛs fɑloʊd baɪ ə mɑtli kəlɛkʃən ə mjul-dʒɹɔn wæɡənz kʌvɝd wɪð taɪtli læʃt kænvəs. ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹoʊd wɑz lɛft fɹi fəɹ mɪlətɛɹi tʃɹæfɪk. hæf ə dʌzən wɛl-maʊntəɾ ɔfəsɝz ɪn θɪn-plum hɛlməts ðət hɪɾ ɔl bʌt ðɛɹ aɪz ɹoʊɾ ət ðə kɑləmz hɛd, lʊkɪŋ niðɝ lɛf nɔɹ ɹaɪt, ɹɛd kloʊks spɹɛd nitli oʊvɝ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz' kɹʌpɝz. ðə bænɝ fɑloʊɪŋ ɑn ði ɔfəsɝz' hilz wɑz mɑɹkt wɪð wʌt lʊk laɪk ə staɪlaɪz sɪlvɝ æɹoʊhɛd, əɹ meɪbi ən æŋkɝ, kɹɔs baɪ ə lɔŋ æɹoʊ ən ə dʒæɡd laɪtnɪŋ boʊlt ɪn ɡoʊld, wɪð skɹɪpt ən numɝəlz bɪloʊ ðət mæt kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ əz ɡʌsts swɛp ðə bænɝ ðɪs weɪ ən ðæt. ðə mɛn ɑn ðə səplaɪ wæɡənz wɔɹ dɑɹk blu koʊts ən bɹitʃɪz ən skwɛɹ ɹɛd-ænd-blu kæps, bʌt ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ ivən mɔɹ ʃoʊi ðən moʊst sintʃæn, ðɛɹ sɛɡmɛntɪɾ ɑɹmɝ stʃɹaɪpt ɪn blu bændɪɾ ət ðə bɑɾəm wɪð sɪlvɝi waɪɾ ən ɹɛd bændɪd wɪð ɡoʊldən jɛloʊ, ðɛɹ hɛlməts peɪntəɾ ɪn ɔl fɔɹ kʌlɝz soʊ ðeɪ ɹɪzɛmbəl ðə feɪsəz ə fɪɹsəm spaɪɾɝz. ə lɑɹdʒ bædʒ wɪð ði æŋkɝ  mæt θɔɾ ɪt mʌs bi ən æŋkɝ  ən æɹoʊ ən laɪtnɪŋ wɑz fæsən tə ðə fɹʌn ʌv itʃ hɛlmət, ən ɛvɹi mæn ɪksɛp ði ɔfəsɝz kæɹiɾ ə dʌbəl-kɝv baʊ əɾ ɪz saɪd, wɪð ə bɹɪsəlɪŋ kwɪvɝ əɾ ɪz bɛl bælənsɪŋ ə ʃɔɹt-sɔɹd.

Hunch-shouldered and clutching the scarf beneath her chin with her free hand, Egeanin let out a breath and loosened fingers that had begun to grip Mat's side almost painfully. After a moment, she straightened and glared at the farmer's departing back as though she were ready to chase after him and box his ears and his bull's. If that were not bad enough, once the farmer was twenty or so paces away, she shifted her scowl to a company of Seanchan soldiers marching down the middle of the road at a pace that would soon overtake the settlers, perhaps two hundred men in a column four abreast followed by a motley collection of mule-drawn wagons covered with tightly lashed canvas. The middle of the road was left free for military traffic. Half a dozen well-mounted officers in thin-plumed helmets that hid all but their eyes rode at the column's head, looking neither left nor right, red cloaks spread neatly over their horses' cruppers. The banner following on the officers' heels was marked with what looked like a stylized silver arrowhead, or maybe an anchor, crossed by a long arrow and a jagged lightning bolt in gold, with script and numerals below that Mat could not make out as gusts swept the banner this way and that. The men on the supply wagons wore dark blue coats and breeches and square red-and-blue caps, but the soldiers were even more showy than most Seanchan, their segmented armor striped in blue banded at the bottom with silvery white and red banded with golden yellow, their helmets painted in all four colors so they resembled the faces of fearsome spiders. A large badge with the anchor  Mat thought it must be an anchor  and arrow and lightning was fastened to the front of each helmet, and every man except the officers carried a double-curve bow at his side, with a bristling quiver at his belt balancing a short-sword.

"ʃɪps ɑɹtʃɝz," ɛdʒiənɪn ɡɹʌmbəld, ɡlaʊɝɪŋ ət ðə soʊlʒɝz. hɝ fɹi hæn hæd lɛft əɹ skɑɹf, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl klɛntʃt ɪn ə fɪst. "tævɝn bɹɔlɝz. ðeɪ ɔlweɪz kɑz pɹɑbləmz wən ðəɹ lɛft əʃɔɹ tu lɔŋ."

"Ship's archers," Egeanin grumbled, glowering at the soldiers. Her free hand had left her scarf, but it was still clenched in a fist. "Tavern brawlers. They always cause problems when they're left ashore too long."

ðeɪ hæɾ ə wɛl-tʃɹeɪn lʊk, tə mæt. ɛniweɪ, hi hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə soʊlʒɝz u dɪd nɑt ɡɛɾ ɪn faɪts, ɪspɛʃli wən ðeɪ wɝ dʒɹʌŋk əɹ bɔɹd, ən bɔɹd soʊlʒɝz tɛndəd tə ɡɛt dʒɹʌŋk. ə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz maɪnd wʌndɝd haʊ fɑɹ ðoʊz baʊz wəd kæɹi, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ən æbsən θɔt. hi wɑntəd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɛni sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz. ɪf i hæɾ ɪz weɪ, hi wəɾ əv nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɛni soʊlʒɝz ɛvɝ əɡɛn.

They had a well-trained look, to Mat. Anyway, he had never heard of soldiers who did not get in fights, especially when they were drunk or bored, and bored soldiers tended to get drunk. A corner of his mind wondered how far those bows would carry, but it was an absent thought. He wanted nothing to do with any Seanchan soldiers. If he had his way, he would have nothing to do with any soldiers ever again.

bʌɾ ɪz lʌk nɛvɝ ɹæn ðət fɑɹ, ɪt simd. feɪɾ ən lʌk wɝ dɪfɹənt, ənfɔɹtʃənətli. tu hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz ət moʊst, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd. ə ɡʊd kɹɔsboʊ wəɾ aʊɾɝeɪndʒ ðɛm, əɹ ɛni tu ɹɪvɝz baʊ.

But his luck never ran that far, it seemed. Fate and luck were different, unfortunately. Two hundred paces at most, he decided. A good crossbow would outrange them, or any Two Rivers bow.

"wɝ nɑɾ ɪn ə tævɝn," hi sɛd θɹu hɪz tiθ, "æn ðəɹ nɑt bɹɔlɪŋ naʊ. soʊ lɛts nɑt stɑɹt wʌn dʒʌs kəz jə wɝ əfɹeɪɾ ə fɑɹmɝ wəd spik tə ju." hɝ dʒɔ sɛt, ən ʃi ʃɑɾ ɪm ə lʊk hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə kɹæk ɪz skʌl. ɪt wɑz ðə tʃɹuθ, ðoʊ. ʃi wɑz fɪɹfəl ʌv oʊpənɪŋ əɹ maʊθ nɪɹ ɛniwʌn u maɪt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz əɹ æksɛnt. ə waɪz pɹikɔʃən, ɪn ɪz bʊk, bʌɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ sim tə ɡɹeɪɾ ət hɝ. "wil əv ə bænɝmən oʊvɝ hɪɹ æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz ɪf jə kip ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət ðɛm. wɪmən ɝaʊn ɛbu dɑɹ ɑɹ feɪməs fəɹ biɪŋ dɪmjʊɹ," hi laɪd. wʌt kəd ʃi noʊ ʌv loʊkəl kʌstəmz?

"We're not in a tavern," he said through his teeth, "and they're not brawling now. So let's not start one just because you were afraid a farmer would speak to you." Her jaw set, and she shot him a look hard enough to crack his skull. It was the truth, though. She was fearful of opening her mouth near anyone who might recognize her accent. A wise precaution, in his book, but everything seemed to grate at her. "We'll have a bannerman over here asking questions if you keep glaring at them. Women around Ebou Dar are famous for being demure," he lied. What could she know of local customs?

ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ fɹaʊn  meɪbi ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɪɡjɝ aʊt wʌt dɪmjʊɹ mɛnt  bʌt ʃi stɑpt ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ ət ði ɑɹtʃɝz. ʃi dʒʌs lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə baɪɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə hɪt.

She gave him a sidelong frown  maybe she was trying to figure out what demure meant  but she stopped grimacing at the archers. She just looked ready to bite instead of hit.

"ðæt fɛloʊz dɑɹk əz ən æθɑn maɪɹ," noʊl mʌɾɝd æbsənli, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə pæsɪŋ soʊlʒɝz. "dɑɹk əz ə ʃɝən. bʌɾ aɪd swɛɹ hiz blu aɪz. aɪv sin ðə laɪk bɪfɔɹ, bʌt wɛɹ?" tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹʌb ɪz tɛmpəlz, hi ɔlmoʊst stʃɹʌk hɪmsɛlf ɑn ðə hɛd wɪð ðə bæmbu fɪʃɪŋ poʊl, ən i tʊk ə stɛp əz ðoʊ hi mɛn tə æsk ðə fɛloʊ wɛɹ i hæd bɪn bɔɹn.

"That fellow's dark as an Atha'an Miere," Noal muttered absently, staring at the passing soldiers. "Dark as a Sharan. But I'd swear he has blue eyes. I've seen the like before, but where?" Trying to rub his temples, he almost struck himself on the head with the bamboo fishing pole, and he took a step as though he meant to ask the fellow where he had been born.

wɪð ə lɝtʃ, mæt kɑt ði oʊl mænz sliv. "wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ bæk tə ðə ʃoʊ, noʊl. naʊ. wi ʃəd nɛvɝ əv lɛft."

With a lurch, Mat caught the old man's sleeve. "We're going back to the show, Noal. Now. We should never have left."

"aɪ toʊl jə ðæt," ɛdʒiənɪn sɛd wɪð ə ʃɑɹp nɑd.

"I told you that," Egeanin said with a sharp nod.

mæt ɡɹoʊnd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪt bʌt tə kip wɔkɪŋ. oʊ, ɪt wɑz weɪ pæs taɪm tə bi ɡɔn. hi oʊnli hoʊpt i hæd nɑt lɛft ɪt tu leɪt.

Mat groaned, but there was nothing for it but to keep walking. Oh, it was way past time to be gone. He only hoped he had not left it too late.

tʃæptɝ tu

CHAPTER 2

tu kæptənz əbaʊt tu maɪlz nɔɹθ ə ðə sɪɾi ə waɪd blu bænɝ stʃɹɛtʃt bɪtwin tu tɔl poʊlz ɹɪpəld ɪn ðə wɪnd, pɹoʊkleɪmɪŋ vɑlən lukəz ɡɹæn tʃɹævlɪŋ ʃoʊ ən mæɡnɪfəsən dɪspleɪ ʌv mɑɹvəlz ən wʌndɝz ɪn bɹɪljən ɹɛd lɛɾɝz lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə bi ɹɛd fɹəm ðə ɹoʊd, pɝhæps ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz ist. fəɹ ðoʊz əneɪbəl tə ɹid, ɪɾ ət list ɪndəkeɪɾəd ðə loʊkeɪʃən ə sʌmθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi. ðɪs wɑz ðə lɑɹdʒəs tʃɹævlɪŋ ʃoʊ ɪn ðə wɝld, soʊ ðə bænɝ kleɪmd. lukə kleɪmd ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni θɪŋz, bʌt mæt θɔɾ i mʌs bi tɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ əbaʊt ðæt. ðə ʃoʊz kænvəs wɔl, tɛn fit haɪ ən taɪtli pɛɡd ət ðə bɑɾəm, ɛnkloʊzd əz mʌtʃ ɡɹaʊn əz ə ɡʊd-saɪz vɪlədʒ. ðə pipəl stʃɹimɪŋ baɪ lʊk təwɔɹd ðə bænɝ kjʊɹiəsli, bʌt ðə fɑɹmɝz ən mɝtʃəns hæd ðɛɹ wɝk əhɛɾ ə ðɛm ən ðə sɛtlɝz ðɛɹ fjutʃɝ, ən nʌn tɝn əsaɪd. θɪk ɹoʊps fæsən tə poʊsts sɛɾ ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɝ mɛn tə hɝd kɹaʊdz tə ðə waɪd, ɑɹtʃt ɛntʃɹəns dʒʌs bɪhaɪn ðə bænɝ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn weɪɾɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ɪn, nɑɾ ət ðɪs aʊɝ. ʌv leɪt, fju keɪm əɾ ɛni aʊɝ.

Two Captains About two miles north of the city a wide blue banner stretched between two tall poles rippled in the wind, proclaiming Valan Luca's Grand Traveling Show and Magnificent Display of Marvels and Wonders in brilliant red letters large enough to be read from the road, perhaps a hundred paces east. For those unable to read, it at least indicated the location of something out of the ordinary. This was The Largest Traveling Show in the World, so the banner claimed. Luca claimed a great many things, but Mat thought he must be telling the truth about that. The show's canvas wall, ten feet high and tightly pegged at the bottom, enclosed as much ground as a good-sized village. The people streaming by looked toward the banner curiously, but the farmers and merchants had their work ahead of them and the settlers their future, and none turned aside. Thick ropes fastened to posts set in the ground were meant to herd crowds to the wide, arched entrance just behind the banner, but there was no one waiting to get in, not at this hour. Of late, few came at any hour.

ðə fɔl ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ hæd bɹɔɾ oʊnli ə slaɪt dʒɹɑp ɪn ətɛndəns, wʌns pipəl ɹilaɪz ðə sɪɾi wəd nɑt bi luɾəd ən ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ əv tə fli fəɹ ðɛɹ laɪvz, bʌt wɪð ðə ɹɪtɝn, ɔl ðoʊz ʃɪps ən sɛtlɝz, nɪɹli ɛvɹiwʌn dɪsaɪɾɪd tə hoʊld ɑn tə ðɛɹ kɔɪn əɡɛns mɔɹ pɹɛsɪŋ nidz. tu bʌlki mɛn, hʌɾəlɪŋ ɪn kloʊks ðət maɪɾ əv kʌm fɹəm ə ɹæɡbæɡ, wɝ ɑn duɾi bɪniθ ðə bænɝ tə kip aʊɾ ɛniwʌn u wɑntəd tə pik ɝaʊnd wɪθaʊt peɪɪŋ, bʌɾ ivən ðoʊz wɝ ɪn ʃɔɹt səplaɪ, naʊədeɪz. ðə pɛɹ, wʌn wɪð ə kɹʊkəd noʊz əbʌv ə θɪk mʌstæʃ ən ði ʌðɝ mɪsɪŋ ən aɪ, wɝ skwɑɾɪŋ ɑn ðə dɝt, tɔsɪŋ daɪs.

The fall of Ebou Dar had brought only a slight drop in attendance, once people realized the city would not be looted and they did not have to flee for their lives, but with the Return, all those ships and settlers, nearly everyone decided to hold on to their coin against more pressing needs. Two bulky men, huddling in cloaks that might have come from a ragbag, were on duty beneath the banner to keep out anyone who wanted to peek around without paying, but even those were in short supply, nowadays. The pair, one with a crooked nose above a thick mustache and the other missing an eye, were squatting on the dirt, tossing dice.

sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, pɛtʃɹə ænhɪl, ðə ʃoʊz stʃɹɔŋmæn, stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ ðə tu hɔɹs-hænlɝz pleɪ, ɑɹmz lɑɹdʒɝ ðən moʊs mɛnz lɛɡz foʊldəɾ əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst. hi wɑz ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən mæt, bʌɾ ət lis twaɪs əz waɪd, hɪz ʃoʊldɝz stʃɹeɪnɪŋ ðə hɛvi blu koʊɾ ɪz waɪf meɪɾ ɪm wɛɹ əɡɛns ðə koʊld. pɛtʃɹə simd ɪnɡɹoʊst ɪn ðə dɪsɪŋ, bʌt ðə mæn dɪd nɑt ɡæmbəl, nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz pɪtʃɪŋ pɛniz. hi ən ɪz waɪf, klɛɹin, ə dɔɡ tʃɹeɪnɝ, seɪvd ɛvɹi kɔɪn ðeɪ kəd spɛɹ, ən pɛtʃɹə niɾəd smɔl ɪkskjus tə tɔk ət lɛŋθ əbaʊt ði ɪn ðeɪ ɪntɛndəd tə baɪ wʌn deɪ. ivən mɔɹ sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ, klɛɹin wɑz əɾ ɪz saɪd, ɛnvɛləpt ɪn ə dɑɹk kloʊk ən əpɛɹənli əz əbzɔɹbd ɪn ðə ɡeɪmɪŋ əz hi.

Surprisingly, Petra Anhill, the show's strongman, stood watching the two horse-handlers play, arms larger than most men's legs folded across his chest. He was shorter than Mat, but at least twice as wide, his shoulders straining the heavy blue coat his wife made him wear against the cold. Petra seemed engrossed in the dicing, but the man did not gamble, not so much as pitching pennies. He and his wife, Clarine, a dog trainer, saved every coin they could spare, and Petra needed small excuse to talk at length about the inn they intended to buy one day. Even more surprising, Clarine was at his side, enveloped in a dark cloak and apparently as absorbed in the gaming as he.

pɛtʃɹə ɡlænst wɛɹəli oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ɪndə ðə kæmp wən i sɔ mæt ən ɛdʒiənɪn əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ɑɹm-ɪn-ɑɹm, wɪtʃ meɪd mæt fɹaʊn. pipəl lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz wɑz nɛvɝ ɡʊd. klɛɹinz plʌmp bɹaʊn feɪs bɹoʊk ɪndə ə wɔɹm smaɪl, ðoʊ. laɪk moʊst wɪmən ɪn ðə ʃoʊ, ʃi θɔɾ i ən ɛdʒiənɪn wɝ ɹoʊmæntɪk. ðə bɛnt-noʊz hɔɹs-hænlɝ, ə hɛvi-ʃoʊldɝd tɛɹən neɪm kɑl, lɪɹɾ əz i skupt ʌp ðə weɪdʒɝ, ə fju kɑpɝz. noʊ wʌn bʌt doʊmən kəd si ɛdʒiənɪn əz pɹɪɾi, bʌt tə səm fulz, noʊbɪləɾi bɪstoʊd bjuɾi. əɹ mʌni dɪd, ən ə noʊbəlwʊmən mʌs bi ɹɪtʃ. ə fju θɔɾ ɛni noʊbəlwʊmən u əbændən əɹ hʌzbən fəɹ ðə laɪks ə mæt kɔθən maɪt bi oʊpən tə livɪŋ hɪm, tu, ən bɹɪŋɪŋ əɹ mʌni wɪð hɝ. ðət wɑz ðə stɔɹi mæt ən ði ʌðɝz hæd pʊɾ ɝaʊn tə ɪkspleɪn waɪ ðeɪ wɝ haɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə sintʃæn: ə kɹuəl hʌzbən ən ə lʌvɝz' flaɪt. ɛvɹiwʌn hæd hɝd ðət sɔɹɾ ə teɪl, fɹəm ɡlimən əɹ bʊks ɪf sɛldəm ɹil laɪf, ɔfən ɪnʌf tə æksɛpt ɪt. kɑl kɛpt ɪz hɛd daʊn, ðoʊ. ɛdʒiənɪn - laɪlwɪn - hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi dʒɹɔn əɹ bɛl naɪf ɑn ə sɔɹd-dʒʌɡəlɝ, ə tu-hænsəm fɛloʊ hu hæd bɪn oʊvɝli sədʒɛstɪv ɪn æskɪŋ əɹ tə ʃɛɹ ə kʌp ʌv waɪn ɪn ɪz wæɡən, ən noʊ wʌn daʊɾɪd ʃi wʊɾə juz ðə bleɪɾ ɪf i hæd pɹɛst ɪz suɾ ən ɪntʃ fɝðɝ.

Petra glanced warily over his shoulder into the camp when he saw Mat and Egeanin approaching arm-in-arm, which made Mat frown. People looking over their shoulders was never good. Clarine's plump brown face broke into a warm smile, though. Like most women in the show, she thought he and Egeanin were romantic. The bent-nosed horse-handler, a heavy-shouldered Tairen named Col, leered as he scooped up the wager, a few coppers. No one but Domon could see Egeanin as pretty, but to some fools, nobility bestowed beauty. Or money did, and a noblewoman must be rich. A few thought any noblewoman who abandoned her husband for the likes of Mat Cauthon might be open to leaving him, too, and bringing her money with her. That was the story Mat and the others had put around to explain why they were hiding from the Seanchan: a cruel husband and a lovers' flight. Everyone had heard that sort of tale, from gleemen or books if seldom real life, often enough to accept it. Col kept his head down, though. Egeanin - Leilwin - had already drawn her belt knife on a sword-juggler, a too-handsome fellow who had been overly suggestive in asking her to share a cup of wine in his wagon, and no one doubted she would have used the blade if he had pressed his suit an inch further.

əz sun əz mæt ɹitʃt ðə stʃɹɔŋmæn, pɛtʃɹə sɛd kwaɪətli, "ðɛɹ ɑɹ sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz tɔkɪŋ tə lukə, əbaʊt twɛnti ʌv ðɛm. ði ɔfəsɝz tɔkɪŋ wɪð hɪm, listwaɪz." hi dɪd nɑt saʊn fɹaɪɾənd, bʌt wɝi kɹist ɪz fɔɹhɛd, ən i leɪɾ ə pɹətɛktɪv hæn ɑn ɪz waɪfs ʃoʊldɝ. klɛɹinz smaɪl feɪɾəd, ən ʃi ɹeɪzd wʌn hæn tə ɹɛst ətɑp hɪz. ðeɪ tʃɹʌstɪd lukəs dʒʌdʒmənt, æftɝ ə fæʃən, jɛt ðeɪ nu ðə ɹɪsk ðeɪ wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ. əɹ θɔt ðeɪ dɪd. ðə ɹɪsk ðeɪ bɪlivd ɪn wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf. "wʌt də ðeɪ wɑnt?" ɛdʒiənɪn dɪmændəd, pʊʃɪŋ fɹi ʌv mæt, bɪfɔɹ i kəd kɹæk ɪz tiθ. ɪn fækt, noʊ wʌn weɪɾəd fəɹ hɪm. "hoʊl ðiz fəɹ mi," noʊl sɛd, hændɪŋ ɪz poʊl ən bæskət tə ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn, hu ɡeɪpt ʌp ət hɪm. stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ, noʊl slɪpt ə nɑbəli hæn bɪniθ ɪz koʊt, wɛɹ i kɛp tu lɔŋbleɪɾɪd naɪvz. "kæn wi ɹitʃ əɹ hɔɹsəz?" hi æsk pɛtʃɹə. ðə stʃɹɔŋmæn aɪɾ ɪm daʊtfəli. mæt wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn ənʃʊɹ wɛðɝ noʊl stɪl pəzɛst ɔl ɪz wɪts.

As soon as Mat reached the strongman, Petra said quietly, "There are Seanchan soldiers talking to Luca, about twenty of them. The officer's talking with him, leastwise." He did not sound frightened, but worry creased his forehead, and he laid a protective hand on his wife's shoulder. Clarine's smile faded, and she raised one hand to rest atop his. They trusted Lucas judgment, after a fashion, yet they knew the risk they were running. Or thought they did. The risk they believed in was bad enough. "What do they want?" Egeanin demanded, pushing free of Mat, before he could crack his teeth. In fact, no one waited for him. "Hold these for me," Noal said, handing his pole and basket to the one-eyed man, who gaped up at him. Straightening, Noal slipped a knobbly hand beneath his coat, where he kept two longbladed knives. "Can we reach our horses?" he asked Petra. The strongman eyed him doubtfully. Mat was not the only one unsure whether Noal still possessed all his wits.

"ðeɪ doʊn sim ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn sɝtʃɪŋ," klɛɹin sɛd heɪstəli, meɪkɪŋ ə hɪn ʌv ə kɝtsi tə ɛdʒiənɪn. ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz səpoʊz tə pɹitɛn mæt ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ pɑɹɾ ə ðə ʃoʊ, bʌt fju mænədʒ tə kæɹi ɪɾ ɔf wɪð ɛdʒiənɪn. "ði ɔfəsɝz bɪn ɪn lukəz wæɡən fəɹ ə ɡʊd hæf-aʊɝ, bʌt ðə soʊlʒɝz əv bɪn stændɪŋ baɪ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ɔl ðət taɪm."

"They don't seem interested in searching," Clarine said hastily, making a hint of a curtsy to Egeanin. Everyone was supposed to pretend Mat and the others were part of the show, but few managed to carry it off with Egeanin. "The officer's been in Luca's wagon for a good half-hour, but the soldiers have been standing by their horses all that time."

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðəɹ hɪɹ əbaʊt ju," pɛtʃɹə æɾəd ɹɪspɛkfəli. əɡɛn, tə ɛdʒiənɪn. waɪ ʃəɾ i bi dɪfɹənt? pɹɑbli pɹæktəsɪŋ tə wɛlkəm noʊbəlz tə ðəɾ ɪn. "wi dʒʌs dɪdnt wɑn jə tə bi sɝpɹaɪzd əɹ wɝid, siɪŋ ðɛm. aɪm ʃʊɹ lukə wɪl sɛn əm ɔf wɪð noʊ tʃɹʌbəl." dɪspaɪɾ ɪz toʊn, ðə kɹisɪz ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ɪz fɔɹhɛd. moʊs mɛn bɪkeɪm əpsɛɾ ɪf ðɛɹ waɪvz ɹæn ɔf, ən ə noʊbəlmən kəd meɪk ʌðɝz bɛɹ ðə bɹʌn ə hɪz aɪɹ. ə tʃɹævlɪŋ ʃoʊ, stʃɹeɪnʒɝz dʒʌs pæsɪŋ θɹu, meɪɾ ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli izi tɑɹɡət wɪθaʊɾ æɾəd kɑmpləkeɪʃənz. "ju doʊn əv tə wɝi əbaʊɾ ɛnibəɾi tɔkɪŋ aʊɾ ə tɝn, maɪ leɪɾi." ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðə hɔɹs hænlɝz, pɛtʃɹə æɾəd, "dʌz ʃi, kɑl?" bɛnt-noʊz ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, hɪz aɪz ɑn ðə daɪs i wɑz baʊnsɪŋ ɑn ɪz pɑm. hi wɑz ə bɪɡ mæn, bʌt nɑɾ əz bɪɡ əz pɛtʃɹə, ən ðə stʃɹɔŋmæn kəd stʃɹeɪɾən hɔɹsʃuz wɪð ɪz bɛɹ hænz.

"I don't think they're here about you," Petra added respectfully. Again, to Egeanin. Why should he be different? Probably practicing to welcome nobles to that inn. "We just didn't want you to be surprised or worried, seeing them. I'm sure Luca will send them off with no trouble." Despite his tone, the creases remained in his forehead. Most men became upset if their wives ran off, and a nobleman could make others bear the brunt of his ire. A traveling show, strangers just passing through, made a particularly easy target without added complications. "You don't have to worry about anybody talking out of turn, my Lady." Glancing at the horse handlers, Petra added, "Does she, Col?" Bent-nose shook his head, his eyes on the dice he was bouncing on his palm. He was a big man, but not as big as Petra, and the strongman could straighten horseshoes with his bare hands.

"ɛvɹibɑɾi laɪks ə tʃæns tə spɪɾ ɑn ə noʊbəlz buts naʊ ən ðɛn," ðə wʌn-aɪd fɛloʊ mʌmbəld, piɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə bæskəɾ ə fɪʃ. hi wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz tɔl ən waɪd-ʃoʊldɝɾ əz kɑl, bʌɾ ɪz feɪs wɑz ɔl lɛðɝi ɹɪŋkəlz, ən i hæɾ ivən fjuɝ tiθ ðən noʊl. ɡlænsɪŋ əɾ ɛdʒiənɪn, hi dʌkt ɪz hɛɾ ən æɾəd, "bɛɡɪŋ jəɹ pɑɹɾən, leɪɾi. 'saɪdz, ðɪs weɪ wi ɔl ɡɛɾ ə lɪɾəl kɔɪn, wɪtʃ ðəɹ eɪn bɪn mʌtʃ ə leɪtli. ɹaɪt, kɑl? ɛnibəɾi tɔks, ðɛm sintʃænəl teɪk əs ɔl ʌp, meɪbi hæŋ əs laɪk ðeɪ dɪɾ əm si foʊk. əɹ pʊɾ əs tə wɝk klinɪŋ əm kənælz ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə hɑɹbɝ." hɔɹs hænlɝz dɪd wʌtɛvɝ niɾəd duɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə ʃoʊ, fɹəm mʌkɪŋ ðə hɔɹslaɪnz ən klinɪŋ ænəməlz' keɪdʒɪz tə ɪɹɛktɪŋ ən teɪkɪŋ daʊn ðə kænvəs wɔl, bʌɾ i ʃʌɾɝəd əz ðoʊ dɪɡɪŋ aʊt sɪltɪd kənælz ɪn ðə ɹæhəd wɑz ə wɝs pɹɑspɛk ðən hæŋɪŋ.

"Everybody likes a chance to spit on a noble's boots now and then," the one-eyed fellow mumbled, peering into the basket of fish. He was almost as tall and wide-shouldered as Col, but his face was all leathery wrinkles, and he had even fewer teeth than Noal. Glancing at Egeanin, he ducked his head and added, "Begging your pardon, Lady. 'Sides, this way we all get a little coin, which there ain't been much of lately. Right, Col? Anybody talks, them Seanchan'll take us all up, maybe hang us like they did them Sea Folk. Or put us to work cleaning them canals the other side of the harbor." Horse handlers did whatever needed doing around the show, from mucking the horselines and cleaning animals' cages to erecting and taking down the canvas wall, but he shuddered as though digging out silted canals in the Rahad was a worse prospect than hanging.

"dɪɾ aɪ seɪ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt tɔkɪŋ?" kɑl pɹətɛstəd, spɹɛɾɪŋ ɪz hænz. "aɪ dʒʌst æsk haʊ lɔŋ wɝ gɑnə sɪt hɪɹ, ðæts ɔl. aɪ dʒʌst æskt wən wɝ gɑnə si səm ə ðɪs kɔɪn." "wi sɪt hɪɹ əz lɔŋ əz aɪ seɪ sɪt." ɪt wɑz ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl haʊ hɑɹɾ ɛdʒiənɪn kəd meɪk ðət dʒɹɔl saʊnd wɪθaʊt ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ vɔɪs, laɪk ə bleɪd slaɪɾɪŋ fɹi ʌv ðə skæbɝd. "ju si jəɹ kɔɪn wən wi ɹitʃ əɹ dɛstəneɪʃən.

"Did I say anything about talking?" Col protested, spreading his hands. "I just asked how long we're going to sit here, that's all. I just asked when we're going to see some of this coin." "We sit here as long as I say sit." It was remarkable how hard Egeanin could make that drawl sound without raising her voice, like a blade sliding free of the scabbard. "You see your coin when we reach our destination.

ðəɹ wɪl bi ə lɪɾəl sʌmθɪŋ ɛkstʃɹə fəɹ ðoʊz u sɝv mi feɪθfəli. ən ə koʊld ɡɹeɪv fəɹ ɛniwʌn u θɪŋks ɑn bɪtʃɹeɪəl." kɑl pʊld ɪz mʌtʃ-pætʃt kloʊk taɪɾ ən waɪɾənd ɪz aɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk ɪndɪɡnənt, əɹ meɪbi ɪnəsənt, bʌɾ i dʒʌst əpɪɹd tə bi hoʊpɪŋ ʃi wəd kʌm kloʊs ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪm tə fɪltʃ əɹ pɝs.

There will be a little something extra for those who serve me faithfully. And a cold grave for anyone who thinks on betrayal." Col pulled his much-patched cloak tight and widened his eyes trying to look indignant, or maybe innocent, but he just appeared to be hoping she would come close enough for him to filch her purse.

mæt ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ðət wɑz ɪz ɡoʊld ʃi wɑz pɹɑməsɪŋ wɪð sətʃ ə fɹi hænd.

Mat ground his teeth. For one thing, that was his gold she was promising with such a free hand.

ʃi hæɾ əɹ oʊn, bʌt nɑt nɪɹ ɪnʌf fəɹ ðɪs. mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾəntli, ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ əɡɛn.

She had her own, but not near enough for this. More importantly, she was trying to take charge again.

laɪt, ɪksɛp fəɹ hɪm, ʃi wəd stɪl bi ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ skimɪŋ tə əvɔɪd ðə sikɝz, ɪf nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi biɪŋ pʊt tə ðə kwɛstʃən.

Light, except for him, she would still be in Ebou Dar scheming to avoid the Seekers, if not already being put to the question.

ɪksɛp fəɹ hɪm, ʃi wəd nɛvɝ əv θɔɾ ə steɪɪŋ kloʊs tə ɛbu dɑɹ tə θɹoʊ ɔf pɝsut, əɹ faʊn ə haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs wɪð lukəz ʃoʊ. bʌt waɪ wɝ soʊlʒɝz ðɛɹ? ðə sintʃæn wʊɾə sɛn ə hʌnʒɹəd mɛn, ə θaʊzənd, fəɹ ə veɪɡ səspɪʃən ə tuɑnz pɹɛzəns. ɪf ðeɪ səspɛktəd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. . . .

Except for him, she would never have thought of staying close to Ebou Dar to throw off pursuit, or found a hiding place with Luca's show. But why were soldiers there? The Seanchan would have sent a hundred men, a thousand, for a vague suspicion of Tuon's presence. If they suspected the Aes Sedai. . . .

noʊ! pɛtʃɹə ən klɛɹin dɪd nɑt noʊ ðeɪ wɝ hɛlpɪŋ haɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ðeɪ wʊɾə mɛnʃən sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn, ən ðə soʊlʒɝz wəd nɑt bi hʌntɪŋ sɪstɝz wɪθaʊt ðɛm. hi fɪŋɡɝd ðə fɑkshɛd θɹu hɪz koʊt. hi wɔɹ ðət weɪkɪŋ ən slipɪŋ, ən ɪt maɪt ɡɪv ɪm ə lɪɾəl wɔɹnɪŋ.

No! Petra and Clarine did not know they were helping hide Aes Sedai, but they would have mentioned sul'dam and damane, and the soldiers would not be hunting sisters without them. He fingered the foxhead through his coat. He wore that waking and sleeping, and it might give him a little warning.

hi nɛvɝ kənsɪɾɝd tʃɹaɪɪŋ fəɹ ðə hɔɹsəz, ən nɑt dʒʌs kəz kɑl ən ə dʌzən mɔɹ laɪk ɪm wəd ɡoʊ ɹʌnɪŋ tə ðə sintʃæn bɪfɔɹ i wɑz wɛl aʊɾ ə saɪt. ðeɪ hæd noʊ pɝtɪkjəlɝ ænəmɑsəɾi təwɔɹɾ ɪm əɹ ɛdʒiənɪn ðəɾ i nu - ivən ɹumən, ðə sɔɹdʒʌɡəlɝ, sim tə hæv sɛɾəld ɪn hæpəli wɪð ə kəntɔɹʃənəs neɪmd ɑdʒɹiə - bʌt səm foʊks wəd nɑt ɹɪzɪs ðə tɛmteɪʃən ʌv ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ɡoʊld, iðɝ. ɪn ɛni keɪs, noʊ wɔɹnɪŋ daɪs tʌmbəld ɪn ɪz hɛd. ən ðəɹ wɝ pipəl ɪnsaɪd ðoʊz kænvəs wɔlz i kəd nɑt liv bɪhaɪnd.

He never considered trying for the horses, and not just because Col and a dozen more like him would go running to the Seanchan before he was well out of sight. They had no particular animosity toward him or Egeanin that he knew - even Rumann, the swordjuggler, seemed to have settled in happily with a contortionist named Adria - but some folks would not resist the temptation of a little more gold, either. In any case, no warning dice tumbled in his head. And there were people inside those canvas walls he could not leave behind.

"ɪf ðəɹ nɑt sɝtʃɪŋ, ðən wɪv nʌθɪŋ tə wɝi əbaʊt," hi sɛd kɑnfəɾəntli. "bʌt θæŋks fəɹ ðə wɔɹnɪŋ, pɛtʃɹə. aɪv nɛvɝ laɪk sɝpɹaɪzəz." ðə stʃɹɔŋmæn meɪɾ ə smɔl dʒɛstʃɝ əz ɪf tə seɪ ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ, bʌɾ ɛdʒiənɪn ən klɛɹin lʊkt ət mæt əz ðoʊ stɑɹɾəld tə faɪn ɪm ðɛɹ. ivən kɑl ən ðə wʌn-aɪd laʊt blɪŋkt ət hɪm. ɪt tʊk ən ɛfɝt tə stɑp ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ɡɹɪɾɪŋ ɪz tiθ əɡɛn. "aɪl dʒʌst wɑndɝ nɪɹ lukəz wæɡən ən si wʌɾ aɪ kən si. leɪ wʌn wɪn, jə ən noʊl faɪn oʊlvɝ ən steɪ wɪð hɪm." ðeɪ laɪk ðə bɔɪ, ɛvɹiwʌn dɪd, ən ðət wəd kip əm aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛɹ. hi kəɾ ivzdʒɹɑp bɛɾɝ əloʊn. ən ɪf ðeɪ hæd tə ɹʌn, meɪbi ɛdʒiənɪn ən noʊl kəd hɛlp ɡɛt ðə bɔɪ aʊt, ət list. ðə laɪt sɛn ɪt dɪd nɑt kʌm tə ðæt. hi kəd si nʌθɪŋ bʌt dɪzæstɝ ɪn ɪt.

"If they're not searching, then we have nothing to worry about," he said confidently. "But thanks for the warning, Petra. I've never liked surprises." The strongman made a small gesture as if to say it was nothing, but Egeanin and Clarine looked at Mat as though startled to find him there. Even Col and the one-eyed lout blinked at him. It took an effort to stop short of gritting his teeth again. "I'll just wander near Luca's wagon and see what I can see. Lei 1 win, you and Noal find Olver and stay with him." They liked the boy, everyone did, and that would keep them out of his hair. He could eavesdrop better alone. And if they had to run, maybe Egeanin and Noal could help get the boy out, at least. The Light send it did not come to that. He could see nothing but disaster in it.

"wɛl, aɪ səpoʊz noʊbɑdi laɪvz fɝɛvɝ," noʊl saɪd, ɹitʃɹivɪŋ ɪz bæmbu poʊl ən bæskət.

"Well, I suppose nobody lives forever," Noal sighed, retrieving his bamboo pole and basket.

bɝn hɪm, bʌt ðə fɛloʊ kəd meɪk ə kɑlɪki ɡoʊt sim tʃɪɹfəl! pɛtʃɹəz fɹaʊn sɝɾənli dipənd.

Burn him, but the fellow could make a colicky goat seem cheerful! Petra's frown certainly deepened.

mɛɹid mɛn ɔlweɪz sim tə bi wɝid, wʌn ɹizən mæt wɑz ɪn noʊ hɝi hɪmsɛlf. əz noʊl vænɪʃt ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə kænvəs wɔl, ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn wɑtʃt ðə fɪʃ ɡoʊ ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli. hi əpɪɹd tə bi ənʌðɝ wɪθaʊɾ ə fʊl sɛɾ ʌv wɪts. hi pɹɑbli hæɾ ə waɪf sʌmwɛɹ.

Married men always seemed to be worried, one reason Mat was in no hurry himself. As Noal vanished around the corner of the canvas wall, the one-eyed man watched the fish go regretfully. He appeared to be another without a full set of wits. He probably had a wife somewhere.

mæt pʊld ɪz kæp ɔlmoʊs daʊn tə hɪz aɪz. stɪl noʊ daɪs. hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk ə haʊ mɛni taɪmz i hæd nɪɹli hæɾ ɪz θɹoʊt slɪɾ əɹ ɪz skʌl splɪt wɪθaʊɾ ɛni daɪs. bʌt ʃʊɹli ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn ðəɹ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛni ɹil deɪnʒɝ. ʌv kɔɹs ðeɪ wʊd. hi hæd nɑt teɪkən θɹi stɛps ɪnsaɪd ði ɛntʃɹəns bɪfɔɹ ɛdʒiənɪn kɑɾ ʌp tə hɪm ən slɪpt əɹ ɑɹm ɝaʊn ɪz weɪst. hi stɑpt ɪn ɪz tʃɹæks, aɪɪŋ əɹ bɑlfəli. ʃi ɹɪzɪstɪɾ ɪz ɔɹɾɝz ðə weɪ ə tʃɹaʊt fɔt ðə hʊk, bʌt ðɪs wɛn bɪɑn stʌbɝn. "wʌt dʒju θɪŋk jəɹ duɪŋ? wʌɾ ɪf ðɪs sintʃæn ɔfəsɝ ɹɛkəɡnaɪzəz ju?" ðət simd əz laɪkli əz taɪlɪn hɝsɛlf wɔkɪŋ ɪndə ðə ʃoʊ, bʌɾ ɛniθɪŋ ðət maɪt meɪk əɹ liv wɑz wɝθ ɡɹæbɪŋ.

Mat pulled his cap almost down to his eyes. Still no dice. He tried not to think of how many times he had nearly had his throat slit or his skull split without any dice. But surely they would have been there if there was any real danger. Of course they would. He had not taken three steps inside the entrance before Egeanin caught up to him and slipped her arm around his waist. He stopped in his tracks, eyeing her balefully. She resisted his orders the way a trout fought the hook, but this went beyond stubborn. "What do you think you're doing? What if this Seanchan officer recognizes you?" That seemed as likely as Tylin herself walking into the show, but anything that might make her leave was worth grabbing.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ ðə tʃænsəz ðɪs fɛloʊ ɪz ɛniwʌn aɪ noʊ?" ʃi skɔft. "aɪ doʊn əv . . ." hɝ feɪs twɪstəd fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, "dɪdn əv . . . mɛni fɹɛnz ðɪs saɪɾ ə ði oʊʃən, ən nʌn ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ." ʃi tʌtʃt ən ɛn ə ðə blæk wɪɡ oʊvɝ əɹ bʊzəm. "ɛniweɪ, ɪn ðɪs, maɪ oʊn mʌðɝ wʊdn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz mi." hɝ vɔɪs tɝn blik təwɔɹd ði ɛnd.

"What are the chances this fellow is anyone I know?" she scoffed. "I don't have . . ." her face twisted for an instant, "didn't have . . . many friends this side of the ocean, and none in Ebou Dar." She touched an end of the black wig over her bosom. "Anyway, in this, my own mother wouldn't recognize me." Her voice turned bleak toward the end.

hi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə tʃɪp ə tuθ ɪf i kɛpt ɑn klɛntʃɪŋ ɪz dʒɔ. stændɪŋ ðəɹ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð əɹ wəd bi wɝs ðən jusləs, bʌt ðə weɪ ʃi hæd stɛɹɾ ət ðoʊz sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz wɑz fɹɛʃ ɪn ɪz maɪnd. "doʊnt ɡlɛɹ əɾ ɛnibəɾi," hi wɔɹn hɝ. "doʊn ivən lʊk əɾ ɛnibəɾi."

He was going to chip a tooth if he kept on clenching his jaw. Standing there arguing with her would be worse than useless, but the way she had stared at those Seanchan soldiers was fresh in his mind. "Don't glare at anybody," he warned her. "Don't even look at anybody."

"ɪm ə dɪmjʊɹ ɛbu dɑɹi wʊmən." ʃi meɪɾ ɪt saʊn ə tʃælənʒ.

"I'm a demure Ebou Dari woman." She made it sound a challenge.

"ju kən də ɔl ðə tɔkɪŋ." ʃi meɪd ðəɾ ɪndə ə wɔɹnɪŋ. laɪt! wən ə wʊmən wɑz nɑt meɪkɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ smuð, ʃi meɪd θɪŋz vɛɹi ɹʌf ɪndid, ən ɛdʒiənɪn nɛvɝ meɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ smuð. hi wɑz dɛfənətli ɪn deɪnʒɝ ə tʃɪpɪŋ ə tuθ. bɪɑn ði ɛntʃɹəns, ðə ʃoʊz meɪn stʃɹit miændɝɾ əmʌŋ wæɡənz laɪk ðoʊz ðə tɪŋkɝz juzd, lɪɾəl haʊsəz ɑn wilz wɪð ðə wæɡən ʃæfs lɪftəɾ əɡɛns ðə dʒɹaɪvɝz' sits, ən wɔl tɛns ɔfən əz lɑɹdʒ əz smɔl haʊsəz. moʊst ə ðə wæɡənz wɝ bɹaɪtli peɪntəd, ɛvɹi ʃeɪɾ ə ɹɛɾ əɹ ɡɹin, jɛloʊ əɹ blu, ən mɛni ʌv ðə tɛns wɝ dʒʌst əz kʌlɝfəl, ə fju ivən stʃɹaɪpt. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ wʊɾən plætfɔɹmz, wɛɹ ɛntɝteɪnɝz kəd pɝfɔɹm, stʊd bɪsaɪd ðə stʃɹit, ðɛɹ kʌlɝd bʌntɪŋ bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə lʊk ə bɪt ɡɹʌbi.

"You can do all the talking." She made that into a warning. Light! When a woman was not making everything smooth, she made things very rough indeed, and Egeanin never made anything smooth. He was definitely in danger of chipping a tooth. Beyond the entrance, the show's main street meandered among wagons like those the Tinkers used, little houses on wheels with the wagon shafts lifted against the drivers' seats, and walled tents often as large as small houses. Most of the wagons were brightly painted, every shade of red or green, yellow or blue, and many of the tents were just as colorful, a few even striped. Here and there wooden platforms, where entertainers could perform, stood beside the street, their colored bunting beginning to look a bit grubby.

ðə bɹɔɾ ɪkspæns ə dɝt, nɪɹ θɝɾi peɪsɪz waɪɾ ən biɾən flæt baɪ θaʊzənz ə fit, ɹɪli wɑz ə stʃɹit, wʌn ə sɛvɹəl ðət waʊn θɹu ðə ʃoʊ. ðə wɪnd wɪpt əweɪ feɪnt ɡɹeɪ stʃɹimɝz ə smoʊk ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə tɪn tʃɪmniz ðət stʌk fɹəm ʌp fɹəm ðə ɹufs ə ðə wæɡənz, ən fɹəm səm tɛns. moʊst ə ðə ʃoʊfoʊk wɝ pɹɑbli ət bɹɛkfəst ɪf nɑt stɪl ɪn bɛd. ðeɪ ɹoʊz leɪt, əz ə ɹul - ə ɹul mæt əpɹuvd - ən noʊ wʌn wəd wɑnə it sɪɾɪŋ ɝaʊn ə kʊk faɪɝ aʊtsaɪɾ ɪn ðɪs koʊld. ði oʊnli pɝsən i sɔ wɑz ɑlʌdʒɹə, ðə slivz ə hɝ dɑɹk ɡɹin dʒɹɛs pʊʃt ʌp əɹ fɹɑɹmz, ɡɹaɪndɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ wɪð ə bɹɑnz mɔɹɾɝ ən pɛsəl ɑn ə teɪbəl ðət foʊldəd daʊn fɹəm ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ vɪvəd blu wæɡən, dʒʌst ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ ɑn wʌn ə ðə nɛɹoʊɝ saɪd stʃɹits. ɪntɛn ɑn əɹ wɝk, ðə slɛndɝ tæɹɑbənɝ dɪd nɑt si ɛdʒiənɪn ən mæt. hi kəd nɑt hɛlp lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ, ðoʊ. wɪð əɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ ɪn θɪn, biɾɪd bɹeɪdz ðət hʌŋ tə hɝ weɪst, ɑlʌdʒɹə wɑz pɹɑbli ðə moʊst ɪɡzɑɾɪk ə lukəz mɑɹvəlz. hi ædvɝtaɪzd əɹ əz ən ɪluməneɪɾɝ, ən ənlaɪk mɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝ pɝfɔɹmɝz ən mɑɹvəlz, ʃi ɹɪli wɑz wʌt lukə kleɪmd, ðoʊ lukə pɹɑbli dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt hɪmsɛlf. mæt wʌndɝd wʌt ʃi wɑz ɡɹaɪndɪŋ. ən wɛðɝ ɪt maɪɾ ɪksploʊd. ʃi hæd pɹɑməs tə ɹɪvil ðə sikɹəɾ ə faɪɹwɝks ɪf i kəɾ ænsɝ ə ɹɪɾəl, bʌɾ i hæd nɑt faʊn ə ɡlɪmɝ, soʊ fɑɹ. hi wʊd, ðoʊ. wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ. ɛdʒiənɪn poʊkt ə hɑɹd fɪŋɡɝ ɪndə hɪz ɹɪbz. "wɝ səpoʊz tə bi lʌvɝz, əz jə kip ɹimaɪndɪŋ mi," ʃi ɡɹaʊld. "huz gɑnə bɪliv ɪɾ ɪf jə stɛɹ ət ðət wʊmən əz ðoʊ jəɹ hʌŋɡɹi?" mæt ɡɹɪn læsɪviəsli. "aɪ ɔlweɪz lʊk ət pɹɪɾi wɪmən, hævən jə noʊɾəst.-" ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ hɛd skɑɹf wɪð ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ vɪɡɝ ðən juʒəwəl, ʃi ɡeɪv ə dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋ ɡɹʌnt, ən i wɑz sæɾəsfaɪd. hɝ pɹuɾɪʃ stʃɹik keɪm ɪn hændi naʊ ən ðɛn. ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz ɑn ðə ɹʌn fəɹ əɹ laɪf, bʌt ʃi wɑz stɪl sintʃæn, ən ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi nu mɔɹ əbaʊɾ ɪm ðən i laɪkt. hi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə tʃɹʌst əɹ wɪð ɔl ə hɪz sikɹəts. ivən ðə wʌnz i dɪd nɑt noʊ jɛt.

The broad expanse of dirt, near thirty paces wide and beaten flat by thousands of feet, really was a street, one of several that wound through the show. The wind whipped away faint gray streamers of smoke rising from the tin chimneys that stuck from up from the roofs of the wagons, and from some tents. Most of the showfolk were probably at breakfast if not still in bed. They rose late, as a rule - a rule Mat approved - and no one would want to eat sitting around a cook fire outside in this cold. The only person he saw was Aludra, the sleeves of her dark green dress pushed up her forearms, grinding something with a bronze mortar and pestle on a table that folded down from the side of her vivid blue wagon, just around the corner on one of the narrower side streets. Intent on her work, the slender Taraboner did not see Egeanin and Mat. He could not help looking at her, though. With her dark hair in thin, beaded braids that hung to her waist, Aludra was probably the most exotic of Luca's marvels. He advertised her as an Illuminator, and unlike many of the other performers and marvels, she really was what Luca claimed, though Luca probably did not believe it himself. Mat wondered what she was grinding. And whether it might explode. She had promised to reveal the secret of fireworks if he could answer a riddle, but he had not found a glimmer, so far. He would, though. One way or another. Egeanin poked a hard finger into his ribs. "We're supposed to be lovers, as you keep reminding me," she growled. "Who's going to believe it if you stare at that woman as though you're hungry?" Mat grinned lasciviously. "I always look at pretty women, haven't you noticed.-" Adjusting her head scarf with a little more vigor than usual, she gave a disparaging grunt, and he was satisfied. Her prudish streak came in handy now and then. Egeanin was on the run for her life, but she was still Seanchan, and she already knew more about him than he liked. He was not about to trust her with all of his secrets. Even the ones he did not know yet.

lukəz wæɡən sæɾ ɪn ðə vɛɹi mɪɾəl ə ðə ʃoʊz kæmp, ðə moʊs feɪvɝd pəzɪʃən, əz fɑɹ əz pɑsəbəl fɹəm ðə smɛlz ə ði ænəməl keɪdʒɪz ən hɔɹslaɪnz sɪtʃueɪɾɪd əlɔŋ ðə kænvəs wɔlz. ðə wæɡən wɑz ɡɛɹɪʃ ivən kəmpɛɹd tə ði ʌðɝz ɪn ðə ʃoʊ, ə ɹɛɾ ən blu θɪŋ ðət ʃoʊn laɪk ðə faɪnəs lækɹwɝk, ɛvɹi sɝfəs spɑɾəd wɪð ɡoʊldən kɑməts ən stɑɹz. ðə feɪzəz ə ðə mun, ɪn sɪlvɝ, ɹæn ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊn dʒʌs bɪloʊ ðə ɹuflaɪn. ivən ðə tɪn tʃɪmni wɑz peɪntəɾ ɪn ɹɛɾ ən blu ɹɪŋz. eɪ tɪŋkɝ wəɾ əv blʌʃt. tə wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə wæɡən tu ɹæŋks ə hɛlməɾɪd sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz stʊd stɪfli bɪsaɪd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, ɡɹin-tæsɛld lænsɪz slæntəɾ əɾ ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm æŋɡəl. wʌn ə ðə mɛn hɛl ðə ɹeɪnz ʌv ən ɛkstʃɹə maʊnt, ə faɪn dʌn ɡɛldɪŋ wɪð stʃɹɔŋ hɔntʃɪz ən ɡʊɾ æŋkəlz. ðə soʊlʒɝz'

Luca's wagon sat in the very middle of the show's camp, the most favored position, as far as possible from the smells of the animal cages and horselines situated along the canvas walls. The wagon was garish even compared to the others in the show, a red and blue thing that shone like the finest lacquerwork, every surface spotted with golden comets and stars. The phases of the moon, in silver, ran all the way around just below the roofline. Even the tin chimney was painted in red and blue rings. A Tinker would have blushed. To one side of the wagon two ranks of helmeted Seanchan soldiers stood stiffly beside their horses, green-tasseled lances slanted at exactly the same angle. One of the men held the reins of an extra mount, a fine dun gelding with strong haunches and good ankles. The soldiers'

blu-ænd-ɡɹin ɑɹmɝ əpɪɹd dʒɹæb əlɔŋsaɪd lukəz wæɡən.

blue-and-green armor appeared drab alongside Luca's wagon.

mæt wɑz ənsɝpɹaɪz tə si hi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ðə sintʃæn. ə dɑɹk stɑkɪŋ kæp kʌvɝɪŋ ɪz ʃeɪv hɛd, beɪl doʊmən wɑz skwɑɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz hilz wɪð ɪz bæk əɡɛnst wʌn wil ə ðə ɡɹin wæɡən ðət bɪlɔŋ tə pɛtʃɹə ən klɛɹin, əbaʊt θɝɾi peɪsɪz bɪɑn ðə soʊlʒɝz. klɛɹinz dɑɡz leɪ ʌndɝ ðə wæɡən, ə mɑtli kəlɛkʃən ə smɔlɪʃ ænəməlz slipɪŋ hʌɾəld təɡɛðɝ. ðə θɪk-bɑɾid ɪliɑnɝ wɑz pɹitɛndɪŋ tə wɪɾəl, bʌɾ ɔl i hæd pɹədust wɑz ə smɔl paɪl ə ʃeɪvɪŋz əɾ ɪz fit. mæt wɪʃt ðə fɛloʊ wəd ɡɹoʊ ə mʌstæʃ tə haɪɾ ɪz ʌpɝ lɪp əɹ ɛls ʃeɪv ɔf ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz bɪɹd. sʌmwʌn maɪt kənɛkt ən ɪliɑnɝ tə ɛdʒiənɪn. blɹɪk nɛdʒinə, ə tɔl fɛloʊ linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wæɡən əz ðoʊ kipɪŋ doʊmən kʌmpəni, hæd nɑt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd tə ɹimuv ɪz ʃaɪnɝən tɑpnɑt tə əvɔɪd sintʃæn noʊɾəs, ðoʊ hi ɹæn ə hæn oʊvɝ ðə blæk bɹɪsəl ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɑn ɪz hɛɾ əbaʊɾ əz ɔfən əz ɛdʒiənɪn tʃɛkt əɹ wɪɡ. meɪbi hi ʃəd wɛɹ ə kæp. ɪn ðɛɹ dɑɹk koʊts wɪð fɹeɪd kʌfs ən wɛl-tʃɹævəl buts, boʊθ mɛn kəd pæs fəɹ ʃoʊfoʊk, meɪbi hɔɹs-hænlɝz, ɪksɛp tə ʌðɝ ʃoʊfoʊk. ðeɪ wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ðə sintʃæn waɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə sim nɑt tə, bʌt blɹɪk wɑz ðə mɔɹ səksɛsfəl, əz maɪt bi ɪkspɛktəd fɹəm ə wɔɹɾɝ. hɪz fʊl ətɛnʃən əpɪɹd tə bi ɑn doʊmən, ɪksɛp fəɹ ən əkeɪʒənəl ɡlæns ət ðə soʊlʒɝz, əz kæʒəwəl əz kəd bi. doʊmən skaʊld ət ðə sintʃæn wən i wɑz nɑt ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət ðə lʌmp ʌv wʊɾ ɪn ɪz hænd, əz ðoʊ ɔɹɾɝɪŋ ɪt tə tɝn ɪndə ə nit kɑɹvɪŋ. ðə mæn hæd teɪkən biɪŋ sɔɪbən ɪntaɪɝli tu mʌtʃ tə hɑɹt.

Mat was unsurprised to see he was not the only one interested in the Seanchan. A dark stocking cap covering his shaved head, Bayle Domon was squatting on his heels with his back against one wheel of the green wagon that belonged to Petra and Clarine, about thirty paces beyond the soldiers. Clarine's dogs lay under the wagon, a motley collection of smallish animals sleeping huddled together. The thick-bodied Illianer was pretending to whittle, but all he had produced was a small pile of shavings at his feet. Mat wished the fellow would grow a mustache to hide his upper lip or else shave off the rest of his beard. Someone might connect an Illianer to Egeanin. Blaeric Negina, a tall fellow leaning against the wagon as though keeping Domon company, had not hesitated to remove his Shienaran topknot to avoid Seanchan notice, though he ran a hand over the black bristle growing on his head about as often as Egeanin checked her wig. Maybe he should wear a cap. In their dark coats with frayed cuffs and well-traveled boots, both men could pass for showfolk, maybe horse-handlers, except to other showfolk. They were watching the Seanchan while trying to seem not to, but Blaeric was the more successful, as might be expected from a Warder. His full attention appeared to be on Domon, except for an occasional glance at the soldiers, as casual as could be. Domon scowled at the Seanchan when he was not glaring at the lump of wood in his hand, as though ordering it to turn into a neat carving. The man had taken being so'jbin entirely too much to heart.

mæt wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɪɡjɝ aʊt haʊ tə snik kloʊs tə lukəz wæɡən ən ivzdʒɹɑp ənsin baɪ ðə soʊlʒɝz wən ðə dɔɹ ət ðə bæk ə ðə wæɡən oʊpən ən ə peɪl-hɛɹd sintʃæn mɑɹtʃt daʊn ðə stɛps, plæntɪŋ ə hɛlmət wɪð ə θɪn blu plum ɑn ɪz hɛɾ əz ɪz but tʌtʃt ðə ɡɹaʊnd. lukə əpɪɹd bɪhaɪn hɪm, ɹisplɛndən ɪn skɑɹləɾ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð ɡoʊldən sʌnbɝsts, boʊɪŋ wɪð ɪlæbɹət flɝɪʃəz əz i fɑloʊd ði ɔfəsɝ. lukə oʊn ət lis tu dʌzən koʊts, moʊst ɹɛɾ ən itʃ ɡɔɾiɝ ðən ðə læst. ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd θɪŋ ɪz wæɡən wɑz ðə lɑɹdʒəst ɪn ðə ʃoʊ, əɹ i wəd nɑɾ əv hæd ɹum fəɹ əm ɔl.

Mat was trying to figure out how to sneak close to Luca's wagon and eavesdrop unseen by the soldiers when the door at the back of the wagon opened and a pale-haired Seanchan marched down the steps, planting a helmet with a thin blue plume on his head as his boot touched the ground. Luca appeared behind him, resplendent in scarlet embroidered with golden sunbursts, bowing with elaborate flourishes as he followed the officer. Luca owned at least two dozen coats, most red and each gaudier than the last. It was a good thing his wagon was the largest in the show, or he would not have had room for them all.

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ lukə, ðə sintʃæn ɔfəsɝ stɛpt ʌp ɑntu hɪz ɡɛldɪŋ, ədʒʌstəɾ ɪz sɔɹd, ən bɑɹkt ɔɹɾɝz ðət sɛn ɪz mɛn floʊɪŋ ɪndə ðɛɹ sæɾəlz ən fɔɹmɪŋ ə kɑləm ə tuz ðət muvd ɔf əɾ ə sloʊ wɔk təwɔɹd ði ɛntʃɹəns. lukə stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ əm liv wɪð ə fɪkst smaɪl ɑn ɪz feɪs, pɔɪz fəɹ ənʌðɝ baʊ ɪf ɛni lʊk bæk.

Ignoring Luca, the Seanchan officer stepped up onto his gelding, adjusted his sword, and barked orders that sent his men flowing into their saddles and forming a column of twos that moved off at a slow walk toward the entrance. Luca stood watching them leave with a fixed smile on his face, poised for another bow if any looked back.

mæt steɪd wɛl tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹiɾ ən lɛɾ ɪz maʊθ hæŋ oʊpən, əfɛktɪŋ tə ɡeɪp ɪn wʌndɝ əz ðə soʊlʒɝz ɹoʊd baɪ. nɑt ðəɾ ɛni ʌv əm soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst ɪz weɪ - ði ɔfəsɝ stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛɾ ən soʊ dɪd ðə soʊlʒɝz bɪhaɪn ɪm - bʌt noʊ wʌn ɛvɝ peɪɾ ɛni maɪn tə ə kʌntʃɹi joʊkəl, əɹ ɹɪmɛmbɝd wʌn. tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ɛdʒiənɪn stʌɾid ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ toʊz, klʌtʃɪŋ ðə skɑɹf nɑɾɪd bɪniθ əɹ tʃɪn, əntɪl ðə læs hɔɹsmən pæst. lɪftɪŋ əɹ hɛd tə lʊk æftɝ ðɛm, ʃi pɝst əɹ lɪps fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "ɪt simz aɪ də noʊ ðət bɔɪ," ʃi dʒɹɔl sɔfli. "aɪ kæɹiɾ ɪm tə pɑm ɑn fɪɹləs. hɪz sɝvən daɪd, mɪdvɔɪədʒ, ən i θɔɾ i kəd juz wʌn ə maɪ kɹu. aɪ hæd tə pʊɾ ɪm stʃɹeɪt. juɾ əv ðoʊ hi wɑz ə ðə blʌd, ðə fʌs i pʊɾ ʌp."

Mat stayed well to the side of the street and let his mouth hang open, affecting to gape in wonder as the soldiers rode by. Not that any of them so much as glanced his way - the officer stared straight ahead and so did the soldiers behind him - but no one ever paid any mind to a country yokel, or remembered one. To his surprise, Egeanin studied the ground in front of her toes, clutching the scarf knotted beneath her chin, until the last horseman passed. Lifting her head to look after them, she pursed her lips for a moment. "It seems I do know that boy," she drawled softly. "I carried him to Palme on Fearless. His servant died, midvoyage, and he thought he could use one of my crew. I had to put him straight. You'd have though he was of the Blood, the fuss he put up."

"blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz," mæt bɹiðd. haʊ mɛni ʌðɝ pipəl hæd ʃi ɡɑɾən kɹɔswaɪz, fɪksɪŋ əɹ feɪs ɪn ðɛɹ maɪnz? ɛdʒiənɪn biɪŋ ɛdʒiənɪn, pɹɑbli hʌnʒɹədz. ən i hæd bɪn lɛɾɪŋ əɹ wɔk ɝaʊnd wɪð dʒʌst ə wɪɡ ən ə tʃeɪnʒ ə kloʊðz fəɹ dɪsɡaɪz! hʌnʒɹədz? θaʊzənz, mɔɹ laɪkli.

"Blood and bloody ashes," Mat breathed. How many other people had she gotten crosswise, fixing her face in their minds? Egeanin being Egeanin, probably hundreds. And he had been letting her walk around with just a wig and a change of clothes for disguise! Hundreds? Thousands, more likely.

ʃi kəɾ ɪɹɪteɪɾ ə bɹɪk.

She could irritate a brick.

ɪn ɛni keɪs, ði ɔfəsɝ wɑz ɡɔn naʊ. mæt ɛksheɪl sloʊli. hɪz lʌk ɹɪli wɑz stɪl wɪð hɪm. ət taɪmz i θɔt ðət wɑz ɔl ðət kɛpt ɪm fɹəm bɔlɪŋ laɪk ə beɪbi. hi hɛɾəd fəɹ lukə tə faɪn aʊt wʌt ðə soʊlʒɝz hæd wɑntəd.

In any case, the officer was gone now. Mat exhaled slowly. His luck really was still with him. At times he thought that was all that kept him from bawling like a baby. He headed for Luca to find out what the soldiers had wanted.

doʊmən ən blɹɪk ɹitʃt lukə əz kwɪkli əz i ən ɛdʒiənɪn dɪd, ən ðə skaʊl ɑn doʊmənz ɹaʊn feɪs dipən əz i stɛɹɾ ət mæts ɑɹm ɝaʊn ɛdʒiənɪnz ʃoʊldɝ. ði ɪliɑnɝ ʌndɝstʊd ðə nəsɛsəɾi fəɹ ðə pɹitɛns, əɹ sɛɾ i dɪd, jɛɾ i sim tə bɪliv ðeɪ kəd kæɹi ɪɾ ɔf wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz tʌtʃɪŋ hænz. mæt ɹimuvd ɪz ɑɹm fɹəm əɹ - ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə kæɹi ɔf hɪɹ; lukə nu ðə tʃɹuθ; ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ - ən ɛdʒiənɪn stɑɹɾəd tə ɹilis hɪm, tu, jɛɾ æftɝ ə lʊk ət doʊmən, ʃi taɪɾənd əɹ ɡɹɪp ɑn mæts weɪst ɪnstɛd, ɔl wɪθaʊt ðə slaɪɾəst tʃeɪnʒ ʌv ɪkspɹɛʃən. doʊmən kəntɪnjud tə skaʊl, bʌɾ ət ðə ɡɹaʊnd, naʊ. mæt dɪsaɪɾɪd i wəɾ ʌndɝstæn ðə sintʃæn lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ i ʌndɝstʊd wɪmən. əɹ ɪliɑnɝz, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ.

Domon and Blaeric reached Luca as quickly as he and Egeanin did, and the scowl on Domon's round face deepened as he stared at Mat's arm around Egeanin's shoulder. The Illianer understood the necessity for the pretense, or said he did, yet he seemed to believe they could carry it off without so much as touching hands. Mat removed his arm from her - there was nothing to carry off here; Luca knew the truth; of everything - and Egeanin started to release him, too, yet after a look at Domon, she tightened her grip on Mat's waist instead, all without the slightest change of expression. Domon continued to scowl, but at the ground, now. Mat decided he would understand the Seanchan long before he understood women. Or Illianers, for that matter.

"hɔɹsəz," lukə ɡɹaʊld ɔlmoʊs bɪfɔɹ mæt stɑpt wɔkɪŋ. hɪz fɹaʊn tʊk ɪn ɔl ə ðɛm, bʌɾ i foʊkəs moʊst ə hɪz æŋɡɝ ɑn mæt. ə lɪɾəl ðə tɔlɝ, lukə stʃɹɛtʃt tə stɛɹ daʊn ət mæt. "ðæts wʌɾ i wɑntəd. aɪ ʃoʊɾ ɪm ðə wɔɹən ɪɡzɛmptɪŋ mi fɹəm ðə hɔɹs lɑɾɝi, saɪn baɪ ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ hɝsɛlf, bʌt wɑz i ɪmpɹɛst? ɪt dɪdn mæɾɝ tə hɪm ðəɾ aɪ ɹɛskjuɾ ə haɪɹæŋkɪŋ sintʃæn." ðə wʊmən hæd nɑt bɪn haɪ-ɹæŋkɪŋ, ən i hæd nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ ɹɛskjuɾ əɹ əz ɡɪvən əɹ ə weɪ tə tʃɹævəl əz ə haɪɝd pɝfɔɹmɝ, bʌt lukə ɔlweɪz ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾəd tə hɪz oʊn ædvæntɪdʒ. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ lɔŋ ðəɾ ɪɡzɛmpʃən ɪz ɹɪli ɡʊd fɔɹ, ɛniweɪ. ðə sintʃæn ɑɹ dɛspɹɪt fəɹ hɔɹsəz. ðeɪ maɪt teɪk ɪt bæk ɛni deɪ!" hɪz feɪs wɑz tɝnɪŋ ɔlmoʊst əz ɹɛɾ əz ɪz koʊt, ən i dʒæbd ə fɪŋɡɝ ət mæt ɹɪpiɾɪdli. "jɔɹ gɑnə ɡɛt maɪ hɔɹsəz teɪkən! haʊ də aɪ muv maɪ ʃoʊ wɪð noʊ hɔɹsəz? ænsɝ mi ðæt, ɪf jə kæn. aɪ wɑz ɹɛɾi tə liv əz sun əz aɪ sɔ ðət mædnəs ɪn ðə hɑɹbɝ, əntɪl jə twɪstəd maɪ ɑɹm. jəɹ gɑnə ɡɛt maɪ hɛd kʌɾ ɔf! aɪ kəd bi ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz fɹəm hɪɹ, ɪf nɑt fəɹ ju, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn aʊɾ ə ðə naɪɾ ən snɛɹɪŋ mi ɪn jəɹ kɹeɪzi skimz! aɪm nɑɾ ɝnɪŋ ə pɛni hɪɹ! ðəɹ hævən bɪn ɪnʌf peɪtʃɹənz ðə læs θɹi deɪz tə peɪ fəɹ fiɾɪŋ ði ænəməlz wʌn deɪ! hæf ə deɪ! aɪ ʃʊɾə lɛft ə mʌnθ əɡoʊ! mɔɹ! aɪ ʃəd hæv!" mæt ɔlmoʊs læft əz lukə ɹæn daʊn ɪndə spləɾɝz.

"Horses," Luca growled almost before Mat stopped walking. His frown took in all of them, but he focused most of his anger on Mat. A little the taller, Luca stretched to stare down at Mat. "That's what he wanted. I showed him the warrant exempting me from the horse lottery, signed by the High Lady Suroth herself, but was he impressed? It didn't matter to him that I rescued a highranking Seanchan." The woman had not been high-ranking, and he had not so much rescued her as given her a way to travel as a hired performer, but Luca always exaggerated to his own advantage. "I don't know how long that exemption is really good for, anyway. The Seanchan are desperate for horses. They might take it back any day!" His face was turning almost as red as his coat, and he jabbed a finger at Mat repeatedly. "You're going to get my horses taken! How do I move my show with no horses? Answer me that, if you can. I was ready to leave as soon as I saw that madness in the harbor, until you twisted my arm. You're going to get my head cut off! I could be a hundred miles from here, if not for you, riding in out of the night and snaring me in your crazy schemes! I'm not earning a penny here! There haven't been enough patrons the last three days to pay for feeding the animals one day! Half a day! I should have left a month ago! More! I should have!" Mat almost laughed as Luca ran down into splutters.

hɔɹsəz. ðət wɑz ɔl; dʒʌs hɔɹsəz. bɪsaɪdz, ðə noʊʃən ðət ðə ʃoʊz hɛvɪləɾən wæɡənz kəd kʌvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz ɪn faɪv deɪz wɑz əz luɾəkɹəs əz lukəz wæɡən. ðə mæn cʊɾə ɡɔn ə mʌnθ əɡoʊ, tu mʌnθs, ɪksɛp fəɹ wɑntɪŋ tə ik ɛvɹi kɑpɝ i kəɾ aʊɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ ən ɪts sintʃæn kɑŋkɝɝz. ən əz fəɹ tɔkɪŋ ɪm ɪndə steɪɪŋ, sɪks naɪts pæst, ðət hæd bɪn əz izi əz fɔlɪŋ aʊɾ ə bɛd. ɪnstɛɾ ə læfɪŋ, mæt pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn lukəz ʃoʊldɝ. ðə fɛloʊ wɑz veɪn əz ə pikɑk, ən ɡɹiɾi bɪsaɪdz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn meɪkɪŋ ɪm æŋɡɹiɝ ðən i ɔlɹɛɾi wɑz. "ɪf jud lɛf ðət naɪt, lukə, jə θɪŋk noʊbɑdi wʊɾə ɡɑɾən səspɪʃəs? jə wʊɾə hæd sintʃæn tɛɹɪŋ jəɹ wæɡənz əpɑɹt bɪfɔɹ jə meɪd tu liɡz. jə kəd seɪ aɪ seɪv jə fɹəm ðæt." lukə ɡlaʊɝd.

Horses. That was all; just horses. Besides, the notion that the show's heavyladen wagons could cover a hundred miles in five days was as ludicrous as Luca's wagon. The man could have gone a month ago, two months, except for wanting to eke every copper he could out of Ebou Dar and its Seanchan conquerors. And as for talking him into staying, six nights past, that had been as easy as falling out of bed. Instead of laughing, Mat put a hand on Luca's shoulder. The fellow was vain as a peacock, and greedy besides, but there was no point making him angrier than he already was. "If you'd left that night, Luca, you think nobody would have gotten suspicious? You would have had Seanchan tearing your wagons apart before you made two leagues. You could say I saved you from that." Luca glowered.

səm pipəl dʒʌs kəd nɑt si bɪɑn ðɛɹ oʊn noʊzɪz. "ɛniweɪ, jə kən stɑp wɝiɪŋ. əz sun əz tɑm ɹɪtɝnz fɹəm ðə sɪɾi, wi kən pʊɾ əz mɛni maɪlz bɪhaɪn əs əz jə wɑnt." lukə lɛp soʊ sʌɾənli ðət mæt stɛp bæk ɪn əlɑɹm, bʌɾ ɔl ðə mæn dɪd wɑz keɪpɝ ɪn ə lɪɾəl sɝkəl læfɪŋ. doʊmən ɡɑɡəld ət hɪm, ən ivən blɹɪk stɛɹd. səmtaɪmz, lukə simd ə flæt bʊl-ɡus ful.

Some people just could not see beyond their own noses. "Anyway, you can stop worrying. As soon as Thom returns from the city, we can put as many miles behind us as you want." Luca leaped so suddenly that Mat stepped back in alarm, but all the man did was caper in a little circle laughing. Domon goggled at him, and even Blaeric stared. Sometimes, Luca seemed a flat bull-goose fool.

lukə hæd bɛɹli bɪɡʌn ɪz dæns wən ɛdʒiənɪn ʃʌv mæt əweɪ fɹəm hɝ. "æz sun əz mɛɹɪlɪn ɹɪtɝnz? aɪ ɡeɪv ɔɹɾɝz noʊ wʌn wɑz tə liv!" hɝ ɡlɛɹ swʌŋ bɪtwin ɪm ən lukə ɪn koʊl fjʊɹi, ə koʊl ðət bɝnd. "aɪ ɪkspɛk maɪ ɔɹɾɝz tə bi oʊbeɪd!" lukə stɑp kəvɔɹɾɪŋ əbɹʌpli ən aɪɾ əɹ saɪdweɪz, ðən sʌɾənli meɪɾ əɹ ə baʊ wɪð soʊ mɛni flɝɪʃəz jə kəd pɹæktəkli si ðə kloʊk. jə kəɾ ɔlmoʊst si ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ɑn ðə kloʊk! hi θɔɾ i hæɾ ə weɪ wɪð ə wɪmən, lukə dɪd. "ju kəmænd, maɪ swit leɪɾi, ən aɪ lip tə oʊbeɪ." kʌmɪŋ əpɹaɪt, hi ʃɹʌɡd əpɑlədʒɛɾɪkli. "bʌt mæstɝ kɔθən əz ɡoʊld, ən aɪ fɪɹ ɡoʊl kəmænz maɪ fɝst oʊbiɾiəns." mæts tʃɛs fʊl ʌv ɡoʊl kɔɪnz ɪn ðɪs vɛɹi wæɡən hæd bɪn ɔl ði ɑɹm-twɪstɪŋ niɾəd tə kənvɪns hɪm. meɪbi mæt biɪŋ tɑvɝən hæd hɛlpt, bʌt fəɹ ɪnʌf ɡoʊld, vɑlən lukə wəd hɛlp kɪdnæp ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ɛdʒiənɪn dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, ɹɛɾi tə bɪɹeɪt lukə fɝðɝ, bʌt ðə mæn tɝn ɪz bæk ən wɛn skæmpɝɪŋ ʌp ðə stɛps ɪndə hɪz wæɡən ʃaʊɾɪŋ, "lətɛl! lətɛl! wi mʌst ɹst ɛvɹibɑɾi aʊɾ ɪmiɾiətli! wɝ livɪŋ ət læst, ðə mɪnət mɛɹɪlɪn ɹɪtɝnz! ðə laɪt bi pɹeɪzd!"

Luca had barely begun his dance when Egeanin shoved Mat away from her. "As soon as Merrilin returns? I gave orders no one was to leave!" Her glare swung between him and Luca in cold fury, a cold that burned. "I expect my orders to be obeyed!" Luca stopped cavorting abruptly and eyed her sideways, then suddenly made her a bow with so many flourishes you could practically see the cloak. You could almost see the embroidery on the cloak! He thought he had a way with a women, Luca did. "You command, my sweet Lady, and I leap to obey." Coming upright, he shrugged apologetically. "But Master Cauthon has gold, and I fear gold commands my first obedience." Mat's chest full of gold coins in this very wagon had been all the arm-twisting needed to convince him. Maybe Mat being ta'veren had helped, but for enough gold, Valan Luca would help kidnap the Dark One. Egeanin drew a deep breath, ready to berate Luca further, but the man turned his back and went scampering up the steps into his wagon shouting, "Latelle! Latelle! We must roust everybody out immediately! We're leaving at last, the minute Merrilin returns! The Light be praised!"

ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ, hi wɑz bæk əɡɛn, dæʃɪŋ bæk daʊn ðə ʃɔɹt stɛɹ fɑloʊd baɪ hɪz waɪf dʒɹɔɪŋ ə blæk vɛlvət kloʊk, soʊn wɪð ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ spæŋɡəlz, ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf. ə stɝn-feɪst wʊmən, ʃi ɹɪŋkəld əɹ noʊz ət mæt əz ðoʊ hi hæɾ ə bæd smɛl ən ɡeɪv ɛdʒiənɪn ə lʊk ðət laɪkli meɪɾ əɹ tʃɹeɪn bɛɹz klaɪm tʃɹiz. lətɛl dɪslaɪk ði aɪdiə ʌv ə wʊmən ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm əɹ hʌzbən ivən wən ʃi nu ɪt wɑz ə laɪ. lʌkəli, ʃi sim tə wɝʃəp lukə fəɹ səm ɹizən, ən ʃi laɪkt ɡoʊl nɪɹli əz wɛl əz i dɪd. lukə ɹæn tə ðə nɪɹəst wæɡən ən bɪɡæn paʊndɪŋ ɑn ðə dɔɹ, ən lətɛl dɪd ðə seɪm ət ðə nɛkst.

A moment later, he was back again, dashing back down the short stair followed by his wife drawing a black velvet cloak, sewn with glittering spangles, around herself. A stern-faced woman, she wrinkled her nose at Mat as though he had a bad smell and gave Egeanin a look that likely made her trained bears climb trees. Latelle disliked the idea of a woman running away from her husband even when she knew it was a lie. Luckily, she seemed to worship Luca for some reason, and she liked gold nearly as well as he did. Luca ran to the nearest wagon and began pounding on the door, and Latelle did the same at the next.

nɑt weɪɾɪŋ ɝaʊn tə wɑtʃ, mæt hɝiɾ ɔf daʊn wʌn ə ðə saɪd stʃɹits. mɔɹ ʌv ən æli kəmpɛɹd tə ðə meɪn stʃɹit, ɪt waʊn əmʌŋ ðə seɪm sɔɹɾ ʌv wæɡənz ən tɛns, ɔl ʃʌɾ ʌp taɪɾ əɡɛns ðə koʊld, wɪð smoʊk stʃɹimɪŋ fɹəm ðə mɛɾəl tʃɪmniz. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ plætfɔɹmz fəɹ pɝfɔɹmɝz hɪɹ, bʌt laɪnz fəɹ dʒɹaɪɪŋ lɔnʒɹi hʌŋ bɪtwin səm ə ðə wæɡənz, ən hɪɹ ən ðəɹ wʊɾən tɔɪz leɪ skæɾɝd ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðɪs stʃɹit wɑz fəɹ lɪvɪŋ oʊnli, ðə nɛɹoʊnəs mɛn tə dɪskɝɪdʒ aʊtsaɪɾɝz.

Not waiting around to watch, Mat hurried off down one of the side streets. More of an alley compared to the main street, it wound among the same sort of wagons and tents, all shut up tight against the cold, with smoke streaming from the metal chimneys. There were no platforms for performers here, but lines for drying laundry hung between some of the wagons, and here and there wooden toys lay scattered on the ground. This street was for living only, the narrowness meant to discourage outsiders.

hi muv kwɪkli dɪspaɪɾ ɪz hɪp - hi hæd wɔk moʊst ə ði eɪk aʊt - bʌɾ i hæd nɑt ɡɔn tɛn stɛps bɪfɔɹ ɛdʒiənɪn ən doʊmən kɑɾ ʌp tə hɪm. blɹɪk hæd vænɪʃt, pɹɑbli ɡɔn tə tɛl ðə sɪstɝz ðeɪ wɝ stɪl seɪf ən kəd faɪnəli liv. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, mæskɝeɪɾɪŋ əz sɝvəns sɪk wɪð wɝi ðət ðɛɹ mɪstʃɹəsəz hʌzbənd wəd kætʃ ðɛm, wɝ fɛɾ ʌp wɪð biɪŋ kənfaɪn tə ðɛɹ wæɡən, nɑt tə mɛnʃən fɛɾ ʌp wɪð ʃɛɹɪŋ wɪð ðə sʌl'-dæm. mæt hæd meɪɾ əm ʃɛɹ, soʊ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd wɑtʃ ðə mldəm waɪl ðə sʌldəm kɛp ði ɛɛs sədaɪ aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛɹ. stɪl mæt wɑz ɡlæd blɹɪk hæd teɪkən əweɪ ðə nəsɛsəɾi fəɹ ɪm tə vɪzət ðət wæɡən əɡɛn. wʌn əɹ ənʌðɝ ə ðə sɪstɝz hæd sʌmən ɪm fɔɹ əɹ faɪv taɪmz ə deɪ sɪns ðɛɹ ɪskeɪp fɹəm ðə sɪɾi, ən i wɛnt wən i kəd nɑɾ əvɔɪɾ ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɛvɝ ə plɛzən ɪkspɪɹiəns. ɛdʒiənɪn dɪd nɑt pʊɾ əɹ ɑɹm ɝaʊn ɪm ðɪs taɪm. ʃi stʃɹoʊɾ əɾ ɪz saɪd stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, nɑt bɑðɝɪŋ tə tʃɛk əɹ wɪɡ, fəɹ wʌns. doʊmən lʌmbɝd bɪhaɪn laɪk ə bɛɹ, mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ ɪn ɪz hɛvi ɪliɑnɝ æksɛnt. ðə stɑkɪŋ kæp ɪkspoʊz ðə fæk ðəɾ ɪz dɑɹk bɪɹd stɑpt əbɹʌpli ət ðə mɪɾəl ʌv itʃ ɪɹ, wɪð oʊnli stʌbəl əbʌv. ɪt meɪɾ ɪm lʊk . . .

He moved quickly despite his hip - he had walked most of the ache out - but he had not gone ten steps before Egeanin and Domon caught up to him. Blaeric had vanished, probably gone to tell the sisters they were still safe and could finally leave. The Aes Sedai, masquerading as servants sick with worry that their mistress's husband would catch them, were fed up with being confined to their wagon, not to mention fed up with sharing with the sul'-dam. Mat had made them share, so the Aes Sedai could watch the ml'dam while the sul'dam kept the Aes Sedai out of his hair. Still Mat was glad Blaeric had taken away the necessity for him to visit that wagon again. One or another of the sisters had summoned him four or five times a day since their escape from the city, and he went when he could not avoid it, but it was never a pleasant experience. Egeanin did not put her arm around him this time. She strode at his side staring straight ahead, not bothering to check her wig, for once. Domon lumbered behind like a bear, muttering under his breath in his heavy Illianer accent. The stocking cap exposed the fact that his dark beard stopped abruptly at the middle of each ear, with only stubble above. It made him look . . .

ənfɪnɪʃt. "tu kæptənz ɑn wʌn ʃɪp meɪk ʃʊɹ kɔɹs fəɹ dɪzæstɝ," ɛdʒiənɪn dʒɹɔld wɪð oʊvɝdʌn peɪʃəns. hɝ ʌndɝstændɪŋ smaɪl lʊkt əz ɪf ɪt hɝɾ əɹ feɪs.

unfinished. "Two captains on one ship make sure course for disaster," Egeanin drawled with overdone patience. Her understanding smile looked as if it hurt her face.

"wi ɑɹən ɑn ə ʃɪp," mæt ɹɪplaɪd.

"We aren't on a ship," Mat replied.

"ðə pɹɪnsəpəlz ðə seɪm, kɔθən! jə ɑɹ ə fɑɹmɝ. aɪ noʊ jəɹ ə ɡʊd mæn ɪn ə taɪt spɑt." ɛdʒiənɪn ʃɑɾ ə dɑɹk lʊk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət doʊmən. hi wɑz ðə wʌn u hæd bɹɔɾ əɹ ən mæt təɡɛðɝ, bæk wən ʃi θɔt ʃi wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ ə haɪɝd mæn. "bʌt ðɪs sɪtʃueɪʃən nidz dʒʌdʒmən ən ɪkspɪɹiəns. wɝ ɪn deɪnʒɝəs wɔɾɝz, ən juv noʊ nɑlədʒ ə kəmænd."

"The principle's the same, Cauthon! You are a farmer. I know you're a good man in a tight spot." Egeanin shot a dark look over her shoulder at Domon. He was the one who had brought her and Mat together, back when she thought she was getting a hired man. "But this situation needs judgment and experience. We're in dangerous waters, and you have no knowledge of command."

"mɔɹ ðən jə maɪt θɪŋk," hi toʊld əɹ dʒɹaɪli. hi cʊɾə spʌn aʊɾ ə lɪst ə ðə bæɾəlz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd kəmændɪŋ, bʌɾ oʊnli ən hɪstɔɹiən wəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz moʊst ə ðɛm, ən meɪbi nɑɾ ivən ən hɪstɔɹiən. noʊ wʌn wəd bɪliv ɪt, ɛniweɪ. hi sɝɾənli wəd nɑɾ ɪf sʌmwʌn ɛls hæd meɪd ðət kleɪm. "ʃʊdn jə ən doʊmən bi ɡɛɾɪŋ ɹɛɾi? jə wʊdnt wɑnə liv ɛniθɪŋ bɪhaɪnd." ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi oʊnd wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi stoʊɾ əweɪ ɪn ðə wæɡən ʃi ən mæt ʃɛɹd wɪð doʊmən - nɑɾ ə kʌmftəɹbəl ɝeɪnʒmənt, ðət - bʌɾ i kwɪkən ɪz stɛp, hoʊpɪŋ ʃi wəd teɪk ðə hɪnt. bɪsaɪdz, hi sɔ hɪz dɛstəneɪʃən əhɛd. ðə bɹaɪt blu wɔl-tɛnt, kɹaʊɾəd bɪtwin ə vɪɹələn jɛloʊ wæɡən ən ən ɛmɹəld ɡɹin wʌn, wɑz bɛɹli lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə hoʊl θɹi kɑts, bʌt pɹəvaɪɾɪŋ ʃɛltɝ fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn i bɹɔɾ aʊɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ hæd ɹikwaɪɝd bɹaɪbz tə meɪk pipəl muv ən mɔɹ bɹaɪbz tə meɪk ʌðɝz lɛɾ əm ɪn. wʌɾ i hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə haɪɝ wɑz wʌt ði oʊnɝz wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə lɛɾ ɪm hæv. ət ɹeɪts suɾəbəl fəɹ ə ɡʊɾ ɪn. dʒulɪn, ə dɑɹk kɑmpæk mæn wɪð ʃɔɹt blæk hɛɹ, wɑz sɪɾɪŋ kɹɑslɛɡd ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə tɛnt wɪð oʊlvɝ, ə θɪn lɪɾəl bɔɪ, ɪf nɑt soʊ skɪni əz wən mæt fɝst sɔ hɪm, ən ʃɔɹt fəɹ tɛn, ði eɪdʒ i kleɪmd. boʊθ koʊtləs dɪspaɪt ðə wɪnd, ðeɪ wɝ pleɪɪŋ sneɪks ən fɑksəz ɑn ə bɔɹd ðə bɔɪz dɛd fɑðɝ hæd dʒɹɔn fəɹ ɪm ɑn ə pis ə ɹɛd klɔθ.

"More than you might think," he told her dryly. He could have spun out a list of the battles he remembered commanding, but only an historian would recognize most of them, and maybe not even an historian. No one would believe it, anyway. He certainly would not if someone else had made that claim. "Shouldn't you and Domon be getting ready? You wouldn't want to leave anything behind." Everything she owned was already stowed away in the wagon she and Mat shared with Domon - not a comfortable arrangement, that - but he quickened his step, hoping she would take the hint. Besides, he saw his destination ahead. The bright blue wall-tent, crowded between a virulent yellow wagon and an emerald green one, was barely large enough to hold three cots, but providing shelter for everyone he brought out of Ebou Dar had required bribes to make people move and more bribes to make others let them in. What he had been able to hire was what the owners were willing to let him have. At rates suitable for a good inn. Juilin, a dark compact man with short black hair, was sitting crosslegged on the ground in front of the tent with Olver, a thin little boy, if not so skinny as when Mat first saw him, and short for ten, the age he claimed. Both coatless despite the wind, they were playing Snakes and Foxes on a board the boy's dead father had drawn for him on a piece of red cloth.

tɔsɪŋ ðə daɪs, oʊlvɝ kaʊntəd ðə pɪps kɛɹfəli ən kənsɪɾɝd ɪz muv əlɔŋ ðə spaɪɾɝwɛb ə blæk laɪnz ən æɹoʊz. ðə tɛɹən θif-kætʃɝ wɑz peɪɪŋ lɛs ətɛnʃən tə ðə ɡeɪm. hi sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾ ət ðə saɪɾ ə mæt.

Tossing the dice, Olver counted the pips carefully and considered his move along the spiderweb of black lines and arrows. The Tairen thief-catcher was paying less attention to the game. He sat up straight at the sight of Mat.

əbɹʌpli, noʊl dɑɹɾɪd ɝaʊn fɹəm ðə ɹɪɹ ə ðə tɛnt, bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹɾ əz ɪf i hæd bɪn ɹʌnɪŋ.

Abruptly, Noal darted around from the rear of the tent, breathing hard as if he had been running.

dʒulɪn ɡlænst ʌp ɪn sɝpɹaɪz ət ði oʊl mæn, ən mæt fɹaʊnd. hi hæd toʊl noʊl tə kʌm stʃɹeɪt hɪɹ.

Juilin glanced up in surprise at the old man, and Mat frowned. He had told Noal to come straight here.

wɛɹ hæɾ i ɡɔn ɪnstɛd? noʊl lʊkt əɾ ɪm ɪkspɛktənli, nɑt wɪð ɛni ɡɪlt əɹ ɪmbɛɹəsmənt, dʒʌst iɡɝ tə hɪɹ wʌt mæt hæd tə seɪ.

Where had he gone instead? Noal looked at him expectantly, not with any guilt or embarrassment, just eager to hear what Mat had to say.

"ju noʊ əbaʊt ðə sintʃæn?" dʒulɪn æskt, tɝnɪŋ ɪz ətɛnʃən tə mæt, tu.

"You know about the Seanchan?" Juilin asked, turning his attention to Mat, too.

ə ʃædoʊ muvd ɪnsaɪd ðə tɛns ɛntʃɹi flæps, ən ə dɑɹk-hɛɹd wʊmən, siɾəd ɑn ði ɛn ʌv wʌn ə ðə kɑts wɪð ən oʊld ɡɹeɪ kloʊk ɹæpt ɝaʊn hɝ, lin fɔɹwɝd tə ɹɛst ə hæn ɑn dʒulɪnz ɑɹm.

A shadow moved inside the tent's entry flaps, and a dark-haired woman, seated on the end of one of the cots with an old gray cloak wrapped around her, leaned forward to rest a hand on Juilin's arm.

ən tə ɡɪv mæt ə wɛɹi lʊk. θɛɹə wɑz pɹɪɾi, ɪf jə laɪkt ə maʊθ ðəɾ ɔlweɪz sim tə bi paʊɾɪŋ, ən ɪt sim ðət dʒulɪn dɪd, fɹəm ðə weɪ hi smaɪld əɾ əɹ ɹiəʃɝɪŋli ən pæɾəd əɹ hænd. ʃi wɑz ɔlsoʊ æməðɛɹə æɛlfdin kæsmɪɹ laʊnoʊ, pɑnɑɹtʃ ə tæɹɑbən ən ðə nɛks θɪŋ tə ə kwin. ət list, ʃi hæd bɪn, wʌns. dʒulɪn hæd noʊn ðæt, ən soʊ hæd tɑm, jɛt noʊ wʌn θɔt tə tɛl mæt əntɪl ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə ʃoʊ. hi səpoʊzd ɪt hɑɹdli mæɾɝd, əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. ʃi ænsɝd fæstɝ tə θɛɹə ðən tə æməðɛɹə, ʃi meɪd noʊ dɪmænz, ɪksɛpt ɑn dʒulɪnz taɪm, ən ðəɹ sim lɪɾəl tʃæns ɛniwʌn wəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz əɹ hɪɹ. ɪn ɛni keɪs, mæt hoʊpt ʃi fɛl mɔɹ ðən ɡɹæɾətud fəɹ biɪŋ ɹɛskjud, kəz dʒulɪn sɝɾənli fɛl mɔɹ fəɹ hɝ. hu wɑz tə seɪ ə dɪθɹoʊn pɑnɑɹtʃ kəd nɑt fɔl ɪn lʌv wɪð ə θif-kætʃɝ? stʃɹeɪnʒɝ θɪŋz hæd hæpənd. ðoʊ hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i kəd neɪm wʌn, ɔfhænd. "ðeɪ dʒʌst wɑntəd tə si ðə wɔɹən fəɹ lukəz hɔɹsəz," hi sɛd, ən dʒulɪn nɑɾəd, vɪzəbli ɹɪlæksɪŋ ə lɪɾəl.

And to give Mat a wary look. Thera was pretty, if you liked a mouth that always seemed to be pouting, and it seemed that Juilin did, from the way he smiled at her reassuringly and patted her hand. She was also Amathera Aelfdene Casmir Lounault, Panarch of Tarabon and the next thing to a queen. At least, she had been, once. Juilin had known that, and so had Thom, yet no one thought to tell Mat until they reached the show. He supposed it hardly mattered, alongside everything else. She answered faster to Thera than to Amathera, she made no demands, except on Juilin's time, and there seemed little chance anyone would recognize her here. In any case, Mat hoped she felt more than gratitude for being rescued, because Juilin certainly felt more for her. Who was to say a dethroned panarch could not fall in love with a thief-catcher? Stranger things had happened. Though he was not sure he could name one, offhand. "They just wanted to see the warrant for Luca's horses," he said, and Juilin nodded, visibly relaxing a little.

"æz wɛl ðeɪ dɪdn kaʊn ðə hɔɹslaɪnz." ðə wɔɹən lɪstəd ði ɪɡzæk nʌmbɝ ə hɔɹsəz lukə wɑz əlaʊd tə kip. ðə sintʃæn kəd bi dʒɛnɝəs wɪð ðɛɹ ɹɪwɔɹdz, bʌt ɡɪvən ðɛɹ nid fəɹ maʊns ən wæɡən timz, ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ əbaʊt tə hæn ɛniwʌn ə laɪsəns tə sɛɾ ʌp hɔɹs tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ. "æt bɛst, ðeɪ wʊɾə teɪkən ði ɛkstʃɹə. ət wɝst. . . ." ðə θif-kætʃɝ ʃɹʌɡd. ənʌðɝ tʃɪɹfəl soʊl.

"As well they didn't count the horselines." The warrant listed the exact number of horses Luca was allowed to keep. The Seanchan could be generous with their rewards, but given their need for mounts and wagon teams, they were not about to hand anyone a license to set up horse trading. "At best, they would have taken the extra. At worst. . . ." The thief-catcher shrugged. Another cheerful soul.

wɪð ə ɡæsp, θɛɹə sʌɾənli pʊld əɹ kloʊk taɪɾɝ ən dʒɝk bæk ɪndə ðə dɛpθs ə ðə tɛnt.

With a gasp, Thera suddenly pulled her cloak tighter and jerked back into the depths of the tent.

dʒulɪn lʊk bɪhaɪn mæt, hɪz aɪz ɡoʊɪŋ hɑɹd, ən ðə tɛɹən kəd mætʃ ðə wɔɹɾɝz wən ɪt keɪm tə hɑɹd. ɛdʒiənɪn dɪd nɑt sim tə kætʃ hɪns, ən ʃi wɑz ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət ðə tɛnt. doʊmən stʊd bɪsaɪɾ əɹ wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz foʊldəd, sʌkɪŋ ɪz tiθ ɪn θɔɾ əɹ fɔɹs peɪʃəns. "ɡɛt jəɹ tɛn pækt ʌp, sændɑɹ," ɛdʒiənɪn ɔɹɾɝd. "ðə ʃoʊ ɪz livɪŋ əz sun əz mɛɹɪlɪn ɹɪtɝnz." hɝ dʒɔ taɪɾənd, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt kwaɪt ɡlɛɹ ət mæt. nɑt kwaɪt. "meɪk ʃʊɹ jəɹ . . . wʊmən . . . dʌznt ɡɪv ɛni tʃɹʌbəl." moʊs leɪtli, θɛɹə hæd bɪn ə sɝvənt, dækoʊvæl, ðə pɹɑpɝɾi ʌv ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ, əntɪl dʒulɪn stoʊl əɹ əweɪ.

Juilin looked behind Mat, his eyes going hard, and the Tairen could match the Warders when it came to hard. Egeanin did not seem to catch hints, and she was glaring at the tent. Domon stood beside her with his arms folded, sucking his teeth in thought or forced patience. "Get your tent packed up, Sandar," Egeanin ordered. "The show is leaving as soon as Merrilin returns." Her jaw tightened, and she did not quite glare at Mat. Not quite. "Make sure your . . . woman . . . doesn't give any trouble." Most lately, Thera had been a servant, da'covale, the property of the High Lady Suroth, until Juilin stole her away.

tə ɛdʒiənɪn, stilɪŋ dækoʊvæl wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz bæɾ əz fɹiɪŋ deɪmeɪn.

To Egeanin, stealing da'covale was almost as bad as freeing damane.

"kæn aɪ ɹaɪd wɪnd?" oʊlvɝ ɪkskleɪmd, baʊndɪŋ tə hɪz fit. "kæn aɪ, mæt? kən aɪ, laɪlwɪn?" ɛdʒiənɪn æktʃəli  smaɪld ət hɪm. mæt hæd jɛt tə si hɝ smaɪl əɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls, ivən doʊmən. "nɑt jɛt," mæt sɛd. nɑɾ əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ fɑɹ ɪnʌf fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ ðət noʊ wʌn wɑz laɪkli tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə ɡɹeɪ wɪnɪŋ ɹeɪsəz wɪð ə smɔl bɔɪ ɑn ɪz bæk. "ɪn ə fju deɪz, meɪbi. dʒulɪn, wɪl jə tɛl ði ʌðɝz?

"Can I ride Wind?" Olver exclaimed, bounding to his feet. "Can I, Mat? Can I, Leilwin?" Egeanin actually smiled at him. Mat had yet to see her smile at anyone else, even Domon. "Not yet," Mat said. Not until they were far enough from Ebou Dar that no one was likely to remember the gray winning races with a small boy on his back. "In a few days, maybe. Juilin, will you tell the others?

blɹɪk ɔlɹɛɾi noʊz, soʊ ðə sɪstɝz ɑɹ teɪkən kɛɹ ʌv." dʒulɪn dɪd nɑt weɪs taɪm, əsaɪd fɹəm dʌkɪŋ ɪnsaɪd ðə tɛn tə ɹiəʃʊɹ θɛɹə. ʃi sim tə nid ɹiəʃʊɹɪŋ fɹikwənli. wən i keɪm aʊt, kæɹiɪŋ ə dɑɹk tɛɹən koʊt ðət wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ʃoʊ wɛɹ, hi toʊld oʊlvɝ tə pʊt ðə ɡeɪm əweɪ ən hɛlp θɛɹə wɪð ðə pækɪŋ əntɪl i ɹɪtɝnd, ðən sɛɾəld ɪz flæt-tɑp kɑnɪkəl ɹɛd hæɾ ɑn ɪz hɛɾ ən stɑɹɾəd ɔf, ʃɹʌɡɪŋ ɪndə ðə koʊt. hi nɛvɝ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst əɾ ɛdʒiənɪn. ʃi kənsɪɾɝd ɪm ə θif, əfɛnsɪv ɪn ɪtsɛlf tə ə θif-kætʃɝ, ən ðə tɛɹən hæd noʊ lʌv fəɹ hɝ, iðɝ. mæt stɑɹɾəd tə æsk noʊl wɛɹ i hæd bɪn, bʌt ði oʊl mæn dɑɹɾɪd nɪmbli æftɝ dʒulɪn, kɔlɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ðəɾ i wəd hɛlp lɛt ði ʌðɝz noʊ ðə ʃoʊ wɑz livɪŋ. wɛl, tu kəd spɹɛd ðə wɝd fæstɝ ðən wʌn - veɪnɪn ən ðə fɔɹ sɝvaɪvɪŋ ɹɛdʒɹmz ʃɛɹɾ ə kɹaʊɾəd tɛn ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə ʃoʊ, waɪl noʊl hɪmsɛlf ʃɛɹɾ ənʌðɝ wɪð tɑm ən ðə tu sɝvɪŋ mɛn, ləpɪn ən nɹɪm, ɑn ði ɑpəzət saɪd - ən ðə kwɛstʃən kəd weɪt. pɹɑbli, hi hæd dʒʌs dɪleɪd tə pʊɾ ɪz pɹɛʃəs fɪʃ sʌmwɛɹ seɪf. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðə kwɛstʃən sʌɾənli simd ənɪmpɔɹɾənt. ðə nɔɪz ə pipəl ʃaʊɾɪŋ fəɹ hɔɹs hænlɝz tə bɹɪŋ ðɛɹ timz, ən ʌðɝz dɪmændɪŋ ət ðə tɑp ə ðɛɹ lʌŋz tə noʊ wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ, wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə fɪl ðə kæmp.

Blaeric already knows, so the sisters are taken care of." Juilin did not waste time, aside from ducking inside the tent to reassure Thera. She seemed to need reassuring frequently. When he came out, carrying a dark Tairen coat that was beginning to show wear, he told Olver to put the game away and help Thera with the packing until he returned, then settled his flat-topped conical red hat on his head and started off, shrugging into the coat. He never so much as glanced at Egeanin. She considered him a thief, offensive in itself to a thief-catcher, and the Tairen had no love for her, either. Mat started to ask Noal where he had been, but the old man darted nimbly after Juilin, calling over his shoulder that he would help let the others know the show was leaving. Well, two could spread the word faster than one - Vanin and the four surviving Redarms shared a crowded tent on one side of the show, while Noal himself shared another with Thom and the two serving men, Lopin and Nerim, on the opposite side - and the question could wait. Probably, he had just delayed to put his precious fish somewhere safe. In any case, the question suddenly seemed unimportant. The noise of people shouting for horse handlers to bring their teams, and others demanding at the top of their lungs to know what was happening, was beginning to fill the camp.

ɑdʒɹiə, ə slɪm wʊmən hoʊldɪŋ ə flaʊɝd ɡɹin ɹoʊb ɝaʊn hɝ, keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ ʌp ɪn bɛɹ fiɾ ən vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə jɛloʊ wæɡən, wɛɹ ði ʌðɝ fɔɹ kəntɔɹʃənɪsts lɪvd. sʌmbɑɾi ɪn ðə ɡɹin wæɡən bɛloʊd hɔɹsli ðət pipəl wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə slip. ə hændfʊl ə pɝfɔɹmɝz' tʃɪlʒɹən, səm pɝfɔɹmɝz ðɛmsɛlvz, dæʃt baɪ, ən oʊlvɝ lʊkt ʌp fɹəm foʊldɪŋ ðə ɡeɪm. ðət wɑz ɪz moʊs pɹaɪz pəzɛʃən, bʌɾ ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðæt, hi pleɪnli wʊɾə ɡɔn æftɝ ðɛm. ɪt wɑz gɑnə teɪk səm taɪm jɛt bɪfɔɹ ðə ʃoʊ wɑz ɹɛɾi tə tʃɹævəl, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt wʌt meɪd mæt ɡɹoʊn. hi hæd dʒʌs hɝd ðoʊz blʌɾi daɪs stɑɹt ɹætlɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛɾ əɡɛn.

Adria, a slim woman holding a flowered green robe around her, came running up in bare feet and vanished into the yellow wagon, where the other four contortionists lived. Somebody in the green wagon bellowed hoarsely that people were trying to sleep. A handful of performers' children, some performers themselves, dashed by, and Olver looked up from folding the game. That was his most prized possession, but if not for that, he plainly would have gone after them. It was going to take some time yet before the show was ready to travel, but that was not what made Mat groan. He had just heard those bloody dice start rattling in his head again.

tʃæptɝ θɹi

CHAPTER 3

eɪ fæn ə kʌlɝz ət dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ tə kɝs əɹ wip. wɪð ðə soʊlʒɝz ɡɔn ən ɛbu dɑɹ əbaʊt tə bi lɛft ɪn ɪz dʌst, ðəɹ sim noʊ ɹizən fəɹ ðə daɪs, bʌt ðəɹ nɛvɝ wɑz ə blʌɾi ɹizən i kəd si əntɪl ɪt wɑz tu leɪt. wʌtɛvɝ wɑz kʌmɪŋ maɪt laɪ deɪz ɪn ðə fjutʃɝ əɹ oʊnli ən aʊɝ, bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ bɪn eɪbəl tə fɪɡjɝ ɪɾ aʊɾ əhɛɾ ə taɪm. ði oʊnli sɝɾəntiz wɝ ðət sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt - əɹ daɪɹ - wɑz gɑnə hæpən ən ðəɾ i wəd nɑt bi eɪbəl tə əvɔɪɾ ɪt. səmtaɪmz, laɪk ðət naɪɾ ət ðə ɡeɪt, hi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ðə daɪs hæd bɪn tʌmbəlɪŋ ivən æftɝ ðeɪ stɑpt. ɔl i ɹɪli nu fəɹ ʃʊɹ wɑz ðət haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ðə daɪs meɪɾ ɪm twɪtʃ laɪk ə ɡoʊt wɪð ði ɪtʃ, wʌns ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd, hi dɪd nɑt wɑn əm tə stɑp ɛvɝ. bʌt ðeɪ dɪd. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ðeɪ ɔlweɪz dɪd.

A Fan of Colors at did not know whether to curse or weep. With the soldiers gone and Ebou Dar about to be left in his dust, there seemed no reason for the dice, but there never was a bloody reason he could see until it was too late. Whatever was coming might lie days in the future or only an hour, but he had never been able to figure it out ahead of time. The only certainties were that something important - or dire - was going to happen and that he would not be able to avoid it. Sometimes, like that night at the gate, he did not understand why the dice had been tumbling even after they stopped. All he really knew for sure was that however much the dice made him twitch like a goat with the itch, once they started, he did not want them to stop ever. But they did. Sooner or later, they always did.

"ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt, mæt?" oʊlvɝ sɛd. "ðoʊz sintʃæn kæn kætʃ ʌs." hi ətɛmptəd ɡɹʌf kənvɪkʃən, bʌɾ ə hɪn ə kwɛstʃən hʌŋ ɪn ɪz vɔɪs.

"Are you all right, Mat?" Olver said. "Those Seanchan can't catch us." He attempted gruff conviction, but a hint of question hung in his voice.

əbɹʌpli mæt ɹilaɪzd i hæd bɪn stɛɹɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ. ɛdʒiənɪn fɹaʊn əɾ ɪm waɪl fɪdlɪŋ æbsəntmaɪndɪdli wɪð əɹ wɪɡ, pleɪnli æŋɡɹi ðəɾ i wɑz ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ hɝ. doʊmənz aɪz hæɾ ə stuɾiəs lʊk; ɪf i wɑz nɑt dəsaɪɾɪŋ wɛðɝ tə bi əpsɛɾ ɑn ɛdʒiənɪnz bɪhæf, mæt wəɾ iɾ ɪz kæp. ivən θɛɹə wɑz pikɪŋ əɾ ɪm pæs ðə tɛns ɛntʃɹi flæp, ən ʃi ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪd tə kip aʊɾ ʌv ɛdʒiənɪnz saɪt. hi kəd nɑɾ ɪkspleɪn. oʊnli ə mæn wɪð pɔɹədʒ fəɹ bɹeɪnz wəd bɪliv i ɡɑt wɔɹnɪŋz fɹəm hɪɹɪŋ daɪs noʊ wʌn kəd si. əɹ meɪbi ə mæn mɑɹk baɪ ðə paʊɝ. əɹ baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. hi wɑz nɑɾ æŋkʃəs tə hæv ɛni ʌv ðoʊz θɪŋz səspɛktəɾ əbaʊt hɪm. ən ɪt maɪt bi ðət naɪɾ ət ðə ɡeɪɾ ɔl oʊvɝ əɡɛn. noʊ, ðɪs wɑz nɑɾ ə sikɹəɾ i kɛɹd tə ɹɪvil. ɪt wəd də noʊ ɡʊd, ɛniweɪ. "ðeɪl nɛvɝ kætʃ ʌs, oʊlvɝ, nɑt jə ən mi." hi ɹʌfəl ðə bɔɪz hɛɹ, ən oʊlvɝ ɡeɪv ə waɪd-maʊðd ɡɹɪn, kɑnfəɾəns ɹɪstɔɹɾ əz izi əz ðæt. "nɑt soʊ lɔŋ əz wi kip əɹ aɪz oʊpən ən əɹ wɪts əbaʊɾ ʌs. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, jə kən faɪn ə weɪ aʊɾ ʌv ɛni dɪfəkəlti ɪf jə kip jəɹ aɪz ən wɪts ʃɑɹp, bʌɾ ɪf jə doʊnt, jəl tʃɹɪp oʊvɝ jəɹ oʊn fit." oʊlvɝ nɑɾəd ɡɹeɪvli, bʌt mæt mɛn ðə ɹimaɪndɝ fəɹ ði ʌðɝz. əɹ meɪbi hɪmsɛlf. laɪt, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ ɛni ʌv əm kəd bi mɔɹ əlɝt. ɪksɛp fəɹ oʊlvɝ, hu θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ɔl ə ɡɹeɪɾ ædvɛntʃɝ, ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl bɪn dʒʌmpɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ skɪnz sɪns bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ ðə sɪɾi. "ɡoʊ hɛlp θɛɹə laɪk dʒulɪn toʊl ju, oʊlvɝ."

Abruptly Mat realized he had been staring at nothing. Egeanin frowned at him while fiddling absentmindedly with her wig, plainly angry that he was ignoring her. Domon's eyes had a studious look; if he was not deciding whether to be upset on Egeanin's behalf, Mat would eat his cap. Even Thera was peeking at him past the tent's entry flap, and she always tried to keep out of Egeanin's sight. He could not explain. Only a man with porridge for brains would believe he got warnings from hearing dice no one could see. Or maybe a man marked by the Power. Or by the Dark One. He was not anxious to have any of those things suspected about him. And it might be that night at the gate all over again. No, this was not a secret he cared to reveal. It would do no good, anyway. "They'll never catch us, Olver, not you and me." He ruffled the boy's hair, and Olver gave a wide-mouthed grin, confidence restored as easy as that. "Not so long as we keep our eyes open and our wits about us. Remember, you can find a way out of any difficulty if you keep your eyes and wits sharp, but if you don't, you'll trip over your own feet." Olver nodded gravely, but Mat meant the reminder for the others. Or maybe himself. Light, there was no way any of them could be more alert. Except for Olver, who thought it was all a great adventure, they had all been jumping out of their skins since before leaving the city. "Go help Thera like Juilin told you, Olver."

ə ʃɑɹp ɡʌs kʌt θɹu mæts koʊt, meɪkɪŋ ɪm ʃɪvɝ. "æn pʊt jəɹ koʊɾ ɑn; ɪts koʊld," hi æɾəd əz ðə bɔɪ dʌk pæs θɛɹə ɪndə ðə tɛnt. ɹʌsəlz ən skɹeɪpɪŋ saʊnz fɹəm ɪnsaɪd sɛd ðəɾ oʊlvɝ wɑz sɛɾɪŋ tə wɝk, wɪð əɹ wɪθaʊɾ ɪz koʊt, bʌt θɛɹə ɹɪmeɪn kɹaʊtʃt ət ðə tɛns ɛntʃɹəns, piɹɪŋ ət mæt. fəɹ ɔl ðə kɛɹ ɛnibəɾi bʌt mæt kɔθən tʊk, ðə bɔɪ kəd kætʃ ɪz dɛθ.

A sharp gust cut through Mat's coat, making him shiver. "And put your coat on; it's cold," he added as the boy ducked past Thera into the tent. Rustles and scraping sounds from inside said that Olver was setting to work, with or without his coat, but Thera remained crouched at the tent's entrance, peering at Mat. For all the care anybody but Mat Cauthon took, the boy could catch his death.

əz sun əz oʊlvɝ dɪsəpɪɹd, ɛdʒiənɪn stɛp kloʊsɝ tə mæt, hɝ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps əɡɛn, ən i ɡɹoʊn ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. "wi ɑɹ gɑnə sɛɾəl mæɾɝz naʊ, kɔθən," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə hɑɹd vɔɪs.

As soon as Olver disappeared, Egeanin stepped closer to Mat, her fists on her hips again, and he groaned under his breath. "We are going to settle matters now, Cauthon," she said in a hard voice.

"naʊ! aɪ woʊn əv əɹ dʒɝni ɹɛk baɪ jə kaʊntɝməndɪŋ maɪ ɔɹɾɝz."

"Now! I won't have our journey wrecked by you countermanding my orders."

"ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ tə sɛɾəl," hi toʊl hɝ. "aɪ wɑz nɛvɝ jəɹ haɪɝd hænd, ən ðæts ðæt." sʌmhaʊ, hɝ feɪs mænədʒ tə ɡɹoʊ hɑɹɾɝ, əz ɡʊɾ əz ʃaʊɾɪŋ ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt si mæɾɝz laɪk ðæt. ðə wʊmən wɑz əz təneɪʃəs əz ə snæpɪŋ tɝɾəl, bʌt ðəɹ hæd tə bi səm weɪ tə pɹaɪ hɝ dʒɔz fɹəm ɪz lɛɡ. bɝn ɪm ɪf i wɑntəd tə bi əloʊn wɪð ðə daɪs ɹoʊlɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd, jɛt ðət wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən hævɪŋ tə lɪsən tə ðɛm waɪl ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð hɝ. "aɪm gɑnə si tuɑn bɪfɔɹ wi liv." ðə wɝdz pɑpt aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ klɪɹ ɪn ɪz hɛd. hi ɹilaɪz ðət ðeɪ hæd bɪn laɪɪŋ ðəɹ fəɹ səm taɪm, ðoʊ, mɝki ən sloʊli səlɪɾəfaɪɪŋ. ðə blʌd dʒɹeɪn fɹəm ɛdʒiənɪnz tʃiks əz sun əz tuɑnz neɪm lɛft ɪz maʊθ, ən i hɝɾ ə skwik fɹəm θɛɹə fɑloʊd baɪ ðə snæp ə ðə tɛntflæps biɪŋ dʒɝkt ʃʌt. ðə wʌntaɪm pɑnɑɹtʃ hæɾ əbzɔɹbd ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni sintʃæn weɪz waɪl ʃi wɑz sjuɹɔθs pɹɑpɝɾi, ən mɛni ʌv ðɛɹ tæbuz əz wɛl. ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz meɪɾ ə hɑɹɾɝ stʌf, haʊɛvɝ. "waɪ?" ʃi dɪmændəd. ɪn ɔlmoʊs ðə seɪm bɹɛθ, ʃi wɛn ɑn, æŋkʃəs ən fjʊɹiəs ɔl ət wʌns. "ju mʌsnt kɔl əɹ ðæt. jə mʌst ʃoʊ ɹɪspɛkt." hɑɹɾɝ ɪn səm weɪz. mæt ɡɹɪnd, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt sim tə si ðə dʒoʊk. ɹɪspɛkt? ðəɹ wɑz pɹɛʃəs lɪɾəl ɹɪspɛkt ɪn stʌfɪŋ ə ɡæɡ ɪn sʌmwʌnz maʊθ ən ɹoʊlɪŋ əm ʌp ɪn ə wɔl hæŋɪŋ. kɔlɪŋ tuɑn haɪ leɪɾi əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls wɑz nɑt gɑnə tʃeɪnʒ ðæt. ʌv kɔɹs, ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz mɔɹ wɪlɪŋ tə tɔk əbaʊt fɹiɪŋ deɪmeɪn ðən ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tuɑn. ɪf ʃi cʊɾə pɹitɛndəd ðə kɪdnæpɪŋ nɛvɝ hæpənd, ʃi wəd hæv, ən əz ɪt wɑz, ʃi tʃɹaɪd. laɪt, ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɪt waɪl ɪt wɑz hæpənɪŋ. ɪn əɹ maɪnd, ɛni ʌðɝ kɹaɪmz ʃi maɪɾ əv kəmɪɾəd peɪl tə nʌθɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðæt. "bɪkɔz aɪ wɑnə tɔk wɪð hɝ," hi sɛd. ən waɪ nɑt? hi hæd tə, sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ.

"There's nothing to settle," he told her. "I was never your hired hand, and that's that." Somehow, her face managed to grow harder, as good as shouting that she did not see matters like that. The woman was as tenacious as a snapping turtle, but there had to be some way to pry her jaws from his leg. Burn him if he wanted to be alone with the dice rolling in his head, yet that was better than having to listen to them while arguing with her. "I'm going to see Tuon before we leave." The words popped out of his mouth before they were clear in his head. He realized that they had been lying there for some time, though, murky and slowly solidifying. The blood drained from Egeanin's cheeks as soon as Tuon's name left his mouth, and he heard a squeak from Thera followed by the snap of the tentflaps being jerked shut. The onetime panarch had absorbed a great many Seanchan ways while she was Suroth's property, and many of their taboos as well. Egeanin was made of harder stuff, however. "Why?" she demanded. In almost the same breath, she went on, anxious and furious all at once. "You mustn't call her that. You must show respect." Harder in some ways. Mat grinned, but she did not seem to see the joke. Respect? There was precious little respect in stuffing a gag in someone's mouth and rolling them up in a wall hanging. Calling Tuon High Lady or anything else was not going to change that. Of course, Egeanin was more willing to talk about freeing damane than she was about Tuon. If she could have pretended the kidnapping never happened, she would have, and as it was, she tried. Light, she had tried to ignore it while it was happening. In her mind, any other crimes she might have committed paled to nothing beside that. "Because I want to talk with her," he said. And why not? He had to, sooner or later.

pipəl hæd bɪɡʌn tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ʌp ən daʊn ðə nɛɹoʊ stʃɹit, naʊ, hæf-dʒɹɛs mɛn wɪð ðɛɹ ʃɝts hæŋɪŋ aʊɾ ən wɪmən wɪð ðɛɹ hɛɹ stɪl ɹæpt ɪn naɪt-kɝtʃəfs, səm liɾɪŋ hɔɹsəz ən ʌðɝz dʒʌs mɪlɪŋ əbaʊɾ əz fɑɹ əz i kəd meɪk aʊt. ə wɪɹi bɔɪ ə lɪɾəl bɪɡɝ ðən oʊlvɝ wɛn pæs duɪŋ hændspɹɪŋz wɛɹɛvɝ ðə kɹaʊd ɡeɪv ɪm ə peɪs ə ɹum, pɹæktəsɪŋ əɹ meɪbi pleɪɪŋ. ðə slipi fɛloʊ ɪn ðə dip ɡɹin wæɡən stɪl hæd nɑɾ əpɪɹd. lukəz ɡɹæn tʃɹævlɪŋ ʃoʊ wəd nɑt bi tʃɹævlɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ fəɹ aʊɝz jɛt. ðəɹ wɑz plɛnti ʌv taɪm. "ju kəd kʌm wɪð mi," hi sədʒɛstəɾ ɪn ɪz moʊst ɪnəsən vɔɪs. hi ʃʊɾə θɔɾ ə ðɪs bɪfɔɹ.

People had begun trotting up and down the narrow street, now, half-dressed men with their shirts hanging out and women with their hair still wrapped in night-kerchiefs, some leading horses and others just milling about as far as he could make out. A wiry boy a little bigger than Olver went past doing handsprings wherever the crowd gave him a pace of room, practicing or maybe playing. The sleepy fellow in the deep green wagon still had not appeared. Luca's Grand Traveling Show would not be traveling anywhere for hours yet. There was plenty of time. "You could come with me," he suggested in his most innocent voice. He should have thought of this before.

ði ɪnvɪteɪʃən meɪɾ ɛdʒiənɪn ɡoʊ fɛns-poʊst stɪf fəɹ tʃɹu. ɪt hɑɹdli sim pɑsəbəl əɹ feɪs kəd ɡɹoʊ ɛni pəlɝ, bʌɾ ən ɛkstʃɹə skɹæp ə kʌlɝ litʃt aʊt. "ju wɪl ʃoʊ hɝ fɪɾɪŋ ɹɪspɛkt," ʃi sɛd hɔɹsli, klʌtʃɪŋ ðə nɑɾɪd skɑɹf wɪð boʊθ hænz əz ðoʊ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə skwiz ðə blæk wɪɡ taɪɾɝ ɑntu hɝ hɛd. "kʌm, beɪl. aɪ wɑnə meɪk ʃʊɹ maɪ θɪŋz ɑɹ stoʊd pɹɑpɝli." doʊmən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd əz ʃi tɝn ən hɝiɾ əweɪ ɪndə ðə kɹaʊd wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ bæk, ən mæt wɑtʃt ɪm wɛɹəli. hi hæd veɪɡ mɛmɹiz ʌv ə flaɪɾ ɑn dimənz ɹɪvɝʃɪp, wʌns, bʌt veɪɡ wɑz ðə bɛst i kəd seɪ ʌv ðɛm. tɑm wɑz fɹɛnli wɪð doʊmən, ə pɔɪn ɪn ði ɪliɑnɝz feɪvɝ, jɛɾ i wɑz ɛdʒiənɪnz mæn tə ðə naɪf, ɹɛɾi tə bæk əɹ ɑn ɛniθɪŋ daʊn tə dɪsləkɪŋ dʒulɪn, ən mæt tʃɹʌstɪɾ ɪm noʊ fɝðɝ ðən i dɪd hɝ. wɪtʃ wɑz tə seɪ, nɑt vɛɹi fɑɹ. ɛdʒiənɪn ən doʊmən hæd ðɛɹ oʊn ɡoʊlz, ən wɛðɝ mæt kɔθən kɛpt ə hoʊl haɪd dɪd nɑt fæktɝ ɪn ðɛm. hi daʊɾɪd ðət ðə mæn ɹɪli tʃɹʌstɪd hɪm, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, bʌt ðɛn, niðɝ ə ðɛm hæd mʌtʃ tʃɔɪs ət ðə moʊmənt. "fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi," doʊmən mʌɾɝd, skɹætʃɪŋ ðə bɹɪsəlz ɡɹoʊɪŋ əbʌv ɪz lɛft ɪɹ, "wʌtɛvɝ jə də bi ʌp tə, jə meɪ bi ɪn oʊvɝ jəɹ hɛd. aɪ θɪŋk ʃi də bi tʌfɝ ðən jə də səspɛkt." "ɛdʒiənɪn?" mæt sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. hi lʊkt ɝaʊn kwɪkli tə si wɛðɝ ɛniwʌn ɪn ði æli hæd hɝɾ ɪz slɪp. ə fju ɡlænst əɾ ɪm ən doʊmən əz ðeɪ bɹʌʃt baɪ, bʌt noʊbɑdi ɡlæns twaɪs. lukə wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn iɡɝ tə bi ɡɔn fɹəm ə sɪɾi wɛɹ ðə floʊ ʌv peɪtʃɹənz fəɹ ðə ʃoʊ hæd dʒɹaɪɾ ʌp ən naɪt laɪtnɪŋ sɛɾɪŋ ðə hɑɹbɝ ɑn faɪɝ wɑz ə fɹɛʃ mɛmɹi. ðeɪ maɪɾ ɔl əv flɛd ðət fɝs naɪt, livɪŋ mæt noʊwɛɹ tə haɪd, ɪksɛp fəɹ lukə ɑɹɡjuɪŋ əm aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. ðət pɹɑməst ɡoʊl hæd meɪd lukə vɛɹi pɝsweɪsɪv. "aɪ noʊ ʃiz tʌfɝ ðən oʊl buts, doʊmən, bʌɾ oʊl buts doʊn kaʊnt wɪð mi. ðɪs ɪzən ə blʌɾi ʃɪp, ən aɪm nɑt lɛɾɪŋ əɹ teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ ən ɹuən ɛvɹiθɪŋ." doʊmən ɡɹɪməst əz ɪf mæt wɝ ɡus-bɹeɪnd. "ðə ɡɝl, mæn. dʒju bɪliv jə kəd bi soʊ kɑm ɪf jə dɪd bi kæɹiɾ ɔf ɪn ðə naɪt? wʌtɛvɝ jə bi pleɪɪŋ æt, wɪð ðət waɪl tɔk ə hɝ biɪŋ jəɹ waɪf, hæv ə kɛɹ əɹ ʃi meɪ ʃeɪv jəɹ hɛɾ ət ðə ʃoʊldɝz."

The invitation made Egeanin go fence-post stiff for true. It hardly seemed possible her face could grow any paler, but an extra scrap of color leached out. "You will show her fitting respect," she said hoarsely, clutching the knotted scarf with both hands as though trying to squeeze the black wig tighter onto her head. "Come, Bayle. I want to make sure my things are stowed properly." Domon hesitated as she turned and hurried away into the crowd without looking back, and Mat watched him warily. He had vague memories of a flight on Demon's rivership, once, but vague was the best he could say of them. Thom was friendly with Domon, a point in the Illianer's favor, yet he was Egeanin's man to the knife, ready to back her on anything down to disliking Juilin, and Mat trusted him no further than he did her. Which was to say, not very far. Egeanin and Domon had their own goals, and whether Mat Cauthon kept a whole hide did not factor in them. He doubted that the man really trusted him, for that matter, but then, neither of them had much choice at the moment. "Fortune prick me," Domon muttered, scratching the bristles growing above his left ear, "whatever you do be up to, you may be in over your head. I think she do be tougher than you do suspect." "Egeanin?" Mat said incredulously. He looked around quickly to see whether anyone in the alley had heard his slip. A few glanced at him and Domon as they brushed by, but nobody glanced twice. Luca was not the only one eager to be gone from a city where the flow of patrons for the show had dried up and night lightning setting the harbor on fire was a fresh memory. They might all have fled that first night, leaving Mat nowhere to hide, except for Luca arguing them out of it. That promised gold had made Luca very persuasive. "I know she's tougher than old boots, Domon, but old boots don't count with me. This isn't a bloody ship, and I'm not letting her take charge and ruin everything." Domon grimaced as if Mat were goose-brained. "The girl, man. Do you believe you could be so calm if you did be carried off in the night? Whatever you be playing at, with that wild talk of her being your wife, have a care or she may shave your head at the shoulders."

"aɪ wɑz dʒʌs kʌɾɪŋ ðə ful," mæt mʌɾɝd. "haʊ mɛni taɪmz də aɪ hæv tə seɪ ɪt? aɪ wɑz ənnɝv fəɹ ə mɪnət." oʊ, hi hæd bɪn ðæt. lɝnɪŋ u tuɑn wɑz, waɪl i wɑz ɹɛslɪŋ wɪð hɝ, wʊɾə ənnɝvd ə blʌɾi tʃɹɑlɑk.

"I was just cutting the fool," Mat muttered. "How many times do I have to say it? I was unnerved for a minute." Oh, he had been that. Learning who Tuon was, while he was wrestling with her, would have unnerved a bloody Trolloc.

doʊmən ɡɹʌntɪɾ ɪn dɪsbɪlif. wɛl, ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli ðə bɛst stɔɹi mæt hæɾ ɛvɝ kʌm ʌp wɪð. ɪksɛp fəɹ doʊmən, ɛvɹiwʌn u hæd hɝɾ ɪm bæbəlɪŋ sim tə æksɛp ðə teɪl, ðoʊ. mæt θɔt ðeɪ hæd, ɛniweɪ. ɛdʒiənɪn maɪt ɡɛɾ ə nɑɾ ɪn əɹ tʌŋ ət ðə vɛɹi θɔɾ ə tuɑn, bʌt ʃi wʊɾə sɛd plɛnti ɪf ʃi bɪlivd i hæd bɪn sɪɹiəs. laɪkli ʃi wʊɾə pʊɾ əɹ naɪf ɪn hɪm.

Domon grunted in disbelief. Well, it was hardly the best story Mat had ever come up with. Except for Domon, everyone who had heard him babbling seemed to accept the tale, though. Mat thought they had, anyway. Egeanin might get a knot in her tongue at the very thought of Tuon, but she would have said plenty if she believed he had been serious. Likely she would have put her knife in him.

pikɪŋ ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ɛdʒiənɪn hæd ɡɔn, ði ɪliɑnɝ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "tʃɹaɪ tə kip ə ɡɹɪp ɑn jəɹ tʌŋ fɹəm naʊ ɑn. ɛɡ - . . . laɪlwɪn . . . də nɪɹ əv ə fɪt wɛnɛvɝ ʃi də θɪŋk əbaʊt wʌt jə dɪd seɪ. aɪv hɝɾ əɹ mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, ən jə kən weɪdʒɝ ðə ɡɝl hɝsɛlf dʌz teɪk ɪt noʊ laɪɾɝ. jə 'kʌt ðə ful' wɪð hɝ, ən jə meɪ ɡɛɾ əs ɔl ʃɔɹɾənd." hi slɪɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ əkɹɔs ɪz θɹoʊɾ ɪkspɹɛsɪvli ən ɡeɪv ə kɝt nɑd bɪfɔɹ pʊʃɪŋ θɹu ðə kɹaʊɾ æftɝ ɛdʒiənɪn.

Peeking in the direction Egeanin had gone, the Illianer shook his head. "Try to keep a grip on your tongue from now on. Eg - . . . Leilwin . . . do near have a fit whenever she do think about what you did say. I've heard her muttering under her breath, and you can wager the girl herself does take it no lighter. You 'cut the fool' with her, and you may get us all shortened." He slid a finger across his throat expressively and gave a curt nod before pushing through the crowd after Egeanin.

wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm ɡoʊ, mæt ʃʊk ɪz oʊn hɛd. tuɑn, tʌf? tʃɹu, ʃi wɑz ðə dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz ən ɔl ə ðæt, ən ʃi hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə ɡɛɾ ʌndɝ ɪz skɪn wɪð ə lʊk bæk ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, wən i θɔt ʃi wɑz dʒʌst ənʌðɝ sintʃæn noʊbəlwʊmən wɪð əɹ noʊz ɪn ði ɛɹ, bʌt ðət wɑz dʒʌs kəz ʃi kɛp tɝnɪŋ ʌp wɛɹ i dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt. noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðæt. tʌf? ʃi lʊk laɪk ə dɑl meɪɾ ə blæk pɔɹsələn. haʊ tʌf kəd ʃi bi? ɪt wɑz ɔl jə kəd də tə kip əɹ fɹəm bɹeɪkɪŋ jəɹ noʊz ən meɪbi mɔɹ, hi ɹimaɪndəd hɪmsɛlf.

Watching him go, Mat shook his own head. Tuon, tough? True, she was the Daughter of the Nine Moons and all of that, and she had been able to get under his skin with a look back in the Tarasin Palace, when he thought she was just another Seanchan noblewoman with her nose in the air, but that was just because she kept turning up where he did not expect. No more than that. Tough? She looked like a doll made of black porcelain. How tough could she be? It was all you could do to keep her from breaking your nose and maybe more, he reminded himself.

hi hæd bɪn kɛɹfəl nɑt tə ɹɪpit wʌt doʊmən kɔld "waɪl tɔk," bʌt ðə tʃɹuθ ʌv ɪt wɑz, hi wɑz gɑnə mɛɹi tuɑn. ðə θɔt meɪɾ ɪm saɪ. hi nu ɪɾ əz ʃʊɹ əz pɹɑfəsi, wɪtʃ ɪt wɑz, ɪn ə weɪ. hi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən haʊ sətʃ ə mɛɹɪdʒ kəd kʌm əbaʊt; ɪt simd ɪmpɑsəbəl, ɑn ðə feɪs ʌv ɪt, ən i wəd nɑt wip ɪf ðət pɹuv tə bi soʊ. bʌɾ i nu ɪt wəd nɑt. waɪ dɪɾ i ɔlweɪz faɪn hɪmsɛlf blʌɾi lʌmbɝd wɪð blʌɾi wɪmən u pʊl naɪvz ɑn ɪm əɹ tʃɹaɪd tə kɪk ɪz hɛɾ ɔf? ɪt wɑz nɑt fɛɹ.

He had been careful not to repeat what Domon called "wild talk," but the truth of it was, he was going to marry Tuon. The thought made him sigh. He knew it as sure as prophecy, which it was, in a way. He could not imagine how such a marriage could come about; it seemed impossible, on the face of it, and he would not weep if that proved to be so. But he knew it would not. Why did he always find himself bloody lumbered with bloody women who pulled knives on him or tried to kick his head off? It was not fair.

hi ɪntɛndəd tə ɡoʊ stʃɹeɪt tə ðə wæɡən wɛɹ tuɑn ən sɪlutʃə wɝ biɪŋ kɛpt, wɪð sɛɾəl ɑnən tə wɑtʃ - ði ɪnkipɝ kəd meɪk ə stoʊn sim sɑft; ə pæmpɝd noʊbəlwʊmən ən ə leɪɾiz meɪd wəd ɡɪv əɹ noʊ tʃɹʌbəl, ɪspɛʃli wɪð ə ɹɛdɑɹm ɑn duɾi aʊtsaɪd. ət list, ðeɪ hæd nɑt soʊ fɑɹ, əɹ i wʊɾə hɝd - bʌɾ i faʊn ɪz fit wɑndɝɪŋ, teɪkɪŋ ɪm əlɔŋ ðə waɪndɪŋ stʃɹits ðət ɹæn θɹu ðə ʃoʊ. bʌsəl fɪld ɔl ə ðɛm, waɪɾ ən nɛɹoʊ əlaɪk. mɛn ɹʌʃt baɪ liɾɪŋ hɔɹsəz ðət fɹɪskt ən ʃaɪd, tu lɔŋ wɪθaʊɾ ɛksɝsaɪz. ʌðɝ pipəl wɝ teɪkɪŋ daʊn tɛns ən pækɪŋ ðə stɔɹədʒ wæɡənz, əɹ hɔlɪŋ klɔθ-ɹæp bʌndəlz ən bɹæs-baʊn tʃɛsts ən kæsks ən kænəstɝz ʌv ɛvɹi saɪz aʊɾ ə ðə haʊs-laɪk wæɡənz ðət hæd bɪn stændɪŋ hɪɹ fəɹ mʌnθs, pɑɹʃəli ənloʊɾɪŋ soʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ kəd bi ɹipæk fəɹ tʃɹævəl ivən waɪl ðə timz wɝ biɪŋ hɑɹnəst. ðə dɪn wɑz kɑnstənt: hɔɹsəz wɪkɝd, wɪmən ʃaʊɾəd fəɹ tʃɪlʒɹən, tʃɪlʒɹən kɹaɪɾ oʊvɝ lɔs tɔɪz əɹ jɛl fəɹ ðə pjʊɹ plɛʒɝ ə nɔɪz, mɛn bɛloʊd tə noʊ hu hæd bɪn ət ðɛɹ hɑɹnəs əɹ u hæd bɑɹoʊd səm tul. ə tʃɹup ʌv ækɹəbæts, slɛndɝ bʌt mʌskjəlɝ wɪmən u wɝkt ɑn ɹoʊps dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm tɔl poʊlz, hæd sɝaʊndəd wʌn ə ðə hɔɹs hænlɝz, ɔl ə ðɛm weɪvɪŋ ðɛɹ ɑɹmz ən ɡɪvɪŋ vɔɪs ət ðə tɑp ə ðɛɹ lʌŋz ən noʊbɑdi lɪsnɪŋ. mæt pɔzd ə moʊmən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɪɡjɝ aʊt wʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ oʊvɝ, bʌɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli hi dɪsaɪɾɪd ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ʃʊɹ ðɛmsɛlvz. tu faɪɾɪŋ koʊtləs mɛn ɹoʊld ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, wɑtʃt kloʊsli baɪ ðə laɪkli kɑz, ə wɪləwi hɑt-aɪd simstʃɹɪs neɪm dʒəmaɪn, bʌt pɛtʃɹə əpɪɹɾ ən pʊld əm əpɑɹt bɪfɔɹ mæt kəɾ ivən ɡɛɾ ə bɛt daʊn.

He intended to go straight to the wagon where Tuon and Selucia were being kept, with Setalle Anan to watch - the innkeeper could make a stone seem soft; a pampered noblewoman and a lady's maid would give her no trouble, especially with a Redarm on duty outside. At least, they had not so far, or he would have heard - but he found his feet wandering, taking him along the winding streets that ran through the show. Bustle filled all of them, wide and narrow alike. Men rushed by leading horses that frisked and shied, too long without exercise. Other people were taking down tents and packing the storage wagons, or hauling cloth-wrapped bundles and brass-bound chests and casks and canisters of every size out of the house-like wagons that had been standing here for months, partially unloading so everything could be repacked for travel even while the teams were being harnessed. The din was constant: horses whickered, women shouted for children, children cried over lost toys or yelled for the pure pleasure of noise, men bellowed to know who had been at their harness or who had borrowed some tool. A troupe of acrobats, slender but muscular women who worked on ropes dangling from tall poles, had surrounded one of the horse handlers, all of them waving their arms and giving voice at the top of their lungs and nobody listening. Mat paused a moment trying to figure out what they were arguing over, but eventually he decided they were not sure themselves. Two fighting coatless men rolled on the ground, watched closely by the likely cause, a willowy hot-eyed seamstress named Jameine, but Petra appeared and pulled them apart before Mat could even get a bet down.

hi wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪɾ ə siɪŋ tuɑn əɡɛn. ʌv kɔɹs nɑt. hi hæd steɪɾ əweɪ, æftɝ stɪkɪŋ əɹ ɪndə ðət wæɡən, tə ɡɪv əɹ taɪm tə sɛɾəl daʊn ən kəlɛk hɝsɛlf. ðət wɑz ɔl. oʊnli. . . . kɑm, doʊmən hæd kɔl hɝ, ən ɪt wɑz tʃɹu. kɪdnæpt ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪt, snætʃt aʊɾ ɪndə ə stɔɹm baɪ pipəl u wəɾ əz sun əv kʌɾ əɹ θɹoʊɾ əz lʊk ət hɝ, əz fɑɹ əz ʃi nu, ən ʃi hæd bɪn baɪ fɑɹ ðə kuləst ə ðɛm ɔl. laɪt, ʃi cʊɾə plæn ɪt hɝsɛlf, ðət wɑz haʊ ʌpsɛt ʃi wɑz! ɪt hæd meɪɾ ɪm fil əz ɪf ðə pɔɪn ʌv ə naɪf wɝ tɪklɪŋ bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz ðɛn, ən ðə naɪf wɑz bæk əɡɛn dʒʌs θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt hɝ. ən ðoʊz daɪs wɝ ɹætlɪŋ əweɪ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz skʌl.

He was not afraid of seeing Tuon again. Of course not. He had stayed away, after sticking her into that wagon, to give her time to settle down and collect herself. That was all. Only. . . . Calm, Domon had called her, and it was true. Kidnapped in the middle of the night, snatched out into a storm by people who would as soon have cut her throat as look at her, as far as she knew, and she had been by far the coolest of them all. Light, she could have planned it herself, that was how upset she was! It had made him feel as if the point of a knife were tickling between his shoulder blades then, and the knife was back again just thinking about her. And those dice were rattling away inside his skull.

ðə wʊmənz hɑɹdli laɪkli tə ɔfɝ tə ɪkstʃeɪnʒ vaʊz hɪɹ ən naʊ, hi θɔt wɪð ə tʃʌkəl, bʌɾ ɪt saʊndəd fɔɹst ivən tə hɪm. jɛt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹizən ʌndɝ ðə sʌn fəɹ ɪm tə bi əfɹeɪd. hi wɑz dʒʌs pɹɑpɝli wɛɹi, nɑɾ əfɹeɪd.

The woman's hardly likely to offer to exchange vows here and now, he thought with a chuckle, but it sounded forced even to him. Yet there was no reason under the sun for him to be afraid. He was just properly wary, not afraid.

ðə ʃoʊ maɪɾ əv ikwəld ə fɛɹ-saɪz vɪlədʒ fəɹ saɪz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli soʊ lɔŋ ə mæn kəd wɑndɝ əbaʊɾ ɪn ðət mʌtʃ speɪs bɪfɔɹ i stɑɹɾəd dʌbəlɪŋ bæk ɑn hɪmsɛlf. sun ɪnʌf, tu sun, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ə wɪndoʊləs wæɡən peɪntəɾ ɪn feɪɾəd pɝpəl, sɝaʊndəd baɪ kænvəs-tɑp stɔɹədʒ wæɡənz ən ɪn saɪɾ ə ðə sʌðɝnmoʊs hɔɹslaɪnz. ðə dʌŋ kɑɹts hæd nɑt ɡɔn aʊt ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ən ði oʊɾɝ wɑz stʃɹɔŋ. ðə wɪn kæɹiɾ ə hɛvi sɛn fɹəm ðə nɪɹəst ænəməl keɪdʒɪz, tu, ə mʌski smɛl ə bɪɡ kæts ən bɛɹz ən ðə laɪt nu wʌɾ ɛls. bɪɑn ðə stɔɹədʒ wæɡənz ən pɪkəts, ə sɛkʃən ə ðə kænvəs wɔl fɛl ən ənʌðɝ bɪɡæn tə ʃeɪk əz mɛn lusən ðə ɡaɪ ɹoʊps hoʊldɪŋ ðə poʊlz. ðə sʌn, hæf-hɪɾən baɪ dɑɹk klaʊdz naʊ, hæd klaɪm hæfweɪ tə ɪts nundeɪ pik əɹ bɛɾɝ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl tu sun. hɑɹnən ən mɛtwɪn, tu ʌv ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz, hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hɪtʃt ðə fɝs pɛɹ ə hɔɹsəz tə ðə ʃæft ə ðə pɝpəl wæɡən ən wɝ ɔlmoʊs dʌn wɪð ðə sɛkən pɛɹ. soʊlʒɝz wɛl tʃɹeɪn ɪn ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd, ðeɪ wəd bi ɹɛɾi tə teɪk ðə ɹoʊd waɪl ðə ʃoʊfoʊk wɝ stɪl fɪɡjɝɪŋ aʊt wɪtʃ weɪ ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ səpoʊz tə feɪs. mæt hæd tɔt ðə bæn tə muv fæst wən ðəɹ wɑz nid. hɪz oʊn fit dʒɹæɡd əz ðoʊ hi wɝ weɪɾɪŋ ɪn mʌd. hɑɹnən, wɪð ðət ful tætu ʌv ə hɔk ɑn ɪz tʃik, wɑz ðə fɝs tə si hɪm. bʌklɪŋ ə tʃɹeɪs, ðə hɛvi-dʒɔd faɪl-liɾɝ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks wɪð mɛtwɪn, ə bɔɪɪʃ-feɪs kɛɹhinɪn huz əpɪɹəns bɪlaɪɾ ɪz eɪdʒ ən ɪz wiknəs fəɹ tævɝn bɹɔlz. ðeɪ hæd noʊ kɔl tə lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd.

The show might have equaled a fair-sized village for size, but there was only so long a man could wander about in that much space before he started doubling back on himself. Soon enough, too soon, he found himself staring at a windowless wagon painted in faded purple, surrounded by canvas-topped storage wagons and in sight of the southernmost horselines. The dung carts had not gone out this morning, and the odor was strong. The wind carried a heavy scent from the nearest animal cages, too, a musky smell of big cats and bears and the Light knew what else. Beyond the storage wagons and pickets, a section of the canvas wall fell and another began to shake as men loosened the guy ropes holding the poles. The sun, half-hidden by dark clouds now, had climbed halfway to its noonday peak or better, but it was still too soon. Harnan and Metwyn, two of the Redarms, had already hitched the first pair of horses to the shaft of the purple wagon and were almost done with the second pair. Soldiers well trained in the Band of the Red Hand, they would be ready to take the road while the showfolk were still figuring out which way the horses were supposed to face. Mat had taught the Band to move fast when there was need. His own feet dragged as though he were wading in mud. Harnan, with that fool tattoo of a hawk on his cheek, was the first to see him. Buckling a trace, the heavy-jawed file-leader exchanged looks with Metwyn, a boyish-faced Cairhienin whose appearance belied his age and his weakness for tavern brawls. They had no call to look surprised.

"ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɡoʊɪŋ smuðli? aɪ wɑnə bi əweɪ ɪn ɡʊd taɪm." ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hænz təɡɛðɝ əɡɛns ðə koʊld, mæt aɪd ðə pɝpəl wæɡən ənizəli. hi ʃʊɾə bɹɔɾ əɹ ə pɹɛzənt, dʒuəlɹi əɹ flaʊɝz. iðɝ wɝkt əz wɛl, wɪð moʊst wɪmən. "smuð ɪnʌf, maɪ lɔɹd," hɑɹnən ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪn ə kɔʃəs toʊn. "noʊ ʃaʊɾɪŋ, noʊ skɹimɪŋ, noʊ kɹaɪɪŋ." hi ɡlænst ət ðə wæɡən əz ɪf i dɪd nɑt kɹɛɾət ɪt hɪmsɛlf.

"Everything going smoothly? I want to be away in good time." Rubbing his hands together against the cold, Mat eyed the purple wagon uneasily. He should have brought her a present, jewelry or flowers. Either worked as well, with most women. "Smooth enough, my Lord," Harnan replied in a cautious tone. "No shouting, no screaming, no crying." He glanced at the wagon as if he did not credit it himself.

"kwaɪət suts mi," mɛtwɪn sɛd, stʃɹɪŋɪŋ wʌn ə ðə ɹeɪnz θɹu ə ɹɪŋ ɑn ə hɔɹs-kɑlɝ.

"Quiet suits me," Metwyn said, stringing one of the reins through a ring on a horse-collar.

"wʊmən stɑɹts kɹaɪɪŋ, ði oʊnli θɪŋ tə də ɪz liv, ɪf jə vælju jəɹ haɪd, ən wi kən hɑɹdli dʒɹɑp ðiz ɔf baɪ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd." bʌɾ i ɡlænst ət ðə wæɡən, tu, ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ɪn dɪsbɪlif.

"Woman starts crying, the only thing to do is leave, if you value your hide, and we can hardly drop these off by the side of the road." But he glanced at the wagon, too, and shook his head in disbelief.

ðəɹ ɹɪli wɑz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ mæt tə də ɪksɛpt ɡoʊ ɪnsaɪd. soʊ hi dɪd. ɪɾ oʊnli tʊk tu tʃɹaɪz, wɪð ə smaɪl fɪkst ɑn ɪz feɪs, tə meɪk hɪmsɛlf klaɪm ðə ʃɔɹt flaɪɾ ə peɪntəd wʊɾən stɛps ət ðə bæk ə ðə wæɡən. hi wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪd, bʌɾ ɛni ful wəd noʊ ɪnʌf tə bi nɝvəs.

There really was nothing for Mat to do except go inside. So he did. It only took two tries, with a smile fixed on his face, to make himself climb the short flight of painted wooden steps at the back of the wagon. He was not afraid, but any fool would know enough to be nervous.

dɪspaɪt ðə læk ʌv wɪndoʊz, ði ɪntɪɹiɝ ə ðə wæɡən wɑz wɛl laɪɾəd, wɪð fɔɹ mɪɹɝd læmps bɝnɪŋ, ən ðə læmps hɛld ɡʊɾ ɔɪl, soʊ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹænsɪd smɛl. bʌt ðɛn, wɪð ðə stɪŋk fɹəm aʊtsaɪd, ɪt wʊɾə bɪn hɑɹd tə tɛl. hi niɾəd tə faɪn ə bɛɾɝ spɑt tə pɑɹk ɪz wæɡən. ə smɔl bɹɪk stoʊv wɪð ən aɪɝn dɔɹ, ən ən aɪɝn tɑp fəɹ kʊkɪŋ, meɪd ðə speɪs toʊsti kəmpɛɹd wɪð aʊtsaɪd. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə lɑɹdʒ wæɡən, ən ɛvɹi ɪntʃ ʌv wɔl ðət kəd bi spɛɹd wɑz kʌvɝd wɪð kæbənəts əɹ ʃɛlvz əɹ pɛɡz fəɹ hæŋɪŋ kloʊðɪŋ ən taʊəlz ən ðə laɪk, bʌt ðə teɪbəl ðət kəd bi lɛt daʊn ɑn ɹoʊps wɑz snʌɡ əɡɛns ðə silɪŋ, ən ðə θɹi wɪmən ɪnsaɪd ðə wæɡən wɝ hɑɹdli kɹaʊɾəd. ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn mɔɹ dɪfɹənt, ðoʊz θɹi. mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn wʌn ə ðə tu nɛɹoʊ bɛdz bɪlt ɪndə ðə wɔlz, ə ɹiɡəl wʊmən wɪð tʌtʃəz ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, simɪŋli ɪntɛn ɑn əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi hup ən nɑt lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɔl əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ə ɡɑɹd. ə lɑɹdʒ ɡoʊldən ɹɪŋ hʌŋ ɪn itʃ ə hɝ ɪɹz, ən əɹ mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf dæŋɡəl fɹəm ə kloʊs-fɪɾɪŋ sɪlvɝ nɛkləs, ðə hɪlt wɪð ɪts ɹɛɾ ən waɪt stoʊnz snʌɡ ɪn ðə klivədʒ ɪkspoʊz baɪ ðə nɛɹoʊ plʌnʒɪŋ nɛklaɪn ə hɝ ɛbu dɑɹi dʒɹɛs ðət hæd wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə skɝt soʊn ʌp tə ɪkspoʊz jɛloʊ pɛɾikoʊts. ʃi wɔɹ ənʌðɝ naɪf, wɪð ə lɔŋ, kɝv bleɪd, tʌk bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt, bʌt ðət wɑz dʒʌs ðə kʌstəm ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ. sɛɾəl hæd ɹəfjuz tə teɪk ɑn ɛni dɪsɡaɪz, wɪtʃ simd wɛl ɪnʌf. noʊ wʌn hæd ɹizən tə bi hʌntɪŋ fəɹ hɝ, ən faɪndɪŋ kloʊðz fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls hæd bɪn ə bɪɡ ɪnʌf pɹɑbləm əz ɪt wɑz. sɪlutʃə, ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən wɪð skɪn ðə kʌlɝ ə bʌɾɝi kɹim, wɑz kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ bɪtwin ðə bɛdz, ə dɑɹk skɑɹf kʌvɝɪŋ əɹ ʃeɪvən hɛɾ ən ə sʌlən ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs, ðoʊ nɔɹməli ʃi wɑz dɪɡnəfaɪɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən lʊk flaɪɾi. hɝ aɪz wɝ əz blu əz ɛdʒiənɪnz, ən mɔɹ pɪɹsɪŋ, ən ʃi hæd meɪd mɔɹ fʌs ðən ɛdʒiənɪn oʊvɝ luzɪŋ əɹ ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ hɛɹ. ʃi dɪslaɪk ðə dɑɹk blu ɛbu dɑɹi dʒɹɛs ʃi hæd bɪn ɡɪvən, tu, kleɪmɪŋ ðə dip nɛklaɪn wɑz ɪndisənt, bʌɾ ɪt hɪɾ əɹ əz ɪfɛktɪvli əz ə mæsk. fju mɛn u ɡlɪmpst sɪlutʃəz ɪmpɹɛsɪv bʊzəm wəd bi eɪbəl tə foʊkəs lɔŋ ɑn əɹ feɪs. mæt maɪɾ əv ɛndʒɔɪd ðə vju fəɹ ə eɪ ɛf eɪ ɛn ə si oʊ ɛl oʊ ɑɹ ɛs wʌnhʌnʒɹədθɝdisɛvən moʊmən əɹ tu hɪmsɛlf, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz tuɑn, siɾəd ɑn ðə wæɡənz oʊnli stul, ə lɛðɝ-baʊn bʊk oʊpən ɑn əɹ læp, ən i kəd bɛɹli meɪk hɪmsɛlf lʊk əɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. hɪz waɪf-tə-bi. laɪt! tuɑn wɑz taɪni, nɑt dʒʌst ʃɔɹt bʌɾ ɔlmoʊst slɪm əz ə bɔɪ, ən ə lus-fɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs ə bɹaʊn wʊl, bɑt fɹəm wʌn ə ðə ʃoʊfoʊk, meɪɾ əɹ sim ə tʃaɪld wɛɹɪŋ əɹ oʊldɝ sɪstɝz kloʊðz. nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ðə sɔɹɾ ʌv wʊmən i ɛndʒɔɪd, ɪspɛʃli wɪð oʊnli ə fju deɪz' ɡɹoʊθ ə blæk stʌbəl kʌvɝɪŋ əɹ skælp. ɪf jə ɪɡnɔɹd ðæt, ʃi wɑz pɹɪɾi, ðoʊ, ɪn ə ɹɪzɝvd weɪ, wɪð əɹ hɑɹt-ʃeɪp feɪs ən fʊl lɪps, hɝ aɪz lɑɹdʒ dɑɹk lɪkwəd pulz ə sɝɛnəɾi. ðəɾ ʌɾɝ kɑmnəs ɔlmoʊst ənnɝv hɪm. nɑɾ ivən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd bi sɝin ɪn əɹ sɝkəmstænsəz. ðə blʌɾi daɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd dɪd nɑt hɛlp mæɾɝz.

Despite the lack of windows, the interior of the wagon was well lighted, with four mirrored lamps burning, and the lamps held good oil, so there was no rancid smell. But then, with the stink from outside, it would have been hard to tell. He needed to find a better spot to park his wagon. A small brick stove with an iron door, and an iron top for cooking, made the space toasty compared with outside. It was not a large wagon, and every inch of wall that could be spared was covered with cabinets or shelves or pegs for hanging clothing and towels and the like, but the table that could be let down on ropes was snug against the ceiling, and the three women inside the wagon were hardly crowded. They could not have been more different, those three. Mistress Anan was sitting on one of the two narrow beds built into the walls, a regal woman with touches of gray in her hair, seemingly intent on her embroidery hoop and not looking at all as if she were a guard. A large golden ring hung in each of her ears, and her marriage knife dangled from a close-fitting silver necklace, the hilt with its red and white stones snug in the cleavage exposed by the narrow plunging neckline of her Ebou Dari dress that had one side of the skirt sewn up to expose yellow petticoats. She wore another knife, with a long, curved blade, tucked behind her belt, but that was just the custom of Ebou Dar. Setalle had refused to take on any disguise, which seemed well enough. No one had reason to be hunting for her, and finding clothes for everyone else had been a big enough problem as it was. Selucia, a pretty woman with skin the color of buttery cream, was cross-legged on the floor between the beds, a dark scarf covering her shaven head and a sullen expression on her face, though normally she was dignified enough to make Mistress Anan look flighty. Her eyes were as blue as Egeanin's, and more piercing, and she had made more fuss than Egeanin over losing her the rest of her hair. She disliked the dark blue Ebou Dari dress she had been given, too, claiming the deep neckline was indecent, but it hid her as effectively as a mask. Few men who glimpsed Selucia's impressive bosom would be able to focus long on her face. Mat might have enjoyed the view for a A F A N OF C O L O R S 137 moment or two himself, but there was Tuon, seated on the wagon's only stool, a leather-bound book open on her lap, and he could barely make himself look at anything else. His wife-to-be. Light! Tuon was tiny, not just short but almost slim as a boy, and a loose-fitting dress of brown wool, bought from one of the showfolk, made her seem a child wearing her older sister's clothes. Not at all the sort of woman he enjoyed, especially with only a few days' growth of black stubble covering her scalp. If you ignored that, she was pretty, though, in a reserved way, with her heart-shaped face and full lips, her eyes large dark liquid pools of serenity. That utter calmness almost unnerved him. Not even an Aes Sedai would be serene in her circumstances. The bloody dice in his head did not help matters.

"sɛɾəl əz bɪn kipɪŋ mi ɪnfɔɹmd," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə kul dʒɹɔl əz i pʊl ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt. hi hæd ɡɑɾən soʊ hi kəd tɛl ə dɪfɝəns ɪn sintʃæn æksɛns; tuɑnz meɪɾ ɛdʒiənɪn saʊn əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ə maʊθfʊl ə mʌʃ, bʌt ðeɪ ɔl saʊndəd slɝɾ ən sloʊ. "ʃiz toʊl mi ðə stɔɹi juv pʊɾ əbaʊt kənsɝnɪŋ mi, tɔɪ."

"Setalle has been keeping me informed," she said in a cool drawl as he pulled the door shut. He had gotten so he could tell a difference in Seanchan accents; Tuon's made Egeanin sound as if she had a mouthful of mush, but they all sounded slurred and slow. "She's told me the story you have put about concerning me, Toy."

tuɑn hæd pɝsɪstəɾ ɪn kɔlɪŋ ɪm ðæt, bæk ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs. hi hæd nɑt kɛɹd, ðɛn. wɛl, nɑt mʌtʃ.

Tuon had persisted in calling him that, back in the Tarasin Palace. He had not cared, then. Well, not much.

"maɪ neɪm ɪz mæt," hi bɪɡæn. hi nɛvɝ sɔ wɛɹ ðə pɑɾɝi kʌp ɪn əɹ hæn keɪm fɹʌm, bʌɾ i mænədʒ tə dʒɹɑp tə ðə flɔɹ ɪn taɪm fəɹ ɪt tə ʃæɾɝ əɡɛns ðə dɔɹ ɪnstɛɾ ə hɪz hɛd. "aɪ æm ə sɝvənt, tɔɪ?" ɪf tuɑnz toʊn hæd bɪn kul bɪfɔɹ, naʊ ɪt wɑz dip wɪntɝ aɪs. ʃi bɛɹli ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹɾ əz aɪs, tu. hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən wʊɾə meɪɾ ə hæŋɪŋ dʒʌdʒ lʊk ɡɪɾi. "ə θivɪŋ sɝvənt?" ðə bʊk slɪd fɹəm əɹ læp əz ʃi stʊɾ ən bɛn tə snætʃ ʌp ðə lɪɾɪd waɪt tʃeɪmbɝ pɑt.

"My name is Mat," he began. He never saw where the pottery cup in her hand came from, but he managed to drop to the floor in time for it to shatter against the door instead of his head. "I am a servant, Toy?" If Tuon's tone had been cool before, now it was deep winter ice. She barely raised her voice, but it was hard as ice, too. Her expression would have made a hanging judge look giddy. "A thieving servant?" The book slid from her lap as she stood and bent to snatch up the lidded white chamber pot.

"ə feɪθləs sɝvənt?"

"A faithless servant?"

"wi wɪl nid ðæt," sɪlutʃə sɛd dɪfɝɛntʃəli, slɪpɪŋ ðə bʌlbəs pɑɾ aʊɾ ə tuɑnz hænz.

"We will need that," Selucia said deferentially, slipping the bulbous pot out of Tuon's hands.

sɛɾɪŋ ɪt kɛɹfəli tə wʌn saɪd, ʃi kɹaʊtʃt ət tuɑnz fiɾ ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ɹɛɾi tə hɝl hɝsɛlf ət mæt, læfəbəl əz ðət wɑz. ðoʊ nʌθɪŋ mʌtʃ sim læfəbəl ɹaɪt ðɛn.

Setting it carefully to one side, she crouched at Tuon's feet almost as if ready to hurl herself at Mat, laughable as that was. Though nothing much seemed laughable right then.

mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən ɹitʃt ʌp tə wʌn ə ðə ɹeɪld ʃɛlvz əbʌv əɹ hɛɾ ən hændəd tuɑn ənʌðɝ kʌp. "wi hæv plɛnti ʌv ðiz," ʃi mɝmɝd.

Mistress Anan reached up to one of the railed shelves above her head and handed Tuon another cup. "We have plenty of these," she murmured.

mæt ʃɑɾ əɹ ən ɪndɪɡnən lʊk, bʌɾ əɹ heɪzəl aɪz twɪŋkəld wɪð əmjuzmənt. əmjuzmənt! ʃi wɑz səpoʊz tə bi ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðoʊz tu!

Mat shot her an indignant look, but her hazel eyes twinkled with amusement. Amusement! She was supposed to be guarding those two!

ə fɪs θʌmpt ɑn ðə dɔɹ. "du jə nid hɛlp ɪn ðɛɹ?" hɑɹnən kɔld ənsɝteɪnli. mæt wʌndɝd wɪtʃ ə ðɛm i wɑz æskɪŋ. "wi hæv ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɛl ɪn hænd," sɛɾəl kɔl bæk, kɑmli pʊʃɪŋ əɹ niɾəl θɹu ðə fæbɹɪk stʃɹɛtʃt ɑn əɹ hup. jə wʊɾə θɔt ðət niɾəlwɝk wɑz ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ. "ɡoʊ ɑn əbaʊt jəɹ wɝk. doʊn dɔɾəl." ðə wʊmən wɑz nɑɾ ɛbu dɑɹi, bʌt ʃi sɝɾənli hæd soʊkt ʌp ɛbu dɑɹi weɪz. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, buts θʌmp bæk daʊn ðə stɛps aʊtsaɪd. ɪt sim hɑɹnən hæd bɪn tu lɔŋ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, əz wɛl. tuɑn tɝn ðə nu kʌp ɪn əɹ hænz əz ðoʊ ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ðə flaʊɝz peɪntəɾ ɑn ɪt, ən əɹ lɪps kwɝkt ɪn ə smaɪl soʊ smɔl ɪɾ ɔlmoʊs maɪɾ əv bɪn mæts ɪmædʒəneɪʃən. ʃi wɑz mɔɹ ðən pɹɪɾi wən ʃi smaɪld, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz smaɪlz ðət sɛd ʃi nu θɪŋz i dɪd nɑt. hi wɑz gɑnə bɹeɪk aʊɾ ɪn haɪvz ɪf ʃi kɛp duɪŋ ðæt. "aɪ wɪl nɑt bi noʊn əz ə sɝvənt, tɔɪ." "maɪ neɪm ɪz mæt, nɑt . . . ðəɾ ʌðɝ θɪŋ," hi sɛd, klaɪmɪŋ tə hɪz fiɾ ən kɔʃəsli tɛstɪŋ ɪz hɪp. tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ɪɾ ætʃt noʊ wɝs æftɝ smækɪŋ ðə flɔɹbɔɹdz.

A fist thumped on the door. "Do you need help in there?" Harnan called uncertainly. Mat wondered which of them he was asking. "We have everything well in hand," Setalle called back, calmly pushing her needle through the fabric stretched on her hoop. You would have thought that needlework was the most important thing. "Go on about your work. Don't dawdle." The woman was not Ebou Dari, but she certainly had soaked up Ebou Dari ways. After a moment, boots thumped back down the steps outside. It seemed Harnan had been too long in Ebou Dar, as well. Tuon turned the new cup in her hands as though examining the flowers painted on it, and her lips quirked in a smile so small it almost might have been Mat's imagination. She was more than pretty when she smiled, but it was one of those smiles that said she knew things he did not. He was going to break out in hives if she kept doing that. "I will not be known as a servant, Toy." "My name is Mat, not . . . that other thing," he said, climbing to his feet and cautiously testing his hip. To his surprise, it ached no worse after smacking the floorboards.

tuɑn ɑɹtʃt ən aɪbɹaʊ ən hɛftəd ðə kʌp ɪn wʌn hænd. "aɪ kəd hɑɹdli tɛl ðə ʃoʊfoʊk aɪd kɪdnæp ðə dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz," hi sɛɾ ɪn ɛksæspɝeɪʃən. "ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑn, pɛzənt!" sɪlutʃə sɛd kɹɪspli. "ʃi ɪz ʌndɝ ðə veɪl!" veɪl? tuɑn hæd wɔɹn ə veɪl ɪn ðə pæləs, bʌt nɑt sɪns.

Tuon arched an eyebrow and hefted the cup in one hand. "I could hardly tell the showfolk I'd kidnapped the Daughter of the Nine Moons," he said in exasperation. "The High Lady Tuon, peasant!" Selucia said crisply. "She is under the veil!" Veil? Tuon had worn a veil in the palace, but not since.

ðə taɪni wʊmən dʒɛstʃɝd ɡɹeɪʃəsli, ə kwin ɡɹæntɪŋ laɪsəns. "ɪɾ ɪz ə noʊ ɪmpɔɹt, sɪlutʃə. hiz ɪɡnɝənt, jɛt. wi mʌst ɛdʒəkeɪt hɪm. bʌt jəl tʃeɪnʒ ðɪs stɔɹi, tɔɪ. əl nɑt bi ə sɝvənt."

The tiny woman gestured graciously, a queen granting license. "It is of no import, Selucia. He is ignorant, yet. We must educate him. But you will change this story, Toy. I will not be a servant."

"ɪts tu leɪt tə tʃeɪnʒ ɛniθɪŋ," mæt sɛd, kipɪŋ ən aɪ ɑn ðət kʌp. hɝ hænz lʊk fɹeɪl, wɪð ðoʊz lɔŋ fɪŋɡɝneɪlz kʌt ʃɔɹt, bʌɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd haʊ kwɪk ðeɪ wɝ. "noʊbɑdiz æskɪŋ jə tə bi ə sɝvənt." lukə ən ɪz waɪf nu ðə tʃɹuθ, bʌt ðəɹ hæd tə bi səm ɹizən tə ɡɪv ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls waɪ tuɑn ən sɪlutʃə wɝ kɛp kənfaɪn tə ðɪs wæɡən ən ɡɑɹɾəd. ðə pɝfək səluʃən hæd bɪn ə pɛɹ ə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz, əbaʊt tə bi dɪsmɪs fəɹ θɛft, hu hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə bɪtʃɹeɪ ðɛɹ mɪstʃɹəsəz flaɪt wɪð əɹ lʌvɝ. ɪt sim pɝfək tə mæt, ɛniweɪ. tə ðə ʃoʊfoʊk, ɪɾ oʊnli æɾəd tə ðə ɹoʊmæns. hi hæd θɔɾ ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz gɑnə swɑloʊ hɝ tʌŋ waɪl i wɑz ɪkspleɪnɪŋ tə lukə. meɪbi ʃi hæd noʊn haʊ tuɑn wəd teɪk ɪt. laɪt, hi ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt ðə daɪs wəd stɑp. haʊ kəɾ ə mæn θɪŋk wɪð ðəɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd? "aɪ kʊdn liv jə bɪhaɪn tə ɹeɪz ən əlɑɹm," hi wɛn ɑn peɪʃənli. ðət wɑz tʃɹu, əz fɑɹ əz ɪt wɛnt. "aɪ noʊ mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən əz ɪkspleɪn ɪt tə ju." hi θɔɾ əbaʊt seɪɪŋ i hæd bɪn bæbəlɪŋ fɹəm nɝvz wən i sɛd ʃi wɑz ɪz waɪf - ʃi mʌs θɪŋk ɪm ə kəmplit lubi! - bʌɾ ɪt sim bɛs nɑt tə bɹɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp əɡɛn. ɪf ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə lɛt ðə mæɾɝ laɪ, ɔl ðə bɛɾɝ. "aɪ noʊ ʃiz ɔlɹɛɾi toʊl jə ðɪs, bʌɾ aɪ pɹɑməs noʊ wʌnz gɑnə hɝt ju. wɝ nɑɾ æftɝ ɹænsəm, dʒʌst ɡɛɾɪŋ əweɪ wɪð əɹ hɛdz stɪl ətætʃt. əz sun əz aɪ kən fɪɡjɝ aʊt haʊ tə sɛn jə hoʊm seɪf ən saʊnd, aɪ wɪl. aɪ pɹɑməs.

"It's too late to change anything," Mat said, keeping an eye on that cup. Her hands looked frail, with those long fingernails cut short, but he remembered how quick they were. "Nobody's asking you to be a servant." Luca and his wife knew the truth, but there had to be some reason to give everyone else why Tuon and Selucia were kept confined to this wagon and guarded. The perfect solution had been a pair of serving girls, about to be dismissed for theft, who had intended to betray their mistress's flight with her lover. It seemed perfect to Mat, anyway. To the showfolk, it only added to the romance. He had thought Egeanin was going to swallow her tongue while he was explaining to Luca. Maybe she had known how Tuon would take it. Light, he almost wished the dice would stop. How could a man think with that in his head? "I couldn't leave you behind to raise an alarm," he went on patiently. That was true, as far as it went. "I know Mistress Anan has explained it to you." He thought about saying he had been babbling from nerves when he said she was his wife - she must think him a complete looby! - but it seemed best not to bring it up again. If she was willing to let the matter lie, all the better. "I know she's already told you this, but I promise no one's going to hurt you. We're not after ransom, just getting away with our heads still attached. As soon as I can figure out how to send you home safe and sound, I will. I promise.

əl meɪk jə əz kʌmftəɹbəl əz aɪ kən əntɪl ðɛn. jəl dʒʌst əv tə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ði ʌðɝ." tuɑnz bɪɡ dɑɹk aɪz kɹækəld, hit laɪtnɪŋ ɪn ə naɪt skaɪ, bʌt ʃi sɛd, "ɪt simz əl si wʌt jəɹ pɹɑməsəz ɑɹ wɝθ, tɔɪ." əɾ əɹ fit, sɪlutʃə hɪs laɪk ə daʊs kæt, hɝ hɛd hæftɝnɪŋ əz ɪf tə əbdʒɛkt, bʌt tuɑnz lɛf hænd wɪɡɡəld, ən ðə bluieɪd wʊmən blʌʃt ən wɛn saɪlənt. ðə blʌd juz sʌmθɪŋ laɪk meɪɾən hæntɔk wɪð ðɛɹ ʌpɝ sɝvəns. mæt wɪʃt i ʌndɝstʊd ðə sɪɡnəlz.

I'll make you as comfortable as I can until then. You'll just have to put up with the other." Tuon's big dark eyes crackled, heat lightning in a night sky, but she said, "It seems I will see what your promises are worth, Toy." At her feet, Selucia hissed like a doused cat, her head halfturning as if to object, but Tuon's left hand wiggled, and the blueeyed woman blushed and went silent. The Blood used something like Maiden handtalk with their upper servants. Mat wished he understood the signals.

"ænsɝ mi ə kwɛstʃən, tuɑn," hi sɛd.

"Answer me a question, Tuon," he said.

hi θɔɾ i hɝd sɛɾəl mɝmɝ, "ful." sɪlutʃəz dʒɔ nɑɾɪd, ən ə deɪnʒɝəs lʊk kɪndəld ɪn tuɑnz aɪz, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi wɑz gɑnə kɔl ɪm "tɔɪ," hi wəd bi bɝn ɪf i ɡeɪv əɹ ɛni taɪɾəlz.

He thought he heard Setalle murmur, "Fool." Selucia's jaw knotted, and a dangerous look kindled in Tuon's eyes, but if she was going to call him "Toy," he would be burned if he gave her any titles.

"haʊ oʊld ɑɹ ju?" hi hæd hɝd ðət ʃi wɑz oʊnli ə fju jɪɹz jʌŋɡɝ ðən hi, bʌt lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ ɪn ðət sæk ʌv ə dʒɹɛs, ɪt simd ɪmpɑsəbəl.

"How old are you?" He had heard that she was only a few years younger than he, but looking at her in that sack of a dress, it seemed impossible.

tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ðət deɪnʒɝəs spɑɹk bɝst ɪndə fleɪm. nɑt dʒʌs hit laɪtnɪŋ, ðɪs taɪm. hi ʃʊɾə bɪn fɹaɪɾ ɑn ðə spɑt. tuɑn θɹu bæk əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən dʒɹu hɝsɛlf tə hɝ fʊl haɪt.

To his surprise, that dangerous spark burst into flame. Not just heat lightning, this time. He should have been fried on the spot. Tuon threw back her shoulders and drew herself to her full height.

sətʃ əz ðət wɑz; hi daʊɾɪd ʃi kəd ɹitʃ faɪv fit wɪð əɹ hilz flæt haʊɛvɝ ʃi stʃɹɛtʃt. "maɪ fɔɹtinθ tʃɹu-neɪm deɪ wɪl kʌm ɪn faɪv mʌnθs," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə vɔɪs ðət wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm koʊld. ɪn fækt, ɪt cʊɾə hiɾəd ðə wæɡən bɛɾɝ ðən ðə stoʊv. hi fɛlt ə moʊmən ə hoʊp, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt fɪnɪʃt.

Such as that was; he doubted she could reach five feet with her heels flat however she stretched. "My fourteenth true-name day will come in five months," she said in a voice that was far from cold. In fact, it could have heated the wagon better than the stove. He felt a moment of hope, but she was not finished.

"noʊ; jə kip jəɹ bɝθ neɪmz hɪɹ, doʊn ju. ðət wɪl bi maɪ twɛntiəθ neɪmɪŋ deɪ. ɑɹ jə sæɾəsfaɪd, tɔɪ? dɪd jə fɪɹ jə hæd stoʊlən ə . . . tʃaɪld?" ʃi ɔlmoʊs hɪs ðə læst wɝd.

"No; you keep your birth names here, don't you. That will be my twentieth naming day. Are you satisfied, Toy? Did you fear you had stolen a . . . child?" She almost hissed the last word.

mæt weɪvd ɪz hænz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, fɹæntəkəli dɪsmɪsɪŋ ðə sədʒɛstʃən. ə wʊmən stɑɹɾəd hɪsɪŋ əɾ ɪm laɪk ə kɛɾəl, ə mæn wɪð ɛni bɹeɪnz faʊn ə weɪ tə kul əɹ daʊn fæst. ʃi wɑz ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə kʌp soʊ taɪtli ðət tɛndənz stʊɾ aʊɾ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɝ hænd, ən i dɪd nɑt wɑnə tʃɹaɪ hɪz hɪp wɪð ənʌðɝ fɔl tə ðə flɔɹ. kʌm tə θɪŋk ɑn ɪt, hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ hɑɹd ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə hɪɾ ɪm ðə fɝs taɪm. hɝ hænz wɝ vɛɹi fæst. "aɪ dʒʌst wɑntəd tə noʊ, ðæts ɔl," hi sɛd kwɪkli. "aɪ wɑz kjʊɹiəs, meɪkɪŋ kɑnvɝseɪʃən. aɪm oʊnli ə lɪɾəl oʊldɝ maɪsɛlf." twɛnti. soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ hoʊpɪŋ ʃi wɑz tu jʌŋ tə mɛɹi fəɹ ənʌðɝ θɹi əɹ fɔɹ jɪɹz. ɛniθɪŋ ðət keɪm bɪtwin ɪm ən ɪz wɛɾɪŋ deɪ wʊɾə bɪn wɛlkəm.

Mat waved his hands in front of him, frantically dismissing the suggestion. A woman started hissing at him like a kettle, a man with any brains found a way to cool her down fast. She was gripping the cup so tightly that tendons stood out on the back of her hand, and he did not want to try his hip with another fall to the floor. Come to think on it, he was not sure how hard she had tried to hit him the first time. Her hands were very fast. "I just wanted to know, that's all," he said quickly. "I was curious, making conversation. I'm only a little older myself." Twenty. So much for hoping she was too young to marry for another three or four years. Anything that came between him and his wedding day would have been welcome.

tuɑn stʌɾid ɪm səspɪʃəsli wɪð əɹ hɛd tɪltəd, ðən tɔs ðə kʌp ɑntu ðə bɛd bɪsaɪd mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən ən siɾəd hɝsɛlf ɑn ðə stul əɡɛn, teɪkɪŋ əz mʌtʃ kɛɹ əbaʊɾ ɝeɪnʒɪŋ əɹ vəlumənəs wʊlən skɝts əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪlɔŋ tə ə sɪlk ɡaʊn. bʌt ʃi kəntɪnjud tə ɪɡzæmɪn ɪm θɹu hɝ lɔŋ aɪlæʃɪz. "wɛɹ ɪz jəɹ ɹɪŋ?" ʃi dɪmændəd.

Tuon studied him suspiciously with her head tilted, then tossed the cup onto the bed beside Mistress Anan and seated herself on the stool again, taking as much care about arranging her voluminous woolen skirts as if they had belonged to a silk gown. But she continued to examine him through her long eyelashes. "Where is your ring?" she demanded.

ʌnkɑnʃəsli, hi θʌm ðə fɪŋɡɝ ɑn ɪz lɛf hænd wɛɹ ðə lɔŋ ɹɪŋ juʒəwəli leɪ. "aɪ doʊnt wɛɹ ɪɾ ɔl ðə taɪm." nɑt wən ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs nu hi wɔɹ ɪt. ðə θɪŋ wʊɾə stʊɾ aʊt, wɪð ɪz ɹʌf laɪəbaʊts ɡɑɹb, ɪn ɛni keɪs. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ivən ɪz sɪɡnɪt, ɛniweɪ, dʒʌst ə kɑɹvɝz tʃɹaɪ-pis. stʃɹeɪnʒ, haʊ hɪz hæn fɛl noʊɾɪsəbli laɪɾɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɪt. tu laɪt. stʃɹeɪnʒ ðət ʃi ɹɪmɑɹkt ɑn ɪt, tu. bʌt ðɛn, waɪ nɑt? laɪt, ðoʊz daɪs hæɾ ɪm ʃaɪɪŋ ət ʃædoʊz ən dʒʌmpɪŋ ət saɪz. əɹ meɪbi ɪt wɑz dʒʌs hɝ, ə dɪskʌmfɝɾɪŋ θɔt.

Unconsciously, he thumbed the finger on his left hand where the long ring usually lay. "I don't wear it all the time." Not when everybody in the Tarasin Palace knew he wore it. The thing would have stood out, with his rough layabout's garb, in any case. It was not even his signet, anyway, just a carver's try-piece. Strange, how his hand felt noticeably lighter without it. Too light. Strange that she remarked on it, too. But then, why not? Light, those dice had him shying at shadows and jumping at sighs. Or maybe it was just her, a discomforting thought.

hi muv tə sɪɾ ɑn ði ənɑkjəpaɪd bɛd, bʌt sɪlutʃə swʌŋ hɝsɛlf ʌp ɑntu ɪt soʊ kwɪkli ɛni ʌv ði ækɹəbæts maɪɾ əv bɪn dʒɛləs, ən stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt wɪð əɹ hɛd pɹɑpt ɑn əɹ hænd.

He moved to sit on the unoccupied bed, but Selucia swung herself up onto it so quickly any of the acrobats might have been jealous, and stretched out with her head propped on her hand.

ðət pʊʃt əɹ skɑɹf əskju fəɹ ə moʊmənt, bʌt ʃi hɝidli stʃɹeɪɾənd ɪt, ɔl ðə waɪl stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm pɹaʊɾ ən koʊld əz ə kwin. hi lʊkt ət ði ʌðɝ bɛd, ən mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən sɛt daʊn əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɑstənteɪʃəsli smuð əɹ skɝts, meɪkɪŋ ɪt klɪɹ ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə ʃɛɹ ən ɪntʃ. bɝn hɝ, ʃi wɑz bɪheɪvɪŋ əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ ɡɑɹɾɪŋ tuɑn fɹəm hɪm! wɪmən ɔlweɪz sim tə klʌb təɡɛðɝ soʊ ə mæn nɛvɝ hæɾ ə fɛɹ tʃæns. wɛl, hi hæd mænədʒ tə kip ɛdʒiənɪn fɹəm teɪkɪŋ tʃɑɹdʒ soʊ fɑɹ, ən i wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə bi bʊlid baɪ sɛɾəl ɑnən əɹ ə boʊsəmi leɪɾiz meɪɾ əɹ ðə haɪ ən maɪɾi haɪ leɪɾi dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn blʌɾi munz! oʊnli, hi kəd hɑɹdli ɡoʊ ʃʌvɪŋ wʌn ə ðɛm aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ tə faɪn ə pleɪs tə sɪt.

That pushed her scarf askew for a moment, but she hurriedly straightened it, all the while staring at him proud and cold as a queen. He looked at the other bed, and Mistress Anan set down her embroidery long enough to ostentatiously smooth her skirts, making it clear she did not intend to share an inch. Burn her, she was behaving as though she were guarding Tuon from him! Women always seemed to club together so a man never had a fair chance. Well, he had managed to keep Egeanin from taking charge so far, and he was not about to be bullied by Setalle Anan or a bosomy lady's maid or the high and mighty High Lady Daughter of the Nine bloody Moons! Only, he could hardly go shoving one of them out of the way to find a place to sit.

linɪŋ əɡɛnst ə dʒɹɔɝd kæbənəɾ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə bɛd mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən wɑz siɾəd ɑn, hi tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk ʌv wʌt tə seɪ. hi nɛvɝ hæd tʃɹʌbəl θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv wʌt tə seɪ tə wɪmən, bʌɾ ɪz bɹeɪn sim dɛfən baɪ ðə saʊn ə ðoʊz daɪs. ɔl θɹi wɪmən ɡeɪv ɪm dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ lʊks - hi kəɾ ɔl bʌt hɪɹ wʌn ə ðɛm tɛlɪŋ ɪm nɑt tə slaʊtʃ! - soʊ hi smaɪld. moʊst wɪmən θɔɾ ɪz bɛst smaɪl vɛɹi wɪnɪŋ.

Leaning against a drawered cabinet at the foot of the bed Mistress Anan was seated on, he tried to think of what to say. He never had trouble thinking of what to say to women, but his brain seemed deafened by the sound of those dice. All three women gave him disapproving looks - he could all but hear one of them telling him not to slouch! - so he smiled. Most women thought his best smile very winning.

tuɑn lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ ðət dɪd nɑt saʊnd wʌn oʊvɝ ɪn ðə slaɪɾəst. "du jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ hɔkwɪŋz feɪs, tɔɪ?" mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ən sɪlutʃə sæɾ ʌp ɑn ðə bɛd fɹaʊnɪŋ. ət hɪm. waɪ wəd ʃi fɹaʊn ət hɪm? tuɑn dʒʌs kəntɪnjud tə lʊk ət hɪm, hænz foʊldəɾ ɪn əɹ læp, əz kul ən kəlɛktəɾ əz ə wɪzdəm ət sʌndeɪ.

Tuon let out a long breath that did not sound won over in the slightest. "Do you remember Hawkwing's face, Toy?" Mistress Anan blinked in surprise, and Selucia sat up on the bed frowning. At him. Why would she frown at him? Tuon just continued to look at him, hands folded in her lap, as cool and collected as a Wisdom at Sunday.

mæts smaɪl fɛl fɹoʊzən. laɪt, wʌd ʃi noʊ? haʊ kəd ʃi noʊ ɛniθɪŋ? hi leɪ bɪniθ ðə bɝnɪŋ sʌn, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz saɪd wɪð boʊθ hænz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ðə læst ə laɪf fɹəm likɪŋ aʊɾ ən wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ðəɹ wɑz ɛni ɹizən tə hoʊld ɑn. eɪdʃɑɝ wɑz fɪnɪʃt, æftɝ ðɪs deɪz wɝk. ə ʃædoʊ blɑɾɪd ðə sʌn fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ən ðən ə tɔl mæn ɪn ɑɹmɝ kɹaʊtʃt bɪsaɪd hɪm, hɛlmət tʌkt ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm, dɑɹk dip-sɛɾ aɪz fɹeɪmɪŋ ə hʊk noʊz. "ju fɔt wɛl əɡɛns mi tədeɪ, kjuln, ən mɛni deɪz pæst," ðət mɛmɝəbəl vɔɪs sɛd. "wɪl jə lɪv wɪð mi ɪn pis?" wɪð ɪz læs bɹɛθ, hi læft ɪn ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz feɪs. hi heɪɾəd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ daɪɪŋ. ə dʌzən ʌðɝ ɪnkaʊntɝz skɪɾɝd θɹu hɪz maɪnd, tu, eɪntʃən mɛmɹiz ðət wɝ hɪz, naʊ. ɑɹɾɝ pɛndʒɹæɡ hæd bɪn ə dɪfəkəl mæn tə ɡɛɾ əlɔŋ wɪð ivən bɪfɔɹ ðə wɔɹz stɑɹɾəd.

Mat's smile felt frozen. Light, what did she know? How could she know anything? He lay beneath the burning sun, holding his side with both hands, trying to keep the last of life from leaking out and wondering whether there was any reason to hold on. Aideshar was finished, after this day's work. A shadow blotted the sun for an instant, and then a tall man in armor crouched beside him, helmet tucked under his arm, dark deep-set eyes framing a hooked nose. "You fought well against me today, Culain, and many days past," that memorable voice said. "Will you live with me in peace?" With his last breath, he laughed in Artur Hawkwing's face. He hated to remember dying. A dozen other encounters skittered through his mind, too, ancient memories that were his, now. Artur Paendrag had been a difficult man to get along with even before the wars started.

dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, hi tʊk kɛɹ tʃuzɪŋ ɪz wɝdz. ðɪs wɑz noʊ taɪm tə ɡoʊ spaʊɾɪŋ ði oʊl tʌŋ. "ʌv kɔɹs aɪ doʊnt!" hi laɪd. ə mæn u kəd nɑt laɪ kənvɪnsɪŋli ɡɑt ʃɔɹt ʃɹɪft fɹəm wɪmən. "laɪt, hɔkwɪŋ daɪɾ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz əɡoʊ! wʌt kaɪndə kwɛstʃən ɪz ðæt?" hɝ maʊθ oʊpən sloʊli, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən i wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi mɛn tə ænsɝ kwɛstʃən wɪð kwɛstʃən. "ə fulɪʃ wʌn, tɔɪ," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd faɪnəli, ɪnstɛd. "aɪ kæn seɪ waɪ ɪt pɑpt ɪndə maɪ hɛd." ðə stɪfnəs ɪn mæts ʃoʊldɝz ɹɪlækst, ə lɪɾəl. ʌv kɔɹs. hi wɑz tɑvɝən. pipəl dɪd θɪŋz ən sɛd θɪŋz ɝaʊn ɪm ðeɪ nɛvɝ wəɾ ɛlswɛɹ. nɑnsɛns kwɑləfaɪd. stɪl, ə θɪŋ laɪk ðət kəd bɪkʌm ənkʌmftəɹbəl wən ɪt hɪt tu kloʊs tə hoʊm. "maɪ neɪm ɪz mæt. mæt kɔθən." hi maɪɾ əz wɛl nɑɾ əv spoʊkən. "aɪ kænɑt seɪ wʌɾ əl də æftɝ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ɛbu dɑɹ, tɔɪ. aɪ hæv nɑt dɪsaɪɾɪd. aɪ meɪ hæv jə meɪd dækoʊvə. jə ɑɹ nɑt pɹɪɾi ɪnʌf fəɹ ə kʌbɛɹɝ, bʌɾ ɪt maɪt pliz mi tə hæv jə fəɹ wʌn. stɪl, juv ɹɛpɹəzɛntəd sɝɾən pɹɑməsəz tə mi, soʊ ɪt plizɪz mi naʊ tə pɹɑməs, əz wɛl. soʊ lɔŋ əz jə kip jəɹ pɹɑməsəz, əl niðɝ ɪskeɪp nɔɹ bɪtʃɹeɪ jə ɪn ɛni weɪ, nɔɹ wɪl aɪ kɑz dɪsɛnʃən əmʌŋ jəɹ fɑloʊɝz. aɪ bɪliv ðət kʌvɝz ɛvɹiθɪŋ nɛsəsɛɹi." ðɪs taɪm, mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən ɡeɪpt ət hɝ, ən sɪlutʃə meɪɾ ə saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt, bʌt tuɑn əpɪɹd nɑt tə noʊɾəs iðɝ wʊmən. ʃi dʒʌs lʊkt əɾ ɪm ɪkspɛktənli, weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə ɹɪspɑns. hi meɪɾ ə saʊn ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt, tu. nɑɾ ə wɪmpɝ, dʒʌst ə saʊnd. tuɑnz feɪs wɑz əz smuð əz ə stɝn mæsk ə dɑɹk ɡlæs. hɝ kɑm wɑz mædnəs, bʌt ðɪs meɪd ɡɪbɝɪŋ lʊk seɪn! ʃi wəɾ əv tə bi ɪnseɪn tə θɪŋk i wəd bɪliv ðəɾ ɔfɝ.

Drawing a deep breath, he took care choosing his words. This was no time to go spouting the Old Tongue. "Of course I don't!" he lied. A man who could not lie convincingly got short shrift from women. "Light, Hawkwing died a thousand years ago! What kind of question is that?" Her mouth opened slowly, and for a moment he was sure she meant to answer question with question. "A foolish one, Toy," she replied finally, instead. "I can't say why it popped into my head." The stiffness in Mat's shoulders relaxed, a little. Of course. He was ta'veren. People did things and said things around him they never would elsewhere. Nonsense qualified. Still, a thing like that could become uncomfortable when it hit too close to home. "My name is Mat. Mat Cauthon." He might as well not have spoken. "I cannot say what I will do after returning to Ebou Dar, Toy. I have not decided. I may have you made da'covah. You are not pretty enough for a cupbearer, but it might please me to have you for one. Still, you have represented certain promises to me, so it pleases me now to promise, as well. So long as you keep your promises, I will neither escape nor betray you in any way, nor will I cause dissension among your followers. I believe that covers everything necessary." This time, Mistress Anan gaped at her, and Selucia made a sound in her throat, but Tuon appeared not to notice either woman. She just looked at him expectantly, waiting on a response. He made a sound in his throat, too. Not a whimper, just a sound. Tuon's face was as smooth as a stern mask of dark glass. Her calm was madness, but this made gibbering look sane! She would have to be insane to think he would believe that offer.

ɪksɛpt, hi θɔt ʃi dɪd min ɪt. ðæt, əɹ ʃi wɑz ə bɛɾɝ laɪɝ ðən i ɛvɝ hoʊp tə bi. əɡɛn i hæd ðət kwizi sɛns ðət ʃi nu mɔɹ ðən i dɪd. ɹɪdɪkjələs, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðəɹ ɪt wɑz. hi swɑloʊɾ ə lʌmp ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt. ə hɑɹd lʌmp.

Except, he thought she did mean it. That, or she was a better liar than he ever hoped to be. Again he had that queasy sense that she knew more than he did. Ridiculous, of course, but there it was. He swallowed a lump in his throat. A hard lump.

"wɛl, ðət dʌz ɔl ɹaɪt fəɹ ju," hi sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə baɪ taɪm, "bʌt wʌɾ əbaʊt sɪlutʃə?" taɪm fəɹ wʌt? hi kəd nɑt θɪŋk wɪð ðoʊz daɪs paʊndɪŋ ɪn ɪz skʌl.

"Well, that does all right for you," he said, trying to buy time, "but what about Selucia?" Time for what? He could not think with those dice pounding in his skull.

"sɪlutʃə fɑloʊz maɪ wɪʃɪz, tɔɪ," tuɑn sɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli. ðə blu-aɪd wʊmən hɝsɛlf stʃɹeɪɾənd ən stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm əz ðoʊ ɪndɪɡnən ðəɾ i hæd daʊɾɪd ðæt. fəɹ ə leɪɾiz meɪd, ʃi kəd lʊk fɪɹs wən ʃi tʃɹaɪd.

"Selucia follows my wishes, Toy," Tuon said impatiently. The blue-eyed woman herself straightened and stared at him as though indignant that he had doubted that. For a lady's maid, she could look fierce when she tried.

mæt dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt tə seɪ əɹ du. wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, hi spæɾ ɑn ɪz pɑm ən ɔfɝɾ ɪz hæn əz ɪf silɪŋ ə bɑɹɡən ɑn ə hɔɹs.

Mat did not know what to say or do. Without thinking, he spat on his palm and offered his hand as if sealing a bargain on a horse.

"jɔɹ kʌstəmz ɑɹ . . . ɝθi," tuɑn sɛɾ ɪn ə dʒɹaɪ vɔɪs, bʌt ʃi spæɾ ɑn əɹ oʊn pɑm ən klæspt ɪz hænd. " 'ðʌs ɪz əɹ tʃɹiɾi ɹɪɾən; ðʌs ɪz əɡɹimən meɪd.' wʌt dʌz ðət ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɑn jəɹ spɪɹ min, tɔɪ?"

"Your customs are . . . earthy," Tuon said in a dry voice, but she spat on her own palm and clasped his hand. " 'Thus is our treaty written; thus is agreement made.' What does that writing on your spear mean, Toy?"

hi dɪd wɪmpɝ ðɪs taɪm, ən nɑt kəz ʃi hæd ɹɛd ði oʊl tʌŋ ɪnskɹɪpʃən ɑn ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ. ə blʌɾi stoʊn wəɾ əv wɪmpɝd. ðə daɪs hæd stɑpt əz sun əz i tʌtʃt əɹ hænd. laɪt, wʌt hæd hæpənd?

He did whimper this time, and not because she had read the Old Tongue inscription on his ashandarei. A bloody stone would have whimpered. The dice had stopped as soon as he touched her hand. Light, what had happened?

nʌkəlz ɹæpt ɑn ðə dɔɹ, ən i wɑz soʊ ɑn ɛdʒ ðəɾ i muvd wɪθaʊt θɔt, spɪnɪŋ, ə naɪf kʌmɪŋ ɪndə iðɝ hæn ɹɛɾi tə θɹoʊ ət wʌtɛvɝ keɪm ɪn. "steɪ bɪhaɪn mi," hi snæpt. ðə dɔɹ oʊpənd, ən tɑm stʌk ɪz hɛɾ ɪn. ðə hʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊk wɑz ʌp, ən mæt ɹilaɪzd ɪt wɑz ɹeɪnɪŋ aʊtsaɪd. bɪtwin tuɑn ən ðə daɪs, hi hæd mɪs ðə saʊn ə ɹeɪn hɪɾɪŋ ðə wæɡənz ɹuf. "aɪ tʃɹʌst aɪm nɑɾ ɪntɝʌptɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ?" tɑm sɛd, nʌklɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ waɪt mʌstæʃɪz.

Knuckles rapped on the door, and he was so on edge that he moved without thought, spinning, a knife coming into either hand ready to throw at whatever came in. "Stay behind me," he snapped. The door opened, and Thom stuck his head in. The hood of his cloak was up, and Mat realized it was raining outside. Between Tuon and the dice, he had missed the sound of rain hitting the wagon's roof. "I trust I'm not interrupting anything?" Thom said, knuckling his long white mustaches.

mæts feɪs hiɾəd. sɛɾəl hæd fɹoʊzən wɪð əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi niɾəl tʃɹeɪlɪŋ blu θɹɛd daʊn tə hɝ wɝk, ən əɹ aɪbɹaʊz sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə klaɪm oʊvɝ ðə tɑp ə hɝ hɛd. tɛnst ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ði ʌðɝ bɛd, sɪlutʃə wɑtʃt ɪm slɪp ðə naɪvz bæk ʌp ɪz slivz wɪð kənsɪɾɝəbəl ɪntʃɹəst. hi wəd nɑɾ əv θɔt ʃi wɑz ðə sɔɹt tə laɪk deɪnʒɝəs mɛn. ðət kaɪndə wʊmən wɑz wɝθ əvɔɪɾɪŋ; ðeɪ tɛndəd tə faɪnd weɪz tə meɪk ə mæn nid tə bi deɪnʒɝəs. hi dɪd nɑt ɡlæns bæk ət tuɑn. ʃi wɑz pɹɑbli stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm əz ɪf i hæd bɪn keɪpɝɪŋ laɪk lukə. dʒʌs kəz i dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɡɛt mɛɹid dɪd nɑt min i wɑntəɾ ɪz fjutʃɝ waɪf tə θɪŋk ɪm ə ful.

Mat's face heated. Setalle had frozen with her embroidery needle trailing blue thread down to her work, and her eyebrows seemed to be trying to climb over the top of her head. Tensed on the edge of the other bed, Selucia watched him slip the knives back up his sleeves with considerable interest. He would not have thought she was the sort to like dangerous men. That kind of woman was worth avoiding; they tended to find ways to make a man need to be dangerous. He did not glance back at Tuon. She was probably staring at him as if he had been capering like Luca. Just because he did not want to get married did not mean he wanted his future wife to think him a fool.

"wʌt dɪd jə faɪn aʊt, tɑm?" hi æsk bɹʌskli. sʌmθɪŋ hæd hæpənd, əɹ ðə daɪs wəd nɑɾ əv stɑpt. ə θɔt keɪm ðət meɪɾ ɪz hɛɹ wɑnə stæn ɑn ɛnd. ðɪs wɑz ðə sɛkən taɪm ðeɪ hæd stɑpt ɪn tuɑnz pɹɛzəns. ðə θɝd, kaʊntɪŋ ðə ɡeɪt liɾɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ. θɹi blʌɾi taɪmz, ən ɔl taɪd tə hɝ.

"What did you find out, Thom?" he asked brusquely. Something had happened, or the dice would not have stopped. A thought came that made his hair want to stand on end. This was the second time they had stopped in Tuon's presence. The third, counting the gate leading out of Ebou Dar. Three bloody times, and all tied to her.

lɪmpɪŋ slaɪtli, ðə waɪt-hɛɹd mæn keɪm ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ ɪn, pʊʃɪŋ bæk ɪz hʊd, ən pʊl ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɪm. hɪz lɪmp keɪm fɹəm ən oʊld ɪnʒɝi, nɑt tʃɹʌbəl ɪn ðə sɪɾi. tɔl ən lin ən lɛðɝi, wɪð ʃɑɹp blu aɪz ən snoʊi mʌstæʃɪz ðət hʌŋ bɪloʊ hɪz tʃɪn, ɪt simd i wəd dʒɹɔ ətɛnʃən wɛɹɛvɝ i wɛnt, bʌɾ i hæd pɹæktəs ət haɪɾɪŋ ɪn pleɪn saɪt, ən ɪz dɑɹk bɹɑnz koʊɾ ən bɹaʊn wʊl kloʊk wɝ suɾəbəl fəɹ ə mæn wɪð ə lɪɾəl kɔɪn tə spɛn bʌt nɑt tu mʌtʃ. "ðə stʃɹits ɑɹ fʊl ə ɹumɝz əbaʊt hɝ," hi sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ təwɔɹd tuɑn, "bʌt nʌθɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ. aɪ bɑt dʒɹɪŋks fəɹ ə fju sintʃæn ɔfəsɝz, ən ðeɪ sim tə bɪliv ʃiz snʌɡ ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs əɹ ɔf ɑn ən ɪnspɛkʃən tʃɹɪp. aɪ dɪdn sɛns ɛni dɪsəmbəlɪŋ, mæt. ðeɪ dɪdnt noʊ."

Limping slightly, the white-haired man came the rest of the way in, pushing back his hood, and pulled the door shut behind him. His limp came from an old injury, not trouble in the city. Tall and lean and leathery, with sharp blue eyes and snowy mustaches that hung below his chin, it seemed he would draw attention wherever he went, but he had practice at hiding in plain sight, and his dark bronze coat and brown wool cloak were suitable for a man with a little coin to spend but not too much. "The streets are full of rumors about her," he said, nodding toward Tuon, "but nothing about her disappearing. I bought drinks for a few Seanchan officers, and they seem to believe she's snug in the Tarasin Palace or off on an inspection trip. I didn't sense any dissembling, Mat. They didn't know."

"dɪd jə ɪkspɛk pʌblɪk ənaʊnsməns, tɔɪ?" tuɑn sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. "æz ɪɾ ɪz, sjuɹɔθ meɪ bi kənsɪɾɝɪŋ teɪkɪŋ əɹ oʊn laɪf fəɹ ðə ʃeɪm. dʒju ɪkspɛkt əɹ tə spɹɛd sətʃ ən ɪl oʊmən fəɹ ðə ɹɪtɝn əbaʊt fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn tə si ɑn tɑp ə ðæt?" soʊ ɛdʒiənɪn hæd bɪn ɹaɪt. ɪt stɪl simd ɪmpɑsəbəl.

"Did you expect public announcements, Toy?" Tuon said incredulously. "As it is, Suroth may be considering taking her own life for the shame. Do you expect her to spread such an ill omen for the Return about for everyone to see on top of that?" So Egeanin had been right. It still seemed impossible.

ən ɪt dɪd nɑt sim əɾ ɔl ɪmpɔɹɾənt kəmpɛɹd tə ðə daɪs stɑpɪŋ. wʌt hæd hæpənd'? hi hæd ʃeɪkən hænz wɪð tuɑn, ðət wɑz ɔl. ʃeɪkən hænz ən meɪɾ ə bɑɹɡən. hi mɛn tə kip ɪz saɪd, bʌt wʌt hæd ðə daɪs toʊl hɪm? ðət ʃi wəd kip hɝz? əɹ ðət ʃi wəd nɑt? fəɹ ɔl i nu, sintʃæn noʊbəlwɪmən wɝ ɪn ðə hæbəɾ ə mɛɹiɪŋ - wʌt wɑz ɪt ʃi hæd sɛd ʃi wɑz gɑnə meɪk hɪm? - ə kʌbɛɹɝ - meɪbi ðeɪ mɛɹid kʌbɛɹɝz ɔl ðə taɪm. "ðɛɹz mɔɹ, mæt," tɑm sɛd, aɪɪŋ tuɑn θɔtfəli, ən wɪð ə hɪn ə sɝpɹaɪz. ɪt keɪm tə mæt ðət ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ oʊvɝli kənsɝn ðət sjuɹɔθ maɪt kɪl hɝsɛlf. meɪbi ʃi wɑz əz tʌf əz doʊmən θɔt. wʌt wɝ ðə blʌɾi daɪs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɛl hɪm? ðət wɑz wʌt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ðən tɑm wɛn ɑn, ən mæt fɝɡɑɾ əbaʊt haʊ tʌf tuɑn maɪt bi ən ivən ðə daɪs. "taɪlɪnz dɛd. ðəɹ kipɪŋ ɪt kwaɪət fəɹ fɪɹ ə dɪstɝbənsəz, bʌt wʌn ə ðə pæləs ɡɑɹdz, ə jʌŋ lutɛnən u kʊdn hoʊld ɪz bɹændi, toʊl mi ðəɹ plænɪŋ əɹ fjunɝəl fist ən bɛslənz kɔɹəneɪʃən fəɹ ðə seɪm deɪ."

And it did not seem at all important compared to the dice stopping. What had happened'? He had shaken hands with Tuon, that was all. Shaken hands and made a bargain. He meant to keep his side, but what had the dice told him? That she would keep hers? Or that she would not? For all he knew, Seanchan noblewomen were in the habit of marrying - what was it she had said she was going to make him? - a cupbearer - maybe they married cupbearers all the time. "There's more, Mat," Thom said, eyeing Tuon thoughtfully, and with a hint of surprise. It came to Mat that she did not appear overly concerned that Suroth might kill herself. Maybe she was as tough as Domon thought. What were the bloody dice trying to tell him? That was what was important. Then Thom went on, and Mat forgot about how tough Tuon might be and even the dice. "Tylin's dead. They're keeping it quiet for fear of disturbances, but one of the Palace Guards, a young lieutenant who couldn't hold his brandy, told me they're planning her funeral feast and Beslan's coronation for the same day."

"haʊ?" mæt dɪmændəd. ʃi wɑz oʊldɝ ðən hi, bʌt nɑt ðət mʌtʃ oʊldɝ! bɛslənz kɔɹəneɪʃən.

"How?" Mat demanded. She was older than he, but not that much older! Beslan's coronation.

laɪt! haʊ wəd bɛslən koʊp wɪð ðæt, wən i heɪɾəd ðə sintʃæn? ɪt hæd bɪn ɪz plæn tə faɪɝ ðoʊz səplaɪz ɑn ðə beɪ ɹoʊd. hi wʊɾə tʃɹaɪɾ ən əpɹaɪzɪŋ ɪf mæt hæd nɑt kənvɪnst ɪm ɪt wəɾ oʊnli ɹɪzʌlt ɪn ə slɔɾɝ, ən nɑɾ ə sintʃæn.

Light! How would Beslan cope with that, when he hated the Seanchan? It had been his plan to fire those supplies on the Bay Road. He would have tried an uprising if Mat had not convinced him it would only result in a slaughter, and not of Seanchan.

tɑm hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz wɪð ə θʌm. faɪnəli, hi saɪd. "ʃi wɑz faʊn ɪn əɹ bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ ðə mɔɹnɪŋ æftɝ wi lɛft, mæt, stɪl baʊn hæn ən fʊt. hɝ hɛd. . . . hɝ hɛd hæd bɪn tɔɹn ɔf."

Thom hesitated, stroking his mustaches with a thumb. Finally, he sighed. "She was found in her bedchamber the morning after we left, Mat, still bound hand and foot. Her head. . . . Her head had been torn off."

mæt dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz ɪz niz hæd ɡɪvən weɪ əntɪl i faʊn hɪmsɛlf sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ wɪð ɪz hɛd bʌzɪŋ. hi kəd hɪɹ əɹ vɔɪs. jəl ɡɛt jəɹ bid kʌɾ ɔf jɛɾ ɪf jəɹ nɑt kɛɹfəl, paɪɡlɛt, ən aɪ wʊdn laɪk ðæt. sɛɾəl lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɑn ðə nɛɹoʊ bɛd tə pɹɛs ə hæn əɡɛnst ɪz tʃik ɪn kəməzɝeɪʃən. "ðə wɪndfɪndɝz?" hi sɛd hɑloʊli. hi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə seɪ mɔɹ.

Mat did not realize his knees had given way until he found himself sitting on the floor with his head buzzing. He could hear her voice. You'll get your bead cut off yet if you're not careful, piglet, and I wouldn't like that. Setalle leaned forward on the narrow bed to press a hand against his cheek in commiseration. "The Windfinders?" he said hollowly. He did not have to say more.

"əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə wʌt ðət lutɛnən sɛd, ðə sintʃæn əv sɛɾəld ɑn ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ ðə bleɪm.

"According to what that lieutenant said, the Seanchan have settled on Aes Sedai for the blame.

kəz taɪlɪn hæd swɔɹn ðə sintʃæn oʊðz. ðæts wʌt ðəl ənaʊns əɾ əɹ fjunɝəl fist." "taɪlɪn daɪz ðə seɪm naɪt ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ɪskeɪp, ən ðə sintʃæn bɪliv ɛɛs sədaɪ kɪl hɝ?" hi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən taɪlɪn dɛd. aɪm gɑnə hæv jə fəɹ sʌpɝ, dʌklɪŋ. "ðæt dʌzn meɪk sɛns, tɑm." tɑm hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, fɹaʊnɪŋ əz i kənsɪɾɝd. "ɪt kəd bi pəlɪɾəkəl, ɪn pɑɹt, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ðæts wʌt ðeɪ ɹɪli bɪliv, mæt. ðət lutɛnən sɛd ðəɹ ʃʊɹ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ tu hɑɹd tə stɑp əɹ ɡoʊ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ weɪ, ən ðə kwɪkɪs pæθ aʊɾ ə ðə pæləs fɹəm ðə deɪmeɪn kɛnəlz ɡoʊz noʊwɛɹ nɪɹ taɪlɪnz əpɑɹtməns."

Because Tylin had sworn the Seanchan oaths. That's what they'll announce at her funeral feast." "Tylin dies the same night the Windfinders escape, and the Seanchan believe Aes Sedai killed her?" He could not imagine Tylin dead. I'm going to have you for supper, duckling. "That doesn't make sense, Thom." Thom hesitated, frowning as he considered. "It could be political, in part, but I think that's what they really believe, Mat. That lieutenant said they're sure the Windfinders were running too hard to stop or go out of their way, and the quickest path out of the palace from the damane kennels goes nowhere near Tylin's apartments."

mæt ɡɹʌntɪd. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz nɑt soʊ. ən ɪf ɪt wɝ, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld i kəd də əbaʊɾ ɪt.

Mat grunted. He was sure it was not so. And if it were, there was nothing in the world he could do about it.

"ðə mɑɹ æθdəmeɪn hæd ɹizən tə mɝɾɝ taɪlɪn," sɪlutʃə sɛd sʌɾənli. "ðeɪ mʌs fɪɹ əɹ ɪɡzæmpəl fəɹ ʌðɝz. wʌt ɹizən hæd ðə deɪmeɪn jə spik ʌv? nʌn. ðə hæn ə dʒʌstəs ɹikwaɪɝz moʊɾɪv ən pɹuf, ivən fəɹ deɪmeɪn ən dækoʊvæl." ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ ɹiɾɪŋ ðə wɝdz ɔf ə peɪdʒ. ən ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət tuɑn fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ.

"The mar ath'damane had reason to murder Tylin," Selucia said suddenly. "They must fear her example for others. What reason had the damane you speak of? None. The hand of justice requires motive and proof, even for damane and da'covale." She sounded as though she were reading the words off a page. And she was looking at Tuon from the corner of her eye.

mæt lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, bʌɾ ɪf ðə taɪni wʊmən hæd bɪn juzɪŋ əɹ hænz tə tɛl sɪlutʃə wʌt tə seɪ, ðeɪ wɝ ɹɛstɪŋ ɪn əɹ læp, naʊ. ʃi wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, ə nutʃɹəl ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs.

Mat looked over his shoulder, but if the tiny woman had been using her hands to tell Selucia what to say, they were resting in her lap, now. She was watching him, a neutral expression on her face.

"dɪd jə kɛɹ fəɹ taɪlɪn soʊ dipli?" ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə kɔʃəs vɔɪs.

"Did you care for Tylin so deeply?" she said in a cautious voice.

"jɛs. noʊ. bɝn mi, aɪ laɪk hɝ!" tɝnɪŋ əweɪ, hi skɹʌb fɪŋɡɝz θɹu hɪz hɛɹ, pʊʃɪŋ ðə kæp ɔf. hi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn soʊ ɡlæd tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ə wʊmən ɪn ɪz laɪf, bʌt ðɪs . . . ! "æn aɪ lɛft əɹ taɪɾ ʌp ən ɡæɡd soʊ ʃi kʊdn ivən kɔl fəɹ hɛlp, izi pɹeɪ fəɹ ðə ɡoʊləm," hi sɛd bɪɾɝli. "ɪt wɑz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mi. doʊnt ʃeɪk jəɹ hɛd. tɑm. jə noʊ ɪɾ əz wɛl əz aɪ du." "wʌɾ ɪz ə . . . ɡoʊləm?" tuɑn æskt.

"Yes. No. Burn me, I liked her!" Turning away, he scrubbed fingers through his hair, pushing the cap off. He had never been so glad to get away from a woman in his life, but this . . . ! "And I left her tied up and gagged so she couldn't even call for help, easy prey for the gholam," he said bitterly. "It was looking for me. Don't shake your head. Thom. You know it as well as I do." "What is a . . . gholam?" Tuon asked.

"ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, maɪ leɪɾi," tɑm sɛd. hi fɹaʊnd wɝidli. hi dɪd nɑt teɪk izəli tə wɝi, bʌɾ ɛnibəɾi ɪksɛpt ə ful wəd wɝi əbaʊɾ ə ɡoʊləm. "ɪt lʊks laɪk ə mæn, bʌɾ ɪt kən slɪp θɹu ə maʊshoʊl, əɹ ʌndɝ ə dɔɹ, ən ɪts stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə. . . ." hi hæɹəmf θɹu hɪz mʌstæʃɪz.

"Shadowspawn, my Lady," Thom said. He frowned worriedly. He did not take easily to worry, but anybody except a fool would worry about a gholam. "It looks like a man, but it can slip through a mousehole, or under a door, and it's strong enough to. . . ." He harrumphed through his mustaches.

"wɛl, ɪnʌf ə ðæt. mæt, ʃi cʊɾə hæɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd ɡɑɹdz ɝaʊn hɝ, ən ɪt wʊdn əv stɑp ðət θɪŋ." ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv niɾəd ə hʌnʒɹəd ɡɑɹdz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt teɪkən ʌp wɪð mæt kɔθən. "ə ɡoʊləm," tuɑn mɝmɝd ɹaɪli. sʌɾənli ʃi ɹæp mæt hɑɹɾ ɑn ðə tɑp ə ðə hɛd wɪð əɹ nʌkəlz. klæpɪŋ ə hæn tə hɪz skælp, hi stɛɹɾ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. "aɪm vɛɹi hæpi ðət jə ʃoʊ lɔɪəlti tə taɪlɪn, tɔɪ," ʃi toʊld ɪm ɪn ə səvɪɹ vɔɪs, "bʌɾ aɪ woʊn əv supɝstɪʃən ɪn ju. əl nɑɾ əv ɪt. ɪt dʌz taɪlɪn noʊ ɑnɝ." bɝn hɪm, taɪlɪnz dɛθ sim tə kənsɝn əɹ əz lɪɾəl əz wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt sjuɹɔθ kəmɪɾəd suəsaɪd. wʌt kaɪndə wʊmən wɑz i ɡoʊɪŋ tə mɛɹi?

"Well, enough of that. Mat, she could have had a hundred guards around her, and it wouldn't have stopped that thing." She would not have needed a hundred guards if she had not taken up with Mat Cauthon. "A gholam," Tuon murmured wryly. Suddenly she rapped Mat hard on the top of the head with her knuckles. Clapping a hand to his scalp, he stared over his shoulder incredulously. "I'm very happy that you show loyalty to Tylin, Toy," she told him in a severe voice, "but I won't have superstition in you. I will not have it. It does Tylin no honor." Burn him, Tylin's death seemed to concern her as little as whether or not Suroth committed suicide. What kind of woman was he going to marry?

wən ə fɪs paʊndɪɾ ɑn ðə dɔɹ ðɪs taɪm, hi dɪd nɑɾ ivən bɑðɝ tə stænd. hi fɛl nʌm ət ðə kɔɹ ən skɹeɪpt ɹɔ ɑn ðə sɝfəs. blɹɪk pʊʃt ɪndə ðə wæɡən wɪθaʊɾ æskɪŋ, hɪz dɑɹk bɹaʊn kloʊk dʒɹɪpɪŋ ɹeɪn. ɪt wɑz ən oʊl kloʊk, wɔɹn θɪn ɪn spɑts, bʌɾ i əpɪɹd nɑt tə kɛɹ wɛðɝ ɹeɪn lik θɹu. ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɛvɹiwʌn bʌt mæt, əɹ ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn. ðə mæn æktʃəli  tʊk ə moʊmən tə kənsɪɾɝ sɪlutʃəz bʊzəm! "dʒoʊlin wɑns ju, kɔθən," hi sɛd, stɪl stʌɾiɪŋ hɝ. laɪt!

When a fist pounded on the door this time, he did not even bother to stand. He felt numb at the core and scraped raw on the surface. Blaeric pushed into the wagon without asking, his dark brown cloak dripping rain. It was an old cloak, worn thin in spots, but he appeared not to care whether rain leaked through. The Warder ignored everyone but Mat, or almost everyone. The man actually took a moment to consider Selucia's bosom! "Joline wants you, Cauthon," he said, still studying her. Light!

ðɪs wɑz ɔl mæt niɾəd tə meɪk ɪɾ ə faɪn deɪ.

This was all Mat needed to make it a fine day.

"hu ɪz dʒoʊlin?" tuɑn dɪmændəd.

"Who is Joline?" Tuon demanded.

mæt ɪɡnɔɹd hɝ. "tɛl dʒoʊlin əl si hɝ wʌns wɝ ɑn ðə ɹoʊd, blɹɪk." ðə læs θɪŋ i wɑntəd wɑz tə bi fɔɹs tə lɪsən tə mɔɹ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ɡɹivənsəz naʊ.

Mat ignored her. "Tell Joline I'll see her once we're on the road, Blaeric." The last thing he wanted was to be forced to listen to more of the Aes Sedai's grievances now.

"ʃi wɑns jə naʊ, kɔθən."

"She wants you now, Cauthon."

wɪð ə saɪ, mæt ɡɑt tə hɪz fiɾ ən ɡæðɝɾ ɪz kæp fɹəm ðə flɔɹ. blɹɪk lʊkt əz ɪf i maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə dʒɹæɡ hɪm, ʌðɝwaɪz. ɪn ɪz oʊn kɝən mud, hi θɔɾ i maɪt pʊɾ ə naɪf ɪn ðə mæn ɪf i tʃɹaɪd. ən ɡɛɾ ɪz nɛk bɹoʊkən fəɹ ɪz peɪnz; ə wɔɹɾɝ wəd nɑt teɪk ə naɪf ɪn ðə ɹɪbz laɪtli. hi wɑz fɛɹli ʃʊɹ i hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi daɪd ðə wʌn taɪm i wɑz əlaʊd, ən nɑɾ ɪn ən oʊl mɛmɹi. ʃʊɹ ɪnʌf nɑt tə teɪk ɹɪsks i kəd saɪdstɛp. "hu ɪz dʒoʊlin, tɔɪ?" ɪf i hæd nɑt noʊn bɛɾɝ, hi wʊɾə sɛd tuɑn saʊndəd dʒɛləs.

With a sigh, Mat got to his feet and gathered his cap from the floor. Blaeric looked as if he might try to drag him, otherwise. In his own current mood, he thought he might put a knife in the man if he tried. And get his neck broken for his pains; a Warder would not take a knife in the ribs lightly. He was fairly sure he had already died the one time he was allowed, and not in an old memory. Sure enough not to take risks he could sidestep. "Who is Joline, Toy?" If he had not known better, he would have said Tuon sounded jealous.

"ə blʌɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ," hi ɡɹʌmbəld, tʌɡɪŋ ðə kæp ɑn, ən ɡɑt wʌn smɔl plɛʒɝ fəɹ ðə deɪ.

"A bloody Aes Sedai," he grumbled, tugging the cap on, and got one small pleasure for the day.

tuɑnz dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt ɪn ʃɑk. hi ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn ɪm ɑn ðə weɪ aʊt bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd faɪn ə wɝd tə seɪ. ə vɛɹi smɔl plɛʒɝ. wʌn bʌɾɝflaɪ ɑn ə mɪɾən hip. taɪlɪn dɛd, ən ðə wɪnfmdɝz maɪt teɪk ðə bleɪm jɛt, wʌtɛvɝ tɑm sɛd. ən ðət wɑz əsaɪd fɹəm tuɑn ən ðə blʌɾi daɪs. ə vɛɹi taɪni bʌɾɝflaɪ ɑn ə vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ mɪɾən. ðə skaɪ wɑz fʊl ə dɑɹk klaʊdz, naʊ, ən ðə daʊnpɔɹ stɛɾi. ə soʊkɪŋ ɹeɪn, ðeɪ wʊɾə kɔld ɪt bæk hoʊm. ɪt bɪɡæn tə slɪk ɪz hɛɹ, kæp əɹ noʊ, ən sip θɹu hɪz koʊɾ əz sun əz i stɛpt aʊtsaɪd. blɹɪk hɑɹdli sim tə noʊɾəs, bɛɹli ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪz kloʊk. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪt bʌt fəɹ mæt tə hʌntʃ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən splæʃ θɹu ðə waɪɾənɪŋ pʌɾəlz ɑn ðə dɝt stʃɹits. baɪ ðə taɪm i kəd ɹitʃ ɪz wæɡən fəɹ ə kloʊk, hi wəd bi dʒɹɛntʃt tə ðə skɪn ɛniweɪ.

Tuon's jaw dropped in shock. He shut the door behind him on the way out before she could find a word to say. A very small pleasure. One butterfly on a midden heap. Tylin dead, and the Windfmders might take the blame yet, whatever Thom said. And that was aside from Tuon and the bloody dice. A very tiny butterfly on a very large midden. The sky was full of dark clouds, now, and the downpour steady. A soaking rain, they would have called it back home. It began to slick his hair, cap or no, and seep through his coat as soon as he stepped outside. Blaeric hardly seemed to notice, barely gathering his cloak. There was nothing for it but for Mat to hunch his shoulders and splash through the widening puddles on the dirt streets. By the time he could reach his wagon for a cloak, he would be drenched to the skin anyway.

bɪsaɪdz, ðə wɛðɝ fɪɾ ɪz spɪɹəts. tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ɹeɪn əɹ noʊ ɹeɪn, ən ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl əmaʊn ʌv wɝk hæd bɪn dʌn ɪn ðə ʃɔɹt taɪm i wɑz ɪnsaɪd. ðə kænvəs wɔl wɑz ɡɔn əz fɑɹ əz i kəd si ɪn iðɝ dɝɛkʃən, ən hæf ðə stɔɹədʒ wæɡənz ðət hæd bɪn ɝaʊn tuɑnz wæɡən wɝ mɪsɪŋ, tu. soʊ wɝ moʊst ə ði ænəməlz ðət hæd bɪn pɪkəɾɪd ɑn ðə hɔɹslaɪnz. ə lɑɹdʒ, aɪɝn-bɑɹd keɪdʒ kənteɪnɪŋ ə blæk-meɪn laɪən tʃɹʌndəl pæs təwɔɹd ðə ɹoʊd bɪhaɪn ə plɑɾɪŋ tim, ðə hɔɹsəz əz ʌnkənsɝnd wɪð ði əpɛɹənli slipɪŋ laɪən bɪhaɪn əm əz ðeɪ wɝ wɪð ðə ʃaʊɝ. pɝfɔɹmɝz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi teɪkɪŋ tə ðə ɹoʊd, tu, ðoʊ haʊ ðeɪ dɪtɝmən ði ɔɹɾɝ ə livɪŋ wɑz ə mɪstɝi. moʊst ə ðə tɛns sim tə hæv vænɪʃt; ɪn wʌn pleɪs θɹi ʌv ðə bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd wæɡənz təɡɛðɝ maɪt bi mɪsɪŋ, ənʌðɝ pleɪs ɛvɹi sɛkənd wæɡən, waɪl ɛlswɛɹ ðə wæɡənz stændɪŋ ən weɪɾɪŋ stɪl simd ə sɑləd mæs. ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðət sɛd ðə ʃoʊfoʊk wɝ nɑt skæɾɝɪŋ wɑz lukə hɪmsɛlf, ə bɹaɪt ɹɛd kloʊk ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ɪm əɡɛns ðə wɛɾ əz i pɝeɪɾɪd əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹit, stɑpɪŋ naʊ ən ðən tə klæp ə mæn ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ əɹ mɝmɝ sʌmθɪŋ tə ə wʊmən ðət meɪɾ əɹ læf. ɪf ðə ʃoʊ hæd bɪn bɹeɪkɪŋ əpɑɹt, lukə wʊɾə bɪn aʊt tʃeɪsɪŋ daʊn ðoʊz u tʃɹaɪd tə liv. hi hɛl ðə ʃoʊ təɡɛðɝ əz mʌtʃ baɪ pɝsweɪʒən əz ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, ən i nɛvɝ lɛɾ ɛniwʌn liv wɪθaʊt tɔkɪŋ hɪmsɛlf hɔɹs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɑɹɡju ðɛm aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. mæt nu hi ʃəd fil ɡʊɾ əbaʊt siɪŋ lukə stɪl ðɛɹ, ðoʊ ɪt hæd nɛvɝ əkɝd tə hɪm ðət ðə mæn wəd ɹʌn aʊɾ ɑn ðə ɡoʊld, bʌt ɹaɪɾ ət ðət moʊmənt, hi daʊɾɪd ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ kəd meɪk ɪm fil ɛniθɪŋ bʌt nʌm ən æŋɡɹi.

Besides, the weather fit his spirits. To his surprise, rain or no rain, an incredible amount of work had been done in the short time he was inside. The canvas wall was gone as far as he could see in either direction, and half the storage wagons that had been around Tuon's wagon were missing, too. So were most of the animals that had been picketed on the horselines. A large, iron-barred cage containing a black-maned lion trundled past toward the road behind a plodding team, the horses as unconcerned with the apparently sleeping lion behind them as they were with the shower. Performers were already taking to the road, too, though how they determined the order of leaving was a mystery. Most of the tents seemed to have vanished; in one place three of the brightly colored wagons together might be missing, another place every second wagon, while elsewhere the wagons standing and waiting still seemed a solid mass. The only thing that said the showfolk were not scattering was Luca himself, a bright red cloak gathered around him against the wet as he paraded along the street, stopping now and then to clap a man on the shoulder or murmur something to a woman that made her laugh. If the show had been breaking apart, Luca would have been out chasing down those who tried to leave. He held the show together as much by persuasion as anything else, and he never let anyone leave without talking himself hoarse trying to argue them out of it. Mat knew he should feel good about seeing Luca still there, though it had never occurred to him that the man would run out on the gold, but right at that moment, he doubted that anything could make him feel anything but numb and angry.

ðə wæɡən ðət blɹɪk tʊk ɪm tə wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz lɑɹdʒ əz lukəz, bʌɾ ɪt hæd bɪn waɪtwɑʃt ɹæðɝ ðən peɪntəd. ðə waɪt hæd lɔŋ sɪns ɹʌn ən stʃɹikt ən feɪɾəd, ən ðə ɹeɪn wɑz wɑʃɪŋ ɪɾ ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ təwɔɹd ɡɹeɪ, wɛɹ ðə wʊd wɑz nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɛɹ. ðə wæɡən bɪlɔŋ tə ə kʌmpəni ʌv fulz, fɔɹ mɝoʊs mɛn u peɪntəd ðɛɹ feɪsəz fəɹ ðə ʃoʊz peɪtʃɹənz, daʊsɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ wɪð wɔɾɝ ən hɪɾɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ wɪð ɪnfleɪɾəd pɪɡblæɾɝz, ən ʌðɝwaɪz spɛn ðɛɹ taɪm ən mʌni ɪmbəbɪŋ əz mʌtʃ waɪn əz ðeɪ kəd baɪ. wɪð wʌt mæt hæd peɪd fəɹ ɹɛnt, ðeɪ maɪt bi dʒɹʌŋk fəɹ mʌnθs, ən ɪt hæd kɑs mɔɹ ðən ðət tə meɪk ɛniwʌn teɪk əm ɪn.

The wagon that Blaeric took him to was almost as large as Luca's, but it had been whitewashed rather than painted. The white had long since run and streaked and faded, and the rain was washing it a little more toward gray, where the wood was not already bare. The wagon belonged to a company of fools, four morose men who painted their faces for the show's patrons, dousing each other with water and hitting each other with inflated pigbladders, and otherwise spent their time and money imbibing as much wine as they could buy. With what Mat had paid for rent, they might be drunk for months, and it had cost more than that to make anyone take them in.

fɔɹ ʃæɡi, nɑndɪskɹɪp hɔɹsəz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi hɪtʃt tə ðə wæɡən, ən fɛn maɪzɑɹ, dʒoʊlinz ʌðɝ wɔɹɾɝ, wɑz ʌp ɑn ðə dʒɹaɪvɝz sit, swɑðd ɪn ən oʊld ɡɹeɪ kloʊk ən ɹeɪnz ɪn hænd. hɪz tɪltəɾ aɪz wɑtʃt mæt ðə weɪ ə wʊlf maɪt wɑtʃ ən ɪmpjəɾənt kɝ. ðə wɔɹɾɝz hæd bɪn ənhæpi wɪð mæts plæn fɹəm ðə stɑɹt, ʃʊɹ ðeɪ cʊɾə ɡɑɾən ðə sɪstɝz əweɪ seɪfli wʌns ðeɪ wɝ aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi wɔlz. pɝhæps ðeɪ kəd hæv, bʌt ðə sintʃæn hʌntəd vɪɡɝəsli fəɹ wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl - ðə ʃoʊ ɪtsɛlf əpɛɹənli hæd bɪn sɝtʃt fɔɹ taɪmz ɪn ðə deɪz æftɝ ɛbu dɑɹ fɛl - ən ɔl ɪt wʊɾə teɪkən wɑz wʌn slɪp tə læn ɔl ə ðɛm ɪn ðə stupɑt. fɹəm wʌɾ ɛdʒiənɪn ən doʊmən sɛd, ðə sikɝz kəd meɪk ə boʊldɝ tɛl ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪt hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. lʌkəli, nɑɾ ɔl ðə sɪstɝz wɝ əz ʃʊɹ əz dʒoʊlinz wɔɹɾɝz. ɛɛs sədaɪ tɛndəd tə dɪðɝ wən ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əɡɹi ɑn wʌt tə du.

Four shaggy, nondescript horses were already hitched to the wagon, and Fen Mizar, Joline's other Warder, was up on the driver's seat, swathed in an old gray cloak and reins in hand. His tilted eyes watched Mat the way a wolf might watch an impudent cur. The Warders had been unhappy with Mat's plan from the start, sure they could have gotten the sisters away safely once they were outside the city walls. Perhaps they could have, but the Seanchan hunted vigorously for women who could channel - the show itself apparently had been searched four times in the days after Ebou Dar fell - and all it would have taken was one slip to land all of them in the stewpot. From what Egeanin and Domon said, the Seekers could make a boulder tell everything it had ever seen. Luckily, not all the sisters were as sure as Joline's Warders. Aes Sedai tended to dither when they could not agree on what to do.

wən mæt ɹitʃt ðə stɛps ət ðə bæk ə ðə wæɡən, blɹɪk stɑpt ɪm wɪð ə hæn tə hɪz tʃɛst. ðə wɔɹɾɝz feɪs maɪɾ əv bɪn kɑɹvd, noʊ mɔɹ kənsɝn ðən ə pis ʌv wʊd wɪð ðə ɹeɪn ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn ɪz tʃiks. "fɛn ən aɪ ɑɹ ɡɹeɪtfəl tə jə fəɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ əɹ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi, kɔθən, bʌt ðɪs kæn kəntɪnju. ðə sɪstɝz ɑɹ kɹaʊɾəd, ʃɛɹɪŋ wɪð ðoʊz ʌðɝ wɪmən, ən ðeɪ doʊnt ɡɛɾ ɑn. ðəɹ ɪz gɑnə bi tʃɹʌbəl ɪf wi kæn faɪn ənʌðɝ wæɡən."

When Mat reached the steps at the back of the wagon, Blaeric stopped him with a hand to his chest. The Warder's face might have been carved, no more concerned than a piece of wood with the rain running down his cheeks. "Fen and I are grateful to you for getting her out of the city, Cauthon, but this can't continue. The sisters are crowded, sharing with those other women, and they don't get on. There is going to be trouble if we can't find another wagon."

"ɪz ðət wʌt ðɪs ɪz əbaʊt?" mæt sɛd kɹɑsli, tʌɡɪŋ ɪz kɑlɝ taɪɾɝ. nɑt ðəɾ ɪt dɪd mʌtʃ ɡʊd. hi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi wɛt θɹu ɑn ðə bæk, ən nɑt mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ɪn fɹʌnt. ɪf dʒoʊlin hæd pʊld ɪm hɪɹ tə waɪn əbaʊt ði əkɑmədeɪʃənz əɡɛn. . . . "ʃil tɛl jə wʌɾ ɪts əbaʊt, kɔθən. dʒʌs jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌɾ aɪ sɛd."

"Is that what this is about?" Mat said crossly, tugging his collar tighter. Not that it did much good. He was already wet through on the back, and not much better in front. If Joline had pulled him here to whine about the accommodations again. . . . "She'll tell you what it's about, Cauthon. Just you remember what I said."

ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, mæt klaɪm ðə dɝt-stʃɹik stɛps ən wɛn ɪn, nɑt kwaɪt slæmɪŋ ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɪm. ðə wæɡən wɑz leɪɾ aʊt mʌtʃ laɪk ðə wʌn tuɑn wɑz ɪn, ðoʊ wɪð fɔɹ bɛdz, tu ʌv əm foʊldəd flæɾ əɡɛns ðə wɔlz əbʌv ði ʌðɝ tu. hi hæd noʊ aɪdiə haʊ ðə sɪks wɪmən ɝeɪnʒd slipɪŋ, bʌɾ i səspɛktəɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt dʌn pisfəli. ði ɛɹ ɪn ðə wæɡən ɔl bʌt kɹækəld laɪk ɡɹis ɑn ə ɡɹɪɾəl. θɹi wɪmən sæɾ ɑn itʃ ə ðə loʊɝ bɛdz, itʃ vɛɹiəsli wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə wɪmən siɾəd ɑn ði ʌðɝ bɛd. dʒoʊlin, hu hæd nɛvɝ bɪn hɛld əz deɪmeɪn bɪheɪvd əz ðoʊ ðə θɹi sʌldəm dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst. ɹiɾɪŋ ə smɔl wʊd-baʊn bʊk, ʃi wɑz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ði ɪntʃ ən ɛɹəɡəns ɑn ə stɪk dɪspaɪɾ əɹ wɛl-wɔɹn blu dʒɹɛs, leɪtli oʊn baɪ ə wʊmən u tɔt ðə laɪənz tə də tʃɹɪks. ði ʌðɝ tu sɪstɝz nu fɝsthænd wʌɾ ɪt wɑz tə bi deɪmeɪn, ðoʊ. idɛzinə wɑtʃt ðə θɹi sʌldəm wɛɹəli, wʌn hæn ɹɛstɪŋ nɪɹ əɹ bɛl naɪf, waɪl tɛslɪnz aɪz ʃɪftəd kɑnstənli, lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðə sʌldəm, ən əɹ hænz niɾɪd əɹ dɑɹk wʊlən skɝts. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ ɛdʒiənɪn hæd koʊɝs ðə θɹi sʌldəm ɪndə hɛlpɪŋ deɪmeɪn ɪskeɪp, bʌɾ ivən ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ biɪŋ sɔt baɪ ði əθɔɹəɾiz əz ʃʊɹli əz ɛdʒiənɪn, ðeɪ hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd ðɛɹ æɾətudz təwɔɹd wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl. bɛθəmən, tɔl ən əz dɑɹk əz tuɑn ɪn ən ɛbu dɑɹi dʒɹɛs wɪð ə vɛɹi dip nɛklaɪn ən skɝts soʊn ʌp əbʌv əɹ ni ɑn wʌn saɪd tə ʃoʊ feɪɾəd ɹɛd pɛɾikoʊts, simd ə mʌðɝ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪnɛvəɾəbəl mɪsbəheɪvjɝ baɪ tʃɪlʒɹən, waɪl jɛloʊ-hɛɹd sɛɾə, ɪn haɪ-nɛkt ɡɹeɪ wʊl ðət kʌvɝɾ əɹ kəmplitli, əpɪɹd tə bi stʌɾiɪŋ deɪnʒɝəs dɑɡz ðət wəd nid tə bi keɪdʒ sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ. ɹɛnə, ʃi ʌv ðə tɔk əbaʊt kʌɾɪŋ ɔf hænz ən fit, pɹitɛndəd tə bi ɹiɾɪŋ, tu, bʌɾ ɛvɹi soʊ ɔfən əɹ dɪsɛptɪvli maɪl bɹaʊn aɪz ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə slɪm vɑljum tə stʌɾi ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən wən ðeɪ dɪd, ʃi smaɪld ɪn ən ənplɛzənt weɪ. mæt fɛlt laɪk kɝsɪŋ bɪfɔɹ wʌn ə ðɛm oʊpən əɹ maʊð. ə waɪz mæn kɛp klɪɹ wən wɪmən wɝ əɾ ɑdz, ɪspɛʃli ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ əmʌŋ ðɛm, bʌt ðɪs wɑz haʊ ɪɾ ɔlweɪz wɑz wən i keɪm tə ðɪs wæɡən.

Grumbling under his breath, Mat climbed the dirt-streaked steps and went in, not quite slamming the door behind him. The wagon was laid out much like the one Tuon was in, though with four beds, two of them folded flat against the walls above the other two. He had no idea how the six women arranged sleeping, but he suspected it was not done peacefully. The air in the wagon all but crackled like grease on a griddle. Three women sat on each of the lower beds, each variously watching or ignoring the women seated on the other bed. Joline, who had never been held as damane behaved as though the three sul'dam did not exist. Reading a small wood-bound book, she was an Aes Sedai to the inch and arrogance on a stick despite her well-worn blue dress, lately owned by a woman who taught the lions to do tricks. The other two sisters knew firsthand what it was to be damane, though. Edesina watched the three sul'dam warily, one hand resting near her belt knife, while Teslyn's eyes shifted constantly, looking at anything except the sul'dam, and her hands kneaded her dark woolen skirts. He did not know how Egeanin had coerced the three sul'dam into helping damane escape, but even though they were being sought by the authorities as surely as Egeanin, they had not changed their attitudes toward women who could channel. Bethamin, tall and as dark as Tuon in an Ebou Dari dress with a very deep neckline and skirts sewn up above her knee on one side to show faded red petticoats, seemed a mother waiting for inevitable misbehavior by children, while yellow-haired Seta, in high-necked gray wool that covered her completely, appeared to be studying dangerous dogs that would need to be caged sooner or later. Renna, she of the talk about cutting off hands and feet, pretended to be reading, too, but every so often her deceptively mild brown eyes rose from the slim volume to study the Aes Sedai, and when they did, she smiled in an unpleasant way. Mat felt like cursing before one of them opened her mouth. A wise man kept clear when women were at odds, especially if there were Aes Sedai among them, but this was how it always was when he came to this wagon.

"ðɪs bɛɾɝ bi ɪmpɔɹɾənt, dʒoʊlin." ənbʌtoʊnɪŋ ɪz koʊt, hi tʃɹaɪd tə ʃeɪk səm ə ðə wɔɾɝ ɔf.

"This better be important, Joline." Unbuttoning his coat, he tried to shake some of the water off.

hi θɔɾ i wəd də bɛɾɝ ɹɪŋɪŋ ðə ɡɑɹmən aʊt. "aɪ dʒʌs lɝn ðət ðə ɡoʊləm kɪl taɪlɪn ðə naɪt wi lɛft, ən aɪm ɪn noʊ mud fəɹ kəmpleɪns." dʒoʊlin mɑɹkt əɹ pleɪs kɛɹfəli wɪð ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd mɑɹkɝ ən foʊldəɾ əɹ hænz ɑn ðə bʊk bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ. ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛvɝ hɝid; ðeɪ dʒʌst ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls tə. wɪθaʊt hɪm, ʃi laɪkli wʊɾə bɪn wɛɹɪŋ ən æɾəm baɪ naʊ hɝsɛlf, bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ faʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli noʊɾəd fəɹ ɡɹæɾətud, iðɝ. ʃi ɪɡnɔɹd wʌɾ i hæd sɛɾ əbaʊt taɪlɪn. "blɹɪk tɛlz mi ðə ʃoʊ hæz ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡʌn muvɪŋ," ʃi sɛd kuli, "bʌt jə mʌst stɑp ɪt. lukə wɪl oʊnli lɪsən tə ju." hɝ maʊθ taɪɾənd slaɪtli ɑn ðə wɝdz. ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlsoʊ wɝ ənjuz tə nɑt biɪŋ lɪsən tə, ən ɡɹinz wɝ nɑt ðə bɛst ət haɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ dɪsplɛʒɝ. "wi mʌst əbændən ði aɪdiə ʌv luɡɹd fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ. wi mʌs teɪk ðə fɛɹi əkɹɔs ðə hɑɹbɝ ən ɡoʊ tə ɪljən."

He thought he would do better wringing the garment out. "I just learned that the gholam killed Tylin the night we left, and I'm in no mood for complaints." Joline marked her place carefully with an embroidered marker and folded her hands on the book before speaking. Aes Sedai never hurried; they just expected everyone else to. Without him, she likely would have been wearing an a'dam by now herself, but he had never found Aes Sedai particularly noted for gratitude, either. She ignored what he had said about Tylin. "Blaeric tells me the show has already begun moving," she said coolly, "but you must stop it. Luca will only listen to you." Her mouth tightened slightly on the words. Aes Sedai also were unused to not being listened to, and Greens were not the best at hiding their displeasure. "We must abandon the idea of Lugard for the time being. We must take the ferry across the harbor and go to Illian."

ðət wɑz əbaʊɾ əz bæɾ ə sədʒɛstʃən əz i hæd hɝɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ, ðoʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt min ɪt fəɹ ə sədʒɛstʃən, ʌv kɔɹs; ʃi wɑz wɝs ðən ɛdʒiənɪn ðət weɪ. wɪð hæf ðə ʃoʊ ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn ðə ɹoʊd, əɹ nɪɹ ɪnʌf, ɪt wəd teɪk ɔl deɪ dʒʌs tə ɡɛɾ ɛvɹiwʌn daʊn tə ðə fɛɹi lændɪŋ, ən ɪt wəd min ɡoʊɪŋ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, bɪsaɪdz. hɛɾɪŋ fəɹ luɡɹd tʊk ðə ʃoʊ əweɪ fɹəm ðə sintʃæn əz kwɪkli əz pɑsəbəl, waɪl ðeɪ hæd soʊlʒɝz kæmpt ɔl ðə weɪ tə ði ɪljən bɔɹɾɝ ən meɪbi bɪɑnd. ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz ɹɪlʌktən tə tɛl wʌt ʃi nu, bʌt tɑm hæɾ ɪz weɪz ə lɝnɪŋ ðiz θɪŋz. mæt dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə kɹæk ɪz tiθ, ðoʊ. hi dɪd nɑt nid tə.

That was about as bad a suggestion as he had heard out of her, though she did not mean it for a suggestion, of course; she was worse than Egeanin that way. With half the show already on the road, or near enough, it would take all day just to get everyone down to the ferry landing, and it would mean going into the city, besides. Heading for Lugard took the show away from the Seanchan as quickly as possible, while they had soldiers camped all the way to the Illian border and maybe beyond. Egeanin was reluctant to tell what she knew, but Thom had his ways of learning these things. Mat did not bother to crack his teeth, though. He did not need to.

"noʊ," tɛslɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs, hɝ ɪliɑnɝ æksɛn stʃɹɔŋ. linɪŋ pæst idɛzinə, ʃi lʊkt əz ðoʊ ʃi tʃud ɹɑks θɹi milz ə deɪ, hɑɹd-feɪst ən sɛt-dʒɔd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə nɝvəsnəs ɪn əɹ aɪz, pʊt ðəɹ baɪ hɝ wiks əz ə deɪmənz. "noʊ, dʒoʊlin. aɪ hæv toʊl ju, wi də noʊ dɛɹ ɹɪsk ɪt! wi də noʊ dɛɹ!"

"No," Teslyn said in a tight voice, her Illianer accent strong. Leaning past Edesina, she looked as though she chewed rocks three meals a day, hard-faced and set-jawed, but there was a nervousness in her eyes, put there by her weeks as a damans. "No, Joline. I have told you, we do no dare risk it! We do no dare!"

"laɪt!" dʒoʊlin spæt, slæmɪŋ əɹ bʊk tə ðə flɔɹ. "teɪk hoʊld ə jɝsɛlf, tɛslɪn! dʒʌs kəz jə wɝ hɛl pɹɪznɝ fəɹ ə lɪɾəl taɪm ɪz noʊ ɹizən tə ɡoʊ tə pisəz!"

"Light!" Joline spat, slamming her book to the floor. "Take hold of yourself, Teslyn! Just because you were held prisoner for a little time is no reason to go to pieces!"

"ɡoʊ tə pisəz? ɡoʊ tə pisəz? lɛɾ əm pʊt ðət kɑlɝ ɑn jə ən ðən spik ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ tə pisəz!" tɛslɪnz hænd wɛn tə hɝ θɹoʊɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi fɛl ði æɾəmz kɑlɝ stɪl. "hɛlp mi kənvɪns hɝ, idɛzinə. ʃɪl əv əs kɑlɝɾ əɡɛn, ɪf wi də lɛt hɝ!" idɛzinə dʒɹu bæk ɑn hɝsɛlf əɡɛns ðə wɔl bɪhaɪn ðə bɛd - ə slɪm, hænsəm wʊmən wɪð blæk hɛɹ spɪlɪŋ tə hɝ weɪst, ʃi ɔlweɪz wɛn saɪlənt wən ðə ɹɛɾ ən ðə ɡɹin ɑɹɡjud, əz ðeɪ dɪɾ ɔfən - bʌt dʒoʊlin dɪd nɑt spɛɹ əɹ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə ɡlæns. "ju æsk ə ɹɛbəl fəɹ hɛlp, tɛslɪn? wi ʃʊɾə lɛft əɹ fəɹ ðə sintʃæn! lɪsən tə mi. jə kən fil ɪɾ əz wɛl əz aɪ. wəd jə ɹɪli æksɛpt ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ deɪnʒɝ tə əvɔɪɾ ə lɛsɝ?" "lɛsɝ!" tɛslɪn snɑɹəld. "ju də noʊ nʌθɪŋ ʌv - !" ɹɛnə hɛld əɹ bʊk aʊɾ əɾ ɑɹmz lɛŋθ ən lɛɾ ɪt dʒɹɑp tə ðə flɔɹ wɪð ə bæŋ. "ɪf maɪ lɔɹd wɪl ɪkskjuz əs ə lɪɾəl waɪl, wi stɪl əv əɹ æɾəm, ən wi kən titʃ ðiz ɡɝlz tə bɪheɪv əɡɛn ɪn ʃɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ." hɝ æksɛn hæɾ ə mjuzɪkəl kwɑləɾi, bʌt ðə smaɪl ɑn əɹ lɪps nɛvɝ tʌtʃt əɹ bɹaʊn aɪz. "ɪt nɛvɝ wɝks tə lɛɾ əm ɡoʊ slæk ðɪs weɪ." sɛɾə nɑɾəd ɡɹɪmli ən stʊɾ əz ɪf tə fɛtʃ aʊt ðə liʃɪz.

"Go to pieces? Go to pieces? Let them put that collar on you and then speak of going to pieces!" Teslyn's hand went to her throat as though she felt the a'dam's collar still. "Help me convince her, Edesina. She will have us collared again, if we do let her!" Edesina drew back on herself against the wall behind the bed - a slim, handsome woman with black hair spilling to her waist, she always went silent when the Red and the Green argued, as they did often - but Joline did not spare her so much as a glance. "You ask a rebel for help, Teslyn? We should have left her for the Seanchan! Listen to me. You can feel it as well as I. Would you really accept a greater danger to avoid a lesser?" "Lesser!" Teslyn snarled. "You do know nothing of - !" Renna held her book out at arm's length and let it drop to the floor with a bang. "If my Lord will excuse us a little while, we still have our a'dam, and we can teach these girls to behave again in short order." Her accent had a musical quality, but the smile on her lips never touched her brown eyes. "It never works to let them go slack this way." Seta nodded grimly and stood as if to fetch out the leashes.

"aɪ θɪŋk wɝ dʌn wɪð æɾəm," bɛθəmən sɛd, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə ʃɑk lʊks fɹəm ði ʌðɝ tu sʌldəm, "bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝ weɪz tə sɛɾəl ðiz ɡɝlz daʊn. meɪ aɪ sədʒɛs maɪ lɔɹd ɹɪtɝn ɪn ən aʊɝ?

"I think we're done with a'dam," Bethamin said, ignoring the shocked looks from the other two sul'dam, "but there are other ways to settle these girls down. May I suggest my Lord return in an hour?

ðəl tɛl jə wʌt jə wɑnə noʊ wɪθaʊɾ ɛni skwɑbəlɪŋ wʌns ðeɪ kæn sɪt daʊn." ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi mɛn ɪɡzækli wʌt ʃi sɛd. dʒoʊlin wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə θɹi sʌldəm ɪn aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ dɪsbɪlif, bʌɾ idɛzinə wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ʌp stʃɹeɪt, ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ bɛl naɪf wɪð ə dɪtɝmən ɪkspɹɛʃən, waɪl tɛslɪn wɑz naʊ ðə wʌn ʃɹɪŋkɪŋ bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl, hɝ hænz klæsp taɪtli əɾ əɹ weɪst.

They'll tell you what you want to know without any squabbling once they can't sit down." She sounded as though she meant exactly what she said. Joline was staring at the three sul'dam in outraged disbelief, but Edesina was sitting up straight, gripping her belt knife with a determined expression, while Teslyn was now the one shrinking back against the wall, her hands clasped tightly at her waist.

"ðæt woʊn bi nɛsəsɛɹi," mæt sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt. oʊnli ə moʊmənt. haʊɛvɝ sæɾɪsfaɪɪŋ ɪt maɪt bi tə hæv dʒoʊlin "sɛɾəld daʊn," idɛzinə maɪt dʒɹɔ ðət naɪf, ən ðət wəd sɛt ðə kæɾ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɪkənz noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɪt tɝn aʊt. "wʌt ɡɹeɪɾɝ deɪnʒɝ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, dʒoʊlin? dʒoʊlin?

"That won't be necessary," Mat said after a moment. Only a moment. However satisfying it might be to have Joline "settled down," Edesina might draw that knife, and that would set the cat among the chickens no matter how it turned out. "What greater danger are you talking about, Joline? Joline?

wʌt deɪnʒɝ ɪz ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən ðə sintʃæn ɹaɪt naʊ?"

What danger is greater than the Seanchan right now?"

ðə ɡɹin dɪsaɪɾɪd əɹ stɛɹ wɑz meɪkɪŋ noʊ ɪmpɹɛʃən ɑn bɛθəmən ən tɝn ɪɾ ɑn mæt, ɪnstɛd. hæd ʃi bɪn ʌðɝ ðən ɛɛs sədaɪ, hi wʊɾə sɛd ʃi lʊk sʌlki. dʒoʊlin dɪslaɪkt ɪkspleɪnɪŋ. "ɪf jə mʌs noʊ, sʌmwʌn ɪz tʃænəlɪŋ." tɛslɪn ən idɛzinə nɑɾəd, ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ ɹɪlʌktənli, ðə jɛloʊ ɛmfæɾɪkli.

The Green decided her stare was making no impression on Bethamin and turned it on Mat, instead. Had she been other than Aes Sedai, he would have said she looked sulky. Joline disliked explaining. "If you must know, someone is channeling." Teslyn and Edesina nodded, the Red sister reluctantly, the Yellow emphatically.

"ɪn ðə kæmp?" hi sɛɾ ɪn əlɑɹm. hɪz ɹaɪt hæn ɹoʊz ɑn ɪts oʊn tə pɹɛs əɡɛns ðə sɪlvɝ fɑkshɛɾ ʌndɝ ɪz ʃɝt, bʌt ðə mədæljən hæd nɑt tɝn koʊld.

"In the camp?" he said in alarm. His right hand rose on its own to press against the silver foxhead under his shirt, but the medallion had not turned cold.

"fɑɹ əweɪ," dʒoʊlin ɹɪplaɪd, stɪl ənwɪlɪŋ. "tə ðə nɔɹθ." "mʌtʃ fɑɹðɝ ðən ɛni ʌv əs ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə sɛns tʃænəlɪŋ," idɛzinə pʊɾ ɪn, ə tʌtʃ ə fɪɹ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. "ði əmaʊn ə seɪaɪdɑɹ biɪŋ wildɪd mʌs bi ɪmɛns, ɪnkənsivəbəl." ʃi fɛl saɪlən əɾ ə ʃɑɹp ɡlæns fɹəm dʒoʊlin, hu tɝn bæk tə stʌɾi mæt əz ðoʊ dəsaɪɾɪŋ haʊ mʌtʃ ʃi hæd tə tɛl hɪm. "æt ðət dɪstəns," ʃi wɛn ɑn, "wi wʊdn bi eɪbəl tə fil ɛvɹi sɪstɝ ɪn ðə taʊɝ tʃænəlɪŋ. ɪts tə bi ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ən wʌtɛvɝ ðəɹ duɪŋ, wi də nɑt wɑnə bi ɛni kloʊsɝ ðən wi kən əvɔɪd." mæt wɑz stɪl fəɹ ə moʊmənt; ðən faɪnəli, hi sɛd, "ɪf ɪts fɑɹ, ðən wi stɪk wɪð ðə plæn." dʒoʊlin wɛn ɑn ɑɹɡjuɪŋ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə lɪsən. wɛnɛvɝ i θɔɾ ə ɹænd əɹ pɛɹɪn, kʌlɝz swɝld ɪn ɪz hɛd. ə pɑɹɾ ə biɪŋ tɑvɝən, hi səpoʊzd. ðɪs taɪm, hi hæd nɑt θɔɾ ʌv iðɝ ə hɪz fɹɛnz, bʌt ðə kʌlɝz hæd sʌɾənli bɪn ðɛɹ, ə fæn ʌv ə θaʊzən ɹeɪnboʊz. ðɪs taɪm, ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlmoʊs fɔɹmd ən ɪmədʒ, ə veɪɡ ɪmpɹɛʃən ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn ə mæn ən ə wʊmən siɾəd ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn feɪsɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ. ɪt wɑz ɡɔn ɪn ən ɪnstənt, bʌɾ i nu əz ʃʊɹli əz i nu hɪz neɪm. nɑt ðə fɔɹseɪkən. ɹænd. ən i kəd nɑt hɛlp wʌndɝɪŋ, wʌt hæd ɹænd bɪn duɪŋ wən ðə daɪs stɑpt?

"Far away," Joline replied, still unwilling. "To the north." "Much farther than any of us should be able to sense channeling," Edesina put in, a touch of fear in her voice. "The amount of saidar being wielded must be immense, inconceivable." She fell silent at a sharp glance from Joline, who turned back to study Mat as though deciding how much she had to tell him. "At that distance," she went on, "we wouldn't be able to feel every sister in the Tower channeling. It has to be the Forsaken, and whatever they're doing, we do not want to be any closer than we can avoid." Mat was still for a moment; then finally, he said, "If it's far, then we stick with the plan." Joline went on arguing, but he did not bother to listen. Whenever he thought of Rand or Perrin, colors swirled in his head. A part of being ta'veren, he supposed. This time, he had not thought of either of his friends, but the colors had suddenly been there, a fan of a thousand rainbows. This time, they had almost formed an image, a vague impression that might have been a man and a woman seated on the ground facing one another. It was gone in an instant, but he knew as surely as he knew his name. Not the Forsaken. Rand. And he could not help wondering, what had Rand been doing when the dice stopped?

tʃæptɝ fɔɹ

CHAPTER 4

ðə teɪl ʌv ə dɑl fɹɪk kɛɹid sæt stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪz ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ðə peɪpɝz ən mæps spɹɛɾ aʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. boʊθ ə hɪz ɔɪl læmps wɝ lɪɾ ən sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, bʌɾ i noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hæd niɾ ə ðɛm.

The Tale of a Doll Furyk Karede sat staring at his writing table without seeing the papers and maps spread out in front of him. Both of his oil lamps were lit and sitting on the table, but he no longer had need of them.

ðə sʌn mʌs bi ɹɪmɪŋ ðə hɝaɪzən, jɛt sɪns weɪkɪŋ fɹəm ə fɪtfəl slip ən seɪɪŋ ɪz dɪvoʊʃənz tə ði ɛmpɹɛs, maɪt ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, hi hæɾ oʊnli dɑn ɪz ɹoʊb, ɪn ðə dɑɹk ɪmpɪɹiəl ɡɹin ðət səm ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn kɔlɪŋ blæk, ən sæt hɪɹ wɪθaʊt muvɪŋ sɪns. hi hæd nɑɾ ivən ʃeɪvd. ðə ɹeɪn hæd stɑpt, ən i kənsɪɾɝd tɛlɪŋ ɪz sɝvən ædʒɪmbʊɹə tə swɪŋ ə wɪndoʊ oʊpən fəɹ ə lɪɾəl fɹɛʃ ɛɹ ɪn ɪz ɹum ət ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən. klin ɛɹ maɪt klɪɹ ɪz hɛd. bʌɾ oʊvɝ ðə læs faɪv deɪz ðəɹ hæd bɪn lʌlz ɪn ðə ɹeɪn ðəɾ ɛndəd wɪð sʌɾən dʒɹɛntʃɪŋ daʊnpɔɹz, ən ɪz bɛd wɑz loʊkeɪɾəd bɪtwin ðə wɪndoʊz. hi hæd niɾəd tə hæv ɪz mætʃɹəs ən bɛɾɪŋ hʌŋ ɪn ðə kɪtʃən tə dʒɹaɪ wʌns ɔlɹɛɾi.

The sun must be rimming the horizon, yet since waking from a fitful sleep and saying his devotions to the Empress, might she live forever, he had only donned his robe, in the dark Imperial green that some insisted on calling black, and sat here without moving since. He had not even shaved. The rain had stopped, and he considered telling his servant Ajimbura to swing a window open for a little fresh air in his room at The Wandering Woman. Clean air might clear his head. But over the last five days there had been lulls in the rain that ended with sudden drenching downpours, and his bed was located between the windows. He had needed to have his mattress and bedding hung in the kitchen to dry once already.

ə taɪni skwil ən ə plizd ɡɹʌn fɹəm ædʒɪmbʊɹə meɪɾ ɪm lʊk ʌp tə faɪn ðə wɪɹi lɪɾəl mæn dɪspleɪɪŋ ə lɪmp ɹæt hæf ðə saɪz ʌv ə kæɾ ɑn ði ɛn ə hɪz lɔŋ naɪf. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə fɝst ædʒɪmbʊɹə hæd kɪld ɪn ðɪs ɹum ɹisənli, sʌmθɪŋ kɛɹid bɪlivd wəd nɑɾ əv hæpən ɪf sɛɾəl ɑnən stɪl oʊn ði ɪn, ðoʊ ðə nʌmbɝ ə ɹæts ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ sim tə bi ɪnkɹisɪŋ wɛl ɪn ədvæns ə spɹɪŋ. ædʒɪmbʊɹə lʊkt ə lɪɾəl laɪk ə waɪzən ɹæt hɪmsɛlf, hɪz ɡɹɪn boʊθ sæɾəsfaɪd ən fɛɹəl. æftɝ mɔɹ ðən θɹi hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ʌndɝ ði ɛmpaɪɝ, ðə kɛnsɑɾə hɪl tʃɹaɪbz wɝ oʊnli hæf sɪvəlaɪzd, ən lɛs ðən hæf teɪmd. ðə mæn wɔɹ ɪz waɪt-stʃɹik dɑɹk ɹɛd hɛɹ ɪn ə θɪk bɹeɪd ðət hʌŋ tə hɪz weɪst, tə meɪk ə ɡʊd tʃɹoʊfi ɪf i ɛvɝ faʊn ɪz weɪ bæk tə ðoʊz nɪɹ-maʊntənz ən fɛl ɪn wʌn ə ði ɛnləs fjudz bɪtwin fæmliz əɹ tʃɹaɪbz, ən i ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ fɹəm ə sɪlvɝ-maʊntəd kʌp ðəɾ ɛniwʌn u lʊkt kloʊsli kəd si wɑz ðə tɑp ə sʌmwʌnz skʌl.

A tiny squeal and a pleased grunt from Ajimbura made him look up to find the wiry little man displaying a limp rat half the size of a cat on the end of his long knife. It was not the first Ajimbura had killed in this room recently, something Karede believed would not have happened if Setalle Anan still owned the inn, though the number of rats in Ebou Dar seemed to be increasing well in advance of spring. Ajimbura looked a little like a wizened rat himself, his grin both satisfied and feral. After more than three hundred years under the Empire, the Kaensada hill tribes were only half civilized, and less than half tamed. The man wore his white-streaked dark red hair in a thick braid that hung to his waist, to make a good trophy if he ever found his way back to those near-mountains and fell in one of the endless feuds between families or tribes, and he insisted on drinking from a silver-mounted cup that anyone who looked closely could see was the top of someone's skull.

"ɪf jə ɑɹ gɑnə it ðæt," kɛɹid sɛɾ əz ðoʊ ðəɹ wɝ ɛni kwɛstʃən, "ju wɪl klin ɪɾ ɪn ðə steɪbliɑɹɾ aʊɾ ʌv ɛniwʌnz saɪt." ædʒɪmbʊɹə wəɾ iɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp fəɹ lɪzɝdz, wɪtʃ wɝ fɔɹbɪɾən tə hɪz tʃɹaɪb fəɹ səm ɹizən i wəd nɛvɝ meɪk klɪɹ.

"If you are going to eat that," Karede said as though there were any question, "you will clean it in the stableyard out of anyone's sight." Ajimbura would eat anything except for lizards, which were forbidden to his tribe for some reason he would never make clear.

"bʌɾ ə kɔɹs, haɪ wʌn," ðə mæn ɹɪplaɪd wɪð ðə hʌntʃ ə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz ðət pæs fəɹ ə baʊ əmʌŋ ɪz pipəl. "aɪ noʊ wɛl ðə weɪz ə ðə taʊnzpipəl, ən aɪ wəd nɑɾ ɪmbɛɹəs ðə haɪ wʌn." æftɝ kloʊs tə twɛnti jɪɹz ɪn kɛɹidz sɝvəs, wɪθaʊɾ ə ɹimaɪndɝ i stɪl wʊɾə skɪn aʊt ðə ɹæɾ ən ɹoʊstəɾ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə fleɪmz ɪn ðə smɔl bɹɪk faɪɝpleɪs.

"But of course, high one," the man replied with the hunch of his shoulders that passed for a bow among his people. "I know well the ways of the townspeople, and I would not embarrass the high one." After close to twenty years in Karede's service, without a reminder he still would have skinned out the rat and roasted it over the flames in the small brick fireplace.

skɹeɪpɪŋ ðə kɑɹkəs ɔf ðə bleɪɾ ɪndə ə smɔl kænvəs sæk, ædʒɪmbʊɹə tʌk ðəɾ ɪndə ə kɔɹnɝ fəɹ leɪɾɝ ən kɛɹfəli waɪpt ɪz naɪf klin bɪfɔɹ ʃiðɪŋ ɪɾ ən sɛɾəlɪŋ ɑn ɪz hilz tə əweɪt kɛɹidz nidz. hi wəd weɪt laɪk ðəɾ ɔl deɪ, ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi, əz peɪʃənli əz ə dækoʊvæl. kɛɹid hæd nɛvɝ pʌzəld aʊɾ ɪɡzækli waɪ ædʒɪmbʊɹə hæd lɛft ɪz hɪl fɔɹt hoʊm tə fɑloʊ wʌn ə ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd. ɪt wɑz ə mʌtʃ mɔɹ sɝkəmskɹaɪb laɪf ðən ðə mæn hæd noʊn bɪfɔɹ, ən bɪsaɪdz, kɛɹid hæd nɪɹli kɪld ɪm θɹi taɪmz bɪfɔɹ i meɪd ðət tʃɔɪs.

Scraping the carcass off the blade into a small canvas sack, Ajimbura tucked that into a corner for later and carefully wiped his knife clean before sheathing it and settling on his heels to await Karede's needs. He would wait like that all day, if necessary, as patiently as a da'covale. Karede had never puzzled out exactly why Ajimbura had left his hill fort home to follow one of the Deathwatch Guard. It was a much more circumscribed life than the man had known before, and besides, Karede had nearly killed him three times before he made that choice.

dɪsmɪsɪŋ θɔts ə hɪz sɝvənt, hi ɹɪtɝn tə ðə dɪspleɪ ɑn ɪz ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl, ðoʊ hi hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə teɪkɪŋ ʌp ɪz pɛn fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. hi hæd bɪn ɹeɪz tə bænɝ-dʒɛnɝəl fəɹ ətʃivɪŋ səm smɔl səksɛs ɪn ðə bæɾəlz wɪð ði æʃəmən, ɪn deɪz wən fju hæɾ ətʃivd ɛni, ən naʊ, kəz i hæd kəmændəɾ əɡɛns mɛn u kəd tʃænəl, səm θɔɾ i mʌst əv wɪzdəm tə ʃɛɹ əbaʊt faɪɾɪŋ mɛɹəθdəmeɪn. noʊ wʌn hæd hæd tə də ðəɾ ɪn sɛntʃɝiz, ən sɪns ðə soʊ-kɔld ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹɪvil ðɛɹ ənnoʊn wɛpən oʊnli ə fju liɡz fɹəm wɛɹ i sæt, ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə θɪŋkɪŋ hæd ɡɔn ɪndə haʊ tə kɹɪpəl ðɛɹ paʊɝ. ðət wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli ɹɪkwɛs lɪɾɝɪŋ ðə teɪbəltɑp. əsaɪd fɹəm ðə juʒəwəl ɹʌn ə ɹɛkwəzɪʃənz ən ɹɪpɔɹts ðət niɾəd ɪz sɪɡnətʃɝ, hɪz kɑmɛns ɑn ðə fɔɹsɪz ɝeɪɾ əɡɛnst əm ɪn ɪljən hæd bɪn səlɪsɪɾɪd baɪ fɔɹ lɔɹdz ən θɹi leɪɾiz, ən ɑn ðə spɛʃəl il pɹɑbləm baɪ sɪks leɪɾiz ən faɪv lɔɹdz, bʌt ðoʊz kwɛstʃənz wəd bi dɪsaɪɾɪd ɛlswɛɹ, vɛɹi laɪkli ɔlɹɛɾi hæd bɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd. hɪz ɑbzɝveɪʃənz wəɾ oʊnli bi juzd ɪn ði ɪnfaɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ u kəntʃɹoʊld wʌɾ ɪn ðə ɹɪtɝn. ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, wɔɹ hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ə sɛkən kɔlɪŋ fəɹ ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd. oʊ, ðə ɡɑɹdz wɝ ɔlweɪz ðəɹ wɛnɛvɝ ə meɪdʒɝ bæɾəl wɑz fɔt, ðə sɔɹdhæn ə ði ɛmpɹɛs, maɪt ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, tə stʃɹaɪk əɾ əɹ ɛnəmiz wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz pɹɛzənt, ɔlweɪz tə lid ðə weɪ wɛɹ ðə faɪt wɑz hɑɾəst, bʌt ðɛɹ fɝs kɔlɪŋ wɑz tə pɹətɛk ðə laɪvz ən pɝsənz ə ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli.

Dismissing thoughts of his servant, he returned to the display on his writing table, though he had no intention of taking up his pen for the moment. He had been raised to banner-general for achieving some small success in the battles with the Asha'man, in days when few had achieved any, and now, because he had commanded against men who could channel, some thought he must have wisdom to share about fighting marath'damane. No one had had to do that in centuries, and since the so-called Aes Sedai revealed their unknown weapon only a few leagues from where he sat, a great deal of thinking had gone into how to cripple their power. That was not the only request littering the tabletop. Aside from the usual run of requisitions and reports that needed his signature, his comments on the forces arrayed against them in Illian had been solicited by four lords and three ladies, and on the special Aiel problem by six ladies and five lords, but those questions would be decided elsewhere, very likely already had been decided. His observations would only be used in the infighting over who controlled what in the Return. In any event, war had always been a second calling for the Deathwatch Guard. Oh, the Guards were always there whenever a major battle was fought, the swordhand of the Empress, might she live forever, to strike at her enemies whether or not she herself was present, always to lead the way where the fight was hottest, but their first calling was to protect the lives and persons of the Imperial family.

wɪð ðɛɹ oʊn laɪvz, wən nɛsəsɛɹi, ən wɪlɪŋli ɡɪvən. ən naɪn naɪts pæst, ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑn hæd vænɪʃt əz ɪf swɑloʊd baɪ ðə stɔɹm. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ə hɝ əz ðə dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz, kəd nɑɾ əntɪl i nu ʃi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ʌndɝ ðə veɪl. hi hæd nɑt kənsɪɾɝd teɪkɪŋ ɪz oʊn laɪf, iðɝ, ðoʊ ðə ʃeɪm kʌɾ ɪm kinli. ɪt wɑz fəɹ ðə blʌd tə ɹɪzɔɹt tə ði izi weɪ tə ɪskeɪp dɪsɡɹeɪs; ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd fɔt tə ðə læst. mjuzənʒ kəmændəɾ əɹ pɝsənəl bɑɾiɡɑɹd, bʌɾ əz ðə haɪɛstʃɹæŋkɪŋ mɛmbɝ ə ðə ɡɑɹd ðɪs saɪɾ ə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, ɪt wɑz kɛɹidz duɾi tə ɹɪtɝn əɹ seɪfli. ɛvɹi kɹæni ɪn ðə sɪɾi wɑz biɪŋ sɝtʃt ɑn wʌn ɪkskjus əɹ ənʌðɝ, ɛvɹi vɛsəl lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ə ɹoʊboʊt, bʌt moʊst ɔfən baɪ mɛn ɪɡnɝən ʌv wʌt ðeɪ wɝ sɝtʃɪŋ fɔɹ, ʌnəwɛɹ ðət ðə feɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪtɝn maɪt ɹɛst ɑn ðɛɹ dɪlədʒəns. ðə duɾi wɑz hɪz. ʌv kɔɹs, ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli wɑz ɡɪvən tə ivən mɔɹ kɑmpləkeɪɾəd ɪntʃɹiɡz ðən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə blʌd, ən ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑn fɹikwənli pleɪɾ ə vɛɹi dip ɡeɪm ɪndid, wɪð ə ʃɑɹp ən dɛdli skɪl. oʊnli ə fju wɝ əwɛɹ ðət ʃi hæd vænɪʃt twaɪs bɪfɔɹ, ən hæd bɪn ɹipɔɹɾəd dɛd, tə ðə vɛɹi ɝeɪnʒmənt ə hɝ fjunɝəl ɹaɪts, ɔl baɪ hɝ oʊn kɑntʃɹaɪvɪŋ. wʌtɛvɝ ðə ɹizənz fəɹ əɹ dɪsəpɪɹəns, ðoʊ, hi hæd tə faɪn ən pɹətɛk hɝ. soʊ fɑɹ i hæd noʊ klu haʊ. swɑloʊd baɪ ðə stɔɹm. əɹ pɝhæps baɪ ðə leɪɾi ʌv ðə ʃædoʊz. ðəɹ hæd bɪn kaʊnləs ətɛmps tə kɪdnæp əɹ əsæsəneɪt hɝ, bɪɡɪnɪŋ ɑn ðə deɪ ʌv əɹ bɝθ. ɪf i faʊn əɹ dɛd, hi mʌs faɪn u hæd kɪl hɝ, hu hæd ɡɪvən ði ʌltəmət kəmænz, ən əvɛnʒ əɹ wʌtɛvɝ ðə kɑst. ðət wɑz ɪz duɾi, tu.

With their own lives, when necessary, and willingly given. And nine nights past, the High Lady Tuon had vanished as if swallowed by the storm. He did not think of her as the Daughter of the Nine Moons, could not until he knew she was no longer under the veil. He had not considered taking his own life, either, though the shame cut him keenly. It was for the Blood to resort to the easy way to escape disgrace; the Deathwatch Guard fought to the last. Musenge commanded her personal bodyguard, but as the highestranking member of the Guard this side of the Aryth Ocean, it was Karede's duty to return her safely. Every cranny in the city was being searched on one excuse or another, every vessel larger than a rowboat, but most often by men ignorant of what they were searching for, unaware that the fate of the Return might rest on their diligence. The duty was his. Of course, the Imperial family was given to even more complicated intrigues than the rest of the Blood, and the High Lady Tuon frequently played a very deep game indeed, with a sharp and deadly skill. Only a few were aware that she had vanished twice before, and had been reported dead, to the very arrangement of her funeral rites, all by her own contriving. Whatever the reasons for her disappearance, though, he had to find and protect her. So far he had no clue how. Swallowed by the storm. Or perhaps by the Lady of the Shadows. There had been countless attempts to kidnap or assassinate her, beginning on the day of her birth. If he found her dead, he must find who had killed her, who had given the ultimate commands, and avenge her whatever the cost. That was his duty, too.

ə slɛndɝ mæn slɪpt ɪndə ðə ɹum fɹəm ðə hɔlweɪ wɪθaʊt nɑkɪŋ. hi maɪɾ əv bɪn wʌn ə ði ɪnz steɪbəlmən fɹəm ɪz ɹʌf koʊt, bʌt noʊ loʊkəl hæɾ ɪz peɪl hɛɹ əɹ ðə blu aɪz ðət slɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɹum əz ðoʊ mɛmɝaɪzɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn ɪt. hɪz hæn slɪpt ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt, ən kɛɹid ɹihɝs tu weɪz ə kɪlɪŋ ɪm bɛɹ-hændəɾ ɪn ðə bɹif moʊmən bɪfɔɹ i pɹədust ə smɔl, ɡoʊld-bɔɹɾɝd aɪvɝi plæk wɝkt wɪð ðə ɹeɪvən ən ðə taʊɝ. sikɝz fəɹ tʃɹuθ dɪd nɑɾ əv tə nɑk.

A slender man slipped into the room from the hallway without knocking. He might have been one of the inn's stablemen from his rough coat, but no local had his pale hair or the blue eyes that slid across the room as though memorizing everything in it. His hand slipped under his coat, and Karede rehearsed two ways of killing him bare-handed in the brief moment before he produced a small, gold-bordered ivory plaque worked with the Raven and the Tower. Seekers for Truth did not have to knock.

kɪlɪŋ əm wɑz fɹaʊn əpɑn.

Killing them was frowned upon.

"liv ʌs," ðə sikɝ toʊld ædʒɪmbʊɹə, tʌkɪŋ əweɪ ðə plæk wʌns i wɑz ʃʊɹ kɛɹid hæd ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɪt. ðə lɪɾəl mæn ɹɪmeɪn kɹaʊtʃt ɑn ɪz hilz, moʊʃənləs, ən ðə sikɝz aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. ivən ɪn ðə kɛnsɑɾə hɪlz ɛvɹiwʌn nu ə sikɝz wɝd wɑz lɔ. wɛl, pɝhæps nɑɾ ɪn səm ə ðə mɔɹ ɹɪmoʊt hɪl fɔɹts, nɑɾ ɪf ðeɪ bɪliv noʊ wʌn nu ðə sikɝ wɑz ðɛɹ, bʌɾ ædʒɪmbʊɹə nu bɛɾɝ ðən ðɪs.

"Leave us," the Seeker told Ajimbura, tucking away the plaque once he was sure Karede had recognized it. The little man remained crouched on his heels, motionless, and the Seeker's eyebrows rose in surprise. Even in the Kaensada Hills everyone knew a Seeker's word was law. Well, perhaps not in some of the more remote hill forts, not if they believed no one knew the Seeker was there, but Ajimbura knew better than this.

"weɪɾ aʊtsaɪd," kɛɹid kəmændəd ʃɑɹpli, ən ædʒɪmbʊɹə ɹoʊz wɪð əlækɹəɾi, mɝmɝɪŋ, "aɪ hɪɹ ən oʊbeɪ, haɪ wʌn." hi stʌɾid ðə sikɝ oʊpənli, ðoʊ, əz ɪf tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə sikɝ nu hi hæd mɑɹkt ɪz feɪs, bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ ðə ɹum. hi wɑz gɑnə ɡɛt hɪmsɛlf bɪhɛɾɪd, wʌn deɪ.

"Wait outside," Karede commanded sharply, and Ajimbura rose with alacrity, murmuring, "I hear and obey, high one." He studied the Seeker openly, though, as if to make sure the Seeker knew he had marked his face, before leaving the room. He was going to get himself beheaded, one day.

"ə pɹɛʃəs θɪŋ, lɔɪəlti," ðə peɪl-hɛɹd mæn sɛd, aɪɪŋ ðə teɪbəltɑp, æftɝ ædʒɪmbʊɹə pʊl ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɪmsɛlf. "ju ɑɹ ɪnvɑlvd ɪn lɔɹd julənz plænz, bænɝ-dʒɛnɝəl kɛɹid? aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv ɪkspɛktəd ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd tə bi pɑɹɾ ə ðæt." kɛɹid muv tu bɹɑnz mæp-weɪts ʃeɪp laɪk laɪənz ən lɛt ðə mæp ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɹoʊl ʌp ɑn ɪtsɛlf. ði ʌðɝ hæd nɑt bɪn ənɹoʊld, jɛt. "ju mʌst æsk lɔɹd julən, sikɝ. lɔɪəlti tə ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn ɪz pɹɛʃəs əbʌv ðə bɹɛθ ə laɪf, fɑloʊd kloʊsli baɪ noʊɪŋ wən tə kip saɪlənt. ðə mɔɹ u spik ʌv ə θɪŋ, ðə mɔɹ wɪl lɝn ʌv ɪɾ u ʃəd nɑt." noʊ wʌn ʃɔɹɾ ə ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli ɹɪbjukt ə sikɝ əɹ wʌtɛvɝ hænd ɡaɪɾəd hɪm, bʌt ðə fɛloʊ əpɪɹɾ ʌnəfɛktɪd. ðən əɡɛn, hi siɾəd hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðə ɹumz kʊʃən ɑɹmtʃɛɹ ən meɪɾ ə tɛn ə hɪz ɹɪŋɝz, piɹɪŋ oʊvɝ əm ət kɛɹid, hu hæd ðə tʃɔɪs ə muvɪŋ ɪz oʊn tʃɛɹ əɹ livɪŋ ðə mæn ɔlmoʊst əɾ ɪz bæk. moʊs pipəl wʊɾə bɪn vɛɹi nɝvəs əbaʊt hævɪŋ ə sikɝ bɪhaɪn ðɛm. moʊst wʊɾə bɪn nɝvəs hævɪŋ ə sikɝ ɪn ðə seɪm ɹum. kɛɹid hɪɾ ə smaɪl ən dɪd nɑt muv. hi hæɾ oʊnli tə tɝn ɪz hɛɾ ə fɹækʃən, ən i wɑz tʃɹeɪn ət siɪŋ klɪɹli wʌt leɪ ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝz ə saɪt.

"A precious thing, loyalty," the pale-haired man said, eyeing the tabletop, after Ajimbura pulled the door shut behind himself. "You are involved in Lord Yulan's plans, Banner-General Karede? I would not have expected the Deathwatch Guard to be part of that." Karede moved two bronze map-weights shaped like lions and let the map of Tar Valon roll up on itself. The other had not been unrolled, yet. "You must ask Lord Yulan, Seeker. Loyalty to the Crystal Throne is precious above the breath of life, followed closely by knowing when to keep silent. The more who speak of a thing, the more will learn of it who should not." No one short of the Imperial family rebuked a Seeker or whatever Hand guided him, but the fellow appeared unaffected. Then again, he seated himself in the room's cushioned armchair and made a tent of his ringers, peering over them at Karede, who had the choice of moving his own chair or leaving the man almost at his back. Most people would have been very nervous about having a Seeker behind them. Most would have been nervous having a Seeker in the same room. Karede hid a smile and did not move. He had only to turn his head a fraction, and he was trained at seeing clearly what lay in the corners of sight.

"ju mʌs bi pɹaʊɾ ə jəɹ sʌnz," ðə sikɝ sɛd, "tu fɑloʊɪŋ jə ɪndə ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd, ðə θɝd lɪstəɾ əmʌŋ ði ɑnɝd dɛd. jəɹ waɪf wʊɾə bɪn vɛɹi pɹaʊd." "wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ neɪm, sikɝ?" ði ænsɝɪŋ saɪləns wɑz dɛfənɪŋ. mɔɹ pipəl ɹɪbjuk sikɝz ðən ɪnkwaɪɝɾ æftɝ ðɛɹ neɪmz.

"You must be proud of your sons," the Seeker said, "two following you into the Deathwatch Guard, the third listed among the honored dead. Your wife would have been very proud." "What is your name, Seeker?" The answering silence was deafening. More people rebuked Seekers than inquired after their names.

"mɔɹ," ðə ɹɪplaɪ keɪm faɪnəli. "ælmjɝɹɑt mɔɹ." soʊ. mɔɹ. hi hæɾ ən ænsɛstɝ u hæd kʌm wɪð luthɛɹ pɛndʒɹæɡ, ðɛn, ən wɑz ɹaɪtli pɹaʊd. wɪθaʊɾ æksɛs tə ðə bɹiɾɪŋ bʊks, wɪtʃ noʊ dækoʊvæl wɑz əlaʊd, kɛɹid hæd noʊ weɪ ʌv noʊɪŋ wɛðɝ ɛni ʌv ðə teɪlz əbaʊɾ ɪz oʊn ænsɛstʃɹi wɝ tʃɹu - hi ɔlsoʊ maɪɾ əv ən ænsɛstɝ u hæd wʌns fɑloʊd ðə ɡɹeɪt hɔkwɪŋ - bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. mɛn u tʃɹaɪd tə stæn ɑn ðɛɹ fɔɹbɛɹz' ʃoʊldɝz ɹæðɝ ðən ðɛɹ oʊn fiɾ ɔfən faʊn ðɛmsɛlvz ʃɔɹɾɝ baɪ ə hɛd. ɪspɛʃli dækoʊvæl.

"Mor," the reply came finally. "Almurat Mor." So. Mor. He had an ancestor who had come with Luthair Paendrag, then, and was rightly proud. Without access to the breeding books, which no da'covale was allowed, Karede had no way of knowing whether any of the tales about his own ancestry were true - he also might have an ancestor who had once followed the great Hawkwing - but it did not matter. Men who tried to stand on their forebears' shoulders rather than their own feet often found themselves shorter by a head. Especially da'covale.

"kɔl mi fɹɪk. wəɹ boʊθ ðə pɹɑpɝɾi ʌv ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn. wʌt dʒju wɑn ə mi, ælmjɝɹɑt? nɑt tə dɪskʌs maɪ fæmli, aɪ θɪŋk." ɪf ɪz sʌnz wɝ ɪn tʃɹʌbəl, ðə fɛloʊ wəd nɛvɝ əv mɛnʃən əm soʊ sun, ən kɑliə wɑz bɪɑn ɛni mɪzɝi. fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, kɛɹid kəd si ðə stʃɹʌɡəl ɑn ðə sikɝz feɪs, ðoʊ hi hɪɾ ɪɾ ɔlmoʊst wɛl ɪnʌf. ðə mæn hæd lɔs kəntʃɹoʊl ə ði ɪntɝvju - əz i maɪɾ əv ɪkspɛktəd, flæʃɪŋ ɪz plæk əz ðoʊ ə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd wɝ nɑt ɹɛɾi tə θɹʌst ə dæɡɝ ɪndə hɪz oʊn hɑɹɾ ɑn kəmænd.

"Call me Furyk. We are both the property of the Crystal Throne. What do you want of me, Almurat? Not to discuss my family, I think." If his sons were in trouble, the fellow would never have mentioned them so soon, and Kalia was beyond any misery. From the corner of his eye, Karede could see the struggle on the Seeker's face, though he hid it almost well enough. The man had lost control of the interview - as he might have expected, flashing his plaque as though a Deathwatch Guard were not ready to thrust a dagger into his own heart on command.

"lɪsən tə ə stɔɹi," mɔɹ sɛd sloʊli, "æn tɛl mi wʌt jə θɪŋk." hɪz ɡeɪz wɑz fæsən tə kɛɹiɾ əz ɪf baɪ tæks, stʌɾiɪŋ, weɪɪŋ, ɪvæljueɪɾɪŋ əz ðoʊ kɛɹid wɝ ɑn ðə blɑk ət seɪl. "ðɪs keɪm tə əs ɪn ðə læs fju deɪz." baɪ ʌs, hi mɛn ðə sikɝz. "ɪt bɪɡæn əmʌŋ ðə loʊkəl pipəl, əz nɪɹ əz wi kən tɛl, ðoʊ wɪv nɑt jɛt faʊn ði ɝɪdʒənəl sɔɹs. səpoʊzədli, ə ɡɝl wɪð ə sindɑɹ æksɛn əz bɪn ɪkstɔɹɾɪŋ ɡoʊld ən dʒuəlɹi fɹəm mɝtʃəns hɪɹ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. ðə taɪɾəl dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz wɑz mɛnʃənd." hi ɡɹɪməst wɪð dɪsɡʌst, ən fəɹ ə moʊmənt, hɪz fɪŋɡɝtɪps tɝnd waɪt, ðeɪ wɝ pɹɛsɪŋ əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ soʊ hɑɹd. "nʌn ə ðə loʊkəlz sim tə ʌndɝstænd wʌt ðət taɪɾəl minz, bʌt ðə dɪskɹɪpʃən ə ðə ɡɝl ɪz ɹɪmɑɹkəbli pɹɪsaɪs. ɹɪmɑɹkəbli ækjɝət. ən noʊ wʌn kən ɹikɔl hɪɹɪŋ ðɪs ɹumɝ bɪfɔɹ ðə naɪɾ æftɝ . . . ðə naɪɾ æftɝ taɪlɪnz mɝɾɝ wɑz dɪskʌvɝd," hi fɪnɪʃt, tʃuzɪŋ ðə list ənplɛzən ɪvɛn tə fɪks ðə taɪm.

"Listen to a story," Mor said slowly, "and tell me what you think." His gaze was fastened to Karede as if by tacks, studying, weighing, evaluating as though Karede were on the block at sale. "This came to us in the last few days." By us, he meant the Seekers. "It began among the local people, as near as we can tell, though we have not yet found the original source. Supposedly, a girl with a Seandar accent has been extorting gold and jewelry from merchants here in Ebou Dar. The title Daughter of the Nine Moons was mentioned." He grimaced with disgust, and for a moment, his fingertips turned white, they were pressing against each other so hard. "None of the locals seem to understand what that title means, but the description of the girl is remarkably precise. Remarkably accurate. And no one can recall hearing this rumor before the night after . . . the night after Tylin's murder was discovered," he finished, choosing the least unpleasant event to fix the time.

"eɪ sindɑɹ æksɛnt," kɛɹid sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs, ən mɔɹ nɑɾəd. "ðɪs ɹumɝ əz pæs tə əɹ oʊn pipəl." ðət wɑz nɑɾ ə kwɛstʃən, bʌt mɔɹ nɑɾəd əɡɛn. eɪ sindɑɹ æksɛn ən ən ækjɝət dɪskɹɪpʃən, tu θɪŋz noʊ loʊkəl kəɾ ɪnvɛnt. sʌmwʌn wɑz pleɪɪŋ ə vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs ɡeɪm. deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz, ən fəɹ ði ɛmpaɪɝ. "haʊ dʌz ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs teɪk ɹisən ɪvɛns?" ðəɹ wəd bi lɪsənɝz əmʌŋ ðə sɝvəns, laɪkli əmʌŋ ivən ði ɛbu dɑɹi sɝvəns baɪ naʊ, ən wʌt ðə lɪsənɝz hɝd sun pæs tə ðə sikɝz.

"A Seandar accent," Karede said in a flat voice, and Mor nodded. "This rumor has passed to our own people." That was not a question, but Mor nodded again. A Seandar accent and an accurate description, two things no local could invent. Someone was playing a very dangerous game. Dangerous for themselves, and for the Empire. "How does the Tarasin Palace take recent events?" There would be Listeners among the servants, likely among even the Ebou Dari servants by now, and what the Listeners heard soon passed to the Seekers.

mɔɹ ʌndɝstʊd ðə kwɛstʃən, ʌv kɔɹs. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə mɛnʃən wʌt ʃəd nɑt bi mɛnʃənd. hi ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪn ən ɪndɪfɹən toʊn. "ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑnz ɑntʊɹɑʒ kæɹiz ɑn əz ðoʊ nʌθɪŋ əz hæpənd, ɪksɛp ðəɾ ænæθ, hɝ tʃɹuθ spikɝ, hæz teɪkən tə sɪkluʒən, bʌɾ aɪm toʊl ðəɾ ɪz nɑɾ ənjuʒəwəl fəɹ hɝ. sjuɹɔθ hɝsɛlf ɪz ivən mɔɹ dɪstʃɹɔɾ ɪn pɹaɪvət ðən ɪn pʌblɪk. ʃi slips pʊɹli, snæps əɾ əɹ feɪvɹɪts, ən əz əɹ pɹɑpɝɾi biɾən oʊvɝ tʃɹaɪfəlz. ʃi ɔɹɾɝd ðə dɛθ ʌv wʌn sikɝ itʃ deɪ əntɪl mæɾɝz ɑɹ ɹɛktəfaɪd, ən oʊnli ɹɪsɪndɪd ði ɔɹɾɝ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, wən ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi maɪt ɹʌn aʊɾ ə sikɝz bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹæn aʊɾ ə deɪz." hɪz ʃoʊldɝz muvd ɪn ə smɔl ʃɹʌɡ, pɝhæps tə ɪndəkeɪt ðɪs wɑz ɔl ɪn ə deɪ fəɹ sikɝz, pɝhæps ɪn ɹɪlif əɾ ə nɪɹ ɪskeɪp. "ɪts ʌndɝstændəbəl. ɪf ʃiz kɔl tə əkaʊnt, ʃɪl pɹeɪ fəɹ ðə dɛθ ə tɛn θaʊzən tɛɹz. ði ʌðɝ blʌɾ u noʊ wʌɾ əz hæpən ɑɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɹoʊ aɪz ɪn ðə bæks ə ðɛɹ hɛdz. ə fju hæv ivən kwaɪətli meɪd fjunɝəl ɝeɪnʒmənts, tə kʌvɝ ɛni əvɛntʃuælɪɾi."

Mor understood the question, of course. There was no need to mention what should not be mentioned. He replied in an indifferent tone. "The High Lady Tuon's entourage carries on as though nothing has happened, except that Anath, her Truth Speaker, has taken to seclusion, but I am told that is not unusual for her. Suroth herself is even more distraught in private than in public. She sleeps poorly, snaps at her favorites, and has her property beaten over trifles. She ordered the death of one Seeker each day until matters are rectified, and only rescinded the order this morning, when she realized she might run out of Seekers before she ran out of days." His shoulders moved in a small shrug, perhaps to indicate this was all in a day for Seekers, perhaps in relief at a near escape. "It's understandable. If she is called to account, she will pray for the Death of Ten Thousand Tears. The other Blood who know what has happened are trying to grow eyes in the backs of their heads. A few have even quietly made funeral arrangements, to cover any eventuality."

kɛɹid wɑntəɾ ə klɪɹɝ lʊk ət ðə mænz feɪs. hi wɑz ɪnjʊɹd tə ɪnsʌlt - ðət wɑz pɑɹɾ ə ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ - bʌt ðɪs. . . . pʊʃɪŋ bæk ɪz tʃɛɹ, hi stʊɾ ən sæɾ ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl. mɔɹ stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm ənblɪŋkɪŋ, tɛns tə dɪfɛn əɡɛnst ən ətæk, ən kɛɹid dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ tə stɪl ɪz æŋɡɝ. "waɪ dɪd jə kʌm tə mi ɪf jə bɪliv ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz ɑɹ ɪmplɪkeɪɾɪd ɪn ðɪs?" ði ɛfɝɾ ə kipɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs lɛvəl ɔlmoʊst stʃɹæŋɡəl hɪm. sɪns ðə fɝs dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz swɔɹ ɑn ðə kɔɹps ə luthɛɹ pɛndʒɹæɡ tə dɪfɛn ɪz sʌn, ðəɹ hæd nɛvɝ bɪn tʃɹizən əmʌŋ ðə ɡɑɹdz! nɛvɝ!

Karede wanted a clearer look at the man's face. He was inured to insult - that was part of the training - but this. . . . Pushing back his chair, he stood and sat at the edge of the writing table. Mor stared at him unblinking, tensed to defend against an attack, and Karede drew a deep breath to still his anger. "Why did you come to me if you believe the Deathwatch Guards are implicated in this?" The effort of keeping his voice level almost strangled him. Since the first Deathwatch Guards swore on the corpse of Luthair Paendrag to defend his son, there had never been treason among the Guards! Never!

mɔɹ ɹɪlæks baɪ ɪŋkɹəməns əz i ɹilaɪz ðət kɛɹid dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə kɪl hɪm, ət lis nɑt ɹaɪt ðɛn, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə heɪz ə swɛɾ ɑn ɪz fɔɹhɛd. "aɪ hæv hɝɾ ɪt sɛɾ ə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd kən si ə bʌɾɝflaɪz bɹɛθ. juv ɛniθɪŋ tə dʒɹɪŋk?" kɛɹid dʒɛstʃɝd kɝtli tə ðə bɹɪk hɑɹθ, wɛɹ ə sɪlvɝ kʌp ən pɪtʃɝ sæt nɪɹ ðə fleɪmz, tə kip wɔɹm. ðeɪ hæd bɪn ðɛɹ, əntʌtʃt, sɪns ædʒɪmbʊɹə bɹɔɾ əm wən kɛɹiɾ əwoʊk. "ðə waɪn meɪ bi kul baɪ naʊ, bʌt bi fɹi ʌv ɪt. ən wən jəɹ θɹoʊɾ ɪz wɛt, jəl ænsɝ maɪ kwɛstʃən. iðɝ jə səspɛkt ɡɑɹdzmɪn, əɹ jə wɪʃ tə pleɪ mi ɪn səm ɡeɪm ə jəɹ oʊn, ən baɪ maɪ aɪz, əl noʊ wɪtʃ, ən waɪ." ðə fɛloʊ saɪɾəld tə ðə hɑɹθ, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, bʌɾ əz mɔɹ bɛn fəɹ ðə pɪtʃɝ, hi fɹaʊn ən ðən ɡeɪv ə smɔl stɑɹt. wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ə sɪlvɝ-ɹɪm boʊl wɪð ə ɹæmʃɹn-pæɾɝnd sɪlvɝ beɪs sæt bɪsaɪd ðə kʌp. laɪɾ ə hɛvən, ædʒɪmbʊɹə hæd bɪn toʊld ɔfən ɪnʌf tə kip ðət θɪŋ aʊɾ ə saɪt! ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊt ðət mɔɹ ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɪt fəɹ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz.

Mor relaxed by increments as he realized that Karede did not intend to kill him, at least not right then, but there was a haze of sweat on his forehead. "I have heard it said a Deathwatch Guard can see a butterfly's breath. Do you have anything to drink?" Karede gestured curtly to the brick hearth, where a silver cup and pitcher sat near the flames, to keep warm. They had been there, untouched, since Ajimbura brought them when Karede awoke. "The wine may be cool by now, but be free of it. And when your throat is wet, you will answer my question. Either you suspect Guardsmen, or you wish to play me in some game of your own, and by my eyes, I will know which, and why." The fellow sidled to the hearth, watching him from the corner of his eye, but as Mor bent for the pitcher, he frowned and then gave a small start. What appeared to be a silver-rimmed bowl with a ram'shorn-patterned silver base sat beside the cup. Light of heaven, Ajimbura had been told often enough to keep that thing out of sight! There was no doubt that Mor recognized it for what it was.

ðə mæn kənsɪɾɝd tʃɹizən pɑsəbəl fəɹ ðə ɡɑɹdz? "pɔɹ fəɹ mi əz wɛl, ɪf jə wɪl." mɔɹ blɪŋkt, ʃoʊɪŋ ə feɪn kɑnstɝneɪʃən - hi hɛl ði oʊnli ɑbviəs kʌp - ən ðən ə laɪɾ ʌv ʌndɝstændɪŋ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ɪz aɪz. ən ənizi laɪt. hi fɪl ðə boʊl, tu, ə tʃɹaɪfəl ənstɛɾəli, ən waɪpt ɪz hæn ɑn ɪz koʊt bɪfɔɹ teɪkɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp. ɛvɹi mæn hæɾ ɪz lɪməts, ivən ə sikɝ, ən ə mæn pʊʃt tə ðɛm wɑz ɪspɛʃli deɪnʒɝəs, bʌɾ i wɑz ɔlsoʊ ɔf bæləns.

The man considered treason possible for the Guards? "Pour for me as well, if you will." Mor blinked, showing a faint consternation - he held the only obvious cup - and then a light of understanding appeared in his eyes. An uneasy light. He filled the bowl, too, a trifle unsteadily, and wiped his hand on his coat before taking it up. Every man had his limits, even a Seeker, and a man pushed to them was especially dangerous, but he was also off balance.

æksɛptɪŋ ðə skʌl-kʌp wɪð boʊθ hænz, kɛɹid ɹeɪzd ɪt haɪ ən loʊɝɾ ɪz hɛd. "tə ði ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ ɪn ɑnɝ ən ɡlɔɹi. dɛθ ən ʃeɪm tə hɝ ɛnəmiz."

Accepting the skull-cup with both hands, Karede raised it high and lowered his head. "To the Empress, may she live forever in honor and glory. Death and shame to her enemies."

"tə ði ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ ɪn ɑnɝ ən ɡlɔɹi," mɔɹ ɛkoʊd, boʊɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ən lɪftɪŋ ɪz kʌp. "dɛθ ən ʃeɪm tə hɝ ɛnəmiz."

"To the Empress, may she live forever in honor and glory," Mor echoed, bowing his head and lifting his cup. "Death and shame to her enemies."

pʊɾɪŋ ædʒɪmbʊɹəz kʌp tə hɪz lɪps, kɛɹid wɑz əwɛɹ ə ði ʌðɝ mæn wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm dʒɹɪŋk. ðə waɪn wɑz ɪndid kul, ðə spaɪsəz bɪɾɝ, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə feɪnt, ækɹɪd hɪn ə sɪlvɝ pɑlɪʃ; hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf ðə teɪst ə dɛd mænz dʌst wɑz ɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən. mɔɹ dæʃt ɔf hæf ɪz oʊn waɪn ɪn hɝid ɡʌlps, ðən stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪz kʌp, sim tə ɹilaɪz wʌɾ i hæd dʌn, ən meɪɾ ə vɪzəbəl ɛfɝt tə ɹɪɡeɪn kəntʃɹoʊl ə hɪmsɛlf. "fɹɪk kɛɹid," hi sɛd bɹɪskli. "bɔɹn fɔɹɾi-tu jɪɹz əɡoʊ tə wivɝz, ðə pɹɑpɝɾi ʌv wʌn dʒɑləd mɑɡoʊnaɪn, ə kɹæfsmən ɪn ænkɹɪd. tʃoʊzən ət fɪftin fəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz. saɪɾəd twaɪs fəɹ hɛɹoʊɪzəm ən mɛnʃən ɪn dɪspætʃɪz θɹi taɪmz, ðɛn, əz ə sɛvən-jɪɹ vɛɾɝən, neɪm tə ðə bɑɾiɡɑɹd ə ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑn əpɑn əɹ bɝθ." ðət hæd nɑt bɪn əɹ neɪm ðɛn, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt mɛnʃənɪŋ əɹ bɝθ-neɪm wʊɾə bɪn ən ɪnsəlt. "ðæt seɪm jɪɹ, əz wʌn ə θɹi sɝvaɪvɝz ə ðə fɝs noʊn ətɛmpt ɑn əɹ laɪf, tʃoʊzən fəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ əz ən ɔfəsɝ. sɝvəs dʊɹɪŋ ðə mʊaɪɑmi əpɹaɪzɪŋ ən ðə dʒiɑnmɪn ɪnsəɾənt, mɔɹ saɪteɪʃənz fəɹ hɛɹoʊɪzəm, mɔɹ mɛnʃənz ɪn dɪspætʃɪz, ən əsaɪnmən bæk tə ðə haɪ leɪɾiz bɑɾiɡɑɹd dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ əɹ fɝs tʃɹu-neɪm deɪ." mɔɹ pɪɹɾ ɪndə hɪz waɪn, ðən lʊkt ʌp sʌɾənli. "æt jəɹ ɹɪkwɛst. ənjuʒəwəl, ðæt. ðə fɑloʊɪŋ jɪɹ, jə tʊk θɹi sɪɹiəs wunz ʃildɪŋ əɹ wɪð jəɹ bɑɾi əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ sɛɾ ʌv əsæsənz. ʃi ɡeɪv jə hɝ moʊs pɹɛʃəs pəzɛʃən, ə dɑl. æftɝ mɔɹ dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt sɝvəs, wɪð fɝðɝ saɪteɪʃənz ən mɛnʃənz, jə wɝ səlɛktəd fəɹ ðə bɑɾiɡɑɹd ə ði ɛmpɹɛs hɝsɛlf, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, ən sɝv ðəɹ əntɪl neɪm tə əkʌmpəni ðə haɪ lɔɹd tʃɹɑk tə ðiz lænz wɪð ðə heɪlin. taɪmz tʃeɪnʒ, ən mɛn tʃeɪnʒ, bʌt bɪfɔɹ gɑnə ɡɑɹd ðə θɹoʊn, jə meɪd tu ʌðɝ ɹɪkwɛsts fəɹ əsaɪnmən tə ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑnz bɑɾiɡɑɹd. moʊst ənjuʒəwəl. ən jə kɛp ðə dɑl əntɪl ɪt wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt faɪɝ ə soʊhimə, ə mæɾɝ ɔfən jɪɹz."

Putting Ajimbura's cup to his lips, Karede was aware of the other man watching him drink. The wine was indeed cool, the spices bitter, and there was a faint, acrid hint of silver polish; he told himself the taste of dead man's dust was his imagination. Mor dashed off half his own wine in hurried gulps, then stared at his cup, seemed to realize what he had done, and made a visible effort to regain control of himself. "Furyk Karede," he said briskly. "Born forty-two years ago to weavers, the property of one Jalid Magonine, a craftsman in Ancarid. Chosen at fifteen for training in the Deathwatch Guards. Cited twice for heroism and mentioned in dispatches three times, then, as a seven-year veteran, named to the bodyguard of the High Lady Tuon upon her birth." That had not been her name then, of course, but mentioning her birth-name would have been an insult. "That same year, as one of three survivors of the first known attempt on her life, chosen for training as an officer. Service during the Muyami Uprising and the Jianmin Incident, more citations for heroism, more mentions in dispatches, and assignment back to the High Lady's bodyguard just before her first true-name day." Mor peered into his wine, then looked up suddenly. "At your request. Unusual, that. The following year, you took three serious wounds shielding her with your body against another set of assassins. She gave you her most precious possession, a doll. After more distinguished service, with further citations and mentions, you were selected for the bodyguard of the Empress herself, may she live forever, and served there until named to accompany the High Lord Turak to these lands with the Hailene. Times change, and men change, but before going to guard the throne, you made two other requests for assignment to the High Lady Tuon's bodyguard. Most unusual. And you kept the doll until it was destroyed in the Great Fire of Sohima, a matter often years."

nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, kɛɹid wɑz ɡlæɾ ə ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ðəɾ əlaʊɾ ɪm tə meɪnteɪn ə smuð feɪs noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt. kɛɹləs ɪkspɹɛʃənz ɡeɪv əweɪ tu mʌtʃ tə ən əpoʊnənt. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə feɪs ə ðə smɔl ɡɝl u hæd leɪd ðət dɑl ɑn ɪz lɪɾɝ. hi kəd hɪɹ əɹ stɪl. juv pɹətɛktəd maɪ laɪf, soʊ jə mʌs teɪk ɛmɪlə tə wɑtʃ oʊvɝ jə ɪn tɝn, ʃi sɛd. ʃi kæn ɹɪli pɹətɛk ju, ʌv kɔɹs; ʃiz oʊnli ə dɑl. bʌt kip əɹ tə ɹimaɪn jə ðəɾ əl ɔlweɪz hɪɹ ɪf jə spik maɪ neɪm. ɪf aɪm stɪl əlaɪv, ʌv kɔɹs.

Not for the first time, Karede was glad of the training that allowed him to maintain a smooth face no matter what. Careless expressions gave away too much to an opponent. He remembered the face of the small girl who had laid that doll on his litter. He could hear her still. You have protected my life, so you must take Emela to watch over you in turn, she said. She can't really protect you, of course; she's only a doll. But keep her to remind you that I will always hear if you speak my name. If I'm still alive, of course.

"maɪ ɑnɝ ɪz lɔɪəlti," hi sɛd, sɛɾɪŋ ædʒɪmbʊɹəz kʌp ɑn ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl kɛɹfəli, soʊ əz nɑt tə slɑp waɪn ɑntu hɪz peɪpɝz. haʊɛvɝ ɔfən ðə fɛloʊ pɑlɪʃt ðə sɪlvɝ, kɛɹid dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i bɑðɝd tə wɑʃ ðə θɪŋ. "lɔɪəlti tə ðə θɹoʊn. waɪ dɪd jə kʌm tə mi?" mɔɹ muv slaɪtli, soʊ ði ɑɹmtʃɛɹ wɑz bɪtwin ðɛm. noʊ daʊɾ i θɔɾ i wɑz stændɪŋ kæʒəwəli, bʌɾ i wɑz klɪɹli ɹɛɾi tə θɹoʊ ðə waɪnkʌp. hi hæɾ ə naɪf ʌndɝ ɪz koʊɾ ɪn ðə smɔl ə hɪz bæk, ən pɹɑbli ət list wʌn ʌðɝ. "θɹi ɹɪkwɛsts tə dʒɔɪn ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑnz bɑɾiɡɑɹd. ən jə kɛp ðə dɑl." "ðæt mʌtʃ, aɪ ʌndɝstænd," kɛɹid toʊld ɪm dʒɹaɪli. ðə ɡɑɹdz wɝ nɑt səpoʊz tə fɔɹm ətætʃməns tə ðoʊz ðeɪ wɝ sɛn tə ɡɑɹd. ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd sɝvd oʊnli ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn, sɝv huɛvɝ səksiɾəd tə ðə θɹoʊn, wɪð ə hoʊl hɑɹɾ ən ə hoʊl feɪθ. bʌɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət sɪɹiəs tʃaɪlz feɪs, ɔlɹɛɾi əwɛɹ ʃi maɪt nɑt lɪv tə də hɝ duɾi jɛt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə də ɪɾ ɛniweɪ, ən i hæd kɛp ðə dɑl. "bʌt ðɛɹz mɔɹ tə ɪt ðən ɹumɝ ʌv ə ɡɝl, ɪzən ðɛɹ?"

"My honor is loyalty," he said, setting Ajimbura's cup on the writing table carefully, so as not to slop wine onto his papers. However often the fellow polished the silver, Karede did not think he bothered to wash the thing. "Loyalty to the throne. Why did you come to me?" Mor moved slightly, so the armchair was between them. No doubt he thought he was standing casually, but he was clearly ready to throw the winecup. He had a knife under his coat in the small of his back, and probably at least one other. "Three requests to join the High Lady Tuon's bodyguard. And you kept the doll." "That much, I understand," Karede told him dryly. The Guards were not supposed to form attachments to those they were sent to guard. The Deathwatch Guard served only the Crystal Throne, served whoever succeeded to the throne, with a whole heart and a whole faith. But he remembered that serious child's face, already aware she might not live to do her duty yet trying to do it anyway, and he had kept the doll. "But there's more to it than rumor of a girl, isn't there?"

"ə bʌɾɝflaɪz bɹɛθ," ðə fɛloʊ mɝmɝd. "ɪɾ ɪz ə plɛʒɝ tə tɔk tə sʌmwʌn u siz dipli. ɑn ðə naɪt ðət taɪlɪn wɑz mɝɾɝd, tu deɪmeɪn wɝ teɪkən fɹəm ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs kɛnəlz.

"A butterfly's breath," the fellow murmured. "It is a pleasure to talk to someone who sees deeply. On the night that Tylin was murdered, two damane were taken from the Tarasin Palace kennels.

boʊθ wɝ fɔɹmɝli ɛɛs sədaɪ. dʒju nɑt faɪn ðə koʊɪnsɪɾəns tu mʌtʃ?"

Both were formerly Aes Sedai. Do you not find the coincidence too much?"

"aɪ faɪn ɛni koʊɪnsɪɾəns səspɛkt, ælmjɝɹɑt. bʌt wʌɾ əz ðət tə də wɪð ɹumɝz ən . . . ʌðɝ mæɾɝz?"

"I find any coincidence suspect, Almurat. But what has that to do with rumors and . . . other matters?"

"ðɪs wɛb ɪz mɔɹ tæŋɡəl ðən jə ɪmædʒən. sɛvɹəl ʌðɝz lɛf ðə pæləs ðət naɪt, əmʌŋ əm ə jʌŋ mæn u wɑz əpɛɹənli taɪlɪnz pɛt, fɔɹ mɛn u wɝ sɝɾənli soʊlʒɝz, ən ən oʊldɝ mæn, wʌn tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn, əɹ soʊ hi kɔl hɪmsɛlf, hu wɑz səpoʊzədli ə sɝvənt, bʌɾ u dɪspleɪd mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɛdʒəkeɪʃən ðən wəd bi ɪkspɛktəd. ət wʌn taɪm əɹ ənʌðɝ, ðeɪ wɝ ɔl sin wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ hu wɝ ɪn ðə sɪɾi bɪfɔɹ ði ɛmpaɪɝ ɹikleɪmd ɪt." ɪntɛnt, ðə sikɝ lin fɔɹwɝd slaɪtli oʊvɝ ðə bæk ə ði ɑɹmtʃɛɹ. "pɝhæps taɪlɪn wɑz nɑt mɝɾɝd kəz ʃi swɔɹ fiəlti, bʌt kəz ʃi hæd lɝn ə θɪŋz ðət wɝ deɪnʒɝəs.

"This web is more tangled than you imagine. Several others left the palace that night, among them a young man who was apparently Tylin's pet, four men who were certainly soldiers, and an older man, one Thom Merrilin, or so he called himself, who was supposedly a servant, but who displayed much more education than would be expected. At one time or another, they were all seen with Aes Sedai who were in the city before the Empire reclaimed it." Intent, the Seeker leaned forward slightly over the back of the armchair. "Perhaps Tylin was not murdered because she swore fealty, but because she had learned of things that were dangerous.

ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn kɛɹləs ɪn wʌt ʃi ɹɪvil tə ðə bɔɪ ɑn ðə pɪloʊz, ən i kæɹid wɝd tə mɛɹɪlɪn. wi kən kɔl ɪm ðəɾ əntɪl wi lɝn ə bɛɾɝ neɪm. ðə mɔɹ aɪ lɝn ə ðət wʌn, ðə mɔɹ ɪntʃɹiɡɪŋ i ɪz: nɑlədʒəbəl ə ðə wɝld, wɛl-spoʊkən, əɾ iz wɪð noʊbəlz ən kɹaʊnz. ə kɔɹɾiɝ, ɪn fækt, ɪf jə dɪdnt noʊ hi wɑz ə sɝvənt. ɪf ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæd sɝɾən plænz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ðeɪ maɪt sɛn sətʃ ə mæn tə kæɹi ðɛm aʊt." plænz. ənθɪŋkɪŋ, kɛɹid pɪkt ʌp ædʒɪmbʊɹəz kʌp ən ɔlmoʊs dʒɹæŋk bɪfɔɹ i ɹilaɪzd wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ. hi kəntɪnjud tə hoʊl ðə kʌp, ðoʊ, soʊ əz nɑt tə ɡɪv əweɪ hɪz tɝmɔɪl. ɛvɹiwʌn  - ðoʊz u nu, ɛniweɪ - wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑnz dɪsəpɪɹəns wɑz pɑɹɾ ə ðə kɑntɛs tə səksid ði ɛmpɹɛs, maɪt ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ. sətʃ wɑz laɪf ɪn ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli. ɪf ðə haɪ leɪɾi wɝ dɛd, æftɝ ɔl, ə nu ɛɹ mʌs bi neɪmd. ɪf ʃi wɝ dɛd. ən ɪf nɑt. . .

She might have been careless in what she revealed to the boy on the pillows, and he carried word to Merrilin. We can call him that until we learn a better name. The more I learn of that one, the more intriguing he is: knowledgeable of the world, well-spoken, at ease with nobles and crowns. A courtier, in fact, if you didn't know he was a servant. If the White Tower had certain plans in Ebou Dar, they might send such a man to carry them out." Plans. Unthinking, Karede picked up Ajimbura's cup and almost drank before he realized what he was doing. He continued to hold the cup, though, so as not to give away his turmoil. Everyone  - those who knew, anyway - was sure the High Lady Tuon's disappearance was part of the contest to succeed the Empress, might she live forever. Such was life in the Imperial family. If the High Lady were dead, after all, a new heir must be named. If she were dead. And if not. . .

. ðə waɪt taʊɝ wʊɾə sɛn ðɛɹ bɛst, ɪf ðeɪ plæn tə kæɹi hɝ əweɪ. ɪf ðə sikɝ wɑz nɑt pleɪɪŋ ɪm ɪn səm ɡeɪm ə hɪz oʊn. sikɝz kəd tʃɹaɪ tə snɛɹ ɛniwʌn ʃɔɹɾ ə ði ɛmpɹɛs hɝsɛlf, maɪt ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ. "ju hæv teɪkən ðɪs noʊʃən tə jəɹ supɪɹiɝz, ən ðeɪ ɹɪdʒɛktɪɾ ɪt, əɹ jə wəd nɑt kʌm tə mi. ðæt, ɔɹ. . . . jə hævən mɛnʃən ɪt tə ðɛm, hæv ju? waɪ nɑt?"

. The White Tower would have sent their best, if they planned to carry her away. If the Seeker was not playing him in some game of his own. Seekers could try to snare anyone short of the Empress herself, might she live forever. "You have taken this notion to your superiors, and they rejected it, or you would not come to me. That, or. . . . You haven't mentioned it to them, have you? Why not?"

"mʌtʃ mɔɹ tæŋɡəl ðən jə kən ɪmædʒən," mɔɹ sɛd sɔfli, aɪɪŋ ðə dɔɹ əz ɪf səspɛktɪŋ ivzdʒɹɑpɝz. waɪ dɪɾ i ɡɹoʊ kɔʃəs naʊ? "ðɛɹ ɑɹ mɛni . . . kɑmpləkeɪʃənz. ðə tu deɪmeɪn wɝ ɹimuv baɪ ðə leɪɾi ɛdʒiənɪn tæmɝəθ, hu hæz hæd dilɪŋz wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪfɔɹ. kloʊs dilɪŋz, ɪn fækt. vɛɹi kloʊs. klɪɹli, ʃi ɹilis ði ʌðɝ deɪmeɪn tə kʌvɝ əɹ ɪskeɪp. ɛdʒiənɪn lɛf ðə sɪɾi ðət seɪm naɪt, wɪð θɹi deɪmeɪn ɪn əɹ ɑntʊɹɑʒ, ən ɔlsoʊ, wi bɪliv, mɛɹɪlɪn ən ði ʌðɝz.

"Much more tangled than you can imagine," Mor said softly, eyeing the door as if suspecting eavesdroppers. Why did he grow cautious now? "There are many . . . complications. The two damane were removed by the Lady Egeanin Tamarath, who has had dealings with Aes Sedai before. Close dealings, in fact. Very close. Clearly, she released the other damane to cover her escape. Egeanin left the city that same night, with three damane in her entourage, and also, we believe, Merrilin and the others.

wi doʊnt noʊ hu ðə θɝd deɪmeɪn wɑz - wi səspɛk sʌmwʌn ɪmpɔɹɾənt əmʌŋ ði æθɑn maɪɹ, əɹ pɝhæps ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu wɑz haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə sɪɾi - bʌt wɪv aɪdɛntəfaɪd ðə sʌldəm ʃi juzd, ən tu hæv kloʊs kənɛkʃənz wɪð sjuɹɔθ. hu hɝsɛlf əz mɛni kənɛkʃənz tə ɛɛs sədaɪ." fəɹ ɔl ɪz wɛɹinɪs, mɔɹ sɛd ðəɾ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ nɑɾ ə laɪtnɪŋ boʊlt. noʊ wʌndɝ i wɑz ɑn ɛdʒ.

We don't know who the third damane was - we suspect someone important among the Atha'an Miere, or perhaps an Aes Sedai who was hiding in the city - but we have identified the sul'dam she used, and two have close connections with Suroth. Who herself has many connections to Aes Sedai." For all his wariness, Mor said that as if it were not a lightning bolt. No wonder he was on edge.

soʊ. sjuɹɔθ plɑɾəd wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ ən hæd kɝʌptɪɾ ət list səm ə ðə sikɝz əbʌv mɔɹ, ən ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæd pleɪs mɛn ʌndɝ wʌn ə ðɛɹ bɛs tə kæɹi aʊt sɝɾən ækʃənz. ɪt wɑz ɔl bəlivəbəl. wən kɛɹid wɑz sɛnt wɪð ðə fɔɹʌnɝz, hi hæd bɪn tæsk tə wɑtʃ ðə blʌd fəɹ oʊvɝ-æmbɪʃən. ðəɹ hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ə pɑsəbɪləɾi, ðɪs fɑɹ fɹəm ði ɛmpaɪɝ, ðət ðeɪ wəd tʃɹaɪ tə sɛɾ ʌp ðɛɹ oʊn kɪŋdəmz. ən i hɪmsɛlf hæd sɛn mɛn ɪndə ə sɪɾi hi nu wəd fɔl wʌtɛvɝ wɑz dʌn tə dɪfɛn ɪt, soʊ ðeɪ kəd hɑɹm ði ɛnəmi fɹəm wɪðɪn.

So. Suroth plotted with Aes Sedai and had corrupted at least some of the Seekers above Mor, and the White Tower had placed men under one of their best to carry out certain actions. It was all believable. When Karede was sent with the Forerunners, he had been tasked to watch the Blood for over-ambition. There had always been a possibility, this far from the Empire, that they would try to set up their own kingdoms. And he himself had sent men into a city he knew would fall whatever was done to defend it, so they could harm the enemy from within.

"ju hæv ə dɝɛkʃən, ælmjɝɹɑt?"

"You have a direction, Almurat?"

mɔɹ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ðeɪ wɛnt nɔɹθ, ən dʒəhænə wɑz mɛnʃən ɪn ðə pæləs steɪbəlz, bʌt ðət simz ən ɑbviəs ətɛmpt ət dɪsɛpʃən. ðəl əv tʃeɪnʒd dɝɛkʃən ət ðə fɝst ɑpɝtunəɾi.

Mor shook his head. "They went north, and Jehannah was mentioned in the palace stables, but that seems an obvious attempt at deception. They will have changed direction at the first opportunity.

wɪv tʃɛkt ɑn boʊts lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə hæv kæɹid ðə pɑɹɾi əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ, bʌt vɛsəlz ə ðət saɪz kʌm ən ɡoʊ ɔl ðə taɪm. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ ɔɹɾɝ ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, noʊ kəntʃɹoʊl." "ðɪs ɡɪvz mi ə ɡɹeɪt dil tə θɪŋk ɑn."

We have checked on boats large enough to have carried the party across the river, but vessels of that size come and go all the time. There is no order in this place, no control." "This gives me a great deal to think on."

ðə sikɝ ɡɹɪməst, ə slaɪt twɪstɪŋ ə hɪz maʊθ, bʌɾ i sim tə ɹilaɪz i hæd ɡɑɾən əz mʌtʃ kəmɪtmən əz kɛɹid wəd meɪk. hi nɑɾəd wʌns. "wʌtɛvɝ jə tʃuz tə du, jə ʃəd noʊ ðɪs. jə meɪ wʌndɝ haʊ ðə ɡɝl ɪkstɔɹɾɪd ɛniθɪŋ fɹəm ðiz mɝtʃəns. ɪt simz tu əɹ θɹi soʊlʒɝz ɔlweɪz əkʌmpənid hɝ. ðə dɪskɹɪpʃən ə ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ wɑz ɔlsoʊ vɛɹi pɹɪsaɪs." hi hæf stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ə hæn əz ðoʊ tə tʌtʃ kɛɹidz ɹoʊb, bʌt waɪzli lɛɾ ɪt fɔl bæk tə hɪz saɪd. "moʊs pipəl kɔl ðət blæk. jə ʌndɝstæn mi? wʌtɛvɝ jə tʃuz tə du, də nɑt dɪleɪ." mɔɹ ɹeɪzd ɪz kʌp. "jɔɹ hɛlθ, bænɝ-dʒɛnɝəl. fɹɪk. jəɹ hɛlθ, ən ðə hɛlθ ə ði ɛmpaɪɝ." kɛɹid dʒɹeɪn ædʒɪmbʊɹəz kʌp wɪθaʊt hɛzəteɪʃən. ðə sikɝ dɪpɑɹɾəd əz əbɹʌpli əz i hæɾ ɛntɝd, ən moʊməns æftɝ ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn hɪm, ɪɾ oʊpən tə ədmɪɾ ædʒɪmbʊɹə. ðə lɪɾəl mæn stɛɹɾ əkjuzɪŋli ət ðə skʌl-kʌp ɪn kɛɹidz hænz.

The Seeker grimaced, a slight twisting of his mouth, but he seemed to realize he had gotten as much commitment as Karede would make. He nodded once. "Whatever you choose to do, you should know this. You may wonder how the girl extorted anything from these merchants. It seems two or three soldiers always accompanied her. The description of their armor was also very precise." He half stretched out a hand as though to touch Karede's robe, but wisely let it fall back to his side. "Most people call that black. You understand me? Whatever you choose to do, do not delay." Mor raised his cup. "Your health, Banner-General. Furyk. Your health, and the health of the Empire." Karede drained Ajimbura's cup without hesitation. The Seeker departed as abruptly as he had entered, and moments after the door closed behind him, it opened to admit Ajimbura. The little man stared accusingly at the skull-cup in Karede's hands.

"ju noʊ ðɪs ɹumɝ, ædʒɪmbʊɹə?" əz wɛl æsk wɛðɝ ðə sʌn ɹoʊz ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ əz æsk wɛðɝ ðə fɛloʊ hæd bɪn lɪsnɪŋ. hi dɪd nɑt dɪnaɪ ɪt, ɪn ɛni keɪs.

"You know this rumor, Ajimbura?" As well ask whether the sun rose in the morning as ask whether the fellow had been listening. He did not deny it, in any case.

"aɪ wəd nɑt sɔɪl maɪ tʌŋ wɪð sətʃ fɪlθ, haɪ wʌn," hi sɛd, dʒɹɔɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ʌp. kɛɹid pɝmɪɾəd hɪmsɛlf ə saɪ. wɛðɝ ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑnz dɪsəpɪɹəns wɑz əɹ oʊn duɪŋ əɹ səm ʌðɝz, ʃi wɑz ɪn ɡɹeɪt deɪnʒɝ. ən ɪf ðə ɹumɝ wɑz səm plɔɪ baɪ mɔɹ, ðə bɛst weɪ tə dɪfiɾ ənʌðɝz ɡeɪm wɑz tə meɪk ðə ɡeɪm jəɹ oʊn. "leɪ aʊt maɪ ɹeɪzɝ." sɪɾɪŋ daʊn, hi ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪz pɛn, hoʊldɪŋ ðə sliv ə hɪz ɹoʊb klɪɹ ə ði ɪŋk wɪð ɪz lɛf hænd. "ðɛn jəl faɪn kæptən mjuzənʒ, wən hiz əloʊn, ən ɡɪv ɪm ðɪs. ɹɪtɝn kwɪkli; əl əv mɔɹ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz fəɹ ju." ʃɔɹtli æftɝ nun ɑn ðə fɑloʊɪŋ deɪ, hi wɑz kɹɔsɪŋ ðə hɑɹbɝ ɑn ðə fɛɹi ðət dɪpɑɹɾəd itʃ aʊɝ, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə stʃɹɪkt ɹɪŋɪŋ ə bɛlz. ɪt wɑz ə lʌmbɝɪŋ bɑɹdʒ ðət hivd əz lɔŋ swips pɹəpɛld ɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə hɑɹbɝz tʃɑpi sɝfəs. ðə ɹoʊps læʃɪŋ ə mɝtʃəns hæf-dʌzən kænvəs-kʌvɝd wæɡənz tə ðə klits ɑn ðə dɛk kɹikt wɪð ɛvɹi ʃɪft, ðə hɔɹsəz stæmp ðɛɹ hʊvz nɝvəsli, ən ði ɔɹsmɪn hæd tə fɛn ɔf wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz ən haɪɝd ɡɑɹdz u wɑntəd tə ɛmpti ðɛɹ bɛliz oʊvɝ ðə saɪd.

"I would not soil my tongue with such filth, high one," he said, drawing himself up. Karede permitted himself a sigh. Whether the High Lady Tuon's disappearance was her own doing or some other's, she was in great danger. And if the rumor was some ploy by Mor, the best way to defeat another's game was to make the game your own. "Lay out my razor." Sitting down, he reached for his pen, holding the sleeve of his robe clear of the ink with his left hand. "Then you will find Captain Musenge, when he is alone, and give him this. Return quickly; I will have more instructions for you." Shortly after noon on the following day, he was crossing the harbor on the ferry that departed each hour, according to the strict ringing of bells. It was a lumbering barge that heaved as long sweeps propelled it across the harbor's choppy surface. The ropes lashing a merchant's half-dozen canvas-covered wagons to the cleats on the deck creaked with every shift, the horses stamped their hooves nervously, and the oarsmen had to fend off wagon drivers and hired guards who wanted to empty their bellies over the side.

səm mɛn hæd noʊ stʌmək fəɹ ðə moʊʃən ʌv wɔɾɝ. ðə mɝtʃən hɝsɛlf, ə plʌmp-feɪst wʊmən wɪð ə kɑpɝi skɪn, stʊɾ ɪn ðə baʊ ɹæpt ɪn əɹ dɑɹk kloʊk, bælənsɪŋ izəli wɪð ðə fɛɹiz muvməns, stɛɹɪŋ fɪksədli ət ði əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ lændɪŋ ən ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ kɛɹid bɪsaɪd hɝ. ʃi maɪt noʊ ðəɾ i wɑz sintʃæn, fɹəm ðə sæɾəl ɑn ɪz beɪ ɡɛldɪŋ ɪf nʌθɪŋ ɛls, bʌɾ ə pleɪn ɡɹeɪ kloʊk kʌvɝɾ ɪz ɹɛd-tʃɹɪmd ɡɹin koʊt, soʊ ɪf ʃi θɔɾ ə hɪm əɾ ɔl, ɪt wɑz əz ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi soʊlʒɝ. nɑɾ ə sɛɾəlɝ, wɪð ə sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz hɪp. ðəɹ maɪɾ əv bɪn ʃɑɹpɝ aɪz bæk ɪn ðə sɪɾi, dɪspaɪɾ ɔl i hæd dʌn tə ɪveɪd ðɛm, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ i kəd də əbaʊt ðæt. wɪð lʌk, hi hæɾ ə deɪ, pɝhæps tu, bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn ɹilaɪzd i wəd nɑt bi ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ði ɪn ɛni taɪm sun.

Some men had no stomach for the motion of water. The merchant herself, a plump-faced woman with a coppery skin, stood in the bow wrapped in her dark cloak, balancing easily with the ferry's movements, staring fixedly at the approaching landing and ignoring Karede beside her. She might know that he was Seanchan, from the saddle on his bay gelding if nothing else, but a plain gray cloak covered his red-trimmed green coat, so if she thought of him at all, it was as an ordinary soldier. Not a settler, with a sword on his hip. There might have been sharper eyes back in the city, despite all he had done to evade them, but there was nothing he could do about that. With luck, he had a day, perhaps two, before anyone realized he would not be returning to the inn any time soon.

swɪŋɪŋ ɪndə hɪz sæɾəl əz sun əz ðə fɛɹi bʌmp hɑɹɾ əɡɛns ðə lændɪŋ dɑks lɛðɝ-pæɾəd poʊsts, hi wɑz fɝst ɔf wən ðə loʊɾɪŋ ɡeɪt swʌŋ əsaɪd, ðə mɝtʃənt wɑz stɪl tʃɪviɪŋ əɹ dʒɹaɪvɝz tə ðə wæɡənz ən ðə fɛɹimən ənlæʃɪŋ wilz. hi kɛpt ɑldəzɑɹ tə ə sloʊ wɔk əkɹɔs ðə stoʊnz, stɪl slɪpɝi wɪð ðə mɔɹnɪŋz ɹeɪn, ə lɪɾɝ ə hɔɹs dʌŋ, ən ðə livɪŋz ʌv ə flɑk ə ʃip, ən lɛt ðə beɪz peɪs ɪnkɹis oʊnli wən i ɹitʃt ði ɪljən ɹoʊɾ ɪtsɛlf, ðoʊ hi kɛpt ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə tʃɹɑɾ ivən ðɛn. ɪmpeɪʃəns wɑz ə vaɪs wən bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə dʒɝni ʌv ənnoʊn lɛŋθ.

Swinging into his saddle as soon as the ferry bumped hard against the landing dock's leather-padded posts, he was first off when the loading gate swung aside, the merchant was still chivvying her drivers to the wagons and the ferrymen unlashing wheels. He kept Aldazar to a slow walk across the stones, still slippery with the morning's rain, a litter of horse dung, and the leavings of a flock of sheep, and let the bay's pace increase only when he reached the Illian Road itself, though he kept short of a trot even then. Impatience was a vice when beginning a journey of unknown length.

ɪnz laɪn ðə ɹoʊd bɪɑn ðə lændɪŋ, flæt-ɹuf bɪldɪŋz, kʌvɝɾ ɪn kɹækt ən fleɪkɪŋ waɪt plæstɝ ən wɪð feɪɾəd saɪnz aʊt fɹʌn əɹ nʌn əɾ ɔl. ðɪs ɹoʊd mɑɹk ðə nɔɹðɝn ɛdʒ ə ðə ɹæhəd, ən ɹʌfli dʒɹɛs mɛn slaʊtʃɪŋ ɑn bɛntʃɪz ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ɪnz sʌlənli wɑtʃt ɪm pæs.

Inns lined the road beyond the landing, flat-roofed buildings, covered in cracked and flaking white plaster and with faded signs out front or none at all. This road marked the northern edge of the Rahad, and roughly dressed men slouching on benches in front of the inns sullenly watched him pass.

nɑt kəz i wɑz sintʃæn; hi səspɛktəd ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn noʊ bɹaɪɾɝ fəɹ ɛniwʌn ɑn hɔɹsbæk.

Not because he was Seanchan; he suspected they would have been no brighter for anyone on horseback.

ɛniwʌn u hæd tu kɔɪnz tə ɹʌb, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. sun i lɛft əm bɪhaɪnd, ðoʊ, ən ðə nɛks fju aʊɝz tʊk ɪm pæst ɑləv ɔɹtʃɝdz ən smɔl fɑɹmz wɛɹ ðə wɝkɝz wɝ əkʌstəmd ɪnʌf tə pæsɝzbi ɑn ðə ɹoʊd ðət ðeɪ dɪd nɑt lʊk ʌp fɹəm ðɛɹ leɪbɝz. ðə tʃɹæfɪk wɑz spɑɹs ɪn ɛni keɪs, ə hændfʊl ə haɪwil fɑɹmɝz' kɑɹts ən twaɪs ə mɝtʃəns tʃɹeɪn ɹʌmbəlɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ɛbu dɑɹ, sɝaʊndəd baɪ haɪɝd ɡɑɹdz. mɛni ʌv ðə dʒɹaɪvɝz ən boʊθ mɝtʃəns wɔɹ ðoʊz dɪstɪŋktɪv ɪliɑnɝ bɪɹdz. ɪt sim stʃɹeɪnʒ ðəɾ ɪljən kəntɪnjud tə sɛn ɪts tʃɹeɪd tə ɛbu dɑɹ waɪl faɪɾɪŋ tə ɹɪzɪs ði ɛmpaɪɝ, bʌt pipəl ɑn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ði istɝn si wɝ ɔfən pəkjuljɝ, wɪð ɑd kʌstəmz, ən lɪɾəl laɪk ðə stɔɹiz toʊld ə ðə ɡɹeɪt hɔkwɪŋz hoʊmlænd. ɔfən nʌθɪŋ laɪk. ðeɪ mʌs bi ʌndɝstʊd, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ tə bi bɹɔɾ ɪndə ði ɛmpaɪɝ, bʌɾ ʌndɝstændɪŋ wɑz fəɹ ʌðɝz, haɪɝ ðən hi. hi hæɾ ɪz duɾi.

Anyone who had two coins to rub, for that matter. Soon he left them behind, though, and the next few hours took him past olive orchards and small farms where the workers were accustomed enough to passersby on the road that they did not look up from their labors. The traffic was sparse in any case, a handful of highwheeled farmers' carts and twice a merchant's train rumbling toward Ebou Dar, surrounded by hired guards. Many of the drivers and both merchants wore those distinctive Illianer beards. It seemed strange that Illian continued to send its trade to Ebou Dar while fighting to resist the Empire, but people on this side of the Eastern Sea were often peculiar, with odd customs, and little like the stories told of the great Hawkwing's homeland. Often nothing like. They must be understood, of course, if they were to be brought into the Empire, but understanding was for others, higher than he. He had his duty.

ðə fɑɹmz ɡeɪv weɪ tə wʊdlænz ən filz ə skɹʌb, ən ɪz ʃædoʊ wɑz lɛŋθənɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, ðə sʌn mɔɹ ðən hæfweɪ tə ðə hɝaɪzən, baɪ ðə taɪm i sɔ wʌɾ i wɑz lʊkɪŋ fɔɹ. dʒʌst əhɛd, ædʒɪmbʊɹə wɑz skwɑɾɪŋ ɑn ðə nɔɹθ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd, pleɪɪŋ ə ɹid flut, ði ɪmədʒ ʌv ən aɪɾəlɝ ʃɝkɪŋ. bɪfɔɹ kɛɹid ɹitʃt hɪm, hi tʌk ðə flut bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛlt, ɡæðɝɾ ɪz bɹaʊn kloʊk ən vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə bɹʌʃ ən tʃɹiz. ɡlænsɪŋ bɪhaɪn tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə ɹoʊd wɑz ɛmpti ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən əz wɛl, kɛɹid tɝn ɑldəzɑɹ ɪndə ðə wʊdlæn ət ðə seɪm pɔɪnt. ðə lɪɾəl mæn wɑz weɪɾɪŋ dʒʌst aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd, əmʌŋ ə stæn ə səm sɔɹɾ ə lɑɹdʒ paɪn tʃɹi, ðə tɔlɪst izəli ə hʌnʒɹəd fit. hi meɪɾ ɪz hʌntʃ-ʃoʊldɝd baʊ ən skɹæmbəld ɪndə ðə sæɾəl ʌv ə lin tʃɛsnʌt wɪð fɔɹ waɪt fit.

The farms gave way to woodlands and fields of scrub, and his shadow was lengthening in front of him, the sun more than halfway to the horizon, by the time he saw what he was looking for. Just ahead, Ajimbura was squatting on the north side of the road, playing a reed flute, the image of an idler shirking. Before Karede reached him, he tucked the flute behind his belt, gathered his brown cloak and vanished into the brush and trees. Glancing behind to make sure the road was empty in that direction as well, Karede turned Aldazar into the woodland at the same point. The little man was waiting just out of sight of the road, among a stand of some sort of large pine tree, the tallest easily a hundred feet. He made his hunch-shouldered bow and scrambled into the saddle of a lean chestnut with four white feet.

hi ɪnsɪstəd ðət waɪt fiɾ ɑn ə hɔɹs wɝ lʌki. "ðɪs weɪ, haɪ wʌn?" hi sɛd, ən ət kɛɹidz dʒɛstʃɝ ə pɝmɪʃən, tɝn ɪz maʊn dipɝ ɪndə ðə fɔɹəst.

He insisted that white feet on a horse were lucky. "This way, high one?" he said, and at Karede's gesture of permission, turned his mount deeper into the forest.

ðeɪ hæɾ oʊnli ə ʃɔɹt weɪ tə ɹaɪd, noʊ mɔɹ ðən hæf ə maɪl, bʌt noʊ wʌn pæsɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹoʊd cʊɾə səspɛktəd wʌt weɪɾəd ðəɹ ɪn ə lɑɹdʒ klɪɹɪŋ. mjuzənʒ hæd bɹɔɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd ə ðə ɡɑɹɾ ɑn ɡʊd hɔɹsəz ən twɛnti oʊɡiɝ ɡɑɹɾənɝz, ɔl ɪn fʊl ɑɹmɝ, əlɔŋ wɪð pæk ænəməlz tə kæɹi səplaɪz fəɹ tu wiks. ðə pækhɔɹs ædʒɪmbʊɹə hæd bɹɔɾ aʊt jɛstɝdeɪ, wɪð kɛɹidz ɑɹmɝ, wəd bi əmʌŋ ðɛm. ə klʌstɝ ə sʌldəm wɝ stændɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðɛɹ oʊn maʊns, səm pɛɾɪŋ ðə sɪks liʃt deɪmeɪn. wən mjuzənʒ ɹoʊd fɔɹwɝd tə mit kɛɹid wɪð hɑɹɾə, ðə fɝst ɡɑɹɾənɝ, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡɹɪm-feɪs bɪsaɪɾ ɪm wɪð ɪz ɡɹintəsɛld æks oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. wʌn ə ðə wɪmən, mɛlɪtin, ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑnz dɝsʌldəm, stɛpt ɪndə hɝ sæɾəl ən dʒɔɪn ðɛm.

They had only a short way to ride, no more than half a mile, but no one passing on the road could have suspected what waited there in a large clearing. Musenge had brought a hundred of the Guard on good horses and twenty Ogier Gardeners, all in full armor, along with pack animals to carry supplies for two weeks. The packhorse Ajimbura had brought out yesterday, with Karede's armor, would be among them. A cluster of sul'dam were standing beside their own mounts, some petting the six leashed damane. When Musenge rode forward to meet Karede with Hartha, the First Gardener, striding grim-faced beside him with his greentasseled axe over his shoulder. One of the women, Melitene, the High Lady Tuon's der'sul'dam, stepped into her saddle and joined them.

mjuzənʒ ən hɑɹɾə tʌtʃt fɪsts tə hɑɹt, ən kɛɹid ɹɪtɝn ðɛɹ səlut, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz wɛn tə ðə deɪmeɪn. tə wʌn ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ, ə smɔl wʊmən huz hɛɹ wɑz biɪŋ stʃɹoʊk baɪ ə dɑɹk, skwɛɹ-feɪst sʌldəm. ə deɪmeɪnz feɪs wɑz ɔlweɪz dɪsɛptɪv  -  ðeɪ eɪdʒ sloʊli ən lɪvd ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm  -  bʌt ðɪs wʌn hæɾ ə dɪfɝəns i hæd lɝn tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz əz bɪlɔŋɪŋ tə ðoʊz u kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ɛɛs sədaɪ. "wʌɾ ɪkskjus dɪd jə jus tə ɡɛɾ ɔl ə ðɛm aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi ət wʌns?" hi æskt.

Musenge and Hartha touched fists to heart, and Karede returned their salute, but his eyes went to the damane. To one in particular, a small woman whose hair was being stroked by a dark, square-faced sul'dam. A damane's face was always deceptive  -  they aged slowly and lived a very long time  -  but this one had a difference he had learned to recognize as belonging to those who called themselves Aes Sedai. "What excuse did you use to get all of them out of the city at once?" he asked.

"ɛksɝsaɪz, bænɝ-dʒɛnɝəl," mɛlɪtin ɹɪplaɪd wɪð ə ɹaɪ smaɪl. "ɛvɹiwʌn ɔlweɪz bɪlivz ɛksɝsaɪz." ɪt wɑz sɛd ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑn ɪn tʃɹuθ niɾəd noʊ dɝsʌldəm tə tʃɹeɪn əɹ pɹɑpɝɾi əɹ əɹ sʌldəm, bʌt mɛlɪtin, wɪð lɛs blæk ðən ɡɹeɪ ɪn əɹ lɔŋ hɛɹ, wɑz ɪkspɪɹiənst ɪn mɔɹ ðən əɹ kɹæft, ən ʃi nu wʌɾ i wɑz ɹɪli æskɪŋ. hi hæd ɹɪkwɛstɪd ðət mjuzənʒ bɹɪŋ ə pɛɹ ə deɪmeɪn, ɪf i kʊd. "nʌn ʌv əs wəd bi lɛf bɪhaɪnd, bænɝ-dʒɛnɝəl. nɛvɝ fəɹ ðɪs. əz fəɹ maɪələn. . . . " ðət mʌs bi ðə fɔɹmɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. "æftɝ wi lɛf ðə sɪɾi, wi toʊl ðə deɪmeɪn waɪ wi wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ. ɪts ɔlweɪz bɛst ɪf ðeɪ noʊ wʌts ɪkspɛktəd. wiv bɪn kɑmɪŋ maɪələn ɛvɝ sɪns. ʃi lʌvz ðə haɪ leɪɾi.

"Exercise, Banner-General," Melitene replied with a wry smile. "Everyone always believes exercise." It was said the High Lady Tuon in truth needed no der'sul'dam to train her property or her sul'dam, but Melitene, with less black than gray in her long hair, was experienced in more than her craft, and she knew what he was really asking. He had requested that Musenge bring a pair of damane, if he could. "None of us would be left behind, Banner-General. Never for this. As for Mylen. . . . " That must be the former Aes Sedai. "After we left the city, we told the damane why we were going. It's always best if they know what's expected. We've been calming Mylen ever since. She loves the High Lady.

ðeɪ ɔl du, bʌt maɪələn wɝʃəps əɹ əz ðoʊ ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi sæɾ ɑn ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn. ɪf maɪələn ɡɛts əɹ hænz ɑn wʌn ə ðiz 'ɛɛs sədaɪ,'" ʃi tʃʌkəld, "wil əv tə bi kwɪk tə kip ðə wʊmən fɹəm biɪŋ tu bæɾɝd tə bi wɝθ liʃɪŋ."

They all do, but Mylen worships her as though she already sat on the Crystal Throne. If Mylen gets her hands on one of these 'Aes Sedai,'" she chuckled, "we'll have to be quick to keep the woman from being too battered to be worth leashing."

"aɪ si noʊ kɑz fəɹ læftɝ," hɑɹɾə ɹʌmbəld. ði oʊɡiɝ wɑz ivən mɔɹ wɛðɝɾ ən ɡɹɪzəl ðən mjuzənʒ, wɪð lɔŋ ɡɹeɪ mʌstæʃɪz ən aɪz laɪk blæk stoʊnz stɛɹɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛlmət. hi hæd bɪn ə ɡɑɹɾənɝ sɪns bɪfɔɹ kɛɹidz fɑðɝ wɑz bɔɹn, meɪbi bɪfɔɹ ɪz ɡɹændfɑðɝ. "wi hæv noʊ tɑɹɡət. wəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kætʃ ðə wɪn ɪn ə nɛt." mɛlɪtin soʊbɝd kwɪkli, ən mjuzənʒ bɪɡæn tə lʊk ɡɹɪmɝ ðən hɑɹɾə, ɪf ðət wɑz pɑsəbəl. ɪn tɛn deɪz, ðə pipəl ðeɪ sɔt wʊɾə pʊt mɛni maɪlz bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ðə bɛs ðə waɪt taʊɝ kəd sɛnd wəd nɑt bi soʊ bleɪɾənt əz tə hɛd du ist æftɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ ðə ɹuz ə dʒəhænə, nɔɹ soʊ stupəd tə əz tə hɛd tu kloʊs tə nɔɹθ, jɛt ðət lɛft ə væst ən ɛvɝ ɪkspændɪŋ ɛɹiə tə bi sɝtʃt. "ðɛn wi mʌs bɪɡɪn spɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ nɛts wɪθaʊt dɪleɪ," kɛɹid sɛd, "æn spɹɛɾ əm faɪnli." mjuzənʒ ən hɑɹɾə nɑɾəd. fəɹ ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd, wʌt mʌs bi dʌn, wəd bi dʌn. ivən tə kætʃɪŋ ðə wɪnd.

"I see no cause for laughter," Hartha rumbled. The Ogier was even more weathered and grizzled than Musenge, with long gray mustaches and eyes like black stones staring out of his helmet. He had been a Gardener since before Karede's father was born, maybe before his grandfather. "We have no target. We are trying to catch the wind in a net." Melitene sobered quickly, and Musenge began to look grimmer than Hartha, if that was possible. In ten days, the people they sought would have put many miles behind them. The best the White Tower could send would not be so blatant as to head due east after trying the ruse of Jehannah, nor so stupid to as to head too close to north, yet that left a vast and ever expanding area to be searched. "Then we must begin spreading our nets without delay," Karede said, "and spread them finely." Musenge and Hartha nodded. For the Deathwatch Guard, what must be done, would be done. Even to catching the wind.

tʃæptɝ faɪv

CHAPTER 5

ðə fɔɹdʒɪŋ ʌv ə hæmɝ i ɹæn izəli θɹu ðə naɪɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə snoʊ ðət kʌvɝd ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hi wɑz wʌn wɪð ðə ʃædoʊz, slɪpɪŋ θɹu ðə fɔɹəst, ðə munlaɪɾ ɔlmoʊst əz klɪɹ tə hɪz aɪz əz ðə laɪɾ ə ðə sʌn. ə koʊld wɪn ɹʌfəld ɪz θɪk fɝ, ən sʌɾənli bɹɔɾ ə sɛn ðət meɪɾ ɪz hækəlz stæn ən ɪz hɑɹt ɹeɪs wɪð ə heɪtʃɹəd ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən ðət fəɹ ðə nɛvɝbɹn. heɪtʃɹəd, ən ə ʃʊɹ nɑlədʒ ə dɛθ kʌmɪŋ.

The Forging of a Hammer He ran easily through the night in spite of the snow that covered the ground. He was one with the shadows, slipping through the forest, the moonlight almost as clear to his eyes as the light of the sun. A cold wind ruffled his thick fur, and suddenly brought a scent that made his hackles stand and his heart race with a hatred greater than that for the Neverborn. Hatred, and a sure knowledge of death coming.

ðəɹ wɝ noʊ tʃɔɪsəz tə bi meɪd, nɑt naʊ. hi ɹæn hɑɹɾɝ, təwɔɹd dɛθ.

There were no choices to be made, not now. He ran harder, toward death.

pɛɹɪn woʊk əbɹʌpli ɪn ðə dip dɑɹknəs bɪfɔɹ dɔn, bɪniθ wʌn ə ðə haɪ-wil səplaɪ kɑɹts. koʊl hæd sipt ɪndə hɪz boʊnz fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊn dɪspaɪɾ ɪz hɛvi fɝ-laɪn kloʊk ən tu blæŋkəts, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə fɪtfəl bɹiz, nɑt stʃɹɔŋ əɹ stɛɾi ɪnʌf tə bi kɔld ə laɪt wɪnd, bʌɾ aɪsi.

Perrin woke abruptly in the deep darkness before dawn, beneath one of the high-wheeled supply carts. Cold had seeped into his bones from the ground despite his heavy fur-lined cloak and two blankets, and there was a fitful breeze, not strong or steady enough to be called a light wind, but icy.

wən i skɹʌbd əɾ ɪz feɪs wɪð ɡɔntələɾəd hænz, fɹɔs kɹækəld ɪn ɪz ʃɔɹt bɪɹd. ət list ɪt sim nɑt tə hæv snoʊɾ ɛni mɔɹ dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt. tu ɔfən i hæɾ əweɪkən kʌvɝd wɪð ə dʌstɪŋ dɪspaɪt ðə ʃɛltɝ ʌv ə kɑɹt, ən snoʊfɔl meɪd θɪŋz dɪfəkəl fəɹ ðə skaʊts. hi wɪʃt i kəd spik wɪð ɛlaɪəs ðə seɪm weɪ hi tɔkt wɪð wʊlvz. ðən i wəd nɑɾ əv tə ɛndʒjʊɹ ðɪs ɛnləs weɪɾɪŋ.

When he scrubbed at his face with gauntleted hands, frost crackled in his short beard. At least it seemed not to have snowed any more during the night. Too often he had awakened covered with a dusting despite the shelter of a cart, and snowfall made things difficult for the scouts. He wished he could speak with Elyas the same way he talked with wolves. Then he would not have to endure this endless waiting.

wɪɹinəs klʌŋ tə hɪm laɪk ə sɛkən skɪn; hi kəd nɑt ɹikɔl wən i hæd læs hæɾ ə saʊnd naɪts slip. slip, əɹ ðə læk ʌv ɪt, simd ənɪmpɔɹɾənt ɛniweɪ. ðiz deɪz, oʊnli ðə hiɾ ʌv æŋɡɝ ɡeɪv ɪm ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ tə kip muvɪŋ.

Weariness clung to him like a second skin; he could not recall when he had last had a sound night's sleep. Sleep, or the lack of it, seemed unimportant anyway. These days, only the heat of anger gave him the strength to keep moving.

hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt wɑz ðə dʒɹim ðət hæd wækən hɪm. ɛvɹi naɪɾ i leɪ daʊn ɪkspɛktɪŋ naɪtmɛɹz, ən ɛvɹi naɪt ðeɪ keɪm. ɪn ðə wɝst, hi faʊn feɪl dɛd, əɹ nɛvɝ faʊn hɝ. ðoʊz woʊk ɪm ʌp ɪn ʃɪvɝɪŋ swɛts. ɛniθɪŋ lɛs hɔɹəbəl, hi slɛp θɹu, əɹ oʊnli hæf-woʊk wɪð tʃɹɑləks kʌɾɪŋ ɪm ʌp əlaɪv fəɹ ðə kʊkpɑɾ əɹ ə dʒɹæɡkɝ iɾɪŋ ɪz soʊl. ðɪs dʒɹim wɑz feɪɾɪŋ kwɪkli, ɪn ðə mænɝ ə dʒɹimz, jɛɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd biɪŋ ə wʊlf ən smɛlɪŋ. . . . wʌt? sʌmθɪŋ wʊlvz heɪɾəd mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ dɪd mɹdʒɹɑl. sʌmθɪŋ ə wʊlf nu wəd kɪl hɪm. ðə nɑlədʒ i hæd hæɾ ɪn ðə dʒɹim wɑz ɡɔn; oʊnli veɪɡ ɪmpɹɛʃənz ɹɪmeɪnd. hi hæd nɑt bɪn ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim, ðət ɹəflɛkʃən ə ðɪs wɝld wɛɹ dɛd wʊlvz lɪvd ɑn ən ðə lɪvɪŋ kəd ɡoʊ tə kənsʌl ðɛm. ðə wʊlf dʒɹim ɔlweɪz ɹɪmeɪn klɪɹ ɪn ɪz hɛɾ æftɝ i lɛft, wɛðɝ i hæd ɡɔn ðəɹ kɑnʃəsli əɹ nɑt. jɛt ðɪs dʒɹim stɪl simd ɹil, ən sʌmhaʊ ɝdʒənt. laɪɪŋ moʊʃənləs ɑn ɪz bæk, hi sɛn ɪz maɪn kwɛstɪŋ, filɪŋ fəɹ wʊlvz. hi hæd tʃɹaɪd juzɪŋ wʊlvz tə hɛlp ɪz hʌnt, tə noʊ əveɪl. kənvɪnsɪŋ əm tə teɪk ən ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ðə duɪŋz ə toʊlɛɡz wɑz dɪfəkəlt, tə seɪ ðə list. ðeɪ əvɔɪɾəd lɑɹdʒ pɑɹɾiz ə mɛn, ən fəɹ ðɛm, hæf ə dʌzən wɑz lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə steɪ klɪɹ ʌv. mɛn tʃeɪst əweɪ ɡeɪm, ən moʊs mɛn tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl ə wʊlf ɑn saɪt. hɪz θɔts faʊnd nʌθɪŋ, bʌt ðɛn, æftɝ ə taɪm, hi tʌtʃt wʊlvz, əɾ ə dɪstəns. haʊ fɑɹ, hi kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz laɪk kætʃɪŋ ə wɪspɝ ɔlmoʊst ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɪɹɪŋ. ə lɔŋ weɪ. ðət wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒ. dɪspaɪt skæɾɝd vɪlədʒəz ən mænɝz ən ivən ði əkeɪʒənəl taʊn, ðɪs wɑz pɹaɪm kʌntʃɹi fəɹ wʊlvz, əntʌtʃt fɔɹəs fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, wɪð plɛnti ʌv dɪɹ ən smɔlɝ ɡeɪm. ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ə fɔɹmæləɾi tə spikɪŋ wɪð ə pæk jə wɝ nɑt pɑɹɾ ʌv.

He did not think it was the dream that had wakened him. Every night he lay down expecting nightmares, and every night they came. In the worst, he found Faile dead, or never found her. Those woke him up in shivering sweats. Anything less horrible, he slept through, or only half-woke with Trollocs cutting him up alive for the cookpot or a Draghkar eating his soul. This dream was fading quickly, in the manner of dreams, yet he remembered being a wolf and smelling. . . . What? Something wolves hated more than they did Myrddraal. Something a wolf knew would kill him. The knowledge he had had in the dream was gone; only vague impressions remained. He had not been in the wolf dream, that reflection of this world where dead wolves lived on and the living could go to consult them. The wolf dream always remained clear in his head after he left, whether he had gone there consciously or not. Yet this dream still seemed real, and somehow urgent. Lying motionless on his back, he sent his mind questing, feeling for wolves. He had tried using wolves to help his hunt, to no avail. Convincing them to take an interest in the doings of twolegs was difficult, to say the least. They avoided large parties of men, and for them, half a dozen was large enough to stay clear of. Men chased away game, and most men tried to kill a wolf on sight. His thoughts found nothing, but then, after a time, he touched wolves, at a distance. How far, he could not be sure, but it was like catching a whisper almost on the edge of hearing. A long way. That was strange. Despite scattered villages and manors and even the occasional town, this was prime country for wolves, untouched forest for the most part, with plenty of deer and smaller game. There was always a formality to speaking with a pack you were not part of.

pəlaɪtli, hi sɛn ɪz neɪm əmʌŋ wʊlvz, jʌŋ bʊl, ʃɛɹɾ ɪz sɛnt, ən ɹəsiv ðɛɹz ɪn ɹɪplaɪ, lifhʌntɝ ən tɔl bɛɹ, waɪt teɪl ən fɛðɝ ən θʌndɝ mɪst, ə kæskeɪɾ ʌv ʌðɝz.

Politely, he sent his name among wolves, Young Bull, shared his scent, and received theirs in reply, Leafhunter and Tall Bear, White Tail and Feather and Thunder Mist, a cascade of others.

ɪt wɑz ə saɪzəbəl pæk, ən lifhʌntɝ, ə fimeɪl wɪð ə fil ə kwaɪət sɝɾənti, wɑz ðɛɹ liɾɝ.

It was a sizable pack, and Leafhunter, a female with a feel of quiet certainty, was their leader.

fɛðɝ, klɛvɝ ən ɪn ɪz pɹaɪm, wɑz əɹ meɪt. ðeɪ hæd hɝɾ ə jʌŋ bʊl, wɝ iɡɝ tə spik wɪð ðə fɹɛn ə ðə feɪbəld lɔŋ tuθ, ðə fɝs tu-lɛɡz u hæd lɝn tə spik wɪð wʊlvz æftɝ ə ɡæp ə taɪm ðət kæɹid ðə fil ʌv eɪdʒəz vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə mɪsts ə ðə pæst. ɪt wɑz ɔl ə tɔɹən ʌv ɪmədʒəz ən mɛmɹiz ə sɛns ðəɾ ɪz maɪn tɝn ɪndə wɝdz, əz ðə wɝdz i θɔt sʌmhaʊ bɪkeɪm ɪmədʒəz ən sɛns ðeɪ kəɾ ʌndɝstænd.

Feather, clever and in his prime, was her mate. They had heard of Young Bull, were eager to speak with the friend of the fabled Long Tooth, the first two-legs who had learned to speak with wolves after a gap of time that carried the feel of Ages vanished into the mists of the past. It was all a torrent of images and memories of scents that his mind turned into words, as the words he thought somehow became images and scents they could understand.

ðəɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ aɪ wɑnə lɝn, hi θɔt, wʌns ðə ɡɹiɾɪŋz wɝ dʌn. wʌt wəɾ ə wʊlf heɪt mɔɹ ðən ðə nɛvɝbɹn? hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹikɔl ðə sɛn fɹəm ðə dʒɹim, tə æd ðæt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɡɔn fɹəm ɪz mɛmɹi. sʌmθɪŋ ðəɾ ə wʊlf noʊz minz dɛθ.

There is something I want to learn, he thought, once the greetings were done. What would a wolf hate more than the Neverborn? He tried to recall the scent from the dream, to add that, but it was gone from his memory. Something that a wolf knows means death.

saɪləns ænsɝd hɪm, ən ə θɹɛɾ ə fɪɹ blɛndəd wɪð heɪtʃɹəɾ ən dɪtɝməneɪʃən ən ɹɪlʌktəns. hi hæd fɛl fɪɹ fɹəm wʊlvz bɪfɔɹ - əbʌv ɔl θɪŋz ðeɪ fɪɹd ðə waɪldfaɪɝ ðət ɹeɪs θɹu ə fɔɹəst, əɹ soʊ hi wʊɾə sɛd - bʌt ðɪs wɑz ðə pɹɪklɪŋ sɔɹɾ ə fɪɹ ðət meɪɾ ə mænz skɪn kɹɔl, meɪɾ ɪm ʃɪvɝ ən dʒʌmp ət θɪŋz ənsin. leɪst wɪð ðə ɹɛzəluʃən tə ɡoʊ ɑn noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt, ɪt fɛl kloʊs tə tɛɹɝ. wʊlvz nɛvɝ ɪkspɪɹiəns ðət kaɪndə dʒɹɛd. ɪksɛp ðət ðiz dɪd.

Silence answered him, and a thread of fear blended with hatred and determination and reluctance. He had felt fear from wolves before - above all things they feared the wildfire that raced through a forest, or so he would have said - but this was the prickling sort of fear that made a man's skin crawl, made him shiver and jump at things unseen. Laced with the resolution to go on no matter what, it felt close to terror. Wolves never experienced that kind of dread. Except that these did.

wʌn baɪ wʌn ðeɪ feɪɾəd fɹəm ɪz kɑnʃəsnəs, ə dɪlɪbɝɪɾ ækt ə ʃʌɾɪŋ ɪm aʊt, əntɪl oʊnli lifhʌntɝ ɹɪmeɪnd. ðə læs hʌn ɪz kʌmɪŋ, ʃi sɛɾ ət læst, ən ðən ʃi ɔlsoʊ wɑz ɡɔn. dɪɾ aɪ əfɛnd? hi sɛnt. aɪaɪaɪ dɪd, ɪt wɑz ɪn ɪɡnɝəns. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹɪplaɪ. ðiz wʊlvz, ət list, wəd nɑt spik wɪð ɪm əɡɛn, nɑɾ ɛni taɪm sun.

One by one they faded from his consciousness, a deliberate act of shutting him out, until only Leafhunter remained. The Last Hunt is coming, she said at last, and then she also was gone. Did I offend? he sent. III did, it was in ignorance. But there was no reply. These wolves, at least, would not speak with him again, not any time soon.

ðə læs hʌn ɪz kʌmɪŋ. ðət wɑz wʌt wʊlvz kɔl ðə læs bæɾəl, tɑɹmən ɡdən. ðeɪ nu ðeɪ wəd bi ðɛɹ, ət ðə faɪnəl kɑnfɹənteɪʃən bɪtwin ðə laɪɾ ən ðə ʃædoʊ, ðoʊ waɪ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ ɪkspleɪn. səm θɪŋz wɝ feɪɾɪd, əz ʃʊɹ əz ðə ɹaɪz ən fɔl ə ðə sʌn ən ðə mun, ən ɪt wɑz feɪɾɪd ðət mɛni wʊlvz wəd daɪ ɪn ðə læs hʌnt. wʌt ðeɪ fɪɹd wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. pɛɹɪn hæɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ sɛns ðəɾ i ɔlsoʊ hæd tə bi ðɛɹ, wɑz mɛn tə bi ət list, bʌɾ ɪf ðə læs bæɾəl keɪm sun, hi wəd nɑt bi. hi hæɾ ə dʒɑb ʌv wɝk ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm ðəɾ i kəd nɑt ʃɝk - wəd nɑt! -  ivən fəɹ tɑɹmən ɡdən.

The Last Hunt is coming. That was what wolves called the Last Battle, Tarmon Gai'don. They knew they would be there, at the final confrontation between the Light and the Shadow, though why was something they could not explain. Some things were fated, as sure as the rise and fall of the sun and the moon, and it was fated that many wolves would die in the Last Hunt. What they feared was something else. Perrin had a strong sense that he also had to be there, was meant to be at least, but if the Last Battle came soon, he would not be. He had a job of work in front of him that he could not shirk - would not! -  even for Tarmon Gai'don.

pʊɾɪŋ neɪmləs fɪɹz ən ðə læs bæɾəl əlaɪk aʊɾ ə hɪz maɪnd, hi fʌmbəld ɪz ɡɔnləts ɔf ən fɛlt ɪn ɪz koʊt pɑkət fəɹ ðə lɛŋθ ə ɹɔhaɪd kɔɹɾ i kɛp ðɛɹ. ɪn ə mɔɹnɪŋ ɹɪtʃuəl, hɪz fɪŋɡɝz meɪɾ ənʌðɝ nɑt məkænɪkli, ðən slɪd daʊn ðə kɔɹd, kaʊntɪŋ. twɛnti-tu nɑts. twɛnti-tu mɔɹnɪŋz sɪns feɪl wɑz kɪdnæpt.

Putting nameless fears and the Last Battle alike out of his mind, he fumbled his gauntlets off and felt in his coat pocket for the length of rawhide cord he kept there. In a morning ritual, his fingers made another knot mechanically, then slid down the cord, counting. Twenty-two knots. Twenty-two mornings since Faile was kidnapped.

ət ðə stɑɹt, hi hæd nɑt θɔt ðəɹ wɑz nid tə kip kaʊnt. ðət fɝs deɪ, hi hæd bɪlivd i wɑz koʊld ən nʌm bʌt foʊkəst, jɛt lʊkɪŋ bæk i kəd si hi hæd bɪn oʊvɝwɛlm baɪ ənbaʊn ɹeɪdʒ ən ə kənsumɪŋ nid tə faɪn ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ əz fæst əz pɑsəbəl. mɛn fɹəm ʌðɝ klænz hæd bɪn əmʌŋ ði il u hæd stoʊlən feɪl, jɛɾ ɑn ði ɛvəɾəns, moʊst wɝ ʃeɪɾoʊ, ən ðət wɑz haʊ hi θɔɾ ə ðɛm. ðə nid tə ɹɪp feɪl əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm, bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd bi hɝt, hæd ɡɹɪpt ɪm baɪ ðə θɹoʊt tɪl i ɔlmoʊs tʃoʊkt. hi wəd ɹɛskju ði ʌðɝ wɪmən kæptʃɝd wɪð hɝ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt səmtaɪmz i hæd tə lɪs ðɛɹ neɪmz ɪn ɪz hɛd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ i dɪd nɑt fɝɡɛɾ əm ɪntaɪɝli. æliændɝ mɛɹɪðə kɪɡɑɝɪn, kwin ʌv ɡildən, ən ɪz lidʒ wʊmən. ɪt stɪl simd ɔf-kɪltɝ tə hæv ɛniwʌn oʊθswɔɹn tə hɪm, ɪspɛʃli ə kwin - hi wɑz ə blæksmɪθ! hi hæd bɪn ə blæksmɪθ, wʌns - bʌɾ i hæd ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾiz təwɔɹɾ æliændɝ, ən ʃi wəd nɛvɝ əv bɪn ɪn deɪnʒɝ ɪksɛp fəɹ hɪm. beɪn ə ðə blæk ɹɑk ʃɝəɾ ən kiæɾ ə ðə stoʊnz ɹɪvɝ ɡoʊʃin, il meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ u hæd fɑloʊd feɪl tə ɡildən ən ɑmɑdɪʃiə. ðeɪ hæd feɪs tʃɹɑləks ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, əz wɛl, wən pɛɹɪn niɾəd ɛvɹi hæn ðət kəd ɹeɪz ə wɛpən, ən ðəɾ ɝn əm ðə ɹaɪt tə kɔl ɑn hɪm. ɹɛlə ʃiɡoʊ ən lətʃəl ɑldɔɹwɪn, tu fulɪʃ jʌŋ wɪmən u θɔt ðeɪ kəd lɝn tə bi il, əɹ səm stʃɹeɪnʒ vɝʒən ʌv il. ðeɪ wɝ oʊθswɔɹn tə feɪl, ən soʊ wɑz meɪaɪɡdɪn dɔɹleɪn, ə pɛniləs ɹɛfjʊdʒi feɪl hæd teɪkən ʌndɝ əɹ wɪŋ əz wʌn ə hɝ meɪdz. hi kəd nɑɾ əbændən feɪlz pipəl. feɪl ni bæʃɪɹ teɪbɑɹə. ðə lɪɾəni keɪm bæk tə hɝ, hɪz waɪf, ðə bɹɛθ ə hɪz laɪf. wɪð ə ɡɹoʊn, hi klʌtʃt ðə kɔɹd soʊ taɪtli ðət ðə nɑts ɪmpɹɛs ðɛmsɛlvz peɪnfəli ɑn ə hæn hɑɹɾənd baɪ lɔŋ deɪz swɪŋɪŋ ðə hæmɝ əɾ ə fɔɹdʒ. laɪt, twɛnti-tu deɪz!

At the start, he had not thought there was need to keep count. That first day, he had believed he was cold and numb but focused, yet looking back he could see he had been overwhelmed by unbound rage and a consuming need to find the Shaido as fast as possible. Men from other clans had been among the Aiel who had stolen Faile, yet on the evidence, most were Shaido, and that was how he thought of them. The need to rip Faile away from them, before she could be hurt, had gripped him by the throat till he almost choked. He would rescue the other women captured with her, of course, but sometimes he had to list their names in his head to make sure he did not forget them entirely. Alliandre Maritha Kigarin, Queen of Ghealdan, and his liege woman. It still seemed off-kilter to have anyone oathsworn to him, especially a queen - he was a blacksmith! He had been a blacksmith, once - but he had responsibilities toward Alliandre, and she would never have been in danger except for him. Bain of the Black Rock Shaarad and Chiad of the Stones River Goshien, Aiel Maidens of the Spear who had followed Faile to Ghealdan and Amadicia. They had faced Trollocs in the Two Rivers, as well, when Perrin needed every hand that could raise a weapon, and that earned them the right to call on him. Arrela Shiego and Lacile Aldorwin, two foolish young women who thought they could learn to be Aiel, or some strange version of Aiel. They were oathsworn to Faile, and so was Maighdin Dorlain, a penniless refugee Faile had taken under her wing as one of her maids. He could not abandon Faile's people. Faile ni Bashere t'Aybara. The litany came back to her, his wife, the breath of his life. With a groan, he clutched the cord so tightly that the knots impressed themselves painfully on a hand hardened by long days swinging the hammer at a forge. Light, twenty-two days!

wɝkɪŋ aɪɝn hæd tɔɾ ɪm ðət heɪst ɹuən mɛɾəl, bʌɾ ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, hi hæd bɪn heɪsti, tʃɹævlɪŋ saʊθwɝd θɹu ɡeɪtweɪz kɹieɪɾəd baɪ ɡɹeɪɾi ən nild, ðə tu æʃəmən, tə wɛɹ ðə fɑɹðəs tʃɹeɪsəz ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hæd bɪn faʊnd, ðən lipɪŋ saʊθ əɡɛn, ðə dɝɛkʃən ðɛɹ tʃɹæks wɛnt, əz sun əz ði æʃəmən kəd meɪk mɔɹ ɡeɪtweɪz. fɹɛɾɪŋ ɛvɹi aʊɝ ɪt tʊk əm tə ɹɛs fɹəm meɪkɪŋ ðə fɝst ən hoʊldɪŋ əm oʊpən lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn tə pæs θɹu, hɪz maɪnd wɑz iɾən ʌp wɪð fɹiɪŋ feɪl əɾ ɛni kɑst. wʌɾ i faʊnd wɝ deɪz ʌv ɪnkɹisɪŋ peɪn əz ðə skaʊts spɹɛd fɑɹðɝ ən fɑɹðɝ θɹu ʌnɪnhæbəɾɪd wɪldɝnəs wɪθaʊt loʊkeɪɾɪŋ ðə slaɪɾəst saɪn ðəɾ ɛniwʌn hæd bɪn ðət weɪ bɪfɔɹ, əntɪl i nu hi hæd tə ɹitʃɹeɪs ɪz pæθ, fɹɪɾɝɪŋ əweɪ mɔɹ deɪz tə kʌvɝ ɡɹaʊn ði æʃəmən hæd teɪkən ɪm əkɹɔs ɪn ə stɛp, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ɛni ɪndəkeɪʃən ʌv wɛɹ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hæd tɝn əsaɪd.

Working iron had taught him that haste ruined metal, but in the beginning, he had been hasty, Traveling southward through gateways created by Grady and Neald, the two Asha'man, to where the farthest traces of the Shaido had been found, then leaping south again, the direction their tracks went, as soon as the Asha'man could make more gateways. Fretting every hour it took them to rest from making the first and holding them open long enough for everyone to pass through, his mind was eaten up with freeing Faile at any cost. What he found were days of increasing pain as the scouts spread farther and farther through uninhabited wilderness without locating the slightest sign that anyone had been that way before, until he knew he had to retrace his path, frittering away more days to cover ground the Asha'man had taken him across in a step, searching for any indication of where the Shaido had turned aside.

hi ʃʊɾə noʊn ðeɪ wəd tɝn. saʊθ tʊk əm təwɔɹd wɔɹmɝ lænz, wɪθaʊt ðə snoʊ ðət sim soʊ stʃɹeɪnʒ tə il, jɛɾ ɪt tʊk əm kloʊsɝ tə ðə sintʃæn ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, əz wɛl. hi nu əbaʊt ðə sintʃæn, ən i ʃʊɾə ɪkspɛktəd ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ tə lɝn! ðeɪ wɝ æftɝ pɪlɪdʒ, nɑɾ ə faɪt wɪð sintʃæn ən deɪmeɪn. deɪz ə sloʊ mɑɹtʃɪŋ wɪð ðə skaʊts fænɪŋ aʊɾ əhɛd, deɪz wən fɔlɪŋ snoʊ blaɪndɪɾ ivən ði il ən fɔɹst əm ɔl tə ə tʃeɪfɪŋ hɔlt, əntɪl faɪnəli dʒɑndɪn bæɹən faʊn ə tʃɹi skɹeɪp baɪ ə wæɡən ən ɛlaɪəs dʌɡ ə bɹoʊkən il spɪɹ ʃæft fɹəm bɪniθ ðə snoʊ. ən pɛɹɪn ət læs tɝn ist, ət moʊs tu deɪz saʊθ ʌv wɛɹ i hæd tʃɹævəl tə ðə fɝs taɪm. hi hæd wɑntəd tə haʊl wən i ɹilaɪz ðæt, jɛɾ i kɛpt ə taɪt hoʊld ɑn hɪmsɛlf. hi kəd nɑt ɡɪv weɪ, nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ən ɪntʃ, nɑt wən feɪl wɑz dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn hɪm. ðət wɑz wən i bɪɡæn tə hʌzbən ɪz æŋɡɝ, bɪɡæn tə fɔɹdʒ ɪt.

He should have known they would turn. South took them toward warmer lands, without the snow that seemed so strange to Aiel, yet it took them closer to the Seanchan in Ebou Dar, as well. He knew about the Seanchan, and he should have expected the Shaido to learn! They were after pillage, not a fight with Seanchan and damane. Days of slow marching with the scouts fanning out ahead, days when falling snow blinded even the Aiel and forced them all to a chafing halt, until finally Jondyn Barran found a tree scraped by a wagon and Elyas dug a broken Aiel spear shaft from beneath the snow. And Perrin at last turned east, at most two days south of where he had Traveled to the first time. He had wanted to howl when he realized that, yet he kept a tight hold on himself. He could not give way, not so much as an inch, not when Faile was depending on him. That was when he began to husband his anger, began to forge it.

hɝ kɪdnæpɝz hæd ɡeɪn ə lɔŋ lɛd kəz i wɑz heɪsti, bʌt sɪns ðɛn, hi hæd bɪn əz kɛɹfəl əz i hæd bɪn ɪn ə smɪθi. hɪz æŋɡɝ wɑz hɑɹɾənd ən ʃeɪp tə ə pɝpəs. sɪns faɪndɪŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊz tʃɹeɪl əɡɛn, hi hæd tʃɹævəl noʊ fɑɹðɝ ɪn wʌn dʒʌmp ðən ðə skaʊts kəd ɡoʊ ən kʌm bɪtwin sʌnɹaɪz ən sʌnsɛt, ən ɪt wɑz wɛl ðəɾ i hæd bɪn kɔʃəs, kəz ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ tʃeɪnʒd dɝɛkʃənz sʌɾənli sɛvɹəl taɪmz, zɪɡzæɡɪŋ ɔlmoʊst əz ðoʊ ðeɪ kəd nɑt dɪsaɪɾ ɑn ə dɛstəneɪʃən. əɹ meɪbi ðeɪ hæd tɝn tə dʒɔɪn ʌðɝz ə ðɛɹ kaɪnd. ɔl i hæd tə ɡoʊ baɪ wɝ oʊl tʃɹeɪsəz, oʊl kæmps bɛɹid baɪ snoʊ, jɛɾ ɔl ə ðə skaʊts əɡɹid ðə ʃeɪɾoʊz nʌmbɝz hæd swoʊlən. ðəɹ hæd tə bi ət lis tu əɹ θɹi sɛps təɡɛðɝ, meɪbi mɔɹ, ə fɔɹməɾəbəl kwɔɹi tə hʌnt. sloʊli bʌt ʃʊɹli, ðoʊ, hi hæd bɪɡʌn oʊvɝteɪkɪŋ ðɛm. ðət wɑz wʌt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt.

Her kidnappers had gained a long lead because he was hasty, but since then, he had been as careful as he had been in a smithy. His anger was hardened and shaped to a purpose. Since finding the Shaido's trail again, he had Traveled no farther in one jump than the scouts could go and come between sunrise and sunset, and it was well that he had been cautious, because the Shaido changed directions suddenly several times, zigzagging almost as though they could not decide on a destination. Or maybe they had turned to joined others of their kind. All he had to go by were old traces, old camps buried by snow, yet all of the scouts agreed the Shaido's numbers had swollen. There had to be at least two or three septs together, maybe more, a formidable quarry to hunt. Slowly but surely, though, he had begun overtaking them. That was what was important.

ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kʌvɝd mɔɹ ɡɹaʊn ɑn ðə mɑɹtʃ ðən i wʊɾə θɔt pɑsəbəl, ɡɪvən ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz ən ðə snoʊ, jɛt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sim tə kɛɹ wɛðɝ ɛniwʌn wɑz tʃɹækɪŋ ðɛm. pɝhæps ðeɪ bɪliv noʊ wʌn dɛɹd. səmtaɪmz ðeɪ hæd kæmp sɛvɹəl deɪz ɪn wʌn spɑt. æŋɡɝ fɔɹdʒ tə ə pɝpəs.

The Shaido covered more ground on the march than he would have thought possible, given their numbers and the snow, yet they did not seem to care whether anyone was tracking them. Perhaps they believed no one dared. Sometimes they had camped several days in one spot. Anger forged to a purpose.

ɹuən vɪlədʒəz ən smɔl taʊnz ən ɪsteɪts lɪɾɝd ðə ʃeɪɾoʊz pæθ əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ hjumən loʊkəsts, stɔɹhaʊzəz ən væljəbəlz luɾəd, mɛn ən wɪmən kæɹiɾ ɔf əlɔŋ wɪð ðə laɪvstɑk. ɔfən noʊ wʌn ɹɪmeɪn baɪ ðə taɪm i ɝaɪvd, oʊnli ɛmpti haʊzɪz, ðə pipəl sikɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ fəɹ fud tə sɝvaɪv əntɪl spɹɪŋ. hi hæd kɹɔs ði ɪldɑɹ ɪndə ɔltɑɹə wɛɹ ə smɔl fɛɹi juz baɪ pɛdlɝz ən loʊkəl fɑɹmɝz, nɑt mɝtʃəns, wʌns ɹæn bɪtwin tu vɪlədʒəz ɑn ðə fɔɹəstəd ɹɪvɝbɑŋks. haʊ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hæd ɡɑɾən əkɹɔs, hi dɪd nɑt noʊ, bʌɾ i hæd ði æʃəmən meɪk ɡeɪtweɪz. ɔl ðət ɹɪmeɪn ə ðə fɛɹi wɝ ðə ɹʌf stoʊn lændɪŋz ɑn iðɝ bæŋk, ən ðə fju ənbɝn stʃɹʌktʃɝz wɝ dɪzɝɾɪd ɪksɛp fəɹ θɹi slæt-ɹɪb fɛɹəl dɑɡz ðət slʌŋk əweɪ ət ðə saɪɾ ə hjumənz. æŋɡɝ hɑɹɾənd ən ʃeɪp fəɹ ə hæmɝ.

Ruined villages and small towns and estates littered the Shaido's path as if they were human locusts, storehouses and valuables looted, men and women carried off along with the livestock. Often no one remained by the time he arrived, only empty houses, the people seeking somewhere for food to survive until spring. He had crossed the Eldar into Altara where a small ferry used by peddlers and local farmers, not merchants, once ran between two villages on the forested riverbanks. How the Shaido had gotten across, he did not know, but he had the Asha'man make gateways. All that remained of the ferry were the rough stone landings on either bank, and the few unburned structures were deserted except for three slat-ribbed feral dogs that slunk away at the sight of humans. Anger hardened and shaped for a hammer.

jɛstɝdeɪ mɔɹnɪŋ, hi hæd kʌm tə ə taɪni vɪlədʒ wɛɹ ə dʌbəl hændfʊl ə stʌnd, dɝɾi-feɪst pipəl hæd stɛɹɾ ət ðə hʌnʒɹədz ə lænsɝz ən boʊmən ɹaɪɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə fɔɹəst ət fɝs laɪt bɪhaɪn ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl ə meɪnɛðɝən ən ðə kɹɪmzən wʊlfzhɛd, ðə sɪlvɝ stɑɹz ʌv ɡildən ən ðə ɡoʊldən hɔk ə min, fɑloʊd baɪ lɔŋ laɪnz ə haɪ-wil kɑɹts ən stʃɹɪŋz ə ɹimaʊns. ət fɝst saɪɾ ʌv ɡɔl ən ði ʌðɝ il, ðoʊz pipəl oʊvɝkeɪm ðɛɹ pɝæləsəs ən bɪɡæn ɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ ðə tʃɹiz ɪn pænɪk.

Yesterday morning, he had come to a tiny village where a double handful of stunned, dirty-faced people had stared at the hundreds of lancers and bowmen riding out of the forest at first light behind the Red Eagle of Manetheren and the crimson Wolfshead, the Silver Stars of Ghealdan and the Golden Hawk of Mayene, followed by long lines of high-wheeled carts and strings of remounts. At first sight of Gaul and the other Aiel, those people overcame their paralysis and began running for the trees in panic.

kætʃɪŋ ə fju tə ænsɝ kwɛstʃənz hæd bɪn dɪfəkəlt; ðeɪ wɝ ɹɛɾi tə ɹʌn ðɛmsɛlvz tə dɛθ ɹæðɝ ðən lɛɾ ən il nɪɹ. bɹaɪɾən hæd kənsɪstəɾ ʌv oʊnli ə dʌzən fæmliz, bʌt ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hæd kæɹiɾ ɔf naɪn jʌŋ mɛn ən wɪmən fɹəm ðɛɹ, əlɔŋ wɪð ɔl ə ðɛɹ ænəməlz, oʊnli tu deɪz əɡoʊ. tu deɪz. ə hæmɝ wɑz ə tul wɪð ə pɝpəs, ən ə tɑɹɡət.

Catching a few to answer questions had been difficult; they were ready to run themselves to death rather than let an Aiel near. Brytan had consisted of only a dozen families, but the Shaido had carried off nine young men and women from there, along with all of their animals, only two days ago. Two days. A hammer was a tool with a purpose, and a target.

hi nu hi hæd tə bi kɛɹfəl, əɹ luz feɪl fɝɛvɝ, bʌt biɪŋ tu kɛɹfəl kəd luz hɝ, tu.

He knew he had to be careful, or lose Faile forever, but being too careful could lose her, too.

ɝli jɛstɝdeɪ hi hæd toʊl ðoʊz u wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ əhɛd tə skaʊt ðət ðeɪ wɝ tə ɡoʊ fɑɹðɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ, pʊʃ ɑn hɑɹɾɝ, ɹɪtɝnɪŋ oʊnli wɪð ə fʊl tɝn ə ðə sʌn ənlɛs ðeɪ faʊn ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ sunɝ. ɪn ə lɪɾəl waɪl ðə sʌn wəd ɹaɪz, ən ət moʊst ə fju aʊɝz æftɝ ðæt, ɛlaɪəs ən ɡɔl ən ði ʌðɝz wəd ɹɪtɝn, ðə meɪɾənz ən tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn i nu kəd tʃɹæk ə ʃædoʊ əkɹɔs wɔɾɝ. əz fæst əz ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ muvd, ðə skaʊts kəd muv fæstɝ. ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɛnkʌmbɝd wɪð fæmliz ən wæɡənz ən kæptɪvz. ðɪs taɪm, ðeɪ wəd bi eɪbəl tə tɛl ɪm ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ. ðeɪ wʊd. hi nu ɪɾ ɪn ɪz boʊnz. ðə sɝɾənti floʊɾ ɪn ɪz veɪnz. hi wəd faɪn feɪl ən fɹi hɝ. ðət keɪm bɪfɔɹ ɛniθɪŋ, ivən lɪvɪŋ, soʊ lɔŋ əz i lɪv lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə əkɑmplɪʃ ɪt, jɛɾ i wɑz ə hæmɝ, naʊ, ən ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛni weɪ tə əkɑmplɪʃ ɪt, ɛni weɪ əɾ ɔl, hi ɪntɛndəd tə hæmɝ ðiz ʃeɪɾoʊ ɪndə skɹæp.

Early yesterday he had told those who were going ahead to scout that they were to go farther than before, push on harder, returning only with a full turn of the sun unless they found the Shaido sooner. In a little while the sun would rise, and at most a few hours after that, Elyas and Gaul and the others would return, the Maidens and Two Rivers men he knew could track a shadow across water. As fast as the Shaido moved, the scouts could move faster. They were not encumbered with families and wagons and captives. This time, they would be able to tell him exactly where the Shaido were. They would. He knew it in his bones. The certainty flowed in his veins. He would find Faile and free her. That came before anything, even living, so long as he lived long enough to accomplish it, yet he was a hammer, now, and if there was any way to accomplish it, any way at all, he intended to hammer these Shaido into scrap.

tɔsɪŋ ðə blæŋkəts əsaɪd, pɛɹɪn tʌɡd ɪz ɡɔnləts bæk ɑn, ɡæðɝɾ ɪz æks fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt leɪ bɪsaɪd hɪm, ə hæf-mun bleɪd bæləns baɪ ə hɛvi spaɪk, ən ɹoʊld aʊɾ ɪndə ði oʊpən, ɹaɪzɪŋ tə hɪz fiɾ ɑn tʃɹæmpəld, fɹoʊzən snoʊ. kɑɹts stʊɾ ɔl ɝaʊn ɪm ɪn ɹoʊz, ɪn wʌt hæd bɪn bɹaɪɾənz filz. ði ɝaɪvəl ə mɔɹ stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, soʊ mɛni, ən ɑɹmd, wɪð ðɛɹ fɔɹən bænɝz, hæd bɪn mɔɹ ðən ðə sɝvaɪvɝz ə ðə lɪɾəl vɪlədʒ kəɾ əbzɔɹb. əz sun əz pɛɹɪn wəd lɛt ðɛm, ðə pɪɾəfəl ɹɛmnən hæd flɛɾ ɪndə ðə fɔɹəst, kæɹiɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ kəɾ ɑn ðɛɹ bæks ən ɑn dʒɹæɡslɛdz. ðeɪ hæd ɹʌn əz hɑɹɾ əz ɪf pɛɹɪn wɑz ənʌðɝ ʃeɪɾoʊ, nɑt lʊkɪŋ bæk fəɹ fɪɹ i wɑz fɑloʊɪŋ ðɛm. əz i slɪp ði æks hæf θɹu ðə θɪk lup ɑn ɪz bɛlt, ə dipɝ ʃædoʊ bɪsaɪɾ ə nɪɹbaɪ kɑɹt ɡɹu tɔlɝ ən ɹizɑlvd ɪndə ə mæn swɑðd ɪn ə kloʊk ðət sim blæk ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt sɝpɹaɪzd; ðə nɪɹbaɪ hɔɹslaɪnz θɪkən ði ɛɹ wɪð ðə smɛl ə sɛvɹəl θaʊzən ænəməlz, maʊns ən ɹimaʊns ən kɑɹt hɔɹsəz, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə swit stɪŋk ə hɔɹs dʌŋ, bʌɾ i stɪl hæd kɑt ði ʌðɝz sɛn ɑn weɪkɪŋ.

Tossing the blankets aside, Perrin tugged his gauntlets back on, gathered his axe from where it lay beside him, a half-moon blade balanced by a heavy spike, and rolled out into the open, rising to his feet on trampled, frozen snow. Carts stood all around him in rows, in what had been Brytan's fields. The arrival of more strangers, so many, and armed, with their foreign banners, had been more than the survivors of the little village could absorb. As soon as Perrin would let them, the pitiful remnant had fled into the forest, carrying what they could on their backs and on dragsleds. They had run as hard as if Perrin was another Shaido, not looking back for fear he was following them. As he slipped the axe haft through the thick loop on his belt, a deeper shadow beside a nearby cart grew taller and resolved into a man swathed in a cloak that seemed black in the darkness. Perrin was not surprised; the nearby horselines thickened the air with the smell of several thousand animals, mounts and remounts and cart horses, not to mention the sweet stink of horse dung, but he still had caught the other's scent on waking.

mæn smɛl ɔlweɪz stʊɾ aʊt. bɪsaɪdz, ɛɹæm wɑz ɔlweɪz ðəɹ wən pɛɹɪn woʊk, weɪɾɪŋ. ə weɪnɪŋ sɪkəl mun loʊ ɪn ðə skaɪ stɪl ɡeɪv ɪnʌf laɪt fəɹ ɪm tə meɪk aʊt ði ʌðɝ mænz feɪs, ɪf nɑt klɪɹli, ən ðə bɹæspəməl hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd slæntɪŋ ʌp pæst ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ɛɹæm hæd bɪn ə tɪŋkɝ wʌns, bʌt pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i wəd bi əɡɛn, ivən ɪf i dɪd wɛɹ ə bɹaɪtli stʃɹaɪp tɪŋkɝ koʊt.

Man smell always stood out. Besides, Aram was always there when Perrin woke, waiting. A waning sickle moon low in the sky still gave enough light for him to make out the other man's face, if not clearly, and the brasspommeled hilt of his sword slanting up past his shoulder. Aram had been a Tinker once, but Perrin did not think he would be again, even if he did wear a brightly striped Tinker coat.

ðəɹ wɑz ə fɹaʊnɪŋ hɑɹdnəs əbaʊɾ ɛɹæm naʊ ðət mun ʃædoʊz kəd nɑt haɪd. hi stʊɾ əz ðoʊ ɹɛɾi tə dʒɹɔ ðət sɔɹd, ən sɪns feɪl wɑz teɪkən, æŋɡɝ simd ə pɝmənən pɑɹɾ ə hɪz sɛnt. ə ɡɹeɪt dil hæd tʃeɪnʒd wən feɪl wɑz teɪkən. ɛniweɪ, pɛɹɪn ʌndɝstʊɾ æŋɡɝ. hi hæd nɑt, nɑt ɹɪli, bɪfɔɹ feɪl wɑz teɪkən.

There was a frowning hardness about Aram now that moon shadows could not hide. He stood as though ready to draw that sword, and since Faile was taken, anger seemed a permanent part of his scent. A great deal had changed when Faile was taken. Anyway, Perrin understood anger. He had not, not really, before Faile was taken.

"ðeɪ wɑnə si ju, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," ɛɹæm sɛd, dʒɝkɪŋ ɪz hɛd təwɔɹd tu dɪm fɔɹmz fɑɹðɝ əweɪ bɪtwin ðə laɪnz ə kɑɹts. ðə wɝdz keɪm aʊɾ ɪn ə feɪn mɪst ɪn ðə koʊld ɛɹ. "aɪ toʊld əm tə lɛt jə slip." ɪt wɑz ə fɔlt ɛɹæm hæd, lʊkɪŋ æftɝ ɪm tu mʌtʃ, ʌnəskt.

"They want to see you, Lord Perrin," Aram said, jerking his head toward two dim forms farther away between the lines of carts. The words came out in a faint mist in the cold air. "I told them to let you sleep." It was a fault Aram had, looking after him too much, unasked.

tɛstɪŋ ði ɛɹ, pɛɹɪn sɛpɝeɪɾəd aʊt ðə sɛns ə ðoʊz tu ʃædoʊz fɹəm ðə mæskɪŋ smɛl ə ðə hɔɹsəz. "aɪl si ðɛm naʊ. hæv stɛpɝ ɹɛɾid fəɹ mi, ɛɹæm." hi tʃɹaɪd tə bi ɪn ðə sæɾəl bɪfɔɹ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə kæmp woʊk. pɑɹtli ðət wɑz kəz stændɪŋ stɪl fəɹ lɔŋ sim bɪɑn hɪm. stændɪŋ stɪl wɑz nɑt kætʃɪŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ. pɑɹtli ɪt wɑz tə əvɔɪd hævɪŋ tə ʃɛɹ ɛniwʌnz kʌmpəni hi kəɾ əvɔɪd. hi wʊɾə ɡɔn aʊt wɪð ðə skaʊts hɪmsɛlf ɪf ðə mɛn ən wɪmən ɔlɹɛɾi duɪŋ ðət dʒɑb wɝ nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ əɾ ɪt ðən hi.

Testing the air, Perrin separated out the scents of those two shadows from the masking smell of the horses. "I'll see them now. Have Stepper readied for me, Aram." He tried to be in the saddle before the rest of the camp woke. Partly that was because standing still for long seemed beyond him. Standing still was not catching the Shaido. Partly it was to avoid having to share anyone's company he could avoid. He would have gone out with the scouts himself if the men and women already doing that job were not so much better at it than he.

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd." ə dʒæədnəs ɛntɝɾ ɛɹæmz sɛn əz i tʃɹʌdʒd əweɪ əkɹɔs ðə snoʊ, bʌt pɛɹɪn bɛɹli noʊɾəd ɪt. oʊnli sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt wəd meɪk sɛbæn beɪlwɝ ɹut hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ə hɪz blæŋkəts ɪn ðə dɑɹk, ən əz fəɹ sɛlən dɛɹənɡəl. . . . beɪlwɝ əpɪɹd skɪni ivən ɪn ə bʌlki kloʊk, hɪz pɪntʃt feɪs ɔl bʌt hɪɾən ɪn ðə dip hʊd. hæɾ i stʊd stʃɹeɪɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə hʌntʃɪŋ, hi stɪl wʊɾə bɪn ət moʊst ə hæn tɔlɝ ðən ðə kɛɹhinɪn wʊmən, hu wɑz nɑt tɔl. wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz ɹæpt ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf, hi wɑz hɑpɪŋ fɹəm wʌn fʊt tə ði ʌðɝ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əvɔɪd ðə koʊl ðət mʌs bi soʊkɪŋ θɹu hɪz buts. sɛlənd, ɪn ə mænz dɑɹk koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz, meɪɾ ə ɡʊɾ ɛfɝɾ əɾ ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə tɛmpɹətʃɝ dɪspaɪt ðə fɛðɝi waɪt ðət mɑɹkt ɛvɹi bɹɛθ. ʃi wɑz ʃɪvɝɪŋ, bʌt mænədʒ tə swæɡɝ stændɪŋ stɪl, wɪð wʌn saɪɾ ə hɝ kloʊk θɹoʊn bæk ən ə ɡlʌv hæn ɑn ðə hɪlt ə hɝ sɔɹd. ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk wɑz loʊɝd, tu, ɪkspoʊzɪŋ hɛɹ kʌt ʃɔɹɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə teɪl ɪn ðə bæk ðət wɑz taɪɾ ət ðə neɪp ə hɝ nɛk wɪð ə dɑɹk ɹɪbən. sɛlənd wɑz ðə liɾɝ ə ðoʊz fulz u wɑntəd tə bi ɪməteɪʃən il, il u kæɹid sɔɹdz. hɝ sɛnt wɑz sɑft ən θɪk, laɪk ə dʒɛli. ʃi wɑz wɝid. beɪlwɝ smɛld . . . ɪntɛnt . . . bʌt ðɛn, hi nɪɹli ɔlweɪz dɪd, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz nɛvɝ ɛni hit tə hɪz ɪntɛnsəɾi, oʊnli foʊkəs.

"Yes, my Lord." A jaggedness entered Aram's scent as he trudged away across the snow, but Perrin barely noted it. Only something important would make Sebban Balwer root himself out of his blankets in the dark, and as for Selande Darengil. . . . Balwer appeared skinny even in a bulky cloak, his pinched face all but hidden in the deep hood. Had he stood straight instead of hunching, he still would have been at most a hand taller than the Cairhienin woman, who was not tall. With his arms wrapped around himself, he was hopping from one foot to the other, trying to avoid the cold that must be soaking through his boots. Selande, in a man's dark coat and breeches, made a good effort at ignoring the temperature despite the feathery white that marked every breath. She was shivering, but managed to swagger standing still, with one side of her cloak thrown back and a gloved hand on the hilt of her sword. The hood of her cloak was lowered, too, exposing hair cut short except for the tail in the back that was tied at the nape of her neck with a dark ribbon. Selande was the leader of those fools who wanted to be imitation Aiel, Aiel who carried swords. Her scent was soft and thick, like a jelly. She was worried. Balwer smelled . . . intent . . . but then, he nearly always did, though there was never any heat to his intensity, only focus.

ðə skɪni lɪɾəl mæn stɑp hɑpɪŋ tə meɪk ə stɪf, hɝid baʊ. "ðə leɪɾi sɛlən əz nuz aɪ θɪŋk jə ʃəd hɪɹ fɹəm əɹ lɪps, maɪ lɔɹd." beɪlwɝz θɪn vɔɪs wɑz dʒɹaɪ ən pɹɪsaɪs, dʒʌs laɪk ɪts oʊnɝ. hi wəd saʊn ðə seɪm wɪð ɪz nɛk ɑn ə hɛdzmənz blɑk. "maɪ leɪɾi, ɪf jə wʊd?" hi wɑz oʊnli ə sɛkɹətɛɹi - feɪlz sɛkɹətɛɹi, ən pɛɹɪnz - ə fʌsi sɛlf-ɪfeɪsɪŋ fɛloʊ fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, ən sɛlənd wɑz ə noʊbəlwʊmən, bʌt beɪlwɝ meɪd ðət mɔɹ ðən ə ɹɪkwɛst.

The skinny little man stopped hopping to make a stiff, hurried bow. "The Lady Selande has news I think you should hear from her lips, my Lord." Balwer's thin voice was dry and precise, just like its owner. He would sound the same with his neck on a headsman's block. "My Lady, if you would?" He was only a secretary - Faile's secretary, and Perrin's - a fussy self-effacing fellow for the most part, and Selande was a noblewoman, but Balwer made that more than a request.

ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə ʃɑɹp saɪdweɪz ɡlæns, ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ sɔɹd, ən pɛɹɪn tɛns tə ɡɹæb hɝ. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi wəɾ æktʃəli  dʒɹɔ ɑn ðə mæn, bʌt ðən əɡɛn, hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪnʌf ə hɝ, əɹ ɛni ʌv əɹ ɹɪdɪkjələs fɹɛnz, tə pʊɾ ɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃən. beɪlwɝ mɪɹli wɑtʃt hɝ, hɪz hɛd tɪltəd tə wʌn saɪd, ən ɪz smɛl kæɹiɾ ɪmpeɪʃəns, nɑt kənsɝn.

She gave him a sharp sideways glance, shifting her sword, and Perrin tensed to grab her. He did not think she would actually draw on the man, but then again, he was not sure enough of her, or any of her ridiculous friends, to put it out of the question. Balwer merely watched her, his head tilted to one side, and his smell carried impatience, not concern.

wɪð ə tɔs ə hɝ hɛd, sɛlən tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən tə pɛɹɪn. "aɪ si ju, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz," ʃi bɪɡæn ɪn ðə kɹɪsp æksɛns ə kɛɹhin, bʌt, əwɛɹ ðəɾ i hæd lɪɾəl peɪʃəns fəɹ əɹ pɹitɛn il fɔɹmæləɾi, ʃi hɝiɾ ɑn. "aɪ hæv lɝn θɹi θɪŋz tənaɪt. fɝst, ðə list ɪmpɔɹɾənt, hɑviɑɹ ɹipɔɹɾəd ðət mæsimə sɛn ənʌðɝ ɹaɪɾɝ bæk təwɔɹɾ ɑmɑdɪʃiə jɛstɝdeɪ. nɛɹiən tʃɹaɪd tə fɑloʊ, bʌt lɔs hɪm."

With a toss of her head, Selande turned her attention to Perrin. "I see you, Lord Perrin Goldeneyes," she began in the crisp accents of Cairhien, but, aware that he had little patience for her pretend Aiel formality, she hurried on. "I have learned three things tonight. First, the least important, Haviar reported that Masema sent another rider back toward Amadicia yesterday. Nerion tried to follow, but lost him."

"tɛl nɛɹiən aɪ sɛɾ i ɪzən tə fɑloʊ ɛnibəɾi," pɛɹɪn toʊld əɹ ʃɑɹpli. "æn tɛl hɑviɑɹ ðə seɪm. ðeɪ ʃəd noʊ ðæt! ðeɪ ɑɹ tə wɑtʃ, lɪsən, ən ɹipɔɹt wʌt ðeɪ si ən hɪɹ, noʊ mɔɹ. dʒju ʌndɝstæn mi?" sɛlənd ɡeɪv ə kwɪk nɑd, ə θɔɹn ə fɪɹ ɛntɝɪŋ əɹ sɛn fəɹ ə moʊmənt. fɪɹ ə hɪm, pɛɹɪn səpoʊzd, fɪɹ ðəɾ i wɑz æŋɡɹi wɪð hɝ. jɛloʊ aɪz ɑn ə mæn meɪd səm pipəl ənizi.

"Tell Nerion I said he isn't to follow anybody," Perrin told her sharply. "And tell Haviar the same. They should know that! They are to watch, listen, and report what they see and hear, no more. Do you understand me?" Selande gave a quick nod, a thorn of fear entering her scent for a moment. Fear of him, Perrin supposed, fear that he was angry with her. Yellow eyes on a man made some people uneasy.

hi tʊk ɪz hæn fɹəm ɪz æks ən klæsp boʊθ hænz bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk.

He took his hand from his axe and clasped both hands behind his back.

hɑviɑɹ ən nɛɹiən wɝ mɔɹ ə feɪlz tu dʌzən jʌŋ fulz, wʌn tɛɹən, ði ʌðɝ kɛɹhinɪn.

Haviar and Nerion were more of Faile's two dozen young fools, one Tairen, the other Cairhienin.

feɪl hæd juz ðə lɑɾ ə ðɛm fəɹ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz, ə fæk ðət stɪl ɪɹəteɪɾəd ɪm fəɹ səm ɹizən, ðoʊ ʃi hæd toʊld ɪm tə hɪz feɪs ðət spaɪɪŋ wɑz ə waɪfs bɪznəs. ə mæn niɾəd tə lɪsən hɑɹd wən i θɔɾ ɪz waɪf wɑz dʒoʊkɪŋ; ʃi maɪt nɑt bi. ðə hoʊl noʊʃən ə spaɪɪŋ meɪɾ ɪm ənkʌmftəɹbəl, bʌɾ ɪf feɪl kəd juz əm soʊ, ðən soʊ kəɾ əɹ hʌzbənd, wən ðəɹ wɑz nid. dʒʌs ðə tu, ðoʊ. mæsimə sim kənvɪns ðəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪksɛp dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɝ feɪɾɪd tə fɑloʊ hɪm sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, jɛɾ i maɪt ɡɹoʊ səspɪʃəs ɪf tu mɛni lɛf pɛɹɪnz kæmp tə dʒɔɪn hɪm.

Faile had used the lot of them for eyes-and-ears, a fact that still irritated him for some reason, though she had told him to his face that spying was a wife's business. A man needed to listen hard when he thought his wife was joking; she might not be. The whole notion of spying made him uncomfortable, but if Faile could use them so, then so could her husband, when there was need. Just the two, though. Masema seemed convinced that everyone except Darkfriends were fated to follow him sooner or later, yet he might grow suspicious if too many left Perrin's camp to join him.

"doʊn kɔl ɪm mæsimə, nɑɾ ivən hɪɹ," hi æɾəd bɹʌskli.

"Don't call him Masema, not even here," he added brusquely.

leɪtli ðə mæn kleɪmd mæsimə dɑɡɝ wɑz æktʃəli  dɛɾ ən ɹɪzən fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv əz ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən i wɑz tʌtʃiɝ ðən ɛvɝ əbaʊt mɛnʃən ə hɪz fɔɹmɝ neɪm.

Lately the man claimed Masema Dagar was actually dead and risen from the grave as the Prophet of the Lord Dragon Reborn, and he was touchier than ever about mention of his former name.

"ju ɡɛt kɛɹləs wɪð jəɹ tʌŋ ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ pleɪs, ən jə maɪt bi lʌki ɪf i dʒʌst əz ə fju ʌv ɪz bʊlɪbɔɪz flɑɡ jə ðə nɛks taɪm ðeɪ kən faɪn jə əloʊn." sɛlənd nɑɾəd əɡɛn, ɡɹeɪvli, ən ðɪs taɪm wɪθaʊɾ ɛni fɪɹ smɛl. laɪt, ðoʊz ɪɾiəts ə feɪlz læk ðə sɛns tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz wʌt ðeɪ ʃəd bi əfɹeɪɾ ʌv. "ɪts ɔlmoʊs dɔn," beɪlwɝ mɝmɝd, ʃɪvɝɪŋ ən pʊlɪŋ ɪz kloʊk taɪɾɝ. "ɔl wɪl bi weɪkɪŋ bɪfɔɹ lɔŋ, ən səm mæɾɝz ɑɹ bɛs dɪskʌst ənsin. ɪf maɪ leɪɾi wɪl kəntɪnju?" wʌns əɡɛn, ðət wɑz mɔɹ ðən ə sədʒɛstʃən. sɛlən ən ðə ɹɛst ə feɪlz hæŋɝz-ɑn hæd bɪn ɡʊɾ oʊnli fəɹ kɑzɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl, ðət pɛɹɪn kəd si, ən beɪlwɝ lʊk tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊɾ ə flaɪ ʌp əɹ noʊz fəɹ səm ɹizən, bʌt ʃi æktʃəli  ɡeɪv ən ɪmbɛɹəst stɑɹɾ ən mɝmɝɾ ən əpɑlədʒi.

"You get careless with your tongue in the wrong place, and you might be lucky if he just has a few of his bullyboys flog you the next time they can find you alone." Selande nodded again, gravely, and this time without any fear smell. Light, those idiots of Faile's lacked the sense to recognize what they should be afraid of. "It's almost dawn," Balwer murmured, shivering and pulling his cloak tighter. "All will be waking before long, and some matters are best discussed unseen. If my Lady will continue?" Once again, that was more than a suggestion. Selande and the rest of Faile's hangers-on had been good only for causing trouble, that Perrin could see, and Balwer looked to be trying to put a fly up her nose for some reason, but she actually gave an embarrassed start and murmured an apology.

ðə dɑɹknəs tʃɹuli wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə lɛsən, pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd, ət lis tə hɪz aɪz. ðə skaɪ oʊvɝhɛd stɪl lʊk blæk, dʌstɪd wɪð bɹaɪt stɑɹz, jɛɾ i kəɾ ɔlmoʊs meɪk aʊt ðə kʌlɝz ə ðə sɪks θɪn stʃɹaɪps ðət kɹɔs ðə fɹʌn ə sɛlənz koʊt. hi kəd tɛl wʌn fɹəm ənʌðɝ, ɛniweɪ. ðə ɹiləzeɪʃən ðəɾ i hæd slɛp leɪɾɝ ðən juʒəwəl meɪɾ ɪm ɡɹaʊl. hi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə ɡɪv ɪn tə wɪɹinəs, haʊɛvɝ taɪɝɾ i wɑz! hi niɾəd tə hɪɹ sɛlənz ɹipɔɹt - ʃi wəd nɑt bi wɝiɾ əbaʊt mæsimə sɛndɪŋ aʊt ɹaɪɾɝz; ðə mæn dɪd ðəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi deɪ - jɛɾ i lʊkt æŋkʃəsli fəɹ ɛɹæm ən stɛpɝ. hɪz ɪɹz pɪkt ʌp ðə saʊnz ʌv æktɪvəɾi əmʌŋ ðə hɔɹslaɪnz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ə hɪz hɔɹs jɛt.

The darkness truly was beginning to lessen, Perrin realized, at least to his eyes. The sky overhead still looked black, dusted with bright stars, yet he could almost make out the colors of the six thin stripes that crossed the front of Selande's coat. He could tell one from another, anyway. The realization that he had slept later than usual made him growl. He could not afford to give in to weariness, however tired he was! He needed to hear Selande's report - she would not be worried about Masema sending out riders; the man did that almost every day - yet he looked anxiously for Aram and Stepper. His ears picked up the sounds of activity among the horselines, but there was no sign of his horse yet.

"ðə sɛkən θɪŋ, maɪ lɔɹd," sɛlən sɛd, "ɪz ðət hɑviɑɹ əz sin kæsks ə sɔl fɪʃ ən sɔl bif bɹændɪd wɪð ɔltɑɹən mɑɹkɪŋz, ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni ʌv ðɛm. hi sɛz ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔltɑɹənz əmʌŋ mɑz . . .

"The second thing, my Lord," Selande said, "is that Haviar has seen casks of salt fish and salt beef branded with Altaran markings, a great many of them. He says there are Altarans among Mas . . .

əmʌŋ ðə pɹɑfəts pipəl, tu. sɛvɹəl əpɪɹ tə bi kɹæftsfoʊk, ən wʌn əɹ tu kəd bi mɝtʃəns əɹ taʊn əfɪʃəlz. ɪstæblɪʃt mɛn ən wɪmən, ɪn ɛni keɪs, sɑləd foʊk, ən səm sim ənʃʊɹ ðeɪ meɪd ðə ɹaɪt dɪsɪʒən. ə fju kwɛstʃənz maɪt ɹɪvil fɹəm wɛɹ ðə fɪʃ ən bif keɪm. ən pɝhæps ɡeɪn mɔɹ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz fəɹ ju."

among the Prophet's people, too. Several appear to be craftsfolk, and one or two could be merchants or town officials. Established men and women, in any case, solid folk, and some seem unsure they made the right decision. A few questions might reveal from where the fish and beef came. And perhaps gain more eyes-and-ears for you."

"aɪ noʊ wɛɹ ðə fɪʃ ən bif keɪm fɹəm ən soʊ də ju," pɛɹɪn sɛɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. hɪz hænz nɑɾɪd ɪndə fɪsts bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. hi hæd hoʊp ðə spid wɪð wɪtʃ i wɑz muvɪŋ wəd kip mæsimə fɹəm sɛndɪŋ aʊt ɹeɪɾɪŋ pɑɹɾiz. ðət wɑz wʌt ðeɪ wɝ, ən əz bæɾ əz ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ɪf nɑt wɝs. ðeɪ ɔfɝd pipəl ə tʃæns tə swɛɹ tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən ðoʊz u ɹəfjuzd, səmtaɪmz ðoʊz u sɪmpli hɛzɪteɪɾɪd tu lɔŋ, daɪd baɪ faɪɝ ən stil. ɪn ɛni keɪs, wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ðeɪ mɑɹtʃt ɔf tə fɑloʊ mæsimə, ðoʊz u swɔɹ wɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə doʊneɪt dʒɛnɝəsli ɪn səpɔɹɾ ə ðə pɹɑfəts kɑz, waɪl ðoʊz u daɪd wɝ pleɪnli dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ðɛɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz fɔɹfɪt. θivz lɔst ə hænd, baɪ mæsiməz lɔz, bʌt nʌn ʌv wʌɾ ɪz ɹeɪɾɝz dɪd wɑz θivɪŋ, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə mæsimə. baɪ hɪz lɔz, mɝɾɝ ən ə hoʊl hoʊst ʌv ʌðɝ kɹaɪmz mɛɹɪɾɪd hæŋɪŋ, jɛɾ ə fɛɹ nʌmbɝ ə hɪz fɑloʊɝz sim tə pɹəfɝ kɪlɪŋ tə ɹəsivɪŋ oʊðz. ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ lut, ðət weɪ, ən fəɹ səm ə ðɛm mɝɾɝ wɑz ə faɪn ɡeɪm tə pleɪ bɪfɔɹ iɾɪŋ.

"I know where the fish and beef came from and so do you," Perrin said irritably. His hands knotted into fists behind his back. He had hoped the speed with which he was moving would keep Masema from sending out raiding parties. That was what they were, and as bad as the Shaido if not worse. They offered people a chance to swear to the Dragon Reborn, and those who refused, sometimes those who simply hesitated too long, died by fire and steel. In any case, whether or not they marched off to follow Masema, those who swore were expected to donate generously in support of the Prophet's cause, while those who died were plainly Darkfriends, their belongings forfeit. Thieves lost a hand, by Masema's laws, but none of what his raiders did was thieving, according to Masema. By his laws, murder and a whole host of other crimes merited hanging, yet a fair number of his followers seemed to prefer killing to receiving oaths. There was more loot, that way, and for some of them murder was a fine game to play before eating.

"tɛl əm tə kip klɪɹ ə ðiz ɔltɑɹənz," pɛɹɪn wɛn ɑn. "ɔl sɔɹts dʒɹɪft ɪndə mæsiməz fɑloʊɪŋ, ən ivən ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ hævɪŋ sɛkən θɔts, ɪt woʊn teɪk əm lɔŋ tə stɪŋk ə zil laɪk ðə ɹɛst. ðeɪ wʊdn hɛzəteɪt tə ɡʌɾ ə neɪbɝ ðɛn, mʌtʃ lɛs sʌmbɑɾi huz æsk ðə ɹɔŋ kwɛstʃənz. wʌɾ aɪ wɑnə noʊ ɪz wʌt mæsiməz duɪŋ, wʌt hiz plænɪŋ." ðət ðə mæn hæd səm skim simd ɑbviəs. mæsimə kleɪmd ɪt wɑz blæsfəmi fəɹ ɛniwʌn ɪksɛpt ɹænd tə tʌtʃ ðə wʌn paʊɝ, kleɪmd i wɑntəd nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən tə dʒɔɪn ɹænd ɪn ði ist. əz ɔlweɪz, θɔɾ ə ɹænd bɹɔt kʌlɝz wɝlɪŋ θɹu pɛɹɪnz hɛd, mɔɹ vɪvədli ðən juʒəwəl ðɪs taɪm, bʌɾ æŋɡɝ mɛltəɾ əm tə veɪpɝ. blæsfəmi əɹ noʊ, mæsimə hæɾ æksɛptɪd tʃɹævlɪŋ, wɪtʃ wɑz nɑt dʒʌs tʃænəlɪŋ bʌt mɛn tʃænəlɪŋ. ən noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ i kleɪmd, hi hæd dʌn ɪt tə ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə wɛst əz lɔŋ əz pɑsəbəl, nɑt tə hɛlp ɹɛskju feɪl. pɛɹɪn tɛndəd tə tʃɹʌs pipəl əntɪl ðeɪ pɹuvd ʌnɹɪlaɪəbəl, bʌt wʌn snɪf ə mæsimə hæd toʊld ɪm ðə fɛloʊ wɑz əz ɪnseɪn əz ə ɹæbɪɾ ænəməl ən lɛs tʃɹʌstwɝði. hi hæd kənsɪɾɝd weɪz tə stɑp ðət skim, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz.

"Tell them to keep clear of these Altarans," Perrin went on. "All sorts drift into Masema's following, and even if they are having second thoughts, it won't take them long to stink of zeal like the rest. They wouldn't hesitate to gut a neighbor then, much less somebody who's asked the wrong questions. What I want to know is what Masema's doing, what he's planning." That the man had some scheme seemed obvious. Masema claimed it was blasphemy for anyone except Rand to touch the One Power, claimed he wanted nothing more than to join Rand in the east. As always, thought of Rand brought colors whirling through Perrin's head, more vividly than usual this time, but anger melted them to vapor. Blasphemy or no, Masema had accepted Traveling, which was not just channeling but men channeling. And no matter what he claimed, he had done it to remain in the west as long as possible, not to help rescue Faile. Perrin tended to trust people until they proved unreliable, but one sniff of Masema had told him the fellow was as insane as a rabid animal and less trustworthy. He had considered ways to stop that scheme, whatever it was.

weɪz tə stɑp mæsiməz kɪlɪŋ ən bɝnɪŋ. mæsimə hæd tɛn əɹ twɛlv θaʊzən mɛn wɪð hɪm, meɪbi mɔɹ - ðə mæn wɑz nɑt vɛɹi fɔɹθkʌmɪŋ əbaʊt nʌmbɝz, ən ðə weɪ ðeɪ kæmpt ɪn ə skwɑləd spɹɔl meɪd kaʊntɪŋ ɪmpɑsəbəl - waɪl lɛs ðən ə kɔɹɾɝ ə ðət nʌmbɝ fɑloʊd pɛɹɪn, sɛvɹəl hʌnʒɹəd ə ðɛm kɑɹt dʒɹaɪvɝz ən ɡɹumz ən ʌðɝz u wəd bi mɔɹ hɪnʒɹəns ðən hɛlp ɪn ə faɪt, jɛt wɪð θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ ən tu æʃəmən, nɑt tə mɛnʃən sɪks il waɪz wʌnz, hi kəd hɔl mæsimə ɪn ɪz tʃɹæks. ðə waɪz wʌnz ən tu ʌv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd bi iɡɝ tə teɪk pɑɹt. mɔɹ ðən sɪmpli wɪlɪŋ, ət list. ðeɪ wɑntəd mæsimə dɛd. bʌt dɪspɝsɪŋ mæsiməz ɑɹmi wəɾ oʊnli bɹeɪk ɪɾ ɪndə hʌnʒɹədz ə smɔlɝ bænz ðət wəd skæɾɝ əkɹɔs ɔltɑɹə ən bɪɑnd, stɪl luɾɪŋ ən kɪlɪŋ, dʒʌs fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɪn ðə neɪm ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɪl də ðə seɪm θɪŋ, hi θɔt, ən pʊʃt ðə θɔɾ əweɪ. stɑpɪŋ mæsimə wəd teɪk taɪm i dɪd nɑt hæv. ðə mæn wəɾ əv tə kip əntɪl feɪl wɑz seɪf. əntɪl ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ smæʃt tə kɪnlɪŋ. "wʌts ðə θɝd θɪŋ jə lɝn tənaɪt, sɛlənd?" hi sɛd ɹʌfli. tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ðə smɛl ʌv wɝi kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə wʊmən θɪkənd.

Ways to stop Masema's killing and burning. Masema had ten or twelve thousand men with him, maybe more - the man was not very forthcoming about numbers, and the way they camped in a squalid sprawl made counting impossible - while less than a quarter of that number followed Perrin, several hundred of them cart drivers and grooms and others who would be more hindrance than help in a fight, yet with three Aes Sedai and two Asha'man, not to mention six Aiel Wise Ones, he could halt Masema in his tracks. The Wise Ones and two of the Aes Sedai would be eager to take part. More than simply willing, at least. They wanted Masema dead. But dispersing Masema's army would only break it into hundreds of smaller bands that would scatter across Altara and beyond, still looting and killing, just for themselves instead of in the name of the Dragon Reborn. Breaking the Shaido will do the same thing, he thought, and pushed the thought away. Stopping Masema would take time he did not have. The man would have to keep until Faile was safe. Until the Shaido were smashed to kindling. "What's the third thing you learned tonight, Selande?" he said roughly. To his surprise, the smell of worry coming from the woman thickened.

"hɑviɑɹ sɔ sʌmwʌn," ʃi sɛd sloʊli. "hi dɪd nɑt tɛl mi ət fɝst." hɝ vɔɪs hɑɹɾənd fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "aɪ meɪd ʃʊɹ ðət wɪl nɑt hæpən əɡɛn!" dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ʃi sim tə stʃɹʌɡəl wɪð hɝsɛlf, ðən bɝst aʊt, "mɑsʊɝi sədaɪ hæz vɪzəɾəd mæsimə . . . ðə pɹɑfət. ɪts tʃɹu, maɪ lɔɹd; bɪliv mi! hɑviɑɹ əz sin əɹ mɔɹ ðən wʌns. ʃi slɪps ɪndə ðɛɹ kæmp hʊɾɪd ən livz ðə seɪm weɪ, bʌt hiz hæɾ ə ɡʊd lʊk əɾ əɹ feɪs twaɪs. ə mæn əkʌmpəniz əɹ itʃ taɪm, ən səmtaɪmz ənʌðɝ wʊmən. hɑviɑɹ əz nɑt sin ðə mæn wɛl ɪnʌf tə bi ʃʊɹ, bʌt ðə dɪskɹɪpʃən fɪts ɹoʊvɛɹ, mɑsʊɝiz wɔɹɾɝ, ən hɑviɑɹ ɪz sɝɾən ðə sɛkənd wʊmən ɪz ənʊɹə sədaɪ." ʃi bɹoʊk ɔf əbɹʌpli, hɝ aɪz ʃaɪnɪŋ dɑɹkli ɪn ðə munlaɪɾ əz ʃi wɑtʃt hɪm. laɪt, ʃi wɑz əz wɝiɾ əbaʊt haʊ hi wəd teɪk ɪɾ əz baɪ wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt! hi fɔɹst ɪz hænz tə ənklɛntʃ.

"Haviar saw someone," she said slowly. "He did not tell me at first." Her voice hardened for a moment. "I made sure that will not happen again!" Drawing a deep breath, she seemed to struggle with herself, then burst out, "Masuri Sedai has visited Masema . . . the Prophet. It is true, my Lord; believe me! Haviar has seen her more than once. She slips into their camp hooded and leaves the same way, but he has had a good look at her face twice. A man accompanies her each time, and sometimes another woman. Haviar has not seen the man well enough to be sure, but the description fits Rovair, Masuri's Warder, and Haviar is certain the second woman is Annoura Sedai." She broke off abruptly, her eyes shining darkly in the moonlight as she watched him. Light, she was as worried about how he would take it as by what it meant! He forced his hands to unclench.

mæsimə dɪspaɪzd ɛɛs sədaɪ əz mʌtʃ əz i dɪd dɑɹkfɹɛnz; hi nɪɹli kənsɪɾɝd əm dɑɹkfɹɛnz. soʊ waɪ wəɾ i ɹəsiv tu sɪstɝz? waɪ wəd ðeɪ ɡoʊ tə hɪm? ənʊɹəz əpɪnjən ə mæsimə leɪ hɪɾən bɪhaɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ mɪstɝi ən dʌbəldʒɔɪntɪd kɑmɛns ðət kəd min ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt mɑsʊɝi hæd sɛd stʃɹeɪɾ aʊt ðət ðə mæn niɾəd tə bi pʊt daʊn laɪk ə mæd dɔɡ.

Masema despised Aes Sedai as much as he did Darkfriends; he nearly considered them Darkfriends. So why would he receive two sisters? Why would they go to him? Annoura's opinion of Masema lay hidden behind Aes Sedai mystery and doublejointed comments that could mean anything, but Masuri had said straight out that the man needed to be put down like a mad dog.

"meɪk ʃʊɹ hɑviɑɹ ən nɛɹiən kip ə ʃɑɹp aɪ fəɹ ðə sɪstɝz ən si ɪf ðeɪ kən ivzdʒɹɑp ɑn wʌn ə ðɛɹ miɾɪŋz wɪð mæsimə." kəd hɑviɑɹ bi mɪsteɪkən? noʊ, ðəɹ wɝ fju wɪmən ɪn mæsiməz kæmp, ɹɛləɾɪvli spikɪŋ, ən ɪt pæs bɪlif ðət ðə tɛɹən kəd mɪsteɪk wʌn ə ðoʊz ənwɑʃt mɝɾɝəs-aɪd hɛɹɹəɾənz fəɹ mɑsʊɝi. ðə sɔɹɾ ʌv wɪmən wɪlɪŋ tə mɑɹtʃ wɪð mæsimə juʒəwəli meɪd ðə mɛn lʊk laɪk tɪŋkɝz. "tɛl əm tə teɪk kɛɹ, ðoʊ. bɛɾɝ tə lɛt ðə tʃæns pæs ðən ɡɛt kɑɾ əɾ ɪt. ðəɹ noʊ ɡʊd tə ɛniwʌn stʃɹʌŋ ʌp ɑn ə tʃɹi." pɛɹɪn nu hi saʊndəd ɡɹʌf, ən tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɪz vɔɪs maɪldɝ. ðət sim hɑɹɾɝ sɪns feɪl wɑz kɪdnæpt. "juv dʌn wɛl, sɛlənd." ət list i dɪd nɑt saʊn əz ɪf i wɝ bɑɹkɪŋ ət hɝ. "ju ən hɑviɑɹ ən nɛɹiən. feɪl wəd bi pɹaʊɾ ɪf ʃi nu."

"Make sure Haviar and Nerion keep a sharp eye for the sisters and see if they can eavesdrop on one of their meetings with Masema." Could Haviar be mistaken? No, there were few women in Masema's camp, relatively speaking, and it passed belief that the Tairen could mistake one of those unwashed murderous-eyed harridans for Masuri. The sort of women willing to march with Masema usually made the men look like Tinkers. "Tell them to take care, though. Better to let the chance pass than get caught at it. They're no good to anyone strung up on a tree." Perrin knew he sounded gruff, and tried to make his voice milder. That seemed harder since Faile was kidnapped. "You've done well, Selande." At least he did not sound as if he were barking at her. "You and Haviar and Nerion. Faile would be proud if she knew."

ə smaɪl lɪɾ ʌp əɹ feɪs, ən ʃi stʊɾ ə lɪɾəl stʃɹeɪɾɝ, ɪf ðət wɑz pɑsəbəl. pɹaɪd, klin ən bɹaɪt, ðə pɹaɪɾ ʌv əkɑmplɪʃmənt, ɔlmoʊst oʊvɝwɛlmd ɛni ʌðɝ sɛn fɹəm hɝ! "θæŋk ju, maɪ lɔɹd. θæŋk ju!" jə wʊɾə θɔɾ i hæd ɡɪvən əɹ ə pɹaɪz. meɪbi hi hæd, kʌm tə θɪŋk ɑn ɪt.

A smile lit up her face, and she stood a little straighter, if that was possible. Pride, clean and bright, the pride of accomplishment, almost overwhelmed any other scent from her! "Thank you, my Lord. Thank you!" You would have thought he had given her a prize. Maybe he had, come to think on it.

ðoʊ kʌm tə θɪŋk feɪl maɪt nɑt bi bɛs pliz ðəɾ i wɑz juzɪŋ əɹ aɪz-ændɪɹz, əɹ ivən nu əbaʊt ðɛm. wʌns, ðə θɔɾ ə feɪl dɪsplizd wʊɾə meɪɾ ɪm ənizi, bʌt ðət wɑz bɪfɔɹ i lɝn əbaʊɾ əɹ spaɪz. ən ðət lɪɾəl mæɾɝ ə ðə bɹoʊkən kɹaʊn ðəɾ ɛlaɪəs hæd lɛt slɪp. ɛvɹibɑɾi ɔlweɪz sɛd ðət waɪvz kɛp ðɛɹ sikɹəts kloʊs, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ lɪməts! ədʒʌstɪŋ ɪz kloʊk ɑn ɪz nɛɹoʊ ʃoʊldɝz wɪð wʌn hænd, beɪlwɝ kɔf bɪhaɪn ði ʌðɝ. "wɛl sɛd, maɪ lɔɹd. vɛɹi wɛl sɛd. maɪ leɪɾi, aɪm ʃʊɹ jə wɑnə pæs ɑn lɔɹd pɛɹɪnz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz əz sun əz pɑsəbəl. ɪt wʊdn də fəɹ ðəɹ tə bi ɛni mɪsəndɝstændɪŋ." sɛlənd nɑɾəd wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ əɹ aɪz ɔf pɛɹɪn. hɝ maʊθ oʊpənd, ən pɛɹɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt hoʊpɪŋ i faʊnd wɔɾɝ ən ʃeɪd.

Though come to think Faile might not be best pleased that he was using her eyes-andears, or even knew about them. Once, the thought of Faile displeased would have made him uneasy, but that was before he learned about her spies. And that little matter of the Broken Crown that Elyas had let slip. Everybody always said that wives kept their secrets close, but there were limits! Adjusting his cloak on his narrow shoulders with one hand, Balwer coughed behind the other. "Well said, my Lord. Very well said. My Lady, I'm sure you want to pass on Lord Perrin's instructions as soon as possible. It wouldn't do for there to be any misunderstanding." Selande nodded without taking her eyes off Perrin. Her mouth opened, and Perrin was sure she intended to say something about hoping he found water and shade.

laɪt, wɔɾɝ wɑz ðə wʌn θɪŋ ðeɪ hæɾ ɪn plɛnti, ivən ɪf ɪt wɑz moʊsli fɹoʊzən, ən ðɪs taɪm ə jɪɹ, noʊbɑdi niɾəd ʃeɪɾ ivən ət nun! ʃi pɹɑbli dɪɾ ɪntɛn ɪt, kəz ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ seɪɪŋ, "ɡɹeɪs feɪvɝ ju, maɪ lɔɹd. ɪf aɪ meɪ bi soʊ boʊld, ɡɹeɪs əz feɪvɝd ðə leɪɾi feɪl ɪn ju." pɛɹɪn dʒɝkt ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ə nɑɾ ə θæŋks. ðəɹ wɑz ə teɪst ʌv æʃəz ɪn ɪz maʊθ. ɡɹeɪs hæɾ ə fʌni weɪ ʌv feɪvɝɪŋ feɪl, ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ ə hʌzbən u stɪl hæd nɑt faʊn əɹ æftɝ mɔɹ ðən tu wiks ə sɝtʃɪŋ. ðə meɪɾənz sɛd ʃi hæd bɪn meɪd ɡeɪʃeɪn, ðət ʃi wəd nɑt bi mɪstʃɹiɾɪd, bʌt ðeɪ hæd tə ədmɪt ðiz ʃeɪɾoʊ ɔlɹɛɾi hæd bɹoʊkən ðɛɹ kʌstəmz ə hʌnʒɹəd dɪfɹənt weɪz. ɪn ɪz bʊk, biɪŋ kɪdnæpt wɑz mɪstʃɹitmən ɪnʌf. bɪɾɝ æʃəz.

Light, water was the one thing they had in plenty, even if it was mostly frozen, and this time of year, nobody needed shade even at noon! She probably did intend it, because she hesitated before saying, "Grace favor you, my Lord. If I may be so bold, Grace has favored the Lady Faile in you." Perrin jerked his head in a nod of thanks. There was a taste of ashes in his mouth. Grace had a funny way of favoring Faile, giving her a husband who still had not found her after more than two weeks of searching. The Maidens said she had been made gai'shain, that she would not be mistreated, but they had to admit these Shaido already had broken their customs a hundred different ways. In his book, being kidnapped was mistreatment enough. Bitter ashes.

"ðə leɪɾi wɪl də vɛɹi wɛl, maɪ lɔɹd," beɪlwɝ sɛd sɔfli, wɑtʃɪŋ sɛlən vænɪʃ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs əmʌŋ ðə kɑɹts. ðɪs əpɹuvəl wɑz ə sɝpɹaɪz; hi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə tɔk pɛɹɪn aʊɾ ə juzɪŋ sɛlən ən əɹ fɹɛnz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnz ðeɪ wɝ hɑthɛɾəd ən ʌnɹɪlaɪəbəl. "ʃi hæz ðə nɛsəsɛɹi ɪnstɪŋks.

"The lady will do very well, my Lord," Balwer said softly, watching Selande vanish into the darkness among the carts. This approval was a surprise; he had tried to talk Perrin out of using Selande and her friends on the grounds they were hotheaded and unreliable. "She has the necessary instincts.

kɛɹhinɪn du, juʒəwəli, ən tɛɹənz tə səm ɪkstɛnt, ət lis ðə noʊbəlz, ɪspɛʃli wʌns - " hi kʌɾ ɔf əbɹʌpli, ən aɪd pɛɹɪn kɔʃəsli. ɪf i wɝ ənʌðɝ mæn, pɛɹɪn wʊɾə bɪlivd i hæd sɛd mɔɹ ðən i ɪntɛndəd, bʌɾ i daʊɾɪd beɪlwɝ slɪpt ɪn ðət fæʃən. ðə mænz sɛn ɹɪmeɪn stɛɾi, nɑt dʒɪɡəlɪŋ ðə weɪ ɪt wəɾ ɪn ə mæn u wɑz ənʃʊɹ. "meɪ aɪ ɔfɝ wʌn əɹ tu pɔɪns ɑn əɹ ɹipɔɹt, maɪ lɔɹd?"

Cairhienin do, usually, and Tairens to some extent, at least the nobles, especially once - " He cut off abruptly, and eyed Perrin cautiously. If he were another man, Perrin would have believed he had said more than he intended, but he doubted Balwer slipped in that fashion. The man's scent remained steady, not jiggling the way it would in a man who was unsure. "May I offer one or two points on her report, my Lord?"

ðə kɹʌntʃ ə hʊvz ɪn ðə snoʊ ənaʊns ði əpɹoʊtʃ ʌv ɛɹæm, liɾɪŋ pɛɹɪnz dʌn stæljən ən ɪz oʊn ɹeɪnʒi ɡɹeɪ ɡɛldɪŋ. ðə tu ænəməlz wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə nɪp ət wʌn ənʌðɝ, ən ɛɹæm wɑz kipɪŋ əm wɛl əpɑɹt, ðoʊ wɪð səm dɪfəkəlti. beɪlwɝ saɪd.

The crunch of hooves in the snow announced the approach of Aram, leading Perrin's dun stallion and his own rangy gray gelding. The two animals were trying to nip at one another, and Aram was keeping them well apart, though with some difficulty. Balwer sighed.

"ju kən seɪ wʌtɛvɝ jə nid tə ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛɹæm, mæstɝ beɪlwɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. ðə lɪɾəl mæn baʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ækwiɛsəns, bʌɾ i saɪɾ əɡɛn, tu. ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪn ðə kæmp nu ðət beɪlwɝ hæd ðə skɪl ə fɪɾɪŋ təɡɛðɝ ɹumɝz ən tʃæns-hɝd kɑmɛns ən θɪŋz pipəl hæd dʌn tə fɔɹm ə pɪktʃɝ ʌv wʌt hæd ɹɪli hæpən əɹ wʌt maɪt, ən beɪlwɝ hɪmsɛlf kənsɪɾɝd ðət pɑɹɾ ə hɪz dʒɑb əz ə sɛkɹətɛɹi, bʌt fəɹ səm ɹizən i laɪk tə pɹitɛn i nɛvɝ dɪɾ ɛni sətʃ θɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ə hɑɹmləs pɹitɛns, ən pɛɹɪn tɛndəd tə hjumɝ hɪm.

"You can say whatever you need to in front of Aram, Master Balwer," Perrin said. The little man bowed his head in acquiescence, but he sighed again, too. Everybody in the camp knew that Balwer had the skill of fitting together rumors and chance-heard comments and things people had done to form a picture of what had really happened or what might, and Balwer himself considered that part of his job as a secretary, but for some reason he liked to pretend he never did any such thing. It was a harmless pretense, and Perrin tended to humor him.

teɪkɪŋ stɛpɝz ɹeɪnz fɹəm ɛɹæm, hi sɛd, "wɔk bɪhaɪn əs əwaɪl, ɛɹæm. aɪ nid tə tɔk wɪð mæstɝ beɪlwɝ ɪn pɹaɪvət." beɪlwɝz saɪ wɑz soʊ feɪn ðət pɛɹɪn bɛɹli hɝɾ ɪt.

Taking Stepper's reins from Aram, he said, "Walk behind us awhile, Aram. I need to talk with Master Balwer in private." Balwer's sigh was so faint that Perrin barely heard it.

ɛɹæm fɛl ɪn bɪhaɪn ðə tu ʌv əm wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝɾ əz ðeɪ bɪɡæn tə wɔk, fɹoʊzən snoʊ kɹækɪŋ bɪniθ ðɛɹ fit, bʌɾ ɪz sɛnt ɡɹu spaɪki əɡɛn, ən kwɪvɝi, ə θɪn, saʊɝ smɛl. ðɪs taɪm, pɛɹɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə sɛnt, ðoʊ hi peɪɾ ɪt noʊ mɔɹ maɪn ðən juʒəwəl. ɛɹæm wɑz dʒɛləs ʌv ɛniwʌn ɪksɛp feɪl u spɛn taɪm wɪð hɪm. pɛɹɪn sɔ noʊ weɪ tə pʊɾ ə stɑp tə ɪt, ən ɛniweɪ, hi wɑz əz juz tə ɛɹæmz pəzɛsɪvnəs əz i wɑz tə ðə weɪ beɪlwɝ hɑpt əlɔŋ əɾ ɪz saɪd, ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ tə si wɛðɝ ɛɹæm wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ wən i faɪnəli dɪsaɪɾɪd tə spik. beɪlwɝz ɹeɪzɝ-θɪn sɛn ə səspɪʃən, kjʊɹiəsli dʒɹaɪ ən nɑɾ ivən wɔɹm bʌt stɪl səspɪʃən, pɹəvaɪɾəd ə kaʊntɝpɔɪn tə ɛɹæmz dʒɛləsi. jə kəd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ mɛn u dɪd nɑt wɑnə tʃeɪnʒ. ðə hɔɹslaɪnz ən səplaɪ kɑɹts wɝ loʊkeɪɾəd ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə kæmp, wɛɹ θivz wəɾ əv ə hɑɹd taɪm ɹitʃɪŋ ðɛm, ən ɔlðoʊ ðə skaɪ stɪl lʊk blæk tə moʊst aɪz, ðə kɑɹt dʒɹaɪvɝz ən ɡɹumz, hu slɛp kloʊs tə ðɛɹ tʃɑɹdʒəz, wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi əweɪk ən foʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ blæŋkəts, səm tɛndɪŋ ʃɛltɝz meɪɾ ə paɪn baʊz ən ʌðɝ smɔl tʃɹi lɪmz hɑɹvəstəd fɹəm ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ fɔɹəst, ɪn keɪs ðeɪ maɪt bi niɾəd ənʌðɝ naɪt.

Aram fell in behind the two of them without a word as they began to walk, frozen snow cracking beneath their feet, but his scent grew spiky again, and quivery, a thin, sour smell. This time, Perrin recognized the scent, though he paid it no more mind than usual. Aram was jealous of anyone except Faile who spent time with him. Perrin saw no way to put a stop to it, and anyway, he was as used to Aram's possessiveness as he was to the way Balwer hopped along at his side, glancing over his shoulder to see whether Aram was close enough to hear when he finally decided to speak. Balwer's razor-thin scent of suspicion, curiously dry and not even warm but still suspicion, provided a counterpoint to Aram's jealousy. You could not change men who did not want to change. The horselines and supply carts were located in the middle of the camp, where thieves would have a hard time reaching them, and although the sky still looked black to most eyes, the cart drivers and grooms, who slept close to their charges, were already awake and folding their blankets, some tending shelters made of pine boughs and other small tree limbs harvested from the surrounding forest, in case they might be needed another night.

kʊk faɪɝz wɝ biɪŋ lɪɾ ən smɔl blæk kɛɾəlz sɛɾ oʊvɝ ðɛm, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl tə iɾ ɪksɛpt pɔɹədʒ əɹ dʒɹaɪd binz. hʌntɪŋ ən tʃɹæpɪŋ æɾəd səm mit, vɛnəsən ən ɹæbəts, pɑɹtʃɹɪdʒɪz ən wʊdhənz ən ðə laɪk, bʌt ðət kəɾ oʊnli ɡoʊ soʊ fɑɹ wɪð soʊ mɛni tə fid, ən ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊwɛɹ tə baɪ səplaɪz sɪns bɪfɔɹ kɹɔsɪŋ ði ɪldɑɹ. ə ɹɪpəl ə baʊz ən kɝtsiz ən mɝmɝz ʌv "ə ɡʊd mɔɹnɪŋ, maɪ lɔɹd" ən "ðə laɪt feɪvɝ ju, maɪ lɔɹd" fɑloʊd pɛɹɪn, bʌt ðə mɛn ən wɪmən u sɔ hɪm stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stʃɹɛŋθən ðɛɹ ʃɛltɝz, ən ə fju bɪɡæn tə pʊl ðɛɹz daʊn, əz ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd sɛnst ɪz dɪtɝməneɪʃən fɹəm ɪz stʃɹaɪd. ðeɪ ʃʊɾə noʊn ɪz ɹizɑlv baɪ naʊ. sɪns ðə deɪ hi ɹilaɪz haʊ bædli hi hæd blʌndɝd, hi hæd nɑt spɛn tu naɪts ɪn wʌn pleɪs. hi ɹɪtɝn ðə ɡɹiɾɪŋz wɪθaʊt sloʊɪŋ. ðə ɹɛst ə ðə kæmp meɪɾ ə θɪn ɹɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə hɔɹsəz ən kɑɹts, feɪsɪŋ ði ɛnsɝkəlɪŋ fɔɹəst, wɪð ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn dɪvaɪɾəd ɪndə fɔɹ ɡɹups ən ðə lænsɝz fɹəm ɡildən ən min speɪs bɪtwin ðɛm. huɛvɝ keɪm ət ðɛm, fɹəm wʌtɛvɝ dɝɛkʃən, wəd feɪs tu ɹɪvɝz lɔŋboʊz ən tʃɹeɪn kævəlɹi.

Cook fires were being lit and small black kettles set over them, though there was little to eat except porridge or dried beans. Hunting and trapping added some meat, venison and rabbits, partridges and woodhens and the like, but that could only go so far with so many to feed, and there had been nowhere to buy supplies since before crossing the Eldar. A ripple of bows and curtsies and murmurs of "A good morning, my Lord" and "The Light favor you, my Lord" followed Perrin, but the men and women who saw him stopped trying to strengthen their shelters, and a few began to pull theirs down, as though they had sensed his determination from his stride. They should have known his resolve by now. Since the day he realized how badly he had blundered, he had not spent two nights in one place. He returned the greetings without slowing. The rest of the camp made a thin ring around the horses and carts, facing the encircling forest, with the Two Rivers men divided into four groups and the lancers from Ghealdan and Mayene spaced between them. Whoever came at them, from whatever direction, would face Two Rivers longbows and trained cavalry.

ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə sʌɾən əpɪɹəns baɪ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ðət pɛɹɪn fɪɹd, bʌt ɹæðɝ mæsimə. ðə mæn sim tə bi fɑloʊɪŋ ɪm mikli ɪnʌf, bʌɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ðɪs nuz ə ɹeɪɾɪŋ, naɪn ɡildænɪn ən eɪt minɝz hæd vænɪʃt ɪn ðə læs tu wiks, ən noʊ wʌn bɪliv ðeɪ hæd dɪzɝɾɪd. bɪfɔɹ ðæt, ɑn ðə deɪ feɪl wɑz stoʊlən, twɛnti minɝz hæd bɪn æmbʊʃt ən kɪld, ən noʊ wʌn bɪlivd ɪt hæd bɪn ɛniwʌn bʌt mæsiməz mɛn u dɪd ðə kɪlɪŋ. soʊ ən ənizi pis ɪɡzɪstəd, ə stʃɹeɪnʒ θɔɹni sɔɹɾ ə pis, jɛɾ ə kɑpɝ weɪdʒɝɾ ɑn ɪt læstɪŋ fɝɛvɝ wɑz laɪkli ə kɑpɝ lɔst. mæsimə pɹitɛndəd tə bi ʌnəwɛɹ ʌv ɛni deɪnʒɝ tə ðət pis, bʌɾ ɪz fɑloʊɝz sim nɑt tə kɛɹ wʌn weɪ əɹ ði ʌðɝ, ən wʌtɛvɝ mæsimə pɹitɛndəd, ðeɪ tʊk ðɛɹ lɛd fɹəm hɪm. sʌmhaʊ, ðoʊ, pɛɹɪn ɪntɛndəd tə si ðəɾ ɪɾ ɛndʒjʊɹɾ əntɪl feɪl wɑz fɹi. meɪkɪŋ ɪz oʊn kæmp tu tʌf ə nʌt tə kɹæk wɑz wʌn weɪ ʌv meɪkɪŋ ðə pis læst.

It was not a sudden appearance by the Shaido that Perrin feared, but rather Masema. The man seemed to be following him meekly enough, but aside from this news of raiding, nine Ghealdanin and eight Mayeners had vanished in the last two weeks, and no one believed they had deserted. Before that, on the day Faile was stolen, twenty Mayeners had been ambushed and killed, and no one believed it had been anyone but Masema's men who did the killing. So an uneasy peace existed, a strange thorny sort of peace, yet a copper wagered on it lasting forever was likely a copper lost. Masema pretended to be unaware of any danger to that peace, but his followers seemed not to care one way or the other, and whatever Masema pretended, they took their lead from him. Somehow, though, Perrin intended to see that it endured until Faile was free. Making his own camp too tough a nut to crack was one way of making the peace last.

ði il hæɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn hævɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn θɪn wɛdʒ ə ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ paɪ, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɝ fjuɝ ðən fɪfti ʌv ðɛm, kaʊntɪŋ ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn u sɝv ðə waɪz wʌnz, ən i pɔz tə stʌɾi ðɛɹ loʊ dɑɹk tɛns. ði oʊnli ʌðɝ tɛns ɪɹɛktəɾ ɛniwɛɹ ɪn ðə kæmp wɝ ðoʊz ə bɹəleɪn ən əɹ tu sɝvɪŋ wɪmən, ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə kæmp, nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm bɹaɪɾənz fju haʊsəz. fliz ən laɪs ɪn hɔɹdz meɪd ðoʊz ʌnɪnhæbəɾəbəl, ivən fəɹ hɑɹɾənd soʊlʒɝz sikɪŋ ʃɛltɝ fɹəm ðə koʊld, ən ðə bɑɹnz wɝ pjutʃɹɪd ɹæmʃækəl əfɛɹz ðət lɛt ðə wɪn haʊl θɹu ən hɑɹbɝd wɝs vɝmɪn ðən ðə haʊsəz.

The Aiel had insisted on having their own thin wedge of the strange pie, though there were fewer than fifty of them, counting the gai'shain who served the Wise Ones, and he paused to study their low dark tents. The only other tents erected anywhere in the camp were those of Berelain and her two serving women, on the other side of the camp, not far from Brytan's few houses. Fleas and lice in hordes made those uninhabitable, even for hardened soldiers seeking shelter from the cold, and the barns were putrid ramshackle affairs that let the wind howl through and harbored worse vermin than the houses.

ðə meɪɾənz ən ɡɔl, ði oʊnli mæn əmʌŋ ði il nɑt ɡeɪʃeɪn, wɝ ɔl aʊt wɪð ðə skaʊts, ən ði il tɛns wɝ saɪlən ən stɪl, ðoʊ ðə smɛl ə smoʊk kʌmɪŋ fɹəm səm ə ðə vɛn hoʊlz toʊld ɪm ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn wɝ pɹipɛɹɪŋ bɹɛkfəs fəɹ ðə waɪz wʌnz, əɹ sɝvɪŋ ɪt. ənʊɹə wɑz bɹəleɪnz ædvaɪzɝ, ən juʒəwəli ʃɛɹɾ əɹ tɛnt, bʌt mɑsʊɝi ən siɑnɪd wəd bi wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz, meɪbi ivən hɛlpɪŋ ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn wɪð bɹɛkfəst. ðeɪ stɪl tʃɹaɪd tə haɪd ðə fæk ðət ðə waɪz wʌnz kənsɪɾɝd əm əpɹɛntəsɪz, ðoʊ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn kæmp mʌs bi əwɛɹ ʌv ɪt baɪ naʊ. ɛniwʌn u sɔ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ æktʃəli  kæɹiɪŋ faɪɝwʊɾ əɹ wɔɾɝ, əɹ hɝd wʌn biɪŋ swɪtʃt, kəd meɪk ɪɾ aʊt. ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ oʊθswɔɹn tə ɹænd - əɡɛn ðə kʌlɝz wɝld ɪn ɪz hɛd, ən ɪksploʊʒən ə hjuz; əɡɛn ðeɪ mɛltəɾ ʌndɝ ɪz kɑnstən æŋɡɝ - bʌɾ ɛdʒɹə ən ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz hæd bɪn sɛn tə kip ən aɪ ɑn ðɛm.

The Maidens and Gaul, the only man among the Aiel not gai'shain, were all out with the scouts, and the Aiel tents were silent and still, though the smell of smoke coming from some of the vent holes told him the gai'shain were preparing breakfast for the Wise Ones, or serving it. Annoura was Berelain's adviser, and usually shared her tent, but Masuri and Seonid would be with the Wise Ones, maybe even helping the gai'shain with breakfast. They still tried to hide the fact that the Wise Ones considered them apprentices, though everyone in camp must be aware of it by now. Anyone who saw an Aes Sedai actually carrying firewood or water, or heard one being switched, could make it out. The two Aes Sedai were oathsworn to Rand - again the colors whirled in his head, an explosion of hues; again they melted under his constant anger - but Edarra and the other Wise Ones had been sent to keep an eye on them.

oʊnli ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ðɛmsɛlvz nu haʊ taɪtli ðɛɹ oʊðz hɛl ðɛm, əɹ wʌt ɹum ðeɪ sɔ tə mənuvɝ bɪtwin ðə wɝdz, ən niðɝ wɑz əlaʊd tə hɑp ənlɛs ə waɪz wʌn sɛd toʊd.

Only the Aes Sedai themselves knew how tightly their oaths held them, or what room they saw to maneuver between the words, and neither was allowed to hop unless a Wise One said toad.

siɑnɪɾ ən mɑsʊɝi hæd boʊθ sɛd mæsimə ʃəd bi pʊt daʊn laɪk ə mæd dɔɡ, ən ðə waɪz wʌnz əɡɹid. əɹ soʊ ðeɪ sɛd. ðeɪ hæd noʊ θɹi oʊðz tə hoʊld əm tə ðə tʃɹuθ, ðoʊ ɪn tʃɹuθ, ðət pɝtɪkjəlɝ oʊθ hɛl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ mɔɹ ɪn lɛɾɝ ðən spɪɹət. ən i sim tə ɹikɔl wʌn ə ðə waɪz wʌnz tɛlɪŋ ɪm ðət mɑsʊɝi θɔt ðət ðə mæd dɔɡ kəd bi liʃt. nɑɾ əlaʊd tə hɑp ənlɛs ə waɪz wʌn sɛd toʊd. ɪt wɑz laɪk ə blæksmɪθs pʌzəl wɪð ði ɛdʒəz ə ðə mɛɾəl pisəz ʃɑɹpənd. hi niɾəd tə sɑlv ɪt, bʌt wʌn mɪsteɪk ən i kəd kʌt hɪmsɛlf tə ðə boʊn. fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, pɛɹɪn kɑt beɪlwɝ wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, lɪps pɝst ɪn θɔt. ə bɝd stʌɾiɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ʌnfəmɪljɝ, nɑɾ əfɹeɪd, nɑt hʌŋɡɹi, dʒʌs kjʊɹiəs. ɡæðɝɪŋ stɛpɝz ɹeɪnz, hi wɔkt ɑn soʊ kwɪkli ðət ðə lɪɾəl mæn hæd tə lɛŋθən ɪz stʃɹaɪɾ ɪndə smɔl dʒʌmps tə kætʃ ʌp.

Seonid and Masuri had both said Masema should be put down like a mad dog, and the Wise Ones agreed. Or so they said. They had no Three Oaths to hold them to the truth, though in truth, that particular Oath held the Aes Sedai more in letter than spirit. And he seemed to recall one of the Wise Ones telling him that Masuri thought that the mad dog could be leashed. Not allowed to hop unless a Wise One said toad. It was like a blacksmith's puzzle with the edges of the metal pieces sharpened. He needed to solve it, but one mistake and he could cut himself to the bone. From the corner of his eye, Perrin caught Balwer watching him, lips pursed in thought. A bird studying something unfamiliar, not afraid, not hungry, just curious. Gathering Stepper's reins, he walked on so quickly that the little man had to lengthen his stride into small jumps to catch up.

tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn hæd ðə sɛɡmən ə kæmp nɛks tə ði il, feɪsɪŋ nɔɹθist, ən pɛɹɪn kənsɪɾɝd wɔkɪŋ ə lɪɾəl nɔɹθ, tə wɛɹ ɡildænɪn lænsɝz wɝ kæmpt, əɹ saʊθ tə ðə nɪɹəs minɝ sɛkʃən, bʌt teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf lɛɾ ɪz hɔɹs θɹu hɪz fɹɛnz ən neɪbɝz fɹəm hoʊm. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl əweɪk, hʌɾəlɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ kloʊks ən fiɾɪŋ ðə ɹɛmnəns ə ðɛɹ ʃɛltɝz ɪndə ðə kʊk faɪɝz əɹ kʌɾɪŋ ʌp ðə koʊld ɹɪmeɪnz ə læs naɪts ɹæbət tə æd tə ðə pɔɹədʒ ɪn ðə kɛɾəlz. tɔk dwɪndəld ən ðə smɛl ʌv wɛɹinɪs ɡɹu θɪk əz hɛdz lɪftəd tə wɑtʃ hɪm. wɛtstoʊnz pɔzd ɪn slaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ stil, ðən ɹɪzum ðɛɹ sɪbələnt wɪspɝɪŋ. ðə baʊ wɑz ðɛɹ pɹəfɝd wɛpən, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn kæɹiɾ ə hɛvi dæɡɝ əɹ ə ʃɔɹt-sɔɹɾ əz wɛl, əɹ səmtaɪmz ə lɔŋzɔɝd, ən ðeɪ hæd pɪkt ʌp spɪɹz ən hælbɝdz ən ʌðɝ pɑlɹmz wɪð stʃɹeɪnʒ bleɪdz ən pɔɪns ðət ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hæd nɑt θɔt wɝθ kæɹiɪŋ ɔf wɪð ðɛɹ pɪlɪdʒ. spɪɹz ðeɪ wɝ əkʌstəm tə, ən hænz juz tə wildɪŋ ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf ət fistdeɪ kɑmpətɪʃənz faʊn ðə pɑlɹmz nɑt mʌtʃ dɪfɹənt wʌns ðə weɪɾ ə mɛɾəl ɑn wʌn ɛnd wɑz əkaʊntəd fɔɹ. ðɛɹ feɪsəz wɝ hʌŋɡɹi, taɪɝɾ ən wɪθdʒɹɔn.

Two Rivers men had the segment of camp next to the Aiel, facing northeast, and Perrin considered walking a little north, to where Ghealdanin lancers were camped, or south to the nearest Mayener section, but taking a deep breath, he made himself lead his horse through his friends and neighbors from home. They were all awake, huddling in their cloaks and feeding the remnants of their shelters into the cook fires or cutting up the cold remains of last night's rabbit to add to the porridge in the kettles. Talk dwindled and the smell of wariness grew thick as heads lifted to watch him. Whetstones paused in sliding along steel, then resumed their sibilant whispering. The bow was their preferred weapon, but everyone carried a heavy dagger or a short-sword as well, or sometimes a longsword, and they had picked up spears and halberds and other polearms with strange blades and points that the Shaido had not thought worth carrying off with their pillage. Spears they were accustomed to, and hands used to wielding the quarterstaff at feastday competitions found the polearms not much different once the weight of metal on one end was accounted for. Their faces were hungry, tired and withdrawn.

sʌmwʌn ɹeɪzd ə hæfhɑɹɾɪd kɹaɪ ʌv "ɡoʊldeɪniz!" bʌt noʊ wʌn tʊk ɪɾ ʌp, ə θɪŋ ðət wʊɾə pliz pɛɹɪn ə mʌnθ ɡɔn. ə ɡɹeɪt dil hæd tʃeɪnʒd sɪns feɪl wɑz teɪkən. naʊ ðɛɹ saɪləns wɑz lɛɾən. jʌŋ kɛnli mɹɪn, hɪz tʃiks stɪl peɪl wɛɹ i hæd skɹeɪpt ɔf ɪz ətɛmpt əɾ ə bɪɹd, əvɔɪɾəd miɾɪŋ pɛɹɪnz aɪz, ən dʒɔɹi kɔŋɡɝ, laɪtfɪŋɡɝd wɛnɛvɝ i sɔ ɛniθɪŋ smɔl ən væljəbəl ən dʒɹʌŋk wɛnɛvɝ i kəd mænədʒ ɪt, spæt kəntɛmptʃwəsli əz pɛɹɪn pæs baɪ. bæn kɹeɪ pʌntʃt dʒɔɹiz ʃoʊldɝ fəɹ ɪt, hɑɹd, bʌt bæn dɪd nɑt lʊk ət pɛɹɪn iðɝ.

Someone raised a halfhearted cry of "Goldeneyes!" but no one took it up, a thing that would have pleased Perrin a month gone. A great deal had changed since Faile was taken. Now their silence was leaden. Young Kenly Maerin, his cheeks still pale where he had scraped off his attempt at a beard, avoided meeting Perrin's eyes, and Jori Congar, lightfingered whenever he saw anything small and valuable and drunk whenever he could manage it, spat contemptuously as Perrin passed by. Ban Crawe punched Jori's shoulder for it, hard, but Ban did not look at Perrin either.

dænɪl luɪn stʊɾ ʌp, tʌɡɪŋ nɝvəsli ət ðə θɪk mʌstæʃ ðət lʊk soʊ ɹɪdɪkjələs bɪniθ ɪz bik ʌv ə noʊz. "ɔɹɾɝz, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn?" ðə skɪni mæn æktʃəli  lʊkt ɹɪlivd wən pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ən i sæt daʊn əɡɛn kwɪkli, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə nɪɹəs kɛɾəl əz ðoʊ hi wɝ æŋkʃəs fəɹ ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ɡɹuɪl. meɪbi hi wɑz; noʊbɑdi ɡɑɾ ə fʊl bɛli leɪtli, ən dænɪl hæd nɛvɝ hæd mʌtʃ spɛɹ flɛʃ ɑn ɪz boʊnz. bɪhaɪn pɛɹɪn, ɛɹæm meɪɾ ə dɪsɡʌstəd saʊn vɛɹi laɪk ə ɡɹaʊl.

Dannil Lewin stood up, tugging nervously at the thick mustache that looked so ridiculous beneath his beak of a nose. "Orders, Lord Perrin?" The skinny man actually looked relieved when Perrin shook his head, and he sat down again quickly, staring at the nearest kettle as though he were anxious for the morning gruel. Maybe he was; nobody got a full belly lately, and Dannil had never had much spare flesh on his bones. Behind Perrin, Aram made a disgusted sound very like a growl.

ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝz hɪɹ bɪsaɪdz tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk, jɛt ðeɪ wɝ noʊ bɛɾɝ. oʊ, læmɡwɪn dɔɹn, ə hʌlkɪŋ fɛloʊ wɪð skɑɹz ɑn ɪz feɪs, tʌɡd ɪz fɔɹlɑk ən bɑbd ɪz hɛd. læmɡwɪn lʊk laɪk ə ʃoʊldɝθʌmpɝ, ə tævɝn tʌf, bʌɾ i wɑz pɛɹɪnz bɑdaɪsɝvənt naʊ, wən i hæd niɾ ʌv wʌn, wɪtʃ wɑz nɑɾ ɔfən, ən i maɪt dʒʌst wɑnə kip ɪn ə ɡʊɾ oʊɾɝ wɪð ɪz ɛmplɔɪɝ. bʌt bɑzəl ɡɪl, ðə staʊt wʌntaɪm ɪnkipɝ feɪl hæd teɪkən ɑn əz ðɛɹ ʃæmbaɪən, bɪzid hɪmsɛlf foʊldɪŋ ɪz blæŋkəts wɪð ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾəd kɛɹ, kipɪŋ ɪz bɔldɪŋ hɛd daʊn, ən feɪlz tʃif meɪd, lini ɛltɝɪŋ, ə boʊni wʊmən huz taɪt waɪt bʌn meɪɾ əɹ feɪs sim ivən nɛɹoʊɝ ðən ɪt wɑz, stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm stɝɪŋ ə kɛɾəl, hɝ θɪn lɪps kəmpɹɛst, ən ɹeɪzd əɹ lɔŋ wʊɾən spun əz ɪf tə fɛn pɛɹɪn ɔf. bɹin tæbɔɹwɪn, dɑɹk aɪz fɪɹs ɪn əɹ peɪl kɛɹhinɪn feɪs, slæp læmɡwɪnz ɑɹm hɑɹɾ ən fɹaʊn ʌp ət hɪm. ʃi wɑz læmɡwɪnz wʊmən, ɪf nɑɾ ɪz waɪf, ən ðə sɛkən ə feɪlz θɹi meɪdz. ðeɪ wəd fɑloʊ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ tɪl ðeɪ dʒɹɑp dɛd, ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi, ən fɔl ɑn feɪlz nɛk wən ðeɪ faʊn hɝ, bʌɾ oʊnli læmɡwɪn hæɾ ən aʊns ʌv wɛlkəm fəɹ pɛɹɪn. hi maɪɾ əv ɡɑɾən mɔɹ fɹəm dʒɝ ɡɹeɪɾi - ði æʃəmən wɝ ɛstʃɹeɪnʒd fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ðɛmsɛlvz, baɪ hu ən wʌt ðeɪ wɝ, ən niðɝ hæd ʃoʊn ɛni ænəmɑsəɾi təwɔɹd pɛɹɪn - bʌt dɪspaɪt ðə nɔɪz ə pipəl tʃɹæmpɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɑn ðə fɹoʊzən snoʊ ən kɝsɪŋ wən ðeɪ slɪpt, ɡɹeɪɾi wɑz stɪl ɹæpt ɪn ɪz blæŋkəts, snɔɹɪŋ əweɪ bɪniθ ə paɪn-bɹæntʃ lin-tə. pɛɹɪn wɔk θɹu hɪz fɹɛnz ən neɪbɝz ən sɝvəns ən fɛlt əloʊn. ə mæn kəɾ oʊnli pɹoʊkleɪm ɪz feɪθfəlnəs soʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ i dʒʌst ɡeɪv ʌp. ðə hɑɹɾ ə hɪz laɪf leɪ sʌmwɛɹ tə ðə nɔɹθist. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wəd ɹɪtɝn tə nɔɹməl wʌns i hæɾ əɹ bæk.

There were others here besides Two Rivers folk, yet they were no better. Oh, Lamgwin Dorn, a hulking fellow with scars on his face, tugged his forelock and bobbed his head. Lamgwin looked like a shoulderthumper, a tavern tough, but he was Perrin's bodyservant now, when he had need of one, which was not often, and he might just want to keep in a good odor with his employer. But Basel Gill, the stout onetime innkeeper Faile had taken on as their shambayan, busied himself folding his blankets with exaggerated care, keeping his balding head down, and Faile's chief maid, Lini Eltring, a bony woman whose tight white bun made her face seem even narrower than it was, straightened from stirring a kettle, her thin lips compressed, and raised her long wooden spoon as if to fend Perrin off. Breane Taborwin, dark eyes fierce in her pale Cairhienin face, slapped Lamgwin's arm hard and frowned up at him. She was Lamgwin's woman, if not his wife, and the second of Faile's three maids. They would follow the Shaido till they dropped dead, if necessary, and fall on Faile's neck when they found her, but only Lamgwin had an ounce of welcome for Perrin. He might have gotten more from Jur Grady - the Asha'man were estranged from everyone else themselves, by who and what they were, and neither had shown any animosity toward Perrin - but despite the noise of people tramping about on the frozen snow and cursing when they slipped, Grady was still wrapped in his blankets, snoring away beneath a pine-branch lean-to. Perrin walked through his friends and neighbors and servants and felt alone. A man could only proclaim his faithfulness so long before he just gave up. The heart of his life lay somewhere to the northeast. Everything would return to normal once he had her back.

ə θɪkɪɾ ə ʃɑɹpən steɪks tɛn peɪsɪz dip ɪnsɝkəl ðə kæmp, ən i wɛn tə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɡildænɪn lænsɝz' sɛkʃən, wɛɹ æŋɡəl pæðz hæd bɪn lɛft fəɹ maʊntəd mɛn tə ɹaɪɾ aʊt, ðoʊ beɪlwɝ ən ɛɹæm hæd tə fɔl ɪn bɪhaɪn ɪm ɪn ðə nɛɹoʊ weɪ. ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, ə mæn əfʊt wəɾ əv tə twɪst ən tɝn tə meɪk ɪt θɹu. ði ɛdʒ ə ðə fɔɹəs leɪ lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz dɪstənt, izi baʊʃɑt fəɹ tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, hjudʒ tʃɹiz θɹʌstɪŋ ə kænəpi haɪ ɪndə ðə skaɪ. səm ə ðə tʃɹiz hɪɹ wɝ stʃɹeɪnʒ tə pɛɹɪn, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ paɪnz ən lɛðɝlif ən ɛlmz aʊt ðɛɹ, səm əz mʌtʃ əz θɹi əɹ fɔɹ peɪsɪz θɪk ət ðə beɪs, ən oʊks ðət wɝ lɑɹdʒɝ stɪl. tʃɹiz ðət bɪɡ kɪld ɛniθɪŋ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən widz əɹ smɔl bʊʃəz ðət tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɹoʊ bɪniθ ðɛm, livɪŋ waɪd speɪsəz bɪtwin, bʌt ʃædoʊz dɑɹkɝ ðən ðə naɪt fɪl ðoʊz speɪsəz. ən oʊl fɔɹəst, wʌn ðət kəd swɑloʊ ɑɹmiz hoʊl ən nɛvɝ ɡɪv ʌp ðə boʊnz. beɪlwɝ fɑloʊɾ ɪm ɔl ðə weɪ θɹu ðə steɪks bɪfɔɹ dəsaɪɾɪŋ ðət ðɪs wɑz əz kloʊz tə əloʊn wɪð pɛɹɪn əz i wɑz laɪkli tə ɡɛɾ ɛni taɪm sun. "ðə ɹaɪɾɝz mæsimə hæz sɛn aʊt, maɪ lɔɹd," hi sɛd, ən hoʊldɪŋ ɪz kloʊk kloʊs i kæst ə səspɪʃəs lʊk bæk əɾ ɛɹæm, hu mɛɾ ɪt wɪð ə flæt stɛɹ.

A thicket of sharpened stakes ten paces deep encircled the camp, and he went to the edge of the Ghealdanin lancers' section, where angled paths had been left for mounted men to ride out, though Balwer and Aram had to fall in behind him in the narrow way. In front of the Two Rivers men, a man afoot would have to twist and turn to make it through. The edge of the forest lay little more than a hundred paces distant, easy bowshot for Two Rivers men, huge trees thrusting a canopy high into the sky. Some of the trees here were strange to Perrin, but there were pines and leatherleaf and elms out there, some as much as three or four paces thick at the base, and oaks that were larger still. Trees that big killed anything larger than weeds or small bushes that tried to grow beneath them, leaving wide spaces between, but shadows darker than the night filled those spaces. An old forest, one that could swallow armies whole and never give up the bones. Balwer followed him all the way through the stakes before deciding that this was as close to alone with Perrin as he was likely to get any time soon. "The riders Masema has sent out, my Lord," he said, and holding his cloak close he cast a suspicious look back at Aram, who met it with a flat stare.

"aɪ noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "ju θɪŋk ðəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə waɪtkloʊks." hi wɑz iɡɝ tə bi muvɪŋ, ən ðət mʌtʃ fɑɹðɝ fɹəm ɪz fɹɛnz. hi pʊt ðə hæn hoʊldɪŋ ɪz ɹeɪnz ɑn ðə sæɾəlboʊ, bʌt ɹɪfɹeɪn fɹəm pʊɾɪŋ ə buɾ ɪn ðə stɝəp. stɛpɝ tɔst ɪz hɛd, ɔlsoʊ ɪmpeɪʃənt. "mæsimə kəd bi sɛndɪŋ mɛsədʒəz tə ðə sintʃæn dʒʌst əz izəli."

"I know," Perrin said, "you think they're going to the Whitecloaks." He was eager to be moving, and that much farther from his friends. He put the hand holding his reins on the saddlebow, but refrained from putting a boot in the stirrup. Stepper tossed his head, also impatient. "Masema could be sending messages to the Seanchan just as easily."

"æz juv sɛd, maɪ lɔɹd. ə vaɪəbəl pɑsəbɪləɾi, tə bi ʃʊɹ. meɪ aɪ sədʒɛst wʌns əɡɛn, haʊɛvɝ, ðət mæsiməz vju ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz vɛɹi kloʊz tə ðəɾ ə ðə waɪtkloʊks? ɪn fækt, aɪdɛntɪkəl. hi wəd si ɛvɹi læst sɪstɝ dɛd, ɪf i kʊd. ðə sintʃæn vju ɪz mɔɹ . . . pɹæɡmæɾɪk, ɪf aɪ meɪ bi pɝmɪɾəd tə kɔl ɪt ðæt. lɛs ɪn əkɔɹd wɪð mæsimə, ɪn ɛni keɪs."

"As you have said, my Lord. A viable possibility, to be sure. May I suggest once again, however, that Masema's view of Aes Sedai is very close to that of the Whitecloaks? In fact, identical. He would see every last sister dead, if he could. The Seanchan view is more . . . pragmatic, if I may be permitted to call it that. Less in accord with Masema, in any case."

"haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ jə heɪt waɪtkloʊks, mæstɝ beɪlwɝ, ðeɪ ɑɹən ət ðə ɹuɾ ʌv ɛvɹi ivəl. ən mæsimə hæz dɛlt wɪð ðə sintʃæn bɪfɔɹ."

"However much you hate Whitecloaks, Master Balwer, they aren't at the root of every evil. And Masema has dealt with the Seanchan before."

"æz jə seɪ, maɪ lɔɹd." beɪlwɝz feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, bʌɾ i ɹikt ə daʊt. pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt pɹuv mæsiməz miɾɪŋz wɪð ðə sintʃæn, ən tɛlɪŋ ɛniwʌn haʊ hi hæd lɝn ə ðɛm wəɾ oʊnli æd tə hɪz pɹɛzən dɪfəkəltiz. ðət ɡeɪv beɪlwɝ pɹɑbləmz; hi wɑz ə mæn u laɪkt ɛvəɾəns. "æz fəɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə waɪz wʌnz, maɪ lɔɹd. . . . ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlweɪz sim tə bɪliv ðeɪ noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls, ɪksɛpt pɑsəbli ənʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ bɪliv ðə waɪz wʌnz ɑɹ mʌtʃ ðə seɪm." pɛɹɪn snɔɹɾɪd bɹif waɪt plumz ɪn ði ɛɹ. "tɛl mi sʌmθɪŋ aɪ doʊnt noʊ. laɪk waɪ mɑsʊɝi wəd mit wɪð mæsimə, ən waɪ ðə waɪz wʌnz əlaʊɾ ɪt. əl weɪdʒɝ stɛpɝ əɡɛnst ə hɔɹsʃu neɪl ʃi dɪdn də ɪt wɪθaʊt ðɛɹ pɝmɪʃən." ənʊɹə wɑz ənʌðɝ kwɛstʃən, bʌt ʃi kəd bi æktɪŋ ɑn əɹ oʊn. ɪt sɝɾənli simd ənlaɪkli ʃi wɑz æktɪŋ ət bɹəleɪnz bɪhɛst. ʃɪftɪŋ ɪz kloʊk ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, beɪlwɝ pɪɹd bæk əkɹɔs ðə ɹoʊz ə ʃɑɹpən steɪks ɪndə ðə kæmp, təwɔɹd ði il tɛns, skwɪntɪŋ əz ɪf i hoʊp tə si θɹu ðə tɛnt wɔlz. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ mɛni pɑsəbɪləɾiz, maɪ lɔɹd," hi sɛd tɛstəli. "fɔɹ səm u swɛɹ ən oʊθ, wʌtɛvɝ ɪz nɑt fɔɹbɪɾən ɪz pɝmɪɾəd, ən wʌtɛvɝ ɪz nɑt kəmændəd kən bi ɪɡnɔɹd. ʌðɝz teɪk ækʃənz ðeɪ bɪliv wɪl hɛlp ðɛɹ lidʒ wɪθaʊt fɝst æskɪŋ pɝmɪʃən. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə waɪz wʌnz fɔl ɪndə wʌn ə ðoʊz kæɾəɡɔɹiz, ɪt simz, bʌt fɝðɝ ðən ðæt, aɪ kən oʊnli spɛkjəleɪt, əz mæɾɝz stænd." "aɪ kəd dʒʌst æsk. ɛɛs sədaɪ kæn laɪ, ən ɪf aɪ pɹɛs hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf, mɑsʊɝi maɪɾ æktʃəli  tɛl mi ðə tʃɹuθ."

"As you say, my Lord." Balwer's face did not change, but he reeked of doubt. Perrin could not prove Masema's meetings with the Seanchan, and telling anyone how he had learned of them would only add to his present difficulties. That gave Balwer problems; he was a man who liked evidence. "As for the Aes Sedai and the Wise Ones, my Lord. . . . Aes Sedai always seem to believe they know better than anyone else, except possibly another Aes Sedai. I believe the Wise Ones are much the same." Perrin snorted brief white plumes in the air. "Tell me something I don't know. Like why Masuri would meet with Masema, and why the Wise Ones allowed it. I'll wager Stepper against a horseshoe nail she didn't do it without their permission." Annoura was another question, but she could be acting on her own. It certainly seemed unlikely she was acting at Berelain's behest. Shifting his cloak on his shoulders, Balwer peered back across the rows of sharpened stakes into the camp, toward the Aiel tents, squinting as if he hoped to see through the tent walls. "There are many possibilities, my Lord," he said testily. "For some who swear an oath, whatever is not forbidden is permitted, and whatever is not commanded can be ignored. Others take actions they believe will help their liege without first asking permission. The Aes Sedai and the Wise Ones fall into one of those categories, it seems, but further than that, I can only speculate, as matters stand." "I could just ask. Aes Sedai can't lie, and if I press hard enough, Masuri might actually tell me the truth."

beɪlwɝ ɡɹɪməst əz ðoʊ əɾ ə sʌɾən stʌmək peɪn. "pɝhæps, maɪ lɔɹd. pɝhæps. mɔɹ laɪkli ɪz ðət ʃi wəd tɛl jə sʌmθɪŋ ðət saʊnz laɪk ðə tʃɹuθ. ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ ɪkspɪɹiənst ɪn ðæt, əz jə noʊ. ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, maɪ lɔɹd, mɑsʊɝi wəd wʌndɝ haʊ jə nu tə æsk, ən ðət laɪn ə θɔt maɪt lɛd tə hɑviɑɹ ən nɛɹiən. ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz, hu kən seɪ hu ʃi maɪt tɛl?

Balwer grimaced as though at a sudden stomach pain. "Perhaps, my Lord. Perhaps. More likely is that she would tell you something that sounds like the truth. Aes Sedai are experienced in that, as you know. In any event, my Lord, Masuri would wonder how you knew to ask, and that line of thought might lead to Haviar and Nerion. Under the circumstances, who can say who she might tell?

stʃɹeɪtfɔɹwɝɾ ɪz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz ðə bɛst weɪ. səmtaɪmz, sɝɾən θɪŋz mʌs bi dʌn bɪhaɪn mæsks, fəɹ seɪfti." "aɪ toʊl jə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kʊdn bi tʃɹʌstɪd," ɛɹæm sɛɾ əbɹʌpli. "aɪ toʊl jə ðæt, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn." hi fɛl saɪlənt wən pɛɹɪn ɹeɪzd ə hænd, bʌt ðə stɪŋk ə fjʊɹi fɹəm ɪm wɑz soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ðət pɛɹɪn hæd tə ɪksheɪl tə klɪɹ ɪz lʌŋz. pɑɹɾ ə hɪm wɑntəd tə dʒɹɔ ðə sɛn dip ən lɛɾ ɪt kənsum hɪm.

Straightforward is not always the best way. Sometimes, certain things must be done behind masks, for safety." "I told you the Aes Sedai couldn't be trusted," Aram said abruptly. "I told you that, Lord Perrin." He fell silent when Perrin raised a hand, but the stink of fury from him was so strong that Perrin had to exhale to clear his lungs. Part of him wanted to draw the scent deep and let it consume him.

pɛɹɪn stʌɾid beɪlwɝ kɛɹfəli. ɪf ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd twɪs ðə tʃɹuθ tɪl jə kəd nɑt tɛl ʌp fɹəm daʊn, ən ðeɪ kəɾ ən dɪd, haʊ fɑɹ kəd jə tʃɹʌst? tʃɹʌst wɑz ɔlweɪz ðə kwɛstʃən. hi hæd lɝn ðəɾ ɪn hɑɹd lɛsənz. hi tʊk ə fɝm tʃɛk ɑn ɪz æŋɡɝ, ðoʊ. ə hæmɝ hæd tə bi juzd wɪð kɛɹ, ən i wɑz wɝkɪŋ ə fɔɹdʒ wɛɹ wʌn slɪp wəd tɛɹ ðə hɑɹɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz tʃɛst. "æn maɪt mæɾɝz tʃeɪnʒ ɪf səm ə sɛlənz fɹɛnz bɪɡæn spɛndɪŋ mɔɹ taɪm əmʌŋ ði il? ðeɪ wɑnə bi il, æftɝ ɔl.

Perrin studied Balwer carefully. If Aes Sedai could twist the truth till you could not tell up from down, and they could and did, how far could you trust? Trust was always the question. He had learned that in hard lessons. He took a firm check on his anger, though. A hammer had to be used with care, and he was working a forge where one slip would tear the heart out of his chest. "And might matters change if some of Selande's friends began spending more time among the Aiel? They want to be Aiel, after all.

ðəɾ ɔt tə ɡɪv əm ɪnʌf ɪkskjus. ən meɪbi wʌn ə ðɛm kən stʃɹaɪk ʌp ə fɹɛndʃɪp wɪð bɹəleɪn, ən wɪð əɹ ædvaɪzɝ." "ðæt ʃəd bi pɑsəbəl, maɪ lɔɹd," beɪlwɝ sɛɾ æftɝ ðə slaɪɾəst hɛzəteɪʃən. "leɪɾi mɛdɔɹz fɑðɝ ɪz ə haɪ lɔɹɾ ə tɛɹ, ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ səfɪʃən ɹæŋk tə əpɹoʊtʃ ðə fɝst ə min, ən ɔlsoʊ ə ɹizən. pɑsəbli wʌn əɹ tu ʌv ðə kɛɹhinɪn stæn haɪ ɪnʌf, əz wɛl. faɪndɪŋ ðoʊz tə lɪv əmʌŋ ði il wɪl bi iziɝ stɪl." pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. ɪnfənət kɛɹ wɪð ðə hæmɝ, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ jə wɑntəd tə smæʃ wʌtɛvɝ leɪ wɪðɪn ɹitʃ. "ðɛn də ɪt. bʌt, mæstɝ beɪlwɝ, juv bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə . . . ɡaɪd . . . mi tə ðɪs sɪns sɛlən lɛft ʌs. fɹəm naʊ ɑn, ɪf juv ə sədʒɛstʃən tə meɪk, meɪk ɪt. ivən ɪf aɪ seɪ noʊ tə naɪn ɪn ə ɹoʊ, əl ɔlweɪz lɪsən tə ə tɛnθ. aɪm nɑɾ ə klɛvɝ mæn, bʌɾ aɪm wɪlɪŋ tə lɪsən tə pipəl u ɑɹ, ən aɪ θɪŋk jə ɑɹ. dʒʌs doʊn tʃɹaɪ poʊkɪŋ mi ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən jə wɑn mi tə ɡoʊ. aɪ doʊn laɪk ðæt, mæstɝ beɪlwɝ." beɪlwɝ blɪŋkt, ðən ʌv ɔl θɪŋz, baʊd wɪð ɪz hænz foʊldəɾ əɾ ɪz weɪst. hi smɛl sɝpɹaɪzd. ən ɡɹæɾəfaɪd. ɡɹæɾəfaɪd? "æz jə seɪ, maɪ lɔɹd. maɪ pɹiviəs ɛmplɔɪɝ dɪslaɪk mi sədʒɛstɪŋ ækʃənz ənlɛs aɪ wɑz æskt. aɪ woʊn meɪk ðə seɪm mɪsteɪk əɡɛn, aɪ əʃʊɹ ju." aɪɪŋ pɛɹɪn, hi sim tə ɹitʃ ə dɪsɪʒən. "ɪf aɪ meɪ seɪ soʊ," hi sɛd kɛɹfəli, "aɪ hæv faʊn sɝvɪŋ jə . . . plɛzənt . . . ɪn weɪz aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt. jə ɑɹ wʌt jə sim, maɪ lɔɹd, wɪð noʊ pɔɪzənd niɾəlz hɪɾən əweɪ tə kætʃ ði ənwɛɹi. maɪ pɹiviəs ɛmplɔɪɝ wɑz noʊn waɪdli fəɹ klɛvɝnəs, bʌɾ aɪ bɪliv jə ɑɹ ikwəli klɛvɝ, ɪn ə dɪfɹənt weɪ. aɪ bɪliv aɪ wəd ɹəɡɹɛt livɪŋ jəɹ sɝvəs. ɛni mæn maɪt seɪ ðiz θɪŋz tə kip ɪz pleɪs, bʌɾ aɪ min ðɛm." pɔɪzənd niɾəlz? bɪfɔɹ ɛntɝɪŋ pɛɹɪnz sɝvəs, beɪlwɝz læst ɛmplɔɪmən hæd bɪn əz sɛkɹətɛɹi tə ə mʊɹændiən noʊbəlwʊmən fɔlən ɪndə hɑɹd taɪmz u kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əfɔɹd tə kip hɪm.

That ought to give them enough excuse. And maybe one of them can strike up a friendship with Berelain, and with her advisor." "That should be possible, my Lord," Balwer said after the slightest hesitation. "Lady Medore's father is a High Lord of Tear, giving her sufficient rank to approach the First of Mayene, and also a reason. Possibly one or two of the Cairhienin stand high enough, as well. Finding those to live among the Aiel will be easier still." Perrin nodded. Infinite care with the hammer, however much you wanted to smash whatever lay within reach. "Then do it. But, Master Balwer, you've been trying to . . . guide . . . me to this since Selande left us. From now on, if you have a suggestion to make, make it. Even if I say no to nine in a row, I'll always listen to a tenth. I'm not a clever man, but I'm willing to listen to people who are, and I think you are. Just don't try poking me in the direction you want me to go. I don't like that, Master Balwer." Balwer blinked, then of all things, bowed with his hands folded at his waist. He smelled surprised. And gratified. Gratified? "As you say, my Lord. My previous employer disliked me suggesting actions unless I was asked. I won't make the same mistake again, I assure you." Eyeing Perrin, he seemed to reach a decision. "If I may say so," he said carefully, "I have found serving you . . . pleasant . . . in ways I did not expect. You are what you seem, my Lord, with no poisoned needles hidden away to catch the unwary. My previous employer was known widely for cleverness, but I believe you are equally clever, in a different way. I believe I would regret leaving your service. Any man might say these things to keep his place, but I mean them." Poisoned needles? Before entering Perrin's service, Balwer's last employment had been as secretary to a Murandian noblewoman fallen into hard times who could no longer afford to keep him.

mʊɹændi mʌs bi ə ɹʌfɝ pleɪs ðən pɛɹɪn θɔt. "aɪ si noʊ ɹizən fəɹ jə tə liv maɪ ɛmplɔɪ. dʒʌs tɛl mi wʌt jə wɑnə də ən lemi dɪsaɪd, doʊn tʃɹaɪ tə pɹɑd. ən fɝɡɛt ðə flæɾɝi."

Murandy must be a rougher place than Perrin thought. "I see no reason for you to leave my employ. Just tell me what you want to do and let me decide, don't try to prod. And forget the flattery."

"aɪ nɛvɝ flæɾɝ, maɪ lɔɹd. bʌɾ aɪm ədɛpt ət ʃeɪpɪŋ maɪsɛlf tə maɪ mæstɝz nidz; ɪts ə ɹɪkwaɪɹmən ə maɪ pɹəfɛʃən." ðə lɪɾəl mæn baʊd wʌns mɔɹ. hi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ðɪs fɔɹməl bɪfɔɹ.

"I never flatter, my Lord. But I am adept at shaping myself to my master's needs; it is a requirement of my profession." The little man bowed once more. He had never been this formal before.

"ɪf juv noʊ fɝðɝ kwɛstʃənz, maɪ lɔɹd, meɪ aɪ ɡoʊ tə faɪn ðə leɪɾi mɛdɔɹ?" pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. ðə lɪɾəl mæn baʊd jɛɾ əɡɛn, bækɪŋ əweɪ, ðən wɛn skɪɾɝɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə kæmp, hɪz kloʊk flʌɾɝɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪm əz i dɑdʒ θɹu ðə ʃɑɹpən steɪks laɪk ə spɛɹoʊ hɑpɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə snoʊ. hi wɑz ə stʃɹeɪnʒ fɛloʊ.

"If you have no further questions, my Lord, may I go to find the Lady Medore?" Perrin nodded. The little man bowed yet again, backing away, then went skittering toward the camp, his cloak fluttering behind him as he dodged through the sharpened stakes like a sparrow hopping across the snow. He was a strange fellow.

"aɪ doʊn tʃɹʌs hɪm," ɛɹæm mʌɾɝd, stɛɹɪŋ æftɝ beɪlwɝ. "æn aɪ doʊn tʃɹʌst sɛlən ən ðət lɑt.

"I don't trust him," Aram muttered, staring after Balwer. "And I don't trust Selande and that lot.

ðəl θɹoʊ ɪn wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, jə mɑɹk maɪ wɝdz."

They'll throw in with the Aes Sedai, you mark my words."

"ju hæv tə tʃɹʌst sʌmbɑɾi," pɛɹɪn sɛd ɹʌfli. ðə kwɛstʃən wɑz, hu? swɪŋɪŋ ɪndə stɛpɝz sæɾəl, hi buɾɪd ðə dʌn ɪn ðə ɹɪbz. ə hæmɝ wɑz jusləs laɪɪŋ ət ɹɛst.

"You have to trust somebody," Perrin said roughly. The question was, who? Swinging into Stepper's saddle, he booted the dun in the ribs. A hammer was useless lying at rest.

tʃæptɝ sɪks

CHAPTER 6

ðə sɛn ʌv ə dʒɹim ðə koʊld ɛɹ sim klin ən fɹɛʃ ɪn pɛɹɪnz noʊz əz i ɡæləpt ɪndə ðə fɔɹəst, ðə bɹizɪz fʊl ə ðə kɹɪspnəs ə ðə snoʊ ðət faʊnteɪn ɪn spɹeɪz bɪniθ stɛpɝz hʊvz. aʊt hɪɹ, hi kəd fɝɡɛɾ oʊl fɹɛnz u wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə bɪliv ðə wɝst ɑn ɹumɝ. hi kəd tʃɹaɪ tə fɝɡɛt mæsimə, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðə waɪz wʌnz. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ wɛldɪd tə ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪz skʌl, haʊɛvɝ, ən aɪɝn pʌzəl ðət wəd nɑt jil noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ hi twɪstəd. hi wɑntəd tə ɹɛntʃ ɪɾ əpɑɹt, bʌt ðət nɛvɝ wɝkt wɪð ə blæksmɪθs pʌzəl.

The Scent of a Dream The cold air seemed clean and fresh in Perrin's nose as he galloped into the forest, the breezes full of the crispness of the snow that fountained in sprays beneath Stepper's hooves. Out here, he could forget old friends who were willing to believe the worst on rumor. He could try to forget Masema, and the Aes Sedai, and the Wise Ones. The Shaido were welded to the inside of his skull, however, an iron puzzle that would not yield no matter how he twisted. He wanted to wrench it apart, but that never worked with a blacksmith's puzzle.

æftɝ wʌn ʃɔɹt bɝst ə spid, hi sloʊd ðə dʌn tə ə wɔk, filɪŋ ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɪlt. ðə dɑɹknəs bɪniθ ðə fɔɹəs kænəpi wɑz dip, ən stoʊn aʊtkɹɑps bɪtwin ðə tɔl tʃɹiz wɔɹn ə mɔɹ hɪɾən bɪniθ ðə snoʊ, ə hʌnʒɹəd pleɪsəz ðət kəd bɹeɪk ə ɹʌnɪŋ hɔɹsəz lɛɡ, ən ðət wɪθaʊt kaʊntɪŋ ɡoʊfɝ hoʊlz ən fɑks dɛnz ən bædʒɝ sɛts. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə teɪk ðə ɹɪsk. ə ɡæləp wəd nɑt fɹi feɪl ən aʊɝ sunɝ, ən noʊ hɔɹs kəd meɪnteɪn ðət peɪs fəɹ lɔŋ ɪn ɛni keɪs. ðə snoʊ hɪɹ wɑz ni-dip ɪn pleɪsəz wɛɹ ɪt hæd dʒɹɪftəd, ən dip ɪnʌf ɛlswɛɹ. hi ɹoʊd nɔɹθist, ðoʊ. ðə skaʊts wəd bi kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə nɔɹθist, wɪð nuz ə feɪl. nuz ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, ət list, ə loʊkeɪʃən.

After one short burst of speed, he slowed the dun to a walk, feeling a touch of guilt. The darkness beneath the forest canopy was deep, and stone outcrops between the tall trees warned of more hidden beneath the snow, a hundred places that could break a running horse's leg, and that without counting gopher holes and fox dens and badger sets. There was no need to take the risk. A gallop would not free Faile an hour sooner, and no horse could maintain that pace for long in any case. The snow here was knee-deep in places where it had drifted, and deep enough elsewhere. He rode northeast, though. The scouts would be coming from the northeast, with news of Faile. News of the Shaido, at least, a location.

hi hæd hoʊp fəɹ ðət soʊ ɔfən, pɹeɪd fəɹ ɪt, bʌt tədeɪ, hi nu ɪt wəd kʌm. jɛt noʊɪŋ oʊnli ɪnkɹist ɪz æŋzaɪəɾi. faɪndɪŋ əm wɑz oʊnli ðə fɝs pɑɹɾ ə sɑlvɪŋ ðɪs pʌzəl. æŋɡɝ meɪɾ ɪz maɪn flæʃ fɹəm wʌn θɪŋ tə ənʌðɝ, jɛt noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt beɪlwɝ sɛd, pɛɹɪn nu hi wɑz məθɑɾəkəl ət bɛst.

He had hoped for that so often, prayed for it, but today, he knew it would come. Yet knowing only increased his anxiety. Finding them was only the first part of solving this puzzle. Anger made his mind flash from one thing to another, yet no matter what Balwer said, Perrin knew he was methodical at best.

hi dɪd nɑt də wɛl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə θɪŋk kwɪkli, ən lækɪŋ klɛvɝnəs, məθɑɾəkəl wɑz gɑnə hæv tə du.

He did not do well trying to think quickly, and lacking cleverness, methodical was going to have to do.

sʌmhaʊ.

Somehow.

ɛɹæm kɑɾ ʌp tə hɪm, ɹʌnɪŋ ɪz ɡɹeɪ hɑɹd, ən sloʊd tə ɹaɪd dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl bɪhaɪn ən tə wʌn saɪd laɪk ə hilɪŋ haʊnd. pɛɹɪn lɛt hɪm. ɛɹæm nɛvɝ smɛl kʌmftəɹbəl wən pɛɹɪn meɪɾ ɪm ɹaɪɾ əlɔŋsaɪd. ðə wʌntaɪm tɪŋkɝ dɪd nɑt spik, bʌɾ ɛɾiz ɪn ði aɪsi ɛɹ bɹɔɾ ɪz sɛnt, ə mɛlæŋ ʌv æŋɡɝ ən səspɪʃən ən dɪsɡɹʌntəlmənt. hi sæɾ ɪz sæɾəl əz tɛns əz ən oʊvɝ-waʊn klɑkspɹɪŋ ən wɑtʃt ðə fɔɹəst ɝaʊn əm ɡɹɪmli, əz ðoʊ hi ɪkspɛktəd ʃeɪɾoʊ tə lip aʊt fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə nɪɹəs tʃɹi. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ɔlmoʊst ɛniθɪŋ cʊɾə hɪɾən fɹəm moʊs mɛn ɪn ðiz wʊdz. wɛɹ ðə skaɪ oʊvɝhɛd kəd bi sin θɹu ðə kænəpi ʌv bɹæntʃəz, ɪt hɛld ə dɛfənət tɪnʒ ə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪnəs, bʌt fəɹ ðə moʊmən ðət kæs ðə fɔɹəst ɪn ʃædoʊz mɝkiɝ ðən naɪt, ən ðə tʃɹiz ðɛmsɛlvz wɝ mæsɪv kɑləmz ə dɑɹknəs. jɛɾ ivən ðə ʃɪft ʌv ə blæk-wɪŋ dʒækdɔ ɑn ə snoʊ-maʊndɪd bɹæntʃ, ɪts fɛðɝz flʌft əɡɛns ðə koʊld, kɑt pɛɹɪnz aɪz, ən ə hʌntɪŋ paɪn mɑɹɾən, ə dipɝ blæk ðən ðə dɑɹknəs, kɔʃəsli ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪts hɛɾ ɑn ənʌðɝ. hi kɑt ðə sɛn ə boʊθ, tu. ə feɪnt wɪf ə mæn sɛn keɪm fɹəm ʌp ɪn ə mæsɪv oʊk wɪð dɑɹk spɹɛɾɪŋ lɪmz əz θɪk əz ə poʊni. ðə ɡildænɪn ən minɝz hæd ðɛɹ maʊntəd pətʃɹoʊlz sɝkəlɪŋ ðə kæmp ə fju maɪlz aʊt, bʌɾ i pɹəfɝd tə ɹɪlaɪ ɑn tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn kloʊsɝ ɪn. hi dɪd nɑɾ əv ɪnʌf mɛn tə ɹɪŋ ðə kæmp kəmplitli, jɛt ðeɪ wɝ juz tə fɔɹəsts, ən tə hʌntɪŋ ænəməlz ðət maɪt hʌn əm ɪn tɝn, juz tə noʊɾɪsɪŋ muvmən ðət wəɾ ɪskeɪp ə mæn θɪŋkɪŋ ɪn tɝmz ə soʊlʒɝz ən wɔɹ. ɹɪdʒɛkæts daʊn fɹəm ðə maʊntənz æftɝ ʃip kəd haɪɾ ɪn pleɪn saɪt, ən bɛɹ ən waɪl bɔɹ wɝ noʊn tə dʌbəl bæk ɑn ðɛɹ pɝsuɝz ən laɪ ɪn æmbʊʃ.

Aram caught up to him, running his gray hard, and slowed to ride just a little behind and to one side like a heeling hound. Perrin let him. Aram never smelled comfortable when Perrin made him ride alongside. The onetime Tinker did not speak, but eddies in the icy air brought his scent, a melange of anger and suspicion and disgruntlement. He sat his saddle as tense as an over-wound clockspring and watched the forest around them grimly, as though he expected Shaido to leap out from behind the nearest tree. In truth, almost anything could have hidden from most men in these woods. Where the sky overhead could be seen through the canopy of branches, it held a definite tinge of dark grayness, but for the moment that cast the forest in shadows murkier than night, and the trees themselves were massive columns of darkness. Yet even the shift of a black-winged jackdaw on a snow-mounded branch, its feathers fluffed against the cold, caught Perrin's eyes, and a hunting pine martin, a deeper black than the darkness, cautiously raising its head on another. He caught the scent of both, too. A faint whiff of man scent came from up in a massive oak with dark spreading limbs as thick as a pony. The Ghealdanin and Mayeners had their mounted patrols circling the camp a few miles out, but he preferred to rely on Two Rivers men closer in. He did not have enough men to ring the camp completely, yet they were used to forests, and to hunting animals that might hunt them in turn, used to noticing movement that would escape a man thinking in terms of soldiers and war. Ridgecats down from the mountains after sheep could hide in plain sight, and bear and wild boar were known to double back on their pursuers and lie in ambush.

fɹəm bɹæntʃəz θɝɾi ən fɔɹɾi fiɾ əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ðə mɛn kəd si ɛniθɪŋ ðət muv bɪloʊ ɪn taɪm tə wɔɹn ðə kæmp, ən wɪð ðɛɹ lɔŋboʊz, ðeɪ kəɾ ɪɡzækt ə hɛvi pɹaɪs fɹəm ɛniwʌn u tʃɹaɪd tə fɔɹs ə weɪ pæs ðɛm. jɛt ðə pɹɛzəns ə ðə ɡɑɹd tʌtʃt ɪz maɪn əz laɪtli əz ðə tɛzəns ə ðə dʒækdɔ. hi wɑz foʊkəst əhɛd θɹu ðə tʃɹiz ən ðə ʃædoʊz, ɪntɛn ɑn pɪkɪŋ aʊt ðə fɝst saɪn ə ðə skaʊts ɹɪtɝnɪŋ. əbɹʌpli stɛpɝ tɔst ɪz hɛɾ ən snɔɹɾɪd ɪn ə spju ʌv mɪst, aɪz ɹoʊlɪŋ ɪn fɪɹ əz i stɑp dɛd, ən ɛɹæmz ɡɹeɪ skwild ən ʃaɪd. pɛɹɪn lin fɔɹwɝd tə pæt ðə tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ stæljənz nɛk, bʌɾ ɪz hæn fɹoʊz əz i kɑɾ ə tʃɹeɪs ə sɛnt, ə smɛl ə bɝn sʌlfɝ feɪn ɪn ði ɛɹ, ðət meɪd ðə hɛɹ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk tʃɹaɪ tə stænd. ɔlmoʊs bɝn sʌlfɝ; ðət wɑz oʊnli ə peɪl ɪməteɪʃən ə ðɪs smɛl. ɪt hæɾ ə ɹik ʌv. . . ɹɔŋɡnəs, ʌv sʌmθɪŋ ðət dɪd nɑt bɪlɔŋ ɪn ðɪs wɝld. ðə sɛnt wɑz nɑt nu - jə kəd nɑɾ ɛvɝ əv kɔl ðət stɪŋk "fɹɛʃ" - bʌt nɑɾ oʊld, iðɝ. ən aʊɝ, pɝhæps lɛs. meɪbi əbaʊt ðə taɪm i hæd wækənd. əbaʊt ðə taɪm i hæd dʒɹimd ə ðɪs sɛnt. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn?" ɛɹæm wɑz hævɪŋ dɪfəkəlti kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ ɪz ɡɹeɪ, wɪtʃ dænst ɪn sɝkəlz faɪɾɪŋ ðə ɹeɪnz ən wɑntɪŋ tə ɹʌn ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪt wɑz əweɪ, bʌɾ ivən waɪl sɔɪŋ əɾ ɪz ɹeɪnz i hæɾ ɪz wʊlfhɛd-pɑməl sɔɹɾ aʊt. hi pɹæktəst wɪð ɪt deɪli, fəɹ aʊɝz ɑn ɛnd wən i kʊd, ən ðoʊz u nu əbaʊt sətʃ θɪŋz sɛɾ i wɑz ɡʊd. "ju meɪ bi eɪbəl tə meɪk aʊɾ ə blæk θɹɛd fɹəm ə waɪɾ ɪn ðɪs, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɪzən deɪ jɛt tə mi. aɪ kæn si ɛniθɪŋ wɛl ɪnʌf tə mæɾɝ." "pʊt ðəɾ əweɪ," pɛɹɪn toʊl hɪm. "ɪɾ ɪzənt niɾəd. sɔɹdz wʊdn də ɛni ɡʊd, ɛniweɪ." hi hæd tə koʊks ɪz tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ maʊn tə muv fɔɹwɝd, bʌɾ i fɑloʊd ðə ɹæŋk smɛl, skænɪŋ ðə snoʊ-kʌvɝd ɡɹaʊn əhɛd. hi nu ðət smɛl, ən nɑt dʒʌs fɹəm ðə dʒɹim.

From branches thirty and forty feet above the ground, the men could see anything that moved below in time to warn the camp, and with their longbows, they could exact a heavy price from anyone who tried to force a way past them. Yet the presence of the guard touched his mind as lightly as the ptesence of the jackdaw. He was focused ahead through the trees and the shadows, intent on picking out the first sign of the scouts returning. Abruptly Stepper tossed his head and snorted in a spew of mist, eyes rolling in fear as he stopped dead, and Aram's gray squealed and shied. Perrin leaned forward to pat the trembling stallion's neck, but his hand froze as he caught a trace of scent, a smell of burned sulphur faint in the air, that made the hair on the back of his neck try to stand. Almost burnt sulphur; that was only a pale imitation of this smell. It had a reek of. . . wrongness, of something that did not belong in this world. The scent was not new - you could not ever have called that stink "fresh" - but not old, either. An hour, perhaps less. Maybe about the time he had wakened. About the time he had dreamed of this scent. "What is it, Lord Perrin?" Aram was having difficulty controlling his gray, which danced in circles fighting the reins and wanting to run in any direction so long as it was away, but even while sawing at his reins he had his wolfhead-pommeled sword out. He practiced with it daily, for hours on end when he could, and those who knew about such things said he was good. "You may be able to make out a black thread from a white in this, but it isn't day yet to me. I can't see anything well enough to matter." "Put that away," Perrin told him. "It isn't needed. Swords wouldn't do any good, anyway." He had to coax his trembling mount to move forward, but he followed the rank smell, scanning the snow-covered ground ahead. He knew that smell, and not just from the dream.

ɪɾ oʊnli tʊk ə lɪɾəl waɪl tə faɪnd wʌɾ i wɑz lʊkɪŋ fɔɹ, ən stɛpɝ ɡeɪv ə ɡɹeɪtfəl wɪkɝ wən pɛɹɪn ɹeɪn ɪm ɪn wɛl ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə slæb-laɪk kɹɛst ʌv ɡɹeɪ stoʊn, tu peɪsɪz waɪd, ðət dʒʌɾɪd ʌp tə hɪz ɹaɪt. ðə snoʊ ɔl ɝaʊnd wɑz smuð ən ənmɑɹkt, bʌt dɔɡ tʃɹæks kʌvɝd ðə tɪltəd spæn ə stoʊn, əz ðoʊ ə pæk hæd skɹæmbəld oʊvɝ ɪɾ əz ðeɪ ɹæn. dɪmnəs ən ʃædoʊz əɹ noʊ, ðeɪ wɝ pleɪn tə pɛɹɪnz aɪz. fʊtpɹɪns lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ðə pɑm ə hɪz hænd, pɹɛst ɪndə ðə stoʊn əz ðoʊ ɪt hæd bɪn mʌd. hi pæɾəd stɛpɝz nɛk əɡɛn. noʊ wʌndɝ ði ænəməl wɑz fɹaɪɾənd.

It only took a little while to find what he was looking for, and Stepper gave a grateful whicker when Perrin reined him in well short of a slab-like crest of gray stone, two paces wide, that jutted up to his right. The snow all around was smooth and unmarked, but dog tracks covered the tilted span of stone, as though a pack had scrambled over it as they ran. Dimness and shadows or no, they were plain to Perrin's eyes. Footprints larger than the palm of his hand, pressed into the stone as though it had been mud. He patted Stepper's neck again. No wonder the animal was frightened.

"ɡoʊ bæk tə ðə kæmp ən faɪn dænɪl, ɛɹæm. tɛl ɪm aɪ sɛd tə lɛɾ ɛvɹiwʌn noʊ ðəɹ wɝ dɑɹkhaʊnz hɪɹ, meɪbi ən aʊɝ əɡoʊ. ən pʊt jəɹ sɔɹɾ əweɪ. jə wʊdnt wɑnə tʃɹaɪ kɪlɪŋ ə dɑɹkhaʊnd wɪð ə sɔɹd, bɪliv mi."

"Go back to the camp and find Dannil, Aram. Tell him I said to let everyone know there were Darkhounds here, maybe an hour ago. And put your sword away. You wouldn't want to try killing a Darkhound with a sword, believe me."

"dɑɹkhaʊnz?" ɛɹæm ɪkskleɪmd, piɹɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪndə ðə mɝki ʃædoʊz bɪtwin ðə tʃɹiz.

"Darkhounds?" Aram exclaimed, peering around into the murky shadows between the trees.

ðəɹ wɑz ən æŋkʃəs fɪɹ ɪn ɪz sɛnt, naʊ. moʊs mɛn wʊɾə læft əbaʊt tʃɹævəlɝz' teɪlz əɹ stɔɹiz fəɹ tʃɪlʒɹən. tɪŋkɝz ɹoʊm ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd, ən nu wʌt kəd faʊn ɪn ðə waɪlz. ɛɹæm ʃiðd ðə sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz bæk wɪð ɑbviəs ɹɪlʌktəns, bʌɾ ɪz ɹaɪt hæn ɹɪmeɪn ɹeɪzd, hæf-ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə hɪlt. "haʊ dʒju kɪl ə dɑɹkhaʊnd? kən ðeɪ bi kɪld?" ðən əɡɛn, meɪbi hi dɪd nɑɾ əv mʌtʃ ɡʊd sɛns ət ðæt.

There was an anxious fear in his scent, now. Most men would have laughed about travelers' tales or stories for children. Tinkers roamed the countryside, and knew what could found in the wilds. Aram sheathed the sword on his back with obvious reluctance, but his right hand remained raised, half-reaching for the hilt. "How do you kill a Darkhound? Can they be killed?" Then again, maybe he did not have much good sense at that.

"dʒʌs bi ɡlæd jə doʊn əv tə tʃɹaɪ, ɛɹæm. naʊ ɡoʊ də laɪk aɪ toʊl ju. ɛvɹiwʌn nidz tə kip ə ʃɑɹp lʊkaʊɾ ɪn keɪs ðeɪ kʌm bæk. nɑt mʌtʃ tʃæns ə ðæt, aɪd seɪ, bʌt bɛɾɝ seɪf." pɛɹɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝd feɪsɪŋ ə pæk ə ðɛm wʌns, ən kɪlɪŋ wʌn. hi θɔɾ i hæd kɪld wʌn, æftɝ hɪɾɪŋ ɪt wɪð θɹi ɡʊd bɹɔdhɛɾ æɹoʊz. ʃæɾoʊzpɔn dɪd nɑt daɪ izəli. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd hæd tə fɪnɪʃ ðət pæk, wɪð bɑlfaɪɝ. "meɪk ʃʊɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən waɪz wʌnz lɝn ə ðɪs, ən ði æʃəmən." smɔl tʃæns ɛni ʌv əm nu haʊ tə meɪk bɑlfaɪɝ - ðə wɪmən maɪt nɑɾ ədmɪt noʊɪŋ ə fɔɹbɪɾən wiv ɪf ðeɪ dɪd, ən meɪbi nɑt ðə mɛn iðɝ - bʌt meɪbi ðeɪ nu sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ðət kəd wɝk.

"Just be glad you don't have to try, Aram. Now go do like I told you. Everyone needs to keep a sharp lookout in case they come back. Not much chance of that, I'd say, but better safe." Perrin remembered facing a pack of them once, and killing one. He thought he had killed one, after hitting it with three good broadhead arrows. Shadowspawn did not die easily. Moiraine had had to finish that pack, with balefire. "Make sure the Aes Sedai and Wise Ones learn of this, and the Asha'man." Small chance any of them knew how to make balefire - the women might not admit knowing a forbidden weave if they did, and maybe not the men either - but maybe they knew something else that could work.

ɛɹæm wɑz ɹɪlʌktən tə liv pɛɹɪn əloʊn əntɪl pɛɹɪn snæpt ət hɪm, ən ðən i tɝn bæk təwɔɹd ðə kæmp tʃɹeɪlɪŋ smɛlz ʌv ʌmbɹɪdʒ ən hɝt, əz ɪf tu mɛn wʊɾə bɪn ə wɪt seɪfɝ ðən wʌn. əz sun əz ði ʌðɝ mæn wɑz aʊɾ ə saɪt, pɛɹɪn ɹeɪn stɛpɝ saʊθwɝd, ðə dɝɛkʃən ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz hæd bɪn hɛɾɪŋ. hi dɪd nɑt wɑn kʌmpəni fəɹ ðɪs, ivən ɛɹæmz. dʒʌs kəz pipəl səmtaɪmz noʊɾəd ɪz ʃɑɹp aɪsaɪt wɑz noʊ ɹizən tə flɔn ɪt, əɹ ɪz sɛns ə smɛl. ðəɹ wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɹizənz ɪnʌf tə ʃʌn ɪm wɪθaʊɾ æɾɪŋ mɔɹ.

Aram was reluctant to leave Perrin alone until Perrin snapped at him, and then he turned back toward the camp trailing smells of umbrage and hurt, as if two men would have been a whit safer than one. As soon as the other man was out of sight, Perrin reined Stepper southward, the direction the Darkhounds had been heading. He did not want company for this, even Aram's. Just because people sometimes noted his sharp eyesight was no reason to flaunt it, or his sense of smell. There were already reasons enough to shun him without adding more.

ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn tʃæns ðət ðə kɹitʃɝz hæd pæst soʊ nɪɹ ɪz kæmp, bʌt ðə læs fju jɪɹz hæd meɪɾ ɪm ənizi wɪð koʊɪnsəɾənsɪz. ɔl tu ɔfən, ðeɪ wɝ nɑt koʊɪnsɪɾəns əɾ ɔl, nɑt ðə weɪ ʌðɝ mɛn kaʊntəd sətʃ θɪŋz. ɪf ðɪs wɑz ənʌðɝ bɪɾ ə hɪz tɑ'-vɹən tʌɡɪŋ ət ðə pæɾɝn, ɪt wɑz ə bɪɾ i cʊɾə dʌn wɪθaʊt.

It might have been chance that the creatures had passed so near his camp, but the last few years had made him uneasy with coincidences. All too often, they were not coincidence at all, not the way other men counted such things. If this was another bit of his ta'-veren tugging at the Pattern, it was a bit he could have done without.

ðə θɪŋ sim tə hæv mɔɹ dɪsədvæntɪdʒɪz ðən ædvæntɪdʒɪz ivən wən ɪɾ əpɪɹd tə bi wɝkɪŋ ɪn jəɹ feɪvɝ. ðə tʃæns ðət feɪvɝd jə wʌn mɪnət kəd tɝn ɑn jə ɪn ðə nɛkst. ən ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ənʌðɝ pɑsəbɪləɾi. biɪŋ tɑvɝən meɪd jə stæn aʊɾ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn, ən səm ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən kəd juz ðət tə faɪn jə ət taɪmz, əɹ soʊ hi hæd bɪn toʊld. meɪbi səm ʃæɾoʊzpɔn kʊd, tu.

The thing seemed to have more disadvantages than advantages even when it appeared to be working in your favor. The chance that favored you one minute could turn on you in the next. And there was always another possibility. Being ta'veren made you stand out in the Pattern, and some of the Forsaken could use that to find you at times, or so he had been told. Maybe some Shadowspawn could, too.

ðə tʃɹeɪl i fɑloʊd wɑz ʃʊɹli nɪɹ ən aʊɝ oʊld, bʌt pɛɹɪn fɛlt ə taɪtnəs bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz, ə pɹɪklɪŋ ɑn ɪz skælp. ðə skaɪ wɑz stɪl ə dip dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ wɛɹ ɪt ʃoʊd, ivən tə hɪz aɪz.

The trail he followed was surely near an hour old, but Perrin felt a tightness between his shoulder blades, a prickling on his scalp. The sky was still a deep dark gray where it showed, even to his eyes.

ðə sʌn hæd nɑt jɛt kɹɛstəd ðə hɝaɪzən. dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ sʌnɹaɪz wɑz wʌn ə ðə wɝs taɪmz tə mit ðə waɪl hʌnt, wən dɑɹknəs wɑz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ tə laɪt bʌt ðə laɪt hæd nɑt teɪkən hoʊld. ət lis ðəɹ wɑz noʊ kɹɔsɹoʊdz nɪɹbaɪ, noʊ ɡɹeɪvjɑɹd, bʌt ði oʊnli hɑɹθstoʊnz tə tʌtʃ leɪ bæk ɪn bɹaɪɾən, ən i wɑz nɑt sɝɾən haʊ mʌtʃ seɪfti ðoʊz hʌvəlz hɛld. ɪn ɪz maɪnd, hi mɑɹkt aʊt ðə loʊkeɪʃən ʌv ə nɪɹbaɪ stʃɹim, wɛɹ ðə kæmp ɡɑɾ ɪts wɔɾɝ baɪ tʃɑpɪŋ θɹu ði aɪs. ɪt wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðən tɛn əɹ twɛlv peɪsɪz waɪɾ ən oʊnli ni-dip, bʌt pʊɾɪŋ ɹʌnɪŋ wɔɾɝ bɪtwin jə ən dɑɹkhaʊnz wəd stɑp əm səpoʊzədli. bʌt ðɛn, soʊ wəd feɪsɪŋ ðɛm, səpoʊzədli, ən i hæd sin ðə ɹɪzʌls ə ðæt. hɪz noʊz tɛstəd ðə bɹizɪz, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ðəɾ oʊl sɛnt. ən fəɹ ɛni hɪn ʌv ə nuɝ. kʌmɪŋ ɑn ðoʊz θɪŋz ʌnəwɛɹ wəd bi wɝs ðən ənplɛzənt.

The sun had not yet crested the horizon. Just before sunrise was one of the worst times to meet the Wild Hunt, when darkness was changing to light but the light had not taken hold. At least there was no crossroads nearby, no graveyard, but the only hearthstones to touch lay back in Brytan, and he was not certain how much safety those hovels held. In his mind, he marked out the location of a nearby stream, where the camp got its water by chopping through the ice. It was no more than ten or twelve paces wide and only knee-deep, but putting running water between you and Darkhounds would stop them supposedly. But then, so would facing them, supposedly, and he had seen the results of that. His nose tested the breezes, searching for that old scent. And for any hint of a newer. Coming on those things unaware would be worse than unpleasant.

stɛpɝ kɑt sɛns ɔlmoʊst əz izəli əz pɛɹɪn, ən səmtaɪmz noʊɾəst wʌt ðeɪ wɝ sunɝ, bʌt wɛnɛvɝ ðə dʌn bɔkt, pɛɹɪn fɔɹst ɪm fɔɹwɝd. ðəɹ wɝ plɛnti ʌv tʃɹæks skæɾɝd ɪn ðə snoʊ, hʊfpɹɪns ə ðə maʊntəd pətʃɹoʊlz ɡoʊɪŋ aʊɾ ən kʌmɪŋ bæk, əkeɪʒənəl saɪn ə ɹæbəts ən fɑksəz, bʌt ði oʊnli mɑɹks lɛf baɪ ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz wɝ wɛɹ stoʊn stʌk ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə snoʊ. ðə bɝn sʌlfɝ smɛl wɑz ɔlweɪz stʃɹɔŋɡəs ðɛɹ, jɛɾ ɪnʌf tʃɹeɪs lɪŋɡɝɾ ɪn bɪtwin tə liɾ ɪm tə ðə nɛks pleɪs wɛɹ ðɛɹ tʃɹæks ʃoʊd. ðə hjudʒ pɔpɹɪns oʊvɝlæpt wʌn ənʌðɝ, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə tɛl haʊ mɛni dɑɹkhaʊnz ðəɹ hæd bɪn, bʌt wɛðɝ ə peɪs waɪɾ əɹ sɪks, ɛvɹi ɹɑk sɝfəs ðeɪ hæd kɹɔst wɑz smʌðɝɾ ɪn tʃɹæks fɹəm wʌn saɪd tə ði ʌðɝ. ə lɑɹdʒɝ pæk ðən ðə tɛn i hæd sin aʊtsaɪɾ ɪljən. mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ. wɑz ðət waɪ ðəɹ wɝ noʊ wʊlvz ɪn ði ɛɹiə? hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət ðə sɝɾənti ʌv dɛθ i hæd fɛlt ɪn ðə dʒɹim wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɹil, ən i hæd bɪn ə wʊlf ɪn ðə dʒɹim.

Stepper caught scents almost as easily as Perrin, and sometimes noticed what they were sooner, but whenever the dun balked, Perrin forced him forward. There were plenty of tracks scattered in the snow, hoofprints of the mounted patrols going out and coming back, occasional sign of rabbits and foxes, but the only marks left by the Darkhounds were where stone stuck up out of the snow. The burnt sulphur smell was always strongest there, yet enough trace lingered in between to lead him to the next place where their tracks showed. The huge pawprints overlapped one another, and there was no way to tell how many Darkhounds there had been, but whether a pace wide or six, every rock surface they had crossed was smothered in tracks from one side to the other. A larger pack than the ten he had seen outside Illian. Much larger. Was that why there were no wolves in the area? He was sure that the certainty of death he had felt in the dream was something real, and he had been a wolf in the dream.

əz ðə tʃɹeɪl bɪɡæn tə kɝv tə ðə wɛst, hi fɛlt ə ɡɹoʊɪŋ səspɪʃən ðət fɝmd ɪndə sɝɾənti əz ɪt kəntɪnjud tə bɛnd. ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz hæd sɝkəl ðə kæmp kəmplitli, ɹʌnɪŋ ɹaɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə pleɪs nɔɹθ ə ðə kæmp wɛɹ sɛvɹəl hjudʒ tʃɹiz leɪ hæf tɑpəld ən pɹɑp baɪ ðɛɹ neɪbɝz, itʃ wɪð ə tɔl tʃʌŋk slaɪs klinli aʊɾ ʌv ɪts splɪntɝd tʃɹʌŋk. ðə tʃɹæks kʌvɝɾ ə stoʊn aʊtkɹɑp əz smuð ən flæɾ əz ə pɑlɪʃt mɑɹbəl flɔɹ ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn hɛɹ-θɪn ɡaʊdʒ kʌt θɹu ɪt stʃɹeɪɾ əz ə plʌm laɪn.

As the trail began to curve to the west, he felt a growing suspicion that firmed into certainty as it continued to bend. The Darkhounds had circled the camp completely, running right across the place north of the camp where several huge trees lay half toppled and propped by their neighbors, each with a tall chunk sliced cleanly out of its splintered trunk. The tracks covered a stone outcrop as smooth and flat as a polished marble floor except for one hair-thin gouge cut through it straight as a plumb line.

nʌθɪŋ ɹɪzɪstɪd ði oʊpənɪŋ ʌv ən æʃəmənz ɡeɪtweɪ, ən tu hæɾ oʊpən hɪɹ. ə θɪk paɪn ðət hæd fɔlən blɑkɪŋ wʌn hæɾ ə sɛkʃən fɔɹ peɪsɪz waɪd bɝn aʊɾ ʌv ɪt, bʌt ðə tʃɑɹɾ ɛnz wɝ əz niɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd kʌm fɹəm ə sɔmɪl. ɪt sim ðəɾ ɛvəɾəns ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ dɪd nɑɾ ɪntʃɹəs dɑɹkhaʊnz, haʊɛvɝ. ðə pæk hæd nɑt pɔz ðəɹ ɛni mɔɹ ðən ɛniwɛɹ ɛls, əɹ ivən sloʊd ðəɾ i kəd tɛl.

Nothing resisted the opening of an Asha'man's gateway, and two had opened here. A thick pine that had fallen blocking one had a section four paces wide burned out of it, but the charred ends were as neat as if they had come from a sawmill. It seemed that evidence of the One Power did not interest Darkhounds, however. The pack had not paused there any more than anywhere else, or even slowed that he could tell.

dɑɹkhaʊnz kəd ɹʌn fæstɝ ðən hɔɹsəz, ən fəɹ lɔŋɡɝ, ən ðə stɛntʃ ə ðɛm hɑɹdli sim tə hæv feɪɾəd mɔɹ ɪn wʌn pleɪs ðən ənʌðɝ. ət tu pɔɪns ɪn ðət sɝkəɾ i hæd pɪkt ʌp ə fɔɹkɪŋ ɪn ðə tʃɹeɪl, bʌt ðət wɑz oʊnli ðə pæk kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ ən dɪpɑɹɾɪŋ saʊθ. wʌns ɝaʊn ðə kæmp, ən ðən ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ æftɝ wʌtɛvɝ əɹ huɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ hʌntɪŋ. pleɪnli, ðət wɑz nɑt hɪm. pɝhæps ðə pæk hæd sɝkəl kəz ðeɪ sɛns hɪm, sɛnst sʌmwʌn u wɑz tɑvɝən, jɛɾ i daʊɾɪd ðət dɑɹkhaʊnz wʊɾə hɛzɪteɪɾɪd wʌn ɪnstən ət kʌmɪŋ ɪndə ðə kæmp, hæd ðeɪ bɪn æftɝ hɪm. ðə pæk i hæd feɪs bɪfɔɹ hæɾ ɛntɝd ðə sɪɾi ʌv ɪljən, ðoʊ ɪt hæd nɑt tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl ɪm tɪl leɪɾɝ. bʌt dɪd dɑɹkhaʊnz ɹipɔɹt wʌt ðeɪ sɔ, ðə weɪ ɹæts ən ɹeɪvənz dɪd? ðə θɔt meɪɾ ɪz dʒɔ klɛntʃ.

Darkhounds could run faster than horses, and for longer, and the stench of them hardly seemed to have faded more in one place than another. At two points in that circuit he had picked up a forking in the trail, but that was only the pack coming from the north and departing south. Once around the camp, and then on their way after whatever or whoever they were hunting. Plainly, that was not him. Perhaps the pack had circled because they sensed him, sensed someone who was ta'veren, yet he doubted that Darkhounds would have hesitated one instant at coming into the camp, had they been after him. The pack he had faced before had entered the city of Illian, though it had not tried to kill him till later. But did Darkhounds report what they saw, the way rats and ravens did? The thought made his jaw clench.

ðə ʃædoʊz ətɛnʃən wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛni seɪn mæn fɪɹd, ðə ʃædoʊz ətɛnʃən maɪɾ ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð fɹiɪŋ feɪl. ðət kənsɝn ɪm mɔɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. jɛt ðəɹ wɝ weɪz tə faɪt ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, weɪz tə faɪt ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ɪf ɪt keɪm tə ðæt. wʌtɛvɝ keɪm bɪtwin ɪm ən feɪl, dɑɹkhaʊnz əɹ ðə fɔɹseɪkən əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, hi wəd faɪn ə weɪ tə ɡoʊ ɝaʊn əɹ θɹu, wɪtʃɛvɝ wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi. ə mæn kəɾ oʊnli hæv soʊ mʌtʃ fɪɹ ɪn ɪm ət wʌn taɪm, ən ɔl ə hɪz fɪɹ wɑz sɛntɝɾ ɑn feɪl. ðəɹ dʒʌst wɑz noʊ ɹum fəɹ ɛni mɔɹ.

The Shadow's attention was something any sane man feared, the Shadow's attention might interfere with freeing Faile. That concerned him more than anything else. Yet there were ways to fight Shadowspawn, ways to fight the Forsaken, if it came to that. Whatever came between him and Faile, Darkhounds or the Forsaken or anything else, he would find a way to go around or through, whichever was necessary. A man could only have so much fear in him at one time, and all of his fear was centered on Faile. There just was no room for any more.

bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ɪz stɑɹɾɪŋ pleɪs əɡɛn, ðə bɹizɪz bɹɔɾ ɪm ðə smɛlz ə pipəl ən hɔɹsəz, ʃɑɹp ɪn ði aɪsi koʊld, ən i ɹeɪn stɛpɝ tə ə sloʊ wɔk, ən ðən tə ə hɔlt. hi hæd spɑɾəd səm fɪfti əɹ sɪksti hɔɹsəz nɪɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əhɛd. ðə sʌn hæd faɪnəli pikt əbʌv ðə hɝaɪzən ən bɪɡʌn tə sɛnd ʃɑɹpli slæntəd ʃæfs ə laɪt θɹu ðə fɔɹəs kænəpi, ɹəflɛktɪŋ ɔf ðə snoʊ ən lɛsənɪŋ ðə ɡlum ə lɪɾəl, ðoʊ dip, dæpəld ʃædoʊz ɹɪmeɪn bɪtwin ðə sʌnz slɛndɝ fɪŋɡɝz.

Before he reached his starting place again, the breezes brought him the smells of people and horses, sharp in the icy cold, and he reined Stepper to a slow walk, and then to a halt. He had spotted some fifty or sixty horses near a hundred paces ahead. The sun had finally peeked above the horizon and begun to send sharply slanted shafts of light through the forest canopy, reflecting off the snow and lessening the gloom a little, though deep, dappled shadows remained between the sun's slender fingers.

səm ə ðoʊz ʃædoʊz ɛnvɛləp hɪm. ðə maʊntəd pɑɹɾi wɑz nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm wɛɹ i hæd fɝst sin ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz' tʃɹæks, ən i kəd si ɛɹæmz sɪkli ɡɹin kloʊk ən ɹɛd-stʃɹaɪp koʊt, ðə tɪŋkɝ ɡɑɹməns dʒɑɹɪŋ wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz bæk. moʊst ə ðə ɹaɪɾɝz wɔɹ ɹɪmd ɹɛd hɛlməts ʃeɪp laɪk pɑts ən dɑɹk kloʊks oʊvɝ ɹɛd bɹɛstpleɪts, ən ðə lɔŋ ɹɛd stʃɹimɝz ɑn ðɛɹ lænsɪz stɝɾ ɪn ðə laɪɾ ɛɹz əz ðə soʊlʒɝz tʃɹaɪd tə kip wɑtʃ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən. ðə fɝst ə min ɔfən ɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋz, wɪð ə suɾəbəl bɑɾiɡɑɹd ə ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz.

Some of those shadows enveloped him. The mounted party was not far from where he had first seen the Darkhounds' tracks, and he could see Aram's sickly green cloak and red-striped coat, the Tinker garments jarring with the sword on his back. Most of the riders wore rimmed red helmets shaped like pots and dark cloaks over red breastplates, and the long red streamers on their lances stirred in the light airs as the soldiers tried to keep watch in every direction. The First of Mayene often rode out in the mornings, with a suitable bodyguard of the Winged Guards.

hi stɑɹɾəd tə slɪp əweɪ wɪθaʊt hævɪŋ tə mit bɹəleɪn, bʌt ðən i sɔ θɹi tɔl wɪmən əfʊɾ əmʌŋ ðə hɔɹsəz, lɔŋ dɑɹk ʃɔlz ɹæpt ɝaʊn ðɛɹ hɛdz ən dʒɹeɪpt oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʌpɝ bɑɾiz, ən i hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. waɪz wʌnz ɹoʊd wən ðeɪ hæd tə, ɪf ənwɪlɪŋli, bʌt tʃɹæmpɪŋ ə maɪl əɹ tu ɪn ðə snoʊ wɛɹɪŋ hɛvi wʊlən skɝts wɑz ɪnsəfɪʃən ɹizən tə fɔɹs əm ɑntu hɔɹsbæk. ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli siɑnɪɾ əɹ mɑsʊɝi wɑz ɪn ðət ɡɹup, əz wɛl, ðoʊ ði il wɪmən sim tə laɪk bɹəleɪn fəɹ səm ɹizən i kəd nɑt fæðəm.

He started to slip away without having to meet Berelain, but then he saw three tall women afoot among the horses, long dark shawls wrapped around their heads and draped over their upper bodies, and he hesitated. Wise Ones rode when they had to, if unwillingly, but tramping a mile or two in the snow wearing heavy woolen skirts was insufficient reason to force them onto horseback. Almost certainly Seonid or Masuri was in that group, as well, though the Aiel women seemed to like Berelain for some reason he could not fathom.

hi hæd noʊ θɔɾ ə dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðə ɹaɪɾɝz, noʊ mæɾɝ u wɑz wɪð ðɛm, bʌt hɛzəteɪʃən kɑst ɪm ɪz tʃæns əɾ ɪveɪʒən. wʌn ə ðə waɪz wʌnz - hi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz kɛɹɛl, ə faɪɝ-hɛɹd wʊmən u ɔlweɪz hæɾ ə tʃælənʒ ɪn əɹ ʃɑɹp blu aɪz - ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə pɔɪn ɪn ɪz dɝɛkʃən, ən ðə hoʊl pɑɹɾi tɝnd, ðə soʊlʒɝz wɪpɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ɝaʊn ən piɹɪŋ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz təwɔɹd hɪm, lænsɪz tɪpt wɪð ə fʊɾ ə stil hæf loʊɝd. ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli ðeɪ kəd meɪk ɪm aʊt klɪɹli θɹu ðə dip pulz ə ʃædoʊ ən bɹaɪt bɑɹz ə sʌnlaɪt. hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz ðə waɪz wʌn hæd, bʌt ðɛn, il dʒɛnɝəli hæd ʃɑɹp aɪz.

He had no thought of joining the riders, no matter who was with them, but hesitation cost him his chance at evasion. One of the Wise Ones - he thought it was Carelle, a fire-haired woman who always had a challenge in her sharp blue eyes - raised a hand to point in his direction, and the whole party turned, the soldiers whipping their horses around and peering through the trees toward him, lances tipped with a foot of steel half lowered. It was unlikely they could make him out clearly through the deep pools of shadow and bright bars of sunlight. He was surprised the Wise One had, but then, Aiel generally had sharp eyes.

mɑsʊɝi wɑz ðɛɹ, ə slɪm wʊmən ɪn ə bɹɑnz-kʌlɝd kloʊk ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə dæpəl mɛɹ, ən ənʊɹə əz wɛl, kipɪŋ əɹ bɹaʊn mɛɹ wɛl bæk bʌt mɑɹk baɪ ðə dʌzənz ə θɪn dɑɹk bɹeɪdz ðət hʌŋ fɹəm ði oʊpənɪŋ ə hɝ kaʊl. bɹəleɪn hɝsɛlf sæɾ ə slik beɪ ɡɛldɪŋ ət ðə fɔɹfɹʌnt, ə tɔl bjuɾəfəl jʌŋ wʊmən wɪð lɔŋ blæk hɛɹ, ɪn ə ɹɛd kloʊk laɪnd wɪð blæk fɝ. ə sɪmpəl flɔ lɛsən əɹ bjuɾi, ðoʊ; ʃi wɑz nɑt feɪl. ə wɝs flɔ ɹuən ɪt, əz fɑɹ əz i wɑz kənsɝnd. hi hæd lɝn ə feɪlz kɪdnæpɪŋ fɹəm hɝ, ən ə mæsiməz kɑntækt wɪð ðə sintʃæn, bʌt nɪɹli ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə kæmp bɪliv ðəɾ i hæd slɛpt wɪð bɹəleɪn ɑn ðə vɛɹi naɪt feɪl wɑz teɪkən, ən ʃi hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ tə kɝɛk ðə teɪl. ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli ðə kaɪndə stɔɹi hi kəɾ æsk əɹ tə stæn ʌp ən dɪnaɪ pʌblɪkli, jɛt ʃi cʊɾə sɛd sʌmθɪŋ, toʊld əɹ meɪdz tə dɪnaɪ ɪt, ɛniθɪŋ. ɪnstɛd, bɹəleɪn hɛld əɹ saɪləns, ən əɹ meɪdz, ɡɑsəpɪŋ laɪk mæɡpaɪz, æktʃəli  fɑstɝd ðə teɪl. ðət sɔɹɾ ə ɹɛpjəteɪʃən stʌk tə ə mæn, ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. hi hæɾ əvɔɪɾəd bɹəleɪn sɪns ðət naɪt, ən wʊɾə əv ɹɪɾən əweɪ naʊ ivən æftɝ ðeɪ sɔ hɪm, bʌt ʃi tʊk ə hufændəl bæskət fɹəm ðə meɪɾ əkʌmpəniɪŋ hɝ, ə plʌmp wʊmən ɹæpt ɪn ə blu-ænd-ɡoʊl kloʊk, ðən spoʊk tə ði ʌðɝz ən stɑɹɾəd əɹ slik beɪ ɡɛldɪŋ təwɔɹd hɪm. əloʊn. ənʊɹə ɹeɪzd ə hæn ən kɔl sʌmθɪŋ æftɝ hɝ, bʌt bɹəleɪn nɛvɝ ɡlæns bæk. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt daʊt ʃi wəd fɑloʊ wɛɹɛvɝ i wɛnt, ən ðə weɪ θɪŋz wɝ, livɪŋ wəɾ oʊnli meɪk pipəl bɪliv i wɑntəd tə bi pɹaɪvət wɪð hɝ. hi dʌɡ hɪz hilz ɪndə stɛpɝz flæŋks, minɪŋ tə dʒɔɪn ði ʌðɝz noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ lɪɾəl i wɑntəd tə - lɛɾ əɹ fɑloʊ hɪm bæk tə ðɛm ɪf ʃi wɑntəd - bʌt ʃi ɝdʒ ðə beɪ tə ə kæntɝ dɪspaɪt ðə ɹʌf ɡɹaʊn ən ðə snoʊ, ivən lipɪŋ ə stoʊn aʊtkɹɑp, hɝ ɹɛd kloʊk floʊɪŋ aʊt bɪhaɪn hɝ, ən mɛɾ ɪm hæfweɪ. ʃi wɑz ə ɡʊd ɹaɪɾɝ, hi ədmɪɾəd ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli. nɑɾ əz ɡʊɾ əz feɪl, bʌt bɛɾɝ ðən moʊst.

Masuri was there, a slim woman in a bronze-colored cloak riding a dapple mare, and Annoura as well, keeping her brown mare well back but marked by the dozens of thin dark braids that hung from the opening of her cowl. Berelain herself sat a sleek bay gelding at the forefront, a tall beautiful young woman with long black hair, in a red cloak lined with black fur. A simple flaw lessened her beauty, though; she was not Faile. A worse flaw ruined it, as far as he was concerned. He had learned of Faile's kidnapping from her, and of Masema's contact with the Seanchan, but nearly everyone in the camp believed that he had slept with Berelain on the very night Faile was taken, and she had done nothing to correct the tale. It was hardly the kind of story he could ask her to stand up and deny publicly, yet she could have said something, told her maids to deny it, anything. Instead, Berelain held her silence, and her maids, gossiping like magpies, actually fostered the tale. That sort of reputation stuck to a man, in the Two Rivers. He had avoided Berelain since that night, and he would have ridden away now even after they saw him, but she took a hoophandled basket from the maid accompanying her, a plump woman wrapped in a blue-and-gold cloak, then spoke to the others and started her sleek bay gelding toward him. Alone. Annoura raised a hand and called something after her, but Berelain never glanced back. Perrin did not doubt she would follow wherever he went, and the way things were, leaving would only make people believe he wanted to be private with her. He dug his heels into Stepper's flanks, meaning to join the others no matter how little he wanted to - let her follow him back to them if she wanted - but she urged the bay to a canter despite the rough ground and the snow, even leaping a stone outcrop, her red cloak flowing out behind her, and met him halfway. She was a good rider, he admitted grudgingly. Not as good as Faile, but better than most.

"jɔɹ skaʊl ɪz kwaɪt fɪɹs," ʃi læf sɔfli əz ʃi hɔltəd ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə stɛpɝ. fɹəm ðə weɪ ʃi hɛld əɹ ɹeɪnz, ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə blɑk ɪm ɪf i tʃɹaɪd ɡoʊɪŋ ɝaʊnd. ðə wʊmən hæd noʊ ʃeɪm əɾ ɔl! "smaɪl, soʊ pipəl θɪŋk wəɹ flɝɾɪŋ." ʃi pʊʃt ðə bæskəɾ əɾ ɪm wɪð wʌn kɹɪmzən-ɡlʌv hænd. "ðɪs ʃəd meɪk jə smaɪl, ət list. aɪ hɪɹ jə fɝɡɛt tə it." hɝ noʊz ɹɪŋkəld. "æn tə wɑʃ, ɪt simz. jəɹ bɪɹd nidz tʃɹɪmɪŋ, tu. ə kɛɹwɹn, sʌmwʌt dɪʃɛvəl hʌzbən ɹɛskjuɪŋ ɪz waɪf ɪz ə ɹoʊmæntɪk fɪɡjɝ, bʌt ʃi maɪt nɑt θɪŋk soʊ wɛl ʌv ə dɝɾi ɹæɡəmfɪn. noʊ wʊmən wɪl ɛvɝ fɝɡɪv jə ɹuɪnɪŋ əɹ ɪmədʒ ə ju."

"Your scowl is quite fierce," she laughed softly as she halted right in front of Stepper. From the way she held her reins, she was ready to block him if he tried going around. The woman had no shame at all! "Smile, so people think we are flirting." She pushed the basket at him with one crimson-gloved hand. "This should make you smile, at least. I hear you forget to eat." Her nose wrinkled. "And to wash, it seems. Your beard needs trimming, too. A careworn, somewhat disheveled husband rescuing his wife is a romantic figure, but she might not think so well of a dirty ragamuffin. No woman will ever forgive you ruining her image of you."

sʌɾənli kənfjuzd, pɛɹɪn tʊk ðə bæskət, sɪɾɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm ɑn ðə tɔl pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl, ən ʌnkɑnʃəsli ɹʌbd əɾ ɪz noʊz. hi wɑz əkʌstəm tə sɝɾən smɛlz fɹəm bɹəleɪn, juʒəwəli ðoʊz ʌv ə hʌntɪŋ ʃi-wʊlf, ən i wɑz ði ɪntɛndəd pɹeɪ, bʌt tədeɪ ʃi ɡeɪv ɔf noʊ hʌntɪŋ sɛnt. nɑɾ ə wɪskɝ ʌv ɪt. ʃi smɛl peɪʃən əz stoʊn, ən əmjuzd, wɪð ʌndɝkɝəns ə fɪɹ. ðə wʊmən sɝɾənli hæd nɛvɝ bɪn əfɹeɪɾ ə hɪm ðəɾ i ɹɪkɔld. ən wʌd ʃi hæv tə bi peɪʃən əbaʊt? fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, wʌd ʃi hæv tə əmjuzd əbaʊt? ə ɹɪdʒ kæt smɛlɪŋ laɪk ə læm wəd nɑɾ əv kənfaʊndɪɾ ɪm mɔɹ.

Suddenly confused, Perrin took the basket, sitting it in front of him on the tall pommel of his saddle, and unconsciously rubbed at his nose. He was accustomed to certain smells from Berelain, usually those of a hunting she-wolf, and he was the intended prey, but today she gave off no hunting scent. Not a whisker of it. She smelled patient as stone, and amused, with undercurrents of fear. The woman certainly had never been afraid of him that he recalled. And what did she have to be patient about? For that matter, what did she have to amused about? A ridge cat smelling like a lamb would not have confounded him more.

kənfjuʒən əɹ noʊ, hɪz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld ət ði ɝoʊməz dʒɹɪftɪŋ fɹəm ðə lɪɾɪd bæskət. ɹoʊstəd wʊɾən, ənlɛs i wɑz mʌtʃ mɪsteɪkən, ən bɹɛd stɪl wɔɹm fɹəm ðə beɪkɪŋ. flaʊɝ wɑz ɪn ʃɔɹt səplaɪ, ən bɹɛɾ ɔlmoʊst əz ɹɛɹ əz mit. ɪt wɑz tʃɹu ðəɾ i mɪst iɾɪŋ səm deɪz. hi ɹɪli dɪd fɝɡɛt, səmtaɪmz, ən wən i ɹɪmɛmbɝd, iɾɪŋ wɑz ə tʃɔɹ, fəɹ i hæd tə ɹʌn ðə ɡɔnlət ə lini ən bɹin əɹ bi ɡɪvən ðə koʊld ʃoʊldɝ baɪ pipəl i hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp wɪð dʒʌs tə ɡɛɾ ə mil. fud ɹaɪɾ ʌndɝ ɪz noʊz meɪɾ ɪz maʊθ wɔɾɝ. wəɾ ɪt bi dɪslɔɪəl tə it fud bɹɔt baɪ bɹəleɪn? "θæŋk jə fəɹ ðə loʊf ən ðə wʊɾən," hi sɛd ɹʌfli, "bʌt ðə læs θɪŋ ɑn ɝθ aɪ wɑn ɪz fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə θɪŋk wɝ flɝɾɪŋ. ən aɪ wɑʃ wən aɪ kæn, ɪf ɪts ɛni ʌv jəɹ bɪznəs. ɪɾ ɪzən izi ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ. bɪsaɪdz, noʊbɑdi ɛls smɛlz ɛni bɛɾɝ ðən aɪ du." ʃi dɪd, hi ɹilaɪz sʌɾənli. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hɪn ə swɛɾ əɹ dɝɾ ʌndɝ əɹ laɪt, flaʊɝi pɝfjum. ɪɾ ɪɹəteɪɾəd ɪm ðəɾ i hæd noʊɾəst ʃi wɑz wɛɹɪŋ pɝfjum, əɹ ðət ʃi smɛl klin. ɪt simd ə bɪtʃɹeɪəl.

Confusion or no, his stomach rumbled at the aromas drifting from the lidded basket. Roasted woodhen, unless he was much mistaken, and bread still warm from the baking. Flour was in short supply, and bread almost as rare as meat. It was true that he missed eating some days. He really did forget, sometimes, and when he remembered, eating was a chore, for he had to run the gauntlet of Lini and Breane or be given the cold shoulder by people he had grown up with just to get a meal. Food right under his nose made his mouth water. Would it be disloyal to eat food brought by Berelain? "Thank you for the loaf and the woodhen," he said roughly, "but the last thing on earth I want is for anyone to think we're flirting. And I wash when I can, if it's any of your business. It isn't easy in this weather. Besides, nobody else smells any better than I do." She did, he realized suddenly. There was no hint of sweat or dirt under her light, flowery perfume. It irritated him that he had noticed she was wearing perfume, or that she smelled clean. It seemed a betrayal.

bɹəleɪnz aɪz waɪɾənd moʊməntɛɹəli ɪn stɑɹɾəlmənt - waɪ? - bʌt ðən ʃi saɪd θɹu hɝ smaɪl, wɪtʃ wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə lʊk fɪkst, ən ə θɹɛɾ ʌv ɪɹɪteɪʃən ɛntɝɾ əɹ sɛnt. "hæv jəɹ tɛn sɛɾ ʌp. aɪ noʊ ðɛɹz ə ɡʊd kɑpɝ bæθtəb ɪn wʌn ə jəɹ kɑɹts. jə woʊn əv θɹoʊn ðəɾ aʊt.

Berelain's eyes widened momentarily in startlement - why? - but then she sighed through her smile, which was beginning to look fixed, and a thread of irritation entered her scent. "Have your tent set up. I know there's a good copper bathtub in one of your carts. You won't have thrown that out.

pipəl ɪkspɛkt ə noʊbəl tə lʊk laɪk ə noʊbəl, pɛɹɪn, ən ðəɾ ɪnkludz biɪŋ pɹəzɛntəbəl, ivən wən ɪt teɪks ɛkstʃɹə ɛfɝt. ɪts ə bɑɹɡən bɪtwin jə ən ðɛm. jə mʌst ɡɪv əm wʌt ðeɪ ɪkspɛkt əz wɛl əz wʌt ðeɪ niɾ əɹ wɑnt, əɹ ðeɪ luz ɹɪspɛkt ən stɑɹt ɹɪzɛntɪŋ jə fəɹ meɪkɪŋ əm luz ɪt. fɹæŋkli, nʌn ʌv əs kən əfɔɹd fəɹ jə tə lɛt ðət hæpən.

People expect a noble to look like a noble, Perrin, and that includes being presentable, even when it takes extra effort. It's a bargain between you and them. You must give them what they expect as well as what they need or want, or they lose respect and start resenting you for making them lose it. Frankly, none of us can afford for you to let that happen.

wɝ ɔl fɑɹ fɹəm əɹ hoʊmz, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ɛnəmiz, ən aɪ vɛɹi mʌtʃ bɪliv ðət ju, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz, meɪ bi əɹ oʊnli tʃæns ə lɪvɪŋ tə ɹitʃ əɹ hoʊmz əɡɛn. wɪθaʊt ju, ɛvɹiθɪŋ fɔlz əpɑɹt. naʊ smaɪl, kəz ɪf wɝ flɝɾɪŋ, ðən wi ɑɹən tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ ɛls." pɛɹɪn bɛɹɾ ɪz tiθ. ðə minɝz ən ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ, bʌɾ ət fɪfti peɪsɪz, ɪn ðɪs ɡlum, ɪt wəd bi teɪkən fəɹ ə smaɪl. luz ɹɪspɛkt? bɹəleɪn hæd hɛlp stʃɹɪp ɪm ʌv ɛni ɹɪspɛkt i wʌns hæd fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk, nɑt tə mɛnʃən feɪlz sɝvəns. wɝs, feɪl hæd ɡɪvən ɪm səm vɝʒən ə ðət lɛktʃɝ əbaʊɾ ə noʊbəlz duɾi tə ɡɪv pipəl wʌt ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəd mɔɹ ðən wʌns. wʌt bi ɹizɛntəd wɑz hɪɹɪŋ ðɪs wʊmən, ʌv ɔl pipəl, ɛkoʊ hɪz waɪf. "wʌɾ ɑɹ wi tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, ðɛn, ðət jə doʊn tʃɹʌs jəɹ oʊn pipəl tə noʊ?"

We're all far from our homes, surrounded by enemies, and I very much believe that you, Lord Perrin Goldeneyes, may be our only chance of living to reach our homes again. Without you, everything falls apart. Now smile, because if we're flirting, then we aren't talking about something else." Perrin bared his teeth. The Mayeners and the Wise Ones were watching, but at fifty paces, in this gloom, it would be taken for a smile. Lose respect? Berelain had helped strip him of any respect he once had from the Two Rivers folk, not to mention Faile's servants. Worse, Faile had given him some version of that lecture about a noble's duty to give people what they expected more than once. What be resented was hearing this woman, of all people, echo his wife. "What are we talking about, then, that you don't trust your own people to know?"

hɝ feɪs ɹɪmeɪn smuð ən smaɪlɪŋ, jɛt ði ʌndɝkɝən ə fɪɹ ɪn əɹ sɛn stʃɹɛŋθənd. ɪt wɑz noʊwɛɹ nɪɹ pænɪk, bʌt ʃi bɪliv hɝsɛlf ɪn deɪnʒɝ. hɝ ɡlʌv hænz wɝ taɪɾ ɑn ðə beɪz ɹeɪnz. "aɪv hæd maɪ θif-kætʃɝz noʊzɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪn mæsiməz kæmp, meɪkɪŋ 'fɹɛnz.' nɑɾ əz ɡʊɾ əz hævɪŋ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ðɛɹ, bʌt ðeɪ tʊk waɪn ðeɪ səpoʊzədli stoʊl fɹəm mi, ən ðeɪ lɝn ə lɪɾəl baɪ lɪsnɪŋ." fəɹ ən ɪnstənt ʃi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɪm kwɪtsɪkli, tɪltɪŋ əɹ hɛd. laɪt! ʃi nu feɪl juz sɛlən ən ðoʊz ʌðɝ ɪɾiəts əz spaɪz! ɪt hæd bɪn bɹəleɪn u toʊld ɪm əbaʊɾ əm ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs.

Her face remained smooth and smiling, yet the undercurrent of fear in her scent strengthened. It was nowhere near panic, but she believed herself in danger. Her gloved hands were tight on the bay's reins. "I've had my thief-catchers nosing about in Masema's camp, making 'friends.' Not as good as having eyes-and-ears there, but they took wine they supposedly stole from me, and they learned a little by listening." For an instant she regarded him quizzically, tilting her head. Light! She knew Faile used Selande and those other idiots as spies! It had been Berelain who told him about them in the first place.

laɪkli dʒɛnʒɹ ən sɑns, hɝ θifkætʃɝz, hæd sin hɑviɑɹ ən nɛɹiən ɪn mæsiməz kæmp. beɪlwɝ wəɾ əv tə bi wɔɹn bɪfɔɹ i tʃɹaɪd tə sɛt mɛdɔɹ ɑn bɹəleɪn ən ənʊɹə. ðət wəd sɝɾənli meɪk ə faɪn tæŋɡəl. wən i sɛd nʌθɪŋ, ʃi wɛn ɑn. "aɪ pʊt sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðət bæskət bɪsaɪdz bɹɛɾ ən ə wʊɾən. ə . . . dɑkjəmɛnt . . . ðət sɑns faʊn ɝli jɛstɝdeɪ, lɑkt əweɪ ɪn mæsiməz kæmp dɛsk. ðə ful nɛvɝ sɔ ə lɑk wɪθaʊt wɑntɪŋ tə noʊ wʌɾ ɪt hɪd. ɪf i hæd tə mɛɾəl wɪð wʌt mæsimə kɛpt ʌndɝ lɑk ən ki, hi ʃʊɾə mɛmɝaɪz ðə θɪŋ ɪnstɛɾ ə teɪkɪŋ ɪt, bʌt wʌts dʌn ɪz dʌn. doʊn lɛɾ ɛniwʌn si jə ɹiɾɪŋ ɪɾ æftɝ aɪ wɛn tə ɔl ðɪs tʃɹʌbəl tə haɪɾ ɪt!" ʃi æɾəd ʃɑɹpli əz i lɪftəd ðə bæskəts lɪd, ɹɪvilɪŋ ə klɔθ-ɹæp bʌndəl ən ɹilisɪŋ stʃɹɔŋɝ smɛlz ə ɹoʊstəd bɝɾ ən wɔɹm bɹɛd. "aɪv sin mæsiməz mɛn fɑloʊɪŋ jə bɪfɔɹ. ðeɪ kəd bi wɑtʃɪŋ naʊ!" "aɪm nɑɾ ə ful," hi ɡɹaʊld. hi nu əbaʊt mæsiməz wɑtʃɝz. moʊst ə ðə mænz fɑloʊɝz wɝ taʊnsmɪn, ən moʊst ə ðə ɹɛst ɑkwɝɾ ɪnʌf ɪn ðə wʊdz tə ʃeɪm ə tɛn-jɪɹ-oʊl bæk hoʊm.

Likely Gendar and Santes, her thiefcatchers, had seen Haviar and Nerion in Masema's camp. Balwer would have to be warned before he tried to set Medore on Berelain and Annoura. That would certainly make a fine tangle. When he said nothing, she went on. "I put something in that basket besides bread and a woodhen. A . . . document . . . that Santes found early yesterday, locked away in Masema's camp desk. The fool never saw a lock without wanting to know what it hid. If he had to meddle with what Masema kept under lock and key, he should have memorized the thing instead of taking it, but what's done is done. Don't let anyone see you reading it after I went to all this trouble to hide it!" she added sharply as he lifted the basket's lid, revealing a cloth-wrapped bundle and releasing stronger smells of roasted bird and warm bread. "I've seen Masema's men following you before. They could be watching now!" "I'm not a fool," he growled. He knew about Masema's watchers. Most of the man's followers were townsmen, and most of the rest awkward enough in the woods to shame a ten-year-old back home.

wɪtʃ wɑz nɑt tə seɪ wʌn əɹ tu maɪt nɑt bi haɪɾɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə spaɪ fɹəm əmʌŋ ðə ʃædoʊz. ðeɪ ɔlweɪz kɛp ðɛɹ dɪstəns, sɪns ɪz aɪz meɪɾ əm bɪliv i wɑz səm sɔɹɾ ə hæf-teɪm ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, soʊ hi sɛldəm dɪtɛktəd ðɛɹ sɛns, ən i hæd hæɾ ʌðɝ θɪŋz ɑn ɪz maɪn ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ.

Which was not to say one or two might not be hiding somewhere among the trees close enough to spy from among the shadows. They always kept their distance, since his eyes made them believe he was some sort of half-tame Shadowspawn, so he seldom detected their scents, and he had had other things on his mind this morning.

fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə klɔθ əsaɪd tə ɪkspoʊz ðə wʊɾən, ɔlmoʊst əz lɑɹdʒ əz ə fɛɹ-saɪz tʃɪkən, wɪð ɪts skɪn kɹɪspli bɹaʊnd, hi tɔɹ ɔf wʌn ə ðə bɝdz lɛɡz waɪl filɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə bʌndəl ən slaɪɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə pis ə hɛvi, kɹim-kʌlɝd peɪpɝ foʊldəɾ ɪn fɔɹ. kɛɹləs ʌv ɡɹis-spɑts, hi ənfoʊldəd ðə peɪpɝ ətɑp ðə bɝd, ə lɪɾəl klʌmsəli ɪn ɪz ɡɔnləts, ən ɹɛd waɪl nɪbəlɪŋ ɑn ðə lɛɡ. tə ɛvɹiwʌn wɑtʃɪŋ, hi wəɾ əpɪɹ tə bi stʌɾiɪŋ wʌt pɑɹɾ ə ðə wʊɾən tə ətæk nɛkst. ə θɪk ɡɹin wæks sil, kɹækt ɑn wʌn saɪd, hɛld ən ɪmpɹɛʃən ʌv wʌɾ i dɪsaɪɾɪd wɝ θɹi hænz, itʃ wɪð ðə fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ ən lɪɾəl fɪŋɡɝ ɹeɪzd ən ði ʌðɝz foʊldəd. ðə lɛɾɝz ɹɪɾən ɑn ðə peɪpɝ ɪn ə floʊɪŋ skɹɪpt wɝ ɑdli fɔɹmd, səm ənɹɛkəɡnaɪzəbəl, bʌt ðə θɪŋ wɑz ɹiɾəbəl wɪð ə lɪɾəl ɛfɝt.

Fingering the cloth aside to expose the woodhen, almost as large as a fair-sized chicken, with its skin crisply browned, he tore off one of the bird's legs while feeling under the bundle and sliding out a piece of heavy, cream-colored paper folded in four. Careless of grease-spots, he unfolded the paper atop the bird, a little clumsily in his gauntlets, and read while nibbling on the leg. To everyone watching, he would appear to be studying what part of the woodhen to attack next. A thick green wax seal, cracked on one side, held an impression of what he decided were three hands, each with the forefinger and little finger raised and the others folded. The letters written on the paper in a flowing script were oddly formed, some unrecognizable, but the thing was readable with a little effort.

ðə bɛɹɝ ə ðɪs stænz ʌndɝ maɪ pɝsənəl pɹətɛkʃən. ɪn ðə neɪm ə ði ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, ɡɪv ɪm wʌtɛvɝ eɪɾ i ɹikwaɪɝz ɪn sɝvəs tə ði ɛmpaɪɝ ən spik ʌv ɪt tə nʌn bʌt mi.

The bearer of this stands under my personal protection. In the name of the Empress, may she live forever, give him whatever aid he requires in service to the Empire and speak of it to none but me.

baɪ hɝ sil sjuɹɔθ səbəl mɛlʒɹəθ ʌv æsɪnbɑɹ ən bɑɹsɑbə haɪ leɪɾi "ði ɛmpɹɛs," hi sɛd sɔfli, sɑf laɪk aɪɝn bɹʌʃɪŋ sɪlk. kɑnfɝmeɪʃən ə mæsiməz dilɪŋz wɪð ðə sintʃæn, ðoʊ fəɹ hɪmsɛlf, hi hæd niɾəd nʌn. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ bɹəleɪn wʊɾə laɪɾ əbaʊt. sjuɹɔθ səbəl mɛlʒɹəθ mʌs bi sʌmwʌn ɪmpɔɹɾənt, tə bi hændɪŋ aʊt ðɪs kaɪndə dɑkjəmɛnt. "ðɪs wɪl fɪnɪʃ hɪm, wʌns sɑns tɛstəfaɪd wɛɹ i faʊn ɪt." sɝvəs tə ði ɛmpaɪɝ?

By her seal Suroth Sabelle Meldarath of Asinbayar and Barsabba High Lady "The Empress," he said softly, soft like iron brushing silk. Confirmation of Masema's dealings with the Seanchan, though for himself, he had needed none. It was not the sort of thing Berelain would have lied about. Suroth Sabelle Meldarath must be someone important, to be handing out this kind of document. "This will finish him, once Santes testified where he found it." Service to the Empire?

mæsimə nu ɹænd hæd fɔt ðə sintʃæn! ðət ɹeɪnboʊ bɝst ɪndə hɪz hɛd, ən wɑz swɛpt əweɪ. ðə mæn wɑz ə tʃɹeɪɾɝ! bɹəleɪn læft əz ɪf i hæd sɛd sʌmθɪŋ wɪɾi, bʌɾ əɹ smaɪl dɛfənətli lʊk fɔɹst, naʊ. "sɑns toʊl mi noʊ wʌn sɔ hɪm ɪn ðə bʌsəl ə sɛɾɪŋ ʌp kæmp, soʊ aɪ əlaʊɾ ɪm ən dʒɛnʒɹ tə ɡoʊ bæk wɪð maɪ læs kæsk ʌv ɡʊd tuneɪɡən. ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə ɹɪtɝn baɪ ən aʊɝ æftɝ dɑɹk, bʌt niðɝ hæz. aɪ səpoʊz ðeɪ kəd bi slipɪŋ ɪɾ ɔf, bʌt ðeɪv nɛvɝ - " ʃi bɹoʊk ɔf wɪð ə stɑɹɾəld saʊnd, stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm, ən i ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i hæd bɪɾən ðə θaɪboʊn ɪn hæf. laɪt, hi hæd stʃɹɪpt ɔl ðə flɛʃ fɹəm ðə lɛɡ wɪθaʊt noʊɾɪsɪŋ. "aɪm hʌŋɡɹiɝ ðən aɪ θɔt," hi mʌɾɝd.

Masema knew Rand had fought the Seanchan! That rainbow burst into his head, and was swept away. The man was a traitor! Berelain laughed as if he had said something witty, but her smile definitely looked forced, now. "Santes told me no one saw him in the bustle of setting up camp, so I allowed him and Gendar to go back with my last cask of good Tunaighan. They were supposed to return by an hour after dark, but neither has. I suppose they could be sleeping it off, but they've never - " She broke off with a startled sound, staring at him, and he realized that he had bitten the thighbone in half. Light, he had stripped all the flesh from the leg without noticing. "I'm hungrier than I thought," he muttered.

spɪɾɪŋ ðə nʌb ə boʊn ɪndə ðə pɑm ə hɪz ɡɔnlət, hi dʒɹɑp ðə pisəz tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "ɪts seɪf tə əsum mæsimə noʊz juv ðɪs. aɪ hoʊp jəɹ kipɪŋ ə hɛvi ɡɑɹɾ ɝaʊn jə ɔl ðə taɪm, nɑt dʒʌst wən jə ɹaɪɾ aʊt." "ɡælɛn əz fɪfti mɛn slipɪŋ ɝaʊn maɪ tɛn əz ə læs naɪt," ʃi sɛd, stɪl stɛɹɪŋ, ən i saɪd. jə wəd θɪŋk ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin ɛnibəɾi baɪɾ ə boʊn ɪn tu bɪfɔɹ. "wʌɾ əz ənʊɹə toʊl ju?"

Spitting the nub of bone into the palm of his gauntlet, he dropped the pieces to the ground. "It's safe to assume Masema knows you have this. I hope you're keeping a heavy guard around you all the time, not just when you ride out." "Gallenne has fifty men sleeping around my tent as of last night," she said, still staring, and he sighed. You would think she had never seen anybody bite a bone in two before. "What has Annoura told you?"

"ʃi wɑntəd mi tə ɡɪv ɪt tə hɝ tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ, soʊ ɪf aɪ wɑz æskt, aɪ kəd seɪ aɪ dɪdn əv ɪɾ ən dɪdnt noʊ wɛɹ ɪt wɑz, ən ʃi kəd səpɔɹt maɪ wɝd. aɪ daʊt ðət wəd sæɾəsfaɪ mæsimə, ðoʊ."

"She wanted me to give it to her to destroy, so if I was asked, I could say I didn't have it and didn't know where it was, and she could support my word. I doubt that would satisfy Masema, though."

"noʊ, aɪ daʊɾ ɪt wʊd." ənʊɹə hæd tə noʊ ðæt, tu. ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd bi ɹɔŋhɛɾɪd, əɹ ivən fulɪʃ əpɑn əkeɪʒən, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ nɛvɝ stupəd. "dɪd ʃi seɪ ʃi wəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɪt, əɹ ðəɾ ɪf jə ɡeɪv ɪt tə hɝ, ʃi kʊd?"

"No, I doubt it would." Annoura had to know that, too. Aes Sedai could be wrongheaded, or even foolish upon occasion, but they were never stupid. "Did she say she would destroy it, or that if you gave it to her, she could?"

bɹəleɪnz bɹaʊ fɝoʊɾ ɪn θɔt, ən ɪt tʊk əɹ ə moʊmən tə seɪ, "ðæt ʃi wʊd." ðə beɪ dænst ə fju ɪmpeɪʃən stɛps, bʌt ʃi bɹɔɾ ɪm ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl izəli, wɪθaʊt peɪɪŋ ətɛnʃən. "aɪ kæn θɪŋk wʌɾ ɛls ʃi wəd wɑn ɪt fɔɹ," ʃi sɛɾ æftɝ ənʌðɝ pɔz. "mæsimə ɪz hɑɹdli laɪkli tə bi səsɛptəbəl tə . . . pɹɛʃɝ." blækmeɪl, ʃi mɛnt. pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt si mæsimə stændɪŋ stɪl fəɹ ðəɾ iðɝ. ɪspɛʃli blækmeɪl baɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Berelain's brow furrowed in thought, and it took her a moment to say, "That she would." The bay danced a few impatient steps, but she brought him under control easily, without paying attention. "I can't think what else she would want it for," she said after another pause. "Masema is hardly likely to be susceptible to . . . pressure." Blackmail, she meant. Perrin could not see Masema standing still for that either. Especially blackmail by an Aes Sedai.

ʌndɝ kʌvɝ ə tɛɹɪŋ ði ʌðɝ lɛɡ lus fɹəm ðə bɝd, hi mænədʒ tə ɹifoʊl ðə pis ə peɪpɝ ən tʌk ɪɾ ɪndə hɪz sliv, wɛɹ ɪz ɡɔnlət wəd kip ɪt fɹəm fɔlɪŋ aʊt. ɪt wɑz stɪl ɛvəɾəns. bʌɾ ʌv wʌt? haʊ kəd ðə mæn bi boʊθ ə fənæɾɪk fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ən ə tʃɹeɪɾɝ? kəɾ i hæv teɪkən ðə dɑkjəmɛn fɹəm . . . ? hu? səm kəlæbɝeɪɾɝ i hæd kæptʃɝd? bʌt waɪ wəd mæsimə kip ɪt lɑkt əweɪ ənlɛs ɪt hæd bɪn mɛn fəɹ hɪm? hi hæd mɛt wɪð sintʃæn. ən haʊ hæɾ i ɪntɛndəd tə juz ɪt? hu kəd tɛl wʌɾ ə θɪŋ ðɪs wəɾ əlaʊ ə mæn tə kɔl ɑn? pɛɹɪn saɪd hɛvəli. hi hæd tu mɛni kwɛstʃənz, ən noʊ ænsɝz. ænsɝz ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə kwɪkɝ maɪn ðən hɪz. meɪbi beɪlwɝ wəɾ əv ə noʊʃən. wɪð ə teɪst ə fuɾ ɪn ɪt, hɪz stʌmək wɑntəɾ ɪm tə dɪvaʊɝ ðə lɛɡ ɪn ɪz hæn ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə bɝd tu, bʌɾ i kloʊz ðə lɪd fɝmli ən tʃɹaɪd tə teɪk mɛʒɝd baɪts. ðəɹ wɑz wʌn θɪŋ i kəd faɪn aʊt fəɹ hɪmsɛlf. "wʌɾ ɛls əz ənʊɹə sɛd? əbaʊt mæsimə." "nʌθɪŋ, bɪsaɪdz ðət hiz deɪnʒɝəs ən aɪ ʃəɾ əvɔɪd hɪm, əz ɪf aɪ dɪdnt noʊ ðəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. ʃi dɪslaɪks ɪm ən tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt hɪm." ənʌðɝ bɹif hɛzəteɪʃən, ən bɹəleɪn æɾəd, "waɪ?" ðə fɝst ə min wɑz juz tə ɪntʃɹiɡz, ən ʃi lɪsən fəɹ wʌt wɑz nɑt sɛd.

Under cover of tearing the other leg loose from the bird, he managed to refold the piece of paper and tuck it into his sleeve, where his gauntlet would keep it from falling out. It was still evidence. But of what? How could the man be both a fanatic for the Dragon Reborn and a traitor? Could he have taken the document from . . . ? Who? Some collaborator he had captured? But why would Masema keep it locked away unless it had been meant for him? He had met with Seanchan. And how had he intended to use it? Who could tell what a thing this would allow a man to call on? Perrin sighed heavily. He had too many questions, and no answers. Answers required a quicker mind than his. Maybe Balwer would have a notion. With a taste of food in it, his stomach wanted him to devour the leg in his hand and the rest of the bird too, but he closed the lid firmly and tried to take measured bites. There was one thing he could find out for himself. "What else has Annoura said? About Masema." "Nothing, besides that he's dangerous and I should avoid him, as if I didn't know that already. She dislikes him and talking about him." Another brief hesitation, and Berelain added, "Why?" The First of Mayene was used to intrigues, and she listened for what was not said.

pɛɹɪn tʊk ənʌðɝ baɪt tə ɡɪv hɪmsɛlf ə moʊmənt waɪl i tʃuɾ ən swɑloʊd. hi wɑz nɑt juz tə ɪntʃɹiɡz, jɛɾ i hæd bɪn ɪkspoʊz tə ɪnʌf ə ðɛm tə noʊ ðət seɪɪŋ tu mʌtʃ kəd bi deɪnʒɝəs. soʊ kəd seɪɪŋ tu lɪɾəl, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt beɪlwɝ θɔt. "ənʊɹə hæz bɪn miɾɪŋ wɪð mæsimə ɪn sikɹət. soʊ hæz mɑsʊɝi."

Perrin took another bite to give himself a moment while he chewed and swallowed. He was not used to intrigues, yet he had been exposed to enough of them to know that saying too much could be dangerous. So could saying too little, no matter what Balwer thought. "Annoura has been meeting with Masema in secret. So has Masuri."

bɹəleɪnz fɪkst smaɪl ɹɪmeɪn ɪn pleɪs, bʌɾ əlɑɹm ɛntɝɾ əɹ sɛnt. ʃi stɑɹɾəd tə twɪst ɪn əɹ sæɾəl əz ɪf tə lʊk bæk ət ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən stɑp hɝsɛlf, lɪkɪŋ əɹ lɪps wɪð ðə tɪp ə hɝ tʌŋ. "ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlweɪz əv ðɛɹ ɹizənz" wɑz ɔl ʃi sɛd. soʊ, wɑz ʃi əlɑɹmd oʊvɝ əɹ ædvaɪzɝ miɾɪŋ mæsimə, əɹ əlɑɹm ðət pɛɹɪn nu, əɹ . . . ? hi heɪɾəd ɔl ðiz kɑmpləkeɪʃənz. ðeɪ dʒʌst ɡɑɾ ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv wʌt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. laɪt, hi hæd mænədʒ tə klin ðə sɛkən lɛɡ ɔlɹɛɾi! hoʊpɪŋ bɹəleɪn hæd nɑt noʊɾəst, hi heɪstəli tɔs ðə boʊnz əsaɪd. hɪz bɛli ɡɹaʊl fəɹ mɔɹ.

Berelain's fixed smile remained in place, but alarm entered her scent. She started to twist in her saddle as if to look back at the two Aes Sedai, and stopped herself, licking her lips with the tip of her tongue. "Aes Sedai always have their reasons" was all she said. So, was she alarmed over her advisor meeting Masema, or alarmed that Perrin knew, or . . . ? He hated all these complications. They just got in the way of what was important. Light, he had managed to clean the second leg already! Hoping Berelain had not noticed, he hastily tossed the bones aside. His belly growled for more.

hɝ pipəl hæd meɪnteɪn ðɛɹ dɪstəns, bʌɾ ɛɹæm hæd ɹɪɾən ə ʃɔɹt weɪ təwɔɹd pɛɹɪn ən bɹəleɪn ən wɑz linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə pɪɹ əɾ əm θɹu ðə ʃæɾoʊd tʃɹiz. ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ stændɪŋ tə wʌn saɪd tɔkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, simɪŋli ʌnəwɛɹ ðət ðeɪ wɝ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ æŋkəlz ɪn snoʊ əɹ ðət ðə koʊl bɹizɪz hæd pɪkt ʌp ɪnʌf tə flæp ðə dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɛnz ə ðɛɹ ʃɔlz. ɛvɹi soʊ ɔfən wʌn əɹ ənʌðɝ ə ðə θɹi lʊk pɛɹɪn ən bɹəleɪnz weɪ, tu. noʊʃənz ə pɹaɪvəsi nɛvɝ kɛpt ə waɪz wʌn fɹəm stɪkɪŋ əɹ noʊz wɛɹɛvɝ ʃi wɑntəd. ðeɪ wɝ laɪk ɛɛs sədaɪ ðət weɪ. mɑsʊɝi ən ənʊɹə wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ, tu, ðoʊ ðeɪ əpɪɹd tə bi kipɪŋ ðɛɹ dɪstəns fɹəm wʌn ənʌðɝ. pɛɹɪn wʊɾə weɪdʒɝd ðət wɪθaʊt ðə waɪz wʌnz ðɛɹ, boʊθ sɪstɝz wʊɾə bɪn juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə ivzdʒɹɑp. ʌv kɔɹs, ðə waɪz wʌnz pɹɑbli nu haʊ tə də ðæt, tu, ən ðeɪ hæɾ əlaʊd mɑsʊɝiz vɪzəts tə mæsimə. wəɾ iðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ kɹæk əɹ tiθ ɪf ðeɪ sɔ ðə waɪz wʌnz lɪsnɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ? ənʊɹə simd ɔlmoʊst əz kɛɹfəl wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz əz mɑsʊɝi wɑz. laɪt, hi hæd noʊ taɪm fəɹ ðɪs bɹaɪɝ θɪkɪt! hi hæd tə lɪv ɪn ɪt, ðoʊ. "wiv ɡɪvən tʌŋz ɪnʌf tə wæɡ oʊvɝ," hi sɛd. nɑt ðət ðeɪ niɾəd ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ hæd. hʊkɪŋ ðə bæskəts hufændəlz oʊvɝ ɪz pɑməl, hi hil stɛpɝz flæŋks. ɪt kəd hɑɹdli bi dɪslɔɪəl dʒʌs tə iɾ ə bɝd.

Her people had maintained their distance, but Aram had ridden a short way toward Perrin and Berelain and was leaning forward to peer at them through the shadowed trees. The Wise Ones were standing to one side talking among themselves, seemingly unaware that they were over their ankles in snow or that the cold breezes had picked up enough to flap the dangling ends of their shawls. Every so often one or another of the three looked Perrin and Berelain's way, too. Notions of privacy never kept a Wise One from sticking her nose wherever she wanted. They were like Aes Sedai that way. Masuri and Annoura were watching, too, though they appeared to be keeping their distance from one another. Perrin would have wagered that without the Wise Ones there, both sisters would have been using the One Power to eavesdrop. Of course, the Wise Ones probably knew how to do that, too, and they had allowed Masuri's visits to Masema. Would either Aes Sedai crack her teeth if they saw the Wise Ones listening with the Power? Annoura seemed almost as careful with the Wise Ones as Masuri was. Light, he had no time for this briar thicket! He had to live in it, though. "We've given tongues enough to wag over," he said. Not that they needed any more than they had. Hooking the basket's hoophandles over his pommel, he heeled Stepper's flanks. It could hardly be disloyal just to eat a bird.

bɹəleɪn dɪd nɑt fɑloʊ ɪmiɾiətli, jɛt bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ɛɹæm, ʃi kɑɾ ʌp ən sloʊɾ əɹ beɪ bɪsaɪd hɪm. "aɪl faɪn aʊt wʌɾ ənʊɹə ɪz ʌp tə," ʃi sɛd dətɝmənədli, lʊkɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd. hɝ aɪz wɝ hɑɹd. pɛɹɪn wʊɾə pɪɾid ənʊɹə, ɪf i hæd nɑt bɪn ɹɛɾi tə tʃɹaɪ ʃeɪkɪŋ ænsɝz aʊɾ ə hɝ hɪmsɛlf. bʌt ðɛn, ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛldəm niɾəd pɪɾi, ən ðeɪ sɛldəm ɡeɪv ænsɝz ðeɪ dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɡɪv. ðə nɛkst ɪnstənt, bɹəleɪn wɑz ɔl smaɪlz ən ɡeɪəɾi əɡɛn, ðoʊ ðə sɛn ə dɪtɝməneɪʃən stɪl hʌŋ əbaʊt hɝ, ɔlmoʊs kɹʌʃɪŋ ðə fɪɹ sɛnt. "jʌŋ ɛɹæm əz bɪn tɛlɪŋ əs ɔl əbaʊt hɑɹtsbeɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ðiz wʊdz wɪð ðə waɪl hʌnt, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn. kəɾ ɪt ɹɪli bi soʊ, dʒju θɪŋk? aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ hɪɹɪŋ ðoʊz teɪlz ɪn ðə nɝsɝi." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz laɪɾ ən əmjuzd ən kæɹiɪŋ. ɛɹæmz tʃiks tɝn ɹɛd, ən səm ə ðə mɛn bɪɑn ɪm læft.

Berelain did not follow immediately, yet before he reached Aram, she caught up and slowed her bay beside him. "I'll find out what Annoura is up to," she said determinedly, looking straight ahead. Her eyes were hard. Perrin would have pitied Annoura, if he had not been ready to try shaking answers out of her himself. But then, Aes Sedai seldom needed pity, and they seldom gave answers they did not want to give. The next instant, Berelain was all smiles and gaiety again, though the scent of determination still hung about her, almost crushing the fear scent. "Young Aram has been telling us all about Heartsbane riding these woods with the Wild Hunt, Lord Perrin. Could it really be so, do you think? I remember hearing those tales in the nursery." Her voice was light and amused and carrying. Aram's cheeks turned red, and some of the men beyond him laughed.

ðeɪ stɑp læfɪŋ wən pɛɹɪn ʃoʊɾ əm ðə tʃɹæks ɪn ðə stoʊn slæb.

They stopped laughing when Perrin showed them the tracks in the stone slab.

tʃæptɝ sɛvən

CHAPTER 7

blæksmɪθs pʌzəl wən ðə læftɝ kʌɾ ɔf, ɛɹæm pʊɾ ɑn ə smʌɡ ɡɹɪn, ən wɪð nʌn ə ðə fɪɹ sɛn i hæd ɡɪvən ɔf ɝliɝ. ɛniwʌn wʊɾə θɔɾ i hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sin ðə tʃɹæks hɪmsɛlf ən nu ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðəɹ wɑz tə noʊ. noʊ wʌn peɪɾ ɛni maɪn tə hɪz smɝk, haʊɛvɝ, əɹ tə mʌtʃ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðə hjudʒ dɔɡ tʃɹæks ɪmpɹɛst ɪn stoʊn, ivən pɛɹɪnz ɛkspləneɪʃən ðət ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz wɝ lɔŋ ɡɔn. ʌv kɔɹs, hi kəd nɑt tɛl əm haʊ hi nu ðæt, jɛt noʊ wʌn sim tə noʊɾəs ðə læk. wʌn ə ðə ʃɑɹpli slæntɪŋ bɑɹz ə ɝli mɔɹnɪŋ laɪt wɑz fɔlɪŋ dɝɛkli ɑn ðə ɡɹeɪ slæb, ɪluməneɪɾɪŋ ɪt klɪɹli. stɛpɝ hæd ɡɹoʊn əkʌstəm tə ðə feɪɾɪŋ bɝnt-sʌlfɝ smɛl - ət list i oʊnli snɔɹɾɪd ən leɪd bæk ɪz ɪɹz - bʌt ði ʌðɝ hɔɹsəz ʃaɪɾ ət ðə tɪltəd stoʊn. nʌn ə ðə hjumənz ɪksɛpt pɛɹɪn kəd dɪtɛk ðət smɛl, ən moʊst ɡɹaʊld oʊvɝ ðɛɹ maʊns' fɹækʃəs bɪheɪvjɝ ən pɪɹɾ ət ði ɑdli mɑɹk stoʊn əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə kjʊɹiɑsəɾi dɪspleɪd baɪ ə tʃɹævlɪŋ ʃoʊ.

Blacksmith's Puzzle When the laughter cut off, Aram put on a smug grin, and with none of the fear scent he had given off earlier. Anyone would have thought he had already seen the tracks himself and knew everything there was to know. No one paid any mind to his smirk, however, or to much of anything except the huge dog tracks impressed in stone, even Perrin's explanation that the Darkhounds were long gone. Of course, he could not tell them how he knew that, yet no one seemed to notice the lack. One of the sharply slanting bars of early morning light was falling directly on the gray slab, illuminating it clearly. Stepper had grown accustomed to the fading burnt-sulphur smell - at least he only snorted and laid back his ears - but the other horses shied at the tilted stone. None of the humans except Perrin could detect that smell, and most growled over their mounts' fractious behavior and peered at the oddly marked stone as if it were a curiosity displayed by a traveling show.

bɹəleɪnz plʌmp meɪd skɹimd wən ʃi sɔ ðə tʃɹæks, ən sweɪɾ ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə fɔlɪŋ ɔf əɹ ɹaʊnd-bɛlid, nɝvəsli dænsɪŋ mɛɹ, bʌt bɹəleɪn mɪɹli æskt ənʊɹə ɪn ən æbsən fæʃən tə lʊk æftɝ əɹ ən stɛɹɾ ət ðə pɹɪns wɪð əz lɪɾəl ɪkspɹɛʃən əz ɪf ʃi hɝsɛlf wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. hɝ hænz taɪɾənd ɑn əɹ ɹeɪnz, ðoʊ, əntɪl ðə θɪn ɹɛd lɛðɝ peɪld əkɹɔs əɹ nʌkəlz. bɝteɪn ɡælɛn, ðə lɔɹd kæptən ə ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz, hɪz ɹɛd hɛlməɾ ɪmbɔst wɪð wɪŋz ən bɛɹɪŋ θɹi θɪn kɹɪmzən plumz, hæd pɝsənəl kəmæn ə bɹəleɪnz bɑɾiɡɑɹd ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ən i fɔɹst ɪz tɔl blæk ɡɛldɪŋ kloʊs tə ðə stoʊn, swɪŋɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl ɪn ni-dip snoʊ ən ɹimuvɪŋ ɪz hɛlmət tə fɹaʊn ət ðə stoʊn slæb wɪð ɪz wʌn aɪ. ə skɑɹlət lɛðɝ pætʃ kʌvɝd ði ɛmpti sɑkəɾ ə ði ʌðɝ, ðə stʃɹæp kʌɾɪŋ θɹu hɪz ʃoʊldɝ-lɛŋθ ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ. hɪz ɡɹɪmɑs sɛɾ i sɔ tʃɹʌbəl, bʌɾ i ɔlweɪz sɔ ðə wɝs pɑsəbɪləɾiz fɝst. pɛɹɪn səpoʊz ðət wɑz bɛɾɝ ɪn ə soʊlʒɝ ðən ɔlweɪz siɪŋ ðə bɛst.

Berelain's plump maid screamed when she saw the tracks, and swayed on the point of falling off her round-bellied, nervously dancing mare, but Berelain merely asked Annoura in an absent fashion to look after her and stared at the prints with as little expression as if she herself were Aes Sedai. Her hands tightened on her reins, though, until the thin red leather paled across her knuckles. Bertain Gallenne, the Lord Captain of the Winged Guards, his red helmet embossed with wings and bearing three thin crimson plumes, had personal command of Berelain's bodyguard this morning, and he forced his tall black gelding close to the stone, swinging down from his saddle in knee-deep snow and removing his helmet to frown at the stone slab with his one eye. A scarlet leather patch covered the empty socket of the other, the strap cutting through his shoulder-length gray hair. His grimace said he saw trouble, but he always saw the worst possibilities first. Perrin supposed that was better in a soldier than always seeing the best.

mɑsʊɝi dɪsmaʊntɪd, tu, bʌt noʊ sunɝ wɑz ʃi ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ðən ʃi pɔzd wɪð əɹ dæpəlz ɹeɪnz ɪn wʌn ɡlʌv hænd, lʊkɪŋ ənsɝteɪnli təwɔɹd ðə θɹi sʌn-dɑɹk il wɪmən. ə fju ʌv ðə minɝ soʊlʒɝz mʌɾɝd ənizəli ət ðæt, jɛt ðeɪ ʃʊɾə bɪn juz tə ɪt baɪ naʊ. ənʊɹə hɪɾ əɹ feɪs dipɝ ɪn əɹ ɡɹeɪ hʊɾ əz ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə si ðə ɹɑk ən ɡeɪv bɹəleɪnz meɪɾ ə bɹɪsk ʃeɪk; ðə wʊmən ɡɑɡəld əɾ əɹ ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt. mɑsʊɝi, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, weɪɾəd bɪsaɪɾ əɹ mɛɹ wɪð ən əpɪɹəns ə peɪʃəns, spɔɪld oʊnli baɪ smuðɪŋ ðə ɹʌsət skɝts ə hɝ sɪlk ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs əz ðoʊ ʌnəwɛɹ ʌv wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ. ðə waɪz wʌnz ɪkstʃeɪnʒd saɪlənt ɡlænsɪz, ɪkspɹɛʃənləs əz sɪstɝz ðɛmsɛlvz. kɛɹɛl stʊɾ ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ə nəvɛɝɪn, ə skɪni ɡɹin-aɪd wʊmən, ən ɑn ði ʌðɝ mɑɹlaɪn, wɪð aɪz ə twaɪlaɪt blu ən dɑɹk hɛɹ, ɹɛɹ əmʌŋ il, nɑt kʌvɝd kəmplitli wɪð əɹ ʃɔl. ɔl θɹi wɝ tɔl wɪmən, əz tɔl əz səm mɛn, ən nʌn lʊk mɔɹ ðən ə fju jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən pɛɹɪn, bʌt noʊ wʌn cʊɾə mænədʒ ðət kɑm sɛlf-əʃʊɹəns wɪθaʊt mɔɹ jɪɹz ðən ðɛɹ feɪsəz kleɪmd.

Masuri dismounted, too, but no sooner was she on the ground than she paused with her dapples reins in one gloved hand, looking uncertainly toward the three sun-dark Aiel women. A few of the Mayener soldiers muttered uneasily at that, yet they should have been used to it by now. Annoura hid her face deeper in her gray hood as if she did not want to see the rock and gave Berelain's maid a brisk shake; the woman goggled at her in astonishment. Masuri, on the other hand, waited beside her mare with an appearance of patience, spoiled only by smoothing the russet skirts of her silk riding dress as though unaware of what she was doing. The Wise Ones exchanged silent glances, expressionless as sisters themselves. Carelle stood on one side of Nevarin, a skinny green-eyed woman, and on the other Marline, with eyes of twilight blue and dark hair, rare among Aiel, not covered completely with her shawl. All three were tall women, as tall as some men, and none looked more than a few years older than Perrin, but no one could have managed that calm self-assurance without more years than their faces claimed.

dɪspaɪt ðə lɔŋ nɛkləsɪz ən hɛvi bɹeɪslɪts ʌv ɡoʊld ən aɪvɝi ðət ðeɪ wɔɹ, ðɛɹ dɑɹk hɛvi skɝts ən ðə dɑɹk ʃɔlz ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs hɪd ðɛɹ waɪt blaʊsəz cʊɾə suɾəd fɑɹm wɪmən, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊɾ u wɑz ɪn kəmæn bɪtwin əm ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪn tʃɹuθ, səmtaɪmz ðəɹ sim tə bi daʊɾ u wɑz ɪn kəmæn bɪtwin əm ən pɛɹɪn.

Despite the long necklaces and heavy bracelets of gold and ivory that they wore, their dark heavy skirts and the dark shawls that almost hid their white blouses could have suited farm women, yet there was no doubt who was in command between them and the Aes Sedai. In truth, sometimes there seemed to be doubt who was in command between them and Perrin.

faɪnəli, nəvɛɝɪn nɑɾəd. ən ɡeɪv ə wɔɹm ən əpɹuvɪŋ smaɪl. pɛɹɪn hæd nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ sin ə smaɪl aʊɾ ə hɝ. nəvɛɝɪn dɪd nɑt wɔk ɝaʊn skaʊlɪŋ, bʌt ʃi juʒəwəli sim tə bi sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ sʌmwʌn tə ʌpbɹeɪd.

Finally, Nevarin nodded. And gave a warm and approving smile. Perrin had never before seen a smile out of her. Nevarin did not walk around scowling, but she usually seemed to be searching for someone to upbraid.

nɑɾ əntɪl ðət nɑd dɪd mɑsʊɝi hæn əɹ ɹeɪnz ʌp tə wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz. hɝ wɔɹɾɝ wɑz noʊwɛɹ tə bi sin, ən ðət hæd tə bi ðə waɪz wʌnz' duɪŋ. ɹoʊvɛɹ juʒəwəli stʌk tə hɝ laɪk ə bɝ. lɪftɪŋ əɹ dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts, ʃi weɪɾɪd θɹu ðə snoʊ, dipɝ ðə kloʊsɝ tə ðə stoʊn ʃi keɪm, ən bɪɡæn pæsɪŋ əɹ hænz əbʌv ðə fʊtpɹɪns, ɑbviəsli tʃænəlɪŋ, ðoʊ nʌθɪŋ hæpən ðət pɛɹɪn kəd si.

Not until that nod did Masuri hand her reins up to one of the soldiers. Her Warder was nowhere to be seen, and that had to be the Wise Ones' doing. Rovair usually stuck to her like a burr. Lifting her divided skirts, she waded through the snow, deeper the closer to the stone she came, and began passing her hands above the footprints, obviously channeling, though nothing happened that Perrin could see.

ðə waɪz wʌnz wɑtʃt əɹ kloʊsli, bʌt ðɛn, mɑsʊɝiz wivz wɝ vɪzəbəl tə ðɛm. ənʊɹə dɪspleɪd noʊ ɪntʃɹəst. ði ɛnz ə ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝz nɛɹoʊ bɹeɪdz twɪtʃt əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ hʊd, ən ʃi muvd əɹ hɔɹs bæk fɹəm ðə meɪd, wɛl aʊɾ ə ðə waɪz wʌnz' laɪn ə saɪt, ðoʊ ðət tʊk əɹ fɑɹðɝ fɹəm bɹəleɪn, hu ɛniwʌn kəd θɪŋk maɪt wɑn əɹ ædvaɪs naʊ. ənʊɹə ɹɪli dɪɾ əvɔɪd ðə waɪz wʌnz əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi kʊd.

The Wise Ones watched her closely, but then, Masuri's weaves were visible to them. Annoura displayed no interest. The ends of the Gray sister's narrow braids twitched as if she were shaking her head inside her hood, and she moved her horse back from the maid, well out of the Wise Ones' line of sight, though that took her farther from Berelain, who anyone could think might want her advice now. Annoura really did avoid the Wise Ones as much as she could.

"faɪɝsaɪd stɔɹiz wɔkɪŋ," ɡælɛn mʌɾɝd, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪz ɡɛldɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə stoʊn wɪð ə saɪdweɪz ɡlæns ət mɑsʊɝi. ɛɛs sədaɪ, hi ɑnɝd, jɛt fju mɛn wɑntəd tə bi kloʊs tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu wɑz tʃænəlɪŋ. "ðoʊ aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ aɪm sɝpɹaɪzd ɛnimɔɹ æftɝ wʌɾ aɪv sin sɪns livɪŋ min." ɪntɛn ɑn ðə tʃɹæks, mɑsʊɝi dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs hɪm.

"Fireside stories walking," Gallenne muttered, drawing his gelding away from the stone with a sideways glance at Masuri. Aes Sedai, he honored, yet few men wanted to be close to an Aes Sedai who was channeling. "Though I don't know why I'm surprised anymore after what I've seen since leaving Mayene." Intent on the tracks, Masuri did not seem to notice him.

ə stɝ ɹɪpəl θɹu ðə maʊntəd lænsɝz, əz ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd nɑt ɹɪli bɪliv ðɛɹ oʊn aɪz əntɪl ðɛɹ kəmændɝ ɡeɪv kɑnfɝmeɪʃən, ən səm ə ðɛm bɪɡæn tə smɛl ʌv ənizi fɪɹ, əz ɪf ɪkspɛktɪŋ dɑɹkhaʊnz tə lip aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊz. pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt pɪk aʊɾ ɪndəvɪdʒəwəlz əmʌŋ soʊ mɛni wɪð ɛni iz, bʌt ðə dʒɪɾɝi ɹæŋknəs wɑz stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf ðəɾ ɪt hæd tə kʌm fɹəm mɔɹ ðən ə fju.

A stir rippled through the mounted lancers, as though they had not really believed their own eyes until their commander gave confirmation, and some of them began to smell of uneasy fear, as if expecting Darkhounds to leap out of the shadows. Perrin could not pick out individuals among so many with any ease, but the jittery rankness was strong enough that it had to come from more than a few.

ɡælɛn sim tə sɛns wʌt pɛɹɪn smɛld; hi hæɾ ɪz fɔls, bʌɾ i hæd kəmændəd soʊlʒɝz fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm. hæŋɪŋ ɪz hɛlməɾ ɑn ɪz lɔŋ sɔɹd hɪlt, hi ɡɹɪnd. ði aɪpætʃ ɡeɪv ɪɾ ə ɡɹɪm kwɑləɾi, ə mæn u kəd si ə dʒoʊk ɪn ðə feɪs ə dɛθ ən ɪkspɛktəɾ ʌðɝz tə si ɪt, tu. "ɪf ðə blæk dɑɡz bɑðɝ ʌs, wɪl sɔl ðɛɹ ɪɹz," hi ənaʊnst ɪn ə laʊɾ ən hɑɹɾi vɔɪs. "ðæts wʌt jə də ɪn ðə stɔɹiz, ɪzən ɪt? spɹɪŋkəl sɔlt ɑn ðɛɹ ɪɹz, ən ðeɪ vænɪʃ." ə fju ʌv ðə lænsɝz læft, ðoʊ ðə miæzmə ʌv fɪɹ dɪd nɑt lɛsən əpɹiʃəbli. stɔɹiz toʊl baɪ ðə faɪɝ wɝ wʌn θɪŋ, ðoʊz seɪm stɔɹiz wɔkɪŋ ɪn ðə flɛʃ kwaɪɾ ənʌðɝ. ɡælɛn lɛɾ ɪz blæk tə bɹəleɪn ən ɹɛstəɾ ə ɡɔntələɾəd hæn ɑn əɹ beɪz nɛk. hi ɡeɪv pɛɹɪn ə kənsɪɾɝɪŋ lʊk ðət pɛɹɪn ɹɪtɝn lɛvəli, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə teɪk ðə hɪnt.

Gallenne seemed to sense what Perrin smelled; he had his faults, but he had commanded soldiers for a long time. Hanging his helmet on his long sword hilt, he grinned. The eyepatch gave it a grim quality, a man who could see a joke in the face of death and expected others to see it, too. "If the Black Dogs bother us, we'll salt their ears," he announced in a loud and hearty voice. "That's what you do in the stories, isn't it? Sprinkle salt on their ears, and they vanish." A few of the lancers laughed, though the miasma of fear did not lessen appreciably. Stories told by the fire were one thing, those same stories walking in the flesh quite another. Gallenne led his black to Berelain and rested a gauntleted hand on her bay's neck. He gave Perrin a considering look that Perrin returned levelly, refusing to take the hint.

wʌtɛvɝ ðə mæn hæd tə seɪ, hi kəd seɪ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm ən ɛɹæm. ɡælɛn saɪd. "ðeɪ wɪl kip ðɛɹ nɝv, maɪ leɪɾi," hi sɛd sɔfli, "bʌt ðə fækt ɪz, əɹ pəzɪʃən ɪz pɹikɛɹiəs, wɪð ɛnəmiz ɑn ɛvɹi saɪɾ ən əɹ səplaɪz ɹʌnɪŋ aʊt. ʃæɾoʊzpɔn kən oʊnli meɪk mæɾɝz wɝs. maɪ duɾi ɪz tə jə ən min, maɪ leɪɾi, ən wɪð ɔl ɹɪspɛk tə lɔɹd pɛɹɪn, jə meɪ wɪʃ tə ɔltɝ jəɹ plænz." æŋɡɝ kɹækəld ɪn pɛɹɪn - ðə mæn wəɾ əbændən feɪl! - bʌt bɹəleɪn spoʊk bɪfɔɹ i kəd sədʒɛst ɪt.

Whatever the man had to say, he could say in front of him and Aram. Gallenne sighed. "They will keep their nerve, my Lady," he said softly, "but the fact is, our position is precarious, with enemies on every side and our supplies running out. Shadowspawn can only make matters worse. My duty is to you and Mayene, my Lady, and with all respect to Lord Perrin, you may wish to alter your plans." Anger crackled in Perrin - the man would abandon Faile! - but Berelain spoke before he could suggest it.

"ðɛɹ wɪl bi noʊ ɔltɝeɪʃən, lɔɹd ɡælɛn." səmtaɪmz ɪt wɑz izi tə fɝɡɛt ðət ʃi wɑz ə ɹulɝ, smɔl ðoʊ min wɑz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹiɡəl noʊɾ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs fɪt fəɹ ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ. bæk stʃɹeɪt, ʃi meɪɾ əɹ sæɾəl sim ə θɹoʊn, ən ʃi spoʊk laʊdli ɪnʌf tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ɛvɹiwʌn hɝɾ əɹ dɪsɪʒən, fɝmli ɪnʌf ðəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðə dɪsɪʒən hæd bɪn meɪd. "ɪf wɪv ɛnəmiz ɔl ɝaʊnd, ðən ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ɪz əz seɪf əz tɝnɪŋ bæk əɹ tɝnɪŋ əsaɪd. jɛɾ ɪf tɝnɪŋ bæk əɹ tɝnɪŋ əsaɪd wɝ tɛn taɪmz seɪfɝ, aɪ wəd stɪl ɡoʊ ɑn. aɪ ɪntɛn tə si ðə leɪɾi feɪl ɹɛskjuɾ ɪf wi mʌs faɪɾ əɹ weɪ θɹu ə θaʊzən dɑɹkhaʊnz, ən tʃɹɑləks əz wɛl. ðəɾ aɪ hæv swɔɹn tə du!" ə ɹɔɹ ə tʃɪɹz ænsɝd hɝ, wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz ʃaʊɾɪŋ ən θɹʌstɪŋ ðɛɹ lænsɪz ɪndə ði ɛɹ soʊ ðə ɹɛd stʃɹimɝz dænst. ðə smɛl ə fɪɹ ɹɪmeɪnd, bʌt ðeɪ saʊndəd ɹɛɾi tə kʌt ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu ɛni nʌmbɝ ə tʃɹɑləks ɹæðɝ ðən əpɪɹ lɛs ɪn bɹəleɪnz aɪz. ɡælɛn kəmændəd ðɛm, bʌt ðeɪ fɛl mɔɹ ðən fɑndnəs fəɹ ðɛɹ ɹulɝ, dɪspaɪɾ əɹ ɹɛpjəteɪʃən wɪð mɛn. meɪbi kəz ʌv ɪt, ɪn pɑɹt.

"There will be no alteration, Lord Gallenne." Sometimes it was easy to forget that she was a ruler, small though Mayene was, but there was a regal note in her voice fit for the Queen of Andor. Back straight, she made her saddle seem a throne, and she spoke loudly enough to make sure everyone heard her decision, firmly enough that everyone knew the decision had been made. "If we have enemies all around, then going on is as safe as turning back or turning aside. Yet if turning back or turning aside were ten times safer, I would still go on. I intend to see the Lady Faile rescued if we must fight our way through a thousand Darkhounds, and Trollocs as well. That I have sworn to do!" A roar of cheers answered her, Winged Guards shouting and thrusting their lances into the air so the red streamers danced. The smell of fear remained, but they sounded ready to cut their way through any number of Trollocs rather than appear less in Berelain's eyes. Gallenne commanded them, but they felt more than fondness for their ruler, despite her reputation with men. Maybe because of it, in part.

bɹəleɪn hæd kɛp tiɹ fɹəm swɑloʊɪŋ min baɪ pleɪɪŋ wʌn mæn u faʊn əɹ bjuɾəfəl əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ. fəɹ ɪz pɑɹt, pɛɹɪn faʊn ɪt hɑɹd nɑt tə ɡeɪp ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. ʃi saʊndəɾ əz dɪtɝmən əz i wɑz!

Berelain had kept Tear from swallowing Mayene by playing one man who found her beautiful against another. For his part, Perrin found it hard not to gape in surprise. She sounded as determined as he was!

ʃi smɛld əz dɪtɝmənd! ɡælɛn baʊɾ ɪz ɡɹeɪ hɛɾ ɪn ənwɪlɪŋ æksɛptəns, ən bɹəleɪn ɡeɪv ə smɔl, sæɾəsfaɪd nɑd bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ əɹ ətɛnʃən tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪsaɪd ðə stoʊn slæb.

She smelled as determined! Gallenne bowed his gray head in unwilling acceptance, and Berelain gave a small, satisfied nod before turning her attention to the Aes Sedai beside the stone slab.

mɑsʊɝi hæd stɑpt weɪvɪŋ əɹ hænz əbaʊɾ ən wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə fʊtpɹɪns, tæpɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ əɡɛnst əɹ lɪps θɔtfəli. ʃi wɑz ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən wɪθaʊt biɪŋ bjuɾəfəl, ðoʊ səm ə ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ eɪɡləsnəs, wɪð ə ɡɹeɪs ən ɛləɡəns ðət maɪɾ ɔlsoʊ hæv kʌm fɹəm biɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪt wɑz ɔfən dɪfəkəl tə tɛl ə sɪstɝ u hæd bɪn bɔɹn ɑn ə hɑɹdskɹæbəl fɑɹm fɹəm wʌn bɔɹn ɪn ə ɡɹæn pæləs. pɛɹɪn hæd sin əɹ ɹɛd-feɪst ən æŋɡɹi, wɔɹn daʊn ən ɑn ði ɛn ə hɝ tɛðɝ, jɛt dɪspaɪt hɑɹd tʃɹævəl ən laɪf ɪn ði il tɛns, hɝ dɑɹk hɛɹ ən əɹ kloʊðɪŋ lʊkt əz ðoʊ ʃi hæɾ ə meɪɾ ətɛndɪŋ hɝ, tu. ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn stændɪŋ ɪn ə laɪbɹɛɹi.

Masuri had stopped waving her hands about and was staring at the footprints, tapping a finger against her lips thoughtfully. She was a pretty woman without being beautiful, though some of that might have been Aes Sedai agelessness, with a grace and elegance that might also have come from being Aes Sedai. It was often difficult to tell a sister who had been born on a hardscrabble farm from one born in a grand palace. Perrin had seen her red-faced and angry, worn down and on the end of her tether, yet despite hard travel and life in the Aiel tents, her dark hair and her clothing looked as though she had a maid attending her, too. She might have been standing in a library.

"wʌɾ əv jə lɝnd, mɑsʊɝi?" bɹəleɪn æskt. "mɑsʊɝi, ɪf jə pliz? mɑsʊɝi?" ðə læs keɪm ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ʃɑɹpli, ən mɑsʊɝi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, əz ðoʊ sɝpɹaɪz tə ɹilaɪz ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn. pɑsəbli ʃi wɑz stɑɹɾəld; ɪn mɛni weɪz ʃi simd mɔɹ ə ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ ðən ðə bɹaʊn, mɔɹ ɪntɛn ɑn ækʃən ðən ɑn kɑntəmpleɪʃən, stʃɹeɪt tə ðə pɔɪn ən nɛvɝ veɪɡ, jɛt ʃi wɑz stɪl keɪpəbəl ə luzɪŋ hɝsɛlf kəmplitli ɪn wʌtɛvɝ kæptʃɝɾ əɹ ɪntʃɹəst. foʊldɪŋ əɹ hænz əɾ əɹ weɪst, ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌt ɹæðɝ ðən spikɪŋ, ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ən lʊkt ə kwɛstʃən ət ðə waɪz wʌnz. "ɡoʊ ɑn, ɡɝl," nəvɛɝɪn sɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli, plæntɪŋ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps ɪn ə dʒæŋɡəl ə bɹeɪslɪts. ə fɹaʊn meɪɾ əɹ əpɪɹ mɔɹ əɹ juʒəwəl sɛlf, bʌt niðɝ ə ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz lʊkt ɛni mɔɹ əpɹuvɪŋ. θɹi fɹaʊnz ɪn ə ɹoʊ laɪk θɹi peɪl-aɪd kɹoʊz ɑn ə fɛns. "wi wɝ nɑt sɪmpli lɛɾɪŋ jə ɛksɝsaɪz jəɹ kjʊɹiɑsəɾi. ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð ɪt. tɛl əs wʌt jə lɝnd." mɑsʊɝiz feɪs ɹɛɾənd, bʌt ʃi spoʊk ʌp ɪmiɾiətli, hɝ aɪz ɑn bɹəleɪn. ʃi kəd nɑt laɪk biɪŋ kɔl daʊn ɪn pʌblɪk, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɛniwʌn nu ʌv əɹ ɹileɪʃənʃɪp wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz.

"What have you learned, Masuri?" Berelain asked. "Masuri, if you please? Masuri?" The last came a little more sharply, and Masuri gave a start, as though surprised to realize she was not alone. Possibly she was startled; in many ways she seemed more of the Green Ajah than the Brown, more intent on action than on contemplation, straight to the point and never vague, yet she was still capable of losing herself completely in whatever captured her interest. Folding her hands at her waist, she opened her mouth, but rather than speaking, she hesitated and looked a question at the Wise Ones. "Go on, girl," Nevarin said impatiently, planting her fists on her hips in a jangle of bracelets. A frown made her appear more her usual self, but neither of the other Wise Ones looked any more approving. Three frowns in a row like three pale-eyed crows on a fence. "We were not simply letting you exercise your curiosity. Get on with it. Tell us what you learned." Masuri's face reddened, but she spoke up immediately, her eyes on Berelain. She could not like being called down in public, no matter what anyone knew of her relationship with the Wise Ones.

"ɹɛləɾɪvli lɪɾəl ɪz noʊn ə dɑɹkhaʊnz, bʌɾ aɪv meɪd sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə stʌɾi ʌv ðɛm, ɪn ə smɔl weɪ. oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz, aɪ hæv kɹɔs ðə pæðz ə sɛvən pæks, faɪv ə ðɛm twaɪs ən tu ʌðɝz θɹi taɪmz." ðə kʌlɝ bɪɡæn tə feɪd fɹəm əɹ tʃiks, ən sloʊli ʃi bɪɡæn tə saʊn əz ɪf ʃi wɝ lɛktʃɝɪŋ. "sʌm eɪntʃən ɹaɪɾɝz seɪ ðəɹ ɑɹ oʊnli sɛvən pæks, ʌðɝz seɪ naɪn, əɹ θɝtin, əɹ səm ʌðɝ nʌmbɝ ðeɪ bɪliv hæd spɛʃəl səɡnɪfɪkəns, bʌt dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, sɔɹɛlænə ælsəən ɹoʊɾ ʌv 'ðə hʌnʒɹəd pæks ðə ʃædoʊz haʊnz ðət hʌn ðə naɪt,' ən ivən ɝliɝ, aɪvoʊneɪl bɹætiiə səpoʊzədli ɹoʊɾ ʌv 'haʊnz bɔɹn ə ðə ʃædoʊ, ɪn nʌmbɝz laɪk ʌntu ðə naɪtmɛɹz ə mænkaɪnd.' ðoʊ ɪn tʃɹuθ, aɪvoʊneɪl hɝsɛlf meɪ bi əpɑkɹəfəl. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðə - " ʃi dʒɛstʃɝɾ əz ɪf ɡɹoʊpɪŋ fəɹ ə wɝd. "smɛl ɪz nɑt ðə ɹaɪt wɝd, ən niðɝ ɪz fleɪvɝ. ðə sɛns ʌv itʃ pæk ɪz junik, ən aɪ kən seɪ wɪð sɝɾənti ðəɾ aɪ hæv nɛvɝ ɪnkaʊntɝd ðɪs wʌn bɪfɔɹ, soʊ wi noʊ ðə nʌmbɝ sɛvən ɪz ɹɔŋ. wɛðɝ ðə kɝɛk nʌmbɝ ɪz naɪn əɹ θɝtin əɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, teɪlz ə dɑɹkhaʊnz ɑɹ mʌtʃ mɔɹ kɑmən ðən dɑɹkhaʊnz ðɛmsɛlvz, ən ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪkstʃɹimli ɹɛɹ ðɪs fɑɹ saʊθ ə ðə blaɪt. ə sɛkən ɹɛɹəɾi: ðəɹ meɪ hæv bɪn əz mɛni əz fɪfti ɪn ðɪs pæk. tɛn əɹ twɛlv ɪz ðə juʒəwəl lɪmət. ə jusfəl mæksəm: tu ɹɛɹɪɾiz kəmbaɪn kɔl fəɹ kloʊs ətɛnʃən." pɔzɪŋ, ʃi ɹeɪzd ə fɪŋɡɝ tə ɛmfəsaɪz ðə pɔɪnt, ðən nɑɾəd wən ʃi θɔt bɹəleɪn hæd teɪkən ɪt, ən foʊldəɾ əɹ hænz əɡɛn. ə ɡʌstɪŋ bɹiz pʊʃt əɹ jɛloʊɪʃ-bɹaʊn kloʊk ɔf wʌn ʃoʊldɝ, jɛt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə noʊɾəs ðə lɔs ʌv wɔɹmθ. "ðɛɹ ɪz ɔlweɪz ə fil ə ɝdʒənsi əbaʊt dɑɹkhaʊnz' tʃɹeɪlz, bʌɾ ɪt vɛɹiz əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ə nʌmbɝ ə fæktɝz, nɑɾ ɔl ʌv wɪtʃ aɪ kən bi sɝɾən ʌv. ðɪs wʌn əz ən ɪntɛns ædmɪkstʃɝ ʌv. . . aɪ səpoʊz jə kəd kɔl ɪɾ ɪmpeɪʃəns. ðəɾ ɪzən ɹɪli stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf, baɪ fɑɹ - əz wɛl kɔl ə stæbwaʊn ə pɪnpɹɪk - bʌɾ ɪɾəl du. aɪ wəd seɪ ðɛɹ hʌn əz bɪn ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn fəɹ səm taɪm, ən ðɛɹ pɹeɪ ɪz ɪluɾɪŋ əm sʌmhaʊ. noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ðə stɔɹiz seɪ - baɪ ðə weɪ, lɔɹd ɡælɛn, sɔl dʌzn hɑɹm dɑɹkhaʊnz ɪn ðə list." soʊ ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn ɪntaɪɝli lɔst ɪn θɔɾ æftɝ ɔl. "dɪspaɪt ðə stɔɹiz, ðeɪ nɛvɝ hʌn ət ɹændəm, ðoʊ ðəl kɪl ɪf ði ɑpɝtunəɾi pɹizɛns ɪtsɛlf ən dʌzn ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð ðə hʌnt. wɪð dɑɹkhaʊnz, ðə hʌn ɪz pɛɹəmaʊnt. ðɛɹ kwɔɹi ɪz ɔlweɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə ðə ʃædoʊ, ðoʊ ət taɪmz wi kænɑt si waɪ. ðeɪv bɪn noʊn tə baɪpæs ðə ɡɹeɪɾ ən maɪɾi tə sleɪ ə fɑɹmwaɪf əɹ ə kɹæfsmən, əɹ tə ɛntɝ ə taʊn əɹ vɪlədʒ ən liv wɪθaʊt kɪlɪŋ, ðoʊ klɪɹli ðeɪ keɪm fəɹ səm ɹizən. maɪ fɝs θɔt fəɹ wʌt bɹɔɾ əm hɪɹ hæd tə bi dɪskɑɹɾɪd, sɪns ðeɪ muvd ɑn." hɝ ɡeɪz flɪkɝd təwɔɹd pɛɹɪn, soʊ kwɪkli hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls noʊɾəst. "ɡɪvən ðæt, aɪ stʃɹɔŋli daʊt ðəl ɹɪtɝn.

"Relatively little is known of Darkhounds, but I've made something of a study of them, in a small way. Over the years, I have crossed the paths of seven packs, five of them twice and two others three times." The color began to fade from her cheeks, and slowly she began to sound as if she were lecturing. "Some ancient writers say there are only seven packs, others say nine, or thirteen, or some other number they believed had special significance, but during the Trolloc Wars, Sorelana Alsahhan wrote of 'the hundred packs the Shadow's hounds that hunt the night,' and even earlier, Ivonell Bharatiya supposedly wrote of 'hounds born of the Shadow, in numbers like unto the nightmares of mankind.' Though in truth, Ivonell herself may be apocryphal. In any case, the - " She gestured as if groping for a word. "Smell is not the right word, and neither is flavor. The sense of each pack is unique, and I can say with certainty that I have never encountered this one before, so we know the number seven is wrong. Whether the correct number is nine or thirteen or something else, tales of Darkhounds are much more common than Darkhounds themselves, and they are extremely rare this far south of the Blight. A second rarity: there may have been as many as fifty in this pack. Ten or twelve is the usual limit. A useful maxim: two rarities combined call for close attention." Pausing, she raised a finger to emphasize the point, then nodded when she thought Berelain had taken it, and folded her hands again. A gusting breeze pushed her yellowish-brown cloak off one shoulder, yet she did not appear to notice the loss of warmth. "There is always a feel of urgency about Darkhounds' trails, but it varies according to a number of factors, not all of which I can be certain of. This one has an intense admixture of. . . I suppose you could call it impatience. That isn't really strong enough, by far - as well call a stabwound a pinprick - but it will do. I would say their hunt has been going on for some time, and their prey is eluding them somehow. No matter what the stories say - by the way, Lord Gallenne, salt doesn't harm Darkhounds in the least." So she had not been entirely lost in thought after all. "Despite the stories, they never hunt at random, though they will kill if the opportunity presents itself and doesn't interfere with the hunt. With Darkhounds, the hunt is paramount. Their quarry is always important to the Shadow, though at times we cannot see why. They have been known to bypass the great and mighty to slay a farmwife or a craftsman, or to enter a town or village and leave without killing, though clearly they came for some reason. My first thought for what brought them here had to be discarded, since they moved on." Her gaze flickered toward Perrin, so quickly he was not sure anyone else noticed. "Given that, I strongly doubt they will return.

oʊ, jɛs; ən ðeɪ ɑɹ ən aʊɝ əɹ mɔɹ ɡɔn. ðæt, aɪm əfɹeɪd, ɪz ɹɪli ɔl aɪ kən tɛl ju." nəvɛɝɪn ən ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz nɑɾəd ðɛɹ əpɹuvəl əz ʃi fɪnɪʃt, ən ə tʌtʃ ə kʌlɝ ɹɪtɝn tə hɝ tʃiks, ðoʊ ɪt vænɪʃt kwɪkli əz ʃi əsumd ə mæsk ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi. ə ʃɪft ɪn ðə bɹiz bɹɔɾ əɹ sɛn tə pɛɹɪn, sɝpɹaɪzd ən plizd, ən əpsɛɾ ət biɪŋ plizd. "θæŋk ju, mɑsʊɝi sədaɪ," bɹəleɪn sɛd fɔɹməli, meɪkɪŋ ə smɔl baʊ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl ðət mɑsʊɝi æknɑlɪdʒd wɪð ə slaɪt moʊʃən ə hɝ hɛd. "ju hæv pʊɾ əɹ maɪnz ət ɹɛst." ɪndid, ðə fɪɹ smɛl əmʌŋ ðə soʊlʒɝz bɪɡæn tə feɪd, ðoʊ pɛɹɪn hɝd ɡælɛn ɡɹʌmbəl ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, "ʃi maɪɾ əv toʊl ðoʊz læs bɪts fɝst."

Oh, yes; and they are an hour or more gone. That, I'm afraid, is really all I can tell you." Nevarin and the other Wise Ones nodded their approval as she finished, and a touch of color returned to her cheeks, though it vanished quickly as she assumed a mask of Aes Sedai serenity. A shift in the breeze brought her scent to Perrin, surprised and pleased, and upset at being pleased. "Thank you, Masuri Sedai," Berelain said formally, making a small bow in her saddle that Masuri acknowledged with a slight motion of her head. "You have put our minds at rest." Indeed, the fear smell among the soldiers began to fade, though Perrin heard Gallenne grumble under his breath, "She might have told those last bits first."

pɛɹɪnz ɪɹz kɑt sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, tu, θɹu ðə stæmpɪŋ ə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz ən mɛnz kwaɪət, ɹɪliv læftɝ. ə bluəɾɪts tʃɹɪl saʊndəd tə ðə saʊθ, bɪɑn ðə hɪɹɪŋ ʌv ɛniwʌn ɛls ðɛɹ, fɑloʊd kloʊsli baɪ ðə bʌzɪŋ kɔl ʌv ə mæsk spɛɹoʊ. ənʌðɝ bluəɾɪt saʊndəd, kloʊsɝ, fɑloʊɾ əɡɛn baɪ ə mæsk spɛɹoʊ, ən ðən ðə seɪm pɛɹ kɔld əɡɛn kloʊsɝ stɪl. ðəɹ maɪt bi bluəɾəts ən mæsk spɛɹoʊz ɪn ɔltɑɹə, bʌɾ i nu ðiz bɝdz kæɹid tu ɹɪvɝz lɔŋboʊz. ðə bluəɾɪt mɛn mɛn wɝ kʌmɪŋ, mɔɹ ðən ə fju ən meɪbi ənfɹɛnli. ðə mæsk spɛɹoʊ, ðət səm bæk hoʊm kɔl ðə θifbɝd fəɹ ɪts hæbəɾ ə stilɪŋ bɹaɪɾ ɑbʒɛkts, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd. . . . pɛɹɪn ɹæn ə θʌm əlɔŋ ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz æks, bʌɾ i weɪɾəd fəɹ wʌn mɔɹ pɛɹ ə kɔlz, kloʊs ɪnʌf ðət ði ʌðɝz maɪɾ əv noʊɾəst.

Perrin's ears caught something else, too, through the stamping of horses' hooves and men's quiet, relieved laughter. A bluetit's trill sounded to the south, beyond the hearing of anyone else there, followed closely by the buzzing call of a masked sparrow. Another bluetit sounded, closer, followed again by a masked sparrow, and then the same pair called again closer still. There might be bluetits and masked sparrows in Altara, but he knew these birds carried Two Rivers longbows. The bluetit meant men were coming, more than a few and maybe unfriendly. The masked sparrow, that some back home called the thiefbird for its habit of stealing bright objects, on the other hand. . . . Perrin ran a thumb along the edge of his axe, but he waited for one more pair of calls, close enough that the others might have noticed.

"dɪd jə hɪɹ ðæt?" hi sɛd, lʊkɪŋ saʊθ əz ɪf i hæd dʒʌs hɝd. "maɪ sɛntʃɹiz əv spɑɾəd mæsimə." ðət bɹɔt hɛdz ʌp, lɪsnɪŋ, ən sɛvɹəl mɛn nɑɾəd wən ðə kɔlz wɝ ɹɪpiɾɪd, kloʊsɝ stɪl. "hiz kʌmɪŋ ðɪs weɪ."

"Did you hear that?" he said, looking south as if he had just heard. "My sentries have spotted Masema." That brought heads up, listening, and several men nodded when the calls were repeated, closer still. "He's coming this way."

ɡɹoʊlɪŋ kɝsɪz, ɡælɛn klæpt ɪz hɛlməɾ ɑntu hɪz hɛɾ ən maʊntəd. ənʊɹə ɡæðɝɾ əɹ ɹeɪnz, ən mɑsʊɝi bɪɡæn flaʊndɝɪŋ bæk təwɔɹɾ əɹ dæpəl. ðə lænsɝz ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz ən bɪɡæn ɡɪvɪŋ ɔf smɛlz ʌv æŋɡɝ, wʌns mɔɹ tʌtʃt wɪð fɪɹ. ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz wɝ oʊɾ ə blʌd dɛt baɪ mæsimə, ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz, bʌt nʌn wɑz æŋkʃəs tə tʃɹaɪ kəlɛktɪŋ wɪð oʊnli fɪfti mɛn, nɑt wən mæsimə ɔlweɪz ɹoʊd wɪð ə hʌnʒɹəd əɾ ɪz bæk.

Growling curses, Gallenne clapped his helmet onto his head and mounted. Annoura gathered her reins, and Masuri began floundering back toward her dapple. The lancers shifted in their saddles and began giving off smells of anger, once more touched with fear. The Winged Guards were owed a blood debt by Masema, in their eyes, but none was anxious to try collecting with only fifty men, not when Masema always rode with a hundred at his back.

"aɪ wɪl nɑt ɹʌn fɹəm hɪm," bɹəleɪn ənaʊnst. ʃi stɛɹd saʊθ wɛɹɪŋ ə koʊl fɹaʊn. "wi wɪl weɪt fəɹ ɪm hɪɹ."

"I will not run from him," Berelain announced. She stared south wearing a cold frown. "We will wait for him here."

ɡælɛn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ən kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ - tə hɝ, ət list. dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, hi bɪɡæn tə bɛloʊ ɔɹɾɝz ɝeɪɪŋ ɪz ɡɑɹdzmɪn. ðət wɑz nɑɾ ən izi mæɾɝ. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ fɑɹ əpɑɹt ðə tʃɹiz stʊd, fɔɹəsts wɝ pʊɹ pleɪsəz fəɹ lænsɝz. ɛni tʃɑɹdʒ wəd bi dɪsdʒɔɪntɪɾ əɾ ɪts stɑɹt, ən stɪkɪŋ ə mæn wɪð ə læns wɑz dɪfəkəlt wən i kəd dɑdʒ bɪhaɪn ə tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋk ən kʌm aʊt bɪhaɪn ju. ɡælɛn tʃɹaɪd tə fɔɹm əm ɪn fɹʌn ə bɹəleɪn, bɪtwin əɹ ən ði əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ mɛn, bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə ʃɑɹp lʊk, ən ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn tʃeɪnʒd ɪz kəmænz, laɪnɪŋ ðə lænsɝz ʌp ɪn ə sɪŋɡəl kɹʊkəd ɹæŋk, bʌlʒɪŋ ɝaʊn mæsɪv tʃɹiz bʌt sɛntɝɾ ɑn hɝ. wʌn soʊlʒɝ ɡælɛn sɛn ɹeɪsɪŋ bæk təwɔɹd ðə kæmp, kɹaʊtʃɪŋ loʊ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl wɪð ɪz læns loʊ əz ɪf ət ðə tʃɑɹdʒ, ɹaɪɾɪŋ əz fæst əz i kəɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə snoʊ ən tɝeɪn. bɹəleɪn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət ðæt, jɛt sɛd nʌθɪŋ.

Gallenne opened his mouth, and closed it again without speaking - to her, at least. Drawing a deep breath, he began to bellow orders arraying his Guardsmen. That was not an easy matter. No matter how far apart the trees stood, forests were poor places for lancers. Any charge would be disjointed at its start, and sticking a man with a lance was difficult when he could dodge behind a tree trunk and come out behind you. Gallenne tried to form them in front of Berelain, between her and the approaching men, but she gave him a sharp look, and the one-eyed man changed his commands, lining the lancers up in a single crooked rank, bulging around massive trees but centered on her. One soldier Gallenne sent racing back toward the camp, crouching low in his saddle with his lance low as if at the charge, riding as fast as he could in spite of the snow and terrain. Berelain raised an eyebrow at that, yet said nothing.

ənʊɹə bɪɡæn ɡaɪɾɪŋ əɹ bɹaʊn mɛɹ təwɔɹd bɹəleɪn, bʌt stɑpt wən mɑsʊɝi kɔld əɹ neɪm. ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝ hæd ɡæðɝɾ əɹ dæpəl bʌt stɪl stʊɾ ɪn ðə snoʊ wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz ɝaʊn hɝ, hu wɝ tɔl ɪnʌf ɪn kəmpɛɹəsən tə meɪk əɹ sim lɛs ðən fʊl-ɡɹoʊn. ənʊɹə hɛzɪteɪɾɪd əntɪl mɑsʊɝi sʌmən əɹ əɡɛn, mɔɹ ʃɑɹpli, ən ðən pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i hɝɾ ənʊɹə saɪ hɛvəli bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹoʊd tə ðɛm ən dɪsmaʊntɪd. wʌtɛvɝ ði il wɪmən hæd tə seɪ, ɪn vɔɪsəz pɪtʃt tu sɔfli fəɹ pɛɹɪn tə hɪɹ, klʌstɝɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ənʊɹə wɪð hɛdz bɛn kloʊs tə hɝz, ðə tæɹɑbənɝ sɪstɝ dɪd nɑt laɪk. hɝ feɪs ɹɪmeɪn hɪɾən ɪn əɹ hʊd, bʌɾ əɹ θɪn bɹeɪdz swʌŋ ɛvɝ fæstɝ wɪð ðə ʃeɪkɪŋ ə hɝ hɛd, ən ət læst ʃi tɝn əweɪ əbɹʌpli ən pʊɾ ə fʊɾ ɪn ðə stɝəp ə hɝ sæɾəl.

Annoura began guiding her brown mare toward Berelain, but stopped when Masuri called her name. The Brown sister had gathered her dapple but still stood in the snow with the Wise Ones around her, who were tall enough in comparison to make her seem less than full-grown. Annoura hesitated until Masuri summoned her again, more sharply, and then Perrin thought he heard Annoura sigh heavily before she rode to them and dismounted. Whatever the Aiel women had to say, in voices pitched too softly for Perrin to hear, clustering in front of Annoura with heads bent close to hers, the Taraboner sister did not like. Her face remained hidden in her hood, but her thin braids swung ever faster with the shaking of her head, and at last she turned away abruptly and put a foot in the stirrup of her saddle.

mɑsʊɝi hæd bɪn stændɪŋ kwaɪətli, lɛɾɪŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz əv ðɛɹ seɪ, bʌt naʊ ʃi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn ənʊɹəz sliv ən sɛd sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs ðət meɪɾ ənʊɹəz ʃoʊldɝz slʌmp ən ðə waɪz wʌnz nɑd. pʊʃɪŋ bæk əɹ hʊd tə fɔl daʊn əɹ bæk, ənʊɹə weɪɾəd fəɹ mɑsʊɝi tə klaɪm ɑntu hɝ mɛɹ bɪfɔɹ maʊntɪŋ əɹ oʊn hɔɹs, ən ðən ðə tu sɪstɝz ɹoʊd bæk tə ðə laɪn ə lænsɝz təɡɛðɝ, kɹaʊɾɪŋ ɪn bɪsaɪd bɹəleɪn wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz pʊʃɪŋ ɪn bɪtwin ðɛm, ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd fɹəm pɛɹɪn.

Masuri had been standing quietly, letting the Wise Ones have their say, but now she laid a hand on Annoura's sleeve and said something in a low voice that made Annoura's shoulders slump and the Wise Ones nod. Pushing back her hood to fall down her back, Annoura waited for Masuri to climb onto her mare before mounting her own horse, and then the two sisters rode back to the line of lancers together, crowding in beside Berelain with the Wise Ones pushing in between them, on the other side from Perrin.

ənʊɹəz waɪd maʊθ wɑz tɝn daʊn ɪn ə ɡlʌm kɝv, ən ʃi wɑz ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ θʌmz nɝvəsli.

Annoura's wide mouth was turned down in a glum curve, and she was rubbing her thumbs nervously.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jəɹ plænɪŋ?" pɛɹɪn æskt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə haɪd səspɪʃəs. meɪbi ðə waɪz wʌnz hæd lɛt mɑsʊɝi mit wɪð mæsimə, jɛt ðeɪ stɪl kleɪm tə θɪŋk ðə mæn wɑz bɛɾɝ dɛd. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd nɑt juz ðə paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən ənlɛs ðeɪ wɝ ɪn deɪnʒɝ, bʌt ðə waɪz wʌnz hæd noʊ sətʃ pɹoʊəbɪʃən. hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɝ lɪŋkt. hi nu mɔɹ ðən i wɑntəɾ əbaʊt ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ən ɪnʌf əbaʊt ðə waɪz wʌnz tə bi ʃʊɹ ðət nəvɛɝɪn wəd bi ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl ɪf ðeɪ hæd fɔɹmd ə sɝkəl. ənʊɹə oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌt snæpt ɪt ʃʌɾ əɾ ə wɔɹnɪŋ tʌtʃ fɹəm kɛɹɛl ən ɡlɛɹɾ ət mɑsʊɝi. ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝ pɝst əɹ lɪps ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd slaɪtli, wɪtʃ dɪd nɑt sim tə mɑləfaɪ ənʊɹə. hɝ ɡlʌv hænz ɡɹɪpt əɹ ɹeɪnz soʊ taɪtli ðət ðeɪ ʃʊk.

"What is it you're planning?" Perrin asked, trying not to hide suspicious. Maybe the Wise Ones had let Masuri meet with Masema, yet they still claimed to think the man was better dead. The Aes Sedai could not use the Power as a weapon unless they were in danger, but the Wise Ones had no such prohibition. He wondered whether they were linked. He knew more than he wanted about the One Power, and enough about the Wise Ones to be sure that Nevarin would be in control if they had formed a circle. Annoura opened her mouth, but snapped it shut at a warning touch from Carelle and glared at Masuri. The Brown sister pursed her lips and shook her head slightly, which did not seem to mollify Annoura. Her gloved hands gripped her reins so tightly that they shook.

nəvɛɝɪn lʊkt ʌp ət pɛɹɪn pæs bɹəleɪn əz ɪf ʃi ɹɛɾ ɪz maɪnd. "tɪldəwi plæn tə si jə seɪfli bæk tə ðə kæmp, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli, "ju ən bɹəleɪn pɹən. wi plæn tə si ðəɾ əz mɛni əz pɑsəbəl sɝvaɪv ðɪs deɪ, ən ðə deɪz tə kʌm. juv əbdʒɛkʃənz?"

Nevarin looked up at Perrin past Berelain as if she read his mind. "~We plan to see you safely back to the camp, Perrin Aybara," she said sharply, "you and Berelain Paeron. We plan to see that as many as possible survive this day, and the days to come. Do you have objections?"

"dʒʌs doʊn də ɛniθɪŋ ənlɛs aɪ tɛl ju," hi sɛd. ən ænsɝ laɪk ðət kəd min ə lɑɾ ə θɪŋz.

"Just don't do anything unless I tell you," he said. An answer like that could mean a lot of things.

"nɑɾ ɛniθɪŋ." nəvɛɝɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪn dɪsɡʌst, ən kɛɹɛl læft əz ɪf i hæd meɪɾ ə hjudʒ dʒoʊk.

"Not anything." Nevarin shook her head in disgust, and Carelle laughed as if he had made a huge joke.

nʌn ə ðə waɪz wʌnz sim tə θɪŋk ɛni mɔɹ ɹɪspɑns wɑz niɾəd. ðeɪ hæd bɪn kəmændəd tə oʊbeɪ hɪm, bʌt ðɛɹ noʊʃənz ʌv oʊbiɾiəns feɪl tə skwɛɹ wɪð ɛni hi hæɾ ɛvɝ lɝnd. pɪɡz wəd ɡɹoʊ wɪŋz bɪfɔɹ i ɡɑɾ ə bɛɾɝ ænsɝ aʊɾ ə ðɛm.

None of the Wise Ones seemed to think any more response was needed. They had been commanded to obey him, but their notions of obedience failed to square with any he had ever learned. Pigs would grow wings before he got a better answer out of them.

hi cʊɾə pʊɾ ə stɑp tə ɪt. hi nu hi ʃʊd. noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ðə waɪz wʌnz hæd plænd, miɾɪŋ mæsimə ðɪs fɑɹ fɹəm ði ʌðɝz ɪn ðə kæmp, wən ðə mæn hæd tə noʊ hu hæd stoʊlən ɪz sintʃæn peɪpɝ, wɑz laɪk hoʊpɪŋ tə snætʃ jəɹ hæn ɔf ði ænvəl bɪfɔɹ ðə hæmɝ fɛl. bɹəleɪn wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz bæɾ əz ðə waɪz wʌnz wən ɪt keɪm tə fɑloʊɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz, bʌɾ i θɔt ʃi wəd lɪsən ɪf i ɡeɪv ən ɔɹɾɝ tə wɪðdʒɹɔ tə ðə kæmp. hi θɔt ʃi wʊd, fəɹ ɔl ðəɾ əɹ smɛl sɛd ʃi hæɾ əɹ hilz dʌɡ ɪn hɑɹd. steɪɪŋ wɑz ə sɛnsləs ɹɪsk. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ i kəd kənvɪns əɹ ə ðæt. jɛɾ i dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɹʌn fɹəm ðə mæn, iðɝ. pɑɹɾ ə hɪm sɛɾ i wɑz biɪŋ ə ful. ðə lɑɹdʒɝ pɑɹt smoʊldɝd wɪð æŋɡɝ ðəɾ i faʊn hɑɹd tə kəntʃɹoʊl. ɛɹæm kɹaʊɾəd ɪn bɪsaɪɾ ɪm skaʊlɪŋ, bʌɾ ət list i hæd nɑt dʒɹɔn ɪz sɔɹd. weɪvɪŋ ə sɔɹd maɪt pʊɾ ə hɑt koʊl ɪn ðə heɪlɔft, ən ðə taɪm fəɹ ə kɑnfɹənteɪʃən wɪð mæsimə hæd nɑt kʌm jɛt. pɛɹɪn ɹɛstəɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz æks. nɑt jɛt.

He could have put a stop to it. He knew he should. No matter what the Wise Ones had planned, meeting Masema this far from the others in the camp, when the man had to know who had stolen his Seanchan paper, was like hoping to snatch your hand off the anvil before the hammer fell. Berelain was almost as bad as the Wise Ones when it came to following orders, but he thought she would listen if he gave an order to withdraw to the camp. He thought she would, for all that her smell said she had her heels dug in hard. Staying was a senseless risk. He was sure he could convince her of that. Yet he did not want to run from the man, either. Part of him said he was being a fool. The larger part smoldered with anger that he found hard to control. Aram crowded in beside him scowling, but at least he had not drawn his sword. Waving a sword might put a hot coal in the hayloft, and the time for a confrontation with Masema had not come yet. Perrin rested a hand on his axe. Not yet.

dɪspaɪt ðə ʃɑɹpli æŋɡəld ɹeɪz ə laɪt ðət pɛnətʃɹeɪɾəd θɹu ðə θɪk bɹæntʃəz oʊvɝhɛd, ðə fɔɹəst əz ə hoʊl leɪ ɹæpt ɪn dɪm ɝli-mɔɹnɪŋ ʃædoʊz. ivən ət nun, ɪt wəd bi dɪm hɪɹ.

Despite the sharply angled rays of light that penetrated through the thick branches overhead, the forest as a whole lay wrapped in dim early-morning shadows. Even at noon, it would be dim here.

saʊnz keɪm tə hɪm fɝst, ðə mʌfəl θʌɾ ə hʊvz ɪn snoʊ, ðə hɛvi bɹɛθ ə hɔɹsəz pʊʃt fəɹ spid, ən ðən ə mæs ə ɹaɪɾɝz əpɪɹd, ə dɪsɔɹɾɝd mɑb floʊɪŋ nɔɹθ əmʌŋ ðə hjudʒ tʃɹiz əɾ ə nɪɹ-ɡæləp ɪn spaɪɾ ə snoʊ ən ɹʌf ɡɹaʊnd. ɹæðɝ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd, ðeɪ nʌmbɝd tu əɹ θɹi taɪmz ðæt. ə hɔɹs wɛn daʊn wɪð ə skɹim ən leɪɪŋ θɹæʃɪŋ ətɑp ɪts ɹaɪɾɝ, bʌt nʌn ə ði ʌðɝz soʊ mʌtʃ əz sloʊɾ əntɪl, səm sɛvənti əɹ eɪɾi peɪsɪz əweɪ, ðə mæn ət ðɛɹ hɛd ɹeɪzd ə hænd, ən ðeɪ sʌɾənli dʒɹu ɹeɪn ɪn spɹeɪz ə snoʊ, læðɝd hɔɹsəz bloʊɪŋ hɑɹɾ ən stimɪŋ. hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ, lænsɪz stʌk ʌp əmʌŋ ðə ɹaɪɾɝz. moʊst wɔɹ noʊ ɑɹmɝ, ən mɛni dʒʌst ə bɹɛstpleɪɾ əɹ ə hɛlmət, jɛt ðɛɹ sæɾəlz wɝ hʌŋ əbaʊt wɪð sɔɹdz ən æksiz ən meɪsəz. ʃæfs ə sʌnlaɪt pɪkt aʊɾ ə fju feɪsəz, ɡɹɪm flæt-aɪd mɛn u lʊkt əz ðoʊ ðeɪ nɛvɝ hæd smaɪld ən nɛvɝ wʊd. ɪɾ əkɝd tə pɛɹɪn ðəɾ i maɪɾ əv meɪɾ ə mɪsteɪk nɑt tə oʊvɝɹul bɹəleɪn. ðət wɑz wʌt keɪm ə heɪsti dɪsɪʒənz, ʌv lɛɾɪŋ æŋɡɝ də hɪz θɪŋkɪŋ. ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðət ʃi ɔfən ɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋz, ən mæsimə maɪt bi dɛspɹɪt tə ɹɪkʌvɝ ɪz sintʃæn dɑkjəmɛnt. ivən wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən waɪz wʌnz, ə faɪɾ ɪn ðiz wʊdz kəd tɝn blʌɾi, ə fɹi-fɔɹ-ɔl wɛɹ mɛn, ən wɪmən, kəd daɪ wɪθaʊt wʌns siɪŋ u kɪl ðɛm. ɪf noʊ wɪtnəsəz lɪvd, ɪt kəɾ ɔlweɪz bi bleɪmd ɑn bændəts əɹ ivən ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ. ðət hæd hæpən bɪfɔɹ. ən ɪf ðəɹ wɝ wɪtnəsəz lɛft, mæsimə wɑz nɑɾ əbʌv hæŋɪŋ ə fju dʌzən ə hɪz oʊn mɛn ən kleɪmɪŋ ðə ɡɪlti hæd bɪn pʌnɪʃt. hi laɪkli wɑntəd tə kip pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə əlaɪv fəɹ ə waɪl jɛt, ðoʊ, ən i wəd nɑɾ əv ɪkspɛktəd ðə waɪz wʌnz, əɹ ə sɛkən ɛɛs sədaɪ. smɔl pɔɪns tə hæŋ fɪfti-ɑd lɪvz ɑn. vɛɹi smɔl pɔɪns tə hæŋ feɪlz laɪf ɑn. pɛɹɪn izd ɪz æks ɪn ɪts lup ɑn ɪz bɛlt. bɪsaɪd hɪm, bɹəleɪn smɛld ə kul kɑm ən stoʊni dɪtɝməneɪʃən. noʊ fɪɹ, ɑdli. nɑɾ ə wɪf. ɛɹæm smɛld . . . ɪksaɪɾəd.

Sounds came to him first, the muffled thud of hooves in snow, the heavy breath of horses pushed for speed, and then a mass of riders appeared, a disordered mob flowing north among the huge trees at a near-gallop in spite of snow and rough ground. Rather than a hundred, they numbered two or three times that. A horse went down with a scream and laying thrashing atop its rider, but none of the others so much as slowed until, some seventy or eighty paces away, the man at their head raised a hand, and they suddenly drew rein in sprays of snow, lathered horses blowing hard and steaming. Here and there, lances stuck up among the riders. Most wore no armor, and many just a breastplate or a helmet, yet their saddles were hung about with swords and axes and maces. Shafts of sunlight picked out a few faces, grim flat-eyed men who looked as though they never had smiled and never would. It occurred to Perrin that he might have made a mistake not to overrule Berelain. That was what came of hasty decisions, of letting anger do his thinking. Everyone knew that she often rode out in the mornings, and Masema might be desperate to recover his Seanchan document. Even with the Aes Sedai and Wise Ones, a fight in these woods could turn bloody, a free-for-all where men, and women, could die without once seeing who killed them. If no witnesses lived, it could always be blamed on bandits or even the Shaido. That had happened before. And if there were witnesses left, Masema was not above hanging a few dozen of his own men and claiming the guilty had been punished. He likely wanted to keep Perrin Aybara alive for a while yet, though, and he would not have expected the Wise Ones, or a second Aes Sedai. Small points to hang fifty-odd lives on. Very small points to hang Faile's life on. Perrin eased his axe in its loop on his belt. Beside him, Berelain smelled of cool calm and stony determination. No fear, oddly. Not a whiff. Aram smelled . . . excited.

ðə tu pɑɹɾiz sæt ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn saɪləns, əntɪl ət læs mæsimə ɹoʊd fɔɹwɝd, fɑloʊd baɪ dʒʌs tu mɛn, ɔl θɹi pʊʃɪŋ bæk ðɛɹ hʊdz. nʌn wɔɹ ə hɛlmət, əɹ ɛni pis ʌv ɑɹmɝ. laɪk mæsimə, nɛŋɡɝ ən bɑɹɾu wɝ ʃaɪnɝən, bʌt laɪk hɪm, ðeɪ hæd ʃeɪvd ɔf ðɛɹ tɑpnɑts, livɪŋ bɛɹ hɛdz wɪð ə lʊk ə skʌlz. ðə kʌmɪŋ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hæd bɹoʊkən ɔl bɑnz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðoʊz ðət hæd plɛdʒ ðiz mɛn tə faɪt ðə ʃædoʊ əlɔŋ ðə blaɪt. nɛŋɡɝ ən bɑɹɾu itʃ kæɹiɾ ə sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz bæk ən hæɾ ənʌðɝ hæŋɪŋ əɾ ɪz sæɾəlboʊ, ən bɑɹɾu, ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ði ʌðɝ tu, hæɾ ə keɪs hɔɹsboʊ ən ə kwɪvɝ fæsən tə hɪz sæɾəl, tu. mæsimə wɔɹ noʊ vɪzəbəl wɛpənz. ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn niɾəd nʌn. pɛɹɪn wɑz ɡlæd tə si ɡælɛn wɑtʃɪŋ ðə mɛn mæsimə hæd lɛf bɪhaɪnd, fəɹ ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt mæsimə ðət dʒɹu ði aɪ. meɪbi ɪt wɑz oʊnli noʊɪŋ u hi wɑz, bʌt ðət wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf. mæsimə stɑpt ɪz ɹeɪnʒi sɔɹəl ə fju peɪsɪz fɹəm pɛɹɪn. ðə pɹɑfət wɑz ə dɑɹk fɹaʊnɪŋ mæn ʌv ævɝɪdʒ saɪz wɪð ə feɪɾəd æɹoʊ-skɑɹ waɪɾ ɑn ɪz tʃik, ɪn ə wɔɹn bɹaʊn wʊlən koʊɾ ən ə dɑɹk kloʊk wɪð fɹeɪɾ ɛdʒəz. mæsimə kɛɹd nʌθɪŋ fəɹ əpɪɹənsəz, list ʌv ɔl ɪz oʊn. əɾ ɪz bæk, nɛŋɡɝ ən bɑɹɾu hɛld ə fivɝ ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz, bʌt mæsiməz dip-sɛt, ɔlmoʊs blæk aɪz simd əz hɑɾ əz koʊlz ɪn ə fɔɹdʒ, əz ðoʊ ðə bɹizɪz mʌst sun fæn əm tə ə ɡloʊ, ən ɪz smɛl wɑz ðə dʒæŋɡəld, dɑɹɾɪŋ ʃɑɹpnəs ə pjʊɹ ɪnsænəɾi. hi ɪɡnɔɹd ðə waɪz wʌnz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð ə skɔɹn i dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə haɪd. waɪz wʌnz wɝ wɝs ðən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪn ɪz vju; ðeɪ nɑɾ oʊnli blæsfim baɪ tʃænəlɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ðeɪ wɝ il sævədʒəz tə but, ə dʌbəl sɪn. ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz cʊɾə bɪn dʒʌs mɔɹ ʃædoʊz bɪniθ ðə tʃɹiz. "ju ɑɹ teɪkɪŋ ə pɪknɪk?" hi sɛd wɪð ə ɡlæns ət ðə bæskət hæŋɪŋ fɹəm pɛɹɪnz sæɾəl. nɔɹməli, mæsiməz vɔɪs wɑz əz ɪntɛns əz ɪz aɪz, bʌt naʊ ɪt saʊndəd ɹaɪ, ən ɪz lɪp kɝld əz ɪz aɪz tʃɹævəl tə bɹəleɪn. hi hæd hɝd ðə ɹumɝz, ʌv kɔɹs.

The two parties sat regarding one another in silence, until at last Masema rode forward, followed by just two men, all three pushing back their hoods. None wore a helmet, or any piece of armor. Like Masema, Nengar and Bartu were Shienaran, but like him, they had shaved off their topknots, leaving bare heads with a look of skulls. The coming of the Dragon Reborn had broken all bonds, including those that had pledged these men to fight the Shadow along the Blight. Nengar and Bartu each carried a sword on his back and had another hanging at his saddlebow, and Bartu, shorter than the other two, had a cased horsebow and a quiver fastened to his saddle, too. Masema wore no visible weapons. The Prophet of the Lord Dragon Reborn needed none. Perrin was glad to see Gallenne watching the men Masema had left behind, for there was something about Masema that drew the eye. Maybe it was only knowing who he was, but that was more than enough. Masema stopped his rangy sorrel a few paces from Perrin. The Prophet was a dark frowning man of average size with a faded arrow-scar white on his cheek, in a worn brown woolen coat and a dark cloak with frayed edges. Masema cared nothing for appearances, least of all his own. At his back, Nengar and Bartu held a fever in their eyes, but Masema's deep-set, almost black eyes seemed as hot as coals in a forge, as though the breezes must soon fan them to a glow, and his smell was the jangled, darting sharpness of pure insanity. He ignored the Wise Ones and Aes Sedai with a scorn he did not bother to hide. Wise Ones were worse than Aes Sedai, in his view; they not only blasphemed by channeling the One Power, they were Aiel savages to boot, a double sin. The Winged Guards could have been just more shadows beneath the trees. "You are taking a picnic?" he said with a glance at the basket hanging from Perrin's saddle. Normally, Masema's voice was as intense as his eyes, but now it sounded wry, and his lip curled as his eyes traveled to Berelain. He had heard the rumors, of course.

ə weɪv ə ɹeɪdʒ ʃɑt θɹu pɛɹɪn, bʌɾ i sizd ɑntu ɪt, fɔɹsɪŋ ɪt bæk. foʊldɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn wɪð ðə ɹɛst, foʊldɪŋ ɪt taɪt. hɪz æŋɡɝ hæd wʌn tɑɹɡət, ən i wəd nɑt weɪst ɪt stʃɹaɪkɪŋ əɾ ənʌðɝ. kætʃɪŋ ɪz ɹaɪɾɝz mud, stɛpɝ bɛɹɾ ɪz tiθ ət mæsiməz ɡɛldɪŋ, ən pɛɹɪn hæd tə ɹeɪn ɪm ɪn ʃɑɹpli. "ðɛɹ wɝ dɑɹkhaʊnz hɪɹ ɪn ðə naɪt," hi sɛd, nɑt vɛɹi smuðli, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə bɛst i kəd mænədʒ.

A wave of rage shot through Perrin, but he seized onto it, forcing it back. Folding it in with the rest, folding it tight. His anger had one target, and he would not waste it striking at another. Catching his rider's mood, Stepper bared his teeth at Masema's gelding, and Perrin had to rein him in sharply. "There were Darkhounds here in the night," he said, not very smoothly, but it was the best he could manage.

"ðeɪɹ ɡɔn, ən mɑsʊɝi dʌzn θɪŋk ðəl kʌm bæk, soʊ ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə wɝi." mæsimə dɪd nɑt smɛl wɝid. hi nɛvɝ smɛld ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp mædnəs. ðə sɔɹəl θɹʌst ɪz hɛɾ əɡɹɛsɪvli təwɔɹd stɛpɝ, bʌt mæsimə pʊld ɪm ʌp wɪð ə hɑɹʃ dʒɝk. hi ɹoʊd wɛl, mæsimə dɪd, bʌɾ i tʃɹiɾəd ɪz hɔɹsəz əz i dɪd pipəl. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, hi lʊkt ət mɑsʊɝi. pɝhæps ɪz ɡeɪz ɡɹu ə lɪɾəl hɑɾɝ, ɪf ðət wɑz pɑsəbəl. "ðə ʃædoʊ kən bi faʊn ɛvɹiwɛɹ," hi sɛd, ə hiɾəd pɹənaʊnsmən ʌv ənkwɛstʃənəbəl tʃɹuθ. "noʊ wʌn nid fɪɹ ðə ʃædoʊ hu fɑloʊz ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, meɪ ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ɪz neɪm. ivən ɪn dɛθ ðəl faɪn ðə faɪnəl vɪktɝi ʌv ðə laɪt." mɑsʊɝiz mɛɹ ʃaɪɾ əz ðoʊ bɝn baɪ ðət ɡeɪz, jɛt mɑsʊɝi kəntʃɹoʊl ði ænəməl wɪð ə tʌtʃ ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz ən mɛt mæsiməz stɛɹ wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪnskɹəɾəbɪlɪti, əz kɑm əz ə fɹoʊzən pɑnd.

"They're gone, and Masuri doesn't think they'll come back, so there's no need to worry." Masema did not smell worried. He never smelled of anything except madness. The sorrel thrust his head aggressively toward Stepper, but Masema pulled him up with a harsh jerk. He rode well, Masema did, but he treated his horses as he did people. For the first time, he looked at Masuri. Perhaps his gaze grew a little hotter, if that was possible. "The Shadow can be found everywhere," he said, a heated pronouncement of unquestionable truth. "No one need fear the Shadow who follows the Lord Dragon Reborn, may the Light illumine his name. Even in death they will find the final victory of the Light." Masuri's mare shied as though burned by that gaze, yet Masuri controlled the animal with a touch on the reins and met Masema's stare with Aes Sedai inscrutability, as calm as a frozen pond.

nʌθɪŋ hɪntəd ðət ʃi hæd bɪn miɾɪŋ ðɪs mæn ɪn sikɹət. "fɪɹ ɪz ə jusfəl spɝ tə ðə wɪts, ən tə dɪtɝməneɪʃən, wən wɛl kəntʃɹoʊld. ɪf wɪv noʊ fɪɹ ʌv əɹ ɛnəmiz, ðət livz oʊnli kəntɛmpt, ən kəntɛmp lidz tə ði ɛnəmiz vɪktɝi." jə cʊɾə θɔt ʃi wɑz spikɪŋ tə ə sɪmpəl fɑɹmɝ ʃi hæd nɛvɝ mɛt bɪfɔɹ. ənʊɹə, wɑtʃɪŋ, lʊkt ə lɪɾəl ɪl. wɑz ʃi əfɹeɪd ðɛɹ sikɹət wəd kʌm aʊt? ðət ðɛɹ plænz fəɹ mæsimə kəd bi spɔɪld?

Nothing hinted that she had been meeting this man in secret. "Fear is a useful spur to the wits, and to determination, when well controlled. If we have no fear of our enemies, that leaves only contempt, and contempt leads to the enemy's victory." You could have thought she was speaking to a simple farmer she had never met before. Annoura, watching, looked a little ill. Was she afraid their secret would come out? That their plans for Masema could be spoiled?

mæsiməz lɪp kɝld əɡɛn, ɪn ə smaɪl, əɹ ə snɪɹ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sim tə sis tə ɪɡzɪs fəɹ ɪm əz i tɝn ɪz ətɛnʃən bæk tə pɛɹɪn. "sʌm ə ðoʊz u fɑloʊ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən əv faʊn ə taʊn kɔl soʊ hæbɝ." ðət wɑz haʊ hi ɔlweɪz ɹəfɝd tə hɪz fɑloʊɝz: ðeɪ ɹɪli fɑloʊd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, nɑt hɪm. ðə fæk ðət mæsimə toʊld əm wʌt də ən wən ən haʊ wɑz dʒʌst ə dɪteɪl. "ə taɪɾi pleɪs ə θɹi əɹ fɔɹ θaʊzən pipəl, əbaʊɾ ə deɪ bæk, əɹ ə lɪɾəl lɛs, tə ðə saʊθ ən wɛst. ɪt simz ðeɪ wɝ aʊɾ ə ði ilz pæθ, ən ðɛɹ kɹɑp wɑz ɡʊd læs jɪɹ dɪspaɪt ðə dʒɹaʊt. ðeɪv stɔɹhaʊzəz fʊl ə bɑɹli, mɪləɾ ən oʊts, ən ʌðɝ nidfəl θɪŋz, aɪ ʃəɾ ɪmædʒən. aɪ noʊ jə ɑɹ ɹʌnɪŋ ʃɔɹɾ ɑn fɑɾɝ. fəɹ jəɹ mɛn əz wɛl əz jəɹ hɔɹsəz." "waɪ wəd ðɛɹ stɔɹhaʊzəz bi fʊl ðɪs taɪm ə jɪɹ?" bɹəleɪn lin fɔɹwɝd wɪð ə fɹaʊn, hɝ toʊn dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə dɪmænd, ən nɑt fɑɹ ʃɔɹɾ ə dɪsbɪlif.

Masema's lip curled again, in a smile, or a sneer. The Aes Sedai seemed to cease to exist for him as he turned his attention back to Perrin. "Some of those who follow the Lord Dragon have found a town called So Habor." That was how he always referred to his followers: they really followed the Dragon Reborn, not him. The fact that Masema told them what do and when and how was just a detail. "A tidy place of three or four thousand people, about a day back, or a little less, to the south and west. It seems they were out of the Aiel's path, and their crop was good last year despite the drought. They have storehouses full of barley, millet and oats, and other needful things, I should imagine. I know you are running short on fodder. For your men as well as your horses." "Why would their storehouses be full this time of year?" Berelain leaned forward with a frown, her tone just short of a demand, and not far short of disbelief.

skaʊlɪŋ, nɛŋɡɝ pʊɾ ə hæn tə hɪz sæɾəl-sɔɹd. noʊ wʌn meɪd dɪmænz ə ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. noʊ wʌn daʊɾɪd hɪm, iðɝ. noʊ wʌn u wɪʃt tə lɪv. lɛðɝ kɹikt əz lænsɝz ʃɪftəd ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, bʌt nɛŋɡɝ ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm. ðə smɛl ə mæsiməz mædnəs slaɪðɝɾ ən fleɪld ɪn pɛɹɪnz noʊz. mæsimə stʌɾid bɹəleɪn. hi simd ʌnəwɛɹ ə nɛŋɡɝ əɹ ðə lænsɝz əɹ ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðət mɛn maɪt stɑɹt kɪlɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ ɛni moʊmənt. "ə mæɾɝ ʌv ɡɹid," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "əpɛɹənli ðə ɡɹeɪn tʃɹeɪɾɝz ə soʊ hæbɝ θɔt tə meɪk lɑɹdʒɝ pɹɑfəts baɪ hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ stɑk əntɪl wɪntɝ dʒɹoʊv pɹaɪsəz ʌp.

Scowling, Nengar put a hand to his saddle-sword. No one made demands of the Prophet of the Lord Dragon. No one doubted him, either. No one who wished to live. Leather creaked as lancers shifted their saddles, but Nengar ignored them. The smell of Masema's madness slithered and flailed in Perrin's nose. Masema studied Berelain. He seemed unaware of Nengar or the lancers or the possibility that men might start killing one another any moment. "A matter of greed," he said finally. "Apparently the grain traders of So Habor thought to make larger profits by holding their stock until winter drove prices up.

bʌt ðeɪ nɔɹməli sɛl wɛst, ɪndə ɡildən ən ɑmɑdɪʃiə, ən ɪvɛns ðəɹ ən ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ əv meɪɾ əm fɪɹfəl ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ ðeɪ sɛn aʊt wɪl bi kɑnfəskeɪɾəd. ðɛɹ ɡɹiɾ əz lɛft əm wɪð fʊl stɔɹhaʊzəz ən ɛmpti pɝsɪz." ə noʊɾ ə sæɾəsfækʃən ɛntɝd mæsiməz vɔɪs. hi dɪspaɪzd ɡɹid. bʌt ðɛn, hi dɪspaɪzd ɛni hjumən wiknəs, ɡɹeɪɾ əɹ smɔl. "aɪ θɪŋk ðəl pɑɹt wɪð ðɛɹ ɡɹeɪn vɛɹi tʃipli, naʊ." pɛɹɪn smɛld ə tʃɹæp, ən ɪt dɪd nɑt teɪk ə wʊlfs noʊz. mæsimə hæɾ ɪz oʊn mɛn ən hɔɹsəz tə fid, ən noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ θɝoʊli ðeɪ hæd skaʊɝd ðə kʌntʃɹi ðeɪ kɹɔst, ðeɪ kəd nɑt bi ɪn mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ʃeɪp ðən pɛɹɪnz oʊn pipəl. waɪ hæd mæsimə nɑt sɛn ə fju θaʊzən ə hɪz fɑloʊɝz ɪndə ðɪs taʊn ən teɪkən wʌtɛvɝ ɪt hɛld? ə deɪ bæk. ðət wəd teɪk ɪm fɑɹðɝ fɹəm feɪl, ən meɪbi ɡɪv ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ taɪm tə ɡeɪn ɡɹaʊn əɡɛn. wɑz ðət ðə ɹizən fəɹ ðɪs pəkjuljɝ ɔfɝ? əɹ ə fɝðɝ dɪleɪ tə kip mæsimə ɪn ðə wɛst, kloʊs tə hɪz sintʃæn fɹɛnz? "pɝhæps ðəɹ wɪl bi taɪm tə vɪzət ðɪs taʊn æftɝ maɪ waɪf ɪz fɹi." wʌns əɡɛn, pɛɹɪnz ɪɹz kɑt ðə feɪn saʊn ə mɛn ən hɔɹsəz muvɪŋ θɹu ðə fɔɹəs bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls, kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə wɛst, ðɪs taɪm, fɹəm ðə kæmp.

But they normally sell west, into Ghealdan and Amadicia, and events there and in Ebou Dar have made them fearful that anything they send out will be confiscated. Their greed has left them with full storehouses and empty purses." A note of satisfaction entered Masema's voice. He despised greed. But then, he despised any human weakness, great or small. "I think they will part with their grain very cheaply, now." Perrin smelled a trap, and it did not take a wolf's nose. Masema had his own men and horses to feed, and no matter how thoroughly they had scoured the country they crossed, they could not be in much better shape than Perrin's own people. Why had Masema not sent a few thousand of his followers into this town and taken whatever it held? A day back. That would take him farther from Faile, and maybe give the Shaido time to gain ground again. Was that the reason for this peculiar offer? Or a further delay to keep Masema in the west, close to his Seanchan friends? "Perhaps there will be time to visit this town after my wife is free." Once again, Perrin's ears caught the faint sound of men and horses moving through the forest before anyone else, coming from the west, this time, from the camp.

ɡælɛnz mɛsənʒɝ mʌst əv ɡæləp ðə hoʊl weɪ.

Gallenne's messenger must have galloped the whole way.

"jɔɹ waɪf," mæsimə sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs, dɝɛktɪŋ ə lʊk ət bɹəleɪn ðət meɪd pɛɹɪnz blʌd bɔɪl. ivən bɹəleɪn kʌlɝd, ðoʊ hɝ feɪs ɹɪmeɪn smuð. "du jə ɹɪli bɪliv jəl əv wɝɾ ə hɝ tədeɪ?"

"Your wife," Masema said in a flat voice, directing a look at Berelain that made Perrin's blood boil. Even Berelain colored, though her face remained smooth. "Do you really believe you will have word of her today?"

"aɪ du." pɛɹɪnz vɔɪs wɑz əz flæɾ əz mæsiməz, ən hɑɹɾɝ. hi klʌtʃt ðə pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl, ətɑp ðə hup-hændəlz ə bɹəleɪnz bæskət, tə kip fɹəm ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ ɪz æks. "fɹiɪŋ əɹ kʌmz fɝst. hɝ ən ði ʌðɝz. wi kən fɪl əɹ bɛliz tə bɝstɪŋ wʌns ðæts dʌn, bʌt ðət kʌmz fɝst." ðə hɔɹsəz əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ wɝ ɑɾəbəl tə ɛvɹiwʌn, naʊ. ə lɔŋ laɪn ə lænsɝz əpɪɹd tə ðə wɛst, sɪftɪŋ θɹu ðə ʃæɾoʊd tʃɹiz wɪð ənʌðɝ maʊntəd laɪn bɪhaɪn ɪt, ðə ɹɛd stʃɹimɝz ən bɹɛstpleɪts ə min ɪntɝspɝst wɪð ðə ɡɹin stʃɹimɝz ən bɝnɪʃt bɹɛstpleɪts ʌv ɡildən.

"I do." Perrin's voice was as flat as Masema's, and harder. He clutched the pommel of his saddle, atop the hoop-handles of Berelain's basket, to keep from reaching for his axe. "Freeing her comes first. Her and the others. We can fill our bellies to bursting once that's done, but that comes first." The horses approaching were audible to everyone, now. A long line of lancers appeared to the west, sifting through the shadowed trees with another mounted line behind it, the red streamers and breastplates of Mayene interspersed with the green streamers and burnished breastplates of Ghealdan.

ðə laɪnz stʃɹɛtʃt fɹəm ɑpəzət pɛɹɪn daʊn bɪloʊ ðə mæs ə hɔɹsmən u wɝ weɪɾɪŋ ɑn mæsimə. mɛn əfʊt ɡɑstɪd fɹəm tʃɹi tə tʃɹi, kæɹiɪŋ lɔŋ tu ɹɪvɝz baʊz. pɛɹɪn faʊn hɪmsɛlf hoʊpɪŋ ðət ðeɪ hæd nɑt stʃɹɪp ðə kæmp tu fɑɹ. stilɪŋ ðət sintʃæn peɪpɝ maɪɾ əv fɔɹs mæsiməz hænd, ən i wɑz ə vɛɾɝən ə faɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə blaɪɾ ən əɡɛns ði il. hi maɪɾ əv θɔt fɝðɝ əhɛd ðən sɪmpli ɹaɪɾɪŋ aʊt tə faɪn bɹəleɪn. ɪt wɑz laɪk ənʌðɝ blæksmɪθs pʌzəl.

The lines stretched from opposite Perrin down below the mass of horsemen who were waiting on Masema. Men afoot ghosted from tree to tree, carrying long Two Rivers bows. Perrin found himself hoping that they had not stripped the camp too far. Stealing that Seanchan paper might have forced Masema's hand, and he was a veteran of fighting along the Blight and against the Aiel. He might have thought further ahead than simply riding out to find Berelain. It was like another blacksmith's puzzle.

muv wʌn pis tə ʃɪft ənʌðɝ dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə lɛɾ ə θɝd slɪp fɹi. ə kæmp wɪð wikən dɪfɛndɝz kəd bi oʊvɝɹʌn, ən ɪn ðiz wʊdz, nʌmbɝz kəd kaʊn fəɹ əz mʌtʃ əz u hæd pipəl tʃænəlɪŋ.

Move one piece to shift another just enough to let a third slip free. A camp with weakened defenders could be overrun, and in these woods, numbers could count for as much as who had people channeling.

dɪd mæsimə wɑnə kip ɪz sikɹəɾ ɪnʌf tə tʃɹaɪ pʊɾɪŋ ə sil tə ɪt hɪɹ ən naʊ? pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i hæd muvd wʌn hæn tə ɹɛst ɑn ɪz æks, bʌɾ i lɛft ɪt ðɛɹ. əmʌŋ ðə mæs ə mæsiməz fɑloʊɝz, hɔɹsəz muv nɝvəsli ət tʌɡz fɹəm ðɛɹ ɹaɪɾɝz, mɛn ʃaʊɾəd ən weɪvd wɛpənz, bʌt mæsimə hɪmsɛlf stʌɾid ði ɔnkʌmɪŋ lænsɝz ən boʊmən wɪð noʊ tʃeɪnʒ ʌv ɪkspɹɛʃən, niðɝ mɔɹ daʊɝ nɔɹ lɛs.

Did Masema want to keep his secret enough to try putting a seal to it here and now? Perrin realized that he had moved one hand to rest on his axe, but he left it there. Among the mass of Masema's followers, horses moved nervously at tugs from their riders, men shouted and waved weapons, but Masema himself studied the oncoming lancers and bowmen with no change of expression, neither more dour nor less.

ðeɪ maɪɾ əv bɪn bɝdz hɑpɪŋ fɹəm bɹæntʃ tə bɹæntʃ. ðə smɛl ə hɪm ɹɪθ mædli, əntʃeɪnʒɪŋ.

They might have been birds hopping from branch to branch. The smell of him writhed madly, unchanging.

"wʌɾ ɪz dʌn tə sɝv ðə laɪt, mʌs bi dʌn," hi sɛd wən ðə nukʌmɝz hɔltəd, səm tu hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əweɪ. ðət wɑz izi ɹeɪnʒ fəɹ ə tu ɹɪvɝz boʊmən, ən mæsimə hæd sin dɛmənstʃɹeɪʃənz, bʌɾ i ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ðət bɹɔdhɛd ʃæfs maɪt bi eɪmd əɾ ɪz hɑɹt. "ɔl ɛls ɪz dʒɹɔs ən tʃɹæʃ. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls ɪz dʒɹɔs ən tʃɹæʃ!" dʒɝkɪŋ ɪz sɔɹəl ɝaʊnd wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝd, hi hɛɾəd bæk təwɔɹɾ ɪz weɪɾɪŋ mɛn tʃɹeɪl baɪ nɛŋɡɝ ən bɑɹɾu, ɔl θɹi pʊʃɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz wɪθaʊɾ ə kɛɹ fəɹ bɹoʊkən lɛɡz əɹ bɹoʊkən hɛdz. ðə weɪɾɪŋ kʌmpəni fɛl ɪn bɪhaɪnd, ə mɑb floʊɪŋ saʊθ, naʊ. ə fju mɛn ət ðə teɪl ɛn stɑp tə dʒɹæɡ ə lɪmp ʃeɪp fɹəm ʌndɝ ði ɪnʒɝd hɔɹs ən pʊt ði ænəməl aʊɾ ʌv ɪts mɪzɝi wɪð ə kwɪk slæʃ ʌv ə dæɡɝ. ðən ðeɪ bɪɡæn ɡʌɾɪŋ ən bʊtʃɝɪŋ. ðət mʌtʃ mit kəd nɑt bi əlaʊd tə ɡoʊ tə weɪst.

"What is done to serve the Light, must be done," he said when the newcomers halted, some two hundred paces away. That was easy range for a Two Rivers bowman, and Masema had seen demonstrations, but he gave no sign that broadhead shafts might be aimed at his heart. "All else is dross and trash. Remember that, Lord Perrin Goldeneyes. Everything else is dross and trash!" Jerking his sorrel around without another word, he headed back toward his waiting men trailed by Nengar and Bartu, all three pushing their horses without a care for broken legs or broken heads. The waiting company fell in behind, a mob flowing south, now. A few men at the tail end stopped to drag a limp shape from under the injured horse and put the animal out of its misery with a quick slash of a dagger. Then they began gutting and butchering. That much meat could not be allowed to go to waste.

ðə ɹaɪɾɝ, ðeɪ lɛft wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd dʒɹɑp hɪm.

The rider, they left where they had dropped him.

"hi bɪlivz ɛvɹi wɝɾ i sɛz," ənʊɹə bɹiðd, "bʌt wɛɹ dʌz ɪz bɪlif lɛd hɪm?" pɛɹɪn kənsɪɾɝd æskɪŋ əɹ stʃɹeɪɾ aʊt wɛɹ ʃi θɔt mæsiməz bɪlif wɑz liɾɪŋ hɪm, wɛɹ ʃi wɑntəd tə lid hɪm, bʌt ʃi sʌɾənli pʊɾ ɑn ðəɾ ɪmpɛnətʃɹəbəl ɛɛs sədaɪ kɑm. ðə tɪp ə hɝ ʃɑɹp noʊz hæd tɝn ɹɛd fɹəm ðə koʊld; ʃi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɪm wɪð ə lɛvəl stɛɹ. jə kəd pɹaɪ ðət dɑɹkhaʊnd-mɑɹk stoʊn aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹaʊn bɛɹ-hændəɾ əz izəli əz ɡɛɾ ən ænsɝ fɹəm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu wɔɹ ðət lʊk. hi wəɾ əv tə liv kwɛstʃənz tə bɹəleɪn.

"He believes every word he says," Annoura breathed, "but where does his belief lead him?" Perrin considered asking her straight out where she thought Masema's belief was leading him, where she wanted to lead him, but she suddenly put on that impenetrable Aes Sedai calm. The tip of her sharp nose had turned red from the cold; she regarded him with a level stare. You could pry that Darkhound-marked stone out of the ground bare-handed as easily as get an answer from an Aes Sedai who wore that look. He would have to leave questions to Berelain.

ðə mæn u hæd bɹɔt ðə lænsɝz sʌɾənli spɝɾ ɪz hɔɹs fɔɹwɝd. ə ʃɔɹt kɑmpæk fɛloʊ ɪn ə sɪlvɝ-pleɪɾəd bɹɛstpleɪɾ ən ə hɛlmət wɪð ə bɑɹd feɪsɡɑɹɾ ən θɹi ʃɔɹt waɪt plumz, dʒɝɑɹɾ ɑɹɡændə wɑz ə tʌf mæn, ə soʊlʒɝ u hæd wɝkt ɪz weɪ ʌp fɹəm ðə bɑɾəm, əɡɛnst ɔl ɑdz, tə bɪkʌm ðə fɝs kæptən ʌv æliændɝz bɑɾiɡɑɹd. hi hæd noʊ laɪkɪŋ fəɹ pɛɹɪn, hu hæd bɹɔɾ ɪz kwin saʊθ fəɹ noʊ ɡʊd ɹizən ən ɡɑɾən əɹ kɪdnæpt, bʌt pɛɹɪn ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪm tə stɑp ən meɪk ɪz ɹɪspɛks tə bɹəleɪn, pɝhæps kənfɝ wɪð ɡælɛn. ɑɹɡændə hæɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə ɹɪspɛk fəɹ ɡælɛn, ən ɔfən spɛn taɪm wɪð ɪm boʊθ smoʊkɪŋ ðɛɹ paɪps. ɪnstɛd, ðə ɹoʊn flaʊndɝd pæs pɛɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz, ɑɹɡændə dɪɡɪŋ ɪz hilz ɪndə ði ænəməlz saɪdz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɔɹs mɔɹ spid.

The man who had brought the lancers suddenly spurred his horse forward. A short compact fellow in a silver-plated breastplate and a helmet with a barred faceguard and three short white plumes, Gerard Arganda was a tough man, a soldier who had worked his way up from the bottom, against all odds, to become the First Captain of Alliandre's bodyguard. He had no liking for Perrin, who had brought his queen south for no good reason and gotten her kidnapped, but Perrin expected him to stop and make his respects to Berelain, perhaps confer with Gallenne. Arganda had a great deal of respect for Gallenne, and often spent time with him both smoking their pipes. Instead, the roan floundered past Perrin and the others, Arganda digging his heels into the animal's sides, trying to force more speed.

wən pɛɹɪn sɔ wɛɹ ðə mæn wɑz hɛɾɪŋ, hi ʌndɝstʊd. ə sɪŋɡəl hɔɹsmən ɑn ə maʊsɛkʌlɝɾ ænəməl wɑz əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ fɹəm ði ist əɾ ə stɛɾi wɔk, ən bɪsaɪd hɪm, ən il ʃʌfəld əlɔŋ ɑn snoʊʃuz.

When Perrin saw where the man was heading, he understood. A single horseman on a mousecolored animal was approaching from the east at a steady walk, and beside him, an Aiel shuffled along on snowshoes.

tʃæptɝ eɪt

CHAPTER 8

wɝlpulz ə kʌlɝ pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz i hæd muvd əntɪl i faʊn hɪmsɛlf kɹaʊtʃt oʊvɝ stɛpɝz nɛk, stʃɹikɪŋ æftɝ ɑɹɡændə. ðə snoʊ wɑz noʊ lɛs dip, ðə ɡɹaʊnd noʊ smuðɝ, ðə laɪt noʊ bɛɾɝ, bʌt stɛpɝ ɹeɪs θɹu ðə ʃædoʊz, ənwɪlɪŋ tə lɛt ðə ɹoʊn steɪ ɪn ðə lɛd, ən pɛɹɪn ɝdʒd ɪm tə ɹʌn fæstɝ. ði əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ɹaɪɾɝ wɑz ɛlaɪəs, hɪz bɪɹd fæn aʊɾ oʊvɝ ɪz tʃɛst, ə bɹɔd-bɹɪm hæt kæstɪŋ ɪz feɪs ɪn ʃædoʊz ən ɪz fɝ-laɪn kloʊk hæŋɪŋ daʊn ɪz bæk. ði il wɑz wʌn ə ðə meɪɾənz, wɪð ə dɑɹk ʃoʊufə ɹæpt ɝaʊn əɹ hɛɾ ən ə waɪt kloʊk, juz fəɹ haɪɾɪŋ əɡɛns ðə snoʊ, wɔɹn oʊvɝ əɹ koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz ʌv ɡɹeɪz ən bɹaʊnz ən ɡɹinz. ɛlaɪəs ən wʌn meɪɾən, wɪθaʊt ði ʌðɝz, mɛn feɪl hæd bɪn faʊnd. ɪt hæd tə.

Whirlpools of Color Perrin did not realize he had moved until he found himself crouched over Stepper's neck, streaking after Arganda. The snow was no less deep, the ground no smoother, the light no better, but Stepper raced through the shadows, unwilling to let the roan stay in the lead, and Perrin urged him to run faster. The approaching rider was Elyas, his beard fanned out over his chest, a broad-brimmed hat casting his face in shadows and his fur-lined cloak hanging down his back. The Aiel was one of the Maidens, with a dark shoufa wrapped around her head and a white cloak, used for hiding against the snow, worn over her coat and breeches of grays and browns and greens. Elyas and one Maiden, without the others, meant Faile had been found. It had to.

ɑɹɡændə ɹæn ɪz hɔɹs wɪθaʊɾ ə kɛɹ fəɹ wɛðɝ i bɹoʊk ðə ɹoʊnz nɛk əɹ ɪz oʊn, lipɪŋ stoʊn aʊtkɹɑps, splæʃɪŋ θɹu ðə snoʊ əɾ ə nɪɹ-ɡæləp, bʌt stɛpɝ oʊvɝtʊk ɪm dʒʌst əz i ɹitʃt ɛlaɪəs ən dɪmændəɾ ɪn ə hɑɹʃ vɔɪs, "dɪd jə si ðə kwin, mækɛɹə? ɪz ʃi əlaɪv? tɛl mi, mæn!" ðə meɪɾən, ɛləəndə, hɝ sʌn-dɑɹkən feɪs ɪkspɹɛʃənləs, ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə pɛɹɪn. ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn mɛn fəɹ ə ɡɹiɾɪŋ, əɹ sɪmpəθi, bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ bɹoʊk əɹ skɪmɪŋ stʃɹaɪd. wɪð ɛlaɪəs tə meɪk ɪz ɹipɔɹt tə pɛɹɪn, ʃi wəd kæɹi hɝz tə ðə waɪz wʌnz.

Arganda ran his horse without a care for whether he broke the roan's neck or his own, leaping stone outcrops, splashing through the snow at a near-gallop, but Stepper overtook him just as he reached Elyas and demanded in a harsh voice, "Did you see the queen, Machera? Is she alive? Tell me, man!" The Maiden, Elienda, her sun-darkened face expressionless, raised a hand to Perrin. It might have been meant for a greeting, or sympathy, but she never broke her skimming stride. With Elyas to make his report to Perrin, she would carry hers to the Wise Ones.

"juv faʊn hɝ?" pɛɹɪnz θɹoʊt wɑz sʌɾənli dʒɹaɪ əz sænd. hi hæd weɪɾəd soʊ lɔŋ fəɹ ðɪs.

"You've found her?" Perrin's throat was suddenly dry as sand. He had waited so long for this.

ɑɹɡændə snɑɹəl saʊnləsli θɹu ðə stil bɑɹz ə hɪz hɛlməts feɪsɡɑɹd, noʊɪŋ ðət pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑɾ æskɪŋ æftɝ æliændɝ.

Arganda snarled soundlessly through the steel bars of his helmet's faceguard, knowing that Perrin was not asking after Alliandre.

"wi faʊn ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wiv bɪn fɑloʊɪŋ," ɛlaɪəs sɛd kɛɹfəli, boʊθ hænz ɑn ðə pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl. ivən ɛlaɪəs, ðə feɪbəld lɔŋ tuθ u hæd lɪvd ən ɹʌn wɪð wʊlvz, wɑz ʃoʊɪŋ ðə stʃɹeɪn ə tu mɛni maɪlz ən nɑɾ ɪnʌf slip. hɪz hoʊl feɪs sæɡd wɪð ə wɪɹinəs ɛmfəsaɪz baɪ ðə ɡoʊldən-jɛloʊ ɡloʊ ʌv ɪz aɪz bɪniθ ɪz hæt bɹɪm. ɡɹeɪ stʃɹikt ɪz θɪk bɪɹɾ ən ðə hɛɹ ðəɾ i wɔɹ hæŋɪŋ tə hɪz weɪst ən taɪd wɪð ə lɛðɝ kɔɹɾ ət ðə neɪp ə hɪz nɛk, ən fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm sɪns pɛɹɪn hæd noʊn hɪm, hi lʊkt oʊld. "ðeɪɹ kæmpt ɝaʊn ə fɛɹ-saɪz taʊn ðeɪ tʊk, ɪn ɹɪdʒ kʌntʃɹi nɪɹ fɔɹɾi maɪlz fɹəm hɪɹ. ðeɪv ɡɑt noʊ sɛntʃɹiz tə spik ə kloʊs ɪn, ən ðoʊz fɝðɝ aʊt sim tə bi wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ pɹɪznɝz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪskeɪp mɔɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, soʊ wi ɡɑt nɪɹ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə ɡʊd lʊk. bʌt pɛɹɪn, ðəɹ ɑɹ mɔɹ ə ðɛm ðən wi θɔt. ət lis naɪn əɹ tɛn sɛps, ðə meɪɾənz seɪ. kaʊntɪŋ ɡeɪʃeɪn - foʊks ɪn waɪt, ɛniweɪ - ðəɹ kəd bi əz mɛni pipəl ɪn ðət kæmp əz ɪn min əɹ ɛbu dɑɹ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ mɛni spɪɹ faɪɾɝz, bʌt tɛn θaʊzən maɪt bi ɑn ðə loʊ saɪd fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ sɔ."

"We found the Shaido we've been following," Elyas said carefully, both hands on the pommel of his saddle. Even Elyas, the fabled Long Tooth who had lived and run with wolves, was showing the strain of too many miles and not enough sleep. His whole face sagged with a weariness emphasized by the golden-yellow glow of his eyes beneath his hat brim. Gray streaked his thick beard and the hair that he wore hanging to his waist and tied with a leather cord at the nape of his neck, and for the first time since Perrin had known him, he looked old. "They're camped around a fair-sized town they took, in ridge country near forty miles from here. They've got no sentries to speak of close in, and those further out seem to be watching for prisoners trying to escape more than anything else, so we got near enough for a good look. But Perrin, there are more of them than we thought. At least nine or ten septs, the Maidens say. Counting gai'shain - folks in white, anyway - there could be as many people in that camp as in Mayene or Ebou Dar. I don't know how many spear fighters, but ten thousand might be on the low side from what I saw."

nɑts ə dɛspɝeɪʃən twɪstəɾ ən taɪɾənd ɪn pɛɹɪnz stʌmək. hɪz maʊθ wɑz soʊ dʒɹaɪ hi kəd nɑɾ əv spoʊkən hæd feɪl mɝækjələsli əpɪɹɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. tɛn θaʊzən ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ, ən ivən wivɝz ən sɪlvɝsmɪθs ən oʊl mɛn u pæs ðɛɹ deɪz ɹɛmənɪsɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃeɪd wəd pɪk ʌp ə spɪɹ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ətækt. hi hæd fjuɝ ðən tu θaʊzən lænsɝz, ən ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn oʊvɝmætʃt əɡɛnst ən ikwəl nʌmbɝ ʌv il. fjuɝ ðən θɹi hʌnʒɹəd tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, hu kəd ɹik hævək wɪð ðɛɹ baʊz əɾ ə dɪstəns bʌt nɑt stɑp tɛn θaʊzənd. ðət mɛni ʃeɪɾoʊ wəd ʃɹɛd mæsiməz mɝɾɝəs ɹæbəl laɪk ə kæt slɔɾɝɪŋ ə nɛst ə maɪs. ivən kaʊntɪŋ ði æʃəmən ən ðə waɪz wʌnz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. . . . ɛdʒɹə ən ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz wɝ hɑɹdli dʒɛnɝəs ɪn wʌt ðeɪ toʊld ɪm əbaʊt waɪz wʌnz, bʌɾ i nu tɛn sɛps maɪɾ əv fɪfti wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl, meɪbi mɔɹ.

Knots of desperation twisted and tightened in Perrin's stomach. His mouth was so dry he could not have spoken had Faile miraculously appeared in front of him. Ten thousand algai'd'siswai, and even weavers and silversmiths and old men who passed their days reminiscing in the shade would pick up a spear if they were attacked. He had fewer than two thousand lancers, and they would have been overmatched against an equal number of Aiel. Fewer than three hundred Two Rivers men, who could wreak havoc with their bows at a distance but not stop ten thousand. That many Shaido would shred Masema's murderous rabble like a cat slaughtering a nest of mice. Even counting the Asha'man and the Wise Ones and Aes Sedai. . . . Edarra and the other Wise Ones were hardly generous in what they told him about Wise Ones, but he knew ten septs might have fifty women who could channel, maybe more.

meɪbi fjuɝ, tu - ðəɹ wɑz noʊ sɛt nʌmbɝ - bʌt nɑɾ ɪnʌf fjuɝ tə meɪk ə dɪfɝəns.

Maybe fewer, too - there was no set number - but not enough fewer to make a difference.

wɪð ən ɛfɝt, hi stʃɹæŋɡəl ðə dɪspɛɹ wɛlɪŋ ʌp ɪn hɪm, skwizd əntɪl oʊnli ɹaɪðɪŋ fɪləməns ɹɪmeɪn fəɹ ɪz æŋɡɝ tə bɝn ʌp. ə hæmɝ hæd noʊ pleɪs ɪn ɪt fəɹ dɪspɛɹ. tɛn sɛps əɹ ðə hoʊl ʃeɪɾoʊ klæn, ðeɪ stɪl hæd feɪl, ən i stɪl hæd tə faɪn ə weɪ. "wʌt dʌz ɪt mæɾɝ haʊ mɛni ðəɹ ɑɹ?" ɛɹæm dɪmændəd. "wɛn tʃɹɑləks keɪm tə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ðəɹ wɝ θaʊzənz, tɛnz ə θaʊzənz, bʌt wi kɪld əm dʒʌs ðə seɪm. ʃeɪɾoʊ kæn bi wɝs ðən tʃɹɑləks." pɛɹɪn blɪŋkt, sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ðə mæn ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn hɪm, nɑt tə mɛnʃən bɹəleɪn ən ɡælɛn ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪn ɪz heɪs tə ɹitʃ ɛlaɪəs, hi hæd ʃʌɾ aʊɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. dɪmli vɪzəbəl θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, ðə mɛn ɑɹɡændə hæd bɹɔɾ aʊt tə kənfɹʌn mæsimə stɪl hɛl ðɛɹ ɹʌf laɪnz, bʌt bɹəleɪnz bɑɾiɡɑɹd wɑz fɔɹmɪŋ ə lus ɹɪŋ sɛntɝɾ ɑn ɛlaɪəs ən feɪsɪŋ aʊtwɝd. ðə waɪz wʌnz stʊɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə sɝkəl, lɪsnɪŋ tə ɛləəndə wɪð ɡɹeɪv feɪsəz. ʃi spoʊk ɪn ə loʊ mɝmɝ, səmtaɪmz ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd. hɝ vju ʌv mæɾɝz wɑz noʊ bɹaɪɾɝ ðən ɛlaɪəsəz. hi mʌst əv lɔs ðə bæskəɾ ɪn ɪz heɪst, əɹ θɹoʊn ɪɾ əweɪ, kəz ɪt hʌŋ fɹəm bɹəleɪnz sæɾəl naʊ. ðəɹ wɑz ə lʊk ʌv. . . kəɾ ɪt bi sɪmpəθi, ɑn əɹ feɪs? bɝn hɪm, hi wɑz tu taɪɝd tə θɪŋk stʃɹeɪt. oʊnli, naʊ mɔɹ ðən ɛvɝ, hi hæd tə θɪŋk stʃɹeɪt. hɪz nɛks mɪsteɪk maɪt bi ðə læst, fəɹ feɪl.

With an effort, he strangled the despair welling up in him, squeezed until only writhing filaments remained for his anger to burn up. A hammer had no place in it for despair. Ten septs or the whole Shaido clan, they still had Faile, and he still had to find a way. "What does it matter how many there are?" Aram demanded. "When Trollocs came to the Two Rivers, there were thousands, tens of thousands, but we killed them just the same. Shaido can't be worse than Trollocs." Perrin blinked, surprised to find the man right behind him, not to mention Berelain and Gallenne and the Aes Sedai. In his haste to reach Elyas, he had shut out everything else. Dimly visible through the trees, the men Arganda had brought out to confront Masema still held their rough lines, but Berelain's bodyguard was forming a loose ring centered on Elyas and facing outward. The Wise Ones stood outside the circle, listening to Elienda with grave faces. She spoke in a low murmur, sometimes shaking her head. Her view of matters was no brighter than Elyas's. He must have lost the basket in his haste, or thrown it away, because it hung from Berelain's saddle now. There was a look of. . . could it be sympathy, on her face? Burn him, he was too tired to think straight. Only, now more than ever, he had to think straight. His next mistake might be the last, for Faile.

"weɪ aɪ hɝɾ ɪt, tɪŋkɝ," ɛlaɪəs sɛd kwaɪətli, "ðə tʃɹɑləks keɪm tə jə ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ən jə mænədʒ tə kætʃ əm ɪn ə vaɪs. juv ɛni fænsi plænz fəɹ kætʃɪŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ɪn ə vaɪs?" ɛɹæm ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm sʌlənli. ɛlaɪəs hæd noʊn ɪm bɪfɔɹ i pɪkt ʌp ə sɔɹd, ən ɛɹæm dɪslaɪk biɪŋ ɹimaɪndəɾ ə ðət taɪm, dɪspaɪɾ ɪz bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd kloʊðz.

"Way I heard it, Tinker," Elyas said quietly, "the Trollocs came to you in the Two Rivers, and you managed to catch them in a vise. You have any fancy plans for catching the Shaido in a vise?" Aram glared at him sullenly. Elyas had known him before he picked up a sword, and Aram disliked being reminded of that time, despite his brightly colored clothes.

"tɛn sɛps əɹ fɪfti," ɑɹɡændə ɡɹaʊld, "ðɛɹ mʌs bi səm weɪ tə fɹi ðə kwin. ən ði ʌðɝz, ʌv kɔɹs. ən ði ʌðɝz." hɪz hɑɹd-bɪɾən feɪs wɑz kɹist ɪn ə skaʊl ʌv æŋɡɝ, jɛɾ i smɛl fɹæntɪk, ə fɑks ɹɛɾi tʃu ɔf ɪts oʊn lɛɡ tə ɪskeɪp ə tʃɹæp. "wɪl . . . ? wɪl ðeɪ æksɛpt ə ɹænsəm?" ðə ɡildænɪn lʊkt ɝaʊn əntɪl i faʊn mɑɹlaɪn kʌmɪŋ θɹu ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz. ʃi mænədʒd ə stɛɾi stʃɹaɪɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə snoʊ, nɑt stæɡɝɪŋ ɪn ðə list. ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɛniwɛɹ tə bi sin əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, nɔɹ ɛləəndə. "wɪl ðiz ʃeɪɾoʊ teɪk ə ɹænsəm . . . waɪz wʌn?" ɑɹɡændəz ɑnɝɪfɪk hæd ðə saʊn ʌv ən æftɝθɑt. hi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bɪliv ði il wɪð əm hæɾ ɛni nɑlədʒ ə ðə kɪdnæpɪŋ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə teɪn ɪn ɪm ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ il. "aɪ kænɑt seɪ." mɑɹlaɪn sim nɑt tə noʊɾəs ɪz toʊn. ɑɹmz foʊldəɾ əkɹɔs əɹ tʃɛst, ʃi stʊd lʊkɪŋ ət pɛɹɪn ɹæðɝ ðən ɑɹɡændə. ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz lʊks wɛɹ ə wʊmən weɪɾ ən mɛʒɝd jə tɪl ʃi cʊɾə soʊn jə ə suɾ ə kloʊðz əɹ toʊl jə wən jəɹ smɔlkloʊðz wɝ læst wɑʃt. ɪt wʊɾə meɪɾ ɪm ənkʌmftəɹbəl bæk wən i hæd hæd taɪm fəɹ sətʃ θɪŋz. wən ʃi spoʊk əɡɛn, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ʌv ɔfɝɪŋ ædvaɪs ɪn əɹ toʊn, mɪɹli ə sɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə fæks. ʃi maɪɾ ivən əv mɛn ɪt soʊ. "jɔɹ wɛtləndɝ peɪɪŋ ə ɹænsəm ɡoʊz əɡɛnst əɹ kʌstəm. ɡeɪʃeɪn meɪ bi ɡɪvən əz ə ɡɪft, əɹ tʃɹeɪɾɪd fəɹ ʌðɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn , bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑɾ ænəməlz tə bi soʊld. jɛɾ ɪt simz ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fɑloʊ dʒiɾəb.

"Ten septs or fifty," Arganda growled, "there must be some way to free the Queen. And the others, of course. And the others." His hard-bitten face was creased in a scowl of anger, yet he smelled frantic, a fox ready chew off its own leg to escape a trap. "Will . . . ? Will they accept a ransom?" The Ghealdanin looked around until he found Marline coming through the Winged Guards. She managed a steady stride in spite of the snow, not staggering in the least. The other Wise Ones were no longer anywhere to be seen among the trees, nor Elienda. "Will these Shaido take a ransom . . . Wise One?" Arganda's honorific had the sound of an afterthought. He no longer believed the Aiel with them had any knowledge of the kidnapping, but there was a taint in him regarding Aiel. "I cannot say." Marline seemed not to notice his tone. Arms folded across her chest, she stood looking at Perrin rather than Arganda. It was one of those looks where a woman weighed and measured you till she could have sewn you a suit of clothes or told you when your smallclothes were last washed. It would have made him uncomfortable back when he had had time for such things. When she spoke again, there was nothing of offering advice in her tone, merely a setting out of the facts. She might even have meant it so. "Your wetlander paying of ransom goes against our custom. Gai'shain may be given as a gift, or traded for other gai'shain , but they are not animals to be sold. Yet it seems the Shaido no longer follow ji'e'tob.

ðeɪ meɪk wɛtləndɝz ɡeɪʃeɪn ən teɪk ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv oʊnli ðə fɪfθ. ðeɪ meɪ sɛɾ ə pɹaɪs."

They make wetlanders gai'shain and take everything instead of only the fifth. They may set a price."

"maɪ dʒuəlz ɑɹ ət jəɹ dɪspoʊzəl, pɛɹɪn," bɹəleɪn pʊɾ ɪn, hɝ vɔɪs stɛɾi ən əɹ feɪs fɝm. "ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi, ɡɹeɪɾi əɹ nil kən fɛtʃ mɔɹ fɹəm min. ɡoʊld, əz wɛl." ɡælɛn klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "ɔltɑɹənz ɑɹ juz tə mɝɔɾɝz, maɪ leɪɾi, neɪbɝɪŋ noʊbəlz ən bɹɪɡænz əlaɪk," hi sɛd sloʊli, slæpɪŋ ɪz ɹeɪnz əɡɛnst ɪz pɑm. ɔlðoʊ ɹɪlʌktən tə kɑntʃɹə dɪk bɹəleɪn, hi klɪɹli ɪntɛndəd tə ɛniweɪ. "ðɛɹz noʊ lɔ ðɪs fɑɹ fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ, ɪksɛpt wʌt ðə loʊkəl lɔɹɾ əɹ leɪɾi sɛz. noʊbəl əɹ kɑmən, ðəɹ əkʌstəm tə peɪɪŋ ɔf ɛniwʌn ðeɪ kæn faɪɾ ɔf, ən kwɪk tə tɛl ðə dɪfɝəns. ɪt ɡoʊz əɡɛnst ɹizən ðət nʌn ə ðɛm tʃɹaɪd tə baɪ seɪfti, jɛt wiv sin nʌθɪŋ bʌt ɹuənz ɪn ðiz ʃeɪɾoʊz pæθ, hɝɾ ə nʌθɪŋ bʌt pɪlɪdʒ ɹaɪt daʊn tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðeɪ meɪ æksɛpt ən ɔfɝ ə ɹænsəm, ən ivən teɪk ɪt, bʌt kən ðeɪ bi tʃɹʌstɪd tə ɡɪv ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ɹɪtɝn? dʒʌs meɪkɪŋ ði ɔfɝ ɡɪvz əweɪ əɹ wʌn ɹil ædvæntɪdʒ, ðət ðeɪ doʊnt noʊ wəɹ hɪɹ." ənʊɹə ʃʊk əɹ hɛd slaɪtli, ðə bɛɹəs muvmənt, bʌt ɡælɛnz wʌn aɪ kɑɾ ɪt, ən i fɹaʊnd. "ju dɪsəɡɹi, ənʊɹə sədaɪ?" hi æsk pəlaɪtli. ən wɪð ə hɪn ə sɝpɹaɪz.

"My jewels are at your disposal, Perrin," Berelain put in, her voice steady and her face firm. "If necessary, Grady or Neald can fetch more from Mayene. Gold, as well." Gallenne cleared his throat. "Altarans are used to marauders, my Lady, neighboring nobles and brigands alike," he said slowly, slapping his reins against his palm. Although reluctant to contra dict Berelain, he clearly intended to anyway. "There's no law this far from Ebou Dar, except what the local lord or lady says. Noble or common, they're accustomed to paying off anyone they can't fight off, and quick to tell the difference. It goes against reason that none of them tried to buy safety, yet we've seen nothing but ruins in these Shaido's path, heard of nothing but pillage right down to the ground. They may accept an offer of ransom, and even take it, but can they be trusted to give anything in return? Just making the offer gives away our one real advantage, that they don't know we are here." Annoura shook her head slightly, the barest movement, but Gallenne's one eye caught it, and he frowned. "You disagree, Annoura Sedai?" he asked politely. And with a hint of surprise.

ðə ɡɹeɪ wɑz ɔlmoʊs dɪfəɾənt ət taɪmz, ɪspɛʃli fəɹ ə sɪstɝ, bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ væsəleɪɾɪd əbaʊt spikɪŋ ʌp wən ʃi dɪsəɡɹid wɪð ædvaɪs ɔfɝd tə bɹəleɪn.

The Gray was almost diffident at times, especially for a sister, but she never vacillated about speaking up when she disagreed with advice offered to Berelain.

ðɪs taɪm ənʊɹə hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðoʊ, ən kʌvɝd baɪ pʊlɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf ən ɝeɪnʒɪŋ ðə foʊlz wɪð kɛɹ. ɪt wɑz klʌmzi ʌv hɝ; ɛɛs sədaɪ kəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ hiɾ əɹ koʊld wən ðeɪ tʃoʊz, ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ əntʌtʃt wən ɛvɹiwʌn ɝaʊn əm wɑz dʒɹɛntʃt wɪð swɛɾ əɹ faɪɾɪŋ tə stɑp ðɛɹ tiθ tʃæɾɝɪŋ. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu peɪɾ ətɛnʃən tə ðə tɛmpɹətʃɝ wɑz baɪɪŋ taɪm tə θɪŋk, juʒəwəli əbaʊt haʊ tə haɪd wʌt ʃi wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ. ɡlænsɪŋ təwɔɹd mɑɹlaɪn wɪð ə smɔl fɹaʊn, ʃi faɪnəli ɹitʃt ə dɪsɪʒən, ən ðə slaɪt kɹis ɪn əɹ fɔɹhɛd vænɪʃt.

This time Annoura hesitated, though, and covered by pulling her cloak around herself and arranging the folds with care. It was clumsy of her; Aes Sedai could ignore heat or cold when they chose, remaining untouched when everyone around them was drenched with sweat or fighting to stop their teeth chattering. An Aes Sedai who paid attention to the temperature was buying time to think, usually about how to hide what she was thinking. Glancing toward Marline with a small frown, she finally reached a decision, and the slight crease in her forehead vanished.

"nɪɡoʊʃieɪʃən ɪz ɔlweɪz bɛɾɝ ðən faɪɾɪŋ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn kul tæɹɑbənɝ æksɛns, "æn ɪn nɪɡoʊʃieɪʃən, tʃɹʌst ɪz ɔlweɪz ə mæɾɝ ə ðə pɹikɔʃənz, jɛs? wi mʌs kənsɪɾɝ wɪð kɛɹ ðə pɹikɔʃənz ðət mʌs bi teɪkən. ðəɹ ɪz ɔlsoʊ ðə kwɛstʃən ə hu ɪz tə əpɹoʊtʃ ðɛm. waɪz wʌnz meɪ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bi sækɹoʊsæŋkt, sɪns ðeɪ tʊk pɑɹɾ ɪn ðə bæɾəl ət dəməaɪz wɛlz. ə sɪstɝ, əɹ ə ɡɹup ə sɪstɝz, maɪt bi bɛɾɝ, jɛɾ ivən ðət mʌst əv kɛɹfəl ɝeɪnʒmənt.

"Negotiation is always better than fighting," she said in cool Taraboner accents, "and in negotiation, trust is always a matter of the precautions, yes? We must consider with care the precautions that must be taken. There is also the question of who is to approach them. Wise Ones may no longer be sacrosanct, since they took part in the battle at Dumai's Wells. A sister, or a group of sisters, might be better, yet even that must have careful arrangement.

"aɪ maɪsɛlf æm wɪlɪŋ tə -"

"I myself am willing to -"

"noʊ ɹænsəm," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ən wən ɛvɹiwʌn stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, moʊst ɪn kɑnstɝneɪʃən, ənʊɹə wɪð əɹ feɪs ənɹiɾəbəl, hi sɛɾ ɪɾ əɡɛn, ɪn ə hɑɹɾɝ vɔɪs. "noʊ ɹænsəm." hi wəd nɑt peɪ ðiz ʃeɪɾoʊ fəɹ meɪkɪŋ feɪl sʌfɝ. ʃi wəd bi əfɹeɪd, ən ðeɪ hæd tə peɪ fəɹ ðæt, nɑt pɹɑfət fɹəm ɪt. bɪsaɪdz, ɡælɛn hæd ðə ɹaɪɾ ʌv ɪt. nʌθɪŋ pɛɹɪn hæd sin, ɪn ɔltɑɹə əɹ ɑmɑdɪʃiə əɹ bɪfɔɹ ðəɾ ɪn kɛɹhin, soʊ mʌtʃ əz hɪntəd ðət ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kəd bi tʃɹʌstɪd tə kip ɛni bɑɹɡən. əz wɛl tʃɹʌst ɹæts ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪn bɪnz ən kʌtwɝmz wɪð ðə hɑɹvəst. "ɛlaɪəs, aɪ wɑnə si ðɛɹ kæmp." wən i wɑz ə bɔɪ hi hæd noʊn ə blaɪn mæn, næt tɔɹfɪn wɪð ɪz ɹɪŋkəl feɪs ən θɪn waɪt hɛɹ, hu kəd dɪsəsɛmbəl ɛni blæksmɪθs pʌzəl baɪ tʌtʃ. fəɹ jɪɹz pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə lɝn haʊ tə dupləkeɪt ðət fit, bʌɾ i nɛvɝ kʊd. hi hæd tə si haʊ ðə pisəz fɪt təɡɛðɝ bɪfɔɹ i kəd meɪk sɛns ə ðɛm. "ɛɹæm, faɪnd ɡɹeɪɾi ən tɛl ɪm tə mit mi əz fæst əz i kæn, ət ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd." ðət wɑz wʌt ðeɪ hæd kʌm tə kɔl ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ðeɪ ɝaɪvd ət ði ɛn ʌv itʃ dʒʌmp, ən dɪpɑɹɾəd fɹəm fəɹ ðə nɛkst. ɪt wɑz iziɝ fəɹ ði æʃəmən tə wiv ə ɡeɪtweɪ ɪn ə pleɪs ɔlɹɛɾi tʌtʃt baɪ wʌn ðeɪ hæd woʊvən bɪfɔɹ.

"No ransom," Perrin said, and when everyone stared at him, most in consternation, Annoura with her face unreadable, he said it again, in a harder voice. "No ransom." He would not pay these Shaido for making Faile suffer. She would be afraid, and they had to pay for that, not profit from it. Besides, Gallenne had the right of it. Nothing Perrin had seen, in Altara or Amadicia or before that in Cairhien, so much as hinted that the Shaido could be trusted to keep any bargain. As well trust rats in the grain bins and cutworms with the harvest. "Elyas, I want to see their camp." When he was a boy he had known a blind man, Nat Torfinn with his wrinkled face and thin white hair, who could disassemble any blacksmith's puzzle by touch. For years Perrin tried to learn how to duplicate that feat, but he never could. He had to see how the pieces fit together before he could make sense of them. "Aram, find Grady and tell him to meet me as fast as he can, at the Traveling ground." That was what they had come to call the place where they arrived at the end of each jump, and departed from for the next. It was easier for the Asha'man to weave a gateway in a place already touched by one they had woven before.

ɛɹæm ɡeɪv wʌn ʃɔɹt, pɝpəsfəl nɑd, ðən wild ɪz ɡɹeɪ ən spɛd təwɔɹd kæmp, bʌt pɛɹɪn kəd si ɑɹɡjəməns ən kwɛstʃənz ən dɪmænz ɡæðɝɪŋ ɑn ðə feɪsəz ɝaʊn hɪm. mɑɹlaɪn wɑz stɪl ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ hɪm, əz ðoʊ sʌɾənli nɑt kwaɪt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ i wɑz, ən ɡælɛn wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə ɹeɪnz ɪn ɪz hænz, noʊ daʊt siɪŋ mæɾɝz tɝn aʊt bædli wʌtɛvɝ i dɪd, bʌt bɹəleɪn wɔɹ ə pɝtɝbd ɪkspɹɛʃən, əbdʒɛkʃənz vɪzəbəl ɪn əɹ aɪz, ən ənʊɹəz maʊθ hæd taɪɾənd tə ə θɪn laɪn. ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪslaɪk biɪŋ ɪntɝʌptɪd, ænd, dɪfəɾənt fəɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ nɑt, ʃi lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə vɛn əɹ dɪsplɛʒɝ. ɑɹɡændə, hɪz feɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɹɛd, oʊpən ɪz maʊθ wɪð ðə klɪɹ ɪntɛntʃən ə ʃaʊɾɪŋ.

Aram gave one short, purposeful nod, then wheeled his gray and sped toward camp, but Perrin could see arguments and questions and demands gathering on the faces around him. Marline was still examining him, as though suddenly not quite sure what he was, and Gallenne was frowning at the reins in his hands, no doubt seeing matters turn out badly whatever he did, but Berelain wore a perturbed expression, objections visible in her eyes, and Annoura's mouth had tightened to a thin line. Aes Sedai disliked being interrupted, and, diffident for an Aes Sedai or not, she looked ready to vent her displeasure. Arganda, his face growing red, opened his mouth with the clear intention of shouting.

ɑɹɡændə hæd ʃaʊɾəd ɔfən sɪns ɪz kwin wɑz kɪdnæpt. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn weɪɾɪŋ tə lɪsən.

Arganda had shouted often since his queen was kidnapped. There was no point in waiting to listen.

dɪɡɪŋ ɪn ɪz hilz, pɛɹɪn sɛn stɛpɝ lʌnʒɪŋ θɹu ðə laɪn ʌv wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz, hɛɾɪŋ bæk təwɔɹd ðə ʃɪɹd tʃɹiz. nɑɾ əɾ ə ɹʌn, bʌt nɑt dɔdlɪŋ, iðɝ - ə kwɪk tʃɹɑt θɹu ðə taʊɝɪŋ fɔɹəsts, hænz taɪɾ ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz ən aɪz ɔlɹɛɾi sɝtʃɪŋ ðə dæpəld ɡlum fəɹ ɡɹeɪɾi. ɛlaɪəs fɑloʊɾ ɑn ɪz ɡɛldɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd. pɛɹɪn hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ i hæd noʊ ɹum ɪn ɪm fəɹ ənʌðɝ aʊns ə fɪɹ, jɛɾ ɛlaɪəs' saɪləns meɪd ðə weɪt ɡɹoʊ. ði ʌðɝ mæn nɛvɝ sɔ ən ɑbstəkəl wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ə weɪ ɝaʊnd. hɪz saɪləns ʃaʊɾəd ʌv ɪmpæsəbəl maʊntənz. ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ, ðoʊ. wən ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə smuð stoʊn aʊtkɹɑp, pɛɹɪn wɔk stɛpɝ bæk ən fɔɹθ θɹu ðə slæntɪŋ bɑɹz ə laɪt, ɝaʊn ðə tɑpəl tʃɹiz ən bɪtwin ðə stændɪŋ wʌnz, əneɪbəl tə meɪk hɪmsɛlf stɑp. hi hæd tə kip muvɪŋ. ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ. hɪz maɪn dɑɹɾɪd laɪk ə keɪdʒd ɹæt.

Digging in his heels, Perrin sent Stepper lunging through the line of Winged Guards, heading back toward the sheared trees. Not at a run, but not dawdling, either - a quick trot through the towering forests, hands tight on the reins and eyes already searching the dappled gloom for Grady. Elyas followed on his gelding without a word. Perrin had been sure he had no room in him for another ounce of fear, yet Elyas' silence made the weight grow. The other man never saw an obstacle without seeing a way around. His silence shouted of impassable mountains. There had to be a way, though. When they reached the smooth stone outcrop, Perrin walked Stepper back and forth through the slanting bars of light, around the toppled trees and between the standing ones, unable to make himself stop. He had to keep moving. There had to be a way. His mind darted like a caged rat.

ɛlaɪəs dɪsmaʊntɪd tə skwɑɾ ən fɹaʊn ət ðə slaɪst stoʊn, peɪ ɪŋ lɪɾəl hid tə hɪz ɡɛldɪŋ tʌɡɪŋ ət ðə ɹeɪnz ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bæk əweɪ. bɪsaɪd ðə stoʊn, ðə θɪk tʃɹʌŋk ʌv ə paɪn ðət hæd stʊɾ ə ɡʊd fɪfti peɪsɪz tɔl wɑz pɹɑpt ʌp ət wʌn ɛn baɪ ðə splɪntɝd ɹɪmeɪnz ʌv ɪts stʌmp, haɪ ɪnʌf ðəɾ ɛlaɪəs cʊɾə wɔk bɪniθ ðə tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋk əpɹaɪt. bɹɪljən ɹeɪz ə sʌnlaɪt pɪɹsɪŋ ðə fɔɹəs kænəpi ɛlswɛɹ sim tə dipən ðə ʃædoʊ tə nɪɹ blæknəs ɝaʊn ðə tʃɹæk-mɑɹkt aʊtkɹɑp bʌt ðət tʃɹ blɛɾ ɪm noʊ mɔɹ ðən ɪt dɪd pɛɹɪn. hɪz noʊz ɹɪŋkəld ət ðə bɝnt-sʌlfɝ smɛl ðət stɪl hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. "aɪ θɔɾ aɪ kɑt ðɪs stɪŋk ɑn ðə weɪ hɪɹ. aɪ ɪkspɛk juɾ əv mɛnʃən ðɪs ɪf jə dɪdn əv θɪŋz ɑn jəɹ maɪnd. ə bɪɡ pæk. bɪɡɝ ðən ɛni θɪŋ aɪv ɛvɝ sin əɹ hɝɾ ʌv."

Elyas dismounted to squat and frown at the sliced stone, pay ing little heed to his gelding tugging at the reins and trying to back away. Beside the stone, the thick trunk of a pine that had stood a good fifty paces tall was propped up at one end by the splintered remains of its stump, high enough that Elyas could have walked beneath the tree trunk upright. Brilliant rays of sunlight piercing the forest canopy elsewhere seemed to deepen the shadow to near blackness around the track-marked outcrop but that trou bled him no more than it did Perrin. His nose wrinkled at the burnt-sulphur smell that still hung in the air. "I thought I caught this stink on the way here. I expect you'd have mentioned this if you didn't have things on your mind. A big pack. Bigger than any thing I've ever seen or heard of."

"ðæts wʌt mɑsʊɝi sɛd," pɛɹɪn sɛɾ æbsənli. wʌt wɑz kipɪŋ ɡɹeɪɾi? haʊ mɛni pipəl wɝ ðəɹ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ? ðət wɑz ðə saɪz ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kæmp. "ʃi sɛd ʃiz kɹɔs ðə pæðz ə sɛvən pæks, ən ðɪs ɪzənt wʌn ʃiz sin bɪfɔɹ." "sɛvən," ɛlaɪəs mɝmɝɾ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "ivən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wəɾ əv tə ɡoʊ səm tə də ðæt. moʊs teɪlz ə dɑɹkhaʊnz ɑɹ dʒʌs pipəl fɹaɪɾənd baɪ ðə dɑɹk." fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə tʃɹæks kɹɔsɪŋ ðə smuð stoʊn, hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ən sædnəs ɛntɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs wən i sɛd, "ðeɪ wɝ wʊlvz, wʌns. ðə soʊlz ʌv wʊlvz, ɛniweɪ, kɑɾ ən twɪstəd baɪ ðə ʃædoʊ. ðət wɑz ðə kɔɹ juz tə meɪk dɑɹkhaʊnz, ðə ʃæɾoʊbɹəðɝz. aɪ θɪŋk ðæts waɪ ðə wʊlvz əv tə bi ət ðə læs bæɾəl. əɹ meɪbi dɑɹkhaʊnz wɝ meɪd kəz wʊlvz wɪl bi ðɛɹ, tə faɪt ðɛm. ðə pæɾɝn meɪks soʊvɹə leɪs lʊk laɪk ə pis ə stʃɹɪŋ, səmtaɪmz. ɛniweɪ, ɪt wɑz ə lɔŋ taɪm əɡoʊ, dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz əz nɪɹ əz aɪ kən meɪk aʊt, ən ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ bɪfɔɹ ðæt.

"That's what Masuri said," Perrin said absently. What was keeping Grady? How many people were there in Ebou Dar? That was the size of the Shaido camp. "She said she's crossed the paths of seven packs, and this isn't one she's seen before." "Seven," Elyas murmured in surprise. "Even an Aes Sedai would have to go some to do that. Most tales of Darkhounds are just people frightened by the dark." Frowning at the tracks crossing the smoothed stone, he shook his head, and sadness entered his voice when he said, "They were wolves, once. The souls of wolves, anyway, caught and twisted by the Shadow. That was the core used to make Darkhounds, the Shadowbrothers. I think that's why the wolves have to be at the Last Battle. Or maybe Darkhounds were made because wolves will be there, to fight them. The Pattern makes Sovarra lace look like a piece of string, sometimes. Anyway, it was a long time ago, during the Trolloc Wars as near as I can make out, and the War of the Shadow before that.

wʊlvz əv lɔŋ mɛmɹiz. wʌɾ ə wʊlf noʊz ɪz nɛvɝ ɹɪli fɝɡɑɾən waɪl ʌðɝ wʊlvz ɹɪmeɪn əlaɪv. ðeɪ əvɔɪd tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt dɑɹkhaʊnz, ðoʊ, ən ðeɪ əvɔɪd dɑɹkhaʊnz, tu. ə hʌnʒɹəd wʊlvz kəd daɪ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl wʌn ʃæɾoʊbɹəðɝ. wɝs, ɪf ðeɪ feɪl, ðə dɑɹkhaʊn kən it ðə soʊlz ə ðoʊz ðəɾ ɑɹən kwaɪt dɛd jɛt, ən ɪn ə jɪɹ əɹ soʊ, ðɛɹəd bi ə nu pæk ə ʃæɾoʊbɹəðɝz ðət dɪdn ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛvɝ biɪŋ wʊlvz. aɪ hoʊp ðeɪ doʊn ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ɛniweɪ." pɛɹɪn ɹeɪn ɪn, ðoʊ hi ɪtʃt tə kip muvɪŋ. ʃæɾoʊbɹəðɝz. ðə wʊlvz' neɪm fəɹ dɑɹkhaʊnz hæd teɪkən ɑn ə nu ɡɹɪmnəs. "kæn ðeɪ iɾ ə mænz soʊl, ɛlaɪəs? seɪ ə mæn u kən tɔk tə wʊlvz?" ɛlaɪəs ʃɹʌɡd. oʊnli ə hændfʊl ə pipəl kəd də wʌt ðeɪ dɪd, əz fɑɹ əz iðɝ mæn nu. ən ænsɝ tə ðət kwɛstʃən maɪt kʌm oʊnli ət ðə pɔɪn ə dɛθ. mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾəntli ɹaɪt ðɛn, ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn wʊlvz, wʌns, ðeɪ mʌs bi ɪntɛlədʒən ɪnʌf tə ɹipɔɹt wʌt ðeɪ faʊnd. mɑsʊɝi hæɾ ɪmplaɪɾ əz mʌtʃ. fulɪʃnəs tə hoʊp ʌðɝwaɪz. haʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ dɪd? haʊ lɔŋ dɪɾ i hæv tə fɹi feɪl?

Wolves have long memories. What a wolf knows is never really forgotten while other wolves remain alive. They avoid talking about Darkhounds, though, and they avoid Darkhounds, too. A hundred wolves could die trying to kill one Shadowbrother. Worse, if they fail, the Darkhound can eat the souls of those that aren't quite dead yet, and in a year or so, there'd be a new pack of Shadowbrothers that didn't remember ever being wolves. I hope they don't remember, anyway." Perrin reined in, though he itched to keep moving. Shadowbrothers. The wolves' name for Darkhounds had taken on a new grimness. "Can they eat a man's soul, Elyas? Say a man who can talk to wolves?" Elyas shrugged. Only a handful of people could do what they did, as far as either man knew. An answer to that question might come only at the point of death. More importantly right then, if they had been wolves, once, they must be intelligent enough to report what they found. Masuri had implied as much. Foolishness to hope otherwise. How long before they did? How long did he have to free Faile?

ðə saʊn ə hʊvz kɹʌntʃɪŋ ɪn snoʊ ənaʊnst ɹaɪɾɝz kʌmɪŋ, ən i hɝidli toʊld ɛlaɪəs ðət ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz hæd sɝkəl ðə kæmp, ðət ðeɪ wəd bi kæɹiɪŋ wɝɾ ə hɪm tə humɛvɝ ðeɪ ɹipɔɹɾəd tə.

The sound of hooves crunching in snow announced riders coming, and he hurriedly told Elyas that the Darkhounds had circled the camp, that they would be carrying word of him to whomever they reported to.

"aɪ wʊdnt wɝi oʊvɝmək, bɔɪ," ði oʊldɝ mæn ɹɪplaɪd, wɑtʃɪŋ wɛɹəli fəɹ saɪɾ ə ði ɔnkʌmɪŋ hɔɹsəz. muvɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə stoʊn, hi bɪɡæn tə stʃɹɛtʃ, wɝkɪŋ mʌsəlz oʊvɝ-lɔŋ ɪn ðə sæɾəl. ɛlaɪəs wɑz tu kɛɹfəl tə bi kɑt stʌɾiɪŋ wʌt wəd bi swɑloʊɾ ɪn ʃædoʊz tə ʌðɝ aɪz.

"I wouldn't worry overmuch, boy," the older man replied, watching warily for sight of the oncoming horses. Moving away from the stone, he began to stretch, working muscles over-long in the saddle. Elyas was too careful to be caught studying what would be swallowed in shadows to other eyes.

"saʊnz laɪk ðəɹ hʌntɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ju. ðəl steɪ ɑn ðət tɪl ðeɪ faɪn ɪɾ ɪf ɪt teɪks ɔl jɪɹ. doʊnt wɝi. wɪl ɡɛt jəɹ waɪf aʊt bɪfɔɹ ðoʊz dɑɹkhaʊnz ɹipɔɹt jə wɝ hɪɹ.

"Sounds like they're hunting something more important than you. They'll stay on that till they find it if it takes all year. Don't worry. We'll get your wife out before those Darkhounds report you were here.

nɑt seɪɪŋ ɪɾəl bi izi, bʌt wɪl də ɪt." ðəɹ wɑz dɪtɝməneɪʃən ɪn ɪz vɔɪs, ən ɪn ɪz sɛnt, bʌt nɑt mʌtʃ hoʊp. ɔlmoʊs nʌn əɾ ɔl, ɪn fækt. faɪɾɪŋ dɪspɛɹ, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə lɛɾ ɪt ɹaɪz əɡɛn, pɛɹɪn ɹɪzumd wɔkɪŋ stɛpɝ əz bɹəleɪn ən əɹ bɑɾiɡɑɹd əpɪɹd θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, wɪð mɑɹlaɪn əstʃɹaɪd bɪhaɪn ənʊɹə. əz sun əz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dʒɹu ɹeɪn, ðə twaɪlaɪt-aɪd waɪz wʌn slɪd tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ʃeɪkɪŋ daʊn əɹ θɪk skɝts tə kʌvɝ əɹ dɑɹk stɑkɪŋz. ənʌðɝ wʊmən maɪɾ əv əpɪɹd flʌstɝɾ oʊvɝ hævɪŋ əɹ lɛɡz ɪkspoʊzd, bʌt nɑt mɑɹlaɪn. ʃi wɑz mɪɹli stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ əɹ kloʊðz. ənʊɹə wɑz ðə wʌn u lʊkt əpsɛt, ə saʊɝ-feɪs dɪsɡɹʌntəlmən ðət meɪɾ əɹ noʊz sim mɔɹ laɪk ə bik. ʃi kɛp saɪlənt, bʌɾ əɹ maʊθ wɑz sɛt tə baɪt. ʃi mʌst əv bɪn sɝɾən əɹ ɔfɝ tə nəɡoʊʃieɪt wɪð ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wəd bi æksɛptɪd, ɪspɛʃli wɪð bɹəleɪn səpɔɹɾɪŋ ən mɑɹlaɪn simɪŋli nutʃɹəl ət wɝst. ɡɹeɪz wɝ nɪɡoʊʃieɪɾɝz ən miɾieɪtɝz, ədʒuɾɪkeɪtɝz ən tʃɹiɾi meɪkɝz. ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn əɹ moʊɾəveɪʃən.

Not saying it'll be easy, but we'll do it." There was determination in his voice, and in his scent, but not much hope. Almost none at all, in fact. Fighting despair, refusing to let it rise again, Perrin resumed walking Stepper as Berelain and her bodyguard appeared through the trees, with Marline astride behind Annoura. As soon as the Aes Sedai drew rein, the twilight-eyed Wise One slid to the ground, shaking down her thick skirts to cover her dark stockings. Another woman might have appeared flustered over having her legs exposed, but not Marline. She was merely straightening her clothes. Annoura was the one who looked upset, a sour-faced disgruntlement that made her nose seem more like a beak. She kept silent, but her mouth was set to bite. She must have been certain her offer to negotiate with the Shaido would be accepted, especially with Berelain supporting and Marline seemingly neutral at worst. Grays were negotiators and mediators, adjudicators and treaty makers. That might have been her motivation.

wʌɾ ɛls kəɾ ɪɾ əv bɪn? ə pɹɑbləm ðəɾ i hæd tə sɛɾ əsaɪd waɪl kipɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn maɪnd. hi hæd tə teɪk ɪndə əkaʊn ɛniθɪŋ ðət maɪɾ ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð fɹiɪŋ feɪl, bʌt ðə pɹɑbləm i hæd tə sɑlv leɪ fɔɹɾi maɪlz tə ðə nɔɹθist. waɪl ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz fɔɹm ðɛɹ pɹətɛktɪv sɝkəl əmʌŋ ðə taʊɝɪŋ tʃɹiz ɝaʊn ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd, bɹəleɪn bɹɔɾ əɹ beɪ əlɔŋsaɪd stɛpɝ ən peɪs hɪm, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɛnɡeɪdʒ pɛɹɪn ɪn tɔk, tə ɪntaɪs ɪm wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə ðə wʊɾən. ʃi smɛld ənsɝɾən, daʊtfəl ə hɪz dɪsɪʒən. meɪbi ʃi hoʊp tə tɔk ɪm ɪndə ətɛmptɪŋ ðə ɹænsəm. hi kɛp stɛpɝ muvɪŋ ən ɹəfjuz tə lɪsən. tə meɪk ðəɾ ətɛmpt wɑz tə ɡæmbəl ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɑn wʌn tɔs ə ðə daɪs. hi kəd nɑt ɡæmbəl wɪð feɪl əz ðə steɪk. məθɑɾəkəl əz wɝkɪŋ əɾ ə fɔɹdʒ, ðət wɑz ðə weɪ. laɪt, bʌɾ i wɑz taɪɝd. hi foʊldəd hɪmsɛlf ɪn taɪɾɝ ɝaʊn ɪz æŋɡɝ, ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə hit fəɹ ɛnɝdʒi.

What else could it have been? A problem that he had to set aside while keeping it in mind. He had to take into account anything that might interfere with freeing Faile, but the problem he had to solve lay forty miles to the northeast. While the Winged Guards formed their protective circle among the towering trees around the Traveling ground, Berelain brought her bay alongside Stepper and paced him, trying to engage Perrin in talk, to entice him with the rest of the woodhen. She smelled uncertain, doubtful of his decision. Maybe she hoped to talk him into attempting the ransom. He kept Stepper moving and refused to listen. To make that attempt was to gamble everything on one toss of the dice. He could not gamble with Faile as the stake. Methodical as working at a forge, that was the way. Light, but he was tired. He folded himself in tighter around his anger, embracing the heat for energy.

ɡælɛn ən ɑɹɡændə ɝaɪvd ʃɔɹtli æftɝ bɹəleɪn, wɪð ə dʌbəl kɑləm ʌv ɡildænɪn lænsɝz ɪn bɝnɪʃt bɹɛstpleɪts ən bɹaɪt kɑnɪkəl hɛlməts u ɪntɝspɝs ðɛmsɛlvz əmʌŋ ðə minɝz bɪtwin ðə tʃɹiz. ə tʃɹeɪs ʌv ɪɹɪteɪʃən ɛntɝɪŋ əɹ sɛnt, bɹəleɪn lɛf pɛɹɪn ən ɹoʊd tə ɡælɛn. ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm sæt ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ni-tə-ni, ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn bɛndɪŋ ɪz hɛd tə lɪsən tə wʌt bɹəleɪn hæd tə seɪ. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz loʊ, bʌt pɛɹɪn nu ðɛɹ sʌbʒɪkt, ət list ɪn pɑɹt. naʊ ən ðən wʌn ə ðɛm ɡlænst əɾ ɪm əz i wɔk stɛpɝ bæk ən fɔɹθ, bæk ən fɔɹθ. ɑɹɡændə plæntəɾ ɪz ɹoʊn ɪn wʌn spɑɾ ən stɛɹd saʊθ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz təwɔɹd ðə kæmp, stɪl əz ə stætʃu jɛt ɹeɪɾieɪtɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃəns əz ə faɪɝ ɹeɪɾieɪtəd hit. hi wɑz ðə pɪktʃɝ ʌv ə soʊlʒɝ, wɪð ɪz plumz ən ɪz sɔɹɾ ən ɪz sɪlvɝɾ ɑɹmɝ, hɪz feɪs əz hɑɹɾ əz stoʊn, bʌɾ i smɛld ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə pænɪk. pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd haʊ hi hɪmsɛlf smɛld. jə kəd nɛvɝ kætʃ jəɹ oʊn sɛn ənlɛs jə wɝ ɪn ə kloʊz speɪs. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i smɛld ə pænɪk, dʒʌs fɪɹ ən æŋɡɝ. ɔl wəd bi wɛl wʌns i hæd feɪl bæk. ɔl wəd bi wɛl, ðɛn. bæk ən fɔɹθ, bæk ən fɔɹθ.

Gallenne and Arganda arrived shortly after Berelain, with a double column of Ghealdanin lancers in burnished breastplates and bright conical helmets who interspersed themselves among the Mayeners between the trees. A trace of irritation entering her scent, Berelain left Perrin and rode to Gallenne. The pair of them sat their horses knee-to-knee, the one-eyed man bending his head to listen to what Berelain had to say. Her voice was low, but Perrin knew their subject, at least in part. Now and then one of them glanced at him as he walked Stepper back and forth, back and forth. Arganda planted his roan in one spot and stared south through the trees toward the camp, still as a statue yet radiating impatience as a fire radiated heat. He was the picture of a soldier, with his plumes and his sword and his silvered armor, his face as hard as stone, but he smelled on the brink of panic. Perrin wondered how he himself smelled. You could never catch your own scent unless you were in a closed space. He did not think he smelled of panic, just fear and anger. All would be well once he had Faile back. All would be well, then. Back and forth, back and forth.

ət læst ɛɹæm əpɪɹd, wɪð ə jɔnɪŋ dʒɝ ɡɹeɪɾi ɑn ə dɑɹk beɪ ɡɛldɪŋ, dɑɹk ɪnʌf ðət ðə waɪt stʃɹaɪp ɑn ɪts noʊz meɪɾ ɪt sim ɔlmoʊst ə blæk. dænɪl ən ə dʌzən tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, spɪɹz ən hælbɝdz əbændən fəɹ ðə moʊmən ɪn feɪvɝ ə ðɛɹ lɔŋboʊz, ɹoʊd kloʊs bɪhaɪnd, bʌt nɑt tu kloʊz. ə stɑki fɛloʊ wɪð ə wɛðɝd feɪs ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ʃoʊ kɹisɪz, ðoʊ hi wɑz ʃɔɹɾ ə hɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz jɛt, ɡɹeɪɾi lʊk laɪk ə slipi fɑɹmɝ dɪspaɪɾ ə ðə lɔŋ-haɪk sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪz weɪst ən ɪz blæk koʊt wɪð ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹd pɪn ɑn ðə haɪ kɑlɝ, bʌɾ i hæd lɛf ðə fɑɹm bɪhaɪn fɝɛvɝ, ən dænɪl ən ði ʌðɝz ɔlweɪz ɡeɪv ɪm ɹum. ðeɪ ɡeɪv pɛɹɪn ɹum, tu, hæŋɪŋ bæk ən piɹɪŋ ət ðə ɡɹaʊnd, səmtaɪmz dɑɹɾɪŋ kwɪk, ɪmbɛɹəs lʊks əɾ ɪm əɹ bɹəleɪn. ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. ɔl wəd bi wɛl. ɛɹæm tʃɹaɪd tə lid ɡɹeɪɾi tə pɛɹɪn, bʌt ði æʃəmən nu waɪ hi hæd bɪn sʌmənd. wɪð ə saɪ, hi klaɪm daʊn bɪsaɪɾ ɛlaɪəs, hu skwɑɾɪd ɪn ə pætʃ ə sʌnlaɪt tə mɑɹk ə mæp ɪn ðə snoʊ wɪð ɪz fɪŋɡɝ ən spik ə dɪstəns ən dɝɛkʃən, dɪskɹaɪbɪŋ ðə pleɪs i wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ ɪn dɪteɪl, ə klɪɹɪŋ ɑn ə sloʊp ðət feɪst ɔlmoʊst saʊθ, wɪð ðə ɹɪdʒ əbʌv nɑtʃt ɪn θɹi pleɪsəz.

At last Aram appeared, with a yawning Jur Grady on a dark bay gelding, dark enough that the white stripe on its nose made it seem almost a black. Dannil and a dozen Two Rivers men, spears and halberds abandoned for the moment in favor of their longbows, rode close behind, but not too close. A stocky fellow with a weathered face already beginning to show creases, though he was short of his middle years yet, Grady looked like a sleepy farmer despite of the long-hiked sword at his waist and his black coat with the silver sword pin on the high collar, but he had left the farm behind forever, and Dannil and the others always gave him room. They gave Perrin room, too, hanging back and peering at the ground, sometimes darting quick, embarrassed looks at him or Berelain. It did not matter. All would be well. Aram tried to lead Grady to Perrin, but the Asha'man knew why he had been summoned. With a sigh, he climbed down beside Elyas, who squatted in a patch of sunlight to mark a map in the snow with his finger and speak of distance and direction, describing the place he wanted to go in detail, a clearing on a slope that faced almost south, with the ridge above notched in three places.

dɪstəns ən dɝɛkʃən wɝ ɪnʌf, ɪf ðə dɪstəns ən dɝɛkʃən wɝ pɹɪsaɪs, bʌt ðə bɛɾɝ ðə pɪktʃɝ ɪn ən æʃəmənz maɪnd, ðə kloʊsɝ i kəd kʌm tə ən ɪɡzæk spɑt.

Distance and direction were enough, if the distance and direction were precise, but the better the picture in an Asha'man's mind, the closer he could come to an exact spot.

"ðɛɹz noʊ mɑɹdʒən fəɹ ɛɹɝ hɪɹ, bɔɪ." ɛlaɪəsəz aɪz sim tə bɹaɪɾən wɪð ɪntɛnsəɾi.

"There's no margin for error here, boy." Elyas's eyes seemed to brighten with intensity.

wʌtɛvɝ ʌðɝz θɔɾ ʌv æʃəmən, ðeɪ nɛvɝ ɪntɪmɪdeɪɾɪd hɪm. "ðɛɹz lɑts ə ɹɪdʒəz ɪn ðət kʌntʃɹi, ən ðə meɪn kæmp ɪz oʊnli ə maɪl əɹ soʊ ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðɪs wʌn. ðɛɹəl bi sɛntʃɹiz, lɪɾəl pɑɹɾiz ðət kæmp ɪn ə dɪfɹən pleɪs ɛvɹi naɪt, meɪbi lɛs ðən tu maɪlz ði ʌðɝ weɪ. jə pʊɾ əs aʊɾ ɔf baɪ mʌtʃ, ən wɪl bi sin fəɹ ʃʊɹ." ɡɹeɪɾi mɛt ðət stɛɹ, ənblɪŋkɪŋ. ðən i nɑɾəd ən skɹʌb stʌbi ɹɪŋɝz θɹu hɪz hɛɹ, dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ. hi lʊkt əz wɪɹi əz ɛlaɪəs. əz boʊn-taɪɝɾ əz pɛɹɪn fɛlt. meɪkɪŋ ɡeɪtweɪz, hoʊldɪŋ əm oʊpən lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ θaʊzənz ə pipəl ən hɔɹsəz tə pæs θɹu, wɑz wɛɹɪŋ wɝk. "ɑɹ jə ɹɛstəɾ ɪnʌf?" pɛɹɪn æsk hɪm. taɪɝd mɛn meɪd mɪsteɪks, ən mɪsteɪks wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ kəd bi dɛdli. "ʃʊɾ aɪ sɛn fəɹ nild?" ɡɹeɪɾi stɛɹɾ ʌp əɾ ɪm blɝəli, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "peɪdʒɝz noʊ mɔɹ ɹɛstəd ðən mi. lɛs, meɪbi. aɪm stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən i ɪz, ə bɪt. bɛɾɝ ɪf aɪ də ɪt." hi tɝn tə feɪs nɔɹθist, ən wɪð noʊ mɔɹ wɔɹnɪŋ, ə vɝɾɪkəl slæʃ ə sɪlvɝ-blu əpɪɹd bɪsaɪd ðə tʃɹækmɑɹk stoʊn. ənʊɹə dʒɝkt əɹ mɛɹ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ wɪð ə laʊd ɡæsp əz ðə laɪn ə laɪt waɪɾənd ɪndə ən oʊpənɪŋ, ə hoʊl ɪn ði ɛɹ ðət ʃoʊɾ ə sʌnlɪt klɪɹɪŋ ɑn stip ɡɹaʊn əmʌŋ tʃɹiz mʌtʃ smɔlɝ ðən ðoʊz ɝaʊn pɛɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz. ði ɔlɹɛɾi splɪntɝd paɪn ʃɪvɝɾ əz ɪt lɔst ənʌðɝ θɪn slaɪs, ɡɹoʊnd, ən kəlæps ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ wɪð ə snoʊ-mʌfəl kɹæʃ ðət meɪd ðə hɔɹsəz snɔɹɾ ən dæns. ənʊɹə ɡlɛɹɾ ət ði æʃəmən, hɝ feɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ dɑɹk, bʌt ɡɹeɪɾi dʒʌs blɪŋkt ən sɛd, "dʌz ðət lʊk laɪk ðə ɹaɪt pleɪs?" ɛlaɪəs ədʒʌstəɾ ɪz hæt bɪfɔɹ nɑɾɪŋ.

Whatever others thought of Asha'man, they never intimidated him. "There's lots of ridges in that country, and the main camp is only a mile or so the other side of this one. There'll be sentries, little parties that camp in a different place every night, maybe less than two miles the other way. You put us out off by much, and we'll be seen for sure." Grady met that stare, unblinking. Then he nodded and scrubbed stubby ringers through his hair, drawing a deep breath. He looked as weary as Elyas. As bone-tired as Perrin felt. Making gateways, holding them open long enough for thousands of people and horses to pass through, was wearing work. "Are you rested enough?" Perrin asked him. Tired men made mistakes, and mistakes with the One Power could be deadly. "Should I send for Neald?" Grady stared up at him blearily, then shook his head. "Pager's no more rested than me. Less, maybe. I'm stronger than he is, a bit. Better if I do it." He turned to face northeast, and with no more warning, a vertical slash of silver-blue appeared beside the trackmarked stone. Annoura jerked her mare out of the way with a loud gasp as the line of light widened into an opening, a hole in the air that showed a sunlit clearing on steep ground among trees much smaller than those around Perrin and the others. The already splintered pine shivered as it lost another thin slice, groaned, and collapsed the rest of the way with a snow-muffled crash that made the horses snort and dance. Annoura glared at the Asha'man, her face growing dark, but Grady just blinked and said, "Does that look like the right place?" Elyas adjusted his hat before nodding.

ðət nɑd wɑz ɔl pɛɹɪn weɪɾəd fɔɹ. hi dʌkt ɪz hɛɾ ən ɹoʊd stɛpɝ θɹu ɪndə snoʊ ðət wɑz oʊvɝ ðə dʌnz fɛtlɑks. ɪt wɑz ə smɔl klɪɹɪŋ, bʌt ðə skaɪ fʊl ʌv waɪt klaʊdz oʊvɝhɛd meɪɾ ɪt sim væsli oʊpən æftɝ ðə fɔɹəs bɪhaɪnd. ðə laɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊs blaɪndɪŋ kəmpɛɹd tə ðə fɔɹəst, ðoʊ ðə sʌn wɑz stɪl hɪɾən baɪ ðə tʃɹi-kʌvɝd ɹɪdʒ əbʌv. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kæmp leɪ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðət ɹɪdʒ. hi stɛɹd təwɔɹd ðə haɪt jɝnɪŋli. ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də tə steɪ wɛɹ i wɑz ɹæðɝ ðən ɹeɪs əhɛd tə faɪnəli si wɛɹ feɪl wɑz. hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf tɝn stɛpɝ tə feɪs ðə ɡeɪtweɪ əz mɑɹlaɪn keɪm aʊt.

That nod was all Perrin waited for. He ducked his head and rode Stepper through into snow that was over the dun's fetlocks. It was a small clearing, but the sky full of white clouds overhead made it seem vastly open after the forest behind. The light was almost blinding compared to the forest, though the sun was still hidden by the tree-covered ridge above. The Shaido camp lay on the other side of that ridge. He stared toward the height yearningly. It was all he could do to stay where he was rather than race ahead to finally see where Faile was. He made himself turn Stepper to face the gateway as Marline came out.

stɪl stʌɾiɪŋ hɪm, hɑɹdli teɪkɪŋ əɹ aɪz əweɪ lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə pleɪs əɹ fiɾ ɪn ðə snoʊ wɪθaʊt tʃɹɪpɪŋ, ʃi muv tə wʌn saɪd tə lɛɾ ɛɹæm ən ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ɹaɪd θɹu. əkʌstəm tə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɪf nɑt tə æʃəmən baɪ naʊ, ðeɪ bɛɹli bɛn ðɛɹ hɛdz ɪnʌf tə klɪɹ ðə tɑp ə ði oʊpənɪŋ, ən oʊnli ðə tɔlɪs dɪɾ ivən ðæt. ɪt stʃɹʌk pɛɹɪn ðət ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɑz lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ðə fɝst wʌn ʌv ɡɹeɪɾiz meɪk ðəɾ i hæd pæs θɹu. hi hæd hæd tə dɪsmaʊnt, ðɛn. ɪt wɑz ə veɪɡ θɔt, noʊ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ə flaɪ bʌzɪŋ. ɛɹæm ɹoʊd stʃɹeɪt tə pɛɹɪn, taɪt-feɪst ən smɛlɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃən ən iɡɝ tə bi ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn, ən wʌns dænɪl ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ, klaɪmɪŋ daʊn ən kɑmli fɪɾɪŋ æɹoʊz tə baʊz waɪl ðeɪ wɑtʃt ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ tʃɹiz, ɡælɛn əpɪɹd, piɹɪŋ ɡɹɪmli ət ðə tʃɹiz ɝaʊn əm əz ðoʊ hi ɪkspɛktəɾ ən ɛnəmi tə kʌm dæʃɪŋ aʊt, fɑloʊd baɪ hæf ə dʌzən minɝz u hæd tə loʊɝ ðɛɹ ɹɛd-stʃɹimɝd lænsɪz tə kɹaʊd θɹu æftɝ hɪm.

Still studying him, hardly taking her eyes away long enough to place her feet in the snow without tripping, she moved to one side to let Aram and the Two Rivers men ride through. Accustomed to Traveling if not to Asha'man by now, they barely bent their heads enough to clear the top of the opening, and only the tallest did even that. It struck Perrin that the gateway was larger than the first one of Grady's make that he had passed through. He had had to dismount, then. It was a vague thought, no more important than a fly buzzing. Aram rode straight to Perrin, tight-faced and smelling impatient and eager to be going on, and once Dannil and the others were out of the way, climbing down and calmly fitting arrows to bows while they watched the surrounding trees, Gallenne appeared, peering grimly at the trees around them as though he expected an enemy to come dashing out, followed by half a dozen Mayeners who had to lower their red-streamered lances to crowd through after him.

ə lɔŋ pɔz pæst wɪð ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ɛmpti, bʌt dʒʌst wən pɛɹɪn hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɡoʊ bæk ən si wʌt wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ɛlaɪəs ʌp, ðə bɪɹɾəd mæn lɛɾ ɪz hɔɹs aʊt, wɪð ɑɹɡændə ən sɪks ɡildænɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ əɾ ɪz hilz, dɪskəntɛn kɑɹvd ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz. ðɛɹ ʃaɪnɪŋ hɛlməts ən bɹɛstpleɪts wɝ noʊwɛɹ tə bi sin, ən ðeɪ skaʊld əz ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd bɪn meɪd tə liv ɔf ðɛɹ bɹitʃɪz.

A long pause passed with the gateway empty, but just when Perrin had decided to go back and see what was holding Elyas up, the bearded man led his horse out, with Arganda and six Ghealdanin riding at his heels, discontent carved on their faces. Their shining helmets and breastplates were nowhere to be seen, and they scowled as though they had been made to leave off their breeches.

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd tə hɪmsɛlf. ʌv kɔɹs. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kæmp wɑz ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðɪs ɹɪdʒ, ən soʊ wɑz ðə sʌn. ðət ɡlimɪŋ ɑɹmɝ wʊɾə bɪn laɪk mɪɹɝz. hi ʃʊɾə θɔɾ ə ðæt. hi wɑz stɪl lɛɾɪŋ fɪɹ ɡoʊɾ ɪm ɪndə ɪmpeɪʃəns ən klaʊɾ ɪz θɪŋkɪŋ. hi hæd tə bi klɪɹhɛɾɪd, naʊ mɔɹ ðən ɛvɝ. ðə dɪteɪl i mɪs naʊ kəd kɪl ɪm ən liv feɪl ɪn ʃeɪɾoʊ hænz. ɪt wɑz iziɝ tə seɪ ðəɾ i hæd tə lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv fɪɹ ðən tə də ɪt, ðoʊ. haʊ kəɾ i nɑt bi əfɹeɪd fəɹ feɪl? ɪt hæd tə bi mænədʒd, bʌt haʊ?

Perrin nodded to himself. Of course. The Shaido camp was on the other side of this ridge, and so was the sun. That gleaming armor would have been like mirrors. He should have thought of that. He was still letting fear goad him into impatience and cloud his thinking. He had to be clearheaded, now more than ever. The detail he missed now could kill him and leave Faile in Shaido hands. It was easier to say that he had to let go of fear than to do it, though. How could he not be afraid for Faile? It had to be managed, but how?

tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ənʊɹə ɹoʊd θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ dʒʌst əhɛɾ ʌv ɡɹeɪɾi, hu wɑz liɾɪŋ ɪz dɑɹk beɪ. dʒʌst əz ɛvɹi taɪm i hæd sin əɹ pæs θɹu ə ɡeɪtweɪ, ʃi leɪ əz flæɾ ɑn əɹ mɛɹ əz əɹ sæɾəlz haɪ pɑməl wəɾ əlaʊ, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ ət ði oʊpənɪŋ ðət hæd bɪn meɪd wɪð ðə teɪntɪd meɪl hæf ə ðə paʊɝ, ən əz sun əz ʃi wɑz klɪɹ ʌv ɪt, ʃi ɝdʒd əɹ hɔɹs əz fɑɹ ʌp ðə sloʊp əz ʃi kəd wɪθaʊɾ ɛntɝɪŋ ðə tʃɹiz. ɡɹeɪɾi lɛt ðə ɡeɪtweɪ snæp ʃʌt, livɪŋ ðə pɝpəl æftɝɪmɪdʒ ʌv ə vɝɾɪkəl bɑɹ ɪn pɛɹɪnz aɪz, ən ənʊɹə flɪntʃt ən lʊkt əweɪ, ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət mɑɹlaɪn, ət pɛɹɪn. ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn ɛniwʌn ʌðɝ ðən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, hi wʊɾə sɛd ʃi wɑz sɪmɝɪŋ ɪn ə sʌlən fjʊɹi. bɹəleɪn mʌst əv toʊld əɹ tə kʌm, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt bɹəleɪn ʃi bleɪm fəɹ əɹ hævɪŋ tə bi ðɛɹ.

To his surprise, Annoura rode through the gateway just ahead of Grady, who was leading his dark bay. Just as every time he had seen her pass through a gateway, she lay as flat on her mare as her saddle's high pommel would allow, grimacing at the opening that had been made with the tainted male half of the Power, and as soon as she was clear of it, she urged her horse as far up the slope as she could without entering the trees. Grady let the gateway snap shut, leaving the purple afterimage of a vertical bar in Perrin's eyes, and Annoura flinched and looked away, glaring at Marline, at Perrin. If she had been anyone other than an Aes Sedai, he would have said she was simmering in a sullen fury. Berelain must have told her to come, but it was not Berelain she blamed for her having to be there.

"fɹʌm hɪɹ, wi ɡoʊ əfʊt," ɛlaɪəs ənaʊnst ɪn ə kwaɪət vɔɪs ðət bɛɹli kæɹiɾ oʊvɝ ði əkeɪʒənəl stæmp ʌv ə hɔɹsəz huf. hi hæd sɛd ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ kɛɹləs ən hæd noʊ sɛntʃɹiz, əɹ ɔlmoʊs nʌn, bʌɾ i spoʊk əz ɪf ðeɪ kəd bi wɪðɪn twɛnti peɪsɪz. "ə mæn ɑn ə hɔɹs stænz aʊt. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ɑɹən blaɪnd, dʒʌs blaɪn fəɹ il, wɪtʃ minz ðeɪ si twaɪs əz ʃɑɹp əz ɛni ʌv ju, soʊ doʊnt ɡoʊ skaɪlaɪnɪŋ jʊɹsɛlvz wən wi ɹitʃ ðə kɹɛst. ən tʃɹaɪ nɑt tə meɪk ɛni mɔɹ nɔɪz ðən jə kən hɛlp.

"From here, we go afoot," Elyas announced in a quiet voice that barely carried over the occasional stamp of a horse's hoof. He had said the Shaido were careless and had no sentries, or almost none, but he spoke as if they could be within twenty paces. "A man on a horse stands out. The Shaido aren't blind, just blind for Aiel, which means they see twice as sharp as any of you, so don't go skylining yourselves when we reach the crest. And try not to make any more noise than you can help.

ðeɪ ɑɹən dɛf, iðɝ. ðəl faɪn əɹ tʃɹæks, ɪvɛntʃəwəli - kæn də mʌtʃ əbaʊt ðəɾ ɪn snoʊ - bʌt wi kæn lɛɾ əm noʊ wi wɝ hɪɹ əntɪl æftɝ wɝ ɡɔn." ɔlɹɛɾi saʊɝ oʊvɝ biɪŋ ʃɔɹn ə hɪz ɑɹmɝ ən plumz, ɑɹɡændə bɪɡæn tə ɑɹɡju əbaʊɾ ɛlaɪəs ɡɪvɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz. nɑt biɪŋ ə kəmplit ful, hi dɪɾ ɪɾ ɪn ə kwaɪət vɔɪs ðət wəd nɑt kæɹi, bʌɾ i hæd bɪn ə soʊlʒɝ sɪns ði eɪdʒ ə fɪftin, hi hæd kəmændəd soʊlʒɝz faɪɾɪŋ waɪtkloʊks, ɔltɑɹənz ən ɑmɑdɪʃənz, ən əz i wɑz fɑn ə pɔɪntɪŋ aʊt, hi hæd fɔɾ ɪn ði il wɔɹ ən lɪv θɹu ðə blʌd snoʊ, ət tɑɹ vəlɑn. hi nu əbaʊɾ il, ən i dɪd nɑt niɾ ən ənbɑɹbɝd wʊdzmən tə tɛl ɪm haʊ tə pʊɾ ɪz buts ɑn. pɛɹɪn lɛɾ ɪt pæs, sɪns ðə mæn dɪɾ ɪz kəmpleɪnɪŋ ɪn bɪtwin tɛlɪŋ ɔf tu mɛn tə hoʊl ðə hɔɹsəz. hi ɹɪli wɑz nɑɾ ə ful, dʒʌst əfɹeɪd fəɹ ɪz kwin. ɡælɛn lɛft ɔl ə hɪz mɛn bɪhaɪnd, mʌɾɝɪŋ ðət lænsɝz wɝ wɝs ðən jusləs ɔf ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ən wəd pɹɑbli bɹeɪk ðɛɹ nɛks ɪf i meɪɾ əm wɔk ɛni dɪstəns. hi wɑz noʊ ful, iðɝ, bʌɾ i dɪd si ðə blæk saɪd fɝst. ɛlaɪəs tʊk ðə lɛd, ən pɛɹɪn weɪɾəd oʊnli lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə tʃɹænsfɝ ðə θɪk bɹæs-baʊn tub ə hɪz lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs fɹəm stɛpɝz sæɾəlbæɡz tə hɪz koʊt pɑkət bɪfɔɹ fɑloʊɪŋ.

They aren't deaf, either. They'll find our tracks, eventually - can't do much about that in snow - but we can't let them know we were here until after we're gone." Already sour over being shorn of his armor and plumes, Arganda began to argue about Elyas giving orders. Not being a complete fool, he did it in a quiet voice that would not carry, but he had been a soldier since the age of fifteen, he had commanded soldiers fighting Whitecloaks, Altarans and Amadicians, and as he was fond of pointing out, he had fought in the Aiel War and lived through the Blood Snow, at Tar Valon. He knew about Aiel, and he did not need an unbarbered woodsman to tell him how to put his boots on. Perrin let it pass, since the man did his complaining in between telling off two men to hold the horses. He really was not a fool, just afraid for his queen. Gallenne left all of his men behind, muttering that lancers were worse than useless off their horses and would probably break their necks if he made them walk any distance. He was no fool, either, but he did see the black side first. Elyas took the lead, and Perrin waited only long enough to transfer the thick brass-bound tube of his looking glass from Stepper's saddlebags to his coat pocket before following.

ði ʌndɝbɹʌʃ ɡɹu ɪn klʌmps bɪniθ ðə tʃɹiz, wɪtʃ wɝ moʊsli paɪn ən fɝ, wɪð klʌstɝz ʌv ʌðɝz ðət wɝ wɪntɝ-ɡɹeɪ ən lifləs, ən ðə tɝeɪn, noʊ stipɝ ðən ðə sæn hɪlz bæk hoʊm, ɪf mɔɹ ɹɑki, pɹizɛntəd noʊ pɹɑbləmz fəɹ dænɪl ən ði ʌðɝ tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, hu ɡɑstɪɾ ʌp ðə sloʊp wɪð æɹoʊz nɑkt ən aɪz wɑtʃfəl, ɔlmoʊst əz saɪlən əz ðə mɪst ə ðɛɹ bɹɛθ. ɛɹæm, noʊ stʃɹeɪnʒɝ tə ðə wʊdz hɪmsɛlf, steɪd kloʊs tə pɛɹɪn wɪð ɪz sɔɹɾ aʊt. wʌns i stɑɹɾəd tə tʃɑp ə tæŋɡəl ə θɪk bɹaʊn vaɪnz aʊɾ ə hɪz weɪ əntɪl pɛɹɪn stɑpt ɪm wɪð ə hæn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm, jɛɾ i meɪd lɪɾəl mɔɹ nɔɪz ðən pɛɹɪn, ðə feɪn kɹʌntʃ ə buts ɪn snoʊ. ɪt wɑz noʊ ʃɑk ðət mɑɹlaɪn muv θɹu ðə tʃɹiz əz ɪf ʃi hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp ɪn ə fɔɹəst ɪnstɛɾ ə ði il weɪst, wɛɹ ɛniθɪŋ ðət kəd bi kɔld ə tʃɹi wɑz ɹɛɹ ən snoʊ ənhɝɾ ʌv, ðoʊ ɪt sim ðəɾ ɔl ə hɝ nɛkləsɪz ən bɹeɪslɪts ʃʊɾə meɪd səm klæɾɝ əz ðeɪ swʌŋ, bʌɾ ənʊɹə klaɪmd wɪð ɔlmoʊst əz lɪɾəl ɛfɝt, flaʊndɝɪŋ ə lɪɾəl wɪð əɹ skɝts bʌt dɛfli əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðə ʃɑɹp θɔɹnz ə dɛd kætsklɔ ən weɪt-ə-mɪnət vaɪnz. ɛɛs sədaɪ juʒəwəli faʊn ə weɪ tə sɝpɹaɪz ju. ʃi mænədʒ tə kip ə wɛɹi aɪ ɑn ɡɹeɪɾi, tu, ðoʊ ði æʃəmən əpɪɹd tə bi foʊkəst ɑn pʊɾɪŋ wʌn fʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ʌðɝ. səmtaɪmz i saɪd hɛvəli ən pɔz fəɹ ə mɪnət, fɹaʊnɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə kɹɛst əhɛd, bʌt sʌmhaʊ hi nɛvɝ fɛl bɪhaɪnd. ɡælɛn ən ɑɹɡændə wɝ nɑt jʌŋ mɛn, nɔɹ əkʌstəm tə wɔkɪŋ wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd ɹaɪd, ən ðɛɹ bɹiðɪŋ bɪɡæn tə ɡɹoʊ hɛviɝ əz ðeɪ əsɛndəd, səmtaɪmz pʊlɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ʌp fɹəm tʃɹi tə tʃɹi, bʌt ðeɪ wɑtʃt wʌn ənʌðɝ nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ dɪd ðə ɡɹaʊnd, itʃ ənwɪlɪŋ tə lɛt ði ʌðɝ aʊtdu hɪm.

The underbrush grew in clumps beneath the trees, which were mostly pine and fir, with clusters of others that were winter-gray and leafless, and the terrain, no steeper than the Sand Hills back home, if more rocky, presented no problems for Dannil and the other Two Rivers men, who ghosted up the slope with arrows nocked and eyes watchful, almost as silent as the mist of their breath. Aram, no stranger to the woods himself, stayed close to Perrin with his sword out. Once he started to chop a tangle of thick brown vines out of his way until Perrin stopped him with a hand on his arm, yet he made little more noise than Perrin, the faint crunch of boots in snow. It was no shock that Marline moved through the trees as if she had grown up in a forest instead of the Aiel Waste, where anything that could be called a tree was rare and snow unheard of, though it seemed that all of her necklaces and bracelets should have made some clatter as they swung, but Annoura climbed with almost as little effort, floundering a little with her skirts but deftly avoiding the sharp thorns of dead cat'sclaw and wait-a-minute vines. Aes Sedai usually found a way to surprise you. She managed to keep a wary eye on Grady, too, though the Asha'man appeared to be focused on putting one foot in front of the other. Sometimes he sighed heavily and paused for a minute, frowning toward the crest ahead, but somehow he never fell behind. Gallenne and Arganda were not young men, nor accustomed to walking where they could ride, and their breathing began to grow heavier as they ascended, sometimes pulling themselves up from tree to tree, but they watched one another nearly as much as they did the ground, each unwilling to let the other outdo him.

ðə fɔɹ ɡildænɪn lænsɝz, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, slɪpt ən slɪd, tʃɹɪpt oʊvɝ ɹuts hɪɾən bɪniθ ðə snoʊ, kɑt ðɛɹ skæbɝdz ɑn vaɪnz, ən ɡɹaʊl kɝsɪz wən ðeɪ fɛl ɑn ɹɑks əɹ wɝ stæbd baɪ θɔɹnz. pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn tə kənsɪɾɝ sɛndɪŋ əm bæk tə weɪt wɪð ðə hɔɹsəz. ðæt, əɹ hɪɾɪŋ əm oʊvɝ ðə hɛɾ ən livɪŋ əm tə bi pɪkt ʌp wən i ɹɪtɝnd.

The four Ghealdanin lancers, on the other hand, slipped and slid, tripped over roots hidden beneath the snow, caught their scabbards on vines, and growled curses when they fell on rocks or were stabbed by thorns. Perrin began to consider sending them back to wait with the horses. That, or hitting them over the head and leaving them to be picked up when he returned.

əbɹʌpli, tu il stɛpt aʊɾ ə ði ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛlaɪəs, dɑɹk veɪlz haɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ feɪsəz tə ði aɪz, waɪt kloʊks hæŋɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ bæks ən spɪɹz ən bʌklɝz ɪn hænd. ðeɪ wɝ meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ baɪ ðɛɹ haɪt, wɪtʃ meɪɾ əm noʊ lɛs deɪnʒɝəs ðən ɛni ʌðɝ ælɡeɪdnswaɪ, ən ɪn ən ɪnstənt, naɪn lɔŋboʊz wɝ dʒɹɔn, bɹɔdhɛd pɔɪns eɪmd ət ðɛɹ hɑɹts. "ju kəd ɡɛt hɝt ðət weɪ, tuænhə," ɛlaɪəs mʌɾɝd. "ju ʃəd noʊ bɛɾɝ, səlɪn." pɛɹɪn moʊʃən fəɹ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn tə loʊɝ ðɛɹ baʊz, ən fəɹ ɛɹæm tə loʊɝ ɪz sɔɹd. hi hæd kɑt ðɛɹ sɛns əz sun əz ɛlaɪəs hæd, bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ stɛpt ɪndə ði oʊpən.

Abruptly, two Aiel stepped out of the undergrowth in front of Elyas, dark veils hiding their faces to the eyes, white cloaks hanging down their backs and spears and bucklers in hand. They were Maidens of the Spear by their height, which made them no less dangerous than any other algai'd'nswai, and in an instant, nine longbows were drawn, broadhead points aimed at their hearts. "You could get hurt that way, Tuandha," Elyas muttered. "You should know better, Sulin." Perrin motioned for the Two Rivers men to lower their bows, and for Aram to lower his sword. He had caught their scents as soon as Elyas had, before they stepped into the open.

ðə meɪɾənz ɪkstʃeɪnʒd stɑɹɾəld lʊks, bʌt ðeɪ ənveɪld, lɛɾɪŋ ðə dɑɹk veɪlz hæŋ daʊn ðɛɹ tʃɛsts. "ju si kloʊsli, ɛlaɪəs mækɛɹə," səlɪn sɛd. wɪɹi ən lɛðɝ-feɪst, wɪð ə skɑɹ əkɹɔs wʌn tʃik, ʃi hæd ʃɑɹp blu aɪz ðət kəd pɪɹs laɪk ɔlz, bʌt ðeɪ stɪl lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd, naʊ. tuænhə wɑz tɔlɝ ən jʌŋɡɝ, ən ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn pɹɪɾi bɪfɔɹ luzɪŋ əɹ ɹaɪɾ aɪ ən ɡeɪnɪŋ ə θɪk skɑɹ ðən ɹæn fɹəm əɹ tʃɪn ʌp ʌndɝ əɹ sboʊufə. ɪt pʊld ʌp wʌn kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ maʊθ ɪn ə hæf-smaɪl, bʌt ðət wɑz ði oʊnli smaɪl ʃi ɛvɝ ɡeɪv.

The Maidens exchanged startled looks, but they unveiled, letting the dark veils hang down their chests. "You see closely, Elyas Machera," Sulin said. Wiry and leather-faced, with a scar across one cheek, she had sharp blue eyes that could pierce like awls, but they still looked surprised, now. Tuandha was taller and younger, and she might have been pretty before losing her right eye and gaining a thick scar than ran from her chin up under her sboufa. It pulled up one corner of her mouth in a half-smile, but that was the only smile she ever gave.

"jɔɹ koʊts ɑɹ dɪfɹənt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. tuænhə fɹaʊn daʊn əɾ əɹ koʊt, ɔl ɡɹeɪ ən ɡɹin ən bɹaʊn, ðən ət səlɪnz aɪdɛntɪkəl ɡɑɹmənt. "jɔɹ kloʊks, tu." ɛlaɪəs wɑz taɪɝd, tə meɪk ðət slɪp.

"Your coats are different," Perrin said. Tuandha frowned down at her coat, all gray and green and brown, then at Sulin's identical garment. "Your cloaks, too." Elyas was tired, to make that slip.

"ðeɪ hævən stɑɹɾəd muvɪŋ, hæv ðeɪ?"

"They haven't started moving, have they?"

"noʊ, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," səlɪn sɛd. "ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ sim pɹipɛɹd tə steɪ ɪn wʌn pleɪs fəɹ ə taɪm. ðeɪ meɪd ðə pipəl fɹəm ðə sɪɾi liv ən ɡoʊ nɔɹθ læs naɪt, ðoʊz ðeɪ wəd lɛt liv." ʃi ɡeɪv ə smɔl ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛd, stɪl pɝtɝbd baɪ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ fɔɹsɪŋ pipəl tə bɪkʌm ɡeɪʃeɪn u dɪd nɑt fɑloʊ dʒiɾoʊ. "jɔɹ fɹɛnz dʒɑndɪn bæɹən ən ɡɛɾ eɪliə ən hu mɑɹwɪn əv ɡɔn æftɝ əm tə si ɪf ðeɪ kən lɝn ɛniθɪŋ. əɹ spɪɹ-sɪstɝz ən ɡɔl ɑɹ meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ ɝaʊn ðə kæmp əɡɛn.

"No, Perrin Aybara," Sulin said. "The Shaido seem prepared to stay in one place for a time. They made the people from the city leave and go north last night, those they would let leave." She gave a small shake of her head, still perturbed by the Shaido forcing people to become gai'shain who did not follow ji'e'toh. "Your friends Jondyn Barran and Get Ayliah and Hu Marwin have gone after them to see if they can learn anything. Our spear-sisters and Gaul are making their way around the camp again.

wi weɪɾəd hɪɹ fəɹ ɛlaɪəs mækɛɹə tə ɹɪtɝn wɪð ju." ʃi sɛldəm lɛɾ ɪmoʊʃən ɪndə hɝ vɔɪs, ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌn ðəɹ naʊ, bʌt ʃi smɛld ə sædnəs. "kʌm, əl ʃoʊ ju." ðə tu meɪɾənz tɝn ʌp ðə sloʊp, ən i hɝiɾ æftɝ ðɛm, fɝɡɛɾɪŋ ɛniwʌn ɛls. ə lɪɾəl ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə kɹɛst, ðeɪ kɹaʊtʃt, ðən wɛn tə hænz ən niz, ən i kɑpid ðɛm, kɹɔlɪŋ ðə læst spænz θɹu ðə snoʊ tə pɪɹ pæst ə tʃɹi oʊvɝ ðə tɑp ə ðə ɹɪdʒəlaɪn. ðə fɔɹəst ɛndəd ðɛɹ, feɪɾɪŋ ɪndə skæɾɝd bɹʌʃ ən aɪsəleɪɾəd sæplɪŋz ɑn ðə daʊnsloʊp. hi wɑz haɪ ɪnʌf tə si fəɹ sɛvɹəl liɡz, əkɹɔs ɹoʊlɪŋ ɹɪdʒəz laɪk lɔŋ tʃɹiləs hɪlz tə wɛɹ ə dɑɹk bæn ə fɔɹəs bɪɡæn əɡɛn. hi kəd si ɛvɹiθɪŋ i wɑntəd tə si, ən soʊ mʌtʃ lɛs ðən i niɾəd. hi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə ɪmædʒən ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kæmp fɹəm ɛlaɪəs' dɪskɹɪpʃən, bʌt ðə ɹiæləɾi dwɔɹft ɪz ɪmædʒɪnɪŋz. ə θaʊzən peɪsɪz bɪloʊ leɪ ə mæs ə loʊ il tɛns ən ɛvɹi ʌðɝ sɔɹɾ ə tɛnt, ə mæs ʌv wæɡənz ən kɑɹts ən pipəl ən hɔɹsəz. ɪt spɹɛd fəɹ wɛl oʊvɝ ə maɪl ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪ stoʊn wɔlz ʌv ə sɪɾi hæfweɪ tə ðə nɛkst ɹaɪz. hi nu ðə spɹɔl mʌs bi ðə seɪm ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. ɪt wɑz nɑt wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾiz, nɑt laɪk keɪɛmlɪn əɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn, lɛs ðən fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz waɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə saɪɾ i kəd si ən nɛɹoʊɝ ɑn ði ʌðɝz, ɪt simd, bʌt stɪl ə sɪɾi wɪð haɪ wɔlz ən taʊɝz ən wʌt lʊk laɪk ə fɔɹtʃɹəs ət ðə nɔɹðmoʊst ɛnd. jɛt ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ɛnkæmpmən swɑloʊɾ ɪt hoʊl. feɪl wɑz sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðət ɡɹeɪt leɪk ə pipəl. fʌmbəlɪŋ ɪz lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs fɹəm ɪz pɑkət, hi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ət ðə læst ɪnstən tə kʌp wʌn hæn fəɹ ʃeɪɾ ɑn ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə tub. ðə sʌn wɑz ə ɡoʊldən bɔl ɔlmoʊst əhɛɾ ə hɪm, dʒʌst ʃaɪ ʌv hæfweɪ tə ɪts nundeɪ haɪt. ə stʃɹeɪ ɹəflɛkʃən fɹəm ðə lɛnz kəd ɹuən ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ɡɹups ə pipəl lɛpt ʌp ɪn ðə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs, ðɛɹ feɪsəz klɪɹ, ət lis tə hɪz aɪ. lɔŋ-hɛɹd wɪmən wɪð dɑɹk ʃɔlz oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, dʒɹeɪpt ɪn dʌzənz ə lɔŋ nɛkləsɪz, wɪmən wɪð fjuɝ nɛkləsɪz mɪlkɪŋ ɡoʊts, wɪmən wɛɹɪŋ ðə keɪɾɪnsɝ ən səmtaɪmz kæɹiɪŋ spɪɹz ən bʌklɝz, wɪmən pikɪŋ fɹəm ðə dip kaʊlz ə hɛvi waɪt ɹoʊbz əz ðeɪ skɝiɾ əkɹɔs snoʊ ɔlɹɛɾi tʃɹæmpəl hæfweɪ tə mʌd. ðəɹ wɝ mɛn ən tʃɪlʒɹən, tu, bʌɾ ɪz aɪ skɪpt pæst əm hʌŋɡɹəli, ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm. θaʊzənz əpɑn θaʊzənz ʌv wɪmən, dʒʌs kaʊntɪŋ ðoʊz ɪn waɪt. "tu mɛni," mɑɹlaɪn wɪspɝd, ən i loʊɝd ðə ɡlæs tə ɡlɛɹ ət hɝ. ði ʌðɝz hæd dʒɔɪn ðə meɪɾənz ən hɪm, ɔl laɪɪŋ ɪn ə ɹoʊ ɪn ðə snoʊ əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪdʒəlaɪn.

We waited here for Elyas Machera to return with you." She seldom let emotion into her voice, and there was none there now, but she smelled of sadness. "Come, I will show you." The two Maidens turned up the slope, and he hurried after them, forgetting anyone else. A little short of the crest, they crouched, then went to hands and knees, and he copied them, crawling the last spans through the snow to peer past a tree over the top of the ridgeline. The forest ended there, fading into scattered brush and isolated saplings on the downslope. He was high enough to see for several leagues, across rolling ridges like long treeless hills to where a dark band of forest began again. He could see everything he wanted to see, and so much less than he needed. He had tried to imagine the Shaido camp from Elyas' description, but the reality dwarfed his imaginings. A thousand paces below lay a mass of low Aiel tents and every other sort of tent, a mass of wagons and carts and people and horses. It spread for well over a mile in every direction from the gray stone walls of a city halfway to the next rise. He knew the sprawl must be the same on the other side. It was not one of the great cities, not like Caemlyn or Tar Valon, less than four hundred paces wide along the side he could see and narrower on the others, it seemed, but still a city with high walls and towers and what looked like a fortress at the northmost end. Yet the Shaido encampment swallowed it whole. Faile was somewhere in that great lake of people. Fumbling his looking glass from his pocket, he remembered at the last instant to cup one hand for shade on the far end of the tube. The sun was a golden ball almost ahead of him, just shy of halfway to its noonday height. A stray reflection from the lens could ruin everything. Groups of people leapt up in the looking glass, their faces clear, at least to his eye. Long-haired women with dark shawls over their shoulders, draped in dozens of long necklaces, women with fewer necklaces milking goats, women wearing the cadin'sor and sometimes carrying spears and bucklers, women peeking from the deep cowls of heavy white robes as they scurried across snow already trampled halfway to mud. There were men and children, too, but his eye skipped past them hungrily, ignored them. Thousands upon thousands of women, just counting those in white. "Too many," Marline whispered, and he lowered the glass to glare at her. The others had joined the Maidens and him, all lying in a row in the snow along the ridgeline.

ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn wɝ teɪkɪŋ peɪnz tə kip ðɛɹ bɑstʃɹɪŋz ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə snoʊ wɪθaʊt ɹeɪzɪŋ ðɛɹ baʊz əbʌv ðə ɹɪdʒəlaɪn. ɑɹɡændə ən ɡælɛn wɝ juzɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn lʊkɪŋ ɡlæsəz tə stʌɾi ðə kæmp bɪloʊ, ən ɡɹeɪɾi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ðə sloʊp wɪð ɪz tʃɪn pɹɑpt ɑn ɪz hænz, ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz ɪntɛn əz ðə tu soʊlʒɝz. meɪbi hi wɑz juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ ɪn səm weɪ. mɑɹlaɪn ən ənʊɹə wɝ stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə kæmp, tu, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ lɪkɪŋ əɹ lɪps ən ðə waɪz wʌn fɹaʊnɪŋ. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk mɑɹlaɪn hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə spik əlaʊd.

The Two Rivers men were taking pains to keep their bowstrings up out of the snow without raising their bows above the ridgeline. Arganda and Gallenne were using their own looking glasses to study the camp below, and Grady was staring down the slope with his chin propped on his hands, every bit as intent as the two soldiers. Maybe he was using the Power in some way. Marline and Annoura were staring at the camp, too, the Aes Sedai licking her lips and the Wise One frowning. Perrin did not think Marline had intended to speak aloud.

"ɪf jə θɪŋk əl wɔk əweɪ dʒʌs kəz ðəɹ ɑɹ mɔɹ ʃeɪɾoʊ ðən aɪ ɪkspɛktəd," hi bɪɡæn hiɾɪdli, bʌt ʃi bɹoʊk ɪn, miɾɪŋ ɪz skaʊl wɪð ə lɛvəl lʊk.

"If you think I'll walk away just because there are more Shaido than I expected," he began heatedly, but she broke in, meeting his scowl with a level look.

"tu mɛni waɪz wʌnz, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. wɛɹɛvɝ aɪ lʊk, aɪ kən si ə wʊmən tʃænəlɪŋ. dʒʌs fəɹ ə moʊmən hɪɹ, ə moʊmən ðəɹ - waɪz wʌnz də nɑt tʃænəl ɔl ðə taɪm - bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ ɛvɹiwɛɹ aɪ lʊk. tu mɛni tə bi ðə waɪz wʌnz ɔfən sɛps." hi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "haʊ mɛni dʒju θɪŋk ðəɹ ɑɹ?" "aɪ θɪŋk meɪbi ɔl ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ waɪz wʌnz ɑɹ daʊn ðɛɹ," mɑɹlaɪn ɹɪplaɪd, əz kɑm əz ɪf ʃi wɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə pɹaɪs ə bɑɹli. "ɔl u kən tʃænəl." ɔl ə ðɛm? ðət meɪd noʊ sɛns! haʊ kəd ðeɪ ɔl bi təɡɛðɝ hɪɹ, wən ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ sim tə bi skæɾɝd ɛvɹiwɛɹ? ət list, hi hæd hɝd teɪlz ʌv wʌt hæd tə bi ʃeɪɾoʊ ɹeɪdz ɔl əkɹɔs ɡildən ən ɑmɑdɪʃiə, teɪlz ə ɹeɪdz hɪɹ ɪn ɔltɑɹə lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ feɪl wɑz teɪkən ən ɹumɝz fɹəm ivən fɑɹðɝ. waɪ wəd ðeɪ ɔl bi təɡɛðɝ? ɪf ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ɪntɛndəd tə ɡæðɝ hɪɹ, ðə hoʊl klæn. . . . noʊ, hi hæd tə dil wɪð wʌɾ i nu fəɹ fækt. ðət wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf. "haʊ mɛni?" hi æskt əɡɛn, ɪn ə ɹizənəbəl toʊn. "du nɑt ɡɹaʊl ət mi, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. aɪ kænɑt seɪ ɪɡzækli haʊ mɛni ʃeɪɾoʊ waɪz wʌnz ɹɪmeɪn əlaɪv. ivən waɪz wʌnz daɪ fɹəm sɪknəs, sneɪkɛbaɪt, æksəɾənt. səm daɪɾ ət dəməaɪz wɛlz. wi faʊn bɑɾiz lɛf bɪhaɪnd, ən ðeɪ mʌst əv kæɹiɾ əweɪ ðoʊz ðeɪ kəd fəɹ pɹɑpɝ bɛɹiəl. ivən ʃeɪɾoʊ kænɑɾ əv əbændən ɔl kʌstəm. ɪf ɔl u ɹɪmeɪn əlaɪv ɑɹ bɪloʊ, ən ði əpɹɛntəsɪz u kən tʃænəl, aɪ wəd seɪ pɝhæps fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd. pɝhæps mɔɹ, bʌt fjuɝ ðən faɪv hʌnʒɹəd. ðəɹ wɝ fjuɝ ðən faɪv hʌnʒɹəd ʃeɪɾoʊ waɪz wʌnz u kəd tʃænəl bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kɹɔs ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl, ən pɝhæps fɪfti əpɹɛntəsɪz." moʊs fɑɹmɝz wʊɾə ʃoʊn mɔɹ ɪmoʊʃən oʊvɝ ðə bɑɹli.

"Too many Wise Ones, Perrin Aybara. Wherever I look, I can see a woman channeling. Just for a moment here, a moment there - Wise Ones do not channel all the time - but they are everywhere I look. Too many to be the Wise Ones often septs." He drew a deep breath. "How many do you think there are?" "I think maybe all the Shaido Wise Ones are down there," Marline replied, as calm as if she were talking about the price of barley. "All who can channel." All of them? That made no sense! How could they all be together here, when the Shaido seemed to be scattered everywhere? At least, he had heard tales of what had to be Shaido raids all across Ghealdan and Amadicia, tales of raids here in Altara long before Faile was taken and rumors from even farther. Why would they all be together? If the Shaido intended to gather here, the whole clan. . . . No, he had to deal with what he knew for fact. That was bad enough. "How many?" he asked again, in a reasonable tone. "Do not growl at me, Perrin Aybara. I cannot say exactly how many Shaido Wise Ones remain alive. Even Wise Ones die from sickness, snakebite, accident. Some died at Dumai's Wells. We found bodies left behind, and they must have carried away those they could for proper burial. Even Shaido cannot have abandoned all custom. If all who remain alive are below, and the apprentices who can channel, I would say perhaps four hundred. Perhaps more, but fewer than five hundred. There were fewer than five hundred Shaido Wise Ones who could channel before they crossed the Dragonwall, and perhaps fifty apprentices." Most farmers would have shown more emotion over the barley.

stɪl stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kæmp, ənʊɹə meɪɾ ə stʃɹæŋɡəl saʊnd, hæf ə sɑb. "faɪv hʌnʒɹəd?

Still staring at the Shaido camp, Annoura made a strangled sound, half a sob. "Five hundred?

laɪt! hæf ðə taʊɝ fɹəm wʌn klæn? oʊ, laɪt!"

Light! Half the Tower from one clan? Oh, Light!"

"wi kəd snik ɪn, ɪn ðə naɪt," dænɪl mɝmɝd fɹəm daʊn ðə ɹoʊ, "ðə weɪ jə snikt ɪndə ðət waɪtkloʊk kæmp bæk hoʊm." ɛlaɪəs ɡeɪv ə ɡɹʌn ðət maɪɾ əv mɛn ɛniθɪŋ bʌt dɪd nɑt saʊn hoʊpfəl.

"We could sneak in, in the night," Dannil murmured from down the row, "the way you sneaked into that Whitecloak camp back home." Elyas gave a grunt that might have meant anything but did not sound hopeful.

səlɪn snɔɹɾɪd dɝɪsɪvli. "wi kəd nɑt snik ɪndə ðət kæmp, nɑt wɪð ɛni ɹil hoʊp ʌv ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊt. jə wəd bi tʃɹʌs laɪk ə ɡoʊt fəɹ ðə spɪt bɪfɔɹ jə pæs ðə fɝs tɛns." pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd sloʊli. hi hæd θɔɾ ə slɪpɪŋ ɪn ʌndɝ kʌvɝ ə dɑɹknəs ən sʌmhaʊ spɪɹəɾɪŋ feɪl əweɪ. ən ði ʌðɝz, ʌv kɔɹs. ʃi wəd nɑt ɡoʊ wɪθaʊt ði ʌðɝz. hi hæd nɛvɝ hæɾ ɛni ɹil bɪlif ðət kəd wɝk, ðoʊ, nɑɾ əɡɛnst il, ən ðə saɪz ə ðə kæmp hæd kwɛntʃt ðə læst ɡlɪmɝz. hi kəd wɑndɝ fəɹ deɪz əmʌŋ ðət mɛni pipəl wɪθaʊt faɪndɪŋ hɝ. əbɹʌpli, hi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt hævɪŋ tə faɪt daʊn dɪspɛɹ. ði æŋɡɝ ɹɪmeɪnd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz koʊld əz stil ɪn wɪntɝ, naʊ, ən i kəd nɑt dɪtɛkt ə sɪŋɡəl dʒɹɑp ə ðə hoʊpləsnəs ðət hæd θɹɛɾənd tə dʒɹaʊn ɪm bɪfɔɹ. ðəɹ wɝ tɛn θaʊzən ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ ɪn ðət kæmp, ən faɪv hʌnʒɹəd wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl - ɡælɛn hæd ðə ɹaɪɾ ʌv ɪt; pɹipɛɹ fəɹ ðə wɝst, ən ɔl jəɹ sɝpɹaɪzəz wɝ plɛzənt wʌnz - faɪv hʌnʒɹəd wɪmən u wəd nɑt hɛzəteɪt tə juz ðə paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən; feɪl wɑz hɪɾən laɪk wʌn snoʊfleɪk ɪn ə mɛdoʊ kʌvɝd wɪð snoʊ, bʌt wən jə paɪld ʌp soʊ mʌtʃ, ðəɹ dʒʌst wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn dɪspɛɹ. jə hæd tə bʌkəl daʊn əɹ bi plaʊɾ ʌndɝ. bɪsaɪdz, hi kəd si ðə pʌzəl, naʊ. næt tɔɹfɪn hæɾ ɔlweɪz sɛɾ ɛni pʌzəl kəd bi sɑlvd, wʌns jə faʊn aʊt wɛɹ tə pʊʃ ən wɛɹ tə pʊl.

Sulin snorted derisively. "We could not sneak into that camp, not with any real hope of getting out. You would be trussed like a goat for the spit before you passed the first tents." Perrin nodded slowly. He had thought of slipping in under cover of darkness and somehow spiriting Faile away. And the others, of course. She would not go without the others. He had never had any real belief that could work, though, not against Aiel, and the size of the camp had quenched the last glimmers. He could wander for days among that many people without finding her. Abruptly, he realized that he was not having to fight down despair. The anger remained, but it was cold as steel in winter, now, and he could not detect a single drop of the hopelessness that had threatened to drown him before. There were ten thousand algai'd'siswai in that camp, and five hundred women who could channel - Gallenne had the right of it; prepare for the worst, and all your surprises were pleasant ones - five hundred women who would not hesitate to use the Power as a weapon; Faile was hidden like one snowflake in a meadow covered with snow, but when you piled up so much, there just was no point in despair. You had to buckle down or be plowed under. Besides, he could see the puzzle, now. Nat Torfinn had always said any puzzle could be solved, once you found out where to push and where to pull.

tə ðə nɔɹθ ən saʊθ, ðə læn hæd bɪn klɪɹd fɑɹðɝ fɹəm ðə sɪɾi ðən ðə ɹaɪz wɛɹ i leɪ.

To the north and south, the land had been cleared farther from the city than the rise where he lay.

skæɾɝd fɑɹmhaʊsəz, nʌn wɪð smoʊk ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ɪts tʃɪmni, dɑɾəd ðə lændskeɪp, ən ɹeɪl fɛnsəz mɑɹkt aʊt filz bɪniθ ðə snoʊ, bʌt mɔɹ ðən ə hændfʊl ə mɛn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əpɹoʊtʃ fɹəm iðɝ dɝɛkʃən maɪɾ əz wɛl kæɹi tɔɹtʃɪz ən bænɝz ən bloʊ tʃɹʌmpəts. ðəɹ sim tə bi ə ɹoʊd liɾɪŋ ɹʌfli saʊθ θɹu ðə fɑɹmz ən ənʌðɝ ɹʌfli nɔɹθ. jusləs tə hɪm, pɹɑbli, bʌt jə nɛvɝ kəd tɛl. dʒɑndɪn maɪt bɹɪŋ bæk səm ɪnfɝmeɪʃən əbaʊt ðə sɪɾi, ðoʊ wʌt ɡʊd ðət wəd də wən ðə sɪɾi wɑz ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, hi kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə ɡɛs. ɡɔl ən ðə meɪɾənz u wɝ meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ ɝaʊn ðə kæmp wəd bi eɪbəl tə tɛl ɪm wʌt leɪ bɪɑn ðə nɛkst ɹɪdʒ. ə sæɾəl ɪn ðət ɹɪdʒ hæd ðə lʊk ʌv ə ɹoʊd hɛɾɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ ist. ɑdli, ə klʌstɝ ʌv wɪndmɪlz stʊd meɪbi ə maɪl nɔɹθ ə ðə sæɾəl, lɔŋ waɪɾ ɑɹmz tɝnɪŋ sloʊli, ən ðəɹ əpɪɹd tə ənʌðɝ ɡɹup ʌv wɪndmɪlz ətɑp ðə nɛkst ɹaɪz bɪɑnd. ə ɹoʊ ʌv ɑɹtʃəz, laɪk ə lɔŋ nɛɹoʊ bɹɪdʒ, stʃɹɛtʃt daʊn ðə sloʊp fɹəm ðə nɪɹəst wɪndmɪlz ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə sɪɾi wɔlz.

Scattered farmhouses, none with smoke rising from its chimney, dotted the landscape, and rail fences marked out fields beneath the snow, but more than a handful of men trying to approach from either direction might as well carry torches and banners and blow trumpets. There seemed to be a road leading roughly south through the farms and another roughly north. Useless to him, probably, but you never could tell. Jondyn might bring back some information about the city, though what good that would do when the city was in the middle of the Shaido, he could not begin to guess. Gaul and the Maidens who were making their way around the camp would be able to tell him what lay beyond the next ridge. A saddle in that ridge had the look of a road heading somewhere east. Oddly, a cluster of windmills stood maybe a mile north of the saddle, long white arms turning slowly, and there appeared to another group of windmills atop the next rise beyond. A row of arches, like a long narrow bridge, stretched down the slope from the nearest windmills all the way to the city walls.

"dʌz ɛnibəɾi noʊ wʌt ðəɾ ɪz?" hi æskt, pɔɪntɪŋ. stʌɾiɪŋ ɪt θɹu ðə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs toʊld ɪm nʌθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪt simd meɪɾ ə ðə seɪm ɡɹeɪ stoʊn əz ðə wɔl. ðə θɪŋ wɑz mʌtʃ tu nɛɹoʊ fəɹ ə bɹɪdʒ. ɪt læk saɪd wɔlz, ən ðəɹ dɪd nɑt sim tə bi ɛniθɪŋ fəɹ ə bɹɪdʒ tə kɹɔs. "ɪɾ ɪz fəɹ bɹɪŋɪŋ wɔɾɝ," səlɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "ɪt ɹʌnz fəɹ faɪv maɪlz, tə ə leɪk. aɪ də nɑt noʊ waɪ ðeɪ dɪd nɑt bɪl ðɛɹ sɪɾi kloʊsɝ, bʌt moʊst ə ðə læn ɝaʊn ðə leɪk lʊks əz ɪf ɪɾəl bi mʌd wən ðə koʊld ɡoʊz əweɪ." ʃi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ stʌmbəld oʊvɝ ʌnfəmɪljɝ wɝdz laɪk mʌd, jɛɾ ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɑ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn "leɪk," ɪn ði aɪdiə ʌv soʊ mʌtʃ wɔɾɝ ɪn wʌn pleɪs. "ju θɪŋk tə stɑp ðɛɹ wɔɾɝ səplaɪ? ðət wɪl ʃʊɹli meɪk əm kʌm aʊt." ʃi ʌndɝstʊd faɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ wɔɾɝ. moʊs faɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə weɪst stɑɹɾəd wɪð wɔɾɝ.

"Does anybody know what that is?" he asked, pointing. Studying it through the looking glass told him nothing except that it seemed made of the same gray stone as the wall. The thing was much too narrow for a bridge. It lacked side walls, and there did not seem to be anything for a bridge to cross. "It is for bringing water," Sulin replied. "It runs for five miles, to a lake. I do not know why they did not build their city closer, but most of the land around the lake looks as if it will be mud when the cold goes away." She no longer stumbled over unfamiliar words like mud, yet a touch of awe remained in "lake," in the idea of so much water in one place. "You think to stop their water supply? That will surely make them come out." She understood fighting over water. Most fighting in the Waste started with water.

"bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk -"

"But I do not think -"

ðə kʌlɝz ɪɹʌptəɾ ɪnsaɪd pɛɹɪnz hɛd, ən ɪksploʊʒən ə hjuz soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ðət saɪɾ ən hɪɹɪŋ vænɪʃt. ɔl saɪɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə kʌlɝz ðɛmsɛlvz, ət list. ðeɪ wɝ ə væs taɪd, əz ɪf ɔl ðə taɪmz i hæd pʊʃt əm aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd hæd bɪlt ə dæm ðət ðeɪ naʊ smæʃt əsaɪɾ ɪn ə saɪlən flʌd, swɝlɪŋ ɪn saʊnləs wɝlpulz ðət tʃɹaɪd tə sʌk ɪm ʌndɝ. ən ɪmədʒ koʊəlɛst ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɪt, ɹænd ən nɪneɪiv sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn feɪsɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ, əz klɪɹ əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. hi hæd noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɹænd, nɑt naʊ. nɑt naʊ! klɔɪŋ ət ðə kʌlɝz laɪk ə dʒɹaʊnɪŋ mæn klɔɪŋ fəɹ ðə sɝfəs, hi  -  fɔɹst  -  ðɛm  -  aʊt! saɪɾ ən hɪɹɪŋ, ðə wɝld ɝaʊnd, kɹæʃt ɪn ɑn hɪm.

The colors erupted inside Perrin's head, an explosion of hues so strong that sight and hearing vanished. All sight except for the colors themselves, at least. They were a vast tide, as if all the times he had pushed them out of his head had built a dam that they now smashed aside in a silent flood, swirling in soundless whirlpools that tried to suck him under. An image coalesced in the middle of it, Rand and Nynaeve sitting on the ground facing one another, as clear as if they were right in front of him. He had no time for Rand, not now. Not now! Clawing at the colors like a drowning man clawing for the surface, he  -  forced  -  them  -  out! Sight and hearing, the world around, crashed in on him.

". . . ɪts mædnəs," ɡɹeɪɾi wɑz seɪɪŋ ɪn wɝid toʊnz. "noʊbɑdi kən hændəl ɪnʌf ə seɪɾɪn fəɹ mi tə fil ðət fɑɹ ɔf! noʊbɑdi!"

". . . it's madness," Grady was saying in worried tones. "Nobody can handle enough of saidin for me to feel that far off! Nobody!"

"noʊ wʌn kən hændəl ðət mʌtʃ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ, iðɝ," mɑɹlaɪn mɝmɝd.

"No one can handle that much of saidar, either," Marline murmured.

"bʌt sʌmwʌn ɪz."

"But someone is."

"ðə fɔɹseɪkən?" ənʊɹəz vɔɪs ʃʊk. "ðə fɔɹseɪkən, juzɪŋ səm sɑŋɡɹil wi nɛvɝ səspɛktəd. əɹ . . . əɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf."

"The Forsaken?" Annoura's voice shook. "The Forsaken, using some sa'angreal we never suspected. Or . . . or the Dark One himself."

ðeɪ wɝ ɔl θɹi piɹɪŋ bæk tə ðə nɔɹθ ən wɛst, ən ɪf mɑɹlaɪn lʊkt kɑmɝ ðən ənʊɹə əɹ ɡɹeɪɾi, ʃi smɛld əz fɹaɪɾənd ən wɝid. ɪksɛp fəɹ ɛlaɪəs, ði ʌðɝz wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ðoʊz θɹi wɪð ðə lʊk ə mɛn əweɪɾɪŋ ən ənaʊnsmən ðəɾ ə nu bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝl hæd bɪɡʌn. ɛlaɪəsəz feɪs wɑz æksɛptɪŋ. ə wʊlf wəd snæp əɾ ə lændslaɪd kæɹiɪŋ ɪm tə hɪz dɛθ, bʌɾ ə wʊlf nu ðət dɛθ keɪm sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ən jə kəd nɑt faɪt dɛθ.

They were all three peering back to the north and west, and if Marline looked calmer than Annoura or Grady, she smelled as frightened and worried. Except for Elyas, the others were watching those three with the look of men awaiting an announcement that a new Breaking of the World had begun. Elyas's face was accepting. A wolf would snap at a landslide carrying him to his death, but a wolf knew that death came sooner or later, and you could not fight death.

"ɪts ɹænd," pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd θɪkli. hi ʃʌɾɝəd əz ðə kʌlɝz tʃɹaɪd tə ɹɪtɝn, bʌɾ i hæmɝɾ əm daʊn. "hɪz bɪznəs. hɪl teɪk kɛɹ ʌv ɪt, wʌtɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz." ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm, ivən ɛlaɪəs. "aɪ nid pɹɪznɝz, səlɪn. ðeɪ mʌst sɛn aʊt hʌntɪŋ pɑɹɾiz. ɛlaɪəs sɛz ðeɪv sɛntʃɹiz aʊɾ ə fju maɪlz, smɔl ɡɹups. kən jə ɡɛt mi pɹɪznɝz?"

"It's Rand," Perrin muttered thickly. He shuddered as the colors tried to return, but he hammered them down. "His business. He'll take care of it, whatever it is." Everyone was staring at him, even Elyas. "I need prisoners, Sulin. They must send out hunting parties. Elyas says they have sentries out a few miles, small groups. Can you get me prisoners?"

"lɪsən tə mi kɛɹfəli," ənʊɹə sɛd, ðə wɝdz ɹʌʃɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ. ʃi ɹoʊz ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə snoʊ ɪnʌf tə ɹitʃ oʊvɝ mɑɹlaɪn ən siz ə fɪsfəl ə pɛɹɪnz kloʊk. "sʌmθɪŋ ɪz hæpənɪŋ, pɝhæps wʌndɝfəl, pɝhæps tɛɹəbəl, bʌɾ ɪn ɛni keɪs moʊmɛntəs, mɔɹ soʊ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ɹəkɔɹɾəd hɪstɝi! wi mʌs noʊ wʌt! ɡɹeɪɾi kən teɪk əs ðɛɹ, kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si. aɪ kəd teɪk əs ɪf aɪ nu ðə wivz. wi mʌs noʊ!"

"Listen to me carefully," Annoura said, the words rushing out of her. She rose up out of the snow enough to reach over Marline and seize a fistful of Perrin's cloak. "Something is happening, perhaps wonderful, perhaps terrible, but in any case momentous, more so than anything in recorded history! We must know what! Grady can take us there, close enough to see. I could take us if I knew the weaves. We must know!"

miɾɪŋ əɹ ɡeɪz, pɛɹɪn ɹeɪzd ɪz hænd, ən ʃi stɑpt wɪð əɹ maʊθ oʊpən. ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛvɝ ʃʌɾ ʌp ðəɾ izəli, jɛt ʃi dɪd. "aɪ toʊl jə wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz. əɹ wɝk ɪz ɹaɪt daʊn ðəɹ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ʌs. səlɪn?" səlɪnz hɛd swʌŋ fɹəm ɪm tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə mɑɹlaɪn. faɪnəli, ʃi ʃɹʌɡd. "ju wɪl lɝn lɪɾəl jusfəl ivən ɪf jə pʊɾ əm tə ðə kwɛstʃən. ðəl ɛmbɹeɪs ðə peɪn ən læf ət ju. ən ʃeɪm wɪl bi sloʊ  -  ɪf ðiz ʃeɪɾoʊ kən stɪl bi ʃeɪmd." "wʌtɛvɝ aɪ lɝn wɪl bi mɔɹ ðən aɪ noʊ naʊ," hi ɹɪplaɪd. hɪz wɝk leɪ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. ə pʌzəl tə sɑlv, feɪl tə fɹi, ən ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ. ðət wɑz ɔl ðət mæɾɝd ɪn ðə wɝld.

Meeting her gaze, Perrin raised his hand, and she stopped with her mouth open. Aes Sedai never shut up that easily, yet she did. "I told you what it is. Our work is right down there in front of us. Sulin?" Sulin's head swung from him to the Aes Sedai to Marline. Finally, she shrugged. "You will learn little useful even if you put them to the question. They will embrace the pain and laugh at you. And shame will be slow  -  if these Shaido can still be shamed." "Whatever I learn will be more than I know now," he replied. His work lay in front of him. A puzzle to solve, Faile to free, and the Shaido to destroy. That was all that mattered in the world.

tʃæptɝ naɪn

CHAPTER 9

tʃɹæps "ænd ʃi kəmpleɪn əɡɛn ðət ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz ɑɹ tɪmɪd," feɪl fɪnɪʃt ɪn əɹ bɛs mik vɔɪs, ʃɪftɪŋ ðə tɔl bæskət ʃi hɛl bælənst ɑn wʌn ʃoʊldɝ, ʃɪftɪŋ fɹəm fʊt tə fʊɾ ɪn ðə mʌɾi snoʊ. ðə bæskət wɑz nɑt hɛvi, ðoʊ fɪld wɪð dɝɾi lɔnʒɹi, ən ðə wʊl ə hɝ waɪt ɹoʊb wɑz θɪk ən wɔɹm, wɪð tu ʌndɝ-ɹoʊbz bɪniθ, bʌɾ əɹ sɑf lɛðɝ buts, ðɛmsɛlvz blitʃt waɪt, ɡeɪv lɪɾəl pɹətɛkʃən fɹəm ðə koʊl slʌʃ. "aɪ wɑz toʊl tə ɹipɔɹt wʌt ðə waɪz wʌn sɪvænə sɛɾ ɪɡzækli," ʃi æɾəd kwɪkli. sʌmɛɝɪn wɑz wʌn ə ði "ʌðɝ" waɪz wʌnz, ən əɹ maʊθ hæd tɝn daʊn ət ðə wɝd tɪmɪd. wɪð əɹ aɪz loʊɝd, ðət wɑz ɔl feɪl kəd si ʌv sʌmɛɝɪnz feɪs. ɡeɪʃeɪn wɝ ɹikwaɪɝd tə meɪnteɪn ə hʌmbəl mænɝ, ɪspɛʃli ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn u wɝ nɑɾ il, ən ðoʊ ʃi lʊkt ʌp θɹu hɝ aɪlæʃɪz tə ɹid sʌmɛɝɪnz ɪkspɹɛʃən, ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wɑz tɔlɝ ðən moʊs mɛn, ivən il mɛn, ə jɛloʊ-hɛɹd dʒaɪən u taʊɝɾ oʊvɝ hɝ. moʊst ʌv wʌt ʃi kəd si wɑz sʌmɛɝɪnz oʊvɝ-lɑɹdʒ bʊzəm, plʌmp sʌn-dɑɹk klivədʒ ɪkspoʊz baɪ ə blaʊs ənleɪs hæfweɪ daʊn əɹ tʃɛst ən kʌvɝd meɪnli baɪ ə mæsɪv kəlɛkʃən ə lɔŋ nɛkləsɪz, faɪɝdʒɹɑps ən ɛmɹəlz, ɹubiz ən oʊpəlz, θɹi-tiɹd stʃɹænz ə fæt pɝlz ən ɪntʃɹəkətli pæɾɝnd tʃeɪnz ʌv ɡoʊld. moʊst ə ðə waɪz wʌnz sim tə dɪslaɪk sɪvænə, hu "spoʊk fəɹ ðə tʃif əntɪl ə nu ʃeɪɾoʊ klæn tʃif kəd bi tʃoʊzən, ən ɪvɛn ənlaɪkli tə əkɝ ɛni taɪm sun, ən ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə ʌndɝkʌɾ əɹ əθɔɹəɾi wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ nɑt skwɑbəlɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz əɹ fɔɹmɪŋ klɪks, bʌt mɛni ʃɛɹd sɪvænəz lʌv ʌv wɛtləndɝ dʒuəlɹi, ən səm hæɾ ivən bɪɡʌn wɛɹɪŋ fɪŋɡɝ ɹɪŋz, laɪk sɪvænə. ɑn əɹ ɹaɪt hæn sʌmɛɝɪn wɔɹ ə lɑɹdʒ waɪɾ oʊpəl ðət flæʃt kævɝnz ə ɹɛd wɛnɛvɝ ʃi ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ʃɔl, ən ə lɔŋ blu sæfaɪɝ sɝaʊndəd baɪ ɹubiz ɑn ðə lɛft. ʃi hæd nɑɾ ədɑptəd sɪlk kloʊðɪŋ, haʊɛvɝ. hɝ blaʊs wɑz pleɪn waɪɾ ælɡoʊd, fɹəm ðə weɪst, ən əɹ skɝɾ ən ʃɔl θɪk wʊl əz dɑɹk əz ðə foʊldəd skɑɹf ðət hɛld əɹ weɪst-lɔŋ jɛloʊ hɛɹ bæk fɹəm əɹ feɪs. ðə koʊl dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə dɪskʌmfɝɾ əɹ ɪn ðə list. ðə tu ʌv əm stʊd dʒʌs bɪɑnd wʌt feɪl θɔɾ ʌv əz ðə bɔɹɾɝ bɪtwin ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kæmp ən ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn kæmp - ðə pɹɪznɝz' kæmp - nɑt ðət ðəɹ ɹɪli wɝ tu kæmps. ə fju ɡeɪʃeɪn slɛpt əmʌŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, bʌt ðə ɹɛst wɝ kɛp tə ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə kæmp ənlɛs duɪŋ ðɛɹ əsaɪnd wɝk, kæɾəl fɛnst ɔf fɹəm ðə lʊɹ ə fɹiɾəm baɪ ə wɔl ə ʃeɪɾoʊ. moʊst ə ðə mɛn ən wɪmən u pæst əm wɔɹ waɪt ɡeɪʃeɪn ɹoʊbz, ðoʊ fju əz faɪnli woʊvən əz wʌt ʃi wɔɹ. wɪð soʊ mɛni tə kloʊð, ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ skupt ʌp ɛni sɔɹɾ ʌv waɪt klɔθ ðeɪ kəd faɪnd. səm wɝ ɡɑɹbd ɪn leɪɝz ə kɔɹs lɪnən əɹ taʊəlɪŋ əɹ ɹoʊbz ə ɹʌf tɛn klɔθ, ən mɛni ʌv ðə ɹoʊbz wɝ steɪnd wɪð mʌɾ əɹ sʊt.

Traps "And she complained again that the other Wise Ones are timid," Faile finished in her best meek voice, shifting the tall basket she held balanced on one shoulder, shifting from foot to foot in the muddy snow. The basket was not heavy, though filled with dirty laundry, and the wool of her white robe was thick and warm, with two under-robes beneath, but her soft leather boots, themselves bleached white, gave little protection from the cold slush. "I was told to report what the Wise One Sevanna said exactly," she added quickly. Someryn was one of the "other" Wise Ones, and her mouth had turned down at the word timid. With her eyes lowered, that was all Faile could see of Someryn's face. Gai'shain were required to maintain a humble manner, especially the gai'shain who were not Aiel, and though she looked up through her eyelashes to read Someryn's expression, the other woman was taller than most men, even Aiel men, a yellow-haired giant who towered over her. Most of what she could see was Someryn's over-large bosom, plump sun-dark cleavage exposed by a blouse unlaced halfway down her chest and covered mainly by a massive collection of long necklaces, firedrops and emeralds, rubies and opals, three-tiered strands of fat pearls and intricately patterned chains of gold. Most of the Wise Ones seemed to dislike Sevanna, who "spoke for the chief until a new Shaido clan chief could be chosen, an event unlikely to occur any time soon, and they tried to undercut her authority whenever they were not squabbling among themselves or forming cliques, but many shared Sevanna's love of wetlander jewelry, and some had even begun wearing finger rings, like Sevanna. On her right hand Someryn wore a large white opal that flashed caverns of red whenever she adjusted her shawl, and a long blue sapphire surrounded by rubies on the left. She had not adopted silk clothing, however. Her blouse was plain white algode, from the Waste, and her skirt and shawl thick wool as dark as the folded scarf that held her waist-long yellow hair back from her face. The cold did not appear to discomfort her in the least. The two of them stood just beyond what Faile thought of as the border between the Shaido camp and the gai'shain camp - the prisoners' camp - not that there really were two camps. A few gai'shain slept among the Shaido, but the rest were kept to the center of the camp unless doing their assigned work, cattle fenced off from the lure of freedom by a wall of Shaido. Most of the men and women who passed them wore white gai'shain robes, though few as finely woven as what she wore. With so many to clothe, the Shaido scooped up any sort of white cloth they could find. Some were garbed in layers of coarse linen or toweling or robes of rough tent cloth, and many of the robes were stained with mud or soot.

oʊnli naʊ ən ðən dɪd wʌn ə ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn ʃoʊ ðə haɪɾ ən peɪl aɪz ʌv ən il. ðə væs mədʒɔɹəɾi wɝ ɹʌɾi-feɪst ɑmɑdɪʃənz, oʊlɪvɛskɪn ɔltɑɹənz, ən peɪl kɛɹhinɪn, əlɔŋ wɪð əkeɪʒənəl tʃɹævəlɝz əɹ mɝtʃəns fɹəm ɪljən əɹ tæɹɑbən əɹ ɛlswɛɹ u hæd faʊn ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn ðə wɝs pleɪs ət ðə wɝs taɪm. ðə kɛɹhinɪn wɝ ðə lɔŋɡəs hɛld ən moʊst ɹɪzaɪn tə ðɛɹ sɪtʃueɪʃən əsaɪd fɹəm ðə hændfʊl ʌv il ɪn waɪt, bʌt ðeɪ ɔl kɛp ðɛɹ aɪz daʊn ən muvd əbaʊt ðɛɹ tæsks əz fæst əz ðə tʃɹæmpəl mʌʃ ə snoʊ ən mʌd wəɾ əlaʊ. ɡeɪʃeɪn wɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə dɪspleɪ hjumɪlɪɾi, oʊbiɾiəns, ən ən iɡɝnəs tə ɛmbɹeɪs boʊθ. ɛni lɛs ɹɪzʌltɪɾ ɪn peɪnfəl ɹimaɪndɝz.

Only now and then did one of the gai'shain show the height and pale eyes of an Aiel. The vast majority were ruddy-faced Amadicians, oliveskinned Altarans, and pale Cairhienin, along with occasional travelers or merchants from Illian or Tarabon or elsewhere who had found themselves in the worst place at the worst time. The Cairhienin were the longest held and most resigned to their situation aside from the handful of Aiel in white, but they all kept their eyes down and moved about their tasks as fast as the trampled mush of snow and mud would allow. Gai'shain were expected to display humility, obedience, and an eagerness to embrace both. Any less resulted in painful reminders.

feɪl wəd vɛɹi mʌtʃ əv laɪk tə hɝi ɑn hɝsɛlf. koʊl fit wɝ oʊnli ə smɔl pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt, ən iɡɝnəs tə də sɪvænəz lɔnʒɹi lɛs. tu mɛni aɪz kəd si hɝ stændɪŋ ðəɹ ɪn ði oʊpən wɪð sʌmɛɝɪn, ən ivən wɪð əɹ dip kaʊl haɪɾɪŋ əɹ feɪs, ðə bɹɔd mɛʃ bɛlt ə ʃaɪni ɡoʊldən lɪŋks ɝaʊn əɹ weɪst ən ə kloʊs-fɪɾɪŋ kɑlɝ tə mætʃ mɑɹkt əɹ əz wʌn ə sɪvænəz sɝvəns. noʊ wʌn kɔld əm ðæt  -  ɪn il aɪz, biɪŋ ə sɝvənt wɑz dɪminɪŋ -bʌt ðət wɑz wʌt ðeɪ wɝ, ðə wɛtləndɝz ət list, dʒʌst ənpeɪɾ ən wɪð fjuɝ ɹaɪts ən lɛs fɹiɾəm ðən ɛni sɝvən feɪl hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝd tɛl ʌv.

Faile would very much have liked to hurry on herself. Cold feet were only a small part of it, and eagerness to do Sevanna's laundry less. Too many eyes could see her standing there in the open with Someryn, and even with her deep cowl hiding her face, the broad mesh belt of shiny golden links around her waist and a close-fitting collar to match marked her as one of Sevanna's servants. No one called them that  -  in Aiel eyes, being a servant was demeaning -but that was what they were, the wetlanders at least, just unpaid and with fewer rights and less freedom than any servant Faile had ever heard tell of.

sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ sɪvænə hɝsɛlf wɑz gɑnə lɝn ðət waɪz wʌnz wɝ stɑpɪŋ əɹ ɡeɪʃeɪn tə kwɛstʃən ðɛm. sɪvænə hæd wɛl oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd sɝvəns ən kɛpt æɾɪŋ tə ðɛm, ən feɪl wɑz sɝɾən ðəɾ ɛvɹi læst wʌn wɑz ɹɪpiɾɪŋ ɛvɹi wɝd ðeɪ hɝd sɪvænə seɪ tə ðə waɪz wʌnz. ɪt wɑz ə bɹuɾəli ɪfɪʃən tʃɹæp. sɪvænə wɑz ə hɑɹʃ mɪstʃɹəs, ɪn ə ɹæðɝ kæʒəwəl weɪ, nɛvɝ snæpɪŋ, sɛldəm oʊpənli æŋɡɹi, bʌt ðə slaɪɾəst ɪnfɹækʃən, ðə smɔləst slɪp ɪn dɪminɝ əɹ bɪheɪvjɝ, wɑz pʌnɪʃt ɪmiɾiətli wɪð ðə swɪtʃ əɹ ðə stʃɹæp, ən ɛvɹi naɪt ðə faɪv ɡeɪʃeɪn u hæd plizd əɹ lis ðət deɪ wɝ tʃoʊzən aʊt fəɹ fɝðɝ pʌnɪʃmənt, səmtaɪmz ə naɪt baʊn ən ɡæɡd ɑn tɑp ʌv ə biɾɪŋ, dʒʌs tə ɛnkɝɪdʒ ðə ɹɛst. feɪl dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk ʌv wʌt ðə wʊmən wəɾ ɔɹɾɝ fəɹ ə spaɪ. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ðə waɪz wʌnz hæd meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ ðəɾ ɛniwʌn u dɪd nɑt tɔk fɹili ʌv wʌt ðeɪ hɝd, ɛniwʌn u tʃɹaɪd tə hoʊl bæk əɹ bɑɹɡən, feɪst ən ənsɝɾən fjutʃɝ, pɑsəbli ɛndɪŋ ɪn ə ʃæloʊ ɡɹeɪv.

Sooner or later Sevanna herself was going to learn that Wise Ones were stopping her gai'shain to question them. Sevanna had well over a hundred servants and kept adding to them, and Faile was certain that every last one was repeating every word they heard Sevanna say to the Wise Ones. It was a brutally efficient trap. Sevanna was a harsh mistress, in a rather casual way, never snapping, seldom openly angry, but the slightest infraction, the smallest slip in demeanor or behavior, was punished immediately with the switch or the strap, and every night the five gai'shain who had pleased her least that day were chosen out for further punishment, sometimes a night bound and gagged on top of a beating, just to encourage the rest. Faile did not want to think of what the woman would order for a spy. On the other hand, the Wise Ones had made it clear that anyone who did not talk freely of what they heard, anyone who tried to hold back or bargain, faced an uncertain future, possibly ending in a shallow grave.

hɑɹmɪŋ ə ɡeɪʃeɪn bɪɑn ðə pɝmɪɾəd lɪməts ə dɪsəplən wɑz ə vaɪəleɪʃən ə dʒiɾoʊ, ðə wɛb ʌv ɑnɝ ən ɑbləɡeɪʃən ðət ɡʌvɝn ðə laɪvz ʌv il, bʌt wɛtləndɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn sim tə stæn aʊtsaɪɾ ə nʌmbɝ ə ðə ɹulz.

Harming a gai'shain beyond the permitted limits of discipline was a violation of ji'e'toh, the web of honor and obligation that governed the lives of Aiel, but wetlander gai'shain seemed to stand outside a number of the rules.

sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, wʌn saɪɾ əɹ ði ʌðɝ ə ðət tʃɹæp wəd snæp ʃʌt. ɔl ðət hæd hɛl ðə dʒɔz əpɑɹt ðɪs lɔŋ wɑz ðət ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ sim tə si ðɛɹ wɛtləndɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn əz noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm kɑɹt hɔɹsəz əɹ pæk ænəməlz, ðoʊ ɪn tʃɹuθ ði ænəməlz ɹəsiv fɑɹ bɛɾɝ tʃɹitmənt. naʊ ən ðən ə ɡeɪʃeɪn tʃɹaɪd tə ɹʌn əweɪ, bʌɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ðæt, wʌn sɪmpli ɡeɪv əm fuɾ ən ʃɛltɝ, pʊɾ əm tə wɝk ən pʌnɪʃt əm ɪf ðeɪ fɔltɝd. ðə waɪz wʌnz noʊ mɔɹ ɪkspɛktəɾ əm tə dɪsəbeɪ, sɪvænə noʊ mɔɹ ɪkspɛktəɾ əm tə spaɪ ɑn hɝ, ðən ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəɾ ə kɑɹt hɔɹs tə sɪŋ. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ðoʊ. . . . ən ðət wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli tʃɹæp feɪl wɑz kɑɾ ɪn.

Sooner or later, one side or the other of that trap would snap shut. All that had held the jaws apart this long was that the Shaido seemed to see their wetlander gai'shain as no different from cart horses or pack animals, though in truth the animals received far better treatment. Now and then a gai'shain tried to run away, but aside from that, one simply gave them food and shelter, put them to work and punished them if they faltered. The Wise Ones no more expected them to disobey, Sevanna no more expected them to spy on her, than they expected a cart horse to sing. Sooner or later, though. . . . And that was not the only trap Faile was caught in.

"waɪz wʌn, aɪ hæv nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ tə tɛl," ʃi mɝmɝd wən sʌmɛɝɪn sɛd nʌθɪŋ. ənlɛs jə wɝ æɾəld ɪn ðə hɛd, jə dɪd nɑt dʒʌst wɔk əweɪ fɹəm ə waɪz wʌn, nɑɾ əntɪl ʃi dɪsmɪs ju. "ðə waɪz wʌn sɪvænə tɔks fɹili ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ʌs, bʌt ʃi sɛz lɪɾəl." ðə tɔl wʊmən ɹɪmeɪn saɪlənt, ən æftɝ ə lɔŋ moʊmən feɪl dɛɹd tə ɹeɪz əɹ aɪz ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ. sʌmɛɝɪn wɑz stɛɹɪŋ oʊvɝ feɪlz hɛd, hɝ maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən ɪn stʌn əmeɪzmənt.

"Wise One, I have nothing more to tell," she murmured when Someryn said nothing. Unless you were addled in the head, you did not just walk away from a Wise One, not until she dismissed you. "The Wise One Sevanna talks freely in front of us, but she says little." The tall woman remained silent, and after a long moment Faile dared to raise her eyes a little more. Someryn was staring over Faile's head, her mouth hanging open in stunned amazement.

fɹaʊnɪŋ, feɪl ʃɪftəd ðə bæskəɾ ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ən lʊk bɪhaɪn hɝ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə əkaʊn fəɹ sʌmɛɝɪnz ɪkspɹɛʃən, dʒʌs ðə spɹɔl ə ðə kæmp, dɑɹk loʊ il tɛns mɪŋɡəld wɪð pik tɛns ən wɔl tɛns ən ɛvɹi sɔɹɾ ə tɛnt, moʊst ɪn ʃeɪdz ə dɝɾi waɪɾ əɹ peɪl bɹaʊn, ʌðɝz ɡɹin əɹ blu əɹ ɹɛɾ əɹ ivən stʃɹaɪpt. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ tʊk ɛvɹiθɪŋ væljəbəl wən ðeɪ stʃɹʌk, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət maɪt pɹuv jusfəl, ən ðeɪ lɛf bɪhaɪnd nʌθɪŋ ðət ɹɪzɛmbəld ə tɛnt.

Frowning, Faile shifted the basket on her shoulder and looked behind her, but there was nothing to account for Someryn's expression, just the sprawl of the camp, dark low Aiel tents mingled with peaked tents and walled tents and every sort of tent, most in shades of dirty white or pale brown, others green or blue or red or even striped. The Shaido took everything valuable when they struck, everything that might prove useful, and they left behind nothing that resembled a tent.

əz ɪt wɑz, ðeɪ hɑɹdli hæɾ ɪnʌf ʃɛltɝ tə ɡoʊ ɝaʊnd. ðəɹ wɝ tɛn sɛps ɡæðɝd hɪɹ, mɔɹ ðən sɛvənti θaʊzənd ʃeɪɾoʊ ən nɪɹli əz mɛni ɡeɪʃeɪn, baɪ hɝ ɛstəmət, ən ɛvɹiwɛɹ ʃi sɔ oʊnli ðə juʒəwəl bʌsəl, dɑɹk-klæɾ il ɡoʊɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ laɪvz əmʌŋ skɝiɪŋ waɪt-klæd kæptɪvz. ə smɪθ wɑz wɝkɪŋ ðə bɛloʊz ɑn ɪz fɔɹdʒ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ən oʊpən tɛnt wɪð ɪz tulz leɪɾ aʊɾ ɑn ə tæn bʊl haɪd, tʃɪlʒɹən wɝ hɝɾɪŋ flɑks ə bliɾɪŋ ɡoʊts wɪð swɪtʃəz, ə tʃɹeɪɾɝ wɑz dɪspleɪɪŋ əɹ ɡʊdz ɪn ən oʊpən pəvɪljən ə jɛloʊ kænvəs, ɛvɹiθɪŋ fɹəm ɡoʊldən kændəlstɪks ən sɪlvɝ boʊlz tə pɑts ən kɛɾəlz, ɔl luɾəd. ə lin mæn wɪð ə hɔɹs ɑn ə lɛd stʊd tɔkɪŋ wɪð ə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd waɪz wʌn neɪmd mæsəlɪn, noʊ daʊt sikɪŋ ə kjʊɹ fəɹ səm eɪlmən ði ænəməl hæd, fɹəm ðə weɪ hi kɛpt pɔɪntɪŋ ət ðə hɔɹsəz bɛli. nʌθɪŋ tə meɪk sʌmɛɝɪn ɡeɪp.

As it was, they hardly had enough shelter to go around. There were ten septs gathered here, more than seventy thousand Shaido and nearly as many gai'shain, by her estimate, and everywhere she saw only the usual bustle, dark-clad Aiel going about their lives among scurrying white-clad captives. A smith was working the bellows on his forge in front of an open tent with his tools laid out on a tanned bull hide, children were herding flocks of bleating goats with switches, a trader was displaying her goods in an open pavilion of yellow canvas, everything from golden candlesticks and silver bowls to pots and kettles, all looted. A lean man with a horse on a lead stood talking with a gray-haired Wise One named Masalin, no doubt seeking a cure for some ailment the animal had, from the way he kept pointing at the horse's belly. Nothing to make Someryn gape.

dʒʌst əz feɪl wɑz əbaʊt tə tɝn bæk ɝaʊnd, ʃi noʊɾəst ə dɑɹkhɛɹɾ il wʊmən feɪsɪŋ ði ʌðɝ weɪ. nɑt dʒʌs dɑɹk hɛɹ, bʌt hɛɹ blæk əz ə ɹeɪvənz wɪŋ, ə ɡɹeɪt ɹɛɹəɾi əmʌŋ il. ivən fɹəm bɪhaɪnd, feɪl θɔt ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd əlɹiz, ənʌðɝ ə ðə waɪz wʌnz. ðəɹ wɝ oʊvɝ fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd waɪz wʌnz ɪn ðə kæmp, bʌt ʃi hæd lɝn kwɪkli tə noʊ ɔl ə ðɛm ɑn saɪt. mɪsteɪkɪŋ ə waɪz wʌn fəɹ ə wivɝ əɹ ə pɑɾɝ wɑz ə kwɪk weɪ tə ɝn ə swɪtʃɪŋ.

Just as Faile was about to turn back around, she noticed a darkhaired Aiel woman facing the other way. Not just dark hair, but hair black as a raven's wing, a great rarity among Aiel. Even from behind, Faile thought she recognized Alarys, another of the Wise Ones. There were over four hundred Wise Ones in the camp, but she had learned quickly to know all of them on sight. Mistaking a Wise One for a weaver or a potter was a quick way to earn a switching.

ɪt maɪɾ əv mɛnt nʌθɪŋ ðəɾ əlɹiz wɑz stændɪŋ stɑk stɪl ən lʊkɪŋ ɪn ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən əz sʌmɛɝɪn, əɹ ðət ʃi hæd lɛɾ əɹ ʃɔl slaɪd tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɪksɛp ðət dʒʌs bɪɑn hɝ, feɪl ɹɛkəɡnaɪz stɪl ənʌðɝ waɪz wʌn, ɔlsoʊ lʊkɪŋ ɔf tə ðə nɔɹθ ən wɛst, ən slæpɪŋ ət pipəl u wɔkt ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. ðət hæd tə bi dʒəsən, ə wʊmən u wʊɾə bɪn kɔld ʃɔɹɾ ivən ɪf ʃi wɝ nɑɾ il, wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt mæs ə hɛɹ ɹɛɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk faɪɝ lʊk peɪl ən ə tɛmpɝ tə mætʃ.

It might have meant nothing that Alarys was standing stock still and looking in the same direction as Someryn, or that she had let her shawl slide to the ground, except that just beyond her, Faile recognized still another Wise One, also looking off to the north and west, and slapping at people who walked in front of her. That had to be Jesain, a woman who would have been called short even if she were not Aiel, with a great mass of hair red enough to make fire look pale and a temper to match.

mæsəlɪn wɑz tɔkɪŋ tə ðə mæn wɪð ðə hɔɹs ən dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ tə ði ænəməl. ʃi kəd nɑt tʃænəl, bʌt θɹi waɪz wʌnz u kəd wɝ ɔl stɛɹɪŋ ɪn ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən. oʊnli wʌn θɪŋ kəɾ əkaʊn fəɹ ɪt; ðeɪ sɔ sʌmwʌn tʃænəlɪŋ ʌp ðəɹ ɑn ðə fɔɹəstəd ɹɪdʒəlaɪn bɪɑn ðə kæmp. eɪ waɪz wʌn tʃænəlɪŋ ʃʊɹli wəd nɑt meɪk ɛni ʌv əm stɛɹ. kəɾ ɪt bi ən ɛɛs sədaɪ? əɹ mɔɹ ðən wʌn?

Masalin was talking to the man with the horse and gesturing to the animal. She could not channel, but three Wise Ones who could were all staring in the same direction. Only one thing could account for it; they saw someone channeling up there on the forested ridgeline beyond the camp. A Wise One channeling surely would not make any of them stare. Could it be an Aes Sedai? Or more than one?

bɛɾɝ nɑt tə ɡɛɾ əɹ hoʊps ʌp. ɪt wɑz tu sun.

Better not to get her hopes up. It was too soon.

ə klaʊɾ ɑn ðə hɛd stæɡɝd hɝ, ən ʃi nɪɹli dʒɹɑp ðə bæskət. "waɪ ɑɹ jə stændɪŋ laɪk ə lʌmp?" sʌmɛɝɪn snɑɹəld. "ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð jəɹ wɝk. ɡoʊ, bɪfɔɹ aɪ . . . !" feɪl wɛnt, bælənsɪŋ ðə bæskət wɪð wʌn hænd, lɪftɪŋ ðə skɝts ə hɝ ɹoʊb aʊɾ ə ðə mʌɾi snoʊ wɪð ði ʌðɝ, ən muvɪŋ əz kwɪkli əz ʃi kəd wɪθaʊt slɪpɪŋ ən fɔlɪŋ ɪn ðə mʌk.

A clout on the head staggered her, and she nearly dropped the basket. "Why are you standing like a lump?" Someryn snarled. "Go on with your work. Go, before I . . . !" Faile went, balancing the basket with one hand, lifting the skirts of her robe out of the muddy snow with the other, and moving as quickly as she could without slipping and falling in the muck.

sʌmɛɝɪn nɛvɝ hɪɾ ɛniwʌn, ən ʃi nɛvɝ ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs. ɪf ʃi wɑz duɪŋ boʊθ, ɪt wɑz bɛs tə bi aʊɾ ə hɝ weɪ wɪð noʊ dɪleɪ. hʌmbli ən oʊbiɾiəntli.

Someryn never hit anyone, and she never raised her voice. If she was doing both, it was best to be out of her way with no delay. Humbly and obediently.

pɹaɪd sɛd tə meɪnteɪn ə kul dɪfaɪəns, ə kwaɪət ɹəfjuzəl tə jild, jɛt sɛns sɛd ðət wɑz ðə weɪ tə faɪn hɝsɛlf ɡɑɹɾəd twaɪs əz kloʊsli əz ʃi wɑz. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ maɪt teɪk ðə wɛtləndɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn fəɹ dəmɛstəkeɪɾəd ænəməlz, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ nɑt kəmplitli blaɪnd. ðeɪ mʌs θɪŋk ðət ʃi hæɾ æksɛptɪɾ əɹ kæptɪvəɾi əz ɪnɪskeɪpəbəl ɪf ʃi wɝ tə bi eɪbəl tə ɪskeɪp, ən ðət wɑz vɛɹi mʌtʃ ɑn əɹ maɪnd. ðə sunɝ, ðə bɛɾɝ. sɝɾənli bɪfɔɹ pɛɹɪn kɑɾ ʌp. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ daʊɾɪd ðət pɛɹɪn wɑz fɑloʊɪŋ hɝ, ðəɾ i wəd faɪn əɹ sʌmhaʊ - ðə mæn wəd wɔk θɹu ə wɔl ɪf i tʊk ɪɾ ɪndə hɪz hɛd! -  bʌt ʃi hæd tə ɪskeɪp bɪfɔɹ ðæt. ʃi wɑz ə soʊlʒɝz dɔɾɝ. ʃi nu ðə ʃeɪɾoʊz nʌmbɝz, ʃi nu ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ pɛɹɪn hæd tə kɔl ɑn, ən ʃi nu ʃi hæd tə ɹitʃ ɪm bɪfɔɹ ðət klæʃ kəd teɪk pleɪs. ðəɹ wɑz dʒʌs ðə lɪɾəl mæɾɝ ʌv ɡɛɾɪŋ fɹi ʌv ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, fɝst.

Pride said to maintain a cool defiance, a quiet refusal to yield, yet sense said that was the way to find herself guarded twice as closely as she was. The Shaido might take the wetlander gai'shain for domesticated animals, but they were not completely blind. They must think that she had accepted her captivity as inescapable if she were to be able to escape, and that was very much on her mind. The sooner, the better. Certainly before Perrin caught up. She had never doubted that Perrin was following her, that he would find her somehow - the man would walk through a wall if he took it into his head! -  but she had to escape before that. She was a soldier's daughter. She knew the Shaido's numbers, she knew the strength Perrin had to call on, and she knew she had to reach him before that clash could take place. There was just the little matter of getting free of the Shaido, first.

wʌt hæd ðə waɪz wʌnz bɪn lʊkɪŋ ət - ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ waɪz wʌnz wɪð pɛɹɪn? laɪt, ʃi hoʊp nɑt, nɑt jɛt! bʌɾ ʌðɝ mæɾɝz tʊk pɹɛsəɾəns, ðə lɔnʒɹi nɑt list. ʃi kæɹid ðə bæskət təwɔɹd wʌt ɹɪmeɪn ə ðə sɪɾi ʌv meɪɾən, wivɪŋ θɹu ə stɛɾi floʊ ʌv ɡeɪʃeɪn. ðoʊz livɪŋ ðə sɪɾi itʃ kæɹiɾ ə pɛɹ ə hɛvi bʌkəts bælənst ɑn ði ɛnz ʌv ə poʊl kæɹiɾ əkɹɔs ðə ʃoʊldɝz, waɪl ðə bʌkəts ə ðoʊz ɡoʊɪŋ ɪn sweɪd, ɛmpti, ɑn ðɛɹ poʊlz. əz mɛni pipəl əz wɝ ɪn ðə kæmp ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv wɔɾɝ, ən ðɪs wɑz haʊ ɪt keɪm tə ðɛm, bʌkət baɪ bʌkət.

What had the Wise Ones been looking at - the Aes Sedai or Wise Ones with Perrin? Light, she hoped not, not yet! But other matters took precedence, the laundry not least. She carried the basket toward what remained of the city of Maiden, weaving through a steady flow of gai'shain. Those leaving the city each carried a pair of heavy buckets balanced on the ends of a pole carried across the shoulders, while the buckets of those going in swayed, empty, on their poles. As many people as were in the camp required a great deal of water, and this was how it came to them, bucket by bucket.

ɪt wɑz izi tə tɛl ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn u hæd bɪn ɪnhæbəɾənts ə meɪɾən. ðɪs fɑɹ nɔɹθ ɪn ɔltɑɹə, ðeɪ wɝ fɛɹ ɹæðɝ ðən oʊlɪvɪkəmplɛktɪd, ən səm ivən hæd blu aɪz, bʌɾ ɔl stʌmbəld əlɔŋ ɪn ə deɪz. ʃeɪɾoʊ klaɪmɪŋ ðə sɪɾi wɔlz ɪn ðə naɪt hæɾ oʊvɝwɛlm ðə dɪfɛnsəz bɪfɔɹ moʊst ə ðə ɹɛzəɾənts nu ðeɪ wɝ ɪn deɪnʒɝ, ən ðeɪ stɪl simd əneɪbəl tə bɪliv wʌt ðɛɹ laɪvz hæd kʌm tə.

It was easy to tell the gai'shain who had been inhabitants of Maiden. This far north in Altara, they were fair rather than olivecomplected, and some even had blue eyes, but all stumbled along in a daze. Shaido climbing the city walls in the night had overwhelmed the defenses before most of the residents knew they were in danger, and they still seemed unable to believe what their lives had come to.

feɪl sɝtʃt fəɹ ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ feɪs, ðoʊ, sʌmwʌn ʃi hoʊpt wəd nɑt bi kæɹiɪŋ wɔɾɝ tədeɪ. ʃi hæd bɪn lʊkɪŋ ɛvɝ sɪns ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ meɪd kæmp hɪɹ, fɔɹ deɪz əɡoʊ. dʒʌst aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi ɡeɪts, wɪtʃ stʊɾ oʊpən ən ʃʌv bæk əɡɛns ðə ɡɹænət wɔlz, ʃi faʊn hɝ, ə waɪt-klæd wʊmən tɔlɝ ðən hɝsɛlf wɪð ə flæt bæskəɾ ə bɹɛɾ ɑn əɹ hɪp ən əɹ hʊd pʊʃt bæk dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə ʃoʊ ə bɪɾ ə dɑɹk ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ. kiæɾ əpɪɹd tə bi stʌɾiɪŋ ði aɪɝn-stʃɹæpt ɡeɪts ðət hæd feɪl tə pɹətɛk meɪɾən, bʌt ʃi tɝn əweɪ fɹəm əm əz sun əz feɪl əpɹoʊtʃt. ðeɪ pɔz saɪd baɪ saɪd, nɑt ɹɪli lʊkɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ waɪl ðeɪ pɹitɛndəd tə ʃɪf ðɛɹ bæskəts. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹizən tu ɡeɪʃeɪn ʃəd nɑt tɔk tə wʌn ənʌðɝ, bʌt noʊ wʌn ʃəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət ðeɪ hæd bɪn kæptʃɝd təɡɛðɝ. beɪn ən kiæd wɝ nɑt wɑtʃt əz kloʊsli əz ɡeɪʃeɪn sɝvɪŋ sɪvænə, bʌt ðət maɪt tʃeɪnʒ ɪf ɛniwʌn ɹɪmɛmbɝd. ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn saɪt wɑz ɡeɪʃeɪn, ən fɹəm wɛst ə ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl bɪsaɪdz, jɛt tu mɛni hæd lɝn tə kʌɹi feɪvɝ baɪ kæɹiɪŋ teɪlz ən ɹumɝz. moʊs pipəl dɪd wʌt ðeɪ mʌs tə sɝvaɪv, ən səm ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪd tə fɛðɝ ðɛɹ oʊn nɛsts, wʌtɛvɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz.

Faile searched for a particular face, though, someone she hoped would not be carrying water today. She had been looking ever since the Shaido made camp here, four days ago. Just outside the city gates, which stood open and shoved back against the granite walls, she found her, a white-clad woman taller than herself with a flat basket of bread on her hip and her hood pushed back just enough to show a bit of dark reddish hair. Chiad appeared to be studying the iron-strapped gates that had failed to protect Maiden, but she turned away from them as soon as Faile approached. They paused side by side, not really looking at one another while they pretended to shift their baskets. There was no reason two gai'shain should not talk to one another, but no one should remember that they had been captured together. Bain and Chiad were not watched as closely as gai'shain serving Sevanna, but that might change if anyone remembered. Almost everyone in sight was gai'shain, and from west of the Dragonwall besides, yet too many had learned to curry favor by carrying tales and rumors. Most people did what they must to survive, and some always tried to feather their own nests, whatever the circumstances.

"ðeɪ ɡɑɾ əweɪ ðə fɝs naɪt hɪɹ," kiæd mɝmɝd. "beɪn ən aɪ lɛɾ əm aʊt tə ðə tʃɹiz ən əbskjʊɹd ðə tʃɹæks kʌmɪŋ bæk. noʊ wʌn simz tə ɹilaɪz ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡɔn, əz fɑɹ əz aɪ kən si.

"They got away the first night here," Chiad murmured. "Bain and I led them out to the trees and obscured the tracks coming back. No one seems to realize they are gone, as far as I can see.

wɪð soʊ mɛni ɡeɪʃeɪn, ɪt simz ə wʌndɝ ðiz ʃeɪɾoʊ noʊɾəs ɛni hu ɹʌn əweɪ." feɪl hivd ə smɔl saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif. θɹi deɪz ɡɔn. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ dɪd noʊɾəs ɹʌnəweɪz. fju mænədʒd ə fʊl deɪ ʌv fɹiɾəm, bʌt ðə tʃænsəz ə səksɛs ɪnkɹist wɪð ɛvɹi deɪ ənkɔt, ən ɪt sim sɝɾən ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wəd muv ɑn təmɑɹoʊ, əɹ ðə nɛks deɪ. ðeɪ hæd nɑt hɔltəɾ əz lɔŋ əz ðɪs sɪns feɪl wɑz kæptʃɝd. ʃi səspɛktəd ðeɪ maɪt bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə mɑɹtʃ bæk tə ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl ən ɹɛkɹɔs ɪndə ðə weɪst.

With so many gai'shain, it seems a wonder these Shaido notice any who run away." Faile heaved a small sigh of relief. Three days gone. The Shaido did notice runaways. Few managed a full day of freedom, but the chances of success increased with every day uncaught, and it seemed certain the Shaido would move on tomorrow, or the next day. They had not halted as long as this since Faile was captured. She suspected they might be trying to march back to the Dragonwall and recross into the Waste.

ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn izi tɔkɪŋ lətʃəl ən ɹɛlə ɪndə livɪŋ wɪθaʊt hɝ. wʌt faɪnəli kənvɪnst əm hæd bɪn ði ɑɹɡjəmən ðət ðeɪ kəd kæɹi wɝd tə pɛɹɪn ʌv wɛɹ feɪl wɑz, əlɔŋ wɪð ə wɔɹnɪŋ ə haʊ mɛni ʃeɪɾoʊ ðəɹ wɝ ən ə kleɪm ðət feɪl ɔlɹɛɾi hæɾ əɹ oʊn ɪskeɪp wɛl ɪn hæn ən ɛni ɪntɝfɪɹəns baɪ hɪm maɪɾ ɛndeɪnʒɝ ðəɾ ən hɝ. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi hæd meɪɾ əm bɪliv ɔl ə ðət - ʃi dɪɾ əv əɹ ɪskeɪp ɪn hænd, ɪn ə weɪ; ʃi hæd sɛvɹəl plænz, ɪn fækt, ən wʌn ə ðɛm hæd tə wɝk - bʌɾ əntɪl ðɪs mɪnət ʃi hæd bɪn hæf kənvɪns ðə tu wɪmən wəd dɪsaɪd ðɛɹ oʊðz tə hɝ ɹikwaɪɝɾ əm tə steɪ. wɔɾɝ oʊðz wɝ taɪɾɝ ðən oʊðz ə fiəlti ɪn səm weɪz, jɛt ðeɪ lɛf kənsɪɾɝəbəl ɹum fəɹ stupɪɾɪti ɪn ðə neɪm ʌv ɑnɝ. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ ðə pɛɹ kəd faɪn pɛɹɪn, bʌɾ iðɝ weɪ, ðeɪ wɝ fɹi ən ʃi hæɾ oʊnli tu ʌðɝ wɪmən tə wɝi əbaʊt. ʌv kɔɹs, ði æbsəns ə θɹi ʌv sɪvænəz sɝvəns wəd bi noʊɾəst vɛɹi kwɪkli, wɪðɪn aʊɝz, ən ðə bɛs tʃɹækɝz wəd bi sɛn tə bɹɪŋ əm bæk. feɪl wɑz əkʌstəm tə ðə wʊdz, bʌt ʃi nu bɛɾɝ ðən tə pɪt hɝsɛlf əɡɛnst il tʃɹækɝz. ɪt wɑz vɛɹi ənplɛzən fəɹ "ɔɹɾənɛɹi" ɡeɪʃeɪn u ɹæn əweɪ ən wɝ ɹikæptʃɝd. fəɹ sɪvænəz ɡeɪʃeɪn, ɪt maɪt bi bɛɾɝ tə daɪ ɪn ði ətɛmpt. ət bɛst, ðeɪ wəd nɛvɝ bi əlaʊd ði ɑpɝtunəɾi fəɹ ə sɛkən tʃɹaɪ.

It had not been easy talking Lacile and Arrela into leaving without her. What finally convinced them had been the argument that they could carry word to Perrin of where Faile was, along with a warning of how many Shaido there were and a claim that Faile already had her own escape well in hand and any interference by him might endanger that and her. She was sure she had made them believe all of that - she did have her escape in hand, in a way; she had several plans, in fact, and one of them had to work - but until this minute she had been half convinced the two women would decide their oaths to her required them to stay. Water oaths were tighter than oaths of fealty in some ways, yet they left considerable room for stupidity in the name of honor. In truth, she did not know whether the pair could find Perrin, but either way, they were free and she had only two other women to worry about. Of course, the absence of three of Sevanna's servants would be noticed very quickly, within hours, and the best trackers would be sent to bring them back. Faile was accustomed to the woods, but she knew better than to pit herself against Aiel trackers. It was very unpleasant for "ordinary" gai'shain who ran away and were recaptured. For Sevanna's gai'shain, it might be better to die in the attempt. At best, they would never be allowed the opportunity for a second try.

"ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs wəɾ əv ə bɛɾɝ tʃæns ɪf jə ən beɪn keɪm wɪð ʌs," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs. ðə floʊ ʌv mɛn ən wɪmən ɪn waɪt kæɹiɪŋ wɔɾɝ baɪ ðɛm kəntɪnjud, noʊ wʌn simɪŋ tə mɔɹ ðən ɡlæns ðɛɹ weɪ, bʌt wɛɹinɪs hæd bɪkʌm ɪnɡɹeɪn ɪn əɹ ðiz læs tu wiks. laɪt, ɪt simd mɔɹ laɪk tu jɪɹz! "wʌt dɪfɝəns kən ðəɹ bi bɪtwin hɛlpɪŋ lətʃəl ən ɹɛlə ɹitʃ ðə fɔɹəst ən hɛlpɪŋ ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs ɡɛt fɝðɝ?" ðət wɑz dɪspɛɹ tɔkɪŋ. ʃi nu ðə dɪfɝəns - beɪn ən kiæd wɝ əɹ fɹɛnz ən hæd tɔɾ əɹ əbaʊɾ il weɪz, əbaʊt dʒiɾoʊ ən ivən ə lɪɾəl meɪɾən hæntɔk - ən ɪt dɪd nɑt sɝpɹaɪz əɹ wən kiæd tɝn əɹ hɛd slaɪtli tə ɹəɡɑɹɾ əɹ wɪð ɡɹeɪ aɪz ðət hæd nʌθɪŋ ʌv ɡeɪʃeɪn miknəs ɪn ðɛm. nɔɹ dɪɾ əɹ vɔɪs, ðoʊ ʃi stɪl spoʊk kwaɪətli.

"The rest of us would have a better chance if you and Bain came with us," she said in a low voice. The flow of men and women in white carrying water by them continued, no one seeming to more than glance their way, but wariness had become ingrained in her these last two weeks. Light, it seemed more like two years! "What difference can there be between helping Lacile and Arrela reach the forest and helping the rest of us get further?" That was despair talking. She knew the difference - Bain and Chiad were her friends and had taught her about Aiel ways, about ji'e'toh and even a little Maiden handtalk - and it did not surprise her when Chiad turned her head slightly to regard her with gray eyes that had nothing of gai'shain meekness in them. Nor did her voice, though she still spoke quietly.

"aɪ wɪl hɛlp jə əz fɑɹ əz aɪ kən kəz ɪts nɑt ɹaɪt fəɹ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ tə hoʊl ju. jə də nɑt fɑloʊ dʒiɾoʊ. aɪ du. ɪf aɪ kæst əsaɪd maɪ ɑnɝ ən maɪ ɑbləɡeɪʃənz dʒʌs kəz ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hæv, ðən aɪ əlaʊ ðɛm tə dɪsaɪd haʊ əl ækt. əl wɛɹ waɪt fəɹ ə jɪɹ ən ə deɪ ən ðən ðəl ɹilis mi, əɹ əl wɔk əweɪ, bʌɾ əl nɑt θɹoʊ əweɪ hu aɪ æm." wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝd, kiæd stʃɹoʊɾ ɔf ɪndə ðə θɹɔŋz ʌv ɡeɪʃeɪn.

"I will help you as far as I can because it is not right for the Shaido to hold you. You do not follow ji'e'toh. I do. If I cast aside my honor and my obligations just because the Shaido have, then I allow them to decide how I will act. I will wear white for a year and a day and then they will release me, or I will walk away, but I will not throw away who I am." Without another word, Chiad strode off into the throngs of gai'shain.

feɪl hæf-ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə stɑp hɝ, ðən lɛɾ ɪt fɔl. ʃi hæɾ æsk ðət kwɛstʃən bɪfɔɹ, ɹəsivɪŋ ə dʒɛnlɝ ænsɝ, ən ɪn æskɪŋ əɡɛn, ʃi hæɾ ɪnsʌltɪɾ əɹ fɹɛnd. ʃi wəɾ əv tə əpɑlədʒaɪz. nɑt tə kip kiædz hɛlp - ðə wʊmən wəd nɑt wɪðdʒɹɔ ðət - bʌt kəz ʃi hæɾ əɹ oʊn ɑnɝ, ivən ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt fɑloʊ dʒiɾoʊ. jə dɪd nɑɾ ɪnsʌl fɹɛnz ən sɪmpli fɝɡɛɾ ɪt, əɹ ɪkspɛkt əm tə. əpɑlədʒiz mʌst weɪt, ðoʊ. ðeɪ dɛɹd nɑt bi sin tɔkɪŋ tu lɔŋ.

Faile half-raised a hand to stop her, then let it fall. She had asked that question before, receiving a gentler answer, and in asking again, she had insulted her friend. She would have to apologize. Not to keep Chiad's help - the woman would not withdraw that - but because she had her own honor, even if she did not follow ji'e'toh. You did not insult friends and simply forget it, or expect them to. Apologies must wait, though. They dared not be seen talking too long.

meɪɾən hæd bɪn ə pɹɑspɝəs sɪɾi, ə pɹədusɝ ʌv ɡʊd wʊl ən ɡɹeɪt kwɑntəɾiz ə fɛɹ-kwɑləɾi waɪn, bʌɾ ən ɛmpti ɹuən ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz, naʊ. əz mɛni ʌv ðə sleɪt-ɹuf haʊsəz wɝ tɪmbɝ əz wɝ stoʊn, ən faɪɝ hæd ɡɑɾən lus dʊɹɪŋ ðə luɾɪŋ. ðə sʌðɝn ɛn ə ðə sɪɾi wɑz hæf paɪlz ə blækən tɪmbɝz dɛkɝeɪɾəd wɪð aɪsɪkəlz, hæf skɔɹtʃt, ɹufləs wɔlz. ðə stʃɹits ɛvɹiwɛɹ, wɛðɝ stoʊn-peɪvd əɹ dɝt, wɝ ɡɹeɪ wɪð wɪnbloʊn æʃ tʃɹæmpəld ɪndə ðə snoʊ, ən ðə hoʊl sɪɾi stæŋk ə tʃɑɹd wʊd. wɔɾɝ wɑz wʌn θɪŋ meɪɾən əpɛɹənli nɛvɝ ɹæn ʃɔɹɾ ʌv, bʌt laɪk ɔl il, ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ pleɪst ə vɛɹi haɪ vælju ɑn ɪt, ən ðeɪ nu nʌθɪŋ ə faɪɾɪŋ faɪɝz. ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl ɪn ði il weɪs ðət kəd bɝn. ðeɪ maɪɾ əv lɛt ði ɪntaɪɝ sɪɾi bi kənsum hæd ðeɪ bɪn fɪnɪʃt wɪð stilɪŋ, ən əz ɪt wɑz, ðeɪ dɪðɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə weɪst ʌv wɔɾɝ bɪfɔɹ fɔɹsɪŋ ɡeɪʃeɪn ɪndə bʌkət laɪnz ət spɪɹpɔɪn ən lɛɾɪŋ ðə mɛn ə meɪɾən bɹɪŋ aʊt ðɛɹ pʌmpwæɡənz.

Maiden had been a prosperous city, a producer of good wool and great quantities of fair-quality wine, but an empty ruin inside the walls, now. As many of the slate-roofed houses were timber as were stone, and fire had gotten loose during the looting. The southern end of the city was half piles of blackened timbers decorated with icicles, half scorched, roofless walls. The streets everywhere, whether stone-paved or dirt, were gray with windblown ash trampled into the snow, and the whole city stank of charred wood. Water was one thing Maiden apparently never ran short of, but like all Aiel, the Shaido placed a very high value on it, and they knew nothing of fighting fires. There was little in the Aiel Waste that could burn. They might have let the entire city be consumed had they been finished with stealing, and as it was, they dithered over the waste of water before forcing gai'shain into bucket lines at spearpoint and letting the men of Maiden bring out their pumpwagons.

feɪl wʊɾə θɔt ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wəɾ ət list əv ɹɪwɔɹɾɪd ðoʊz mɛn baɪ əlaʊɪŋ əm tə liv wɪð ðə pipəl u hæɾ ɪskeɪp biɪŋ tʃoʊzən fəɹ ɡeɪʃeɪn, bʌt ðə mɛn u wɝk ðə pʌmps wɝ jʌŋ ən fɪt, dʒʌs ðə sɔɹt ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɑntəd fəɹ ðɛɹ ɡeɪʃeɪn. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kɛp səm ə ðə ɹulz ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɡeɪʃeɪn - wɪmən u wɝ pɹɛɡnən əɹ hæd tʃɪlʒɹən ʌndɝ ði eɪdʒ ɔfən hæd bɪn lɛt ɡoʊ, ən juðz ʌndɝ sɪkstin, ən ðə sɪɾiz blæksmɪθs, hu hæd bɪn boʊθ mɪstəfaɪɾ ən ɡɹeɪtfəl -  bʌt ɡɹæɾətud nɛvɝ ɛntɝɾ ɪndə ɪt.

Faile would have thought the Shaido would at least have rewarded those men by allowing them to leave with the people who had escaped being chosen for gai'shain, but the men who worked the pumps were young and fit, just the sort the Shaido wanted for their gai'shain. The Shaido kept some of the rules regarding gai'shain - women who were pregnant or had children under the age often had been let go, and youths under sixteen, and the city's blacksmiths, who had been both mystified and grateful -  but gratitude never entered into it.

fɝnɪtʃɝ lɪɾɝd ðə stʃɹits, lɑɹdʒ oʊvɝtɝn teɪbəlz ən ɔɹneɪt tʃɛsts ən tʃɛɹz, ən səmtaɪmz ə kɹʌmpəld wɔl hæŋɪŋ əɹ bɹoʊkən dɪʃəz. bɪts ə kloʊðɪŋ leɪ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, koʊts ən bɹitʃɪz ən dʒɹɛsəz, moʊst slaɪs tə tæɾɝz. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hæd sizd ɛniθɪŋ meɪɾ ʌv ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ, ɛniθɪŋ ðət hæd dʒɛmz, ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl əɹ ɛɾəbəl, bʌt ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz mʌst əv bɪn hɔld aʊtsaɪɾ ɪn ðə fɹɛnzi ʌv luɾɪŋ, ðən əbændənd wən huɛvɝ wɑz kæɹiɪŋ əm dɪsaɪɾɪd ðəɾ ə lɪɾəl ɡɪldɪɾ ɛdʒɪŋ əɹ faɪn kɑɹvɪŋ dɪd nɑt meɪk əm wɝθ ði ɛfɝt. il dɪd nɑt juz tʃɛɹz ɪn ɛni keɪs, ɪksɛp fəɹ tʃifs, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹum ɑn ðə kɑɹts ən wæɡənz fəɹ ɛni ʌv ðoʊz hɛvi teɪbəlz. ə fju ʃeɪɾoʊ stɪl wɑndɝd θɹu, sɝtʃɪŋ ðə haʊsəz ən ɪnz ən ʃɑps fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ðeɪ maɪɾ əv mɪst, jɛt moʊs pipəl ʃi sɔ wɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn kæɹiɪŋ bʌkəts. il hæd noʊ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn sɪɾiz ɪksɛpt əz stɔɹhaʊzəz tə bi plʌndɝd. ə pɛɹ ə meɪɾənz pæs hɝ, juzɪŋ ðə bʌts ə ðɛɹ spɪɹz tə dʒɹaɪv ə neɪkəd, waɪld-aɪd mæn, hɪz ɑɹmz baʊn bɪhaɪn hɪm, təwɔɹd ðə ɡeɪts. daʊtləs i hæd θɔɾ i kəd haɪɾ ɪn ə beɪsmən əɹ æɾɪk əntɪl ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ ɡɔn. daʊtləs ðə meɪɾənz hæd θɔt tə faɪn ə kæʃ ə kɔɪn əɹ pleɪt.

Furniture littered the streets, large overturned tables and ornate chests and chairs, and sometimes a crumpled wall hanging or broken dishes. Bits of clothing lay everywhere, coats and breeches and dresses, most sliced to tatters. The Shaido had seized anything made of gold or silver, anything that had gems, anything useful or edible, but the furnishings must have been hauled outside in the frenzy of looting, then abandoned when whoever was carrying them decided that a little gilded edging or fine carving did not make them worth the effort. Aiel did not use chairs in any case, except for chiefs, and there was no room on the carts and wagons for any of those heavy tables. A few Shaido still wandered through, searching the houses and inns and shops for anything they might have missed, yet most people she saw were gai'shain carrying buckets. Aiel had no interest in cities except as storehouses to be plundered. A pair of Maidens passed her, using the butts of their spears to drive a naked, wild-eyed man, his arms bound behind him, toward the gates. Doubtless he had thought he could hide in a basement or attic until the Shaido were gone. Doubtless the Maidens had thought to find a cache of coin or plate.

wən ə hjudʒ mæn ɪn ðə keɪɾɪnsɝ ʌv ən ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ stɛpt ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ʃi swɝv tə ɡoʊ ɝaʊn ɪm əz smuðli əz ʃi kʊd. ə ɡeɪʃeɪn ɔlweɪz meɪd weɪ fəɹ ɛni ʃeɪɾoʊ.

When a huge man in the cadin'sor of an algai'd'siswai stepped in front of her, she swerved to go around him as smoothly as she could. A gai'shain always made way for any Shaido.

"ju ɑɹ vɛɹi pɹɪɾi," hi sɛd, pʊɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪn əɹ weɪ. hi wɑz ðə bɪɡəs mæn ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin, pɝhæps sɛvən fit tɔl ən θɪk ɪn pɹəpɔɹʃən. nɑt fæt - ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin ə fæɾ il - bʌt vɛɹi waɪd. hi bɛltʃt, ən ʃi smɛld waɪn fjumz. dʒɹʌŋkən il ʃi hæd sin, sɪns ðeɪ faʊn ɔl ðoʊz kæsks ʌv waɪn hɪɹ ɪn meɪɾən. ʃi fɛl noʊ fɪɹ, ðoʊ. ɡeɪʃeɪn maɪt bi pʌnɪʃt fəɹ ɛni nʌmbɝ ʌv ɪnfɹækʃənz, ɔfən fəɹ tʃɹænzɡɹɛʃənz fju ʌv ðə wɛtləndɝz ʌndɝstʊd, bʌt ðə waɪt ɹoʊbz ɡeɪv ə sɝɾən pɹətɛkʃən, tu, ən ʃi hæɾ ənʌðɝ leɪɝ bɪsaɪdz.

"You are very pretty," he said, putting himself in her way. He was the biggest man she had ever seen, perhaps seven feet tall and thick in proportion. Not fat - she had never seen a fat Aiel - but very wide. He belched, and she smelled wine fumes. Drunken Aiel she had seen, since they found all those casks of wine here in Maiden. She felt no fear, though. Gai'shain might be punished for any number of infractions, often for transgressions few of the wetlanders understood, but the white robes gave a certain protection, too, and she had another layer besides.

"aɪ æm ɡeɪʃeɪn tə ðə waɪz wʌn sɪvænə," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn əz əbsikwiəs ə toʊn əz ʃi kəd mænədʒ. tə hɝ dɪsɡʌst, ʃi hæd ɡɑɾən soʊ ʃi kəd mænədʒ ɪt vɛɹi wɛl. "sɪvænə wəd bi dɪsplizd ɪf aɪ ʃɝk maɪ duɾiz tə tɔk." ʃi tʃɹaɪɾ əɡɛn tə stɛp ɝaʊn hɪm, ən ɡæspt wən i sizd əɹ ɑɹm ɪn ə hæn ðət cʊɾə ɹæpt ɝaʊn ɪt twaɪs wɪð ɪntʃəz tə spɛɹ.

"I am gai'shain to the Wise One Sevanna," she said in as obsequious a tone as she could manage. To her disgust, she had gotten so she could manage it very well. "Sevanna would be displeased if I shirked my duties to talk." She tried again to step around him, and gasped when he seized her arm in a hand that could have wrapped around it twice with inches to spare.

"sɪvænə hæz hʌnʒɹədz ʌv ɡeɪʃeɪn. ʃɪl nɑt mɪs wʌn fəɹ ən aʊɝ əɹ tu." ðə bæskət fɛl tə ðə stʃɹiɾ əz i plʌkt əɹ ɪndə ði ɛɹ əz izəli əz pɪkɪŋ ʌp ə pɪloʊ. bɪfɔɹ ʃi nu wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ, hi hæɾ əɹ tʌk bɪniθ ɪz ɑɹm, hɝ oʊn ɑɹmz tʃɹæpt əɾ əɹ saɪdz.

"Sevanna has hundreds of gai'shain. She will not miss one for an hour or two." The basket fell to the street as he plucked her into the air as easily as picking up a pillow. Before she knew what was happening, he had her tucked beneath his arm, her own arms trapped at her sides.

ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə skɹim, ən i juzd ɪz fɹi hæn tə pɹɛs əɹ feɪs flæɾ əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst. ðə smɛl ə swɛɾi wʊl fɪld əɹ noʊz. ɔl ʃi kəd si wɑz ɡɹeɪ-bɹaʊn wʊl. wɛɹ wɝ ðoʊz tu meɪɾənz? meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ wəd nɑt lɛɾ ɪm də ðɪs! ɛni il u sɔ wəd stɛp ɪn! ʃi nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd hɛlp fɹəm ɛni ʌv ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn. wʌn əɹ tu maɪt ɹʌn fəɹ hɛlp, ɪf ʃi wɑz lʌki, bʌt ðə vɛɹi fɝs lɛsən ə ɡeɪʃeɪn lɝnd wɑz ðəɾ ivən ə θɹɛɾ ə vaɪələns ɡɑt jə hʌŋ ʌp baɪ ði æŋkəlz ən biɾən tɪl jə haʊld. ðə fɝs lɛsən wɛtləndɝz lɝnd, ət list; il ɔlɹɛɾi nu: & ɡeɪʃeɪn wɑz fɔɹbɪɾən tə ɔfɝ vaɪələns fəɹ ɛni ɹizən. ɛni ɹizən. wɪtʃ dɪd nɑt stɑp əɹ fɹəm kɪkɪŋ ət ðə mæn fjʊɹiəsli. ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn kɪkɪŋ ə wɔl fəɹ ɔl ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ɪt meɪd. hi wɑz muvɪŋ, kæɹiɪŋ əɹ sʌmwɛɹ. ʃi bɪɾ əz hɑɹd daʊn əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kʊd, ən ɡɑɾ ə maʊθfʊl ə kɔɹs dɝɾi wʊl fəɹ əɹ peɪnz, hɝ tiθ slaɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ mʌsəl wɪð noʊ slæk tə ɡɪv əɹ pɝtʃəs. hi simd meɪɾ ə stoʊn. ʃi skɹimd, bʌɾ əɹ ʃɹik saʊndəd mʌfəld ivən tə hɝ oʊn ɪɹz.

She opened her mouth to scream, and he used his free hand to press her face flat against his chest. The smell of sweaty wool filled her nose. All she could see was gray-brown wool. Where were those two Maidens? Maidens of the Spear would not let him do this! Any Aiel who saw would step in! She never expected help from any of the gai'shain. One or two might run for help, if she was lucky, but the very first lesson a gai'shain learned was that even a threat of violence got you hung up by the ankles and beaten till you howled. The first lesson wetlanders learned, at least; Aiel already knew: & gai'shain was forbidden to offer violence for any reason. Any reason. Which did not stop her from kicking at the man furiously. She might as well have been kicking a wall for all the impression it made. He was moving, carrying her somewhere. She bit as hard down as hard as she could, and got a mouthful of coarse dirty wool for her pains, her teeth sliding over muscle with no slack to give her purchase. He seemed made of stone. She screamed, but her shriek sounded muffled even to her own ears.

əbɹʌpli, ðə mɑnstɝ kæɹiɪŋ əɹ stɑpt.

Abruptly, the monster carrying her stopped.

"aɪ meɪd ðɪs wʌn ɡeɪʃeɪn, nædʒɹɪk," ənʌðɝ mænz dip vɔɪs sɛd.

"I made this one gai'shain, Nadric," another man's deep voice said.

feɪl fɛlt ə ɹʌmbəl ə læftɝ ɪn ðə tʃɛst əɡɛnst əɹ feɪs ivən bɪfɔɹ ʃi hɝɾ ɪt. ʃi dɪd nɑt stɑp əɹ kɪkɪŋ, nɛvɝ stɑpt ɹaɪðɪŋ əɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʃaʊt, jɛɾ əɹ kæptɝ simd ʌnəwɛɹ ə hɝ ɛfɝts.

Faile felt a rumble of laughter in the chest against her face even before she heard it. She did not stop her kicking, never stopped writhing or trying to shout, yet her captor seemed unaware of her efforts.

"ʃi bɪlɔŋz tə sɪvænə naʊ, bɹʌðɝləs," ðə hjudʒ mæn - nædʒɹɪk? - sɛd kəntɛmptʃwəsli. "sɪvænə teɪks wʌt ʃi wɑns, ən aɪ teɪk wʌɾ aɪ wɑnt. ɪts ðə nu weɪ."

"She belongs to Sevanna now, Brotherless," the huge man - Nadric? - said contemptuously. "Sevanna takes what she wants, and I take what I want. It is the new way."

"sɪvænə tʊk hɝ," ði ʌðɝ mæn ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli, "bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ ɡeɪv əɹ tə sɪvænə. aɪ nɛvɝ ɔfɝd tə tʃɹeɪɾ əɹ tə sɪvænə. dʒju əbændən jəɹ ɑnɝ kəz sɪvænə əbændənz hɝz?" ðəɹ wɑz ə lɔŋ saɪləns bɹoʊkən oʊnli baɪ ðə smʌðɝd nɔɪzɪz feɪl wɑz meɪkɪŋ. ʃi dɪd nɑt stɑp stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ, kəd nɑt stɑp, bʌt ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ən ɪnfən ɪn swɑɾəlɪŋ. "ʃi ɪz nɑt pɹɪɾi ɪnʌf tə faɪɾ oʊvɝ," nædʒɹɪk sɛd faɪnəli. hi dɪd nɑt saʊn fɹaɪɾənd əɹ ivən kənsɝnd.

"Sevanna took her," the other man replied calmly, "but I never gave her to Sevanna. I never offered to trade her to Sevanna. Do you abandon your honor because Sevanna abandons hers?" There was a long silence broken only by the smothered noises Faile was making. She did not stop struggling, could not stop, but she might as well have been an infant in swaddling. "She is not pretty enough to fight over," Nadric said finally. He did not sound frightened or even concerned.

hɪz hænz fɛl əweɪ fɹəm hɝ, ən feɪlz tiθ ɹɪp lus fɹəm ɪz koʊt soʊ sʌɾənli ʃi θɔt wʌn əɹ tu maɪt bi dʒɝkt aʊt, bʌt ðə ɡɹaʊn smæʃt ɪndə hɝ bæk ən ɔl ə ði ɛɹ ɹʌʃt aʊɾ ə hɝ lʌŋz əlɔŋ wɪð moʊst ə ðə wɪts fɹəm əɹ hɛd. baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi kəd ɡæðɝ ɪnʌf bɹɛθ tə pʊʃ ʌp ɑn əɹ hænz, ðə hjudʒ mæn wɑz stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əweɪ daʊn ði æli, ɔlmoʊs bæk tə ðə stʃɹit. ɪt wɑz ən æli, ə nɛɹoʊ tʃɹæk ə dɝt bɪtwin tu stoʊn bɪldɪŋz. noʊ wʌn wʊɾə sin wʌɾ i dɪd bæk hɪɹ. ʃɪvɝɪŋ  -  ʃi wɑz nɑt tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, dʒʌst ʃɪvɝɪŋ!  -  spɪɾɪŋ aʊt ðə teɪst ʌv ənwɑʃt wʊl ən nædʒɹɪks swɛt, ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɪz bæk. ɪf ðə naɪf ʃi hæd hɪɾən əweɪ hæd bɪn wɪðɪn ɹitʃ, ʃi wʊɾə stæb hɪm. nɑt pɹɪɾi ɪnʌf tə faɪɾ oʊvɝ, wɑz ʃi? pɑɹɾ ə hɝ nu ðət wɑz luɾəkɹəs, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɡɹæbɪŋ hoʊld ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ðət kəd fiɾ əɹ æŋɡɝ, dʒʌs fəɹ ðə wɔɹmθ ʌv ɪt. tə hɛlp əɹ stɑp ʃɪvɝɪŋ. ʃi wʊɾə stæbd ɪm ən stæb hɪm, əntɪl ʃi kəd nɑt lɪft əɹ ɑɹmz. ɡɛɾɪŋ ʌp ɑn lɛɡz ðət wɑbəld, ʃi ɪksplɔɹɾ əɹ tiθ wɪð əɹ tʌŋ. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl saʊnd, nʌθɪŋ bɹoʊkən əɹ mɪsɪŋ. hɝ feɪs hæd bɪn skɹeɪp baɪ ðə ɹʌf wʊl ə nædʒɹɪks koʊt, ən əɹ lɪps wɝ bɹuzd, bʌt ʃi wɑz ənhɝt. ʃi ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf ə ðæt. ʃi wɑz ənhɝt, ən fɹi tə wɔk aʊɾ ə ði æli. əz fɹi əz ɛniwʌn ɪn ɡeɪʃeɪn ɹoʊbz kəd bi, ɛniweɪ. ɪf ðəɹ wɝ mɛni laɪk nædʒɹɪk u noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sɔ ðə pɹətɛkʃən ə ðoʊz ɹoʊbz, ðən ɔɹɾɝ wɑz bɹeɪkɪŋ daʊn əmʌŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ. ðə kæmp wəd bi ə mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs pleɪs, bʌt dɪsɔɹɾɝ wəd bɹɪŋ mɔɹ ɑpɝtunəɾiz fəɹ ɪskeɪp. ðət wɑz haʊ ʃi hæd tə lʊk ət ðɪs. ʃi hæd lɝn sʌmθɪŋ ðət kəɾ eɪd hɝ. ɪf oʊnli ʃi kəd stɑp ʃɪvɝɪŋ.

His hands fell away from her, and Faile's teeth ripped loose from his coat so suddenly she thought one or two might be jerked out, but the ground smashed into her back and all of the air rushed out of her lungs along with most of the wits from her head. By the time she could gather enough breath to push up on her hands, the huge man was striding away down the alley, almost back to the street. It was an alley, a narrow track of dirt between two stone buildings. No one would have seen what he did back here. Shivering  -  she was not trembling, just shivering!  -  spitting out the taste of unwashed wool and Nadric's sweat, she glared at his back. If the knife she had hidden away had been within reach, she would have stabbed him. Not pretty enough to fight over, was she? Part of her knew that was ludicrous, but she was grabbing hold of anything that could feed her anger, just for the warmth of it. To help her stop shivering. She would have stabbed him and stabbed him, until she could not lift her arms. Getting up on legs that wobbled, she explored her teeth with her tongue. They were all sound, nothing broken or missing. Her face had been scraped by the rough wool of Nadric's coat, and her lips were bruised, but she was unhurt. She reminded herself of that. She was unhurt, and free to walk out of the alley. As free as anyone in gai'shain robes could be, anyway. If there were many like Nadric who no longer saw the protection of those robes, then order was breaking down among the Shaido. The camp would be a more dangerous place, but disorder would bring more opportunities for escape. That was how she had to look at this. She had learned something that could aid her. If only she could stop shivering.

ət læst, ɹɪlʌktənli, ʃi lʊkt əɾ əɹ ɹɛskjuɝ. ʃi hæd ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɪz vɔɪs. hi stʊd wɛl bæk fɹəm hɝ, wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ kɑmli, meɪkɪŋ noʊ muv tə ɔfɝ sɪmpəθi. ʃi θɔt ʃi wʊɾə skɹimd ɪf i tʌtʃt hɝ. ənʌðɝ əbsɝɾəti, sɪns i hæd ɹɛskjud hɝ, bʌɾ ə fækt ɔl ðə seɪm. ɹoʊlən wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə hænd ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən nædʒɹɪk, ən ɔlmoʊst əz waɪd, ən ʃi hæd ɹizən tə wɑnə stæb hɪm, tu. hi wɑz nɑt ʃeɪɾoʊ, bʌt wʌn ə ðə bɹʌðɝləs, ðə mɛɝeɪɾɪn, mɛn u hæd lɛf ðɛɹ klænz kəz ðeɪ wəd nɑt fɑloʊ ɹænd ælθɹ, ən i hæɾ ɪndid bɪn ðə wʌn tə "meɪk əɹ ɡeɪʃeɪn." tʃɹu, hi hæd kɛpt əɹ fɹəm fɹizɪŋ tə dɛθ ðə naɪɾ æftɝ ʃi wɑz kæptʃɝd baɪ ɹæpɪŋ əɹ ɪn ɪz oʊn koʊt, jɛt ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv niɾəd ðə kʌvɝɪŋ ɪf i hæd nɑt kʌɾ ɔf ɛvɹi læst stɪtʃ ə hɝ kloʊðɪŋ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. ðə fɝs pɑɹɾ ə biɪŋ meɪd ɡeɪʃeɪn wɑz ɔlweɪz biɪŋ stʃɹɪpt, bʌt ðət wɑz noʊ ɹizən tə fɝɡɪv ɪm fəɹ ɛni ʌv ɪt.

At last, reluctantly, she looked at her rescuer. She had recognized his voice. He stood well back from her, watching her calmly, making no move to offer sympathy. She thought she would have screamed if he touched her. Another absurdity, since he had rescued her, but a fact all the same. Rolan was no more than a hand shorter than Nadric, and almost as wide, and she had reason to want to stab him, too. He was not Shaido, but one of the Brotherless, the Mera'din, men who had left their clans because they would not follow Rand al'Thor, and he had indeed been the one to "make her gai'shain." True, he had kept her from freezing to death the night after she was captured by wrapping her in his own coat, yet she would not have needed the covering if he had not cut off every last stitch of her clothing in the first place. The first part of being made gai'shain was always being stripped, but that was no reason to forgive him for any of it.

"θæŋk ju," ʃi sɛd, ðə wɝdz saʊɝ ɑn əɹ tʌŋ. "aɪ də nɑɾ æsk fəɹ ɡɹæɾətud," hi sɛd maɪldli.

"Thank you," she said, the words sour on her tongue. "I do not ask for gratitude," he said mildly.

"du nɑt lʊk ət mi əz ðoʊ jə wɑnə baɪt mi dʒʌs kəz jə kəd nɑt baɪt nædʒɹɪk." ʃi mænədʒ nɑt tə snɑɹl əɾ ɪm - bɛɹli; ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv sʌmən miknəs ɹaɪt ðən hæd ʃi wɑntəd tə - bɪfɔɹ ʃi tɝn əweɪ ən stɔk bæk aʊt tə ðə stʃɹit. wɛl, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə stɔk. hɝ lɛɡz wɝ stɪl ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪnʌf ðəɾ ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ʌv ə lɝtʃ. ðə pæsɪŋ ɡeɪʃeɪn bɛɹli ɡlænst ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən əz ðeɪ tʃɹʌdʒd əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹit wɪð ðɛɹ wɔɾɝ bʌkəts. fju ʌv ðə kæptɪvz wɑntəd tə ʃɛɹ ɛniwʌn ɛlsəz tʃɹʌbəlz. ðeɪ hæɾ ɪnʌf ə ðɛɹ oʊn.

"Do not look at me as though you want to bite me just because you could not bite Nadric." She managed not to snarl at him - barely; she could not have summoned meekness right then had she wanted to - before she turned away and stalked back out to the street. Well, she tried to stalk. Her legs were still shaking enough that it was more of a lurch. The passing gai'shain barely glanced in her direction as they trudged along the street with their water buckets. Few of the captives wanted to share anyone else's troubles. They had enough of their own.

ɹitʃɪŋ ðə lɔnʒɹi bæskət, ʃi ɡeɪv ə saɪ. ɪt leɪ ɑn ɪts saɪd, waɪt sɪlk blaʊsəz ən dɑɹk sɪlk skɝts dɪvaɪɾəd fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ spɪld aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə dɝɾi æʃ-smɪɹd peɪvmənt. ət list ɪt sim noʊ wʌn hæd tʃɹɑɾən ɑn ðɛm. ɛniwʌn u hæd bɪn kæɹiɪŋ wɔɾɝ ɔl mɔɹnɪŋ, ən hæɾ ə deɪ ʌv ɪt tə lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə, cʊɾə bɪn fɝɡɪvən ɪf ðeɪ feɪl tə stɛp əsaɪd, wɪð bɪts ə kloʊðɪŋ laɪɪŋ ɔl ɝaʊn ðət hæd bɪn kʌɾ ɔf ðə pipəl ə meɪɾən u hæd bɪn meɪd ɡeɪʃeɪn. ʃi wʊɾə tʃɹaɪd tə fɝɡɪv ðɛm.

Reaching the laundry basket, she gave a sigh. It lay on its side, white silk blouses and dark silk skirts divided for riding spilled out over the dirty ash-smeared pavement. At least it seemed no one had trodden on them. Anyone who had been carrying water all morning, and had a day of it to look forward to, could have been forgiven if they failed to step aside, with bits of clothing lying all around that had been cut off the people of Maiden who had been made gai'shain. She would have tried to forgive them.

ɹaɪɾɪŋ ðə bæskət, ʃi bɪɡæn ɡæðɝɪŋ ðə kloʊðz, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɔf ðə dɝɾ ən æʃ ðət wəd kʌm lus ən kɛɹfəl nɑt tə ɡɹaɪn ɪn ðə ɹɛst. ənlaɪk sʌmɛɝɪn, sɪvænə hæd teɪkən tə sɪlk. ʃi wɔɹ nʌθɪŋ ɛls.

Righting the basket, she began gathering the clothes, shaking off the dirt and ash that would come loose and careful not to grind in the rest. Unlike Someryn, Sevanna had taken to silk. She wore nothing else.

ʃi wɑz əz pɹaʊɾ ə hɝ sɪlks əz ʃi wɑz ə hɝ dʒuəlɹi, ən ikwəli pəzɛsɪv ə boʊθ. ʃi wəd nɑt bi plizd ɪf ɛni ʌv ðiz ɡɑɹməns feɪl tə bi ɹɪtɝn klin.

She was as proud of her silks as she was of her jewelry, and equally possessive of both. She would not be pleased if any of these garments failed to be returned clean.

əz feɪl leɪd ðə læs blaʊs ətɑp ðə ɹɛst, ɹoʊlən ɹitʃt pæst əɹ ən lɪftəd ðə bæskət wɪð wʌn hænd. ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə snæpɪŋ əɾ ɪm - ʃi kəd kæɹi hɝ oʊn bɝɾənz, θæŋk jə vɛɹi mʌtʃ! - ʃi swɑloʊd ðə wɝdz. hɝ bɹeɪn wɑz ði oʊnli ɹil wɛpən ʃi pəzɛst, ən ʃi hæd tə juz ɪɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə lɛɾɪŋ əɹ tɛmpɝ əv kəntʃɹoʊl. ɹoʊlən hæd nɑt bɪn hɪɹ baɪ tʃæns. ðət wɑz stʃɹeɪnɪŋ kɹɪduləɾi tu fɑɹ.

As Faile laid the last blouse atop the rest, Rolan reached past her and lifted the basket with one hand. On the brink of snapping at him - she could carry her own burdens, thank you very much! - she swallowed the words. Her brain was the only real weapon she possessed, and she had to use it instead of letting her temper have control. Rolan had not been here by chance. That was straining credulity too far.

ʃi hæd sin ɪm fɹikwənli sɪns ʃi wɑz kæptʃɝd, mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɔfən ðən tʃæns kəɾ əkaʊn fɔɹ.

She had seen him frequently since she was captured, much more often than chance could account for.

hi hæd bɪn fɑloʊɪŋ hɝ. wʌt wɑz ɪɾ i hæd toʊl nædʒɹɪk? hi hæd nɑt ɡɪvən əɹ tə sɪvænə əɹ ɔfɝd tə tʃɹeɪd hɝ. fəɹ ɔl ðəɾ i hæd bɪn ðə wʌn tə kæptʃɝ hɝ, ʃi θɔɾ i dɪsəpɹuvd ə meɪkɪŋ wɛtləndɝz ɡeɪʃeɪn  - moʊst ə ðə bɹʌðɝləs dɪd - bʌɾ əpɛɹənli hi stɪl kleɪmd ɪz ɹaɪts tə hɝ.

He had been following her. What was it he had told Nadric? He had not given her to Sevanna or offered to trade her. For all that he had been the one to capture her, she thought he disapproved of making wetlanders gai'shain  - most of the Brotherless did - but apparently he still claimed his rights to her.

ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi dɪd nɑt nid tə fɪɹ ɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɔɹs hɝ. ɹoʊlən hæd hæɾ ɪz tʃæns fəɹ ðæt, wən i hæɾ əɹ neɪkəɾ ən baʊnd, ən i cʊɾə bɪn lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə fɛns poʊs ðɛn. pɝhæps i dɪd nɑt laɪk wɪmən ɪn ðət weɪ. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðə bɹʌðɝləs wɝ ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ aʊtsaɪɾɝz əmʌŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ əz ðə wɛtləndɝz. nʌn ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ɹɪli tʃɹʌstɪd ðɛm, ən ðə bɹʌðɝləs ðɛmsɛlvz ɔfən sim laɪk mɛn hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ noʊzɪz, æksɛptɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ kənsɪɾɝd ə lɛsɝ ɹɔŋ ɹæðɝ ðən ɛmbɹeɪs ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ, bʌt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ tʃɹuli ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz lɛsɝ. ɪf ʃi kəd meɪk ə fɹɛn ə ðə mæn, pɝhæps i wəd bi wɪlɪŋ tə hɛlp hɝ. nɑt tə ɪskeɪp, sɝɾənli - ðət wəɾ æskɪŋ tu mʌtʃ - bʌt. . . .

She was sure she did not need to fear him trying to force her. Rolan had had his chance for that, when he had her naked and bound, and he could have been looking at a fence post then. Perhaps he did not like women in that way. In any case, the Brotherless were almost as much outsiders among the Shaido as the wetlanders. None of the Shaido really trusted them, and the Brotherless themselves often seemed like men holding their noses, accepting what they considered a lesser wrong rather than embrace a greater, but no longer truly sure that it was lesser. If she could make a friend of the man, perhaps he would be willing to help her. Not to escape, certainly - that would asking too much - but. . . .

əɹ wəɾ ɪt? ði oʊnli weɪ tə faɪn aʊt wɑz tə tʃɹaɪ. "θæŋk ju," ʃi sɛɾ əɡɛn, ən ðɪs taɪm ʃi wɝkt ʌp ə smaɪl. sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, hi smaɪl bæk. ə smɔl smaɪl, bɛɹli ðəɹ əɾ ɔl, bʌɾ il wɝ nɑt dɪmɑnstʃɹəɾɪv. ðeɪ kəd sim stoʊn-feɪs tɪl jə bɪkeɪm juz tə ðɛm.

Or would it? The only way to find out was to try. "Thank you," she said again, and this time she worked up a smile. Surprisingly, he smiled back. A small smile, barely there at all, but Aiel were not demonstrative. They could seem stone-faced till you became used to them.

fəɹ ə fju peɪsɪz ðeɪ wɔkt əlɔŋ saɪd baɪ saɪɾ ɪn saɪləns, hɪm kæɹiɪŋ ðə bæskəɾ ɪn wʌn hæn ən əɹ hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ðə skɝts ə hɝ ɹoʊbz. ðeɪ maɪɾ əv bɪn aʊt fəɹ ə stʃɹoʊl. ɪf jə skwɪntɪd. səm ə ðə pæsɪŋ ɡeɪʃeɪn lʊkt əɾ əm ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, bʌt ðeɪ ɔlweɪz pʊt ðɛɹ aɪz daʊn əɡɛn kwɪkli.

For a few paces they walked along side by side in silence, him carrying the basket in one hand and her holding up the skirts of her robes. They might have been out for a stroll. If you squinted. Some of the passing gai'shain looked at them in surprise, but they always put their eyes down again quickly.

ʃi kəd nɑt θɪŋk ə haʊ tə bɪɡɪn - ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn ɪm tə θɪŋk ʃi wɑz flɝɾɪŋ; hi maɪt laɪk wɪmən æftɝ ɔl - bʌɾ i tʊk əweɪ ðə nəsɛsəɾi.

She could not think of how to begin - she did not want him to think she was flirting; he might like women after all - but he took away the necessity.

"aɪ hæv wɑtʃt ju," hi sɛd. "ju ɑɹ stʃɹɔŋ ən fɪɹs, ən nɑɾ əfɹeɪd, aɪ θɪŋk. moʊst ə ðə wɛtləndɝz ɑɹ fɹaɪɾənd hæf aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ hɛdz. ðeɪ blʌstɝ əntɪl ðeɪ ɑɹ pʌnɪʃt, ən ðən ðeɪ wip ən kaʊɝ. aɪ θɪŋk jə ɑɹ ə wʊmən ə mʌtʃ dʒi." "aɪ æm fɹaɪɾənd," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd. "aɪ dʒʌs tʃɹaɪ nɑt lɛɾ ɪt ʃoʊ. kɹaɪɪŋ nɛvɝ dʌz ɛni ɡʊd." moʊs mɛn bɪliv ðæt. tɪɹz kəd ɡɛɾ ɪn jəɹ weɪ ɪf jə lɛt ðɛm, bʌɾ ə fju tɪɹz ʃɛɾ ət naɪt kəd hɛlp jə meɪk ɪt θɹu ðə nɛks deɪ.

"I have watched you," he said. "You are strong and fierce, and not afraid, I think. Most of the wetlanders are frightened half out of their heads. They bluster until they are punished, and then they weep and cower. I think you are a woman of much ji." "I am frightened," she replied. "I just try not let it show. Crying never does any good." Most men believed that. Tears could get in your way if you let them, but a few tears shed at night could help you make it through the next day.

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ taɪmz tə wip ən taɪmz tə læf. aɪ wəd laɪk tə si jə læf." ʃi dɪd læf, ə dʒɹaɪ læf. "ðɛɹz lɪɾəl ɹizən waɪl aɪ wɛɹ waɪt, ɹoʊlən." ʃi ɡlænst əɾ ɪm aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ. wɑz ʃi ɡoʊɪŋ tu fæst? bʌɾ i oʊnli nɑɾəd.

"There are times to weep and times to laugh. I would like to see you laugh." She did laugh, a dry laugh. "There's little reason while I wear white, Rolan." She glanced at him out of the corner of her eye. Was she going too fast? But he only nodded.

"stɪl, aɪ wəd laɪk tə si ɪt. smaɪlz sut jəɹ feɪs. læftɝ wəd suɾ ɪɾ ivən bɛɾɝ. aɪ hæv noʊ waɪf, bʌɾ aɪ kən meɪk ə wʊmən læf, səmtaɪmz. aɪ hæv hɝd juv ə hʌzbənd?" stɑɹɾəld, feɪl tʃɹɪpt oʊvɝ əɹ oʊn fiɾ ən kɑt hɝsɛlf ɑn ɪz ɑɹm. kwɪkli, ʃi snætʃt əɹ hæn əweɪ, stʌɾiɪŋ ɪm pæs ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ kaʊl. hi pɔz lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ əɹ tə stɛɾi hɝsɛlf, ðən wɔkt ɑn wən ʃi dɪd. hɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðən maɪldli kjʊɹiəs. dɪspaɪt nædʒɹɪk, il kʌstəm wɑz fəɹ ə wʊmən tə də ði æskɪŋ, æftɝ ə mæn ətʃɹæktəɾ əɹ ɪntʃɹəst. ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ ɡɪfs wɑz wʌn weɪ. meɪkɪŋ əɹ læf wɑz ənʌðɝ. soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ ɪz nɑt laɪkɪŋ wɪmən. "aɪ də hæv ə hʌzbənd, ɹoʊlən, ən aɪ lʌv ɪm vɛɹi mʌtʃ.

"Still, I would like to see it. Smiles suit your face. Laughter would suit it even better. I have no wife, but I can make a woman laugh, sometimes. I have heard you have a husband?" Startled, Faile tripped over her own feet and caught herself on his arm. Quickly, she snatched her hand away, studying him past the edge of her cowl. He paused long enough for her to steady herself, then walked on when she did. His expression was no more than mildly curious. Despite Nadric, Aiel custom was for a woman to do the asking, after a man attracted her interest. Giving her gifts was one way. Making her laugh was another. So much for his not liking women. "I do have a husband, Rolan, and I love him very much.

vɛɹi mʌtʃ. aɪ kænt weɪt tə ɹɪtɝn tə hɪm." "wʌt hæpənz waɪl jə ɑɹ ɡeɪʃeɪn kænɑt bi hɛld əɡɛns jə wən jə pʊɾ ɔf waɪt," hi sɛd kɑmli, "bʌt pɝhæps jə wɛtləndɝz də nɑt si ɪt ðət weɪ. stɪl, ɪt kən bi loʊnli wən jə ɑɹ ɡeɪʃeɪn. pɝhæps wi kən tɔk səmtaɪmz." ðə mæn wɑntəd tə si hɝ læf, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ tə læf əɹ kɹaɪ. hi wɑz ənaʊnsɪŋ ðəɾ i dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə ɡɪv ʌp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ətʃɹækt əɹ ɪntʃɹəst. il wɪmən ədmaɪɝd pɝsəvɪɹəns ɪn ə mæn. stɪl, ɪf kiæɾ ən beɪn wəd nɑt, kəd nɑt, hɛlp bɪɑnd ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ eɪɾ ɪn ɹitʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹiz, ɹoʊlən wɑz əɹ bɛs hoʊp. ʃi θɔt ʃi kəd kənvɪns hɪm, ɡɪvən taɪm. ʌv kɔɹs ʃi kʊd; feɪn hɑɹts nɛvɝ səksiɾəd! hi wɑz ə skɔɹn aʊtkæst, æksɛptɪɾ oʊnli kəz ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ niɾəd ɪz spɪɹ. bʌt ʃi wɑz gɑnə hæv tə ɡɪv ɪm ə ɹizən tə pɝsɪst.

Very much. I can't wait to return to him." "What happens while you are gai'shain cannot be held against you when you put off white," he said calmly, "but perhaps you wetlanders do not see it that way. Still, it can be lonely when you are gai'shain. Perhaps we can talk sometimes." The man wanted to see her laugh, and she did not know whether to laugh or cry. He was announcing that he did not intend to give up trying to attract her interest. Aiel women admired perseverance in a man. Still, if Chiad and Bain would not, could not, help beyond giving her aid in reaching the trees, Rolan was her best hope. She thought she could convince him, given time. Of course she could; faint hearts never succeeded! He was a scorned outcast, accepted only because the Shaido needed his spear. But she was going to have to give him a reason to persist.

"aɪ wəd laɪk ðæt," ʃi sɛd kɛɹfəli. ə lɪɾəl flɝɾɪŋ maɪt bi nɛsəsɛɹi æftɝ ɔl, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt ɡoʊ fɹəm tɛlɪŋ ɪm haʊ mʌtʃ ʃi lʌvd əɹ hʌzbən stʃɹeɪt tə waɪd-aɪɾ ən bɹɛθləs. nɑt ðət ʃi hæɾ ɛni ɪntɛntʃən ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ ðət fɑɹ - ʃi wɑz noʊ dəmɑni! - jɛt ʃi maɪt nid tə kʌm kloʊs. fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ, ə lɪɾəl ɹimaɪndɝ ðət sɪvænə hæd jusɝpt ɪz "ɹaɪt" wəd nɑt ɡoʊ əmɪs. "aɪ hæv wɝk tə də naʊ, ðoʊ, ən aɪ daʊt sɪvænə wəd bi plizd ɪf aɪ spɛn ðə taɪm tɔkɪŋ tə jə ɪnstɛd." ɹoʊlən nɑɾəd əɡɛn, ən feɪl saɪd. hi maɪt noʊ haʊ tə meɪk ə wʊmən læf, əz i kleɪmd, bʌɾ i sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt tɔk vɛɹi mʌtʃ. ʃi wɑz gɑnə hæv tə wɝk tə dʒɹɔ hɪm aʊɾ ɪf ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə ɡɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən dʒoʊks ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. ivən wɪð kiæɾ ən beɪnz hɛlp, il hjumɝ ɹɪmeɪn ɪŋkɑmpɹəhɛnsɪbəl tə hɝ.

"I would like that," she said carefully. A little flirting might be necessary after all, but she could not go from telling him how much she loved her husband straight to wide-eyed and breathless. Not that she had any intention of going that far - she was no Domani! - yet she might need to come close. For the time being, a little reminder that Sevanna had usurped his "right" would not go amiss. "I have work to do now, though, and I doubt Sevanna would be pleased if I spent the time talking to you instead." Rolan nodded again, and Faile sighed. He might know how to make a woman laugh, as he claimed, but he certainly did not talk very much. She was going to have to work to draw him out if she intended to get anything more than jokes she did not understand. Even with Chiad and Bain's help, Aiel humor remained incomprehensible to her.

ðeɪ hæd ɹitʃt ðə bɹɔd skwɛɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs ət ðə nɔɹθ ɛn ə ðə sɪɾi, ə taʊɝd mæs ʌv ɡɹeɪ stoʊn wɔlz ðət hæd pɹətɛktəɾ ɪts ɪnhæbəɾənts noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən ðə sɪɾi wɔlz. feɪl θɔt ʃi hæd sin ðə leɪɾi hu hæd ɹul meɪɾən ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ fəɹ twɛnti maɪlz ɝaʊnd, ə hænsəm dɪɡnəfaɪd wɪɾoʊ ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl jɪɹz, əmʌŋ ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn hɔlɪŋ wɔɾɝ. waɪt-klæd mɛn ən wɪmən kæɹiɪŋ bʌkəts kɹaʊɾəd ðə stoʊn-peɪv skwɛɹ. ət ði istɝn ɛn ə ðə skwɛɹ, wʌt lʊk laɪk ə sɛkʃən ə ðə sɪɾiz aʊɾɝ wɔl, ɡɹeɪ ən θɝɾi fit haɪ, wɑz æktʃəli  ðə wɔl ʌv ə hjudʒ sɪstɝn fɛd baɪ ən ækwədʌkt. fɔɹ pʌmps, itʃ wɝk baɪ ə pɛɹ ə mɛn, ɡʌʃt aʊt wɔɾɝ tə fɪl ðə bʌkəts, ə ɡʊd bɪt mɔɹ splæʃɪŋ tə ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ðən ðə wʊɾə əv dɛɹɾ əlaʊ ɪf ðeɪ hæd noʊn ɹoʊlən wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si. feɪl hæd kənsɪɾɝd kɹɔlɪŋ θɹu ðə tʌnəl-laɪk ækwədʌk tə ɪskeɪp, bʌt ðeɪ hæd noʊ weɪ tə kip ɛniθɪŋ dʒɹaɪ, ən wɛɹɛvɝ ɪt lɛɾ əm aʊt, ðeɪ wəd bi soʊkɪŋ wɛɾ ən mɔɹ laɪkli tə fɹiz tə dɛθ ðən meɪk ɪt mɔɹ ðən ə maɪl əɹ tu ɪn ðə snoʊ.

They had reached the broad square in front of the fortress at the north end of the city, a towered mass of gray stone walls that had protected its inhabitants no better than the city walls. Faile thought she had seen the lady who had ruled Maiden and everything for twenty miles around, a handsome dignified widow in her middle years, among the gai'shain hauling water. White-clad men and women carrying buckets crowded the stone-paved square. At the eastern end of the square, what looked like a section of the city's outer wall, gray and thirty feet high, was actually the wall of a huge cistern fed by an aqueduct. Four pumps, each worked by a pair of men, gushed out water to fill the buckets, a good bit more splashing to the paving stones than the men would have dared allow if they had known Rolan was close enough to see. Faile had considered crawling through the tunnel-like aqueduct to escape, but they had no way to keep anything dry, and wherever it let them out, they would be soaking wet and more likely to freeze to death than make it more than a mile or two in the snow.

ðəɹ wɝ tu ʌðɝ pleɪsəz ɪn ðə sɪɾi tə ɡɛt wɔɾɝ, boʊθ fɛd baɪ stoʊn kɑnduəts ʌndɝɡɹaʊnd, bʌt hɪɹ ə lɔŋ, laɪən-fʊɾɪd blækwʊd teɪbəl hæd bɪn pleɪst ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə sɪstɝn wɔl. wʌns ɪt hæd bɪn ə bæŋkəɾɪŋ teɪbəl, ðə tɑp ɪnleɪd wɪð aɪvɝi, bʌt ði aɪvɝi wɛdʒəz hæd bɪn pɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ən sɛvɹəl wʊɾən wɑʃtʌbz sæɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəltɑp naʊ. ə pɛɹ ʌv wʊɾən bʌkəts stʊd bɪsaɪd ðə teɪbəl, ən ət wʌn ɛn ə kɑpɝ kɛɾəl stimd oʊvɝ ə faɪɝ meɪd fɹəm bɹoʊkən-ʌp tʃɛɹz. feɪl daʊɾɪd ðət sɪvænə hæɾ əɹ lɔnʒɹi kæɹiɾ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi tə seɪv əɹ ɡeɪʃeɪn ðə leɪbɝ ə hɔlɪŋ wɔɾɝ aʊt tə ðə tɛns, bʌt wʌtɛvɝ ðə ɹizən, feɪl wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl. ə bæskəɾ ə lɔnʒɹi wɑz laɪɾɝ ðən fʊl wɔɾɝ bʌkəts. ʃi hæd kæɹiɾ ɪnʌf ə ðɛm tə noʊ. tu bæskəts stʊɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, bʌɾ oʊnli wʌn wʊmən wɛɹɪŋ ðə ɡoʊldən bɛlt ən kɑlɝ wɑz ət wɝk, ðə slivz ə hɝ waɪt ɹoʊb ɹoʊld ʌp əz haɪ əz ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ ən əɹ lɔŋ dɑɹk hɛɹ taɪd wɪð ə stʃɹɪp ʌv waɪt klɔθ tə kip ɪt fɹəm fɔlɪŋ ɪndə ðə wɑʃtʌbz wɔɾɝ.

There were two other places in the city to get water, both fed by stone conduits underground, but here a long, lion-footed blackwood table had been placed at the foot of the cistern wall. Once it had been a banqueting table, the top inlaid with ivory, but the ivory wedges had been pried out and several wooden washtubs sat on the tabletop now. A pair of wooden buckets stood beside the table, and at one end a copper kettle steamed over a fire made from broken-up chairs. Faile doubted that Sevanna had her laundry carried into the city to save her gai'shain the labor of hauling water out to the tents, but whatever the reason, Faile was grateful. A basket of laundry was lighter than full water buckets. She had carried enough of them to know. Two baskets stood on the table, but only one woman wearing the golden belt and collar was at work, the sleeves of her white robe rolled up as high as they would go and her long dark hair tied with a strip of white cloth to keep it from falling into the washtub's water.

wən æliændɝ sɔ feɪl əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ wɪð ɹoʊlən, ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd, dʒɹaɪɪŋ əɹ bɛɹ ɑɹmz ɑn əɹ ɹoʊb. æliændɝ mɛɹɪðə kɪɡɑɝɪn, kwin ʌv ɡildən, blɛsɪɾ ə ðə laɪt, dɪfɛndɝ ʌv ɡæɹənz wɔl ən ə dʌzən mɔɹ taɪɾəlz, hæd bɪn ən ɛləɡənt, ɹɪzɝvd wʊmən, pɔɪzd ən steɪtli. æliændɝ ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn wɑz stɪl pɹɪɾi, bʌt ʃi wɔɹ ə pɝpɛtʃuəli hɛɹiɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən. wɪð dæmp pætʃəz ɑn əɹ ɹoʊbz ən əɹ hænz ɹɪŋkəl fɹəm lɔŋ ɪmɝʒən ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ, ʃi cʊɾə pæs fəɹ ə pɹɪɾi wɑʃɝwʊmən. wɑtʃɪŋ ɹoʊlən sɛt daʊn ðə bæskəɾ ən smaɪl ət feɪl bɪfɔɹ stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əweɪ, wɑtʃɪŋ feɪl ɹɪtɝn ðə smaɪl, ʃi ɹeɪzd ə kwɪtsɪkəl aɪbɹaʊ. "hiz ðə wʌn u kæptʃɝd mi," feɪl sɛd, sɛɾɪŋ pisəz ə kloʊðɪŋ fɹəm ðə bæskəɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl. ivən hɪɹ əmʌŋ nʌn bʌt ɡeɪʃeɪn, ɪt wɑz bɛs tə tɔk waɪl wɝkɪŋ. "hiz wʌn ə ðə bɹʌðɝləs, ən aɪ θɪŋk i dʌzn ɹɪli əpɹuv ə meɪkɪŋ wɛtləndɝz ɡeɪʃeɪn. aɪ θɪŋk i meɪ hɛlp ʌs."

When Alliandre saw Faile approaching with Rolan, she straightened, drying her bare arms on her robe. Alliandre Maritha Kigarin, Queen of Ghealdan, Blessed of the Light, Defender of Garen's Wall and a dozen more titles, had been an elegant, reserved woman, poised and stately. Alliandre the gai'shain was still pretty, but she wore a perpetually harried expression. With damp patches on her robes and her hands wrinkled from long immersion in the water, she could have passed for a pretty washerwoman. Watching Rolan set down the basket and smile at Faile before striding away, watching Faile return the smile, she raised a quizzical eyebrow. "He's the one who captured me," Faile said, setting pieces of clothing from the basket on the table. Even here among none but gai'shain, it was best to talk while working. "He's one of the Brotherless, and I think he doesn't really approve of making wetlanders gai'shain. I think he may help us."

"aɪ si," æliændɝ sɛd. wɪð wʌn hænd ʃi bɹʌʃt dɛləkətli ət ðə bæk ə feɪlz ɹoʊb.

"I see," Alliandre said. With one hand she brushed delicately at the back of Faile's robe.

fɹaʊnɪŋ, feɪl twɪstəd tə lʊk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ðə dɝɾ ən æʃ ðət kʌvɝɾ əɹ bæk fɹəm ðə ʃoʊldɝz daʊn; ðən hit flʌɾəd əɹ feɪs. "aɪ fɛl," ʃi sɛd kwɪkli. ʃi kəd nɑt tɛl æliændɝ wʌt hæd hæpənd wɪð nædʒɹɪk. ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi kəd tɛl ɛniwʌn. "ɹoʊlən ɔfɝd tə kæɹi maɪ bæskət."

Frowning, Faile twisted to look over her shoulder. For a moment she stared at the dirt and ash that covered her back from the shoulders down; then heat flooded her face. "I fell," she said quickly. She could not tell Alliandre what had happened with Nadric. She did not think she could tell anyone. "Rolan offered to carry my basket."

æliændɝ ʃɹʌɡd. "ɪf i hɛlp mi ɪskeɪp, aɪ wəd mɛɹi hɪm. əɹ nɑt, əz i wɑntəd. hiz nɑt kwaɪt pɹɪɾi, bʌɾ ɪt wʊdn bi peɪnfəl, ən maɪ hʌzbənd, ɪf aɪ hæd wʌn, wəd nɛvɝ əv tə noʊ. ɪf i hæɾ ɛni sɛns, hi wəd bi oʊvɝdʒɔɪd tə hæv mi bæk ən æsk noʊ kwɛstʃənz i dɪdnt wɑnə hɪɹ ænsɝz tə." hænz taɪɾənɪŋ ɑn ə sɪlk blaʊs, feɪl ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ.

Alliandre shrugged. "If he helped me escape, I would marry him. Or not, as he wanted. He's not quite pretty, but it wouldn't be painful, and my husband, if I had one, would never have to know. If he had any sense, he would be overjoyed to have me back and ask no questions he didn't want to hear answers to." Hands tightening on a silk blouse, Faile gritted her teeth.

æliændɝ wɑz əɹ lidʒ wʊmən, θɹu pɛɹɪn, ən ʃi hɛl tə ðət wɛl ɪnʌf, ət list ɪnsəfɑɹ əz oʊbeɪɪŋ kəmænz, bʌt ðə neɪtʃɝ ə ðə ɹileɪʃənʃɪp hæd bɪkʌm stʃɹeɪnd. ðeɪ hæɾ əɡɹid ðət ðeɪ mʌs tʃɹaɪ tə θɪŋk laɪk sɝvəns, tʃɹaɪ tə bi sɝvəns, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ tə sɝvaɪv, jɛt ðət mɛn ðəɾ itʃ hæd sin ði ʌðɝ kɝtsiɪŋ ən skɝiɪŋ tə oʊbeɪ. sɪvænəz pʌnɪʃməns wɝ dɛlt aʊt baɪ ðə nɪɹəst ɡeɪʃeɪn tə hænd wən ʃi meɪɾ əɹ dɪsɪʒən, ən wʌns feɪl hæd bɪn ɔɹɾɝd tə swɪtʃ æliændɝ.

Alliandre was her liege woman, through Perrin, and she held to that well enough, at least insofar as obeying commands, but the nature of the relationship had become strained. They had agreed that they must try to think like servants, try to be servants, if they were to survive, yet that meant that each had seen the other curtsying and scurrying to obey. Sevanna's punishments were dealt out by the nearest gai'shain to hand when she made her decision, and once Faile had been ordered to switch Alliandre.

wɝs, æliændɝ hæd bɪn ɔɹɾɝd tə ɹɪtɝn ðə feɪvɝ twaɪs. hoʊldɪŋ bæk oʊnli mɛn ə teɪst ə ðə seɪm fəɹ jɝsɛlf plʌs ði ʌðɝ wʊmən hævɪŋ tə ɛndʒjʊɹ ə dʌbəl doʊs fɹəm sʌmwʌn u wəd nɑt spɛɹ əɹ ɑɹm. ɪt hæd tə meɪk ə dɪfɝəns wən jə hæd twaɪs meɪd jəɹ lidʒ-leɪɾi kɪk ən ʃɹik.

Worse, Alliandre had been ordered to return the favor twice. Holding back only meant a taste of the same for yourself plus the other woman having to endure a double dose from someone who would not spare her arm. It had to make a difference when you had twice made your liege-lady kick and shriek.

əbɹʌpli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət ðə blaʊs ʃi wɑz ɡɹɪpɪŋ wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz ðət hæd pɪkt ʌp ɛkstʃɹə dɝt wən ðə bæskət fɛl. lusənɪŋ əɹ ɡɹɪp, ʃi ɪɡzæmən ðə ɡɑɹmən æŋkʃəsli. ɪt dɪd nɑt sim ðət ʃi hæd ɡɹaʊn ðə dɝɾ ɪn. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ʃi fɛlt ɹɪlif, ən ðən ɪɹɪteɪʃən ət biɪŋ ɹɪlivd. ivən mɔɹ ɪɹəteɪɾɪŋ, ðə ɹɪlif dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ əweɪ.

Abruptly she realized that the blouse she was gripping was one of those that had picked up extra dirt when the basket fell. Loosening her grip, she examined the garment anxiously. It did not seem that she had ground the dirt in. For a moment, she felt relief, and then irritation at being relieved. Even more irritating, the relief did not go away.

"ɹɛlə ən lətʃəl ɪskeɪp θɹi deɪz əɡoʊ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs. "ðeɪ ʃəd bi wɛl əweɪ baɪ naʊ. wɛɹ ɪz meɪaɪɡdɪn?" ə wɝid fɹaʊn əpɪɹɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz feɪs. "ʃi ɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə snik ɪndə θɛɝɑvəz tɛnt. θɛɝɑvə pæst əs wɪð ə ɡɹup ʌv waɪz wʌnz, ən fɹəm wʌt wi oʊvɝhɝd, ðeɪ sim tə bi ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə mit wɪð sɪvænə. meɪaɪɡdɪn ʃʌvd əɹ bæskəɾ ət mi ən sɛd ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə tʃɹaɪ. aɪ θɪŋk. . . . aɪ θɪŋk ʃiz bɪkʌmɪŋ dɛspɹɪɾ ɪnʌf tə teɪk tu mɛni tʃænsəz," ʃi sɛd wɪð ə tʌtʃ ə hoʊpləsnəs ɪn əɹ oʊn vɔɪs. "ʃi ʃʊɾə bɪn hɪɹ baɪ naʊ." feɪl dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən lɛɾ ɪɾ aʊt sloʊli. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl bɪkʌmɪŋ dɛspɹɪt. ðeɪ hæd ɡæðɝd səplaɪz fəɹ ðɛɹ ɪskeɪp-naɪvz ən fud, buts ən mɛnz bɹitʃɪz ən koʊts ðət fɪt nɪɹ ɪnʌf, ɔl kɛɹfəli hɪɾən ɪn ðə wæɡənz; ðə waɪt ɹoʊbz wəd sɝv əz blæŋkəts, ən əz kloʊks tə haɪɾ əm ɪn ðə snoʊ - bʌt ðə tʃæns tə juz ɔl ðət pɹɛpɝeɪʃən sim noʊ kloʊsɝ naʊ ðən ðə deɪ ðeɪ wɝ kæptʃɝd. oʊnli tu wiks. twɛnti-tu deɪz tə bi ɪɡzækt. ðət ʃəɾ əv nɑt bɪn lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə tʃeɪnʒ ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt ðɛɹ pɹitɛns ə biɪŋ sɝvəns wɑz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ əm ɪn spaɪɾ ʌv ɔl ðeɪ kəd du. oʊnli tu wiks, ən ðeɪ faʊn ðɛmsɛlvz dʒʌmpɪŋ tə oʊbeɪ kəmænz wɪθaʊt θɔt, wɝiɪŋ oʊvɝ pʌnɪʃməns ən wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɝ plizɪŋ sɪvænə. ðə wɝst ʌv ɪt wɑz, ðeɪ kəd si ðɛmsɛlvz duɪŋ ðiz θɪŋz, nu səm pɑɹɾ ə ðɛm wɑz biɪŋ moʊldəɾ əɡɛns ðɛɹ wɪlz. fəɹ naʊ, ðeɪ kəd tɛl ðɛmsɛlvz ðeɪ wɝ dʒʌs duɪŋ wʌt wɑz niɾəd tə əvɔɪd səspɪʃən əntɪl ðeɪ kəɾ ɪskeɪp, jɛɾ ɛvɹi deɪ ðə ɹiækʃənz bɪkeɪm mɔɹ ɔɾəmætɪk. haʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ɪskeɪp wɑz ə peɪl dʒɹim dʒɹimd ɪn ðə naɪɾ æftɝ ə deɪ ʌv biɪŋ ə pɝfəkt ɡeɪʃeɪn ɪn θɔɾ əz wɛl əz did? noʊ wʌn hæd dɛɹɾ æsk ðət kwɛstʃən əlaʊd, soʊ fɑɹ, ən feɪl nu ðət ʃi hɝsɛlf tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk ɪt, bʌt ðə kwɛstʃən wɑz ɔlweɪz ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ kɑnʃəsnəs. ɪn ə weɪ, ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɪt livɪŋ. wən ɪt dɪd, wəɾ ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæv bɪn ænsɝd?

"Arrela and Lacile escaped three days ago," she said in a low voice. "They should be well away by now. Where is Maighdin?" A worried frown appeared on the other woman's face. "She is trying to sneak into Therava's tent. Therava passed us with a group of Wise Ones, and from what we overheard, they seemed to be on their way to meet with Sevanna. Maighdin shoved her basket at me and said she was going to try. I think. . . . I think she's becoming desperate enough to take too many chances," she said with a touch of hopelessness in her own voice. "She should have been here by now." Faile drew a deep breath and let it out slowly. They were all becoming desperate. They had gathered supplies for their escape-knives and food, boots and men's breeches and coats that fit near enough, all carefully hidden in the wagons; the white robes would serve as blankets, and as cloaks to hide them in the snow - but the chance to use all that preparation seemed no closer now than the day they were captured. Only two weeks. Twenty-two days to be exact. That should have not been long enough to change anything, but their pretense of being servants was changing them in spite of all they could do. Only two weeks, and they found themselves jumping to obey commands without thought, worrying over punishments and whether they were pleasing Sevanna. The worst of it was, they could see themselves doing these things, knew some part of them was being molded against their wills. For now, they could tell themselves they were just doing what was needed to avoid suspicion until they could escape, yet every day the reactions became more automatic. How long before escape was a pale dream dreamed in the night after a day of being a perfect gai'shain in thought as well as deed? No one had dared ask that question aloud, so far, and Faile knew that she herself tried not to think it, but the question was always on the edge of her consciousness. In a way, she was afraid of it leaving. When it did, would it already have been answered?

wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ʃi fɔɹs hɝsɛlf bæk fɹəm dɪspɑndənsi. ðət wɑz ðə sɛkən tʃɹæp, ən oʊnli wɪlpaʊɝ hɛld ɪɾ oʊpən. "meɪaɪɡdɪn noʊz ʃiz tə bi kɛɹfəl," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə fɝm vɔɪs. "ʃi wɪl bi hɪɹ sun, æliændɝ."

With an effort, she forced herself back from despondency. That was the second trap, and only willpower held it open. "Maighdin knows she has to be careful," she said in a firm voice. "She will be here soon, Alliandre."

"æn ɪf ʃiz kɑt?"

"And if she is caught?"

"ʃi woʊn bi!" feɪl sɛd ʃɑɹpli. ɪf ʃi wɑz. . . . noʊ. ʃi hæd tə θɪŋk ə vɪktɝi, nɑt dɪfit.

"She won't be!" Faile said sharply. If she was. . . . No. She had to think of victory, not defeat.

feɪn hɑɹts nɛvɝ wʌn. wɑʃɪŋ ðə sɪlk wɑz taɪm-kənsumɪŋ. ðə bʌkəts ʌv wɔɾɝ ðeɪ fɛtʃt fɹəm ðə sɪstɝn pʌmps wɝ aɪsi koʊld, bʌt hɑt wɔɾɝ skup fɹəm ðə kɑpɝ kɛɾəl bɹɔt ðə tɛmpɹətʃɝ ɪn ðə wɑʃtʌbz ʌp tə lukwɔɹm. jə kəd nɑt wɑʃ sɪlk ɪn hɑt wɔɾɝ. sɪŋkɪŋ jəɹ hænz ɪndə ðə wɑʃtʌbz fɛlt wʌndɝfəl ɪn ðə koʊld, bʌt jə ɔlweɪz hæd tə teɪk əm aʊɾ əɡɛn, ən ðən ðə koʊld wɑz twaɪs əz bɪɾɝ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ soʊp, nɑt ðət wɑz maɪld ɪnʌf ɛniweɪ, soʊ itʃ skɝɾ ən blaʊs hæd tə bi səbmɝst wʌn baɪ wʌn ən dɛləkətli skɹʌbd əɡɛnst ɪtsɛlf. ðən ɪt wɑz leɪɾ ɑn ə pis ə taʊəlɪŋ ən dʒɛnli ɹoʊld ʌp tə skwiz aʊɾ əz mʌtʃ wɔɾɝ əz pɑsəbəl. ðə dæmp ɡɑɹmənt wɑz dɪpt əɡɛn, ɪn ənʌðɝ wɑʃtʌb ðət wɑz fɪld wɪð ə mɪkstʃɝ ə vɪnəɡɝ ən wɔɾɝ - ðət ɹədus feɪɾɪŋ ən ɛnhæns ðə ɡlɔs ə ðə sɪlk - ðən ɹoʊld ʌp ɪn taʊəlɪŋ əɡɛn. ðə wɛt taʊəlɪŋ wɑz ɹʌŋ aʊt hɑɹɾ ən spɹɛɾ ɪn ðə sʌn tə dʒɹaɪ wɛɹɛvɝ ðəɹ wɑz ɹum, waɪl itʃ pis ə sɪlk wɑz hʌŋ ɑn ə hɔɹəzɑntəl poʊl, slʌŋ ɪn ðə ʃeɪɾ ʌv ə ɹʌf kænvəs pəvɪljən ɪɹɛktəɾ ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə skwɛɹ, ən smuð baɪ hæn tə ɹʌb aʊt ɹɪŋkəlz. wɪð lʌk, nʌθɪŋ wəd niɾ aɪɝnɪŋ. boʊθ ə ðɛm nu haʊ sɪlk hæd tə bi kɛɹd fɔɹ, bʌɾ aɪɝnɪŋ ɪt niɾəd ɪkspɪɹiəns niðɝ ə ðɛm hæd. nʌn ə sɪvænəz ɡeɪʃeɪn dɪd, nɑɾ ivən meɪaɪɡdɪn, ðoʊ ʃi hæd bɪn ə leɪɾiz meɪɾ ivən bɪfɔɹ ɛntɝɪŋ feɪlz sɝvəs, bʌt sɪvænə dɪd nɑɾ æksɛpt ɪkskjuzɪz. ɛvɹi taɪm feɪl əɹ æliændɝ wɛn tə hæŋ ənʌðɝ ɡɑɹmənt, ðeɪ tʃɛk ðoʊz ɔlɹɛɾi ðəɹ ən smuðd ɛni ðət sim tə niɾ ɪt.

Faint hearts never won. Washing the silk was time-consuming. The buckets of water they fetched from the cistern pumps were icy cold, but hot water scooped from the copper kettle brought the temperature in the washtubs up to lukewarm. You could not wash silk in hot water. Sinking your hands into the washtubs felt wonderful in the cold, but you always had to take them out again, and then the cold was twice as bitter. There was no soap, not that was mild enough anyway, so each skirt and blouse had to be submersed one by one and delicately scrubbed against itself. Then it was laid on a piece of toweling and gently rolled up to squeeze out as much water as possible. The damp garment was dipped again, in another washtub that was filled with a mixture of vinegar and water - that reduced fading and enhanced the gloss of the silk - then rolled up in toweling again. The wet toweling was wrung out hard and spread in the sun to dry wherever there was room, while each piece of silk was hung on a horizontal pole, slung in the shade of a rough canvas pavilion erected at the edge of the square, and smoothed by hand to rub out wrinkles. With luck, nothing would need ironing. Both of them knew how silk had to be cared for, but ironing it needed experience neither of them had. None of Sevanna's gai'shain did, not even Maighdin, though she had been a lady's maid even before entering Faile's service, but Sevanna did not accept excuses. Every time Faile or Alliandre went to hang another garment, they checked those already there and smoothed any that seemed to need it.

feɪl wɑz æɾɪŋ hɑt wɔɾɝ tə ə wɑʃtʌb wən æliændɝ sɛd bɪɾɝli, "hɪɹ kʌmz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Faile was adding hot water to a washtub when Alliandre said bitterly, "Here comes the Aes Sedai."

ɡəlinə wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, kəmplit wɪð ði eɪdʒləs feɪs ən ə ɡoʊldən ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝ, bʌt ʃi wɔɹ waɪt ɡeɪʃeɪn ɹoʊbz, tu - ɪn sɪlk əz θɪk əz ɛniwʌn ɛlsəz wʊl, noʊ lɛs! - əlɔŋ wɪð ə waɪd, ɪlæbɹət bɛlt ʌv ɡoʊld ən faɪɝdʒɹɑps ðət sɪntʃt əɹ weɪs taɪtli ən ə tɔl mætʃɪŋ kɑlɝ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk, dʒuəlz fɪt fəɹ ə mɑnɑɹk. ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən səmtaɪmz ɹoʊɾ aʊt fɹəm ðə kæmp əloʊn, bʌt ʃi ɔlweɪz ɹɪtɝnd, ən ʃi dʒʌmpt wən ɛni waɪz wʌn kɹʊkəɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ, ɪspɛʃli θɛɝɑvə, huz tɛnt ʃi ɔfən ʃɛɹd. ɪn ə weɪ, ðət læst wɑz ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɪst θɪŋ ʌv ɔl. ɡəlinə nu hu feɪl wɑz, nu hu hɝ hʌzbənd wɑz ən pɛɹɪnz kənɛkʃən tə ɹænd ælθɹ, ən ʃi θɹɛɾənd tə ɹɪvil ɪt tə sɪvænə ənlɛs feɪl ən əɹ fɹɛnz stoʊl sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm ðə vɛɹi tɛnt ʃi slɛpt ɪn. ðət wɑz ðə θɝd tʃɹæp laɪɪŋ ɪn weɪt fəɹ ðɛm. sɪvænə wɑz əbsɛst wɪð ælθɹ, ənseɪnli kənvɪns ðət ʃi kəd sʌmhaʊ mɛɹi hɪm, ən ɪf ʃi lɝn əbaʊt pɛɹɪn, feɪl wəd nɛvɝ bi əlaʊd fɑɹ ɪnʌf aʊɾ ə hɝ saɪt tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪskeɪp. ʃi wəd bi steɪkt aʊt laɪk ə ɡoʊt tə dʒɹɔ ə laɪən.

Galina was Aes Sedai, complete with the ageless face and a golden Great Serpent ring on her finger, but she wore white gai'shain robes, too - in silk as thick as anyone else's wool, no less! - along with a wide, elaborate belt of gold and firedrops that cinched her waist tightly and a tall matching collar around her neck, jewels fit for a monarch. She was Aes Sedai, and sometimes rode out from the camp alone, but she always returned, and she jumped when any Wise One crooked a finger, especially Therava, whose tent she often shared. In a way, that last was the strangest thing of all. Galina knew who Faile was, knew who her husband was and Perrin's connection to Rand al'Thor, and she threatened to reveal it to Sevanna unless Faile and her friends stole something from the very tent she slept in. That was the third trap lying in wait for them. Sevanna was obsessed with al'Thor, insanely convinced that she could somehow marry him, and if she learned about Perrin, Faile would never be allowed far enough out of her sight to think of escape. She would be staked out like a goat to draw a lion.

feɪl hæd sin ɡəlinə slɪŋkɪŋ ən kaʊɝɪŋ, bʌt naʊ ðə sɪstɝ ɡlaɪɾɪd θɹu ðə skwɛɹ laɪk ə kwin dɪsdeɪnɪŋ ðə ɹæbəl ɝaʊn hɝ, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ðə hɪlt. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ waɪz wʌnz hɪɹ fəɹ əɹ sɪmpɝ æt. ɡəlinə wɑz pɹɪɾi, bʌt noʊwɛɹ nɪɹ bjuɾəfəl, ən feɪl dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd wʌt θɛɝɑvə sɔ ɪn hɝ, ənlɛs ɪt wɑz sɪmpli ðə plɛʒɝ ə dɑməneɪɾɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðət stɪl lɛf ðə kwɛstʃən ʌv waɪ ðə wʊmən ɹɪmeɪnd wən θɛɝɑvə sim tə teɪk ɛvɹi ɑpɝtunəɾi tə hjumɪlieɪt hɝ.

Faile had seen Galina slinking and cowering, but now the sister glided through the square like a queen disdaining the rabble around her, an Aes Sedai to the hilt. There were no Wise Ones here for her simper at. Galina was pretty, but nowhere near beautiful, and Faile did not understand what Therava saw in her, unless it was simply the pleasure of dominating an Aes Sedai. That still left the question of why the woman remained when Therava seemed to take every opportunity to humiliate her.

stɑpɪŋ ə peɪs fɹəm ðə teɪbəl, ɡəlinə sɝveɪɾ əm wɪð ə smɔl smaɪl ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn kɔl pɪɾiɪŋ. "ju ɑɹ nɑt pɹəɡɹɛsɪŋ vɛɹi fɑɹ ɪn jəɹ wɝk," ʃi sɛd. ʃi wɑz nɑt spikɪŋ ə ðə lɔnʒɹi.

Stopping a pace from the table, Galina surveyed them with a small smile that might have been called pitying. "You are not progressing very far in your work," she said. She was not speaking of the laundry.

ɪt wɑz feɪlz pleɪs tə də ðə tɔkɪŋ, bʌɾ æliændɝ spoʊk ʌp, ivən mɔɹ bɪɾɝli ðən bɪfɔɹ.

It was Faile's place to do the talking, but Alliandre spoke up, even more bitterly than before.

"meɪaɪɡdɪn wɛn tə fɛtʃ jəɹ aɪvɝi ɹɑd ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ɡəlinə. wən wɪl wi si səm ə ðə hɛlp jə pɹɑməst?" hɛlp ɪn ðɛɹ ɪskeɪp wɑz ðə kæɹət ɡəlinə ɔfɝɾ əlɔŋ wɪð ðə stɪk ə θɹɛɾənɪŋ feɪlz ɪkspoʊʒɝ. soʊ fɑɹ, haʊɛvɝ, ðeɪ hæd sin oʊnli ðə stɪk.

"Maighdin went to fetch your ivory rod this morning, Galina. When will we see some of the help you promised?" Help in their escape was the carrot Galina offered along with the stick of threatening Faile's exposure. So far, however, they had seen only the stick.

"ʃi wɛn tə θɛɝɑvəz tɛn ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ?" ɡəlinə wɪspɝd, ðə blʌd dʒɹeɪnɪŋ fɹəm əɹ feɪs.

"She went to Therava's tent this morning?" Galina whispered, the blood draining from her face.

ɪt dɔn ɑn feɪl ðət ðə sʌn wɑz hæfweɪ daʊn tə ðə hɝaɪzən ɪn ðə wɛst, ən əɹ hɑɹt bɪɡæn tə θʌd peɪnfəli. meɪaɪɡdɪn ʃʊɾə dʒɔɪn əm lɔŋ sɪns.

It dawned on Faile that the sun was halfway down to the horizon in the west, and her heart began to thud painfully. Maighdin should have joined them long since.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ simd ivən mɔɹ ʃeɪkən ðən ʃi. "ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ?" ɡəlinə ɹɪpiɾɪd, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən ə kɹaɪ wən meɪaɪɡdɪn sʌɾənli əpɪɹɾ aʊɾ ə ðə θɹɔŋ ʌv ɡeɪʃeɪn kɹaʊɾɪŋ ðə skwɛɹ.

The Aes Sedai seemed even more shaken than she. "This morning?" Galina repeated, looking over her shoulder. She gave a start and a cry when Maighdin suddenly appeared out of the throng of gai'shain crowding the square.

ənlaɪk æliændɝ, ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən hæd ɡɹoʊn tʌfɝ baɪ ðə deɪ sɪns ðɛɹ kæptʃɝ.

Unlike Alliandre, the golden-haired woman had grown tougher by the day since their capture.

ʃi wɑz noʊ lɛs dɛspɹɪt, bʌt ʃi sim tə foʊkəs ɪɾ ɔl ɪndə dɪtɝməneɪʃən. ʃi ɔlweɪz hæɾ ə pɹɛzəns ðət bɪlɔŋ mɔɹ tə ə kwin ðən ə leɪɾiz meɪd, ðoʊ moʊs leɪɾiz meɪdz hæɾ ɪt, bʌt naʊ ʃi stʌmbəl pæs ðɛm, dʌleɪd, ən plʌnʒd əɹ hænz ɪndə ə wɔɾɝ bʌkət, kʌpɪŋ ə dʌbəl hændfʊl tə hɝ maʊθ tə dʒɹɪŋk θɝstəli, ðən skɹʌbɪŋ ðə bæk ʌv ə hæn əkɹɔs əɹ maʊθ.

She was no less desperate, but she seemed to focus it all into determination. She always had a presence that belonged more to a queen than a lady's maid, though most lady's maids had it, but now she stumbled past them, dulleyed, and plunged her hands into a water bucket, cupping a double handful to her mouth to drink thirstily, then scrubbing the back of a hand across her mouth.

"aɪ wɑnə kɪl θɛɝɑvə wən wi ɡoʊ," ʃi sɛd θɪkli. "aɪ wəd laɪk tə kɪl əɹ naʊ." hɝ blu aɪz tʊk ɑn laɪf əɡɛn, ən hit. "jɔɹ seɪf, ɡəlinə. ʃi θɔɾ aɪ wɑz ðəɹ tə stil. aɪ hædn stɑɹɾəd lʊkɪŋ. sʌmθɪŋ. . . . sʌmθɪŋ hæpənd, ən ʃi lɛft. æftɝ taɪɪŋ mi ʌp. fəɹ leɪɾɝ." ðə hit feɪɾəd fɹəm əɹ ɡeɪz tə bi ɹipleɪs baɪ pʌzəlmənt. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt, ɡəlinə? ivən aɪ fil ɪt, ən aɪ hæv soʊ lɪɾəl əbɪləɾi ðiz il wɪmən dɪsaɪɾɪd aɪ wɑz noʊ deɪnʒɝ."

"I want to kill Therava when we go," she said thickly. "I would like to kill her now." Her blue eyes took on life again, and heat. "You're safe, Galina. She thought I was there to steal. I hadn't started looking. Something. . . . Something happened, and she left. After tying me up. For later." The heat faded from her gaze to be replaced by puzzlement. "What is it, Galina? Even I feel it, and I have so little ability these Aiel women decided I was no danger."

meɪaɪɡdɪn kəd tʃænəl. nɑt ɹɪlaɪəbli, ðoʊ ən nɑt vɛɹi mʌtʃ - fɹəm wʌt lɪɾəl feɪl nu, ðə waɪt taʊɝ wʊɾə sɛn əɹ əweɪ ɪn ə mæɾɝ ʌv wiks, ən ʃi kleɪm nɛvɝ tə hæv ɡɔn -  soʊ hɝ əbɪləɾi wəd nɑt bi ʌv mʌtʃ jus ɪn eɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ ɪskeɪp. feɪl wʊɾə æskt wʌt ʃi wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ ɡɑt ðə tʃæns.

Maighdin could channel. Not reliably, though and not very much - from what little Faile knew, the White Tower would have sent her away in a matter of weeks, and she claimed never to have gone -  so her ability would not be of much use in aiding their escape. Faile would have asked what she was talking about, but she never got the chance.

ɡəlinəz feɪs wɑz stɪl peɪl, bʌɾ ʌðɝwaɪz ʃi wɑz ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ kɑm. ɪksɛp ðət ʃi sizd ə hændfʊl ə meɪaɪɡdɪnz kaʊl ən ðə hɛɹ bɪniθ ən ɹɛntʃt əɹ hɛd bæk. "nɛvɝ jə maɪnd wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz," ʃi sɛd kuli. "nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ju. ɔl jə nid wɝi əbaʊɾ ɪz ɡɛɾɪŋ mi wʌɾ aɪ wɑnt. bʌt jə ʃəd wɝi əbaʊt ðət vɛɹi hɑɹd."

Galina's face was still pale, but otherwise she was all Aes Sedai calm. Except that she seized a handful of Maighdin's cowl and the hair beneath and wrenched her head back. "Never you mind what it is," she said coolly. "Nothing to do with you. All you need worry about is getting me what I want. But you should worry about that very hard."

bɪfɔɹ feɪl kəd muv tə dɪfɛn meɪaɪɡdɪn, ənʌðɝ wʊmən wɛɹɪŋ ðə waɪd ɡoʊldən bɛlt oʊvɝ əɹ waɪt ɹoʊbz wɑz ðɛɹ, pʊlɪŋ ɡəlinə əweɪ ən slɪŋɪŋ əɹ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. plʌmp ən pleɪn, ɝɑvin hæd bɪn wɪɹi-aɪɾ ən ɹɪzaɪn ðə fɝs taɪm feɪl sɔ hɝ, ðə deɪ ði ɑmɑdɪʃən wʊmən hændəɾ əɹ ðə ɡoʊldən bɛlt ʃi wɔɹ ən toʊld əɹ ʃi wɑz naʊ ɪn ðə sɝvəs ʌv "ðə leɪɾi sɪvænə." ði ɪntɝvinɪŋ deɪz hæd stɪfən ɝɑvin ivən mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ hæd meɪaɪɡdɪn, ðoʊ.

Before Faile could move to defend Maighdin, another woman wearing the wide golden belt over her white robes was there, pulling Galina away and slinging her to the ground. Plump and plain, Aravine had been weary-eyed and resigned the first time Faile saw her, the day the Amadician woman handed her the golden belt she wore and told her she was now in the service of "the Lady Sevanna." The intervening days had stiffened Aravine even more than they had Maighdin, though.

"ɑɹ jə mæd, tə leɪ hænz ɑn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ɡəlinə snæpt, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə hɝ fit. bɹʌʃɪŋ ət ðə dɝt steɪnɪŋ əɹ sɪlk ɹoʊbz, ʃi dɝɛktəɾ ɔl əɹ fjʊɹi ət ðə plʌmp wʊmən. "aɪ wɪl əv jə - "

"Are you mad, to lay hands on an Aes Sedai?" Galina snapped, struggling to her feet. Brushing at the dirt staining her silk robes, she directed all her fury at the plump woman. "I will have you - "

"ʃæl aɪ tɛl θɛɝɑvə jə wɝ mænhænlɪŋ wʌn ə sɪvænəz ɡeɪʃeɪn?" ɝɑvin bɹoʊk ɪn koʊldli. hɝ æksɛns wɝ kʌltʃɝd. ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn ə mɝtʃən ə səm noʊt, əɹ pɝhæps ivən ə noʊbəl, bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ spoʊk ʌv wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn bɪfɔɹ pʊɾɪŋ ɑn waɪt. "ðə læs taɪm θɛɝɑvə θɔt jud poʊk jəɹ noʊz wɛɹ ʃi dɪdnt wɑn ɪt, ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪnsaɪɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz kəd hɪɹ jə skwilɪŋ ən bɛɡɪŋ."

"Shall I tell Therava you were manhandling one of Sevanna's gai'shain?" Aravine broke in coldly. Her accents were cultured. She might have been a merchant of some note, or perhaps even a noble, but she never spoke of what she had been before putting on white. "The last time Therava thought you'd poked your nose where she didn't want it, everybody inside a hundred paces could hear you squealing and begging."

ɡəlinə æktʃəli  kwɪvɝd wɪð ɹeɪdʒ, ðə fɝs taɪm feɪl hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ən ɛɛs sədaɪ soʊ aʊtdʌn.

Galina actually quivered with rage, the first time Faile had ever seen an Aes Sedai so outdone.

wɪð ə vɪzəbəl ɛfɝt, ʃi ɡeɪn kəntʃɹoʊl ə hɝsɛlf. dʒʌst. hɝ vɔɪs dʒɹɪpt æsəd. "ɛɛs sədaɪ də wʌt wi də fəɹ əɹ oʊn ɹizənz, ɝɑvin, ɹizənz jə kəd nɑt pɑsəbli ʌndɝstænd. jəl ɹəɡɹɛɾ ɪnkɝɪŋ ðɪs dɛt wən aɪ dɪsaɪd tə kəlɛk peɪmənt. jəl ɹəɡɹɛɾ ɪt tə jəɹ hɑɹt." ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ ɹoʊbz ə læs bɹʌʃ, ʃi stɔkt əweɪ, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðə kwin dɪsdeɪnɪŋ ɹæbəl bʌɾ ə lɛpɝd dɛɹɪŋ ʃip tə blɑk əɹ pæθ.

With a visible effort, she gained control of herself. Just. Her voice dripped acid. "Aes Sedai do what we do for our own reasons, Aravine, reasons you could not possibly understand. You will regret incurring this debt when I decide to collect payment. You will regret it to your heart." Giving her robes a last brush, she stalked away, no longer the queen disdaining rabble but a leopard daring sheep to block her path.

wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ ɡoʊ, ɝɑvin simd ʌnɪmpɹɛst, ən ʌnɪnklaɪn tə tʃæt. "sɪvænə wɑns ju, feɪl" wɑz ɔl ʃi sɛd.

Watching her go, Aravine seemed unimpressed, and uninclined to chat. "Sevanna wants you, Faile" was all she said.

feɪl dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə æsk waɪ. ʃi dʒʌs dʒɹaɪɾ əɹ hænz, ɹoʊl daʊn əɹ slivz, ən fɑloʊd ði ɑmɑdɪʃən wʊmən, æftɝ pɹɑməsɪŋ æliændɝ ən meɪaɪɡdɪn tə ɹɪtɝn əz sun əz ʃi kʊd. sɪvænə wɑz fæsəneɪɾəd wɪð ðə θɹi ʌv ðɛm. meɪaɪɡdɪn, ði oʊnli tʃɹu leɪɾiz meɪɾ əmʌŋ əɹ ɡeɪʃeɪn, sim tə ɪntʃɹəst əɹ əz mʌtʃ əz kwin æliændɝ, ən feɪl hɝsɛlf, ə wʊmən paʊɝfəl ɪnʌf tə hæv ə kwin əz əɹ lidʒ wʊmən, ən səmtaɪmz ʃi sʌmənd wʌn ə ðɛm baɪ neɪm tə hɛlp əɹ tʃeɪnʒ kloʊðz əɹ beɪð ɪn ðə lɑɹdʒ kɑpɝ bæθtəb ðət ʃi juz mɔɹ ɔfən ðən ðə swɛt tɛnt, əɹ dʒʌs tə pɔɹ əɹ waɪn.

Faile did not bother to ask why. She just dried her hands, rolled down her sleeves, and followed the Amadician woman, after promising Alliandre and Maighdin to return as soon as she could. Sevanna was fascinated with the three of them. Maighdin, the only true lady's maid among her gai'shain, seemed to interest her as much as Queen Alliandre, and Faile herself, a woman powerful enough to have a queen as her liege woman, and sometimes she summoned one of them by name to help her change clothes or bathe in the large copper bathtub that she used more often than the sweat tent, or just to pour her wine.

ðə ɹɛst ə ðə taɪm ðeɪ wɝ ɡɪvən ðə seɪm tʃɔɹz əz əɹ ʌðɝ sɝvəns, bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ æskt wɛðɝ ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn əsaɪnd wɝk əɹ lɛɾ əm ɔf kəz ʌv ɪt. wʌtɛvɝ sɪvænə wɑntəd, feɪl nu ʃi stɪl wəd bi hɛld əkaʊntəbəl fəɹ ðə lɔnʒɹi əlɔŋ wɪð ði ʌðɝ tu. sɪvænə wɑntəd wʌt ʃi wɑntəd wən ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪt, ən ʃi dɪd nɑɾ æksɛpt ɪkskjusɪz.

The rest of the time they were given the same chores as her other servants, but she never asked whether they had already been assigned work or let them off because of it. Whatever Sevanna wanted, Faile knew she still would be held accountable for the laundry along with the other two. Sevanna wanted what she wanted when she wanted it, and she did not accept excuses.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ feɪl tə bi ʃoʊn ðə weɪ tə sɪvænəz tɛnt, bʌɾ ɝɑvin lɛd ðə weɪ θɹu ðə θɹɔŋ ʌv wɔɾɝ kæɹiɝz əntɪl ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə fɝs loʊ il tɛns, ən ðən ʃi pɔɪntəɾ ɪn ði ɑpəzət dɝɛkʃən tə sɪvænəz tɛn ən sɛd, "ðɪs weɪ, fɝst." feɪl stɑpt wɛɹ ʃi stʊd.

There was no need for Faile to be shown the way to Sevanna's tent, but Aravine led the way through the throng of water carriers until they reached the first low Aiel tents, and then she pointed in the opposite direction to Sevanna's tent and said, "This way, first." Faile stopped where she stood.

"waɪ?" ʃi æsk səspɪʃəsli. ðəɹ wɝ æktʃəli  mɛn ən wɪmən əmʌŋ sɪvænəz sɝvəns u wɝ dʒɛləs ə ði ətɛnʃənz ʃi ɡeɪv feɪl, æliændɝ ən meɪaɪɡdɪn, ən ðoʊ feɪl hæd nɛvɝ dɪtɛktəd ðəɾ ɪn ɝɑvin, səm ə ðə ɹɛs maɪt wɛl tʃɹaɪ tə ɡɛɾ əm ɪn tʃɹʌbəl baɪ pæsɪŋ ɑn fɔls ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz.

"Why?" she asked suspiciously. There were actually men and women among Sevanna's servants who were jealous of the attentions she gave Faile, Alliandre and Maighdin, and though Faile had never detected that in Aravine, some of the rest might well try to get them in trouble by passing on false instructions.

"ju wɪl wɑnə si ðɪs bɪfɔɹ jə si sɪvænə. bɪliv mi." feɪl oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə dɪmæn mɔɹ ɛkspləneɪʃən, bʌɾ ɝɑvin sɪmpli tɝn ən wɔkt əweɪ. feɪl ɡæðɝɾ ʌp ðə skɝts ə hɝ ɹoʊbz ən fɑloʊd.

"You will want to see this before you see Sevanna. Believe me." Faile opened her mouth to demand more explanation, but Aravine simply turned and walked away. Faile gathered up the skirts of her robes and followed.

ɔl sɔɹts ən saɪzəz ə kɑɹts ən wæɡənz stʊɾ əmʌŋ ðə tɛns, ðɛɹ wilz ɹipleɪs baɪ slɛdz.

All sorts and sizes of carts and wagons stood among the tents, their wheels replaced by sleds.

moʊst wɝ paɪl haɪ wɪð bʌndəlz ən wʊɾən kɹeɪts ən bæɹəlz, wɪð ðə wilz taɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə ðə loʊdz, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə fɑloʊ ɝɑvin fɑɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi sɔ ə flætbɛd kɑɹt ðət hæd bɪn ɛmptid.

Most were piled high with bundles and wooden crates and barrels, with the wheels tied on top of the loads, but she did not have to follow Aravine far before she saw a flatbed cart that had been emptied.

ɪksɛp ðət ðə kɑɹt bɛd wɑz nɑɾ ɛmpti. tu wɪmən leɪ ɑn ðə ɹʌf wʊɾən plæŋks, neɪkəɾ ən kɹuli hɑɡtid, ʃɪvɝɪŋ ɪn ðə koʊl jɛt pæntɪŋ əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ. boʊθ wɪmənz hɛdz hʌŋ taɪɹədli, bʌɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ sʌmhaʊ nu feɪl wɑz ðɛɹ, boʊθ lʊkt ʌp. ɹɛlə, ə dɑɹk tɛɹən əz tɔl əz moʊst il wɪmən, əvɝɾəd əɹ aɪz ɪn ɪmbɛɹəsmənt.

Except that the cart bed was not empty. Two women lay on the rough wooden planks, naked and cruelly hogtied, shivering in the cold yet panting as if they were running. Both women's heads hung tiredly, but as if they somehow knew Faile was there, both looked up. Arrela, a dark Tairen as tall as most Aiel women, averted her eyes in embarrassment.

lətʃəl, slɪm ən peɪl ən kɛɹhinɪn, wɛn bɹaɪt ɹɛd. "ðeɪ wɝ bɹɔt bæk ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ," ɝɑvin sɛd, wɑtʃɪŋ feɪlz feɪs. "ðeɪ wɪl bi əntaɪd bɪfɔɹ dɑɹk, sɪns ɪts ðə fɝs taɪm ðeɪv tʃɹaɪd tə ɪskeɪp, ðoʊ aɪ daʊt ðəl bi ɪn ɛni kəndɪʃən tə wɔk bɪfɔɹ təmɑɹoʊ."

Lacile, slim and pale and Cairhienin, went bright red. "They were brought back this morning," Aravine said, watching Faile's face. "They will be untied before dark, since it's the first time they've tried to escape, though I doubt they will be in any condition to walk before tomorrow."

"waɪ dɪd jə ʃoʊ mi ðɪs?" feɪl sɛd. ðeɪ hæd bɪn soʊ kɛɹfəl tə kip ðə kənɛkʃən bɪtwin əm ə sikɹət. "ju fɝɡɛt, maɪ leɪɾi, aɪ wɑz ðəɹ wən jə wɝ ɔl pʊɾ ɪn waɪt." ɝɑvin stʌɾid əɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən sʌɾənli tʊk feɪlz hænz ən tɝn əm soʊ ðəɾ əɹ oʊn hænz wɝ bɪtwin feɪlz pɑmz. bɛndɪŋ əɹ niz dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ə nilɪŋ, ʃi sɛd kwɪkli, "ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ ən baɪ maɪ hoʊp ə ɹibɝθ, aɪ, ɝɑvin kɑɹnəl, də plɛdʒ maɪ fiəlti ən oʊbiɾiəns ɪn ɔl θɪŋz tə ðə leɪɾi feɪl teɪbɑɹə."

"Why did you show me this?" Faile said. They had been so careful to keep the connection between them a secret. "You forget, my Lady, I was there when you were all put in white." Aravine studied her a moment, then suddenly took Faile's hands and turned them so that her own hands were between Faile's palms. Bending her knees just short of kneeling, she said quickly, "Under the Light and by my hope of rebirth, I, Aravine Carnel, do pledge my fealty and obedience in all things to the Lady Faile t'Aybara."

oʊnli lətʃəl əpɪɹd tə hæv noʊɾəst; ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɔkɪŋ pæs peɪd noʊ maɪn tə tu ɡeɪʃeɪn wɪmən. feɪl dʒɝkt əɹ hænz fɹi. "haʊ dʒju noʊ ðət neɪm?" ʃi hæd hæd tə ɡɪv mɔɹ ə hɝ neɪm ðən feɪl, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən feɪl bæʃɪɹ wʌns ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət nʌn ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hæɾ ə klu hu dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ wɑz. əsaɪd fɹəm æliændɝ ən ði ʌðɝz, oʊnli ɡəlinə nu ðə tʃɹuθ.

Only Lacile appeared to have noticed; the Shaido walking past paid no mind to two gai'shain women. Faile jerked her hands free. "How do you know that name?" She had had to give more of her name than Faile, of course, but she had chosen Faile Bashere once she realized that none of the Shaido had a clue who Davram Bashere was. Aside from Alliandre and the others, only Galina knew the truth.

əɹ soʊ ʃi hæd θɔt. "æn u hæv jə toʊld?" "aɪ lɪsən, maɪ leɪɾi. aɪ oʊvɝhɝd ɡəlinə spikɪŋ tə ju, wʌns." æŋzaɪəɾi tʌtʃt ɝɑvinz vɔɪs. "æn aɪ hæv toʊl noʊ wʌn." ʃi dɪd nɑt saʊn sɝpɹaɪz ðət feɪl wɑntəd tə haɪɾ əɹ neɪm, ðoʊ klɪɹli teɪbɑɹə mɛnt nʌθɪŋ tə hɝ. pɝhæps ɝɑvin kɑɹnəl wɑz nɑɾ əɹ tʃɹu neɪm, əɹ nɑɾ ɔl ʌv ɪt. "ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, sikɹəts mʌs bi hɛld əz kloʊsli əz ɪn æmədɔɹ. aɪ nu ðiz wɪmən wɝ jʊɹz, bʌɾ aɪ toʊl noʊ wʌn. aɪ noʊ jə ɪntɛn tə ɪskeɪp. aɪv bɪn sɝɾən sɪns ðə sɛkən əɹ θɝd deɪ, ən nʌθɪŋ aɪv sin sɪns kənvɪnsɪz mi ʌðɝwaɪz. æksɛp maɪ oʊθ, ən teɪk mi wɪð ju. aɪ kən hɛlp, ən wʌɾ ɪz mɔɹ, aɪ kən bi tʃɹʌstɪd. aɪ hæv pɹuvd ɪt baɪ kipɪŋ jəɹ sikɹəts. pliz." ðə læst wɝd keɪm aʊt stʃɹeɪnd, əz ɪf fɹəm sʌmwʌn ənjuz tə seɪɪŋ ɪt. ə noʊbəlwʊmən, ðɛn, ɹæðɝ ðən ə mɝtʃənt.

Or so she had thought. "And who have you told?" "I listen, my Lady. I overheard Galina speaking to you, once." Anxiety touched Aravine's voice. "And I have told no one." She did not sound surprised that Faile wanted to hide her name, though clearly t'Aybara meant nothing to her. Perhaps Aravine Carnel was not her true name, or not all of it. "In this place, secrets must be held as closely as in Amador. I knew these women were yours, but I told no one. I know you intend to escape. I've been certain since the second or third day, and nothing I've seen since convinces me otherwise. Accept my oath, and take me with you. I can help, and what is more, I can be trusted. I have proved it by keeping your secrets. Please." The last word came out strained, as if from someone unused to saying it. A noblewoman, then, rather than a merchant.

ðə wʊmən hæd pɹuvən nʌθɪŋ bɪɑn ðət ʃi kəd spaɪ aʊt sikɹəts, bʌt ðəɾ ɪn ɪtsɛlf wɑz ə jusfəl tʃɹeɪt. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, feɪl nu ʌv ət lis tu ɡeɪʃeɪn u hæd tʃɹaɪd tə ɪskeɪp ən bɪn bɪtʃɹeɪd baɪ ʌðɝz. səm pipəl ɹɪli dɪd tʃɹaɪ tə fɛðɝ ðɛɹ oʊn nɛsts noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ðə sɝkəmstænsəz. bʌɾ ɝɑvin ɔlɹɛɾi nu ɪnʌf tə ɹuən ɛvɹiθɪŋ. feɪl θɔɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ hɪɾən naɪf əɡɛn. ə dɛd wʊmən kəd bɪtʃɹeɪ nʌθɪŋ. bʌt ðə naɪf wɑz hæf ə maɪl əweɪ, ʃi kəd θɪŋk ə noʊ weɪ tə haɪd ðə bɑɾi, ən bɪsaɪdz, ðə wʊmən cʊɾə kɝid feɪvɝ wɪð sɪvænə dʒʌs baɪ seɪɪŋ ʃi θɔt feɪl wɑz plænɪŋ ɪskeɪp. teɪkɪŋ ɝɑvinz hænz bɪtwin hɝz, ʃi spoʊk əz kwɪkli əz ði ʌðɝ wʊmən hæd. "ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, aɪ də æksɛp jəɹ plɛdʒ ən wɪl dɪfɛn ən pɹətɛk jə ən jʊɹz θɹu bæɾəlz ɹæk ən wɪntɝz blæst ən ɔl ðət taɪm meɪ bɹɪŋ. naʊ. dʒju noʊ ɛniwʌn ɛls u kən bi tʃɹʌstɪd? nɑt pipəl jə θɪŋk jə kən tʃɹʌst, pipəl jə noʊ jə kæn."

The woman had proven nothing beyond that she could spy out secrets, but that in itself was a useful trait. On the other hand, Faile knew of at least two gai'shain who had tried to escape and been betrayed by others. Some people really did try to feather their own nests no matter what the circumstances. But Aravine already knew enough to ruin everything. Faile thought about her hidden knife again. A dead woman could betray nothing. But the knife was half a mile away, she could think of no way to hide the body, and besides, the woman could have curried favor with Sevanna just by saying she thought Faile was planning escape. Taking Aravine's hands between hers, she spoke as quickly as the other woman had. "Under the Light, I do accept your pledge and will defend and protect you and yours through battle's wrack and winter's blast and all that time may bring. Now. Do you know anyone else who can be trusted? Not people you think you can trust, people you know you can."

"nɑt wɪð ðɪs, maɪ leɪɾi," ɝɑvin sɛd ɡɹɪmli. hɝ feɪs ʃoʊn wɪð ɹɪlif, ðoʊ. ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn ʃʊɹ feɪl wəɾ æksɛp hɝ. ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ɹɪlif ɹæðɝ ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls meɪd feɪl tɛn tə bɪliv ɪn hɝ. tɛn tə, wɪtʃ wɑz nɑt tə seɪ kəmplitli. "hæf wəd bɪtʃɹeɪ ðɛɹ oʊn mʌðɝz ɪn hoʊps ə baɪɪŋ fɹiɾəm, ən ði ʌðɝ hæf ɑɹ tu əfɹeɪd tə tʃɹaɪ əɹ tu stʌn tə bi tʃɹʌstɪd nɑt tə pænɪk. ðəɹ mʌs bi sʌm, ən aɪ hæv maɪ aɪ ɑn wʌn əɹ tu, bʌɾ aɪ wɑnə bi vɛɹi kɛɹfəl. wʌn mɪsteɪk ɪz wʌn mɔɹ ðən əl bi əlaʊd."

"Not with this, my Lady," Aravine said grimly. Her face shone with relief, though. She had not been sure Faile would accept her. That it was relief rather that anything else made Faile tend to believe in her. Tend to, which was not to say completely. "Half would betray their own mothers in hopes of buying freedom, and the other half are too afraid to try or too stunned to be trusted not to panic. There must be some, and I have my eye on one or two, but I want to be very careful. One mistake is one more than I'll be allowed."

"vɛɹi kɛɹfəl," feɪl əɡɹid. "dɪd sɪvænə ɹɪli sɛn fəɹ mi?

"Very careful," Faile agreed. "Did Sevanna really send for me?

"ɪf ʃi dɪdnt - "

"If she didn't - "

ɪt sim ðət ʃi hæd, ən feɪl wɑz kwɪk əbaʊt ɹitʃɪŋ sɪvænəz tɛnt - kwɪkɝ ðən ʃi wəɾ əv laɪkt, ɪn tʃɹuθ; ɪt wɑz ɪɹəteɪɾɪŋ tə lip tə əvɔɪd sɪvænəz dɪsplɛʒɝ - bʌt noʊ wʌn peɪɾ əɹ ðə slaɪɾəst hid wən ʃi wɔkt ɪn ən stʊd mikli baɪ ði ɛntʃɹi flæps.

It seemed that she had, and Faile was quick about reaching Sevanna's tent - quicker than she would have liked, in truth; it was irritating to leap to avoid Sevanna's displeasure - but no one paid her the slightest heed when she walked in and stood meekly by the entry flaps.

sɪvænəz tɛnt wɑz noʊ loʊ il stʃɹʌktʃɝ, bʌɾ ə wɔl-tɛn ə ɹɛd kænvəs lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə nid tu sɛntɝ poʊlz, lɪt baɪ nɪɹ ə dʌzən mɪɹɝd stænd-læmps. tu ɡɪldɪd bɹeɪʒɝz ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl wɔɹmθ, ɪmɪɾɪŋ θɪn tɛnʒɹəlz ə smoʊk ðəɾ ɛɾid aʊt θɹu ðə smoʊk hoʊlz ɪn ðə ɹuf, bʌt ði ɪntɪɹiɝ wɑz lɪɾəl wɔɹmɝ ðən aʊtsaɪd. ɹɪtʃ kɑɹpəts, ðə snoʊ kɛɹfəli skɹeɪpt əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ leɪd, meɪɾ ə flɔɹ ə ɹɛdz ən ɡɹinz ən bluz, tɛɹən meɪzɪz ən flaʊɝz ən ænəməlz. tæsɛl sɪlk kʊʃənz leɪ stʃɹun əbaʊt ðə kɑɹpəts, ən wʌn tʃɛɹ, ə mæsɪv θɪŋ ɪntʃɹəkətli kɑɹvd ən hɛvəli ɡɪldɪd, sæɾ ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ. feɪl hæd nɛvɝ sin ɛniwʌn sɪɾ ɪn ɪt, bʌɾ ɪts pɹɛzəns wɑz səpoʊz tə ɪvoʊk ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ə klæn tʃif, ʃi nu. ʃi wɑz dʒʌst əz hæpi tə stæn kwaɪətli wɪð əɹ aɪz daʊn. θɹi ʌðɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn wɪð ɡoʊldən bɛls ən kɑlɝz, wʌn ə bɪɹɾəd meɪl, stʊɾ əlɔŋ wʌn wɔl ə ðə tɛnt, ɪn keɪs səm sɝvəs wɑz niɾəd. sɪvænə wɑz ðɛɹ, ən soʊ wɑz θɛɝɑvə. sɪvænə wɑz ə tɔl wʊmən, ə lɪɾəl tɔlɝ ðən feɪl hɝsɛlf, wɪð peɪl ɡɹin aɪz ən hɛɹ laɪk spʌn ɡoʊld. ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn bjuɾəfəl ɪksɛp fəɹ ə stʃɹɔŋ hɪn ʌv ævɝəs ɝaʊn əɹ plʌmp maʊθ. lɪɾəl əbaʊɾ əɹ ɹɪli simd il, bɪɑn əɹ aɪz ən hɛɹ ən sʌn-dɑɹk feɪs. hɝ blaʊs wɑz waɪt sɪlk, hɝ skɝt dɪvaɪɾəd fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ən ɔlsoʊ sɪlk, ɪf ə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ, ən ðə skɑɹf foʊldəɾ ɝaʊn əɹ tɛmpəlz wɑz ə bleɪz ə kɹɪmzən ən ɡoʊld. ɔlsoʊ sɪlk. ɹɛd buts pikt aʊt bɪniθ ðə hɛm ə hɝ skɝt wən ʃi muvd. dʒuəld ɹɪŋz dɛkɝeɪɾəd əɹ ɛvɹi fɪŋɡɝ, ən əɹ nɛkləsɪz ən bɹeɪslɪts ə fæt pɝlz ən kʌt daɪmənz ən ɹubiz əz lɑɹdʒ əz pɪdʒənz ɛɡz, sæfaɪɝz ən ɛmɹəlz ən faɪɝdʒɹɑps, peɪld ɛniθɪŋ sʌmɛɝɪn hæd. nɑɾ ə sɪŋɡəl wʌn wɑz il-meɪd. θɛɝɑvə, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, wɑz ɔl il, ɪn dɑɹk wʊl ən waɪɾ ælɡoʊd, hɝ hænz bɛɹ ən əɹ nɛkləsɪz ən bɹeɪslɪts ɡoʊld ən aɪvɝi. noʊ fɪŋɡɝ ɹɪŋz əɹ dʒɛmz fəɹ hɝ. tɔlɝ ðən moʊs mɛn, hɝ dɑɹk ɹɛd hɛɹ tʌtʃt wɪð stʃɹiks ʌv waɪt, ʃi wɑz ə blu-aɪɾ iɡəl ðəɾ ɪt simd mʌs dɪvaʊɝ sɪvænə laɪk ə kɹɪpəld læm. feɪl wəd ɹæðɝ æŋɡɝ sɪvænə tɛn taɪmz ðən θɛɝɑvə wʌns, bʌt ðə tu wɪmən feɪst ənʌðɝ əkɹɔs ə teɪbəl ɪnleɪd wɪð aɪvɝi ən tɝkwɔɪz, ən sɪvænə mɛt θɛɝɑvə ɡlɛɹ fəɹ ɡlɛɹ.

Sevanna's tent was no low Aiel structure, but a wall-tent of red canvas large enough to need two center poles, lit by near a dozen mirrored stand-lamps. Two gilded braziers gave a little warmth, emitting thin tendrils of smoke that eddied out through the smoke holes in the roof, but the interior was little warmer than outside. Rich carpets, the snow carefully scraped away before they were laid, made a floor of reds and greens and blues, Tairen mazes and flowers and animals. Tasseled silk cushions lay strewn about the carpets, and one chair, a massive thing intricately carved and heavily gilded, sat in a corner. Faile had never seen anyone sit in it, but its presence was supposed to evoke the presence of a clan chief, she knew. She was just as happy to stand quietly with her eyes down. Three other gai'shain with golden belts and collars, one a bearded male, stood along one wall of the tent, in case some service was needed. Sevanna was there, and so was Therava. Sevanna was a tall woman, a little taller than Faile herself, with pale green eyes and hair like spun gold. She might have been beautiful except for a strong hint of avarice around her plump mouth. Little about her really seemed Aiel, beyond her eyes and hair and sun-dark face. Her blouse was white silk, her skirt divided for riding and also silk, if a dark gray, and the scarf folded around her temples was a blaze of crimson and gold. Also silk. Red boots peeked out beneath the hem of her skirt when she moved. Jeweled rings decorated her every finger, and her necklaces and bracelets of fat pearls and cut diamonds and rubies as large as pigeon's eggs, sapphires and emeralds and firedrops, paled anything Someryn had. Not a single one was Aiel-made. Therava, on the other hand, was all Aiel, in dark wool and white algode, her hands bare and her necklaces and bracelets gold and ivory. No finger rings or gems for her. Taller than most men, her dark red hair touched with streaks of white, she was a blue-eyed eagle that it seemed must devour Sevanna like a crippled lamb. Faile would rather anger Sevanna ten times than Therava once, but the two women faced another across a table inlaid with ivory and turquoise, and Sevanna met Therava glare for glare.

"wʌɾ ɪz hæpənɪŋ tədeɪ minz deɪnʒɝ," θɛɝɑvə sɛd wɪð ði ɛɹ ə sʌmwʌn taɪɝɾ ə ɹɪpiɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf. ən pɝhæps əbaʊt tə dʒɹɔ ðə naɪf əɾ əɹ bɛlt. ʃi kɝɛs ðə hɪlt əz ʃi spoʊk, ən nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli æbsənli, feɪl θɔt. "wi nid tə pʊɾ əz mʌtʃ dɪstəns bɪtwin aʊɝsɛlvz ən wʌtɛvɝ ɪts əz wi pɑsəbli kæn, ən əz sun əz wi kæn. ðəɹ ɑɹ maʊntənz tə ði ist. wʌns wi ɹitʃ ðɛm, wi kən bi seɪf əntɪl wi ɡæðɝ ɔl ðə sɛps təɡɛðɝ əɡɛn. sɛps ðət wəd nɛvɝ əv bɪn sɛpɝeɪɾəd ɪf jə hæd nɑt bɪn soʊ ʃʊɹ ə jɝsɛlf, sɪvænə."

"What is happening today means danger," Therava said with the air of someone tired of repeating herself. And perhaps about to draw the knife at her belt. She caressed the hilt as she spoke, and not entirely absently, Faile thought. "We need to put as much distance between ourselves and whatever it is as we possibly can, and as soon as we can. There are mountains to the east. Once we reach them, we can be safe until we gather all the septs together again. Septs that would never have been separated if you had not been so sure of yourself, Sevanna."

"ju spik ə seɪfti?" sɪvænə læft. "hæv jə ɡɹoʊn soʊ oʊld ən tuθləs jə nid tə bi fɛd bɹɛɾ ən mɪlk? lʊk. ðiz maʊntənz ə jʊɹz ɑɹ haʊ dɪstənt? haʊ mɛni deɪz, əɹ wiks, wən wi mʌs kɹɔl θɹu ðɪs kɝst snoʊ?" ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə teɪbəl bɪtwin əm wɛɹ ə mæp leɪ spɹɛɾ aʊt, weɪɾɪd daʊn wɪð tu θɪk ɡoʊldən boʊlz ən ə hɛvi θɹi-pɹɔŋd ɡoʊldən kændəlstɪk.

"You speak of safety?" Sevanna laughed. "Have you grown so old and toothless you need to be fed bread and milk? Look. These mountains of yours are how distant? How many days, or weeks, when we must crawl through this cursed snow?" She gestured to the table between them where a map lay spread out, weighted down with two thick golden bowls and a heavy three-pronged golden candlestick.

moʊst il dɪsdeɪn mæps, bʌt sɪvænə hæd teɪkən tə ðɛm əlɔŋ wɪð ʌðɝ wɛtlæn kʌstəmz. "wʌtɛvɝ hæpən ɪz fɑɹ əweɪ, θɛɝɑvə. jə əɡɹiɾ ɪts soʊ, əz dɪɾ ɛvɹi waɪz wʌn. ðɪs sɪɾi ɪz fʊl ə fud, ɪnʌf tə fiɾ əs fəɹ wiks, ɪf wi ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ. hu ɪz ðəɹ tə tʃælənʒ ʌs, ɪf wi du? ən ɪf wi du. . .

Most Aiel disdained maps, but Sevanna had taken to them along with other wetland customs. "Whatever happened is far away, Therava. You agreed it is so, as did every Wise One. This city is full of food, enough to feed us for weeks, if we remain here. Who is there to challenge us, if we do? And if we do. . .

. juv hɝd ðə ɹʌnɝz, ðə mɛsədʒəz. ɪn tu əɹ θɹi wiks, fɔɹ ət ðə moʊst, tɛn mɔɹ sɛps wɪl əv dʒɔɪn mi. pɝhæps mɔɹ! ðɪs snoʊ wɪl əv mɛltəd baɪ ðɛn, ɪf ðiz wɛtləndɝz fɹəm ðə sɪɾi kən bi bɪlivd. wɪl tʃɹævəl kwɪkli ɪnstɛɾ ə hævɪŋ tə dʒɹæɡ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɑn slɛdz." feɪl wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ɛni ʌv ðə sɪɾi pipəl hæd mɛnʃən mʌd. "tɛn mɔɹ sɛps wɪl dʒɔɪn ju" θɛɝɑvə sɛd, hɝ vɔɪs flæɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə læst wɝd. hɝ hæn taɪɾənd ɑn ðə naɪf hɪlt. "ju spik fəɹ ðə klæn tʃif, sɪvænə, ən soʊ aɪ wɑz tʃoʊzən tə ædvaɪz jə əz ə klæn tʃif, hu mʌs lɪsən tə ædvaɪs fəɹ ðə ɡʊɾ ʌv əɹ klæn. aɪ ædvaɪz jə tə muv ist ən kip muvɪŋ ist. ði ʌðɝ sɛps kən dʒɔɪn əs əz izəli ɪn ðoʊz maʊntənz əz hɪɹ, ən ɪf wi mʌst ɡoʊ ə lɪɾəl hʌŋɡɹi ɑn ðə weɪ, hu əmʌŋ əs ɪz ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ tə pɹaɪveɪʃən?"

. You have heard the runners, the messages. In two or three weeks, four at the most, ten more septs will have joined me. Perhaps more! This snow will have melted by then, if these wetlanders from the city can be believed. We will travel quickly instead of having to drag everything on sleds." Faile wondered whether any of the city people had mentioned mud. "Ten more septs will join you" Therava said, her voice flat except for the last word. Her hand tightened on the knife hilt. "You speak for the clan chief, Sevanna, and so I was chosen to advise you as a clan chief, who must listen to advice for the good of our clan. I advise you to move east and keep moving east. The other septs can join us as easily in those mountains as here, and if we must go a little hungry on the way, who among us is a stranger to privation?"

sɪvænə fɪŋɡɝɾ əɹ nɛkləsɪz, ə lɑɹdʒ ɛmɹəld ɑn əɹ ɹaɪt hæn laɪk ɡɹin faɪɝ ɪn ðə laɪɾ ə ðə stænd-læmps. hɝ maʊθ taɪɾənd, ən sim hʌŋɡɹiɝ fəɹ ɪt. ʃi maɪɾ əv noʊn pɹaɪveɪʃən, bʌt dɪspaɪt ðə læk ʌv wɔɹmθ ɪn ðə tɛnt, ʃi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ tʃoʊz tə. "aɪ spik fəɹ ðə tʃif, ən aɪ seɪ wɪl ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ." ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ ðən ə hɪn ə tʃælənʒ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡɪv θɛɝɑvə ə tʃæns tə miɾ ɪt. "ɑ, aɪ si ðət feɪl əz kʌm. maɪ ɡʊd, oʊbiɾiənt ɡeɪʃeɪn." teɪkɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɹæpt ɪn ə klɔθ fɹəm ðə teɪbəl, ʃi stʃɹɪpt əweɪ ðə klɔθ. "du jə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðɪs, feɪl bæʃɪɹ?" wʌt sɪvænə hɛld wɑz ə naɪf wɪð ə sɪŋɡəl-ɛdʒ bleɪɾ ə hæn ən ə hæf lɔŋ, ə sɪmpəl tul ə ðə sɔɹt ðət θaʊzənz ə fɑɹmɝz kæɹid. ɪksɛp ðət feɪl ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə pæɾɝn ə ɹɪvəts ɪn ðə wʊɾən hændəl, ən ðə tʃɪp ɪn ði ɛdʒ. ɪt wɑz ðə naɪf ðət ʃi hæd stoʊlən ən hɪɾən əweɪ wɪð sətʃ kɛɹ. ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ.

Sevanna fingered her necklaces, a large emerald on her right hand like green fire in the light of the stand-lamps. Her mouth tightened, and seemed hungrier for it. She might have known privation, but despite the lack of warmth in the tent, she no longer chose to. "I speak for the chief, and I say we will remain here." There was more than a hint of challenge in her voice, but she did not give Therava a chance to meet it. "Ah, I see that Faile has come. My good, obedient gai'shain." Taking something wrapped in a cloth from the table, she stripped away the cloth. "Do you recognize this, Faile Bashere?" What Sevanna held was a knife with a single-edged blade a hand and a half long, a simple tool of the sort that thousands of farmers carried. Except that Faile recognized the pattern of rivets in the wooden handle, and the chip in the edge. It was the knife that she had stolen and hidden away with such care. She said nothing.

ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə seɪ. ɡeɪʃeɪn wɝ fɔɹbɪɾən tə pəzɛs ɛni wɛpən, ivən ə naɪf ɪksɛpt wən kʌɾɪŋ miɾ əɹ vɛdʒtəbəlz fəɹ kʊkɪŋ. ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp dʒɝkɪŋ wən sɪvænə wɛn ɑn, ðoʊ.

There was nothing to say. Gai'shain were forbidden to possess any weapon, even a knife except when cutting meat or vegetables for cooking. She could not help jerking when Sevanna went on, though.

"æz wɛl ɡəlinə bɹɔt mi ðɪs bɪfɔɹ jə kəd juz ɪt. fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ pɝpəs. ɪf jə stæb sʌmwʌn, aɪ wəɾ əv tə bi vɛɹi æŋɡɹi wɪð ju."

"As well Galina brought me this before you could use it. For whatever purpose. If you stabbed someone, I would have to be very angry with you."

ɡəlinə? ʌv kɔɹs. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd nɑɾ əlaʊ ðɛm tə ɪskeɪp bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ dɪɾ əz ʃi wɑntəd.

Galina? Of course. The Aes Sedai would not allow them to escape before they did as she wanted.

"ʃi ɪz ʃɑkt, θɛɝɑvə." sɪvænəz læftɝ wɑz əmjuzd. "ɡəlinə noʊz wʌɾ ɪz ɹikwaɪɝɾ ʌv ɡeɪʃeɪn, feɪl bæʃɪɹ. wʌt ʃəɾ aɪ də wɪð hɝ, θɛɝɑvə? ðəɾ ɪz ædvaɪs jə kən ɡɪv mi. sɛvɹəl wɛtləndɝz əv bɪn kɪl fəɹ haɪɾɪŋ wɛpənz, bʌɾ aɪ wəd heɪt tə luz hɝ." θɛɝɑvə tɪp feɪlz tʃɪn ʌp wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ ən stɛɹɾ ɪndə hɝ aɪz. feɪl mɛt ðət ɡeɪz wɪθaʊt blɪŋkɪŋ, bʌt ʃi fɛlt əɹ niz tʃɹɛmbəl. ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tɛlɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɪt wɑz oʊnli ðə koʊld. feɪl nu ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ə kaʊɝd, bʌt wən θɛɝɑvə lʊkt ət hɝ, feɪl sɔ hɝsɛlf əz ə ɹæbəɾ ɪn ðəɾ iɡəlz təlɑnz, əlaɪv ən weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə bik tə dɪsɛnd. ɪt hæd bɪn θɛɝɑvə hu fɝs toʊld əɹ tə spaɪ ɑn sɪvænə, ən haʊɛvɝ sɝkəmspɛk ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz maɪɾ əv bɪn, feɪl hæd noʊ daʊt ðət θɛɝɑvə wəd slɪɾ əɹ θɹoʊt wɪθaʊt ðə slaɪɾəst kwɑm ɪf ʃi feɪl hɝ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ jus pɹitɛndɪŋ ðə wʊmən dɪd nɑt fɹaɪɾən hɝ. ʃi dʒʌs hæd tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðət fɪɹ. ɪf ʃi kʊd.

"She is shocked, Therava." Sevanna's laughter was amused. "Galina knows what is required of gai'shain, Faile Bashere. What should I do with her, Therava? That is advice you can give me. Several wetlanders have been killed for hiding weapons, but I would hate to lose her." Therava tipped Faile's chin up with a finger and stared into her eyes. Faile met that gaze without blinking, but she felt her knees tremble. She did not try telling herself it was only the cold. Faile knew she was not a coward, but when Therava looked at her, Faile saw herself as a rabbit in that eagle's talons, alive and waiting for the beak to descend. It had been Therava who first told her to spy on Sevanna, and however circumspect the other Wise Ones might have been, Faile had no doubt that Therava would slit her throat without the slightest qualm if she failed her. There was no use pretending the woman did not frighten her. She just had to control that fear. If she could.

"aɪ θɪŋk ʃi wɑz plænɪŋ tə ɹʌn əweɪ, sɪvænə. bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ʃi kən lɝn tə də əz ʃiz toʊld." ðə ɹʌf wʊɾən teɪbəl hæd bɪn sɛɾ aʊt bɪtwin ðə tɛns ɪn ðə nɪɹəst oʊpən speɪs tə sɪvænəz tɛnt, ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əweɪ. ət fɝst, feɪl θɔt ðət ðə ʃeɪm ə biɪŋ neɪkəd wəd bi ðə wɝst ʌv ɪt, ðəɾ ən ði aɪsi koʊl ðət pɛbəld əɹ skɪn. ðə sʌn sæt loʊ ɪn ðə skaɪ; ði ɛɹ hæd ɡɹoʊn koʊldɝ, ən ɪt wəd ɡɛt mʌtʃ koʊldɝ bɪfɔɹ mɔɹnɪŋ. ʃi hæd tə steɪ ðəɹ tɪl mɔɹnɪŋ. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ ɡʊɾ ət lɝnɪŋ wʌt ʃeɪmd wɛtləndɝz, ən ðeɪ juzd ʃeɪm əz ə pʌnɪʃmənt. ʃi θɔt ʃi wəd daɪ ʌv blʌʃɪŋ wɛnɛvɝ ɛniwʌn lʊkt ət hɝ, bʌt ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hu pæs baɪ dɪd nɑɾ ivən pɔz.

"I think she was planning to run away, Sevanna. But I think she can learn to do as she is told." The rough wooden table had been set out between the tents in the nearest open space to Sevanna's tent, a hundred paces away. At first, Faile thought that the shame of being naked would be the worst of it, that and the icy cold that pebbled her skin. The sun sat low in the sky; the air had grown colder, and it would get much colder before morning. She had to stay there till morning. The Shaido were good at learning what shamed wetlanders, and they used shame as a punishment. She thought she would die of blushing whenever anyone looked at her, but the Shaido who passed by did not even pause.

ɪn ɪtsɛlf, nuɾɪti wɑz noʊ ɹizən fəɹ ʃeɪm əmʌŋ il. ɝɑvin əpɪɹɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, bʌt ʃi stɑpt oʊnli lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə wɪspɝ, "kip jəɹ kɝədʒ," ən ðən ʃi wɑz ɡɔn. feɪl ʌndɝstʊd. wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ðə wʊmən wɑz lɔɪəl, ʃi dɪd nɑt dɛɹ də ɛniθɪŋ tə hɛlp.

In itself, nudity was no reason for shame among Aiel. Aravine appeared in front of her, but she stopped only long enough to whisper, "Keep your courage," and then she was gone. Faile understood. Whether or not the woman was loyal, she did not dare do anything to help.

æftɝ ə vɛɹi ʃɔɹt taɪm, feɪl noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɝiɾ əbaʊt ʃeɪm. hɝ ɹɪsts hæd bɪn taɪd bɪhaɪn hɝ, ən ðən əɹ æŋkəlz hæd bɪn dʌbəl bæk ən taɪd tə hɝ ɛlboʊz. ʃi ʌndɝstʊd naʊ waɪ lətʃəl ən ɹɛlə hæd bɪn pæntɪŋ. bɹiðɪŋ wɑz ən ɛfɝɾ ɪn ðɪs pəzɪʃən. ðə koʊl bɪt dipɝ ən dipɝ, əntɪl ʃi wɑz ʃɪvɝɪŋ ʌnkəntʃɹoʊləbli, bʌɾ ivən ðət sun sim sɛkəndɛɹi. kɹæmps bɪɡæn tə bɝn ɪn əɹ lɛɡz, hɝ ʃoʊldɝz, hɝ saɪdz, bʌntʃɪŋ mʌsəlz ðət simd ɑn faɪɝ, twɪstɪŋ taɪɾɝ ən taɪɾɝ ən taɪɾɝ. ʃi foʊkəst ɑn nɑt skɹimɪŋ. ðət bɪkeɪm ðə sɛntɝ ə hɝ ɛɡzɪstəns.

After a very short time, Faile no longer worried about shame. Her wrists had been tied behind her, and then her ankles had been doubled back and tied to her elbows. She understood now why Lacile and Arrela had been panting. Breathing was an effort in this position. The cold bit deeper and deeper, until she was shivering uncontrollably, but even that soon seemed secondary. Cramps began to burn in her legs, her shoulders, her sides, bunching muscles that seemed on fire, twisting tighter and tighter and tighter. She focused on not screaming. That became the center of her existence.

ʃi - wəd - nɑt - skɹim. bʌt, oʊ, laɪt, ʃi hɝt! "sɪvænə ɔɹɾɝd ðət jə wɝ tə ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ tɪl dɔn, feɪl bæʃɪɹ, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt seɪ jə kəd nɑɾ əv kʌmpəni." ʃi hæd tə blɪŋk sɛvɹəl taɪmz bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd si klɪɹli. swɛt stʌŋ əɹ aɪz. haʊ kəd ʃi bi swɛɾɪŋ wən ʃi wɑz fɹoʊzən tə ðə mɛɹoʊ? ɹoʊlən wɑz stændɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ən stʃɹeɪnʒli, hi wɑz kæɹiɪŋ ə pɛɹ ə loʊ bɹɑnz bɹeɪʒɝz fʊl ʌv ɡloʊɪŋ koʊlz, wɪð pisəz ə klɔθ ɹæpt ɝaʊn ə lɛɡ ʌv itʃ tə pɹətɛkt ɪz hænz fɹəm ðə hit. siɪŋ əɹ stɛɹ ət ðə bɹeɪʒɝz, hi ʃɹʌɡd. "wʌns, ə naɪɾ ɪn ðə koʊld wəd nɑɾ əv bɑðɝd mi, bʌɾ aɪ hæv ɡɹoʊn sɑf sɪns aɪ kɹɔs ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl." ʃi ɔlmoʊst ɡæspt wən i sɛt ðə bɹeɪʒɝz bɪniθ ðə teɪbəl. wɔɹmθ flʌɾəd ʌp θɹu ðə kɹæks bɪtwin ðə plæŋks. hɝ mʌsəlz stɪl ʃɹikt wɪð kɹæmps, bʌɾ oʊ, ðə blɛsɪd wɔɹmθ. ʃi dɪd ɡæsp wən ðə mæn pʊɾ ən ɑɹm əkɹɔs əɹ tʃɛst ən ði ʌðɝ əkɹɔs əɹ bɛnt niz. sʌɾənli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðə pɹɛʃɝ wɑz ɡɔn fɹəm əɹ ɛlboʊz. hi hæd . . . skwizd . . . hɝ. wʌn ə hɪz hænz bɪɡæn wɝkɪŋ əɾ əɹ θaɪ, ən ʃi ɔlmoʊst skɹimd əz ɪz fɪŋɡɝz dʌɡ ɪndə nɑɾɪd mʌsəlz, bʌt ʃi fɛl ðə nɑts bɪɡɪn tə lusən. ðeɪ stɪl hɝt, hɪz məsɑʒɪŋ hɝt, bʌt ðə peɪn ɪn ðət wʌn θaɪ mʌsəl wɑz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɪn kaɪnd. nɑt ɡɹoʊɪŋ lɛs, ɪɡzækli, bʌt ʃi nu ðəɾ ɪt wʊd, ɪf i kəntɪnjud.

She - would - not - scream. But, oh, Light, she hurt! "Sevanna ordered that you were to remain here till dawn, Faile Bashere, but she did not say you could not have company." She had to blink several times before she could see clearly. Sweat stung her eyes. How could she be sweating when she was frozen to the marrow? Rolan was standing in front of her, and strangely, he was carrying a pair of low bronze braziers full of glowing coals, with pieces of cloth wrapped around a leg of each to protect his hands from the heat. Seeing her stare at the braziers, he shrugged. "Once, a night in the cold would not have bothered me, but I have grown soft since I crossed the Dragonwall." She almost gasped when he set the braziers beneath the table. Warmth flooded up through the cracks between the planks. Her muscles still shrieked with cramps, but oh, the blessed warmth. She did gasp when the man put an arm across her chest and the other across her bent knees. Suddenly she realized the pressure was gone from her elbows. He had . . . squeezed . . . her. One of his hands began working at her thigh, and she almost screamed as his fingers dug into knotted muscles, but she felt the knots begin to loosen. They still hurt, his massaging hurt, but the pain in that one thigh muscle was changing in kind. Not growing less, exactly, but she knew that it would, if he continued.

"ju də nɑt maɪn ɪf aɪ ɑkjəpaɪ maɪsɛlf waɪl aɪ tʃɹaɪ tə θɪŋk ʌv ə weɪ tə meɪk jə læf, də ju?" hi æskt. sʌɾənli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi wɑz læfɪŋ, ən nɑt hɪstɛɹɪkli. wɛl, ɪt wɑz oʊnli pɑɹtli hɪstɛɹiə. ʃi wɑz tʃɹʌs laɪk ə ɡus fəɹ ði ʌvən ən biɪŋ seɪv fɹəm ðə koʊl fəɹ ðə sɛkən taɪm baɪ ə mæn ʃi θɔt meɪbi ʃi wəd nɑt stæb æftɝ ɔl, sɪvænə wəd bi wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ laɪk ə hɔk fɹəm naʊ ɑn, ən θɛɝɑvə maɪt bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl əɹ əz ən ɪɡzæmpəl; bʌt ʃi nu ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə ɪskeɪp.

"You do not mind if I occupy myself while I try to think of a way to make you laugh, do you?" he asked. Suddenly she realized that she was laughing, and not hysterically. Well, it was only partly hysteria. She was trussed like a goose for the oven and being saved from the cold for the second time by a man she thought maybe she would not stab after all, Sevanna would be watching her like a hawk from now on, and Therava might be trying to kill her as an example; but she knew she was going to escape.

wʌn dɔɹ nɛvɝ kloʊz bʌɾ ənʌðɝ oʊpənd. ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə ɪskeɪp. ʃi læft əntɪl ʃi kɹaɪd.

One door never closed but another opened. She was going to escape. She laughed until she cried.

tʃæptɝ tɛn

CHAPTER 10

eɪ bleɪzɪŋ bikən ðə waɪd-aɪd meɪd wɑz mɔɹ juz tə niɾɪŋ bɹɛd doʊ ðən duɪŋ ʌp ɹoʊz ə taɪni bʌɾənz, bʌɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli ʃi fɪnɪʃt bʌtoʊnɪŋ ɪleɪn ɪndə hɝ dɑɹk ɡɹin ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs, kɝtsiɾ ən stɛp bæk bɹiðɪŋ hɛvəli, ðoʊ wɛðɝ fɹəm ði ɛfɝɾ ə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən əɹ dʒʌs fɹəm biɪŋ ɪn ðə pɹɛzəns ə ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ wɑz hɑɹd tə tɛl. ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn ɪleɪnz lɛf hæn maɪɾ əv hæd sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɪt, tu. dʒʌst oʊvɝ twɛnti maɪlz ɪn ə stʃɹeɪt laɪn wəd teɪk jə fɹəm ðə mænɝ ə haʊs mæðɝɪn tə ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn ən ɔl ɪts ɡɹeɪt kɑmɝs, bʌt ðə dɪstəns wɑz fɑɹ ɡɹeɪɾɝ ɪn æktʃəwəl maɪlz tə bi kʌvɝd θɹu ðə tʃɪʃən maʊntənz, ən pipəl hɪɹ wɝ mɔɹ əkʌstəm tə kæɾəl ɹeɪdz əkɹɔs ðə bɔɹɾɝ fɹəm mʊɹændi ðən ɛni sɔɹɾ ə vɪzəɾɝ, ɪspɛʃli ə vɪzəɾɝ u ɹæp ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪndə wʌn pækədʒ. ði ɑnɝ sim bɪɑnd wʌt səm ə ðə sɝvəns kəd bɛɹ. ɛlsi hæd bɪn peɪnfəli kɑnʃiɛnʃəs ɪn foʊldɪŋ ðə blu sɪlk ɡaʊn ðəɾ ɪleɪn hæd wɔɹn læs naɪɾ ən pækɪŋ ɪɾ əweɪ ɪn ə lɑɹdʒ lɛðɝ tʃɹævlɪŋ tʃɛst, wʌn ʌv ə pɛɹ ɪn ði əpɑɹtməns dʒɹɛsɪŋ ɹum, soʊ kɑnʃiɛnʃəs ðəɾ ɪleɪn hæd nɪɹli teɪkən oʊvɝ ðə tæsk hɝsɛlf.

A Blazing Beacon The wide-eyed maid was more used to kneading bread dough than doing up rows of tiny buttons, but eventually she finished buttoning Elayne into her dark green riding dress, curtsied and stepped back breathing heavily, though whether from the effort of concentration or just from being in the presence of the Daughter-Heir was hard to tell. The Great Serpent ring on Elayne's left hand might have had something to do with it, too. Just over twenty miles in a straight line would take you from the manor of House Matherin to the River Erinin and all its great commerce, but the distance was far greater in actual miles to be covered through the Chishen Mountains, and people here were more accustomed to cattle raids across the border from Murandy than any sort of visitor, especially a visitor who wrapped the Daughter-Heir and an Aes Sedai into one package. The honor seemed beyond what some of the servants could bear. Elsie had been painfully conscientious in folding the blue silk gown that Elayne had worn last night and packing it away in a large leather traveling chest, one of a pair in the apartment's dressing room, so conscientious that Elayne had nearly taken over the task herself.

ʃi hæd slɛpt pʊɹli ət fɝst, fɪtfəl ən weɪkɪŋ, ðən slɛp leɪt wən ʃi kəd slip, ən ʃi wɑz bɪɑn tʃeɪfɪŋ tə bi ɑn əɹ weɪ bæk tə keɪɛmlɪn.

She had slept poorly at first, fitful and waking, then slept late when she could sleep, and she was beyond chafing to be on her way back to Caemlyn.

ðɪs wɑz ðə fɪfθ taɪm ʃi hæd spɛn ə naɪɾ aʊɾ ə keɪɛmlɪn sɪns lɝnɪŋ ðə sɪɾi wɑz θɹɛɾənd, ən ɑn itʃ tʃɹɪp ʃi hæd ɡɪvən ə deɪ tə vɪzəɾɪŋ θɹi əɹ fɔɹ mænɝz, wʌns faɪv, ɔl ðə pɹɑpɝɾi ʌv mɛn ən wɪmən baʊn tə haʊs tʃɹəkən baɪ blʌɾ əɹ oʊðz, ən ɛvɹi vɪzət tʊk taɪm. ðə pɹɛs ə taɪm weɪd daʊn əɹ boʊnz, jɛt pɹɪzɛntɪŋ ðə pɹɑpɝ ɪmədʒ wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi. ɹaɪɾɪŋ kloʊðz wɝ niɾəd tə tʃɹævəl fɹəm wʌn mænɝ tə ðə nɛks lɛst ʃi ɝaɪvd ɹʌmpəld ən lʊkɪŋ ə fjudʒəɾɪv, bʌt ʃi hæd tə tʃeɪnʒ bɪfɔɹ sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪn wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz fəɹ ðə naɪɾ əɹ dʒʌst ə fju aʊɝz. hæf ðoʊz aʊɝz maɪt bi teɪkən ʌp baɪ ʃɪftɪŋ fɹəm ɹaɪɾɪŋ kloʊðz tə ə ɡaʊn ən bæk əɡɛn, bʌt ɹaɪɾɪŋ kloʊðz spoʊk ə heɪst ən nid, pɝhæps ə dɛspɝeɪʃən, waɪl ðə kɔɹənɛɾ ə ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ən ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɡaʊn tʃɹɪmd wɪð leɪs, ənpæk fɹəm ə sɛɾ ə tʃɹævlɪŋ keɪsəz ən dɑn æftɝ wɑʃɪŋ, pɔɹtʃɹeɪd kɑnfəɾəns ən stʃɹɛŋkθ. ʃi wʊɾə bɹɔɾ əɹ oʊn meɪd tə æd tə ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ɪf ɛsæn hæd bɪn ʌp tə kipɪŋ ðə peɪs ɪn wɪntɝ, ðoʊ ʃi səspɛktəd ðə waɪt-hɛɹd wʊmənz sloʊnəs wʊɾə hæɾ əɹ tʃuɪŋ əɹ tʌŋ ɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. stɪl, ɛsæn kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn əz sloʊ əz ðɪs ɡɑɡəld-aɪd jʌŋ ɛlsi.

This was the fifth time she had spent a night out of Caemlyn since learning the city was threatened, and on each trip she had given a day to visiting three or four manors, once five, all the property of men and women bound to House Trakand by blood or oaths, and every visit took time. The press of time weighed down her bones, yet presenting the proper image was necessary. Riding clothes were needed to travel from one manor to the next lest she arrived rumpled and looking a fugitive, but she had to change before settling in whether it was for the night or just a few hours. Half those hours might be taken up by shifting from riding clothes to a gown and back again, but riding clothes spoke of haste and need, perhaps of desperation, while the coronet of the Daughter-Heir and an embroidered gown trimmed with lace, unpacked from a set of traveling cases and donned after washing, portrayed confidence and strength. She would have brought her own maid to add to the impression if Essande had been up to keeping the pace in winter, though she suspected the white-haired woman's slowness would have had her chewing her tongue in frustration. Still, Essande could not have been as slow as this goggled-eyed young Elsie.

ət læst ɛlsi hændəɾ əɹ əɹ fɝ-laɪn kɹɪmzən kloʊk wɪð ə kɝtsi, ən ʃi slʌŋ ðə kloʊk ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz heɪstəli. ə faɪɝ bleɪzd ɑn ðə stoʊn hɑɹθ, bʌt ðə ɹum wɑz noʊwɛɹ nɪɹ wɔɹm, ən ɹisənli ʃi kəd nɑt sim tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə koʊld wɪð ɛni ɹilaɪəbɪləɾi.

At last Elsie handed her her fur-lined crimson cloak with a curtsy, and she slung the cloak around her shoulders hastily. A fire blazed on the stone hearth, but the room was nowhere near warm, and recently she could not seem to ignore the cold with any reliability.

ðə ɡɝl bɑbd əz ʃi æskt wɛðɝ ʃi kəd fɛtʃ mɛn tə kæɹi daʊn ðə tʃɛsts ɪf ɪt plizd əɹ mædʒəsti. ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi hæd dʌn ðæt, ɪleɪn hæd dʒɛnli ɪkspleɪn ðət ʃi wɑz nɑt jɛt kwin, bʌɾ ɛlsi sim hɔɹəfaɪɾ ət ði aɪdiə ʌv ədʒɹɛsɪŋ əɹ sɪmpli əz maɪ leɪɾi, əɹ ivən əz pɹɪnsɛs, ðoʊ ɪn tʃɹuθ ðə læst wɑz kənsɪɾɝd vɛɹi oʊld-fæʃənd. pɹɑpɝ əɹ nɑt, ɪt juʒəwəli plizd ɪleɪn tə hɪɹ sʌmwʌn æknɑlɪdʒ əɹ ɹaɪt tə ðə θɹoʊn, bʌt ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ ʃi wɑz tu taɪɝd tə bi ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ æŋkʃəs tə bi ɑn ðə ɹoʊd. səpɹɛsɪŋ ə jɔn, ʃi toʊld ɛlsi kɝtli tə fɛtʃ ðə mɛn ən bi kwɪk əbaʊɾ ɪt, ən tɝn fəɹ ðə pænəl dɔɹ. ðə ɡɝl ɹʌʃt tə oʊpən ɪt fəɹ hɝ, wɪtʃ tʊk lɔŋɡɝ ðən ɪf ʃi hæd dʌn ɪt hɝsɛlf, wɪð ə kɝtsi bɪfɔɹ oʊpənɪŋ ən jɛɾ ənʌðɝ æftɝ. hɝ dɪvaɪɾəd sɪlk skɝts wɪspɝd fjʊɹiəsli əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ əz ʃi stʃɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum tʌɡɪŋ ɑn əɹ ɹɛd ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌvz. ɪf ɛlsi hæd dɪleɪɾ əɹ wʌn mɔɹ sɛkənd, ʃi θɔt ʃi wəɾ əv skɹimd.

The girl bobbed as she asked whether she could fetch men to carry down the chests if it pleased Her Majesty. The first time she had done that, Elayne had gently explained that she was not yet Queen, but Elsie seemed horrified at the idea of addressing her simply as my Lady, or even as Princess, though in truth the last was considered very old-fashioned. Proper or not, it usually pleased Elayne to hear someone acknowledge her right to the throne, but this morning she was too tired to be anything but anxious to be on the road. Suppressing a yawn, she told Elsie curtly to fetch the men and be quick about it, and turned for the paneled door. The girl rushed to open it for her, which took longer than if she had done it herself, with a curtsy before opening and yet another after. Her divided silk skirts whispered furiously against each other as she strode out of the room tugging on her red riding gloves. If Elsie had delayed her one more second, she thought she would have screamed.

ɪt wɑz ðə ɡɝl u ʃɹikt, haʊɛvɝ, bɪfɔɹ ɪleɪn hæd ɡɔn θɹi peɪsɪz, ə hɔɹəfaɪd haʊl ðət saʊndəd ɹɪp fɹəm əɹ θɹoʊt. ðə kloʊk flɛɹɾ əz ɪleɪn spʌn ɝaʊnd, ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, filɪŋ ðə ɹɪtʃnəs ə seɪaɪdɑɹ flʌd θɹu hɝ. ɛlsi wɑz stændɪŋ ɑn ðə stʃɹɪp ə kɑɹpət ðət ɹæn əlɔŋ ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə peɪl bɹaʊn flɔɹ taɪlz, stɛɹɪŋ ði ʌðɝ weɪ daʊn ðə hɔl wɪð boʊθ hænz pɹɛs tə hɝ maʊθ. tu kɹɔsɪŋ kɔɹɪɾɝz oʊpən ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ənʌðɝ soʊl ɪn saɪt.

It was the girl who shrieked, however, before Elayne had gone three paces, a horrified howl that sounded ripped from her throat. The cloak flared as Elayne spun around, embracing the True Source, feeling the richness of saidar flood through her. Elsie was standing on the strip of carpet that ran along the middle of the pale brown floor tiles, staring the other way down the hall with both hands pressed to her mouth. Two crossing corridors opened in that direction, but there was not another soul in sight.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt, ɛlsi?" ɪleɪn dɪmændəd. ʃi hæd sɛvɹəl wivz ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə fɔɹmɪŋ, ɹeɪnʒɪŋ fɹəm ə sɪmpəl nɛɾ ʌv ɛɹ tə ə faɪɝbɔl ðət wʊɾə dɪmɑlɪʃt hæf ðə wɔlz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ən ɪn əɹ pɹɛzən hjumɝ, ʃi wɑntəd tə juz wʌn ə ðɛm, tə stʃɹaɪk aʊt wɪð ðə paʊɝ. hɝ mudz wɝ ənsɝɾən ə leɪt, tə seɪ ðə list.

"What is it, Elsie?" Elayne demanded. She had several weaves already on the edge of forming, ranging from a simple net of air to a fireball that would have demolished half the walls in front of her, and in her present humor, she wanted to use one of them, to strike out with the Power. Her moods were uncertain of late, to say the least.

ðə ɡɝl lʊk bæk oʊvɝ wʌn ʃoʊldɝ, tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, ən ɪf əɹ aɪz hæd bɪn waɪd bɪfɔɹ, ðeɪ bʌlʒd naʊ. hɝ hænz ɹɪmeɪn klæmp tə maʊð əz ɪf tə pɹɪvɛn ənʌðɝ skɹim. dɑɹk-hɛɹɾ ən dɑɹk-aɪd, tɔl ən plʌmp-boʊsəmd ɪn haʊs mæðɝɪnz ɡɹeɪ-ænblju lɪvɝi, ʃi wɑz nɑt ɹɪli ə ɡɝl -  ɛlsi maɪt bi fɔɹ əɹ faɪv jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən hɝsɛlf - bʌt ðə weɪ ʃi bɪheɪv meɪɾ ɪt dɪfəkəl tə θɪŋk ə hɝ ɛni ʌðɝ weɪ.

The girl looked back over one shoulder, trembling, and if her eyes had been wide before, they bulged now. Her hands remained clamped to mouth as if to prevent another scream. Dark-haired and dark-eyed, tall and plump-bosomed in House Matherin's gray-andblue livery, she was not really a girl -  Elsie might be four or five years older than herself - but the way she behaved made it difficult to think of her any other way.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt, ɛlsi? ən doʊn tɛl mi ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ. jə lʊk əz ɪf jud sin ə ɡoʊst." ðə ɡɝl flɪntʃt. "aɪ dɪd," ʃi sɛɾ ənstɛɾəli. ðət ʃi ɡeɪv ɪleɪn noʊ taɪɾəl ʃoʊd dʒʌs haʊ ənstɛɾi ʃi wɑz. "leɪɾi neɪlaɪn, əz wɑz lɔɹɾ æɛdmʌnz ɡɹændmʌðɝ. ʃi daɪd wən aɪ wɑz lɪɾəl, bʌɾ aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ivən lɔɹɾ æɛdmʌn tɪptoʊɾ ɝaʊn əɹ tɛmpɝ, ən ðə meɪdz juz tə dʒʌmp ɪf ʃi lʊkt ət ðɛm, ən ʌðɝ leɪɾiz u vɪzəɾəd, tu, ən ðə lɔɹdz, əz wɛl. ɛvɹibɑɾi wɑz əfɹeɪɾ ə hɝ. ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt ðəɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə mi, ən ʃi skaʊl soʊ fjʊɹiəs - " ʃi bɹoʊk ɔf, blʌʃɪŋ, wən ɪleɪn læft.

"What is it, Elsie? And don't tell me it was nothing. You look as if you'd seen a ghost." The girl flinched. "I did," she said unsteadily. That she gave Elayne no title showed just how unsteady she was. "Lady Nelein, as was Lord Aedmun's grandmother. She died when I was little, but I remember even Lord Aedmun tiptoed around her temper, and the maids used to jump if she looked at them, and other ladies who visited, too, and the lords, as well. Everybody was afraid of her. She was right there in front of me, and she scowled so furious - " She broke off, blushing, when Elayne laughed.

ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ə læf ə ɹɪlif ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. ðə blæk ədʒɑ hæd nɑt sʌmhaʊ fɑloʊɾ əɹ tə lɔɹɾ æɛdmʌnz mænɝ.

It was more a laugh of relief than anything else. The Black Ajah had not somehow followed her to Lord Aedmun's manor.

ðəɹ wɝ noʊ əsæsənz weɪɾɪŋ wɪð naɪvz ɪn ðɛɹ fɪsts, noʊ sɪstɝz lɔɪəl tə ɪleɪɾə wɑntɪŋ tə wɪsk əɹ bæk tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. səmtaɪmz ʃi dʒɹimd əbaʊt ðoʊz θɪŋz, əbaʊɾ ɔl ə ðɛm ɪn ðə seɪm dʒɹim. ʃi ɹilist seɪaɪdɑɹ, ɹɪlʌktənli əz ɔlweɪz, ɹɪɡɹɛtfəl əz ðət fʊlnəs ə dʒɔɪ ən laɪf dʒɹeɪn aʊɾ ə hɝ. mæðɝɪn səpɔɹɾəd hɝ, bʌɾ æɛdmʌn maɪɾ əv teɪkən ɪɾ əmɪs ɪf ʃi hæd ɹuən hæf ɪz hoʊm pleɪs.

There were no assassins waiting with knives in their fists, no sisters loyal to Elaida wanting to whisk her back to Tar Valon. Sometimes she dreamed about those things, about all of them in the same dream. She released saidar, reluctantly as always, regretful as that fullness of joy and life drained out of her. Matherin supported her, but Aedmun might have taken it amiss if she had ruined half his home place.

"ðə dɛd kænɑt hɑɹm ðə lɪvɪŋ, ɛlsi," ʃi sɛd dʒɛnli. ðə mɔɹ dʒɛnli kəz ʃi hæd læft, nɑt tə mɛnʃən wɑntɪŋ tə bɑks ðə nɪniz ɪɹz. "ðeɪɹ nɑɾ ə ðɪs wɝld ɛnimɔɹ, ən ðeɪ kæn tʌtʃ ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ɪt, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ʌs." ðə ɡɝl nɑɾəd, ən dʒɹɑpt ənʌðɝ kɝtsi, bʌt baɪ ðə saɪz ə hɝ aɪz ən ðə tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ ə hɝ lɪps ʃi wɑz ʌnkənvɪnst. ɪleɪn hæd noʊ taɪm tə kɑsət hɝ, ðoʊ.

"The dead cannot harm the living, Elsie," she said gently. The more gently because she had laughed, not to mention wanting to box the ninny's ears. "They're not of this world anymore, and they can't touch anything in it, including us." The girl nodded, and dropped another curtsy, but by the size of her eyes and the trembling of her lips she was unconvinced. Elayne had no time to cosset her, though.

"fɛtʃ ðə mɛn fəɹ maɪ keɪsəz, ɛlsi," ʃi sɛd fɝmli, "æn doʊnt wɝi əbaʊt ɡoʊsts." wɪð jɛɾ ənʌðɝ kɝtsi ðə ɡɝl dæʃt ɔf, hɝ hɛd swɪvəlɪŋ æŋkʃəsli ɪn keɪs ðə leɪɾi neɪlaɪn lɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə pænəld wɔlz. ɡoʊsts! ðə ful ɡɝl wɑz ə nɪni! mæðɝɪn wɑz ən oʊl haʊs, ɪf nɑt lɑɹdʒ əɹ stʃɹɔŋ, ən ðə meɪn stɛɹz, liɾɪŋ daʊn tə ði ɛntʃɹi hɔl, wɝ bɹɔɾ ən tʃɹɪmd wɪð mɑɹbəl ɹeɪlɪŋz. ði ɛntʃɹi hɔl ɪtsɛlf wɑz ə dʒɛnɝəs speɪs, wɪð ɡɹeɪ-ænd-blu flɔɹ taɪlz ən mɪɹɝɾ ɔɪl læmps hæŋɪŋ ɑn tʃeɪnz fɹəm ðə silɪŋ twɛnti fiɾ əbʌv. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv ɡɪldɪŋ ən lɪɾəl ɪnleɪ, bʌɾ ɔɹnətli kɑɹv tʃɛsts ən kæbənəts stʊɾ əlɔŋ ðə saɪdz ə ðə hɔl, ən tu wɔl hæŋʒɪŋz wɝ dɪspleɪɾ ɑn wʌn wɔl. wʌn ʃoʊd mɛn hʌntɪŋ lɛpɝdz fɹəm hɔɹsbæk, ə tʃænsi bɪznəs ət bɛst, ən ði ʌðɝ wɪmən ə haʊs mæðɝɪn pɹɪzɛntɪŋ ə sɔɹd tə ðə fɝs kwin ʌv ændɝ, ən ɪvɛn ðət mæðɝɪn tʃɹɛʒɝɾ ən ðət maɪɾ əɹ maɪt nɑɾ əv æktʃəli  hæpənd.

"Fetch the men for my cases, Elsie," she said firmly, "and don't worry about ghosts." With yet another curtsy the girl dashed off, her head swiveling anxiously in case the Lady Nelein leaped out of the paneled walls. Ghosts! The fool girl was a ninny! Matherin was an old House, if not large or strong, and the main stairs, leading down to the entry hall, were broad and trimmed with marble railings. The entry hall itself was a generous space, with gray-and-blue floor tiles and mirrored oil lamps hanging on chains from the ceiling twenty feet above. There was nothing in the way of gilding and little inlay, but ornately carved chests and cabinets stood along the sides of the hall, and two wall hangings were displayed on one wall. One showed men hunting leopards from horseback, a chancy business at best, and the other women of House Matherin presenting a sword to the first Queen of Andor, an event that Matherin treasured and that might or might not have actually happened.

eɪvinhə wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi daʊn, peɪsɪŋ ɹɛsləsli ɪn ðə hɔl, ən ɪleɪn saɪɾ ət ðə saɪt. ðeɪ wʊɾə ʃɛɹɾ ə ɹum, ɪf nɑt fəɹ ði ɪmpləkeɪʃən ðət mæðɝɪn kəd nɑt pɹəvaɪɾ æɾəkwətli fəɹ tu vɪzəɾɝz ə noʊt, bʌɾ eɪvinhə dɪd nɑt ɹɪli ʌndɝstæn ðət ðə smɔlɝ ðə haʊs, ðə lɔftiɝ ðə pɹaɪd.

Aviendha was already down, pacing restlessly in the hall, and Elayne sighed at the sight. They would have shared a room, if not for the implication that Matherin could not provide adequately for two visitors of note, but Aviendha did not really understand that the smaller the House, the loftier the pride.

ɔfən, ðə smɔlɝ haʊsəz pəzɛs lɪɾəl mɔɹ. pɹaɪd, ʃi ʃəɾ əv ʌndɝstʊd, sɪns ə fɪɹs pɹaɪɾ ən stʃɹɛŋkθ ɔl bʌt ʃoʊn fɹəm hɝ. stʃɹeɪtbækt ən ivən tɔlɝ ðən ɪleɪn, ə θɪk dɑɹk ʃɔl dʒɹeɪpt oʊvɝ əɹ peɪl blaʊs ən ə foʊldəd ɡɹeɪ hɛd skɑɹf hoʊldɪŋ bæk əɹ lɔŋ ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ, ʃi wɑz ðə vɛɹi pɪktʃɝ ʌv ə waɪz wʌn dɪspaɪɾ oʊnli ə jɪɹ oʊldɝ ðən ɪleɪn. waɪz wʌnz u kəd tʃænəl ɔfən əpɪɹd tə bi mʌtʃ jʌŋɡɝ ðən ðeɪ wɝ, ən eɪvinhə hæd ðə dɪɡnəɾi. ət ðɪs moʊmənt ʃi dɪd, ɛniweɪ, ðoʊ ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm hæd ɡɪɡəl təɡɛðɝ ɔfən ɪnʌf. ʌv kɔɹs, hɝ oʊnli dʒuəlɹi wɑz ə lɔŋ, sɪlvɝ kændɔɹi nɛkləs, ən æmbɝ bɹutʃ ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə tɝɾəl ən ə waɪɾ aɪvɝi bɹeɪslət, ən waɪz wʌnz ɔlweɪz wɔɹ fɛstunz ə nɛkləsɪz ən bɹeɪslɪts, bʌɾ eɪvinhə wɑz nɑɾ ə waɪz wʌn jɛt, mɪɹli ən əpɹɛntəs. ɪleɪn nɛvɝ θɔɾ ʌv eɪvinhə əz mɪɹli ɛniθɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd pɹɛzən pɹɑbləmz naʊ ən ðɛn. səmtaɪmz ʃi θɔt ðə waɪz wʌnz kənsɪɾɝd əɹ ən əpɹɛntəs ə səm sɔɹɾ əz wɛl, əɹ ət list ə stuɾənt. ə sɪli θɔt, tə bi ʃʊɹ, bʌt səmtaɪmz. . . .

Often, the smaller Houses possessed little more. Pride, she should have understood, since a fierce pride and strength all but shone from her. Straightbacked and even taller than Elayne, a thick dark shawl draped over her pale blouse and a folded gray head scarf holding back her long reddish hair, she was the very picture of a Wise One despite only a year older than Elayne. Wise Ones who could channel often appeared to be much younger than they were, and Aviendha had the dignity. At this moment she did, anyway, though the pair of them had giggled together often enough. Of course, her only jewelry was a long, silver Kandori necklace, an amber brooch in the shape of a turtle and a wide ivory bracelet, and Wise Ones always wore festoons of necklaces and bracelets, but Aviendha was not a Wise One yet, merely an apprentice. Elayne never thought of Aviendha as merely anything, but it did present problems now and then. Sometimes she thought the Wise Ones considered her an apprentice of some sort as well, or at least a student. A silly thought, to be sure, but sometimes. . . .

əz ɪleɪn ɹitʃt ðə fʊɾ ə ðə stɛɹz, eɪvinhə ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ʃɔl ən æskt, "dɪd jə slip wɛl?" hɝ toʊn wɑz əntʃɹʌbəld, bʌɾ æŋzaɪəɾi nɛsəld ɝaʊn əɹ ɡɹin aɪz. "ju dɪd nɑt sɛn fəɹ waɪn tə hɛlp jə slip, dɪd ju? aɪ meɪd ʃʊɹ jəɹ waɪn wɑz wɔɾɝd wən wi eɪt, bʌɾ aɪ sɔ jə lʊkɪŋ ət ðə waɪn pɪtʃɝ." "jɛs, mʌðɝ," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə sɪkli swit vɔɪs. "noʊ, mʌðɝ. aɪ wɑz wʌndɝɪŋ haʊ æɛdmʌn ɡɑɾ ɪz hænz ɑn sətʃ ə faɪn vɪntɪdʒ, mʌðɝ. ɪt wɑz ə ʃeɪm tə wɔɾɝ ɪt. ən aɪ dʒɹæŋk ðə ɡoʊts mɪlk bɪfɔɹ aɪ wɛn tə slip." ɪf ɛniθɪŋ bɹɔɾ əɹ tə bɝθɪŋ sɪknəs, ɪt wəd bi ɡoʊts mɪlk!

As Elayne reached the foot of the stairs, Aviendha adjusted her shawl and asked, "Did you sleep well?" Her tone was untroubled, but anxiety nestled around her green eyes. "You did not send for wine to help you sleep, did you? I made sure your wine was watered when we ate, but I saw you looking at the wine pitcher." "Yes, Mother," Elayne said in a sickly sweet voice. "No, Mother. I was wondering how Aedmun got his hands on such a fine vintage, Mother. It was a shame to water it. And I drank the goat's milk before I went to sleep." If anything brought her to birthing sickness, it would be goat's milk!

ən tə θɪŋk ʃi juz tə laɪk ɪt. eɪvinhə plæntəɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps, sətʃ ən ɛmbɑɾimənt ʌv ɪndɪɡneɪʃən ðəɾ ɪleɪn hæd tə læf. ðəɹ wɝ ɪnkənvinjənsɪz tə biɪŋ wɪð tʃaɪld, ɹeɪnʒɪŋ fɹəm əbɹʌp swɪŋz ɪn əɹ tɛmpɝ tə tɛndɝnəs ɪn əɹ bɹɛsts tə ɔlweɪz biɪŋ taɪɝd, bʌt ðə kɑɾəlɪŋ wɑz ðə wɝst, ɪn səm weɪz. ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs nu ʃi wɑz pɹɛɡnənt - ə ɡʊd mɛni hæd noʊn bɪfɔɹ ʃi dɪd, kɝɾəsi ʌv mɪnz vjuɪŋ ən mɪn biɪŋ tu fɹi wɪð əɹ tʌŋ - ən ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi cʊɾə bɪn soʊ mʌðɝd wən ʃi wɑz ən ɪnfənt. stɪl, ʃi pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɔl ðə bɑðɝ wɪð əz mʌtʃ ɡɹeɪs əz ʃi kəd mʌstɝ. juʒəwəli, ʃi dɪd. ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bi hɛlpfəl. ʃi dʒʌst wɪʃt ɛvɹi wʊmən ʃi nu dɪd nɑt bɪliv ðət pɹɛɡnənsi hæd meɪɾ əɹ bɹeɪnləs. nɪɹli ɛvɹi wʊmən ʃi nu. ðoʊz u hæd nɛvɝ bɔɹn ə tʃaɪl ðɛmsɛlvz wɝ ðə wɝst.

And to think she used to like it. Aviendha planted her fists on her hips, such an embodiment of indignation that Elayne had to laugh. There were inconveniences to being with child, ranging from abrupt swings in her temper to tenderness in her breasts to always being tired, but the coddling was the worst, in some ways. Everyone in the Royal Palace knew she was pregnant - a good many had known before she did, courtesy of Min's viewing and Min being too free with her tongue - and she did not think she could have been so mothered when she was an infant. Still, she put up with all the bother with as much grace as she could muster. Usually, she did. They were only trying to be helpful. She just wished every woman she knew did not believe that pregnancy had made her brainless. Nearly every woman she knew. Those who had never borne a child themselves were the worst.

θɪŋkɪŋ ə hɝ beɪbi - ət taɪmz ʃi wɪʃt mɪn hæd sɛd wɛðɝ ɪt wəd bi ə bɔɪ əɹ ɡɝl, əɹ ɹæðɝ ðəɾ eɪvinhə əɹ bɝdʒɪt kəd ɹikɔl ɪɡzækli wʌt mɪn æktʃəli  hæd sɛd; mɪn wɑz ɔlweɪz ɹaɪt, bʌt ðə θɹi ʌv əm hæd kənsumd ə ɡɹeɪt dil waɪn ðət naɪt, ən mɪn hæd bɪn ɡɔn fɹəm ðə pæləs lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ɪleɪn hɝsɛlf nu tə æsk - θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə tʃaɪld ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɪn əɹ ɔlweɪz meɪɾ əɹ θɪŋk ə ɹænd, dʒʌst əz θɪŋkɪŋ ə hɪm meɪɾ əɹ θɪŋk ə ðə beɪb. wʌn fɑloʊd ði ʌðɝ əz ʃʊɹli əz kɹim ɹoʊz ɪn ðə mɪlkpæn. ʃi mɪst ɹænd tɛɹəbli, ən jɛt ʃi kəd nɑt mɪs hɪm. ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm, ðə sɛns ə hɪm, ɹoʊɾ ɔlweɪz ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛɾ ənlɛs ʃi mæsk ðə bɑnd, ɹaɪɾ əlɔŋsaɪɾ əɹ sɛns ə bɝdʒɪt, hɝ ʌðɝ wɔɹɾɝ. ðə bɑn hæɾ ɪts lɪməts, haʊɛvɝ. hi wɑz sʌmwɛɹ tə ðə wɛst, fɑɹ ɪnʌf ðət ʃi kəd tɛl lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ðəɾ i wɑz əlaɪv. nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ, ɹɪli, ðoʊ ʃi θɔt ʃi wəd noʊ ɪf i hæd bɪn bædli ɪnʒɝd. ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi wɑntəd tə noʊ wʌɾ i wɑz ʌp tə. hi hæd bɪn fɑɹ tə ðə saʊθ fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm æftɝ livɪŋ hɝ, ən naʊ, dʒʌs ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, hi hæd tʃɹævəl tə ðə wɛst. ɪt wɑz dɪskənsɝɾɪŋ, ɹɪli, tə fil ɪm ɪn wʌn dɝɛkʃən ən ðən sʌɾənli hæv ɪm ɔf ɪn ənʌðɝ, ivən fɑɹðɝ əweɪ. hi kəd bi pɝsuɪŋ ɛnəmiz əɹ ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ɛnəmiz əɹ ɛni wʌn ʌv ə θaʊzən θɪŋz. ʃi hoʊp vɛɹi mʌtʃ ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɪnɑkjuəs ðət meɪɾ ɪm tʃɹævəl. hi gɑnə tə daɪ ɑn əɹ ɔl tu sun - mɛn u kəd tʃænəl ɔlweɪz daɪɾ ʌv ɪt - bʌt ʃi wɑntəd soʊ vɛɹi mʌtʃ tə kip ɪm əlaɪv əz lɔŋ əz pɑsəbəl.

Thinking of her baby - at times she wished Min had said whether it would be a boy or girl, or rather that Aviendha or Birgitte could recall exactly what Min actually had said; Min was always right, but the three of them had consumed a great deal wine that night, and Min had been gone from the palace long before Elayne herself knew to ask - thinking of the child growing in her always made her think of Rand, just as thinking of him made her think of the babe. One followed the other as surely as cream rose in the milkpan. She missed Rand terribly, and yet she could not miss him. A part of him, the sense of him, rode always in the back of her head unless she masked the bond, right alongside her sense of Birgitte, her other Warder. The bond had its limits, however. He was somewhere to the west, far enough that she could tell little more than that he was alive. Nothing more, really, though she thought she would know if he had been badly injured. She was not sure she wanted to know what he was up to. He had been far to the south for a long time after leaving her, and now, just this morning, he had Traveled to the west. It was disconcerting, really, to feel him in one direction and then suddenly have him off in another, even farther away. He could be pursuing enemies or running from enemies or any one of a thousand things. She hoped very much it was something innocuous that made him Travel. He was going to die on her all too soon - men who could channel always died of it - but she wanted so very much to keep him alive as long as possible.

"hi ɪz wɛl," eɪvinhə sɛɾ ɔlmoʊst əz ðoʊ ʃi kəd ɹiɾ əɹ maɪnd. ðeɪ hæd ðɛɹ oʊn ʃɛɹd sɛns ʌv wʌn ənʌðɝ sɪns ðɛɹ mjutʃəwəl ədɑpʃən əz fɝst-sɪstɝz, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ əz fɑɹ əz ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn ðeɪ ən mɪn ʃɛɹd wɪð ɹænd. "ɪf i əlaʊz hɪmsɛlf tə bi kɪld, əl kʌɾ ɔf ɪz ɪɹz." ɪleɪn blɪŋkt, ðən læft əɡɛn, ən æftɝ ə stɑɹɾəld ɡlæns, eɪvinhə dʒɔɪn ɪn. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðət fʌni, ɪksɛp meɪbi tə ən il - eɪvinhəz sɛns ə hjumɝ wɑz vɛɹi ɑd - bʌɾ ɪleɪn kəd nɑt stɑp læfɪŋ, ən eɪvinhə simd əz hɛlpləs. ʃeɪkɪŋ wɪð mɝθ, ðeɪ hʌɡd wʌn ənʌðɝ ən hʌŋ ɑn. laɪf wɑz vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ. hæɾ ɛniwʌn toʊld əɹ ə fju jɪɹz əɡoʊ ðət ʃi wəd ʃɛɹ ə mæn wɪð ənʌðɝ wʊmən - wɪð tu ʌðɝ wɪmən! - ʃi wʊɾə kɔld əm mæd. ðə vɛɹi aɪdiə wʊɾə bɪn ɪndisənt. bʌt ʃi lʌvd eɪvinhə ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi dɪd ɹænd, oʊnli ɪn ə dɪfɹənt weɪ, ən eɪvinhə lʌvd ɹænd əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi dɪd.

"He is well," Aviendha said almost as though she could read her mind. They had their own shared sense of one another since their mutual adoption as first-sisters, but it did not go as far as the Warder bond they and Min shared with Rand. "If he allows himself to be killed, I will cut off his ears." Elayne blinked, then laughed again, and after a startled glance, Aviendha joined in. It was not that funny, except maybe to an Aiel - Aviendha's sense of humor was very odd - but Elayne could not stop laughing, and Aviendha seemed as helpless. Shaking with mirth, they hugged one another and hung on. Life was very strange. Had anyone told her a few years ago that she would share a man with another woman - with two other women! - she would have called them mad. The very idea would have been indecent. But she loved Aviendha every bit as much as she did Rand, only in a different way, and Aviendha loved Rand as much as she did.

dɪnaɪɪŋ ðət mɛn dɪnaɪɪŋ eɪvinhə, ən ʃi kəɾ əz izəli stɛp aʊɾ ə hɛt skɪn. il wɪmən, sɪstɝz əɹ kloʊs fɹɛnz, ɔfən mɛɹid ðə seɪm mæn, ən sɛldəm ɡeɪv ɪm ɛni seɪ ɪn ðə mæɾɝ. ʃi wɑz gɑnə mɛɹi ɹænd, ən soʊ wɑz eɪvinhə, ən soʊ wɑz mɪn. wʌtɛvɝ ɛniwʌn sɛɾ əɹ θɔt, ðət wɑz ɔl ðəɹ wɑz tə ɪt. ɪf i lɪv lɔŋ ɪnʌf.

Denying that meant denying Aviendha, and she could as easily step out of het skin. Aiel women, sisters or close friends, often married the same man, and seldom gave him any say in the matter. She was going to marry Rand, and so was Aviendha, and so was Min. Whatever anyone said or thought, that was all there was to it. If he lived long enough.

sʌɾənli ʃi bɪkeɪm əfɹeɪd ðəɾ əɹ læftɝ wɑz ɛdʒɪŋ təwɔɹd tɪɹz. pliz, laɪt, lɛɾ əɹ nɑt bi wʌn ə ðoʊz wɪmən u bɪkeɪm wipi wən ðeɪ wɝ wɪð tʃaɪld. ɪt wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf nɑt noʊɪŋ wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz gɑnə bi mɛlənkɑli əɹ fjʊɹiəs fɹəm wʌn mɪnət tə ðə nɛkst. aʊɝz maɪt pæs wən ʃi fɛl pɝfəkli nɔɹməl, bʌt ðən ðəɹ wɝ aʊɝz wən ʃi fɛlt laɪk ə tʃaɪlz bɔl baʊnsɪŋ daʊn ən ɛnləs flaɪɾ ə stɛɹz. ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ʃi sim tə bi ɑn ðə stɛɹz.

Suddenly she became afraid that her laughter was edging toward tears. Please, Light, let her not be one of those women who became weepy when they were with child. It was bad enough not knowing whether she was going to be melancholy or furious from one minute to the next. Hours might pass when she felt perfectly normal, but then there were hours when she felt like a child's ball bouncing down an endless flight of stairs. This morning, she seemed to be on the stairs.

"hi ɪz wɛl, ən hɪl bi wɛl," eɪvinhə wɪspɝd fɪɹsli, əz ɪf ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə əʃʊɹ ɪz sɝvaɪvəl baɪ kɪlɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ðət θɹɛɾənd hɪm.

"He is well, and he will be well," Aviendha whispered fiercely, as if she intended to assure his survival by killing anything that threatened him.

wɪð ðə tɪps ə hɝ fɪŋɡɝz, ɪleɪn bɹʌʃt ə tiɹ fɹəm əɹ sɪstɝz tʃik. "hi ɪz wɛl, ən hɪl bi wɛl," ʃi əɡɹid sɔfli. bʌt ðeɪ kəd nɑt kɪl seɪɾɪn, ən ðə teɪn ɑn ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə paʊɝ wɑz wʌt wɑz gɑnə kɪl hɪm.

With the tips of her fingers, Elayne brushed a tear from her sister's cheek. "He is well, and he will be well," she agreed softly. But they could not kill saidin, and the taint on the male half of the Power was what was going to kill him.

ðə læmps oʊvɝhɛd flɪkɝɾ əz wʌn ə ðə tɔl dɔɹz tə ði aʊtsaɪɾ oʊpənd, lɛɾɪŋ ɪn ə ɡʌst ʌv ɛɹ ivən koʊldɝ ðən ðəɾ ɪn ði ɛntʃɹi hɔl, ən ðeɪ kwɪkli muvd ə lɪɾəl əpɑɹt, dʒʌs hoʊldɪŋ hænz.

The lamps overhead flickered as one of the tall doors to the outside opened, letting in a gust of air even colder than that in the entry hall, and they quickly moved a little apart, just holding hands.

ɪleɪn skuld əɹ feɪs tə ə sɝin smuðnəs fʊli wɝði ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə lɛɾ ɛniwʌn si hɝ əpɛɹənli sikɪŋ kʌmfɝɾ ɪn ə hʌɡ. ə ɹulɝ, əɹ wʌn u sɔt tə ɹul, wɑz nɑɾ əlaʊd ðə slaɪɾəst sədʒɛstʃən ʌv wiknəs əɹ tɪɹz, nɑɾ ɪn pʌblɪk. ðəɹ wɝ ɹumɝz ɪnʌf əbaʊɾ əɹ əz ɪt wɑz, əz mɛni bæɾ əz ɡʊd. ʃi wɑz bənɛvələn əɹ kɹuəl, fɛɹ-maɪndəɾ əɹ ɑɹbətʃɹɛɹi, dʒɛnɝəs əɹ əvɝɪʃəs, ɔl əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə wɪtʃ teɪl jə lɪsən tə. ət lis ðə teɪlz bælənst aʊt wʌn ənʌðɝ, bʌɾ ɛniwʌn u kəd seɪ ðeɪ hæɾ æktʃəli  sin ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ hʌɾəlɪŋ ɪn ði ɑɹmz ə hɝ kəmpænjən maɪɾ æɾ ə teɪl ə fɪɹ tə ðə blɛnd, ən ɪf əɹ ɛnəmiz bɪlivd ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪd, ðeɪ wəɾ oʊnli ɡɹoʊ boʊldɝ. ən stʃɹɔŋɝ. kaʊɝɾəs wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə ɹumɝ ðət stʌk laɪk ɡɹisi mʌd; jə nɛvɝ kəd wɑʃ ɪɾ ɔf kəmplitli. hɪstɝi ɹəkɔɹɾəd wɪmən u hæd lɔs ðɛɹ bɪdz fəɹ ðə laɪən θɹoʊn ɑn noʊ fɝðɝ dɪsɝnəbəl ɡɹaʊnz. keɪpəbɪləɾi wɑz ə ɹɪkwaɪɹmən fəɹ ə səksɛsfəl ɹulɝ ən wɪzdəm wɑz tə bi hoʊp fɔɹ, ðoʊ wɪmən lækɪŋ boʊθ hæd ɡeɪn ðə θɹoʊn ən mʌɾəld θɹu sʌmhaʊ, bʌt fju wəd səpɔɹɾ ə kaʊɝd, ən nʌn ə ðoʊz pipəl ʃi wɑntəɾ ɑn əɹ saɪd.

Elayne schooled her face to a serene smoothness fully worthy of an Aes Sedai. She could not afford to let anyone see her apparently seeking comfort in a hug. A ruler, or one who sought to rule, was not allowed the slightest suggestion of weakness or tears, not in public. There were rumors enough about her as it was, as many bad as good. She was benevolent or cruel, fair-minded or arbitrary, generous or avaricious, all according to which tale you listened to. At least the tales balanced out one another, but anyone who could say they had actually seen the Daughter-Heir huddling in the arms of her companion might add a tale of fear to the blend, and if her enemies believed she was afraid, they would only grow bolder. And stronger. Cowardice was the sort of rumor that stuck like greasy mud; you never could wash it off completely. History recorded women who had lost their bids for the Lion Throne on no further discernible grounds. Capability was a requirement for a successful ruler and wisdom was to be hoped for, though women lacking both had gained the throne and muddled through somehow, but few would support a coward, and none of those people she wanted on her side.

ðə mæn u keɪm ɪn, tɝnɪŋ tə pʊʃ ðə mæsɪv dɔɹ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɪm, hæɾ oʊnli wʌn lɛɡ ən juzd ə kɹʌtʃ ɪn pleɪs ə ði ʌðɝ. ivən wɪð flis pæɾɪŋ, ðə sliv ə hɪz hɛvi wʊlən koʊt wɑz wɔɹn fɹəm ɪt. ə hɛvi-ʃoʊldɝd fɔɹmɝ soʊlʒɝ, fɹɪdwɪn ɹɔs mænədʒ lɔɹɾ æɛdmʌnz ɪsteɪt, wɪð ði eɪɾ ʌv ə fæt klɝk u hæd blɪŋkt ət ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ɪn kɑnstɝneɪʃən, ɡeɪpt əɾ əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ wɪð sʌmθɪŋ nɪɹ tə ɑ, ən skɝid bæk tə hɪz lɛdʒɝz ɪn ɹɪlif əz sun əz i ɹilaɪzd ʃi hæd noʊ bɪznəs wɪð hɪm. hi hæd pɹɑbli fɪɹɾ ə lɛvi ɑn ðə mænɝz əkaʊns. mæstɝ ɹɔs hæd stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ ɹɪŋ ɪn əmeɪzmənt, tə bi ʃʊɹ, bʌɾ i hæd ɡɹɪnd wɪð dɪlaɪɾ ət ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ən ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd ðəɾ i kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɹaɪd fəɹ əɹ wɪð sətʃ sənsɛɹəɾi ðæt, hæɾ i bɪn ə laɪɝ, hi wəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæv bɪlkt æɛdmʌn ən ðə klɝk ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðeɪ oʊn bɪtwin ðɛm. ʃi dɪd nɑt fɪɹ ɪm kæɹiɪŋ ðə ɹɔŋ teɪlz.

The man who came in, turning to push the massive door shut behind him, had only one leg and used a crutch in place of the other. Even with fleece padding, the sleeve of his heavy woolen coat was worn from it. A heavy-shouldered former soldier, Fridwyn Ros managed Lord Aedmun's estate, with the aid of a fat clerk who had blinked at the Daughter-Heir in consternation, gaped at her Great Serpent ring with something near to awe, and scurried back to his ledgers in relief as soon as he realized she had no business with him. He had probably feared a levy on the manor's accounts. Master Ros had stared at her ring in amazement, to be sure, but he had grinned with delight at the Daughter-Heir and regretted that he could no longer ride for her with such sincerity that, had he been a liar, he would already have bilked Aedmun and the clerk of everything they owned between them. She did not fear him carrying the wrong tales.

hɪz kɹʌtʃ meɪɾ ə ɹɪðmɪk θʌmp əz i keɪm ʌp ðə hɔl, ən i mænədʒd ə kɹɛɾəbəl baʊ ɪn spaɪɾ ʌv ɪt, ɪnkluɾɪŋ eɪvinhə ɪn ɪz kɝɾəsi. hi hæd bɪn stɑɹɾəld baɪ hɝ ət fɝst, bʌt sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli kwɪk tə kætʃ ðɛɹ fɹɛndʃɪp, ən ɪf i dɪd nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli tʃɹʌst ən il, ɪt mɛn i æksɛptɪd hɝ. jə kəd nɑɾ æsk fəɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. "ðə mɛn ɑɹ stʃɹæpɪŋ jəɹ keɪsəz tə ðə pæk ænəməlz, maɪ kwin, ən jəɹ ɛskɔɹɾ ɪz ɹɛɾi." hi wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz u ɹəfjuz tə kɔl əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛpt "maɪ kwin" əɹ "mædʒəsti," bʌɾ ə hɪn ə daʊɾ ɛntɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs ət mɛnʃən ə hɝ ɛskɔɹt. hi kʌvɝɾ ɪt heɪstəli wɪð ə kɑf ən hɝiɾ ɑn. "ðə mɛn wɝ sɛndɪŋ wɪð jə ɑɹ ɔl maʊntəɾ əz wɛl əz aɪ kəd mænədʒ. jʌŋ mɛn, meɪnli, ən ə fju mɔɹ ɪkspɪɹiənst, bʌt ðeɪ ɔl noʊ wɪtʃ ɛn ʌv ə hælbɹɾ əz ðə pɔɪnt. aɪ wɪʃ ðə mænɝ kəd ɡɪv jə mɔɹ, bʌɾ aɪ ɪkspleɪnd, wən lɔɹɾ æɛdmʌn hɝd ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝz kleɪmɪŋ wʌts jʊɹz baɪ ɹaɪt, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd nɑt tə weɪt fəɹ spɹɪŋ, ən i kɔld ɪn ɪz ɑɹmmɪn ən sɛɾ aʊt fəɹ keɪɛmlɪn.

His crutch made a rhythmic thump as he came up the hall, and he managed a credible bow in spite of it, including Aviendha in his courtesy. He had been startled by her at first, but surprisingly quick to catch their friendship, and if he did not entirely trust an Aiel, it meant he accepted her. You could not ask for everything. "The men are strapping your cases to the pack animals, my Queen, and your escort is ready." He was one of those who refused to call her anything except "my Queen" or "Majesty," but a hint of doubt entered his voice at mention of her escort. He covered it hastily with a cough and hurried on. "The men we're sending with you are all mounted as well as I could manage. Young men, mainly, and a few more experienced, but they all know which end of a halberd has the point. I wish the manor could give you more, but I explained, when Lord Aedmun heard there were others claiming what's yours by right, he decided not to wait for spring, and he called in his armsmen and set out for Caemlyn.

wiv hæɾ ə kʌpəl ə bæd snoʊfɔlz sɪns, bʌɾ i maɪt bi hæfweɪ ðəɹ baɪ naʊ wɪð lʌk ɪn ðə pæsəz." hɪz ɡeɪz kæɹid kənvɪkʃən, bʌɾ i nu bɛɾɝ ðən ʃi ðət wɪð ðə ɹɔŋ lʌk æɛdmʌn ən ɪz ɑɹmmɪn maɪt bi dɛɾ ɪn ðoʊz pæsəz.

We've had a couple of bad snowfalls since, but he might be halfway there by now with luck in the passes." His gaze carried conviction, but he knew better than she that with the wrong luck Aedmun and his armsmen might be dead in those passes.

"mæðɝɪn əz ɔlweɪz meɪnteɪn feɪθ wɪð tʃɹəkənd," ɪleɪn toʊl hɪm, "æn aɪ pʊt maɪ tʃɹʌs ðəɾ ɪɾ ɔlweɪz wɪl. aɪ vælju lɔɹɾ æɛdmʌnz lɔɪəlti, mæstɝ ɹɔs, ən jʊɹz." ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪnsʌl mæðɝɪn, ən hɪm, baɪ pɹɑməsɪŋ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ əɹ ɔfɝɪŋ ɹɪwɔɹdz, jɛt mæstɝ ɹɔs' bɹɔd smaɪl sɛd ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɪvən ɪm əz mʌtʃ ɹɪwɔɹɾ əz i dɪzaɪɝd. mæðɝɪn wəd ɹəsiv ɹɪwɔɹdz, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɝnd, bʌt ðeɪ kəd nɑt bi hɛld aʊɾ əz ɪf ɔfɝɪŋ tə baɪ ə hɔɹs.

"Matherin has always maintained faith with Trakand," Elayne told him, "and I put my trust that it always will. I value Lord Aedmun's loyalty, Master Ros, and yours." She did not insult Matherin, and him, by promising to remember or offering rewards, yet Master Ros' broad smile said she had already given him as much reward as he desired. Matherin would receive rewards, if they were earned, but they could not be held out as if offering to buy a horse.

θʌmpɪŋ əlɔŋ ɑn ɪz kɹʌtʃ, mæstɝ ɹɔs baʊɾ əɹ tə ðə dɔɹ, ən baʊɾ əɹ aʊɾ ɑntu ðə bɹɔd ɡɹænət stɛp wɛɹ sɝvəns wɛɹɪŋ hɛvi koʊts weɪɾəd ɪn ðə bɪɾɝ koʊld wɪð ə stɝəp kʌp ə hɑt spaɪst waɪn ðət ʃi ɹɪdʒɛktɪd wɪð ə mɝmɝ. əntɪl ʃi hæɾ ə tʃæns tə ədʒʌs tə ðə ʃɑɹp ɛɹ, ʃi wɑntəd boʊθ hænz tə hoʊld əɹ kloʊk kloʊzd. eɪvinhə wəd pɹɑbli hæv faʊn ə weɪ tə meɪk əɹ dʒɹɑp ɪɾ ɛniweɪ. ʃi tʊk ə kʌp, æftɝ ɹæpɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl ɝaʊn əɹ hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz, ði oʊnli kənsɛʃən ʃi meɪd tə ði aɪsi mɔɹnɪŋ. ʃi wɑz ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə koʊld, ʌv kɔɹs. ɪleɪn wɑz ðə wʌn u hæd tɔɾ əɹ haʊ. ɪleɪn tʃɹaɪɾ əɡɛn tə pʊʃ ðə koʊld əweɪ, ən tə hɝ sɝpɹaɪz, ɪt ɹəsiɾəd. nɑɾ ɔl ðə weɪ - ʃi stɪl fɛl tʃɪli - bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən fɹizɪŋ.

Thumping along on his crutch, Master Ros bowed her to the door, and bowed her out onto the broad granite step where servants wearing heavy coats waited in the bitter cold with a stirrup cup of hot spiced wine that she rejected with a murmur. Until she had a chance to adjust to the sharp air, she wanted both hands to hold her cloak closed. Aviendha would probably have found a way to make her drop it anyway. She took a cup, after wrapping her shawl around her head and shoulders, the only concession she made to the icy morning. She was ignoring the cold, of course. Elayne was the one who had taught her how. Elayne tried again to push the cold away, and to her surprise, it receded. Not all the way - she still felt chilly - but it was better than freezing.

ðə skaɪ wɑz klɪɹ, ðə sʌn bɹaɪɾ əz ɪt sæɾ oʊvɝ ðə maʊntənz, bʌt stɔɹm klaʊdz kəd kʌm bɔɪlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ piks əɾ ɛni taɪm. ɪt wəd bi bɛs tə ɹitʃ ðɛɹ fɝs dɛstəneɪʃən tədeɪ əz kwɪkli əz pɑsəbəl. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, faɪɹhɑɹt, hɝ tɔl blæk ɡɛldɪŋ, wɑz lɪvɪŋ ʌp tə hɪz neɪm, ɹɪɹɪŋ ən snɔɹɾɪŋ ɡaʊts ə stimi bɹɛθ əz ɪf i hæd nɛvɝ wɔɹn ə bɹaɪɾəl bɪfɔɹ, ən eɪvinhəz lɛɡi ɑɹtʃ-nɛkt ɡɹeɪ hæd teɪkən ɪɾ ɪndə hɝ hɛd tə ɪməteɪt hɪm, dænsɪŋ ɪn ðə ni-dip snoʊ ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡoʊ ɛniwɛɹ ɪksɛpt wɛɹ ðə ɡɹum tʃɹaɪd tə lid hɝ. ʃi wɑz ə mɔɹ spɪɹəɾəd ænəməl ðən ɪleɪn wʊɾə tʃoʊzən fəɹ əɹ sɪstɝ, jɛɾ eɪvinhə hɝsɛlf hæɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ æftɝ lɝnɪŋ ðə mɛɹz neɪm. sɪswaɪ mɛn spɪɹ, ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ. ðə ɡɹumz sim keɪpəbəl wɪmən, bʌt ðeɪ əpɪɹd tə θɪŋk ðeɪ niɾəd tə kɑm ði ænəməlz bɪfɔɹ hændɪŋ əm oʊvɝ. ɪt wɑz ɔl ɪleɪn kəd də nɑt tə snæp əɾ əm ðət ʃi hæd mænədʒ faɪɹhɑɹt bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɛvɝ sɔ hɪm.

The sky was clear, the sun bright as it sat over the mountains, but storm clouds could come boiling across the surrounding peaks at any time. It would be best to reach their first destination today as quickly as possible. Unfortunately, Fireheart, her tall black gelding, was living up to his name, rearing and snorting gouts of steamy breath as if he had never worn a bridle before, and Aviendha's leggy arch-necked gray had taken it into her head to imitate him, dancing in the knee-deep snow and trying to go anywhere except where the groom tried to lead her. She was a more spirited animal than Elayne would have chosen for her sister, yet Aviendha herself had insisted after learning the mare's name. Siswai meant spear, in the Old Tongue. The grooms seemed capable women, but they appeared to think they needed to calm the animals before handing them over. It was all Elayne could do not to snap at them that she had managed Fireheart before they ever saw him.

hɝ ɛskɔɹt wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi maʊntəd, tə əvɔɪd stændɪŋ ɪn ðə snoʊ, twɛnti-ɑd ɹaɪɾɝz ɪn ðə waɪt-kɑlɝd ɹɛd koʊts ən bɹaɪtli bɝnɪʃt bɹɛstpleɪts ən hɛlməts ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹd. mæstɝ ɹɔs'

Her escort was already mounted, to avoid standing in the snow, twenty-odd riders in the white-collared red coats and brightly burnished breastplates and helmets of the Queen's Guard. Master Ros'

daʊt maɪt bi ɪkspleɪn baɪ ðə fæk ðət ðə ɹaɪɾɝz' koʊts wɝ sɪlk, əz wɝ ðɛɹ ɹɛd bɹitʃɪz wɪð ðə waɪt stʃɹaɪp ʌp itʃ lɛɡ, ən baɪ ðə peɪl leɪs ðeɪ wɔɹ ət nɛk ən kʌf. ðeɪ sɝɾənli əpɪɹd mɔɹ sɛɹəmoʊniəl ðən ɪfɛktɪv. əɹ ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɔl wɪmən. wɪmən wɝ ənkɑmən ɪn dʒɑbz ðət ɹikwaɪɝd juzɪŋ wɛpənz, dʒʌs ði əkeɪʒənəl mɝtʃəns' ɡɑɹɾ əɹ ə ɹɛɹ wʊmən u tɝn ʌp ɪn ən ɑɹmi dʊɹɪŋ taɪm ʌv wɔɹ, ən ɪleɪn hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ə ɡɹup ʌv ɔl-fimeɪl soʊlʒɝz bɪfɔɹ ʃi kɹieɪɾəd wʌn. ɪksɛp ðə meɪɾənz, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ il ən ə dɪfɹən mæɾɝ. ʃi hoʊpt pipəl wəd θɪŋk əm ən æfɛkteɪʃən ɑn əɹ pɑɹt, ən lɑɹdʒli dɛkɹəɾɪv wɪð ɔl ðə leɪs ən sɪlk. mɛn tɛndəd tə ʌndɝɛstəmeɪɾ ə wʊmən kæɹiɪŋ wɛpənz əntɪl ðeɪ feɪst wʌn, ən ivən moʊst ʌðɝ wɪmən tɛndəd tə θɪŋk əɹ ə bɹeɪnləs ful. bɑɾiɡɑɹdz juʒəwəli tʃɹaɪd tə əpɪɹ soʊ fɝoʊʃəs ðət noʊ wʌn wəd dɛɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛt pæs ðɛm, bʌɾ əɹ ɛnəmiz wəd dʒʌs faɪn ə nu weɪ tə ətæk ɪf ʃi stʊd ðə hoʊl kwinz ɡɑɹɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ-tə-ʃoʊldɝ. ə bɑɾiɡɑɹd əɹ ɛnəmiz wəd dɪsmɪs əntɪl ɪt wɑz tu leɪt fəɹ mɔɹ ðən ɹɪɡɹɛts wɑz əɹ eɪm. ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə meɪk ðɛɹ junəfɔɹmz mɔɹ ɪlæbɹət, pɑɹtli tə fid ðoʊz mɪskənsɛpʃənz ən pɑɹtli tə fid ðə wɪmənz pɹaɪɾ əz soʊlʒɝz mɑɹkt aʊt fɹəm ðə ɹɛst, bʌt ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd noʊ daʊts. ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm, fɹəm mɝtʃəns' ɡɑɹdz tə hʌntɝz ə ðə hɔɹn, hæd bɪn kɛɹfəli tʃoʊzən fəɹ əɹ skɪlz, ɪkspɪɹiəns ən kɝədʒ. ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə pʊɾ əɹ laɪf ɪn ðɛɹ hænz. ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi hæd.

doubt might be explained by the fact that the riders' coats were silk, as were their red breeches with the white stripe up each leg, and by the pale lace they wore at neck and cuff. They certainly appeared more ceremonial than effective. Or it might have been that they were all women. Women were uncommon in jobs that required using weapons, just the occasional merchants' guard or a rare woman who turned up in an army during time of war, and Elayne had never heard of a group of all-female soldiers before she created one. Except the Maidens, of course, but they were Aiel and a different matter. She hoped people would think them an affectation on her part, and largely decorative with all the lace and silk. Men tended to underestimate a woman carrying weapons until they faced one, and even most other women tended to think her a brainless fool. Bodyguards usually tried to appear so ferocious that no one would dare trying to get past them, but her enemies would just find a new way to attack if she stood the whole Queen's Guard around her shoulder-to-shoulder. A bodyguard her enemies would dismiss until it was too late for more than regrets was her aim. She intended to make their uniforms more elaborate, partly to feed those misconceptions and partly to feed the women's pride as soldiers marked out from the rest, but she herself had no doubts. Every one of them, from merchants' guards to Hunters of the Horn, had been carefully chosen for her skills, experience and courage. She was ready to put her life in their hands. She already had.

ə lin wʊmən wɛɹɪŋ ə lutɛnəns tu ɡoʊldən nɑts ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ ə hɝ ɹɛd kloʊk səluɾəd ɪleɪn wɪð ən ɑɹm əkɹɔs əɹ tʃɛst, ən əɹ ɹoʊn ɡɛldɪŋ tɔst ɪz hɛd, meɪkɪŋ ðə sɪlvɝ bɛlz ɪn ɪz meɪn tʃaɪm feɪnli, əz ɪf i tu wɝ səluɾɪŋ. "wi ɑɹ ɹɛɾi, maɪ leɪɾi, ən ði ɛɹiə ɪz klɪɹ." keɪsil ɹɑskɑvni wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz u hæd bɪn ə mɝtʃəns ɡɑɹd, ən əɹ ɝæfɛlɪn æksɛns wɝ nɑt ðoʊz ʌv ən ɛdʒəkeɪɾəd wʊmən, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs wɑz bɹɪsk ən nɑnɑnsɛns. ʃi juz ðə pɹɑpɝ fɔɹm ʌv ədʒɹɛs, ən wəɾ əntɪl ɪleɪn wɑz kɹaʊnd, jɛt ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə faɪt tə ɡeɪn ðət kɹaʊn fəɹ ɪleɪn. vɛɹi, vɛɹi fju, meɪl əɹ fimeɪl, saɪn ðə ɹɑstɝ ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹd ðiz deɪz ənlɛs ðeɪ wɝ ɹɛɾi fəɹ ðæt. "ðə mɛn mæstɝ ɹɔs hændəɾ oʊvɝ ɑɹ ɹɛɾi, tu. əz ɹɛɾi əz ðəl ɛvɝ bi." klɪɹɪŋ ɪz θɹoʊt, ðə mæn ʃɪftəɾ ɪz kɹʌtʃ ən tʊk tə stʌɾiɪŋ ðə snoʊ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz buts.

A lean woman wearing a lieutenant's two golden knots on the shoulder of her red cloak saluted Elayne with an arm across her chest, and her roan gelding tossed his head, making the silver bells in his mane chime faintly, as if he too were saluting. "We are ready, my Lady, and the area is clear." Caseille Raskovni was one of those who had been a merchant's guard, and her Arafellin accents were not those of an educated woman, but her voice was brisk and nononsense. She used the proper form of address, and would until Elayne was crowned, yet she was ready to fight to gain that crown for Elayne. Very, very few, male or female, signed the roster of the Queen's Guard these days unless they were ready for that. "The men Master Ros handed over are ready, too. As ready as they'll ever be." Clearing his throat, the man shifted his crutch and took to studying the snow in front of his boots.

ɪleɪn kəd si wʌt keɪsil mɛnt. mæstɝ ɹɔs hæd skɹeɪp təɡɛðɝ ɪlɛvən mɛn fɹəm ðə mænɝ tə sɛn tə keɪɛmlɪn ən aʊtfɪɾɪd əm wɪð hælbɝdz ən ʃɔɹt-sɔɹdz ən wʌɾ ɑɹmɝ i kəd faɪnd, naɪn æntik hɛlməts wɪθaʊt feɪsɡɑɹdz ən sɛvən bɹɛstpleɪts wɪð dɛns ðət meɪɾ əm vʌlnɝəbəl. ðɛɹ maʊns wɝ nɑt bæd, ðoʊ hɛɹi wɪð ðɛɹ wɪntɝ koʊts, bʌɾ ivən hʌɾəld əz ðɛɹ ɹaɪɾɝz wɝ ɪn θɪk kloʊks, ʃi kəd si ðəɾ eɪt wɝ ənlaɪkli tə nid tə ʃeɪv əbʌv wʌns ɪn ə wik, ɪf ðæt. ðə mɛn mæstɝ ɹɔs hæd dɪskɹaɪbd əz biɪŋ ɪkspɪɹiəns hæd ɹɪŋkəl feɪsəz ən boʊni hænz ən pɹɑbli nɑɾ ə fʊl sɛɾ ə tiθ bɪtwin ðɛm. hi hæd nɑt bɪn laɪɪŋ əɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɪnt; æɛdmʌn wʊɾə ɡæðɝɾ ɔl ðə fɪt mɛn ɪn ði ɛɹiə tə teɪk wɪð ɪm ən aʊtfɪɾɪd əm ɪn ðə bɛst i hæd. ðə stɔɹi hæd bɪn ðə seɪm ɛvɹiwɛɹ. əpɛɹənli ə ɡɹeɪt nʌmbɝ ə heɪl ən hɑɹɾi mɛn skæɾɝd ðə lɛŋθ ʌv ændɝ wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹitʃ əɹ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ən nʌn ə ðɛm laɪkli tə ɡɛɾ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi əntɪl ɔl wɑz dɪsaɪɾɪd, naʊ. ʃi kəd sɝtʃ ɛvɹi deɪ wɪθaʊt faɪndɪŋ ə sɪŋɡəl bænd. stɪl, ðɪs lɪɾəl bʌntʃ hɛl ðɛɹ hælbɝdz əz ɪf ðeɪ nu haʊ tə juz ðɛm. ðən əɡɛn, ðət wɑz nɑt hɑɹd tə də sɪɾɪŋ ə sæɾəl ət ɹɛst wɪð ðə hælbɹdz bʌt tʌkt ɪn jəɹ stɝəp. ʃi cʊɾə mænədʒ ðæt.

Elayne could see what Caseille meant. Master Ros had scraped together eleven men from the manor to send to Caemlyn and outfitted them with halberds and short-swords and what armor he could find, nine antique helmets without faceguards and seven breastplates with dents that made them vulnerable. Their mounts were not bad, though hairy with their winter coats, but even huddled as their riders were in thick cloaks, she could see that eight were unlikely to need to shave above once in a week, if that. The men Master Ros had described as being experienced had wrinkled faces and bony hands and probably not a full set of teeth between them. He had not been lying or trying to stint; Aedmun would have gathered all the fit men in the area to take with him and outfitted them in the best he had. The story had been the same everywhere. Apparently a great number of hale and hearty men scattered the length of Andor were trying to reach her in Caemlyn. And none of them likely to get into the city until all was decided, now. She could search every day without finding a single band. Still, this little bunch held their halberds as if they knew how to use them. Then again, that was not hard to do sitting a saddle at rest with the halberd's butt tucked in your stirrup. She could have managed that.

"wi hæv vɪzəɾəd naɪntin ə ðiz mænɝz, sɪstɝ," eɪvinhə sɛd sɔfli, muvɪŋ kloʊsɝ əntɪl ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz tʌtʃt, "æn kaʊntɪŋ ðiz, wɪv ɡæðɝd tu hʌnʒɹəd ən faɪv bɔɪz tu jʌŋ tə bi blʌɾɪd ən oʊl mɛn u ʃʊɾə leɪd daʊn ðə spɪɹ lɔŋ əɡoʊ. aɪ hæv nɑɾ æsk bɪfoʊt. jə noʊ jəɹ pipəl ən jəɹ weɪz. ɪz ðɪs wɝθ ðə taɪm jə ɡɪv ɪt?" "oʊ, jɛs, sɪstɝ." ɪleɪn kɛpt əɹ vɔɪs dʒʌst əz loʊ, soʊ ðə wʌnləɡd fɔɹmɝ soʊlʒɝ ən ðə sɝvəns kəd nɑɾ oʊvɝhɪɹ. ðə bɛst ə pipəl kəd tɝn mjulhɛɾɪd ɪf ðeɪ ɹilaɪz jə wɑntəɾ əm tə bɪheɪv ə sɝɾən weɪ. pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɪf ðeɪ ɹilaɪz ðət ðə hɛlp ðeɪ hæd peɪnfəli ɡæðɝɾ ən ɔfɝd, ən jə hæɾ æksɛptɪd, wɑz nɑt wʌt jə wɝ æftɝ əɾ ɔl. "ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðət vɪlədʒ daʊn baɪ ðə ɹɪvɝ noʊz aɪm hɪɹ baɪ naʊ, ən soʊ də hæf ðə fɑɹmz fəɹ maɪlz.

"We have visited nineteen of these manors, sister," Aviendha said softly, moving closer until their shoulders touched, "and counting these, we have gathered two hundred and five boys too young to be blooded and old men who should have laid down the spear long ago. I have not asked befote. You know your people and your ways. Is this worth the time you give it?" "Oh, yes, sister." Elayne kept her voice just as low, so the onelegged former soldier and the servants could not overhear. The best of people could turn muleheaded if they realized you wanted them to behave a certain way. Particularly if they realized that the help they had painfully gathered and offered, and you had accepted, was not what you were after at all. "Everyone in that village down by the river knows I'm here by now, and so do half the farms for miles.

baɪ nun, ði ʌðɝ hæf wɪl noʊ, ən baɪ təmɑɹoʊ, ðə nɛks vɪlədʒ oʊvɝ, ən mɔɹ fɑɹmz.

By noon, the other half will know, and by tomorrow, the next village over, and more farms.

nuz tʃɹævəlz sloʊli ɪn wɪntɝ, ɪspɛʃli ɪn ðɪs kʌntʃɹi. ðeɪ noʊ aɪv spoʊkən maɪ kleɪm tə ðə θɹoʊn, jɛɾ ɪf aɪ ɡeɪn ðə θɹoʊn təmɑɹoʊ əɹ daɪ təmɑɹoʊ, ðeɪ maɪt nɑt lɝn ʌv ɪt bɪfɔɹ ðə mɪɾəl ə spɹɪŋ, meɪbi nɑɾ ivən əntɪl sʌmɝ. bʌt tədeɪ ðeɪ noʊ ðəɾ ɪleɪn tʃɹəkən ɪz əlaɪv ðət ʃi vɪzəɾəd ðə mænɝ ɪn sɪlks ən dʒuəlz ən sʌmən mɛn tə hɝ bænɝ. pipəl twɛnti maɪlz fɹəm hɪɹ wɪl kleɪm ðeɪ sɔ mi ən tʌtʃt maɪ hænd. fju pipəl kən seɪ ðət wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ ɪn feɪvɝ ə huɛvɝ ðeɪ kleɪm tə hæv sin, ən wən jə spik ɪn feɪvɝ ə sʌmwʌn, jə kənvɪns jɝsɛlf tə feɪvɝ ðɛm.

News travels slowly in winter, especially in this country. They know I've spoken my claim to the throne, yet if I gain the throne tomorrow or die tomorrow, they might not learn of it before the middle of spring, maybe not even until summer. But today they know that Elayne Trakand is alive that she visited the manor in silks and jewels and summoned men to her banner. People twenty miles from here will claim they saw me and touched my hand. Few people can say that without speaking in favor of whoever they claim to have seen, and when you speak in favor of someone, you convince yourself to favor them.

ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛn ən wɪmən ɪn naɪntin pleɪsəz ɝaʊn ændɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt haʊ ðeɪ sɔ ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ dʒʌs ðɪs læst wik, ən ɛvɹi deɪ ði ɛɹiə ðət tɔk kʌvɝz spɹɛdz laɪk ən ɪŋkblɑt. "ɪf aɪ hæd taɪm, aɪd vɪzəɾ ɛvɹi vɪlədʒ ɪn ændɝ. ɪt woʊn meɪk ə hɛɹ ə dɪfɝəns ɪn wʌt hæpənz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, bʌɾ ɪt meɪ meɪk ɔl ðə dɪfɝəns æftɝ aɪ wɪn." ʃi wəd nɑɾ ədmɪt tə ɛni pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌðɝ ðən wɪnɪŋ.

There are men and women in nineteen places around Andor talking about how they saw the Daughter-Heir just this last week, and every day the area that talk covers spreads like an inkblot. "If I had time, I'd visit every village in Andor. It won't make a hair of difference in what happens in Caemlyn, but it may make all the difference after I win." She would not admit to any possibility other than winning.

ɪspɛʃli nɑt ɡɪvən u wəd teɪk ðə θɹoʊn ɪf ʃi feɪld. "moʊs kwinz ɪn əɹ hɪstɝi spɛn ðə fɝs jɪɹz ə ðɛɹ ɹul ɡæðɝɪŋ ðə pipəl sɑlədli bɪhaɪn ðɛm, eɪvinhə, ən səm nɛvɝ dɪd, bʌt hɑɹɾɝ taɪmz ðən ðiz ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ. aɪ meɪ nɑɾ əv wʌn jɪɹ bɪfɔɹ aɪ niɾ ɛvɹi ændɔɝən tə stæn bɪhaɪn mi. aɪ kænt weɪɾ əntɪl aɪ hæv ðə θɹoʊn. hɑɹɾɝ taɪmz ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ, ən aɪ hæv tə bi ɹɛɾi. ændɝ əz tə bi ɹɛɾi, ən aɪ mʌs meɪk ɪt soʊ," ʃi fɪnɪʃt fɝmli.

Especially not given who would take the throne if she failed. "Most Queens in our history spent the first years of their rule gathering the people solidly behind them, Aviendha, and some never did, but harder times than these are coming. I may not have one year before I need every Andoran to stand behind me. I can't wait until I have the throne. Harder times are coming, and I have to be ready. Andor has to be ready, and I must make it so," she finished firmly.

smaɪlɪŋ, eɪvinhə tʌtʃt ɪleɪnz tʃik. "aɪ θɪŋk əl lɝn ə ɡɹeɪt dil əbaʊt biɪŋ ə waɪz wʌn fɹəm ju." tə hɝ mɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃən, ɪleɪn blʌʃt ɪn ɪmbɛɹəsmənt. hɝ tʃiks fɛlt ɑn faɪɝ! meɪbi ðə swɪŋz ɪn hjumɝ wɝ wɝs ðən ðə kɑsəɾɪŋ. laɪt, ʃi hæd mʌnθs ə ðɪs tə lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə!

Smiling, Aviendha touched Elayne's cheek. "I think I will learn a great deal about being a Wise One from you." To her mortification, Elayne blushed in embarrassment. Her cheeks felt on fire! Maybe the swings in humor were worse than the cosseting. Light, she had months of this to look forward to!

nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, ʃi faʊn ə kɝnəl ə ɹɪzɛnmənt təwɔɹd ɹænd. hi hæd dʌn ðɪs tə hɝ - ɔl ɹaɪt, ʃi hæd hɛlp hɪm, ɪnstəɡeɪɾɪd ðə duɪŋ, ɪn fækt, bʌt ðət wɑz bɪsaɪd ðə pɔɪnt - hi hæd dʌn ðɪs ən wɔkt əweɪ wɪð ə smʌɡ ɡɹɪn ɑn ɪz feɪs. ʃi daʊɾɪd ɪz ɡɹɪn tiæd ɹɪli bɪn smʌɡ, bʌt ʃi kəd pɪktʃɝ ɪɾ ɔl tu izəli. lɛɾ ɪm dɑɹt fɹəm ɡɪɾi tə wipi ɛvɹi ʌðɝ aʊɝ ən si haʊ hi laɪkt ɪt! aɪ kæn θɪŋk ɪn ə stʃɹeɪt laɪn, ʃi θɔɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. ðət wɑz ɪz fɔlt, tu.

Not for the first time, she found a kernel of resentment toward Rand. He had done this to her - all right, she had helped him, instigated the doing, in fact, but that was beside the point - he had done this and walked away with a smug grin on his face. She doubted his grin tiad really been smug, but she could picture it all too easily. Let him dart from giddy to weepy every other hour and see how he liked it! I can't think in a straight line, she thought irritably. That was his fault, too.

ðə ɡɹumz faɪnəli dim faɪɹhɑɹɾ ən eɪvinhəz sɪswaɪ mik ɪnʌf tə bi maʊntəd baɪ leɪɾiz, ən eɪvinhə klaɪm tə hɝ sæɾəl fɹəm ðə stoʊn maʊntɪŋ blɑk wɪð ə ɡʊd dil mɔɹ ɡɹeɪs ðən ʃi wʌns hæd ʃoʊn, ɝeɪnʒɪŋ əɹ bʌlki ʌndəvaɪɾɪd skɝts tə kʌvɝ əz mʌtʃ ə hɝ dɑɹk-stɑkɪnɡd lɛɡz əz pɑsəbəl. ʃi stɪl bɪliv ðəɾ əɹ oʊn lɛɡz wɝ supɪɹiɝ tə ɛni hɔɹs, jɛt ʃi hæd bɪkʌm ə pæsəbəl ɹaɪɾɝ. ðoʊ ʃi dɪɾ əv ə tɛndənsi tə lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd wən ðə hɔɹs dɪɾ əz ʃi wɑntəd.

The grooms finally deemed Fireheart and Aviendha's Siswai meek enough to be mounted by ladies, and Aviendha climbed to her saddle from the stone mounting block with a good deal more grace than she once had shown, arranging her bulky undivided skirts to cover as much of her dark-stockinged legs as possible. She still believed that her own legs were superior to any horse, yet she had become a passable rider. Though she did have a tendency to look surprised when the horse did as she wanted.

faɪɹhɑɹt tʃɹaɪd tə dæns wʌns ɪleɪn wɑz ɑn ɪz bæk, bʌt ʃi ɹeɪn ɪm ɪn smɑɹtli, ən ə bɪt mɔɹ ʃɑɹpli ðən ʃi wəɾ əv nɔɹməli. hɝ tiɾɝɪŋ mudz hæd teɪkən əɹ tə ə sʌɾən sɛns ə dʒɹɛd fəɹ ɹænd, ən ɪf ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɛnʃʊɹ ɪz seɪfti, ðəɹ wɑz wʌn meɪl ət hænd ʃi kəd meɪk sɝɾən dɪɾ ɪɡzækli əz i wɑz səpoʊz tə. sɪks ə ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən lɛd ðə weɪ daʊn ðə ɹoʊd fɹəm ðə mænɝ əɾ ə sloʊ wɔk, ɔl ðə dɛpθ ə snoʊ wəɾ əlaʊ, wɪð ðə ɹɛs fɑloʊɪŋ əɹ ən eɪvinhə ɪn smɑɹt kɑləmz, ðə læs hɔɹswɪmən ɪn laɪn liɾɪŋ ðə pæk ænəməlz. ðə loʊkəl mɛn tʃɹeɪl bɪhaɪn ɹæədli wɪð ðɛɹ oʊn pækhɔɹs, ə ʃæɡi kɹitʃɝ taɪɾ əbaʊt wɪð kʊkpɑts ən ɹʌf bʌndəlz ən ivən hæf ə dʌzən laɪv tʃɪkənz. ə fju tʃɪɹz ɡɹiɾəd əm əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd θɹu ðə θætʃ-ɹuf vɪlədʒ ən əkɹɔs ðə stoʊn bɹɪdʒ ðət kɹɔst ə sneɪk-kɝv fɹoʊzən stʃɹim, laʊd kɹaɪz ʌv "ɪleɪn ə ðə lɪli!" ən "tʃɹəkənd! tʃɹəkənd!" ən "mæðɝɪn stænz!" bʌt ʃi sɔ ə wʊmən kɹaɪɪŋ ɑn əɹ hʌzbənz tʃɛst, ən tɪɹz ɑn ɪz feɪs, tu, ən ənʌðɝ wʊmən u stʊd wɪð əɹ bæk tə ðə ɹaɪɾɝz ən əɹ hɛd daʊn, ɹəfjuzɪŋ ivən tə lʊk. ɪleɪn hoʊpt ʃi wəd sɛn ðɛɹ sʌnz hoʊm tə ðɛm. ðəɹ ʃəd bi lɪɾəl faɪɾɪŋ ət keɪɛmlɪn, ənlɛs ʃi blʌndɝd bædli, bʌt ðəɹ wəd bi sʌm, ən wʌns ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn wɑz hɝz, bæɾəlz leɪ əhɛd. tə ðə saʊθ leɪ ðə sintʃæn, ən tə ðə nɔɹθ, mɹdʒɹɑl ən tʃɹɑləks weɪɾɪŋ tə dɪsɛn fəɹ tɑɹmən ɡdən. ændɝ wəd blid sʌnz ɪn ðə deɪz tə kʌm. bɝn hɝ, ʃi wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ tə kɹaɪ!

Fireheart tried to dance once Elayne was on his back, but she reined him in smartly, and a bit more sharply than she would have normally. Her teetering moods had taken her to a sudden sense of dread for Rand, and if she could not ensure his safety, there was one male at hand she could make certain did exactly as he was supposed to. Six of the Guardswomen led the way down the road from the manor at a slow walk, all the depth of snow would allow, with the rest following her and Aviendha in smart columns, the last horsewomen in line leading the pack animals. The local men trailed behind raggedly with their own packhorse, a shaggy creature tied about with cookpots and rough bundles and even half a dozen live chickens. A few cheers greeted them as they rode through the thatch-roofed village and across the stone bridge that crossed a snake-curved frozen stream, loud cries of "Elayne of the Lily!" and "Trakand! Trakand!" and "Matherin stands!" But she saw a woman crying on her husband's chest, and tears on his face, too, and another woman who stood with her back to the riders and her head down, refusing even to look. Elayne hoped she would send their sons home to them. There should be little fighting at Caemlyn, unless she blundered badly, but there would be some, and once the Rose Crown was hers, battles lay ahead. To the south lay the Seanchan, and to the north, Myrddraal and Trollocs waiting to descend for Tarmon Gai'don. Andor would bleed sons in the days to come. Burn her, she was not going to cry!

bɪɑn ðə bɹɪdʒ, ðə ɹoʊd slæntəɾ ʌp əɡɛn, ə stip klaɪm θɹu paɪn ən fɝ ən lɛðɝlif, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə lɔŋ maɪl tə ðə maʊntən mɛdoʊ ðeɪ sɔt. ðə snoʊ ʃaɪnɪŋ bɪniθ ðə mɪdmɔɹnɪŋ sʌn stɪl bɔɹ ðə mɑɹks ə hʊvz kʌmɪŋ fɹəm wɛɹ ə ɡeɪtweɪ hæd lɛft ə dip fɝoʊ ɪn ðə snoʊ. ɪt cʊɾə bɪn nɪɹɝ ðə mænɝ, bʌt ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv sʌmwʌn stændɪŋ wɛɹ jəɹ ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpənd wɑz ɔlweɪz ðə deɪnʒɝ.

Beyond the bridge, the road slanted up again, a steep climb through pine and fir and leatherleaf, but it was no more than a long mile to the mountain meadow they sought. The snow shining beneath the midmorning sun still bore the marks of hooves coming from where a gateway had left a deep furrow in the snow. It could have been nearer the manor, but the possibility of someone standing where your gateway opened was always the danger.

ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəɾ eɪvinhə əz ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə mɛdoʊ. ʃi hæd meɪd ðə ɡeɪtweɪ tə kʌm hɪɹ fɹəm ðɛɹ læst stɑp jɛstɝdeɪ æftɝnun, ə mænɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz nɔɹθ, soʊ ʃi wəd wiv ðə ɡeɪtweɪ tə ɡoʊ tə keɪɛmlɪn, bʌt ðə saɪɾ ʌv eɪvinhə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ meɪɾ ɪleɪn ɡoʊ bɹuɾi. huɛvɝ meɪd ðə ɡeɪtweɪ tə liv keɪɛmlɪn ɔlweɪz ɛndəɾ ʌp meɪkɪŋ ɔl ði ʌðɝz əntɪl ðeɪ ɹɪtɝnd, sɪns ʃi lɝn ðə ɡɹaʊn əɾ itʃ pleɪs əɹ ɡeɪtweɪ tʌtʃt, bʌɾ ɑn itʃ ə ðɛɹ faɪv tʃɹɪps, eɪvinhə hæɾ æsk tə meɪk ðət fɝst ɡeɪtweɪ. ʃi maɪt sɪmpli hæv wɑntəd ðə pɹæktəs, əz ʃi kleɪmd, ðoʊ ɪleɪn hɑɹdli hæd mɔɹ pɹæktəs ðən ʃi dɪd, bʌɾ ənʌðɝ pɑsəbɪləɾi hæd kʌm tə maɪnd. meɪbi eɪvinhə wɑntəd tə kip əɹ fɹəm tʃænəlɪŋ, ɪn ɛni kənsɪɾɝəbəl əmaʊn ət list.

The glow of saidar surrounded Aviendha as they rode into the meadow. She had made the gateway to come here from their last stop yesterday afternoon, a manor a hundred miles north, so she would weave the gateway to go to Caemlyn, but the sight of Aviendha shining with the Power made Elayne go broody. Whoever made the gateway to leave Caemlyn always ended up making all the others until they returned, since she learned the ground at each place her gateway touched, but on each of their five trips, Aviendha had asked to make that first gateway. She might simply have wanted the practice, as she claimed, though Elayne hardly had more practice than she did, but another possibility had come to mind. Maybe Aviendha wanted to keep her from channeling, in any considerable amount at least.

kəz ʃi wɑz pɹɛɡnənt. ðə wiv ðət hæd meɪɾ əm sɪstɝz ə ðə seɪm mʌðɝ kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn juzd ɪf iðɝ ə ðɛm hæd bɪn wɪð tʃaɪld, kəz ði ʌnbɔɹn tʃaɪld wʊɾə ʃɛɹɾ ɪn ðə bɑnd, ə θɪŋ ɪt kəd nɑt bi stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə sɝvaɪv, bʌt ʃʊɹli wʌn ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə pæləs wʊɾə sɛd sʌmθɪŋ ɪf tʃænəlɪŋ wɑz tə bi əvɔɪɾəd ɪn pɹɛɡnənsi. ðən əɡɛn, vɛɹi fju ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛvɝ bɔɹ tʃɪlʒɹən. ðeɪ maɪt nɑt noʊ. ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ ðəɹ wɝ mɛni θɪŋz ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ðeɪ maɪt pɹitɛn ʌðɝwaɪz tə ðə ɹɛst ə ðə wɝld - ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd teɪkən ædvæntɪdʒ ə ðət pɹɪzʌmpʃən fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm - bʌɾ ɪt sim vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ ðət ðeɪ maɪt bi ɪɡnɝən ə sʌmθɪŋ soʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə moʊst wɪmən. ɪt wɑz əz ðoʊ ə bɝd nu haʊ tə iɾ ɛvɹi siɾ ən ɡɹeɪn ɪksɛp bɑɹli, soʊ səpoʊzədli nu, kəz ɪf ɪt dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ tə it bɑɹli, wʌɾ ɛls maɪɾ ɪt bi ɪɡnɝən ʌv? waɪz wʌnz bɔɹ tʃɪlʒɹən, ðoʊ, ən ðeɪ hæd sɛd nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt -  əbɹʌpli kənsɝnz oʊvɝ əɹ beɪb ən tʃænəlɪŋ ən wʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪɾ əɹ maɪt nɑt noʊ wɝ pʊʃt ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd. ʃi kəd fil sʌmwʌn tʃænəlɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ. nɑɾ eɪvinhə, nɑt sʌmwʌn ɑn wʌn ə ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ maʊntənz, nɑɾ ɛniwʌn nɪɹ əz kloʊs əz ðæt. ðɪs wɑz dɪstənt, laɪk ə bikən bleɪzɪŋ ɑn ə fɑɹ maʊntəntɑp ɪn ðə naɪt. ə vɛɹi dɪstən maʊntən. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən haʊ mʌtʃ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɑz niɾəd fəɹ əɹ tə fil tʃænəlɪŋ ət ðət dɪstəns. ɛvɹi wʊmən ɪn ðə wɝld u kəd tʃænəl mʌs bi eɪbəl tə sɛns ðɪs. tə pɔɪn stʃɹeɪt tə ɪt. ən ðə bikən leɪ tə ðə wɛst. nʌθɪŋ hæd tʃeɪnʒd ɪn ðə bɑnd wɪð ɹænd, ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv sɛɾ ɪɡzækli wɛɹ i wɑz wɪðɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz, bʌt ʃi nu.

Because she was pregnant. The weave that had made them sisters of the same mother could not have been used if either of them had been with child, because the unborn child would have shared in the bond, a thing it could not be strong enough to survive, but surely one of the Aes Sedai in the palace would have said something if channeling was to be avoided in pregnancy. Then again, very few Aes Sedai ever bore children. They might not know. She was aware there were many things Aes Sedai did not know, however much they might pretend otherwise to the rest of the world - she herself had taken advantage of that presumption from time to time - but it seemed very strange that they might be ignorant of something so important to most women. It was as though a bird knew how to eat every seed and grain except barley, so supposedly knew, because if it did not know how to eat barley, what else might it be ignorant of? Wise Ones bore children, though, and they had said nothing about -  Abruptly concerns over her babe and channeling and what Aes Sedai might or might not know were pushed right out of her head. She could feel someone channeling saidar. Not Aviendha, not someone on one of the surrounding mountains, not anyone near as close as that. This was distant, like a beacon blazing on a far mountaintop in the night. A very distant mountain. She could not imagine how much of the One Power was needed for her to feel channeling at that distance. Every woman in the world who could channel must be able to sense this. To point straight to it. And the beacon lay to the west. Nothing had changed in the bond with Rand, she could not have said exactly where he was within a hundred miles, but she knew.

"hiz ɪn deɪnʒɝ," ʃi sɛd. "wi mʌst ɡoʊ tə hɪm, eɪvinhə."

"He's in danger," she said. "We must go to him, Aviendha."

eɪvinhə ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk ən stɑp stɛɹɪŋ wɛstwɝd. ðə ɡloʊ ɹɪmeɪn ɝaʊn hɝ, ən ɪleɪn kəd fil ðət ʃi hæd dʒɹɔn ɑn ðə sɔɹs əz dipli əz ʃi kʊd. bʌɾ ivən əz eɪvinhə tɝn tə hɝ, ʃi fɛl ði əmaʊn ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən hɛl dwɪndəl. "wi mʌs nɑt, ɪleɪn." əɡæst, ɪleɪn twɪstəɾ ɪn faɪɹhɑɹts sæɾəl tə stɛɹ ət hɝ. "ju wɑnə əbændən hɪm? tə ðæt!" noʊ wʌn kəd hændəl soʊ mʌtʃ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ, nɑt ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst sɝkəl, nɑɾ əneɪɾɪd. səpoʊzədli ə sɑŋɡɹil ɪɡzɪstəd, ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ɛvɝ meɪd, ən ɪf wʌt ʃi hæd hɝd wɑz kɝɛkt, ðət maɪt bi eɪbəl tə hændəl ðɪs. meɪbi. bʌt fɹəm wʌt ʃi hæd hɝd, noʊ wʊmən kəd juz ɪɾ ən lɪv, nɑt wɪθaʊt tɛɹæŋɡɹil meɪd fəɹ ðə pɝpəs, ən noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ sin wʌn ðət ʃi nu ʌv. ʃʊɹli noʊ sɪstɝ wəd tʃɹaɪ ivən ɪf ʃi hæd faʊnd wʌn. ðət mʌtʃ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ kəd lɛvəl maʊntən ɹeɪnʒəz əɾ ə stʃɹoʊk! noʊ sɪstɝ wəd tʃɹaɪ ɪksɛpt pɝhæps wʌn ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ. əɹ wɝs, wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən.

Aviendha gave herself a shake and stopped staring westward. The glow remained around her, and Elayne could feel that she had drawn on the Source as deeply as she could. But even as Aviendha turned to her, she felt the amount of saidar the other woman held dwindle. "We must not, Elayne." Aghast, Elayne twisted in Fireheart's saddle to stare at her. "You want to abandon him? To that!" No one could handle so much of saidar, not the strongest circle, not unaided. Supposedly a sa'angreal existed, greater than anything else ever made, and if what she had heard was correct, that might be able to handle this. Maybe. But from what she had heard, no woman could use it and live, not without ter'angreal made for the purpose, and no one had ever seen one that she knew of. Surely no sister would try even if she had found one. That much of the One Power could level mountain ranges at a stroke! No sister would try except perhaps one of the Black Ajah. Or worse, one of the Forsaken.

meɪbi mɔɹ ðən wʌn. wʌɾ ɛls kəɾ ɪt bi? ən eɪvinhə sɪmpli wɑntəd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɪt, wən ʃi mʌs noʊ ðət ɹænd wɑz ðɛɹ?

Maybe more than one. What else could it be? And Aviendha simply wanted to ignore it, when she must know that Rand was there?

ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən, ʌnəwɛɹ, wɝ stɪl weɪɾɪŋ peɪʃənli ɑn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, kipɪŋ wɑtʃ ɑn ðə tʃɹilaɪn ɝaʊn ðə mɛdoʊ ən lɪɾəl kənsɝnd wɪð ðəɾ æftɝ ðɛɹ ɹɪsɛpʃən ət ðə mænɝ, ðoʊ keɪsil wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə, ə slaɪt fɹaʊn vɪzəbəl bɪhaɪn ðə feɪs-bɑɹz ə hɝ hɛlmət.

The Guardswomen, unaware, were still waiting patiently on their horses, keeping watch on the treeline around the meadow and little concerned with that after their reception at the manor, though Caseille was watching Elayne and Aviendha, a slight frown visible behind the face-bars of her helmet.

ʃi nu ðeɪ nɛvɝ dɪleɪɾ əɾ oʊpənɪŋ ə ɡeɪtweɪ. ðə mɛn fɹəm ðə mænɝ wɝ ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ pækhɔɹs, pɔɪŋ ət ðə bʌndəlz ən əpɛɹənli ɑɹɡjuɪŋ oʊvɝ wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt sʌmθɪŋ hæd bɪn ɪnkluɾəd. eɪvinhə stɪl muvd əɹ ɡɹeɪ kloʊsɝ tə ɪleɪnz blæk ən spoʊk ɪn ə vɔɪs ðət wəd nɑt kæɹi.

She knew they never delayed at opening a gateway. The men from the manor were gathered around their packhorse, pawing at the bundles and apparently arguing over whether or not something had been included. Aviendha still moved her gray closer to Elayne's black and spoke in a voice that would not carry.

"wi noʊ nʌθɪŋ, ɪleɪn. nɑt wɛðɝ hiz dænsɪŋ ðə spɪɹz əɹ ðɪs ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. ɪf i dænsəz ðə spɪɹz ən wi ɹʌʃ ɪn, wɪl i ətæk əs bɪfɔɹ i noʊz u ɑɹ? wɪl wi dɪstʃɹækt ɪm kəz i dʌz nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt ʌs, ən əlaʊ hɪz ɛnəmiz tə wɪn? ɪf i daɪz, wɪl faɪn u tʊk ɪz laɪf ən kɪl ðɛm, bʌɾ ɪf wi ɡoʊ tə hɪm naʊ, wi ɡoʊ blaɪnli, ən wi meɪ bɹɪŋ dɪzæstɝ ɑn əɹ bæks." "wi kəd bi kɛɹfəl," ɪleɪn sɛd sʌlənli. ɪɾ ɪnfjʊɹieɪɾəd əɹ ðət ʃi wɑz filɪŋ sʌlən, ən ʃoʊɪŋ ɪt, bʌɾ ɔl ʃi kəd də wɑz ɹaɪɾ əɹ mudz ən tʃɹaɪ nɑt lɛɾ əm ɡɛt ði ʌpɝ hæn kəmplitli. "wi doʊn əv tə tʃɹævəl ɹaɪt tə ðə spɑt." ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ paʊtʃ, filɪŋ ðə smɔl aɪvɝi kɑɹvɪŋ ʌv ə siɾəd wʊmən ðət nɛsəld ɪnsaɪd, ʃi lʊk pɔɪntɪdli əɾ əɹ sɪstɝz æmbɝ bɹutʃ. "laɪt, eɪvinhə, wɪv æŋɡɹil, ən niðɝ ʌv əs ɪz ɪɡzækli hɛlpləs." oʊ, laɪt, naʊ ʃi wɑz saʊndɪŋ pɛtʃələnt. ʃi nu vɛɹi wɛl ðət boʊθ ə ðɛm təɡɛðɝ, æŋɡɹil ən ɔl, wəd bi flaɪz bæɾəlɪŋ ə fleɪm əɡɛnst wʌt ðeɪ kəd sɛns, bʌɾ ivən soʊ, ə flaɪbaɪɾ ət ðə ɹaɪt moʊmən maɪt meɪk ðə dɪfɝəns. "æn doʊn tɛl mi əl ɛndeɪnʒɝ ðə beɪbi. mɪn sɛd ʃɪl bi bɔɹn stʃɹɔŋ ən hɛlθi. jə toʊl mi soʊ jɝsɛlf. ðət minz əl lɪv ət lis lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ maɪ dɔɾɝ tə bi bɔɹn." ʃi hoʊp fəɹ ə dɔɾɝ. faɪɹhɑɹt tʃoʊz ðət moʊmən tə nɪp ət ðə ɡɹeɪ, ən sɪswaɪ nɪp bæk, ən fəɹ ə bɪɾ ɪleɪn wɑz ɑkjəpaɪd wɪð ɡɛɾɪŋ əɹ ɡɛldɪŋ ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl ən kipɪŋ eɪvinhə fɹəm biɪŋ θɹoʊn ən tɛlɪŋ keɪsil ðət ðeɪ dɪd nɑt niɾ ɛni hɛlp, ən baɪ ði ɛn ʌv ɪt, ʃi wɑz nɑt filɪŋ sʌlən ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ʃi wɑntəd tə smæk faɪɹhɑɹt ɹaɪt bɪtwin ɪz ɪɹz.

"We know nothing, Elayne. Not whether he is dancing the spears or this is something else. If he dances the spears and we rush in, will he attack us before he knows who are? Will we distract him because he does not expect us, and allow his enemies to win? If he dies, we will find who took his life and kill them, but if we go to him now, we go blindly, and we may bring disaster on our backs." "We could be careful," Elayne said sullenly. It infuriated her that she was feeling sullen, and showing it, but all she could do was ride her moods and try not let them get the upper hand completely. "We don't have to Travel right to the spot." Gripping her pouch, feeling the small ivory carving of a seated woman that nestled inside, she looked pointedly at her sister's amber brooch. "Light, Aviendha, we have angreal, and neither of us is exactly helpless." Oh, Light, now she was sounding petulant. She knew very well that both of them together, angreal and all, would be flies battling a flame against what they could sense, but even so, a flybite at the right moment might make the difference. "And don't tell me I'll endanger the baby. Min said she will be born strong and healthy. You told me so yourself. That means I will live at least long enough for my daughter to be born." She hoped for a daughter. Fireheart chose that moment to nip at the gray, and Siswai nipped back, and for a bit Elayne was occupied with getting her gelding under control and keeping Aviendha from being thrown and telling Caseille that they did not need any help, and by the end of it, she was not feeling sullen any longer. She wanted to smack Fireheart right between his ears.

əsaɪd fɹəm meɪkɪŋ ði ænəməl oʊbeɪ ðə ɹeɪnz, eɪvinhə bɪheɪvd əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ hæd hæpən əɾ ɔl. ʃi dɪd fɹaʊn, ə lɪɾəl ənsɝteɪnli, hɝ feɪs fɹeɪm baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʊl ə hɝ ʃɔl, bʌɾ əɹ ənsɝɾənti hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə hɔɹs.

Aside from making the animal obey the reins, Aviendha behaved as if nothing had happened at all. She did frown, a little uncertainly, her face framed by the dark wool of her shawl, but her uncertainty had nothing to do with the horse.

"aɪ hæv toʊl jə əbaʊt ðə ɹɪŋz ɪn ɹɪɾiən," ʃi sɛd sloʊli, ən ɪleɪn ɡeɪv ən ɪmpeɪʃənt nɑd. ɛvɹi wʊmən u wɑntəd tə bɪkʌm ə waɪz wʌn wɑz sɛn θɹu ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil bɪfɔɹ ʃi bɪɡæn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil juz tə tɛs nɑvəsɪz fəɹ biɪŋ ɹeɪz tə æksɛptɪɾ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪn ðɪs wʌn, ə wʊmən sɔ hɝ hoʊl laɪf. ɔl ə hɝ pɑsəbəl laɪvz, ɹɪli, ɛvɹi dɪsɪʒən meɪd dɪfɹənli, ən ɪnfənət fæn ə laɪvz beɪst ɑn dɪfɝɪŋ tʃɔɪsəz. "noʊ wʌn kən ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɔl ə ðæt, ɪleɪn, oʊnli bɪts ən pisəz. aɪ nu aɪ wəd lʌv ɹænd ælθɹ . . . " ʃi wɑz stɪl ənkʌmftəɹbəl səmtaɪmz əbaʊt juzɪŋ dʒʌst ɪz fɝs neɪm ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ʌðɝz, "æn ðəɾ aɪ wəd faɪn sɪstɝ-waɪvz. fəɹ moʊs θɪŋz, ɔl jə ɹɪteɪn ɪz ə veɪɡ ɪmpɹɛʃən ət bɛst. ə hɪn ʌv wɔɹnɪŋ, səmtaɪmz. aɪ θɪŋk ɪf wi ɡoʊ tə hɪm naʊ, sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi bæd wɪl hæpən. meɪbi wʌn ʌv əs wɪl daɪ, meɪbi boʊθ ɪn spaɪɾ ʌv wʌt mɪn sɛd." ðət ʃi sɛd mɪnz neɪm wɪθaʊt fʌmbəlɪŋ wɑz ə mɛʒɝ ə hɝ kənsɝn. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ mɪn vɛɹi wɛl, ən juʒəwəli neɪmd əɹ fɔɹməli, əz mɪn fɑɹʃɔ. "pɝhæps hɪl daɪ. pɝhæps sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. aɪ də nɑt noʊ fəɹ ʃʊɹ - meɪbi wɪl ɔl sɝvaɪv, ən wɪl sɪɾ ɝaʊn ə faɪɝ wɪð ɪm ɹoʊstɪŋ pɛkɑɹə wən wi faɪn ɪm - bʌt ðə ɡlɪmɝ ʌv ə wɔɹnɪŋ ɪz ðəɹ ɪn maɪ hɛd." ɪleɪn oʊpən əɹ maʊθ æŋɡɹəli. ðən ʃi kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn, æŋɡɝ dʒɹeɪnɪŋ əweɪ laɪk wɔɾɝ daʊn ə hoʊl, ən əɹ ʃoʊldɝz slʌmpt. pɝhæps eɪvinhəz ɡlɪmɝ wɑz tʃɹu ən pɝhæps nɑt, bʌt ðə fækt wɑz ðəɾ əɹ ɑɹɡjəməns hæd bɪn ɡʊd fɹəm ðə stɑɹt. ə ɡɹeɪt ɹɪsk teɪkən ɪn ɪɡnɝəns, ən teɪkɪŋ ɪt maɪt bɹɪŋ dɪzæstɝ. ðə bikən hæd ɡɹoʊn bɹaɪɾɝ stɪl. ən i wɑz ðɛɹ, ɹaɪt wɛɹ ðə bikən wɑz. ðə bɑn dɪd nɑt tɛl əɹ soʊ, nɑɾ ət ðɪs dɪstəns, bʌt ʃi nu. ən ʃi nu ʃi hæd tə liv ɪm tə teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪmsɛlf waɪl ʃi tʊk kɛɹ ʌv ændɝ.

"I have told you about the rings in Rhuidean," she said slowly, and Elayne gave an impatient nod. Every woman who wanted to become a Wise One was sent through a ter'angreal before she began training. It was something like the ter'angreal used to test novices for being raised to Accepted in the White Tower, except that in this one, a woman saw her whole life. All of her possible lives, really, every decision made differently, an infinite fan of lives based on differing choices. "No one can remember all of that, Elayne, only bits and pieces. I knew I would love Rand al'Thor . . . " she was still uncomfortable sometimes about using just his first name in front of others, "and that I would find sister-wives. For most things, all you retain is a vague impression at best. A hint of warning, sometimes. I think if we go to him now, something very bad will happen. Maybe one of us will die, maybe both in spite of what Min said." That she said Min's name without fumbling was a measure of her concern. She did not know Min very well, and usually named her formally, as Min Farshaw. "Perhaps he will die. Perhaps something else. I do not know for sure - maybe we will all survive, and we will sit around a fire with him roasting pecara when we find him - but the glimmer of a warning is there in my head." Elayne opened her mouth angrily. Then she closed it again, anger draining away like water down a hole, and her shoulders slumped. Perhaps Aviendha's glimmer was true and perhaps not, but the fact was that her arguments had been good from the start. A great risk taken in ignorance, and taking it might bring disaster. The beacon had grown brighter still. And he was there, right where the beacon was. The bond did not tell her so, not at this distance, but she knew. And she knew she had to leave him to take care of himself while she took care of Andor.

"aɪ doʊn əv ɛniθɪŋ tə titʃ jə əbaʊt biɪŋ ə waɪz wʌn, eɪvinhə," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. "ju ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi mʌtʃ waɪzɝ ðən aɪ. nɑt tə mɛnʃən bɹeɪvɝ ən mɔɹ kulhɛɾɪd. wi ɹɪtɝn tə keɪɛmlɪn." eɪvinhə kʌlɝd feɪnli ʌndɝ ðə pɹeɪz - ʃi kəd bi vɛɹi sɛnsəɾɪv, ət taɪmz - bʌt ʃi weɪstəd noʊ taɪm ɪn oʊpənɪŋ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ə ɹoʊteɪɾɪŋ vju ʌv ə steɪbliɑɹɾ ɪn ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ðət waɪɾənd ɪndə ə hoʊl ɪn ði ɛɹ ən lɛt snoʊ fɹəm ðə mɛdoʊ fɔl ɑntu ðə klin-swɛpt peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz əz nɪɹ θɹi hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz əweɪ əz meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns. ðə sɛns ə bɝdʒɪt, sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə pæləs, spɹæŋ əlaɪv ɪn ɪleɪnz hɛd. bɝdʒɪt hæɾ ə hɛdeɪk ən ə saʊɝ stʌmək, nɑɾ ənjuʒəwəl əkɝənsɪz ə leɪt, bʌt ðeɪ suɾəd ɪleɪnz muɾ ɔl tu wɛl.

"I don't have anything to teach you about being a Wise One, Aviendha," she said quietly. "You are already much wiser than I. Not to mention braver and more coolheaded. We return to Caemlyn." Aviendha colored faintly under the praise - she could be very sensitive, at times - but she wasted no time in opening the gateway, a rotating view of a stableyard in the Royal Palace that widened into a hole in the air and let snow from the meadow fall onto the clean-swept paving stones as near three hundred miles away as made no difference. The sense of Birgitte, somewhere in the palace, sprang alive in Elayne's head. Birgitte had a headache and a sour stomach, not unusual occurrences of late, but they suited Elayne's mood all too well.

aɪ mʌs liv ɪm tə teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪmsɛlf, ʃi θɔɾ əz ʃi ɹoʊd θɹu. laɪt, haʊ ɔfən hæd ʃi θɔt ðæt? noʊ mæɾɝ. ɹænd wɑz ðə lʌv ə hɝ hɑɹɾ ən ðə dʒɔɪ ʌv əɹ laɪf, bʌɾ ændɝ wɑz əɹ duɾi.

I must leave him to take care of himself, she thought as she rode through. Light, how often had she thought that? No matter. Rand was the love of her heart and the joy of her life, but Andor was her duty.

tʃæptɝ ɪlɛvən

CHAPTER 11

tɔk ə dɛts ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɑz pəzɪʃən soʊ ðəɾ ɪleɪn sim tə bi ɹaɪɾɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə hoʊl ɪn ðə wɔl əɡɛns ðə stʃɹit, ɪndə ə skwɛɹ mɑɹkt aʊt fəɹ seɪfti baɪ sænd-fɪld waɪn bæɹəlz stændɪŋ ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz.

Talk of Debts The gateway was positioned so that Elayne seemed to be riding out of a hole in the wall against the street, into a square marked out for safety by sand-filled wine barrels standing on the paving stones.

ɑdli, ʃi kəd nɑt fil ə sɪŋɡəl wʊmən tʃænəlɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ ɪn ðə pæləs, ðoʊ ɪt haʊz mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd ən fɪfti wɪð ði əbɪləɾi. səm wəd bi steɪʃən ɑn ðə sɪɾiz aʊɾɝ wɔlz, ʌv kɔɹs, tu fɑɹ fəɹ əɹ tə sɛns ɛniθɪŋ ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə lɪŋk sɝkəl, ən ə fju wəd bi aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi ɔltəɡɛðɝ, jɛt sʌmwʌn ɪn ðə pæləs wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz juzɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ, wɛðɝ tə tʃɹaɪ fɔɹsɪŋ wʌn ə ðə kæptɪv sʌldəm tə ədmɪt ðət ʃi ɹɪli kəd si wivz ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ əɹ sɪmpli tə smuð ðə ɹɪŋkəlz fɹəm ə ʃɔl wɪθaʊt hiɾɪŋ ən aɪɝn. nɑt ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ðoʊ. wɪndfɪndɝ ɛɹəɡəns ɔfən mætʃt ðə wɝst ʃoʊn baɪ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ, jɛɾ ivən ðət mʌs bi kwɔʃt baɪ wʌt ðeɪ sɛnst. ɪleɪn θɔt ðəɾ ɪf ʃi klaɪm tə ə haɪ wɪndoʊ, ʃi mʌs bi eɪbəl tə si ðə wivz ə ðət ɡɹeɪt bikən, hʌnʒɹədz ə liɡz dɪstən əz ðeɪ wɝ. ʃi fɛlt laɪk ən æn ðət hæd dʒʌs bɪkʌm əwɛɹ ə maʊntənz, ən æn kəmpɛɹɪŋ ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝl tə ðə hɪlz ɪt hæɾ ɔlweɪz hɛld ɪn ɑ. jɛs, ivən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz mʌs bi wɔkɪŋ smɔl ɪn ðə feɪs ə ðæt.

Oddly, she could not feel a single woman channeling anywhere in the palace, though it housed more than a hundred and fifty with the ability. Some would be stationed on the city's outer walls, of course, too far for her to sense anything short of a linked circle, and a few would be out of the city altogether, yet someone in the palace was almost always using saidar, whether to try forcing one of the captive sul'dam to admit that she really could see weaves of the One Power or simply to smooth the wrinkles from a shawl without heating an iron. Not this morning, though. Windfinder arrogance often matched the worst shown by any Aes Sedai, yet even that must be quashed by what they sensed. Elayne thought that if she climbed to a high window, she must be able to see the weaves of that great beacon, hundreds of leagues distant as they were. She felt like an ant that had just become aware of mountains, an ant comparing the Spine of the World to the hills it had always held in awe. Yes, even the Windfinders must be walking small in the face of that.

ɑn ði istɝn saɪɾ ə ðə pæləs ən fɹʌntɪɾ ɑn nɔɹθ ən saʊθ baɪ tu-stɔɹi-haɪ steɪbəlz ə pjʊɹ waɪt stoʊn, ðə kwinz steɪbliɑɹd tʃɹədɪʃənəli wɑz ɡɪvən oʊvɝ tə ðə kwinz pɝsənəl hɔɹsəz ən kæɹɪdʒɪz, ən ʃi hæd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊvɝ juzɪŋ ɪt bɪfɔɹ ðə laɪən θɹoʊn wɑz æknɑlɪdʒ hɝz. ðə stɛps ðət lɛd tə ðə θɹoʊn wɝ əz dɛləkəɾ əz ɛni kɔɹt dæns, ən ɪf ðə dæns səmtaɪmz keɪm tə ɹɪzɛmbəl ə tævɝn bɹɔl, jə stɪl hæd tə meɪk jəɹ stɛps wɪð ɡɹeɪs ən pɹisɪʒən ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə ɡeɪn jəɹ ɡoʊl. kleɪmɪŋ ðə pɝkwəzɪts bɪfɔɹ biɪŋ kənfɝm hæd kɑst səm wɪmən ðɛɹ tʃæns tə ɹul. ɪn ði ɛnd, ʃi hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə tʃɹænzɡɹɛʃən ðət wəd meɪk əɹ sim oʊvɝ-pɹaʊd. bɪsaɪdz, ðə kwinz steɪbliɑɹd wɑz ɹɛləɾɪvli smɔl ən hæd noʊ ʌðɝ juz. ðəɹ wɝ fjuɝ pipəl tə kip əweɪ fɹəm ən oʊpənɪŋ ɡeɪtweɪ hɪɹ. ɪn fækt, wən ʃi ɛntɝɾ ɪt, ðə stoʊn-peɪv jɑɹd wɑz ɛmpti əpɑɹt fɹəm ə sɪŋɡəl ɹɛd-koʊɾəd ɡɹum stændɪŋ ɪn wʌn ə ði ɑɹtʃt steɪbəl dɔɹweɪz, bʌɾ i tɝn tə ɡɪv ə ʃaʊɾ ɪnsaɪd, ən dʌzənz mɔɹ keɪm spɪlɪŋ aʊɾ əz ʃi ɡaɪɾəd faɪɹhɑɹt klɪɹ ə ðə mɑɹkt-ɔf skwɛɹ. æftɝ ɔl, ʃi maɪɾ əv ɹɪtɝnd wɪð ən ɑntʊɹɑʒ ə paʊɝfəl lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz, əɹ pɝhæps ðeɪ dʒʌs hoʊpt ʃi hæd. keɪsil bɹɔt ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ən ɔɹɾɝd moʊs tə dɪsmaʊn ən si tə ðɛɹ ænəməlz. ʃi ən hæf ə dʌzən mɔɹ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, kipɪŋ wɑtʃ oʊvɝ ðə hɛdz ə ðə pipəl əfʊt. ivən hɪɹ, ʃi wəd nɑt liv ɪleɪn ənɡɑɹɾɪd. pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli hɪɹ, wɛɹ ʃi feɪs mɔɹ deɪnʒɝ ðən ɪn ɛni mænɝ ʃi hæd vɪzəɾəd. ðə mæðɝɪn mɛn mɪld əbaʊt, ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv ɡɹumz ən ɡɑɹdz waɪl ɡeɪpɪŋ ət ðə waɪt stoʊn bælkəniz ən kɑləneɪdz ðəɾ oʊvɝlʊk ðə jɑɹɾ ən ðə spaɪɹz ən ɡoʊldən doʊmz vɪzəbəl bɪɑnd. ðə koʊl sim lɛs hɪɹ ðən ɪn ðə maʊntənz -  ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə lɛɾ ɪt tʌtʃ hɝ, əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kəɾ ət pɹɛzənt, dɪd nɑt meɪk əɹ toʊɾəli ʌnəwɛɹ - bʌt mɛn ən wɪmən ən hɔɹsəz ɔl stɪl bɹið feɪn plumz ə mɪst. ði oʊɾɝ ə hɔɹs dʌŋ sim stʃɹɔŋ, tu, æftɝ ðə klin ɛɹ ə ðə maʊntənz. ə hɑt bæθ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə ɹɔɹɪŋ faɪɝ wəd bi wɛlkəm. æftɝwɝd, ʃi wəɾ əv tə plʌnʒ bæk ɪndə ðə bɪznəs ə sɪkjʊɹɪŋ ðə θɹoʊn, bʌt ɹaɪt naʊ ə lɔŋ soʊk wəd bi dʒʌs ðə θɪŋ.

On the eastern side of the palace and fronted on north and south by two-story-high stables of pure white stone, the Queen's Stableyard traditionally was given over to the Queen's personal horses and carriages, and she had hesitated over using it before the Lion Throne was acknowledged hers. The steps that led to the throne were as delicate as any court dance, and if the dance sometimes came to resemble a tavern brawl, you still had to make your steps with grace and precision in order to gain your goal. Claiming the perquisites before being confirmed had cost some women their chance to rule. In the end, she had decided it was not a transgression that would make her seem over-proud. Besides, the Queen's Stableyard was relatively small and had no other use. There were fewer people to keep away from an opening gateway here. In fact, when she entered it, the stone-paved yard was empty apart from a single red-coated groom standing in one of the arched stable doorways, but he turned to give a shout inside, and dozens more came spilling out as she guided Fireheart clear of the marked-off square. After all, she might have returned with an entourage of powerful lords and ladies, or perhaps they just hoped she had. Caseille brought the Guardswomen through the gateway, and ordered most to dismount and see to their animals. She and half a dozen more remained in their saddles, keeping watch over the heads of the people afoot. Even here, she would not leave Elayne unguarded. Particularly here, where she faced more danger than in any manor she had visited. The Matherin men milled about, getting in the way of grooms and Guards while gaping at the white stone balconies and colonnades that overlooked the yard and the spires and golden domes visible beyond. The cold seemed less here than in the mountains -  refusing to let it touch her, as far as she could at present, did not make her totally unaware - but men and women and horses all still breathed faint plumes of mist. The odor of horse dung seemed strong, too, after the clean air of the mountains. A hot bath in front of a roaring fire would be welcome. Afterward, she would have to plunge back into the business of securing the throne, but right now a long soak would be just the thing.

ə pɛɹ ʌv ɡɹumz ɹæn tə faɪɹhɑɹt. wʌn tʊk ɪz bɹaɪɾəl wɪð ə hɝid kɝtsi fəɹ ɪleɪn, mɔɹ kənsɝnd wɪð siɪŋ ðət ðə tɔl ɡɛldɪŋ meɪd noʊ bɑðɝ waɪl ɪleɪn dɪsmaʊntɪd ðən wɪð meɪkɪŋ kɝɾəsiz hɝsɛlf, ən ənʌðɝ u meɪɾ ɪz baʊ ən ɹɪmeɪn bɛnt wɪð ɪz hænz meɪkɪŋ ə stɝəp fəɹ ɪleɪn. niðɝ ɡeɪv mɔɹ ðən ə ɡlæns ət ðə vju ʌv ə snoʊ-kʌvɝd maʊntən mɛdoʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ wəd nɔɹməli si ə stoʊn wɔl. ðə steɪbəlwɝkɝz wɝ əkʌstəm tə ɡeɪtweɪz baɪ naʊ. ʃi hæd hɝd ðət ðeɪ ɡɑɹnɝd dʒɹɪŋks ɪn ðə tævɝnz baɪ boʊstɪŋ ə haʊ ɔfən ðeɪ sɔ ðə paʊɝ juzd ən ðə θɪŋz ðeɪ səpoʊzədli hæd sin dʌn wɪð ɪt. ɪleɪn kəɾ ɪmædʒən wʌt ðoʊz teɪlz saʊndəd laɪk baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹitʃt ɛɹəmɪlə. ʃi ɹæðɝ ɛndʒɔɪd ðə θɔɾ ʌv ɛɹəmɪlə tʃuɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝneɪlz.

A pair of grooms ran to Fireheart. One took his bridle with a hurried curtsy for Elayne, more concerned with seeing that the tall gelding made no bother while Elayne dismounted than with making courtesies herself, and another who made his bow and remained bent with his hands making a stirrup for Elayne. Neither gave more than a glance at the view of a snow-covered mountain meadow where they would normally see a stone wall. The stableworkers were accustomed to gateways by now. She had heard that they garnered drinks in the taverns by boasting of how often they saw the Power used and the things they supposedly had seen done with it. Elayne could imagine what those tales sounded like by the time they reached Arymilla. She rather enjoyed the thought of Arymilla chewing her fingernails.

əz ʃi sɛt fʊɾ ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz, ə klʌstɝ ʌv ɡɑɹdzwɪmən əpɪɹɾ ɝaʊn hɝ, ɪn kɹɪmzən hæts wɪð waɪt plumz laɪɪŋ flæɾ ɑn ðə bɹɔd bɹɪmz, ən leɪs-ɛdʒ kɹɪmzən sæʃɪz, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð ðə waɪt laɪən, ðət slæntəɾ əkɹɔs ðɛɹ bɹaɪt bɹɛstpleɪts. nɑɾ əntɪl ðən dɪd keɪsil teɪk ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ ʌv ɪleɪnz ɛskɔɹt tə ðə steɪbəl. ðɛɹ ɹipleɪsməns wɝ dʒʌst əz wɛɹi, aɪz wɑtʃɪŋ ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, hænz hʌvɝɪŋ nɪɹ ðɛɹ sɔɹd hɪls, ɪksɛp fəɹ dɪni, ə waɪd, plæsəd-feɪst wʊmən u kæɹiɾ ə lɔŋ bɹæstʌɾɪd kʌdʒəl. ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli naɪn ɪn nʌmbɝ -  oʊnli naɪn, ɪleɪn θɔt bɪɾɝli.

As she set foot on the paving stones, a cluster of Guardswomen appeared around her, in crimson hats with white plumes lying flat on the broad brims, and lace-edged crimson sashes, embroidered with the White Lion, that slanted across their bright breastplates. Not until then did Caseille take the remainder of Elayne's escort to the stable. Their replacements were just as wary, eyes watching every direction, hands hovering near their sword hilts, except for Deni, a wide, placid-faced woman who carried a long brassstudded cudgel. They were only nine in number -  Only nine, Elayne thought bitterly.

aɪ niɾ oʊnli naɪn bɑɾiɡɑɹdz ɪn ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ɪtsɛlf!  - jɛɾ ɛvɹi wʌn u kæɹiɾ ə sɔɹd wɑz ɛkspɝt.

I need only nine bodyguards in the Royal Palace itself!  - yet every one who carried a sword was expert.

wɪmən u fɑloʊd ðə "tʃɹeɪɾ ə ðə sɔɹd," əz keɪsil kɔld ɪt, hæd tə bi ɡʊd, əɹ ɛls sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ðeɪ wɝ kʌt daʊn baɪ səm fɛloʊ huz oʊnli ædvæntɪdʒ wɑz stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪnʌf tə bæɾɝ əɹ daʊn.

Women who followed the "trade of the sword," as Caseille called it, had to be good, or else sooner or later they were cut down by some fellow whose only advantage was strength enough to batter her down.

dɪni pəzɛs noʊ fəsɪlɪɾi wɪð ə sɔɹɾ əɾ ɔl, bʌt ðə fju mɛn u hæd tɛstəɾ əɹ kʌdʒəl ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd duɪŋ soʊ. dɪspaɪɾ əɹ bʌlk, dɪni wɑz vɛɹi kwɪk, ən ʃi hæd noʊ kɑnsɛpt ə faɪɾɪŋ fɛɹ, əɹ ə pɹæktəs, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ.

Deni possessed no facility with a sword at all, but the few men who had tested her cudgel regretted doing so. Despite her bulk, Deni was very quick, and she had no concept of fighting fair, or of practice, for that matter.

ɹæsɔɹiə, ðə stɑki ʌndɝ-lutɛnən ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ, simd ɹɪlivd wən ðə ɡɹumz lɛd faɪɹhɑɹɾ ɔf. ɪf ɪleɪnz bɑɾiɡɑɹd hæd ðɛɹ weɪ, noʊ wʌn ɪksɛp ðɛmsɛlvz wʊɾə bɪn əlaʊd wɪðɪn ɑɹmz ɹitʃ. wɛl, meɪbi ðeɪ wɝ nɑt kwaɪt ðət bæd, bʌt ðeɪ lʊkt wɪð səspɪʃən əɾ ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn ɪksɛp bɝdʒɪɾ ən eɪvinhə. ɹæsɔɹiə, ə tɛɹən dɪspaɪɾ əɹ blu aɪz ən ðə jɛloʊ hɛɹ ʃi wɔɹ kʌt ʃɔɹt, wɑz əmʌŋ ðə wɝst ɪn ðət ɹəɡɑɹd, ivən ɪnsɪstɪŋ ɑn wɑtʃɪŋ ðə kʊks meɪk ɪleɪnz milz ən hævɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ teɪstəd bɪfɔɹ ɪt wɑz bɹɔɾ ʌp. ɪleɪn hæd nɑt pɹətɛstəd, haʊɛvɝ oʊvɝ-zɛləs ðeɪ maɪt bi. wʌn ɪkspɪɹiəns ə dʒɹʌɡd waɪn wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf, ivən wən ʃi nu ʃi wəd lɪv ət lis lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə bɛɹ əɹ tʃaɪld. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz niðɝ ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmənz mɪstʃɹʌs nɔɹ ðə nid fəɹ ɪt ðət taɪɾənd əɹ maʊð. ɪt wɑz bɝdʒɪt, wivɪŋ əɹ weɪ θɹu ðə kɹaʊɾəd steɪbliɑɹd, bʌt nɑt təwɔɹd hɝ.

Rasoria, the stocky under-lieutenant in charge, seemed relieved when the grooms led Fireheart off. If Elayne's bodyguard had their way, no one except themselves would have been allowed within arm's reach. Well, maybe they were not quite that bad, but they looked with suspicion at almost everyone except Birgitte and Aviendha. Rasoria, a Tairen despite her blue eyes and the yellow hair she wore cut short, was among the worst in that regard, even insisting on watching the cooks make Elayne's meals and having everything tasted before it was brought up. Elayne had not protested, however over-zealous they might be. One experience of drugged wine was more than enough, even when she knew she would live at least long enough to bear her child. But it was neither the Guardswomen's mistrust nor the need for it that tightened her mouth. It was Birgitte, weaving her way through the crowded stableyard, but not toward her.

eɪvinhə wɑz læs tə əpɪɹ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ʌv kɔɹs, æftɝ ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz θɹu, ən bɪfɔɹ ʃi lɛt ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɪŋk aʊɾ ʌv ɛɡzɪstəns, ɪleɪn stɑɹɾəd ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ɔf soʊ sʌɾənli ðəɾ əɹ ɛskɔɹt hæd tə lip tə meɪnteɪn ðɛɹ ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɹɪŋ ɝaʊn hɝ. əz kwɪkli əz ʃi muvd, ðoʊ, bɝdʒɪt, wɪð əɹ θɪk ɡoʊldən bɹeɪd hæŋɪŋ tə hɝ weɪst, wɑz ðəɹ fɝst, hɛlpɪŋ eɪvinhə daʊn ən hændɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪ mɛɹ oʊvɝ tə ə lɔŋ-feɪst ɡɹum u simd ɔlmoʊst əz lɛɡi əz sɪswaɪ. eɪvinhə ɔlweɪz hæd mɔɹ dɪfəkəlti ɡɛɾɪŋ ɔf ə hɔɹs ðən ɡɛɾɪŋ ɑn, bʌt bɝdʒɪt hæd mɔɹ ðən əsɪstəns ɪn maɪnd. ɪleɪn ən əɹ ɛskɔɹɾ ɝaɪv dʒʌst ɪn taɪm tə hɪɹ ðə wʊmən seɪ tə eɪvinhə ɪn ə loʊ, hɝid vɔɪs, "dɪd ʃi dʒɹɪŋk əɹ ɡoʊts mɪlk? dɪd ʃi ɡɛɾ ɪnʌf slip? ʃi filz. . . ." hɝ vɔɪs tʃɹeɪld ɔf ət ði ɛnd, ən ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ tə feɪs ɪleɪn, aʊtwɝdli kɑm, ən ənsɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn əɹ ɹaɪt ðɛɹ. ðə bɑn dɪd wɝk boʊθ weɪz.

Aviendha was last to appear out of the gateway, of course, after she was sure that everyone was through, and before she let the gateway wink out of existence, Elayne started in her direction, striding off so suddenly that her escort had to leap to maintain their guarding ring around her. As quickly as she moved, though, Birgitte, with her thick golden braid hanging to her waist, was there first, helping Aviendha down and handing the gray mare over to a long-faced groom who seemed almost as leggy as Siswai. Aviendha always had more difficulty getting off a horse than getting on, but Birgitte had more than assistance in mind. Elayne and her escort arrived just in time to hear the woman say to Aviendha in a low, hurried voice, "Did she drink her goat's milk? Did she get enough sleep? She feels. . . ." Her voice trailed off at the end, and she drew a deep breath before turning to face Elayne, outwardly calm, and unsurprised to find her right there. The bond did work both ways.

bɝdʒɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə bɪɡ wʊmən, ðoʊ ʃi stʊd tɔlɝ ðən ɪleɪn ɪn əɹ hil buts, əz tɔl əz eɪvinhə, bʌt ʃi juʒəwəli hæɾ ə pɹɛzəns ðət wɑz oʊnli haɪɾənd baɪ ðə junəfɔɹm ə ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz, ə ʃɔɹt ɹɛd koʊt wɪð ə haɪ waɪt kɑlɝ wɔɹn oʊvɝ bæɡi blu tʃɹaʊzɝz tʌkt ɪndə ɡlimɪŋ blæk buts, fɔɹ ɡoʊldən nɑts ɑn əɹ lɛft ʃoʊldɝ ən fɔɹ bænz ʌv ɡoʊld ɑn itʃ waɪt kʌf. æftɝ ɔl, ʃi wɑz bɝdʒɪt sɪlvɝboʊ, ə hɪɹoʊ aʊɾ ə lɛdʒənd. ʃi ɹɪmeɪnd wɛɹi ʌv tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɪv ʌp tə ðoʊz lɛdʒənz; ʃi kleɪm ðət ðə stɔɹiz wɝ ɡɹoʊsli ɪnfleɪɾəd wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ nɑt kəmplit fæbɹɪkeɪʃənz. jɛt ʃi wɑz stɪl ðə seɪm wʊmən u hæd dʌn ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðə θɪŋz ðət fɔɹm ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðoʊz lɛdʒənz ən mɔɹ bɪsaɪdz. naʊ, dɪspaɪɾ əɹ əpɛɹən kəmpoʊʒɝ, əniz tɪŋ ðə kənsɝn fəɹ ɪleɪn ðət floʊd θɹu ðə bɑn əlɔŋ wɪð əɹ hɛdeɪk ən əɹ sʌlən stʌmək. ʃi nu vɛɹi wɛl ðəɾ ɪleɪn heɪɾəd fəɹ əm tə tʃɛk ɑn əɹ bɪhaɪn əɹ bæk. ðət wɑz nɑt ðə hoʊl ɹizən fəɹ ɪleɪnz ɪɹɪteɪʃən, bʌt ðə bɑn lɛt bɝdʒɪt noʊ dʒʌs haʊ ʌpsɛt ʃi wɑz. eɪvinhə, kɑmli ənɹæpɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl fɹəm ɝaʊn əɹ hɛɾ ən dʒɹeɪpɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ətɛmptəd ðə ɡeɪz ʌv ə wʊmən u hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ ɹɔŋ ən sɝɾənli wɑz nɑɾ ɪnvɑlvd wɪð ɛniwʌn ɛls u hæd dʌn ɛniθɪŋ ɹɔŋ. ʃi maɪɾ əv mænədʒd ɪɾ ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt waɪɾənd əɹ aɪz fəɹ ən æɾəd tʌtʃ ʌv ɪnəsəns. bɝdʒɪt wɑz ə bæɾ ɪnfluəns ɑn əɹ ɪn səm weɪz. "aɪ dʒɹæŋk ðə ɡoʊts mɪlk," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə lɛvəl vɔɪs, ɔl tu kɑnʃəs ə ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən ɹɪŋɪŋ ðə θɹi ʌv ðɛm. feɪsɪŋ aʊtwɝd, aɪz skænɪŋ ðə jɑɹɾ ən ðə bælkəniz ən ðə ɹuftɑps, nɪɹli ɛvɹi wʌn wɑz sɝɾənli lɪsnɪŋ. "aɪ ɡɑɾ ɪnʌf slip. ɪz ðəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls jə wɑnə æsk mi?" eɪvinhəz tʃiks kʌlɝd feɪnli.

Birgitte was not a big woman, though she stood taller than Elayne in her heeled boots, as tall as Aviendha, but she usually had a presence that was only heightened by the uniform of the Captain-General of the Queen's Guards, a short red coat with a high white collar worn over baggy blue trousers tucked into gleaming black boots, four golden knots on her left shoulder and four bands of gold on each white cuff. After all, she was Birgitte Silverbow, a hero out of legend. She remained wary of trying to live up to those legends; she claimed that the stories were grossly inflated where they were not complete fabrications. Yet she was still the same woman who had done every one of the things that formed the heart of those legends and more besides. Now, despite her apparent composure, unease tinged the concern for Elayne that flowed through the bond along with her headache and her sullen stomach. She knew very well that Elayne hated for them to check on her behind her back. That was not the whole reason for Elayne's irritation, but the bond let Birgitte know just how upset she was. Aviendha, calmly unwrapping her shawl from around her head and draping it over her shoulders, attempted the gaze of a woman who had done nothing wrong and certainly was not involved with anyone else who had done anything wrong. She might have managed it if she had not widened her eyes for an added touch of innocence. Birgitte was a bad influence on her in some ways. "I drank the goat's milk," Elayne said in a level voice, all too conscious of the Guardswomen ringing the three of them. Facing outward, eyes scanning the yard and the balconies and the rooftops, nearly every one was certainly listening. "I got enough sleep. Is there anything else you want to ask me?" Aviendha's cheeks colored faintly.

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ hæv ɔl ði ænsɝz aɪ nid fəɹ ðə moʊmənt," bɝdʒɪt ɹɪplaɪd wɪθaʊɾ ə hɪn ə ðə blʌʃ ɪleɪn hæd bɪn hoʊpɪŋ fɔɹ. ðə wʊmən nu ʃi wɑz taɪɝd, nu ʃi hæd tə bi laɪɪŋ əbaʊt ðə slip.

"I think I have all the answers I need for the moment," Birgitte replied without a hint of the blush Elayne had been hoping for. The woman knew she was tired, knew she had to be lying about the sleep.

ðə bɑnd wɑz dɪsaɪɾədli ɪnkənvinjən ət taɪmz. ʃi hæd dʒɹʌŋk nʌθɪŋ bʌt hæf ə kʌp ʌv ɪkstʃɹimli wɛl wɔɾɝd waɪn læs naɪt, bʌt ʃi wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə hæv bɝdʒɪts mɔɹnɪŋ-æftɝ hɛɾ ən əɹ saʊɝ stʌmək. nʌn ə ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃi hæd spoʊkən tə əbaʊt ðə bɑn hæd mɛnʃən ɛniθɪŋ ə ðə kaɪnd, bʌt ʃi ən bɝdʒɪɾ ɔl tu ɔfən mɪɹɝd wʌn ənʌðɝ, fɪzɪkəli ən ɪmoʊʃnəli.

The bond was decidedly inconvenient at times. She had drunk nothing but half a cup of extremely well watered wine last night, but she was beginning to have Birgitte's morning-after head and her sour stomach. None of the other Aes Sedai she had spoken to about the bond had mentioned anything of the kind, but she and Birgitte all too often mirrored one another, physically and emotionally.

ðə læs pɹizɛntəd ɹil pɹɑbləmz wən əɹ mudz wɝ ɑn ə sisɔ. səmtaɪmz ʃi mænədʒ tə ʃɹʌɡ ɪɾ ɔf, əɹ faɪɾ ɪɾ ɔf, bʌt tədeɪ ʃi nu ʃi wɑz gɑnə hæv tə sʌfɝ əntɪl bɝdʒɪt wɑz hild. ʃi θɔt ðə mɪɹɝɪŋ mʌst əkɝ kəz ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ wɪmən. noʊ wʌn hæd hɝɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn bɑndɪŋ ənʌðɝ wʊmən bɪfɔɹ. fju hæd hɝɾ ʌv ɪt naʊ, tə tɛl ðə tʃɹuθ, ən səm ə ðɛm sim tə bɪliv ɪt kəd nɑt bi tʃɹu. eɪ wɔɹɾɝ wɑz meɪl əz ʃʊɹli əz ə bʊl wɑz meɪl. ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðæt, ən nɑt mɛni stɑp tə θɪŋk ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ ðət "ɛvɹiwʌn nu" dɪzɝv kloʊs ɪɡzæməneɪʃən.

The last presented real problems when her moods were on a seesaw. Sometimes she managed to shrug it off, or fight it off, but today she knew she was going to have to suffer until Birgitte was Healed. She thought the mirroring must occur because they were both women. No one had heard of anyone bonding another woman before. Few had heard of it now, to tell the truth, and some of them seemed to believe it could not be true. A Warder was male as surely as a bull was male. Everyone knew that, and not many stopped to think that anything that "everyone knew" deserved close examination.

biɪŋ kɑɾ ɪn ə laɪ, wən ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɑloʊ ɛɡwinz dɪkteɪɾ əbaʊt lɪvɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi teɪkən ðə θɹi oʊðz, meɪɾ ɪleɪn dɪfɛnsɪv, ən ðət meɪɾ əɹ blʌnt. "ɪz daɪɛlɪn bæk?" "noʊ," bɝdʒɪt sɛd dʒʌst əz blʌnli, ən ɪleɪn saɪd. daɪɛlɪn hæd lɛf ðə sɪɾi deɪz bɪfɔɹ ɛɹəmɪləz ɑɹmi əpɪɹd, teɪkɪŋ ɹin kɔɹli wɪð əɹ tə meɪk ɡeɪtweɪz ən spiɾ əɹ tʃɹævəl, ən ə ɡɹeɪt dil dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn daɪɛlɪnz ɹɪtɝn. ɑn wʌt nuz ʃi bɹɔt bæk. ɑn wɛðɝ ʃi bɹɔɾ ɛniθɪŋ bɪsaɪdz nuz. tʃuzɪŋ u wəd bi kwin ʌv ændɝ wɑz kwaɪt sɪmpəl, bɔɪl daʊn tə ɛsɛntʃəlz. ðəɹ wɝ oʊvɝ fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd haʊsəz ɪn ðə ɹɛlm, bʌɾ oʊnli naɪntin stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf ðəɾ ʌðɝz wəd fɑloʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ lɛd. juʒəwəli, ɔl naɪntin stʊd bɪhaɪn ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ, əɹ moʊst ə ðɛm, ənlɛs ʃi wɑz pleɪnli ɪnkɑmpəɾənt. haʊs mæntʃɹ hæd lɔs ðə θɹoʊn tə tʃɹəkənd wən mɔɹdʒɹɛlən daɪɾ oʊnli kəz tɪɡɹeɪn, ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ, hæd vænɪʃt ən mæntʃɹ hæd bɪɡʌn ɹʌnɪŋ hɛvəli tə bɔɪ tʃɪlʒɹən. ən kəz mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkən hæd ɡæðɝd θɝtin haʊsəz ɪn əɹ səpɔɹt. oʊnli tɛn ə ðə naɪntin wɝ nɛsəsɛɹi tə əsɛn ðə θɹoʊn, baɪ lɔ ən kʌstəm. ivən kleɪməns u stɪl θɔt ðeɪ ʃəɾ əv ðə θɹoʊn ðɛmsɛlvz juʒəwəli fɛl ɪn wɪð ðə ɹɛst, əɹ ət lis fɛl saɪlən ən ɡeɪv ʌp ðɛɹ pɝsut, wʌns ənʌðɝ wʊmən hæd tɛn haʊsəz əɾ əɹ bæk.

Being caught in a lie, when she was trying to follow Egwene's dictate about living as if she had already taken the Three Oaths, made Elayne defensive, and that made her blunt. "Is Dyelin back?" "No," Birgitte said just as bluntly, and Elayne sighed. Dyelin had left the city days before Arymilla's army appeared, taking Reanne Corly with her to make gateways and speed her travel, and a great deal depended on Dyelin's return. On what news she brought back. On whether she brought anything besides news. Choosing who would be Queen of Andor was quite simple, boiled down to essentials. There were over four hundred Houses in the realm, but only nineteen strong enough that others would follow where they led. Usually, all nineteen stood behind the Daughter-Heir, or most of them, unless she was plainly incompetent. House Mantear had lost the throne to Trakand when Mordrellen died only because Tigraine, the Daughter-Heir, had vanished and Mantear had begun running heavily to boy children. And because Morgase Trakand had gathered thirteen Houses in her support. Only ten of the nineteen were necessary to ascend the throne, by law and custom. Even claimants who still thought they should have the throne themselves usually fell in with the rest, or at least fell silent and gave up their pursuit, once another woman had ten Houses at her back.

θɪŋz hæd bɪn bæɾ ɪnʌf wən ʃi hæd θɹi dɪklɛɹd ɹaɪvəlz, bʌt naʊ nɑiən ən ɛləniə wɝ junaɪɾəd bɪhaɪn ɛɹəmɪlə mɑɹn, ʌv ɔl pipəl, ðə lis laɪkli ʌv ðə θɹi tə hæv səksiɾəd, ən ðət mɛnt ʃi hæd tu haʊzɪz - tu lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə kaʊnt;

Things had been bad enough when she had three declared rivals, but now Naean and Elenia were united behind Arymilla Marne, of all people, the least likely of the three to have succeeded, and that meant she had two Houses - two large enough to count;

mæðɝɪn ən ðoʊz eɪtin ʌðɝz ʃi hæd vɪzəɾəd wɝ tu smɔl - hɝ oʊn tʃɹəkən ən daɪɛlɪnz tæɹɑvɪn, tə feɪs sɪks. oʊ, daɪɛlɪn ɪnsɪstəd ðət kɑɝənd, koʊələn ən ɹɛnʃɝ wəd kʌm tə ɪleɪn, ən nɔɹwlɪn ən pɛnʒɹ ən tʃɹæmən bɪsaɪdz, bʌt ðə fɝs θɹi wɑntəd daɪɛlɪn hɝsɛlf ɑn ðə θɹoʊn, ən ðə læs θɹi sim tə hæv ɡɔn ɪndə haɪbɝneɪʃən. daɪɛlɪn wɑz fɝm ɪn əɹ lɔɪəlti, ðoʊ, ən taɪɝləs ɑn ɪleɪnz bɪhæf. ʃi pɝsɪstəɾ ɪn əɹ bɪlif ðət səm ə ðə haʊsəz ðət wɝ kipɪŋ saɪlən kəd bi kənvɪns tə səpɔɹɾ ɪleɪn. ʌv kɔɹs, ɪleɪn kəd nɑɾ əpɹoʊtʃ əm hɝsɛlf, bʌt daɪɛlɪn kʊd. ən naʊ ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən vɝdʒd ɑn dɛspɹɪt. sɪks haʊsəz səpɔɹɾɪŋ ɛɹəmɪlə, ən oʊnli ə ful wəd θɪŋk ʃi hæd nɑt sɛn filɝz aʊt təwɔɹd ði ʌðɝz. əɹ ðət səm maɪt lɪsən dʒʌs kəz ʃi dɪɾ əv sɪks ɔlɹɛɾi.

Matherin and those eighteen others she had visited were too small - her own Trakand and Dyelin's Taravin, to face six. Oh, Dyelin insisted that Carand, Coelan and Renshar would come to Elayne, and Norwelyn and Pendar and Traemane besides, but the first three wanted Dyelin herself on the throne, and the last three seemed to have gone into hibernation. Dyelin was firm in her loyalty, though, and tireless on Elayne's behalf. She persisted in her belief that some of the Houses that were keeping silent could be convinced to support Elayne. Of course, Elayne could not approach them herself, but Dyelin could. And now the situation verged on desperate. Six Houses supporting Arymilla, and only a fool would think she had not sent feelers out toward the others. Or that some might listen just because she did have six already.

dɪspaɪt ðə fæk ðət keɪsil ən əɹ ɡɑɹdz hæd veɪkeɪɾəd ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, ɪleɪn ən ði ʌðɝz hæd tə θɹɛd ðɛɹ weɪ əkɹɔs ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ðoʊ ə kɹaʊd. ðə mɛn fɹəm mæðɝɪn wɝ faɪnəli daʊn ɔf ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ stɪl mɔɪlɪŋ əbaʊt, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ðɛɹ hælbɝdz ən pɪkɪŋ əm ʌp oʊnli tə dʒɹɑp əm əɡɛn, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ənloʊd ðɛɹ pækhɔɹs ðəɹ ɪn ðə steɪbliɑɹd. wʌn ə ðə bɔɪz wɑz tʃeɪsɪŋ ə tʃɪkən ðət sʌmhaʊ hæd ɡɑɾən lus ən wɑz skʌɾəlɪŋ bɪtwin ðə hɔɹsəz' lɛɡz, waɪl wʌn ə ðə ɹɪŋkəld oʊl mɛn ʃaʊɾəd ɛnkɝɪdʒmənt, ðoʊ wɛðɝ fəɹ ðə bɔɪ əɹ ðə tʃɪkən wɑz ənklɪɹ.

Despite the fact that Caseille and her Guards had vacated the courtyard, Elayne and the others had to thread their way across the paving stones though a crowd. The men from Matherin were finally down off their horses, but they were still moiling about, dropping their halberds and picking them up only to drop them again, trying to unload their packhorse there in the stableyard. One of the boys was chasing a chicken that somehow had gotten loose and was scuttling between the horses' legs, while one of the wrinkled old men shouted encouragement, though whether for the boy or the chicken was unclear.

ə lɛðɝ-feɪs bænɝmən wɪð ðə mɛɹəs fɹɪnʒ ʌv waɪt hɛɹ ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ, ɪn ə feɪɾəd ɹɛd koʊt ðət stʃɹeɪn əkɹɔs ɪz bɛli, wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪstæblɪʃ ɔɹɾɝ wɪð ðə hɛlp ʌv ən oʊnli slaɪtli jʌŋɡɝ ɡɑɹdzmæn, boʊθ ə ðɛm laɪkli ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ðɛɹ pɛnʃənz, əz ə ɡʊd mɛni hæd, bʌɾ ənʌðɝ ə ðə bɔɪz simd əbaʊt tə liɾ ɪz ʃæɡi hɔɹs ɪndə ðə pæləs ɪtsɛlf, ən bɝdʒɪt hæd tə ɔɹɾɝ ɪm aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ bɪfɔɹ ɪleɪn kəɾ ɛntɝ. ðə bɔɪ, ə fʌz-tʃik læɾ u kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn əbʌv fɔɹtin, ɡeɪpt ət bɝdʒɪɾ əz waɪdli əz i hæɾ ət ðə pæləs. ʃi wɑz sɝɾənli mɔɹ pɪktʃɝəsk ɪn əɹ junəfɔɹm ðən ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ɪn ə ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs, ən i hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sin ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ. ɹæsɔɹiə ɡeɪv ɪm ə ʃʌv bæk təwɔɹd ði oʊl bænɝmən, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd.

A leather-faced bannerman with the merest fringe of white hair remaining, in a faded red coat that strained across his belly, was trying to establish order with the help of an only slightly younger Guardsman, both of them likely returned from their pensions, as a good many had, but another of the boys seemed about to lead his shaggy horse into the palace itself, and Birgitte had to order him out of the way before Elayne could enter. The boy, a fuzz-cheeked lad who could not have been above fourteen, gaped at Birgitte as widely as he had at the palace. She was certainly more picturesque in her uniform than the Daughter-Heir in a riding dress, and he had already seen the Daughter-Heir. Rasoria gave him a shove back toward the old bannerman, shaking her head.

"aɪ doʊnt neɪmɪŋ noʊ wʌɾ aɪ kən də wɪð ðɛm," bɝdʒɪt ɡɹʌmbəld əz ə meɪd lɪvɹiɾ ɪn ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt tʊk ɪleɪnz kloʊk ən ɡlʌvz ɪn ðə smɔl ɛntʃɹi hɔl. smɔl ɪn tɝmz ə ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs. wɪð ɡɪldɪd stænd-læmps flɪkɝɪŋ bɪtwin nɛɹoʊ, fluɾəd waɪt kɑləmz, ɪt wɑz hæf əɡɛn ðə saɪz ə mæðɝɪnz meɪn ɛntʃɹi hɔl, ðoʊ ðə silɪŋ wɑz nɑt soʊ haɪ. ənʌðɝ meɪd wɪð ðə waɪt laɪən ɑn ðə lɛf bɹɛst ə hɝ dʒɹɛs, ə ɡɝl nɑt ðət mʌtʃ oʊldɝ ðən ðə bɔɪ hu hæd tʃɹaɪd tə bɹɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs ɪnsaɪd, ɔfɝɾ ə ɹoʊpwɝk sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ wɪð tɔl kʌps ə stimɪŋ spaɪst waɪn bɪfɔɹ saɪməlteɪniəs fɹaʊnz fɹəm eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪt meɪɾ əɹ ʃaɪ bæk. "ðə fleɪmɪŋ bɔɪz fɔl əslip ɪf ðəɹ pʊɾ ɑn ɡɑɹd," bɝdʒɪt wɛn ɑn, skaʊlɪŋ ət ðə ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ meɪd. "ði oʊl mɛn steɪ əweɪk, bʌt hæf kæn ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt ðəɹ fleɪmɪŋ səpoʊz tə də ɪf ðeɪ si sʌmbɑɾi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə skeɪl ðə blʌɾi wɔl, ən ði ʌðɝ hæf təɡɛðɝ kʊdn faɪɾ ɔf sɪks ʃɛpɝdz wɪð ə dɔɡ." eɪvinhə ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ əɾ ɪleɪn ən nɑɾəd.

"I don't naming know what I can do with them," Birgitte grumbled as a maid liveried in red-and-white took Elayne's cloak and gloves in the small entry hall. Small in terms of the Royal Palace. With gilded stand-lamps flickering between narrow, fluted white columns, it was half again the size of Matherin's main entry hall, though the ceiling was not so high. Another maid with the White Lion on the left breast of her dress, a girl not that much older than the boy who had tried to bring his horse inside, offered a ropework silver tray with tall cups of steaming spiced wine before simultaneous frowns from Aviendha and Birgitte made her shy back. "The flaming boys fall asleep if they're put on guard," Birgitte went on, scowling at the retreating maid. "The old men stay awake, but half can't remember what they're flaming supposed to do if they see somebody trying to scale the bloody wall, and the other half together couldn't fight off six shepherds with a dog." Aviendha raised an eyebrow at Elayne and nodded.

"ðeɪ ɑɹən hɪɹ tə faɪt," ɪleɪn ɹimaɪndəɾ əm əz ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd daʊn ə blu-taɪl kɔɹəɾɝ laɪnd wɪð mɪɹɝd stænd-læmps ən ɪnleɪd tʃɛsts, bɝdʒɪɾ ən eɪvinhə ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɝ ən ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən spɹɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə fju peɪsɪz əhɛɾ ə ðɛm ən bɪhaɪnd. laɪt, ʃi θɔt, aɪ wʊdn əv teɪkən ðə waɪn! hɝ hɛd paʊndɪɾ ɪn ɹɪðəm wɪð bɝdʒɪts, ən ʃi tʌtʃt əɹ tɛmpəl, wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ʃi ʃəɾ ɔɹɾɝ əɹ wɔɹɾɝ tə ɡoʊ faɪn hilɪŋ ɪmiɾiətli.

"They aren't here to fight," Elayne reminded them as they started down a blue-tiled corridor lined with mirrored stand-lamps and inlaid chests, Birgitte and Aviendha on either side of her and the Guardswomen spreading out a few paces ahead of them and behind. Light, she thought, I wouldn't have taken the wine! Her head pounded in rhythm with Birgitte's, and she touched her temple, wondering whether she should order her Warder to go find Healing immediately.

bɝdʒɪt hæɾ ʌðɝ aɪdiəz, ðoʊ. ʃi aɪd ɹæsɔɹiə ən ði ʌðɝz ɪn fɹʌnt, ðən lʊkt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ən moʊʃən ðoʊz fɑloʊɪŋ tə fɔl bæk ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ. ðət wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒ. ʃi hæd hændpɪkt ɛvɹi læst wʊmən ɪn ðə ɡɑɹdz, ən ʃi tʃɹʌstɪd ðɛm. ivən soʊ, wən ʃi spoʊk ɪt wɑz ɪn ə hɝid nɪɹ-wɪspɝ, bɛndɪŋ əɹ hɛd kloʊs tə ɪleɪn. "sʌmθɪŋ hæpən dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ jə ɹɪtɝnd. aɪ wɑz æskɪŋ sumeɪkoʊ ɪf ʃid hil mi bɪfɔɹ jə ɡɑt bæk, ən ʃi sʌɾənli fɛl oʊvɝ ɪn ə feɪnt. hɝ aɪz dʒʌst ɹoʊld ʌp ɪn əɹ hɛd, ən daʊn ʃi wɛnt. ɪɾ ɪzən oʊnli hɝ. noʊbɑdi wɪl ədmɪɾ ə fleɪmɪŋ θɪŋ, nɑt tə mi, bʌt ði ʌðɝ kɪn aɪv sin əv bɪn dʒʌmpɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ blʌɾi skɪnz, ən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, tu. nɑt wʌn ə ðɛm kəd spɪɾ ɪf ʃi hæd tə. jə wɝ bæk bɪfɔɹ aɪ kəd faɪn ə sɪstɝ, bʌɾ aɪ səspɛk ðeɪd ɡɪmi ðə fɪʃ aɪ, tu. ðəl tɛl ju, ðoʊ."

Birgitte had other ideas, though. She eyed Rasoria and the others in front, then looked over her shoulder and motioned those following to fall back a little more. That was strange. She had handpicked every last woman in the Guards, and she trusted them. Even so, when she spoke it was in a hurried near-whisper, bending her head close to Elayne. "Something happened just before you returned. I was asking Sumeko if she'd Heal me before you got back, and she suddenly fell over in a faint. Her eyes just rolled up in her head, and down she went. It isn't only her. Nobody will admit a flaming thing, not to me, but the other Kin I've seen have been jumping out of their bloody skins, and the Windfinders, too. Not one of them could spit if she had to. You were back before I could find a sister, but I suspect they'd give me the fish eye, too. They'll tell you, though."

ðə pæləs ɹikwaɪɝd ðə pɑpjəleɪʃən ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ vɪlədʒ tə kip ɹʌnɪŋ, ən sɝvəns hæd bɪɡʌn tə əpɪɹ, lɪvɹid mɛn ən wɪmən skɝiɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz, flæɾənɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz əɡɛns ðə wɔlz əɹ dʌkɪŋ ɪndə kɹɔsɪŋ hɔlweɪz tə meɪk ɹum fəɹ ɪleɪnz ɛskɔɹt, soʊ ʃi ɪkspleɪn ðə lɪɾəl ʃi nu ɪn əz sɑft ə vɔɪs ən əz fju wɝdz əz pɑsəbəl. səm ɹumɝz ʃi dɪd nɑt maɪn ɹitʃɪŋ ðə stʃɹits, ən ɪnɛvəɾəbli ɛɹəmɪlə, bʌt teɪlz ə ɹænd kəd bi əz bæɾ əz teɪlz ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ wɝ twɪstəd θɹu ə fju ɹɛtɛlɪŋz. wɝs, ɪn ə weɪ. noʊ wʌn wəd bɪliv ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊɾ əɹ ɑn ðə θɹoʊn əz ə pʌpət. "ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt," ʃi fɪnɪʃt, "ɪts nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð əs hɪɹ." ʃi θɔt ʃi saʊndəd vɛɹi kənvɪnsɪŋ, vɛɹi kul ən dɪtætʃt, bʌɾ eɪvinhə ɹitʃt aʊt tə skwiz əɹ hænd, fəɹ ən il əz mʌtʃ əz ə kʌmfɝɾɪŋ hʌɡ wɪð soʊ mɛni pipəl tə si, ən bɝdʒɪts sɪmpəθi flʌɾəd θɹu ðə bɑnd. ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən kəməzɝeɪʃən; ɪt wɑz ðə ʃɛɹd filɪŋ ʌv ə wʊmən u hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sʌfɝd ðə lɔs ʃi hɝsɛlf fɪɹɾ ən mɔɹ. ɡeɪɾəl keɪn wɑz lɔs tə bɝdʒɪɾ əz ʃʊɹli əz ɪf i wɝ dɛd, ən ɑn tɑp ə ðæt, hɝ mɛmɹiz ə hɝ pæs laɪvz wɝ feɪɾɪŋ. ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɔlmoʊs nʌθɪŋ klɪɹli bɪfɔɹ ðə faʊndɪŋ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən nɑɾ ɔl ə ðæt. səm naɪts, ðə fɪɹ ðət ɡeɪɾəl wəd feɪd fɹəm əɹ mɛmɹi, tu, ðət ʃi wəd luz ɛni ɹimɛmbɹəns ʌv æktʃəli  hævɪŋ noʊn ən lʌv hɪm, lɛft əɹ əneɪbəl tə slip əntɪl ʃi dʒɹæŋk əz mʌtʃ bɹændi əz ʃi kəd hoʊld. ðət wɑz ə pʊɹ səluʃən, ən ɪleɪn wɪʃt ʃi kəɾ ɔfɝ ə bɛɾɝ, jɛt ʃi nu hɝ oʊn mɛmɹiz ə ɹænd wəd nɑt daɪ əntɪl ʃi dɪd, ən ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən ðə hɔɹɝ ə noʊɪŋ ðoʊz mɛmɹiz maɪt liv hɝ. stɪl, ʃi hoʊp sʌmwʌn hil bɝdʒɪts mɔɹnɪŋ-æftɝ hɛd sun, bɪfɔɹ əɹ oʊn splɪɾ oʊpən laɪk ən oʊvɝ-ɹaɪp mɛlən. hɝ əbɪləɾi wɪð hilɪŋ fɛl ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə tæsk, ən eɪvinhəz wɑz noʊ stʃɹɔŋɝ. dɪspaɪt ði ɪmoʊʃən ʃi kəd fil ɪn bɝdʒɪt, ði ʌðɝ wʊmən kɛpt əɹ feɪs smuð ən ʌnkənsɝnd. "ðə fɔɹseɪkən," ʃi mʌɾɝd dʒɹaɪli. ən sɔfli. ðət wɑz nɑɾ ə neɪm tə bændi əbaʊt. "wɛl, əz lɔŋ ɪts əz nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ʌs, wɝ blʌɾi ɔl ɹaɪt." ə ɡɹʌn ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn ə læf ɡeɪv əɹ ðə laɪ. bʌt ðɛn, ɔlðoʊ bɝdʒɪt sɛd ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ə soʊlʒɝ bɪfɔɹ, ʃi hæɾ ə soʊlʒɝz vju. lɔŋ ɑdz wɝ juʒəwəli ði oʊnli ɑdz jə kəd faɪnd, bʌt jə stɪl hæd tə ɡɛt ðə dʒɑb dʌn. "aɪ wʌndɝ wʌt ðeɪ θɪŋk ʌv ɪt?" ʃi æɾəd, nɑɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə fɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæd dʒʌst stɛpt aʊɾ ʌv ə kɹɔsɪŋ kɔɹəɾɝ daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ.

The palace required the population of a large village to keep running, and servants had begun to appear, liveried men and women scurrying along the corridors, flattening themselves against the walls or ducking into crossing hallways to make room for Elayne's escort, so she explained the little she knew in as soft a voice and as few words as possible. Some rumors she did not mind reaching the streets, and inevitably Arymilla, but tales of Rand could be as bad as tales of the Forsaken by the time they were twisted through a few retellings. Worse, in a way. No one would believe the Forsaken were trying to put her on the throne as a puppet. "In any event," she finished, "it's nothing to do with us here." She thought she sounded very convincing, very cool and detached, but Aviendha reached out to squeeze her hand, for an Aiel as much as a comforting hug with so many people to see, and Birgitte's sympathy flooded through the bond. It was more than commiseration; it was the shared feeling of a woman who had already suffered the loss she herself feared and more. Gaidal Cain was lost to Birgitte as surely as if he were dead, and on top of that, her memories of her past lives were fading. She remembered almost nothing clearly before the founding of the White Tower, and not all of that. Some nights, the fear that Gaidal would fade from her memory, too, that she would lose any remembrance of actually having known and loved him, left her unable to sleep until she drank as much brandy as she could hold. That was a poor solution, and Elayne wished she could offer a better, yet she knew her own memories of Rand would not die until she did, and she could not imagine the horror of knowing those memories might leave her. Still, she hoped someone Healed Birgitte's morning-after head soon, before her own split open like an over-ripe melon. Her ability with Healing fell short of the task, and Aviendha's was no stronger. Despite the emotion she could feel in Birgitte, the other woman kept her face smooth and unconcerned. "The Forsaken," she muttered dryly. And softly. That was not a name to bandy about. "Well, as long as it has nothing to do with us, we're bloody all right." A grunt that might have been a laugh gave her the lie. But then, although Birgitte said she had never been a soldier before, she had a soldier's view. Long odds were usually the only odds you could find, but you still had to get the job done. "I wonder what they think of it?" she added, nodding toward the four Aes Sedai who had just stepped out of a crossing corridor down the hallway.

vændin, mɛɝɪlɪl, sɝaɪðə ən kɛɝin hæd ðɛɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ əz ðeɪ wɔkt, əɹ ɹæðɝ, ðə læs θɹi wɝ klʌstɝɾ ɝaʊn vændin, linɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əɹ ən tɔkɪŋ wɪð ɝdʒən dʒɛstʃɝz ðət meɪd ðə fɹɪnʒɪz ɑn ðɛɹ ʃɔlz sweɪ. vændin ɡlaɪɾɪd əlɔŋ sloʊli əz ɪf ʃi wɝ əloʊn, peɪɪŋ noʊ hid. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn slɛndɝ, bʌɾ əɹ dɑɹk ɡɹin dʒɹɛs, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð flaʊɝz ɑn ðə slivz ən ʃoʊldɝz, hʌŋ ɑn əɹ əz ðoʊ meɪd fəɹ ə staʊɾɝ wʊmən, ən ðə waɪt hɛɹ ɡæðɝɾ ət ðə neɪp ə hɝ nɛk simd ɪn niɾ ʌv ə bɹʌʃ. hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən wɑz blik, bʌt ðət maɪɾ əv hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð wʌtɛvɝ ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz wɝ seɪɪŋ. ʃi hæd bɪn dʒɔɪləs ɛvɝ sɪns əɹ sɪstɝz mɝɾɝ. ɪleɪn wʊɾə weɪdʒɝd ðət dʒɹɛs hæd bɪlɔŋ tə æɾɪliz. sɪns ðə mɝɾɝ, vændin wɔɹ əɹ sɪstɝz kloʊðz mɔɹ ɔfən ðən əɹ oʊn. nɑt ðət ðəɾ əkaʊntəd fəɹ ðə fɪt. ðə tu wɪmən hæd bɪn ʌv ə saɪz, bʌt vændinz æpətaɪt fəɹ fud hæd daɪd wɪð əɹ sɪstɝ. hɝ teɪs fəɹ moʊs θɪŋz sim tə hæv daɪd ðɛn.

Vandene, Merilille, Sareitha and Careane had their heads together as they walked, or rather, the last three were clustered around Vandene, leaning toward her and talking with urgent gestures that made the fringes on their shawls sway. Vandene glided along slowly as if she were alone, paying no heed. She had always been slender, but her dark green dress, embroidered with flowers on the sleeves and shoulders, hung on her as though made for a stouter woman, and the white hair gathered at the nape of her neck seemed in need of a brush. Her expression was bleak, but that might have had nothing to do with whatever the other sisters were saying. She had been joyless ever since her sister's murder. Elayne would have wagered that dress had belonged to Adeleas. Since the murder, Vandene wore her sister's clothes more often than her own. Not that that accounted for the fit. The two women had been of a size, but Vandene's appetite for food had died with her sister. Her taste for most things seemed to have died then.

sɝaɪðə, ə bɹaʊn huz dɑɹk skwɛɹ feɪs wɑz nɑt jɛt tʌtʃt wɪð eɪɡləsnəs, sɔ ɪleɪn dʒʌs ðɛn, ən pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn vændinz ɑɹm əz ɪf tə dʒɹɔ hɝ ʌp ðə kɔɹəɾɝ. vændin bɹʌʃt ðə tɛɹən wʊmənz hæn əweɪ ən ɡlaɪɾɪd ɑn wɪð ðə mɛɹəst ɡlæns əɾ ɪleɪn, dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ ɑn əlɔŋ ðə hɔlweɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm aʊɾ ʌv. tu wɪmən ɪn nɑvəs waɪt, hu hæd bɪn fɑloʊɪŋ ði ʌðɝz əɾ ə ɹɪspɛkfəl dɪstəns, ɔfɝd kwɪk kɝtsiz tə ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ sɪstɝz ən heɪsən æftɝ vændin. mɛɝɪlɪl, ə taɪni wʊmən ɪn dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ ðət meɪɾ əɹ kɛɹhinɪn pælnəs sim laɪk aɪvɝi, stɛɹɾ əz ɪf ʃi maɪt fɑloʊ.

Sareitha, a Brown whose dark square face was not yet touched with agelessness, saw Elayne just then, and put a hand on Vandene's arm as if to draw her up the corridor. Vandene brushed the Tairen woman's hand away and glided on with the merest glance at Elayne, disappearing on along the hallway they had come out of. Two women in novice white, who had been following the others at a respectful distance, offered quick curtsies to the remaining sisters and hastened after Vandene. Merilille, a tiny woman in dark gray that made her Cairhienin paleness seem like ivory, stared as if she might follow.

kɛɝin ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ɡɹin-fɹɪnd ʃɔl ɑn ʃoʊldɝz waɪɾɝ ðən ðoʊz ə mɛni mɛn ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd kwaɪət wɝdz wɪð sɝaɪðə. ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm tɝn tə miɾ ɪleɪn əz ʃi əpɹoʊtʃt, meɪkɪŋ əɹ kɝtsiz ɔlmoʊst əz dip əz ðə nɑvəsɪz hæd ɡɪvən ðɛm. mɛɝɪlɪl noʊɾəst ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən ən blɪŋkt, ðən noʊɾəst ɪleɪn ən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. hɝ kɝtsi mætʃt ðə nɑvəsɪz'. mɛɝɪlɪl hæd wɔɹn ðə ʃɔl fəɹ oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, kɛɝin fəɹ mɔɹ ðən fɪfti, ən ivən sɝaɪðə hæd wɔɹn ɪt lɔŋɡɝ ðən ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd, bʌt stændɪŋ əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛnt wɪð stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə paʊɝ, ən nʌn ə ðiz θɹi wɑz mɔɹ ðən mɪɾəlɪŋ stʃɹɔŋ əmʌŋ sɪstɝz. ɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ aɪz, ɪnkɹist stʃɹɛŋkθ ɡeɪv, ɪf nɑɾ ɪnkɹist wɪzdəm, ət list ɪnkɹist weɪt tə jəɹ əpɪnjənz. wɪð ə səfɪʃənt ɡæp, ðoʊz əpɪnjənz bɪkeɪm kəmænz. səmtaɪmz, ɪleɪn θɔt ðə kɪnz weɪ wɑz bɛɾɝ.

Careane adjusted her green-fringed shawl on shoulders wider than those of many men and exchanged quiet words with Sareitha. The pair of them turned to meet Elayne as she approached, making her curtsies almost as deep as the novices had given them. Merilille noticed the Guardswomen and blinked, then noticed Elayne and gave a start. Her curtsy matched the novices'. Merilille had worn the shawl for over a hundred years, Careane for more than fifty, and even Sareitha had worn it longer than Elayne Trakand, but standing among Aes Sedai went with strength in the Power, and none of these three was more than middling strong among sisters. In Aes Sedai eyes, increased strength gave, if not increased wisdom, at least increased weight to your opinions. With a sufficient gap, those opinions became commands. Sometimes, Elayne thought the Kin's way was better.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz," ʃi sɛd bɪfɔɹ ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd spik, "bʌt ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ wi kən də əbaʊɾ ɪt, soʊ wi maɪɾ əz wɛl kwɪt wɝiɪŋ. wɪv ɪnʌf ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv əs wɪθaʊt fɹɛɾɪŋ oʊvɝ θɪŋz wi kæn əfɛkt."

"I don't know what it is," she said before any of the other Aes Sedai could speak, "but there is nothing we can do about it, so we might as well quit worrying. We have enough right in front of us without fretting over things we can't affect."

ɹæsɔɹiə hæf-tɝn əɹ hɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ ən pleɪnli wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt ʃi hæd mɪst, bʌt ðə wɝdz smuðd ði æŋzaɪəɾi fɹəm sɝaɪðəz dɑɹk aɪz. pɝhæps nɑt fɹəm ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ, sɪns əɹ hænz muvd əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə smuð əɹ bɹaʊn skɝts, jɛt ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə fɑloʊ ðə lɛɾ ʌv ə sɪstɝ u stʊɾ əz haɪ əz ɪleɪn. səmtaɪmz, ðəɹ wɝ ædvæntɪdʒɪz tə stændɪŋ haɪ ɪnʌf ðət jə kəd kwɛl əbdʒɛkʃənz wɪð ə sɛntəns. kɛɝin hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɹiɡeɪn sɝɛnəɾi, ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ lɔst ɪt. ɪt sæɾ izəli ɑn hɝ, ðoʊ ʃi lʊk mɔɹ laɪk ə wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝ ðən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪspaɪɾ əɹ bɛɹəl-slæʃt sɪlks ən smuð, eɪdʒləs kɑpɝi feɪs.

Rasoria half-turned her head, frowning and plainly wondering what she had missed, but the words smoothed the anxiety from Sareitha's dark eyes. Perhaps not from the rest of her, since her hands moved as if she wanted to smooth her brown skirts, yet she was willing to follow the lead of a sister who stood as high as Elayne. Sometimes, there were advantages to standing high enough that you could quell objections with a sentence. Careane had already regained serenity, if she had ever lost it. It sat easily on her, though she looked more like a wagon driver than an Aes Sedai despite her beryl-slashed silks and smooth, ageless coppery face.

bʌt ðɛn, ɡɹinz juʒəwəli wɝ meɪɾ ə tʌfɝ stʌf ðən bɹaʊnz. mɛɝɪlɪl dɪd nɑt lʊk əɾ ɔl sɝin. waɪɾ aɪz ən hæf-pɑɹɾəd lɪps ɡeɪv əɹ ði əpɪɹəns ə stɑɹɾəlmənt. ðət wɑz juʒəwəl fəɹ hɝ, ðoʊ.

But then, Greens usually were made of tougher stuff than Browns. Merilille did not look at all serene. Wide eyes and half-parted lips gave her the appearance of startlement. That was usual for her, though.

ɪleɪn kəntɪnjuɾ əlɔŋ ðə hɔlweɪ, hoʊpɪŋ ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ əbaʊt ðɛɹ bɪznəs, bʌt mɛɝɪlɪl fɛl ɪn bɪsaɪd bɝdʒɪt. ðə ɡɹeɪ ʃʊɾə teɪkən pɹaɪməsi əmʌŋ ðə θɹi, bʌt ʃi hæd dɪvɛləpt ə tɛndənsi tə weɪt fəɹ sʌmwʌn tə tɛl əɹ wʌt tə du, ən ʃi ʃɪftəɾ oʊvɝ wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd wən sɝaɪðə pəlaɪtli æsk bɝdʒɪt tə ɡɪv əɹ ɹum. ðə sɪstɝz wɝ ənfeɪlɪŋli kɝɾiəs tə ɪleɪnz wɔɹɾɝ wən ʃi wɑz æktɪŋ əz kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl. ɪt wɑz bɝdʒɪɾ əz wɔɹɾɝ ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ. eɪvinhə ɹəsiv noʊ sətʃ səvɪləɾi fɹəm kɛɝin, hu ɛlboʊɾ ɪn bɪtwin əɹ ən ɪleɪn. ɛniwʌn nɑt tʃɹeɪn ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɑz ə waɪldɝ baɪ dɛfənɪʃən, ən kɛɝin dɪspaɪzd waɪldɝz. eɪvinhə pɝst əɹ lɪps ðoʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt dʒɹɔ hɝ bɛl naɪf əɹ ivən sədʒɛs ðət ʃi maɪt, fəɹ wɪtʃ ɪleɪn wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl. hɝ fɝst-sɪstɝ kəd bi . . . pɹɪsɪpɪteɪt, ət taɪmz. ɑn sɛkən θɔt, ʃi wʊɾə fɝɡɪvən ə lɪɾəl heɪstinəs fɹəm eɪvinhə ɹaɪt ðɛn. kʌstəm fɝbeɪd ɹudnəs təwɔɹɾ ənʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌndɝ ɛni sɝkəmstænsəz, bʌɾ eɪvinhə cʊɾə ɡɹaʊl θɹɛts ən weɪvd əɹ naɪf tə hɝ hɑɹts kɑntɛnt. ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn ɪnʌf tə meɪk ðə θɹisəm liv, ivən ɪf ɪn ə tɪzi. kɛɝin dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs ðə kul ɡɹin ɡeɪz mɑɹkɪŋ hɝ.

Elayne continued along the hallway, hoping they would go about their business, but Merilille fell in beside Birgitte. The Gray should have taken primacy among the three, but she had developed a tendency to wait for someone to tell her what to do, and she shifted over without a word when Sareitha politely asked Birgitte to give her room. The sisters were unfailingly courteous to Elayne's Warder when she was acting as Captain-General. It was Birgitte as Warder they tried to ignore. Aviendha received no such civility from Careane, who elbowed in between her and Elayne. Anyone not trained in the White Tower was a wilder by definition, and Careane despised wilders. Aviendha pursed her lips though she did not draw her belt knife or even suggest that she might, for which Elayne was grateful. Her first-sister could be . . . precipitate, at times. On second thought, she would have forgiven a little hastiness from Aviendha right then. Custom forbade rudeness toward another Aes Sedai under any circumstances, but Aviendha could have growled threats and waved her knife to her heart's content. That might have been enough to make the threesome leave, even if in a tizzy. Careane did not seem to notice the cool green gaze marking her.

"aɪ toʊl mɛɝɪlɪl ən sɝaɪðə ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ wi kəd də ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt," ʃi sɛd kɑmli. "bʌt ʃʊdnt wi bi ɹɛɾi tə fli ɪf ɪt kʌmz kloʊsɝ? ðɛɹz noʊ ʃeɪm flaɪɪŋ fɹəm ðæt. ivən lɪŋkt, wi wəd bi mɔθs faɪɾɪŋ ə fɔɹəs faɪɝ. vændin wʊdn bɑðɝ tə lɪsən."

"I told Merilille and Sareitha it was nothing we could do anything about," she said calmly. "But shouldn't we be ready to flee if it comes closer? There's no shame flying from that. Even linked, we would be moths fighting a forest fire. Vandene wouldn't bother to listen."

"wi ɹɪli ʃəd meɪk səm sɔɹɾ ə pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz, ɪleɪn," sɝaɪðə mɝmɝɾ æbsənli, əz ɪf meɪkɪŋ lɪsts ɪn əɹ hɛd. "ɪts wən jə doʊn meɪk plænz ðət jə wɪʃ jə hæd. ðəɹ ɑɹ ə nʌmbɝ ə vɑljumz ɪn ðə laɪbɹɛɹi hɪɹ ðət mʌsnt bi lɛf bɪhaɪnd. aɪ bɪliv sɛvɹəl kæn bi faʊn ɪn ðə taʊɝ laɪbɹɛɹi." "jɛs." mɛɝɪlɪlz vɔɪs wɑz bɹɛθləs, ən əz æŋkʃəs əz əɹ lɑɹdʒ dɑɹk aɪz. "jɛs, wi ɹɪli ʃəd bi ɹɛɾi tə ɡoʊ. pɝhæps. . . . pɝhæps wi ʃəd nɑt weɪt. ʃʊɹli ɡoʊɪŋ fɹəm nəsɛsəɾi wəd nɑt vaɪəleɪɾ əɹ əɡɹimənt. aɪm ʃʊɹ ɪt wəd nɑt." oʊnli bɝdʒɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst ət hɝ, bʌt ʃi flɪntʃt.

"We really should make some sort of preparations, Elayne," Sareitha murmured absently, as if making lists in her head. "It's when you don't make plans that you wish you had. There are a number of volumes in the library here that mustn't be left behind. I believe several can't be found in the Tower library." "Yes." Merilille's voice was breathless, and as anxious as her large dark eyes. "Yes, we really should be ready to go. Perhaps. . . . Perhaps we should not wait. Surely going from necessity would not violate our agreement. I am sure it would not." Only Birgitte as much as glanced at her, but she flinched.

"ɪf wi də ɡoʊ," kɛɝin sɛɾ əz ɪf mɛɝɪlɪl hæd nɑt spoʊkən, "wil əv tə teɪk ɔl ə ðə kɪn wɪð ʌs. əlaʊ ðɛm tə skæɾɝ, ən ðə laɪɾ oʊnli noʊz wʌt ðəl də əɹ wən wɪl ɛvɝ kætʃ əm əɡɛn, ɪspɛʃli naʊ ðət səm əv lɝn tə tʃɹævəl." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ bɪɾɝnəs ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, ðoʊ oʊnli ɪleɪn əmʌŋ ðə sɪstɝz ɪn ðə pæləs kəd tʃɹævəl. ɪt sim tə meɪk ə dɪfɝəns tə kɛɝin ðət ðə kɪnswɪmən hæd bɪɡʌn ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ivən ɪf moʊs hæd bɪn pʊɾ aʊɾ ən ə fju hæd ɹʌn əweɪ.

"If we do go," Careane said as if Merilille had not spoken, "we'll have to take all of the Kin with us. Allow them to scatter, and the Light only knows what they'll do or when we will ever catch them again, especially now that some have learned to Travel." There was no bitterness in her voice, though only Elayne among the sisters in the palace could Travel. It seemed to make a difference to Careane that the Kinswomen had begun in the White Tower, even if most had been put out and a few had run away.

ʃi hæɾ aɪdɛntəfaɪd noʊ fjuɝ ðən fɔɹ ə ðɛm hɝsɛlf, ɪnkluɾɪŋ wʌn ɹʌnəweɪ. ət lis ðeɪ wɝ nɑt waɪldɝz.

She had identified no fewer than four of them herself, including one runaway. At least they were not wilders.

sɝaɪðəz maʊθ taɪɾənd, ðoʊ. ɪt weɪɾ ɑn əɹ ðət sɛvɹəl kɪnswɪmən kəd wiv ɡeɪtweɪz, ən ʃi hæd vɛɹi dɪfɹənt noʊʃənz ə ðə kɪn. nɔɹməli, ʃi lɪməɾəd əɹ əbdʒɛkʃənz tə ði əkeɪʒənəl fɹaʊn əɹ dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋ ɡɹɪmɑs, sɪns ɪleɪn hæd meɪɾ əɹ oʊn vjuz klɪɹ, bʌt ðə stʃɹɛs ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sim tə hæv lusən əɹ tʌŋ. "wi də ɪndid nid tə teɪk əm wɪð ʌs," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə kʌɾɪŋ toʊn, "ɛls ðəl ɔl bi kleɪmɪŋ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ əz sun əz ðəɹ aʊɾ ʌv əɹ saɪt. ɛni wʊmən u meɪnteɪnz ʃi wɑz pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ oʊvɝ θɹi hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɡoʊ wɪl kleɪm ɛniθɪŋ!

Sareitha's mouth tightened, though. It weighed on her that several Kinswomen could weave gateways, and she had very different notions of the Kin. Normally, she limited her objections to the occasional frown or disparaging grimace, since Elayne had made her own views clear, but the stress of the morning seemed to have loosened her tongue. "We do indeed need to take them with us," she said in a cutting tone, "else they'll all be claiming to be Aes Sedai as soon as they're out of our sight. Any woman who maintains she was put out of the Tower over three hundred years ago will claim anything!

ðeɪ nid tə bi kɛpt ʌndɝ ə kloʊs wɑtʃ, ɪf jə æsk mi, ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ əbaʊɾ əz ðeɪ pliz, moʊst ɪspɛʃli ðoʊz u kən tʃɹævəl. ðeɪ meɪ hæv ɡɔn wɛɹ jə toʊld əm ən kʌm bæk soʊ fɑɹ, ɪleɪn, bʌt haʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ wʌn ə ðɛm dʌzn ɹɪtɝn? mɑɹk maɪ wɝdz, wʌns wʌn ə ðɛm ɪskeɪps, ʌðɝz wɪl fɑloʊ, ən wɪl əv ə mɛs ɑn əɹ hænz wɪl nɛvɝ klin ʌp."

They need to be kept under a close watch, if you ask me, instead of going about as they please, most especially those who can Travel. They may have gone where you told them and come back so far, Elayne, but how long before one of them doesn't return? Mark my words, once one of them escapes, others will follow, and we will have a mess on our hands we'll never clean up."

"ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ ɹizən fəɹ əs tə ɡoʊ ɛniwɛɹ," ɪleɪn sɛd fɝmli, əz mʌtʃ fəɹ ðə ɡɑɹdz əz fəɹ ðə sɪstɝz. ðət dɪstən bikən wɑz stɪl ɪn ðə seɪm spɑt wɛɹ ʃi hæd fɝst sɛnst ɪt, ən ɪf ɪt dɪd muv, ðə tʃæns sim smɔl ðəɾ ɪt wəd muv təwɔɹd keɪɛmlɪn, mʌtʃ lɛs æktʃəli  kʌm ðɛɹ, bʌɾ ə ɹumɝ ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ plænɪŋ flaɪt maɪt bi ɪnʌf tə ɛndʒɛndɝ ə stæmpid, mɑbz klɔɪŋ tə ɹitʃ ðə ɡeɪts əhɛɾ ʌv wʌtɛvɝ kəd fɹaɪɾən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən ɑɹmi sækɪŋ ðə sɪɾi wəd nɑt kɪl əz mɛni. ən ðiz θɹi tʃæɾɝd əweɪ əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ noʊ wʌn tə hɪɹ bʌt ðə wɔl hæŋʒɪŋz! ðəɹ wɑz səm ɪkskjus fəɹ mɛɝɪlɪl, bʌt nɑt ði ʌðɝz. "wi wɪl ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ, əz ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ əz kəmændəd, əntɪl ði æmɪɝlɪn kəmænz ʌðɝwaɪz. ðə kɪnswɪmən wɪl kəntɪnju tə ɹəsiv ɛvɹi kɝɾəsi əntɪl ðeɪ ɑɹ wɛlkəm bæk ɪndə ðə taʊɝ, ən ðəɾ ɪz ði æmɪɝlɪnz kəmænd, tu, əz jə vɛɹi wɛl noʊ. jəl wɪl kəntɪnju titʃɪŋ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ən ɡoʊ əbaʊt jəɹ lɪvz əz ɛɛs sədaɪ wəɹ ɑɹ səpoʊz tə dil wɪð pipəlz fɪɹz ən suð ðɛm, nɑt spɹɛd sɛnsləs ɡɑsəp ən pænɪk." wɛl, pɝhæps ʃi hæd bɪn ə tʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən fɝm. sɝaɪðə pʊɾ əɹ ɡeɪz ɑn ðə flɔɹ taɪlz laɪk ə ɹɪbjuk nɑvəs. mɛɝɪlɪl flɪntʃt əɡɛn ət mɛnʃən ə ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, bʌt ðət wɑz tə bi ɪkspɛktəd. ði ʌðɝz ɡeɪv lɛsənz, bʌt ðə si foʊk hɛl mɛɝɪlɪl əz taɪtli əz ðeɪ dɪd wʌn ə ðɛɹ əpɹɛntəsɪz. ʃi slɛpt ɪn ðɛɹ kɔɹɾɝz ən nɔɹməli wɑz nɑt sin wɪθaʊt tu əɹ θɹi ʌv ðɛm, ən əɹ tʃɹeɪlɪŋ mikli ət ðɛɹ hilz. ðeɪ ɹəfjuz tə æksɛpt ɛniθɪŋ lɛs ðən miknəs fɹəm hɝ.

"There is no reason for us to go anywhere," Elayne said firmly, as much for the Guards as for the sisters. That distant beacon was still in the same spot where she had first sensed it, and if it did move, the chance seemed small that it would move toward Caemlyn, much less actually come there, but a rumor that Aes Sedai were planning flight might be enough to engender a stampede, mobs clawing to reach the gates ahead of whatever could frighten Aes Sedai. An army sacking the city would not kill as many. And these three chattered away as if there were no one to hear but the wall hangings! There was some excuse for Merilille, but not the others. "We will remain here, as the Amyrlin Seat has commanded, until the Amyrlin commands otherwise. The Kinswomen will continue to receive every courtesy until they are welcomed back into the Tower, and that is the Amyrlin's command, too, as you very well know. And you will continue teaching the Windfinders and go about your lives as Aes Sedai should. We are supposed to deal with people's fears and soothe them, not spread senseless gossip and panic." Well, perhaps she had been a touch more than firm. Sareitha put her gaze on the floor tiles like a rebuked novice. Merilille flinched again at mention of the Windfinders, but that was to be expected. The others gave lessons, but the Sea Folk held Merilille as tightly as they did one of their apprentices. She slept in their quarters and normally was not seen without two or three of them, and her trailing meekly at their heels. They refused to accept anything less than meekness from her.

"ʌv kɔɹs, ɪleɪn," kɛɝin sɛd heɪstəli. "ʌv kɔɹs. nʌn ʌv əs wəd sədʒɛs dɪsəbɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪn." hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ, ʃi ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ɡɹin-fɹɪnd ʃɔl oʊvɝ əɹ ɑɹmz, simɪŋli ɑkjəpaɪd wɪð sɛɾɪŋ ɪt dʒʌst soʊ. ʃi dɪd spɛɹ ə pɪɾiɪŋ lʊk fəɹ mɛɝɪlɪl. "bʌt spikɪŋ ə ðə si foʊk, kəd jə tɛl vændin tə teɪk əɹ ʃɛɹ ə ðə lɛsənz?" wən ɪleɪn sɛd nʌθɪŋ, hɝ vɔɪs tʊk ɑn ən ɛdʒ ðət wʊɾə bɪn kɔl sʌlən ɪn ɛniwʌn nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. "ʃi sɛz ʃiz tu bɪzi wɪð ðoʊz tu ɹʌnəweɪz, bʌt ʃi faɪnz ɪnʌf taɪm tə kip mi tɔkɪŋ səm naɪts əntɪl aɪm hæf əslip. ðət pɛɹ ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi soʊ kaʊd ðeɪ wʊdn skwik ɪf ðɛɹ dʒɹɛsəz kɑt faɪɝ. ðeɪ doʊnt niɾ əɹ ətɛnʃən. ʃi kəd teɪk əɹ pɔɹʃən ə titʃɪŋ ðoʊz kɝst waɪldɝz. vændin nidz tə stɑɹt bɪheɪvɪŋ əz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, tu!"

"Of course, Elayne," Careane said hastily. "Of course. None of us would suggest disobeying the Amyrlin." Hesitating, she adjusted her green-fringed shawl over her arms, seemingly occupied with setting it just so. She did spare a pitying look for Merilille. "But speaking of the Sea Folk, could you tell Vandene to take her share of the lessons?" When Elayne said nothing, her voice took on an edge that would have been called sullen in anyone not Aes Sedai. "She says she's too busy with those two runaways, but she finds enough time to keep me talking some nights until I'm half asleep. That pair is already so cowed they wouldn't squeak if their dresses caught fire. They don't need her attention. She could take her portion of teaching those cursed wilders. Vandene needs to start behaving as an Aes Sedai, too!"

stændɪŋ əɹ noʊ, ɹibjuk əɹ noʊ, ʃi ɡeɪv ɪleɪn ə beɪlfəl ɡlɛɹ ðət tʊk əɹ ə moʊmən tə smʌðɝ.

Standing or no, rebuke or no, she gave Elayne a baleful glare that took her a moment to smother.

ɪleɪn hæd bɪn ðə wʌn u meɪd ðə bɑɹɡən ðət lɛd tə ɛɛs sədaɪ hævɪŋ tə titʃ wɪndfɪndɝz, bʌt soʊ fɑɹ ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd mænədʒ tə mɪs ɡɪvɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ə hændfʊl ə lɛsənz, kleɪmɪŋ ðə pɹɛs ʌv ʌðɝ, mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt duɾiz. bɪsaɪdz, ðə si foʊk sɔ ə ʃɔɹbaʊn titʃɝ əz ə haɪɹəlɪŋ, ivən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ə haɪɹəlɪŋ wɪð lɛs stændɪŋ ðən ə skʌljən ət ðæt. ə skʌljən u maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə tʃiɾ ɑn əɹ leɪbɝ.

Elayne had been the one who made the bargain that led to Aes Sedai having to teach Windfinders, but so far she herself had managed to miss giving more than a handful of lessons, claiming the press of other, more important duties. Besides, the Sea Folk saw a shorebound teacher as a hireling, even an Aes Sedai, and a hireling with less standing than a scullion at that. A scullion who might try to cheat on her labor.

ʃi stɪl θɔt nɪneɪiv hæd ɡɔn əweɪ dʒʌs tə əvɔɪd ɡɪvɪŋ ðoʊz lɛsənz. sɝɾənli noʊ wʌn ɪkspɛktəd tə ɛn ʌp ɪn mɛɝɪlɪlz steɪt, bʌɾ ivən ə fju aʊɝz əɾ ə taɪm wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf.

She still thought Nynaeve had gone away just to avoid giving those lessons. Certainly no one expected to end up in Merilille's state, but even a few hours at a time was bad enough.

"oʊ, noʊ, kɛɝin," sɝaɪðə pʊɾ ɪn, stɪl əvɔɪɾɪŋ ɪleɪnz aɪ. ən mɛɝɪlɪlz. ɪn əɹ əpɪnjən, ðə ɡɹeɪ hæd ɡɑɾən hɝsɛlf ɪndə ðɪs fɪks ən ðʌs dɪzɝvd wʌt keɪm ʌv ɪt, bʌt ʃi dɪd tʃɹaɪ nɑt tə ɹʌb sɔlt ɪn ðə wunz. "vændin ɪz dɪstʃɹɔɾ oʊvɝ əɹ sɪstɝ, ən kɝstʃən ən zɛɹjə hɛlp əɹ ɑkjəpaɪ hɝ maɪnd." wʌtɛvɝ ʃi θɔɾ ə ði ʌðɝ kɪn, ʃi æksɛptɪd ðət zɛɹjə wɑz ə ɹʌnəweɪ, əz ʃi hæd tə, sɪns zɛɹjə wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz kɛɝin hæd ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd, ən ɪf kɝstʃən mʌs bi ə laɪɝ, hɝ oʊn laɪ wəd meɪk əɹ peɪ ɪn fʊl fəɹ ðæt. ɹʌnəweɪz wɝ nɑt tʃɹiɾəd kaɪnli. "aɪ spɛn aʊɝz wɪð hɝ, tu, ən ʃi ɔlmoʊs nɛvɝ tɔks ʌv ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ æɾɪliz. ɪts əz ɪf ʃi wɑns tə æd maɪ mɛmɹiz tə hɝ oʊn. aɪ θɪŋk ʃi nidz tə bi əlaʊɾ əz mʌtʃ taɪm əz ʃi nidz, ən ðoʊz tu kip əɹ fɹəm biɪŋ əloʊn tu ɔfən." ɡɪvɪŋ ɪleɪn ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlæns, ʃi dʒɹu bɹɛθ. "stɪl, titʃɪŋ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ɪz sɝɾənli . . .

"Oh, no, Careane," Sareitha put in, still avoiding Elayne's eye. And Merilille's. In her opinion, the Gray had gotten herself into this fix and thus deserved what came of it, but she did try not to rub salt in the wounds. "Vandene is distraught over her sister, and Kirstian and Zarya help her occupy her mind." Whatever she thought of the other Kin, she accepted that Zarya was a runaway, as she had to, since Zarya was one of those Careane had recognized, and if Kirstian must be a liar, her own lie would make her pay in full for that. Runaways were not treated kindly. "I spend hours with her, too, and she almost never talks of anything but Adeleas. It's as if she wants to add my memories to her own. I think she needs to be allowed as much time as she needs, and those two keep her from being alone too often." Giving Elayne a sidelong glance, she drew breath. "Still, teaching the Windfinders is certainly . . .

tʃælənʒɪŋ. pɝhæps ən aʊɝ naʊ ən ðən wəd hɛlp pʊl əɹ aʊɾ ə dɪspɑndənsi, ɪf oʊnli baɪ meɪkɪŋ əɹ æŋɡɹi. doʊn jə əɡɹi, ɪleɪn? dʒʌst ən aʊɝ əɹ tu, naʊ ən ðɛn."

challenging. Perhaps an hour now and then would help pull her out of despondency, if only by making her angry. Don't you agree, Elayne? Just an hour or two, now and then."

"vændin wɪl bi əlaʊɾ əz mʌtʃ taɪm tə ɡɹiv fəɹ əɹ sɪstɝ əz ʃi nidz əɹ wɑns," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪn lɛvəl toʊnz. "æn ðəɹ wɪl bi noʊ mɔɹ dɪskʌʃən ʌv ɪt." kɛɝin saɪd hɛvəli ən ɹiɝeɪnʒd əɹ ʃɔl əɡɛn. sɝaɪðə saɪd feɪnli ən bɪɡæn twɪstɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn ðə fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ ə hɝ lɛf hænd. pɝhæps ðeɪ hæd sɛnst əɹ mud, əɹ pɝhæps ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðət niðɝ lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə ənʌðɝ sɛʃən wɪð ðə wɪndfɪndɝz. mɛɝɪlɪlz pɝmənənli sɝpɹaɪzd ɪkspɹɛʃən dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, bʌt ðɛn, hɝ sɛʃənz wɪð ðə si foʊk læstəɾ ɔl deɪ ən ɔl naɪɾ ənlɛs ɪleɪn mænədʒ tə pɹaɪ hɝ əweɪ, ən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ bɪkʌmɪŋ lɛs ən lɛs wɪlɪŋ tə lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɪleɪn pɹaɪd.

"Vandene will be allowed as much time to grieve for her sister as she needs or wants," Elayne said in level tones. "And there will be no more discussion of it." Careane sighed heavily and rearranged her shawl again. Sareitha sighed faintly and began twisting the Great Serpent ring on the forefinger of her left hand. Perhaps they had sensed her mood, or perhaps it was just that neither looked forward to another session with the Windfinders. Merilille's permanently surprised expression did not change, but then, her sessions with the Sea Folk lasted all day and all night unless Elayne managed to pry her away, and the Windfinders were becoming less and less willing to let her go no matter how Elayne pried.

ət list ʃi hæd mænədʒ tə əvɔɪd biɪŋ kɝt wɪð ðə θɹi. ɪt tʊk ən ɛfɝt, ɪspɛʃli wɪð eɪvinhə ðɛɹ. ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt ʃi wəd də ɪf ʃi ɛvɝ lɔst əɹ sɪstɝ. vændin wɑz nɑɾ oʊnli ɡɹivɪŋ fəɹ ə sɪstɝ, ʃi wɑz sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ æɾɪlizəz mɝɾɝɝ, ən ðəɹ kəd bi noʊ daʊt ðət ðə kɪlɝ wɑz mɛɝɪlɪl ʃiændɪvɪn, kɛɝin fɹænzi əɹ sɝaɪðə toʊmɑɹz. wʌn ə ðɛm, əɹ wɝs, mɔɹ ðən wʌn. ðə tʃɑɹdʒ wɑz hɑɹd tə bɪliv ə mɛɝɪlɪl, ɪn əɹ pɹɛzən kəndɪʃən, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi tə bɪliv ʌv ɛni sɪstɝ. əz bɝdʒɪt hæd pɔɪntəɾ aʊt, wʌn ə ðə wɝs dɑɹkfɹɛnz ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ mɛt, dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, wɑz ə maɪld-æz-mɪlk læɾ u dʒʌmpt ət laʊd nɔɪzɪz. ən pɔɪzən ən ɪntaɪɝ sɪɾiz wɔɾɝ səplaɪ. eɪvinhəz sədʒɛstʃən wɑz tə pʊɾ ɔl θɹi tə ðə kwɛstʃən, wɪtʃ hæd hɔɹəfaɪd bɝdʒɪt, bʌɾ eɪvinhə wɑz kənsɪɾɝəbli lɛs ɪn ɑ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ðən ʃi wʌns hæd bɪn. ðə pɹɑpɝ kɝɾəsiz mʌs bi meɪnteɪnd, əntɪl ðəɹ wɑz ɛvəɾəns tə kənvɪkt. ðən ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ kɝɾəsi əɾ ɔl.

At least she had managed to avoid being curt with the three. It took an effort, especially with Aviendha there. Elayne did not know what she would do if she ever lost her sister. Vandene was not only grieving for a sister, she was searching for Adeleas's murderer, and there could be no doubt that the killer was Merilille Ceandevin, Careane Fransi or Sareitha Tomares. One of them, or worse, more than one. The charge was hard to believe of Merilille, in her present condition, but it was not easy to believe of any sister. As Birgitte had pointed out, one of the worst Darkfriends she had ever met, during the Trolloc Wars, was a mild-as-milk lad who jumped at loud noises. And poisoned an entire city's water supply. Aviendha's suggestion was to put all three to the question, which had horrified Birgitte, but Aviendha was considerably less in awe of Aes Sedai than she once had been. The proper courtesies must be maintained, until there was evidence to convict. Then there would be no courtesy at all.

"oʊ," sɝaɪðə sɛd, bɹaɪɾənɪŋ sʌɾənli. "hɪɹz kæptən mɛlɝ. hi wɑz ə hɪɹoʊ əɡɛn waɪl jə wɝ ɡɔn, ɪleɪn." eɪvinhə ɡɹɪp ðə hɪlt ə hɝ bɛl naɪf, ən bɝdʒɪt stɪfənd. kɛɝinz feɪs wɛn vɛɹi stɪl, vɛɹi koʊld, ən ivən mɛɝɪlɪl mænədʒd ə dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ hoʊtʊɹ. niðɝ sɪstɝ meɪɾ ɛni sikɹəɾ ə hɝ dɪslaɪk fəɹ dɔɪlən mɛlɝ.

"Oh," Sareitha said, brightening suddenly. "Here's Captain Mellar. He was a hero again while you were gone, Elayne." Aviendha gripped the hilt of her belt knife, and Birgitte stiffened. Careane's face went very still, very cold, and even Merilille managed a disapproving hauteur. Neither sister made any secret of her dislike for Doilan Mellar.

wɪð ə nɛɹoʊ feɪs, hi wɑz nɑt pɹɪɾi, əɹ ivən hænsəm, jɛɾ i muvd wɪð ə sɔɝdzmənz laɪð ɡɹeɪs ðət spoʊk ə fɪzɪkəl stʃɹɛŋkθ. əz kæptən ʌv ɪleɪnz bɑɾiɡɑɹd, hi ɹeɪɾəd θɹi ɡoʊldən nɑts ə ɹæŋk, ən i wɔɹ əm sɑldɝd tə itʃ ʃoʊldɝ ə hɪz bɹaɪtli bɝnɪʃt bɹɛstpleɪt. ən ɪɡnɝən əbzɝvɝ maɪɾ əv θɔɾ i aʊtʃɹæŋk bɝdʒɪt. ðə fɔlz ə snoʊ-waɪt leɪs əɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən ɹɪsts wɝ twaɪs əz θɪk ən twaɪs əz lɔŋ əz ðoʊz wɔɹn baɪ ɛni ʌv ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən, bʌɾ i hæd lɛft ɔf ðə sæʃ əɡɛn, pɝhæps kəz ɪt wʊɾə əbskjʊɹd wʌn sɛɾ ʌv ɡoʊldən nɑts. hi kleɪm ðəɾ i wɑntəd nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ɪn laɪf ðən tə kəmæn əɹ bɑɾiɡɑɹd, jɛɾ i fɹikwənli tɔkt ə bæɾəlz i hæd fɔɾ əz ə mɝsənɛɹi. ɪt simd i hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ɑn ðə luzɪŋ saɪd, ən vɪktɝi hæɾ ɔfən kʌm fɹəm ɪz ənsʌŋ ɛfɝts ɑn ðə fild. hi swɛpt ɔf ɪz waɪt-plum hæɾ ɪn ə dip, flɝɪʃɪŋ baʊ, mænɪdʒɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd dɛfli wɪð wʌn hænd, ðən ɔfɝɾ ə slaɪtli lɛsɝ tə bɝdʒɪt wɪð ən ɑɹm əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst ɪn səlut. ɪleɪn ɝeɪnʒd ə smaɪl ɑn əɹ feɪs. "sɝaɪðə sɛz jə wɝ ə hɪɹoʊ əɡɛn, kæptən mɛlɝ. haʊ soʊ?"

With a narrow face, he was not pretty, or even handsome, yet he moved with a swordsman's lithe grace that spoke of physical strength. As Captain of Elayne's bodyguard, he rated three golden knots of rank, and he wore them soldered to each shoulder of his brightly burnished breastplate. An ignorant observer might have thought he outranked Birgitte. The falls of snow-white lace at his throat and wrists were twice as thick and twice as long as those worn by any of the Guardswomen, but he had left off the sash again, perhaps because it would have obscured one set of golden knots. He claimed that he wanted nothing more in life than to command her bodyguard, yet he frequently talked of battles he had fought as a mercenary. It seemed he had never been on the losing side, and victory had often come from his unsung efforts on the field. He swept off his white-plumed hat in a deep, flourishing bow, managing his sword deftly with one hand, then offered a slightly lesser to Birgitte with an arm across his chest in salute. Elayne arranged a smile on her face. "Sareitha says you were a hero again, Captain Mellar. How so?"

"nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən maɪ duɾi tə maɪ kwin." dɪspaɪɾ ə vɔɪs θɪk wɪð sɛlf-dɪpɹəkeɪʃən, hɪz ænsɝɪŋ smaɪl wɑz wɔɹmɝ ðən ɪt ʃəɾ əv bɪn. hæf ðə pæləs θɔɾ ɪm ðə fɑðɝ ʌv ɪleɪnz tʃaɪld. ðət ʃi hæd nɑt kɹʌʃt ðət ɹumɝ sim tə meɪk ɪm bɪliv i hæd pɹɑspɛks. ðə smaɪl nɛvɝ ɹitʃt ɪz dɑɹk aɪz, ðoʊ. ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪn əz koʊld əz dɛθ. "maɪ duɾi tə jə ɪz maɪ plɛʒɝ, maɪ kwin."

"Nothing more than my duty to my queen." Despite a voice thick with self-deprecation, his answering smile was warmer than it should have been. Half the palace thought him the father of Elayne's child. That she had not crushed that rumor seemed to make him believe he had prospects. The smile never reached his dark eyes, though. They remained as cold as death. "My duty to you is my pleasure, my Queen."

"kæptən mɛlɝ lɛɾ ənʌðɝ sɔɹɾi wɪθaʊɾ ɔɹɾɝz jɛstɝdeɪ," bɝdʒɪt sɛɾ ɪn ə kɛɹfəli ivən vɔɪs. "ðɪs taɪm ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɔlmoʊst spɪld ɪndə ðə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ ɡeɪt, wɪtʃ i hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd lɛft oʊpən əɡɛnst ɪz ɹɪtɝn." ɪleɪn fɛlt əɹ feɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ hɑɹd. "oʊ, noʊ," sɝaɪðə pɹətɛstəd. "ɪt wɑzn laɪk ðəɾ əɾ ɔl. ə hʌnʒɹəd ə lɔɹd lwɑnz ɑɹmmɪn tʃɹaɪd tə ɹitʃ ðə sɪɾi ɪn ðə naɪt, bʌt ðeɪ lɛft ɪt tu leɪt, ən sʌnɹaɪz kɑt ðɛm. soʊ dɪd θɹi taɪmz ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ ə lɔɹd næsənz mɛn. ɪf kæptən mɛlɝ hædn oʊpən ðə ɡeɪts ən lɛɾ ə ɹɛskju, ðeɪɾ əv bɪn kʌt tə pisəz ɪn saɪɾ ə ðə wɔlz. əz ɪt wɑz, hi mænədʒ tə seɪv eɪɾi fəɹ jəɹ kɑz." smaɪlɪŋ, mɛlɝ bæskt ɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪz pɹeɪz əz ɪf i hæd nɑt hɝd bɝdʒɪts kɹɪɾɪsɪzəm. ʌv kɔɹs, hi simd ʌnəwɛɹ ə kɛɝin ən mɛɝɪlɪlz dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ stɛɹz, tu. hi ɔlweɪz mænədʒ tə ɪɡnɔɹ dɪsəpɹuvəl.

"Captain Mellar led another sortie without orders yesterday," Birgitte said in a carefully even voice. "This time the righting almost spilled into the Far Madding Gate, which he had ordered left open against his return." Elayne felt her face growing hard. "Oh, no," Sareitha protested. "It wasn't like that at all. A hundred of Lord Luan's armsmen tried to reach the city in the night, but they left it too late, and sunrise caught them. So did three times their number of Lord Nasin's men. If Captain Mellar hadn't opened the gates and led a rescue, they'd have been cut to pieces in sight of the walls. As it was, he managed to save eighty for your cause." Smiling, Mellar basked in the Aes Sedai's praise as if he had not heard Birgitte's criticism. Of course, he seemed unaware of Careane and Merilille's disapproving stares, too. He always managed to ignore disapproval.

"haʊ dɪd jə noʊ ðeɪ wɝ lɔɹd lwɑnz mɛn, kæptən?" ɪleɪn æskt kwaɪətli. ə smɔl smaɪl ðət ʃʊɾə ɡɪvən mɛlɝ wɔɹnɪŋ əpɪɹɾ ɑn bɝdʒɪts feɪs. bʌt ðɛn, hi wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz u sim nɑt tə bɪliv ʃi wɑz ə wɔɹɾɝ. ivən ɪf i dɪd, fju ɪksɛpt wɔɹɾɝz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ nu wʌt ðə bɑn ɪnteɪld. ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, mɛlɝz ɪkspɹɛʃən ɡɹu mɔɹ smʌɡ. "aɪ dɪdnt ɡoʊ baɪ bænɝz, maɪ kwin.

"How did you know they were Lord Luan's men, Captain?" Elayne asked quietly. A small smile that should have given Mellar warning appeared on Birgitte's face. But then, he was one of those who seemed not to believe she was a Warder. Even if he did, few except Warders and Aes Sedai knew what the bond entailed. If anything, Mellar's expression grew more smug. "I didn't go by banners, my Queen.

ɛnibəɾi kən kæɹi ə bænɝ. aɪ ɹɛkəɡnaɪz dʒʊɹæɾ ɑkən θɹu maɪ lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs. ɑkən ɪz lwɑnz mæn tə hɪz toʊneɪlz. wʌns aɪ nu ðæt. . . . " hi meɪɾ ə dɪsmɪsɪv dʒɛstʃɝ ɪn ə flɝi ʌv leɪs. "ðə ɹɛst wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðən teɪkɪŋ ə lɪɾəl ɛksɝsaɪz."

Anybody can carry a banner. I recognized Jurad Accan through my looking glass. Accan is Luan's man to his toenails. Once I knew that. . . . " He made a dismissive gesture in a flurry of lace. "The rest was no more than taking a little exercise."

"æn dɪd ðɪs dʒʊɹæɾ ɑkən bɹɪŋ ɛni mɛsədʒ fɹəm lɔɹd lwɑn? ɛniθɪŋ saɪn ən sild, əfɝmɪŋ haʊs nɔɹwlɪnz səpɔɹt fəɹ tʃɹəkənd?"

"And did this Jurad Accan bring any message from Lord Luan? Anything signed and sealed, affirming House Norwelyn's support for Trakand?"

"nʌθɪŋ ɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ, maɪ kwin, bʌɾ əz aɪ sɛd - " "lɔɹd lwɑn əz nɑt dɪklɛɹd fəɹ mi, kæptən." mɛlɝz smaɪl feɪɾəd sʌmwʌt. hi wɑz ənjuz tə biɪŋ kʌt ʃɔɹt. "bʌt, maɪ kwin, leɪɾi daɪɛlɪn sɛz ðət lwɑn ɪz əz ɡʊɾ əz ɪn jəɹ kæmp ɹaɪt naʊ. ɑkən ʃoʊɪŋ ʌp ɪz pɹuf ʌv - "

"Nothing in writing, my Queen, but as I said - " "Lord Luan has not declared for me, Captain." Mellar's smile faded somewhat. He was unused to being cut short. "But, my Queen, Lady Dyelin says that Luan is as good as in your camp right now. Accan showing up is proof of - "

"ʌv nʌθɪŋ, kæptən," ɪleɪn sɛd koʊldli. "pɝhæps lɔɹd lwɑn wɪl bi ɪn maɪ kæmp ɪvɛntʃəwəli, kæptən, bʌɾ əntɪl i dɪklɛɹz, juv ɡɪvən mi eɪɾi mɛn u nid tə bi wɑtʃt." eɪɾi aʊɾ ʌv ə hʌnʒɹəd. ən haʊ mɛni ʌv hɝz hæɾ i lɔst? ən i hæd ɹɪskt keɪɛmlɪn duɪŋ ɪt, bɝn hɪm! "sɪns jə kən faɪn taɪm ɪn jəɹ duɾiz kəmændɪŋ maɪ bɑɾiɡɑɹd tə lid sɔɹɾiz, jə kən faɪn taɪm tə ɝeɪnʒ fəɹ wɑtʃɪŋ ðɛm. aɪ woʊn spɛɹ ɛniwʌn fɹəm ðə wɔlz fəɹ ɪt. sɛt mæstɝ ɑkən ən ɪz fɛloʊz tə dʒɹɪlɪŋ ðə mɛn aɪv bɹɔɾ ɪn fɹəm ðə mænɝz. ðət wɪl kip əm ɔl bɪzi ən aʊɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl moʊst ʌv itʃ deɪ, bʌɾ aɪ liv ɪt tə jə haʊ tə kip əm əweɪ fɹəm ðə wɔlz ðə ɹɛst ə ðə taɪm. ən aɪ də ɪkspɛkt əm kɛpt əweɪ fɹəm ðə wɔlz ən aʊɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl, kæptən. jə meɪ si tə ɪt naʊ." mɛlɝ stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, stʌnd. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ teɪkən ɪm tə tæsk bɪfɔɹ, ən i dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪt, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɪn fɹʌn ə soʊ mɛni wɪtnəsəz. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ oʊvɝ-wɔɹm smaɪlz naʊ. hɪz maʊθ twɪtʃt, ən ə sʌlən hit ɡɹu ɪn ɪz aɪz. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə də ɪksɛp tə dʒɝk ənʌðɝ baʊ, mɝmɝ "æz maɪ kwin kəmænz" ɪn ə hɔɹs vɔɪs, ən liv wɪð əz ɡʊɾ ə ɡɹeɪs əz i kəd mʌstɝ. bɪfɔɹ i hæd ɡɔn θɹi peɪsɪz i wɑz stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ daʊn ðə hɔl əz ɪf tə tʃɹæmpəl ɛniwʌn u ɡɑɾ ɪn ɪz weɪ. ʃi wəɾ əv tə tɛl ɹæsɔɹiə tə teɪk kɛɹ. hi maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə suð ɪz baɪl baɪ teɪkɪŋ ɪɾ aʊɾ ɑn ðoʊz u hæd sin ən hɝd. mɛɝɪlɪl ən kɛɝin ɡeɪv ɔlmoʊst aɪdɛntɪkəl nɑdz; ðeɪ wʊɾə sin mɛlɝ kɔl daʊn, ən pɹɛfɝəbli pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə pæləs, lɔŋ sɪns.

"Of nothing, Captain," Elayne said coldly. "Perhaps Lord Luan will be in my camp eventually, Captain, but until he declares, you've given me eighty men who need to be watched." Eighty out of a hundred. And how many of hers had he lost? And he had risked Caemlyn doing it, burn him! "Since you can find time in your duties commanding my bodyguard to lead sorties, you can find time to arrange for watching them. I won't spare anyone from the walls for it. Set Master Accan and his fellows to drilling the men I've brought in from the manors. That will keep them all busy and out of trouble most of each day, but I leave it to you how to keep them away from the walls the rest of the time. And I do expect them kept away from the walls and out of trouble, Captain. You may see to it now." Mellar stared at her, stunned. She had never taken him to task before, and he did not like it, particularly in front of so many witnesses. There were no over-warm smiles now. His mouth twitched, and a sullen heat grew in his eyes. But there was nothing for him to do except to jerk another bow, murmur "As my Queen commands" in a hoarse voice, and leave with as good a grace as he could muster. Before he had gone three paces he was striding down the hall as if to trample anyone who got in his way. She would have to tell Rasoria to take care. He might try to soothe his bile by taking it out on those who had seen and heard. Merilille and Careane gave almost identical nods; they would have seen Mellar called down, and preferably put out of the palace, long since.

"ivən ɪf i dɪd ɹɔŋ," sɝaɪðə sɛd kɛɹfəli, "æn aɪm nɑt kənvɪns ðəɾ i dɪd, kæptən mɛlɝ seɪv jəɹ laɪf ət ɹɪsk tə hɪz oʊn, ɪleɪn, jəɹ laɪf ən ðəɾ ə ðə leɪɾi daɪɛlɪn. wɑz ðəɹ ɹɪli nid tə ɪmbɛɹəs ɪm ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs?" "nɛvɝ θɪŋk aɪ əvɔɪd peɪɪŋ maɪ dɛts, sɝaɪðə." ɪleɪn fɛlt eɪvinhə ɡɹɪp wʌn ə hɝ hænz, ən bɝdʒɪt ði ʌðɝ. ʃi ɡeɪv itʃ ə ðɛm ə laɪt skwiz. wən jə wɝ sɝaʊndəd baɪ ɛnəmiz, ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə hæv ə sɪstɝ ən ə fɹɛn kloʊs baɪ. "aɪ æm gɑnə faɪn ə hɑt bæθ naʊ, ən ənlɛs wʌn ə jə wɪʃɪz tə skɹʌb maɪ bæk . . . ?" ðeɪ kəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ə dɪsmɪsəl, ən ðeɪ dɪpɑɹɾəd mɔɹ ɡɹeɪsfəli ðən kæptən mɛlɝ, kɛɝin ən sɝaɪðə ɔlɹɛɾi dɪskʌsɪŋ wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wəɾ æktʃəli  wɑn lɛsənz tədeɪ, mɛɝɪlɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən ət wʌns ɪn hoʊp ʌv əvɔɪɾɪŋ ɛni wɪndfɪndɝz. wʌt wəd ðeɪ tɔk ə leɪɾɝ, ðoʊ? wɛðɝ ɪleɪn wɑz hævɪŋ ə spæt wɪð ðə fɑðɝ ə hɝ tʃaɪld? wɛðɝ ðeɪ hæd səksɛsfəli hɪɾən ðɛɹ ɡɪlt ɪn kɪlɪŋ æɾɪliz?

"Even if he did wrong," Sareitha said carefully, "and I am not convinced that he did, Captain Mellar saved your life at risk to his own, Elayne, your life and that of the Lady Dyelin. Was there really need to embarrass him in front of the rest of us?" "Never think I avoid paying my debts, Sareitha." Elayne felt Aviendha grip one of her hands, and Birgitte the other. She gave each of them a light squeeze. When you were surrounded by enemies, it was good to have a sister and a friend close by. "I am going to find a hot bath now, and unless one of you wishes to scrub my back . . . ?" They could recognize a dismissal, and they departed more gracefully than Captain Mellar, Careane and Sareitha already discussing whether or not the Windfinders would actually want lessons today, Merilille trying to look every direction at once in hope of avoiding any Windfinders. What would they talk of later, though? Whether Elayne was having a spat with the father of her child? Whether they had successfully hidden their guilt in killing Adeleas?

aɪ ɔlweɪz peɪ maɪ dɛts, ɪleɪn θɔt, wɑtʃɪŋ əm ɡoʊ. ən aɪ hɛlp maɪ fɹɛnz peɪ ðɛɹz.

I always pay my debts, Elayne thought, watching them go. And I help my friends pay theirs.

tʃæptɝ twɛlv

CHAPTER 12

eɪ bɑɹɡən ə bæθ wɑz nɑt hɑɹd tə faɪnd, ðoʊ ɪleɪn hæd tə weɪɾ ɪn ðə hɔl fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə laɪən-kɑɹv dɔɹz ə hɝ əpɑɹtməns, dʒɹæfs flɪkɝɪŋ ðə mɪɹɝd stænd-læmps waɪl ɹæsɔɹiə ən tu ʌv ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən wɛn ɪn tə sɝtʃ. wʌns ðeɪ wɝ ʃʊɹ ðəɹ wɝ noʊ əsæsənz laɪɪŋ ɪn weɪt, ən ɡɑɹdz hæd bɪn ɝeɪɾ ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ ən aʊɾɝ ɹum, ɪleɪn ɛntɝd tə faɪnd waɪt-hɛɹɾ ɛsænd weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ wɪð nænz ən sɛfæni, ðə tu jʌŋ taɪɹwɪmən ʃi wɑz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. ɛsænd wɑz slɪm, wɪð ɪleɪnz ɡoʊldən lɪli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd oʊvɝ əɹ lɛf bɹɛst ən ə vɛɹi ɡɹeɪt dɪɡnəɾi ɛmfəsaɪz baɪ hɝ dɪlɪbɝɪt weɪ ʌv muvɪŋ, ðoʊ səm ə ðət keɪm fɹəm eɪdʒ ən eɪkɪŋ dʒɔɪns ʃi ɹəfjuz tə æknɑlɪdʒ. nɛɹɪs ən sɛfæni wɝ sɪstɝz, fɹɛʃ-feɪst, stɝɾi ən ʃaɪ-aɪd, pɹaʊɾ ə ðɛɹ lɪvɝi ən hæpi tə hæv bɪn tʃoʊzən aʊt fəɹ ðɪs ɹæðɝ ðən klinɪŋ hɔlweɪz bʌɾ ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ ɪn ɑ ʌv ɛsæn əz ʌv ɪleɪn. ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ ɪkspɪɹiəns meɪdz əveɪləbəl, wɪmən u hæd wɝk jɪɹz ɪn ðə pæləs, bʌt sædli, ɡɝlz u hæd kʌm sikɪŋ ɛni sɔɹɾ ʌv wɝk ðeɪ kəd faɪnd wɝ seɪfɝ.

A Bargain A bath was not hard to find, though Elayne had to wait in the hall frowning at the lion-carved doors of her apartments, drafts flickering the mirrored stand-lamps while Rasoria and two of the Guardswomen went in to search. Once they were sure there were no assassins lying in wait, and guards had been arrayed in the corridor and outer room, Elayne entered to find white-haired Essande waiting in the bedchamber with Nans and Sephanie, the two young tirewomen she was training. Essande was slim, with Elayne's Golden Lily embroidered over her left breast and a very great dignity emphasized by her deliberate way of moving, though some of that came from age and aching joints she refused to acknowledge. Naris and Sephanie were sisters, fresh-faced, sturdy and shy-eyed, proud of their livery and happy to have been chosen out for this rather than cleaning hallways but almost as much in awe of Essande as of Elayne. There were more experienced maids available, women who had worked years in the palace, but sadly, girls who had come seeking any sort of work they could find were safer.

tu kɑpɝ bæθtʌbz sæɾ ɑn θɪk leɪɝz ə taʊəlɪŋ leɪɾ ətɑp ðə ɹoʊz-kʌlɝd flɔɹ taɪlz wɛɹ wʌn ə ðə kɑɹpəts hæd bɪn ɹoʊld ʌp, ɛvəɾəns ðət wɝɾ ʌv ɪleɪnz ɝaɪvəl hæd floʊn əhɛɾ ə hɝ.

Two copper bathtubs sat on thick layers of toweling laid atop the rose-colored floor tiles where one of the carpets had been rolled up, evidence that word of Elayne's arrival had flown ahead of her.

sɝvəns hæɾ ə næk fəɹ lɝnɪŋ wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ ðət ðə taʊɝz aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz maɪɾ ɛnvi. ə ɡʊd bleɪz ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪs ən taɪt keɪsməns ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz meɪd ðə ɹum wɔɹm æftɝ ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz, ən ɛsænd weɪɾəd oʊnli tə si ɪleɪn ɛntɝ ðə ɹum bɪfɔɹ sɛndɪŋ sɛfæni ɔf əɾ ə ɹʌn tə fɛtʃ ðə mɛn wɪð ðə hɑt wɔɾɝ. ðət wəd bi bɹɔɾ ʌp ɪn dʌbəl-wɔl peɪlz wɪð lɪdz tə kip ɪt fɹəm ɡɛɾɪŋ koʊld ɑn ðə weɪ fɹəm ðə kɪtʃənz, ðoʊ ɪt maɪt bi dɪleɪɾ ə lɪɾəl baɪ ɡɑɹdzwɪmən tʃɛkɪŋ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðəɹ wɝ noʊ naɪvz hɪɾən ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ.

Servants had a knack for learning what was happening that the Tower's eyes-and-ears might envy. A good blaze in the fireplace and tight casements in the windows made the room warm after the corridors, and Essande waited only to see Elayne enter the room before sending Sephanie off at a run to fetch the men with the hot water. That would be brought up in double-walled pails with lids to keep it from getting cold on the way from the kitchens, though it might be delayed a little by Guardswomen checking to make sure there were no knives hidden in the water.

eɪvinhə aɪd ðə sɛkən bæθtəb ɔlmoʊst əz daʊtfəli əz ɛsæn aɪd bɝdʒɪt, ðə wʌn stɪl ənizi əbaʊɾ æktʃəli  stɛpɪŋ ɪndə wɔɾɝ ən ði ʌðɝ stɪl nɑɾ æksɛptɪŋ ðəɾ ɛniwʌn mɔɹ ðən nɛsəsɛɹi ʃəd bi pɹɛzən dʊɹɪŋ ə bæθ, bʌt ðə waɪt-hɛɹd wʊmən weɪstəd noʊ taɪm bɪfɔɹ kwaɪətli bʌsəlɪŋ ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə boʊθ ɪndə ðə dʒɹɛsɪŋ ɹum, wɛɹ ənʌðɝ faɪɝ ɑn ə waɪd mɑɹbəl hɑɹθ hæd teɪkən ðə tʃɪl fɹəm ði ɛɹ. ɪt wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt ɹɪlif tə hæv ɛsæn hɛlp əɹ aʊɾ ə hɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ kloʊðz, noʊɪŋ ðət ʃi hæd mɔɹ əhɛɾ ə hɝ ðən ə heɪsti wɑʃ ən ə ʃoʊ ʌv iz waɪl wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt haʊ kwɪkli ʃi kəd muv ɑn tə hɝ nɛks dɛstəneɪʃən. ʌðɝ pɹitɛnsɪz əweɪɾəd, ðə laɪt hɛlp hɝ, ən ʌðɝ wɝiz, bʌt ʃi wɑz hoʊm, ən ðət kaʊntəd fəɹ mʌtʃ. ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊt ðət bikən ʃaɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə wɛst. ɔlmoʊst. wɛl, nɑɾ əɾ ɔl, ɹɪli, bʌt ʃi kəd mænədʒ tə stɑp fɹɛɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪɾ əz lɔŋ əz ʃi dɪd nɑt dwɛl ɑn ðə θɪŋ.

Aviendha eyed the second bathtub almost as doubtfully as Essande eyed Birgitte, the one still uneasy about actually stepping into water and the other still not accepting that anyone more than necessary should be present during a bath, but the white-haired woman wasted no time before quietly bustling Elayne and Aviendha both into the dressing room, where another fire on a wide marble hearth had taken the chill from the air. It was a great relief to have Essande help her out of her riding clothes, knowing that she had more ahead of her than a hasty wash and a show of ease while worrying about how quickly she could move on to her next destination. Other pretenses awaited, the Light help her, and other worries, but she was home, and that counted for much. She could almost forget about that beacon shining in the west. Almost. Well, not at all, really, but she could manage to stop fretting over it as long as she did not dwell on the thing.

baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ hæd bɪn ənʒɹəst - wɪð eɪvinhə slæpɪŋ nɛɹɪs' hænz əweɪ ən ɹimuvɪŋ əɹ oʊn dʒuəlɹi, duɪŋ əɹ bɛs tə pɹitɛn ðət nɛɹɪs dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst ən əɹ ɡɑɹməns wɝ sʌmhaʊ ɹimuvɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz - baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ hæd bɪn bʌndəld ɪndə ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd sɪlk ɹoʊbz ən hæd ðɛɹ hɛɹ taɪɾ ʌp ɪn waɪt taʊəlɪŋ - eɪvinhə tʃɹaɪd tə ɹæp ðə taʊəl ɝaʊn əɹ oʊn hɛd θɹi taɪmz, ən oʊnli æftɝ ðə kənstʃɹʌkʃən kəlæps daʊn əɹ nɛk fəɹ ðə θɝd taɪm dɪd ʃi əlaʊ nɛɹɪs tə də ɪt, mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt ɡɛɾɪŋ soʊ sɑf ðət ʃi sun wəd nid sʌmwʌn tə leɪs ʌp əɹ buts əntɪl ɪleɪn bɪɡæn læfɪŋ ən ʃi dʒɔɪn ɪn, θɹoʊɪŋ əɹ hɛd bæk soʊ ðət nɛɹɪs hæd tə stɑɹɾ oʊvɝ əɡɛn - baɪ ðə taɪm ɔl ðət wɑz dʌn ən ðeɪ hæd ɹɪtɝn tə ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ, ðə bæθtʌbz wɝ fʊl ən ðə sɛn ə ðə ɹoʊz ɔɪl ðət hæd bɪn æɾəd tə ðə wɔɾɝ fɪl ði ɛɹ. ðə mɛn u hæd bɹɔɾ ʌp ðə wɔɾɝ wɝ ɡɔn, ʌv kɔɹs, ən sɛfæni wɑz weɪɾɪŋ wɪð əɹ slivz pʊʃt əbʌv əɹ ɛlboʊz ɪn keɪs sʌmwʌn wɑntəɾ əɹ bæk skɹʌbd. bɝdʒɪt wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə tɝkwɔɪz-ɪnleɪd tʃɛst ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə bɛd, hɝ ɛlboʊz ɑn əɹ niz.

By the time they had been undressed - with Aviendha slapping Naris' hands away and removing her own jewelry, doing her best to pretend that Naris did not exist and her garments were somehow removing themselves - by the time they had been bundled into embroidered silk robes and had their hair tied up in white toweling - Aviendha tried to wrap the towel around her own head three times, and only after the construction collapsed down her neck for the third time did she allow Naris to do it, muttering about getting so soft that she soon would need someone to lace up her boots until Elayne began laughing and she joined in, throwing her head back so that Naris had to start over again - by the time all that was done and they had returned to the bedchamber, the bathtubs were full and the scent of the rose oil that had been added to the water filled the air. The men who had brought up the water were gone, of course, and Sephanie was waiting with her sleeves pushed above her elbows in case someone wanted her back scrubbed. Birgitte was sitting on the turquoise-inlaid chest at the foot of the bed, her elbows on her knees.

ɪleɪn əlaʊɾ ɛsæn tə hɛlp əɹ ɔf wɪð əɹ peɪl ɡɹin, swɑloʊ-wɝkt ɹoʊb ən sæŋk ɪndə hɝ tʌb ɪmiɾiətli, səbmɝdʒɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə hɝ nɛk ɪn wɔɾɝ dʒʌst ə hɛɹ ʃɔɹɾ ə tu hɑt. ðət lɛft əɹ niz poʊkɪŋ ʌp, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɪmɝs moʊst ə hɝ ɪn ðə wɔɹmθ, ən ʃi saɪd, filɪŋ wɪɹinəs litʃ aʊɾ ə hɝ ən læŋɝ kɹip ɪn. hɑt wɔɾɝ maɪɾ əv bɪn ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst sɪŋɡəl ɡɪft ə sɪvəlɪzeɪʃən.

Elayne allowed Essande to help her off with her pale green, swallow-worked robe and sank into her tub immediately, submerging herself to her neck in water just a hair short of too hot. That left her knees poking up, but it immersed most of her in the warmth, and she sighed, feeling weariness leach out of her and languor creep in. Hot water might have been the greatest single gift of civilization.

stɛɹɪŋ ət ði ʌðɝ tʌb, eɪvinhə ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt wən nɛɹɪs ətɛmptəd tə ɹimuv əɹ ɹoʊb, lævəndɝ ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð flaʊɝz ɑn ðə waɪd slivz. ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ, ʃi faɪnəli əlaʊɾ ɪt, ən stɛp dʒɪnʒɝli ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝ, bʌt ʃi snætʃt ðə ɹaʊn soʊp aʊɾ ə sɛfæniz hæn ən bɪɡæn wɑʃɪŋ hɝsɛlf vɪɡɝəsli. vɪɡɝəsli, bʌt vɛɹi kɛɹfəl nɑt tə slɑp soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə spunfʊl ʌv wɔɾɝ oʊvɝ ðə tʌbz ɹɪm. ði il dɪd juz wɔɾɝ fəɹ wɑʃɪŋ, əz wɛl əz ɪn ðə swɛt tɛns, ɪspɛʃli fəɹ ɹɪnsɪŋ aʊt ðə ʃæmpu ðeɪ meɪd fɹəm ə fæt lif ðət ɡɹu ɪn ðə weɪst, jɛt ðə dɝɾi wɔɾɝ wɑz kənsɝvd ən juz fəɹ wɔɾɝɪŋ kɹɑps. ɪleɪn hæd ʃoʊn əɹ tu ʌv ðə ɡɹeɪt sɪstɝnz bɪniθ keɪɛmlɪn, fɛd baɪ ə pɛɹ ʌv ʌndɝɡɹaʊn ɹɪvɝz ən lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf ðət ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ʌv itʃ wɑz lɔst ɪn ə fɔɹəst ə θɪk kɑləmz ən ʃædoʊz, bʌt ði æɹəd weɪst wɑz ɪn eɪvinhəz boʊnz.

Staring at the other tub, Aviendha gave a start when Naris attempted to remove her robe, lavender and embroidered with flowers on the wide sleeves. Grimacing, she finally allowed it, and stepped gingerly into the water, but she snatched the round soap out of Sephanie's hand and began washing herself vigorously. Vigorously, but very careful not to slop so much as a spoonful of water over the tub's rim. The Aiel did use water for washing, as well as in the sweat tents, especially for rinsing out the shampoo they made from a fat leaf that grew in the Waste, yet the dirty water was conserved and used for watering crops. Elayne had shown her two of the great cisterns beneath Caemlyn, fed by a pair of underground rivers and large enough that the far side of each was lost in a forest of thick columns and shadows, but the arid Waste was in Aviendha's bones.

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɛsænz pɔɪntəd lʊks -  ʃi sɛldəm sɛd tu wɝdz mɔɹ ðən nɛsəsɛɹi, ən θɔt bæθz noʊ taɪm tə seɪ ɛniθɪŋ - bɝdʒɪt tɔkt waɪl ðeɪ beɪðd, ðoʊ ʃi tʊk kɛɹ ʌv wʌt ʃi sɛɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə nɛɹɪs ən sɛfæni. ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ðə peɪ ʌv ənʌðɝ haʊs, bʌt meɪdz ɡɑsaɪpt ɔlmoʊst əz fɹili əz mɛn - ɪt simd ɔlmoʊst ə tʃɹədɪʃən. səm ɹumɝz wɝ wɝθ fɑstɝɪŋ, nʌnðəlɛs. moʊsli bɝdʒɪt tɔkt ə tu hjudʒ mɝtʃəns' tʃɹeɪnz ðət hæɾ ɝaɪv jɛstɝdeɪ fɹəm tɛɹ, ðə wæɡənz hɛvi wɪð ɡɹeɪn ən sɔltəd bif, ən ənʌðɝ fɹəm ɪljən wɪð ɔɪl ən sɔlt ən smoʊk fɪʃ.

Ignoring Essande's pointed looks -  she seldom said two words more than necessary, and thought baths no time to say anything - Birgitte talked while they bathed, though she took care of what she said in front of Naris and Sephanie. It was unlikely they were in the pay of another House, but maids gossiped almost as freely as men - it seemed almost a tradition. Some rumors were worth fostering, nonetheless. Mostly Birgitte talked of two huge merchants' trains that had arrived yesterday from Tear, the wagons heavy with grain and salted beef, and another from Illian with oil and salt and smoked fish.

ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz wɝθwaɪl ɹimaɪndɪŋ pipəl ðət fud kəntɪnjud tə floʊ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi. fju mɝtʃəns bɹeɪv ðə ɹoʊdz ʌv ændɝ ɪn wɪntɝ, nʌn kæɹiɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ əz tʃip əz fud, bʌt ɡeɪtweɪz mɛn ðəɾ ɛɹəmɪlə kəɾ ɪntɝsɛpt ɔl ðə mɝtʃəns ʃi wɪʃt ən əɹ fɔɹsɪz stɪl wəd stɑɹv lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ keɪɛmlɪn fɛl ðə fɝs pæŋz ə hʌŋɡɝ. ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, hu wɝ meɪkɪŋ moʊst ə ðoʊz ɡeɪtweɪz, ɹipɔɹɾəd ðət ðə haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪn - kleɪmɪŋ ðə taɪɾəl ə stuɝɾ ɪn tiɹ fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz! - wɑz bɪsidʒd ɪn ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ baɪ noʊbəlz u wɑntəd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn aʊɾ ə tɛɹ kəmplitli, bʌɾ ivən ðeɪ wɝ ənlaɪkli tə tʃɹaɪ stɑpɪŋ ə ɹɪtʃ tʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ɡɹeɪn, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli sɪns ðeɪ bɪliv ðə kɪn u əkʌmpənid ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. nɑt ðəɾ ɛni ɹil ətɛmpt wɑz meɪɾ ət dɪsɛpʃən, bʌt ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋz hæd bɪn meɪd fəɹ kɪnswɪmən u hæd pæs ðɛɹ tɛsts fəɹ æksɛptɪd bɪfɔɹ biɪŋ pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ, ən ɪf ɛniwʌn dʒɹu ðə ɹɔŋ kənkluʒən, noʊ wʌn æktʃəli  laɪd tə ðɛm. ðə wɔɾɝ gɑnə tə ʃɛɾ ɪts hiɾ ɪf ʃi weɪɾəd mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ, ɪleɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd, soʊ ʃi tʊk ə ɹoʊz-sɛntɪd soʊp fɹəm sɛfæni ən əlaʊd nɛɹɪs tə bɪɡɪn skɹʌbɪŋ əɹ bæk wɪð ə lɔŋ-hændəl bɹʌʃ. ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn nuz ʌv ɡɔɪn əɹ ɡɑləd, wʊɾə əv mɛnʃən ɪt stʃɹeɪɾ ɔf.

It was always worthwhile reminding people that food continued to flow into the city. Few merchants braved the roads of Andor in winter, none carrying anything as cheap as food, but gateways meant that Arymilla could intercept all the merchants she wished and her forces still would starve long before Caemlyn felt the first pangs of hunger. The Windfinders, who were making most of those gateways, reported that the High Lord Darlin - claiming the title of Steward in Tear for the Dragon Reborn, of all things! - was besieged in the Stone of Tear by nobles who wanted the Dragon Reborn out of Tear completely, but even they were unlikely to try stopping a rich trade in grain, particularly since they believed the Kin who accompanied the Windfinders were Aes Sedai. Not that any real attempt was made at deception, but Great Serpent rings had been made for Kinswomen who had passed their tests for Accepted before being put out of the Tower, and if anyone drew the wrong conclusion, no one actually lied to them. The water was going to shed its heat if she waited much longer, Elayne decided, so she took a rose-scented soap from Sephanie and allowed Naris to begin scrubbing her back with a long-handled brush. If there had been news of Gawyn or Galad, Birgitte would have mentioned it straight off.

ʃi wɑz əz iɡɝ tə hɪɹ əz ɪleɪn, ən ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv hɛld ɪt bæk. ɡɔɪnz ɹɪtɝn wɑz wʌn ɹumɝ ðeɪ dɪɹli wɑntəd tə ɹitʃ ðə stʃɹits. bɝdʒɪt pɝfɔɹmd əɹ duɾiz wɛl əz kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl, ən ɪleɪn mɛn əɹ tə kip ðə pəzɪʃən, ɪf ʃi kəd bi kənvɪnst, bʌt hævɪŋ ɡɔɪn ðəɹ wəɾ əlaʊ boʊθ wɪmən tə ɹɪlæks ə lɪɾəl. moʊst ə ðə soʊlʒɝz ɪn ðə sɪɾi wɝ mɝsənɛɹiz, ən oʊnli ɪnʌf ə ðɛm tə mæn ðə ɡeɪts stʃɹɔŋli ən meɪk ə dɪspleɪ əlɔŋ ðə maɪlz ʌv wɔl sɝaʊndɪŋ ðə nu sɪɾi, bʌt ðeɪ stɪl nʌmbɝd mɔɹ ðən θɝɾi kʌmpəniz, itʃ wɪð ɪts oʊn kæptən u ɪnɛvəɾəbli wɑz fʊl ə pɹaɪd, əbsɛst wɪð pɹɛsəɾəns, ən ɹɛɾi tə skwɑbəl oʊvɝ ɛni ɪmædʒən slaɪt fɹəm ənʌðɝ kæptən ət ðə dʒɹɑp ʌv ə stʃɹɔ. ɡɔɪn hæd tʃɹeɪn ɪz hoʊl laɪf tə kəmæn ɑɹmiz. hi kəd dil wɪð ðə skwɑblɝz, livɪŋ əɹ fɹi tə sɪkjʊɹ ðə θɹoʊn. əpɑɹt fɹəm ðæt, ʃi sɪmpli wɑntəɾ ɪm əweɪ fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ʃi pɹeɪd ðət wʌn ə hɝ mɛsənʒɝz hæd ɡɑɾən θɹu ən ðəɾ i wɑz wɛl daʊnɹɪvɝ baɪ ðɪs taɪm. ɛɡwin hæd bɪn bɪsidʒɪŋ tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪð əɹ ɑɹmi fəɹ mɔɹ ðən ə wik, naʊ, ən ɪt wəd bi ðə kɹuləst spɪnɪŋ ə feɪt fəɹ ɡɔɪn tə bi kɑt bɪtwin ɪz oʊðz tə dɪfɛn ðə taʊɝ ən ɪz lʌv fəɹ ɛɡwin.

She was as eager to hear as Elayne, and she could not have held it back. Gawyn's return was one rumor they dearly wanted to reach the streets. Birgitte performed her duties well as Captain-General, and Elayne meant her to keep the position, if she could be convinced, but having Gawyn there would allow both women to relax a little. Most of the soldiers in the city were mercenaries, and only enough of them to man the gates strongly and make a display along the miles of wall surrounding the New City, but they still numbered more than thirty companies, each with its own captain who inevitably was full of pride, obsessed with precedence, and ready to squabble over any imagined slight from another captain at the drop of a straw. Gawyn had trained his whole life to command armies. He could deal with the squabblers, leaving her free to secure the throne. Apart from that, she simply wanted him away from the White Tower. She prayed that one of her messengers had gotten through and that he was well downriver by this time. Egwene had been besieging Tar Valon with her army for more than a week, now, and it would be the cruelest spinning of fate for Gawyn to be caught between his oaths to defend the Tower and his love for Egwene.

wɝs, hi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɹoʊkən ðəɾ oʊθ wʌns, əɹ ət lis bɛn ɪt, fəɹ lʌv ə hɪz sɪstɝ ən pɝhæps ɪz lʌv ʌv ɛɡwin. ɪf ɪleɪɾə ɛvɝ səspɛktəd ðət ɡɔɪn hæɾ eɪɾəd sɪuənz ɪskeɪp, wʌtɛvɝ kɹɛɾət i hæd ɡeɪn baɪ hɛlpɪŋ əɹ ɹipleɪs sɪuən əz æmɪɝlɪn wəɾ ɪvæpɝeɪt laɪk ə dudʒɹɑp, ən ɪf i wɑz stɪl wɪðɪn ɪleɪɾəz ɹitʃ wən ʃi lɝnd, hi wəd faɪn hɪmsɛlf ɪn ə sɛl, ən lʌki tə əvɔɪd ðə hɛdzmən. ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt ɹɪzɛn ɪz dɪsɪʒən tə eɪɾ ɪleɪɾə; hi kəd nɑɾ əv noʊn ɪnʌf ðən tə meɪk ɛni ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs. ə ɡʊd mɛni sɪstɝz hæd bɪn kənfjuzd oʊvɝ wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ, tu. ə ɡʊd mɛni stɪl sim tə bi. haʊ kəd ʃi æsk ɡɔɪn tə si wʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd nɑt?

Worse, he had already broken that oath once, or at least bent it, for love of his sister and perhaps his love of Egwene. If Elaida ever suspected that Gawyn had aided Siuan's escape, whatever credit he had gained by helping her replace Siuan as Amyrlin would evaporate like a dewdrop, and if he was still within Elaida's reach when she learned, he would find himself in a cell, and lucky to avoid the headsman. Elayne did not resent his decision to aid Elaida; he could not have known enough then to make any other choice. A good many sisters had been confused over what was happening, too. A good many still seemed to be. How could she ask Gawyn to see what Aes Sedai could not?

əz fəɹ ɡɑləd. . . . ʃi hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp əneɪbəl tə laɪk ðə mæn, ʃʊɹ i mʌst ɹɪzɛn hɝ, ən ɹɪzɛnt ɡɔɪn moʊst ʌv ɔl. ɡɑləd hæd tə hæv θɔɾ i wəd bi fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹd wʌn deɪ, əntɪl ɡɔɪn wɑz bɔɹn. hɝ ɝliəs mɛmɹiz ə hɪm wɝ ʌv ə bɔɪ, ə jʌŋ mæn, ɔlɹɛɾi bɪheɪvɪŋ mɔɹ laɪk ə fɑðɝ əɹ ʌŋkəl ðən ə bɹʌðɝ, ɡɪvɪŋ ɡɔɪn ɪz fɝs lɛsənz wɪð ə sɔɹd. ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd biɪŋ əfɹeɪɾ i wəd bɹeɪk oʊpən ɡɔɪnz hɛd wɪð ðə pɹæktəs bleɪd. bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ ɡɪvən mɔɹ ðən ðə bɹuzəz ɛni juθ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪn lɝnɪŋ sɔɹdz. hi nu wʌt wɑz ɹaɪt, ɡɑləd dɪd, ən i wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə də wʌt wɑz ɹaɪt noʊ mæɾɝ ðə kɑs tə ɛniwʌn, ɪnkluɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf. laɪt, hi hæd stɑɹɾəd ə wɔɹ tə hɛlp əɹ ən nɪneɪiv ɪskeɪp fɹəm sæmɝə, ən ɪt wɑz laɪkli hi hæd noʊn ðə ɹɪsk fɹəm ðə stɑɹt! ɡɑləd fænsid nɪneɪiv, əɹ hæd fəɹ ə taɪm - ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə ɪmædʒən i stɪl fɛl ðət weɪ, wɪð ɪm ə waɪtkloʊk, ðə laɪɾ oʊnli nu wɛɹ ən duɪŋ wʌt - bʌt ðə tʃɹuθ wɑz, hi hæd stɑɹɾəd ðət wɔɹ tə ɹɛskju hɪz sɪstɝ. ʃi kəd nɑt kəndoʊn ɪm biɪŋ ə tʃaɪld ə ðə laɪt, ʃi kəd nɑt laɪk hɪm, jɛt ʃi hoʊp ðəɾ i wɑz seɪf ən wɛl. ʃi hoʊpt i faʊn ɪz weɪ hoʊm tə keɪɛmlɪn, tu. nuz ə hɪm wʊɾə bɪn nɪɹli əz wɛlkəm əz nuz ʌv ɡɔɪn. ðət sɝpɹaɪz hɝ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tʃɹu. "tu mɔɹ sɪstɝz keɪm waɪl jə wɝ əweɪ. ðəɹ ət ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn." bɝdʒɪt meɪɾ ɪt saʊn əz ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ mɪɹli stɑpɪŋ əɾ ən ɪn kəz ɛvɹi bɛɾ ɪn ðə pæləs wɑz teɪkən. "eɪ ɡɹin wɪð tu wɔɹɾɝz ən ə ɡɹeɪ wɪð wʌn. ðeɪ keɪm sɛpɝətli. eɪ jɛloʊ ən ə bɹaʊn lɛf ðə seɪm deɪ, soʊ ðəɹ ɑɹ stɪl tɛn ɔltəɡɛðɝ. ðə jɛloʊ wɛn saʊθ, təwɔɹd fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. ðə bɹaʊn wɑz hɛɾɪŋ ist." sɛfæni, weɪɾɪŋ peɪʃənli bɪsaɪɾ eɪvinhəz tʌb wɪð nʌθɪŋ tə du, ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə ɡlæns wɪð əɹ sɪstɝ oʊvɝ ɪleɪnz hɛɾ ən ɡɹɪnd. laɪk mɛni ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ðeɪ nu fəɹ ə fæk ðət ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ət ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn sɪɡnəfaɪd waɪt taʊɝ səpɔɹt fəɹ ɪleɪn ən haʊs tʃɹəkənd.

As for Galad. . . . She had grown up unable to like the man, sure he must resent her, and resent Gawyn most of all. Galad had to have thought he would be First Prince of the Sword one day, until Gawyn was born. Her earliest memories of him were of a boy, a young man, already behaving more like a father or uncle than a brother, giving Gawyn his first lessons with a sword. She remembered being afraid he would break open Gawyn's head with the practice blade. But he had never given more than the bruises any youth expected in learning swords. He knew what was right, Galad did, and he was willing to do what was right no matter the cost to anyone, including himself. Light, he had started a war to help her and Nynaeve escape from Samara, and it was likely he had known the risk from the start! Galad fancied Nynaeve, or had for a time - it was hard to imagine he still felt that way, with him a Whitecloak, the Light only knew where and doing what - but the truth was, he had started that war to rescue his sister. She could not condone him being a Child of the Light, she could not like him, yet she hoped that he was safe and well. She hoped he found his way home to Caemlyn, too. News of him would have been nearly as welcome as news of Gawyn. That surprised her, but it was true. "Two more sisters came while you were away. They're at the Silver Swan." Birgitte made it sound as though they were merely stopping at an inn because every bed in the palace was taken. "A Green with two Warders and a Gray with one. They came separately. A Yellow and a Brown left the same day, so there are still ten altogether. The Yellow went south, toward Far Madding. The Brown was heading east." Sephanie, waiting patiently beside Aviendha's tub with nothing to do, exchanged a glance with her sister over Elayne's head and grinned. Like many in the city, they knew for a fact that the presence of Aes Sedai at the Silver Swan signified White Tower support for Elayne and House Trakand.

wɑtʃɪŋ ðə tu ɡɝlz laɪk ə hɔk, ɛsænd nɑɾəd; ʃi nu ɪt, tu. ɛvɹi stʃɹitswipɝ ən ɹæɡpɪkɝ wɑz əwɛɹ ðət ðə taʊɝ wɑz dɪvaɪɾəd əɡɛnst ɪtsɛlf, bʌɾ ivən soʊ, ðə neɪm stɪl kæɹid weɪt, ən ən ɪmədʒ ə stʃɹɛŋkθ ðət nɛvɝ feɪld. ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæd lɛn səpɔɹt tə ɛvɹi ɹaɪtfəl kwin ʌv ændɝ. ɪn tʃɹuθ, moʊst sɪstɝz lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə ə sɪɾɪŋ mɑnɑɹk u wɑz ɔlsoʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə fɝst ɪn ə θaʊzən jɪɹz ən ðə fɝst sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝl tə bi oʊpənli noʊn əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ ɪleɪn wəd nɑt bi sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ðəɹ wɑz ə sɪstɝ ɪn ɛɹəmɪləz kæmp, kipɪŋ dɪskɹitli aʊɾ ə noʊɾəs. ðə waɪt taʊɝ nɛvɝ pleɪst ɔl ʌv ɪts kɔɪn ɑn wʌn hɔɹs ənlɛs ðə ɹeɪs wɑz fɪkst.

Watching the two girls like a hawk, Essande nodded; she knew it, too. Every streetsweeper and ragpicker was aware that the Tower was divided against itself, but even so, the name still carried weight, and an image of strength that never failed. Everyone knew the White Tower had lent support to every rightful Queen of Andor. In truth, most sisters looked forward to a sitting monarch who was also Aes Sedai, the first in a thousand years and the first since the Breaking of the World to be openly known as Aes Sedai, but Elayne would not be surprised to find there was a sister in Arymilla's camp, keeping discreetly out of notice. The White Tower never placed all of its coin on one horse unless the race was fixed.

"ðæts ɪnʌf ə ðə bɹʌʃ," ʃi sɛd, ɪɹɪɾəbli twɪstɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə bɹɪsəlz. wɛl tʃɹeɪnd, ðə ɡɝl leɪd ðə bɹʌʃ daʊn ɑn ə stul ən hændəɾ əɹ ə lɑɹdʒ ɪliɑnɝ spʌnʒ ðət ʃi juz tə bɪɡɪn slusɪŋ ɔf soʊp. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi nu wʌt ðoʊz sɪstɝz mɛnt. ðeɪ wɝ laɪk ə ɡɹeɪn ə sæn ɪn əɹ slɪpɝ, soʊ taɪni ə θɪŋ ðət jə kəd hɑɹdli ɪmædʒən ɪt biɪŋ ə dɪskʌmfɝt, bʌt ðə lɔŋɡɝ ɪt ɹɪmeɪnd, ðə lɑɹdʒɝ ɪt simd. ðə sɪstɝz ət ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn wɝ bɪkʌmɪŋ ə saɪzəbəl stoʊn dʒʌs baɪ biɪŋ ðɛɹ.

"That's enough of the brush," she said, irritably twisting away from the bristles. Well trained, the girl laid the brush down on a stool and handed her a large Illianer sponge that she used to begin sluicing off soap. She wished she knew what those sisters meant. They were like a grain of sand in her slipper, so tiny a thing that you could hardly imagine it being a discomfort, but the longer it remained, the larger it seemed. The sisters at the Silver Swan were becoming a sizable stone just by being there.

sɪns bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɝaɪvd ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ðə nʌmbɝ ət ði ɪn hæd bɪn tʃeɪnʒd fɹikwənli, ə fju sɪstɝz livɪŋ ɛvɹi wik ən ə fju kʌmɪŋ tə ɹipleɪs ðɛm. ðə sidʒ hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd ɛniθɪŋ; ðə soʊlʒɝz sɝaʊndɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn wɝ noʊ mɔɹ laɪkli tə tʃɹaɪ stɑpɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ fɹəm ɡoʊɪŋ wɛɹ ʃi wɑntəd ðən wɝ ðə ɹɪbɛljəs noʊbəlz ɪn tɛɹ. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɹɛdz ɪn ðə sɪɾi tu, fəɹ ə waɪl, æskɪŋ æftɝ mɛn hɛɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə blæk taʊɝ, bʌt ðə mɔɹ ðeɪ lɝnd, ðə mɔɹ ðeɪ hæd lɛt ðɛɹ dɪsɡɹʌntəlmənt ʃoʊ, ən ðə læs pɛɹ hæd ɹɪɾən aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi ðə deɪ æftɝ ɛɹəmɪlə əpɪɹd bɪfɔɹ ðə wɔlz. ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ hu ɛntɝd ðə sɪɾi wɑz kɛɹfəli wɑtʃt, ən nʌn ə ðə ɹɛdz hæd ɡɔn nɪɹ ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn, soʊ ɪt simd ənlaɪkli ðə sɪstɝz ðəɹ hæd bɪn sɛn baɪ ɪleɪɾə tə kɪdnæp hɝ. fəɹ səm ɹizən ʃi ɪmædʒən lɪɾəl ɡɹups ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ skæɾɝd fɹəm ðə blaɪt tə ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, ən kɑnstən stʃɹimz ə sɪstɝz floʊɪŋ bɪtwin, ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən, ʃɛɹɪŋ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən. ə pəkjuljɝ θɔt. sɪstɝz juzd aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz tə wɑtʃ ðə wɝld, ən ɹɛɹli ʃɛɹd wʌt ðeɪ lɝn ənlɛs ɪt wɑz ə θɹɛt tə ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf. laɪkli ðoʊz ət ðə swɑn wɝ əmʌŋ ðə sɪstɝz sɪɾɪŋ aʊt ðə taʊɝz tʃɹʌbəlz, weɪɾɪŋ tə si wɛðɝ ɛɡwin əɹ ɪleɪɾə wəɾ ɛnd wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn sit bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ dɪklɛɹd ðɛmsɛlvz. ðət wɑz ɹɔŋ - ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃəd stæn fəɹ wʌt ʃi θɔt wɑz ɹaɪt wɪθaʊt wɝiɪŋ oʊvɝ wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz tʃuzɪŋ ðə wɪnɪŋ saɪd! - bʌt ðiz meɪɾ əɹ ənizi fəɹ ənʌðɝ ɹizən.

Since before she arrived in Caemlyn the number at the inn had been changed frequently, a few sisters leaving every week and a few coming to replace them. The siege had not changed anything; the soldiers surrounding Caemlyn were no more likely to try stopping an Aes Sedai from going where she wanted than were the rebellious nobles in Tear. There had been Reds in the city too, for a while, asking after men heading for the Black Tower, but the more they learned, the more they had let their disgruntlement show, and the last pair had ridden out of the city the day after Arymilla appeared before the walls. Every Aes Sedai who entered the city was carefully watched, and none of the Reds had gone near the Silver Swan, so it seemed unlikely the sisters there had been sent by Elaida to kidnap her. For some reason she imagined little groups of Aes Sedai scattered from the Blight to the Sea of Storms, and constant streams of sisters flowing between, gathering information, sharing information. A peculiar thought. Sisters used eyes-and-ears to watch the world, and rarely shared what they learned unless it was a threat to the Tower itself. Likely those at the Swan were among the sisters sitting out the Tower's troubles, waiting to see whether Egwene or Elaida would end with the Amyrlin Seat before they declared themselves. That was wrong - an Aes Sedai should stand for what she thought was right without worrying over whether she was choosing the winning side! - but these made her uneasy for another reason.

ɹisənli wʌn ə hɝ wɑtʃɝz ət ðə swɑn hæɾ oʊvɝhɝɾ ə dɪstɝbɪŋ neɪm, mɝmɝɾ ən kwɪkli ʃʌʃt, əz ɪf ɪn fɪɹ ʌv ivzdʒɹɑpɝz. kædzueɪn. nɑɾ ə kɑmən neɪm, ðæt. ən kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn hæd mɛʃt hɝsɛlf kloʊsli wɪð ɹænd waɪl i wɑz ɪn kɛɹhin. vændin dɪd nɑt θɪŋk mʌtʃ ə ðə wʊmən, kɔlɪŋ əɹ əpɪnjəneɪɾɪd ən mjulhɛɾɪd, bʌt kɛɝin hæɾ ɔlmoʊs feɪntɪɾ ɪn ɑ ət hɪɹɪŋ əɹ neɪm. ɪt sim ðə stɔɹiz sɝaʊndɪŋ kædzueɪn əmaʊntɪd tə lɛdʒənz. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dil wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn sɪŋɡəl-hændəd wɑz dʒʌs ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn maɪt du. nɑt ðəɾ ɪleɪn hæd kənsɝnz əbaʊt ɹænd ən ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪksɛp ðəɾ i maɪɾ aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ əɹ bɪɑn əɹ kəntʃɹoʊl - ðə mæn wɑz tu paɪɡhɛɾɪd hɪmsɛlf səmtaɪmz tə si wɛɹ ɪz oʊn ɡʊd leɪ! - bʌt waɪ wəɾ ə sɪstɝ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn mɛnʃən əɹ neɪm? ən waɪ hæɾ ənʌðɝ hʌʃt hɝ? dɪspaɪt ðə hɑt bæθwɔɾɝ, ʃi ʃɪvɝd, θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɔl ðə wɛbz ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæd spʌn θɹu ðə sɛntʃɝiz, soʊ faɪn ðət nʌn kəd si ðɛm ɪksɛp ðə sɪstɝz u dɪd ðə spɪnɪŋ, soʊ kɑnvəluɾəd ðət nʌn bʌt ðoʊz sɪstɝz cʊɾə ənɹævəl ðɛm. ðə taʊɝ spʌn wɛbz, ði ədʒəz spʌn wɛbz, ivən ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl sɪstɝz spʌn wɛbz. səmtaɪmz ðoʊz skimz blɛndəɾ ɪndə wʌn ənʌðɝ əz ðoʊ ɡaɪɾəd baɪ ə sɪŋɡəl hænd. ʌðɝ taɪmz ðeɪ hæd pʊld wʌn ənʌðɝ əpɑɹt. ðət wɑz haʊ ðə wɝl hæd bɪn ʃeɪp fəɹ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz. naʊ ðə taʊɝ hæd dɪvaɪɾəd ɪtsɛlf nitli ɪndə ɹʌf θɝdz, wʌn θɝd fəɹ ɛɡwin, wʌn fəɹ ɪleɪɾə, ən wʌn ðət wɑz stændɪŋ əsaɪd. ɪf ðoʊz læst wɝ ɪn kɑntækt wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ, ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən - fɔɹmɪŋ plænz? - ði ɪmpləkeɪʃənz. . . . ə sʌɾən tuməlt ə vɔɪsəz, dɪm baɪ ðə kloʊz dɔɹ, meɪɾ əɹ sɪɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt. nɛɹɪs ən sɛfæni skwild ən lɛp tə klʌtʃ wʌn ənʌðɝ, stɛɹɪŋ waɪd-aɪɾ ət ðə dɔɹ.

Recently one of her watchers at the Swan had overheard a disturbing name, murmured and quickly shushed, as if in fear of eavesdroppers. Cadsuane. Not a common name, that. And Cadsuane Melaidhrin had meshed herself closely with Rand while he was in Cairhien. Vandene did not think much of the woman, calling her opinionated and muleheaded, but Careane had almost fainted in awe at hearing her name. It seemed the stories surrounding Cadsuane amounted to legends. Trying to deal with the Dragon Reborn single-handed was just the sort of thing Cadsuane Melaidhrin might do. Not that Elayne had concerns about Rand and any Aes Sedai, except that he might outrage her beyond her control - the man was too pigheaded himself sometimes to see where his own good lay! - but why would a sister in Caemlyn mention her name? And why had another hushed her? Despite the hot bathwater, she shivered, thinking of all the webs the White Tower had spun through the centuries, so fine that none could see them except the sisters who did the spinning, so convoluted that none but those sisters could have unraveled them. The Tower spun webs, the Ajahs spun webs, even individual sisters spun webs. Sometimes those schemes blended into one another as though guided by a single hand. Other times they had pulled one another apart. That was how the world had been shaped for three thousand years. Now the Tower had divided itself neatly into rough thirds, one third for Egwene, one for Elaida, and one that was standing aside. If those last were in contact with one another, exchanging information - forming plans? - the implications. . . . A sudden tumult of voices, dimmed by the closed door, made her sit up straight. Naris and Sephanie squealed and leaped to clutch one another, staring wide-eyed at the door.

"wʌɾ ɪn ðə blʌɾi fleɪmɪŋ . . . ?" snɑɹlɪŋ, bɝdʒɪt hɝl hɝsɛlf ɔf ðə tʃɛst ən aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum, slæmɪŋ ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɝ. ðə vɔɪsəz ɹoʊz haɪɝ.

"What in the bloody flaming . . . ?" Snarling, Birgitte hurled herself off the chest and out of the room, slamming the door behind her. The voices rose higher.

ɪt dɪd nɑt saʊn əz ɪf ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən wɝ faɪɾɪŋ, dʒʌst ɑɹɡjuɪŋ ət ðə tɑps ə ðə lʌŋz, ən ðə bɑn kæɹid meɪnli æŋɡɝ ən fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən, əlɔŋ wɪð əɹ blʌɾi hɛdeɪk, bʌɾ ɪleɪn klaɪmd aʊɾ ə ðə bæθtəb, hoʊldɪŋ aʊɾ əɹ ɑɹmz fəɹ ɛsæn tə slɪp əɹ ɹoʊb ɑn. ðə waɪt-hɛɹd wʊmənz kɑmnəs, ən pɝhæps ɪleɪnz, suðd ðə tu meɪdz ɪnʌf ðət ðeɪ blʌʃt wən ɛsæn lʊkt ət ðɛm, bʌɾ eɪvinhə lɛp fɹəm əɹ tʌb, splæʃɪŋ wɔɾɝ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ən dæʃt dʒɹɪpɪŋ ɪndə ðə dʒɹɛsɪŋ ɹum. ɪleɪn ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ tə ɹɪtɝn wɪð əɹ bɛl naɪf, bʌɾ ɪnstɛd ʃi keɪm bæk sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə ɡloʊ oʊɪseɪaɪdɑɹ ən hoʊldɪŋ ði æmbɝ tɝɾəl ɪn wʌn hænd. wɪð ði ʌðɝ ʃi hændəɾ ɪleɪn ði æŋɡɹil ðət hæd bɪn ɪn əɹ bɛl paʊtʃ, ən eɪdʒɪɾ aɪvɝi kɑɹvɪŋ ʌv ə wʊmən kloʊðd oʊnli ɪn əɹ hɛɹ.

It did not sound as if the Guardswomen were fighting, just arguing at the tops of the lungs, and the bond carried mainly anger and frustration, along with her bloody headache, but Elayne climbed out of the bathtub, holding out her arms for Essande to slip her robe on. The white-haired woman's calmness, and perhaps Elayne's, soothed the two maids enough that they blushed when Essande looked at them, but Aviendha leaped from her tub, splashing water everywhere, and dashed dripping into the dressing room. Elayne expected her to return with her belt knife, but instead she came back surrounded by the glow oisaidar and holding the amber turtle in one hand. With the other she handed Elayne the angreal that had been in her belt pouch, an aged ivory carving of a woman clothed only in her hair.

ɛksɛptɪŋ ðə taʊəl ətɑp əɹ hɛd, eɪvinhə wɔɹ oʊnli ə wɛt ʃin, ən ʃi æŋɡɹəli weɪv sɛfæni əweɪ wən ðə wʊmən tʃɹaɪd tə pʊɾ əɹ ɹoʊb ɑn hɝ. naɪf əɹ noʊ naɪf, eɪvinhə stɪl tɛndəd tə θɪŋk əz ɪf ʃi wɝ gɑnə faɪt wɪð ə bleɪɾ ən maɪt nid tə muv sʌɾənli. "pʊt ðɪs bæk ɪn ðə dʒɹɛsɪŋ ɹum," ɪleɪn sɛd, hændɪŋ ði aɪvɝi æŋɡɹil tə ɛsænd. "eɪvinhə, aɪ ɹɪli doʊn θɪŋk wi nid ðə dɔɹ oʊpən ə kɹæk, ən bɝdʒɪt pʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ ɪn, skaʊlɪŋ. nɛɹɪs ən sɛfæni dʒʌmpt, nɑt soʊ suðd əz ðeɪ hæd simd.

Excepting the towel atop her head, Aviendha wore only a wet sheen, and she angrily waved Sephanie away when the woman tried to put her robe on her. Knife or no knife, Aviendha still tended to think as if she were going to fight with a blade and might need to move suddenly. "Put this back in the dressing room," Elayne said, handing the ivory angreal to Essande. "Aviendha, I really don't think we need The door opened a crack, and Birgitte put her head in, scowling. Naris and Sephanie jumped, not so soothed as they had seemed.

"zeɪɾə wɑns tə si ju," bɝdʒɪt ɡɹaʊld əɾ ɪleɪn. "aɪ toʊld əɹ ʃiɾ əv tə weɪt, bʌt - " wɪð ə sʌɾən jɛlp, ʃi stæɡɝɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum, kætʃɪŋ əɹ bæləns æftɝ tu stɛps ən wɝlɪŋ tə feɪs ðə wʊmən u hæd pʊʃt hɝ.

"Zaida wants to see you," Birgitte growled at Elayne. "I told her she'd have to wait, but - " With a sudden yelp, she staggered into the room, catching her balance after two steps and whirling to face the woman who had pushed her.

ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs ə klæn kæɾɪlɝ dɪd nɑt lʊk əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd pʊʃt ɛniwʌn. ði ɛnz ə hɝ ɪntʃɹəkətli nɑɾɪd ɹɛd sæʃ swɝlɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ niz, ʃi ɛntɝd ðə ɹum kɑmli, fɑloʊd baɪ tu wɪndfɪndɝz, wʌn ə hum ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ ɪn ɹæsɔɹiəz æŋɡɹi feɪs. ɔl θɹi sweɪd wən ðeɪ muv nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ əz bɝdʒɪt dɪɾ ɪn əɹ hil buts. zeɪɾə wɑz ʃɔɹt, wɪð stʃɹiks ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn əɹ taɪtli kɝl hɛɹ, bʌɾ əɹ dɑɹk feɪs wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz ðət ɡɹu mɔɹ bjuɾəfəl wɪð ðə jɪɹz, ən əɹ bjuɾi oʊnli simd mæɡnəfaɪd baɪ ðə ɡoʊldən tʃeɪn, hɛvi wɪð smɔl mədæljənz, ðət kənɛktəd wʌn ə hɝ fæt ɡoʊldən ɪɹɪŋz tə hɝ noʊz ɹɪŋ. mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾəntli, hɝ ɛɹ wɑz wʌn ə kəmænd. nɑɾ ʌv ɛɹəɡəns, bʌɾ ə ðə nɑlədʒ ðət ʃi wəd bi oʊbeɪd. ðə wɪndfɪndɝz aɪɾ eɪvinhə, stɪl ɡloʊɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ, ən tʃənɛlz æŋɡjəlɝ feɪs taɪɾənd, jɛɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ə mɝmɝ fɹəm ʃilɪn ðət "ði il ɡɝl" wɑz ɹɛɾi tə wiv, ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪn saɪlən ən weɪɾəd. ði eɪɾ ɪɹɪŋz ɪn ʃilɪnz ɪɹz mɑɹkt əɹ əz wɪndfɪndɝ tə ə klæn weɪvməstʃɹəs, ən tʃənɛlz ɑnɝ-tʃeɪn kæɹid nɪɹli əz mɛni ɡoʊldən mədæljənz əz ðəɾ ə zeɪɾə hɝsɛlf. boʊθ wɝ wɪmən ʌv əθɔɹəɾi, ən ɪt wɑz pleɪn ɪn ðə weɪ ðeɪ hɛl ðɛmsɛlvz ən muvd, jɛt wʌn niɾəd tə noʊ nʌθɪŋ ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ tə noʊ əz sun əz wʌn sɔ ðɛm ðət zeɪɾə dɪn pɑɹid hɛl ðə fɝst spɑt.

The Wavemistress of Clan Catelar did not look as though she had pushed anyone. The ends of her intricately knotted red sash swirling about her knees, she entered the room calmly, followed by two Windfinders, one of whom shut the door in Rasoria's angry face. All three swayed when they moved nearly as much as Birgitte did in her heeled boots. Zaida was short, with streaks of gray in her tightly curled hair, but her dark face was one of those that grew more beautiful with the years, and her beauty only seemed magnified by the golden chain, heavy with small medallions, that connected one of her fat golden earrings to her nose ring. More importantly, her air was one of command. Not of arrogance, but of the knowledge that she would be obeyed. The Windfinders eyed Aviendha, still glowing with the Power, and Chanelle's angular face tightened, yet aside from a murmur from Shielyn that "the Aiel girl" was ready to weave, they remained silent and waited. The eight earrings in Shielyn's ears marked her as Windfinder to a Clan Wavemistress, and Chanelle's honor-chain carried nearly as many golden medallions as that of Zaida herself. Both were women of authority, and it was plain in the way they held themselves and moved, yet one needed to know nothing of the Atha'an Miere to know as soon as one saw them that Zaida din Parede held the first spot.

"jɔɹ buts mʌst əv tʃɹɪp ju, kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl," ʃi mɝmɝd wɪð ə smɔl smaɪl ɑn əɹ fʊl lɪps, wʌn dɑɹk tætud hæn tɔɪɪŋ wɪð ðə ɡoʊldən sɛnt-bɑks ðət dæŋɡəld ɑn əɹ tʃɛst. "klʌmzi θɪŋz, buts." ʃi ən ðə tu wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ bɛɹfʊɾ əz ɔlweɪz. ðə soʊlz ə ði æθɑn maɪɹz fit wɝ əz tʌf əz ʃu-soʊlz, ənbəðɝd baɪ ɹʌf dɛks əɹ koʊl flɔɹ taɪlz. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ɪn ədɪʃən tə ðɛɹ blaʊsəz ən tʃɹaʊzɝz ə bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd sɪlk bɹoʊkeɪdz, itʃ wʊmən wɔɹ ə waɪd stoʊl ə pleɪn waɪt ðət hʌŋ bɪloʊ hɝ weɪst ən ɔlmoʊs hɪɾ əɹ mʌltətuɾ ə nɛkləsɪz. "aɪ wɑz teɪkɪŋ ə bæθ," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs. əz ɪf ðeɪ kəd nɑt si ðət wɪð əɹ hɛɹ dʌn ʌp ən əɹ ɹoʊb klɪŋɪŋ tə hɝ dæmpli. ɛsænd wɑz ɔlmoʊs kwɪvɝɪŋ wɪð ɪndɪɡneɪʃən, wɪtʃ mɛnt ʃi mʌs bi bɪsaɪd hɝsɛlf wɪð fjʊɹi. ɪleɪn fɛl kloʊs tə ɪt hɝsɛlf. "aɪ wɪl bi teɪkɪŋ ə bæθ əɡɛn əz sun əz jə ɡoʊ. əl spik wɪð jə wən aɪ hæv fɪnɪʃt teɪkɪŋ maɪ bæθ. ɪf ɪt plizɪz ðə laɪt." ðɛɹ! ɪf ðeɪ wɝ gɑnə ʃʌv ɪndə hɝ ɹumz, lɛɾ əm tʃu ɑn ðət fəɹ sɛɹəmoʊni!

"Your boots must have tripped you, Captain-General," she murmured with a small smile on her full lips, one dark tattooed hand toying with the golden scent-box that dangled on her chest. "Clumsy things, boots." She and the two Windfinders were barefoot as always. The soles of the Atha'an Miere's feet were as tough as shoe-soles, unbothered by rough decks or cold floor tiles. Strangely, in addition to their blouses and trousers of brightly colored silk brocades, each woman wore a wide stole of plain white that hung below her waist and almost hid her multitude of necklaces. "I was taking a bath," Elayne said in a tight voice. As if they could not see that with her hair done up and her robe clinging to her damply. Essande was almost quivering with indignation, which meant she must be beside herself with fury. Elayne felt close to it herself. "I will be taking a bath again as soon as you go. I will speak with you when I have finished taking my bath. If it pleases the Light." There! If they were going to shove into her rooms, let them chew on that for ceremony!

"ðə ɡɹeɪs ə ðə laɪt bi əpɑn jə ɔlsoʊ, ɪleɪn sədaɪ," zeɪɾə ɹɪplaɪd smuðli. ʃi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ əɾ eɪvinhə, ðoʊ niðɝ ət ðə kəntɪnjuɪŋ laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ, sɪns zeɪɾə kəd nɑt tʃænəl, nɔɹ əɾ əɹ nuɾɪti, sɪns ðə si foʊk wɝ kwaɪt kæʒəwəl əbaʊt ðæt, ət list aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ə lænmən. "ju hæv nɛvɝ ɪnvaɪɾəd mi tə beɪð wɪð ju, ðoʊ ɪt wʊɾə bɪn kɝɾiəs, bʌt wɪl nɑt spik ə ðæt. aɪ hæv lɝn ðət nɛstə dɪn ɹiz tu munz ɪz dɛd, kɪl baɪ ðə sintʃæn. wi mɔɹn əɹ lɔs." ɔl θɹi wɪmən tʌtʃt ðɛɹ waɪt stoʊlz ən tʌtʃt fɪŋɡɝtɪps tə lɪps, jɛt zeɪɾə simd əz ɪmpeɪʃənt wɪð fɔɹmæləɾi əz ɪleɪn. wɪθaʊt ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ vɔɪs əɹ spiɾɪŋ ɪts peɪs, ʃi mɪɹli pʊʃt ɑn, ɔlmoʊst ʃɑkɪŋli əbɹʌpt ən tə ðə pɔɪn fəɹ wʌn ə ðə si foʊk.

"The grace of the Light be upon you also, Elayne Sedai," Zaida replied smoothly. She raised an eyebrow at Aviendha, though neither at the continuing light of saidar, since Zaida could not channel, nor at her nudity, since the Sea Folk were quite casual about that, at least out of sight of landmen. "You have never invited me to bathe with you, though it would have been courteous, but we will not speak of that. I have learned that Nesta din Reas Two Moons is dead, killed by the Seanchan. We mourn her loss." All three women touched their white stoles and touched fingertips to lips, yet Zaida seemed as impatient with formality as Elayne. Without raising her voice or speeding its pace, she merely pushed on, almost shockingly abrupt and to the point for one of the Sea Folk.

"ðə fɝs twɛlv ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ mʌs mit tə tʃuz ənʌðɝ mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps.

"The First Twelve of the Atha'an Miere must meet to choose another Mistress of the Ships.

wʌɾ ɪz hæpənɪŋ tə ðə wɛs meɪks ɪt klɪɹ ðəɹ kən bi noʊ dɪleɪ." ʃilɪnz maʊθ taɪɾənd, ən tʃənɛl ɹeɪzd əɹ pɪɹst sɛn bɑks tə hɝ noʊz əz ɪf tə dʒɹaʊn ðə smɛl ə sʌmθɪŋ. ɪts spaɪsi pɝfjum wɑz ʃɑɹp ɪnʌf tə slaɪs θɹu ðə sɛn ə ɹoʊz ɔɪl ɪn ðə ɹum. haʊɛvɝ ðeɪ hæd dɪskɹaɪbd wʌt ðeɪ sɛns tə zeɪɾə, ʃi dɪspleɪd noʊ əniz, əɹ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt sɝɾənti. hɝ ɡeɪz hɛl stɛɾi ɑn ɪleɪnz feɪs. "wi mʌs bi ɹɛɾi fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ kʌmz, ən fəɹ ðət wi niɾ ə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps. ɪn ðə neɪm ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, jə pɹɑməs twɛnti titʃɝz. aɪ kænɑt teɪk vændin ɪn əɹ ɡɹif, əɹ ju, bʌɾ əl teɪk ði ʌðɝ θɹi wɪð mi. ðə ɹɛst, ðə waɪt taʊɝ oʊz, ən əl ɪkspɛk pɹɑmpt peɪmənt. aɪ hæv sɛn tə ðə sɪstɝz ət ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn tə si wɛðɝ səm ə ðɛm wɪl mit ðə taʊɝz dɛt, bʌɾ aɪ kænɑt weɪɾ ɑn ðɛɹ ɹɪplaɪ. ɪf ɪt plizɪz ðə laɪt, əl beɪð wɪð ði ʌðɝ weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz tənaɪɾ ət ðə hɑɹbɝ ʌv ɪljən."

What is happening to the west makes it clear there can be no delay." Shielyn's mouth tightened, and Chanelle raised her pierced scent box to her nose as if to drown the smell of something. Its spicy perfume was sharp enough to slice through the scent of rose oil in the room. However they had described what they sensed to Zaida, she displayed no unease, or anything but certainty. Her gaze held steady on Elayne's face. "We must be ready for whatever comes, and for that we need a Mistress of the Ships. In the name of the White Tower, you promised twenty teachers. I cannot take Vandene in her grief, or you, but I will take the other three with me. The rest, the White Tower owes, and I will expect prompt payment. I have sent to the sisters at the Silver Swan to see whether some of them will meet the Tower's debt, but I cannot wait on their reply. If it pleases the Light, I will bathe with the other Wavemistresses tonight at the harbor of Illian."

ɪleɪn fɔt vɛɹi hɑɹd tə kip əɹ oʊn feɪs smuð. ðə wʊmən dʒʌst ənaʊns ðət ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə skup ʌp ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ laɪɪŋ ɝaʊn lus ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ən kæɹi ðɛm ɔf? ən ɪt saʊndəd vɛɹi mʌtʃ əz ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə liv ɛni ʌv ðə wɪndfɪndɝz bɪhaɪnd. ðət meɪɾ ɪleɪnz hɑɹt sɪŋk. əntɪl ɹin ɹɪtɝnd, ðəɹ wɝ sɛvən ə ðə kɪn wɪð səfɪʃən stʃɹɛŋkθ tə wiv ə ɡeɪtweɪ, bʌt tu ʌv ðoʊz kəd nɑt meɪk wʌn lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə ədmɪɾ ə hɔɹs kɑɹt. wɪθaʊt ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, plænz fəɹ kipɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn səplaɪd fɹəm tiɹ ən ɪljən bɪkeɪm pɹɑbləmæɾɪkəl ət bɛst.

Elayne fought very hard to keep her own face smooth. The woman just announced that she intended to scoop up every Aes Sedai lying around loose in Caemlyn and carry them off? And it sounded very much as if she did not intend to leave any of the Windfinders behind. That made Elayne's heart sink. Until Reanne returned, there were seven of the Kin with sufficient strength to weave a gateway, but two of those could not make one large enough to admit a horse cart. Without the Windfinders, plans for keeping Caemlyn supplied from Tear and Illian became problematical at best.

ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn! laɪt, huɛvɝ zeɪɾə hæd sɛnt wəd ɹɪvil ɛvɹi laɪn ə ðə bɑɹɡən ʃi hæd meɪd!

The Silver Swan! Light, whoever Zaida had sent would reveal every line of the bargain she had made!

ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt gɑnə θæŋk əɹ fəɹ spɪlɪŋ ðət mɛs aʊɾ ɪndə ði oʊpən. ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ hæd soʊ mɛni pɹɑbləmz dʒɹɑpt ɪn əɹ læp ɪn ðə kɔɹs ʌv wʌn ʃɔɹt steɪtmənt.

Egwene was not going to thank her for spilling that mess out into the open. She did not think she had ever had so many problems dropped in her lap in the course of one short statement.

"aɪ ɹəɡɹɛt jəɹ lɔs, ən ði æθɑn maɪɹz lɔs," ʃi sɛd, θɪŋkɪŋ fæst. "nɛstə dɪn ɹiz wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt wʊmən." ʃi hæd bɪn ə paʊɝfəl wʊmən, ɛniweɪ, ən ə vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ pɝsənælɪɾi. ɪleɪn hæd fɛl hæpi tə wɔk əweɪ wɪð mɔɹ ðən əɹ ʃɪft æftɝ əɹ wʌn miɾɪŋ wɪð hɝ. spikɪŋ ə ʃɪfs, ʃi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd taɪm tə dʒɹɛs. zeɪɾə maɪt nɑt weɪt. ʃi bɛltəɾ əɹ ɹoʊb taɪɾɝ. "wi mʌs tɔk. hæv waɪn bɹɔt fəɹ əɹ ɡɛsts, ɛsænd, ən ti fəɹ mi. wik ti," ʃi saɪɾ əɾ ə bɝst ə kɑʃən θɹu ðə bɑn tə bɝdʒɪt. "ɪn ðə smɔlɝ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum. wɪl jə dʒɔɪn mi, weɪvməstʃɹəs?" tə hɝ sɝpɹaɪz, zeɪɾə mɪɹli nɑɾəd əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd ðɪs. ðət stɑɹɾəd ɪleɪn θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt zeɪɾəz saɪɾ ə ðə bɑɹɡən bɪtwin ðɛm. ðə bɑɹɡənz; ðəɹ wɝ tu, ɹɪli, ən ðət maɪt bi ə ki pɔɪnt.

"I regret your loss, and the Atha'an Miere's loss," she said, thinking fast. "Nesta din Reas was a great woman." She had been a powerful woman, anyway, and a very strong personality. Elayne had felt happy to walk away with more than her shift after her one meeting with her. Speaking of shifts, she could not afford time to dress. Zaida might not wait. She belted her robe tighter. "We must talk. Have wine brought for our guests, Essande, and tea for me. Weak tea," she sighed at a burst of caution through the bond to Birgitte. "In the smaller sitting room. Will you join me, Wavemistress?" To her surprise, Zaida merely nodded as if she had expected this. That started Elayne thinking about Zaida's side of the bargain between them. The bargains; there were two, really, and that might be a key point.

noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd ðə smɔlɝ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum tə bi juz fəɹ səm taɪm, soʊ ði ɛɹ hɛld ə tʃɪl ivən æftɝ sɛfæni ɹʌʃt wɪð ə spɑɹk-wil tə laɪt ðə kɪnlɪŋ leɪd bɪniθ splɪɾ oʊk ɑn ðə waɪd waɪt hɑɹθ ən skɝiɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum. fleɪmz lɛpt ʌp fɹəm ðə fætwʊd, kætʃɪŋ ɑn ðə lɔɡ ətɑp ðə faɪɝ-aɪɝnz əz ðə wɪmən ɝeɪd ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn ðə laɪtli kɑɹv loʊ-bæk tʃɛɹz ɝeɪnʒd ɪn ə sɛmɪsɝkəl ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs. wɛl, ɪleɪn ən ðə si foʊk wɪmən ɝeɪd ðɛmsɛlvz, ɪleɪn ɝeɪnʒɪŋ əɹ ɹoʊb kɛɹfəli oʊvɝ əɹ niz ən wɪʃɪŋ zeɪɾə hæd dɪleɪd dʒʌst ən aʊɝ soʊ ʃi kəd bi pɹɑpɝli dʒɹɛst, ðə wɪndfɪndɝz kuli weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs tə teɪk ə tʃɛɹ, ðən sɪɾɪŋ tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɝ. bɝdʒɪt stʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl wɪð əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ hɪps ən əɹ fiɾ əpɑɹt, hɝ feɪs ə θʌndɝhɛd. ðə bɑn kæɹiɾ ə klɪɹ dɪzaɪɝ tə ɹɪŋ ən æθɑn maɪɹ nɛk. eɪvinhə lin kæʒəwəli əɡɛnst wʌn ə ðə saɪdbɔɹdz, ən ivən wən ɛsæn bɹɔɾ əɹ ɹoʊb ən pɔɪntɪdli hɛld ɪɾ aʊt fəɹ hɝ, ʃi mɪɹli pʊɾ ɪɾ ɑn ən ɹɪzumd əɹ poʊz wɪð əɹ ɑɹmz foʊldəd bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts.

No one had expected the smaller sitting room to be used for some time, so the air held a chill even after Sephanie rushed with a spark-wheel to light the kindling laid beneath split oak on the wide white hearth and scurried out of the room. Flames leapt up from the fatwood, catching on the log atop the fire-irons as the women arrayed themselves in the lightly carved low-backed chairs arranged in a semicircle in front of the fireplace. Well, Elayne and the Sea Folk women arrayed themselves, Elayne arranging her robe carefully over her knees and wishing Zaida had delayed just an hour so she could be properly dressed, the Windfinders coolly waiting for the Wavemistress to take a chair, then sitting to either side of her. Birgitte stood in front of the writing table with her hands on her hips and her feet apart, her face a thunderhead. The bond carried a clear desire to wring an Atha'an Miere neck. Aviendha leaned casually against one of the sideboards, and even when Essande brought her robe and pointedly held it out for her, she merely put it on and resumed her pose with her arms folded beneath her breasts.

ʃi hæd ɹilist seɪaɪdɑɹ, bʌt ðə tɝɾəl wɑz stɪl ɪn əɹ hænd, ən ɪleɪn səspɛktəd ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə ɛmbɹeɪs ðə paʊɝ əɡɛn ɪn ən ɪnstənt. niðɝ eɪvinhəz koʊld ɡɹin-aɪd stɛɹ nɔɹ bɝdʒɪts skaʊl əfɛktəd ðə si foʊk ɪn ðə list, haʊɛvɝ. ðeɪ wɝ u ðeɪ wɝ, ən ðeɪ nu hu ðeɪ wɝ.

She had released saidar, but the turtle was still in her hand, and Elayne suspected she was ready to embrace the Power again in an instant. Neither Aviendha's cold green-eyed stare nor Birgitte's scowl affected the Sea Folk in the least, however. They were who they were, and they knew who they were.

"ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɝ pɹɑməs twɛnti titʃɝz," ɪleɪn sɛd, ɛmfəsaɪzɪŋ slaɪtli. zeɪɾə hæd sɛd ðət ʃi hæd bɪn pɹɑməst, ðət ʃi wəd kəlɛk peɪmənt, bʌt ðət bɑɹɡən hæd bɪn meɪd wɪð nɛstə dɪn ɹiz. ʌv kɔɹs, zeɪɾə maɪt bɪliv ʃi wəd bɪkʌm ðə nu mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps hɝsɛlf.

"The Atha'an Miere were promised twenty teachers," Elayne said, emphasizing slightly. Zaida had said that she had been promised, that she would collect payment, but that bargain had been made with Nesta din Reas. Of course, Zaida might believe she would become the new Mistress of the Ships herself.

"pɹɑpɝ titʃɝz, tə bi səlɛktəd baɪ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. aɪ noʊ ðət ði æθɑn maɪɹ pɹaɪd ðɛmsɛlvz ɑn miɾɪŋ ðɛɹ bɑɹɡənz ɪn fʊl, ən ðə taʊɝ wɪl miɾ ɪts saɪd, tu. bʌt jə nu wən sɪstɝz hɪɹ əɡɹid tə titʃ, ðəɾ ɪt wɑz tɛmpɝɛɹi. ən ə bɑɹɡən kwaɪɾ əpɑɹt fɹəm ðət meɪd wɪð ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps. jə ədmɪɾəd əz mʌtʃ wən jə əɡɹid fəɹ wɪndfɪndɝz tə wiv ɡeɪtweɪz tə bɹɪŋ səplaɪz tə keɪɛmlɪn fɹəm ɪljən ən tɛɹ. ʃʊɹli jə wəd nɑɾ əv ɡɑɾən ɪnvɑlvd ɪn ði əfɛɹz ə ðə ʃɔɹbaʊn fəɹ ɛni ɹizən ʌðɝ ðən peɪɪŋ ɔf ə bɑɹɡən. bʌɾ ɪf jə ɑɹ livɪŋ, jəɹ hɛlp ɪz əɾ ən ɛnd, ən soʊ ɪz əɹ ɹɪkwaɪɹmən tə titʃ. aɪ fɪɹ jəl hɑɹvəs noʊ titʃɝz ət ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn, iðɝ. ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɪl əv tə weɪɾ əntɪl ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛnz titʃɝz. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə bɑɹɡən meɪd wɪð ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps." ə pɪɾi ʃi kəd nɑt dɪmæn ðeɪ steɪ əweɪ fɹəm ði ɪn, bʌɾ ɪt maɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bi tu leɪt fəɹ ðæt, ən ɛvɹi ɹizən ʃi kəd θɪŋk ə saʊndəd hɑloʊ. ən ɑɹɡjəmən ðət ʃæɾɝd fəɹ læk ʌv ə sɛntɝ wəɾ oʊnli ɛmboʊldən zeɪɾə.. ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɝ fɝoʊʃəs hæɡəlɝz.

"Proper teachers, to be selected by the Amyrlin Seat. I know that the Atha'an Miere pride themselves on meeting their bargains in full, and the Tower will meet its side, too. But you knew when sisters here agreed to teach, that it was temporary. And a bargain quite apart from that made with the Mistress of the Ships. You admitted as much when you agreed for Windfinders to weave gateways to bring supplies to Caemlyn from Illian and Tear. Surely you would not have gotten involved in the affairs of the shorebound for any reason other than paying off a bargain. But if you are leaving, your help is at an end, and so is our requirement to teach. I fear you will harvest no teachers at the Silver Swan, either. The Atha'an Miere will have to wait until the Amyrlin sends teachers. According to the bargain made with the Mistress of the Ships." A pity she could not demand they stay away from the inn, but it might already be too late for that, and every reason she could think of sounded hollow. An argument that shattered for lack of a center would only embolden Zaida.. The Atha'an Miere were ferocious hagglers.

skɹupjələs, bʌt fɝoʊʃəs. ʃi hæd tə ɡoʊ vɛɹi sloʊli, vɛɹi kɛɹfəli. "maɪ sɪstɝ əz jə baɪ ði ɪɹ, zeɪɾə dɪn pɑɹid," eɪvinhə tʃɔɹɾəld, slæpɪŋ əɹ θaɪ. "hʌŋ ʌp baɪ ði æŋkəlz, ɪn fækt." ðət wɑz ə si foʊk pʌnɪʃmən ðət ʃi faʊn ɪnkɹɛɾəbli əmjuzɪŋ, fəɹ səm ɹizən.

Scrupulous, but ferocious. She had to go very slowly, very carefully. "My sister has you by the ear, Zaida din Parede," Aviendha chortled, slapping her thigh. "Hung up by the ankles, in fact." That was a Sea Folk punishment that she found incredibly amusing, for some reason.

ɪleɪn staɪfəld ə bɝst ʌv ɪɹɪteɪʃən. eɪvinhə ɛndʒɔɪd tʃænsəz tə twik ðə si foʊks noʊzɪz - ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn waɪl ðeɪ wɝ fliɪŋ ɛbu dɑɹ ən nɛvɝ ɹɪli stɑpt - bʌt ðɪs wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɪt.

Elayne stifled a burst of irritation. Aviendha enjoyed chances to tweak the Sea Folk's noses - she had begun while they were fleeing Ebou Dar and never really stopped - but this was no time for it.

tʃənɛl stɪfənd, hɝ kɑm feɪs sɪŋkɪŋ ɪndə ə ɡlɛɹ. ðə lin wʊmən hæd bɪn ðə bʌɾ ʌv eɪvinhəz noʊz-twikɪŋ mɔɹ ðən wʌns, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ə ɹɪɡɹɛɾəbəl ɛpəsoʊɾ ɪnvɑlvɪŋ uskaɪ, ə vɛɹi poʊɾənt il dʒɹɪŋk. ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ æktʃəli  sɝaʊndəd hɝ! zeɪɾə kəd nɑt si ðæt, bʌt ʃi nu əbaʊt ði uskaɪ ən tʃənɛl biɪŋ kæɹid tə hɝ bɛd, sɪkɪŋ ʌp ðə hoʊl weɪ, ən ʃi ɹeɪzd ə pɝɛmptɝi hæn təwɔɹd ðə wɪndfɪndɝ. ðə ɡloʊ feɪɾəd, ən tʃənɛlz feɪs dɑɹkənd. ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn ə blʌʃ əɹ æŋɡɝ.

Chanelle stiffened, her calm face sinking into a glare. The lean woman had been the butt of Aviendha's nose-tweaking more than once, including a regrettable episode involving oosquai, a very potent Aiel drink. The glow of saidar actually surrounded her! Zaida could not see that, but she knew about the oosquai and Chanelle being carried to her bed, sicking up the whole way, and she raised a peremptory hand toward the Windfinder. The glow faded, and Chanelle's face darkened. It might have been a blush or anger.

"ɔl ðət jə seɪ meɪ bi soʊ," zeɪɾə sɛd, wɪtʃ wɑz nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ɪnsʌltɪŋ, ɪspɛʃli sɛd tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. "ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, mɛɝɪlɪl wɑz nɑt pɑɹɾ ə ðæt. ʃi əɡɹid tə bi wʌn ə ðə titʃɝz lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹitʃt keɪɛmlɪn, ən ʃɪl ɡoʊ wɪð mi tə kəntɪnju hɝ titʃɪŋ." ɪleɪn dʒɹu ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ivən tʃɹaɪ tə ɑɹɡju zeɪɾə aʊɾ ə ðɪs. ə ɡɹeɪt pɑɹɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝz ɪnfluəns ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ðə fæk ðət ðə taʊɝ kɛpt ɪts wɝɾ əz ʃʊɹli əz ðə si foʊk. ðəɾ ɪt wɑz noʊn tə kip ɪts wɝd. oʊ, pipəl sɛd jə hæd tə lɪsən kɛɹfəli tə bi ʃʊɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd pɹɑməst wʌt jə θɔt ʃi hæd, ən ðət wɑz ɔfən tʃɹu, bʌt wʌns ðə pɹɑməs wɑz klɪɹ, ɪt wɑz əz ɡʊɾ əz ən oʊθ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt. ət lis ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ nɑt laɪkli tə lɛt mɛɝɪlɪl ɡɛɾ əweɪ. ðeɪ hɑɹdli lɛɾ əɹ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ saɪt. "ju meɪ hæv tə ɹɪtɝn əɹ tə mi, ɪf aɪ hæv pɝtɪkjəlɝ niɾ ə hɝ." ɪf vændin ən ðə tu hɛlpɝz faʊn pɹuf ðət ʃi wɑz blæk ədʒɑ. "ɪf ðət hæpənz, əl ɝeɪnʒ ə ɹɪpleɪsmənt." ən u ðət kəd bi, ʃi hæd noʊ aɪdiə. "ʃi hæz ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ jɪɹ tə sɝv. ət list ə jɪɹ, baɪ ðə bɑɹɡən." zeɪɾə dʒɛstʃɝɾ əz ɪf meɪkɪŋ ə kənsɛʃən. "bʌt soʊ lɔŋ əz jə ʌndɝstæn ðəɾ əɹ ɹɪpleɪsmən mʌs kʌm bɪfɔɹ ʃi livz. əl nɑt lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ ɪn əɹ pleɪs." "aɪ səpoʊz ðət wɪl du," ɪleɪn ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli. ɪt wəd blʌɾi wɛl əv tə, sɪns ʃi hæd noʊ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs!

"All that you say may be so," Zaida said, which was not far from insulting, especially said to an Aes Sedai. "In any event, Merilille was not part of that. She agreed to be one of the teachers long before she reached Caemlyn, and she will go with me to continue her teaching." Elayne drew a long breath. She could not even try to argue Zaida out of this. A great part of the White Tower's influence rested on the fact that the Tower kept its word as surely as the Sea Folk. That it was known to keep its word. Oh, people said you had to listen carefully to be sure an Aes Sedai had promised what you thought she had, and that was often true, but once the promise was clear, it was as good as an oath under the Light. At least the Windfinders were not likely to let Merilille get away. They hardly let her out of their sight. "You may have to return her to me, if I have particular need of her." If Vandene and the two helpers found proof that she was Black Ajah. "If that happens, I will arrange a replacement." And who that could be, she had no idea. "She has the rest of her year to serve. At least a year, by the bargain." Zaida gestured as if making a concession. "But so long as you understand that her replacement must come before she leaves. I will not let her go without another in her place." "I suppose that will do," Elayne replied calmly. It would bloody well have to, since she had no other choice!

zeɪɾə smaɪl feɪnli ən lɛt ðə saɪləns stʃɹɛtʃ. tʃənɛl ʃɪftəɾ əɹ fit, bʌt mɔɹ ɪn ɪmpeɪʃəns ðən əz ɪf tə ɹaɪz, ən ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs dɪd nɑt stɝ. pleɪnli ʃi wɑntəd sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ, ɪntɛndəɾ ənʌðɝ bɑɹɡən, ən pleɪnli ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪleɪn tə spik fɝst. ɪleɪn sɛt hɝsɛlf tə aʊtweɪt ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. ðə faɪɝ hæd bɪɡʌn tə bleɪz ən kɹækəl, sɛndɪŋ spɑɹks ʌp ðə tʃɪmni ən ɹeɪɾieɪtɪŋ ə faɪn wɔɹmθ ɪndə ðə ɹum, bʌɾ əɹ dæmp ɹoʊb əbzɔɹb ðə tʃɪl ɪn ði ɛɹ ən tʃɹænsfɝɾ ɪt tə hɝ skɪn.

Zaida smiled faintly and let the silence stretch. Chanelle shifted her feet, but more in impatience than as if to rise, and the Wavemistress did not stir. Plainly she wanted something more, intended another bargain, and plainly she wanted Elayne to speak first. Elayne set herself to outwait the other woman. The fire had begun to blaze and crackle, sending sparks up the chimney and radiating a fine warmth into the room, but her damp robe absorbed the chill in the air and transferred it to her skin.

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə koʊld wɑz ɔl vɛɹi wɛl, bʌt haʊ wɝ jə səpoʊz tə ɪɡnɔɹ biɪŋ koʊld ən wɛt? ʃi mɛt zeɪɾəz ɡeɪz lɛvəli ən mætʃt əɹ taɪni smaɪl. ɛsæn ɹɪtɝnd, fɑloʊd baɪ nɛɹɪs ən sɛfæni kæɹɪŋ ɹoʊpwɝk tʃɹeɪz, ðə wʌn wɪð ə sɪlvɝ tipɑɾ ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə laɪən ən θɪn ɡɹin kʌps ə si foʊk pɔɹsələn, ði ʌðɝ hæmɝd sɪlvɝ kʌps ən ə tɔl-nɛkt waɪn pɪtʃɝ ðət ɡeɪv ɔf ði ɝoʊmə ʌv spaɪsəz. ɛvɹiwʌn tʊk waɪn, ɪksɛp fəɹ ɪleɪn, hu wɑz nɛvɝ ɔfɝd ðə tʃɔɪs. piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɝ ti, ʃi saɪd. ʃi kəd si ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə kʌp kwaɪt klɪɹli. ɪf ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪɾ ɛni wikɝ, ðeɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl ɡɪv əɹ wɔɾɝ!

Ignoring the cold was all very well, but how were you supposed to ignore being cold and wet? She met Zaida's gaze levelly and matched her tiny smile. Essande returned, followed by Naris and Sephanie carring ropework trays, the one with a silver teapot in the shape of a lion and thin green cups of Sea Folk porcelain, the other hammered silver cups and a tall-necked wine pitcher that gave off the aroma of spices. Everyone took wine, except for Elayne, who was never offered the choice. Peering into her tea, she sighed. She could see the bottom of the cup quite clearly. If they made it any weaker, they might as well give her water!

æftɝ ə moʊmənt, eɪvinhə stʃɹoʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɹum tə sɛɾ əɹ waɪnkʌp bæk ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ ətɑp wʌn ə ðə saɪdbɔɹdz ən pɔɹ hɝsɛlf ə kʌp ə ti. ʃi ɡeɪv ɪleɪn ə nɑɾ ən ə smaɪl kəmbaɪnɪŋ sɪmpəθi wɪð ə sədʒɛstʃən ðət ʃi ɹɪli pɹəfɝd wɔɾɝi ti tə waɪn. ɪleɪn smaɪl bæk ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf.

After a moment, Aviendha strode across the room to set her winecup back on the tray atop one of the sideboards and pour herself a cup of tea. She gave Elayne a nod and a smile combining sympathy with a suggestion that she really preferred watery tea to wine. Elayne smiled back in spite of herself.

fɝst-sɪstɝz ʃɛɹd ðə bæɾ əz wɛl əz ðə ɡʊd. bɝdʒɪt ɡɹɪn oʊvɝ ðə tɑp ə hɝ sɪlvɝ kʌp, ən pɹəsiɾəd tə ɛmpti hæf ʌv ɪɾ ɪn ə ɡʌlp. ðə bɑn kæɹiɾ əɹ əmjuzmən ət ðə ɡɹʌmpinəs ʃi fɛl fɹəm ɪleɪn. ən ɪt stɪl kæɹiɾ əɹ hɛdeɪk, ɪn noʊ weɪ ɹədust. ɪleɪn ɹʌbd əɹ tɛmpəl. ʃi ʃʊɾə ɪnsɪstəd ðət mɛɝɪlɪl hil ðə wʊmən əz sun əz ʃi hæd sin hɝ. ə nʌmbɝ ə ðə kɪn aʊtstʃɹɪp mɛɝɪlɪl wən ɪt keɪm tə hilɪŋ, bʌt ʃi wɑz ði oʊnli sɪstɝ ɪn ðə pæləs wɪð ə hæfweɪ disən əbɪləɾi.

First-sisters shared the bad as well as the good. Birgitte grinned over the top of her silver cup, and proceeded to empty half of it in a gulp. The bond carried her amusement at the grumpiness she felt from Elayne. And it still carried her headache, in no way reduced. Elayne rubbed her temple. She should have insisted that Merilille Heal the woman as soon as she had seen her. A number of the Kin outstripped Merilille when it came to Healing, but she was the only sister in the palace with a halfway decent ability.

"ju hæv ɡɹeɪt niɾ ʌv wɪmən tə meɪk ðiz ɡeɪtweɪz," zeɪɾə sɛd sʌɾənli. hɝ fʊl maʊθ wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ smaɪlɪŋ. ʃi dɪslaɪk hævɪŋ spoʊkən fɝst.

"You have great need of women to make these gateways," Zaida said suddenly. Her full mouth was no longer smiling. She disliked having spoken first.

ɪleɪn sɪpt əɹ ɹɛtʃɪɾ ɪkskjus fəɹ ti ən sɛd nʌθɪŋ. "ɪt maɪt pliz ðə laɪt ðəɾ aɪ kəd liv wʌn əɹ tu wɪnfmdɝz hɪɹ," zeɪɾə wɛn ɑn. "fɔɹ ə sɛt taɪm." ɪleɪn ɹɪŋkəld əɹ bɹaʊ əz ðoʊ kənsɪɾɝɪŋ. ʃi niɾəd ðoʊz blʌɾi wɪmən, ən mɔɹ ðən wʌn əɹ tu. "wʌt wəd jə æsk ɪn ɹɪtɝn?" ʃi sɛd faɪnəli.

Elayne sipped her wretched excuse for tea and said nothing. "It might please the Light that I could leave one or two Windfmders here," Zaida went on. "For a set time." Elayne wrinkled her brow as though considering. She needed those bloody women, and more than one or two. "What would you ask in return?" she said finally.

"wʌn skwɛɹ maɪl ə læn ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn. ɡʊd lænd, maɪnd. nɑt mɑɹʃi əɹ bɑi. ɪts tə bi æθɑn maɪɹ læn ɪn pɝpɪtʃjuɪɾi. ʌndɝ əɹ lɔz, nɑɾ ændɝz," ʃi æɾəd əz ɪf ðət wɝ ə smɔl æftɝθɑt hɑɹdli wɝθ mɛnʃənɪŋ.

"One square mile of land on the River Erinin. Good land, mind. Not marshy or boggy. It is to be Atha'an Miere land in perpetuity. Under our laws, not Andor's," she added as if that were a small afterthought hardly worth mentioning.

ɪleɪn tʃoʊkt ɑn əɹ ti. ði æθɑn maɪɹ heɪɾəd livɪŋ ðə si, heɪɾəd biɪŋ aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ʌv ɪt.

Elayne choked on her tea. The Atha'an Miere hated leaving the sea, hated being out of sight of it.

ən zeɪɾə wɑz æskɪŋ fəɹ læn ə θaʊzən maɪlz fɹəm ðə nɪɹəst sɔlt wɔɾɝ? æskɪŋ fəɹ ɪt tə bi siɾəd æbsəlutli, ət ðæt. kɛɹhinɪn ən mʊɹændiənz ən ivən ɔltɑɹənz hæd blɛd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə teɪk bɪts ʌv ændɝ, ən ændɔɹənz hæd blɛd tə kip əm aʊt. stɪl, wʌn skwɛɹ maɪl wɑz ə smɔl bɪt, ən ə smɔl pɹaɪs tə kip keɪɛmlɪn səplaɪd. nɑt ðət ʃi wəd lɛt zeɪɾə noʊ ðæt. ən ɪf ðə si foʊk bɪɡæn tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ dɝɛkli ɪndə ændɝ, ðən ændɔɝən ɡʊdz wəd bi eɪbəl tə muv ɪn si foʊk bɑɾəmz ɛvɹiwɛɹ ðə si foʊk seɪld, ən ðət wɑz ɛvɹiwɛɹ. zeɪɾə ʃʊɹli nu ðəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn lɛɾɪŋ əɹ noʊ ðəɾ ɪleɪn hæd θɔɾ ʌv ɪt. ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn ɝdʒ kɑʃən, jɛt ðəɹ wɝ taɪmz fəɹ boʊlnəs, əz bɝdʒɪt ʃəd noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən ɛniwʌn.

And Zaida was asking for land a thousand miles from the nearest salt water? Asking for it to be ceded absolutely, at that. Cairhienin and Murandians and even Altarans had bled trying to take bits of Andor, and Andorans had bled to keep them out. Still, one square mile was a small bit, and a small price to keep Caemlyn supplied. Not that she would let Zaida know that. And if the Sea Folk began trading directly into Andor, then Andoran goods would be able to move in Sea Folk bottoms everywhere the Sea Folk sailed, and that was everywhere. Zaida surely knew that already, but there was no point in letting her know that Elayne had thought of it. The Warder bond urged caution, yet there were times for boldness, as Birgitte should know better than anyone.

"səmtaɪmz ti ɡoʊz daʊn ðə ɹɔŋ weɪ." nɑɾ ə laɪ; mɪɹli ən ɪveɪʒən. "fɔɹ ə skwɛɹ maɪl ʌv ændɝ, aɪ dɪzɝv mɔɹ ðən tu wɪndfɪndɝz. ði æθɑn maɪɹ ɡɑt twɛnti titʃɝz ən mɔɹ fəɹ hɛlp juzɪŋ ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz, ən wən ðeɪ ɡoʊ jəl əv twɛnti tə ɹipleɪs ðɛm. juv twɛnti-wʌn wɪndfɪndɝz wɪð ju. fəɹ ə maɪl ʌv ændɝ, aɪ ʃəɾ əv ɔl twɛnti-wʌn, ən twɛnti-wʌn mɔɹ ɪn ðɛɹ pleɪsəz wən ðeɪ liv, fəɹ əz lɔŋ əz ɛɛs sədaɪ titʃ si foʊk." bɛs nɑt tə lɛt ðə wʊmən θɪŋk ðət wɑz əɹ weɪ ʌv ɹɪdʒɛktɪŋ ði ɔfɝ aʊɾ ə hænd. "ʌv kɔɹs, ðə nɔɹməl kʌstəmz duɾiz wəɾ əplaɪ tə ɛni ɡʊdz muvɪŋ ɔf ðɪs læn ɪndə ændɝ."

"Sometimes tea goes down the wrong way." Not a lie; merely an evasion. "For a square mile of Andor, I deserve more than two Windfinders. The Atha'an Miere got twenty teachers and more for help using the Bowl of the Winds, and when they go you will have twenty to replace them. You have twenty-one Windfinders with you. For a mile of Andor, I should have all twenty-one, and twenty-one more in their places when they leave, for as long as Aes Sedai teach Sea Folk." Best not to let the woman think that was her way of rejecting the offer out of hand. "Of course, the normal customs duties would apply to any goods moving off this land into Andor."

zeɪɾə ɹeɪzd əɹ sɪlvɝ kʌp tə hɝ maʊθ, ən wən ʃi loʊɝɾ ɪt, ʃi wɔɹ ðə taɪniəst smaɪl. jɛɾ ɪleɪn θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ə smaɪl ə ɹɪlif ɹæðɝ ðən tʃɹaɪəmf. "ɡʊdz muvɪŋ ɪndə ændɝ, bʌt nɑt ɡʊdz kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ ɑntu əɹ lænd. aɪ maɪt liv θɹi wɪndfɪndɝz. fəɹ hæf ə jɪɹ, seɪ. ən ðeɪ mʌs nɑt bi juzd ɪn faɪɾɪŋ. əl nɑɾ əv maɪ pipəl daɪ fəɹ ju, ən əl nɑɾ əv ʌðɝ ændɔɹənz æŋɡɹi əɾ əs kəz si foʊk əv kɪl səm ə ðɛm."

Zaida raised her silver cup to her mouth, and when she lowered it, she wore the tiniest smile. Yet Elayne thought it was a smile of relief rather than triumph. "Goods moving into Andor, but not goods coming from the river onto our land. I might leave three Windfinders. For half a year, say. And they must not be used in fighting. I will not have my people die for you, and I will not have other Andorans angry at us because Sea Folk have killed some of them."

"ðeɪ wɪl bi æskt oʊnli tə meɪk ɡeɪtweɪz," ɪleɪn sɛd, "ðoʊ ðeɪ mʌs meɪk əm wɛɹɛvɝ aɪ ɹikwaɪɝ." laɪt! əz ɪf ʃi ɪntɛndəd juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən! ðə si foʊk dɪd soʊ wɪθaʊɾ ə sɛkən θɔt, bʌt ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ vɛɹi hɑɹd tə bɪheɪv əz ɛɡwin dɪmændəd, əz ðoʊ ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi teɪkən ðə θɹi oʊðz. bɪsaɪdz, ɪf ʃi blæstəd ðoʊz kæmps aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔlz wɪð seɪaɪdɑɹ, əɹ əlaʊɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls tə, nɑɾ ə haʊs ɪn ændɝ wəd stænd wɪð hɝ. "ðeɪ mʌst steɪ əntɪl maɪ kɹaʊn ɪz sɪkjʊɹ, wɛðɝ ðəɾ ɪz hæf ə jɪɹ əɹ lɔŋɡɝ." ðə kɹaʊn ʃəd bi hɝz ɪn mʌtʃ lɛs taɪm, bʌɾ əz əɹ oʊl nɝs lini juz tə seɪ, jə kaʊntəd jəɹ plʌmz ɪn ðə bæskət, nɑɾ ɑn ðə tʃɹi. wʌns ðə kɹaʊn wɑz hɝz, ðoʊ, ʃi wəd nɑt nid wɪndfɪndɝz tə səplaɪ ðə sɪɾi, ən ɪn ɔl tʃɹuθ, ʃi wəd bi hæpi tə si ðɛɹ bæks. "bʌt θɹi ɪz nɑt nɪɹli ɪnʌf. jəl wɑnt ʃilɪn, sɪns ʃiz jəɹ wɪndfɪndɝ. əl kip ðə ɹɛst."

"They will be asked only to make gateways," Elayne said, "though they must make them wherever I require." Light! As if she intended using the One Power as a weapon! The Sea Folk did so without a second thought, but she was trying very hard to behave as Egwene demanded, as though she had already taken the Three Oaths. Besides, if she blasted those camps outside the walls with saidar, or allowed anyone else to, not a House in Andor would stand with her. "They must stay until my crown is secure, whether that is half a year or longer." The crown should be hers in much less time, but as her old nurse Lini used to say, you counted your plums in the basket, not on the tree. Once the crown was hers, though, she would not need Windfinders to supply the city, and in all truth, she would be happy to see their backs. "But three is not nearly enough. You will want Shielyn, since she is your Windfinder. I will keep the rest."

ðə mədæljənz ɑn zeɪɾəz ɑnɝ-tʃeɪn sweɪd dʒɛnli əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "tɑlɑn ən mɛtʃɹə ɑɹ əpɹɛntəsɪz stɪl. ðeɪ mʌst ɹɪtɝn tə ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. ði ʌðɝz əv duɾiz, tu. fɔɹ maɪt bi spɛɹɾ əntɪl jəɹ kɹaʊn ɪz sɪkjʊɹ."

The medallions on Zaida's honor-chain swayed gently as she shook her head. "Talaan and Metarra are apprentices still. They must return to their training. The others have duties, too. Four might be spared until your crown is secure."

fɹəm ðəɹ ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə mæɾɝ ə bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ. ɪleɪn hæd nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə kip ði əpɹɛntəsɪz, ən wɪndfɪndɝz tə klæn weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz kəd nɑt bi spɛɹɾ iðɝ, wɪtʃ ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd. moʊst weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz juz ðɛɹ wɪndfɪndɝz ən sɔɹdmæstɝz əz kloʊs ædvaɪzɝz, ən wəd bi pɑɹɾəd fɹəm wʌn əz izəli əz ʃi wəd bi pɑɹɾəd fɹəm bɝdʒɪt. zeɪɾə tʃɹaɪd tə ɪkskluɾ ʌðɝz əz wɛl, sətʃ əz wɪndfɪndɝz u sɝvd ɑn lɑɹdʒ vɛsəlz laɪk ɹeɪkɝz ən skɪmɝz, bʌt ðət wʊɾə dɪskwɑləfaɪd ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ nʌmbɝ ɹaɪt ðɛɹ, ən ɪleɪn ɹəfjuzd, ən ɹəfjuz tə kʌm daʊn ɪn əɹ dɪmænz ənlɛs zeɪɾə keɪm ʌp ɪn əɹ ɔfɝz. wɪtʃ ðə wʊmən dɪd sloʊli, ɡɹʌdʒɪŋ ɛvɹi kənsɛʃən. bʌt nɑt soʊ sloʊli əz ɪleɪn maɪɾ əv ɪkspɛktəd. klɪɹli, ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs niɾəd ðɪs bɑɹɡən əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi hɝsɛlf niɾəd wɪmən u kəd wiv ɡeɪtweɪz. "ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, ɪts əɡɹid," ʃi wɑz eɪbəl tə seɪ ət læst, kɪsɪŋ ðə fɪŋɡɝtɪps ə hɝ ɹaɪt hæn ən linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə pɹɛs əm tə zeɪɾəz lɪps. eɪvinhə ɡɹɪnd, ɑbviəsli ɪmpɹɛst. bɝdʒɪt kɛpt ə smuð feɪs, bʌt ðə bɑn sɛd ʃi faʊn ɪt hɑɹd tə bɪliv ɪleɪn hæd kʌm aʊt soʊ wɛl.

From there it was just a matter of bargaining. Elayne had never expected to keep the apprentices, and Windfinders to Clan Wavemistresses could not be spared either, which she had expected. Most Wavemistresses used their Windfinders and Swordmasters as close advisors, and would be parted from one as easily as she would be parted from Birgitte. Zaida tried to exclude others as well, such as Windfinders who served on large vessels like rakers and skimmers, but that would have disqualified the greater number right there, and Elayne refused, and refused to come down in her demands unless Zaida came up in her offers. Which the woman did slowly, grudging every concession. But not so slowly as Elayne might have expected. Clearly, the Wavemistress needed this bargain as much as she herself needed women who could weave gateways. "Under the Light, it is agreed," she was able to say at last, kissing the fingertips of her right hand and leaning forward to press them to Zaida's lips. Aviendha grinned, obviously impressed. Birgitte kept a smooth face, but the bond said she found it hard to believe Elayne had come out so well.

"ɪɾ ɪz əɡɹid, ʌndɝ ðə laɪt," zeɪɾə mɝmɝd. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ɪleɪnz lɪps wɝ hɑɹɾ ən kælʌzd, ðoʊ ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv hɔld ɑn ə ɹoʊp hɝsɛlf ɪn mɛni jɪɹz. ʃi lʊkt kwaɪt sæɾəsfaɪd fəɹ ə wʊmən u hæd jildəd naɪn ə ðə fɔɹtin wɪndfɪndɝz u hæd bɪn ɑn ðə teɪbəl. ɪleɪn wʌndɝd haʊ mɛni ʌv ðoʊz naɪn wəd bi wɪmən huz ʃɪps hæd bɪn dɪstʃɹɔɪd baɪ ðə sintʃæn ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. luzɪŋ ə ʃɪp wɑz ə sɪɹiəs mæɾɝ əmʌŋ ði æθɑn maɪɹ, wʌtɛvɝ ðə ɹizən, ən meɪbi kɑz ɪnʌf tə wɑnə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm hoʊm ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ. noʊ mæɾɝ.

"It is agreed, under the Light," Zaida murmured. Her fingers on Elayne's lips were hard and callused, though she could not have hauled on a rope herself in many years. She looked quite satisfied for a woman who had yielded nine of the fourteen Windfinders who had been on the table. Elayne wondered how many of those nine would be women whose ships had been destroyed by the Seanchan in Ebou Dar. Losing a ship was a serious matter among the Atha'an Miere, whatever the reason, and maybe cause enough to want to stay away from home a little longer. No matter.

tʃənɛl lʊkt ɡlʌm, hɝ tætud hænz taɪɾ ɑn ðə niz ə hɝ ɹɛd bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd tʃɹaʊzɝz, jɛt nɑt soʊ ɡlʌm əz maɪt bi ɪkspɛktəd fɹəm ə si foʊk wʊmən u wəɾ əv tə ɹɪmeɪn əʃɔɹ ə waɪl lɔŋɡɝ.

Chanelle looked glum, her tattooed hands tight on the knees of her red brocaded trousers, yet not so glum as might be expected from a Sea Folk woman who would have to remain ashore a while longer.

ʃi wɑz tə kəmæn ðə wɪndfɪndɝz u steɪd, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪt ðət zeɪɾə hæɾ æksiɾɪd tə hɝ biɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪleɪnz əθɔɹəɾi, ən bɝdʒɪts. ðəɹ wɝ tə bi noʊ mɔɹ si foʊk stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əbaʊt ðə pæləs əz ɪf ðeɪ oʊn ɪɾ ən meɪkɪŋ dɪmænz lɛft ən ɹaɪt. bʌt ðɛn, ɪleɪn səspɛktəd ðət zeɪɾə hæd kʌm tə ðɪs miɾɪŋ noʊɪŋ ʃi wəd liv səm ə hɝ pɑɹɾi bɪhaɪnd, ən tʃənɛl hæd kʌm noʊɪŋ ʃi wəd kəmæn ðɛm. ðət hɑɹdli mæɾɝd, iðɝ, nɔɹ dɪɾ ɪt mæɾɝ wʌɾ ædvæntɪdʒ zeɪɾə hoʊp tə ɡeɪn təwɔɹd bɪkʌmɪŋ mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps. ðət ʃi sɔ səm wɑz klɪɹ əz ɡʊd ɡlæs. ɔl ðət mæɾɝd wɑz ðət keɪɛmlɪn wəd nɑt ɡoʊ hʌŋɡɹi. ðəɾ ən ðə . . . ðə blʌɾi bikən stɪl bleɪzɪŋ ɪn ðə wɛst. noʊ, ʃi wəd bi ə kwin, ən ʃi kəd nɑt bi ə munstʃɹʌk ɡɝl. keɪɛmlɪn ən ændɝ wɝ ɔl ðət kəd mæɾɝ.

She was to command the Windfinders who stayed, and she did not like it that Zaida had acceded to her being under Elayne's authority, and Birgitte's. There were to be no more Sea Folk striding about the palace as if they owned it and making demands left and right. But then, Elayne suspected that Zaida had come to this meeting knowing she would leave some of her party behind, and Chanelle had come knowing she would command them. That hardly mattered, either, nor did it matter what advantage Zaida hoped to gain toward becoming Mistress of the Ships. That she saw some was clear as good glass. All that mattered was that Caemlyn would not go hungry. That and the . . . the bloody beacon still blazing in the west. No, she would be a queen, and she could not be a moonstruck girl. Caemlyn and Andor were all that could matter.

tʃæptɝ θɝtin

CHAPTER 13

haɪ sits zeɪɾə ən ðə tu wɪndfɪndɝz dɪpɑɹɾəd fɹəm ɪleɪnz əpɑɹtməns, ɡɹeɪsfəl ən aʊtwɝdli ənhɝid bʌt wɪð ɔlmoʊst əz lɪɾəl sɛɹəmoʊni əz ðeɪ hæɾ ɛntɝd, ə bɛɹ wɪʃ ðət ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ɪleɪn ən si hɝ seɪf. fəɹ æθɑn maɪɹ, ðət wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɹʌʃɪŋ ɔf wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd. ɪleɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd ðəɾ ɪf zeɪɾə dɪɾ ɪndid wɑnə bi ðə nɛks mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps, ðə wʊmən hæɾ ə ɹaɪvəl ʃi hoʊp tə stil ə mɑɹtʃ ɑn. ɪt maɪt bi wɛl fəɹ ændɝ ɪf zeɪɾə dɪɾ əteɪn ði æθɑn maɪɹ θɹoʊn, əɹ wʌtɛvɝ ðə si foʊk kɔld ɪt; bɑɹɡən əɹ noʊ bɑɹɡən, ʃi wəɾ ɔlweɪz bi əwɛɹ ðəɾ ændɝ hæd hɛlp hɝ, ən ðət hæd tə bi fəɹ ðə ɡʊd. ðoʊ ɪf ʃi feɪld, hɝ ɹaɪvəl wəd bi əwɛɹ ʌv wɛɹ ændɝz feɪvɝ hæd ɡɔn, tu. stɪl, ɪt wɑz ɔl ɪf ən meɪbi. hɪɹ ən naʊ wɑz ənʌðɝ θɪŋ ɔltəɡɛðɝ.

High Seats Zaida and the two Windfinders departed from Elayne's apartments, graceful and outwardly unhurried but with almost as little ceremony as they had entered, a bare wish that the Light illumine Elayne and see her safe. For Atha'an Miere, that was almost rushing off without a word. Elayne decided that if Zaida did indeed want to be the next Mistress of the Ships, the woman had a rival she hoped to steal a march on. It might be well for Andor if Zaida did attain the Atha'an Miere throne, or whatever the Sea Folk called it; bargain or no bargain, she would always be aware that Andor had helped her, and that had to be for the good. Though if she failed, her rival would be aware of where Andor's favor had gone, too. Still, it was all if and maybe. Here and now was another thing altogether.

"aɪ də nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt ɛniwʌn tə mænhændəl ən æmbæsəɾɝ," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli wʌns ðə dɔɹz hæd kloʊz bɪhaɪn ðɛm, "bʌɾ ɪn ðə fjutʃɝ aɪ də ɪkspɛk ðə pɹaɪvəsi ʌv maɪ ɹumz. ivən æmbæsəɾɝz ɑɹ nɑt tə bi əlaʊd sɪmpli tə wɑndɝ ɪn. æm aɪ ʌndɝstʊd?"

"I do not expect anyone to manhandle an ambassador," she said quietly once the doors had closed behind them, "but in the future I do expect the privacy of my rooms. Even ambassadors are not to be allowed simply to wander in. Am I understood?"

ɹæsɔɹiə nɑɾəd, hɝ feɪs wʊɾən, bʌt baɪ ðə kʌlɝ ðət flæʃt ɪndə hɝ tʃiks, ʃi fɛl ðə mɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃən ə hævɪŋ lɛt ðə si foʊk pæs əz kinli əz bɝdʒɪt, ən ðə bɑnd . . . ɹɪθd. . . əntɪl ɪleɪn fɛlt əɹ oʊn feɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɹɛd wɪð ə stɪŋɪŋ ɪmbɛɹəsmənt. "ju dɪd nʌθɪŋ ɹɔŋ, ɪɡzækli, bʌt doʊn lɛɾ ɪt hæpən əɡɛn." laɪt, naʊ ʃi saʊndəɾ ə doʊlt! "wi wɪl spik noʊ mɔɹ ʌv ɪt," ʃi sɛd stɪfli. oʊ, bɝn bɝdʒɪɾ ən ðə bɑnd! ðeɪ wʊɾə hæd tə ɹɛsəl wɪð zeɪɾə tə stɑp hɝ, bʌɾ æɾɪŋ boʊn-dip hjumɪlieɪʃən tə ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz hɛdeɪk wɑz paɪlɪŋ ɪnsəlt ɑn ɪnʒɝi! ən eɪvinhə hæd noʊ kɔl tə ɡɹɪn ɪn ðət . . . ðət smɑɹmi weɪ. ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ wən əɹ haʊ hɝ sɪstɝ hæd lɝn ðət ʃi ən bɝdʒɪt səmtaɪmz ɹəflɛktəd wʌn ənʌðɝ, bʌɾ eɪvinhə faʊn ðə hoʊl θɪŋ væsli əmjuzɪŋ. hɝ sɛns ə hjumɝ kəd bi ɹʌf ət taɪmz.

Rasoria nodded, her face wooden, but by the color that flashed into her cheeks, she felt the mortification of having let the Sea Folk pass as keenly as Birgitte, and the bond . . . writhed. . . until Elayne felt her own face growing red with a stinging embarrassment. "You did nothing wrong, exactly, but don't let it happen again." Light, now she sounded a dolt! "We will speak no more of it," she said stiffly. Oh, burn Birgitte and the bond! They would have had to wrestle with Zaida to stop her, but adding bone-deep humiliation to the other woman's headache was piling insult on injury! And Aviendha had no call to grin in that . . . that smarmy way. Elayne did not know when or how her sister had learned that she and Birgitte sometimes reflected one another, but Aviendha found the whole thing vastly amusing. Her sense of humor could be rough at times.

"aɪ θɪŋk jə tu wɪl meɪk itʃ ʌðɝ mɛlt, wʌn deɪ," ʃi sɛd, læfɪŋ. "bʌt ðɛn, jə ɔlɹɛɾi pleɪd ðət dʒoʊk, bɝdʒɪt tʃɹɑilaɪən." bɝdʒɪt skaʊld ət hɝ, sʌɾən əlɑɹm kɹʌʃɪŋ ɪmbɛɹəsmən ɪn ðə bɑnd, ən ʃi ɹɪtɝn sətʃ ə lʊk ʌv ɪnəsəns ɪt simd əɹ aɪz maɪt fɔl aʊɾ ə hɝ feɪs.

"I think you two will make each other melt, one day," she said, laughing. "But then, you already played that joke, Birgitte Trahelion." Birgitte scowled at her, sudden alarm crushing embarrassment in the bond, and she returned such a look of innocence it seemed her eyes might fall out of her face.

bɛɾɝ nɑt tə æsk, ɪleɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd. wən jə æsk kwɛstʃənz, lini juz tə seɪ, ðən juv tə hɪɹ ði ænsɝz wɛðɝ jə wɑnə əɹ nɑt. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə hɪɹ, nɑt wɪð ɹæsɔɹiə stuɾiəsli ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ðə flɔɹ taɪlz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ buts ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən ɪn ði æntəɹum feɪlɪŋ tə pɹitɛnd nɑt tə bi lɪsnɪŋ. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ɹilaɪz haʊ pɹɛʃəs pɹaɪvəsi wɑz əntɪl ʃi lɔst ɪt kəmplitli.

Better not to ask, Elayne decided. When you ask questions, Lini used to say, then you have to hear the answers whether you want to or not. She did not want to hear, not with Rasoria studiously examining the floor tiles in front of her boots and the rest of the Guardswomen in the anteroom failing to pretend not to be listening. She had never realized how precious privacy was until she lost it completely.

nɪɹ ɪnʌf kəmplitli, ɛniweɪ. "aɪ æm gɑnə fɪnɪʃ maɪ bæθ naʊ," ʃi sɛd kɑmli. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, wʌt dʒoʊk hæd bɝdʒɪt pleɪɾ ɑn hɝ? sʌmθɪŋ ðət meɪɾ əɹ . . . mɛlt? ɪt kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn mʌtʃ ɪf ʃi stɪl dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz.

Near enough completely, anyway. "I am going to finish my bath now," she said calmly. Blood and ashes, what joke had Birgitte played on her? Something that made her . . . melt? It could not have been much if she still did not know what it was.

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ðə bæθ wɔɾɝ hæd ɡɔn koʊld. tɛpɪd, ɛniweɪ. hɑɹdli ɛniθɪŋ ʃi wɑntəd tə sɪɾ ɪn. ə lɪɾəl waɪl lɔŋɡɝ soʊkɪŋ wʊɾə bɪn wʌndɝfəl, bʌt nɑɾ ət ði ɪkspɛns ʌv weɪɾɪŋ waɪl ðə tʌbz wɝ ɛmptid bʌkət baɪ bʌkəɾ ən mɔɹ hɑt wɔɾɝ bɹɔɾ ʌp. ði ɪntaɪɝ pæləs mʌs noʊ ʃi wɑz bæk baɪ naʊ, ən ðə fɝs meɪɾ ən ðə fɝs klɝk wəd bi æŋkʃəs tə meɪk ðɛɹ deɪli ɹɪpɔɹts.

Unfortunately, the bath water had gone cold. Tepid, anyway. Hardly anything she wanted to sit in. A little while longer soaking would have been wonderful, but not at the expense of waiting while the tubs were emptied bucket by bucket and more hot water brought up. The entire palace must know she was back by now, and the First Maid and the First Clerk would be anxious to make their daily reports.

deɪli wən ʃi wɑz ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ən dʌbli æŋkʃəs kəz ʃi hæd bɪn ɡɔn fəɹ ə deɪ. duɾi keɪm bɪfɔɹ plɛʒɝ, ɪf jə wɝ gɑnə ɹul ə kʌntʃɹi. ən ðət wɛn dʌbli fəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡeɪn ðə θɹoʊn ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs.

Daily when she was in the city, and doubly anxious because she had been gone for a day. Duty came before pleasure, if you were going to rule a country. And that went doubly for trying to gain the throne in the first place.

eɪvinhə pʊl ðə taʊəl fɹəm əɹ hɛɾ ən ʃʊk daʊn əɹ hɛɹ, əpɪɹɪŋ ɹɪliv ðət ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv tə klaɪm ɪndə wɔɾɝ əɡɛn. ʃi stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dʒɹɛsɪŋ ɹum, ʃɛɾɪŋ əɹ ɹoʊb bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹitʃt ðə dɔɹ, ən hæd dɑn moʊst ə hɝ ɡɑɹməns wən ɪleɪn ən ðə meɪdz ɛntɝd. wɪð oʊnli ə fju mʌɾɝz, ʃi lɛt nɛɹɪs kəmplit ðə dʒɑb, ɔlðoʊ lɪɾəl ɹɪmeɪn bɪɑn stɛpɪŋ ɪndə hɝ hɛvi wʊlən skɝt. ʃi slæp ðə meɪdz hænz əweɪ ən taɪɾənd ðə leɪsəz ə hɝ sɑf ni-haɪ buts hɝsɛlf.

Aviendha pulled the towel from her head and shook down her hair, appearing relieved that she would not have to climb into water again. She started for the dressing room, shedding her robe before she reached the door, and had donned most of her garments when Elayne and the maids entered. With only a few mutters, she let Naris complete the job, although little remained beyond stepping into her heavy woolen skirt. She slapped the maid's hands away and tightened the laces of her soft knee-high boots herself.

fəɹ ɪleɪn, ɪt wɑz nɑt soʊ izi. ənlɛs səm ɪmɝdʒənsi lumd, ɛsæn fɛl slaɪɾɪd wən ʃi dɪd nɑt dɪskʌs əɹ tʃɔɪs ə dʒɹɛsəz. wɪð kloʊs sɝvəns, ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ə dɛləkət bæləns tə meɪnteɪn. wɪθaʊɾ ɪksɛpʃən ə bɑdaɪsɝvənt nu mɔɹ ə jəɹ sikɹəts ðən jə θɔt ʃi dɪd, ən ʃi sɔ jə ət jəɹ wɝst, ɡɹʌmpi, taɪɝd, wipɪŋ ɪn jəɹ pɪloʊ, ɪn ɹeɪdʒɪz ən sʌlks. ɹɪspɛk hæd tə ɡoʊ boʊθ weɪz, əɹ ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən bɪkeɪm ɪmpɑsəbəl. soʊ eɪvinhə wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn wʌn ə ðə pæɾəd bɛntʃɪz, əlaʊɪŋ nɛɹɪs tə koʊm aʊɾ əɹ hɛɹ, bɪfɔɹ ɪleɪn kəd kənkluɾ ɑn ə sɪmpəl ɡɹeɪ ɪn faɪn wʊl, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn ɡɹin ɑn ðə haɪ nɛk ən ðə slivz ən tʃɹɪmd wɪð blæk fɑks. ɪt wɑz nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ ðət ʃi hæd dɪfəkəlti dəsaɪɾɪŋ, bʌt ðəɾ ɛsæn kɛpt pʊɾɪŋ fɔɹwɝd sɪlks soʊn wɪð pɝlz əɹ sæfaɪɝz əɹ faɪɝdʒɹɑps, itʃ mɔɹ ɔɹnətli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ðən ðə læst. noʊ mæɾɝ ðət ðə θɹoʊn wɑz nɑt jɛt hɝz, ɛsænd wɑntəd tə dʒɹɛs əɹ ɛvɹi deɪ əz ə kwin ɹɛɾiɪŋ fəɹ ən ɑɾiəns. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə pɔɪn tə ðæt, bæk wən ɛvɹi deɪ bɹɔt dɛləɡeɪʃənz ə mɝtʃəns tə ɔfɝ pətɪʃənz əɹ meɪk ðɛɹ ɹɪspɛks, ɪspɛʃli aʊtləndɝz hoʊpɪŋ ðə tʃɹʌbəlz ɪn ændɝ wəd nɑɾ əfɛk ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪd. ði oʊl seɪɪŋ ðəɾ u hɛl keɪɛmlɪn hɛld ændɝ hæd nɛvɝ ɹɪli bɪn tʃɹu, ən ɪn mɝtʃən aɪz, ðə tʃænsəz ʃi wəɾ æktʃəli  ɡeɪn ðə θɹoʊn hæd dɪmɪnɪʃt wɪð ði ɝaɪvəl ʌv ɛɹəmɪləz ɑɹmi aʊtsaɪd ðə ɡeɪts.

For Elayne, it was not so easy. Unless some emergency loomed, Essande felt slighted when she did not discuss her choice of dresses. With close servants, there was always a delicate balance to maintain. Without exception a bodyservant knew more of your secrets than you thought she did, and she saw you at your worst, grumpy, tired, weeping in your pillow, in rages and sulks. Respect had to go both ways, or the situation became impossible. So Aviendha was sitting on one of the padded benches, allowing Naris to comb out her hair, before Elayne could conclude on a simple gray in fine wool, embroidered in green on the high neck and the sleeves and trimmed with black fox. It was not so much that she had difficulty deciding, but that Essande kept putting forward silks sewn with pearls or sapphires or firedrops, each more ornately embroidered than the last. No matter that the throne was not yet hers, Essande wanted to dress her every day as a queen readying for an audience. There had been a point to that, back when every day brought delegations of merchants to offer petitions or make their respects, especially outlanders hoping the troubles in Andor would not affect their trade. The old saying that who held Caemlyn held Andor had never really been true, and in merchant eyes, the chances she would actually gain the throne had diminished with the arrival of Arymilla's army outside the gates.

ðeɪ kəd kaʊn ðə haʊsəz ɝeɪɾ ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ əz izəli əz ðeɪ kəd kaʊn kɔɪn.

They could count the Houses arrayed on either side as easily as they could count coin.

ivən ændɔɝən mɝtʃəns əvɔɪɾəd ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs naʊ, kipɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl soʊ noʊ wʌn wəd θɪŋk ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn tə ðə pæləs, ən bæŋkɝz keɪm wɛl hʊɾɪd, ɪn ənɑnəməs kæɹɪdʒɪz. nʌn wɪʃt əɹ ɪl, ðət ʃi nu, ən sɝɾənli nʌn wɑntəd tə æŋɡɝ hɝ, bʌt niðɝ dɪd ðeɪ wɑnə æŋɡɝ ɛɹəmɪlə, nɑt naʊ. stɪl, ðə bæŋkɝz dɪd kʌm, ən soʊ fɑɹ ʃi hæd nɑt hɝɾ ʌv ɛni mɝtʃəns pɹɪzɛntɪŋ pətɪʃənz tə ɛɹəmɪlə.

Even Andoran merchants avoided the Royal Palace now, keeping out of the Inner City as much as possible so no one would think they had gone to the palace, and bankers came well hooded, in anonymous carriages. None wished her ill, that she knew, and certainly none wanted to anger her, but neither did they want to anger Arymilla, not now. Still, the bankers did come, and so far she had not heard of any merchants presenting petitions to Arymilla.

ðət wəd bi ðə fɝst saɪn ðəɾ əɹ kɑz wɑz lɔst. ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə dʒɹɛs tʊk twaɪs əz lɔŋ əz ɪt ʃəd hæv, sɪns ɛsæn əlaʊd sɛfæni tə hɛlp ɪleɪn. ðə ɡɝl bɹið hɛvəli ðə hoʊl taɪm, ʌnəkʌstəmd əz jɛt tə dʒɹɛsɪŋ sʌmwʌn ɛls ən fɪɹfəl ə meɪkɪŋ ə mɪsteɪk ʌndɝ ɛsænz aɪ.

That would be the first sign that her cause was lost. Getting into the dress took twice as long as it should have, since Essande allowed Sephanie to help Elayne. The girl breathed heavily the whole time, unaccustomed as yet to dressing someone else and fearful of making a mistake under Essande's eye.

mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən ə meɪkɪŋ wʌn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ mɪstʃɹəs, ɪleɪn səspɛktəd. æpɹɪhɛnʃən meɪd ðə stɝɾi jʌŋ wʊmən klʌmzi, klʌmzinəs meɪɾ əɹ mɔɹ peɪnsteɪkɪŋ, ən teɪkɪŋ peɪnz meɪɾ əɹ wɝi mɔɹ əbaʊt mɪsteɪks, soʊ ðə ɹɪzʌlt wɑz ðət ʃi muv mɔɹ sloʊli ðən ðə fɹeɪl oʊldɝ wʊmən ɛvɝ hæd.

Much more than of making one in front of her mistress, Elayne suspected. Apprehension made the sturdy young woman clumsy, clumsiness made her more painstaking, and taking pains made her worry more about mistakes, so the result was that she moved more slowly than the frail older woman ever had.

faɪnəli, haʊɛvɝ, ɪleɪn faʊn hɝsɛlf siɾəd feɪsɪŋ eɪvinhə, lɛɾɪŋ ɛsæn dʒɹɔ ən aɪvɝi koʊm θɹu hɝ kɝlz. ɪn ɛsænz vju, əlaʊɪŋ wʌn ə ðə ɡɝlz tə slɪp ə ʃɪft oʊvɝ ɪleɪnz hɛɾ əɹ fæsən əɹ bʌɾənz wɑz wʌn θɪŋ, bʌt ɹɪskɪŋ iðɝ ə ðɛm meɪkɪŋ ə tæŋɡəl ɪn əɹ hɛɹ kwaɪɾ ənʌðɝ. bɪfɔɹ ðə koʊm hæd meɪd tu dʌzən stʃɹoʊks, ðoʊ, bɝdʒɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ. ɛsæn snɪft, ən ɪleɪn kəɾ ɔl bʌt si ðə wʊmən ɡɹɪmɑs bɪhaɪn əɹ bæk. ɛsæn hæd ɡɪvən weɪ ɑn bɝdʒɪt biɪŋ pɹɛzən ət bæθs, haʊɛvɝ ɹɪlʌktənli, bʌt ðə dʒɹɛsɪŋ ɹum wɑz sækɹoʊsæŋkt.

Finally, however, Elayne found herself seated facing Aviendha, letting Essande draw an ivory comb through her curls. In Essande's view, allowing one of the girls to slip a shift over Elayne's head or fasten her buttons was one thing, but risking either of them making a tangle in her hair quite another. Before the comb had made two dozen strokes, though, Birgitte appeared in the doorway. Essande sniffed, and Elayne could all but see the woman grimace behind her back. Essande had given way on Birgitte being present at baths, however reluctantly, but the dressing room was sacrosanct.

sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, bɝdʒɪt lɛt ðə meɪdz dɪsəpɹuvəl slaɪd pæst wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə pleɪkeɪɾɪŋ lʊk.

Surprisingly, Birgitte let the maid's disapproval slide past without so much as a placating look.

juʒəwəli, ʃi ɹɪfɹeɪn fɹəm pʊʃɪŋ ɛsæn ən ɪntʃ fɝðɝ ðən ɪleɪn ɹikwaɪɝd. "daɪɛlɪn əz ɹɪtɝnd, ɪleɪn. ʃiz bɹɔt kʌmpəni. ðə haɪ sits ə mæntʃɹ, hɛvɪn, ʒəljɑɹɾ ən nɔɹθən." fəɹ səm ɹizən, ðə bɑn kæɹid stʃɹiks ə pʌzəlmən ən ənɔɪəns. ʃɛɹd hɛdeɪk əɹ noʊ, ɪleɪn cʊɾə dʒʌmp fəɹ dʒɔɪ. ɪf ɛsæn hæd nɑt hæd ðə koʊm dip ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, ʃi maɪt hæv. fɔɹ! ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd daɪɛlɪn tə əkɑmplɪʃ soʊ mʌtʃ. hoʊp fəɹ ɪt, pɹeɪd fəɹ ɪt, bʌt nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪt, sɝɾənli nɑɾ ɪn wʌn ʃɔɹt wik. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ʃi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ daɪɛlɪn wəd ɹɪtɝn ɛmpti-hændəd. fɔɹ ɡeɪv əɹ ən ikwəl fʊɾɪŋ wɪð ɛɹəmɪlə. ɪt wɑz ɡɔlɪŋ tə θɪŋk ə biɪŋ ɑn "æn ikwəl fʊɾɪŋ" wɪð ðət fulɪʃ wʊmən, bʌt tʃɹuθ wɑz tʃɹuθ. mæntʃɹ, hɛvɪn, ʒəljɑɹɾ ən nɔɹθən. waɪ nɑt kændʒɹeɪd? ðət wɑz ðə fɪfθ haʊs daɪɛlɪn hæd ɡɔn tə əpɹoʊtʃ. noʊ. ʃi hæd fɔɹ mɔɹ haʊsəz, ən ʃi wɑz nɑt gɑnə fɹɛɾ oʊvɝ ðə læk ʌv wʌn.

Usually, she refrained from pushing Essande an inch further than Elayne required. "Dyelin has returned, Elayne. She's brought company. The High Seats of Mantear, Haevin, Gilyard and Northan." For some reason, the bond carried streaks of puzzlement and annoyance. Shared headache or no, Elayne could have jumped for joy. If Essande had not had the comb deep in her hair, she might have. Four! She had never expected Dyelin to accomplish so much. Hoped for it, prayed for it, but never expected it, certainly not in one short week. In truth, she had been sure Dyelin would return empty-handed. Four gave her an equal footing with Arymilla. It was galling to think of being on "an equal footing" with that foolish woman, but truth was truth. Mantear, Haevin, Gilyard and Northan. Why not Candraed? That was the fifth House Dyelin had gone to approach. No. She had four more Houses, and she was not going to fret over the lack of one.

"ɛntɝteɪn əm ɪn ðə fɔɹməl sɪɾɪŋ ɹum əntɪl aɪ kən kʌm, bɝdʒɪt." ðə smɔl sɪɾɪŋ ɹum hæd bɪn səfɪʃən fəɹ zeɪɾə - ʃi hoʊp ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs hæd nɑt noʊɾəst ðə slaɪt - bʌt fɔɹ haɪ sits ɹikwaɪɝd mɔɹ. "æn æsk ðə fɝs meɪd tə ɝeɪnʒ əpɑɹtməns." əpɑɹtməns. laɪt! ði æθɑn maɪɹ wəɾ əv tə bi hɝiɾ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹz tə meɪk ɹum. əntɪl ðeɪ lɛft, moʊs bɛdz ðət dɪd nɑɾ əv tu ɑkjəpəns hæd θɹi. "ɛsænd, ðə ɡɹin sɪlk wɪð ðə sæfaɪɝz, aɪ θɪŋk. ən sæfaɪɝz fəɹ maɪ hɛɹ, tu.

"Entertain them in the formal sitting room until I can come, Birgitte." The small sitting room had been sufficient for Zaida - she hoped the Wavemistress had not noticed the slight - but four High Seats required more. "And ask the First Maid to arrange apartments." Apartments. Light! The Atha'an Miere would have to be hurried out of theirs to make room. Until they left, most beds that did not have two occupants had three. "Essande, the green silk with the sapphires, I think. And sapphires for my hair, too.

ðə lɑɹdʒ sæfaɪɝz."

The large sapphires."

bɝdʒɪt lɛf stɪl filɪŋ pʌzəld ən ʌpsɛt. waɪ? ʃʊɹli ʃi kəd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi ʃʊɾə lɛf daɪɛlɪn kulɪŋ əɹ hilz kəz ə zeɪɾə? oʊ, laɪt, naʊ ʃi wɑz filɪŋ pʌzəld oʊvɝ bɝdʒɪt filɪŋ pʌzəld; ɪf ðət wɑz əlaʊd tə fiɾ ɑn ɪtsɛlf, ðeɪ wəd boʊθ ɛn ʌp dɪzi! əz ðə dɔɹ kloʊzd, ɛsæn muv tə ðə nɪɹəst wɔɹdʒɹoʊb wɛɹɪŋ ə smaɪl ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn kɔl tʃɹaɪʌmfənt.

Birgitte left still feeling puzzled and upset. Why? Surely she could not think she should have left Dyelin cooling her heels because of Zaida? Oh, Light, now she was feeling puzzled over Birgitte feeling puzzled; if that was allowed to feed on itself, they would both end up dizzy! As the door closed, Essande moved to the nearest wardrobe wearing a smile that might have been called triumphant.

lʊkɪŋ əɾ eɪvinhə, hu hæd moʊʃənd nɛɹɪs ən əɹ koʊm əweɪ ən wɑz foʊldɪŋ ə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ skɑɹf tə taɪ hɝ hɛɹ bæk, ɪleɪn smaɪl hɝsɛlf. ʃi niɾəd sʌmθɪŋ tə teɪk əɹ aʊɾ ə ðət spɪnɪŋ lup. "meɪbi jə ʃəd wɛɹ sɪlks ən dʒɛmz dʒʌs ðɪs wʌns mɔɹ, eɪvinhə," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə dʒɛnli tizɪŋ toʊn. "daɪɛlɪn woʊn maɪnd, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ði ʌðɝz ɑɹən juz tə il. ðeɪ maɪt θɪŋk aɪm ɛntɝteɪnɪŋ ə steɪbəlɪhænd."

Looking at Aviendha, who had motioned Naris and her comb away and was folding a dark gray scarf to tie her hair back, Elayne smiled herself. She needed something to take her out of that spinning loop. "Maybe you should wear silks and gems just this once more, Aviendha," she said in a gently teasing tone. "Dyelin won't mind, of course, but the others aren't used to Aiel. They might think I'm entertaining a stablehand."

ʃi mɛn ɪt fəɹ ə dʒoʊk - ðeɪ twɪɾɪd wʌn ənʌðɝ əbaʊt kloʊðz ɔl ðə taɪm, ən daɪɛlɪn lʊkt əskæns əɾ eɪvinhə wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɔɹ - bʌɾ əɹ sɪstɝ fɹaʊn ət ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊbz laɪnɪŋ ðə wɔl, ðən nɑɾəd ən sɛt ðə skɑɹf daʊn bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ɑn ðə tʌftəd kʊʃən. "dʒʌst soʊ ðiz haɪ sits wɪl bi pɹɑpɝli ɪmpɹɛst. də nɑt θɪŋk əl də ðɪs ɔl ðə taɪm. ɪts ə feɪvɝ tə ju." fəɹ sʌmwʌn dʒʌs duɪŋ ə feɪvɝ, ʃi pɔɹɾ oʊvɝ ðə kloʊðz ðəɾ ɛsæn pʊld aʊt wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv ɪntʃɹəs bɪfɔɹ dəsaɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə dɑɹk blu vɛlvət slæʃt wɪð ɡɹin, ən ə sɪlvɝ nɛt tə kætʃ əɹ hɛɹ. ðeɪ wɝ əɹ kloʊðz, meɪd fəɹ hɝ, bʌt sɪns ɹitʃɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn ʃi hæɾ əvɔɪɾəd əm əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ kɹɔlɪŋ wɪð dɛθshɛd spaɪɾɝz. stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ðə slivz, ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd əz ɪf ʃi maɪt tʃeɪnʒ əɹ maɪnd, bʌt faɪnəli ʃi lɛt nɛɹɪs də ʌp ðə taɪni pɝl bʌɾənz.

She meant it for a joke - they twitted one another about clothes all the time, and Dyelin looked askance at Aviendha whatever she wore - but her sister frowned at the wardrobes lining the wall, then nodded and set the scarf down beside her on the tufted cushion. "Just so these High Seats will be properly impressed. Do not think I will do this all the time. It is a favor to you." For someone just doing a favor, she pored over the clothes that Essande pulled out with a great deal of interest before deciding on a dark blue velvet slashed with green, and a silver net to catch her hair. They were her clothes, made for her, but since reaching Caemlyn she had avoided them as if they were crawling with death'shead spiders. Stroking the sleeves, she hesitated as if she might change her mind, but finally she let Naris do up the tiny pearl buttons.

ʃi dɪklaɪn ɪleɪnz ɔfɝ ʌv ɛmɹəlz ðət wʊɾə suɾəd ðə ɡaʊn ædmɝəbli, kipɪŋ əɹ sɪlvɝ snoʊfleɪk nɛkləs ən hɛvi aɪvɝi bɹeɪslət, bʌɾ ət ðə læs mɪnət ʃi dɪd pɪn ði æmbɝ tɝɾəl tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝ.

She declined Elayne's offer of emeralds that would have suited the gown admirably, keeping her silver snowflake necklace and heavy ivory bracelet, but at the last minute she did pin the amber turtle to her shoulder.

"ju kən nɛvɝ tɛl wən ɪt maɪt bi nidfəl," ʃi sɛd. "bɛɾɝ seɪf ðən sɑɹi," ɪleɪn əɡɹid.

"You can never tell when it might be needful," she said. "Better safe than sorry," Elayne agreed.

"ðoʊz kʌlɝz lʊk bjuɾəfəl ɑn ju." ɪt wɑz tʃɹu, bʌɾ eɪvinhə blʌʃt. kɑmpləmɛn əɹ ɑn haʊ wɛl ʃi ʃɑɾ ə baʊ əɹ haʊ fæst ʃi kəd ɹʌn, ən ʃi tʊk ɪɾ əz noʊ mɔɹ ðən əɹ du, bʌt ʃi hæd dɪfəkəlti kʌmɪŋ tə ɡɹɪps wɪð ðə fæk ðət ʃi wɑz bjuɾəfəl. ðət wɑz ə pɑɹɾ ə hɝsɛlf ʃi hæd mænədʒ tə ɪɡnɔɹ, tɪl ɹisənli.

"Those colors look beautiful on you." It was true, but Aviendha blushed. Compliment her on how well she shot a bow or how fast she could run, and she took it as no more than her due, but she had difficulty coming to grips with the fact that she was beautiful. That was a part of herself she had managed to ignore, till recently.

ɛsænd ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪn dɪsəpɹuvəl, ʌnəwɛɹ ðət ðə bɹutʃ wɑz ən æŋɡɹil. æmbɝ dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ wɪð blu vɛlvət. əɹ meɪbi ɪt wɑz eɪvinhəz hɔɹn-hɪltɪd naɪf, wɪtʃ ʃi tʌk bɪhaɪn əɹ ɡɹin vɛlvət bɛlt. ðə waɪt-hɛɹd wʊmən meɪd ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɪleɪn wɔɹ ə smɔl dæɡɝ wɪð sæfaɪɝz ɑn ðə skæbɝɾ ən pɑməl, hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ə bɛlt ʌv woʊvən ɡoʊld. ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæd tə bi dʒʌst soʊ tə ɡeɪn ɛsænz æpɹəbeɪʃən.

Essande shook her head in disapproval, unaware that the brooch was an angreal. Amber did not go with blue velvet. Or maybe it was Aviendha's horn-hilted knife, which she tucked behind her green velvet belt. The white-haired woman made sure that Elayne wore a small dagger with sapphires on the scabbard and pommel, hanging from a belt of woven gold. Everything had to be just so to gain Essande's approbation.

ɹæsɔɹiə ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt wən eɪvinhə ɛntɝd ði æntəɹum ɪn əɹ haɪ-nɛk vɛlvəts. ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən hæd nɛvɝ sin əɹ ɪn ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ il ɡɑɹb bɪfɔɹ. eɪvinhə skaʊld əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd læft, ən ɡɹɪpt əɹ bɛl naɪf fɝmli, bʌt lʌkəli hɝ ətɛnʃən wɑz daɪvɝɾɪd baɪ ə klɔθ-kʌvɝd tʃɹeɪ sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə lɔŋ saɪd teɪbəl əɡɛns ðə wɔl. ɪleɪnz mɪddeɪ mil hæd bɪn dɪlɪvɝd waɪl ðeɪ wɝ dʒɹɛsɪŋ. wɪskɪŋ ðə blu-stʃɹaɪp klɔθ əsaɪd, eɪvinhə tʃɹaɪd tə ɪntʃɹəst ɪleɪn ɪn iɾɪŋ, smaɪlɪŋ ən pɔɪntɪŋ aʊt haʊ swit ðə stu ʌv dʒɹaɪd plʌmz wəd bi ən ɪkskleɪmɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə pisəz ə pɔɹk ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪni mʌʃ. slɪvɝz, ðeɪ lʊk laɪk. ɹæsɔɹiə klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊɾ ən mɛnʃən ðəɾ ə faɪɝ wɑz bɝnɪŋ naɪsli ɪn ði əpɑɹtməns lɑɹdʒɝ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum. ʃi wəd bi mɔɹ ðən hæpi tə kæɹi ðə tʃɹeɪ ɪn fəɹ ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn. ɛvɹiwʌn tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ɪleɪn eɪt pɹɑpɝli, haʊɛvɝ ðeɪ sɔ "pɹɑpɝli," bʌt ðɪs wɑz ɹɪdɪkjələs. ðə tʃɹeɪ hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ səm taɪm. ðə mʌʃ wɑz ə kəndʒil mæs ðət wʊɾə stʌk ɪn ðə boʊl ɪf ʃi tɝn ɪɾ ʌpsaɪd daʊn!

Rasoria gave a start when Aviendha entered the anteroom in her high-necked velvets. The Guardswomen had never seen her in anything but Aiel garb before. Aviendha scowled as if they had laughed, and gripped her belt knife firmly, but luckily her attention was diverted by a cloth-covered tray sitting on the long side table against the wall. Elayne's midday meal had been delivered while they were dressing. Whisking the blue-striped cloth aside, Aviendha tried to interest Elayne in eating, smiling and pointing out how sweet the stew of dried plums would be and exclaiming over the pieces of pork in the grainy mush. Slivers, they looked like. Rasoria cleared her throat and mentioned that a fire was burning nicely in the apartment's larger sitting room. She would be more than happy to carry the tray in for the Lady Elayne. Everyone tried to make sure Elayne ate properly, however they saw "properly," but this was ridiculous. The tray had been sitting there some time. The mush was a congealed mass that would have stuck in the bowl if she turned it upside down!

ʃi hæd ðə haɪ sits ə fɔɹ haʊsəz weɪɾɪŋ ɑn hɝ, ən ðeɪ hæd weɪɾəd lɔŋ ɪnʌf. ʃi pɔɪntəd ðəɾ aʊt, bʌɾ ɔfɝd tə lɛt ðə tu ʌv əm iɾ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ hʌŋɡɹi. ɪn fækt, ʃi ɪmplaɪd ðət ʃi maɪɾ ɪnsɪst ɑn əm iɾɪŋ. ðət wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk eɪvinhə dʒɹɑp ðə klɔθ bæk oʊvɝ ðə tʃɹeɪ wɪð ə ʃʌɾɝ, ən ɹæsɔɹiə weɪstəd noʊ mɔɹ taɪm, iðɝ.

She had the High Seats of four Houses waiting on her, and they had waited long enough. She pointed that out, but offered to let the two of them eat if they were hungry. In fact, she implied that she might insist on them eating. That was enough to make Aviendha drop the cloth back over the tray with a shudder, and Rasoria wasted no more time, either.

ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə ʃɔɹt wɔk daʊn ði aɪsi hɔlweɪ tə ðə fɔɹməl sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, ən ði oʊnli θɪŋz ðət muvd, əsaɪd fɹəm ðɛm, wɝ ðə bɹaɪt wɪntɝ wɔl hæŋʒɪŋz ðət stɝɾ ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝz dʒɹæfs, bʌt ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən fɔɹmd ə ɹɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə ən kɛpt wɑtʃ əz ɪf ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəd tʃɹɑləks.

It was only a short walk down the icy hallway to the formal sitting room, and the only things that moved, aside from them, were the bright winter wall hangings that stirred in the corridor's drafts, but the Guardswomen formed a ring around Elayne and Aviendha and kept watch as if they expected Trollocs.

ɪt wɑz oʊnli wɪð ən ɛfɝt ðəɾ ɪleɪn kənvɪnst ɹæsɔɹiə ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə sɝtʃ ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɛntɝd. ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən sɝvd əɹ ən oʊbeɪd hɝ, bʌt ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ wɝ plɛdʒ tə kip əɹ əlaɪv, ən ðeɪ kəd bi əz mjuli oʊvɝ ðət læs duɾi əz bɝdʒɪt wɑz oʊvɝ dəsaɪɾɪŋ wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz wɔɹɾɝ, kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl əɹ ɛldɝ sɪstɝ əɾ ɛni ɡɪvən moʊmənt. laɪkli, fɑloʊɪŋ ɑn ðə hilz ə ði ɪnsəɾənt wɪð zeɪɾə, ɹæsɔɹiə wʊɾə wɑntəd ðə lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz weɪɾɪŋ ɪnsaɪd tə sɝɛndɝ ðɛɹ wɛpənz! ðə θɹɛt wɪð ðə mʌʃ maɪɾ əv hæɾ ɪts pɑɹt, tu. æftɝ ə ʃɔɹɾ ɑɹɡjəmənt, haʊɛvɝ, ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə swɛpt ɪn θɹu ðə waɪd dɔɹweɪ təɡɛðɝ, ən əloʊn. ɪleɪnz filɪŋ ə sæɾəsfækʃən dɪd nɑt læst, ðoʊ. ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum wɑz lɑɹdʒ, mɛn tə æksɛp dʌzənz ə pipəl kʌmfɝɾəbli, ə dɑɹk-pænəl speɪs wɪð leɪɝd kɑɹpəts kʌvɝɪŋ ðə flɔɹ taɪlz ən ə hɔɹsʃu ɑɹtʃ ə haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹz ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə tɔl faɪɝpleɪs ʌv waɪt mɑɹbəl wɪð faɪn ɹɛd veɪnz. hɪɹ, ɪmpɔɹɾənt dɪɡnətɛɹiz kəd bi ɹəsivd wɪð mɔɹ ɑnɝ ðən ən ɑɾiəns bɪfɔɹ ðə θɹoʊn, kəz ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ɪntəmət. ðə bleɪz dænsɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə lɔɡz ɑn ðə hɑɹθ hæd bɛɹli hæd taɪm tə teɪk ən ɛdʒ ɔf ðə tʃɪl ɪn ði ɛɹ, bʌt ðət sɝɾənli wɑz nɑt ðə ɹizən ɪleɪn fɛlt əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn stʃɹʌk ɪn ðə stʌmək. ʃi ʌndɝstʊd bɝdʒɪts pʌzəlmənt, naʊ.

It was only with an effort that Elayne convinced Rasoria there was no need to search the sitting room before she entered. The Guardswomen served her and obeyed her, but they also were pledged to keep her alive, and they could be as muley over that last duty as Birgitte was over deciding whether she was Warder, Captain-General or elder sister at any given moment. Likely, following on the heels of the incident with Zaida, Rasoria would have wanted the lords and ladies waiting inside to surrender their weapons! The threat with the mush might have had its part, too. After a short argument, however, Elayne and Aviendha swept in through the wide doorway together, and alone. Elayne's feeling of satisfaction did not last, though. The sitting room was large, meant to accept dozens of people comfortably, a dark-paneled space with layered carpets covering the floor tiles and a horseshoe arch of high-back chairs in front of a tall fireplace of white marble with fine red veins. Here, important dignitaries could be received with more honor than an audience before the throne, because it was more intimate. The blaze dancing along the logs on the hearth had barely had time to take an edge off the chill in the air, but that certainly was not the reason Elayne felt as if she had been struck in the stomach. She understood Birgitte's puzzlement, now.

daɪɛlɪn tɝn fɹəm wɔɹmɪŋ əɹ hænz ət ðə faɪɝ əz ðeɪ ɛntɝd. ə stʃɹɔŋ-feɪst wʊmən wɪð faɪn laɪnz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ aɪz ən hɪns ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn əɹ ɡoʊldən hɛɹ, ʃi hæd nɑt weɪɾəd tə tʃeɪnʒ ɑn ɹitʃɪŋ ðə pæləs, ən stɪl wɔɹ ə ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs ə dip ɡɹeɪ ðət ʃoʊɾ ə fju tʃɹævəl steɪnz ɑn ðə hɛm. hɝ kɝtsi wɑz ðə mɛɹəs bɛn ə hɝ nɛk, ðə slaɪɾəst dɪp ə hɝ niz, bʌt ʃi ɪntɛndəd noʊ dɪskɔɝɾɪsi. daɪɛlɪn nu hu ʃi wɑz əz ʃʊɹli əz zeɪɾə dɪd - hɝ oʊnli dʒuəlɹi wɑz ə smɔl ɡoʊldən pɪn ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ə tæɹɑvɪnz aʊl ən oʊk ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ə klɪɹ stætmən ðət haɪ siɾ ə tæɹɑvɪn niɾəd nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ - jɛt ʃi hæɾ ɔlmoʊs daɪd tə pɹuv əɹ lɔɪəlti tə ɪleɪn. "maɪ leɪɾi ɪleɪn," ʃi sɛd fɔɹməli, "ɪt ɡɪvz mi ɑnɝ tə pɹizɛn tə jə lɔɹd pɛɝaɪvəl, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs mæn tɛɹ." ə pɹɪɾi, ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd bɔɪ ɪn ə pleɪn blu koʊt dʒɝkt əweɪ fɹəm piɹɪŋ θɹu ðə fɔɹ-bæɹəl kəlaɪɾəskoʊp ɑn ə ɡɪldɪd stæn tɔlɝ ðən i wɑz. hi hæɾ ə sɪlvɝ kʌp ɪn ɪz hæn ðəɾ ɪleɪn hoʊp vɛɹi mʌtʃ dɪd nɑt kənteɪn waɪn, əɹ ət list ɪkstʃɹimli wɛl wɔɾɝd ɪf ɪt dɪd. wʌn ə ðə saɪd teɪbəlz hɛl sɛvɹəl tʃɹeɪz leɪɾən wɪð pɪtʃɝz ən kʌps. ən ən ɔɹneɪt tipɑt ʃi nu maɪɾ əz wɛl bi fɪld wɪð wɔɾɝ. "maɪ plɛʒɝ, maɪ leɪɾi ɪleɪn," hi paɪpt, blʌʃɪŋ ən mænɪdʒɪŋ ə kɹɛɾəbəl baʊ dɪspaɪɾ ə lɪɾəl klʌmzinəs ɪn hænlɪŋ ðə sɔɹd bɛltəd tə hɪz weɪst. ðə wɛpən lʊk mʌtʃ tu lɔŋ fəɹ hɪm.

Dyelin turned from warming her hands at the fire as they entered. A strong-faced woman with fine lines at the corners of her eyes and hints of gray in her golden hair, she had not waited to change on reaching the palace, and still wore a riding dress of deep gray that showed a few travel stains on the hem. Her curtsy was the merest bend of her neck, the slightest dip of her knees, but she intended no discourtesy. Dyelin knew who she was as surely as Zaida did - her only jewelry was a small golden pin in the shape of Taravin's Owl and Oak on her shoulder, a clear statment that High Seat of Taravin needed nothing more - yet she had almost died to prove her loyalty to Elayne. "My Lady Elayne," she said formally, "it gives me honor to present to you Lord Perival, High Seat of House Man tear." A pretty, golden-haired boy in a plain blue coat jerked away from peering through the four-barreled kaleidoscope on a gilded stand taller than he was. He had a silver cup in his hand that Elayne hoped very much did not contain wine, or at least extremely well watered if it did. One of the side tables held several trays laden with pitchers and cups. And an ornate teapot she knew might as well be filled with water. "My pleasure, my Lady Elayne," he piped, blushing and managing a credible bow despite a little clumsiness in handling the sword belted to his waist. The weapon looked much too long for him.

"haʊs mæntʃɹ stænz wɪð haʊs tʃɹəkənd." ʃi ɹɪtɝn ɪz kɝɾəsi ɪn ə deɪz, spɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ skɝts məkænɪkli.

"House Mantear stands with House Trakand." She returned his courtesy in a daze, spreading her skirts mechanically.

"leɪɾi kæɾəlɪn, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs hɛvɪn," daɪɛlɪn kəntɪnjud. "ɪleɪn," ə dɑɹk-aɪd jʌŋ wʊmən əɾ əɹ saɪd mɝmɝd, tʌtʃɪŋ əɹ dɑɹk ɡɹin dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts ən meɪkɪŋ ə fɹækʃənəl dɪp ðət maɪt pɑsəbli hæv bɪn ɪntɛndəd fəɹ ə kɝtsi, ðoʊ pɝhæps ʃi dʒʌs mɛn tə ɪməteɪt daɪɛlɪn. əɹ pɝhæps ʃi wɑntəd tə əvɔɪd poʊkɪŋ əɹ tʃɪn əɡɛns ðə lɑɹdʒ ɪnæməl bɹutʃ ɑn ðə haɪ nɛk ə hɝ dʒɹɛs, ðə blu bɛɹ ə hɛvɪn. hɝ hɛɹ wɑz kɑɾ ɪn ə sɪlvɝ nɛt wɝkt wɪð ðə blu bɛɹ, tu, ən ʃi wɔɹ ə lɔŋ ɹɪŋ wɪð ðə sɪdʒəl əz wɛl. ə tʌtʃ tu mʌtʃ pɹaɪɾ ə haʊs, pɝhæps. dɪspaɪɾ əɹ kul hɔtinəs, ʃi wɑz ə wʊmən oʊnli baɪ kɝɾəsi, hɝ tʃiks stɪl ɹaʊnd wɪð beɪbi fæt. "hɛvɪn stænz wɪð tʃɹəkənd, ɑbviəsli, əɹ aɪ wəd nɑt bi hɪɹ." daɪɛlɪnz maʊθ taɪɾənd slaɪtli, ən ʃi ɡeɪv ðə ɡɝl ə hɑɹd ɡlæns ðət kæɾəlɪn sim nɑt tə si. "lɔɹd bɹænlət, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs ʒəljɑɹd." ənʌðɝ bɔɪ, ðɪs wʌn wɪð ənɹuli blæk kɝlz, ɪn ɡɹin ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð ɡoʊld ɑn ðə slivz, hu heɪstəli sɛɾ ɪz waɪnkʌp daʊn ɑn ə saɪd teɪbəl əz ɪf ənizi ət biɪŋ sin wɪð ɪt. hɪz blu aɪz wɝ tu bɪɡ fəɹ ɪz feɪs, ən i nɪɹli tʃɹɪp hɪmsɛlf wɪð ɪz sɔɹd, boʊɪŋ. "ɪɾ ɪz maɪ plɛʒɝ tə seɪ ðət haʊs ʒəljɑɹd stænz fəɹ tʃɹəkənd, leɪɾi ɪleɪn." hæfweɪ θɹu, hɪz vɔɪs bɹoʊk fɹəm tʃɹɛbəl tə bæs, ən i blʌʃt ivən hɑɹɾɝ ðən pɛɝaɪvəl.

"Lady Catalyn, High Seat of House Haevin," Dyelin continued. "Elayne," a dark-eyed young woman at her side murmured, touching her dark green divided skirts and making a fractional dip that might possibly have been intended for a curtsy, though perhaps she just meant to imitate Dyelin. Or perhaps she wanted to avoid poking her chin against the large enameled brooch on the high neck of her dress, the Blue Bear of Haevin. Her hair was caught in a silver net worked with the Blue Bear, too, and she wore a long ring with the sigil as well. A touch too much pride of House, perhaps. Despite her cool haughtiness, she was a woman only by courtesy, her cheeks still round with baby fat. "Haevin stands with Trakand, obviously, or I would not be here." Dyelin's mouth tightened slightly, and she gave the girl a hard glance that Catalyn seemed not to see. "Lord Branlet, High Seat of House Gilyard." Another boy, this one with unruly black curls, in green embroidered with gold on the sleeves, who hastily set his winecup down on a side table as if uneasy at being seen with it. His blue eyes were too big for his face, and he nearly tripped himself with his sword, bowing. "It is my pleasure to say that House Gilyard stands for Trakand, Lady Elayne." Halfway through, his voice broke from treble to bass, and he blushed even harder than Perival.

"æn lɔɹd kɑneɪl, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs nɔɹθən." kɑneɪl nɔɹθən ɡɹɪn oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪm ə hɪz sɪlvɝ kʌp. tɔl ən lin, ɪn ə ɡɹeɪ koʊt wɪð slivz dʒʌs tu ʃɔɹt tə kʌvɝ ɪz boʊni ɹɪsts, hi hæɾ ən ɛnɡeɪdʒɪŋ ɡɹɪn, mɛɹi bɹaʊn aɪz, ən ən iɡəlz bik fəɹ ə noʊz. "wi dʒɹu stʃɹɔz fəɹ ði ɔɹɾɝ tə bi ɪntʃɹədust, ən aɪ dʒɹu ʃɔɹt. nɔɹθən stænz wɪð tʃɹəkənd. kæn lɛɾ ə nɪni laɪk ɛɹəmɪlə teɪk ðə θɹoʊn." hi mænədʒd ɪz sɔɹd smuðli, ən i ət lis hæd ɹitʃt ɪz mədʒɔɹəɾi, bʌɾ ɪf i wɑz mɛni mʌnθs pæst sɪkstin, ɪleɪn wəɾ iɾ ɪz tɝnd-daʊn buts ən ɪz sɪlvɝ-nɑt spɝz.

"And Lord Conail, High Seat of House Northan." Conail Northan grinned over the rim of his silver cup. Tall and lean, in a gray coat with sleeves just too short to cover his bony wrists, he had an engaging grin, merry brown eyes, and an eagle's beak for a nose. "We drew straws for the order to be introduced, and I drew short. Northan stands with Trakand. Can't let a ninny like Arymilla take the throne." He managed his sword smoothly, and he at least had reached his majority, but if he was many months past sixteen, Elayne would eat his turned-down boots and his silver-knot spurs.

ðɛɹ juθ wɑz noʊ sɝpɹaɪz, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd kɑneɪl tə hæv ə ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɾ əɾ ɪz saɪd tə ædvaɪz ɪm ən ði ʌðɝz tə hæv ðɛɹ ɡɑɹɾiənz lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ɛls ɪn ðə ɹum əsaɪd fɹəm bɝdʒɪt, stændɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə tɔl ɑɹtʃt wɪndoʊz wɪð əɹ ɑɹmz foʊldəd bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts. bɹaɪt mɪddeɪ sʌnlaɪt flʌɾɪŋ θɹu ðə klɪɹ ɡlæs sɛɾ ɪn ðə keɪsməns meɪɾ əɹ ə sɪləwɛɾ ə dɪsplɛʒɝ. "tʃɹəkənd wɛlkəmz ɔl ə ju, ən aɪ wɛlkəm ɔl ə ju," ɪleɪn sɛd, səpɹɛsɪŋ əɹ dɪsmeɪ. "aɪ wɪl nɑt fɝɡɛt jəɹ səpɔɹt, ən tʃɹəkənd wɪl nɑt fɝɡɛt." sʌmθɪŋ ə hɝ kɑnstɝneɪʃən mʌst əv kɹɛp θɹu, kəz kæɾəlɪnz maʊθ kəmpɹɛst ən əɹ aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd.

Their youth was no surprise, of course, but she had expected Conail to have a graying head at his side to advise him and the others to have their guardians looking over their shoulders. There was no one else in the room aside from Birgitte, standing in front of the tall arched windows with her arms folded beneath her breasts. Bright midday sunlight flooding through the clear glass set in the casements made her a silhouette of displeasure. "Trakand welcomes all of you, and I welcome all of you," Elayne said, suppressing her dismay. "I will not forget your support, and Trakand will not forget." Something of her consternation must have crept through, because Catalyn's mouth compressed and her eyes glittered.

"aɪ æm pæs maɪ ɡɑɹɾiənʃɪp, əz jə mʌs noʊ, ɪleɪn," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə stɪf vɔɪs. "maɪ ʌŋkəl, lɔɹɾ ɝɛndɝ, sɛɾ ət ðə fist ə laɪts ðəɾ aɪ wɑz əz ɹɛɾi əz aɪ wəɾ ɛvɝ bi ən maɪɾ əz wɛl əv fɹi ɹeɪn ðən əz ɪn ə jɪɹ. tʃɹuθ, aɪ θɪŋk i wɑntəd mɔɹ taɪm tə ɡoʊ hʌntɪŋ waɪl i stɪl kæn. hiz ɔlweɪz lʌv hʌntɪŋ, ən hiz kwaɪɾ oʊld." wʌns əɡɛn ʃi feɪl tə si daɪɛlɪnz fɹaʊn. ɝɛndɝ hɛvɪn ən daɪɛlɪn wɝ ɹʌfli ʌv ən eɪdʒ.

"I am past my guardianship, as you must know, Elayne," she said in a stiff voice. "My uncle, Lord Arendor, said at the Feast of Lights that I was as ready as I would ever be and might as well have free rein then as in a year. Truth, I think he wanted more time to go hunting while he still can. He has always loved hunting, and he's quite old." Once again she failed to see Dyelin's frown. Arendor Haevin and Dyelin were roughly of an age.

"aɪ hæv noʊ ɡɑɹɾiən iðɝ," bɹænlət sɛɾ ənsɝteɪnli, hɪz vɔɪs nɪɹli əz haɪ-pɪtʃt əz kæɾəlɪnz.

"I have no guardian either," Branlet said uncertainly, his voice nearly as high-pitched as Catalyn's.

daɪɛlɪn ɡeɪv ɪm ə sɪmpəθɛɾɪk smaɪl ən smuðd ɪz hɛɹ bæk fɹəm ɪz fɔɹhɛd. ɪt pɹɑmpli fɛl fɔɹwɝɾ əɡɛn. "meɪv wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ əloʊn, əz ʃi laɪk tə du, ən əɹ hɔɹs stɛpt ɪndə ə ɡoʊfɝ hoʊl," ʃi ɪkspleɪn kwaɪətli. "baɪ ðə taɪm ɛniwʌn faʊn hɝ, ɪt wɑz tu leɪt. ðəɹ əz bɪn səm . . .

Dyelin gave him a sympathetic smile and smoothed his hair back from his forehead. It promptly fell forward again. "Mayv was riding alone, as she liked to do, and her horse stepped into a gopher hole," she explained quietly. "By the time anyone found her, it was too late. There has been some . . .

dɪskʌʃən . . . oʊvɝ huz tə teɪk əɹ pleɪs."

discussion . . . over who's to take her place."

"ðeɪv bɪn ɑɹɡjuɪŋ fəɹ θɹi mʌnθs," bɹænlət mʌɾɝd fəɹ ə moʊmən i lʊk jʌŋɡɝ ðən pɛɝaɪvəl, ə bɔɪ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ɪz weɪ wɪð noʊ wʌn tə ʃoʊ hɪm ðə pæθ. "aɪm nɑt səpoʊz tə tɛl ɛniwʌn ðæt, bʌɾ aɪ kən tɛl ju. jəɹ gɑnə bi ðə kwin." daɪɛlɪn pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn pɛɝaɪvəlz ʃoʊldɝ, ən i stʊɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾɝ, ðoʊ hi stɪl wɑz ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ʃi. "lɔɹd wɪlɪn wəd bi hɪɹ wɪð lɔɹd pɛɝaɪvəl, bʌt ðə jɪɹz əv ɪm bɛdʒɹɪɾən. eɪdʒ kɹips ʌp ɑn əs ɔl, ɪvɛntʃəwəli." ʃi ʃɑɾ ənʌðɝ lʊk ət kæɾəlɪn, bʌt ðə ɡɝl wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ bɝdʒɪt, naʊ, hɝ lɪps pɝst. "wɪlɪn sɛɾ aɪ wɑz tə tɛl jə ðəɾ i sɛnz ɪz ɡʊd wɪʃɪz ən ɔlsoʊ wʌn i kənsɪɾɝz ə sʌn."

"They've been arguing for three months," Branlet muttered For a moment he looked younger than Perival, a boy trying to find his way with no one to show him the path. "I'm not supposed to tell anyone that, but I can tell you. You're going to be the Queen." Dyelin put a hand on Perival's shoulder, and he stood up straighter, though he still was shorter than she. "Lord Willin would be here with Lord Perival, but the years have him bedridden. Age creeps up on us all, eventually." She shot another look at Catalyn, but the girl was studying Birgitte, now, her lips pursed. "Willin said I was to tell you that he sends his good wishes and also one he considers a son."

"ʌŋkəl wɪlɪn toʊl mi tə əphoʊl ði ɑnɝ ə mæntʃɹ ən ʌv ændɝ," pɛɝaɪvəl sɛd, ɪntɛn əz oʊnli ə tʃaɪl biɪŋ sɪɹiəs kəd bi. "aɪ wɪl tʃɹaɪ, ɪleɪn. əl tʃɹaɪ vɛɹi hɑɹd."

"Uncle Willin told me to uphold the honor of Mantear and of Andor," Perival said, intent as only a child being serious could be. "I will try, Elayne. I will try very hard."

"aɪm ʃʊɹ jəl səksid," ɪleɪn toʊl hɪm, mænɪdʒɪŋ tə pʊɾ ət list ə lɪɾəl wɔɹmθ ɪndə hɝ toʊn. ʃi wɑntəd tə tʃeɪs əm ɔl aʊɾ ən æsk daɪɛlɪn səm vɛɹi pɔɪntəd kwɛstʃənz, bʌt ðət kəd nɑt bi, nɑt ɹaɪɾ əweɪ. wʌtɛvɝ ðɛɹ eɪdʒəz, ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ðə haɪ sits ə paʊɝfəl haʊsəz, ən ʃi hæd tə ɔfɝ ɹəfɹɛʃmən ən ət list ə mɑɾɪkəm ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɛn tə tʃeɪnʒ fɹəm ðɛɹ dʒɝni.

"I'm sure you will succeed," Elayne told him, managing to put at least a little warmth into her tone. She wanted to chase them all out and ask Dyelin some very pointed questions, but that could not be, not right away. Whatever their ages, they were all the High Seats of powerful Houses, and she had to offer refreshment and at least a modicum of conversation before they went to change from their journey.

"ɪz ʃi ɹɪli ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz?" kæɾəlɪn æskt əz bɝdʒɪt hændəɾ ɪleɪn ə θɪn blu pɔɹsələn kʌp ə slaɪtli dɑɹkən hɑt wɔɾɝ. ðə ɡɝl spoʊk əz ðoʊ bɝdʒɪt wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ. bɝdʒɪt ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ, bʌt kæɾəlɪn sim pɹæktəst ɪn nɑt siɪŋ wʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə si. ðə waɪnkʌp ɪn əɹ plʌmp hænd ɡeɪv ɔf ðə ʃɑɹpli swiɾ ɝoʊmə ʌv spaɪsəz.

"Is she really the Captain-General of the Queen's Guards?" Catalyn asked as Birgitte handed Elayne a thin blue porcelain cup of slightly darkened hot water. The girl spoke as though Birgitte was not there. Birgitte raised an eyebrow before leaving, but Catalyn seemed practiced in not seeing what she did not want to see. The winecup in her plump hand gave off the sharply sweet aroma of spices.

ðəɹ wɑz nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə dʒɹɑp ə hʌni ɪn ɪleɪnz mɪzɝəbəl ɪkskjus fəɹ ti.

There was not so much as a drop of honey in Elayne's miserable excuse for tea.

"jɛs, ən maɪ wɔɹɾɝ, tu," ʃi sɛd. pəlaɪtli. əz ɹɛɾi əz ʃi wəɾ ɛvɝ bi! ðə ɡɝl pɹɑbli θɔɾ ɪɾ ə kɑmpləmənt. ʃi dɪzɝvd ə swɪtʃɪŋ fəɹ pjʊɹ ɹudnəs, jɛt jə kəd nɑt swɪtʃ ə haɪ sit. nɑt wən jə niɾəd əɹ səpɔɹt.

"Yes, and my Warder, too," she said. Politely. As ready as she would ever be! The girl probably thought it a compliment. She deserved a switching for pure rudeness, yet you could not switch a High Seat. Not when you needed her support.

kæɾəlɪnz aɪz flæʃt tə ɪleɪnz hænz, bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə ɔltɝ ðə kulnəs ə hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən. "ðeɪ ɡeɪv jə ðæt? aɪ hæd nɑt hɝd jə hæd bɪn ɹeɪzd ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ θɔt ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæd sɛn jə hoʊm. wən jəɹ mʌðɝ daɪd. əɹ pɝhæps kəz ə ðə tʃɹʌbəlz ɪn ðə taʊɝ wi hɪɹ əbaʊt. ɪmædʒən, ɛɛs sədaɪ skwɑbəlɪŋ laɪk fɑɹmwaɪvz ət mɑɹkət. bʌt haʊ kən ʃi bi ə dʒɛnɝəl əɹ ə wɔɹɾɝ wɪθaʊɾ ə sɔɹd? ɪn ɛni keɪs, maɪ æn ɛvɛl sɛz ə wʊmən ʃəd liv sɔɹdz tə mɛn. jə doʊnt ʃu jəɹ oʊn hɔɹs wən juv ə fɛɹiɝ, əɹ ɡɹaɪn jəɹ oʊn ɡɹeɪn wən juv ə mɪlɝ." ə kwoʊt fɹəm leɪɾi ɛvɛl, noʊ daʊt. ɪleɪn skuld əɹ feɪs, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ði oʊnli slaɪtli bɛɹiɾ ɪnsəls. "æn ɑɹmi ɪz ə dʒɛnɝəlz sɔɹd, kæɾəlɪn. ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn sɛz ə dʒɛnɝəl u juzɪz ənʌðɝ bleɪɾ ɪz mɪsteɪkɪŋ ðə dʒɑb." ðə neɪm sim tə meɪk noʊ ɪmpɹɛʃən ɑn hɝ, iðɝ.

Catalyn's eyes flashed to Elayne's hands, but the Great Serpent ring did nothing to alter the coolness of her expression. "They gave you that? I had not heard you had been raised Aes Sedai. I thought the White Tower had sent you home. When your mother died. Or perhaps because of the troubles in the Tower we hear about. Imagine, Aes Sedai squabbling like farmwives at market. But how can she be a general or a Warder without a sword? In any case, my aunt Evelle says a woman should leave swords to men. You don't shoe your own horse when you have a farrier, or grind your own grain when you have a miller." A quote from Lady Evelle, no doubt. Elayne schooled her face, ignoring the only slightly buried insults. "An army is a general's sword, Catalyn. Gareth Bryne says a general who uses another blade is mistaking the job." The name seemed to make no impression on her, either.

maɪnɝz' tʃɪlʒɹən ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪs nu ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪnz neɪm! eɪvinhə əpɪɹɾ əɾ ɪleɪnz saɪd, smaɪlɪŋ əz ðoʊ dɪlaɪɾəd ət ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə tɔk wɪð ðə ɡɝl. "sɔɹdz ɑɹ noʊ jus əɾ ɔl," ʃi sɛd switli. switli! eɪvinhə! ɪleɪn hæd nɛvɝ ɹilaɪzd əɹ sɪstɝ kəd dɪsəmbəl soʊ skɪlfəli. ʃi hæɾ ə kʌp ə mʌld waɪn, tu. ɪt wʊɾə bɪn tu mʌtʃ tə ɪkspɛkt əɹ tə kəntɪnju dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ bɪɾɝ ti aʊɾ ə sɪstɝli əfɛkʃən. "ju ʃəd lɝn ðə spɪɹ. ɔlsoʊ ðə naɪf, ən ðə baʊ. bɝdʒɪt tʃɹɑilaɪən kəd ʃut jəɹ aɪz aʊɾ ət tu hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz wɪð əɹ baʊ. meɪbi ət θɹi hʌnʒɹəd."

Miners' children in the Mountains of Mist knew Gareth Bryne's name! Aviendha appeared at Elayne's side, smiling as though delighted at the opportunity to talk with the girl. "Swords are no use at all," she said sweetly. Sweetly! Aviendha! Elayne had never realized her sister could dissemble so skillfully. She had a cup of mulled wine, too. It would have been too much to expect her to continue drinking bitter tea out of sisterly affection. "You should learn the spear. Also the knife, and the bow. Birgitte Trahelion could shoot your eyes out at two hundred paces with her bow. Maybe at three hundred."

"ðə spɪɹ?" kæɾəlɪn sɛd feɪnli. ən ðɛn, ɪn ə slaɪtli ɪnkɹɛdʒələs toʊn, "maɪ aɪz?"

"The spear?" Catalyn said faintly. And then, in a slightly incredulous tone, "My eyes?"

"ju hæv nɑt mɛt maɪ sɪstɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "eɪvinhə, leɪɾi kæɾəlɪn hɛvɪn. kæɾəlɪn, eɪvinhə ʌv ðə naɪn væliz tɑɹdæd." pɝhæps ʃi ʃʊɾə dʌn ðət ði ʌðɝ weɪ ɝaʊnd, bʌɾ eɪvinhə wɑz əɹ sɪstɝ, ən ivən ə haɪ sit mʌst sɛɾəl fəɹ biɪŋ ɪntʃɹədus tə ðə sɪstɝ ə ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ.

"You have not met my sister," Elayne said. "Aviendha, Lady Catalyn Haevin. Catalyn, Aviendha of the Nine Valleys Taardad." Perhaps she should have done that the other way around, but Aviendha was her sister, and even a High Seat must settle for being introduced to the sister of the Daughter-Heir.

"eɪvinhə ɪz il. ʃiz stʌɾiɪŋ tə bɪkʌm ə waɪz wʌn."

"Aviendha is Aiel. She's studying to become a Wise One."

ðə ful ɡɝlz maʊθ dʒɹɑpt oʊpən ət ðə stɑɹt, hɝ tʃɪn fɔlɪŋ mɔɹ ən mɔɹ wɪð itʃ pɹənaʊnsmən əntɪl ʃi wɑz ɡeɪpɪŋ laɪk ə fɪʃ. vɛɹi sæɾɪsfaɪɪŋ. eɪvinhə ɡeɪv ɪleɪn ə smɔlɝ smaɪl, hɝ ɡɹin aɪz spɑɹklɪŋ wɪð æpɹəbeɪʃən əbʌv əɹ waɪnkʌp. ɪleɪn kɛpt əɹ oʊn feɪs smuð, bʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə ɡɹɪn bæk.

The fool girl's mouth dropped open at the start, her chin falling more and more with each pronouncement until she was gaping like a fish. Very satisfying. Aviendha gave Elayne a smaller smile, her green eyes sparkling with approbation above her winecup. Elayne kept her own face smooth, but she wanted to grin back.

ði ʌðɝz wɝ mʌtʃ mɔɹ izəli hændəld, mʌtʃ lɛs ɪnfjʊɹieɪɾɪŋ. pɛɝaɪvəl ən bɹænlət wɝ ʃaɪ ðɛɹ fɝs taɪm ɪn keɪɛmlɪn mʌtʃ lɛs ɪn ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs, hɑɹdli seɪɪŋ tu wɝdz ənlɛs sʌmwʌn dʒɹu ðɛm aʊt. kɑneɪl dɪd θɪŋk ðə kleɪm ðəɾ eɪvinhə wɑz il mʌs bi ə dʒoʊk, ən nɪɹli ɡɑɾ əɹ bɛl naɪf ɪn ɪz bɹɪskət fəɹ læfɪŋ ɹɔkəsli, bʌt lʌkəli, hi θɔt ðət wɑz ə dʒoʊk əz wɛl eɪvinhə ədɑptəɾ ən aɪsi kəmpoʊʒɝ ðət maɪɾ əv meɪɾ əɹ sim ə waɪz wʌn ɪn əɹ juʒəwəl kloʊðz; ɪn vɛlvəts, ʃi əpɪɹɾ ivən mɔɹ ə leɪɾi ʌv ðə kɔɹt noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ʃi fɪŋɡɝɾ əɹ naɪf. ən bɹænlət dɪd kip snikɪŋ saɪɾɛlɔŋ piks ət bɝdʒɪt. ɪt tʊk ɪleɪn ə lɪɾəl waɪl tə ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ wɔk ɪn əɹ hil buts - ðoʊz waɪd tʃɹaʊzɝz wɝ æktʃəli  kwaɪt snʌɡ oʊvɝ ðə hɪps - bʌt ʃi oʊnli saɪd.

The others were much more easily handled, much less infuriating. Perival and Branlet were shy their first time in Caemlyn much less in the Royal Palace, hardly saying two words unless someone drew them out. Conail did think the claim that Aviendha was Aiel must be a joke, and nearly got her belt knife in his brisket for laughing raucously, but luckily, he thought that was a joke as well Aviendha adopted an icy composure that might have made her seem a Wise One in her usual clothes; in velvets, she appeared even more a lady of the court no matter how she fingered her knife. And Branlet did keep sneaking sidelong peaks at Birgitte. It took Elayne a little while to realize that he was watching her walk in her heeled boots - those wide trousers were actually quite snug over the hips - but she only sighed.

fɔɹtʃənətli, bɝdʒɪt nɛvɝ noʊɾəst, ən ðə bɑnd wʊɾə lɛɾ ɪleɪn noʊ ivən ɪf ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə haɪɾ ɪt.

Fortunately, Birgitte never noticed, and the bond would have let Elayne know even if she tried to hide it.

bɝdʒɪt laɪk hævɪŋ mɛn lʊk ət hɝ. ɡɹoʊn mɛn. ɪt wʊɾə dʌn ɪleɪnz kɑz noʊ ɡʊɾ ɪf əɹ wɔɹɾɝ smæk jʌŋ bɹænləts bɑɾəm.

Birgitte liked having men look at her. Grown men. It would have done Elayne's cause no good if her Warder smacked young Branlet's bottom.

meɪnli ðeɪ wɑntəd tə noʊ wɛðɝ ɹin kɔɹli wɑz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. nʌn ə ðə fɔɹ hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ə sɪstɝ bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ðeɪ θɔt ʃi mʌs bi, sɪns ʃi kəd tʃænəl, ən kæɹi ðɛm ən ðɛɹ ɑɹmmɪn əkɹɔs hʌnʒɹədz ə maɪlz ɪn ə stɛp. ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊɾ ɑpɝtunəɾi tə pɹæktəs ɪveɪʒən wɪθaʊɾ æktʃəli  laɪɪŋ, hɛlp baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ oʊn fɪŋɡɝ. ə laɪ wəd teɪn əɹ ɹileɪʃənz wɪð ðiz fɔɹ ət ðə stɑɹt, bʌɾ ɪt wəd hɑɹdli də tə hoʊp ðət ɹumɝz ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ eɪd wəd fɪltɝ aʊt tə ɛɹəmɪlə waɪl spɹɛɾɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ əbaʊt fɹili. ʌv kɔɹs, ɔl fɔɹ wɝ iɡɝ tə lɛɾ əɹ noʊ haʊ mɛni ɑɹmmɪn ðeɪ hæd bɹɔt, ə toʊɾəl ə dʒʌst oʊvɝ θɹi θaʊzənd, nɪɹli hæf ə ðɛm kɹɔsboʊmən əɹ hælbɝdɪɝz u wəd bi ɪspɛʃli jusfəl ɑn ðə wɔlz. ðət wɑz ə saɪzəbəl fɔɹs fəɹ fɔɹ haʊsəz tə hæv hæd ɹɛɾi tə hænd wən daɪɛlɪn keɪm kɔlɪŋ, bʌt ðɛn, noʊ haʊs wɑntəɾ ɪts haɪ siɾ ənɡɑɹɾɪd ɪn ðiz taɪmz. kɪdnæpɪŋ wɑz nɑɾ ənhɝɾ ʌv wən (hi θɹoʊn sæɾ ɪn kwɛstʃən. kɑneɪl sɛɾ əz mʌtʃ, wɪð ə læf; hi sim tə faɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɝθ ə læf. bɹænlət nɑɾəd ən skɹʌbd ə hæn θɹu hɪz hɛɹ. ɪleɪn wʌndɝd haʊ mɛni ʌv ɪz numɝəs æns, ʌŋkəlz ən kʌzənz nu hi wɑz ɡɔn, ən wʌt ðeɪ wəd də wən ðeɪ lɝnd.

Mainly they wanted to know whether Reanne Corly was an Aes Sedai. None of the four had ever seen a sister before, but they thought she must be, since she could channel, and carry them and their armsmen across hundreds of miles in a step. It was a good opportunity to practice evasion without actually lying, helped by the Great Serpent ring on her own finger. A lie would taint her relations with these four at the start, but it would hardly do to hope that rumors of Aes Sedai aid would filter out to Arymilla while spreading the truth about freely. Of course, all four were eager to let her know how many armsmen they had brought, a total of just over three thousand, nearly half of them crossbowmen or halberdiers who would be especially useful on the walls. That was a sizable force for four Houses to have had ready to hand when Dyelin came calling, but then, no House wanted its High Seat unguarded in these times. Kidnapping was not unheard of when (he throne sat in question. Conail said as much, with a laugh; he seemed to find everything worth a laugh. Branlet nodded and scrubbed a hand through his hair. Elayne wondered how many of his numerous aunts, uncles and cousins knew he was gone, and what they would do when they learned.

"ɪf daɪɛlɪn hæd bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə weɪɾ ə fju deɪz," kæɾəlɪn sɛd, "aɪ cʊɾə bɹɔt mɔɹ ðən twɛlv hʌnʒɹəd mɛn." ðət wɑz ðə θɝd taɪm ɪn əz mɛni sɛntənsəz ðət ʃi hæd mænədʒ tə pɔɪn aʊt ðət ʃi hæd bɹɔt ðə lɑɹdʒəs kəntɪnʒənt baɪ ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl mɑɹdʒən. "aɪ hæv sɛn tə ɔl ə ðə haʊsəz plɛdʒ tə hɛvɪn."

"If Dyelin had been willing to wait a few days," Catalyn said, "I could have brought more than twelve hundred men." That was the third time in as many sentences that she had managed to point out that she had brought the largest contingent by a considerable margin. "I have sent to all of the Houses pledged to Haevin."

"æn aɪ tə ɛvɹi haʊs plɛdʒ tə nɔɹθən," kɑneɪl æɾəd. wɪð ə ɡɹɪn, ʌv kɔɹs. "nɔɹθən meɪ nɑt sʌmən əz mɛni sɔɹdz əz hɛvɪn əɹ tʃɹəkənd  -  əɹ mæntʃɹ," hi pʊɾ ɪn wɪð ə baʊ tə pɛɝaɪvəl, "bʌt huɛvɝ ɹaɪdz wən ði iɡəlz kɔl wɪl bi ɹaɪɾɪŋ fəɹ keɪɛmlɪn." "ðeɪ wɪl nɑt ɹaɪd vɛɹi fæst ɪn wɪntɝ," pɛɝaɪvəl sɛd kwaɪətli. ən əstɑnɪʃɪŋli, sɪns noʊ wʌn hæd spoʊkən tə hɪm. "aɪ θɪŋk ðət wʌtɛvɝ wi du, wɪl əv tə də ɪt wɪð u wɪv naʊ." kɑneɪl læft ən kʌf ðə lædz ʃoʊldɝ ən toʊld ɪm tə bʌk ʌp ɪz spɪɹəts, kəz ɛvɹi mæn wɪð ə hɑɹt wɑz ɑn ɪz weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn tə səpɔɹt ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn, bʌɾ ɪleɪn stʌɾid pɛɝaɪvəl mɔɹ kloʊsli. hɪz blu aɪz mɛt hɝz fəɹ ə moʊmənt wɪθaʊt blɪŋkɪŋ bɪfɔɹ i ʃaɪli loʊɝɾ ɪz ɡeɪz. ə bɔɪ, bʌɾ i nu wʌɾ i hæd ɹɪɾən ɪndə bɛɾɝ ðən kɑneɪl əɹ kæɾəlɪn, hu pɹəsiɾəd tə tɛl əm jɛɾ əɡɛn haʊ mɛni ɑɹmmɪn ʃi hæd bɹɔt, ən haʊ mɛni hɛvɪn kəd kɔl ɑn, əz ɪf ɛvɹiwʌn ðəɹ ɪksɛpt eɪvinhə dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪɡzækli haʊ mɛni ɹoʊd tə itʃ haʊsəz sʌmənz, ɪn tʃɹeɪn soʊlʒɝz ən fɑɹmɝz u hæd kæɹiɾ ə hælbɹɾ əɹ paɪk ɪn səm wɔɹ ən vɪlədʒ mɛn u kəd bi dʒɹæftɪɾ ət nid. kloʊs ɪnʌf tə ɪɡzækli, ɛniweɪ. lɔɹd wɪlɪn hæd dʌn ɡʊd wɝk wɪð jʌŋ pɛɝaɪvəl. naʊ ʃi hæd tə kip ɪt fɹəm ɡoʊɪŋ tə weɪst. ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɪt wɑz taɪm tə ɪkstʃeɪnʒ kɪsəz, wɪð bɹænlət blʌʃɪŋ tə hɪz hɛɹ, ən pɛɝaɪvəl blɪŋkɪŋ bæʃfəli wən ɪleɪn bɛn tə hɪm, ən kɑneɪl vaʊɪŋ nɛvɝ tə wɑʃ ɪz tʃik. kæɾəlɪn ɹɪtɝn ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli hɛzɪɾənt pɛk tə ɪleɪn 'ɛs tʃik, əz ɪf ɪt hæd dʒʌst əkɝd tə hɝ ðət ʃi hæd kənsɛntɪd tə pleɪsɪŋ ɪleɪn əbʌv hɝ, bʌɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt ʃi nɑɾəd tə hɝsɛlf, kul pɹaɪd sɛɾəlɪŋ bæk ɑn əɹ laɪk ə mæntəl. wʌns ðə fɔɹ wɝ hændəɾ oʊvɝ tə ðə meɪdz ən sɝvɪŋ mɛn u wəd teɪk əm tə ði əpɑɹtməns ðəɾ ɪleɪn hoʊp ðə fɝs meɪd hæd hæd taɪm tə ɹɛɾi, daɪɛlɪn ɹifɪld əɹ waɪnkʌp ən sɛɾəld hɝsɛlf ɪn wʌn ə ðə tɔl, kɑɹv tʃɛɹz wɪð ə wɪɹi saɪ.

"And I to every House pledged to Northan," Conail added. With a grin, of course. "Northan may not summon as many swords as Haevin or Trakand  -  or Mantear," he put in with a bow to Perival, "but whoever rides when the Eagles call will be riding for Caemlyn." "They will not ride very fast in winter," Perival said quietly. And astonishingly, since no one had spoken to him. "I think that whatever we do, we will have to do it with who we have now." Conail laughed and cuffed the lad's shoulder and told him to buck up his spirits, because every man with a heart was on his way to Caemlyn to support the Lady Elayne, but Elayne studied Perival more closely. His blue eyes met hers for a moment without blinking before he shyly lowered his gaze. A boy, but he knew what he had ridden into better than Conail or Catalyn, who proceeded to tell them yet again how many armsmen she had brought, and how many Haevin could call on, as if everyone there except Aviendha did not know exactly how many rode to each House's summons, in trained soldiers and farmers who had carried a halberd or pike in some war and village men who could be drafted at need. Close enough to exactly, anyway. Lord Willin had done good work with young Perival. Now she had to keep it from going to waste. Eventually it was time to exchange kisses, with Branlet blushing to his hair, and Perival blinking bashfully when Elayne bent to him, and Conail vowing never to wash his cheek. Catalyn returned a surprisingly hesitant peck to Elayne 's cheek, as if it had just occurred to her that she had consented to placing Elayne above her, but after a moment she nodded to herself, cool pride settling back on her like a mantle. Once the four were handed over to the maids and serving men who would take them to the apartments that Elayne hoped the First Maid had had time to ready, Dyelin refilled her winecup and settled herself in one of the tall, carved chairs with a weary sigh.

"æz faɪn ə wiks wɝk əz aɪv ɛvɝ dʌn, ɪf aɪ də seɪ soʊ maɪsɛlf. aɪ ɡɑt kændʒɹeɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ stʃɹeɪɾ ɔf. aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt deɪnin wəd bi eɪbəl tə meɪk ʌp əɹ maɪnd, ən ɪɾ oʊnli tʊk ən aʊɝ tə pɹuv mi ɹaɪt, ðoʊ aɪ hæd tə steɪ θɹi tə kip fɹəm əfɛndɪŋ hɝ. ðə wʊmən mʌs kip ɪn bɛd tɪl nun fɹəm biɪŋ əneɪbəl tə dɪsaɪd tə wɪtʃ saɪɾ ə ðə mætʃɹəs tə klaɪm daʊn fɹʌm! ðə ɹɛst wɝ ɹɛɾi tə si sɛns wɪð oʊnli ə lɪɾəl kənvɪnsɪŋ. noʊ wʌn wɪð ɛni sɛns wɑns tə ɹɪsk ɛɹəmɪlə ɡeɪnɪŋ ðə θɹoʊn."

"As fine a week's work as I've ever done, if I do say so myself. I got Candraed out of the way straight off. I never thought Danine would be able to make up her mind, and it only took an hour to prove me right, though I had to stay three to keep from offending her. The woman must keep in bed till noon from being unable to decide to which side of the mattress to climb down from! The rest were ready to see sense with only a little convincing. No one with any sense wants to risk Arymilla gaining the throne."

fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ʃi fɹaʊn əɾ əɹ waɪn, ðən fɪkst ɪleɪn wɪð ə stɛɾi lʊk. ʃi nɛvɝ hɛzɪteɪɾɪd tə spik əɹ maɪnd, wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ʃi θɔɾ ɪleɪn wəɾ əɡɹi, ən pleɪnli ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə də soʊ naʊ. "ɪt meɪ hæv bɪn ə mɪsteɪk tə pæs ðiz kɪnswɪmən ɔf əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, haʊɛvɝ saɪd-maʊðd wiv bɪn əbaʊɾ ɪt. ðə stʃɹeɪn meɪ bi tu mʌtʃ tə æsk ə ðɛm, ən ɪt pʊts əs ɔl ət ɹɪsk. ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, fəɹ noʊ ɹizən aɪ kəd meɪk aʊt, mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ən ɡeɪpɪŋ laɪk ə ɡus-ɡɝl kʌm tə ðə sɪɾi. aɪ θɪŋk ʃi ɔlmoʊs feɪld ət wivɪŋ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ tə bɹɪŋ əs hɪɹ. ðət wʊɾə bɪn wʌndɝfəl, ɛvɹiwʌn laɪn ʌp tə ɹaɪd θɹu ə mɝækjələs hoʊl ɪn ði ɛɹ ðət nɛvɝ mətɪɹiəlaɪzd. nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðəɾ ɪt wʊɾə stʌk mi ɪn kæɾəlɪnz kʌmpəni fəɹ ðə laɪt noʊz haʊ lɔŋ. oʊɾiəs tʃaɪld!

For a moment, she frowned at her wine, then fixed Elayne with a steady look. She never hesitated to speak her mind, whether or not she thought Elayne would agree, and plainly she intended to do so now. "It may have been a mistake to pass these Kinswomen off as Aes Sedai, however side-mouthed we've been about it. The strain may be too much to ask of them, and it puts us all at risk. This morning, for no reason I could make out, Mistress Corly was staring and gaping like a goose-girl come to the city. I think she almost failed at weaving the gateway to bring us here. That would have been wonderful, everyone lined up to ride through a miraculous hole in the air that never materialized. Not to mention that it would have stuck me in Catalyn's company for the Light knows how long. Odious child!

ðɛɹz ə ɡʊd maɪn ðɛɹ, ɪf sʌmwʌn tʊk əɹ ɪn hæn fəɹ ə fju jɪɹz, bʌt ʃiz ə dʌbəl doʊs ə ðə vaɪpɝəs hɛvɪn tʌŋ."

There's a good mind there, if someone took her in hand for a few years, but she has a double dose of the viperous Haevin tongue."

ɪleɪn ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ. ʃi nu haʊ kʌɾɪŋ hɛvɪnz kəd bi. ðə hoʊl fæmli tʊk, pɹaɪɾ ɪn ɪt! kæɾəlɪn ɑbviəsli dɪd. ən ʃi wɑz taɪɝɾ ʌv ɪkspleɪnɪŋ wʌɾ ɑn ðɪs deɪ kəd fɹaɪɾən ɛni wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl. ʃi wɑz taɪɝɾ ə biɪŋ ɹimaɪndəɾ ʌv wʌt ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪɡnɔɹ. ðət blʌɾi bikən wɑz stɪl bleɪzɪŋ ɪn ðə wɛst, ən ʌɾɝ ɪmpɔsɪbɪlɪɾi boʊθ fəɹ ɪts saɪz ən ɪts dʊɹeɪʃən. ðə θɪŋ hæd bɪn əntʃeɪnʒɪŋ fəɹ aʊɝz! ɛniwʌn u tʃænəl fəɹ ðɪs lɔŋ wɪθaʊɾ ə ɹɛs mʌst əv fɔlən oʊvɝ wɪð ɪɡzɔstʃən baɪ naʊ. ən ɹænd blʌɾi ælθɹ wɑz ɹaɪt ðɛɹ, ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ə ðæt! hi wɑz əlaɪv, bʌt ðəɾ oʊnli meɪɾ əɹ wɑnə slæp ɪz feɪs fəɹ pʊɾɪŋ əɹ θɹu ðɪs. wɛl, hɪz feɪs wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ, bʌt -  bɝdʒɪt slæmd əɹ sɪlvɝ kʌp daʊn ɑn ə saɪd teɪbəl soʊ hɑɹd ðət waɪn flu ɛvɹiwɛɹ. səm lɔnʒɹɪs wɑz gɑnə swɛt tə teɪk ðət steɪn aʊɾ ə hɝ koʊtsliv. ə meɪd wəd leɪbɝ fəɹ aʊɝz tə ɹɪstɔɹ ðə saɪd teɪbəlz pɑlɪʃ. "tʃɪlʒɹən!" ʃi bɑɹkt. "pipəl ɑɹ gɑnə daɪ kəz ə ðə dɪsɪʒənz ðeɪ meɪk, ən ðəɹ fleɪmɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən, kɑneɪl wɝst ʌv ɔl! jə hɝd hɪm, daɪɛlɪn. hi wɑns tə tʃælənʒ ɛɹəmɪləz tʃæmpiən laɪk ɑɹɾɝ blʌɾi hɔkwɪŋ! hɔkwɪŋ nɛvɝ fɔɾ ɛnibəɾiz fleɪmɪŋ tʃæmpiən, ən i nu wən i wɑz jʌŋɡɝ ðən lɔɹd nɔɹθən ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə fulz ɡeɪm tə ɹɛst soʊ mʌtʃ ɑn ə fleɪmɪŋ duəl, bʌt kɑneɪl θɪŋks i kən wɪn ɪleɪn ðə fleɪmɪŋ θɹoʊn wɪð ɪz fleɪmɪŋ sɔɹd!" "bɝdʒɪt tʃɹɑilaɪən ɪz ɹaɪt," eɪvinhə sɛd fɪɹsli. hɝ hænz wɝ fɪsts ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ skɝts.

Elayne gritted her teeth. She knew how cutting Haevins could be. The whole family took, pride in it! Catalyn obviously did. And she was tired of explaining what on this day could frighten any woman who could channel. She was tired of being reminded of what she was trying to ignore. That bloody beacon was still blazing in the west, an utter impossibility both for its size and its duration. The thing had been unchanging for hours! Anyone who channeled for this long without a rest must have fallen over with exhaustion by now. And Rand bloody al'Thor was right there, in the heart of it. She was certain of that! He was alive, but that only made her want to slap his face for putting her through this. Well, his face was not there, but -  Birgitte slammed her silver cup down on a side table so hard that wine flew everywhere. Some laundress was going to sweat to take that stain out of her coatsleeve. A maid would labor for hours to restore the side table's polish. "Children!" she barked. "People are going to die because of the decisions they make, and they're flaming children, Conail worst of all! You heard him, Dyelin. He wants to challenge Arymilla's champion like Artur bloody Hawkwing! Hawkwing never fought anybody's flaming champion, and he knew when he was younger than Lord Northan that it was a fool's game to rest so much on a flaming duel, but Conail thinks he can win Elayne the flaming throne with his flaming sword!" "Birgitte Trahelion is right," Aviendha said fiercely. Her hands were fists gripping her skirts.

"kɑneɪl nɔɹθən ɪz ə ful! bʌt haʊ kəɾ ɛniwʌn fɑloʊ ðoʊz tʃɪlʒɹən ɪndə ðə dæns ə spɪɹz? haʊ kəɾ ɛniwʌn æsk əm tə lid?"

"Conail Northan is a fool! But how could anyone follow those children into the dance of spears? How could anyone ask them to lead?"

daɪɛlɪn ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əm boʊθ, ən tʃoʊz tə ænsɝ eɪvinhə fɝst. ʃi wɑz pleɪnli bɪmjuz baɪ eɪvinhəz ɡɑɹb. bʌt ðɛn, ʃi wɑz bɪmjuz baɪ eɪvinhə ən ɪleɪn ədɑptɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ əz sɪstɝz, baɪ ɪleɪn hævɪŋ ən il fɹɛn ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. ðəɾ ɪleɪn tʃoʊz tə ɪnklud ðət fɹɛn ɪn ðɛɹ kaʊnsəlz wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʃi tɑlɝeɪɾəd. ðoʊ nɑt wɪθaʊt lɛɾɪŋ əɹ tɑlɝeɪʃən ʃoʊ. "aɪ bɪkeɪm haɪ siɾ ə tæɹɑvɪn ət fɪftin, wən maɪ fɑðɝ daɪɾ ɪn ə skɝmɪʃ ɑn ði ɔltɑɹən mɑɹtʃɪz. maɪ tu jʌŋɡɝ bɹʌðɝz daɪd faɪɾɪŋ kæɾəl ɹeɪɾɝz aʊɾ ə mʊɹændi ðət seɪm jɪɹ. aɪ lɪsən tə ædvaɪzɝz, bʌɾ aɪ toʊl tæɹɑvɪn ɹaɪɾɝz wɛɹ tə stʃɹaɪk, ən wi tɔt ði ɔltɑɹənz ən ðə mʊɹændiənz tə lʊk ɛlswɛɹ fəɹ ðɛɹ θivɪŋ. ðə taɪmz tʃuz wən tʃɪlʒɹən mʌst ɡɹoʊ ʌp, eɪvinhə, nɑt wi, ən ɪn ðiz taɪmz, ə haɪ siɾ u ɪz ə tʃaɪl kænɑt bi ə tʃaɪld ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. "æz fəɹ ju, leɪɾi bɝdʒɪt," ʃi wɛn ɑn ɪn ə dʒɹaɪɝ vɔɪs. "jɔɹ læŋɡwədʒ ɪz, əz ɛvɝ . . . pʌnʒənt." ʃi dɪd nɑɾ æsk haʊ bɝdʒɪt pɹəzum tə noʊ soʊ mʌtʃ ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ, θɪŋz noʊ hɪstɔɹiən nu, bʌt ʃi stʌɾid əɹ əpɹeɪzɪŋli. "bɹænləɾ ən pɛɝaɪvəl wɪl teɪk ɡaɪɾəns fɹəm mi, ən soʊ wɪl kæɾəlɪn, aɪ θɪŋk, mʌtʃ əz aɪ ɹəɡɹɛt ðə taɪm əl əv tə spɛnd wɪð ðə ɡɝl. əz fəɹ kɑneɪl, hiz hɑɹdli ðə fɝs jʌŋ mæn tə θɪŋk hiz ɪnvɪnsəbəl ən ɪmɔɹɾəl.

Dyelin regarded them both, and chose to answer Aviendha first. She was plainly bemused by Aviendha's garb. But then, she was bemused by Aviendha and Elayne adopting one another as sisters, by Elayne having an Aiel friend in the first place. That Elayne chose to include that friend in their counsels was something she tolerated. Though not without letting her toleration show. "I became High Seat of Taravin at fifteen, when my father died in a skirmish on the Altaran Marches. My two younger brothers died fighting cattle raiders out of Murandy that same year. I listened to advisors, but I told Taravin riders where to strike, and we taught the Altarans and the Murandians to look elsewhere for their thieving. The times choose when children must grow up, Aviendha, not we, and in these times, a High Seat who is a child cannot be a child any longer. "As for you, Lady Birgitte," she went on in a drier voice. "Your language is, as ever . . . pungent." She did not ask how Birgitte presumed to know so much of Artur Hawkwing, things no historian knew, but she studied her appraisingly. "Branlet and Perival will take guidance from me, and so will Catalyn, I think, much as I regret the time I'll have to spend with the girl. As for Conail, he's hardly the first young man to think he's invincible and immortal.

ɪf jə kæn kip ɪm ɹeɪn ɪn əz kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl, aɪ sədʒɛs jə tʃɹaɪ wɔkɪŋ fəɹ hɪm. ðə weɪ hi wɑz aɪɪŋ ðoʊz bɹitʃɪz ə jʊɹz, hɪl fɑloʊ ɛniwɛɹ jə lɛd." ɪleɪn . . . ʃɹʌɡd ɔf. . . ðə pjʊɹ fjʊɹi wɛlɪŋ ʌp ɪn hɝ. nɑɾ əɹ fjʊɹi, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ɪt hæd bɪn əɹ æŋɡɝ ət daɪɛlɪn ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs, əɹ əɹ æŋɡɝ ət bɝdʒɪt splæʃɪŋ waɪn əbaʊt. ɪt wɑz bɝdʒɪts. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə slæp ɹændz feɪs. wɛl, ʃi dɪd, bʌt ðət wɑz bɪsaɪd ðə pɔɪnt. laɪt, kɑneɪl hæd bɪn lʊkɪŋ ət bɝdʒɪt, tu? "ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə haɪ sits ə ðɛɹ haʊsəz, eɪvinhə. noʊ wʌn ɪn ðɛɹ haʊsəz wəd θæŋk mi fəɹ tʃɹiɾɪŋ əm əz lɛs; fɑɹ fɹəm ɪt. ðə mɛn u ɹaɪd fəɹ əm wɪl faɪt tə kip əm əlaɪv, bʌɾ ɪts pɛɝaɪvəl ən bɹænlət, kɑneɪl ən kæɾəlɪn ðeɪ ɹaɪd fɔɹ, nɑt mi. kəz ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə haɪ sits." eɪvinhə fɹaʊnd, ən foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz əz ðoʊ pʊlɪŋ ə ʃɔl ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf, bʌt ʃi nɑɾəd. əbɹʌpli, ən ɹɪlʌktənli - noʊ wʌn ɹoʊz tə sətʃ pɹɑmənəns əmʌŋ ði il wɪθaʊt jɪɹz ʌv ɪkspɪɹiəns, ən ði əpɹuvəl ə ðə waɪz wʌnz - bʌt ʃi nɑɾəd. "bɝdʒɪt, jəl əv tə dil wɪð ðɛm, kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl tə haɪ sit. waɪt hɛɹ wʊdnt nɛsəsɛɹəli meɪk əm ɛni waɪzɝ, ən ɪt dɛfənətli wʊdn meɪk əm ɛni iziɝ tə dil wɪð. ðeɪd stɪl əv ðɛɹ oʊn əpɪnjənz, ən wɪð jɪɹz ʌv ɪkspɪɹiəns tə ɡɪv əm weɪt, moʊs laɪkli ðeɪd bi tɛn taɪmz əz sɝɾən ðeɪ nu wʌt nidz tə bi dʌn bɛɾɝ ðən jə du. əɹ ðən aɪ du." ʃi meɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪɾ ɛfɝt tə kip əɹ toʊn klɪɹ ə ʃɑɹpnəs, ən noʊ daʊt bɝdʒɪt fɛl ði ɛfɝt. ət list, ðə floʊ ʌv ɹeɪdʒ θɹu ðə bɑn sʌɾənli dɪmɪnɪʃt. ɪt wɑz oʊnli tæmp daʊn, nɑt ɡɔn - bɝdʒɪɾ ɛndʒɔɪd hævɪŋ mɛn lʊk, ət list wən ʃi wɑntəɾ əm tə lʊk, bʌt ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ dɪd nɑt laɪk ɛniwʌn seɪɪŋ ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ətʃɹæk ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən - jɛɾ ivən soʊ, ʃi nu ðə deɪnʒɝ tə boʊθ ə ðɛm ə lɛɾɪŋ ðɛɹ ɪmoʊʃənz ɹʌn tu fɹi.

If you can't keep him reined in as Captain-General, I suggest you try walking for him. The way he was eyeing those breeches of yours, he'll follow anywhere you lead." Elayne . . . shrugged off. . . the pure fury welling up in her. Not her fury, any more than it had been her anger at Dyelin in the first place, or her anger at Birgitte splashing wine about. It was Birgitte's. She did not want to slap Rand's face. Well, she did, but that was beside the point. Light, Conail had been looking at Birgitte, too? "They are the High Seats of their Houses, Aviendha. No one in their Houses would thank me for treating them as less; far from it. The men who ride for them will fight to keep them alive, but it is Perival and Branlet, Conail and Catalyn they ride for, not me. Because they are the High Seats." Aviendha frowned, and folded her arms as though pulling a shawl around herself, but she nodded. Abruptly, and reluctantly - no one rose to such prominence among the Aiel without years of experience, and the approval of the Wise Ones - but she nodded. "Birgitte, you will have to deal with them, Captain-General to High Seat. White hair wouldn't necessarily make them any wiser, and it definitely wouldn't make them any easier to deal with. They'd still have their own opinions, and with years of experience to give them weight, most likely they'd be ten times as certain they knew what needs to be done better than you do. Or than I do." She made a great effort to keep her tone clear of sharpness, and no doubt Birgitte felt the effort. At least, the flow of rage through the bond suddenly diminished. It was only tamped down, not gone - Birgitte enjoyed having men look, at least when she wanted them to look, but she very much did not like anyone saying she was trying to attract their attention - yet even so, she knew the danger to both of them of letting their emotions run too free.

daɪɛlɪn hæd bɪɡʌn sɪpɪŋ əɾ əɹ waɪn, stɪl stʌɾiɪŋ bɝdʒɪt. oʊnli ə bɛɹ hændfʊl nu ðə tʃɹuθ ðət bɝdʒɪt dɛspɝətli wɑntəd tə kip hɪɾən, ən daɪɛlɪn wɑz nɑɾ əmʌŋ ðɛm, jɛt bɝdʒɪt hæd bɪn kɛɹləs ɪnʌf, ə slɪp ə ðə tʌŋ hɪɹ, ə slɪp ðɛɹ, ðət ði oʊldɝ wʊmən wɑz sɝɾən ðət səm mɪstɝi hɪd bɪhaɪn bɝdʒɪts blu aɪz. ðə laɪɾ oʊnli nu wʌt ʃi wəd θɪŋk ɪf ʃi sɑlv ðət ɹɪɾəl. əz ɪt wɑz, ðə tu wɝ ɔɪl ən wɔɾɝ. ðeɪ kəɾ ɑɹɡju oʊvɝ wɪtʃ weɪ wɑz ʌp, ən sɝɾənli oʊvɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. ðɪs taɪm, daɪɛlɪn klɪɹli θɔt ʃi hæd wʌn, fʊɾ ən hɔɹs. "bi ðəɾ əz ɪt meɪ, daɪɛlɪn," ɪleɪn kəntɪnjud, "aɪ wʊɾə bɪn mɔɹ plizd ɪf jə hæd bɹɔt ðɛɹ ædvaɪzɝz wɪð ðɛm. wʌts dʌn ɪz dʌn, bʌt bɹænlət tʃɹʌbəlz mi ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ. ɪf ʒəljɑɹɾ əkjuzɪz mi ʌv kɪdnæpɪŋ hɪm, mæɾɝz bɪkʌm wɝs ðən ðeɪ wɝ, nɑt bɛɾɝ."

Dyelin had begun sipping at her wine, still studying Birgitte. Only a bare handful knew the truth that Birgitte desperately wanted to keep hidden, and Dyelin was not among them, yet Birgitte had been careless enough, a slip of the tongue here, a slip there, that the older woman was certain that some mystery hid behind Birgitte's blue eyes. The Light only knew what she would think if she solved that riddle. As it was, the two were oil and water. They could argue over which way was up, and certainly over everything else. This time, Dyelin clearly thought she had won, foot and horse. "Be that as it may, Dyelin," Elayne continued, "I would have been more pleased if you had brought their advisors with them. What's done is done, but Branlet troubles me in particular. If Gilyard accuses me of kidnapping him, matters become worse than they were, not better."

daɪɛlɪn weɪv ðəɾ əweɪ. "ju doʊnt noʊ ðə ɡəljɑɹdz wɛl, də ju? ðə weɪ ðeɪ skwɑbəl əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, ðeɪ meɪ nɑt noʊɾəs ðə bɔɪ ɪz ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ sʌmɝ, ən ɪf ðeɪ du, nʌn wɪl ɹipjuɾieɪt wʌt hiz dʌn. nʌn ə ðɛm wɪl ədmɪt ðeɪ wɝ soʊ bɪzi ɪn ɑɹɡjuɪŋ oʊvɝ huz tə bi hɪz ɡɑɹɾiən ðət ðeɪ fɝɡɑt tə kip ən aɪ ɑn hɪm. ən sɛkənd, nʌn ə ðɛm wɪl ədmɪt ðeɪ wɝn kənsʌltəd bɪfɔɹhænd. ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, ʒəljɑɹd wəd stæn fəɹ zeɪɾə bɪfɔɹ stændɪŋ fəɹ mɑɹn, ən ðeɪ doʊn laɪk ɑɝɔn əɹ sɑɝən mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ."

Dyelin waved that away. "You don't know the Gilyards well, do you? The way they squabble among themselves, they may not notice the boy is gone before summer, and if they do, none will repudiate what he's done. None of them will admit they were so busy in arguing over who's to be his guardian that they forgot to keep an eye on him. And second, none of them will admit they weren't consulted beforehand. In any event, Gilyard would stand for Zaida before standing for Marne, and they don't like Arawn or Sarand much better."

"aɪ hoʊp jəɹ ɹaɪt, daɪɛlɪn, kəz aɪm əpɔɪntɪŋ jə tə dil wɪð ɛni æŋɡɹi ɡəljɑɹdz u əpɪɹ. ən waɪl jəɹ ædvaɪzɪŋ ði ʌðɝ θɹi, jə kən kip ə θʌm ɑn kɑneɪl soʊ hi dʌzn də ɛniθɪŋ kəmplitli hɛɹbɹeɪnd."

"I hope you're right, Dyelin, because I'm appointing you to deal with any angry Gilyards who appear. And while you're advising the other three, you can keep a thumb on Conail so he doesn't do anything completely harebrained."

fəɹ ɔl əɹ tɔk, ðə fɝst sədʒɛstʃən meɪd daɪɛlɪn wɪns slaɪtli. ðə sɛkən meɪɾ əɹ saɪ.

For all her talk, the first suggestion made Dyelin wince slightly. The second made her sigh.

ɪt meɪd bɝdʒɪt læf aʊt laʊd. "ɪf juv ɛni pɹɑbləmz, əl lɛn jə ə pɛɹ ə bɹitʃɪz ən səm buts, ən jə kən wɔk fəɹ hɪm."

It made Birgitte laugh out loud. "If you have any problems, I'll lend you a pair of breeches and some boots, and you can walk for him."

"sʌm wɪmən," daɪɛlɪn mɝmɝɾ ɪndə hɝ waɪn, "kæn meɪk ə fɪʃ baɪt baɪ kɹʊkɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ, leɪɾi bɝdʒɪt. ʌðɝ wɪmən əv tə dʒɹæɡ ðɛɹ beɪɾ ɔl oʊvɝ ðə pɑnd." eɪvinhə læft ət ðæt, bʌt bɝdʒɪts æŋɡɝ bɪɡæn tə ɛdʒ ʌpwɝɾ ɪn ðə bɑnd. ə weɪv ə koʊld ɛɹ swɛpt ɪndə ðə ɹum əz ðə dɔɹ oʊpənd, ən ɹæsɔɹiə ɛntɝd, kʌmɪŋ tə ə stɪf ətɛnʃən. "ðə fɝs meɪɾ ən ðə fɝs klɝk əv kʌm, maɪ leɪɾi ɪleɪn," ʃi ənaʊnst. hɝ vɔɪs fɔltɝɾ ət ði ɛnd, əz ʃi kɑt ðə muɾ ɪn ðə ɹum. ə blaɪnd ɡoʊt cʊɾə kɑɾ ɪt, wɪð daɪɛlɪn smʌɡ əz ə kæɾ ɪn ðə kɹimɝi, ən bɝdʒɪt skaʊlɪŋ əɾ əɹ ən eɪvinhə boʊθ, ən eɪvinhə tʃuzɪŋ ðɪs moʊmən tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət bɝdʒɪt wɑz bɝdʒɪt sɪlvɝboʊ, wɪtʃ ɑn ðɪs əkeɪʒən meɪɾ əɹ stɛɹ ət ðə flɔɹ, əz əbæʃt əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn læfɪŋ əɾ ə waɪz wʌn. naʊ ən əɡɛn ɪleɪn wɪʃt əɹ fɹɛnz kəɾ ɔl ɡɛɾ ɑn əz wɛl əz ʃi ən eɪvinhə dɪd, bʌt sʌmhaʊ ðeɪ mænədʒ tə ɹʌb ɑn təɡɛðɝ, ən ʃi səpoʊz ðət wɑz ɹɪli ɔl ʃi kəɾ æsk fɹəm ɹil pipəl. pɝfɛkʃən wɑz ə θɪŋ fəɹ bʊks ən ɡlimənz stɔɹiz. "sɛn əm ɪn," ʃi toʊld ɹæsɔɹiə.

"Some women," Dyelin murmured into her wine, "can make a fish bite by crooking a finger, Lady Birgitte. Other women have to drag their bait all over the pond." Aviendha laughed at that, but Birgitte's anger began to edge upward in the bond. A wave of cold air swept into the room as the door opened, and Rasoria entered, coming to a stiff attention. "The First Maid and the First Clerk have come, my Lady Elayne," she announced. Her voice faltered at the end, as she caught the mood in the room. A blind goat could have caught it, with Dyelin smug as a cat in the creamery, and Birgitte scowling at her and Aviendha both, and Aviendha choosing this moment to remember that Birgitte was Birgitte Silverbow, which on this occasion made her stare at the floor, as abashed as if she had been laughing at a Wise One. Now and again Elayne wished her friends could all get on as well as she and Aviendha did, but somehow they managed to rub on together, and she supposed that was really all she could ask from real people. Perfection was a thing for books and gleemen's stories. "Send them in," she told Rasoria.

"æn doʊn dɪstɝb əs ənlɛs ðə sɪɾi ɪz ʌndɝ ətæk. ənlɛs ɪts ɪmpɔɹɾənt," ʃi əmɛndəd. ɪn stɔɹiz, wɪmən u ɡeɪv ɔɹɾɝz laɪk ðət wɝ ɔlweɪz sɛɾɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ʌp fəɹ dɪzæstɝ. səmtaɪmz, ðəɹ wɝ lɛsənz ɪn stɔɹiz, ɪf jə lʊk fəɹ ðɛm.

"And don't disturb us unless the city is under attack. Unless it is important," she amended. In stories, women who gave orders like that were always setting themselves up for disaster. Sometimes, there were lessons in stories, if you looked for them.

tʃæptɝ fɔɹtin

CHAPTER 14

wʌt waɪz wʌnz noʊ ælwɪn nɔɹi, ðə fɝs klɝk, ən ɹɪn hɑɹfɝ, ðə fɝs meɪd, ɛntɝd təɡɛðɝ, hɪm meɪkɪŋ ə dʒɝki, ʌnpɹæktəs baʊ, ən əɹ ə ɡɹeɪsfəl kɝtsi ðət wɑz niðɝ tu loʊ nɔɹ tu ʃæloʊ. ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn mɔɹ dɪfɹənt. mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ wɑz ɹaʊnd-feɪst ən ɹiɡəli dɪɡnəfaɪd, hɝ hɛɹ ɪn ə nit ɡɹeɪ bʌn ətɑp əɹ hɛd, mæstɝ nɔɹi tɔl ən ɡɔki əz ə weɪɾɪŋbɝd, wɪð ɪz lɪɾəl ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ hɛɹ stɪkɪŋ ʌp bɪhaɪn ɪz ɪɹz laɪk spɹeɪz ʌv waɪt fɛðɝz. itʃ kæɹiɾ ən ɪmbɔs lɛðɝ foʊldɝ stʌft wɪð peɪpɝz, bʌt ʃi hɛl hɝz əɾ əɹ saɪɾ əz ɪf nɑt tə ɹʌmpəl əɹ fɔɹməl skɑɹlət tɑbɝd, ənɹɪŋkəld əz ɪɾ ɔlweɪz sim tə bi, noʊ mæɾɝ ði aʊɝ əɹ haʊ lɔŋ ʃi hæd bɪn ɑn əɹ fit, waɪl i klʌtʃt ɪz foʊldɝ tə hɪz nɛɹoʊ tʃɛst əz ɪf tə haɪɾ oʊld ɪŋksteɪnz, ʌv wɪtʃ sɛvɹəl spɑɾəd ɪz tɑbɝd, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ə lɑɹdʒ blɑt ðət meɪd ðə waɪt laɪənz teɪl ɛn ɪn ə blæk tʌft. kɝɾəsiz dʌn, ðeɪ ɪmiɾiətli pʊɾ ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns bɪtwin ðɛm, itʃ nɑt kwaɪt wɑtʃɪŋ ði ʌðɝ.

What Wise Ones Know alwin Norry, the First Clerk, and Reene Harfor, the First Maid, entered together, him making a jerky, unpracticed bow, and her a graceful curtsy that was neither too low nor too shallow. They could not have been more different. Mistress Harfor was round-faced and regally dignified, her hair in a neat gray bun atop her head, Master Norry tall and gawky as a wadingbird, with his little remaining hair sticking up behind his ears like sprays of white feathers. Each carried an embossed leather folder stuffed with papers, but she held hers at her side as if not to rumple her formal scarlet tabard, unwrinkled as it always seemed to be, no matter the hour or how long she had been on her feet, while he clutched his folder to his narrow chest as if to hide old inkstains, of which several spotted his tabard, including a large blot that made the White Lion's tail end in a black tuft. Courtesies done, they immediately put a little distance between them, each not quite watching the other.

əz sun əz ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn ɹæsɔɹiə, ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ spɹʌŋ ʌp ɝaʊn eɪvinhə, ən ʃi woʊv ə wɔɹɾ əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ ðət klʌŋ tə ðə wɔlz ə ðə ɹum. wʌt wɑz sɛd bɪtwin əm wɑz naʊ əz seɪf əz ðeɪ kəd meɪk ɪt, ən eɪvinhə wəd noʊ ɪf ɛniwʌn ivən tʃɹaɪd tə lɪsən wɪð ðə paʊɝ. ʃi wɑz vɛɹi ɡʊd wɪð ðɪs sɔɹɾ ʌv wiv.

As soon as the door closed behind Rasoria, the glow of saidar sprung up around Aviendha, and she wove a ward against eavesdropping that clung to the walls of the room. What was said between them was now as safe as they could make it, and Aviendha would know if anyone even tried to listen with the Power. She was very good with this sort of weave.

"mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd, "ɪf jəl bɪɡɪn." ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɔfɝ waɪn əɹ sits, ʌv kɔɹs.

"Mistress Harfor," Elayne said, "if you will begin." She did not offer wine or seats, of course.

mæstɝ nɔɹi wʊɾə bɪn ʃɑk tə hɪz toʊneɪlz baɪ sətʃ ə læps ɪn ðə pɹəpɹaɪəɾiz, ən mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ maɪt wɛl əv bɪn əfɛndəd. əz ɪt wɑz, nɔɹi twɪtʃt ən ɡlænst saɪdweɪz ət ɹɪn, ən əɹ maʊθ θɪnd. ivən æftɝ ə wiks miɾɪŋz, ðɛɹ dɪslaɪk fəɹ ɡɪvɪŋ ðɛɹ ɹɪpɔɹts wɛɹ ði ʌðɝ kəd hɪɹ wɑz pælpəbəl. ðeɪ wɝ dʒɛləs ə ðɛɹ fifs, ðə mɔɹ soʊ sɪns ðə fɝs meɪd hæd muvd ɪndə tɛɹɪtɔɹi ðət wʌns maɪɾ əv bɪn kənsɪɾɝd mæstɝ nɔɹiz ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi. ʌv kɔɹs, ɹʌnɪŋ ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ðə fɝs meɪdz tʃɑɹdʒ, ən ɪt maɪt bi sɛd ðəɾ əɹ nu duɾiz wɝ oʊnli ən ɪkstɛnʃən ə ðæt. ɪt wəd nɑt bi sɛd baɪ hælwɪn nɔɹi, ðoʊ. ðə bleɪzɪŋ lɔɡz sɛɾəld ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪs wɪð ə laʊd kɹæk, sɛndɪŋ ə ʃaʊɝ ə spɑɹks ʌp ðə tʃɪmni.

Master Norry would have been shocked to his toenails by such a lapse in the proprieties, and Mistress Harfor might well have been offended. As it was, Norry twitched and glanced sideways at Reene, and her mouth thinned. Even after a week's meetings, their dislike for giving their reports where the other could hear was palpable. They were jealous of their fiefs, the more so since the First Maid had moved into territory that once might have been considered Master Norry's responsibility. Of course, running the Royal Palace had always been the First Maid's charge, and it might be said that her new duties were only an extension of that. It would not be said by Halwin Norry, though. The blazing logs settled in the fireplace with a loud crack, sending a shower of sparks up the chimney.

"aɪ æm kənvɪns ðə sɛkən laɪbɹɛɹiən ɪz . . . ə spaɪ, maɪ leɪɾi," mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ sɛd faɪnəli, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ nɔɹi əz ɪf tə meɪk ɪm dɪsəpɪɹ. ʃi hæd ɹɪzɪstɪd lɛɾɪŋ ɛniwʌn ɛls noʊ ðət ʃi wɑz sɝtʃɪŋ aʊt spaɪz ɪn ðə pæləs, jɛt ðə fɝs klɝk noʊɪŋ sim tə ɡɹeɪɾ ɑn əɹ wɝst ʌv ɔl. hɪz oʊnli əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ hɝ, ɪf sətʃ ɪt wɑz, keɪm fɹəm peɪɪŋ ðə pæləs əkaʊns, ən i nɛvɝ kwɛstʃən ən ɪkspɛndətʃɝ, bʌɾ ivən ðət lɪɾəl wɑz mɔɹ ðən ʃi wɪʃt. "ɛvɹi θɹi əɹ fɔɹ deɪz mæstɝ hɑɹndɝ vɪzəts ən ɪn kɔl ðə hup ən æɹoʊ, səpoʊzədli fəɹ ði eɪl meɪd baɪ ði ɪnkipɝ, wʌn mɪlɪs fɛnʒɹi, bʌt mɪstʃɹəs fɛnʒɹi ɔlsoʊ kips pɪdʒənz, ən wɛnɛvɝ mæstɝ hɑɹndɝ vɪzəts, ʃi sɛnz ɔf ə pɪdʒən ðət flaɪz nɔɹθ. jɛstɝdeɪ, θɹi ʌv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ steɪɪŋ ət ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn faʊn ɹizən tə vɪzət ðə hup ən æɹoʊ, ðoʊ ɪt keɪɾɝz tə ə mʌtʃ pʊɹɝ kɹaʊd ðən ðə swɑn. ðeɪ keɪm ən wɛn hʊɾɪd, ən wɝ klɑzəɾɪd wɪð mɪstʃɹəs fɛnʒɹi ɪn pɹaɪvət fəɹ oʊvɝ ən aʊɝ. ɔl θɹi ɑɹ bɹaʊn ədʒɑ. aɪ fɪɹ ðəɾ ɪndəkeɪts mæstɝ hɑɹndɝz ɛmplɔɪɝ."

"I am convinced the Second Librarian is . . . a spy, my Lady," Mistress Harfor said finally, ignoring Norry as if to make him disappear. She had resisted letting anyone else know that she was searching out spies in the palace, yet the First Clerk knowing seemed to grate on her worst of all. His only authority over her, if such it was, came from paying the palace accounts, and he never questioned an expenditure, but even that little was more than she wished. "Every three or four days Master Harnder visits an inn called the Hoop and Arrow, supposedly for the ale made by the innkeeper, one Millis Fendry, but Mistress Fendry also keeps pigeons, and whenever Master Harnder visits, she sends off a pigeon that flies north. Yesterday, three of the Aes Sedai staying at the Silver Swan found reason to visit the Hoop and Arrow, though it caters to a much poorer crowd than the Swan. They came and went hooded, and were closeted with Mistress Fendry in private for over an hour. All three are Brown Ajah. I fear that indicates Master Harnder's employer."

"hɛɹdʒɹɛsɝz, fʊtmən, kʊks, ðə mæstɝ kæbəntmeɪkɝ, noʊ fjuɝ ðən faɪv ə mæstɝ nɔɹiz klɝks, ən naʊ wʌn ə ðə laɪbɹɛɹiənz."

"Hairdressers, footmen, cooks, the master cabinetmaker, no fewer than five of Master Norry's clerks, and now one of the librarians."

linɪŋ bæk ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ ən kɹɔsɪŋ əɹ lɛɡz, daɪɛlɪn ɡlaʊɝd saʊɝli. "ɪz ðəɹ ɛniwʌn wi woʊn ɪvɛntʃəwəli lɝn ɪz ə spaɪ, mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ?" nɔɹi stʃɹɛtʃt ɪz nɛk ənkʌmftəbli; hi tʊk ðə mælfizəns ə hɪz klɝks əz ə pɝsənəl əfɹʌnt. "aɪ hæv hoʊps aɪ meɪ bi ɹitʃɪŋ ðə bɑɾəm ə ðət bæɹəl, maɪ leɪɾi," mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ sɛd kəmpleɪsənli. niðɝ spaɪz nɔɹ ðə haɪ sits ə paʊɝfəl haʊsəz ɹʌfəl hɝ. spaɪz wɝ pɛsts ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə ɹɪd ðə pæləs ʌv əz ʃʊɹli əz ʃi kɛpt ɪt klɪɹ ə fliz ən ɹæts - ðoʊ ʃi hæd bɪn fɔɹs tə æksɛpt ɛɛs sədaɪ eɪd wɪð ɹæts ɹisənli - waɪl paʊɝfəl noʊbəlz wɝ laɪk ɹeɪn əɹ snoʊ, fæks ə neɪtʃɝ tə bi ɛndʒjʊɹɾ əntɪl ðeɪ wɛn əweɪ, bʌt nʌθɪŋ tə ɡɛt flʌstɝɾ oʊvɝ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ oʊnli soʊ mɛni pipəl u kən bi bɑt, ən oʊnli soʊ mɛni kən əfɔɹd tə baɪ, əɹ wɑn tə." ɪleɪn tʃɹaɪd tə pɪktʃɝ mæstɝ hɑɹndɝ, bʌɾ ɔl ʃi kəd bɹɪŋ ʌp ɪn əɹ maɪnd wɑz veɪɡ, ə tʃʌbi, bɔldɪŋ mæn u blɪŋkt ɪnsɛsənli. hi hæd sɝvd əɹ mʌðɝ, ən əz ʃi ɹɪkɔld, kwin mɔɹdʒɹɛlən bɪfɔɹ ðæt. noʊ wʌn kɑmɛntəɾ ɑn ðə fæk ðəɾ ɪt simd i ɔlsoʊ sɝv ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ.

Leaning back in her chair and crossing her legs, Dyelin glowered sourly. "Is there anyone we won't eventually learn is a spy, Mistress Harfor?" Norry stretched his neck uncomfortably; he took the malfeasance of his clerks as a personal affront. "I have hopes I may be reaching the bottom of that barrel, my Lady," Mistress Harfor said complacently. Neither spies nor the High Seats of powerful Houses ruffled her. Spies were pests she intended to rid the palace of as surely as she kept it clear of fleas and rats - though she had been forced to accept Aes Sedai aid with rats recently - while powerful nobles were like rain or snow, facts of nature to be endured until they went away, but nothing to get flustered over. "There are only so many people who can be bought, and only so many can afford to buy, or want to." Elayne tried to picture Master Harnder, but all she could bring up in her mind was vague, a chubby, balding man who blinked incessantly. He had served her mother, and as she recalled, Queen Mordrellen before that. No one commented on the fact that it seemed he also served the Brown Ajah.

ɛvɹi ɹulɝz pæləs bɪtwin ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld ən ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən kənteɪn ðə taʊɝz aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz. ɛni ɹulɝ wɪð hæf ə bɹeɪn ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪt. daʊtləs ðə sintʃæn wəd sun bi lɪvɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə waɪt taʊɝz ɡeɪz, tu, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. ɹɪn hæd dɪskʌvɝd sɛvɹəl spaɪz fəɹ ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ, əʃʊɹədli lɛɡəsiz ʌv ɪleɪɾəz taɪm ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, bʌt ðɪs laɪbɹɛɹiən wɑz ðə fɝs fəɹ ənʌðɝ ədʒɑ. ɪleɪɾə wəd nɑɾ əv laɪkt ʌðɝ ədʒəz noʊɪŋ wʌt wɛn ɑn ɪn ðə pæləs waɪl ʃi wɑz ædvaɪzɝ tə ðə kwin.

Every ruler's palace between the Spine of the World and the Aryth Ocean contained the Tower's eyes-and-ears. Any ruler with half a brain expected it. Doubtless the Seanchan would soon be living under the White Tower's gaze, too, if they were not already. Reene had discovered several spies for the Red Ajah, assuredly legacies of Elaida's time in Caemlyn, but this librarian was the first for another Ajah. Elaida would not have liked other Ajahs knowing what went on in the palace while she was advisor to the Queen.

"ə pɪɾi wɪv noʊ fɔls stɔɹiz wi wɑn ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ tə bɪliv," ʃi sɛd laɪtli. ə ɡɹeɪt pɪɾi ðeɪ, ən ðə ɹɛdz, nu əbaʊt ðə kɪn. ət bɛst, ðeɪ hæd tə noʊ ðəɹ wɝ ə lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝ ʌv wɪmən ɪn ðə pæləs u kəd tʃænəl, ən ɪt wəd nɑt teɪk əm lɔŋ tə fɪɡjɝ aʊɾ u ðeɪ wɝ.

"A pity we have no false stories we want the Brown Ajah to believe," she said lightly. A great pity they, and the Reds, knew about the Kin. At best, they had to know there were a large number of women in the palace who could channel, and it would not take them long to figure out who they were.

ðət wəd kɹieɪɾ ɛni nʌmbɝ ə pɹɑbləmz daʊn ðə ɹoʊd, jɛt ðoʊz dɪfəkəltiz dɪd laɪ sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə fjutʃɝ. ɔlweɪz plæn əhɛd, lini juz tə seɪ, bʌt wɝi tu hɑɹɾ oʊvɝ nɛks jɪɹ, ən jə kən tʃɹɪp oʊvɝ təmɑɹoʊ. "wɑtʃ mæstɝ hɑɹndɝ ən tʃɹaɪ tə faɪn aʊɾ ɪz fɹɛnz. ðət wɪl əv tə səfaɪs fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ." səm spaɪz dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn ðɛɹ ɪɹz, iðɝ tə hɪɹ ɡɑsəp əɹ lɪsən ət dɔɹz; ʌðɝz lubɹəkeɪɾɪd tʌŋz wɪð ə fju fɹɛnli kʌps ʌv waɪn. ðə fɝs pɑɹɾ ə kaʊntɝæktɪŋ ə spaɪ wɑz tə faɪn aʊt haʊ hi lɝnd wʌɾ i soʊld.

That would create any number of problems down the road, yet those difficulties did lie somewhere in the future. Always plan ahead, Lini used to say, but worry too hard over next year, and you can trip over tomorrow. "Watch Master Harnder and try to find out his friends. That will have to suffice for the time being." Some spies depended on their ears, either to hear gossip or listen at doors; others lubricated tongues with a few friendly cups of wine. The first part of counteracting a spy was to find out how he learned what he sold.

eɪvinhə snɔɹɾɪd laʊdli ænd, spɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ skɝts, stɑɹɾəd tə sɪt daʊn ɑn ðə kɑɹpət bɪfɔɹ ɹilaɪzɪŋ wʌt ʃi wɔɹ. wɪð ə wɔɹnɪŋ ɡlæns ət daɪɛlɪn, ʃi pɝtʃt stɪfli ɑn ðə fɹʌn ɛdʒ ʌv ə tʃɛɹ ɪnstɛd, ðə pɪktʃɝ ʌv ə kɔɹt leɪɾi wɪð əɹ aɪz flæʃɪŋ. ɪksɛp ðəɾ ə leɪɾi ʌv ðə kɔɹt wəd nɑɾ əv tʃɛk ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ bɛl naɪf wɪð ə θʌm. lɛf tə hɝ oʊn dɪvaɪsəz, eɪvinhə wəd slɪɾ ɛvɹi spaɪz θɹoʊɾ əz sun əz ɪt kəd bi stʃɹɛtʃt fəɹ ðə naɪf. spaɪɪŋ wɑz ə vaɪl bɪznəs, ɪn əɹ vju, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɔfən ɪleɪn ɪkspleɪn ðəɾ ɛvɹi spaɪ faʊnd wɑz ə tul ðət kəd bi juz tə meɪk əɹ ɛnəmiz bɪliv wʌt ʃi wɑntəd. nɑt ðəɾ ɛvɹi spaɪ nɛsəsɛɹəli wɝk fəɹ ən ɛnəmi. moʊst ə ðoʊz ðə fɝs meɪd hæɾ ənkʌvɝd tʊk mʌni fɹəm mɔɹ ðən wʌn sɔɹs, ən əmʌŋ ðoʊz ʃi hæɾ aɪdɛntəfaɪd wɝ kɪŋ ɹɔdʒɹən ə mʊɹændi, vɛɹiəs tɛɹən haɪ lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz, ə hændfʊl ə kɛɹhinɪn noʊbəlz, ən ə fɛɹ nʌmbɝ ə mɝtʃəns. ə ɡʊd mɛni pipəl wɝ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn wʌt hæpən ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, wɛðɝ fəɹ ɪts ɪfɛkt ɑn tʃɹeɪɾ əɹ ʌðɝ ɹizənz. səmtaɪmz ɪt sim ðəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn spaɪɾ ɑn ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls.

Aviendha snorted loudly and, spreading her skirts, started to sit down on the carpet before realizing what she wore. With a warning glance at Dyelin, she perched stiffly on the front edge of a chair instead, the picture of a court lady with her eyes flashing. Except that a lady of the court would not have checked the edge of her belt knife with a thumb. Left to her own devices, Aviendha would slit every spy's throat as soon as it could be stretched for the knife. Spying was a vile business, in her view, no matter how often Elayne explained that every spy found was a tool that could be used to make her enemies believe what she wanted. Not that every spy necessarily worked for an enemy. Most of those the First Maid had uncovered took money from more than one source, and among those she had identified were King Roedran of Murandy, various Tairen High Lords and Ladies, a handful of Cairhienin nobles, and a fair number of merchants. A good many people were interested in what happened in Caemlyn, whether for its effect on trade or other reasons. Sometimes it seemed that everyone spied on everyone else.

"mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ," ʃi sɛd, "ju hævən faʊn ɛni aɪz-ændɪɹz fəɹ ðə blæk taʊɝ." laɪk moʊs pipəl u hɝd ðə blæk taʊɝ mɛnʃənd, daɪɛlɪn ʃɪvɝd, ən tʊk ə dip dʒɹɪŋk ə hɝ waɪn, bʌt ɹɪn dʒʌst ɡɹɪməs feɪnli. ʃi hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə fæk ðət ðeɪ wɝ mɛn u kəd tʃænəl, sɪns ʃi kəd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ mæɾɝz. tə hɝ, ðə blæk taʊɝ wɑz . . . ən ənɔɪəns.

"Mistress Harfor," she said, "you haven't found any eyes-andears for the Black Tower." Like most people who heard the Black Tower mentioned, Dyelin shivered, and took a deep drink of her wine, but Reene just grimaced faintly. She had decided to ignore the fact that they were men who could channel, since she could not change matters. To her, the Black Tower was . . . an annoyance.

"ðeɪ hævən hæd taɪm, maɪ leɪɾi. ɡɪv əm ə jɪɹ, ən jəl faɪn fʊtmən ən laɪbɹɛɹiənz teɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ kɔɪn, tu."

"They haven't had time, my Lady. Give them a year, and you'll find footmen and librarians taking their coin, too."

"aɪ səpoʊz aɪ wɪl." dʒɹɛdfəl θɔt. "wʌɾ ɛls juv fəɹ əs tədeɪ?"

"I suppose I will." Dreadful thought. "What else do you have for us today?"

"aɪv hæɾ ə wɝd wɪð dʒɑn skɛlɪt, maɪ leɪɾi. ə mæn u tɝnz ɪz koʊt wʌns ɪz ɔfən əmɛnəbəl tə tɝnɪŋ ɪɾ əɡɛn, ən skɛlɪɾ ɪz." skɛlɪt, ə bɑɹbɝ, wɑz ɪn ðə peɪ ʌv haʊs ɑɝɔn, wɪtʃ fəɹ ðə pɹɛzən meɪɾ ɪm ɛɹəmɪləz mæn.

"I've had a word with Jon Skellit, my Lady. A man who turns his coat once is often amenable to turning it again, and Skellit is." Skellit, a barber, was in the pay of House Arawn, which for the present made him Arymilla's man.

bɝdʒɪt bɪɾ ɔf ən oʊθ ɪn mɪdwɝd - fəɹ səm ɹizən, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə wɑtʃ əɹ læŋɡwədʒ ɝaʊn ɹɪn hɑɹfɝ - ən spoʊk ɪn ə peɪn vɔɪs. "ju hæɾ ə wɝd wɪð hɪm? wɪθaʊɾ æskɪŋ ɛniwʌn?" daɪɛlɪn wɑz ʌndɝ noʊ kəmpjuŋkʃənz ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə fɝs meɪd, ən ʃi mʌɾɝd, "mʌðɝz mɪlk ɪn ə kʌp!" ɪleɪn hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ əɹ juz ən əbsɛnəɾi bɪfɔɹ. mæstɝ nɔɹi blɪŋkt ən ɔlmoʊs dʒɹɑpt ɪz foʊldɝ, ən bɪzid hɪmsɛlf wɪð nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət daɪɛlɪn. ðə fɝs meɪd, haʊɛvɝ, mɪɹli pɔzd əntɪl ʃʊɹ ʃi ən bɝdʒɪt wɝ dʌn, ðən wɛn ɑn kɑmli.

Birgitte bit off an oath in midword - for some reason, she tried to watch her language around Reene Harfor - and spoke in a pained voice. "You had a word with him? Without asking anyone?" Dyelin was under no compunctions regarding the First Maid, and she muttered, "Mother's milk in a cup!" Elayne had never heard her use an obscenity before. Master Norry blinked and almost dropped his folder, and busied himself with not looking at Dyelin. The First Maid, however, merely paused until sure she and Birgitte were done, then went on calmly.

"ðə taɪm simd ɹaɪp, ən soʊ dɪd skɛlɪt. wʌn ə ðə mɛn i hænz ɪz ɹɪpɔɹts tə lɛf ðə sɪɾi ən hæzən ɹɪtɝn jɛt, waɪl ɪɾ əpɪɹz ði ʌðɝ bɹoʊk ɪz lɛɡ. ðə stʃɹits ɑɹ ɔlweɪz aɪsi wɛɹ ə faɪɝ əz bɪn pʊɾ aʊt." ʃi sɛd ðət soʊ blænli, ɪt simd mɔɹ ðən laɪkli ʃi hæɾ ɛnʒəniɹd ðə mænz fɔl sʌmhaʊ. hɑɹd taɪmz ənkʌvɝd hɑɹd tæləns ɪn ðə moʊst sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ pipəl. "skɛlɪɾ ɪz kwaɪɾ əɡɹiəbəl tə kæɹiɪŋ ɪz nɛks kəmjunəkeɪʃən aʊt tə ðə kæmps hɪmsɛlf. hi sɔ ə ɡeɪtweɪ meɪd, ən i woʊn əv tə pɹitɛn tɛɹɝ." jə wʊɾə θɔt ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd bɪn siɪŋ mɝtʃəns' wæɡənz ɹʌmbəl aʊɾ ə hoʊlz ɪn ði ɛɹ fəɹ əɹ ɪntaɪɝ laɪf. "wʌts tə stɑp ðɪs bɑɹbɝ kipɪŋ ɑn ɹʌnɪŋ wʌns hiz aʊtsaɪd ðə flɑ . . . ʌ . . . ðə sɪɾi?" bɝdʒɪt dɪmændəɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli, bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə peɪs ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝ wɪð əɹ hænz klæsp bɪhaɪn hɝ. hɝ hɛvi ɡoʊldən bɹeɪd ʃʊɾə bɪn bɹɪsəlɪŋ. "ɪf i ɡoʊz, ɑɝɔn wɪl haɪɝ sʌmbɑɾi ɛls, ən jəl əv tə hʌn ɪm aʊɾ ɔl oʊvɝ əɡɛn. laɪt, ɛɹəmɪlə mʌst əv hɝɾ ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪz ɔlmoʊst əz sun əz ʃi ɝaɪvd, ən skɛlɪɾ əz tə noʊ ɪt." ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə θɔɾ ə skɛlɪɾ ɪskeɪpɪŋ ðəɾ ɪɹəteɪɾəd hɝ, əɹ nɑɾ oʊnli ðæt. ðə mɝsənɛɹiz θɔt ðeɪ hæd bɪn haɪɝd tə stɑp soʊlʒɝz, bʌt fəɹ ə fju sɪlvɝz ðeɪ wəɾ əlaʊ wʌn əɹ tu tə slɪp θɹu ðə ɡeɪts baɪ naɪɾ ɪn iðɝ dɝɛkʃən.

"The time seemed ripe, and so did Skellit. One of the men he hands his reports to left the city and hasn't returned yet, while it appears the other broke his leg. The streets are always icy where a fire has been put out." She said that so blandly, it seemed more than likely she had engineered the man's fall somehow. Hard times uncovered hard talents in the most surprising people. "Skellit is quite agreeable to carrying his next communication out to the camps himself. He saw a gateway made, and he won't have to pretend terror." You would have thought she herself had been seeing merchants' wagons rumble out of holes in the air for her entire life. "What's to stop this barber keeping on running once he's outside the fla . . . uh . . . the city?" Birgitte demanded irritably, beginning to pace in front of the fire with her hands clasped behind her. Her heavy golden braid should have been bristling. "If he goes, Arawn will hire somebody else, and you'll have to hunt him out all over again. Light, Arymilla must have heard of the gateways almost as soon as she arrived, and Skellit has to know it." It was not the thought of Skellit escaping that irritated her, or not only that. The mercenaries thought they had been hired to stop soldiers, but for a few silvers they would allow one or two to slip through the gates by night in either direction.

wʌn əɹ tu kəd də noʊ hɑɹm, əz ðeɪ sɔ mæɾɝz. bɝdʒɪt dɪd nɑt laɪk biɪŋ ɹimaɪndəɾ ə ðæt.

One or two could do no harm, as they saw matters. Birgitte did not like being reminded of that.

"ɡɹid wɪl stɑp hɪm, maɪ leɪɾi," mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli. "ðə θɔɾ ə ɝnɪŋ ɡoʊl fɹəm ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn əz wɛl əz fɹəm leɪɾi nɑiən ɪz ɪnʌf tə meɪk ðə mæn bɹið hɑɹd. ɪts tʃɹu, leɪɾi ɛɹəmɪlə mʌst ɔlɹɛɾi hæv hɝɾ ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪz, bʌt ðəɾ oʊnli ædz kɹɛɾət tə skɛlɪts ɹizən fəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɪn pɝsən." "æn ɪf ɪz ɡɹiɾ ɪz ɡɹeɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪm tə tʃɹaɪ ɝnɪŋ stɪl mɔɹ ɡoʊl baɪ tɝnɪŋ ɪz koʊɾ ə θɝd taɪm?" daɪɛlɪn sɛd. "hi kəd kɑz ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv . . . mɪstʃəf, mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ." ɹɪnz toʊn bɪkeɪm ə lɪɾəl kɹɪspɝ. ʃi wəd nɛvɝ stɛp oʊvɝ ðə baʊndɝiz, bʌt ʃi dɪslaɪkt ɛniwʌn θɪŋkɪŋ əɹ kɛɹləs. "leɪɾi nɑiən wəɾ əv ɪm bɛɹiɾ ʌndɝ ðə nɪɹəst snoʊdʒɹɪft, maɪ leɪɾi, əz aɪ meɪd sɝɾən hiz əwɛɹ. ʃiz nɛvɝ bɪn peɪʃənt. əz aɪm ʃʊɹ jə ɑɹ əwɛɹ. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðə nuz wi ɡɛt fɹəm ðə kæmps ɪz kwaɪt spɑɹs, tə seɪ ðə list, ən i maɪt si ə fju θɪŋz wi wəd laɪk tə noʊ."

"Greed will stop him, my Lady," Mistress Harfor replied calmly. "The thought of earning gold from the Lady Elayne as well as from Lady Naean is enough to make the man breathe hard. It's true, Lady Arymilla must already have heard of the gateways, but that only adds credit to Skellit's reason for going in person." "And if his greed is great enough for him to try earning still more gold by turning his coat a third time?" Dyelin said. "He could cause a great deal of . . . mischief, Mistress Harfor." Reene's tone became a little crisper. She would never step over the boundaries, but she disliked anyone thinking her careless. "Lady Naean would have him buried under the nearest snowdrift, my Lady, as I made certain he is aware. She has never been patient. As I am sure you are aware. In any case, the news we get from the camps is quite sparse, to say the least, and he might see a few things we would like to know."

"ɪf skɛlɪt kən tɛl əs wɪtʃ kæmp ɛɹəmɪlə, ɛləniə ən nɑiən wɪl bi ɪn ən wɛn, əl ɡɪv ɪm ɪz ɡoʊld wɪð maɪ oʊn hænd," ɪleɪn sɛd dɪlɪbɝətli. ɛləniə ən nɑiən steɪd kloʊs tə ɛɹəmɪlə, əɹ ʃi kɛpt əm kloʊs, ən ɛɹəmɪlə wɑz mʌtʃ lɛs peɪʃən ðən nɑiən, mʌtʃ lɛs wɪlɪŋ tə bɪliv ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ kəd fʌŋkʃən wɪθaʊɾ əɹ pɹɛzəns. ʃi spɛn hæf ʌv itʃ deɪ ɹaɪɾɪŋ fɹəm kæmp tə kæmp, ən nɛvɝ slɛpt ɪn ðə seɪm tu naɪts ɹʌnɪŋ, əz fɑɹ əz ɛniwʌn kəd lɝn. "ðæɾ ɪz ði oʊnli θɪŋ i kən tɛl əs ə ðə kæmps ðəɾ aɪ wɑnə noʊ." ɹɪn ɪnklaɪn əɹ hɛd. "æz jə seɪ, maɪ leɪɾi. əl si tə ɪt." ʃi tu ɔfən tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə seɪ θɪŋz stʃɹeɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə nɔɹi, bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ðət ʃi hæd hɝɾ ɛni ɹipɹuf. ʌv kɔɹs, ɪleɪn wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi æktʃəli  wəd ɹibjuk ðə wʊmən oʊpənli.

"If Skellit can tell us which camp Arymilla, Elenia and Naean will be in and when, I'll give him his gold with my own hand," Elayne said deliberately. Elenia and Naean stayed close to Arymilla, or she kept them close, and Arymilla was much less patient than Naean, much less willing to believe that anything could function without her presence. She spent half of each day riding from camp to camp, and never slept in the same two nights running, as far as anyone could learn. "That is the only thing he can tell us of the camps that I want to know." Reene inclined her head. "As you say, my Lady. I will see to it." She too often tried not to say things straight out in front of Norry, but she gave no sign that she had heard any reproof. Of course, Elayne was not sure she actually would rebuke the woman openly.

mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ wəd kəntɪnju tə pɝfɔɹm əɹ duɾiz pɹɑpɝli ɪf ʃi dɪd, ən ʃi sɝɾənli wəd kəntɪnju hʌntɪŋ spaɪz wɪð ʌndəmɪnɪʃt ɑɹɾɝ, ɪf fəɹ noʊ ʌðɝ ɹizən ðən ðɛɹ pɹɛzəns ɪn ðə pæləs əfɛndəd hɝ, jɛɾ ɪleɪn maɪt faɪn ə dʌzən ɪnkənvinjənsɪz ɪn ɛvɹi deɪ, ə dʌzən smɔl dɪskʌmfɝts ðəɾ æɾəd ʌp tə mɪzɝi, ən nɑɾ ə wʌn ðət ʃi kəd dɝɛkli ætʃɹəbjut tə ðə fɝs meɪd.

Mistress Harfor would continue to perform her duties properly if she did, and she certainly would continue hunting spies with undiminished ardor, if for no other reason than their presence in the palace offended her, yet Elayne might find a dozen inconveniences in every day, a dozen small discomforts that added up to misery, and not a one that she could directly attribute to the First Maid.

wi mʌs fɑloʊ ðə stɛps ə ðə dæns əz ʃʊɹli əz əɹ sɝvəns, hɝ mʌðɝ hæd toʊld əɹ wʌns.

We must follow the steps of the dance as surely as our servants, her mother had told her once.

jə kən kip haɪɹɪŋ nu sɝvəns, ən spɛn ɔl jəɹ taɪm tʃɹeɪnɪŋ əm ən sʌfɝɪŋ tɪl ðeɪ lɝn, oʊnli tə faɪn jɝsɛlf bæk wɛɹ jə stɑɹɾəd, əɹ jə kən æksɛp ðə ɹulz əz ðeɪ du, ən lɪv kʌmfɝɾəbli waɪl jə jus jəɹ taɪm tə ɹul.

You can keep hiring new servants, and spend all your time training them and suffering till they learn, only to find yourself back where you started, or you can accept the rules as they do, and live comfortably while you use your time to rule.

"θæŋk ju, mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ," ʃi sɛd, fəɹ wɪtʃ ʃi ɹəsivd ənʌðɝ pɹɪsaɪs kɝtsi. ɹɪn hɑɹfɝ wɑz ənʌðɝ u nu hɝ oʊn wɝθ. "mæstɝ nɔɹi?"

"Thank you, Mistress Harfor," she said, for which she received another precise curtsy. Reene Harfor was another who knew her own worth. "Master Norry?"

ðə hɛɹən-laɪk mæn ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən stɑp fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ɹɪn. ɪn səm weɪz, hi sɔ ðə ɡeɪtweɪz əz hɪz, ən nɑt tə bi tʃɹaɪfəld wɪð. "jɛs, maɪ leɪɾi. ʌv kɔɹs." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz ə dʌsti mɑnətoʊn.

The heron-like man gave a start and stopped frowning at Reene. In some ways, he saw the gateways as his, and not to be trifled with. "Yes, my Lady. Of course." His voice was a dusty monotone.

"aɪ tʃɹʌs ðə leɪɾi bɝdʒɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæz ɪnfɔɹm jə ʌv ðə mɝtʃəns' tʃɹeɪnz fɹəm ɪljən ən tɛɹ. aɪ bɪliv ðəɾ ɪz . . . ʌm . . . hɝ juʒəwəl kʌstəm wən jə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə sɪɾi." fəɹ ə moʊmənt, hɪz aɪz ɹɛstəd ɹipɹoʊtʃfəli ɑn bɝdʒɪt. hi wəd nɛvɝ θɪŋk ə kɑzɪŋ ɪleɪn ðə smɔləst ɪɹɪteɪʃən ivən ɪf ʃi ʃaʊɾəd ət hɪm, bʌɾ i lɪv baɪ hɪz oʊn sɛɾ ə ɹulz, ænd, ɪn ə maɪl fæʃən, hi ɹizɛntəd bɝdʒɪt stilɪŋ ɪz tʃæns tə ɪnumɝeɪt ðə wæɡənz ən kæsks ən bæɹəlz ðət hæɾ ɝaɪvd. hi dɪd lʌv ɪz nʌmbɝz. ət list, ɪleɪn səpoʊzd ɪt wɑz ɪn ə maɪl fæʃən. ðəɹ sim tə bi vɛɹi lɪɾəl hiɾ ɪn mɪstɝ nɔɹi.

"I trust the lady Birgitte already has informed you of the merchants' trains from Illian and Tear. I believe that is . . . um . . . her usual custom when you return to the city." For a moment, his eyes rested reproachfully on Birgitte. He would never think of causing Elayne the smallest irritation even if she shouted at him, but he lived by his own set of rules, and, in a mild fashion, he resented Birgitte stealing his chance to enumerate the wagons and casks and barrels that had arrived. He did love his numbers. At least, Elayne supposed it was in a mild fashion. There seemed to be very little heat in Mister Norry.

"ʃi dɪd," ʃi toʊl hɪm, wɪð dʒʌst ə hɪn ʌv əpɑlədʒi, nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə ɪmbɛɹəs hɪm. "aɪ fɪɹ səm ə ðə si foʊk ɑɹ livɪŋ ʌs. wɪl oʊnli hæv hæf ðə nʌmbɝ tə meɪk ɡeɪtweɪz æftɝ tədeɪ." hɪz fɪŋɡɝz spaɪɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə lɛðɝ foʊldɝ əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst əz ðoʊ filɪŋ ðə peɪpɝz wɪðɪn. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin ɪm kənsʌlt wʌn. "ɑ. ɑ. wi ʃæl . . . koʊp, maɪ leɪɾi." hælwɪn nɔɹi ɔlweɪz koʊpt. "tə kəntɪnju, ðəɹ wɝ naɪn ɑɹsənz jɛstɝdeɪ ən læs naɪt, slaɪtli mɔɹ ðən juʒəwəl. θɹi ətɛmps wɝ meɪd tə faɪɝ wɛɹhaʊzɪz stɔɹɪŋ fud. nʌn səksɛsfəl, aɪ heɪsən tə æd." hi maɪt heɪsən tə æd, jɛɾ i dɪɾ ɪɾ ɪn ðət seɪm dʒɹoʊn. "ɪf aɪ meɪ seɪ soʊ, ðə ɡɑɹdz pətʃɹoʊlɪŋ ðə stʃɹits ɑɹ hævɪŋ ən ɪfɛkt - ðə nʌmbɝ ʌv əsɔls ən θɛfs əz dɪklaɪn tə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən nɔɹməl fəɹ ðɪs taɪm ə jɪɹ - bʌɾ ɪt simz ɛvəɾənt ðət səm hæn ɪz dɝɛktɪŋ ði ɑɹsənz. sɛvəntin bɪldɪŋz wɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪd, ɔl seɪv wʌn əbændənd," hɪz maʊθ nɛɹoʊɾ ɪn dɪsəpɹuvəl; ɪt wəd teɪk fɑɹ mɔɹ ðən ə sidʒ tə meɪk ɪm liv keɪɛmlɪn, "æn ɪn maɪ əpɪnjən, ɔl ə ðə faɪɝz wɝ pleɪst soʊ əz tə dʒɹɔ ðə wɔɾɝ-wæɡənz əz fɑɹ əz pɑsəbəl fɹəm ðə wɛɹhaʊzɪz wɛɹ ətɛmps wɝ meɪd. aɪ naʊ bɪliv ðət pæɾɝn hoʊlz fəɹ ɛvɹi faɪɝ wiv sin ðiz pæst wiks."

"She did," she told him, with just a hint of apology, not enough to embarrass him. "I fear some of the Sea Folk are leaving us. We'll only have half the number to make gateways after today." His fingers spidered across the leather folder against his chest as though feeling the papers within. She had never seen him consult one. "Ah. Ah. We shall . . . cope, my Lady." Halwin Norry always coped. "To continue, there were nine arsons yesterday and last night, slightly more than usual. Three attempts were made to fire warehouses storing food. None successful, I hasten to add." He might hasten to add, yet he did it in that same drone. "If I may say so, the Guards patrolling the streets are having an effect - the number of assaults and thefts has declined to little more than normal for this time of year - but it seems evident that some hand is directing the arsons. Seventeen buildings were destroyed, all save one abandoned," his mouth narrowed in disapproval; it would take far more than a siege to make him leave Caemlyn, "and in my opinion, all of the fires were placed so as to draw the water-wagons as far as possible from the warehouses where attempts were made. I now believe that pattern holds for every fire we've seen these past weeks."

"bɝdʒɪt?" ɪleɪn sɛd.

"Birgitte?" Elayne said.

"aɪ kən tʃɹaɪ plɑɾɪŋ ðə wɛɹhaʊzɪz ɑn ə mæp," bɝdʒɪt ɹɪplaɪd daʊtfəli, "æn pʊɾ ɛkstʃɹə ɡɑɹdz ɑn ðə stʃɹits ðət sim tə bi fɑɹðəst əweɪ, bʌɾ ɪts stɪl livɪŋ ə lɑt tə flɑ . . . ʌ . . . tə tʃæns." ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk təwɔɹd mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ, bʌɾ ɪleɪn fɛlt ə feɪn hɪn ʌv ə blʌʃ fɹəm hɝ. "ɛnibəɾi kən əv flɪn ən stil ɪn ə bɛl paʊtʃ, ən ɪɾ oʊnli teɪks ə mɪnət wɪð səm dʒɹaɪ stʃɹɔ tə stɑɹɾ ə faɪɝ."

"I can try plotting the warehouses on a map," Birgitte replied doubtfully, "and put extra Guards on the streets that seem to be farthest away, but it's still leaving a lot to fla . . . uh . . . to chance." She did not look toward Mistress Harfor, but Elayne felt a faint hint of a blush from her. "Anybody can have flint and steel in a belt pouch, and it only takes a minute with some dry straw to start a fire."

"du wʌt jə kæn," ɪleɪn toʊl hɝ. ɪt wəd bi pjʊɹ lʌk ɪf ðeɪ kɑɾ ən ɑɹsənəst ɪn ði ækt, ən bɪɑn lʌk ɪf ði ɑɹsənəs kəd seɪ mɔɹ ðən ðət ʃi hæd bɪn hændəd kɔɪn baɪ sʌmwʌn wɪð ə hʊd haɪɾɪŋ əɹ feɪs. tʃɹeɪsɪŋ ðət ɡoʊl bæk tə ɛɹəmɪlə əɹ ɛləniə əɹ nɑiən wəd ɹikwaɪɝ mæt kɔθənz lʌk. "hæv jə ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ, mæstɝ nɔɹi?"

"Do what you can," Elayne told her. It would be pure luck if they caught an arsonist in the act, and beyond luck if the arsonist could say more than that she had been handed coin by someone with a hood hiding her face. Tracing that gold back to Arymilla or Elenia or Naean would require Mat Cauthon's luck. "Have you anything more, Master Norry?"

nʌklɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ noʊz, hi əvɔɪɾəd əɹ ɡeɪz. "ɪɾ əz . . . ʌ . . . kʌm tə maɪ ətɛnʃən," hi sɛd hɛzɪɾəntli, "ðæt mɑɹn, ɑɝɔn ən sɑɝən əv ɔl ɹisənli teɪkən vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ loʊnz əɡɛns ðə ɹɛvənuz ə ðɛɹ ɪsteɪts." mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝz aɪbɹaʊz klaɪm bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɡɑɾ əm ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl.

Knuckling his long nose, he avoided her gaze. "It has . . . uh . . . come to my attention," he said hesitantly, "that Marne, Arawn and Sarand have all recently taken very large loans against the revenues of their estates." Mistress Harfor's eyebrows climbed before she got them under control.

piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɝ tikʌp, ɪleɪn dɪskʌvɝd ðət ʃi hæɾ æktʃəli  ɛmptiɾ ɪt. bæŋkɝz nɛvɝ toʊld ɛniwʌn haʊ mʌtʃ ðeɪ hæd loʊn tə hum, əɹ əɡɛnst wʌt, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ æsk haʊ hi nu. ɪt wəd bi . . . ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ. fəɹ boʊθ ə ðɛm. ʃi smaɪld wən əɹ sɪstɝ tʊk ðə kʌp, ðən ɡɹɪməst wən eɪvinhə ɹɪtɝnd wɪð ɪt fɪld əɡɛn. eɪvinhə sim tə θɪŋk ʃi ʃəd dʒɹɪŋk wik ti tɪl əɹ aɪz floʊɾəd! ɡoʊts mɪlk wɑz bɛɾɝ, bʌt dɪʃwɔɾɝ fəɹ ti wəd du. wɛl, ʃi wəd hoʊl ðə blʌɾi kʌp, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə dʒɹɪŋk.

Peering into her teacup, Elayne discovered that she had actually emptied it. Bankers never told anyone how much they had loaned to whom, or against what, but she did not ask how he knew. It would be . . . embarrassing. For both of them. She smiled when her sister took the cup, then grimaced when Aviendha returned with it filled again. Aviendha seemed to think she should drink weak tea till her eyes floated! Goat's milk was better, but dishwater for tea would do. Well, she would hold the bloody cup, but she did not have to drink.

"ðə mɝsənɛɹiz," daɪɛlɪn ɡɹaʊld, ðə hiɾ ɪn əɹ aɪz ɪnʌf tə meɪk ə bɛɹ bæk ʌp. "aɪv sɛɾ ɪt bɪfɔɹ, ən əl seɪ ɪɾ əɡɛn; ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɪð sɛl-sɔɹdz ɪz ðeɪ doʊn ɔlweɪz steɪ bɑt." ʃi hæɾ əpoʊz haɪɹɪŋ mɝsənɛɹiz tə hɛlp dɪfɛn ðə sɪɾi fɹəm ðə stɑɹt, ðoʊ ðə fækt wɑz ðət wɪθaʊt ðɛm, ɛɹəmɪlə cʊɾə ɹɪɾən ɪn wɪð əɹ ɑɹmi baɪ ɛni ɡeɪt ʃi pɪkt, əɹ nɪɹ ɪnʌf. ðəɹ sɪmpli hæd nɑt bɪn ɪnʌf mɛn tə ɡɑɹɾ ɛvɹi ɡeɪt pɹɑpɝli ʌðɝwaɪz, mʌtʃ lɛs mæn ðə wɔlz.

"The mercenaries," Dyelin growled, the heat in her eyes enough to make a bear back up. "I've said it before, and I'll say it again; the trouble with sell-swords is they don't always stay bought." She had opposed hiring mercenaries to help defend the city from the start, though the fact was that without them, Arymilla could have ridden in with her army by any gate she picked, or near enough. There simply had not been enough men to guard every gate properly otherwise, much less man the walls.

bɝdʒɪt hæɾ əpoʊz ðə mɝsənɛɹiz, tu, jɛt ʃi hæɾ æksɛptɪɾ ɪleɪnz ɹizənz, ɪf ɹɪlʌktənli. ʃi stɪl dɪstʃɹʌstəd ðɛm, bʌt naʊ ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ði ɑɹm ʌv ə tʃɛɹ nɪɹ ðə faɪɝ, ʃi ɹɛstəɾ əɹ spɝd buɾ ɑn ðə sit. "mɝsənɛɹiz əv ə kənsɝn fəɹ ðɛɹ ɹɛpjəteɪʃənz ɪf nɑt ðɛɹ ɑnɝ. tʃeɪnʒɪŋ saɪdz ɪz wʌn θɪŋ; æktʃəli  bɪtʃɹeɪɪŋ ə ɡeɪɾ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ɪntaɪɝli. ə kʌmpəni ðət dɪd ðət wəd nɛvɝ bi haɪɝɾ əɡɛn, ɛniwɛɹ. ɛɹəmɪlə wəɾ əv tə ɔfɝ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə kæptən tə lɪv ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz laɪf laɪk ə lɔɹd, ən ət lis kənvɪns ɪz mɛn ðeɪd bi eɪbəl tə, əz wɛl." nɔɹi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. ivən ðət saʊndəd dʌsti, sʌmhaʊ. "ɪt simz ðeɪ meɪ hæv bɑɹoʊɾ əɡɛns ðə seɪm ɹɛvənuz twaɪs əɹ ivən θɹi taɪmz. ðə bæŋkɝz, ʌv kɔɹs, ɑɹ . . . ʌnəwɛɹ . . . ʌv ðɪs, əz jɛt." bɝdʒɪt bɪɡæn tə kɝs, ðən kʌt hɝsɛlf ɔf. daɪɛlɪn skaʊld əɾ əɹ waɪn hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪt tɝn saʊɝ. eɪvinhə skwizd ɪleɪnz hænd, dʒʌst ə kwɪk pɹɛʃɝ kwɪkli ɹilist. ðə faɪɝ kɹækəld ɪn ə ʃaʊɝ ə spɑɹks, səm nɪɹli ɹitʃɪŋ ðə kɑɹpəts. "ðə mɝsənɛɹi kʌmpəniz wɪl əv tə bi wɑtʃt." ɪleɪn ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə fɔɹstɔl bɝdʒɪt. ði ʌðɝ wʊmən hæd nɑɾ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌt ðə bɑnd ʃaʊɾəd vɑljumz. "ju wɪl əv tə faɪn ðə mɛn fəɹ ɪt sʌmwɛɹ." laɪt! ðeɪ sim tə bi ɡɑɹɾɪŋ əɡɛnst əz mɛni pipəl ɪnsaɪd ðə sɪɾi əz aʊtsaɪd! "ɪt ʃʊdn teɪk ðət mɛni, bʌt wi nid tə noʊ ɪf ðeɪ stɑɹt tə æk stʃɹeɪnʒli, əɹ sikɹəɾɪvli, bɝdʒɪt. ðət maɪt bi əɹ oʊnli wɔɹnɪŋ." "aɪ wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ wʌt tə də ɪf wʌn ə ðə kʌmpəniz dʌz sɛl aʊt," bɝdʒɪt sɛd ɹaɪli. "noʊɪŋ woʊn bi ɪnʌf ənlɛs aɪ hæv mɛn tə ɹʌʃ tə ɛni ɡeɪɾ aɪ θɪŋk gɑnə tə bi bɪtʃɹeɪd. ən hæf ðə soʊlʒɝz ɪn ðə sɪɾi ɑɹ mɝsənɛɹiz. hæf ðə ɹɛst ɑɹ oʊl mɛn u wɝ lɪvɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ pɛnʃənz ə fju mʌnθs ɡɔn. əl ʃɪf ðə mɝsənɛɹiz' poʊstɪŋz əɾ ɪɹɛɡjəlɝ ɪɾəl wɪl bi hɑɹɾɝ fəɹ əm tə bɪtʃɹeɪ ə ɡeɪɾ ɪf ðeɪ kæn bi ʃʊɹ wɛɹ ðəl bi təmɑɹoʊ, bʌt ðət dʌzn meɪk ɪɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl." pɹoʊɾɛst haʊ ʃi wəd ðət ʃi wɑz noʊ dʒɛnɝəl, ʃi hæd sin mɔɹ bæɾəlz ən sidʒəz ðən ɛni tɛn dʒɛnɝəlz lɪvɪŋ, ən ʃi nu vɛɹi wɛl haʊ ðiz mæɾɝz ənfoʊldəd.

Birgitte had opposed the mercenaries, too, yet she had accepted Elayne's reasons, if reluctantly. She still distrusted them, but now she shook her head. Sitting on the arm of a chair near the fire, she rested her spurred boot on the seat. "Mercenaries have a concern for their reputations if not their honor. Changing sides is one thing; actually betraying a gate is something else entirely. A company that did that would never be hired again, anywhere. Arymilla would have to offer enough for a captain to live the rest of his life like a lord, and at least convince his men they'd be able to, as well." Norry cleared his throat. Even that sounded dusty, somehow. "It seems they may have borrowed against the same revenues twice or even three times. The bankers, of course, are . . . unaware . . . of this, as yet." Birgitte began to curse, then cut herself off. Dyelin scowled at her wine hard enough to make it turn sour. Aviendha squeezed Elayne's hand, just a quick pressure quickly released. The fire crackled in a shower of sparks, some nearly reaching the carpets. "The mercenary companies will have to be watched." Elayne raised a hand to forestall Birgitte. The other woman had not opened her mouth, but the bond shouted volumes. "You will have to find the men for it somewhere." Light! They seemed to be guarding against as many people inside the city as outside! "It shouldn't take that many, but we need to know if they start to act strangely, or secretively, Birgitte. That might be our only warning." "I was thinking what to do if one of the companies does sell out," Birgitte said wryly. "Knowing won't be enough unless I have men to rush to any gate I think is going to be betrayed. And half the soldiers in the city are mercenaries. Half the rest are old men who were living on their pensions a few months gone. I'll shift the mercenaries' postings at irregular intervals. It will be harder for them to betray a gate if they can't be sure where they'll be tomorrow, but that doesn't make it impossible." Protest how she would that she was no general, she had seen more battles and sieges than any ten generals living, and she knew very well how these matters unfolded.

ɪleɪn ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt ʃi hæd waɪn ɪn əɹ kʌp. ɔlmoʊst. "ɪz ðəɹ ɛni tʃæns ðə bæŋkɝz wɪl lɝn wʌt jə hæv, mæstɝ nɔɹi? bɪfɔɹ ðə loʊnz kʌm du?" ɪf ðeɪ dɪd, səm maɪt dɪsaɪd ðeɪ pɹəfɝɾ ɛɹəmɪlə ɑn ðə θɹoʊn. ʃi kəd stʃɹɪp ðə kʌntʃɹiz kɑfɝz tə ɹipeɪ ðoʊz loʊnz, ðɛn. ʃi maɪɾ ivən də ɪt. mɝtʃəns ɹoʊd ðə pəlɪɾəkəl wɪnz, wɪtʃɛvɝ weɪ ðeɪ blu. bæŋkɝz hæd bɪn noʊn tə ətɛmp tə ɪnfluəns ɪvɛns. "ɪn maɪ əpɪnjən, ɪts ənlaɪkli, maɪ leɪɾi. ðeɪ wəɾ əv tə . . .

Elayne almost wished she had wine in her cup. Almost. "Is there any chance the bankers will learn what you have, Master Norry? Before the loans come due?" If they did, some might decide they preferred Arymilla on the throne. She could strip the country's coffers to repay those loans, then. She might even do it. Merchants rode the political winds, whichever way they blew. Bankers had been known to attempt to influence events. "In my opinion, it is unlikely, my Lady. They would have to . . .

ʌm . . . æsk ðə ɹaɪt kwɛstʃənz ə ðə ɹaɪt pipəl, bʌt bæŋkɝz ɑɹ nɔɹməli . . . ʌm . . . kloʊsəməðd . . .

um . . . ask the right questions of the right people, but bankers are normally . . . um . . . closemouthed . . .

wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ. jɛs, aɪ θɪŋk ɪɾ ənlaɪkli. fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ." ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə bi dʌn ɪn ɛni keɪs. ɪksɛp tə tɛl bɝdʒɪt ðəɹ maɪt bi ə nu sɔɹs fəɹ əsæsənz ən kɪdnæpɝz. oʊnli ɡɪvən əɹ hɑɹɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən ən ə sʌɾən ɡɹɪmnəs ɪn ðə bɑnd, ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɹilaɪz ðæt. ðəɹ wəd bi lɪɾəl tʃæns ə kipɪŋ ðə bɑɾiɡɑɹd ʌndɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd wɪmən, naʊ. ɪf ðəɹ ɛvɝ hæd bɪn.

with one another. Yes, I think it unlikely. For the time being." There was nothing to be done in any case. Except to tell Birgitte there might be a new source for assassins and kidnappers. Only given her hard expression and a sudden grimness in the bond, she had already realized that. There would be little chance of keeping the bodyguard under a hundred women, now. If there ever had been.

"θæŋk ju, mæstɝ nɔɹi," ɪleɪn sɛd. "juv dʌn wɛl, əz ɔlweɪz. lemi noʊ ɪmiɾiətli ɪf jə si ɛni ɪndəkeɪʃənz ðət ðə bæŋkɝz əv æsk ðoʊz kwɛstʃənz."

"Thank you, Master Norry," Elayne said. "You've done well, as always. Let me know immediately if you see any indications that the bankers have asked those questions."

"ʌv kɔɹs, maɪ leɪɾi," hi mɝmɝd, dʌkɪŋ ɪz hɛd laɪk ən ɛɡɹɪt dɑɹɾɪŋ æftɝ ə fɪʃ. "maɪ leɪɾi ɪz vɛɹi kaɪnd." wən ɹɪn ən nɔɹi lɛf ðə ɹum, hɪm hoʊldɪŋ ðə dɔɹ fəɹ əɹ ən meɪkɪŋ ə baʊ ðət wɑz ə hɛɹ mɔɹ ɡɹeɪsfəl ðən juʒəwəl ən əɹ ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm ə slaɪt baʊ ʌv əɹ hɛɾ əz ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd pæst ɪm ɪndə ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, eɪvinhə dɪd nɑt ɹilis ðə wɔɹd ʃi wɑz hoʊldɪŋ. əz sun əz ðə dɔɹ kloʊzd, ɪts sɑləd saʊn swɑloʊd baɪ ðə wɔɹd, ʃi sɛd, "sʌmwʌn tʃɹaɪd tə lɪsən." ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə tɛl u - ə blæk sɪstɝ? ə kjʊɹiəs kɪnswʊmən? -  bʌɾ ət lis ði ivzdʒɹɑp hæd feɪld. nɑt ðət ðəɹ wɑz mʌtʃ tʃæns ʌv ɛniwʌn ɡɛɾɪŋ pæst wʌn ʌv eɪvinhəz wɔɹdz, meɪbi nɑɾ ivən ðə fɔɹseɪkən, bʌt ʃi wʊɾə spoʊkən ʌp ɹaɪɾ əweɪ ɪf sʌmwʌn hæd.

"Of course, my Lady," he murmured, ducking his head like an egret darting after a fish. "My Lady is very kind." When Reene and Norry left the room, him holding the door for her and making a bow that was a hair more graceful than usual and her giving him a slight bow of her head as she glided past him into the corridor, Aviendha did not release the ward she was holding. As soon as the door closed, its solid sound swallowed by the ward, she said, "Someone tried to listen." Elayne shook her head. There was no way to tell who - a Black sister? A curious Kinswoman? -  but at least the eavesdrop had failed. Not that there was much chance of anyone getting past one of Aviendha's wards, maybe not even the Forsaken, but she would have spoken up right away if someone had.

daɪɛlɪn tʊk eɪvinhəz ənaʊnsmənt wɪð lɛs əplɑm, mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt ðə si foʊk. ʃi hæd nɑt tɝn ə hɛɹ ət hɪɹɪŋ ðət hæf ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ livɪŋ, nɑɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ɹɪn ən nɔɹi, bʌt naʊ ʃi dɪmændəd tə noʊ ðə hoʊl stɔɹi. "aɪ nɛvɝ dɪd tʃɹʌs zeɪɾə," ʃi ɡɹʌmbəld wən ɪleɪn fɪnɪʃt. "ðɪs əɡɹimən saʊnz ɡʊd fəɹ tʃɹeɪd, aɪ səpoʊz, bʌɾ ɪt wʊdn sɝpɹaɪz mi ɪf ʃi hæd wʌn ə ðə wɪndfɪndɝz tʃɹaɪ tə lɪsən ɪn. ʃi stʃɹʌk mi əz ə wʊmən u wɑns tə noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs ɪt maɪt bi jusfəl wʌn deɪ." ðəɹ wɑz vɛɹi lɪɾəl hɛzɪɾənt əbaʊt daɪɛlɪn, jɛt ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd naʊ, ɹoʊlɪŋ əɹ waɪnkʌp bɪtwin əɹ pɑmz. "ɑɹ jə sɝɾən ðɪs . . . ðɪs bikən . . . kæn hɑɹm ʌs, ɪleɪn?" "æz sɝɾən əz aɪ kən bi, daɪɛlɪn. ɪf ɪt wɑz gɑnə kɹæk oʊpən ðə wɝld, aɪ θɪŋk ɪt wəɾ əv baɪ naʊ." eɪvinhə læft, bʌt daɪɛlɪn tɝn kwaɪt peɪl. ɹɪli! səmtaɪmz jə hæd tə læf ɪf oʊnli tə kip fɹəm kɹaɪɪŋ.

Dyelin took Aviendha's announcement with less aplomb, muttering about the Sea Folk. She had not turned a hair at hearing that half the Windfinders were leaving, not in front of Reene and Norry, but now she demanded to know the whole story. "I never did trust Zaida," she grumbled when Elayne finished. "This agreement sounds good for trade, I suppose, but it wouldn't surprise me if she had one of the Windfinders try to listen in. She struck me as a woman who wants to know everything, just in case it might be useful one day." There was very little hesitant about Dyelin, yet she hesitated now, rolling her winecup between her palms. "Are you certain this . . . this beacon . . . can't harm us, Elayne?" "As certain as I can be, Dyelin. If it was going to crack open the world, I think it would have by now." Aviendha laughed, but Dyelin turned quite pale. Really! Sometimes you had to laugh if only to keep from crying.

"ɪf wi tɛɹi mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ naʊ ðət nɔɹi ən mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ ɑɹ ɡɔn," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, "sʌmbɑɾi maɪt stɑɹt wʌndɝɪŋ waɪ." ʃi weɪvd ə hæn ət ðə wɔlz, ɪndəkeɪɾɪŋ ðə wɔɹd ʃi kəd nɑt si. ʃi nu ɪt wɑz stɪl ɪn pleɪs, ðoʊ. ðə deɪli miɾɪŋz wɪð ðə fɝs meɪɾ ən ðə fɝs klɝk ɔlweɪz kənsild ə lɪɾəl sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ.

"If we tarry much longer now that Norry and Mistress Harfor are gone," Birgitte said, "somebody might start wondering why." She waved a hand at the walls, indicating the ward she could not see. She knew it was still in place, though. The daily meetings with the First Maid and the First Clerk always concealed a little something more.

ɛvɹiwʌn ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn əɹ əz ʃi muvd ə pɛɹ ʌv ɡoʊldən si foʊk pɔɹsələn boʊlz ɑn wʌn ə ðə saɪd teɪbəlz ən pʊld ə mʌtʃfoʊldəd mæp fɹəm ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ ʃɔɹt koʊt. ɪt ɹoʊd ðəɹ ɔlweɪz, ɪksɛpt wən ʃi slɛpt, ən ðən ɪt ɹɪzaɪɾɪd bɪniθ əɹ pɪloʊ. spɹɛɾ aʊt, wɪð ɛmpti waɪnkʌps ət ðə kɔɹnɝz tə hoʊld ɪt flæt, ðə mæp dɪspleɪɾ ændɝ fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn tə ðə bɔɹɾɝ bɪtwin ɔltɑɹə ən mʊɹændi.

Everyone gathered around her as she moved a pair of golden Sea Folk porcelain bowls on one of the side tables and pulled a muchfolded map from inside her short coat. It rode there always, except when she slept, and then it resided beneath her pillow. Spread out, with empty winecups at the corners to hold it flat, the map displayed Andor from the River Erinin to the border between Altara and Murandy.

ɪn tʃɹuθ, ɪt cʊɾə bɪn sɛd tə ʃoʊ ɔl ʌv ændɝ, sɪns wʌt leɪ fɑɹðɝ wɛs hæd bɪn oʊnli hæf ʌndɝ keɪɛmlɪnz kəntʃɹoʊl fəɹ dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz. ɪt hæd hɑɹdli bɪn ə mæstɝpis ə ðə mæpmeɪkɝz ɑɹt tə bɪɡɪn wɪð, ən kɹisɪz əbskjʊɹd mʌtʃ ə ðə dɪteɪl, bʌɾ ɪt ʃoʊd ðə tɝeɪn wɛl ɪnʌf, ən ɛvɹi taʊn ən vɪlədʒ wɑz mɑɹkt, ɛvɹi ɹoʊɾ ən bɹɪdʒ ən fɔɹd. ɪleɪn sɛɾ əɹ tikʌp daʊn əɾ ɑɹmz lɛŋθ fɹəm ðə mæp tə əvɔɪd spɪlɪŋ ɑn ɪɾ ən æɾɪŋ mɔɹ steɪnz. ən tə ɹɪd hɝsɛlf ə ðə ɹɛtʃɪɾ ɪkskjus fəɹ ti.

In truth, it could have been said to show all of Andor, since what lay farther west had been only half under Caemlyn's control for generations. It had hardly been a masterpiece of the mapmaker's art to begin with, and creases obscured much of the detail, but it showed the terrain well enough, and every town and village was marked, every road and bridge and ford. Elayne set her teacup down at arm's length from the map to avoid spilling on it and adding more stains. And to rid herself of the wretched excuse for tea.

"ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz ɑɹ muvɪŋ," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ tə ðə fɔɹəsts nɔɹθ ə keɪɛmlɪn, tə ə spɑɾ əbʌv ændɝz nɔɹðmoʊs bɔɹɾɝ, "bʌt ðeɪ hævən kʌvɝd mʌtʃ ɡɹaʊnd. ət ðɪs ɹeɪt, ðəl bi wɛl oʊvɝ ə mʌnθ ɡɛɾɪŋ kloʊs tə keɪɛmlɪn." swɝlɪŋ əɹ sɪlvɝ kʌp, daɪɛlɪn pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə dɑɹk waɪn, ðən lʊkt ʌp sʌɾənli. "aɪ θɔt jə nɔɹðɝnɝz wɝ juz tə snoʊ, leɪɾi bɝdʒɪt." ivən naʊ ʃi hæd tə pɹoʊb, ən tɛlɪŋ əɹ nɑt tə wəɾ oʊnli meɪk əɹ tɛn taɪmz əz sɝɾən ðət bɝdʒɪt wɑz haɪɾɪŋ sikɹəts, ən twɛnti taɪmz əz dɪtɝmən tə lɝn ðɛm. eɪvinhə skaʊld ət ði oʊldɝ wʊmən - wən ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɪn ɑ ʌv bɝdʒɪt, səmtaɪmz ʃi bɪkeɪm fɪɹsli pɹətɛktɪv ə bɝdʒɪts sikɹəts - bʌt bɝdʒɪt hɝsɛlf mɛt daɪɛlɪnz ɡeɪz lɛvəli, wɪð noʊ hɪn ʌv əlɑɹm ɪn ðə bɑnd. ʃi hæd bɪkʌm kwaɪt kʌmftəɹbəl wɪð ðə laɪ əbaʊɾ əɹ ɔɹədʒɪnz. "aɪ hævən bɪn bæk tə kændɝ ɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm." ðət wɑz sɪmpəl tʃɹuθ, ðoʊ ɪt hæd bɪn fɑɹ lɔŋɡɝ ðən daɪɛlɪn kəɾ əv ɪmædʒənd. ðə kʌntʃɹi hæd nɑɾ ivən bɪn kɔl kændɝ, ðɛn. "bʌt noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt jəɹ juz tə, muvɪŋ tu hʌnʒɹəd θaʊzən soʊlʒɝz, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn noʊz haʊ mɛni kæmp fɑloʊɝz, ɪz sloʊ ɡoʊɪŋ ɪn wɪntɝ. wɝs, aɪ sɛn mɪstʃɹəs oʊkɑlɪn ən mɪstʃɹəs foʊt tə vɪzət səm ə ðə vɪlədʒəz ə fju maɪlz saʊθ ə ðə bɔɹɾɝ." səbaɪn oʊkɑlɪn ən dʒulənjə foʊt wɝ kɪnswɪmən u kəd tʃɹævəl. "ðeɪ seɪ ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz θɪŋk ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz ɑɹ kæmp fəɹ ðə wɪntɝ."

"The Borderlanders are moving," Birgitte said, pointing to the forests north of Caemlyn, to a spot above Andor's northmost border, "but they haven't covered much ground. At this rate, they'll be well over a month getting close to Caemlyn." Swirling her silver cup, Dyelin peered into the dark wine, then looked up suddenly. "I thought you northerners were used to snow, Lady Birgitte." Even now she had to probe, and telling her not to would only make her ten times as certain that Birgitte was hiding secrets, and twenty times as determined to learn them. Aviendha scowled at the older woman - when she was not in awe of Birgitte, sometimes she became fiercely protective of Birgitte's secrets - but Birgitte herself met Dyelin's gaze levelly, with no hint of alarm in the bond. She had become quite comfortable with the lie about her origins. "I haven't been back to Kandor in a long time." That was simple truth, though it had been far longer than Dyelin could have imagined. The country had not even been called Kandor, then. "But no matter what you're used to, moving two hundred thousand soldiers, not to mention the Light alone knows how many camp followers, is slow going in winter. Worse, I sent Mistress Ocalin and Mistress Fote to visit some of the villages a few miles south of the border." Sabeine Ocalin and Julanya Fote were Kinswomen who could Travel. "They say the villagers think the Borderlanders are camped for the winter."

ɪleɪn tskt, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə mæp əz ʃi tʃɹeɪs dɪstənsəz wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ. ʃi wɑz kaʊntɪŋ ɑn nuz ə ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz, ɪf nɑɾ ɑn ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz ðɛmsɛlvz. wɝɾ ʌv ən ɑɹmi ðət saɪz ɛntɝɪŋ ændɝ ʃəd bi lipɪŋ əhɛɾ ʌv ɪt laɪk waɪldfaɪɝ ɪn dʒɹaɪ ɡɹæs. noʊ wʌn bʌɾ ə ful kəd bɪliv ðeɪ hæd mɑɹtʃt ɔl ðoʊz hʌnʒɹədz ə liɡz tə tʃɹaɪ kɑŋkɝɪŋ ændɝ, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn u hɝd wəd bi spɛkjəleɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ ɪntɛntʃənz ən wʌt tə də əbaʊt ðɛm, ə dɪfɹən əpɪnjən ɑn ɛvɹi tʌŋ. wʌns ðə nuz bɪɡæn tə spɹɛd, ɛniweɪ. wən ɪt dɪd, ʃi hæɾ ən ædvæntɪdʒ oʊvɝ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. ʃi hæɾ ɝeɪnʒd fəɹ ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz tə kɹɔs ɪndə ændɝ ɪndə ðə fɝs pleɪs, ən ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɝeɪnʒd fəɹ əm tə liv. ðə tʃɔɪs hæd nɑt bɪn vɛɹi dɪfəkəlt. stɑpɪŋ əm wʊɾə bɪn ə blʌɾi əfɛɹ, ɪf ɪt cʊɾə bɪn mænədʒd əɾ ɔl, ən ðeɪ wɑntəd noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðə wɪdθ ʌv ə ɹoʊd tə mɑɹtʃ ɔnwɝɾ ɪndə mʊɹændi, wɛɹ ðeɪ θɔt ðeɪ wəd faɪn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ðət wɑz əɹ duɪŋ, əz wɛl. ðeɪ hɪd ðɛɹ ɹizən fəɹ sikɪŋ ɹænd, ən ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə ɡɪv əm ə tʃɹu loʊkeɪʃən, nɑt wən ðeɪ hæɾ əz mɛni əz ə dʌzən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð əm ən hɪd ðət fækt, tu. bʌt wʌns nuz ə ðɛm ɹitʃt ðə haɪ sits. . . . "ɪt ʃəd wɝk," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi, wi kən plæn ɹumɝz ə ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz aʊɝsɛlvz."

Elayne tsked, frowning at the map as she traced distances with a finger. She was counting on news of the Borderlanders, if not on the Borderlanders themselves. Word of an army that size entering Andor should be leaping ahead of it like wildfire in dry grass. No one but a fool could believe they had marched all those hundreds of leagues to try conquering Andor, but everyone who heard would be speculating on their intentions and what to do about them, a different opinion on every tongue. Once the news began to spread, anyway. When it did, she had an advantage over everyone else. She had arranged for the Borderlanders to cross into Andor into the first place, and she had already arranged for them to leave. The choice had not been very difficult. Stopping them would have been a bloody affair, if it could have been managed at all, and they wanted no more than the width of a road to march onward into Murandy, where they thought they would find the Dragon Reborn. That was her doing, as well. They hid their reason for seeking Rand, and she was not about to give them a true location, not when they had as many as a dozen Aes Sedai with them and hid that fact, too. But once news of them reached the High Seats. . . . "It should work," she said softly. "If necessary, we can plant rumors of the Borderlanders ourselves."

"ɪt ʃəd wɝk," daɪɛlɪn əɡɹid, ðən æɾəd ɪn ə dɑɹk vɔɪs, "æz lɔŋ əz bæʃɪɹ ən beɪl kip ə kloʊs ɹeɪn ɑn ðɛɹ mɛn. ɪts gɑnə bi ə vɑləɾəl mɪks, wɪð bɔɹɾɝləndɝz, il ən ðə lidʒən ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɔl wɪðɪn ə fju maɪlz ʌv wʌn ənʌðɝ. ən aɪ kæn si haʊ wi kən bi ʃʊɹ ði æʃəmən woʊn də sʌmθɪŋ mæd." ʃi ɛndəd wɪð ə snɪf. ɪn əɹ bʊk, ə mæn hæd tə bi mæɾ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs, əɹ i wəd nɛvɝ əv tʃoʊzən tə bɪkʌm ən æʃəmən. eɪvinhə nɑɾəd. ʃi dɪsəɡɹid wɪð daɪɛlɪn ɔlmoʊst əz fɹikwənli əz bɝdʒɪt dɪd, bʌt fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, ði æʃəmən wɝ wʌn θɪŋ ðeɪ əɡɹiɾ ɑn.

"It should work," Dyelin agreed, then added in a dark voice, "As long as Bashere and Bael keep a close rein on their men. It's going to be a volatile mix, with Borderlanders, Aiel and the Legion of the Dragon all within a few miles of one another. And I can't see how we can be sure the Asha'man won't do something mad." She ended with a sniff. In her book, a man had to be mad in the first place, or he would never have chosen to become an Asha'man. Aviendha nodded. She disagreed with Dyelin almost as frequently as Birgitte did, but for the most part, the Asha'man were one thing they agreed on.

"aɪl meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz steɪ wɛl klɪɹ ə ðə blæk taʊɝ," ɪleɪn ɹiəʃʊɹd ðɛm, ðoʊ ʃi hæd dʌn ðə seɪm bɪfɔɹ. ivən daɪɛlɪn nu ðət beɪl ən bæʃɪɹ wəd hoʊl ðɛɹ fɔɹsɪz ɪn tʃɛk  -  niðɝ mæn wɑntəɾ ə bæɾəl i dɪd nɑt nid, ən dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ sɝɾənli wəd nɑt faɪɾ ɪz oʊn kʌntʃɹimɪn  -  bʌɾ ɛniwʌn hæɾ ə ɹaɪt tə bi ənizi əbaʊt ði æʃəmən ən wʌt ðeɪ maɪt du. ʃi slɪɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝ fɹəm ðə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ aɪdɛntəfaɪɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn əkɹɔs ðə fju maɪlz tə ðə ɡɹaʊn ði æʃəmən hæd jusɝpt. ðə blæk taʊɝ wɑz nɑt mɑɹkt, bʌt ʃi nu ɔl tu wɛl ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ɪt leɪ. ət lis ðət wɑz wɛl əweɪ fɹəm ðə luɡɹd ɹoʊd. sɛndɪŋ ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz saʊθ ɪndə mʊɹændi wɪθaʊɾ əpsɛɾɪŋ ði æʃəmən wəd nɑt bi dɪfəkəlt. hɝ maʊθ kəmpɹɛst ət ðə θɔt ðət ʃi mʌs nɑɾ əpsɛt ði æʃəmən, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə bi dʌn əbaʊɾ ɪɾ ɛni taɪm sun, soʊ ʃi mɛntəli ʃɪftəd ðə blæk-koʊɾəd mɛn tə wʌn saɪd. wʌt kəd nɑt bi dɛlt wɪð naʊ, hæd tə bi dɛlt wɪð leɪɾɝ.

"I'll make sure the Borderlanders stay well clear of the Black Tower," Elayne reassured them, though she had done the same before. Even Dyelin knew that Bael and Bashere would hold their forces in check  -  neither man wanted a battle he did not need, and Davram Bashere certainly would not fight his own countrymen  -  but anyone had a right to be uneasy about the Asha'man and what they might do. She slid her finger from the six-pointed star identifying Caemlyn across the few miles to the ground the Asha'man had usurped. The Black Tower was not marked, but she knew all too well exactly where it lay. At least that was well away from the Lugard Road. Sending the Borderlanders south into Murandy without upsetting the Asha'man would not be difficult. Her mouth compressed at the thought that she must not upset the Asha'man, but there was nothing to be done about it any time soon, so she mentally shifted the black-coated men to one side. What could not be dealt with now, had to be dealt with later.

"æn ði ʌðɝz?" ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə seɪ mɔɹ. sɪks meɪdʒɝ haʊsəz ɹɪmeɪn ʌnkəmɪɾɪd - ət lis tə hɝ əɹ ɛɹəmɪlə. daɪɛlɪn kleɪm ðeɪ wəɾ ɔl kʌm tə ɪleɪn ɪvɛntʃəwəli, bʌt ðeɪ ʃoʊd noʊ saɪn ʌv ɪt soʊ fɑɹ. səbaɪn ən dʒulənjə hæd bɪn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ wɝɾ ə ðoʊz sɪks, tu. boʊθ wɪmən hæd spɛn ðə læs twɛnti jɪɹz əz pɛdlɝz, əkʌstəm tə hɑɹd dʒɝniz, slipɪŋ ɪn steɪbəlz əɹ ʌndɝ ðə tʃɹiz, ən lɪsnɪŋ tə wʌt pipəl dɪd nɑt seɪ əz mʌtʃ əz tə wʌt ðeɪ sɛd. ðeɪ meɪd pɝfək skaʊts. ɪt wəd bi ə ɡɹeɪt lɔs ɪf ðeɪ hæd tə bi ʃɪftəd tə hɛlpɪŋ kip ðə sɪɾi səplaɪd. "ɹumɝ əz lɔɹd lwɑn ə dʌzən pleɪsəz, ist ən wɛst." fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə mʌtʃ-kɹis mæp əz ðoʊ lwɑnz pəzɪʃən ʃʊɾə bɪn mɑɹkt ɑn ɪt, bɝdʒɪt mʌɾɝd ə kɝs, mʌtʃ vaɪlɝ ðən kɔl fɔɹ, naʊ ðət ɹɪn hɑɹfɝ wɑz æbsənt.

"And the others?" She did not have to say more. Six major Houses remained uncommitted - at least to her or Arymilla. Dyelin claimed they would all come to Elayne eventually, but they showed no sign of it so far. Sabeine and Julanya had been looking for word of those six, too. Both women had spent the last twenty years as peddlers, accustomed to hard journeys, sleeping in stables or under the trees, and listening to what people did not say as much as to what they said. They made perfect scouts. It would be a great loss if they had to be shifted to helping keep the city supplied. "Rumor has Lord Luan a dozen places, east and west." Frowning at the much-creased map as though Luan's position should have been marked on it, Birgitte muttered a curse, much viler than called for, now that Reene Harfor was absent.

"ɔlweɪz ðə nɛks vɪlədʒ oʊvɝ, əɹ ðə wʌn bɪɑn ðæt. leɪɾi ɛlɹin ən lɔɹɾ æbəl sim tə hæv vænɪʃt kəmplitli, dɪfəkəlt əz ðəɾ əz tə bi fəɹ ə haɪ sit. ət list, mɪstʃɹəs oʊkɑlɪn ən mɪstʃɹəs foʊt hævən bɪn eɪbəl tə faɪn ə wɪspɝ ə ðɛm, əɹ ʌv ɛni haʊs pɛnʒɹ əɹ haʊs tʃɹæmən ɑɹmmɪn, iðɝ. nɑɾ ə mæn əɹ ə hɔɹs." ðət wɑz vɛɹi ənjuʒəwəl. sʌmwʌn wɑz ɪɡzɝɾɪŋ ɡɹeɪɾ ɛfɝt. "æbəl wɑz ɔlweɪz ə ɡoʊst wən i wɑntəd tə bi," daɪɛlɪn mʌɾɝd, "ɔlweɪz eɪbəl tə kætʃ jə ɹɔŋ-fʊɾɪd.

"Always the next village over, or the one beyond that. Lady Ellorien and Lord Abelle seem to have vanished completely, difficult as that has to be for a High Seat. At least, Mistress Ocalin and Mistress Fote haven't been able to find a whisper of them, or of any House Pendar or House Traemane armsmen, either. Not a man or a horse." That was very unusual. Someone was exerting great effort. "Abelle was always a ghost when he wanted to be," Dyelin muttered, "always able to catch you wrong-footed.

ɛlɹin. . . ." bɹʌʃɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz əɡɛnst əɹ lɪps, ʃi saɪd. "ðə wʊmənz tu flæmbɔɪən tə dɪsəpɪɹ.

Ellorien. . . ." Brushing fingers against her lips, she sighed. "The woman's too flamboyant to disappear.

ənlɛs ʃiz wɪð æbəl əɹ lwɑn. əɹ boʊθ ə ðɛm." ʃi wɑz nɑt hæpi wɪð ðəɾ aɪdiə, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ʃi sɛd.

Unless she's with Abelle or Luan. Or both of them." She was not happy with that idea, no matter what she said.

"æz fəɹ əɹ ʌðɝ "fɹɛnz'," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, "leɪɾi ɑɝəθɛl kɹɔst aʊɾ ə mʊɹændi faɪv deɪz əɡoʊ, hɪɹ." ʃi tʌtʃt ðə mæp laɪtli, səm tu hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz saʊθ ə keɪɛmlɪn. "fɔɹ deɪz əɡoʊ, lɔɹd pɛlɪvɑɹ kɹɔst əbaʊt faɪv əɹ sɪks maɪlz wɛst ə ðæt, ən leɪɾi æɛmlɪn hɪɹ, ənʌðɝ faɪv əɹ sɪks maɪlz."

"As for our other "friends'," Birgitte said, "Lady Arathelle crossed out of Murandy five days ago, here." She touched the map lightly, some two hundred miles south of Caemlyn. "Four days ago, Lord Pelivar crossed about five or six miles west of that, and Lady Aemlyn here, another five or six miles."

"nɑt təɡɛðɝ," daɪɛlɪn sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ. "dɪd ðeɪ bɹɪŋ ɛni mʊɹændiənz? noʊ? ɡʊd. ðeɪ kəd bi muvɪŋ tə ðɛɹ ɪsteɪts, ɪleɪn. ɪf ðeɪ muv fɝðɝ əpɑɹt, wɪl noʊ fəɹ sɝɾən." ðoʊz θɹi haʊsəz meɪɾ əɹ moʊst æŋkʃəs ʌv ɔl. "ðeɪ kəd bi hɛɾɪŋ hoʊm," bɝdʒɪɾ əɡɹid, ɹɪlʌktənli əz ɔlweɪz wən əɡɹiɪŋ wɪð daɪɛlɪn. dʒɹɔɪŋ əɹ ɪntʃɹəkət bɹeɪɾ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ʃi ɡɹɪpt ɪɾ ɪn ə fɪst ɔlmoʊs ðə weɪ nɪneɪiv dɪd. "ðə mɛn ən hɔɹsəz mʌs bi wɔɹn aʊt, æftɝ mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɪndə mʊɹændi ɪn wɪntɝ. bʌɾ ɔl wi kən bi ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪz ðət ðəɹ ɑn ðə muv." eɪvinhə snɔɹɾɪd. wɪð əɹ ɪn ɛləɡən vɛlvəts, ɪt wɑz ə stɑɹtlɪŋ saʊnd. "ɔlweɪz əsum jəɹ ɛnəmi wɪl də wʌt jə də nɑt wɑnt. dɪsaɪd wʌt jə list wɑn əm tə du, ən plæn ɑn ðæt."

"Not together," Dyelin said, nodding. "Did they bring any Murandians? No? Good. They could be moving to their estates, Elayne. If they move further apart, we'll know for certain." Those three Houses made her most anxious of all. "They could be heading home," Birgitte agreed, reluctantly as always when agreeing with Dyelin. Drawing her intricate braid over her shoulder, she gripped it in a fist almost the way Nynaeve did. "The men and horses must be worn out, after marching into Murandy in winter. But all we can be sure of is that they're on the move." Aviendha snorted. With her in elegant velvets, it was a startling sound. "Always assume your enemy will do what you do not want. Decide what you least want them to do, and plan on that."

"æɛmlɪn, ɑɝəθɛl ən pɛlɪvɑɹ ɑɹən ɛnəmiz," daɪɛlɪn pɹətɛstəd wikli. wɛɹɛvɝ ʃi bɪliv ðɛɹ əlidʒəns wəd fɔl ɪn taɪm, ðoʊz θɹi hæɾ ənaʊns ðɛɹ səpɔɹɾ ə daɪɛlɪn hɝsɛlf fəɹ ðə θɹoʊn.

"Aemlyn, Arathelle and Pelivar aren't enemies," Dyelin protested weakly. Wherever she believed their allegiance would fall in time, those three had announced their support of Dyelin herself for the throne.

ɪleɪn hæd nɛvɝ ɹɛɾ ʌv ɛni kwin biɪŋ fɔɹst ɑntu ðə θɹoʊn - ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ maɪt nɑɾ əv meɪɾ ɪɾ ɪndə ðə hɪstɝiz ɪn ɛni keɪs - jɛɾ æɛmlɪn, ɑɝəθɛl ən pɛlɪvɑɹ simd wɪlɪŋ tə tʃɹaɪ, ən nɑt fəɹ hoʊp ə paʊɝ fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz. daɪɛlɪn dɪd nɑt wɑn ðə θɹoʊn, bʌt ʃi wəd hɑɹdli bi ə pæsɪv ɹulɝ. ðə sɪmpəl fækt wɑz ðət mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənz faɪnəl jɪɹ hæd bɪn mɑɹd baɪ blʌndɝ æftɝ blʌndɝ, ən fju nu əɹ bɪliv ðət ʃi hæd bɪn ə kæptɪv ʌv wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən dʊɹɪŋ ðət taɪm.

Elayne had never read of any queen being forced onto the throne - that sort of thing might not have made it into the histories in any case - yet Aemlyn, Arathelle and Pelivar seemed willing to try, and not for hope of power for themselves. Dyelin did not want the throne, but she would hardly be a passive ruler. The simple fact was that Morgase Trakand's final year had been marred by blunder after blunder, and few knew or believed that she had been a captive of one of the Forsaken during that time.

səm haʊsəz wɑntəɾ ɛniwʌn ɪksɛpt ənʌðɝ tʃɹəkən ɑn ðə θɹoʊn. əɹ θɔt ðeɪ dɪd.

Some Houses wanted anyone except another Trakand on the throne. Or thought they did.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðə læs θɪŋ wi wɑn əm tə du?" ɪleɪn sɛd. "ɪf ðeɪ dɪspɝs tə ðɛɹ ɪsteɪts, ðən ðeɪ ɑɹ aʊɾ ʌv ɪɾ əntɪl spɹɪŋ ət ði ɝliəst, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɪl bi dɪsaɪɾɪd baɪ ðɛn." ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ, ɪt wʊd. "bʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ kəntɪnju ɑn tə keɪɛmlɪn?" "wɪθaʊt ðə mʊɹændiənz, ðeɪ doʊn əv ɪnʌf ɑɹmmɪn tə tʃælənʒ ɛɹəmɪlə." stʌɾiɪŋ ðə mæp, bɝdʒɪt ɹʌbd əɹ tʃɪn.

"What is the last thing we want them to do?" Elayne said. "If they disperse to their estates, then they are out of it until spring at the earliest, and everything will be decided by then." The Light willing, it would. "But if they continue on to Caemlyn?" "Without the Murandians, they don't have enough armsmen to challenge Arymilla." Studying the map, Birgitte rubbed her chin.

"ɪf ðeɪ doʊnt noʊ baɪ naʊ ðət ði il ən ðə lidʒən ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɑɹ steɪɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðɪs, ðəl əv tə lɝn ʌv ɪt sun, bʌt ðəl wɑnə bi kɛɹfəl. nʌn ə ðɛm simz fulɪʃ ɪnʌf tə pɹəvoʊk ə faɪt ðeɪ kænt wɪn wən ðeɪ doʊn əv tə. aɪd seɪ ðəl kæmp sʌmwɛɹ tə ði ist əɹ saʊθist, wɛɹ ðeɪ kən kip ən aɪ ɑn ɪvɛns ən meɪbi ɪnfluəns wʌt hæpənz." daʊnɪŋ ðə læst ə hɝ waɪn, wɪtʃ mʌst əv bɪn koʊl baɪ naʊ, daɪɛlɪn ɛksheɪl hɛvəli ən wɔkt oʊvɝ tə fɪl əɹ kʌp əɡɛn. "ɪf ðeɪ kʌm tə keɪɛmlɪn," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə lɛɾən toʊn, "ðɛn ðeɪ ɑɹ hoʊpɪŋ ðət lwɑn əɹ æbəl əɹ ɛlɹin wɪl dʒɔɪn ðɛm. pɝhæps ɔl θɹi."

"If they don't know by now that the Aiel and the Legion of the Dragon are staying out of this, they'll have to learn of it soon, but they'll want to be careful. None of them seems foolish enough to provoke a fight they can't win when they don't have to. I'd say they'll camp somewhere to the east or southeast, where they can keep an eye on events and maybe influence what happens." Downing the last of her wine, which must have been cold by now, Dyelin exhaled heavily and walked over to fill her cup again. "If they come to Caemlyn," she said in a leaden tone, "then they are hoping that Luan or Abelle or Ellorien will join them. Perhaps all three."

"ðɛn wi mʌs fɪɡjɝ aʊt haʊ tə stɑp əm ɹitʃɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn bɪfɔɹ əɹ plænz kʌm tə fɹut, wɪθaʊt meɪkɪŋ əm pɝmənən ɛnəmiz." ɪleɪn wɝk tə meɪk əɹ vɔɪs əz ʃʊɹ ən fɝm əz daɪɛlɪnz wɑz dʌl. "ænd wi mʌs plæn wʌt tə də ɪn keɪs ðeɪ ɝaɪv hɪɹ tu ɝli. ɪf ðət hæpənz, daɪɛlɪn, jəl əv tə kənvɪns əm ðə tʃɔɪs ɪz bɪtwin mi ən ɛɹəmɪlə. ʌðɝwaɪz, wɪl bi ɪn ə tæŋɡəl wi meɪ nɛvɝ stʃɹeɪɾən aʊt, ən ɔl ʌv ændɝ ɪn ɪt wɪð ʌs." daɪɛlɪn ɡɹʌntɪɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn pʌntʃt. ðə læs taɪm ðə ɡɹeɪt haʊsəz splɪɾ ivənli əmʌŋ θɹi kleɪməns fəɹ ðə laɪən θɹoʊn hæd bɪn nɪɹli faɪv hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ən sɛvən jɪɹz ʌv oʊpən wɔɹ fɑloʊd bɪfɔɹ ə kwin wɑz kɹaʊnd. ði ɝɪdʒənəl kleɪməns wɝ ɔl dɛd baɪ ðət pɔɪnt.

"Then we must figure out how to stop them reaching Caemlyn before our plans come to fruit, without making them permanent enemies." Elayne worked to make her voice as sure and firm as Dyelin's was dull. "And we must plan what to do in case they arrive here too early. If that happens, Dyelin, you will have to convince them the choice is between me and Arymilla. Otherwise, we'll be in a tangle we may never straighten out, and all of Andor in it with us." Dyelin grunted as if she had been punched. The last time the great Houses split evenly among three claimants for the Lion Throne had been nearly five hundred years ago, and seven years of open war followed before a queen was crowned. The original claimants were all dead by that point.

wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, ɪleɪn pɪkt ʌp əɹ tikʌp ən tʊk ə sɪp.

Without thinking, Elayne picked up her teacup and took a sip.

ðə ti hæd ɡɔn koʊld, bʌt hʌni ɪksploʊɾəd ɑn əɹ tʌŋ. hʌni! ʃi lʊkt əɾ eɪvinhə ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt, ən əɹ sɪstɝz lɪps kwɝkt ɪn ə smɔl smaɪl. ə kənspɪɹətɔɹiəl smaɪl, əz ɪf bɝdʒɪt dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪɡzækli wʌt hæd hæpənd. ivən ðɛɹ stʃɹeɪnʒli ɛnhæns bɑn dɪd nɑɾ ɪkstɛn tə hɝ teɪstɪŋ wʌɾ ɪleɪn dɪd, jɛt ʃi hæd ʃʊɹli fɛlt ɪleɪnz sɝpɹaɪz ən plɛʒɝ ɑn teɪstɪŋ ðə ti. plæntɪŋ fɪsts ɑn hɪps, ʃi ədɑptəɾ ə sɛnsɔɹiəs lʊk. əɹ ɹæðɝ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə; dɪspaɪɾ ɔl ʃi kəd du, ə smaɪl kɹɛpt ɑntu hɝ feɪs, tu. əbɹʌpli, ɪleɪn ɹilaɪz ðət bɝdʒɪts hɛdeɪk wɑz ɡɔn. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wən ɪt hæd vænɪʃt, bʌɾ ɪt sɝɾənli wɑz nɑt ðəɹ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ.

The tea had gone cold, but honey exploded on her tongue. Honey! She looked at Aviendha in astonishment, and her sister's lips quirked in a small smile. A conspiratorial smile, as if Birgitte did not know exactly what had happened. Even their strangely enhanced bond did not extend to her tasting what Elayne did, yet she had surely felt Elayne's surprise and pleasure on tasting the tea. Planting fists on hips, she adopted a censorious look. Or rather, she tried to; despite all she could do, a smile crept onto her face, too. Abruptly, Elayne realized that Birgitte's headache was gone. She did not know when it had vanished, but it certainly was not there any longer.

"hoʊp fəɹ ðə bɛst ən plæn fəɹ ðə wɝst," ʃi sɛd. "səmtaɪmz, ðə bɛst æktʃəli  hæpənz." daɪɛlɪn, ʌnəwɛɹ ə ðə hʌni əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɔl θɹi ɡɹɪnɪŋ, hæɹəmf laʊdli.

"Hope for the best and plan for the worst," she said. "Sometimes, the best actually happens." Dyelin, unaware of the honey or anything except that they were all three grinning, harrumphed loudly.

"æn səmtaɪmz ɪt dʌzn hæpən. ɪf jəɹ klɛvɝ skim kʌmz ɔf ɪɡzækli əz plænd, ɪleɪn, wi woʊn əv ɛni nid fəɹ æɛmlɪn əɹ ɛlɹin əɹ ði ʌðɝz, bʌɾ ɪts ə tɛɹəbəl ɡæmbəl. ɔl ɪt teɪks tə ɡoʊ ɹɔŋ ɪz  -  " ðə lɛft-hæn dɔɹ oʊpən tə ədmɪɾ ə weɪv ə koʊld ən ən æpəl-tʃikt wʊmən wɪð aɪsi aɪz ən ðə ɡoʊldən nɑɾ ʌv ən ʌndɝ-lutɛnən ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ʃi maɪɾ əv nɑk fɝst, bʌɾ ɪf soʊ, ðə wɔɹd hæd sild ɔf ðə saʊnd. laɪk ɹæsɔɹiə, zɪɡən sɑkɹɪn hæd bɪn ə hʌntɝ fəɹ ðə hɔɹn bɪfɔɹ dʒɔɪnɪŋ ɪleɪnz bɑɾiɡɑɹd. ɪt sim ðə ɡɑɹd hæd tʃeɪnʒd. "ðə waɪz wʌn mɑneɪəl wɪʃɪz tə si ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn," zɪɡən ənaʊnst, dʒɹɔɪŋ hɝsɛlf ʌp ɹɪdʒɪdli. "mɪstʃɹəs kɛɹɪstoʊvən ɪz wɪð hɝ." sumeɪkoʊ kəd bi pʊɾ ɔf, bʌt nɑt mɑneɪəl. ɛɹəmɪləz pipəl wəɾ əz sun ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ əz wɪð ði il, jɛɾ oʊnli sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt wʊɾə bɹɔɾ ə waɪz wʌn ɪndə ðə sɪɾi. bɝdʒɪt nu ðæt, tu; ʃi ɪmiɾiətli bɪɡæn foʊldɪŋ ðə mæp ʌp əɡɛn. eɪvinhə lɛt ðə wɔɹɾɪŋ dɪsəpeɪɾ ən ɹilis ðə sɔɹs.

"And sometimes it doesn't happen. If your clever scheme comes off exactly as planned, Elayne, we won't have any need for Aemlyn or Ellorien or the others, but it's a terrible gamble. All it takes to go wrong is  -  " The left-hand door opened to admit a wave of cold and an apple-cheeked woman with icy eyes and the golden knot of an under-lieutenant on her shoulder. She might have knocked first, but if so, the ward had sealed off the sound. Like Rasoria, Tzigan Sokorin had been a Hunter for the Horn before joining Elayne's bodyguard. It seemed the guard had changed. "The Wise One Monaelle wishes to see the Lady Elayne," Tzigan announced, drawing herself up rigidly. "Mistress Karistovan is with her." Sumeko could be put off, but not Monaelle. Arymilla's people would as soon interfere with Aes Sedai as with the Aiel, yet only something important would have brought a Wise One into the city. Birgitte knew that, too; she immediately began folding the map up again. Aviendha let the warding dissipate and released the Source.

"æsk əm tə kʌm ɪn," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"Ask them to come in," Elayne said.

mɑneɪəl dɪd nɑt weɪɾ ɑn zɪɡən, ɡlaɪɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum əz sun əz ðə wɔɹd vænɪʃt, hɝ mʌltətuɾ ʌv ɡoʊld ən aɪvɝi bɹeɪslɪts ɹætlɪŋ əz ʃi loʊɝɾ əɹ ʃɔl fɹəm ʃoʊldɝz tə ɛlboʊz ɪn ðə kəmpɛɹəɾɪv wɔɹmθ. ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ oʊl mɑneɪəl wɑz  -  waɪz wʌnz wɝ nɑɾ əz ɹɛɾɪsənt əbaʊɾ eɪdʒ əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ əblik  -  jɛt ʃi əpɪɹd nɑt fɑɹ ɪndə hɝ mɪɾəl jɪɹz. ðəɹ wɝ hɪns ə ɹɛɾ ɪn əɹ weɪst-lɔŋ jɛloʊ hɛɹ, bʌt nɑɾ ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪ. ʃɔɹt fəɹ ən il, ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ɪleɪn, wɪð ə maɪld, mʌðɝli feɪs, ʃi wɑz bɛɹli stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf ɪn ðə paʊɝ tə hæv bɪn æksɛptɪɾ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌt stʃɹɛŋkθ dɪd nɑt kaʊn əmʌŋ waɪz wʌnz, ən əmʌŋ ðɛm, ʃi stʊd vɛɹi haɪ.

Monaelle did not wait on Tzigan, gliding into the room as soon as the ward vanished, her multitude of gold and ivory bracelets rattling as she lowered her shawl from shoulders to elbows in the comparative warmth. Elayne did not know how old Monaelle was  -  Wise Ones were not as reticent about age as Aes Sedai, but they were oblique  -  yet she appeared not far into her middle years. There were hints of red in her waist-long yellow hair, but not a touch of gray. Short for an Aiel, shorter than Elayne, with a mild, motherly face, she was barely strong enough in the Power to have been accepted in the White Tower, but strength did not count among Wise Ones, and among them, she stood very high.

mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾəntli fəɹ ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə, ʃi hæd bɪn ðə mɪdwaɪf ət ðɛɹ ɹibɝθ əz fɝst-sɪstɝz.

More importantly for Elayne and Aviendha, she had been the midwife at their rebirth as first-sisters.

ɪleɪn ɔfɝɾ əɹ ə kɝtsi, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ daɪɛlɪnz dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ snɪf, ən eɪvinhə meɪɾ ə dip baʊ, foʊldɪŋ hɝsɛlf oʊvɝ əɹ hænz. əsaɪd fɹəm ðə duɾiz oʊd tə hɝ mɪdwaɪf ʌndɝ il kʌstəmz, ʃi wɑz stɪl oʊnli ən əpɹɛntəs waɪz wʌn, æftɝ ɔl.

Elayne offered her a curtsy, ignoring Dyelin's disapproving sniff, and Aviendha made a deep bow, folding herself over her hands. Aside from the duties owed to her midwife under Aiel customs, she was still only an apprentice Wise One, after all.

"aɪ əsum jəɹ nid fəɹ pɹaɪvəsi ɪz ɛndəd, sɪns jə loʊɝd ðə wɔɹd," mɑneɪəl sɛd, "æn ɪts taɪm aɪ tʃɛkt ɑn jəɹ kəndɪʃən, ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd. ɪt ʃəd bi dʌn twaɪs ɪn ðə mʌnθ əntɪl fʊl tɝm." waɪ wɑz ʃi fɹaʊnɪŋ əɾ eɪvinhə? oʊ, laɪt, ðə vɛlvəts!

"I assume your need for privacy is ended, since you lowered the ward," Monaelle said, "and it is time I checked on your condition, Elayne Trakand. It should be done twice in the month until full term." Why was she frowning at Aviendha? Oh, Light, the velvets!

"æn aɪ hæv kʌm tə si wʌt ʃi dʌz," sumeɪkoʊ æɾəd, fɑloʊɪŋ ðə waɪz wʌn ɪndə ðə ɹum.

"And I have come to see what she does," Sumeko added, following the Wise One into the room.

sumeɪkoʊ wɑz ɪmpoʊzɪŋ, ə staʊt wʊmən wɪð kɑnfəɾənt aɪz, ɪn wɛl-kʌt ɹɛd-bɛltəd jɛloʊ wʊl, wɪð sɪlvɝ koʊmz ɪn əɹ stʃɹeɪt blæk hɛɹ, ən ə ɹɛd-ɪnæməl sɪlvɝ sɝkəl-pɪn ɑn ðə haɪ nɛk ə hɝ dʒɹɛs. ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn ə noʊbəlwʊmən əɹ ə səksɛsfəl mɝtʃənt. wʌns ʃi hæd ʃoʊn ə sɝɾən dɪfəɾəns, ət list ɝaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ. nɑt wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ soʊlʒɝz ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz. "ju meɪ ɡoʊ," ʃi toʊl zɪɡən. "ðɪs dʌzn kənsɝn ju." əɹ wɪð noʊbəlz, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ.

Sumeko was imposing, a stout woman with confident eyes, in well-cut red-belted yellow wool, with silver combs in her straight black hair, and a red-enameled silver circle-pin on the high neck of her dress. She might have been a noblewoman or a successful merchant. Once she had shown a certain diffidence, at least around Aes Sedai, but no longer. Not with Aes Sedai or soldiers of the Queen's Guards. "You may go," she told Tzigan. "This doesn't concern you." Or with nobles, for that matter.

"ju meɪ liv, tu, leɪɾi daɪɛlɪn, ən ju, leɪɾi bɝdʒɪt." ʃi stʌɾid eɪvinhə əz ɪf kənsɪɾɝɪŋ æɾɪŋ əɹ tə ðə lɪst. "eɪvinhə meɪ ɹɪmeɪn," mɑneɪəl sɛd. "ʃi ɪz mɪsɪŋ ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni lɛsənz, ən ʃi mʌs lɝn ðɪs sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ." sumeɪkoʊ nɑɾəd ɪn æksɛptəns ʌv eɪvinhə, bʌt ʃi kɛpt ə kuli ɪmpeɪʃənt ɡeɪz ɑn daɪɛlɪn ən bɝdʒɪt.

"You may leave, too, Lady Dyelin, and you, Lady Birgitte." She studied Aviendha as if considering adding her to the list. "Aviendha may remain," Monaelle said. "She is missing a great many lessons, and she must learn this sooner or later." Sumeko nodded in acceptance of Aviendha, but she kept a coolly impatient gaze on Dyelin and Birgitte.

"leɪɾi daɪɛlɪn ən aɪ hæv mæɾɝz tə dɪskʌs," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, stʌfɪŋ ðə foʊldəd mæp bæk ʌndɝ əɹ ɹɛd koʊɾ əz ʃi stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ. "aɪl tɛl jə tənaɪt wʌt wiv θɔɾ ʌv, ɪleɪn." daɪɛlɪn ɡeɪv əɹ ə ʃɑɹp lʊk, ɔlmoʊst əz ʃɑɹp əz ðə wʌn ʃi hæd ɡɪvən sumeɪkoʊ, bʌt ʃi sɛɾ əɹ waɪnkʌp ɑn wʌn ə ðə tʃɹeɪz ən meɪɾ əɹ kɝɾəsiz tə ɪleɪn, ðən weɪɾəd wɪð vɪzəbəl ɪmpeɪʃəns waɪl bɝdʒɪt bɛn tə mɝmɝ ət lɛŋθ ɪn mɑneɪəlz ɪɹ ən ðə waɪz wʌn ɹɪplaɪd bɹifli, bʌt dʒʌst əz kwaɪətli. wʌt wɝ ðeɪ wɪspɝɪŋ əbaʊt? pɹɑbli ɡoʊts mɪlk.

"Lady Dyelin and I have matters to discuss," Birgitte said, stuffing the folded map back under her red coat as she started for the door. "I'll tell you tonight what we've thought of, Elayne." Dyelin gave her a sharp look, almost as sharp as the one she had given Sumeko, but she set her winecup on one of the trays and made her courtesies to Elayne, then waited with visible impatience while Birgitte bent to murmur at length in Monaelle's ear and the Wise One replied briefly, but just as quietly. What were they whispering about? Probably goat's milk.

wʌns ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn zɪɡən ən ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən, ɪleɪn ɔfɝd tə sɛn fəɹ mɔɹ waɪn, sɪns wʌt wɑz ɪn ðə pɪtʃɝz wɑz koʊld, bʌt sumeɪkoʊ dɪklaɪn kɝtli, ən mɑneɪəl pəlaɪtli ɪf ɹæðɝ æbsənli. ðə waɪz wʌn wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ eɪvinhə wɪð sətʃ ɪntɛnsəɾi ðət ðə jʌŋɡɝ wʊmən bɪɡæn tə ɹɛɾən ən lʊkt əweɪ, ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ skɝts.

Once the door closed behind Tzigan and the other two women, Elayne offered to send for more wine, since what was in the pitchers was cold, but Sumeko declined curtly, and Monaelle politely if rather absently. The Wise One was studying Aviendha with such intensity that the younger woman began to redden and looked away, gripping her skirts.

"ju mʌsnt teɪk eɪvinhə tə tæsk əbaʊɾ əɹ kloʊðz, mɑneɪəl," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ æskt əɹ tə wɛɹ ðɛm, ən ʃi dɪɾ əz ə feɪvɝ tə mi."

"You mustn't take Aviendha to task about her clothes, Monaelle," Elayne said. "I asked her to wear them, and she did as a favor to me."

pɝsɪŋ əɹ lɪps, mɑneɪəl θɔt bɪfɔɹ ænsɝɪŋ. "fɝstsɪstɝz ʃəd ɡɪv wʌn ənʌðɝ feɪvɝz," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "ju noʊ jəɹ duɾi tə əɹ pipəl, eɪvinhə. soʊ fɑɹ, juv dʌn wɛl əɾ ə dɪfəkəl tæsk. jə mʌs lɝn tə lɪv ɪn tu wɝlz, soʊ ɪts fɪɾɪŋ ðət jə bɪkʌm kʌmftəɹbəl ɪn ðoʊz kloʊðz." eɪvinhə bɪɡæn tə ɹɪlæks. əntɪl mɑneɪəl kəntɪnjud. "bʌt nɑt tu kʌmftəɹbəl. fɹəm naʊ ɑn, jəl spɛn ɛvɹi θɝd deɪ ən naɪɾ ɪn ðə tɛns. jə kən ɹɪtɝn wɪð mi təmɑɹoʊ. juv ə ɡɹeɪt dil tə lɝn jɛt bɪfɔɹ jə kən bɪkʌm ə waɪz wʌn, ən ðəɾ ɪz əz mʌtʃ jəɹ duɾi əz ɪz biɪŋ ə baɪndɪŋ kɔɹd."

Pursing her lips, Monaelle thought before answering. "Firstsisters should give one another favors," she said finally. "You know your duty to our people, Aviendha. So far, you have done well at a difficult task. You must learn to live in two worlds, so it is fitting that you become comfortable in those clothes." Aviendha began to relax. Until Monaelle continued. "But not too comfortable. From now on, you will spend every third day and night in the tents. You can return with me tomorrow. You have a great deal to learn yet before you can become a Wise One, and that is as much your duty as is being a binding cord."

ɪleɪn ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən tʊk əɹ sɪstɝz hænd, ən wən eɪvinhə tʃɹaɪd tə lɛt ɡoʊ æftɝ wʌn skwiz, ʃi hɛld ɑn. æftɝ ə bɹif hɛzəteɪʃən, eɪvinhə klʌŋ, tu. ɪn ə stʃɹeɪnʒ weɪ, hævɪŋ eɪvinhə ðəɹ hæd kʌmfɝɾɪd ɪleɪn fəɹ ðə lɔs ə ɹænd; ʃi wɑz nɑɾ oʊnli ə sɪstɝ bʌɾ ə sɪstɝ u ɔlsoʊ lʌv hɪm. ðeɪ kəd ʃɛɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ ən meɪk itʃ ʌðɝ læf wən ðeɪ wɑntəd tə kɹaɪ, ən ðeɪ kəd kɹaɪ təɡɛðɝ wən ðət wɑz niɾəd. wʌn naɪɾ ɪn θɹi əloʊn vɛɹi laɪkli mɛnt wʌn naɪɾ ɪn θɹi wipɪŋ əloʊn. laɪt, wʌt wɑz ɹænd duɪŋ? ðəɾ ɑfəl bikən tə ðə wɛst wɑz stɪl bleɪzɪŋ əz stʃɹɔŋli əz ɛvɝ, ən ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ðəɾ i wɑz ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. nɑt wʌn pɑɹɾəkəl hæd tʃeɪnʒd ɪn ðə bɑnd wɪð hɪm, bʌt ʃi wɑz sɝɾən. sʌɾənli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi hæɾ ə kɹʌʃɪŋ ɡɹæsp ɑn eɪvinhəz hænd, ən eɪvinhə wɑz hoʊldɪŋ hɝz əz fɪɹsli. ðeɪ lusən ðɛɹ ɡɹɪps ət ðə seɪm ɪnstənt. niðɝ lɛt ɡoʊ, haʊɛvɝ.

Elayne reached out and took her sister's hand, and when Aviendha tried to let go after one squeeze, she held on. After a brief hesitation, Aviendha clung, too. In a strange way, having Aviendha there had comforted Elayne for the loss of Rand; she was not only a sister but a sister who also loved him. They could share strength and make each other laugh when they wanted to cry, and they could cry together when that was needed. One night in three alone very likely meant one night in three weeping alone. Light, what was Rand doing? That awful beacon to the west was still blazing as strongly as ever, and she was certain that he was in the heart of it. Not one particle had changed in the bond with him, but she was certain. Suddenly she realized that she had a crushing grasp on Aviendha's hand, and Aviendha was holding hers as fiercely. They loosened their grips at the same instant. Neither let go, however.

"mɛn kɑz tʃɹʌbəl ivən wən ðeɪ ɑɹ ɛlswɛɹ," eɪvinhə sɛd sɔfli.

"Men cause trouble even when they are elsewhere," Aviendha said softly.

"ðeɪ du," ɪleɪn əɡɹid.

"They do," Elayne agreed.

mɑneɪəl smaɪld ət ði ɪkstʃeɪnʒ. ʃi wɑz əmʌŋ ðə fju hu nu əbaʊt ðə bɑndɪŋ ə ɹænd, ən u ðə fɑðɝ ʌv ɪleɪnz beɪbi wɑz. nʌn ə ðə kɪnswɪmən dɪd, ðoʊ. "aɪd θɪŋk juv lɛɾ ə mæn kɑz jə ɔl ðə tʃɹʌbəl i kʊd, ɪleɪn," sumeɪkoʊ sɛd pɹɪmli. ðə kɪnz ɹul fɑloʊd ðə ɹulz fəɹ nɑvəsɪz ən æksɛptɪd, fɝbɪɾɪŋ nɑɾ oʊnli tʃɪlʒɹən bʌɾ ɛniθɪŋ ðət maɪt lɛd tə ðɛm, ən ðeɪ hɛl tə ɪt stʃɹɪkli. wʌns, ə kɪnswʊmən wʊɾə swɑloʊɾ əɹ tʌŋ bɪfɔɹ sədʒɛstɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ fɛl ʃɔɹɾ ə ðɛɹ ɹul. mʌtʃ hæd tʃeɪnʒd sɪns ðɛn, haʊɛvɝ. "aɪm səpoʊz tə tʃɹævəl tə tɛɹ tədeɪ soʊ aɪ kən bɹɪŋ bæk ə ʃɪpmən ʌv ɡɹeɪn ən ɔɪl təmɑɹoʊ, ən ɪts ɡɹoʊɪŋ leɪt, soʊ ɪf jə ɑɹ dʌn tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt mɛn, aɪ sədʒɛs jə lɛt mɑneɪəl ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð wʌt ʃi keɪm fɔɹ." mɑneɪəl pəzɪʃən ɪleɪn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs, kloʊs ɪnʌf ðət ðə hit fɹəm ðə nɪɹli kənsum lɔɡz wɑz nɪɹ tə ənkʌmftəɹbəl - ɪt wɑz bɛst ɪf ðə mʌðɝ wɑz vɛɹi wɔɹm, ʃi ɪkspleɪnd -  ðən ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəd hɝ, ən ʃi bɪɡæn tə wiv θɹɛdz ə spɪɹəɾ ən faɪɝ ən ɝθ.

Monaelle smiled at the exchange. She was among the few who knew about the bonding of Rand, and who the father of Elayne's baby was. None of the Kinswomen did, though. "I'd think you've let a man cause you all the trouble he could, Elayne," Sumeko said primly. The Kin's Rule followed the rules for novices and Accepted, forbidding not only children but anything that might lead to them, and they held to it strictly. Once, a Kinswoman would have swallowed her tongue before suggesting an Aes Sedai fell short of their Rule. Much had changed since then, however. "I'm supposed to travel to Tear today so I can bring back a shipment of grain and oil tomorrow, and it is growing late, so if you are done talking about men, I suggest you let Monaelle get on with what she came for." Monaelle positioned Elayne in front of the fireplace, close enough that the heat from the nearly consumed logs was near to uncomfortable - it was best if the mother was very warm, she explained -  then the glow of saidar surrounded her, and she began to weave threads of Spirit and Fire and Earth.

eɪvinhə wɑtʃt ɔlmoʊst əz ævədli əz sumeɪkoʊ.

Aviendha watched almost as avidly as Sumeko.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs?" ɪleɪn æskt əz ðə wiv sɛɾəld ɝaʊn əɹ ən sæŋk ɪndə hɝ. "ɪz ɪt laɪk dɛlvɪŋ?" ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə pæləs hæd dɛlv hɝ, ðoʊ oʊnli mɛɝɪlɪl hæd səfɪʃən skɪl wɪð hilɪŋ fəɹ ɪt tə bi mʌtʃ jus, bʌt niðɝ ðeɪ nɔɹ sumeɪkoʊ hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə seɪ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən ðət ʃi wɑz wɪð tʃaɪld. ʃi fɛlt ə feɪn tɪŋɡəlɪŋ, ə sɔɹɾ ə hʌm ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ flɛʃ. "doʊn bi sɪli, ɡɝl," sumeɪkoʊ sɛɾ æbsənli. ɪleɪn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ, ən ivən θɔɾ ʌv weɪvɪŋ əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ʌndɝ sumeɪkoʊz noʊz, bʌt ðə ɹaʊnd-feɪst wʊmən dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə noʊɾəs. ʃi maɪt nɑɾ əv noʊɾəst ðə ɹɪŋ, iðɝ. ʃi wɑz linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, piɹɪŋ əz ðoʊ ʃi kəd si ðə wiv ɪnsaɪɾ ɪleɪnz bɑɾi.

"What is this?" Elayne asked as the weave settled around her and sank into her. "Is it like Delving?" Every Aes Sedai in the palace had Delved her, though only Merilille had sufficient skill with Healing for it to be much use, but neither they nor Sumeko had been able to say much more than that she was with child. She felt a faint tingling, a sort of hum inside her flesh. "Don't be silly, girl," Sumeko said absently. Elayne raised an eyebrow, and even thought of waving her Great Serpent ring under Sumeko's nose, but the round-faced woman did not appear to notice. She might not have noticed the ring, either. She was leaning forward, peering as though she could see the weave inside Elayne's body.

"ðə waɪz wʌnz lɝn əbaʊt hilɪŋ fɹəm mi. ən fɹəm nɪneɪiv, aɪ səpoʊz," ʃi əlaʊɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt. oʊ, nɪneɪiv wʊɾə ɡɔn ʌp laɪk ən ɪluməneɪɾɝz faɪɝwɝk, hɪɹɪŋ ðæt. bʌt ðɛn, sumeɪkoʊ hæɾ aʊtstʃɹɪp nɪneɪiv lɔŋ sɪns. "æn ðeɪ dɪd lɝn ðə sɪmpəl fɔɹm fɹəm ɛɛs sədaɪ." ə snɔɹt laɪk ɹɪpɪŋ kænvəs ʃoʊd wʌt sumeɪkoʊ θɔɾ ə ðə "sɪmpəl" fɔɹm, ði oʊnli sɔɹɾ ə hilɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd noʊn fəɹ θaʊzənz ə jɪɹz. "ðɪs ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə waɪz wʌnz' oʊn." "ɪɾ ɪz kɔl kɝɛsɪŋ ðə tʃaɪld," mɑneɪəl sɛɾ ɪn ən æbstʃɹæktɪd vɔɪs. moʊst ə hɝ ətɛnʃən wɑz foʊkəst ɑn ðə wiv. ə sɪmpəl dɛlvɪŋ tə lɝn wʌɾ eɪl sʌmwʌn - ɪt wɑz sɪmpəl, kʌm tə θɪŋk - wʊɾə bɪn fɪnɪʃt baɪ naʊ, bʌt ʃi ɔltɝd ðə floʊz, ən ðə hʌm ɪnsaɪɾ ɪleɪn tʃeɪnʒd pɪtʃ, sɪŋkɪŋ dipɝ. "ɪt meɪ bi səm pɑɹɾ ə hilɪŋ, ə sɔɹɾ ə hilɪŋ, bʌt wɪv noʊn ðɪs sɪns bɪfɔɹ wi wɝ sɛn tə ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd. səm ə ðə weɪz ðə floʊz ɑɹ juzd ɑɹ sɪməlɝ tə wʌt sumeɪkoʊ kɛɹɪstoʊvən ən nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə ʃoʊɾ ʌs. ɪn kɝɛsɪŋ ðə tʃaɪld, jə lɝn ðə hɛlθ ə mʌðɝ ən tʃaɪld, ən baɪ tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ðə wivz, jə kən kjʊɹ səm pɹɑbləmz ʌv iðɝ, bʌt ðəl nɑt wɝk ɑn ə wʊmən u ɪz nɑt wɪð tʃaɪld. əɹ ɑn ə mæn, ʌv kɔɹs." ðə hʌm ɡɹu laʊɾɝ, əntɪl ɪt simd ɛvɹiwʌn mʌs bi eɪbəl tə hɪɹ ɪt. ɪleɪn θɔɾ əɹ tiθ wɝ vaɪbɹeɪɾɪŋ.

"The Wise Ones learned about Healing from me. And from Nynaeve, I suppose," she allowed after a moment. Oh, Nynaeve would have gone up like an Illuminator's firework, hearing that. But then, Sumeko had outstripped Nynaeve long since. "And they did learn the simple form from Aes Sedai." A snort like ripping canvas showed what Sumeko thought of the "simple" form, the only sort of Healing Aes Sedai had known for thousands of years. "This is something of the Wise Ones' own." "It is called Caressing the Child," Monaelle said in an abstracted voice. Most of her attention was focused on the weave. A simple Delving to learn what ailed someone - it was simple, come to think - would have been finished by now, but she altered the flows, and the hum inside Elayne changed pitch, sinking deeper. "It may be some part of Healing, a sort of Healing, but we have known this since before we were sent to the Three-fold Land. Some of the ways the flows are used are similar to what Sumeko Karistovan and Nynaeve al'Meara showed us. In Caressing the Child, you learn the health of mother and child, and by changing the weaves, you can cure some problems of either, but they will not work on a woman who is not with child. Or on a man, of course." The hum grew louder, until it seemed everyone must be able to hear it. Elayne thought her teeth were vibrating.

ən ɝliɝ θɔt ɹɪtɝn tə hɝ, ən ʃi sɛd, "wɪl tʃænəlɪŋ hɝt maɪ tʃaɪld? ɪf aɪ tʃænəl, aɪ min."

An earlier thought returned to her, and she said, "Will channeling hurt my child? If I channel, I mean."

"noʊ mɔɹ ðən bɹiðɪŋ dʌz." mɑneɪəl lɛt ðə wiv vænɪʃ wɪð ə ɡɹɪn. "ju hæv tu. ɪts tu ɝli tə seɪ wɛðɝ ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡɝlz ɑɹ bɔɪz, bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ hɛlθi, ən soʊ ɑɹ ju." tu! ɪleɪn ʃɛɹɾ ə waɪd smaɪl wɪð eɪvinhə. ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil əɹ sɪstɝz dɪlaɪt. ʃi wɑz gɑnə hæv twɪnz. ɹændz beɪbiz. ə bɔɪ ən ə ɡɝl, ʃi hoʊpt, əɹ tu bɔɪz. twɪn ɡɝlz wəd pɹizɛn ɔl mænɝ ə dɪfəkəltiz fəɹ ðə səksɛʃən. noʊ wʌn ɛvɝ ɡeɪn ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn wɪð ɛvɹiwʌn bɪhaɪn hɝ. sumeɪkoʊ meɪɾ ən ɝdʒən saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ɪleɪn, ən mɑneɪəl nɑɾəd. "du ɪɡzækli əz aɪ dɪd, ən jəl si." wɑtʃɪŋ sumeɪkoʊ ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs ən fɔɹm ðə wiv, ʃi nɑɾəd əɡɛn, ən ðə ɹaʊn kɪnswʊmən lɛɾ ɪt sɪŋk ɪndə ɪleɪn, lɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ɡæsp əz ɪf ʃi fɛl ðə hʌmɪŋ hɝsɛlf.

"No more than breathing does." Monaelle let the weave vanish with a grin. "You have two. It is too early to say whether they are girls are boys, but they are healthy, and so are you." Two! Elayne shared a wide smile with Aviendha. She could almost feel her sister's delight. She was going to have twins. Rand's babies. A boy and a girl, she hoped, or two boys. Twin girls would present all manner of difficulties for the succession. No one ever gained the Rose Crown with everyone behind her. Sumeko made an urgent sound in her throat, gesturing toward Elayne, and Monaelle nodded. "Do exactly as I did, and you will see." Watching Sumeko embrace the Source and form the weave, she nodded again, and the round Kinswoman let it sink into Elayne, letting out a gasp as if she felt the humming herself.

"ju wɪl nɑɾ əv tə wɝi əbaʊt bɝθɪŋ sɪknəs," mɑneɪəl wɛn ɑn, "bʌt jəl faɪn ðət juv dɪfəkəlti ɪn tʃænəlɪŋ səmtaɪmz. ðə θɹɛdz meɪ slɪp əweɪ fɹəm jə əz ðoʊ ɡɹist əɹ feɪd laɪk mɪst, soʊ jəl əv tə tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn ən əɡɛn tə meɪk ðə sɪmpləst wiv əɹ hoʊld ɪt. ðɪs meɪ ɡɹoʊ wɝs əz jəɹ pɹɛɡnənsi pɹɑɡɹɛsəz, ən jəl nɑt bi eɪbəl tə tʃænəl əɾ ɔl waɪl ɪn leɪbɝ əɹ ɡɪvɪŋ bɝθ, bʌɾ ɪɾəl kʌm ɹaɪɾ æftɝ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɑɹ bɔɹn. jə sun wɪl bɪkʌm muɾi, tu, ɪf ðəɾ əz nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi stɑɹɾəd, wipi wʌn mɪnəɾ ən snɑɹlɪŋ ðə nɛkst. ðə fɑðɝ ə jəɹ tʃaɪld wɪl bi waɪz tə stɛp wɛɹəli ən kip ɪz dɪstəns əz mʌtʃ əz i kæn."

"You will not have to worry about birthing sickness," Monaelle went on, "but you will find that you have difficulty in channeling sometimes. The threads may slip away from you as though greased or fade like mist, so you will have to try again and again to make the simplest weave or hold it. This may grow worse as your pregnancy progresses, and you will not be able to channel at all while in labor or giving birth, but it will come right after the children are born. You soon will become moody, too, if that has not already started, weepy one minute and snarling the next. The father of your child will be wise to step warily and keep his distance as much as he can."

"aɪ hɪɹ ʃiz ɔlɹɛɾi snæpt ɪz hɛɾ ɔf wʌns ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ," sumeɪkoʊ mʌɾɝd. ɹilisɪŋ ðə wiv, ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd ən ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ɹɛd bɛlt ɝaʊn əɹ ɡɝθ. "ðɪs ɪz ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl, mɑneɪəl. aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ ʌv ə wiv ðət kəɾ oʊnli bi juzd ɑn ə pɹɛɡnənt wʊmən." ɪleɪnz maʊθ taɪɾənd, bʌt wʌt ʃi sɛd wɑz "ju kən tɛl ɔl ə ðət wɪð ðɪs wiv, mɑneɪəl?" ɪt wɑz bɛs ðət pipəl θɔɾ əɹ beɪbz wɝ dɔɪlən mɛlɝz. ɹænd ælθɹz tʃɪlʒɹən wəd bi tɑɹɡəts, stɔk fəɹ fɪɹ əɹ ædvæntɪdʒ əɹ heɪtʃɹəd, bʌt noʊ wʌn wəd θɪŋk twaɪs əbaʊt mɛlɝz, pɝhæps nɑɾ ivən mɛlɝ. ɪt wɑz fəɹ ðə bɛst, ən ðət wɑz ðæt.

"I hear she's already snapped his head off once this morning," Sumeko muttered. Releasing the weave, she straightened and adjusted her red belt around her girth. "This is remarkable, Monaelle. I never thought of a weave that could only be used on a pregnant woman." Elayne's mouth tightened, but what she said was "You can tell all of that with this weave, Monaelle?" It was best that people thought her babes were Doilan Mellar's. Rand al'Thor's children would be targets, stalked for fear or advantage or hatred, but no one would think twice about Mellar's, perhaps not even Mellar. It was for the best, and that was that.

mɑneɪəl θɹu bæk əɹ hɛd, læfɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd ðət ʃi hæd tə waɪp ə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪz wɪð əɹ ʃɔl. "aɪ noʊ ðɪs fɹəm bɛɹɪŋ sɛvən tʃɪlʒɹən ən hævɪŋ θɹi hʌzbənz, ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd. ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl ʃilz jə fɹəm ðə bɝθɪŋ sɪknəs, bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝ pɹaɪsəz tə peɪ. kʌm, eɪvinhə, jə mʌs tʃɹaɪ, tu. kɛɹfəli, naʊ. ɪɡzækli əz aɪ dɪd." iɡɝli, eɪvinhə ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn tə wiv ə θɹɛd, ʃi lɛt seɪaɪdɑɹ ɡoʊ ən tɝn əɹ hɛd tə stɛɹ təwɔɹd ðə dɑɹk-pænəld wɔl. təwɔɹd ðə wɛst. soʊ dɪɾ ɪleɪn, ən mɑneɪəl, ən sumeɪkoʊ. ðə bikən ðət hæd bɪn bɝnɪŋ fəɹ soʊ lɔŋ hæd dʒʌs vænɪʃt. wʌn ɪnstən ɪt hæd bɪn ðɛɹ, ðət ɹeɪdʒɪŋ bleɪz ə seɪaɪdɑɹ, ən ðən ɪt wɑz ɡɔn əz ɪf ɪt hæd nɛvɝ ɪɡzɪstəd.

Monaelle threw back her head, laughing so hard that she had to wipe a corner of her eyes with her shawl. "I know this from bearing seven children and having three husbands, Elayne Trakand. The ability to channel shields you from the birthing sickness, but there are other prices to pay. Come, Aviendha, you must try, too. Carefully, now. Exactly as I did." Eagerly, Aviendha embraced the Source, but before she had begun to weave a thread, she let saidar go and turned her head to stare toward the dark-paneled wall. Toward the west. So did Elayne, and Monaelle, and Sumeko. The beacon that had been burning for so long had just vanished. One instant it had been there, that raging blaze of saidar, and then it was gone as if it had never existed.

sumeɪkoʊz mæsɪv bʊzəm hivd əz ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "aɪ θɪŋk sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi wʌndɝfəl əɹ vɛɹi tɛɹəbəl əz hæpən tədeɪ," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "æn aɪ θɪŋk aɪm əfɹeɪd tə lɝn wɪtʃ."

Sumeko's massive bosom heaved as she drew a deep breath. "I think something very wonderful or very terrible has happened today," she said softly. "And I think I am afraid to learn which."

"wʌndɝfəl," ɪleɪn sɛd. ɪt wɑz dʌn, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz, ən ɹænd wɑz əlaɪv. ðət wɑz wʌndɝfəl ɪnʌf. mɑneɪəl ɡlænst əɾ əɹ kwɪtsɪkli. noʊɪŋ əbaʊt ðə bɑnd, ʃi kəd pʌzəl aʊt ðə ɹɛst, bʌt ʃi oʊnli fɪŋɡɝd wʌn ə hɝ nɛkləsɪz ɪn ə θɔtfəl mænɝ. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃi wəd pɹaɪ ɪɾ aʊɾ ʌv eɪvinhə sun ɪnʌf.

"Wonderful," Elayne said. It was done, whatever it was, and Rand was alive. That was wonderful enough. Monaelle glanced at her quizzically. Knowing about the bond, she could puzzle out the rest, but she only fingered one of her necklaces in a thoughtful manner. In any case, she would pry it out of Aviendha soon enough.

ə nɑk ət ðə dɔɹ meɪɾ əm ɔl stɑɹt. ɔl bʌt mɑneɪəl, ɛniweɪ. pɹitɛndɪŋ nɑt tə si ði ʌðɝ wɪmən dʒʌmp, ʃi foʊkəst ə lɪɾəl tu ɪntɛnli ɑn ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl wɪtʃ meɪd ðə kɑntʃɹæst ɔl ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ. sumeɪkoʊ kɔf tə haɪɾ əɹ ɪmbɛɹəsmənt. "kʌm," ɪleɪn sɛd laʊdli. ə hæf-ʃaʊt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi tə bi hɝd θɹu ðə dɔɹ ivən wɪθaʊɾ ə wɔɹd.

A knock at the door made them all start. All but Monaelle, anyway. Pretending not to see the other women jump, she focused a little too intently on adjusting her shawl which made the contrast all the greater. Sumeko coughed to hide her embarrassment. "Come," Elayne said loudly. A half-shout was necessary to be heard through the door even without a ward.

keɪsil pʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum, plum hæɾ ɪn hænd, ðən keɪm ɪn ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ ən kloʊz ðə dɔɹ kɛɹfəli bɪhaɪn hɝ. ðə waɪt leɪs əɾ əɹ nɛk ən ɹɪsts wɑz fɹɛʃ, ðə leɪs ən laɪənz ɑn əɹ sæʃ ɡlimd, ən əɹ bɹɛstpleɪt spɑɹkəld əz ɪf fɹɛʃli bɝnɪʃt, bʌɾ ɑbviəsli ʃi hæd ɡɔn ɹaɪt bæk ɑn duɾi æftɝ klinɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ðɛɹ oʊvɝnaɪt tʃɹɪp. "fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ ɪntɝʌptɪŋ, maɪ leɪɾi, bʌɾ aɪ θɔt jə ʃəd noʊ ɹaɪɾ əweɪ. ðə si foʊk ɑɹ ɪn ə fɹɛnzi, ðoʊz ðəɾ ɑɹ stɪl hɪɹ. ɪt simz wʌn ə ðɛɹ əpɹɛntəsɪz əz ɡɔn mɪsɪŋ."

Caseille put her head into the room, plumed hat in hand, then came in the rest of the way and closed the door carefully behind her. The white lace at her neck and wrists was fresh, the lace and lions on her sash gleamed, and her breastplate sparkled as if freshly burnished, but obviously she had gone right back on duty after cleaning up from their overnight trip. "Forgive me for interrupting, my Lady, but I thought you should know right away. The Sea Folk are in a frenzy, those that are still here. It seems one of their apprentices has gone missing."

"wʌɾ ɛls?" ɪleɪn sɛd. ə mɪsɪŋ əpɹɛntəs maɪt bi bæɾ ɪnʌf, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ ɪn keɪsilz feɪs toʊld əɹ ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ.

"What else?" Elayne said. A missing apprentice might be bad enough, but something in Caseille's face told her there was more.

"ɡɑɹdzwʊmən əzɛɹi hæpən tə tɛl mi ðət ʃi sɔ mɛɝɪlɪl sədaɪ livɪŋ ðə pæləs əbaʊt θɹi aʊɝz əɡoʊ," keɪsil sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli. "mɛɝɪlɪl ən ə wʊmən u wɑz kloʊkt ən hʊɾɪd. ðeɪ tʊk hɔɹsəz, ən ə loʊɾəd pæk mjul. jʊɹɪθ sɛd ðə sɛkənd wʊmənz hænz wɝ tætud. maɪ leɪɾi, noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛni ɹizən tə bi lʊkɪŋ fəɹ - " ɪleɪn weɪvd əɹ tə saɪləns. "noʊ wʌn dɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɹɔŋ, keɪsil. noʊ wʌn wɪl bi bleɪmd." nɑɾ əmʌŋ ðə ɡɑɹdz, ɛniweɪ. ə faɪn pɪkəl ðɪs wɑz. tɑlɑn ən mɛtʃɹə, ðə tu əpɹɛntəs wɪndfɪndɝz, wɝ vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə paʊɝ, ən ɪf mɛɝɪlɪl hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə tɔk iðɝ wʌn ɪndə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn eɪbəl tə kənvɪns hɝsɛlf ðət teɪkɪŋ ðə ɡɝl wɛɹ ʃi kəd bi ɛntɝɾ ɪndə ðə nɑvəs bʊk wɑz ɹizən ɪnʌf tə ɪveɪɾ əɹ oʊn pɹɑməs tə titʃ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz. hu wəd bi mɔɹ ðən əpsɛɾ oʊvɝ luzɪŋ mɛɝɪlɪl, ən mɔɹ ðən fjʊɹiəs oʊvɝ ði əpɹɛntəs. ðeɪ wəd bleɪm ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn saɪt, ən ɪleɪn moʊst ʌv ɔl.

"Guardswoman Azeri happened to tell me that she saw Merilille Sedai leaving the palace about three hours ago," Caseille said reluctantly. "Merilille and a woman who was cloaked and hooded. They took horses, and a loaded pack mule. Yurith said the second woman's hands were tattooed. My Lady, no one had any reason to be looking for - " Elayne waved her to silence. "No one did anything wrong, Caseille. No one will be blamed." Not among the Guards, anyway. A fine pickle this was. Talaan and Metarra, the two apprentice Windfinders, were very strong in the Power, and if Merilille had been able to talk either one into trying to become Aes Sedai, she might have been able to convince herself that taking the girl where she could be entered into the novice book was reason enough to evade her own promise to teach the Windfinders. Who would be more than upset over losing Merilille, and more than furious over the apprentice. They would blame everyone in sight, and Elayne most of all.

"ɪz ðɪs dʒɛnɝəl nɑlədʒ əbaʊt mɛɝɪlɪl?" ʃi æskt. "nɑt jɛt, maɪ leɪɾi, bʌt huɛvɝ sæɾəld ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ən loʊɾəd ðət mjul woʊn hoʊl ðɛɹ tʌŋz. steɪbəlɪhənz doʊn əv mʌtʃ tə ɡɑsəp əbaʊt." mɔɹ ʌv ə bɹʌʃ faɪɝ ðən ə pɪkəl, ðɛn, ən smɔl tʃæns ə pʊɾɪŋ ɪɾ aʊt bɪfɔɹ ɪt ɹitʃt ðə bɑɹnz. "aɪ hoʊp jəl daɪn wɪð mi leɪɾɝ, mɑneɪəl," ɪleɪn sɛd, "bʌt jə mʌs fɝɡɪv mi, naʊ." duɾi tə hɝ mɪdwaɪf əɹ noʊ, ʃi dɪd nɑt weɪt fəɹ ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz əsɛnt. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə daʊs ðə faɪɝ maɪt bi ɪnʌf tə stɑp ðə bɑɹnz fɹəm kætʃɪŋ. meɪbi. "keɪsil, ɪnfɔɹm bɝdʒɪt, ən tɛl əɹ aɪ wɑn ən ɔɹɾɝ sɛn tə ðə ɡeɪts ɪmiɾiətli tə wɑtʃ fəɹ mɛɝɪlɪl. aɪ noʊ; aɪ noʊ; ʃi meɪ bi aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi ɔlɹɛɾi, ən ðə ɡeɪt ɡɑɹdz woʊn stɑp ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɛniweɪ, bʌt meɪbi ðeɪ kən dɪleɪ hɝ, əɹ fɹaɪɾən əɹ kəmpænjən ɪndə skʌɾəlɪŋ bæk ɪndə ðə sɪɾi tə haɪd. sumeɪkoʊ, wəd jə æsk ɹin tə əsaɪn ɛvɹi kɪnswʊmən u kæn tʃɹævəl tə stɑɹt sɝtʃɪŋ θɹu ðə sɪɾi. ɪts ə smɔl hoʊp, bʌt mɛɝɪlɪl meɪ hæv θɔɾ ɪt wɑz tu leɪɾ ɪn ðə deɪ tə stɑɹɾ aʊt. tʃɛk ɛvɹi ɪn, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn, ænd. . . ." ʃi hoʊpt ɹænd hæd dʌn sʌmθɪŋ wʌndɝfəl tədeɪ, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt weɪs taɪm ivən θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðət naʊ. ʃi hæɾ ə θɹoʊn tə ɡeɪn ən æŋɡɹi æθɑn maɪɹ tə dil wɪð, bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd vɛn ðɛɹ æŋɡɝ ɑn hɝ, ɪt wɑz tə bi hoʊpt. ɪn ʃɔɹt, ɪt wɑz ə deɪ laɪk ɛvɹi ʌðɝ sɪns ʃi ɹɪtɝn tə keɪɛmlɪn, ən ðət mɛn əɹ hænz wɝ kwaɪt fʊl ɪnʌf.

"Is this general knowledge about Merilille?" she asked. "Not yet, my Lady, but whoever saddled their horses and loaded that mule won't hold their tongues. Stablehands don't have much to gossip about." More of a brush fire than a pickle, then, and small chance of putting it out before it reached the barns. "I hope you will dine with me later, Monaelle," Elayne said, "but you must forgive me, now." Duty to her midwife or no, she did not wait for the other woman's assent. Trying to douse the fire might be enough to stop the barns from catching. Maybe. "Caseille, inform Birgitte, and tell her I want an order sent to the gates immediately to watch for Merilille. I know; I know; she may be out of the city already, and the gate guards won't stop an Aes Sedai, anyway, but maybe they can delay her, or frighten her companion into scuttling back into the city to hide. Sumeko, would you ask Reanne to assign every Kinswoman who can't Travel to start searching through the city. It's a small hope, but Merilille may have thought it was too late in the day to start out. Check every inn, including the Silver Swan, and. . . ." She hoped Rand had done something wonderful today, but she could not waste time even thinking about that now. She had a throne to gain and angry Atha'an Miere to deal with, before they could vent their anger on her, it was to be hoped. In short, it was a day like every other since she returned to Caemlyn, and that meant her hands were quite full enough.

tʃæptɝ fɪftin

CHAPTER 15

ɡæðɝɪŋ dɑɹknəs ði ivnɪŋ sʌn wɑz ə bɔl ə blʌɾ ɑn ðə tʃɹitɑps, kæstɪŋ ə lʊɹəd laɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə kæmp, ə waɪdli speɪst spɹɔl ə hɔɹslaɪnz ən kænvəs-kʌvɝd wæɡənz ən haɪ-wil kɑɹts ən tɛns ɪn ɛvɹi saɪz ən sɔɹt wɪð ðə snoʊ bɪtwin tʃɹæmpəl tə slʌʃ. nɑt ðə taɪm ə deɪ əɹ sɔɹɾ ə pleɪs ðəɾ ɛləniə wɪʃt tə bi ɑn hɔɹsbæk. ðə smɛl ə bɔɪlɪŋ bif wɑftɪŋ fɹəm ðə bɪɡ blæk aɪɝn kʊkpɑts wɑz ɪnʌf tə tɝn əɹ stʌmək. ðə koʊld ɛɹ fɹɔstəɾ əɹ bɹɛθ ən pɹɑməst ə bɪɾɝ naɪt tə kʌm, ən ðə wɪn kʌt θɹu hɝ bɛst ɹɛd kloʊk wɪθaʊt ɹəɡɑɹd fəɹ ðə θɪk laɪnɪŋ ə plʌʃ waɪt fɝ. snoʊfɑks wɑz səpoʊz tə bi wɔɹmɝ ðən ʌðɝ fɝz, bʌt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ faʊn ɪt soʊ. hoʊldɪŋ ðə kloʊk kloʊzd wɪð wʌn ɡlʌv hænd, ʃi ɹoʊd sloʊli ən tʃɹaɪd vɛɹi hɑɹd, ɪf nɑt vɛɹi səksɛsfəli, nɑt tə ʃɪvɝ. ɡɪvən ði aʊɝ, ɪt simd mɔɹ ðən laɪkli ʃi wəd bi spɛndɪŋ ðə naɪt hɪɹ, bʌɾ əz jɛt, ʃi hæd noʊ aɪdiə wɛɹ ʃi wəd slip.

Gathering Darkness The evening sun was a ball of blood on the treetops, casting a lurid light across the camp, a widely spaced sprawl of horselines and canvas-covered wagons and high-wheeled carts and tents in every size and sort with the snow between trampled to slush. Not the time of day or sort of place that Elenia wished to be on horseback. The smell of boiling beef wafting from the big black iron cookpots was enough to turn her stomach. The cold air frosted her breath and promised a bitter night to come, and the wind cut through her best red cloak without regard for the thick lining of plush white fur. Snowfox was supposed to be warmer than other furs, but she had never found it so. Holding the cloak closed with one gloved hand, she rode slowly and tried very hard, if not very successfully, not to shiver. Given the hour, it seemed more than likely she would be spending the night here, but as yet, she had no idea where she would sleep.

daʊtləs ɪn səm lɛsɝ noʊbəlz tɛnt, wɪð ðə lɔɹɾ əɹ leɪɾi ʃʌfəld ɔf tə faɪn heɪvən ɛlswɛɹ ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊt ðə bɛs feɪs ɑn biɪŋ ɪvɪktɪd, bʌɾ ɛɹəmɪlə laɪk livɪŋ əɹ ɑn tɛntɝhʊks əntɪl ðə vɛɹi læst, əbaʊt bɛdz ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. wʌn səspɛns wɑz noʊ sunɝ dɪspɛl ðən ənʌðɝ ɹipleɪst ɪt.

Doubtless in some lesser noble's tent, with the lord or lady shuffled off to find haven elsewhere and trying to put the best face on being evicted, but Arymilla liked leaving her on tenterhooks until the very last, about beds and everything else. One suspense was no sooner dispelled than another replaced it.

pleɪnli ðə wʊmən θɔt ðə kɑnstən ənsɝɾənti wəd meɪk əɹ skwɝm, pɝhæps ivən stʃɹaɪv tə pliz. ðət wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm ði oʊnli mɪskælkjəleɪʃən ɛɹəmɪlə hæd meɪd, bɪɡɪnɪŋ wɪð ðə bɪlif ðəɾ ɛləniə sɑɝənz klɔz hæd bɪn klɪpt.

Plainly the woman thought the constant uncertainty would make her squirm, perhaps even strive to please. That was far from the only miscalculation Arymilla had made, beginning with the belief that Elenia Sarand's claws had been clipped.

ʃi hæd dʒʌs fɔɹ mɛn wɪð ðə tu ɡoʊldən bɔɹz ɑn ðɛɹ kloʊks əz ɛskɔɹt - ən əɹ meɪd, dʒæni, ʌv kɔɹs, hʌɾəlɪŋ ɪn əɹ kloʊk tɪl ʃi simd ə bʌndəl ʌv ɡɹin wʊl paɪld ɑn əɹ sæɾəl - ən ʃi hæd nɑt sin ə sɪŋɡəl fɛloʊ mɔɹ ɪn ðə kæmp u ʃi kəd bi ʃʊɹ hɛld ə skɹæp ə lɔɪəlti tə sɑɝənd. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ wʌn ə ðə klʌmps ə mɛn hʌɾəld ɝaʊn ðə kæmpfaɪɝz wɪð ðɛɹ lɔnʒɹəsəz ən simstʃɹəsəz dɪspleɪd haʊs ænʃɝz ɹɛd fɑks, ən ə dʌbəl kɑləm ə hɔɹsmən wɛɹɪŋ bɛɹɪnz wɪŋ hæmɝ pæst əɹ hɛɾɪŋ ɪn ði ɑpəzət dɝɛkʃən əɾ ə sloʊ wɔk, hɑɹd-feɪs bɪhaɪn ðə bɑɹz ə ðɛɹ hɛlməts. ðeɪ wɝ ə lɪɾəl ɹil əkaʊnt, ɪn ðə lɔŋ ɹʌn. kɑɝɪn ən lɝ hæd ɡɑɾən sɪŋʒd bædli baɪ biɪŋ sloʊ wən mɔɹɡeɪs tʊk ðə θɹoʊn. ðɪs taɪm ðeɪ wəd teɪk ænʃɝ ən bɛɹɪn wɛɹɛvɝ ði ædvæntɪdʒ leɪ ði ɪnstən ðeɪ sɔ ɪt klɪɹli, əbændənɪŋ ɛɹəmɪlə wɪð əz ɡɹeɪɾ ən əlækɹəɾi əz ðeɪ hæd lɛp tə dʒɔɪn hɝ. wən ðə taɪm keɪm. moʊst ə ðə mɛn tʃɹʌdʒɪŋ θɹu ðə mʌɾi slʌʃ əɹ piɹɪŋ hoʊpfəli ɪndə ðoʊz dɪsɡʌstɪŋ kʊkpɑts wɝ lɛviz, fɑɹmɝz ən vɪlɪdʒɝz ɡæðɝɾ ʌp wən ðɛɹ lɔɹɾ əɹ leɪɾi mɑɹtʃt, ən fju wɔɹ ɛni sɔɹɾ ə haʊs bædʒ ɑn ðɛɹ ʃæbi koʊts ən pætʃt kloʊks. ivən sɛpɝeɪɾɪŋ pjuɾətɪv soʊlʒɝz fɹəm fɛɹiɝz ən flɛtʃɝz ən ðə laɪk wɑz nɪɹ ɪmpɑsəbəl, sɪns nɪɹli ɔl hæd bɛltəɾ ɑn ə sɔɹɾ ə səm dɪskɹɪpʃən, əɹ ən æks. laɪt, ə fɛɹ nʌmbɝ ə ðə wɪmən wɔɹ naɪvz lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə bi kɔld ʃɔɹt-sɔɹdz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə tɛl səm kənskɹɪptɪd fɑɹmɝz waɪf fɹəm ə wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝ. ðeɪ wɔɹ ðə seɪm θɪk wʊl ən hæd ðə seɪm ɹʌf hænz ən wɪɹi feɪsəz. ɪt dɪd nɑt ɹɪli mæɾɝ, ɪn ɛni keɪs. ðɪs wɪntɝ sidʒ wɑz ə daɪɹ mɪsteɪk - ði ɑɹmmɪn wəd bɪɡɪn ɡoʊɪŋ hʌŋɡɹi lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə sɪɾi dɪd - bʌɾ ɪt ɡeɪv ɛləniə ən ɑpɝtunəɾi, ən wən ən oʊpənɪŋ pɹizɛntəɾ ɪtsɛlf, jə stʃɹʌk. kipɪŋ əɹ hʊd bæk fɑɹ ɪnʌf tə ʃoʊ hɝ fitʃɝz klɪɹli ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə fɹizɪŋ wɪnd, ʃi nɑɾəd ɡɹeɪʃəsli tə ɛvɹi ənwɑʃt laʊɾ u soʊ mʌtʃ əz lʊkt ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən, ən ɪɡnɔɹd ðə sɝpɹaɪz stɑɹts ðət səm ɡeɪv əɾ əɹ kɑndəsɛnʃən.

She had just four men with the two Golden Boars on their cloaks as escort - and her maid, Janny, of course, huddling in her cloak till she seemed a bundle of green wool piled on her saddle - and she had not seen a single fellow more in the camp who she could be sure held a scrap of loyalty to Sarand. Here and there one of the clumps of men huddled around the campfires with their laundresses and seamstresses displayed House Anshar's Red Fox, and a double column of horsemen wearing Baryn's Winged Hammer passed her heading in the opposite direction at a slow walk, hard-faced behind the bars of their helmets. They were of little real account, in the long run. Karind and Lir had gotten singed badly by being slow when Morgase took the throne. This time they would take Anshar and Baryn wherever the advantage lay the instant they saw it clearly, abandoning Arymilla with as great an alacrity as they had leapt to join her. When the time came. Most of the men trudging through the muddy slush or peering hopefully into those disgusting cookpots were levies, farmers and villagers gathered up when their lord or lady marched, and few wore any sort of House badge on their shabby coats and patched cloaks. Even separating putative soldiers from farriers and fletchers and the like was near impossible, since nearly all had belted on a sword of some description, or an axe. Light, a fair number of the women wore knives large enough to be called short-swords, but there was no way to tell some conscripted farmer's wife from a wagon driver. They wore the same thick wool and had the same rough hands and weary faces. It did not really matter, in any case. This winter siege was a dire mistake - the armsmen would begin going hungry long before the city did - but it gave Elenia an opportunity, and when an opening presented itself, you struck. Keeping her hood back far enough to show her features clearly in spite of the freezing wind, she nodded graciously to every unwashed lout who so much as looked in her direction, and ignored the surprised starts that some gave at her condescension.

moʊst wəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ əɹ əfəbɪlɪɾi, ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə ɡoʊldən bɔɹz əɹ ɛskɔɹt wɔɹ, ən noʊ ðəɾ ɛləniə sɑɝən hæd teɪkən noʊɾəs ə ðɛm. ɑn sətʃ ə faʊndeɪʃən paʊɝ wɑz bɪlt. eɪ haɪ siɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ə kwin stʊɾ ətɑp ə taʊɝ bɪlt ə pipəl. tʃɹu, ðoʊz ət ðə bɑɾəm wɝ bɹɪks ə ðə beɪsəs kleɪ, jɛɾ ɪf ðoʊz kɑmən bɹɪks kɹʌmpəld ɪn ðɛɹ səpɔɹt, ðə taʊɝ fɛl. ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛɹəmɪlə əpɪɹd tə hæv fɝɡɑɾən, ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ noʊn. ɛləniə daʊɾɪd ðəɾ ɛɹəmɪlə spoʊk tə ɛniwʌn loʊɝ ðən ə stuɝɾ əɹ ə pɝsənəl sɝvənt. hæɾ ɪt bɪn . . . pɹuɾənt . . . ʃi hɝsɛlf wʊɾə pæst ə fju wɝdz əɾ ɛvɹi kæmpfaɪɝ, pɝhæps ɡɹæspɪŋ ə ɡɹʌbi hænd naʊ ən ðɛn, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ pipəl ʃi hæɾ ɪnkaʊntɝd bɪfɔɹ əɹ ət lis dɪsəmbəlɪŋ wɛl ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪt sim ʃi dɪd. pjʊɹ ən sɪmpəl, ɛɹəmɪlə læk ðə wɪt tə bi kwin.

Most would remember her affability, remember the Golden Boars her escort wore, and know that Elenia Sarand had taken notice of them. On such a foundation power was built. A High Seat as much as a queen stood atop a tower built of people. True, those at the bottom were bricks of the basest clay, yet if those common bricks crumpled in their support, the tower fell. That was something Arymilla appeared to have forgotten, if she had ever known. Elenia doubted that Arymilla spoke to anyone lower than a steward or a personal servant. Had it been . . . prudent . . . she herself would have passed a few words at every campfire, perhaps grasping a grubby hand now and then, remembering people she had encountered before or at least dissembling well enough to make it seem she did. Pure and simple, Arymilla lacked the wit to be queen.

ðə kæmp kʌvɝd mɔɹ ɡɹaʊn ðən moʊs taʊnz, mɔɹ laɪk ə hʌnʒɹəd klʌstɝd kæmps ə vɛɹiɪŋ saɪzəz ðən wʌn, soʊ ʃi wɑz fɹi tə wɑndɝ wɪθaʊt wɝiɪŋ tu mʌtʃ əbaʊt stʃɹeɪɪŋ kloʊs tə ði aʊɾɝ baʊndɝiz, bʌt ʃi tʊk ə kɛɹ ɛniweɪ. ðə ɡɑɹdz ɑn sɛntʃɹi wəd bi pəlaɪt, ənlɛs ðeɪ wɝ ʌɾɝ fulz, jɛt wɪθaʊɾ ɛni daʊt ðeɪ hæd ðɛɹ ɔɹɾɝz. ɑn pɹɪnsəpəl, ʃi əpɹuvd ə pipəl duɪŋ əz ðeɪ wɝ toʊld, bʌɾ ɪt wəd bi bɛs tə əvɔɪɾ ɛni ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ ɪnsəɾənts. ɪspɛʃli ɡɪvən ðə laɪkli kɑnsəkwɛnsəz ɪf ɛɹəmɪlə æktʃəli  θɔt ʃi hæd bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə liv. ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn fɔɹs tə ɛndʒjʊɹ wʌn fɹɪdʒəd naɪt slipɪŋ ɪn səm soʊlʒɝz fɪlθi tɛnt, ə ʃɛltɝ hɑɹdli wɝθ ðə neɪm, kəmplit wɪð vɝmɪn ən bædli pætʃt hoʊlz, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə læk ə dʒæni tə hɛlp əɹ wɪð əɹ kloʊðz ən æɾ ə lɪɾəl wɔɹmθ ʌndɝ ðə sɑɹi ɪkskjus fəɹ blæŋkəts, ən ðət hæd bɪn fəɹ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə pɝsiv slaɪt. wɛl, ɪt hæd bɪn ən æktʃəwəl slaɪt, bʌt ʃi hæd nɑt θɔɾ ɛɹəmɪlə bɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf tə kætʃ ɪt.

The camp covered more ground than most towns, more like a hundred clustered camps of varying sizes than one, so she was free to wander without worrying too much about straying close to the outer boundaries, but she took a care anyway. The guards on sentry would be polite, unless they were utter fools, yet without any doubt they had their orders. On principle, she approved of people doing as they were told, but it would be best to avoid any embarrassing incidents. Especially given the likely consequences if Arymilla actually thought she had been trying to leave. She had already been forced to endure one frigid night sleeping in some soldier's filthy tent, a shelter hardly worth the name, complete with vermin and badly patched holes, not to mention the lack of Janny to help her with her clothes and add a little warmth under the sorry excuse for blankets, and that had been for no more than a perceived slight. Well, it had been an actual slight, but she had not thought Arymilla bright enough to catch it.

laɪt, tə θɪŋk ðət ʃi mʌst stɛp wɛɹəli ɝaʊn ðət . . . ðət pi-bɹeɪnd nɪni! pʊlɪŋ əɹ kloʊk kloʊsɝ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə pɹitɛn ðəɾ əɹ ʃʌɾɝ wɑz dʒʌst ə ɹiækʃən tə ðə wɪnd. ðəɹ wɝ bɛɾɝ θɪŋz tə dwɛl ɑn. mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋz. ʃi nɑɾəd tə ə waɪd-aɪd jʌŋ mæn wɪð ə dɑɹk skɑɹf ɹæpt ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd, ən i ɹikɔɪld əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd ɡlɛɹd. ful pɛzənt!

Light, to think that she must step warily around that . . . that pea-brained ninny! Pulling her cloak closer, she tried to pretend that her shudder was just a reaction to the wind. There were better things to dwell on. More important things. She nodded to a wide-eyed young man with a dark scarf wrapped around his head, and he recoiled as though she had glared. Fool peasant!

ɪt wɑz ɡɹeɪɾɪŋ tə θɪŋk ðæt, oʊnli ə fju maɪlz əweɪ, ðət jʌŋ tʃɪɾ ɪleɪn sæt snʌɡ ən wɔɹm ɪn ðə kʌmfɝɾ ə ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs, ətɛndəd baɪ skɔɹz ʌv wɛl-tʃɹeɪn sɝvəns ən laɪkli wɪθaʊt tu θɔts ɪn əɹ hɛd bɪɑnd wʌt tə wɛɹ tənaɪɾ əɾ ə sʌpɝ pɹipɛɹd baɪ ðə pæləs kʊks. ɹumɝ hæd ðə ɡɝl wɪð tʃaɪld, pɑsəbli baɪ səm ɡɑɹdzmæn. ɪt maɪt bi soʊ. ɪleɪn hæd nɛvɝ pəzɛst ɛni mɔɹ sɛns ə disənsi ðən əɹ mʌðɝ. daɪɛlɪn wɑz ðə bɹeɪn ðɛɹ, ə ʃɑɹp maɪn ən deɪnʒɝəs nɑtwɪθstændɪŋ əɹ pəθɛɾɪk læk ʌv æmbɪʃən, pɝhæps ædvaɪz baɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðəɹ mʌs bi ət list wʌn ɹil ɛɛs sədaɪ əmʌŋ ɔl ðoʊz əbsɝd ɹumɝz. soʊ mɛni fæbjəleɪʃənz dʒɹɪftəɾ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi ðət tɛlɪŋ ɹiæləɾi fɹəm nɑnsɛns bɪkeɪm dɪfəkəlt - si foʊk meɪkɪŋ hoʊlz ɪn ði ɛɹ? æbsəlut dʒɹɪvəl! - jɛt ðə waɪt taʊɝ klɪɹli hæɾ ən ɪntʃɹəst ɪn pʊɾɪŋ wʌn ʌv ɪts oʊn ɑn ðə θɹoʊn. haʊ kəɾ ɪt nɑt? ivən soʊ, tɑɹ vəlɑn sim tə bi pɹæɡmæɾɪk wən ɪt keɪm tə ðiz mæɾɝz. hɪstɝi klɪɹli ʃoʊd ðət huɛvɝ ɹitʃt ðə laɪən θɹoʊn wəd sun faɪn ðət ʃi wɑz ðə wʌn ðə taʊɝ æktʃəli  hæd feɪvɝɾ ɔl əlɔŋ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd nɑt luz ðɛɹ kənɛkʃən tə ændɝ θɹu ə læk ə nɪmblnəs, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli nɑt wɪð ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf ɹɪvən. ɛləniə wɑz əz sɝɾən ə ðəɾ əz ʃi wɑz ə hɝ oʊn neɪm. ɪn fækt, ɪf hæf wʌt ʃi hɝɾ ə ðə taʊɝz sɪtʃueɪʃən wɑz tʃɹu, ðə nɛks kwin ʌv ændɝ maɪt faɪn hɝsɛlf eɪbəl tə dɪmænd wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪn ɹɪtɝn fəɹ kipɪŋ ðət kənɛkʃən ɪntækt. ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, noʊ wʌn gɑnə tə ɹɛs ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn ɑn əɹ hɛd bɪfɔɹ sʌmɝ ət ði ɝliəst, ən ə ɡɹeɪt dil kəd tʃeɪnʒ bɪfɔɹ ðɛn. ə vɛɹi ɡɹeɪt dil.

It was grating to think that, only a few miles away, that young chit Elayne sat snug and warm in the comfort of the Royal Palace, attended by scores of well-trained servants and likely without two thoughts in her head beyond what to wear tonight at a supper prepared by the palace cooks. Rumor had the girl with child, possibly by some Guardsman. It might be so. Elayne had never possessed any more sense of decency than her mother. Dyelin was the brain there, a sharp mind and dangerous notwithstanding her pathetic lack of ambition, perhaps advised by an Aes Sedai. There must be at least one real Aes Sedai among all those absurd rumors. So many fabulations drifted out of the city that telling reality from nonsense became difficult - Sea Folk making holes in the air? Absolute drivel! - yet the White Tower clearly had an interest in putting one of its own on the throne. How could it not? Even so, Tar Valon seemed to be pragmatic when it came to these matters. History clearly showed that whoever reached the Lion Throne would soon find that she was the one the Tower actually had favored all along. The Aes Sedai would not lose their connection to Andor through a lack of nimbleness, particularly not with the Tower itself riven. Elenia was as certain of that as she was of her own name. In fact, if half what she heard of the Tower's situation was true, the next Queen of Andor might find herself able to demand whatever she wanted in return for keeping that connection intact. In any event, no one was going to rest the Rose Crown on her head before summer at the earliest, and a great deal could change before then. A very great deal.

ʃi wɑz meɪkɪŋ əɹ sɛkən ɹaʊn ə ðə kæmp wən ðə saɪɾ ʌv ənʌðɝ smɔl maʊntəd pɑɹɾi əhɛɾ ə hɝ, pɪkɪŋ ɪts sloʊ weɪ bɪtwin ðə skæɾɝd kæmpfaɪɝz ɪn ðə læs laɪt, meɪɾ əɹ skaʊl ən dʒɹɔ ɹeɪn ʃɑɹpli. ðə wɪmən wɝ kloʊkt ən dipli hʊɾɪd, wʌn ɪn stʃɹɔŋ blu sɪlk laɪnd wɪð blæk fɝ, ði ʌðɝ ɪn pleɪn ɡɹeɪ wʊl, bʌt ðə sɪlvɝ tʃɹɪpəl kiz wɝk lɑɹdʒ ɑn ðə fɔɹ ɑɹmmɪnz kloʊks neɪmd əm klɪɹli ɪnʌf. ʃi kəd θɪŋk ʌv ɛni nʌmbɝ ə pipəl ʃi wəd ɹæðɝ ɪnkaʊntɝ ðən nɑiən ɑɝɔn. ɪn ɛni keɪs, waɪl ɛɹəmɪlə hæd nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli fɔɹbɪɾən əm tə mit wɪθaʊɾ əɹ -  ɛləniə hɝɾ əɹ tiθ ɡɹaɪn əz mʌtʃ əz fɛl ðɛm, ən fɔɹst əɹ feɪs smuð - fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, ɪt simd waɪzəs nɑt tə pɹɛs mæɾɝz. ɪspɛʃli wən ðəɹ sim noʊ pɑsəbəl ædvæntɪdʒ tə sətʃ ə miɾɪŋ.

She was making her second round of the camp when the sight of another small mounted party ahead of her, picking its slow way between the scattered campfires in the last light, made her scowl and draw rein sharply. The women were cloaked and deeply hooded, one in strong blue silk lined with black fur, the other in plain gray wool, but the silver Triple Keys worked large on the four armsmen's cloaks named them clearly enough. She could think of any number of people she would rather encounter than Naean Arawn. In any case, while Arymilla had not precisely forbidden them to meet without her -  Elenia heard her teeth grind as much as felt them, and forced her face smooth - for the moment, it seemed wisest not to press matters. Especially when there seemed no possible advantage to such a meeting.

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, nɑiən sɔ hɝ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd tɝn əsaɪd. ðə wʊmən spoʊk heɪstəli tə hɝ ɛskɔɹɾ ænd, waɪl ɑɹmmɪn ən meɪd wɝ stɪl boʊɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, spɝd təwɔɹɾ ɛləniə əɾ ə peɪs ðət sɛn klɑdz ə slʌʃ flaɪɪŋ fɹəm əɹ blæk ɡɛldɪŋz hʊvz. ðə laɪt bɝn ðə ful! ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, wʌtɛvɝ wɑz ɡoʊɾɪŋ nɑiən tə ɹɛkləsnəs maɪt bi væljəbəl tə noʊ, ən deɪnʒɝəs nɑt tə. ɪt maɪt, bʌt faɪndɪŋ aʊt pɹizɛntəɾ ɪts oʊn deɪnʒɝz. "steɪ hɪɹ ən ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət juv sin nʌθɪŋ," ɛləniə snæpt əɾ əɹ oʊn miɡɝ ɹɛɾənu ən dʌɡ hɝ hilz ɪndə dɔn wɪnz flæŋks wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɛni ɹɪplaɪ. ʃi hæd noʊ nid fəɹ ɪlæbɹət baʊz ən kɝɾəsiz ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi tɝn ɝaʊnd, nɑt bɪɑnd wʌt simlaɪnəs dɪmændəd, ən əɹ pipəl nu bɛɾɝ ðən tə də ɛniθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən wʌt ʃi kəmændəd.

Unfortunately, Naean saw her before she could turn aside. The woman spoke hastily to her escort and, while armsmen and maid were still bowing in their saddles, spurred toward Elenia at a pace that sent clods of slush flying from her black gelding's hooves. The Light burn the fool! On the other hand, whatever was goading Naean to recklessness might be valuable to know, and dangerous not to. It might, but finding out presented its own dangers. "Stay here and remember that you've seen nothing," Elenia snapped at her own meager retinue and dug her heels into Dawn Wind's flanks without waiting for any reply. She had no need for elaborate bows and courtesies every time she turned around, not beyond what seemliness demanded, and her people knew better than to do anything other than what she commanded.

ɪt wɑz ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ʃi hæd tə wɝi əbaʊt, bɝn əm ɔl! əz ðə lɔŋ-lɛɡəd beɪ spɹæŋ fɔɹwɝd, ʃi lɔst əɹ ɡɹɪp ɑn əɹ kloʊk, ən ɪt stʃɹim bɪhaɪn əɹ laɪk ðə kɹɪmzən bænɝ ə sɑɝənd. ʃi ɹəfjuz tə ɡæðɝ ðə kloʊk ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl, fleɪlɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə fɑɹmɝz ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu hu, soʊ ðə wɪn ɹeɪzɝd θɹu hɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs, ənʌðɝ ɹizən fəɹ ɪɹɪteɪʃən.

It was everyone else she had to worry about, burn them all! As the long-legged bay sprang forward, she lost her grip on her cloak, and it streamed behind her like the crimson banner of Sarand. She refused to gather the cloak under control, flailing around in front of farmers and the Light alone knew who, so the wind razored through her riding dress, another reason for irritation.

nɑiən ət lis hæd ðə sɛns tə sloʊ ən miɾ əɹ lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən hæfweɪ, bɪsaɪɾ ə pɛɹ ə hɛvəli leɪɾən kɑɹts wɪð ðɛɹ ɛmpti ʃæfs laɪɪŋ ɪn ðə mʌk. ðə nɪɹəs faɪɝ wɑz ɔlmoʊs twɛnti peɪsɪz əweɪ, ən ðə nɪɹəs tɛns fɑɹðɝ, ðɛɹ ɛntʃɹi flæps leɪs taɪɾ əɡɛns ðə koʊld. ðə mɛn ət ðə faɪɝ wɝ ɪntɛn ɑn ðə bɪɡ aɪɝn pɑt stimɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə fleɪmz, ən ɪf ðə stɛntʃ fɹəm ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɛləniə wɑnə ɛmpti hɝ stʌmək, ət lis ðə wɪn ðət kæɹid ðə stɪŋk wəd kip stʃɹeɪ wɝdz fɹəm ðɛɹ ɪɹz. bʌt ðeɪ hæd bɛɾɝ bi ɪmpɔɹɾənt wɝdz.

Naean at least had the sense to slow and meet her little more than halfway, beside a pair of heavily laden carts with their empty shafts lying in the muck. The nearest fire was almost twenty paces away, and the nearest tents farther, their entry flaps laced tight against the cold. The men at the fire were intent on the big iron pot steaming over the flames, and if the stench from it was enough to make Elenia want to empty her stomach, at least the wind that carried the stink would keep stray words from their ears. But they had better be important words.

wɪð ə feɪs əz peɪl əz aɪvɝi ɪn ɪts fɹeɪm ə blæk fɝ, nɑiən maɪɾ əv bɪn kɔl bjuɾəfəl baɪ səm dɪspaɪt mɔɹ ðən ə hɪn ə hɑɹʃnəs ɝaʊn əɹ maʊθ ən aɪz əz koʊld əz blu aɪs. stʃɹeɪtbækt ən aʊtwɝdli kwaɪt kɑm, ʃi simd əntʌtʃt baɪ ɪvɛns. hɝ bɹɛθ, meɪkɪŋ ə waɪt mɪst, wɑz stɛɾi ən ivən. "du jə noʊ wɛɹ wəɹ slipɪŋ tənaɪt, ɛləniə?" ʃi sɛd kuli.

With a face as pale as ivory in its frame of black fur, Naean might have been called beautiful by some despite more than a hint of harshness around her mouth and eyes as cold as blue ice. Straightbacked and outwardly quite calm, she seemed untouched by events. Her breath, making a white mist, was steady and even. "Do you know where we are sleeping tonight, Elenia?" she said coolly.

ɛləniə meɪd noʊ ɛfɝɾ əɾ ɔl tə stɑp fɹəm ɡlɛɹɪŋ. "ɪz ðət wʌt jə wɑnt?" ɹɪskɪŋ ɛɹəmɪləz dɪsplɛʒɝ fəɹ ə bɹeɪnləs kwɛstʃən!

Elenia made no effort at all to stop from glaring. "Is that what you want?" Risking Arymilla's displeasure for a brainless question!

ðə θɔɾ ə ɹɪskɪŋ ɛɹəmɪləz dɪsplɛʒɝ, ðə θɔt ðəɾ ɛɹəmɪləz dɪsplɛʒɝ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʃi niɾəd tə əvɔɪd, meɪɾ əɹ snɑɹl. "ju noʊ əz mʌtʃ əz aɪ, nɑiən." tʌɡɪŋ əɾ əɹ ɹeɪnz, ʃi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi tɝnɪŋ əɹ maʊn əweɪ wən nɑiən spoʊk əɡɛn, wɪð dʒʌst ə hɪn ə hit.

The thought of risking Arymilla's displeasure, the thought that Arymilla's displeasure was something she needed to avoid, made her snarl. "You know as much as I, Naean." Tugging at her reins, she was already turning her mount away when Naean spoke again, with just a hint of heat.

"doʊn pleɪ ðə sɪmpəltən wɪð mi, ɛləniə. ən doʊn tɛl mi jə ɑɹən əz ɹɛɾi əz aɪm tə tʃu ɔf jəɹ oʊn fʊt tə ɪskeɪp ðɪs tʃɹæp. naʊ, kən wi ət lis pɹitɛn tə səvɪləɾi?" ɛləniə kɛp dɔn wɪn hæf tɝn əweɪ fɹəm ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ən lʊkt əɾ əɹ saɪdweɪz, pæs ðə fɝ-tʃɹɪmd ɛdʒ ə hɝ hʊd. ðət weɪ, ʃi kəd kip ən aɪ ɑn ðə mɛn kɹaʊɾɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə nɪɹəs faɪɝ, tu. noʊ haʊs bædʒɪz dɪspleɪd ðɛɹ. ðeɪ kəd bɪlɔŋ tə ɛniwʌn. naʊ ən ðən wʌn fɛloʊ əɹ ənʌðɝ ʃildɪŋ bɛɹ hænz ɪn ɪz ɑɹmpɪts ɡlæns təwɔɹd ðə tu leɪɾiz ɑn hɔɹsbæk, bʌt ðɛɹ ɹil ɪntʃɹəst wɑz ɑn ʃʌflɪŋ nɪɹ ɪnʌf ðə faɪɝ tə ɡɛt wɔɹm. ðæt, ən haʊ lɔŋ ɪt wɑz gɑnə teɪk fəɹ ðə bif tə bɔɪl daʊn tə sʌmθɪŋ əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ mʌʃ. ðət sɔɹt simd eɪbəl tə iɾ ɛniθɪŋ.

"Don't play the simpleton with me, Elenia. And don't tell me you aren't as ready as I am to chew off your own foot to escape this trap. Now, can we at least pretend to civility?" Elenia kept Dawn Wind half turned away from the other woman and looked at her sideways, past the fur-trimmed edge of her hood. That way, she could keep an eye on the men crowding around the nearest fire, too. No House badges displayed there. They could belong to anyone. Now and then one fellow or another shielding bare hands in his armpits glanced toward the two ladies on horseback, but their real interest was on shuffling near enough the fire to get warm. That, and how long it was going to take for the beef to boil down to something approaching mush. That sort seemed able to eat anything.

"du jə θɪŋk jə kən ɪskeɪp?" ʃi æskt kwaɪətli. səvɪləɾi wɑz ɔl vɛɹi wɛl, bʌt nɑɾ ət ði ɪkspɛns ə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ hɪɹ fəɹ ɔl tə si ɛni lɔŋɡɝ ðən æbsəlutli nɛsəsɛɹi. ɪf nɑiən sɔ ə weɪ aʊt, ðoʊ. . . . "haʊ? ðə plɛdʒ jə saɪn tə səpɔɹt mɑɹn əz bɪn poʊstɪɾ əkɹɔs hæf ʌv ændɝ baɪ naʊ. bɪsaɪdz, jə kən hɑɹdli θɪŋk ɛɹəmɪlə wɪl dʒʌst əlaʊ jə tə ɹaɪɾ əweɪ." nɑiən flɪntʃt, ən ɛləniə kəd nɑt hɛlp ə taɪt smaɪl. ðə wʊmən wɑz nɑt soʊ əntʌtʃt əz ʃi feɪnd. ʃi stɪl mænədʒ tə kip əɹ vɔɪs lɛvəl, ðoʊ.

"Do you think you can escape?" she asked quietly. Civility was all very well, but not at the expense of remaining here for all to see any longer than absolutely necessary. If Naean saw a way out, though. . . . "How? The pledge you signed to support Marne has been posted across half of Andor by now. Besides, you can hardly think Arymilla will just allow you to ride away." Naean flinched, and Elenia could not help a tight smile. The woman was not so untouched as she feigned. She still managed to keep her voice level, though.

"aɪ sɔ dʒɑɝɪd jɛstɝdeɪ, ɛləniə, ən ivən əɾ ə dɪstəns i lʊk laɪk ə θʌndɝklaʊd, ɡæləpɪŋ fɪt tə bɹeɪk ɪz maʊns nɛk ən ɪz oʊn. ɪf aɪ noʊ jəɹ hʌzbənd, hiz ɔlɹɛɾi plænɪŋ ə weɪ tə kʌt jə aʊɾ ə ðɪs. hi wəd spɪɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz aɪ fəɹ ju." ðət wɑz tʃɹu; hi wʊd. "ɪm ʃʊɹ jə kən si ɪt wəd bi bɛst ɪf aɪ wɝ pɑɹɾ ə ðoʊz plænz."

"I saw Jarid yesterday, Elenia, and even at a distance he looked like a thundercloud, galloping fit to break his mount's neck and his own. If I know your husband, he's already planning a way to cut you out of this. He would spit in the Dark One's eye for you." That was true; he would. "I'm sure you can see it would be best if I were part of those plans."

"maɪ hʌzbən saɪn ðə seɪm plɛdʒ jə dɪd, nɑiən, ən hiz ən ɑnɝəbəl mæn." hi wɑz tu ɑnɝəbəl fəɹ ɪz oʊn ɡʊd, ɪn sɪmpəl fækt, bʌt wʌɾ ɛləniə wɑntəd hæd bɪn ɪz ɡaɪd sɪns bɪfɔɹ ðɛɹ wɛɾɪŋ vaʊz. dʒɑɝɪd hæd saɪn ðə plɛdʒ kəz ʃi ɹoʊɾ ən toʊld ɪm tə, nɑt ðət ʃi hæɾ ɛni tʃɔɪs əz mæɾɝz wɝ, ən i wəɾ ivən ɹipjuɾieɪt ɪt, haʊɛvɝ ɹɪlʌktənli, ɪf ʃi wɝ mæɾ ɪnʌf tə æsk ɪt. ʌv kɔɹs, ðəɹ wɑz ðə dɪfəkəlti ɪn lɛɾɪŋ ɪm noʊ wʌt ʃi dɪd wɑn ət ðə moʊmənt. ɛɹəmɪlə wɑz vɛɹi kɛɹfəl nɑt tə lɛɾ əɹ wɪðɪn ə maɪl ə hɪm. ʃi hæɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn hænd - əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kəɾ ɪn ðə sɝkəmstænsəz - bʌt ʃi niɾəd tə lɛt dʒɑɝɪd noʊ, ɪf oʊnli tə stɑp ɪm fɹəm "kʌɾɪŋ əɹ ə weɪ aʊt." spɪɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz aɪ? hi kəd teɪk əm boʊθ tə ɹuən ɪn ðə bɪlif i wɑz hɛlpɪŋ hɝ, ən i maɪt də ɪɾ ivən noʊɪŋ ɪt mɛn ðɛɹ ɹuəneɪʃən.

"My husband signed the same pledge you did, Naean, and he is an honorable man." He was too honorable for his own good, in simple fact, but what Elenia wanted had been his guide since before their wedding vows. Jarid had signed the pledge because she wrote and told him to, not that she had any choice as matters were, and he would even repudiate it, however reluctantly, if she were mad enough to ask it. Of course, there was the difficulty in letting him know what she did want at the moment. Arymilla was very careful not to let her within a mile of him. She had everything in hand - as far as she could in the circumstances - but she needed to let Jarid know, if only to stop him from "cutting her a way out." Spit in the Dark One's eye? He could take them both to ruin in the belief he was helping her, and he might do it even knowing it meant their ruination.

ɪt ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə ɡɹeɪɾ ɛfɝt nɑt tə əlaʊ ðə fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən ən fjʊɹi sʌɾənli wɛlɪŋ ʌp ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ tə ʃoʊ ɑn əɹ feɪs, bʌt ʃi kʌvɝd ðə stʃɹeɪn wɪð ə smaɪl. ʃi tʊk kənsɪɾɝəbəl pɹaɪɾ ɪn biɪŋ eɪbəl tə pɹədus ə smaɪl fəɹ ɛni sɪtʃueɪʃən. ðɪs wʌn hɛld ə tʌtʃ ə sɝpɹaɪz. ən ə tʌtʃ ə dɪsdeɪn. "aɪm nɑt plænɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ, nɑiən, ən niðɝ ɪz dʒɑɝɪd, aɪm ʃʊɹ. bʌɾ ɪf aɪ wɝ, waɪ wəɾ aɪ ɪnklud ju?"

It required a great effort not to allow the frustration and fury suddenly welling up inside her to show on her face, but she covered the strain with a smile. She took considerable pride in being able to produce a smile for any situation. This one held a touch of surprise. And a touch of disdain. "I'm not planning anything, Naean, and neither is Jarid, I'm sure. But if I were, why would I include you?"

"bɪkɔz ɪf aɪm nɑɾ ɪnkluɾəd ɪn ðoʊz plænz," nɑiən sɛd blʌnli, "ɛɹəmɪlə maɪt lɝn ə ðɛm. ʃi meɪ bi ə blaɪn ful, bʌt ʃɪl si wʌns ʃiz toʊld wɛɹ tə lʊk. ən jə maɪt faɪn jɝsɛlf ʃɛɹɪŋ ə tɛnt wɪð jəɹ bɪtʃɹɑθd ɛvɹi naɪt, nɑt tə mɛnʃən pɹətɛktəd baɪ hɪz ɑɹmmɪn." ɛləniəz smaɪl mɛltəd, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs tɝn tə aɪs, mætʃɪŋ ðə fɹoʊzən bɔl ðəɾ əbɹʌpli fɪld əɹ stʌmək. "ju wɑnə bi kɛɹfəl wʌt jə seɪ, əɹ ɛɹəmɪlə meɪ æsk əɹ tæɹɑbənɝ tə pleɪ kæts kɹeɪɾəl wɪð jə əɡɛn. ɪn tʃɹuθ, aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kən ɡɛɹənti əz mʌtʃ." ɪt simd ɪmpɑsəbəl ðət nɑiənz feɪs kəd ɡɹoʊ ɛni waɪɾɝ, jɛɾ ɪt dɪd. ʃi æktʃəli  sweɪɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, ən kɑɾ ɛləniəz ɑɹm əz ɪf tə kip fɹəm fɔlɪŋ. ə ɡʌst ʌv wɪn flʌŋ əɹ kloʊk əbaʊt, ən ʃi lɛɾ ɪt fleɪl. ðoʊz wʌns-koʊld aɪz wɝ kwaɪt waɪd, naʊ. ðə wʊmən meɪd noʊ ɛfɝt tə haɪɾ əɹ fɪɹ.

"Because if I am not included in those plans," Naean said bluntly, "Arymilla might learn of them. She may be a blind fool, but she'll see once she's told where to look. And you might find yourself sharing a tent with your betrothed every night, not to mention protected by his armsmen." Elenia's smile melted, but her voice turned to ice, matching the frozen ball that abruptly filled her stomach. "You want to be careful what you say, or Arymilla may ask her Taraboner to play cat's cradle with you again. In truth, I think I can guarantee as much." It seemed impossible that Naean's face could grow any whiter, yet it did. She actually swayed in her saddle, and caught Elenia's arm as if to keep from falling. A gust of wind flung her cloak about, and she let it flail. Those once-cold eyes were quite wide, now. The woman made no effort to hide her fear.

pɝhæps ʃi wɑz tu fɑɹ ɡɔn tə bi keɪpəbəl ə haɪɾɪŋ ɪt. hɝ vɔɪs keɪm bɹɛθi ən pænɪkt. "aɪ noʊ jə ən dʒɑɝɪɾ ɑɹ plænɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ, ɛləniə. aɪ noʊ ɪt! teɪk mi wɪð ju, ən . . . ən əl plɛdʒ ɑɝɔn tə jə əz sun əz aɪ kən bi fɹi ʌv ɛɹəmɪlə." oʊ, ʃi wɑz ʃeɪkən, tə ɔfɝ ðæt.

Perhaps she was too far gone to be capable of hiding it. Her voice came breathy and panicked. "I know you and Jarid are planning something, Elenia. I know it! Take me with you, and . . . and I will pledge Arawn to you as soon as I can be free of Arymilla." Oh, she was shaken, to offer that.

"du jə wɑnə dʒɹɔ mɔɹ ətɛnʃən ðən jə ɔlɹɛɾi hæv?" ɛləniə snæpt, pʊlɪŋ fɹi ʌv ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz ɡɹæsp. dɔn wɪn ən ðə blæk ɡɛldɪŋ dæns nɝvəsli, kætʃɪŋ ðɛɹ ɹaɪɾɝz' mudz, ən ɛləniə ɹeɪn əɹ beɪ hɑɹd tə kwaɪət hɪm. tu ʌv ðə mɛn ət ðə faɪɝ hɝidli pʊt ðɛɹ hɛdz daʊn.

"Do you want to draw more attention than you already have?" Elenia snapped, pulling free of the other woman's grasp. Dawn Wind and the black gelding danced nervously, catching their riders' moods, and Elenia reined her bay hard to quiet him. Two of the men at the fire hurriedly put their heads down.

noʊ daʊt ðeɪ θɔt ðeɪ sɔ tu noʊbəlwɪmən ɑɹɡjuɪŋ ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪɪŋ ivnɪŋ ən wɑntəd tə ətʃɹæk noʊ pɑɹɾ ə ðəɾ æŋɡɝ ɑn ðɛmsɛlvz. jɛs; ɪt mʌs bi oʊnli ðæt. ðeɪ maɪt kæɹi teɪlz, bʌt ðeɪ nu bɛɾɝ ðən tə ɡɛt mɪkst ɪn ðɛɹ bɛɾɝz' ɑɹɡjəməns.

No doubt they thought they saw two noblewomen arguing in the graying evening and wanted to attract no part of that anger on themselves. Yes; it must be only that. They might carry tales, but they knew better than to get mixed in their betters' arguments.

"aɪ hæv noʊ plænz tə . . . ɪskeɪp; nʌn əɾ ɔl," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə kwaɪəɾɝ vɔɪs. dʒɹɔɪŋ əɹ kloʊk kloʊs əɡɛn, ʃi kɑmli tɝn əɹ hɛd tə tʃɛk ðə kɑɹts, ən ðə nɪɹəs tɛns. ɪf nɑiən wɑz fɹaɪɾənd ɪnʌf. . . . wən ən oʊpənɪŋ pɹizɛntəɾ ɪtsɛlf. . . . ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn kloʊs ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝhɪɹ, bʌt ʃi stɪl kɛpt əɹ vɔɪs loʊ. "mæɾɝz maɪt tʃeɪnʒ, ʌv kɔɹs. hu kən seɪ? ɪf ðeɪ du, aɪ meɪk jə ðɪs pɹɑməs, ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ ən baɪ maɪ hoʊp ə ɹibɝθ, əl nɑt liv wɪθaʊt ju." ə stɑɹɾəld hoʊp blumd ɑn nɑiənz feɪs. naʊ tə pɹizɛn ðə hʊk. "ɪf, ðəɾ ɪz, aɪ hæv ɪn maɪ pəzɛʃən ə lɛɾɝ ɹɪɾən ɪn jəɹ oʊn hænd, saɪn ən sild, ɪn wɪtʃ jə ɪksplɪsətli ɹipjuɾieɪt jəɹ səpɔɹɾ ə mɑɹn, ʌv jəɹ oʊn fɹi wɪl, ən swɛɹ ðə səpɔɹɾ ə haʊs ɑɝɔn tə mi fəɹ ðə θɹoʊn. ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ ən baɪ jəɹ hoʊp ə ɹibɝθ. nʌθɪŋ lɛs wɪl du." nɑiənz hɛd dʒɝk bæk, ən ʃi tʌtʃt əɹ lɪps wɪð əɹ tʌŋ. hɝ aɪz ʃɪftəɾ əz ðoʊ sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ə weɪ aʊt, fəɹ hɛlp. ðə blæk kəntɪnjud tə snɔɹɾ ən dæns, bʌt ʃi bɛɹli taɪɾənd əɹ ɹeɪnz ɪnʌf tə kip ɪm fɹəm boʊltɪŋ, ən ivən ðət simd ʌnkɑnʃəs. jɛs, ʃi wɑz fɹaɪɾənd. bʌt nɑt tu fɹaɪɾənd tə noʊ wʌɾ ɛləniə wɑz dɪmændɪŋ. ðə hɪstɝi ʌv ændɝ kənteɪn tu mɛni ɪɡzæmpəlz fəɹ əɹ nɑt tə noʊ. ə θaʊzən pɑsəbɪləɾiz ɹɪmeɪn soʊ lɔŋ əz nʌθɪŋ wɑz ɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ, bʌt ðə mɪɹ ɛɡzɪstəns ə sətʃ ə lɛɾɝ wəd pʊɾ ə bɪt bɪtwin nɑiənz tiθ ən ðə ɹeɪnz ɪn ɛləniəz hænz. pʌbləkeɪʃən mɛnt nɑiənz dɪstʃɹʌkʃən, ənlɛs ɛləniə wɑz ful ɪnʌf tə ədmɪt tə koʊɝʃən. ʃi kəd tʃɹaɪ tə hæŋ ɑn æftɝ ðət ɹɛvəleɪʃən, jɛɾ ivən ə haʊs wɪð mɛni fjuɝ æntæɡənɪzəmz bɪtwin ɪts mɛmbɝz ðən ɑɝɔn, mɛni fjuɝ kʌzənz ən æns ən ʌŋkəlz ɹɛɾi tə ʌndɝkʌt wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn ə hɑɹtbit, wəd stɪl bɹeɪk əpɑɹt. ðə lɛsɝ haʊsəz ðət hæd bɪn taɪd tə ɑɝɔn fəɹ dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz wəd sik pɹətɛkʃən ɛlswɛɹ. ɪn ə mæɾɝ ə jɪɹz, ɪf nɑt sunɝ, nɑiən wəd bi lɛft əz ðə haɪ siɾ ʌv ə maɪnɝ ən dɪskɹɛɾɪtɪd ɹɛmnənt. oʊ, jɛs; ɪt hæd hæpən bɪfɔɹ.

"I have no plans to . . . escape; none at all," she said in a quieter voice. Drawing her cloak close again, she calmly turned her head to check the carts, and the nearest tents. If Naean was frightened enough. . . . When an opening presented itself. . . . There was no one close enough to overhear, but she still kept her voice low. "Matters might change, of course. Who can say? If they do, I make you this promise, under the Light and by my hope of rebirth, I will not leave without you." A startled hope bloomed on Naean's face. Now to present the hook. "If, that is, I have in my possession a letter written in your own hand, signed and sealed, in which you explicitly repudiate your support of Marne, of your own free will, and swear the support of House Arawn to me for the throne. Under the Light and by your hope of rebirth. Nothing less will do." Naean's head jerked back, and she touched her lips with her tongue. Her eyes shifted as though searching for a way out, for help. The black continued to snort and dance, but she barely tightened her reins enough to keep him from bolting, and even that seemed unconscious. Yes, she was frightened. But not too frightened to know what Elenia was demanding. The history of Andor contained too many examples for her not to know. A thousand possibilities remained so long as nothing was in writing, but the mere existence of such a letter would put a bit between Naean's teeth and the reins in Elenia's hands. Publication meant Naean's destruction, unless Elenia was fool enough to admit to coercion. She could try to hang on after that revelation, yet even a House with many fewer antagonisms between its members than Arawn, many fewer cousins and aunts and uncles ready to undercut one another in a heartbeat, would still break apart. The lesser Houses that had been tied to Arawn for generations would seek protection elsewhere. In a matter of years, if not sooner, Naean would be left as the High Seat of a minor and discredited remnant. Oh, yes; it had happened before.

"wiv bɪn təɡɛðɝ lɔŋ ɪnʌf." ɛləniə ɡæðɝɾ əɹ ɹeɪnz. "aɪ wʊdnt wɑnə sɛt tʌŋz wæɡɪŋ. pɝhæps wɪl əv ənʌðɝ tʃæns tə spik əloʊn bɪfɔɹ ɛɹəmɪlə teɪks ðə θɹoʊn." wʌɾ ə vaɪl θɔt! "pɝhæps."

"We've been together long enough." Elenia gathered her reins. "I wouldn't want to set tongues wagging. Perhaps we will have another chance to speak alone before Arymilla takes the throne." What a vile thought! "Perhaps."

ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ɛksheɪld əz ɪf ɔl ə ðə bɹɛθ ɪn əɹ bɑɾi wɝ likɪŋ aʊt, bʌɾ ɛləniə wɛn ɑn əbaʊt tɝnɪŋ əɹ hɔɹs əweɪ, niðɝ sloʊli nɔɹ ɪn heɪst, nɑt stɑpɪŋ əntɪl nɑiən sɛɾ ɝdʒənli, "weɪt!"

The other woman exhaled as if all of the breath in her body were leaking out, but Elenia went on about turning her horse away, neither slowly nor in haste, not stopping until Naean said urgently, "Wait!"

lʊkɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ʃi dɪd dʒʌs ðæt. weɪɾəd. wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ ə wɝd. wʌt niɾəd tə bi sɛd hæd bɪn sɛd. ɔl ðət ɹɪmeɪnd wɑz tə si wɛðɝ ðə wʊmən wɑz dɛspɹɪɾ ɪnʌf tə dɪlɪvɝ hɝsɛlf ɪndə ɛləniəz hænz. ʃi ʃəd bi. ʃi hæd noʊ dʒɑɝɪd tə wɝk fəɹ hɝ. ɪn fækt, ɛniwʌn ɪn ɑɝɔn u sədʒɛstəd ðət nɑiən niɾəd ɹɛskjuɪŋ laɪkli wəd faɪn hɝsɛlf ɪmpɹɪzən fəɹ θwɔɹɾɪŋ nɑiənz ɪkspɹɛst wɪl. wɪθaʊɾ ɛləniə, ʃi kəd ɡɹoʊ oʊld ɪn kæptɪvəɾi. wɪð ðə lɛɾɝ, ðoʊ, hɝ kæptɪvəɾi wəd bi ʌv ə dɪfɹən kaɪnd. wɪð ðə lɛɾɝ, ɛləniə wəd bi eɪbəl tə əlaʊ hɝ ɛvɹi əpɪɹəns ə kəmplit fɹiɾəm. əpɛɹənli ʃi wɑz bɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf tə si ðæt. əɹ meɪbi dʒʌs fɹaɪɾənd ɪnʌf ə ðə tæɹɑbənɝ.

Looking back over her shoulder, she did just that. Waited. Without speaking a word. What needed to be said had been said. All that remained was to see whether the woman was desperate enough to deliver herself into Elenia's hands. She should be. She had no Jarid to work for her. In fact, anyone in Arawn who suggested that Naean needed rescuing likely would find herself imprisoned for thwarting Naean's expressed will. Without Elenia, she could grow old in captivity. With the letter, though, her captivity would be of a different kind. With the letter, Elenia would be able to allow her every appearance of complete freedom. Apparently she was bright enough to see that. Or maybe just frightened enough of the Taraboner.

"aɪ wɪl ɡɛɾ ɪt tə jə əz sun əz aɪ kæn," ʃi sɛɾ ət læst, ɪn ə ɹɪzaɪn vɔɪs.

"I will get it to you as soon as I can," she said at last, in a resigned voice.

"aɪ lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə siɪŋ ɪt," ɛləniə mɝmɝd, bɛɹli bɑðɝɪŋ tə mæsk əɹ sæɾəsfækʃən. bʌt doʊnt weɪt tu lɔŋ, ʃi ɔlmoʊst æɾəd, ən dʒʌst stɑp hɝsɛlf. nɑiən maɪt bi biɾən, bʌɾ ə biɾən foʊ kəd stɪl pʊɾ ə naɪf ɪn jəɹ bæk ɪf ɡoʊɾɪd tu fɑɹ. bɪsaɪdz wɪtʃ, ʃi fɪɹd nɑiənz θɹɛɾ əz mʌtʃ əz nɑiən fɪɹd hɝz. pɝhæps mɔɹ. soʊ lɔŋ əz nɑiən dɪd nɑt noʊ ðæt, haʊɛvɝ, hɝ bleɪd hæd noʊ pɔɪnt.

"I look forward to seeing it," Elenia murmured, barely bothering to mask her satisfaction. But don't wait too long, she almost added, and just stopped herself. Naean might be beaten, but a beaten foe could still put a knife in your back if goaded too far. Besides which, she feared Naean's threat as much as Naean feared hers. Perhaps more. So long as Naean did not know that, however, her blade had no point.

əz ʃi ɹoʊd bæk tə hɝ ɑɹmmɪn, ɛləniəz mud wɑz mɔɹ bɔɪən ðən ɪt hæd bɪn sɪns. . . .

As she rode back to her armsmen, Elenia's mood was more buoyant than it had been since. . . .

sɝɾənli sɪns bɪfɔɹ əɹ "ɹeɪz kɝz" hæd tɝn aʊt tə bi ɛɹəmɪləz mɛn. pɝhæps sɪns bɪfɔɹ daɪɛlɪn hæɾ ɪmpɹɪzən əɹ ɪn ɑɹɪŋɡəl ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs, ðoʊ ʃi hæd nɛvɝ lɔs hoʊp ðɛɹ. hɝ pɹɪzən hæd bɪn ðə ɡʌvɝnɝz haʊs, kwaɪt kʌmftəɹbəl, ivən ɪf ʃi hæd tə ʃɛɹ ən əpɑɹtmənt wɪð nɑiən.

Certainly since before her "res cuers" had turned out to be Arymilla's men. Perhaps since before Dyelin had imprisoned her in Aringill in the first place, though she had never lost hope there. Her prison had been the governor's house, quite comfortable, even if she had to share an apartment with Naean.

kəmjunəkeɪɾɪŋ wɪð dʒɑɝɪd sɝɾənli hæd pɹizɛntəd noʊ pɹɑbləm, ən ʃi θɔt ʃi hæd meɪd səm ɪnɹoʊdz wɪð ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz ɪn ɑɹɪŋɡəl. soʊ mɛni ʌv əm hæd bɪn nu-kʌm aʊɾ ə kɛɹhin ðət ðeɪ wɝ . . . ənʃʊɹ . . . wɛɹ ðɛɹ tʃɹu lɔɪəltiz leɪ.

Communicating with Jarid certainly had presented no problem, and she thought she had made some inroads with the Queen's Guards in Aringill. So many of them had been new-come out of Cairhien that they were . . . unsure . . . where their true loyalties lay.

naʊ, ðɪs wʌndɝfəli fɔɹtuɪɾəs ɪnkaʊntɝ wɪð nɑiən lɪftəɾ əɹ spɪɹəts soʊ mʌtʃ ðət ʃi smaɪld ət dʒæni ən pɹɑməst əɹ ə bɛvi ʌv nu dʒɹɛsəz wʌns ðeɪ wɝ ɪnsaɪd keɪɛmlɪn. wɪtʃ pɹədust ə pɹɑpɝli ɡɹeɪtfəl smaɪl fɹəm ðə plʌmp-tʃikt wʊmən. ɛləniə ɔlweɪz bɑt nu dʒɹɛsəz fəɹ əɹ meɪd wən ʃi fɛl pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɡʊd, ɛvɹi wʌn faɪn ɪnʌf fəɹ ə səksɛsfəl mɝtʃənt. ɪt wɑz wʌn weɪ tə ɪnʃʊɹ lɔɪəlti ən dɪskɹɛʃən, ən fəɹ twɛnti jɪɹz, dʒæni hæd dɪlɪvɝd boʊθ.

Now, this wonderfully fortuitous encounter with Naean lifted her spirits so much that she smiled at Janny and promised her a bevy of new dresses once they were inside Caemlyn. Which produced a properly grateful smile from the plump-cheeked woman. Elenia always bought new dresses for her maid when she felt particularly good, every one fine enough for a successful merchant. It was one way to insure loyalty and discretion, and for twenty years, Janny had delivered both.

ðə sʌn wɑz oʊnli ə ɹɛd ɹɪm əbʌv ðə tʃɹiz naʊ, ən ɪt wɑz taɪm tə faɪn ɛɹəmɪlə soʊ ʃi kəd bi toʊld wɛɹ ʃi wɑz slipɪŋ tənaɪt. ðə laɪt sɛn ɪt wɑz ə disən bɛd, ɪn ə wɔɹm tɛn ðət wɑz nɑt tu smoʊki, wɪð ə disən mil bɪfɔɹhænd. ʃi kəd nɑɾ æsk mɔɹ, ət pɹɛzənt. ivən ðət dɪd nɑt dɛn əɹ mud, ðoʊ. ʃi nɑɾ oʊnli nɑɾəd tə ðə klʌstɝz ə mɛn ən wɪmən ðeɪ ɹoʊd pæst, ʃi smaɪld ət ðɛm. ʃi ɔlmoʊst wɛn soʊ fɑɹ əz tə weɪv. mæɾɝz wɝ pɹəɡɹɛsɪŋ bɛɾɝ ðən ðeɪ hæɾ ɪn kwaɪt səm taɪm. nɑiən wɑz nɑt sɪmpli dɪspoʊzd ʌv əz ə ɹaɪvəl fəɹ ðə θɹoʊn, ʃi hæd bɪn liʃt ən bɹɔt tə hil, əɹ əz ɡʊɾ æz, ən ðət maɪt - wʊd! - bi səfɪʃən tə bɹɪŋ kɑɝɪn ən lɝ. ən ðəɹ wɝ ðoʊz u wəɾ æksɛpt ɛniwʌn ʌðɝ ðən ənʌðɝ tʃɹəkən ɑn ðə θɹoʊn. ɛlɹin, fəɹ wʌn. mɔɹɡeɪs hæd hæɾ əɹ flɑɡdbækslæʃ ɛlɹin wəd nɛvɝ stæn fəɹ ɛni tʃɹəkənd. æɛmlɪn, ɑɝəθɛl ən æbəl wɝ pɑsəbɪləɾiz, tu, wɪð ðɛɹ oʊn ɡɹivənsəz ðət kəd bi ɛksplɔɪɾəd. pɝhæps pɛlɪvɑɹ əɹ lwɑn, əz wɛl.

The sun was only a red rim above the trees now, and it was time to find Arymilla so she could be told where she was sleeping tonight. The Light send it was a decent bed, in a warm tent that was not too smoky, with a decent meal beforehand. She could not ask more, at present. Even that did not dent her mood, though. She not only nodded to the clusters of men and women they rode past, she smiled at them. She almost went so far as to wave. Matters were progressing better than they had in quite some time. Naean was not simply disposed of as a rival for the throne, she had been leashed and brought to heel, or as good as, and that might - would! - be sufficient to bring Karind and Lir. And there were those who would accept anyone other than another Trakand on the throne. Ellorien, for one. Morgase had had her flogged\ Ellorien would never stand for any Trakand. Aemlyn, Arathelle and Abelle were possibilities, too, with their own grievances that could be exploited. Perhaps Pelivar or Luan, as well.

ʃi hæɾ əɹ filɝz aʊt. ən ʃi wəd nɑt skwɑndɝ ði ædvæntɪdʒ ə keɪɛmlɪn, əz ðət hɔɪɾən ɪleɪn hæd. hɪstɔɹɪkəli, hoʊldɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn wɑz ɪnʌf tə ɡæðɝ ðə səpɔɹɾ ʌv ət lis fɔɹ əɹ faɪv haʊsəz baɪ ɪtsɛlf. ðə taɪmɪŋ wəd bi ki, sɝɾənli, əɹ ɔl ði ædvæntɪdʒ wəd fɔl tə ɛɹəmɪlə, bʌɾ ɛləniə kəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi si hɝsɛlf siɾəd ɑn ðə laɪən θɹoʊn, wɪð ðə haɪ sits nilɪŋ tə swɛɹ fiəlti. ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi hæɾ əɹ lɪst ʌv wɪtʃ haɪ sits wəd nid tə bi ɹipleɪst. noʊ wʌn u hæɾ əpoʊzd əɹ wɑz gɑnə bi əlaʊd tə kɑz əɹ tʃɹʌbəl leɪɾɝ. ə sɪɹiz ʌv ənfɔɹtʃənəɾ æksəɾənts wəd si tə ðæt. ə pɪɾi ʃi kəd nɑt tʃuz ðɛɹ ɹipleɪsməns, bʌɾ æksəɾənts kəd hæpən wɪð ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl fɹikwənsi.

She had her feelers out. And she would not squander the advantage of Caemlyn, as that hoyden Elayne had. Historically, holding Caemlyn was enough to gather the support of at least four or five Houses by itself. The timing would be key, certainly, or all the advantage would fall to Arymilla, but Elenia could already see herself seated on the Lion Throne, with the High Seats kneeling to swear fealty. She already had her list of which High Seats would need to be replaced. No one who had opposed her was going to be allowed to cause her trouble later. A series of unfortunate accidents would see to that. A pity she could not choose their replacements, but accidents could happen with incredible frequency.

hɝ hæpi kɑntəmpleɪʃən wɑz ʃæɾɝd baɪ ðə skɹɔni mæn u sʌɾənli keɪm ʌp bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ɑn ə stɑki ɡɹeɪ, hɪz aɪz fɛvɝɪʃli bɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə feɪɾɪŋ laɪt. fəɹ səm ɹizən, næsən hæd spɹɪɡz ʌv ɡɹin fɝ stʌk ɪn ɪz θɪn waɪt hɛɹ. ɪt meɪɾ ɪm lʊk əz ɪf i hæd bɪn klaɪmɪŋ ɪn ə tʃɹi, ən ɪz ɹɛd sɪlk koʊɾ ən kloʊk wɝ soʊ wɝkt wɪð bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd flaʊɝz ðeɪ cʊɾə pæs fəɹ ɪliɑnɝ kɑɹpəts. hi wɑz luɾəkɹəs. hi wɑz ɔlsoʊ haɪ siɾ ə ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl sɪŋɡəl haʊs ɪn ændɝ. ən i wɑz kwaɪt mæd. "ɛləniə, maɪ dɑɹlɪŋ tʃɹɛʒɝ," hi bɹeɪd, spɹeɪɪŋ spɪɾəl, "haʊ swit ðə saɪɾ ə jə ɪz tə maɪ aɪz. jə meɪk hʌni sim steɪl ən ɹoʊzɪz dʒɹæb."

Her happy contemplation was shattered by the scrawny man who suddenly came up beside her on a stocky gray, his eyes feverishly bright in the fading light. For some reason, Nasin had sprigs of green fir stuck in his thin white hair. It made him look as if he had been climbing in a tree, and his red silk coat and cloak were so worked with brightly colored flowers they could have passed for Illianer carpets. He was ludicrous. He was also High Seat of the most powerful single House in Andor. And he was quite mad. "Elenia, my darling treasure," he brayed, spraying spittle, "how sweet the sight of you is to my eyes. You make honey seem stale and roses drab."

wɪθaʊt nid fəɹ kɑnʃəs θɔt, ʃi heɪstəli ɹeɪn dɔn wɪn bæk ən tə ðə ɹaɪt, pʊɾɪŋ dʒæniz bɹaʊn mɛɹ bɪtwin əɹ ən hɪm. "aɪ æm nɑt jəɹ bɪtʃɹɑθd, næsən," ʃi snæpt, siθɪŋ ət hævɪŋ tə seɪ ðəɾ əlaʊd fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn tə hɪɹ. "aɪ æm mɛɹid, jə oʊl ful! weɪt!" ʃi æɾəd, flɪŋɪŋ ʌp ə hænd. ði ɪmpɛɹəɾɪv wɝɾ ən ðə dʒɛstʃɝ wɝ fəɹ əɹ ɑɹmmɪn, hu hæd leɪd hænz ɑn sɔɹd hɪls ən wɝ ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət næsən. səm θɝɾi əɹ fɔɹɾi mɛn wɛɹɪŋ haʊs kɝənz sɔɹɾ ən stɑɹ wɝ fɑloʊɪŋ ðə mæn, ən ðeɪ wəd nɑt hɛzəteɪt tə kʌt daʊn ɛniwʌn ðeɪ θɔt wɑz θɹɛɾənɪŋ ðɛɹ haɪ sit. səm ɔlɹɛɾi hæd bleɪdz hæf-dʒɹɔn. ðeɪ wəd nɑt hɑɹm hɝ, ʌv kɔɹs. næsən wəɾ əv əm hæŋ tə ə mæn ɪf ʃi wɑz ivən bɹuzd. laɪt, ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ tə læf əɹ kɹaɪ oʊvɝ ðæt. "ɑɹ jə stɪl əfɹeɪɾ ə ðət jʌŋ ɑf dʒɑɝɪd?" næsən dɪmændəd, æŋɡlɪŋ ɪz maʊn tə fɑloʊ hɝ.

Without need for conscious thought, she hastily reined Dawn Wind back and to the right, putting Janny's brown mare between her and him. "I am not your betrothed, Nasin," she snapped, seething at having to say that aloud for everyone to hear. "I am married, you old fool! Wait!" she added, flinging up a hand. The imperative word and the gesture were for her armsmen, who had laid hands on sword hilts and were glaring at Nasin. Some thirty or forty men wearing House Caeren's Sword and Star were following the man, and they would not hesitate to cut down anyone they thought was threatening their High Seat. Some already had blades half-drawn. They would not harm her, of course. Nasin would have them hanged to a man if she was even bruised. Light, she did not know whether to laugh or cry over that. "Are you still afraid of that young oaf Jarid?" Nasin demanded, angling his mount to follow her.

"hi hæz noʊ ɹaɪt tə kip bɑðɝɪŋ ju. ðə bɛɾɝ mæn wʌn, ən i ʃəɾ æknɑlɪdʒ ɪt. əl tʃælənʒ hɪm!" wʌn hænd, pleɪnli boʊni ivən ɪn ɪts taɪt ɹɛd ɡlʌv, fʌmbəld əɾ ə sɔɹɾ i pɹɑbli hæd nɑt dʒɹɔn ɪn twɛnti jɪɹz. "aɪ wɪl kʌɾ ɪm daʊn laɪk ə dɔɡ fəɹ fɹaɪɾənɪŋ ju!" ɛləniə muv dɔn wɪn dɛfli, soʊ ðeɪ dɪskɹaɪbd ə sɝkəl ɝaʊn dʒæni, hu mɝmɝɾ əpɑlədʒiz tə næsən ən pɹitɛndəd tə teɪk əɹ mɛɹ aʊɾ ə hɪz weɪ waɪl ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪn ɪt. mɛntəli, ɛləniə æɾəd ə lɪɾəl ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi tə ðə dʒɹɛsəz ʃi wəd baɪ. æəlpeɪɾɪd əz i wɑz, næsən kəd ɡoʊ ɪn ə blɪŋk fɹəm hʌnid wɝdz ə kɔɹtli lʌv tə ɡɹoʊpɪŋ əɾ əɹ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ðə loʊəst sɔɹɾ ə tævɝn meɪd.

"He has no right to keep bothering you. The better man won, and he should acknowledge it. I'll challenge him!" One hand, plainly bony even in its tight red glove, fumbled at a sword he probably had not drawn in twenty years. "I will cut him down like a dog for frightening you!" Elenia moved Dawn Wind deftly, so they described a circle around Janny, who murmured apologies to Nasin and pretended to take her mare out of his way while getting in it. Mentally, Elenia added a little embroidery to the dresses she would buy. Addlepated as he was, Nasin could go in a blink from honeyed words of courtly love to groping at her as if she were the lowest sort of tavern maid.

ðæt, ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɛndʒjʊɹ, nɑɾ əɡɛn, sɝɾənli nɑɾ ɪn pʌblɪk. sɝkəlɪŋ, ʃi fɔɹst ə wɝid smaɪl ɑntu hɝ feɪs, ðoʊ ɪn tʃɹuθ, ðə smaɪl tʊk mɔɹ ɛfɝt ðən ðə wɝi. ɪf ðɪs oʊl ful fɔɹs dʒɑɝɪd tə kɪl hɪm, ɪt wəd ɹuən ɛvɹiθɪŋ! "ju noʊ aɪ kəd nɑɾ əbaɪd tə hæv mɛn faɪɾ oʊvɝ mi, næsən." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz bɹɛθi ən æŋkʃəs, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt. bɹɛθi ən æŋkʃəs suɾəd wɛl ɪnʌf. "haʊ kəɾ aɪ lʌv ə mæn wɪð blʌɾ ɑn ɪz hænz?" ðə ɹɪdɪkjələs mæn fɹaʊn daʊn ðət lɔŋ noʊz tɪl ʃi bɪɡæn tə wʌndɝ wɛðɝ ʃi hæd ɡɔn tu fɑɹ. hi wɑz mæɾ əz ə spɹɪŋ hɛɹ, bʌt nɑɾ ɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ. nɑɾ ɔlweɪz. "aɪ hæd nɑt ɹilaɪz jə wɝ soʊ . . . sɛnsəɾɪv," hi sɛd faɪnəli. wɪθaʊt stɑpɪŋ ɪz ɛfɝt tə ɹaɪɾ ɝaʊn dʒæni. hɪz dəkɹɛpɪt feɪs bɹaɪɾənd. "bʌɾ aɪ ʃəɾ əv noʊn. əl ɹɪmɛmbɝ, fɹəm naʊ ɑn. dʒɑɝɪd meɪ lɪv. soʊ lɔŋ əz i dʌzn pɛstɝ ju." əbɹʌpli, hi sim tə noʊɾəs dʒæni fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, ən wɪð ən ɪɹəteɪɾəd ɡɹɪmɑs, hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hæn haɪ, bɔlɪŋ ɪɾ ɪndə ə fɪst.

That, she could not endure, not again, certainly not in public. Circling, she forced a worried smile onto her face, though in truth, the smile took more effort than the worry. If this old fool forced Jarid to kill him, it would ruin everything! "You know I could not abide to have men fight over me, Nasin." Her voice was breathy and anxious, but she did not try to control it. Breathy and anxious suited well enough. "How could I love a man with blood on his hands?" The ridiculous man frowned down that long nose till she began to wonder whether she had gone too far. He was mad as a spring hare, but not in everything. Not always. "I had not realized you were so . . . sensitive," he said finally. Without stopping his effort to ride around Janny. His decrepit face brightened. "But I should have known. I will remember, from now on. Jarid may live. So long as he doesn't pester you." Abruptly, he seemed to notice Janny for the first time, and with an irritated grimace, he raised his hand high, balling it into a fist.

ðə plʌmp wʊmən vɪzəbli stil hɝsɛlf fəɹ ðə bloʊ wɪθaʊt muvɪŋ əsaɪd, ən ɛləniə ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ. sɪlk ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. dɛfənətli ənsuɾəbəl fəɹ ə meɪd, bʌt dʒæni hæɾ ɝn ɪt.

The plump woman visibly steeled herself for the blow without moving aside, and Elenia gritted her teeth. Silk embroidery. Definitely unsuitable for a maid, but Janny had earned it.

"lɔɹd næsən, aɪ hæv bɪn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ jə ɛvɹiwɛɹ" ə wʊmənz sɪmpɝɪŋ vɔɪs kɹaɪd, ən ðə sɝkəlɪŋ stɑpt. ɛləniə ɛksheɪld ɪn ɹɪlif əz ɛɹəmɪlə ɹoʊɾ ʌp ɪn ðə twaɪlaɪt wɪð əɹ ɑntʊɹɑʒ, ən hæd tə staɪfəl ə sɝdʒ ə fjʊɹi ət filɪŋ ɹɪlif. ɪn oʊvɝ-ɪlæbɹətli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɡɹin sɪlk, wɪð leɪs ʌndɝ əɹ tʃɪn ən əɾ əɹ ɹɪsts, ɛɹəmɪlə wɑz plʌmp vɝdʒɪŋ ɑn staʊt, wɪð ə vækjuəs smaɪl ən bɹaʊn aɪz ðət wɝ ɔlweɪz waɪd wɪð əfɛktəɾ ɪntʃɹəst ivən wən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə bi ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn. lækɪŋ ðə bɹeɪnz tə tɛl ðə dɪfɝəns, ʃi pəzɛs dʒʌst ɪnʌf kʌnɪŋ tə noʊ ðəɹ wɝ θɪŋz ðət ʃəɾ ɪntʃɹəs hɝ, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn ɛniwʌn tə θɪŋk ʃi hæd mɪs ðɛm. ði oʊnli ɹil kənsɝn ʃi hæd wɑz əɹ oʊn kʌmfɝɾ ən ði ɪnkʌm tə ɛnʃʊɹ ɪt, ən ði oʊnli ɹizən ʃi wɑntəd ðə θɹoʊn wɑz ðət ðə ɹɔɪəl kɑfɝz kəd pɹəvaɪd ɡɹeɪɾɝ kʌmfɝt ðən ðə ɹɛvənuz ʌv ɛni haɪ sit. hɝ ɑntʊɹɑʒ wɑz lɑɹdʒɝ ðən næsənz, ðoʊ oʊnli hæf wɝ ɑɹmmɪn wɛɹɪŋ ðə fɔɹ munz ə hɝ haʊs. fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, hæŋɝz-ɑn ən sɪkɑfæns meɪɾ ʌp ðə ɹɛst, lɛsɝ lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz ə maɪnɝ haʊsəz ən ʌðɝz wɪlɪŋ tə lɪk ɛɹəmɪləz ɹɪs fəɹ ə pleɪs nɪɹ paʊɝ. ʃi dɪd lʌv pipəl tə fɔn oʊvɝ hɝ. nɑiən wɑz ðɛɹ, tu, ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɡɹup wɪð əɹ ɑɹmmɪn ən meɪd, əpɛɹənli kul-aɪɾ ən ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl ə hɝsɛlf wʌns mɔɹ. bʌt kipɪŋ wɛl əweɪ fɹəm dʒæk laʊnɔlt, ə lin mæn wɪð wʌn ə ðoʊz fɑɹsəkəl tæɹɑbənɝ veɪlz kʌvɝɪŋ ɪz hjudʒ mʌstæʃɪz ən ə kɑnɪkəl kæp pʊʃɪŋ ðə hʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊk tə ə ɹɪdɪkjələs haɪt. ðə fɛloʊ smaɪl tu mʌtʃ, əz wɛl. hi hɑɹdli lʊkt ə mæn u kəd ɹədus sʌmwʌn tə bɛɡɪŋ wɪð dʒʌst ə fju kɔɹdz. "ɛɹəmɪlə," næsən sɛɾ ɪn ə kənfjuz toʊn, ðən fɹaʊn əɾ ɪz fɪst əz ɪf sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ɪt ɹeɪzd. loʊɝɪŋ ɪz hæn tə ðə pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl, hi bimd ə smaɪl ət ðə sɪli wʊmən. "ɛɹəmɪlə, maɪ dɪɹ," hi sɛd wɔɹmli. nɑt wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ ʌv wɔɹmθ i ɔfən dɝɛktəɾ əɾ ɛləniə. sʌmhaʊ, ɪt simd, hi hæd bɪkʌm ət lis hæf-kənvɪns ðəɾ ɛɹəmɪlə wɑz ɪz dɔɾɝ, ən ɪz feɪvɹɪɾ ət ðæt. wʌns, ɛləniə hæd hɝɾ ɪm ɹɛmənɪsɪŋ ət lɛŋθ wɪð ðə wʊmən əbaʊɾ əɹ "mʌðɝ," hɪz læst waɪf, dɛd nɪɹli θɝɾi jɪɹz naʊ. ɛɹəmɪlə mænədʒ tə hoʊld əɹ ɛn ə ðə kɑnvɝseɪʃən, tu, ðoʊ ʃi hæd nɛvɝ mɛt midɛl kɝən əz fɑɹ əz ɛləniə nu. stɪl, dɪspaɪɾ ɔl ɪz fɑðɝli smaɪlz fəɹ ɛɹəmɪlə, hɪz aɪz sɔt θɹu ðə ʃæɾoʊd kɹaʊɾ ɑn hɔɹsbæk bɪhaɪn hɝ, ən ɪz feɪs ɹɪlækst wən i faʊn sɪlveɪs, hɪz ɡɹændɔɾɝ ən ɛɹ, ə stɝɾi, plæsəd jʌŋ wʊmən u mɛɾ ɪz ɡeɪz, ənsmaɪlɪŋ, ðən pʊld əɹ dɑɹk, fɝ-laɪn kaʊl wɛl fɔɹwɝd. ʃi nɛvɝ smaɪld əɹ fɹaʊn əɹ ʃoʊɾ ɛni ɪmoʊʃən əɾ ɔl ðəɾ ɛləniə hæɾ ɛvɝ dɪtɛktəd, dʒʌs kɛpt ən ənvɹiɪŋ kaʊlaɪk ɪkspɹɛʃən.

"Lord Nasin, I have been looking for you everywhere" a woman's simpering voice cried, and the circling stopped. Elenia exhaled in relief as Arymilla rode up in the twilight with her entourage, and had to stifle a surge of fury at feeling relief. In over-elaborately embroidered green silk, with lace under her chin and at her wrists, Arymilla was plump verging on stout, with a vacuous smile and brown eyes that were always wide with affected interest even when there was nothing to be interested in. Lacking the brains to tell the difference, she possessed just enough cunning to know there were things that should interest her, and she did not want anyone to think she had missed them. The only real concern she had was her own comfort and the income to ensure it, and the only reason she wanted the throne was that the royal coffers could provide greater comfort than the revenues of any High Seat. Her entourage was larger than Nasin's, though only half were armsmen wearing the Four Moons of her House. For the most part, hangers-on and sycophants made up the rest, lesser lords and ladies of minor Houses and others willing to lick Arymilla's wrist for a place near power. She did love people to fawn over her. Naean was there, too, on the edge of the group with her armsmen and maid, apparently cool-eyed and in control of herself once more. But keeping well away from Jaq Lounalt, a lean man with one of those farcical Taraboner veils covering his huge mustaches and a conical cap pushing the hood of his cloak to a ridiculous height. The fellow smiled too much, as well. He hardly looked a man who could reduce someone to begging with just a few cords. "Arymilla," Nasin said in a confused tone, then frowned at his fist as if surprised to find it raised. Lowering his hand to the pommel of his saddle, he beamed a smile at the silly woman. "Arymilla, my dear," he said warmly. Not with the sort of warmth he often directed at Elenia. Somehow, it seemed, he had become at least half-convinced that Arymilla was his daughter, and his favorite at that. Once, Elenia had heard him reminiscing at length with the woman about her "mother," his last wife, dead nearly thirty years now. Arymilla managed to hold her end of the conversation, too, though she had never met Miedelle Caeren as far as Elenia knew. Still, despite all his fatherly smiles for Arymilla, his eyes sought through the shadowed crowd on horseback behind her, and his face relaxed when he found Sylvase, his granddaughter and heir, a sturdy, placid young woman who met his gaze, unsmiling, then pulled her dark, fur-lined cowl well forward. She never smiled or frowned or showed any emotion at all that Elenia had ever detected, just kept an unvarying cowlike expression.

pleɪnli, ʃi hæɾ ə kaʊz wɪts, tu. ɛɹəmɪlə kɛp sɪlveɪs kloʊsɝ ðən ʃi dɪɾ ɛləniə əɹ nɑiən, ən soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi dɪd, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃæns ðət næsən wəd bi fɔɹs tə ɹɪtaɪɹ fɹəm ɪz ɑnɝz. hi wɑz mæd, əʃʊɹədli, bʌt slaɪ. "aɪ hoʊp jəɹ teɪkɪŋ ɡʊd kɛɹ ə maɪ lɪɾəl sɪlveɪs, ɛɹəmɪlə," hi mɝmɝd. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ fɔɹtʃən hʌntɝz ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ən aɪ wɑn ðə dɑɹlɪŋ ɡɝl kɛp seɪf."

Plainly, she had a cow's wits, too. Arymilla kept Sylvase closer than she did Elenia or Naean, and so long as she did, there was no chance that Nasin would be forced to retire from his honors. He was mad, assuredly, but sly. "I hope you're taking good care of my little Sylvase, Arymilla," he murmured. "There are fortune hunters everywhere, and I want the darling girl kept safe."

"ʌv kɔɹs, aɪ æm," ɛɹəmɪlə ɹɪplaɪd, bɹʌʃɪŋ əɹ oʊvɝfɛd mɛɹ pæst ɛləniə wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə ɡlæns. hɝ toʊn wɑz hʌniswit, ən sɪkənɪŋli doʊɾɪŋ. "ju noʊ əl kip əɹ əz seɪf əz aɪ kip maɪsɛlf." smaɪlɪŋ ðəɾ ɛmpti-hɛɾəd smaɪl, ʃi sɛɾ əbaʊt stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ næsənz kloʊk ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən smuðɪŋ ɪt wɪð ði ɛɹ ə sʌmwʌn sɛɾəlɪŋ ə ʃɔl ɑn ə bɪlʌvd ɪnvʌləd. "ɪts mʌtʃ tu koʊld aʊt fəɹ ju. aɪ noʊ wʌt jə nid. ə wɔɹm tɛn ən səm hɑt spaɪst waɪn. əl bi hæpi tə hæv maɪ meɪd pɹipɛɹ ɪt fəɹ ju. ɑɹlin, əkʌmpəni lɔɹd næsən tə hɪz tɛn ən fɪks ɪm səm ɡʊd spaɪst waɪn." ə slɪm wʊmən ɪn əɹ ɑntʊɹɑʒ ɡeɪv ə vaɪələn twɪtʃ, ðən ɹoʊd fɔɹwɝd sloʊli, pʊʃɪŋ bæk ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ pleɪn blu kloʊk tə ɹɪvil ə pɹɪɾi feɪs ən ə tʃɹɛmjələs smaɪl. sʌɾənli ɔl lɪkspɪɾəlz ən toʊd-iɾɝz wɝ ədʒʌstɪŋ ðɛɹ kloʊks əɡɛns ðə wɪn əɹ snʌɡɪŋ ðɛɹ ɡlʌvz, lʊkɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ ɪksɛpt əɾ ɛɹəmɪləz meɪd. ɪspɛʃli ðə wɪmən. wʌn ə ðɛm cʊɾə bɪn tʃoʊzən əz izəli, ən ðeɪ nu ɪt. ɑdli, sɪlveɪs dɪd nɑt lʊk əweɪ. ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl tə si hɝ feɪs ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz ə hɝ hʊd, bʌt ði oʊpənɪŋ tɝn tə fɑloʊ ðə slɛndɝ wʊmən. næsənz ɡɹɪn ʃoʊɾ ɪz tiθ, meɪkɪŋ ɪm lʊk ivən mɔɹ laɪk ə ɡoʊt ðən juʒəwəl. "jɛs. jɛs, mʌld waɪn wəd bi ɡʊd. ɑɹlin, ɪz ɪt? kʌm, ɑɹlin, ðɛɹz ə ɡʊd ɡɝl. nɑt tu tʃɪl, ɑɹ ju?" ðə ɡɝl skwikt əz i swɛpt ə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz kloʊk ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən ɡæðɝɾ əɹ soʊ kloʊs ʃi wɑz linɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ sæɾəl. "jul bi wɔɹm ɪn maɪ tɛnt, aɪ pɹɑməs." wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə ɡlæns bæk, hi ɹoʊɾ ɔf əɾ ə wɔk, tʃɔɹɾəlɪŋ ən wɪspɝɪŋ ət ðə jʌŋ wʊmən ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm. hɪz ɑɹmmɪn fɑloʊd wɪð ðə kɹik ə lɛðɝ ən ðə sloʊ, wɛt klɑp ə hʊvz ɪn ðə mʌk. wʌn ə ðɛm læft, əz ɪf ənʌðɝ hæd sɛd sʌmθɪŋ fʌni. ɛləniə ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪn dɪsɡʌst. pʊʃɪŋ ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən ɪn fɹʌn ə næsən tə dɪstʃɹækt ɪm wɑz wʌn θɪŋ - ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən əv tə bi ðət pɹɪɾi; ɛni wʊmən ði oʊl ful kəd kɔɹnɝ wɑz ɪn deɪnʒɝ - bʌt juzɪŋ jəɹ oʊn meɪd wɑz ɹivoʊltɪŋ. nɑɾ əz ɹivoʊltɪŋ əz næsən hɪmsɛlf, ðoʊ. "ju pɹɑməs tə kip ɪm əweɪ fɹəm mi, ɛɹəmɪlə," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə loʊ, taɪt vɔɪs. ðət lɛtʃɝəs oʊl kɹækbɹeɪn maɪɾ əv fɝɡɑɾən əɹ ɛɡzɪstəns fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, bʌɾ i wəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə nɛks taɪm i sɔ hɝ. "ju pɹɑməs tə kip ɪm ɑkjəpaɪd."

"Of course, I am," Arymilla replied, brushing her overfed mare past Elenia without so much as a glance. Her tone was honeysweet, and sickeningly doting. "You know I'll keep her as safe as I keep myself." Smiling that empty-headed smile, she set about straightening Nasin's cloak on his shoulders and smoothing it with the air of someone settling a shawl on a beloved invalid. "It's much too cold out for you. I know what you need. A warm tent and some hot spiced wine. I'll be happy to have my maid prepare it for you. Arlene, accompany Lord Nasin to his tent and fix him some good spiced wine." A slim woman in her entourage gave a violent twitch, then rode forward slowly, pushing back the hood of her plain blue cloak to reveal a pretty face and a tremulous smile. Suddenly all lickspittles and toad-eaters were adjusting their cloaks against the wind or snugging their gloves, looking anywhere except at Arymilla's maid. Especially the women. One of them could have been chosen as easily, and they knew it. Oddly, Sylvase did not look away. It was impossible to see her face in the shadows of her hood, but the opening turned to follow the slender woman. Nasin's grin showed his teeth, making him look even more like a goat than usual. "Yes. Yes, mulled wine would be good. Arlene, is it? Come, Arlene, there's a good girl. Not too chill, are you?" The girl squeaked as he swept a corner of his cloak around her shoulders and gathered her so close she was leaning out of her saddle. "You'll be warm in my tent, I promise." Without so much as a glance back, he rode off at a walk, chortling and whispering at the young woman under his arm. His armsmen followed with the creak of leather and the slow, wet clop of hooves in the muck. One of them laughed, as if another had said something funny. Elenia shook her head in disgust. Pushing a pretty woman in front of Nasin to distract him was one thing - she did not even have to be that pretty; any woman the old fool could corner was in danger - but using your own maid was revolting. Not as revolting as Nasin himself, though. "You promised to keep him away from me, Arymilla," she said in a low, tight voice. That lecherous old crackbrain might have forgotten her existence for the moment, but he would remember the next time he saw her. "You promised to keep him occupied."

ɛɹəmɪləz feɪs ɡɹu sʌlən, ən ʃi pətʃələnli tʌɡd əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌvz taɪɾɝ. ʃi hæd nɑt ɡɑɾən wʌt ʃi wɑntəd. ðət wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt sɪn, tə hɝ. "ɪf jə wɑnə bi seɪf fɹəm ədmaɪɹɝz, jə ɔt tə steɪ kloʊs tə mi ɪnstɛɾ ʌv wɑndɝɪŋ əbaʊt lus. kən aɪ hɛlp ɪɾ ɪf jə ətʃɹæk mɛn? ən aɪ dɪd ɹɛskju ju. aɪ hævən hɝɾ ɛni θæŋks fəɹ ðæt."

Arymilla's face grew sullen, and she petulantly tugged her riding gloves tighter. She had not gotten what she wanted. That was a great sin, to her. "If you want to be safe from admirers, you ought to stay close to me instead of wandering about loose. Can I help it if you attract men? And I did rescue you. I haven't heard any thanks for that."

ɛləniəz dʒɔ klɛntʃt soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ ɪt bɪɡæn tə eɪk. pɹitɛndɪŋ ðət ʃi səpɔɹɾəd ðɪs wʊmən ə hɝ oʊn tʃɔɪs wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk əɹ wɑnə baɪt sʌmθɪŋ. hɝ tʃɔɪsəz hæd bɪn meɪd klɪɹ ɪnʌf; ɹaɪt tə dʒɑɝɪɾ əɹ ɛndʒjʊɹ ən ɪkstɛndəd hʌnimun wɪð əɹ "bɪtʃɹɑθd." laɪt, ʃi maɪɾ əv teɪkən ðə tʃɔɪs ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðə sɝɾənti ðət næsən wəd lɑk əɹ ʌp ɪn səm aʊt-ʌv-ðə-weɪ mænɝ ænd, æftɝ ʃi hæd pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɪz pɔɪŋ, ɪvɛntʃəwəli fɝɡɛt ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ. ən liv əɹ ðɛɹ. ɛɹəmɪlə ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn ðə pɹitɛns, ðoʊ. ʃi ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni θɪŋz, səm ə ðɛm ʌɾɝli ɪnsʌfɝəbəl.

Elenia's jaw clenched so hard that it began to ache. Pretending that she supported this woman of her own choice was enough to make her want to bite something. Her choices had been made clear enough; write to Jarid or endure an extended honeymoon with her "betrothed." Light, she might have taken the choice if not for the certainty that Nasin would lock her up in some out-of-the-way manor and, after she had put up with his pawing, eventually forget she was there. And leave her there. Arymilla insisted on the pretense, though. She insisted on a great many things, some of them utterly insufferable.

jɛt ðeɪ hæd tə bi sʌfɝd. fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ. pɝhæps, wʌns mæɾɝz wɝ sɛt stʃɹeɪt, mæstɝ laʊnɔl kəɾ ɔfɝ ɪz ətɛnʃənz tə ɛɹəmɪlə fəɹ ə fju deɪz. fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ ʃi sʌmən ən əpɑlədʒɛɾɪk smaɪl, ən meɪd hɝsɛlf bɛn əɹ nɛk əz ɪf ʃi wɝ wʌn ə ðə but-lɪkɪŋ litʃɪz u wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ ævədli. æftɝ ɔl, ɪf ʃi kɹɔl fəɹ ɛɹəmɪlə, ɪɾ oʊnli pɹuv ðeɪ wɝ ɹaɪt tə. ðə fil ə ðɛɹ aɪz ɑn əɹ meɪɾ əɹ wɑnə beɪð. duɪŋ ðɪs ɪn fɹʌn ə nɑiən meɪɾ əɹ wɑnə ʃɹik. "aɪ ɔfɝ jə ɔl ðə ɡɹæɾətud ðæts ɪn mi, ɛɹəmɪlə." wɛl, ðət wɑz noʊ laɪ. ɔl ðə ɡɹæɾətud ðət wɑz ɪn əɹ keɪm əbaʊɾ ikwəl tə ə dɪzaɪɝ tə stʃɹæŋɡəl ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. vɛɹi sloʊli. ʃi hæd tə ɪnheɪl dipli bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd ɡɛt ðə nɛks pɑɹɾ aʊt, ðoʊ. "ju mʌs fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ biɪŋ sloʊ, pliz." ə vɛɹi bɪɾɝ wɝd. "næsən meɪd mi kwaɪt dɪstʃɹɔt. jə noʊ haʊ dʒɑɝɪd wəd ɹiækt ɪf i lɝn ə næsənz bɪheɪvjɝ." hɝ oʊn vɔɪs tʊk ɑn ə hoʊn ɛdʒ ət ðət læst, bʌt ðə ful wʊmən ɡɪɡəld. ʃi ɡɪɡəld! "ʌv kɔɹs jəɹ fɝɡɪvən, ɛləniə," ʃi læft, hɝ feɪs laɪɾənɪŋ. "ɔl jə nid də ɪz æsk. dʒɑɝɪɾ ɪz ə hʌðhɛd, ɪzən hi?

Yet they had to be suffered. For the time being. Perhaps, once matters were set straight, Master Lounalt could offer his attentions to Arymilla for a few days. From somewhere she summoned an apologetic smile, and made herself bend her neck as if she were one of the boot-licking leeches who were watching her avidly. After all, if she crawled for Arymilla, it only proved they were right to. The feel of their eyes on her made her want to bathe. Doing this in front of Naean made her want to shriek. "I offer you all the gratitude that's in me, Arymilla." Well, that was no lie. All the gratitude that was in her came about equal to a desire to strangle the other woman. Very slowly. She had to inhale deeply before she could get the next part out, though. "You must forgive me for being slow, please." A very bitter word. "Nasin made me quite distraught. You know how Jarid would react if he learned of Nasin's behavior." Her own voice took on a honed edge at that last, but the fool woman giggled. She giggled! "Of course you're forgiven, Elenia," she laughed, her face lightening. "All you need do is ask. Jarid is a hothead, isn't he?

jə mʌst ɹaɪt tə hɪm ən tɛl ɪm haʊ kɑntɛn jə ɑɹ. jə ɑɹ kɑntɛnt, ɑɹən ju? jə kən dɪkteɪt tə maɪ sɛkɹətɛɹi. aɪ də heɪt steɪnɪŋ maɪ fɪŋɡɝz wɪð ɪŋk, doʊn ju?"

You must write to him and tell him how content you are. You are content, aren't you? You can dictate to my secretary. I do hate staining my fingers with ink, don't you?"

"sɝɾənli ɪm kɑntɛnt, ɛɹəmɪlə. haʊ kəɾ aɪ nɑt bi?" smaɪlɪŋ ɹikwaɪɝd noʊ ɛfɝɾ əɾ ɔl, ðɪs taɪm. ðə wʊmən æktʃəli  θɔt ʃi wɑz klɛvɝ. juzɪŋ ɛɹəmɪləz sɛkɹətɛɹi pɹɪkluɾɪd ɛni pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv sikɹəɾ ɪŋks, bʌt ʃi kəd tɛl dʒɑɝɪd kwaɪɾ oʊpənli tə də æbsəlutli nʌθɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ əɹ kaʊnsəl, ən ðə bɹeɪnləs flʌf wəd θɪŋk ʃi wɑz oʊnli oʊbeɪɪŋ.

"Certainly I'm content, Arymilla. How could I not be?" Smiling required no effort at all, this time. The woman actually thought she was clever. Using Arymilla's secretary precluded any possibility of secret inks, but she could tell Jarid quite openly to do absolutely nothing without her counsel, and the brainless fluff would think she was only obeying.

nɑɾɪŋ wɪð ə smʌɡ sɛlf-sæɾəsfækʃən, ɛɹəmɪlə ɡæðɝɾ əɹ ɹeɪnz, ɪməteɪɾɪd baɪ hɝ koʊɾɝi. ɪf ʃi stʌk ə pɑɾ ɑn əɹ hɛɾ ən kɔld ɪɾ ə hæt, ðeɪ wəɾ ɔl wɛɹ pɑts, tu. "ɪɾ ɪz ɡɛɾɪŋ leɪt," ʃi sɛd, "æn aɪ wɑn ən ɝli stɑɹɾ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. æɛdɛl bɛɹɪnz kʊk əz ən ɛksələn ɹipəst weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ʌs.

Nodding with a smug self-satisfaction, Arymilla gathered her reins, imitated by her coterie. If she stuck a pot on her head and called it a hat, they would all wear pots, too. "It is getting late," she said, "and I want an early start in the morning. Aedelle Baryn's cook has an excellent repast waiting on us.

jə ən nɑiən mʌst ɹaɪd wɪð mi, ɛləniə." ʃi meɪɾ ɪt saʊn əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ hɑn ɔɹɪŋ ðɛm, ən ðeɪ hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs ɪksɛp tə bɪheɪv əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ, fɔlɪŋ ɪn ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɝ. "æn sɪlveɪs, ʌv kɔɹs. kʌm, sɪlveɪs."

You and Naean must ride with me, Elenia." She made it sound as though she were hon oring them, and they had no choice except to behave as though she were, falling in on either side of her. "And Sylvase, of course. Come, Sylvase."

næsənz ɡɹændɔɾɝ bɹɔɾ əɹ mɛɹ kloʊsɝ, bʌt nɑɾ ʌp bɪsaɪɾ ɛɹəmɪlə. ʃi fɑloʊɾ ə lɪɾəl bɪhaɪnd, wɪð ɛɹəmɪləz sɪkɑfæns kɹaʊɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ hilz sɪns ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn ɪnvaɪɾəd tə ɹaɪd wɪð ɛɹəmɪlə. dɪspaɪt ðə fɪtfəl, aɪsi wɪn tʌɡɪŋ ət ðɛɹ kloʊks, sɛvɹəl ə ðə wɪmən ən tu əɹ θɹi ʌv ðə mɛn tʃɹaɪɾ ʌnsəksɛsfəli tə ɛnɡeɪdʒ ðə ɡɝl ɪn kɑnvɝseɪʃən. ʃi sɛldəm sɛd tu wɝdz təɡɛðɝ.

Nasin's granddaughter brought her mare closer, but not up beside Arymilla. She followed a little behind, with Arymilla's sycophants crowding on her heels since they had not been invited to ride with Arymilla. Despite the fitful, icy wind tugging at their cloaks, several of the women and two or three of the men tried unsuccessfully to engage the girl in conversation. She seldom said two words together.

stɪl, wɪð noʊ haɪ siɾ ɪn ɹitʃ tə fɔn oʊvɝ, ə haɪ sits ɛɹ wəd du, ən meɪbi wʌn ə ðə fɛloʊz hoʊp tə mɛɹi wɛl. laɪkli wʌn əɹ tu wɝ mɔɹ ɪn ðə neɪtʃɝ ʌv ɡɑɹdz, əɹ ət list spaɪz meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə kəmjunəkeɪt wɪð ɛniwʌn ɪn əɹ haʊs. ðɪs lɑt wəd faɪn ðəɾ ɪksaɪɾɪŋ, tʌtʃɪŋ ɑn ði ɛdʒəz ə paʊɝ. ɛləniə hæɾ əɹ oʊn plænz fəɹ sɪlveɪs. ɛɹəmɪlə wɑz ənʌðɝ wɪð noʊ əbdʒɛkʃənz tə næɾɝɪŋ əweɪ wən ɛniwʌn wɪð sɛns wəd bi mʌfəlɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɪn əɹ kaʊl, ən əɹ tʃæɾɝ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd θɹu ðə daɪɪŋ laɪt flɪɾɪd fɹəm wʌt lɝz sɪstɝ wəɾ ɔfɝ ət sʌpɝ tə ðə plænz fəɹ əɹ kɔɹəneɪʃən. ɛləniə lɪsən oʊnli ɪnʌf tə mɝmɝ əpɹuvɪŋli ət wʌt simd əpɹoʊpɹiət spɑts. ɪf ðə ful wɑntəd tə ɔfɝ ə swɔɹn æmnəsti tə ðoʊz u əpoʊz hɝ, fɑɹ bi ɪt fɹəm ɛləniə sɑɝən tə tɛl əɹ ʃi wɑz ə ful. ɪt wɑz peɪnfəl ɪnʌf hævɪŋ tə . . . sɪmpɝ. . . ət ðə wʊmən wɪθaʊt lɪsnɪŋ tə hɝ. ðən wʌn θɪŋ ɛɹəmɪlə sɛd hɪɾ əɹ ɪɹ laɪk ən ɔl.

Still, with no High Seat in reach to fawn over, a High Seat's heir would do, and maybe one of the fellows hoped to marry well. Likely one or two were more in the nature of guards, or at least spies making sure she did not try to communicate with anyone in her House. This lot would find that exciting, touching on the edges of power. Elenia had her own plans for Sylvase. Arymilla was another with no objections to nattering away when anyone with sense would be muffling herself in her cowl, and her chatter as they rode through the dying light flitted from what Lir's sister would offer at supper to the plans for her coronation. Elenia listened only enough to murmur approvingly at what seemed appropriate spots. If the fool wanted to offer a sworn amnesty to those who opposed her, far be it from Elenia Sarand to tell her she was a fool. It was painful enough having to . . . simper. . . at the woman without listening to her. Then one thing Arymilla said hit her ear like an awl.

"ju ən nɑiən woʊn maɪnd ʃɛɹɪŋ ə bɛd, wɪl ju? ɪt simz wəɹ ʃɔɹɾ ə disən tɛns hɪɹ." ʃi flɪɾɪd ɑn, bʌt fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɛləniə kəd nɑt hɪɹ ə wɝd. ʃi fɛlt əz ðoʊ hɝ skɪn hæd bɪn stʌft wɪð snoʊ. tɝnɪŋ əɹ hɛd slaɪtli, ʃi mɛt nɑiənz ʃɑkt ɡeɪz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɑsəbəl weɪ ɛɹəmɪlə kəd noʊ əbaʊt ðɛɹ tʃæns miɾɪŋ, nɑt jɛt, ən ivən ɪf ʃi dɪd, waɪ wəd ʃi ɔfɝ əm ə tʃæns tə plɑt təɡɛðɝ? ə tʃɹæp? spaɪz tə lɪsən tə wʌt ðeɪ sɛd? nɑiənz meɪd, ɔɹ. . . .

"You and Naean won't mind sharing a bed, will you? It seems we are short of decent tents here." She flitted on, but for a moment, Elenia could not hear a word. She felt as though her skin had been stuffed with snow. Turning her head slightly, she met Naean's shocked gaze. There was no possible way Arymilla could know about their chance meeting, not yet, and even if she did, why would she offer them a chance to plot together? A trap? Spies to listen to what they said? Naean's maid, or. . . .

əɹ dʒæni? ðə wɝl sim tə spɪn. blæk ən sɪlvɝ flɛks floʊɾəd ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛləniəz aɪz. ʃi θɔt ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə feɪnt. əbɹʌpli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɛɹəmɪlə hæɾ ədʒɹɛst sʌmθɪŋ tə hɝ dɝɛkli ən wɑz weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ən ænsɝ wɪð ən ɪnkɹisɪŋli ɪmpeɪʃən skaʊl. fɹæntəkəli, ʃi kæst əɹ maɪn əbaʊt. jɛs, ʃi hæɾ ɪt. "ə ɡɪldɪd koʊtʃ, ɛɹəmɪlə?" wʌɾ ə ɹɪdɪkjələs noʊʃən. əz wɛl ɹaɪɾ ɪn ə tɪŋkɝz wæɡən! "oʊ, dɪlaɪtfəl! jə də hæv sətʃ mɑɹvələs aɪdiəz!" ɛɹəmɪləz pliz sɪmpɝ pʊɾ ə lɪɾəl iz ɪndə ɛləniəz bɹiðɪŋ. ðə wʊmən wɑz ə bɹeɪnləs ful. meɪbi ðəɹ wɑz ə ʃɔɹɾədʒ ə suɾəbəl tɛns. mɔɹ laɪkli ʃi dʒʌs θɔt ðeɪ wɝ seɪf, naʊ.

Or Janny? The world seemed to spin. Black and silver flecks floated in front of Elenia's eyes. She thought she was about to faint. Abruptly she realized that Arymilla had addressed something to her directly and was waiting on an answer with an increasingly impatient scowl. Frantically, she cast her mind about. Yes, she had it. "A gilded coach, Arymilla?" What a ridiculous notion. As well ride in a Tinker's wagon! "Oh, delightful! You do have such marvelous ideas!" Arymilla's pleased simper put a little ease into Elenia's breathing. The woman was a brainless fool. Maybe there was a shortage of suitable tents. More likely she just thought they were safe, now.

teɪmd. ɛləniə tɝn əɹ bɛɹd tiθ ɪndə ə sɪmpɝ ə hɝ oʊn. bʌt ʃi pʊɾ əsaɪɾ ɛni aɪdiə ʌv hævɪŋ ðə tæɹɑbənɝ "ɛntɝteɪn" ðə wʊmən, ivən fəɹ ən aʊɝ. wɪð dʒɑɝɪdz sɪɡnətʃɝ ɑn ðət plɛdʒ, ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn weɪ tə klɪɹ əɹ pæθ tə ðə θɹoʊn. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz ɪn hæn ən ɹɛɾi tə ɡoʊ fɔɹwɝd. ði oʊnli kwɛstʃən wɑz wɛðɝ ɛɹəmɪlə əɹ næsən ʃəd daɪ fɝst.

Tamed. Elenia turned her bared teeth into a simper of her own. But she put aside any idea of having the Taraboner "entertain" the woman, even for an hour. With Jarid's signature on that pledge, there was only one way to clear her path to the throne. Everything was in hand and ready to go forward. The only question was whether Arymilla or Nasin should die first.

naɪt pɹɛs daʊn ɑn keɪɛmlɪn wɪð ə hɑɹd koʊl dʒɹɪvən dip baɪ ʃɑɹp wɪnz. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ə ɡloʊ ʌv laɪt spɪlɪŋ fɹəm ən ʌpɝ wɪndoʊ spoʊk ə pipəl stɪl əweɪk, bʌt moʊst ʃʌɾɝz wɝ dʒɹɔn, ən ə θɪn slɪvɝ ə mun loʊ ɪn ðə skaɪ oʊnli sim tə ɛmfəsaɪz ðə dɑɹknəs. ivən ðə snoʊ koʊɾɪŋ ɹuftɑps ən paɪld əlɔŋ ðə fɹʌns ə bɪldɪŋz wɛɹ ɪt hæɾ ɪskeɪp ðə deɪz tʃɹæfɪk wɑz ə ʃæɾoʊi ɡɹeɪ. ðə loʊn mæn mʌfəl hɛd tə æŋkəlz ɪn ə dɑɹk kloʊk, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ θɹu ðə fɹoʊzən slʌʃ lɛft ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz, ænsɝd tə dɑv hænlən əɹ dɔɪlən mɛlɝ wɪð ikwəl iz; ə neɪm wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə koʊt, ən ə mæn tʃeɪnʒd ɪz koʊt wɛnɛvɝ niɾəd. hi hæd wɔɹn ə nʌmbɝ oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz. ɡɪvən ɪz wɪʃɪz, hi wʊɾə hæɾ ɪz fiɾ ʌp ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə ɹɔɹɪŋ faɪɝ ɪn ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs, ə mʌɡ ɪn ɪz hænd, ə pɪtʃɝ ə bɹændi əɾ ɪz saɪd, ən ə wɪlɪŋ wɛnk ɑn ɪz ni, bʌɾ i hæɾ ʌðɝz' wɪʃɪz tə sɝv. ət lis ðə fʊɾɪŋ wɑz bɛɾɝ hɪɹ ɪn ðə nu sɪɾi. nɑt ɡʊd, wɪð ðɪs fɹoʊzən mʌk ʌndɝfʊt ðət kəd tɝn ə kɛɹləs stɛp ɪndə ə spɹɔl, jɛɾ ə mænz buts wɝ lɛs laɪkli tə ɡoʊ aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪm hɪɹ ðən bæk ɑn ðə stipɝ hɪlz ə ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi. bɪsaɪdz, dɑɹknəs suɾəd ɪm tənaɪt.

Night pressed down on Caemlyn with a hard cold driven deep by sharp winds. Here and there a glow of light spilling from an upper window spoke of people still awake, but most shutters were drawn, and a thin sliver of moon low in the sky only seemed to emphasize the darkness. Even the snow coating rooftops and piled along the fronts of buildings where it had escaped the day's traffic was a shadowy gray. The lone man muffled head to ankles in a dark cloak, striding through the frozen slush left on the paving stones, answered to Daved Hanlon or Doilan Mellar with equal ease; a name was no more than a coat, and a man changed his coat whenever needed. He had worn a number over the years. Given his wishes, he would have had his feet up in front of a roaring fire in the Royal Palace, a mug in his hand, a pitcher of brandy at his side, and a willing wench on his knee, but he had others' wishes to serve. At least the footing was better here in the New City. Not good, with this frozen muck underfoot that could turn a careless step into a sprawl, yet a man's boots were less likely to go out from under him here than back on the steeper hills of the Inner City. Besides, darkness suited him tonight.

ðəɹ hæd bɪn fju pipəl ɪn ðə stʃɹits wən i stɑɹɾəd aʊt, ən ðə nʌmbɝ hæd dwɪndəld əweɪ əz dɑɹknəs dipənd. waɪz pipəl steɪɾ ɪndɔɹz wʌns naɪt fɛl. əkeɪʒənəli, dɪm ʃeɪps skʌlkt ɪn ðə dipɝ ʃædoʊz, bʌɾ æftɝ ə bɹif stʌɾi ʌv hænlən, ðeɪ skʌɾəld ɝaʊn kɔɹnɝz əhɛɾ ə hɪm, əɹ wɪθdʒɹu ɪndə æliz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə mʌfəl ðɛɹ kɝsɪz əz ðeɪ flaʊndɝɾ ɪn snoʊ ðət laɪkli hæd nɑt bɪn tʌtʃt baɪ ðə sʌn. hi wɑz nɑt bʌlki, ən lɪɾəl tɔlɝ ðən ði ævɝɪdʒ ɹʌn ə mɛn, wɪð ɪz sɔɹɾ ən bɹɛstpleɪt hɪɾən baɪ hɪz kloʊk tə but, bʌt fʊtpædz lʊk fəɹ wiknəs əɹ hɛzəteɪʃən, ən i muvd wɪð ən ɑbviəs sɛlf-kɑnfəɾəns, pleɪnli ʌnəfɹeɪɾ ə lɝkɝz. ən æɾətud hɛlp baɪ ðə lɔŋ dæɡɝ kənsild ɪn ɪz ɡɔntələɾəd ɹaɪt hænd.

There had been few people in the streets when he started out, and the number had dwindled away as darkness deepened. Wise people stayed indoors once night fell. Occasionally, dim shapes skulked in the deeper shadows, but after a brief study of Hanlon, they scuttled around corners ahead of him, or withdrew into alleys trying to muffle their curses as they floundered in snow that likely had not been touched by the sun. He was not bulky, and little taller than the average run of men, with his sword and breastplate hidden by his cloak to boot, but footpads looked for weakness or hesitation, and he moved with an obvious self-confidence, plainly unafraid of lurkers. An attitude helped by the long dagger concealed in his gauntleted right hand.

hi kɛpt ən aɪ aʊt fəɹ pətʃɹoʊlz ʌv ɡɑɹdzmɪn əz i wɔkt, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk tə si ɛni. ðə stʃɹɔŋɡɑɝmz ən pɹaʊlɝz wʊɾə sɔɾ ʌðɝ hʌntɪŋ ɡɹaʊnz ɪf ðə ɡɑɹdz wɝ əbaʊt. ʌv kɔɹs, hi kəd sɛnd noʊzi ɡɑɹdzmɪn ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ wɪð ə wɝd, jɛɾ i wɑntəd noʊ əbzɝvɝz ʌv ɛni kaɪnd, ən noʊ kwɛstʃənz waɪ hi wɑz soʊ fɑɹ fɹəm ðə pæləs əfʊt. hɪz stɛp hɛzɪteɪɾɪd əz tu hɛvəli kloʊkt wɪmən əpɪɹɾ əɾ ə kɹɔsɪŋ wɛl əhɛd, bʌt ðeɪ muvd ɑn wɪθaʊt ɡlænsɪŋ ɪz weɪ, ən i bɹið mɔɹ izəli. vɛɹi fju wɪmən wəd vɛntʃɝ aʊɾ ət ðɪs taɪm ə naɪt wɪθaʊɾ ə mæn əlɔŋ tə wil sɔɹɾ əɹ kʌdʒəl, ən ivən wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ðɛɹ feɪsəz i wʊɾə weɪdʒɝɾ ə fɪsfəl ʌv ɡoʊl tə ə hɔɹs æpəl ðət pɛɹ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. əɹ ɛls səm ə ðoʊz stʃɹeɪnʒ wɪmən u fɪl moʊst ə ðə bɛdz ɪn ðə pæləs.

He kept an eye out for patrols of Guardsmen as he walked, but he did not expect to see any. The strongarms and prowlers would have sought other hunting grounds if the Guards were about. Of course, he could send nosy Guardsmen on their way with a word, yet he wanted no observers of any kind, and no questions why he was so far from the palace afoot. His step hesitated as two heavily cloaked women appeared at a crossing well ahead, but they moved on without glancing his way, and he breathed more easily. Very few women would venture out at this time of night without a man along to wield sword or cudgel, and even without seeing their faces he would have wagered a fistful of gold to a horse apple that pair were Aes Sedai. Or else some of those strange women who filled most of the beds in the palace.

ðə θɔɾ ə ðət lɑt bɹɔɾ ə skaʊl, ən ə pɹɪklɪŋ bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz laɪk ðə bɹʌʃ ə nɛɾəlz. wʌtɛvɝ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ɪn ðə pæləs, ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf tə ɡɪv ɪm ðə ɡɹɪps. ðə si foʊk wɪmən wɝ bæɾ ɪnʌf, ən nɑt dʒʌs kəz ðeɪ wɛn sweɪɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə hɔlz ɪn ðət sɪdʌktɪv weɪ, ðən pʊld ə naɪf ɑn ə mæn. hi hæd nɑɾ ivən θɔɾ ə pæɾɪŋ wʌn ɑn ðə bɑɾəm æftɝ i ɹilaɪz ðeɪ ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ stɛɹɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ laɪk stʃɹeɪnʒ kæts ɪn ə bɑks. ən pleɪnli, haʊɛvɝ ɪmpɑsəbli, ðə si foʊk wɝ ðə lɑɹdʒɝ kæts. ði ʌðɝz wɝ wɝs, ɪn ə weɪ. noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ðə ɹumɝz sɛd, hi nu ðə lʊk ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ɪt dɪd nɑɾ ɪnklud ɹɪŋkəlz. jɛt səm ə ðɛm kəd tʃænəl, ən i hæd ðə dɪstɝbɪŋ noʊʃən ðət ðeɪ ɔl kʊd.

The thought of that lot brought a scowl, and a prickling between his shoulder blades like the brush of nettles. Whatever was going on in the palace, it was enough to give him the grips. The Sea Folk women were bad enough, and not just because they went swaying along the halls in that seductive way, then pulled a knife on a man. He had not even thought of patting one on the bottom after he realized they and the Aes Sedai were staring at one another like strange cats in a box. And plainly, however impossibly, the Sea Folk were the larger cats. The others were worse, in a way. No matter what the rumors said, he knew the look of Aes Sedai, and it did not include wrinkles. Yet some of them could channel, and he had the disturbing notion that they all could.

wɪtʃ meɪd noʊ sɛns əɾ ɔl. meɪbi ðə si foʊk hæd səm sɔɹɾ ə pəkjuljɝ dɪspənseɪʃən, bʌɾ əz fəɹ ðiz kɪn, əz fæljən kɔl ðɛm, ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðəɾ ɪf θɹi wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl ən wɝ nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ sæt daʊn ət ðə seɪm teɪbəl, ɛɛs sədaɪ wəɾ əpɪɹ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd fɪnɪʃ ə pɪtʃɝ ʌv waɪn ən tɛl əm tə muv ɑn ən nɛvɝ spik tə wʌn ənʌðɝ əɡɛn. ən meɪk ʃʊɹ ðeɪ dɪɾ ɪt, bɪsaɪdz.

Which made no sense at all. Maybe the Sea Folk had some sort of peculiar dispensation, but as for these Kin, as Falion called them, everyone knew that if three women who could channel and were not Aes Sedai sat down at the same table, Aes Sedai would appear before they could finish a pitcher of wine and tell them to move on and never speak to one another again. And make sure they did it, besides.

ðət wɑz ɡɪvən. bʌt ðəɹ ðoʊz wɪmən sæɾ ɪn ðə pæləs, oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd ə ðɛm, hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ pɹaɪvət miɾɪŋz, wɔkɪŋ ɝaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪθaʊt wʌn fɹaʊn bɪtwin ðɛm. əntɪl tədeɪ, ɛniweɪ, ən wʌtɛvɝ hæd sɛɾ əm hʌɾəlɪŋ laɪk fɹaɪɾənd hɛnz, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd bɪn ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz æŋkʃəs. ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni ɑɾətiz tə sut hɪm. wən ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪheɪvd ɑdli, ɪt wɑz taɪm fəɹ ə mæn tə lʊk tə ðə seɪfti ʌv ɪz oʊn skɪn. wɪð ə kɝs i dʒɝk hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ə hɪz ɹɛvɝi. ə mæn niɾəd tə lʊk aʊt fəɹ ɪz skɪn ɪn ðə naɪt, tu, ən lɛɾɪŋ ɪz kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən dʒɹɪft wɑz noʊ weɪ tə də ɪt. ət list i hæd nɑt stɑpt, əɹ ivən sloʊd. æftɝ ə fju mɔɹ stɛps, hi smaɪld ə θɪn smaɪl ən θʌm ðə bleɪɾ ə hɪz dæɡɝ. ðə wɪn saɪd daʊn ðə stʃɹiɾ ən fɛl, wɪsəld əkɹɔs ɹuftɑps ən fɛl, ən ɪn ðə bɹif saɪlənsɪz bɪtwin i kəd hɪɹ ðə feɪn kɹʌntʃ ə ðə buts ðət hæd bɪn fɑloʊɪŋ ɪm sɪns ʃɔɹtli æftɝ i lɛf ðə pæləs. ət ðə nɛks kɹɔsɪŋ stʃɹit, hi tɝn tə hɪz ɹaɪɾ ət ðə seɪm stɛɾi ənhɝid peɪs, ðən sʌɾənli flæɾənd ɪz bæk əɡɛns ðə fɹʌn ʌv ə steɪbəl ðət stʊd hɑɹɾ ɑn ðə kɔɹnɝ. ðə waɪd steɪbəl dɔɹz wɝ ʃʌt, ən laɪkli bɑɹɾ ɑn ði ɪnsaɪd, bʌt ðə smɛl ə hɔɹs ən hɔɹs dʌŋ hʌŋ ɪn ði aɪsi ɛɹ. ði ɪn əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit wɑz kloʊzd ʌp taɪt, əz wɛl, ɪts wɪndoʊz ʃʌɾɝd ən dɑɹk, ði oʊnli saʊn əsaɪd fɹəm ðə wɪn ðə kɹik ʌv ɪts swɪŋɪŋ saɪn i kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ ɪn ðə naɪt. noʊ wʌn tə si wʌt ðeɪ ʃəd nɑt.

That was given. But there those women sat in the palace, over a hundred of them, holding their private meetings, walking around Aes Sedai without one frown between them. Until today, anyway, and whatever had set them huddling like frightened hens, the Aes Sedai had been every bit as anxious. There were too many oddities to suit him. When Aes Sedai behaved oddly, it was time for a man to look to the safety of his own skin. With a curse he jerked himself out of his reverie. A man needed to look out for his skin in the night, too, and letting his concentration drift was no way to do it. At least he had not stopped, or even slowed. After a few more steps, he smiled a thin smile and thumbed the blade of his dagger. The wind sighed down the street and fell, whistled across rooftops and fell, and in the brief silences between he could hear the faint crunch of the boots that had been following him since shortly after he left the palace. At the next crossing street, he turned to his right at the same steady unhurried pace, then suddenly flattened his back against the front of a stable that stood hard on the corner. The wide stable doors were shut, and likely barred on the inside, but the smell of horse and horse dung hung in the icy air. The inn across the street was closed up tight, as well, its windows shuttered and dark, the only sound aside from the wind the creak of its swinging sign he could not make out in the night. No one to see what they should not.

hi hæɾ ə moʊməns wɔɹnɪŋ, ðə saʊn ə buts kwɪkən ɪn ən ɛfɝt nɑt tə lɛɾ ɪm aʊɾ ə saɪt tu lɔŋ, ən ðən ə kaʊl hɛd wɑz θɹʌs kɔʃəsli ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ. nɑt kɔʃəsli ɪnʌf, ʌv kɔɹs. hɪz lɛf hæn dɑɹɾɪd ɪndə ðə kaʊl tə siz ə θɹoʊɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm ɪz ɹaɪt meɪɾ ə pɹæktəst stɑp-θɹʌst wɪð ðə dæɡɝ. hi hæf ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn ə bɹɛstpleɪt, əɹ ə meɪl ʃɝɾ ʌndɝ ðə mænz koʊt, ən i wɑz ɹɛɾi ɪf i dɪd, bʌɾ ən ɪntʃ ə stil sæŋk izəli bɪniθ ðə fɛloʊz bɹɛstboʊn. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ waɪ ðət sim tə pɛɹəlaɪz ə mænz lʌŋz, soʊ hi kəd nɑt kɹaɪ aʊt, əntɪl i hæd dʒɹaʊn ɪn ɪz oʊn blʌd, bʌɾ i nu ðəɾ ɪt dɪd. stɪl, tənaɪɾ i hæd noʊ taɪm tə weɪt. noʊ ɡɑɹdz ɪn saɪɾ ət pɹɛzən dɪd nɑt min mæɾɝz wəd steɪ ðət weɪ fəɹ lɔŋ. wɪð ə kwɪk ɹɛntʃ, hi slæm ðə mænz hɛɾ əɡɛns ðə steɪbəlz stoʊn wɔl hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə kɹæk ə skʌl, ðən ʃʌvd ɪz dæɡɝ tə ðə hɪlt, filɪŋ ðə bleɪd ɡɹeɪɾ əz ɪt dʌɡ θɹu ðə fɛloʊz spaɪn.

He had a moment's warning, the sound of boots quickened in an effort not to let him out of sight too long, and then a cowled head was thrust cautiously around the corner. Not cautiously enough, of course. His left hand darted into the cowl to seize a throat at the same time his right made a practiced stop-thrust with the dagger. He half expected to find a breastplate, or a mail shirt under the man's coat, and he was ready if he did, but an inch of steel sank easily beneath the fellow's breastbone. He did not know why that seemed to paralyze a man's lungs, so he could not cry out, until he had drowned in his own blood, but he knew that it did. Still, tonight he had no time to wait. No Guards in sight at present did not mean matters would stay that way for long. With a quick wrench, he slammed the man's head against the stable's stone wall hard enough to crack a skull, then shoved his dagger to the hilt, feeling the blade grate as it dug through the fellow's spine.

hɪz bɹiðɪŋ ɹɪmeɪn stɛɾi - kɪlɪŋ wɑz dʒʌst ə θɪŋ ðæt, hæd tə bi dʌn naʊ ən əɡɛn, nʌθɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ɪksaɪɾəd oʊvɝ - bʌɾ i hɝidli loʊɝd ðə kɔɹps tə ðə snoʊ əɡɛns ðə wɔl ən kɹaʊtʃt bɪsaɪɾ ɪt, waɪpɪŋ ɪz bleɪɾ ɑn ðə dɛd mænz dɑɹk koʊt waɪl stɪkɪŋ ɪz ʌðɝ hæn ɪndə hɪz ɑɹmpɪt tə tʌɡ ɔf ɪz stilbækt ɡɔnlət. hɛd swɪvəlɪŋ, hi wɑtʃt ðə stʃɹit boʊθ weɪz əz i fɛl kwɪkli əkɹɔs ðə mænz feɪs ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. ə ɹæsp ə stʌbəl ʌndɝ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz toʊld ɪm ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə mæn, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ. mæn, wʊmən əɹ tʃaɪl meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns tə hɪm - fulz bɪheɪvd əz ðoʊ tʃɪlʒɹən hæd noʊ aɪz tə si əɹ tʌŋz tə tɛl wʌt ðeɪ sɔ - jɛɾ i wɪʃt ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə mʌstæʃ əɹ ə bʌlbəs noʊz, ɛniθɪŋ tə spɑɹk ə mɛmɹi ən tɛl ɪm u ðɪs fɛloʊ hæd bɪn. ə skwiz ət ðə dɛd mænz sliv faʊn θɪk wʊl, niðɝ faɪn nɔɹ pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɹʌf, ən ə sɪnjui ɑɹm ðət cʊɾə bɪlɔŋ tə klɝk əɹ wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝ əɹ fʊtmən. tə ɛni mæn, ɪn ʃɔɹt, dʒʌs laɪk ðə koʊt. sɝtʃɪŋ daʊn ðə bɑɾi, hi ɹaɪfəl θɹu ðə fɛloʊz pɑkəts, faɪndɪŋ ə wʊɾən koʊm ən ə bɔl ə twaɪn, wɪtʃ i tɔst əsaɪd. ət ðə mænz bɛlt, hɪz hæn pɔzd. ə lɛðɝ ʃiθ hʌŋ ðɛɹ, ɛmpti. noʊ mæn ɑn ɝθ cʊɾə dʒɹɔn ə dæɡɝ æftɝ hænlənz bleɪd faʊn ɪz lʌŋz. ʌv kɔɹs, ðəɹ wɑz ɡʊd kɑz fəɹ ə mæn tə kæɹi hɪz naɪf ənʃiðd wən i wɔkt aʊɾ ət naɪt, bʌt ðə ɹizən ðət keɪm moʊst ɹɛɾəli tə maɪn ɹaɪt ðən wɑz tə stæb sʌmwʌn ɪn ðə bæk əɹ kʌɾ ə θɹoʊt. ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə fliɾɪŋ pɔz, ðoʊ.

His breathing remained steady - killing was just a thing that, had to be done now and again, nothing to get excited over - but he hurriedly lowered the corpse to the snow against the wall and crouched beside it, wiping his blade on the dead man's dark coat while sticking his other hand into his armpit to tug off his steelbacked gauntlet. Head swiveling, he watched the street both ways as he felt quickly across the man's face in the darkness. A rasp of stubble under his fingers told him that it was a man, but no more. Man, woman or child made no difference to him - fools behaved as though children had no eyes to see or tongues to tell what they saw - yet he wished there had been a mustache or a bulbous nose, anything to spark a memory and tell him who this fellow had been. A squeeze at the dead man's sleeve found thick wool, neither fine nor particularly rough, and a sinewy arm that could have belonged to clerk or wagon driver or footman. To any man, in short, just like the coat. Searching down the body, he rifled through the fellow's pockets, finding a wooden comb and a ball of twine, which he tossed aside. At the man's belt, his hand paused. A leather sheath hung there, empty. No man on earth could have drawn a dagger after Hanlon's blade found his lungs. Of course, there was good cause for a man to carry his knife unsheathed when he walked out at night, but the reason that came most readily to mind right then was to stab someone in the back or cut a throat. It was only a fleeting pause, though.

weɪstɪŋ noʊ taɪm ɑn spɛkjəleɪʃən, hi slaɪst ɔf ðə fɛloʊz pɝs bɪniθ ðə dʒɹɔstʃɹɪŋz. ðə weɪɾ ə ðə kɔɪnz i spɪld ɪndə hɪz hæn ən heɪstəli stʌft ɪndə hɪz oʊn pɑkət toʊld ɪm ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɡoʊld, laɪkli nɑɾ ivən ə pis ə sɪlvɝ, bʌɾ ə kʌt pɝs ən noʊ kɔɪnz wəd meɪk huɛvɝ faʊn ðə bɑɾi θɪŋk ɪm ðə pɹeɪ ʌv stʃɹɔŋɡɑɝmz. stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ, hi tʌɡd ɑn ɪz ɡɔnlət, ən oʊnli moʊməns æftɝ dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ɪz bleɪd hoʊm, hi wɑz stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə slʌʃ-kʌvɝd peɪvmənt wʌns mɔɹ, dæɡɝ hɛl kloʊs tə hɪz saɪd bɪniθ ɪz kloʊk ən aɪz wɛɹi. hi dɪd nɑt ɹɪlæks əntɪl i wɑz ə stʃɹiɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə dɛd mæn, ən ðən i dɪd nɑt ɹɪlæks vɛɹi fɑɹ.

Wasting no time on speculation, he sliced off the fellow's purse beneath the drawstrings. The weight of the coins he spilled into his hand and hastily stuffed into his own pocket told him there was no gold, likely not even a piece of silver, but a cut purse and no coins would make whoever found the body think him the prey of strongarms. Straightening, he tugged on his gauntlet, and only moments after driving his blade home, he was striding along the slush-covered pavement once more, dagger held close to his side beneath his cloak and eyes wary. He did not relax until he was a street away from the dead man, and then he did not relax very far.

moʊs pipəl u hɝɾ ə ðə kɪlɪŋ wəɾ æksɛp ðə teɪl ə mɝɾɝ fəɹ θɛf ðəɾ i hæd leɪɾ aʊt fəɹ ðɛm, bʌt nɑt huɛvɝ hæd sɛn ðə fɛloʊ. fɑloʊɪŋ ɔl ðə weɪ fɹəm ðə pæləs mɛn ðəɾ i hæd bɪn sɛnt, bʌt baɪ hum? hi wɑz fɛɹli ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɛni ʌv ðə si foʊk u wɑntəɾ ə naɪf pʊɾ ɪn ɪm wʊɾə dʌn ðə did hɝsɛlf. fəɹ ɔl ðət ðə kɪn tʃɹʌbəld ɪm dʒʌs baɪ biɪŋ ðɛɹ, ðeɪ sim tə kip kwaɪəɾ ən wɔk smɔl. tʃɹu, pipəl u pɹæktəst əvɔɪɾɪŋ noʊɾəs wɝ ðə moʊs laɪkli tə ɹɪzɔɹt tə ə haɪɝd naɪf ɪn ðə naɪt, bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd mɔɹ ðən θɹi wɝdz əɾ ə taɪm wɪð ɛni ʌv ðɛm, ən i sɝɾənli hæd nɛvɝ tʃɹaɪd tə fɪŋɡɝ wʌn. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ simd mɔɹ laɪkli, jɛɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ i hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ tə ɹaʊs ðɛɹ səspɪʃənz. stɪl, ɛni wʌn ə ðɛm maɪɾ əv əɹ oʊn ɹizənz fəɹ wɑntɪŋ ɪm dɛd. jə kəd nɛvɝ tɛl wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ. bɝdʒɪt tʃɹɑilaɪən wɑz ə sɪli bɪn u sim tə θɪŋk ʃi ɹɪli wɑz ə kɛɹɪktɝ aʊɾ ʌv ə stɔɹi, meɪbi ivən ðə ɹil bɝdʒɪt, ɪf ðəɹ hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn ə ɹil bɝdʒɪt, bʌt ʃi kəd wɛl θɪŋk i wɑz ə θɹɛt tə hɝ pəzɪʃən. ʃi maɪt bi ə stʃɹʌmpət, wɪɡəlɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz ɪn ðoʊz tʃɹaʊzɝz ðə weɪ ʃi dɪd, jɛt ʃi hæɾ ə koʊld aɪ. ðət wʌn kəɾ ɔɹɾɝ ə θɹoʊt slɪt wɪθaʊt blɪŋkɪŋ. ðə læs pɑsəbɪləɾi wɑz ðə wʌn ðət wɝiɾ ɪm moʊst, ðoʊ. hɪz oʊn mæstɝz wɝ nɑt ðə moʊs tʃɹʌstɪŋ ə pipəl, ən nɑɾ ɔlweɪz ðə moʊs tʃɹʌstwɝði. ən ðə leɪɾi ʃieɪn əvɑɹhən, hu kɝənli ɡeɪv ɪm ɪz ɔɹɾɝz, wɑz ðə wʌn u hæd sɛn ə sʌmənz ðət hæd pʊld ɪm ɪndə ðə naɪt. wɛɹ ə fɛloʊ dʒʌs hæpən tə bi weɪɾɪŋ tə fɑloʊ hɪm, naɪf ɪn hænd. hi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪn koʊɪnsɪɾəns, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt pipəl sɛɾ əbaʊt ðɪs ælθɹ.

Most people who heard of the killing would accept the tale of murder for theft that he had laid out for them, but not whoever had sent the fellow. Following all the way from the palace meant that he had been sent, but by whom? He was fairly sure that any of the Sea Folk who wanted a knife put in him would have done the deed herself. For all that the Kin troubled him just by being there, they seemed to keep quiet and walk small. True, people who practiced avoiding notice were the most likely to resort to a hired knife in the night, but he had never exchanged more than three words at a time with any of them, and he certainly had never tried to finger one. The Aes Sedai seemed more likely, yet he was sure he had done nothing to rouse their suspicions. Still, any one of them might have her own reasons for wanting him dead. You could never tell with Aes Sedai. Birgitte Trahelion was a silly bint who seemed to think she really was a character out of a story, maybe even the real Birgitte, if there had ever been a real Birgitte, but she could well think he was a threat to her position. She might be a strumpet, wiggling around the corridors in those trousers the way she did, yet she had a cold eye. That one could order a throat slit without blinking. The last possibility was the one that worried him most, though. His own masters were not the most trusting of people, and not always the most trustworthy. And the Lady Shiaine Avarhin, who currently gave him his orders, was the one who had sent a summons that had pulled him into the night. Where a fellow just happened to be waiting to follow him, knife in hand. He did not believe in coincidence, no matter what people said about this al'Thor.

θɔts ə tɝnɪŋ bæk tə ðə pæləs keɪm ən wɛn ɪn ə flæʃ. hi hæd ɡoʊl tʌkt əweɪ; hi kəd bɹaɪb ɪz weɪ θɹu ðə ɡeɪts əz izəli əz ɛniwʌn ɛls, əɹ dʒʌst ɔɹɾɝ wʌn oʊpən lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə lɛɾ ɪm ɹaɪɾ aʊt. bʌɾ ɪt wəd min spɛndɪŋ ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz laɪf wɑtʃɪŋ ɪz bæk, ən ɛniwʌn u keɪm ɪnsaɪɾ ɑɹmz lɛŋθ ə hɪm maɪt bi ðə wʌn sɛn tə kɪl hɪm. nɑt soʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə weɪ hi lɪv naʊ. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə sɝɾənti ðət sʌmwʌn wəd pʊt pɔɪzən ɪn ɪz sup əɹ ə naɪf θɹu hɪz ɹɪbz sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ. bɪsaɪdz, ðət stoʊn-aɪd tʃɹʌl bɝdʒɪt wɑz ðə moʊs laɪkli kʌlpɹɪt. əɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. əɹ meɪbi hi hæɾ əfɛndəd ðiz kɪn sʌmhaʊ. stɪl, ɪɾ ɔlweɪz peɪd tə bi kɛɹfəl. hɪz fɪŋɡɝz flɛkst ɝaʊn ðə dæɡɝz hɪlt. laɪf wɑz ɡʊɾ ət ðə moʊmənt, wɪð plɛnti ʌv kʌmfɝɾ ən plɛnti ʌv wɪmən ɪmpɹɛst əɹ fɹaɪɾənd ɪndə kəmplaɪəns baɪ ə kæptən ə ðə ɡɑɹdz, bʌt laɪf ɑn ðə ɹʌn wɑz ɔlweɪz pɹɛfɝəbəl tə dɛθ hɪɹ ən naʊ.

Thoughts of turning back to the palace came and went in a flash. He had gold tucked away; he could bribe his way through the gates as easily as anyone else, or just order one opened long enough to let him ride out. But it would mean spending the rest of his life watching his back, and anyone who came inside arm's length of him might be the one sent to kill him. Not so different from the way he lived now. Except for the certainty that someone would put poison in his soup or a knife through his ribs sooner or later. Besides, that stone-eyed trull Birgitte was the most likely culprit. Or an Aes Sedai. Or maybe he had offended these Kin somehow. Still, it always paid to be careful. His fingers flexed around the dagger's hilt. Life was good at the moment, with plenty of comfort and plenty of women impressed or frightened into compliance by a Captain of the Guards, but life on the run was always preferable to death here and now.

faɪndɪŋ ðə kɝɛk stʃɹit, mʌtʃ lɛs ðə kɝɛk haʊs, wɑz nɑt wʌn nɛɹoʊ saɪd stʃɹit lʊk vɛɹi laɪk ənʌðɝ wən dɑɹknəs swɑð boʊθ - bʌɾ i tʊk ə kɛɹ ən ɪvɛntʃəwəli faʊn hɪmsɛlf paʊndɪŋ ɑn ðə fɹʌn dɔɹz ʌv ə tɔl, ʃæɾoʊd paɪl ðət cʊɾə bɪlɔŋ tə ə wɛlθi bʌt dɪskɹit mɝtʃənt. ɪksɛpt i nu naʊ ðəɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt. əvɑɹhən wɑz ə taɪni haʊs, ɪkstɪŋk səm sɛd, bʌt wʌn dɔɾɝ ʌv ɪt ɹɪmeɪnd, ən ʃieɪn pəzɛs mʌni. wʌn ə ðə dɔɹz swʌŋ oʊpən, ən i flʌŋ ʌp ə hæn əɡɛns ðə sʌɾən ɡlɛɹ ə laɪt. hɪz lɛf hænd; ðə dæɡɝ ɪn ɪz ɹaɪt, hi kɛp kənsild ən ɹɛɾi. skwɪntɪŋ θɹu hɪz spɹɛd fɪŋɡɝz, hi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə wʊmən ət ðə dɔɹ, ɪn ðə pleɪn dɑɹk dʒɹɛs ʌv ə meɪd. nɑt ðət ðəɾ izd ɪz maɪn baɪ ə hɛɹ.

Finding the correct street, much less the correct house, was not one narrow side street looked very like another when darkness swathed both - but he took a care and eventually found himself pounding on the front doors of a tall, shadowed pile that could have belonged to a wealthy but discreet merchant. Except he knew now that it did not. Avarhin was a tiny House, extinct some said, but one daughter of it remained, and Shiaine possessed money. One of the doors swung open, and he flung up a hand against the sudden glare of light. His left hand; the dagger in his right, he kept concealed and ready. Squinting through his spread fingers, he recognized the woman at the door, in the plain dark dress of a maid. Not that that eased his mind by a hair.

"ɡɪv əs ə kɪs, fæljən," hi sɛɾ əz i stɛpt ɪnsaɪd. lɪɹɪŋ, hi ɹitʃt fəɹ hɝ. lɛft-hændəd, ʌv kɔɹs.

"Give us a kiss, Falion," he said as he stepped inside. Leering, he reached for her. Left-handed, of course.

ðə lɔŋ-feɪst wʊmən bɹʌʃt ɪz hæn əsaɪɾ ən ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ fɝmli bɪhaɪn hɪm. "ʃieɪn ɪz klɑzəɾɪd wɪð ə vɪzəɾɝ ɪn ðə fɹʌn sɪɾɪŋ ɹum əpstɛɹz," ʃi sɛd kɑmli, "æn ðə kʊk ɪz ɪn əɹ bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ wʌn ɛls ɪn ðə haʊs. hæŋ jəɹ kloʊk ɑn ðə ɹæk. əl lɛɾ əɹ noʊ jə ɑɹ hɪɹ, bʌt jə meɪ hæv tə weɪt."

The long-faced woman brushed his hand aside and shut the door firmly behind him. "Shiaine is closeted with a visitor in the front sitting room upstairs," she said calmly, "and the cook is in her bedchamber. There is no one else in the house. Hang your cloak on the rack. I will let her know you are here, but you may have to wait."

hænlən lɛɾ ɪz lɪɹ vænɪʃ ən ɪz hæn dʒɹɑp. fəɹ ɔl ə hɝ eɪdʒləs feɪs, hænsəm wɑz ðə bɛs ðət fæljən kəd bi kɔld, ən ivən ðət maɪt bi stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ, wɪð əɹ koʊld ɡeɪz ən ə koʊldɝ mænɝ ɪn ðə bɑɹɡən. ʃi wɑz hɑɹdli ðə sɔɹɾ ʌv wʊmən i wʊɾə tʃoʊzən tə fɑndəl, bʌɾ ɪt simd ʃi wɑz biɪŋ pʌnɪʃt baɪ wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən ən i wɑz səpoʊz tə bi pɑɹɾ ə ðə pʌnɪʃmənt, wɪtʃ ɔltɝd mæɾɝz. tə səm ɪkstɛnt. tʌmbəlɪŋ ə wʊmən u hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs hæd nɛvɝ tʃɹʌbəl hɪm, ən fæljən sɝɾənli hæd nʌn. hɝ meɪdz dʒɹɛs wɑz sɪmpəl tʃɹuθ; ʃi dɪd ðə wɝk ə fɔɹ əɹ faɪv wɪmən baɪ hɝsɛlf, meɪdz ən skʌljənz ən spɪt-ɡɝl, slipɪŋ wən ʃi kəɾ ən tʃɹʌklɪŋ wɛnɛvɝ ʃieɪn fɹaʊnd. hɝ hænz wɝ ɹʌf ən ɹɛd fɹəm duɪŋ lɔnʒɹi ən skɹʌbɪŋ flɔɹz. jɛt ʃi wɑz laɪkli tə sɝvaɪv əɹ pʌnɪʃmənt, ən ðə læs θɪŋ i wɑntəd wɑz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð ə pɝsənəl ɡɹʌdʒ əɡɛns dɑv hænlən. nɑt wən sɝkəmstænsəz maɪt wɛl tʃeɪnʒ bɪfɔɹ i hæɾ ən ɑpɝtunəɾi tə pʊɾ ə naɪf θɹu hɝ hɑɹt, ɛniweɪ.

Hanlon let his leer vanish and his hand drop. For all of her ageless face, handsome was the best that Falion could be called, and even that might be stretching the truth, with her cold gaze and a colder manner in the bargain. She was hardly the sort of woman he would have chosen to fondle, but it seemed she was being punished by one of the Chosen and he was supposed to be part of the punishment, which altered matters. To some extent. Tumbling a woman who had no choice had never troubled him, and Falion certainly had none. Her maid's dress was simple truth; she did the work of four or five women by herself, maids and scullions and spit-girl, sleeping when she could and truckling whenever Shiaine frowned. Her hands were rough and red from doing laundry and scrubbing floors. Yet she was likely to survive her punishment, and the last thing he wanted was an Aes Sedai with a personal grudge against Daved Hanlon. Not when circumstances might well change before he had an opportunity to put a knife through her heart, anyway.

ɹitʃɪŋ ən əkɑmədeɪʃən wɪð əɹ hæd bɪn izi, ðoʊ. ʃi sim tə hæv ə pɹæktəkəl vju. wən ʌðɝz kəd si, hi ɹʌmpəld əɹ ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi keɪm ɪn ɹitʃ, ən wən ðəɹ wɑz taɪm, hi bʌndəld əɹ ʌp tə hɝ taɪni meɪdz ɹum ʌndɝ ði ivz. wɛɹ ðeɪ mʌs ðə bɛdkloʊðz, ðən sæɾ ɑn ðə nɛɹoʊ bɛɾ ɪn ðə koʊld ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɪnfɝmeɪʃən. ðoʊ əɾ əɹ ɝdʒɪŋ, hi dɪd ɡɪv əɹ ə fju bɹuzəz, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs ʃieɪn tʃoʊz tə tʃɛk. hi hoʊpt ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðəɾ ɪt wɑz əɾ əɹ ɝdʒɪŋ.

Reaching an accommodation with her had been easy, though. She seemed to have a practical view. When others could see, he rumpled her every time she came in reach, and when there was time, he bundled her up to her tiny maid's room under the eaves. Where they mussed the bedclothes, then sat on the narrow bed in the cold and exchanged information. Though at her urging, he did give her a few bruises, just in case Shiaine chose to check. He hoped she remembered that it was at her urging.

"wɛɹ ɑɹ ði ʌðɝz?" hi sɛd, swɪŋɪŋ ɪz kloʊk ɔf ən hæŋɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn ðə lɛpɝd-kɑɹv kloʊk ɹæk. ðə saʊn ə hɪz buts ɑn ðə flɔɹ taɪlz baʊns fɹəm ði ɛntʃɹi hɔlz haɪ silɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ə faɪn speɪs, wɪð peɪntəd plæstɝ kɔɹnɪsəz ən sɛvɹəl ɹɪtʃ wɔl hæŋʒɪŋz ɑn kɑɹv pænəlz ðət wɝ pɑlɪʃt tə ə feɪnt ɡloʊ, wɛl lɪt baɪ mɪɹɝd stænd-læmps wɪð ɪnʌf ɡɪldɪŋ fəɹ ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ɪtsɛlf, bʌt bɝn ɪm ɪf ɪt wɑz mʌtʃ wɔɹmɝ ðən aʊtsaɪd. fæljən ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət ðə dæɡɝ ɪn ɪz hænd, ən i ʃiðd ɪt wɪð ə taɪt smaɪl. hi kəɾ əv ɪɾ aʊɾ əɡɛn fæstɝ ðən ɛniwʌn wəd bɪliv, ən ɪz sɔɹd nɪɹ əz fæst. "ðə stʃɹits ɑɹ fʊl ə θivz ət naɪt." dɪspaɪt ðə tʃɪl, hi ɹimuvd ɪz ɡɔnləts ən tʌkt əm bɪhaɪn ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt. ɛniθɪŋ ɛls maɪt meɪk ɪɾ əpɪɹ i θɔt hɪmsɛlf ɪn deɪnʒɝ. ðə bɹɛstpleɪt ʃəd bi ɪnʌf ɛniweɪ, kʌm ðə wɝst.

"Where are the others?" he said, swinging his cloak off and hanging it on the leopard-carved cloak rack. The sound of his boots on the floor tiles bounced from the entry hall's high ceiling. It was a fine space, with painted plaster cornices and several rich wall hangings on carved panels that were polished to a faint glow, well lit by mirrored stand-lamps with enough gilding for the Royal Palace itself, but burn him if it was much warmer than outside. Falion raised an eyebrow at the dagger in his hand, and he sheathed it with a tight smile. He could have it out again faster than anyone would believe, and his sword near as fast. "The streets are full of thieves at night." Despite the chill, he removed his gauntlets and tucked them behind his sword belt. Anything else might make it appear he thought himself in danger. The breastplate should be enough anyway, come the worst.

"aɪ də nɑt noʊ wɛɹ mɑɹilɪn ɪz," ʃi sɛɾ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ɔlɹɛɾi tɝnɪŋ əweɪ ən ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ skɝts fəɹ ðə stɛɹstɛps. "ʃi wɛn aʊt bɪfɔɹ sʌnsɛt. mɹɛlɪn ɪz ɪn ðə steɪbəlz wɪð ɪz paɪp. wi kən tɔk æftɝ aɪ ɪnfɔɹm ʃieɪn juv ɝaɪvd."

"I do not know where Marillin is," she said over her shoulder, already turning away and gathering her skirts for the stairsteps. "She went out before sunset. Murellin is in the stables with his pipe. We can talk after I inform Shiaine you've arrived."

wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ klaɪm ðə stɛɹz, hi ɡɹʌntɪd. mɹɛlɪn, ə hʌlkɪŋ fɛloʊ hænlən dɪd nɑt laɪk əɾ ɪz bæk, wɑz bænɪʃt tə ðə steɪbəlz bɪhaɪn ðə haʊs wɛnɛvɝ i wɑntəd tə smoʊk ɪz paɪp, kəz ʃieɪn dɪslaɪk ðə smɛl ə ðə ɹʌf təbæk i juzd, ən sɪns i juʒəwəli tʊk ə pɑɾ ʌv eɪl wɪð hɪm, əɹ ivən ə pɪtʃɝ, hi ʃəd nɑt bi kʌmɪŋ ɪn ɛni taɪm sun. mɑɹilɪn wɝiɾ ɪm mɔɹ. ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, tu, əpɛɹənli əz mʌtʃ ʌndɝ ʃieɪnz ɔɹɾɝz əz fæljən, əɹ hɪmsɛlf, bʌɾ i hæd noʊ əɡɹiməns wɪð hɝ. noʊ ɑɹɡjəməns, iðɝ, jɛɾ i dɪstʃɹʌstəɾ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑn pɹɪnsəpəl, blæk ədʒɑ əɹ nɑt. wɛɹ hæd ʃi ɡɔn? tə də wʌt? wʌɾ ə mæn dɪd nɑt noʊ kəd kɪl hɪm, ən mɑɹilɪn ɡəmɑlfɪn spɛn ɪntaɪɝli tu mʌtʃ taɪm ɔf duɪŋ θɪŋz i nu nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt. hi wɑz kʌmɪŋ tə ðə kənkluʒən ðət ðəɹ wɝ ɪntaɪɝli tu mɛni θɪŋz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn i nu nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt. pæs taɪm i lɝnd, ɪf i wɑntəd tə lɪv.

Watching her climb the stairs, he grunted. Murellin, a hulking fellow Hanlon did not like at his back, was banished to the stables behind the house whenever he wanted to smoke his pipe, because Shiaine disliked the smell of the rough tabac he used, and since he usually took a pot of ale with him, or even a pitcher, he should not be coming in any time soon. Marillin worried him more. She was Aes Sedai, too, apparently as much under Shiaine's orders as Falion, or himself, but he had no agreements with her. No arguments, either, yet he distrusted any Aes Sedai on principle, Black Ajah or not. Where had she gone? To do what? What a man did not know could kill him, and Marillin Gemalphin spent entirely too much time off doing things he knew nothing about. He was coming to the conclusion that there were entirely too many things in Caemlyn he knew nothing about. Past time he learned, if he wanted to live.

wɪð fæljən ɡɔn, hi wɛn fɹəm ði aɪsi ɛntʃɹi hɔl stʃɹeɪt tə ðə kɪtʃən ət ðə bæk ə ðə haʊs.

With Falion gone, he went from the icy entry hall straight to the kitchen at the back of the house.

ðə bɹɪk-wɔld ɹum wɑz ɛmpti, ʌv kɔɹs - ðə kʊk nu bɛɾɝ ðən tə poʊk əɹ noʊz aʊɾ ə hɝ ɹum ɪn ðə beɪsmənt wʌns ʃi wɑz sɛn əweɪ fəɹ ðə naɪt - ən ðə blæk aɪɝn stoʊv ən ði ʌvənz stʊd koʊld, bʌɾ ə smɔl bleɪz ɑn ðə lɔŋ stoʊn hɑɹθ meɪd ðə kɪtʃən wʌn ə ðə fju ɹumz ɪn ðə haʊs ðət wəd bi wɔɹm. kəmpɛɹd tə ðə ɹɛst, ət list. ʃieɪn wɑz ə stɪnʒi wʊmən, ɪksɛpt wən ɪt keɪm tə hɝ oʊn kʌmfɝts. ðə faɪɝ hɪɹ wɑz oʊnli ɪn keɪs ʃi hæpən tə wɑn mʌld waɪn ɪn ðə naɪt, əɹ ə hiɾəd ɛɡ-mɪlk. hi hæd bɪn ɪn ðɪs haʊs əbʌv hæf ə dʌzən taɪmz sɪns kʌmɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn, ən i nu wɪtʃ kæbənəts hɛl ðə spaɪsəz ən wɪtʃ ɹum ɔf ðə kɪtʃən ɔlweɪz hɛld ə kæsk ʌv waɪn. ɔlweɪz ɡʊd waɪn. ʃieɪn nɛvɝ stɪntɪd ðɛɹ. nɑt wɪð ðət ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə dʒɹɪŋk hɝsɛlf, ɛniweɪ. baɪ ðə taɪm fæljən ɹɪtɝnd, hi hæd ðə hʌnipɑɾ ən ə dɪʃ ə dʒɪnʒɝ ən kloʊvz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə waɪd kɪtʃən teɪbəl wɪð ə pɪtʃɝ fʊl ʌv waɪn, ən ə poʊkɝ θɹʌst ɪndə ðə faɪɝ. ʃieɪn maɪt seɪ "kʌm naʊ" ən min "naʊ," bʌt wən ʃi wɑntəd tə meɪk ə mæn weɪt, ɪt kəd bi nɪɹ deɪlaɪt bɪfɔɹ ʃi sɔ hɪm. ðiz kɔlz ɔlweɪz kɑst ɪm slip, bɝn ðə wʊmən! "hu ɪz ðə vɪzəɾɝ?" hi æskt.

The brick-walled room was empty, of course - the cook knew better than to poke her nose out of her room in the basement once she was sent away for the night - and the black iron stove and the ovens stood cold, but a small blaze on the long stone hearth made the kitchen one of the few rooms in the house that would be warm. Compared to the rest, at least. Shiaine was a stingy woman, except when it came to her own comforts. The fire here was only in case she happened to want mulled wine in the night, or a heated egg-milk. He had been in this house above half a dozen times since coming to Caemlyn, and he knew which cabinets held the spices and which room off the kitchen always held a cask of wine. Always good wine. Shiaine never stinted there. Not with that she intended to drink herself, anyway. By the time Falion returned, he had the honeypot and a dish of ginger and cloves sitting on the wide kitchen table with a pitcher full of wine, and a poker thrust into the fire. Shiaine might say "come now" and mean "now," but when she wanted to make a man wait, it could be near daylight before she saw him. These calls always cost him sleep, burn the woman! "Who is the visitor?" he asked.

"hi ɡeɪv noʊ neɪm, nɑt tə mi," fæljən sɛd, pɹɑpɪŋ ðə dɔɹ tə ðə hɔl oʊpən wɪð ə tʃɛɹ. ðət lɛt səm ə ðə spɑɹs wɔɹmθ lik aʊt, bʌt ʃi wəd wɑnə bi eɪbəl tə hɪɹ ɪf ʃieɪn sʌmən hɝ.

"He gave no name, not to me," Falion said, propping the door to the hall open with a chair. That let some of the sparse warmth leak out, but she would want to be able to hear if Shiaine summoned her.

əɹ meɪbi ʃi wɑntəd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wɑz nɑɾ eɪbəl tə ivzdʒɹɑp. "ə lin mæn, tɔl ən hɑɹd, wɪð ðə lʊk ʌv ə soʊlʒɝ. ən ɔfəsɝ ə səm ɹæŋk, meɪbi ə noʊbəl, baɪ hɪz mænɝ, ən ændɔɝən baɪ hɪz æksɛns. hi simz ɪntɛlədʒən ən kɔʃəs. hɪz kloʊðz ɑɹ kwaɪt pleɪn, ðoʊ kɑsli, ən i wɛɹz noʊ ɹɪŋz əɹ pɪnz." fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə teɪbəl, ʃi tɝn tə wʌn ə ðə tɔl oʊpən-fɹʌn kæbənəts bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ tə ðə hɔlweɪ ən æɾəd ə sɛkən pjuɾɝ kʌp tə ðə wʌn i hæd sɛɾ aʊt fəɹ hɪmsɛlf. ɪt hæd nɛvɝ əkɝd tə hɪm tə sɛɾ aʊt tu. bæɾ ɪnʌf i hæd tə fɪks ɪz oʊn waɪn. ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃi wɑz ðə meɪd. bʌt ʃi tʊk ə tʃɛɹ ət ðə teɪbəl ən pʊʃt ðə dɪʃ ə spaɪsəz əweɪ fɹəm əɹ fəɹ ɔl ðə wɝld əz ðoʊ ʃi ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪm tə sɝv.

Or maybe she wanted to make sure the other woman was not able to eavesdrop. "A lean man, tall and hard, with the look of a soldier. An officer of some rank, maybe a noble, by his manner, and Andoran by his accents. He seems intelligent and cautious. His clothes are quite plain, though costly, and he wears no rings or pins." Frowning at the table, she turned to one of the tall open-front cabinets beside the door to the hallway and added a second pewter cup to the one he had set out for himself. It had never occurred to him to set out two. Bad enough he had to fix his own wine. Aes Sedai or no Aes Sedai, she was the maid. But she took a chair at the table and pushed the dish of spices away from her for all the world as though she expected him to serve.

"ʃieɪn hæd tu vɪzəɾɝz jɛstɝdeɪ, haʊɛvɝ, mɔɹ kɛɹləs ðən ðɪs fɛloʊ," ʃi wɛn ɑn.

"Shiaine had two visitors yesterday, however, more careless than this fellow," she went on.

"wʌn, ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, hæd ðə ɡoʊldən bɔɹz ə sɑɝən ɑn ðə kʌf ə hɪz ɡɔnləts. hi pɹɑbli θɔt noʊ wʌn wəd noʊɾəs smɔl-wɝk, ɪf i θɔɾ əɾ ɔl. ə plʌmp, jɛloʊ-hɛɹd mæn ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz u lʊk daʊn ɪz noʊz əɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, kəmpləmɛntɪd ðə waɪn əz ðoʊ sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ə disən vɪntɪdʒ ɪn ðə haʊs, ən wɑntəd ʃieɪn tə hæv mi biɾən fəɹ ʃoʊɪŋ ɪnsəfɪʃən ɹɪspɛkt." ʃi sɛɾ ivən ðəɾ ɪn ə koʊld, mɛʒɝd vɔɪs. ði oʊnli taɪm ʃi hæd hæɾ ɛni hiɾ ɪn əɹ wɑz wən ʃieɪn pʊt ðə stʃɹæp tə hɝ. hi hæd hɝɾ əɹ haʊl ɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf ðɛn. "ə kʌntʃɹimən u hæz sɛldəm bɪn tə keɪɛmlɪn bʌt bɪlivz i noʊz haʊ hɪz bɛɾɝz bɪheɪv, aɪ ʃəd seɪ. jə kən mɑɹk ɪm baɪ ə wɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz tʃɪn ən ə smɔl hæf-mun skɑɹ bɪsaɪɾ ɪz lɛft aɪ. ðə fɛloʊ ɪn ði æftɝnun wɑz ʃɔɹɾ ən dɑɹk, wɪð ə ʃɑɹp noʊz ən wɛɹi aɪz, ən noʊ skɑɹz əɹ mɑɹks aɪ kəd si, ðoʊ hi wɔɹ ə ɹɪŋ wɪð ə skwɛɹ ɡɑɹnəɾ ɑn ɪz lɛf hænd. hi wɑz spɛɹɪŋ wɪð wɝdz, vɛɹi maɪnfəl tə ɡɪv əweɪ nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðə lɪɾəl aɪ hɝd, bʌɾ i kæɹiɾ ə dæɡɝ wɪð ðə fɔɹ munz ə haʊs mɑɹn ɑn ðə pɑməl." foʊldɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz, hænlən lin əɡɛns ðə saɪɾ ə ðə faɪɝ pleɪs ən kɛpt ɪz feɪs smuð dɪspaɪɾ ə dɪzaɪɝ tə skaʊl. hi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ðət ðə plæn wɑz fəɹ ɪleɪn tə teɪk ðə θɹoʊn, ðoʊ wʌt keɪm æftɝ ɹɪmeɪn ə mɪstɝi. ʃi hæd bɪn pɹɑməs tə hɪm əz ə kwin. wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ʃi wɔɹ ə kɹaʊn wən i tʊk əɹ mæɾɝd nɑɾ ə wɪt tə hɪm ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə spaɪs ɪɾ æɾəd - bɹeɪkɪŋ ðət lɔŋ-lɛɡəd bɪt tə sæɾəl wəd bi pjʊɹ plɛʒɝ ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn ə fɑɹmɝz dɔɾɝ, ɪspɛʃli æftɝ ðə tʃɪt kʌɾ ə slaɪs ɔf ɪm tədeɪ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɔl ðoʊz ʌðɝ wɪmən! - bʌt dilɪŋz wɪð sɑɝən ən mɑɹn sɛd meɪbi ɪleɪn wɑz mɛn tə daɪ ʌnkɹoʊnd. meɪbi, ɪn spaɪɾ ʌv ɔl ðə pɹɑməsəz ðəɾ i kəd ɹɑmp ə kwin, hi hæd bɪn pleɪst wɛɹ i wɑz soʊ hi kəd kɪl əɹ ət səm səlɛktəd moʊmənt, wən əɹ dɛθ wəd bɹɪŋ səm spəsɪfɪk ɹɪzʌl sɔt baɪ ʃieɪn. əɹ ɹæðɝ baɪ ðə tʃoʊzən u hæd ɡɪvən əɹ əɹ ɔɹɾɝz. mɔɹaɪɾɪn, ðə fɛloʊ wɑz kɔld, ə neɪm hænlən hæd nɛvɝ hɝd bɪfɔɹ kɑm ɪŋ tə ðɪs haʊs.

"One, in the morning, had the Golden Boars of Sarand on the cuff of his gauntlets. He probably thought no one would notice small-work, if he thought at all. A plump, yellow-haired man in his middle years who looked down his nose at everything, complimented the wine as though surprised to find a decent vintage in the house, and wanted Shiaine to have me beaten for showing insufficient respect." She said even that in a cold, measured voice. The only time she had had any heat in her was when Shiaine put the strap to her. He had heard her howl right enough then. "A countryman who has seldom been to Caemlyn but believes he knows how his betters behave, I should say. You can mark him by a wart on his chin and a small half-moon scar beside his left eye. The fellow in the afternoon was short and dark, with a sharp nose and wary eyes, and no scars or marks I could see, though he wore a ring with a square garnet on his left hand. He was sparing with words, very mindful to give away nothing in the little I heard, but he carried a dagger with the Four Moons of House Marne on the pommel." Folding his arms, Hanlon leaned against the side of the fire place and kept his face smooth despite a desire to scowl. He had been sure that the plan was for Elayne to take the throne, though what came after remained a mystery. She had been promised to him as a queen. Whether or not she wore a crown when he took her mattered not a whit to him except for the spice it added - breaking that long-legged bit to saddle would be pure pleasure if she had been a farmer's daughter, especially after the chit cut a slice off him today in front of all those other women! - but dealings with Sarand and Marne said maybe Elayne was meant to die uncrowned. Maybe, in spite of all the promises that he could romp a queen, he had been placed where he was so he could kill her at some selected moment, when her death would bring some specific result sought by Shiaine. Or rather by the Chosen who had given her her orders. Moridin, the fellow was called, a name Hanlon had never heard before com ing to this house.

ðət dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌbəl hɪm. ɪf ə mæn hæd ðə nɝv tə kɔl hɪmsɛlf wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən, hænlən wɑz nɑt ful ɪnʌf tə kwɛstʃən ɪt. ðə laɪklihʊd ðəɾ i wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə dæɡɝ ɪn ðɪs dɪd tʃɹʌbəl hɪm. soʊ lɔŋ əz ə dæɡɝ dɪd ðə dʒɑb, wʌt mæɾɝ ɪf ɪt bɹoʊk ɪn ðə duɪŋ? mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ tə bi ðə fɪst ɑn ðə hɪl ðən ðə bleɪd.

That did not trouble him. If a man had the nerve to call himself one of the Chosen, Hanlon was not fool enough to question it. The likelihood that he was no more than a dagger in this did trouble him. So long as a dagger did the job, what matter if it broke in the doing? Much better to be the fist on the hilt than the blade.

"dɪd jə si ɛni ɡoʊl tʃeɪnʒ hænz?" hi æskt. "dɪd jə hɪɹ ɛniθɪŋ?"

"Did you see any gold change hands?" he asked. "Did you hear anything?"

"aɪ wəɾ əv sɛd," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd θɪnli. "æn baɪ əɹ əɡɹimənt, ɪts maɪ tɝn fəɹ ə kwɛstʃən." hi mænədʒ tə mæsk ɪz ɪɹɪteɪʃən bɪhaɪn ən ɪkspɛktən lʊk. ðə ful wʊmən ɔlweɪz æskt əbaʊt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə pæləs əɹ ðoʊz ʃi kɔl ðə kɪn, əɹ əbaʊt ðə si foʊk. sɪli kwɛstʃənz. hu wɑz fɹɛnli wɪð hum, ən u ənfɹɛnli. hu ɪkstʃeɪnʒd pɹaɪvət wɝdz ən u əvɔɪɾəd wʌn ənʌðɝ.

"I would have said," she replied thinly. "And by our agreement, it is my turn for a question." He managed to mask his irritation behind an expectant look. The fool woman always asked about the Aes Sedai in the palace or those she called the Kin, or about the Sea Folk. Silly questions. Who was friendly with whom, and who unfriendly. Who exchanged private words and who avoided one another.

wʌɾ i hæd hɝɾ əm seɪ. əz ɪf i hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɪz taɪm bʌt lɝk ɝaʊn ðə hɔlweɪz spaɪɪŋ ɑn ðɛm. hi nɛvɝ laɪd tə hɝ - ðəɹ wɑz tu mʌtʃ tʃæns ʃi maɪt lɝn ðə tʃɹuθ, ivən maɪɹd hɪɹ ɪn ðɪs haʊs əz ə meɪd; ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, æftɝ ɔl - bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ dɪfəkəl tə kʌm ʌp wɪð sʌmθɪŋ i hæd nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi toʊl hɝ, ən ʃi wɑz æɾəmənt ðəɾ i ɡɪv ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ɪf i ɪkspɛktəd tə ɹəsiv ɛni. stɪl, hi hæɾ ə fju tɪdbɪts tə ɔfɝ tədeɪ, səm ə ðə si foʊk ɡoʊɪŋ ɔf, ən ðə hoʊl lɑɾ ə ðɛm dʒʌmpɪŋ fəɹ moʊst ə ðə deɪ əz ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ aɪsɪkəlz ʃʌv daʊn ðɛɹ bæks. ʃi wəɾ əv tə sɛɾəl fəɹ ðæt. wʌɾ i niɾəd tə noʊ wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, nɑt blʌɾi ɡɑsəp.

What he had heard them say. As if he had nothing to do with his time but lurk around the hallways spying on them. He never lied to her - there was too much chance she might learn the truth, even mired here in this house as a maid; she was Aes Sedai, after all - but it was growing difficult to come up with something he had not already told her, and she was adamant that he give information if he expected to receive any. Still, he had a few tidbits to offer today, some of the Sea Folk going off, and the whole lot of them jumping for most of the day as if they had icicles shoved down their backs. She would have to settle for that. What he needed to know was important, not bloody gossip.

bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd ɡɛɾ əɹ kwɛstʃən aʊt, ðoʊ, ðə dɔɹ tə ði aʊtsaɪɾ oʊpənd. mɹɛlɪn wɑz lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf ðəɾ i ɔlmoʊs fɪl ðə dɔɹweɪ, jɛɾ aɪsi koʊl stɪl swɝld ɪn, ə ɡʌs ðət meɪd ðə smɔl faɪɝ dæns ən sɛn spɑɹks flaɪɪŋ ʌp ðə tʃɪmni əntɪl ðə bɪɡ mæn pʊʃt ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt. hi ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ðəɾ i fɛl ðə tʃɪl, bʌt ðɛn, hɪz bɹaʊn koʊt lʊk θɪk əz tu kloʊks. bɪsaɪdz, ðə mæn wɑz nɑɾ oʊnli ðə saɪz ʌv ən ɑks, hi hæd ðə wɪts ʌv wʌn. sɛɾɪŋ ə tɔl wʊɾən mʌɡ daʊn ɑn ðə teɪbəl wɪð ə θʌmp, hi tʌkt ɪz θʌmz bɪhaɪn ɪz waɪd bɛlt ən aɪd hænlən ɹɪzɛnfəli. "ju mɛsɪŋ wɪð maɪ wʊmən?" hi mʌɾɝd.

Before she could get her question out, though, the door to the outside opened. Murellin was large enough that he almost filled the doorway, yet icy cold still swirled in, a gust that made the small fire dance and sent sparks flying up the chimney until the big man pushed the door shut. He gave no sign that he felt the chill, but then, his brown coat looked thick as two cloaks. Besides, the man was not only the size of an ox, he had the wits of one. Setting a tall wooden mug down on the table with a thump, he tucked his thumbs behind his wide belt and eyed Hanlon resentfully. "You messing with my woman?" he muttered.

hænlən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. nɑt fɹəm ɛni fɪɹ ə mɹɛlɪn, nɑt wɪð ði ɑf ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə teɪbəl.

Hanlon gave a start. Not from any fear of Murellin, not with the oaf on the other side of the table.

wʌt stɑɹɾəld ɪm wɑz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ lipɪŋ fɹəm əɹ tʃɛɹ ən snætʃɪŋ ʌp ðə waɪn pɪtʃɝ. dʌmpɪŋ ɪn ðə dʒɪnʒɝ ən kloʊvz, ʃi æɾəd ə skup ə hʌni ən swɝl ðə pɪtʃɝ ɝaʊn əz ɪf ðət wɑz gɑnə mɪks ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ðən juzd ə foʊld ə hɝ skɝt tə pʊl ðə poʊkɝ fɹəm ðə faɪɝ ən ʃʌv ɪɾ ɪndə ðə waɪn wɪθaʊt tʃɛkɪŋ tə si wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz hɑɾ ɪnʌf jɛt. ʃi nɛvɝ lʊkt ɪn mɹɛlɪnz dɝɛkʃən əɾ ɔl.

What startled him was the Aes Sedai leaping from her chair and snatching up the wine pitcher. Dumping in the ginger and cloves, she added a scoop of honey and swirled the pitcher around as if that was going to mix everything, then used a fold of her skirt to pull the poker from the fire and shove it into the wine without checking to see whether it was hot enough yet. She never looked in Murellin's direction at all.

"jɔɹ wʊmən?" hænlən sɛd kɛɹfəli. ðəɾ ɝn ə smɝk fɹəm ði ʌðɝ mæn.

"Your woman?" Hanlon said carefully. That earned a smirk from the other man.

"nɪɹ ɪnʌf. ðə leɪɾi fɪɡjɝɾ aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl jus wʌt jə ɑɹənt. ɛniweɪ, fæli ən mi kip itʃ ʌðɝ wɔɹm naɪts." mɹɛlɪn stɑɹɾəd ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl, stɪl ɡɹɪnɪŋ, bʌɾ ət ðə wʊmən, naʊ.

"Near enough. The Lady figured I might as well use what you aren't. Anyway, Fally and me keep each other warm nights." Murellin started around the table, still grinning, but at the woman, now.

ə ʃaʊɾ ɛkoʊɾ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ, ən i stɑpt wɪð ə saɪ, hɪz ɡɹɪn feɪɾɪŋ.

A shout echoed in the hallway, and he stopped with a sigh, his grin fading.

"fæljən!" ʃieɪnz dɪstən vɔɪs kɔld ʃɑɹpli. "bɹɪŋ hænlən ʌp naʊ ən bi kwɪk əbaʊɾ ɪt!" fæljən sɛt ðə pɪtʃɝ ɑn ðə teɪbəl hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə slɑp waɪn oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪm ən wɑz hɛɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə dɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃieɪn fɪnɪʃt. wən ði ʌðɝ wʊmən spoʊk, fæljən dʒʌmpt.

"Falion!" Shiaine's distant voice called sharply. "Bring Hanlon up now and be quick about it!" Falion set the pitcher on the table hard enough to slop wine over the rim and was heading for the door before Shiaine finished. When the other woman spoke, Falion jumped.

hænlən dʒʌmp tu, ɪf fəɹ ə dɪfɹən ɹizən. kætʃɪŋ ʌp tə hɝ, hi sizd əɹ ɑɹm əz ʃi tʊk ðə fɝst stɛp ɑn ðə stɛɹz. ə kwɪk ɡlæns bæk ʃoʊd ðə kɪtʃən dɔɹ kloʊzd. meɪbi mɹɛlɪn dɪd fil ðə koʊld. hi kɛpt ɪz vɔɪs loʊ ɛniweɪ. "wʌt wɑz ðəɾ ɔl əbaʊt?"

Hanlon jumped too, if for a different reason. Catching up to her, he seized her arm as she took the first step on the stairs. A quick glance back showed the kitchen door closed. Maybe Murellin did feel the cold. He kept his voice low anyway. "What was that all about?"

"ɪɾ ɪz nʌn ə jəɹ bɪznəs," ʃi sɛd kɝtli. "kæn jə ɡɛt mi sʌmθɪŋ ðət wɪl meɪk ɪm slip? sʌmθɪŋ aɪ kən pʊɾ ɪn ɪz eɪl əɹ waɪn? hɪl dʒɹɪŋk ɛniθɪŋ, haʊɛvɝ ɪt teɪsts." "ɪf ʃieɪn θɪŋks aɪm nɑɾ oʊbeɪɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz, ɪt blʌɾi wɛl ɪz maɪ bɪznəs, ən jə ɔt tə si ɪt ðət weɪ, tu, ɪf juv tu blʌɾi θɔts tə ɹʌb təɡɛðɝ."

"It is none of your business," she said curtly. "Can you get me something that will make him sleep? Something I can put in his ale or wine? He will drink anything, however it tastes." "If Shiaine thinks I'm not obeying orders, it bloody well is my business, and you ought to see it that way, too, if you have two bloody thoughts to rub together."

ʃi tɪltəɾ əɹ hɛd, stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ðət lɔŋ noʊz ət hɪm, koʊld əz ə fɪʃ. "ðɪs əz nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ju. əz fɑɹ əz ʃieɪn ɪz kənsɝnd, əl stɪl bɪlɔŋ tə jə wən jə ɑɹ hɪɹ. jə si, sɝɾən mæɾɝz tʃeɪnʒd." sʌɾənli, sʌmθɪŋ ənsin ɡɹæspt ɪz ɹɪs taɪtli ən pʊld ɪz hæn fɹəm əɹ sliv. sʌmθɪŋ ɛls lætʃt ɑn tə hɪz θɹoʊt, skwizɪŋ tɪl i kəd nɑt dʒɹɔ bɹɛθ.

She tilted her head, staring down that long nose at him, cold as a fish. "This has nothing to do with you. As far as Shiaine is concerned, I will still belong to you when you are here. You see, certain matters changed." Suddenly, something unseen grasped his wrist tightly and pulled his hand from her sleeve. Something else latched on to his throat, squeezing till he could not draw breath.

fjuɾɪlli, hi skɹæbəld lɛft-hændəd fəɹ ɪz dæɡɝ. hɝ toʊn ɹɪmeɪn kul. "aɪ θɔt sɝɾən ʌðɝ mæɾɝz ʃəd tʃeɪnʒ əkɔɹɾɪŋli, bʌt ʃieɪn dʌz nɑt si θɪŋz lɑdʒɪkli. ʃi sɛz ðət wən ðə ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ mɔɹaɪɾɪn wɪʃɪz maɪ pʌnɪʃmən lɛsənd, hɪl seɪ soʊ. mɔɹaɪɾɪn ɡeɪv mi tə hɝ.

Futilely, he scrabbled left-handed for his dagger. Her tone remained cool. "I thought certain other matters should change accordingly, but Shiaine does not see things logically. She says that when the Great Master Moridin wishes my punishment lessened, he will say so. Moridin gave me to her.

mɹɛlɪn ɪz əɹ weɪ ʌv meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ aɪ ʌndɝstæn ðæt. hɝ weɪ ʌv meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ aɪ noʊ ðəɾ aɪm əɹ dɔɡ əntɪl ʃi sɛz ʌðɝwaɪz." əbɹʌpli ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, ən ðə pɹɛʃɝ vænɪʃt fɹəm ɪz ɹɪst ən θɹoʊt. ɛɹ hæd nɛvɝ teɪstəd soʊ swit. "ju kən ɡɛt wʌɾ aɪ æsk fɔɹ?" ʃi sɛd, əz kɑm əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt dʒʌs tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl ɪm wɪð ðə blʌɾi paʊɝ. dʒʌs ðə θɔt ðət ðət hæd bɪn tʌtʃɪŋ ɪm meɪɾ ɪz skɪn kɹɔl.

Murellin is her way of making sure I understand that. Her way of making sure I know that I am her dog until she says otherwise." Abruptly she drew a deep breath, and the pressure vanished from his wrist and throat. Air had never tasted so sweet. "You can get what I ask for?" she said, as calm as if she had not just tried to kill him with the bloody Power. Just the thought that that had been touching him made his skin crawl.

"aɪ kən . . . " hi bɪɡæn hɔɹsli, ən stɑp tə swɑloʊ, ɹʌbɪŋ əɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. ɪt fɛlt əz ðoʊ ɪt hæd bɪn sɪntʃt ɪn ə hæŋmənz nus. "aɪ kən ɡɛt jə sʌmθɪŋ ðət wɪl pʊɾ ɪm ɪn ə slip hɪl nɛvɝ weɪk fɹʌm." əz sun əz ɪt wɑz seɪf, hi wɑz gɑnə ɡʌɾ əɹ laɪk ə ɡus.

"I can . . . " he began hoarsely, and stopped to swallow, rubbing at his throat. It felt as though it had been cinched in a hangman's noose. "I can get you something that will put him in a sleep he'll never wake from." As soon as it was safe, he was going to gut her like a goose.

ʃi snɔɹɾɪd dɝɪsɪvli. "aɪ wəd bi ðə fɝst ʃieɪn səspɛktəd, ən aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl kʌt maɪ oʊn ɹɪsts əz əbdʒɛk tə ɛniθɪŋ ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə du. ɪɾəl bi ɪnʌf ɪf i slips ðə naɪts θɹu. liv ðə θɪŋkɪŋ tə mi, ən wɪl boʊθ bi ðə bɛɾɝ fəɹ ɪt."

She snorted derisively. "I would be the first Shiaine suspected, and I might as well cut my own wrists as object to anything she decided to do. It will be enough if he sleeps the nights through. Leave the thinking to me, and we will both be the better for it."

ɹɛstɪŋ ə hæn ɑn ðə kɑɹv nuəlpoʊst, ʃi ɡlænst ʌp ðə stɛɹz. "kʌm. wən ʃi sɛz naʊ, ʃi minz naʊ." ə pɪɾi hi kəd nɑt hæŋ əɹ ʌp laɪk ə ɡus tə weɪt fəɹ ðə naɪf. fɑloʊɪŋ hɝ, hɪz buts θʌmpt ɑn ðə tʃɹɛdz, sɛndɪŋ ə klæɾɝ θɹu ði ɛntʃɹi hɔl, ən ɪt stʃɹʌk ɪm ðəɾ i hæd nɑt hɝd ðə vɪzəɾɝ liv. ənlɛs ðə haʊs hæd səm sikɹət weɪ aʊɾ i dɪd nɑt noʊ, ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ, ðə wʌn ɪn ðə kɪtʃən, ən ə sɛkən ət ðə bæk ðət kəɾ oʊnli bi ɹitʃt baɪ pæsɪŋ ðə kɪtʃən. soʊ ɪt simd i wɑz tə mit ðɪs soʊlʒɝ. meɪbi ɪt wɑz səpoʊz tə kʌm əz ə sɝpɹaɪz.

Resting a hand on the carved newelpost, she glanced up the stairs. "Come. When she says now, she means now." A pity he could not hang her up like a goose to wait for the knife. Following her, his boots thumped on the treads, sending a clatter through the entry hall, and it struck him that he had not heard the visitor leave. Unless the house had some secret way out he did not know, there was only the front door, the one in the kitchen, and a second at the back that could only be reached by passing the kitchen. So it seemed he was to meet this soldier. Maybe it was supposed to come as a surprise.

sɝəptɪʃəsli, hi izd ɪz dæɡɝ ɪn ɪts ʃiθ.

Surreptitiously, he eased his dagger in its sheath.

əz ɪkspɛktəd, ðə fɹʌn sɪɾɪŋ ɹum hæɾ ə faɪn bleɪz bɝnɪŋ əweɪ ɪn ðə waɪd faɪɝpleɪs ə blu-veɪn mɑɹbəl. ɪt wɑz ə ɹum wɝθ ðə luɾɪŋ, wɪð si foʊk pɔɹsələn veɪsəz ɑn ðə ɡɪlt-ɛdʒ saɪd teɪbəlz, ən tæpəstʃɹiz ən kɑɹpəts ðət wəd fɛtʃ ə pɹɪɾi pɹaɪs. ɪksɛp ðət wʌn ə ðə kɑɹpəts wɑz laɪkli wɝθləs, naʊ. ə loʊ blæŋkət-kʌvɝd maʊn leɪ nɪɹ ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum, ən ɪf ðə fɛloʊ ðət meɪɾ ɪt hæd nɑt steɪn ðə kɑɹpət wɪð ɪz blʌd, hænlən wəɾ it ðə buts stɪkɪŋ aʊt fɹəm wʌn ɛnd.

As expected, the front sitting room had a fine blaze burning away in the wide fireplace of blue-veined marble. It was a room worth the looting, with Sea Folk porcelain vases on the gilt-edged side tables, and tapestries and carpets that would fetch a pretty price. Except that one of the carpets was likely worthless, now. A low blanket-covered mound lay near the middle of the room, and if the fellow that made it had not stained the carpet with his blood, Hanlon would eat the boots sticking out from one end.

ʃieɪn hɝsɛlf wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə kɑɹvd ɑɹmtʃɛɹ, ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən ɪn ɡoʊld-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd blu sɪlk wɪð ən ɔɹneɪt bɛlt ʌv woʊvən ɡoʊld ən ə hɛvi ɡoʊl nɛkləs ɝaʊn əɹ slɪm nɛk. ɡlɔsi bɹaʊn hɛɹ hʌŋ bɪloʊ hɝ ʃoʊldɝz ivən kɑɾ ɪn ə nɛɾ ʌv ɪntʃɹəkət leɪs. ʃi lʊk dɛləkəɾ ət fɝst ɡlæns, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ vʌlpaɪn əbaʊɾ əɹ feɪs, ən əɹ smaɪl nɛvɝ tʌtʃt ðoʊz bɪɡ bɹaʊn aɪz. ʃi wɑz juzɪŋ ə leɪs-ɛdʒ hæŋkɝtʃɪf tə klin ə smɔl dæɡɝ kæpt wɪð ə faɪɝdʒɹɑp ɑn ðə pɑməl. "ɡoʊ tɛl mɹɛlɪn ðəɾ əl əv ə . . . bʌndəl . . . fəɹ ɪm tə dɪspoʊz ə leɪɾɝ, fæljən," ʃi sɛd kɑmli.

Shiaine herself was sitting in a carved armchair, a pretty woman in gold-embroidered blue silk with an ornate belt of woven gold and a heavy gold necklace around her slim neck. Glossy brown hair hung below her shoulders even caught in a net of intricate lace. She looked delicate at first glance, but there was something vulpine about her face, and her smile never touched those big brown eyes. She was using a lace-edged handkerchief to clean a small dagger capped with a firedrop on the pommel. "Go tell Murellin that I will have a . . . bundle . . . for him to dispose of later, Falion," she said calmly.

fæljənz feɪs ɹɪmeɪn smuð əz pɑlɪʃt mɑɹbəl, bʌt ʃi meɪɾ ə kɝtsi ðət læk lɪɾəl ə kɹɪŋɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi skʌɾəld aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum əɾ ə ɹʌn.

Falion's face remained smooth as polished marble, but she made a curtsy that lacked little of cringing before she scuttled out of the room at a run.

wɑtʃɪŋ ðə wʊmən ən əɹ dæɡɝ fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, hænlən muv tə ðə kʌvɝd maʊn ən bɛn tə lɪft ə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə blæŋkət. ɡleɪz blu aɪz stɛɹɾ aʊɾ ʌv ə feɪs ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn hɑɹd, əlaɪv. ðə dɛɾ ɔlweɪz lʊk sɑftɝ. əpɛɹənli hi hæd bɪn niðɝ əz kɔʃəs nɔɹ əz ɪntɛlədʒən əz fæljən θɔt hɪm. hænlən lɛt ðə blæŋkət fɔl ən stʃɹeɪɾənd. "hi sɛd sʌmθɪŋ jə əbdʒɛktəd tə, maɪ leɪɾi?" hi sɛd maɪldli. "hu wɑz hi?" "hi sɛd sɛvɹəl θɪŋz aɪ əbdʒɛktəd tə." ʃi hɛld əɹ dæɡɝ ʌp, stʌɾiɪŋ ðə smɔl bleɪd tə bi ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz klin, ðən slɪɾ ɪɾ ɪndə ə ɡoʊld-wɝkt ʃiθ əɾ əɹ weɪst.

Watching the woman and her dagger from the corner of his eye, Hanlon moved to the covered mound and bent to lift a corner of the blanket. Glazed blue eyes stared out of a face that might have been hard, alive. The dead always looked softer. Apparently he had been neither as cautious nor as intelligent as Falion thought him. Hanlon let the blanket fall and straightened. "He said something you objected to, my Lady?" he said mildly. "Who was he?" "He said several things I objected to." She held her dagger up, studying the small blade to be sure it was clean, then slid it into a gold-worked sheath at her waist.

"tɛl mi, ɪz ɪleɪnz tʃaɪl jʊɹz?" "aɪ doʊnt noʊ hu fɑðɝd ðə wɛlp," hi sɛd ɹaɪli. "waɪ, maɪ leɪɾi? dʒju θɪŋk aɪd ɡoʊ sɑft? ðə læs tʃɪɾ u kleɪmd aɪd ɡɑɾən ə tʃaɪld ɑn hɝ, aɪ stʌft əɹ daʊn ə wɛl tə kul əɹ hɛɾ ən meɪd ʃʊɹ ʃi steɪd ðɛɹ." ðəɹ wɝ ə lɔŋ-nɛk sɪlvɝ waɪn pɪtʃɝ ən tu tʃeɪst sɪlvɝ kʌps sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə tʃɹeɪ ɑn wʌn ə ðə saɪd teɪbəlz. "ɪz ðɪs seɪf?" hi æskt, piɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə kʌps. boʊθ hæd waɪn ɪn ðə bɑɾəm, bʌɾ ə lɪɾəl ədɪʃən tə wʌn wʊɾə tɝn ðə dɛd mæn ɪndə izi pɹeɪ.

"Tell me, is Elayne's child yours?" "I don't know who fathered the whelp," he said wryly. "Why, my Lady? Do you think I'd go soft? The last chit who claimed I'd gotten a child on her, I stuffed her down a well to cool her head and made sure she stayed there." There were a long-necked silver wine pitcher and two chased silver cups sitting on a tray on one of the side tables. "Is this safe?" he asked, peering into the cups. Both had wine in the bottom, but a little addition to one would have turned the dead man into easy prey.

"kætʃɹɛl moʊsənən, ən aɪɝənmɑŋɡɝz dɔɾɝ fɹəm mɹoʊn," ðə wʊmən sɛd, dʒʌst əz smuðli əz ɪf ɪt wɝ kɑmən nɑlədʒ, ən i vɛɹi nɪɹli flɪntʃt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "ju splɪɾ əɹ hɛɾ oʊpən wɪð ə ɹɑk bɪfɔɹ jə pɪtʃt əɹ daʊn, noʊ daʊt tə spɛɹ əɹ dʒɹaʊnɪŋ." haʊ dɪd ʃi noʊ ðə wɛnks neɪm, mʌtʃ lɛs əbaʊt ðə ɹɑk? hi hæd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əɹ neɪm hɪmsɛlf. "noʊ, aɪ daʊt jə wəd ɡoʊ sɑft, bʌɾ aɪ wəd heɪt tə θɪŋk jə wɝ kɪsɪŋ ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn wɪθaʊt lɛɾɪŋ mi noʊ. aɪ wəd pjʊɹli heɪt ðæt."

"Catrelle Mosenain, an ironmonger's daughter from Maerone," the woman said, just as smoothly as if it were common knowledge, and he very nearly flinched in surprise. "You split her head open with a rock before you pitched her down, no doubt to spare her drowning." How did she know the wench's name, much less about the rock? He had not remembered her name himself. "No, I doubt you would go soft, but I would hate to think you were kissing the Lady Elayne without letting me know. I would purely hate that."

sʌɾənli ʃi fɹaʊn ət ðə blʌdsteɪn hæŋkɝtʃɪf ɪn əɹ hæn ən ɹoʊz ɡɹeɪsfəli tə ɡlaɪd tə ðə faɪɝpleɪs ən tɔs ɪɾ ɪndə ðə fleɪmz. ʃi stʊd ðəɹ wɔɹmɪŋ hɝsɛlf, nɛvɝ ivən ɡlænsɪŋ ɪn ɪz dɝɛkʃən. "kæn jə ɝeɪnʒ fəɹ səm ə ðə sintʃæn wɪmən tə ɪskeɪp? bɛst ɪf ɪt kən bi boʊθ ðoʊz kɔl sʌldəm ən ðə wʌnz kɔl deɪmeɪn" ʃi stʌmbəld ə lɪɾəl oʊvɝ ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ wɝdz, "bʌɾ ɪf jə kæn də boʊθ, ðən ə fju ʌv ðə sʌldəm ʃəd du. ðəl fɹi səm ə ði ʌðɝz."

Suddenly she frowned at the bloodstained handkerchief in her hand and rose gracefully to glide to the fireplace and toss it into the flames. She stood there warming herself, never even glancing in his direction. "Can you arrange for some of the Seanchan women to escape? Best if it can be both those called sul'dam and the ones called damane" she stumbled a little over the strange words, "but if you can't do both, then a few of the sul'dam should do. They will free some of the others."

"meɪbi." blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz, ʃi wɑz dænsɪŋ fɹəm wʌn θɪŋ tə ənʌðɝ wɝs ðən fæljən tənaɪt. "ɪt woʊn bi izi, maɪ leɪɾi. ðəɹ ɔl ɡɑɹɾəd kloʊs."

"Maybe." Blood and bloody ashes, she was dancing from one thing to another worse than Falion tonight. "It won't be easy, my Lady. They're all guarded close."

"aɪ dɪdn æsk wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz izi," ʃi sɛd, stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə fleɪmz. "kæn jə ʃɪft ɡɑɹdz əweɪ fɹəm ðə fud wɛɹhaʊzɪz? ɪt wəd pliz mi ɪf səm ə ðoʊz æktʃəli  aɪm æm taɪɝɾ ʌv ətɛmps ðəɾ ɔlweɪz feɪl."

"I didn't ask whether it was easy," she said, staring into the flames. "Can you shift guards away from the food warehouses? It would please me if some of those actually burned. I am tired of attempts that always fail."

"ðæɾ aɪ kænɑt du," hi mʌɾɝd. "nɑɾ ənlɛs jə ɪkspɛk mi tə ɡoʊ ɪndə haɪɾɪŋ ɹaɪɾ æftɝ. ðeɪ kip ə ɹɛkɝɾ ʌv ɔɹɾɝz ðət wəd meɪk ə kɛɹhinɪn wɪns. ən ɪt wʊdn də ɛni ɡʊɾ ɛniweɪ, nɑt wɪð ðoʊz blʌɾi ɡeɪtweɪz bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪn mɔɹ wæɡənz ɛvɹi blʌɾi deɪ." ɪn tʃɹuθ, hi wɑz nɑt sɑɹi fəɹ ðæt. kwizi oʊvɝ ðə minz juzd, sɝɾənli, bʌt nɑt sɑɹi. hi ɪkspɛktəd ðə pæləs wəd bi ðə læs pleɪs ɪn keɪɛmlɪn tə ɡoʊ hʌŋɡɹi ɪn ɛni keɪs, bʌɾ i hæd lɪvd aʊt sidʒəz ɑn boʊθ saɪdz ə ðə laɪnz, ən i hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ʌv ɛvɝ bɔɪlɪŋ ɪz buts fəɹ sup əɡɛn. ʃieɪn wɑntəd faɪɝz, ðoʊ.

"That I cannot do," he muttered. "Not unless you expect me to go into hiding right after. They keep a record of orders that would make a Cairhienin wince. And it wouldn't do any good anyway, not with those bloody gateways bringing in more wagons every bloody day." In truth, he was not sorry for that. Queasy over the means used, certainly, but not sorry. He expected the palace would be the last place in Caemlyn to go hungry in any case, but he had lived out sieges on both sides of the lines, and he had no intention of ever boiling his boots for soup again. Shiaine wanted fires, though.

"ənʌðɝ ænsɝ aɪ dɪd nɑɾ æsk fɔɹ." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, stɪl lʊkɪŋ ɪndə ðə faɪɝpleɪs, nɑɾ ət hɪm. "bʌt pɝhæps sʌmθɪŋ kən bi dʌn ðɛɹ. haʊ kloʊs ɑɹ jə tə æktʃəli  . . . ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ɪleɪnz əfɛkʃənz?" ʃi fɪnɪʃt pɹɪmli.

"Another answer I did not ask for." She shook her head, still looking into the fireplace, not at him. "But perhaps something can be done there. How close are you to actually . . . enjoying Elayne's affections?" she finished primly.

"kloʊsɝ ðən ðə deɪ aɪ ɝaɪvd ɪn ðə pæləs," hi ɡɹaʊld, ɡlaʊɝɪŋ əɾ əɹ bæk. hi tʃɹaɪd nɛvɝ tə əfɛn ðoʊz ðə tʃoʊzən hæd sɛɾ əbʌv hɪm, bʌt ðə tʃɪt wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ hɪm. hi kəd snæp ðət slɛndɝ nɛk laɪk ə twɪɡ! tə kip ɪz hænz fɹəm əɹ θɹoʊt, hi fɪld wʌn ə ðə kʌps ən hɛld ɪt wɪð noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ. ɪn ɪz lɛf hænd, ʌv kɔɹs. dʒʌs kəz ðəɹ wɑz wʌn dɛd mæn ɪn ðə ɹum ɔlɹɛɾi dɪd nɑt min ʃi hæd noʊ plænz tə meɪk ɪt tu kɔɹpsəz. "bʌɾ aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ sloʊ. ɪɾ ɪzən əz ɪf aɪ kən bæk əɹ ɪndə ə kɔɹnɝ ən tɪkəl əɹ aʊɾ ə hɝ ʃɪft."

"Closer than the day I arrived in the palace," he growled, glowering at her back. He tried never to offend those the Chosen had set above him, but the chit was trying him. He could snap that slender neck like a twig! To keep his hands from her throat, he filled one of the cups and held it with no intention of drinking. In his left hand, of course. Just because there was one dead man in the room already did not mean she had no plans to make it two corpses. "But I have to go slow. It isn't as if I can back her into a corner and tickle her out of her shift."

"aɪ səpoʊz nɑt," ʃieɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə mʌfəl vɔɪs. "ʃi ɪz hɑɹdli ðə sɔɹɾ ʌv wʊmən jə ɑɹ juz tə." wɑz ʃi læfɪŋ! wɑz ʃi əmjuzd ət hɪm? ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də nɑt tə θɹoʊ daʊn ðə waɪnkʌp ən stʃɹæŋɡəl ðə fɑks-feɪs bɪnt.

"I suppose not," Shiaine said in a muffled voice. "She is hardly the sort of woman you are used to." Was she laughing! Was she amused at him? It was all he could do not to throw down the winecup and strangle the fox-faced bint.

sʌɾənli ʃi tɝn ɝaʊnd, ən i blɪŋkt əz ʃi kæʒəwəli slɪpt əɹ dæɡɝ bæk ɪndə ɪts ʃiθ. hi hæd nɛvɝ sin əɹ dʒɹɔ ðə blʌɾi θɪŋ! hi tʊk ə swɑloʊ ʌv waɪn wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, ən ɔlmoʊs tʃoʊkt wən i ɹilaɪzd wʌɾ i hæd dʌn. "haʊ wəd jə laɪk tə si keɪɛmlɪn luɾəd?" ʃi æskt. "wɛl ɪnʌf, ɪf aɪ hæv ə ɡʊd kʌmpəni ət maɪ bæk ən ə klɪɹ pæθ tə ðə ɡeɪts." ðə waɪn hæd tə bi seɪf. tu kʌps mɛnt ʃi hæd dʒɹʌŋk, tu, ən ɪf i hæd pɪkt ʌp ðə dɛd mænz, ðəɹ kəd nɑt bi ɪnʌf pɔɪzən lɛft ɪn ɪt tə sɪkən ə maʊs. "ɪz ðət wʌt jə wɑnt? aɪ fɑloʊ ɔɹɾɝz əz wɛl əz ðə nɛks mæn." hi dɪd wən i sim laɪkli tə sɝvaɪv ðɛm, əɹ wən ðeɪ keɪm fɹəm ðə tʃoʊzən. əz wɛl daɪ fəɹ ə ful əz dɪsəbeɪ ðə tʃoʊzən. "bʌt səmtaɪmz ɪt hɛlps tə noʊ mɔɹ ðən 'ɡoʊ ðəɹ ən də ðæt.' ɪf jə toʊl mi wʌt jəɹ æftɝ hɪɹ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, aɪ maɪt bi eɪbəl tə hɛlp jə ɹitʃ ɪt fæstɝ."

Suddenly she turned around, and he blinked as she casually slipped her dagger back into its sheath. He had never seen her draw the bloody thing! He took a swallow of wine without thinking, and almost choked when he realized what he had done. "How would you like to see Caemlyn looted?" she asked. "Well enough, if I have a good company at my back and a clear path to the gates." The wine had to be safe. Two cups meant she had drunk, too, and if he had picked up the dead man's, there could not be enough poison left in it to sicken a mouse. "Is that what you want? I follow orders as well as the next man." He did when he seemed likely to survive them, or when they came from the Chosen. As well die for a fool as disobey the Chosen. "But sometimes it helps to know more than 'go there and do that.' If you told me what you're after here in Caemlyn, I might be able to help you reach it faster."

"ʌv kɔɹs." ʃi smaɪld ə tuθi smaɪl waɪl əɹ aɪz steɪɾ əz flæɾ əz bɹaʊn stoʊnz. "bʌt fɝst, tɛl mi waɪ ðəɹ ɪz fɹɛʃ blʌɾ ɑn jəɹ ɡɔnlət?"

"Of course." She smiled a toothy smile while her eyes stayed as flat as brown stones. "But first, tell me why there is fresh blood on your gauntlet?"

hi smaɪl bæk. "ə fʊtpæɾ u ɡɑɾ ənlʌki, maɪ leɪɾi." meɪbi ʃi hæd sɛn ðə mæn ən meɪbi nɑt, bʌɾ i æɾəd əɹ θɹoʊt tə ðə lɪst ə ðoʊz i ɪntɛndəd tə slɪt. ən i maɪɾ əz wɛl æd mɑɹilɪn ɡəmɑlfɪn, tu. æftɝ ɔl, ə loʊn sɝvaɪvɝ wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn u kəd tɛl ðə teɪl ʌv wʌt hæd hæpənd.

He smiled back. "A footpad who got unlucky, my Lady." Maybe she had sent the man and maybe not, but he added her throat to the list of those he intended to slit. And he might as well add Marillin Gemalphin, too. After all, a lone survivor was the only one who could tell the tale of what had happened.

tʃæptɝ sɪkstin

CHAPTER 16

ðə sʌbʒɪkt ə nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sʌn sæɾ ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən, livɪŋ ðə nɪɹɝ saɪɾ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn stɪl ɹæpt ɪn ʃædoʊz, bʌt ðə snoʊ ðət kʌvɝɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɡlim bɹaɪtli. ðə sɪɾi ɪtsɛlf sim tə ʃaɪn bɪhaɪn ɪts lɔŋ waɪt wɔlz, ɔl bɹeɪvli taʊɝɾ ən bænɝd, jɛt tə ɛɡwin, sɪɾɪŋ əɹ ɹoʊn ɡɛldɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk əbʌv ðə sɪɾi, ɪt simd ivən fɑɹðɝ əweɪ ðən ɪt ɹɪli wɑz. ði ɛɹɪnɪn waɪɾənd tə mɔɹ ðən tu maɪlz hɪɹ, ən ði əlɪndʒɹɛl ɛɹɪnɪn ən oʊsəndʒɹɛl ɛɹɪnɪn, floʊɪŋ tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə ði aɪlənd, wɝ ɔlmoʊs hæf ðæt, soʊ ðət tɑɹ vəlɑn əpɪɹd tə sɪɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə ɡɹeɪt leɪk, ənɹitʃəbəl dɪspaɪt ðə mæsɪv bɹɪdʒəz ðət stʊd haɪ əbʌv ðə wɔɾɝz soʊ ðət ʃɪps kəd seɪl bɪniθ əm izəli. ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf, ə θɪk boʊn-waɪt ʃæft ɹaɪzɪŋ tə ən ɪmpɑsəbəl haɪt fɹəm ðə sɪɾiz hɑɹt, fɪld əɹ oʊn hɑɹt wɪð ə jɝnɪŋ fəɹ hoʊm. nɑt fəɹ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, bʌt fəɹ ðə taʊɝ. ðət wɑz əɹ hoʊm, naʊ. ə plum ə smoʊk kɑɾ əɹ aɪ, ə feɪn blæk laɪn ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə fɑɹ bæŋk bɪɑn ðə sɪɾi, ən ʃi ɡɹɪməst. deɪʃɝ stæmpt ə huf ɪn ðə snoʊ, bʌɾ ə pæɾ ɑn ðə nɛk səfaɪs tə suð ðə ɹoʊn. ɪt wəd teɪk mɔɹ tə suð ɪz ɹaɪɾɝ. hoʊmsɪknəs wɑz ðə smɔləs pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. mɪnəskjul, kəmpɛɹd tə ðə ɹɛst.

The Subject of Negotiations The morning sun sat on the horizon, leaving the nearer side of Tar Valon still wrapped in shadows, but the snow that covered everything gleamed brightly. The city itself seemed to shine behind its long white walls, all bravely towered and bannered, yet to Egwene, sitting her roan gelding on the riverbank above the city, it seemed even farther away than it really was. The Erinin widened to more than two miles here, and the Alindrelle Erinin and Osendrelle Erinin, flowing to either side of the island, were almost half that, so that Tar Valon appeared to sit in the middle of a great lake, unreachable despite the massive bridges that stood high above the waters so that ships could sail beneath them easily. The White Tower itself, a thick bone-white shaft rising to an impossible height from the city's heart, filled her own heart with a yearning for home. Not for the Two Rivers, but for the Tower. That was her home, now. A plume of smoke caught her eye, a faint black line rising from the far bank beyond the city, and she grimaced. Daishar stamped a hoof in the snow, but a pat on the neck sufficed to soothe the roan. It would take more to soothe his rider. Homesickness was the smallest part of it. Minuscule, compared to the rest.

wɪð ə saɪ, ʃi ɹɛstəɾ əɹ ɹeɪnz ɑn ðə haɪ pɑməl ə hɝ sæɾəl ən ɹeɪz ðə lɔŋ bɹæsbaʊn lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs. hɝ kloʊk fɛl bæk, slɪpɪŋ ɔf wʌn ʃoʊldɝ, bʌt ʃi ɪɡnɔɹd ðə koʊl ðət mɪstɪɾ əɹ bɹɛθ ən pleɪst ə ɡlʌv hæn tə ʃil ðə fɹʌn lɛnz əɡɛns ðə sʌnz ɡlɛɹ. ðə sɪɾi wɔlz lɛp kloʊsɝ ɪn əɹ saɪt. ʃi foʊkəst ɑn ðə tɔl kɝvɪŋ ɑɹmz ə nɔɹθhɑɹbɝ ðət pʊʃt aʊɾ ɪndə ði ʌpstʃɹim kɝəns. pipəl muv pɝpəsfəli ətɑp ðə bæɾəlmənts ðəɾ ɛnfoʊldəd ðə hɑɹbɝ, bʌt ʃi kəd bɛɹli dɪsɝn mɛn fɹəm wɪmən ət ðət dɪstəns. stɪl, ʃi wɑz ɡlæd ðət ʃi wɑz nɑt wɛɹɪŋ əɹ sɛvən-stʃɹaɪp stoʊl, ən ðəɾ əɹ feɪs wɑz dip wɪðɪn əɹ kaʊl, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs sʌmwʌn ðəɹ hæɾ ə stʃɹɔŋɝ ɡlæs ðən ʃi. ðə waɪd maʊθ ə ðə mæn-meɪd hɑɹbɝ wɑz blɑk baɪ ə mæsɪv aɪɝn tʃeɪn dʒɹɔn tɔɾ ə fju fiɾ əbʌv ðə wɔɾɝ. taɪni dɑts ɑn ðə wɔɾɝ, daɪvɪŋ bɝdz fɪʃɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə hɑɹbɝ, ɡeɪv ðə tʃeɪn skeɪl. wʌn sɪŋɡəl peɪs-lɔŋ lɪŋk wʊɾə ɹikwaɪɝd tu mɛn tə lɪft ɪt. ə ɹoʊboʊt maɪt slɪp ʌndɝ ðət bæɹiɝ, bʌt noʊ vɛsəl ʌv ɛni saɪz wəɾ ɛntɝ ənlɛs ðə waɪt taʊɝ əlaʊd. ʌv kɔɹs, ðə tʃeɪn wɑz oʊnli ɪntɛndəd tə kip aʊɾ ɛnəmiz. "ðɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ, mʌðɝ," lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ mɝmɝd, ən ʃi loʊɝd ðə ɡlæs. hɝ dʒɛnɝəl wɑz ə stɑki mæn ɪn ə pleɪn bɹɛstpleɪt wɔɹn oʊvɝ ə pleɪn bɹaʊn koʊt, wɪθaʊɾ ɛni tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɪlt əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ɛniwɛɹ. hɪz feɪs wɑz blʌf ən wɛðɝd bɪhaɪn ðə bɑɹz ə hɪz hɛlmət, ən ðə jɪɹz hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ə stʃɹeɪnʒ sɔɹɾ ə kʌmfɝɾɪŋ kɑmnəs. ɔl jə nid də wɑz lʊk ət ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn tə noʊ ðəɾ ɪf ðə pɪɾ ə dum oʊpən ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, hi wəd smʌðɝ ɪz fɪɹ ən ɡoʊ əbaʊt duɪŋ wʌt niɾəd duɪŋ. ən ʌðɝ mɛn wəd fɑloʊ hɪm. hi hæd pɹuvd ɑn bæɾəlfild æftɝ bæɾəlfild ðət fɑloʊɪŋ ɪm wɑz ðə pæθ tə vɪktɝi. ə ɡʊd mæn tə hæv fɑloʊɪŋ hɝ. hɝ aɪz fɑloʊɾ ɪz ɡɔntələɾəd hænd, pɔɪntɪŋ ʌpɹɪvɝ.

With a sigh, she rested her reins on the high pommel of her saddle and raised the long brassbound looking glass. Her cloak fell back, slipping off one shoulder, but she ignored the cold that misted her breath and placed a gloved hand to shield the front lens against the sun's glare. The city walls leaped closer in her sight. She focused on the tall curving arms of Northharbor that pushed out into the upstream currents. People moved purposefully atop the battlements that enfolded the harbor, but she could barely discern men from women at that distance. Still, she was glad that she was not wearing her seven-striped stole, and that her face was deep within her cowl, just in case someone there had a stronger glass than she. The wide mouth of the man-made harbor was blocked by a massive iron chain drawn taut a few feet above the water. Tiny dots on the water, diving birds fishing in front of the harbor, gave the chain scale. One single pace-long link would have required two men to lift it. A rowboat might slip under that barrier, but no vessel of any size would enter unless the White Tower allowed. Of course, the chain was only intended to keep out enemies. "There they are, Mother," Lord Gareth murmured, and she lowered the glass. Her general was a stocky man in a plain breastplate worn over a plain brown coat, without any touch of gilt or embroidery anywhere. His face was bluff and weathered behind the bars of his helmet, and the years had given him a strange sort of comforting calmness. All you need do was look at Gareth Bryne to know that if the Pit of Doom opened in front of him, he would smother his fear and go about doing what needed doing. And other men would follow him. He had proved on battlefield after battlefield that following him was the path to victory. A good man to have following her. Her eyes followed his gauntleted hand, pointing upriver.

dʒʌs kʌmɪŋ ɪn saɪɾ ɝaʊn ə pɔɪn ə lænd, faɪv, sɪks - noʊ, sɛvən - ɹɪvɝʃɪps wɝ slaɪsɪŋ fɝoʊz daʊn ði ɛɹɪnɪn. lɑɹdʒ vɛsəlz əz sətʃ θɪŋz wɝ sin ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝ, wʌn wɪð θɹi mæsts, ðɛɹ tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ seɪlz stʊɾ aʊt taɪt, ən ðɛɹ lɔŋ swips kʌt hɑɹd θɹu ðə blu-ɡɹin wɔɾɝ tə æɾ ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ spid.

Just coming in sight around a point of land, five, six - no, seven - riverships were slicing furrows down the Erinin. Large vessels as such things were seen on the river, one with three masts, their triangular sails stood out tight, and their long sweeps cut hard through the blue-green water to add a little more speed.

ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə kɹæf spoʊk ʌv ə bɝnɪŋ dɪzaɪɝ fəɹ spid, ə dɪzaɪɝ tə ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn naʊ!

Everything about the craft spoke of a burning desire for speed, a desire to reach Tar Valon now!

ðə ɹɪvɝ wɑz dip ɪnʌf hɪɹ ðət ʃɪps kəd ɹʌn wɪðɪn ʃaʊɾɪŋ dɪstəns ə ðə bæŋks ɪn pleɪsəz, bʌt ðiz seɪld ɪn ɔlmoʊst sɪŋɡəl faɪl əz kloʊs tə ðə mɪɾəl ə ði ɛɹɪnɪn əz ðə stɪɹsmɪn kəd mænədʒ ən hoʊl ðə wɪnd. seɪlɝz klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə mæsθhɛdz kɛpt wɑtʃ əlɔŋ ðə ʃɔɹlaɪn, ən nɑt fəɹ mʌdbæŋks.

The river was deep enough here that ships could run within shouting distance of the banks in places, but these sailed in almost single file as close to the middle of the Erinin as the steersmen could manage and hold the wind. Sailors clinging to the mastheads kept watch along the shoreline, and not for mudbanks.

ɪn fækt, ðeɪ hæd nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl tə fɪɹ soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ kɛpt aʊɾ ə baʊʃɑt. tʃɹu, fɹəm wɛɹ ʃi sæɾ əɹ hɔɹs, ʃi cʊɾə sɛt faɪɝ tə ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðoʊz ʃɪps, əɹ sɪmpli kʌt hoʊlz θɹu ðɛɹ hʌlz ən lɛɾ əm sɪŋk. ðə wɝk ə moʊməns. jɛt duɪŋ soʊ ʃʊɹli mɛn səm ə ðoʊz əbɔɹd wəd dʒɹaʊn.

In fact, they had nothing at all to fear so long as they kept out of bowshot. True, from where she sat her horse, she could have set fire to every one of those ships, or simply cut holes through their hulls and let them sink. The work of moments. Yet doing so surely meant some of those aboard would drown.

ðə kɝəns wɝ stʃɹɔŋ, ðə wɔɾɝ laɪk aɪs, ən ðə swɪm tə ʃɔɹ lɔŋ, fəɹ ðoʊz u æktʃəli  kəd swɪm. ivən wʌn dɛθ wəd meɪk wʌt ʃi dɪd juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən. ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɪv əz ðoʊ ɔlɹɛɾi baʊn baɪ ðə θɹi oʊðz, ən ði oʊðz pɹətɛktəd ðoʊz vɛsəlz fɹəm əɹ əɹ ɛni ʌðɝ sɪstɝ. ə sɪstɝ u hæd swɔɹn ɑn ði oʊθ ɹɑd wəd nɑt bi eɪbəl tə meɪk hɝsɛlf sɛt ðoʊz wivz, pɝhæps nɑɾ ivən tə fɔɹm ðɛm, ənlɛs ʃi kəd kənvɪns hɝsɛlf ʃi wɑz ɪn ɪmiɾiət deɪnʒɝ fɹəm ðə ʃɪps. bʌt niðɝ kæptənz nɔɹ kɹuz bɪliv ðæt, əpɛɹənli.

The currents were strong, the water like ice, and the swim to shore long, for those who actually could swim. Even one death would make what she did using the Power as a weapon. She was trying to live as though already bound by the Three Oaths, and the Oaths protected those vessels from her or any other sister. A sister who had sworn on the Oath Rod would not be able to make herself set those weaves, perhaps not even to form them, unless she could convince herself she was in immediate danger from the ships. But neither captains nor crews believed that, apparently.

əz ðə ɹɪvɝʃɪps keɪm kloʊsɝ, ʃaʊts θɪn tə θɹɛdbɛɹ baɪ dɪstəns dʒɹɪftəɾ əkɹɔs ðə wɔɾɝ.

As the riverships came closer, shouts thinned to threadbare by distance drifted across the water.

ðə lʊkaʊts ʌp ɑn ðə mæsts pɔɪntəd tə hɝ ən ɡɛɹɪθ, ən ɪt kwɪkli bɪkeɪm əpɛɹən ðeɪ tʊk əɹ fəɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð əɹ wɔɹɾɝ. əɹ ət list, ðə kæptənz wɝ ənwɪlɪŋ tə teɪk ðə tʃæns ʃi wɑz nɑt. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ðə biɾ ə ðə swips ɪnkɹist. oʊnli baɪ ə fɹækʃən, bʌt ði ɔɹsmɪn leɪbɝd tə faɪn ðət fɹækʃən. ə wʊmən ɑn ðə kɔɹɾɝdɛk ə ðə lɛd vɛsəl, laɪkli ðə kæptən, weɪvd əɹ ɑɹmz əz ɪf dɪmændɪŋ stɪl mɔɹ ɛfɝt, ən ə hændfʊl ə mɛn bɪɡæn ɹʌnɪŋ ʌp ən daʊn ðə dɛk, taɪɾənɪŋ ðɪs laɪn əɹ lusənɪŋ ðət tə tʃeɪnʒ ði æŋɡəl ə ðə seɪlz, ðoʊ ɛɡwin kəd nɑt si ðət ðeɪ ətʃivd ɛniθɪŋ. ðəɹ wɝ mɛn ɑn ðoʊz dɛks ʌðɝ ðən seɪlɝz, ən moʊst ə ðoʊz kɹaʊɾəd tə ðə ɹeɪlɪŋz, ə hændfʊl ɹeɪzɪŋ lʊkɪŋ ɡlæsəz ə ðɛɹ oʊn. səm sim tə bi mɛʒɝɪŋ ðə dɪstəns lɛf tə kʌvɝ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə seɪfti ʌv ðə hɑɹbɝ. ʃi θɔɾ əbaʊt wivɪŋ ə flɛɹ, ə stɑɹbɝst ə laɪt, pɝhæps wɪð ə laʊd bæŋ, dʒʌst əbʌv itʃ ə ðə vɛsəlz. ðət wəd sɝɾənli lɛɾ ɛniwʌn əbɔɹd wɪð bɹeɪnz ɹilaɪz ðət niðɝ spid nɔɹ dɪstəns kɛpt əm seɪf hɪɹ, oʊnli ə fɔɹbɛɹəns bɔɹn ə ðə θɹi oʊðz. ðeɪ ʃəd noʊ ðət ðeɪ wɝ seɪf kəz ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ.

The lookouts up on the masts pointed to her and Gareth, and it quickly became apparent they took her for an Aes Sedai with her Warder. Or at least, the captains were unwilling to take the chance she was not. After a moment, the beat of the sweeps increased. Only by a fraction, but the oarsmen labored to find that fraction. A woman on the quarterdeck of the lead vessel, likely the captain, waved her arms as if demanding still more effort, and a handful of men began running up and down the deck, tightening this line or loosening that to change the angle of the sails, though Egwene could not see that they achieved anything. There were men on those decks other than sailors, and most of those crowded to the railings, a handful raising looking glasses of their own. Some seemed to be measuring the distance left to cover before they reached the safety of the harbor. She thought about weaving a flare, a starburst of light, perhaps with a loud bang, just above each of the vessels. That would certainly let anyone aboard with brains realize that neither speed nor distance kept them safe here, only a forbearance born of the Three Oaths. They should know that they were safe because of Aes Sedai.

ɪkshəlɪŋ hɛvəli, ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ən mɛntəli əpbɹeɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf. ðət sɪmpəl wiv wəɾ ɔlsoʊ ətʃɹækt ətɛnʃən ɪn ðə sɪɾi, sɝɾənli mɔɹ ðən ði əpɪɹəns ʌv ə sɪŋɡəl sɪstɝ. sɪstɝz ɔfən keɪm tə ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk tə stɛɹ ət tɑɹ vəlɑn ən ðə taʊɝ. ivən ɪf ði oʊnli ɹiækʃən tə hɝ flɛɹz wɑz səm sɔɹɾ ə kaʊntɝɾɪspleɪ, wʌns bɪɡʌn, ðət sɔɹɾ ə kɑntɛs kəd bi vɛɹi dɪfəkəl tə pʊɾ ə stɑp tə. wʌns bɪɡʌn, mæɾɝz maɪt wɛl ɛskəleɪɾ aʊɾ ə hænd. ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni ɑpɝtunəɾiz fəɹ ðæt, əz ɪt wɑz, ðə mɔɹ soʊ ðiz læs faɪv deɪz.

Exhaling heavily, she shook her head and mentally upbraided herself. That simple weave would also attract attention in the city, certainly more than the appearance of a single sister. Sisters often came to the riverbank to stare at Tar Valon and the Tower. Even if the only reaction to her flares was some sort of counterdisplay, once begun, that sort of contest could be very difficult to put a stop to. Once begun, matters might well escalate out of hand. There were too many opportunities for that, as it was, the more so these last five days.

"ðə hɑɹbɔɹmæstɝ hæzən lɛɾ əbʌv eɪɾ əɹ naɪn ʃɪps ɪn ət wʌn taɪm sɪns wi ɝaɪvd," ɡɛɹɪθ sɛɾ əz ðə fɝs vɛsəl dʒɹu əbɹɛst ə ðɛm, "bʌt ðə kæptənz sim tə hæv wɝkt aʊt ðə taɪmɪŋ.

"The harbormaster hasn't let above eight or nine ships in at one time since we arrived," Gareth said as the first vessel drew abreast of them, "but the captains seemed to have worked out the timing.

ənʌðɝ klʌtʃ wɪl əpɪɹ sun, ən ɹitʃ ðə sɪɾi əbaʊt ðə taɪm ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹdz ɑɹ ʃʊɹ ðiz fɛloʊz æktʃəli  keɪm tə ɛnlɪst. dʒɪmɑɹ tʃʌbn noʊz ɪnʌf tə ɡɑɹɾ əɡɛns mi snikɪŋ mɛn ɪn əbɔɹd hiz hæz mɔɹ ə ðə ɡɑɹdz kɹaʊɾəd ɪndə ðə hɑɹbɝz ðən ɛniwɛɹ ɪksɛpt ət ðə bɹɪdʒ taʊɝz, ən nɑt mɛni ɛniwɛɹ ɛls, soʊ fɑɹ əz aɪ kən lɝn. ðət wɪl tʃeɪnʒ, ðoʊ. ðə floʊ ʌv ʃɪps stɑɹts ət fɝs laɪɾ ən kips ʌp tɪl nɪɹ naɪtfɔl, hɪɹ ən ət saʊθhɑɹbɝ tu. ðɪs lɑt dʌzn sim tə bi kæɹiɪŋ əz mɛni soʊlʒɝz əz moʊs du. ɛvɹi plæn ɪz bɹɪljən əntɪl ðə deɪ kʌmz, mʌðɝ, bʌt ðən jə mʌst ədæp tə sɝkəmstænsəz əɹ bi ɹɪɾən daʊn."

Another clutch will appear soon, and reach the city about the time the Tower Guards are sure these fellows actually came to enlist. Jimar Chubain knows enough to guard against me sneaking men in aboard ships. He has more of the Guards crowded into the harbors than anywhere except at the bridge towers, and not many anywhere else, so far as I can learn. That will change, though. The flow of ships starts at first light and keeps up till near nightfall, here and at Southharbor too. This lot doesn't seem to be carrying as many soldiers as most do. Every plan is brilliant until the day comes, Mother, but then you must adapt to circumstances or be ridden down."

ɛɡwin meɪɾ ə vɛkst saʊnd. ðəɹ mʌs bi tu hʌnʒɹəd əɹ mɔɹ pæsənʒɝz ɔltəɡɛðɝ ɑn ðoʊz sɛvən ʃɪps. ə fju maɪt bi mɝtʃəns əɹ tʃɹeɪɾɝz əɹ səm ʌðɝ sɔɹɾ ʌv ɪnəsən tʃɹævəlɝ, bʌt ðə loʊ sʌn ɡlɪɾɝd ɔf hɛlməts ən bɹɛstpleɪts ən stil dɪsks soʊn tə lɛðɝ dʒɝkɪnz. haʊ mɛni ʃɪploʊdz ɝaɪvd itʃ deɪ? wʌtɛvɝ ðə nʌmbɝ, ə stɛɾi floʊ wɑz pɔɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi tə ɛnlɪst ʌndɝ haɪ kæptən tʃʌbn. "waɪ də mɛn ɔlweɪz ɹʌʃ soʊ hɑɹd tə kɪl əɹ bi kɪld?" ʃi mʌɾɝd ɪɹɪɾəbli. lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ lʊkt əɾ əɹ kɑmli. hi sæɾ ɪz hɔɹs, ə bɪɡ beɪ ɡɛldɪŋ wɪð ə waɪt stʃɹaɪp daʊn ɪz noʊz, laɪk ə stætʃu. səmtaɪmz, ʃi θɔt ʃi nu wʌn smɔl pɑɹɾ ə haʊ sɪuən fɛlt əbaʊt ðə mæn. səmtaɪmz ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wəd bi wɝθ wʌtɛvɝ ɛfɝt wɑz niɾəd tə stɑɹɾəl hɪm, dʒʌs tə si hɪm stɑɹɾəld.

Egwene made a vexed sound. There must be two hundred or more passengers altogether on those seven ships. A few might be merchants or traders or some other sort of innocent traveler, but the low sun glittered off helmets and breastplates and steel discs sewn to leather jerkins. How many shiploads arrived each day? Whatever the number, a steady flow was pouring into the city to enlist under High Captain Chubain. "Why do men always rush so hard to kill or be killed?" she muttered irritably. Lord Gareth looked at her calmly. He sat his horse, a big bay gelding with a white stripe down his nose, like a statue. Sometimes, she thought she knew one small part of how Siuan felt about the man. Sometimes she thought it would be worth whatever effort was needed to startle him, just to see him startled.

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ʃi nu ði ænsɝ tə hɝ oʊn kwɛstʃən əz wɛl əz i dɪd. ət list əz ɪɾ əplaɪd tə mɛn ɡoʊɪŋ soʊlʒɝɪŋ. oʊ, ðəɹ wɝ mɛn ɪnʌf u ɹʌʃt tə səpɔɹɾ ə kɑz əɹ dɪfɛnd wʌt ðeɪ θɔt wʌt wɑz ɹaɪt, ən səm u sɔɾ ædvɛntʃɝ, wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ bɪliv ðət wɑz, jɛt ðə sɪmpəl fækt wɑz ðət fəɹ kæɹiɪŋ ə paɪk əɹ spɪɹ, ə mæn kəɾ ɝn twaɪs itʃ deɪ wʌɾ i wəd ɡɛt fəɹ wɔkɪŋ bɪhaɪn ənʌðɝ mænz plaʊ, ən hæf əɡɛn əz mʌtʃ ɪf i kəd ɹaɪd wɛl ɪnʌf tə dʒɔɪn ðə kævəlɹi. kɹɔsboʊmən ən ɑɹtʃɝz fɛl ɪn bɪtwin. ðə mæn u wɝk fəɹ ənʌðɝ kəd dʒɹim ə hævɪŋ ɪz oʊn fɑɹm əɹ ʃɑp wʌn deɪ, əɹ ə bɪɡɪnɪŋ təwɔɹd wʌn ðəɾ ɪz sʌnz kəd bɪld ɑn, bʌɾ i ʃʊɹli hæd hɝɾ ə θaʊzən teɪlz ə mɛn soʊlʒɝɪŋ fəɹ faɪv jɪɹz əɹ tɛn ən kʌmɪŋ hoʊm wɪð ɪnʌf ɡoʊl tə sɛt ðɛmsɛlvz ʌp ɪn kʌmfɝt, teɪlz ʌv ɔɹɾənɛɹi mɛn u ɹoʊz tə bɪkʌm dʒɛnɝəlz, əɹ lɔɹdz. fəɹ ə pʊɹ mæn, ɡɛɹɪθ hæd sɛd blʌnli, stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ðə pɔɪn ʌv ə paɪk kəd bi ə bɛɾɝ vju ðən ðə haɪn ɛn ə sʌmbɑɾi ɛlsəz plaʊ hɔɹs. ivən ɪf i wɑz fɑɹ mɔɹ laɪkli tə daɪ fɹəm ðə paɪk ðən ɝn feɪm əɹ fɔɹtʃən. ə bɪɾɝ weɪ tə lʊk əɾ ɪt, jɛt ʃi ɪmædʒən ðət wɑz haʊ moʊst ə ðoʊz mɛn ɑn ðə ʃɪps sɔ mæɾɝz, tu. bʌt ðɛn, ðət wɑz haʊ ʃi hæd ɡɑɾən əɹ oʊn ɑɹmi. fəɹ ɛvɹi mæn u wɑntəd tə si ðə jusɝpɝ pʊl fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, fəɹ ɛvɹi mæn u ivən nu fəɹ sɝɾən u ɪleɪɾə wɑz, tɛn ɪf nɑɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd hæd dʒɔɪn fəɹ ðə peɪ. səm ə ðə mɛn ɑn ðə ʃɪp wɝ ɹeɪzɪŋ ðɛɹ hænz, tə ʃoʊ ðə ɡɑɹdz ɑn ðə hɑɹbɝ wɔlz ðeɪ wɝ nɑt hoʊldɪŋ wɛpənz.

Unfortunately, she knew the answer to her own question as well as he did. At least as it applied to men going soldiering. Oh, there were men enough who rushed to support a cause or defend what they thought what was right, and some who sought adventure, whatever they believed that was, yet the simple fact was that for carrying a pike or spear, a man could earn twice each day what he would get for walking behind another man's plow, and half again as much if he could ride well enough to join the cavalry. Crossbowmen and archers fell in between. The man who worked for another could dream of having his own farm or shop one day, or a beginning toward one that his sons could build on, but he surely had heard a thousand tales of men soldiering for five years or ten and coming home with enough gold to set themselves up in comfort, tales of ordinary men who rose to become generals, or lords. For a poor man, Gareth had said bluntly, staring down the point of a pike could be a better view than the hind end of somebody else's plow horse. Even if he was far more likely to die from the pike than earn fame or fortune. A bitter way to look at it, yet she imagined that was how most of those men on the ships saw matters, too. But then, that was how she had gotten her own army. For every man who wanted to see the usurper pulled from the Amyrlin Seat, for every man who even knew for certain who Elaida was, ten if not a hundred had joined for the pay. Some of the men on the ship were raising their hands, to show the guards on the harbor walls they were not holding weapons.

"noʊ," ʃi sɛd, ən lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ saɪd. hɪz vɔɪs ɹɪmeɪn kɑm, bʌɾ ɪz wɝdz wɝ hɑɹdli kʌmfɝɾɪŋ wən i spoʊk. "mʌðɝ, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðə hɑɹbɝz ɹɪmeɪn oʊpən, tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪl it bɛɾɝ ðən wi du, ən ɹæðɝ ðən ɡɹoʊɪŋ wikɝ wɪð hʌŋɡɝ, ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd wɪl ɡɹoʊ lɑɹdʒɝ ən stʃɹɔŋɝ. aɪ vɛɹi mʌtʃ daʊt ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə wɪl lɛt tʃʌbn ɹʌʃ aʊt tə ətæk ʌs, əz mʌtʃ əz aɪ wɪʃ i wʊd. ɛvɹi deɪ jə weɪɾ oʊnli ædz tə ðə bʊtʃɝz bɪl wɪl əv tə peɪ sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ. aɪv sɛd fɹəm ðə stɑɹɾ ɪɾəl kʌm tə ən əsɔlt, ɪn ði ɛnd, ən ðət hæzən tʃeɪnʒd, bʌɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls hæz. hæv ðə sɪstɝz pʊt mi ən maɪ mɛn ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz naʊ, ən aɪ kən teɪk tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɪt woʊn bi klin. ɪt nɛvɝ ɪz. bʌɾ aɪ kən teɪk ðə sɪɾi fəɹ ju. ən fjuɝ wɪl daɪ ðən ɪf jə dɪleɪ."

"No," she said, and Lord Gareth sighed. His voice remained calm, but his words were hardly comforting when he spoke. "Mother, so long as the harbors remain open, Tar Valon will eat better than we do, and rather than growing weaker with hunger, the Tower Guard will grow larger and stronger. I very much doubt that Elaida will let Chubain rush out to attack us, as much as I wish he would. Every day you wait only adds to the butcher's bill we'll have to pay sooner or later. I've said from the start it will come to an assault, in the end, and that hasn't changed, but everything else has. Have the sisters put me and my men inside the walls now, and I can take Tar Valon. It won't be clean. It never is. But I can take the city for you. And fewer will die than if you delay."

ə nɑt fɔɹmd ɪn əɹ bɛli, twɪstəd taɪt tɪl ʃi kəd hɑɹdli bɹið. kɛɹfəli, stɛp baɪ stɛp, ʃi pɝfɔɹm nɑvəs ɛksɝsaɪzəz tə meɪk ɪt lusən. ðə bæŋk kənteɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ, ɡaɪɾɪŋ wɪθaʊt kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ.

A knot formed in her belly, twisted tight till she could hardly breathe. Carefully, step by step, she performed novice exercises to make it loosen. The bank contained the river, guiding without controlling.

kɑm sɛɾəld ɑn hɝ, ɪn hɝ.

Calm settled on her, in her.

tu mɛni pipəl hæd bɪɡʌn siɪŋ ðə jusəz ʌv ɡeɪtweɪz, ən ɪn ə weɪ, ɡɛɹɪθ ɹɛpɹəzɛntəd ðə wɝst. hɪz bɪznəs wɑz wɔɹ, ən i wɑz vɛɹi ɡʊɾ əɾ ɪt. əz sun əz i lɝn ə ɡeɪtweɪ kəd teɪk mɔɹ ðən ə smɔl ɡɹup ə pipəl ət wʌn taɪm, hi hæd sin ði ɪmpləkeɪʃənz. ivən ðə ɡɹeɪt wɔlz ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, bɪɑn ðə ɹeɪnʒ ʌv ɛni sidʒ kæɾəpʌlt nɑɾ ɑn ə bɑɹdʒ, ən wɝkt wɪð ðə paʊɝ tɪl ðə lɑɹdʒəs kæɾəpʌlt kəd nɑt mɑɹk əm ɪn ɛni keɪs, maɪɾ əz wɛl bi meɪɾ ə peɪpɝ əɡɛnst ən ɑɹmi ðət kəd tʃɹævəl. bʌt wɛðɝ ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn hæd lɝn əɹ nɑt, ʌðɝ mɛn wəd siz ɑn ðəɾ aɪdiə. ði æʃəmən ɔlɹɛɾi hæd, ɪt simd. wɔɹ hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ʌɡli, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz gɑnə ɡɹoʊ ʌɡliɝ. "noʊ," ʃi ɹɪpiɾɪd. "aɪ noʊ pipəl ɑɹ gɑnə daɪ bɪfɔɹ ðɪs ɪz oʊvɝ." ðə laɪt hɛlp hɝ, ʃi kəd si ðɛm daɪɪŋ dʒʌs baɪ kloʊzɪŋ əɹ aɪz. ivən mɔɹ wəd daɪ ɪf ʃi meɪd ðə ɹɔŋ dɪsɪʒənz, ðoʊ, ən nɑt dʒʌs hɪɹ. "bʌɾ aɪ hæv tə kip ðə waɪt taʊɝ əlaɪv - əɡɛns tɑɹmən ɡdən - tə stæn bɪtwin ðə wɝld ən ði æʃəmən - ən ðə taʊɝ wɪl daɪ ɪf ðɪs kʌmz tə sɪstɝz kɪlɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn ðə stʃɹits ə tɑɹ vəlɑn." ðət hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæpənd wʌns. ɪt kəd nɑt bi əlaʊɾ ə sɛkən taɪm. "ɪf ðə waɪt taʊɝ daɪz, hoʊp daɪz. aɪ ʃʊdn əv tə tɛl jə ðəɾ əɡɛn." deɪʃɝ snɔɹɾɪd ən tɔst ɪz hɛd, lʌnʒɪŋ əz ðoʊ hi hæd sɛnst əɹ ɪɹɪteɪʃən, bʌt ʃi ɹeɪn ɪm ɪn fɝmli ən slɪp ðə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs ɪndə ðə tuld lɛðɝ keɪs hæŋɪŋ fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl.

Too many people had begun seeing the uses of gateways, and in a way, Gareth represented the worst. His business was war, and he was very good at it. As soon as he learned a gateway could take more than a small group of people at one time, he had seen the implications. Even the great walls of Tar Valon, beyond the range of any siege catapult not on a barge, and worked with the Power till the largest catapult could not mark them in any case, might as well be made of paper against an army that could Travel. But whether Gareth Bryne had learned or not, other men would seize on that idea. The Asha'man already had, it seemed. War had always been ugly, yet it was going to grow uglier. "No," she repeated. "I know people are going to die before this is over." The Light help her, she could see them dying just by closing her eyes. Even more would die if she made the wrong decisions, though, and not just here. "But I have to keep the White Tower alive - against Tarmon Gai'don - to stand between the world and the Asha'man - and the Tower will die if this comes to sisters killing one another in the streets of Tar Valon." That had already happened once. It could not be allowed a second time. "If the White Tower dies, hope dies. I shouldn't have to tell you that again." Daishar snorted and tossed his head, lunging as though he had sensed her irritation, but she reined him in firmly and slipped the looking glass into the tooled leather case hanging from her saddle.

ðə daɪvɪŋ bɝdz ɡeɪv ʌp ðɛɹ fɪʃɪŋ ən spɹæŋ ɪndə ði ɛɹ əz ðə θɪk tʃeɪn ðət blɑk nɔɹθhɑɹbɝ bɪɡæn tə dʒɹup. ɪt wəd dɪp bɪniθ ðə sɝfəs wɛl bɪfɔɹ ðə fɝst ʃɪp ɹitʃt ðə hɑɹbɝ maʊθ.

The diving birds gave up their fishing and sprang into the air as the thick chain that blocked Northharbor began to droop. It would dip beneath the surface well before the first ship reached the harbor mouth.

haʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ hæɾ ɪt bɪn ðət ʃi ɹitʃt tɑɹ vəlɑn baɪ ðət seɪm ɹut? ɔlmoʊs bɪɑn mɛmɹi, ɪt simd. ən eɪdʒ ɡɔn. ɪt hæd bɪn ənʌðɝ wʊmən u keɪm əʃɔɹ ən wɑz mɛt baɪ ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz.

How long ago had it been that she reached Tar Valon by that same route? Almost beyond memory, it seemed. An Age gone. It had been another woman who came ashore and was met by the Mistress of Novices.

ɡɛɹɪθ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd wɪð ə kwɪk ɡɹɪmɑs. bʌt ðɛn, hi nɛvɝ ɡeɪv ʌp, dɪd hi? "ju hæv tə kip ðə waɪt taʊɝ əlaɪv, mʌðɝ, bʌt maɪ dʒɑb ɪz tə ɡɪv ɪt tə ju. ənlɛs θɪŋz əv tʃeɪnʒd ðəɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt. aɪ kən si sɪstɝz wɪspɝɪŋ ən lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz ivən ɪf aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt minz. ɪf jə stɪl wɑn ðə taʊɝ, ɪɾəl kʌm tə ən əsɔlt, bɛɾɝ sun ðən leɪt." sʌɾənli ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sim dɑɹkɝ, əz ðoʊ klaʊdz hæɾ əbskjʊɹd ðə sʌn. wʌtɛvɝ ʃi dɪd, ðə dɛd wɝ gɑnə paɪl ʌp laɪk kɔɹdwʊd, bʌt ʃi hæd tə kip ðə waɪt taʊɝ əlaɪv. ʃi hæd tə.

Gareth shook his head with a quick grimace. But then, he never gave up, did he? "You have to keep the White Tower alive, Mother, but my job is to give it to you. Unless things have changed that I don't know about. I can see sisters whispering and looking over their shoulders even if I don't know what it means. If you still want the Tower, it will come to an assault, better soon than late." Suddenly the morning seemed darker, as though clouds had obscured the sun. Whatever she did, the dead were going to pile up like cordwood, but she had to keep the White Tower alive. She had to.

wən ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɡʊd tʃɔɪsəz, jə hæd tə tʃuz ðə wʌn ðət sim list ɹɔŋ.

When there were no good choices, you had to choose the one that seemed least wrong.

"aɪv sin ɪnʌf hɪɹ," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. wɪð wʌn læst ɡlæns ət ðət nɛɹoʊ laɪn ə smoʊk bɪɑn ðə sɪɾi, ʃi tɝn deɪʃɝ təwɔɹd ðə tʃɹiz ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz bæk fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ, wɛɹ əɹ ɛskɔɹt weɪɾəd əmʌŋ ði ɛvɝɡɹin lɛðɝlif ən wɪntɝ-bɛɹ bitʃ ən bɝtʃ.

"I've seen enough here," she said quietly. With one last glance at that narrow line of smoke beyond the city, she turned Daishar toward the trees a hundred paces back from the river, where her escort waited among the evergreen leatherleaf and winter-bare beech and birch.

tu hʌnʒɹəd laɪt kævəlɹi, ɪn bɔɪld lɛðɝ bɹɛstpleɪts əɹ koʊts kʌvɝd wɪð mɛɾəl dɪsks, wəd sɝɾənli hæv ətʃɹæktəd noʊɾəs əpɪɹɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk, bʌt ɡɛɹɪθ hæd kənvɪnst əɹ ə ðə nəsɛsəɾi ʌv ðiz mɛn wɪð ðɛɹ slɛndɝ lænsɪz ən ʃɔɹt hɔɹsboʊz. wɪθaʊɾ ɛni daʊt, ðət smoʊk plum ɑn ðə fɑɹ bæŋk ɹoʊz fɹəm bɝnɪŋ wæɡənz əɹ səplaɪz. pɪnpɹɪks, jɛt ðoʊz pɪnpɹɪks keɪm ɛvɹi naɪt, səmtaɪmz wʌn, səmtaɪmz tu əɹ θɹi, tɪl ɛvɹiwʌn lʊk fəɹ smoʊk fɝs θɪŋ ɑn ɹaɪzɪŋ.

Two hundred light cavalry, in boiled leather breastplates or coats covered with metal discs, would certainly have attracted notice appearing on the riverbank, but Gareth had convinced her of the necessity of these men with their slender lances and short horsebows. Without any doubt, that smoke plume on the far bank rose from burning wagons or supplies. Pinpricks, yet those pinpricks came every night, sometimes one, sometimes two or three, till everyone looked for smoke first thing on rising.

hʌntɪŋ ðə ɹeɪɾɝz daʊn hæd pɹuvd ɪmpɑsəbəl, soʊ fɑɹ. sʌɾən snoʊ skwɔlz flɛɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə pɝsuɝz, əɹ fɪɹs fɹizɪŋ naɪt wɪnz, əɹ ðə tʃɹæks sɪmpli vænɪʃt əbɹʌpli, ðə snoʊ bɪɑn ðə læs hʊfpɹɪn əz smuð əz fɹɛʃ fɔlən. ðə ɹɛzəduz ʌv wivɪŋz meɪɾ ɪt pleɪn ɪnʌf ðeɪ wɝ biɪŋ eɪɾəd baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn teɪkɪŋ ə tʃæns ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə hæd mɛn ən meɪbi sɪstɝz ɑn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ, tu. fju θɪŋz kəd pliz ɪleɪɾə mɔɹ ðən ɡɛɾɪŋ əɹ hænz ɑn ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ.

Hunting the raiders down had proved impossible, so far. Sudden snow squalls flared around the pursuers, or fierce freezing night winds, or the tracks simply vanished abruptly, the snow beyond the last hoofprint as smooth as fresh fallen. The residues of weavings made it plain enough they were being aided by Aes Sedai, and there was no point in taking a chance that Elaida had men and maybe sisters on this side of the river, too. Few things could please Elaida more than getting her hands on Egwene al'Vere.

ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ əɹ hoʊl ɛskɔɹt, ʌv kɔɹs. bɪsaɪdz ʃɛɹiəm, hɝ kipɝ, ʃi hæd ɹɪɾən aʊt wɪð sɪks mɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ən ðoʊz u hæd wɔɹɾɝz hæd bɹɔt ðɛm, soʊ bɪhaɪn ðə sɪstɝ eɪt mɛn weɪɾəd ɪn kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊks ðət ɹɪpəld ɪn kwizimækɪŋ fæʃən wən ə bɹiz kɑɾ əm ən ʌðɝwaɪz meɪd pɑɹts ə ɹaɪɾɝz ən hɔɹsəz sim tə vænɪʃ ɪndə ðə tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋks. əwɛɹ ə ðə deɪnʒɝz - fɹəm ɹeɪɾɝz, ət list - əwɛɹ ðət ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ waʊn taɪt tə nɪɹ bɹeɪkɪŋ, ðeɪ wɑtʃt ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ kɑps əz ðoʊ ðə kævəlɹimən wɝ nɑt ðɛɹ. ðə seɪfti ʌv ðɛɹ oʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz ðɛɹ pɹaɪmɛɹi kənsɝn, ən ðət ðeɪ tʃɹʌstɪd tə noʊ wʌn ɛls. sɑɹɪn, ə blæk-bɪɹɾəd stʌmp ʌv ə mæn, nɑt ðət ʃɔɹt bʌt vɛɹi waɪd, steɪd soʊ kloʊs tə naɪsaʊ ðəɾ i sim tə lum oʊvɝ ðə dɪmɪnjəɾɪv jɛloʊ, ən dʒɔɹi mænədʒ tə lum oʊvɝ mɔɹvɹɪn əz wɛl, ðoʊ hi wɑz æktʃəli  ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ʃi. əz bɹɔɾ əz sɑɹɪn, bʌt vɛɹi ʃɔɹɾ ivən fəɹ ə kɛɹhinɪn. maɪɹɛlz θɹi wɔɹɾɝz, ðə θɹi ʃi dɛɹɾ æknɑlɪdʒ, klʌstɝɾ ɝaʊn əɹ əntɪl ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv muvd əɹ hɔɹs wɪθaʊt pʊʃɪŋ wʌn ə ðɛɹz aʊɾ ə hɝ weɪ. æneɪjəz sɛɾɑɡænə, lin ən dɑɹk ən əz bjuɾəfəl əz ʃi wɑz pleɪn, ɔlmoʊs mænədʒ tə sɝaʊn əɹ baɪ hɪmsɛlf, ən tɝveɪl, wɪð ɪz boʊl noʊz ən skɑɹd feɪs, dɪd ðə seɪm wɪð bioʊnɪn. kɑɹlɪnjə hæd noʊ wɔɹɾɝ, nɑɾ ənjuʒəwəl fəɹ ə waɪt, bʌt ʃi stʌɾid ðə mɛn fɹəm ðə dɛpθs ə hɝ fɝ-laɪn kaʊl əz ɪf θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ɹɪndɪŋ wʌn.

They were not her whole escort, of course. Besides Sheriam, her Keeper, she had ridden out with six more Aes Sedai this morning, and those who had Warders had brought them, so behind the sister eight men waited in color-shifting cloaks that rippled in queasymaking fashion when a breeze caught them and otherwise made parts of riders and horses seem to vanish into the tree trunks. Aware of the dangers - from raiders, at least - aware that their Aes Sedai were wound tight to near breaking, they watched the surrounding copse as though the cavalrymen were not there. The safety of their own Aes Sedai was their primary concern, and that they trusted to no one else. Sarin, a black-bearded stump of a man, not that short but very wide, stayed so close to Nisao that he seemed to loom over the diminutive Yellow, and Jori managed to loom over Morvrin as well, though he was actually shorter than she. As broad as Sarin, but very short even for a Cairhienin. Myrelle's three Warders, the three she dared acknowledge, clustered around her until she could not have moved her horse without pushing one of theirs out of her way. Anaiya's Setagana, lean and dark and as beautiful as she was plain, almost managed to surround her by himself, and Tervail, with his bold nose and scarred face, did the same with Beonin. Carlinya had no Warder, not unusual for a White, but she studied the men from the depths of her fur-lined cowl as if thinking about rinding one.

nɑt tu lɔŋ əɡoʊ, ɛɡwin wʊɾə hɛzɪteɪɾɪd tə bi sin wɪð ðoʊz sɪks wɪmən. ðeɪ ən ʃɛɹiəm hæɾ ɔl swɔɹn fiəlti tə hɝ, fəɹ vɛɹiəs ɹizənz, ən niðɝ ðeɪ nɔɹ ʃi wɑntəd ðə fæk noʊn əɹ ivən səspɛktəd. ðeɪ hæd bɪn əɹ weɪ tə ɪnfluəns ɪvɛns, tə ði ɪkstɛn ðət ʃi kʊd, wən ɛvɹiwʌn θɔɾ əɹ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə fɪɡjɝhɛd, ə ɡɝl æmɪɝlɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ kəd juz əz ɪt wɪʃt ən noʊ wʌn lɪsən tə. ðə hɔl hæd lɔs ðəɾ ɪluʒən wən ʃi bɹɔɾ əm tə dɪklɛɹ wɔɹ ɑn ɪleɪɾə, faɪnəli ædmɪɾɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ hæd bɪn əbaʊt sɪns ðə deɪ ðeɪ hæd flɛd ðə taʊɝ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs, bʌt ðəɾ oʊnli meɪd ðə hɔl, ən ði ədʒəz, wɝi oʊvɝ wʌt ʃi wəd də nɛkst ən tʃɹaɪ tə fɪɡjɝ aʊt haʊ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðət wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz mɛt wɪð ðɛɹ əpɹuvəl. ðə sɪɾɝz hæd bɪn vɛɹi sɝpɹaɪzd wən ʃi æksɛptɪd ðɛɹ sədʒɛstʃən ʌv ə kaʊnsəl, wʌn sɪstɝ fɹəm itʃ ədʒɑ, tə ædvaɪz əɹ wɪð ðɛɹ wɪzdəm ən ɪkspɪɹiəns. əɹ pɝhæps ðeɪ θɔɾ əɹ səksɛs wɪð ðə dɛklɝeɪʃən ʌv wɔɹ hæd ɡɔn tə hɝ hɛd. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi hæd dʒʌs toʊl mɔɹvɹɪn ən æneɪjə ən ði ʌðɝz tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ ðə sɪstɝz tʃoʊzən, ən ðeɪ ɹɪteɪn ɪnʌf pɹɛstiʒ wɪðɪn ðɛɹ ədʒəz tə mænədʒ ɪt, dʒʌst. ʃi hæd bɪn lɪsnɪŋ tə ðɛɹ ædvaɪs, ɪf nɑɾ ɔlweɪz teɪkɪŋ ɪt, fəɹ wiks baɪ ðət taɪm, bʌt naʊ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɛni nid tə ɝeɪnʒ fɝɾɪv miɾɪŋz əɹ pæs mɛsədʒəz ɪn sikɹət.

Not too long ago, Egwene would have hesitated to be seen with those six women. They and Sheriam had all sworn fealty to her, for various reasons, and neither they nor she wanted the fact known or even suspected. They had been her way to influence events, to the extent that she could, when everyone thought her no more than a figurehead, a girl Amyrlin the Hall of the Tower could use as it wished and no one listened to. The Hall had lost that illusion when she brought them to declare war on Elaida, finally admitting what they had been about since the day they had fled the Tower in the first place, but that only made the Hall, and the Ajahs, worry over what she would do next and try to figure out how to make sure that whatever it was met with their approval. The Sitters had been very surprised when she accepted their suggestion of a council, one sister from each Ajah, to advise her with their wisdom and experience. Or perhaps they thought her success with the declaration of war had gone to her head. Of course, she had just told Morvrin and Anaiya and the others to make sure they were the sisters chosen, and they retained enough prestige within their Ajahs to manage it, just. She had been listening to their advice, if not always taking it, for weeks by that time, but now there was no longer any need to arrange furtive meetings or pass messages in secret.

ɪt simd, haʊɛvɝ, ðət ðəɹ hæd bɪn ən ədɪʃən tə ðə pɑɹɾi waɪl ɛɡwin wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə taʊɝ.

It seemed, however, that there had been an addition to the party while Egwene was staring at the Tower.

ʃɛɹiəm, wɛɹɪŋ ðə nɛɹoʊ blu stoʊl ə hɝ ɔfəs aʊtsaɪɾ əɹ kloʊk, mænədʒd ə vɛɹi fɔɹməl baʊ fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl. ðə fleɪmhɛɹd wʊmən kəd bi ɪnkɹɛɾəbli fɔɹməl ət taɪmz. "mʌðɝ, ðə sɪɾɝ dɛlænə wɪʃɪz tə spik wɪð ju," ʃi sɛɾ əz ɪf ɛɡwin kəd nɑt si ðə staʊt ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝ sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ ɑn ə dæpəl mɛɹ ɔlmoʊst əz dɑɹk əz ʃɛɹiəmz blæk-fʊɾɪd maʊnt. "ɑn ə mæɾɝ ə səm ɪmpɔɹɾəns, soʊ ʃi sɛz." ən ðə slaɪt tʌtʃ ʌv æspɹəɾi mɛn dɛlænə hæd nɑt toʊld əɹ wʌt mæɾɝ. ʃɛɹiəm wəd nɑɾ əv laɪk ðæt. ʃi kəd bi vɛɹi dʒɛləs ə hɝ pəzɪʃən. "ɪn pɹaɪvət, ɪf jə pliz, mʌðɝ," dɛlænə sɛd, pʊʃɪŋ bæk əɹ dɑɹk hʊd tə ɹɪvil hɛɹ nɪɹli ðə kʌlɝ ə sɪlvɝ. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz dip fəɹ ə wʊmənz, bʌɾ ɪt hɑɹdli kæɹid ði ɝdʒənsi ʌv sʌmwʌn wɪð ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz tə spik ʌv.

Sheriam, wearing the narrow blue stole of her office outside her cloak, managed a very formal bow from her saddle. The flamehaired woman could be incredibly formal at times. "Mother, the Sitter Delana wishes to speak with you," she said as if Egwene could not see the stout Gray sister sitting there on a dappled mare almost as dark as Sheriam's black-footed mount. "On a matter of some importance, so she says." And the slight touch of asperity meant Delana had not told her what matter. Sheriam would not have liked that. She could be very jealous of her position. "In private, if you please, Mother," Delana said, pushing back her dark hood to reveal hair nearly the color of silver. Her voice was deep for a woman's, but it hardly carried the urgency of someone with important matters to speak of.

hɝ pɹɛzəns wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə sɝpɹaɪz. dɛlænə ɔfən səpɔɹɾəd ɛɡwin ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, wən sɪɾɝz wɝ kwɪbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ wɛðɝ ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ dɪsɪʒən æktʃəli  kənsɝn ðə wɔɹ əɡɛnst ɪleɪɾə. ðət mɛn ðə hɔl wɑz ɹikwaɪɝd tə səpɔɹɾ ɛɡwinz kəmænz əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd stʊd wɪð ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ kənsɛnsəs, ən ivən ðə sɪɾɝz u hæd stʊd fəɹ wɔɹ dɪd nɑt hæf laɪk ðət lɪɾəl fækt, wɪtʃ meɪd fəɹ ɛnləs kwɪbəlɪŋ. ðeɪ wɑntəd tə pʊl ɪleɪɾə daʊn, jɛt lɛf tə ðɛmsɛlvz, ðə wʊɾə əv dʌn nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ɑɹɡju. tʃɹuθ tə tɛl, ðoʊ, dɛlænəz səpɔɹt wɑz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz wɛlkəm.

Her presence was something of a surprise. Delana often supported Egwene in the Hall of the Tower, when Sitters were quibbling over whether a particular decision actually concerned the war against Elaida. That meant the Hall was required to support Egwene's commands as if they had stood with the greater consensus, and even the Sitters who had stood for war did not half like that little fact, which made for endless quibbling. They wanted to pull Elaida down, yet left to themselves, the Hall would have done nothing but argue. Truth to tell, though, Delana's support was not always welcome.

wʌn deɪ ʃi kəd bi ðə vɛɹi ɪmədʒ ʌv ə ɡɹeɪ nəɡoʊʃieɪɾɝ sikɪŋ kənsɛnsəs, ən ðə nɛkst soʊ stʃɹaɪɾənt ɪn əɹ ɑɹɡjəməns ðəɾ ɛvɹi sɪɾɝ wɪðɪn hɪɹɪŋ ɡɑɾ əɹ bæk ʌp. ʃi hæd bɪn noʊn tə sɛt ðə kæɾ əmʌŋ ðə pɪdʒənz ɪn ʌðɝ weɪz, tu. noʊ fjuɝ ðən θɹi taɪmz naʊ, ʃi hæd dɪmændəd ðə hɔl meɪk ə fɔɹməl dɛklɝeɪʃən ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə wɑz blæk ədʒɑ, wɪtʃ ɪnɛvəɾəbli lɛd tə ən ɑkwɝd saɪləns əntɪl sʌmwʌn kɔl fəɹ ðə sɪɾɪŋ tə bi ədʒɝnd. fju wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə dɪskʌs ðə blæk ədʒɑ oʊpənli.

One day she could be the very image of a Gray negotiator seeking consensus, and the next so strident in her arguments that every Sitter within hearing got her back up. She had been known to set the cat among the pigeons in other ways, too. No fewer than three times now, she had demanded the Hall make a formal declaration that Elaida was Black Ajah, which inevitably led to an awkward silence until someone called for the sitting to be adjourned. Few were willing to discuss the Black Ajah openly.

dɛlænə wəd dɪskʌs ɛniθɪŋ, fɹəm haʊ ðeɪ wɝ tə faɪn pɹɑpɝ kloʊðz fəɹ naɪn hʌnʒɹəd ən eɪɾi-sɛvən nɑvəsɪz tə wɛðɝ ɪleɪɾə hæd sikɹət səpɔɹɾɝz əmʌŋ ðə sɪstɝz, ənʌðɝ tɑpɪk ðət ɡeɪv moʊst sɪstɝz ə keɪs ə ðə pɹɪkəlz. wɪtʃ lɛf ðə kwɛstʃən ʌv waɪ ʃi hæd ɹɪɾən aʊt soʊ ɝli, ən baɪ hɝsɛlf.

Delana would discuss anything, from how they were to find proper clothes for nine hundred and eighty-seven novices to whether Elaida had secret supporters among the sisters, another topic that gave most sisters a case of the prickles. Which left the question of why she had ridden out so early, and by herself.

ʃi hæd nɛvɝ əpɹoʊtʃt ɛɡwin bɪfɔɹ wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ sɪɾɝ əɹ θɹi fəɹ kʌmpəni. dɛlænəz peɪl blu aɪz ɡeɪv əweɪ noʊ mɔɹ ðən dɪɾ əɹ smuð ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪs.

She had never approached Egwene before without another Sitter or three for company. Delana's pale blue eyes gave away no more than did her smooth Aes Sedai face.

"waɪl wi ɹaɪd," ɛɡwin toʊl hɝ. "wi wɪl wɑn ə lɪɾəl pɹaɪvəsi," ʃi æɾəd wən ʃɛɹiəm oʊpən əɹ maʊθ. "steɪ bæk wɪð ði ʌðɝz, pliz." ðə kipɝz ɡɹin aɪz taɪɾənd ɪn wʌt maɪɾ ɔlmoʊst əv bɪn æŋɡɝ. ən ɪfɪʃən kipɝ, ən iɡɝ wɪð ɪt, ʃi hæd pɪn əɹ hoʊps ɑn ɛɡwin ən meɪd lɪɾəl sikɹət ðət ʃi dɪslaɪk biɪŋ ɪkskluɾəd fɹəm ɛni miɾɪŋ ɛɡwin hæd. əpsɛɾ əɹ nɑt, ʃi baʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ ɪn æksɛptəns wɪð oʊnli ə smɔl hɛzəteɪʃən. ʃɛɹiəm hæd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz noʊn wɪtʃ ə ðɛm kəmændəd, bʌt ʃi dɪd naʊ.

"While we ride," Egwene told her. "We will want a little privacy," she added when Sheriam opened her mouth. "Stay back with the others, please." The Keeper's green eyes tightened in what might almost have been anger. An efficient Keeper, and eager with it, she had pinned her hopes on Egwene and made little secret that she disliked being excluded from any meeting Egwene had. Upset or not, she bowed her head in acceptance with only a small hesitation. Sheriam had not always known which of them commanded, but she did now.

ðə læn tɛndəɾ ʌpwɝd fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn, nɑɾ ɪn hɪlz bʌt sɪmpli ɹaɪzɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə mɑnstʃɹəs pik ðət lum tə ðə wɛst, soʊ mæsɪv ɪt sim tə mɑk ðə neɪm maʊntən.

The land tended upward from the River Erinin, not in hills but simply rising toward the monstrous peak that loomed to the west, so massive it seemed to mock the name mountain.

dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt wʊɾə taʊɝɾ əbʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls ivən ɪn ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld; ɪn ðə ɹɛləɾɪvli flæt kʌntʃɹi ɝaʊn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɪts waɪtkæp kɹɛst sim tə ɹitʃ ðə hɛvənz, ɪspɛʃli wən ə θɪn θɹɛɾ ə smoʊk wɑz stʃɹimɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə dʒæɡd tɑp əz ɪt wɑz naʊ. ə θɪn θɹɛɾ ət ðət haɪt wəd bi sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ɪntaɪɝli, kloʊs ət hænd. tʃɹiz ɡeɪv aʊt lɛs ðən hæfweɪ ʌp dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt, ən noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ səksiɾəd ɪn ɹitʃɪŋ ðə kɹɛst əɹ ivən kʌmɪŋ kloʊs, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz sɛd ðə sloʊps wɝ lɪɾɝd wɪð ðə boʊnz ə ðoʊz u hæd tʃɹaɪd. waɪ ɛniwʌn wəd tʃɹaɪ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs, noʊ wʌn kəd kwaɪɾ ɪkspleɪn. səmtaɪmz ðə lɔŋ ivnɪŋ ʃædoʊ ʌv ðə maʊntən stʃɹɛtʃt ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə sɪɾi. pipəl u lɪvd ɪn ðə ɹidʒən wɝ əkʌstəm tə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊn dɑməneɪɾɪŋ ðə skaɪ, mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ wɝ əkʌstəm tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ lumɪŋ əbʌv ðə sɪɾi wɔlz ən vɪzəbəl fəɹ maɪlz.

Dragonmount would have towered above everything else even in the Spine of the World; in the relatively flat country around Tar Valon, its whitecapped crest seemed to reach the heavens, especially when a thin thread of smoke was streaming away from the jagged top as it was now. A thin thread at that height would be something else entirely, close at hand. Trees gave out less than halfway up Dragonmount, and no one had ever succeeded in reaching the crest or even coming close, though it was said the slopes were littered with the bones of those who had tried. Why anyone would try in the first place, no one could quite explain. Sometimes the long evening shadow of the mountain stretched all the way to the city. People who lived in the region were accustomed to Dragonmount dominating the sky, much as they were accustomed to the White Tower looming above the city walls and visible for miles.

boʊθ wɝ əntʃeɪnʒɪŋ fɪkstʃɝz ðət hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ðəɹ ən ɔlweɪz wəd bi, bʌt kɹɑps ən kɹæfs ɑkjəpaɪd ðə pipəlz laɪvz, nɑt maʊntənz əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Both were unchanging fixtures that had always been there and always would be, but crops and crafts occupied the people's lives, not mountains or Aes Sedai.

ɪn taɪni hæmləts ɔfən əɹ ə dʌzən stoʊn haʊsəz ɹuft ɪn θætʃ əɹ sleɪt, ən ði əkeɪʒənəl vɪlədʒ ʌv ə hʌnʒɹəd, tʃɪlʒɹən pleɪɪŋ ɪn ðə snoʊ əɹ kæɹiɪŋ bʌkəts ʌv wɔɾɝ fɹəm ðə wɛlz stɑp tə ɡeɪp ət ðə soʊlʒɝz ɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə dɝt tʃɹæks ðət pæs fəɹ ɹoʊdz wən nɑt kʌvɝɾ ɪn snoʊ. ðeɪ kæɹid noʊ bænɝz, bʌɾ ə fju ʌv ðə soʊlʒɝz wɔɹ ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn wɝkt ɑn ðɛɹ kloʊks əɹ koʊtslivz, ən ðə wɔɹɾɝz' stʃɹeɪnʒ kloʊks neɪmd ət list səm ə ðə wɪmən əz ɛɛs sədaɪ. ivən ðɪs nɪɹ ðə sɪɾi, sɪstɝz hæd bɪn ən ənkɑmən saɪt tɪl ɹisənli, ən ðeɪ wɝ stɪl sʌmθɪŋ tə meɪk ə tʃaɪlz aɪz ɡlim. bʌt ðɛn, ðə soʊlʒɝz ðɛmsɛlvz pɹɑbli keɪm kloʊs ɪn ðə lɪst ə mɑɹvəlz. ðə fɑɹmz ðət fɛd tɑɹ vəlɑn kʌvɝd moʊst ə ðə lænd, stoʊn-wɔl filz sɝaʊndɪŋ spɹɔlɪŋ haʊsəz ən tɔl bɑɹnz ə stoʊn əɹ bɹɪk, wɪð kɑpsɪz ən kɑpɪsɪz ən θɪkəts ə tʃɹiz bɪtwin, ən ɡɹups ə fɑɹm tʃɪlʒɹən ɔfən ɹæn ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns pɛɹəlɛl tə ðə laɪn ə tʃɹævəl, lipɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə snoʊ laɪk hɛɹz. wɪntɝ tʃɔɹz kɛp moʊst oʊldɝ foʊk ɪndɔɹz, bʌt ðoʊz u vɛntʃɝɾ aʊt, hɛvəli bʌndəld əɡɛns ðə koʊld, spɛɹd bɛɹli ə ɡlæns fəɹ soʊlʒɝz əɹ wɔɹɾɝz əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. spɹɪŋ wəd bi kʌmɪŋ sun, ən ðə plaʊɪŋ ən plæntɪŋ, ən wʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd wəd nɑɾ əfɛk ðæt. ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ, ɪt wəd nɑt. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn tə ɡɑɹdz ənlɛs ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ əz ɪf ɪkspɛktɪŋ ən ətæk, ən lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ hæɾ ɝeɪnʒd ə stʃɹɔŋ pɑɹɾi ʌv fɔɹ-ɹaɪɾɝz ən laɪnz ə flæŋkɝz, wɪð tʃɹeɪlɝz ɹaɪɾɪŋ tə ðə ɹɪɹ waɪl i lɛd ðə mæs ə ðə soʊlʒɝz ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn ðə wɔɹɾɝz u fɑloʊd kloʊsli ɑn ðə hilz ə ʃɛɹiəm ən ðə "kaʊnsəl." ðeɪ ɔl meɪɾ ə lɑɹdʒ, lɑpsaɪɾɪd ɹɪŋ ɝaʊn ɛɡwin, ən ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɪmædʒən ʃi wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ θɹu ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪɾ əloʊn wɪð dɛlænə ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk ɝaʊn tu kloʊsli. əɹ ɪf ʃi lʊk bɪɑnd. ɪnstɛɾ ə pɹɛsɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪɾɝ tə spik - ɪt wɑz ə lɔŋ ɹaɪd bæk tə kæmp, ən noʊ wʌn wɑz əlaʊd tə wiv ə ɡeɪtweɪ wɛɹ ðə wiv maɪt bi əbzɝvd; ðəɹ wɑz plɛnti ʌv taɪm tə hɪɹ wʌt dɛlænə hæd tə seɪ -  ɛɡwin kəmpɛɹd ðə fɑɹmz ðeɪ pæs tə ðoʊz ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. pɝhæps ðə ɹiləzeɪʃən ðət ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hoʊm meɪɾ əɹ stʌɾi ðɛm. æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ kəd nɛvɝ bi ə bɪtʃɹeɪəl, jɛt ʃi niɾəd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. jə kəd fɝɡɛɾ u jə wɝ ɪf jə fɝɡɑt wɛɹ jə keɪm fɹʌm, ən səmtaɪmz ði ɪnkipɝz dɔɾɝ fɹəm ɛmənz fil simd ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ tə hɝ. ɛni ʌv ðiz fɑɹmz wʊɾə lʊk dɪsaɪɾədli ɑd, sɛt daʊn nɪɹ ɛmənz fild, ðoʊ ʃi kəd nɑt pʊɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ ɑn waɪ, ɪɡzækli. ə dɪfɹənt ʃeɪp tə ðə haʊsəz, ə dɪfɹən slæn tə ðə ɹufs. ən mɔɹ ɔfən sleɪt tɑpt ə haʊs ðən θætʃ, hɪɹ, wən jə kəd meɪk aʊɾ iðɝ θɹu ðə snoʊ ðət wɑz ɔfən maʊndɪɾ ɑn ðə ɹuftɑps. ʌv kɔɹs, ðəɹ wɑz lɛs θætʃ ən mɔɹ stoʊn ən bɹɪk ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz naʊ ðən ðəɹ hæd bɪn. ʃi hæd sin ɪt, ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. tʃeɪnʒ keɪm soʊ sloʊli jə nɛvɝ noʊɾəst ɪt kɹipɪŋ ʌp ɑn ju, əɹ fɑɹ tu fæs fəɹ kʌmfɝt, bʌɾ ɪt keɪm. nʌθɪŋ steɪd ðə seɪm, ivən wən jə θɔɾ ɪt dɪd. əɹ hoʊpt ɪt wʊd.

In tiny hamlets often or a dozen stone houses roofed in thatch or slate, and the occasional village of a hundred, children playing in the snow or carrying buckets of water from the wells stopped to gape at the soldiers riding along the dirt tracks that passed for roads when not covered in snow. They carried no banners, but a few of the soldiers wore the Flame of Tar Valon worked on their cloaks or coatsleeves, and the Warders' strange cloaks named at least some of the women as Aes Sedai. Even this near the city, sisters had been an uncommon sight till recently, and they were still something to make a child's eyes gleam. But then, the soldiers themselves probably came close in the list of marvels. The farms that fed Tar Valon covered most of the land, stone-walled fields surrounding sprawling houses and tall barns of stone or brick, with copses and coppices and thickets of trees between, and groups of farm children often ran a little distance parallel to the line of travel, leaping across the snow like hares. Winter chores kept most older folk indoors, but those who ventured out, heavily bundled against the cold, spared barely a glance for soldiers or Warders or Aes Sedai. Spring would be coming soon, and the plowing and planting, and what Aes Sedai did would not affect that. The Light willing, it would not. There was no point to guards unless they rode as if expecting an attack, and Lord Gareth had arranged a strong party of fore-riders and lines of flankers, with trailers riding to the rear while he led the mass of the soldiers right behind the Warders who followed closely on the heels of Sheriam and the "council." They all made a large, lopsided ring around Egwene, and she could almost imagine she was riding through the countryside alone with Delana if she did not look around too closely. Or if she looked beyond. Instead of pressing the Gray Sitter to speak - it was a long ride back to camp, and no one was allowed to weave a gateway where the weave might be observed; there was plenty of time to hear what Delana had to say -  Egwene compared the farms they passed to those in the Two Rivers. Perhaps the realization that the Two Rivers was no longer home made her study them. Acknowledging the truth could never be a betrayal, yet she needed to remember the Two Rivers. You could forget who you were if you forgot where you came from, and sometimes the innkeeper's daughter from Emond's Field seemed a stranger to her. Any of these farms would have looked decidedly odd, set down near Emond's Field, though she could not put a finger on why, exactly. A different shape to the houses, a different slant to the roofs. And more often slate topped a house than thatch, here, when you could make out either through the snow that was often mounded on the rooftops. Of course, there was less thatch and more stone and brick in the Two Rivers now than there had been. She had seen it, in Tel'aran'rhiod. Change came so slowly you never noticed it creeping up on you, or far too fast for comfort, but it came. Nothing stayed the same, even when you thought it did. Or hoped it would.

"sʌm θɪŋk jəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə bɑn ɪm jəɹ wɔɹɾɝ," dɛlænə sɛd sʌɾənli ɪn ə kwaɪət vɔɪs. ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn ɛnɡeɪdʒɪŋ ɪn kæʒəwəl kɑnvɝseɪʃən. hɝ hoʊl ətɛnʃən sim tə bi ɑn ɝeɪnʒɪŋ ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk wɪð ɡɹin-ɡlʌv hænz. ʃi ɹoʊd wɛl, blɛndɪŋ wɪð ðə moʊʃən ə hɝ mɛɹ soʊ ɛfɝtləsli ðət ʃi əpɪɹɾ ʌnəwɛɹ ə ði ænəməl. "sʌm θɪŋk pɝhæps jə ɔlɹɛɾi hæv. aɪ hævən hæd wʌn maɪsɛlf fəɹ səm taɪm, bʌt dʒʌs noʊɪŋ jəɹ wɔɹɾɝ ɪz ðəɹ kən bi ə kʌmfɝt. ɪf jə tʃuz ðə ɹaɪt wʌn." ɛɡwin ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ - ʃi wɑz pɹaʊd ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡeɪp ət ðə wʊmən; ðɪs wɑz ðə vɛɹi læs tɑpɪk ʃi wʊɾə ɪkspɛktəd - ən dɛlænə æɾəd, "lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ. hi spɛnz ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə taɪm wɪð ju. hiz ɹæðɝ oʊldɝ ðən ɪz juʒəwəl, bʌt ɡɹinz ɔfən tʃuz ə mɔɹ ɪkspɪɹiəns mæn fəɹ ðɛɹ fɝst. aɪ noʊ jə nɛvɝ æktʃəli  hæɾ ən ədʒɑ, jɛɾ aɪ ɔfən θɪŋk ə jə əz ə ɡɹin. aɪ wʌndɝ, wɪl sɪuən bi ɹɪlivd ɪf jə bɑn hɪm, əɹ ʌpsɛt? səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk wʌn, səmtaɪmz ði ʌðɝ. ðɛɹ ɹileɪʃənʃɪp, ɪf ɪt kən bi kɔl ðæt, ɪz moʊs pəkjuljɝ, jɛt ʃi simz kəmplitli ʌnɪmbɛɹəst." "ju mʌst æsk sɪuən hɝsɛlf əbaʊt ðæt." ɛɡwinz smaɪl hæd səm baɪɾ ɪn ɪt. soʊ dɪɾ əɹ toʊn, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli ʌndɝstæn hɝsɛlf waɪ ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn hæɾ ɔfɝɾ əɹ ɪz lɔɪəlti, bʌt ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ hæd bɛɾɝ jusəz fəɹ ɪts taɪm ðən ɡɑsəpɪŋ laɪk vɪlədʒ wɪmən. "ju kən tɛl huɛvɝ jə tʃuz ðəɾ aɪv bɑndəd noʊ wʌn, dɛlænə. lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ spɛnz taɪm wɪð mi, əz jə pʊɾ ɪt, aɪm æm ði æmɪɝlɪn hiz ɪz maɪ dʒɛnɝəl. jə meɪ ɹimaɪn əm ə ðæt, əz wɛl." soʊ dɛlænə θɔɾ ə hɝ əz ə ɡɹin. ðət wɑz ði ədʒɑ ʃi wəɾ əv tʃoʊzən, ðoʊ ɪn tʃɹuθ, ʃi wɑntəɾ oʊnli wʌn wɔɹɾɝ. bʌt ɡɔɪn wɑz iðɝ ɪnsaɪd tɑɹ vəlɑn əɹ ɛls ɑn ɪz weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn, ən iðɝ weɪ, ʃi wəd nɑt leɪ hænz ɑn ɪm sun.

"Some think you're going to bond him your Warder," Delana said suddenly in a quiet voice. She might have been engaging in casual conversation. Her whole attention seemed to be on arranging the hood of her cloak with green-gloved hands. She rode well, blending with the motion of her mare so effortlessly that she appeared unaware of the animal. "Some think perhaps you already have. I haven't had one myself for some time, but just knowing your Warder is there can be a comfort. If you choose the right one." Egwene raised an eyebrow - she was proud that she did not gape at the woman; this was the very last topic she would have expected - and Delana added, "Lord Gareth. He spends a great deal of time with you. He's rather older than is usual, but Greens often choose a more experienced man for their first. I know you never actually had an Ajah, yet I often think of you as a Green. I wonder, will Siuan be relieved if you bond him, or upset? Sometimes I think one, sometimes the other. Their relationship, if it can be called that, is most peculiar, yet she seems completely unembarrassed." "You must ask Siuan herself about that." Egwene's smile had some bite in it. So did her tone, for that matter. She did not entirely understand herself why Gareth Bryne had offered her his loyalty, but the Hall of the Tower had better uses for its time than gossiping like village women. "You can tell whoever you choose that I've bonded no one, Delana. Lord Gareth spends time with me, as you put it, because I am the Amyrlin and he is my general. You may remind them of that, as well." So Delana thought of her as a Green. That was the Ajah she would have chosen, though in truth, she wanted only one Warder. But Gawyn was either inside Tar Valon or else on his way to Caemlyn, and either way, she would not lay hands on him soon.

ʃi pæɾəd deɪʃɝz nɛk ənnɛsəsɛɹəli ən tʃɹaɪd tə kip əɹ smaɪl fɹəm bɪkʌmɪŋ ə ɡlɛɹ. ɪt hæd bɪn plɛzən tə fɝɡɛt ðə hɔl, əmʌŋ ʌðɝ θɪŋz, fəɹ ə waɪl. ðə hɔl meɪɾ əɹ ʌndɝstænd waɪ sɪuən hæd soʊ ɔfən lʊk laɪk ə bɛɹ wɪð ə sɔɹ tuθ wən ʃi wɑz æmɪɝlɪn.

She patted Daishar's neck unnecessarily and tried to keep her smile from becoming a glare. It had been pleasant to forget the Hall, among other things, for a while. The Hall made her understand why Siuan had so often looked like a bear with a sore tooth when she was Amyrlin.

"aɪ wʊdn seɪ ɪts bɪkʌm ə mæɾɝ fəɹ waɪd dɪskʌʃən," dɛlænə mɝmɝd. "soʊ fɑɹ. stɪl, ðəɹ ɪz səm ɪntʃɹəst ɪn wɛðɝ jəl bɑn ə wɔɹɾɝ, ən hu. aɪ daʊt ðət ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn wəd bi kənsɪɾɝd ə waɪz pɪk." ʃi twɪstəɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl tə lʊk bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ət lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ, ɛɡwin θɔt, bʌt wən ðə sɪɾɝ tɝn bæk ɝaʊnd, ʃi sɛd, vɛɹi sɔfli, "ʃɛɹiəm wɑz nɛvɝ jəɹ tʃɔɪs fəɹ kipɝ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt jə mʌs noʊ ðət ði ədʒəz sɛt ðə ɹɛst ə ðət lɑt tə wɑtʃ ju, əz wɛl." hɝ dæpəld ɡɹeɪ mɛɹ wɑz ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən deɪʃɝ, soʊ ʃi hæd tə lʊk ʌp əɾ ɛɡwin, wɪtʃ ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə də wɪθaʊt simɪŋ tə. ðoʊz wɔɾɝi blu aɪz wɝ sʌɾənli kwaɪt ʃɑɹp. "ðɛɹ wɑz səm θɔt ðət sɪuən maɪt bi ædvaɪzɪŋ jə . . . tu wɛl . . . æftɝ ðə weɪ jə bɹɔɾ əbaʊt ðə dɛklɝeɪʃən ʌv wɔɹ əɡɛnst ɪleɪɾə. bʌt ʃiz stɪl ɹɪzɛnfəl oʊvɝ əɹ tʃeɪnʒd sɝkəmstænsəz, ɪzənt ʃi? ʃɛɹiəm ɪz sin əz ðə moʊs laɪkli kʌlpɹɪt, naʊ. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ði ədʒəz wɑn ə lɪɾəl wɔɹnɪŋ ɪf jə dɪsaɪd tə pʊl ənʌðɝ sɝpɹaɪz." "aɪ θæŋk jə fəɹ ðə wɔɹnɪŋ," ɛɡwin sɛd pəlaɪtli. kʌlpɹɪt? ʃi hæd pɹuvən tə ðə hɔl ðət ʃi wəd nɑt bi ðɛɹ pʌpət, jɛt moʊst ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn θɪŋkɪŋ ʃi hæd tə bi sʌmwʌnz. ət lis noʊ wʌn səspɛktəd ðə tʃɹuθ əbaʊɾ əɹ kaʊnsəl. ɪt wɑz tə bi hoʊp noʊ wʌn dɪd.

"I wouldn't say it has become a matter for wide discussion," Delana murmured. "So far. Still, there is some interest in whether you will bond a Warder, and who. I doubt that Gareth Bryne would be considered a wise pick." She twisted in her saddle to look behind them. At Lord Gareth, Egwene thought, but when the Sitter turned back around, she said, very softly, "Sheriam was never your choice for Keeper, of course, but you must know that the Ajahs set the rest of that lot to watch you, as well." Her dappled gray mare was shorter than Daishar, so she had to look up at Egwene, which she tried to do without seeming to. Those watery blue eyes were suddenly quite sharp. "There was some thought that Siuan might be advising you . . . too well . . . after the way you brought about the declaration of war against Elaida. But she's still resentful over her changed circumstances, isn't she? Sheriam is seen as the most likely culprit, now. In any case, the Ajahs want a little warning if you decide to pull another surprise." "I thank you for the warning," Egwene said politely. Culprit? She had proven to the Hall that she would not be their puppet, yet most insisted on thinking she had to be someone's. At least no one suspected the truth about her council. It was to be hoped no one did.

"ðɛɹ ɪz ənʌðɝ ɹizən jə ʃəd bi wɛɹi," dɛlænə wɛn ɑn, ði ɪntɛnsəɾi ɪn əɹ aɪz bɪlaɪɪŋ ðə kæʒəɑlnəs ə hɝ vɔɪs. ðɪs wɑz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə hɝ ðən ʃi wɑntəɾ ɛɡwin tə noʊ. "ju meɪ bi ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɛni ædvaɪs wʌn ə ðɛm ɡɪvz jə kʌmz stʃɹeɪt fɹəm ðə hɛɾ ə hɝ ədʒɑ, ən əz jə noʊ, ðə hɛɾ ʌv ən ədʒɑ ən ɪts sɪɾɝz doʊn ɔlweɪz si aɪ tə aɪ. lɪsnɪŋ tu kloʊsli kəd pʊt jə əɾ ɑdz wɪð ðə hɔl. nɑɾ ɛvɹi dɪsɪʒən kənsɝnz ðə wɔɹ, ɹɪmɛmbɝ, bʌt jəl ʃʊɹli wɑn səm ə ðoʊz tə ɡoʊ jəɹ weɪ." "æn æmɪɝlɪn ʃəd lɪsən tə ɛvɹi saɪd bɪfɔɹ meɪkɪŋ ɛni dɪsɪʒən," ɛɡwin ɹɪplaɪd, "bʌɾ əl ɹɪmɛmbɝ jəɹ wɔɹnɪŋ wən ðeɪ ædvaɪz mi, dɔɾɝ." dɪd dɛlænə θɪŋk ʃi wɑz ə ful? əɹ pɝhæps ðə wʊmən wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk əɹ æŋɡɹi. æŋɡɝ meɪd fəɹ heɪsti dɪsɪʒənz ən ɹæʃ wɝdz ðət səmtaɪmz wɝ hɑɹd tə teɪk bæk. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən wʌt dɛlænə wɑz eɪmɪŋ æt, bʌt wən sɪɾɝz kəd nɑt mənɪpjəleɪɾ əɹ wʌn weɪ, ðeɪ tʃɹaɪɾ ənʌðɝ. ʃi hæd ɡɑɾən ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə pɹæktəs ɪn saɪdstɛpɪŋ mənɪpjəleɪʃən sɪns biɪŋ ɹeɪzd æmɪɝlɪn. teɪkɪŋ dip, ɹɛɡjəlɝ bɹɛθs, ʃi sɔt ðə bæləns ə kɑm ən faʊn ɪt. ʃi hæɾ ɪntaɪɝli tu mʌtʃ pɹæktəs ət ðæt, tu, ʌv leɪt.

"There is another reason you should be wary," Delana went on, the intensity in her eyes belying the casualness of her voice. This was more important to her than she wanted Egwene to know. "You may be sure that any advice one of them gives you comes straight from the head of her Ajah, and as you know, the head of an Ajah and its Sitters don't always see eye to eye. Listening too closely could put you at odds with the Hall. Not every decision concerns the war, remember, but you will surely want some of those to go your way." "An Amyrlin should listen to every side before making any decision," Egwene replied, "but I'll remember your warning when they advise me, Daughter." Did Delana think she was a fool? Or perhaps the woman was trying to make her angry. Anger made for hasty decisions and rash words that sometimes were hard to take back. She could not imagine what Delana was aiming at, but when Sitters could not manipulate her one way, they tried another. She had gotten a great deal of practice in sidestepping manipulation since being raised Amyrlin. Taking deep, regular breaths, she sought the balance of calm and found it. She had entirely too much practice at that, too, of late.

ðə ɡɹeɪ lʊkt ʌp əɾ əɹ pæs ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ hʊd, hɝ feɪs ʌɾɝli smuð. bʌɾ əɹ peɪl blu aɪz wɝ vɛɹi ʃɑɹp, naʊ, laɪk ɔɡɝz. "ju maɪɾ ɪnkwaɪɹ wʌt ðeɪ θɪŋk ɑn ðə sʌbʒɪkt ə nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz wɪð ɪleɪɾə, mʌðɝ."

The Gray looked up at her past the edge of her hood, her face utterly smooth. But her pale blue eyes were very sharp, now, like augers. "You might inquire what they think on the subject of negotiations with Elaida, Mother."

ɛɡwin ɔlmoʊst smaɪld. ðə pɔz hæd bɪn vɛɹi dɪlɪbɝɪt. əpɛɹənli dɛlænə dɪslaɪk biɪŋ kɔl dɔɾɝ baɪ ə wʊmən jʌŋɡɝ ðən moʊs nɑvəsɪz. jʌŋɡɝ ðən moʊst u hæd kʌm fɹəm ðə taʊɝ, lɛɾ əloʊn ðə nuəst. bʌt ðɛn, dɛlænə hɝsɛlf wɑz tu jʌŋ tə bi ə sɪɾɝ. ən ʃi kəd nɑt hoʊld əɹ tɛmpɝ əz wɛl əz ði ɪnkipɝz dɔɾɝ. "ænd waɪ wəɾ aɪ æsk ðæt?" "bɪkɔz ðə sʌbʒɪkt əz kʌm ʌp ɪn ðə hɔl ɪn ðə læs fju deɪz. nɑɾ əz ə pɹəpoʊzəl, bʌɾ ɪts bɪn mɛnʃənd, vɛɹi kwaɪətli, baɪ vɛɹɪlɪn, ən baɪ tɑkimə, ən ɔlsoʊ baɪ mæɡlə. ən feɪsɛl ən sɛɝɔɪjə hæv əpɪɹɾ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn wʌt ðeɪv hæd tə seɪ." kɑm əɹ noʊ kɑm, ə wɝm ʌv æŋɡɝ sʌɾənli ɹɪθd ɪnsaɪɾ ɛɡwin, ən kɹʌʃɪŋ ɪt wɑz noʊ izi tæsk. ðoʊz faɪv hæd bɪn sɪɾɝz bɪfɔɹ ðə taʊɝ wɑz bɹoʊkən, bʌt mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾəntli, ðeɪ wɝ dɪvaɪɾəd bɪtwin ðə tu meɪdʒɝ fækʃənz stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ fəɹ kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðə hɔl. ɪn ɹiæləɾi, ðeɪ wɝ dɪvaɪɾəd bɪtwin fɑloʊɪŋ ɹoʊmændə əɹ ləleɪn, jɛt ðət pɛɹ wəɾ əpoʊz wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪf ɪt mɛn ðeɪ boʊθ dʒɹaʊnd. ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ kɛpt ən aɪɝn ɡɹɪp ɑn ðɛɹ fɑloʊɝz. ʃi maɪt bɪliv ði ʌðɝz hæd bɪn pænɪk baɪ ɪvɛns, bʌt nɑt ɹoʊmændə əɹ ləleɪn. fəɹ hæf ə wik naʊ, tɔk ʌv ɪleɪɾə əɹ ɹəteɪkɪŋ ðə taʊɝ hæd bɪn ɔl bʌɾ oʊvɝwɛlm baɪ wɝid kɑnvɝseɪʃənz oʊvɝ ðəɾ ɪmpɑsəbli paʊɝfəl, ɪmpɑsəbli lɔŋ ɪɹʌpʃən ə ðə paʊɝ. nɪɹli ɛvɹiwʌn wɑntəd tə noʊ wʌt hæd kɑzd ɪt, ən nɪɹli ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz əfɹeɪd tə lɝn. oʊnli jɛstɝdeɪ hæɾ ɛɡwin bɪn eɪbəl tə kənvɪns ðə hɔl ðəɾ ɪt mʌs bi seɪf fəɹ ə smɔl pɑɹɾi tə tʃɹævəl tə wɛɹ ðəɾ ɪɹʌpʃən hæd bɪn - ivən ðə mɛmɹi wɑz stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn tə pɪnpɔɪn ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ɪt hæd bɪn - ən moʊst sɪstɝz stɪl sim tə bi hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ kəlɛktɪv bɹɛθ əntɪl ækæɹən ən ði ʌðɝz ɹɪtɝnd. ɛvɹi ədʒɑ hæd wɑntəɾ ə ɹɛpɹəzɛntəɾɪv, bʌɾ ækæɹən hæd bɪn ði oʊnli ɛɛs sədaɪ tə pʊʃ fɔɹwɝd.

Egwene almost smiled. The pause had been very deliberate. Apparently Delana disliked being called Daughter by a woman younger than most novices. Younger than most who had come from the Tower, let alone the newest. But then, Delana herself was too young to be a Sitter. And she could not hold her temper as well as the innkeeper's daughter. "And why would I ask that?" "Because the subject has come up in the Hall in the last few days. Not as a proposal, but it has been mentioned, very quietly, by Varilin, and by Takima, and also by Magla. And Faiselle and Saroiya have appeared interested in what they have had to say." Calm or no calm, a worm of anger suddenly writhed inside Egwene, and crushing it was no easy task. Those five had been Sitters before the Tower was broken, but more importantly, they were divided between the two major factions struggling for control of the Hall. In reality, they were divided between following Romanda or Lelaine, yet that pair would oppose one another if it meant they both drowned. They also kept an iron grip on their followers. She might believe the others had been panicked by events, but not Romanda or Lelaine. For half a week now, talk of Elaida or retaking the Tower had been all but overwhelmed by worried conversations over that impossibly powerful, impossibly long eruption of the Power. Nearly everyone wanted to know what had caused it, and nearly everyone was afraid to learn. Only yesterday had Egwene been able to convince the Hall that it must be safe for a small party to Travel to where that eruption had been - even the memory was strong enough for everyone to pinpoint exactly where it had been - and most sisters still seemed to be holding their collective breath until Akarrin and the others returned. Every Ajah had wanted a representative, but Akarrin had been the only Aes Sedai to push forward.

niðɝ ləleɪn nɔɹ ɹoʊmændə sim kənsɝnd, haʊɛvɝ. vaɪələn ən pɹəlɔŋd əz ðə dɪspleɪ hæd bɪn, ɪɾ ɔlsoʊ hæd bɪn vɛɹi fɑɹ əweɪ, ən noʊ hɑɹm dʌn ðət ðeɪ kəd si; ɪf ɪt wɑz ðə fɔɹseɪkənz wɝk, əz sim sɝɾən, ðə tʃæns ə lɝnɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ wɑz vænɪʃɪŋli smɔl, ən ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðət ðeɪ kəd də ɛniθɪŋ tə kaʊntɝ ɪɾ ivən smɔlɝ. weɪstɪŋ taɪm ən ɛfɝɾ ɑn ɪmpɑsəbɪləɾiz wɑz sɛnsləs wən ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt tæsk leɪ ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm. soʊ ðeɪ sɛd, ɡɹɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ tiθ oʊvɝ faɪndɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn əɡɹimənt. ðeɪ dɪɾ əɡɹi ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə mʌs bi stʃɹɪpt ə ðə stoʊl ən stæf, ðoʊ, ɹoʊmændə wɪð ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ fɝvɝ əz ləleɪn, ən ɪf ɪleɪɾə ənsiɾɪŋ ə fɔɹmɝ blu əz æmɪɝlɪn hæɾ ɛnɹeɪdʒ ləleɪn, ɪleɪɾəz pɹɑkləmeɪʃən ðət ðə blu ədʒɑ wɑz dɪsbændɪd hæd meɪɾ əɹ nɪɹ-ɹæbɪd. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ əlaʊɪŋ tɔk ə nɪɡoʊʃieɪʃən. . . . ɪt meɪd noʊ sɛns.

Neither Lelaine nor Romanda seemed concerned, however. Violent and prolonged as the display had been, it also had been very far away, and no harm done that they could see; if it was the Forsaken's work, as seemed certain, the chance of learning anything was vanishingly small, and the possibility that they could do anything to counter it even smaller. Wasting time and effort on impossibilities was senseless when an important task lay right in front of them. So they said, gritting their teeth over finding themselves in agreement. They did agree that Elaida must be stripped of the stole and staff, though, Romanda with almost as much fervor as Lelaine, and if Elaida unseating a former Blue as Amyrlin had enraged Lelaine, Elaida's proclamation that the Blue Ajah was disbanded had made her near-rabid. If they were allowing talk of negotiation. . . . It made no sense.

ðə læs θɪŋ ɛɡwin wɑntəd wɑz fəɹ dɛlænə əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls tə səspɛk ðət ʃɛɹiəm ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ mɔɹ ðən ə sɛɾ ə ʃipdɔɡz sɛt tə wɑtʃ hɝ, bʌt ʃi sʌmən əm wɪð ə ʃɑɹp kɔl.

The last thing Egwene wanted was for Delana or anyone else to suspect that Sheriam and the others were more than a set of sheepdogs set to watch her, but she summoned them with a sharp call.

ðeɪ wɝ smɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə kip ðə sikɹəts ðət niɾəd kipɪŋ, sɪns ðɛɹ oʊn ədʒəz wəɾ əv ðɛɹ haɪdz ɪf ivən ðə hæf keɪm aʊt, ən wɪð noʊ ɡɹeɪt heɪst, ðeɪ keɪm fɔɹwɝɾ ən ɹoʊɾ ɪn ə klʌstɝ ɝaʊn hɝ, ðɛɹ feɪsəz ɔl mæsks ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi ən peɪʃəns. ðən ɛɡwin toʊl dɛlænə tə ɹɪpit wʌt ʃi hæd sɛd. fəɹ ɔl əɹ ɪnɪʃəl ɹɪkwɛs fəɹ pɹaɪvəsi, ðə ɡɹeɪ meɪɾ oʊnli ə pɝfʌŋktɝi dɪmɹəl bɪfɔɹ kəmplaɪɪŋ. ən ðət wɑz ði ɛn ə kɑm ən peɪʃəns.

They were smart enough to keep the secrets that needed keeping, since their own Ajahs would have their hides if even the half came out, and with no great haste, they came forward and rode in a cluster around her, their faces all masks of Aes Sedai serenity and patience. Then Egwene told Delana to repeat what she had said. For all her initial request for privacy, the Gray made only a perfunctory demurral before complying. And that was the end of calm and patience.

"ðæts mædnəs," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls kəɾ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ. ʃi saʊndəɾ æŋɡɹi, ən pɝhæps ə lɪɾəl fɹaɪɾənd. wɛl ʃi maɪt bi. hɝ neɪm wɑz ɑn ə lɪst ə ðoʊz mɑɹk fəɹ stɪlɪŋ.

"That's madness," Sheriam said before anyone else could open her mouth. She sounded angry, and perhaps a little frightened. Well she might be. Her name was on a list of those marked for stilling.

"nʌn ə ðɛm kən ɹɪli bɪliv nɪɡoʊʃieɪʃən ɪz pɑsəbəl." "aɪ ʃəd hɑɹdli θɪŋk soʊ," æneɪjə pʊɾ ɪn dʒɹaɪli. hɝ pleɪn feɪs bɪlɔŋd ɑn ə fɑɹmwaɪf ɹæðɝ ðən ə blu sɪstɝ, ən ʃi dʒɹɛs vɛɹi sɪmpli, pʌblɪkli ət list, ɪn ɡʊd wʊl, bʌt ʃi hændəld əɹ beɪ ɡɛldɪŋ əz izəli əz dɛlænə dɪɾ əɹ mɛɹ. vɛɹi lɪɾəl kəd ɹʌfəl æneɪjəz kɑm. ʌv kɔɹs, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ blu əmʌŋ ðə sɪɾɝz tɔkɪŋ nɪɡoʊʃieɪʃən.

"None of them can really believe negotiation is possible." "I should hardly think so," Anaiya put in dryly. Her plain face belonged on a farmwife rather than a Blue sister, and she dressed very simply, publicly at least, in good wool, but she handled her bay gelding as easily as Delana did her mare. Very little could ruffle Anaiya's calm. Of course, there was no Blue among the Sitters talking negotiation.

æneɪjə lʊkt ən ənlaɪkli soʊlʒɝ, bʌt fəɹ bluz, ðɪs wɑz wɔɹ tə ðə naɪf, noʊ kɔɹɾɝ æskt əɹ ɡɪvən.

Anaiya looked an unlikely soldier, but for Blues, this was war to the knife, no quarter asked or given.

"ɪleɪɾə hæz meɪd ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən kwaɪt klɪɹ."

"Elaida has made the situation quite clear."

"ɪleɪɾə ɪz ɪɹæʃənəl," kɑɹlɪnjə sɛd wɪð ə tɔs ə hɝ hɛd ðət meɪɾ əɹ kaʊl fɔl tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz ən ʃʊk əɹ ʃɔɹt dɑɹk kɝlz. ʃi pʊl ðə hʊd bæk ɪndə pleɪs ɪɹɪɾəbli. kɑɹlɪnjə sɛldəm ʃoʊɾ ɛni hɪn ʌv ɪmoʊʃən, jɛɾ əɹ peɪl tʃiks wɝ nɪɹli əz flʌʃt əz ʃɛɹiəmz, ən hit fɪld əɹ vɔɪs. "ʃi kænɑt pɑsəbli bɪliv ðət wɪl ɔl kʌm kɹɔlɪŋ bæk tə hɝ naʊ. haʊ kən sɛɝɔɪjə bɪliv ʃɪl æksɛpt ɛniθɪŋ lɛs?" "kɹɔlɪŋ ɪz wʌɾ ɪleɪɾə hæz dɪmændəd, ðoʊ," mɔɹvɹɪn mʌɾɝd ækɹɪdli. hɝ juʒəwəli plæsəd ɹaʊn feɪs wɔɹ ə saʊɝ ɪkspɝz sən, tu, ən əɹ plʌmp hænz wɝ taɪɾ ɑn əɹ ɹeɪnz. ʃi skaʊl soʊ hɑɹɾ əɾ ə flaɪɾ ə mæɡpaɪz, skæɾɝɪŋ fɹəm ə stæn ə bɝtʃ tʃɹiz ət ðə pæsədʒ ə hɔɹsəz, ðəɾ ɪt sim ðeɪ ʃəd fɔl aʊɾ ə ðə skaɪ. "tɑkimə laɪks ðə saʊn ə hɝ oʊn vɔɪs, səmtaɪmz. ʃi mʌs bi tɔkɪŋ tə hɪɹ hɝsɛlf."

"Elaida is irrational," Carlinya said with a toss of her head that made her cowl fall to her shoulders and shook her short dark curls. She pulled the hood back into place irritably. Carlinya seldom showed any hint of emotion, yet her pale cheeks were nearly as flushed as Sheriam's, and heat filled her voice. "She cannot possibly believe that we will all come crawling back to her now. How can Saroiya believe she will accept anything less?" "Crawling is what Elaida has demanded, though," Morvrin muttered acridly. Her usually placid round face wore a sour expres sion, too, and her plump hands were tight on her reins. She scowled so hard at a flight of magpies, scattering from a stand of birch trees at the passage of horses, that it seemed they should fall out of the sky. "Takima likes the sound of her own voice, sometimes. She must be talking to hear herself."

"feɪsɛl mʌst, tu," maɪɹɛl sɛd dɑɹkli, ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət dɛlænə əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ tə bleɪm. ði ɑləv-skɪnd wʊmən wɑz noʊn fəɹ əɹ tɛmpɝ, ivən əmʌŋ ɡɹinz. "aɪ nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə hɪɹ ðət sɔɹɾ ə tɔk aʊɾ ə hɝ. ʃiz nɛvɝ bɪn ə ful bɪfɔɹ." "aɪ kæn bɪliv mæɡlə ɹɪli minz ɛni sətʃ θɪŋ," naɪsaʊ ɪnsɪstəd, piɹɪŋ əɾ itʃ ə ðɛm ɪn tɝn. "ʃi dʒʌs kænt. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, əz mʌtʃ əz aɪ heɪt tə seɪ ɪt, ɹoʊmændə hæz mæɡlə soʊ taɪɾ ʌndɝ əɹ θʌm ðət mæɡlə skwiks wɛnɛvɝ ɹoʊmændə snizɪz, ən ði oʊnli daʊt ɹoʊmændə hæz ɪz wɛðɝ ɪleɪɾə ʃəd bi bɝtʃt bɪfɔɹ ʃiz ɛɡzaɪld." dɛlænəz ɪkspɹɛʃən wɑz soʊ blænd, ʃi hæd tə bi səpɹɛsɪŋ ə smʌɡ smaɪl. pleɪnli, ðɪs wɑz ɪɡzækli ðə ɹiækʃən ʃi hæd hoʊp fɔɹ. "ɹoʊmændə hoʊlz sɛɝɔɪjə ən vɛɹɪlɪn dʒʌst əz fɝmli, ən tɑkimə ən feɪsɛl hɑɹdli pʊt wʌn fʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ʌðɝ wɪθaʊt ləleɪnz pɝmɪʃən, bʌt ðeɪ stɪl sɛd wʌt ðeɪ sɛd. aɪ θɪŋk jəɹ ædvaɪzɝz ɑɹ kloʊsɝ tə ðə filɪŋz ə moʊst sɪstɝz, ðoʊ, mʌðɝ." smuðɪŋ əɹ ɡlʌvz, ʃi ɡeɪv ɛɡwin ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk. "ju meɪ bi eɪbəl tə nɪp ðɪs ɪn ðə bʌd, ɪf jə muv fɝmli. ɪt simz jəl əv ðə səpɔɹt jə nid fɹəm ði ədʒəz. ən maɪn, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪn ðə hɔl. maɪn, ən ɪnʌf mɔɹ tə stɑp ɪt dɛd." əz ɪf ɛɡwin niɾəd səpɔɹt tə əkɑmplɪʃ ðæt. pɝhæps ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪnɡɹeɪʃieɪt hɝsɛlf. əɹ dʒʌs tə meɪk ɪɾ əpɪɹ ðət səpɔɹɾ ʌv ɛɡwin wɑz əɹ oʊnli kənsɝn.

"Faiselle must, too," Myrelle said darkly, glaring at Delana as though she were to blame. The olive-skinned woman was known for her temper, even among Greens. "I never expected to hear that sort of talk out of her. She's never been a fool before." "I can't believe Magla really means any such thing," Nisao insisted, peering at each of them in turn. "She just can't. For one thing, as much as I hate to say it, Romanda has Magla so tight under her thumb that Magla squeaks whenever Romanda sneezes, and the only doubt Romanda has is whether Elaida should be birched before she's exiled." Delana's expression was so bland, she had to be suppressing a smug smile. Plainly, this was exactly the reaction she had hoped for. "Romanda holds Saroiya and Varilin just as firmly, and Takima and Faiselle hardly put one foot in front of the other without Lelaine's permission, but they still said what they said. I think your advisors are closer to the feelings of most sisters, though, Mother." Smoothing her gloves, she gave Egwene a sidelong look. "You may be able to nip this in the bud, if you move firmly. It seems you will have the support you need from the Ajahs. And mine, of course, in the Hall. Mine, and enough more to stop it dead." As if Egwene needed support to accomplish that. Perhaps she was trying to ingratiate herself. Or just to make it appear that support of Egwene was her only concern.

bioʊnɪn hæd bɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn saɪləns, klʌtʃɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn əɹ ən piɹɪŋ əɾ ə spɑt bɪtwin əɹ bɹaʊn mɛɹz ɪɹz, bʌt sʌɾənli ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. ɔɹɾənɛɹəli, hɝ lɑɹdʒ blu-ɡɹeɪ aɪz meɪɾ əɹ əpɪɹ stɑɹɾəld, bʌt ðeɪ pɪɹd fɹəm əɹ hʊɾ ɪn ə bleɪz ʌv æŋɡɝ əz ʃi ɡlɛɹd fɹəm wʌn ə hɝ kəmpænjənz tə ənʌðɝ, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɛɡwin. "waɪ ʃəd nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz bi aʊɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃən?" ʃɛɹiəm blɪŋkt əɾ əɹ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ən mɔɹvɹɪn oʊpən əɹ maʊθ wɪð ə skaʊl, bʌt bioʊnɪn plʌnʒd ɑn, dɝɛktɪŋ əɹ aɪɹ ət dɛlænə, naʊ, hɝ tæɹɑbənɝ æksɛn stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən juʒəwəl. "wi ɑɹ ɡɹeɪ, jə ən aɪ. wi nəɡoʊʃieɪt, miɾieɪt. ɪleɪɾə, ʃiz steɪɾəd ðə kəndɪʃənz moʊst oʊnɝəs, bʌt ðəɾ ɪz ɔfən ðə keɪs ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz. wi kən ɹiunaɪt ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən əʃʊɹ ðə seɪfti ʌv ɛvɹiwʌn, ɪf wi oʊnli tɔk."

Beonin had been riding in silence, clutching her cloak around her and peering at a spot between her brown mare's ears, but suddenly she shook her head. Ordinarily, her large blue-gray eyes made her appear startled, but they peered from her hood in a blaze of anger as she glared from one of her companions to another, including Egwene. "Why should negotiations be out of the question?" Sheriam blinked at her in surprise, and Morvrin opened her mouth with a scowl, but Beonin plunged on, directing her ire at Delana, now, her Taraboner accent stronger than usual. "We are Gray, you and I. We negotiate, mediate. Elaida, she has stated the conditions most onerous, but that is often the case in the beginning of negotiations. We can reunite the White Tower and assure the safety of everyone, if we only talk."

"wi ɔlsoʊ dʒʌdʒ," dɛlænə snæpt, "æn ɪleɪɾə hæz bɪn dʒʌdʒd." ðət wɑz nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli tʃɹu, bʌt ʃi simd mɔɹ stɑɹɾəld ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls baɪ bioʊnɪnz aʊtbɝst. hɝ vɔɪs dʒɹɪpt æsəd. "pɝhæps jə ɑɹ wɪlɪŋ tə nəɡoʊʃieɪt jɝsɛlf ɪndə biɪŋ bɝtʃt. aɪm nɑt, ən aɪ θɪŋk jəl faɪn fju ʌðɝz u ɑɹ, iðɝ." "ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən, ɪts ɔltɝd," bioʊnɪn pɝsɪstəd. ʃi stʃɹɛtʃt ə hæn təwɔɹɾ ɛɡwin, ɔlmoʊs pliɾɪŋ. "ɪleɪɾə wəd nɑɾ əv meɪd ðə pɹɑkləmeɪʃən ʃi dɪd kənsɝnɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ənlɛs ʃi hæɾ ɪm ɪn hænd, wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ. ðət flɛɹ ɑfseɪaɪdɑɹ wɑz ə wɔɹnɪŋ. ðə fɔɹseɪkən mʌs bi muvɪŋ, ən ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ɪt mʌs bi - " "ɪnʌf," ɛɡwin kʌɾ ɪn. "ju ɑɹ wɪlɪŋ tə oʊpən nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz wɪð ɪleɪɾə? wɪð ðə sɪɾɝz stɪl ɪn ðə taʊɝ?" ʃi əmɛndəd. ɪleɪɾə wəd nɛvɝ tɔk.

"We also judge," Delana snapped, "and Elaida has been judged." That was not precisely true, but she seemed more startled than anyone else by Beonin's outburst. Her voice dripped acid. "Perhaps you are willing to negotiate yourself into being birched. I am not, and I think you will find few others who are, either." "The situation, it has altered," Beonin persisted. She stretched a hand toward Egwene, almost pleading. "Elaida would not have made the proclamation she did concerning the Dragon Reborn unless she had him in hand, one way or another. That flare ofsaidar was a warning. The Forsaken must be moving, and the White Tower, it must be - " "Enough," Egwene cut in. "You are willing to open negotiations with Elaida? With the Sitters still in the Tower?" she amended. Elaida would never talk.

"jɛs," bioʊnɪn sɛd fɝvənli. "mæɾɝz kən bi ɝeɪnʒd tə ɛvɹiwʌnz sæɾəsfækʃən. aɪ noʊ ðeɪ kæn."

"Yes," Beonin said fervently. "Matters can be arranged to everyone's satisfaction. I know they can."

"ðɛn juv maɪ pɝmɪʃən."

"Then you have my permission."

ɪmiɾiətli ɛvɹiwʌn bʌt bioʊnɪn bɪɡæn tɔkɪŋ fɹæntəkəli ɑn tɑp ʌv wʌn ənʌðɝ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsweɪd hɝ, tɛlɪŋ əɹ ðɪs wɑz ɪnsænəɾi. æneɪjə ʃaʊɾəd əz laʊdli əz ʃɛɹiəm, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ ɛmfæɾɪkli, ən dɛlænəz aɪz bʌlʒd ɪn wʌt lʊk laɪk nɪɹ tɛɹɝ. səm ə ði aʊtʃɹaɪɾɝz bɪɡæn lʊkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə sɪstɝz əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ wɑtʃt ðə fɑɹmz ðeɪ wɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ pæst, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə stɝ əmʌŋ ðə wɔɹɾɝz, hu sɝɾənli hæd noʊ niɾ ə ðɛɹ bɑnz ət ðə moʊmən tə noʊ ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ædʒəteɪɾəd, bʌt ðeɪ hɛl ðɛɹ pleɪsəz. waɪz mɛn kɛp ðɛɹ noʊzɪz aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ wən ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪɡæn ɹeɪzɪŋ ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz.

Immediately everyone but Beonin began talking frantically on top of one another, trying to dissuade her, telling her this was insanity. Anaiya shouted as loudly as Sheriam, gesturing emphatically, and Delana's eyes bulged in what looked like near terror. Some of the outriders began looking toward the sisters as much as they watched the farms they were riding past, and there was a stir among the Warders, who certainly had no need of their bonds at the moment to know their Aes Sedai were agitated, but they held their places. Wise men kept their noses out of the way when Aes Sedai began raising their voices.

ɛɡwin ɪɡnɔɹd ðə ʃaʊts ən ɑɹm-weɪvɪŋ. ʃi hæd kənsɪɾɝd ɛvɹi pɑsəbɪləɾi ʃi kəd θɪŋk ə fəɹ ɛndɪŋ ðɪs stʃɹʌɡəl wɪð ðə waɪt taʊɝ hoʊl ən junaɪɾəd. ʃi hæd tɔk fəɹ aʊɝz wɪð sɪuən, hu hæd mɔɹ ɹizən ðən ɛniwʌn tə wɑnə ənsiɾ ɪleɪɾə. ɪf ɪt cʊɾə seɪv ðə taʊɝ, ɛɡwin wʊɾə sɝɛndɝd tə ɪleɪɾə, fɝɡɛt wɛðɝ ðə wʊmən hæd kʌm tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit liɡəli. sɪuən hæd nɪɹli hæɾ æpəplɛksi ət ðə sədʒɛstʃən, jɛt ʃi hæɾ əɡɹid, ɹɪlʌktənli, ðət pɹəzɝvɪŋ ðə taʊɝ supɝsiɾəd ɛvɹi ʌðɝ kənsɪɾɝeɪʃən. bioʊnɪn wɔɹ sətʃ ə bjuɾəfəl smaɪl, ɪt simd ə kɹaɪm tə kwɛntʃ ɪt.

Egwene ignored the shouts and arm-waving. She had considered every possibility she could think of for ending this struggle with the White Tower whole and united. She had talked for hours with Siuan, who had more reason than anyone to want to unseat Elaida. If it could have saved the Tower, Egwene would have surrendered to Elaida, forget whether the woman had come to the Amyrlin Seat legally. Siuan had nearly had apoplexy at the suggestion, yet she had agreed, reluctantly, that preserving the Tower superseded every other consideration. Beonin wore such a beautiful smile, it seemed a crime to quench it.

ɛɡwin ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə bi hɝɾ oʊvɝ ði ʌðɝz. "ju wɪl əpɹoʊtʃ vɛɹɪlɪn ən ði ʌðɝz dɛlænə neɪmd, ən ɝeɪnʒ tə əpɹoʊtʃ ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðiz ɑɹ ðə tɝmz əl æksɛpt: ɪleɪɾə ɪz tə ɹɪzaɪn ən ɡoʊ ɪndə ɛɡzaɪl." kəz ɪleɪɾə wəd nɛvɝ æksɛp bæk ðə sɪstɝz u hæd ɹɪbɛld əɡɛns hɝ. ən æmɪɝlɪn hæd noʊ seɪ oʊvɝ haʊ ən ədʒɑ ɡʌvɝn ɪtsɛlf, bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə hæd dɪklɛɹd ðət ðə sɪstɝz u flɛd ðə taʊɝ wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ mɛmbɝz ʌv ɛni ədʒɑ. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə hɝ, ðeɪ wəɾ əv tə bɛɡ ɹidmɪɾəns tə ðɛɹ ədʒəz, æftɝ sɝvɪŋ ə pɛnəns ʌndɝ əɹ dɝɛkt kəntʃɹoʊl. ɪleɪɾə wəd nɑt ɹiunaɪt ðə taʊɝ, oʊnli ʃæɾɝ ɪt wɝs ðən ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi wɑz. "ðoʊz ɑɹ ði oʊnli tɝmz əl æksɛpt, bioʊnɪn. ði oʊnli tɝmz. dʒju ʌndɝstæn mi?" bioʊnɪnz aɪz ɹoʊld ʌp ɪn əɹ hɛd, ən ʃi wʊɾə fɔlən fɹəm əɹ hɔɹs ɪf mɔɹvɹɪn hæd nɑt kɑt hɝ, mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ əz ʃi hɛl ðə ɡɹeɪ əpɹaɪɾ ən slæpt əɹ feɪs, nɑt laɪtli. ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls stɛɹɾ əɾ ɛɡwin əz ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ sin əɹ bɪfɔɹ. ivən dɛlænə, hu mʌst əv plæn fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs tə hæpən fɹəm ðə fɝst wɝd ʃi hæd sɛd. ðeɪ hæd kʌm tə ə hɔlt wɪð bioʊnɪnz feɪntɪŋ fɪt, ən ðə ɹɪŋ ə soʊlʒɝz ɝaʊn əm dʒɹu ʌp əɾ ə ʃaʊɾəd kəmæn fɹəm lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ. səm stɛɹd təwɔɹd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðɛɹ æŋzaɪəɾi pleɪn ivən wɪð ðɛɹ feɪsəz hɪɾən bɪhaɪn ðə bɑɹz ə ðɛɹ hɛlməts. "ɪts taɪm tə ɡɛt bæk tə kæmp," ɛɡwin sɛd. kɑmli. wʌt hæd tə bi dʌn hæd tə bi dʌn. pɝhæps sɝɛndɝ wʊɾə hil ðə taʊɝ, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt bɪliv ɪt. ən naʊ ɪt maɪt kʌm daʊn tə ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪsɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn ðə stʃɹits ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ənlɛs ʃi kəd faɪn ə weɪ tə meɪk əɹ plæn səksid. "wi hæv wɝk tə du," ʃi sɛd, ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz, "æn ðəɹ ɪzən mʌtʃ taɪm lɛft." ʃi pɹeɪd ðəɹ wɑz ɪnʌf.

Egwene raised her voice just enough to be heard over the others. "You will approach Varilin and the others Delana named, and arrange to approach the White Tower. These are the terms I will accept: Elaida is to resign and go into exile." Because Elaida would never accept back the sisters who had rebelled against her. An Amyrlin had no say over how an Ajah governed itself, but Elaida had declared that the sisters who fled the Tower were no longer members of any Ajah. According to her, they would have to beg readmittance to their Ajahs, after serving a penance under her direct control. Elaida would not reunite the Tower, only shatter it worse than it already was. "Those are the only terms I will accept, Beonin. The only terms. Do you understand me?" Beonin's eyes rolled up in her head, and she would have fallen from her horse if Morvrin had not caught her, muttering under her breath as she held the Gray upright and slapped her face, not lightly. Everyone else stared at Egwene as though they had never seen her before. Even Delana, who must have planned for something like this to happen from the first word she had said. They had come to a halt with Beonin's fainting fit, and the ring of soldiers around them drew up at a shouted command from Lord Gareth. Some stared toward the Aes Sedai, their anxiety plain even with their faces hidden behind the bars of their helmets. "It's time to get back to camp," Egwene said. Calmly. What had to be done had to be done. Perhaps surrender would have healed the Tower, but she could not believe it. And now it might come down to Aes Sedai facing one another in the streets of Tar Valon, unless she could find a way to make her plan succeed. "We have work to do," she said, gathering her reins, "and there isn't much time left." She prayed there was enough.

tʃæptɝ sɛvəntin

CHAPTER 17

sikɹəts wʌns dɛlænə wɑz ʃʊɹ ðəɾ əɹ nɑkʃəs sid hæd teɪkən ɹut, ʃi mɝmɝd ðəɾ ɪt maɪt bi bɛst ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑt sin ɝaɪvɪŋ bæk ət ðə kæmp təɡɛðɝ ən slɪpt əweɪ, pʊʃɪŋ əɹ mɛɹ tə ə kwɪk tʃɹɑt θɹu ðə snoʊ ən livɪŋ ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm tə ɹaɪɾ ɑn ɪn ənizi saɪləns ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə kɹʌntʃ ə ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz. ðə wɔɹɾɝz meɪnteɪn ðɛɹ dɪstəns bɪhaɪnd, ən ði ɛskɔɹɾɪŋ soʊlʒɝz hæd ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən bæk ɑn ðə fɑɹmz ən θɪkəts, wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə ɡlæns təwɔɹd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ðəɾ ɛɡwin kəd si, naʊ. mɛn nɛvɝ nu wən tə kip ðɛɹ maʊðz ʃʌt, ðoʊ. tɛlɪŋ ə mæn tə bi kwaɪəɾ oʊnli meɪɾ ɪm ɡɑsəp ɔl ðə hɑɹɾɝ, dʒʌs tə kloʊz fɹɛnz i kəd tʃɹʌst, tə bi ʃʊɹ, əz ɪf ðeɪ ɪn tɝn wəd nɑt tɛl ɛvɹiwʌn u wəd lɪsən. ðə wɔɹɾɝz maɪt bi dɪfɹənt - ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlweɪz ɪnsɪstəd ðeɪ wɝ, ðoʊz u hæd wɔɹɾɝz - bʌt noʊ daʊt ðə soʊlʒɝz wəd tɔk ə sɪstɝz ɑɹɡjuɪŋ, ən noʊ daʊt ðeɪ wəd seɪ dɛlænə hæd bɪn sɛn ɔf wɪð ə fli ɪn əɹ ɪɹ. ðə wʊmən hæd plæn ðɪs vɛɹi kɛɹfəli.

Secrets Once Delana was sure that her noxious seed had taken root, she murmured that it might be best if they were not seen arriving back at the camp together and slipped away, pushing her mare to a quick trot through the snow and leaving the rest of them to ride on in uneasy silence except for the crunch of the horses' hooves. The Warders maintained their distance behind, and the escorting soldiers had their attention back on the farms and thickets, without so much as a glance toward the Aes Sedai that Egwene could see, now. Men never knew when to keep their mouths shut, though. Telling a man to be quiet only made him gossip all the harder, just to close friends he could trust, to be sure, as if they in turn would not tell everyone who would listen. The Warders might be different - Aes Sedai always insisted they were, those who had Warders - but no doubt the soldiers would talk of sisters arguing, and no doubt they would say Delana had been sent off with a flea in her ear. The woman had planned this very carefully.

wɝs ðən faɪɝwiɾ əɹ stʃɹæŋɡlɝvaɪn kəd ɡɹoʊ ɪf ðət sid wɑz əlaʊd tə spɹaʊt, bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪɾɝ hæd ʃɛltɝd hɝsɛlf fɹəm bleɪm vɛɹi nitli. tʃɹuθ ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz dɪd kʌm aʊɾ ɪn ði ɛnd, bʌt baɪ ði ɛnd, tʃɹuθ wɑz ɔfən soʊ ɹæpt ɝaʊnd wɪð ɹumɝz ən spɛkjəleɪʃən ən æbsəlut laɪz ðət moʊs pipəl nɛvɝ dɪd bɪliv ɪt.

Worse than fireweed or stranglervine could grow if that seed was allowed to sprout, but the Gray Sitter had sheltered herself from blame very neatly. Truth almost always did come out in the end, but by the end, truth was often so wrapped around with rumors and speculation and absolute lies that most people never did believe it.

"aɪ tʃɹʌst aɪ doʊn əv tə æsk wɛðɝ ɛni ʌv jə hæd hɝɾ əbaʊt ðɪs bɪfɔɹ." ɛɡwin sɛd ðət kwaɪt kæʒəwəli, simɪŋli stʌɾiɪŋ ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪɾ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd, bʌt ʃi wɑz plizd wən ɛvɹiwʌn dɪnaɪɾ ɪɾ aʊtʃɹaɪt wɪð kənsɪɾɝəbəl ɪndɪɡneɪʃən, ɪnkluɾɪŋ bioʊnɪn, hu wɑz wɝkɪŋ əɹ dʒɔ ən ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət mɔɹvɹɪn. ɛɡwin tʃɹʌstɪɾ əm əz fɑɹ əz ʃi dɛɹd - ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əv ɡɪvən əɹ ðɛɹ oʊðz wɪθaʊt minɪŋ tə hoʊl tə ɛvɹi wɝd; nɑɾ ənlɛs ðeɪ wɝ blæk ədʒɑ, ə nɪɡəlɪŋ pɑsəbɪləɾi ðəɾ əkaʊntəd fəɹ moʊst ə hɝ kɑʃən - jɛɾ ivən oʊðz ə fiəlti lɛft ɹum fəɹ ðə moʊs lɔɪəl pipəl duɪŋ ðə wɝs pɑsəbəl θɪŋ ɪn ðə bɪlif ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ɪn jəɹ bɛst ɪntʃɹəst. ən pipəl u hæd bɪn koʊɝst ɪndə ðɛɹ oʊðz kəd bi ədɛpt ət spɑɾɪŋ ðə ɡæps ən liweɪz. "ðə ɹil kwɛstʃən," ʃi kəntɪnjud, "ɪz wʌt wɑz dɛlænə æftɝ?" ʃi hæd noʊ nid tə ɪkspleɪn, nɑt fəɹ ðiz wɪmən, ɛvɹi wʌn ɪkspɪɹiənst ɪn ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz. ɪf ɔl dɛlænə hæd wɑntəd wɑz tə stɑp nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz wɪð ɪleɪɾə waɪl kipɪŋ əɹ oʊn neɪm aʊɾ ʌv ɪt, ʃi kəd sɪmpli hæv spoʊkən tə ɛɡwin əloʊn əɾ ɛni taɪm. sɪɾɝz niɾəd noʊ ɪkskjus tə kʌm tə ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi. əɹ ʃi cʊɾə juz hɑlimə, hu slɛpt ɑn ə pæləɾ ɪn ɛɡwinz tɛn moʊs naɪts dɪspaɪt biɪŋ dɛlænəz sɛkɹətɛɹi. ɛɡwin wɑz tʃɹʌbəld wɪð hɛdeɪks, ən səm naɪts oʊnli hɑliməz məsɑʒɪz kəd suð əm soʊ ʃi kəd slip. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ən ənɑnəməs noʊt maɪɾ əv bɪn səfɪʃən tə meɪk əɹ pɹizɛn ðə hɔl wɪð ən iɾɪkt fɝbɪɾɪŋ nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz. ðə tʌtʃiəs kwɪblɝ wəɾ əv tə ədmɪt ðət tɔks tə ɛn ðə wɔɹ sɝɾənli tʌtʃt ɑn ðə wɔɹ. bʌt pleɪnli dɛlænə wɑntəd ʃɛɹiəm ən ði ʌðɝz tə noʊ, tu. hɝ tɑlbɛɹɪŋ wɑz ən æɹoʊ eɪmd əɾ ənʌðɝ tɑɹɡət.

"I trust I don't have to ask whether any of you had heard about this before." Egwene said that quite casually, seemingly studying the countryside as they rode, but she was pleased when everyone denied it outright with considerable indignation, including Beonin, who was working her jaw and glaring at Morvrin. Egwene trusted them as far as she dared - they could not have given her their oaths without meaning to hold to every word; not unless they were Black Ajah, a niggling possibility that accounted for most of her caution - yet even oaths of fealty left room for the most loyal people doing the worst possible thing in the belief that it was in your best interest. And people who had been coerced into their oaths could be adept at spotting the gaps and leeways. "The real question," she continued, "is what was Delana after?" She had no need to explain, not for these women, every one experienced in the Game of Houses. If all Delana had wanted was to stop negotiations with Elaida while keeping her own name out of it, she could simply have spoken to Egwene alone at any time. Sitters needed no excuse to come to the Amyrlin's study. Or she could have used Halima, who slept on a pallet in Egwene's tent most nights despite being Delana's secretary. Egwene was troubled with headaches, and some nights only Halima's massages could soothe them so she could sleep. For that matter, an anonymous note might have been sufficient to make her present the Hall with an edict forbidding negotiations. The touchiest quibbler would have to admit that talks to end the war certainly touched on the war. But plainly Delana wanted Sheriam and the others to know, too. Her talebearing was an arrow aimed at another target.

"stʃɹaɪf bɪtwin ði ədʒɑ hɛdz ən ðə sɪɾɝz," kɑɹlɪnjə sɛd, əz kul əz ðə snoʊ. "pɝhæps stʃɹaɪf bɪtwin ði ədʒəz." kæʒəwəli ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ kloʊk, ɪntʃɹəkətli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd waɪt-ɑn-waɪt bʌt laɪnd wɪð dɛns blæk fɝ, ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn dɪskʌsɪŋ ðə pɹaɪs ʌv ə spul ə θɹɛd. "waɪ ʃi wɑns ðiz θɪŋz, aɪ kæn bɪɡɪn tə seɪ, bʌt ðoʊz wɪl bi ðə ɹɪzʌls, ənlɛs wəɹ vɛɹi kɛɹfəl, ən ʃi kəd nɑt noʊ wi wəd bi kɛɹfəl, əɹ ðət wɪv ɛni ɹizən tə bi, soʊ lɑdʒɪkli wʌn əɹ boʊθ mʌs bi hɝ eɪm."

"Strife between the Ajah heads and the Sitters," Carlinya said, as cool as the snow. "Perhaps strife between the Ajahs." Casually adjusting her cloak, intricately embroidered white-on-white but lined with dense black fur, she might have been discussing the price of a spool of thread. "Why she wants these things, I can't begin to say, but those will be the results, unless we are very careful, and she could not know we would be careful, or that we have any reason to be, so logically one or both must be her aim."

"ðə fɝst ænsɝ ðət kʌmz tə maɪn ɪzən ɔlweɪz kɝɛkt, kɑɹlɪnjə," mɔɹvɹɪn sɛd. "ðɛɹz noʊ seɪɪŋ ðət dɛlænə θɔɾ əɹ ækʃənz θɹu əz kɛɹfəli əz jə hæv, əɹ ðət ʃi θɔɾ əlɔŋ ðə seɪm laɪnz." ðə staʊt bɹaʊn bɪliv mɔɹ ɪn kɑmən sɛns ðən lɑdʒɪk, əɹ soʊ ʃi sɛd, bʌɾ ɪn tʃɹuθ ʃi sim tə blɛn ðə tu, ə kɑmbəneɪʃən ðət meɪɾ əɹ vɛɹi hɑɹdhɛɾɪd, ən səspɪʃəs ə kwɪk əɹ izi ænsɝz. wɪtʃ wɑz nɑɾ ə bæd θɪŋ tə bi. "dɛlænə meɪ bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə sweɪ səm əmʌŋ ðə sɪɾɝz ɑn səm ɪʃu ðæts ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə hɝ. meɪbi ʃi hoʊps tə ɡɛɾ ɪleɪɾə dɪklɛɹd blæk ədʒɑ æftɝ ɔl. noʊ mæɾɝ ðə ɹɪzʌls, hɝ ɡoʊl meɪ bi sʌmθɪŋ wi doʊn ivən səspɛkt. sɪɾɝz kən bi əz pɛɾi əz ɛniwʌn ɛls. fəɹ ɔl wi noʊ, ʃi maɪɾ əv ə ɡɹʌdʒ əɡɛnst wʌn ə ðoʊz ʃi neɪm deɪɾɪŋ bæk tə wən ʃi wɑz ə nɑvəs ən ðeɪ tɔt hɝ. bɛɾɝ tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn wʌt wɪl kʌm ʌv ɪt ðən tə wɝi əbaʊt waɪ əntɪl wi noʊ mɔɹ." hɝ toʊn wɑz əz plæsəɾ əz əɹ bɹɔd feɪs, bʌt kɑɹlɪnjəz kul kəmpoʊʒɝ flɪkɝd tə kul dɪsdeɪn fəɹ ə moʊmənt. hɝ ɹæʃənælɪɾi meɪd fju kənsɛʃənz fəɹ hjumən fɔɪbəlz. əɹ fəɹ ɛniwʌn dɪsəɡɹiɪŋ wɪð hɝ.

"The first answer that comes to mind isn't always correct, Carlinya," Morvrin said. "There's no saying that Delana thought her actions through as carefully as you have, or that she thought along the same lines." The stout Brown believed more in common sense than logic, or so she said, but in truth she seemed to blend the two, a combination that made her very hardheaded, and suspicious of quick or easy answers. Which was not a bad thing to be. "Delana may be trying to sway some among the Sitters on some issue that's important to her. Maybe she hopes to get Elaida declared Black Ajah after all. No matter the results, her goal may be something we don't even suspect. Sitters can be as petty as anyone else. For all we know, she might have a grudge against one of those she named dating back to when she was a novice and they taught her. Better to concentrate on what will come of it than to worry about why until we know more." Her tone was as placid as her broad face, but Carlinya's cool composure flickered to cool disdain for a moment. Her rationality made few concessions for human foibles. Or for anyone disagreeing with her.

æneɪjə læft, ə saʊn ʌv ɔlmoʊs mʌðɝli əmjuzmən ðət meɪɾ əɹ beɪ dæns ə fju stɛps bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹeɪn ɪm bæk tə ə wɔk. ə mʌðɝli fɑɹmwaɪf əmjuz baɪ ði æntɪks ʌv ʌðɝz ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ.

Anaiya laughed, a sound of almost motherly amusement that made her bay dance a few steps before she reined him back to a walk. A motherly farmwife amused by the antics of others in the village.

ivən səm sɪstɝz wɝ fulɪʃ ɪnʌf tə dɪsmɪs əɹ ðəɾ izəli. "doʊn sʌlk, kɑɹlɪnjə. jə ɑɹ vɛɹi pɹɑbli ɹaɪt. noʊ, mɔɹvɹɪn, ʃi pɹɑbli ɪz. ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, aɪ bɪliv wi kən skwɑʃ ɛni hoʊps ʃiz fəɹ dɪskɔɹd." ðət dɪd nɑt saʊn əmjuzd əɾ ɔl. noʊ blu wɑz əmjuz baɪ ɛniθɪŋ ðət maɪt hæmpɝ pʊlɪŋ ɪleɪɾə daʊn.

Even some sisters were foolish enough to dismiss her that easily. "Don't sulk, Carlinya. You are very probably right. No, Morvrin, she probably is. In any event, I believe we can squash any hopes she has for discord." That did not sound amused at all. No Blue was amused by anything that might hamper pulling Elaida down.

maɪɹɛl ɡeɪv ə sævədʒ nɑɾ ʌv əɡɹimənt, ðən blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz wən naɪsaʊ sɛd, "kæn jə əfɔɹd tə stɑp ðɪs, mʌðɝ?" ðə taɪni jɛloʊ dɪd nɑt spik ʌp ɔfən. "aɪ doʊn min wʌtɛvɝ dɛlænə ɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə du. ɪf wi kən sɛɾəl ɑn wʌt ðəɾ ɪz," ʃi æɾəd kwɪkli, meɪkɪŋ ə dʒɛstʃɝ ət mɔɹvɹɪn, hu hæɾ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ əɡɛn. naɪsaʊ lʊkt ə tʃaɪld əlɔŋsaɪd ði ʌðɝ wɪmən, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə pɝɛmptɝi dʒɛstʃɝ. ʃi wɑz jɛloʊ, æftɝ ɔl, wɪð ɔl ðə sɛlfəʃʊɹəns ðəɾ ɪmplaɪd, ən ənwɪlɪŋ tə stɛp bæk fəɹ ɛniwʌn ɪn moʊst sɝkəmstænsəz. "aɪ min ðə tɔk ə pɑɹli wɪð ðə sɪɾɝz ɪn ðə taʊɝ." fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɛvɹiwʌn ɡeɪpt ət hɝ, ivən bioʊnɪn. "ænd waɪ wəd wi wɑnə əlaʊ ðæt?" æneɪjə sɛd faɪnəli, ɪn ə deɪnʒɝəs vɔɪs. "wi dɪdn kʌm ɔl ðɪs weɪ tə tɔk tə ɪleɪɾə." ʃi wɑz ə fɑɹmwaɪf wɪð ə klivɝ hɪɾən bɪhaɪn əɹ bæk ən ə maɪn tə juz ɪt, naʊ.

Myrelle gave a savage nod of agreement, then blinked in surprise when Nisao said, "Can you afford to stop this, Mother?" The tiny Yellow did not speak up often. "I don't mean whatever Delana is trying to do. If we can settle on what that is," she added quickly, making a gesture at Morvrin, who had opened her mouth again. Nisao looked a child alongside the other women, but it was a peremptory gesture. She was Yellow, after all, with all the selfassurance that implied, and unwilling to step back for anyone in most circumstances. "I mean the talk of parley with the Sitters in the Tower." For a moment, everyone gaped at her, even Beonin. "And why would we want to allow that?" Anaiya said finally, in a dangerous voice. "We didn't come all this way to talk to Elaida." She was a farmwife with a cleaver hidden behind her back and a mind to use it, now.

naɪsaʊ lʊkt ʌp əɾ əɹ ən snɪf dɪsmɪsɪvli. "aɪ dɪdn seɪ wi wɑntəɾ ɪt. aɪ æskt wɛðɝ wi dɛɹ stɑp ɪt." "aɪ hɑɹdli si ðə dɪfɝəns." ʃɛɹiəmz vɔɪs wɑz aɪsi, ən əɹ feɪs peɪl. wɪð æŋɡɝ, ɛɡwin θɔt, bʌɾ ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn fɪɹ.

Nisao looked up at her and sniffed dismissively. "I didn't say we wanted it. I asked whether we dare stop it." "I hardly see the difference." Sheriam's voice was icy, and her face pale. With anger, Egwene thought, but it might have been fear.

"ðɛn θɪŋk fəɹ ə waɪl, ən jə maɪt si ɪt," naɪsaʊ sɛd dʒɹaɪli. dʒɹaɪ ðə weɪ ə naɪf-bleɪd wɑz dʒɹaɪ, ən ikwəli kʌɾɪŋ. "æt pɹɛzənt, tɔk ə nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz ɪz lɪməɾəd tə faɪv sɪɾɝz, ən vɛɹi kwaɪət, bʌt wɪl ɪt ɹɪmeɪn soʊ? wʌns wɝd spɹɛdz ðət tɔks wɝ pɹəpoʊzd ən ɹɪdʒɛktɪd, haʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ dɪspɛɹ sɛts ɪn? noʊ, hɪɹ mi aʊt! wi ɔl sɛɾ ɔf fʊl ə ɹaɪtʃəs fjʊɹi fəɹ dʒʌstəs, jɛt hɪɹ wi sɪt, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə wɔlz ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, waɪl ɪleɪɾə sɪts ɪn ðə taʊɝ. wiv bɪn hɪɹ nɪɹli tu wiks, ən fəɹ ɔl ɛniwʌn kən si, wi meɪ bi hɪɹ tu jɪɹz, əɹ twɛnti. ðə lɔŋɡɝ wi sɪt wɪð nʌθɪŋ hæpənɪŋ, ðə mɔɹ sɪstɝz wɪl stɑɹt meɪkɪŋ ɪkskjusɪz fəɹ ɪleɪɾəz kɹaɪmz. ðə mɔɹ ðəl stɑɹt θɪŋkɪŋ ðət wɪv tə mɛn ðə taʊɝ, nɛvɝ maɪn ðə kɑst. dʒju wɑnə weɪɾ əntɪl sɪstɝz stɑɹt slɪpɪŋ bæk tə ɪleɪɾə wʌn baɪ wʌn? aɪ maɪsɛlf də nɑt fænsi stændɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk dɪfaɪɪŋ ðə wʊmən wɪð dʒʌs ðə blu ədʒɑ ən ðə ɹɛst ə jə fəɹ kʌmpəni. nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz wɪl ət lis lɛɾ ɛvɹiwʌn si ðət sʌmθɪŋ ɪz hæpənɪŋ."

"Then think for a while, and you might see it," Nisao said dryly. Dry the way a knife-blade was dry, and equally cutting. "At present, talk of negotiations is limited to five Sitters, and very quiet, but will it remain so? Once word spreads that talks were proposed and rejected, how long before despair sets in? No, hear me out! We all set off full of righteous fury for justice, yet here we sit, staring at the walls of Tar Valon, while Elaida sits in the Tower. We've been here nearly two weeks, and for all anyone can see, we may be here two years, or twenty. The longer we sit with nothing happening, the more sisters will start making excuses for Elaida's crimes. The more they'll start thinking that we have to mend the Tower, never mind the cost. Do you want to wait until sisters start slipping back to Elaida one by one? I myself do not fancy standing on the riverbank defying the woman with just the Blue Ajah and the rest of you for company. Negotiations will at least let everyone see that something is happening."

"noʊ wʌn ɪz gɑnə ɹɪtɝn tə ɪleɪɾə," æneɪjə pɹətɛstəd, ʃɪftɪŋ ɑn əɹ sæɾəl, bʌt ʃi wɔɹ ə tʃɹʌbəl fɹaʊn, ən ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi kəd si ɪt hæpənɪŋ. ðə taʊɝ bɛkən tə ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ. vɛɹi laɪkli ivən blæk sɪstɝz jɝn fəɹ ðə taʊɝ tə bi hoʊl əɡɛn. ən ðəɹ ɪt stʊd, dʒʌst ə fju maɪlz əweɪ, bʌt simɪŋli aʊɾ ə ɹitʃ.

"No one is going to return to Elaida," Anaiya protested, shifting on her saddle, but she wore a troubled frown, and she sounded as if she could see it happening. The Tower beckoned to every Aes Sedai. Very likely even Black sisters yearned for the Tower to be whole again. And there it stood, just a few miles away, but seemingly out of reach.

"tɔk kəd baɪ taɪm, mʌðɝ," mɔɹvɹɪn sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli, ən noʊ wʌn kəd pʊɾ əz mʌtʃ ɹɪlʌktəns ɪn əɹ vɔɪs əz ʃi. hɝ fɹaʊn wɑz θɔtfəl, ən nɑɾ əɾ ɔl plizd. "ə fju mɔɹ wiks, ən lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ maɪt bi eɪbəl tə faɪn ðə ʃɪps i nidz tə blɑk ðə hɑɹbɝz. ðət wɪl ɔltɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɪn əɹ feɪvɝ. wɪð noʊ weɪ fəɹ fud tə ɡɛɾ ɪn əɹ maʊðz tə ɡɛɾ aʊt, ðə sɪɾi wɪl bi stɑɹvɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ ə mʌnθ." ɛɡwin hʌŋ ɑn tə ə smuð feɪs wɪð ən ɛfɝt. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹil hoʊp ə ʃɪps tə blɑk ðə hɑɹbɝ, ðoʊ nʌn kf əm nu ðæt. ɡɛɹɪθ hæd meɪɾ ɪt pleɪn ɪnʌf tə hɝ, haʊɛvɝ, lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ mʊɹændi. ɝɪdʒənəli, hi hæd hoʊp tə baɪ vɛsəlz waɪl ðeɪ mɑɹtʃt nɔɹθ əlɔŋ ði ɛɹɪnɪn, juzɪŋ əm tə fɛɹi səplaɪz əntɪl ðeɪ ɹitʃt tɑɹ vəlɑn, ðən sɪŋkɪŋ əm ɪn ðə hɑɹbɝ maʊðz.

"Talk could buy time, Mother," Morvrin said reluctantly, and no one could put as much reluctance in her voice as she. Her frown was thoughtful, and not at all pleased. "A few more weeks, and Lord Gareth might be able to find the ships he needs to block the harbors. That will alter everything, in our favor. With no way for food to get in or mouths to get out, the city will be starving inside a month." Egwene hung on to a smooth face with an effort. There was no real hope of ships to block the harbor, though none cf them knew that. Gareth had made it plain enough to her, however, long before leaving Murandy. Originally, he had hoped to buy vessels while they marched north along the Erinin, using them to ferry supplies until they reached Tar Valon, then sinking them in the harbor mouths.

juzɪŋ ɡeɪtweɪz tə ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn hæd pʊt peɪd tə ðəɾ ɪn mɔɹ weɪz ðən wʌn. wɝɾ ə ðə sidʒ hæd lɛf ðə sɪɾi wɪð ðə fɝst ʃɪps seɪlɪŋ æftɝ ði ɑɹmi ɝaɪvd, ən naʊ, əz fɑɹ nɔɹθ ən saʊθ əz i hæd sɛn ɹaɪɾɝz, ʃɪp kæptənz wɝ kæɹiɪŋ aʊt ðɛɹ bɪznəs əʃɔɹ baɪ boʊt, fɹəm æŋkɝədʒɪz wɛl aʊɾ ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ. noʊ kæptən wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə ɹɪsk ðə tʃæns əɹ ʃɪp wəd sɪmpli bi sizd. ɡɛɹɪθ meɪɾ ɪz ɹɪpɔɹts oʊnli tə hɝ, ən ɪz ɔfəsɝz oʊnli tə hɪm, jɛɾ ɛni sɪstɝ cʊɾə noʊn ɪf ʃi tɔkt wɪð ə fju soʊlʒɝz.

Using gateways to reach Tar Valon had put paid to that in more ways than one. Word of the siege had left the city with the first ships sailing after the army arrived, and now, as far north and south as he had sent riders, ship captains were carrying out their business ashore by boat, from anchorages well out in the river. No captain was willing to risk the chance her ship would simply be seized. Gareth made his reports only to her, and his officers only to him, yet any sister could have known if she talked with a few soldiers.

fɔɹtʃənətli, ivən sɪstɝz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ wɔɹɾɝz ɹɛɹli spoʊk tə soʊlʒɝz. ðeɪ wɝ dʒɛnɝəli əkaʊntəɾ ə θivɪŋ, ənlɛɾɝd lɑɾ u oʊnli beɪð baɪ æksəɾənt, wən ðeɪ hæd tə weɪɾ ə stʃɹim. nɑt ðə kaɪndə mæn ɛni sɪstɝ spɛn taɪm wɪð ɪksɛpt wən kəmpɛl tə. ɪt meɪd kipɪŋ sikɹəts iziɝ, ən səm sikɹəts wɝ ɪsɛnʃəl. ɪnkluɾɪŋ, səmtaɪmz, sikɹəts kɛp fɹəm ðoʊz simɪŋli ɑn jəɹ saɪd. ʃi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ nɑt θɪŋkɪŋ ðət weɪ, bʌt ðət wɑz ə pɑɹɾ ə ði ɪnkipɝz dɔɾɝ ʃi hæd bɪn əblaɪdʒ tə liv bɪhaɪnd. ðɪs wɑz ənʌðɝ wɝld, wɪð vɛɹi dɪfɹən ɹulz fɹəm ɛmənz fild. ə mɪsstɛp ðəɹ mɛn ə sʌmənz tə ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl. hɪɹ, ə mɪsstɛp mɛn dɛθ əɹ wɝs, ən fəɹ mɔɹ ðən hɝsɛlf. "ðə sɪɾɝz ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə taʊɝ ʃəd bi wɪlɪŋ tə tɔk," kɑɹlɪnjə pʊɾ ɪn, wɪð ə saɪ. "ðeɪ hæv tə noʊ ðət ðə lɔŋɡɝ ðə sidʒ læsts, ðə mɔɹ tʃæns lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ wɪl faɪn ɪz ʃɪps.

Fortunately, even sisters looking for Warders rarely spoke to soldiers. They were generally accounted a thieving, unlettered lot who only bathed by accident, when they had to wade a stream. Not the kind of man any sister spent time with except when compelled to. It made keeping secrets easier, and some secrets were essential. Including, sometimes, secrets kept from those seemingly on your side. She could remember not thinking that way, but that was a part of the innkeeper's daughter she had been obliged to leave behind. This was another world, with very different rules from Emond's Field. A misstep there meant a summons to the Women's Circle. Here, a misstep meant death or worse, and for more than herself. "The Sitters remaining in the Tower should be willing to talk," Carlinya put in, with a sigh. "They have to know that the longer the siege lasts, the more chance Lord Gareth will find his ships.

aɪ kænɑt θɪŋk haʊ lɔŋ ðəl kəntɪnju tɔkɪŋ, ðoʊ, wən ðeɪ ɹilaɪz wi də nɑt min tə sɝɛndɝ."

I cannot think how long they will continue talking, though, when they realize we do not mean to surrender."

"ɪleɪɾə wɪl ɪnsɪst ɑn ðæt," maɪɹɛl mʌɾɝd, jɛt ʃi dɪd nɑt sim tə bi ɑɹɡjuɪŋ, dʒʌs tɔkɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf, ən ʃɛɹiəm ʃɪvɝd, dʒɹɔɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn əɹ əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd lɛt ðə koʊl tʌtʃ hɝ.

"Elaida will insist on that," Myrelle muttered, yet she did not seem to be arguing, just talking to herself, and Sheriam shivered, drawing her cloak around her as though she had let the cold touch her.

oʊnli bioʊnɪn lʊk hæpi, sɪɾɪŋ iɡɝ ən əpɹaɪɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, dɑɹk hʌni hɛɹ fɹeɪmɪŋ ə waɪd smaɪl ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ hʊd. ʃi dɪd nɑt pɹɛs əɹ keɪs, haʊɛvɝ. ʃi wɑz ɡʊɾ ət nɪɡoʊʃieɪʃən, soʊ ɛvɹiwʌn sɛd, ən nu wən tə weɪt.

Only Beonin looked happy, sitting eager and upright in her saddle, dark honey hair framing a wide smile inside her hood. She did not press her case, however. She was good at negotiation, so everyone said, and knew when to wait.

"aɪ dɪd seɪ jə kəd bɪɡɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd. nɑt ðət ʃi hæd mɛn ɪt fəɹ mɔɹ ðən ə sɛtdaʊn, jɛɾ ɪf jə wɝ gɑnə lɪv baɪ ðə θɹi oʊðz, ðən jə hæd tə stæn baɪ wʌt jə sɛd. ʃi kəd nɑt weɪt tə hoʊl ði oʊθ ɹɑd. ɪt wəd bi soʊ mʌtʃ iziɝ, ðɛn. "dʒʌs meɪk ʃʊɹ jəɹ vɛɹi kɛɹfəl wʌt jə seɪ. ənlɛs ðeɪ θɪŋk wi ɔl ɡɹu wɪŋz tə flaɪ hɪɹ, ðeɪ mʌst səspɛkt wiv ɹiɾɪskʌvɝd tʃɹævlɪŋ, bʌt ðeɪ kæn bi sɝɾən ənlɛs sʌmwʌn kənfɝmz ɪt. ɪts bɛɾɝ fəɹ əs ɪf ðeɪ steɪ ənsɝɾən. ðət mʌs bi wʌn sikɹət jə hoʊld əz taɪtli əz jə hoʊl ðə sikɹəɾ ʌv əɹ fɛɹəts ɪn ðə taʊɝ." maɪɹɛl ən æneɪjə dʒɝkt ət ðæt, ən kɑɹlɪnjə lʊkt ɝaʊn əz ðoʊ fɪɹfəl, ðoʊ niðɝ wɔɹɾɝz nɔɹ soʊlʒɝz wɝ kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ ənlɛs sʌmwʌn ʃaʊɾəd. mɔɹvɹɪn mɪɹli tʊk ɑn ən ivən mɔɹ saʊɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən. ivən naɪsaʊ lʊkt ə lɪɾəl ɪl, ðoʊ ʃi hæd hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə dɪsɪʒən tə sɛn sɪstɝz bæk tə ðə taʊɝ ɪn sikɹət, səpoʊzədli ænsɝɪŋ ɪleɪɾəz sʌmənz. ðə hɔl maɪt bi hæpi tə lɝn ðət tɛn sɪstɝz wɝ ɪn ðə taʊɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʌndɝmaɪn ɪleɪɾə haʊɛvɝ ðeɪ kʊd, ivən ɪf ði ɛfɝt hæd bɔɹn noʊ əpɛɹən fɹut soʊ fɑɹ, bʌt ðə sɪɾɝz wəd moʊs dɛfənətli bi ənhæpi ət ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðəɾ ɪt hæd bɪn kɛp sikɹət kəz ðiz wɪmən fɪɹd ðət səm ə ðə sɪɾɝz maɪɾ æktʃəli  bi blæk ədʒɑ. əz wɛl fəɹ ʃɛɹiəm ən ði ʌðɝz tə ɹɪvil ðɛɹ oʊðz tə ɛɡwin əz ɹɪvil ðæt. ðə ɹɪzʌls fəɹ əm maɪt nɑt bi vɛɹi dɪfɹənt. ðə hɔl hæd nɑɾ ɔɹɾɝd ɛniwʌn bɝtʃt jɛt, bʌt ðə weɪ moʊst sɪɾɝz tʃeɪft ət ðə bɪɾ oʊvɝ ɛɡwinz kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðə wɔɹ, ɪt kəd hɑɹdli kʌm əz ə sɝpɹaɪz ɪf ðeɪ dʒʌmpt ət ðə tʃæns tə ʃoʊ ðeɪ stɪl hæd səm əθɔɹəɾi waɪl saɪməlteɪniəsli ɪkspɹɛsɪŋ ðɛɹ dɪsplɛʒɝ fɔɹsfəli.

"I did say you could begin," Egwene said. Not that she had meant it for more than a setdown, yet if you were going to live by the Three Oaths, then you had to stand by what you said. She could not wait to hold the Oath Rod. It would be so much easier, then. "Just make sure you're very careful what you say. Unless they think we all grew wings to fly here, they must suspect we've rediscovered Traveling, but they can't be certain unless someone confirms it. It's better for us if they stay uncertain. That must be one secret you hold as tightly as you hold the secret of our ferrets in the Tower." Myrelle and Anaiya jerked at that, and Carlinya looked around as though fearful, though neither Warders nor soldiers were close enough to hear unless someone shouted. Morvrin merely took on an even more sour expression. Even Nisao looked a little ill, though she had had nothing to do with the decision to send sisters back to the Tower in secret, supposedly answering Elaida's summons. The Hall might be happy to learn that ten sisters were in the Tower trying to undermine Elaida however they could, even if the effort had borne no apparent fruit so far, but the Sitters would most definitely be unhappy at realizing that it had been kept secret because these women feared that some of the Sitters might actually be Black Ajah. As well for Sheriam and the others to reveal their oaths to Egwene as reveal that. The results for them might not be very different. The Hall had not ordered anyone birched yet, but the way most Sitters chafed at the bit over Egwene's control of the war, it could hardly come as a surprise if they jumped at the chance to show they still had some authority while simultaneously expressing their displeasure forcefully.

bioʊnɪn wɑz əpɛɹənli ði oʊnli wʌn u hæɾ əpoʊz ðət dɪsɪʒən - ət list, əntɪl ɪt bɪkeɪm əpɛɹən ði ʌðɝz wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ əhɛɾ ɛniweɪ - bʌt ʃi dʒɹu ə ʃʌɾɝɪŋ bɹɛθ, tu, ən ə taɪtnəs sɛɾəld ɝaʊn əɹ aɪz. ɪn əɹ keɪs, ðə sʌɾən ɹiləzeɪʃən ə dʒʌst wʌt ʃi hæɾ ʌndɝteɪkən maɪɾ əv pleɪɾ ɪts pɑɹt, tu. dʒʌs faɪndɪŋ sʌmwʌn ɪn ðə taʊɝ u wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə tɔk maɪt pɹuv ə dɔntɪŋ tæsk. aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ɪnsaɪd tɑɹ vəlɑn kəɾ ɔfɝ oʊnli hɪɹseɪ əbaʊɾ ɪvɛns ɪnsaɪd ðə taʊɝ; nuz ə ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf keɪm oʊnli ɪn dʒɹɪbz ən dʒɹæbz, fɹəm sɪstɝz vɛntʃɝɪŋ ɪndə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd tə ɡlɪmps fliɾɪŋ ɹɪflɛkʃənz ə ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld, bʌɾ ɛvɹi læst wʌn ə ðoʊz skɹæps toʊld ʌv ɪleɪɾə ɹulɪŋ baɪ iɾɪkt ən kəpɹis, wɪð nɑɾ ivən ðə hɔl dɛɹɪŋ tə stæn əɡɛns hɝ. bioʊnɪnz feɪs tʊk ɑn ə ɡɹeɪɪʃ tɪnʒ, tɪl ʃi bɪɡæn tə əpɪɹ mɔɹ sɪkli ðən naɪsaʊ. æneɪjə ən ði ʌðɝz lʊkt əz blik əz dɛθ. ə weɪv ʌv ɡlum ɹoʊz ɪn ɛɡwin. ðiz wɝ əmʌŋ ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst əɡɛnst ɪleɪɾə, ivən ðə fʊt-dʒɹæɡɪŋ bioʊnɪn, hu ɔlweɪz wɑntəd tə tɔk ɹæðɝ ðən ækt. wɛl, ɡɹeɪz wɝ noʊɾəd fəɹ bɪlivɪŋ ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ kəd bi sɑlvd wɪð ɪnʌf tɔk. ðeɪ ʃəd tʃɹaɪ ðəɾ ɑn ə tʃɹɑlɑk sʌmtaɪm, əɹ dʒʌst ə fʊtpæd, ən si haʊ fɑɹ ðeɪ ɡɑt! wɪθaʊt ʃɛɹiəm ən ðə ɹɛst, ɹɪzɪstəns tə ɪleɪɾə wʊɾə fɔlən əpɑɹt bɪfɔɹ ɪɾ ɛvɝ hæɾ ə tʃæns tə koʊəlɛs. ɪt nɪɹli hæɾ ɛniweɪ. bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə wɑz əz fɝmli siɾəd ɪn ðə taʊɝ əz ɛvɝ, ən æftɝ ɔl ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn θɹu, ɔl ðeɪ hæd dʌn, ɪt sim ðəɾ ivən æneɪjə sɔ ɪɾ ɔl mɛltɪŋ əweɪ ɪndə dɪzæstɝ. noʊ! dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ɛɡwin stʃɹeɪɾənd əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən sæɾ ɪɹɛkt ɪn əɹ sæɾəl. ʃi wɑz ðə lɔfəl æmɪɝlɪn, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ðə hɔl hæd θɔt ðeɪ wɝ ɡɛɾɪŋ wən ðeɪ ɹeɪz hɝ, ən ʃi hæd tə kip ðə ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛnst ɪleɪɾə əlaɪv tə hæv ɛni hoʊp ə hilɪŋ ðə taʊɝ. ɪf ðət ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə pɹitɛns ə nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz, ɪt wəd nɑt bi ðə fɝs taɪm ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd pɹitɛndəd tə eɪm ət wʌn θɪŋ waɪl tɑɹɡəɾɪŋ ənʌðɝ. wʌtɛvɝ wɑz ɹikwaɪɝd tə kip ðə ɹɪbɛljən əlaɪv ən pʊl ɪleɪɾə daʊn, ʃi wəd du. wʌtɛvɝ wɑz ɹikwaɪɝd.

Beonin was apparently the only one who had opposed that decision - at least, until it became apparent the others were going ahead anyway - but she drew a shuddering breath, too, and a tightness settled around her eyes. In her case, the sudden realization of just what she had undertaken might have played its part, too. Just finding someone in the Tower who was willing to talk might prove a daunting task. Eyes-and-ears inside Tar Valon could offer only hearsay about events inside the Tower; news of the Tower itself came only in dribs and drabs, from sisters venturing into Tel'aran'rhiod to glimpse fleeting reflections of the waking world, but every last one of those scraps told of Elaida ruling by edict and caprice, with not even the Hall daring to stand against her. Beonin's face took on a grayish tinge, till she began to appear more sickly than Nisao. Anaiya and the others looked as bleak as death. A wave of gloom rose in Egwene. These were among the strongest against Elaida, even the foot-dragging Beonin, who always wanted to talk rather than act. Well, Grays were noted for believing that anything could be solved with enough talk. They should try that on a Trolloc sometime, or just a footpad, and see how far they got! Without Sheriam and the rest, resistance to Elaida would have fallen apart before it ever had a chance to coalesce. It nearly had anyway. But Elaida was as firmly seated in the Tower as ever, and after all they had gone through, all they had done, it seemed that even Anaiya saw it all melting away into disaster. No! Drawing a deep breath, Egwene straightened her shoulders and sat erect in her saddle. She was the lawful Amyrlin, no matter what the Hall had thought they were getting when they raised her, and she had to keep the rebellion against Elaida alive to have any hope of healing the Tower. If that required a pretense of negotiations, it would not be the first time Aes Sedai had pretended to aim at one thing while targeting another. Whatever was required to keep the rebellion alive and pull Elaida down, she would do. Whatever was required.

"stʃɹɛtʃ ðə tɔks aʊɾ əz lɔŋ əz jə kæn," ʃi toʊl bioʊnɪn. "ju kən tɔk əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ, soʊ lɔŋ əz jə kip ðə sikɹəts ðət nid kipɪŋ, bʌɾ əɡɹi tə nʌθɪŋ, ən kip əm tɔkɪŋ." sweɪɪŋ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, ðə ɡɹeɪ dɛfənətli lʊk sɪkɝ ðən æneɪjə. ʃi ɔlmoʊst əpɪɹd ɹɛɾi tə ɛmpti hɝ stʌmək.

"Stretch the talks out as long as you can," she told Beonin. "You can talk about anything, so long as you keep the secrets that need keeping, but agree to nothing, and keep them talking." Swaying in her saddle, the Gray definitely looked sicker than Anaiya. She almost appeared ready to empty her stomach.

wən ðə kæmp keɪm ɪndə saɪt, wɪð ðə sʌn nɪɹli hæfweɪ tə ɪts nundeɪ pik, ði ɛskɔɹɾ ə laɪtli ɑɹmɝd hɔɹsmən bɹoʊk əweɪ bæk təwɔɹd ðə ɹɪvɝ, livɪŋ ɛɡwin ən ðə sɪstɝz tə ɹaɪd ðə læs maɪl əkɹɔs ðə snoʊ fɑloʊd baɪ ðə wɔɹɾɝz. lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ pɔzd əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə spik wɪð əɹ wʌns mɔɹ, bʌt faɪnəli hi tɝn ɪz beɪ ist æftɝ ðə kævəlɹi, tʃɹɑɾɪŋ tə kætʃ ʌp əz ðeɪ vænɪʃt bɪɑn ə lɔŋ, kɑpaɪst stæn ə tʃɹiz. hi wəd nɑt bɹɪŋ ʌp ðɛɹ dɪsəɡɹimənt, əɹ ðɛɹ dɪskʌʃənz, wɛɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls kəd hɪɹ, ən i bɪliv ðət bioʊnɪn ən ði ʌðɝz dʒʌst wʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls θɔt ðɛm, ði ədʒəz' wɑtʃdɔɡz. ʃi fɛlt ə lɪɾəl sæɾ ət hoʊldɪŋ θɪŋz bæk fɹəm hɪm, bʌt ðə fjuɝ u nu ə sikɹət, ðə mɔɹ laɪkli ɪt wəd ɹɪmeɪn sikɹət. ðə kæmp wɑz ə spɹɔl ə tɛns ɪn ɛvɹi ʃeɪp ən saɪz ən kʌlɝ ən steɪɾ ə ɹɪpɛɹ ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs kʌvɝɾ ə bɹɔd tʃɹi-ɹɪm pæstʃɝ, hæfweɪ bɪtwin tɑɹ vəlɑn ən dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt, ɪnsaɪɾ ə ɹɪŋ ə hɔɹslaɪnz ən ɹoʊz ʌv wæɡənz ən kɑɹts ɪn ɔlmoʊst əz mɛni ʃeɪps əz ðəɹ wɝ wæɡənz ən kɑɹts. tʃɪmni smoʊk ɹoʊz ɪn sɛvɹəl pleɪsəz ə fju maɪlz bɪɑn ðə tʃɹilaɪn, bʌt ðə loʊkəl fɑɹmɝz steɪɾ əweɪ ɪksɛp fəɹ sɛlɪŋ ɛɡz ən mɪlk ən bʌɾɝ, əɹ səmtaɪmz wən wʌn niɾəd hilɪŋ fɹəm səm æksəɾənt, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn əɾ ɔl ə ði ɑɹmi ɛɡwin hæd bɹɔt soʊ fɑɹ. ɡɛɹɪθ hæd kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɪz fɔɹsɪz əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ, pɑɹɾ ɑkjəpaɪɪŋ ðə bɹɪdʒ taʊnz ɑn boʊθ bæŋks ən ðə ɹɛst ɪn wʌɾ i kɔld ɹɪzɝv kæmps, pleɪst wɛɹ mɛn kəd bi ɹʌʃt tə hɛlp faɪɾ ɔf ɛni sɔɹɾi ɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ fɹəm ðə sɪɾi, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs i wɑz ɹɔŋ əbaʊt haɪ kæptən tʃʌbn. ɔlweɪz kənsɪɾɝ ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi jəɹ əsʌmpʃənz ɑɹ ɹɔŋ, hi hæd toʊl hɝ. noʊ wʌn əbdʒɛktəd tə hɪz pleɪsməns, ʌv kɔɹs, nɑɾ ɪn dʒɛnɝəl ɛniweɪ. ɛni nʌmbɝ ə sɪstɝz wɝ ɹɛɾi tə nɪtpɪk ðə dɪteɪlz, bʌt hoʊldɪŋ ðə bɹɪdʒ taʊnz wɑz ði oʊnli weɪ tə bɪsidʒ tɑɹ vəlɑn, æftɝ ɔl. baɪ lænd, ɪt wɑz. ən ə ɡʊd mɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ pliz tə hæv ðə soʊlʒɝz aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ɪf nɑɾ aʊɾ ə maɪnd.

When the camp came into sight, with the sun nearly halfway to its noonday peak, the escort of lightly armored horsemen broke away back toward the river, leaving Egwene and the sisters to ride the last mile across the snow followed by the Warders. Lord Gareth paused as if he wanted to speak with her once more, but finally he turned his bay east after the cavalry, trotting to catch up as they vanished beyond a long, coppiced stand of trees. He would not bring up their disagreement, or their discussions, where anyone else could hear, and he believed that Beonin and the others just what everyone else thought them, the Ajahs' watchdogs. She felt a little sad at holding things back from him, but the fewer who knew a secret, the more likely it would remain secret. The camp was a sprawl of tents in every shape and size and color and state of repair that almost covered a broad tree-rimmed pasture, halfway between Tar Valon and Dragonmount, inside a ring of horselines and rows of wagons and carts in almost as many shapes as there were wagons and carts. Chimney smoke rose in several places a few miles beyond the treeline, but the local farmers stayed away except for selling eggs and milk and butter, or sometimes when one needed Healing from some accident, and there was no sign at all of the army Egwene had brought so far. Gareth had concentrated his forces along the river, part occupying the bridge towns on both banks and the rest in what he called reserve camps, placed where men could be rushed to help fight off any sortie in strength from the city, just in case he was wrong about High Captain Chubain. Always consider the possibility your assumptions are wrong, he had told her. No one objected to his placements, of course, not in general anyway. Any number of sisters were ready to nitpick the details, but holding the bridge towns was the only way to besiege Tar Valon, after all. By land, it was. And a good many Aes Sedai were pleased to have the soldiers out of sight if not out of mind.

θɹi wɔɹɾɝz ɪn kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊks keɪm ɹaɪɾɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ðə kæmp əz ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz əpɹoʊtʃt, wʌn ə ðɛm vɛɹi tɔl ən wʌn kwaɪt ʃɔɹt, soʊ ðeɪ simd ɝeɪnʒd ɪn stɛps. meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ baʊz tə ɛɡwin ən ðə sɪstɝz, nɑɾɪŋ tə ðə wɔɹɾɝz bɪhaɪnd, ðeɪ ɔl hæd ðət deɪnʒɝəs lʊk ə mɛn soʊ kɑnfəɾənt ðət ðeɪ hæd noʊ nid tə kənvɪns ɛniwʌn haʊ deɪnʒɝəs ðeɪ wɝ, wɪtʃ sʌmhaʊ meɪɾ ɪɾ ɔl ðə mɔɹ ɛvəɾənt. eɪ wɔɹɾɝ əɾ ɪz iz ən ə laɪən ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn ə hɪl, soʊ wɛn ən oʊl seɪɪŋ əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə ɹɛst ʌv ɪt wɑz lɔst ɪn ðə jɪɹz, bʌt ðəɹ ɹɪli wɑz noʊ nid tə seɪ mɔɹ. ðə sɪstɝz wɝ nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli kəmpleɪsən əbaʊt ðə seɪfti ʌv ivən ə kæmp fʊl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz.

Three Warders in color-shifting cloaks came riding out from the camp as Egwene and the others approached, one of them very tall and one quite short, so they seemed arranged in steps. Making their bows to Egwene and the sisters, nodding to the Warders behind, they all had that dangerous look of men so confident that they had no need to convince anyone how dangerous they were, which somehow made it all the more evident. A Warder at his ease and a lion resting on a hill, so went an old saying among Aes Sedai. The rest of it was lost in the years, but there really was no need to say more. The sisters were not entirely complacent about the safety of even a camp full of Aes Sedai, under the circumstances.

wɔɹɾɝz pətʃɹoʊl kloʊsli fəɹ maɪlz ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, laɪənz ɑn ðə pɹaʊl. æneɪjə ən ði ʌðɝz, ɔl bʌt ʃɛɹiəm, skæɾɝd əz sun əz ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə fɝst ɹoʊ ʌv tɛns bɪɑn ðə wæɡənz. itʃ wəd bi sikɪŋ aʊt ðə hɛɾ ə hɝ ədʒɑ, ɑstɛnsəbli tə ɹipɔɹɾ ɑn ɛɡwinz*  ɛs i si ɑɹ i ti ɛs fɔɹhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntin ɹaɪd tə ðə ɹɪvɝ wɪð lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ, ən mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾəntli, tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðoʊz ədʒɑ hɛdz nu ðət səm ə ðə sɪɾɝz wɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz wɪð ɪleɪɾə ən ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑz biɪŋ fɝm. ɪt wʊɾə bɪn iziɝ ɪf ʃi nu hu ðoʊz wɪmən wɝ, bʌɾ ivən oʊðz ə fiəlti dɪd nɑt stʃɹɛtʃ tə ɹɪvilɪŋ ðæt. maɪɹɛl hæd nɪɹli swɑloʊɾ əɹ tʌŋ wən ɛɡwin sədʒɛstəɾ ɪt. biɪŋ dʒɹɑpt ɪndə ə dʒɑb wɪθaʊt tʃɹeɪnɪŋ wɑz hɑɹdli ðə bɛst weɪ tə lɝn ɪt, ən ɛɡwin nu ʃi hæɾ oʊʃənz tə lɝn jɛɾ əbaʊt biɪŋ æmɪɝlɪn.

Warders patrolled closely for miles in every direction, lions on the prowl. Anaiya and the others, all but Sheriam, scattered as soon as they reached the first row of tents beyond the wagons. Each would be seeking out the head of her Ajah, ostensibly to report on Egwene's*  S E C R E T S 417 ride to the river with Lord Gareth, and more importantly, to make sure those Ajah heads knew that some of the Sitters were talking about negotiations with Elaida and that Egwene was being firm. It would have been easier if she knew who those women were, but even oaths of fealty did not stretch to revealing that. Myrelle had nearly swallowed her tongue when Egwene suggested it. Being dropped into a job without training was hardly the best way to learn it, and Egwene knew she had oceans to learn yet about being Amyrlin.

oʊʃənz tə lɝn, ən ə dʒɑb ʌv wɝk tə də ət ðə seɪm taɪm. "ɪf jəl fɝɡɪv mi, mʌðɝ," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd wən bioʊnɪn, ðə læs tə ɡoʊ, vænɪʃt əmʌŋ ðə tɛns tʃɹeɪl baɪ hɝ skɑɹ-feɪst wɔɹɾɝ, "aɪ hæv ə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl paɪl haɪ wɪð peɪpɝ." ðə læk ʌv ɪnθuziæzəm ɪn əɹ vɔɪs wɑz ʌndɝstændəbəl. ðə kipɝz stoʊl keɪm əlɔŋ wɪð ɛvɝ-ɡɹoʊɪŋ stæks ə ɹɪpɔɹts tə bi sɔɹɾɪd ən dɑkjəməns tə bi pɹipɛɹd. dɪspaɪɾ əɹ zil fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə dʒɑb, wɪtʃ ɪn ðɪs keɪs wɑz tə kip ðə kæmp ɹʌnɪŋ, ʃɛɹiəm hæd bɪn hɝd tə mʌɾɝ fɝvənt wɪʃɪz, wən kənfɹʌntəd baɪ jɛɾ ənʌðɝ maʊn ə peɪpɝz, ðət ʃi wɑz stɪl mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz. stɪl, əz sun əz ɛɡwin ɡeɪv pɝmɪʃən, ʃi buɾɪd əɹ blækfʊɾɪd dæpəl tə ə tʃɹɑt, skæɾɝɪŋ ə kʌvi ʌv wɝkmɪn ɪn ɹʌf koʊts ən mʌflɝz ɹæpt ɝaʊn ðɛɹ hɛdz, hu wɝ kæɹiɪŋ lɑɹdʒ bæskəts ɑn ðɛɹ bæks. wʌn fɛl flæɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs ɪn ðə hæfɹəzən mʌk ðət pæs fəɹ ə stʃɹit. ʃɛɹiəmz ɑɹɪnvɑɹ, ə slɪm kɛɹhinɪn wɪð ɡɹeɪɪŋ tɛmpəlz, pɔz lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə fɛloʊ wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ tə hɪz fit, ðən spɝɾ ɪz dɑɹk beɪ stæljən æftɝ hɝ, livɪŋ ðə wɝkmən tə hɪz kɝsɪz, moʊst ʌv wɪtʃ sim tə bi dɝɛktəɾ əɾ ɪz kəmpænjənz' læftɝ. ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðət wən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ sʌmwɛɹ, jə ɡɑɾ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ.

Oceans to learn, and a job of work to do at the same time. "If you will forgive me, Mother," Sheriam said when Beonin, the last to go, vanished among the tents trailed by her scar-faced Warder, "I have a writing table piled high with paper." The lack of enthusiasm in her voice was understandable. The Keeper's stole came along with ever-growing stacks of reports to be sorted and documents to be prepared. Despite her zeal for the rest of the job, which in this case was to keep the camp running, Sheriam had been heard to mutter fervent wishes, when confronted by yet another mound of papers, that she was still Mistress of Novices. Still, as soon as Egwene gave permission, she booted her blackfooted dapple to a trot, scattering a covey of workmen in rough coats and mufflers wrapped around their heads, who were carrying large baskets on their backs. One fell flat on his face in the halffrozen muck that passed for a street. Sheriam's Arinvar, a slim Cairhienin with graying temples, paused long enough to make sure the fellow was getting to his feet, then spurred his dark bay stallion after her, leaving the workman to his curses, most of which seemed to be directed at his companions' laughter. Everyone knew that when an Aes Sedai wanted to go somewhere, you got out of the way.

wʌt hæd spɪld aʊɾ ə ðə fɛloʊz bæskəɾ ɑntu ðə stʃɹit kɑɾ ɛɡwinz aɪ ən meɪɾ əɹ ʃɪvɝ, ə tɔl hip ə mil kɹɔlɪŋ wɪð wivəlz tɪl ɪt sim ðəɹ wɝ əz mɛni muvɪŋ blæk spɛks əz mil. ðə mɛn mʌst ɔl əv bɪn kæɹiɪŋ ɹuən mil tə ðə mɪɾən hips. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ jus bɑðɝɪŋ tə sɪft ɛniθɪŋ ðəɾ ɪnfɛstəd - oʊnli sʌmwʌn u wɑz stɑɹvɪŋ kəɾ iɾ ɪt - bʌt tu mɛni bæskəts ə mil ən ɡɹeɪn hæd tə bi dɪspoʊzd ʌv ɛvɹi deɪ.

What had spilled out of the fellow's basket onto the street caught Egwene's eye and made her shiver, a tall heap of meal crawling with weevils till it seemed there were as many moving black specks as meal. The men must all have been carrying ruined meal to the midden heaps. There was no use bothering to sift anything that infested - only someone who was starving could eat it - but too many baskets of meal and grain had to be disposed of every day.

fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, hæf ðə bæɹəlz ə sɔl pɔɹk ən sɔl bif oʊpən fəɹ jus stæŋk soʊ ðət ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə bi dʌn ɪksɛp bɛɹi ðɛm. fəɹ ðə sɝvəns ən wɝkmɪn, ət lis ðoʊz u hæɾ ɪkspɪɹiəns ə kæmp laɪf, ðət wɑz nʌθɪŋ nu. ə lɪɾəl wɝs ðən juʒəwəl, bʌt nɑɾ ənhɝɾ ʌv. wivəlz kəɾ əpɪɹ ɛni taɪm, ən mɝtʃəns tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stʃɹɛtʃ ðɛɹ pɹɑfəts ɔlweɪz soʊl səm ɹɑɾɪŋ miɾ əlɔŋ wɪð ðə ɡʊd. əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðoʊ, ɪt wɑz kɑz fəɹ dip wɝi. ɛvɹi bæɹəl ə mit, ɛvɹi sæk ʌv ɡɹeɪn əɹ flaʊɝ əɹ mil, hæd bɪn sɝaʊndəd baɪ ə kipɪŋ əz sun əz bɑt, ən wʌtɛvɝ wɑz woʊvən ɪndə ə kipɪŋ kəd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ əntɪl ðə wiv wɑz ɹimuvd. bʌt stɪl ðə mit ɹɑɾɪd ən ði ɪnsɛks mʌltəplaɪd. ɪt wɑz əz ðoʊ seɪaɪdɑɹ ɪtsɛlf wɑz feɪlɪŋ. jə kəd ɡɛɾ ə sɪstɝ tə meɪk dʒoʊks əbaʊt ðə blæk ədʒɑ bɪfɔɹ jə kəd ɡɛɾ əɹ tə tɔk əbaʊt ðæt.

For that matter, half the barrels of salt pork and salt beef opened for use stank so that there was nothing to be done except bury them. For the servants and workmen, at least those who had experience of camp life, that was nothing new. A little worse than usual, but not unheard of. Weevils could appear any time, and merchants trying to stretch their profits always sold some rotting meat along with the good. Among the Aes Sedai, though, it was cause for deep worry. Every barrel of meat, every sack of grain or flour or meal, had been surrounded by a Keeping as soon as bought, and whatever was woven into a Keeping could not change until the weave was removed. But still the meat rotted and the insects multiplied. It was as though saidar itself was failing. You could get a sister to make jokes about the Black Ajah before you could get her to talk about that.

wʌn ə ðə læfɪŋ mɛn kɑt saɪɾ ʌv ɛɡwin wɑtʃɪŋ əm ən nʌdʒ ðə mʌd-kʌvɝd fɛloʊ, hu mɑɾɝeɪtɪd ɪz læŋɡwədʒ, ðoʊ nɑt vɛɹi fɑɹ. hi ivən ɡlaʊɝɾ əz ɪf bleɪmɪŋ əɹ fəɹ ɪz fɔl. wɪð əɹ feɪs hæf-hɪɾən baɪ hɝ hʊɾ ən ði æmɪɝlɪnz stoʊl foʊldəɾ ɪn əɹ bɛl paʊtʃ, ðeɪ sim tə teɪk əɹ fəɹ wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd, nɑɾ ɔl ə hum hæɾ ɪnʌf pɹɑpɝ kloʊðɪŋ tə ɔlweɪz dʒɹɛs əz ðeɪ ʃʊd, əɹ pɝhæps ə vɪzəɾɝ. wɪmən fɹikwənli slɪpt ɪndə ðə kæmp, ɔfən kipɪŋ ðɛɹ feɪsəz hɪɾən ɪn pʌblɪk əntɪl ðeɪ lɛft əɡɛn wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɔɹ faɪn sɪlks əɹ θɹɛdbɛɹ wʊl, ən ʃoʊɪŋ ə saʊɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən tə ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ əɹ ən æksɛptɪd wɑz sɝɾənli seɪfɝ ðən ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ əɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪt simd ɑd nɑt tə hæv ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn saɪt bɑbɪŋ ən boʊɪŋ. ʃi hæd bɪn ɪn ðə sæɾəl sɪns bɪfɔɹ fɝs laɪt, ən ɪf ə hɑt bæθ wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃən - wɔɾɝ hæd tə bi kæɹiɾ ɪn fɹəm ðə wɛlz ðət hæd bɪn dʌɡ hæf ə maɪl wɛst ə ðə kæmp, wɪtʃ meɪɾ ɔl bʌt ðə moʊs fæstɪɾiəs əɹ sɛlf-əbzɔɹb sɪstɝz lɪmət ðɛmsɛlvz  - ɪf ə lɔŋ hɑt soʊk wɑz nɑt tə bi hæd, ʃi stɪl wʊɾə laɪk tə pʊɾ əɹ fit bæk ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. əɹ bɛɾɝ jɛt, pʊɾ əm ʌp ɑn ə fʊtstul. bɪsaɪdz, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə lɛt ðə koʊl tʌtʃ jə wɑz nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ðə seɪm əz wɔɹmɪŋ jəɹ hænz əɾ ə toʊsti bɹeɪziɝ. hɝ oʊn ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl wəɾ əv ɪts paɪl ə peɪpɝ, tu. læs naɪt ʃi hæd toʊld ʃɛɹiəm tə ɡɪv əɹ ðə ɹɪpɔɹts ɑn ðə steɪɾ ʌv wæɡən ɹɪpɛɹz ən ðə səplaɪ ʌv fɑɾɝ fəɹ ðə hɔɹsəz. ðeɪ wəd bi dʒɹaɪ ən bɔɹɪŋ, bʌt ʃi tʃɛkt ɑn dɪfɹən ɛɹiəz ɛvɹi deɪ, soʊ ʃi kəɾ ət lis tɛl wɛðɝ wʌt pipəl toʊld əɹ wɑz beɪst ɑn fækt əɹ wɪʃɪz. ən ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz ði aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz' ɹɪpɔɹts.

One of the laughing men caught sight of Egwene watching them and nudged the mud-covered fellow, who moderated his language, though not very far. He even glowered as if blaming her for his fall. With her face half-hidden by her hood and the Amyrlin's stole folded in her belt pouch, they seemed to take her for one of the Accepted, not all of whom had enough proper clothing to always dress as they should, or perhaps a visitor. Women frequently slipped into the camp, often keeping their faces hidden in public until they left again whether they wore fine silks or threadbare wool, and showing a sour expression to a stranger or an Accepted was certainly safer than grimacing at an Aes Sedai. It seemed odd not to have everyone in sight bobbing and bowing. She had been in the saddle since before first light, and if a hot bath was out of the question - water had to be carried in from the wells that had been dug half a mile west of the camp, which made all but the most fastidious or self-absorbed sisters limit themselves  - if a long hot soak was not to be had, she still would have liked to put her feet back on the ground. Or better yet, put them up on a footstool. Besides, refusing to let the cold touch you was not at all the same as warming your hands at a toasty brazier. Her own writing table would have its pile of paper, too. Last night she had told Sheriam to give her the reports on the state of wagon repairs and the supply of fodder for the horses. They would be dry and boring, but she checked on different areas every day, so she could at least tell whether what people told her was based on fact or wishes. And there were always the eyes-and-ears' reports.

ði ədʒəz dɪsaɪɾɪd tə pæs əlɔŋ tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit meɪd fəɹ fæsəneɪɾɪŋ ɹɛɾɪŋ wən kəmpɛɹd tə wʌt sɪuən ən lin ɡeɪv əɹ fɹəm ðɛɹ eɪdʒəns. ɪt wɑz nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ ðət ðəɹ wɝ kɑntʃɹədɪkʃənz, jɛt wʌt ði ədʒəz tʃoʊz tə kip tə ðɛmsɛlvz kəd dʒɹɔ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ pɪktʃɝz. kʌmfɝɾ ən duɾi boʊθ pʊld əɹ təwɔɹɾ əɹ stʌɾi - dʒʌst ənʌðɝ tɛnt, ɹɪli, ðoʊ ɛvɹiwʌn kɔld ɪt ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi - bʌt ðɪs wɑz ən ɑpɝtunəɾi tə lʊk ɝaʊnd wɪθaʊt hævɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ heɪstəli meɪd ɹɛɾi əhɛɾ ə hɝ ɝaɪvəl. pʊlɪŋ əɹ hʊɾ ə lɪɾəl fɝðɝ fɔɹwɝd tə bɛɾɝ kənsil əɹ feɪs, ʃi tʌtʃt əɹ hilz laɪtli tə deɪʃɝz flæŋks. ðəɹ wɝ fju pipəl maʊntəd, moʊsli wɔɹɾɝz, ðoʊ ði ɪnfɹikwənt ɡɹum æɾəd tə ðə tʃɹæfɪk, liɾɪŋ ə hɔɹs əɾ əz kloʊs tə ə tʃɹɑɾ əz kəd bi mænədʒd ɪn ði æŋkəl-dip slʌʃ, bʌt noʊ wʌn sim tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz əɹ əɹ əɹ maʊnt. ɪn kɑntʃɹæs tə ðə nɪɹli ɛmpti stʃɹits, ðə wʊɾən wɔkweɪz, noʊ mɔɹ ðən ɹʌf plæŋks pɛɡd ətɑp sɔn lɔɡz, ʃɪftəd slaɪtli ʌndɝ ðə weɪɾ ə pipəl. ðə hændfʊl ə mɛn, dɑɾɪŋ ðə stʃɹimz ʌv wɪmən laɪk ɹeɪzənz ɪn ə tʃip keɪk, wɔk twaɪs əz fæst əz ɛniwʌn ɛls. ɛksɛptɪŋ wɔɹɾɝz, mɛn ɡɑt ðɛɹ bɪznəs əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ dʌn əz kwɪkli əz pɑsəbəl. nɪɹli ɔl ðə wɪmən hæd ðɛɹ feɪsəz hɪɾən, ðɛɹ bɹɛθ mɪstɪŋ ɪn ði oʊpənɪŋz ə ðɛɹ hʊdz, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz izi tə pɪk aʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ fɹəm vɪzəɾɝz wɛðɝ ðɛɹ kloʊks wɝ pleɪn əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ən laɪnd wɪð fɝ. ðə kɹaʊdz pɑɹɾəd ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə sɪstɝ. ɛniwʌn ɛls hæd tə wiv əɹ weɪ θɹu. nɑt ðət mɛni sɪstɝz wɝ əbaʊɾ ɑn ðɪs fɹɪdʒəd mɪdmɔɹnɪŋ. moʊst wəd bi snʌɡ ɪn ðɛɹ tɛns. əloʊn əɹ ɪn tuz əɹ θɹiz, ðeɪ wəd bi ɹiɾɪŋ, əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ lɛɾɝz, əɹ kwɛstʃənɪŋ ðɛɹ vɪzəɾɝz əbaʊt wʌtɛvɝ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ðoʊz wɪmən hæd bɹɔt. wɪtʃ maɪɾ əɹ maɪt nɑt bi ʃɛɹd wɪð ðə ɹɛst ʌv ə sɪstɝz ədʒɑ, mʌtʃ lɛs wɪð ɛniwʌn ɛls. ðə wɝl sɔ ɛɛs sədaɪ əz ə mɑnəlɪθ, taʊɝɪŋ ən sɑləd, əɹ ɪt hæd bɪfɔɹ ðə kɝən dɪvɪʒən ɪn ðə taʊɝ bɪkeɪm kɑmən nɑlədʒ, jɛt ðə pjʊɹ fækt wɑz ðət ði ədʒəz stʊɾ əpɑɹɾ ɪn ɔl bʌt neɪm, ðə hɔl ðɛɹ oʊnli tʃɹu miɾɪŋ pɔɪnt, ən ðə sɪstɝz ðɛmsɛlvz wɝ lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə kɑnvəkeɪʃən ə hɝməts, spikɪŋ θɹi wɝdz bɪɑnd wʌt wɑz æbsəlutli ɹikwaɪɝɾ oʊnli wɪð ə fju fɹɛnz. əɹ wɪð ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ ðeɪ hæd dʒɔɪn ɪn səm dɪzaɪn.

The Ajahs decided to pass along to the Amyrlin Seat made for fascinating reading when compared to what Siuan and Leane gave her from their agents. It was not so much that there were contradictions, yet what the Ajahs chose to keep to themselves could draw interesting pictures. Comfort and duty both pulled her toward her study - just another tent, really, though everyone called it the Amyrlin's study - but this was an opportunity to look around without having everything hastily made ready ahead of her arrival. Pulling her hood a little further forward to better conceal her face, she touched her heels lightly to Daishar's flanks. There were few people mounted, mostly Warders, though the infrequent groom added to the traffic, leading a horse at as close to a trot as could be managed in the ankle-deep slush, but no one seemed to recognize her or her mount. In contrast to the nearly empty streets, the wooden walkways, no more than rough planks pegged atop sawn logs, shifted slightly under the weight of people. The handful of men, dotting the streams of women like raisins in a cheap cake, walked twice as fast as anyone else. Excepting Warders, men got their business among Aes Sedai done as quickly as possible. Nearly all the women had their faces hidden, their breath misting in the openings of their hoods, yet it was easy to pick out Aes Sedai from visitors whether their cloaks were plain or embroidered and lined with fur. The crowds parted in front of a sister. Anyone else had to weave her way through. Not that many sisters were about on this frigid midmorning. Most would be snug in their tents. Alone or in twos or threes, they would be reading, or writing letters, or questioning their visitors about whatever information those women had brought. Which might or might not be shared with the rest of a sister's Ajah, much less with anyone else. The world saw Aes Sedai as a monolith, towering and solid, or it had before the current division in the Tower became common knowledge, yet the pure fact was that the Ajahs stood apart in all but name, the Hall their only true meeting point, and the sisters themselves were little more than a convocation of hermits, speaking three words beyond what was absolutely required only with a few friends. Or with another sister they had joined in some design.

wʌtɛvɝ ɛls tʃeɪnʒd əbaʊt ðə taʊɝ, ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət nɛvɝ wʊd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn pɹitɛndɪŋ ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ ɛvɝ wəd bi, ə ɡɹeɪt ɹɪvɝ ɹoʊlɪŋ ɔnwɝd, ɔl ɪts paʊɝfəl kɝəns hɪɾən dip, ɔltɝɪŋ ɪts kɔɹs wɪð ɪmpɝsɛptɪbəl sloʊnəs. ʃi hæd bɪlt ə fju heɪsti dæmz ɪn ðət ɹɪvɝ, daɪvɝɾɪŋ ə stʃɹim hɪɹ ən ə stʃɹim ðəɹ fəɹ əɹ oʊn pɝpəsəz, jɛt ʃi nu ðeɪ wɝ tɛmpɝɛɹi stʃɹʌktʃɝz. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ðoʊz dip kɝəns wəɾ ʌndɝkʌɾ əɹ dæmz.

Whatever else changed about the Tower, Egwene was sure that never would. There was no point pretending that Aes Sedai had ever been anything but Aes Sedai or ever would be, a great river rolling onward, all its powerful currents hidden deep, altering its course with imperceptible slowness. She had built a few hasty dams in that river, diverting a stream here and a stream there for her own purposes, yet she knew they were temporary structures. Sooner or later those deep currents would undercut her dams.

ʃi kəɾ oʊnli pɹeɪ ðeɪ læstəd lɔŋ ɪnʌf. pɹeɪ, ən ʃɔɹ ʌp əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kʊd. vɛɹi əkeɪʒənəli wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə θɹɔŋ, wɪð ðə sɛvən bænz ə kʌlɝ ɑn ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ waɪt kloʊk, bʌt moʊs baɪ fɑɹ wɝ nɑvəsɪz ɪn ʌnədɔɹnd waɪt wʊl. oʊnli ə hændfʊl ə ðə twɛnti-wʌn æksɛptɪɾ ɪn ðə kæmp æktʃəli  pəzɛs bændɪd kloʊks, ən ðeɪ seɪv ðɛɹ fju bændɪd dʒɹɛsəz fəɹ titʃɪŋ klæsəz əɹ ətɛndɪŋ sɪstɝz, jɛt ɡɹeɪɾ ɛfɝts hæd bɪn meɪd tə si ðəɾ ɛvɹi nɑvəs wɑz dʒɹɛst ɪn waɪɾ əɾ ɔl taɪmz, ivən ɪf ʃi oʊnli hæd wʌn tʃeɪnʒ. ði æksɛptɪɾ ɪnɛvəɾəbli tʃɹaɪd tə muv wɪð ðə swɑnlaɪk ɡlaɪɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən wʌn əɹ tu nɪɹli mænədʒ dɪspaɪt ðə tɪltɪŋ ə ðə wɔkweɪz ʌndɝfʊt, bʌt ðə nɑvəsɪz dɑɹɾɪd əlɔŋ ɔlmoʊst əz kwɪkli əz ðə fju mɛn, skɝiɪŋ ɑn ɛɹənz əɹ hɝiɪŋ tə klæsəz ɪn ɡɹups ə sɪks əɹ sɛvən.

She could only pray they lasted long enough. Pray, and shore up as hard as she could. Very occasionally one of the Accepted appeared in the throng, with the seven bands of color on the hood of her white cloak, but most by far were novices in unadorned white wool. Only a handful of the twenty-one Accepted in the camp actually possessed banded cloaks, and they saved their few banded dresses for teaching classes or attending sisters, yet great efforts had been made to see that every novice was dressed in white at all times, even if she only had one change. The Accepted inevitably tried to move with the swanlike glide of Aes Sedai, and one or two nearly managed despite the tilting of the walkways underfoot, but the novices darted along almost as quickly as the few men, scurrying on errands or hurrying to classes in groups of six or seven.

ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd nɑt hæd soʊ mɛni nɑvəsɪz tə titʃ ɪn ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm, nɑt sɪns bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, wən ðəɹ hæd bɪn mɛni mɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ əz wɛl, ən ðə ɹɪzʌlt ə faɪndɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz wɪð nɪɹ ə θaʊzən stuɾənts hæd bɪn ʌɾɝ kənfjuʒən əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ ɔɹɡənaɪzd ɪndə ðiz "fæmliz." ðə neɪm wɑz nɑt stʃɹɪkli əfɪʃəl, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz juzd ivən baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ hu stɪl dɪslaɪk teɪkɪŋ ɛni wʊmən u æskt. naʊ ɛvɹi nɑvəs nu wɛɹ ʃi wɑz səpoʊz tə bi ən wɛn, ən ɛvɹi sɪstɝ kəɾ ət lis faɪn aʊt. nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðət ðə nʌmbɝ ə ɹʌnəweɪz hæd dɪklaɪnd. ðət wɑz ɔlweɪz ə kənsɝn fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən sɛvɹəl hʌnʒɹəd ə ðiz wɪmən maɪt wɛl əteɪn ðə ʃɔl. noʊ sɪstɝ wɑntəd tə luz wʌn ə ðoʊz, əɹ ɛni, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, nɑt bɪfɔɹ ðə dɪsɪʒən wɑz meɪd tə sɛn ə wʊmən əweɪ. wɪmən stɪl slɪpt ɔf əkeɪʒənəli æftɝ ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðət ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ wɑz hɑɹɾɝ ðən ðeɪ hæɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ ən ðə ɹoʊd tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪz ʃɔl lɔŋɡɝ, bʌt kwaɪɾ əpɑɹt fɹəm ðə fæmliz meɪkɪŋ ɪɾ iziɝ tə kip tʃɹæk, ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ sim tə bi lɛs ətʃɹæktɪv tə wɪmən u hæd faɪv əɹ sɪks kʌzənz, əz ðeɪ wɝ kɔld, tə lin ɑn.

Aes Sedai had not had so many novices to teach in a very long time, not since before the Trolloc Wars, when there had been many more Aes Sedai as well, and the result of finding themselves with near a thousand students had been utter confusion until they were organized into these "families." The name was not strictly official, yet it was used even by Aes Sedai who still disliked taking any woman who asked. Now every novice knew where she was supposed to be and when, and every sister could at least find out. Not to mention that the number of runaways had declined. That was always a concern for Aes Sedai, and several hundred of these women might well attain the shawl. No sister wanted to lose one of those, or any, for that matter, not before the decision was made to send a woman away. Women still slipped off occasionally after realizing that the training was harder than they had expected and the road to an Aes Sedai's shawl longer, but quite apart from the families making it easier to keep track, running away seemed to be less attractive to women who had five or six cousins, as they were called, to lean on.

wɛl ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə bɪɡ skwɛɹ pəvɪljən ðət sɝvd əz ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, ʃi tɝn deɪʃɝ daʊn ə saɪd stʃɹit. ðə wɔkweɪ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə peɪl bɹaʊn kænvəs pəvɪljən wɑz ɛmpti  -  ðə hɔl wɑz nɑɾ ə pleɪs ɛniwʌn əpɹoʊtʃt wɪθaʊt bɪznəs ðɛɹ  -  bʌt ðə mʌtʃ-pætʃt saɪd kɝɾənz wɝ kɛp daʊn wɪθaʊɾ ə ɹizən tə meɪk ðə wɝkɪŋz ə ðə hɔl pʌblɪk, soʊ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tɛlɪŋ u maɪt stɛp aʊt. ɛni sɪɾɝ wəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz deɪʃɝ əɾ ə ɡlæns, ən səm sɪɾɝz ʃi wəɾ əz sun əvɔɪɾ ivən mɔɹ ðən ʌðɝz. ləleɪn ən ɹoʊmændə, fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, hu ɹɪzɪstɪɾ əɹ əθɔɹəɾi əz ɪnstɪŋktɪvli əz ðeɪ əpoʊzd itʃ ʌðɝ. əɹ ɛni ʌv ðoʊz u hæd bɪɡʌn tɔkɪŋ ə nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz. ɪt wɑz tu mʌtʃ tə bɪliv ðət ðeɪ wɝ dʒʌs hoʊpɪŋ tə ɹæli spɪɹəts, əɹ ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv kɛp tə wɪspɝz. ðə kɝɾəsiz hæd tə bi meɪnteɪnd, ðoʊ, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɔfən ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd bɑks sʌmwʌnz ɪɹz, jɛt noʊ wʌn kəd θɪŋk ʃi wɑz biɪŋ snʌbd ɪf ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt si hɝ. ə feɪn sɪlvɝi laɪt flæʃt bɪhaɪn ə tɔl kænvəs wɔl dʒʌst əhɛɾ ə hɝ, sɝaʊndɪŋ wʌn ə ðə kæmps tu tʃɹævlɪŋ ɡɹaʊnz, ən ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ tu sɪstɝz ɪmɝdʒ fɹəm bɪhaɪnd wʌn ə ðə flæps. niðɝ fidʒɹɪn nɔɹ ʃɛmɑɹi wɑz stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə wiv ə ɡeɪtweɪ baɪ hɝsɛlf, bʌt lɪŋkt ʃi θɔt ðeɪ kəd dʒʌs mænədʒ wʌn bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə wɔk θɹu. hɛdz kloʊs təɡɛðɝ ɪn dip kɑnvɝseɪʃən, stʃɹeɪnʒli ðeɪ wɝ dʒʌs pɪnɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ kloʊks.

Well short of the big square pavilion that served as the Hall of the Tower, she turned Daishar down a side street. The walkway in front of the pale brown canvas pavilion was empty  -  the Hall was not a place anyone approached without business there  -  but the much-patched side curtains were kept down without a reason to make the workings of the Hall public, so there was no telling who might step out. Any Sitter would recognize Daishar at a glance, and some Sitters she would as soon avoid even more than others. Lelaine and Romanda, for example, who resisted her authority as instinctively as they opposed each other. Or any of those who had begun talking of negotiations. It was too much to believe that they were just hoping to rally spirits, or they would not have kept to whispers. The courtesies had to be maintained, though, no matter how often she wished she could box someone's ears, yet no one could think she was being snubbed if Egwene did not see her. A faint silvery light flashed behind a tall canvas wall just ahead of her, surrounding one of the camp's two Traveling grounds, and a moment later two sisters emerged from behind one of the flaps. Neither Phaedrine nor Shemari was strong enough to weave a gateway by herself, but linked she thought they could just manage one big enough to walk through. Heads close together in deep conversation, strangely they were just pinning on their cloaks.

ɛɡwin kɛpt əɹ feɪs əvɝɾəd ɛniweɪ əz ʃi ɹoʊd baɪ. boʊθ ə ðə bɹaʊnz hæd tɔɾ əɹ əz ə nɑvəs, ən fidʒɹɪn stɪl sim sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑz æmɪɝlɪn. lin əz ə hɛɹən, ʃi wɑz kwaɪt keɪpəbəl ʌv weɪɾɪŋ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə mʌk tə æsk wɛðɝ ɛɡwin niɾəd əsɪstəns. ʃɛmɑɹi, ə vɪɡɝəs skwɹəfeɪst wʊmən u lʊk mɔɹ laɪk ə ɡɹin ðən ə laɪbɹɛɹiən, wɑz ɔlweɪz bɪɑn pɹɑpɝ ɪn əɹ bɪheɪvjɝ.

Egwene kept her face averted anyway as she rode by. Both of the Browns had taught her as a novice, and Phaedrine still seemed surprised that Egwene was Amyrlin. Lean as a heron, she was quite capable of wading out into the muck to ask whether Egwene needed assistance. Shemari, a vigorous squarefaced woman who looked more like a Green than a librarian, was always beyond proper in her behavior.

mʌtʃ bɪɑnd. hɝ dip kɝtsiz, suɾəbəl fəɹ ə nɑvəs, kæɹiɾ ət list ə sədʒɛstʃən ə mɑkɝi noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ smuð əɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən, nɑt lis kəz ʃi hæd bɪn noʊn tə kɝtsi wən ʃi sɔ ɛɡwin ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əweɪ.

Much beyond. Her deep curtsies, suitable for a novice, carried at least a suggestion of mockery no matter how smooth her expression, not least because she had been known to curtsy when she saw Egwene a hundred paces away.

wɛɹ hæd ðeɪ bɪn, ʃi wʌndɝd. sʌmwɛɹ ɪndɔɹz, pɝhæps, əɹ ət list wɔɹmɝ ðən ðə kæmp. noʊ wʌn ɹɪli kɛp tʃɹæk ə ðə sɪstɝz' kʌmɪŋz ən ɡoʊɪŋz, ʌv kɔɹs, nɑɾ ivən ði ədʒəz. kʌstəm ɹuld ɛvɹiwʌn, ən kʌstəm stʃɹɔŋli dɪskɝədʒ dɝɛkt kwɛstʃənz əbaʊt wʌɾ ə sɪstɝ wɑz duɪŋ əɹ wɛɹ ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ. moʊs laɪkli, fidʒɹɪn ən ʃɛmɑɹi hæd bɪn tə hɪɹ fɹəm səm ə ðɛɹ aɪz-ændɪɹz feɪs tə feɪs. əɹ meɪbi tə lʊk əɾ ə bʊk ɪn səm laɪbɹɛɹi. ðeɪ wɝ bɹaʊn. bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp θɪŋkɪŋ ə naɪsaʊz kɑmɛn əbaʊt sɪstɝz slɪpɪŋ əweɪ tə ɪleɪɾə. ɪt wɑz kwaɪt pɑsəbəl tə haɪɝ ə boʊtmən tə meɪk ðə kɹɔsɪŋ tə ðə sɪɾi, wɛɹ dʌzənz ə taɪni wɔɾɝ ɡeɪts ɡeɪv ɛntʃɹəns tə ɛniwʌn u wɪʃt ɪt, bʌt wɪð ə ɡeɪtweɪ, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə ɹɪsk ɪkspoʊʒɝ baɪ ɹaɪɾɪŋ tə ðə ɹɪvɝ ən æskɪŋ æftɝ boʊts. dʒʌst wʌn sɪstɝ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə taʊɝ wɪð ðə nɑlədʒ ə ðət wiv wəd ɡɪv əweɪ ðɛɹ lɑɹdʒəst ædvæntɪdʒ. ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə stɑp ɪt. ɪksɛp tə kip hɑɹɾ ɪn ði ɑpəzɪʃən tə ɪleɪɾə.

Where had they been, she wondered. Somewhere indoors, perhaps, or at least warmer than the camp. No one really kept track of the sisters' comings and goings, of course, not even the Ajahs. Custom ruled everyone, and custom strongly discouraged direct questions about what a sister was doing or where she was going. Most likely, Phaedrine and Shemari had been to hear from some of their eyes-andears face to face. Or maybe to look at a book in some library. They were Brown. But she could not help thinking of Nisao's comment about sisters slipping away to Elaida. It was quite possible to hire a boatman to make the crossing to the city, where dozens of tiny water gates gave entrance to anyone who wished it, but with a gateway, there was no need to risk exposure by riding to the river and asking after boats. Just one sister returning to the Tower with the knowledge of that weave would give away their largest advantage. And there was no way to stop it. Except to keep heart in the opposition to Elaida.

ɪksɛp tə meɪk ðə sɪstɝz bɪliv ðəɹ kəd bi ə kwɪk ɛn tə ðɪs. ɪf oʊnli ðəɹ wɑz ə weɪ tə ə kwɪk ɛnd.

Except to make the sisters believe there could be a quick end to this. If only there was a way to a quick end.

nɑt fɑɹ bɪɑn ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd, ɛɡwin dʒɹu ɹeɪn ən fɹaʊn əɾ ə lɔŋ wɔl-tɛnt, ivən mɔɹ pætʃt ðən ðə hɔl. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ keɪm swɑnɪŋ daʊn ðə wɔkweɪ - ʃi wɔɹ ə pleɪn dɑɹk blu kloʊk, ən ðə kaʊl hɪɾ əɹ feɪs, bʌt nɑvəsɪz ən ʌðɝz skɪpt aʊɾ ə hɝ weɪ əz ðeɪ nɛvɝ wəɾ əv fəɹ ə mɝtʃənt, seɪ - ən pɔzd ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə tɛnt, lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪt fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmən bɪfɔɹ pʊʃɪŋ əsaɪd ði ɛntʃɹi flæp tə ɡoʊ ɪnsaɪd, hɝ ənwɪlɪŋnɪs əz klɪɹ əz ɪf ʃi hæd ʃaʊɾəd. ɛɡwin hæd nɛvɝ ɡɔn ɪn ðɛɹ. ʃi kəd fil seɪaɪdɑɹ biɪŋ tʃænəld ɪnsaɪd, ðoʊ feɪnli. ði əmaʊnt nɛsəsɛɹi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli smɔl. ə kwɪk vɪzət fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪn ʃəd nɑt dʒɹɔ tu mʌtʃ ətɛnʃən, haʊɛvɝ.

Not far beyond the Traveling ground, Egwene drew rein and frowned at a long wall-tent, even more patched than the Hall. An Aes Sedai came swanning down the walkway - she wore a plain dark blue cloak, and the cowl hid her face, but novices and others skipped out of her way as they never would have for a merchant, say - and paused in front of the tent, looking at it for a long moment before pushing aside the entry flap to go inside, her unwillingness as clear as if she had shouted. Egwene had never gone in there. She could feel saidar being channeled inside, though faintly. The amount necessary was surprisingly small. A quick visit from the Amyrlin should not draw too much attention, however.

ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ wɑntəd tə si wʌt ʃi hæd sɛɾ ɪn moʊʃən. dɪsmaʊntɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə tɛnt, ðoʊ, ʃi dɪskʌvɝɾ ə tʃɹaɪflɪŋ dɪfəkəlti. ðəɹ wɑz noʊwɛɹ tə taɪ deɪʃɝ. ði æmɪɝlɪn ɔlweɪz hæd sʌmwʌn ɹʌʃɪŋ tə hoʊld əɹ stɝəp ən teɪk əweɪ hɝ hɔɹs, bʌt ʃi stʊd ðəɹ hoʊldɪŋ ðə ɡɛldɪŋz ɹeɪnz, ən klʌstɝz ə nɑvəsɪz bʌsəl pæst wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə kwɪk ɡlæns, dɪsmɪsɪŋ əɹ əz wʌn ə ðə vɪzəɾɝz.

She very much wanted to see what she had set in motion. Dismounting in front of the tent, though, she discovered a trifling difficulty. There was nowhere to tie Daishar. The Amyrlin always had someone rushing to hold her stirrup and take away her horse, but she stood there holding the gelding's reins, and clusters of novices bustled past with no more than a quick glance, dismissing her as one of the visitors.

baɪ ðɪs taɪm, ɛvɹi nɑvəs nu ɔl ə ði æksɛptɪɾ ɑn saɪt, bʌt fju hæd sin ði æmɪɝlɪn sit kloʊs ʌp. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən əv ði eɪdʒləs feɪs tə tɛl əm ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. wɪð ə ɹufəl læf, ʃi pʊɾ ə ɡlʌv hæn ɪndə hɝ bɛl paʊtʃ. ðə stoʊl wəd tɛl əm u ʃi wɑz, ən ðən ʃi kəɾ ɔɹɾɝ wʌn ə ðɛm tə hoʊld əɹ hɔɹs fəɹ ə fju mɪnəts. ənlɛs ðeɪ θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ə dʒoʊk ɪn bæd teɪst, ət list. səm ə ðə nɑvəsɪz fɹəm ɛmənz fil hæd tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl ðə stoʊl fɹəm əɹ nɛk, tə kip əɹ fɹəm ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪn tʃɹʌbəl. noʊ, ðət wɑz pæst ən dɛlt wɪð.

By this time, every novice knew all of the Accepted on sight, but few had seen the Amyrlin Seat close up. She did not even have the ageless face to tell them she was Aes Sedai. With a rueful laugh, she put a gloved hand into her belt pouch. The stole would tell them who she was, and then she could order one of them to hold her horse for a few minutes. Unless they thought it was a joke in bad taste, at least. Some of the novices from Emond's Field had tried to pull the stole from her neck, to keep her from getting in trouble. No, that was past and dealt with.

əbɹʌpli, ði ɛntʃɹi flæp wɑz pʊʃt oʊpən ən lin ɪmɝdʒd, fæsənɪŋ əɹ dɑɹk ɡɹin kloʊk wɪð ə sɪlvɝ pɪn ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə fɪʃ. ðə kloʊk wɑz sɪlk, ən ɹɪtʃli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn sɪlvɝ ən ɡoʊld, əz wɑz ðə bɑɾəs ə hɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs. hɝ ɹɛd ɡlʌvz wɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɑn ðə bæks, tu. lin peɪd mɪnəɾ ətɛnʃən tə hɝ kloʊðz sɪns dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ. hɝ aɪz waɪɾənd laɪtli ət ðə saɪɾ ʌv ɛɡwin, bʌɾ əɹ kɑpɝi feɪs smuðd ɪmiɾiətli. teɪkɪŋ ɪn ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən əɾ ə ɡlæns, ʃi pʊɾ aʊɾ ə hæn tə stɑp ə nɑvəs u əpɪɹd tə bi baɪ hɝsɛlf. nɑvəsɪz wɛn tə klæsəz baɪ fæmli. "wʌts jəɹ neɪm, tʃaɪld?" mʌtʃ hæd tʃeɪnʒd əbaʊt lin, bʌt nɑɾ əɹ bɹɪsknəs. ɪksɛpt wən ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪt tə, ɛniweɪ. moʊs mɛn tɝn tə pʌɾi wən linz vɔɪs ɡɹu læŋɔɹəs, bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ weɪstəd ðəɾ ɑn wɪmən. "ɑɹ jə ɑn ən ɛɹən fəɹ ə sɪstɝ?" ðə nɑvəs, ə peɪl-aɪd wʊmən kloʊs tə hɝ mɪɾəl jɪɹz, wɪð ən ənblɛmɪʃt skɪn ðət hæd nɛvɝ sin ə deɪz wɝk ɪn ðə fild, ɡeɪpt oʊpənli bɪfɔɹ ɹəkʌvɝɪŋ ɪnʌf tə meɪk əɹ kɝtsi, ə smuðli pɹæktəst spɹɛɾɪŋ ə hɝ waɪt skɝts wɪð mɪɾənd hænz. əz tɔl əz moʊs mɛn bʌt wɪləwi ən ɡɹeɪsfəl ən bjuɾəfəl, lin læk ði eɪdʒləs lʊk, tu, jɛt hɝz wɑz wʌn ə ðə tu moʊst wɛl noʊn feɪsəz ɪn ðə kæmp. nɑvəsɪz pɔɪntəɾ əɹ aʊɾ ɪn ɑ, ə sɪstɝ u hæd wʌns bɪn kipɝ, hu hæd bɪn stɪld, ən hil soʊ ʃi kəd tʃænəl əɡɛn, ɪf nɑt soʊ stʃɹɔŋli əz bɪfɔɹ. ən ðən ʃi hæd tʃeɪnʒd ədʒəz! ðə nuəst wɪmən ɪn waɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæd lɝn ðət ðət dʒʌs nɛvɝ hæpənd, ðoʊ ði ʌðɝ wɑz bɪkʌmɪŋ ə pɑɹɾ ə lɔɹ, ənfɔɹtʃənətli. ɪt wɑz hɑɹɾɝ tə meɪk ə nɑvəs ɡoʊ sloʊli wən jə kəd nɑt pɔɪn aʊt ðət ʃi ɹɪskt ɛndɪŋ əɹ kwɛs fəɹ ðə ʃɔl baɪ bɝnɪŋ hɝsɛlf aʊɾ ən luzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ fɝɛvɝ.

Abruptly, the entry flap was pushed open and Leane emerged, fastening her dark green cloak with a silver pin in the shape of a fish. The cloak was silk, and richly embroidered in silver and gold, as was the bodice of her riding dress. Her red gloves were embroidered on the backs, too. Leane paid minute attention to her clothes since joining the Green Ajah. Her eyes widened lightly at the sight of Egwene, but her coppery face smoothed immediately. Taking in the situation at a glance, she put out a hand to stop a novice who appeared to be by herself. Novices went to classes by family. "What's your name, child?" Much had changed about Leane, but not her briskness. Except when she wanted it to, anyway. Most men turned to putty when Leane's voice grew languorous, but she never wasted that on women. "Are you on an errand for a sister?" The novice, a pale-eyed woman close to her middle years, with an unblemished skin that had never seen a day's work in the field, gaped openly before recovering enough to make her curtsy, a smoothly practiced spreading of her white skirts with mittened hands. As tall as most men but willowy and graceful and beautiful, Leane lacked the ageless look, too, yet hers was one of the two most well known faces in the camp. Novices pointed her out in awe, a sister who had once been Keeper, who had been stilled, and Healed so she could channel again, if not so strongly as before. And then she had changed Ajahs! The newest women in white already had learned that that just never happened, though the other was becoming a part of lore, unfortunately. It was harder to make a novice go slowly when you could not point out that she risked ending her quest for the shawl by burning herself out and losing the One Power forever.

"ləɾəs mɹoʊ, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ðə wʊmən sɛd ɹɪspɛkfəli, ɪn ə lɪltɪŋ mʊɹændiən æksɛnt. ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə seɪ mɔɹ, pɝhæps tə ɡɪv ə taɪɾəl, bʌt wʌn ə ðə fɝs lɛsənz ɑn dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðə taʊɝ wɑz ðət jə hæd lɛf bɪhaɪn u jə juz tə bi. ɪt wɑz ə hɑɹd lɛsən, fəɹ sʌm, ɪspɛʃli ðoʊz u pəzɛs taɪɾəlz. "aɪm gɑnə vɪzət maɪ sɪstɝ. aɪ hævən sin əɹ mɔɹ ðən ə mɪnət sɪns bɪfɔɹ wi lɛf mʊɹændi." ɹɛləɾɪvz wɝ ɔlweɪz pʊɾ ɪn dɪfɹənt nɑvəs fæmliz, əz wɝ wɪmən u hæd noʊn itʃ ʌðɝ bɪfɔɹ biɪŋ ɛntɝɾ ɪn ðə nɑvəs bʊk. ɪɾ ɛnkɝɪdʒ meɪkɪŋ nu fɹɛnz, ən kʌt daʊn ɑn ði ɪnɛvəɾəbəl tɛntʃənz wən wʌn wɑz lɝnɪŋ fæstɝ ðən ði ʌðɝ əɹ hæɾ ə haɪɝ pətɛnʃəl.

"Letice Murow, Aes Sedai," the woman said respectfully, in a lilting Murandian accent. She sounded as if she wanted to say more, perhaps to give a title, but one of the first lessons on joining the Tower was that you had left behind who you used to be. It was a hard lesson, for some, especially those who possessed titles. "I'm going to visit my sister. I haven't seen her more than a minute since before we left Murandy." Relatives were always put in different novice families, as were women who had known each other before being entered in the novice book. It encouraged making new friends, and cut down on the inevitable tensions when one was learning faster than the other or had a higher potential.

"ʃiz fɹi ʌv klæsəz, tu, əntɪl ði æftɝnun, ən - " "jɔɹ sɪstɝ wɪl əv tə weɪɾ ə waɪl lɔŋɡɝ, tʃaɪld," lin bɹoʊk ɪn. "hoʊl ði æmɪɝlɪnz hɔɹs fəɹ hɝ." ləɾəs ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən stɛɹɾ əɾ ɛɡwin, hu hæd faɪnəli mænədʒ tə ɪkstʃɹækt əɹ stoʊl. hændɪŋ deɪʃɝz ɹeɪnz tə ðə wʊmən, ʃi loʊɝɾ əɹ kaʊl ən sɛɾəld ðə lɔŋ nɛɹoʊ stʃɹɪp ə klɔθ ɑntu hɝ ʃoʊldɝz. laɪɾ əz ə fɛðɝ ɪn əɹ paʊtʃ, ðə stoʊl hæd ɹil weɪt hæŋɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk. sɪuən kleɪm ðət səmtaɪmz jə kəd fil ɛvɹi wʊmən u hæɾ ɛvɝ wɔɹn ðə stoʊl hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ði ɛnz ʌv ɪt, ə kɑnstən ɹimaɪndɝ ə ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi ən duɾi, ən ɛɡwin bɪlivd ɛvɹi wɝd. ðə mʊɹændiən ɡeɪpt əɾ əɹ hɑɹɾɝ ðən ʃi hæd fəɹ lin, ən tʊk lɔŋɡɝ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ tə kɝtsi. noʊ daʊt ʃi hæd hɝd ðət ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz jʌŋ, bʌɾ ɪt simd ənlaɪkli ʃi hæd ɡɪvən ə θɔt tə haʊ jʌŋ. "θæŋk ju, tʃaɪld," ɛɡwin sɛd smuðli.

"She's free of classes, too, until the afternoon, and - " "Your sister will have to wait a while longer, child," Leane broke in. "Hold the Amyrlin's horse for her." Letice gave a start and stared at Egwene, who had finally managed to extract her stole. Handing Daishar's reins to the woman, she lowered her cowl and settled the long narrow strip of cloth onto her shoulders. Light as a feather in her pouch, the stole had real weight hanging around her neck. Siuan claimed that sometimes you could feel every woman who had ever worn the stole hanging from the ends of it, a constant reminder of responsibility and duty, and Egwene believed every word. The Murandian gaped at her harder than she had for Leane, and took longer to remember to curtsy. No doubt she had heard that the Amyrlin was young, but it seemed unlikely she had given a thought to how young. "Thank you, child," Egwene said smoothly.

ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə taɪm wən ʃi fɛl stʃɹeɪnʒ kɔlɪŋ ə wʊmən tɛn jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən hɝsɛlf tʃaɪld.

There had been a time when she felt strange calling a woman ten years older than herself child.

ɛvɹiθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd, wɪð taɪm. "ɪt woʊn bi fəɹ lɔŋ. lin, wəd jə æsk sʌmwʌn tə sɛn ə ɡɹum fəɹ deɪʃɝ? naʊ ðəɾ aɪm aʊɾ ə ðə sæɾəl, aɪɾ əz sun steɪ aʊt, ən ləɾəs ʃəd bi əlaʊd tə si hɝ sɪstɝ."

Everything changed, with time. "It won't be for long. Leane, would you ask someone to send a groom for Daishar? Now that I'm out of the saddle, I'd as soon stay out, and Letice should be allowed to see her sister."

"aɪ wɪl si tə ɪt maɪsɛlf, mʌðɝ."

"I will see to it myself, Mother."

lin ɔfɝɾ ə fluəd kɝtsi ən muvd əweɪ wɪð nɛvɝ ə hɪn ðət ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ bɪtwin əm ðən ðɪs tʃæns ɪnkaʊntɝ. ɛɡwin tʃɹʌstɪɾ əɹ fɑɹ mɔɹ ðən ʃi dɪɾ æneɪjə əɹ ivən ʃɛɹiəm. ʃi sɝɾənli kɛp noʊ sikɹəts fɹəm lin, ɛni mɔɹ ðən fɹəm sɪuən. bʌt ðɛɹ fɹɛndʃɪp wɑz jɛɾ ənʌðɝ sikɹət ðət hæd tə bi kɛpt. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, lin hæɾ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz æktʃəli  ɪnsaɪd tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪf nɑɾ ɪn ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf, ən ðɛɹ ɹɪpɔɹts keɪm tə ɛɡwin ən ɛɡwin əloʊn. fəɹ ənʌðɝ, lin wɑz mʌtʃ pɛɾəd fəɹ əkɑmədeɪɾɪŋ soʊ wɛl tə hɝ ɹədust stæɾəs, ən ɛvɹi sɪstɝ wɛlkəm hɝ, ɪf oʊnli kəz ʃi wɑz lɪvɪŋ pɹuf ðət stɪlɪŋ, ðə dipəs dʒɹɛɾ ʌv ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ, kəd bi ɹɪvɝst. ðeɪ wɛlkəmd əɹ wɪð oʊpən ɑɹmz, ən kəz ʃi wɑz lɛs, naʊ, stændɪŋ bɪloʊ ət lis hæf ðə sɪstɝz ɪn ðə kæmp, ðeɪ ɔfən spoʊk ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ əbaʊt mæɾɝz ðeɪ wəd nɛvɝ wɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn tə noʊ ʌv. soʊ ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlæns æftɝ əɹ əz ʃi lɛft. ɪnstɛd, ʃi, ɔfɝd ləɾəs ə smaɪl - ðə wʊmən ɹɛɾənd ən bɑbd ənʌðɝ kɝtsi - ðən ɛntɝd ðə tɛnt, stʃɹɪpɪŋ ɔf əɹ ɡlʌvz ən tʌkɪŋ əm bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt.

Leane offered a fluid curtsy and moved away with never a hint that there was more between them than this chance encounter. Egwene trusted her far more than she did Anaiya or even Sheriam. She certainly kept no secrets from Leane, any more than from Siuan. But their friendship was yet another secret that had to be kept. For one thing, Leane had eyes-and-ears actually inside Tar Valon if not in the Tower itself, and their reports came to Egwene and Egwene alone. For another, Leane was much petted for accommodating so well to her reduced status, and every sister welcomed her, if only because she was living proof that stilling, the deepest dread of any Aes Sedai, could be reversed. They welcomed her with open arms, and because she was less, now, standing below at least half the sisters in the camp, they often spoke in front of her about matters they would never want the Amyrlin to know of. So Egwene did not so much as glance after her as she left. Instead, she, offered Letice a smile - the woman reddened and bobbed another curtsy - then entered the tent, stripping off her gloves and tucking them behind her belt.

ɪnsaɪd, eɪt mɪɹɝd stænd-læmps stʊɾ əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz bɪtwin loʊ wʊɾən tʃɛsts. wʌn wɪð ə bɪɾ ʌv wɔɹn ɡɪldɪŋ ən ðə ɹɛst ə peɪntəɾ aɪɝn, noʊ tu ʌv ðə læmps hæd ðə seɪm nʌmbɝ ʌv ɑɹmz, bʌt ðeɪ pɹəvaɪɾəd ɡʊɾ ɪluməneɪʃən, ɪf nɑt soʊ bɹaɪɾ əz aʊtsaɪd. əsɔɹɾɪd teɪbəlz ðət sim tə hæv kʌm fɹəm sɛvən dɪfɹən fɑɹm kɪtʃənz meɪɾ ə ɹoʊ daʊn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə kænvəs ɡɹaʊnd-klɔθ, ðə bɛntʃɪz ə ðə θɹi fɑɹðəst ɑkjəpaɪd baɪ ə hæf ə dʌzən nɑvəsɪz wɪð ðɛɹ kloʊks foʊldəd bɪsaɪd ðɛm, itʃ wʊmən sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ðə paʊɝ. tiɑnə, ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz, hʌvɝɾ æŋkʃəsli oʊvɝ ðɛm, wɔkɪŋ bɪtwin ðə teɪbəlz, ən sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, soʊ dɪd ʃɛɝinə mɛlɔɪ, wʌn ə ðə nɑvəsɪz əkwaɪɝɾ ɪn mʊɹændi.

Inside, eight mirrored stand-lamps stood along the walls between low wooden chests. One with a bit of worn gilding and the rest of painted iron, no two of the lamps had the same number of arms, but they provided good illumination, if not so bright as outside. Assorted tables that seemed to have come from seven different farm kitchens made a row down the center of the canvas ground-cloth, the benches of the three farthest occupied by a half a dozen novices with their cloaks folded beside them, each woman surrounded by the glow of the Power. Tiana, the Mistress of Novices, hovered anxiously over them, walking between the tables, and surprisingly, so did Sharina Melloy, one of the novices acquired in Murandy.

wɛl, ʃɛɝinə wɑz nɑɾ ɪɡzækli hʌvɝɪŋ, dʒʌst wɑtʃɪŋ kɑmli, ən pɝhæps ɪt ʃəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ə sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn əɹ ðɛɹ. ə dɪɡnəfaɪd, ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd ɡɹændmʌðɝ wɪð ə taɪt bʌn ɑn ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd, ʃɛɝinə hæd ɹʌn ə vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ fæmli wɪð ə vɛɹi fɝm hænd, ən ʃi sim tə hæv ədɑptəɾ ɔl ə ði ʌðɝ nɑvəsɪz əz ɡɹændɔɾɝz əɹ ɡɹændnisəz. ʃi wɑz ðə wʌn u hæɾ ɔɹɡənaɪzd əm ɪndə ðoʊz taɪni fæmliz, kəmplitli ɑn əɹ oʊn ən əpɛɹənli aʊɾ ə sɪmpəl dɪsɡʌst ət siɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn flaʊndɝ ɝaʊnd. moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛn mɔɹ ðən ə tʌtʃ taɪt-maʊðd ɪf ɹimaɪndəɾ ə ðæt, ðoʊ ðeɪ hæɾ æksɛptɪd ðə fɔɹm kwɪkli ɪnʌf wʌns ðeɪ ɹilaɪz haʊ mʌtʃ iziɝ ɪt meɪd kipɪŋ tʃɹæk ən ɔɹɡənaɪzɪŋ klæsəz. tiɑnə wɑz ɪnspɛktɪŋ ðə nɑvəsɪz' wɝk soʊ kloʊsli ðəɾ ɪt simd ɑbviəs ʃi wɑz ətɛmptɪŋ tə ɪɡnɔɹ ʃɛɝinəz pɹɛzəns. ʃɔɹɾ ən slaɪt, wɪð lɑɹdʒ bɹaʊn aɪz ən ə dɪmpəl ɪn əɹ tʃik, tiɑnə sʌmhaʊ lʊk jʌŋ dɪspaɪɾ əɹ eɪdʒləs feɪs, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli əlɔŋsaɪd ðə tɔlɝ nɑvəsəz kɹis tʃiks ən bɹɔd hɪps.

Well, Sharina was not exactly hovering, just watching calmly, and perhaps it should not have been a surprise to find her there. A dignified, gray-haired grandmother with a tight bun on the back of her head, Sharina had run a very large family with a very firm hand, and she seemed to have adopted all of the other novices as granddaughters or grandnieces. She was the one who had organized them into those tiny families, completely on her own and apparently out of simple disgust at seeing everyone flounder around. Most Aes Sedai went more than a touch tight-mouthed if reminded of that, though they had accepted the form quickly enough once they realized how much easier it made keeping track and organizing classes. Tiana was inspecting the novices' work so closely that it seemed obvious she was attempting to ignore Sharina's presence. Short and slight, with large brown eyes and a dimple in her cheek, Tiana somehow looked young despite her ageless face, particularly alongside the taller novice's creased cheeks and broad hips.

ðə pɛɹ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ tʃænəlɪŋ ət ðə teɪbəl nɪɹəs ði ɛntʃɹəns, kɛɹən ən æʃmɑneɪl, hæɾ ən ɑɾiəns ə tu əz wɛl, dʒɑnjə fɹɛnd, ə sɪɾɝ fəɹ ðə bɹaʊn, ən sæliɾə tɔɹeɪnz, ə sɪɾɝ fəɹ ðə jɛloʊ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə nɑvəsɪz wɝ ɔl pɝfɔɹmɪŋ ðə seɪm tæsk. ɪn fɹʌn ʌv itʃ wʊmən, ə kloʊs nɛt woʊvən ə ɝθ, faɪɝ ən ɛɹ sɝaʊndəɾ ə smɔl boʊl əɹ kʌp əɹ ðə laɪk, ɔl meɪd baɪ ðə kæmps blæksmɪθs, hu wɝ vɛɹi pʌzəld ət waɪ ðə sɪstɝz wɑntəd sətʃ θɪŋz meɪɾ ʌv aɪɝn, nɑt tə mɛnʃən hævɪŋ əm meɪɾ əz faɪnli əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ sɪlvɝ. ə sɛkənd wiv, ɝθ ən faɪɝ woʊvən dʒʌst soʊ, pɛnətʃɹeɪɾəd itʃ nɛt tə tʌtʃ ði ɑbʒɛkt, wɪtʃ wɑz sloʊli tɝnɪŋ waɪt. vɛɹi, vɛɹi sloʊli, ɪn ɛvɹi keɪs. əbɪləɾi wɪð ðə wiv ɪmpɹuvd wɪð pɹæktəs, bʌɾ ə ðə faɪv paʊɝz, stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ɝθ wɑz ðə ki, ən bɪsaɪɾ ɛɡwin hɝsɛlf, oʊnli naɪn sɪstɝz ɪn ðə kæmp - əlɔŋ wɪð tu ʌv ði æksɛptɪɾ ən nɪɹli tu dʌzən nɑvəsɪz - hæd səfɪʃən ə ðət tə meɪk ðə wivz wɝk əɾ ɔl. fju əmʌŋ ðə sɪstɝz wɑntəd tə ɡɪv ɛni taɪm tə ɪt, ðoʊ. æʃmɑneɪl, lin ɪnʌf tə meɪk əɹ sim tɔlɝ ðən ʃi ɹɪli wɑz, fɪŋɡɝz tæpɪŋ ðə teɪbəltɑp ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə sɪmpəl mɛɾəl kʌp ɪn fɹʌn hɝ, wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃənli əz ði ɛdʒ ʌv waɪtnəs kɹɛpt ʌpwɝd pæs hæfweɪ. kɛɹənz blu aɪz wɝ koʊld ɪnʌf ðəɾ ɪt simd əɹ stɛɹ əloʊn maɪt ʃæɾɝ ðə tɔl ɡɑblət ʃi wɑz wɝkɪŋ ɑn. ðət hæɾ oʊnli ðə smɔləst ɹɪm ʌv waɪɾ ət ðə bɑɾəm. ɪt mʌst əv bɪn kɛɹən ɛɡwin hæd sin ɡoʊɪŋ ɪn.

The pair of Aes Sedai channeling at the table nearest the entrance, Kairen and Ashmanaille, had an audience of two as well, Janya Frende, a Sitter for the Brown, and Salita Toranes, a Sitter for the Yellow. The Aes Sedai and the novices were all performing the same task. In front of each woman, a close net woven of Earth, Fire and Air surrounded a small bowl or cup or the like, all made by the camp's blacksmiths, who were very puzzled at why the sisters wanted such things made of iron, not to mention having them made as finely as if they were silver. A second weave, Earth and Fire woven just so, penetrated each net to touch the object, which was slowly turning white. Very, very slowly, in every case. Ability with the weave improved with practice, but of the Five Powers, strength in Earth was the key, and beside Egwene herself, only nine sisters in the camp - along with two of the Accepted and nearly two dozen novices - had sufficient of that to make the weaves work at all. Few among the sisters wanted to give any time to it, though. Ashmanaille, lean enough to make her seem taller than she really was, fingers tapping the tabletop on either side of the simple metal cup in front her, was frowning impatiently as the edge of whiteness crept upward past halfway. Kairen's blue eyes were cold enough that it seemed her stare alone might shatter the tall goblet she was working on. That had only the smallest rim of white at the bottom. It must have been Kairen Egwene had seen going in.

nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz ənɪnθuziæstɪk, ðoʊ. dʒɑnjə, slɪm ɪn əɹ peɪl bɹɑnz sɪlks ən wɛɹɪŋ əɹ bɹaʊn-fɹɪnd ʃɔl dʒɹeɪpt oʊvɝ əɹ ɑɹmz, stʌɾid wʌt kɛɹən ən æʃmɑneɪl wɝ duɪŋ wɪð ði iɡɝnəs ʌv wʌn u wɪʃt ʃi kəd bi duɪŋ ðə seɪm. dʒɑnjə wɑntəd tə noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, tə noʊ haʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz dʌn ən waɪ ɪt hæpən ðət weɪ. ʃi hæd bɪn ɪkstʃɹimli dɪsəpɔɪntɪd wən ʃi kəd nɑt lɝn tə meɪk tɛɹæŋɡɹil - oʊnli θɹi sɪstɝz əsaɪd fɹəm ɪleɪn hæd mænədʒ ðæt, soʊ fɑɹ, wɪð vɛɹi spɑɾi səksɛs - ən ʃi hæd meɪɾ ə kənsɝɾəd ɛfɝt tə lɝn ðɪs skɪl ivən æftɝ ðə tɛstɪŋ ʃoʊd ʃi fɛl ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə ɹikwaɪɝd stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn juzɪŋ ɝθ.

Not everyone was unenthusiastic, though. Janya, slim in her pale bronze silks and wearing her brown-fringed shawl draped over her arms, studied what Kairen and Ashmanaille were doing with the eagerness of one who wished she could be doing the same. Janya wanted to know everything, to know how everything was done and why it happened that way. She had been extremely disappointed when she could not learn to make ter'angreal - only three sisters aside from Elayne had managed that, so far, with very spotty success - and she had made a concerted effort to learn this skill even after the testing showed she fell short of the required strength in using Earth.

sæliɾə wɑz ðə fɝs tə noʊɾəs ɛɡwin. ɹaʊnd-feɪst ən ɔlmoʊst əz dɑɹk əz tʃɑɹkoʊl, ʃi aɪɾ ɛɡwin lɛvəli, ən ðə jɛloʊ fɹɪnʒ ə hɝ ʃɔl sweɪd slaɪtli əz ʃi meɪɾ ə vɛɹi pɹɪsaɪs kɝtsi, ɪɡzæk tə ði ɪntʃ. ɹeɪzd ɪn sɑlədɑɹ, sæliɾə wɑz pɑɹɾ ʌv ə dɪstɝbɪŋ pæɾɝn: tu mɛni sɪɾɝz u wɝ tu jʌŋ fəɹ ðə pəzɪʃən. sæliɾə hæɾ oʊnli bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ θɝɾi-faɪv jɪɹz, ən ɹɛɹli wɑz ə wʊmən ɡɪvən ə tʃɛɹ bɪfɔɹ wɛɹɪŋ ðə ʃɔl fəɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd əɹ mɔɹ. sɪuən sɔ ə pæɾɝn, ɛniweɪ, ən θɔɾ ɪt dɪstɝbɪŋ, ðoʊ ʃi kəd nɑt seɪ waɪ. pæɾɝnz ʃi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ɔlweɪz dɪstɝb sɪuən.

Salita was the first to notice Egwene. Round-faced and almost as dark as charcoal, she eyed Egwene levelly, and the Yellow fringe of her shawl swayed slightly as she made a very precise curtsy, exact to the inch. Raised in Salidar, Salita was part of a disturbing pattern: too many Sitters who were too young for the position. Salita had only been Aes Sedai for thirty-five years, and rarely was a woman given a chair before wearing the shawl for a hundred or more. Siuan saw a pattern, anyway, and thought it disturbing, though she could not say why. Patterns she could not understand always disturbed Siuan.

stɪl, sæliɾə hæd stʊd fəɹ wɔɹ əɡɛnst ɪleɪɾə, ən fɹikwənli səpɔɹɾəd ɛɡwin ɪn ðə hɔl. bʌt nɑɾ ɔlweɪz, ən nɑɾ ɪn ðɪs. "mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd kuli. dʒɑnjəz hɛd dʒɝkt ʌp, ən ʃi bɹoʊk ɪndə ə bimɪŋ smaɪl. ʃi ɔlsoʊ hæd stʊd fəɹ wɔɹ, ði oʊnli wʊmən u hæd bɪn ə sɪɾɝ bɪfɔɹ ðə taʊɝ dɪvaɪɾəd tə də soʊ ɛksɛptɪŋ ləleɪn ən laɪɹɛl, tu ʌv ðə bluz, ən ɪf əɹ səpɔɹt fəɹ ɛɡwin wɑz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz ənweɪvɝɪŋ, ɪt wɑz soʊ hɪɹ. əz juʒəwəl, wɝdz spɪld aʊɾ ə hɝ. "aɪ wɪl nɛvɝ ɡɛɾ oʊvɝ ðɪs, mʌðɝ. ɪts sɪmpli əmeɪzɪŋ. aɪ noʊ wi ʃʊdn bi sɝpɹaɪzd ɛni lɔŋɡɝ wən jə kʌm ʌp wɪð sʌmθɪŋ noʊ wʌn ɛls əz θɔɾ ʌv - səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk wiv ɡɑɾən tu sɛɾ ɪn əɹ weɪz, tu ʃʊɹ wʌt kən ən kænɑt bi dʌn - bʌt tə pʌzəl aʊt haʊ tə meɪk kwəndɪlɝ . . . !" ʃi pɔz fəɹ bɹɛθ, ən sæliɾə muvd ɪndə ðə ɡæp smuðli. ən koʊldli. "aɪ stɪl seɪ ɪts ɹɔŋ," ʃi sɛd fɝmli. "aɪ ədmɪt ðə dɪskʌvɝi wɑz ə bɹɪljən pis ʌv wɝk ɑn jəɹ pɑɹt, mʌðɝ, bʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃəd nɑt bi meɪkɪŋ θɪŋz fəɹ . . . seɪl." sæliɾə ɪnvɛstəd ðət wɝd wɪð ɔl ðə skɔɹn ʌv ə wʊmən u æksɛptɪd ði ɪnkʌm fɹəm əɹ ɪsteɪɾ ɪn tiɹ wɪθaʊɾ ɛvɝ θɪŋkɪŋ haʊ ɪt hæd bɪn kʌm baɪ. ði æɾətud wɑz nɑɾ ənkɑmən, ðoʊ moʊst sɪstɝz lɪvd ɑn ðə taʊɝz dʒɛnɝəs jɪɹli əlaʊəns. əɹ hæd, bɪfɔɹ ðə taʊɝ splɪɾ əpɑɹt. "ɑn tɑp ʌv wɪtʃ," ʃi wɛn ɑn, "nɪɹli hæf ðə sɪstɝz fɔɹst ɪndə ðɪs ɑɹ jɛloʊ. aɪ ɹəsiv kəmpleɪns ɛvɹi deɪ.

Still, Salita had stood for war against Elaida, and frequently supported Egwene in the Hall. But not always, and not in this. "Mother," she said coolly. Janya's head jerked up, and she broke into a beaming smile. She also had stood for war, the only woman who had been a Sitter before the Tower divided to do so excepting Lelaine and Lyrelle, two of the Blues, and if her support for Egwene was not always unwavering, it was so here. As usual, words spilled out of her. "I will never get over this, Mother. It's simply amazing. I know we shouldn't be surprised any longer when you come up with something no one else has thought of - sometimes I think we've gotten too set in our ways, too sure what can and cannot be done - but to puzzle out how to make cuendillar . . . !" She paused for breath, and Salita moved into the gap smoothly. And coldly. "I still say it is wrong," she said firmly. "I admit the discovery was a brilliant piece of work on your part, Mother, but Aes Sedai should not be making things for . . . sale." Salita invested that word with all the scorn of a woman who accepted the income from her estate in Tear without ever thinking how it had been come by. The attitude was not uncommon, though most sisters lived on the Tower's generous yearly allowance. Or had, before the Tower split apart. "On top of which," she went on, "nearly half the sisters forced into this are Yellow. I receive complaints every day.

wi, ət list, hæv mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt jusəz fəɹ əɹ taɪm ðən meɪkɪŋ . . . tʃɹɪŋkəts." ðəɾ ɝn əɹ ə hɑɹd ɡlɛɹ fɹəm æʃmɑneɪl, ə ɡɹeɪ, ən ə fɹɪdʒəd stɛɹ fɹəm kɛɹən, hu wɑz blu, bʌt sæliɾə ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm.

We, at least, have more important uses for our time than making . . . trinkets." That earned her a hard glare from Ashmanaille, a Gray, and a frigid stare from Kairen, who was Blue, but Salita ignored them.

ʃi wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz jɛloʊz u sim tə θɪŋk ði ʌðɝ ədʒəz wɝ oʊnli ædʒʌŋks tə hɝ oʊn, wɪtʃ ə kɔɹs hæd ði oʊnli tʃɹuli jusfəl pɝpəs əmʌŋ ðɛm.

She was one of those Yellows who seemed to think the other Ajahs were only adjuncts to her own, which of course had the only truly useful purpose among them.

"ænd nɑvəsɪz ʃəd nɑt bi duɪŋ wivz ə ðɪs kəmplɛksəɾi əɾ ɔl," tiɑnə æɾəd, dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðɛm.

"And novices should not be doing weaves of this complexity at all," Tiana added, joining them.

ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz wɑz nɛvɝ ʃaɪ əbaʊt spikɪŋ ʌp tə sɪɾɝz, əɹ tə ði æmɪɝlɪn, ən ʃi wɔɹ ə dɪsɡɹʌntəld ɪkspɹɛʃən. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪt dipən əɹ dɪmpəl ən meɪɾ əɹ lʊk sʌlki. "ɪɾ ɪz ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl dɪskʌvɝi, ən aɪ fəɹ wʌn əv noʊ əbdʒɛkʃənz tə tʃɹeɪd, bʌt səm ə ðiz ɡɝlz kən bɛɹli mænədʒ tə meɪk ə bɔl ə faɪɝ tʃeɪnʒ kʌlɝ wɪð ɛni ʃʊɹəɾi. lɛɾɪŋ əm hændəl wivz laɪk ðɪs wɪl oʊnli meɪk ɪt mɔɹ dɪfəkəl tə stɑp əm fɹəm lipɪŋ tə θɪŋz ðeɪ kæn hændəl, ən ðə laɪt noʊz, ðæts dɪfəkəlt ɪnʌf ɔlɹɛɾi. ðeɪ meɪ ivən də ðɛmsɛlvz ən ɪnʒɝi."

The Mistress of Novices was never shy about speaking up to Sitters, or to the Amyrlin, and she wore a disgruntled expression. She did not appear to realize that it deepened her dimple and made her look sulky. "It is a remarkable discovery, and I for one have no objections to trade, but some of these girls can barely manage to make a ball of fire change color with any surety. Letting them handle weaves like this will only make it more difficult to stop them from leaping to things they can't handle, and the Light knows, that's difficult enough already. They may even do themselves an injury."

"nɑnsɛns, nɑnsɛns," dʒɑnjə ɪkskleɪmd, weɪvɪŋ ə slɛndɝ hæn əz ɪf tə bɹʌʃ əweɪ ðə vɛɹi aɪdiə. "ɛvɹi ɡɝl huz bɪn tʃoʊzən kən ɔlɹɛɾi meɪk θɹi bɔlz ə faɪɝ ət wʌns, ən ðɪs ɹikwaɪɝz vɛɹi lɪɾəl mɔɹ ə ðə paʊɝ. ðɛɹz noʊ deɪnʒɝ əɾ ɔl, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðəɹ ʌndɝ ə sɪstɝz supɝvɪʒən, ən ðeɪ ɔlweɪz ɑɹ. aɪv sin ðə ɹɑstɝ. bɪsaɪdz, wʌt wi meɪk ɪn ə deɪ wɪl bɹɪŋ ɪnʌf tə peɪ ði ɑɹmi fəɹ ə wik əɹ mɔɹ, bʌt ðə sɪstɝz əloʊn kæn pɹədus nɪɹ ðət mʌtʃ." skwɪntɪŋ slaɪtli, ʃi sʌɾənli əpɪɹd tə bi lʊkɪŋ θɹu tiɑnə. ðə kæskeɪd fɹəm əɹ tʌŋ nɛvɝ sloʊd, jɛt ʃi sim tə bi tɔkɪŋ ət lis hæf tə hɝsɛlf. "wi wɪl əv tə teɪk ɡɹeɪt kɛɹ ɪn ðə sɛlɪŋ. ðə si foʊk əv ə vɔɹeɪʃəs æpətaɪt fəɹ kwəndɪlɝ, ən ðəɹ ɑɹ plɛnti ʌv ðɛɹ ʃɪps stɪl əɾ ɪljən ən tiɹ baɪ ɔl əkaʊns - ðə noʊbəlz ðəɹ ɑɹ ɡɹiɾi fəɹ ɪt, tu - bʌɾ ivən ɹævənəs æpətaɪts əv lɪməts. aɪ stɪl kænɑt dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ ɪɾəl bi bɛs tə əpɪɹ wɪð ɛvɹiθɪŋ ət wʌns, əɹ lɛɾ ɪt tʃɹɪkəl aʊt. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ivən ðə pɹaɪs ə kwəndɪlɝ wɪl bɪɡɪn tə dʒɹɑp." əbɹʌpli ʃi blɪŋkt ən pɪɹd fɝst ət tiɑnə ðən ət sæliɾə, tɪltɪŋ əɹ hɛd tə wʌn saɪd. "ju də si maɪ pɔɪnt, doʊn ju?" sæliɾə ɡlaʊɝɾ ən hɪtʃt əɹ ʃɔl ʌp ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz.

"Nonsense, nonsense," Janya exclaimed, waving a slender hand as if to brush away the very idea. "Every girl who's been chosen can already make three balls of fire at once, and this requires very little more of the Power. There's no danger at all, so long as they're under a sister's supervision, and they always are. I've seen the roster. Besides, what we make in a day will bring enough to pay the army for a week or more, but the sisters alone can't produce near that much." Squinting slightly, she suddenly appeared to be looking through Tiana. The cascade from her tongue never slowed, yet she seemed to be talking at least half to herself. "We will have to take great care in the selling. The Sea Folk have a voracious appetite for cuendillar, and there are plenty of their ships still at Illian and Tear by all accounts - the nobles there are greedy for it, too - but even ravenous appetites have limits. I still cannot decide whether it will be best to appear with everything at once, or let it trickle out. Sooner or later, even the price of cuendillar will begin to drop." Abruptly she blinked and peered first at Tiana then at Salita, tilting her head to one side. "You do see my point, don't you?" Salita glowered and hitched her shawl up on her shoulders.

tiɑnə θɹu ʌp əɹ hænz ɪn ɛksæspɝeɪʃən. ɛɡwin hɛld əɹ pis. fəɹ wʌns, ʃi fɛl noʊ ʃeɪm ət biɪŋ pɹeɪz fəɹ wʌn ə hɝ səpoʊz dɪskʌvɝiz. ənlaɪk nɪɹli ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls ɪksɛp tʃɹævlɪŋ, ðɪs wʌn æktʃəli  wɑz hɝz, ðoʊ mɑɡiɾin hæd pɔɪntəd ðə weɪ bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɪskeɪpt. ðə wʊmən dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ tə æktʃəli  meɪk ɛniθɪŋ - ət list, ʃi hæd nɑt ɹɪvild ɛni sətʃ nɑlədʒ haʊɛvɝ hɑɹɾ ɛɡwin hæd pɹɛs hɝ, ən ʃi hæd pɹɛs vɛɹi hɑɹd - bʌt mɑɡiɾin hæɾ ə waɪd stʃɹik ʌv ɡɹid, ən ivən ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, kwəndɪlɝ hæd bɪn ə pɹaɪz lʌɡʒɝi. ʃi hæd noʊn ɪnʌf ə haʊ ɪt wɑz meɪd fəɹ ɛɡwin tə pʌzəl aʊt ðə ɹɛst. ɪn ɛni keɪs, noʊ mæɾɝ u əbdʒɛktəɾ əɹ haʊ stʃɹɛnjuəsli, ðə nid fəɹ mʌni mɛn ðə pɹədʌkʃən ə kwəndɪlɝ wəd kəntɪnju. ðoʊ əz fɑɹ əz ʃi wɑz kənsɝnd, ðə lɔŋɡɝ bɪfɔɹ ɛni ʌv ɪt wɑz soʊld, ðə bɛɾɝ.

Tiana threw up her hands in exasperation. Egwene held her peace. For once, she felt no shame at being praised for one of her supposed discoveries. Unlike nearly everything else except Traveling, this one actually was hers, though Moghedien had pointed the way before she escaped. The woman did not know how to actually make anything - at least, she had not revealed any such knowledge however hard Egwene had pressed her, and she had pressed very hard - but Moghedien had a wide streak of greed, and even in the Age of Legends, cuendillar had been a prized luxury. She had known enough of how it was made for Egwene to puzzle out the rest. In any case, no matter who objected or how strenuously, the need for money meant the production of cuendillar would continue. Though as far as she was concerned, the longer before any of it was sold, the better.

ʃɛɝinə slæpɪŋ əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ laʊdli ɪn ðə bæk ə ðə tɛn dʒɝkt ɛvɹiwʌnz hɛd ðət weɪ. kɛɹən ən æʃmɑneɪl tɝnd, tu, ðə blu ivən lɛɾɪŋ əɹ wivz ɡoʊ soʊ ðə ɡɑblət baʊnst ɑn ðə teɪbəltɑp wɪð ə mətælɪk klæɾɝ. ɪt wɑz ə saɪn ə bɔɹɾəm. ðə pɹɑsɛs kəd bi stɑɹɾəd oʊvɝ, ðoʊ faɪndɪŋ ðə pɹɪsaɪs pɔɪnt wɑz vɛɹi hɑɹd, ən səm sɪstɝz tʊk ɛvɹi ɑpɝtunəɾi tə də ɛniθɪŋ ɛls dʊɹɪŋ ði aʊɝ ðeɪ hæd tə spɛn ɪn ðə tɛn itʃ deɪ. ən aʊɝ əɹ əntɪl ðeɪ kəmpliɾəd wʌn aɪɾəm stɑɹt tə fɪnɪʃ, wɪtʃɛvɝ keɪm fɝst. ðət wɑz səpoʊz tə pʊʃ əm tə tʃɹaɪ hɑɹɾɝ əɾ ɪnkɹisɪŋ ðɛɹ skɪl, bʌt fju hæd pɹəɡɹɛs vɛɹi fɑɹ. "boʊɾuwɪn, nɪkoʊlə, ɔf tə jəɹ nɛks klæs," ʃɛɝinə ənaʊnst. ʃi dɪd nɑt spik laʊdli, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs hæɾ ə stʃɹɛŋkθ ðət cʊɾə kʌt θɹu ə bæbəl ə vɔɪsəz mʌtʃ lɛs ðə kwaɪəɾ ə ðə tɛnt. "ju hæv dʒʌs taɪm tə wɑʃ jəɹ hænz ən feɪsəz. kwɪkli, naʊ.

Sharina slapping her hands together loudly in the back of the tent jerked everyone's head that way. Kairen and Ashmanaille turned, too, the Blue even letting her weaves go so the goblet bounced on the tabletop with a metallic clatter. It was a sign of boredom. The process could be started over, though finding the precise point was very hard, and some sisters took every opportunity to do anything else during the hour they had to spend in the tent each day. An hour or until they completed one item start to finish, whichever came first. That was supposed to push them to try harder at increasing their skill, but few had progressed very far. "Bodewhin, Nicola, off to your next class," Sharina announced. She did not speak loudly, but her voice had a strength that could have cut through a babble of voices much less the quiet of the tent. "You have just time to wash your hands and faces. Quickly, now.

jə doʊnt wɑn ɛni bæd ɹɪpɔɹts."

You don't want any bad reports."

boʊd - boʊɾuwɪn - muvd wɪð ɪfɪʃən əlækɹəɾi, ɹilisɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ ən pleɪsɪŋ əɹ hæf-meɪd kwəndɪlɝ bɹeɪsləɾ ɪn wʌn ə ðə tʃɛsts əlɔŋ ðə wɔl fəɹ sʌmwʌn ɛls tə fɪnɪʃ, ðən ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ kloʊk. plʌmp-tʃikt ən pɹɪɾi, ʃi wɔɹ əɹ hɛɹ ɪn ə lɔŋ dɑɹk bɹeɪd, ðoʊ ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi hæd ɡɑɾən pɝmɪʃən fɹəm ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl. bʌt ðɛn, ðət wɝld wɑz bɪhaɪn hɝ, naʊ. tʌɡɪŋ ɑn əɹ mɪɾənz əz ʃi hɝid fɹəm ðə tɛnt, boʊd kɛpt əɹ aɪz daʊn ən nɛvɝ ɡlænst ɪn ɛɡwinz dɝɛkʃən. pleɪnli, ʃi stɪl dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ə nɑvəs kəd nɑt dʒɹɑp baɪ tə tʃæt wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɛnɛvɝ ʃi wɑntəd, ivən ɪf ðeɪ hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp təɡɛðɝ.

Bode - Bodewhin - moved with efficient alacrity, releasing saidar and placing her half-made cuendillar bracelet in one of the chests along the wall for someone else to finish, then gathering her cloak. Plump-cheeked and pretty, she wore her hair in a long dark braid, though Egwene was not sure she had gotten permission from the Women's Circle. But then, that world was behind her, now. Tugging on her mittens as she hurried from the tent, Bode kept her eyes down and never glanced in Egwene's direction. Plainly, she still did not understand why a novice could not drop by to chat with the Amyrlin Seat whenever she wanted, even if they had grown up together.

ɛɡwin wʊɾə lʌv tə tɔk wɪð boʊɾ ən səm ə ði ʌðɝz, bʌɾ ən æmɪɝlɪn hæd lɛsənz tə lɝn, tu. ən æmɪɝlɪn hæd mɛni duɾiz, fju fɹɛnz, ən noʊ feɪvɹɪts. bɪsaɪdz, ivən ði əpɪɹəns ə feɪvɝɪtɪzəm wəd mɑɹk ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɡɝlz aʊɾ ən meɪk ðɛɹ laɪvz wɪð ði ʌðɝ nɑvəsɪz ə mɪzɝi.

Egwene would have loved to talk with Bode and some of the others, but an Amyrlin had lessons to learn, too. An Amyrlin had many duties, few friends, and no favorites. Besides, even the appearance of favoritism would mark the Two Rivers girls out and make their lives with the other novices a misery.

ən ɪt wʊdn də mi mʌtʃ ɡʊd wɪð ðə hɔl, iðɝ, ʃi θɔt ɹaɪli. ʃi dɪd wɪʃ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɡɝlz ʌndɝstʊd, ðoʊ.

And it wouldn't do me much good with the Hall, either, she thought wryly. She did wish the Two Rivers girls understood, though.

ði ʌðɝ nɑvəs ʃɛɝinə hæd neɪm dɪd nɑt liv əɹ bɛntʃ əɹ stɑp tʃænəlɪŋ. nɪkoʊləz blæk aɪz flæʃt ət ʃɛɝinə. "aɪ kəd bi ðə bɛst ət ðɪs ɪf aɪ wɑz ɛvɝ əlaʊd tə ɹɪli pɹæktəs," ʃi ɹʌmbəl sʌlənli. "aɪm ɡɛɾɪŋ bɛɾɝ; aɪ noʊ aɪ æm. aɪ kən fɔɹtɛl, jə noʊ." əz ɪf ðə wʌn hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ði ʌðɝ. "tiɑnə sədaɪ, tɛl əɹ aɪ kən steɪ lɔŋɡɝ. aɪ kən fɪnɪʃ ðɪs boʊl bɪfɔɹ maɪ nɛks klæs, ən aɪm ʃʊɹ ɑdini sədaɪ woʊn maɪn ɪf aɪm dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl leɪt." ɪf əɹ klæs wɑz ɛni taɪm sun, ʃi wəd bi mɔɹ ðən ə lɪɾəl leɪɾ ɪf ʃi tɑɹid tə kəmplit ðə boʊl; hɝ aʊɝz ɛfɝt hæd tɝn oʊnli hæf ʌv ɪt waɪt.

The other novice Sharina had named did not leave her bench or stop channeling. Nicola's black eyes flashed at Sharina. "I could be the best at this if I was ever allowed to really practice," she rumbled sullenly. "I'm getting better; I know I am. I can Foretell, you know." As if the one had anything to do with the other. "Tiana Sedai, tell her I can stay longer. I can finish this bowl before my next class, and I'm sure Adine Sedai won't mind if I'm just a little late." If her class was any time soon, she would be more than a little late if she tarried to complete the bowl; her hour's effort had turned only half of it white.

tiɑnə oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəɾ ʌɾɝ ə wɝd, ʃɛɝinə ɹeɪzd wʌn fɪŋɡɝ, ðən ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ, ə sɛkənd. ɪt mʌst əv hæd səm pɝtɪkjəlɝ səɡnɪfɪkəns, kəz nɪkoʊlə wɛn peɪl ən lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv əɹ wivz ɑn ði ɪnstənt, lipɪŋ ʌp soʊ kwɪkli ðət ʃi dʒɑɡəl ðə bɛntʃ, ɝnɪŋ kwɪk fɹaʊnz fɹəm ði ʌðɝ tu nɑvəsɪz u ʃɛɹɾ ɪt. ðeɪ bɛn kwɪkli bæk tə ðɛɹ wɝk, ðoʊ, ən nɪkoʊlə ɔlmoʊst ɹæn tə θɹʌs ðə hæf-dʌn boʊl ɪndə ə tʃɛs bɪfɔɹ snætʃɪŋ ʌp əɹ kloʊk. tə ɛɡwinz sɝpɹaɪz, ə wʊmən ʃi hæd nɑt sin, dʒɹɛst ɪn ə ʃɔɹt bɹaʊn koʊɾ ən waɪd tʃɹaʊzɝz, dʒʌmpt ʌp fɹəm wɛɹ ʃi hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd-klɔθ bɪɑn ðə teɪbəlz. skaʊlɪŋ blu-aɪd dæɡɝz əɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn saɪt, ɑɹinə ɹæn aʊɾ ə ðə tɛn æftɝ nɪkoʊlə, ðə tu wɪmən mɪɹɝ ɪmədʒəz ə dɪsɡɹʌntəlmən ən dɪskəntɛnt.

Tiana opened her mouth, but before she could utter a word, Sharina raised one finger, then a moment later, a second. It must have had some particular significance, because Nicola went pale and let go of her weaves on the instant, leaping up so quickly that she joggled the bench, earning quick frowns from the other two novices who shared it. They bent quickly back to their work, though, and Nicola almost ran to thrust the half-done bowl into a chest before snatching up her cloak. To Egwene's surprise, a woman she had not seen, dressed in a short brown coat and wide trousers, jumped up from where she had been sitting on the ground-cloth beyond the tables. Scowling blue-eyed daggers at everyone in sight, Areina ran out of the tent after Nicola, the two women mirror images of disgruntlement and discontent.

siɪŋ ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm təɡɛðɝ meɪɾ ɛɡwin ənizi. "aɪ dɪdnt noʊ fɹɛnz wɝ əlaʊɾ ɪn hɪɹ tə wɑtʃ," ʃi sɛd. "ɪz nɪkoʊlə stɪl kɑzɪŋ pɹɑbləmz?" nɪkoʊlə ən ɑɹinə hæɾ ətɛmptəd tə blækmeɪl hɝ, ən maɪɹɛl ən naɪsaʊ, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt wʌt ʃi mɛnt. ðət wɑz stɪl ənʌðɝ sikɹət. "bɛɾɝ ðə ɡɝlz fɹɛnli wɪð ɑɹinə ðən wɪð wʌn ə ðə meɪl ɡɹumz," tiɑnə sɛd wɪð ə snɪf. "wiv hæd tu ɡɛt wɪð tʃaɪld, jə noʊ, ən tɛn mɔɹ laɪkli tə. ðə ɡɝl nidz mɔɹ fɹɛnz, ðoʊ. fɹɛnz wɪl də ðə tʃɹɪk wɪð hɝ." ʃi kʌɾ ɔf əz tu mɔɹ waɪt-klæd nɑvəsɪz hɝiɾ ɪndə ðə tɛnt, ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm skwikɪŋ ən skɪɾɪŋ tə ə hɔlt wən ðeɪ faʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ stændɪŋ ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm. heɪstəli dʒɹɑpɪŋ kɝtsiz, ðeɪ skʌɾəld tə ðə bæk ə ðə tɛn əɾ ə dʒɛstʃɝ fɹəm tiɑnə ən foʊldəd ðɛɹ kloʊks ɑn ə bɛntʃ bɪfɔɹ fɛtʃɪŋ ə pɑɹtli waɪt ɡɑbləɾ ən ən ɔlmoʊst waɪt kʌp fɹəm wʌn ə ðə tʃɛsts.

Seeing the pair of them together made Egwene uneasy. "I didn't know friends were allowed in here to watch," she said. "Is Nicola still causing problems?" Nicola and Areina had attempted to blackmail her, and Myrelle and Nisao, but that was not what she meant. That was still another secret. "Better the girl's friendly with Areina than with one of the male grooms," Tiana said with a sniff. "We've had two get with child, you know, and ten more likely to. The girl needs more friends, though. Friends will do the trick with her." She cut off as two more white-clad novices hurried into the tent, the pair of them squeaking and skidding to a halt when they found Aes Sedai standing right in front of them. Hastily dropping curtsies, they scuttled to the back of the tent at a gesture from Tiana and folded their cloaks on a bench before fetching a partly white goblet and an almost white cup from one of the chests.

ʃɛɝinə sɔ ðɛm sɛɾəld tə wɝk, ðən ɡæðɝɾ əɹ oʊn kloʊk ən swʌŋ ɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz bɪfɔɹ kʌmɪŋ ʌp ðə tɛnt. "ɪf jəl ɪkskjuz mi, tiɑnə sədaɪ," ʃi sɛd, meɪkɪŋ ə kɝtsi ðət dʒʌs keɪm ʃɔɹɾ ə biɪŋ tə ən ikwəl, "aɪv bɪn toʊld ɔf tə hɛlp wɪð ðə mɪddeɪ mil tədeɪ, ən aɪ wʊdnt wɑnə ɡɛt kɹɔswaɪz wɪð ðə kʊks." hɝ dɑɹk aɪz ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ɛɡwin fəɹ ə bɹif moʊmənt, ən ʃi nɑɾəd tə hɝsɛlf.

Sharina saw them settled to work, then gathered her own cloak and swung it around her shoulders before coming up the tent. "If you will excuse me, Tiana Sedai," she said, making a curtsy that just came short of being to an equal, "I've been told off to help with the midday meal today, and I wouldn't want to get crosswise with the cooks." Her dark eyes rested on Egwene for a brief moment, and she nodded to herself.

"ɡoʊ ɑn, ðɛn," tiɑnə sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "aɪ wəd heɪt tə hɪɹ jə hæd bɪn swɪtʃt fəɹ biɪŋ leɪt." wɪθaʊt tɝnɪŋ ə hɛɹ, ʃɛɝinə ɔfɝɾ əɹ kɝɾəsiz əɡɛn, niðɝ ɪn ə hɝi nɔɹ dʒɹæɡɪŋ ɪɾ aʊt, tə tiɑnə, tə ðə sɪɾɝz, tə ɛɡwin - wɪð ənʌðɝ ɡlæns ðət wɑz pɛnətʃɹeɪɾɪŋ bʌt tu ʃɔɹt fəɹ əfɛns - ən wən ðə tɛntflæp swʌŋ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɝ, tiɑnə blu aʊɾ əɹ tʃiks ɪn ɛksæspɝeɪʃən.

"Go on, then," Tiana said sharply. "I would hate to hear you had been switched for being late." Without turning a hair, Sharina offered her courtesies again, neither in a hurry nor dragging it out, to Tiana, to the Sitters, to Egwene - with another glance that was penetrating but too short for offense - and when the tentflap swung shut behind her, Tiana blew out her cheeks in exasperation.

"nɪkoʊlə kɑzəz lɛs tʃɹʌbəl ðən sʌm," ʃi sɛd dɑɹkli, ən dʒɑnjə ʃʊk əɹ hɛd.

"Nicola causes less trouble than some," she said darkly, and Janya shook her head.

"ʃɛɝinə dʌzn kɑz pɹɑbləmz, tiɑnə." ʃi spoʊk əz kwɪkli əz ɛvɝ, bʌt kwaɪətli, soʊ hɝ vɔɪs wəd nɑt kæɹi tə ðə bæk ə ðə tɛnt. dɪsəɡɹiməns bɪtwin sɪstɝz wɝ nɛvɝ ɛɹɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə nɑvəsɪz. ɪspɛʃli wən ðə dɪsəɡɹimənt wɑz oʊvɝ ə nɑvəs. "ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi noʊz ðə ɹulz bɛɾɝ ðən ɛni æksɛptɪd, ən nɛvɝ pʊts ə toʊ oʊvɝ ðə laɪn. ʃi nɛvɝ ʃɝks əɾ ivən ðə dɝɾiəst tʃɔɹz, iðɝ, ən ʃiz ðə fɝs tə lɛn ə hænd wən ənʌðɝ nɑvəs nidz wʌn. ʃɛɝinə ɪz sɪmpli hu ʃi ɪz. laɪt, jə kæn əlaʊ ə nɑvəs tə ɪntɪmɪdeɪt ju."

"Sharina doesn't cause problems, Tiana." She spoke as quickly as ever, but quietly, so her voice would not carry to the back of the tent. Disagreements between sisters were never aired in front of novices. Especially when the disagreement was over a novice. "She already knows the rules better than any Accepted, and never puts a toe over the line. She never shirks at even the dirtiest chores, either, and she's the first to lend a hand when another novice needs one. Sharina is simply who she is. Light, you can't allow a novice to intimidate you."

tiɑnə stɪfən ən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ æŋɡɹəli, bʌt wʌns dʒɑnjə hæd ðə bɪt bɪtwin əɹ tiθ, ɡɛɾɪŋ ə wɝɾ ɪn ɛdʒwaɪz wɑz noʊ izi mæɾɝ. "nɪkoʊlə, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, kɑzəz ɔl sɔɹts ə pɹɑbləmz, mʌðɝ," ðə bɹaʊn ɹʌʃt ɑn. "ɛvɝ sɪns wi faʊn aʊt ʃiz ðə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ, ʃiz bɪn fɔɹtɛlɪŋ tu əɹ θɹi taɪmz ə deɪ, tə hɪɹ əɹ tɛl ɪt. əɹ ɹæðɝ, tə hɪɹ ɑɹinə tɛl ɪt. nɪkoʊlə ɪz smɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə noʊ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪz əwɛɹ ʃi kæn ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt ʃi sɛz wən ʃi fɔɹtɛlz, bʌɾ ɑɹinə ɔlweɪz simz tə bi ðəɹ tə hɪɹ ən ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ən hɛlp əɹ ɪntɝpɹət. səm ɑɹ ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ ɛniwʌn ɪn ðə kæmp wɪð hæf ə bɹeɪn ən ə kɹɛdʒjələs neɪtʃɝ maɪt θɪŋk ʌv - bæɾəlz wɪð ðə sintʃæn əɹ ði æʃə'-mæn, ən æmɪɝlɪn ɪmpɹɪzənd, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn duɪŋ naɪn ɪmpɑsəbəl θɪŋz, vɪʒənz ðət maɪt bi tɑɹmən ɡdən əɹ ə bɪliəs stʌmək - ən ðə ɹɛst ɔl dʒʌs hæpən tə ɪndəkeɪt ðət nɪkoʊlə ɔt tə bi əlaʊd tə ɡoʊ fæstɝ wɪð əɹ lɛsənz. ʃiz ɔlweɪz tu ɡɹiɾi fəɹ ðæt. aɪ θɪŋk ivən moʊst ə ði ʌðɝ nɑvəsɪz əv stɑp bɪlivɪŋ hɝ."

Tiana stiffened and opened her mouth angrily, but once Janya had the bit between her teeth, getting a word in edgewise was no easy matter. "Nicola, on the other hand, causes all sorts of problems, Mother," the Brown rushed on. "Ever since we found out she has the Foretelling, she's been Foretelling two or three times a day, to hear her tell it. Or rather, to hear Areina tell it. Nicola is smart enough to know everyone is aware she can't remember what she says when she Foretells, but Areina always seems to be there to hear and remember, and help her interpret. Some are the sort of thing anyone in the camp with half a brain and a credulous nature might think of - battles with the Seanchan or the Asha'-man, an Amyrlin imprisoned, the Dragon Reborn doing nine impossible things, visions that might be Tarmon Gai'don or a bilious stomach - and the rest all just happen to indicate that Nicola ought to be allowed to go faster with her lessons. She's always too greedy for that. I think even most of the other novices have stopped believing her."

"ʃi ɔlsoʊ poʊks əɹ noʊz ɛvɹiwɛɹ," sæliɾə pʊɾ ɪn ðə moʊmən dʒɑnjə ɡeɪv əɹ ən oʊpənɪŋ, "hɝ ən ðə ɡɹum, boʊθ." hɝ feɪs ɹɪmeɪn smuð ən kul, ən ʃi ʃɪftəɾ əɹ ʃɔl əz ðoʊ ðət wɝ ðə foʊkəs ə hɝ ətɛnʃən, bʌt ʃi ɹʌʃt əɹ wɝdz ə lɪɾəl, pɝhæps fɪɹɪŋ ðət ðə bɹaʊn wəd teɪk oʊvɝ əɡɛn. "ðeɪv boʊθ bɪn swɪtʃt fəɹ ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ ɑn sɪstɝz, ən aɪ maɪsɛlf kɑt nɪkoʊlə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pik ɪndə wʌn ə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɡɹaʊnz. ʃi sɛd ʃi dʒʌst wɑntəd tə si ə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpən, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɝn ðə wiv. ɪmpeɪʃəns, aɪ kən ʌndɝstænd, bʌt dəsit kænɑt bi tɑlɝeɪɾəd. aɪ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bɪliv nɪkoʊlə wɪl əteɪn ðə ʃɔl, ən fɹæŋkli, aɪv bɪɡʌn tə wʌndɝ wɛðɝ ʃi ʃəd bi sɛn əweɪ sun ɹæðɝ ðən leɪt. ðə nɑvəs bʊk meɪ bi oʊpən tə ɛvɹiwʌn," ʃi fɪnɪʃt wɪð ən ɪkspɹɛʃənləs ɡlæns əɾ ɛɡwin, "bʌt wi də nɑɾ əv tə loʊɝ əɹ stændɝdz kəmplitli." ɡlɛɹɪŋ, tiɑnə pɝst əɹ lɪps stʌbɝnli, ɛmfəsaɪzɪŋ əɹ dɪmpəl əɡɛn. jə kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fɝɡɛt ʃi hæd wɔɹn ðə ʃɔl fəɹ oʊvɝ θɝɾi jɪɹz ən θɪŋk əɹ ə nɑvəs hɝsɛlf. "æz lɔŋ əz aɪm mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz, ðə dɪsɪʒən ɑn wɛðɝ tə sɛn ə ɡɝl əweɪ ɪz maɪn," ʃi sɛd hiɾɪdli, "æn aɪ də nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə luz ə ɡɝl ə nɪkoʊləz pətɛnʃəl." nɪkoʊlə wəd bi vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə paʊɝ, wʌn deɪ. "ɔɹ ʃɛɝinəz," ʃi æɾəd wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs, hænz smuðɪŋ əɹ skɝts ɪn ɪɹɪteɪʃən. ʃɛɝinəz pətɛnʃəl wɑz nʌθɪŋ ʃɔɹɾ ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl, fɑɹ bɪɑn ɛniwʌn ɪn lɪvɪŋ mɛmɹi ɪksɛp fəɹ nɪneɪiv, ən əhɛɾ ə nɪneɪiv əz wɛl. səm θɔt ʃi maɪt bɪkʌm əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl tə bi, ðoʊ ðət wɑz oʊnli spɛkjəleɪʃən. "ɪf nɪkoʊlə hæz bɪn bɑðɝɪŋ ju, mʌðɝ, əl si tə hɝ."

"She also pokes her nose everywhere," Salita put in the moment Janya gave her an opening, "her and the groom, both." Her face remained smooth and cool, and she shifted her shawl as though that were the focus of her attention, but she rushed her words a little, perhaps fearing that the Brown would take over again. "They've both been switched for eavesdropping on sisters, and I myself caught Nicola trying to peek into one of the Traveling grounds. She said she just wanted to see a gateway open, but I think she was trying to learn the weave. Impatience, I can understand, but deceit cannot be tolerated. I no longer believe Nicola will attain the shawl, and frankly, I've begun to wonder whether she should be sent away soon rather than late. The novice book may be open to everyone," she finished with an expressionless glance at Egwene, "but we do not have to lower our standards completely." Glaring, Tiana pursed her lips stubbornly, emphasizing her dimple again. You could almost forget she had worn the shawl for over thirty years and think her a novice herself. "As long as I am Mistress of Novices, the decision on whether to send a girl away is mine," she said heatedly, "and I do not intend to lose a girl of Nicola's potential." Nicola would be very strong in the Power, one day. "Or Sharina's," she added with a grimace, hands smoothing her skirts in irritation. Sharina's potential was nothing short of remarkable, far beyond anyone in living memory except for Nynaeve, and ahead of Nynaeve as well. Some thought she might become as strong as it was possible to be, though that was only speculation. "If Nicola has been bothering you, Mother, I will see to her."

"aɪ wɑz dʒʌs kjʊɹiəs," ɛɡwin sɛd kɛɹfəli, swɑloʊɪŋ ə sədʒɛstʃən ðət ðə jʌŋ wʊmən ən əɹ fɹɛn boʊθ bi wɑtʃt kloʊsli. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə tɔk əbaʊt nɪkoʊlə. ɪt wəd bi tu izi tə faɪn hɝsɛlf wɪð ə tʃɔɪs bɪtwin laɪɪŋ əɹ ɹɪvilɪŋ mæɾɝz ʃi dɛɹd nɑɾ ɪkspoʊz. ə pɪɾi ʃi hæd nɑɾ əlaʊd sɪuən tə ɝeɪnʒ fəɹ tu kwaɪət dɛθs.

"I was just curious," Egwene said carefully, swallowing a suggestion that the young woman and her friend both be watched closely. She did not want to talk about Nicola. It would be too easy to find herself with a choice between lying or revealing matters she dared not expose. A pity she had not allowed Siuan to arrange for two quiet deaths.

hɝ hɛd dʒɝkt ɪn ʃɑk ət ðə θɔt. hæd ʃi ɡɔn ðət fɑɹ fɹəm ɛmənz fild? ʃi nu ʃi wəɾ əv tə ɔɹɾɝ mɛn tə daɪ ɪn bæɾəl sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ən ʃi θɔt ʃi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə ɔɹɾɝ ə dɛθ ɪf ðə nid wɑz ɡɹeɪɾ ɪnʌf. ɪf wʌn dɛθ kəd stɑp ðə dɛθ ə θaʊzənz, əɹ ivən hʌnʒɹədz, wɑz ɪt nɑt ɹaɪt tə ɔɹɾɝ ɪt? bʌt ðə deɪnʒɝ pɹizɛntəd baɪ nɪkoʊlə ən ɑɹinə wɑz sɪmpli ðət ðeɪ maɪt ɹɪvil sikɹəts ðət kəɾ ɪnkənvinjəns ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ.

Her head jerked in shock at the thought. Had she gone that far from Emond's Field? She knew she would have to order men to die in battle sooner or later, and she thought she might be able to order a death if the need was great enough. If one death could stop the death of thousands, or even hundreds, was it not right to order it? But the danger presented by Nicola and Areina was simply that they might reveal secrets that could inconvenience Egwene al'Vere.

oʊ, maɪɹɛl ən ði ʌðɝz maɪt bi lʌki tə ɡɛɾ ɔf wɪð ə bɝtʃɪŋ, ən ðeɪ wəd sɝɾənli kənsɪɾɝ ðət mɔɹ ðən ɪnkənvinjənt, bʌt dɪskʌmfɝt, haʊɛvɝ ɡɹeɪt, wɑz nɑt səfɪʃən ɹizən fəɹ kɪlɪŋ.

Oh, Myrelle and the others might be lucky to get off with a birching, and they would certainly consider that more than inconvenient, but discomfort, however great, was not sufficient reason for killing.

əbɹʌpli, ɛɡwin ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ, ən tiɑnə ən ðə tu sɪɾɝz wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ, dʒɑnjə nɑt bɑðɝɪŋ tə haɪɾ əɹ kjʊɹiɑsəɾi bɪhaɪn ə mæsk ə sɝɛnəɾi. tə kʌvɝ hɝsɛlf, ɛɡwin ʃɪftəɾ əɹ fɹaʊn tə ðə teɪbəl wɛɹ kɛɹən ən æʃmɑneɪl wɝ wʌns mɔɹ ət wɝk. ðə waɪɾ ɑn æʃmɑneɪlz kʌp hæd klaɪmd ə lɪɾəl fɑɹðɝ, bʌɾ ɪn dʒʌs ðət ʃɔɹt taɪm, kɛɹən hæd kɑɾ ʌp. mɔɹ ðən kɑɾ ʌp, ɪn fækt, sɪns əɹ ɡɑblət stʊd twaɪs əz haɪ əz ðə kʌp.

Abruptly, Egwene realized that she was frowning, and Tiana and the two Sitters were watching her, Janya not bothering to hide her curiosity behind a mask of serenity. To cover herself, Egwene shifted her frown to the table where Kairen and Ashmanaille were once more at work. The white on Ashmanaille's cup had climbed a little farther, but in just that short time, Kairen had caught up. More than caught up, in fact, since her goblet stood twice as high as the cup.

"jɔɹ skɪl ɪz ɪmpɹuvɪŋ, kɛɹən," ɛɡwin sɛɾ əpɹuvɪŋli. ðə blu lʊkt ʌp ət hɝ, ən dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. hɝ oʊvəl feɪs bɪkeɪm ən ɪmədʒ ə kul kɑm ɝaʊn ðoʊz aɪsi blu aɪz. "ðɛɹ ɪzən mʌtʃ skɪl ɪnvɑlvd, mʌðɝ. ɔl ðæts niɾəd ɪz tə sɛt ðə wiv ən weɪt." ðə læst wɝd hɛld ə tʌtʃ ʌv ækɹɪdnəs, ən fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə slaɪt hɛzəteɪʃən bɪfɔɹ mʌðɝ. kɛɹən hæd bɪn sɛn ɔf fɹəm sɑlədɑɹ ɑn ə vɛɹi ɪmpɔɹɾənt mɪʃən oʊnli tə si ɪt kəlæps ɪn ə ʃæmbəlz, ðoʊ fɹəm noʊ fɔlt ə hɝz, ən ʃi hæd ɹɪtɝn tə ðɛm ɪn mʊɹændi tə faɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi hæd lɛf bɪhaɪn stʊɾ ɑn ɪts hɛɾ ən ə ɡɝl ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əz ə nɑvəs wɛɹɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪnz stoʊl. ʌv leɪt, kɛɹən hæd bɪn spɛndɪŋ ə ɡʊd dil ə taɪm wɪð ləleɪn.

"Your skill is improving, Kairen," Egwene said approvingly. The Blue looked up at her, and drew a deep breath. Her oval face became an image of cool calm around those icy blue eyes. "There isn't much skill involved, Mother. All that's needed is to set the weave and wait." The last word held a touch of acridness, and for that matter, there had been a slight hesitation before Mother. Kairen had been sent off from Salidar on a very important mission only to see it collapse in a shambles, though from no fault of hers, and she had returned to them in Murandy to find everything she had left behind stood on its head and a girl she remembered as a novice wearing the Amyrlin's stole. Of late, Kairen had been spending a good deal of time with Lelaine.

"ʃi ɪz ɪmpɹuvɪŋ; ɪn səm θɪŋz," dʒɑnjə sɛd wɪð ə pɔɪntəd fɹaʊn fəɹ ðə blu sɪstɝ. dʒɑnjə maɪɾ əv bɪn əz ʃʊɹ əz ɛni ʌðɝ sɪɾɝ ðət ðə hɔl wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ ə pʌpət wən ðeɪ ɹeɪzd ɛɡwin, bʌt ʃi sim tə hæv æksɛptɪd ðəɾ ɛɡwin dɪd wɛɹ ðə stoʊl, ən dɪzɝv ðə pɹɑpɝ ɹɪspɛk fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn. "ʌv kɔɹs, aɪ daʊt ʃɪl kætʃ lin ənlɛs ʃi əplaɪz hɝsɛlf, mʌtʃ lɛs jɝsɛlf, mʌðɝ.

"She is improving; in some things," Janya said with a pointed frown for the Blue sister. Janya might have been as sure as any other Sitter that the Hall was getting a puppet when they raised Egwene, but she seemed to have accepted that Egwene did wear the stole, and deserved the proper respect from everyone. "Of course, I doubt she'll catch Leane unless she applies herself, much less yourself, Mother.

jʌŋ boʊɾuwɪn maɪt kætʃ hɝ, ɪn fækt. aɪ wʊdnt wɑnə bi aʊtdʌn baɪ ə nɑvəs, maɪsɛlf, bʌɾ aɪ səpoʊz səm doʊn fil ðət weɪ." ə steɪn ə ɹɛd kɹɛpt ɪndə kɛɹənz tʃiks, ən əɹ aɪz dʒɹɑp tə ðə ɡɑblət.

Young Bodewhin might catch her, in fact. I wouldn't want to be outdone by a novice, myself, but I suppose some don't feel that way." A stain of red crept into Kairen's cheeks, and her eyes dropped to the goblet.

tiɑnə snɪft. "boʊɾuwɪnz ə ɡʊd ɡɝl, bʌt ʃi spɛnz mɔɹ taɪm ɡɪɡəlɪŋ ən pleɪɪŋ wɪð ði ʌðɝ nɑvəsɪz ðən əplaɪɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɪf ʃɑ - " ʃi ɪnheɪld ʃɑɹpli. "ɪf ʃi ɪzənt wɑtʃt. jɛstɝdeɪ, ʃi ən ælθɪn kɑnli tʃɹaɪd tu aɪɾəmz ət wʌns, dʒʌs tə si wʌt wəd hæpən, ən ðə θɪŋz fjuz təɡɛðɝ ɪn ə sɑləd lʌmp. jusləs fəɹ seɪl, ʌv kɔɹs, ənlɛs jə faɪn sʌmwʌn u wɑns ə pɛɹ ə hæf-aɪɝn, bækslæʃvtɪi-kwəndɪlɝ kʌps dʒɔɪn əɾ æŋɡəlz. ən ðə laɪt noʊz wʌt maɪɾ əv hæpən tə ðə ɡɝlz. ðeɪ dɪdn sim tə bi hɑɹmd, bʌɾ u kən seɪ əbaʊt ðə nɛks taɪm?" "meɪk ʃʊɹ ðəɹ ɪzən ə nɛks taɪm," ɛɡwin sɛɾ æbsənli, hɝ ətɛnʃən ɑn kɛɹənz kʌp. ðə laɪn ʌv waɪt kɹɛpt ʌpwɝd stɛɾəli. wən lin dɪd ðɪs wiv, blæk aɪɝn tɝn tə waɪt kwəndɪlɝ əz ɪf ði aɪɝn wɝ sɪŋkɪŋ kwɪkli ɪndə mɪlk.

Tiana sniffed. "Bodewhin's a good girl, but she spends more time giggling and playing with the other novices than applying herself if Sha - " She inhaled sharply. "If she isn't watched. Yesterday, she and Althyn Conly tried two items at once, just to see what would happen, and the things fused together in a solid lump. Useless for sale, of course, unless you find someone who wants a pair of half-iron, \vtii-cuendillar cups joined at angles. And the Light knows what might have happened to the girls. They didn't seem to be harmed, but who can say about the next time?" "Make sure there isn't a next time," Egwene said absently, her attention on Kairen's cup. The line of white crept upward steadily. When Leane did this weave, black iron turned to white cuendillar as if the iron were sinking quickly into milk.

fəɹ ɛɡwin hɝsɛlf, ðə tʃeɪnʒ wɑz fæstɝ ðən ðə blɪŋk ʌv ən aɪ, blæk tə waɪɾ ɪn ə flæʃ. ɪt wəɾ əv tə bi kɛɹən ən lin, bʌɾ ivən lin wɑz bɛɹli fæst ɪnʌf. kɛɹən niɾəd taɪm tə ɪmpɹuv.

For Egwene herself, the change was faster than the blink of an eye, black to white in a flash. It would have to be Kairen and Leane, but even Leane was barely fast enough. Kairen needed time to improve.

deɪz? wiks? wʌtɛvɝ wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi, kəz ɛniθɪŋ lɛs mɛn dɪzæstɝ, fəɹ ðə wɪmən ɪnvɑlvd ən fəɹ ðə mɛn u wəd daɪ faɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹits ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən meɪbi fəɹ ðə taʊɝ. sʌɾənli ɛɡwin wɑz ɡlæd ʃi hæɾ əpɹuv bioʊnɪnz sədʒɛstʃən. tɛlɪŋ kɛɹən waɪ ʃi niɾəd tə tʃɹaɪ hɑɹɾɝ maɪɾ əv spɝɾ əɹ ɛfɝts, bʌt ðɪs wɑz ənʌðɝ sikɹət ðət hæd tə bi kɛpt əntɪl ðə taɪm keɪm tə ənveɪl ɪt tə ðə wɝld.

Days? Weeks? Whatever was necessary, because anything less meant disaster, for the women involved and for the men who would die fighting in the streets of Tar Valon and maybe for the Tower. Suddenly Egwene was glad she had approved Beonin's suggestion. Telling Kairen why she needed to try harder might have spurred her efforts, but this was another secret that had to be kept until the time came to unveil it to the world.

tʃæptɝ eɪtin

CHAPTER 18

eɪ tʃæt wɪð sɪuən deɪʃɝ hæd bɪn teɪkən əweɪ wən ɛɡwin lɛf ðə tɛnt, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðə sɛvən-stʃɹaɪp stoʊl hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ði oʊpənɪŋ ə hɝ kaʊl wɝk bɛɾɝ ðən ən ɛɛs sədaɪz feɪs ət meɪkɪŋ ə weɪ θɹu ðə kɹaʊd. ʃi muvd ɪn ə ɹɪpəl ə kɝtsiz, wɪð ði əkeɪʒənəl baʊ θɹoʊn ɪn fɹəm ə wɔɹɾɝ, əɹ ə kɹæfsmən u hæd səm tæsk əmʌŋ ðə sɪstɝz tɛns. səm nɑvəsɪz skwikt wən ðeɪ sɔ ði æmɪɝlɪnz stoʊl, ən hoʊl fæmliz stɛp hɝidli ɔf ðə wɔkweɪ, meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ dip kɝtsiz ɪn ðə maɪɹ ə ðə stʃɹit. sɪns ʃi hæd bɪn fɔɹs tə ɔɹɾɝ pʌnɪʃmən fəɹ səm ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɪmən, wɝd hæd spɹɛɾ əmʌŋ ðə nɑvəsɪz ðət ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz əz hɑɹɾ əz sɛɝl beɪɡənd, ən ɪt wɑz bɛs tə əvɔɪɾ ɪnkɝɪŋ əɹ tɛmpɝ, wɪtʃ kəd spɹɪŋ ʌp laɪk waɪldfaɪɝ. nɑt ðət moʊst ə ðɛm nu ɪnʌf hɪstɝi tə hæv ɛni ɹil aɪdiə hu sɛɝl hæd bɪn, bʌɾ əɹ neɪm hæd bɪn ə baɪwɝɾ ʌv aɪɝn-hændəd stʃɹiknəs ɪn ðə taʊɝ fəɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, ən ði æksɛptɪd meɪd ʃʊɹ ðət nɑvəsɪz əbzɔɹb tɪdbɪts laɪk ðæt. ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd θɪŋ ðəɾ ɛɡwinz kaʊl hɪɾ əɹ feɪs. baɪ ðə tɛnθ taɪm ə nɑvəs fæmli lɛpt aʊɾ ə hɝ weɪ laɪk fɹaɪɾənd hɛɹz, ʃi wɑz ɡɹɪɾɪŋ əɹ tiθ soʊ hɑɹd ðət siɪŋ əɹ feɪs wʊɾə səmɛntəɾ əɹ ɹɛpjəteɪʃən fəɹ tʃuɪŋ aɪɝn ən spɪɾɪŋ neɪlz. ʃi hæd ðə hɔɹəbəl filɪŋ ðəɾ ɪn ə fju hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, æksɛptɪd wəd bi juzɪŋ əɹ neɪm tə fɹaɪɾən nɑvəsɪz ðə weɪ ðeɪ juz sɛɝlz naʊ.

A Chat with Siuan Daishar had been taken away when Egwene left the tent, of course, but the seven-striped stole hanging from the opening of her cowl worked better than an Aes Sedai's face at making a way through the crowd. She moved in a ripple of curtsies, with the occasional bow thrown in from a Warder, or a craftsman who had some task among the sister's tents. Some novices squeaked when they saw the Amyrlin's stole, and whole families stepped hurriedly off the walkway, making their deep curtsies in the mire of the street. Since she had been forced to order punishment for some of the Two Rivers women, word had spread among the novices that the Amyrlin was as hard as Sereille Bagand, and it was best to avoid incurring her temper, which could spring up like wildfire. Not that most of them knew enough history to have any real idea who Sereille had been, but her name had been a byword of iron-handed strictness in the Tower for a hundred years, and the Accepted made sure that novices absorbed tidbits like that. It was a good thing that Egwene's cowl hid her face. By the tenth time a novice family leaped out of her way like frightened hares, she was gritting her teeth so hard that seeing her face would have cemented her reputation for chewing iron and spitting nails. She had the horrible feeling that in a few hundred years, Accepted would be using her name to frighten novices the way they used Sereille's now.

ʌv kɔɹs, ðəɹ wɑz ðə lɪɾəl mæɾɝ ə sɪkjʊɹɪŋ ðə waɪt taʊɝ fɝst. smɔl ɪɹɪteɪʃənz hæd tə weɪt. ʃi θɔt ʃi cʊɾə spɪt neɪlz wɪθaʊt ði aɪɝn.

Of course, there was the little matter of securing the White Tower first. Small irritations had to wait. She thought she could have spit nails without the iron.

ðə kɹaʊdz θɪn tə nʌθɪŋ ɝaʊn ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi, wɪtʃ wɑz dʒʌst ə pikt kænvəs tɛnt wɪð pætʃt bɹaʊn wɔlz, dɪspaɪt ðə neɪm. laɪk ðə hɔl, ɪt wɑz ə pleɪs tə bi əvɔɪɾəd ənlɛs jə hæd bɪznəs ðəɹ əɹ wɝ sʌmənd. noʊ wʌn wɑz sɪmpli æsk tə ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ əɹ ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi. ðə moʊst ɪnɑkjuəs ɪnvɪteɪʃən tə iðɝ wɑz ə sʌmənz, ə fæk ðət tɝn ðət sɪmpəl tɛn ɪndə ə heɪvən. swipɪŋ θɹu ði ɛntʃɹi flæps, ʃi swʌŋ əɹ kloʊk ɔf wɪð ə filɪŋ ə ɹɪlif. ə pɛɹ ə bɹeɪʒɝz meɪd ðə tɛn dɪlɪʃəʃli wɔɹm æftɝ aʊtsaɪd, ən ðeɪ ɡeɪv ɔf vɛɹi lɪɾəl smoʊk. ə tʌtʃ ə swit sɛn lɪŋɡɝd fɹəm ðə dʒɹaɪɾ ɝbz ðət hæd bɪn spɹɪŋkəld ɑn ðə ɡloʊɪŋ ɛmbɝz. "ðə weɪ ðoʊz ful ɡɝlz bɪheɪv, jə wəd θɪŋk aɪ - " ʃi bɪɡæn ɪn ə ɡɹaʊl, ən kʌɾ ɔf əbɹʌpli.

The crowds thinned to nothing around the Amyrlin's study, which was just a peaked canvas tent with patched brown walls, despite the name. Like the Hall, it was a place to be avoided unless you had business there or were summoned. No one was simply asked to the Hall of the Tower or the Amyrlin's study. The most innocuous invitation to either was a summons, a fact that turned that simple tent into a haven. Sweeping through the entry flaps, she swung her cloak off with a feeling of relief. A pair of braziers made the tent deliciously warm after outside, and they gave off very little smoke. A touch of sweet scent lingered from the dried herbs that had been sprinkled on the glowing embers. "The way those fool girls behave, you would think I - " she began in a growl, and cut off abruptly.

ʃi wɑz nɑt sɝpɹaɪz tə si sɪuən stændɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl ɪn pleɪn blu wʊl, faɪnli kʌt bʌt sɪmpəl, ə waɪd tuldliðɝ foʊldɝ hɛl tə hɝ tʃɛst. moʊst sɪstɝz stɪl sim tə bɪliv, laɪk dɛlænə, ðət ʃi wɑz ɹədus tə ɪnstʃɹʌktɪŋ ɛɡwin ɪn pɹoʊɾəkɑl ən ɹʌnɪŋ ɛɹənz, ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli ɪn boʊθ keɪsəz, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɔlweɪz ðəɹ bɹaɪɾ ən ɝli, wɪtʃ sim tə hæv ɡɔn ənnoʊɾɪst soʊ fɑɹ. sɪuən hæd bɪn ən æmɪɝlɪn u tʃuɾ aɪɝn, ðoʊ noʊ wʌn wəd bɪliv u dɪd nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi noʊ. nɑvəsɪz pɔɪntəɾ əɹ aʊɾ əz ɔfən əz ðeɪ dɪd lin, bʌt wɪð ən ɛɹ ə daʊt ðət ʃi ɹɪli wɑz u ðə sɪstɝz sɛd. pɹɪɾi, ɪf nɑt kwaɪt bjuɾəfəl, wɪð ə dɛləkət maʊθ ən dɑɹk ɡlɔsi hɛɹ tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz, sɪuən lʊkt ivən jʌŋɡɝ ðən lin, oʊnli ə fju jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən ɛɡwin. ʃi cʊɾə bɪn teɪkən fəɹ wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd wɪθaʊt ðə blufɹɪnd ʃɔl dʒɹeɪpt əkɹɔs əɹ ɑɹmz. ðət wɑz waɪ ʃi nɛvɝ wɛnt wɪθaʊt ðə ʃɔl, tə əvɔɪɾ ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ mɪsteɪks. hɝ aɪz hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd ɛni mɔɹ ðən əɹ spɪɹət, haʊɛvɝ, ən ðeɪ wɝ aɪsi blu ɔlz eɪmd ət ðə wʊmən huz pɹɛzəns wɑz ə sɝpɹaɪz. hɑlimə wɑz sɝɾənli wɛlkəm, jɛɾ ɛɡwin hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəd tə si hɝ stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɑn ðə bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd kʊʃənz ðət wɝ paɪld əlɔŋ wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə tɛnt, hɝ hɛd pɹɑpt ɑn wʌn hæn eɪ si eɪtʃ eɪ ti dʌbəlju aɪ ti eɪtʃ ɛs aɪ ju eɪ ɛn fɔɹhʌnʒɹədθɝdisɛvən wɛɹ sɪuən wɑz pɹɪɾi, ðə sɔɹɾ ə jʌŋ wʊmən - simɪŋli jʌŋ, ət list - hu meɪd mɛn ən wɪmən əlaɪk smaɪl ət hɝ, hɑlimə wɑz stʌnɪŋ, wɪð bɪɡ ɡɹin aɪz ɪn ə pɝfək feɪs ən ə fʊl fɝm bʊzəm, ðə sɔɹɾ u meɪd mɛn swɑloʊ ən ʌðɝ wɪmən fɹaʊn. nɑt ðəɾ ɛɡwin fɹaʊnd, əɹ bɪliv ðə teɪlz kæɹid baɪ wɪmən dʒɛləs ə ðə weɪ hɑlimə ətʃɹæktəd mɛn dʒʌs baɪ biɪŋ. ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp ðə weɪ ʃi lʊkt, æftɝ ɔl. bʌɾ ivən ɪf əɹ pəzɪʃən əz dɛlænəz sɛkɹətɛɹi wɑz pleɪnli ə mæɾɝ ə tʃɛɹɪɾi baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝ - ə pʊɹli ɛdʒəkeɪɾəd kʌntʃɹi wʊmən, hɑlimə fɔɹmd əɹ lɛɾɝz wɪð ði ɔkwɝdnəs ʌv ə jʌŋ tʃaɪld - dɛlænə juʒəwəli kɛpt əɹ bɪzi ɔl deɪ wɪð səm sɔɹɾ ə meɪk-wɝk. ʃi sɛldəm əpɪɹd bɪfɔɹ taɪm fəɹ bɛd, ən ðən ɪt wɑz nɪɹli ɔlweɪz kəz ʃi hæd hɝɾ ɛɡwin hæd wʌn ə hɝ hɛdz. naɪsaʊ kəd də nʌθɪŋ wɪð ðoʊz hɛdeɪks, ivən juzɪŋ ðə nu hilɪŋ, bʌt hɑliməz məsɑʒɪz wɝkt wʌndɝz ivən wən ðə peɪn hæɾ ɛɡwin wɪmpɝɪŋ.

She was not surprised to see Siuan standing beside the writing table in plain blue wool, finely cut but simple, a wide tooledleather folder held to her chest. Most sisters still seemed to believe, like Delana, that she was reduced to instructing Egwene in protocol and running errands, grudgingly in both cases, but she was always there bright and early, which seemed to have gone unnoticed so far. Siuan had been an Amyrlin who chewed iron, though no one would believe who did not already know. Novices pointed her out as often as they did Leane, but with an air of doubt that she really was who the sisters said. Pretty, if not quite beautiful, with a delicate mouth and dark glossy hair to her shoulders, Siuan looked even younger than Leane, only a few years older than Egwene. She could have been taken for one of the Accepted without the bluefringed shawl draped across her arms. That was why she never went without the shawl, to avoid embarrassing mistakes. Her eyes had not changed any more than her spirit, however, and they were icy blue awls aimed at the woman whose presence was a surprise. Halima was certainly welcome, yet Egwene had not expected to see her stretched out on the brightly colored cushions that were piled along one side of the tent, her head propped on one hand.< A C H A T W I T H S I U A N 437 Where Siuan was pretty, the sort of young woman - seemingly young, at least - who made men and women alike smile at her, Halima was stunning, with big green eyes in a perfect face and a full firm bosom, the sort who made men swallow and other women frown. Not that Egwene frowned, or believed the tales carried by women jealous of the way Halima attracted men just by being. She could not help the way she looked, after all. But even if her position as Delana's secretary was plainly a matter of charity by the Gray sister - a poorly educated country woman, Halima formed her letters with the awkwardness of a young child - Delana usually kept her busy all day with some sort of make-work. She seldom appeared before time for bed, and then it was nearly always because she had heard Egwene had one of her heads. Nisao could do nothing with those headaches, even using the new Healing, but Halima's massages worked wonders even when the pain had Egwene whimpering.

"aɪ toʊld əɹ jə wʊdn əv taɪm fəɹ vɪzəts ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, mʌðɝ," sɪuən sɛd ʃɑɹpli, stɪl ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət ðə wʊmən ɑn ðə kʊʃənz əz ʃi tʊk ɛɡwinz kloʊk wɪð əɹ fɹi hænd, "bʌɾ aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl əv pleɪd kæts kɹeɪɾəl wɪð maɪsɛlf əz oʊpən maɪ maʊθ." hæŋɪŋ ðə kloʊk ɑn ðə ɹʌstɪk kloʊk stænd, ʃi snɔɹɾɪd kəntɛmptʃwəsli. "meɪbi ɪf aɪ wɔɹ bɹitʃɪz ən hæɾ ə mʌstæʃ, ʃid peɪ maɪnd." sɪuən sim tə bɪliv ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðə ɹumɝz əbaʊt hɑliməz səpoʊz dɛpɹədeɪʃənz əmʌŋ ðə pɹɪɾiɝ kɹæfsmən ən soʊlʒɝz.

"I told her you wouldn't have time for visits this morning, Mother," Siuan said sharply, still glaring at the woman on the cushions as she took Egwene's cloak with her free hand, "but I might as well have played cat's cradle with myself as opened my mouth." Hanging the cloak on the rustic cloak stand, she snorted contemptuously. "Maybe if I wore breeches and had a mustache, she'd pay mind." Siuan seemed to believe every one of the rumors about Halima's supposed depredations among the prettier craftsmen and soldiers.

stʃɹeɪnʒli, hɑlimə simd əmjuz baɪ hɝ ɹɛpjəteɪʃən. ʃi maɪɾ ivən əv ɛndʒɔɪɾ ɪt. ʃi læft, loʊ ən θɹoʊɾi, ən stʃɹɛtʃt ɑn ðə kʊʃənz laɪk ə kæt. ʃi dɪɾ əv ən ənfɔɹtʃənət laɪkɪŋ fəɹ loʊ-kʌt bɑɾɪsɪz, ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ, ən ʃi nɪɹli keɪm aʊɾ ə hɝ blu-slæʃt ɡɹin sɪlk. sɪlk wɑz hɑɹdli ðə juʒəwəl ɡɑɹb fəɹ ə sɛkɹətɛɹi, bʌt dɛlænəz tʃɛɹɪɾi ɹæn dip, əɹ əɹ dɛt tə hɑlimə dɪd.

Strangely, Halima seemed amused by her reputation. She might even have enjoyed it. She laughed, low and throaty, and stretched on the cushions like a cat. She did have an unfortunate liking for low-cut bodices, incredible in this weather, and she nearly came out of her blue-slashed green silk. Silk was hardly the usual garb for a secretary, but Delana's charity ran deep, or her debt to Halima did.

"ju simd wɝid ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, mʌðɝ," ðə ɡɹin-aɪd wʊmən mɝmɝd, "æn jə slɪpt aʊt soʊ ɝli fəɹ jəɹ ɹaɪd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə weɪk mi. aɪ θɔt jə maɪt laɪk tə tɔk. jə wʊdnt ɡɛt soʊ mɛni hɛdeɪks ɪf jə tɔkt oʊvɝ jəɹ wɝiz mɔɹ. ət lis jə noʊ jə kən tɔk tə mi." aɪɪŋ sɪuən, hu wɑz piɹɪŋ daʊn əɹ noʊz dɪsdeɪnfəli, hɑlimə ɡeɪv ənʌðɝ smoʊki læf. "æn jə noʊ aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɛniθɪŋ fɹəm ju, ənlaɪk sʌm." sɪuən snɔɹɾɪd əɡɛn, ən dɪlɪbɝətli bɪzid hɝsɛlf wɪð pleɪsɪŋ ðə foʊldɝ ɑn ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl dʒʌst soʊ bɪtwin ðə stoʊn ɪŋkwɛl ən ðə sæn dʒɑɹ.

"You seemed worried this morning, Mother," the green-eyed woman murmured, "and you slipped out so early for your ride, trying not to wake me. I thought you might like to talk. You wouldn't get so many headaches if you talked over your worries more. At least you know you can talk to me." Eyeing Siuan, who was peering down her nose disdainfully, Halima gave another smoky laugh. "And you know I don't want anything from you, unlike some." Siuan snorted again, and deliberately busied herself with placing the folder on the writing table just so between the stone inkwell and the sand jar.

ʃi ivən fɪɾəld wɪð ðə pɛn-ɹɛst. wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ɛɡwin mænədʒ nɑt tə saɪ. dʒʌst. hɑlimə dɪɾ æsk fəɹ nʌθɪŋ bɪɑn ə pæləɾ ɪn ɛɡwinz tɛnt, soʊ ʃi kəd bi ɑn hænd wən wʌn ʌv ɛɡwinz hɛdeɪks keɪm ɑn, ən slipɪŋ ðəɹ mʌst əv ɡɪvən dɪfəkəltiz wɪð kæɹiɪŋ aʊɾ əɹ duɾiz fəɹ dɛlænə.

She even fiddled with the pen-rest. With an effort, Egwene managed not to sigh. Just. Halima did ask for nothing beyond a pallet in Egwene's tent, so she could be on hand when one of Egwene's headaches came on, and sleeping there must have given difficulties with carrying out her duties for Delana.

bɪsaɪdz, ɛɡwin laɪkt əɹ ɝθi aʊtspoʊkən mænɝ. ɪt wɑz vɛɹi izi tə tɔk tə hɑlimə ən fɝɡɛt fəɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl ðət ʃi wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ə ɹilækseɪʃən ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv ivən wɪð sɪuən. ʃi hæd fɔt tu hɑɹd fəɹ ɹɛkəɡnɪʃən əz ɛɛs sədaɪ ən æmɪɝlɪn, ən əɹ ɡɹɪp ɑn ðət ɹɛkəɡnɪʃən wɑz tu tɛnjəwəs. ɛvɹi slɪp fɹəm biɪŋ æmɪɝlɪn wəd meɪk ðə nɛkst slɪp iziɝ, ən ðə nɛkst, ən ðə nɛkst æftɝ ðæt, əntɪl ʃi wɑz bæk tə biɪŋ ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əz ə tʃaɪld ət pleɪ. ðət meɪd hɑlimə ə lʌɡʒɝi tə bi tʃɹɛʒɝd kwaɪɾ əpɑɹt fɹəm wʌɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz kəd də tə ɛɡwinz hɛdeɪks. tə hɝ ənɔɪəns, ðoʊ, ɛvɹi ʌðɝ wʊmən ɪn ðə kæmp əpɪɹd tə ʃɛɹ sɪuənz vju, wɪð ðə pɑsəbəl ɪksɛpʃən ə dɛlænə. ðə ɡɹeɪ sim tu pɹuɾɪʃ tə ɛmplɔɪ ə laɪtskɝt, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt tʃɛɹɪɾi ʃi θɔt ʃi oʊd. ɪn ɛni keɪs, wɛðɝ ðə wʊmən tʃeɪs mɛn, əɹ ivən tʃɹɪpt əm ʌp, wɑz bɪsaɪd ðə pɔɪnt naʊ.

Besides, Egwene liked her earthy outspoken manner. It was very easy to talk to Halima and forget for a little while that she was the Amyrlin Seat, a relaxation she could not have even with Siuan. She had fought too hard for recognition as Aes Sedai and Amyrlin, and her grip on that recognition was too tenuous. Every slip from being Amyrlin would make the next slip easier, and the next, and the next after that, until she was back to being regarded as a child at play. That made Halima a luxury to be treasured quite apart from what her fingers could do to Egwene's headaches. To her annoyance, though, every other woman in the camp appeared to share Siuan's view, with the possible exception of Delana. The Gray seemed too prudish to employ a lightskirt, no matter what charity she thought she owed. In any case, whether the woman chased men, or even tripped them up, was beside the point now.

"aɪm əfɹeɪɾ aɪ də hæv wɝk, hɑlimə," ʃi sɛd, tʌɡɪŋ ɔf əɹ ɡlʌvz. ə maʊntən ʌv wɝk, moʊs deɪz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ə ʃɛɹiəmz ɹɪpɔɹts ɑn ðə teɪbəl jɛt, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ʃi wəd bi sɛndɪŋ əm sun, əlɔŋ wɪð ə fju pətɪʃənz ʃi θɔt mɛɹɪɾɪd ɛɡwinz ətɛnʃən. dʒʌst ə fju; tɛn əɹ twɛlv əpilz fəɹ ɹɪdʒɹɛs ʌv ɡɹivənsəz, wɪð ɛɡwin ɪkspɛktəd tə pæs ði æmɪɝlɪnz dʒʌdʒmən ɑn itʃ. jə kəd nɑt də ðət wɪθaʊt stʌɾi, ən kwɛstʃənz, nɑɾ ən hæn daʊn ə dʒʌs dɪsɪʒən. "pɝhæps jə kən əv dɪnɝ wɪð mi." ɪf ʃi fɪnɪʃt ɪn taɪm tə də mɔɹ ðən iɾ əɾ əɹ teɪbəl ɹaɪt ðəɹ ɪn əɹ stʌɾi. ɪt wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ ɑn təwɔɹd mɪddeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi. "wi kən tɔk ðɛn."

"I'm afraid I do have work, Halima," she said, tugging off her gloves. A mountain of work, most days. There was no sign of Sheriam's reports on the table yet, of course, but she would be sending them soon, along with a few petitions she thought merited Egwene's attention. Just a few; ten or twelve appeals for redress of grievances, with Egwene expected to pass the Amyrlin's judgment on each. You could not do that without study, and questions, not and hand down a just decision. "Perhaps you can have dinner with me." If she finished in time to do more than eat at her table right there in her study. It was getting on toward midday already. "We can talk then."

hɑlimə sæɾ ʌp əbɹʌpli, aɪz flæʃɪŋ ən fʊl lɪps kəmpɹɛst, bʌɾ əɹ skaʊl vænɪʃt əz kwɪkli əz ɪt hæd kʌm. ə smoʊldɝɪŋ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn əɹ aɪz, ðoʊ. hæd ʃi bɪn ə kæt, ʃi wʊɾə hæɾ əɹ bæk ɑɹtʃt ən əɹ teɪl laɪk ə bɑɾəl-bɹʌʃ. ɹaɪzɪŋ ɡɹeɪsfəli tə hɝ fiɾ ɑn ðə leɪɝd kɑɹpəts, ʃi smuðd əɹ dʒɹɛs oʊvɝ əɹ hɪps. "vɛɹi wɛl, ðɛn. ɪf jəɹ sɝɾən jə doʊnt wɑn mi tə steɪ." wɪð ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl taɪmɪŋ, ə dʌl θɹəb bɪɡæn bɪhaɪn ɛɡwinz aɪz, ən ɔl tu fəmɪljɝ pɹikɝsɝ tə ə blaɪndɪŋ hɛdeɪk, bʌt ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɛniweɪ ən ɹɪpiɾɪd ðət ʃi hæd wɝk tə du. hɑlimə hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ, hɝ maʊθ ɡoʊɪŋ taɪt wʌns mɔɹ, hænz fɪstɪŋ ɪn əɹ skɝts, ðən ʃi snætʃt əɹ fɝ-laɪn sɪlk kloʊk fɹəm ðə kloʊk stæn ən stɔkt aʊɾ ə ðə tɛnt wɪθaʊt bɑðɝɪŋ tə pʊl ðə ɡɑɹmən ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ʃi kəd də hɝsɛlf ən ɪnʒɝi ɡoʊɪŋ əbaʊt laɪk ðəɾ ɪn ðə koʊld.

Halima sat up abruptly, eyes flashing and full lips compressed, but her scowl vanished as quickly as it had come. A smoldering remained in her eyes, though. Had she been a cat, she would have had her back arched and her tail like a bottle-brush. Rising gracefully to her feet on the layered carpets, she smoothed her dress over her hips. "Very well, then. If you're certain you don't want me to stay." With remarkable timing, a dull throb began behind Egwene's eyes, an all too familiar precursor to a blinding headache, but she shook her head anyway and repeated that she had work to do. Halima hesitated a moment longer, her mouth going tight once more, hands fisting in her skirts, then she snatched her fur-lined silk cloak from the cloak stand and stalked out of the tent without bothering to pull the garment around her shoulders. She could do herself an injury going about like that in the cold.

"ðæt fɪʃwaɪf tɛmpɝ wɪl ɡɛɾ əɹ ɪn tʃɹʌbəl sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ," sɪuən mʌɾɝd bɪfɔɹ ði ɛntʃɹi flæps stɑp sweɪɪŋ. skaʊlɪŋ æftɝ hɑlimə, ʃi twɪtʃt əɹ ʃɔl ʌp ɑntu hɝ ʃoʊldɝz. "ðə wʊmən hoʊlz ɪɾ ɪn ɝaʊn ju, bʌt ʃi dʌzn maɪnd ɡɪvɪŋ mi ðə ɹʌf saɪɾ ə hɝ tʌŋ. mi əɹ ɛnibəɾi ɛls. ʃiz bɪn hɝd skɹimɪŋ ət dɛlænə. hu ɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ə sɛkɹətɛɹi skɹimɪŋ əɾ əɹ ɛmplɔɪɝ, ən ə sɪstɝ ət ðæt? eɪ sɪɾɝ! aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd waɪ dɛlænə pʊts ʌp wɪð hɝ."

"That fishwife temper will get her in trouble sooner or later," Siuan muttered before the entry flaps stopped swaying. Scowling after Halima, she twitched her shawl up onto her shoulders. "The woman holds it in around you, but she doesn't mind giving me the rough side of her tongue. Me or anybody else. She's been heard screaming at Delana. Who ever heard of a secretary screaming at her employer, and a sister at that? A Sitter! I don't understand why Delana puts up with her."

"ðæts dɛlænəz bɪznəs, ʃʊɹli." kwɛstʃənɪŋ ənʌðɝ sɪstɝz ækʃənz wɑz dʒʌst əz fɔɹbɪɾən əz ɪntɝfɪɹɪŋ wɪð ðɛm. oʊnli baɪ kʌstəm, nɑt lɔ, jɛt səm kʌstəmz wɝ əz stʃɹɔŋ əz lɔ. ʃʊɹli ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə ɹimaɪn sɪuən ə ðæt.

"That's Delana's business, surely." Questioning another sister's actions was just as forbidden as interfering with them. Only by custom, not law, yet some customs were as strong as law. Surely she did not have to remind Siuan of that.

ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ tɛmpəlz, ɛɡwin sæt daʊn kɛɹfəli ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ bɪhaɪn əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl, bʌt ðə tʃɛɹ wɑbəld ɛniweɪ. dɪzaɪn tə foʊl fəɹ stɔɹədʒ ɑn ə wæɡən, ðə lɛɡz hæɾ ə hæbəɾ ə foʊldɪŋ wən ðeɪ wɝ nɑt səpoʊz tə, ən nʌn ə ðə kɑɹpəntɝz hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə fɪks əm æftɝ ɹɪpiɾɪd ətɛmps.

Rubbing her temples, Egwene sat down carefully in the chair behind her writing table, but the chair wobbled anyway. Designed to fold for storage on a wagon, the legs had a habit of folding when they were not supposed to, and none of the carpenters had been able to fix them after repeated attempts.

ðə teɪbəl foʊldəɾ əz wɛl, bʌt ðət hɛld ʌp mɔɹ fɝmli. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi hæd teɪkən ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə əkwaɪɝ ə nu tʃɛɹ ɪn mʊɹændi, jɛt ðəɹ hæd bɪn soʊ mɛni θɪŋz ðət niɾəd baɪɪŋ ən nɑɾ ɪnʌf kɔɪn tə stʃɹɛtʃ wən ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi hæɾ ə tʃɛɹ. ət list ʃi hæɾ əkwaɪɝɾ ə pɛɹ ə stænd-læmps ən ə teɪbəl-læmp, ɔl θɹi pleɪn ɹɛd-peɪntəɾ aɪɝn bʌt wɪð ɡʊd mɪɹɝz ðət wɝ fɹi ʌv bʌbəlz. ɡʊd laɪt dɪd nɑt sim tə hɛlp əɹ hɛdeɪks, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹid baɪ ə fju tæloʊ kændəlz ən ə læntɝn.

The table folded as well, but that held up more firmly. She wished she had taken the opportunity to acquire a new chair in Murandy, yet there had been so many things that needed buying and not enough coin to stretch when she already had a chair. At least she had acquired a pair of stand-lamps and a table-lamp, all three plain red-painted iron but with good mirrors that were free of bubbles. Good light did not seem to help her headaches, yet it was better than trying to read by a few tallow candles and a lantern.

ɪf sɪuən hɝɾ ɛni ɹibjuk, ɪt dɪd nɑt sloʊ hɝ daʊn. "ɪts mɔɹ ðən dʒʌst ə tɛmpɝ. wʌns əɹ twaɪs, aɪv θɔt ʃi wɑz ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stʃɹaɪk mi. aɪ səpoʊz ʃiz sɛns ɪnʌf tə hoʊl bæk fɹəm ðæt, bʌt nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪm kənvɪnst ʃi mænədʒ tə bɹeɪk ə wilɹaɪts ɑɹm sʌmhaʊ. hi sɛz i fɛl, bʌɾ i lʊks tə bi laɪɪŋ tə mi, wɪð ɪz aɪz ʃɪftɪŋ ən ɪz maʊθ twɪtʃɪŋ.

If Siuan heard any rebuke, it did not slow her down. "It's more than just a temper. Once or twice, I've thought she was on the brink of trying to strike me. I suppose she has sense enough to hold back from that, but not everyone is Aes Sedai. I'm convinced she managed to break a wheelwright's arm somehow. He says he fell, but he looks to be lying to me, with his eyes shifting and his mouth twitching.

hi wʊdn laɪk ædmɪɾɪŋ ə wʊmən bɛn ɪz ɛlboʊ bækwɝdz, naʊ wəd hi?"

He wouldn't like admitting a woman bent his elbow backwards, now would he?"

"ɡɪv oʊvɝ, sɪuən," ɛɡwin sɛd wɛɹəli. "ðə mæn laɪkli tʃɹaɪd tə teɪk lɪbɝɾiz." hi mʌs hæv.

"Give over, Siuan," Egwene said wearily. "The man likely tried to take liberties." He must have.

ʃi kəd nɑt si haʊ hɑlimə cʊɾə bɹoʊkən ə mænz ɑɹm ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt. haʊɛvɝ jə dɪskɹaɪb ðə wʊmən, mʌskjəlɝ dɪd nɑt kʌm ɪndə ɪt. ɪnstɛɾ ʌv oʊpənɪŋ ði ɪmbɔs foʊldɝ ðət sɪuən hæd leɪɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, ʃi ɹɛstəɾ əɹ hænz ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ʌv ɪt. ðət kɛpt əm əweɪ fɹəm əɹ hɛd. meɪbi ɪf ʃi ɪɡnɔɹd ðə peɪn, ɪt wəd ɡoʊ əweɪ ðɪs taɪm. bɪsaɪdz, fəɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ, ʃi hæɾ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən tə ʃɛɹ wɪð sɪuən. "ɪt simz ðət səm ə ðə sɪɾɝz ɑɹ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt nɪɡoʊʃieɪɾɪŋ wɪð ɪleɪɾə," ʃi bɪɡæn.

She could not see how Halima could have broken a man's arm in any event. However you described the woman, muscular did not come into it. Instead of opening the embossed folder that Siuan had laid on the table, she rested her hands on either side of it. That kept them away from her head. Maybe if she ignored the pain, it would go away this time. Besides, for a change, she had information to share with Siuan. "It seems that some of the Sitters are talking about negotiating with Elaida," she began.

ɪkspɹɛʃənləs, sɪuən bæləns hɝsɛlf ətɑp wʌn ə ðə tu ɹɪkəɾi θɹi-lɛɡəd stulz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə teɪbəl ən lɪsən ətɛntɪvli, oʊnli hɝ fɪŋɡɝz muvɪŋ, laɪtli stʃɹoʊkɪŋ əɡɛnst əɹ skɝts, əntɪl ɛɡwin fɪnɪʃt. ðən ʃi meɪd fɪsts ən ɡɹaʊld ə sɛɾ ə kɝsɪz ðət wɝ pʌnʒənt ivən fəɹ hɝ, bɪɡɪnɪŋ wɪð ə wɪʃ fəɹ ðə lɑɾ ə ðɛm tə tʃoʊk tə dɛθ ɑn wik-oʊl fɪʃ ɡʌts ən slaɪɾɪŋ daʊnhɪl fæs fɹəm ðɛɹ. kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðət jʌŋ, pɹɪɾi feɪs oʊnli meɪɾ əm wɝs.

Expressionless, Siuan balanced herself atop one of the two rickety three-legged stools in front of the table and listened attentively, only her fingers moving, lightly stroking against her skirts, until Egwene finished. Then she made fists and growled a set of curses that were pungent even for her, beginning with a wish for the lot of them to choke to death on week-old fish guts and sliding downhill fast from there. Coming from that young, pretty face only made them worse.

"aɪ səpoʊz jəɹ ɹaɪt lɛɾɪŋ ɪt ɡoʊ fɔɹwɝd," ʃi mʌɾɝd wʌns əɹ ɪnvɛktɪv ɹæn daʊn. "ðə tɔk wɪl spɹɛd, naʊ ɪts bɪɡʌn, ən ðɪs weɪ, jə ɡeɪn ə dʒʌmp ɑn ɪt. bioʊnɪn ʃʊdn sɝpɹaɪz mi, aɪ səpoʊz. bioʊnɪnz æmbɪʃəs, bʌɾ aɪ ɔlweɪz θɔt ʃiɾ əv ɡɔn skɝiɪŋ bæk tə ɪleɪɾə ɪf ʃɛɹiəm ən ði ʌðɝz hædn stɪfən əɹ bækboʊn." vɔɪs kwɪkənɪŋ, sɪuən fɪkst əɹ aɪz ɑn ɛɡwin əz ɪf tə lɛnd weɪt tə hɝ wɝdz. "aɪ wɪʃ vɛɹɪlɪn ən ðət lɑt sɝpɹaɪz mi, mʌðɝ. dɪskaʊntɪŋ ðə blu, sɪks sɪɾɝz fɹəm faɪv ədʒəz flɛd ðə taʊɝ æftɝ ɪleɪɾə kæɹiɾ aʊɾ əɹ ku," hɝ maʊθ twɪstəd slaɪtli ɑn ðə wɝd, "æn hɪɹ wɪv wʌn fɹəm itʃ ə ðoʊz faɪv. aɪ wɑz ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd læs naɪt, ɪn ðə taʊɝ - "

"I suppose you're right letting it go forward," she muttered once her invective ran down. "The talk will spread, now it's begun, and this way, you gain a jump on it. Beonin shouldn't surprise me, I suppose. Beonin's ambitious, but I always thought she'd have gone scurrying back to Elaida if Sheriam and the others hadn't stiffened her backbone." Voice quickening, Siuan fixed her eyes on Egwene as if to lend weight to her words. "I wish Varilin and that lot surprised me, Mother. Discounting the Blue, six Sitters from five Ajahs fled the Tower after Elaida carried out her coup," her mouth twisted slightly on the word, "and here we have one from each of those five. I was in Tel'aran'rhiod last night, in the Tower - "

"aɪ hoʊp jə wɝ kɛɹfəl," ɛɡwin sɛd ʃɑɹpli. sɪuən hɑɹdli sim tə noʊ ðə minɪŋ ə kɛɹfəl, səmtaɪmz. ðə fju dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɪn ðɛɹ pəzɛʃən hæd laɪnz ə sɪstɝz pæntɪŋ tə juz ðɛm, moʊsli tə vɪzət ðə taʊɝ, ən waɪl sɪuən wɑz nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli fɔɹbɪɾən wʌn, ɪt wɑz ðə nɛks θɪŋ tə. ʃi cʊɾə pʊɾ əɹ neɪm daʊn fɝɛvɝ wɪθaʊt ðə hɔl ɡɹæntɪŋ əɹ ə sɪŋɡəl naɪt. kwaɪɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ðə sɪstɝz u bleɪm sɪuən fəɹ ðə taʊɝ biɪŋ bɹoʊkən ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs - ʃi wɑz nɑɾ æksɛptɪd bæk kwaɪɾ əz wɔɹmli əz lin, ɑn ðəɾ əkaʊnt, nɔɹ kɑstɪd baɪ ɛniwʌn - kwaɪɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ðæt, tu mɛni ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əɹ ɹʌf titʃɪŋ, wən ʃi wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju hu nu haʊ tə juz ðə dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil. sɪuən dɪd nɑt sʌfɝ fulz ɡlædli, ən ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz ə ful ðɛɹ fɝs fju taɪmz ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, soʊ naʊ ʃi hæd tə bɑɹoʊ linz tɝn wən ʃi wɑntəd tə vɪzət ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz, ən ɪf ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ sɔ hɝ ðɛɹ, 'ðə nɛks θɪŋ tə' maɪt bɪkʌm ən aʊtʃɹaɪt bæn. əɹ wɝs, sɛɾ ɔf ə sɝtʃ fəɹ u hæd loʊn əɹ ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, wɪtʃ maɪɾ ɛn baɪ ənmæskɪŋ lin.

"I hope you were careful," Egwene said sharply. Siuan hardly seemed to know the meaning of careful, sometimes. The few dream ter'angreal in their possession had lines of sisters panting to use them, mostly to visit the Tower, and while Siuan was not precisely forbidden one, it was the next thing to. She could have put her name down forever without the Hall granting her a single night. Quite aside from the sisters who blamed Siuan for the Tower being broken in the first place - she was not accepted back quite as warmly as Leane, on that account, nor cosseted by anyone - quite aside from that, too many remembered her rough teaching, when she was one of the few who knew how to use the dream ter'angreal. Siuan did not suffer fools gladly, and everyone was a fool their first few times in Tel'aran'rhiod, so now she had to borrow Leane's turn when she wanted to visit the World of Dreams, and if another sister saw her there, 'the next thing to' might become an outright ban. Or worse, set off a search for who had loaned her a ter'angreal, which might end by unmasking Leane.

"ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd," sɪuən sɛd wɪð ə dɪsmɪsɪv dʒɛstʃɝ, "ɪm ə dɪfɹənt wʊmən ɪn ə dɪfɹən dʒɹɛs ɛvɹi taɪm aɪ tɝn ə kɔɹnɝ." ðət wɑz ɡʊd tə hɪɹ, ðoʊ ɪt sim laɪkli ə læk ə kəntʃɹoʊl hæɾ əz mʌtʃ tə də wɪð ɪɾ əz ɪntɛnt. sɪuənz bɪlif ɪn əɹ oʊn əbɪləɾiz wɑz səmtaɪmz ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən wɔɹəntɪd.

"In Tel'aran'rhiod," Siuan said with a dismissive gesture, "I'm a different woman in a different dress every time I turn a corner." That was good to hear, though it seemed likely a lack of control had as much to do with it as intent. Siuan's belief in her own abilities was sometimes greater than warranted.

"ðə pɔɪn ɪz, læs naɪɾ aɪ sɔ ə pɑɹʃəl lɪst ə sɪɾɝz ən mænədʒ tə ɹid moʊst ə ðə neɪmz bɪfɔɹ ɪt tʃeɪnʒd tə ə tæli ʌv waɪnz." ðət wɑz ə kɑmən əkɝəns ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, wɛɹ nʌθɪŋ steɪd ðə seɪm fəɹ lɔŋ ənlɛs ɪt wɑz ə ɹəflɛkʃən ə sʌmθɪŋ pɝmənən ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld. "ændaɪə fɔɹ wɑz ɹeɪz fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪ, ɹinə hæfdən fəɹ ðə ɡɹin, ən dʒuleɪn mədoʊm fəɹ ðə bɹaʊn. nʌn əz wɔɹn ðə ʃɔl mɔɹ ðən sɛvənti jɪɹz ət moʊst. ɪleɪɾə hæz ðə seɪm pɹɑbləm wi du, mʌðɝ."

"The point is, last night I saw a partial list of Sitters and managed to read most of the names before it changed to a tally of wines." That was a common occurrence in Tel'aran'rhiod, where nothing stayed the same for long unless it was a reflection of something permanent in the waking world. "Andaya Forae was raised for the Gray, Rina Hafden for the Green, and Juilaine Madome for the Brown. None has worn the shawl more than seventy years at most. Elaida has the same problem we do, Mother."

"aɪ si," ɛɡwin sɛd sloʊli. ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi wɑz məsɑʒɪŋ ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ hɛd. ðə θɹəb bɪhaɪn əɹ aɪz biɾ ɑn. ɪt wəd ɡɹoʊ stʃɹɔŋɝ. ɪɾ ɔlweɪz dɪd. baɪ naɪtfɔl, ʃi wɑz gɑnə ɹəɡɹɛt hævɪŋ sɛn hɑlimə əweɪ. bɹɪŋɪŋ əɹ hæn daʊn fɝmli, ʃi muv ðə lɛðɝ foʊldɝ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ ə hæf ɪntʃ tə ðə lɛft, ðən slɪɾ ɪt bæk. "wʌɾ ə ðə ɹɛst? ðeɪ hæd sɪks sɪɾɝz tə ɹipleɪs."

"I see," Egwene said slowly. She realized that she was massaging the side of her head. The throb behind her eyes beat on. It would grow stronger. It always did. By nightfall, she was going to regret having sent Halima away. Bringing her hand down firmly, she moved the leather folder in front of her a half inch to the left, then slid it back. "What of the rest? They had six Sitters to replace."

"fɛɹən nhɝən wɑz ɹeɪz fəɹ ðə waɪt," sɪuən ədmɪɾəd, "æn swænə dʒɹeɪɡən fəɹ ðə jɛloʊ.

"Ferane Neheran was raised for the White," Siuan admitted, "and Suana Dragand for the Yellow.

ðeɪv boʊθ bɪn ɪn ðə hɔl bɪfɔɹ. ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə pɑɹʃəl lɪst, ən aɪ dɪdnt ɡɛt tə ɹiɾ ɪɾ ɔl." hɝ bæk stʃɹeɪɾənd, ən əɹ tʃɪn ʃɑɾ aʊt stʌbɝnli. "wʌn əɹ tu ɹeɪz bɪfɔɹ taɪm wəd bi ənjuʒəwəl ɪnʌf - ɪt hæpənz, bʌt nɑɾ ɔfən - bʌt ðɪs meɪks ɪlɛvən - meɪbi twɛlv, bʌɾ ɪlɛvən fəɹ ʃʊɹ -  bɪtwin əs ən ðə taʊɝ. aɪ doʊn bɪliv ɪn koʊɪnsəɾənsɪz ðət bɪɡ. wən ðə fɪʃmɑŋɡɝz ɑɹ ɔl baɪɪŋ ət ðə seɪm pɹaɪs, jə kən bɛt ðeɪ wɝ ɔl dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ət ðə seɪm ɪn læs naɪt." "ju doʊn əv tə kənvɪns mi ɛni mɔɹ, sɪuən." wɪð ə saɪ, ɛɡwin sæt bæk, ɔɾəmætɪkli kætʃɪŋ ðə tʃɛɹ lɛɡ ðəɾ ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪd tə foʊld wən ʃi dɪd ðæt. klɪɹli, sʌmθɪŋ ɑd wɑz hæpənɪŋ, bʌt wʌɾ ɪt min?

They've both been in the Hall before. It was only a partial list, and I didn't get to read it all." Her back straightened, and her chin shot out stubbornly. "One or two raised before time would be unusual enough - it happens, but not often - but this makes eleven - maybe twelve, but eleven for sure -  between us and the Tower. I don't believe in coincidences that big. When the fishmongers are all buying at the same price, you can bet they were all drinking at the same inn last night." "You don't have to convince me any more, Siuan." With a sigh, Egwene sat back, automatically catching the chair leg that always tried to fold when she did that. Clearly, something odd was happening, but what did it mean?

ən u kəɾ ɪnfluəns ðə tʃɔɪs ə sɪɾɝz ɪn ɛvɹi ədʒɑ? ɛvɹi ədʒɑ ɪksɛp ðə blu, ət list; ðeɪ hæd tʃoʊzən wʌn nu sɪɾɝ, bʌt mɔɹiə hæd bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛl oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. ən meɪbi ðə ɹɛd wɑz nɑɾ əfɛktəd; noʊ wʌn nu wʌt tʃeɪnʒəz ɪf ɛni hæd bɪn meɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹɛd sɪɾɝz. ðə blæk maɪt bi bɪhaɪn ɪt, bʌt wʌt kəd ðeɪ ɡeɪn, ənlɛs ɔl ə ðoʊz tu-jʌŋ sɪɾɝz wɝ blæk? ðət simd ɪmpɑsəbəl ɪn ɛni keɪs; ɪf ðə blæk ədʒɑ hæd hæd ðət mʌtʃ ɪnfluəns, ðə hɔl wʊɾə bɪn ɔl dɑɹkfɹɛnz lɔŋ əɡoʊ. jɛɾ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ə pæɾɝn ən koʊɪnsɪɾəns wəd nɑt hoʊld, ðən sʌmwʌn hæd tə bi ət ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. dʒʌs θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə pɑsəbɪləɾiz, ði ɪmpɑsəbɪləɾiz, meɪd ðə dʌl peɪn bɪhaɪn əɹ aɪz ɡɹoʊ ə lɪɾəl ʃɑɹpɝ. "ɪf ðɪs tɝnz aʊt tə bi hæpənstæns æftɝ ɔl, sɪuən, jəɹ gɑnə ɹəɡɹɛɾ ɛvɝ θɪŋkɪŋ jə sɔ ə pʌzəl." ʃi fɔɹst ə smaɪl seɪɪŋ ðæt, tə teɪk aʊɾ ɛni stɪŋ. ən æmɪɝlɪn hæd tə bi kɛɹfəl wɪð əɹ wɝdz. "naʊ ðət juv kənvɪns mi ðəɹ ɪz ə pʌzəl, aɪ wɑn jə tə sɑlv ɪt.

And who could influence the choice of Sitters in every Ajah? Every Ajah except the Blue, at least; they had chosen one new Sitter, but Moria had been Aes Sedai well over a hundred years. And maybe the Red was not affected; no one knew what changes if any had been made in the Red Sitters. The Black might be behind it, but what could they gain, unless all of those too-young Sitters were Black? That seemed impossible in any case; if the Black Ajah had had that much influence, the Hall would have been all Darkfriends long ago. Yet if there was a pattern and coincidence would not hold, then someone had to be at the heart of it. Just thinking about the possibilities, the impossibilities, made the dull pain behind her eyes grow a little sharper. "If this turns out to be happenstance after all, Siuan, you're going to regret ever thinking you saw a puzzle." She forced a smile saying that, to take out any sting. An Amyrlin had to be careful with her words. "Now that you've convinced me there is a puzzle, I want you to solve it.

hu ɪz ɹispɑnsəbəl, ən wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ æftɝ? əntɪl wi noʊ ðæt, wi doʊnt noʊ ɛniθɪŋ." "ɪz ðəɾ ɔl jə wɑnt?" sɪuən sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "bɪfɔɹ sʌpɝ, əɹ æftɝ?"

Who is responsible, and what are they after? Until we know that, we don't know anything." "Is that all you want?" Siuan said dryly. "Before supper, or after?"

"æftɝ wɪl əv tə du, aɪ səpoʊz," ɛɡwin snæpt, ðən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ət ði əbæʃt lʊk ɑn ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz feɪs. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn teɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛdeɪk aʊɾ ɑn sɪuən. ən æmɪɝlɪnz wɝdz hæd paʊɝ, ən səmtaɪmz kɑnsəkwɛnsəz; ʃi hæd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt. "æz sun əz jə kən wəd bi vɛɹi ɡʊd, ðoʊ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə maɪldɝ vɔɪs. "aɪ noʊ jəl bi əz kwɪk əz jə kæn." ʃəɡɹɪn əɹ nɑt, sɪuən sim tə ʌndɝstæn ðəɾ ɛɡwinz aʊtbɝs keɪm fɹəm mɔɹ ðən əɹ oʊn sɑɹkæzəm. dɪspaɪɾ əɹ juθfəl əpɪɹəns, ʃi hæd jɪɹz ə pɹæktəs ət ɹiɾɪŋ feɪsəz.

"After will have to do, I suppose," Egwene snapped, then took a deep breath at the abashed look on the other woman's face. There was no point taking her headache out on Siuan. An Amyrlin's words had power, and sometimes consequences; she had to remember that. "As soon as you can would be very good, though," she said in a milder voice. "I know you'll be as quick as you can." Chagrined or not, Siuan seemed to understand that Egwene's outburst came from more than her own sarcasm. Despite her youthful appearance, she had years of practice at reading faces.

"ʃæl aɪ ɡoʊ faɪn hɑlimə?" ʃi sɛd, hæf ɹaɪzɪŋ. ðə læk ə tɑɹtnəs ətætʃt tə ðə wʊmənz neɪm wɑz ə mɛʒɝ ə hɝ kənsɝn. "ɪt woʊn teɪk ə mɪnət."

"Shall I go find Halima?" she said, half rising. The lack of tartness attached to the woman's name was a measure of her concern. "It won't take a minute."

"ɪf aɪ ɡɪv weɪ fəɹ ɛvɹi eɪk, əl nɛvɝ ɡɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ dʌn," ɛɡwin sɛd, oʊpənɪŋ ðə foʊldɝ.

"If I give way for every ache, I'll never get anything done," Egwene said, opening the folder.

"naʊ, wʌt juv fəɹ mi tədeɪ?" ʃi kɛpt əɹ hænz ɑn ðə peɪpɝz, ðoʊ, tə stɑp fɹəm ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ hɛd.

"Now, what do you have for me today?" She kept her hands on the papers, though, to stop from rubbing her head.

wʌn ə sɪuənz tæsks itʃ mɔɹnɪŋ wɑz tə fɛtʃ wʌt ði ədʒəz wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə ʃɛɹ fɹəm ðɛɹ nɛtwɝks ʌv aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz, əlɔŋ wɪð wʌtɛvɝ ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl sɪstɝz hæd pæst ɑn tə ðɛɹ ədʒəz ən ði ədʒəz hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə pæs ɑn tə ɛɡwin. ɪt wɑz ə stʃɹeɪnʒ pɹɑsɛs ə sɪvɪŋ, jɛɾ ɪt stɪl ɡeɪv ə fɛɹ pɪktʃɝ ə ðə wɝld wən æɾəd tə wʌt sɪuən pʊɾ ɪn. ʃi hæd mænədʒ tə hoʊld ɑn tə ði eɪdʒəns ðət hæd bɪn hɝz əz æmɪɝlɪn baɪ ðə sɪmpəl ɪkspiɾiənt ə ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə tɛl ɛniwʌn u ðeɪ wɝ dɪspaɪɾ ɛvɹi ɛfɝt baɪ ðə hɔl, ən ɪn ði ɛnd, noʊ wʌn kəd ɡeɪnseɪ ðət ðoʊz aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz wɝ ði æmɪɝlɪnz, ən ðət ðeɪ ʃəd baɪ ɹaɪts ɹipɔɹt tə ɛɡwin. oʊ, ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ ɛn ʌv ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪt, ən stɪl wɑz ɑn əkeɪʒən, bʌt noʊ wʌn kəd dɪnaɪ ðə fæks. əz juʒəwəl, ðə fɝst ɹipɔɹt keɪm fɹəm niðɝ ði ədʒəz nɔɹ sɪuən, bʌt lin, ɹɪɾən ɑn θɪn ʃits ə peɪpɝ ɪn ə floʊɪŋ ɛləɡən hænd. ɛɡwin kəd nɑt si ɪɡzækli waɪ, bʌt jə kəd nɛvɝ daʊt ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ lin ɹoʊt hæd bɪn ɹɪɾən baɪ ə wʊmən. ðoʊz peɪdʒəz ɛɡwin hɛl tə ðə teɪbəl-læmps fleɪm wʌn baɪ wʌn əz sun əz ʃi ɹɛd ðɛm, lɛɾɪŋ ðə peɪpɝ bɝn ɔlmoʊs tə hɝ fɪŋɡɝz, ðən kɹʌmplɪŋ ði æʃ. ɪt wəd hɑɹdli də fəɹ əɹ ən lin tə bɪheɪv laɪk nɪɹ-stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ɪn pʌblɪk ðən əlaʊ wʌn ə hɝ ɹɪpɔɹts tə fɔl ɪndə ðə ɹɔŋ hænz.

One of Siuan's tasks each morning was to fetch what the Ajahs were willing to share from their networks of eyes-and-ears, along with whatever individual sisters had passed on to their Ajahs and the Ajahs had decided to pass on to Egwene. It was a strange process of sieving, yet it still gave a fair picture of the world when added to what Siuan put in. She had managed to hold on to the agents that had been hers as Amyrlin by the simple expedient of refusing to tell anyone who they were despite every effort by the Hall, and in the end, no one could gainsay that those eyes-and-ears were the Amyrlin's, and that they should by rights report to Egwene. Oh, there had been no end of grumbling over it, and still was on occasion, but no one could deny the facts. As usual, the first report came from neither the Ajahs nor Siuan, but Leane, written on thin sheets of paper in a flowing elegant hand. Egwene could not see exactly why, but you could never doubt that anything Leane wrote had been written by a woman. Those pages Egwene held to the table-lamp's flame one by one as soon as she read them, letting the paper burn almost to her fingers, then crumpling the ash. It would hardly do for her and Leane to behave like near-strangers in public then allow one of her reports to fall into the wrong hands.

vɛɹi fju sɪstɝz wɝ əwɛɹ ðət lin hæɾ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ɪnsaɪd tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪtsɛlf. ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn ði oʊnli sɪstɝ u dɪd. ɪt wɑz ə hjumən feɪlɪŋ tə wɑtʃ kinli wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ daʊn ðə stʃɹit waɪl ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ wʌt leɪ ɹaɪɾ ət jəɹ fit, ən ðə laɪt nu ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ əz mɛni hjumən feɪlɪŋz əz ɛniwʌn ɛls. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, lin hæd lɪɾəl nu tə kəmjunəkeɪt.

Very few sisters were aware that Leane had eyes-and-ears inside Tar Valon itself. She might have been the only sister who did. It was a human failing to watch keenly what was happening down the street while ignoring what lay right at your feet, and the Light knew Aes Sedai had as many human failings as anyone else. Unfortunately, Leane had little new to communicate.

hɝ pipəl ɪn ðə sɪɾi kəmpleɪn ə fɪlθi stʃɹits ðət wɝ ɪnkɹisɪŋli deɪnʒɝəs æftɝ dɑɹk ən lɪɾəl seɪfɝ baɪ deɪlaɪt. wʌns kɹaɪm hæd bɪn ɔl bʌɾ ənnoʊn ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, bʌt naʊ ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹdz hæɾ əbændən ðə stʃɹits tə pətʃɹoʊl ðə hɑɹbɝz ən ðə bɹɪdʒ taʊɝz. ɪksɛp fəɹ kəlɛktɪŋ ðə kʌstəmz duɾiz ən baɪɪŋ səplaɪz, boʊθ dʌn θɹu ɪntɝmiɾiɛɹiz, ðə waɪt taʊɝ sim tə hæv ʃʌɾ ɪtsɛlf ɔf fɹəm ðə sɪɾi kəmplitli. ðə ɡɹeɪt dɔɹz ðəɾ əlaʊd ðə pʌblɪk tə ɛntɝ ðə taʊɝ ɹɪmeɪnd ʃʌɾ ən bɑɹd, ən noʊ wʌn hæd sin ə sɪstɝ aʊtsaɪd ðə taʊɝ tə noʊ hɝ əz ɛɛs sədaɪ sɪns ðə sidʒ bɪɡæn, ɪf nɑɾ ɝliɝ. ɔl kɑnfɝmeɪʃən ʌv wʌt lin hæd ɹipɔɹɾəd bɪfɔɹ. ðə læs peɪdʒ meɪɾ ɛɡwinz aɪbɹaʊz ɹaɪz, ðoʊ. ɹumɝ ɪn ðə stʃɹits sɛd ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn hæd faʊn ə sikɹət weɪ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi ən wəɾ əpɪɹ ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz wɪð ɪz hoʊl ɑɹmi ɛni deɪ.

Her people in the city complained of filthy streets that were increasingly dangerous after dark and little safer by daylight. Once crime had been all but unknown in Tar Valon, but now the Tower Guards had abandoned the streets to patrol the harbors and the bridge towers. Except for collecting the customs duties and buying supplies, both done through intermediaries, the White Tower seemed to have shut itself off from the city completely. The great doors that allowed the public to enter the Tower remained shut and barred, and no one had seen a sister outside the Tower to know her as Aes Sedai since the siege began, if not earlier. All confirmation of what Leane had reported before. The last page made Egwene's eyebrows rise, though. Rumor in the streets said Gareth Bryne had found a secret way into the city and would appear inside the walls with his whole army any day.

"lin wʊɾə sɛɾ ɪf ɛniwʌn hæd bɹiðd ə wɝd ðət saʊndəd laɪk ðeɪ mɛnt ɡeɪtweɪz," sɪuən sɛd kwɪkli wən ʃi sɔ ɛɡwinz ɪkspɹɛʃən. ʃi hæd ɹɛɾ ɔl ə ðiz ɹɪpɔɹts ɔlɹɛɾi, ʌv kɔɹs, ən nu wʌɾ ɛɡwin wɑz siɪŋ baɪ wɪtʃ peɪdʒ ʃi hɛld. ʃɪftɪŋ ɑn ði ənstɛɾi stul, sɪuən ɔlmoʊs fɛl ɔf ɑntu ðə kɑɹpəts, ʃi wɑz peɪɪŋ soʊ lɪɾəl hid. ɪt dɪd nɑt sloʊ hɝ daʊn ə hɛɹ, ðoʊ. "æn jə kən bi ʃʊɹ ɡɛɹɪθ hæzən lɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ slɪp," ʃi wɛn ɑn waɪl stɪl ɹaɪɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf.

"Leane would have said if anyone had breathed a word that sounded like they meant gateways," Siuan said quickly when she saw Egwene's expression. She had read all of these reports already, of course, and knew what Egwene was seeing by which page she held. Shifting on the unsteady stool, Siuan almost fell off onto the carpets, she was paying so little heed. It did not slow her down a hair, though. "And you can be sure Gareth hasn't let anything slip," she went on while still righting herself.

"nɑt ðəɾ ɛni ʌv ɪz soʊlʒɝz ɑɹ ful ɪnʌf tə dɪzɝt tə ðə sɪɾi naʊ, bʌɾ i noʊz wən tə kip ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt. hi dʒʌst əz ðə ɹɛpjəteɪʃən fəɹ ətækɪŋ wɛɹ i kæn pɑsəbli bi. hiz dʌn ði ɪmpɑsəbəl ɔfən ɪnʌf ðət pipəl ɪkspɛkt ɪm tə. ðæts ɔl." haɪɾɪŋ ə smaɪl, ɛɡwin hɛl ðə peɪpɝ mɛnʃənɪŋ lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ tə ðə fleɪm ən wɑtʃt ɪt kɝl ən blækən. ə fju mʌnθs pæst, sɪuən wʊɾə ɔfɝɾ ən æsəd kɑmɛn əbaʊt ðə mæn ɪnstɛɾ ə pɹeɪz. hi wʊɾə bɪn "ɡɛɹɪθ blʌɾi bɹaɪn," nɑt ɡɛɹɪθ. ʃi kəd nɑt pɑsəbli mɪs duɪŋ ɪz lɔnʒɹi ən pɑlɪʃɪŋ ɪz buts, bʌɾ ɛɡwin hæd sin əɹ stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm ɑn ðoʊz ɹɛɹ taɪmz wən i keɪm tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kæmp. stɛɹɪŋ, ən ðən ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ ɪf i soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst ət hɝ. sɪuən! ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ! sɪuən hæd bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ mɔɹ ðən twɛnti jɪɹz, ən æmɪɝlɪn fəɹ tɛn, bʌt ʃi hæd noʊ mɔɹ aɪdiə haʊ tə dil wɪð biɪŋ ɪn lʌv ðən ə dʌk hæɾ əbaʊt ʃɪɹɪŋ ʃip.

"Not that any of his soldiers are fool enough to desert to the city now, but he knows when to keep his mouth shut. He just has the reputation for attacking where he can't possibly be. He's done the impossible often enough that people expect him to. That's all." Hiding a smile, Egwene held the paper mentioning Lord Gareth to the flame and watched it curl and blacken. A few months past, Siuan would have offered an acid comment about the man instead of praise. He would have been "Gareth bloody Bryne," not Gareth. She could not possibly miss doing his laundry and polishing his boots, but Egwene had seen her staring at him on those rare times when he came to the Aes Sedai camp. Staring, and then running away if he so much as glanced at her. Siuan! Running away! Siuan had been Aes Sedai for more than twenty years, and Amyrlin for ten, but she had no more idea how to deal with being in love than a duck had about shearing sheep.

ɛɡwin kɹʌmbəl ði æʃ ən dʌstɪɾ əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ, hɝ smaɪl feɪɾɪŋ. ʃi hæd noʊ ɹum tə tɔk əbaʊt sɪuən. ʃi wɑz ɪn lʌv, tu, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən noʊ wɛɹ ɪn ðə wɝld ɡɔɪn wɑz, əɹ wʌt tə də ɪf ʃi lɝnd. hi hæɾ ɪz duɾi tə ændɝ, ən ʃi hɝz tə ðə taʊɝ. ən ðə wʌn weɪ tə bɹɪdʒ ðət kæzəm, bɑndɪŋ hɪm, maɪt lɛd tə hɪz dɛθ. bɛɾɝ tə lɛɾ ɪm ɡoʊ, fɝɡɛɾ ɪm ɪntaɪɝli. əz izi əz fɝɡɛɾɪŋ əɹ oʊn neɪm. ən ʃi wəd bɑn hɪm. ʃi nu ðæt. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi kəd nɑt bɑn ðə mæn wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ wɛɹ i wɑz, wɪθaʊt hævɪŋ əɹ hænz ɑn hɪm, soʊ ɪɾ ɔl keɪm fʊl sɝkəl. mɛn wɝ . . . ə bɑðɝbækslæʃ pɔzɪŋ tə pɹɛs əɹ fɪŋɡɝz əɡɛnst əɹ tɛmpəlz - ɪt dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə lɛsən ðə pʌlsɪŋ peɪn - ʃi pʊt ɡɔɪn aʊɾ ə hɝ maɪnd. əz fɑɹ aʊɾ əz ʃi kʊd. ʃi θɔt ʃi hæɾ ə fɔɹteɪst ʌv wʌɾ ɪt wɑz laɪk hævɪŋ ə wɔɹɾɝ; ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ɡɔɪn ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd. ən laɪəbəl tə kɪk ɪts weɪ ɪndə hɝ kɑnʃəsnəs ət ðə moʊst ɪnkənvinjən taɪm. kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə bɪznəs ət hænd, ʃi pɪkt ʌp ðə nɛkst ʃit.

Egwene crumbled the ash and dusted her hands together, her smile fading. She had no room to talk about Siuan. She was in love, too, but she did not even know where in the world Gawyn was, or what to do if she learned. He had his duty to Andor, and she hers to the Tower. And the one way to bridge that chasm, bonding him, might lead to his death. Better to let him go, forget him entirely. As easy as forgetting her own name. And she would bond him. She knew that. Of course, she could not bond the man without knowing where he was, without having her hands on him, so it all came full circle. Men were . . . a bother\ Pausing to press her fingers against her temples - it did nothing to lessen the pulsing pain - she put Gawyn out of her mind. As far out as she could. She thought she had a foretaste of what it was like having a Warder; there was always something of Gawyn in the back of her head. And liable to kick its way into her consciousness at the most inconvenient time. Concentrating on the business at hand, she picked up the next sheet.

mʌtʃ ə ðə wɝl hæd vænɪʃt, əz fɑɹ əz aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz wɝ kənsɝnd. lɪɾəl nuz keɪm fɹəm ðə lænz hɛl baɪ ðə sintʃæn, ən ðət dɪvaɪɾəd bɪtwin fænsɪfəl dɪskɹɪpʃənz ə sintʃæn bists dɪlɪvɝɾ əz pɹuf ðeɪ wɝ juzɪŋ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, hɔɹəfaɪɪŋ teɪlz ʌv wɪmən biɪŋ tɛstəd tə si wɛðɝ ðeɪ ʃəd bi kɑlɝɾ əz deɪmeɪn, ən dɪpɹɛsɪŋ stɔɹiz ʌv. . . æksɛptəns. ðə sintʃæn, ɪt simd, wɝ noʊ wɝs ɹulɝz ðən ɛni ʌðɝz ən bɛɾɝ ðən səm - əz lɔŋ əz jə wɝ nɑɾ ə wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl - ən ɔl tu mɛni pipəl əpɪɹd tə hæv ɡɪvən ʌp θɔts ə ɹɪzɪstəns wʌns ɪt bɪkeɪm klɪɹ ðə sintʃæn wəd lɛɾ əm ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð ðɛɹ lɪvz. ɑɹæd dumən wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz bæd, pɹədusɪŋ nʌθɪŋ bʌt ɹumɝz, ədmɪɾəd əz sətʃ baɪ ðə sɪstɝz u ɹoʊt ðə ɹɪpɔɹts bʌɾ ɪnkluɾəd dʒʌs tə ʃoʊ ðə steɪt ðə kʌntʃɹi wɑz ɪn. kɪŋ ælsələm wɑz dɛd. noʊ, hi hæd bɪɡʌn tʃænəlɪŋ ən ɡɔn mæd.

Much of the world had vanished, as far as eyes-and-ears were concerned. Little news came from the lands held by the Seanchan, and that divided between fanciful descriptions of Seanchan beasts delivered as proof they were using Shadowspawn, horrifying tales of women being tested to see whether they should be collared as damane, and depressing stories of. . . acceptance. The Seanchan, it seemed, were no worse rulers than any others and better than some - as long as you were not a woman who could channel - and all too many people appeared to have given up thoughts of resistance once it became clear the Seanchan would let them go on with their lives. Arad Doman was almost as bad, producing nothing but rumors, admitted as such by the sisters who wrote the reports but included just to show the state the country was in. King Alsalam was dead. No, he had begun channeling and gone mad.

ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi, ðə ɡɹeɪt kæptən, ɔlsoʊ wɑz dɛd, əɹ i hæd jusɝp ðə θɹoʊn, əɹ wɑz ɪnveɪɾɪŋ sɑldɑiə.

Rodel Ituralde, the Great Captain, also was dead, or he had usurped the throne, or was invading Saldaea.

ðə kaʊnsəl ə mɝtʃəns wɝ ɔl dɛd, əz wɛl, əɹ hæd flɛd ðə kʌntʃɹi, əɹ bɪɡʌn ə sɪvəl wɔɹ oʊvɝ u ðə nɛks kɪŋ wɑz tə bi. ɛni ʌv ðoʊz maɪɾ əv bɪn tʃɹu. əɹ nʌn. ði ədʒəz wɝ əkʌstəm tə siɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, bʌt naʊ ə θɝɾ ə ðə wɝl hæd bɪn ɛnvɛləpt ɪn dɛns fɑɡ, wɪð oʊnli ðə taɪniəst ɡæps. ət list, ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ɛni klɪɹɝ vjuz, noʊ ədʒɑ hæd dn tə pæs ɑn wʌt ðeɪ sɔ ðɛɹ.

The Council of Merchants were all dead, as well, or had fled the country, or begun a civil war over who the next king was to be. Any of those might have been true. Or none. The Ajahs were accustomed to seeing everything, but now a third of the world had been enveloped in dense fog, with only the tiniest gaps. At least, if there were any clearer views, no Ajah had deigned to pass on what they saw there.

ənʌðɝ pɹɑbləm wɑz ðət ði ədʒəz sɔ dɪfɹən θɪŋz əz hævɪŋ pɛɹəmaʊn ɪmpɔɹɾəns, ən lɑɹdʒli ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls.

Another problem was that the Ajahs saw different things as having paramount importance, and largely ignored anything else.

ðə ɡɹinz, fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, wɝ pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli kənsɝn oʊvɝ teɪlz ə bɔɹɾɝlənd ɑɹmiz nɪɹ nu bɹəm, hʌnʒɹədz ə liɡz fɹəm ðə blaɪt ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə bi ɡɑɹɾɪŋ. ðɛɹ ɹipɔɹt tɔkt ə ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz ən oʊnli ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz, əz ɪf sʌmθɪŋ hæd tə bi dʌn ən dʌn naʊ. nɑt ðət ðeɪ sədʒɛstəɾ ɛniθɪŋ, əɹ soʊ mʌtʃ əz hɪntəd, jɛt fɹəstʃɹeɪʃənz keɪm θɹu ɪn ðə kɹæmpt, heɪsti hændʒɹaɪɾɪŋ ðət spaɪɾɝd ɝdʒənli əkɹɔs ðə peɪdʒ. ɛɡwin hæd ðə tʃɹuθ ə ðət sɪtʃueɪʃən fɹəm ɪleɪn, bʌt ʃi wɑz kɑntɛn tə lɛt ðə ɡɹinz næʃ ðɛɹ tiθ fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, sɪns sɪuən hæd ɹɪvild waɪ ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ɹʌʃɪŋ ɔf tə sɛt mæɾɝz stʃɹeɪt. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə hɝ eɪdʒən ɪn nu bɹəm, ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz wɝ əkʌmpənid baɪ fɪfti əɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd sɪstɝz, pɝhæps tu hʌnʒɹəd. ðə nʌmbɝ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪt bi ənsɝɾən, ən ɪt mʌs bi waɪldli ɪnfleɪɾəd, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðɛɹ pɹɛzəns wɑz ə fæk ðə ɡɹinz hæd tə bi əwɛɹ ʌv, ðoʊ ðə ɹɪpɔɹts ðeɪ sɛn tə ɛɡwin nɛvɝ mɛnʃən ðɛm. noʊ ədʒɑ hæd mɛnʃən ðoʊz sɪstɝz ɪn ðɛɹ ɹɪpɔɹts. ɪn ði ɛnd, ðoʊ, ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl dɪfɝəns bɪtwin tu hʌnʒɹəd sɪstɝz ən tu. noʊ wʌn kəd bi sɝɾən u ðoʊz sɪstɝz wɝ əɹ waɪ ðeɪ wɝ ðɛɹ, jɛt poʊkɪŋ ə noʊz ɪn wəd ʃʊɹli bi sin əz ɪntɝfɪɹɪŋ. ɪt sim stʃɹeɪnʒ ðət ðeɪ kəd bi ɛnɡeɪdʒd ɪn ə wɔɹ bɪtwin ɛɛs sədaɪ ən stɪl bi hɛl bæk fɹəm ɪntɝfɪɹɪŋ wɪð ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ baɪ kʌstəm, bʌt θæŋkfəli, ɪt wɑz soʊ.

The Greens, for example, were particularly concerned over tales of Borderland armies near New Braem, hundreds of leagues from the Blight they were supposed to be guarding. Their report talked of the Borderlanders and only the Borderlanders, as if something had to be done and done now. Not that they suggested anything, or so much as hinted, yet frustrations came through in the cramped, hasty handwriting that spidered urgently across the page. Egwene had the truth of that situation from Elayne, but she was content to let the Greens gnash their teeth for the moment, since Siuan had revealed why they were not rushing off to set matters straight. According to her agent in New Braem, the Borderlanders were accompanied by fifty or a hundred sisters, perhaps two hundred. The number of Aes Sedai might be uncertain, and it must be wildly inflated, of course, but their presence was a fact the Greens had to be aware of, though the reports they sent to Egwene never mentioned them. No Ajah had mentioned those sisters in their reports. In the end, though, there was little difference between two hundred sisters and two. No one could be certain who those sisters were or why they were there, yet poking a nose in would surely be seen as interfering. It seemed strange that they could be engaged in a war between Aes Sedai and still be held back from interfering with another sister by custom, but thankfully, it was so.

"æt lis ðeɪ doʊn sədʒɛst sɛndɪŋ ɛniwʌn tə keɪɛmlɪn." ɛɡwin blɪŋkt, ðə peɪn bɪhaɪn əɹ aɪz ʃɑɹpən baɪ fɑloʊɪŋ ðə taɪt lɛɾɝz.

"At least they don't suggest sending anyone to Caemlyn." Egwene blinked, the pain behind her eyes sharpened by following the tight letters.

sɪuən ɡeɪv ə dɝɪsɪv snɔɹt. "waɪ ʃəd ðeɪ? əz fɑɹ əz ðeɪ noʊ, ɪleɪn ɪz lɛɾɪŋ mɛɝɪlɪl ən vændin ɡaɪd hɝ, soʊ ðəɹ ʃʊɹ ðəl ɡɛt ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ kwin, ən ə ɡɹin ət ðæt. bɪsaɪdz, əz lɔŋ ði æʃəmən steɪ aʊɾ ə keɪɛmlɪn, noʊ wʌn wɑns tə teɪk ðə tʃæns ə stɝɪŋ əm ʌp. ðə weɪ θɪŋz stænd, wi maɪɾ əz wɛl tʃɹaɪ pʊlɪŋ wɑsp-dʒɛliz aʊɾ ə ðə wɔɾɝ wɪð əɹ bɛɹ hænz, ən ivən ðə ɡɹinz noʊ ɪt. ɛniweɪ, ðət woʊn stɑp səm sɪstɝ, ɡɹin əɹ ʌðɝwaɪz, fɹəm dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪndə keɪɛmlɪn.

Siuan gave a derisive snort. "Why should they? As far as they know, Elayne is letting Merilille and Vandene guide her, so they're sure they'll get their Aes Sedai queen, and a Green at that. Besides, as long the Asha'man stay out of Caemlyn, no one wants to take the chance of stirring them up. The way things stand, we might as well try pulling wasp-jellies out of the water with our bare hands, and even the Greens know it. Anyway, that won't stop some sister, Green or otherwise, from dropping into Caemlyn.

dʒʌst ə kwaɪət vɪzət tə si wʌn ə hɝ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz. əɹ tə hæv ə dʒɹɛs meɪd, əɹ baɪ ə sæɾəl, əɹ ðə laɪt noʊz waɪ ɛls."

Just a quiet visit to see one of her eyes-and-ears. Or to have a dress made, or buy a saddle, or the Light knows why else."

"ivən ðə ɡɹinz?" ɛɡwin sɛd tɑɹtli. ɛvɹiwʌn θɔɾ ə bɹaʊnz biɪŋ ðɪs weɪ ən waɪts ðæt, ivən wən ɪt wɑz dɪmɑnstʃɹəbli nɑt soʊ, jɛt səmtaɪmz ʃi bɹɪsəld ə lɪɾəl ət hɪɹɪŋ ɡɹinz lʌmp təɡɛðɝ əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ðə seɪm wʊmən. meɪbi ʃi dɪd θɪŋk ə hɝsɛlf əz ə ɡɹin, əɹ əz hævɪŋ bɪn wʌn, wɪtʃ wɑz sɪli. ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz ʌv ɔl ədʒəz ən nʌn - ʃi ədʒʌstəd ðə stoʊl ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ɹimaɪndɪŋ hɝsɛlf ə ðə fækt ɹɛpɹəzɛntəd baɪ ðoʊz sɛvən stʃɹaɪps - ən ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪlɔŋ tə wʌn ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. jɛt ʃi dɪd fil ə - nɑt fɑndnəs; ðət wɑz tu stʃɹɔŋ - ə sɛns ə seɪmnəs bɪtwin hɝsɛlf ən ɡɹin sɪstɝz. "haʊ mɛni sɪstɝz ɑɹ ʌnəkaʊntɪd fɔɹ, sɪuən? ivən ðə wikəs kən tʃɹævəl wɛɹɛvɝ ðeɪ wɑnt, lɪŋkt, ən aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu wɛɹ ðeɪ wɛnt." fəɹ ə moʊmənt, sɪuən fɹaʊn ɪn θɔt. "əbaʊt twɛnti, aɪ θɪŋk," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "meɪbi ə fju lɛs. ðə nʌmbɝ tʃeɪnʒəz deɪ tə deɪ. noʊ wʌn kips tʃɹæk, ɹɪli. noʊ sɪstɝ wəd stæn stɪl fəɹ ɪt." ʃi lin fɔɹwɝd, kɛɹfəli bælənsɪŋ hɝsɛlf ðɪs taɪm wən ði ənivən lɛɡz meɪɾ əɹ stul lɝtʃ. "juv dʒʌɡəl mæɾɝz bjuɾəfli, soʊ fɑɹ, mʌðɝ, bʌɾ ɪt kæn læst. ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ðə hɔl wɪl faɪn aʊɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðæts ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ðeɪ maɪɾ æksɛp kipɪŋ ðə sintʃæn pɹɪznɝz sikɹət - ðət wɪl bi sin əz vændinz bɪznəs, əɹ mɛɝɪlɪlz - bʌt ðeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi noʊ ðəɹ ɑɹ si foʊk ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ən ðəl lɝn əbaʊt ðə bɑɹɡən wɪð əm sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ. ən ðə kɪn, ɪf nɑt jəɹ plænz fəɹ ðɛm." sɪuən snɔɹɾɪd əɡɛn, ðoʊ feɪnli. ʃi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən haʊ ʃi hɝsɛlf fɛlt əbaʊt ði aɪdiə ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹɪtaɪɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə kɪn, mʌtʃ lɛs haʊ ʌðɝ sɪstɝz wəd teɪk tə ðə noʊʃən. "maɪ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz hævən pɪkt ʌp ə ɡlɪmɝ, jɛt, bʌt sʌmbɑɾiz wɪl, əz ʃʊɹ əz sɝɾən. jə kæn dɪleɪ mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ, əɹ wɪl faɪn aʊɝsɛlvz weɪɾɪŋ θɹu ə skul ə sɪlvɝpaɪk."

"Even the Greens?" Egwene said tartly. Everyone thought of Browns being this way and Whites that, even when it was demonstrably not so, yet sometimes she bristled a little at hearing Greens lumped together as if they were all the same woman. Maybe she did think of herself as a Green, or as having been one, which was silly. The Amyrlin was of all Ajahs and none - she adjusted the stole on her shoulders, reminding herself of the fact represented by those seven stripes - and she had never belonged to one in the first place. Yet she did feel a - not fondness; that was too strong - a sense of sameness between herself and Green sisters. "How many sisters are unaccounted for, Siuan? Even the weakest can Travel wherever they want, linked, and I wish I knew where they went." For a moment, Siuan frowned in thought. "About twenty, I think," she said finally. "Maybe a few less. The number changes day to day. No one keeps track, really. No sister would stand still for it." She leaned forward, carefully balancing herself this time when the uneven legs made her stool lurch. "You've juggled matters beautifully, so far, Mother, but it can't last. Eventually, the Hall will find out everything that's going on in Caemlyn. They might accept keeping the Seanchan prisoners secret - that will be seen as Vandene's business, or Merilille's - but they already know there are Sea Folk in Caemlyn, and they'll learn about the bargain with them sooner or later. And the Kin, if not your plans for them." Siuan snorted again, though faintly. She was not certain how she herself felt about the idea of Aes Sedai retiring into the Kin, much less how other sisters would take to the notion. "My eyes-and-ears haven't picked up a glimmer, yet, but somebody's will, as sure as certain. You can't delay much longer, or we'll find ourselves wading through a school of silverpike."

"wʌn ə ðiz deɪz," ɛɡwin mʌɾɝd, "aɪl əv tə si ðiz sɪlvɝpaɪk jəɹ ɔlweɪz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt." ʃi hɛld ʌp ə hæn əz ði ʌðɝ wʊmən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ. "wʌn deɪ. ði əɡɹimənt wɪð ðə si foʊk wɪl kɑz pɹɑbləmz," ʃi kənfɛst, "bʌt wən ði ədʒəz hɪɹ hɪns, ðeɪ woʊn ɹilaɪz ɹaɪɾ əweɪ wʌt ðəɹ hɪɹɪŋ. sɪstɝz titʃɪŋ si foʊk ɪn keɪɛmlɪn? ɪts ənhɝɾ ʌv, bʌɾ u ɪz gɑnə æsk kwɛstʃənz əɹ ɪntɝfɪɹ, əɡɛnst ɔl kʌstəm? aɪm ʃʊɹ ðəɹ wɪl bi ɔl sɔɹts ʌv ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ, meɪbi səm kwɛstʃənz kɔld ɪn ðə hɔl, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ɪt kʌmz aʊt ðət ðəɹ ɪz ə bɑɹɡən, əl əv ɪntʃɹədus maɪ plæn fəɹ ðə kɪn."

"One of these days," Egwene muttered, "I'll have to see these silverpike you're always talking about." She held up a hand as the other woman opened her mouth. "One day. The agreement with the Sea Folk will cause problems," she confessed, "but when the Ajahs hear hints, they won't realize right away what they're hearing. Sisters teaching Sea Folk in Caemlyn? It's unheard of, but who is going to ask questions or interfere, against all custom? I'm sure there will be all sorts of grumbling, maybe some questions called in the Hall, but before it comes out that there is a bargain, I will have introduced my plan for the Kin."

"ju θɪŋk ðət woʊnt ʃɑɹpən ðɛɹ tiθ?" ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl, sɪuən bɛɹli bɑðɝd tə haɪɾ əɹ ɪnkɹədulɪɾi. ɪn fækt, ʃi skaʊld wɪð ɪt.

"You think that won't sharpen their teeth?" Shifting her shawl, Siuan barely bothered to hide her incredulity. In fact, she scowled with it.

"ɪt wɪl kɑz ɑɹɡjəmənt," ɛɡwin əlaʊd dʒudɪʃɪsli. ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl ʌndɝsteɪtmənt. ɪt wəd kɑz ən ʌpɹɔɹ wɑz wʌɾ ɪt wəd du, wʌns ðə hoʊl wɑz noʊn. laɪkli əz kloʊs tə ə ɹaɪəɾ əz hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn sin əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. bʌt ðə taʊɝ hæd bɪn dwɪndəlɪŋ fəɹ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz naʊ, ɪf nɑt mɔɹ, ən ʃi plæn tə pʊɾ ən ɛn tə ðæt. "bʌɾ aɪ də ɪntɛn tə ɡoʊ sloʊli. ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ bi ɹɪlʌktən tə tɔk əbaʊɾ eɪdʒ, sɪuən, bʌt ðəl fɪɡjɝ aʊt sun ɪnʌf ðət swɛɹɪŋ ɑn ði oʊθ ɹɑd ʃɔɹɾənz əɹ laɪvz baɪ hæf ət list. noʊ wʌn wɑns tə daɪ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ mʌst." "ɪf ðəɹ kənvɪns ðəɹ ɹɪli ɪz ə kɪnswʊmən huz sɪks hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz oʊld," sɪuən sɛɾ ɪn ɡɹʌdʒɪŋ toʊnz, ən ɛɡwin saɪd wɪð vɛkseɪʃən. ðət wɑz ənʌðɝ θɪŋ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wɑz ənsɝɾən əbaʊt, ðə kɪnz kleɪmz ə lɔndʒɛvəɾi. ʃi væljud sɪuənz ædvaɪs, væljud ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt dʒʌst seɪ wʌɾ ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə hɪɹ, bʌɾ ət taɪmz ðə wʊmən sim tə dʒɹæɡ hɝ hilz əz hɑɹɾ əz ɹoʊmændə əɹ ləleɪn.

"It will cause argument," Egwene allowed judiciously. A considerable understatement. It would cause an uproar was what it would do, once the whole was known. Likely as close to a riot as had ever been seen among Aes Sedai. But the Tower had been dwindling for a thousand years now, if not more, and she planned to put an end to that. "But I do intend to go slowly. Aes Sedai may be reluctant to talk about age, Siuan, but they'll figure out soon enough that swearing on the Oath Rod shortens our lives by half at least. No one wants to die before they must." "If they're convinced there really is a Kinswoman who's six hundred years old," Siuan said in grudging tones, and Egwene sighed with vexation. That was another thing the other woman was uncertain about, the Kin's claims of longevity. She valued Siuan's advice, valued that she did not just say what Egwene wanted to hear, but at times the woman seemed to drag her heels as hard as Romanda or Lelaine.

"ɪf nid bi, sɪuən," ʃi sɛɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli, "aɪl dʒʌs lɛt ðə sɪstɝz tɔk tə ə fju wɪmən ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɹ mɔɹ oʊldɝ ðən ɛni ʌv ðɛm. ðeɪ meɪ tʃɹaɪ tə dɪsmɪs əm əz waɪldɝz ən laɪɝz, bʌt ɹin kɔɹli kən pɹuv ʃi wɑz ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ən wɛn. soʊ kən ʌðɝz. wɪð lʌk, əl kənvɪns ðə sɪstɝz tə æksɛp biɪŋ fɹiɾ ə ðə θɹi oʊðz soʊ ðeɪ kən ɹɪtaɪɹ ɪndə ðə kɪn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɛvɝ lɝn ðɛɹz ə bɑɹɡən wɪð ði æθɑn maɪɹ. ən wʌns ðeɪ æksɛpt ɛni sɪstɝ biɪŋ fɹiɾ ə ði oʊðz, ɪt woʊn bi nɪɹli əz hɑɹd tə kənvɪns əm tə lɛt ðə si foʊk sɪstɝz ɡoʊ. bɪsaɪd ðæt, ðə ɹɛst ə ðəɾ əɡɹimən ɪz smɔl tɝnəps. əz jə kip seɪɪŋ, skɪl ən ə dɛf hæn ɑɹ nɛsəsɛɹi tə ɡɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ dʌn ɪn ðə hɔl, bʌt lʌk ɪz æbsəlutli ɹikwaɪɝd. wɛl, əl bi əz skɪlfəl ən dɛft əz aɪ kən bi, ən əz fəɹ lʌk, ði ɑdz sim tə bi ɪn maɪ feɪvɝ fəɹ wʌns." sɪuən ɡɹɪməst ən hɛmd ən hɔd, bʌt ʃi hæd tə əɡɹi ɪn ði ɛnd. ʃi ivən əɡɹid ðəɾ ɛɡwin maɪt pʊl ɪɾ ɔf, wɪð lʌk, ən taɪmɪŋ. nɑt ðət ʃi wɑz kənvɪnst əbaʊt ðə kɪn əɹ ði əɡɹimənt wɪð ði æθɑn maɪɹ iðɝ wʌn, bʌt wʌɾ ɛɡwin pɹəpoʊzd wɑz soʊ ənpɹɛsɪdɛntɪd ðəɾ ɪt sim ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt maɪt pæs ðə hɔl bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹilaɪzd wʌt wɑz fɔlɪŋ ɑn ðɛm. ɛɡwin wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə sɛɾəl fəɹ ðæt. wʌtɛvɝ wɑz leɪd bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl, ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz ɪnʌf sɪɾɝz stʊɾ ɪn ɑpəzɪʃən tə meɪk faɪndɪŋ ə kənsɛnsəs hɑɹd wɝk ət bɛst, ən nʌθɪŋ wɑz dʌn ɪn ðə hɔl wɪθaʊɾ ət lis ðə lɛsɝ kənsɛnsəs ən juʒəwəli nɑt wɪθaʊt ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ. ɪt sim tə hɝ ðət moʊs dilɪŋz wɪð ðə hɔl kənsɪstəɾ ə kənvɪnsɪŋ əm tə də wʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt wɑn tə. ðəɹ wɑz sɝɾənli noʊ ɹizən fəɹ ðɪs tə bi ɛni dɪfɹənt. waɪl ðə ɡɹinz kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz, ðə ɡɹeɪz foʊkəst saʊθ ət pɹizɛnt. ɛvɹi ədʒɑ wɑz fæsəneɪɾəd baɪ ðə ɹɪpɔɹts fɹəm ɪljən ən tiɹ ə lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝz ʌv waɪldɝz əmʌŋ ðə si foʊk, wɪtʃ ðeɪ faʊn ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ, ɪf tʃɹu, ðoʊ ðəɹ sim stʃɹɔŋ daʊt ðəɾ ɪt kəd bi tʃɹu, əɹ ɛls sɪstɝz wʊɾə noʊn əbaʊɾ ɪt bɪfɔɹ ðɪs. æftɝ ɔl, haʊ kəd sətʃ ə θɪŋ bi hɪɾən? noʊ wʌn mɛnʃən ðət ðeɪ hæd dʒʌst æksɛptɪd wʌt ðeɪ sɔ ɑn ðə sɝfəs ən nɛvɝ lʊk dipɝ. ðə ɡɹeɪz, ðoʊ, wɝ fæsəneɪɾəd baɪ ðə kəntɪnjud sintʃæn θɹɛt tə ɪljən ən ðə ɹisənli bɪɡʌn sidʒ ə ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ. wɔɹz ən θɹɛts ʌv wɔɹ ɔlweɪz mɛzmɝaɪzd ɡɹeɪz, sɪns ðeɪ wɝ dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə ɛndɪŋ stʃɹaɪf. ən tə ɪkstɛndɪŋ ðɛɹ ɪnfluəns, ʌv kɔɹs; ɛvɹi taɪm ðə ɡɹeɪz stɑpt ə wɔɹ wɪð ə tʃɹiɾi, ðeɪ ɪnkɹis ði ɪnfluəns ʌv ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ ʌv ɡɹeɪz moʊst ʌv ɔl. ðə sintʃæn sim bɪɑnd nɪɡoʊʃieɪʃən, haʊɛvɝ, ət lis baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðə ɡɹeɪz' aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ sɛns ə biɪŋ θwɔɹɾəd keɪm θɹu ɪn kɝt wɝdz əbaʊt sintʃæn ɪnkɝʒənz əkɹɔs ðə bɔɹɾɝ ən ði ɪnkɹisɪŋ fɔɹsɪz biɪŋ ɡæðɝd baɪ lɔɹd ɡɹɛɡɹɪn, ðə stuɝɾ ɪn ɪljən fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ə taɪɾəl ðət wɑz ə mæɾɝ ə səm kənsɝn ɪn ɪtsɛlf. tiɹ hæɾ ɪts oʊn stuɝd fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ðə haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪn sɪsnɛɹə, ən i wɑz bɪsidʒd ɪn ðə stoʊn baɪ noʊbəlz u ɹəfjuz tə æksɛpt ɹænd. ɪt wɑz ə vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ sidʒ. ðə stoʊn hæɾ ɪts oʊn dɑks ən dɑɹlɪnz ɛnəmiz kəd nɑt kʌɾ ɔf səplaɪz ivən hoʊldɪŋ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə sɪɾi əz ðeɪ dɪd, ən ðeɪ sim kɑntɛn tə sɪɾ ən weɪɾ ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt. əɹ pɝhæps ðeɪ dʒʌs kəd nɑt si wʌt tə də nɛkst. oʊnli ði il hæɾ ɛvɝ teɪkən ðə stoʊn baɪ əsɔlt, ən noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ stɑɹvd ɪɾ aʊt. ðə ɡɹeɪz hæd səm hoʊps ɪn tiɹ.

"If need be, Siuan," she said irritably, "I'll just let the sisters talk to a few women a hundred years or more older than any of them. They may try to dismiss them as wilders and liars, but Reanne Corly can prove she was in the Tower, and when. So can others. With luck, I'll convince the sisters to accept being freed of the Three Oaths so they can retire into the Kin before they ever learn there's a bargain with the Atha'an Miere. And once they accept any sister being freed of the Oaths, it won't be nearly as hard to convince them to let the Sea Folk sisters go. Beside that, the rest of that agreement is small turnips. As you keep saying, skill and a deft hand are necessary to get anything done in the Hall, but luck is absolutely required. Well, I'll be as skillful and deft as I can be, and as for luck, the odds seem to be in my favor for once." Siuan grimaced and hemmed and hawed, but she had to agree in the end. She even agreed that Egwene might pull it off, with luck, and timing. Not that she was convinced about the Kin or the agreement with the Atha'an Miere either one, but what Egwene proposed was so unprecedented that it seemed the greater part of it might pass the Hall before they realized what was falling on them. Egwene was willing to settle for that. Whatever was laid before the Hall, almost always enough Sitters stood in opposition to make finding a consensus hard work at best, and nothing was done in the Hall without at least the lesser consensus and usually not without the greater. It seemed to her that most dealings with the Hall consisted of convincing them to do what they did not want to. There was certainly no reason for this to be any different. While the Greens concentrated on the Borderlanders, the Grays focused south at present. Every Ajah was fascinated by the reports from Illian and Tear of large numbers of wilders among the Sea Folk, which they found interesting, if true, though there seemed strong doubt that it could be true, or else sisters would have known about it before this. After all, how could such a thing be hidden? No one mentioned that they had just accepted what they saw on the surface and never looked deeper. The Grays, though, were fascinated by the continued Seanchan threat to Illian and the recently begun siege of the Stone of Tear. Wars and threats of war always mesmerized Grays, since they were dedicated to ending strife. And to extending their influence, of course; every time the Grays stopped a war with a treaty, they increased the influence of all Aes Sedai, but of Grays most of all. The Seanchan seemed beyond negotiation, however, at least by Aes Sedai, and the Grays' outraged sense of being thwarted came through in curt words about Seanchan incursions across the border and the increasing forces being gathered by Lord Gregorin, the Steward in Illian for the Dragon Reborn, a title that was a matter of some concern in itself. Tear had its own Steward for the Dragon Reborn, the High Lord Darlin Sisnera, and he was besieged in the Stone by nobles who refused to accept Rand. It was a very strange siege. The Stone had its own docks and Darlin's enemies could not cut off supplies even holding the rest of the city as they did, and they seemed content to sit and wait in any event. Or perhaps they just could not see what to do next. Only the Aiel had ever taken the Stone by assault, and no one had ever starved it out. The Grays had some hopes in Tear.

ɛɡwinz hɛd keɪm ʌp əz ʃi ɹɛd tə ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə peɪdʒ, ən ʃi hɝidli sɛt ðət peɪdʒ daʊn ən pɪkt ʌp ðə nɛkst. ðə ɡɹeɪz hæd hæd səm hoʊps. əpɛɹənli, ə ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝ hæd bɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə stoʊn, ən fɑloʊd tə ə miɾɪŋ wɪð haɪ lɔɹd tidoʊzɪn ən haɪ leɪɾi ɪstændə, tu ʌv ðə moʊs pɹɑmənən əmʌŋ ðə bɪsiɡɝz. "mɛɹænə," ʃi bɹiðd. "ðeɪ seɪ ɪt wɑz mɛɹænə æmbɹi, sɪuən." ʌnkɑnʃəsli, ʃi məsɑʒd əɹ tɛmpəl. ðə peɪn bɪhaɪn əɹ aɪz hæd ɹætʃəɾɪd ə lɪɾəl haɪɝ. "ʃi meɪ də səm ɡʊd." ɹaɪzɪŋ, sɪuən kɹɔs ðə kɑɹpəts tə ə smɔl teɪbəl əɡɛns ðə tɛnt wɔl, wɛɹ sɛvɹəl mɪsmætʃt kʌps ən tu pɪtʃɝz sæɾ ɑn ə tʃɹeɪ. ðə sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ hɛl spaɪst waɪn, ðə blu-ɡleɪz pɑɾɝi ti, boʊθ sɛt ðəɹ ət fɝs laɪɾ əɡɛns ði æmɪɝlɪnz ɝaɪvəl ən boʊθ lɔŋ sɪns ɡɔn koʊld. noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛɡwin tə ɡoʊ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɔf tə ðə ɹɪvɝ. "æz lɔŋ əz tidoʊzɪn ən ði ʌðɝz doʊn ɹilaɪz u ʃiz ɹɪli wɝkɪŋ fɔɹ." sɪuənz ʃɔl slɪpt ɔf wʌn ʃoʊldɝ əz ʃi fɛl ðə saɪɾ ə ðə pɑɾɝi pɪtʃɝ, ən ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəɾ əɹ bɹifli əz ʃi tʃænəl faɪɝ, wɔɹmɪŋ ðə kɑntɛns. "ðeɪ woʊn tʃɹʌst əɹ tə nəɡoʊʃieɪɾ ɪn ɡʊd feɪθ ɪf ðeɪ faɪn aʊt ʃiz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹnz kɹitʃɝ." fɪlɪŋ ə pɑlɪʃt pjuɾɝ kʌp wɪð ti, ʃi æɾəd dʒɛnɝəs dɑləps fɹəm ðə hʌni dʒɑɹ, stɝɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn wɛl, ən bɹɔt ðə kʌp bæk tə ɛɡwin. "ðɪs maɪt hɛlp jəɹ hɛd.

Egwene's head came up as she read to the bottom of the page, and she hurriedly set that page down and picked up the next. The Grays had had some hopes. Apparently, a Gray sister had been recognized coming out of the Stone, and followed to a meeting with High Lord Tedosian and High Lady Estanda, two of the most prominent among the besiegers. "Merana," she breathed. "They say it was Merana Ambrey, Siuan." Unconsciously, she massaged her temple. The pain behind her eyes had ratcheted a little higher. "She may do some good." Rising, Siuan crossed the carpets to a small table against the tent wall, where several mismatched cups and two pitchers sat on a tray. The silver pitcher held spiced wine, the blue-glazed pottery tea, both set there at first light against the Amyrlin's arrival and both long since gone cold. No one had expected Egwene to go riding off to the river. "As long as Tedosian and the others don't realize who she's really working for." Siuan's shawl slipped off one shoulder as she felt the side of the pottery pitcher, and the light of saidar surrounded her briefly as she channeled Fire, warming the contents. "They won't trust her to negotiate in good faith if they find out she's the Dragon Reborn's creature." Filling a polished pewter cup with tea, she added generous dollops from the honey jar, stirring it in well, and brought the cup back to Egwene. "This might help your head.

ɪts səm sɔɹɾ ə ɝb kənkɑkʃən tʃɛsə faʊnd, bʌt hʌni kʌts ðə teɪst." ɛɡwin tʊk ə kɔʃəs sɪp, ən sɛt ðə kʌp daʊn wɪð ə ʃʌɾɝ. ɪf ɪt teɪstəd ðət ʃɑɹp wɪð hʌni, ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɪmædʒən ɪt wɪθaʊt. ðə hɛdeɪk maɪt bi bɛɾɝ. "haʊ kən jə teɪk ðɪs soʊ kɑmli, sɪuən? mɛɹænə tɝnɪŋ ʌp ɪn tiɹ ɪz ðə fɝst ɹil pɹuf wiv hæd. əl teɪk jəɹ sɪɾɝz əz koʊɪnsɪɾəns bɪfɔɹ ðæt." ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, ðəɹ hæɾ oʊnli bɪn wɪspɝz, fɹəm ði ədʒəz əɹ fɹəm sɪuənz aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz. ðəɹ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn kɛɹhin, ən ðeɪ sim tə muv fɹili ɪn ən aʊɾ ə ðə sʌn pæləs waɪl ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑz ðɛɹ. ðən ðə wɪspɝz ɡɹu hɔɹs ən ənizi, hɛzɪɾənt. ði aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ɪn kɛɹhin dɪd nɑt wɑnə seɪ ɪt. noʊ wʌn wɑntəd tə ɹɪpit wʌt ðɛɹ eɪdʒəns sɛd. ðəɹ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn kɛɹhin, ən ðeɪ sim tə bi fɑloʊɪŋ ði ɔɹɾɝz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. wɝs wɝ ðə neɪmz ðət tʃɹɪkəld aʊt. səm wɝ wɪmən u hæd bɪn ɪn sɑlədɑɹ, əmʌŋ ðə fɝs tə ɹɪzɪst ɪleɪɾə, waɪl ʌðɝz wɝ wɪmən noʊn tə bi lɔɪəl tə ɪleɪɾə. noʊ wʌn hæd mɛnʃən kəmpʌlʃən əlaʊd ðəɾ ɛɡwin nu ʌv, bʌt ðeɪ hæd tə bi θɪŋkɪŋ ɪt.

It's some sort of herb concoction Chesa found, but honey cuts the taste." Egwene took a cautious sip, and set the cup down with a shudder. If it tasted that sharp with honey, she did not want to imagine it without. The headache might be better. "How can you take this so calmly, Siuan? Merana turning up in Tear is the first real proof we've had. I'll take your Sitters as coincidence before that." In the beginning, there had only been whispers, from the Ajahs or from Siuan's eyes-and-ears. There were Aes Sedai in Cairhien, and they seemed to move freely in and out of the Sun Palace while the Dragon Reborn was there. Then the whispers grew hoarse and uneasy, hesitant. The eyes-and-ears in Cairhien did not want to say it. No one wanted to repeat what their agents said. There were Aes Sedai in Cairhien, and they seemed to be following the orders of the Dragon Reborn. Worse were the names that trickled out. Some were women who had been in Salidar, among the first to resist Elaida, while others were women known to be loyal to Elaida. No one had mentioned Compulsion aloud that Egwene knew of, but they had to be thinking it.

"noʊ jus pʊlɪŋ jəɹ hɛɹ wən ðə wɪn ɪzən bloʊɪŋ ðə weɪ jə wɑnt," sɪuən ɹɪplaɪd, teɪkɪŋ əɹ stul əɡɛn. ʃi stɑɹɾəd tə kɹɔs əɹ niz, bʌt heɪstəli pʊt boʊθ fit bæk ɑn ðə kɑɹpət wən əɹ stul tɪltəd. mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, ʃi ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ʃɔl wɪð ə twɪtʃ ə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz. ən wɑz fɔɹs tə bæləns əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ lɝtʃ. "ju hæv tə tʃɹɪm jəɹ seɪlz tə teɪk ædvæntɪdʒ ə haʊ ðə wɪn ɪz bloʊɪŋ. θɪŋk kuli, ən jə meɪk ɪt bæk tə ʃɔɹ. ɡɛt jəɹ nɛk hɑt, ən jəl dʒɹaʊn." səmtaɪmz, sɪuən kəd saʊn əz ɪf ʃi stɪl wɝkt ə fɪʃɪŋ boʊt. "aɪ bɪliv jə nid mɔɹ ðən wʌn sɪp fəɹ ðət tə də ɛni ɡʊd, mʌðɝ."

"No use pulling your hair when the wind isn't blowing the way you want," Siuan replied, taking her stool again. She started to cross her knees, but hastily put both feet back on the carpet when her stool tilted. Muttering under her breath, she adjusted her shawl with a twitch of her shoulders. And was forced to balance against another lurch. "You have to trim your sails to take advantage of how the wind is blowing. Think coolly, and you make it back to shore. Get your neck hot, and you'll drown." Sometimes, Siuan could sound as if she still worked a fishing boat. "I believe you need more than one sip for that to do any good, Mother."

wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs, ɛɡwin pʊʃt ðə kʌp ə lɪɾəl fɑɹðɝ fɹəm hɝ. ðə teɪs klɪŋɪŋ tə hɝ tʌŋ wɑz ət list əz bæɾ əz əɹ hɛdeɪk. "sɪuən, ɪf jə si ə weɪ tə meɪk jus ə ðɪs, aɪ wɪʃ jud tɛl mi. aɪ doʊn ivən wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt juzɪŋ ðə fæk ðət ɹænd meɪ hæv kəmpɛl sɪstɝz. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðəɾ i kəd hæv." niðɝ əbaʊt ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðəɾ i nu sətʃ ə ɹipʌlsɪv wiv, əɹ ðəɾ i kəd leɪ ðət wiv ɑn ɛniwʌn. ʃi nu ɪt - ənʌðɝ lɪɾəl ɡɪft fɹəm mɑɡiɾin - ən ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ wɪʃt ʃi kəd fɝɡɛt haʊ tə meɪk ɪt. "ɪn ðɪs keɪs, ɪɾ ɪzən soʊ mʌtʃ ə mæɾɝ ə juzɪŋ əz fɪɡjɝɪŋ aʊt ði ɪfɛks. hɪl əv tə bi dɛlt wɪð ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ən meɪbi tɔɾ ə lɛsən, bʌt jə doʊnt wɑn sɪstɝz flaɪɪŋ ɔf æftɝ ɪm naʊ, ən ðiz teɪlz aʊɾ ə kɛɹhin meɪk ɛvɹiwʌn kɔʃəs." sɪuənz vɔɪs wɑz kɑm ɪnʌf, bʌt ʃi fɪdʒəɾɪd, klɪɹli ædʒəteɪɾəd ɪnwɝdli. ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd spik ə tu kɑmli. "æt ðə seɪm taɪm, wʌns ɛvɹiwʌn θɪŋks ɪt θɹu, ðəl ɹilaɪz ðɪs meɪks nɑnsɛns aʊɾ ə ðoʊz stɔɹiz əbaʊɾ ɪm səbmɪɾɪŋ tə ɪleɪɾə. ʃi maɪɾ əv sɛn sɪstɝz tə wɑtʃ oʊvɝ hɪm, bʌt ðeɪ wʊdn æksɛp sɪstɝz u wɑnə pʊl ɪleɪɾə daʊn. ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðət wɪl pʊɾ ə lɪɾəl bækboʊn ɪn ðoʊz huv stɑɹɾəd θɪŋkɪŋ meɪbi ɪleɪɾə hæz ɪm ɑn ə lɛd. ðæts wʌn lɛs ɹizən fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə kənsɪɾɝ jildɪŋ tə hɝ."

With a grimace, Egwene pushed the cup a little farther from her. The taste clinging to her tongue was at least as bad as her headache. "Siuan, if you see a way to make use of this, I wish you'd tell me. I don't even want to think about using the fact that Rand may have Compelled sisters. I don't want to think about the possibility that he could have." Neither about the possibility that he knew such a repulsive weave, or that he could lay that weave on anyone. She knew it - another little gift from Moghedien - and she very much wished she could forget how to make it. "In this case, it isn't so much a matter of using as figuring out the effects. He'll have to be dealt with eventually, and maybe taught a lesson, but you don't want sisters flying off after him now, and these tales out of Cairhien make everyone cautious." Siuan's voice was calm enough, but she fidgeted, clearly agitated inwardly. It was nothing any Aes Sedai could speak of too calmly. "At the same time, once everyone thinks it through, they'll realize this makes nonsense out of those stories about him submitting to Elaida. She might have sent sisters to watch over him, but they wouldn't accept sisters who want to pull Elaida down. Realizing that will put a little backbone in those who've started thinking maybe Elaida has him on a lead. That's one less reason for anyone to consider yielding to her."

"wʌɾ əbaʊt kædzueɪn?" ɛɡwin sɛd. ʌv ɔl ðə neɪmz kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə kɛɹhin, ðət wʌn hæd sɛn ðə moʊst ʃɑk θɹu ðə sɪstɝz. kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn wɑz ə lɛdʒənd, ən ðəɹ wɝ əz mɛni dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ vɝʒənz ə ðə lɛdʒən əz əpɹuvɪŋ. səm sɪstɝz hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ɪt mʌs bi ə mɪsteɪk; kædzueɪn mʌs bi dɛd baɪ naʊ.

"What about Cadsuane?" Egwene said. Of all the names coming out of Cairhien, that one had sent the most shock through the sisters. Cadsuane Melaidhrin was a legend, and there were as many disapproving versions of the legend as approving. Some sisters had been sure it must be a mistake; Cadsuane must be dead by now.

ʌðɝz dʒʌst əpɪɹd tə wɪʃ ʃi wɝ dɛd. "ɑɹ jə sɝɾən ʃi ɹɪmeɪn ɪn kɛɹhin æftɝ ɹænd dɪsəpɪɹd?" "aɪ meɪd ʃʊɹ maɪ pipəl kɛpt ən aɪ ɑn əɹ əz sun əz aɪ hɝɾ əɹ neɪm," sɪuən sɛd, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ saʊndɪŋ əɾ ɔl kɑm. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ ʃiz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, aɪ dʒʌst səspɛkt, bʌɾ aɪ kən ɡɛɹənti ðət ʃi wɑz ɪn ðə sʌn pæləs ə wik æftɝ i vænɪʃt." skwizɪŋ əɹ aɪz ʃʌt, ɛɡwin pɹɛs ðə hilz ə hɝ pɑmz əɡɛnst əɹ lɪdz. ðət hɑɹdli sim tə əfɛk ðə pʌlsɪŋ niɾəl ɪn əɹ hɛd. meɪbi ɹænd wɑz ɪn kʌmpəni wɪð ə blæk sɪstɝ, əɹ hæd bɪn. meɪbi hi hæd juz kəmpʌlʃən ɑn ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Others just appeared to wish she were dead. "Are you certain she remained in Cairhien after Rand disappeared?" "I made sure my people kept an eye on her as soon as I heard her name," Siuan said, no longer sounding at all calm. "I don't know she's a Darkfriend, I just suspect, but I can guarantee that she was in the Sun Palace a week after he vanished." Squeezing her eyes shut, Egwene pressed the heels of her palms against her lids. That hardly seemed to affect the pulsing needle in her head. Maybe Rand was in company with a Black sister, or had been. Maybe he had used Compulsion on Aes Sedai.

bæɾ ɪnʌf ɑn ɛniwʌn, bʌt sʌmhaʊ wɝs juzd ɑn ɛɛs sədaɪ, mɔɹ ɑmənəs. wʌt wɑz dɛɹɾ əɡɛnst ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz tɛn taɪmz, ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz, əz laɪkli tə bi juzd əɡɛns ðoʊz u kəd nɑt dɪfɛn ðɛmsɛlvz. ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðeɪ wəɾ əv tə dil wɪð hɪm, sʌmhaʊ. ʃi hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp wɪð ɹænd, jɛt ʃi kəd nɑɾ əlaʊ ðət tə ɪnfluəns hɝ. hi wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, naʊ, ðə hoʊp ə ðə wɝld ən ət ðə seɪm taɪm meɪbi ðə sɪŋɡəl ɡɹeɪɾəst θɹɛt ðə wɝl feɪst. meɪbi? ðə sintʃæn kəd nɑt də əz mʌtʃ dæmədʒ əz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ən ʃi wɑz gɑnə juz ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðəɾ i hæd kəmpɛl sɪstɝz. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit ɹɪli wɑz ə dɪfɹənt wʊmən fɹəm ðəɾ ɪnkipɝz dɔɾɝ.

Bad enough on anyone, but somehow worse used on Aes Sedai, more ominous. What was dared against Aes Sedai was ten times, a hundred times, as likely to be used against those who could not defend themselves. Eventually they would have to deal with him, somehow. She had grown up with Rand, yet she could not allow that to influence her. He was the Dragon Reborn, now, the hope of the world and at the same time maybe the single greatest threat the world faced. Maybe? The Seanchan could not do as much damage as the Dragon Reborn. And she was going to use the possibility that he had Compelled sisters. The Amyrlin Seat really was a different woman from that innkeeper's daughter.

skaʊlɪŋ ət ðə pjuɾɝ kʌp ə soʊ-kɔl ti, ʃi pɪkt ɪɾ ʌp ən meɪd hɝsɛlf dʒɹɪŋk ðə vaɪl stʌf daʊn, ɡæɡɪŋ ən spləɾɝɪŋ ðə hoʊl weɪ. pɝhæps ðə teɪst wəd teɪk əɹ maɪn ɔf əɹ hɛdeɪk, ət list.

Scowling at the pewter cup of so-called tea, she picked it up and made herself drink the vile stuff down, gagging and spluttering the whole way. Perhaps the taste would take her mind off her headache, at least.

əz ʃi sɛt ðə kʌp daʊn wɪð ə ʃɑɹp klɪŋk ə mɛɾəl ɑn wʊd, æneɪjə pʊʃt ɪndə ðə tɛnt, maʊθ tɝn daʊn ən ə fɹaʊn kɹisɪŋ əɹ pleɪn feɪs.

As she set the cup down with a sharp clink of metal on wood, Anaiya pushed into the tent, mouth turned down and a frown creasing her plain face.

"ækæɹən ən ði ʌðɝz əv ɹɪtɝnd, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd. "mɔɹiə toʊl mi tə ɪnfɔɹm jə ʃiz kɔl ðə hɔl tə hɪɹ ðɛɹ ɹipɔɹt."

"Akarrin and the others have returned, Mother," she said. "Moria told me to inform you she has called the Hall to hear their report."

"soʊ hæv ɛskɹɑldi ən mɑlɪnd," mɔɹvɹɪn ənaʊnst, kʌmɪŋ ɪn bɪhaɪn æneɪjə wɪð maɪɹɛl.

"So have Escaralde and Malind," Morvrin announced, coming in behind Anaiya with Myrelle.

ðə ɡɹin simd ən ɪmədʒ ə sɝin fjʊɹi, ɪf ðət wɑz pɑsəbəl, hɝ ɑləv feɪs smuð ən əɹ aɪz laɪk dɑɹk ɛmbɝz, bʌt mɔɹvɹɪn wɔɹ ə skaʊl tə meɪk æneɪjə lʊk plizd. "ðeɪɹ sɛndɪŋ nɑvəsɪz ən æksɛptɪd ɹʌnɪŋ tə faɪn ɔl ðə sɪɾɝz," ðə bɹaʊn sɛd. "wi kæn kætʃ ə wɪspɝ ʌv wʌɾ ækæɹən faʊnd, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ɛskɹɑldi ən ði ʌðɝz ɪntɛn tə juz ɪt tə pɹɑd ðə hɔl təwɔɹd sʌmθɪŋ." piɹɪŋ ət ðə dɑɹk dʒɹɛɡz floʊɾɪŋ ɪn ə fju dʒɹɑps ɪn ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə pjuɾɝ kʌp, ɛɡwin saɪd.

The Green seemed an image of serene fury, if that was possible, her olive face smooth and her eyes like dark embers, but Morvrin wore a scowl to make Anaiya look pleased. "They're sending novices and Accepted running to find all the Sitters," the Brown said. "We can't catch a whisper of what Akarrin found, but I think Escaralde and the others intend to use it to prod the Hall toward something." Peering at the dark dregs floating in a few drops in the bottom of the pewter cup, Egwene sighed.

ʃi wəɾ əv tə bi ðɛɹ, tu, ən naʊ ʃi wəɾ əv tə feɪs ðə sɪɾɝz wɪð ə hɛdeɪk ən ðəɾ ɑfəl teɪst ɪn əɹ maʊθ. pɝhæps ʃi kəd kɔl ɪɾ ə pɛnəns fəɹ wʌt ʃi wɑz gɑnə də tə ðə hɔl.

She would have to be there, too, and now she would have to face the Sitters with a headache and that awful taste in her mouth. Perhaps she could call it a penance for what she was going to do to the Hall.

tʃæptɝ naɪntin

CHAPTER 19

sɝpɹaɪzəz baɪ kʌstəm, ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz ɪnfɔɹmd ə ðə hɔl sɪɾɪŋ, jɛt nʌθɪŋ sɛd ðeɪ hæd tə weɪt fəɹ əɹ bɪfɔɹ stɑɹɾɪŋ ðə sɛʃən, wɪtʃ mɛn ðət taɪm maɪt bi ʃɔɹt. ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə lip tə hɝ fiɾ ən mɑɹtʃ stʃɹeɪt tə ðə bɪɡ pəvɪljən bɪfɔɹ mɔɹiə ən ði ʌðɝ tu kəd spɹɪŋ wʌtɛvɝ sɝpɹaɪz ðeɪ ɪntɛndəd. sɝpɹaɪzəz ɪn ðə hɔl wɝ sɛldəm ɡʊd. sɝpɹaɪzəz jə lɝn əbaʊt leɪt wɝ wɝs.

Surprises By custom, the Amyrlin was informed of the Hall sitting, yet nothing said they had to wait for her before starting the session, which meant that time might be short. Egwene wanted to leap to her feet and march straight to the big pavilion before Moria and the other two could spring whatever surprise they intended. Surprises in the Hall were seldom good. Surprises you learned about late were worse.

stɪl, pɹoʊɾəkɔlz ðət wɝ lɔ, nɑt kʌstəm, hæd tə bi fɑloʊd fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn ɛntɝɪŋ ðə hɔl, soʊ ʃi ɹɪmeɪnd wɛɹ ʃi wɑz ən sɛn sɪuən tə fɛtʃ ʃi-ɹiəm soʊ ʃi kəd bi ənaʊns pɹɑpɝli baɪ ðə kipɝ ə ðə kɹɑnəkəlz. sɪuən hæd toʊld əɹ ðət wɑz ɹɪli ə mæɾɝ ʌv wɔɹnɪŋ ðə sɪɾɝz ə hɝ pɹɛzəns - ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz mæɾɝz ðeɪ maɪt wɑnə dɪskʌs wɪθaʊt ði æmɪɝlɪn noʊɪŋ - ən ʃi hæd nɑt saʊndəɾ ɪntaɪɝli əz ɪf ʃi wɝ meɪkɪŋ ə dʒoʊk.

Still, protocols that were law, not custom, had to be followed for the Amyrlin entering the Hall, so she remained where she was and sent Siuan to fetch She-riam so she could be announced properly by the Keeper of the Chronicles. Siuan had told her that was really a matter of warning the Sitters of her presence - there were always matters they might want to discuss without the Amyrlin knowing - and she had not sounded entirely as if she were making a joke.

ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə hɔl əntɪl ʃi kəɾ ɛntɝ. tæmpɪŋ daʊn əɹ ɪmpeɪʃəns, ʃi pɹɑpt əɹ hɛɾ ɑn əɹ hænz ən məsɑʒd əɹ tɛmpəlz əz ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹiɾ ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ə ði ədʒɑ ɹɪpɔɹts. dɪspaɪt ðə vaɪl "ti," əɹ pɝhæps kəz ʌv ɪt, hɝ hɛdeɪk meɪd ðə wɝdz ʃɪmɝ ɑn ðə peɪdʒ ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi blɪŋkt, ən æneɪjə ən ði ʌðɝ tu dɪd nɑt hɛlp. noʊ sunɝ dɪd sɪuən dɪpɑɹt ðən æneɪjə tɔs bæk əɹ kloʊk, sɛɾəlɪŋ ɑn ðə stul sɪuən hæd veɪkeɪɾəd - ɪt dɪd nɑt sim tə lɝtʃ ʌndɝ hɝ, ənivən lɛɡz əɹ noʊ - ən bɪɡæn tə spɛkjəleɪɾ ɑn wʌt mɔɹiə ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ æftɝ.

In any case, there was no point in going to the Hall until she could enter. Tamping down her impatience, she propped her head on her hands and massaged her temples as she tried to read a little more of the Ajah reports. Despite the vile "tea," or perhaps because of it, her headache made the words shimmer on the page every time she blinked, and Anaiya and the other two did not help. No sooner did Siuan depart than Anaiya tossed back her cloak, settling on the stool Siuan had vacated - it did not seem to lurch under her, uneven legs or no - and began to speculate on what Moria and the others were after.

ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ə flaɪɾi wʊmən, soʊ hɝ vɛntʃɝz wɝ kwaɪt kənstʃɹeɪnd ɡɪvən ðə sɝkəmstænsəz.

She was not a flighty woman, so her ventures were quite constrained given the circumstances.

kənstʃɹeɪnd, bʌt noʊ lɛs əpsɛɾɪŋ fəɹ ðæt.

Constrained, but no less upsetting for that.

"fɹaɪɾənd pipəl də sɪli θɪŋz, mʌðɝ, ivən ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃi mɝmɝd, pleɪsɪŋ əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ niz, "bʌɾ ət lis jə kən bi ʃʊɹ mɔɹiə wɪl bi fɝm əbaʊɾ ɪleɪɾə, ət list ɪn ðə lɔŋ ɹʌn. ʃi leɪz ɛvɹi sɪstɝ u daɪɾ æftɝ sɪuən wɑz dɪpoʊzd ɹaɪɾ əɾ ɪleɪɾəz fit. mɔɹiə wɑns ɪleɪɾə bɝtʃt fəɹ ɛvɹi sɪŋɡəl dɛθ bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɡoʊz tə ðə hɛdzmən. ə hɑɹd wʊmən, hɑɹɾɝ ðən ləleɪn ɪn səm weɪz.

"Frightened people do silly things, Mother, even Aes Sedai," she murmured, placing her hands on her knees, "but at least you can be sure Moria will be firm about Elaida, at least in the long run. She lays every sister who died after Siuan was deposed right at Elaida's feet. Moria wants Elaida birched for every single death before she goes to the headsman. A hard woman, harder than Lelaine in some ways.

tʌfɝ, ɛniweɪ. ʃi woʊn skɹupəl ət θɪŋz ðət maɪt meɪk ləleɪn bɔk. aɪm vɛɹi mʌtʃ əfɹeɪd ʃɪl pɹɛs fəɹ ən əsɔlt ɑn ðə sɪɾi əz sun əz pɑsəbəl. ɪf ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ muvɪŋ soʊ oʊpənli, ɑn sətʃ ə skeɪl, ðən bɛɾɝ ə wundəd taʊɝ ðæts hoʊl ðən ə taʊɝ dɪvaɪɾəd. ət list, aɪ fɪɹ ðæts haʊ mɔɹiə meɪ si θɪŋz. æftɝ ɔl, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ wi wɑnə əvɔɪd sɪstɝz kɪlɪŋ sɪstɝz, ɪt wʊdn bi ðə fɝs taɪm. ðə taʊɝ əz læstəɾ ə lɔŋ taɪm, ən hil fɹəm mɛni wunz. wi kən hil fɹəm ðɪs wʌn, tu." æneɪjəz vɔɪs suɾəd əɹ feɪs, wɔɹm ən peɪʃən ən kʌmfɝɾɪŋ, bʌt meɪkɪŋ ðoʊz ɹɪmɑɹks ɪt sim laɪk fɪŋɡɝneɪlz skɹitʃɪŋ daʊn ə slæt. laɪt, fəɹ ɔl æneɪjə seɪɪŋ ðɪs wɑz wʌt ʃi fɪɹɾ aʊɾ ə mɔɹiə, ʃi simd mʌtʃ ɪn əkɔɹd wɪð ðə sɛntəməns. ʃi wɑz dɪlɪbɝɪt, ənflæpəbəl, ən nɛvɝ kɛɹləs wɪð wɝdz. ɪf ʃi feɪvɝɾ ən əsɔlt, haʊ mɛni ʌðɝz dɪd, tu? əz juʒəwəl, maɪɹɛl wɑz ɛniθɪŋ bʌt kənstʃɹeɪnd. mɝkjʊɹiəl ən faɪɝi dɪskɹaɪbd əɹ bɛst. ʃi wəd nɑt noʊ peɪʃəns ɪf ɪt bɪɾ əɹ ɑn ðə noʊz. ʃi peɪs bæk ən fɔɹθ, əz mʌtʃ əz ðə kɑnfaɪnz ə ðə tɛn əlaʊd, kɪkɪŋ əɹ dip-ɡɹin skɝts ən səmtaɪmz kɪkɪŋ wʌn ə ðə bɹaɪt kʊʃənz paɪld əɡɛns ðə wɔl bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ tə meɪk ənʌðɝ ɹaʊnd. "ɪf mɔɹiə ɪz fɹaɪɾənd ɪnʌf tə pɹɛs fəɹ ən əsɔlt, ðən ʃiz fɹaɪɾənd aʊɾ ə hɝ wɪts. eɪ taʊɝ tu wundəd tə stæn əloʊn woʊn bi eɪbəl tə feɪs ðə fɔɹseɪkən əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls. mɑlɪn ɪz u ʃəd kənsɝn ju. ʃiz ɔlweɪz pɔɪntɪŋ aʊt ðət tɑɹmən ɡdən kəd bi əpɑn əs ɛni deɪ.

Tougher, anyway. She won't scruple at things that might make Lelaine balk. I'm very much afraid she will press for an assault on the city as soon as possible. If the Forsaken are moving so openly, on such a scale, then better a wounded Tower that's whole than a Tower divided. At least, I fear that's how Moria may see things. After all, however much we want to avoid sisters killing sisters, it wouldn't be the first time. The Tower has lasted a long time, and healed from many wounds. We can heal from this one, too." Anaiya's voice suited her face, warm and patient and comforting, but making those remarks it seemed like fingernails screeching down a slat. Light, for all Anaiya saying this was what she feared out of Moria, she seemed much in accord with the sentiments. She was deliberate, unflappable, and never careless with words. If she favored an assault, how many others did, too? As usual, Myrelle was anything but constrained. Mercurial and fiery described her best. She would not know patience if it bit her on the nose. She paced back and forth, as much as the confines of the tent allowed, kicking her deep-green skirts and sometimes kicking one of the bright cushions piled against the wall before turning to make another round. "If Moria is frightened enough to press for an assault, then she's frightened out of her wits. A Tower too wounded to stand alone won't be able to face the Forsaken or anyone else. Malind is who should concern you. She's always pointing out that Tarmon Gai'don could be upon us any day.

aɪv hɝɾ əɹ seɪ ðət wʌt wi fɛl kəd wɛl əv bɪn ði oʊpənɪŋ bloʊz ðə læs bæɾəl. ɔ ðəɾ ɪt maɪt hæpən hɪɹ, nɛkst. wɛɹ bɛɾɝ fəɹ ðə ʃædoʊ tə stʃɹaɪk ðən tɑɹ vəlɑn? mɑlɪn əz nɛvɝ bɪn əfɹeɪd tə meɪk hɑɹd tʃɔɪsəz, əɹ tə ɹitʃɹit wən ʃi θɔɾ ɪt nɛsəsɛɹi. ʃi wəɾ əbændən tɑɹ vəlɑn ən ðə taʊɝ ət wʌns ɪf ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wəd pɹəzɝv ət list səm ʌv əs fəɹ tɑɹmən ɡdən. ʃɪl pɹəpoʊz lɪftɪŋ ðə sidʒ, fliɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ ðə fɔɹseɪkən kæn faɪn əs əntɪl wɝ ɹɛɾi tə stʃɹaɪk bæk.

I've heard her say that what we felt could well have been the opening blows the Last Battle. AW that it might happen here, next. Where better for the Shadow to strike than Tar Valon? Malind has never been afraid to make hard choices, or to retreat when she thought it necessary. She would abandon Tar Valon and the Tower at once if she thought it would preserve at least some of us for Tarmon Gai'don. She will propose lifting the siege, fleeing somewhere the Forsaken can't find us until we're ready to strike back.

ɪf ʃi pʊts ðə kwɛstʃən tə ðə hɔl ɪn ðə ɹaɪt weɪ, ʃi maɪɾ ivən ɡɛt ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ kənsɛnsəs ɪn səpɔɹt." ðə vɛɹi θɔt meɪd ðə wɝdz dæns hɑɹɾɝ ɑn ðə peɪdʒ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛɡwin.

If she puts the question to the Hall in the right way, she might even get the greater consensus in support." The very thought made the words dance harder on the page in front of Egwene.

mɔɹvɹɪn, hɝ ɹaʊn feɪs ʌnɹilɛntɪŋ, sɪmpli plæntəd fɪsts ɑn æmpəl hɪps ən mɛɾ itʃ sədʒɛstʃən wɪð ə kɝɾ ænsɝ. "wi doʊnt noʊ ɪnʌf jɛt tə bi ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ðə fɔɹseɪkən," ən "ju kænt noʊ əntɪl ʃi sɛz." "pɝhæps ɪt wɑz, ən pɝhæps nɑt," ən "sʌpəzɪʃən ɪzən ɛvəɾəns." ɪt wɑz sɛd ʃi wəd nɑt bɪliv ɪt wɑz mɔɹnɪŋ tɪl ʃi sɔ ðə sʌn fəɹ hɝsɛlf. hɝ fɝm vɔɪs bɹʊk noʊ nɑnsɛns, ɪspɛʃli dʒʌmps tə kənkluʒənz. ɪt wɑz nɑt suðɪŋ tə ən eɪkɪŋ hɛd, iðɝ. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əpoʊzɪŋ ðə sədʒɛstʃənz, ɹɪli, dʒʌs kipɪŋ ən oʊpən maɪnd. ən oʊpən maɪn kəd ɡoʊ iðɝ weɪ wən ɪt keɪm daʊn tə ðə stɪkɪŋ pɔɪnt. ɛɡwin slæp ði ɪmbɔs foʊldɝ ʃʌɾ ɑn ðə ɹɪpɔɹts wɪð ə laʊd smæk. bɪtwin ðə dɪsɡʌstɪŋ teɪst ɑn əɹ tʌŋ ən ðə ʃɑɹp θɹəb ɪn əɹ hɛd - nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðɛɹ ɪnsɛsən vɔɪsəz! - ʃi kəd nɑt kip əɹ pleɪs tə ɹiɾ ɛniweɪ. ðə θɹi sɪstɝz lʊkt əɾ əɹ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. ʃi hæd meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ lɔŋ əɡoʊ ðət ʃi wɑz ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ, bʌt ʃi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə ʃoʊ tɛmpɝ. oʊðz ə fiəlti əɹ noʊ oʊðz ə fiəlti, ə jʌŋ wʊmən dɪspleɪɪŋ tɛmpɝ wɑz tu izi tə dɪsmɪs əz sʌlki. wɪtʃ oʊnli meɪɾ əɹ æŋɡɹiɝ, wɪtʃ meɪɾ əɹ hɛd hɝt mɔɹ, wɪtʃ. . . .

Morvrin, her round face unrelenting, simply planted fists on ample hips and met each suggestion with a curt answer. "We don't know enough yet to be sure it was the Forsaken," and "You can't know until she says." "Perhaps it was, and perhaps not," and "Supposition isn't evidence." It was said she would not believe it was morning till she saw the sun for herself. Her firm voice brooked no nonsense, especially jumps to conclusions. It was not soothing to an aching head, either. She was not opposing the suggestions, really, just keeping an open mind. An open mind could go either way when it came down to the sticking point. Egwene slapped the embossed folder shut on the reports with a loud smack. Between the disgusting taste on her tongue and the sharp throb in her head - not to mention their incessant voices! - she could not keep her place to read anyway. The three sisters looked at her in surprise. She had made it clear long ago that she was in charge, but she tried not to show temper. Oaths of fealty or no oaths of fealty, a young woman displaying temper was too easy to dismiss as sulky. Which only made her angrier, which made her head hurt more, which. . . .

"aɪv weɪɾəd lɔŋ ɪnʌf," ʃi sɛd, meɪkɪŋ ən ɛfɝt tə kip əɹ vɔɪs smuð. hɝ hɛd ɡeɪv ɪɾ ə slaɪɾ ɛdʒ ə ʃɑɹpnəs ɛniweɪ. pɝhæps ʃɛɹiəm θɔt ʃi wɑz səpoʊz tə miɾ əɹ ət ðə hɔl.

"I've waited long enough," she said, making an effort to keep her voice smooth. Her head gave it a slight edge of sharpness anyway. Perhaps Sheriam thought she was supposed to meet her at the Hall.

ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ kloʊk, ʃi stʃɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə koʊld waɪl stɪl swɪŋɪŋ ɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ən mɔɹvɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝ tu hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ fɑloʊɪŋ ɪn əɹ weɪk. əkʌmpəniɪŋ əɹ tə ðə hɔl maɪt sim ə lɪɾəl laɪk ðeɪ wɝ əɹ ɑntʊɹɑʒ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə bi wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ, ən ʃi səspɛktəd ðəɾ ivən mɔɹvɹɪn wɑz iɡɝ tə hɪɹ wʌɾ ækæɹən hæd tə ɹipɔɹɾ ən wʌt mɔɹiə ən ðə ɹɛst ɪntɛndəd tə fæʃən fɹəm ɪt. nʌθɪŋ tu dɪfəkəl tə dil wɪð, ɛɡwin hoʊpt, nʌθɪŋ laɪk wʌɾ æneɪjə ən maɪɹɛl θɔt. ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi, ʃi kəd tʃɹaɪ əplaɪɪŋ ðə lɔ ʌv wɔɹ, bʌɾ ivən ɪf ðət wɑz səksɛsfəl, ɹulɪŋ baɪ iɾɪkt hæɾ ɪts dɪsədvæntɪdʒɪz. wən pipəl hæd tə oʊbeɪ jə ɪn wʌn θɪŋ, ðeɪ ɔlweɪz faʊnd weɪz tə ɹɪɡəl əweɪ ɑn ʌðɝz, ən ðə mɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ fɔɹs tə oʊbeɪ, ðə mɔɹ pleɪsəz ðeɪ faʊn fəɹ ɹɪəlɪŋ əweɪ. ɪt wɑz ə nætʃɹəl bæləns jə kəd nɑɾ ɪskeɪp. wɝs, ʃi hæd lɝn dʒʌs haʊ ədɪktɪv ɪt wɑz tə hæv pipəl dʒʌmp wən ʃi spoʊk. jə keɪm tə teɪk ɪɾ əz ðə nætʃɹəl weɪ ʌv θɪŋz, ən ðən wən ðeɪ feɪl tə dʒʌmp, jə wɝ kɑɾ ɑn ðə ɹɔŋ fʊt. bɪsaɪdz, wɪð əɹ hɛd paʊndɪŋ - ɪt wɑz paʊndɪŋ, naʊ, nɑt θɹɑbɪŋ, ðoʊ pɝhæps nɑɾ əz ʃɑɹpli - wɪð əɹ hɛd, ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə snæp əɾ ɛniwʌn u lʊkt əɾ əɹ kɹɔswaɪz, ən ivən wən pipəl hæd tə swɑloʊ ɪt, ðət nɛvɝ wɛn daʊn wɛl.

Gathering her cloak, she strode out into the cold while still swinging it around her shoulders, and Morvrin and the other two hesitated only a moment before following in her wake. Accompanying her to the Hall might seem a little like they were her entourage, but they were supposed to be watching her, and she suspected that even Morvrin was eager to hear what Akarrin had to report and what Moria and the rest intended to fashion from it. Nothing too difficult to deal with, Egwene hoped, nothing like what Anaiya and Myrelle thought. If necessary, she could try applying the Law of War, but even if that was successful, ruling by edict had its disadvantages. When people had to obey you in one thing, they always found ways to wriggle away on others, and the more they were forced to obey, the more places they found for wriggling away. It was a natural balance you could not escape. Worse, she had learned just how addictive it was to have people jump when she spoke. You came to take it as the natural way of things, and then when they failed to jump, you were caught on the wrong foot. Besides, with her head pounding - it was pounding, now, not throbbing, though perhaps not as sharply - with her head, she was ready to snap at anyone who looked at her crosswise, and even when people had to swallow it, that never went down well.

ðə sʌn stʊd stʃɹeɪɾ oʊvɝhɛd, ə ɡoʊldən bɔl ɪn ə blu skaɪ wɪð ə skæɾɝɪŋ ʌv waɪt klaʊdz, bʌɾ ɪt ɡeɪv noʊ wɔɹmθ, oʊnli wɑn ʃædoʊz ən ə ɡlɪɾɝ tə ðə snoʊ wɛɹɛvɝ ɪt ɹɪmeɪn əntʃɹæmpəld. ði ɛɹ fɛlt əz tʃɪl əz ɪt hæd baɪ ðə ɹɪvɝ. ɛɡwin ɪɡnɔɹd ðə koʊld, ɹəfjuz tə lɛɾ ɪt tʌtʃ hɝ, bʌɾ oʊnli ðə dɛd cʊɾə bɪn ʌnəwɛɹ, wɪð ɛvɹiwʌnz bɹɛθ mɪstɪŋ waɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ feɪsəz. ɪt wɑz taɪm fəɹ ðə mɪddeɪ mil, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv fiɾɪŋ soʊ mɛni nɑvəsɪz ət wʌns, soʊ ɛɡwin ən əɹ ɛskɔɹt stɪl muv θɹu ə weɪv ʌv waɪt-klæd wɪmən lipɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ weɪ ən stɑɹɾɪŋ tə kɝtsi ɪn ðə stʃɹit. ʃi sɛt sətʃ ə peɪs ðət ðeɪ wɝ juʒəwəli pæs bɪfɔɹ ðə nɑts ə nɑvəsɪz kəd mɔɹ ðən spɹɛd ðɛɹ skɝts.

The sun stood straight overhead, a golden ball in a blue sky with a scattering of white clouds, but it gave no warmth, only wan shadows and a glitter to the snow wherever it remained untrampled. The air felt as chill as it had by the river. Egwene ignored the cold, refused to let it touch her, but only the dead could have been unaware, with everyone's breath misting white in front of their faces. It was time for the midday meal, yet there was no possibility of feeding so many novices at once, so Egwene and her escort still moved through a wave of white-clad women leaping out of their way and starting to curtsy in the street. She set such a pace that they were usually past before the knots of novices could more than spread their skirts.

ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə lɔŋ weɪ, wɪð oʊnli fɔɹ pleɪsəz ðət ðeɪ niɾəd tə weɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə mʌɾi stʃɹits.

It was not a long way, with only four places that they needed to wade across the muddy streets.

ðəɹ hæd bɪn tɔk ʌv wʊɾən bɹɪdʒəz, tɔl ɪnʌf tə ɹaɪɾ ʌndɝ, bʌt bɹɪdʒəz sədʒɛstəɾ ə pɝmənəns tə ðə kæmp ðət noʊ wʌn wɑntəd. ivən ðə sɪstɝz u spoʊk ə ðɛm nɛvɝ pɹɛs tə hæv əm bɪlt.

There had been talk of wooden bridges, tall enough to ride under, but bridges suggested a permanence to the camp that no one wanted. Even the sisters who spoke of them never pressed to have them built.

wɪtʃ lɛft weɪɾɪŋ sloʊli, ən teɪkɪŋ kɛɹ tə kip jəɹ skɝts ən kloʊk haɪ ɪf jə wɝ nɑt tə ɝaɪv fɪlθi tə jəɹ niz. ət lis ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ kɹaʊdz vænɪʃt əz ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt ðə hɔl. ðət stʊɾ əloʊn əz ɔlweɪz, əɹ nɪɹli soʊ.

Which left wading slowly, and taking care to keep your skirts and cloak high if you were not to arrive filthy to your knees. At least the remaining crowds vanished as they approached the Hall. That stood alone as always, or nearly so.

naɪsaʊ ən kɑɹlɪnjə wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi weɪɾɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə bɪɡ kænvəs pəvɪljən wɪð ɪts pætʃt saɪd kɝɾənz, ðə taɪni jɛloʊ fɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ ʌndɝlɪp wɪð əɹ tiθ ən aɪɪŋ ɛɡwin æŋkʃəsli. kɑɹlɪnjə wɑz kɑmnəs ɪtsɛlf, kul-aɪd, hænz foʊldəɾ əɾ əɹ weɪst. ɪksɛp ðət ʃi hæd fɝɡɑɾən əɹ kloʊk, mʌd steɪn ðə skɹoʊlɪmbɹɔɪɾɝd hɛm ə hɝ peɪl skɝt, ən əɹ kæp ə dɑɹk kɝlz bædli niɾəd ə koʊm.

Nisao and Carlinya were already waiting in front of the big canvas pavilion with its patched side curtains, the tiny Yellow fretting her underlip with her teeth and eyeing Egwene anxiously. Carlinya was calmness itself, cool-eyed, hands folded at her waist. Except that she had forgotten her cloak, mud stained the scrollembroidered hem of her pale skirt, and her cap of dark curls badly needed a comb.

meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ kɝɾəsiz, ðə pɛɹ dʒɔɪn æneɪjə ən ði ʌðɝ tu, ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns bɪhaɪn ɛɡwin. ðə lɑɾ ə ðɛm mɝmɝd sɔfli, ðə snætʃɪz ðəɾ ɛɡwin kɑɾ ɪnɑkjuəs, əbaʊt ðə wɛðɝ, əɹ haʊ lɔŋ ðeɪ maɪɾ əv tə weɪt. ðɪs wɑz noʊ pleɪs fəɹ əm tə sim tu kloʊsli əsoʊsieɪɾəd wɪð hɝ.

Making their courtesies, the pair joined Anaiya and the other two, a little distance behind Egwene. The lot of them murmured softly, the snatches that Egwene caught innocuous, about the weather, or how long they might have to wait. This was no place for them to seem too closely associated with her.

bioʊnɪn keɪm daʊn ðə wɔk əɾ ə ɹʌn, hɝ hɝid bɹɛθ mɪstɪŋ, ən skɪɾəd tə ə hɔlt, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɛɡwin bɪfɔɹ dʒɔɪnɪŋ ði ʌðɝz. ðə stʃɹeɪn ɝaʊn əɹ blu-ɡɹeɪ aɪz wɑz ivən mɔɹ əpɛɹən ðən ɝliɝ.

Beonin came down the walk at a run, her hurried breath misting, and skidded to a halt, staring at Egwene before joining the others. The strain around her blue-gray eyes was even more apparent than earlier.

pɝhæps ʃi θɔt ðɪs wəɾ əfɛkt əɹ nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz. bʌt ʃi nu ðə tɔks wəd bi ə ʃæm, dʒʌst ə plɔɪ tə ɡeɪn taɪm. ɛɡwin kəntʃɹoʊld əɹ bɹiðɪŋ ən pɹæktəs nɑvəs ɛksɝsaɪzəz, jɛt nʌn ʌv ɪt hɛlpt əɹ hɛd. ɪt nɛvɝ dɪd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ə ʃɛɹiəm əmʌŋ ðə tɛns ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli əloʊn ɑn ðə wɔkweɪ aʊtsaɪd ðə pəvɪljən. ækæɹən ən ðə faɪv ʌðɝ sɪstɝz u hæd ɡɔn wɪð hɝ, wʌn fɹəm itʃ ədʒɑ, wɝ weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə klʌstɝ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ði ɛntʃɹəns. moʊst ɔfɝd kɝtsiz tə ɛɡwin dɪstʃɹæktɪdli, jɛt kɛp ðɛɹ dɪstəns. pɝhæps ðeɪ hæd bɪn wɔɹn tə seɪ nʌθɪŋ tə ɛniwʌn əntɪl ðeɪ spoʊk bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl. ɛɡwin kəd sɪmpli hæv dɪmændəd ðɛɹ ɹipɔɹɾ ɑn ðə spɑt, ʌv kɔɹs. ðeɪ maɪɾ ivən əv ɡɪvən ɪt, tə ði æmɪɝlɪn. laɪkli ðeɪ wəd hæv. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ən æmɪɝlɪnz ɹileɪʃənz wɪð ði ədʒəz wɝ ɔlweɪz dɛləkət, ɔfən ɪnkluɾɪŋ ði ədʒɑ ʃi hæd bɪn ɹeɪz fɹʌm. nɪɹli əz dɛləkəɾ əz ɹileɪʃənz wɪð ðə hɔl. ɛɡwin meɪd hɝsɛlf smaɪl ən baʊ hɝ hɛd ɡɹeɪʃəsli. ɪf ʃi ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ bɪhaɪn ðət smaɪl, wɛl, ðət hɛlp kip əɹ maʊθ ʃʌt.

Perhaps she thought this would affect her negotiations. But she knew the talks would be a sham, just a ploy to gain time. Egwene controlled her breathing and practiced novice exercises, yet none of it helped her head. It never did. There was no sign of Sheriam among the tents in any direction, but they were not precisely alone on the walkway outside the pavilion. Akarrin and the five other sisters who had gone with her, one from each Ajah, were waiting in a cluster on the other side of the entrance. Most offered curtsies to Egwene distractedly, yet kept their distance. Perhaps they had been warned to say nothing to anyone until they spoke before the Hall. Egwene could simply have demanded their report on the spot, of course. They might even have given it, to the Amyrlin. Likely they would have. On the other hand, an Amyrlin's relations with the Ajahs were always delicate, often including the Ajah she had been raised from. Nearly as delicate as relations with the Hall. Egwene made herself smile and bow her head graciously. If she gritted her teeth behind that smile, well, that helped keep her mouth shut.

nɑɾ ɔl ə ðə sɪstɝz simd əwɛɹ ə hɝ pɹɛzəns. ækæɹən, slɛndɝ ɪn pleɪn bɹaʊn wʊl ən ə kloʊk wɪð sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli ɪlæbɹət ɡɹin ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ, nɑɾɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf naʊ ən ðɛn. əpɛɹənli ʃi wɑz pɹæktəsɪŋ wʌt ʃi wəd seɪ ɪnsaɪd. ækæɹən wɑz nɑt stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə paʊɝ, lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən sɪuən ɪf əɾ ɔl, bʌɾ oʊnli wʌn ʌðɝ ə ðə sɪks, θɝvə, ə slɪm wʊmən ɪn jɛloʊ-slæʃt ɹaɪɾɪŋ skɝts ən ə kloʊk ɛdʒd wɪð jɛloʊ, stʊɾ ivən əz haɪ əz ʃi. ðət wɑz ə dɪstʃɹɛsɪŋ mɛʒɝ ə dʒʌs haʊ fɹaɪɾənd ðə sɪstɝz wɝ baɪ ðət stʃɹeɪnʒ bikən ə seɪaɪdɑɹ. ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ʃʊɾə stɛp fɔɹwɝd fəɹ ðə tæsk ðət hæd bɪn ɡɪvən tə ðiz, bʌɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ækæɹən hɝsɛlf, zil hæd bɪn noʊɾəbli lækɪŋ. hɝ kəmpænjənz stɪl əpɪɹd lɛs ðən ɪnθuziæstɪk. ʃænə nɔɹməli meɪnteɪn ə dip ɹɪzɝv dɪspaɪɾ aɪz ðət meɪɾ əɹ əpɪɹ kɑnstənli stɑɹɾəld, bʌt naʊ ðeɪ simd ɹɛɾi tə kʌm aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd wɪð wɝi. ʃi pɪɹɾ ət ði ɛntʃɹəns tə ðə hɔl, kloʊzd ɔf baɪ hɛvi flæps, ən əɹ hænz fɪɾəld wɪð əɹ kloʊk əz ɪf ʃi kəd nɑt kip əm stɪl. ɹikoʊ, ə staʊɾ ɝæfɛlɪn blu, kɛpt əɹ aɪz daʊn, bʌt ðə sɪlvɝ bɛlz ɪn əɹ lɔŋ dɑɹk hɛɹ tʃaɪm feɪnli əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ kaʊl. oʊnli θɝvəz lɔŋ-noʊz feɪs wɔɹ ə lʊk ʌv æbsəlut sɝɛnəɾi, kəmplitli ʌnpɝtɝbd ən ənʃeɪkəbəl, jɛt ðəɾ ɪn ɪtsɛlf wɑz ə bæd saɪn. ðə jɛloʊ sɪstɝ wɑz ɪksaɪɾəbəl baɪ neɪtʃɝ. wʌt hæd ðeɪ sin? wʌt wɝ mɔɹiə ən ði ʌðɝ tu sɪɾɝz æftɝ? ɛɡwin kəntʃɹoʊld əɹ ɪmpeɪʃəns; ðə hɔl pleɪnli wɑz nɑt sɪɾɪŋ jɛt. ɪt wɑz ɡæðɝɪŋ, bʌt sɛvɹəl sɪɾɝz stʃɹoʊl pæst əɹ ən ɪndə ðə bɪɡ pəvɪljən, nʌn hɝiɪŋ. sæliɾə hɛzɪteɪɾɪd əz ɪf ʃi maɪt spik, bʌt ðən oʊnli dɪpt əɹ niz bɪfɔɹ ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ jɛloʊ-fɹɪnd ʃɔl ɑntu hɝ ʃoʊldɝz ən swipɪŋ ɪnsaɪd. kweɪmɛsə pɪɹd daʊn əɹ ʃɑɹp noʊz əɾ ɛɡwin waɪl meɪkɪŋ əɹ kɝtsi, ən pɪɹd daʊn əɹ noʊz waɪl stʌɾiɪŋ æneɪjə ən ði ʌðɝz bɹifli, bʌt ðɛn, ðə slɪm ɡɹeɪ pɪɹd daʊn əɹ noʊz əɾ ɛvɹiwʌn. ʃi wɑz nɑt tɔl, bʌt ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə sim soʊ. bɛɹænə, feɪs ə mæsk ə hɔtinəs ən bɪɡ bɹaʊn aɪz əz koʊld əz ðə snoʊ, pɔz tə ɔfɝ kul kɝɾəsiz tə ɛɡwin ən fɹaʊn əɾ ækæɹən. æftɝ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt, pɝhæps ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðəɾ ækæɹən dɪd nɑɾ ivən si hɝ, ʃi smuðd əɹ sɪlvɝ-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd waɪt skɝts, wɪtʃ dɪd nɑt niɾ ɪt, ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ʃɔl əlɔŋ əɹ ɑɹmz soʊ ðə waɪt fɹɪnʒ hʌŋ dʒʌst soʊ, ən ɡlaɪɾɪd θɹu ði ɛntʃɹi flæps əz ðoʊ ʃi dʒʌs hæpən tə bi ɡoʊɪŋ ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən. ɔl θɹi wɝ əmʌŋ ðə sɪɾɝz sɪuən hæd pɔɪntəɾ aʊɾ əz tu jʌŋ. əz wɝ mɑlɪn ən ɛskɹɑldi. bʌt mɔɹiə hæd bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd ən θɝɾi jɪɹz. laɪt, sɪuən hæɾ əɹ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ kənspɪɹəsiz ɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ!

Not all of the sisters seemed aware of her presence. Akarrin, slender in plain brown wool and a cloak with surprisingly elaborate green embroidery, was staring at nothing, nodding to herself now and then. Apparently she was practicing what she would say inside. Akarrin was not strong in the Power, little more than Siuan if at all, but only one other of the six, Therva, a slim woman in yellow-slashed riding skirts and a cloak edged with yellow, stood even as high as she. That was a distressing measure of just how frightened the sisters were by that strange beacon of saidar. The strongest should have stepped forward for the task that had been given to these, but except for Akarrin herself, zeal had been notably lacking. Her companions still appeared less than enthusiastic. Shana normally maintained a deep reserve despite eyes that made her appear constantly startled, but now they seemed ready to come out of her head with worry. She peered at the entrance to the Hall, closed off by heavy flaps, and her hands fiddled with her cloak as if she could not keep them still. Reiko, a stout Arafellin Blue, kept her eyes down, but the silver bells in her long dark hair chimed faintly as if she were shaking her head inside her cowl. Only Therva's long-nosed face wore a look of absolute serenity, completely unperturbed and unshakable, yet that in itself was a bad sign. The Yellow sister was excitable by nature. What had they seen? What were Moria and the other two Sitters after? Egwene controlled her impatience; the Hall plainly was not sitting yet. It was gathering, but several Sitters strolled past her and into the big pavilion, none hurrying. Salita hesitated as if she might speak, but then only dipped her knees before raising her yellow-fringed shawl onto her shoulders and sweeping inside. Kwamesa peered down her sharp nose at Egwene while making her curtsy, and peered down her nose while studying Anaiya and the others briefly, but then, the slim Gray peered down her nose at everyone. She was not tall, but she tried to seem so. Berana, face a mask of haughtiness and big brown eyes as cold as the snow, paused to offer cool courtesies to Egwene and frown at Akarrin. After a long moment, perhaps realizing that Akarrin did not even see her, she smoothed her silver-embroidered white skirts, which did not need it, adjusted her shawl along her arms so the white fringe hung just so, and glided through the entry flaps as though she just happened to be going in that direction. All three were among the Sitters Siuan had pointed out as too young. As were Malind and Escaralde. But Moria had been Aes Sedai for a hundred and thirty years. Light, Siuan had her looking for conspiracies in everything!

dʒʌst əz ɛɡwin bɪɡæn tə θɪŋk ðəɾ əɹ hɛd wəɾ ɪksploʊd fɹəm fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən ɪf nɑt fɹəm əɹ hɛdeɪk, ʃɛɹiəm sʌɾənli əpɪɹd, haɪkɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ən skɝts waɪl hæf-ɹʌnɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə dɝɾi slʌʃ ə ðə stʃɹit. "aɪm tɛɹəbli sɑɹi, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd bɹɛθləsli, tʃænəlɪŋ hɝidli tə klin ɔf ðə mʌd ʃi hæd splæʃt ɑn hɝsɛlf. ɪt fɛl tə ðə wɔkweɪ ɪn ə dʒɹaɪ paʊɾɝ wən ʃi twɪtʃt əɹ skɝts.

Just as Egwene began to think that her head would explode from frustration if not from her headache, Sheriam suddenly appeared, hiking her cloak and skirts while half-running across the dirty slush of the street. "I'm terribly sorry, Mother," she said breathlessly, channeling hurriedly to clean off the mud she had splashed on herself. It fell to the walkway in a dry powder when she twitched her skirts.

"aɪ . . . aɪ hɝd ðət ðə hɔl wɑz sɪɾɪŋ, ən aɪ nu jə wəd bi lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mi, soʊ aɪ keɪm əz fæst əz aɪ kʊd. ɪm vɛɹi sɑɹi." soʊ sɪuən wɑz stɪl sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ hɝ. "jɔɹ hɪɹ naʊ," ɛɡwin sɛd fɝmli.

"I . . . I heard that the Hall was sitting, and I knew you would be looking for me, so I came as fast as I could. I'm very sorry." So Siuan was still searching for her. "You're here now," Egwene said firmly.

ðə wʊmən mʌst əv bɪn tʃɹuli ʌpsɛt tə ɔfɝ əpɑlədʒiz ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ʌðɝz, ækæɹən ən əɹ kəmpænjənz mɔɹ ðən æneɪjə ən ðə ɹɛst. ivən wən pipəl nu bɛɾɝ, ðeɪ tɛndəd tə teɪk jə fəɹ wʌt jə əpɪɹd tə bi, ən ðə kipɝ ʃəd nɑt bi sin əpɑlədʒaɪzɪŋ ən ɹɪŋɪŋ əɹ hænz. ʃʊɹli ʃi nu ðæt. "ɡoʊ əhɛɾ ən ənaʊns mi." dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ʃɛɹiəm pʊʃt bæk ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk, ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ nɛɹoʊ blu stoʊl, ən stɛp θɹu ði ɛntʃɹi flæps. hɝ vɔɪs ɹæŋ aʊt klɪɹli ɪn ðə ɹɪtʃuəl fɹeɪzəz. "ʃi kʌmz, ʃi kʌmz. . . ."

The woman must have been truly upset to offer apologies in front of the others, Akarrin and her companions more than Anaiya and the rest. Even when people knew better, they tended to take you for what you appeared to be, and the Keeper should not be seen apologizing and wringing her hands. Surely she knew that. "Go ahead and announce me." Drawing a deep breath, Sheriam pushed back the hood of her cloak, adjusted her narrow blue stole, and stepped through the entry flaps. Her voice rang out clearly in the ritual phrases. "She comes, she comes. . . ."

ɛɡwin bɛɹli weɪɾəd fəɹ əɹ tə fɪnɪʃ wɪð " . . . ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit," bɪfɔɹ stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn θɹu ðə ɹɪŋ ə bɹeɪʒɝz ən stænd-læmps ðət ɹɪm ðə pəvɪljənz wɔlz. ðə stænd-læmps ɡeɪv ə ɡʊd laɪt, ən ðə bɹeɪʒɝz, ɡɪvɪŋ ɔf ə sɛn ə lævəndɝ tədeɪ, wɔɹm ðə hoʊl speɪs. noʊ wʌn wɪʃt tə hæv tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə koʊld wən ʃi kəd fil ɹil wɔɹmθ.

Egwene barely waited for her to finish with " . . . the Flame of Tar Valon, the Amyrlin Seat," before striding in through the ring of braziers and stand-lamps that rimmed the pavilion's walls. The stand-lamps gave a good light, and the braziers, giving off a scent of lavender today, warmed the whole space. No one wished to have to ignore the cold when she could feel real warmth.

ði ɝeɪnʒmənt ə ðə pəvɪljən fɑloʊɾ eɪntʃən ɹulz, mɑɾəfaɪd oʊnli slaɪtli tə əlaʊ fəɹ ðə fæk ðət ðeɪ wɝ nɑt miɾɪŋ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝkjəlɝ tʃeɪmbɝ kɔl ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ. ət ðə fɑɹ ɛnd, ə sɪmpəl ɪf wɛl pɑlɪʃt bɛntʃ stʊɾ ətɑp ə bɑks-laɪk plætfɔɹm kʌvɝd wɪð klɔθ stʃɹaɪpt ɪn ðə sɛvən kʌlɝz ə ði ədʒəz. ðəɾ ən ðə stoʊl ɝaʊn ɛɡwinz nɛk wɝ ʃʊɹli ði oʊnli pleɪsəz ɪn ðə kæmp wɛɹ ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ hæɾ ɛni ɹɛpɹəzɛnteɪʃən. səm bluz hæd wɑntəd ðə kʌlɝ ɹimuvd, sɪns ɪleɪɾə əpɛɹənli hæd hæd ði æktʃəwəl θɹoʊn kɔl ði æmɪɝlɪn sit ɹipeɪntəɾ ən ə stoʊl woʊvən wɪθaʊt blu, bʌɾ ɛɡwin hæd dʌɡ ɪn əɹ hilz. ɪf ʃi wɑz tə bi ʌv ɔl ədʒəz ən nʌn, ðən ʃi wəd bi ʌv ɔl ədʒəz. daʊn ðə bɹaɪt leɪɝd kɑɹpəts ðət sɝvd əz ə ɡɹaʊnd-klɔθ, tu laɪnz ə bɛntʃɪz slæntəɾ əweɪ fɹəm ði ɛntʃɹəns ɪn ɡɹups ə θɹi, sɪɾɪŋ ətɑp klɔθ-kʌvɝd bɑksəz ɪn ðə kʌlɝz ə ði ədʒəz. wɛl, sɪks ə ði ədʒəz. baɪ tʃɹədɪʃən, ðə tu oʊldəst sɪɾɝz kəd kleɪm ðə pleɪsəz kloʊsəs tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit fəɹ ðɛɹ ədʒəz, soʊ jɛloʊ ən blu hɛl ðoʊz spɑts hɪɹ. æftɝ ðæt, ɪt wɑz ə mæɾɝ ə hu keɪm fɝst ən wɪʃt tə bi siɾəd wɛɹ, ðə fɝst ɝaɪvəl ɔlweɪz tʃuzɪŋ əɹ ədʒɑz pleɪs. ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli naɪn sɪɾɝz pɹɛzənt, tu fju fəɹ ðə hɔl tə bi sɪɾɪŋ jɛt, liɡəli spikɪŋ, bʌɾ ən ɑɾəti ɪn ðə siɾɪŋ stʃɹʌk ɛɡwin ɹaɪɾ əweɪ. ʌnsɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ɹoʊmændə wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn pleɪs, ən ɛmpti bɛntʃ bɪtwin əɹ ən sæliɾə, ən ləleɪn ən mɔɹiə ɑkjəpaɪd ði ɛn bɛntʃɪz ə ðə blu. ɹoʊmændə, hɝ hɛɹ ɪn ə taɪt ɡɹeɪ bʌn ɑn ðə neɪp ə hɝ nɛk, wɑz ði oʊldəst sɪɾɝ, ən ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz ðə fɝs tə ɹitʃ əɹ pleɪs wən ðə hɔl sæt. ləleɪn, nɛkst oʊldəs dɪspaɪɾ əɹ dɑɹk ɡlɔsi hɛɹ, simd əneɪbəl tə lɛt ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ɡeɪn ə dʒʌmp ɑn əɹ ivən ɪn sʌmθɪŋ soʊ smɔl. ðə mɛn u hæd ʃɪftəd ðə bɑksəz - ðeɪ wɝ stɔɹɾ əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz əntɪl ðə hɔl wɑz kɔl tə sɪt - mʌst əv dʒʌs lɛf θɹu ðə bæk, kəz kweɪmɛsə, ɔlɹɛɾi siɾəd ɑn əɹ bɛntʃ, wɑz ði oʊnli ɡɹeɪ sɪɾɝ ɪn ɛvəɾəns, ən bɛɹænə, dʒʌs klaɪmɪŋ tə hɝz, ði oʊnli waɪt. bʌt mɑlɪnd, ə ɹaʊnd-feɪs kændɔɹi wɪð ən iɡəlz aɪz, ən ðə loʊn ɡɹin, ɑbviəsli hæɾ ɛntɝɾ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, jɛt stʃɹeɪnʒli, ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən tə sit ðə ɡɹinz nɪɹ ðə pəvɪljənz ɛntʃɹɑns. ðə nɪɹɝ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit ðə bɛɾɝ, wɑz ðə juʒəwəl θɪŋ. ən dɝɛkli ɑpəzət hɝ, ɛskɹɑldi stʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə bɹaʊn-kʌvɝd bɑksəz, ɪn hʌʃt ɑɹɡjəmənt wɪð tɑkimə. ɔlmoʊst əz ʃɔɹɾ əz naɪsaʊ, tɑkimə wɑz ə kwaɪət bɝd-laɪk wʊmən, bʌt ʃi kəd bi fɔɹsfəl wən ʃi wɪʃt, ən wɪð əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps ʃi lʊkt ə spɛɹoʊ ɪn ə tɛmpɝ, fɛðɝz ɔl pʌft aʊt tə meɪk əɹ sim lɑɹdʒɝ. baɪ ðə weɪ ʃi kɛp dɑɹɾɪŋ ʃɑɹp lʊks təwɔɹd bɛɹænə, ðə siɾɪŋ wɑz wʌɾ əpsɛt hɝ. ɪt wɑz tu leɪt fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ tə bi tʃeɪnʒd fəɹ ðɪs sɪɾɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɪn ɛni keɪs, ɛskɹɑldi lum bæk ət tɑkimə əz ɪf ʃi ɪkspɛktəd tə hæv tə faɪt fəɹ əɹ tʃɔɪs. ɪɾ əmeɪzd ɛɡwin haʊ ɛskɹɑldi kəd də ðæt. lum, ðət wɑz. ʃi stʊɾ ɪntʃəz ʃɔɹɾɝ ivən ðən naɪsaʊ. ɪt mʌst əv bɪn ʃɪɹ fɔɹs ʌv wɪl.

The arrangement of the pavilion followed ancient rules, modified only slightly to allow for the fact that they were not meeting in the White Tower, in the great circular chamber called the Hall of the Tower. At the far end, a simple if well polished bench stood atop a box-like platform covered with cloth striped in the seven colors of the Ajahs. That and the stole around Egwene's neck were surely the only places in the camp where the Red Ajah had any representation. Some Blues had wanted the color removed, since Elaida apparently had had the actual throne called the Amyrlin Seat repainted and a stole woven without blue, but Egwene had dug in her heels. If she was to be of all Ajahs and none, then she would be of all Ajahs. Down the bright layered carpets that served as a ground-cloth, two lines of benches slanted away from the entrance in groups of three, sitting atop cloth-covered boxes in the colors of the Ajahs. Well, six of the Ajahs. By tradition, the two oldest Sitters could claim the places closest to the Amyrlin Seat for their Ajahs, so Yellow and Blue held those spots here. After that, it was a matter of who came first and wished to be seated where, the first arrival always choosing her Ajah's place. There were only nine Sitters present, too few for the Hall to be sitting yet, legally speaking, but an oddity in the seating struck Egwene right away. Unsurprisingly, Romanda was already in place, an empty bench between her and Salita, and Lelaine and Moria occupied the end benches of the Blue. Romanda, her hair in a tight gray bun on the nape of her neck, was the oldest Sitter, and almost always the first to reach her place when the Hall sat. Lelaine, next oldest despite her dark glossy hair, seemed unable to let the other woman gain a jump on her even in something so small. The men who had shifted the boxes - they were stored along the walls until the Hall was called to sit - must have just left through the back, because Kwamesa, already seated on her bench, was the only Gray Sitter in evidence, and Berana, just climbing to hers, the only White. But Malind, a round-faced Kandori with an eagle's eyes, and the lone Green, obviously had entered ahead of them, yet strangely, she had chosen to seat the Greens near the pavilion's entrance. The nearer the Amyrlin Seat the better, was the usual thing. And directly opposite her, Escaralde stood in front of the brown-covered boxes, in hushed argument with Takima. Almost as short as Nisao, Takima was a quiet bird-like woman, but she could be forceful when she wished, and with her fists on her hips she looked a sparrow in a temper, feathers all puffed out to make her seem larger. By the way she kept darting sharp looks toward Berana, the seating was what upset her. It was too late for anything to be changed for this sitting, of course, but in any case, Escaralde loomed back at Takima as if she expected to have to fight for her choice. It amazed Egwene how Escaralde could do that. Loom, that was. She stood inches shorter even than Nisao. It must have been sheer force of will.

ɛskɹɑldi nɛvɝ bæk daʊn wən ʃi θɔt ʃi wɑz ɪn ðə ɹaɪt. ən ʃi ɔlweɪz dɪd θɪŋk ʃi wɑz ɪn ðə ɹaɪt. ɪf mɔɹiə ɹɪli dɪd wɑn ən ɪmiɾiət əsɔlt ɑn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən mɑlɪn ɹɪli wɑntəd tə ɹitʃɹit, wʌɾ ɛskɹɑldi wɑnt? fəɹ ɔl sɪuənz tɔk ə sɪɾɝz wɑntɪŋ tə bi wɔɹnd, ɛɡwinz ɛntʃɹəns kɑz noʊ ɡɹeɪt stɝ. fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ ɹizənz mɑlɪn ən ði ʌðɝz hæd kɔl ðə hɔl tə hɪɹ ækæɹənz ɹipɔɹt, ðeɪ hæd nɑt kənsɪɾɝd ðə mæɾɝ soʊ sɛnsəɾɪv ðəɾ ɪt niɾəd tə bi hɛl fəɹ sɪɾɝz' ɪɹz əloʊn, soʊ lɪɾəl klʌstɝz ə fɔɹ əɹ faɪv ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ stændɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðə bɛntʃɪz ə ðɛɹ ədʒɑz sɪɾɝz, ən ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ kɝtsiz əz ɛɡwin wɔk daʊn ðə kɑɹpəts təwɔɹɾ əɹ oʊn sit. ðə sɪɾɝz ðɛmsɛlvz mɪɹli wɑtʃt hɝ, əɹ pɝhæps ɪnklaɪn ə hɛd bɹifli. ləleɪn aɪɾ əɹ kuli, ðən ɹɪtɝn tə fɹaʊnɪŋ feɪnli ət mɔɹiə, ə kwaɪɾ ɔɹɾənɛɹi-əpɪɹɪŋ wʊmən ɪn pleɪn blu wʊl. soʊ ɔɹɾənɛɹi, ɪn fækt, ðət jə kəd mɪs ði eɪdʒləs kwɑləɾi ɪn əɹ feɪs ət fɝst ɡlæns. ʃi sæt stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, əbzɔɹbd ɪn əɹ oʊn θɔts. ɹoʊmændə wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz tə tɪlt əɹ hɛɾ ə fɹækʃən.

Escaralde never backed down when she thought she was in the right. And she always did think she was in the right. If Moria really did want an immediate assault on Tar Valon, and Malind really wanted to retreat, what did Escaralde want? For all Siuan's talk of Sitters wanting to be warned, Egwene's entrance caused no great stir. For whatever reasons Malind and the others had called the Hall to hear Akarrin's report, they had not considered the matter so sensitive that it needed to be held for Sitters' ears alone, so little clusters of four or five Aes Sedai were standing behind the benches of their Ajah's Sitters, and they made their curtsies as Egwene walked down the carpets toward her own seat. The Sitters themselves merely watched her, or perhaps inclined a head briefly. Lelaine eyed her coolly, then returned to frowning faintly at Moria, a quite ordinary-appearing woman in plain blue wool. So ordinary, in fact, that you could miss the ageless quality in her face at first glance. She sat staring straight ahead, absorbed in her own thoughts. Romanda was one of those to tilt her head a fraction.

ɪnsaɪd ðə hɔl, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɑz stɪl ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, bʌɾ ə lɪɾəl lɛs soʊ ðən aʊtsaɪɾ ɪt. ɪnsaɪd ðə hɔl, sɪɾɝz fɛl ðɛɹ paʊɝ. ɪn ə weɪ, ði æmɪɝlɪn kəd bi sɛd tə bi oʊnli ðə fɝst əmʌŋ ikwəlz, ɪnsaɪd ðə hɔl. wɛl, pɝhæps ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ðæt, bʌt nɑt baɪ mʌtʃ. sɪuən sɛɾ əz mɛni æmɪɝlənz hæd feɪl baɪ bɪlivɪŋ ðə sɪɾɝz wɝ fʊli hɝ ikwəlz əz baɪ bɪlivɪŋ ðə dɪfɝəns wɑz waɪɾɝ ðən ɹɪli ɪɡzɪstəd. ɪt wɑz laɪk ɹʌnɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə tɑp ʌv ə nɛɹoʊ wɔl wɪð fɪɹs mæstəfs ɑn iðɝ saɪd. jə meɪnteɪn ə kɛɹfəl bæləns ən tʃɹaɪd tə wɑtʃ jəɹ fit mɔɹ ðən ðə dɑɡz. bʌt jə wɝ ɔlweɪz əwɛɹ ə ðə dɑɡz. ənpɪnɪŋ əɹ kloʊk əz ʃi stɛpt ʌp ɑntu ðə stʃɹaɪp bɑks, ɛɡwin foʊldəɾ ɪɾ əkɹɔs əɹ bɛntʃ bɪfɔɹ sɪɾɪŋ. ðə bɛntʃɪz wɝ hɑɹd, ən səm sɪɾɝz bɹɔt kʊʃənz wən ðeɪ θɔt ðə sɪɾɪŋ wəd bi lɔŋ. ɛɡwin pɹəfɝd nɑt tə. ðə pɹoʊəbɪʃən ɑn spitʃəz sɛldəm stɑpt ət list wʌn əɹ tu wɪmən fɹəm dʒɹɔɪŋ ðɛɹ kɑmɛns aʊɾ ət lɛŋθ, ən ə hɑɹd sit kəd hɛlp jə ɹɪmeɪn əweɪk θɹu ðə wɝst. ʃɛɹiəm tʊk ðə kipɝz pleɪs stændɪŋ tə ɛɡwinz lɛft, ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə də bʌt weɪt. meɪbi ʃi ʃʊɾə bɹɔɾ ə kʊʃən.

Inside the Hall, the Amyrlin Seat was still the Amyrlin Seat, but a little less so than outside it. Inside the Hall, Sitters felt their power. In a way, the Amyrlin could be said to be only the first among equals, inside the Hall. Well, perhaps a little more than that, but not by much. Siuan said as many Amyrlins had failed by believing the Sitters were fully her equals as by believing the difference was wider than really existed. It was like running along the top of a narrow wall with fierce mastiffs on either side. You maintained a careful balance and tried to watch your feet more than the dogs. But you were always aware of the dogs. Unpinning her cloak as she stepped up onto the striped box, Egwene folded it across her bench before sitting. The benches were hard, and some Sitters brought cushions when they thought the sitting would be long. Egwene preferred not to. The prohibition on speeches seldom stopped at least one or two women from drawing their comments out at length, and a hard seat could help you remain awake through the worst. Sheriam took the Keeper's place standing to Egwene's left, and there was nothing to do but wait. Maybe she should have brought a cushion.

ði ʌðɝ bɛntʃɪz wɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə fɪl, ðoʊ sloʊli. ələdʒɹɪn ən sɛɝɔɪjə hæd dʒɔɪn bɛɹænə, ələdʒɹɪn plʌmp ɪnʌf tə meɪk ði ʌðɝ tu əpɪɹ slɪm. ʌv kɔɹs, ðə vɝɾɪkəl laɪnz ʌv waɪt skɹɑlwɝk ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn sɛɝɔɪjəz skɝts hæd ðəɾ ɪfɛkt ɛniweɪ, waɪl ələdʒɹɪnz waɪd waɪt slivz ən ðə snoʊi pænəl ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn ðə fɹʌn ə hɝ dʒɹɛs dɪd dʒʌs ði ɑpəzət. itʃ əpɛɹənli wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn aʊt wɛðɝ ði ʌðɝz nu wʌt wɑz əfʊt, fɹəm ðə weɪ ðeɪ wɝ ʃeɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛdz əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ ən ʃuɾɪŋ ɡlænsɪz təwɔɹd ðə bluz, ðə bɹaʊnz ən ðə ɡɹinz. vɛɹɪlɪn, ə ɹɛd-hɛɹd stɔɹk ʌv ə wʊmən ən tɔlɝ ðən moʊs mɛn, hæd teɪkən əɹ sit bɪsaɪd kweɪmɛsə, tu. ədʒʌstɪŋ ən ɹiədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl ɹɛsləsli, vɛɹɪlɪn dɑɹɾɪd əɹ aɪz fɹəm mɔɹiə tə ɛskɹɑldi tə mɑlɪn ən bæk.

The other benches were beginning to fill, though slowly. Aledrin and Saroiya had joined Berana, Aledrin plump enough to make the other two appear slim. Of course, the vertical lines of white scrollwork running down Saroiya's skirts had that effect anyway, while Aledrin's wide white sleeves and the snowy panel running down the front of her dress did just the opposite. Each apparently was trying to find out whether the others knew what was afoot, from the way they were shaking their heads at each other and shooting glances toward the Blues, the Browns and the Greens. Varilin, a red-haired stork of a woman and taller than most men, had taken her seat beside Kwamesa, too. Adjusting and readjusting her shawl restlessly, Varilin darted her eyes from Moria to Escaralde to Malind and back.

mæɡlə, jɛloʊ-fɹɪnd ʃɔl ɹæp taɪtli ɝaʊn əɹ bɹɔd ʃoʊldɝz, ən feɪsɛl, ə skwɹəfeɪs dəmɑni ɪn sɪlks kʌvɝd wɪð dɛns ɡɹin ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, wɝ dʒʌst ɛntɝɪŋ ðə pəvɪljən, itʃ ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ði ʌðɝ ivən wən ðɛɹ skɝts bɹʌʃt. mæɡlə wɑz fɝmli ɪn ɹoʊmændəz kæmp ən feɪsɛl ɪn ləleɪnz, ən ðə tu ɡɹups dɪd nɑt mɪks. ʌðɝ sɪstɝz wɝ tʃɹɪklɪŋ ɪn baɪ spɝts, əz wɛl, naɪsaʊ ən maɪɹɛl əmʌŋ hæf ə dʌzən əɹ soʊ hu slɪpt ɪn bɪhaɪn mæɡlə ən feɪsɛl. mɔɹvɹɪn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi əmʌŋ ðə bɹaʊnz bɪhaɪn tɑkimə ən ɛskɹɑldi, ən bioʊnɪn stʊɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɡɹeɪz bɪhaɪn vɛɹɪlɪn ən kweɪmɛsə. ət ðɪs ɹeɪt, hæf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə kæmp wəd bi kɹaʊɾəd ɪndə ðə pəvɪljən bɪfɔɹ lɔŋ.

Magla, yellow-fringed shawl wrapped tightly around her broad shoulders, and Faiselle, a squarefaced Domani in silks covered with dense green embroidery, were just entering the pavilion, each ignoring the other even when their skirts brushed. Magla was firmly in Romanda's camp and Faiselle in Lelaine's, and the two groups did not mix. Other sisters were trickling in by spurts, as well, Nisao and Myrelle among half a dozen or so who slipped in behind Magla and Faiselle. Morvrin was already among the Browns behind Takima and Escaralde, and Beonin stood on the edge of the Grays behind Varilin and Kwamesa. At this rate, half the Aes Sedai in the camp would be crowded into the pavilion before long.

waɪl mæɡlə wɑz stɪl wɔkɪŋ daʊn ðə kɑɹpəts təwɔɹd ðə jɛloʊ sits, ɹoʊmændə ɹoʊz tə hɝ fit. "wi ɑɹ mɔɹ ðən ɪlɛvən naʊ, soʊ wi meɪ əz wɛl bɪɡɪn." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli haɪpɪtʃt.

While Magla was still walking down the carpets toward the Yellow seats, Romanda rose to her feet. "We are more than eleven now, so we may as well begin." Her voice was surprisingly highpitched.

jə maɪɾ əv θɔt ʃi hæɾ ə bjuɾəfəl sɪŋɪŋ vɔɪs, ɪf jə kəɾ ɪmædʒən ɹoʊmændə sɪŋɪŋ. hɝ feɪs ɔlweɪz simd mɔɹ sɛt fəɹ skoʊldɪŋ, ət list slaɪtli dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk wi nid meɪk ðɪs ə fɔɹməl sɛʃən," ʃi æɾəd wən kweɪmɛsə stʊd. "aɪ hɑɹdli si waɪ ðɪs nid bi dʌn ɪn sɛʃən əɾ ɔl, bʌɾ ɪf ɪt mʌst, lɛɾ əs ɡɛɾ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ən aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ. səm ʌv əs əv mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz tə dil wɪð. əz aɪm ʃʊɹ jə du, mʌðɝ."

You might have thought she had a beautiful singing voice, if you could imagine Romanda singing. Her face always seemed more set for scolding, at least slightly disapproving. "I don't think we need make this a formal session," she added when Kwamesa stood. "I hardly see why this need be done in session at all, but if it must, let us get it over and out of the way. Some of us have more important matters to deal with. As I'm sure you do, Mother."

ðət læst wɑz sɛd wɪð ə dip baʊ ʌv əɹ hɛd, ɪn ə toʊn pɝhæps ə hɛɹ tu ɹɪspɛkfəl. nɑt fɑɹ ɪnʌf oʊvɝ ðə laɪn tə bi kɔl sɑɹkæzəm, ʌv kɔɹs. ʃi wɑz tu ɪntɛlədʒən tə pleɪs hɝsɛlf ɪn dʒɛpɝɾi; fulz sɛldəm əteɪn ə sɪɾɝz tʃɛɹ, əɹ hɛld ɪt lɔŋ, ən ɹoʊmændə hæd hɛld ə siɾ ɪn ðə hɔl fəɹ ɔlmoʊst eɪɾi jɪɹz. ðɪs wɑz əɹ sɛkən taɪm əz ə sɪɾɝ. ɛɡwin ɪnklaɪn əɹ oʊn hɛd slaɪtli, aɪz kul. ən æknɑlɪdʒmən ðət ʃi hæd bɪn ədʒɹɛst ən ðət ʃi hæd mɑɹk ðə toʊn. ə vɛɹi kɛɹfəl bæləns.

That last was said with a deep bow of her head, in a tone perhaps a hair too respectful. Not far enough over the line to be called sarcasm, of course. She was too intelligent to place herself in jeopardy; fools seldom attained a Sitter's chair, or held it long, and Romanda had held a seat in the Hall for almost eighty years. This was her second time as a Sitter. Egwene inclined her own head slightly, eyes cool. An acknowledgment that she had been addressed and that she had marked the tone. A very careful balance.

kweɪmɛsə wɑz lɛf lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊnd wɪð əɹ maʊθ oʊpən, ənsɝɾən wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz tə spik ðə fɹeɪzəz, ɔlweɪz ʌɾɝd baɪ ðə jʌŋɡəst sɪɾɝ pɹɛzənt, ðəɾ oʊpən ə fɔɹməl sɪɾɪŋ ə ðə hɔl. ɹoʊmændəz pleɪs ɡeɪv əɹ kənsɪɾɝəbəl ɪnfluəns ən səm mɛʒɝ ʌv əθɔɹəɾi, jɛɾ ʌðɝz kəɾ oʊvɝɹaɪɾ əɹ ɪn ðɪs. ə nʌmbɝ ə sɪɾɝz fɹaʊn əɹ ʃɪftəɾ ɑn ðɛɹ bɛntʃɪz, bʌt noʊ wʌn spoʊk. laɪɹɛl ɡlaɪɾɪd ɪndə ðə pəvɪljən, ɡlaɪɾɪd təwɔɹd ðə blu bɛntʃɪz. tɔl fəɹ ə kɛɹhinɪn wʊmən, wɪtʃ meɪɾ əɹ ʌv ævɝɪdʒ haɪt fəɹ ɔlmoʊst ɛniwɛɹ ɛls, ʃi wɑz ɛləɡən ɪn blu-slæʃt sɪlk ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɑn ðə bɑɾəs wɪð ɹɛɾ ən ɡoʊld, hɝ muvməns floʊɪŋ. səm sɛd ʃi hæd bɪn ə dænsɝ bɪfɔɹ kʌmɪŋ tə ðə taʊɝ əz ə nɑvəs. baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən, səmeɪlɪn, ðə fɑks-feɪst ɡɹin u ɛntɝɾ ɑn əɹ hilz, sim tə stʃɹaɪd mænɪʃli, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl ɑkwɝɾ əbaʊt ðə mʊɹændiən wʊmən. ðeɪ boʊθ sim sɝpɹaɪz tə si kweɪmɛsə ɑn əɹ fit, ən hɝid tə ðɛɹ ɹɪspɛktɪv bɛntʃɪz. ɪn ɛni keɪs, vɛɹɪlɪn bɪɡæn plʌkɪŋ ət kweɪmɛsəz sliv, əntɪl ði ɝæfɛlɪn wʊmən faɪnəli sæt daʊn. kweɪmɛsəz feɪs wɑz ə mæsk ə kul kɑmnəs, jɛt ʃi mænədʒ tə ɹeɪɾiət dɪsplɛʒɝ. ʃi pʊɾ ə ɡɹeɪt stɔɹ ɪn sɛɹəmoʊni. "pɝhæps ðəɹ ɪz ɹizən fəɹ fɔɹməl sɛʃən." ləleɪnz vɔɪs sim loʊ, æftɝ ɹoʊmændəz. ɝeɪnʒɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl əz ðoʊ ʃi hæɾ ɔl ðə taɪm ɪn ðə wɝld, ʃi ɹoʊz ɡɹeɪsfəli, vɛɹi dɪlɪbɝətli nɑt lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɛɡwin. ə bjuɾəfəl wʊmən, ləleɪn stɪl wɑz dɪɡnəɾi ɪnkɑɹnət. "ɪt simz ðət tɔks wɪð ɪleɪɾə hæv bɪn laɪsənst," ʃi sɛd kuli. "aɪ də ʌndɝstæn ðəɾ ʌndɝ ðə lɔ ʌv wɔɹ, wi nid nɑt bi kənsʌltəɾ ɑn ðɪs, bʌɾ aɪ ɔlsoʊ bɪliv wi ʃəd dɪskʌs ɪɾ ɪn sɛʃən, ɪspɛʃli sɪns mɛni ʌv əs feɪs ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv biɪŋ stɪld ɪf ɪleɪɾə ɹɪteɪnz ɛni paʊɝ."

Kwamesa was left looking around with her mouth open, uncertain whether she was to speak the phrases, always uttered by the youngest Sitter present, that opened a formal sitting of the Hall. Romanda's place gave her considerable influence and some measure of authority, yet others could override her in this. A number of Sitters frowned or shifted on their benches, but no one spoke. Lyrelle glided into the pavilion, glided toward the Blue benches. Tall for a Cairhienin woman, which made her of average height for almost anywhere else, she was elegant in blue-slashed silk embroidered on the bodice with red and gold, her movements flowing. Some said she had been a dancer before coming to the Tower as a novice. By comparison, Samalin, the fox-faced Green who entered on her heels, seemed to stride mannishly, though there was nothing at all awkward about the Murandian woman. They both seemed surprised to see Kwamesa on her feet, and hurried to their respective benches. In any case, Varilin began plucking at Kwamesa's sleeve, until the Arafellin woman finally sat down. Kwamesa's face was a mask of cool calmness, yet she managed to radiate displeasure. She put a great store in ceremony. "Perhaps there is reason for formal session." Lelaine's voice seemed low, after Romanda's. Arranging her shawl as though she had all the time in the world, she rose gracefully, very deliberately not looking at Egwene. A beautiful woman, Lelaine still was dignity incarnate. "It seems that talks with Elaida have been licensed," she said coolly. "I do understand that under the Law of War, we need not be consulted on this, but I also believe we should discuss it in session, especially since many of us face the possibility of being stilled if Elaida retains any power."

ðət wɝd, "stɪld," noʊ lɔŋɡɝ kæɹid kwaɪt ðə tʃɪl ɪt hæd bɪfɔɹ sɪuən ən lin wɝ hil fɹəm stɪlɪŋ, bʌt mɝmɝz ɹoʊz əmʌŋ ðə wɑtʃɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ kɹaʊɾəd bɪhaɪn ðə bɛntʃɪz. ɪt sim ðət nuz ə nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz hæd nɑt spɹɛɾ əz kwɪkli əz ɛɡwin ɪkspɛktəd. ʃi kəd nɑt tɛl wɛðɝ ðə sɪstɝz wɝ ɪksaɪɾəd əɹ dɪsmeɪd, bʌt klɪɹli ðeɪ wɝ sɝpɹaɪzd. ɪnkluɾɪŋ səm ə ðə sɪɾɝz. dʒɑnjə, hu hæɾ ɛntɝd waɪl ləleɪn wɑz spikɪŋ, stɑp dɛɾ ɪn əɹ tʃɹæks, soʊ ðəɾ ənʌðɝ nɑɾ ə sɪstɝz kʌmɪŋ ɪn nɪɹli wɔkt ɪndə hɝ. ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ðə blu, ðən lɔŋɡɝ ən hɑɹɾɝ əɾ ɛɡwin hɝsɛlf.

That word, "stilled," no longer carried quite the chill it had before Siuan and Leane were Healed from stilling, but murmurs rose among the watching Aes Sedai crowded behind the benches. It seemed that news of negotiations had not spread as quickly as Egwene expected. She could not tell whether the sisters were excited or dismayed, but clearly they were surprised. Including some of the Sitters. Janya, who had entered while Lelaine was speaking, stopped dead in her tracks, so that another knot of sisters coming in nearly walked into her. She stared at the Blue, then longer and harder at Egwene herself.

ɹoʊmændə pleɪnli hæd nɑt hɝɾ iðɝ, fɹəm ðə weɪ hɝ maʊθ hɑɹɾənd, ən ɪkspɹɛʃənz əmʌŋ ðə tu-jʌŋ sɪɾɝz ɹeɪnʒd fɹəm bɛɹænəz aɪsi kɑm tə əmeɪzd ɑn səmeɪlɪnz pɑɹɾ ən oʊpənli əpɔld ɑn sæliɾəz. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ʃɛɹiəm sweɪɾ ɑn əɹ fit fəɹ ə moʊmənt. ɛɡwin hoʊp ðə wʊmən wəd nɑt sɪk ʌp ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ɪntaɪɝ hɔl. mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ, ðoʊ, wɝ ðə ɹiækʃənz ə ðoʊz dɛlænə hæd ɹipɔɹɾəd əz spikɪŋ ə nɪɡoʊʃieɪʃən. vɛɹɪlɪn sæt vɛɹi stɪl ən sim tə bi səpɹɛsɪŋ ə smaɪl əz ʃi stʌɾid əɹ skɝts, bʌt mæɡlə lɪkt əɹ lɪps hɛzɪɾəntli ən kæst ɡlænsɪz ət ɹoʊmændə fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ. sɛɝɔɪjə hæɾ əɹ aɪz kloʊzd, ən əɹ maʊθ muvd əz ðoʊ ʃi maɪt bi ʌɾɝɪŋ ə pɹɛɹ.

Romanda plainly had not heard either, from the way her mouth hardened, and expressions among the too-young Sitters ranged from Berana's icy calm to amazed on Samalin's part and openly appalled on Salita's. For that matter, Sheriam swayed on her feet for a moment. Egwene hoped the woman would not sick up in front of the entire Hall. More interesting, though, were the reactions of those Delana had reported as speaking of negotiation. Varilin sat very still and seemed to be suppressing a smile as she studied her skirts, but Magla licked her lips hesitantly and cast glances at Romanda from the corner of her eye. Saroiya had her eyes closed, and her mouth moved as though she might be uttering a prayer.

feɪsɛl ən tɑkimə ɡeɪzd əɾ ɛɡwin wɛɹɪŋ ɔlmoʊst aɪdɛntɪkəl taɪni fɹaʊnz. ðən itʃ noʊɾəst ði ʌðɝ ən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, kwɪkli əsumɪŋ sətʃ ɹiɡəl sɝɛnəɾi ðət ðeɪ sim tə bi mɑkɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ. ɪt wɑz vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ. ʃʊɹli baɪ naʊ bioʊnɪn hæɾ ɪnfɔɹmd ɔl ə ðɛm wʌɾ ɛɡwin hæd sɛd, jɛɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ vɛɹɪlɪn, ðeɪ simd ʌpsɛt. ðeɪ kəd nɑt pɑsəbli hæv θɔt ðeɪ maɪt ɹɪli nəɡoʊʃieɪɾ ən ɛnd.

Faiselle and Takima gazed at Egwene wearing almost identical tiny frowns. Then each noticed the other and gave a start, quickly assuming such regal serenity that they seemed to be mocking one another. It was very strange. Surely by now Beonin had informed all of them what Egwene had said, yet except for Varilin, they seemed upset. They could not possibly have thought they might really negotiate an end.

ɛvɹi wʊmən sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðɪs hɔl ɹɪsk stɪlɪŋ ən ɛksəkjuʃən dʒʌs baɪ biɪŋ ðɛɹ. ɪf ðəɹ ɛvɝ hæd bɪn ɛni pæθ bæk ɪksɛp tə ɹimuv ɪleɪɾə, ɪt hæd wɑʃt əweɪ mʌnθs əɡoʊ, wən ðɪs hɔl wɑz tʃoʊzən.

Every woman sitting in this Hall risked stilling and execution just by being there. If there ever had been any path back except to remove Elaida, it had washed away months ago, when this Hall was chosen.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɡoʊɪŋ bæk fɹəm ðæt. ləleɪn əpɪɹd sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð ðə ɹiækʃənz tə hɝ wɝdz - smʌɡ əz ə kæɾ ɪn ðə mɪlkbɑɹn, ɪn fækt - bʌt bɪfɔɹ ʃi fɪnɪʃt sɛɾəlɪŋ bæk ɑntu hɝ bɛntʃ, mɔɹiə baʊndəd tə hɝ fit. ðət kɑɾ ɛvɹi aɪ ən kɑzd ə fju mɔɹ mɝmɝz. noʊ wʌn kɔl mɔɹiə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɡɹeɪsfəl, bʌt ði ɪliɑnɝ wɑz nɑɾ ə wʊmən u baʊndəd. "ðæt də nid dɪskʌʃən," ʃi sɛd, "bʌɾ ɪt mʌs kʌm leɪɾɝ. ðɪs hɔl dɪd bi kɔl baɪ θɹi sɪɾɝz æskɪŋ ðə seɪm kwɛstʃən. ðət kwɛstʃən mʌs bi ədʒɹɛs bɪfɔɹ ɛni ʌðɝ. wʌɾ ækæɹən ən əɹ pɑɹɾi faɪnd? aɪ də æsk ðeɪ bi bɹɔɾ ɪn tə meɪk ðɛɹ ɹipɔɹt bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl."

There was no going back from that. Lelaine appeared satisfied with the reactions to her words - smug as a cat in the milkbarn, in fact - but before she finished settling back onto her bench, Moria bounded to her feet. That caught every eye and caused a few more murmurs. No one called Moria particularly graceful, but the Illianer was not a woman who bounded. "That do need discussion," she said, "but it must come later. This Hall did be called by three Sitters asking the same question. That question must be addressed before any other. What did Akarrin and her party find? I do ask they be brought in to make their report before the Hall."

ləleɪn skaʊld əɾ əɹ fɛloʊ blu, ən ʃi kəd skaʊl wɪð ðə bɛst, hɝ aɪz əz ʃɑɹp əz ɔlz, jɛt taʊɝ lɔ wɑz kwaɪt pleɪn ɑn ðə sʌbʒɪkt, fəɹ wʌns, ən wɛl noʊn tə ɛvɹiwʌn. ɔfən ɪnʌf, ɪt wɑz niðɝ. ɪn ən ənstɛɾi vɔɪs, ʃɛɹiəm æskt ələdʒɹɪn, ðə jʌŋɡəst æftɝ kweɪmɛsə, tə ɡoʊ ən ɛskɔɹɾ ækæɹən ən ði ʌðɝz bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl. ɛɡwin dɪsaɪɾɪd ʃi hæd bɛs tɔk tə ðə faɪɝ-hɛɹd wʊmən əz sun əz ðɪs sɪɾɪŋ wɑz dʌn. ɪf ʃɛɹiəm kɛpt ɑn ðɪs weɪ, ʃi wəd sun bɪkʌm wɝs ðən jusləs əz kipɝ. dɛlænə dɑɹɾɪd ɪndə ðə pəvɪljən əmɪɾ ə klʌstɝ ə sɪstɝz, ðə læst sɪɾɝ tə ɝaɪv, ən wɑz ɑn əɹ bɛntʃ dʒɹeɪpɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl əkɹɔs əɹ ɛlboʊz baɪ ðə taɪm ðə plʌmp waɪt sɪɾɝ ɹɪtɝnd wɪð ðə sɪks sɪstɝz ən lɛɾ əm tə stæn bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwin. ðeɪ mʌst əv lɛf ðɛɹ kloʊks ɑn ðə wɔkweɪ aʊtsaɪd, kəz nʌn wɑz wɛɹɪŋ wʌn naʊ. dɛlænə pɪɹɾ ət ðɛm, ən ənsɝɾən fɹaʊn dʒɹɔɪŋ əɹ aɪbɹaʊz daʊn. ʃi simd aʊɾ ə bɹɛθ, əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd ɹʌn tə ɡɛt ðɛɹ.

Lelaine scowled at her fellow Blue, and she could scowl with the best, her eyes as sharp as awls, yet Tower law was quite plain on the subject, for once, and well known to everyone. Often enough, it was neither. In an unsteady voice, Sheriam asked Aledrin, the youngest after Kwamesa, to go and escort Akarrin and the others before the Hall. Egwene decided she had best talk to the fire-haired woman as soon as this sitting was done. If Sheriam kept on this way, she would soon become worse than useless as Keeper. Delana darted into the pavilion amid a cluster of sisters, the last Sitter to arrive, and was on her bench draping her shawl across her elbows by the time the plump White Sitter returned with the six sisters and led them to stand before Egwene. They must have left their cloaks on the walkway outside, because none was wearing one now. Delana peered at them, an uncertain frown drawing her eyebrows down. She seemed out of breath, as though she had run to get there.

əpɛɹənli, ələdʒɹɪn fɛl ðət wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ðə sɪɾɪŋ wɑz fɔɹməl, ʃi, ət list, ʃəd kæɹi ɑn wɪð pɹɑpɝ fɔɹmæləɾi. "ju hæv bɪn kɔl bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ tə ɹɪleɪt wʌt juv sin," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə stʃɹɔŋ tæɹɑbənɝ æksɛnt. hɝ kɑmbəneɪʃən ə dɑɹk ɡoʊldən hɛɹ ən bɹaʊn aɪz wɑz nɑɾ ənjuʒəwəl ɪn tæɹɑbən, ðoʊ ʃi wɔɹ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ-lɛŋθ hɛɹ kɑɾ ɪn ə leɪsi waɪt nɛt ɹæðɝ ðən ɪn biɾɪd bɹeɪdz. "aɪ tʃɑɹdʒ jə tə spik ə ðiz θɪŋz wɪθaʊt ði ɪveɪʒən əɹ hoʊldɪŋ bæk, ən tə ænsɝ ɔl kwɛstʃənz ɪn kəmplit fʊlnəs, livɪŋ aʊt nʌθɪŋ. seɪ naʊ ðət jəl də soʊ, ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ ən baɪ jəɹ hoʊp ə ðə ɹibɝθ ən sælveɪʃən, əɹ sʌfɝ ðə kɑnsəkwɛnsəz." ðoʊz eɪntʃən sɪstɝz u meɪd ðɪs pɑɹɾ ə ðə hɔlz sɛɹəmoʊni hæd bɪn wɛl əwɛɹ ə haʊ mʌtʃ liweɪ ðə θɹi oʊðz ɡeɪv. ə lɪɾəl lɛft aʊt hɪɹ, ə tʌtʃ ə veɪɡnɪs ðɛɹ, ən ðə hoʊl minɪŋ ʌv wʌt jə sɛd kəd bi stʊɾ ɑn ɪts hɛd, ɔl waɪl jə spoʊk oʊnli ðə tʃɹuθ. ækæɹən spoʊk ði əʃʊɹəns laʊdli ən sʌmwʌɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli, ði ʌðɝ faɪv wɪð vɛɹiɪŋ lɛvəlz ə fɔɹmæləɾi ən sɛlfkɑnʃəsnəs. mɛni sɪstɝz hæd lɪv ðɛɹ ɪntaɪɝ lɪvz wɪθaʊt biɪŋ kɔl tə tɛstəfaɪ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə hɔl. ələdʒɹɪn weɪɾəd əntɪl ðə læs hæd ɹɪpiɾɪd ɛvɹi wɝd bɪfɔɹ mɑɹtʃɪŋ bæk təwɔɹɾ əɹ bɛntʃ. "tɛl əs wʌt jə dɪd si, ækæɹən," mɔɹiə sɛɾ əz sun əz ðə waɪt sɪɾɝ tɝn əweɪ. ələdʒɹɪn stɪfən vɪzəbli, ən wən ʃi tʊk əɹ sit, hɝ feɪs wɑz ʌɾɝli ɪkspɹɛʃənləs, bʌt bɹaɪt spɑts ə kʌlɝ haɪlaɪɾɪd əɹ tʃiks. mɔɹiə ʃəɾ əv weɪɾəd. ʃi mʌst əv bɪn vɛɹi æŋkʃəs.

Apparently, Aledrin felt that whether or not the sitting was formal, she, at least, should carry on with proper formality. "You have been called before the Hall of the Tower to relate what you have seen," she said in a strong Taraboner accent. Her combination of dark golden hair and brown eyes was not unusual in Tarabon, though she wore her shoulder-length hair caught in a lacy white net rather than in beaded braids. "I charge you to speak of these things without the evasion or holding back, and to answer all questions in complete fullness, leaving out nothing. Say now that you will do so, under the Light and by your hope of the rebirth and salvation, or suffer the consequences." Those ancient sisters who made this part of the Hall's ceremony had been well aware of how much leeway the Three Oaths gave. A little left out here, a touch of vagueness there, and the whole meaning of what you said could be stood on its head, all while you spoke only the truth. Akarrin spoke the assurance loudly and somewhat impatiently, the other five with varying levels of formality and selfconsciousness. Many sisters had lived their entire lives without being called to testify in front of the Hall. Aledrin waited until the last had repeated every word before marching back toward her bench. "Tell us what you did see, Akarrin," Moria said as soon as the White Sitter turned away. Aledrin stiffened visibly, and when she took her seat, her face was utterly expressionless, but bright spots of color highlighted her cheeks. Moria should have waited. She must have been very anxious.

baɪ tʃɹədɪʃən - ðəɹ wɝ mɛni mɔɹ tʃɹədɪʃənz ən kʌstəmz ðən lɔz, ən ðə laɪt nu ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ lɔz ðən ɛniwʌn ɹɪli nu, ɔfən kɑntʃɹədɪktɝi leɪɝz ə lɔ leɪd daʊn oʊvɝ ðə sɛntʃɝiz, bʌt tʃɹədɪʃən ən kʌstəm ɹuld ɛɛs sədaɪ əz mʌtʃ əz taʊɝ lɔ ɛvɝ hæd, pɝhæps mɔɹ soʊ - baɪ tʃɹədɪʃən, ækæɹən ədʒɹɛst əɹ ɹɪspɑns tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit.

By tradition - there were many more traditions and customs than laws, and the Light knew there were more laws than anyone really knew, often contradictory layers of law laid down over the centuries, but tradition and custom ruled Aes Sedai as much as Tower law ever had, perhaps more so - by tradition, Akarrin addressed her response to the Amyrlin Seat.

"wʌt wi sɔ, mʌðɝ, wɑz ə ɹʌfli sɝkjəlɝ hoʊl ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd," ʃi sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ fəɹ ɛmfəsəs ət nɪɹli ɛvɹi ʌðɝ wɝd. ʃi sim tə tʃuz ðoʊz wɝdz kɛɹfəli, əz ɪf tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ʃi wɑz æbsəlutli klɪɹ tə ɛvɹiwʌn. "ɪt meɪ hæv bɪn ə pɹɪsaɪs sɝkəl, ɝɪdʒənəli, ʃeɪp laɪk hæf ʌv ə bɔl, bʌt ðə saɪdz əv kəlæpst ɪn səm pleɪsəz. ðə hoʊl ɪz əpɹɑksəmətli θɹi maɪlz əkɹɔs ən pɝhæps ə maɪl ən ə hæf dip." sʌmwʌn ɡæsp laʊdli, ən ækæɹən fɹaʊn əz ðoʊ huɛvɝ ɪt wɑz hæd tʃɹaɪd tə ɪntɝʌpt. ʃi wɛn ɑn wɪθaʊt pɔzɪŋ, haʊɛvɝ. "wi kəd nɑt bi ɪntaɪɝli sɝɾən ə ðə dɛpθ. ðə bɑɾəm ɪz kʌvɝd wɪð wɔɾɝ ən aɪs. wi bɪliv ɪt meɪ bɪkʌm ə leɪk, ɪvɛntʃəwəli. ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, wi wɝ eɪbəl tə æsɝteɪn əɹ ɪɡzæk loʊkeɪʃən wɪθaʊt tu mʌtʃ dɪfəkəlti, ən wəɹ pɹipɛɹd tə seɪ ðət ðə hoʊl ɪz loʊkeɪɾəd wɛɹ ðə sɪɾi kɔld ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ wʌns stʊd." ʃi fɛl saɪlənt, ən fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmən ði oʊnli saʊnd wɑz ðə ɹʌsəl ə skɝts əz ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli.

"What we saw, Mother, was a roughly circular hole in the ground," she said, nodding for emphasis at nearly every other word. She seemed to choose those words carefully, as if to make sure she was absolutely clear to everyone. "It may have been a precise circle, originally, shaped like half of a ball, but the sides have collapsed in some places. The hole is approximately three miles across and perhaps a mile and a half deep." Someone gasped loudly, and Akarrin frowned as though whoever it was had tried to interrupt. She went on without pausing, however. "We could not be entirely certain of the depth. The bottom is covered with water and ice. We believe it may become a lake, eventually. In any event, we were able to ascertain our exact location without too much difficulty, and we are prepared to say that the hole is located where the city called Shadar Logoth once stood." She fell silent, and for a long moment the only sound was the rustle of skirts as Aes Sedai shifted uneasily.

ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə ʃɪft, tu. laɪt, ə hoʊl ðət saɪz wəd kʌvɝ hæf ə tɑɹ vəlɑn! "du juv ɛni aɪdiə haʊ ðɪs . . . hoʊl . . . wɑz kɹieɪɾəd, ækæɹən?" ʃi æsk faɪnəli. ʃi wɑz kwaɪt pɹaʊɾ ə haʊ stɛɾi hɝ vɔɪs wɑz. ʃɛɹiəm wɑz æktʃəli  tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ! ɛɡwin hoʊp noʊ wʌn ɛls noʊɾəst. eɪ kipɝz ækʃənz ɔlweɪz ɹəflɛktəɾ ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn. ɪf ðə kipɝ ʃoʊd fɪɹ, ə ɡʊd mɛni sɪstɝz wəd θɪŋk ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑz əfɹeɪd. ðət wɑz hɑɹdli sʌmθɪŋ ʃi wɑntəɾ ɛniwʌn tə səspɛkt.

Egwene wanted to shift, too. Light, a hole that size would cover half of Tar Valon! "Do you have any idea how this . . . hole . . . was created, Akarrin?" she asked finally. She was quite proud of how steady her voice was. Sheriam was actually trembling! Egwene hoped no one else noticed. A Keeper's actions always reflected on the Amyrlin. If the Keeper showed fear, a good many sisters would think that Egwene was afraid. That was hardly something she wanted anyone to suspect.

"itʃ ʌv əs wɑz tʃoʊzən kəz wɪv səm əbɪləɾi ət ɹiɾɪŋ ɹɛzəduz, mʌðɝ. bɛɾɝ ðən moʊst, ɪn tʃɹuθ." soʊ ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn tʃoʊzən sɪmpli kəz noʊ wʌn stʃɹɔŋɝ wɑz ɪntʃɹəstəd. ðəɹ wɑz ə lɛsən ɪn ðæt. wʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd wɑz sɛldəm əz sɪmpəl əz ɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə sɝfəs. ɛɡwin wɪʃt ʃi kəd stɑp hævɪŋ tə ɹilɝn lɛsənz ʃi hæd θɔɾ ɔlɹɛɾi lɝnd. "naɪsən ɪz ðə bɛst ʌv əs ət ðæt," ækæɹən wɛn ɑn. "wɪð jəɹ pɝmɪʃən, mʌðɝ, əl lɛɾ əɹ ænsɝ." naɪsən smuðd əɹ dɑɹk wʊlən skɝts nɝvəsli ən klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt. ə ɡæŋli ɡɹeɪ wɪð ə stʃɹɔŋ tʃɪn ən stɑɹtlɪŋli blu aɪz, ʃi hæd səm smɔl ɹipjuɾ ɪn mæɾɝz ə lɔ ən tʃɹiɾiz, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɑbviəsli ənizi əbaʊt spikɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl. ʃi lʊk stʃɹeɪɾ əɾ ɛɡwin wɪð ði ɛɹ ə sʌmwʌn u dɪd nɑt wɑnə æktʃəli  si ɔl ðə sɪɾɝz əsɛmbəld. "ɡɪvən ði əmaʊn ə seɪaɪdɑɹ juz ðɛɹ, mʌðɝ, ɪt wɑz noʊ sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ðə ɹɛzəduz nɪɹ əz θɪk əz ðə snoʊ." mɔɹ ðən ə hɪn ə mʊɹændi klʌŋ tə hɝ tʌŋ, ə lɪltɪŋ saʊnd. "ivən æftɝ soʊ lɔŋ, ʃʊɾə əv bɪn eɪbəl tə ɡɹæsp səm aɪdiə ʌv wʌt wɑz woʊvən, ɪf ɪt wɑz əɾ ɔl laɪk ɛniθɪŋ aɪm fəmɪljɝ wɪð, bʌɾ aɪ hæv nʌn. aɪ kəɾ ɔl bʌt tʃɹeɪs ðə wiv, mʌðɝ, ən ɪt meɪd noʊ sɛns əɾ ɔl. nʌn. ɪn fækt, ɪt sim soʊ eɪliən, ɪt maɪt nɑɾ əv bɪn. . . . " klɪɹɪŋ əɹ θɹoʊɾ əɡɛn, ʃi swɑloʊd. hɝ feɪs ɡɹu ə lɪɾəl pəlɝ. "ɪt maɪt nɑɾ əv bɪn woʊvən baɪ ə wʊmən. wi θɔɾ ɪt mʌst əv bɪn ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ʌv kɔɹs, soʊ aɪ tɛstəd fəɹ ɹɛzənəns. wi ɔl dɪd." hæftɝnɪŋ tə dʒɛstʃɝ tə hɝ kəmpænjənz, ʃi hɝidli tɝn bæk. ʃi dɛfənətli pɹəfɝd lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɛɡwin tə ðə sɪɾɝz, ɔl linɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪntɛnli. "aɪ kæn seɪ wʌt wɑz dʌn, bɪɑn skupɪŋ θɹi maɪlz aʊɾ ə ði ɝθ, əɹ haʊ ɪt wɑz dʌn, bʌt seɪɾɪn wɑz dɛfənətli juzd, tu. ðə ɹɛzənəns wɑz soʊ stʃɹɔŋ, ʃʊɾə əv bɪn eɪbəl tə smɛl ɪt. ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ seɪɾɪn juz ðən seɪaɪdɑɹ, mʌtʃ mɔɹ, dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊn bɪsaɪɾ ə fʊthɪl. ən ðəɾ ɪz ɔl aɪ kən seɪ, mʌðɝ." ə saʊn flʌɾɝd θɹu ðə pəvɪljən, ðə saʊn ə sɪstɝz lɛɾɪŋ aʊt ðə bɹɛθ ðeɪ hæd bɪn hoʊldɪŋ. ʃɛɹiəmz ɛkshəleɪʃən sim ðə laʊɾəst, bʌt pɝhæps ðət wɑz dʒʌs kəz ʃi wɑz nɪɹəst.

"Each of us was chosen because we have some ability at reading residues, Mother. Better than most, in truth." So they had not been chosen simply because no one stronger was interested. There was a lesson in that. What Aes Sedai did was seldom as simple as it appeared on the surface. Egwene wished she could stop having to relearn lessons she had thought already learned. "Nisain is the best of us at that," Akarrin went on. "With your permission, Mother, I will let her answer." Nisain smoothed her dark woolen skirts nervously and cleared her throat. A gangly Gray with a strong chin and startlingly blue eyes, she had some small repute in matters of law and treaties, but she was obviously uneasy about speaking before the Hall. She looked straight at Egwene with the air of someone who did not want to actually see all the Sitters assembled. "Given the amount of saidar used there, Mother, it was no surprise to find the residues near as thick as the snow." More than a hint of Murandy clung to her tongue, a lilting sound. "Even after so long, I should have been able to grasp some idea of what was woven, if it was at all like anything I'm familiar with, but I have none. I could all but trace the weave, Mother, and it made no sense at all. None. In fact, it seemed so alien, it might not have been. . . . " Clearing her throat again, she swallowed. Her face grew a little paler. "It might not have been woven by a woman. We thought it must have been the Forsaken, of course, so I tested for resonance. We all did." Halfturning to gesture to her companions, she hurriedly turned back. She definitely preferred looking at Egwene to the Sitters, all leaning forward intently. "I can't say what was done, beyond scooping three miles out of the earth, or how it was done, but saidin was definitely used, too. The resonance was so strong, we should have been able to smell it. There was more saidin used than saidar, much more, Dragonmount beside a foothill. And that is all I can say, Mother." A sound fluttered through the pavilion, the sound of sisters letting out the breath they had been holding. Sheriam's exhalation seemed the loudest, but perhaps that was just because she was nearest.

ɛɡwin skuld əɹ feɪs tə stɪlnəs. ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ən ə wiv ðət kəd tɛɹ əweɪ hæf ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɪf mɑlɪn dɪd pɹəpoʊz flaɪt, kəd ʃi tʃɹaɪ tə meɪk ðə sɪstɝz ɹɪmeɪn ən feɪs ðæt? kəd ʃi əbændən tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ðə taʊɝ, ən ðə laɪt nu haʊ mɛni tɛnz ə θaʊzənz ə laɪvz? "dʌz ɛniwʌn ɛls əv ə kwɛstʃən?" ʃi æskt.

Egwene schooled her face to stillness. The Forsaken, and a weave that could tear away half of Tar Valon. If Malind did propose flight, could she try to make the sisters remain and face that? Could she abandon Tar Valon, and the Tower, and the Light knew how many tens of thousands of lives? "Does anyone else have a question?" she asked.

"aɪ hæv wʌn," ɹoʊmændə sɛɾ ɪn ə dʒɹaɪ toʊn. hɝ kɑm hæd nɑt kɹæk baɪ ə hɛɹ. "bʌt nɑt fəɹ ðiz sɪstɝz. ɪf noʊ wʌn əz ɛni fɝðɝ kwɛstʃənz fəɹ ðɛm, aɪm ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wəd laɪk tə bi əweɪ fɹəm hævɪŋ ðə hɔl stɛɹ ət ðɛm."

"I have one," Romanda said in a dry tone. Her calm had not cracked by a hair. "But not for these sisters. If no one has any further questions for them, I'm sure they would like to be away from having the Hall stare at them."

ɪt wɑz nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli hɝ pleɪs tə sədʒɛs ðæt, bʌt niðɝ wɑz ɪt pɹɪsaɪsli nɑt, soʊ ɛɡwin lɛɾ ɪt pæs. noʊ wʌn ɛls hæd kwɛstʃənz fəɹ ækæɹən əɹ əɹ kəmpænjənz, əz ɪt tɝn aʊt, ən ɹoʊmændə ɔfɝɾ əm sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli wɔɹm θæŋks fəɹ ðɛɹ ɛfɝts. əɡɛn, nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli hɝ pleɪs.

It was not precisely her place to suggest that, but neither was it precisely not, so Egwene let it pass. No one else had questions for Akarrin or her companions, as it turned out, and Romanda offered them surprisingly warm thanks for their efforts. Again, not precisely her place.

"hu ɪz jəɹ kwɛstʃən fɔɹ?" ɛɡwin æskt əz ækæɹən ən ði ʌðɝ faɪv skæɾɝd tə dʒɔɪn ðə ɡɹoʊɪŋ nʌmbɝz ə sɪstɝz kɹaʊɾɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə stænd-læmps ən bɹeɪʒɝz. ðeɪ wɝ iɡɝ, əz ɹoʊmændə hæd sɛd, tə ɡɛɾ aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə hɔlz aɪz, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd wɑnə hɪɹ wʌt keɪm ə ðɛɹ wɝk. ɪt wɑz vɛɹi dɪfəkəl fəɹ ɛɡwin tə kip æspɹəɾi aʊɾ ə hɝ vɔɪs. ɹoʊmændə əfɛktəd nɑt tə noʊɾəs.

"Who is your question for?" Egwene asked as Akarrin and the other five scattered to join the growing numbers of sisters crowding among the stand-lamps and braziers. They were eager, as Romanda had said, to get out from under the Hall's eyes, but they did want to hear what came of their work. It was very difficult for Egwene to keep asperity out of her voice. Romanda affected not to notice.

əɹ pɝhæps dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs.

Or perhaps did not notice.

"fɔɹ mɔɹiə," ʃi sɛd. "wi səspɛktəd ðə fɔɹseɪkən fɹəm ðə stɑɹt. wi nu ðət wʌtɛvɝ hæpənd wɑz paʊɝfəl, ən fɑɹ əweɪ. ɔl wiv lɝnd, ɹɪli, ɪz ðət ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ ɪz ɡɔn, ən ə ðəɾ aɪ kən oʊnli seɪ, ðə wɝld ɪz bɛɾɝ ɔf wɪθaʊt ðət sɪŋkhoʊl ə ðə ʃædoʊ." ʃi fɪks ðə blu sɪɾɝ wɪð ə fɹaʊn ðət hæd meɪd mɛni ən ɛɛs sədaɪ skwɝm laɪk ə nɑvəs. "maɪ kwɛstʃən ɪz ðɪs. hæz ɛniθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd fəɹ ʌs?"

"For Moria," she said. "We suspected the Forsaken from the start. We knew that whatever happened was powerful, and far away. All we've learned, really, is that Shadar Logoth is gone, and of that I can only say, the world is better off without that sinkhole of the Shadow." She fixed the Blue Sitter with a frown that had made many an Aes Sedai squirm like a novice. "My question is this. Has anything changed for us?"

"ɪt ʃʊd," mɔɹiə ɹɪplaɪd, miɾɪŋ ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz stɛɹ lɛvəli. ʃi maɪt nɑɾ əv bɪn ɪn ðə hɔl əz lɔŋ əz ɹoʊmændə, bʌt sɪɾɝz wɝ ət list səpoʊzədli ɑn ən ikwəl fʊɾɪŋ. "wi hæv lɔŋ hæd pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz ɪn keɪs ðə fɔɹseɪkən də kʌm əɡɛnst ʌs. ɛvɹi sɪstɝ dʌz noʊ tə fɔɹm ə sɝkəl ɪf ʃi bi eɪbəl, əɹ dʒɔɪn wʌn ʃi dʌz faɪn fɔɹmɪŋ, əntɪl ɛvɹi sɝkəl dʌz ɹitʃ θɝtin. ɛvɹiwʌn ɪz tə bi bɹɔɾ ɪn, ivən ðə nɑvəsɪz, ivən ðə nuəst." ləleɪn lʊkt ʌp əɾ əɹ ʃɑɹpli, bʌt haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ʃi wɑntəd tə tʃaɪd mɔɹiə, ðeɪ wɝ ə ðə seɪm ədʒɑ. ðeɪ mʌst ɡɪv ət lis ði əpɪɹəns ʌv ə kɑmən fɹʌnt. ði ɛfɝɾ ə kipɪŋ əɹ maʊθ ʃʌt θɪn ləleɪnz lɪps, ðoʊ.

"It should," Moria replied, meeting the other woman's stare levelly. She might not have been in the Hall as long as Romanda, but Sitters were at least supposedly on an equal footing. "We have long had preparations in case the Forsaken do come against us. Every sister does know to form a circle if she be able, or join one she does find forming, until every circle does reach thirteen. Everyone is to be brought in, even the novices, even the newest." Lelaine looked up at her sharply, but however much she wanted to chide Moria, they were of the same Ajah. They must give at least the appearance of a common front. The effort of keeping her mouth shut thinned Lelaine's lips, though.

ɹoʊmændə wɑz ʌndɝ noʊ sətʃ kənstʃɹeɪnt. "mʌs jə ɪkspleɪn wʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn hɪɹ ɔlɹɛɾi noʊz?

Romanda was under no such constraint. "Must you explain what everyone here already knows?

wəɹ ðə wʌnz u meɪd ðoʊz ɝeɪnʒmənts. pɝhæps juv fɝɡɑɾən?" ðɪs taɪm, hɝ vɔɪs wɑz kʌɾɪŋ. oʊpən dɪspleɪz ʌv æŋɡɝ wɝ fɔɹbɪɾən ɪn ðə hɔl, bʌt nɑt ɡoʊɾɪŋ.

We are the ones who made those arrangements. Perhaps you have forgotten?" This time, her voice was cutting. Open displays of anger were forbidden in the Hall, but not goading.

ɪf mɔɹiə fɛl ðə pɹɪk, ðoʊ, ʃi ɡeɪv noʊ aʊtwɝd saɪn bɪɑn ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl. "aɪ mʌst ɪkspleɪn fɹəm ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, kəz wɪv noʊ θɔt fɑɹ ɪnʌf. mɑlɪnd, kən əɹ sɝkəlz stæn əɡɛnst wʌɾ ækæɹən ən naɪsən dɪskɹaɪbd?" dɪspaɪɾ əɹ fɪɹs aɪz, mɑlɪnz fʊl maʊθ ɔlweɪz lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə smaɪl, bʌt ʃi wɑz kwaɪt stɝn əz ʃi stʊd, ən ʃi stɛɹɾ əɾ itʃ sɪɾɝ ɪn tɝn əz ɪf tə ɪmpɹɛs əɹ wɝdz ɑn ðɛm. "ðeɪ kænɑt. ivən ɪf wi ɹiɝeɪnʒ mæɾɝz soʊ ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst sɪstɝz ɑɹ ɔlweɪz ɪn ðə seɪm sɝkəl - ən ðət minz ðeɪ mʌs lɪv, iɾ ən slip təɡɛðɝ, ɪf ðəɹ tə lɪŋk ɑn ðə moʊmənt -  ivən ðɛn, wi wəd bi maɪs feɪsɪŋ ə kæt. ɪnʌf maɪs kən oʊvɝwɛlm ivən ə lɑɹdʒ hʌŋɡɹi kæt, bʌt nɑt bɪfɔɹ mɛni maɪs ɑɹ dɛd. ɪf ɪnʌf ə ðiz maɪs daɪ, ðoʊ, ðə waɪt taʊɝ daɪz." əɡɛn ðət ɹɪpəl ə saɪz ɹæn ðoʊ ðə pəvɪljən laɪk ən ənstɛɾi bɹiz. ɛɡwin mænədʒ tə kip əɹ feɪs kɑm, bʌt ʃi hæd tə fɔɹs əɹ fɪsts tə ɹɪlæks ðɛɹ ɡɹɪp ɑn əɹ skɝt. wɪtʃ wəd ðeɪ pɹəpoʊz, ən əsɔlt əɹ flaɪt? laɪt, haʊ kəd ʃi əpoʊz ðɛm? seɪm ədʒɑ əɹ nɑt, ləleɪn kəd teɪk ðə stʃɹeɪn noʊ lɔŋɡɝ.

If Moria felt the prick, though, she gave no outward sign beyond adjusting her shawl. "I must explain from the beginning, because we have no thought far enough. Malind, can our circles stand against what Akarrin and Nisain described?" Despite her fierce eyes, Malind's full mouth always looked ready to smile, but she was quite stern as she stood, and she stared at each Sitter in turn as if to impress her words on them. "They cannot. Even if we rearrange matters so the strongest sisters are always in the same circle - and that means they must live, eat and sleep together, if they're to link on the moment -  even then, we would be mice facing a cat. Enough mice can overwhelm even a large hungry cat, but not before many mice are dead. If enough of these mice die, though, the White Tower dies." Again that ripple of sighs ran though the pavilion like an unsteady breeze. Egwene managed to keep her face calm, but she had to force her fists to relax their grip on her skirt. Which would they propose, an assault or flight? Light, how could she oppose them? Same Ajah or not, Lelaine could take the strain no longer.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə sədʒɛstɪŋ, mɔɹiə?" ʃi snæpt. "ivən ɪf wi ɹiunaɪt ðə taʊɝ ðɪs vɛɹi deɪ, ðət woʊn tʃeɪnʒ ðə fæks." mɔɹiə smaɪl slaɪtli, əz ɪf ði ʌðɝ blu hæd sɛd dʒʌst wʌt ʃi wɑz hoʊpɪŋ sʌmwʌn wəd seɪ. "bʌt wi mʌs tʃeɪnʒ ðə fæks. ðə fækt ət pɹɛzən də bi ðəɾ əɹ stʃɹɔŋɡəst sɝkəlz bi tu wik. wi də hæv noʊ æŋɡɹil, mʌtʃ lɛs sɑŋɡɹil, soʊ wi maɪɾ əz wɛl ɪɡnɔɹ ðɛm. ɪm noʊ sɝɾən ðəɹ bi ɛniθɪŋ ivən ɪn ðə taʊɝ ðət wəd meɪk ə lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf dɪfɝəns, ɛniweɪ. haʊ, ðɛn, də wi meɪk əɹ sɝkəlz stʃɹɔŋɝ? stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf, wi mʌs hoʊp, tə feɪs wʌt hæpən ət ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ ən stɑp ɪt. ɛskɹɑldi, wʌɾ əv jə tə seɪ ɑn ðə mæɾɝ?"

"What are you suggesting, Moria?" she snapped. "Even if we reunite the Tower this very day, that won't change the facts." Moria smiled slightly, as if the other Blue had said just what she was hoping someone would say. "But we must change the facts. The fact at present do be that our strongest circles be too weak. We do have no angreal, much less sa'angreal, so we might as well ignore them. I'm no certain there be anything even in the Tower that would make a large enough difference, anyway. How, then, do we make our circles stronger? Strong enough, we must hope, to face what happened at Shadar Logoth and stop it. Escaralde, what have you to say on the matter?"

stɑɹɾəld, ɛɡwin lin fɔɹwɝd. ðeɪ wɝ wɝkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ. bʌt tə wʌɾ ɛnd? ʃi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn tə ɹilaɪz ðət ðə θɹi sɪɾɝz u hæd kɔl ðə hɔl wɝ ɔl ɑn ðɛɹ fit. baɪ ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ stændɪŋ, mɔɹiə ən mɑlɪn hæd meɪɾ ə klɪɹ dɛklɝeɪʃən. ɛskɹɑldi stʊd laɪk ə kwin, jɛt ðə taɪni bɹaʊn simd ɔl tu əwɛɹ ə ði aɪz slaɪɾɪŋ bɪtwin əɹ ən mɑlɪn ən mɔɹiə, ðə θɔtfəl fɹaʊnz ən tu-stɪl feɪsəz. ʃi ʃɪftəɾ əɹ ʃɔl twaɪs bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ. ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ lɛktʃɝɪŋ ə klæs, hɝ vɔɪs θɪn jɛt fɔɹsfəl.

Startled, Egwene leaned forward. They were working together. But to what end? She was not the only one to realize that the three Sitters who had called the Hall were all on their feet. By remaining standing, Moria and Malind had made a clear declaration. Escaralde stood like a queen, yet the tiny Brown seemed all too aware of the eyes sliding between her and Malind and Moria, the thoughtful frowns and too-still faces. She shifted her shawl twice before speaking. She sounded as though she were lecturing a class, her voice thin yet forceful.

"ði eɪntʃən lɪɾɝətʃɝ ɪz kwaɪt klɪɹ, ðoʊ lɪɾəl stʌɾid, aɪ fɪɹ. ɪt ɡæðɝz dʌst ɹæðɝ ðən ɹiɾɝz. ɹaɪɾɪŋz kəlɛktəɾ ɪn ði ɝliəs jɪɹz ə ðə taʊɝ meɪk ɪt pleɪn ðət sɝkəlz wɝ nɑt lɪməɾəd tə θɝtin, ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ðə pɹɪsaɪs mɛkənɪzəm - aɪ ʃəd seɪ, ðə pɹɪsaɪs bæləns - ɪz ənnoʊn, bʌɾ ɪt ʃəd nɑt bi tu dɪfəkəl tə wɝk aʊt. fəɹ ðoʊz ə jə hu hæv nɑt spɛn ðə taɪm jə ʃəɾ əv ɪn ðə taʊɝ laɪbɹɛɹi, ðə mænɝ ʌv ɪnkɹisɪŋ ðə saɪz ʌv ə sɝkəl ɪnvɑlvz . . . " fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, ʃi fɔltɝd, ən vɪzəbli fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə kəntɪnju. " . . . ɪnvɑlvz ði ɪnkluʒən ə mɛn u kən tʃænəl."

"The ancient literature is quite clear, though little studied, I fear. It gathers dust rather than readers. Writings collected in the earliest years of the Tower make it plain that circles were not limited to thirteen, in the Age of Legends. The precise mechanism - I should say, the precise balance - is unknown, but it should not be too difficult to work out. For those of you who have not spent the time you should have in the Tower library, the manner of increasing the size of a circle involves . . . " For the first time, she faltered, and visibly forced herself to continue. " . . . involves the inclusion of men who can channel."

feɪsɛl pɑp tə hɝ fit. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə sədʒɛstɪŋ?" ʃi dɪmændəɾ ən sæt daʊn ɪmiɾiətli, əz ðoʊ sʌmwʌn maɪt θɪŋk ʃi wɑz stændɪŋ ɪn səpɔɹt.

Faiselle popped to her feet. "What are you suggesting?" she demanded and sat down immediately, as though someone might think she was standing in support.

"aɪ də æsk ðət ðə hɔl bi klɪɹd!" mæɡlə sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ. laɪk mɔɹiə, ʃi wɑz ɪliɑnɝ, ən ædʒəteɪʃən θɪkən əɹ æksɛn mɑɹkədli. "ðɪs də noʊ bi ə mæɾɝ fəɹ dɪskʌʃən bɪfɔɹ ɛni seɪv ðə hɔl ɪn kloʊz sɪɾɪŋ." ʃi, tu, dʒɹɑp bæk ɑntu hɝ bɛntʃ əz sun əz ʃi fɪnɪʃt, ən sæt ɡlaʊɝɪŋ, waɪd ʃoʊldɝz hʌntʃt ən hænz oʊpənɪŋ ən kloʊzɪŋ ɑn əɹ skɝts.

"I do ask that the Hall be cleared!" Magla said, rising. Like Moria, she was Illianer, and agitation thickened her accent markedly. "This do no be a matter for discussion before any save the Hall in closed sitting." She, too, dropped back onto her bench as soon as she finished, and sat glowering, wide shoulders hunched and hands opening and closing on her skirts.

"aɪ də fɪɹ ɪt bi tu leɪt fəɹ ðæt," mɔɹiə sɛd laʊdli. ʃi hæd tə spik laʊdli, tə bi hɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə mɝmɝ ə sɪstɝz tɔkɪŋ ɪksaɪɾədli bɪhaɪn ðə bɛntʃɪz, ə hʌm laɪk ə hjudʒ bihaɪv. "wʌɾ əz bɪn sɛɾ əz bɪn sɛd, ən hɝd baɪ tu mɛni sɪstɝz fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə tʃɹaɪ ʃʌɾɪŋ ðə wɝdz əweɪ naʊ." hɝ bʊzəm ɹoʊz əz ʃi pʊld ɪn ə dip bɹɛθ, ən ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs ə nɑtʃ laʊɾɝ. "aɪ də pʊt bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl ðə pɹəpoʊzəl ðət wi də ɛntɝ ɪndə ən əɡɹimənt wɪð ðə blæk taʊɝ, ðət wi meɪ bɹɪŋ mɛn ɪndə əɹ sɝkəlz ət nid." ɪf ʃi saʊndəɾ ə tʃɹaɪfəl stʃɹæŋɡəld ət ði ɛnd, ɪt wɑz noʊ wʌndɝ. fju ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd seɪ ðət neɪm wɪθaʊɾ ɪmoʊʃən, dɪsɡʌst ɪf nɑɾ aʊtʃɹaɪt heɪtʃɹəd. ɪt stʃɹʌk əɡɛns ðə bʌz ə vɔɪsəz - ən pɹədust æbsəlut saɪləns fəɹ ðə speɪs ə θɹi hɑɹtbits. "ðæɾ ɪz mædnəs!" ʃɛɹiəmz ʃɹik ʃæɾɝd ðə stɪlnəs ɪn mɔɹ weɪz ðən wʌn. ðə kipɝ dɪd nɑɾ ɛntɝ dɪskʌʃənz ɪn ðə hɔl. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ivən ɛntɝ ðə hɔl ɪtsɛlf wɪθaʊt ði æmɪɝlɪn. feɪs flʌɾɪŋ wɪð ɹɛd, ʃɛɹiəm dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp, pɝhæps tə feɪs ði ɪnɛvəɾəbəl ɹibjuk, pɝhæps tə dɪfɛn hɝsɛlf. ðə hɔl hæɾ ʌðɝ θɪŋz ɑn ɪts maɪn ðən ɹibjukɪŋ hɝ, ðoʊ.

"I do fear it be too late for that," Moria said loudly. She had to speak loudly, to be heard over the murmur of sisters talking excitedly behind the benches, a hum like a huge beehive. "What has been said has been said, and heard by too many sisters for anyone to try shutting the words away now." Her bosom rose as she pulled in a deep breath, and she raised her voice a notch louder. "I do put before the Hall the proposal that we do enter into an agreement with the Black Tower, that we may bring men into our circles at need." If she sounded a trifle strangled at the end, it was no wonder. Few Aes Sedai could say that name without emotion, disgust if not outright hatred. It struck against the buzz of voices - and produced absolute silence for the space of three heartbeats. "That is madness!" Sheriam's shriek shattered the stillness in more ways than one. The Keeper did not enter discussions in the Hall. She could not even enter the Hall itself without the Amyrlin. Face flooding with red, Sheriam drew herself up, perhaps to face the inevitable rebuke, perhaps to defend herself. The Hall had other things on its mind than rebuking her, though.

lipɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ðɛɹ bɛntʃɪz dʒʌs lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɡɛt ðɛɹ wɝdz aʊt, sɪɾɝz bɪɡæn tə spik, tə ʃaʊt, səmtaɪmz ɑn tɑp ʌv wʌn ənʌðɝ.

Leaping up from their benches just long enough to get their words out, Sitters began to speak, to shout, sometimes on top of one another.

"mædnəs hɑɹdli bɪɡɪnz tə dɪskɹaɪb ɪt!" feɪsɛl ʃaʊɾəd, ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðət vɛɹɪlɪn kɹaɪd, "haʊ kən wi ælaɪ aʊɝsɛlvz wɪð mɛn u kən tʃænəl?"

"Madness hardly begins to describe it!" Faiselle shouted, at the same time that Varilin cried, "How can we ally ourselves with men who can channel?"

"ðiz soʊ-kɔld æʃəmən ɑɹ teɪntɪd!" sɛɝɔɪjə kɔld aʊt wɪð noʊ saɪn ə ðə vɔntɪd waɪɾ ədʒɑ ɹɪzɝv. hænz nɑɾɪd ɪn əɹ ʃɔl, ʃi tʃɹɛmbəl soʊ hɑɹd ðət ðə lɔŋ snoʊi fɹɪnʒ sweɪd.

"These so-called Asha'man are tainted!" Saroiya called out with no sign of the vaunted White Ajah reserve. Hands knotted in her shawl, she trembled so hard that the long snowy fringe swayed.

"teɪntɪd wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌnz tʌtʃ!"

"Tainted with the Dark One's touch!"

"ivən sədʒɛstɪŋ sətʃ ə θɪŋ pʊts əs əɡɛnst ɔl ðə waɪt taʊɝ stænz fɔɹ," tɑkimə sɛd ɹʌfli. "wi wəd bi dɪspaɪz baɪ ɛvɹi wʊmən u kɔlz hɝsɛlf ɛɛs sədaɪ, baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ lɔŋ ɪn ðɛɹ ɡɹeɪvz!"

"Even suggesting such a thing puts us against all the White Tower stands for," Takima said roughly. "We would be despised by every woman who calls herself Aes Sedai, by Aes Sedai long in their graves!"

mæɡlə wɛn soʊ fɑɹ əz tə ʃeɪk ə fɪst, wɪð ə fjʊɹi ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ətɛmp tə mæsk. "oʊnli ə dɑɹkfɹɛn kəd sədʒɛs ðɪs! oʊnli ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd!" mɔɹiə peɪld ət ði ækjəzeɪʃən, ðən wɛn bɹaɪt ɹɛd wɪð æŋɡɝ ə hɝ oʊn.

Magla went so far as to shake a fist, with a fury she did not attempt to mask. "Only a Darkfriend could suggest this! Only a Darkfriend!" Moria paled at the accusation, then went bright red with anger of her own.

ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛɹ ʃi stʊɾ ɑn ðɪs. ðə blæk taʊɝ wɑz ɹændz kɹieɪʃən, ən pɝhæps nɛsəsɛɹi, ɪf ðəɹ wɑz tə bi ɛni hoʊp ʌv wɪnɪŋ ðə læs bæɾəl, jɛt ði æʃəmən wɝ mɛn u kəd tʃænəl, ə θɪŋ fɪɹd fəɹ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz, ən ðeɪ tʃænəld ʃædoʊ-steɪn seɪɾɪn.

Egwene did not know where she stood on this. The Black Tower was Rand's creation, and perhaps necessary, if there was to be any hope of winning the Last Battle, yet the Asha'man were men who could channel, a thing feared for three thousand years, and they channeled Shadow-stained saidin.

ɹænd hɪmsɛlf wɑz ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl, jɛt wɪθaʊt hɪm, ðə ʃædoʊ wəd wɪn ət tɑɹmən ɡdən. ðə laɪt hɛlp əɹ fəɹ siɪŋ ɪt soʊ koʊldli, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tʃɹuθ. wɛɹɛvɝ ʃi stʊɾ ɑn ðə mæɾɝ, mæɾɝz wɝ ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə hæn ðəɹ ən ðɛn. ɛskɹɑldi wɑz ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɪnsʌls wɪð feɪsɛl, boʊθ ət ðə tɑps ə ðɛɹ lʌŋz. oʊpən ɪnsʌls!

Rand himself was a man who could channel, yet without him, the Shadow would win at Tarmon Gai'don. The Light help her for seeing it so coldly, but it was hard truth. Wherever she stood on the matter, matters were getting out of hand there and then. Escaralde was exchanging insults with Faiselle, both at the tops of their lungs. Open insults!

ɪn ðə hɔl! sɛɝɔɪjə hæɾ əbændən ðə læst ʃɹɛdz ʌv waɪɾ ədʒɑ kulnəs ən wɑz skɹimɪŋ ət mɑlɪnd, hu skɹim bæk, niðɝ weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ. ɪt wʊɾə bɪn ə wʌndɝ ɪf iðɝ kəɾ ʌndɝstænd wʌt ði ʌðɝ wɑz seɪɪŋ, ən pɝhæps ə blɛsɪŋ ɪf ðeɪ kəd nɑt. sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, niðɝ ɹoʊmændə nɔɹ ləleɪn hæɾ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ sɪns ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ðeɪ sæt stɛɹɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ, ənblɪŋkɪŋ. laɪkli itʃ wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹid haʊ ði ʌðɝ wəd stæn dʒʌst soʊ ʃi kəd stæn ɪn ɑpəzɪʃən. mæɡlə ɡɑt daʊn fɹəm əɹ bɛntʃ ən stɔk təwɔɹd mɔɹiə wɪð ðə ɡlɛɹ ə sʌmwʌn iɡɝ tə kʌm tə bloʊz. nɑt wɝdz, bʌt fɪsts. mæɡləz wɝ klɛntʃt əɾ əɹ saɪdz. hɝ vaɪn-wɝkt ʃɔl slɪɾ ɔf ɑntu ðə kɑɹpəts, ənnoʊɾɪst.

In the Hall! Saroiya had abandoned the last shreds of White Ajah coolness and was screaming at Malind, who screamed back, neither waiting on the other. It would have been a wonder if either could understand what the other was saying, and perhaps a blessing if they could not. Surprisingly, neither Romanda nor Lelaine had opened her mouth since the beginning. They sat staring at one another, unblinking. Likely each was trying to read how the other would stand just so she could stand in opposition. Magla got down from her bench and stalked toward Moria with the glare of someone eager to come to blows. Not words, but fists. Magla's were clenched at her sides. Her vine-worked shawl slid off onto the carpets, unnoticed.

stændɪŋ, ɛɡwin ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs. ɪksɛp fəɹ sɝɾən ɪɡzækli pɹiskɹaɪb fʌŋkʃənz, tʃænəlɪŋ wɑz fɔɹbɪɾən ɪn ðə hɔl - ənʌðɝ ə ðə kʌstəmz ðət pɔɪntəd tə dɑɹkɝ deɪz ɪn ðə hɔlz hɪstɝi - bʌt ʃi meɪɾ ə sɪmpəl wiv ʌv ɛɹ ən faɪɝ. "ə pɹəpoʊzəl əz bɪn leɪd bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl," ʃi sɛd, ən ɹilist seɪaɪdɑɹ. ðət wɑz nɑɾ əz hɑɹɾ əz ɪt wʌns hæd bɪn. nɑɾ izi, nɑt kloʊs tə izi, bʌt nɑɾ əz hɑɹd. ə mɛmɹi ʌv ðə paʊɝz switnəs ɹɪmeɪnd, ɪnʌf tə səsteɪn əɹ əntɪl ðə nɛks taɪm.

Standing, Egwene embraced the Source. Except for certain exactly prescribed functions, channeling was forbidden in the Hall - another of the customs that pointed to darker days in the Hall's history - but she made a simple weave of Air and Fire. "A proposal has been laid before the Hall," she said, and released saidar. That was not as hard as it once had been. Not easy, not close to easy, but not as hard. A memory of the Power's sweetness remained, enough to sustain her until the next time.

mæɡnəfaɪd baɪ ðə wiv, hɝ wɝdz bumd ɪn ðə pəvɪljən laɪk θʌndɝ. ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃɹæŋk bæk, wɪnsɪŋ ən kʌvɝɪŋ ðɛɹ ɪɹz. ðə saɪləns æftɝ simd ɪnkɹɛɾəbli laʊd. mæɡlə ɡeɪpt əɾ əɹ ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt, ðən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ət ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðət ʃi wɑz stændɪŋ hæfweɪ tə ðə blu bɛntʃɪz. heɪstəli ənluzɪŋ əɹ fɪsts, ʃi pɔz tə snætʃ ʌp əɹ ʃɔl ən hɝid bæk tə hɝ oʊn sit. ʃɛɹiəm stʊd wipɪŋ oʊpənli. ʃʊɹli ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn ðət laʊd. "ə pɹəpoʊzəl əz bɪn leɪd bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl," ɛɡwin ɹɪpiɾɪd ɪndə ðə saɪləns. æftɝ ðət paʊɝ-mæɡnəfaɪd blɛɹ, hɝ vɔɪs ɹæŋ ɪn əɹ oʊn ɪɹz. pɝhæps ɪt hæd bɪn laʊɾɝ ðən ʃi θɔt. ðət wiv hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ɪntɛndəd fəɹ jus ɪnsaɪd wɔlz, ivən pætʃt kænvəs wɔlz. "haʊ spik jə ɪn səpɔɹɾ ʌv ən əlaɪəns wɪð ðə blæk taʊɝ, mɔɹiə?" ʃi sæt daʊn əz sun əz ʃi fɪnɪʃt. haʊ dɪd ʃi stæn ɑn ðɪs? wʌt dɪfəkəltiz wəɾ ɪt pɹizɛn hɝ? haʊ kəɾ ɪt bi juz tə ædvæntɪdʒ? ðə laɪt hɛlp hɝ, ɪndid. ðoʊz wɝ ðə fɝs tu θɪŋz tə kʌm tə maɪnd. ʃi wɪʃt ʃɛɹiəm wəd dʒɹaɪ hɝ aɪz ən stʃɹeɪɾən əɹ bækboʊn. ʃi wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ən ʃi niɾəd ə kipɝ, nɑɾ ə mɪlksɑp. ɪt tʊk ə fju mɪnəts fəɹ ɔɹɾɝ tə ɹɪstɔɹ ɪtsɛlf, sɪɾɝz stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ kloʊðz ən smuðɪŋ skɝts ənnɛsəsɛɹəli, əvɔɪɾɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝz aɪz ən ɪspɛʃli nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət ðə wɑtʃɪŋ sɪstɝz kɹaʊɾəd bɪhaɪn ðə bɛntʃɪz. səm sɪɾɝz feɪsəz bɪkeɪm steɪnd wɪð ɹɛd ðət hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð æŋɡɝ. sɪɾɝz dɪd nɑt ʃɹik ət wʌn ənʌðɝ laɪk fɑɹmhænz ət ʃɪɹɪŋ. moʊst ɪspɛʃli nɑɾ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ʌðɝ sɪstɝz.

Magnified by the weave, her words boomed in the pavilion like thunder. Aes Sedai shrank back, wincing and covering their ears. The silence after seemed incredibly loud. Magla gaped at her in astonishment, then gave a start at realizing that she was standing halfway to the Blue benches. Hastily unloosing her fists, she paused to snatch up her shawl and hurried back to her own seat. Sheriam stood weeping openly. Surely it had not been that loud. "A proposal has been laid before the Hall," Egwene repeated into the silence. After that Power-magnified blare, her voice rang in her own ears. Perhaps it had been louder than she thought. That weave had never been intended for use inside walls, even patched canvas walls. "How speak you in support of an alliance with the Black Tower, Moria?" She sat down as soon as she finished. How did she stand on this? What difficulties would it present her? How could it be used to advantage? The Light help her, indeed. Those were the first two things to come to mind. She wished Sheriam would dry her eyes and straighten her backbone. She was the Amyrlin Seat, and she needed a Keeper, not a milksop. It took a few minutes for order to restore itself, Sitters straightening clothes and smoothing skirts unnecessarily, avoiding each other's eyes and especially not looking at the watching sisters crowded behind the benches. Some Sitter's faces became stained with red that had nothing to do with anger. Sitters did not shriek at one another like farmhands at shearing. Most especially not in front of other sisters.

"wi də bi feɪst wɪð tu simɪŋli ɪnsɝmaʊntəbəl dɪfəkəltiz," mɔɹiə sɛd faɪnəli. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz kəmpoʊzd ən kul wʌns mɔɹ, bʌɾ ə hɪn ə flʌʃ stɪl hʌŋ ɪn əɹ tʃiks. "ðə fɔɹseɪkən əv dɪskʌvɝɾ ə wɛpən - dɪskʌvɝɾ əɹ ənkʌvɝd; ðeɪ ʃʊɹli wʊɾə juzd ɪt bɪfɔɹ naʊ, hæd ðeɪ pəzɛst ɪt - ə wɛpən wi kən noʊ kaʊntɝ. ə wɛpən wi kən noʊ mætʃ, ðoʊ ðə laɪt də noʊ waɪ wi wəd wɪʃ tə, bʌt moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾəntli, ə wɛpən wi kən niðɝ sɝvaɪv nɔɹ stɑp. ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ði . . . æʃə'-mæn . . . hæv ɡɹoʊn laɪk widz. ɹɪlaɪəbəl ɹɪpɔɹts də pʊt ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz ət nɪɹli ikwəl tə ɔl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ lɪvɪŋ. ivən ɪf ðət nʌmbɝ də bi ɪnfleɪɾəd, wi kən noʊ əfɔɹd tə bɪliv ɪɾ ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾəd fɑɹ. ən mɔɹ mɛn kʌm ɛvɹi deɪ. ði aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz də bi tu kənsɪstən tə bɪliv ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. wi ʃəd teɪk ðiz mɛn ən dʒɛntəl ðɛm, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt wɪv ɪɡnɔɹɾ əm kəz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. wɪv pʊɾ əm ɔf, tə bi dɛlt wɪð leɪɾɝ. ðə bɪɾɝ tʃɹuθ də bi ðəɾ ɪt bi tu leɪt tə tʃɹaɪ teɪkɪŋ ðɛm. ðeɪ də bi tu mɛni. meɪbi ɪt dɪd bi tu leɪt wən wi dɪd fɝs lɝnd wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ.

"We do be faced with two seemingly insurmountable difficulties," Moria said finally. Her voice was composed and cool once more, but a hint of flush still hung in her cheeks. "The Forsaken have discovered a weapon - discovered or uncovered; they surely would have used it before now, had they possessed it - a weapon we can no counter. A weapon we can no match, though the Light do know why we would wish to, but most importantly, a weapon we can neither survive nor stop. At the same time, the . . . Asha'-man . . . have grown like weeds. Reliable reports do put their numbers at nearly equal to all the Aes Sedai living. Even if that number do be inflated, we can no afford to believe it exaggerated far. And more men come every day. The eyes-and-ears do be too consistent to believe anything else. We should take these men and gentle them, of course, but we have ignored them because of the Dragon Reborn. We have put them off, to be dealt with later. The bitter truth do be that it be too late to try taking them. They do be too many. Maybe it did be too late when we did first learned what they were doing.

"ɪf wi kən noʊ dʒɛntəl ðiz mɛn, ðən wi mʌs kəntʃɹoʊl əm sʌmhaʊ. ən əɡɹimənt wɪð ðə blæk taʊɝ -  əlaɪəns bi tu stʃɹɔŋ ə wɝd - wɪð ə kɛɹfəli wɝɾɪd əɡɹimənt, wi kən teɪk ðə fɝst stɛps təwɔɹd pɹətɛktɪŋ ðə wɝl fɹəm ðɛm. wi ɔlsoʊ kən bɹɪŋ əm ɪndə əɹ sɝkəlz." ɹeɪzɪŋ ə kɔʃənɛɹi fɪŋɡɝ, mɔɹiə ɹæn əɹ ɡeɪz əlɔŋ ðə bɛntʃɪz, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs ɹɪmeɪn kul ən kəmpoʊzd.

"If we can no gentle these men, then we must control them somehow. An agreement with the Black Tower -  alliance be too strong a word - with a carefully worded agreement, we can take the first steps toward protecting the world from them. We also can bring them into our circles." Raising a cautionary finger, Moria ran her gaze along the benches, but her voice remained cool and composed.

ən fɝm. "wi mʌs meɪk ɪt klɪɹ ðəɾ ə sɪstɝ wɪl ɔlweɪz mɛl ðə floʊz - aɪ də nɑt sədʒɛs lɛɾɪŋ ə mæn kəntʃɹoʊl ə lɪŋk sɝkəl! bʌt wɪð mɛn ɪn ðə sɝkəlz, wi kən ɪkspæn ðɛm. wɪð ðə blɛsɪŋz ə ðə laɪt, pɝhæps wi kən ɪkspæn ðə sɝkəlz fɑɹ ɪnʌf tə kaʊntɝ ðɪs wɛpən ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. wi də kɪl tu hɛɹz wɪð wʌn stoʊn. bʌt ðiz hɛɹz də bi laɪənz, ən ɪf wi də noʊ kæs ðət stoʊn, wʌn ə ðɛm wɪl ʃʊɹli kɪl ʌs. ɪts əz sɪmpəl əz ðæt."

And firm. "We must make it clear that a sister will always meld the flows - I do not suggest letting a man control a linked circle! But with men in the circles, we can expand them. With the blessings of the Light, perhaps we can expand the circles far enough to counter this weapon of the Forsaken. We do kill two hares with one stone. But these hares do be lions, and if we do no cast that stone, one of them will surely kill us. It is as simple as that."

saɪləns fɛl. ɛksɛptɪŋ ʃɛɹiəm, ət list. stændɪŋ hʌntʃt ɪn ɑn hɝsɛlf ə fju fit fɹəm ɛɡwin, ʃoʊldɝz ʃeɪkɪŋ, ʃi stɪl hæd nɑt mæstɝɾ əɹ wipɪŋ.

Silence fell. Excepting Sheriam, at least. Standing hunched in on herself a few feet from Egwene, shoulders shaking, she still had not mastered her weeping.

ðən ɹoʊmændə saɪd hɛvəli. "pɝhæps wi kən ɪkspæn ðə sɝkəlz ɪnʌf tə kaʊntɝ ðə fɔɹseɪkən," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə kwaɪət vɔɪs. ɪn ə weɪ, ðət ɡeɪv əɹ wɝdz mɔɹ weɪt ðən ɪf ʃi hæd ʃaʊɾəd.

Then Romanda sighed heavily. "Perhaps we can expand the circles enough to counter the Forsaken," she said in a quiet voice. In a way, that gave her words more weight than if she had shouted.

"pɝhæps wi kən kəntʃɹoʊl ði æʃəmən. ə θɪn wɝd, pɝhæps, ɪn iðɝ kɑntɛkst."

"Perhaps we can control the Asha'man. A thin word, perhaps, in either context."

"wɛn jə də bi dʒɹaʊnɪŋ," mɔɹiə ɹɪplaɪd, ikwəli kwaɪət, "ju də ɡɹæb ət wʌtɛvɝ bɹæntʃ floʊts baɪ, ivən wən jə kən noʊ bi ʃʊɹ ɪɾəl səpɔɹt jəɹ weɪɾ əntɪl juv hoʊld. ðə wɔɾɝ əz noʊ kloʊzd oʊvɝ əɹ hɛdz jɛt, ɹoʊmændə, bʌt wi bi dʒɹaʊnɪŋ. wi də bi dʒɹaʊnɪŋ." əɡɛn ðəɹ wɑz saɪləns, bʌt fəɹ ʃɛɹiəmz snaɪvəlɪŋ. hæd ʃi fɝɡɑɾən ɔl sɛlf-kəntʃɹoʊl? bʌt ðɛn, noʊ wʌn əmʌŋ ðə sɪɾɝz wɔɹ ə plɛzən ɪkspɹɛʃən, nɑɾ ivən mɔɹiə əɹ mɑlɪn əɹ ɛskɹɑldi. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə plɛzən pɹɑspɛk ðət leɪ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm. dɛlænəz feɪs hæd tɝn dɪsaɪɾədli ɡɹinɪʃ. ʃi lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi maɪt bi ðə wʌn tə sɪk ʌp ɹæðɝ ðən ʃɛɹiəm.

"When you do be drowning," Moria replied, equally quiet, "you do grab at whatever branch floats by, even when you can no be sure it will support your weight until you have hold. The water has no closed over our heads yet, Romanda, but we be drowning. We do be drowning." Again there was silence, but for Sheriam's sniveling. Had she forgotten all self-control? But then, no one among the Sitters wore a pleasant expression, not even Moria or Malind or Escaralde. It was not a pleasant prospect that lay in front of them. Delana's face had turned decidedly greenish. She looked as if she might be the one to sick up rather than Sheriam.

ɛɡwin stʊd wʌns mɔɹ, lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə æsk ðə ɹikwaɪɝd kwɛstʃən. ivən wən ði ənθɪŋkəbəl wɑz pɹəpoʊzd, ðə ɹɪtʃuəlz mʌs bi fɑloʊd. pɝhæps mɔɹ soʊ ðən ðən ɛvɝ. "hu spiks əɡɛns ðɪs pɹəpoʊzəl?"

Egwene stood once more, long enough to ask the required question. Even when the unthinkable was proposed, the rituals must be followed. Perhaps more so then than ever. "Who speaks against this proposal?"

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ʃɔɹɾədʒ ə spikɝz ðɛɹ, ðoʊ ɛvɹiwʌn hæd ɹiɡeɪn hɝsɛlf ɪnʌf fəɹ əm tə fɑloʊ pɹoʊɾəkɑl. sɛvɹəl sɪɾɝz muvd ət wʌns, bʌt mæɡlə wɑz fɝst ɑn əɹ fit, ən ði ʌðɝz sæt bæk wɪð noʊ aʊtwɝd dɪspleɪz ʌv ɪmpeɪʃəns. feɪsɛl fɑloʊd mæɡlə, ən vɛɹɪlɪn fɑloʊd feɪsɛl. ðən keɪm sɛɝɔɪjə, ən faɪnəli tɑkimə. itʃ spoʊk ət lɛŋθ, vɛɹɪlɪn ən sɛɝɔɪjə kʌmɪŋ vɛɹi nɪɹ meɪkɪŋ ðə fɔɹbɪɾən spitʃəz, ən itʃ spoʊk wɪð ɔl ði ɛləkwəns ʃi kəd sʌmən. noʊ wʌn ɹitʃt ə sɪɾɝz tʃɛɹ lækɪŋ ɛləkwəns ət nid. ivən soʊ, ɪt sun bɪkeɪm klɪɹ ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɹɪpiɾɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ən itʃ ʌðɝ, dʒʌst ɪn dɪfɹənt wɝdz. ðə fɔɹseɪkən ən ðɛɹ wɛpən wɝ nɛvɝ mɛnʃənd. ðə blæk taʊɝ wɑz ðə sɪɾɝz' tɑpɪk, ðə blæk taʊɝ ən ði æʃə'-mæn. ðə blæk taʊɝ wɑz ə blaɪɾ ɑn ðə feɪs ə ði ɝθ, əz ɡɹeɪɾ ə θɹɛt tə ðə wɝld əz ðə læs bæɾəl ɪtsɛlf. ðə vɛɹi neɪm sədʒɛstəd kənɛkʃənz tə ðə ʃædoʊ, nɑt tə mɛnʃən biɪŋ ə dɝɛk slæp ət ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

There was no shortage of speakers there, though everyone had regained herself enough for them to follow protocol. Several Sitters moved at once, but Magla was first on her feet, and the others sat back with no outward displays of impatience. Faiselle followed Magla, and Varilin followed Faiselle. Then came Saroiya, and finally Takima. Each spoke at length, Varilin and Saroiya coming very near making the forbidden speeches, and each spoke with all the eloquence she could summon. No one reached a Sitter's chair lacking eloquence at need. Even so, it soon became clear that they were repeating themselves and each other, just in different words. The Forsaken and their weapon were never mentioned. The Black Tower was the Sitters' topic, the Black Tower and the Asha'-man. The Black Tower was a blight on the face of the earth, as great a threat to the world as the Last Battle itself. The very name suggested connections to the Shadow, not to mention being a direct slap at the White Tower.

ðə soʊ-kɔld æʃəmən - noʊ wʌn juz ðə neɪm wɪθaʊɾ æɾɪŋ "soʊ-kɔld," əɹ seɪɪŋ ɪt wɪð ə snɪɹ;

The so-called Asha'man - no one used the name without adding "so-called," or saying it with a sneer;

"ɡɑɹɾiənz" ɪt mɛn ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, ən ðeɪ wɝ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt ɡɑɹɾiənz - ðə soʊ-kɔld æʃəmən wɝ mɛn u kəd tʃænəl. mɛn dum tə ɡoʊ ɪnseɪn ɪf ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə paʊɝ dɪd nɑt kɪl əm fɝst. mædmən wildɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ. fɹəm mæɡlə tə tɑkimə, ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm ɪnvɛstəd ðət wɪð ɛvɹi skɹæp ə hɔɹɝ ɪn ðɛm. θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz ə ðə wɝlz hɔɹɝ, ən ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝl bɪfɔɹ ðæt. mɛn laɪk ðɪs hæd dɪstʃɹɔɪd ðə wɝld, dɪstʃɹɔɪd ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ən tʃeɪnʒd ðə feɪs ə ðə wɝl tə dɛsəleɪʃən. ðɪs wɑz u ðeɪ wɝ biɪŋ æsk tə meɪk əlaɪəns wɪð. ɪf ðeɪ dɪd soʊ, ðeɪ wəd bi ənæθəmə ɪn ɛvɹi neɪʃən, ən ɹaɪtli. ðeɪ wəd bi skɔɹn baɪ ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ɹaɪtli. ɪt kəd nɑt bi. ɪt kəd nɑt.

"guardians" it meant in the Old Tongue, and they were anything but guardians - the so-called Asha'man were men who could channel. Men doomed to go insane if the male half of the Power did not kill them first. Madmen wielding the One Power. From Magla to Takima, every one of them invested that with every scrap of horror in them. Three thousand years of the world's horror, and the Breaking of the World before that. Men like this had destroyed the world, destroyed the Age of Legends and changed the face of the world to desolation. This was who they were being asked to make alliance with. If they did so, they would be anathema in every nation, and rightly. They would be scorned by every Aes Sedai, and rightly. It could not be. It could not.

wən tɑkimə faɪnəli sæt, ɝeɪnʒɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl kɛɹfəli əlɔŋ əɹ ɑɹmz, ʃi wɔɹ ə smɔl bʌt kwaɪt sæɾəsfaɪd smaɪl. təɡɛðɝ ðeɪ hæd mænədʒ tə meɪk ði æʃəmən sim mɔɹ fɪɹsəm, mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs, ðən ðə fɔɹseɪkən ən ðə læs bæɾəl kəmbaɪnd. meɪbi ivən ə mætʃ fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf. sɪns ɛɡwin hæd bɪɡʌn ðə ɹɪtʃuəl kwɛstʃənz, ɪt wɑz fəɹ əɹ tə fɪnɪʃ, ən ʃi ɹoʊz lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə seɪ, "hu stænz fəɹ ən əɡɹimənt wɪð ðə blæk taʊɝ?" ʃi hæɾ oʊnli θɔt ðəɹ wɑz saɪləns ɪn ðə pəvɪljən bɪfɔɹ. ʃɛɹiəm hæd faɪnəli ɡʌvɝn əɹ wipɪŋ, ðoʊ tɪɹz ɡlɪsən ɑn əɹ tʃiks stɪl, bʌɾ əɹ ɡʌlp saʊndəd laɪk ʃaʊts ɪn ðə kwaɪət ðət fɑloʊd ðət kwɛstʃən. tɑkiməz smaɪl slɪd saɪdweɪz wən dʒɑnjə stʊɾ əz sun əz ðə kwɛstʃən lɛft ɛɡwinz maʊθ. "ivən ə slɪm bɹæntʃ ɪz bɛɾɝ ðən noʊ bɹæntʃ wən jəɹ dʒɹaʊnɪŋ," dʒɑnjə sɛd. "aɪd ɹæðɝ tʃɹaɪ ðən tʃɹʌs tə hoʊp əntɪl aɪ ɡoʊ ʌndɝ." ʃi hæd ðə hæbəɾ ə spikɪŋ wən ʃi wɑz nɑt səpoʊz tə.

When Takima finally sat, arranging her shawl carefully along her arms, she wore a small but quite satisfied smile. Together they had managed to make the Asha'man seem more fearsome, more dangerous, than the Forsaken and the Last Battle combined. Maybe even a match for the Dark One himself. Since Egwene had begun the ritual questions, it was for her to finish, and she rose long enough to say, "Who stands for an agreement with the Black Tower?" She had only thought there was silence in the pavilion before. Sheriam had finally governed her weeping, though tears glistened on her cheeks still, but her gulp sounded like shouts in the quiet that followed that question. Takima's smile slid sideways when Janya stood as soon as the question left Egwene's mouth. "Even a slim branch is better than no branch when you're drowning," Janya said. "I'd rather try than trust to hope until I go under." She had the habit of speaking when she was not supposed to.

səmeɪlɪn ɹoʊz tə stæn bɪsaɪd mɑlɪnd, ən sʌɾənli ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹʌʃ, sæliɾə ən bɛɹænə ən ələdʒɹɪn təɡɛðɝ, wɪð kweɪmɛsə oʊnli ə tɪk bɪhaɪnd. naɪn sɪɾɝz ɑn ðɛɹ fit, ən ðəɹ ɪt hʌŋ əz ðə moʊməns stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt. ɛɡwin ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz baɪɾɪŋ əɹ lɪp ən stɑp hɝidli, hoʊpɪŋ noʊ wʌn hæd noʊɾəst. ʃi kəd stɪl fil ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ə hɝ tiθ. ʃi hoʊpt ʃi hæd nɑt dʒɹɔn blʌd. nɑt ðəɾ ɛniwʌn wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ. ɛvɹiwʌn sim tə bi hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ bɹɛθ.

Samalin rose to stand beside Malind, and suddenly there was a rush, Salita and Berana and Aledrin together, with Kwamesa only a tick behind. Nine Sitters on their feet, and there it hung as the moments stretched out. Egwene realized she was biting her lip and stopped hurriedly, hoping no one had noticed. She could still feel the impression of her teeth. She hoped she had not drawn blood. Not that anyone was looking at her. Everyone seemed to be holding their breath.

ɹoʊmændə sæt fɹaʊnɪŋ ʌp ət sæliɾə, hu wɑz stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, hɝ feɪs ɡɹeɪ ən əɹ lɪps tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. ðə tɛɹən sɪstɝ maɪt nɑt bi eɪbəl tə haɪɾ əɹ fɪɹ, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ əhɛd. ɹoʊmændə nɑɾəd sloʊli ən ðɛn, ʃɑkɪŋli, stʊd. ʃi, tu, dɪsaɪɾɪd tə vaɪəleɪt kʌstəm. "səmtaɪmz," ʃi sɛd, lʊkɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ət ləleɪn, "wi mʌs də θɪŋz wi wəd ɹæðɝ nɑt." ləleɪn mɛt ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd jɛloʊz aɪz wɪθaʊt blɪŋkɪŋ. hɝ feɪs maɪɾ əv bɪn kæst ɪn pɔɹsələn. hɝ tʃɪn ɹoʊz baɪ sloʊ ɪŋkɹəməns. ən sʌɾənli, ʃi stʊd, ɡlænsɪŋ daʊn ɪmpeɪʃənli ət laɪɹɛl, hu ɡeɪpt əɾ əɹ ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ kʌmɪŋ tə hɝ fit. ɛvɹiwʌn stɛɹd. noʊ wʌn meɪɾ ə saʊnd.

Romanda sat frowning up at Salita, who was staring straight ahead, her face gray and her lips trembling. The Tairen sister might not be able to hide her fear, but she was going ahead. Romanda nodded slowly and then, shockingly, stood. She, too, decided to violate custom. "Sometimes," she said, looking straight at Lelaine, "we must do things we would rather not." Lelaine met the gray-haired Yellow's eyes without blinking. Her face might have been cast in porcelain. Her chin rose by slow increments. And suddenly, she stood, glancing down impatiently at Lyrelle, who gaped at her a moment before coming to her feet. Everyone stared. No one made a sound.

ɪt wɑz dʌn. ɔlmoʊs dʌn, ɛniweɪ. ɛɡwin klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kætʃ ʃɛɹiəmz ətɛnʃən. ðə nɛks pɑɹt wɑz ðə kipɝz, bʌt ʃɛɹiəm stʊd skɹʌbɪŋ ðə tɪɹz fɹəm əɹ tʃiks wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ən ɹʌnɪŋ əɹ aɪz əlɔŋ ðə bɛntʃɪz əz ɪf kaʊntɪŋ haʊ mɛni sɪɾɝz wɝ stændɪŋ ən hoʊpɪŋ tə faɪnd ʃi hæd mɪskaʊntɪd. ɛɡwin klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt mɔɹ laʊdli, ən ðə ɡɹin-aɪd wʊmən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən tɝn tə stɛɹ ət hɝ. ivən ðɛn, ɪt sim tə teɪk fɝɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹɪkɔl hɝsɛlf tə hɝ duɾi. "ðə lɛsɝ kənsɛnsəs stændɪŋ," ʃi ənaʊnst ɪn ən ənstɛɾi vɔɪs, "æn əɡɹimənt wɪl bi sɔt wɪð . . .

It was done. Almost done, anyway. Egwene cleared her throat, trying to catch Sheriam's attention. The next part was the Keeper's, but Sheriam stood scrubbing the tears from her cheeks with her fingers and running her eyes along the benches as if counting how many Sitters were standing and hoping to find she had miscounted. Egwene cleared her throat more loudly, and the green-eyed woman gave a start and turned to stare at her. Even then, it seemed to take forever before she recalled herself to her duty. "The lesser consensus standing," she announced in an unsteady voice, "an agreement will be sought with . . .

wɪð ðə blæk taʊɝ." ɪnheɪlɪŋ dipli, ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd tə hɝ fʊl haɪt, ən əɹ vɔɪs ɡeɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ. ʃi wɑz bæk ɑntu fəmɪljɝ ɡɹaʊnd. "ɪn ði ɪntʃɹəst ə junəɾi, aɪ æsk fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ kənsɛnsəs tə stænd." ðət wɑz ə paʊɝfəl kɔl. ivən ɑn mæɾɝz ðət kəd bi dɪsaɪɾɪd baɪ ðə lɛsɝ kənsɛnsəs, junənɪməɾi wɑz ɔlweɪz pɹəfɝd, ɔlweɪz stʃɹɪv fɔɹ. aʊɝz ə dɪskʌʃən, deɪz, maɪt ɡoʊ ɪndə ɹitʃɪŋ ɪt, bʌt ði ɛfɝt wəd nɑt stɑp əntɪl ɛvɹi sɪɾɝ əɡɹiɾ əɹ ɪt wɑz klɪɹ əz wɛl wɔɾɝ ðət ðəɹ kəd bi noʊ əɡɹimənt. ə paʊɝfəl kɔl, wʌn ðət tʌɡd əɾ ɛvɹi sɪstɝ. dɛlænə ɹoʊz laɪk ə pʌpət dʒɹɔn ʌp əɡɛnst əɹ wɪl, lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn ənsɝteɪnli. "aɪ kænɑt stæn fəɹ ðɪs," tɑkimə sɛd, əɡɛnst ɔl dɪkɔɹəm. "noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɛniwʌn sɛz, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ lɔŋ wi sɪt, aɪ kænɑɾ ən əl nɑt! aɪ - wɪl -  nɑt" noʊ wʌn ɛls stʊd, iðɝ. oʊ, feɪsɛl ʃɪftəɾ ɑn əɹ bɛntʃ, hæf muvd əz ɪf tə stænd, ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ʃɔl, twɪtʃt əɡɛn əz ɪf ʃi maɪt stænd. ðət wɑz əz kloʊz əz ɛniwʌn keɪm. sɛɝɔɪjə wɑz baɪɾɪŋ əɹ nʌkəl wɪð ən ɪkspɹɛʃən ə hɔɹɝ, ən vɛɹɪlɪn wɔɹ ðə lʊk ʌv ə wʊmən u hæd bɪn hɪt bɪtwin ði aɪz wɪð ə hæmɝ. mæɡlə ɡɹɪp ði ɛnz ə hɝ bɛntʃ, hoʊldɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɪn pleɪs ən stɛɹɪŋ blikli ət ðə kɑɹpəts ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. pleɪnli, ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ ə ðə skaʊl ɹoʊmændə wɑz eɪmɪŋ ət ðə bæk ə hɝ nɛk, bʌɾ əɹ oʊnli ɹɪspɑns wɑz tə hʌntʃ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz.

with the Black Tower." Inhaling deeply, she straightened to her full height, and her voice gained strength. She was back onto familiar ground. "In the interest of unity, I ask for the greater consensus to stand." That was a powerful call. Even on matters that could be decided by the lesser consensus, unanimity was always preferred, always strived for. Hours of discussion, days, might go into reaching it, but the effort would not stop until every Sitter agreed or it was clear as well water that there could be no agreement. A powerful call, one that tugged at every sister. Delana rose like a puppet drawn up against her will, looking around uncertainly. "I cannot stand for this," Takima said, against all decorum. "No matter what anyone says, no matter how long we sit, I cannot and I will not! I - will -  not\" No one else stood, either. Oh, Faiselle shifted on her bench, half moved as if to stand, adjusted her shawl, twitched again as if she might stand. That was as close as anyone came. Saroiya was biting her knuckle with an expression of horror, and Varilin wore the look of a woman who had been hit between the eyes with a hammer. Magla gripped the ends of her bench, holding herself in place and staring bleakly at the carpets in front of her. Plainly, she was aware of the scowl Romanda was aiming at the back of her neck, but her only response was to hunch her shoulders.

tɑkimə ʃʊɾə bɪn ði ɛn ʌv ɪt. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn sikɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ kənsɛnsəs wən sʌmwʌn meɪɾ ɪt pleɪn ʃi wəd nɑt stænd. bʌɾ ɛɡwin dɪsaɪɾɪd tə meɪk əɹ oʊn bɹeɪk wɪð dɪkɔɹəm ən pɹoʊɾəkɑl. "ɪz ðəɹ ɛniwʌn u filz ʃi mʌs liv əɹ tʃɛɹ oʊvɝ ðɪs?" ʃi æskt ɪn ə laʊd, klɪɹ vɔɪs. ɡæsps fɪl ðə pəvɪljən, bʌt ʃi wɑz hoʊldɪŋ əɹ bɹɛθ. ðɪs kəd ʃæɾɝ ðɛm, bʌt bɛɾɝ tə hæv ɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn ði oʊpən naʊ, ɪf ðət wɑz wʌt wɑz tə kʌm ʌv ɪt. sɛɝɔɪjə lʊkt əɾ əɹ waɪldli, bʌt noʊ wʌn muvd.

Takima should have been the end of it. There was no point in seeking the greater consensus when someone made it plain she would not stand. But Egwene decided to make her own break with decorum and protocol. "Is there anyone who feels she must leave her chair over this?" she asked in a loud, clear voice. Gasps filled the pavilion, but she was holding her breath. This could shatter them, but better to have it out in the open now, if that was what was to come of it. Saroiya looked at her wildly, but no one moved.

"ðɛn wɪl ɡoʊ fɔɹwɝd," ʃi sɛd. "kɛɹfəli. ɪɾəl teɪk taɪm tə plæn ɪɡzækli hu ɪz tə əpɹoʊtʃ ðə blæk taʊɝ, ən wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ tə seɪ." taɪm fəɹ əɹ tə plæn ə fju seɪfɡɑɹdz, ɪt wɑz tə bi hoʊpt. laɪt, ʃi wɑz gɑnə hæv tə skɹæmbəl tə dil wɪð ðɪs. "fɝst, ɑɹ ðəɹ sədʒɛstʃənz fəɹ əɹ . . . ɛmbəsi?"

"Then we will go forward," she said. "Carefully. It will take time to plan exactly who is to approach the Black Tower, and what they are to say." Time for her to plant a few safeguards, it was to be hoped. Light, she was going to have to scramble to deal with this. "First, are there suggestions for our . . . embassy?"

tʃæptɝ twɛnti

CHAPTER 20

ɪn ðə naɪɾ ɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɛndəd, ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə kloʊk foʊldəd bɪniθ hɝ, ɛɡwinz bɑɾəm wɑz kwaɪt nʌm fɹəm ðə hɑɹd wʊɾən bɛntʃ. æftɝ lɪsnɪŋ tə ɛnləs dɪskʌʃən, ʃi wɪʃt əɹ ɪɹz wɝ nʌm, əz wɛl. ʃɛɹiəm, fɔɹs tə stænd, hæd bɪɡʌn ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ fiɾ əz ɪf wɪʃɪŋ fəɹ ə tʃɛɹ. əɹ meɪbi dʒʌs tə sɪt daʊn ɑn ðə kɑɹpəts. ɛɡwin kəɾ əv lɛft, fɹiɪŋ hɝsɛlf ən ʃɛɹiəm. nʌθɪŋ ɹikwaɪɝd ði æmɪɝlɪn tə steɪ, ən ət bɛst əɹ kɑmɛns wɝ lɪsən tə pəlaɪtli. æftɝ wɪtʃ ðə hɔl ɡæləpt ɔf ɪn ɪts oʊn dɝɛkʃən. ðɪs hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə wɔɹ, ən wɪð ðə bɪt bɪtwin ðɛɹ tiθ, ðə hɔl wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə lɛɾ əɹ ɡɛɾ ə hæn ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz. ʃi cʊɾə wɔkt aʊɾ əɾ ɛni taɪm - wɪð ə slaɪɾ ɪntɝʌpʃən ɪn ðə dɪskʌʃənz fəɹ ðə ɹikwaɪɝd sɛɹəmoʊniz - bʌɾ ɪf ʃi dɪd, ʃi fɪɹd ðət fɝs θɪŋ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ʃi maɪt bi hændəɾ ə fʊli flɛdʒ plæn, wʌn ðə sɪɾɝz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi kæɹiɪŋ aʊt, ən əɹ wɪð noʊ aɪdiə wʌt wɑz kʌmɪŋ əntɪl ʃi ɹɛɾ ɪt. ət list, ðət wɑz əɹ fɪɹ ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ.

In the Night ong before the sitting ended, in spite of the cloak folded beneath her, Egwene's bottom was quite numb from the hard wooden bench. After listening to endless discussion, she wished her ears were numb, as well. Sheriam, forced to stand, had begun shifting her feet as if wishing for a chair. Or maybe just to sit down on the carpets. Egwene could have left, freeing herself and Sheriam. Nothing required the Amyrlin to stay, and at best her comments were listened to politely. After which the Hall galloped off in its own direction. This had nothing to do with the war, and with the bit between their teeth, the Hall was not about to let her get a hand on the reins. She could have walked out at any time - with a slight interruption in the discussions for the required ceremonies - but if she did, she feared that first thing in the morning she might be handed a fully fledged plan, one the Sitters were already carrying out, and her with no idea what was coming until she read it. At least, that was her fear in the beginning.

hu spoʊk ət ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst lɛŋθ wɑz noʊ sɝpɹaɪz, nɑɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. mæɡlə ən sɛɝɔɪjə, tɑkimə ən feɪsɛl ən vɛɹɪlɪn, itʃ fɹɛɾɪŋ vɪzəbli wən ənʌðɝ sɪɾɝ hæd ðə flɔɹ. oʊ, ðeɪ æksɛptɪd ðə dɪsɪʒən ə ðə hɔl, ət list ɑn ðə sɝfəs. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɛls fəɹ əm tə də ɪksɛpt ɹɪzaɪn ðɛɹ tʃɛɹz; haʊɛvɝ hɑɹd ðə hɔl maɪt bi wɪlɪŋ tə stʃɹʌɡəl fəɹ kənsɛnsəs ɪf nid bi, wʌns ə kɔɹs ʌv ækʃən wɑz dɪsaɪɾɪd, baɪ wʌtɛvɝ kənsɛnsəs, ðən ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz ɪkspɛktəd tə fɑloʊ, əɹ ət ðə vɛɹi lis nɑt hɪndɝ. ðət wɑz ðə ɹʌb. wʌt, ɪɡzækli, kɑnstətuɾəd hɪnʒɹəns? nʌn ə ðə faɪv spoʊk əɡɛnst ə sɪɾɝ fɹəm əɹ oʊn ədʒɑ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ði ʌðɝ fɔɹ lɛp tə ðɛɹ fit wən ɛni sɪɾɝ tʊk əɹ bɛntʃ əɡɛn, ən ɔl faɪv ɪf ðə sɪɾɝ wɑz blu. ən huɛvɝ ɡɑt ðə flɔɹ spoʊk vɛɹi pɝsweɪsɪvli əz tə waɪ ðə pɹiviəs spikɝz sədʒɛstʃənz wɝ ʌɾɝli ɹɔŋ ən pɝhæps ə ɹɛsəpi fəɹ dɪzæstɝ. nɑt ðət ðəɹ wɑz ɛni ɹil saɪn ə kəluʒən ðəɾ ɛɡwin kəd si. ðeɪ aɪɾ itʃ ʌðɝ əz wɛɹəli əz ðeɪ dɪɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls, fɹaʊn əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ əz hɑɹɾ ɪf nɑt hɑɹɾɝ ænd, pleɪnli, tʃɹʌstɪd nʌn ə ði ʌðɝz tə meɪk əɹ ɑɹɡjəməns.

Who spoke at the greatest length was no surprise, not any longer. Magla and Saroiya, Takima and Faiselle and Varilin, each fretting visibly when another Sitter had the floor. Oh, they accepted the decision of the Hall, at least on the surface. There was nothing else for them to do except resign their chairs; however hard the Hall might be willing to struggle for consensus if need be, once a course of action was decided, by whatever consensus, then everyone was expected to follow, or at the very least not hinder. That was the rub. What, exactly, constituted hindrance? None of the five spoke against a Sitter from her own Ajah, of course, but the other four leaped to their feet when any Sitter took her bench again, and all five if the Sitter was Blue. And whoever got the floor spoke very persuasively as to why the previous speaker's suggestions were utterly wrong and perhaps a recipe for disaster. Not that there was any real sign of collusion that Egwene could see. They eyed each other as warily as they did anyone else, frowned at each other as hard if not harder and, plainly, trusted none of the others to make her arguments.

ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, lɪɾəl ʌv wʌt wɑz sədʒɛstəd keɪm kloʊs tə kənfɔɹməɾi. ðə sɪɾɝz dɪsəɡɹiɾ ɑn haʊ mɛni sɪstɝz ʃəd bi sɛn tə ðə blæk taʊɝ ən haʊ mɛni fɹəm itʃ ədʒɑ, ɑn wən ðoʊz sɪstɝz wɝ tə bi sɛnt, wʌt ðeɪ mʌs dɪmænd, wʌt ðeɪ ʃəd bi əlaʊd tə əɡɹi tə ən wʌɾ ɔɹɾɝd tə ɹəfjuz ɪntaɪɝli. ɪn ə mæɾɝ ðɪs dɛləkət, ɛni ɛɹɝ kəd lid tə dɪzæstɝ. ɑn tɑp ʌv wɪtʃ, ɛvɹi ədʒɑ ɪksɛp ðə jɛloʊ kənsɪɾɝd ɪtsɛlf junikli kwɑləfaɪd tə pɹəvaɪd ðə liɾɝʃɪp ə ðə mɪʃən, fɹəm kweɪmɛsəz ɪnsɪstəns ðət ðə ɡoʊl wɑz nɪɡoʊʃieɪɾɪŋ ə tʃɹiɾi, ʌv sɔɹts, tə ɛskɹɑldiz kleɪm ðət hɪstɔɹɪkəl nɑlədʒ wɑz ə nəsɛsəɾi fəɹ sətʃ ən ənpɹɛsɪdɛntɪɾ ʌndɝteɪkɪŋ. bɛɹænə ivən pɔɪntəɾ aʊt ðəɾ ən əɡɹimən ə ðɪs neɪtʃɝ mʌs bi ɹitʃt baɪ æbsəlut ɹæʃənælɪɾi; dilɪŋ wɪð ði æʃəmən wɑz ʃʊɹ tə ɪnfleɪm pæʃənz, ən ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp koʊld lɑdʒɪk wəd ʃʊɹli lɛd tə dɪzæstɝ ɑn ðə spɑt.

In any event, little of what was suggested came close to conformity. The Sitters disagreed on how many sisters should be sent to the Black Tower and how many from each Ajah, on when those sisters were to be sent, what they must demand, what they should be allowed to agree to and what ordered to refuse entirely. In a matter this delicate, any error could lead to disaster. On top of which, every Ajah except the Yellow considered itself uniquely qualified to provide the leadership of the mission, from Kwamesa's insistence that the goal was negotiating a treaty, of sorts, to Escaralde's claim that historical knowledge was a necessity for such an unprecedented undertaking. Berana even pointed out that an agreement of this nature must be reached by absolute rationality; dealing with the Asha'man was sure to inflame passions, and anything except cold logic would surely lead to disaster on the spot.

ʃi ɡɹu ɹæðɝ hiɾəd əbaʊɾ ɪt, ɪn fækt. ɹoʊmændə dɪd wɑn ðə pɑɹɾi lɛd baɪ ə jɛloʊ, jɛt sɪns ɪt hɑɹdli sim ðəɹ wəd bi ɛni ɡɹeɪt nid fəɹ hilɪŋ, ʃi wɑz ɹədus tə ə stʌbɝn ɪnsɪstəns ðəɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls maɪt bi sweɪd baɪ hɝ ədʒɑz spɛʃəl ɪntʃɹəsts ən fɝɡɛt ðə pɔɪn ʌv wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ.

She grew rather heated about it, in fact. Romanda did want the party led by a Yellow, yet since it hardly seemed there would be any great need for Healing, she was reduced to a stubborn insistence that anyone else might be swayed by her Ajah's special interests and forget the point of what they were doing.

sɪɾɝz ə ðə seɪm ədʒɑ səpɔɹɾəd wʌn ənʌðɝ oʊnli tə ði ɪkstɛn ə nɑɾ oʊpənli əpoʊzɪŋ, ən noʊ tu ədʒəz wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə stæn təɡɛðɝ ɑn mʌtʃ bɪɑn ðə fæk ðət ðeɪ hæɾ əɡɹid tə sɛn ən ɛmbəsi tə ðə blæk taʊɝ. wɛðɝ ɪt ʃəd bi kɔld ən ɛmbəsi ɹɪmeɪn ɪn dɪspjut, ivən baɪ səm u hæd stʊɾ ɪn ɪts. feɪvɝ ət ðə stɑɹt. mɔɹiə hɝsɛlf sim teɪkən əbæk baɪ ðə vɛɹi aɪdiə.

Sitters of the same Ajah supported one another only to the extent of not openly opposing, and no two Ajahs were willing to stand together on much beyond the fact that they had agreed to send an embassy to the Black Tower. Whether it should be called an embassy remained in dispute, even by some who had stood in its. favor at the start. Moria herself seemed taken aback by the very idea.

ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn u faʊn ðə kɑnstən ɑɹɡjəmən ən kaʊntɝɑɹɡjəmənt wɛɹɪŋ, ðə pɔɪns tʃɑp soʊ faɪn ðət nʌθɪŋ ɹɪmeɪn ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæd tə bɪɡɪn oʊvɝ. sɪstɝz dʒɹɪftəɾ əweɪ fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə bɛntʃɪz. ʌðɝz ɹipleɪst əm ən ðən dʒɹɪftəɾ əweɪ ɪn tɝn æftɝ ə fju aʊɝz. baɪ ðə taɪm ʃɛɹiəm ʌɾɝd ðə ɹɪtʃuəl "dɪpɑɹt naʊ ɪn ðə laɪt," naɪt hæd dɪsɛndəd, ən oʊnli ə fju dʌzən ɹɪmeɪn bɪsaɪdz ɛɡwin ən ðə sɪɾɝz, sɛvɹəl ə hum sæɡd əz ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɹʌn θɹu ə mæŋɡəl laɪk dæmp bɛd-lɪnənz. ən nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl hæd bɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪksɛp ðət mɔɹ tɔk wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi bɪfɔɹ ɛniθɪŋ kəd bi dɪsaɪɾɪd. aʊtsaɪd, ə peɪl hæf-mun hʌŋ ɪn ə vɛlvət-blæk skaɪ dʌstɪd wɪð ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ stɑɹz, ən ði ɛɹ wɑz bɪɾɝ koʊld. hɝ bɹɛθ kɝlɪŋ ə peɪl mɪst ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, ɛɡwin wɔkt əweɪ fɹəm ðə hɔl smaɪlɪŋ əz ʃi lɪsən tə ðə sɪɾɝz skæɾɝɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ, səm stɪl ɑɹɡjuɪŋ. ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn wɝ wɔkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ, bʌt ðə jɛloʊz klɪɹ haɪ vɔɪs ɹoʊz pɛɹələsli kloʊs tə ʃaʊɾɪŋ, ən ðə bluz wɑz nɑt fɑɹ bɪhaɪnd. ðeɪ juʒəwəli ɑɹɡjud wən fɔɹst ɪndə wʌn ənʌðɝz kʌmpəni, bʌt ðɪs wɑz ðə fɝs taɪm ɛɡwin hæd sin əm tʃuz ɪt wən ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ əv tə. ʃɛɹiəm hæfhɑɹɾɪdli ɔfɝd tə fɛtʃ ðə ɹɪpɔɹts ɑn wæɡən ɹɪpɛɹz ən fɑɾɝ ðət ʃi hæɾ æsk fəɹ ðət mɔɹnɪŋ, bʌt ðə wɪɹi-aɪd wʊmən dɪd nɑɾ ətɛmp tə haɪɾ əɹ ɹɪlif wən ɛɡwin sɛn əɹ ɔf tə hɝ bɛd. wɪð ə hɝid kɝtsi, ʃi wɛn skɝiɪŋ əweɪ ɪndə ðə naɪt klʌtʃɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn hɝ.

Egwene was not the only one who found the constant argument and counterargument wearing, the points chopped so fine that nothing remained and everything had to begin over. Sisters drifted away from behind the benches. Others replaced them and then drifted away in turn after a few hours. By the time Sheriam uttered the ritual "Depart now in the Light," night had descended, and only a few dozen remained besides Egwene and the Sitters, several of whom sagged as though they had been run through a mangle like damp bed-linens. And nothing at all had been decided except that more talk was necessary before anything could be decided. Outside, a pale half-moon hung in a velvet-black sky dusted with glittering stars, and the air was bitter cold. Her breath curling a pale mist in the darkness, Egwene walked away from the Hall smiling as she listened to the Sitters scattering behind her, some still arguing. Romanda and Lelaine were walking together, but the Yellow's clear high voice rose perilously close to shouting, and the Blue's was not far behind. They usually argued when forced into one another's company, but this was the first time Egwene had seen them choose it when they did not have to. Sheriam halfheartedly offered to fetch the reports on wagon repairs and fodder that she had asked for that morning, but the weary-eyed woman did not attempt to hide her relief when Egwene sent her off to her bed. With a hurried curtsy, she went scurrying away into the night clutching her cloak around her.

moʊst ə ðə tɛns stʊd dɑɹk, ʃædoʊz ɪn ðə munlaɪt. fju sɪstɝz ɹɪmeɪn əweɪk lɔŋ æftɝ naɪtfɔl.

Most of the tents stood dark, shadows in the moonlight. Few sisters remained awake long after nightfall.

læmp-ɔɪl ən kændəlz wɝ nɛvɝ ɪn dʒɛnɝəs səplaɪ. fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, dɪleɪ suɾəd ɛɡwin pɝfəkli, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli ɹizən fəɹ əɹ smaɪl. sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ɔl ðəɾ ɑɹɡjəmənt, hɝ hɛdeɪk hæd ɡɔn əweɪ ɪntaɪɝli. ʃi wəɾ əv noʊ dɪfəkəlti əɾ ɔl gɑnə slip ðɪs naɪt. hɑlimə ɔlweɪz ɹɛməɾid ðæt, jɛɾ əɹ dʒɹimz wɝ ɔlweɪz tʃɹʌbəld æftɝ wʌn ə hɑliməz məsɑʒɪz. wɛl, fju ʌv əɹ dʒɹimz wɝ laɪt, bʌt ðiz wɝ dɑɹkɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝz, ænd, stʃɹeɪnʒli, ʃi kəd nɛvɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðət ðeɪ wɝ dɑɹk ən tʃɹʌbəld. daʊtləs boʊθ θɪŋz keɪm fɹəm səm ɹɛmnən ə ðə peɪnz ðət hɑliməz fɪŋɡɝz wəd nɑt ɹitʃ, jɛt ðə læst wɑz dɪstɝbɪŋ ɪn ɪtsɛlf. ʃi hæd lɝn tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛvɹi dʒɹim. ʃi hæd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛvɹi dʒɹim. stɪl, wɪð noʊ hɛdeɪk tənaɪt, ʃi ʃəɾ əv noʊ pɹɑbləmz, ən dʒɹimɪŋ wɑz ðə list ʌv wʌt ʃi hæd tə du.

Lamp-oil and candles were never in generous supply. For the moment, delay suited Egwene perfectly, but that was not the only reason for her smile. Somewhere in all that argument, her headache had gone away entirely. She would have no difficulty at all going to sleep this night. Halima always remedied that, yet her dreams were always troubled after one of Halima's massages. Well, few of her dreams were light, but these were darker than any others, and, strangely, she could never remember anything except that they were dark and troubled. Doubtless both things came from some remnant of the pains that Halima's fingers would not reach, yet the last was disturbing in itself. She had learned to remember every dream. She had to remember every dream. Still, with no headache tonight, she should have no problems, and dreaming was the least of what she had to do.

laɪk ðə hɔl ən əɹ stʌɾi, hɝ tɛn stʊɾ ɪn ə lɪɾəl klɪɹɪŋ wɪð ɪts oʊn stʃɹɪp ʌv wʊɾən wɔkweɪ, ðə nɪɹəs tɛns ə dʌzən spænz ɔf tə ɡɪv ði æmɪɝlɪn ə bɪɾ ə pɹaɪvəsi. ət list, ðət wɑz haʊ ðə speɪsɪŋ wɑz ɪkspleɪnd. ɪt maɪɾ ivən əv bɪn ðə tʃɹuθ, naʊ. ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ wɑz sɝɾənli nɑɾ ɪɹɛləvən ɛnimɔɹ. ðə tɛnt wɑz nɑt lɑɹdʒ, ʃɔɹɾ ə fɔɹ peɪsɪz ɑn ə saɪd, ən kɹaʊɾəd ɪnsaɪd, wɪð fɔɹ bɹæs-baʊn tʃɛsts fʊl ə kloʊðɪŋ stækt əɡɛnst wʌn wɔl, tu kɑts ən ə taɪni ɹaʊn teɪbəl, ə bɹɑnz bɹeɪziɝ, ə wɑʃstænd, ə stænd-mɪɹɝ ən wʌn ə ðə fju ɹil tʃɛɹz ɪn ðə kæmp. ə sɪmpəl pis wɪð ə lɪɾəl pleɪn kɑɹvɪŋ, ɪt tʊk ʌp ɪntaɪɝli tu mʌtʃ ɹum, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz kʌmftəɹbəl, ən ə ɡɹeɪt lʌɡʒɝi wən ʃi wɑntəd tə kɝl əɹ fit bɪniθ əɹ ən ɹɛd. wən ʃi hæd taɪm tə ɹiɾ ɛniθɪŋ fəɹ plɛʒɝ. ðə sɛkən kɑt wɑz hɑliməz, ən ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si ðə wʊmən wɑz nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ðəɹ weɪɾɪŋ ɑn hɝ.

Like the Hall and her study, her tent stood in a little clearing with its own strip of wooden walkway, the nearest tents a dozen spans off to give the Amyrlin a bit of privacy. At least, that was how the spacing was explained. It might even have been the truth, now. Egwene al'Vere was certainly not irrelevant anymore. The tent was not large, short of four paces on a side, and crowded inside, with four brass-bound chests full of clothing stacked against one wall, two cots and a tiny round table, a bronze brazier, a washstand, a stand-mirror and one of the few real chairs in the camp. A simple piece with a little plain carving, it took up entirely too much room, but it was comfortable, and a great luxury when she wanted to curl her feet beneath her and read. When she had time to read anything for pleasure. The second cot was Halima's, and she was surprised to see the woman was not already there waiting on her.

ðə tɛnt wɑz nɑɾ ənɑkjəpaɪd, haʊɛvɝ. "ju hæd nʌθɪŋ bʌt bɹɛd fəɹ bɹɛkfəst, mʌðɝ," tʃɛsə sɛɾ ɪn ə maɪldli əkjuzɪŋ vɔɪs əz ɛɡwin dʌk θɹu ði ɛntʃɹi flæps. nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm staʊɾ ɪn əɹ pleɪn ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛs, ɛɡwinz meɪd wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə tɛns stul, dɑɹnɪŋ stɑkɪŋz baɪ ðə laɪɾ ʌv ən ɔɪl læmp.

The tent was not unoccupied, however. "You had nothing but bread for breakfast, Mother," Chesa said in a mildly accusing voice as Egwene ducked through the entry flaps. Not far from stout in her plain gray dress, Egwene's maid was sitting on the tent's stool, darning stockings by the light of an oil lamp.

ʃi wɑz ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən, wɪθaʊɾ ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, jɛt səmtaɪmz ɪt sim ðət tʃɛsə hæd bɪn ɪn əɹ ɛmplɔɪ fɝɛvɝ ɹæðɝ ðən dʒʌst sɪns sɑlədɑɹ. ʃi sɝɾənli tʊk ɔl ðə lɪbɝɾiz ʌv ən oʊl sɝvənt, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə ɹaɪt tə skoʊld. "ju eɪt nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl mɪddeɪ, əz fɑɹ əz aɪ kən lɝn," ʃi wɛn ɑn, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ə snoʊi sɪlk stɑkɪŋ tə stʌɾi ðə pætʃ ʃi wɑz meɪkɪŋ ɪn ðə hil, "æn jəɹ dɪnɝz ɡɔn koʊl ðəɹ ɑn ðə teɪbəl ən aʊɝ əɡoʊ ət list. noʊbɑdiz æsk mi, bʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ dɪd, aɪd seɪ ðoʊz hɛdz ə jʊɹz kʌm fɹəm nɑɾ iɾɪŋ. jəɹ mʌtʃ tu skɪni."

She was a pretty woman, without a touch of gray in her hair, yet sometimes it seemed that Chesa had been in her employ forever rather than just since Salidar. She certainly took all the liberties of an old servant, including the right to scold. "You ate nothing at all midday, as far as I can learn," she went on, holding up a snowy silk stocking to study the patch she was making in the heel, "and your dinner's gone cold there on the table an hour ago at least. Nobody's asked me, but if they did, I'd say those heads of yours come from not eating. You're much too skinny."

wɪð ðæt, ʃi faɪnəli pʊt ðə stɑkɪŋ daʊn ətɑp əɹ mɛndɪŋ bæskəɾ ən ɹoʊz tə teɪk ɛɡwinz kloʊk. ən tə ɪkskleɪm ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑz koʊld əz aɪs. ðət wɑz ənʌðɝ kɑz ə hɛdeɪks, ɪn əɹ bʊk.

With that, she finally put the stocking down atop her mending basket and rose to take Egwene's cloak. And to exclaim that Egwene was cold as ice. That was another cause of headaches, in her book.

ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛn ɝaʊn ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ fɹizɪŋ koʊld əɹ stimɪŋ hit, bʌt jəɹ bɑɾi nu wɛðɝ jə dɪɾ əɹ nɑt. bɛs tə bʌndəl ʌp wɔɹm. ən wɛɹ ɹɛd ʃɪfs. ɛvɹiwʌn nu ɹɛd wɑz wɔɹməst.

Aes Sedai went around ignoring freezing cold or steaming heat, but your body knew whether you did or not. Best to bundle up warm. And wear red shifts. Everyone knew red was warmest.

iɾɪŋ hɛlpt, tu. ən ɛmpti bɛli ɔlweɪz lɛd tə ʃɪvɝɪŋ. jə nɛvɝ sɔ hɝ ʃɪvɝɪŋ, naʊ dɪd ju?

Eating helped, too. An empty belly always led to shivering. You never saw her shivering, now did you?

"θæŋk ju, mʌðɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd laɪtli, wɪtʃ ɝn ə sɑf snɔɹɾ ə læftɝ. ən ə ʃɑk lʊk. fəɹ ɔl əɹ lɪbɝɾiz, tʃɛsə wɑz ə stɪkəlɝ fəɹ ðə pɹəpɹaɪəɾiz tə meɪk ələdʒɹɪn sim læks. ðə spɪɹət, ɛniweɪ, ɪf ɔfən nɑt ðə lɛɾɝ. "aɪ doʊn əv ə hɛdeɪk tənaɪt, θæŋks tə ðət ti ʌv jʊɹz." meɪbi ɪt hæd bɪn ðə ti. vaɪl əz ðət teɪstəd, əz ə kjʊɹ, ɪt wɑz noʊ wɝs ðən sɪɾɪŋ θɹu ə sɛʃən ə ðə hɔl læstɪŋ mɔɹ ðən hæf ə deɪ. "æn aɪm nɑt vɛɹi hʌŋɡɹi, ɹɪli. ə ɹoʊl wɪl bi ɪnʌf." ʌv kɔɹs, ɪt wɑz nɑt kwaɪt soʊ sɪmpəl əz ðæt. ðə ɹileɪʃənʃɪp bɪtwin mɪstʃɹəs ən sɝvənt wɑz nɛvɝ sɪmpəl. jə lɪvd ɪn wʌn ənʌðɝz sliv, ən ʃi sɔ jə ət jəɹ wɝst, nu ɔl jəɹ fɔls ən fɔɪbəlz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ sətʃ θɪŋ əz pɹaɪvəsi fɹəm jəɹ meɪd. tʃɛsə mʌɾɝd ən ɡɹʌmbəld ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ ðə hoʊl taɪm ʃi wɑz hɛlpɪŋ ɛɡwin əndʒɹɛs, ən ɪn ði ɛnd, ɹæpt ɪn ə ɹoʊb - ɹɛd sɪlk, tə bi ʃʊɹ, ɛdʒd wɪð fɹɔθi mʊɹændiən leɪs ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð sʌmɝi flaʊɝz; ə ɡɪft fɹəm æneɪjə - ɛɡwin lɛɾ əɹ ɹimuv ðə lɪnən klɔθ kʌvɝɪŋ ðə tʃɹeɪ ɑn ðə lɪɾəl ɹaʊn teɪbəl. ðə lɛntəl stu wɑz ə kəndʒil mæs ɪn ðə boʊl, bʌɾ ə lɪɾəl tʃænəlɪŋ fɪks ðæt, ən wɪð ðə fɝst spunfʊl, ɛɡwin dɪskʌvɝd ʃi dɪɾ əv səm æpətaɪt. ʃi eɪɾ ɛvɹi skɹæp, ən ðə pis ə blu-veɪnd waɪt tʃiz, ən ðə sʌmwʌt ʃɹɪvəld ɑlɪvz, ən ðə tu kɹʌsti bɹaʊn ɹoʊlz, ðoʊ ʃi hæd tə pɪk wivəlz aʊɾ ə boʊθ. sɪns ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə fɔl əslip tu kwɪkli, ʃi dʒɹæŋk oʊnli wʌn kʌp ə ðə spaɪst waɪn, wɪtʃ niɾəd ɹihiɾɪŋ, tu, ən hæɾ ə slaɪt bɪɾɝnəs fəɹ ɪt, bʌt tʃɛsə bimd wɪð əpɹuvəl əz ɪf ʃi hæd klin ðə tʃɹeɪ. piɹɪŋ ət ðə dɪʃəz, ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ði ɑləv pɪts ən ə fju kɹʌmz, ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi hæd, ət ðæt. wʌns ʃi wɑz ɪn əɹ nɛɹoʊ kɑt, tu sɑft wʊlən blæŋkəts ən ə ɡus-daʊn kʌmfɝɾɝ pʊl tə hɝ tʃɪn, tʃɛsə tʊk ʌp ðə dɪnɝ tʃɹeɪ, bʌt ʃi pɔzd ət ðə tɛns ɛntʃɹəns. "du jə wɑn mi tə kʌm bæk, mʌðɝ? ɪf jə ɡɛt wʌn ə jəɹ hɛdz. . . . wɛl, ðət wʊmənz faʊn kʌmpəni, əɹ ʃid bi hɪɹ baɪ naʊ." ðəɹ wɑz oʊpən skɔɹn ɪn "ðæt wʊmən." "aɪ kəd bɹu ənʌðɝ pɑɾ ə ti. aɪ ɡɑɾ ɪt fɹəm ə pɛdlɝ u sɛɾ ɪt wɑz sɑvɹən fəɹ eɪkɪŋ hɛdz. ən dʒɔɪns, ən bɛli ʌpsɛts, tu."

"Thank you, Mother," Egwene said lightly, which earned a soft snort of laughter. And a shocked look. For all her liberties, Chesa was a stickler for the proprieties to make Aledrin seem lax. The spirit, anyway, if often not the letter. "I don't have a headache tonight, thanks to that tea of yours." Maybe it had been the tea. Vile as that tasted, as a cure, it was no worse than sitting through a session of the Hall lasting more than half a day. "And I'm not very hungry, really. A roll will be enough." Of course, it was not quite so simple as that. The relationship between mistress and servant was never simple. You lived in one another's sleeve, and she saw you at your worst, knew all your faults and foibles. There was no such thing as privacy from your maid. Chesa muttered and grumbled under her breath the whole time she was helping Egwene undress, and in the end, wrapped in a robe - red silk, to be sure, edged with frothy Murandian lace and embroidered with summery flowers; a gift from Anaiya - Egwene let her remove the linen cloth covering the tray on the little round table. The lentil stew was a congealed mass in the bowl, but a little channeling fixed that, and with the first spoonful, Egwene discovered she did have some appetite. She ate every scrap, and the piece of blue-veined white cheese, and the somewhat shriveled olives, and the two crusty brown rolls, though she had to pick weevils out of both. Since she did not want to fall asleep too quickly, she drank only one cup of the spiced wine, which needed reheating, too, and had a slight bitterness for it, but Chesa beamed with approval as if she had cleaned the tray. Peering at the dishes, empty except for the olive pits and a few crumbs, she realized she had, at that. Once she was in her narrow cot, two soft woolen blankets and a goose-down comforter pulled to her chin, Chesa took up the dinner tray, but she paused at the tent's entrance. "Do you want me to come back, Mother? If you get one of your heads. . . . Well, that woman's found company, or she'd be here by now." There was open scorn in "that woman." "I could brew another pot of tea. I got it from a peddler who said it was sovereign for aching heads. And joints, and belly upsets, too."

"du jə ɹɪli θɪŋk ʃiz ə laɪtskɝt, tʃɛsə?" ɛɡwin mɝmɝd. ɔlɹɛɾi wɔɹm ʌndɝ əɹ kʌvɝz, ʃi fɛl dʒɹaʊzi. ʃi wɑntəd slip, bʌt nɑt dʒʌs jɛt. hɛdz ən dʒɔɪns ən bɛliz? nɪneɪiv wəd læf hɝsɛlf sɪk tə hɪɹ ðæt. pɝhæps ɪt hæd bɪn ɔl ðoʊz tʃæɾɝɪŋ sɪɾɝz u tʃeɪst əɹ hɛdeɪk əweɪ æftɝ ɔl. "hɑlimə dʌz flɝt, aɪ səpoʊz, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ɪts ɛvɝ ɡɔn bɪɑn flɝɾɪŋ." fəɹ ə moʊmən tʃɛsə wɑz saɪlənt, pɝsɪŋ əɹ lɪps. "ʃi meɪks mi . . . ənizi, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ dʒʌs nɑt ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt ðət hɑlimə. aɪ fil ɪɾ ɛvɹi taɪm ʃiz ɝaʊnd. ɪts laɪk filɪŋ sʌmbɑɾi snikɪŋ ʌp bɪhaɪn mi, əɹ ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðɛɹz ə mæn wɑtʃɪŋ mi beɪð, ɔɹ. . . . " ʃi læft, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ən ənkʌmftəɹbəl saʊnd. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ tə dɪskɹaɪb ɪt. dʒʌst, nɑt ɹaɪt." ɛɡwin saɪɾ ən snʌɡəl dipɝ ʌndɝ ðə kʌvɝz. "ɡʊd naɪt, tʃɛsə." tʃænəlɪŋ bɹifli, ʃi ɪkstɪŋɡwɪʃt ðə læmp, plʌnʒɪŋ ðə tɛn ɪndə pɪtʃ blæknəs. "ju ɡoʊ slip ɪn jəɹ oʊn bɛd tənaɪt." hɑlimə maɪt bi əpsɛt tə kʌm ən faɪn sʌmwʌn ɛls ɑn əɹ kɑt. hæd ðə wʊmən ɹɪli bɹoʊkən ə mænz ɑɹm? ðə mæn mʌst əv pɹəvoʊkt əɹ sʌmhaʊ.

"Do you really think she's a lightskirt, Chesa?" Egwene murmured. Already warm under her covers, she felt drowsy. She wanted sleep, but not just yet. Heads and joints and bellies? Nynaeve would laugh herself sick to hear that. Perhaps it had been all those chattering Sitters who chased her headache away after all. "Halima does flirt, I suppose, but I don't think it's ever gone beyond flirting." For a moment Chesa was silent, pursing her lips. "She makes me . . . uneasy, Mother," she said finally. "There's something just not right about that Halima. I feel it every time she's around. It's like feeling somebody sneaking up behind me, or realizing there's a man watching me bathe, or. . . . " She laughed, but it was an uncomfortable sound. "I don't know how to describe it. Just, not right." Egwene sighed and snuggled deeper under the covers. "Good night, Chesa." Channeling briefly, she extinguished the lamp, plunging the tent into pitch blackness. "You go sleep in your own bed tonight." Halima might be upset to come and find someone else on her cot. Had the woman really broken a man's arm? The man must have provoked her somehow.

ʃi wɑntəd dʒɹimz tənaɪt, əntʃɹʌbəl dʒɹimz - ət list, dʒɹimz ʃi kəd ɹikɔl; fju ʌv əɹ dʒɹimz wɝ wʌɾ ɛniwʌn wəd kɔl əntʃɹʌbəld - bʌt ʃi hæɾ ənʌðɝ sɔɹɾ ə dʒɹim tə ɛntɝ fɝst, ən fəɹ ðæt, ɪt hæd bɪn səm taɪm sɪns ʃi niɾəd tə bi əslip. nɔɹ dɪd ʃi nid wʌn ə ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðə hɔl ɡɑɹɾəd soʊ kloʊsli. slɪpɪŋ ɪndə ə laɪt tʃɹæns wɑz noʊ hɑɹɾɝ ðən dəsaɪɾɪŋ tə də soʊ, ɪspɛʃli əz taɪɝɾ əz ʃi wɑz, ænd. . . .

She wanted dreams tonight, untroubled dreams - at least, dreams she could recall; few of her dreams were what anyone would call untroubled - but she had another sort of dream to enter first, and for that, it had been some time since she needed to be asleep. Nor did she need one of the ter'angreal the Hall guarded so closely. Slipping into a light trance was no harder than deciding to do so, especially as tired as she was, and. . . .

. . . bɑɾələs, ʃi floʊɾəd ɪn ən ɛnləs blæknəs, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ən ɛnləs si ʌv laɪts, ən ɪmɛns swɝl ə taɪni pɪnpɔɪns ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ mɔɹ ʃɑɹpli ðən stɑɹz ɑn ðə klɪɹɪs naɪt, mɔɹ numɝəs ðən ðə stɑɹz. ðoʊz wɝ ðə dʒɹimz ʌv ɔl ðə pipəl ɪn ðə wɝld, ʌv pipəl ɪn ɔl ðə wɝlz ðət wɝ əɹ kəd bi, wɝlz soʊ stʃɹeɪnʒ ʃi kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə kɑmpɹihɛn ðɛm, ɔl vɪzəbəl hɪɹ ɪn ðə taɪni ɡæp bɪtwin tɛlɝɑnɹbiəɾ ən weɪkɪŋ, ði ɪnfənət speɪs bɪtwin ɹiæləɾi ən dʒɹimz. səm ə ðoʊz dʒɹimz, ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd əɾ ə ɡlæns. ðeɪ ɔl lʊk ðə seɪm, jɛt ʃi nu ðɛm əz ʃʊɹli əz ʃi dɪd ðə feɪsəz ə hɝ sɪstɝz. sʌm, ʃi əvɔɪɾəd.

. . . bodiless, she floated in an endless blackness, surrounded by an endless sea of lights, an immense swirl of tiny pinpoints glittering more sharply than stars on the clearest night, more numerous than the stars. Those were the dreams of all the people in the world, of people in all the worlds that were or could be, worlds so strange she could not begin to comprehend them, all visible here in the tiny gap between Tel'aran'rbiod and waking, the infinite space between reality and dreams. Some of those dreams, she recognized at a glance. They all looked the same, yet she knew them as surely as she did the faces of her sisters. Some, she avoided.

ɹændz dʒɹimz wɝ ɔlweɪz ʃildɪd, ən ʃi fɪɹɾ i maɪt noʊ wən ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə pik ɪn.

Rand's dreams were always shielded, and she feared he might know when she tried to peek in.

ðə ʃild wəd kip əɹ fɹəm siɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ, ɛniweɪ. ə pɪɾi ʃi kəd nɑt tɛl wɛɹ sʌmwʌn wɑz fɹəm ðɛɹ dʒɹimz; tu pɔɪns ə laɪt kəd bi saɪd-baɪ-saɪd hɪɹ, ən ðə dʒɹimɝz ə θaʊzən maɪlz əpɑɹt. ɡɔɪnz dʒɹimz tʌɡd ət hɝ, ən ʃi flɛd. hɪz dʒɹimz hɛl ðɛɹ oʊn deɪnʒɝz, nɑt lis kəz pɑɹɾ ə hɝ wɑntəd vɛɹi mʌtʃ tə sɪŋk ɪndə ðɛm. nɪneɪivz dʒɹimz ɡeɪv əɹ pɔz, ən ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə pʊt ðə fɪɹ ə ðə laɪɾ ɪndə ðə ful wʊmən, bʌt nɪneɪiv hæd mænədʒ tə ɪɡnɔɹ əɹ soʊ fɑɹ, ən ɛɡwin wəd nɑt sɪŋk tə pʊlɪŋ əɹ ɪndə tɛlɝɑnɹbiəɾ əɡɛnst əɹ wɪl. ðət wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ ðə fɔɹseɪkən dɪd. ɪt wɑz ə tɛmteɪʃən, ðoʊ.

The shield would keep her from seeing anything, anyway. A pity she could not tell where someone was from their dreams; two points of light could be side-by-side here, and the dreamers a thousand miles apart. Gawyn's dreams tugged at her, and she fled. His dreams held their own dangers, not least because part of her wanted very much to sink into them. Nynaeve's dreams gave her pause, and the desire to put the fear of the Light into the fool woman, but Nynaeve had managed to ignore her so far, and Egwene would not sink to pulling her into Tel'aran'rbiod against her will. That was the sort of thing the Forsaken did. It was a temptation, though.

muvɪŋ wɪθaʊt muvɪŋ, ʃi sɝtʃt fəɹ wʌn pɝtɪkjəlɝ dʒɹimɝ. wʌn ə tu, ət list; iðɝ wəd du. ðə laɪts sim tə spɪn ɝaʊn hɝ, tə swip pæst soʊ fæs ðət ðeɪ blɝɾ ɪndə stʃɹiks waɪl ʃi floʊɾəd moʊʃənləs ɪn ðət stɑɹi si. ʃi hoʊp ðəɾ ət list wʌn ə ðoʊz ʃi hʌntəd wɑz əslip ɔlɹɛɾi. ðə laɪt nu, ɪt wɑz leɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛniwʌn. veɪɡli əwɛɹ ə hɝ bɑɾi ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld, ʃi fɛl hɝsɛlf jɔn ən kɝl əɹ lɛɡz ʌp bɪniθ əɹ kʌvɝz.

Moving without moving, she searched for one particular dreamer. One of two, at least; either would do. The lights seemed to spin around her, to sweep past so fast that they blurred into streaks while she floated motionless in that starry sea. She hoped that at least one of those she hunted was asleep already. The Light knew, it was late enough for anyone. Vaguely aware of her body in the waking world, she felt herself yawn and curl her legs up beneath her covers.

ðən ʃi sɔ ðə pɔɪn ə laɪt ʃi sɔt, ən ɪt swɛld ɪn əɹ saɪɾ əz ɪt ɹʌʃt təwɔɹd hɝ, fɹəm ə stɑɹ ɪn ðə skaɪ tə ə fʊl mun tə ə ʃɪmɝɪŋ wɔl ðət fɪld əɹ vɪʒən, pʌlsɪŋ laɪk ə bɹiðɪŋ θɪŋ. ʃi dɪd nɑt tʌtʃ ɪt, ʌv kɔɹs; ðət kəd lid tə ɔl sɔɹts ə kɑmpləkeɪʃənz ivən wɪð ðɪs dʒɹimɝ.

Then she saw the point of light she sought, and it swelled in her sight as it rushed toward her, from a star in the sky to a full moon to a shimmering wall that filled her vision, pulsing like a breathing thing. She did not touch it, of course; that could lead to all sorts of complications even with this dreamer.

bɪsaɪdz, ɪt wəd bi ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ tə slaɪɾ ɪndə sʌmwʌnz dʒɹim æksədɛntəli. ɹitʃɪŋ aʊt wɪð əɹ wɪl əkɹɔs ðə hɛɹ-faɪn speɪs ðət ɹɪmeɪn bɪtwin əɹ ən ðə dʒɹim, ʃi spoʊk kɔʃəsli, soʊ ʃi wəd nɑt bi hɝɾ ɪn ə ʃaʊt. ʃi hæd noʊ bɑɾi, noʊ maʊθ, bʌt ʃi spoʊk.

Besides, it would be embarrassing to slide into someone's dream accidentally. Reaching out with her will across the hair-fine space that remained between her and the dream, she spoke cautiously, so she would not be heard in a shout. She had no body, no mouth, but she spoke.

ɪleɪn, ɪts ɛɡwin. mit mi ət ðə juʒəwəl pleɪs.

ELAYNE, IT'S EGWENE. MEET ME AT THE USUAL PLACE.

ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɛniwʌn kəɾ ivzdʒɹɑp, nɑt wɪθaʊɾ əɹ noʊɪŋ, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn teɪkɪŋ ənniɾɪd tʃænsəz. ðə pɪnpɹɪk wɪŋkt aʊt. ɪleɪn hæd wækənd. bʌt ʃi wəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ən noʊ ðə vɔɪs hæd nɑt bɪn dʒʌs pɑɹɾ ʌv ə dʒɹim. ɛɡwin muvd . . . saɪdweɪz. əɹ pɝhæps ɪt wɑz mɔɹ laɪk kəmpliɾɪŋ ə stɛp ðət ʃi hæd pɔz hæfweɪ θɹu. ɪt fɛlt laɪk boʊθ. ʃi muvd, ænd. . . .

She did not think anyone could eavesdrop, not without her knowing, yet there was no point in taking unneeded chances. The pinprick winked out. Elayne had wakened. But she would remember, and know the voice had not been just part of a dream. Egwene moved . . . sideways. Or perhaps it was more like completing a step that she had paused halfway through. It felt like both. She moved, and. . . .

. . . ʃi wɑz stændɪŋ ɪn ə smɔl ɹum, ɛmpti seɪv fəɹ ə skɑɹd wʊɾən teɪbəl ən θɹi stʃɹeɪt-bæk tʃɛɹz. ðə tu wɪndoʊz ʃoʊd dip naɪɾ aʊtsaɪd, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz laɪɾ ʌv ən ɑd sɔɹt, dɪfɹən fɹəm munlaɪɾ əɹ læmplaɪɾ əɹ sʌnlaɪt. ɪt dɪd nɑt sim tə kʌm fɹəm ɛniwɛɹ; ɪt dʒʌst wɑz. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf tə si ðət sæd, sɑɹi lɪɾəl ɹum klɪɹli. ðə dʌsti wɔl-pænəlz wɝ ɹɪɾəld baɪ biɾəlz, ən bɹoʊkən peɪnz ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz hæɾ əlaʊd snoʊ tə dʒɹɪft ɪn ətɑp ə lɪɾɝ ə twɪɡz ən dɛd livz. ət list, ðəɹ wɑz snoʊ ɑn ðə flɔɹ səmtaɪmz, ən twɪɡz ən livz səmtaɪmz. ðə teɪbəl ən tʃɛɹz ɹɪmeɪnd wɛɹ ðeɪ stʊd, bʌt wɛnɛvɝ ʃi ɡlænst əweɪ, ðə snoʊ maɪt bi ɡɔn wən ʃi lʊk bæk, ðə twɪɡz ən bɹaʊn livz ɪn dɪfɹən pleɪsəz əz ɪf skæɾɝd baɪ ə wɪnd. ðeɪ ivən ʃɪftəd waɪl ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ, sɪmpli hɪɹ ðən ðɛɹ. ðət noʊ lɔŋɡɝ simd ɛni ɑɾɝ tə hɝ ðən ðə fil ʌv ənsin aɪz wɑtʃɪŋ. niðɝ wɑz tʃɹuli ɹil, dʒʌs ðə weɪ θɪŋz wɝ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ə ɹəflɛkʃən ə ɹiæləɾi ən ə dʒɹim, ɔl dʒʌmbəl təɡɛðɝ.

. . . she was standing in a small room, empty save for a scarred wooden table and three straight-back chairs. The two windows showed deep night outside, yet there was light of an odd sort, different from moonlight or lamplight or sunlight. It did not seem to come from anywhere; it just was. But it was more than enough to see that sad, sorry little room clearly. The dusty wall-panels were riddled by beetles, and broken panes in the windows had allowed snow to drift in atop a litter of twigs and dead leaves. At least, there was snow on the floor sometimes, and twigs and leaves sometimes. The table and chairs remained where they stood, but whenever she glanced away, the snow might be gone when she looked back, the twigs and brown leaves in different places as if scattered by a wind. They even shifted while she was looking, simply here then there. That no longer seemed any odder to her than the feel of unseen eyes watching. Neither was truly real, just the way things were in Tel'aran'rhiod. A reflection of reality and a dream, all jumbled together.

ɛvɹiwɛɹ ɪn ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz fɛlt ɛmpti, bʌt ðɪs ɹum hæd ðə hɑloʊ ɛmptinəs ðəɾ oʊnli keɪm fɹəm ə pleɪs ðət wɑz tʃɹuli əbændən ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld. nɑt soʊ mɛni mʌnθs pæst, ðɪs lɪɾəl ɹum hæd bɪn ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi, ði ɪn ðət hɛld ɪt wɑz kɔl ðə lɪɾəl taʊɝ, ən ðə vɪlədʒ ə sɑlədɑɹ, ɹikleɪm fɹəm ði ɪnkɹoʊtʃɪŋ fɔɹəs hæd bʌsəld, ðə hɑɹɾ ə ɹɪzɪstəns tə ɪleɪɾə. naʊ, ɪf ʃi wɔkt aʊtsaɪd, ʃi wəd si sæplɪŋz θɹʌst ɪŋ θɹu ðə snoʊ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðoʊz stʃɹits ðət hæd bɪn soʊ peɪnfəli klɪɹd. sɪstɝz dɪd tʃɹævəl tə sɑlədɑɹ stɪl, tə vɪzət ðə dʌvəkoʊts, ɔl dʒɛləs ðəɾ ə pɪdʒən sɛn baɪ wʌn ə ðɛɹ aɪz-ændɪɹz maɪt fɔl ɪndə ənʌðɝz hænz, bʌɾ oʊnli ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld.

Everywhere in the World of Dreams felt empty, but this room had the hollow emptiness that only came from a place that was truly abandoned in the waking world. Not so many months past, this little room had been the Amyrlin's study, the inn that held it was called the Little Tower, and the village of Salidar, reclaimed from the encroaching forest had bustled, the heart of resistance to Elaida. Now, if she walked outside, she would see saplings thrust ing through the snow in the middle of those streets that had been so painfully cleared. Sisters did Travel to Salidar still, to visit the dovecotes, all jealous that a pigeon sent by one of their eyes-andears might fall into another's hands, but only in the waking world.

ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə dʌvəkoʊts hɪɹ wəd bi əz jusləs əz wɪʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə pɪdʒənz tə faɪn jə baɪ ə mɪɹəkəl.

Going to the dovecotes here would be as useless as wishing for the pigeons to find you by a miracle.

teɪm ænəməlz sim tə hæv noʊ ɹɪflɛkʃənz ɪn ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz, ən nʌθɪŋ dʌn hɪɹ kəd tʌtʃ ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld. sɪstɝz wɪð æksɛs tə ðə dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil hæɾ ʌðɝ pleɪsəz tə vɪzət ðən ə dɪzɝɾɪd vɪlədʒ ɪn ɔltɑɹə, ən tʃɝ teɪnli noʊ wʌn ɛls hæd ɹizən tə kʌm hɪɹ ɪn ðə dʒɹim, iðɝ. ðɪs wɑz wʌn ə ðə pleɪsəz ɪn ðə wɝld ɛɡwin kəd bi ʃʊɹ noʊ wʌn wəd kætʃ əɹ baɪ sɝpɹaɪz. tu mɛni ʌðɝz tɝn aʊt tə hæv ivzdʒɹɑpɝz. əɹ boʊn-dip sædnəs. ʃi heɪɾəd siɪŋ wʌt hæd bɪkʌm ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz sɪns ʃi lɛft.

Tame animals seemed to have no reflections in the World of Dreams, and nothing done here could touch the waking world. Sisters with access to the dream ter'angreal had other places to visit than a deserted village in Altara, and cer tainly no one else had reason to come here in the dream, either. This was one of the places in the world Egwene could be sure no one would catch her by surprise. Too many others turned out to have eavesdroppers. Or bone-deep sadness. She hated seeing what had become of the Two Rivers since she left.

weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪleɪn tə əpɪɹ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə kwɛl əɹ ɪmpeɪʃəns. ɪleɪn wɑz nɑɾ ə dʒɹimwɔkɝ; ʃi niɾəd tə juz ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ən ʃi wəd wɑnə tɛl eɪvinhə wɛɹ ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ, noʊ daʊt.

Waiting for Elayne to appear, she tried to quell her impatience. Elayne was not a dreamwalker; she needed to use a ter'angreal. And she would want to tell Aviendha where she was going, no doubt.

stɪl, əz ðə mɪnəts stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt, ɛɡwin faʊn hɝsɛlf peɪsɪŋ ðə ɹʌf flɔɹbɔɹdz ɪɹɪɾəbli. taɪm floʊd dɪfɹənli hɪɹ. ən aʊɝ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹbiəd kəd bi mɪnəts ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld, əɹ ði ʌðɝ weɪ ɝaʊnd. ɪleɪn kəd bi muvɪŋ laɪk ðə wɪnd. ɛɡwin tʃɛkt əɹ kloʊðɪŋ, ə ɡɹeɪ ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs wɪð ɪlæbɹət ɡɹin ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ɑn ðə bɑɾəs ən ɪn bɹɔd bænz ɑn ðə dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts - hæd ʃi bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ? - ə sɪmpəl sɪlvɝ nɛt tə kætʃ əɹ hɛɹ. ʃʊɹ ɪnʌf, ði æmɪɝlɪnz lɔŋ nɛɹoʊ stoʊl hʌŋ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk.

Still, as the minutes stretched out, Egwene found herself pacing the rough floorboards irritably. Time flowed differently here. An hour in Tel'aran'rbiod could be minutes in the waking world, or the other way around. Elayne could be moving like the wind. Egwene checked her clothing, a gray riding dress with elaborate green embroidery on the bodice and in broad bands on the divided skirts - had she been thinking of the Green Ajah? - a simple silver net to catch her hair. Sure enough, the Amyrlin's long narrow stole hung around her neck.

ʃi meɪd ðə stoʊl vænɪʃ, ðən æftɝ ə moʊmənt, əlaʊɾ ɪt tə ɹɪtɝn. ɪt wɑz ə mæɾɝ ə lɛɾɪŋ ɪt kʌm bæk, nɑt kɑnʃəsli θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɪt. ðə stoʊl wɑz pɑɹɾ ə haʊ ʃi θɔɾ ə hɝsɛlf, naʊ, ən ɪt wɑz əz æmɪɝlɪn ðət ʃi niɾəd tə spik tə ɪleɪn. ðə wʊmən u faɪnəli əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə ɹum, ðoʊ, dʒʌs flæʃɪŋ ɪndə ɛɡzɪstəns, wɑz nɑɾ ɪleɪn bʌɾ eɪvinhə, sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli ɡɑɹbd ɪn sɪlvɝ-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd blu sɪlk, wɪð peɪl leɪs əɾ əɹ ɹɪsts ən θɹoʊt. ðə hɛvi bɹeɪsləɾ ə kɑɹvd aɪvɝi ʃi wɔɹ simd əz mʌtʃ aʊɾ ə pleɪs wɪð ðət dʒɹɛs əz ðə dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðət dæŋɡəl fɹəm ə lɛðɝ kɔɹɾ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk, ə stʃɹeɪnʒli twɪstəd stoʊn ɹɪŋ flɛkt wɪð kʌlɝ.

She made the stole vanish, then after a moment, allowed it to return. It was a matter of letting it come back, not consciously thinking of it. The stole was part of how she thought of herself, now, and it was as Amyrlin that she needed to speak to Elayne. The woman who finally appeared in the room, though, just flashing into existence, was not Elayne but Aviendha, surprisingly garbed in silver-embroidered blue silk, with pale lace at her wrists and throat. The heavy bracelet of carved ivory she wore seemed as much out of place with that dress as the dream ter'angreal that dangled from a leather cord around her neck, a strangely twisted stone ring flecked with color.

"wɛɹ ɪz ɪleɪn?" ɛɡwin æskt æŋkʃəsli. "ɪz ʃi ɔl ɹaɪt?" ði il wʊmən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾəld ɡlæns ət hɝsɛlf, ən əbɹʌpli ʃi wɑz ɪn ə dɑɹk bʌlki skɝɾ ən waɪt blaʊs, wɪð ə dɑɹk ʃɔl dʒɹeɪpt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən ə dɑɹk kɝtʃəf foʊldəɾ ɝaʊn əɹ tɛmpəlz tə hoʊl ðə ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ ðət naʊ hʌŋ tə hɝ weɪst, lɔŋɡɝ ðən ɪn laɪf, ɛɡwin səspɛktəd. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz mjuɾəbəl ɪn ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz. ə sɪlvɝ nɛkləs əpɪɹɾ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk, kɑmpləkeɪɾəd stʃɹænz ʌv ɪntʃɹəkətli wɝk dɪsks ðət ðə kændɔɹi kɔl snoʊfleɪks, ə ɡɪft fɹəm ɛɡwin hɝsɛlf wʌt simd ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm əɡoʊ. "ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk ðɪs wɝk," eɪvinhə sɛd, ði aɪvɝi bɹeɪslət slaɪɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ ɹɪst əz ʃi tʌtʃt ðə twɪstəd ɹɪŋ ðət stɪl hʌŋ fɹəm ɪts stʃɹɪp ə lɛðɝ, əbʌv ðə nɛkləs naʊ. "ðə floʊz kɛp slɪpɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm hɝ. ɪts ðə beɪbz." sʌɾənli, ʃi ɡɹɪnd. hɝ ɛmɹəld aɪz simd ɔlmoʊs tə ʃaɪn. "ʃi hæz ə wʌndɝfəl tɛmpɝ, səmtaɪmz. ʃi θɹu ðə ɹɪŋ daʊn ən dʒʌmpt ʌp ən daʊn ɑn ɪt." ɛɡwin snɪft. beɪbz? soʊ ðəɹ wɑz tə bi mɔɹ ðən wʌn. ɑdli, eɪvinhə tʊk ɪɾ ɪn stʃɹaɪd ðəɾ ɪleɪn wɑz wɪð tʃaɪld, ðoʊ ɛɡwin wɑz kənvɪns ðə wʊmən lʌvd ɹænd, tu. il weɪz wɝ pəkjuljɝ, tə seɪ ðə list. ɛɡwin wəd nɑɾ əv θɔɾ ɪɾ ʌv ɪleɪn, ðoʊ! ən ɹænd! noʊ wʌn hæɾ æktʃəli  sɛɾ i wɑz ðə fɑðɝ, ən ʃi kəd hɑɹdli æsk sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðæt, bʌt ʃi kəd kaʊnt, ən ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ daʊɾɪd ðəɾ ɪleɪn wəd laɪ wɪð ənʌðɝ mæn. ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi wɑz wɛɹɪŋ staʊt wʊlənz, dɑɹk ən hɛvi, ən ə ʃɔl mʌtʃ θɪkɝ ðən eɪvinhəz. ɡʊd tu ɹɪvɝz ɡɑɹməns. ðə sɔɹɾ ə kloʊðz ə wʊmən wəd wɛɹ tə sɪɾ ɪn ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl. seɪ, wən səm ful wʊmən hæd lɛt hɝsɛlf ɡɛt wɪð tʃaɪld ən ʃoʊd noʊ saɪn ə mɛɹiɪŋ. ə dip, ɹɪlæksɪŋ bɹɛθ, ən ʃi wɑz bæk ɪn əɹ ɡɹinɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs. ðə ɹɛst ə ðə wɝld wɑz nɑt ðə seɪm əz ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. laɪt, ʃi hæd kʌm fɑɹ ɪnʌf tə noʊ ðət mʌtʃ. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə laɪk ɪt, bʌt ʃi hæd tə lɪv wɪð ɪt. "æz lɔŋ əz ʃi ən ðə . . . beɪbz . . . ɑɹ wɛl." laɪt, haʊ mɛni? mɔɹ ðən wʌn kəd pɹizɛn dɪfəkəltiz. noʊ; ʃi wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ tə æsk. ɪleɪn ʃʊɹli hæd ðə bɛs mɪdwaɪf ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. bɛs dʒʌs tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə sʌbʒɪkt kwɪkli. "hæv jə hɝd fɹəm ɹænd? əɹ nɪneɪiv? aɪ hæv səm wɝdz fəɹ hɝ, ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf wɪð ɪm ðət weɪ." "wi hæv hɝd fɹəm niðɝ," eɪvinhə ɹɪplaɪd, ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl əz kɛɹfəli əz ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ əvɔɪɾɪŋ əɹ æmɪɝlɪnz aɪz. wɑz əɹ toʊn kɛɹfəl, tu?

"Where is Elayne?" Egwene asked anxiously. "Is she all right?" The Aiel woman gave a startled glance at herself, and abruptly she was in a dark bulky skirt and white blouse, with a dark shawl draped over her shoulders and a dark kerchief folded around her temples to hold the reddish hair that now hung to her waist, longer than in life, Egwene suspected. Everything was mutable in the World of Dreams. A silver necklace appeared around her neck, complicated strands of intricately worked discs that the Kandori called snowflakes, a gift from Egwene herself what seemed a very long time ago. "She could not make this work," Aviendha said, the ivory bracelet sliding on her wrist as she touched the twisted ring that still hung from its strip of leather, above the necklace now. "The flows kept slipping away from her. It is the babes." Suddenly, she grinned. Her emerald eyes seemed almost to shine. "She has a wonderful temper, sometimes. She threw the ring down and jumped up and down on it." Egwene sniffed. Babes? So there was to be more than one. Oddly, Aviendha took it in stride that Elayne was with child, though Egwene was convinced the woman loved Rand, too. Aiel ways were peculiar, to say the least. Egwene would not have thought it of Elayne, though! And Rand! No one had actually said he was the father, and she could hardly ask something like that, but she could count, and she very much doubted that Elayne would lie with another man. She realized that she was wearing stout woolens, dark and heavy, and a shawl much thicker than Aviendha's. Good Two Rivers garments. The sort of clothes a woman would wear to sit in the Women's Circle. Say, when some fool woman had let herself get with child and showed no sign of marrying. A deep, relaxing breath, and she was back in her greenembroidered riding dress. The rest of the world was not the same as the Two Rivers. Light, she had come far enough to know that much. She did not have to like it, but she had to live with it. "As long as she and the . . . babes . . . are well." Light, how many? More than one could present difficulties. No; she was not going to ask. Elayne surely had the best midwife in Caemlyn. Best just to change the subject quickly. "Have you heard from Rand? Or Nynaeve? I have some words for her, running off with him that way." "We have heard from neither," Aviendha replied, adjusting her shawl as carefully as any Aes Sedai avoiding her Amyrlin's eyes. Was her tone careful, too?

ɛɡwin klɪkt əɹ tʌŋ, vɛkst wɪð hɝsɛlf. ʃi ɹɪli wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə si kənspɪɹəsiz ɛvɹiwɛɹ ən səspɪʃənz ɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ɹænd hæd ɡɔn ɪndə haɪɾɪŋ, ən ðət wɑz ðæt. nɪneɪiv wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, fɹi tə də əz ʃi wɪʃt. ivən wən ði æmɪɝlɪn kəmændəd, ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔfən faʊn ə weɪ tə də ɪɡzækli əz ðeɪ wɪʃt ɛniweɪ. bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz stɪl gɑnə sɛt nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə daʊn hɑɹd, wʌns ʃi leɪd hænz ɑn hɝ. əz fəɹ ɹænd. . . . "aɪm əfɹeɪd tʃɹʌbəl ɪz hɛɾɪŋ jəɹ weɪ," ʃi sɛd.

Egwene clicked her tongue, vexed with herself. She really was beginning to see conspiracies everywhere and suspicions in everything. Rand had gone into hiding, and that was that. Nynaeve was Aes Sedai, free to do as she wished. Even when the Amyrlin commanded, Aes Sedai often found a way to do exactly as they wished anyway. But the Amyrlin was still going to set Nynaeve al'Meara down hard, once she laid hands on her. As for Rand. . . . "I'm afraid trouble is heading your way," she said.

ə faɪn sɪlvɝ tipɑɾ əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, ɑn ə hæmɝd sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ wɪð tu dɛləkət ɡɹin pɔɹsələn kʌps. ə θɹɛɾ ə stim ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə spaʊt. ʃi cʊɾə meɪd ðə ti əpɪɹ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðə kʌps, jɛt pɔɹɪŋ sim pɑɹɾ ʌv ɔfɝɪŋ sʌmwʌn ti, ivən ɪfɛmɝəl ti wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ɹiæləɾi ðən ə dʒɹim. jə kəd daɪ ʌv θɝs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dʒɹɪŋk wʌt jə faʊn ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, mʌtʃ lɛs wʌt jə meɪd, bʌt ðɪs ti teɪstəɾ əz ɪf ðə livz hæd kʌm fɹəm ə nu kæsk ən ʃi hæd pʊɾ ɪn dʒʌs ðə ɹaɪɾ əmaʊn ə hʌni. teɪkɪŋ ə siɾ ɑn wʌn ə ðə tʃɛɹz, ʃi sɪp hɝz əz ʃi ɪkspleɪnd wʌt hæd hæpən ɪn ðə hɔl ən waɪ.

A fine silver teapot appeared on the table, on a hammered silver tray with two delicate green porcelain cups. A thread of steam rose from the spout. She could have made the tea appear already in the cups, yet pouring seemed part of offering someone tea, even ephemeral tea with no more reality than a dream. You could die of thirst trying to drink what you found in Tel'aran'rhiod, much less what you made, but this tea tasted as if the leaves had come from a new cask and she had put in just the right amount of honey. Taking a seat on one of the chairs, she sipped hers as she explained what had happened in the Hall and why.

æftɝ ðə fɝst wɝdz, eɪvinhə hɛld əɹ kʌp ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝtɪps wɪθaʊt dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ən wɑtʃt ɛɡwin wɪθaʊt blɪŋkɪŋ. hɝ dɑɹk skɝts ən peɪl blaʊs bɪkeɪm ðə kædnsɝ, koʊɾ ən tʃɹaʊzɝz ʌv ɡɹeɪ ən bɹaʊn ðət wəd feɪɾ ɪndə ʃædoʊz. hɝ lɔŋ hɛɹ wɑz sʌɾənli ʃɔɹt, ən hɪɾən baɪ ə ʃoʊufə, ðə blæk veɪl hæŋɪŋ daʊn əɹ tʃɛst. ɪŋkɔŋɹuəsli, ði aɪvɝi bɹeɪslət stɪl hʌŋ fɹəm əɹ ɹɪst ɔlðoʊ meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ dɪd nɑt wɛɹ dʒuəlɹi. "ɔl ə ðɪs kəz ə ðə bikən wi fɛlt," ʃi mʌɾɝd, hæf tə hɝsɛlf, wən ɛɡwin fɪnɪʃt. "bɪkɔz ðeɪ θɪŋk ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld əv ə wɛpən." ən ɑd weɪ tə pʊɾ ɪt.

After the first words, Aviendha held her cup on her fingertips without drinking and watched Egwene without blinking. Her dark skirts and pale blouse became the cadtn'sor, coat and trousers of gray and brown that would fade into shadows. Her long hair was suddenly short, and hidden by a shoufa, the black veil hanging down her chest. Incongruously, the ivory bracelet still hung from her wrist although Maidens of the Spear did not wear jewelry. "All of this because of the beacon we felt," she muttered, half to herself, when Egwene finished. "Because they think the Shadowsouled have a weapon." An odd way to put it.

"wʌɾ ɛls kən ɪt bi?" ɛɡwin æskt, kjʊɹiəs. "dɪd wʌn ə ðə waɪz wʌnz seɪ sʌmθɪŋ?" ɪt hæd bɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm sɪns ʃi bɪliv ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ pəzɛst ɔl nɑlədʒ, ən səmtaɪmz ðə waɪz wʌnz ɹɪvil pɑkəts ʌv ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ðət kəd stɑɹɾəl ðə moʊst stɑləd sɪstɝ.

"What else can it be?" Egwene asked, curious. "Did one of the Wise Ones say something?" It had been a long time since she believed that Aes Sedai possessed all knowledge, and sometimes the Wise Ones revealed pockets of information that could startle the most stolid sister.

eɪvinhə fɹaʊnd, ən əɹ kloʊðɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd bæk tə ðə skɝɾ ən blaʊs ən ʃɔl, ðən æftɝ ə moʊmən tə ðə blu sɪlk ən leɪs, ðɪs taɪm wɪð boʊθ ðə kændɔɹi nɛkləs ən ði aɪvɝi bɹeɪslət. ðə dʒɹim ɹɪŋ ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ɪts kɔɹd, ʌv kɔɹs. ə ʃɔl əpɪɹɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ðə ɹum wɑz wɪntɝ koʊld, jɛɾ ɪt hɑɹdli sim ðət ɡɔzi leɪɝ ə peɪl blu leɪs kəd pɹəvaɪɾ ɛni wɔɹmθ. "ðə waɪz wʌnz ɑɹ əz ənsɝɾən əz jəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. nɑɾ əz fɹaɪɾənd, ðoʊ, aɪ θɪŋk. laɪf ɪz ə dʒɹim, ən ɛvɹiwʌn weɪks ɪvɛntʃəwəli. wi dæns ðə spɪɹz wɪð lifblaɪɾɝ," ðət neɪm fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn hæɾ ɔlweɪz sim stʃɹeɪnʒ tə ɛɡwin, kʌmɪŋ əz ɪt dɪd fɹəm ðə tʃɹiləs weɪst, "bʌt noʊ wʌn ɛntɝz ðə dæns sɝɾən ðəl lɪv, əɹ wɪn. aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ðə waɪz wʌnz wəd kənsɪɾɝ ɛni əlaɪəns wɪð ði æʃəmən. ɪz ðɪs waɪz?" ʃi æɾəd kɔʃəsli. "fɹʌm wʌt jə sɛd, aɪ kænɑt bi sɝɾən wɛðɝ jə wɪʃ ɪt." "aɪ doʊn si ɛni ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs," ɛɡwin sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli. "ðæt hoʊl ɪz θɹi maɪlz əkɹɔs. ðɪs ɪz ði oʊnli hoʊp wɪv ðəɾ aɪ kən si."

Aviendha frowned, and her clothing changed back to the skirt and blouse and shawl, then after a moment to the blue silk and lace, this time with both the Kandori necklace and the ivory bracelet. The dream ring remained on its cord, of course. A shawl appeared around her shoulders. The room was winter cold, yet it hardly seemed that gauzy layer of pale blue lace could provide any warmth. "The Wise Ones are as uncertain as your Aes Sedai. Not as frightened, though, I think. Life is a dream, and everyone wakes eventually. We dance the spears with Leafblighter," that name for the Dark One had always seemed strange to Egwene, coming as it did from the treeless Waste, "but no one enters the dance certain they will live, or win. I do not think the Wise Ones would consider any alliance with the Asha'man. Is this wise?" she added cautiously. "From what you said, I cannot be certain whether you wish it." "I don't see any other choice," Egwene said reluctantly. "That hole is three miles across. This is the only hope we have that I can see."

eɪvinhə pɪɹɾ ɪndə hɝ ti. "æn ɪf ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld pəzɛs noʊ wɛpən?" sʌɾənli, ɛɡwin ɹilaɪzd wʌt ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wɑz duɪŋ. eɪvinhə wɑz ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ tə bi ə waɪz wʌn, ən ɡɑɹməns əɹ noʊ, ʃi wɑz biɪŋ ə waɪz wʌn. laɪkli ðət wɑz ðə ɹizən fəɹ ðə ʃɔl. pɑɹɾ ʌv ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə smaɪl. hɝ fɹɛnd wɑz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ fɹəm ði ɔfən hɑthɛɾəd meɪɾən ə ðə spɪɹ ʃi hæd fɝs kʌm tə noʊ. ənʌðɝ pɑɹɾ ə hɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət ðə waɪz wʌnz dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz əv ðə seɪm ɡoʊlz əz ɛɛs sədaɪ. wʌt sɪstɝz væljud dipli səmtaɪmz mɛnt nʌθɪŋ tə ðə waɪz wʌnz. ɪt meɪɾ əɹ sæd, ðət ʃi mʌs θɪŋk ʌv eɪvinhə əz ə waɪz wʌn ɪnstɛɾ ə dʒʌst ə fɹɛnd. eɪ waɪz wʌn u wəd si wʌt wɑz ɡʊd fəɹ ði il ɹæðɝ ðən wʌt wɑz ɡʊd fəɹ ðə waɪt taʊɝ. stɪl, ðə kwɛstʃən wɑz ə ɡʊd wʌn.

Aviendha peered into her tea. "And if the Shadowsouled possessed no weapon?" Suddenly, Egwene realized what the other woman was doing. Aviendha was in training to be a Wise One, and garments or no, she was being a Wise One. Likely that was the reason for the shawl. Part of Egwene wanted to smile. Her friend was changing from the often hotheaded Maiden of the Spear she had first come to know. Another part of her remembered that the Wise Ones did not always have the same goals as Aes Sedai. What sisters valued deeply sometimes meant nothing to the Wise Ones. It made her sad, that she must think of Aviendha as a Wise One instead of just a friend. A Wise One who would see what was good for the Aiel rather than what was good for the White Tower. Still, the question was a good one.

"wi də hæv tə dil wɪð ðə blæk taʊɝ sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, eɪvinhə, ən mɔɹiə wɑz ɹaɪt; ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi tu mɛni æʃə'-mæn fəɹ ɛni θɔɾ ə dʒɛntəlɪŋ əm ɔl. ən ðæts ɪf wi dɛɹd θɪŋk ə dʒɛntəlɪŋ əm bɪfɔɹ ðə læs bæɾəl. meɪbi ə dʒɹim wɪl ʃoʊ mi ənʌðɝ weɪ, bʌt nʌn əz soʊ fɑɹ." nʌn ə hɝ dʒɹimz hæd ʃoʊɾ əɹ ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl, soʊ fɑɹ. wɛl, nɑt ɹɪli. "ðɪs dʌz ɡɪv əs ət lis ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ʌv ə weɪ tə hændəl ðɛm. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ɪts ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæpən. ɪf ðə sɪɾɝz kən əɡɹi ɑn ɛniθɪŋ bɪsaɪdz ðə fæk ðeɪv tə tʃɹaɪ fəɹ ən əɡɹimənt. soʊ wi mʌs lɪv wɪð ɪt. ɪt maɪɾ ivən bi fəɹ ðə bɛst, ɪn ðə lɔŋ ɹʌn."

"We do have to deal with the Black Tower sooner or later, Aviendha, and Moria was right; there are already too many Asha'-man for any thought of gentling them all. And that's if we dared think of gentling them before the last Battle. Maybe a dream will show me another way, but none has so far." None of her dreams had showed her anything useful, so far. Well, not really. "This does give us at least the beginning of a way to handle them. In any case, it's going to happen. If the Sitters can agree on anything besides the fact they have to try for an agreement. So we must live with it. It might even be for the best, in the long run."

eɪvinhə smaɪld ɪndə hɝ tikʌp. nɑɾ ən əmjuz smaɪl; ʃi simd ɹɪlivd, fəɹ səm ɹizən.

Aviendha smiled into her teacup. Not an amused smile; she seemed relieved, for some reason.

hɝ vɔɪs wɑz sɪɹiəs, ðoʊ. "ju ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlweɪz θɪŋk mɛn ɑɹ fulz. kwaɪɾ ɔfən, ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt.

Her voice was serious, though. "You Aes Sedai always think men are fools. Quite often, they are not.

mɔɹ ɔfən ðən jə θɪŋk, ət list. teɪk ə kɛɹ wɪð ðiz æʃəmən. mæzɹim teɪm ɪz fɑɹ fɹəm ə ful, ən aɪ θɪŋk hiz ə vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs mæn."

More often than you think, at least. Take a care with these Asha'man. Mazrim Taim is far from a fool, and I think he is a very dangerous man."

"ðə hɔl ɪz əwɛɹ ə ðæt," ɛɡwin sɛd dʒɹaɪli. ðəɾ i wɑz deɪnʒɝəs, sɝɾənli. ði ʌðɝ maɪt bi wɝθ pɔɪntɪŋ aʊt. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ wɝ ivən dɪskʌsɪŋ ðɪs. ɪts aʊɾ ə maɪ hænz. ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ ɪz ðəɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli sɪstɝz wɪl dɪsaɪd ðə blæk taʊɝ ɪz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɛni ɹizən tə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn, ɪf wɝ gɑnə tɔk wɪð əm ɛniweɪ. nɛkst wik əɹ təmɑɹoʊ, jəl faɪn sɪstɝz pɑpɪŋ ɪn dʒʌs tə lʊk ɪn ɑn ɪleɪn ən si haʊ ðə sidʒ ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ. wʌt wɪv tə dɪsaɪɾ ɪz haʊ tə kip wʌt wi wɑn hɪɾən, hɪɾən. aɪ hæv ə fju sədʒɛstʃənz, ən aɪ hoʊp juv mɔɹ." ðə noʊʃən ə stʃɹeɪnʒ ɛɛs sədaɪ əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ædʒəteɪɾəd eɪvinhə tə ðə pɔɪn ðət ʃi flæʃt fɹəm blu sɪlk tə keɪɾɪnsɝ tə wʊlən skɝɾ ən ælɡoʊd blaʊs ən bæk əɡɛn əz ðeɪ tɔkt, ðoʊ ʃi əpɪɹd nɑt tə noʊɾəs. hɝ feɪs ɹɪmeɪn smuð ɪnʌf tə suɾ ɛni sɪstɝ. ʃi sɝɾənli hæd nʌθɪŋ tə wɝi əbaʊɾ ɪf ðə vɪzəɾɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ ənkʌvɝd ðə kɪnswɪmən, əɹ ðə kæptɪv sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn, əɹ ðə bɑɹɡən wɪð ðə si foʊk, bʌt laɪkli ʃi wɑz kənsɝn əbaʊt ðə ɹipɝkʌʃənz ɑn ɪleɪn. ðə si foʊk nɑɾ oʊnli meɪd ðə keɪɾɪnsɝ əpɪɹ, bʌɾ ə ɹaʊn bʊl-haɪd bʌkəlɝ laɪɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ əɹ tʃɛɹ wɪð θɹi ʃɔɹɾ il spɪɹz. ɛɡwin kənsɪɾɝd æskɪŋ wɛðɝ ðəɹ wɑz ɛni spɛʃəl pɹɑbləm wɪð ðə wɪnfmdɝz - ɛni pɹɑbləm bɪɑn ðə juʒəwəl, ðət wɑz - jɛt ʃi hɛld əɹ tʌŋ. ɪf eɪvinhə dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ɪt, ðən ðə mæɾɝ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʃi ən ɪleɪn wɑntəd tə hændəl ðɛmsɛlvz. ʃʊɹli ʃi wʊɾə sɛd sʌmθɪŋ ɪf ɪt wɑz ɛniθɪŋ ɛɡwin ʃəd noʊ əbaʊt. əɹ wəd ʃi?

"The Hall is aware of that," Egwene said dryly. That he was dangerous, certainly. The other might be worth pointing out. "I don't know why we're even discussing this. It's out of my hands. The important thing is that eventually sisters will decide the Black Tower is no longer any reason to stay away from Caemlyn, if we're going to talk with them anyway. Next week or tomorrow, you'll find sisters popping in just to look in on Elayne and see how the siege is going. What we have to decide is how to keep what we want hidden, hidden. I have a few suggestions, and I hope you have more." The notion of strange Aes Sedai appearing in the Royal Palace agitated Aviendha to the point that she flashed from blue silk to cadin'sor to woolen skirt and algode blouse and back again as they talked, though she appeared not to notice. Her face remained smooth enough to suit any sister. She certainly had nothing to worry about if the visiting Aes Sedai uncovered the Kinswomen, or the captive sul'dam and damane, or the bargain with the Sea Folk, but likely she was concerned about the repercussions on Elayne. The Sea Folk not only made the cadin'sor appear, but a round bull-hide buckler lying beside her chair with three short Aiel spears. Egwene considered asking whether there was any special problem with the Windfmders - any problem beyond the usual, that was - yet she held her tongue. If Aviendha did not mention it, then the matter was something she and Elayne wanted to handle themselves. Surely she would have said something if it was anything Egwene should know about. Or would she?

saɪɪŋ, ɛɡwin sɛɾ əɹ kʌp ɑn ðə teɪbəl, wɛɹ ɪt pɹɑmpli dɪsəpɪɹd, ən ɹʌbd əɹ aɪz wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. səspɪʃən tʃɹuli wɑz pɑɹɾ ə hɝ boʊnz, naʊ. ən ʃi wɑz ənlaɪkli tə sɝvaɪv lɔŋ wɪθaʊɾ ɪt. ət list ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz əv tə ækt ɑn əɹ səspɪʃənz, nɑt wɪð ə fɹɛnd.

Sighing, Egwene set her cup on the table, where it promptly disappeared, and rubbed her eyes with her fingers. Suspicion truly was part of her bones, now. And she was unlikely to survive long without it. At least she did not always have to act on her suspicions, not with a friend.

"ju ɑɹ taɪɝd," eɪvinhə sɛd, wʌns əɡɛn ɪn ðə waɪt blaʊs ən dɑɹk skɝɾ ən ʃɔl, ə kənsɝnd waɪz wʌn wɪð ʃɑɹp ɡɹin aɪz. "ju də nɑt slip wɛl?"

"You are tired," Aviendha said, once again in the white blouse and dark skirt and shawl, a concerned Wise One with sharp green eyes. "You do not sleep well?"

"aɪ slip wɛl," ɛɡwin laɪd, mænɪdʒɪŋ ə smaɪl. eɪvinhə ən ɪleɪn hæd ðɛɹ oʊn wɝiz wɪθaʊt lɛɾɪŋ əm noʊ əbaʊɾ əɹ hɛdeɪks. "aɪ kæn θɪŋk ʌv ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ," ʃi sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ. "kæn ju? ðən wɝ dʌn," ʃi wɛn ɑn wən ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "tɛl ɪleɪn tə teɪk kɛɹ ə hɝsɛlf. jə teɪk kɛɹ ə hɝ. ən əɹ beɪbz."

"I sleep well," Egwene lied, managing a smile. Aviendha and Elayne had their own worries without letting them know about her headaches. "I can't think of anything more," she said, rising. "Can you? Then we're done," she went on when the other woman shook her head. "Tell Elayne to take care of herself. You take care of her. And her babes."

"aɪ wɪl," eɪvinhə sɛd, naʊ ɪn ðə blu sɪlk. "bʌt jə mʌs teɪk kɛɹ ə jɝsɛlf. aɪ θɪŋk jə juz jɝsɛlf tu hɑɹd. slip wɛl ən weɪk," ʃi sɛd dʒɛnli, ði il weɪ ʌv seɪɪŋ ɡʊd naɪt, ən ʃi wɑz ɡɔn.

"I will," Aviendha said, now in the blue silk. "But you must take care of yourself. I think you use yourself too hard. Sleep well and wake," she said gently, the Aiel way of saying good night, and she was gone.

ɛɡwin fɹaʊn ət ðə spɑt wɛɹ əɹ fɹɛn hæd vænɪʃt. ʃi wɑz nɑt juzɪŋ hɝsɛlf tu hɑɹd.

Egwene frowned at the spot where her friend had vanished. She was not using herself too hard.

oʊnli əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi niɾəd tə. ʃi slɪp bæk tə hɝ bɑɾi ən dɪskʌvɝd ðəɾ ɪt wɑz saʊn əslip.

Only as hard as she needed to. She slipped back to her body and discovered that it was sound asleep.

ðət dɪd nɑt min ðət ʃi wɑz əslip, əɹ nɑɾ ɪɡzækli. hɝ bɑɾi slʌmbɝd, bɹiðɪŋ sloʊ ən dip, bʌt ʃi lɛt hɝsɛlf slɪp oʊnli fɑɹ ɪnʌf ʌndɝ fəɹ dʒɹimz tə kʌm. ʃi kəd dʒʌst əv weɪɾəd əntɪl ʃi woʊk ən ɹɪkɔl ðə dʒɹimz ðən əz ʃi ɹoʊɾ əm ɪndə ðə lɪɾəl lɛðɝ-baʊn bʊk ðət ʃi kɛpt ət ðə bɑɾəm ʌv wʌn əɹ kloʊðɪŋ tʃɛsts, tʌkt ʌndɝ θɪn lɪnən ʃɪfs ðət wəd nɑt bi teɪkən aʊt tɪl wɛl ɪndə spɹɪŋ. bʌɾ əbzɝvɪŋ ðə dʒɹimz əz ðeɪ keɪm seɪv taɪm. ʃi θɔɾ ɪt maɪt hɛlp əɹ dɪsaɪfɝ wʌt ðeɪ mɛnt. ət list, ðoʊz ðət wɝ mɔɹ ðən ɔɹɾənɛɹi naɪt fænsiz.

That did not mean that she was asleep, or not exactly. Her body slumbered, breathing slow and deep, but she let herself slip only far enough under for dreams to come. She could just have waited until she woke and recalled the dreams then as she wrote them into the little leather-bound book that she kept at the bottom of one her clothing chests, tucked under thin linen shifts that would not be taken out till well into spring. But observing the dreams as they came saved time. She thought it might help her decipher what they meant. At least, those that were more than ordinary night fancies.

ðəɹ wɝ plɛnti ʌv ðoʊz, ɔfən fitʃɝɪŋ ɡɔɪn, ə tɔl bjuɾəfəl mæn u tʊk əɹ ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz ən dænst wɪð əɹ ən meɪd lʌv wɪð hɝ. wʌns, ivən ɪn əɹ dʒɹimz, ʃi hæd ʃaɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm θɔts ə meɪkɪŋ lʌv wɪð hɪm. ʃi hæd blʌʃt tə θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪɾ əweɪk. ðət sim soʊ fulɪʃ, naʊ, soʊ tʃaɪldɪʃ. ʃi wəd bɑn ɪm əz əɹ wɔɹɾɝ wʌn deɪ, sʌmhaʊ, ən ʃi wəd mɛɹi hɪm, ən meɪk lʌv tə hɪm əntɪl i kɹaɪd fəɹ mɝsi. ivən ɪn əɹ slip, ʃi ɡɪɡəld ət ðæt. ʌðɝ dʒɹimz wɝ nɑt soʊ plɛzənt. weɪɾɪŋ θɹu weɪst-dip snoʊ wɪð tʃɹiz θɪk ɔl ɝaʊn hɝ, noʊɪŋ ʃi hæd tə ɹitʃ ði ɛdʒ ə ðə fɔɹəst. bʌɾ ivən wən ʃi ɡlɪmps ði ɛn ə ðə tʃɹiz əhɛd, wʌn blɪŋk ən ɪt ɹəsiɾəd ɪndə ðə dɪstəns, livɪŋ əɹ tə flaʊndɝ ɑn. əɹ ʃi wɑz pʊʃɪŋ ə ɡɹeɪt mɪlstoʊn ʌp ə stip hɪl, bʌɾ ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊs tə ðə tɑp, ʃi slɪpt ən fɛl ən wɑtʃt ðə hjudʒ stoʊn ɹoʊl bæk tə ðə bɑɾəm, soʊ ʃi hæd tə tʃɹʌdʒ bæk daʊn ən bɪɡɪn əɡɛn, oʊnli ɛvɹi taɪm, ðə hɪl wɑz haɪɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ. ʃi nu ɪnʌf ə dʒɹimz tə noʊ wɛɹ ðoʊz keɪm fɹəm ivən ɪf ðeɪ hæd noʊ spɛʃəl minɪŋ. nʌn bɪɑn ðə fæk ðət ʃi wɑz taɪɝɾ ən hæɾ ə simɪŋli ɛnləs tæsk ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ɛniweɪ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hɛlp fəɹ ɪt, ðoʊ. ʃi fɛlt əɹ bɑɾi dʒɝkɪŋ ət ðə ləbɔɹiəs dʒɹimz, ən tʃɹaɪd tə suð əɹ mʌsəlz, meɪk əm ɹɪlæks. ðɪs sɔɹɾ ə hɔfslip wɑz lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ ðən nʌn, ən lɛs ɪf ʃi spɛn ðə hoʊl naɪt θɹæʃɪŋ ɝaʊn ɑn əɹ kɑt. hɝ ɛfɝts wɝkt, ə lɪɾəl. ət list ʃi oʊnli twɪtʃt θɹu ə dʒɹim ə biɪŋ fɔɹs tə pʊl ə kɑɹt dʒæm fʊl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ daʊn ə mʌɾi ɹoʊd. ʌðɝ dʒɹimz keɪm, bɛtwɪkst ən bɪtwin.

There were plenty of those, often featuring Gawyn, a tall beautiful man who took her in his arms and danced with her and made love with her. Once, even in her dreams, she had shied away from thoughts of making love with him. She had blushed to think about it awake. That seemed so foolish, now, so childish. She would bond him as her Warder one day, somehow, and she would marry him, and make love to him until he cried for mercy. Even in her sleep, she giggled at that. Other dreams were not so pleasant. Wading through waist-deep snow with trees thick all around her, knowing she had to reach the edge of the forest. But even when she glimpsed the end of the trees ahead, one blink and it receded into the distance, leaving her to flounder on. Or she was pushing a great millstone up a steep hill, but every time she was almost to the top, she slipped and fell and watched the huge stone roll back to the bottom, so she had to trudge back down and begin again, only every time, the hill was higher than before. She knew enough of dreams to know where those came from even if they had no special meaning. None beyond the fact that she was tired and had a seemingly endless task in front of her, anyway. There was no help for it, though. She felt her body jerking at the laborious dreams, and tried to soothe her muscles, make them relax. This sort of halfsleep was little better than none, and less if she spent the whole night thrashing around on her cot. Her efforts worked, a little. At least she only twitched through a dream of being forced to pull a cart jammed full of Aes Sedai down a muddy road. Other dreams came, betwixt and between.

mæt stʊɾ ɑn ə vɪlədʒ ɡɹin, pleɪɪŋ ət boʊlz. ðə θætʃɹʊf haʊsəz wɝ veɪɡ, ɪn ðə mænɝ ə dʒɹimz - səmtaɪmz ðə ɹufs wɝ sleɪt; səmtaɪmz ðə haʊsəz simd ə stoʊn, səmtaɪmz wʊd - bʌɾ i wɑz ʃɑɹp ən klɪɹ, dʒɹɛst ɪn ə faɪn ɡɹin koʊɾ ən ðət waɪd-bɹɪm blæk hæt, dʒʌst əz i hæd bɪn ðə deɪ hi ɹoʊɾ ɪndə sɑlədɑɹ. ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ənʌðɝ hjumən biɪŋ ɪn saɪt. ɹʌbɪŋ ðə bɔl bɪtwin ɪz hænz, hi tʊk ə ʃɔɹt ɹʌn ən kæʒəwəli ɹoʊld ɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə smuð ɡɹæs. ɔl naɪn pɪnz fɛl, skæɾɝd əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn kɪkt. mæt tɝn ən pɪkt ʌp ənʌðɝ bɔl, ən ðə pɪnz wɝ bæk əpɹaɪt. noʊ, ðəɹ wɑz ə fɹɛʃ sɛɾ ə pɪnz. ði oʊl stɪl leɪ wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd fɔlən. hi hɝl ðə bɔl əɡɛn, ə leɪzi ʌndɝhændɪd boʊl. ən ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə skɹim. ðə pɪnz wɝ nɑt tɝn pisəz ʌv wʊd. ðeɪ wɝ mɛn, stændɪŋ ðəɹ wɑtʃɪŋ ðə bɔl ɹoʊl təwɔɹd ðɛm. nʌn muvd əntɪl ðə bɔl sɛn əm flaɪɪŋ. mæt tɝn tə pɪk ʌp ənʌðɝ bɔl, ən ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ nu pɪnz, nu mɛn, stændɪŋ ɪn ɔɹɾɝli fɔɹmeɪʃən əmʌŋ ðə mɛn laɪɪŋ spɹɔld ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn əz ɪf dɛd. noʊ, ðeɪ wɝ dɛd.

Mat stood on a village green, playing at bowls. The thatchroofed houses were vague, in the manner of dreams - sometimes the roofs were slate; sometimes the houses seemed of stone, sometimes wood - but he was sharp and clear, dressed in a fine green coat and that wide-brimmed black hat, just as he had been the day he rode into Salidar. There was not another human being in sight. Rubbing the ball between his hands, he took a short run and casually rolled it across the smooth grass. All nine pins fell, scattered as if they had been kicked. Mat turned and picked up another ball, and the pins were back upright. No, there was a fresh set of pins. The old still lay where they had fallen. He hurled the ball again, a lazy underhanded bowl. And Egwene wanted to scream. The pins were not turned pieces of wood. They were men, standing there watching the ball roll toward them. None moved until the ball sent them flying. Mat turned to pick up another ball, and there were more new pins, new men, standing in orderly formation among the men lying sprawled on the ground as if dead. No, they were dead.

ʌnkənsɝnd, mæt boʊld.

Unconcerned, Mat bowled.

ɪt wɑz ə tʃɹu dʒɹim; ʃi nu ðət lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ɪt feɪɾəd. ə ɡlɪmps ʌv ə fjutʃɝ ðət maɪt kʌm tə pæs, ə wɔɹnɪŋ ʌv wʌt ʃəd bi wɑtʃt fɔɹ. tʃɹu dʒɹimz wɝ ɔlweɪz pɑsəbɪləɾiz, nɑt sɝɾəntiz -  ʃi ɔfən hæd tə ɹimaɪn hɝsɛlf ə ðæt; dʒɹimɪŋ wɑz nɑt fɔɹtɛlɪŋ - bʌt ðɪs wɑz ə daɪɹ pɑsəbɪləɾi.

It was a true dream; she knew that long before it faded. A glimpse of a future that might come to pass, a warning of what should be watched for. True dreams were always possibilities, not certainties -  she often had to remind herself of that; Dreaming was not Foretelling - but this was a dire possibility.

ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðoʊz hjumən pɪnz hæd ɹɛpɹəzɛntəd θaʊzənz ə mɛn. ʌv ðæt, ʃi wɑz sɝɾən. ən ən ɪluməneɪɾɝ wɑz pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. mæt hæd mɛɾ ən ɪluməneɪɾɝ wʌns, bʌt ðət wɑz lɔŋ əɡoʊ. ðɪs wɑz sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ ɹisənt. ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz wɝ skæɾɝd, ðɛɹ ɡɪldhaʊsɪz ɡɔn. wʌn wɑz ivən wɝkɪŋ əɹ kɹæft wɪð ə tʃɹævlɪŋ ʃoʊ ðəɾ ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv hæd tʃɹævəld wɪð fəɹ ə taɪm. mæt maɪt faɪn ən ɪluməneɪɾɝ ɛniwɛɹ. stɪl, ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə pɑsəbəl fjutʃɝ. blik ən blʌdsteɪnd, bʌɾ oʊnli pɑsəbəl. jɛt ʃi hæd dʒɹimd ʌv ɪɾ ət lis twaɪs. nɑt ðə seɪm dʒɹim, ɪɡzækli, bʌɾ ɔlweɪz ðə seɪm minɪŋ. dɪd ðət meɪk ɪt mɔɹ laɪkli tə kʌm tə pæs? ʃi wəɾ əv tə æsk ðə waɪz wʌnz tə faɪn aʊt, ən ʃi wɑz ɪnkɹisɪŋli ɹɪlʌktən tə də ðæt. ɛvɹi kwɛstʃən ʃi æskt ɹɪvil sʌmθɪŋ tə ðɛm, ən ðɛɹ ɡoʊlz wɝ nɑt hɝz. tə seɪv wʌt ðeɪ kəɾ ə ði il, ðeɪ wəd lɛt ðə waɪt taʊɝ bi ɡɹaʊn tə dʌst.

Every one of those human pins had represented thousands of men. Of that, she was certain. And an Illuminator was part of it. Mat had met an Illuminator once, but that was long ago. This was something more recent. The Illuminators were scattered, their guildhouses gone. One was even working her craft with a traveling show that Elayne and Nynaeve had traveled with for a time. Mat might find an Illuminator anywhere. Still, it was only a possible future. Bleak and bloodstained, but only possible. Yet she had dreamed of it at least twice. Not the same dream, exactly, but always the same meaning. Did that make it more likely to come to pass? She would have to ask the Wise Ones to find out, and she was increasingly reluctant to do that. Every question she asked revealed something to them, and their goals were not hers. To save what they could of the Aiel, they would let the White Tower be ground to dust.

ʃi hæd mɔɹ ðən ɛni wʌn pipəl, ɛni wʌn neɪʃən, tə θɪŋk ʌv. mɔɹ dʒɹimz.

She had more than any one people, any one nation, to think of. More dreams.

ʃi wɑz stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ ʌp ə nɛɹoʊ, ɹɑki pæθ əlɔŋ ðə feɪs ʌv ə taʊɝɪŋ klɪf. klaʊdz sɝaʊndəd hɝ, haɪɾɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪloʊ ən ðə kɹɛst əbʌv, jɛt ʃi nu ðət boʊθ wɝ vɛɹi fɑɹ əweɪ. ʃi hæd tə pleɪs əɹ fit vɛɹi kɛɹfəli. ðə pæθ wɑz ə kɹæk lɛdʒ bɛɹli waɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ əɹ tə stæn ɑn wɪð wʌn ʃoʊldɝ pɹɛst əɡɛns ðə klɪf, ə lɛdʒ lɪɾɝd wɪð stoʊnz əz lɑɹdʒ əz əɹ fɪs ðət kəd tɝn ʌndɝ ə mɪspleɪst stɛp ən sɛn əɹ hɝtlɪŋ oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ. ɪɾ ɔlmoʊst sim ðɪs wɑz laɪk ðə dʒɹimz ə pʊʃɪŋ mɪlstoʊnz ən pʊlɪŋ kɑɹts, jɛt ʃi nu ɪt wɑz ə tʃɹu dʒɹim. əbɹʌpli, ðə lɛdʒ dʒɹɑpt əweɪ fɹəm ʌndɝ əɹ wɪð ðə kɹæk ə kɹʌmbəlɪŋ stoʊn, ən ʃi kɑt fɹæntəkəli ət ðə klɪf, fɪŋɡɝz skɹæbəlɪŋ tə faɪn ə hoʊld. hɝ fɪŋɡɝtɪps slɪɾ ɪndə ə taɪni kɹɛvəs, ən əɹ fɔl stɑpt wɪð ə dʒoʊl ðət ɹɛntʃt əɹ ɑɹmz. fit dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɪndə ðə klaʊdz, ʃi lɪsən tə ðə fɔlɪŋ stoʊn kɹæʃ əɡɛns ðə klɪf əntɪl ðə saʊn feɪɾəd tə nʌθɪŋ wɪθaʊt ðə stoʊn ɛvɝ hɪɾɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊnd. dɪmli, ʃi kəd si ðə bɹoʊkən lɛdʒ tə hɝ lɛft. tɛn fiɾ əweɪ, ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ə maɪl ɔf fəɹ ɔl ðə tʃæns ʃi hæɾ ə ɹitʃɪŋ ɪt. ɪn ði ʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən, ðə mɪsts hɪd wʌtɛvɝ ɹɪmeɪn ə ðə pæθ, bʌt ʃi θɔɾ ɪt hæd tə bi fɑɹðɝ əweɪ stɪl. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn əɹ ɑɹmz. ʃi kəd nɑt pʊl hɝsɛlf ʌp, oʊnli hæŋ ðəɹ baɪ hɝ fɪŋɡɝtɪps əntɪl ʃi fɛl. ði ɛdʒ ə ðə kɹɛvəs simd əz ʃɑɹp əz ə naɪf ʌndɝ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz.

She was struggling up a narrow, rocky path along the face of a towering cliff. Clouds surrounded her, hiding the ground below and the crest above, yet she knew that both were very far away. She had to place her feet very carefully. The path was a cracked ledge barely wide enough for her to stand on with one shoulder pressed against the cliff, a ledge littered with stones as large as her fist that could turn under a misplaced step and send her hurtling over the edge. It almost seemed this was like the dreams of pushing millstones and pulling carts, yet she knew it was a true dream. Abruptly, the ledge dropped away from under her with the crack of crumbling stone, and she caught frantically at the cliff, fingers scrabbling to find a hold. Her fingertips slid into a tiny crevice, and her fall stopped with a jolt that wrenched her arms. Feet dangling into the clouds, she listened to the falling stone crash against the cliff until the sound faded to nothing without the stone ever hitting the ground. Dimly, she could see the broken ledge to her left. Ten feet away, it might as well have been a mile off for all the chance she had of reaching it. In the other direction, the mists hid whatever remained of the path, but she thought it had to be farther away still. There was no strength in her arms. She could not pull herself up, only hang there by her fingertips until she fell. The edge of the crevice seemed as sharp as a knife under her fingers.

sʌɾənli ə wʊmən əpɪɹd, klæmbɝɪŋ daʊn ðə ʃɪɹ saɪɾ ə ðə klɪf aʊɾ ə ðə klaʊdz, meɪkɪŋ əɹ weɪ əz dɛfli əz ɪf ʃi wɝ wɔkɪŋ daʊn stɛɹz. ðəɹ wɑz ə sɔɹd stʃɹæp tə hɝ bæk.

Suddenly a woman appeared, clambering down the sheer side of the cliff out of the clouds, making her way as deftly as if she were walking down stairs. There was a sword strapped to her back.

hɝ feɪs weɪvɝd, nɛvɝ sɛɾəlɪŋ klɪɹli, bʌt ðə sɔɹd simd əz sɑləɾ əz ðə stoʊn. ðə wʊmən ɹitʃt ɛɡwinz lɛvəl ən hɛld aʊt wʌn hænd. "wi kən ɹitʃ ðə tɑp təɡɛðɝ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə fəmɪljɝ dʒɹɔlɪŋ æksɛnt.

Her face wavered, never settling clearly, but the sword seemed as solid as the stone. The woman reached Egwene's level and held out one hand. "We can reach the top together," she said in a familiar drawling accent.

ɛɡwin pʊʃt ðə dʒɹim əweɪ əz ʃi wəɾ əv ə vaɪpɝ. ʃi fɛlt əɹ bɑɾi θɹæʃ, hɝd hɝsɛlf ɡɹoʊn ɪn əɹ slip, bʌt fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi kəd də nʌθɪŋ. ʃi hæd dʒɹimd ə ðə sintʃæn bɪfɔɹ, ʌv ə sintʃæn wʊmən sʌmhaʊ taɪd tə hɝ, bʌt ðɪs wɑz ə sintʃæn u wəd seɪv hɝ. noʊ!

Egwene pushed the dream away as she would have a viper. She felt her body thrash, heard herself groan in her sleep, but for a moment she could do nothing. She had dreamed of the Seanchan before, of a Seanchan woman somehow tied to her, but this was a Seanchan who would save her. No!

ðeɪ hæd pʊɾ ə liʃ ɑn hɝ, meɪɾ əɹ deɪmeɪn. ʃi wəɾ əz sun daɪ əz bi seɪv baɪ ə sintʃæn! ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm pæs bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəɾ ædʒɹɛs hɝsɛlf tə kɑmɪŋ əɹ slipɪŋ bɑɾi. əɹ meɪbi ɪɾ oʊnli simd ə lɔŋ taɪm. nɑɾ ə sintʃæn; nɛvɝ ðæt!

They had put a leash on her, made her damane. She would as soon die as be saved by a Seanchan! A very long time passed before she could address herself to calming her sleeping body. Or maybe it only seemed a long time. Not a Seanchan; never that!

sloʊli, ðə dʒɹimz ɹɪtɝnd.

Slowly, the dreams returned.

ʃi wɑz klaɪmɪŋ ənʌðɝ pæθ əlɔŋ ə klɪf ʃɹaʊɾɪd ɪn klaʊdz, bʌt ðɪs wɑz ə bɹɔd lɛdʒ ə smuðli peɪvd waɪt stoʊn, ən ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɹɑks ʌndɝfʊt. ðə klɪf ɪtsɛlf wɑz tʃæki waɪɾ ən əz smuð əz ɪf pɑlɪʃt. dɪspaɪt ðə klaʊdz, ðə peɪl stoʊn ɔlmoʊst ɡlimd. ʃi klaɪm kwɪkli ən sun ɹilaɪz ðət ðə lɛdʒ wɑz spaɪɹəlɪŋ ɝaʊnd. ðə klɪf wɑz æktʃəli  ə spaɪɹ. noʊ sunɝ dɪd ðət θɔɾ əkɝ ðən ʃi wɑz stændɪŋ ɑn ðə tɑp ʌv ɪt, ə flæt pɑlɪʃt dɪsk wɔl baɪ mɪst. nɑt kwaɪt flæt, ðoʊ. ə smɔl waɪt plɪnθ stʊd sɛntɝɾ ɪn ðət sɝkəl, səpɔɹɾɪŋ ən ɔɪl-læmp meɪɾ ə klɪɹ ɡlæs. ðə fleɪm ɑn ðət læmp bɝn bɹaɪɾ ən stɛɾi, wɪθaʊt flɪkɝɪŋ. ɪt wɑz waɪt, tu.

She was climbing another path along a cliff shrouded in clouds, but this was a broad ledge of smoothly paved white stone, and there were no rocks underfoot. The cliff itself was chalky white and as smooth as if polished. Despite the clouds, the pale stone almost gleamed. She climbed quickly and soon realized that the ledge was spiraling around. The cliff was actually a spire. No sooner did that thought occur than she was standing on the top of it, a flat polished disc walled by mist. Not quite flat, though. A small white plinth stood centered in that circle, supporting an oil-lamp made of clear glass. The flame on that lamp burned bright and steady, without flickering. It was white, too.

sʌɾənli ə pɛɹ ə bɝdz flæʃt aʊɾ ə ðə mɪst, tu ɹeɪvənz blæk əz naɪt. stʃɹikɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə spaɪɹ-tɑp, ðeɪ stʃɹʌk ðə læmp ən flu ɑn wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə pɔz. ðə læmp spʌn ən wɑbəld, dænsɪŋ ɝaʊn ətɑp ðə plɪnθ, flɪŋɪŋ ɔf dʒɹɑpləts ʌv ɔɪl. səm ə ðoʊz dʒɹɑps kɑt faɪɝ ɪn mɪdɛɹ ən vænɪʃt. ʌðɝz fɛl ɝaʊn ðə ʃɔɹt kɑləm, itʃ səpɔɹɾɪŋ ə taɪni, flɪkɝɪŋ waɪt fleɪm. ən ðə læmp kəntɪnjud tə wɑbəl ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə fɔlɪŋ. ɛɡwin woʊk ɪn dɑɹknəs wɪð ə dʒoʊlt. ʃi nu. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, ʃi nu ɪɡzækli wʌɾ ə dʒɹim mɛnt. bʌt waɪ wəd ʃi dʒɹim ʌv ə sintʃæn wʊmən seɪvɪŋ hɝ, ən ðən ə ðə sintʃæn ətækɪŋ ðə waɪt taʊɝ? ən ətæk ðət wəd ʃeɪk ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ðɛɹ kɔɹ ən θɹɛɾən ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf. ʌv kɔɹs, ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə pɑsəbɪləɾi. bʌt ði ɪvɛns sin ɪn tʃɹu dʒɹimz wɝ mɔɹ laɪkli ðən ʌðɝ pɑsəbɪləɾiz.

Suddenly a pair of birds flashed out of the mist, two ravens black as night. Streaking across the spire-top, they struck the lamp and flew on without so much as a pause. The lamp spun and wobbled, dancing around atop the plinth, flinging off droplets of oil. Some of those drops caught fire in midair and vanished. Others fell around the short column, each supporting a tiny, flickering white flame. And the lamp continued to wobble on the edge of falling. Egwene woke in darkness with a jolt. She knew. For the first time, she knew exactly what a dream meant. But why would she dream of a Seanchan woman saving her, and then of the Seanchan attacking the White Tower? An attack that would shake the Aes Sedai to their core and threaten the Tower itself. Of course, it was only a possibility. But the events seen in true dreams were more likely than other possibilities.

ʃi θɔt ʃi wɑz kənsɪɾɝɪŋ kɑmli, bʌɾ əɾ ə ɹʌf ɹʌsəl ə kænvəs fɹəm ði ɛntʃɹi flæps, ʃi vɛɹi nɪɹli ɛmbɹeɪs ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. heɪstəli ʃi ɹæn θɹu nɑvəs ɛksɝsaɪzəz tə kəmpoʊz hɝsɛlf, wɔɾɝ floʊɪŋ oʊvɝ smuð stoʊnz, wɪn bloʊɪŋ θɹu haɪ ɡɹæs. laɪt, ʃi hæd bɪn fɹaɪɾənd. ɪt tʊk tu tə ətʃiv ɛni sɔɹɾ ə kɑm. ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə æsk u wɑz ðɛɹ. "əslip?" hɑliməz vɔɪs mʌɾɝd sɔfli. ʃi saʊndəd waʊn ʌp taɪt, ɔlmoʊst ɪksaɪɾəd. "wɛl, aɪ wʊdn maɪn ə ɡʊd naɪts slip maɪsɛlf."

She thought she was considering calmly, but at a rough rustle of canvas from the entry flaps, she very nearly embraced the True Source. Hastily she ran through novice exercises to compose herself, water flowing over smooth stones, wind blowing through high grass. Light, she had been frightened. It took two to achieve any sort of calm. She opened her mouth to ask who was there. "Asleep?" Halima's voice muttered softly. She sounded wound up tight, almost excited. "Well, I wouldn't mind a good night's sleep myself."

lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə wʊmən əndʒɹɛs fəɹ bɛɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk, ɛɡwin leɪ vɛɹi stɪl. ɪf ʃi lɛɾ əɹ noʊ ʃi wɑz əweɪk, ʃi wəɾ əv tə tɔk wɪð hɝ, ən ət ðə moʊmənt, ðət wəd bi ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ. ʃi wɑz fɛɹli sɝɾən ðət hɑlimə hæd faʊn hɝsɛlf kʌmpəni, ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðə hoʊl naɪt. hɑlimə kəd də əz ʃi wɪʃt, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɛɡwin wɑz stɪl dɪsəpɔɪntɪd. wɪʃɪŋ ðət ʃi hæd ɹɪmeɪn əslip, ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf slɪpɪŋ ʌndɝ wʌns mɔɹ, ən ðɪs taɪm, ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp hæfweɪ. ʃi wəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛni dʒɹimz ðət keɪm, ən ʃi dɪd nid səm æktʃəwəl slip. tʃɛsə keɪm bɹaɪɾ ən ɝli tə bɹɪŋ əɹ bɹɛkfəst ɑn ə tʃɹeɪ ən hɛlp əɹ dʒɹɛs. æktʃəli , ɪt wɑz ɝli ən nɑt bɹaɪɾ əɾ ɔl. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə mɛɹəs hɪn ə sʌnlaɪt, ən ðə læmps' laɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi tə si ɛniθɪŋ. ði ɛmbɝz ɪn ðə bɹeɪziɝ hæd daɪd daʊn dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt, ʌv kɔɹs, ən ðə koʊl ðət hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ fɛlt ɡɹeɪ. ðəɹ maɪt bi ə tʃæns ə mɔɹ snoʊ tədeɪ. hɑlimə ɹɪəld ɪndə hɝ sɪlk ʃɪft ən dʒɹɛs, meɪkɪŋ læfɪŋ dʒoʊks əbaʊt haʊ ʃi wəd laɪk tə hæv ə meɪd waɪl tʃɛsə wɑz duɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹoʊz ə bʌɾənz ðət ɹæn daʊn ɛɡwinz bæk. ðə plʌmp wʊmən wɔɹ ə sɛt feɪs, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ hɑlimə ɔltəɡɛðɝ. ɛɡwin sɛd nʌθɪŋ.

Listening to the woman undress for bed in the dark, Egwene lay very still. If she let her know she was awake, she would have to talk with her, and at the moment, that would be embarrassing. She was fairly certain that Halima had found herself company, if not for the whole night. Halima could do as she wished, of course, but Egwene was still disappointed. Wishing that she had remained asleep, she found herself slipping under once more, and this time, she did not try to stop halfway. She would remember any dreams that came, and she did need some actual sleep. Chesa came bright and early to bring her breakfast on a tray and help her dress. Actually, it was early and not bright at all. There was only the merest hint of sunlight, and the lamps' light was necessary to see anything. The embers in the brazier had died down during the night, of course, and the cold that hung in the air felt gray. There might be a chance of more snow today. Halima wriggled into her silk shift and dress, making laughing jokes about how she would like to have a maid while Chesa was doing up the rows of buttons that ran down Egwene's back. The plump woman wore a set face, ignoring Halima altogether. Egwene said nothing.

ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ vɛɹi dətɝmənədli. hɑlimə wɑz nɑɾ əɹ sɝvənt. ʃi hæd noʊ ɹaɪt tə sɛt stændɝdz fəɹ ðə wʊmən. dʒʌst əz tʃɛsə fɪnɪʃt ðə læst ə ðə taɪni bʌɾənz ən ɡeɪv ɛɡwinz ɑɹm ə pæt, naɪsaʊ dʌkt ɪndə ðə tɛnt, lɛɾɪŋ ɪn ə fɹɛʃ weɪv ə koʊld ɛɹ. ðə bɹif ɡlɪmps əfɔɹɾəd bɪfɔɹ ðə flæps fɛl bɪhaɪn əɹ ʃoʊd ðəɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl ɡɹeɪ aʊtsaɪd. dɛfənətli ə tʃæns ə snoʊ.

She said nothing very determinedly. Halima was not her servant. She had no right to set standards for the woman. Just as Chesa finished the last of the tiny buttons and gave Egwene's arm a pat, Nisao ducked into the tent, letting in a fresh wave of cold air. The brief glimpse afforded before the flaps fell behind her showed that it was still gray outside. Definitely a chance of snow.

"aɪ mʌst spik tə ðə mʌðɝ əloʊn," ʃi sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn əɹ əz ɪf ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi fɛl ðə snoʊ. sətʃ ə fɝm toʊn wɑz ənjuʒəwəl fɹəm ðə smɔl wʊmən.

"I must speak to the Mother alone," she said, holding her cloak around her as if she already felt the snow. Such a firm tone was unusual from the small woman.

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd tə tʃɛsə, hu kɝtsid, bʌt stɪl kɑʃənd, "naʊ doʊn lɛt jəɹ bɹɛkfəst ɡɛt koʊld," ɑn əɹ weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə tɛnt. hɑlimə pɔzd, aɪɪŋ naɪsaʊ ən ɛɡwin boʊθ, bɪfɔɹ skupɪŋ ʌp əɹ kloʊk fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt leɪ ɪn ən əntaɪɾi hip ət ðə fʊɾ ə hɝ kɑt. "aɪ səpoʊz dɛlænə hæz wɝk fəɹ mi," ʃi sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ɪɹəteɪɾəd. naɪsaʊ fɹaʊn ət ðə wʊmənz bæk əz ʃi lɛft, bʌt wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ʃi ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ ən woʊv ə wɔɹɾ əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ ən ɛɡwin. wɪθaʊɾ æskɪŋ pɝməs sən. "æneɪjə ən əɹ wɔɹɾɝ ɑɹ dɛd," ʃi sɛd. "sʌm ə ðə wɝkmɪn bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪn sæks ə koʊlz læs naɪt hɝɾ ə nɔɪz, laɪk sʌmwʌn θɹæʃɪŋ ɝaʊnd, ən fəɹ ə wʌndɝ, ðeɪ ɔl wɛn ɹʌn nɪŋ tə si wʌɾ ɪt wɑz. ðeɪ faʊn æneɪjə ən sɛɾɑɡænə laɪɪŋ ɪn ðə snoʊ, dɛd." ɛɡwin sæt daʊn sloʊli ɑn əɹ tʃɛɹ, wɪtʃ dɪd nɑt fil pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli kʌmftəɹbəl ət ðə moʊmənt.

Egwene nodded to Chesa, who curtsied, but still cautioned, "Now don't let your breakfast get cold," on her way out of the tent. Halima paused, eyeing Nisao and Egwene both, before scooping up her cloak from where it lay in an untidy heap at the foot of her cot. "I suppose Delana has work for me," she said, sounding irritated. Nisao frowned at the woman's back as she left, but without saying anything she embraced saidar and wove a ward against eavesdropping around her and Egwene. Without asking permis sion. "Anaiya and her Warder are dead," she said. "Some of the workmen bringing in sacks of coals last night heard a noise, like someone thrashing around, and for a wonder, they all went run ning to see what it was. They found Anaiya and Setagana lying in the snow, dead." Egwene sat down slowly on her chair, which did not feel particularly comfortable at the moment.

æneɪjə, dɛd. ʃi hæd hæd noʊ bjuɾi ɪksɛpt əɹ smaɪl, bʌt wən ʃi smaɪld, ɪt wɔɹmd ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɝaʊn hɝ. ə pleɪn-feɪst wʊmən u lʌv leɪs ɑn əɹ ɹoʊbz. ɛɡwin nu ʃi ʃəd fil sædnəs fəɹ sɛɾɑɡænə, tu, bʌɾ i hæd bɪn ə wɔɹɾɝ. ɪf i hæd sɝvaɪvd æneɪjə, ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli hi wʊɾə lɪv lɔŋ. "haʊ?" ʃi sɛd. naɪsaʊ wəd nɑɾ əv woʊvən ðət wɔɹd dʒʌs tə tɛl əɹ æneɪjə wɑz dɛd.

Anaiya, dead. She had had no beauty except her smile, but when she smiled, it warmed everything around her. A plain-faced woman who loved lace on her robes. Egwene knew she should feel sadness for Setagana, too, but he had been a Warder. If he had survived Anaiya, it was unlikely he would have lived long. "How?" she said. Nisao would not have woven that ward just to tell her Anaiya was dead.

naɪsaʊz feɪs taɪɾənd, ən dɪspaɪt ðə wɔɹd, ʃi lʊkt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ əz ɪf ʃi fɪɹd sʌmwʌn maɪt bi lɪsnɪŋ ət ði ɛntʃɹi flæps. "ðə wɝkmɪn θɔt ðeɪ hæɾ iɾən bædli pɹəzɝv mʌʃɹumz.

Nisao's face tightened, and despite the ward, she looked over her shoulder as if she feared someone might be listening at the entry flaps. "The workmen thought they had eaten badly preserved mushrooms.

səm fɑɹmɝz ɑɹ kɛɹləs ɪn ɡæðɝɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ ɪntɛn tə sɛl, ən ðə ɹɔŋ sɔɹt kən pɛɹəlaɪz jəɹ lʌŋz əɹ meɪk jəɹ θɹoʊt swɛl ʌp, soʊ jə daɪ stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ fəɹ ɛɹ." ɛɡwin nɑɾəd ɪmpeɪʃənli. ʃi hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp ɪn ə kʌntʃɹi vɪlədʒ, æftɝ ɔl. "ɛvɹiwʌn simd wɪlɪŋ tə æksɛp ðæt," naɪsaʊ wɛn ɑn, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt hɝi. hænz twɪstɪŋ ən flɛksɪŋ ɑn ði ɛdʒəz ə hɝ kloʊk, ʃi əpɪɹd ɹɪlʌktən tə ɹitʃ əɹ kənkluʒən. "ðɛɹ wɝ noʊ wunz, noʊ ɪnʒɝiz ʌv ɛni sɔɹt. noʊ ɹizən tə θɪŋk ɪt wɑz ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ ə ɡɹiɾi fɑɹmɝ sɛlɪŋ bæd mʌʃɹumz. bʌt. . . ." ʃi saɪd, ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ əɡɛn, ən loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs. "aɪ səpoʊz ɪt wɑz ɔl ðə tɔk ə ðə blæk taʊɝ ɪn ðə hɔl tədeɪ. aɪ tɛstəd fəɹ ɹɛzənəns. ðeɪ wɝ kɪld wɪð seɪɾɪn." ə ɡɹɪmɑs ə dɪsɡʌs kɹɔst əɹ feɪs. "aɪ θɪŋk sʌmwʌn dʒʌst woʊv sɑləd floʊz ʌv ɛɹ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ hɛdz ən lɛɾ əm smʌðɝ." ʃʌɾɝɪŋ, ʃi dʒɹu hɝ kloʊk kloʊsɝ.

Some farmers are careless in gathering what they intend to sell, and the wrong sort can paralyze your lungs or make your throat swell up, so you die struggling for air." Egwene nodded impatiently. She had grown up in a country village, after all. "Everyone seemed willing to accept that," Nisao went on, but she did not hurry. Hands twisting and flexing on the edges of her cloak, she appeared reluctant to reach her conclusion. "There were no wounds, no injuries of any sort. No reason to think it was anything but a greedy farmer selling bad mushrooms. But. . . ." She sighed, glancing over her shoulder again, and lowered her voice. "I suppose it was all the talk of the Black Tower in the Hall today. I tested for resonance. They were killed with saidin." A grimace of disgust crossed her face. "I think someone just wove solid flows of Air around their heads and let them smother." Shuddering, she drew her cloak closer.

ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə ʃʌɾɝ, tu. ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd ʃi dɪd nɑt. æneɪjə, dɛd. smʌðɝd. ə dɪlɪbɝətli kɹuəl weɪ ʌv kɪlɪŋ, juz baɪ sʌmwʌn u hæd hoʊp tə liv noʊ tʃɹeɪsəz. "hæv jə toʊld ɛniwʌn, jɛt?"

Egwene wanted to shudder, too. She was surprised she did not. Anaiya, dead. Smothered. A deliberately cruel way of killing, used by someone who had hoped to leave no traces. "Have you told anyone, yet?"

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt," naɪsaʊ sɛɾ ɪndɪɡnənli. "aɪ keɪm tə jə stʃɹeɪɾəweɪ. əz sun əz aɪ nu jud bi əweɪk, ət list." "ə pɪɾi. jəl əv tə ɪkspleɪn waɪ jə dɪleɪd. wi kæn kip ðɪs sikɹət." wɛl, æmɪɝlənz hæd kɛp dɑɹkɝ sikɹəts, fəɹ ðə ɡʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ əz ðeɪ sɔ ɪt. "ɪf wɪv ə mæn u kən tʃænəl əmʌŋ ʌs, ðən ðə sɪstɝz nid tə bi ɑn ðɛɹ ɡɑɹd." ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl haɪɾɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə wɝkmɪn əɹ soʊlʒɝz simd ənlaɪkli, bʌt lɛs soʊ ðən wʌn kʌmɪŋ ðəɹ dʒʌs tə kɪl ə sɪŋɡəl sɪstɝ ən əɹ wɔɹɾɝ. wɪtʃ ɹeɪzd ənʌðɝ kwɛstʃən. "waɪ æneɪjə? wɑz ʃi dʒʌst ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ pleɪs ət ðə ɹɔŋ taɪm, naɪsaʊ? wɛɹ dɪd ðeɪ daɪ?"

"Of course not," Nisao said indignantly. "I came to you straightaway. As soon as I knew you'd be awake, at least." "A pity. You will have to explain why you delayed. We can't keep this secret." Well, Amyrlins had kept darker secrets, for the good of the Tower as they saw it. "If we have a man who can channel among us, then the sisters need to be on their guard." A man who could channel hiding among the workmen or soldiers seemed unlikely, but less so than one coming there just to kill a single sister and her Warder. Which raised another question. "Why Anaiya? Was she just in the wrong place at the wrong time, Nisao? Where did they die?"

"nɪɹ ðə wæɡənz ɑn ðə saʊθ saɪɾ ə kæmp. aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ ðeɪ wɝ ðəɹ ðət taɪm ə naɪt. ənlɛs æneɪjə wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə pɹaɪviz ən sɛɾɑɡænə θɔt ʃi nid ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ivən ðɛɹ."

"Near the wagons on the south side of camp. I don't know why they were there that time of night. Unless Anaiya was going to the privies and Setagana thought she need guarding even there."

"ðɛn jəɹ gɑnə faɪn aʊt fəɹ mi, naɪsaʊ. wʌt wɝ æneɪjə ən sɛɾɑɡænə duɪŋ aʊt wən ɛvɹibɑɾi ɛls wɑz əslip? waɪ wɝ ðeɪ kɪld? ðɪs, jəl kip sikɹət. əntɪl jə kən ɡɪmi ɹizənz, noʊ wʌn bʌt ðə tu ʌv əs ɪz tə noʊ jəɹ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɛni." naɪsaʊz maʊθ oʊpən ən kloʊzd. "ɪf aɪ mʌst, aɪ mʌst," ʃi mʌɾɝd oʊnli hæf ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ.

"Then you're going to find out for me, Nisao. What were Anaiya and Setagana doing out when everybody else was asleep? Why were they killed? This, you will keep secret. Until you can give me reasons, no one but the two of us is to know you're looking for any." Nisao's mouth opened and closed. "If I must, I must," she muttered only half under her breath.

ʃi wɑz nɑt ɹɪli suɾəd tə kipɪŋ dip sikɹəts, ən ʃi nu ɪt. ðə læst ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kip hæd lɛd dɝɛkli tə hɝ hævɪŋ tə swɛɹ fiəlti tə ɛɡwin. "wɪl ðɪs pʊɾ ə stɑp tə tɔk əbaʊɾ ən əɡɹimənt wɪð ðə blæk taʊɝ?" "aɪ daʊɾ ɪt," ɛɡwin sɛd wɛɹəli. laɪt, haʊ kəd ʃi bi wɪɹi ɔlɹɛɾi? ðə sʌn wɑz nɑt fʊli ʌp jɛt. "iðɝ weɪ, aɪ θɪŋk ɪts gɑnə bi ənʌðɝ vɛɹi lɔŋ deɪ." ən ðə bɛst ʃi kəd faɪn tə hoʊp fəɹ ɪn ɪt wɑz ðət ʃi kəd meɪk ɪt tə ənʌðɝ naɪt wɪθaʊɾ ə hɛdeɪk.

She was not really suited to keeping deep secrets, and she knew it. The last she had tried to keep had led directly to her having to swear fealty to Egwene. "Will this put a stop to talk about an agreement with the Black Tower?" "I doubt it," Egwene said wearily. Light, how could she be weary already? The sun was not fully up yet. "Either way, I think it is going to be another very long day." And the best she could find to hope for in it was that she could make it to another night without a headache.

tʃæptɝ twɛntiwʌn

CHAPTER 21

eɪ mɑɹk ɑlviɛɝɪn stɛp θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, lɛɾɪŋ ɪt snæp ʃʌt bɪhaɪn əɹ ɪn ə feɪɾɪŋ slæʃ ə bɹɪljən blu-waɪt, ən ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli sniz fɹəm ðə dʌs kɪkt ʌp baɪ hɝ ʃuz. ət wʌns ənʌðɝ sniz ɹæk hɝ, ən ðən ənʌðɝ ðət bɹɔt tɪɹz tə hɝ aɪz. lɪɾ oʊnli baɪ ðə ɡloʊɪŋ ɡloʊb ðət floʊɾəd ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ðə ɹʌf-wɔl stɔɹɹum hjun aʊɾ ə ðə bɛdʒɹɑk θɹi lɛvəlz bɪloʊ ðə taʊɝ laɪbɹɛɹi wɑz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ sɛntʃɝiz wɝθ ə dʌst. ʃi wəd mʌtʃ ɹæðɝ əv ɹɪtɝn stʃɹeɪt tə hɝ əpɑɹtməns ɪn ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ðə tʃæns ʌv wɔkɪŋ ɪn tə faɪn ə sɝvən klinɪŋ, ən ðən ʃi wəɾ əv tə ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə ðə bɑɾi ən hoʊp ðət noʊ wʌn ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət ðə sɝvən hæd læs bɪn sin ɡoʊɪŋ ɪndə hɝ ɹumz. ɹɪmeɪn hɪɾən ən ɹaʊs nɑɾ ivən ðə slaɪɾəst hɪn ə səspɪʃən, mɛsænə hæd kəmændəd. ðət simd oʊvɝtɪməd wən ðə blæk ədʒɑ hæd wɔk ðə taʊɝ wɪð ɪmpjunɪɾi sɪns ɪts faʊndɪŋ, bʌt wən wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən kəmændəd, oʊnli ə ful dɪsoʊbeɪd. ət list, ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛni tʃæns ə biɪŋ faʊn aʊt.

A Mark Alviarin stepped through the gateway, letting it snap shut behind her in a fading slash of brilliant blue-white, and almost immediately sneezed from the dust kicked up by her shoes. At once another sneeze racked her, and then another that brought tears to her eyes. Lit only by the glowing globe that floated in front of her, the rough-walled storeroom hewn out of the bedrock three levels below the Tower Library was empty except for centuries worth of dust. She would much rather have returned straight to her apartments in the Tower itself, but there was always the chance of walking in to find a servant cleaning, and then she would have to get rid of the body and hope that no one remembered that the servant had last been seen going into her rooms. Remain hidden and rouse not even the slightest hint of suspicion, Mesaana had commanded. That seemed overtimid when the Black Ajah had walked the Tower with impunity since its founding, but when one of the Chosen commanded, only a fool disobeyed. At least, if there was any chance of being found out.

ɪɹɪɾəbli, ɑlviɛɝɪn tʃænəl tə fɔɹs ðə dʌst aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ, slæmɪŋ ɪt daʊn soʊ hɑɹd ðət ðə stoʊn flɔɹ ʃəɾ əv ʃeɪkən. ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv tə ɡoʊ θɹu ðɪs ɛvɹi taɪm ɪf ʃi sɪmpli swɛpt ɔl ðə dʌst ɪndə ə kɔɹnɝ ɹæðɝ ðən livɪŋ ɪt spɹɛɾ aʊt. noʊ wʌn ɛls hæd kʌm ðɪs fɑɹ ɪndə ðə laɪbɹɛɹi beɪsməns ɪn jɪɹz; noʊ wʌn wəd noʊɾəs ðə ɹum wɑz klin. bʌt sʌmwʌn wɑz ɔlweɪz duɪŋ wʌt noʊ wʌn ɛvɝ dɪd. ʃi ɔfən dɪd soʊ hɝsɛlf, ən ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə bi kɑt θɹu ə fulɪʃ mɪsteɪk.

Irritably, Alviarin channeled to force the dust out of the air, slamming it down so hard that the stone floor should have shaken. She would not have to go through this every time if she simply swept all the dust into a corner rather than leaving it spread out. No one else had come this far into the Library basements in years; no one would notice the room was clean. But someone was always doing what no one ever did. She often did so herself, and she did not intend to be caught through a foolish mistake.

stɪl, ʃi ɡɹʌmbəld ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ əz ʃi tʃænəl ðə ɹɛɾɪʃ mʌd fɹəm əɹ ʃuz ən ðə hɛm ə hɝ skɝts ən kloʊk. ɪt simd ənlaɪkli ðəɾ ɛniwʌn wəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɪɾ əz kʌmɪŋ fɹəm tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ, ðə lɑɹdʒəst ə ðə si foʊk aɪlənz, bʌt sʌmwʌn maɪt wʌndɝ wɛɹ ʃi hæd bɪn tə ɡɛt mʌɾi. ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz wəd bi bɛɹiɾ ɪn snoʊ ɪksɛpt wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn ʃʌvəl klɪɹ ən ðə dɝt fɹoʊzən hɑɹd.

Still, she grumbled under her breath as she channeled the reddish mud from her shoes and the hem of her skirts and cloak. It seemed unlikely that anyone would recognize it as coming from Tremalking, the largest of the Sea Folk islands, but someone might wonder where she had been to get muddy. The Tower grounds would be buried in snow except where they had been shoveled clear and the dirt frozen hard.

stɪl mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf, ʃi tʃænəld əɡɛn tə mʌfəl ðə skwil ə ɹʌstəd hɪnʒɪz əz ʃi pʊʃt oʊpən ðə ɹʌf wʊɾən dɔɹ. ðəɹ wɑz ə weɪ tə meɪk ə wiv ən haɪɾ ɪt, soʊ ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv tə sɑfən ðət kɹik ɛvɹi taɪm - ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ðəɹ wɑz - bʌt mɛsænə ɹəfjuz tə titʃ ɪt tə hɝ.

Still muttering to herself, she channeled again to muffle the squeal of rusted hinges as she pushed open the rough wooden door. There was a way to make a weave and hide it, so she would not have to soften that creak every time - she was certain there was - but Mesaana refused to teach it to her.

mɛsænə wɑz ðə ɹil sɔɹs ə hɝ ənɔɪəns. ðə tʃoʊzən tɔt wʌt ʃi wɪʃt ən nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ, hɪntəɾ ət wʌndɝz ðən wɪθhɛl ðɛm. ən mɛsænə juzd əɹ laɪk ən ɛɹənd ɡɝl. ʃi sæɾ ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə səpɹim kaʊnsəl ən nu ðə neɪmz ʌv ɛvɹi blæk sɪstɝ ɪn ɛvɹi hɑɹt, wɪtʃ wɑz mɔɹ ðən mɛsænə kəd seɪ. ðə wʊmən ʃoʊd lɪɾəl ɪntʃɹəst ɪn u wəd kæɹi aʊɾ əɹ ɔɹɾɝz, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ wɝ kæɹiɾ aʊt, ən tə ði æbsəlut lɛɾɝ. ɔl tu ɔfən, ʃi wɑntəɾ əm kæɹiɾ aʊt baɪ ɑlviɛɝɪn hɝsɛlf, fɔɹsɪŋ əɹ tə dil wɪð wɪmən ən mɛn u θɔt ðɛmsɛlvz əɹ ikwəlz dʒʌs kəz ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ sɝv ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. tu mɛni ʌv ðə fɹɛnz θɔt ðɛmsɛlvz ikwəl tə ɛɛs sədaɪ, əɹ ivən supɪɹiɝ. wɝs, mɛsænə fɝbeɪɾ əɹ tə meɪk ən ɑbʒɛkt lɛsən ʌv ivən wʌn. ɹɪpɛlən lɪɾəl ɹoʊɾənts, nʌn eɪbəl tə tʃænəl, ən ɑlviɛɝɪn hæd tə bi pəlaɪt dʒʌs kəz səm ə ðɛm maɪt bi sɝvɪŋ ənʌðɝ ə ðə tʃoʊzən! ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs ðət mɛsænə dɪd nɑt noʊ fəɹ ʃʊɹ. ʃi wɑz wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən, ən ʃi meɪɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn smaɪl ət ðə dʌst ə ðə stʃɹit fəɹ əɹ ənsɝɾənti.

Mesaana was the real source of her annoyance. The Chosen taught what she wished and nothing more, hinted at wonders then withheld them. And Mesaana used her like an errand girl. She sat at the head of the Supreme Council and knew the names of every Black sister in every heart, which was more than Mesaana could say. The woman showed little interest in who would carry out her orders, so long as they were carried out, and to the absolute letter. All too often, she wanted them carried out by Alviarin herself, forcing her to deal with women and men who thought themselves her equals just because they also served the Great Lord. Too many of the Friends thought themselves equal to Aes Sedai, or even superior. Worse, Mesaana forbade her to make an object lesson of even one. Repellent little rodents, none able to channel, and Alviarin had to be polite just because some of them might be serving another of the Chosen! It was obvious that Mesaana did not know for sure. She was one of the Chosen, and she made Alviarin smile at the dust of the street for her uncertainty.

ðə bɔl ə peɪl laɪt floʊɾɪŋ əhɛɾ ə hɝ fəɹ ɪluməneɪʃən, ɑlviɛɝɪn ɡlaɪɾɪd daʊn ðə ɹʌf stoʊn kɔɹəɾɝ, smuðɪŋ ðə dʌs bɪhaɪnd wɪð fɛðɝi bɹʌʃɪz ʌv ɛɹ soʊ ɪt wəd sim ʌndɪstɝbd ən ɹɪhɝsɪŋ sɛvɹəl tʃɔɪs θɪŋz ʃi wəd laɪk tə seɪ tə mɛsænə. ʃi wəɾ æktʃəli  seɪ nʌn ə ðɛm, ʌv kɔɹs, wɪtʃ oʊnli hoʊn əɹ ɪɹɪteɪʃən. kɹɪɾɪsaɪzɪŋ wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən ɪn ivən ðə maɪldəs tɝmz wɑz ə ʃɔɹt pæθ tə peɪn, pɝhæps tə dɛθ. ɔlmoʊst ʃʊɹli boʊθ, ɪn tʃɹuθ. wɪð ðə tʃoʊzən, ɡɹɑvəl ən oʊbeɪ wɑz ði oʊnli weɪ tə sɝvaɪv, ən ðə fɝst wɑz əz ɪmpɔɹɾənt əz ðə sɛkənd. ðə pɹaɪz ʌv ɪmɔɹtælɪɾi wɑz wɝθ ə lɪɾəl ɡɹɔvəlɪŋ. wɪð ðæt, ʃi kəd ɡeɪn ɔl ðə paʊɝ ʃi wɪʃt, mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən ɛni æmɪɝlɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ wildɪd. fɝst, ðoʊ, ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi tə sɝvaɪv.

The ball of pale light floating ahead of her for illumination, Alviarin glided down the rough stone corridor, smoothing the dust behind with feathery brushes of Air so it would seem undisturbed and rehearsing several choice things she would like to say to Mesaana. She would actually say none of them, of course, which only honed her irritation. Criticizing one of the Chosen in even the mildest terms was a short path to pain, perhaps to death. Almost surely both, in truth. With the Chosen, grovel and obey was the only way to survive, and the first was as important as the second. The prize of immortality was worth a little groveling. With that, she could gain all the power she wished, much more than any Amyrlin had ever wielded. First, though, it was necessary to survive.

wʌns ʃi ɹitʃt ðə tɑp ə ðə fɝst ɹæmp liɾɪŋ ʌpwɝd, ʃi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bɑðɝd haɪɾɪŋ əɹ tʃɹeɪsəz. ðəɹ wɑz nɑt nɪɹli soʊ mʌtʃ dʌs hɪɹ, ən ðət mɑɹk baɪ ðə wilz ə hændkɑɹts ən skʌfs fɹəm ʃuz; ənʌðɝ sɛɾ ə feɪn fʊtpɹɪns wəd nɛvɝ bi noʊɾəst. ʃi stɪl wɔkt kwɪkli, ðoʊ.

Once she reached the top of the first ramp leading upward, she no longer bothered hiding her traces. There was not nearly so much dust here, and that marked by the wheels of handcarts and scuffs from shoes; another set of faint footprints would never be noticed. She still walked quickly, though.

juʒəwəli, ðə θɔɾ ə lɪvɪŋ fɝɛvɝ bɹaɪɾənd hɝ, ðə θɔɾ ʌv ɪvɛntʃəwəli wildɪŋ paʊɝ θɹu mɛsænə əz ʃi naʊ dɪd θɹu ɪleɪɾə. wɛl, ɔlmoʊs ðə seɪm; ɪkspɛktɪŋ tə bɹɪŋ mɛsænə tə ɪleɪɾəz steɪɾ ə kəmplaɪəns wɑz tu æmbɪʃəs, bʌt ʃi kəd stɪl taɪ stʃɹɪŋz tə ðə wʊmən ðət wəɾ əʃʊɹ əɹ oʊn ɹaɪz. tədeɪ, hɝ maɪn kɛpt ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə fæk ðət ʃi hæd bɪn aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ fəɹ ɔlmoʊst ə mʌnθ. mɛsænə wəd nɑɾ əv bɑðɝd tə kip ɪleɪɾə ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl dʊɹɪŋ əɹ æbsəns, ðoʊ ðə tʃoʊzən wəd ʃʊɹli leɪ ðə fɔlt əɾ ɑlviɛɝɪnz fiɾ ɪf ɛniθɪŋ hæd ɡɔn əmɪs. ʌv kɔɹs, ɪleɪɾə wɑz pɹɑpɝli kaʊɾ æftɝ ðə læs taɪm. ðə wʊmən hæd bɛɡd fəɹ ɹilis fɹəm teɪkɪŋ pɹaɪvət pɛnənsɪz fɹəm ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz. ʌv kɔɹs ʃi wɑz tu kaʊd tə hæv stɛpt aʊɾ ə laɪn. ʌv kɔɹs.

Usually, the thought of living forever brightened her, the thought of eventually wielding power through Mesaana as she now did through Elaida. Well, almost the same; expecting to bring Mesaana to Elaida's state of compliance was too ambitious, but she could still tie strings to the woman that would assure her own rise. Today, her mind kept returning to the fact that she had been out of the Tower for almost a month. Mesaana would not have bothered to keep Elaida under control during her absence, though the Chosen would surely lay the fault at Alviarin's feet if anything had gone amiss. Of course, Elaida was properly cowed after the last time. The woman had begged for release from taking private penances from the Mistress of Novices. Of course she was too cowed to have stepped out of line. Of course.

ɑlviɛɝɪn pʊʃt ɪleɪɾə fɝmli tə ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt sloʊ hɝ stɛps.

Alviarin pushed Elaida firmly to the back of her head, but she did not slow her steps.

ə sɛkən ɹæmp tʊk əɹ tə ðə haɪəs beɪsmənt, wɛɹ ʃi lɛt ðə ɡloʊɪŋ bɔl vænɪʃ ən ɹilist seɪaɪdɑɹ. ðə ʃædoʊz hɪɹ wɝ dɑɾəd wɪð pulz ʌv wɑn laɪt ðət nɪɹli tʌtʃt wʌn ənʌðɝ, kæs baɪ læmps sɪɾɪŋ ɪn aɪɝn bɹækəts əlɔŋ stoʊn wɔlz ðət wɝ nitli dʒɹɛst ɑn ðɪs lɛvəl. nʌθɪŋ muvd ɪksɛp fəɹ ə ɹæt ðət wɛn skʌɾəlɪŋ əweɪ wɪð ə feɪn klɪk ə klɔz ɑn ðə flɔɹstoʊnz.

A second ramp took her to the highest basement, where she let the glowing ball vanish and released saidar. The shadows here were dotted with pools of wan light that nearly touched one another, cast by lamps sitting in iron brackets along stone walls that were neatly dressed on this level. Nothing moved except for a rat that went scuttling away with a faint click of claws on the floorstones.

ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs meɪɾ əɹ smaɪl. ɔlmoʊst. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz aɪz ɹɪɾəld ðə taʊɝ, naʊ, ðoʊ noʊ wʌn sim tə hæv noʊɾəst ðət ðə wɔɹɾɪŋz hæd feɪld. ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt wɑz ɛniθɪŋ mɛsænə hæd dʌn; ðə wɔɹdz sɪmpli noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɝkt əz ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə. ðəɹ wɝ . . . ɡæps. ʃi sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wɛðɝ ði ænəməl sɔ hɝ, əɹ ɹipɔɹɾəd wʌɾ ɪt hæd sin, bʌt ʃi stɪl dʌkt kwɪkli ɪndə ə nɛɹoʊ sɝkjəlɝ stɛɹkeɪs. ðəɹ maɪt bi pipəl əbaʊɾ ɑn ðɪs lɛvəl, ən pipəl wɝ nɑt tə bi tʃɹʌstɪd ðə seɪm əz ɹæts.

That almost made her smile. Almost. The Great Lord's eyes riddled the Tower, now, though no one seemed to have noticed that the wardings had failed. She did not think it was anything Mesaana had done; the wards simply no longer worked as they were supposed to. There were . . . gaps. She certainly did not care whether the animal saw her, or reported what it had seen, but she still ducked quickly into a narrow circular staircase. There might be people about on this level, and people were not to be trusted the same as rats.

pɝhæps, ʃi θɔɾ əz ʃi klaɪmd, ʃi kəd pɹoʊb mɛsænə əbaʊt ðəɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl flɛɹ ɪn ðə paʊɝ, soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi wɑz . . . dɛləkət. ðə tʃoʊzən wəd θɪŋk ʃi wɑz haɪɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɪf ʃi nɛvɝ mɛnʃən ɪt. ɛvɹi wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl ɪn ðə hoʊl wɝl hæd tə bi wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt hæd hæpənd. ʃi wəd dʒʌst əv tə bi kɛɹfəl nɑt tə lɛt slɪp ɛniθɪŋ ðət sədʒɛstəd ðət ʃi hæɾ æktʃəli  vɪzəɾəd ðə saɪt. lɔŋ æftɝ ðə flɛɹ vænɪʃt, ʌv kɔɹs - ʃi wɑz nɑt stupəɾ ɪnʌf tə sɪmpli stʃɹoʊl ɪndə ðæt!  - bʌt mɛsænə sim tə θɪŋk ɑlviɛɝɪn ʃəd kæɹi aʊɾ əɹ tʃɔɹz wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ ə moʊmən fəɹ hɝsɛlf. kəd ðə wʊmən ɹɪli bɪliv ðət ʃi hæd noʊ əfɛɹz ə hɝ oʊn tə si tə? ɪt wɑz bɛs tə bɪheɪv əz ɪf ʃi dɪɾ əv nʌn. fəɹ ðə moʊmən ɪt wɑz, ət list. ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz ət ðə tɑp ə ðə stɛɹz, ʃi stɑpt ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə smɔl pleɪn dɔɹ, ɹʌfli fɪnɪʃt ɑn ðɪs saɪd, ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə teɪk hoʊld ə hɝsɛlf əz ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ kloʊk oʊvɝ əɹ ɑɹm. mɛsænə wɑz wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən, bʌt stɪl hjumən. mɛsænə meɪd mɪsteɪks. ən ʃi wəd kɪl ɑlviɛɝɪn ɪn ə hɑɹtbiɾ ɪf ʃi meɪd wʌn. ɡɹɑvəl, oʊbeɪ ən sɝvaɪv. ən ɔlweɪz bi wɛɹi. ʃi hæd noʊn ðət lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ miɾɪŋ wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən. ɹitʃɹivɪŋ ðə waɪt kipɝz stoʊl fɹəm əɹ bɛl paʊtʃ, ʃi sɛɾəld ɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk ən kɹæk ðə dɔɹ kɛɹfəli tə lɪsən. saɪləns, əz ɪkspɛktəd. ʃi stɛpt aʊɾ ɪndə ðə naɪnθ dɪpɑzətɔɹi ən kloʊz ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɝ.

Perhaps, she thought as she climbed, she could probe Mesaana about that impossible flare in the Power, so long as she was . . . delicate. The Chosen would think she was hiding something if she never mentioned it. Every woman who could channel in the whole world had to be wondering what had happened. She would just have to be careful not to let slip anything that suggested that she had actually visited the site. Long after the flare vanished, of course - she was not stupid enough to simply stroll into that!  - but Mesaana seemed to think Alviarin should carry out her chores without taking a moment for herself. Could the woman really believe that she had no affairs of her own to see to? It was best to behave as if she did have none. For the moment it was, at least. In the shadows at the top of the stairs, she stopped in front of the small plain door, roughly finished on this side, in order to take hold of herself as she folded her cloak over her arm. Mesaana was one of the Chosen, but still human. Mesaana made mistakes. And she would kill Alviarin in a heartbeat if she made one. Grovel, obey and survive. And always be wary. She had known that long before meeting one of the Chosen. Retrieving the white Keeper's stole from her belt pouch, she settled it around her neck and cracked the door carefully to listen. Silence, as expected. She stepped out into the Ninth Depository and closed the door behind her.

ɑn ði ɪnɝ saɪd, ðə dɔɹ wɑz noʊ lɛs pleɪn, bʌt pɑlɪʃt tə ə sɑft ɡloʊ.

On the inner side, the door was no less plain, but polished to a soft glow.

ðə taʊɝ laɪbɹɛɹi wɑz dɪvaɪɾəd ɪndə twɛlv dəpɑzətɔɹiz, ət list ɪnsəfɑɹ əz ðə wɝl nu, ən ðə naɪnθ wɑz ðə smɔləst, ɡɪvən oʊvɝ tə tɛksts ɑn vɛɹiəs fɔɹmz ʌv ɛɹɪθmɛɾɪk, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl ə lɑɹdʒ tʃeɪmbɝ, ə lɔŋ oʊvəl wɪð ə flæɾənd doʊm fəɹ ə silɪŋ, fɪld wɪð ɹoʊ ɑn ɹoʊ ʌv tɔl wʊɾən ʃɛlvz, itʃ sɝaʊndəd baɪ ə nɛɹoʊ wɔkweɪ fɔɹ peɪsɪz əbʌv ðə sɛvən-kʌlɝd flɔɹ taɪlz. tɔl læɾɝz stʊɾ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə ʃɛlvz, ɑn wilz soʊ ðeɪ kəd bi muvd izəli, boʊθ ɑn ðə flɔɹ ən ɑn ðə wɔkweɪz, ən mɪɹɝd bɹæs stænd-læmps wɪð beɪsəz soʊ hɛvi ðəɾ itʃ tʊk θɹi əɹ fɔɹ mɛn tə muv. faɪɝ wɑz ə kɑnstən kənsɝn ɪn ðə laɪbɹɛɹi. ðə stænd-læmps ɔl bɝn bɹaɪtli, ɹɛɾi tə laɪt ðə weɪ fəɹ ɛni sɪstɝ u wɑntəd tə faɪn ə bʊk əɹ bɑks mænjəskɹɪpt, bʌɾ ə ʃɛlv hændkɑɹt hoʊldɪŋ θɹi lɑɹdʒ lɛðɝ-keɪs vɑljumz tə bi ɹipleɪst wɑz stɪl ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv wʌn aɪl ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪt fɹəm ðə læs taɪm ʃi wɔk θɹu. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ðəɹ wɑz ɛni nid fəɹ dɪfɹən fɔɹmz ʌv ɛɹɪθmɛɾɪk əɹ waɪ soʊ mɛni bʊks hæd bɪn ɹɪɾən ɑn ðɛm, ən fəɹ ɔl ðə taʊɝ pɹaɪɾɪd ɪtsɛlf ɑn hævɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst kəlɛkʃən ə bʊks ɪn ðə wɝld, kʌvɝɪŋ ɛvɹi pɑsəbəl tɑpɪk, ɪt sim ðət moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ əɡɹid wɪð hɝ. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ ɪn ðə naɪnθ dɪpɑzətɔɹi, ðə ɹizən ʃi juzd ɪt fəɹ əɹ ɛntʃɹɪweɪ. ət ðə waɪɾ ɑɹtʃt dɔɹz, stændɪŋ ɪnvaɪɾɪŋli oʊpən, ʃi lɪsən əntɪl ʃi wɑz sæɾəsfaɪd ðət ðə kɔɹəɾɝ bɪɑnd wɑz ɛmpti bɪfɔɹ slɪpɪŋ aʊt. ɛniwʌn wʊɾə θɔɾ ɪt stʃɹeɪnʒ ðət ʃi hæd dɪvɛləpt ən ɪntʃɹəs fəɹ ðə bʊks ɪn ðɛɹ.

The Tower Library was divided into twelve depositories, at least insofar as the world knew, and the Ninth was the smallest, given over to texts on various forms of arithmetic, yet it was still a large chamber, a long oval with a flattened dome for a ceiling, filled with row on row of tall wooden shelves, each surrounded by a narrow walkway four paces above the seven-colored floor tiles. Tall ladders stood alongside the shelves, on wheels so they could be moved easily, both on the floor and on the walkways, and mirrored brass stand-lamps with bases so heavy that each took three or four men to move. Fire was a constant concern in the Library. The stand-lamps all burned brightly, ready to light the way for any sister who wanted to find a book or boxed manuscript, but a shelved handcart holding three large leather-cased volumes to be replaced was still in the middle of one aisle exactly where she remembered it from the last time she walked through. She did not understand why there was any need for different forms of arithmetic or why so many books had been written on them, and for all the Tower prided itself on having the greatest collection of books in the world, covering every possible topic, it seemed that most Aes Sedai agreed with her. She had never seen another sister in the Ninth Depository, the reason she used it for her entryway. At the wide arched doors, standing invitingly open, she listened until she was satisfied that the corridor beyond was empty before slipping out. Anyone would have thought it strange that she had developed an interest for the books in there.

əz ʃi hɝiɾ əlɔŋ ðə meɪn kɔɹɪɾɝz, wɛɹ ðə flɔɹ taɪlz wɝ leɪɾ ɪn ɹɪpiɾɪŋ ɹoʊz ə ði ədʒɑ kʌlɝz, ɪt keɪm tə hɝ ðət ðə laɪbɹɛɹi wɑz mɔɹ saɪlən ðən juʒəwəl, ivən kaʊntɪŋ haʊ fju ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə taʊɝ ət pɹɛzənt. ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ə sɪstɝ əɹ tu tə bi sin, ɪf oʊnli ðə laɪbɹɛɹiənz - səm bɹaʊnz æktʃəli  meɪnteɪn əpɑɹtməns ɪn ði ʌpɝ lɛvəlz ɪn ədɪʃən tə ðɛɹ ɹumz ɪn ðə taʊɝ - jɛt ðə hjudʒ fɪɡjɝz kɑɹvd ɪndə ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz' wɔlz, fænsɪfəli ɡɑɹb pipəl ən stʃɹeɪnʒ ænəməlz tɛn fit tɔl əɹ mɔɹ, maɪɾ əv bɪn ðə laɪbɹɛɹiz oʊnli ɪnhæbəɾənts. dʒɹæfs meɪd ði ɪntʃɹəkətli kɑɹv læmp wilz hæŋɪŋ tɛn peɪsɪz oʊvɝhɛd kɹik feɪnli ɑn ðɛɹ tʃeɪnz. hɝ fʊtstɛps simd ənnətʃɝəli laʊd, kæstɪŋ sɑft ɛkoʊz fɹəm ðə vɔltəd silɪŋ. "meɪ aɪ hɛlp ju?" ə wʊmənz vɔɪs sɛd kwaɪətli bɪhaɪn hɝ. stɑɹɾəld, ɑlviɛɝɪn spʌn ɝaʊnd, ɔlmoʊs dʒɹɑpɪŋ əɹ kloʊk, bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd kætʃ hɝsɛlf. "aɪ dʒʌst wɑntəd tə wɔk θɹu ðə laɪbɹɛɹi, zəmɛl," ʃi sɛd, ən ɪmiɾiətli fɛlt ə stæb ʌv ɪɹɪteɪʃən. ɪf ʃi wɑz dʒʌmpi ɪnʌf tə ɪkspleɪn hɝsɛlf tə ə laɪbɹɛɹiən, ðən ʃi ɹɪli dɪd nid tə teɪk ə ɡɹɪp bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹipɔɹɾəd tə mɛsænə. ʃi ɔlmoʊst wɑntəd tə tɛl zəmɛl wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ ɑn tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ, dʒʌs tə si wɛðɝ ðə wʊmən wəd flɪntʃ.

As she hurried along the main corridors, where the floor tiles were laid in repeating rows of the Ajah colors, it came to her that the Library was more silent than usual, even counting how few Aes Sedai remained in the Tower at present. There was always a sister or two to be seen, if only the librarians - some Browns actually maintained apartments in the upper levels in addition to their rooms in the Tower - yet the huge figures carved into the corridors' walls, fancifully garbed people and strange animals ten feet tall or more, might have been the Library's only inhabitants. Drafts made the intricately carved lamp wheels hanging ten paces overhead creak faintly on their chains. Her footsteps seemed unnaturally loud, casting soft echoes from the vaulted ceiling. "May I help you?" a woman's voice said quietly behind her. Startled, Alviarin spun around, almost dropping her cloak, before she could catch herself. "I just wanted to walk through the Library, Zemaille," she said, and immediately felt a stab of irritation. If she was jumpy enough to explain herself to a librarian, then she really did need to take a grip before she reported to Mesaana. She almost wanted to tell Zemaille what was happening on Tremalking, just to see whether the woman would flinch.

ðə blæn ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝz dɑɹk feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, bʌɾ ə tʌtʃ ə səm ənɹiɾəbəl ɪmoʊʃən ɔltɝd ðə pɪtʃ ə hɝ vɔɪs. tɔl ən vɛɹi lin, zəmɛl ɔlweɪz hɛl ðəɾ aʊɾɝ mæsk ə ɹɪzɝv ən dɪstəns, bʌɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn səspɛktəd ʃi wɑz lɛs ʃaɪ ðən ʃi pɹitɛndəd, ən lɛs plɛzənt. "ðæts kwaɪɾ ʌndɝstændəbəl. ðə laɪbɹɛɹi ɪz ɹɛsfəl, ən ɪts ə sæd taɪm fəɹ əs ɔl. ən sæɾɝ stɪl fəɹ ju, ʌv kɔɹs."

The bland expression on the Brown sister's dark face did not change, but a touch of some unreadable emotion altered the pitch of her voice. Tall and very lean, Zemaille always held that outer mask of reserve and distance, but Alviarin suspected she was less shy than she pretended, and less pleasant. "That's quite understandable. The Library is restful, and it's a sad time for us all. And sadder still for you, of course."

"ʌv kɔɹs," ɑlviɛɝɪn ɹɪpiɾɪd əz ɪf baɪ ɹoʊt. ə sæd taɪm? fəɹ əɹ ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ? ʃi kənsɪɾɝd dʒɹɔɪŋ ðə wʊmən tə səm sɪkluɾɪd kɔɹnɝ wɛɹ ʃi kəd bi kwɛstʃən ən dɪspoʊzd ʌv, bʌt ðən ʃi noʊɾəst ənʌðɝ bɹaʊn, ə ɹaʊnd wʊmən ivən dɑɹkɝ ðən zəmɛl, wɑtʃɪŋ əm fɹəm fɑɹðɝ daʊn ðə hɔl. eɪɾən ən zəmɛl wɝ wik ɪn ðə paʊɝ, jɛɾ oʊvɝkʌmɪŋ boʊθ ət wʌns wəd bi dɪfəkəlt ɪf ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl əɾ ɔl. waɪ wɝ ðeɪ boʊθ daʊn hɪɹ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn flɔɹ? ðə pɛɹ wɑz sɛldəm sin, ʃʌɾəlɪŋ bɪtwin ðə ɹumz ɑn ði ʌpɝ lɛvəlz ðeɪ ʃɛɹd wɪð naɪaɪn, ðə θɝd si foʊk sɪstɝ, ən ðə soʊ-kɔl θɝtinθ dɪpɑzətɔɹi, wɛɹ ðə sikɹət ɹɛkɝdz wɝ kɛpt. ɔl θɹi wɝk ðɛɹ, wɪlɪŋli ɪmɝs tə ðɛɹ nɛks ɪn ðɛɹ leɪbɝz. ʃi wɔkt ɑn ən tʃɹaɪd tə tɛl hɝsɛlf ʃi wɑz biɪŋ skɪɾɪʃ wɪθaʊt ɹizən, bʌt ðət dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə suð ðə pɹɪklɪŋ bɪtwin əɹ ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz.

"Of course," Alviarin repeated as if by rote. A sad time? For her in particular? She considered drawing the woman to some secluded corner where she could be questioned and disposed of, but then she noticed another Brown, a round woman even darker than Zemaille, watching them from farther down the hall. Aiden and Zemaille were weak in the Power, yet overcoming both at once would be difficult if it was possible at all. Why were they both down here on the ground floor? The pair was seldom seen, shuttling between the rooms on the upper levels they shared with Nyein, the third Sea Folk sister, and the so-called Thirteenth Depository, where the secret records were kept. All three worked there, willingly immersed to their necks in their labors. She walked on and tried to tell herself she was being skittish without reason, but that did nothing to soothe the prickling between her shoulder blades.

ðə læk ə laɪbɹɛɹiənz ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə fɹʌn ɛntʃɹəns oʊnli meɪd ðə pɹɪkəlz ɡɹoʊ. laɪbɹɛɹiənz ɔlweɪz stʊɾ əɾ ɛvɹi ɛntʃɹəns, tə meɪk ʃʊɹ nɑɾ ə skɹæp ə peɪpɝ lɛf ðə laɪbɹɛɹi wɪθaʊt ðɛɹ nɑlədʒ.

The lack of librarians guarding the front entrance only made the prickles grow. Librarians always stood at every entrance, to make sure not a scrap of paper left the library without their knowledge.

ɑlviɛɝɪn tʃænəl tə ʃʌv wʌn ə ðə tɔl kɑɹv dɔɹz oʊpən bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹitʃt ɪɾ ən lɛft ɪt stændɪŋ əɡeɪp ɑn ɪts bɹɑnz hɪnʒɪz əz ʃi hɝid daʊn ðə waɪd mɑɹbəl stɛɹz. ðə bɹɔd, oʊk-laɪn stoʊn pæθ ðət lɛd təwɔɹd ðə tɔl waɪt ʃæft ə ðə taʊɝ hæd bɪn ʃʌvəl klɪɹ, bʌɾ ɪf ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn, ʃi wʊɾə juz ðə paʊɝ tə mɛl ðə snoʊ əweɪ əhɛɾ ə hɝ, lɛɾ ɛniwʌn θɪŋk ʌv ɪt wʌt ðeɪ wʊd.

Alviarin channeled to shove one of the tall carved doors open before she reached it and left it standing agape on its bronze hinges as she hurried down the wide marble stairs. The broad, oak-lined stone path that led toward the tall white shaft of the Tower had been shoveled clear, but if it had not been, she would have used the Power to melt the snow away ahead of her, let anyone think of it what they would.

mɛsænə hæd meɪd kɹɪstəl klɪɹ ðə pɹaɪs ə teɪkɪŋ ðə ɹɪsk ðəɾ ɛniwʌn maɪt lɝn ðə wiv fəɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ, əɹ ivən ðət ʃi nu ɪt, ɛls ʃi wʊɾə tʃɹævəl fɹəm ðə spɑt. wɪð ðə taʊɝ ɪn saɪt, lumɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə tʃɹiz ən ɡlimɪŋ ɪn ðə peɪl mɔɹnɪŋ sʌnlaɪt, ʃi cʊɾə bɪn ðəɹ ɪn ə stɛp. ɪnstɛd, ʃi fɔt ði ɝdʒ tə ɹʌn.

Mesaana had made crystal clear the price of taking the risk that anyone might learn the weave for Traveling, or even that she knew it, else she would have Traveled from the spot. With the Tower in sight, looming over the trees and gleaming in the pale morning sunlight, she could have been there in a step. Instead, she fought the urge to run.

ɪt wɑz noʊ sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ðə taʊɝz waɪd, tɔl kɔɹɪɾɝz* eɪ mɑɹk faɪvhʌnʒɹədfaɪv ɛmpti. ə fju skɝiɪŋ sɝvəns wɪð ðə waɪt fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɑn ðɛɹ bɹɛsts bɑb ðɛɹ baʊz ən kɝtsiz əz ʃi pæst, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ noʊ mɔɹ juz, noʊ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ðən ðə dʒɹæfs ðət meɪd ðə ɡɪldɪd stænd-læmps nɪkɝ ən ɹɪpəl ðə bɹaɪt tæpəstʃɹiz hæŋɪŋ ɑn ðə snoʊi waɪt wɔlz. sɪstɝz kɛp tə ðɛɹ oʊn ədʒɑ kɔɹɾɝz əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl ðiz deɪz, ʌv kɔɹs, ən ənlɛs ʃi ɪnkaʊntɝɾ ə mɛmbɝ ə hɝ oʊn hɑɹt, ivən siɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃi nu wɑz blæk ədʒɑ wʊɾə bɪn jusləs. ʃi nu ðɛm, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ hɝ. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə ɹɪvil hɝsɛlf tə ɛniwʌn ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə.

It was no surprise to find the Tower's wide, tall corridors* A MARK 505 empty. A few scurrying servants with the white Flame of Tar Valon on their breasts bobbed their bows and curtsies as she passed, but they were no more use, no more important, than the drafts that made the gilded stand-lamps nicker and rippled the bright tapestries hanging on the snowy white walls. Sisters kept to their own Ajah quarters as much as possible these days, of course, and unless she encountered a member of her own heart, even seeing an Aes Sedai she knew was Black Ajah would have been useless. She knew them, but they did not know her. Besides, she was not about to reveal herself to anyone she did not have to.

pɝhæps səm ə ðoʊz mɑɹvələs ɪnstʃɹəməns fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ðət mɛsænə tɔkt əbaʊt wəɾ əlaʊ hɝ tə kwɛstʃən ɛni sɪstɝ ɪmiɾiətli wʌn deɪ, ɪf ðə wʊmən ɛvɝ æktʃəli  pɹədus ðɛm, bʌt naʊ ɪt wɑz stɪl ə mæɾɝ ə sɪfɝɾ ɔɹɾɝz lɛft ɑn pɪloʊz əɹ ɪn sikɹət spɑts. wʌt hæd wʌns simd ɔlmoʊst ɪnstəntæniəs ɹɪspɑnsɪz naʊ simd ɪntɝmɪnæbli dɪleɪd. ə stɑki bɔld-hɛɾəd sɝvɪŋ mæn meɪkɪŋ ɪz baʊ ɡʌlpt ɑɾəbli, ən ʃi smuðd əɹ fitʃɝz. ʃi pɹaɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf ɑn əɹ aɪsi dɪtætʃmənt, ɔlweɪz pɹɪzɛntɪŋ ə kul ənɹʌfəl sɝfəs. ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, skaʊlɪŋ əɹ weɪ ðoʊ ðə taʊɝ gɑnə tə ɡɛɾ əɹ ɪɡzækli noʊwɛɹ.

Perhaps some of those marvelous instruments from the Age of Legends that Mesaana talked about would allow her to question any sister immediately one day, if the woman ever actually produced them, but now it was still a matter of ciphered orders left on pillows or in secret spots. What had once seemed almost instantaneous responses now seemed interminably delayed. A stocky bald-headed serving man making his bow gulped audibly, and she smoothed her features. She prided herself on her icy detachment, always presenting a cool unruffled surface. In any event, scowling her way though the Tower was going to get her exactly nowhere.

ðəɹ wɑz wʌn pɝsən ɪn ðə taʊɝ ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi nu ɪɡzækli wɛɹ tə faɪnd, sʌmwʌn ʃi kəd dɪmæn ænsɝz fɹəm wɪð noʊ fɪɹ ʌv wʌt ðə wʊmən θɔt. ə lɪɾəl kɑʃən wɑz niɾəd ivən ðɛɹ, ʌv kɔɹs - kɛɹləs kwɛstʃənz ɹɪvil mɔɹ ðən moʊst ænsɝz wɝ wɝθ - bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə wəd tɛl əɹ ɛniθɪŋ. wɪð ə saɪ, ʃi bɪɡæn tə klaɪm.

There was one person in the Tower she was sure she knew exactly where to find, someone she could demand answers from with no fear of what the woman thought. A little caution was needed even there, of course - careless questions revealed more than most answers were worth - but Elaida would tell her anything. With a sigh, she began to climb.

mɛsænə hæd toʊld əɹ ʌv ənʌðɝ mɑɹvəl ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ðət ʃi wɪʃt vɛɹi mʌtʃ tə si, ə θɪŋ kɔld ə "lɪft." ðə flaɪɪŋ məʃinz saʊndəd mʌtʃ ɡɹændɝ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz fɑɹ iziɝ tə ɛnvɪʒən ə məkænɪkəl kəntʃɹaɪvəns ðət wɪsk jə fɹəm flɔɹ tə flɔɹ. ʃi wɑz nɑt ɹɪli sɝɾən ðət bɪldɪŋz sɛvɹəl taɪmz əz haɪ əz ðə waɪt taʊɝ kəd ɹɪli hæv ɪɡzɪstəd, iðɝ - ɪn ðə hoʊl wɝld, nɑɾ ivən ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ ɹaɪvəl ðə taʊɝz haɪt - bʌt dʒʌs noʊɪŋ əbaʊt "lɪfs" meɪd klaɪmɪŋ ʌp spaɪɹəlɪŋ hɔlweɪz ən swipɪŋ flaɪts ə stɛɹz sim ləbɔɹiəs. ʃi dɪd pɔz ət ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi, oʊnli θɹi lɛvəlz ʌp, bʌɾ əz ɪkspɛktəd, boʊθ ɹumz wɝ ɛmpti, ðə bɛɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəlz pɑlɪʃt tɪl ðeɪ ʃoʊn. ðə ɹumz ðɛmsɛlvz sim bɛɹ, wɪð noʊ wɔl hæŋʒɪŋz, noʊ ɔɹnəməns, nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl bʌt ðə teɪbəlz ən tʃɛɹz ən ənlɪt stænd-læmps. ɪleɪɾə ɹɛɹli keɪm daʊn fɹəm əɹ əpɑɹtməns nɪɹ ðə taʊɝz pik ɛnimɔɹ. ðət hæd simd æksɛptəbəl ət wʌn taɪm, sɪns ɪɾ aɪsəleɪɾəd ðə wʊmən ivən mɔɹ fɹəm ðə ɹɛst ə ðə taʊɝ. fju sɪstɝz meɪd ðət klaɪm wɪlɪŋli. tədeɪ, ðoʊ, baɪ ðə taɪm ɑlviɛɝɪn hæd klaɪm kloʊz tə eɪɾi spænz, ʃi wɑz sɪɹiəsli kənsɪɾɝɪŋ meɪkɪŋ ɪleɪɾə muv bæk daʊn. ɪleɪɾəz weɪɾɪŋ ɹum wɑz ɛmpti, ʌv kɔɹs, ðoʊ ə foʊldɝ ə peɪpɝz sɪɾɪŋ ətɑp ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl sɛd sʌmwʌn hæd bɪn ðɛɹ. siɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ kənteɪnd, ən dəsaɪɾɪŋ wɛðɝ ɪleɪɾə niɾəd tə bi pʌnɪʃt fəɹ hævɪŋ ɪt, kəd weɪt, ðoʊ. ɑlviɛɝɪn tɔst əɹ kloʊk daʊn ɑn ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl ən pʊʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ, nuli kɑɹvd wɪð ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən əweɪɾɪŋ ðə ɡɪldɝ, ðət lɛd dipɝ ɪndə ði əpɑɹtməns.

Mesaana had told her of another marvel of the Age of Legends that she wished very much to see, a thing called a "lift." The flying machines sounded much grander, of course, but it was far easier to envision a mechanical contrivance that whisked you from floor to floor. She was not really certain that buildings several times as high as the White Tower could really have existed, either - in the whole world, not even the Stone of Tear rivaled the Tower's height - but just knowing about "lifts" made climbing up spiraling hallways and sweeping flights of stairs seem laborious. She did pause at the Amyrlin's study, only three levels up, but as expected, both rooms were empty, the bare writing tables polished till they shone. The rooms themselves seemed bare, with no wall hangings, no ornaments, nothing at all but the tables and chairs and unlit stand-lamps. Elaida rarely came down from her apartments near the Tower's peak anymore. That had seemed acceptable at one time, since it isolated the woman even more from the rest of the Tower. Few sisters made that climb willingly. Today, though, by the time Alviarin had climbed close to eighty spans, she was seriously considering making Elaida move back down. Elaida's waiting room was empty, of course, though a folder of papers sitting atop the writing table said someone had been there. Seeing what they contained, and deciding whether Elaida needed to be punished for having it, could wait, though. Alviarin tossed her cloak down on the writing table and pushed open the door, newly carved with the Flame of Tar Valon and awaiting the gilder, that led deeper into the apartments.

ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd ət ðə sɝdʒ ə ɹɪlif ʃi fɛlt ət siɪŋ ɪleɪɾə sɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðə stɑɹkli kɑɹvd ən ɡɪldɪd ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl, ðə sɛvən-stʃɹaɪpt - noʊ, sɪks-stʃɹaɪpt, naʊ - stoʊl ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk ən ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn pɪkt aʊɾ ɪn munstoʊnz əmʌŋ ðə ɡoʊldwɝk ɑn ðə haɪ tʃɛɹbæk əbʌv əɹ hɛd. ə nɪɡəlɪŋ wɝi ðət ʃi hæd nɑt lɛt sɝfəs əntɪl naʊ hæd bɪn ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðət ðə wʊmən wɑz dɛɾ ɪn səm ful æksəɾənt. ðət wʊɾə ɪkspleɪn zəmɛlz kɑmɛnt. tʃuzɪŋ ə nu æmɪɝlɪn cʊɾə teɪkən mʌnθs, ivən wɪð ðə ɹɛbəlz ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls kənfɹʌntɪŋ ðɛm, bʌɾ əɹ deɪz əz kipɝ wʊɾə bɪn nʌmbɝd. wʌt sɝpɹaɪzd əɹ mɔɹ ðən əɹ ɹɪlif, ðoʊ, wɑz ðə pɹɛzəns ə mɔɹ ðən hæf ðə sɪɾɝz ɪn ðə hɔl stændɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl ɪn ðɛɹ fɹɪnd ʃɔlz. ɪleɪɾə nu bɛɾɝ ðən tə ɛntɝteɪn ðɪs sɔɹɾ ə dɛləɡeɪʃən wɪθaʊɾ əɹ pɹizɛnt. ðə hjudʒ ɡɪldɪd keɪs klɑk əɡɛns ðə wɔl, ə vʌlɡɑɹli oʊvɝ-ɔɹnəmɛntɪd pis, tʃaɪm twaɪs fəɹ haɪ, smɔl ɪnæməl fɪɡjɝz ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ pɑpɪŋ aʊɾ ə taɪni dɔɹz ɪn ɪts fɹʌn əz ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə tɛl ðə sɪɾɝz ðət ʃi niɾəd tə kənfɝ wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn pɹaɪvətli. ðeɪ wəd liv wɪð lɪɾəl hɛmɪŋ əɹ hɔɪŋ. eɪ kipɝ hæd noʊ əθɔɹəɾi tə ɔɹɾɝ əm aʊt, bʌt ðeɪ nu ðəɾ əɹ əθɔɹəɾi ɪkstɛndəd bɪɑn ðəɾ əɹ stoʊl kənfɝɾ ivən ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə səspɛk haʊ ðət kəd bi.

She was surprised at the surge of relief she felt at seeing Elaida sitting behind the starkly carved and gilded writing table, the seven-striped - no, six-striped, now - stole around her neck and the Flame of Tar Valon picked out in moonstones among the goldwork on the high chairback above her head. A niggling worry that she had not let surface until now had been the possibility that the woman was dead in some fool accident. That would have explained Zemaille's comment. Choosing a new Amyrlin could have taken months, even with the rebels and everything else confronting them, but her days as Keeper would have been numbered. What surprised her more than her relief, though, was the presence of more than half the Sitters in the Hall standing in front of the writing table in their fringed shawls. Elaida knew better than to entertain this sort of delegation without her present. The huge gilded case clock against the wall, a vulgarly over-ornamented piece, chimed twice for High, small enameled figures of Aes Sedai popping out of tiny doors in its front as she opened her mouth to tell the Sitters that she needed to confer with the Amyrlin privately. They would leave with little hemming or hawing. A Keeper had no authority to order them out, but they knew that her authority extended beyond that her stole conferred even if they did not begin to suspect how that could be.

"ɑlviɛɝɪn," ɪleɪɾə sɛd, saʊndɪŋ sɝpɹaɪzd, bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd ɡɛɾ ə wɝɾ aʊt. ðə hɑɹdnəs ʌv ɪleɪɾəz feɪs sɔfən ɪn wʌɾ ɔlmoʊst sim plɛʒɝ. hɝ maʊθ kwɝkt kloʊs tə ə smaɪl. ɪleɪɾə hæd hæd noʊ ɹizənz tə smaɪl ɪn səm taɪm. "stæn oʊvɝ ðəɹ ən bi kwaɪəɾ əntɪl aɪ hæv taɪm tə dil wɪð ju," ʃi sɛd, weɪvɪŋ ən ɪmpɪɹiəs hæn təwɔɹɾ ə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə ɹum. ðə sɪɾɝz ʃɪftəd ðɛɹ fiɾ ən ədʒʌstəd ðɛɹ ʃɔlz. swænə, ə bifi wʊmən, ɡeɪv ɑlviɛɝɪn ə taɪt ɡlæns, ən ʃɛvən, tɔl əz ə mæn ən æŋɡjəlɝ, stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əɾ əɹ wɪð noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən, bʌt ði ʌðɝz əvɔɪɾəd miɾɪŋ əɹ aɪ.

"Alviarin," Elaida said, sounding surprised, before she could get a word out. The hardness of Elaida's face softened in what almost seemed pleasure. Her mouth quirked close to a smile. Elaida had had no reasons to smile in some time. "Stand over there and be quiet until I have time to deal with you," she said, waving an imperious hand toward a corner of the room. The Sitters shifted their feet and adjusted their shawls. Suana, a beefy woman, gave Alviarin a tight glance, and Shevan, tall as a man and angular, stared straight at her with no expression, but the others avoided meeting her eye.

stʌnd, ʃi stʊd stɑk-stɪl ɑn ðə bɹaɪtli pæɾɝnd sɪlk kɑɹpət, ɡeɪpɪŋ. ðɪs kəd nɑt bi mɪɹ ɹɪbɛljən ɑn ɪleɪɾəz pɑɹt - ðə wʊmən wəɾ əv tə bi ɪnseɪn! - bʌt wʌɾ ɪn ðə neɪm ə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd hæd hæpən tə ɡɪv əɹ ðə nɝv? wʌt? ɪleɪɾəz hæn slæp ðə teɪbəltɑp wɪð ə laʊd kɹæk, ə bloʊ ðət meɪd wʌn ə ðə lækɝd bɑksəz ðəɹ ɹæɾəl. "wɛn aɪ tɛl jə tə stæn ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ, dɔɾɝ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə loʊ, deɪnʒɝəs vɔɪs, "aɪ ɪkspɛk jə tə oʊbeɪ." hɝ aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd. "ɔɹ ʃæl aɪ sʌmən ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz soʊ ðiz sɪstɝz kən wɪtnəs jəɹ 'pɹaɪvət' pɛnəns?" hit səfjuzd ɑlviɛɝɪnz feɪs, pɑɹt hjumɪlieɪʃən ən pɑɹɾ æŋɡɝ. tə hæv ɛniwʌn hɪɹ sətʃ θɪŋz sɛd, ən tə hɝ feɪs! fɪɹ bʌbəld ɪn hɝ, tu, tɝnɪŋ əɹ stʌmək tə æsəd. ə fju wɝdz fɹəm hɝ, ən ɪleɪɾə wəd stæn əkjuzd ə sɛndɪŋ sɪstɝz tə dɪzæstɝ ən kæptɪvəɾi, nɑt wʌns bʌt twaɪs. ɹumɝz hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡʌn swɝlɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪvɛns ɪn kɛɹhin; mɝki ɹumɝz, bʌt ɡɹoʊɪŋ mɔɹ sɝɾən baɪ ðə deɪ.

Stunned, she stood stock-still on the brightly patterned silk carpet, gaping. This could not be mere rebellion on Elaida's part - the woman would have to be insane! - but what in the name of the Great Lord had happened to give her the nerve? What? Elaida's hand slapped the tabletop with a loud crack, a blow that made one of the lacquered boxes there rattle. "When I tell you to stand in the corner, Daughter," she said in a low, dangerous voice, "I expect you to obey." Her eyes glittered. "Or shall I summon the Mistress of Novices so these sisters can witness your 'private' penance?" Heat suffused Alviarin's face, part humiliation and part anger. To have anyone hear such things said, and to her face! Fear bubbled in her, too, turning her stomach to acid. A few words from her, and Elaida would stand accused of sending sisters to disaster and captivity, not once but twice. Rumors had already begun swirling about events in Cairhien; murky rumors, but growing more certain by the day.

ən wʌns ɪt wɑz lɝn ðəɾ ɑn tɑp ə ðæt, ɪleɪɾə hæd sɛn fɪfti sɪstɝz tə tʃɹaɪ tə dɪfit hʌnʒɹədz ə mɛn u kəd tʃænəl, nɑɾ ivən ði ɛɡzɪstəns ə ðə ɹɛbəl sɪstɝz wɪntɝɪŋ ɪn mʊɹændi wɪð ðɛɹ ɑɹmi wəd kip ði æmɪɝlɪnz stoʊl ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, əɹ əɹ hɛd. ʃi kəd nɑt dɛɹ tə də ðɪs. ənlɛs. . . .

And once it was learned that on top of that, Elaida had sent fifty sisters to try to defeat hundreds of men who could channel, not even the existence of the rebel sisters wintering in Murandy with their army would keep the Amyrlin's stole on her shoulders, or her head. She could not dare to do this. Unless. . . .

ənlɛs ʃi kəd dɪskɹɛɾət ɑlviɛɝɪn əz blæk ədʒɑ. ðət maɪt ɡeɪn əɹ ə lɪɾəl taɪm. oʊnli ə lɪɾəl, ʃʊɹli, wʌns ðə fæks əbaʊt dəməaɪz wɛlz ən ðə blæk taʊɝ wɝ noʊn, bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə maɪt bi ɹɛɾi tə ɡɹæsp ət stʃɹɔz. noʊ, ɪt wɑz nɑt pɑsəbəl, kəd nɑt bi pɑsəbəl.

Unless she could discredit Alviarin as Black Ajah. That might gain her a little time. Only a little, surely, once the facts about Dumai's Wells and the Black Tower were known, but Elaida might be ready to grasp at straws. No, it was not possible, could not be possible.

flaɪt sɝɾənli wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ɪf ɪleɪɾə wɑz ɹɛɾi tə leɪ tʃɑɹdʒəz, flaɪt wəɾ oʊnli kənfɝm ðɛm. fəɹ ənʌðɝ, mɛsænə wəd faɪn əɹ ən kɪl əɹ ɪf ʃi flɛd. ɔl ðət flæʃt θɹu hɝ hɛɾ əz ʃi muvd ɑn lɛɾən fit tə stæn ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ laɪk ə pɛnɪɾɪnt nɑvəs. ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ tə ɹɪkʌvɝ fɹəm ðɪs, wʌtɛvɝ hæd hæpənd. ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ə weɪ tə ɹɪkʌvɝ. lɪsnɪŋ maɪt faɪn ɪt fəɹ hɝ. ʃi wəɾ əv pɹeɪd, ɪf ðə dɑɹk lɔɹd lɪsən tə pɹɛɹz.

Flight certainly was impossible. For one thing, if Elaida was ready to lay charges, flight would only confirm them. For another, Mesaana would find her and kill her if she fled. All that flashed through her head as she moved on leaden feet to stand in the corner like a penitent novice. There had to be a way to recover from this, whatever had happened. There was always a way to recover. Listening might find it for her. She would have prayed, if the Dark Lord listened to prayers.

ɪleɪɾə stʌɾid əɹ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən ɡeɪv ə sæɾəsfaɪd nɑd. ðə wʊmənz aɪz stɪl ʃoʊn wɪð ɪmoʊʃən, ðoʊ. lɪftɪŋ ðə lɪɾ ʌv wʌn ə ðə θɹi lækɝd bɑksəz ɑn əɹ teɪbəl, ʃi tʊk aʊɾ ə smɔl, eɪdʒ-dɑɹkən aɪvɝi kɑɹvɪŋ ʌv ə tɝɾəl ən stʃɹoʊkt ɪt bɪtwin əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. fɑndəlɪŋ ðə kɑɹvɪŋz ɪn ðət bɑks wɑz ə hæbət ʃi hæd wən ʃi wɑntəd tə suð əɹ nɝvz. "naʊ," ʃi sɛd. "ju wɝ ɪkspleɪnɪŋ tə mi waɪ aɪ ʃəɾ ɛntɝ nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz." "wi wɝ nɑɾ æskɪŋ pɝmɪʃən, mʌðɝ," swænə sɛd ʃɑɹpli, θɹʌstɪŋ əɹ tʃɪn aʊt. ʃi hæd tu mʌtʃ tʃɪn, ə skwɛɹ stoʊn ʌv ɪt, ən ði ɛɹəɡəns tə θɹʌst ɪɾ əɾ ɛniwʌn. "ə dɪsɪʒən ə ðɪs sɔɹt bɪlɔŋz tə ðə hɔl. ðəɹ ɪz stʃɹɔŋ filɪŋ ɪn feɪvɝ ʌv ɪɾ ɪn ðə jɛloʊ ədʒɑ." wɪtʃ mɛnt ʃi hæd stʃɹɔŋ filɪŋz. ʃi wɑz ðə hɛɾ ə ðə jɛloʊ ədʒɑ, ðə fɝst wivɝ, sʌmθɪŋ ɑlviɛɝɪn nu kəz ðə blæk ədʒɑ nu ɔl ði ədʒɑ sikɹəts, əɹ nɪɹli ɔl, ən ɪn swænəz vju, hɝ əpɪnjənz wɝ əɹ ədʒɑz əpɪnjənz. dʌsin, ði ʌðɝ jɛloʊ pɹɛzənt, aɪd swænə saɪdweɪz, bʌt sɛd nʌθɪŋ. peɪl ən bɔɪɪʃli slɪm, dʌsin lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli wɑnə bi ðɛɹ, ə pɹɪɾi, sʌlki bɔɪ hu hæd bɪn dʒɹæɡd sʌmwɛɹ baɪ hɪz ɪɹ. sɪɾɝz ɔfən bɔkt əɾ ɑɹm-twɪstɪŋ fɹəm ðɛɹ ədʒɑz hɛd, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt bɪɑn pɑsəbɪləɾi ðət swænə hæd faʊn səm weɪ.

Elaida studied her for a moment, then gave a satisfied nod. The woman's eyes still shone with emotion, though. Lifting the lid of one of the three lacquered boxes on her table, she took out a small, age-darkened ivory carving of a turtle and stroked it between her fingers. Fondling the carvings in that box was a habit she had when she wanted to soothe her nerves. "Now," she said. "You were explaining to me why I should enter negotiations." "We were not asking permission, Mother," Suana said sharply, thrusting her chin out. She had too much chin, a square stone of it, and the arrogance to thrust it at anyone. "A decision of this sort belongs to the Hall. There is strong feeling in favor of it in the Yellow Ajah." Which meant she had strong feelings. She was the head of the Yellow Ajah, the First Weaver, something Alviarin knew because the Black Ajah knew all the Ajah secrets, or nearly all, and in Suana's view, her opinions were her Ajah's opinions. Doesine, the other Yellow present, eyed Suana sideways, but said nothing. Pale and boyishly slim, Doesine looked as if she did not really want to be there, a pretty, sulky boy who had been dragged somewhere by his ear. Sitters often balked at arm-twisting from their Ajah's head, yet it was not beyond possibility that Suana had found some way.

"mɛni waɪts ɔlsoʊ səpɔɹt tɔks," fɛɹən sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ dɪstʃɹæktɪdli əɾ ən ɪŋk steɪn ɑn wʌn plʌmp fɪŋɡɝ. "ɪɾ ɪz ðə lɑdʒɪkəl θɪŋ tə du, ʌndɝ ðə pɹɛzən sɝkəmstænsəz." ʃi wɑz fɝst ɹizənɝ, hɛɾ ə ðə waɪɾ ədʒɑ, bʌt lɛs laɪkli ðən swænə tə teɪk əɹ oʊn vjuz fəɹ ðoʊz ə ði ɪntaɪɝ ədʒɑ. ə lɪɾəl lɛs laɪkli. fɛɹən ɔfən simd əz veɪɡ əz ðə wɝst ə ðə bɹaʊnz - ðə lɔŋ blæk hɛɹ ðət fɹeɪmd əɹ ɹaʊn feɪs niɾəd ə bɹʌʃ, ən pɑɹɾ ə ðə fɹɪnʒ ɑn əɹ ʃɔl əpɪɹd tə hæv bɪn dɪp kɛɹləsli ɪn əɹ bɹɛkfəs ti - bʌt ʃi kəd kætʃ ðə slaɪɾəst kɹæk ɪn ðə lɑdʒɪk ʌv ən ɑɹɡjəmənt. ʃi maɪt wɛl əv bɪn ðəɹ baɪ hɝsɛlf kəz ʃi sɪmpli dɪd nɑt bɪliv ʃi niɾəd ɛni əsɪstəns fɹəm ði ʌðɝ waɪt sɪɾɝz.

"Many Whites also support talks," Ferane said, frowning distractedly at an ink stain on one plump finger. "It is the logical thing to do, under the present circumstances." She was First Reasoner, head of the White Ajah, but less likely than Suana to take her own views for those of the entire Ajah. A little less likely. Ferane often seemed as vague as the worst of the Browns - the long black hair that framed her round face needed a brush, and part of the fringe on her shawl appeared to have been dipped carelessly in her breakfast tea - but she could catch the slightest crack in the logic of an argument. She might well have been there by herself because she simply did not believe she needed any assistance from the other White Sitters.

linɪŋ bæk ɪn əɹ tɔl tʃɛɹ, ɪleɪɾə bɪɡæn tə ɡlaʊɝ, hɝ fɪŋɡɝz stʃɹoʊkɪŋ fæstɝ ɑn ðə tɝɾəl, ən ændaɪə spoʊk ʌp kwɪkli, nɑt kwaɪt lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪleɪɾə waɪl pɹitɛndɪŋ tə ədʒʌs ðə sɛɾ ə hɝ ɡɹeɪ-fɹɪnd ʃɔl əlɔŋ əɹ ɑɹmz.

Leaning back in her tall chair, Elaida began to glower, her fingers stroking faster on the turtle, and Andaya spoke up quickly, not quite looking at Elaida while pretending to adjust the set of her gray-fringed shawl along her arms.

"ðə pɔɪnt, mʌðɝ, ɪz ðət wi mʌs faɪn ə weɪ tə ɛn ðɪs pisfəli," ʃi sɛd, ðə tæɹɑbənɝ æksɛn stʃɹɔŋ ɪn əɹ spitʃ əz ɪt wɑz wən ʃi fɛlt ənizi. fɹikwənli dɪfəɾənt ɝaʊn ɪleɪɾə, ʃi ɡlænst ət jukɪɝi əz ðoʊ hoʊpɪŋ fəɹ səpɔɹt, bʌt ðə slɛndɝ lɪɾəl wʊmən tɝn əɹ hɛɾ əsaɪd slaɪtli. jukɪɝi wɑz ɹɪmɑɹkəbli stʌbɝn fəɹ sətʃ ə taɪni wʊmən; ənlaɪk dʌsin, ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv ɹɪspɑndɪd tə ɑɹm-twɪstɪŋ. soʊ waɪ wɑz ʃi hɪɹ ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi? ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðət ʃi wɑz ɑn əɹ oʊn, ændaɪə ɹʌʃt ɑn. "ɪt mʌs nɑt bi əlaʊd tə kʌm tə faɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹits ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. əɹ ɪn ðə taʊɝ; ɪspɛʃli nɑt ðæt; nɑɾ əɡɛn. soʊ fɑɹ, ðə ɹɛbəlz sim kɑntɛn tə sɪɾ ən wɑtʃ ðə sɪɾi, bʌt ðət kænɑt læst. ðeɪv ɹiɾɪskʌvɝd haʊ tə tʃɹævəl, mʌðɝ, ən əv juzd ɪt tə kæɹi ən ɑɹmi əkɹɔs hʌnʒɹədz ə liɡz. wi mʌs bɪɡɪn tɔks bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ dɪsaɪd tə juz tʃɹævlɪŋ tə bɹɪŋ ðəɾ ɑɹmi ɪndə tɑɹ vəlɑn, əɹ ɔl ɪz lɔst ivən ɪf wi wɪn."

"The point, Mother, is that we must find a way to end this peacefully," she said, the Taraboner accent strong in her speech as it was when she felt uneasy. Frequently diffident around Elaida, she glanced at Yukiri as though hoping for support, but the slender little woman turned her head aside slightly. Yukiri was remarkably stubborn for such a tiny woman; unlike Doesine, she would not have responded to arm-twisting. So why was she here if she did not want to be? Realizing that she was on her own, Andaya rushed on. "It must not be allowed to come to fighting in the streets of Tar Valon. Or in the Tower; especially not that; not again. So far, the rebels seem content to sit and watch the city, but that cannot last. They have rediscovered how to Travel, Mother, and have used it to carry an army across hundreds of leagues. We must begin talks before they decide to use Traveling to bring that army into Tar Valon, or all is lost even if we win."

fɪsts nɑɾɪd ɪn əɹ skɝts, ɑlviɛɝɪn swɑloʊd hɑɹd. ʃi θɔɾ əɹ aɪz maɪt pɑp aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd. ðə ɹɛbəlz nu haʊ tə tʃɹævəl? ðeɪ wɝ hɪɹ ət tɑɹ vəlɑn ɔlɹɛɾi? ən ðiz fulz wɑntəd tə tɔk? ʃi kəd si kɛɹfəli leɪd plænz, kɛɹfəli ɝeɪnʒd dɪzaɪnz, ɪvæpɝeɪɾɪŋ laɪk mɪst ɪn ə sʌmɝ sʌn. pɝhæps ðə dɑɹk lɔɹd wəd lɪsən, ɪf ʃi pɹeɪd vɛɹi hɑɹd. ɪleɪɾəz skaʊl dɪd nɑt dɪmɪnɪʃ, bʌt ʃi sɛt ði aɪvɝi tɝɾəl daʊn vɛɹi kɛɹfəli, ən əɹ vɔɪs keɪm kloʊs tə nɔɹməl. ði oʊl nɔɹməl, bɪfɔɹ ɑlviɛɝɪn ɹeɪn əɹ ɪn, wɪð ə stil kɔɹ bɪniθ ðə sɔfnəs ə ðə wɝdz. "du ðə bɹaʊn ən ðə ɡɹin ɔlsoʊ səpɔɹt tɔks?"

Fists knotted in her skirts, Alviarin swallowed hard. She thought her eyes might pop out of her head. The rebels knew how to Travel? They were here at Tar Valon already? And these fools wanted to talk? She could see carefully laid plans, carefully arranged designs, evaporating like mist in a summer sun. Perhaps the Dark Lord would listen, if she prayed very hard. Elaida's scowl did not diminish, but she set the ivory turtle down very carefully, and her voice came close to normal. The old normal, before Alviarin reined her in, with a steel core beneath the softness of the words. "Do the Brown and the Green also support talks?"

"ðə bɹaʊn," ʃɛvən bɪɡæn, ðən pɝst əɹ lɪps ɪn θɔɾ ən vɪzəbli tʃeɪnʒd wʌt ʃi hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə seɪ. aʊtwɝdli, ʃi simd ʌɾɝli kəmpoʊzd, jɛt ʃi wɑz ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ lɔŋ θʌmz əɡɛnst əɹ boʊni fɔɹfɪŋɝz ʌnkɑnʃəsli. "ðə bɹaʊn ɪz kwaɪt klɪɹ ɑn ðə hɪstɔɹɪkəl pɹɛsəɾənts. juv ɔl ɹɛd ðə sikɹət hɪstɝiz, əɹ ʃəd hæv. wɛnɛvɝ ðə taʊɝ əz bɪn dɪvaɪɾəd əɡɛnst ɪtsɛlf, dɪzæstɝ əz stʃɹʌk ðə wɝld. wɪð ðə læs bæɾəl lumɪŋ, ɪn ə wɝl ðət kənteɪnz ðə blæk taʊɝ, wi kən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əfɔɹd tə ɹɪmeɪn dɪvaɪɾəd ə deɪ lɔŋɡɝ ðən nid bi."

"The Brown," Shevan began, then pursed her lips in thought and visibly changed what she had intended to say. Outwardly, she seemed utterly composed, yet she was rubbing her long thumbs against her bony forefingers unconsciously. "The Brown is quite clear on the historical precedents. You have all read the secret histories, or should have. Whenever the Tower has been divided against itself, disaster has struck the world. With the Last Battle looming, in a world that contains the Black Tower, we can no longer afford to remain divided a day longer than need be."

ɪt hɑɹdli sim ðəɾ ɪleɪɾəz feɪs kəd ɡɹoʊ dɑɹkɝ, bʌt mɛnʃən ə ðə blæk taʊɝ dɪɾ ɪt.

It hardly seemed that Elaida's face could grow darker, but mention of the Black Tower did it.

"æn ðə ɡɹin?" hɝ vɔɪs wɑz stɪl kəntʃɹoʊld.

"And the Green?" Her voice was still controlled.

ɔl θɹi ɡɹin sɪɾɝz wɝ ðɛɹ, ɪndəkeɪɾɪŋ vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ səpɔɹɾ əmʌŋ ðɛɹ ədʒɑ, əɹ hɛvi pɹɛʃɝ fɹəm ðə hɛɾ ə ðə ɡɹin. əz sinjɝ, tælin ʃʊɾə ænsɝɾ ɪleɪɾə - ɡɹinz stʌk tə ðɛɹ haɪɹɑɹkiz ɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ - bʌt ðə tɔl, ɡoʊldɪnhɛɹd wʊmən ɡlænst ət jukɪɝi fəɹ səm ɹizən, ðən dʒʌst əz ɑdli, ət dʌsin, ən pʊɾ əɹ aɪz ɑn ðə kɑɹpəɾ ən stʊd plʌkɪŋ əɾ əɹ ɡɹin sɪlk skɝts.

All three Green Sitters were there, indicating very strong support among their Ajah, or heavy pressure from the head of the Green. As senior, Talene should have answered Elaida - Greens stuck to their hierarchies in everything - but the tall, goldenhaired woman glanced at Yukiri for some reason, then just as oddly, at Doesine, and put her eyes on the carpet and stood plucking at her green silk skirts.

ɹinə fɹaʊn feɪnli, ɹɪŋkəlɪŋ əɹ ʌptɝnd noʊz ɪn pʌzəlmənt, bʌt ʃi hæd wɔɹn ðə ʃɔl fəɹ fjuɝ ðən fɪfti jɪɹz, soʊ ɪt wɑz lɛf tə ɹubɪn tə ɹɪplaɪ. ə stɝɾi wʊmən, ɹubɪn əpɪɹd ʃɔɹɾ ən stɑki əlɔŋsaɪd tælin, ən ɔlmoʊs pleɪn dɪspaɪɾ aɪz ðə kʌlɝ ə sæfaɪɝz.

Rina frowned faintly, wrinkling her upturned nose in puzzlement, but she had worn the shawl for fewer than fifty years, so it was left to Rubinde to reply. A sturdy woman, Rubinde appeared short and stocky alongside Talene, and almost plain despite eyes the color of sapphires.

"aɪ æm ɪnstʃɹʌktəd tə meɪk ðə seɪm pɔɪns əz ʃɛvən," ʃi sɛd, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə stɑɹɾəld lʊk ðət ɹinə ɡeɪv hɝ. pleɪnli ðəɹ hæd bɪn pɹɛʃɝ fɹəm ædlɔɹnə, ðə ɡɹin 'kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl,' ən pleɪnli ɹubɪn dɪsəɡɹiɾ ɪf ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə meɪk ɪt pʌblɪk. "tɑɹmən ɡdən ɪz kʌmɪŋ, ðə blæk taʊɝ ɪz ɔlmoʊst əz ɡɹeɪɾ ə θɹɛt, ən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz mɪsɪŋ, ɪf i ɪzən dɛd. wi kən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əfɔɹd tə bi dɪvaɪɾəd. ɪf ændaɪə kən tɔk ðə ɹɛbəlz bæk ɪndə ðə taʊɝ, ðən wi mʌs lɛɾ əɹ tʃɹaɪ."

"I am instructed to make the same points as Shevan," she said, ignoring the startled look that Rina gave her. Plainly there had been pressure from Adelorna, the Green 'Captain-General,' and plainly Rubinde disagreed if she was willing to make it public. "Tarmon Gai'don is coming, the Black Tower is almost as great a threat, and the Dragon Reborn is missing, if he isn't dead. We can no longer afford to be divided. If Andaya can talk the rebels back into the Tower, then we must let her try."

"aɪ si," ɪleɪɾə sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt toʊn. bʌt stʃɹeɪnʒli, hɝ kʌlɝ ɪmpɹuvd, ən ðə hɪn ʌv ə smaɪl ivən tʌtʃt əɹ maʊθ. "ðɛn baɪ ɔl minz, tɔk əm bæk, ɪf jə kæn. bʌt maɪ iɾɪkts stænd. ðə blu ədʒɑ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪɡzɪsts, ən ɛvɹi sɪstɝ u fɑloʊz ðət tʃaɪld ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ mʌst sɝv pɛnəns ʌndɝ maɪ ɡaɪɾəns bɪfɔɹ ʃi kən bi ɹiədmɪɾɪd tə ɛni ədʒɑ. aɪ ɪntɛn tə wɛl ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪndə ə wɛpən tə juz ət tɑɹmən ɡdən."

"I see," Elaida said in a flat tone. But strangely, her color improved, and the hint of a smile even touched her mouth. "Then by all means, talk them back, if you can. But my edicts stand. The Blue Ajah no longer exists, and every sister who follows that child Egwene al'Vere must serve penance under my guidance before she can be readmitted to any Ajah. I intend to weld the White Tower into a weapon to use at Tarmon Gai'don."

fɛɹən ən swænə oʊpən ðɛɹ maʊðz, pɹoʊɾɛst peɪntəɾ ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz, bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə kʌɾ əm ɔf wɪð ə ɹeɪz hænd. "aɪ hæv spoʊkən, dɔɾɝz. liv mi naʊ. ən si tə jəɹ . . . tɔks." ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ðə sɪɾɝz kəd də ʃɔɹɾ ʌv oʊpən dɪfaɪəns.

Ferane and Suana opened their mouths, protest painted on their faces, but Elaida cut them off with a raised hand. "I have spoken, daughters. Leave me now. And see to your . . . talks." There was nothing the Sitters could do short of open defiance.

wʌt wɑz ðə hɔlz ɹaɪt wɑz ðɛɹz, bʌt ðə hɔl sɛldəm dɛɹɾ ɪnfɹɪnʒ fɑɹ ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn sits əθɔɹəɾi. nɑɾ ənlɛs ðə hɔl wɑz junaɪɾəd əɡɛns ði æmɪɝlɪn, ən ðɪs hɔl wɑz ɛniθɪŋ bʌt junaɪɾəd ɑn ɛni pɔɪnt. ɑlviɛɝɪn hæd hɛlpt ɪnʃʊɹ ðət hɝsɛlf. ðeɪ lɛft, fɛɹən ən swænə, stɪf-bækt ən taɪt-lɪpt, ændaɪə, ɔlmoʊst skɝiɪŋ. nʌn ə ðɛm soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst ɪn ɑlviɛɝɪnz dɝɛkʃən.

What was the Hall's right was theirs, but the Hall seldom dared infringe far on the Amyrlin Seat's authority. Not unless the Hall was united against the Amyrlin, and this Hall was anything but united on any point. Alviarin had helped insure that herself. They left, Ferane and Suana, stiff-backed and tight-lipped, Andaya, almost scurrying. None of them so much as glanced in Alviarin's direction.

ʃi bɛɹli weɪɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ tə kloʊz bɪhaɪn ðə læst. "ðɪs ɹɪli tʃeɪnʒəz nʌθɪŋ, ɪleɪɾə, ʃʊɹli jə si ðæt. jə mʌs θɪŋk klɪɹli, nɑt tʃɹɪp oʊvɝ ə moʊməntɛɹi æbɝeɪʃən." ʃi nu ʃi wɑz bæbəlɪŋ, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt sim tə stɑp. "ðə dɪzæstɝ ət dəməaɪz wɛlz, ðə sɝɾən dɪzæstɝ ət ðə blæk taʊɝ, ðiz kən stɪl ənsit ju. jə nid mi tə hoʊld ɑn tə ðə stæf ən stoʊl. jə nid mi, ɪleɪɾə. ju. . . . " ʃi klæmpt əɹ tiθ ʃʌt bɪfɔɹ əɹ tʌŋ θɹu ɛvɹiθɪŋ əweɪ. ðəɹ stɪl hæd tə bi ə weɪ. "aɪm sɝpɹaɪz jə ɹɪtɝnd," ɪleɪɾə sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ ən smuðɪŋ əɹ ɹɛd-slæʃt skɝts. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ɡɪvən ʌp əɹ weɪ ʌv dʒɹɛsɪŋ əz ə ɹɛd. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ʃi wɑz smaɪlɪŋ əz ʃi keɪm ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl. nɑɾ ə hɪn əɾ ə smaɪl, bʌɾ ə fʊl, pliz kɝv ə hɝ lɪps. "hæv jə bɪn haɪɾɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə sɪɾi sɪns ðə ɹɛbəlz ɝaɪvd? aɪ θɔt juɾ əv teɪkən ʃɪp əz sun əz jə lɝn ðeɪ wɝ hɪɹ.

She barely waited for the door to close behind the last. "This really changes nothing, Elaida, surely you see that. You must think clearly, not trip over a momentary aberration." She knew she was babbling, but she could not seem to stop. "The disaster at Dumai's Wells, the certain disaster at the Black Tower, these can still unseat you. You need me to hold on to the staff and stole. You need me, Elaida. You. . . . " She clamped her teeth shut before her tongue threw everything away. There still had to be a way. "I'm surprised you returned," Elaida said, rising and smoothing her red-slashed skirts. She had never given up her way of dressing as a Red. Strangely, she was smiling as she came around the table. Not a hint at a smile, but a full, pleased curve of her lips. "Have you been hiding somewhere in the city since the rebels arrived? I thought you'd have taken ship as soon as you learned they were here.

hu wʊɾə θɔt ðeɪ wəd ɹiɾɪskʌvɝ tʃɹævlɪŋ? ɪmædʒən wʌt wi kən də wʌns wi noʊ ðæt." smaɪlɪŋ, ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd əkɹɔs ðə kɑɹpət.

Who would have thought they would rediscover Traveling? Imagine what we can do once we know that." Smiling, she glided across the carpet.

"naʊ lemi si. wʌt də aɪ hæv tə fɪɹ fɹəm ju? ðə stɔɹiz aʊɾ ə kɛɹhin ɑɹ ðə tɔk ə ðə taʊɝ, bʌɾ ivən ɪf sɪstɝz ɹɪli wɝ oʊbeɪɪŋ ði ælθɹ bɔɪ, wɪtʃ aɪ fəɹ wʌn kænɑt bɪliv, ɛvɹiwʌn bleɪmz kɔɪɹən. ʃi hæd ðə ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi ʌv bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪm hɪɹ, ən ʃiz əz ɡʊɾ əz bɪn tʃɹaɪɾ ən kənvɪktəd, ɪn ðə maɪnz ə ðə sɪstɝz." ɪleɪɾə stɑpt ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɑlviɛɝɪn, hɛmɪŋ əɹ ɪndə ðə kɔɹnɝ.

"Now let me see. What do I have to fear from you? The stories out of Cairhien are the talk of the Tower, but even if sisters really were obeying the al'Thor boy, which I for one cannot believe, everyone blames Coiren. She had the responsibility of bringing him here, and she has as good as been tried and convicted, in the minds of the sisters." Elaida stopped in front of Alviarin, hemming her into the corner.

ðət smaɪl nɛvɝ tʌtʃt əɹ aɪz. ʃi smaɪld, ən əɹ aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd. ɑlviɛɝɪn kəd nɑt bɹeɪk əweɪ fɹəm ðət ɡeɪz. "ɪn ðə læst wik, wiv hɝɾ ə ɡʊd mɛni θɪŋz əbaʊt ðə 'blæk taʊɝ,' əz wɛl." ɪleɪɾəz lɪps twɪstəɾ ɪn dɪsɡʌst ɝaʊn ðə neɪm. "ɪt simz ðəɹ ɑɹ ivən mɔɹ mɛn ðən jə səpoʊzd.

That smile never touched her eyes. She smiled, and her eyes glittered. Alviarin could not break away from that gaze. "In the last week, we've heard a good many things about the 'Black Tower,' as well." Elaida's lips twisted in disgust around the name. "It seems there are even more men than you supposed.

bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn θɪŋks tʌvaɪn mʌst əv hæd ðə sɛns tə lɝn ðət bɪfɔɹ ʃi ətækt. ðəɹ əz bɪn ə ɡʊd dil ə dɪskʌʃən oʊvɝ ɪt. ɪf ʃi kʌmz dʒɹæɡɪŋ bæk hɪɹ dɪfiɾəd, ʃɪl hɑɹvəs ðə bleɪm. soʊ jəɹ θɹɛts. . . ."

But everyone thinks Toveine must have had the sense to learn that before she attacked. There has been a good deal of discussion over it. If she comes dragging back here defeated, she will harvest the blame. So your threats. . . ."

ɑlviɛɝɪn stæɡɝɾ ɪndə ðə wɔl, blɪŋkɪŋ əweɪ spɑts, bɪfɔɹ ʃi ivən ɹilaɪz ðət ði ʌðɝ wʊmən hæd slæp hɝ. hɝ tʃik ɔlɹɛɾi fɛl swoʊlən. ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ hæd sɝaʊndəɾ ɪleɪɾə, ən ðə ʃil sɛɾəld ɑn ɑlviɛɝɪn bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd twɪtʃ, kʌɾɪŋ əɹ ɔf fɹəm ðə paʊɝ. bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə juz ðə paʊɝ. ʃi dʒɹu bæk ə fɪst. stɪl smaɪlɪŋ.

Alviarin staggered into the wall, blinking away spots, before she even realized that the other woman had slapped her. Her cheek already felt swollen. The glow of saidar had surrounded Elaida, and the shield settled on Alviarin before she could twitch, cutting her off from the Power. But Elaida did not intend to use the Power. She drew back a fist. Still smiling.

sloʊli, ðə wʊmən dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən lɛɾ əɹ hæn fɔl. ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹimuv ðə ʃild, haʊɛvɝ. "wʊd jə ɹɪli jus ðæt?" ʃi æskt ɪn ən ɔlmoʊs maɪl toʊn.

Slowly, the woman drew a deep breath and let her hand fall. She did not remove the shield, however. "Would you really use that?" she asked in an almost mild tone.

ɑlviɛɝɪnz hæn spɹæŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə hɪlt ə hɝ bɛl naɪf. ɡɹæbɪŋ ɪt hæd bɪn ə ɹiflɛks, bʌɾ ivən ɪf ɪleɪɾə hæd nɑt bɪn hoʊldɪŋ ðə paʊɝ, kɪlɪŋ əɹ wən soʊ mɛni sɪɾɝz nu ðeɪ wɝ təɡɛðɝ wʊɾə bɪn əz ɡʊɾ əz kɪlɪŋ hɝsɛlf. stɪl, hɝ feɪs bɝnd wən ɪleɪɾə snɪf kəntɛmptʃwəsli. "aɪ lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə siɪŋ jəɹ nɛk stʃɹɛtʃt ɑn ðə hɛdzmənz blɑk fəɹ tʃɹizən, ɑlviɛɝɪn, bʌɾ əntɪl aɪ hæv ðə pɹuf aɪ nid, ðəɹ ɑɹ stɪl ə fju θɪŋz aɪ kən du. dʒju ɹɪmɛmbɝ haʊ mɛni taɪmz jə hæd sɪlviænə kʌm tə ɡɪmi pɹaɪvət pɛnəns? aɪ hoʊp jə du, kəz jə ɑɹ gɑnə teɪk tɛn fəɹ ɛvɹi deɪ aɪ sʌfɝd. ænd, oʊ, jɛs." wɪð ə dʒɝk, ʃi pʊl ðə kipɝz stoʊl ɹʌfli fɹəm ɑlviɛɝɪnz nɛk. "sɪns noʊ wʌn kəd faɪn jə wən ðə ɹɛbəlz ɝaɪvd, aɪ æsk ðə hɔl tə ɹimuv jə əz kipɝ. nɑt ðə fʊl hɔl, ʌv kɔɹs. jə meɪ stɪl əv ə lɪɾəl ɪnfluəns ðɛɹ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli izi tə ɡeɪn ðə kənsɛnsəs fɹəm ðoʊz u wɝ sɪɾɪŋ ðət deɪ. eɪ kipɝ ɪz səpoʊz tə bi wɪð əɹ æmɪɝlɪn, nɑt wɑndɝɪŋ ɔf ɑn əɹ oʊn. ɑn sɛkən θɔt, jə meɪ nɑɾ əv ɛni ɪnfluəns əɾ ɔl, sɪns ɪt tɝnz aʊt jə wɝ haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə sɪɾi ɔl əlɔŋ. əɹ dɪd jə seɪl bæk tə faɪn dɪzæstɝ, ən æktʃəli  θɪŋk jə kəd ɹɪkʌvɝ sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm ðə ɹuənz? "noʊ mæɾɝ. ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn bɛɾɝ fəɹ jə tə lip ɑn ðə fɝst ʃɪp jə kəd faɪn livɪŋ tɑɹ vəlɑn. bʌɾ aɪ mʌst ədmɪt, ðə θɔɾ ə jə skʌɾəlɪŋ fɹəm vɪlədʒ tə vɪlədʒ əʃeɪm tə ʃoʊ jəɹ feɪs tə ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ peɪlz bɪsaɪd ðə plɛʒɝ əl teɪk siɪŋ jə sʌfɝ. naʊ ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə maɪ saɪt bɪfɔɹ aɪ dɪsaɪɾ ɪt ʃəd bi ðə bɝtʃ ɹæðɝ ðən sɪlviænəz stʃɹæp." tɔsɪŋ ðə waɪt stoʊl tə ðə flɔɹ, ʃi tɝn əɹ bæk ən ɹilist seɪaɪdɑɹ, ɡlaɪɾɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əɹ tʃɛɹ əz ɪf ɑlviɛɝɪn hæd sis tə ɪɡzɪst.

Alviarin's hand sprang away from the hilt of her belt knife. Grabbing it had been a reflex, but even if Elaida had not been holding the Power, killing her when so many Sitters knew they were together would have been as good as killing herself. Still, her face burned when Elaida sniffed contemptuously. "I look forward to seeing your neck stretched on the headsman's block for treason, Alviarin, but until I have the proof I need, there are still a few things I can do. Do you remember how many times you had Silviana come to give me private penance? I hope you do, because you are going to take ten for every day I suffered. And, oh, yes." With a jerk, she pulled the Keeper's stole roughly from Alviarin's neck. "Since no one could find you when the rebels arrived, I asked the Hall to remove you as Keeper. Not the full Hall, of course. You may still have a little influence there. But it was surprisingly easy to gain the consensus from those who were sitting that day. A Keeper is supposed to be with her Amyrlin, not wandering off on her own. On second thought, you may not have any influence at all, since it turns out you were hiding in the city all along. Or did you sail back to find disaster, and actually think you could recover something from the ruins? "No matter. It might have been better for you to leap on the first ship you could find leaving Tar Valon. But I must admit, the thought of you scuttling from village to village ashamed to show your face to another sister pales beside the pleasure I'll take seeing you suffer. Now get out of my sight before I decide it should be the birch rather than Silviana's strap." Tossing the white stole to the floor, she turned her back and released saidar, gliding toward her chair as if Alviarin had ceased to exist.

ɑlviɛɝɪn dɪd nɑt liv, ʃi flɛd, ɹʌnɪŋ wɪð ðə fil ə ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz' bɹɛθ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɝ nɛk. ʃi hæd bɛɹli bɪn eɪbəl tə θɪŋk sɪns ʃi hɝd ðə wɝd tʃɹizən. ðət wɝd, ɛkoʊɪŋ ɪn əɹ hɛd, meɪɾ əɹ wɑnə haʊl. tʃɹizən kəɾ oʊnli min wʌn θɪŋ. ɪleɪɾə nu, ən ʃi wɑz sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ pɹuf. ðə dɑɹk lɔɹɾ əv mɝsi. bʌɾ i nɛvɝ dɪd. mɝsi wɑz fəɹ ðoʊz əfɹeɪd tə bi stʃɹɔŋ. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪd. ʃi wɑz ə skɪn stʌf tə bɝstɪŋ wɪð tɛɹɝ.

Alviarin did not leave, she fled, running with the feel of the Darkhounds' breath on the back of her neck. She had barely been able to think since she heard the word treason. That word, echoing in her head, made her want to howl. Treason could only mean one thing. Elaida knew, and she was searching for proof. The Dark Lord have mercy. But he never did. Mercy was for those afraid to be strong. She was not afraid. She was a skin stuffed to bursting with terror.

bæk daʊn θɹu ðə taʊɝ ʃi flɛd, ən ɪf ðəɹ wɑz soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə sɝvən ɪn ðə hɔlweɪz, ʃi dɪd nɑt si hɪm. hɔɹɝ blaɪndɪɾ əɹ aɪz tə ɛniθɪŋ nɑt dɝɛkli ɪn əɹ pæθ. ɔl ðə weɪ bæk daʊn tə ðə sɪksθ lɛvəl ʃi ɹæn, tə hɝ oʊn əpɑɹtməns. ət list, ʃi səpoʊz ðeɪ wɝ stɪl hɝz fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. ðə ɹumz wɪð ðɛɹ bælkəni oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt skwɛɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə taʊɝ wɛnt wɪð ði ɔfəs ə kipɝ. fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf ðət ʃi stɪl hæd ɹumz. ən ə tʃæns tə lɪv. ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz wɝ stɪl ðə dəmɑni pisəz lɛf baɪ ðə pɹiviəs ɑkjəpənt, ɔl peɪl stʃɹaɪpt wʊɾ ɪnleɪd wɪð pɝlʃɛl ən æmbɝ. ɪn ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ, ʃi θɹu oʊpən wʌn ə ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊbz ən fɛl tə hɝ niz, pʊʃɪŋ əsaɪd dʒɹɛsəz tə ɹʌmɪdʒ ɪn ðə bæk fəɹ ə smɔl tʃɛst, ə bɑks lɛs ðən tu hænz skwɛɹ, ðət hæd bɪn hɝz fəɹ mɛni jɪɹz. ðə kɑɹvɪŋ ɑn ðə bɑks wɑz ɪntʃɹəkət bʌt klʌmzi, ɹoʊz ə vɛɹid nɑts əpɛɹənli dʌn baɪ ə kɑɹvɝ wɪð mɔɹ æmbɪʃən ðən skɪl. hɝ hænz ʃʊk əz ʃi kæɹiɾ ɪt tə ə teɪbəl, ən ʃi sɛɾ ɪt daʊn tə waɪp klæmi pɑmz ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛs. ðə tʃɹɪk tə oʊpənɪŋ ðə bɑks wɑz sɪmpli ə mæɾɝ ə spɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz əz waɪɾ əz ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ tə pɹɛs saɪməlteɪniəsli ət fɔɹ nɑts ɪn ðə kɑɹvɪŋ, noʊ tu əlaɪk. ðə lɪd lɪftəd slaɪtli, ən ʃi θɹu ɪt bæk, ɹɪvilɪŋ əɹ moʊs pɹɛʃəs pəzɛʃən ɹæpt ɪn ə smɔl bʌndəl ə bɹaʊn klɔθ tə kip ɪt fɹəm ɹætlɪŋ ɪf ə meɪd ʃʊk ðə bɑks.

Back down through the Tower she fled, and if there was so much as a servant in the hallways, she did not see him. Horror blinded her eyes to anything not directly in her path. All the way back down to the sixth level she ran, to her own apartments. At least, she supposed they were still hers for the moment. The rooms with their balcony overlooking the great square in front of the Tower went with the office of Keeper. For the moment, it was enough that she still had rooms. And a chance to live. The furnishings were still the Domani pieces left by the previous occupant, all pale striped wood inlaid with pearlshell and amber. In the bedchamber, she threw open one of the wardrobes and fell to her knees, pushing aside dresses to rummage in the back for a small chest, a box less than two hands square, that had been hers for many years. The carving on the box was intricate but clumsy, rows of varied knots apparently done by a carver with more ambition than skill. Her hands shook as she carried it to a table, and she set it down to wipe clammy palms on her dress. The trick to opening the box was simply a matter of spreading her fingers as wide as they would go to press simultaneously at four knots in the carving, no two alike. The lid lifted slightly, and she threw it back, revealing her most precious possession wrapped in a small bundle of brown cloth to keep it from rattling if a maid shook the box.

moʊs taʊɝ sɝvəns wəd nɑt ɹɪsk stilɪŋ, bʌt moʊs dɪd nɑt min ɔl.

Most Tower servants would not risk stealing, but most did not mean all.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɑlviɛɝɪn oʊnli stɛɹɾ ət ðə pækədʒ. hɝ moʊs pɹɛʃəs pəzɛʃən, ə θɪŋ fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, bʌt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ dɛɹd juz ɪt bɪfɔɹ. oʊnli ɪn ðə wɝst ɪmɝdʒənsi, mɛsænə hæd sɛd, ðə moʊs dɛspɹɪt nid, jɛt wʌt nid kəd bi mɔɹ daɪɹ ðən ðɪs? mɛsænə sɛd ðə θɪŋ kəd teɪk hæmɝ bloʊz wɪθaʊt bɹeɪkɪŋ, bʌt ʃi əndɪd ðə ɹæpɪŋz wɪð ðə kɛɹ ʃi wʊɾə juzd wɪð ə pis ə faɪn bloʊn ɡlæs, ɹɪvilɪŋ ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ə bɹɪljən ɹɛd ɹɑd noʊ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən əɹ fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ, ʌɾɝli smuð ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju faɪn laɪnz wɝkt ɪndə ðə sɝfəs ɪn ə sɪnwəs ɪntɝkənɛktɪŋ pæɾɝn.

For a moment, Alviarin only stared at the package. Her most precious possession, a thing from the Age of Legends, but she had never dared use it before. Only in the worst emergency, Mesaana had said, the most desperate need, yet what need could be more dire than this? Mesaana said the thing could take hammer blows without breaking, but she undid the wrappings with the care she would have used with a piece of fine blown glass, revealing a ter'angreal. a brilliant red rod no larger than her forefinger, utterly smooth except for a few fine lines worked into the surface in a sinuous interconnecting pattern.

ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə sɔɹs, ʃi tʌtʃt ðət pæɾɝn wɪð hɛɹ-θɪn floʊz ə faɪɝ ən ɝθ ət tu ʌv ði ɪntɝkənɛkʃənz. ðət wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn nɛsəsɛɹi ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ kɔl ðə "stændɪŋ floʊz" noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪɡzɪstəd. ə wɝld wɛɹ ɔlmoʊst ɛni tɛɹæŋɡɹil kəd bi juz baɪ pipəl əneɪbəl tə tʃænəl simd ɑd bɪɑn kɑmpɹihɛnʃən. waɪ hæɾ ɪt bɪn əlaʊd?

Embracing the Source, she touched that pattern with hair-thin flows of Fire and Earth at two of the interconnections. That would not have been necessary in the Age of Legends, but something called the "standing flows" no longer existed. A world where almost any ter'angreal could be used by people unable to channel seemed odd beyond comprehension. Why had it been allowed?

pɹɛsɪŋ wʌn ɛn ə ðə ɹɑd hɑɹd wɪð əɹ θʌm - ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf, baɪ ɪtsɛlf - ʃi sæt daʊn hɛvəli ən lin əɡɛns ðə tʃɛɹz loʊ bæk, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə θɪŋ ɪn əɹ hænd. ɪt wɑz dʌn.

Pressing one end of the rod hard with her thumb - the One Power was not enough, by itself - she sat down heavily and leaned against the chair's low back, staring at the thing in her hand. It was done.

ʃi fɛl hɑloʊ, naʊ, ə væst ɛmpti speɪs wɪð fɪɹz flʌɾɝɪŋ θɹu ðə dɑɹknəs laɪk ɪnɔɹməs bæts.

She felt hollow, now, a vast empty space with fears fluttering through the darkness like enormous bats.

ɪnstɛɾ ə ɹiɹæpɪŋ ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ʃi tʌkt ɪɾ ɪndə hɝ bɛl paʊtʃ ən ɡɑɾ ʌp lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə stʌf ðə bɑks bæk ɪndə ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb. əntɪl ʃi nu ʃi wɑz seɪf, ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə lɛt ðət ɹɑɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ pəzɛʃən. bʌt ðən ɔl ʃi kəd də wɑz sɪɾ ən weɪt, ɹɑkɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ wɪð əɹ hænz klæsp bɪtwin əɹ niz. ʃi kəd nɑt stɑp ɹɑkɪŋ ɛni mɔɹ ðən ʃi kəd stɑp ðə loʊ moʊnz ðət tʃɹɪkəl bɪtwin əɹ tiθ. sɪns ðə faʊndɪŋ ə ðə taʊɝ, noʊ sɪstɝ hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn tʃɑɹdʒd wɪð biɪŋ blæk ədʒɑ. oʊ, ðəɹ hæd bɪn səspɪʃənz baɪ ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl sɪstɝz, ən fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd daɪd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðoʊz səspɪʃənz nɛvɝ wɛn fɝðɝ, bʌt nɛvɝ hæɾ ɪt kʌm tə əfɪʃəl tʃɑɹdʒəz. ɪf ɪleɪɾə wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə spik oʊpənli ʌv ðə hɛdzmənz blɑk, ʃi mʌs bi kloʊs tə bɹɪŋɪŋ tʃɑɹdʒəz. vɛɹi kloʊs. blæk sɪstɝz hæd bɪn meɪd tə dɪsəpɪɹ, tu, wən səspɪʃənz ɡɹu tu ɡɹeɪt. ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɹɪmeɪn hɪɾən wʌtɛvɝ ðə kɑst. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd stɑp moʊnɪŋ.

Instead of rewrapping the ter'angreal, she tucked it into her belt pouch and got up long enough to stuff the box back into the wardrobe. Until she knew she was safe, she did not intend to let that rod out of her possession. But then all she could do was sit and wait, rocking back and forth with her hands clasped between her knees. She could not stop rocking any more than she could stop the low moans that trickled between her teeth. Since the founding of the Tower, no sister had ever been charged with being Black Ajah. Oh, there had been suspicions by individual sisters, and from time to time Aes Sedai had died to make sure those suspicions never went further, but never had it come to official charges. If Elaida was willing to speak openly of the headsman's block, she must be close to bringing charges. Very close. Black sisters had been made to disappear, too, when suspicions grew too great. The Black Ajah remained hidden whatever the cost. She wished she could stop moaning.

sʌɾənli ðə laɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹum dɪmd, ɪnvɛləpɪŋ ðə tʃeɪmbɝ ɪn swɝlɪŋ twaɪlaɪt ʃædoʊz.

Suddenly the light in the room dimmed, enveloping the chamber in swirling twilight shadows.

ðə sʌnlaɪɾ ət ðə keɪsməns simd əneɪbəl tə pɛnətʃɹeɪt bɪɑn ðə ɡlæs peɪnz. ɑlviɛɝɪn wɑz ɑn əɹ niz ɪn ə bɹɛθ, aɪz daʊn. ʃi tʃɹɛmbəld wɪð wɑntɪŋ tə pɔɹ aʊɾ əɹ fɪɹz, bʌt wɪð ðə tʃoʊzən, ðə fɔɹmz mʌs bi fɑloʊd. "aɪ lɪv tə sɝv, ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs," ʃi sɛd, ən nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ. ʃi kəd nɑt weɪst ə moʊmənt, mʌtʃ lɛs ən aʊɝ skɹimɪŋ ɪn peɪn. hɝ hænz wɝ klʌtʃt təɡɛðɝ tə kip əm fɹəm ʃeɪkɪŋ.

The sunlight at the casements seemed unable to penetrate beyond the glass panes. Alviarin was on her knees in a breath, eyes down. She trembled with wanting to pour out her fears, but with the Chosen, the forms must be followed. "I live to serve, Great Mistress," she said, and nothing more. She could not waste a moment, much less an hour screaming in pain. Her hands were clutched together to keep them from shaking.

"wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ ɡɹeɪv ɪmɝdʒənsi, tʃaɪld?" ɪt wɑz ə wʊmənz vɔɪs, bʌɾ ə vɔɪs ə kɹɪstəl tʃaɪmz.

"What is your grave emergency, child?" It was a woman's voice, but a voice of crystal chimes.

dɪspliz tʃaɪmz. oʊnli dɪsplizd.

Displeased chimes. Only displeased.

æŋɡɹi tʃaɪmz maɪɾ əv mɛn dɛθ ɑn ðə spɑt. "ɪf, jə θɪŋk əl ɹeɪz ə fɪŋɡɝ tə ɡɛt ðə kipɝz stoʊl bæk fəɹ ju, jə ɑɹ sædli mɪsteɪkən. jə kən stɪl də wʌɾ aɪ wɪʃ dʌn, wɪð ə lɪɾəl ɛkstʃɹə ɛfɝt. ən jə meɪ kənsɪɾɝ jəɹ pɛnənsɪz wɪð ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz ə smɔl pʌnɪʃmən fɹəm mi. aɪ dɪd wɔɹn jə əbaʊt pʊʃɪŋ ɪleɪɾə kwaɪt soʊ hɑɹd."

Angry chimes might have meant death on the spot. "If, you think I will raise a finger to get the Keeper's stole back for you, you are sadly mistaken. You can still do what I wish done, with a little extra effort. And you may consider your penances with the Mistress of Novices a small punishment from me. I did warn you about pushing Elaida quite so hard."

ɑlviɛɝɪn swɑloʊɾ əɹ pɹoʊɾɛsts. ɪleɪɾə wɑz nɑɾ ə wʊmən tə bɛnd wɪθaʊt hɑɹd pʊʃɪŋ.

Alviarin swallowed her protests. Elaida was not a woman to bend without hard pushing.

mɛsænə hæd tə noʊ ðæt. bʌt pɹoʊɾɛsts kəd bi deɪnʒɝəs, wɪð ðə tʃoʊzən. mɛni θɪŋz wɝ deɪnʒɝəs, wɪð ðə tʃoʊzən. ɪn ɛni keɪs, sɪlviænəz stʃɹæp wɑz ə tʃɹaɪfəl kəmpɛɹd tə ðə hɛdzmənz æks.

Mesaana had to know that. But protests could be dangerous, with the Chosen. Many things were dangerous, with the Chosen. In any case, Silviana's strap was a trifle compared to the headsman's axe.

"ɪleɪɾə noʊz, ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs," ʃi bɹiðd, ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ aɪz. ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ stʊɾ ə wʊmən ə laɪt-ænd-ʃædoʊ, kloʊðd ɪn laɪt-ænd-ʃædoʊ, ɔl stɑɹk blæks ən sɪlvɝi waɪts ðət floʊd fɹəm wʌn tə ði ʌðɝ ən bæk. sɪlvɝ aɪz fɹaʊn fɹəm ə feɪs ə smoʊk, wɪð sɪlvɝ lɪps dʒɹɔn ɪn ə taɪt laɪn. ɪt wɑz oʊnli ɪluʒən, ən ɹɪli nɑt dʌn ɛni bɛɾɝ ðən ɑlviɛɝɪn kəd hæv. ə flæʃ ʌv ɡɹin sɪlk skɝɾ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð ɪlæbɹət bænz ə bɹɑnz ʃoʊɾ əz mɛsænə ɡlaɪɾɪd əkɹɔs ðə dəmɑni kɑɹpət. bʌɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn kəd nɑt si ðə wivz ðət meɪd ði ɪluʒən ɛni mɔɹ ðən ʃi hæd fɛl ðoʊz ðə wʊmən hæd juz tə ɝaɪv əɹ kæs ðə ɹum ɪn ʃædoʊz. fəɹ ɔl ʃi kəd sɛns, mɛsænə kəd nɑt tʃænəl əɾ ɔl! ðə lʌs fəɹ ðoʊz tu sikɹəts juʒəwəli kʌɾ ət hɝ, bʌt tədeɪ ʃi hɑɹdli noʊɾəst. "ʃi noʊz aɪm blæk ədʒɑ, ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs. ɪf ʃiz ənkʌvɝd mi, ðən ʃiz hæd sʌmwʌn dɪɡɪŋ dip. dʌzənz ʌv əs meɪ bi ət ɹɪsk, pɝhæps ɔl ʌv ʌs." bɛs tə meɪk ə θɹɛɾ əz lɑɹdʒ əz pɑsəbəl ɪf jə wɑntəd tə bi ʃʊɹ ʌv ə ɹɪspɑns. ɪt maɪɾ ivən bi soʊ.

"Elaida knows, Great Mistress," she breathed, raising her eyes. In front of her stood a woman of light-and-shadow, clothed in light-and-shadow, all stark blacks and silvery whites that flowed from one to the other and back. Silver eyes frowned from a face of smoke, with silver lips drawn in a tight line. It was only Illusion, and really not done any better than Alviarin could have. A flash of green silk skirt embroidered with elaborate bands of bronze showed as Mesaana glided across the Domani carpet. But Alviarin could not see the weaves that made the Illusion any more than she had felt those the woman had used to arrive or cast the room in shadows. For all she could sense, Mesaana could not channel at all! The lust for those two secrets usually cut at her, but today she hardly noticed. "She knows I am Black Ajah, Great Mistress. If she has uncovered me, then she has had someone digging deep. Dozens of us may be at risk, perhaps all of us." Best to make a threat as large as possible if you wanted to be sure of a response. It might even be so.

bʌt mɛsænəz ɹɪspɑns wɑz ə dɪsmɪsɪv weɪv ʌv wʌn naʊ-sɪlvɝ hænd. hɝ feɪs ɡloʊd laɪk ə mun ɝaʊn aɪz blækɝ ðən koʊlz. "ðæɾ ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs. ɪleɪɾə kænɑt dɪsaɪd fɹəm wʌn deɪ tə ðə nɛkst wɛðɝ ʃi ivən bɪlivz ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɪɡzɪsts. jə ɑɹ dʒʌs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə seɪv jɝsɛlf ə lɪɾəl peɪn.

But Mesaana's response was a dismissive wave of one now-silver hand. Her face glowed like a moon around eyes blacker than coals. "That is ridiculous. Elaida cannot decide from one day to the next whether she even believes the Black Ajah exists. You are just trying to save yourself a little pain.

pɝhæps ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ wɪl ɪnstʃɹʌk jə ɪn jəɹ ɛɹɝ." ɑlviɛɝɪn bɪɡæn tə pliɾ əz mɛsænə ɹeɪz ðət hæn haɪɝ, ən ə wiv ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd mʌtʃ tu wɛl fɔɹmd ɪn ði ɛɹ. ʃi hæd tə meɪk ðə wʊmən ʌndɝstænd!

Perhaps a little more will instruct you in your error." Alviarin began to plead as Mesaana raised that hand higher, and a weave she remembered much too well formed in the air. She had to make the woman understand!

əbɹʌpli, ðə ʃædoʊz ɪn ðə ɹum lɝtʃt. ɛvɹiθɪŋ sim tə ʃɪf saɪdweɪz əz ðə dɑɹknəs θɪkən ɪn mɪdnaɪt lʌmps.

Abruptly, the shadows in the room lurched. Everything seemed to shift sideways as the darkness thickened in midnight lumps.

ən ðən ðə dɑɹknəs wɑz ɡɔn. stɑɹɾəld, ɑlviɛɝɪn faʊn hɝsɛlf wɪð əɹ bɛɡɪŋ hænz stʃɹɛtʃt ʌp təwɔɹɾ ə blu-aɪd wʊmən ə flɛʃ ən blʌd, ɡɑɹbd ɪn bɹɑnz-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɡɹin. ə tæntəlaɪzɪŋli fəmɪljɝ wʊmən u lʊk dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ə hɝ mɪɾəl jɪɹz. ʃi hæd noʊn mɛsænə wɔk ðə taʊɝ dɪsɡaɪzd əz wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz, ðoʊ noʊ tʃoʊzən ʃi hæd mɛt ʃoʊɾ ɛni saɪn ʌv eɪɡləsnəs, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt mætʃ ðət feɪs tə ɛni neɪm. ən ʃi ɹilaɪz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, əz wɛl.

And then the darkness was gone. Startled, Alviarin found herself with her begging hands stretched up toward a blue-eyed woman of flesh and blood, garbed in bronze-embroidered green. A tantalizingly familiar woman who looked just short of her middle years. She had known Mesaana walked the Tower disguised as one of the sisters, though no Chosen she had met showed any sign of agelessness, but she could not match that face to any name. And she realized something else, as well.

ðət feɪs wɑz əfɹeɪd. haɪɾɪŋ ɪt, bʌɾ əfɹeɪd.

That face was afraid. Hiding it, but afraid.

"ʃiz bɪn vɛɹi jusfəl," mɛsænə sɛd, nɑt saʊndɪŋ əfɹeɪɾ əɾ ɔl, ɪn ə vɔɪs ðət tʌɡd ði ɛdʒ ə ɹɛkəɡnɪʃən, "ænd naʊ əl əv tə kɪl hɝ."

"She's been very useful," Mesaana said, not sounding afraid at all, in a voice that tugged the edge of recognition, "and now I will have to kill her."

"ju wɝ ɔlweɪz . . . oʊvɝli weɪsfəl," ɹɪplaɪɾ ə hɑɹʃ vɔɪs, laɪk ɹɑɾən boʊn kɹʌmbəlɪŋ ʌndɝfʊt.

"You were always . . . overly wasteful," replied a harsh voice, like rotten bone crumbling underfoot.

ɑlviɛɝɪn fɛl oʊvɝ ɪn ʃɑk ət ðə tɔl ʃeɪp ʌv ə mæn ɪn sɪnwəs blæk ɑɹmɝ, ɔl oʊvɝlæpɪŋ pleɪts laɪk ðə skeɪlz ʌv ə sneɪk, stændɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv wʌn wɪndoʊ. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə mæn, ðoʊ. ðət blʌdləs feɪs hæd noʊ aɪz, dʒʌst smuð dɛd waɪt skɪn wɛɹ ðeɪ ʃəɾ əv bɪn. ʃi hæɾ ɪnkaʊntɝd mɹdʒɹɑl bɪfɔɹ, ɪn ðə sɝvəs ə ðə dɑɹk lɔɹd, ən ivən mænədʒ tə mit ðɛɹ aɪləs ɡeɪzəz wɪθaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ weɪ tə ðə tɛɹɝ ðoʊz stɛɹz ɛndʒɛndɝd, bʌt ðɪs wʌn meɪɾ əɹ skɹæbəl bæk əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ əntɪl əɹ bæk dʒɑɹɾ ə lɛɡ ʌv ðə teɪbəl. lɝks wɝ əlaɪk əz tu ɹeɪndʒɹɑps, tɔl ən lin ən aɪdɛntɪkəl, bʌt ðɪs wʌn stʊɾ ə hɛd tɔlɝ, ən fɪɹ sim tə ɹeɪɾiət fɹəm ɪt, soʊkɪŋ ɪndə hɝ boʊnz.

Alviarin fell over in shock at the tall shape of a man in sinuous black armor, all overlapping plates like the scales of a snake, standing in front of one window. It was not a man, though. That bloodless face had no eyes, just smooth dead white skin where they should have been. She had encountered Myrddraal before, in the service of the Dark Lord, and even managed to meet their eyeless gazes without giving way to the terror those stares engendered, but this one made her scrabble back across the floor until her back jarred a leg of the table. Lurks were alike as two raindrops, tall and lean and identical, but this one stood a head taller, and fear seemed to radiate from it, soaking into her bones.

ənθɪŋkɪŋ, ʃi ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə sɔɹs. ən nɪɹli skɹimd. ðə sɔɹs wɑz ɡɔn! ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃildɪd; ðəɹ wɑz sɪmpli nʌθɪŋ ðəɹ fəɹ əɹ tə ɛmbɹeɪs! ðə mɹdʒɹɑl lʊkt əɾ əɹ ən smaɪld.

Unthinking, she reached for the Source. And nearly screamed. The Source was gone! She was not shielded; there was simply nothing there for her to embrace! The Myrddraal looked at her and smiled.

lɝks nɛvɝ smaɪld.

Lurks never smiled.

nɛvɝ. hɝ bɹɛθ keɪm ɪn ɹæɡəd pæntɪŋ.

Never. Her breath came in ragged panting.

"ʃi kən bi jusfəl," ðə mɹdʒɹɑl ɹæspt. "aɪ wəd nɑt wɑn ðə blæk ədʒɑ dɪstʃɹɔɪd."

"She can be useful," the Myrddraal rasped. "I would not want the Black Ajah destroyed."

"hu ɑɹ jə tə tʃælənʒ wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən?" mɛsænə dɪmændəd kəntɛmptʃwəsli, ðən ɹuən ði ɪfɛk baɪ lɪkɪŋ əɹ lɪps.

"Who are you to challenge one of the Chosen?" Mesaana demanded contemptuously, then ruined the effect by licking her lips.

"du jə θɪŋk hæn ə ðə ʃædoʊ ɪz dʒʌst ə neɪm?" ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz vɔɪs noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɡɹeɪɾɪd.

"Do you think Hand of the Shadow is just a name?" The Myrddraal's voice no longer grated.

hɑloʊ, ɪt sim tə bum daʊn kævɝnz fɹəm səm ʌnɪmædʒɪnəbəl dɪstəns. ðə kɹitʃɝ ɡɹu əz ɪt spoʊk, swɛlɪŋ ɪn saɪz tɪl ɪts hɛd bɹʌʃt ðə silɪŋ, oʊvɝ tu spænz ʌp. "ju wɝ sʌmənd, ən jə dɪd nɑt kʌm. maɪ hæn ɹitʃəz fɑɹ, mɛsænə."

Hollow, it seemed to boom down caverns from some unimaginable distance. The creature grew as it spoke, swelling in size till its head brushed the ceiling, over two spans up. "You were summoned, and you did not come. My hand reaches far, Mesaana."

ʃeɪkɪŋ vɪzəbli, ðə tʃoʊzən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, pɝhæps tə plid, bʌt sʌɾənli blæk faɪɝ flæʃt ɝaʊn hɝ, ən ʃi skɹimd əz əɹ kloʊðɪŋ fɛl əweɪ ɪn dʌst. bænz ə blæk fleɪm baʊn əɹ ɑɹmz tə hɝ saɪdz, ɹæp taɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ lɛɡz, ən ə siθɪŋ bɔl ə blæk əpɪɹɾ ɪn əɹ maʊθ, fɔɹsɪŋ əɹ dʒɔz waɪd. ʃi ɹɪθ ðɛɹ, stændɪŋ neɪkəɾ ən hɛlpləs, ən ðə lʊk ɪn əɹ ɹoʊlɪŋ aɪz meɪɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn wɑnə sɔɪl hɝsɛlf. "du jə wɑnə noʊ waɪ wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən mʌs bi pʌnɪʃt?" ðə vɔɪs wɑz ə boʊn-ɡɹeɪɾɪŋ ɹæsp wʌns mɔɹ, ðə mɹdʒɹɑl simɪŋli oʊnli ə tu-tɔl lɝk, bʌɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn wɑz nɑt fuld. "du jə wɑnə wɑtʃ?" ɪɾ æskt.

Shaking visibly, the Chosen opened her mouth, perhaps to plead, but suddenly black fire flashed around her, and she screamed as her clothing fell away in dust. Bands of black flame bound her arms to her sides, wrapped tight around her legs, and a seething ball of black appeared in her mouth, forcing her jaws wide. She writhed there, standing naked and helpless, and the look in her rolling eyes made Alviarin want to soil herself. "Do you want to know why one of the Chosen must be punished?" The voice was a bone-grating rasp once more, the Myrddraal seemingly only a too-tall Lurk, but Alviarin was not fooled. "Do you want to watch?" it asked.

ʃi ʃəd ɡoʊ feɪsdaʊn ɑn ðə flɔɹ, ɡɹɑvəl fəɹ əɹ laɪf, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt muv. ʃi kəd nɑt lʊk əweɪ fɹəm ðəɾ aɪləs stɛɹ. "noʊ, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd," ʃi mænədʒd wɪð ə maʊθ əz dʒɹaɪ əz dʌst. ʃi nu. ɪt kəd nɑt bi, bʌt ʃi nu. tɪɹz wɝ ɹoʊlɪŋ daʊn əɹ tʃiks, ʃi ɹilaɪzd.

She should go facedown on the floor, grovel for her life, but she could not move. She could not look away from that eyeless stare. "No, Great Lord," she managed with a mouth as dry as dust. She knew. It could not be, but she knew. Tears were rolling down her cheeks, she realized.

ðə mɹdʒɹɑl smaɪld əɡɛn. "mɛni hæv fɔlən fɹəm ɡɹeɪt haɪts fəɹ wɑntɪŋ tə noʊ tu mʌtʃ."

The Myrddraal smiled again. "Many have fallen from great heights for wanting to know too much."

ɪt floʊd təwɔɹɾ əɹ - noʊ; nɑɾ ɪt - ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, kloʊðd ɪn ðə skɪn ʌv ə mɹdʒɹɑl, floʊd təwɔɹd hɝ. hi wɔkt ɑn lɛɡz, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ʌðɝ dɪskɹɪpʃən fəɹ ðə weɪ hi muvd. ðə peɪl, blæk-klæd ʃeɪp bɛn təwɔɹd hɝ, ən ʃi wʊɾə ʃɹikt wən i tʌtʃt ə fɪŋɡɝ tə hɝ fɔɹhɛd. ʃi wʊɾə ʃɹikt ɪf ʃi cʊɾə sʌmən ɛni saʊn əɾ ɔl. hɝ lʌŋz wɝ ɛɹləs sæks. ðə tʌtʃ bɝn laɪk ɹɛd-hɑɾ aɪɝn. veɪɡli, ʃi wʌndɝd waɪ ʃi dɪd nɑt smɛl əɹ oʊn flɛʃ bɝnɪŋ. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd stʃɹeɪɾənd, ən ðə sɪɹɪŋ peɪn dwɪndəld, vænɪʃt. hɝ tɛɹɝ dɪd nɑt lɛsən ɪn ðə slaɪɾəst, ðoʊ.

It flowed toward her - no; not it - the Great Lord, clothed in the skin of a Myrddraal, flowed toward her. He walked on legs, yet there was no other description for the way he moved. The pale, black-clad shape bent toward her, and she would have shrieked when he touched a finger to her forehead. She would have shrieked if she could have summoned any sound at all. Her lungs were airless sacks. The touch burned like red-hot iron. Vaguely, she wondered why she did not smell her own flesh burning. The Great Lord straightened, and the searing pain dwindled, vanished. Her terror did not lessen in the slightest, though.

"ju ɑɹ mɑɹkt əz maɪn," ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd ɹæspt. "mɛsænə wɪl nɑt hɑɹm ju, naʊ. ənlɛs aɪ ɡɪv əɹ pɝmɪʃən. jəl faɪn u θɹɛɾənz maɪ kɹitʃɝz hɪɹ ən dɪlɪvɝ əm tə mi." hi tɝn əweɪ fɹəm hɝ, ən ðə dɑɹk ɑɹmɝ fɛl fɹəm ɪz bɑɾi. ʃi wɑz stɑɹɾəld wən ɪt hɪt ðə kɑɹpəɾɪd flɔɹ taɪlz wɪð ə kɹæʃ ə stil ɹæðɝ ðən sɪmpli vænɪʃɪŋ. hi wɑz kloʊðd ɪn blæk, ən ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv sɛd wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz sɪlk əɹ lɛðɝ əɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. ðə dɑɹknəs ʌv ɪt sim tə dʒɹɪŋk ðə laɪt fɹəm ðə ɹum. mɛsænə bɪɡæn tə θɹæʃ ɪn əɹ bɑnz, kinɪŋ ʃɹɪli pæs ðə ɡæɡ ɪn əɹ maʊθ. "ɡoʊ naʊ," hi sɛd, "ɪf jə wɪʃ tə lɪv ənʌðɝ aʊɝ." ðə saʊn kʌmɪŋ fɹəm mɛsænə ɹoʊz tə ə dɪspɛɹɪŋ skɹim.

"You are marked as mine," the Great Lord rasped. "Mesaana will not harm you, now. Unless I give her permission. You will find who threatens my creatures here and deliver them to me." He turned away from her, and the dark armor fell from his body. She was startled when it hit the carpeted floor tiles with a crash of steel rather than simply vanishing. He was clothed in black, and she could not have said whether it was silk or leather or something else. The darkness of it seemed to drink the light from the room. Mesaana began to thrash in her bonds, keening shrilly past the gag in her mouth. "Go now," he said, "if you wish to live another hour." The sound coming from Mesaana rose to a despairing scream.

ɑlviɛɝɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ ʃi ɡɑɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ ɹumz - ʃi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn haʊ ʃi wɑz əpɹaɪt wən əɹ lɛɡz fɛlt laɪk wɔɾɝ - bʌt ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz, skɝts pʊl tə hɝ niz ən ɹʌnɪŋ əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kʊd. sʌɾənli ðə hɛɾ ʌv ə waɪd stɛɹkeɪs lumd ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ən ʃi bɛɹli mænədʒ tə stɑp fɹəm ɹʌnɪŋ ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ. sæɡɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl, ʃeɪkɪŋ, ʃi stɛɹd daʊn ðə kɝvɪŋ flaɪɾ ʌv waɪt mɑɹbəl stɛps. ɪn əɹ maɪnd, ʃi kəd si hɝ bɑɾi bɹeɪkɪŋ əz ɪt kɹæʃt daʊn ðə stɛɹweɪ.

Alviarin did not know how she got out of her rooms - she could not understand how she was upright when her legs felt like water - but she found herself running through the corridors, skirts pulled to her knees and running as hard as she could. Suddenly the head of a wide staircase loomed in front of her, and she barely managed to stop from running right out into the air. Sagging against the wall, shaking, she stared down the curving flight of white marble steps. In her mind, she could see her body breaking as it crashed down the stairway.

bɹiðɪŋ ɹæədli, ɪn hɔɹs, ɹɔ-θɹoʊɾɪd pæns, ʃi pʊɾ ə tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ hæn tə hɝ fɔɹhɛd. hɝ θɔts tʌmbəld wʌn oʊvɝ ənʌðɝ, əz ʃi wəɾ əv daʊn ðə stɛɹz. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd hæd mɑɹkt əɹ əz hɪz. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz slɪɾ əkɹɔs smuð ənblɛmɪʃt skɪn. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz pɹaɪz nɑlədʒ - paʊɝ ɡɹu fɹəm nɑlədʒ  - bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə noʊ wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹumz ʃi hæd lɛft.

Breathing raggedly, in hoarse, raw-throated pants, she put a trembling hand to her forehead. Her thoughts tumbled one over another, as she would have down the stairs. The Great Lord had marked her as his. Her fingers slid across smooth unblemished skin. She had always prized knowledge - power grew from knowledge  - but she did not want to know what was happening in the rooms she had left.

ʃi wɪʃt ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ wɑz hæpənɪŋ. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd hæd mɑɹk hɝ, bʌt mɛsænə wəd faɪn ə weɪ tə kɪl hɝ, fəɹ noʊɪŋ ðæt. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd hæd mɑɹkt əɹ ən ɡɪvən əɹ ə kəmænd. ʃi kəd lɪv, ɪf ʃi faʊn u wɑz hʌntɪŋ ðə blæk ədʒɑ. stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ əɹ bæk wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ʃi hɝidli skɹʌbd ət ðə tɪɹz ɑn əɹ tʃiks wɪð ðə hilz ə hɝ pɑmz. ʃi kəd nɑt pʊl əɹ aɪz əweɪ fɹəm ðə stɛɹz fɔlɪŋ əweɪ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. ɪleɪɾə ʃʊɹli səspɛktəd hɝ, bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɔɹ tə ɪt ðən ðæt, ʃi kəɾ ɔlweɪz mænjəfæktʃɝ ə hʌnt. ɪt dʒʌs hæd tə ɪnkluɾ ɪleɪɾə hɝsɛlf əz ə θɹɛt tə bi ɪkstɪŋɡwɪʃt.

She wished she did not know that anything was happening. The Great Lord had marked her, but Mesaana would find a way to kill her, for knowing that. The Great Lord had marked her and given her a command. She could live, if she found who was hunting the Black Ajah. Straightening her back with an effort, she hurriedly scrubbed at the tears on her cheeks with the heels of her palms. She could not pull her eyes away from the stairs falling away in front of her. Elaida surely suspected her, but if there was no more to it than that, she could always manufacture a hunt. It just had to include Elaida herself as a threat to be extinguished.

dɪlɪvɝd tə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz flʌɾɝd tə hɝ fɔɹhɛɾ əɡɛn. ʃi hæd ðə blæk ədʒɑ əɾ əɹ kəmænd. smuð, ənblɛmɪʃt skɪn. tælin hæd bɪn ðɛɹ, ɪn ɪleɪɾəz ɹumz. waɪ hæd ʃi lʊkt ət jukɪɝi ən dʌsin ðət weɪ? tælin wɑz blæk, ðoʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ ðəɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn wɑz, ʌv kɔɹs. wəɾ ɛni mɑɹk ʃoʊ ɪn ə mɪɹɝ? wɑz ðəɹ sʌmθɪŋ ðəɾ ʌðɝz kəd si? ɪf ʃi hæd tə mænjəfæktʃɝ ə skim fəɹ ɪleɪɾəz səpoʊz hʌntɝz, tælin maɪt bi ə pleɪs tə stɑɹt. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə tʃɹeɪs ðə ɹuɾ ɛni mɛsədʒ wʊɾə teɪkən fɹəm hɑɹt tə hɑɹt bɪfɔɹ ɪt ɹitʃt tælin, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt stɑp stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ðə stɛɹz, siɪŋ əɹ bɑɾi baʊns ən bɹeɪk ɪts weɪ tə ðə bɑɾəm. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd hæd mɑɹk hɝ.

Delivered to the Great Lord. Her fingers fluttered to her forehead again. She had the Black Ajah at her command. Smooth, unblemished skin. Talene had been there, in Elaida's rooms. Why had she looked at Yukiri and Doesine that way? Talene was Black, though she did not know that Alviarin was, of course. Would any mark show in a mirror? Was there something that others could see? If she had to manufacture a scheme for Elaida's supposed hunters, Talene might be a place to start. She tried to trace the route any message would have taken from heart to heart before it reached Talene, but she could not stop staring down the stairs, seeing her body bounce and break its way to the bottom. The Great Lord had marked her.

tʃæptɝ twɛntiɾu

CHAPTER 22

wʌn ænsɝ ɪvɑɹə weɪɾəd wɪð ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɪmpeɪʃəns waɪl ðə slɪm lɪɾəl æksɛptɪd pleɪs ðə ɹɪm sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ ɑn ə saɪd teɪbəl ən ənkʌvɝd ðə dɪʃ ə keɪks. ə ʃɔɹt wʊmən wɪð ə sɪɹiəs feɪs, peɪdʒɹə wɑz nɑt biɪŋ læɡɝd, əɹ ɹɪzɛnfəl oʊvɝ hævɪŋ tə spɛn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ fɛtʃɪŋ ən kæɹiɪŋ fəɹ ə sɪɾɝ, dʒʌs pɹɪsaɪs ən kɛɹfəl. ðoʊz wɝ jusfəl kwɑləɾiz, tə bi ɛnkɝɪdʒd. stɪl, wən ði æksɛptɪɾ æskt wɛðɝ ʃi ʃəd pɔɹ ðə waɪn, pɛvɑɹə sɛd kɹɪspli, "wi wɪl də fəɹ aʊɝsɛlvz, tʃaɪld. jə meɪ weɪɾ ɪn ði æntəɹum." ʃi ɔlmoʊs toʊl ðə jʌŋ wʊmən tə ɡoʊ bæk tə hɝ stʌɾiz.

One Answer evara waited with a touch of impatience while the slim little Accepted placed the rimmed silver tray on a side table and uncovered the dish of cakes. A short woman with a serious face, Pedra was not being laggard, or resentful over having to spend the morning fetching and carrying for a Sitter, just precise and careful. Those were useful qualities, to be encouraged. Still, when the accepted asked whether she should pour the wine, Pevara said crisply, "We will do for ourselves, child. You may wait in the anteroom." She almost told the young woman to go back to her studies.

peɪdʒɹə spɹɛɾ əɹ bændɪd waɪt skɝts ɪn ə ɡɹeɪsfəl kɝtsi wɪθaʊɾ ɛni saɪn ə biɪŋ flʌstɝd ðə weɪ æksɛptɪɾ ɔfən wɝ wən ə sɪɾɝ ʃoʊd snæpɪʃnəs. ɔl tu fɹikwənli, æksɛptɪd tʊk ɛni baɪɾ ɪn ə sɪɾɝz toʊn əz ən əpɪnjən ɑn ðɛɹ fɪtnəs fəɹ ðə ʃɔl, əz ɪf sɪɾɝz hæd noʊ ʌðɝ kənsɝnz.

Pedra spread her banded white skirts in a graceful curtsy without any sign of being flustered the way Accepted often were when a Sitter showed snappishness. All too frequently, Accepted took any bite in a Sitter's tone as an opinion on their fitness for the shawl, as if Sitters had no other concerns.

pɛvɑɹə weɪɾəd əntɪl ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn peɪdʒɹə ən ðə lætʃ klɪk bɪfɔɹ nɑɾɪŋ əpɹuvɪŋli. "ðæt wʌn wɪl bi ɹeɪzd ɛɛs sədaɪ sun," ʃi sɛd. ɪt wɑz sæɾɪsfaɪɪŋ wən ɛni wʊmən əteɪn ðə ʃɔl, bʌɾ ɪspɛʃli wən ðə wʊmən hæɾ əpɪɹɾ ənpɹɔmɪsɪŋ tə bɪɡɪn wɪð. smɔl plɛʒɝz sim ði oʊnli wʌnz əveɪləbəl, ðiz deɪz.

Pevara waited until the door closed behind Pedra and the latch clicked before nodding approvingly. "That one will be raised Aes Sedai soon," she said. It was satisfying when any woman attained the shawl, but especially when the woman had appeared unpromising to begin with. Small pleasures seemed the only ones available, these days.

"nɑt wʌn ʌv aʊɝz, ðoʊ, aɪ θɪŋk" wɑz ðə ɹɪplaɪ fɹəm əɹ sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ ɡɛst, hu tɝn fɹəm ə stʌɾi ʌv ðə ɹoʊ ʌv peɪntəd mɪniətʃɝz ə pɛvɑɹəz dɛd fæmli ðət stʊɾ ɪn ə laɪn ɑn ðə weɪvkɑɹv mɑɹbəl mæntəl əbʌv ðə faɪɝpleɪs. "ʃiz ənsɝɾən əbaʊt mɛn. aɪ bɪliv ðeɪ meɪk əɹ nɝvəs." tɑɹnə sɝɾənli hæd nɛvɝ bɪn nɝvəs əbaʊt mɛn əɹ vɛɹi mʌtʃ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, ət lis nɑt sɪns ʃi ɹitʃt ðə ʃɔl dʒʌst oʊvɝ twɛnti jɪɹz əɡoʊ. pɛvɑɹə kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ə vɛɹi dʒʌmpi nɑvəs, bʌt ðə peɪl-hɛɹd wʊmənz blu aɪz wɝ stɛɾi əz stoʊnz, naʊ. ən əbaʊɾ əz wɔɹm əz stoʊnz ɪn wɪntɝ. ivən soʊ, ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðət kul pɹaɪdfəl feɪs, sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə sɛɾ ə hɝ maʊθ, ðət meɪɾ əɹ sim ənizi ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. pɛvɑɹə kəd hɑɹdli ɪmædʒən wʌt maɪt meɪk tɑɹnə fiɹ nɝvəs.

"Not one of ours, though, I think" was the reply from her surprising guest, who turned from a study of the row of painted miniatures of Pevara's dead family that stood in a line on the wavecarved marble mantel above the fireplace. "She's uncertain about men. I believe they make her nervous." Tarna certainly had never been nervous about men or very much of anything else, at least not since she reached the shawl just over twenty years ago. Pevara could remember a very jumpy novice, but the pale-haired woman's blue eyes were steady as stones, now. And about as warm as stones in winter. Even so, there was something in that cool prideful face, something in the set of her mouth, that made her seem uneasy this morning. Pevara could hardly imagine what might make Tarna Feir nervous.

ðə ɹil kwɛstʃən, ðoʊ, wɑz waɪ ðə wʊmən hæd kʌm tə si hɝ. ɪt bɔɹɾɝd ɑn ɪmpɹəpɹaɪəɾi fəɹ əɹ tə vɪzəɾ ɛni sɪɾɝ pɹaɪvətli, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ə ɹɛd. tɑɹnə stɪl meɪnteɪn əɹ ɹumz hɪɹ ɪn ðə ɹɛd kɔɹɾɝ, bʌt soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi hɛld əɹ nu pəzɪʃən, ʃi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ dɪspaɪt ðə kɹɪmzən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ɑn əɹ dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛs. dɪleɪɪŋ ðə muv tə hɝ nu əpɑɹtmən maɪt bi teɪkən əz ə ʃoʊ ʌv dɛləkəsi, baɪ ðoʊz u dɪd nɑt noʊ hɝ.

The real question, though, was why the woman had come to see her. It bordered on impropriety for her to visit any Sitter privately, particularly a Red. Tarna still maintained her rooms here in the Red quarter, but so long as she held her new position, she was no longer part of the Red Ajah despite the crimson embroidery on her dark gray dress. Delaying the move to her new apartment might be taken as a show of delicacy, by those who did not know her.

ɛniθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi meɪd pɛvɑɹə wɛɹi sɪns sin hæd pʊld əɹ ɪndə hʌntɪŋ ðə blæk ədʒɑ. ən ɪleɪɾə tʃɹʌstɪd tɑɹnə, dʒʌst əz ʃi hæd tʃɹʌstɪd ɡəlinə; ɪt wɑz waɪz tə bi vɛɹi kɔʃəs wɪð ɛniwʌn ɪleɪɾə tʃɹʌstɪd. dʒʌs θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɡəlinə - ðə laɪt bɝn ðə wʊmən fɝɛvɝ! - stɪl sɛt pɛvɑɹəz tiθ ɑn ɛdʒ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə sɛkən kənɛkʃən. ɡəlinə hæd teɪkən ə spɛʃəl ɪntʃɹəst ɪn tɑɹnə əz ə nɑvəs, tu. tʃɹu, ɡəlinə hæd teɪkən ən ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ɛni nɑvəs əɹ æksɛptɪd ʃi θɔt maɪt dʒɔɪn ðə ɹɛd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ənʌðɝ ɹizən fəɹ kɑʃən.

Anything out of the ordinary made Pevara wary since Seaine had pulled her into hunting the Black Ajah. And Elaida trusted Tarna, just as she had trusted Galina; it was wise to be very cautious with anyone Elaida trusted. Just thinking of Galina - the Light burn the woman forever! - still set Pevara's teeth on edge, but there was a second connection. Galina had taken a special interest in Tarna as a novice, too. True, Galina had taken an interest in any novice or Accepted she thought might join the Red, but it was another reason for caution.

nɑt ðət pɑvɑɹə lɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ ʃoʊ ɑn əɹ feɪs, ʌv kɔɹs. ʃi hæd bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ tu lɔŋ fəɹ ðæt. smaɪlɪŋ, ʃi ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə lɔŋ-nɛk sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ ðət sæɾ ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ ɡɪvɪŋ ɔf ðə swit sɛn ə spaɪsəz. "wɪl jə teɪk waɪn, tɑɹnə, ɪn kənɡɹætʃəleɪʃən fəɹ biɪŋ ɹeɪzd?" sɪlvɝ ɡoʊbləts ɪn hænd, ðeɪ sɛɾəld ɑn spaɪɹəl-wɝkt ɑɹmtʃɛɹz, ə staɪl ðət hæd ɡɔn aʊɾ ə fæʃən ɪn kændɝ nɪɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɡoʊ, bʌt wʌn ðət pɛvɑɹə laɪkt. ʃi sɔ noʊ ɹizən tə tʃeɪnʒ əɹ fɝnɪtʃɝ əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə wɪmz ə ðə moʊmənt. ðə tʃɛɹz hæd sɝvd əɹ sɪns ðeɪ wɝ nu-meɪd, ən ðeɪ wɝ kʌmftəɹbəl wɪð ði ədɪʃən ʌv ə fju kʊʃənz. tɑɹnə sæt stɪfli, haʊɛvɝ, ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ sit. noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ kɔld əɹ læŋɡwəd, bʌt klɪɹli ʃi wɑz ənizi.

Not that Pavara let anything show on her face, of course. She had been Aes Sedai too long for that. Smiling, she reached for the long-necked silver pitcher that sat on the tray giving off the sweet scent of spices. "Will you take wine, Tarna, in congratulation for being raised?" Silver goblets in hand, they settled on spiral-worked armchairs, a style that had gone out of fashion in Kandor near a hundred years ago, but one that Pevara liked. She saw no reason to change her furniture or anything else according to the whims of the moment. The chairs had served her since they were new-made, and they were comfortable with the addition of a few cushions. Tarna sat stiffly, however, on the edge of her seat. No one had ever called her languid, but clearly she was uneasy.

"aɪ æm nɑt sɝɾən kənɡɹætʃəleɪʃənz ɑɹ ɪn ɔɹɾɝ," ʃi sɛd, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə nɛɹoʊ ɹɛd stoʊl dʒɹeɪpt ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk. ði ɪɡzækt ʃeɪd wɑz nɑt pɹiskɹaɪbd, ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɛniwʌn u sɔ ɪt mʌs kɔl ðə kʌlɝ ɹɛd, ən ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən ə bɹɪljən skɑɹlət ðət nɪɹli ʃoʊn. "ɪleɪɾə ɪnsɪstəd, ən aɪ kəd nɑt ɹəfjuz.

"I am not certain congratulations are in order," she said, fingering the narrow red stole draped around her neck. The exact shade was not prescribed, except that anyone who saw it must call the color red, and she had chosen a brilliant scarlet that nearly shone. "Elaida insisted, and I could not refuse.

mʌtʃ əz tʃeɪnʒd sɪns aɪ lɛf ðə taʊɝ, ɪnsaɪɾ əz wɛl əz aʊt. ɑlviɛɝɪn meɪɾ ɛvɹiwʌn . . . wɑtʃfəl . . .

Much has changed since I left the Tower, inside as well as out. Alviarin made everyone . . . watchful . . .

ʌv ðə kipɝ. aɪ səspɛk səm wɪl wɑn əɹ bɝtʃt, wən ʃi faɪnəli ɹɪtɝnz. ən ɪleɪɾə. . . . " ʃi pɔz tə sɪp əɾ əɹ waɪn, bʌt wən ʃi loʊɝd ðə ɡɑblət, ʃi wɛn ɑn ɪn ə dɪfɹən veɪn. "aɪ hæv ɔfən hɝd jə kɔld ʌnkənvɛnʃənəl. aɪ hæv ivən hɝd ðət jə wʌns sɛd jə wəd laɪk tə hæv ə wɔɹɾɝ." "aɪv bɪn kɔld wɝs ðən ʌnkənvɛnʃənəl," pɛvɑɹə sɛd dʒɹaɪli. wʌt hæd ðə wʊmən bɪn əbaʊt tə seɪ kənsɝnɪŋ ɪleɪɾə? ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi wʊɾə ɹəfjuz ðə kipɝz stoʊl, ɡɪvən əɹ wɪʃɪz. stʃɹeɪnʒ. tɑɹnə wɑz hɑɹdli ʃaɪ əɹ ʃɹɪŋkɪŋ. saɪləns sim bɛst. ɪspɛʃli əbaʊt wɔɹɾɝz. ʃi hæd bɪn tɔkɪŋ tu mʌtʃ ɪt ðət wɑz dʒɛnɝəl ɡɑsəp. bɪsaɪdz, kip saɪlən lɔŋ ɪnʌf, ən ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ɔlweɪz spoʊk ɪf oʊnli tə fɪl ʌp ðə ɡæp. jə kəd lɝn ə ɡɹeɪt dil θɹu saɪləns. ʃi sɪpt əɹ oʊn waɪn sloʊli. ðəɹ wɑz tu mʌtʃ hʌni ɪn ɪt fəɹ əɹ teɪst, ən nɑɾ ɪnʌf dʒɪnʒɝ.

of the Keeper. I suspect some will want her birched, when she finally returns. And Elaida. . . . " She paused to sip at her wine, but when she lowered the goblet, she went on in a different vein. "I have often heard you called unconventional. I have even heard that you once said you would like to have a Warder." "I've been called worse than unconventional," Pevara said dryly. What had the woman been about to say concerning Elaida? She sounded as though she would have refused the Keeper's stole, given her wishes. Strange. Tarna was hardly shy or shrinking. Silence seemed best. Especially about Warders. She had been talking too much it that was general gossip. Besides, keep silent long enough, and the other woman always spoke if only to fill up the gap. You could learn a great deal through silence. She sipped her own wine slowly. There was too much honey in it for her taste, and not enough ginger.

stɪl stɪf, tɑɹnə ɹoʊz ən stʃɹoʊd tə ðə faɪɝpleɪs, wɛɹ ʃi stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə mɪniətʃɝz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ waɪt lækɝd stænz. ʃi ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə tʌtʃ wʌn ə ði aɪvɝi oʊvəlz, ən pɛvɑɹə fɛlt əɹ oʊn ʃoʊldɝz taɪɾən ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf. ɡeɪɔɹɡ, hɝ jʌŋɡəs bɹʌðɝ, hæd bɪn oʊnli twɛlv wən i daɪd, wən ɔl ə ðə pipəl ɪn ðoʊz peɪntɪŋz daɪd, ɪn ən əpɹaɪzɪŋ baɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnz.

Still stiff, Tarna rose and strode to the fireplace, where she stood staring at the miniatures sitting on their white lacquered stands. She raised a hand to touch one of the ivory ovals, and Pevara felt her own shoulders tighten in spite of herself. Georg, her youngest brother, had been only twelve when he died, when all of the people in those paintings died, in an uprising by Darkfriends.

ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn ə fæmli hu kəɾ əfɔɹɾ aɪvɝi mɪniətʃɝz, bʌt wʌns ʃi hæd ðə kɔɪn, ʃi faʊn ə peɪntɝ u kəd kæptʃɝ əɹ mɛmɹiz. ə bjuɾəfəl bɔɪ, ɡeɪɔɹɡ, tɔl fəɹ ɪz jɪɹz ən ʌɾɝli fɪɹləs. lɔŋ æftɝ ði ɪvɛnt, ʃi hæd lɝn haʊ hɝ beɪbi bɹʌðɝ daɪd. wɪð ə naɪf ɪn ɪz hænd, stændɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ fɑðɝz bɑɾi ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ðə mɑb fɹəm ðɛɹ mʌðɝ. soʊ mɛni jɪɹz əɡoʊ, naʊ.

They had not been a family who could afford ivory miniatures, but once she had the coin, she found a painter who could capture her memories. A beautiful boy, Georg, tall for his years and utterly fearless. Long after the event, she had learned how her baby brother died. With a knife in his hand, standing over their father's body and trying to keep the mob from their mother. So many years ago, now.

ðeɪ wəɾ ɔl əv bɪn lɔŋ dɛɾ ɪn ɛni keɪs, ən ðɛɹ tʃɪlʒɹənz tʃɪlʒɹənz tʃɪlʒɹən, əz wɛl. bʌt səm heɪtʃɹədz nɛvɝ daɪd. "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz tɑvɝən, soʊ aɪ hæv hɝd," tɑɹnə sɛd faɪnəli, stɪl stɛɹɪŋ ət ɡeɪɔɹɡz pɪktʃɝ. "du jə θɪŋk i ɔltɝz tʃæns ɛvɹiwɛɹ? əɹ də wi tʃeɪnʒ ðə fjutʃɝ baɪ aʊɝsɛlvz, wʌn stɛp fɑloʊɪŋ ənʌðɝ əntɪl wi faɪn aʊɝsɛlvz sʌmwɛɹ wi nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd?"

They would all have been long dead in any case, and their children's children's children, as well. But some hatreds never died. "The Dragon Reborn is ta'veren, so I have heard," Tarna said finally, still staring at Georg's picture. "Do you think he alters chance everywhere? Or do we change the future by ourselves, one step following another until we find ourselves somewhere we never expected?"

"wʌt dʒju min?" pɛvɑɹə sɛd, ə tʃɹaɪfəl mɔɹ kɝtli ðən ʃi kəɾ əv wɪʃt. ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk ði ʌðɝ wʊmən piɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ bɹʌðɝz ɪmədʒ soʊ ɪntɛnli waɪl tɔkɪŋ ʌv ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl, ivən ɪf i wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ʃi bɪɾ əɹ lɪp soʊ əz nɑt tə tɛl tɑɹnə tə tɝn ɝaʊn ən lʊk ət hɝ. jə kəd nɑt ɹɛd sʌmwʌnz bæk ðə weɪ jə kəɾ ə feɪs.

"What do you mean?" Pevara said, a trifle more curtly than she could have wished. She did not like the other woman peering at her brother's image so intently while talking of a man who could channel, even if he was the Dragon Reborn. She bit her lip so as not to tell Tarna to turn around and look at her. You could not read someone's back the way you could a face.

"aɪ æntɪsəpeɪɾəd noʊ ɡɹeɪt dɪfəkəlti ɪn sɑlədɑɹ. noʊ ɡɹeɪt səksɛs, iðɝ, bʌt wʌɾ aɪ faʊnd. . . ." wɑz ðəɾ ə ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛd, əɹ hæd ʃi mɪɹli tʃeɪnʒd ði æŋɡəl ət wɪtʃ ʃi wɑz piɹɪŋ ət ðə mɪniətʃʊɹ?

"I anticipated no great difficulty in Salidar. No great success, either, but what I found. . . ." Was that a shake of her head, or had she merely changed the angle at which she was peering at the miniature?

ʃi spoʊk sloʊli, bʌt wɪð ən ʌndɝkɝən ə ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɝdʒənsi. "aɪ lɛft ə pɪdʒən-hænlɝ ə deɪ aʊtsaɪd ðə vɪlədʒ, jɛɾ ɪt tʊk mi lɛs ðən hæf ə deɪ tə ɡɛt bæk tə hɝ, ən æftɝ aɪ lus ðə bɝdz wɪð kɑpiz ə maɪ ɹipɔɹt, aɪ pɹɛst ɑn soʊ hɑɹɾ aɪ hæd tə peɪ ðə wʊmən ɔf kəz ʃi kəd nɑt kip ʌp. aɪ kən hɑɹdli seɪ haʊ mɛni hɔɹsəz aɪ wɛn θɹu. səmtaɪmz, ði ænəməl wɑz spɛn tə ðə pɔɪn aɪ hæd tə ʃoʊ maɪ ɹɪŋ tə meɪk ə steɪbəl teɪk ɪɾ ɪn tʃɹeɪd, ivən wɪð sɪlvɝ æɾəd. ən kəz aɪ pɹɛst soʊ hɑɹd, aɪ hæpən tə ɹitʃ ə vɪlədʒ ɪn mʊɹændi waɪl ə . . . ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ pɑɹɾi . . . wɑz ðɛɹ. ɪf aɪ hæd nɑt bɪn fɹaɪɾənd aʊɾ ə maɪ wɪts fəɹ ðə taʊɝ baɪ wʌɾ aɪ sɔ ɪn sɑlədɑɹ, aɪ wʊɾə ɹɪɾən tə ɛbu dɑɹ ən teɪkən ʃɪp fəɹ ɪljən ən ðən ʌpɹɪvɝ, bʌt ðə θɔɾ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ saʊθ ɪnstɛɾ ə nɔɹθ, ðə θɔɾ ʌv weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ə vɛsəl, sɛn mi laɪk ən æɹoʊ təwɔɹd tɑɹ vəlɑn. soʊ aɪ wɑz ɪn ðət vɪlədʒ tə si ðɛm."

She spoke slowly, but with an undercurrent of remembered urgency. "I left a pigeon-handler a day outside the village, yet it took me less than half a day to get back to her, and after I loosed the birds with copies of my report, I pressed on so hard I had to pay the woman off because she could not keep up. I can hardly say how many horses I went through. Sometimes, the animal was spent to the point I had to show my ring to make a stable take it in trade, even with silver added. And because I pressed so hard, I happened to reach a village in Murandy while a . . . recruiting party . . . was there. If I had not been frightened out of my wits for the Tower by what I saw in Salidar, I would have ridden to Ebou Dar and taken ship for Illian and then upriver, but the thought of going south instead of north, the thought of waiting for a vessel, sent me like an arrow toward Tar Valon. So I was in that village to see them."

"hu, tɑɹnə?"

"Who, Tarna?"

"æʃəmən." ðə wʊmən dɪd tɝn ðɛn. hɝ aɪz wɝ stɪl blu aɪs, bʌt taɪt. ʃi hɛld əɹ ɡɑbləɾ ɪn boʊθ hænz əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə soʊk ɪn ðə wɔɹmθ. "aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ ðɛn, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ oʊpənli ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ mɛn tə fɑloʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən ɪt simd waɪzəs tə lɪsən bɪfɔɹ aɪ spoʊk. wɛl fəɹ mi ðəɾ aɪ dɪd. ðəɹ wɝ sɪks ə ðɛm, pɛvɑɹə, sɪks mɛn ɪn blæk koʊts. tu wɪð sɪlvɝ sɔɹdz ɑn ðɛɹ kɑlɝz wɝ filɪŋ mɛn aʊɾ əbaʊt wɛðɝ ðeɪ maɪt laɪk tə lɝn tə tʃænəl. oʊ, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt seɪ soʊ ɹaɪɾ aʊt. wil ðə laɪtnɪŋz, ðeɪ kɔld ɪt. wil ðə laɪtnɪŋz ən ɹaɪd ðə θʌndɝ.

"Asha'man." The woman did turn then. Her eyes were still blue ice, but tight. She held her goblet in both hands as if trying to soak in the warmth. "I did not know what they were then, of course, but they were openly recruiting men to follow the Dragon Reborn, and it seemed wisest to listen before I spoke. Well for me that I did. There were six of them, Pevara, six men in black coats. Two with silver swords on their collars were feeling men out about whether they might like to learn to channel. Oh, they did not say so right out. Wield the lightnings, they called it. Wield the lightnings and ride the thunder.

bʌɾ ɪt wɑz klɪɹ ɪnʌf tə mi, ɪf nɑt tə ðə fulz ðeɪ wɝ tɔkɪŋ tə."

But it was clear enough to me, if not to the fools they were talking to."

"jɛs; vɛɹi wɛl fəɹ jə ðət jə kɛp saɪlənt," pɛvɑɹə sɛd kwaɪətli. "sɪks mɛn u kən tʃænəl wəd bi mɔɹ ðən mɪɹli deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ ə sɪstɝ baɪ hɝsɛlf. əɹ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ɑɹ fʊl ə tɔk əbaʊt ðiz ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ pɑɹɾiz - ðeɪ əpɪɹ ɛvɹiwɛɹ fɹəm sɑldɑiə tə tɛɹ - bʌt noʊ wʌn simz tə hæv ən aɪdiə ʌv haʊ tə stɑp ðɛm. ɪf ɪɾ ɪzən tu leɪt fəɹ ðəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi." ʃi vɛɹi nɪɹli bɪɾ əɹ lɪp əɡɛn. ðət wɑz ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɪð tɔkɪŋ. səmtaɪmz, jə sɛd mɔɹ ðən jə wɑntəd.

"Yes; very well for you that you kept silent," Pevara said quietly. "Six men who can channel would be more than merely dangerous for a sister by herself. Our eyes-and-ears are full of talk about these recruiting parties - they appear everywhere from Saldaea to Tear - but no one seems to have an idea of how to stop them. If it isn't too late for that already." She very nearly bit her lip again. That was the trouble with talking. Sometimes, you said more than you wanted.

ɑdli, ðə kɑmɛn tʊk səm ə ðə stɪfnəs aʊɾ ə tɑɹnə. ʃi ɹɪzumd əɹ sit, linɪŋ bæk, ðoʊ ə hɪn ʌv wɛɹinɪs stɪl klʌŋ tə ðə weɪ ʃi hɛl hɝsɛlf. ʃi tʃoʊz əɹ wɝdz kɛɹfəli, pɔzɪŋ tə tʌtʃ ðə waɪn tə hɝ lɪps, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ æktʃəli  dʒɹɪŋk, ðət pɛvɑɹə sɔ. "aɪ hæɾ ə lɔŋ taɪm tə θɪŋk ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝʃɪp kʌmɪŋ nɔɹθ. lɔŋɡɝ, æftɝ ðə ful kæptən ɹæn əs əɡɹaʊn soʊ hɑɹɾ i bɹoʊk ə mæst ən pʊɾ ə hoʊl ɪn ðə hʌl. deɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə heɪl ənʌðɝ ʃɪp, æftɝ wi ɡɑɾ əʃɔɹ, ən deɪz faɪndɪŋ ə hɔɹs. sɪks ə ðoʊz mɛn sɛn tə wʌn vɪlədʒ kənvɪns mi, faɪnəli. oʊ, ðə dɪstʃɹɪkt ɝaʊnd, əz wɛl, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt vɛɹi pɑpjələs. aɪ. . . . aɪ ɪts ɪz tu leɪt."

Oddly, the comment took some of the stiffness out of Tarna. She resumed her seat, leaning back, though a hint of wariness still clung to the way she held herself. She chose her words carefully, pausing to touch the wine to her lips, but she did not actually drink, that Pevara saw. "I had a long time to think on the rivership coming north. Longer, after the fool captain ran us aground so hard he broke a mast and put a hole in the hull. Days trying to hail another ship, after we got ashore, and days finding a horse. Six of those men sent to one village convinced me, finally. Oh, the district around, as well, but it was not very populous. I. . . . I believe it is too late."

"ɪleɪɾə θɪŋks ðeɪ kən ɔl bi dʒɛntəld," pɛvɑɹə sɛd nɑnkəmɪɾəli. ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪkspoʊz hɝsɛlf tu mʌtʃ. "wɛn ðeɪ kən sɛn sɪks tə wʌn smɔl vɪlədʒ, ən tʃɹævəl? ðəɹ ɪz oʊnli wʌn ænsɝ aɪ kən si. wi. . . . " tɑɹnə tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə bɹaɪt ɹɛd stoʊl əɡɛn, bʌt naʊ ɪt simd mɔɹ ɪn ɹəɡɹɛt ðən tə pleɪ fəɹ taɪm. "ɹɛd sɪstɝz mʌs teɪk əm əz wɔɹɾɝz, pɛvɑɹə." ðət wɑz soʊ stɑɹtlɪŋ ðət pɛvɑɹə blɪŋkt. ə hɛɹ lɛs sɛlfkɑntʃɹɑl, ən ʃi wəɾ əv ɡeɪpt.

"Elaida thinks they can all be gentled," Pevara said noncommittally. She had already exposed herself too much. "When they can send six to one small village, and Travel? There is only one answer I can see. We. . . . " Tarna took a deep breath, fingering the bright red stole again, but now it seemed more in regret than to play for time. "Red sisters must take them as Warders, Pevara." That was so startling that Pevara blinked. A hair less selfcontrol, and she would have gaped.

"ɑɹ jə sɪɹiəs?" ðoʊz aɪsi blu aɪz mɛɾ əɹ ɡeɪz stɛɾəli. ðə wɝst wɑz pæs ði ənθɪŋkəbəl spoʊkən əlaʊd -  ən tɑɹnə wɑz ə wʊmən ə stoʊn wʌns mɔɹ. "ðɪs ɪz hɑɹdli ə mæɾɝ fəɹ dʒoʊkɪŋ. ði oʊnli ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs ɪz tə lɛɾ əm ɹʌn lus. hu ɛls kən də ɪt? ɹɛd sɪstɝz ɑɹ juz tə feɪsɪŋ mɛn laɪk ðɪs, ən ɹɛɾi tə teɪk ðə nɛsəsɛɹi ɹɪsks. ɛniwʌn ɛls wɪl flɪntʃ. itʃ sɪstɝ wɪl əv tə teɪk mɔɹ ðən wʌn, bʌt ɡɹinz əpɪɹ tə mænədʒ wɛl ɪnʌf wɪð ðæt. aɪ θɪŋk ðə ɡɹinz wɪl feɪn ɪf ðɪs ɪz sədʒɛstəd tə ðɛm, ðoʊ. wi . . . ɹɛd sɪstɝz . . . mʌs də wʌt nidz tə bi dʌn." "hæv jə bɹoʊtʃt ðɪs tə ɪleɪɾə?" pɛvɑɹə æskt, ən tɑɹnə ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli.

"Are you serious?" Those icy blue eyes met her gaze steadily. The worst was past the unthinkable spoken aloud -  and Tarna was a woman of stone once more. "This is hardly a matter for joking. The only other choice is to let them run loose. Who else can do it? Red sisters are used to facing men like this, and ready to take the necessary risks. Anyone else will flinch. Each sister will have to take more than one, but Greens appear to manage well enough with that. I think the Greens will faint if this is suggested to them, though. We . . . Red sisters . . . must do what needs to be done." "Have you broached this to Elaida?" Pevara asked, and Tarna shook her head impatiently.

"ɪleɪɾə bɪlivz əz jə sɛd. ʃi. . . . " ðə jɛloʊ-hɛɹd wʊmən fɹaʊn ɪndə hɝ waɪn bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. "ɪleɪɾə ɔfən bɪlivz wʌt ʃi wɑns tə bɪliv ən siz wʌt ʃi wɑns tə si. aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə bɹɪŋ ʌp ði æʃəmən ðə fɝs deɪ aɪ wɑz bæk. nɑt tə sədʒɛs bɑndɪŋ; nɑt tə hɝ. aɪm nɑɾ ə ful. ʃi fɝbeɪd mi tə mɛnʃən əm tə hɝ. bʌt jə ɑɹ . . . ʌnkənvɛnʃənəl." "æn dʒju bɪliv ðeɪ kən bi dʒɛntəld æftɝ ðəɹ bɑndəd? aɪ hæv noʊ aɪdiə wʌt ðət wəd də tə ðə sɪstɝ hoʊldɪŋ ðə bɑnd, ən ɪn tʃɹuθ, aɪ doʊnt wɑnə lɝn." ʃi wɑz ðə wʌn pleɪɪŋ fəɹ taɪm, pɛvɑɹə ɹilaɪzd. ʃi hæd hæd noʊ aɪdiə wɛɹ ðɪs ɪntɝvju wɑz hɛɾəd wən ɪt bɪɡæn, bʌt ʃi wʊɾə weɪdʒɝɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi oʊn əɡɛnst ɪt kʌmɪŋ tə ðɪs.

"Elaida believes as you said. She. . . . " The yellow-haired woman frowned into her wine before going on. "Elaida often believes what she wants to believe and sees what she wants to see. I tried to bring up the Asha'man the first day I was back. Not to suggest bonding; not to her. I am not a fool. She forbade me to mention them to her. But you are . . . unconventional." "And do you believe they can be gentled after they're bonded? I have no idea what that would do to the sister holding the bond, and in truth, I don't want to learn." She was the one playing for time, Pevara realized. She had had no idea where this interview was headed when it began, but she would have wagered everything she owned against it coming to this.

"ðæt maɪt bi ði ɛnd, ən ɪt maɪt pɹuv ɪmpɑsəbəl," ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ɹɪplaɪd kuli. ðə wʊmən wɑz stoʊn. "iðɝ weɪ, aɪ kən si noʊ ʌðɝ weɪ tə hændəl ðiz æʃəmən. ɹɛd sɪstɝz mʌs bɑn əm əz wɔɹɾɝz. ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ɛni weɪ, əl bi əmʌŋ ðə fɝst, bʌɾ ɪt mʌs bi dʌn." ʃi sæt ðɛɹ, kɑmli sɪpɪŋ əɹ waɪn, ən fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm, pɛvɑɹə kəɾ oʊnli stɛɹ əɾ əɹ ɪn kɑnstɝneɪʃən. nʌθɪŋ tɑɹnə hæd sɛd pɹuvd ʃi wɑz nɑt blæk ədʒɑ, jɛt ʃi kəd nɑt dɪstʃɹʌst ɛvɹi sɪstɝ əneɪbəl tə pɹuv ðæt. wɛl, ʃi kəɾ ən dɪd, wən ɪt keɪm tə mæɾɝz ə ðə blæk, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝ mæɾɝz ʃi hæd tə dil wɪð. ʃi wɑz ə sɪɾɝ, nɑt sɪmpli ə hʌntɪŋ dɔɡ. ʃi hæd ðə waɪt taʊɝ tə θɪŋk ʌv, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ fɑɹ fɹəm ðə taʊɝ. ən ðə fjutʃɝ.

"That might be the end, and it might prove impossible," the other woman replied coolly. The woman was stone. "Either way, I can see no other way to handle these Asha'man. Red sisters must bond them as Warders. If there is any way, I will be among the first, but it must be done." She sat there, calmly sipping her wine, and for a long time, Pevara could only stare at her in consternation. Nothing Tarna had said proved she was not Black Ajah, yet she could not distrust every sister unable to prove that. Well, she could and did, when it came to matters of the Black, but there were other matters she had to deal with. She was a Sitter, not simply a hunting dog. She had the White Tower to think of, and Aes Sedai far from the Tower. And the future.

dɪpɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɪndə hɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd bɛl paʊtʃ, ʃi dʒɹu aʊɾ ə smɔl pis ə peɪpɝ ɹoʊld ɪndə ə θɪn tub. ɪt sim tə hɝ ðəɾ ɪt ʃəd ɡloʊ wɪð lɛɾɝz ə faɪɝ. soʊ fɑɹ, ʃi wɑz wʌn ə tu wɪmən ɪn ðə taʊɝ u nu wʌt wɑz ɹɪɾən ðɛɹ. ivən wʌns ʃi hæɾ ɪɾ aʊt, ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ hændɪŋ ɪt tə tɑɹnə. "ðɪs keɪm fɹəm wʌn ʌv əɹ eɪdʒəns ɪn kɛɹhin, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz sɛn baɪ tʌvaɪn ɡæzəl." tɑɹnəz aɪz dʒɝk tə pɛvɑɹəz feɪs ət ðə mɛnʃən ə tʌvaɪnz neɪm, ðən fɛl tə ɹiɾɪŋ əɡɛn.

Dipping her fingers into her embroidered belt pouch, she drew out a small piece of paper rolled into a thin tube. It seemed to her that it should glow with letters of fire. So far, she was one of two women in the Tower who knew what was written there. Even once she had it out, she hesitated before handing it to Tarna. "This came from one of our agents in Cairhien, but it was sent by Toveine Gazal." Tarna's eyes jerked to Pevara's face at the mention of Toveine's name, then fell to reading again.

hɝ stoʊni feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ ivən æftɝ ʃi fɪnɪʃt ən lɛt ðə peɪpɝ ɹoʊl bæk ɪndə ə tub ɪn əɹ hænd.

Her stony face did not change even after she finished and let the paper roll back into a tube in her hand.

"ðɪs tʃeɪnʒəz nʌθɪŋ," ʃi sɛd flætli. koʊldli. "ɪɾ oʊnli meɪks wʌɾ aɪ sədʒɛs mɔɹ ɝdʒənt."

"This changes nothing," she said flatly. Coldly. "It only makes what I suggest more urgent."

"ɑn ðə kɑntʃɹɛɹi," pɛvɑɹə saɪd. "ðæt tʃeɪnʒəz ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ɪt tʃeɪnʒəz ðə hoʊl wɝld." tʃæptɝ twɛntiθɹi

"On the contrary," Pevara sighed. "That changes everything. It changes the whole world." CHAPTER 23

ɔɹnəməns ði ɛɹ ɪn ðə ɹum wɑz dʒʌst səfɪʃənli wɔɹmɝ ðən aʊtsaɪd tə pʊɾ ə mɪst ɑn ðə ɡlæs peɪnz sɛɾ ɪn ðə ɹɛd-peɪntəd keɪsməns, ən ðə ɡlæs kənteɪn bʌbəlz bɪsaɪdz, bʌt kædzueɪn stʊd piɹɪŋ aʊɾ əz ɪf ʃi kəd si ðə dʒɹɪɹi lændskeɪp klɪɹli. ʃi kəd si wɪð mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf klɛɹəɾi, ɪn ɛni keɪs.

Ornaments The air in the room was just sufficiently warmer than outside to put a mist on the glass panes set in the red-painted casements, and the glass contained bubbles besides, but Cadsuane stood peering out as if she could see the dreary landscape clearly. She could see with more than enough clarity, in any case.

ə fju hæpləs foʊk, bʌndəld ən hæɾɪd ən oʊnli ʃeɪpləs skɝts əɹ bæɡi bɹitʃɪz dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃɪŋ mɛn fɹəm wɪmən, wɝ tʃɹʌdʒɪŋ ðə mʌɾi filz ðət sɝaʊndəd ðə mænɝ haʊs, səmtaɪmz stupɪŋ tə fil ə hændfʊl ə ðə sɔɪl. ɪt wəd nɑt bi lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd bɪɡɪn ðɛɹ plaʊɪŋ ən mænɝɪŋ, bʌɾ oʊnli ðɛɹ ɪnspɛkʃən ɪndəkeɪɾəd ðə kʌmɪŋ ə spɹɪŋ ɛni taɪm sun. bɪɑn ðə filz, ðə fɔɹəst wɑz ɔl dɑɹk bɛɹ bɹæntʃəz əɡɛnst ə wɑʃɛdaʊt ɡɹeɪ mɔɹnɪŋ skaɪ. ə ɡʊd koʊɾɪŋ ə snoʊ wʊɾə meɪd ðə vju mʌtʃ lɛs blik, bʌɾ ɪt snoʊd laɪtli ən sɛldəm hɪɹ, wɪð tʃɹeɪsəz ʌv wʌn fɔl ɹɛɹli læstɪŋ əntɪl ðə nɛkst. stɪl, ʃi kəd θɪŋk ə fju pleɪsəz bɛɾɝ fəɹ əɹ pɝpəsəz, wɪð ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə deɪz hɑɹd ɹaɪd tə ði ist. hu wəd θɪŋk tə lʊk ɪnsaɪd ðə bɔɹɾɝz ə tiɹ? hæd kənvɪnsɪŋ ðə bɔɪ tə steɪ hɪɹ bɪn tu izi, ðoʊ? wɪð ə saɪ, ʃi tɝn fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ, filɪŋ ðə ɡoʊldən ɔɹnəməns hæŋɪŋ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ sweɪ, ðə smɔl munz ən stɑɹz, bɝdz ən fɪʃ. ʃi wɑz vɛɹi əwɛɹ ə ðɛm, ʌv leɪt. əwɛɹ? fɔ! ʌv leɪt, ʃi hæd kənsɪɾɝd slipɪŋ wɪð əm ɪn pleɪs.

A few hapless folk, bundled and hatted and only shapeless skirts or baggy breeches distinguishing men from women, were trudging the muddy fields that surrounded the manor house, sometimes stooping to feel a handful of the soil. It would not be long before they could begin their plowing and manuring, but only their inspection indicated the coming of spring any time soon. Beyond the fields, the forest was all dark bare branches against a washedout gray morning sky. A good coating of snow would have made the view much less bleak, but it snowed lightly and seldom here, with traces of one fall rarely lasting until the next. Still, she could think of few places better for her purposes, with the Spine of the World little more than a day's hard ride to the east. Who would think to look inside the borders of Tear? Had convincing the boy to stay here been too easy, though? With a sigh, she turned from the window, feeling the golden ornaments hanging in her hair sway, the small moons and stars, birds and fish. She was very aware of them, of late. Aware? Phaw! Of late, she had considered sleeping with them in place.

ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum wɑz lɑɹdʒ bʌt nɑɾ ɔɹneɪt, laɪk ðə mænɝ haʊs ɪtsɛlf, wɪð kɔɹnɪsəz ə kɑɹvd wʊd, peɪntəd ɹɛd. ðə fɝnɪtʃɝ wɑz bɹaɪt wɪð peɪn bʌt nɑɾ ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɪldɪŋ, ðə tu lɔŋ faɪɝpleɪsəz pleɪn stoʊn ɪf wɛl meɪd, ði ændaɪɝənz stɝɾi ɹɔt mɛɾəl meɪd fəɹ lɔŋ sɝvəs ɹæðɝ ðən əpɪɹənsəz. ðə faɪɝz ɑn ðə hɑɹθs wɝ smɔl, əɾ əɹ ɪnsɪstəns, ðə fleɪmz flɪkɝɪŋ loʊ ɑn hæf-kənsum splɪts, bʌɾ iðɝ wɑz ɪnʌf tə wɔɹm əɹ hænz, wɪtʃ wɑz ɔl ʃi wɑntəd. lɛf tə hɪz oʊn dɪvaɪsəz, ælɡɝɪn wʊɾə sɝaʊndəɾ əɹ wɪð bleɪzɪŋ wɔɹmθ ən smʌðɝɾ əɹ ɪn sɝvəns, fju əz i stɪl ɛmplɔɪd. ə lɛsɝ lɔɹɾ ə ðə lænd, hi wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm wɛlθi, jɛɾ i peɪɾ ɪz dɛts ɪn lɛɾɝ ən spɪɹət, ivən wən moʊst ʌðɝ mɛn wʊɾə sin kwaɪt ðə ɹɪvɝs ʌv ə dɛt. ði ənkɑɹv dɔɹ tə ðə hɔl kɹikt oʊpən - moʊst ʌv ælɡɝɪnz sɝvəns wɝ nɪɹli əz oʊld əz hi, ən ðoʊ ðeɪ kɛpt ɛvɹiθɪŋ dʌstɪɾ ən nit, ðə læmps tɑpt wɪð ɔɪl ən ðə wɪks tʃɹɪmd, hɪnʒɪz ɪn ðə mænɝ sim tə ɪskeɪp ɹɛɡjəlɝ ɔɪlɪŋ - ðə dɔɹ kɹikt oʊpən tə ədmɪt vɛɹɪn, stɪl dʒɹɛs fəɹ ə dʒɝni ɪn sɪmpəl bɹaʊn wʊl wɪð dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts ən kæɹiɪŋ əɹ kloʊk oʊvɝ əɹ ɑɹm, stɪl pæɾɪŋ əɹ ɡɹeɪ-stʃɹik hɛɹ ɪndə pleɪs.

The sitting room was large but not ornate, like the manor house itself, with cornices of carved wood, painted red. The furniture was bright with paint but not a touch of gilding, the two long fireplaces plain stone if well made, the andirons sturdy wrought metal made for long service rather than appearances. The fires on the hearths were small, at her insistence, the flames flickering low on half-consumed splits, but either was enough to warm her hands, which was all she wanted. Left to his own devices, Algarin would have surrounded her with blazing warmth and smothered her in servants, few as he still employed. A lesser Lord of the Land, he was far from wealthy, yet he paid his debts in letter and spirit, even when most other men would have seen quite the reverse of a debt. The uncarved door to the hall creaked open - most of Algarin's servants were nearly as old as he, and though they kept everything dusted and neat, the lamps topped with oil and the wicks trimmed, hinges in the manor seemed to escape regular oiling - the door creaked open to admit Verin, still dressed for a journey in simple brown wool with divided skirts and carrying her cloak over her arm, still patting her gray-streaked hair into place.

ðə staʊt lɪɾəl sɪstɝz skwɛɹ feɪs wɔɹ ə vɛkst ɪkspɹɛʃən, ən ʃi wɑz ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd. "wɛl, ðə si foʊk ɑɹ dɪlɪvɝd tə tɛɹ, kædzueɪn. aɪ dɪdnt ɡoʊ nɪɹ ðə stoʊn, bʌɾ aɪ hɝd ðət haɪ lɔɹɾ əstɔɹəl stɑp kəmpleɪnɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪz kɹikɪŋ dʒɔɪns ən mʌstɝɾ ɪnsaɪd wɪð dɑɹlɪn. huɾ əv θɔɾ əstɔɹəl wəd stɝ hɪmsɛlf, ən ɑn dɑɹlɪnz saɪd? ðə stʃɹits ɑɹ fʊl ʌv ɑɹmmɪn, moʊst ɡɛɾɪŋ dʒɹʌŋk ən pɪkɪŋ faɪts wɪð itʃ ʌðɝ wən ðəɹ nɑt faɪɾɪŋ æθɑn maɪɹ. ðəɹ ɑɹ əz mɛni si foʊk ɪn ðə sɪɾi əz ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls pʊt təɡɛðɝ. hɑɹɪn wɑz əɡæst. ʃi wɛn ɹʌʃɪŋ aʊt tə ðə ʃɪps əz sun əz ʃi kəd haɪɝ ə boʊt, ɪkspɛktɪŋ tə bi dɪklɛɹd mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps ən sɛɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ tə ɹaɪts. ðəɹ simz noʊ daʊt ðət nɛstə dɪn ɹiz ɪz dɛd." kædzueɪn wɑz kɑntɛn tə lɛt ðə ɹaʊn lɪɾəl wʊmən tʃæɾɝ ɑn.

The stout little sister's square face wore a vexed expression, and she was shaking her head. "Well, the Sea Folk are delivered to Tear, Cadsuane. I didn't go near the Stone, but I heard that High Lord Astoril stopped complaining about his creaking joints and mustered inside with Darlin. Who'd have thought Astoril would stir himself, and on Darlin's side? The streets are full of armsmen, most getting drunk and picking fights with each other when they're not fighting Atha'an Miere. There are as many Sea Folk in the city as everyone else put together. Harine was aghast. She went rushing out to the ships as soon as she could hire a boat, expecting to be declared Mistress of the Ships and set everything to rights. There seems no doubt that Nesta din Reas is dead." Cadsuane was content to let the round little woman chatter on.

vɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt nɪɹli soʊ veɪɡ əz ʃi pɹitɛndəd. səm bɹaʊnz ɹɪli wɝ keɪpəbəl ə tʃɹɪpɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ oʊn fit fɹəm nɑt noʊɾɪsɪŋ ðɛm, bʌt vɛɹɪn wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz u wɔɹ ən əsum kloʊk ʌv ənwɝldlinəs. ʃi sim tə bɪliv ðət kædzueɪn æksɛptɪd ðə kloʊk fəɹ ɹiæləɾi, jɛɾ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ə pɔɪn tə bi meɪd, ʃi wəd meɪk ɪt. ən wʌt ʃi lɛft aʊt maɪt bi ɹɪvilɪŋ, tu. kædzueɪn wɑz lɛs ʃʊɹ ə ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝ ðən ʃi maɪɾ əv wɪʃt. ənsɝɾənti wɑz ə fækt ə laɪf, bʌt ʃi wɑz ənsɝɾən əbaʊɾ ɪntaɪɝli tu mɛni θɪŋz tə sut hɝ.

Verin was not nearly so vague as she pretended. Some Browns really were capable of tripping over their own feet from not noticing them, but Verin was one of those who wore an assumed cloak of unworldliness. She seemed to believe that Cadsuane accepted the cloak for reality, yet if there was a point to be made, she would make it. And what she left out might be revealing, too. Cadsuane was less sure of the other sister than she might have wished. Uncertainty was a fact of life, but she was uncertain about entirely too many things to suit her.

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, mɪn mʌst əv bɪn lɪsnɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ, ən ðət jʌŋ wʊmən hæd lɪɾəl peɪʃəns. "aɪ toʊl hɑɹɪn ɪt wʊdn bi laɪk ðæt," ʃi pɹətɛstəd, bɝstɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum. "aɪ toʊld əɹ ʃid bi pʌnɪʃt fəɹ ðə bɑɹɡən ʃi meɪd wɪð ɹænd. oʊnli æftɝ ðət wɪl ʃi bɪkʌm mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps, ən aɪ kæn seɪ ɪf ɪɾəl bi tɛn deɪz fɹəm naʊ əɹ tɛn jɪɹz." slɪm ən pɹɪɾi, ən tɔl ɪn əɹ ɹɛd-hil buts, wɪð dɑɹk ɹɪŋləts hæŋɪŋ tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz, mɪn hæɾ ə loʊ wʊmənli vɔɪs, bʌt ʃi wɔɹ ə bɔɪz ɹɛd koʊɾ ən blu bɹitʃɪz. ðə koʊt wɑz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð kʌlɝfəl flaʊɝz ɑn ðə ləpɛlz ən ʌp ðə slivz, ən ðə bɹitʃɪz ɪn bænz daʊn ði aʊtsaɪdz ə ðə lɛɡz, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ stɪl koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz.

Unfortunately, Min must have been listening at the door, and that young woman had little patience. "I told Harine it wouldn't be like that," she protested, bursting into the room. "I told her she'd be punished for the bargain she made with Rand. Only after that will she become Mistress of the Ships, and I can't say if it will be ten days from now or ten years." Slim and pretty, and tall in her red-heeled boots, with dark ringlets hanging to her shoulders, Min had a low womanly voice, but she wore a boy's red coat and blue breeches. The coat was embroidered with colorful flowers on the lapels and up the sleeves, and the breeches in bands down the outsides of the legs, but they were still coat and breeches.

"ju meɪ kʌm ɪn, mɪn," kædzueɪn sɛd kwaɪətli. ɪt wɑz ə toʊn ðət juʒəwəli meɪd pipəl sɪɾ ʌp ən teɪk noʊɾəs. ðoʊz u nu hɝ əɾ ɔl, ɛniweɪ. spɑts ə kʌlɝ əpɪɹɾ ɪn mɪnz tʃiks. "ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs əz ɔlɹɛɾi lɝn ɔl ʃiz ɡoʊɪŋ tə fɹəm jəɹ vjuɪŋ, aɪ fɪɹ. bʌt fɹəm jəɹ ɝdʒənsi, pɝhæps juv ɹɛd sʌmwʌn ɛlsəz ɔʊɹəz ən wɪʃ tə tɛl mi wʌt jə sɔ?" ðə ɡɝlz pəkjuljɝ əbɪləɾi hæd pɹuv hɛlpfəl ɪn ðə pæst ən daʊtləs kəɾ əɡɛn. pɝhæps. əz fɑɹ əz kædzueɪn kəd tɛl, ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪ əbaʊt wʌt ʃi sɔ ɪn ði ɪmədʒəz ən ɔʊɹəz ðət ʃi pɝsiv floʊɾɪŋ ɝaʊn pipəl, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz fɔɹθkʌmɪŋ, iðɝ. pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli nɑt wən ɪt keɪm tə ðə wʌn pɝsən kædzueɪn wʊɾə laɪk tə noʊ əbaʊɾ əbʌv ɔl ʌðɝz.

"You may come in, Min," Cadsuane said quietly. It was a tone that usually made people sit up and take notice. Those who knew her at all, anyway. Spots of color appeared in Min's cheeks. "The Wavemistress has already learned all she is going to from your viewing, I fear. But from your urgency, perhaps you've read someone else's auras and wish to tell me what you saw?" The girl's peculiar ability had proved helpful in the past and doubtless could again. Perhaps. As far as Cadsuane could tell, she did not lie about what she saw in the images and auras that she perceived floating around people, but she was not always forthcoming, either. Particularly not when it came to the one person Cadsuane would have liked to know about above all others.

ɹɛd tʃiks əɹ noʊ ɹɛd tʃiks, mɪn ɹeɪzd əɹ tʃɪn stʌbɝnli. ʃi hæd tʃeɪnʒd sɪns ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, əɹ pɝhæps ɪt hæd bɪɡʌn ɝliɝ, bʌɾ iðɝ weɪ, ðə tʃeɪnʒ wɑz nɑt fəɹ ðə bɛɾɝ. "ɹænd wɑns jə tə kʌm si hɪm. hi sɛd tə æsk, soʊ jə nidnt ɡɛt snɪpi oʊvɝ ɪt." kædzueɪn mɪɹli lʊkt əɾ əɹ ən lɛt ðə saɪləns stʃɹɛtʃ. snɪpi? dɛfənətli nɑt fəɹ ðə bɛɾɝ.

Red cheeks or no red cheeks, Min raised her chin stubbornly. She had changed since Shadar Logoth, or perhaps it had begun earlier, but either way, the change was not for the better. "Rand wants you to come see him. He said to ask, so you needn't get snippy over it." Cadsuane merely looked at her and let the silence stretch. Snippy? Definitely not for the better.

"tɛl ɪm əl kʌm wən aɪm eɪbəl," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "kloʊz ðə dɔɹ fɝmli bɪhaɪn ju, mɪn." ðə jʌŋ wʊmən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ əz ɪf tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ, bʌɾ ət list ʃi ɹɪteɪn sɛns ɪnʌf tə liv ɪɾ ənsɛd. ʃi ivən meɪɾ ə pæsəbəl kɝtsi, ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðoʊz ɹɪdɪkjələs buts, ən ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ fɝmli bɪhaɪn hɝ. dʒʌs bɛɹli ʃɔɹɾ ə slæmɪŋ ɪt, ɪn fækt.

"Tell him I will come when I am able," she said finally. "Close the door firmly behind you, Min." The young woman opened her mouth as if to say something more, but at least she retained sense enough to leave it unsaid. She even made a passable curtsy, in spite of those ridiculous boots, and shut the door firmly behind her. Just barely short of slamming it, in fact.

vɛɹɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ əɡɛn, ɡɪvɪŋ ə læf ðət saʊndəɾ oʊnli slaɪtli əmjuzd. "ʃiz ɪn lʌv wɪð ðə jʌŋ mæn, kædzueɪn, ən ʃiz tʌkt əɹ hɑɹɾ ɪn ɪz pɑkət. ʃɪl fɑloʊ ðət bɪfɔɹ əɹ hɛd, wʌtɛvɝ jə seɪ əɹ du. aɪ θɪŋk ʃiz əfɹeɪɾ i ɔlmoʊs daɪɾ ɑn hɝ, ən jə noʊ haʊ ðət kən meɪk ə wʊmən dɪtɝmən tə hæŋ ɑn."

Verin shook her head again, giving a laugh that sounded only slightly amused. "She's in love with the young man, Cadsuane, and she's tucked her heart in his pocket. She'll follow that before her head, whatever you say or do. I think she's afraid he almost died on her, and you know how that can make a woman determined to hang on."

kædzueɪnz lɪps θɪnd. vɛɹɪn nu mɔɹ əbaʊt ðət sɔɹɾ ə ɹileɪʃənz wɪð mɛn ðən ʃi dɪd -  ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪlivd ɪn ɪndʌlʒɪŋ wɪð əɹ oʊn wɔɹɾɝz, əz səm ɡɹinz dɪd, ən ʌðɝ mɛn hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn aʊɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃən - bʌt ðə bɹaʊn hæd hɪt kloʊz tə ə tʃɹuθ wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ. ət list, kædzueɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝ nu mɪn wɑz bɑndəd tə ði ælθɹ bɔɪ. ʃi hɝsɛlf oʊnli nu kəz ðə ɡɝl hæd lɛt tu mʌtʃ slɪp ɪn ə kɛɹləs moʊmənt. ivən ðə taɪɾəst mʌsəl ɪvɛntʃəwəli jildəɾ ɪts mit wʌns jə ɡɑt ðət fɝst smɔl kɹæk ɪn ðə ʃɛl. səmtaɪmz ɪt ɡeɪv ʌp ən ʌnɪkspɛktɪd pɝl, əz wɛl. jɛs, mɪn wəd wɑnə kip ðə læɾ əlaɪv wɛðɝ ʃi lʌvd ɪm əɹ nɑt, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ ðən kædzueɪn dɪd.

Cadsuane's lips thinned. Verin knew more about that sort of relations with men than she did -  she had never believed in indulging with her own Warders, as some Greens did, and other men had always been out of the question - but the Brown had hit close to a truth without knowing. At least, Cadsuane did not think the other sister knew Min was bonded to the alThor boy. She herself only knew because the girl had let too much slip in a careless moment. Even the tightest mussel eventually yielded its meat once you got that first small crack in the shell. Sometimes it gave up an unexpected pearl, as well. Yes, Min would want to keep the lad alive whether she loved him or not, but no more than Cadsuane did.

dʒɹeɪpɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɑn ðə tɔl bæk ʌv ə tʃɛɹ, vɛɹɪn muv tə ðə nɪɹəs faɪɝpleɪs ən stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ əɹ hænz tə wɔɹm əm ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə loʊ fleɪmz. jə kəd nɑt seɪ ðət vɛɹɪn ɡlaɪɾɪd, bʌt ʃi wɑz mɔɹ ɡɹeɪsfəl ðən əɹ bʌlk sədʒɛstəd. haʊ mʌtʃ ə hɝ wɑz dɪsɛpʃən? ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ hɪd bɪhaɪn vɛɹiəs mæsks, oʊvɝ taɪm. ɪt bɪkeɪm hæbəɾ æftɝ ə waɪl. "aɪ bɪliv ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən ɪn tiɹ meɪ bi ɹizɑlv pisfəli jɛt," ʃi sɛd, piɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə faɪɝ. ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn tɔkɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. əɹ wɑntəd kædzueɪn tə θɪŋk ɪt. "hɝn ən sɪmɑn ɑɹ ɡɹoʊɪŋ kwaɪt dɛspɹɪt, əfɹeɪd ði ʌðɝ haɪ lɔɹdz wɪl ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ɪljən ən tʃɹæp əm ɪn ðə sɪɾi. ðeɪ meɪ bi əmɛnəbəl tə æksɛptɪŋ dɑɹlɪn, ɡɪvən ðɛɹ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪsəz. ɪstændə ɪz meɪɾ ə stɝnɝ stʌf, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi kən bi kənvɪns ðɛɹz ædvæntɪdʒ fəɹ əɹ ɪn ɪt - "

Draping her cloak on the tall back of a chair, Verin moved to the nearest fireplace and stretched out her hands to warm them in front of the low flames. You could not say that Verin glided, but she was more graceful than her bulk suggested. How much of her was deception? Every Aes Sedai hid behind various masks, over time. It became habit after a while. "I believe the situation in Tear may be resolved peacefully yet," she said, peering into the fire. She might have been talking to herself. Or wanted Cadsuane to think it. "Hearne and Simaan are growing quite desperate, afraid the other High Lords will return from Illian and trap them in the city. They may be amenable to accepting Darlin, given their other choices. Estanda is made of sterner stuff, but if she can be convinced there's advantage for her in it - "

"aɪ toʊl jə nɑt tə ɡoʊ nɪɹ ðɛm," kædzueɪn bɹoʊk ɪn stɝnli.

"I told you not to go near them," Cadsuane broke in sternly.

ðə staʊt wʊmən blɪŋkt əɾ əɹ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "aɪ dɪdnt. ðə stʃɹits ɑɹ ɔlweɪz fʊl ə ɹumɝz, ən aɪ də noʊ haʊ tə ɹumɝz təɡɛðɝ ən sɪft aʊɾ ə lɪɾəl tʃɹuθ. aɪ dɪd si ɑlɑnə ən ɹæfɛlə, bʌɾ aɪ dʌk bɪhaɪn ə fɛloʊ hɔkɪŋ mit paɪz fɹəm ə bæɹoʊ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ sɔ mi. aɪm ʃʊɹ ðeɪ dɪdnt." ʃi pɔzd, klɪɹli weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ kædzueɪn tə ɪkspleɪn waɪ ʃi hæd bɪn toʊl tə əvɔɪd ðə sɪstɝz əz wɛl.

The stout woman blinked at her in surprise. "I didn't. The streets are always full of rumors, and I do know how to rumors together and sift out a little truth. I did see Alanna and Rafela, but I ducked behind a fellow hawking meat pies from a barrow before they saw me. I'm sure they didn't." She paused, clearly waiting for Cadsuane to explain why she had been told to avoid the sisters as well.

"aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ tə ðə bɔɪ naʊ, vɛn," kædzueɪn sɛɾ ɪnstɛd. ðət wɑz ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɪð əɡɹiɪŋ tə ædvaɪz sʌmwʌn. ivən wən jə mænədʒ tə sɛɾ ɔl ðə kəndɪʃənz jə kəd wɪʃ fəɹ - moʊst ə ðɛm, ɛniweɪ - jə stɪl hæd tə kʌm sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ wən ðeɪ kɔld. ɪvɛntʃəwəli. bʌɾ ɪt dɪd ɡɪv əɹ ə ɹizən tə ɪveɪd vɛɹɪnz kjʊɹiɑsəɾi. ði ænsɝ wɑz sɪmpəl. ɪf jə tʃɹaɪd tə sɑlv ɛvɹi pɹɑbləm jɝsɛlf, jə ɛndəd baɪ sɑlvɪŋ nʌn. ən wɪð səm pɹɑbləmz, haʊ ðeɪ wɝ sɑlvd ɹɪli dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ ɪn ðə lɔŋ ɹʌn. bʌt nɑɾ ænsɝɪŋ lɛf vɛɹɪn wɪð ə pʌzəl tə pɑndɝ, ə lɪɾəl bʌɾɝ fəɹ əɹ pɔz. wən kædzueɪn wɑz ənʃʊɹ ə sʌmwʌn, ʃi wɑntəɾ əm ənʃʊɹ ə hɝ, tu.

"I have to go to the boy now, Venn," Cadsuane said instead. That was the trouble with agreeing to advise someone. Even when you managed to set all the conditions you could wish for - most of them, anyway - you still had to come sooner or later when they called. Eventually. But it did give her a reason to evade Verin's curiosity. The answer was simple. If you tried to solve every problem yourself, you ended by solving none. And with some problems, how they were solved really did not matter in the long run. But not answering left Verin with a puzzle to ponder, a little butter for her paws. When Cadsuane was unsure of someone, she wanted them unsure of her, too.

vɛɹɪn ɡæðɝɾ ʌp əɹ kloʊk ən lɛf ðə ɹum wɪð hɝ. dɪd ði ʌðɝ wʊmən min tə əkʌmpəni hɝ? bʌɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, ðeɪ ɪnkaʊntɝd nɛsun wɔkɪŋ bɹɪskli daʊn ðə hɔl.

Verin gathered up her cloak and left the room with her. Did the other woman mean to accompany her? But outside the sitting room, they encountered Nesune walking briskly down the hall.

ʃi keɪm tə ə sʌɾən hɔlt. noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə hændfʊl ə pipəl hæɾ ɛvɝ mænədʒ tə ɪɡnɔɹ kædzueɪn, jɛt nɛsun dɪɾ ə kɹɛɾəbəl dʒɑb, hɝ nɪɹli blæk aɪz lætʃɪŋ ɑn tə vɛɹɪn.

She came to a sudden halt. No more than a handful of people had ever managed to ignore Cadsuane, yet Nesune did a credible job, her nearly black eyes latching on to Verin.

"jɔɹ bæk ðɛn, ɑɹ ju?" ðə bɛst ə bɹaʊnz dɪɾ əv ə weɪ ʌv steɪɾɪŋ ði ɑbviəs. "ju ɹoʊɾ ə peɪpɝ ɑn ænəməlz ə ðə dʒɹaʊn lænz, əz aɪ ɹikɔl." wɪtʃ mɛn ðət vɛɹɪn hæd; nɛsun ɹɪkɔld ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin - ə jusfəl skɪl, ɪf kædzueɪn hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ɪnʌf ə hɝ tə meɪk jus ʌv ɪt. "lɔɹɾ ælɡɝɪn ʃoʊd mi ðə skɪn ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ sneɪk i kleɪmz keɪm fɹəm ðə dʒɹaʊn lænz, bʌɾ aɪm kənvɪnst ɪts ðə seɪm əz aɪ əbzɝvd. . . ." vɛɹɪn ɡlæns hɛlpləsli ət kædzueɪn oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ əz ðə tɔlɝ wʊmən dʒɹu hɝ əweɪ baɪ hɝ sliv, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ θɹi stɛps əlɔŋ ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, ʃi wɑz dip ɪn dɪskʌʃən oʊvɝ ðɪs ful sneɪk.

"You're back then, are you?" The best of Browns did have a way of stating the obvious. "You wrote a paper on animals of the Drowned Lands, as I recall." Which meant that Verin had; Nesune recalled everything she had ever seen - a useful skill, if Cadsuane had been sure enough of her to make use of it. "Lord Algarin showed me the skin of a large snake he claims came from the Drowned Lands, but I'm convinced it is the same as I observed. . . ." Verin glanced helplessly at Cadsuane over her shoulder as the taller woman drew her away by her sleeve, but before they were three steps along the corridor, she was deep in discussion over this fool snake.

ɪt wɑz ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl saɪt, ən tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ ɪn ə weɪ. nɛsun wɑz lɔɪəl tə ɪleɪɾə, əɹ hæd bɪn, waɪl vɛɹɪn wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz u wɑntəd tə pʊl ɪleɪɾə daʊn. əɹ hæd bɪn. naʊ ðeɪ tɔkt eɪmiəbli əbaʊt sneɪks. ðət boʊθ hæd swɔɹn fiəlti tə ði ælθɹ bɔɪ kəd bi leɪd tə hɪz biɪŋ tɑvɝən, waɪndɪŋ ðə pæɾɝn ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf ʌnkɑnʃəsli, bʌt wɑz ðəɾ oʊθ səfɪʃən tə meɪk əm ɪɡnɔɹ ðɛɹ ɑpəzɪʃən oʊvɝ u hɛl ði æmɪɝlɪn sit? əɹ wɝ ðeɪ əfɛktəd baɪ hævɪŋ ə tɑvɝən ɪn kloʊs pɹɑksɪməɾi? ʃi wʊɾə laɪk vɛɹi mʌtʃ tə noʊ ðæt. nʌn ə hɝ ɔɹnəməns pɹətɛktəɾ əɡɛns tɑvɝən. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt tu ʌv ðə fɪʃ ən wʌn ə ðə munz dɪd, bʌɾ ɪt simd ənlaɪkli ðeɪ dɪd ðæt. ɪt cʊɾə bɪn əz sɪmpəl əz vɛɹɪn ən nɛsun boʊθ biɪŋ bɹaʊn. bɹaʊnz kəd fɝɡɛɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls wən ðeɪ sɛɾəld tə stʌɾi sʌmθɪŋ. sneɪks. fɔ! ðə smɔl ɔɹnəməns sweɪɾ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ əweɪ, hævɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪsiɾɪŋ bɹaʊnz bɪhaɪnd. wʌd ðə bɔɪ wɑnt? ʃi hæd nɛvɝ laɪk biɪŋ ən ædvaɪzɝ, nɛsəsɛɹi əɹ nɑt.

It was a remarkable sight, and troubling in a way. Nesune was loyal to Elaida, or had been, while Verin was one of those who wanted to pull Elaida down. Or had been. Now they talked amiably about snakes. That both had sworn fealty to the al'Thor boy could be laid to his being ta'veren, winding the Pattern around himself unconsciously, but was that oath sufficient to make them ignore their opposition over who held the Amyrlin Seat? Or were they affected by having a ta'veren in close proximity? She would have liked very much to know that. None of her ornaments protected against ta'veren. Of course, she did not know what two of the fish and one of the moons did, but it seemed unlikely they did that. It could have been as simple as Verin and Nesune both being Brown. Browns could forget everything else when they settled to study something. Snakes. Phaw! The small ornaments swayed as she shook her head before turning away, having the two receding Browns behind. What did the boy want? She had never liked being an advisor, necessary or not.

dʒɹæfs əlɔŋ ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz ɹɪpəl ðə fju tæpəstʃɹiz ɑn ðə wɔlz, ɔl ɪn oʊl staɪlz ən ʃoʊɪŋ ðə wɛɹ ə hævɪŋ bɪn teɪkən daʊn ən ɹihʌŋ mɛni taɪmz. ðə mænɝ haʊs hæd ɡɹoʊn laɪk ə ɹæmblɪŋ fɑɹmhaʊs ɹæðɝ ðən biɪŋ bɪlt lɑɹdʒ, wɪð ədɪʃənz æɾəd wɛnɛvɝ ðə fæmliz fɔɹtʃənz ən nʌmbɝz wækst. haʊs pɛndəloʊn hæd nɛvɝ bɪn wɛlθi, bʌt ðəɹ hæd bɪn taɪmz ðeɪ wɝ numɝəs. ðə ɹɪzʌls ʃoʊɾ ɪn mɔɹ ðən wɔɹn, oʊldfɑʃənd wɔl hæŋʒɪŋz. ðə kɔɹnɪsəz wɝ bɹaɪtli peɪntəd, ɹɛɾ əɹ blu əɹ jɛloʊ, bʌt ðə hɔlweɪz vɛɹiɾ ɪn wɪdθ ən haɪt, ən səmtaɪmz mɛɾ əɾ ə slaɪt skju. wɪndoʊz ðət wʌns hæd lʊk tə ðə filz naʊ lʊk daʊn ɑn kɔɹtʃjɑɹdz, juʒəwəli bɛɹ ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju bɛntʃɪz ən pleɪs pjʊɹli tə pɹəvaɪd laɪt. səmtaɪmz ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃɔɪs ɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ fɹəm hɪɹ tə ðəɹ ɪksɛp tə teɪk ə ɹuf kɑləneɪɾ oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ wʌn ə ðoʊz kɔɹtʃjɑɹdz. ðə kɑləmz wɝ wʊɾən mɔɹ ɔfən ðən nɑt, ðoʊ bɹeɪvli peɪntəɾ ivən wɛɹ nɑt kɑɹvd.

Drafts along the corridors rippled the few tapestries on the walls, all in old styles and showing the wear of having been taken down and rehung many times. The manor house had grown like a rambling farmhouse rather than being built large, with additions added whenever the family's fortunes and numbers waxed. House Pendaloan had never been wealthy, but there had been times they were numerous. The results showed in more than worn, oldfashioned wall hangings. The cornices were brightly painted, red or blue or yellow, but the hallways varied in width and height, and sometimes met at a slight skew. Windows that once had looked to the fields now looked down on courtyards, usually bare except for a few benches and placed purely to provide light. Sometimes there was no choice in getting from here to there except to take a roofed colonnade overlooking one of those courtyards. The columns were wooden more often than not, though bravely painted even where not carved.

ɑn wʌn ə ðoʊz wɔkweɪz, wɪð fæt ɡɹin kɑləmz, tu sɪstɝz wɝ stændɪŋ təɡɛðɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ði æktɪvəɾi ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd bɪloʊ. ət list, ðeɪ wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ təɡɛðɝ wən kædzueɪn oʊpən ðə dɔɹ tə ðə kɑləneɪd. bɛldaɪn sɔ hɝ stɛp aʊt, ən stɪfənd, twɪtʃɪŋ ət ðə ɡɹin-fɹɪnd ʃɔl ʃi hæd wɔɹn fjuɝ ðən faɪv jɪɹz. pɹɪɾi, wɪð əɹ haɪ tʃikboʊnz ən ə slaɪt tɪl tə hɝ bɹaʊn aɪz, ʃi hæd nɑt jɛɾ ətʃivd eɪɡləsnəs, ən lʊk jʌŋɡɝ ðən mɪn, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli wən ʃi ʃɑt kædzueɪn ə fɹɔsti stɛɹ ən hɝid fɹəm ðə kɑləneɪɾ ɪn ði ʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən.

On one of those walkways, with fat green columns, two sisters were standing together watching the activity in the courtyard below. At least, they were watching together when Cadsuane opened the door to the colonnade. Beldeine saw her step out, and stiffened, twitching at the green-fringed shawl she had worn fewer than five years. Pretty, with her high cheekbones and a slight tilt to her brown eyes, she had not yet achieved agelessness, and looked younger than Min, particularly when she shot Cadsuane a frosty stare and hurried from the colonnade in the other direction.

mɛɹaɪs, hɝ kəmpænjən, smaɪld æftɝ əɹ ɪn əmjuzmənt, ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ oʊn ɡɹin-fɹɪnd ʃɔl slaɪtli. tɔl ən juʒəwəli kwaɪt sɪɹiəs, wɪð əɹ hɛɹ dʒɹɔn bæk taɪtli fɹəm əɹ peɪl feɪs, mɛɹaɪs wɑz nɑɾ ə wʊmən u smaɪld ɔfən. "bɛldaɪn, ʃiz bɪkʌmɪŋ kənsɝn ðət ʃiz noʊ wɔɹɾɝ jɛt," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ði æksɛns ə tæɹɑbən əz kædzueɪn stɑp bɪsaɪd hɝ, ðoʊ hɝ blu aɪz ɹɪtɝn tə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. "ʃi simz tə bi kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ən æʃə'-mæn, ɪf ʃi kən faɪnd wʌn. aɪ toʊld əɹ tə tɔk tə deɪdʒiən.

Merise, her companion, smiled after her in amusement, shifting her own green-fringed shawl slightly. Tall and usually quite serious, with her hair drawn back tightly from her pale face, Merise was not a woman who smiled often. "Beldeine, she is becoming concerned that she has no Warder yet," she said in the accents of Tarabon as Cadsuane stopped beside her, though her blue eyes returned to the courtyard. "She seems to be considering an Asha'-man, if she can find one. I told her to talk to Daigian.

ɪf ɪt dʌz nɑt hɛlp hɝ, ɪɾəl hɛlp deɪdʒiən."

If it does not help her, it will help Daigian."

ɔl ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz ðeɪ hæd wɪð əm wɝ ɡæðɝɾ ɪn ðə stoʊn-peɪv jɑɹd, ɪn ðɛɹ ʃɝtslivz dɪspaɪt ðə koʊld, moʊst siɾəd ɑn peɪntəd wʊɾən bɛntʃɪz wɑtʃɪŋ tu ʌv ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ wɝk wɪð wʊɾən pɹæktəs sɔɹdz. dʒɑhɹ, wʌn ə mɛɹaɪsəz θɹi, wɑz ə pɹɪɾi, sʌn-dɑɹk jʌŋ mæn. ðə sɪlvɝ bɛlz fæsən tə ði ɛnz ə hɪz tu lɔŋ bɹeɪdz tʃaɪmd wɪð ðə fjʊɹi ʌv ɪz ətæk. hi muv laɪk ə stʃɹaɪkɪŋ blækləns. nɑɾ ə bɹɛθ ə bɹiz stɝd, bʌt ði eɪt-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ, laɪk ə ɡoʊldən kʌmpəs ɹoʊz, sim tə ʃɪft əɡɛns kædzueɪnz hɛɹ. hæɾ ɪt bɪn hɛld ɪn əɹ hænd, ʃi cʊɾə fɛlt ɪt vaɪbɹeɪɾɪŋ klɪɹli. bʌt ðɛn, ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi nu ðət dʒɑhɹ wɑz ən æʃəmən, ən ðə stɑɹ wəd nɑɾ əv pɔɪntəɾ ɪm aʊt, mɪɹli toʊld əɹ ðəɾ ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl wɑz nɪɹbaɪ. ðə mɔɹ mɛn u kəd tʃænəl, ðə hɑɹɾɝ ðə stɑɹ kwɪvɝd, ʃi hæd lɝnd. dʒɑhɹz əpoʊnənt, ə vɛɹi tɔl, bɹɔd-ʃoʊldɝd fɛloʊ wɪð ə stoʊn feɪs ən ə bɹeɪɾɪd lɛðɝ kɔɹɾ ɝaʊn ɪz ɡɹeɪɪŋ tɛmpəlz tə hoʊl bæk ʃoʊldɝ-lɛŋθ hɛɹ, wɑz nɑt ðə sɛkən æʃəmən daʊn ðɛɹ, bʌɾ i wɑz əz dɛdli ɪn ɪz oʊn weɪ. læn dɪd nɑt ɹɪli sim tə muv ðət fæst, bʌɾ i . . . floʊd. hɪz bleɪɾ ə bʌndəld læθs wɑz ɔlweɪz ðəɹ tə dɪflɛk dʒɑhɹz, ɔlweɪz muvɪŋ ðə jʌŋɡɝ mæn dʒʌst ə tʌtʃ mɔɹ aʊɾ ə hɪz laɪn. sʌɾənli, lænz wʊɾən bleɪd stʃɹʌk dʒɑhɹz saɪd wɪð ə ɹisaʊndɪŋ kɹæk, ə kɪlɪŋ bloʊ ɡɪvən wɪð stil. waɪl ðə jʌŋɡɝ mæn wɑz stɪl flɪntʃɪŋ fɹəm ðə fɔɹs ə ðə stʃɹaɪk, læn floʊd bæk ɪndə ə ɹɛɾi stæns, lɔŋ bleɪɾ əpɹaɪɾ ɪn ɪz hænz. nɛθən, ənʌðɝ ə mɛɹaɪsəz, ɹoʊz tə hɪz fit, ə lin fɛloʊ wɪð wɪŋz ʌv waɪɾ əɾ ɪz tɛmpəlz ən tɔl, ɪf stɪl ə hæn əɹ mɔɹ ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən læn. dʒɑhɹ weɪvd ɪm əweɪ ən ɹeɪzd ɪz pɹæktəs bleɪɾ əɡɛn, laʊdli dɪmændɪŋ ənʌðɝ ɡoʊ.

All of the Warders they had with them were gathered in the stone-paved yard, in their shirtsleeves despite the cold, most seated on painted wooden benches watching two of their number work with wooden practice swords. Jahar, one of Merise's three, was a pretty, sun-dark young man. The silver bells fastened to the ends of his two long braids chimed with the fury of his attack. He moved like a striking blacklance. Not a breath of breeze stirred, but the eight-pointed star, like a golden compass rose, seemed to shift against Cadsuane's hair. Had it been held in her hand, she could have felt it vibrating clearly. But then, she already knew that Jahar was an Asha'man, and the star would not have pointed him out, merely told her that a man who could channel was nearby. The more men who could channel, the harder the star quivered, she had learned. Jahar's opponent, a very tall, broad-shouldered fellow with a stone face and a braided leather cord around his graying temples to hold back shoulder-length hair, was not the second Asha'man down there, but he was as deadly in his own way. Lan did not really seem to move that fast, but he . . . flowed. His blade of bundled laths was always there to deflect Jahar's, always moving the younger man just a touch more out of his line. Suddenly, Lan's wooden blade struck Jahar's side with a resounding crack, a killing blow given with steel. While the younger man was still flinching from the force of the strike, Lan flowed back into a ready stance, long blade upright in his hands. Nethan, another of Merise's, rose to his feet, a lean fellow with wings of white at his temples and tall, if still a hand or more shorter than Lan. Jahar waved him away and raised his practice blade again, loudly demanding another go.

"ɪz deɪdʒiən stɪl bɛɹɪŋ ʌp?" kædzueɪn æskt.

"Is Daigian still bearing up?" Cadsuane asked.

"bɛɾɝ ðən aɪ ɪkspɛktəd," mɛɹaɪs ədmɪɾəd. "ʃi steɪz ɪn əɹ ɹum tu mʌtʃ, bʌt ʃi kips əɹ wipɪŋ pɹaɪvət." hɝ ɡeɪz ʃɪftəd fɹəm ðə mɛn dænsɪŋ ðɛɹ sɔɹdz tə ə ɡɹin-peɪntəd bɛntʃ wɛɹ vɛɹɪnz stɑki ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd toʊmɑs sæt nɛks tə ə ɡɹɪzəl fɛloʊ wɪð oʊnli ə fɹɪnʒ ʌv waɪt hɛɹ ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ. "dɑɹnɝ, hi wɑntəd tə tʃɹaɪ hɪz hilɪŋ ɑn hɝ, bʌt deɪdʒiən ɹəfjuzd. ʃi meɪ nɛvɝ əv hæɾ ə wɔɹɾɝ bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ʃi noʊz ðət ðə ɡɹivɪŋ oʊvɝ ə dɛd wɔɹɾɝ ɪz pɑɹɾ ə ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ hɪm. aɪm sɝpɹaɪz ðət kɔɹəl wəd kənsɪɾɝ əlaʊɪŋ ɪt."

"Better than I expected," Merise admitted. "She stays in her room too much, but she keeps her weeping private." Her gaze shifted from the men dancing their swords to a green-painted bench where Verin's stocky gray-haired Tomas sat next to a grizzled fellow with only a fringe of white hair remaining. "Darner, he wanted to try his Healing on her, but Daigian refused. She may never have had a Warder before, but she knows that the grieving over a dead Warder is part of remembering him. I am surprised that Corele would consider allowing it."

wɪð ə ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛd, ðə tæɹɑbənɝ sɪstɝ ɹɪtɝn tə stʌɾiɪŋ dʒɑhɹ. ʌðɝ sɪstɝz' wɔɹɾɝz dɪd nɑt ɹɪli ɪntʃɹəs hɝ, ət lis nɑt laɪk əɹ oʊn. "æʃəmən, ðeɪ ɡɹiv əz wɔɹɾɝz du. aɪ θɔt pɝhæps dʒɑhɹ ən dɑɹnɝ mɪɹli fɑloʊd ðə lɛɾ ə ði ʌðɝz, bʌt dʒɑhɹ, hi sɛz ɪts ðɛɹ weɪ, tu. aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪntʃɹud, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ aɪ wɑtʃt əm dʒɹɪŋk ɪn mɛmɹi ʌv deɪdʒiənz jʌŋ ɛbən. ðeɪ nɛvɝ mɛnʃən ɪz neɪm, bʌt ðeɪ hæɾ ə fʊl waɪnkʌp sɪɾɪŋ fəɹ hɪm. bæsɑn ən nɛθən, ðeɪ noʊ ðeɪ kən daɪ ɑn ɛni deɪ, ən ðeɪ æksɛp ðæt. dʒɑhɹ ɪkspɛks tə daɪ; ɛvɹi deɪ hi ɪkspɛks ɪt. tə hɪm, ɛvɹi aʊɝ ɪz moʊst əʃʊɹədli hɪz læst." kædzueɪn bɛɹli ɹɪfɹeɪn fɹəm ɡlænsɪŋ ət ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. mɛɹaɪs dɪd nɑɾ ɔfən ɡoʊ ɑn ət sətʃ lɛŋθ. ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz feɪs wɑz smuð, hɝ mænɝ ənɹʌfəld, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ hæɾ əpsɛt hɝ. "aɪ noʊ jə pɹæktəs lɪŋkɪŋ wɪð hɪm," ʃi sɛd dɛləkətli, piɹɪŋ daʊn ɪndə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. dɛləkəsi wɑz ɹikwaɪɝɾ ɪn tɔkɪŋ tə ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ əbaʊɾ əɹ wɔɹɾɝ. ðət wɑz pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɹizən ʃi stɛɹɾ ɪndə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "hæv jə dɪsaɪɾɪd jɛt wɛðɝ ði ælθɹ bɔɪ səksiɾəd ət ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ? dɪɾ i ɹɪli mænədʒ tə klɛnz ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə sɔɹs?" kɔɹəl pɹæktəs lɪŋkɪŋ wɪð deɪmɝ, tu, bʌt ðə jɛloʊ wɑz soʊ foʊkəst ɑn əɹ fjuɾəl ɛfɝts tə ɹizən aʊt haʊ tə də wɪð seɪaɪdɑɹ wʌɾ i dɪd wɪð seɪɾɪn ðət ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv noʊɾəst ðə dɑɹk wʌnz teɪn slaɪɾɪŋ daʊn əɹ θɹoʊt. ə pɪɾi ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd nɑt kʌm tə ðə ʃɔl fɪfti jɪɹz leɪɾɝ ðən ʃi hæd, əɹ ʃi wʊɾə bɑndəd wʌn ə ðə mɛn hɝsɛlf ən hæd noʊ nid tə æsk. bʌt fɪfti jɪɹz wʊɾə mɛn ðət nɔɹlə daɪɾ ɪn əɹ lɪɾəl haʊs ɪn ðə blæk hɪlz bɪfɔɹ kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn ɛvɝ wɛn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðət wʊɾə ɔltɝɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə hɪstɝi. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ɪt wʊɾə bɪn ənlaɪkli ðət ʃi wəd bi ɪn ɛniθɪŋ əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ əɹ pɹɛzən sɝkəmstænsəz. soʊ ʃi æskt, dɛləkətli, ən weɪɾəd.

With a shake of her head, the Taraboner sister returned to studying Jahar. Other sisters' Warders did not really interest her, at least not like her own. "Asha'man, they grieve as Warders do. I thought perhaps Jahar and Darner merely followed the lead of the others, but Jahar, he says it is their way, too. I did not intrude, of course, but I watched them drink in memory of Daigian's young Eben. They never mentioned his name, but they had a full winecup sitting for him. Bassane and Nethan, they know they can die on any day, and they accept that. Jahar expects to die; every day he expects it. To him, every hour is most assuredly his last." Cadsuane barely refrained from glancing at the other woman. Merise did not often go on at such length. The other woman's face was smooth, her manner unruffled, but something had upset her. "I know you practice linking with him," she said delicately, peering down into the courtyard. Delicacy was required in talking to another sister about her Warder. That was part of the reason she stared into the courtyard, frowning. "Have you decided yet whether the al'Thor boy succeeded at Shadar Logoth? Did he really manage to cleanse the male half of the Source?" Corele practiced linking with Damer, too, but the Yellow was so focused on her futile efforts to reason out how to do with saidar what he did with saidin that she would not have noticed the Dark One's taint sliding down her throat. A pity she herself had not come to the shawl fifty years later than she had, or she would have bonded one of the men herself and had no need to ask. But fifty years would have meant that Norla died in her little house in the Black Hills before Cadsuane Melaidhrin ever went to the White Tower. That would have altered a great deal of history. For one thing, it would have been unlikely that she would be in anything approaching her present circumstances. So she asked, delicately, and waited.

mɛɹaɪs wɑz kwaɪət, ən stɪl, fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt, ən ðən ʃi saɪd. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ, kædzueɪn.

Merise was quiet, and still, for a long moment, and then she sighed. "I do not know, Cadsuane.

seɪaɪdɑɹ ɪz ə kɑm oʊʃən ðət wɪl teɪk jə wɛɹɛvɝ jə wɑn soʊ lɔŋ əz jə noʊ ðə kɝəns ən lɛɾ əm kæɹi ju. seɪɾɪn. . . . ən ævəlæntʃ ə bɝnɪŋ stoʊn. kəlæpsɪŋ maʊntənz ʌv aɪs. ɪt filz klinɝ ðən wən aɪ fɝs lɪŋkt wɪð dʒɑhɹ, bʌɾ ɛniθɪŋ kəd haɪɾ ɪn ðət keɪɑs. ɛniθɪŋ." kædzueɪn nɑɾəd.

Saidar is a calm ocean that will take you wherever you want so long as you know the currents and let them carry you. Saidin. . . . An avalanche of burning stone. Collapsing mountains of ice. It feels cleaner than when I first linked with Jahar, but anything could hide in that chaos. Anything." Cadsuane nodded.

ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛni ʌðɝ ænsɝ. waɪ ʃəd ʃi faɪn ɛni sɝɾənti əbaʊt wʌn ə ðə tu moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt kwɛstʃənz ɪn ðə wɝld wən ʃi kəd faɪnd nʌn ɑn soʊ mɛni sɪmpəlɝ mæɾɝz? ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, lænz wʊɾən bleɪd stɑpt, nɑt wɪð ə kɹæk ðɪs taɪm, dʒʌs tʌtʃɪŋ dʒɑhɹz θɹoʊt, ən ðə bɪɡɝ mæn floʊd bæk tə hɪz weɪɾɪŋ stæns. nɛθən stʊɾ əɡɛn, ən əɡɛn dʒɑhɹ weɪvd ɪm bæk, æŋɡɹəli ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz sɔɹɾ ən sɛɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf. mɛɹaɪsəz θɝd, bæsɑn, ə ʃɔɹt waɪd fɛloʊ nɪɹli əz sʌn-dɑɹk əz dʒɑhɹ fəɹ ɔl i wɑz kɛɹhinɪn, læft ən meɪɾ ə ɹud kɑmɛn əbaʊɾ oʊvɝ-æmbɪʃəs mɛn tʃɹɪpɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn bleɪdz. toʊmɑs ən dɑɹnɝ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz ən ʃʊk ðɛɹ hɛdz; mɛn ə ðəɾ eɪdʒ juʒəwəli hæd ɡɪvən ʌp tɔntɪŋ lɔŋ əɡoʊ. ðə klæk ʌv wʊɾ ɑn wʊd bɪɡæn wʌns mɔɹ. ði ʌðɝ fɔɹ wɔɹɾɝz wɝ nɑt ði oʊnli ɑɾiəns fəɹ læn ən dʒɑhɹ ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. ðə slɪm ɡɝl wɪð əɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ ɪn ə lɔŋ bɹeɪd, wɑtʃɪŋ æŋkʃəsli fɹəm ə ɹɛd bɛntʃ, wɑz ðə foʊkəs ə kædzueɪnz fɹaʊn. ðə tʃaɪld wəd nid tə flæʃ əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ʌndɝ pipəlz noʊzɪz tə bi teɪkən fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, wɪtʃ ʃi wɑz, ɪf dʒʌs tɛknɪkəli. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ oʊnli kəz nɪneɪivz feɪs wɑz ə ɡɝlz feɪs; bɛldaɪn stɪl simd əz jʌŋ. nɪneɪiv baʊnst ɑn ðə bɛntʃ, ɔlweɪz ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə lipɪŋ ʌp. əkeɪʒənəli hɝ maʊθ muvd əz ɪf ʃi wɝ saɪlənli ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɛnkɝɪdʒmənt, ən səmtaɪmz əɹ hænz twɪstəɾ əz ðoʊ dɛmənstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ haʊ læn ʃʊɾə muvd ɪz sɔɹd. ə fɹɪvələs ɡɝl, fʊl ə pæʃənz, hu oʊnli ɹɛɹli dɛmənstʃɹeɪɾəd ðət ʃi hæɾ ə bɹeɪn. mɪn wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn tə hæv θɹoʊn əɹ hɑɹɾ ən hɛd boʊθ daʊn ðə wɛl oʊvɝ ə mæn. baɪ ðə kʌstəmz ə dɛd mɔlkiɝ, ðə ɹɛd dɑt peɪntəɾ ɑn nɪneɪivz fɔɹhɛɾ ɪndəkeɪɾəd əɹ mɛɹɪdʒ tə læn, ðoʊ jɛloʊz sɛldəm mɛɹid ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz. vɛɹi fju sɪstɝz dɪd, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. ən ə kɔɹs, læn wɑz nɑt nɪneɪivz wɔɹɾɝ, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ i ən ðə ɡɝl pɹitɛndəɾ ʌðɝwaɪz. hu hi dɪd bɪlɔŋ tə wɑz ə mæɾɝ ðeɪ ɪveɪɾɪd laɪk θivz slɪpɪŋ θɹu ðə naɪt. mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ, mɔɹ dɪstɝbɪŋ, wɑz ðə dʒuəlɹi nɪneɪiv wɔɹ, ə lɔŋ ɡoʊl nɛkləs ən slɪm ɡoʊl bɛlt, wɪð mætʃɪŋ bɹeɪslɪts ən fɪŋɡɝ ɹɪŋz, ðə ɡɔɾi ɹɛɾ ən ɡɹin ən blu dʒɛmz ðət stʌɾɪd əm klæʃɪŋ wɪð əɹ jɛloʊ-slæʃt dʒɹɛs. ən ʃi wɔɹ ðət pəkjuljɝ pis əz wɛl, ɑn əɹ lɛf hænd, ɡoʊldən ɹɪŋz ətætʃt tə ə ɡoʊldən bɹeɪslət baɪ flæt tʃeɪnz. ðət wɑz ən æŋɡɹil, mʌtʃ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən kædzueɪnz ʃɹaɪk hɛɹ ɔɹnəmənt. ði ʌðɝz wɝ mʌtʃ laɪk əɹ oʊn dɛkɝeɪʃənz, tu, tɛɹæŋɡɹil ən pleɪnli meɪɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm, dʊɹɪŋ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, wən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪt faɪn mɛni hænz tɝn əɡɛns hɝ, moʊst ɪspɛʃli ðoʊz ə mɛn u kəd tʃænəl. stʃɹeɪnʒ tə θɪŋk ðət ðeɪ hæd bɪn kɔld ɛɛs sədaɪ, tu. ɪt wəd bi laɪk miɾɪŋ ə mæn kɔl kædzueɪn.

She was not sure she had expected any other answer. Why should she find any certainty about one of the two most important questions in the world when she could find none on so many simpler matters? In the courtyard, Lan's wooden blade stopped, not with a crack this time, just touching Jahar's throat, and the bigger man flowed back to his waiting stance. Nethan stood again, and again Jahar waved him back, angrily raising his sword and setting himself. Merise's third, Bassane, a short wide fellow nearly as sun-dark as Jahar for all he was Cairhienin, laughed and made a rude comment about over-ambitious men tripping on their own blades. Tomas and Darner exchanged glances and shook their heads; men of that age usually had given up taunting long ago. The clack of wood on wood began once more. The other four Warders were not the only audience for Lan and Jahar in the courtyard. The slim girl with her dark hair in a long braid, watching anxiously from a red bench, was the focus of Cadsuane's frown. The child would need to flash her Great Serpent ring under people's noses to be taken for Aes Sedai, which she was, if just technically. It was not only because Nynaeve's face was a girl's face; Beldeine still seemed as young. Nynaeve bounced on the bench, always on the point of leaping up. Occasionally her mouth moved as if she were silently shouting encouragement, and sometimes her hands twisted as though demonstrating how Lan should have moved his sword. A frivolous girl, full of passions, who only rarely demonstrated that she had a brain. Min was not the only one to have thrown her heart and head both down the well over a man. By the customs of dead Malkier, the red dot painted on Nynaeve's forehead indicated her marriage to Lan, though Yellows seldom married their Warders. Very few sisters did, for that matter. And of course, Lan was not Nynaeve's Warder, however much he and the girl pretended otherwise. Who he did belong to was a matter they evaded like thieves slipping through the night. More interesting, more disturbing, was the jewelry Nynaeve wore, a long gold necklace and slim gold belt, with matching bracelets and finger rings, the gaudy red and green and blue gems that studded them clashing with her yellow-slashed dress. And she wore that peculiar piece as well, on her left hand, golden rings attached to a golden bracelet by flat chains. That was an angreal, much stronger than Cadsuane's shrike hair ornament. The others were much like her own decorations, too, ter'angreal and plainly made at the same time, during the Breaking of the World, when an Aes Sedai might find many hands turned against her, most especially those of men who could channel. Strange to think that they had been called Aes Sedai, too. It would be like meeting a man called Cadsuane.

ðə kwɛstʃən - hɝ mɔɹnɪŋ sim fɪld wɪð kwɛstʃənz, ən ðə sʌn nɑt hæfweɪ tə nun jɛt -  ðə kwɛstʃən wɑz, dɪd ðə ɡɝl wɛɹ əɹ dʒuəlɹi kəz ə ði ælθɹ bɔɪ, əɹ ði æʃəmən? əɹ kəz ə kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn? nɪneɪiv hæd dɛmənstʃɹeɪɾəd əɹ lɔɪəlti tə ə jʌŋ mæn fɹəm əɹ oʊn vɪlədʒ, ən ʃi hæd ʃoʊn əɹ wɛɹinɪs ə hɪm əz wɛl. ʃi dɪɾ əv ə bɹeɪn, wən ʃi tʃoʊz tə juz ɪt. əntɪl ðət kwɛstʃən wɑz ænsɝd, haʊɛvɝ, tʃɹʌstɪŋ ðə ɡɝl tu fɑɹ wɑz deɪnʒɝəs. ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɑz, lɪɾəl ðiz deɪz dɪd nɑt sim deɪnʒɝəs.

The question - her morning seemed filled with questions, and the sun not halfway to noon yet -  the question was, did the girl wear her jewelry because of the al'Thor boy, or the Asha'man? Or because of Cadsuane Melaidhrin? Nynaeve had demonstrated her loyalty to a young man from her own village, and she had shown her wariness of him as well. She did have a brain, when she chose to use it. Until that question was answered, however, trusting the girl too far was dangerous. The trouble was, little these days did not seem dangerous.

"dʒɑhɹ ɪz ɡɹoʊɪŋ stʃɹɔŋɝ," mɛɹaɪs sɛɾ əbɹʌpli.

"Jahar is growing stronger," Merise said abruptly.

fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, kædzueɪn fɹaʊn ət ði ʌðɝ ɡɹin. stʃɹɔŋɝ? ðə jʌŋ mænz ʃɝt wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə klɪŋ dæmpli tə hɪz bæk, waɪl læn əpɪɹd nɑt tə hæv bɹoʊkən ɪz fɝst swɛt. ðən ʃi ʌndɝstʊd. mɛɹaɪs mɛn ɪn ðə paʊɝ. kædzueɪn oʊnli ɹeɪzd ə kwɛstʃənɪŋ aɪbɹaʊ, ðoʊ. ʃi kəd nɑt ɹikɔl ðə læs taɪm ʃi hæd lɛt ʃɑk ɹitʃ əɹ feɪs. ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn ɔl ðoʊz jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ɪn ðə blæk hɪlz, wən ʃi bɪɡæn ɝnɪŋ ði ɔɹnəməns ʃi naʊ wɔɹ.

For an instant, Cadsuane frowned at the other Green. Stronger? The young man's shirt was beginning to cling damply to his back, while Lan appeared not to have broken his first sweat. Then she understood. Merise meant in the Power. Cadsuane only raised a questioning eyebrow, though. She could not recall the last time she had let shock reach her face. It might have been all those years ago, in the Black Hills, when she began earning the ornaments she now wore.

"æt fɝst, aɪ θɔt ðə weɪ ðiz æʃəmən tʃɹeɪn, ðə fɔɹsɪŋ, hæd pʊʃt ɪm tə hɪz fʊl stʃɹɛŋkθ ɔlɹɛɾi," mɛɹaɪs sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ daʊn ət ðə tu mɛn wɝkɪŋ ðɛɹ pɹæktəs bleɪdz. noʊ; ɪt wɑz ət dʒɑhɹ ʃi wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ. dʒʌst ə feɪn kɹɪŋkəl ə hɝ aɪz, bʌt ʃi ɹɪzɝvd əɹ fɹaʊnz fəɹ ðoʊz u kəd si ən noʊ hɝ dɪsplɛʒɝ. "æt ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, aɪ θɔɾ aɪ mʌs bi ɪmædʒənɪŋ ɪt. θɹi əɹ fɔɹ deɪz əɡoʊ, aɪ wɑz hæf kənvɪnst aɪ wɑz mɪsteɪkən. naʊ, aɪm ʃʊɹ aɪm kɝɛkt. ɪf mɛn ɡeɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ baɪ fɪts ən stɑɹts, ðəɹ ɪz noʊ seɪɪŋ haʊ stʃɹɔŋ hɪl bɪkʌm."

"At first, I thought the way these Asha'man train, the forcing, had pushed him to his full strength already," Merise said, frowning down at the two men working their practice blades. No; it was at Jahar she was frowning. Just a faint crinkle of her eyes, but she reserved her frowns for those who could see and know her displeasure. "At Shadar Logoth, I thought I must be imagining it. Three or four days ago, I was half convinced I was mistaken. Now, I am sure I am correct. If men gain strength by fits and starts, there is no saying how strong he will become."

ʃi dɪd nɑt vɔɪs əɹ ɑbviəs wɝi, ʌv kɔɹs: ðəɾ i maɪt ɡɹoʊ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ʃi. seɪɪŋ sətʃ ə θɪŋ wʊɾə bɪn ənθɪŋkəbəl ɑn mɛni dɪfɹən lɛvəlz, ən waɪl mɛɹaɪs hæd bɪkʌm sʌmwʌɾ əkʌstəm tə duɪŋ ði ənθɪŋkəbəl - moʊst sɪstɝz wəd feɪn ət ðə vɛɹi aɪdiə ʌv bɑndɪŋ ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl - ʃi wɑz nɛvɝ kʌmftəɹbəl ɡɪvɪŋ əm vɔɪs. kædzueɪn wɑz, jɛt ʃi kɛpt əɹ vɔɪs nutʃɹəl. laɪt, bʌt ʃi heɪɾəd biɪŋ dɛləkət. heɪɾəd ðə nəsɛsəɾi, ɛniweɪ.

She did not voice her obvious worry, of course: that he might grow stronger than she. Saying such a thing would have been unthinkable on many different levels, and while Merise had become somewhat accustomed to doing the unthinkable - most sisters would faint at the very idea of bonding a man who could channel - she was never comfortable giving them voice. Cadsuane was, yet she kept her voice neutral. Light, but she hated being delicate. Hated the necessity, anyway.

"hi simz kɑntɛnt, mɛɹaɪs." mɛɹaɪsəz wɔɹɾɝz ɔlweɪz sim kɑntɛnt; ʃi hændəld əm wɛl.

"He seems content, Merise." Merise's Warders always seemed content; she handled them well.

"hi ɪz ɪn ə fjʊɹi ʌv. . . . " ði ʌðɝ wʊmən tʌtʃt ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ hɛɾ əz ðoʊ fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə bʌndəl ə sɛnseɪʃənz ʃi fɛl θɹu ðə bɑnd. ʃi ɹɪli wɑz ʌpsɛt! "nɑt ɹeɪdʒ. fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən." ɹitʃɪŋ ɪndə hɝ ɡɹin wɝkt-lɛðɝ bɛl paʊtʃ, ʃi tʊk aʊɾ ə smɔl ɪnæməl pɪn, ə sɪnwəs fɪɡjɝ ɪn ɹɛɾ ən ɡoʊld, laɪk ə sneɪk wɪð lɛɡz ən ə laɪənz meɪn. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ wɛɹ ði ælθɹ læd ɡɑt ðɪs, bʌɾ i ɡeɪv ɪt tə dʒɑhɹ. əpɛɹənli, fəɹ æʃəmən, ɪts əkɪn tə əteɪnɪŋ ðə ʃɔl. aɪ hæd tə teɪk ɪɾ əweɪ, ʌv kɔɹs; dʒɑhɹ, hiz stɪl ət ðə steɪdʒ wɛɹ hiz tə lɝn tə æksɛpt oʊnli wʌɾ aɪ seɪ hi kæn. bʌt hiz soʊ ædʒəteɪɾəd oʊvɝ ðə θɪŋ. . . . ʃəɾ aɪ ɡɪv ɪt bæk tə hɪm? ɪn ə weɪ, ɪt wəd kʌm fɹəm maɪ hænd, ðɛn." kædzueɪnz aɪbɹaʊz bɪɡæn tə klaɪm bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd kəntʃɹoʊl ðɛm. mɛɹaɪs wɑz æskɪŋ ædvaɪs əbaʊt wʌn ə hɝ wɔɹɾɝz? ʌv kɔɹs, kædzueɪn hæd sədʒɛstəd ʃi saʊn ðə mæn aʊɾ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs, bʌt ðɪs dɪɡɹi ʌv ɪntəməsi wɑz. . . . ənθɪŋkəbəl? fɔ! "aɪm ʃʊɹ wʌtɛvɝ jə dɪsaɪd wɪl bi kɝɛkt." wɪð wʌn læst ɡlæns ət nɪneɪiv, ʃi lɛf ðə tɔlɝ wʊmən stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ði ɪnæməl pɪn wɪð əɹ θʌm ən fɹaʊnɪŋ daʊn ɪndə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. læn hæd dʒʌs dɪfiɾəd dʒɑhɹ wʌns mɔɹ, bʌt ðə jʌŋ mæn wɑz skwɛɹɪŋ ʌp əɡɛn, dɪmændɪŋ jɛɾ ənʌðɝ mætʃ. wʌtɛvɝ mɛɹaɪs dɪsaɪɾɪd, ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi lɝnd wʌn θɪŋ ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk. ðə baʊndɝiz bɪtwin ɛɛs sədaɪ ən wɔɹɾɝz hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn əz klɪɹ əz ðə kənɛkʃənz; ɛɛs sədaɪ kəmændəd, ən wɔɹɾɝz oʊbeɪd. bʌɾ ɪf mɛɹaɪs, ʌv ɔl pipəl, wɑz dɪðɝɪŋ oʊvɝ ə kɑlɝ pɪn - mɛɹaɪs, hu mænədʒd əɹ wɔɹɾɝz wɪð ə fɝm hænd - ðən nu baʊndɝiz wəɾ əv tə bi wɝkt aʊt, ət list wɪð wɔɹɾɝz u kəd tʃænəl. ɪt simd ənlaɪkli ðət bɑndɪŋ əm wəd stɑp naʊ; bɛldaɪn wɑz ɛvəɾəns fəɹ ðæt. pipəl nɛvɝ ɹɪli tʃeɪnʒd, jɛt ðə wɝl dɪd, wɪð dɪstɝbɪŋ ɹɛɡjəlɛɹəɾi. jə dʒʌs hæd tə lɪv wɪð ɪt, əɹ ət lis lɪv θɹu ɪt. naʊ ən ðɛn, wɪð lʌk, jə kəɾ əfɛk ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə tʃeɪnʒəz, bʌɾ ivən ɪf jə stɑpt wʌn, jə oʊnli sɛɾ ənʌðɝ ɪn moʊʃən. əz ɪkspɛktəd, ʃi dɪd nɑt faɪn ðə dɔɹ tə ði ælθɹ bɔɪz ɹumz ənɡɑɹɾɪd. əliviə wɑz ðɛɹ, ʌv kɔɹs, siɾəd ɑn ə bɛntʃ tə wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə dɔɹ wɪð əɹ hænz foʊldəd peɪʃənli ɪn əɹ læp. ðə peɪl-hɛɹd sintʃæn wʊmən hæɾ əpɔɪntəd hɝsɛlf ðə bɔɪz pɹətɛktɝ, ʌv sɔɹts. əliviə kɹɛɾətəd ɪm wɪð fɹiɪŋ əɹ fɹəm ə deɪmeɪnz kɑlɝ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ tə ɪt ðən ðæt. mɪn dɪslaɪk hɝ, fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ən ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə juʒəwəl sɔɹɾ ə dʒɛləsi. əliviə hɑɹdli sim tə noʊ wʌt mɛn ən wɪmən dɪd təɡɛðɝ. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə kənɛkʃən bɪtwin əɹ ən ðə bɔɪ, ə kənɛkʃən ɹɪvild ɪn ɡlænsɪz ðət kæɹid dɪtɝməneɪʃən ɑn əɹ saɪɾ ən ɑn hɪz, hoʊp, hɑɹɾ əz ðət wɑz tə bɪliv. əntɪl kædzueɪn nu wʌt ðət wɑz ɔl əbaʊt, ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə də nʌθɪŋ tə sɛpɝeɪt ðɛm. əliviəz ʃɑɹp blu aɪz ɹəɡɑɹɾəd kædzueɪn wɪð ə ɹɪspɛkfəl wɛɹinɪs, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt si ən ɛnəmi. əliviə hæɾ ə ʃɔɹt weɪ wɪð ðoʊz ʃi kənsɪɾɝd ði ælθɹ bɔɪz ɛnəmiz. ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ɑn ɡɑɹd wɑz mʌtʃ ʌv ə saɪz wɪð əliviə, bʌt ðə tu kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn mɔɹ dɪfɹənt, ən nɑt dʒʌs kəz ɛlzəz aɪz wɝ bɹaʊn ən ʃi hæd ðə smuð, eɪdʒləs lʊk ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ, wɛɹ əliviə hæd faɪn laɪnz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ aɪz ən θɹɛdz ʌv waɪɾ ɔlmoʊs hɪɾən ɪn əɹ hɛɹ. ɛlzə lɛp tə hɝ fiɾ əz sun əz ʃi sɔ kædzueɪn, dʒɹɔɪŋ hɝsɛlf ʌp ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə dɔɹ ən ɹæpɪŋ hɝsɛlf taɪɾ ɪn əɹ ʃɔl. "hi ɪz nɑɾ əloʊn," ʃi sɛd, fɹɔst ɹaɪmɪŋ əɹ vɔɪs.

"He is in a fury of. . . . " The other woman touched the side of her head as though fingering the bundle of sensations she felt through the bond. She really was upset! "Not rage. Frustration." Reaching into her green worked-leather belt pouch, she took out a small enameled pin, a sinuous figure in red and gold, like a snake with legs and a lion's mane. "I do not know where the al'Thor lad got this, but he gave it to Jahar. Apparently, for Asha'man, it is akin to attaining the shawl. I had to take it away, of course; Jahar, he is still at the stage where he has to learn to accept only what I say he can. But he is so agitated over the thing. . . . Should I give it back to him? In a way, it would come from my hand, then." Cadsuane's eyebrows began to climb before she could control them. Merise was asking advice about one of her Warders? Of course, Cadsuane had suggested she sound the man out in the first place, but this degree of intimacy was. . . . Unthinkable? Phaw! "I'm sure whatever you decide will be correct." With one last glance at Nynaeve, she left the taller woman stroking the enameled pin with her thumb and frowning down into the courtyard. Lan had just defeated Jahar once more, but the young man was squaring up again, demanding yet another match. Whatever Merise decided, she had already learned one thing she did not like. The boundaries between Aes Sedai and Warders had always been as clear as the connections; Aes Sedai commanded, and Warders obeyed. But if Merise, of all people, was dithering over a collar pin - Merise, who managed her Warders with a firm hand - then new boundaries would have to be worked out, at least with Warders who could channel. It seemed unlikely that bonding them would stop now; Beldeine was evidence for that. People never really changed, yet the world did, with disturbing regularity. You just had to live with it, or at least live through it. Now and then, with luck, you could affect the direction of the changes, but even if you stopped one, you only set another in motion. As expected, she did not find the door to the al'Thor boy's rooms unguarded. Alivia was there, of course, seated on a bench to one side of the door with her hands folded patiently in her lap. The pale-haired Seanchan woman had appointed herself the boy's protector, of sorts. Alivia credited him with freeing her from a damane's collar, but there was more to it than that. Min disliked her, for one thing, and it was not the usual sort of jealousy. Alivia hardly seemed to know what men and women did together. But there was a connection between her and the boy, a connection revealed in glances that carried determination on her side and on his, hope, hard as that was to believe. Until Cadsuane knew what that was all about, she intended to do nothing to separate them. Alivia's sharp blue eyes regarded Cadsuane with a respectful wariness, but she did not see an enemy. Alivia had a short way with those she considered the al'Thor boy's enemies. The other woman on guard was much of a size with Alivia, but the two could not have been more different, and not just because Elza's eyes were brown and she had the smooth, ageless look of Aes Sedai, where Alivia had fine lines at the corners of her eyes and threads of white almost hidden in her hair. Elza leaped to her feet as soon as she saw Cadsuane, drawing herself up in front of the door and wrapping herself tight in her shawl. "He is not alone," she said, frost riming her voice.

"du jə min tə stæn ɪn maɪ weɪ?" kædzueɪn æskt, dʒʌst əz koʊldli. ði ændɔɝən ɡɹin ʃʊɾə muvd əsaɪd. ɛlzə stʊd fɑɹ ɪnʌf bɪloʊ hɝ ɪn ðə paʊɝ ðət ʃi ʃəd nɑɾ əv hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, mʌtʃ lɛs weɪɾəd, fəɹ ə kəmænd, bʌt ðə wʊmən plæntəɾ əɹ fit, ən əɹ ɡeɪz æktʃəli  ɡɹu hiɾəd.

"Do you mean to stand in my way?" Cadsuane asked, just as coldly. The Andoran Green should have moved aside. Elza stood far enough below her in the Power that she should not have hesitated, much less waited, for a command, but the woman planted her feet, and her gaze actually grew heated.

ɪt wɑz ə kwɑndɝi. faɪv ʌðɝ sɪstɝz ɪn ðə mænɝ haʊs swɔɹn fiəlti tə ðə bɔɪ, ən ðoʊz u hæd bɪn lɔɪəl tə ɪleɪɾə ɔl stɛɹɾ ət kædzueɪn əz ɪf səspɪʃəs ə hɝ ɪntɛntʃənz təwɔɹd hɪm. wɪtʃ ɹeɪz ðə kwɛstʃən ʌv waɪ vɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt, ʌv kɔɹs. bʌɾ oʊnli ɛlzə tʃɹaɪd tə kip əɹ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. ðə wʊmənz æɾətud ɹikt ə dʒɛləsi, wɪtʃ meɪd noʊ sɛns. ʃi kəd nɑt pɑsəbli bɪliv hɝsɛlf bɛɾɝ suɾəd tə ædvaɪz hɪm, ən ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɛni sədʒɛstʃən ðəɾ ɛlzə dɪzaɪɝd ðə bɔɪ, əz ə mæn əɹ ə wɔɹɾɝ, mɪn wʊɾə bɪn snɑɹlɪŋ. ðə ɡɝl hæd faɪnli hoʊn ɪnstɪŋks, ðɛɹ. kædzueɪn wəɾ əv ɡɹaʊn əɹ tiθ, hæd ʃi bɪn ðə sɔɹɾ ʌv wʊmən tə ɡɹaɪn əɹ tiθ.

It was a quandary. Five other sisters in the manor house sworn fealty to the boy, and those who had been loyal to Elaida all stared at Cadsuane as if suspicious of her intentions toward him. Which raised the question of why Verin did not, of course. But only Elza tried to keep her away from him. The woman's attitude reeked of jealousy, which made no sense. She could not possibly believe herself better suited to advise him, and if there had been any suggestion that Elza desired the boy, as a man or a Warder, Min would have been snarling. The girl had finely honed instincts, there. Cadsuane would have ground her teeth, had she been the sort of woman to grind her teeth.

ət ðə pɔɪnt wən ʃi θɔt ʃi wəɾ əv tə ɔɹɾɝ ɛlzə tə stɛp əsaɪd, əliviə lin fɔɹwɝd.

At the point when she thought she would have to order Elza to step aside, Alivia leaned forward.

"hi dɪd sɛn fəɹ hɝ, ɛlzə," ʃi dʒɹɔld. "hil bi əpsɛɾ ɪf wi kip əɹ aʊt. əpsɛt wɪð ʌs, nɑt hɝ. lɛɾ əɹ ɪn."

"He did send for her, Elza," she drawled. "He'll be upset if we keep her out. Upset with us, not her. Let her in."

ɛlzə ɡlænst ət ðə sintʃæn wʊmən fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ, ən əɹ lɪp kɝld ɪn kəntɛmpt.

Elza glanced at the Seanchan woman from the corner of her eye, and her lip curled in contempt.

əliviə stʊd fɑɹ əbʌv əɹ ɪn ðə paʊɝ - əliviə stʊd wɛl əbʌv kædzueɪn, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ - bʌt ʃi wɑz ə waɪldɝ, ən ə laɪɝ ɪn ɛlzəz vju. ðə dɑɹk-hɛɹd wʊmən hɑɹdli sim tə æksɛp ðəɾ əliviə hæd bɪn deɪmeɪn, mʌtʃ lɛs ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ stɔɹi. stɪl, ɛlzə dɑɹɾɪd ə lʊk ət kædzueɪn, ðən ət ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɝ, ən ʃɪftəɾ əɹ ʃɔl. pleɪnli, ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn ðə bɔɪ ʌpsɛt. nɑt wɪð hɝ.

Alivia stood far above her in the Power - Alivia stood well above Cadsuane, for that matter - but she was a wilder, and a liar in Elza's view. The dark-haired woman hardly seemed to accept that Alivia had been damane, much less the rest of her story. Still, Elza darted a look at Cadsuane, then at the door behind her, and shifted her shawl. Plainly, she did not want the boy upset. Not with her.

"aɪl si wɛðɝ hiz ɹɛɾi fəɹ ju," ʃi sɛd, vɛɹi nɪɹ tə sʌlən. "kip əɹ hɪɹ," ʃi æɾəd tə əliviə, mɔɹ ʃɑɹpli, bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ tə nɑk laɪtli ət ðə dɔɹ. ə meɪl vɔɪs kɔl fɹəm ði ʌðɝ saɪd, ən ʃi oʊpən ðə dɔɹ dʒʌst waɪɾ ɪnʌf tə slɪp ɪn, pʊlɪŋ ɪt ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɝ.

"I'll see whether he's ready for you," she said, very near to sullen. "Keep her here," she added to Alivia, more sharply, before turning to knock lightly at the door. A male voice called from the other side, and she opened the door just wide enough to slip in, pulling it shut behind her.

"jul əv tə fɝɡɪv hɝ," əliviə sɛɾ ɪn ðəɾ ɪɹɪteɪɾɪŋli sloʊ, sɑf sintʃæn æksɛnt. "aɪ θɪŋk ɪts dʒʌs ðət ʃi teɪks əɹ oʊθ vɛɹi sɪɹiəsli. ʃi ɪzən juz tə sɝvɪŋ ɛniwʌn." "ɛɛs sədaɪ kip ðɛɹ wɝd," kædzueɪn ɹɪplaɪd dʒɹaɪli. ðə wʊmən meɪɾ əɹ fil əz ɪf əɹ oʊn weɪ ʌv tɔkɪŋ wɝ əz kwɪk ən kɹɪsp əz ə kɛɹhinɪnz! "wi mʌst."

"You'll have to forgive her," Alivia said in that irritatingly slow, soft Seanchan accent. "I think it's just that she takes her oath very seriously. She isn't used to serving anyone." "Aes Sedai keep their word," Cadsuane replied dryly. The woman made her feel as if her own way of talking were as quick and crisp as a Cairhienin's! "We must."

"aɪ θɪŋk jə du. dʒʌst soʊ jə noʊ, aɪ kip maɪ wɝd, tu. aɪ oʊ hɪm ɛniθɪŋ i wɑns ə mi." ə fæsəneɪɾɪŋ kɑmɛnt, ən ən oʊpənɪŋ, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd teɪk ædvæntɪdʒ ʌv ɪt, ɛlzə keɪm aʊt. bɪhaɪn əɹ keɪm ælɡɝɪn, waɪt bɪɹd tʃɹɪm tə ə nit pɔɪnt. hi ɔfɝd kædzueɪn ə baʊ, wɪð ə smaɪl ðət dipən ðə ɹɪŋkəlz ə hɪz feɪs. hɪz pleɪn koʊɾ ə dɑɹk wʊl, meɪɾ ɪn ɪz jʌŋɡɝ deɪz, hʌŋ lusli ɑn ɪm naʊ, ən ðə hɛɹ ɑn ɪz hɛd pɹəvaɪɾəd ə θɪn kʌvɝɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃæns tə faɪn aʊt waɪ hi hæd bɪn vɪzəɾɪŋ ði ælθɹ bɔɪ. "hi wɪl si jə naʊ," ɛlzə sɛd ʃɑɹpli.

"I think you do. Just so you know, I keep my word, too. I owe him anything he wants of me." A fascinating comment, and an opening, but before she could take advantage of it, Elza came out. Behind her came Algarin, white beard trimmed to a neat point. He offered Cadsuane a bow, with a smile that deepened the wrinkles of his face. His plain coat of dark wool, made in his younger days, hung loosely on him now, and the hair on his head provided a thin covering. There was no chance to find out why he had been visiting the al'Thor boy. "He will see you now," Elza said sharply.

kædzueɪn vɛɹi nɪɹli dɪd ɡɹaɪn əɹ tiθ. əliviə wəɾ əv tə weɪt. ən ælɡɝɪn.

Cadsuane very nearly did grind her teeth. Alivia would have to wait. And Algarin.

ðə bɔɪ wɑz ɑn ɪz fit wən kædzueɪn ɛntɝd, ɔlmoʊst əz tɔl ən bɹɔd-ʃoʊldɝɾ əz læn ɪn ə blæk koʊt wɝkt wɪð ɡoʊld ɑn ðə slivz ən ðə haɪ kɑlɝ. ɪt wɑz tu mʌtʃ laɪk ən æʃəmənz koʊt wɪð ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi æɾəd tə sut hɝ, bʌt ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ. hi meɪɾ ə kɝɾiəs baʊ, ʌʃɝɪŋ əɹ tə ə tʃɛɹ wɪð ə tæsɛl kʊʃən ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs ən æskɪŋ wɛðɝ ʃi wəd laɪk waɪn. ðəɾ ɪn ðə pɪtʃɝ sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə saɪd teɪbəl wɪð tu waɪnkʌps hæd ɡɔn koʊld, bʌɾ i kəd sɛn fəɹ mɔɹ. ʃi hæd wɝk hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə fɔɹs ɪm ɪndə səvɪləɾi; hi kəd wɛɹ ɛni koʊɾ i wɑntəd. ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz i hæd tə bi ɡaɪɾəd ɪn. əɹ pɹɑɾɪd, əɹ pʊld əz nid bi. ʃi wɑz nɑt gɑnə weɪs taɪm əɹ tɔk ɑn ɪz kloʊðɪŋ.

The boy was on his feet when Cadsuane entered, almost as tall and broad-shouldered as Lan in a black coat worked with gold on the sleeves and the high collar. It was too much like an Asha'man's coat with embroidery added to suit her, but she said nothing. He made a courteous bow, ushering her to a chair with a tasseled cushion in front of the fireplace and asking whether she would like wine. That in the pitcher sitting on a side table with two winecups had gone cold, but he could send for more. She had worked hard enough to force him into civility; he could wear any coat he wanted. There were more important matters he had to be guided in. Or prodded, or pulled as need be. She was not going to waste time or talk on his clothing.

ɪnklaɪnɪŋ əɹ hɛd pəlaɪtli, ʃi dɪklaɪn ðə waɪn. ə waɪnkʌp ɔfɝd mɛni ɑpɝtunəɾiz - tə sɪp wən jə niɾəd ə moʊməns θɔt; tə pɪɹ ɪndə wən jə wɪʃt tə haɪd jəɹ aɪz - jɛt ðɪs jʌŋ mæn niɾəd wɑtʃɪŋ ɛvɹi moʊmənt. hɪz feɪs ɡeɪv əweɪ ɔlmoʊst əz lɪɾəl əz ə sɪstɝz. wɪð ðət dɑɹk ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ ən ðoʊz blu-ɡɹeɪ aɪz, hi cʊɾə pæs fəɹ il, bʌt fju il hæɾ aɪz ðət koʊld.

Inclining her head politely, she declined the wine. A winecup offered many opportunities - to sip when you needed a moment's thought; to peer into when you wished to hide your eyes - yet this young man needed watching every moment. His face gave away almost as little as a sister's. With that dark reddish hair and those blue-gray eyes, he could have passed for Aiel, but few Aiel had eyes that cold.

ðeɪ meɪd ðə mɔɹnɪŋ skaɪ ʃi hæd bɪn stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɝliɝ sim wɔɹm. koʊldɝ ðən ðeɪ hæd bɪn bɪfɔɹ ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. hɑɹɾɝ, tu, ənfɔɹtʃənətli. ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ lʊkt . . . wɪɹi. "ælɡɝɪn hæɾ ə bɹʌðɝ u kəd tʃænəl," hi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ə feɪsɪŋ tʃɛɹ. hæfweɪ ɪndə ðə tɝn, hi stæɡɝd. hi kɑt hɪmsɛlf ɑn ən ɑɹm ə ðə tʃɛɹ wɪð ə bɑɹk læf, pɹitɛndɪŋ i hæd tʃɹɪpt oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn buts, bʌt ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ tʃɹɪpɪŋ. ən i hæd nɑt siz seɪɾɪn - ʃi hæd sin ɪm stæɡɝ, duɪŋ ðət - əɹ əɹ ɔɹnəməns wʊɾə wɔɹn hɝ. kɔɹəl sɛɾ i oʊnli niɾəd ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ slip tə ɹɪkʌvɝ fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. laɪt, ʃi niɾəd tə kip ðə bɔɪ əlaɪv, əɹ ɪt hæɾ ɔl bɪn fəɹ nʌθɪŋ!

They made the morning sky she had been staring at earlier seem warm. Colder than they had been before Shadar Logoth. Harder, too, unfortunately. They also looked . . . weary. "Algarin had a brother who could channel," he said, turning toward a facing chair. Halfway into the turn, he staggered. He caught himself on an arm of the chair with a barked laugh, pretending he had tripped over his own boots, but there had been no tripping. And he had not seized saidin - she had seen him stagger, doing that - or her ornaments would have warned her. Corele said he only needed a little more sleep to recover from Shadar Logoth. Light, she needed to keep the boy alive, or it had all been for nothing!

"aɪ noʊ," ʃi sɛd. ən sɪns ɪt simd ælɡɝɪn maɪɾ əv toʊld ɪm ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ʃi æɾəd, "aɪ wɑz ðə wʌn u kæptʃɝɾ əmɝɪn ən tʊk ɪm tə tɑɹ vəlɑn." ə stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋ fəɹ ælɡɝɪn tə bi ɡɹeɪtfəl fɔɹ, ɪn səm aɪz, bʌɾ ɪz jʌŋɡɝ bɹʌðɝ sɝvaɪv biɪŋ dʒɛntəl fəɹ mɔɹ ðən tɛn jɪɹz æftɝ ʃi hæd hɛlpt ɪm ɹɛkənsaɪl tə ɪt. ðə bɹʌðɝz hæd bɪn kloʊz.

"I know," she said. And since it seemed Algarin might have told him everything, she added, "I was the one who captured Emarin and took him to Tar Valon." A strange thing for Algarin to be grateful for, in some eyes, but his younger brother survived being gentled for more than ten years after she had helped him reconcile to it. The brothers had been close.

ðə bɔɪz aɪbɹaʊz twɪtʃt əz i sɛɾəld ɪndə hɪz tʃɛɹ. hi hæd nɑt noʊn. "ælɡɝɪn wɑns tə bi tɛstəd," hi sɛd. ʃi mɛɾ ɪz ɡeɪz lɛvəli, sɝinəli, ən hɛld əɹ tʌŋ. ælɡɝɪnz tʃɪlʒɹən wɝ mɛɹid, ðoʊz u stɪl lɪvd. meɪbi hi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə tɝn ðɪs pis ə læn oʊvɝ tə hɪz dɪsɛndəns. ɪn ɛni keɪs, wʌn mæn mɔɹ əɹ lɛs u kəd tʃænəl hɑɹdli meɪɾ ɛni dɪfɝəns ət ðɪs pɔɪnt. ənlɛs ɪt wɑz ðə bɔɪ hu wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət hɝ.

The boy's eyebrows twitched as he settled into his chair. He had not known. "Algarin wants to be tested," he said. She met his gaze levelly, serenely, and held her tongue. Algarin's children were married, those who still lived. Maybe he was ready to turn this piece of land over to his descendants. In any case, one man more or less who could channel hardly made any difference at this point. Unless it was the boy who was staring at her.

æftɝ ə moʊmənt, hɪz tʃɪn muvd, ðə vɛstɪdʒ ʌv ə nɑd. hæɾ i bɪn tɛstɪŋ hɝ? "nɛvɝ fɪɹ ðəɾ əl feɪl tə tɛl jə wən jəɹ biɪŋ ə ful, bɔɪ." moʊs pipəl ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðəɾ æftɝ wʌn miɾɪŋ ʃi hæɾ ə ʃɑɹp tʌŋ. ðɪs jʌŋ mæn ɹikwaɪɝd ɹimaɪndɪŋ fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm. hi ɡɹʌntɪd. ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn ə læf. ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn ɹufəl. ʃi ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf ðəɾ i wɑntəɾ əɹ tə titʃ ɪm sʌmθɪŋ, ðoʊ hi dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊ wʌt. noʊ mæɾɝ. ʃi hæɾ ə lɪs tə tʃuz fɹʌm, ən ʃi hæɾ oʊnli bɪɡʌn ɑn ɪt. hɪz feɪs maɪɾ əv bɪn kɑɹv fɹəm stoʊn fəɹ ɔl ði ɪkspɹɛʃən i ʃoʊd, bʌɾ i baʊndəd tə hɪz fiɾ ən bɪɡæn tə peɪs bæk ən fɔɹθ bɪtwin ðə faɪɝpleɪs ən ðə dɔɹ. hɪz hænz wɝ klɛntʃt ɪn fɪsts bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. "aɪv bɪn tɔkɪŋ wɪð əliviə, əbaʊt ðə sintʃæn," hi sɛd. "ðeɪ kɔl ðɛɹ ɑɹmi ði ɛvɝ vɪktɔɹiəs ɑɹmi fəɹ ə ɹizən. ɪts nɛvɝ lɔst ə wɔɹ. bæɾəlz, jɛs, bʌt nɛvɝ ə wɔɹ.

After a moment, his chin moved, the vestige of a nod. Had he been testing her? "Never fear that I'll fail to tell you when you're being a fool, boy." Most people remembered that after one meeting she had a sharp tongue. This young man required reminding from time to time. He grunted. It might have been a laugh. It might have been rueful. She reminded herself that he wanted her to teach him something, though he did not seem to know what. No matter. She had a list to choose from, and she had only begun on it. His face might have been carved from stone for all the expression he showed, but he bounded to his feet and began to pace back and forth between the fireplace and the door. His hands were clenched in fists behind his back. "I've been talking with Alivia, about the Seanchan," he said. "They call their army the Ever Victorious Army for a reason. It's never lost a war. Battles, yes, but never a war.

wən ðeɪ luz ə bæɾəl, ðeɪ sɪt daʊn ən wɝk aʊt wʌt ðeɪ dɪd ɹɔŋ, əɹ wʌt ði ɛnəmi dɪd ɹaɪt.

When they lose a battle, they sit down and work out what they did wrong, or what the enemy did right.

ðən ðeɪ tʃeɪnʒ wʌt nidz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ fəɹ əm tə wɪn."

Then they change what needs changing for them to win."

"ə waɪz weɪ," ʃi sɛd wən ðə floʊ ʌv wɝdz pɔzd. pleɪnli, hi ɪkspɛktəd səm kɑmɛnt. "aɪ noʊ mɛn u də ðə seɪm. dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ, fəɹ wʌn. ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn, ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi, eɪɡəlmɝ dʒəɡəd.

"A wise way," she said when the flow of words paused. Plainly, he expected some comment. "I know men who do the same. Davram Bashere, for one. Gareth Bryne, Rodel Ituralde, Agelmar Jagad.

ivən peɪdʒɹən naɪl dɪd, wən i wɑz əlaɪv. ɔl dʒʌdʒd ɡɹeɪt kæptənz."

Even Pedron Niall did, when he was alive. All judged great captains."

"jɛs," hi sɛd, stɪl peɪsɪŋ. hi dɪd nɑt lʊk ət hɝ, pɝhæps dɪd nɑt si hɝ, bʌɾ i wɑz lɪsnɪŋ.

"Yes," he said, still pacing. He did not look at her, perhaps did not see her, but he was listening.

ɪt wɑz tə bi hoʊp ðəɾ i æktʃəli  hɝd, əz wɛl. "faɪv mɛn, ɔl ɡɹeɪt kæptənz. ðə sintʃæn ɔl də ɪt.

It was to be hoped that he actually heard, as well. "Five men, all great captains. The Seanchan all do it.

ðæts bɪn ðɛɹ weɪ fəɹ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz. ðeɪ tʃeɪnʒ wʌt ðeɪv tə tʃeɪnʒ, bʌt ðeɪ doʊnt ɡɪv ʌp."

That's been their way for a thousand years. They change what they have to change, but they don't give up."

"ɑɹ jə kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðeɪ kæn bi dɪfiɾəd?" ʃi æskt kɑmli. kɑmnəs ɔlweɪz suɾəd əntɪl jə nu ðə fæks, ən juʒəwəli æftɝ, tu.

"Are you considering the possibility they can't be defeated?" she asked calmly. Calmness always suited until you knew the facts, and usually after, too.

ðə bɔɪ ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn hɝ, stɪf-nɛkt ən aɪz laɪk aɪs. "aɪ kən dɪfiɾ əm ɪvɛntʃəwəli," hi sɛd, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə kip ɪz toʊn sɪvəl. ðət mʌtʃ wɑz tə ðə ɡʊd. ðə lɛs ɔfən ʃi hæd tə pɹuv ðət ʃi kəɾ ən wəd pʌnɪʃ tʃɹænzɡɹɛʃənz ə hɝ ɹulz, ðə bɛɾɝ. "bʌt - " hi kʌɾ ɔf wɪð ə ɡɹaʊl əz ðə saʊnz ʌv ɑɹɡjəmən ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ pɛnətʃɹeɪɾəd ðə dɔɹ.

The boy rounded on her, stiff-necked and eyes like ice. "I can defeat them eventually," he said, struggling to keep his tone civil. That much was to the good. The less often she had to prove that she could and would punish transgressions of her rules, the better. "But - " He cut off with a growl as the sounds of argument in the hallway penetrated the door.

ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ ðə dɔɹ swʌŋ oʊpən, ən ɛlzə bækt ɪndə ðə ɹum, stɪl ɑɹɡjuɪŋ ɪn ə laʊd vɔɪs ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hoʊl bæk tu ʌðɝ sɪstɝz wɪð əɹ spɹɛɾ ɑɹmz. bɹaɪən, hɝ peɪl feɪs flʌʃt wɪð kʌlɝ, wɑz pʊʃɪŋ ði ʌðɝ ɡɹin əhɛɾ ə hɝ fɪzɪkəli. sɝin, ə wʊmən soʊ bjuɾəfəl ʃi meɪd bɹaɪən lʊk ɔlmoʊst ɔɹɾənɛɹi, wɔɹ ə kulɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən, əz maɪt bi ɪkspɛktəd fɹəm ə waɪt, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ɪn ɛksæspɝeɪʃən, ən hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ðə kʌlɝfəl bidz ɪn əɹ θɪn bɹeɪdz klɪk təɡɛðɝ. sɝin pəzɛst ə tɛmpɝ, ðoʊ ʃi nɔɹməli kɛpt ɪt sild əweɪ taɪtli. "bɑɹɾəl ən ɹæʃən də bi kʌmɪŋ," bɹaɪən ənaʊns laʊdli, ædʒəteɪʃən θɪkənɪŋ ɪljən ɪn əɹ spitʃ. ðoʊz wɝ əɹ tu wɔɹɾɝz, lɛf bɪhaɪn ɪn kɛɹhin. "aɪ dɪd noʊ sɛn fəɹ ðɛm, bʌt sʌmwʌn dɪd tʃɹævəl wɪð ðɛm. ən aʊɝ əɡoʊ, aɪ fɛlt əm sʌɾənli kloʊsɝ, ən dʒʌs naʊ, kloʊsɝ əɡɛn. ðeɪ ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əs naʊ." "maɪ vaɪɾəliən, hi ɔlsoʊ ɪz kʌmɪŋ kloʊsɝ," sɝin sɛd. "hi wɪl bi hɪɹ ɪn ə fju aʊɝz, aɪ θɪŋk." ɛlzə lɛɾ əɹ ɑɹmz dʒɹɑp, ðoʊ fɹəm ðə stɪfnəs ə hɝ bæk, ʃi wɑz stɪl ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət ðə tu sɪstɝz. "maɪ fɝəl wɪl bi hɪɹ ʃɔɹtli əz wɛl," ʃi mʌɾɝd. hi wɑz əɹ oʊnli wɔɹɾɝ; ɪt wɑz sɛd ðeɪ wɝ mɛɹid, ən ɡɹinz u mɛɹid sɛldəm tʊk ənʌðɝ ənʌðɝ wɔɹɾɝ ət ðə seɪm taɪm. kædzueɪn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ʃi wʊɾə spoʊkən ɪf ði ʌðɝz hæd nɑt.

A moment later the door swung open, and Elza backed into the room, still arguing in a loud voice and trying to hold back two other sisters with her spread arms. Brian, her pale face flushed with color, was pushing the other Green ahead of her physically. Sarene, a woman so beautiful she made Brian look almost ordinary, wore a cooler expression, as might be expected from a White, but she was shaking her head in exasperation, and hard enough to make the colorful beads in her thin braids click together. Sarene possessed a temper, though she normally kept it sealed away tightly. "Bartol and Rashan do be coming," Brian announced loudly, agitation thickening Illian in her speech. Those were her two Warders, left behind in Cairhien. "I did no send for them, but someone did Travel with them. An hour ago, I felt them suddenly closer, and just now, closer again. They are coming toward us now." "My Vitalien, he also is coming closer," Sarene said. "He will be here in a few hours, I think." Elza let her arms drop, though from the stiffness of her back, she was still glaring at the two sisters. "My Fearil will be here shortly as well," she muttered. He was her only Warder; it was said they were married, and Greens who married seldom took another another Warder at the same time. Cadsuane wondered whether she would have spoken if the others had not.

"aɪ dɪdn ɪkspɛkt ɪt soʊ sun," ðə bɔɪ sɛd sɔfli. sɔfli, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz stil ɪn ɪz vɔɪs. "bʌɾ aɪ ʃʊdn əv ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪvɛns tə weɪɾ ɑn mi, ʃəɾ aɪ, kædzueɪn?"

"I didn't expect it so soon," the boy said softly. Softly, but there was steel in his voice. "But I shouldn't have expected events to wait on me, should I, Cadsuane?"

"ɪvɛns nɛvɝ weɪɾ ɑn ɛniwʌn," ʃi sɛd, stændɪŋ. bɹaɪən flɪntʃt əz ɪf ʃi hæd dʒʌs noʊɾəst hɝ, ðoʊ kædzueɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ əɹ feɪs wɑz əz smuð əz ðə bɔɪz. ən meɪbi əz stoʊni, ət ðæt. wʌt hæd bɹɔt ðoʊz wɔɹɾɝz fɹəm kɛɹhin, ən u hæd tʃɹævəld wɪð ðɛm, maɪt bi pɹɑbləmz ɪnʌf tə ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð, bʌt ʃi θɔt ʃi hæd ɡɑɾən ənʌðɝ ænsɝ fɹəm ðə bɔɪ, ən ʃi wɑz gɑnə hæv tə kənsɪɾɝ vɛɹi kɛɹfəli haʊ tə ædvaɪz ɪm ɑn ɪt. səmtaɪmz, ði ænsɝz wɝ θɔɹniɝ ðən ðə kwɛstʃənz.

"Events never wait on anyone," she said, standing. Brian flinched as if she had just noticed her, though Cadsuane was sure her face was as smooth as the boy's. And maybe as stony, at that. What had brought those Warders from Cairhien, and who had Traveled with them, might be problems enough to go on with, but she thought she had gotten another answer from the boy, and she was going to have to consider very carefully how to advise him on it. Sometimes, the answers were thornier than the questions.

tʃæptɝ twɛntifɔɹ

CHAPTER 24

eɪ stʃɹɛŋθənɪŋ stɔɹm mɪdæftɝnun sʌnlaɪt ʃʊɾə bɪn slæntɪŋ θɹu ðə wɪndoʊz ə ɹændz bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ, bʌɾ ə hɑɹd ɹeɪn wɑz fɔlɪŋ aʊtsaɪd, ən ɔl ðə læmps wɝ lɪt tə hoʊld ɔf ə twaɪlaɪt dɑɹknəs. θʌndɝ ɹæɾəld ðə ɡlæs-fɪl keɪsməns ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz. ɪt wɑz ə fɪɹs stɔɹm ðət hæd ɹoʊl daʊn aʊɾ ə ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl fæstɝ ðən ə ɹʌnɪŋ hɔɹs ən bɹɔɾ ə dipɝ koʊld, ɔlmoʊs dip ɪnʌf fəɹ snoʊ. ðə ɹeɪndʒɹɑps pɛltɪŋ ðə haʊs wɝ hæf-fɹoʊzən slʌʃ, ən dɪspaɪt bleɪzɪŋ lɔɡz ɑn ðə hɑɹθstoʊn, ə tʃɪl klʌŋ tə ðə ɹum.

A Strengthening Storm Midafternoon sunlight should have been slanting through the windows of Rand's bedchamber, but a hard rain was falling outside, and all the lamps were lit to hold off a twilight darkness. Thunder rattled the glass-filled casements in the windows. It was a fierce storm that had rolled down out of the Dragonwall faster than a running horse and brought a deeper cold, almost deep enough for snow. The raindrops pelting the house were half-frozen slush, and despite blazing logs on the hearthstone, a chill clung to the room.

laɪɪŋ ɑn ɪz bɛd wɪð ɪz buɾɪd fit pɹɑpt wʌn ətɑp ði ʌðɝ ɑn ðə kʌvɝlət, hi stɛɹɾ ʌp ət ðə kænəpi ən tʃɹaɪd tə pʊɾ ɪz θɔts ɪn ɔɹɾɝ. hi kəd dɪsɹɪɡɑɹd ðə θʌndɝstɔɹm aʊtsaɪd, bʌt mɪn, snʌɡəlɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm, wɑz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə dɪstʃɹæk hɪm; ʃi dʒʌs dɪɾ ɪt wɪθaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ. wʌt wɑz i tə də əbaʊt hɝ? əbaʊɾ ɪleɪn, ən eɪvinhə. ðoʊz tu wɝ oʊnli veɪɡ pɹɛzənsɪz ɪn ɪz hɛd, ət ðɪs dɪstəns fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn.

Lying on his bed with his booted feet propped one atop the other on the coverlet, he stared up at the canopy and tried to put his thoughts in order. He could disregard the thunderstorm outside, but Min, snuggling under his arm, was another matter. She did not try to distract him; she just did it without trying. What was he to do about her? About Elayne, and Aviendha. Those two were only vague presences in his head, at this distance from Caemlyn.

ət list, hi əsum ðeɪ wɝ stɪl ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. əsumɪŋ wɑz deɪnʒɝəs wən ɪt keɪm tə ðoʊz tu. ɔl i hæɾ ə ðɛm ət ðə moʊmənt wɑz ə dʒɛnɝəl sɛns ə dɝɛkʃən ən ðə nɑlədʒ ðeɪ wɝ əlaɪv. mɪnz bɑɾi wɑz pɹɛs taɪɾ əɡɛnst ɪz saɪd, ðoʊ, ən ðə bɑn meɪɾ əɹ əz vaɪbɹən ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛɾ əz ʃi wɑz ɪn ðə flɛʃ. wɑz ɪt tu leɪt tə kip mɪn seɪf, tə kip ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə seɪf?

At least, he assumed they were still in Caemlyn. Assuming was dangerous when it came to those two. All he had of them at the moment was a general sense of direction and the knowledge they were alive. Min's body was pressed tight against his side, though, and the bond made her as vibrant inside his head as she was in the flesh. Was it too late to keep Min safe, to keep Elayne and Aviendha safe?

wʌt meɪks jə θɪŋk jə kən kip ɛniwʌn seɪf? luz θɝɪn wɪspɝɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd. ðə dɛd mædmæn wɑz ən oʊl fɹɛnd, naʊ. wəɹ ɔl ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ. dʒʌs hoʊp ðət jə ɑɹən ðə wʌn u kɪlz ðɛm. nɑɾ ə wɛlkəm fɹɛnd, dʒʌst wʌn i kəd nɑt ɹɪd hɪmsɛlf ʌv. hi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fɪɹd kɪlɪŋ mɪn əɹ ɪleɪn əɹ eɪvinhə ɛni mɔɹ ðən i fɪɹd ɡoʊɪŋ mæd. mæɾɝ ðən i ɔlɹɛɾi wɑz, ət list, wɪð ə dɛd mæn ɪn ɪz hɛd, ən səmtaɪmz ə fɑɡi feɪs i kəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɹɛkəɡnaɪz. dɪɾ i dɛɹ æsk kædzueɪn əbaʊɾ iðɝ wʌn?

What makes you think you can keep anyone safe? Lews Therin whispered in his head. The dead madman was an old friend, now. We are all going to die. Just hope that you aren't the one who kills them. Not a welcome friend, just one he could not rid himself of. He no longer feared killing Min or Elayne or Aviendha any more than he feared going mad. Madder than he already was, at least, with a dead man in his head, and sometimes a foggy face he could almost recognize. Did he dare ask Cadsuane about either one?

tʃɹʌs noʊ wʌn, lu θɝɪn mɝmɝd, ðən ɡeɪv ə ɹaɪ læf. ɪnkluɾɪŋ mi.

Trust no one, Lew Therin murmured, then gave a wry laugh. Including me.

wɪθaʊt wɔɹnɪŋ, mɪn pʌntʃt ɪm ɪn ðə ɹɪbz hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪm ɡɹʌnt. "jɔɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ mɛlənkɑli, ʃifɝɾɝ," ʃi ɡɹaʊld. "ɪf jəɹ wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt mi əɡɛn, aɪ swɛɹ, aɪl. . . . " ʃi hæd soʊ mɛni dɪfɹənt weɪz ʌv ɡɹoʊlɪŋ, mɪn dɪd, itʃ mætʃt tə vɛɹi dɪfɹən sɛnseɪʃənz θɹu ðə bɑnd. ðəɹ wɑz ðə laɪɾ ɪɹɪteɪʃən i fɛl fɹəm əɹ naʊ, ðɪs taɪm tʌtʃt wɪð wɝi, ən səmtaɪmz ðəɹ wɑz ə ʃɑɹp ɛdʒ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ɹɪfɹeɪnɪŋ fɹəm snæpɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ɔf. ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡɹaʊl ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs meɪɾ ɪm læf fɹəm ði əmjuzmən ɪn əɹ hɛd, əɹ əz kloʊs tə læfɪŋ əz i hæd kʌm ɪn wʌt simd ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm, ən ə θɹoʊɾi ɡɹaʊl ðət wʊɾə hiɾəd ɪz blʌɾ ivən wɪθaʊt ðə bɑnd.

Without warning, Min punched him in the ribs hard enough to make him grunt. "You're getting melancholy, sheepherder," she growled. "If you're worrying about me again, I swear, I'll. . . . " She had so many different ways of growling, Min did, each matched to very different sensations through the bond. There was the light irritation he felt from her now, this time touched with worry, and sometimes there was a sharp edge as if she were refraining from snapping his head off. There was a growl that almost made him laugh from the amusement in her head, or as close to laughing as he had come in what seemed a very long time, and a throaty growl that would have heated his blood even without the bond.

"nʌn ə ðæt, naʊ," ʃi sɛd wɔɹnɪŋli, bɪfɔɹ i kəd muv ðə hæn ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn əɹ bæk, ən ɹoʊld ɔf ðə bɛd tə hɝ fit, tʌɡɪŋ əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd koʊt stʃɹeɪt wɪð ə ɹipɹoʊvɪŋ lʊk. sɪns bɑndɪŋ hɪm, ʃi wɑz ivən bɛɾɝ ət ɹiɾɪŋ ɪz maɪnd, ən ʃi hæd bɪn ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf bɪfɔɹ. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə gɑnə də əbaʊt ðɛm, ɹænd? wʌɾ ɪz kædzueɪn ɡoʊɪŋ tə du?" laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz, ɔlmoʊs bɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf tə wɑʃ aʊt ðə læmps, ən θʌndɝ bumd əɡɛns ðə wɪndoʊ ɡlæs.

"None of that, now," she said warningly, before he could move the hand resting on her back, and rolled off the bed to her feet, tugging her embroidered coat straight with a reproving look. Since bonding him, she was even better at reading his mind, and she had been good enough before. "What are you going to do about them, Rand? What is Cadsuane going to do?" Lightning flashed in the windows, almost bright enough to wash out the lamps, and thunder boomed against the window glass.

"aɪ hævən jɛt bɪn eɪbəl tə si wʌt ʃi wɑz gɑnə də əhɛɾ ə taɪm, mɪn. waɪ ʃəd tədeɪ bi dɪfɹənt?"

"I haven't yet been able to see what she was going to do ahead of time, Min. Why should today be different?"

ðə θɪk fɛðɝ mætʃɹəs sæɡd bɪniθ ɪm əz i swʌŋ ɪz lɛɡz oʊvɝ ðə saɪɾ ən sæɾ ʌp feɪsɪŋ hɝ. hi ɔlmoʊs pɹɛst ə hæn tə ði oʊld wunz ɪn ɪz saɪd wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, ðən kɑt hɪmsɛlf ən tʃeɪnʒd ðə muvmən tə bʌtoʊnɪŋ ʌp ɪz koʊt. hæf-hild ən nɛvɝ hilɪŋ, ðoʊz tu oʊvɝlæpɪŋ wunz hɝt sɪns ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. əɹ meɪbi hi wɑz dʒʌs mɔɹ əwɛɹ ə haʊ ðeɪ θɹɑbd, ðə hiɾ ə ðɛm ə fɝnəs ə fivɝ tʃɹæpt ɪn ən ɛɹiə smɔlɝ ðən ðə pɑm ə hɪz hænd. wʌn, ət list, hi hoʊpt, wəd bɪɡɪn tə hil wɪð ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ ɡɔn. meɪbi ðəɹ hæd dʒʌs nɑt bɪn ɪnʌf taɪm jɛt fəɹ ɪm tə fil ɛni dɪfɝəns. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə seɪm saɪd ðət mɪn hæd fɪstɪd - ʃi wɑz ɔlweɪz dʒɛntəl wɪð ðæt, ɪf nɑɾ ɔlweɪz wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə hɪm - bʌɾ i θɔɾ i hæd kɛp ðə peɪn hɪɾən fɹəm hɝ. noʊ pɔɪn ɪn ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ tə wɝi oʊvɝ. ðə kənsɝn ɪn əɹ aɪz, ən ɪn əɹ hɛd, mʌs bi əbaʊt kædzueɪn. əɹ ði ʌðɝz.

The thick feather mattress sagged beneath him as he swung his legs over the side and sat up facing her. He almost pressed a hand to the old wounds in his side without thinking, then caught himself and changed the movement to buttoning up his coat. Half-healed and never healing, those two overlapping wounds hurt since Shadar Logoth. Or maybe he was just more aware of how they throbbed, the heat of them a furnace of fever trapped in an area smaller than the palm of his hand. One, at least, he hoped, would begin to heal with Shadar Logoth gone. Maybe there had just not been enough time yet for him to feel any difference. It was not the same side that Min had fisted - she was always gentle with that, if not always with the rest of him - but he thought he had kept the pain hidden from her. No point in giving her something more to worry over. The concern in her eyes, and in her head, must be about Cadsuane. Or the others.

ðə mænɝ haʊs ən ɔl ʌv ɪts aʊtlaɪɪŋ bɪldɪŋz wɝ kɹaʊɾəd, naʊ. ɪt hæd simd ɪnɛvəɾəbəl ðət sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ sʌmwʌn wəd tʃɹaɪ juzɪŋ ðə wɔɹɾɝz lɛft ɪn kɛɹhin; ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd nɑt blɛɹd ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ ɔf tə faɪn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bʌt niðɝ hæd ðeɪ bɪn pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli sikɹəɾɪv.

The manor house and all of its outlying buildings were crowded, now. It had seemed inevitable that sooner or later someone would try using the Warders left in Cairhien; their Aes Sedai had not blared that they were going off to find the Dragon Reborn, but neither had they been particularly secretive.

ivən soʊ, hi hæd nɛvɝ æntɪsəpeɪɾəd ðoʊz u ɝaɪvd wɪð ðɛm. dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ wɪð ə hʌnʒɹəd ə hɪz sɑldəiən laɪt hɔɹs, dɪsmaʊntɪŋ ɪn ə wɪndʒɹaɪvən soʊkɪŋ ɹeɪn ən mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt ɹuən sæɾəlz.

Even so, he had never anticipated those who arrived with them. Davram Bashere with a hundred of his Saldaean light horse, dismounting in a winddriven soaking rain and muttering about ruined saddles.

oʊvɝ hæf ə dʌzən blæk-koʊɾəd æʃəmən u fəɹ səm ɹizən hæd nɑt ʃildɪd ðɛmsɛlvz fɹəm ðə daʊnpɔɹ. ðeɪ ɹoʊd wɪð bæʃɪɹ, bʌɾ ɪt hæd bɪn laɪk tu pɑɹɾiz ɝaɪvɪŋ, ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns bɪtwin əm ɔlweɪz, ə stʃɹɔŋ wɪf ʌv wɑtʃfəl wɛɹinɪs. ən wʌn ə ði æʃəmən wɑz lɑɡən əblɝ. lɑɡən!

Over half a dozen black-coated Asha'man who for some reason had not shielded themselves from the downpour. They rode with Bashere, but it had been like two parties arriving, a little distance between them always, a strong whiff of watchful wariness. And one of the Asha'man was Logain Ablar. Logain!

ən æʃəmən, wɛɹɪŋ ðə sɔɹɾ ən dʒɹæɡən ɑn ɪz kɑlɝ! bæʃɪɹ ən lɑɡən boʊθ wɑntəd tə tɔk tə hɪm, bʌt nɑɾ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛniwʌn, ɪspɛʃli itʃ ʌðɝ ɪt simd. ʌnɪkspɛktɪɾ əɹ nɑt, ðoʊ, ðeɪ wɝ hɑɹdli ðə moʊst sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ ə ðə vɪzəɾɝz. hi hæd θɔt ði eɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ mʌs bi mɔɹ fɹɛnz ə kædzueɪn, jɛɾ i wəd swɛɹ ʃi hæd bɪn əz sɝpɹaɪzd əz i tə si moʊst ə ðɛm. ɑɾɝ, ɔl bʌt wʌn sim tə bi wɪð ði æʃəmən! nɑt pɹɪznɝz, ən sɝɾənli nɑt ɡɑɹdz, bʌt lɑɡən hæd bɪn ɹɪlʌktən tə ɪkspleɪn wɪð bæʃɪɹ pɹɛzənt, ən bæʃɪɹ ɹɪlʌktən tə liv lɑɡən ðə fɝs tʃæns tə tɔk tə ɹænd əloʊn. naʊ ðeɪ wɝ ɔl dʒɹaɪɪŋ ɔf ən sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪndə ðɛɹ ɹumz, livɪŋ ɪm tə tʃɹaɪ tə pʊɾ ɪz θɔts ɪn ɔɹɾɝ. tə ði ɪkstɛn ðəɾ i kʊd, wɪð mɪn kloʊs baɪ. wʌt wəd kædzueɪn du? wɛl, hi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə æsk əɹ ædvaɪs. ɪvɛns hæɾ aʊtʃɹʌn boʊθ ə ðɛm, ðoʊ. ðə dɪsɪʒən hæd bɪn meɪd, wʌtɛvɝ kædzueɪn θɔt. laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt əɡɛn ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz. laɪtnɪŋ sim tə sut kædzueɪn. jə kəd nɛvɝ tɛl wɛɹ ɪt wəd stʃɹaɪk.

An Asha'man, wearing the Sword and Dragon on his collar! Bashere and Logain both wanted to talk to him, but not in front of anyone, especially each other it seemed. Unexpected or not, though, they were hardly the most surprising of the visitors. He had thought the eight Aes Sedai must be more friends of Cadsuane, yet he would swear she had been as surprised as he to see most of them. Odder, all but one seemed to be with the Asha'man! Not prisoners, and certainly not guards, but Logain had been reluctant to explain with Bashere present, and Bashere reluctant to leave Logain the first chance to talk to Rand alone. Now they were all drying off and settling into their rooms, leaving him to try to put his thoughts in order. To the extent that he could, with Min close by. What would Cadsuane do? Well, he had tried to ask her advice. Events had outrun both of them, though. The decision had been made, whatever Cadsuane thought. Lightning flashed again in the windows. Lightning seemed to suit Cadsuane. You could never tell where it would strike.

əliviə wəd fɪnɪʃ hɝ, luz θɝɪn mʌɾɝd. ʃiz gɑnə hɛlp əs daɪ; ʃid ɹimuv kædzueɪn fəɹ ʌs, ɪf jə tɛl əɹ tə.

Alivia would finish her, Lews Therin muttered. She's going to help us die; she'd remove Cadsuane for us, if you tell her to.

aɪ doʊnt wɑnə kɪl hɝ. ɹænd θɔɾ ət ðə dɛd mæn. aɪ kæn əfɔɹd fəɹ əɹ tə daɪ. luz θɝɪn nu ðəɾ əz wɛl əz hi, bʌt ðə mæn ɡɹʌmbəld ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ ɛniweɪ. sɪns ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, hi simd ə tʌtʃ lɛs mæd, səmtaɪmz. əɹ meɪbi ɹænd wɑz ə tʌtʃ mɔɹ. æftɝ ɔl, hi tʊk tɔkɪŋ tə ə dɛd mæn ɪn ɪz hɛɾ əz ə mæɾɝ ʌv ɛvɹi deɪ, ən ðət wɑz hɑɹdli seɪn.

I don't want to kill her. Rand thought at the dead man. I can't afford for her to die. Lews Therin knew that as well as he, but the man grumbled under his breath anyway. Since Shadar Logoth, he seemed a touch less mad, sometimes. Or maybe Rand was a touch more. After all, he took talking to a dead man in his head as a matter of every day, and that was hardly sane.

"ju hæv tə də sʌmθɪŋ" mɪn mʌɾɝd, foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts. "lɑɡənz ɔɹə stɪl spiks ʌv ɡlɔɹi, stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɛvɝ. meɪbi hi stɪl θɪŋks hiz ðə ɹil dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ən ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ . . . dɑɹk . . . ɪn ði ɪmədʒəz aɪ sɔ ɝaʊn lɔɹd dævɹæm. ɪf i tɝnz əɡɛns ju, əɹ daɪz. . . . aɪ hɝd wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz seɪ lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪn maɪt daɪ. luzɪŋ ivən wʌn ə ðɛm wəd bi ə bloʊ. luz ɔl θɹi, ən ɪt maɪt teɪk jə ə jɪɹ tə ɹɪkʌvɝ." "ɪf juv sin ɪt, ðən ɪts ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæpən. aɪ hæv tə də wʌɾ aɪ kæn, mɪn, nɑt wɝi oʊvɝ wʌɾ aɪ kænt." ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm wʌn ə ðoʊz lʊks wɪmən hæɾ ɪn ɡɹeɪt stɔɹ, əz ɪf i wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɑɹɾ ən ɑɹɡjəmənt.

"You have to do something" Min muttered, folding her arms beneath her breasts. "Logain's aura still speaks of glory, stronger than ever. Maybe he still thinks he's the real Dragon Reborn. And there's something . . . dark . . . in the images I saw around Lord Davram. If he turns against you, or dies. . . . I heard one of the soldiers say Lord Dobraine might die. Losing even one of them would be a blow. Lose all three, and it might take you a year to recover." "If you've seen it, then it's going to happen. I have to do what I can, Min, not worry over what I can't." She gave him one of those looks women had in great store, as if he were trying to start an argument.

ə skɹætʃɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ bɹɔɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɝaʊn ən meɪd mɪn ʃɪft əɹ stæns. hi səspɛktəd ʃi hæd slɪpt ə θɹoʊɪŋ naɪf aʊɾ ə hɝ sliv ən wɑz haɪɾɪŋ ɪt bɪhaɪn əɹ ɹɪst. ðə wʊmən kæɹid mɔɹ naɪvz tʌkt əbaʊɾ əɹ ðən tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn hæd. əɹ mæt. kʌlɝz wɝld ɪn ɪz hɛd, ɔlmoʊst ɹizɑlvɪŋ ɪndə . . . wʌt? ə mæn ɑn ə wæɡən sit? nɑt ðə feɪs ðət səmtaɪmz əpɪɹɾ ɪn ɪz θɔts, ɛniweɪ, ən ðə sin wɑz ɡɔn ɪn ən ɪnstənt, wɪθaʊɾ ɛni ʌv ðə dɪzinəs ðəɾ əkʌmpənid ðə feɪs. "kʌm," hi kɔld, stændɪŋ ʌp.

A scratching at the door brought his head around and made Min shift her stance. He suspected she had slipped a throwing knife out of her sleeve and was hiding it behind her wrist. The woman carried more knives tucked about her than Thom Merrilin had. Or Mat. Colors whirled in his head, almost resolving into . . . what? A man on a wagon seat? Not the face that sometimes appeared in his thoughts, anyway, and the scene was gone in an instant, without any of the dizziness that accompanied the face. "Come," he called, standing up.

ɛlzə spɹɛɾ əɹ dɑɹk ɡɹin skɝts ɪn ən ɛləɡən kɝtsi wən ʃi ɛntɝd, hɝ aɪz bɹaɪɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs. ə plɛzənt-əpɪɹɪŋ wʊmən, ən kuli kəmpleɪsən əz ə kæt, ʃi hɑɹdli sim tə si mɪn. ʌv ɔl ðə sɪstɝz u hæd swɔɹn tə hɪm, ɛlzə wɑz ðə moʊst iɡɝ. ði oʊnli iɡɝ wʌn, ɹɪli. ði ʌðɝz hæd ðɛɹ ɹizənz fəɹ swɛɹɪŋ, ðɛɹ ɛkspləneɪʃənz, ən ə kɔɹs vɛɹɪn ən ðə sɪstɝz u keɪm tə faɪn ɪm ət dəməaɪz wɛlz hæd noʊ ɹil tʃɔɪs feɪsɪŋ ə tɑvɝən, bʌt fəɹ ɔl ɛlzəz aʊɾɝ kulnəs, ʃi sim tə bɝn ɪnsaɪd wɪð ə pæʃən tə si hi ɹitʃt tɑɹmən ɡdən. "ju sɛd tə lɛt jə noʊ wən ði oʊɡiɝ keɪm," ʃi sɛd, nɛvɝ teɪkɪŋ əɹ aɪz fɹəm ɪz feɪs.

Elza spread her dark green skirts in an elegant curtsy when she entered, her eyes bright on his face. A pleasant-appearing woman, and coolly complacent as a cat, she hardly seemed to see Min. Of all the sisters who had sworn to him, Elza was the most eager. The only eager one, really. The others had their reasons for swearing, their explanations, and of course Verin and the sisters who came to find him at Dumai's Wells had no real choice facing a ta'veren, but for all Elza's outer coolness, she seemed to burn inside with a passion to see he reached Tarmon Gai'don. "You said to let you know when the Ogier came," she said, never taking her eyes from his face.

"lɔɪəl!" mɪn ʃaʊɾəd ɡlifəli, tʌkɪŋ ðə naɪf bæk ʌp əɹ sliv əz ʃi ɹʌʃt pæst ɛlzə, hu blɪŋkt ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə bleɪd. "aɪ cʊɾə kɪld ɹænd fəɹ lɛɾɪŋ jə ɡɛɾ ɔf tə jəɹ ɹum bɪfɔɹ aɪ sɔ ju!" ðə bɑn sɛd ʃi dɪd nɑt min ɪt. nɑɾ ɪɡzækli.

"Loial!" Min shouted gleefully, tucking the knife back up her sleeve as she rushed past Elza, who blinked at the sight of the blade. "I could have killed Rand for letting you get off to your room before I saw you!" The bond said she did not mean it. Not exactly.

"θæŋk ju," ɹænd toʊld ɛlzə, lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə saʊnz ə mɛɹəmən fɹəm ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, mɪnz laɪt læftɝ ən lɔɪəlz kweɪk ʌv oʊɡiɝ mɝθ, laɪk ði ɝθ læfɪŋ. θʌndɝ ɹoʊld əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ.

"Thank you," Rand told Elza, listening to the sounds of merriment from the sitting room, Min's light laughter and Loial's quake of Ogier mirth, like the earth laughing. Thunder rolled across the sky.

pɝhæps ði ɛɛs sədaɪz pæʃən ɪkstɛndəd tə wɑntɪŋ tə noʊ wʌɾ i sɛd tə lɔɪəl, kəz əɹ lɪps θɪnd, ən ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ meɪkɪŋ ənʌðɝ kɝtsi ən swipɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ. ə bɹif pɔz ɪn ðə saʊnz ə plɛʒɝ ənaʊnst əɹ pæsədʒ əkɹɔs ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, ən ðɛɹ ɹɪzʌmpʃən əɹ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ. oʊnli ðən dɪɾ i siz ðə paʊɝ. hi tʃɹaɪd nɛvɝ tə lɛɾ ɛniwʌn si hɪm də ðæt.

Perhaps the Aes Sedai's passion extended to wanting to know what he said to Loial, because her lips thinned, and she hesitated before making another curtsy and sweeping out of the bedchamber. A brief pause in the sounds of pleasure announced her passage across the sitting room, and their resumption her departure. Only then did he seize the Power. He tried never to let anyone see him do that.

faɪɝ flʌɾəd ɪndə hɪm, hɑɾɝ ðən ðə sʌn, ən koʊl tə meɪk ðə wɝs blɪzɝd sim spɹɪŋ, ɔl ə swɝlɪŋ ɹeɪdʒ ðət dwɔɹf ðə stɔɹm aʊtsaɪd, θɹɛɾənɪŋ tə skaʊɝ ɪm əweɪ fəɹ ə moʊməns ɪnətɛntʃən.

Fire flooded into him, hotter than the sun, and cold to make the worst blizzard seem spring, all a swirling rage that dwarfed the storm outside, threatening to scour him away for a moment's inattention.

sizɪŋ seɪɾɪn wɑz ə wɔɹ fəɹ sɝvaɪvəl. bʌt ðə ɡɹin ə ðə kɔɹnɪsəz wɑz sʌɾənli ɡɹinɝ, ðə blæk ə hɪz koʊt blækɝ, ðə ɡoʊld ʌv ɪts ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi mɔɹ ɡoʊldən. hi kəd si ðə ɡɹeɪn ə ðə vaɪn-kɑɹv bɪdpoʊsts, si feɪn mɑɹks lɛf baɪ ðə kɹæfsmənz sændɪŋ ɔl ðoʊz jɪɹz əɡoʊ. seɪɾɪn meɪɾ ɪm fil əz ɪf i hæd bɪn hæfblɪn ən nʌm wɪθaʊɾ ɪt. ðət wɑz ə pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌɾ i fɛlt.

Seizing saidin was a war for survival. But the green of the cornices was suddenly greener, the black of his coat blacker, the gold of its embroidery more golden. He could see the grain of the vine-carved bedposts, see faint marks left by the craftsman's sanding all those years ago. Saidin made him feel as if he had been halfblind and numb without it. That was a part of what he felt.

klin, luz θɝɪn wɪspɝd. pjʊɹ ən klin əɡɛn.

Clean, Lews Therin whispered. Pure and clean again.

ɪt wɑz. ðə faʊlnəs ðət hæd mɑɹk ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə paʊɝ sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ wɑz ɡɔn.

It was. The foulness that had marked the male half of the Power since the Breaking was gone.

ðət dɪd nɑt stɑp nɔziə fɹəm ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn ɹænd, ðoʊ, ðə vaɪələn ɝdʒ tə bɛn dʌbəl ən ɛmpti hɪmsɛlf ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ðə ɹum sim tə spɪn fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ən i hæd tə pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ðə nɪɹəs bɪdpoʊs tə stɛɾi hɪmsɛlf. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ waɪ hi ʃəd stɪl fil ðɪs sɪknəs, wɪð ðə teɪnt ɡɔn. luz θɝɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ, əɹ wəd nɑt tɛl. bʌt ðə sɪknəs wɑz ðə ɹizən i kəd nɑt lɛɾ ɛniwʌn si hɪm teɪk hoʊld ə seɪɾɪn, ɪf i kəd hɛlp ɪt. ɛlzə maɪt bɝn tə si hɪm ɹitʃ ðə læs bæɾəl, bʌt tu mɛni ʌðɝz wɑntəd tə si hɪm fɔl, nɑɾ ɔl ə ðɛm dɑɹkfɹɛnz.

That did not stop nausea from rising in Rand, though, the violent urge to bend double and empty himself on the floor. The room seemed to spin for an instant, and he had to put a hand on the nearest bedpost to steady himself. He did not know why he should still feel this sickness, with the taint gone. Lews Therin did not know, or would not tell. But the sickness was the reason he could not let anyone see him take hold of saidin, if he could help it. Elza might burn to see him reach the Last Battle, but too many others wanted to see him fall, not all of them Darkfriends.

ɪn ðət moʊmən ʌv wiknəs, ðə dɛd mæn ɹitʃt fəɹ seɪɾɪn. ɹænd kəd fil ɪm klɔɪŋ fəɹ ɪt ɡɹiɾəli. wɑz ɪt hɑɹɾɝ ðən ɪt hæd bɪn tə pʊʃ ɪm əweɪ? ɪn səm weɪz, luz θɝɪn simd mɔɹ sɑlədli pɑɹɾ ə hɪm sɪns ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. hi hæɾ oʊnli soʊ fɑɹ lɛf tə ɡoʊ bɪfɔɹ i kəd daɪ. hi dʒʌs hæd tə læs ðət fɑɹ. dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, hi ɪɡnɔɹd ðə lɪŋɡɝɪŋ tʃɹeɪsəz ə sɪknəs ɪn ɪz bɛli ən stʃɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum tə ðə kɹæʃ ə θʌndɝ.

In that moment of weakness, the dead man reached for saidin. Rand could feel him clawing for it greedily. Was it harder than it had been to push him away? In some ways, Lews Therin seemed more solidly part of him since Shadar Logoth. It did not matter. He had only so far left to go before he could die. He just had to last that far. Drawing a deep breath, he ignored the lingering traces of sickness in his belly and strode into the sitting room to the crash of thunder.

mɪn stʊɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum hoʊldɪŋ wʌn ə lɔɪəlz hænz ɪn boʊθ ə hɝz ən smaɪlɪŋ ʌp ət hɪm. ɪt tʊk boʊθ ə hɝ hænz tə hoʊld wʌn ə lɔɪəlz, ən ðə pɛɹ dɪd nɑt kʌm kloʊs tə kʌvɝɪŋ ɪt.

Min stood in the middle of the room holding one of Loial's hands in both of hers and smiling up at him. It took both of her hands to hold one of Loial's, and the pair did not come close to covering it.

ðə tɑp ə hɪz hɛd mɪs ðə plæstɝ silɪŋ baɪ lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə fʊt. hi hæd dɑn ə fɹɛʃ koʊɾ ə dɑɹk blu wʊl, ðə bɑɾəm flɛɹɪŋ oʊvɝ bæɡi tʃɹaʊzɝz tə ðə tɑps ə hɪz ni-haɪ buts, bʌt fəɹ wʌns ɪz pɑkəts dɪd nɑt bʌlʒ wɪð ði æŋɡjəlɝ ʃeɪps ə bʊks. aɪz ðə saɪz ə tikəps lɪɾ ʌp ət ðə saɪɾ ə ɹænd, ən ðə ɡɹɪn ɑn ɪz waɪd maʊθ ɹɪli dɪd splɪɾ ɪz feɪs ɪn tu. ðə tʌftəɾ ɪɹz stɪkɪŋ ʌp θɹu hɪz ʃæɡi hɛɹ kwɪvɝd wɪð plɛʒɝ. "lɔɹɾ ælɡɝɪn əz oʊɡiɝ ɡɛst ɹumz, ɹænd," hi bumd ɪn ə vɔɪs laɪk ə dip dʒɹʌm. "kæn jə ɪmædʒən ɪt? sɪks ə ðɛm! ʌv kɔɹs, ðeɪ hævən bɪn juzd ɪn səm taɪm, bʌt ðəɹ ɛɹɾ aʊɾ ɛvɹi wik, soʊ ðəɹ ɪzən ɛni mʌstinəs, ən ðə bɛdʃits ɑɹ vɛɹi ɡʊd lɪnən. aɪ θɔɾ aɪd bi bæk tə dʌbəlɪŋ maɪsɛlf ʌp ɪn ə hjumən-saɪz bɛd. ʌm. wi ɑɹən steɪɪŋ hɪɹ lɔŋ, ɑɹ wi?" hɪz lɔŋ ɪɹz sæɡd ə lɪɾəl, ðən bɪɡæn tə twɪtʃ ənizəli. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk wi ʃʊd. aɪ min, aɪ maɪt ɡɛt juz tə hævɪŋ ə ɹil bɛd, ən ðət wʊdn də ɪf aɪm gɑnə steɪ wɪð ju. aɪ min. .

The top of his head missed the plaster ceiling by little more than a foot. He had donned a fresh coat of dark blue wool, the bottom flaring over baggy trousers to the tops of his knee-high boots, but for once his pockets did not bulge with the angular shapes of books. Eyes the size of teacups lit up at the sight of Rand, and the grin on his wide mouth really did split his face in two. The tufted ears sticking up through his shaggy hair quivered with pleasure. "Lord Algarin has Ogier guest rooms, Rand," he boomed in a voice like a deep drum. "Can you imagine it? Six of them! Of course, they haven't been used in some time, but they're aired out every week, so there isn't any mustiness, and the bedsheets are very good linen. I thought I'd be back to doubling myself up in a human-sized bed. Umm. We aren't staying here long, are we?" His long ears sagged a little, then began to twitch uneasily. "I don't think we should. I mean, I might get used to having a real bed, and that wouldn't do if I'm going to stay with you. I mean. .

. . wɛl, jə noʊ wʌɾ aɪ min."

. . Well, you know what I mean."

"aɪ noʊ," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli. hi cʊɾə læft ət ði oʊɡiɝz kɑnstɝneɪʃən. hi ʃəɾ əv læft. læftɝ dʒʌst sim tə hæv ɪskeɪp hɪm, leɪtli. spɪnɪŋ ə wɛb əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə ɹum, hi nɑɾɪd ɪt soʊ hi kəd ɹilis seɪɾɪn.

"I know," Rand said softly. He could have laughed at the Ogier's consternation. He should have laughed. Laughter just seemed to have escaped him, lately. Spinning a web against eavesdropping around the room, he knotted it so he could release saidin.

ðə læs tʃɹeɪsəz ə nɔziə bɪɡæn tə feɪɾ ɪmiɾiətli. hi kəd kɑn-tʃɹoʊl ðə sɪknəs, juʒəwəli, wɪð ən ɛfɝt, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪnt wən i dɪd nɑɾ əv tə. "dɪɾ ɛni ʌv jəɹ bʊks ɡɛt wɛt?" lɔɪəlz meɪn kənsɝn kʌmɪŋ ɪn hæd bɪn tə tʃɛk ɑn ɪz bʊks. sʌɾənli ɪt stʃɹʌk ɪm ðəɾ i hæd θɔɾ ʌv wʌɾ i hæd dʌn əz spɪnɪŋ ə wɛb. ðət wɑz haʊ luz θɝɪn wəd pʊɾ ɪt. ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ hæpən tu ɔfən, ði ʌðɝ mænz tɝnz ə fɹeɪz dʒɹɪftɪŋ ɪndə hɪz hɛd, ði ʌðɝ mænz mɛmɹiz mɪŋɡəlɪŋ wɪð hɪz. hi wɑz ɹænd ælθɹ, nɑt luz θɝɪn tɛləmən. hi hæd woʊvən ə wɔɹɾ ən taɪɾ ɔf ðə wiv, nɑt spʌn ə wɛb ən nɑɾɪd ɪt. bʌt ðə wʌn keɪm tə hɪm əz izəli əz ði ʌðɝ. "maɪ ɛseɪz ɑfwɪlɪm ə meɪnɪtʃɪz ɡɑt dæmp," lɔɪəl sɛd dɪsɡʌstɪdli, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz ʌpɝ lɪp wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ ðə θɪknəs ʌv ə sɔsədʒ. hæɾ i bɪn kɛɹləs ʃeɪvɪŋ, əɹ wɑz ðət ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ʌv ə mʌstæʃ bɪniθ ɪz waɪd noʊz?

The last traces of nausea began to fade immediately. He could con-trol the sickness, usually, with an effort, but there was no point when he did not have to. "Did any of your books get wet?" Loial's main concern coming in had been to check on his books. Suddenly it struck him that he had thought of what he had done as spinning a web. That was how Lews Therin would put it. That sort of thing happened too often, the other man's turns of phrase drifting into his head, the other man's memories mingling with his. He was Rand al'Thor, not Lews Therin Telamon. He had woven a ward and tied off the weave, not spun a web and knotted it. But the one came to him as easily as the other. "My Essays ofWillim of Maneches got damp," Loial said disgustedly, rubbing his upper lip with a finger the thickness of a sausage. Had he been careless shaving, or was that the beginning of a mustache beneath his wide nose?

"ðə peɪdʒəz meɪ spɑt. aɪ ʃʊdn əv bɪn soʊ kɛɹləs, nɑt wɪð ə bʊk. ən maɪ bʊk ə noʊts tʊk səm wɛt, tu. bʌt ði ɪŋk dɪdn ɹʌn. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪz stɪl ɹiɾəbəl, bʌɾ aɪ ɹɪli nid tə meɪk ə keɪs tə pɹətɛkt. . . . " sloʊli, ə fɹaʊn kɹɛpt ɑntu hɪz feɪs, dæŋɡəlɪŋ ðə lɔŋ ɛnz ə hɪz aɪbɹaʊz ɑntu hɪz tʃiks. "ju lʊk taɪɝd, ɹænd. hi lʊks taɪɝd, mɪn." "hiz bɪn duɪŋ tu mʌtʃ, bʌt hiz ɹɛstɪŋ naʊ," mɪn sɛd dɪfɛnsɪvli, ən ɹænd dɪd smaɪl. ə lɪɾəl. mɪn wəɾ ɔlweɪz dɪfɛn hɪm, ivən tə hɪz fɹɛnz.

"The pages may spot. I shouldn't have been so careless, not with a book. And my book of notes took some wet, too. But the ink didn't run. Everything is still readable, but I really need to make a case to protect. . . . " Slowly, a frown crept onto his face, dangling the long ends of his eyebrows onto his cheeks. "You look tired, Rand. He looks tired, Min." "He's been doing too much, but he's resting now," Min said defensively, and Rand did smile. A little. Min would always defend him, even to his friends.

"ju ɑɹ ɹɛstɪŋ, ʃifɝɾɝ," ʃi æɾəd, lɛɾɪŋ ɡoʊ ʌv lɔɪəlz hjudʒ hæn ən plæntɪŋ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps. "sɪt daʊn ən ɹɛst. oʊ, sɪt daʊn, lɔɪəl. əl pʊɾ ə kɹɪk ɪn maɪ nɛk ɪf aɪ kip stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət ju." lɔɪəl tʃʌkəld, ðə bɛloʊɪŋ ʌv ə bʊl mjuɾɪd ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt, əz i ɪɡzæmənd wʌn ə ðə stʃɹeɪt-bæk tʃɛɹz dubiəsli. kəmpɛɹd tə hɪm, ɪt simd ə tʃɛɹ meɪd fəɹ ə tʃaɪld. "ʃifɝɾɝ. jə doʊnt noʊ haʊ ɡʊɾ ɪts tə hɪɹ jə kɔlɪŋ ɪm ʃifɝɾɝ, mɪn." hi sæt daʊn kɔʃəsli. ðə pleɪn-kɑɹv tʃɛɹ kɹikt ʌndɝ ɪz weɪt, ən ɪz niz stʌk ʌp ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. "aɪ æm sɑɹi, ɹænd, bʌɾ ɪts fʌni, ən aɪ hævən hɝd mʌtʃ tə læf ət ðiz pæs mʌnθs." ðə tʃɛɹ wɑz hoʊldɪŋ. wɪð ə kwɪk ɡlæns təwɔɹd ðə hɔl dɔɹ, hi æɾəd, ə lɪɾəl tu laʊdli, "kɑɹldɪn dʌzn əv mʌtʃ sɛns ə hjumɝ."

"You are resting, sheepherder," she added, letting go of Loial's huge hand and planting her fists on her hips. "Sit down and rest. Oh, sit down, Loial. I'll put a crick in my neck if I keep staring up at you." Loial chuckled, the bellowing of a bull muted in his throat, as he examined one of the straight-back chairs dubiously. Compared to him, it seemed a chair made for a child. "Sheepherder. You don't know how good it is to hear you calling him sheepherder, Min." He sat down cautiously. The plain-carved chair creaked under his weight, and his knees stuck up in front of him. "I am sorry, Rand, but it is funny, and I haven't heard much to laugh at these past months." The chair was holding. With a quick glance toward the hall door, he added, a little too loudly, "Karldin doesn't have much sense of humor."

"ju kən spik fɹili," ɹænd toʊl hɪm. "wɝ seɪf bɪhaɪn ə . . . ə wɔɹd." hi hæɾ ɔlmoʊst sɛd bɪhaɪn ə ʃild, wɪtʃ wɑz nɑt ðə seɪm θɪŋ. ɪksɛp ðəɾ i nu ɪt wɑz.

"You can speak freely," Rand told him. "We're safe behind a . . . a ward." He had almost said behind a shield, which was not the same thing. Except that he knew it was.

hi wɑz tu wɪɹi tə sɪt, dʒʌst əz i wɑz tu taɪɝd tə faɪn slip izəli moʊs naɪts - hɪz boʊnz ætʃt wɪð ɪt - soʊ hi wɛn tə stæn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs. wɪnz ɡʌstɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə tʃɪmni tɑp meɪd ðə fleɪmz dæns ɑn ðə splɪt lɔɡz ən səmtaɪmz lɛɾ ə smɔl pʌf ə smoʊk ɪndə ðə ɹum, ən i kəd hɪɹ ðə ɹeɪn dʒɹʌmɪŋ əweɪ ət ðə wɪndoʊz, bʌt ðə θʌndɝ sim tə hæv muvd ɑn. meɪbi ðə stɔɹm wɑz ɛndɪŋ. klæspɪŋ ɪz hænz bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk, hi tɝn əweɪ fɹəm ðə faɪɝ. "wʌt dɪd ði ɛldɝz seɪ, lɔɪəl?" ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ænsɝɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾəweɪ, lɔɪəl lʊkt ət mɪn əz ɪf sikɪŋ ɛnkɝɪdʒmən əɹ səpɔɹt. pɝtʃt ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə blu ɑɹmtʃɛɹ wɪð əɹ niz kɹɔst, ʃi smaɪld ət ði oʊɡiɝ ən nɑɾəd, ən i saɪd hɛvəli, ə wɪnd ɡʌstɪŋ θɹu dip kævɝnz. "kɑɹldɪn ən aɪ vɪzəɾəd ɛvɹi stɛɾɪŋ, ɹænd. ɔl bʌt stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ, ʌv kɔɹs. aɪ kʊdnt ɡoʊ ðɛɹ, bʌɾ aɪ lɛft ə mɛsədʒ ɛvɹiwɛɹ wi wɛnt, ən deɪɾɪŋ ɪzən fɑɹ fɹəm ʃæŋktaɪ. sʌmwʌn wɪl kæɹi ɪt ðɛɹ. ðə ɡɹeɪt stʌmp ɪz miɾɪŋ ɪn ʃæŋktaɪ, ən ðət wɪl ətʃɹækt kɹaʊdz. ðɪs ɪz ðə fɝs taɪm ə ɡɹeɪt stʌmp əz bɪn kɔld ɪn ə θaʊzən jɪɹz, nɑt sɪns jə hjumənz fɔt ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, ən ɪt wɑz ʃæŋktaɪz tɝn. ðeɪ mʌs bi kənsɪɾɝɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi ɪmpɔɹɾənt, bʌt noʊ wʌn wəd tɛl mi waɪ ɪt wɑz kɔld.

He was too weary to sit, just as he was too tired to find sleep easily most nights - his bones ached with it - so he went to stand in front of the fireplace. Winds gusting across the chimney top made the flames dance on the split logs and sometimes let a small puff of smoke into the room, and he could hear the rain drumming away at the windows, but the thunder seemed to have moved on. Maybe the storm was ending. Clasping his hands behind his back, he turned away from the fire. "What did the Elders say, Loial?" Instead of answering straightaway, Loial looked at Min as if seeking encouragement or support. Perched on the edge of a blue armchair with her knees crossed, she smiled at the Ogier and nodded, and he sighed heavily, a wind gusting through deep caverns. "Karldin and I visited every stedding, Rand. All but Stedding Shangtai, of course. I couldn't go there, but I left a message everywhere we went, and Daiting isn't far from Shangtai. Someone will carry it there. The Great Stump is meeting in Shangtai, and that will attract crowds. This is the first time a Great Stump has been called in a thousand years, not since you humans fought the War of the Hundred Years, and it was Shangtai's turn. They must be considering something very important, but no one would tell me why it was called.

ðeɪ woʊn tɛl jə əbaʊɾ ɛni stʌmp əntɪl juv ə bɪɹd," hi mʌɾɝd, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ə nɛɹoʊ pætʃ ə stʌbəl ɑn ɪz bɹɔd tʃɪn. əpɛɹənli, hi ɪntɛndəd tə ɹɛməɾi hɪz læk, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz nɑt sɝɾən ðəɾ i kʊd. lɔɪəl wɑz oʊvɝ naɪnti jɪɹz oʊld, naʊ, jɛt fəɹ ən oʊɡiɝ, ðət wɑz stɪl ə bɔɪ.

They won't tell you about any Stump until you have a beard," he muttered, fingering a narrow patch of stubble on his broad chin. Apparently, he intended to remedy his lack, though it was not certain that he could. Loial was over ninety years old, now, yet for an Ogier, that was still a boy.

"ði ɛldɝz?" ɹænd æsk peɪʃənli. jə hæd tə bi peɪʃənt wɪð lɔɪəl, wɪð ɛni oʊɡiɝ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt si taɪm ðə weɪ hjumənz dɪd - hu əmʌŋ hjumənz wəd θɪŋk ə huz tɝn ɪt wɑz æftɝ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz? - ən lɔɪəl tɛndəd tə ɡoʊ ɑn ət lɛŋθ, ɡɪvən hæf ə tʃæns. ɡɹeɪt lɛŋθ.

"The Elders?" Rand asked patiently. You had to be patient with Loial, with any Ogier. They did not see time the way humans did - who among humans would think of whose turn it was after a thousand years? - and Loial tended to go on at length, given half a chance. Great length.

lɔɪəlz ɪɹz twɪtʃt, ən i ɡeɪv mɪn ənʌðɝ lʊk, ɹəsivd ənʌðɝ ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋ smaɪl ɪn ɹɪtɝn. "wɛl, əz aɪ sɛd, aɪ vɪzəɾəd ɔl ðə stɛɾɪŋ bʌt ʃæŋktaɪ. kɑɹldɪn wʊdnt ɡoʊ ɪnsaɪd. hid ɹæðɝ slip ɛvɹi naɪɾ ʌndɝ ə bʊʃ ðən bi kʌɾ ɔf fɹəm ðə sɔɹs fəɹ ə mɪnət." ɹænd dɪd nɑt seɪ ə wɝd, bʌt lɔɪəl ɹeɪzd ɪz hænz fɹəm ɪz niz, pɑmz aʊt. "aɪ æm ɡɛɾɪŋ tə ðə pɔɪnt, ɹænd. aɪ æm. aɪ dɪd wʌɾ aɪ kʊd, bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf. ðə stɛɾɪŋ ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz toʊl mi tə ɡoʊ hoʊm ən liv mæɾɝz tə oʊldɝ ən waɪzɝ hɛdz. soʊ dɪd ʃædun ən mɑɹdun, ɪn ðə maʊntənz ɑn ðə ʃædoʊ koʊst. ði ʌðɝ slɛɾɪŋ əɡɹid tə ɡɑɹd ðə weɪɡeɪts. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðeɪ ɹɪli bɪliv ðɛɹz ɛni deɪnʒɝ, bʌt ðeɪ əɡɹid, soʊ jə noʊ ðəl kip ə kloʊs ɡɑɹd. ən aɪm ʃʊɹ sʌmwʌn wɪl teɪk wɝd tə ʃæŋktaɪ. ði ɛldɝz ɪn ʃæŋktaɪ nɛvɝ laɪk hævɪŋ ə weɪɡeɪt ɹaɪɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə stɛɾɪŋ. aɪ mʌst əv hɝɾ ɛldɝ heɪmən seɪ ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz ðəɾ ɪt wɑz deɪnʒɝəs. aɪ noʊ ðəl əɡɹi tə hæv ɪt wɑtʃt."

Loial's ears twitched, and he gave Min another look, received another encouraging smile in return. "Well, as I said, I visited all the stedding but Shangtai. Karldin wouldn't go inside. He'd rather sleep every night under a bush than be cut off from the Source for a minute." Rand did not say a word, but Loial raised his hands from his knees, palms out. "I am getting to the point, Rand. I am. I did what I could, but I don't know whether it was enough. The stedding in the Borderlands told me to go home and leave matters to older and wiser heads. So did Shadoon and Mardoon, in the mountains on the Shadow Coast. The other sledding agreed to guard the Waygates. I don't think they really believe there's any danger, but they agreed, so you know they will keep a close guard. And I'm sure someone will take word to Shangtai. The Elders in Shangtai never liked having a Waygate right outside the stedding. I must have heard Elder Haman say a hundred times that it was dangerous. I know they'll agree to have it watched."

ɹænd nɑɾəd sloʊli. oʊɡiɝ nɛvɝ laɪd, əɹ ət lis ðə fju hu meɪd ði ətɛmpt wɝ soʊ pʊɹ əɾ ɪt ðət ðeɪ sɛldəm tʃɹaɪɾ ə sɛkən taɪm. ən oʊɡiɝz wɝd wɑz teɪkən əz sɪɹiəsli əz ɛniwʌn ɛlsəz swɔɹn oʊθ. ðə weɪɡeɪts wəd bi ɡɑɹɾəd kloʊsli. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðoʊz ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, ən ɪn ðə maʊntənz saʊθ ʌv ɑmɑdɪʃiə ən tæɹɑbən. fɹəm ɡeɪt tə ɡeɪt, ə mæn kəd dʒɝni fɹəm ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝl tə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, fɹəm ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz tə ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, ɔl ɪn ə stʃɹeɪnʒ wɝl sʌmhaʊ aʊtsaɪɾ ə taɪm, əɹ meɪbi əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɪt. tu deɪz wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə weɪz kəd kæɹi jə ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz, əɹ faɪv hʌnʒɹəd, dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn ðə pæðz jə tʃoʊz. ən ɪf jə wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə ɹɪsk ðə deɪnʒɝz. jə kəd daɪ vɛɹi izəli ɪn ðə weɪz, əɹ wɝs. ðə weɪz hæd tɝn dɑɹk ən kɝʌptɪd lɔŋ əɡoʊ. tʃɹɑləks dɪd nɑt kɛɹ əbaʊt ðæt, ðoʊ, ət lis nɑt wən ðeɪ hæd mɹdʒɹɑl dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ðɛm.

Rand nodded slowly. Ogier never lied, or at least the few who made the attempt were so poor at it that they seldom tried a second time. An Ogier's word was taken as seriously as anyone else's sworn oath. The Waygates would be guarded closely. Except for those in the Borderlands, and in the mountains south of Amadicia and Tarabon. From gate to gate, a man could journey from the Spine of the World to the Aryth Ocean, from the Borderlands to the Sea of Storms, all in a strange world somehow outside of time, or maybe alongside it. Two days walking along the Ways could carry you a hundred miles, or five hundred, depending on the paths you chose. And if you were willing to risk the dangers. You could die very easily in the Ways, or worse. The Ways had turned dark and corrupted long ago. Trollocs did not care about that, though, at least not when they had Myrddraal driving them.

tʃɹɑləks kɛɹɾ oʊnli fəɹ kɪlɪŋ, ɪspɛʃli wən ðeɪ hæd mɹdʒɹɑl dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ðɛm. ən naɪn weɪɡeɪts wəd ɹɪmeɪn ənwɑtʃt, wɪð ðə deɪnʒɝ ðəɾ ɛni ʌv əm maɪɾ oʊpən ʌp tə lɛɾ aʊt tʃɹɑləks baɪ ðə tɛnz ə θaʊzənz. sɛɾɪŋ ɛni sɔɹɾ ʌv ɡɑɹd wɪθaʊt ðə stɛɾɪŋ'?, koʊɑpɝeɪʃən maɪt bi ɪmpɑsəbəl. mɛni pipəl dɪd nɑt bɪliv oʊɡiɝ ɪɡzɪstəd, ən fju ʌv ðoʊz u dɪd wɑntəd tə mɛɾəl wɪθaʊt liv. meɪbi ði æʃəmən, ɪf i hæɾ ɪnʌf i kəd tʃɹʌst.

Trollocs cared only for killing, especially when they had Myrddraal driving them. And nine Waygates would remain unwatched, with the danger that any of them might open up to let out Trollocs by the tens of thousands. Setting any sort of guard without the stedding'?, cooperation might be impossible. Many people did not believe Ogier existed, and few of those who did wanted to meddle without leave. Maybe the Asha'man, if he had enough he could trust.

sʌɾənli, hi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn u wɑz taɪɝd. lɔɪəl lʊkt wɔɹn ən ɡɔnt.

Suddenly, he realized that he was not the only one who was tired. Loial looked worn and gaunt.

hɪz koʊt wɑz ɹʌmpəld ən hʌŋ lusli ɑn hɪm. ɪt wɑz deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ ən oʊɡiɝ tə bi aʊtsaɪd ðə stɛɾɪŋ tu lɔŋ, ən lɔɪəl hæd lɛft ɪz hoʊm ə ɡʊd faɪv jɪɹz əɡoʊ. meɪbi ðoʊz bɹif vɪzəts oʊvɝ ðə læs fju mʌnθs hæd nɑt bɪn ɪnʌf fəɹ hɪm. "meɪbi jə ʃəd ɡoʊ hoʊm naʊ, lɔɪəl. stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ ɪz ə oʊnli ə fju deɪz fɹəm hɪɹ."

His coat was rumpled and hung loosely on him. It was dangerous for an Ogier to be outside the stedding too long, and Loial had left his home a good five years ago. Maybe those brief visits over the last few months had not been enough for him. "Maybe you should go home now, Loial. Stedding Shangtai is a only a few days from here."

lɔɪəlz tʃɛɹ kɹikt əlɑɹmɪŋli əz i sæt boʊlt əpɹaɪt. hɪz ɪɹz ə ʃɑɾ əpɹaɪt, tu, ɪn əlɑɹm.

Loial's chair creaked alarmingly as he sat bolt upright. His ears A shot upright, too, in alarm.

"maɪ mʌðɝ wɪl bi ðɛɹ, ɹænd. ʃiz ə feɪməs spikɝ. ʃi wəd nɛvɝ mɪs ə ɡɹeɪt stʌmp." "ʃi kæn əv kʌm ɔl ðə weɪ bæk fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɔlɹɛɾi," ɹænd toʊl hɪm. lɔɪəlz mʌðɝ wɑz səpoʊzədli ə feɪməs wɔkɝ, tu, jɛt ðəɹ wɝ lɪməts, ivən fəɹ oʊɡiɝ. "ju doʊnt noʊ maɪ mʌðɝ," lɔɪəl mʌɾɝd, ə dʒɹʌm bumɪŋ dɑɹkli. "ʃil stɪl əv ɛɹɪθ ɪn toʊ, tu. ʃi wɪl." mɪn lin təwɔɹd ði oʊɡiɝ, ə deɪnʒɝəs laɪɾ ɪn əɹ aɪz. "ðə weɪ jə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɛɹɪθ, aɪ noʊ jə wɑnə mɛɹi hɝ, soʊ waɪ dʒju kip ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm hɝ?"

"My mother will be there, Rand. She's a famous Speaker. She would never miss a Great Stump." "She can't have come all the way back from the Two Rivers already," Rand told him. Loial's mother was supposedly a famous walker, too, yet there were limits, even for Ogier. "You don't know my mother," Loial muttered, a drum booming darkly. "She'll still have Erith in tow, too. She will." Min leaned toward the Ogier, a dangerous light in her eyes. "The way you talk about Erith, I know you want to marry her, so why do you keep running from her?"

ɹænd stʌɾid əɹ fɹəm ðə faɪɝpleɪs. mɛɹɪdʒ. eɪvinhə əsum ðəɾ i wəd mɛɹi hɝ, ən ɪleɪn ən mɪn əz wɛl, ɪn ði il fæʃən. ɪleɪn əpɪɹd tə θɪŋk soʊ, tu, stʃɹeɪnʒ əz ðət simd. hi θɔt ʃi dɪd. wʌd mɪn θɪŋk? ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sɛd. hi ʃəd nɛvɝ əv lɛɾ əm bɑn hɪm. ðə bɑnd wəd smʌðɝ əm ɪn ɡɹif wən i daɪd.

Rand studied her from the fireplace. Marriage. Aviendha assumed that he would marry her, and Elayne and Min as well, in the Aiel fashion. Elayne appeared to think so, too, strange as that seemed. He thought she did. What did Min think? She had never said. He should never have let them bond him. The bond would smother them in grief when he died.

lɔɪəlz ɪɹz tʃɹɛmbəld wɪð kɑʃən, naʊ. ðoʊz ɪɹz wɝ wʌn ɹizən oʊɡiɝ meɪd pʊɹ laɪɝz. hi meɪd pleɪkeɪɾɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝz əz ðoʊ mɪn wɝ ðə lɑɹdʒɝ ə ðɛm. "wɛl, aɪ də wɑn tə, mɪn. ʌv kɔɹs, aɪ du. ɛɹɪθ ɪz bjuɾəfəl, ən vɛɹi pɝsɛptɪv. dɪɾ aɪ ɛvɝ tɛl jə haʊ kɛɹfəli ʃi lɪsən tə mi ɪkspleɪn əbaʊt . . . ? ʌv kɔɹs, aɪ dɪd. aɪ tɛl ɛvɹibɑɾi aɪ mit. aɪ də wɑnə mɛɹi hɝ. bʌt nɑt jɛt. ɪɾ ɪzən laɪk wɪð jə hjumənz, mɪn. jə də ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹænd æsks. ɛɹɪθ wɪl ɪkspɛk mi tə sɛɾəl daʊn ən steɪ hoʊm.

Loial's ears trembled with caution, now. Those ears were one reason Ogier made poor liars. He made placating gestures as though Min were the larger of them. "Well, I do want to, Min. Of course, I do. Erith is beautiful, and very perceptive. Did I ever tell you how carefully she listened to me explain about . . . ? Of course, I did. I tell everybody I meet. I do want to marry her. But not yet. It isn't like with you humans, Min. You do everything Rand asks. Erith will expect me to settle down and stay home.

waɪvz nɛvɝ lɛɾ ə hʌzbənd ɡoʊ ɛniwɛɹ əɹ də ɛniθɪŋ, ɪf ɪt minz livɪŋ ðə stɛɾɪŋ fəɹ mɔɹ ðən ə fju deɪz. aɪ hæv maɪ bʊk tə fɪnɪʃ, ən haʊ kən aɪ də ðəɾ ɪf aɪ doʊn si ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹænd dʌz? aɪm ʃʊɹ hiz dʌn ɔl sɔɹts ə θɪŋz sɪns aɪ lɛf kɛɹhin, ən aɪ noʊ əl nɛvɝ ɡɛɾ ɪɾ ɔl daʊn ɹaɪt. ɛɹɪθ dʒʌst wʊdn ʌndɝstænd. mɪn? mɪn, ɑɹ jə æŋɡɹi wɪð mi?"

Wives never let a husband go anywhere or do anything, if it means leaving the stedding for more than a few days. I have my book to finish, and how can I do that if I don't see everything Rand does? I'm sure he's done all sorts of things since I left Cairhien, and I know I'll never get it all down right. Erith just wouldn't understand. Min? Min, are you angry with me?"

"wʌt meɪks jə θɪŋk aɪm æŋɡɹi?" ʃi sɛd kuli. lɔɪəl saɪd hɛvəli, ən soʊ klɪɹli ɪn ɹɪlif ðət ɹænd ɔlmoʊst stɛɹd. laɪt, ði oʊɡiɝ æktʃəli  θɔt ʃi mɛnt ʃi wɑz nɑɾ æŋɡɹi! ɹænd nu hi wɑz filɪŋ ɪz weɪ ɪn ðə dɑɹk wən ɪt keɪm tə wɪmən, ivən mɪn - meɪbi ɪspɛʃli mɪn - bʌt lɔɪəl hæd bɛɾɝ lɝn ə lɑt mɔɹ ðən i ɔlɹɛɾi nu bɪfɔɹ i mɛɹiɾ ɪz ɛɹɪθ. ʌðɝwaɪz, ʃi wəd skɪn ɪm aʊt laɪk ə sɪk ɡoʊt. bɛs tə ɡɛɾ ɪm aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum bɪfɔɹ mɪn dɪɾ ɛɹɪθs dʒɑb fəɹ hɝ. ɹænd klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt.

"What makes you think I'm angry?" she said coolly. Loial sighed heavily, and so clearly in relief that Rand almost stared. Light, the Ogier actually thought she meant she was not angry! Rand knew he was feeling his way in the dark when it came to women, even Min - maybe especially Min - but Loial had better learn a lot more than he already knew before he married his Erith. Otherwise, she would skin him out like a sick goat. Best to get him out of the room before Min did Erith's job for her. Rand cleared his throat.

"θɪŋk ɑn ɪɾ oʊvɝnaɪt, lɔɪəl," hi sɛd. "meɪbi jəl tʃeɪnʒ jəɹ maɪn baɪ mɔɹnɪŋ." pɑɹɾ ə hɪm hoʊp lɔɪəl wʊd. ði oʊɡiɝ hæd bɪn tu lɔŋ fɹəm hoʊm. ənʌðɝ pɑɹɾ ə hɪm, ðoʊ. . . . hi kəd juz lɔɪəl, ɪf wʌɾ əliviə hæd toʊld ɪm əbaʊt ðə sintʃæn wɑz tʃɹu. səmtaɪmz, hi dɪsɡʌstəd hɪmsɛlf. "ɪn ɛni keɪs, aɪ nid tə tɔk tə bæʃɪɹ, naʊ. ən lɑɡən." hɪz maʊθ taɪɾənd ɝaʊn ðə neɪm. wʌt wɑz lɑɡən duɪŋ ɪn æʃəmən blæk?

"Think on it overnight, Loial," he said. "Maybe you'll change your mind by morning." Part of him hoped Loial would. The Ogier had been too long from home. Another part of him, though. . . . He could use Loial, if what Alivia had told him about the Seanchan was true. Sometimes, he disgusted himself. "In any case, I need to talk to Bashere, now. And Logain." His mouth tightened around the name. What was Logain doing in Asha'man black?

lɔɪəl dɪd nɑt stænd. ɪndid, hɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən ɡɹu mɔɹ tʃɹʌbəld, ɪɹz slæntɪŋ bæk ən aɪbɹaʊz dʒɹupɪŋ. "ɹænd, ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ aɪ nid tə tɛl ju. əbaʊt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu keɪm wɪð ʌs." laɪtnɪŋz flɛɹɾ ənu aʊtsaɪd ðə wɪndoʊz əz i wɛn ɑn, ən ðə θʌndɝ kɹæʃt oʊvɝhɛd hɑɹɾɝ ðən ɛvɝ. wɪð səm stɔɹmz, ə lʌl oʊnli mɛn ðə wɝst wɑz kʌmɪŋ.

Loial did not stand. Indeed, his expression grew more troubled, ears slanting back and eyebrows drooping. "Rand, there's something I need to tell you. About the Aes Sedai who came with us." Lightnings flared anew outside the windows as he went on, and the thunder crashed overhead harder than ever. With some storms, a lull only meant the worst was coming.

aɪ toʊl jə tə kɪl əm ɔl wən jə hæd ðə tʃæns, luz θɝɪn læft. aɪ toʊl ju.

I told you to kill them all when you had the chance, Lews Therin laughed. I told you.

"ɑɹ jə pɑzəɾɪv ðeɪv bɪn bɑndəd, sæmɪtsu?" kædzueɪn æsk fɝmli. ən laʊdli ɪnʌf tə bi hɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə θʌndɝ bumɪŋ ɑn ðə mænɝ haʊsəz ɹuftɑp. θʌndɝ ən laɪtnɪŋ fɪɾ əɹ mud.

"Are you positive they've been bonded, Samitsu?" Cadsuane asked firmly. And loudly enough to be heard over the thunder booming on the manor house's rooftop. Thunder and lightning fit her mood.

ʃi wʊɾə laɪk tə snɑɹl. ɪt ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə ɡʊdli mɛʒɝ ə hɝ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ən ɪkspɪɹiəns tə sɪt kɑmli ən sɪp hɑt dʒɪnʒɝ ti. ʃi hæd nɑt lɛɾ ɪmoʊʃən ɡɛt ði ʌpɝ hæn ɪn ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm, bʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə baɪt sʌmθɪŋ. əɹ sʌmwʌn.

She would have liked to snarl. It required a goodly measure of her training and experience to sit calmly and sip hot ginger tea. She had not let emotion get the upper hand in a very long time, but she wanted to bite something. Or someone.

sæmɪtsu hɛld ə pɔɹsələn kʌp ə ti, tu, bʌt ʃi hæd jɛt tə swɑloʊ ə dʒɹɑp, ən ʃi hæɾ ɪɡnɔɹd kædzueɪnz ɔfɝ ʌv ə tʃɛɹ. ðə slɛndɝ sɪstɝ tɝn fɹəm piɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə fleɪmz ə ðə lɛfθæn faɪɝpleɪs, ðə bɛlz ɪn əɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ dʒɪŋɡəlɪŋ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. ʃi hæd nɑt bɑðɝd tə dʒɹaɪ hɝ hɛɹ pɹɑpɝli, ən ɪt hʌŋ dæmp ən hɛvi daʊn əɹ bæk. hɝ heɪzəl aɪz wɝ ənizi. "ɪts hɑɹdli ðə sɔɹɾ ə kwɛstʃən aɪ kəɾ æsk ə sɪstɝ, naʊ ɪz ɪt, kædzueɪn, ən ðeɪ sɝɾənli dɪdn tɛl mi. əz u wʊd? ət fɝst, aɪ θɔt meɪbi ðeɪ hæd dʌn laɪk mɛɹaɪs ən kɔɹəl. ən pʊɹ deɪdʒiən." ə bɹif wɪns ə sɪmpəθi kɹɔst əɹ feɪs. ʃi nu ɪn fʊl ðə peɪn ðət wɑz nɔɪŋ ət deɪdʒiən oʊvɝ əɹ lɔs. ɛni sɪstɝ bɪɑn əɹ fɝst wɔɹɾɝ nu ðət tu wɛl. "bʌɾ ɪts pleɪn tʌvaɪn ən ɡɑbɹɛl ɑɹ boʊθ wɪð lɑɡən. aɪ θɪŋk ɡɑbɹɛl ɪz bɛɾɪŋ hɪm. ɪf ðɛɹz bɑndɪŋ bɪn dʌn, ɪt wɑz ðə mɛn u dɪɾ ɪt."

Samitsu held a porcelain cup of tea, too, but she had yet to swallow a drop, and she had ignored Cadsuane's offer of a chair. The slender sister turned from peering into the flames of the lefthand fireplace, the bells in her dark hair jingling as she shook her head. She had not bothered to dry her hair properly, and it hung damp and heavy down her back. Her hazel eyes were uneasy. "It's hardly the sort of question I could ask a sister, now is it, Cadsuane, and they certainly didn't tell me. As who would? At first, I thought maybe they had done like Merise and Corele. And poor Daigian." A brief wince of sympathy crossed her face. She knew in full the pain that was gnawing at Daigian over her loss. Any sister beyond her first Warder knew that too well. "But it's plain Toveine and Gabrelle are both with Logain. I think Gabrelle is bedding him. If there's bonding been done, it was the men who did it."

"tɝnəbaʊt," kædzueɪn mʌɾɝd ɪndə hɝ ti. səm sɛd ðət tɝnəbaʊt wɑz fɛɹ pleɪ, bʌt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪlivd ɪn faɪɾɪŋ fɛɹ. iðɝ jə fɔt, əɹ jə dɪd nɑt, ən ɪt wɑz nɛvɝ ə ɡeɪm. fɛɹnəs wɑz fəɹ pipəl stændɪŋ seɪfli tə wʌn saɪd, tɔkɪŋ waɪl ʌðɝz blɛd. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl ʃi kəd də bɪɑn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ə weɪ tə bæləns ɪvɛns. bæləns wɑz nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ðə seɪm əz fɛɹnəs. wʌɾ ə dɔɡz dɪnɝ ðɪs wɑz tɝnɪŋ ɪntu. "aɪm ɡlæd jə ɡeɪv mi ət list ə lɪɾəl wɔɹnɪŋ bɪfɔɹ aɪ hæv tə feɪs tʌvaɪn ən ði ʌðɝz, bʌɾ aɪ wɑn jə tə ɹɪtɝn tə kɛɹhin ðə fɝs θɪŋ təmɑɹoʊ."

"Turnabout," Cadsuane muttered into her tea. Some said that turnabout was fair play, but she had never believed in fighting fair. Either you fought, or you did not, and it was never a game. Fairness was for people standing safely to one side, talking while others bled. Unfortunately, there was little she could do beyond trying to find a way to balance events. Balance was not at all the same as fairness. What a dog's dinner this was turning into. "I'm glad you gave me at least a little warning before I have to face Toveine and the others, but I want you to return to Cairhien the first thing tomorrow."

"ðɛɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ aɪ kəd du, kædzueɪn," sæmɪtsu sɛd bɪɾɝli. "hæf ðə pipəl aɪ ɡeɪv ən ɔɹɾɝ hæd bɪɡʌn tʃɛkɪŋ wɪð sæʃəl tə si ɪf ɪt wɑz ɹaɪt, ən ði ʌðɝ hæf toʊl mi tə maɪ feɪs ʃiɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sɛd dɪfɹənt. lɔɹd bæʃɪɹ tɔkt əɹ ɪndə tɝnɪŋ ðə wɔɹɾɝz lus - aɪ hæv noʊ aɪdiə haʊ hi faʊn aʊɾ əbaʊɾ əm ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs - ən ʃi tɔk sɔɹɪliə ɪndə ɪt, ən ðəɹ wɑzn ðə lis θɪŋ aɪ kəd də tə stɑp ɪt. sɔɹɪliə wɑz bɪheɪvɪŋ əz ɪf aɪ hæd dʒʌst æbdəkeɪɾəd! ʃi dʌzn ʌndɝstænd, ən ʃi meɪɾ ɪt pleɪn ʃi θɪŋks ɪm ə ful. ðɛɹz noʊ pɔɪn əɾ ɔl ɪn mi ɡoʊɪŋ bæk, ənlɛs jə ɪkspɛk mi tə kæɹi sæʃəlz ɡlʌvz fəɹ hɝ."

"There was nothing I could do, Cadsuane," Samitsu said bitterly. "Half the people I gave an order had begun checking with Sashalle to see if it was right, and the other half told me to my face she'd already said different. Lord Bashere talked her into turning the Warders loose - I have no idea how he found out about them in the first place - and she talked Sorilea into it, and there wasn't the least thing I could do to stop it. Sorilea was behaving as if I had just abdicated! She doesn't understand, and she made it plain she thinks I'm a fool. There's no point at all in me going back, unless you expect me to carry Sashalle's gloves for her."

"aɪ ɪkspɛk jə tə wɑtʃ hɝ, sæmɪtsu. noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðæt. aɪ wɑnə noʊ wʌt wʌn ə ðiz dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn sɪstɝz dʌz wən niðɝ aɪ nɔɹ ðə waɪz wʌnz ɑɹ lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən hoʊldɪŋ ə swɪtʃ. juv ɔlweɪz bɪn vɛɹi əbzɝvənt." peɪʃəns wɑz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz əɹ stʃɹɔŋɡəs tʃɹeɪt, bʌt səmtaɪmz ɪt wɑz ɹikwaɪɝd wɪð sæmɪtsu. ðə jɛloʊ wɑz əbzɝvənt, ən ɪntɛlədʒənt, ən stʃɹɔnwɪl moʊst ə ðə taɪm, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə bɛst əlaɪv ət hilɪŋ ət list əntɪl ði əpɪɹəns ə dɑɹnɝ flɪn -  bʌt ʃi kəd sʌfɝ ðə moʊst əstɑnɪʃɪŋ kəlæpsɪz ɪn əɹ kɑnfəɾəns. ðə stɪk nɛvɝ wɝkt wɪð sæmɪtsu, bʌt pæts ɑn ðə bæk dɪd, ən ɪt wɑz ɹɪdɪkjələs nɑt tə juz wʌt wɝkt. əz kædzueɪn ɹimaɪndəɾ əɹ haʊ ɪntɛlədʒənt ʃi wɑz, haʊ skɪld ət hilɪŋ - ðət wɑz ɔlweɪz nɛsəsɛɹi, wɪð sæmɪtsu; ʃi kəd ɡoʊ ɪndə ə dɪpɹɛʃən oʊvɝ feɪlɪŋ tə hil ə dɛd mæn - haʊ klɛvɝ, ði ɝæfɛlɪn sɪstɝ bɪɡæn tə dʒɹɔ ʌp əɹ kəmpoʊʒɝ. ən əɹ sɛlf-əʃʊɹəns.

"I expect you to watch her, Samitsu. No more than that. I want to know what one of these Dragonsworn sisters does when neither I nor the Wise Ones are looking over their shoulders and holding a switch. You've always been very observant." Patience was not always her strongest trait, but sometimes it was required with Samitsu. The Yellow was observant, and intelligent, and strongwilled most of the time, not to mention the best alive at Healing at least until the appearance of Darner Flinn -  but she could suffer the most astonishing collapses in her confidence. The stick never worked with Samitsu, but pats on the back did, and it was ridiculous not to use what worked. As Cadsuane reminded her how intelligent she was, how skilled at Healing - that was always necessary, with Samitsu; she could go into a depression over failing to Heal a dead man - how clever, the Arafellin sister began to draw up her composure. And her self-assurance.

"ju kən bi əʃʊɹd sæʃəl woʊn tʃeɪnʒ əɹ stɑkɪŋz wɪθaʊɾ aɪ noʊ ɪt," ʃi sɛd kɹɪspli. ɪn tʃɹuθ, kædzueɪn ɪkspɛktəd noʊ lɛs. "bʌɾ ɪf jə doʊn maɪn mi æskɪŋ," wɪð əɹ kɑnfəɾəns ɹɪstɔɹd, sæmɪtsuz toʊn meɪd ðət ðə mɛɹəs kɝɾəsi; ʃi wɑz noʊ ʃɹɪŋkɪŋ flaʊɝ ɪksɛpt wən əɹ sɛlfəʃʊɹəns wikənd, "waɪ ɑɹ jə hɪɹ, ət ðə bæk ɛn ə tiɹ? wʌts jʌŋ ælθɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə du? əɹ ʃəɾ aɪ seɪ, wʌɾ ɑɹ jə gɑnə hæv ɪm du?" "hi ɪntɛnz sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs," kædzueɪn ɹɪplaɪd. laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt aʊtsaɪd ðə wɪndoʊz, ʃɑɹp sɪlvɝ fɔɹks ɪn ə skaɪ nɪɹ əz dɑɹk əz naɪt. ʃi nu ɪɡzækli wʌɾ i ɪntɛndəd. ʃi dʒʌs dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ tə stɑp ɪt.

"You can be assured Sashalle won't change her stockings without I know it," she said crisply. In truth, Cadsuane expected no less. "But if you don't mind me asking," with her confidence restored, Samitsu's tone made that the merest courtesy; she was no shrinking flower except when her selfassurance weakened, "why are you here, at the back end of Tear? What's young al'Thor going to do? Or should I say, what are you going to have him do?" "He intends something very dangerous," Cadsuane replied. Lightning flashed outside the windows, sharp silver forks in a sky near as dark as night. She knew exactly what he intended. She just did not know whether to stop it.

"ɪɾ əz tə ɛnd!" ɹænd θʌndɝd, ɛkoʊd baɪ ðə kɹæʃɪz ɪn ðə skaɪ. hi hæd dɑft ɪz koʊt bɪfɔɹ ðɪs ɪntɝvju, ən ɹoʊld ʌp ɪz ʃɝtslivz tə bɛɹ ðə dʒɹæɡənz twaɪn ɝaʊn ɪz fɹɑɹmz ɪn skɑɹləɾ ən ɡoʊld, ðə ɡoʊldən-meɪn hɛdz ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn ðə bæks ə hɪz hænz. hi wɑntəd ðə mæn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm ɹimaɪndəd wɪð ɛvɹi lʊk ðəɾ i wɑz feɪsɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. bʌɾ ɪz hænz wɝ fɪsts, tə kip ɪm fɹəm ɡɪvɪŋ ɪn tə luz θɝɪnz ɝdʒɪŋz ən θɹɑɾəlɪŋ blʌɾi lɑɡən əblɝ. "aɪ doʊnt niɾ ə wɔɹ wɪð ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən jə blʌɾi æʃəmən blʌɾi wɛl woʊnt ɡɪmi ə wɔɹ wɪð ðə waɪt taʊɝ!

"It has to end!" Rand thundered, echoed by the crashes in the sky. He had doffed his coat before this interview, and rolled up his shirtsleeves to bare the Dragons twined around his forearms in scarlet and gold, the golden-maned heads resting on the backs of his hands. He wanted the man in front of him reminded with every look that he was facing the Dragon Reborn. But his hands were fists, to keep him from giving in to Lews Therin's urgings and throttling bloody Logain Ablar. "I don't need a war with the White Tower, and you bloody Asha'man bloody well won't give me a war with the White Tower!

də aɪ meɪk maɪsɛlf ʌndɝstʊd?" lɑɡən, hænz ɹɛstɪŋ izəli ətɑp ðə lɔŋ hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd, dɪd nɑt flɪntʃ. hi wɑz ə bɪɡ mæn, ɪf smɔlɝ ðən ɹænd, wɪð ə stɛɾi ɡeɪz ðət ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ðəɾ i hæd bɪn dʒɹɛs daʊn əɹ kɔl tə əkaʊnt. ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹɾ ən ɹɛd-ænd-ɡoʊl dʒɹæɡən ɡlɪɾɝd bɹaɪtli ɪn ðə læmplaɪɾ ɑn ðə haɪ kɑlɝ ə hɪz blæk koʊt, ən ðəɾ ɪtsɛlf lʊk fɹɛʃli aɪɝnd. "ɑɹ jə seɪɪŋ ɹilis ðɛm?" hi æskt kɑmli. "wɪl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹilis ðoʊz ʌv aʊɝz ðeɪv teɪkən?"

Do I make myself understood?" Logain, hands resting easily atop the long hilt of his sword, did not flinch. He was a big man, if smaller than Rand, with a steady gaze that gave no sign that he had been dressed down or called to account. The silver sword and red-and-gold Dragon glittered brightly in the lamplight on the high collar of his black coat, and that itself looked freshly ironed. "Are you saying release them?" he asked calmly. "Will the Aes Sedai release those of ours they've taken?"

"noʊ!" ɹænd sɛd kɝtli. ən saʊɝli. "wʌts dʌn kæn bi əndʌn." mɛɹaɪs hæd bɪn soʊ ʃɑkt wən i sədʒɛstəd ʃi ɹilis nɛɹɪʃmə, jə wʊɾə θɔɾ i wɑz æskɪŋ əɹ tə əbændən ə pʌpi baɪ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd. ən i səspɛktəd flɪn wəd faɪɾ əz hɑɹd tə hæŋ ɑn tə kɔɹəl əz ʃi tə hɪm; hi wɑz fɛɹli sɝɾən ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ bɪtwin ðoʊz tu ðən ðə bɑnd, naʊ. wɛl, ɪf ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd bɑn ə mæn u tʃænəld, wʌt wɑz tə seɪ ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən kəd nɑt fɪks ɑn ə ɡɝnpi oʊl mæn? "ju ɹilaɪz ðə mɛs juv kɹieɪɾəd, ðoʊ, doʊn ju? əz ɪɾ ɪz, ði oʊnli mæn u kən tʃænəl ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə wɑns əlaɪv ɪz mi, ən ðəɾ oʊnli tɪl ðə læs bæɾəl ɪz dʌn. wʌns ʃi lɝnz ə ðɪs, ʃɪl bi twaɪs əz hɑt tə si jə ɔl dɛɾ ɛni weɪ ʃi kən mænədʒ ɪt. aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ ði ʌðɝ lɑt wɪl ɹiækt, bʌɾ ɛɡwin wɑz ɔlweɪz ə ʃɑɹp bɑɹɡɪnɝ. aɪ meɪ hæv tə tɛl ɔf æʃəmən fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə bɑn əntɪl ðeɪv əz mɛni ʌv jə əz jə də ʌv ðɛm. ðæts ɪf ðeɪ doʊn dʒʌs dɪsaɪd jə ɔl əv tə daɪ əz sun əz ðeɪ kən ɝeɪnʒ ɪt, tu. wʌts dʌn ɪz dʌn, bʌt ðəɹ kænɑt bi ɛni mɔɹ!" lɑɡən stɪfən ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ wɪð ɛvɹi wɝd, bʌɾ ɪz ɡeɪz hɛld ɑn ɹænz. ɪt wɑz pleɪn əz hɔɹnz ɑn ə ɹæm ðəɾ i wɑz ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ði ʌðɝz ɪn ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum. mɪn hæd wɑntəd noʊ pɑɹɾ ə ðɪs miɾɪŋ ən teɪkən hɝsɛlf ɔf tə ɹid; ɹænd kəd nɑt meɪk ʌp fɹəm daʊn ɪn hɹɪd pɛlz bʊks, bʌt ʃi faʊn əm fæsəneɪɾɪŋ.

"No!" Rand said curtly. And sourly. "What's done can't be undone." Merise had been so shocked when he suggested she release Narishma, you would have thought he was asking her to abandon a puppy by the side of the road. And he suspected Flinn would fight as hard to hang on to Corele as she to him; he was fairly certain there was more between those two than the bond, now. Well, if an Aes Sedai could bond a man who channeled, what was to say a pretty woman could not fix on a girnpy old man? "You realize the mess you've created, though, don't you? As it is, the only man who can channel that Elaida wants alive is me, and that only till the Last Battle is done. Once she learns of this, she'll be twice as hot to see you all dead any way she can manage it. I don't know how the other lot will react, but Egwene was always a sharp bargainer. I may have to tell off Asha'man for Aes Sedai to bond until they have as many of you as you do of them. That's if they don't just decide you all have to die as soon as they can arrange it, too. What's done is done, but there cannot be any more!" Logain stiffened a little more with every word, but his gaze held on Rand's. It was plain as horns on a ram that he was ignoring the others in the sitting room. Min had wanted no part of this meeting and taken herself off to read; Rand could not make up from down in Herid Pel's books, but she found them fascinating.

hi hæɾ ɪnsɪstəd lɔɪəl ɹɪmeɪn, ðoʊ, ən ði oʊɡiɝ wɑz pɹitɛndɪŋ tə stʌɾi ðə fleɪmz ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪs.

He had insisted Loial remain, though, and the Ogier was pretending to study the flames in the fireplace.

ɪksɛpt wən i ɡlænst ət ðə dɔɹ, tʌftəɾ ɪɹz twɪtʃɪŋ, əz ɪf wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ i kəd slɪp aʊɾ ənnoʊɾɪst ʌndɝ kʌvɝ ə ðə stɔɹm. dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ əpɪɹɾ ivən ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən i ɹɪli wɑz əlɔŋsaɪd ði oʊɡiɝ, ə ɡɹeɪɪŋ mæn wɪð dɑɹk tɪltəɾ aɪz, ə bik ʌv ə noʊz, ən θɪk mʌstæʃɪz kɝvɪŋ daʊn ɝaʊn ɪz maʊθ. hi hæd wɔɹn ɪz sɔɹd, tu, ə ʃɔɹɾɝ bleɪd ðən lɑɡənz, ən sɝpəntaɪn. bæʃɪɹ spɛn mɔɹ taɪm piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɪz waɪnkʌp ðən lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, bʌt wɛnɛvɝ ɪz aɪz tʌtʃt lɑɡən, hi ʌnkɑnʃəsli ɹæn ə θʌm əlɔŋ ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt. ɹænd θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ʌnkɑnʃəs. "teɪm ɡeɪv ði ɔɹɾɝ," lɑɡən sɛd, koʊldli ənkʌmftəɹbəl ɪkspleɪnɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ən ɑɾiəns. sʌɾən laɪtnɪŋ kloʊs tə ðə haʊs kæst ɪz feɪs ɪn lʊɹəd ʃædoʊz fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ə blik mæsk ə dɑɹknəs. "aɪ əsumd ɪt keɪm fɹəm ju." hɪz aɪz muv slaɪtli ɪn bæʃɪɹz dɝɛkʃən, ən ɪz maʊθ taɪɾənd.

Except when he glanced at the door, tufted ears twitching, as if wondering whether he could slip out unnoticed under cover of the storm. Davram Bashere appeared even shorter than he really was alongside the Ogier, a graying man with dark tilted eyes, a beak of a nose, and thick mustaches curving down around his mouth. He had worn his sword, too, a shorter blade than Logain's, and serpentine. Bashere spent more time peering into his winecup than looking at anything else, but whenever his eyes touched Logain, he unconsciously ran a thumb along his sword hilt. Rand thought it was unconscious. "Taim gave the order," Logain said, coldly uncomfortable explaining himself in front of an audience. Sudden lightning close to the house cast his face in lurid shadows for an instant, a bleak mask of darkness. "I assumed it came from you." His eyes moved slightly in Bashere's direction, and his mouth tightened.

"teɪm dʌz ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni θɪŋz pipəl θɪŋk ɑɹ ət jəɹ dɝɛkʃən," hi wɛn ɑn ɹɪlʌktənli, "bʌt hiz ɪz oʊn plænz. flɪn ən nɛɹɪʃmə ən mænfɝ ɑɹ ɑn ðə dɛzɝɾɝz' lɪst, laɪk ɛvɹi æʃəmən jə kɛpt wɪð ju. ən hiz ə koʊɾɝi ʌv twɛnti əɹ θɝɾi hi kips kloʊs ən tʃɹeɪnz pɹaɪvətli. ɛvɹi mæn u wɛɹz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪz wʌn ə ðət ɡɹup ɪksɛp mi, ən hiɾ əv kɛp ðə dʒɹæɡən fɹəm mi, ɪf i dɛɹd.

"Taim does a great many things people think are at your direction," he went on reluctantly, "but he has his own plans. Flinn and Narishma and Manfor are on the deserters' list, like every Asha'man you kept with you. And he has a coterie of twenty or thirty he keeps close and trains privately. Every man who wears the Dragon is one of that group except me, and he'd have kept the Dragon from me, if he dared.

noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt juv dʌn, ɪts taɪm tə tɝn jəɹ aɪz tə ðə blæk taʊɝ bɪfɔɹ teɪm splɪts ɪt wɝs ðən ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪz. ɪf i dʌz, jəl faɪn ðə lɑɹdʒɝ pɑɹɾ ɪz lɔɪəl tə hɪm, nɑt ju. ðeɪ noʊ hɪm.

No matter what you've done, it is time to turn your eyes to the Black Tower before Taim splits it worse than the White Tower is. If he does, you'll find the larger part is loyal to him, not you. They know him.

moʊst əv nɛvɝ ivən sin ju." ɪɹɪɾəbli, ɹænd pʊʃt ɪz slivz daʊn ən dʒɹɑpt ɪndə ə tʃɛɹ.

Most have never even seen you." Irritably, Rand pushed his sleeves down and dropped into a chair.

wʌɾ i hæd dʌn meɪd noʊ mæɾɝ tə lɑɡən. ðə mæn nu seɪɾɪn wɑz klin, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt bɪliv ɹænd əɹ ɛni mæn hæɾ æktʃəli  dʌn ðə klɛnzɪŋ. dɪɾ i θɪŋk ðə kɹieɪɾɝ hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə stʃɹɛtʃ aʊɾ ə mɝsɪfəl hæn æftɝ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz ə sʌfɝɪŋ? ðə kɹieɪɾɝ hæd meɪd ðə wɝld ən ðən lɛf hjumənkaɪn tə meɪk ʌv ɪt wʌt ðeɪ wʊd, ə hɛvən əɹ ðə pɪɾ ə dum baɪ ðɛɹ tʃuzɪŋ. ðə kɹieɪɾɝ hæd meɪd mɛni wɝlz, wɑtʃt itʃ flaʊɝ əɹ daɪ, ən ɡɔn ɑn tə meɪk ɛnləs wɝlz bɪɑnd. ə ɡɑɹɾənɝ dɪd nɑt wip fəɹ itʃ blɑsəm ðət fɛl.

What he had done made no matter to Logain. The man knew saidin was clean, but he could not believe Rand or any man had actually done the cleansing. Did he think the Creator had decided to stretch out a merciful hand after three thousand years of suffering? The Creator had made the world and then left humankind to make of it what they would, a heaven or the Pit of Doom by their choosing. The Creator had made many worlds, watched each flower or die, and gone on to make endless worlds beyond. A gardener did not weep for each blossom that fell.

fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, hi θɔt ðoʊz mʌst əv bɪn luz θɝɪnz ɹɪflɛkʃənz. hi hæd nɛvɝ ɡɔn ɑn ðət weɪ əbaʊt ðə kɹieɪɾɝ əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ðəɾ i ɹɪkɔld. bʌɾ i kəd fil luz θɝɪn nɑɾɪŋ ɪn əpɹuvəl, ə mæn lɪsnɪŋ tə sʌmwʌn ɛls. stɪl, ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə kaɪndə θɪŋ i wʊɾə kənsɪɾɝd bɪfɔɹ luz θɝɪn. haʊ mʌtʃ speɪs ɹɪmeɪn bɪtwin ðɛm?

For an instant, he thought those must have been Lews Therin's reflections. He had never gone on that way about the Creator or anything else that he recalled. But he could feel Lews Therin nodding in approval, a man listening to someone else. Still, it was not the kind of thing he would have considered before Lews Therin. How much space remained between them?

"teɪm wɪl əv tə weɪt," hi sɛd wɛɹəli. haʊ lɔŋ kəd teɪm weɪt? hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz nɑt tə hɪɹ luz θɝɪn ɹeɪdʒɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə kɪl ðə mæn. hi wɪʃt ðət meɪɾ ɪm fil iziɝ. "dɪd jə dʒʌs kʌm tə si ðət lɑɡən ɹitʃt mi seɪfli, bæʃɪɹ, əɹ tə tɛl mi sʌmbɑɾi stæb dɑbɹeɪn? əɹ juv ən ɝdʒən tæsk fəɹ mi, tu?"

"Taim will have to wait," he said wearily. How long could Taim wait? He was surprised not to hear Lews Therin raging for him to kill the man. He wished that made him feel easier. "Did you just come to see that Logain reached me safely, Bashere, or to tell me somebody stabbed Dobraine? Or do you have an urgent task for me, too?"

bæʃɪɹ ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət ɹændz toʊn, ən ɪz dʒɔ taɪɾənd əz i ɡlænst ət lɑɡən, bʌɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt, hi snɔɹɾɪd soʊ hɑɹɾ ɪz θɪk mʌstæʃɪz ʃəɾ əv ʃeɪkən. "tu mɛn ɹænsæk maɪ tɛnt," hi sɛd, sɛɾɪŋ ɪz waɪnkʌp daʊn ɑn ə kɑɹv blu teɪbəl əɡɛns ðə wɔl, "wʌn kæɹiɪŋ ə noʊɾ aɪ kəd swɛɹ aɪ ɹoʊt maɪsɛlf ɪf aɪ dɪdnt noʊ bɛɾɝ. ən ɔɹɾɝ tə kæɹi əweɪ 'sɝɾən aɪɾəmz.' lɔɪəl tɛlz mi ðə fɛloʊz u naɪfɛd dɑbɹeɪn hæd ðə seɪm sɔɹɾ ə noʊt, əpɛɹənli ɪn dɑbɹeɪnz hænd. ə blaɪn mæn kəd si wʌt ðeɪ wɝ æftɝ, wɪð ə lɪɾəl θɔt. dɑbɹeɪn ən aɪ ɑɹ ðə moʊs laɪkli kændəɾeɪts tə bi ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə silz fəɹ ju. juv θɹi, ən jə seɪ θɹi ɑɹ bɹoʊkən. meɪbi ðə ʃædoʊ noʊz wɛɹ ðə læst ɪz."

Bashere raised an eyebrow at Rand's tone, and his jaw tightened as he glanced at Logain, but after a moment, he snorted so hard his thick mustaches should have shaken. "Two men ransacked my tent," he said, setting his winecup down on a carved blue table against the wall, "one carrying a note I could swear I wrote myself if I didn't know better. An order to carry away 'certain items.' Loial tells me the fellows who knifed Dobraine had the same sort of note, apparently in Dobraine's hand. A blind man could see what they were after, with a little thought. Dobraine and I are the most likely candidates to be guarding the seals for you. You have three, and you say three are broken. Maybe the Shadow knows where the last is."

lɔɪəl hæd tɝn fɹəm ðə faɪɝpleɪs əz ðə sɑldəiən spoʊk, hɪz ɪɹz ɹɪdʒəd, ən naʊ hi bɝst aʊt, "ðæɾ ɪz sɪɹiəs, ɹænd. ɪf sʌmwʌn bɹeɪks ɔl ðə silz ɑn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən, əɹ meɪbi ivən dʒʌst wʌn əɹ tu mɔɹ, ðə dɑɹk wʌn kəd bɹeɪk fɹi. ivən jə kæn feɪs ðə dɑɹk wʌn! aɪ min, aɪ noʊ ðə pɹɑfəsiz seɪ jə wɪl, bʌt ðəɾ əz tə bi dʒʌst ə weɪ ʌv spikɪŋ." ivən lɑɡən lʊkt kənsɝnd, hɪz aɪz stʌɾiɪŋ ɹænd əz ɪf mɛʒɝɪŋ ɪm əɡɛns ðə dɑɹk wʌn.

Loial had turned from the fireplace as the Saldaean spoke, his ears rigid, and now he burst out, "That is serious, Rand. If someone breaks all the seals on the Dark One's prison, or maybe even just one or two more, the Dark One could break free. Even you can't face the Dark One! I mean, I know the Prophecies say you will, but that has to be just a way of speaking." Even Logain looked concerned, his eyes studying Rand as if measuring him against the Dark One.

ɹænd lin bæk ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ, kɛɹfəl nɑt tə lɛɾ ɪz taɪɹədnəs ʃoʊ. ðə silz ɑn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən ɑn wʌn hænd, teɪm splɪɾɪŋ ði æʃəmən ɑn ði ʌðɝ. wɑz ðə sɛvənθ sil ɔlɹɛɾi bɹoʊkən?

Rand leaned back in his chair, careful not to let his tiredness show. The seals on the Dark One's prison on one hand, Taim splitting the Asha'man on the other. Was the seventh seal already broken?

wɑz ðə ʃædoʊ bɪɡɪnɪŋ ði oʊpənɪŋ muvz ə ðə læs bæɾəl? "ju toʊl mi sʌmθɪŋ wʌns, bæʃɪɹ. ɪf jəɹ ɛnəmi ɔfɝz jə tu tɑɹɡəts. . . . "

Was the Shadow beginning the opening moves of the Last Battle? "You told me something once, Bashere. If your enemy offers you two targets. . . . "

"stʃɹaɪk əɾ ə θɝd," bæʃɪɹ fɪnɪʃt pɹɑmpli, ən ɹænd nɑɾəd. hi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi dɪsaɪɾɪd, ɛniweɪ. θʌndɝ ɹæɾəld ðə wɪndoʊz tɪl ðə keɪsməns ʃʊk. ðə stɔɹm wɑz stʃɹɛŋθənɪŋ. "aɪ kæn faɪt ðə ʃædoʊ ən ðə sintʃæn ət ðə seɪm taɪm. aɪm sɛndɪŋ ðə θɹi ʌv jə tə ɝeɪnʒ ə tʃɹus wɪð ðə sintʃæn." bæʃɪɹ ən lɑɡən sim stʌn ɪndə saɪləns. əntɪl ðeɪ bɪɡæn tə ɑɹɡju, wʌn ɑn tɑp ə ði ʌðɝ. lɔɪəl dʒʌs lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə feɪnt.

"Strike at a third," Bashere finished promptly, and Rand nodded. He had already decided, anyway. Thunder rattled the windows till the casements shook. The storm was strengthening. "I can't fight the Shadow and the Seanchan at the same time. I am sending the three of you to arrange a truce with the Seanchan." Bashere and Logain seemed stunned into silence. Until they began to argue, one on top of the other. Loial just looked ready to faint.

ɛlzə fɪdʒəɾɪd, lɪsnɪŋ tə fɝəl ɹipɔɹt wʌt hæɾ əkɝd sɪns ʃi lɛft ɪm ɪn kɛɹhin. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə mænz hɑɹʃ vɔɪs ðəɾ ɪɹəteɪɾəd hɝ. ʃi heɪɾəd laɪtnɪŋ, ən wɪʃt ʃi kəd wɔɹɾ əweɪ ðə vaɪələn laɪts flæʃɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz əz ʃi hæd wɔɹɾɪd əɹ ɹum əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ. noʊ wʌn wəd θɪŋk əɹ wɪʃ fəɹ pɹaɪvəsi stʃɹeɪnʒ, sɪns ʃi hæd spɛn twɛnti jɪɹz kənvɪnsɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn ðət ʃi wɑz mɛɹid tə ðə peɪl-hɛɹd mæn. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz vɔɪs, fɝəl lʊk ðə sɔɹɾ ə wʊmən wəd mɛɹi, tɔl ən lin ən kwaɪt pɹɪɾi. ðə hɑɹɾ ɛdʒ tə hɪz maʊθ oʊnli meɪɾ ɪz feɪs mɔɹ soʊ, ɹɪli. ʌv kɔɹs, səm maɪt θɪŋk ɪt pəkjuljɝ ðət ʃi hæd nɛvɝ hæd mɔɹ ðən wʌn wɔɹɾɝ əɾ ə taɪm, ɪf ðeɪ stɑp tə θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt. ə mæn wɪð dʒʌs ðə ɹaɪt kwɑləfəkeɪʃənz wɑz dɪfəkəl tə faɪnd, bʌt pɝhæps ʃi ʃəd stɑɹt lʊkɪŋ. laɪtnɪŋ lɪɾ ʌp ðə wɪndoʊz əɡɛn.

Elza fidgeted, listening to Fearil report what had occurred since she left him in Cairhien. It was not the man's harsh voice that irritated her. She hated lightning, and wished she could ward away the violent lights flashing in the windows as she had warded her room against eavesdropping. No one would think her wish for privacy strange, since she had spent twenty years convincing everyone that she was married to the pale-haired man. Despite his voice, Fearil looked the sort a woman would marry, tall and lean and quite pretty. The hard edge to his mouth only made his face more so, really. Of course, some might think it peculiar that she had never had more than one Warder at a time, if they stopped to think about it. A man with just the right qualifications was difficult to find, but perhaps she should start looking. Lightning lit up the windows again.

"jɛs, jɛs, ɪnʌf," ʃi bɹoʊk ɪn faɪnəli. "ju dɪd ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ, fɝəl. ɪt wʊɾə bɪn teɪkən əz ɑɾ ɪf jə wɝ ði oʊnli wʌn tə ɹəfjuz tə faɪn jəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ." ə sɛns ə ɹɪlif flæʃt θɹu ðə bɑnd. ʃi wɑz stʃɹɪkt əbaʊɾ oʊbiɾiəns tə hɝ ɔɹɾɝz, ən waɪl i nu ʃi kəd nɑt kɪl ɪm -  wəd nɑt, ət list - pʌnɪʃmən oʊnli ɹikwaɪɝɾ əɹ tə mæsk ðə bɑn soʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt ʃɛɹ ɪz peɪn. ðæt, ən ə wɔɹd tə mʌfəl ɪz skɹimz. ʃi dɪslaɪk skɹimɪŋ ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi dɪslaɪk laɪtnɪŋ. "ɪɾ ɪz dʒʌst əz wɛl jəɹ wɪð mi," ʃi wɛn ɑn. ə pɪɾi ðət ði il sævədʒəz wɝ stɪl hoʊldɪŋ fɛɹə, ðoʊ ʃi wəɾ əv tə kwɪz ðə waɪɾ ɑn ɪɡzækli waɪ ʃi hæd swɔɹn bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd bi tʃɹʌstɪd. əntɪl ðə dʒɝni tə kɛɹhin, ʃi hæd nɑt noʊn ʃi ʃɛɹɾ ɛniθɪŋ wɪð fɛɹə. ə vɛɹi ɡɹeɪt pɪɾi ðət nʌn ə hɝ oʊn hɑɹt wɑz wɪð hɝ, bʌɾ oʊnli ʃi hæd bɪn sɛn tə kɛɹhin, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt kwɛstʃən ði ɔɹɾɝz ʃi ɹəsivd ɛni mɔɹ ðən fɝəl kwɛstʃən ðoʊz ʃi ɡeɪv. "aɪ θɪŋk ə fju pipəl ɑɹ gɑnə hæv tə daɪ sun." əz sun əz ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd wɪtʃ wʌnz. fɝəl baʊɾ ɪz hɛd, ən ə dʒoʊlt ə plɛʒɝ keɪm θɹu ðə bɑnd. hi dɪd laɪk kɪlɪŋ. "ɪn ðə minwaɪl, jəl kɪl ɛniwʌn u θɹɛɾənz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

"Yes, yes, enough," she broke in finally. "You did the right thing, Fearil. It would have been taken as odd if you were the only one to refuse to find your Aes Sedai." A sense of relief flashed through the bond. She was strict about obedience to her orders, and while he knew she could not kill him -  would not, at least - punishment only required her to mask the bond so she did not share his pain. That, and a ward to muffle his screams. She disliked screaming almost as much as she disliked lightning. "It is just as well you're with me," she went on. A pity that the Aiel savages were still holding Fera, though she would have to quiz the White on exactly why she had sworn before she could be trusted. Until the journey to Cairhien, she had not known she shared anything with Fera. A very great pity that none of her own heart was with her, but only she had been sent to Cairhien, and she did not question the orders she received any more than Fearil questioned those she gave. "I think a few people are going to have to die soon." As soon as she decided which ones. Fearil bowed his head, and a jolt of pleasure came through the bond. He did like killing. "In the meanwhile, you will kill anyone who threatens the Dragon Reborn.

ɛniwʌn." æftɝ ɔl, ɪt hæd bɪkʌm pɝfəkli klɪɹ tə hɝ, waɪl ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz ə kæptɪv ə ðə sævədʒəz.

Anyone." After all, it had become perfectly clear to her, while she herself was a captive of the savages.

ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hæd tə ɹitʃ tɑɹmən ɡdən, əɹ haʊ kəd ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd dɪfiɾ ɪm ðɛɹ?

The Dragon Reborn had to reach Tarmon Gai'don, or how could the Great Lord defeat him there?

tʃæptɝ twɛntifaɪv

CHAPTER 25

wən tə wɛɹ dʒuəlz pɛɹɪn stʃɹoʊɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli ʌp ən daʊn ðə flaʊɝd kɑɹpəts ðət flɔɹd ðə tɛnt, ʃɹʌɡɪŋ wɪð dɪskʌmfɝɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk ɡɹin sɪlk koʊɾ i hæd sɛldəm wɔɹn sɪns feɪl hæd hæɾ ɪt meɪd. ʃi sɛd ði ɪlæbɹət sɪlvɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi suɾəd ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, bʌt ðə waɪd lɛðɝ bɛl səpɔɹɾɪŋ ɪz æks əɾ ɪz saɪd, ðə wʌn əz pleɪn əz ði ʌðɝ, oʊnli pɔɪntəɾ ʌp ðəɾ i wɑz ə ful pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi mɔɹ ðən i wɑz.

When to Wear Jewels Perrin strode impatiently up and down the flowered carpets that floored the tent, shrugging with discomfort in the dark green silk coat he had seldom worn since Faile had had it made. She said the elaborate silver embroidery suited his shoulders, but the wide leather belt supporting his axe at his side, the one as plain as the other, only pointed up that he was a fool pretending to be more than he was.

səmtaɪmz i tʌɡd ɪz ɡɔnləts taɪɾɝ, əɹ ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɪz fɝ-laɪn kloʊk, laɪɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə bæk ʌv ə tʃɛɹ ɹɛɾi fəɹ ɪm tə pʊɾ ɑn. twaɪs, hi pʊld ə ʃiɾ ə peɪpɝ fɹəm ɪz sliv ən ənfoʊldəɾ ɪt tə stʌɾi ðə skɛtʃt mæp ə meɪɾən waɪl i peɪst. ðət wɑz ðə taʊn wɛɹ feɪl wɑz biɪŋ hɛld. dʒɑndɪn ən ɡɛɾ ən hu hæd kɑɾ ʌp tə ðə fliɪŋ ɪnhæbəɾənts ə meɪɾən, bʌt ði oʊnli jusfəl θɪŋ ðeɪ hæd ɡɑɾən wɑz ðɪs mæp, ən meɪkɪŋ ɛniwʌn pɔz lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə pɹəvaɪd ðət hæd bɪn ə tʃɔɹ. ðoʊz stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə faɪt wɝ dɛɾ əɹ wɛɹɪŋ ɡeɪʃeɪn waɪt fəɹ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ; ðoʊz u ɹɪmeɪn tə fli wɝ ði oʊld ən ðə vɛɹi jʌŋ, ðə sɪk ən ðə leɪm. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə dʒɑndɪn, ðə θɔt ðət sʌmwʌn maɪt fɔɹs əm tə ɹɪtɝn ən faɪt ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hæd kwɪkən ðɛɹ stɛps nɔɹθ təwɔɹɾ ændɝ ən seɪfti. ðə mæp wɑz ə pʌzəl, wɪð ɪts meɪz ə stʃɹits ən ðə leɪɾiz fɔɹtʃɹəs ən ðə ɡɹeɪt sɪstɝn ɪn ðə nɔɹθis kɔɹnɝ. ɪt tæntəlaɪzd ɪm wɪð pɑsəbɪləɾiz. bʌt ðeɪ wɝ pɑsəbɪləɾiz oʊnli ɪf i faʊn ə səluʃən tə ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ pʌzəl ðət wɑz nɑt ʃoʊn ɑn ðə mæp, ðə hjudʒ mæs ə ʃeɪɾoʊ sɝaʊndɪŋ ðə wɔl taʊn, nɑt tə mɛnʃən fɔɹ əɹ faɪv hʌnʒɹəd ʃeɪɾoʊ waɪz wʌnz u kəd tʃænəl. soʊ ðə mæp wɛn bæk ɪndə hɪz sliv, ən i kəntɪnjud tə peɪs. ðə ɹɛd-stʃɹaɪp tɛn ɪtsɛlf meɪɾ ɪm tʃeɪf əz mʌtʃ əz ðə mæp, ən soʊ dɪd ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz, ðə ɡɪlt-ɛdʒ tʃɛɹz ðət foʊldəd fəɹ stɔɹədʒ ən ðə moʊzeɪɪk-tɑp teɪbəl ðət dɪd nɑt, ðə stænd-mɪɹɝ ən ðə mɪɹɝd wɑʃstæn ən ivən ðə bɹæs-baʊn tʃɛsts stændɪŋ ɪn ə ɹoʊ əlɔŋ ən aʊɾɝ wɔl. ɪt wɑz bɛɹli laɪɾ aʊtsaɪd, ən ɔl twɛlv ə ðə læmps wɝ lɪt, mɪɹɝz spɑɹklɪŋ.

Sometimes he tugged his gauntlets tighter, or glared at his fur-lined cloak, lying across the back of a chair ready for him to put on. Twice, he pulled a sheet of paper from his sleeve and unfolded it to study the sketched map of Maiden while he paced. That was the town where Faile was being held. Jondyn and Get and Hu had caught up to the fleeing inhabitants of Maiden, but the only useful thing they had gotten was this map, and making anyone pause long enough to provide that had been a chore. Those strong enough to fight were dead or wearing gai'shain white for the Shaido; those who remained to flee were the old and the very young, the sick and the lame. According to Jondyn, the thought that someone might force them to return and fight the Shaido had quickened their steps north toward Andor and safety. The map was a puzzle, with its maze of streets and the lady's fortress and the great cistern in the northeast corner. It tantalized him with possibilities. But they were possibilities only if he found a solution to the greater puzzle that was not shown on the map, the huge mass of Shaido surrounding the walled town, not to mention four or five hundred Shaido Wise Ones who could channel. So the map went back into his sleeve, and he continued to pace. The red-striped tent itself made him chafe as much as the map, and so did the furnishings, the gilt-edged chairs that folded for storage and the mosaic-topped table that did not, the stand-mirror and the mirrored washstand and even the brass-bound chests standing in a row along an outer wall. It was barely light outside, and all twelve of the lamps were lit, mirrors sparkling.

ðə bɹeɪʒɝz ðət hæd hɛld ɔf ðə naɪts fɹizɪŋ koʊl stɪl kənteɪn ə fju ɛmbɝz. hi hæɾ ivən hæd feɪlz tu sɪlk hæŋʒɪŋz, wɝkt wɪð laɪnz ə bɝdz ən flaʊɝz, bɹɔɾ aʊɾ ən hʌŋ fɹəm ðə ɹuf poʊlz. hi hæd lɛt læmɡwɪn tʃɹɪm ɪz bɪɹɾ ən ʃeɪv ɪz tʃiks ən nɛk; hi hæd wɑʃt ən dɑn klin kloʊðz. hi hæd hæd ðə tɛn sɛɾ ʌp əz ɪf feɪl wɝ gɑnə ɹɪtɝn ɛni moʊmən fɹəm ə ɹaɪd. ɔl soʊ ɛvɹiwʌn wəd lʊk əɾ ɪm ən si ə blʌɾi lɔɹd, lʊk əɾ ɪm ən fil kɑnfəɾənt. ən ɛvɹi bɪɾ ʌv ɪt ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ðət feɪl wɑz nɑɾ aʊt ɹaɪɾɪŋ. tʌɡɪŋ ɔf wʌn ə hɪz ɡɔnləts, hi fɛlt ɪn ɪz koʊt pɑkəɾ ən ɹæn ɪz fɪŋɡɝz əlɔŋ ðə ɹɔhaɪd kɔɹd tʌkt ɪn ðɛɹ. θɝɾi-tu nɑts, naʊ. hi dɪd nɑt nid ɹimaɪndɪŋ ə ðæt, bʌt səmtaɪmz i leɪ əweɪk ə hoʊl naɪɾ ɪn ðə bɛɾɪŋ ðət dɪd nɑɾ əv feɪl ɪn ɪt, kaʊntɪŋ ðoʊz nɑts. sʌmhaʊ, ðeɪ hæd bɪkʌm ə kənɛkʃən tə hɝ. ɛniweɪ, weɪkfəlnəs wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən naɪtmɛɹz.

The braziers that had held off the night's freezing cold still contained a few embers. He had even had Faile's two silk hangings, worked with lines of birds and flowers, brought out and hung from the roof poles. He had let Lamgwin trim his beard and shave his cheeks and neck; he had washed and donned clean clothes. He had had the tent set up as if Faile were going to return any moment from a ride. All so everyone would look at him and see a bloody lord, look at him and feel confident. And every bit of it reminded him that Faile was not out riding. Tugging off one of his gauntlets, he felt in his coat pocket and ran his fingers along the rawhide cord tucked in there. Thirty-two knots, now. He did not need reminding of that, but sometimes he lay awake a whole night in the bedding that did not have Faile in it, counting those knots. Somehow, they had become a connection to her. Anyway, wakefulness was better than nightmares.

"ɪf jə doʊn sɪt daʊn, jə ɑɹ gɑnə bi tu taɪɝd tə ɹaɪd tə soʊ hæbɝ ivən wɪð nilz hɛlp," bɹəleɪn sɛd, saʊndɪŋ feɪnli əmjuzd. "dʒʌst wɑtʃɪŋ jə ɪz ɪɡzɔstɪŋ mi." hi mænədʒ nɑt tə ɡlɛɹ ət hɝ. ɪn ə dɑɹk blu sɪlk ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs, ə waɪd ɡoʊldən nɛkləs stʌɾɪd wɪð faɪɝdʒɹɑps taɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk ən ðə nɛɹoʊ kɹaʊn ə min hoʊldɪŋ ə ɡoʊldən hɔk ɪn flaɪɾ əbʌv əɹ bɹaʊz, ðə fɝst ə min wɑz siɾəd ətɑp əɹ kɹɪmzən kloʊk ɑn wʌn ə ðə foʊldɪŋ tʃɛɹz wɪð əɹ hænz foʊldəɾ ɝaʊn ɹɛd ɡlʌvz ɪn əɹ læp. ʃi lʊkt əz kəmpoʊzd əz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ʃi smɛld . . . peɪʃənt. hi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ʃi hæd stɑp smɛlɪŋ əz ɪf i wɝ ə fæt læm kɑɾ ɪn bɹæmbəlz fəɹ əɹ mil, bʌɾ i ɔlmoʊs fɛlt ɡɹeɪtfəl tə hɝ. ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə hæv sʌmwʌn i kəd tɔk tə əbaʊt mɪsɪŋ feɪl. ʃi lɪsənd, ən smɛld ə sɪmpəθi.

"If you don't sit down, you are going to be too tired to ride to So Habor even with Neald's help," Berelain said, sounding faintly amused. "Just watching you is exhausting me." He managed not to glare at her. In a dark blue silk riding dress, a wide golden necklace studded with firedrops tight around her neck and the narrow crown of Mayene holding a golden hawk in flight above her brows, the First of Mayene was seated atop her crimson cloak on one of the folding chairs with her hands folded around red gloves in her lap. She looked as composed as an Aes Sedai, and she smelled . . . patient. He did not understand why she had stopped smelling as if he were a fat lamb caught in brambles for her meal, but he almost felt grateful to her. It was good to have someone he could talk to about missing Faile. She listened, and smelled of sympathy.

"aɪ wɑnə bi hɪɹ ɪf. . . wən ɡɔl ən ðə meɪɾənz bɹɪŋ ɪn səm pɹɪznɝz." ðə slɪp meɪɾ ɪm ɡɹɪmɑs əz mʌtʃ əz ðə dɪleɪ. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf i daʊɾɪd. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ðeɪ wəd kæptʃɝ səm ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, jɛɾ əpɛɹənli ðət wɑz noʊ izi mæɾɝ. teɪkɪŋ pɹɪznɝz dɪd noʊ ɡʊɾ ənlɛs ðeɪ kəd bi bɹɔɾ əweɪ, ən ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ oʊnli kɛɹləs kəmpɛɹd tə ʌðɝ il. səlɪn hæd bɪn peɪʃənt, tu, ɪkspleɪnɪŋ ɪt tə hɪm. ɪt wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd fəɹ ɪm tə bi peɪʃənt, ðoʊ. "wʌts kipɪŋ ɑɹɡændə?" hi ɡɹaʊld. əz ɪf ðə ɡildænɪnz neɪm hæd sʌmən ɪm ət læst, ɑɹɡændə pʊʃt θɹu ði ɛntʃɹi flæps, hɪz feɪs laɪk stoʊn ən ɪz aɪz sʌŋkən. hi lʊkt əz ðoʊ hi slɛpt əz lɪɾəl əz pɛɹɪn. ðə ʃɔɹt mæn wɔɹ ɪz sɪlvɝi bɹɛstpleɪt, bʌt noʊ hɛlmət. hi hæd nɑt ʃeɪv jɛt ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ən ɡɹeɪɪŋ stʌbəl ɡɹɪzəld ɪz tʃɪn. dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm wʌn ɡɔntələɾəd hænd, ə fæt lɛðɝ pɝs klɪŋkt əz i sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl əlɔŋsaɪd tu ɔlɹɛɾi ðɛɹ. "fɹʌm ðə kwinz stʃɹɔŋbɑks," hi sɛd saʊɝli. hi hæd sɛd lɪɾəl ðə læs tɛn deɪz ðət wɑz nɑt saʊɝ. "ɪnʌf tə kʌvɝ əɹ ʃɛɹ ən mɔɹ. aɪ hæd tə bɹeɪk oʊpən ðə lɑk ən pʊt θɹi mɛn tə ɡɑɹd ðə tʃɛst. ɪts ə tɛmteɪʃən tə ðə bɛst ə ðɛm, wɪð ðə lɑk bɹoʊkən." "ɡʊd, ɡʊd," pɛɹɪn sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə saʊn tu ɪmpeɪʃənt. hi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wɛðɝ ɑɹɡændə hæd tə sɛɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd mɛn ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɪz kwinz stʃɹɔŋbɑks. hɪz oʊn pɝs wɑz ðə smɔləst ə ðə θɹi, ən i hæd ɡlin ɛvɹi bɪɾ ʌv ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ i kəd faɪn tə meɪk ɪɾ ʌp. slɪŋɪŋ ɪz kloʊk ɝaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, hi pɪkt ʌp ðə pɝsɪz ən bɹʌʃt pæs ðə mæn aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɡɹeɪ mɔɹnɪŋ. tə hɪz dɪsɡʌst, ðə kæmp hæd teɪkən ə mɔɹ pɝmənən ɛɹ, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz nɑt baɪ dɪzaɪn, ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ i kəd də əbaʊɾ ɪt.

"I want to be here if. . . when Gaul and the Maidens bring in some prisoners." The slip made him grimace as much as the delay. It was as if he doubted. Sooner or later they would capture some of the Shaido, yet apparently that was no easy matter. Taking prisoners did no good unless they could be brought away, and the Shaido were only careless compared to other Aiel. Sulin had been patient, too, explaining it to him. It was getting so hard for him to be patient, though. "What's keeping Arganda?" he growled. As if the Ghealdanin's name had summoned him at last, Arganda pushed through the entry flaps, his face like stone and his eyes sunken. He looked as though he slept as little as Perrin. The short man wore his silvery breastplate, but no helmet. He had not shaved yet this morning, and graying stubble grizzled his chin. Dangling from one gauntleted hand, a fat leather purse clinked as he set it on the table alongside two already there. "From the Queen's strongbox," he said sourly. He had said little the last ten days that was not sour. "Enough to cover our share and more. I had to break open the lock and put three men to guard the chest. It's a temptation to the best of them, with the lock broken." "Good, good," Perrin said, trying not to sound too impatient. He did not care whether Arganda had to set a hundred men guarding his queen's strongbox. His own purse was the smallest of the three, and he had gleaned every bit of gold or silver he could find to make it up. Slinging his cloak around his shoulders, he picked up the purses and brushed past the man out into the gray morning. To his disgust, the camp had taken a more permanent air, though it was not by design, and there was nothing he could do about it.

mɛni ʌv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn slɛpt ʌndɝ tɛns naʊ, peɪl bɹaʊn pætʃt kænvəs ɹæðɝ ðən stʃɹaɪpt ɹɛd laɪk hɪz, bʌt bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ eɪɾ əɹ tɛn mɛn itʃ, wɪð ðɛɹ ɪl-əsɔɹɾɪd pɑlɹmz stækt ət ðə fɹʌnt, ən ði ʌðɝz hæd tɝn ðɛɹ tɛmpɝɛɹi bɹʌʃ ʃɛltɝz ɪndə stɝɾi lɪɾəl hʌts ʌv woʊvən ɛvɝɡɹin bɹæntʃəz. ðə tɛns ən hʌts meɪɾ ət bɛs miændɝɪŋ ɹoʊz, nɑɾ əɾ ɔl laɪk ðə ɹɪdʒəd laɪnz sin əmʌŋ ðə ɡildænɪn ən minɝz, jɛɾ ɪt stɪl lʊkt ə lɪɾəl laɪk ə vɪlədʒ, wɪð pæðz ən leɪnz θɹu ðə snoʊ tʃɹæmpəl daʊn tə bɛɹ, fɹoʊzən ɝθ. ə nit stoʊn faɪɝ-ɹɪŋ sɝaʊndəɾ itʃ ə ðə kʊkfaɪɝz, wɛɹ klʌstɝz ə mɛn stʊd kloʊkt ən hʊɾɪd əɡɛns ðə koʊld, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðɛɹ bɹɛkfəst. ɪt wɑz wʌt wɑz ɪn ðoʊz blæk aɪɝn kʊkpɑts ðət hæd pɛɹɪn muvɪŋ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. wɪð soʊ mɛni mɛn hʌntɪŋ, ɡeɪm wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ θɪn ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ aʊt. ðeɪ wɝ daʊn tə sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ skwɝəlz' hɔɹdz ʌv eɪkɔɹnz tə ɡɹaɪn fəɹ stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ ði oʊtmil, ən ðɪs leɪɾ ɪn ðə wɪntɝ, wʌt ðeɪ faʊnd wɝ oʊld ən dʒɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ət bɛst. ðə saʊɝ mɪkstʃɝ fɪl ðə bɛli æftɝ ə fæʃən, bʌt jə hæd tə bi hʌŋɡɹi tə ɡɛɾ ɪt daʊn. moʊst ə ðə feɪsəz pɛɹɪn kəd si wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ðə kʊkpɑts iɡɝli. ðə læst ə ðə kɑɹts wɝ ɹætlɪŋ ðoʊ ə ɡæp meɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹɪŋ ə ʃɑɹpən steɪks ɝaʊn ðə kæmp, ðə kɛɹhinɪn dʒɹaɪvɝz swɑð tə ðɛɹ ɪɹz ən hʌntʃt ɑn ðɛɹ sits laɪk dɑɹk sæks ʌv wʊl. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðə kɑɹts hæd hɛld wɑz stækt ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə kæmp. ɛmpti, ðeɪ lɝtʃt ɪn ðə ɹʌts lɛf baɪ ðə kɑɹts əhɛd, ə sɪŋɡəl faɪl dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ fɔɹəst. pɛɹɪnz əpɪɹəns wɪð bɹəleɪn ən ɑɹɡændə əɾ ɪz hilz kɑzd ə stɝ, ɔlðoʊ nɑɾ əmʌŋ ðə hʌŋɡɹi tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn. oʊ, ə fju meɪd kɔʃəs nɑdz ɪn ɪz dɝɛkʃən - wʌn əɹ tu fulz ɡeɪv ɹʌf baʊz! - bʌt moʊst stɪl tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lʊk əɾ ɪm wən bɹəleɪn wɑz ɪn ðə vəsɪnəɾi. ɪɾiəts. stoʊn-bɹeɪn ɪɾiəts! ðəɹ wɝ plɛnti ʌv ʌðɝ pipəl, ðoʊ, ɡæðɝɾ ə lɪɾəl weɪ fɹəm ðə ɹɛd-stʃɹaɪp tɛnt, kɹaʊɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə leɪnz bɪtwin ði ʌðɝ tɛns.

Many of the Two Rivers men slept under tents now, pale brown patched canvas rather than striped red like his, but big enough for eight or ten men each, with their ill-assorted polearms stacked at the front, and the others had turned their temporary brush shelters into sturdy little huts of woven evergreen branches. The tents and huts made at best meandering rows, not at all like the rigid lines seen among the Ghealdanin and Mayeners, yet it still looked a little like a village, with paths and lanes through the snow trampled down to bare, frozen earth. A neat stone fire-ring surrounded each of the cookfires, where clusters of men stood cloaked and hooded against the cold, waiting for their breakfast. It was what was in those black iron cookpots that had Perrin moving this morning. With so many men hunting, game was growing thin on the ground, and everything else was running out. They were down to searching for squirrels' hoards of acorns to grind for stretching the oatmeal, and this late in the winter, what they found were old and dried out at best. The sour mixture filled the belly after a fashion, but you had to be hungry to get it down. Most of the faces Perrin could see were watching the cookpots eagerly. The last of the carts were rattling though a gap made in the ring of sharpened stakes around the camp, the Cairhienin drivers swathed to their ears and hunched on their seats like dark sacks of wool. Everything the carts had held was stacked in the center of the camp. Empty, they lurched in the ruts left by the carts ahead, a single file disappearing into the surrounding forest. Perrin's appearance with Berelain and Arganda at his heels caused a stir, although not among the hungry Two Rivers men. Oh, a few made cautious nods in his direction - one or two fools gave rough bows! - but most still tried not to look at him when Berelain was in the vicinity. Idiots. Stone-brained idiots! There were plenty of other people, though, gathered a little way from the red-striped tent, crowding into the lanes between the other tents.

ən ənɑɹmɝd minɝ soʊlʒɝ ɪn ə ɡɹeɪ koʊt keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ wɪð bɹəleɪnz waɪt mɛɹ, boʊɪŋ ən bɛndɪŋ tə hoʊld əɹ stɝəp.

An unarmored Mayener soldier in a gray coat came running with Berelain's white mare, bowing and bending to hold her stirrup.

ənʊɹə wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ʌp ɑn ə slik mɛɹ ɔlmoʊst əz dɑɹk əz bɹəleɪnz maʊnt wɑz peɪl. θɪn biɾɪd bɹeɪdz hæŋɪŋ daʊn əɹ tʃɛs fɹəm ðə kaʊl ə hɝ kloʊk, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ bɛɹli sim tə noʊɾəs ðə wʊmən ʃi wɑz səpoʊz tə ædvaɪz. bæk stɪf, ʃi pɪɹd fɪksədli təwɔɹd ðə loʊ il tɛns, wɛɹ nʌθɪŋ muv bʌt ðə θɪn weɪvɝɪŋ laɪnz ə smoʊk ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə smoʊk hoʊlz. wʌn aɪd ɡælɛn, ɪn ɪz ɹɛd hɛlməɾ ən bɹɛstpleɪɾ ən aɪpætʃ, meɪɾ ʌp fəɹ ðə tæɹɑbənɝ sɪstɝz ɪnətɛntʃən, ðoʊ. əz sun əz bɹəleɪn əpɪɹd, hi bɑɹkt ən ɔɹɾɝ ðət stɪfən fɪfti ʌv ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz tə stætʃuz, lɔŋ, ɹɛd-stʃɹimɝd stil-tɪp lænsɪz əpɹaɪɾ ət ðɛɹ saɪdz, ən wən ʃi maʊntəd, ɡælɛn snæpt ənʌðɝ kəmæn ðət pʊɾ əm ɑn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz soʊ smuðli ðeɪ sim tə muv əz wʌn.

Annoura was already up on a sleek mare almost as dark as Berelain's mount was pale. Thin beaded braids hanging down her chest from the cowl of her cloak, the Aes Sedai barely seemed to notice the woman she was supposed to advise. Back stiff, she peered fixedly toward the low Aiel tents, where nothing moved but the thin wavering lines of smoke rising from the smoke holes. One eyed Gallenne, in his red helmet and breastplate and eyepatch, made up for the Taraboner sister's inattention, though. As soon as Berelain appeared, he barked an order that stiffened fifty of the Winged Guards to statues, long, red-streamered steel-tipped lances upright at their sides, and when she mounted, Gallenne snapped another command that put them on their horses so smoothly they seemed to move as one.

ɑɹɡændə dɝɛktəɾ ə fɹaʊn təwɔɹd ði il tɛns, fɹaʊn ət ðə minɝz, ðən stɔkt oʊvɝ tə wɛɹ əz mɛni ɡildænɪn lænsɝz weɪɾəd, ɪn ʃaɪnɪŋ ɑɹmɝ ən kɑnɪkəl ɡɹin hɛlməts, ən spoʊk sɔfli tə ðə fɛloʊ hu wəd bi kəmændɪŋ ðɛm, ə lin mæn neɪm kaɪɹən u pɛɹɪn səspɛktəd wɑz nɑbli bɔɹn fɹəm ðə hɔɾi ɡeɪz vɪzəbəl bɪhaɪn ðə feɪs-bɑɹz ə hɪz sɪlvɝd hɛlmət. ɑɹɡændə wɑz ʃɔɹɾ ɪnʌf ðət kaɪɹən hæd tə bɛn tə lɪsən tə wʌɾ i hæd tə seɪ, ən ðə nəsɛsəɾi fɹɔstəd ðə tɔlɝ mænz feɪs ivən mɔɹ. wʌn ə ðə mɛn bɪhaɪn kaɪɹən wɑz kæɹiɪŋ ə stæf wɪð ə ɹɛd bænɝ bɛɹɪŋ ðə θɹi sɪks-pɔɪntəd sɪlvɝ stɑɹz ʌv ɡildən ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə ɡɹin-stʃɹimɝd læns, ən wʌn ə ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz kæɹid minz ɡoʊldən hɔk ɑn blu. ɛɹæm wɑz ðɛɹ, tu, ðoʊ ɔf tə wʌn saɪɾ ən nɑt ɹɛɾi tə ɹaɪd. ɹæpt ɪn ɪz pjutʃɹɪd ɡɹin kloʊk, sɔɹd hɪlt ɹaɪzɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, hi ʃɛɹɾ ɪz dʒɛləs skaʊlz bɪtwin ðə minɝz ən ðə ɡildænɪn. wən i sɔ pɛɹɪn, ðə mænz skaʊl tɝn sʌlən, ən i hɝiɾ ɔf, blʌndɝɪŋ θɹu ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðɛɹ bɹɛkfəst. hi dɪd nɑt pɔz tə ɔfɝ əpɑlədʒiz wən i bʌmp sʌmwʌn. ɛɹæm hæd ɡɹoʊn ɪnkɹisɪŋli tʌtʃi, snæpɪŋ ən snɪɹɪŋ əɾ ɛvɹiwʌn bʌt pɛɹɪn əz ðə deɪz pæst ən ðeɪ sæɾ ən weɪɾəd. jɛstɝdeɪ, hi hæɾ ɔlmoʊs kʌm tə bloʊz wɪð ə pɛɹ ʌv ɡildænɪn oʊvɝ sʌmθɪŋ nʌn ə ðɛm kəd kwaɪt ɹikɔl wʌns ðeɪ wɝ sɛpɝeɪɾəd, ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɛɹæm sɛd ðə ɡildænɪn hæd noʊ ɹɪspɛkt ən ðeɪ sɛɾ i hæɾ ə bæd maʊθ. ðət wɑz waɪ ðə fɔɹmɝ tɪŋkɝ wɑz steɪɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. θɪŋz wɝ laɪkli tə bi tʌtʃi ɪnʌf ɪn soʊ hæbɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɛɹæm stɑɹɾɪŋ ə faɪt wən pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt lʊkɪŋ. "kip ən aɪ ɑn ɛɹæm," hi sɛd kwaɪətli wən dænɪl bɹɔɾ ʌp ɪz beɪ. "æn kip ə kloʊs aɪ ɑn ɑɹɡændə," hi æɾəd, stʌfɪŋ ðə pɝsɪz ɪndə hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz ən bʌklɪŋ ðə flæps daʊn taɪt. ðə weɪɾ ə bɹəleɪnz kɑntʃɹəbjuʃən bælənst ɪz ən ɑɹɡændəz təɡɛðɝ vɛɹi naɪsli. wɛl, ʃi hæd kɑz tə bi dʒɛnɝəs. hɝ mɛn wɝ əz hʌŋɡɹi əz ɛniwʌn ɛls. "ɑɹɡændə lʊks ə mæn ɹɛɾi tə də sʌmθɪŋ stupəd, tə mi." steɪɝ fɹɪskt ə lɪɾəl ən tɔst ɪz hɛɾ əz pɛɹɪn tʊk ðə ɹeɪnz, bʌt ðə stæljən sɛɾəld kwɪkli ʌndɝ ə fɝm, dʒɛntəl hænd.

Arganda directed a frown toward the Aiel tents, frowned at the Mayeners, then stalked over to where as many Ghealdanin lancers waited, in shining armor and conical green helmets, and spoke softly to the fellow who would be commanding them, a lean man named Kireyin who Perrin suspected was nobly born from the haughty gaze visible behind the face-bars of his silvered helmet. Arganda was short enough that Kireyin had to bend to listen to what he had to say, and the necessity frosted the taller man's face even more. One of the men behind Kireyin was carrying a staff with a red banner bearing the three six-pointed Silver Stars of Ghealdan instead of a green-streamered lance, and one of the Winged Guards carried Mayene's Golden Hawk on blue. Aram was there, too, though off to one side and not ready to ride. Wrapped in his putrid green cloak, sword hilt rising behind his shoulder, he shared his jealous scowls between the Mayeners and the Ghealdanin. When he saw Perrin, the man's scowl turned sullen, and he hurried off, blundering through the Two Rivers men waiting for their breakfast. He did not pause to offer apologies when he bumped someone. Aram had grown increasingly touchy, snapping and sneering at everyone but Perrin as the days passed and they sat and waited. Yesterday, he had almost come to blows with a pair of Ghealdanin over something none of them could quite recall once they were separated, except that Aram said the Ghealdanin had no respect and they said he had a bad mouth. That was why the former Tinker was staying behind this morning. Things were likely to be touchy enough in So Habor without Aram starting a fight when Perrin was not looking. "Keep an eye on Aram," he said quietly when Dannil brought up his bay. "And keep a close eye on Arganda," he added, stuffing the purses into his saddlebags and buckling the flaps down tight. The weight of Berelain's contribution balanced his and Arganda's together very nicely. Well, she had cause to be generous. Her men were as hungry as anyone else. "Arganda looks a man ready to do something stupid, to me." Stayer frisked a little and tossed his head as Perrin took the reins, but the stallion settled quickly under a firm, gentle hand.

dænɪl ɹʌbd ɪz tʌsk-laɪk mʌstæʃɪz wɪð ə koʊld-ɹɛɾənd nʌkəl ən aɪɾ ɑɹɡændə saɪdweɪz, ðən ɛksheɪl hɛvəli ɪn ə mɪst. "aɪl wɑtʃ hɪm, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," hi mʌɾɝd, ɡɪvɪŋ ɪz kloʊk ə hɪtʃ, "bʌt noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt jə sɛɾ əbaʊt mi biɪŋ ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ, əz sun əz jəɹ aʊɾ ə saɪt, hi woʊn lɪsən tə ə θɪŋ aɪ seɪ." ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ðət wɑz tʃɹu. pɛɹɪn wəd ɹæðɝ əv teɪkən ɑɹɡændə wɪð ɪm ən lɛft ɡælɛn hɪɹ, bʌt niðɝ hæd bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə æksɛp ðæt. ðə ɡildænɪn dɪɾ æksɛp ðət mɛn ən hɔɹsəz wəd bɪɡɪn stɑɹvɪŋ sun ənlɛs fuɾ ən fɑɾɝ wɝ faʊn sʌmwɛɹ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt meɪk hɪmsɛlf spɛn ə deɪ fɑɹðɝ fɹəm ɪz kwin ðən i ɔlɹɛɾi wɑz. ɪn səm weɪz, hi simd ivən mɔɹ fɹæntɪk ðən pɛɹɪn, əɹ meɪbi dʒʌs mɔɹ ɹɛɾi tə ɡɪv ɪn tə ɪt. lɛf tə hɪmsɛlf, ɑɹɡændə wʊɾə bɪn ɛdʒɪŋ ə lɪɾəl nɪɹɝ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ɛvɹi deɪ əntɪl i wɑz ɹaɪɾ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ noʊzɪz. pɛɹɪn wɑz ɹɛɾi tə daɪ tə fɹi feɪl. ɑɹɡændə dʒʌst simd ɹɛɾi tə daɪ. "du wʌt jə kən tə kip ɪm fɹəm duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ stupəd, dænɪl." æftɝ ə moʊmənt, hi æɾəd, "æz lɔŋ əz ɪt dʌzn kʌm tə bloʊz." ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli soʊ fɑɹ i kəɾ ɪkspɛk dænɪl tə ɹistʃɹeɪn ðə fɛloʊ, æftɝ ɔl. ðəɹ wɝ θɹi ɡildænɪn fəɹ ɛvɹi tu ɹɪvɝz mæn, ən feɪl wəd nɛvɝ bi fɹiɾ ɪf ɪt keɪm tə ðɛm kɪlɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ. pɛɹɪn vɛɹi nɪɹli ɹɛstəɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɑn steɪɝz flæŋk. laɪt, bʌɾ i wɑz taɪɝd, ən i kəd nɑt si ɛni pleɪs əhɛɾ ə hɪm ɛniwɛɹ.

Dannil rubbed his tusk-like mustaches with a cold-reddened knuckle and eyed Arganda sideways, then exhaled heavily in a mist. "I'll watch him, Lord Perrin," he muttered, giving his cloak a hitch, "but no matter what you said about me being in charge, as soon as you're out of sight, he won't listen to a thing I say." Unfortunately, that was true. Perrin would rather have taken Arganda with him and left Gallenne here, but neither had been willing to accept that. The Ghealdanin did accept that men and horses would begin starving soon unless food and fodder were found somewhere, but he could not make himself spend a day farther from his queen than he already was. In some ways, he seemed even more frantic than Perrin, or maybe just more ready to give in to it. Left to himself, Arganda would have been edging a little nearer the Shaido every day until he was right under their noses. Perrin was ready to die to free Faile. Arganda just seemed ready to die. "Do what you can to keep him from doing anything stupid, Dannil." After a moment, he added, "As long as it doesn't come to blows." There was only so far he could expect Dannil to restrain the fellow, after all. There were three Ghealdanin for every Two Rivers man, and Faile would never be freed if it came to them killing each other. Perrin very nearly rested his head on Stayer's flank. Light, but he was tired, and he could not see any place ahead of him anywhere.

ə sloʊ klɑp ə hʊvz ənaʊns ði ɝaɪvəl ə mɑsʊɝi ən siɑnɪd, wɪð ðɛɹ θɹi wɔɹɾɝz ɹaɪɾɪŋ kloʊs bɪhaɪn ɹæpt ɪn kloʊks ðət meɪd moʊst ʌv itʃ mæn vænɪʃ, əlɔŋ wɪð pɑɹɾ ə hɪz hɔɹs.

A slow clop of hooves announced the arrival of Masuri and Seonid, with their three Warders riding close behind wrapped in cloaks that made most of each man vanish, along with part of his horse.

boʊθ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɔɹ ʃɪmɝɪŋ sɪlk, ən ə hɛvi ɡoʊl nɛkləs, leɪɝz ə θɪk stʃɹænz, ʃoʊɾ ʌndɝ ði ɛdʒ ə mɑsʊɝiz dɑɹk kloʊk. ə smɔl waɪt dʒuəl dæŋɡəld ɑntu siɑnɪdz fɔɹhɛd fɹəm ə faɪn ɡoʊldən tʃeɪn fæsən ɪn əɹ hɛɹ. ənʊɹə ɹɪlækst, sɛɾəlɪŋ mɔɹ izəli ɪn əɹ sæɾəl. bæk əmʌŋ ði il tɛns, ðə waɪz wʌnz stʊɾ ɪn ə laɪn wɑtʃɪŋ, sɪks tɔl wɪmən wɪð ðɛɹ hɛdz ɹæpt ɪn dɑɹk ʃɔlz.

Both Aes Sedai wore shimmering silk, and a heavy gold necklace, layers of thick strands, showed under the edge of Masuri's dark cloak. A small white jewel dangled onto Seonid's forehead from a fine golden chain fastened in her hair. Annoura relaxed, settling more easily in her saddle. Back among the Aiel tents, the Wise Ones stood in a line watching, six tall women with their heads wrapped in dark shawls.

ðə pipəl ə soʊ hæbɝ maɪt bi əbaʊɾ əz wɛlkəmɪŋ tə il əz ðə pipəl ə meɪɾən wəɾ əv bɪn, bʌt pɛɹɪn hæd nɑt bɪn ʃʊɹ ðə waɪz wʌnz wəd lɛɾ iðɝ sɪstɝ kʌm əloʊn. ðeɪ hæd bɪn ðə læst ɹizən fəɹ weɪɾɪŋ. ðə sʌn wɑz ə ɹɛd-ɡoʊld ɹɪm ɑn ðə tʃɹitɑps.

The people of So Habor might be about as welcoming to Aiel as the people of Maiden would have been, but Perrin had not been sure the Wise Ones would let either sister come alone. They had been the last reason for waiting. The sun was a red-gold rim on the treetops.

"ðə sunɝ ðɛɹ, ðə sunɝ bæk," hi sɛd, klaɪmɪŋ ɪndə ðə beɪz sæɾəl. əz i ɹoʊd θɹu ðə ɡæp ðət hæd bɪn meɪd tə lɛt ðə kɑɹts aʊt, tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ɹipleɪs ðə mɪsɪŋ steɪks. noʊ wʌn læk fəɹ wɛɹinɪs wɪð mæsiməz pipəl nɪɹbaɪ.

"The sooner there, the sooner back," he said, climbing into the bay's saddle. As he rode through the gap that had been made to let the carts out, Two Rivers men were already beginning to replace the missing stakes. No one lacked for wariness with Masema's people nearby.

ɪt wɑz ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz tə ðə tʃɹilaɪn, bʌɾ ɪz aɪ kɑt muvmənt, sʌmwʌn ɑn ə hɔɹs slɪpɪŋ əweɪ ɪndə ðə dipɝ ʃædoʊz bɪniθ ðə taʊɝɪŋ tʃɹiz. wʌn ə mæsiməz wɑtʃɝz, noʊ daʊt, ɹeɪsɪŋ tə tɛl ðə pɹɑfət ðət pɛɹɪn ən bɹəleɪn hæd lɛf ðə kæmp. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ fæst i ɹoʊd, ðoʊ, hi kəd nɑt bi ɪn taɪm. ɪf mæsimə wɑntəd bɹəleɪn əɹ pɛɹɪn dɛd, əz sim laɪkli, hi wəɾ əv tə weɪɾ ɑn ənʌðɝ ɑpɝtunəɾi. ɡælɛn wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə teɪk ɛni tʃænsəz, ðoʊ. noʊ wʌn hæd sin haɪd nɔɹ toʊneɪlz ə sɑns əɹ dʒɛnʒɹ, bɹəleɪnz tu θifkætʃɝz, sɪns ðə deɪ ðeɪ feɪl tə ɹɪtɝn fɹəm mæsiməz kæmp, ən tə ɡælɛn ðət wɑz əz ʃʊɹ ə mɛsədʒ əz ðɛɹ hɛdz ɪn ə sæk. hi hæɾ ɪz lænsɝz spɹɛɾ ɪn ə ʃɑɹp-aɪd ɹɪŋ ɝaʊn bɹəleɪn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə tʃɹiz. ən ɝaʊn pɛɹɪn, tu, bʌt ðət wɑz oʊnli ɪnsɪdɛntəl. ɡɪvən ɪz wɪʃɪz, ɡælɛn wʊɾə bɹɔɾ ɔl naɪn hʌnʒɹəd əɹ soʊ ʌv ɪz wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz, əɹ bɛɾɝ jɛt, ɪn ɪz vju, tɔk bɹəleɪn aʊɾ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ. pɛɹɪn hæd tʃɹaɪd ðæt, əz wɛl, wɪð noʊ bɛɾɝ lʌk. ðə wʊmən hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv lɪsnɪŋ, ðən duɪŋ ɪɡzækli əz ʃi wɪʃt. feɪl wɑz laɪk ðæt, tu. səmtaɪmz ə mæn dʒʌs hæd tə lɪv wɪð ɪt. moʊst ə ðə taɪm, sɪns ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɛls tə du.

It was a hundred paces to the treeline, but his eye caught movement, someone on a horse slipping away into the deeper shadows beneath the towering trees. One of Masema's watchers, no doubt, racing to tell the Prophet that Perrin and Berelain had left the camp. No matter how fast he rode, though, he could not be in time. If Masema wanted Berelain or Perrin dead, as seemed likely, he would have to wait on another opportunity. Gallenne was not about to take any chances, though. No one had seen hide nor toenails of Santes or Gendar, Berelain's two thiefcatchers, since the day they failed to return from Masema's camp, and to Gallenne that was as sure a message as their heads in a sack. He had his lancers spread in a sharp-eyed ring around Berelain before they reached the trees. And around Perrin, too, but that was only incidental. Given his wishes, Gallenne would have brought all nine hundred or so of his Winged Guards, or better yet, in his view, talked Berelain out of going. Perrin had tried that, as well, with no better luck. The woman had a way of listening, then doing exactly as she wished. Faile was like that, too. Sometimes a man just had to live with it. Most of the time, since there was nothing else to do.

ðə hjudʒ tʃɹiz ən stoʊn aʊtkɹɑps stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə snoʊ bɹoʊk ʌp ðə fɔɹmeɪʃən, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl ə kʌlɝfəl saɪɾ ivən ɪn ðə dɪm laɪɾ ə ðə fɔɹəst, ɹɛd stʃɹimɝz floʊɾɪŋ ɑn laɪɾ ɛɹz ɪn slæntəd bimz ə sʌnlaɪt, ɹɛd-ɑɹmɝd ɹaɪɾɝz vænɪʃɪŋ moʊməntɛɹəli bɪhaɪn mæsɪv oʊks ən lɛðɝlifs. ðə θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹoʊd bɪhaɪn pɛɹɪn ən bɹəleɪn, fɑloʊd baɪ ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz, ɔl wɑtʃɪŋ ðə wʊdz ɝaʊn ðɛm, ən ðən ðə mæn wɪð bɹəleɪnz bænɝ. kaɪɹən ən ðə bænɝ ʌv ɡildən keɪm ə lɪɾəl bɪhaɪnd, hɪz mɛn dʒɹɛst ɪn nit, ʃaɪnɪŋ laɪnz, əɹ əz nɪɹ əz ðeɪ kəd mænədʒ.

The huge trees and stone outcrops sticking out of the snow broke up the formation, of course, but it was still a colorful sight even in the dim light of the forest, red streamers floating on light airs in slanted beams of sunlight, red-armored riders vanishing momentarily behind massive oaks and leatherleafs. The three Aes Sedai rode behind Perrin and Berelain, followed by their Warders, all watching the woods around them, and then the man with Berelain's banner. Kireyin and the banner of Ghealdan came a little behind, his men dressed in neat, shining lines, or as near as they could manage.

ðə fɔɹəsts oʊpənnəs wɑz ə dɪsɛpʃən, ən ɪl suɾəd tə nit laɪnz ən bɹaɪt bænɝz, bʌɾ æɾ ɪn ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd sɪlks ən dʒɛmz ən ə kɹaʊn ən wɔɹɾɝz ɪn ðoʊz kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊks, ən ɪt wɑz ə moʊst ɪmpɹɛsɪv saɪt. pɛɹɪn kəɾ əv læft, ðoʊ wɪθaʊt mʌtʃ mɝθ.

The forest's openness was a deception, and ill suited to neat lines and bright banners, but add in embroidered silks and gems and a crown and Warders in those color-shifting cloaks, and it was a most impressive sight. Perrin could have laughed, though without much mirth.

bɹəleɪn sim tə sɛns ɪz θɔts. "wɛn jə ɡoʊ tə baɪ ə sæk ə flaʊɝ," ʃi sɛd, "wɛɹ pleɪn wʊl soʊ ðə sɛlɝ θɪŋks jə kæn əfɔɹd tə peɪ ɛni mɔɹ ðən jə mʌst. wən jəɹ æftɝ flaʊɝ baɪ ðə wæɡoʊnloʊd, wɛɹ dʒuəlz soʊ ʃi θɪŋks jə kən əfɔɹd tə kʌm bæk fəɹ ɔl ʃi kən leɪ hænz ɑn." pɛɹɪn snɔɹɾɪd ə læf ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf. ɪt saʊndəd vɛɹi mʌtʃ laɪk sʌmθɪŋ mæstɝ luhən hæd toʊl hɪm, wʌns, wɪð ə nʌdʒ ɪn ðə ɹɪbz tə seɪ ɪt wɑz ə dʒoʊk ən ə lʊk ɪn ɪz aɪ ðət sɛɾ ɪt wɑz ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ. dʒɹɛs pʊɹ wən jə wɑn ə smɔl feɪvɝ, ən faɪn wən jə wɑn ə lɑɹdʒ wʌn. hi wɑz vɛɹi ɡlæd bɹəleɪn noʊ lɔŋɡɝ smɛld laɪk ə hʌntɪŋ wʊlf. ət lis ðət tʊk wʌn wɝi ɔf ɪz maɪnd.

Berelain seemed to sense his thoughts. "When you go to buy a sack of flour," she said, "wear plain wool so the seller thinks you can't afford to pay any more than you must. When you're after flour by the wagonload, wear jewels so she thinks you can afford to come back for all she can lay hands on." Perrin snorted a laugh in spite of himself. It sounded very much like something Master Luhhan had told him, once, with a nudge in the ribs to say it was a joke and a look in his eye that said it was a little more. Dress poor when you want a small favor, and fine when you want a large one. He was very glad Berelain no longer smelled like a hunting wolf. At least that took one worry off his mind.

ðeɪ sun kɑɾ ʌp tə ðə teɪl ɛn ə ðə kɑɹts, ə laɪn ðət wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ muvɪŋ baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd. ækswɝk ən swɛt hæd ɹimuv ðə tʃɹiz ʃɪɹɾ ɔf baɪ ɡeɪtweɪz ən meɪɾ ə lɪɾəl klɪɹɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz kɹaʊɾəd ivən bɪfɔɹ ɡælɛn spɹɛɾ ɪz ɹɪŋ ə lænsɝz ɝaʊn ɪt feɪsɪŋ aʊtwɝd. peɪdʒɝ nild wɑz ðəɹ ɔlɹɛɾi, ə fɑpɪʃ mʊɹændiən wɪð ɪz mʌstæʃ wæks tə pɔɪns, ɑn ə dæpəl ɡɛldɪŋ. hɪz koʊt wəd də fəɹ ɛniwʌn u hæd nɑt sin ən æʃəmən bɪfɔɹ; ði oʊnli ʌðɝ wʌn i hæd wɑz blæk əz wɛl, ən ət list i hæd noʊ kɑlɝ pɪnz tə mɑɹk ɪm aʊt. ðə snoʊ wɑz nɑt dip, bʌt ðə twɛnti tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn lɛd baɪ wɪl ælsin wɝ ɑn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, tu, ɹæðɝ ðən stændɪŋ ən weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðɛɹ fit tə fɹiz ɪn ðɛɹ buts. ðeɪ lʊkt ə hɑɹɾɝ lɑt ðən ðə fɛloʊz u hæd lɛf ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɪð hɪm, lɔŋboʊz slʌŋ əkɹɔs ðɛɹ bæks, bɹɪsəlɪŋ kwɪvɝz ən sɔɹdz ə vɛɹiəs dɪskɹɪpʃənz ət ðɛɹ bɛls. pɛɹɪn hoʊpt i kəd sɛn əm hoʊm sun, əɹ bɛɾɝ, teɪk əm hoʊm.

They soon caught up to the tail end of the carts, a line that was no longer moving by the time they reached the Traveling ground. Axework and sweat had removed the trees sheared off by gateways and made a little clearing, but it was crowded even before Gallenne spread his ring of lancers around it facing outward. Pager Neald was there already, a foppish Murandian with his mustache waxed to points, on a dapple gelding. His coat would do for anyone who had not seen an Asha'man before; the only other one he had was black as well, and at least he had no collar pins to mark him out. The snow was not deep, but the twenty Two Rivers men led by Wil al'Seen were on their horses, too, rather than standing and waiting for their feet to freeze in their boots. They looked a harder lot than the fellows who had left the Two Rivers with him, longbows slung across their backs, bristling quivers and swords of various descriptions at their belts. Perrin hoped he could send them home soon, or better, take them home.

moʊst wɝ bælənsɪŋ ə pɑlɹm oʊvɝ ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, bʌt tɑɾ ɑlkɑɹ ən flæn bɑɹstɪɹ kæɹid bænɝz, pɛɹɪnz oʊn ɹɛd wʊlfhɛɾ ən ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl ə meɪnɛðɝən. tɑdz hɛvi dʒɔ wɑz sɛt stʌbɝnli, ən flæn, ə tɔl skɪni fɛloʊ fɹəm ʌp tə wɑtʃ hɪl, lʊk sʌlən. laɪkli hi hæd nɑt wɑntəd ðə dʒɑb. meɪbi tɑd hæd nɑt, iðɝ. wɪl ɡeɪv pɛɹɪn wʌn ə ðoʊz oʊpən, ɪnəsən lʊks ðət ful soʊ mɛni ɡɝlz bæk hoʊm - wɪl laɪk tu mʌtʃ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ɑn ɪz koʊɾ ət fistdeɪz, ən i pjʊɹli lʌvd ɹaɪɾɪŋ əhɛɾ ə ðoʊz bænɝz, pɹɑbli ɪn ðə hoʊp səm wʊmən wəd θɪŋk ðeɪ wɝ ɪz - bʌt pɛɹɪn lɛɾ ɪt pæs. hi hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəd ði ʌðɝ θɹi pipəl ɪn ðə klɪɹɪŋ ɛni mɔɹ ðən i hæd ðə bænɝz. hoʊldɪŋ ɪz kloʊk ɝaʊn ɪm əz ɪf ðə maɪl bɹiz wɝ ə ɡeɪl, beɪlwɝ klʌmsəli hild ɪz blʌnt-noʊzd ɹoʊn fɔɹwɝd tə mit pɛɹɪn. tu ʌv feɪlz hæŋɝz-ɑn tʃɹeɪld æftɝ ɪm wɪð dɪfaɪən ɪkspɹɛʃənz. mɛdɔɹz blu aɪz lʊkt ɑɾ ɪn əɹ dɑɹk tɛɹən feɪs, bʌt ðɛn, hɝ koʊt, wɪð ɪts pʌfi ɡɹin-stʃɹaɪp slivz, lʊkt ɑɾ ɑn əɹ boʊsəmi fɹeɪm. ðə dɔɾɝ ʌv ə haɪ lɔɹd, ʃi wɑz ɛvɹi ɪntʃ ə noʊbəlwʊmən, ən mɛnz kloʊðɪŋ dʒʌs dɪd nɑt sut hɝ. lɑɾən, kɛɹhinɪn ən peɪl ɪn ə koʊɾ ɔlmoʊst əz dɑɹk əz nilz, ðoʊ mɑɹkt wɪð fɔɹ slæʃɪz ə ɹɛɾ ən blu əkɹɔs ðə tʃɛst, wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ tɔlɝ ðən ʃi, ən ðə weɪ hi snɪfəld wɪð ə koʊld ən ɹʌbd əɾ ɪz ʃɑɹp noʊz meɪɾ ɪm lʊk mʌtʃ lɛs kɑmpəɾənt. niðɝ wɔɹ ə sɔɹd, ənʌðɝ sɝpɹaɪz.

Most were balancing a polearm over their saddles, but Tod al'Caar and Flann Barstere carried banners, Perrin's own Red Wolfhead and the Red Eagle of Manetheren. Tod's heavy jaw was set stubbornly, and Flann, a tall skinny fellow from up to Watch Hill, looked sullen. Likely he had not wanted the job. Maybe Tod had not, either. Wil gave Perrin one of those open, innocent looks that fooled so many girls back home - Wil liked too much embroidery on his coat at feastdays, and he purely loved riding ahead of those banners, probably in the hope some woman would think they were his - but Perrin let it pass. He had not expected the other three people in the clearing any more than he had the banners. Holding his cloak around him as if the mild breeze were a gale, Balwer clumsily heeled his blunt-nosed roan forward to meet Perrin. Two of Faile's hangers-on trailed after him with defiant expressions. Medore's blue eyes looked odd in her dark Tairen face, but then, her coat, with its puffy green-striped sleeves, looked odd on her bosomy frame. The daughter of a High Lord, she was every inch a noblewoman, and men's clothing just did not suit her. Latian, Cairhienin and pale in a coat almost as dark as Neald's, though marked with four slashes of red and blue across the chest, was not much taller than she, and the way he sniffled with a cold and rubbed at his sharp nose made him look much less competent. Neither wore a sword, another surprise.

"maɪ lɔɹd; maɪ leɪɾi fɝst," beɪlwɝ sɛɾ ɪn ðət dʒɹaɪ vɔɪs, dʌkɪŋ ə baʊ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, ə spɛɹoʊ bɑbɪŋ ɑn ə bɹæntʃ. hɪz aɪz flɪkɝd təwɔɹd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, bʌt ðət wɑz ði oʊnli saɪn i ɡeɪv ðəɾ i wɑz əwɛɹ ə ðə sɪstɝz. "maɪ lɔɹd, aɪ ɹɪkɔl ðəɾ aɪ hæv ən əkweɪntəns ɪn ðɪs soʊ hæbɝ.

"My Lord; my Lady First," Balwer said in that dry voice, ducking a bow in his saddle, a sparrow bobbing on a branch. His eyes flickered toward the Aes Sedai behind them, but that was the only sign he gave that he was aware of the sisters. "My Lord, I recalled that I have an acquaintance in this So Habor.

ə kʌtlɝ u tʃɹævəlz wɪð ɪz wɛɹz, bʌɾ i meɪ bi ət hoʊm, ən aɪv nɑt sin ɪm ɪn sɛvɹəl jɪɹz." ðɪs wɑz ðə fɝs taɪm i hæɾ ɛvɝ mɛnʃən hævɪŋ ə fɹɛn ɛniwɛɹ, ən ə taʊn bɛɹiɾ ɪn ðə nɔɹθ ʌv ɔltɑɹə simd ə pəkjuljɝ pleɪs fəɹ ɪt, bʌt pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. hi səspɛktəd ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ tə ðɪs fɹɛn ðən beɪlwɝ wɑz lɛɾɪŋ ɑn. hi wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə səspɛk ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ tə beɪlwɝ ðən ðə mæn lɛɾ ɑn.

A cutler who travels with his wares, but he may be at home, and I've not seen him in several years." This was the first time he had ever mentioned having a friend anywhere, and a town buried in the north of Altara seemed a peculiar place for it, but Perrin nodded. He suspected there was more to this friend than Balwer was letting on. He was beginning to suspect there was more to Balwer than the man let on.

"æn jəɹ kəmpænjənz, mæstɝ beɪlwɝ?" bɹəleɪnz feɪs steɪd smuð ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ fɝ-laɪn kaʊl, bʌt ʃi smɛld əmjuzd. ʃi nu vɛɹi wɛl ðət feɪl hæd juzd əɹ jʌŋ fɑloʊɝz əz spaɪz ən wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət pɛɹɪn meɪd ðə seɪm jus ə ðɛm. "ðeɪ wɑntəɾ ən aʊɾɪŋ, maɪ leɪɾi fɝst," ðə boʊni lɪɾəl mæn ɹɪplaɪd blænli. "aɪ wɪl vaʊtʃ fəɹ ðɛm, maɪ lɔɹd. ðeɪv pɹɑməs tə kɑz noʊ tʃɹʌbəl, ən ðeɪ meɪ lɝn sʌmθɪŋ." hi smɛld əmjuzd, tu - ə mʌsti smɛl, ʌv kɔɹs, kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ɪm - ðoʊ wɪð ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɪɹɪteɪʃən. beɪlwɝ nu ʃi nu, wɪtʃ dɪd nɑt pliz hɪm, bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ meɪɾ oʊpən ɹɛfɝəns tə ðə fækt, wɪtʃ dɪd. ðəɹ dɛfənətli wɑz mɔɹ tə beɪlwɝ ðən i lɛɾ ɑn.

"And your companions, Master Balwer?" Berelain's face stayed smooth inside her fur-lined cowl, but she smelled amused. She knew very well that Faile had used her young followers as spies and was sure that Perrin made the same use of them. "They wanted an outing, my Lady First," the bony little man replied blandly. "I will vouch for them, my Lord. They've promised to cause no trouble, and they may learn something." He smelled amused, too - a musty smell, of course, coming from him - though with a touch of irritation. Balwer knew she knew, which did not please him, but she never made open reference to the fact, which did. There definitely was more to Balwer than he let on.

ðə mæn mʌst əv ɪz ɹizənz fəɹ teɪkɪŋ əm əlɔŋ. hi hæd mænədʒ tə teɪk ʌp ɔl ə feɪlz jʌŋ fɑloʊɝz wʌn weɪ ən ənʌðɝ, ən hæɾ əm ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ ən wɑtʃɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə ɡildænɪn ən ðə minɝz ən ivən ði il. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə hɪm, wʌt jəɹ fɹɛnz sɛɾ ən dɪd kəd bi əz ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ əz wʌt jəɹ ɛnəmiz plænd, ən ðət wɑz wən jə wɝ ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ jəɹ fɹɛnz. ʌv kɔɹs, bɹəleɪn nu ðəɾ əɹ pipəl wɝ biɪŋ spaɪɾ ɑn. ən beɪlwɝ nu ʃi nu ðæt, tu. ən ʃi nu ðət hi. . . . ɪt wɑz ɔl tu səfɪstəkeɪɾɪd fəɹ ə kʌntʃɹi blæksmɪθ. "wɝ weɪstɪŋ taɪm," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "oʊpən ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, nild."

The man must have his reasons for taking them along. He had managed to take up all of Faile's young followers one way and another, and had them eavesdropping and watching among the Ghealdanin and the Mayeners and even the Aiel. According to him, what your friends said and did could be as interesting as what your enemies planned, and that was when you were sure they were your friends. Of course, Berelain knew that her people were being spied on. And Balwer knew she knew that, too. And she knew that he. . . . It was all too sophisticated for a country blacksmith. "We're wasting time," Perrin said. "Open the gateway, Neald."

ði æʃəmən ɡɹɪn əɾ ɪm ən stʃɹoʊkt ɪz wæks mʌstæʃɪz nild ɡɹɪn tu mʌtʃ sɪns ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ faʊnd; meɪbi hi wɑz iɡɝ tə kʌm tə ɡɹɪps wɪð əm - hi ɡɹɪn ən dʒɛstʃɝd ɡɹænli wɪð wʌn hænd. "æz jə kəmænd," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə tʃɪɹfəl vɔɪs, ən ðə fəmɪljɝ sɪlvɝi slæʃ ə laɪɾ əpɪɹd, waɪɾənɪŋ ɪndə ə hoʊl ɪn ði ɛɹ.

The Asha'man grinned at him and stroked his waxed mustaches Neald grinned too much since the Shaido were found; maybe he was eager to come to grips with them - he grinned and gestured grandly with one hand. "As you command," he said in a cheerful voice, and the familiar silvery slash of light appeared, widening into a hole in the air.

wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls, pɛɹɪn ɹoʊd θɹu ɪndə ə snoʊ-kʌvɝd fild, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ə loʊ stoʊn wɔl, ɪn ɹoʊlɪŋ kʌntʃɹi ðət simd ɔlmoʊs tʃɹiləs kəmpɛɹd wɪð ðə fɔɹəst i hæd lɛf bɪhaɪnd, dʒʌst ə fju maɪlz fɹəm soʊ hæbɝ ənlɛs nil hæd meɪɾ ə səbstæntʃəl ɛɹɝ. ɪf i hæd, pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i maɪt pʊl ðoʊz ful mʌstæʃɪz ɹaɪɾ ɔf ðə mænz feɪs. haʊ kəd ðə fɛloʊ bi tʃɪɹfəl?

Without waiting for anyone else, Perrin rode through into a snow-covered field, surrounded by a low stone wall, in rolling country that seemed almost treeless compared with the forest he had left behind, just a few miles from So Habor unless Neald had made a substantial error. If he had, Perrin thought he might pull those fool mustaches right off the man's face. How could the fellow be cheerful?

sun, ðoʊ, hi wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɛs bɪniθ ə ɡɹeɪ klaʊɾi skaɪ, əlɔŋ ə snoʊi ɹoʊd wɪð ðə haɪwil kɑɹts tʃɹʌnlɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪn ə laɪn æftɝ ɪm ən ɝli-mɔɹnɪŋ ʃædoʊz stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ əhɛd. steɪɝ tʌɡd ət ðə ɹeɪnz, wɑntɪŋ tə ɹʌn, bʌt pɛɹɪn hɛld ɪm tə ə stɛɾi wɔk, noʊ fæstɝ ðən ðə kɑɹθɔɹsɪz kəd mænədʒ. ɡælɛnz minɝz hæd tə kɹɔs filz bɪsaɪd ðə ɹoʊd tə meɪnteɪn ðɛɹ ɹɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪm ən bɹəleɪn, ən ðət mɛnt ɡɛɾɪŋ pæs ðə loʊ wɔlz ə ɹʌf stoʊn ðət dɪvaɪɾəd fil fɹəm fild.

Soon, though, he was riding west beneath a gray cloudy sky, along a snowy road with the highwheeled carts trundling along in a line after him and early-morning shadows stretching ahead. Stayer tugged at the reins, wanting to run, but Perrin held him to a steady walk, no faster than the carthorses could manage. Gallenne's Mayeners had to cross fields beside the road to maintain their ring around him and Berelain, and that meant getting past the low walls of rough stone that divided field from field.

səm hæd ɡeɪts fɹəm wʌn fɑɹmɝz pɹɑpɝɾi tə ðə nɛkst, pɹɑbli tə əlaʊ ʃɛɹɪŋ plaʊ-timz, ən ʌðɝz ðeɪ dʒʌmp flæmbɔɪənli wɪð ðə stʃɹimɝz ɑn ðɛɹ lænsɪz flaɪɪŋ, ɹɪskɪŋ ðɛɹ ænəməlz lɛɡz ən ðɛɹ nɛks. pɛɹɪn kɛɹd ðə lɛs əbaʊt ðɛɹ nɛks, ɪn tʃɹuθ. wɪl ən ðə tu fulz kæɹiɪŋ ðə wʊlfhɛɾ ən ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl dʒɔɪn ðə minɝ bænɝmən bɪhaɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən wɔɹɾɝz, bʌt ði ʌðɝ tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn stʃɹʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz aʊt flæŋkɪŋ ðə laɪn ə kɑɹts. ðəɹ wɝ fɑɹ tu mɛni kɑɹts fəɹ fjuɝ ðən twɛnti mɛn tə ɡɑɹd, jɛt ðə kɑɹt dʒɹaɪvɝz wəd fil iziɝ siɪŋ ðɛm. nɑt ðəɾ ɛniwʌn ɪkspɛktəd bɹɪɡænz, əɹ ʃeɪɾoʊ fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, bʌt noʊ wʌn fɛl kʌmftəɹbəl aʊtsaɪd ðə pɹətɛkʃən ə ðə kæmp. ɪn ɛni keɪs, hɪɹ ðeɪ wəd bi eɪbəl tə si ɛni θɹɛt wɛl bɪfɔɹ ɪt ɹitʃt ðɛm.

Some had gates from one farmer's property to the next, probably to allow sharing plow-teams, and others they jumped flamboyantly with the streamers on their lances flying, risking their animal's legs and their necks. Perrin cared the less about their necks, in truth. Wil and the two fools carrying the Wolfhead and the Red Eagle joined the Mayener bannerman behind the Aes Sedai and Warders, but the other Two Rivers men strung themselves out flanking the line of carts. There were far too many carts for fewer than twenty men to guard, yet the cart drivers would feel easier seeing them. Not that anyone expected brigands, or Shaido for that matter, but no one felt comfortable outside the protection of the camp. In any case, here they would be able to see any threat well before it reached them.

ðə loʊ ɹoʊlɪŋ hɪlz dɪd nɑt ɹɪli əlaʊ ə vɛɹi lɔŋ vju, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz fɑɹm kʌntʃɹi, wɪð stɝɾi θætʃ-ɹuf stoʊn haʊsəz ən bɑɹnz skæɾɝd əmʌŋ ðə filz, ən nʌθɪŋ ʌv waɪlnəs əbaʊɾ ɪɾ ɛniwɛɹ. ivən moʊst ə ðə smɔl θɪkəts klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə sloʊps wɝ kɑpaɪs fəɹ faɪɝwʊd. bʌɾ ɪt stʃɹʌk pɛɹɪn sʌɾənli ðət ðə snoʊ ɑn ðə ɹoʊɾ əhɛɾ ə hɪm wɑz nɑt fɹɛʃ; jɛt ði oʊnli tʃɹæks wɝ ðoʊz meɪd baɪ ɡælɛnz fɔɹaɪɾɝz. noʊ wʌn muvd ɝaʊn ɛni ʌv ðoʊz dɑɹk haʊsəz ən bɑɹnz; noʊ smoʊk ɹoʊz fɹəm ɛni ʌv ðə θɪk tʃɪmniz. ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd simd æbsəlutli stɪl ən æbsəlutli ɛmpti. ðə hɛɹ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk stɝd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stænd.

The low rolling hills did not really allow a very long view, but it was farm country, with sturdy thatch-roofed stone houses and barns scattered among the fields, and nothing of wildness about it anywhere. Even most of the small thickets clinging to the slopes were coppiced for firewood. But it struck Perrin suddenly that the snow on the road ahead of him was not fresh; yet the only tracks were those made by Gallenne's foreriders. No one moved around any of those dark houses and barns; no smoke rose from any of the thick chimneys. The countryside seemed absolutely still and absolutely empty. The hair on the back of his neck stirred, trying to stand.

ən ɛkskləmeɪʃən fɹəm wʌn ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪɾ ɪm lʊk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ən i fɑloʊd mɑsʊɝiz pɔɪntɪŋ fɪŋɡɝ nɔɹθ tə ə ʃeɪp flaɪɪŋ θɹu ði ɛɹ. ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn teɪkən fəɹ ə lɑɹdʒ bæɾ ət fɝst ɡlæns, swipɪŋ istwɝɾ ɑn lɔŋ ɹɪbd wɪŋz, ə stʃɹeɪnʒ bæt wɪð ə lɔŋ nɛk ən ə lɔŋ θɪn teɪl tʃɹeɪlɪŋ bɪhaɪnd. ɡælɛn bɑɹkt ən oʊθ ən pɹɛst ɪz lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs tə hɪz aɪ. pɛɹɪn kəd si ɪt wɛl ɪnʌf əneɪɾɪd, ən ivən meɪk aʊt ðə fɪɡjɝ ʌv ə hjumən biɪŋ klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə kɹitʃɝz bæk, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪt laɪk ə hɔɹs.

An exclamation from one of the Aes Sedai made him look over his shoulder, and he followed Masuri's pointing finger north to a shape flying through the air. It might have been taken for a large bat at first glance, sweeping eastward on long ribbed wings, a strange bat with a long neck and a long thin tail trailing behind. Gallenne barked an oath and pressed his looking glass to his eye. Perrin could see it well enough unaided, and even make out the figure of a human being clinging to the creature's back, riding it like a horse.

"sintʃæn," bɹəleɪn bɹiðd, boʊθ əɹ vɔɪs ən ðə smɛl ə hɝ wɝid.

"Seanchan," Berelain breathed, both her voice and the smell of her worried.

pɛɹɪn twɪstəɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl tə wɑtʃ ðə θɪŋz flaɪɾ əntɪl ðə ɡlɛɹ ə ðə sʌnɹaɪz meɪɾ ɪm tɝn əweɪ. "nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ʌs," hi sɛd. ɪf nil hæd meɪɾ ə mɪsteɪk, hi wəd stʃɹæŋɡəl ðə mæn.

Perrin twisted in his saddle to watch the thing's flight until the glare of the sunrise made him turn away. "Nothing to do with us," he said. If Neald had made a mistake, he would strangle the man.

tʃæptɝ twɛntisɪks

CHAPTER 26

ɪn soʊ hæbɝ ɛs ɪt hæpənd, nild, hu hæd hæd tə ɹɪmeɪn tə hoʊl ðə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpən tɪl kaɪɹən ən ðə ɡildænɪn wɝ θɹu, hæd pleɪs ðə hoʊl ɪn ði ɛɹ vɛɹi kloʊs tə wɛɹ i eɪmd. hi ən kaɪɹən kɑɾ ʌp əɾ ə ɡæləp dʒʌst əz pɛɹɪn tɑpt ə ɹaɪz ən dʒɹu ɹeɪn wɪð ðə taʊn ə soʊ hæbɝ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ʌv ə smɔl ɹɪvɝ kɹɔs baɪ ə pɛɹ ʌv ɑɹtʃɪŋ tɪmbɝ bɹɪdʒəz. pɛɹɪn wɑz noʊ soʊlʒɝ, bʌɾ i nu ɹaɪɾ əweɪ waɪ mæsimə hæd lɛf ðɪs pleɪs əloʊn. hɑɹɾ əɡɛns ðə ɹɪvɝ, ðə taʊn hæd tu mæsɪv stoʊn wɔlz dɑɾəd wɪð taʊɝz ɝaʊn ɪt, ði ɪnɝ ɹaɪzɪŋ tɔlɝ ðən ði aʊɾɝ. ə pɛɹ ə bɑɹdʒəz wɝ taɪd tə ə lɔŋ wɔɹf ðət ɹæn əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ wɔl fɹəm bɹɪdʒ tə bɹɪdʒ, jɛt ðə waɪd bɹɪdʒ ɡeɪts, aɪɝn-stʃɹæpt ən kloʊz taɪt, sim tə bi ði oʊnli oʊpənɪŋz ɪn ðəɾ ɪkspæns ə ɹʌf ɡɹeɪ stoʊn, ən bæɾəlmənts tɑp ðə hoʊl lɛŋθ ʌv ɪt. bɪl tə hoʊld ɔf ɡɹiɾi neɪbɝɪŋ noʊbəlz, soʊ hæbɝ wʊɾə hæd lɪɾəl fɪɹ ə ðə pɹɑfəts ɹæbəl ivən ɪf ðeɪ keɪm baɪ θaʊzənz. ɛniwʌn wɑntɪŋ tə bɹeɪk ɪndə ðɪs taʊn wəd nid sidʒ ɛnʒənz ən peɪʃəns, ən mæsimə wɑz mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl tɛɹɝaɪzɪŋ vɪlədʒəz ən taʊnz wɪθaʊt wɔlz əɹ dɪfɛnsəz.

In So Habor s it happened, Neald, who had had to remain to hold the gateway open till Kireyin and the Ghealdanin were through, had placed the hole in the air very close to where he aimed. He and Kireyin caught up at a gallop just as Perrin topped a rise and drew rein with the town of So Habor in front of him, on the other side of a small river crossed by a pair of arching timber bridges. Perrin was no soldier, but he knew right away why Masema had left this place alone. Hard against the river, the town had two massive stone walls dotted with towers around it, the inner rising taller than the outer. A pair of barges were tied to a long wharf that ran along the river wall from bridge to bridge, yet the wide bridge gates, iron-strapped and closed tight, seemed to be the only openings in that expanse of rough gray stone, and battlements topped the whole length of it. Built to hold off greedy neighboring nobles, So Habor would have had little fear of the Prophet's rabble even if they came by thousands. Anyone wanting to break into this town would need siege engines and patience, and Masema was more comfortable terrorizing villages and towns without walls or defenses.

"wɛl, ɪts ɡlæɾ aɪm tə si pipəl ɑn ðə wɔlz oʊvɝ ðɛɹ," nil sɛd. "aɪ wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə θɪŋk ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðɪs kʌntʃɹi wɑz dɛɾ ən bɛɹid." hi saʊndəɾ oʊnli hæf dʒoʊkɪŋ, ən ɪz ɡɹɪn lʊk fɔɹst.

"Well, it's glad I am to see people on the walls over there," Neald said. "I was beginning to think everyone in this country was dead and buried." He sounded only half joking, and his grin looked forced.

"æz lɔŋ əz ðəɹ əlaɪv ɪnʌf tə sɛl ɡɹeɪn," kaɪɹən mɝmɝɾ ɪn ɪz neɪzəl, bɔɹd vɔɪs.

"As long as they're alive enough to sell grain," Kireyin murmured in his nasal, bored voice.

ənbəklɪŋ ɪz sɪlvɝi, waɪɾɪplumd hɛlmət, hi lɪftəɾ ɪt daʊn tə ðə tɔl pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl. hɪz aɪz swɛpt pæs pɛɹɪn ən pɔz bɹifli ɑn bɹəleɪn bɪfɔɹ i twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn tə ædʒɹɛs ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə seɪm wɪɹi toʊn. "ɑɹ wi gɑnə sɪt hɪɹ, əɹ ɡoʊ daʊn?" bɹəleɪn ɑɹtʃt ən aɪbɹaʊ ət hɪm, ə deɪnʒɝəs lʊk, əz ə mæn wɪð ɛni bɹeɪnz wəd si. kaɪɹən dɪd nɑt si.

Unbuckling his silvery, whiteplumed helmet, he lifted it down to the tall pommel of his saddle. His eyes swept past Perrin and paused briefly on Berelain before he twisted around to address the Aes Sedai in the same weary tone. "Are we going to sit here, or go down?" Berelain arched an eyebrow at him, a dangerous look, as a man with any brains would see. Kireyin did not see.

pɛɹɪnz hækəlz wɝ stɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stænd, ðə mɔɹ soʊ sɪns siɪŋ ðə taʊn. meɪbi ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm ðət wɑz wʊlf, dɪsləkɪŋ wɔlz. bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk soʊ. ðə pipəl ətɑp ðə wɔlz pɔɪntəd təwɔɹd ðɛm, ən səm hɛld lʊkɪŋ ɡlæsəz. ðoʊz, ət list, wəd bi eɪbəl tə meɪk aʊt ðə bænɝz klɪɹli. ɛvɹiwʌn wəd bi eɪbəl tə si ðə soʊlʒɝz, wɪð ðə stʃɹimɝz ɑn ðɛɹ lænsɪz floʊɾɪŋ ɑn ə mɔɹnɪŋ bɹiz. ən ðə fɝs fju kɑɹts ə ðə laɪn ðət stʃɹɛtʃt daʊn ðə ɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ saɪt. meɪbi ɛvɹiwʌn fɹəm ðə fɑɹmz wɑz kɹaʊɾəd ɪndə ðə taʊn. "wi dɪdn kʌm hɪɹ tə sɪt," hi sɛd.

Perrin's hackles were still trying to stand, the more so since seeing the town. Maybe it was just the part of him that was wolf, disliking walls. But he did not think so. The people atop the walls pointed toward them, and some held looking glasses. Those, at least, would be able to make out the banners clearly. Everyone would be able to see the soldiers, with the streamers on their lances floating on a morning breeze. And the first few carts of the line that stretched down the road out of their sight. Maybe everyone from the farms was crowded into the town. "We didn't come here to sit," he said.

bɹəleɪn ən ənʊɹə bɪtwin əm hæd leɪɾ aʊt haʊ tə əpɹoʊtʃ soʊ hæbɝ. ðə loʊkəl lɔɹɾ əɹ leɪɾi hæd ʃʊɹli hɝɾ ə ʃeɪɾoʊ dɛpɹədeɪʃənz nɑt mɛni maɪlz tə ðə nɔɹθ ə ðɛm, ən ðeɪ maɪɾ əv hɝɾ ə ðə pɹɑfəts pɹɛzəns ɪn ɔltɑɹə, tu. iðɝ θɪŋ wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɛniwʌn wɛɹi; təɡɛðɝ, ðeɪ maɪt bi ɪnʌf tə meɪk pipəl lus æɹoʊz ən weɪt tɪl æftɝ tə æsk u ðeɪ hæd ʃɑt. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ɪt wɑz haɪli ənlaɪkli ðeɪ wəd wɛlkəm aʊtlæn soʊlʒɝz θɹu ðɛɹ ɡeɪts ət ðə moʊmənt. ðə lænsɝz ɹɪmeɪn spɹɛɾ əlɔŋ ðə ɹaɪz, ə ʃoʊ ðət ðiz vɪzəɾɝz pəzɛst səm ɑɹmd maɪɾ ivən ɪf ðeɪ tʃoʊz nɑt tə ɛmplɔɪ ɪt. nɑt ðət soʊ hæbɝ wəd bi oʊvɝli ɪmpɹɛs baɪ ə hʌnʒɹəd mɛn, bʌt ðə bɝnɪʃt ɑɹmɝ ə ðə ɡildænɪn ən ðə ɹɛɾ ɑɹmɝ ə ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz sɛd ðə vɪzəɾɝz wɝ nɑt wɑndɝɪŋ tʃɹɪkstɝz. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn wəɾ ɪmpɹɛs noʊ wʌn əntɪl ðeɪ juz ðɛɹ baʊz, soʊ ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪn bæk wɪð ðə kɑɹts, tə hoʊld ʌp ðə kɑɹt dʒɹaɪvɝz' spɪɹəts. ɪt wɑz ɔl ən ɪlæbɹət bɪɾ ə nɑnsɛns, flʌf ən fɛðɝz, bʌt pɛɹɪn wɑz ə kʌntʃɹi blæksmɪθ noʊ mæɾɝ u kɔld ɪm lɔɹd. ðə fɝst ə min ən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃəd noʊ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ əbaʊɾ ɪn ə θɪŋ laɪk ðɪs.

Berelain and Annoura between them had laid out how to approach So Habor. The local lord or lady had surely heard of Shaido depredations not many miles to the north of them, and they might have heard of the Prophet's presence in Altara, too. Either thing was enough to make anyone wary; together, they might be enough to make people loose arrows and wait till after to ask who they had shot. In any case, it was highly unlikely they would welcome outland soldiers through their gates at the moment. The lancers remained spread along the rise, a show that these visitors possessed some armed might even if they chose not to employ it. Not that So Habor would be overly impressed by a hundred men, but the burnished armor of the Ghealdanin and the red armor of the Winged Guards said the visitors were not wandering tricksters. The Two Rivers men would impress no one until they used their bows, so they remained back with the carts, to hold up the cart drivers' spirits. It was all an elaborate bit of nonsense, fluff and feathers, but Perrin was a country blacksmith no matter who called him lord. The First of Mayene and an Aes Sedai should know what they were about in a thing like this.

ɡælɛn lɛd ðə weɪ daʊn tə ðə ɹɪvɝ əɾ ə sloʊ wɔk, bɹaɪt kɹɪmzən hɛlmət ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn ɪz sæɾəl, hɪz bæk stʃɹeɪt. pɛɹɪn ən bɹəleɪn ɹoʊɾ ə lɪɾəl weɪ bɪhaɪnd, wɪð siɑnɪd bɪtwin əm ən mɑsʊɝi ən ənʊɹə tə iðɝ saɪd, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð ðɛɹ hʊdz θɹoʊn bæk soʊ ɛniwʌn ɑn ðoʊz wɔlz u kəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪs wəɾ əv ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə si θɹi. ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ wɛlkəmd moʊs pleɪsəz, ivən wɛɹ pipəl ɹɪli wəd ɹæðɝ nɑt. ət ðɛɹ bæks keɪm ɔl fɔɹ bænɝmɪn, wɪð ðə wɔɹɾɝz speɪst əmʌŋ əm ɪn ðɛɹ aɪ-ɹɛntʃɪŋ kloʊks. ən kaɪɹən wɪð ɪz ʃaɪnɪŋ hɛlmət bælənst ɑn ɪz θaɪ, saʊɝ-maʊðd ət biɪŋ ɹɛləɡeɪɾɪd tə ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɪð ðə wɔɹɾɝz ən naʊ ən ðən ɡlɛɹɪŋ koʊldli daʊn ɪz noʊz ət beɪlwɝ, hu tʃɹeɪld ət ðə ɹɪɹ wɪð ɪz tu kəmpænjənz.

Gallenne led the way down to the river at a slow walk, bright crimson helmet resting on his saddle, his back straight. Perrin and Berelain rode a little way behind, with Seonid between them and Masuri and Annoura to either side, the Aes Sedai with their hoods thrown back so anyone on those walls who could recognize an Aes Sedai face would have the opportunity to see three. Aes Sedai were welcomed most places, even where people really would rather not. At their backs came all four bannermen, with the Warders spaced among them in their eye-wrenching cloaks. And Kireyin with his shining helmet balanced on his thigh, sour-mouthed at being relegated to riding with the Warders and now and then glaring coldly down his nose at Balwer, who trailed at the rear with his two companions.

noʊ wʌn hæd toʊl beɪlwɝ i kəd kʌm, jɛt noʊ wʌn hæd sɛɾ i kəd nɑt. hi bɑbd ə baʊ wɛnɛvɝ ðə noʊbəlmən lʊkt ət hɪm, ðən wɛn bæk tə stʌɾiɪŋ ðə taʊn wɔlz əhɛd. pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt ʃeɪk ɪz ʌnizinəs əz ðeɪ dʒɹu nɪɹɝ ðə taʊn. ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz klæɾɝd hɑloʊli ɑn ðə sʌðɝnmoʊs bɹɪdʒ, ə waɪd stʃɹʌktʃɝ ðət ɹoʊz haɪ ɪnʌf əbʌv ðə swɪftfloʊɪŋ ɹɪvɝ tə lɛɾ ə bɑɹdʒ laɪk ðoʊz taɪd tə ðə wɔɹf pæs izəli ʌndɝniθ ɑn swips. niðɝ ə ðə bɹɔd blʌf-baʊd kɹæf hæɾ ɛni pɹəvɪʒən fəɹ stɛpɪŋ ə mæst. wʌn ə ðoʊz bɑɹdʒəz hæd sɛɾəld dip ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ, slæntɪŋ əɡɛns tɔt mʊɹɪŋ ɹoʊps, ən ði ʌðɝ sʌmhaʊ lʊkt əbændənd, tu. ə ɹæŋk, saʊɝ smɛl ɪn ði ɛɹ meɪɾ ɪm ɹʌb əɾ ɪz noʊz. noʊ wʌn ɛls sim tə noʊɾəs.

No one had told Balwer he could come, yet no one had said he could not. He bobbed a bow whenever the nobleman looked at him, then went back to studying the town walls ahead. Perrin could not shake his uneasiness as they drew nearer the town. The horses' hooves clattered hollowly on the southernmost bridge, a wide structure that rose high enough above the swiftflowing river to let a barge like those tied to the wharf pass easily underneath on sweeps. Neither of the broad bluff-bowed craft had any provision for stepping a mast. One of those barges had settled deep in the water, slanting against taut mooring ropes, and the other somehow looked abandoned, too. A rank, sour smell in the air made him rub at his nose. No one else seemed to notice.

nɪɹ ðə fʊɾ ə ðə bɹɪdʒ, ɡælɛn dʒɹu ʌp. ðə kloʊzd ɡeɪts, kʌvɝd wɪð blæk aɪɝn stʃɹæps ə fʊt waɪd, wʊɾə fɔɹst ə pɔz ɛniweɪ. "wi hæv hɝɾ ə ðə tʃɹʌbəlz pleɪɡɪŋ ðɪs lænd," hi bɛloʊɾ ət ðə mɛn ətɑp ðə wɔl, mænɪdʒɪŋ fɔɹmæləɾi ət ðə tɑp ə hɪz lʌŋz, "bʌt wəɹ mɪɹli pæsɪŋ θɹu, ən wi kʌm fəɹ tʃɹeɪd, nɑt tʃɹʌbəl; tə baɪ ɡɹeɪn ən ʌðɝ nidfəl θɪŋz, nɑt tə faɪt. aɪ hæv ði ɑnɝ tə ənaʊns bɹəleɪn sɝ pɛndʒɹæɡ pɹən, fɝst ə min, blɛsɪɾ ə ðə laɪt, dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə weɪvz, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs pɹən, kʌm tə spik wɪð ðə lɔɹɾ əɹ leɪɾi ʌv ðɪs lænd. aɪ hæv ði ɑnɝ tə ənaʊns pɛɹɪn tæʃɪɹ eɪbɑɹə. . . ." hi tɔst ɪn lɔɹɾ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz fəɹ pɛɹɪn, ən sɛvɹəl ʌðɝ taɪɾəlz ðət pɛɹɪn hæd noʊ mɔɹ ɹaɪt tə ən hæd nɛvɝ hɝd bɪfɔɹ, ðən wɛn ɑn fəɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɡɪvɪŋ itʃ ðə fʊl ɑnɝɪfɪk ən æɾɪŋ əɹ ədʒɑ, əz wɛl. ɪt wɑz ə vɛɹi ɪmpɹɛsɪv ɹəsaɪɾəl. wən i fɛl saɪlənt, ðəɹ wɑz . . . saɪləns. ɪn ðə kɹɛnəleɪʃənz əbʌv, dɝɾi-feɪst mɛn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd blik lʊks ən fɪɹs wɪspɝz, ʃɪftɪŋ kɹɔsboʊz ən pɑlɹmz nɝvəsli. oʊnli ə fju wɔɹ hɛlməts əɹ ɛni sɔɹɾ ʌv ɑɹmɝ. moʊst wɝ ɪn ɹʌf koʊts, bʌɾ ɑn wʌn mæn pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i sɔ wʌt maɪɾ əv bɪn sɪlk ʌndɝ ə leɪɝ ʌv ɡɹaɪm. ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə tɛl, wɪð soʊ mʌtʃ keɪk dɝt. ivən ɪz ɪɹz kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt wʌt ðeɪ wɝ seɪɪŋ. "haʊ də wi noʊ jəɹ əlaɪv?" ə hɔɹs vɔɪs ʃaʊɾəd daʊn ət læst.

Near the foot of the bridge, Gallenne drew up. The closed gates, covered with black iron straps a foot wide, would have forced a pause anyway. "We have heard of the troubles plaguing this land," he bellowed at the men atop the wall, managing formality at the top of his lungs, "but we are merely passing through, and we come for trade, not trouble; to buy grain and other needful things, not to fight. I have the honor to announce Berelain sur Paendrag Paeron, First of Mayene, Blessed of the Light, Defender of the Waves, High Seat of House Paeron, come to speak with the lord or lady of this land. I have the honor to announce Perrin t'Bashere Aybara. . . ." He tossed in Lord of the Two Rivers for Perrin, and several other titles that Perrin had no more right to and had never heard before, then went on for the Aes Sedai, giving each the full honorific and adding her Ajah, as well. It was a very impressive recital. When he fell silent, there was . . . silence. In the crenelations above, dirty-faced men exchanged bleak looks and fierce whispers, shifting crossbows and polearms nervously. Only a few wore helmets or any sort of armor. Most were in rough coats, but on one man Perrin thought he saw what might have been silk under a layer of grime. It was hard to tell, with so much caked dirt. Even his ears could not make out what they were saying. "How do we know you're alive?" a hoarse voice shouted down at last.

bɹəleɪn blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, bʌt noʊ wʌn læft. ɪt wɑz ful tɔk, jɛt pɛɹɪn θɔt ðə hɛɹ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk ɹɪli wɑz stændɪŋ stɪf. sʌmθɪŋ wɑz vɛɹi ɹɔŋ, hɪɹ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sim nɑt tə sɛns ɪt. ðən əɡɛn, ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd haɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðoʊz smuð mæsks ə kul sɝɛnəɾi.

Berelain blinked in surprise, but no one laughed. It was fool talk, yet Perrin thought the hair on the back of his neck really was standing stiff. Something was very wrong, here. The Aes Sedai seemed not to sense it. Then again, Aes Sedai could hide anything behind those smooth masks of cool serenity.

ðə bidz ɪn ənʊɹəz θɪn bɹeɪdz klɪk feɪnli əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. mɑsʊɝi ɹæn ən aɪsi ɡeɪz əlɔŋ ðə mɛn ɑn ðə wɔl.

The beads in Annoura's thin braids clicked faintly as she shook her head. Masuri ran an icy gaze along the men on the wall.

"ɪf aɪ mʌs pɹuv aɪm əlaɪv, jəl ɹəɡɹɛɾ ɪt," siɑnɪɾ ənaʊns laʊdli ɪn kɹɪsp kɛɹhinɪn æksɛns, ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ hiɾəd ðən əɹ feɪs sədʒɛstəd. "ɪf jə kəntɪnju tə pɔɪn ðət kɹɔsboʊ ət mi, jəl ɹəɡɹɛɾ ɪɾ ivən mɔɹ." sɛvɹəl ə ðə mɛn heɪstəli ɹeɪz ðɛɹ kɹɔsboʊz tə pɔɪn ət ðə skaɪ. nɑɾ ɔl, ðoʊ. mɔɹ wɪspɝz ɹʌsəld əlɔŋ ðə tɑp ə ðə wɔl, bʌt sʌmwʌn mʌst əv ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɛɛs sədaɪ.

"If I must prove I am alive, you will regret it," Seonid announced loudly in crisp Cairhienin accents, a little more heated than her face suggested. "If you continue to point that crossbow at me, you will regret it even more." Several of the men hastily raised their crossbows to point at the sky. Not all, though. More whispers rustled along the top of the wall, but someone must have recognized Aes Sedai.

ət læst, ðə ɡeɪts skwild oʊpən ɑn mæsɪv ɹʌsti hɪnʒɪz. ə ɡæɡɪŋ stɛntʃ swɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə taʊn, ðə stɪŋk pɛɹɪn hæd bɪn smɛlɪŋ, oʊnli stʃɹɔŋɝ. oʊl dɝɾ ən oʊl swɛt, dəkeɪɪŋ mɪɾənz ən tʃeɪmbɝ pɑts tu lɔŋ ʌnɪmptaɪd. pɛɹɪnz ɪɹz tʃɹaɪd tə laɪ bæk. ɡælɛn hæf-lɪftəɾ ɪz ɹɛd hɛlməɾ əz ɪf tə ɹipleɪs ɪɾ ɑn ɪz hɛd bɪfɔɹ ɝdʒɪŋ ɪz dʌn θɹu ðə ɡeɪts. pɛɹɪn buɾɪd steɪɝ tə fɑloʊ, izɪŋ ɪz æks ɪn ɪts bɛlt lup. dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə ɡeɪt, ə fɪlθi mæn ɪn ə tɔɹn koʊt poʊk pɛɹɪnz lɛɡ wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ, ðən dɑɹɾɪd bæk wən steɪɝ snæpt ət hɪm. ðə fɛloʊ hæd bɪn fæt, wʌns, bʌɾ ɪz koʊt sæɡd ən ɪz skɪn hʌŋ lus. "dʒʌst wɑntəd tə bi ʃʊɹ," hi mʌɾɝd, skɹætʃɪŋ ɪz saɪɾ æbsənli. "maɪ lɔɹd," hi æɾəd, ə tɪk leɪt. hɪz aɪz sim tə foʊkəs ɑn pɛɹɪnz feɪs fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, ən ɪz skɹætʃɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz fɹoʊz.

At last, the gates squealed open on massive rusty hinges. A gagging stench swept out of the town, the stink Perrin had been smelling, only stronger. Old dirt and old sweat, decaying middens and chamber pots too long unemptied. Perrin's ears tried to lie back. Gallenne half-lifted his red helmet as if to replace it on his head before urging his dun through the gates. Perrin booted Stayer to follow, easing his axe in its belt loop. Just inside the gate, a filthy man in a torn coat poked Perrin's leg with a finger, then darted back when Stayer snapped at him. The fellow had been fat, once, but his coat sagged and his skin hung loose. "Just wanted to be sure," he muttered, scratching his side absently. "My Lord," he added, a tick late. His eyes seemed to focus on Perrin's face for the first time, and his scratching fingers froze.

ɡoʊldən jɛloʊ aɪz wɝ nɑɾ ə kɑmən saɪt, æftɝ ɔl.

Golden yellow eyes were not a common sight, after all.

"du jə si mɛni dɛd mɛn wɔkɪŋ?" pɛɹɪn æskt ɹaɪli, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ə dʒoʊk ʌv ɪt, əz i pæɾəd ðə beɪz nɛk. ə tʃɹeɪnd wɔɹhɔɹs wɑntəd tə bi ɹɪwɔɹɾɪd fəɹ pɹətɛktɪŋ ɪz ɹaɪɾɝ. ðə fɛloʊ flɪntʃt əz ɪf ðə hɔɹs hæd bɛɹd tiθ əɾ ɪm əɡɛn; hɪz maʊθ twɪtʃt ɪndə ə ɹɪktəs smaɪl, ən i ɛdʒ saɪdweɪz. əntɪl i bʌmp sɑlədli ɪndə bɹəleɪnz mɛɹ. ɡælɛn wɑz ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn hɝ, stɪl lʊkɪŋ ɹɛɾi tə dɑn ɪz hɛlmət, hɪz wʌn aɪ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɑtʃ sɪks weɪz ət wʌns.

"Do you see many dead men walking?" Perrin asked wryly, trying to make a joke of it, as he patted the bay's neck. A trained warhorse wanted to be rewarded for protecting his rider. The fellow flinched as if the horse had bared teeth at him again; his mouth twitched into a rictus smile, and he edged sideways. Until he bumped solidly into Berelain's mare. Gallenne was right behind her, still looking ready to don his helmet, his one eye trying to watch six ways at once.

"wɛɹ kən aɪ faɪn jəɹ lɔɹɾ əɹ leɪɾi?" ʃi dɪmændəɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli. min wɑz ə smɔl neɪʃən, bʌt bɹəleɪn wɑz ʌnəkʌstəm tə biɪŋ ɪɡnɔɹd. "ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls simz tə hæv ɡɔn mjut, bʌɾ aɪ hɝd jə juz jəɹ tʌŋ. wɛl, mæn? spik ʌp." ðə fɛloʊ stɛɹɾ ʌp ət hɝ, lɪkɪŋ ɪz lɪps. "lɔɹd kaʊlɪn. . . .

"Where can I find your lord or lady?" she demanded impatiently. Mayene was a small nation, but Berelain was unaccustomed to being ignored. "Everyone else seems to have gone mute, but I heard you use your tongue. Well, man? Speak up." The fellow stared up at her, licking his lips. "Lord Cowlin. . . .

lɔɹd kaʊlɪn ɪz . . . əweɪ. maɪ leɪɾi." hɪz aɪz dɑɹɾɪd təwɔɹd pɛɹɪn, ðən flɪkɝɾ əweɪ. "ðə ɡɹeɪn mɝtʃəns. . . . ðəɹ u jə wɑnt. ðeɪ kən ɔlweɪz bi faʊn ət ðə ɡoʊldən bɑɹdʒ. ðət weɪ." hi θɹʌst aʊɾ ə hæn pɔɪntɪŋ veɪɡli dipɝ ɪndə ðə taʊn, ðən sʌɾənli skɹæmbəld əweɪ, lʊkɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əɾ əm əz ðoʊ fɪɹfəl ə pɝsut.

Lord Cowlin is . . . away. My Lady." His eyes darted toward Perrin, then flickered away. "The grain merchants. . . . They're who you want. They can always be found at the Golden Barge. That way." He thrust out a hand pointing vaguely deeper into the town, then suddenly scrambled away, looking back over his shoulder at them as though fearful of pursuit.

"aɪ θɪŋk wi ʃəd faɪn sʌmwɛɹ ɛls," pɛɹɪn sɛd. ðət fɛloʊ hæd bɪn əfɹeɪɾ ə mɔɹ ðən jɛloʊ aɪz. ðɪs pleɪs fɛlt . . . əskju.

"I think we should find somewhere else," Perrin said. That fellow had been afraid of more than yellow eyes. This place felt . . . askew.

"wi ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi hɪɹ, ən ðəɹ ɪz noʊwɛɹ ɛls," bɹəleɪn ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪn ə vɛɹi pɹæktəkəl vɔɪs. ɪn ɔl ðət stɪŋk, hi kəd nɑt kætʃ əɹ sɛnt; hi wəɾ əv tə ɡoʊ baɪ wʌɾ i hɝɾ ən sɔ, ən əɹ feɪs wɑz kɑm ɪnʌf fəɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. "aɪv bɪn ɪn taʊnz ðət smɛld wɝs ðən ðɪs, pɛɹɪn. aɪm ʃʊɹ aɪ hæv.

"We are already here, and there is nowhere else," Berelain replied in a very practical voice. In all that stink, he could not catch her scent; he would have to go by what he heard and saw, and her face was calm enough for an Aes Sedai. "I've been in towns that smelled worse than this, Perrin. I'm sure I have.

ən ɪf ðɪs lɔɹd kaʊlɪn ɪz ɡɔn, ɪt woʊn bi ðə fɝs taɪm aɪv dɛlt wɪð mɝtʃəns. jə doʊn ɹɪli bɪliv ðeɪv sin ðə dɛd wɔkɪŋ, də ju?"

And if this Lord Cowlin is gone, it won't be the first time I've dealt with merchants. You don't really believe they've seen the dead walking, do you?"

wʌt wɑz ə mæn tə seɪ tə ðət wɪθaʊt saʊndɪŋ ə pjʊɹ wʊl hɛd? ɪn ɛni keɪs, ði ʌðɝz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi kɹaʊɾɪŋ θɹu ðə ɡeɪts, ðoʊ nɑɾ ɪn ɛni niɾ ɝeɪ, naʊ. wɪntɝ ən ælhæɹə hil siɑnɪd laɪk mɪsmætʃt ɡɑɹd dɑɡz, ðə wʌn fɛɹ, ði ʌðɝ dɑɹk, ən boʊθ ɹɛɾi tə ɹɪp aʊt θɹoʊts ət ðə blɪŋk ʌv ən aɪ. ðeɪ sɝɾənli hæd ðə fil ə soʊ hæbɝ. kɝklɪn, ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɪsaɪd mɑsʊɝi, lʊkt ənwɪlɪŋ tə weɪt fəɹ ðəɾ aɪ tə blɪŋk; hɪz hæn ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd. kaɪɹən hæɾ ə hæn tə hɪz noʊz, ən ə ɡlɛɹ ɪn ɪz aɪ ðət sɛd sʌmwʌn wɑz gɑnə peɪ fəɹ meɪkɪŋ ɪm smɛl ðɪs. mɛdɔɹ ən lɑɾən lʊkt ɪl, tu, bʌt beɪlwɝ mɪɹli pɪɹɾ əbaʊt, tɪltɪŋ ɪz hɛd, ðən dʒɹu ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm ɔf ɪndə ə nɛɹoʊ saɪd stʃɹit liɾɪŋ nɔɹθ. əz bɹəleɪn sɛd, ðeɪ wɝ ðəɹ ɔlɹɛɾi.

What was a man to say to that without sounding a pure wool head? In any case, the others were already crowding through the gates, though not in any neat array, now. Wynter and Alharra heeled Seonid like mismatched guard dogs, the one fair, the other dark, and both ready to rip out throats at the blink of an eye. They certainly had the feel of So Habor. Kirklin, riding beside Masuri, looked unwilling to wait for that eye to blink; his hand rested on the hilt of his sword. Kireyin had a hand to his nose, and a glare in his eye that said someone was going to pay for making him smell this. Medore and Latian looked ill, too, but Balwer merely peered about, tilting his head, then drew the pair of them off into a narrow side street leading north. As Berelain said, they were there already.

ðə kʌlɝfəl bænɝz lʊk dɪsaɪɾədli aʊɾ ə pleɪs əz pɛɹɪn ɹoʊd θɹu ðə kɹæmpt waɪndɪŋ stʃɹits ə ðə taʊn. səm ə ðə stʃɹits wɝ æktʃəli  kwaɪt waɪd fəɹ ðə saɪz ə soʊ hæbɝ, bʌt ðeɪ fɛl kloʊs, əz ɪf ðə stoʊn bɪldɪŋz ɑn iðɝ saɪd sʌmhaʊ lum haɪɝ ðən ðɛɹ tu əɹ θɹi stɔɹiz ən wɝ əbaʊt tə tɑpəl ɑn ɪz hɛd, tə but. ɪmædʒəneɪʃən meɪd ðə stʃɹits sim dɪm, tu. ɪt hæd tə bi ɪmædʒəneɪʃən. ðə skaɪ wɑz nɑt ðət ɡɹeɪ. pipəl fɪl ðə dɝɾi stoʊn peɪvɪŋ, bʌt nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə əkaʊn fəɹ ɔl ðə fɑɹmz ɪn ði ɛɹiə biɪŋ əbændənd, ən ɛvɹiwʌn skɝid, hɛdz daʊn. nɑt hɝiɪŋ təwɔɹd sʌmθɪŋ; hɝiɪŋ əweɪ. noʊ wʌn lʊkt əɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls. wɪð ə ɹɪvɝ pɹæktəkli ɑn ðɛɹ dɔɹstɛps, ðeɪ hæd fɝɡɑɾən haʊ tə wɑʃ, tu. hi dɪd nɑt si ə feɪs wɪθaʊɾ ə koʊɾɪŋ ʌv ɡɹaɪm əɹ ə ɡɑɹmən ðət dɪd nɑt lʊk tə hæv bɪn wɔɹn fəɹ ə wik, ən hɑɹd wɝk ɪn mʌk wɪð ɪt. ðə stɪŋk oʊnli wɝsən ðə dipɝ ɪndə ðə taʊn ðeɪ ɹoʊd. hi səpoʊz jə kəd ɡɛt juz tə ɛniθɪŋ, ɪn taɪm. wɝst ʌv ɔl wɑz ðə kwaɪət, ðoʊ. vɪlədʒəz wɝ kwaɪət səmtaɪmz, ɪf nɑt soʊ stɪl əz ðə wʊdz, bʌɾ ə taʊn ɔlweɪz hɛld ə feɪn mɝmɝ, ðə saʊn ə ʃɑpkipɝz bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ ən pipəl ɡoʊɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ lɪvz. soʊ hæbɝ dɪd nɑɾ ivən wɪspɝ. ɪt bɛɹli sim tə bɹið.

The colorful banners looked decidedly out of place as Perrin rode through the cramped winding streets of the town. Some of the streets were actually quite wide for the size of So Habor, but they felt close, as if the stone buildings on either side somehow loomed higher than their two or three stories and were about to topple on his head, to boot. Imagination made the streets seem dim, too. It had to be imagination. The sky was not that gray. People filled the dirty stone paving, but not enough to account for all the farms in the area being abandoned, and everyone scurried, heads down. Not hurrying toward something; hurrying away. No one looked at anyone else. With a river practically on their doorsteps, they had forgotten how to wash, too. He did not see a face without a coating of grime or a garment that did not look to have been worn for a week, and hard work in muck with it. The stink only worsened the deeper into the town they rode. He supposed you could get used to anything, in time. Worst of all was the quiet, though. Villages were quiet sometimes, if not so still as the woods, but a town always held a faint murmur, the sound of shopkeepers bargaining and people going about their lives. So Habor did not even whisper. It barely seemed to breathe.

ɡɛɾɪŋ bɛɾɝ dɝɛkʃənz wɑz dɪfəkəlt, sɪns moʊs pipəl dɑɹɾɪd əweɪ ɪf spoʊkən tə, bʌɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðeɪ dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə pɹɑspɝəs-əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn, θɹi stɔɹiz ə nitli dʒɹɛst ɡɹeɪ stoʊn ʌndɝ ə sleɪt ɹuf, wɪð ə saɪn hæŋɪŋ aʊt fɹʌn ənaʊnsɪŋ ðə ɡoʊldən bɑɹdʒ. ðə saɪn ivən hæɾ ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɪlt ɑn ðə lɛɾɝɪŋ, ən ɑn ðə ɡɹeɪn maʊndɪd haɪ ɪn ðə bɑɹdʒ ən ənkʌvɝɾ əz ɪt nɛvɝ wəd bi fəɹ ʃɪpɪŋ. noʊ ɡɹumz əpɪɹd fɹəm ðə steɪbliɑɹd bɪsaɪd ði ɪn, soʊ ðə bænɝmɪn hæd tə sɝv əz hɔɹs hoʊldɝz, ə tæsk ðət dɪd nɑt meɪk əm hæpi. tɑd pʊt soʊ mʌtʃ ətɛnʃən ɪndə piɹɪŋ ət ðə floʊ ʌv dɝɾi pipəl ðət skɝid baɪ ən fɑndəlɪŋ ðə hɪlt ə hɪz ʃɔɹt-sɔɹd ðət steɪɝ vɛɹi nɪɹli ɡɑɾ ə kʌpəl ə hɪz fɪŋɡɝz wən i tʊk ðə stæljənz ɹeɪnz. ðə minɝ ən ðə ɡildænɪn sim tə bi wɪʃɪŋ ðeɪ hæd lænsɪz ɹæðɝ ðən bænɝz. flæn dʒʌs lʊkt waɪld-aɪd. ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sʌn, ðə laɪt dɪd sim . . . ʃæɾoʊi. ɡoʊɪŋ ɪnsaɪd dɪd nɑt meɪk θɪŋz ɛni bɛɾɝ.

Getting better directions was difficult, since most people darted away if spoken to, but eventually they dismounted in front of a prosperous-appearing inn, three stories of neatly dressed gray stone under a slate roof, with a sign hanging out front announcing the Golden Barge. The sign even had a touch of gilt on the lettering, and on the grain mounded high in the barge and uncovered as it never would be for shipping. No grooms appeared from the stableyard beside the inn, so the bannermen had to serve as horse holders, a task that did not make them happy. Tod put so much attention into peering at the flow of dirty people that scurried by and fondling the hilt of his short-sword that Stayer very nearly got a couple of his fingers when he took the stallion's reins. The Mayener and the Ghealdanin seemed to be wishing they had lances rather than banners. Flann just looked wild-eyed. In spite of the morning sun, the light did seem . . . shadowy. Going inside did not make things any better.

ət fɝst ɡlæns, ðə kɑmən ɹum bɔɹ aʊt ði ɪnz pɹɑspɛɹəɾi, wɪð pɑlɪʃt ɹaʊn teɪbəlz ən pɹɑpɝ tʃɛɹz ɪnstɛɾ ə bɛntʃɪz, stændɪŋ bɪniθ ə haɪ, staʊt-bim silɪŋ. ðə wɔlz wɝ peɪntəd wɪð filz ə bɑɹli ən oʊts ən mɪlət, ɹaɪpənɪŋ ʌndɝ ə bɹaɪt sʌn, ən ə kʌlɝfli peɪntəd klɑk stʊɾ ɑn ðə kɑɹv mæntəl əbʌv ə waɪd faɪɝpleɪs ʌv waɪt stoʊn. ðə faɪɝpleɪs wɑz koʊld, ðoʊ, ði ɛɹ nɪɹli əz aɪsi əz aʊtsaɪd. ðə klɑk hæd ɹʌn daʊn ən ðə pɑlɪʃ dʌld. dʌs leɪ ɑn ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ði oʊnli pipəl ɪn ðə ɹum wɝ sɪks mɛn ən faɪv wɪmən hʌɾəlɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ dʒɹɪŋks ɝaʊn ən oʊvəl teɪbəl, lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ðə ɹɛst, ðət stʊɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə flɔɹ. wʌn ə ðə mɛn lɛp tə hɪz fit wɪð ən oʊθ, feɪs pælɪŋ ʌndɝniθ ðə dɝt, wən pɛɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz ɛntɝd. ə plʌmp wʊmən wɪð læŋk ɡɹisi hɛɹ ʃʌvd əɹ pjuɾɝ kʌp tə hɝ maʊθ ən tʃɹaɪd tə ɡʌlp soʊ fæs ðət waɪn spɪld oʊvɝ əɹ tʃɪn. meɪbi ɪt wɑz ɪz aɪz. meɪbi.

At first glance, the common room bore out the inn's prosperity, with polished round tables and proper chairs instead of benches, standing beneath a high, stout-beamed ceiling. The walls were painted with fields of barley and oats and millet, ripening under a bright sun, and a colorfully painted clock stood on the carved mantel above a wide fireplace of white stone. The fireplace was cold, though, the air nearly as icy as outside. The clock had run down and the polish dulled. Dust lay on everything. The only people in the room were six men and five women huddling over their drinks around an oval table, larger than the rest, that stood in the middle of the floor. One of the men leaped to his feet with an oath, face paling underneath the dirt, when Perrin and the others entered. A plump woman with lank greasy hair shoved her pewter cup to her mouth and tried to gulp so fast that wine spilled over her chin. Maybe it was his eyes. Maybe.

"wʌt hæpən ɪn ðɪs taʊn?" ənʊɹə sɛd fɝmli, tɔsɪŋ bæk əɹ kloʊk əz ðoʊ ə faɪɝ bleɪzd ɑn ðə hɑɹθ. ðə kɑm ɡeɪz ʃi ɹæn əkɹɔs ðə pipəl ət ðə teɪbəl fɹoʊz ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm.

"What happened in this town?" Annoura said firmly, tossing back her cloak as though a fire blazed on the hearth. The calm gaze she ran across the people at the table froze every one of them.

əbɹʌpli pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪz ðət niðɝ mɑsʊɝi nɔɹ siɑnɪd hæd fɑloʊɾ ɪm ɪnsaɪd. hi daʊɾɪd vɛɹi mʌtʃ ðət ðeɪ wɝ weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹit wɪð ðə hɔɹsəz. wʌt ðeɪ ən ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz wɝ duɪŋ wɑz ɛni mænz ɡɛs.

Abruptly Perrin realized that neither Masuri nor Seonid had followed him inside. He doubted very much that they were waiting in the street with the horses. What they and their Warders were doing was any man's guess.

ðə mæn u hæd dʒʌmpt ʌp tʌɡd əɾ ɪz koʊt kɑlɝ wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ. ðə koʊt hæd bɪn faɪn blu wʊl wʌns, wɪð ə ɹoʊ ʌv ɡɪldɪd bʌɾənz tə hɪz nɛk, bʌɾ i əpɪɹd tə hæv bɪn spɪlɪŋ fud daʊn ðə fɹʌn ʌv ɪt fəɹ səm taɪm. meɪbi mɔɹ ðən hæd ɡɔn ɪndə hɪm. hi wɑz ənʌðɝ huz skɪn hʌŋ slæk.

The man who had jumped up tugged at his coat collar with a finger. The coat had been fine blue wool once, with a row of gilded buttons to his neck, but he appeared to have been spilling food down the front of it for some time. Maybe more than had gone into him. He was another whose skin hung slack.

"eɪtʃ-hæpənd, ɛɛs sədaɪ?" hi stæmɝd.

"H-happened, Aes Sedai?" he stammered.

"bi kwaɪət, mɪkəl!" ə hæɡɝd wʊmən sɛd kwɪkli. hɝ dɑɹk dʒɹɛs wɑz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɑn ðə haɪ nɛk ən əlɔŋ ðə slivz, bʌt dɝt meɪd ðə kʌlɝz ənsɝɾən. hɝ aɪz wɝ sʌŋkən pɪts. "wʌt meɪks jə θɪŋk sʌmθɪŋ hæpənd, ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ənʊɹə wəɾ əv kəntɪnjud, bʌt bɹəleɪn stɛpt ɪn əz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ əɡɛn. "wi ɑɹ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪn mɝtʃəns." ənʊɹəz ɪkspɹɛʃən nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd, bʌɾ əɹ maʊθ snæpt ʃʌt wɪð ən ɑɾəbəl klɪk.

"Be quiet, Mycal!" a haggard woman said quickly. Her dark dress was embroidered on the high neck and along the sleeves, but dirt made the colors uncertain. Her eyes were sunken pits. "What makes you think something happened, Aes Sedai?" Annoura would have continued, but Berelain stepped in as the Aes Sedai opened her mouth again. "We are looking for the grain merchants." Annoura's expression never changed, but her mouth snapped shut with an audible click.

lɔŋ lʊks pæs bɪtwin ðə pipəl ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl. ðə hæɡɝd wʊmən stʌɾid ənʊɹə fəɹ ə moʊmənt, kwɪkli pæsɪŋ ɑn tə bɹəleɪn ən ɑbviəsli teɪkɪŋ ɪn ðə sɪlks ən faɪɝdʒɹɑps. ən ðə daɪədɛm. ʃi spɹɛɾ əɹ skɝts ɪn ə kɝtsi. "wi ɑɹ ðə mɝtʃəns ɡɪld ə soʊ hæbɝ, maɪ leɪɾi. wʌts lɛft ə  -  " bɹeɪkɪŋ ɔf, ʃi tʊk ə dip, ʃʌɾɝɪŋ bɹɛθ. "aɪ æm ɹæhimə ɑɹnən, maɪ leɪɾi. haʊ meɪ wi sɝv ju?"

Long looks passed between the people around the table. The haggard woman studied Annoura for a moment, quickly passing on to Berelain and obviously taking in the silks and firedrops. And the diadem. She spread her skirts in a curtsy. "We are the merchant's guild of So Habor, my Lady. What's left of  -  " Breaking off, she took a deep, shuddering breath. "I am Rahema Arnon, my Lady. How may we serve you?"

ðə mɝtʃəns sim tə bɹaɪɾən ə lɪɾəl ɑn lɝnɪŋ ðət ðɛɹ vɪzəɾɝz hæd kʌm fəɹ ɡɹeɪn ən ʌðɝ θɪŋz ðət ðeɪ kəd səplaɪ, ɔɪl fəɹ læmps ən kʊkɪŋ, binz ən niɾəlz ən hɔɹsʃu neɪlz, klɔθ ən kændəlz ən ə dʌzən θɪŋz mɔɹ ðət ðə kæmp niɾəd. ət list, ðeɪ ɡɹu ə lɪɾəl lɛs fɪɹfəl.

The merchants seemed to brighten a little on learning that their visitors had come for grain and other things that they could supply, oil for lamps and cooking, beans and needles and horseshoe nails, cloth and candles and a dozen things more that the camp needed. At least, they grew a little less fearful.

ɛni ɔɹɾənɛɹi mɝtʃən hɪɹɪŋ ðə lɪs bɹəleɪn ɡeɪv wʊɾə bɪn hɑɹd-pɹɛs nɑt tə smaɪl ɡɹiɾəli, bʌt ðɪs lɑt. . . .

Any ordinary merchant hearing the list Berelain gave would have been hard-pressed not to smile greedily, but this lot. . . .

mɪstʃɹəs ɑɹnən ʃaʊɾəd fəɹ ði ɪnkipɝ tə bɹɪŋ waɪn  -  "ðə bɛst waɪn; kwɪkli, naʊ; kwɪkli"  -  bʌt wən ə lɔŋ-noʊzd wʊmən stʌk əɹ hɛd hɛzɪɾəntli ɪndə ðə kɑmən ɹum, mɪstʃɹəs ɑɹnən hæd tə ɹʌʃ oʊvɝ ən kætʃ əɹ sɔɪl sliv tə kip əɹ fɹəm vænɪʃɪŋ əɡɛn. ðə fɛloʊ ɪn ðə fud-steɪn koʊt kɔl fəɹ sʌmwʌn neɪm spɝəl tə bɹɪŋ ðə sæmpəl dʒɑɹz, bʌɾ æftɝ ʃaʊɾɪŋ θɹi taɪmz wɪð noʊ ɹɪspɑns, hi ɡeɪv ə nɝvəs læf ən dɑɹɾɪd ɪndə ə bæk ɹum tə ɹɪtɝn ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ, hɪz ɑɹmz ɝaʊn θɹi lɑɹdʒ səlɪnʒɹɪkəl wʊɾən kənteɪnɝz ðəɾ i sæɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, stɪl læfɪŋ nɝvəsli. ði ʌðɝz wɔɹ ə kəlɛkʃən ə twɪtʃɪŋ smaɪlz əz ðeɪ baʊɾ ən kɝtsid bɹəleɪn tə ə siɾ ət ðə hɛɾ ə ði oʊvəl teɪbəl, ɡɹisi-feɪs mɛn ən wɪmən skɹætʃɪŋ ət ðɛmsɛlvz wɪθaʊɾ əpɪɹɪŋ tə noʊɾəs wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ. pɛɹɪn tʌkt ɪz ɡɔnləts bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛlt ən stʊɾ əɡɛnst ə peɪntəd wɔl, wɑtʃɪŋ. ðeɪ hæɾ əɡɹid tə liv ðə bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ tə bɹəleɪn. ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə ədmɪt, ɹɪlʌktənli, ðəɾ i nu mɔɹ ə hɔɹsflɛʃ ðən ʃi, bʌt ʃi hæd nəɡoʊʃieɪɾəd tʃɹiɾiz kʌvɝɪŋ ðə seɪl ə jɪɹz' wɝθ ə ði ɔɪlfɪʃ hɑɹvəst. ənʊɹə hæd smaɪl θɪnli ət ðə sədʒɛstʃən ðəɾ ə dʒʌmpt-ʌp kʌntʃɹi læd maɪt teɪk ə hænd. ʃi dɪd nɑt kɔl ɪm ðæt  -  ʃi kəd "maɪ lɔɹd" hɪm əz smuðli əz mɑsʊɝi əɹ siɑnɪd  -  jɛɾ ɪt wɑz klɪɹ ʃi θɔt səm θɪŋz klɪɹli əbʌv ɪz əbɪləɾi. ʃi wɑz nɑt smaɪlɪŋ naʊ, stændɪŋ bɪhaɪn bɹəleɪn ən stʌɾiɪŋ ðə mɝtʃəns əz ɪf tə mɛmɝaɪz ðɛɹ feɪsəz.

Mistress Arnon shouted for the innkeeper to bring wine  -  "the best wine; quickly, now; quickly"  -  but when a long-nosed woman stuck her head hesitantly into the common room, Mistress Arnon had to rush over and catch her soiled sleeve to keep her from vanishing again. The fellow in the food-stained coat called for someone named Speral to bring the sample jars, but after shouting three times with no response, he gave a nervous laugh and darted into a back room to return a moment later, his arms around three large cylindrical wooden containers that he sat on the table, still laughing nervously. The others wore a collection of twitching smiles as they bowed and curtsied Berelain to a seat at the head of the oval table, greasy-faced men and women scratching at themselves without appearing to notice what they were doing. Perrin tucked his gauntlets behind his belt and stood against a painted wall, watching. They had agreed to leave the bargaining to Berelain. She was willing to admit, reluctantly, that he knew more of horseflesh than she, but she had negotiated treaties covering the sale of years' worth of the oilfish harvest. Annoura had smiled thinly at the suggestion that a jumped-up country lad might take a hand. She did not call him that  -  she could "my Lord" him as smoothly as Masuri or Seonid  -  yet it was clear she thought some things clearly above his ability. She was not smiling now, standing behind Berelain and studying the merchants as if to memorize their faces.

ði ɪnkipɝ bɹɔt waɪn, ɪn pjuɾɝ kʌps ðət hæd læst sin ə pɑlɪʃɪŋ klɔθ wiks əɡoʊ ɪf nɑt mʌnθs, bʌt pɛɹɪn oʊnli pɪɹɾ ɪndə hɪz ən swɝld ɪɾ ɪn ðə kʌp. mɪstʃɹəs veɪdɪɹ, ði ɪnkipɝ, hæd dɝɾ ʌndɝ əɹ fɪŋɡɝneɪlz ən ɛmbɛɾɪd ɪn əɹ nʌkəlz laɪk pɑɹɾ ə hɝ skɪn. hi noʊɾəst ðət ɡælɛn, stændɪŋ wɪð ɪz bæk tə ði ɑpəzət wɔl ən wʌn hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt, oʊnli hɛld ɪz kʌp, tu, ən bɹəleɪn nɛvɝ tʌtʃt hɝz. kaɪɹən snɪft ət hɪz, ðən dʒɹæŋk dipli ən kɔl fəɹ mɪstʃɹəs veɪdɪɹ tə bɹɪŋ ɪm ə pɪtʃɝ.

The innkeeper brought wine, in pewter cups that had last seen a polishing cloth weeks ago if not months, but Perrin only peered into his and swirled it in the cup. Mistress Vadere, the innkeeper, had dirt under her fingernails and embedded in her knuckles like part of her skin. He noticed that Gallenne, standing with his back to the opposite wall and one hand on his sword hilt, only held his cup, too, and Berelain never touched hers. Kireyin sniffed at his, then drank deeply and called for Mistress Vadere to bring him a pitcher.

"θɪn stʌf, tə bi kɔl jəɹ bɛst," hi toʊl ðə wʊmən θɹu hɪz noʊz, ən lʊkɪŋ daʊn ɪt, "bʌɾ ɪt maɪt wɑʃ əweɪ ðə stɪŋk." ʃi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm blæŋkli, ðən fɛtʃt ə tɔl pjuɾɝ pɪtʃɝ tə hɪz teɪbəl wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ ə wɝd. kaɪɹən əpɛɹənli tʊk əɹ saɪləns fəɹ ɹɪspɛkt.

"Thin stuff, to be called your best," he told the woman through his nose, and looking down it, "but it might wash away the stink." She stared at him blankly, then fetched a tall pewter pitcher to his table without saying a word. Kireyin apparently took her silence for respect.

mæstɝ kɹɑsɪn, ðə fɛloʊ ɪn ðə fud-steɪn koʊt, ənskɹud ðə tɑps ə ðə wʊɾən kənteɪnɝz ən spɪld aʊt hʌl sæmpəlz ə ðə ɡɹeɪn ðeɪ hæd tə ɔfɝ ɪn paɪlz ɑn ðə teɪbəl, jɛloʊ mɪləɾ ən bɹaʊn oʊts, ðə bɑɹli oʊnli ə lɪɾəl dɑɹkɝ bɹaʊn. ðəɹ wʊɾə bɪn noʊ ɹeɪn bɪfɔɹ ðə hɑɹvəst.

Master Crossin, the fellow in the food-stained coat, unscrewed the tops of the wooden containers and spilled out hulled samples of the grain they had to offer in piles on the table, yellow millet and brown oats, the barley only a little darker brown. There would have been no rain before the harvest.

"ðə faɪnəs kwɑləɾi, əz jə kən si," hi sɛd.

"The finest quality, as you can see," he said.

"jɛs, ðə faɪnəst." ðə smaɪl slɪɾ ɔf mɪstʃɹəs ɑɹnənz feɪs, ən ʃi dʒɝkt ɪt bæk. "wi sɛl oʊnli ðə faɪnəst."

"Yes, the finest." The smile slid off Mistress Arnon's face, and she jerked it back. "We sell only the finest."

fəɹ pipəl taʊɾɪŋ ðɛɹ wɛɹz əz ðə faɪnəst, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sim tə bɑɹɡən vɛɹi hɑɹd. pɛɹɪn hæd wɑtʃt mɛn ən wɪmən bæk hoʊm sɛlɪŋ ðə wʊl klɪp ən ðə təbæk tə mɝtʃəns daʊn fɹəm bɛɹlən, ən ðeɪ ɔlweɪz dɪspɛɹɪdʒ ðə baɪɝz' ɔfɝz, səmtaɪmz kəmpleɪnɪŋ ðə mɝtʃəns wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɛɡɝ əm wən ðə pɹaɪs wɑz twaɪs wʌɾ ɪt hæd bɪn ðə jɪɹ bɪfɔɹ əɹ ivən sədʒɛstɪŋ ðeɪ maɪt weɪt tɪl nɛks jɪɹ tə sɛl əɾ ɔl. ɪt wɑz ə dæns əz ɪntʃɹəkəɾ əz ɛni əɾ ə fistdeɪ.

For people touting their wares as the finest, they did not seem to bargain very hard. Perrin had watched men and women back home selling the wool clip and the tabac to merchants down from Baerlon, and they always disparaged the buyers' offers, sometimes complaining the merchants were trying to beggar them when the price was twice what it had been the year before or even suggesting they might wait till next year to sell at all. It was a dance as intricate as any at a feastday.

"aɪ səpoʊz wi maɪt loʊɝ ðə pɹaɪs fɝðɝ fəɹ sətʃ ə lɑɹdʒ kwɑntəɾi," ə bɔldɪŋ mæn toʊl bɹəleɪn, skɹætʃɪŋ əɾ ɪz ɡɹeɪstʃɹik bɪɹd. ɪt wɑz kʌt ʃɔɹt, ən ɡɹisi ɪnʌf tə klɪŋ kloʊs tə hɪz tʃɪn. pɛɹɪn wɑntəd tə skɹætʃ ɪz oʊn bɪɹd dʒʌst wɑtʃɪŋ ðə fɛloʊ.

"I suppose we might lower the price further for such a large quantity," a balding man told Berelain, scratching at his graystreaked beard. It was cut short, and greasy enough to cling close to his chin. Perrin wanted to scratch his own beard just watching the fellow.

"ɪts bɪn ə hɑɹd wɪntɝ," ə ɹaʊnd-feɪst wʊmən mʌɾɝd. oʊnli tu ʌv ði ʌðɝ mɝtʃəns bɑðɝd tə fɹaʊn ət hɝ.

"It's been a hard winter," a round-faced woman muttered. Only two of the other merchants bothered to frown at her.

pɛɹɪn sɛɾ ɪz waɪnkʌp daʊn ɑn ə nɪɹbaɪ teɪbəl ən wɔkt ʌv$ tə ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum. ənʊɹə ɡeɪv ɪm wʌn ʃɑɹp, wɔɹnɪŋ ɡlæns, bʌt sɛvɹəl ə ðə mɝtʃəns lʊkt əɾ ɪm kjʊɹiəsli. ən kɔʃəsli. ɡælɛn hæd meɪɾ ɪz ɪntʃɹədʌkʃənz ɔl oʊvɝ əɡɛn, bʌt ðiz foʊk wɝ nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli klɪɹ wɛɹ min wɑz, ɪɡzækli, əɹ haʊ paʊɝfəl, ən ðə tu ɹɪvɝz oʊnli mɛnt ɡʊd təbæk, tə ðɛm. tu ɹɪvɝz təbæk wɑz noʊn ɛvɹiwɛɹ. ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, hɪz aɪz maɪɾ əv sɛɾ əm ɹʌnɪŋ. ɛvɹiwʌn fɛl saɪlən əz pɛɹɪn skupt ʌp ə hændfʊl ə mɪlət, ðə taɪni sfɪɹz smuð ən vɪvəd jɛloʊ ɑn ɪz pɑm. ðɪs ɡɹeɪn wɑz ðə fɝs klin θɪŋ i hæd sin ɪn ðə taʊn. lɛɾɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪn spɪl bæk ɑntu ðə teɪbəl, hi pɪkt ʌp ðə lɪɾ ʌv wʌn ə ðə kənteɪnɝz. ðə θɹɛdz kʌɾ ɪndə ðə wʊd wɝ ʃɑɹp ən ənwɹn. ðə lɪd wəd fɪt taɪtli.

Perrin set his winecup down on a nearby table and walked ove$ to the gathering in the middle of the room. Annoura gave him one sharp, warning glance, but several of the merchants looked at him curiously. And cautiously. Gallenne had made his introductions all over again, but these folk were not entirely clear where Mayene was, exactly, or how powerful, and the Two Rivers only meant good tabac, to them. Two Rivers tabac was known everywhere. If not for the presence of an Aes Sedai, his eyes might have set them running. Everyone fell silent as Perrin scooped up a handful of millet, the tiny spheres smooth and vivid yellow on his palm. This grain was the first clean thing he had seen in the town. Letting the grain spill back onto the table, he picked up the lid of one of the containers. The threads cut into the wood were sharp and unworn. The lid would fit tightly.

mɪstʃɹəs ɑɹnənz aɪz slɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm hɪz, ən ʃi lɪkt əɹ lɪps.

Mistress Arnon's eyes slid away from his, and she licked her lips.

"aɪ wɑnə si ðə ɡɹeɪn ɪn ðə wɛɹhaʊzɪz," hi sɛd. hæf ðə pipəl ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl twɪtʃt.

"I want to see the grain in the warehouses," he said. Half the people around the table twitched.

mɪstʃɹəs ɑɹnən dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp, blʌstɝɪŋ. "wi doʊn sɛl wʌt wi doʊn hæv. jə kən wɑtʃ əɹ leɪbɝɝz loʊɾ ɛvɹi sæk ɑn jəɹ kɑɹts, ɪf jə wɪʃ tə spɛn aʊɝz ɪn ðə koʊld." "aɪ wɑz əbaʊt tə sədʒɛst ə vɪzət tə ə wɛɹhaʊs," bɹəleɪn pʊɾ ɪn. ɹaɪzɪŋ, ʃi dʒɹu hɝ ɹɛd ɡlʌvz fɹəm bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt ən bɪɡæn tʌɡɪŋ əm ɑn. "aɪ wəd nɛvɝ baɪ ɡɹeɪn wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ðə wɛɹhaʊs." mɪstʃɹəs ɑɹnən sæɡd. ðə bɔld-hɛɾəd mæn pʊɾ ɪz hɛd daʊn ɑn ðə teɪbəl. noʊ wʌn sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ, ðoʊ. ðə dɪspɪɹəɾɪd mɝtʃəns dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə fɛtʃ ðɛɹ kloʊks bɪfɔɹ liɾɪŋ əm ɪndə ðə stʃɹit. ðə bɹiz hæd pɪkt ʌp tə ə wɪnd, koʊld əz oʊnli ə leɪt wɪntɝ wɪn kəd bi, wən pipəl wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi θɪŋkɪŋ əhɛd tə spɹɪŋ, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs. ðə hʌntʃ ə ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð koʊld. "kæn wi ɡoʊ naʊ, lɔɹd pɝɹɪnp" flæn æskt æŋkʃəsli wən pɛɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz əpɪɹd. "ðɪs pleɪs meɪks mi wɑn ə bæθ." ənʊɹə ɡeɪv ɪm ə fɹaʊn ɪn pæsɪŋ ðət meɪɾ ɪm flɪntʃ laɪk wʌn ə ðə mɝtʃəns. flæn tʃɹaɪɾ ə pleɪkeɪɾɪŋ smaɪl ɑn hɝ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə sɪkli ɛfɝt, ən tu leɪt fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ əɹ bæk.

Mistress Arnon drew herself up, blustering. "We don't sell what we don't have. You can watch our laborers load every sack on your carts, if you wish to spend hours in the cold." "I was about to suggest a visit to a warehouse," Berelain put in. Rising, she drew her red gloves from behind her belt and began tugging them on. "I would never buy grain without seeing the warehouse." Mistress Arnon sagged. The bald-headed man put his head down on the table. No one said anything, though. The dispirited merchants did not bother to fetch their cloaks before leading them into the street. The breeze had picked up to a wind, cold as only a late winter wind could be, when people were already thinking ahead to spring, but they did not seem to notice. The hunch of their shoulders had nothing to do with cold. "Can we go now, Lord PerrinP" Flann asked anxiously when Perrin and the others appeared. "This place makes me want a bath." Annoura gave him a frown in passing that made him flinch like one of the merchants. Flann tried a placating smile on her, but it was a sickly effort, and too late for anything but her back.

"æz sun əz aɪ kən ɝeɪnʒ ɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. ðə mɝtʃəns wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi skɝiɪŋ daʊn ðə stʃɹit, hɛdz daʊn ən nɑt lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɛniwʌn. bɹəleɪn ən ənʊɹə mænədʒ tə fɑloʊ wɪθaʊɾ əpɪɹɪŋ tə ɹʌʃ, ɡlaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ, wʌn əz kəmpoʊzd əz ði ʌðɝ, tu faɪn leɪɾiz aʊt fəɹ ə stʃɹoʊl ən nɛvɝ maɪn ðə fɪlθ ʌndɝfʊt, əɹ ðə stɪŋk ɪn ði ɛɹ, əɹ ðə dɝɾi pipəl u stɑɹɾəd ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðɛm ən səmtaɪmz ɔl bʌt ɹæn əweɪ əz fæst əz ðeɪ kʊd. ɡælɛn hæd faɪnəli dɑn ɪz hɛlmət, ən oʊpənli hɛld ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt wɪð boʊθ hænz, ɹɛɾi tə dʒɹɔ. kaɪɹən wɑz kæɹiɪŋ ɪz hɛlməɾ ɑn ɪz hɪp, hɪz ʌðɝ hæn ɑkjəpaɪd wɪð ɪz waɪnkʌp. kəntɛmptʃwəsli aɪɪŋ ðə ɡɹaɪmi-feɪs foʊk u hɝid baɪ, hi snɪft ət ðə waɪn əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə poʊmændɝ tə faɪɾ ɔf ðə stɛntʃ ə ðə taʊn. ðə wɛɹhaʊzɪz wɝ loʊkeɪɾəd ɑn ə stoʊn-peɪv stʃɹit bɛɹli waɪɾɝ ðən ə wæɡən, bɪtwin ðə taʊnz tu wɔlz. ðə smɛl wɑz bɛɾɝ ðɛɹ, kloʊs tə ðə ɹɪvɝ, bʌt ðə wɪnbloʊn stʃɹit wɑz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ pɛɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz. ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ivən ə stʃɹeɪ dɔɡ tə bi sin. dɑɡz dɪsəpɪɹd wən ə taʊn ɡɹu hʌŋɡɹi, bʌt waɪ wəɾ ə taʊn wɪð ɪnʌf ɡɹeɪn tə sɛl bi hʌŋɡɹi? pɛɹɪn pɔɪntəd tə ə tu-stɔɹi wɛɹhaʊs tʃoʊzən ət ɹændəm, noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ, ə wɪndoʊləs stoʊn bɪldɪŋ wɪð ə waɪd pɛɹ ʌv wʊɾən dɔɹz hɛld ʃʌt baɪ ə wʊɾən bɑɹ ðət cʊɾə dʌn fəɹ ə silɪŋ bim ət ðə ɡoʊldən bɑɹdʒ.

"As soon as I can arrange it," Perrin said. The merchants were already scurrying down the street, heads down and not looking at anyone. Berelain and Annoura managed to follow without appearing to rush, gliding along, one as composed as the other, two fine ladies out for a stroll and never mind the filth underfoot, or the stink in the air, or the dirty people who started at the sight of them and sometimes all but ran away as fast as they could. Gallenne had finally donned his helmet, and openly held his sword hilt with both hands, ready to draw. Kireyin was carrying his helmet on his hip, his other hand occupied with his winecup. Contemptuously eyeing the grimy-faced folk who hurried by, he sniffed at the wine as if it were a pomander to fight off the stench of the town. The warehouses were located on a stone-paved street barely wider than a wagon, between the town's two walls. The smell was better there, close to the river, but the windblown street was empty except for Perrin and the others. There was not even a stray dog to be seen. Dogs disappeared when a town grew hungry, but why would a town with enough grain to sell be hungry? Perrin pointed to a two-story warehouse chosen at random, no different from any other, a windowless stone building with a wide pair of wooden doors held shut by a wooden bar that could have done for a ceiling beam at the Golden Barge.

ðə mɝtʃəns sʌɾənli ɹɪkɔl ðət ðeɪ hæd fɝɡɑɾən tə bɹɪŋ mɛn tə lɪf ðə bɑɹz. ðeɪ ɔfɝd tə ɡoʊ bæk fəɹ ðɛm. ðə leɪɾi bɹəleɪn ən ənʊɹə sədaɪ kəd ɹɛst ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝ ət ðə ɡoʊldən bɑɹdʒ waɪl wɝkmɪn wɝ fɛtʃt. ðeɪ wɝ ʃʊɹ mɪstʃɹəs veɪdɪɹ wəd leɪ ə faɪɝ. ðɛɹ tʌŋz wɛn stɪl wən pɛɹɪn pleɪst ɪz hæn bɪniθ ðə θɪk bim ən ʃʌvd ɪɾ ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə wʊɾən bɹækəts. ðə θɪŋ wɑz hɛvi, bʌɾ i bækt ʌp wɪð ɪt tə ɡɪv ɪm ɹum tə tɝn ən tɔs ɪt daʊn ɑn ðə stʃɹit wɪð ə kɹæʃ. ðə mɝtʃəns stɛɹd. ðɪs maɪɾ əv bɪn ðə fɝs taɪm ðeɪ hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ə mæn ɪn ə sɪlk koʊt də ɛniθɪŋ ðət kəd bi kɔld wɝk. kaɪɹən ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz ən tʊk ənʌðɝ snɪf əɾ ɪz waɪn.

The merchants suddenly recalled that they had forgotten to bring men to lift the bars. They offered to go back for them. The Lady Berelain and Annoura Sedai could rest in front of the fire at the Golden Barge while workmen were fetched. They were sure Mistress Vadere would lay a fire. Their tongues went still when Perrin placed his hand beneath the thick beam and shoved it up out of the wooden brackets. The thing was heavy, but he backed up with it to give him room to turn and toss it down on the street with a crash. The merchants stared. This might have been the first time they had ever seen a man in a silk coat do anything that could be called work. Kireyin rolled his eyes and took another sniff at his wine.

"læntɝnz," mɪstʃɹəs ɑɹnən sɛd wikli. "wil nid læntɝnz, əɹ tɔɹtʃɪz. ɪf. . . . " ə bɔl ə laɪɾ əpɪɹd floʊɾɪŋ əbʌv ənʊɹəz hænd, ɡloʊɪŋ bɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ mɔɹnɪŋ tə kæst ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn feɪnt ʃædoʊz ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ ən ðə stoʊn wɔlz. səm ə ðə mɝtʃəns pʊt hænz ʌp tə ʃil ðɛɹ aɪz. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, mæstɝ kɹɑsɪn tʌɡd wʌn ə ðə dɔɹz oʊpən baɪ ən aɪɝn ɹɪŋ.

"Lanterns," Mistress Arnon said weakly. "We'll need lanterns, or torches. If. . . . " A ball of light appeared floating above Annoura's hand, glowing bright enough in the gray morning to cast everyone in faint shadows on the paving and the stone walls. Some of the merchants put hands up to shield their eyes. After a moment, Master Crossin tugged one of the doors open by an iron ring.

ðə smɛl ɪnsaɪd wɑz ðə fəmɪljɝ ʃɑɹp sɛn ə bɑɹli, ɔlmoʊst stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝkʌm ðə stɛntʃ ə ðə taʊn, ən sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ. smɔl dɪm ʃeɪps slʌŋk əweɪ ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊz əhɛɾ ʌv ənʊɹəz laɪt. hi cʊɾə sin bɛɾɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɪt, əɹ ət lis dipɝ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs. ðə ɡloʊɪŋ bɔl kæst ə lɑɹdʒ pul ə laɪt, ən wɔld ɔf wʌt leɪ bɪɑnd. hi smɛl kæt, kloʊsɝ tə fɛɹəl ðən nɑt.

The smell inside was the familiar sharp scent of barley, almost strong enough to overcome the stench of the town, and something more. Small dim shapes slunk away into the shadows ahead of Annoura's light. He could have seen better without it, or at least deeper into the darkness. The glowing ball cast a large pool of light, and walled off what lay beyond. He smelled cat, closer to feral than not.

ən ɹæt, tu. ə sʌɾən skwil ɪn ðə blæk dɛpθs ə ðə wɛɹhaʊs, sʌɾənli kʌɾ ɔf, spoʊk ə kæt miɾɪŋ ɹæt. ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz ɹæts ɪn ɡɹeɪn bɑɹnz, ən kæts tə hʌn ðɛm. ɪt wɑz kʌmfɝɾɪŋ, ən nɔɹməl.

And rat, too. A sudden squeal in the black depths of the warehouse, suddenly cut off, spoke of cat meeting rat. There were always rats in grain barns, and cats to hunt them. It was comforting, and normal.

ɔlmoʊst ɪnʌf tə suð ɪz ʌnizinəs. ɔlmoʊst. hi smɛl sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, ə smɛl i ʃəd noʊ. ə fɪɹs jaʊl dip ɪn ðə wɛɹhaʊs tɝn tə ɹaɪzɪŋ kɹaɪz ə peɪn ðət daɪɾ əbɹʌpli. əpɛɹənli ðə ɹæts ə soʊ hæbɝ səmtaɪmz hʌntəd bæk. pɛɹɪnz hækəlz stɝɾ əɡɛn, bʌt ʃʊɹli ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ hɪɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn wəd wɑnə spaɪ ɑn. moʊst ɹæts wɝ dʒʌst ɹæts. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə ɡoʊ vɛɹi fɑɹ ɪn. kɔɹs sæks fɪl ðə dɑɹknəs, ɪn haɪ slænt-saɪɾəd stæks ɑn loʊ wʊɾən plætfɔɹmz tə kip ðə sæks ɔf ðə stoʊn flɔɹ. ɹoʊz ən ɹoʊz ə stæks paɪl nɪɹli tə ðə silɪŋ, ən laɪkli ðə seɪm ɑn ðə flɔɹ əbʌv.

Almost enough to soothe his uneasiness. Almost. He smelled something else, a smell he should know. A fierce yowl deep in the warehouse turned to rising cries of pain that died abruptly. Apparently the rats of So Habor sometimes hunted back. Perrin's hackles stirred again, but surely there was nothing here the Dark One would want to spy on. Most rats were just rats. There was no need to go very far in. Coarse sacks filled the darkness, in high slant-sided stacks on low wooden platforms to keep the sacks off the stone floor. Rows and rows of stacks piled nearly to the ceiling, and likely the same on the floor above.

ɪf nɑt, ðɪs bɪldɪŋ stɪl hɛld ɪnʌf ɡɹeɪn tə fiɾ ɪz pipəl fəɹ wiks. wɔkɪŋ tə ðə nɪɹəst stæk, hi dʒɹoʊv ɪz bɛl naɪf ɪndə ə peɪl bɹaʊn sæk ən slaɪs daʊn θɹu ðə tʌf dʒut faɪbɝz. ə flʌɾ ə bɑɹlikɔɹnz spɪld aʊt. ænd, klɪɹ ɪn ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ənʊɹəz bɹɪljən laɪt, ɹɪəlɪŋ blæk spɛks.

If not, this building still held enough grain to feed his people for weeks. Walking to the nearest stack, he drove his belt knife into a pale brown sack and sliced down through the tough jute fibers. A flood of barleycorns spilled out. And, clear in the glow of Annoura's brilliant light, wriggling black specks.

wivəlz, ɔlmoʊst əz mɛni əz ðəɹ wɝ bɑɹlikɔɹnz. ðɛɹ sɛnt wɑz ʃɑɹpɝ ðən ðəɾ ə ðə bɑɹli.

Weevils, almost as many as there were barleycorns. Their scent was sharper than that of the barley.

wivəlz. hi wɪʃt ðə hɛɹ ɑn ɪz nɛk wəd stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹaɪz. ðə koʊld ʃʊɾə bɪn ɪnʌf tə kɪl wivəlz. ðət wʌn sæk wɑz pɹuf, ən ɪz noʊz nu ðə smɛl ʌv wivəlz, naʊ, bʌɾ i muv tə ənʌðɝ stæk, ðən ənʌðɝ, ən ənʌðɝ, itʃ taɪm slaɪsɪŋ oʊpən wʌn sæk. itʃ ɹilist ə spɪl ə peɪl bɹaʊn bɑɹli ən blæk wivəlz.

Weevils. He wished the hair on his neck would stop trying to rise. The cold should have been enough to kill weevils. That one sack was proof, and his nose knew the smell of weevils, now, but he moved to another stack, then another, and another, each time slicing open one sack. Each released a spill of pale brown barley and black weevils.

ðə mɝtʃəns wɝ stændɪŋ hʌɾəld təɡɛðɝ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, deɪlaɪt bɪhaɪn ðɛm, bʌɾ ənʊɹəz laɪt kæs ðɛɹ feɪsəz ɪn ʃɑɹp ɹɪlif. wɝid feɪsəz. dɪspɛɹɪŋ feɪsəz. "wi wəd bi moʊs hæpi tə wɪnoʊ itʃ sæk wi sɛl," mɪstʃɹəs ɑɹnən sɛɾ ənstɛɾəli. "fɔɹ oʊnli ə slaɪɾ ədɪʃənəl - "

The merchants were standing huddled together in the doorway, daylight behind them, but Annoura's light cast their faces in sharp relief. Worried faces. Despairing faces. "We would be most happy to winnow each sack we sell," Mistress Arnon said unsteadily. "For only a slight additional - "

"fɔɹ hæf ðə læs pɹaɪs aɪ ɔfɝd," bɹəleɪn kʌɾ ɪn ʃɑɹpli. ɹɪŋkəlɪŋ əɹ noʊz ɪn dɪsɡʌst, ʃi muvd əɹ skɝts klɪɹ ə ðə wivəlz skʌɾəlɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə ɡɹeɪn ɑn ðə flɔɹ. "ju wɪl nɛvɝ ɡɛɾ ɔl ə ðɛm."

"For half the last price I offered," Berelain cut in sharply. Wrinkling her nose in disgust, she moved her skirts clear of the weevils scuttling among the grain on the floor. "You will never get all of them."

"ænd noʊ mɪlət," pɛɹɪn sɛd ɡɹɪmli. hɪz mɛn niɾəd fud, ən soʊ dɪd ðə soʊlʒɝz, bʌt ðə mɪlət ɡɹeɪnz wɝ hɑɹdli bɪɡɝ ðən ðə wivəlz. wɪnoʊ əz ðeɪ wʊd, hi wəd bɹɪŋ bæk wivəlz ən mɪləɾ ɪn ikwəl weɪt. "wil teɪk ɛkstʃɹə binz ɪnstɛd. bʌt ðeɪ ɡɛt wɪnoʊd, tu." sʌɾənli sʌmwʌn ʃɹikt aʊtsaɪɾ ɪn ðə stʃɹit. nɑɾ ə kæɾ əɹ ə ɹæt, bʌɾ ə mæn ɪn tɛɹɝ. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑɾ ivən ɹilaɪz i hæd dʒɹɔn ɪz æks əntɪl i faʊn ðə hæft ɪn ɪz hæn əz i pʊʃt θɹu ðə mɝtʃəns ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ. ðeɪ hʌɾəld kloʊsɝ təɡɛðɝ, lɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ lɪps ən nɑɾ ivən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə si hu hæd skɹimd. kaɪɹən wɑz bækt ʌp əɡɛns ðə wɔl ʌv ə wɛɹhaʊs əkɹɔs ðə weɪ, hɪz ʃaɪnɪŋ hɛlmət wɪð ðə waɪt plum laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə peɪvmən bɪsaɪɾ ɪz waɪnkʌp. ðə mænz sɔɹd wɑz hæf aʊɾ ə ðə skæbɝd, bʌɾ i sim fɹoʊzən, stɛɹɪŋ wɪð bʌlʒɪŋ aɪz ət ðə wɔl ə ðə bɪldɪŋ pɛɹɪn hæd dʒʌs kʌm aʊɾ ʌv. pɛɹɪn tʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm, ən i dʒʌmpt.

"And no millet," Perrin said grimly. His men needed food, and so did the soldiers, but the millet grains were hardly bigger than the weevils. Winnow as they would, he would bring back weevils and millet in equal weight. "We'll take extra beans instead. But they get winnowed, too." Suddenly someone shrieked outside in the street. Not a cat or a rat, but a man in terror. Perrin did not even realize he had drawn his axe until he found the haft in his hand as he pushed through the merchants in the doorway. They huddled closer together, licking their lips and not even trying to see who had screamed. Kireyin was backed up against the wall of a warehouse across the way, his shining helmet with the white plume lying on the pavement beside his winecup. The man's sword was half out of the scabbard, but he seemed frozen, staring with bulging eyes at the wall of the building Perrin had just come out of. Perrin touched his arm, and he jumped.

"ðɛɹ wɑz ə mæn," ðə ɡildænɪn sɛɾ ənsɝteɪnli. "hi wɑz dʒʌs ðɛɹ. hi lʊkt ət mi, ænd. .

"There was a man," the Ghealdanin said uncertainly. "He was just there. He looked at me, and. .

. ." kaɪɹən skɹʌbd ə hæn oʊvɝ ɪz feɪs. dɪspaɪt ðə koʊld, swɛt ɡlɪsən ɑn ɪz fɔɹhɛd. "hi wɔk θɹu ðə wɔl. hi dɪd. jə mʌs bɪliv mi."

. ." Kireyin scrubbed a hand over his face. Despite the cold, sweat glistened on his forehead. "He walked through the wall. He did. You must believe me."

sʌmwʌn moʊnd; wʌn ə ðə mɝtʃəns, pɛɹɪn θɔt. "aɪ sɔ ðə mæn, tu," siɑnɪd sɛd bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən ɪt wɑz ɪz tɝn tə ɡɪv ə stɑɹt. hɪz noʊz wɑz jusləs ɪn ðɪs pleɪs! ɡɪvɪŋ ðə wɔl kaɪɹən hæɾ ɪndəkeɪɾəd ə læst ɡlæns, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stɛpt əweɪ fɹəm ɪt wɪð ə pælpəbəl ənwɪlɪŋnɪs.

Someone moaned; one of the merchants, Perrin thought. "I saw the man, too," Seonid said behind him, and it was his turn to give a start. His nose was useless in this place! Giving the wall Kireyin had indicated a last glance, the Aes Sedai stepped away from it with a palpable unwillingness.

hɝ wɔɹɾɝz wɝ tɔl mɛn, taʊɝɪŋ oʊvɝ hɝ, bʌt ðeɪ steɪɾ oʊnli fɑɹ ɪnʌf əweɪ tə ɡeɪn ɹum tə dʒɹɔ ðɛɹ sɔɹdz. ðoʊ wʌt ðə ɡɹɪm-aɪd wɔɹɾɝz wɝ tə faɪɾ ɪf siɑnɪd wɑz sɪɹiəs, pɛɹɪn kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən.

Her Warders were tall men, towering over her, but they stayed only far enough away to gain room to draw their swords. Though what the grim-eyed Warders were to fight if Seonid was serious, Perrin could not imagine.

"aɪ faɪn ɪt dɪfəkəl tə laɪ, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," siɑnɪd sɛd dʒɹaɪli wən i ɪkspɹɛs daʊt, bʌɾ əɹ toʊn kwɪkli bɪkeɪm əz sɪɹiəs əz əɹ feɪs, ən əɹ aɪz wɝ soʊ ɪntɛn ðət ðeɪ əloʊn bɪɡæn tə meɪk pɛɹɪn fil ənizi. "ðə dɛɾ ɑɹ wɔkɪŋ ɪn soʊ hæbɝ. lɔɹd kaʊlɪn flɛd ðə taʊn fəɹ fɪɹ ə hɪz waɪfs spɪɹət.

"I find it difficult to lie, Lord Perrin," Seonid said dryly when he expressed doubt, but her tone quickly became as serious as her face, and her eyes were so intent that they alone began to make Perrin feel uneasy. "The dead are walking in So Habor. Lord Cowlin fled the town for fear of his wife's spirit.

ɪt simz ðəɹ wɑz daʊɾ əz tə haʊ ʃi daɪd. hɑɹdli ə mæn əɹ wʊmən ɪn ðə taʊn əz nɑt sin sʌmwʌn dɛd, ən ə ɡʊd mɛni hæv sin mɔɹ ðən wʌn.

It seems there was doubt as to how she died. Hardly a man or woman in the town has not seen someone dead, and a good many have seen more than one.

səm seɪ pipəl əv daɪd fɹəm ðə tʌtʃ ə sʌmwʌn dɛd. aɪ kænɑt vɛɹəfaɪ ðæt, bʌt pipəl əv daɪɾ ə fɹaɪt, ən ʌðɝz kəz ʌv ɪt. noʊ wʌn ɡoʊz aʊɾ ət naɪɾ ɪn soʊ hæbɝ, əɹ wɔks ɪndə ə ɹum ʌnənaʊnst. pipəl stʃɹaɪk aʊɾ ət ʃædoʊz ən sɝpɹaɪzəz wɪð wʌtɛvɝ ɪz tə hænd, ən səmtaɪmz ðeɪv faʊn ə hʌzbənd, waɪf əɹ neɪbɝ dɛɾ ət ðɛɹ fit. ðɪs ɪz nɑt hɪstɛɹiə əɹ ə teɪl tə fɹaɪɾən tʃɪlʒɹən, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn. aɪ hæv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə ðə laɪk, bʌɾ ɪts ɹil. jə mʌs liv wʌn ʌv əs hɪɹ tə də wʌt wi kæn." pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd sloʊli. hi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə luz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪf i wɑz tə fɹi feɪl. mɪstʃɹəs ɑɹnən bɪɡæn tə wip ivən bɪfɔɹ i sɛd, "soʊ hæbɝ wɪl əv tə feɪs ɪts dɛɾ əloʊn." bʌt fɪɹ ə ðə dɛɾ oʊnli ɪkspleɪn soʊ mʌtʃ. meɪbi pipəl wɝ tu fɹaɪɾənd tə θɪŋk ʌv wɑʃɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt simd ənlaɪkli ðət fɪɹ wəd teɪk ɛvɹiwʌn ðət weɪ. ðeɪ dʒʌs dɪd nɑt sim tə kɛɹ ɛnimɔɹ. ən wivəlz θɹaɪvɪŋ ɪn wɪntɝ, ɪn fɹizɪŋ koʊld? ðəɹ wɑz wɝs ɹɔŋ ɪn soʊ hæbɝ ðən spɪɹəts wɔkɪŋ, ən ɛvɹi ɪnstɪŋk toʊld ɪm tə liv əɾ ə dɛd ɹʌn, wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ bæk. hi pjʊɹli wɪʃt ðəɾ i kʊd.

Some say people have died from the touch of someone dead. I cannot verify that, but people have died of fright, and others because of it. No one goes out at night in So Habor, or walks into a room unannounced. People strike out at shadows and surprises with whatever is to hand, and sometimes they have found a husband, wife or neighbor dead at their feet. This is not hysteria or a tale to frighten children, Lord Perrin. I have never heard of the like, but it is real. You must leave one of us here to do what we can." Perrin shook his head slowly. He could not afford to lose an Aes Sedai if he was to free Faile. Mistress Arnon began to weep even before he said, "So Habor will have to face its dead alone." But fear of the dead only explained so much. Maybe people were too frightened to think of washing, but it seemed unlikely that fear would take everyone that way. They just did not seem to care anymore. And weevils thriving in winter, in freezing cold? There was worse wrong in So Habor than spirits walking, and every instinct told him to leave at a dead run, without looking back. He purely wished that he could.

tʃæptɝ twɛntisɛvən

CHAPTER 27

wʌt mʌs bi dʌn ðə wɪnoʊɪŋ tʊk pleɪs ɑn ðə snoʊi istɝn ɹɪvɝbæŋk, wɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə kʌt ðə ʃɑɹp nɔɹθ wɪnd. mɛn ən wɪmən fɹəm ðə taʊn hɔl sæks əkɹɔs ðə bɹɪdʒəz ɪn fɔɹ-hɔɹs wæɡənz ən wʌn-hɔɹs kɑɹts ivən bæɹoʊz pʊʃt baɪ hænd. nɔɹməli baɪɝz bɹɔt ðɛɹ oʊn wæɡənz tə ðə wɛɹhaʊzɪz, əɹ ət wɝs ðə ɡɹeɪn ən dʒɹaɪd binz oʊnli hæd tə bi kæɹiɾ əz fɑɹ əz ðə wɔɹf, bʌt pɛɹɪn hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə sɛndɪŋ ɪz kɑɹt dʒɹaɪvɝz ɪndə soʊ hæbɝ. əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ.

What Must Be Done The winnowing took place on the snowy eastern riverbank, where there was nothing to cut the sharp north wind. Men and women from the town hauled sacks across the bridges in four-horse wagons and one-horse carts even barrows pushed by hand. Normally buyers brought their own wagons to the warehouses, or at worst the grain and dried beans only had to be carried as far as the wharf, but Perrin had no intention of sending his cart drivers into So Habor. Or anyone else, for that matter.

wʌtɛvɝ wɑz ɹɔŋ ɪn ðət taʊn maɪt bi kætʃɪŋ. ɛniweɪ, ðə dʒɹaɪvɝz wɝ ənizi ɪnʌf əz ɪt wɑz, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə dɝɾi taʊnzfoʊk, pipəl u nɛvɝ spoʊk, bʌt læf nɝvəsli wən ðeɪ æksədɛntəli mɛt sʌmwʌnz aɪ. ðə ɡɹaɪmi-feɪs mɝtʃəns oʊvɝsiɪŋ ðə wɝk wɝ noʊ bɛɾɝ. ɪn ðə dʒɹaɪvɝz' neɪɾɪv kɛɹhin, mɝtʃəns wɝ klin, ɹɪspɛktəbəl pipəl, ət list aʊtwɝdli, hu vɛɹi sɛldəm twɪtʃt dʒʌs kəz sʌmwʌn muvd ət ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ðɛɹ vɪʒən. bɪtwin mɝtʃəns wɪð ə tɛndənsi tə pɪɹ səspɪʃəsli əɾ ɛniwʌn ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ, ən taʊnzfoʊk u dʒɹæɡd ðɛɹ fit ɹɛkɹɔsɪŋ ðə bɹɪdʒəz, klɪɹli ɹɪlʌktən tə ɡoʊ bæk ɪnsaɪd ðɛɹ oʊn wɔlz, ðə kɑɹt dʒɹaɪvɝz wɝ ɹaɪɾ ɑn ɛdʒ. ðeɪ ɡæðɝɾ ɪn lɪɾəl klʌstɝz, peɪl, dɑɹk-klæd mɛn ən wɪmən, ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə hɪls ə ðɛɹ bɛl naɪvz ən piɹɪŋ ət ðə kɔlɝ loʊkəlz əz ɪf ət mɝɾɝəs mædmən.

Whatever was wrong in that town might be catching. Anyway, the drivers were uneasy enough as it was, frowning at the dirty townsfolk, people who never spoke, but laughed nervously when they accidentally met someone's eye. The grimy-faced merchants overseeing the work were no better. In the drivers' native Cairhien, merchants were clean, respectable people, at least outwardly, who very seldom twitched just because someone moved at the corner of their vision. Between merchants with a tendency to peer suspiciously at anyone they did not know, and townsfolk who dragged their feet recrossing the bridges, clearly reluctant to go back inside their own walls, the cart drivers were right on edge. They gathered in little clusters, pale, dark-clad men and women, gripping the hilts of their belt knives and peering at the caller locals as if at murderous madmen.

pɛɹɪn ɹoʊɾ əbaʊt sloʊli, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə wɪnoʊɪŋ, ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ðə ɹoʊ ʌv kɑɹts ðət stʃɹɛtʃt ʌp ðə ɹaɪz ən aʊɾ ə saɪt weɪɾɪŋ tə bi loʊɾəd, əɹ ðə taʊnz wæɡənz ən kɑɹts ən bæɹoʊz ɹoʊlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə bɹɪdʒəz. hi meɪd ʃʊɹ i wɑz ɪn pleɪn vju. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ waɪ ðə saɪɾ ə hɪm pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi ʌnkənsɝnd ʃəd sɛɾəl ɛniwʌn ɛlsəz nɝvz, jɛɾ ɪt sim tə. ɪnʌf ðət noʊ wʌn stɑɹɾəd ɹʌnɪŋ, ət list, ðoʊ ðeɪ kəntɪnjud tə lʊk əskæns ət ðə pipəl ə soʊ hæbɝ. ðeɪ kɛp ðɛɹ dɪstəns, tu, ən dʒʌst əz wɛl. lɛt ðə noʊʃən ðət səm ə ðoʊz foʊk maɪt nɑt bi əlaɪv ɡɛɾ ɪndə ðə kɛɹhinɪnz hɛdz, ən hæf wəd wɪp ʌp ðɛɹ kɑɹt hɔɹsəz tə fli ðən ən ðɛɹ. moʊst ə ðə ɹɛs maɪt nɑt weɪt mʌtʃ pæs dɑɹk. ðət sɔɹɾ ə teɪl kəd twɪst ɛniwʌnz hɛd, kʌm naɪt. ðə wɑn sʌn, nɪɹli hɪɾən baɪ ɡɹeɪ oʊvɝkæst, stɪl sæt lɛs ðən hæfweɪ tə ɪts nundeɪ pik, jɛɾ ɪnkɹisɪŋli ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs ðeɪ wəɾ əv tə bi ðəɹ θɹu ðə naɪt. meɪbi mɔɹ ðən wʌn. hɪz dʒɔ nɑɾɪd wɪð ði ɛfɝɾ ə nɑt ɡɹaɪndɪŋ ɪz tiθ, ən ivən nil bɪɡæn tə əvɔɪɾ ɪz skaʊlz. hi dɪd nɑt snæp əɾ ɛniwʌn. hi dʒʌst wɑntəd tə.

Perrin rode about slowly, watching the winnowing, examining the row of carts that stretched up the rise and out of sight waiting to be loaded, or the town's wagons and carts and barrows rolling across the bridges. He made sure he was in plain view. He was not sure why the sight of him pretending to be unconcerned should settle anyone else's nerves, yet it seemed to. Enough that no one started running, at least, though they continued to look askance at the people of So Habor. They kept their distance, too, and just as well. Let the notion that some of those folk might not be alive get into the Cairhienin's heads, and half would whip up their cart horses to flee then and there. Most of the rest might not wait much past dark. That sort of tale could twist anyone's head, come night. The wan sun, nearly hidden by gray overcast, still sat less than halfway to its noonday peak, yet increasingly it was obvious they would have to be there through the night. Maybe more than one. His jaw knotted with the effort of not grinding his teeth, and even Neald began to avoid his scowls. He did not snap at anyone. He just wanted to.

ɪt wɑz ən ɑɹdʒuəs pɹɑsɛs, ðə wɪnoʊɪŋ. ɛvɹi læst sæk hæd tə bi oʊpən ən ɛmptiɾ ɑntu lɑɹdʒ flæt wɪkɝ bæskəts, itʃ ʌv wɪtʃ tʊk tu pipəl tə tɔs ðə ɡɹeɪn əɹ binz. ðə koʊld wɪn kæɹiɾ əweɪ wivəlz ɪn ə ʃaʊɝ ə blæk flɛks, ən mɛn ən wɪmən wɪð woʊvən tu-hændəd fænz æɾəd tə ðə ɡʌsts. ə swɪf kɝən swɛpt əweɪ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət wɑz bloʊn ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ, bʌt sun ðə snoʊ ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk wɑz tʃɹæmpəld ʌndɝfʊɾ ən ðə ɡɹeɪ slʌʃ leɪɝd wɪð ɪnsɛks dɛɾ əɹ daɪɪŋ fɹəm ðə koʊld, ən ə lɪbɝəl koʊɾɪŋ ʌv oʊts ən bɑɹli spɛkəld wɪð ɹɛd binz. ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ə nu leɪɝ tə ɹipleɪs wʌt fit mæʃt ɪndə ðə snoʊ. wʌt wɑz lɛft ɑn ðə bæskəts sim klinɝ, ðoʊ, ɪf nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli klin wən ɪt wɑz pɔɹd bæk ɪndə ðə kɔɹs dʒut bæɡz, wɪtʃ hæd bɪn tɝn ɪnsaɪɾ aʊɾ ən biɾən fɪɹsli wɪð stɪks baɪ tʃɪlʒɹən tə ʃeɪk aʊt vɝmɪn. ðə ɹifɪl sæks wɛn ɪndə ðə kɛɹhinɪnz kɑɹts əz sun əz ðə tɑps wɝ taɪd, bʌt ðə paɪlz ʌv ɛmpti bæɡz ɡɹu əɾ ə pɹədɪdʒəs ɹeɪt.

It was an arduous process, the winnowing. Every last sack had to be opened and emptied onto large flat wicker baskets, each of which took two people to toss the grain or beans. The cold wind carried away weevils in a shower of black flecks, and men and women with woven two-handed fans added to the gusts. A swift current swept away everything that was blown into the river, but soon the snow on the riverbank was trampled underfoot and the gray slush layered with insects dead or dying from the cold, and a liberal coating of oats and barley speckled with red beans. There was always a new layer to replace what feet mashed into the snow. What was left on the baskets seemed cleaner, though, if not entirely clean when it was poured back into the coarse jute bags, which had been turned inside out and beaten fiercely with sticks by children to shake out vermin. The refilled sacks went into the Cairhienin's carts as soon as the tops were tied, but the piles of empty bags grew at a prodigious rate.

hi wɑz linɪŋ ɑn ðə pɑməl ə steɪɝz sæɾəl, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kælkjəleɪt wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz teɪkɪŋ tu hoʊl kɑɹt loʊdz fɹəm ðə wɛɹhaʊzɪz tə fɪl wʌn ə hɪz kɑɹts wɪð ɡɹeɪn, wən bɹəleɪn bɹɔɾ əɹ waɪt mɛɹ ʌp bɪsaɪd hɪm, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ skɑɹlət kloʊk kloʊs əɡɛns ðə wɪnd wɪð wʌn ɹɛd-ɡlʌv hænd. ənʊɹə ɹeɪn ɪn ə fju peɪsɪz əweɪ, hɝ eɪdʒləs feɪs smuð ən ənɹiɾəbəl. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əpɪɹd tə bi ɡɪvɪŋ əm pɹaɪvəsi, jɛt ʃi wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ ɛniθɪŋ əbʌv wɪspɝz ivən wɪθaʊɾ ɛni tʃɹɪks ə ðə paʊɝ. smuð feɪs əɹ noʊ, hɝ bik ʌv ə noʊz ɡeɪv əɹ ə pɹɛɾətɔɹi lʊk tədeɪ. hɝ biɾɪd bɹeɪdz sim səm stʃɹeɪnʒ iɡəlz loʊɝd kɹɛst.

He was leaning on the pommel of Stayer's saddle, trying to calculate whether it was taking two whole cart loads from the warehouses to fill one of his carts with grain, when Berelain brought her white mare up beside him, holding her scarlet cloak close against the wind with one red-gloved hand. Annoura reined in a few paces away, her ageless face smooth and unreadable. The Aes Sedai appeared to be giving them privacy, yet she was close enough to hear anything above whispers even without any tricks of the Power. Smooth face or no, her beak of a nose gave her a predatory look today. Her beaded braids seemed some strange eagle's lowered crest.

"ju kænɑt seɪv ɛvɹiwʌn," bɹəleɪn sɛd kɑmli. əweɪ fɹəm ðə stɪŋk ə ðə taʊn, hɝ sɛnt wɑz ʃɑɹp wɪð ɝdʒənsi, ən ɹeɪzɝədʒd wɪð æŋɡɝ. "səmtaɪmz, jə mʌs tʃuz. soʊ hæbɝ ɪz lɔɹd kaʊlɪnz duɾi. hi hæd noʊ ɹaɪt tə əbændən ɪz pipəl." nɑɾ æŋɡɹi wɪð hɪm, ðɛn.

"You cannot save everyone," Berelain said calmly. Away from the stink of the town, her scent was sharp with urgency, and razoredged with anger. "Sometimes, you must choose. So Habor is Lord Cowlin's duty. He had no right to abandon his people." Not angry with him, then.

pɛɹɪn fɹaʊnd. dɪd ʃi θɪŋk i fɛlt ɡɪlti? bælənst əɡɛns feɪlz laɪf, ðə tʃɹʌbəlz ə soʊ hæbɝ kəd nɑt bʌdʒ ðə skeɪlz ə hɛɹ. bʌɾ i tɝn ɪz beɪ soʊ hi wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət ðə ɡɹeɪ taʊn wɔlz əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ, nɑt ðə hɑloʊ-aɪd tʃɪlʒɹən paɪlɪŋ ʌp ɛmpti sæks. ə mæn dɪd wʌɾ i kʊd. wʌɾ i hæd tə. "dʌz ənʊɹə hæv ən əpɪnjən ɑn wʌts hæpənɪŋ hɪɹ?" hi ɡɹaʊld. kwaɪətli, bʌt sʌmhaʊ hi hæd noʊ daʊt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hɝd. "aɪv lɪɾəl aɪdiə wʌɾ ənʊɹə θɪŋks," bɹəleɪn ɹɪplaɪd, meɪkɪŋ noʊ ɛfɝt tə loʊɝ əɹ vɔɪs. ʃi nɑɾ oʊnli dɪd nɑt kɛɹ u oʊvɝhɝd, ʃi wɑntəd tə bi hɝd. "ʃi ɪz nɑɾ əz fɔɹθkʌmɪŋ əz ʃi wʌns wɑz. əz aɪ wʌns θɔt ʃi wɑz. ɪts ʌp tə hɝ tə mɛnd wʌt ʃiz tɔɹn." wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃi tɝn ən ɹoʊɾ əweɪ.

Perrin frowned. Did she think he felt guilty? Balanced against Faile's life, the troubles of So Habor could not budge the scales a hair. But he turned his bay so he was looking at the gray town walls across the river, not the hollow-eyed children piling up empty sacks. A man did what he could. What he had to. "Does Annoura have an opinion on what's happening here?" he growled. Quietly, but somehow he had no doubt the Aes Sedai heard. "I've little idea what Annoura thinks," Berelain replied, making no effort to lower her voice. She not only did not care who overheard, she wanted to be heard. "She is not as forthcoming as she once was. As I once thought she was. It is up to her to mend what she has torn." Without looking at the Aes Sedai, she turned and rode away.

ənʊɹə ɹɪmeɪn bɪhaɪnd, aɪz ənblɪŋkɪŋ ɑn pɛɹɪnz feɪs. "ju ɑɹ tɑvɝən, jɛs, bʌt jə ɑɹ stɪl oʊnli ə θɹɛɾ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn, əz æm aɪ. ɪn ði ɛnd, ivən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz dʒʌst ə θɹɛd tə bi woʊvən ɪndə ðə pæɾɝn. nɑɾ ivən ə tɑvɝən θɹɛd tʃuzəz haʊ ɪɾəl bi woʊvən."

Annoura remained behind, eyes unblinking on Perrin's face. "You are ta'veren, yes, but you are still only a thread in the Pattern, as am I. In the end, even the Dragon Reborn is just a thread to be woven into the Pattern. Not even a ta'veren thread chooses how it will be woven."

"ðoʊz θɹɛdz ɑɹ pipəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd wɛɹəli. "səmtaɪmz meɪbi pipəl doʊnt wɑnə bi woʊvən ɪndə ðə pæɾɝn wɪθaʊɾ ɛni seɪ."

"Those threads are people," Perrin said wearily. "Sometimes maybe people don't want to be woven into the Pattern without any say."

"æn jə θɪŋk ðɪs meɪks ə dɪfɝəns?" nɑt weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ən ænsɝ, ʃi lɪftəɾ əɹ ɹeɪnz ən hild əɹ faɪn-æŋkəl bɹaʊn mɛɹ æftɝ bɹəleɪn ɪn ə ɡæləp ðət fæn əɹ kloʊk bɪhaɪn hɝ.

"And you think this makes a difference?" Not waiting on an answer, she lifted her reins and heeled her fine-ankled brown mare after Berelain in a gallop that fanned her cloak behind her.

ʃi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli ɛɛs sədaɪ hu wɑntəd wɝdz wɪð pɛɹɪn. "noʊ," hi toʊl siɑnɪd fɝmli æftɝ lɪsnɪŋ tə hɝ, pæɾɪŋ steɪɝz nɛk. ɪt wɑz ðə ɹaɪɾɝ wɑntəd suðɪŋ, ðoʊ. hi wɑntəd tə bi əweɪ fɹəm soʊ hæbɝ. "aɪ sɛd noʊ, ən aɪ min noʊ." ʃi sæɾ əɹ sæɾəl stɪfli, ə peɪl lɪɾəl wʊmən kɑɹvd ʌv aɪs.

She was not the only Aes Sedai who wanted words with Perrin. "No," he told Seonid firmly after listening to her, patting Stayer's neck. It was the rider wanted soothing, though. He wanted to be away from So Habor. "I said no, and I mean no." She sat her saddle stiffly, a pale little woman carved of ice.

ɪksɛp ðəɾ əɹ aɪz wɝ dɑɹk koʊlz bɝnɪŋ, ən ʃi ɹikt ʌv əfɹʌntɪd fjʊɹi bɛɹli ɪn tʃɛk. siɑnɪd wɑz maɪld əz mɪlk-wɔɾɝ wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑɾ ə waɪz wʌn. bɪhaɪn hɝ, ælhæɹəz dɑɹk feɪs wɑz ə stoʊn, ɡɹeɪ stʃɹikɪŋ ɪz kɝli blæk hɛɹ laɪk fɹɔst. wɪntɝz feɪs wɑz ɹɛɾ əbʌv ɪz kɝl mʌstæʃɪz. ðeɪ hæd tə æksɛpt wʌt pæs bɪtwin ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə waɪz wʌnz, bʌt pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt. . . . ðə wɪnd wɪp ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝ kloʊks əbaʊt, livɪŋ ðɛɹ hænz fɹi fəɹ sɔɹdz ɪf nid bi.

Except that her eyes were dark coals burning, and she reeked of affronted fury barely in check. Seonid was mild as milk-water with the Wise Ones, but he was not a Wise One. Behind her, Alharra's dark face was a stone, gray streaking his curly black hair like frost. Wynter's face was red above his curled mustaches. They had to accept what passed between their Aes Sedai and the Wise Ones, but Perrin was not. . . . The wind whipped their Warder cloaks about, leaving their hands free for swords if need be.

ɹɪpəlɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd, ðə kloʊks ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ʃeɪdz ʌv ɡɹeɪ ən bɹaʊn, blu ən waɪt. ɪt wɑz iziɝ ɑn ðə stʌmək ðən siɪŋ əm meɪk pɑɹts ʌv ə mæn dɪsəpɪɹ. səm iziɝ.

Rippling in the wind, the cloaks shifted in shades of gray and brown, blue and white. It was easier on the stomach than seeing them make parts of a man disappear. Some easier.

"ɪf aɪ hæv tə, əl sɛn ɛdʒɹə tə bɹɪŋ jə bæk," hi wɔɹnd. hɝ feɪs steɪd koʊld, hɝ aɪz hɑt, jɛɾ ə kwɪvɝ ɹæn θɹu hɝ, sweɪɪŋ ðə smɔl waɪt dʒɛm hæŋɪŋ ɑn əɹ fɔɹhɛd. nɑt fɹəm fɪɹ ʌv wʌt ðə waɪz wʌnz wəd də tə hɝ ɪf ʃi hæd tə bi bɹɔt bæk, dʒʌs fɹəm ðə seɪm əfɛns ət pɛɹɪn ðət meɪɾ əɹ sɛn ə hʊk θɔɹn. hi wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ əkʌstəm tə əfɛndɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. nɑɾ ə hæbəɾ ə waɪz mæn ɡɑɾ ɪntu, bʌt ðəɹ sim noʊ weɪ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt.

"If I have to, I'll send Edarra to bring you back," he warned. Her face stayed cold, her eyes hot, yet a quiver ran through her, swaying the small white gem hanging on her forehead. Not from fear of what the Wise Ones would do to her if she had to be brought back, just from the same offense at Perrin that made her scent a hooked thorn. He was growing accustomed to offending Aes Sedai. Not a habit a wise man got into, but there seemed no way out of it.

"wʌɾ əbaʊt ju?" hi æsk mɑsʊɝi. "du jə wɑnə steɪ ɪn soʊ hæbɝ əz wɛl?" ðə slɪm wʊmən wɑz noʊn fəɹ spikɪŋ stʃɹeɪt tə ðə pɔɪnt, dɝɛkt əz ə ɡɹin fəɹ ɔl ʃi wɑz bɹaʊn, bʌt ʃi sɛd kɑmli, "wʊd jə nɑt sɛn ɛdʒɹə æftɝ mi, tu? ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛni weɪz tə sɝv, ən wi kænɑɾ ɔlweɪz pɪk ðə weɪz wi wəd wɪʃ." wɪtʃ, kʌm tə θɪŋk, maɪt bi tə ðə pɔɪnt, ɪn ə weɪ. hi stɪl hæd noʊ aɪdiə waɪ ʃi vɪzəɾəd mæsimə ɪn sikɹət. dɪd ʃi səspɛk ðəɾ i nu? mɑsʊɝiz feɪs wɑz ə blæn mæsk. kɝklɪn wɔɹ ə bɔɹɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən, naʊ ðeɪ wɝ aʊɾ ə soʊ hæbɝ. hi mænədʒ tə sim slʌmpt waɪl sɪɾɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs ɪɹɛkt, wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝi ɪn ðə wɝld əɹ ə θɔɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd. ə mæn u bɪliv ðəɾ ə kɝklɪn wəd ɹɪtɝn ðə nɛks deɪ tə baɪ ə sɛkən pɪɡ ɪn ə poʊk.

"What about you?" he asked Masuri. "Do you want to stay in So Habor as well?" The slim woman was known for speaking straight to the point, direct as a Green for all she was Brown, but she said calmly, "Would you not send Edarra after me, too? There are many ways to serve, and we cannot always pick the ways we would wish." Which, come to think, might be to the point, in a way. He still had no idea why she visited Masema in secret. Did she suspect that he knew? Masuri's face was a bland mask. Kirklin wore a bored expression, now they were out of So Habor. He managed to seem slumped while sitting his horse erect, without a worry in the world or a thought in his head. A man who believed that of Kirklin would return the next day to buy a second pig in a poke.

ðə taʊnzfoʊk wɝk məkænɪkli əz ðə sʌn ɹoʊz haɪɝ, laɪk pipəl u wɑntəd tə luz ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn ðə tæsk ət hæn ən fɪɹd ðə ɹɪtɝn ə mɛmɹiz wən ðeɪ stɑpt. pɛɹɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd soʊ hæbɝ wɑz meɪkɪŋ ɪm fænsɪfəl. stɪl, hi θɔɾ i wɑz ɹaɪt.

The townsfolk worked mechanically as the sun rose higher, like people who wanted to lose themselves in the task at hand and feared the return of memories when they stopped. Perrin decided So Habor was making him fanciful. Still, he thought he was right.

ði ɛɹ bɪɑn ðə wɔlz stɪl lʊk tu dɪm, əz ðoʊ ə ʃeɪɾɪŋ klaʊd hʌŋ oʊvɝ ðə taʊn.

The air beyond the walls still looked too dim, as though a shading cloud hung over the town.

ət nun, ðə kɑɹt dʒɹaɪvɝz klɪɹd pætʃəz ə snoʊ ɑn ðə sloʊp ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ tə meɪk smɔl faɪɝz ən bɹu wik ti wɪð livz bɹuɪŋ ðɛɹ θɝd pɑt, əɹ meɪbi fɔɹθ. ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ ti tə bi hæɾ ɪn ðə taʊn. səm ə ðə dʒɹaɪvɝz lʊkt ət ðə bɹɪdʒəz əz ɪf θɪŋkɪŋ tə ɛntɝ soʊ hæbɝ ən si wʌt ðeɪ kəd faɪn tə it. ə ɡlæns ət ðə dɝt-keɪk pipəl wɝkɪŋ ðə wɪnoʊɪŋ bæskəts sɛn əm bæk tə dɪɡ aʊt ðɛɹ smɔl bæɡz ʌv oʊtmil ən ɡɹaʊn eɪkɔɹn. ət lis ðeɪ nu ðət mɪks wɑz klin. ə fju aɪd ðə sæks ɔlɹɛɾi loʊɾəd ɑn ðə kɑɹts, bʌt ðə binz niɾəd tə bi soʊkt ən ðə ɡɹeɪn ɹʌn θɹu ðə lɑɹdʒ hænʒɹnɪlz ðət hæd bɪn lɛf bæk ɪn ðə kæmp, ən ðət wɑz æftɝ ðə kʊks pɪkt aʊɾ əz mɛni mɔɹ wivəlz əz ðeɪ θɔt mɛn kəd nɑt stʌmək iɾɪŋ. pɛɹɪn hæd noʊ æpətaɪt, nɑt fəɹ ðə klinəs bɹɛd, bʌɾ i wɑz dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ wʌt pæs fəɹ ti fɹəm ə bæɾɝd tɪn kʌp wən lɑɾən faʊn hɪm.

At noon, the cart drivers cleared patches of snow on the slope rising from the river to make small fires and brew weak tea with leaves brewing their third pot, or maybe fourth. There had been no tea to be had in the town. Some of the drivers looked at the bridges as if thinking to enter So Habor and see what they could find to eat. A glance at the dirt-caked people working the winnowing baskets sent them back to dig out their small bags of oatmeal and ground acorn. At least they knew that mix was clean. A few eyed the sacks already loaded on the carts, but the beans needed to be soaked and the grain run through the large handrnills that had been left back in the camp, and that was after the cooks picked out as many more weevils as they thought men could not stomach eating. Perrin had no appetite, not for the cleanest bread, but he was drinking what passed for tea from a battered tin cup when Latian found him.

ðə kɛɹhinɪn dɪd nɑɾ æktʃəli  kʌm tə hɪm. ɪnstɛd, ðə ʃɔɹt mæn ɪn ðə stʃɹaɪp dɑɹk koʊt ɹoʊd sloʊli pæs ðə smɔl faɪɝ wɛɹ pɛɹɪn wɑz stændɪŋ, ðən ɹeɪn ɪn wɪð ə fɹaʊn ə lɪɾəl ʌpsloʊp. dɪsmaʊntɪŋ, lɑɾən lɪftəɾ ɪz ɡɛldɪŋz nɪɹ fɔɹhuf ən fɹaʊn əɾ ɪt. ʌv kɔɹs, hi dɪd lʊk ʌp twaɪs tə si wɛðɝ pɛɹɪn wɑz kʌmɪŋ.

The Cairhienin did not actually come to him. Instead, the short man in the striped dark coat rode slowly past the small fire where Perrin was standing, then reined in with a frown a little upslope. Dismounting, Latian lifted his gelding's near forehoof and frowned at it. Of course, he did look up twice to see whether Perrin was coming.

wɪð ə saɪ, pɛɹɪn ɹɪtɝn ðə dɛntɪd kʌp tə ðə blɑki lɪɾəl wʊmən i hæd bɑɹoʊɾ ɪt fɹʌm, ə ɡɹeɪɪŋ kɑɹt dʒɹaɪvɝ u spɹɛɾ əɹ dɑɹk skɝts ɪn ə kɝtsi. ən ɡɹɪn ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ət lɑɾən.

With a sigh, Perrin returned the dented cup to the blocky little woman he had borrowed it from, a graying cart driver who spread her dark skirts in a curtsy. And grinned and shook her head at Latian.

laɪkli, ʃi kəd snik tɛn taɪmz əz wɛl əz ðə fɛloʊ. nild, skwɑɾɪŋ baɪ ðə faɪɝ wɪð ɪz hænz ɹæpt ɝaʊn ənʌðɝ tɪn kʌp, læft aʊt laʊd soʊ hɑɹɾ i hæd tə waɪp ə tiɹ fɹəm ɪz aɪ. meɪbi hi wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ɡoʊ kɹeɪzi. laɪt, bʌt ðɪs pleɪs ɡeɪv ə mæn tʃɪɹfəl θɔts.

Likely, she could sneak ten times as well as the fellow. Neald, squatting by the fire with his hands wrapped around another tin cup, laughed out loud so hard he had to wipe a tear from his eye. Maybe he was beginning to go crazy. Light, but this place gave a man cheerful thoughts.

lɑɾən stʃɹeɪɾənd lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə meɪk pɛɹɪn ə lɛɡ ən seɪ, "aɪ si ju, maɪ lɔɹd," ðən dʌk bæk daʊn tə snætʃ ʌp ðə fɔɹɛlɪɡ əɡɛn laɪk ə ful. jə dɪd nɑt ɡɹæb əɾ ə hɔɹsəz lɛɡz ðət weɪ ənlɛs jə wɑntəd kɪkɪŋ. bʌt ðɛn, pɛɹɪn ɪkspɛktəd nʌθɪŋ bʌt fulɪʃnəs, ɹɪli. fɝs ðəɹ wɑz lɑɾənz pleɪɪŋ ət biɪŋ il, wɪð ɪz ʃoʊldɝ-lɔŋ hɛɹ taɪɾ ɔf ɪn ə teɪl ət ðə neɪp ə hɪz nɛk ɪn wik ɪməteɪʃən ə haʊ il kʌt ðɛɹz, ən naʊ ðə mæn wɑz pleɪɪŋ ət biɪŋ ə spaɪ. pɛɹɪn ɹɛstəɾ ə hæn ɑn ðə ɡɛldɪŋz nɛk tə suð ði ænəməl æftɝ ɔl ðət snætʃɪŋ ən pʊɾ ən ɪntʃɹəstəd lʊk ɑn ɪz feɪs əz i pɪɹɾ əɾ ə huf ðət hæɾ æbsəlutli nʌθɪŋ ɹɔŋ wɪð ɪt. ɪksɛp fəɹ ə nɪk ɪn ðə ʃu wɛɹ ði aɪɝn maɪt bɹeɪk ɪn ə fju deɪz ɪf ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹipleɪst. hɪz hænz ɪtʃt fəɹ fɛɹiɝz tulz. ɪt sim jɪɹz sɪns i hæd tʃeɪnʒd ə hɔɹsəz ʃuz, əɹ wɝkt ə fɔɹdʒ.

Latian straightened long enough to make Perrin a leg and say, "I see you, my Lord," then ducked back down to snatch up the foreleg again like a fool. You did not grab at a horse's legs that way unless you wanted kicking. But then, Perrin expected nothing but foolishness, really. First there was Latian's playing at being Aiel, with his shoulder-long hair tied off in a tail at the nape of his neck in weak imitation of how Aiel cut theirs, and now the man was playing at being a spy. Perrin rested a hand on the gelding's neck to soothe the animal after all that snatching and put an interested look on his face as he peered at a hoof that had absolutely nothing wrong with it. Except for a nick in the shoe where the iron might break in a few days if it was not replaced. His hands itched for farrier's tools. It seemed years since he had changed a horse's shoes, or worked a forge.

"mæstɝ beɪlwɝ sɛnz wɝd, maɪ lɔɹd," lɑɾən sɛd sɔfli, hɛd daʊn. "hɪz fɹɛn ɪz tʃɹævlɪŋ tə sɛl ɪz wɛɹz, bʌɾ ɪz ɪkspɛktəd bæk təmɑɹoʊ əɹ ðə nɛks deɪ. hi sɛd tə æsk wɛðɝ ɪɾəl bi ɔl ɹaɪɾ ɪf wi kætʃ ʌp tə jə ðɛn." piɹɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə hɔɹsəz bɛli ət ðə wɪnoʊɝz daʊn baɪ ðə ɹɪvɝ, hi æɾəd, "ðoʊ ɪt hɑɹdli lʊks əz ɪf jəl bi əweɪ bɪfɔɹ." pɛɹɪn skaʊl daʊn ət ðə wɪnoʊɪŋ. hi skaʊld ət ðə laɪn ə kɑɹts weɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ tɝn tə bi loʊɾəd, ət ðə hæf dʌzən əɹ soʊ ðəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæd ðɛɹ kænvəs kʌvɝz læʃt daʊn. wʌn ə ðoʊz hɛl ðə fɝst ə ðə lɛðɝ fəɹ pætʃɪŋ buts ən kændəlz ən sʌtʃ. noʊ ɔɪl, ðoʊ. ðə læmp ɔɪl ɪn soʊ hæbɝ smɛld əz ɹænsɪɾ əz ðə kʊkɪŋ ɔɪl. wʌɾ ɪf ɡɔl ən ðə meɪɾənz bɹɔt wɝɾ ə feɪl? ən æktʃəwəl saɪɾɪŋ, pɝhæps? hi wəd ɡɪv ɛniθɪŋ tə tɔk tə sʌmwʌn u hæd sin hɝ, kəd tɛl ɪm ʃi wɑz ənhɑɹmd. wʌɾ ɪf ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ bɪɡæn tə muv sʌɾənli? "tɛl beɪlwɝ nɑt tə weɪt tu lɔŋ," hi ɡɹaʊld.

"Master Balwer sends word, my Lord," Latian said softly, head down. "His friend is traveling to sell his wares, but is expected back tomorrow or the next day. He said to ask whether it will be all right if we catch up to you then." Peering under the horse's belly at the winnowers down by the river, he added, "Though it hardly looks as if you will be away before." Perrin scowled down at the winnowing. He scowled at the line of carts waiting their turn to be loaded, at the half dozen or so that already had their canvas covers lashed down. One of those held the first of the leather for patching boots and candles and such. No oil, though. The lamp oil in So Habor smelled as rancid as the cooking oil. What if Gaul and the Maidens brought word of Faile? An actual sighting, perhaps? He would give anything to talk to someone who had seen her, could tell him she was unharmed. What if the Shaido began to move suddenly? "Tell Balwer not to wait too long," he growled.

"æz fəɹ mi, əl bi əweɪ ɪnsaɪd ði aʊɝ."

"As for me, I'll be away inside the hour."

hi wɑz əz ɡʊɾ əz ɪz wɝd. moʊst ə ðə kɑɹts ən dʒɹaɪvɝz hæd tə bi lɛf bɪhaɪn tə meɪk ðə wʌn-deɪ dʒɝni bæk tə kæmp ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn, ən kaɪɹən ən ɪz ɡɹin-hɛlməɾɪd soʊlʒɝz tə ɡɑɹd ðɛm, wɪð ɔɹɾɝz ðət noʊ wʌn wɑz tə kɹɔs ðə bɹɪdʒəz. koʊld-aɪd, əpɪɹɪŋ kəmplitli ɹəkʌvɝd fɹəm ɪz bɹeɪkdaʊn, ðə ɡildænɪn əʃʊɹɾ ɪm ðəɾ i wɑz fɪɾ ən ɹɛɾi. vɛɹi laɪkli, ɔɹɾɝz əɹ nɑt, hi wəd bi ɡoʊɪŋ bæk ɪndə soʊ hæbɝ dʒʌs tə kənvɪns hɪmsɛlf i wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪd. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt weɪs taɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɔk ɪm aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, siɑnɪd hæd tə bi faʊnd. ʃi wɑz nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli haɪɾɪŋ, jɛt ʃi hæd lɝn ə hɪz dɪpɑɹtʃɝ, ænd, livɪŋ əɹ wɔɹɾɝz tə hoʊld əɹ hɔɹs kwaɪɾ oʊpənli, ʃi dɑdʒd əbaʊɾ ɑn fʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip kɑɹts bɪtwin hɝsɛlf ən hɪm. ðə peɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd nɑt haɪɾ əɹ sɛnt, ðoʊ, əɹ ɪf ʃi kʊd, ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi. ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd wən i tʃɹækt əɹ daʊn kwɪkli, ən ɪndɪɡnənt wən i mɑɹtʃt əɹ tə hɝ hɔɹs əhɛɾ ə steɪɝ. ivən soʊ, hi wɑz wɛl ʌndɝ ði aʊɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm soʊ hæbɝ, wɪð ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ ɹɪŋ ə ɹɛɾ ɑɹmɝ ɝaʊn bɹəleɪn, ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn sɝaʊndɪŋ ði eɪt loʊɾəd kɑɹts ðət tʃɹʌndəld əlɔŋ bɪhaɪn ðə θɹi ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ bænɝz, ən nild ɡɹɪnɪŋ fəɹ ɔl i wɑz wɝθ. nɑt tə mɛnʃən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃæɾ ʌp ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt tə də ɪf ðə fɛloʊ ɹɪli wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ mæd. əz sun əz ðə ɹaɪz hɪd soʊ hæbɝ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, hi fɛl ðə lusənɪŋ ʌv ə nɑɾ i hæd nɑt ɹilaɪzd wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. ðət lɛft oʊnli tɛn ʌðɝz, ən ə nɑɾ ʌv ɪmpeɪʃəns twɪstɪŋ ɪz bɛli. bɹəleɪnz ɑbviəs sɪmpəθi kəd nɑt lusən ðoʊz.

He was as good as his word. Most of the carts and drivers had to be left behind to make the one-day journey back to camp on their own, and Kireyin and his green-helmeted soldiers to guard them, with orders that no one was to cross the bridges. Cold-eyed, appearing completely recovered from his breakdown, the Ghealdanin assured him that he was fit and ready. Very likely, orders or not, he would be going back into So Habor just to convince himself he was not afraid. Perrin did not waste time trying to talk him out of it. For one thing, Seonid had to be found. She was not precisely hiding, yet she had learned of his departure, and, leaving her Warders to hold her horse quite openly, she dodged about on foot trying to keep carts between herself and him. The pale Aes Sedai could not hide her scent, though, or if she could, she did not know it was necessary. She was surprised when he tracked her down quickly, and indignant when he marched her to her horse ahead of Stayer. Even so, he was well under the hour riding away from So Habor, with the Winged Guards making their ring of red armor around Berelain, the Two Rivers men surrounding the eight loaded carts that trundled along behind the three remaining banners, and Neald grinning for all he was worth. Not to mention trying to chat up the Aes Sedai. Perrin did not know what to do if the fellow really was going mad. As soon as the rise hid So Habor behind them, he felt the loosening of a knot he had not realized was riding between his shoulders. That left only ten others, and a knot of impatience twisting his belly. Berelain's obvious sympathy could not loosen those.

nilz ɡeɪtweɪ tʊk əm fɹəm ðə snoʊ-kʌvɝd fil tə ðə smɔl klɪɹɪŋ ə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɡɹaʊn əmɪd ðə taʊɝɪŋ tʃɹiz, fɔɹ liɡz ɪn ə stɛp, bʌt pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt weɪt fəɹ ðə hændfʊl ə kɑɹts tə kʌm θɹu. hi θɔɾ i hɝd bɹəleɪn meɪk ə vɛkst saʊnd wən i buɾɪd steɪɝ tə ə kwɪk tʃɹɑt, bæk təwɔɹd ðə kæmp. əɹ meɪbi ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. mʌtʃ mɔɹ laɪkli. ðəɹ wɑz ə sɛns ə stɪlnəs wən i ɹoʊɾ ɪn əmʌŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛnz tɛns ən hʌts. ðə sʌn stɪl hʌŋ nɑt tu fɑɹ ɔf oʊvɝhɛɾ ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ skaɪ, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ noʊ kʊkpɑts ɑn ðə faɪɝz ən vɛɹi fju ʌv ðə mɛn ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ðə kæmpfaɪɝz, hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ kloʊks kloʊs ən piɹɪŋ ɪntɛnli ɪndə ðə fleɪmz. ə hændfʊl wɝ sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹʌf stulz ðət bæn kɹeɪ nu haʊ tə meɪk; ðə ɹɛst stʊɾ əɹ skwɑɾɪd. noʊ wʌn soʊ mʌtʃ əz lʊkt ʌp. sɝɾənli noʊ wʌn keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ tə teɪk ɪz hɔɹs. nɑt stɪlnəs, hi ɹilaɪzd. tɛnʃən.

Neald's gateway took them from the snow-covered field to the small clearing of the Traveling ground amid the towering trees, four leagues in a step, but Perrin did not wait for the handful of carts to come through. He thought he heard Berelain make a vexed sound when he booted Stayer to a quick trot, back toward the camp. Or maybe it was one of the Aes Sedai. Much more likely. There was a sense of stillness when he rode in among the Two Rivers men's tents and huts. The sun still hung not too far off overhead in the gray sky, but there were no cookpots on the fires and very few of the men gathered around the campfires, holding their cloaks close and peering intently into the flames. A handful were sitting on the rough stools that Ban Crawe knew how to make; the rest stood or squatted. No one so much as looked up. Certainly no one came running to take his horse. Not stillness, he realized. Tension.

ðə smɛl sʌmhaʊ maɪndəɾ ɪm ʌv ə baʊ dʒɹɔn tə ðə pɔɪn ə bɹeɪkɪŋ. hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs hɪɹ ðə kɹik.

The smell somehow minded him of a bow drawn to the point of breaking. He could almost hear the creak.

əz i dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɹɛd-stʃɹaɪp tɛnt, dænɪl əpɪɹd fɹəm ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə loʊ il tɛns, wɔkɪŋ fæst.

As he dismounted in front of the red-striped tent, Dannil appeared from the direction of the low Aiel tents, walking fast.

səlɪn ən ɛdʒɹə, wʌn ə ðə waɪz wʌnz, wɝ fɑloʊɪŋ hɪm, ən kipɪŋ ʌp izəli ðoʊ niðɝ əpɪɹd tə hɝi. səlɪnz feɪs wɑz ə sʌn-dɑɹk lɛðɝ mæsk. ɛdʒɹəz, bɛɹli ɹɪvil baɪ ðə dɑɹk ʃɔl ɹæpt ɝaʊn əɹ hɛd, wɑz ən ɪmədʒ ə kɑm. dɪspaɪɾ əɹ bʌlki skɝts, ʃi meɪɾ əz lɪɾəl saʊn əz ðə waɪt-hɛɹd meɪɾən, nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə feɪn klɪŋk fɹəm əɹ ɡoʊld ən aɪvɝi bɹeɪslɪts ən nɛkləsɪz. dænɪl wɑz tʃuɪŋ ði ɛdʒ ʌv wʌn θɪk mʌstæʃ, æbsənli pʊlɪŋ ɪz sɔɹɾ ən ɪntʃ aʊɾ ʌv ɪts ɹʌf lɛðɝ skæbɝɾ ən ʃʌvɪŋ ɪt bæk hɑɹd. pʊl ən ʃʌv. hi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ.

Sulin and Edarra, one of the Wise Ones, were following him, and keeping up easily though neither appeared to hurry. Sulin's face was a sun-dark leather mask. Edarra's, barely revealed by the dark shawl wrapped around her head, was an image of calm. Despite her bulky skirts, she made as little sound as the white-haired Maiden, not so much as a faint clink from her gold and ivory bracelets and necklaces. Dannil was chewing the edge of one thick mustache, absently pulling his sword an inch out of its rough leather scabbard and shoving it back hard. Pull and shove. He drew a deep breath before speaking.

"ðə meɪɾənz bɹɔɾ ɪn faɪv ʃeɪɾoʊ, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn. ɑɹɡændə tʊk əm oʊvɝ tə ðə ɡildænɪn tɛns tə pʊɾ əm tə ðə kwɛstʃən. mæsiməz wɪð ðɛm."

"The Maidens brought in five Shaido, Lord Perrin. Arganda took them over to the Ghealdanin tents to put them to the question. Masema's with them."

pɛɹɪn bɹʌʃt əsaɪd mæsiməz pɹɛzəns ɪnsaɪd ðə kæmp. "waɪ dɪd jə lɛɾ ɑɹɡændə teɪk ðɛm?" hi æskt ɛdʒɹə. dænɪl kəd nɑɾ əv stɑpt ɪt, bʌt ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ ə dɪfɹən pɹɑpəzɪʃən.

Perrin brushed aside Masema's presence inside the camp. "Why did you let Arganda take them?" he asked Edarra. Dannil could not have stopped it, but the Wise Ones were a different proposition.

ɛdʒɹə əpɪɹd nɑt mʌtʃ oʊldɝ ðən pɛɹɪn, jɛɾ əɹ kul blu aɪz sim tə hæv sin fɑɹ mɔɹ ðən i ɛvɝ wʊd. ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts ɪn ə ɹæɾəl ə bɹeɪslɪts. ən wɪð ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɪmpeɪʃəns. "ivən ʃeɪɾoʊ noʊ haʊ tə ɛmbɹeɪs peɪn, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. ɪɾəl teɪk deɪz tə bɹɪŋ ɛni ʌv əm tə tɔk, ən ðəɹ sim noʊ ɹizən tə weɪt."

Edarra appeared not much older than Perrin, yet her cool blue eyes seemed to have seen far more than he ever would. She folded her arms beneath her breasts in a rattle of bracelets. And with a touch of impatience. "Even Shaido know how to embrace pain, Perrin Aybara. It will take days to bring any of them to talk, and there seemed no reason to wait."

ɪf ɛdʒɹəz aɪz wɝ kul, səlɪnz wɝ blu aɪs. "maɪ spɝsɪstɝz ən aɪ cʊɾə dʌn ɪt fæstɝ aʊɝsɛlvz, ə lɪɾəl, bʌt dænɪl luɪn sɛd jə wɑntəd noʊ bloʊz stʃɹʌk. dʒɝɑɹɾ ɑɹɡændə ɪz ən ɪmpeɪʃən mæn, ən i mɪstʃɹʌsts ʌs." ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi wəɾ əv spæɾ ɪf ʃi wɝ nɑɾ il. "ju meɪ nɑt lɝn mʌtʃ, ɪn ɛni keɪs. ðeɪ ɑɹ stoʊn dɑɡz. ðəl jil sloʊli, ən əz lɪɾəl əz pɑsəbəl. ɪn ðɪs, ɪts ɔlweɪz nɛsəsɛɹi tə pʊt təɡɛðɝ ə lɪɾəl fɹəm wʌn wɪð ə lɪɾəl fɹəm ənʌðɝ tə meɪk ə pɪktʃɝ." ɛmbɹeɪs peɪn. ðəɹ hæd tə bi peɪn, wən jə pʊɾ ə mæn tə ðə kwɛstʃən. hi hæd nɑt lɛt ðət θɔt fɔɹm ɪn ɪz hɛd bɪfɔɹ ðɪs. bʌt tə ɡɛt feɪl bæk. . . .

If Edarra's eyes were cool, Sulin's were blue ice. "My spearsisters and I could have done it faster ourselves, a little, but Dannil Lewin said you wanted no blows struck. Gerard Arganda is an impatient man, and he mistrusts us." She sounded as though she would have spat if she were not Aiel. "You may not learn much, in any case. They are Stone Dogs. They will yield slowly, and as little as possible. In this, it is always necessary to put together a little from one with a little from another to make a picture." Embrace pain. There had to be pain, when you put a man to the question. He had not let that thought form in his head before this. But to get Faile back. . . .

"hæv sʌmbɑɾi ɹʌb steɪɝ daʊn," hi sɛd ɹʌfli, θɹʌstɪŋ ðə ɹeɪnz ət dænɪl.

"Have somebody rub Stayer down," he said roughly, thrusting the reins at Dannil.

ðə ɡildænɪn pɔɹʃən ə ðə kæmp kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn mɔɹ dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə ɹud ʃɛltɝz ən hæfəzɝdli pleɪs tɛns ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn. hɪɹ, ðə pikt kænvəs tɛns stʊɾ ɪn pɹɪsaɪs ɹoʊz, moʊst wɪð ə stil-tɪp koʊn ə lænsɪz stændɪŋ ət ði ɛntʃɹi flæps ən sæɾəld hɔɹsəz tɛðɝɾ ət ðə saɪd, ɹɛɾi tə maʊnt. ðə flɪkɪŋ ə ðə hɔɹsəz' teɪlz ən ðə lɔŋ stʃɹimɝz ɑn ðə lænsɪz, lɪftɪŋ ɑn ə koʊl bɹiz, wɝ ði oʊnli dɪsɔɹɾɝd θɪŋz tə bi sin. ðə pæðz bɪtwin ðə tɛns wɝ ɔl ðə seɪm wɪdθ, ən ə stʃɹeɪt laɪn cʊɾə bɪn dʒɹɔn θɹu ðə ɹoʊz ə kʊkfaɪɝz.

The Ghealdanin portion of the camp could not have been more different from the rude shelters and haphazardly placed tents of the Two Rivers men. Here, the peaked canvas tents stood in precise rows, most with a steel-tipped cone of lances standing at the entry flaps and saddled horses tethered at the side, ready to mount. The flicking of the horses' tails and the long streamers on the lances, lifting on a cold breeze, were the only disordered things to be seen. The paths between the tents were all the same width, and a straight line could have been drawn through the rows of cookfires.

ivən ðə kɹisɪz ɪn ðə kænvəs, fɹəm wɛɹ ðə tɛns hæd bɪn foʊldəɾ əweɪ ət ðə bɑɾəm ə kɑɹts əntɪl ðə snoʊz keɪm, meɪd stʃɹeɪt laɪnz. ɔl ɔɹɾɝli ən nit.

Even the creases in the canvas, from where the tents had been folded away at the bottom of carts until the snows came, made straight lines. All orderly and neat.

ə smɛl ʌv oʊtmil pɔɹədʒ ən bɔɪld eɪkɔɹn hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ən səm ɡɹin-koʊɾəd mɛn wɝ skɹeɪpɪŋ ðə læst ə ðə mɪddeɪ mil fɹəm ðɛɹ tɪn pleɪts wɪð ðɛɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ʌðɝz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi skaʊɝɪŋ aʊt ðə kʊkpɑts. nʌn ʃoʊɾ ɛni saɪn ə tɛnʃən. ðeɪ wɝ dʒʌst iɾɪŋ ən duɪŋ tʃɔɹz, wɪð əbaʊɾ ikwəl plɛʒɝ. ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ðət hæd tə bi dʌn.

A smell of oatmeal porridge and boiled acorn hung in the air, and some green-coated men were scraping the last of the midday meal from their tin plates with their fingers. Others were already scouring out the cookpots. None showed any sign of tension. They were just eating and doing chores, with about equal pleasure. It was something that had to be done.

ə lɑɹdʒ nɑɾ ə mɛn stʊd ɡæðɝɾ ɪn ə ɹɪŋ nɪɹ ðə ʃɑɹpən steɪks ðət mɑɹk ði aʊɾɝ ɛdʒ ə ðə kæmp. noʊ mɔɹ ðən hæf wɔɹ ðə ɡɹin koʊts ən bɝnɪʃt bɹɛstpleɪts ʌv ɡildænɪn lænsɝz. səm ə ði ʌðɝz kæɹid lænsɪz əɹ hæd sɔɹdz bɛltəɾ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ɹʌmpəl koʊts. ðoʊz ɹeɪnʒd fɹəm faɪn sɪlk əɹ ɡʊd wʊl tə ðə pɪkɪŋz ʌv ə ɹæɡbæɡ, bʌt nʌn kəd bi kɔl klin ɪksɛpt ɪn kəmpɛɹəsən tə soʊ hæbɝ. jə kəɾ ɔlweɪz tɛl mæsiməz mɛn, ivən fɹəm ðə bæk.

A large knot of men stood gathered in a ring near the sharpened stakes that marked the outer edge of the camp. No more than half wore the green coats and burnished breastplates of Ghealdanin lancers. Some of the others carried lances or had swords belted over their rumpled coats. Those ranged from fine silk or good wool to the pickings of a ragbag, but none could be called clean except in comparison to So Habor. You could always tell Masema's men, even from the back.

ənʌðɝ smɛl keɪm tə hɪm əz i əpɹoʊtʃt ðə sɝkəl ə mɛn. ðə smɛl ə mit ɹoʊstɪŋ. ən ðəɹ wɑz ə mʌfəl saʊn ðəɾ i tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə hɪɹ. wən i bɪɡæn pʊʃɪŋ ɪz weɪ θɹu, ðə soʊlʒɝz lʊkt ɝaʊn əɾ ɪm ən ɡeɪv weɪ ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli. mæsiməz mɛn stɑɹɾəd bæk, mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt jɛloʊ aɪz ən ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. iðɝ weɪ, hi ɡeɪn pæsədʒ tə ðə fɹʌnt.

Another smell came to him as he approached the circle of men. The smell of meat roasting. And there was a muffled sound that he tried not to hear. When he began pushing his way through, the soldiers looked around at him and gave way grudgingly. Masema's men started back, muttering about yellow eyes and Shadowspawn. Either way, he gained passage to the front.

fɔɹ tɔl mɛn, ɹɛd-hɛɹɾ əɹ peɪl ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ-ænd-bɹaʊn keɪɾɪn'-sɔɹ, leɪ baʊnd wɪð ðɛɹ ɹɪsts læʃt tə ðɛɹ æŋkəlz ɪn ðə smɔl ə ðɛɹ bæks ən staʊt lɛŋθs ə bɹæntʃ taɪd bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ niz ən ɛlboʊz. ðɛɹ feɪsəz wɝ bæɾɝd ən bɹuzd, ən ðeɪ hæd wɑɾəd ɹæɡz taɪd bɪtwin ðɛɹ tiθ. ðə fɪfθ mæn wɑz neɪkəd, steɪkt aʊt bɪtwin fɔɹ staʊt pɛɡz dʒɹɪvən ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊn ən stʃɹɛtʃt soʊ taɪɾ ɪz sɪnuz stʊɾ aʊt. hi θɹæʃt əz mʌtʃ əz ɪz baɪndɪŋ əlaʊd, ðoʊ, ən haʊld ɪndə ðə ɹæɡz stʌfɪŋ ɪz maʊð, ə mʌfəl bɛloʊ ʌv æɡəni. hɑt koʊlz meɪɾ ə smɔl klʌstɝ ɑn ɪz bɛli, ɡɪvɪŋ ɔf ə feɪn smoʊk. ɪt wɑz ðə smɛl ə blɪstɝɪŋ flɛʃ ðət pɛɹɪnz noʊz hæd kɑt. ðə koʊlz klʌŋ tə ðə stʃɹɛtʃt mænz skɪn, ən ɛvɹi taɪm ɪz ɹaɪðɪŋ mænədʒ tə θɹoʊ wʌn ɔf, ə ɡɹɪnɪŋ fɛloʊ ɪn ə fɪlθi ɡɹin sɪlk koʊt, skwɑɾɪŋ bɪsaɪd hɪm, juzd ə pɛɹ ə tɑŋz tə ɹipleɪs ɪt wɪð ənʌðɝ fɹəm ə pɑtfəl mɛltɪŋ ə sɝkəl ə mʌɾ ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. pɛɹɪn nu hɪm. hɪz neɪm wɑz hɑɹi, ən i laɪk tə kəlɛkt ɪɹz stʃɹʌŋ ɑn ə lɛðɝ kɔɹd. mɛnz ɪɹz, wɪmənz ɪɹz, tʃɪlʒɹənz ɪɹz; ɪt nɛvɝ maɪndəd tə hɑɹi. wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, pɛɹɪn stʃɹoʊd fɔɹwɝɾ ən kɪk ðə lɪɾəl paɪl ə koʊlz ɔf ðə baʊn mæn. səm ə ðɛm stʃɹʌk hɑɹi, hu dʒʌmp bæk wɪð ə stɑɹɾəld skwil ðət tɝn tə ə ʃɹik wən ɪz hæn keɪm daʊn ɪn ðə pɑt. hi tɑpəld oʊvɝ saɪdweɪz, kɹeɪɾəlɪŋ ɪz bɝn hæn ən ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət pɛɹɪn, ə wizəl ɪn ə hjumən skɪn. "ðə sævədʒ meɪks ə ʃæm, eɪbɑɹə," mæsimə sɛd. pɛɹɪn hæd nɑɾ ivən noʊɾəst ðə mæn stændɪŋ ðɛɹ, feɪs laɪk ə skaʊlɪŋ stoʊn bɪniθ ɪz ʃeɪv skælp. hɪz dɑɹk fivɝɾ aɪz hɛld ə mɛʒɝ ə kəntɛmpt. ðə sɛn ə mædnəs skɪɾɝd θɹu ðə stɪŋk ə bɝn flɛʃ. "aɪ noʊ ðɛm. ðeɪ pɹitɛn tə fil peɪn, bʌt ðeɪ də nɑt; nɑt ðə weɪ ʌðɝ mɛn du. jə mʌs bi wɪlɪŋ ən eɪbəl tə hɝɾ ə stoʊn tə meɪk wʌn ə ðɛm tɔk."

Four tall men, red-haired or pale in the gray-and-brown cadin'-sor, lay bound with their wrists lashed to their ankles in the small of their backs and stout lengths of branch tied behind their knees and elbows. Their faces were battered and bruised, and they had wadded rags tied between their teeth. The fifth man was naked, staked out between four stout pegs driven into the ground and stretched so tight his sinews stood out. He thrashed as much as his binding allowed, though, and howled into the rags stuffing his mouth, a muffled bellow of agony. Hot coals made a small cluster on his belly, giving off a faint smoke. It was the smell of blistering flesh that Perrin's nose had caught. The coals clung to the stretched man's skin, and every time his writhing managed to throw one off, a grinning fellow in a filthy green silk coat, squatting beside him, used a pair of tongs to replace it with another from a potful melting a circle of mud in the ground. Perrin knew him. His name was Hari, and he liked to collect ears strung on a leather cord. Men's ears, women's ears, children's ears; it never minded to Hari. Without thinking, Perrin strode forward and kicked the little pile of coals off the bound man. Some of them struck Hari, who jumped back with a startled squeal that turned to a shriek when his hand came down in the pot. He toppled over sideways, cradling his burned hand and glaring at Perrin, a weasel in a human skin. "The savage makes a sham, Aybara," Masema said. Perrin had not even noticed the man standing there, face like a scowling stone beneath his shaved scalp. His dark fevered eyes held a measure of contempt. The scent of madness skittered through the stink of burned flesh. "I know them. They pretend to feel pain, but they do not; not the way other men do. You must be willing and able to hurt a stone to make one of them talk."

ɑɹɡændə, ɹɪdʒəd bɪsaɪd mæsimə, wɑz ɡɹɪpɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd hɪl soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ ɪz hænd ʃʊk. "pɝhæps jə ɑɹ wɪlɪŋ tə luz jəɹ waɪf, eɪbɑɹə," hi ɡɹeɪɾɪd, "bʌɾ əl nɑt luz maɪ kwin!" "ɪɾ əz tə bi dʌn," ɛɹæm sɛd, hæf pliɾɪŋ, hæf dɪmændɪŋ. hi wɑz ɑn mæsiməz ʌðɝ saɪd, klʌtʃɪŋ ði ɛdʒəz ə hɪz ɡɹin kloʊk əz ɪf tə kip ɪz hænz fɹəm ðə sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz bæk. hɪz aɪz wɝ ɔlmoʊst əz hɑɾ əz mæsiməz. "ju tɔt mi ðəɾ ə mæn dʌz wʌɾ i mʌst."

Arganda, rigid beside Masema, was gripping his sword hilt so hard that his hand shook. "Perhaps you are willing to lose your wife, Aybara," he grated, "but I will not lose my queen!" "It has to be done," Aram said, half pleading, half demanding. He was on Masema's other side, clutching the edges of his green cloak as if to keep his hands from the sword on his back. His eyes were almost as hot as Masema's. "You taught me that a man does what he must."

pɛɹɪn fɔɹst ɪz fɪsts tə ənnət. wʌt hæd tə bi dʌn, fəɹ feɪl.

Perrin forced his fists to unknot. What had to be done, for Faile.

bɹəleɪn ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ keɪm pʊʃɪŋ θɹu ðə kɹaʊd, bɹəleɪn ɹɪŋkəlɪŋ əɹ noʊz slaɪtli ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə mæn stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt bɪtwin ðə pɛɡz. ðə θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪɾ əv bɪn lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə pis ʌv wʊd fəɹ ɔl ðɛɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən. ɛdʒɹə ən səlɪn wɝ wɪð ðɛm, niðɝ mɔɹ əfɛktəd. səm ə ðə ɡildænɪn soʊlʒɝz fɹaʊn ət ðə tu il wɪmən ən mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ ðɛɹ bɹɛθ. mæsiməz ɹʌmpəld, dɝɾi-feɪst mɛn ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ il ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əlaɪk, bʌt moʊst ɛdʒd əweɪ fɹəm ðə θɹi wɔɹɾɝz, ən ðoʊz u dɪd nɑt wɝ pʊld əweɪ baɪ ðɛɹ kəmpænjənz. səm fulz nu ðə lɪməts ə stupɪɾɪti. mæsimə ɡlɛɹɾ ət bɹəleɪn wɪð bɝnɪŋ aɪz bɪfɔɹ dəsaɪɾɪŋ tə pɹitɛnd ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst. səm fulz nu noʊ lɪməts.

Berelain and the Aes Sedai came pushing through the crowd, Berelain wrinkling her nose slightly at the sight of the man stretched out between the pegs. The three Aes Sedai might have been looking at a piece of wood for all their expression. Edarra and Sulin were with them, neither more affected. Some of the Ghealdanin soldiers frowned at the two Aiel women and muttered under their breath. Masema's rumpled, dirty-faced men glared at Aiel and Aes Sedai alike, but most edged away from the three Warders, and those who did not were pulled away by their companions. Some fools knew the limits of stupidity. Masema glared at Berelain with burning eyes before deciding to pretend she did not exist. Some fools knew no limits.

bɛndɪŋ, pɛɹɪn əntaɪd ðə ɹæɡ ɝaʊn ðə pɛɡd mænz maʊθ ən tʌɡd ðə wɑd fɹəm bɪtwin ɪz tiθ. hi dʒʌs mænədʒ tə snætʃ ɪz hæn bæk fɹəm ə snæp əz vɪʃəs əz ɛni steɪɝ kəɾ əv ɡɪvən.

Bending, Perrin untied the rag around the pegged man's mouth and tugged the wad from between his teeth. He just managed to snatch his hand back from a snap as vicious as any Stayer could have given.

ɪmiɾiətli, ði ilmən θɹu bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən bɪɡæn tə sɪŋ ɪn ə dip, klɪɹ vɔɪs:

Immediately, the Aielman threw back his head and began to sing in a deep, clear voice:

"wɑʃ ðə spɪɹz; waɪl ðə sʌn klaɪmz haɪ.

"Wash the spears; while the sun climbs high.

wɑʃ ðə spɪɹz; waɪl ðə sʌn fɔlz loʊ.

Wash the spears; while the sun falls low.

wɑʃ ðə spɪɹz; hu fɪɹz tə daɪ?

Wash the spears; who fears to die?

wɑʃ ðə spɪɹz; noʊ wʌn aɪ noʊ!"

Wash the spears; no one I know!"

mæsiməz læftɝ ɹoʊz ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə sɪŋɪŋ. pɛɹɪnz hækəlz ɹoʊz, tu. hi hæd nɛvɝ hɝd mæsimə læf bɪfɔɹ. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə plɛzən saʊnd.

Masema's laughter rose in the middle of the singing. Perrin's hackles rose, too. He had never heard Masema laugh before. It was not a pleasant sound.

hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə luz ə fɪŋɡɝ, soʊ hi pʊld ɪz æks aʊɾ ʌv ɪts bɛlt lup ən kɛɹfəli juz ðə tɑp ə ði æks hɛɾ əɡɛns ðə mænz tʃɪn tə pʊʃ ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt. aɪz ðə kʌlɝ ə ðə skaɪ lʊkt ʌp əɾ ɪm aʊɾ ʌv ə sʌn-dɑɹk feɪs, ʌnəfɹeɪd. ðə mæn smaɪld. "aɪ doʊn æsk jə tə bɪtʃɹeɪ jəɹ pipəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. hɪz θɹoʊt hɝt wɪð ði ɛfɝɾ ə kipɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs stɛɾi. "ju ʃeɪɾoʊ kæptʃɝd səm wɪmən. ɔl aɪ wɑnə noʊ ɪz haʊ tə ɡɛɾ əm bæk. wʌn ɪz neɪm feɪl. ʃiz əz tɔl əz wʌn ə jəɹ wɪmən, wɪð dɑɹk tɪltəɾ aɪz, ə stʃɹɔŋ noʊz ən ə boʊl maʊð. ə bjuɾəfəl wʊmən. jud ɹɪmɛmbɝ hɝ, ɪf jə hæd sin hɝ. hæv ju?" pʊlɪŋ ði æks əweɪ, hi stʃɹeɪɾənd.

He did not want to lose a finger, so he pulled his axe out of its belt loop and carefully used the top of the axe head against the man's chin to push his mouth shut. Eyes the color of the sky looked up at him out of a sun-dark face, unafraid. The man smiled. "I don't ask you to betray your people," Perrin said. His throat hurt with the effort of keeping his voice steady. "You Shaido captured some women. All I want to know is how to get them back. One is named Faile. She's as tall as one of your women, with dark tilted eyes, a strong nose and a bold mouth. A beautiful woman. You'd remember her, if you had seen her. Have you?" Pulling the axe away, he straightened.

ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛɾ ən bɪɡæn tə sɪŋ əɡɛn, nɛvɝ teɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz fɹəm pɛɹɪn. ɪt wɑz ə dʒɑli sɔŋ, wɪð ðə ɹɑlɪkɪŋ saʊn ʌv ə dæns:

The Shaido stared at him for a moment, then raised his head and began to sing again, never taking his eyes from Perrin. It was a jolly song, with the rollicking sound of a dance:

"aɪ wʌns mɛɾ ə mæn u wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm hoʊm.

"I once met a man who was far from home.

hɪz aɪz wɝ jɛloʊ ən ɪz wɪts wɝ stoʊn.

His eyes were yellow and his wits were stone.

hi æsk mi tə hoʊl smoʊk ɪn maɪ hænd, ən sɛɾ i kəd ʃoʊ mi ə wɔɾɝi lænd.

He asked me to hold smoke in my hand, and said he could show me a watery land.

hi pʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊn ən ɪz fiɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ən sɛɾ i kəd dæns laɪk ə wʊmən fɛɹ.

He put his head in the ground and his feet in the air, and said he could dance like a woman fair.

hi sɛɾ i kəd stæn tɪl i tɝn tə stoʊn.

He said he could stand till he turned to stone.

wən aɪ blɪŋk maɪ aɪz, hi wɑz ɡɔn."

When I blinked my eyes, he was gone."

lɛɾɪŋ ɪz hɛd fɔl bæk, ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ tʃʌkəld, dip ən ɹɪtʃ. hi cʊɾə bɪn laʊnʒɪŋ əɾ iz ɑn ə fɛðɝ bɛd. "ɪf. . . . ɪf jə kæn də ðɪs," ɛɹæm sɛd dɛspɝətli, "ðɛn ɡoʊ əweɪ. əl hɛlp si tə ɪt."

Letting his head fall back, the Shaido chuckled, deep and rich. He could have been lounging at ease on a feather bed. "If. . . . If you can't do this," Aram said desperately, "then go away. I'll help see to it."

wʌt hæd tə bi dʌn. pɛɹɪn lʊkt ət ðə feɪsəz ɝaʊn hɪm.

What had to be done. Perrin looked at the faces around him.

ɑɹɡændə, skaʊlɪŋ wɪð heɪtʃɹəd, əɾ ɪm əz mʌtʃ əz ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, naʊ. mæsimə, stɪŋkɪŋ ə mædnəs ən fɪld wɪð ə skɔɹnfəl heɪt. jə mʌs bi wɪlɪŋ ən eɪbəl tə hɝɾ ə stoʊn. ɛdʒɹə, hɝ feɪs əz ənɹiɾəbəl əz ði ɛɛs sədaɪz, ɑɹmz foʊldəd kɑmli bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts. ivən ʃeɪɾoʊ noʊ haʊ tə ɛmbɹeɪs peɪn. ɪɾəl teɪk deɪz. səlɪn, ðə skɑɹ əkɹɔs əɹ tʃik stɪl peɪl ɑn əɹ lɛðɝi skɪn, hɝ ɡeɪz lɛvəl ən əɹ sɛn ɪmplækəbəl. ðəl jil sloʊli ən əz lɪɾəl əz pɑsəbəl. bɹəleɪn, smɛlɪŋ ə dʒʌdʒmənt, ə ɹulɝ u hæd sɛntəns mɛn tə dɛθ ən nɛvɝ lɔst ə naɪts slip. wʌt hæd tə bi dʌn.

Arganda, scowling with hatred, at him as much as the Shaido, now. Masema, stinking of madness and filled with a scornful hate. You must be willing and able to hurt a stone. Edarra, her face as unreadable as the Aes Sedai's, arms folded calmly beneath her breasts. Even Shaido know how to embrace pain. It will take days. Sulin, the scar across her cheek still pale on her leathery skin, her gaze level and her scent implacable. They will yield slowly and as little as possible. Berelain, smelling of judgment, a ruler who had sentenced men to death and never lost a night's sleep. What had to be done.

wɪlɪŋ ən eɪbəl tə hɝɾ ə stoʊn. ɛmbɹeɪs peɪn. oʊ, laɪt, feɪl.

Willing and able to hurt a stone. Embrace pain. Oh, Light, Faile.

ði æks wɑz əz laɪɾ əz ə fɛðɝ ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn ɪz hænd, ən keɪm daʊn laɪk ə hæmɝ ɑn ði ænvəl, ðə hɛvi bleɪd ʃɪɹɪŋ θɹu ðə ʃeɪɾoʊz lɛft ɹɪst.

The axe was as light as a feather rising in his hand, and came down like a hammer on the anvil, the heavy blade shearing through the Shaido's left wrist.

ðə mæn ɡɹʌntɪɾ ɪn peɪn, ðən ɹɪɹɾ ʌp kənvʌlsɪvli wɪð ə snɑɹl, dɪlɪbɝətli spɹeɪɪŋ ðə blʌd ðət ɡtəd fɹəm ɪz ɹɪst əkɹɔs pɛɹɪnz feɪs.

The man grunted in pain, then reared up convulsively with a snarl, deliberately spraying the blood that gouted from his wrist across Perrin's face.

"hil hɪm," pɛɹɪn sɛd tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, stɛpɪŋ bæk. hi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə waɪp ɪz feɪs. ðə blʌd wɑz sipɪŋ ɪndə hɪz bɪɹd. hi fɛl hɑloʊ. hi kəd nɑɾ əv lɪftəd ði æks əɡɛn ɪf i hæd tə fəɹ ɪz laɪf.

"Heal him," Perrin said to the Aes Sedai, stepping back. He did not try to wipe his face. The blood was seeping into his beard. He felt hollow. He could not have lifted the axe again if he had to for his life.

"ɑɹ jə mæd?" mɑsʊɝi sɛɾ æŋɡɹəli. "wi kænɑt ɡɪv ðə mæn bæk ɪz hænd!"

"Are you mad?" Masuri said angrily. "We cannot give the man back his hand!"

"aɪ sɛd, hil hɪm!" hi ɡɹaʊld.

"I said, Heal him!" he growled.

siɑnɪd wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi muvɪŋ, ðoʊ, lɪftɪŋ əɹ skɝts tə ɡlaɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹaʊn ən nil ət ðə mænz hɛd. hi wɑz baɪɾɪŋ əɾ ɪz sɛvɝd ɹɪst, tʃɹaɪɪŋ fjuɾɪlli tə stɛm ðə floʊ ʌv blʌd wɪð ðə pɹɛʃɝ ə hɪz tiθ. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ fɪɹ ɪn ɪz aɪz. əɹ ɪn ɪz smɛl. nʌn.

Seonid was already moving, though, lifting her skirts to glide across the ground and kneel at the man's head. He was biting at his severed wrist, trying futilely to stem the flow of blood with the pressure of his teeth. But there was no fear in his eyes. Or in his smell. None.

siɑnɪd ɡɹɪp ðə ʃeɪɾoʊz hɛd, ən sʌɾənli hi kənvʌlsd əɡɛn, flɪŋɪŋ ɪz ɑɹm aʊt waɪldli.

Seonid gripped the Shaido's head, and suddenly he convulsed again, flinging his arm out wildly.

ðə spɹeɪ ʌv blʌd dwɪndəld əz i dʒɝkt, ən wɑz ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ i slʌmp bæk tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɡɹeɪ-feɪst. ənstɛɾəli, hi ɹeɪz ðə stʌmp ə hɪz lɛft ɑɹm tə lʊk ət ðə smuð skɪn ðət naʊ kʌvɝd ði ɛnd. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ə skɑɹ, pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt si ɪt. ðə mæn bɛɹd tiθ ət hɪm. hi stɪl dɪd nɑt smɛl əfɹeɪd.

The spray of blood dwindled as he jerked, and was gone before he slumped back to the ground, gray-faced. Unsteadily, he raised the stump of his left arm to look at the smooth skin that now covered the end. If there was a scar, Perrin could not see it. The man bared teeth at him. He still did not smell afraid.

siɑnɪd slʌmpt, tu, əz ɪf ʃi hæd stʃɹeɪn tə hɝ lɪmət. ælhæɹə ən wɪntɝ tʊk ə stɛp fɔɹwɝd, ən ʃi weɪvd əm əweɪ, ɹaɪzɪŋ baɪ hɝsɛlf wɪð ə hɛvi saɪ. "aɪv bɪn toʊl jə kən hoʊld aʊt fəɹ deɪz ən stɪl seɪ nɛks tə nʌθɪŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. hɪz vɔɪs saʊndəd tu laʊɾ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz. "aɪ doʊn əv taɪm fəɹ jə tə ʃoʊ haʊ tʌf jə ɑɹ, əɹ haʊ bɹeɪv. aɪ noʊ jəɹ bɹeɪv ən tʌf. bʌt maɪ waɪfs bɪn ə pɹɪznɝ tu lɔŋ. jəl bi sɛpɝeɪɾəd ən æskt əbaʊt səm wɪmən. wɛðɝ juv sin əm ən wɛɹ.

Seonid slumped, too, as if she had strained to her limit. Alharra and Wynter took a step forward, and she waved them away, rising by herself with a heavy sigh. "I've been told you can hold out for days and still say next to nothing," Perrin said. His voice sounded too loud in his ears. "I don't have time for you to show how tough you are, or how brave. I know you're brave and tough. But my wife's been a prisoner too long. You'll be separated and asked about some women. Whether you've seen them and where.

ðæts ɔl aɪ wɑnə noʊ. ðɛɹəl bi noʊ hɑt koʊlz əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls; dʒʌs kwɛstʃənz. bʌɾ ɪf ɛnibəɾi ɹəfjuzəz tə ænsɝ, əɹ ɪf jəɹ ænsɝz ɑɹ tu dɪfɹənt, ðən ɛvɹibɑɾi luzəz sʌmθɪŋ." hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ðəɾ i kəd lɪf ði æks æftɝ ɔl. ðə bleɪd wɑz smɪɹd wɪð ɹɛd.

That's all I want to know. There'll be no hot coals or anything else; just questions. But if anybody refuses to answer, or if your answers are too different, then everybody loses something." He was surprised to find that he could lift the axe after all. The blade was smeared with red.

"tu hænz ən tu fit," hi sɛd koʊldli. laɪt, hi saʊndəd laɪk aɪs. hi fɛlt laɪk aɪs tə hɪz boʊnz. "ðæt minz jə ɡɛt fɔɹ tʃænsəz tə ænsɝ ðə seɪm. ən ɪf jə ɔl hoʊld aʊt, aɪ stɪl woʊn kɪl ju. əl faɪn ə vɪlədʒ tə liv jə ɪn, səm pleɪs ðət wɪl lɛt jə bɛɡ, sʌmwɛɹ ðə bɔɪz wɪl tɔs ə kɔɪn tə ðə fɪɹs ilmɛn wɪð noʊ hænz əɹ fit. jə θɪŋk ɑn ɪɾ ən dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ ɪts wɝθ kipɪŋ maɪ waɪf fɹəm mi."

"Two hands and two feet," he said coldly. Light, he sounded like ice. He felt like ice to his bones. "That means you get four chances to answer the same. And if you all hold out, I still won't kill you. I'll find a village to leave you in, some place that will let you beg, somewhere the boys will toss a coin to the fierce Aielmen with no hands or feet. You think on it and decide whether it's worth keeping my wife from me."

ivən mæsimə wɑz stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm əz ɪf i hæd nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ sin ðə mæn stændɪŋ ðəɹ wɪð ən æks. wən i tɝn tə ɡoʊ, mæsiməz mɛn ən ðə ɡildænɪn əlaɪk pɑɹɾəd ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm əz ðoʊ tə lɛɾ ə hoʊl fɪst ə tʃɹɑləks θɹu. hi faʊn ðə hɛdʒ ə ʃɑɹpən steɪks ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, ən ðə fɔɹəst ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əɹ soʊ bɪɑnd, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ dɝɛkʃən. kæɹiɪŋ ði æks, hi wɔkt əntɪl hjudʒ tʃɹiz sɝaʊndəɾ ɪm ən ðə smɛl ə ðə kæmp wɑz lɛf bɪhaɪnd. ðə smɛl ə blʌɾ i kæɹid wɪð hɪm, ʃɑɹp ən mətælɪk. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ðæt.

Even Masema was staring at him as if he had never before seen the man standing there with an axe. When he turned to go, Masema's men and the Ghealdanin alike parted in front of him as though to let a whole fist of Trollocs through. He found the hedge of sharpened stakes in front of him, and the forest a hundred paces or so beyond, but he did not change direction. Carrying the axe, he walked until huge trees surrounded him and the smell of the camp was left behind. The smell of blood he carried with him, sharp and metallic. There was no running from that.

hi kəd nɑɾ əv sɛd haʊ lɔŋ i wɔk θɹu ðə snoʊ. hi bɛɹli noʊɾəst ðə ʃɑɹpənɪŋ slæn ə ðə bɑɹz ə laɪt ðət slaɪs ðə ʃædoʊz bɪniθ ðə fɔɹəs kænəpi. ðə blʌd wɑz θɪk ɑn ɪz feɪs, ɪn ɪz bɪɹd. bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə dʒɹaɪ. haʊ mɛni taɪmz hæɾ i sɛɾ i wəd də ɛniθɪŋ tə ɡɛt feɪl bæk? ə mæn dɪd wʌɾ i hæd tə. fəɹ feɪl, ɛniθɪŋ.

He could not have said how long he walked through the snow. He barely noticed the sharpening slant of the bars of light that sliced the shadows beneath the forest canopy. The blood was thick on his face, in his beard. Beginning to dry. How many times had he said he would do anything to get Faile back? A man did what he had to. For Faile, anything.

əbɹʌpli, hi ɹeɪz ði æks bɪhaɪn ɪz hɛɾ ɪn boʊθ hænz ən hɝld ɪɾ əz hɑɹɾ əz i kʊd. ɪt spʌn ɛn oʊvɝ ɛnd, ən slæmd ɪndə ðə θɪk tʃɹʌŋk ʌv ən oʊk wɪð ə sɑləd θkʌŋk. lɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə bɹɛθ ðət sim lɑkt ɪn ɪz lʌŋz, hi sæŋk daʊn ɑn ə ɹʌf stoʊn aʊtkɹɑp ðət stʌk ʌp əz haɪ ən bɹɔɾ əz ə bɛntʃ, ən pʊɾ ɪz ɛlboʊz ɑn ɪz niz. "ju kən ʃoʊ jɝsɛlf naʊ, ɛlaɪəs," hi sɛd wɛɹəli. "aɪ kən smɛl jə ðɛɹ." ði ʌðɝ mæn stɛp laɪtli aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊz, jɛloʊ aɪz ɡloʊɪŋ feɪnli bɪniθ ðə waɪd bɹɪm ə hɪz hæt. ði il wɝ nɔɪzi, kəmpɛɹd tə hɪm. ədʒʌstɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ naɪf, hi tʊk ə sit bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪn ɑn ði aʊtkɹɑp, bʌt fəɹ ə taɪm i mɪɹli sæt koʊmɪŋ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz θɹu ðə ɡɹeɪ-stʃɹik bɪɹd ðət fæn əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst. hi nɑɾəd təwɔɹd ði æks stʌk ɪn ðə saɪɾ ə ði oʊk.

Abruptly, he raised the axe behind his head in both hands and hurled it as hard as he could. It spun end over end, and slammed into the thick trunk of an oak with a solid thcunk. Letting out a breath that seemed locked in his lungs, he sank down on a rough stone outcrop that stuck up as high and broad as a bench, and put his elbows on his knees. "You can show yourself now, Elyas," he said wearily. "I can smell you there." The other man stepped lightly out of the shadows, yellow eyes glowing faintly beneath the wide brim of his hat. The Aiel were noisy, compared to him. Adjusting his long knife, he took a seat beside Perrin on the outcrop, but for a time he merely sat combing his fingers through the gray-streaked beard that fanned across his chest. He nodded toward the axe stuck in the side of the oak.

"aɪ toʊl jə wʌns tə kip ðət tɪl jə ɡɑt tə laɪk juzɪŋ ɪt tu mʌtʃ. dɪd jə stɑɹt laɪkɪŋ ɪt? bæk ðɛɹ?" pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd hɑɹd. "noʊ! nɑt ðæt! bʌt. . . . " "bʌt wʌt, bɔɪ? aɪ θɪŋk jə ɔlmoʊst əv mæsimə skɛɹd. oʊnli, jə smɛl skɛɹd, tu."

"I told you once to keep that till you got to like using it too much. Did you start liking it? Back there?" Perrin shook his head hard. "No! Not that! But. . . . " "But what, boy? I think you almost have Masema scared. Only, you smell scared, too."

"əbaʊt taɪm i wɑz skɛɹɾ ə sʌmθɪŋ," pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd, ʃɹʌɡɪŋ ənkʌmftəbli. səm θɪŋz wɝ hɑɹd tə ɡɪv vɔɪs. meɪbi ɪt wɑz taɪm tə, ðoʊ. "ði æks. aɪ dɪdnt noʊɾəs ɪt, ðə fɝs taɪm; oʊnli lʊkɪŋ bæk. ðət wɑz ðə naɪɾ aɪ mɛt ɡɔl, ən ðə waɪtkloʊks tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl ʌs. leɪɾɝ, faɪɾɪŋ tʃɹɑləks ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, aɪ wɑznt ʃʊɹ. bʌt ðɛn, ət dəməaɪz wɛlz, aɪ wɑz. aɪm əfɹeɪɾ ɪn ə bæɾəl, ɛlaɪəs, əfɹeɪɾ ən sæd, kəz meɪbi əl nɛvɝ si feɪl əɡɛn." hɪz hɑɹt klɛntʃt tɪl ɪz tʃɛs hɝt.

"About time he was scared of something," Perrin muttered, shrugging uncomfortably. Some things were hard to give voice. Maybe it was time to, though. "The axe. I didn't notice it, the first time; only looking back. That was the night I met Gaul, and the Whitecloaks tried to kill us. Later, fighting Trollocs in the Two Rivers, I wasn't sure. But then, at Dumai's Wells, I was. I'm afraid in a battle, Elyas, afraid and sad, because maybe I'll never see Faile again." His heart clenched till his chest hurt.

feɪl. "oʊnli. . . . aɪv hɝd ɡɹeɪɾi ən nil tɔk əbaʊt haʊ ɪɾ ɪz, hoʊldɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ðeɪ seɪ ðeɪ fil mɔɹ əlaɪv. aɪm tu fɹaɪɾənd tə spɪt, ɪn ə bæɾəl, bʌɾ aɪ fil mɔɹ əlaɪv ðən ɛni taɪm ɪksɛpt wən aɪm hoʊldɪŋ feɪl. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk aɪ kəd stæn ɪɾ ɪf aɪ keɪm tə fil ðət weɪ əbaʊt wʌɾ aɪ dʒʌs dɪd bæk ðɛɹ. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk feɪl wəɾ əv mi bæk ɪf aɪ keɪm tə ðæt." ɛlaɪəs snɔɹɾɪd. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk juv ðəɾ ɪn ju, bɔɪ. lɪsən, deɪnʒɝ teɪks dɪfɹən mɛn ɪn dɪfɹənt weɪz. səm ɑɹ koʊld əz klɑkwɝk, bʌt jə nɛvɝ stʃɹʌk mi əz ðə koʊl sɔɹt. wən jəɹ hɑɹt stɑɹts paʊndɪŋ, ɪt hits jəɹ blʌd. stænz tə ɹizən ɪt haɪɾənz jəɹ sɛnsɪz, tu. meɪks jə əwɛɹ.

Faile. "Only. . . . I've heard Grady and Neald talk about how it is, holding the One Power. They say they feel more alive. I'm too frightened to spit, in a battle, but I feel more alive than any time except when I'm holding Faile. I don't think I could stand it if I came to feel that way about what I just did back there. I don't think Faile would have me back if I came to that." Elyas snorted. "I don't think you have that in you, boy. Listen, danger takes different men in different ways. Some are cold as clockwork, but you never struck me as the cold sort. When your heart starts pounding, it heats your blood. Stands to reason it heightens your senses, too. Makes you aware.

meɪbi jəl daɪ ɪn ə fju mɪnəts, meɪbi ɪn ə hɑɹtbit, bʌt jəɹ nɑt dɛd naʊ, ən jə noʊ ɪt fɹəm jəɹ tiθ tə jəɹ toʊneɪlz. dʒʌs ðə weɪ θɪŋz ɑɹ. dʌzn min jə laɪk ɪt."

Maybe you'll die in a few minutes, maybe in a heartbeat, but you're not dead now, and you know it from your teeth to your toenails. Just the way things are. Doesn't mean you like it."

"aɪ wəd laɪk tə bɪliv ðæt," pɛɹɪn sɛd sɪmpli. "lɪv əz lɔŋ əz aɪ hæv," ɛlaɪəs ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪn ə dʒɹaɪ vɔɪs, "æn jəl bɪliv. tɪl ðɛn, dʒʌs teɪk ɪt ðəɾ aɪv lɪv lɔŋɡɝ ðən jə hæv, ən aɪv bɪn ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ ju."

"I would like to believe that," Perrin said simply. "Live as long as I have," Elyas replied in a dry voice, "and you'll believe. Till then, just take it that I've lived longer than you have, and I've been there before you."

ðə tu ʌv əm sæt lʊkɪŋ ət ði æks. pɛɹɪn wɑntəd tə bɪliv. ðə blʌɾ ɑn ɪz æks lʊk blæk, naʊ. blʌd hæd nɛvɝ lʊk soʊ blæk bɪfɔɹ. haʊ lɔŋ hæɾ ɪt bɪn? fɹəm ði æŋɡəl ə ðə laɪt sɪftɪŋ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, ðə sʌn wɑz fɔlɪŋ. hɪz ɪɹz kɑt ðə kɹʌntʃ ə hʊvz ɪn ðə snoʊ, sloʊli kʌmɪŋ təwɔɹd hɪm. mɪnəts leɪɾɝ, nild ən ɛɹæm əpɪɹd, ðə wʌntaɪm tɪŋkɝ pɔɪntɪŋ aʊt tʃɹæks ən ði æʃəmən ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli. ɪt wɑz ə klɪɹ tʃɹeɪl, bʌɾ ɪn tʃɹuθ, pɛɹɪn wəd nɑɾ əv bɛɾ ɑn nil biɪŋ eɪbəl tə fɑloʊ ɪt. hi wɑz ə sɪɾi mæn. "ɑɹɡændə θɔt wi ɔt tə weɪt tɪl jəɹ blʌd kuld," nil sɛd, linɪŋ ɑn ɪz sæɾəl ən stʌɾiɪŋ pɛɹɪn. "mi, aɪ θɪŋk ɪt kænt ɡɛɾ ɛni kulɝ." hi nɑɾəd, ə tʌtʃ ə sæɾəsfækʃən ɝaʊn ɪz maʊθ. hi wɑz əkʌstəm tə pipəl biɪŋ əfɹeɪɾ ə hɪm, kəz ə hɪz blæk koʊɾ ən wʌɾ ɪt ɹɛpɹəzɛntəd. "ðeɪ tɔkt," ɛɹæm sɛd, "æn ðeɪ ɔl ɡeɪv ðə seɪm ænsɝz." hɪz skaʊl sɛɾ i dɪd nɑt laɪk ði ænsɝz. "aɪ θɪŋk ðə θɹɛɾ ə livɪŋ əm tə bɛɡ fɹaɪɾənd əm mɔɹ ðən jəɹ æks. bʌt ðeɪ seɪ ðeɪv nɛvɝ sin ðə leɪɾi feɪl. əɹ ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz.

The two of them sat looking at the axe. Perrin wanted to believe. The blood on his axe looked black, now. Blood had never looked so black before. How long had it been? From the angle of the light sifting through the trees, the sun was falling. His ears caught the crunch of hooves in the snow, slowly coming toward him. Minutes later, Neald and Aram appeared, the onetime Tinker pointing out tracks and the Asha'man shaking his head impatiently. It was a clear trail, but in truth, Perrin would not have bet on Neald being able to follow it. He was a city man. "Arganda thought we ought to wait till your blood cooled," Neald said, leaning on his saddle and studying Perrin. "Me, I think it can't get any cooler." He nodded, a touch of satisfaction around his mouth. He was accustomed to people being afraid of him, because of his black coat and what it represented. "They talked," Aram said, "and they all gave the same answers." His scowl said he did not like the answers. "I think the threat of leaving them to beg frightened them more than your axe. But they say they've never seen the Lady Faile. Or any of the others.

wi kəd tʃɹaɪ ðə koʊlz əɡɛn. ðeɪ maɪt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðɛn."

We could try the coals again. They might remember then."

dɪɾ i saʊn iɡɝ? tə faɪn feɪl, əɹ tə juz ðə koʊlz? ɛlaɪəs ɡɹɪməst. "ðeɪl dʒʌst ɡɪv jə bæk ði ænsɝz juv ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɪvən ðɛm, naʊ. tɛl jə wʌt jə wɑnə hɪɹ. ɪt wɑz ə smɔl tʃæns, ɛniweɪ. ðɛɹz θaʊzənz ə ʃeɪɾoʊ ən θaʊzənz ə pɹɪznɝz. ə mæn kəd lɪv ɪz hoʊl laɪf əmʌŋ ðət mɛni pipəl ən nɛvɝ mit mɔɹ ðən ə fju hʌnʒɹəd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ." "ðɛn wɪv tə kɪl ðɛm," ɛɹæm sɛd ɡɹɪmli. "səlɪn sɛd ðə meɪɾənz meɪd ʃʊɹ tə teɪk əm wən ðeɪ hæd noʊ wɛpənz, soʊ ðeɪ kəd bi kwɛstʃənd. ðeɪ woʊn dʒʌst sɛɾəl daʊn tə bi ɡeɪʃeɪn. ɪf ivən wʌn ɪskeɪps, hi kən lɛt ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ noʊ wɝ hɪɹ. ðən ðəl bi kʌmɪŋ æftɝ ʌs." pɛɹɪnz dʒɔɪns fɛlt ɹʌstəd, eɪkɪŋ əz i stʊɾ ʌp. hi kəd nɑt dʒʌs lɛt ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ɡoʊ. "ðeɪ kən bi ɡɑɹɾəd, ɛɹæm." heɪs hæɾ ɔlmoʊs lɔst ɪm feɪl kəmplitli, ən i hæd bɪn heɪsti əɡɛn. heɪsti.

Did he sound eager? To find Faile, or to use the coals? Elyas grimaced. "They'll just give you back the answers you've already given them, now. Tell you what you want to hear. It was a small chance, anyway. There's thousands of Shaido and thousands of prisoners. A man could live his whole life among that many people and never meet more than a few hundred to remember." "Then we have to kill them," Aram said grimly. "Sulin said the Maidens made sure to take them when they had no weapons, so they could be questioned. They won't just settle down to be gai'shain. If even one escapes, he can let the Shaido know we're here. Then they'll be coming after us." Perrin's joints felt rusted, aching as he stood up. He could not just let the Shaido go. "They can be guarded, Aram." Haste had almost lost him Faile completely, and he had been hasty again. Hasty.

sətʃ ə maɪld wɝd fəɹ kʌɾɪŋ ɔf ə mænz hænd. ən tə noʊ pɝpəs. hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk kɛɹfəli ən muv kɛɹfəli. hi hæd tə θɪŋk naʊ, bʌɾ ɛvɹi θɔt hɝt. feɪl wɑz lɔst ɪn ə si ʌv waɪt-klæd pɹɪznɝz. "meɪbi ʌðɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn wəd noʊ wɛɹ ʃi ɪz," hi mʌɾɝd, tɝnɪŋ bæk təwɔɹd ðə kæmp. bʌt haʊ tə pʊɾ ɪz hænz ɑn ɛni ʌv ðə ʃeɪɾoʊz ɡeɪʃeɪn? ðeɪ wɝ nɛvɝ əlaʊɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə kæmp ɪksɛpt ʌndɝ ɡɑɹd. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ðæt, bɔɪ?" ɛlaɪəs æskt.

Such a mild word for cutting off a man's hand. And to no purpose. He had always tried to think carefully and move carefully. He had to think now, but every thought hurt. Faile was lost in a sea of white-clad prisoners. "Maybe other gai'shain would know where she is," he muttered, turning back toward the camp. But how to put his hands on any of the Shaido's gai'shain? They were never allowed outside the camp except under guard. "What about that, boy?" Elyas asked.

pɛɹɪn nu wʌɾ i mɛnt wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ. ði æks. "liv ɪt fəɹ huɛvɝ faɪnz ɪt." hɪz vɔɪs tɝn hɑɹʃ. "meɪbi səm ful ɡlimən wɪl meɪk ə stɔɹi aʊɾ ʌv ɪt." hi stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ təwɔɹd ðə kæmp, nɛvɝ lʊkɪŋ bæk. wɪð ɪts ɛmpti lup, ðə θɪk bɛlt ɝaʊn ɪz weɪst wɑz tu laɪt. ɔl tə noʊ pɝpəs.

Perrin knew what he meant without looking. The axe. "Leave it for whoever finds it." His voice turned harsh. "Maybe some fool gleeman will make a story out of it." He strode away toward the camp, never looking back. With its empty loop, the thick belt around his waist was too light. All to no purpose.

θɹi deɪz leɪɾɝ ðə kɑɹts ɹɪtɝn fɹəm soʊ hæbɝ, hɛvi leɪɾən, ən beɪlwɝ ɛntɝd pɛɹɪnz tɛnt wɪð ə tɔl ənʃeɪvən mæn, wɛɹɪŋ ə dɝɾi wʊlən koʊɾ ən ə sɔɹd ðət lʊk mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ kɛɹd fɔɹ. ət fɝst, pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɪm bɪhaɪn ən əntʃɹɪmd mʌnθs ɡɹoʊθ ə bɪɹd. ðən i kɑt ðə mænz sɛnt. "aɪ nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə si jə əɡɛn," hi sɛd. beɪlwɝ blɪŋkt, əz mʌtʃ əz ə ɡæsp ə stɑɹɾəlmənt fɹəm ɛniwʌn ɛls. daʊtləs ðə bɝd-laɪk lɪɾəl mæn hæd bɪn lʊkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə pɹɪzɛntɪŋ ə sɝpɹaɪz.

Three days later the carts returned from So Habor, heavy laden, and Balwer entered Perrin's tent with a tall unshaven man, wearing a dirty woolen coat and a sword that looked much better cared for. At first, Perrin did not recognize him behind an untrimmed month's growth of beard. Then he caught the man's scent. "I never expected to see you again," he said. Balwer blinked, as much as a gasp of startlement from anyone else. Doubtless the bird-like little man had been looking forward to presenting a surprise.

"aɪv bɪn sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ . . . fəɹ meɪaɪɡdɪn," tɑlænvɝ sɛd ɹʌfli, "bʌt ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ muv fæstɝ ðən aɪ kʊd. mæstɝ beɪlwɝ sɛz jə noʊ wɛɹ ʃi ɪz."

"I've been searching for . . . for Maighdin," Tallanvor said roughly, "but the Shaido moved faster than I could. Master Balwer says you know where she is."

beɪlwɝ ɡeɪv ðə jʌŋɡɝ mæn ə ʃɑɹp lʊk, bʌɾ ɪz vɔɪs ɹɪmeɪn əz dʒɹaɪ ən ɪmoʊʃənləs əz ɪz sɛnt. "mæstɝ tɑlænvɝ ɹitʃt soʊ hæbɝ dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ aɪ lɛft, maɪ lɔɹd. ɪt wɑz ðə mɛɹəs tʃæns ðəɾ aɪ ɪnkaʊntɝd hɪm. bʌt pɝhæps ə fɔɹtʃənət tʃæns. hi meɪ hæv səm ælaɪz fəɹ ju. əl lɛɾ ɪm tɛl ɪt.". tɑlænvɝ fɹaʊn əɾ ɪz buts ən sɛd nʌθɪŋ.

Balwer gave the younger man a sharp look, but his voice remained as dry and emotionless as his scent. "Master Tallanvor reached So Habor just before I left, my Lord. It was the merest chance that I encountered him. But perhaps a fortunate chance. He may have some allies for you. I will let him tell it.". Tallanvor frowned at his boots and said nothing.

"ælaɪz?" pɛɹɪn pɹɑmptəd. "nʌθɪŋ lɛs ðən ən ɑɹmi wɪl bi mʌtʃ jus, bʌɾ əl teɪk ɛni eɪd jə kən bɹɪŋ." tɑlænvɝ lʊkt ət beɪlwɝ, hu ɹɪtɝn ə hæf baʊ ən ə blænli ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋ smaɪl.

"Allies?" Perrin prompted. "Nothing less than an army will be much use, but I'll take any aid you can bring." Tallanvor looked at Balwer, who returned a half bow and a blandly encouraging smile.

ði ənʃeɪvən mæn dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "fɪftin θaʊzən sintʃæn, nɪɹ ɪnʌf. moʊst ɑɹ tæɹɑbənɝz, æktʃəli , bʌt ðeɪ ɹaɪɾ ʌndɝ sintʃæn bænɝz. ænd. . . . ðeɪv hæv ət list ə dʌzən deɪmeɪn." hɪz vɔɪs kwɪkənd wɪð ɝdʒənsi, ə nid tə fɪnɪʃ bɪfɔɹ pɛɹɪn kəd kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. "aɪ noʊ ɪts laɪk teɪkɪŋ hɛlp fɹəm ðə dɑɹk wʌn, bʌt ðəɹ hʌntɪŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, tu, ən aɪd teɪk ðə dɑɹk wʌnz hɛlp tə fɹi meɪaɪɡdɪn." fəɹ ə moʊmənt, pɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ ət ðə tu mɛn, tɑlænvɝ nɝvəsli θʌmɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt, beɪlwɝ laɪk ə spɛɹoʊ weɪɾɪŋ tə si wɪtʃ weɪ ə kɹɪkət wəd hɑp. sintʃæn. ən deɪmeɪn. jɛs, ðət wəd bi laɪk teɪkɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz hɛlp. "sɪt daʊn ən tɛl mi əbaʊt ðiz sintʃæn," hi sɛd.

The unshaven man drew a deep breath. "Fifteen thousand Seanchan, near enough. Most are Taraboners, actually, but they ride under Seanchan banners. And. . . . And they have at least a dozen damane." His voice quickened with urgency, a need to finish before Perrin could cut him off. "I know it's like taking help from the Dark One, but they're hunting the Shaido, too, and I'd take the Dark One's help to free Maighdin." For a moment, Perrin stared at the two men, Tallanvor nervously thumbing his sword hilt, Balwer like a sparrow waiting to see which way a cricket would hop. Seanchan. And damane. Yes, that would be like taking the Dark One's help. "Sit down and tell me about these Seanchan," he said.

tʃæptɝ twɛntieɪt

CHAPTER 28

eɪ klʌstɝ ə ɹoʊzbʊdz fɹəm ðə deɪ ðeɪ lɛft ɛbu dɑɹ, tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð vɑlən lukəz ɡɹæn tʃɹævlɪŋ ʃoʊ ən mæɡnɪfəsən dɪspleɪ ʌv mɑɹvəlz ən wʌndɝz wɑz ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz bæɾ əz mæts dɑɹkəs θɔts hæd meɪɾ ɪt. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ɪt ɹeɪn ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi deɪ fəɹ ə fju aʊɝz ən wʌns fəɹ θɹi deɪz ɹʌnɪŋ, koʊld wɪntɝ ɹeɪn ɪn daʊnpɔɹz lɪɾəl ʃɔɹɾ ə snoʊ ən aɪsi dʒɹɪzəlz ðət sloʊli soʊkt ə koʊt θɹu ən lɛf jə ʃɪvɝɪŋ bɪfɔɹ jə nu ɪt. wɔɾɝ ɹæn ɔf ðə hɑɹd-pækt ɹoʊɾ əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn peɪvd ɪn stoʊn, livɪŋ ət wɝst ə θɪn slɪk ə mʌd, bʌt ðət lɔŋ tʃɹeɪn ʌv wæɡənz ən hɔɹsəz ən pipəl kʌvɝd lɪɾəl ɪnʌf ɡɹaʊnd wən ðə sʌn ʃoʊn. ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, ðə ʃoʊfoʊk hæd bɪn ɔl iɡɝnəs tə liv ðə sɪɾi wɛɹ laɪtnɪŋ sæŋk ʃɪps ɪn ðə naɪɾ ən stʃɹeɪnʒ mɝɾɝz hæɾ ɛvɹiwʌn lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, tə bi əweɪ fɹəm ə dʒɛləs sintʃæn noʊbəlmən u wəd bi hʌntɪŋ ɪz waɪf fjʊɹiəsli ən maɪt teɪk aʊɾ ɪz æŋɡɝ ɑn ɛniwʌn əsoʊsieɪɾəd wɪð spɪɹəɾɪŋ əɹ aʊɾ əɹ ə hɪz klʌtʃəz. ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, ðeɪ pɹɛst əhɛɾ əz fæst əz ðə hɔɹsəz kəd pʊl ðə wæɡənz, ɝdʒɪŋ ði ænəməlz fəɹ ə kwɪkɝ stɛp, ənʌðɝ maɪl. bʌɾ ɛvɹi maɪl sim tə meɪk əm fil ðət mʌtʃ fɑɹðɝ fɹəm deɪnʒɝ, ðət mʌtʃ seɪfɝ, ən baɪ ðə fɝst æftɝnun. . . .

A Cluster of Rosebuds From the day they left Ebou Dar, traveling with Valan Luca's Grand Traveling Show and Magnificent Display of Marvels and Wonders was every bit as bad as Mat's darkest thoughts had made it. For one thing, it rained almost every day for a few hours and once for three days running, cold winter rain in downpours little short of snow and icy drizzles that slowly soaked a coat through and left you shivering before you knew it. Water ran off the hard-packed road as if it had been paved in stone, leaving at worst a thin slick of mud, but that long train of wagons and horses and people covered little enough ground when the sun shone. In the beginning, the showfolk had been all eagerness to leave the city where lightning sank ships in the night and strange murders had everyone looking over their shoulders, to be away from a jealous Seanchan nobleman who would be hunting his wife furiously and might take out his anger on anyone associated with spiriting her out her of his clutches. In the beginning, they pressed ahead as fast as the horses could pull the wagons, urging the animals for a quicker step, another mile. But every mile seemed to make them feel that much farther from danger, that much safer, and by the first afternoon. . . .

"hæv tə teɪk kɛɹ ə ðə hɔɹsəz," lukə ɪkspleɪnd, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə tim ənhɪtʃt fɹəm ɪz ɹədɪkjələsli peɪntəd wæɡən ən lɛɾ əweɪ tə ðə hɔɹslaɪnz θɹu ə laɪt dʒɹɪzəl. ðə sʌn stɪl sæt lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən hæfweɪ daʊn tə ðə hɝaɪzən, bʌɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɹeɪ tɛnʒɹəlz wɝ ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə smoʊk hoʊlz ə tɛns ən ðə mɛɾəl tʃɪmniz ə ðə bɑks-laɪk lɪvɪŋ wæɡənz. "noʊbɑdiz tʃeɪsɪŋ ʌs, ən ɪts ə lɔŋ weɪ tə luɡɹd. ɡʊd hɔɹsəz ɑɹ hɑɹd tə kʌm baɪ, ən ɪkspɛnsɪv." lukə ɡeɪv ə saʊɝ fɹaʊn ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. mɛnʃən ʌv ɪkspɛns ɔlweɪz saʊɝd hɪm. hi wɑz taɪt wɪð ə pɛni, ɪksɛpt wɛɹ ɪz waɪf wɑz kənsɝnd. "nɑt mɛni pleɪsəz bɪtwin hɪɹ ən ðəɹ wɝθ stɑpɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ə deɪ. moʊs vɪlədʒəz woʊn pɹəvaɪɾ ə fʊl kɹaʊɾ ivən ɪf ðə hoʊl pɑpjəleɪʃən tɝnz aʊt, ən jə kən nɛvɝ tɛl haʊ ə taʊn wɪl bi əntɪl jə sɛɾ ʌp. jəɹ nɑt peɪɪŋ mi ɪnʌf tə ɡɪv ʌp wʌɾ aɪ kən ɝn, ðoʊ." hɪtʃɪŋ ɪz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd kɹɪmzən kloʊk kloʊsɝ əɡɛns ðə dæmp, hi ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ təwɔɹɾ ɪz wæɡən. ðə smɛl ə sʌmθɪŋ bɪɾɝ dʒɹɪftəd θɹu ðə laɪt ɹeɪn. mæt wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i wəd wɑnə iɾ ɛniθɪŋ lukəz waɪf kʊkt. "jɔɹ sɝɾən noʊbɑdi ɪz tʃeɪsɪŋ ʌs, ɹaɪt, kɔθən?" ɪɹɪɾəbli tʌɡɪŋ ɪz wʊlən kæp loʊɝ, mæt stɔkt əweɪ θɹu ðə bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd spɹɔl ə tɛns ən wæɡənz ɡɹaɪndɪŋ ɪz tiθ. nɑt peɪɪŋ ɪnʌf? fəɹ wʌɾ i hæɾ ɔfɝd, lukə ʃʊɾə bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə ɹʌn ɪz ænəməlz ɔl ðə weɪ tə luɡɹd. wɛl, nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ɹʌn - hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə kɪl hɔɹsəz, æftɝ ɔl - bʌt ðət pʌft-ʌp poʊpənʒ ʃʊɾə bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə blʌɾi pʊʃ hɑɹd.

"Have to take care of the horses," Luca explained, watching the team unhitched from his ridiculously painted wagon and led away to the horselines through a light drizzle. The sun still sat little more than halfway down to the horizon, but already gray tendrils were rising from the smoke holes of tents and the metal chimneys of the box-like living wagons. "Nobody's chasing us, and it's a long way to Lugard. Good horses are hard to come by, and expensive." Luca gave a sour frown and shook his head. Mention of expense always soured him. He was tight with a penny, except where his wife was concerned. "Not many places between here and there worth stopping more than a day. Most villages won't provide a full crowd even if the whole population turns out, and you can never tell how a town will be until you set up. You're not paying me enough to give up what I can earn, though." Hitching his embroidered crimson cloak closer against the damp, he glanced over his shoulder toward his wagon. The smell of something bitter drifted through the light rain. Mat was not sure he would want to eat anything Luca's wife cooked. "You're certain nobody is chasing us, right, Cauthon?" Irritably tugging his woolen cap lower, Mat stalked away through the brightly colored sprawl of tents and wagons grinding his teeth. Not paying enough? For what he had offered, Luca should have been willing to run his animals all the way to Lugard. Well, not exactly run - he did not want to kill horses, after all - but that puffed-up popinjay should have been willing to bloody push hard.

nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm lukəz wæɡən, tʃəl veɪnɪn wɑz siɾəd ɑn ə θɹiləɡd stul ðəɾ i oʊvɝlæpt, stɝɪŋ səm sɔɹɾ ə dɑɹk stu ɪn ə smɔl kɛɾəl ðət hʌŋ oʊvɝ ə smɔl faɪɝ. ɹeɪn dʒɹɪpt ɪndə ðə kɛɾəl fɹəm ðə dʒɹupɪŋ bɹɪm ə hɪz hæt, bʌt ðə fæt mæn dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs, əɹ kɛɹ. ɡɔɹɾɝən ən fɝdʒɪn, tu ʌv ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz, ɡɹʌmbəl kɝsɪz əz ðeɪ dʒɹoʊv pɛɡz ɪndə ðə mʌɾi ɡɹaʊn fəɹ ðə ɡaɪ ɹoʊps ə ðə dɝɾi-bɹaʊn kænvəs tɛn ðeɪ ʃɛɹd wɪð hɑɹnən ən mɛtwɪn. ən wɪð veɪnɪn, tu, bʌt veɪnɪn pəzɛst skɪlz ðəɾ i kənsɪɾɝd pʊɾ ɪm əbʌv ɹeɪzɪŋ tɛns, ən ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz əɡɹid wɪð oʊnli ə lɪɾəl ɹɪlʌktəns. veɪnɪn wɑz ən ɪkspɪɹiəns fɛɹiɝ, bʌt mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾəntli, hi wɑz ðə bɛs tʃɹækɝ ən ðə bɛs hɔɹsɛθif ɪn ðə kʌntʃɹi, ənlaɪkli əz ðət sim tə lʊk ət hɪm, ən jə kəd neɪm ðə kʌntʃɹi jə tʃoʊz.

Not far from Luca's wagon, Chel Vanin was seated on a threelegged stool that he overlapped, stirring some sort of dark stew in a small kettle that hung over a small fire. Rain dripped into the kettle from the drooping brim of his hat, but the fat man did not seem to notice, or care. Gorderan and Fergin, two of the Redarms, grumbled curses as they drove pegs into the muddy ground for the guy ropes of the dirty-brown canvas tent they shared with Harnan and Metwyn. And with Vanin, too, but Vanin possessed skills that he considered put him above raising tents, and the Redarms agreed with only a little reluctance. Vanin was an experienced farrier, but more importantly, he was the best tracker and the best horsethief in the country, unlikely as that seemed to look at him, and you could name the country you chose.

fɝdʒɪn kɑt saɪɾ ə mæt, ən bɪɾ ɔf ən oʊθ əz ɪz hæmɝ mɪs ðə tɛn pɛɡ ən hɪɾ ɪz θʌm. dʒɹɑpɪŋ ðə hæmɝ, hi stʌk ðə θʌm ɪn ɪz maʊθ ən skwɑɾɪd ðəɹ kəmpleɪnɪŋ ʃɹɪli ɝaʊn ɪt. "wɝ gɑnə bi aʊɾ ɪn ðɪs ɔl naɪt ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðoʊz wɪmən, maɪ lɔɹd. kæn jə haɪɝ səm ə ðoʊz hɔɹs hænlɝz tə də ðɪs soʊ wi kən ət list steɪ dʒɹaɪ tɪl wɪv tə ɡɛt wɛt?" ɡɔɹɾɝən poʊk fɝdʒɪnz ʃoʊldɝ wɪð ə θɪk fɪŋɡɝ. hi wɑz əz waɪɾ əz fɝdʒɪn wɑz skɪni, ən ə tɛɹən dɪspaɪɾ ɪz ɡɹeɪ aɪz. "hɔɹs hænlɝzəl pʊɾ ʌp ðə tɛn ən stil ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn ɪt ðæts lus, fɝdʒɪn." ənʌðɝ poʊk. "ju wɑnt wʌn ə ðoʊz laɪtfɪŋɝz wɔkɪŋ ɔf wɪð maɪ kɹɔsboʊ, əɹ maɪ sæɾəl? ðæts ə ɡʊd sæɾəl." ə θɝd poʊk nɪɹli pʊʃt fɝdʒɪn oʊvɝ saɪdweɪz. "wi doʊnt ɡɛt ðɪs tɛn ʌp, ən hɑɹnənəl əv əs stændɪŋ ɡɑɹɾ ɔl naɪt." fɝdʒɪn ɡlaʊɝɾ ən ɡɹʌmbəld, bʌɾ i pɪkt ʌp ɪz hæmɝ, waɪpɪŋ ðə mʌɾ ɔf ɑn ɪz koʊt. hi wɑz ə ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf soʊlʒɝ, bʌt nɑt vɛɹi bɹaɪt.

Fergin caught sight of Mat, and bit off an oath as his hammer missed the tent peg and hit his thumb. Dropping the hammer, he stuck the thumb in his mouth and squatted there complaining shrilly around it. "We're going to be out in this all night guarding those women, my Lord. Can't you hire some of those horse handlers to do this so we can at least stay dry till we have to get wet?" Gorderan poked Fergin's shoulder with a thick finger. He was as wide as Fergin was skinny, and a Tairen despite his gray eyes. "Horse handlers'll put up the tent and steal everything in it that's loose, Fergin." Another poke. "You want one of those lightfingers walking off with my crossbow, or my saddle? That's a good saddle." A third poke nearly pushed Fergin over sideways. "We don't get this tent up, and Harnan'll have us standing guard all night." Fergin glowered and grumbled, but he picked up his hammer, wiping the mud off on his coat. He was a good enough soldier, but not very bright.

veɪnɪn spæt θɹu ðə ɡæp ɪn ɪz tiθ, dʒʌs mɪsɪŋ ðə kɛɾəl. ðə stu smɛld wʌndɝfəl æftɝ wʌtɛvɝ lətɛl wɑz meɪkɪŋ, bʌt mæt dɪsaɪɾɪd i wɑz nɑt gɑnə it hɪɹ, iðɝ. tæpɪŋ ɪz wʊɾən spun ɑn ðə ɹɪm ə ðə kɛɾəl tə klin ɪt, ðə fæt mæn lʊkt ʌp ət mæt θɹu hɛvi-lɪɾɪd aɪz. hɪz ɹaʊn feɪs ɔfən lʊk hæf-əslip, bʌɾ oʊnli ə ful bɪlivd ɪt. "æt ðɪs ɹeɪt, wɪl ɹitʃ luɡɹɾ əbaʊt ði ɛn ə sʌmɝ. ɪf wi ɛvɝ du." "wi wɪl, veɪnɪn," mæt sɛd, mɔɹ kɑnfəɾəntli ðən i fɛlt ət ðə moʊmənt. ðə ɹʌf wʊlən koʊɾ i hæd dɑn dʒɹaɪ ə fju aʊɝz əɡoʊ oʊnli ʃɛd ɹeɪn ɪn spɑts, ən wɔɾɝ wɑz tʃɹɪklɪŋ daʊn ɪz bæk. ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə fil kɑnfəɾənt wɪð aɪsi ɹeɪn slaɪɾɪŋ daʊn jəɹ bækboʊn.

Vanin spat through the gap in his teeth, just missing the kettle. The stew smelled wonderful after whatever Latelle was making, but Mat decided he was not going to eat here, either. Tapping his wooden spoon on the rim of the kettle to clean it, the fat man looked up at Mat through heavy-lidded eyes. His round face often looked half-asleep, but only a fool believed it. "At this rate, we'll reach Lugard about the end of summer. If we ever do." "We will, Vanin," Mat said, more confidently than he felt at the moment. The rough woolen coat he had donned dry a few hours ago only shed rain in spots, and water was trickling down his back. It was hard to feel confident with icy rain sliding down your backbone.

"wɪntɝz ɔlmoʊs dʌn. wɪl muv fæstɝ wʌns spɹɪŋ kʌmz. jəl si. kʌm ðə mɪɾəl ə spɹɪŋ, ən wɪl bi ɪn luɡɹd."

"Winter's almost done. We'll move faster once spring comes. You'll see. Come the middle of spring, and we'll be in Lugard."

hi wɑz nɑt soʊ ʃʊɹ ə ðæt, iðɝ. ðeɪ kʌvɝd noʊ mɔɹ ðən tu liɡz ðət fɝs deɪ, ən æftɝ ðæt, tu ən ə hæf meɪɾ ə ɡʊd deɪ. nɑt mɛni pleɪsəz kəd bi kɔl taʊnz əlɔŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt nɔɹθ ɹoʊd, ə neɪm ðət bɪɡæn tə tʃeɪnʒ vɛɹi kwɪkli əz ðə ʃoʊ kɹɛp nɔɹθ. pipəl kɔld ɪt "ði ɛbu dɑɹ ɹoʊd," əɹ "ðə fɛɹi ɹoʊd," əɹ səmtaɪmz dʒʌst "ðə ɹoʊd," əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli wʌn. bʌt lukə stɑpt əɾ ɛvɹi læs taʊn, ɹil əɹ soʊ-kɔld, wɔld əɹ dʒʌmpt-ʌp vɪlədʒ wɪð sɪks stʃɹits ən ə ɹʌf-peɪvd ɪkskjus fəɹ ə taʊn skwɛɹ. nɪɹ hæf ə deɪ wɛn ɪndə dʒʌst ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə ʃoʊ sɛɾ ʌp ən ðə kænvəs wɔl ɪɹɛktəɾ ɝaʊn ɪt wɪð ðət hjudʒ ɹɛd-lɛɾɝd blu bænɝ hʌŋ əkɹɔs ði ɛntʃɹəns. vɑlən lukəz ɡɹæn tʃɹævlɪŋ ʃoʊ. ɪt wɑz dʒʌs nɑɾ ɪn lukə tə pæs ʌp ðə tʃæns ʌv ə kɹaʊd. əɹ ðə kɔɪnz ɪn ðɛɹ pɝsɪz. əɹ ðə tʃæns tə flɝɪʃ wʌn ə hɪz bɹaɪt ɹɛd kloʊks ən bæsk ɪn ðɛɹ ædʒəleɪʃən. lukə laɪk ðəɾ ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz ðə kɔɪn. ɔlmoʊst.

He was not so sure of that, either. They covered no more than two leagues that first day, and after that, two and a half made a good day. Not many places could be called towns along the Great North Road, a name that began to change very quickly as the show crept north. People called it "the Ebou Dar Road," or "the Ferry Road," or sometimes just "the road," as if there were only one. But Luca stopped at every last town, real or so-called, walled or jumped-up village with six streets and a rough-paved excuse for a town square. Near half a day went into just getting the show set up and the canvas wall erected around it with that huge red-lettered blue banner hung across the entrance. Valan Luca's Grand Traveling Show. It was just not in Luca to pass up the chance of a crowd. Or the coins in their purses. Or the chance to flourish one of his bright red cloaks and bask in their adulation. Luca liked that almost as much as the coin. Almost.

ðə stʃɹeɪnʒnəs ə ðə pɝfɔɹmɝz ən ðə keɪdʒd ænəməlz fɹəm fɑɹ-ɔf lænz wɝ səfɪʃən tə pʊl pipəl. ði ænəməlz fɹəm nɑt soʊ fɑɹ wɝ ɪnʌf, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ; fju hæd bɪn fɑɹ ɪnʌf ɪndə ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd tə si ə bɛɹ mʌtʃ lɛs ə laɪən. oʊnli hɛvi ɹeɪn lɛsən ðə kɹaʊd, ən wən ðə ɹeɪn wɑz tu stɪf, ðə dʒʌɡəlɝz ən ækɹəbæts ɹəfjuz tə pɝfɔɹm ɛniweɪ wɪθaʊt səm sɔɹɾ ə kʌvɝɪŋ oʊvɝhɛd.

The strangeness of the performers and the caged animals from far-off lands were sufficient to pull people. The animals from not so far were enough, for that matter; few had been far enough into the countryside to see a bear much less a lion. Only heavy rain lessened the crowd, and when the rain was too stiff, the jugglers and acrobats refused to perform anyway without some sort of covering overhead.

wɪtʃ meɪd lukə stɔk əbaʊɾ ɪn ə sʌlən snɪɾ ən tɔk waɪldli ʌv faɪndɪŋ ɪnʌf kænvəs tɑɹps tə ʃɛltɝ ɛvɹi ækt, əɹ hævɪŋ ə tɛn meɪd lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə hoʊl ði ɪntaɪɝ ʃoʊ. wʌn tɛnt! ðə mæn wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɪf nɑt ɡɹændioʊs ɪn ɪz æmbɪʃənz. waɪ nɑɾ ə pæləs ɑn wilz waɪl i wɑz əbaʊɾ ɪt?

Which made Luca stalk about in a sullen snit and talk wildly of finding enough canvas tarps to shelter every act, or having a tent made large enough to hold the entire show. One tent! The man was nothing if not grandiose in his ambitions. Why not a palace on wheels while he was about it?

ɪf lukə ən ðə sloʊ weɪ ðə ʃoʊ muv hæd bɪn ɔl mæt hæd tə wɝi əbaʊt, ðoʊ, hi wʊɾə bɪn ə hæpi mæn. səmtaɪmz, tu əɹ θɹi sloʊ-muvɪŋ tʃɹeɪnz ə sintʃæn sɛtlɝz u hæd ɡɑɾən ən ɝli stɑɹt pæst wɪð ðɛɹ stʃɹeɪnʒli ʃeɪpt, pikt wæɡənz ən ɑd-lʊkɪŋ kæɾəl əɹ ʃip əɹ ɡoʊts bɪfɔɹ ðə fɝst wæɡən fɹəm ðə ʃoʊ bɪɡæn tə muv. səmtaɪmz kɑləmz ə sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz oʊvɝtʊk əm əz ðeɪ æmbəld əlɔŋ əɾ ə sloʊ wɔk, ɹæŋks ə mɛn wɛɹɪŋ hɛlməts laɪk hjudʒ ɪnsɛks' hɛdz, stɛpɪŋ aʊt smɑɹtli, ən kɑləmz ə hɔɹsmən wɪð ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ ʌv oʊvɝlæpɪŋ pleɪts peɪntəɾ ɪn stʃɹaɪps. wʌns, ðə ɹaɪɾɝz wɝ ɑn fɔɹm, bɹɑnz-skeɪl kɹitʃɝz laɪk hɔɹs-saɪz kæts. ɪksɛp fəɹ hævɪŋ θɹi aɪz, ɛniweɪ. twɛnti əɹ soʊ ʌv əm sneɪkɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪn ə sɪnwəs loʊp fæstɝ ðən ə hɔɹs kəd tʃɹɑt. niðɝ ðə ɹaɪɾɝz nɔɹ ðɛɹ maʊns ɡeɪv ðə ʃoʊ ə sɛkənd ɡlæns, bʌt ðə ʃoʊz hɔɹsəz wɛnt waɪld əz ðə fɔɹm pæst, skɹimɪŋ ən ɹɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðə tʃɹeɪsəz. ðə laɪənz ən lɛpɝdz ən bɛɹz ɹɔɹɾ ɪn ðɛɹ keɪdʒɪz, ən ðə pəkjuljɝ dɪɹ flʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz əɡɛns ðə bɑɹz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fli. ɪt, tʊk aʊɝz tə kwaɪəɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ daʊn ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə wæɡənz tə muv əɡɛn, ən lukə ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn hævɪŋ ðə keɪdʒd ænəməlz' skɹeɪps sin tə fɝst. hɪz ænəməlz wɝ ə lɑɹdʒ ɪnvɛsmənt. twaɪs, ɔfəsɝz ɪn θɪn-plum hɛlməts dɪsaɪɾɪd tə tʃɛk ðə wɔɹən fəɹ lukəs hɔɹsəz, ən mæt uz koʊl swɛt ðə saɪz ʌv ɡɹeɪps əntɪl ðeɪ muvd ɑn əɡɛn, sæɾəsfaɪd. əz ðə ʃoʊ kɹɛp nɔɹθ, ðə nʌmbɝz ə sintʃæn ɑn ðə ɹoʊd dwɪndəld, jɛɾ i stɪl swɛɾɪd wən i sɔ ənʌðɝ pɑɹɾi, soʊlʒɝz əɹ sɛtlɝz iðɝ wʌn. meɪbi sjuɹɔθ ɹɪli wɑz kipɪŋ tuɑnz dɪsəpɪɹəns ə sikɹət, bʌt ðə sintʃæn wəd bi sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ hɝ. ɔl ɪt wəd teɪk wɑz wʌn mɛɾəlsəm ɔfəsɝ u æktʃəli  kəmpɛɹd ðə nʌmbɝz ɑn ðə wɔɹənt wɪð ðə nʌmbɝ ə hɔɹsəz. hi wəd sɝtʃ ðə wæɡənz wɪð ə faɪn-tuθ koʊm æftɝ ðæt, fəɹ sɝɾən. dʒʌst wʌn ɔfɪʃəs mldəm u θɔt ðəɹ maɪt bi ə wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl əmʌŋ ðə dʒʌɡəlɝz ən tʌmblɝz ən kəntɔɹʃənɪsts. hi swɛɾɪd plʌmz! ənfɔɹtʃənətli, nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn hæɾ ə pɹɑpɝ ɹəɡɑɹd fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn skɪnz.

If Luca and the slow way the show moved had been all Mat had to worry about, though, he would have been a happy man. Sometimes, two or three slow-moving trains of Seanchan settlers who had gotten an early start passed with their strangely shaped, peaked wagons and odd-looking cattle or sheep or goats before the first wagon from the show began to move. Sometimes columns of Seanchan soldiers overtook them as they ambled along at a slow walk, ranks of men wearing helmets like huge insects' heads, stepping out smartly, and columns of horsemen with their armor of overlapping plates painted in stripes. Once, the riders were on form, bronze-scaled creatures like horse-sized cats. Except for having three eyes, anyway. Twenty or so of them snaking along in a sinuous lope faster than a horse could trot. Neither the riders nor their mounts gave the show a second glance, but the show's horses went wild as the form passed, screaming and rearing in the traces. The lions and leopards and bears roared in their cages, and the peculiar deer flung themselves against the bars trying to flee. It, took hours to quiet everything down enough for the wagons to move again, and Luca insisted on having the caged animals' scrapes seen to first. His animals were a large investment. Twice, officers in thin-plumed helmets decided to check the warrant for Lucas horses, and Mat oozed cold sweat the size of grapes until they moved on again, satisfied. As the show crept north, the numbers of Seanchan on the road dwindled, yet he still sweated when he saw another party, soldiers or settlers either one. Maybe Suroth really was keeping Tuon's disappearance a secret, but the Seanchan would be searching for her. All it would take was one meddlesome officer who actually compared the numbers on the warrant with the number of horses. He would search the wagons with a fine-tooth comb after that, for certain. Just one officious ml'dam who thought there might be a woman who could channel among the jugglers and tumblers and contortionists. He sweated plums! Unfortunately, not everyone had a proper regard for their own skins.

aʊtsaɪɾ ə flaɪspɛk vɪlədʒ kɔld wisən, ə θætʃ-ɹuf lɪɾəl klʌstɝ ə haʊsəz wɛɹ nɑɾ ivən lukə θɔt tu kɑpɝz kəd bi ʃeɪkən lus, mæt stʊd wɪð ə hɛvi wʊlən kloʊk pʊld ɝaʊn ɪm ɪn ə dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ɹeɪn ən wɑtʃt ðə θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ stil bæk ɪndə ðə ʃoʊ əz ðə sʌn sɛt. θʌndɝ bumd ɪn ðə dɪstəns. ðeɪ wɝ swɑðd ɪn dɑɹk kloʊks wɪð ðə hʊdz wɛl ʌp, jɛɾ i hæd noʊ daʊts u ðeɪ wɝ. ɪn ðə daʊnpɔɹ, ðeɪ pæst wɪðɪn tɛn fit wɪθaʊt siɪŋ hɪm, bʌt ðə sɪlvɝ mədæljən hæŋɪŋ bɪniθ ɪz ʃɝt wɛn koʊld əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst. ət list wʌn ə ðɛm wɑz tʃænəlɪŋ, əɹ hoʊldɪŋ ðə paʊɝ, ɛniweɪ. bɝn hɪm, ðeɪ wɝ ɔl θɹi mæɾ əz lunz.

Outside a flyspeck village called Weesin, a thatch-roofed little cluster of houses where not even Luca thought two coppers could be shaken loose, Mat stood with a heavy woolen cloak pulled around him in a driving rain and watched the three Aes Sedai steal back into the show as the sun set. Thunder boomed in the distance. They were swathed in dark cloaks with the hoods well up, yet he had no doubts who they were. In the downpour, they passed within ten feet without seeing him, but the silver medallion hanging beneath his shirt went cold against his chest. At least one of them was channeling, or holding the Power, anyway. Burn him, they were all three mad as loons.

noʊ sunɝ dɪd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ vænɪʃ əmʌŋ ðə wæɡənz ən tɛns ðən θɹi mɔɹ kloʊkt ʃeɪps əpɪɹd, hɝiɪŋ æftɝ ðɛm. wʌn ə ðiz wɪmən hæɾ ə ʃɑɹpɝ aɪ, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hæn tə pɔɪn ət hɪm, bʌt ði ʌðɝz oʊnli pɔzd, ən ðən ðeɪ skɝiɾ æftɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ təɡɛðɝ. hi stɑɹɾəd tə kɝs, ðən lɛft ɪɾ ənʌɾɝd. hi wɑz bɪɑn ðæt. ɪf i neɪm ðə pipəl i wɑntəd wɑndɝɪŋ ɝaʊnd wɛɹ ə sintʃæn pətʃɹoʊl maɪt si ðɛm, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə sʌldəm wəd kʌm əbaʊɾ ivən wɪð tuɑn ən sɪlutʃə.

No sooner did the Aes Sedai vanish among the wagons and tents than three more cloaked shapes appeared, hurrying after them. One of these women had a sharper eye, raising a hand to point at him, but the others only paused, and then they scurried after the Aes Sedai together. He started to curse, then left it unuttered. He was beyond that. If he named the people he wanted wandering around where a Seanchan patrol might see them, the Aes Sedai and the sul'dam would come about even with Tuon and Selucia.

"aɪ wʌndɝ wʌt ðeɪ wɑnt?" noʊl sɛd bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən mæt ɡeɪv ə dʒʌmp ðət lɛɾ ə tɔɹən ə ɹeɪn ɪndə hɪz kaʊl ən daʊn ɪz nɛk. hi wɪʃt ðə nɑbəli oʊl mæn wəd kwɪt snikɪŋ ʌp ɑn hɪm. "aɪ ɪntɛn tə faɪn aʊt," hi mʌɾɝd, dʒɝkɪŋ ɪz kloʊk stʃɹeɪt. hi hɑɹdli nu waɪ hi bɑðɝd. hɪz koʊt wɑz oʊnli ə lɪɾəl dæmp, bʌɾ ɪz lɪnən ʃɝt wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi soʊkt.

"I wonder what they want?" Noal said behind him, and Mat gave a jump that let a torrent of rain into his cowl and down his neck. He wished the knobbly old man would quit sneaking up on him. "I intend to find out," he muttered, jerking his cloak straight. He hardly knew why he bothered. His coat was only a little damp, but his linen shirt was already soaked.

ɑdli ɪnʌf, noʊl wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɪð ɪm wən i ɹitʃt ðə ɡɹeɪ-stʃɹikt wæɡən wɪð ɪts feɪɾɪŋ waɪtwɑʃ wɛɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən sʌldəm slɛpt. ðə mæn laɪk stɪkɪŋ ɪz noʊz ɪn ɛvɹiwɛɹ. meɪbi hi hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd i wɑz wɛɾ ɪnʌf. blɹɪk ən fɛn wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɹæpt ɪn ðɛɹ blæŋkəts bɪniθ ðə wæɡən, əpɛɹənli əblɪviəs tə ɹeɪn əɹ mʌd, bʌɾ i wəd nɑɾ əv weɪdʒɝɾ ɑn iðɝ biɪŋ əslip. ɪndid, wʌn sæɾ ʌp əz i skwɛltʃt ʌp tə ðə wæɡən. wɪtʃɛvɝ ɪt wɑz, hi sɛd nʌθɪŋ, jɛt mæt kəd fil ðə mænz aɪz. hi dɪd nɑt hɛzəteɪt, ðoʊ, ən i dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ wɪð nɑkɪŋ.

Oddly enough, Noal was no longer with him when he reached the gray-streaked wagon with its fading whitewash where the Aes Sedai and sul'dam slept. The man liked sticking his nose in everywhere. Maybe he had decided he was wet enough. Blaeric and Fen were already wrapped in their blankets beneath the wagon, apparently oblivious to rain or mud, but he would not have wagered on either being asleep. Indeed, one sat up as he squelched up to the wagon. Whichever it was, he said nothing, yet Mat could feel the man's eyes. He did not hesitate, though, and he did not bother with knocking.

ði ɪntɪɹiɝ wɑz kɹaʊɾəd wɪð ɔl sɪks wɪmən ɑn ðɛɹ fit, dʒɹɪpɪŋ kloʊks stɪl ɪn hænd. tu læmps maʊntəɾ ɪn ɡɪmbəlz ɑn ðə wɔlz ɡeɪv ə ɡʊd laɪt, bɛɾɝ ðən i cʊɾə wɪʃt fɔɹ, ɪn ə weɪ. sɪks feɪsəz swɪvəl təwɔɹɾ ɪm wɪð ðoʊz fɹoʊzən lʊks wɪmən ɡeɪv ə mæn wən i pʊɾ ə fʊt wɛɹ ðeɪ dɪd nɑt wɑn ɪt. ði ɛɹ ɪn ðə wæɡən smɛld ə dæmp wʊl ən fɛlt əz ɪf laɪtnɪŋ hæd dʒʌst stʃɹʌk, əɹ maɪɾ əɾ ɛni moʊmənt. ɹeɪn dʒɹʌmd ɑn ðə ɹuf, ən θʌndɝ ɹoʊld, bʌt ðə fɑkshɛd mədæljən fɛl noʊ kulɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ pis ə sɪlvɝ. meɪbi blɹɪk ən fɛn hæd lɛɾ ɪm kʌm ɪnsaɪd θɪŋkɪŋ i wəd ɡɛɾ ɪz hɛd snæpt ɔf. meɪbi ðeɪ dʒʌst wɑntəd tə steɪ aʊɾ ə ðɪs ðɛmsɛlvz. bʌt ðɛn, ə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz ɹɛɾi tə daɪ ɪf ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi. nɑt mæt kɔθən. hi pʊʃt ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt wɪð ɪz hɪp. ɪt hɑɹdli ɡeɪv ɪm ə twɪnʒ ɛnimɔɹ. sɛldəm, ɛniweɪ.

The interior was crowded with all six women on their feet, dripping cloaks still in hand. Two lamps mounted in gimbals on the walls gave a good light, better than he could have wished for, in a way. Six faces swiveled toward him with those frozen looks women gave a man when he put a foot where they did not want it. The air in the wagon smelled of damp wool and felt as if lightning had just struck, or might at any moment. Rain drummed on the roof, and thunder rolled, but the foxhead medallion felt no cooler than any other piece of silver. Maybe Blaeric and Fen had let him come inside thinking he would get his head snapped off. Maybe they just wanted to stay out of this themselves. But then, a Warder was ready to die if his Aes Sedai decided it was necessary. Not Mat Cauthon. He pushed the door shut with his hip. It hardly gave him a twinge anymore. Seldom, anyway.

wən i tʃælənʒd ðɛm, idɛzinə fɪɹsli, ʃeɪkɪŋ aʊt ðə blæk hɛɹ ðət spɪl daʊn əɹ bæk. "aɪ æm ɡɹeɪtfəl tə jə fəɹ ɹɛskjuɪŋ mi fɹəm ðə sintʃæn, mæstɝ kɔθən, ən əl ʃoʊ maɪ ɡɹæɾətud, bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ lɪməts. aɪm nɑt jəɹ sɝvən tə bi ɔɹɾɝd əbaʊt. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ sintʃæn ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ, ən wi kɛpt əɹ feɪsəz hɪɾən. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə sɛn jəɹ . . . wɑtʃdɔɡz . . . æftɝ ʌs." ðə lʊk ʃi ʃɑɾ ət ðə θɹi sintʃæn wɪmən cʊɾə fɹaɪɾ ɛɡz. idɛzinə wɑz oʊvɝ biɪŋ nɝvəs əbaʊɾ ɛniwʌn wɪð ə sintʃæn æksɛnt. ʃi wɑntəd səm ə hɝ oʊn bæk, ən ðə sʌldəm wɝ kloʊs tə hænd.

When he challenged them, Edesina fiercely, shaking out the black hair that spilled down her back. "I am grateful to you for rescuing me from the Seanchan, Master Cauthon, and I will show my gratitude, but there are limits. I am not your servant to be ordered about. There were no Seanchan in the village, and we kept our faces hidden. There was no need to send your . . . watchdogs . . . after us." The look she shot at the three Seanchan women could have fried eggs. Edesina was over being nervous about anyone with a Seanchan accent. She wanted some of her own back, and the sul'dam were close to hand.

mæt wɑz kaʊntɪŋ ɑn ðət feɪbəld ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛlf-kəntʃɹoʊl tə kip mæɾɝz ʃɔɹɾ ə vaɪələns. hi hoʊpt ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi stʃɹɛtʃt tu fɑɹ tə hoʊld. ðoʊz oʊl mɛmɹiz ɹɪkɔld ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp laɪk ən ɪluməneɪɾɝz wɛɹz.

Mat was counting on that fabled Aes Sedai self-control to keep matters short of violence. He hoped it was not already stretched too far to hold. Those old memories recalled Aes Sedai going up like an Illuminator's wares.

bɛθəmənz dɑɹk feɪs ʃoʊd noʊ saɪn ʌv əlɑɹm. ʃi hæd fɪnɪʃt ʃeɪkɪŋ aʊɾ əɹ kloʊk ən hæŋɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn ə pɛɡ waɪl idɛzinə wɑz spikɪŋ, ðən smuðd əɹ dʒɹɛs oʊvɝ əɹ hɪps. tənaɪt, ʃi wɔɹ feɪɾəd ɡɹin pɛɾikoʊts. ʃi kəmpleɪn ðət ði ɛbu dɑɹi ɡɑɹmənt wɑz ɪndisənt, ən i səpoʊz ðəɾ i wəɾ əv tə faɪn əɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls naʊ ðeɪ wɝ əweɪ fɹəm ðə koʊst, bʌt ʃi dɪd fɪl aʊt ðət vɛɹi loʊ nɛɹoʊ nɛklaɪn naɪsli. ʃi saʊndəd tu mʌtʃ laɪk ə mʌðɝ fəɹ ɪz teɪst, ðoʊ. "ðeɪ dɪd kip ðɛɹ feɪsəz hɪɾən, maɪ lɔɹd," ʃi dʒɹɔld, "æn ðeɪ steɪd təɡɛðɝ. noʊ wʌn tʃɹaɪd tə snik ɔf.

Bethamin's dark face showed no sign of alarm. She had finished shaking out her cloak and hanging it on a peg while Edesina was speaking, then smoothed her dress over her hips. Tonight, she wore faded green petticoats. She complained that the Ebou Dari garment was indecent, and he supposed that he would have to find her something else now they were away from the coast, but she did fill out that very low narrow neckline nicely. She sounded too much like a mother for his taste, though. "They did keep their faces hidden, my Lord," she drawled, "and they stayed together. No one tried to sneak off.

vɛɹi wɛl bɪheɪvd, ɔl ɪn ɔl." ə mʌðɝ pɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ tʃɪlʒɹən. əɹ meɪbi ə dɔɡ tʃɹeɪnɝ pɹeɪzɪŋ ðə dɑɡz.

Very well behaved, all in all." A mother praising her children. Or maybe a dog trainer praising the dogs.

jɛloʊhɛɹd sɛɾə nɑɾəd əpɹuvɪŋli. dɛfənətli ə dɔɡ tʃɹeɪnɝ. "ɪf maɪ lɔɹd wɪʃɪz tə kip əm kənfaɪnd," ɹɛnə sɛd fʊlsəmli, "wi kən ɔlweɪz juz ði eɪwʌn dæm. ðeɪ ɹɪli ʃʊdn bi tʃɹʌstɪd lus." ʃi ivən ɔfɝɾ ɪm ə baʊ, ɪn ðə sintʃæn weɪ, bɛndɪŋ hɝsɛlf əɾ ə ʃɑɹp ɹaɪɾ æŋɡəl. hɝ bɪɡ bɹaʊn aɪz lʊk hoʊpfəl. tɛslɪn ɡæspt ən klʌtʃt əɹ wɛt kloʊk tə hɝ bʊzəm. ʃi sɝɾənli wɑz nɑɾ oʊvɝ əɹ fɪɹ ə ðə sʌldəm, fəɹ ɔl ʃi lʊkt əz ðoʊ ʃi kəɾ it neɪlz. dʒoʊlin, hɔɾi əz ɛvɝ, dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp, aɪz flæʃɪŋ. ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi əɹ noʊ, laɪtnɪŋ maɪɾ əz wɛl stʃɹaɪk wən dʒoʊlinz aɪz stɑɹɾəd flæʃɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ɔfən soʊ wɪð pɹɪɾi wɪmən.

Yellowhaired Seta nodded approvingly. Definitely a dog trainer. "If my Lord wishes to keep them confined," Renna said fulsomely, "we can always use the a1 dam. They really shouldn't be trusted loose." She even offered him a bow, in the Seanchan way, bending herself at a sharp right angle. Her big brown eyes looked hopeful. Teslyn gasped and clutched her wet cloak to her bosom. She certainly was not over her fear of the sul'dam, for all she looked as though she could eat nails. Joline, haughty as ever, drew herself up, eyes flashing. Aes Sedai serenity or no, lightning might as well strike when Joline's eyes started flashing. It was often so with pretty women.

"noʊ," mæt sɛd heɪstəli. "ðɛɹz noʊ nid fəɹ ðæt. jə ɡɪv ðoʊz θɪŋz tə mi, ən əl ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə ðɛm." laɪt, waɪ hæɾ i ɛvɝ sæɾəld hɪmsɛlf wɪð ðiz wɪmən? wʌt sim ðə bɛst aɪdiə ət ðə taɪm kəd lʊk pjʊɹ kwɪl stupəɾ ɪn haɪndsaɪt. "ɔl ə jə dʒʌst əv tə bi kɛɹfəl. wɝ nɑt θɝɾi maɪlz fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ jɛt. ðə ɹoʊdz ɑɹ fʊl ə blʌɾi sintʃæn." hi ɡeɪv ən əpɑlədʒɛɾɪk lʊk tə ðə θɹi sintʃæn wɪmən. ðeɪ wɝ ɑn ɪz saɪd, æftɝ ɔl. ɪn ə mænɝ ə spikɪŋ. ðeɪ hæd noʊwɛɹ ɛls tə ɡoʊ ɪksɛpt ɛdʒiənɪn, ən ðeɪ hæd ɹilaɪzd u hæd ðə mʌni. bɛθəmənz aɪbɹaʊz twɪtʃt ʌpwɝɾ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. sintʃæn noʊbəlz dɪd nɑɾ əpɑlədʒaɪz, ivən wɪð ə ɡlæns.

"No," Mat said hastily. "There's no need for that. You give those things to me, and I'll get rid of them." Light, why had he ever saddled himself with these women? What seemed the best idea at the time could look pure quill stupid in hindsight. "All of you just have to be careful. We're not thirty miles from Ebou Dar yet. The roads are full of bloody Seanchan." He gave an apologetic look to the three Seanchan women. They were on his side, after all. In a manner of speaking. They had nowhere else to go except Egeanin, and they had realized who had the money. Bethamin's eyebrows twitched upward in surprise. Seanchan nobles did not apologize, even with a glance.

"sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz dɪd pæs θɹu ðə vɪlədʒ jɛstɝdeɪ," tɛslɪn sɛd, hɝ ɪliɑnɝ æksɛn pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli stʃɹɔŋ. dʒoʊlinz flæʃɪŋ aɪz ʃɪftəd tə hɝ, bʌt ʃi tʊk noʊ noʊɾəs bɪɑn tɝnɪŋ əweɪ tə hæŋ ʌp əɹ oʊn kloʊk. "ðeɪ dɪɾ æsk kwɛstʃənz əbaʊt stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ɑn ðə ɹoʊd. ən səm dɪd kəmpleɪn əbaʊt biɪŋ sɛnt nɔɹθ." tɛslɪn ɡlænst oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət ðə sʌldəm, ðən dʒɝkt əɹ aɪz əweɪ ən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "ɪt dʌz sim ðə ɹɪtɝn bi eɪmd ist. ðə soʊlʒɝz dɪd bɪliv ði ɛvɝ vɪktɔɹiəs ɑɹmi wɪl pɹizɛn ɪljən tə ðɛɹ ɛmpɹɛs bɪfɔɹ ði ɛn ə spɹɪŋ. ðə sɪɾi ɪtsɛlf, ən ɔl ðə ɹɛst." səpoʊzədli ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪv ʌp ðə lænz ə ðɛɹ bɝθ wən ðeɪ wɛn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌt tə ɛni ɪliɑnɝ, ðə sɪɾi ʌv ɪljən wɑz 'ðə sɪɾi,' ən jə kəd hɪɹ ðə kæpəɾəl. "ðæts ɡʊd," mæt sɛd hæf tə hɪmsɛlf, θɪŋkɪŋ. soʊlʒɝz tɔkt aʊɾ ə tɝn ɔl ðə taɪm; ðət wɑz wʌn ɹizən jə dɪd nɑt tɛl jəɹ plænz tə ɛvɹi tʃɹupɝ əntɪl ðə læs mɪnət. tɛslɪnz θɪn aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz, ən i æɾəd, "ɪt minz ðə ɹoʊd tə luɡɹd wɪl bi klɪɹ moʊst ə ðə weɪ." tɛslɪnz nɑd wɑz kɝɾ ən nɑt vɛɹi plizd. wʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə də ən wʌt ðeɪ dɪd wɝ ɔfən waɪdli dɪfɹənt.

"Seanchan soldiers did pass through the village yesterday," Teslyn said, her Illianer accent particularly strong. Joline's flashing eyes shifted to her, but she took no notice beyond turning away to hang up her own cloak. "They did ask questions about strangers on the road. And some did complain about being sent north." Teslyn glanced over her shoulder at the sul'dam, then jerked her eyes away and took a deep breath. "It does seem the Return be aimed east. The soldiers did believe the Ever Victorious Army will present Illian to their empress before the end of spring. The City itself, and all the rest." Supposedly Aes Sedai gave up the lands of their birth when they went to the White Tower, but to any Illianer, the city of Illian was 'the City,' and you could hear the capital. "That's good," Mat said half to himself, thinking. Soldiers talked out of turn all the time; that was one reason you did not tell your plans to every trooper until the last minute. Teslyn's thin eyebrows rose, and he added, "It means the road to Lugard will be clear most of the way." Teslyn's nod was curt and not very pleased. What Aes Sedai were supposed to do and what they did were often widely different.

"wi dɪdn spik tə ɛniwʌn, maɪ lɔɹd, oʊnli wɑtʃt ðə ɡɝlz," bɛθəmən sɛd, ivən mɔɹ sloʊli ðən juʒəwəl, ən sintʃæn juʒəwəli tɔk laɪk hʌni pɔɹɪŋ ɪn ə snoʊstɔɹm. ʃi wɑz klɪɹli ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ əmʌŋ ðə θɹi sʌldəm, bʌt ʃi lʊkt əɾ itʃ ə ði ʌðɝz bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. "ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ɔl ðə tɔk ɪn ðə sʌldəm kɔɹɾɝz wɑz ʌv ɪljən. ə fæt læn ən ə fæt sɪɾi, wɛɹ mɛni wəɾ ɝn nu neɪmz. ən wɛlθ." ʃi tɔs ðəɾ ɪn əz ɪf wɛlθ hɑɹdli kaʊntəɾ əlɔŋsaɪɾ ə nu neɪm. "wi ʃʊɾə ɹilaɪz jud wɑnə noʊ əbaʊt sətʃ θɪŋz." ənʌðɝ dip bɹɛθ ɔlmoʊs pɑpt əɹ aʊɾ ə ðət dʒɹɛs. "ɪf juv ɛni kwɛstʃənz, maɪ lɔɹd, wɪl tɛl jə wʌt wi noʊ." ɹɛnə meɪɾ ɪm ənʌðɝ baʊ, hɝ feɪs iɡɝ, ən sɛɾə paɪpt ʌp wɪð, "wi kəd lɪsən ɪn ðə taʊnz ən vɪlədʒəz wɛɹ wi stɑp, tu, maɪ lɔɹd. ðə ɡɝlz kən bi ʃɪfti, bʌt jə kən tʃɹʌst ʌs." waɪ, wən ə wʊmən ɔfɝd tə hɛlp ju, dɪd ʃi ɔlweɪz stɑɹt baɪ stɪkɪŋ jə ɪn ə pɑɾ ə hɑt wɔɾɝ ən stoʊkɪŋ ʌp ðə faɪɝ?

"We didn't speak to anyone, my Lord, only watched the girls," Bethamin said, even more slowly than usual, and Seanchan usually talked like honey pouring in a snowstorm. She was clearly in charge among the three sul'dam, but she looked at each of the others before going on. "In Ebou Dar, all the talk in the sul'dam quarters was of Illian. A fat land and a fat city, where many would earn new names. And wealth." She tossed that in as if wealth hardly counted alongside a new name. "We should have realized you'd want to know about such things." Another deep breath almost popped her out of that dress. "If you have any questions, my Lord, we'll tell you what we know." Renna made him another bow, her face eager, and Seta piped up with, "We could listen in the towns and villages where we stop, too, my Lord. The girls can be shifty, but you can trust us." Why, when a woman offered to help you, did she always start by sticking you in a pot of hot water and stoking up the fire?

dʒoʊlinz feɪs bɪkeɪm ə dɪsdeɪnfəl mæsk ʌv aɪs. ðə sintʃæn wɪmən wɝ bɪniθ əɹ noʊɾəs; ʃi meɪd ðət klɪɹ wɪð ə ɡlæns. ɪt wɑz mæt blʌɾi kɔθən u ɹəsivd əɹ fɹizɪŋ ɡeɪz. idɛzinəz maʊθ θɪnd, ən ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə stɛɹ hoʊlz ɪn ɪm ən ðə sʌldəm boʊθ. ivən tɛslɪn mænədʒd ɪndɪɡneɪʃən. ʃi wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ ɹɛskju, tu, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən ʃi dɝɛktəɾ əɹ fɹaʊn ət hɪm.

Joline's face became a disdainful mask of ice. The Seanchan women were beneath her notice; she made that clear with a glance. It was Mat bloody Cauthon who received her freezing gaze. Edesina's mouth thinned, and she tried to stare holes in him and the sul'dam both. Even Teslyn managed indignation. She was grateful for rescue, too, but she was Aes Sedai. And she directed her frown at him.

hi səspɛktəd ʃi wəd dʒʌmp laɪk ə stɑɹɾəld fɹɑɡ ɪf wʌn ə ðə sʌl'-dæm klæpt əɹ hænz.

He suspected she would jump like a startled frog if one of the sul'-dam clapped her hands.

"wʌɾ aɪ wɑnt," hi ɪkspleɪn peɪʃənli, "ɪz fəɹ ɔl ə jə tə steɪ wɪð ðə wæɡənz." jə hæd tə bi peɪʃənt wɪð wɪmən, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi wɑz blʌɾi wɛl lɝnɪŋ ðət baɪ hɑɹt. "wʌn wɪspɝ ðɛɹz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð ðɪs ʃoʊ, ən wɪl bi hɪp-dip ɪn sintʃæn hʌntɪŋ fəɹ hɝ. ɹumɝz ə sintʃæn wɪð ðə ʃoʊ woʊn sɝv əs ɛni bɛɾɝ. iðɝ weɪ, sʌmbɑɾi wɪl kʌm tə faɪn aʊt wʌts bɪhaɪn ɪt sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ən wɪl ɔl bi ɪn ðə pɪklɪŋ kɛɾəl. doʊn flɔn jʊɹsɛlvz. jə nid tə steɪ loʊ tɪl wi ɡɛt kloʊsɝ tə luɡɹd. ðəɾ ɪzən soʊ mʌtʃ tə æsk, naʊ ɪz ɪt?" laɪtnɪŋ lɪɾ ʌp ðə wæɡənz wɪndoʊz wɪð ə blu flæʃ, ən θʌndɝ kɹæʃt oʊvɝhɛd, soʊ kloʊs ɪt ɹæɾəld ðə wæɡən.

"What I want," he explained patiently, "is for all of you to stay with the wagons." You had to be patient with women, including Aes Sedai. He was bloody well learning that by heart. "One whisper there's an Aes Sedai with this show, and we'll be hip-deep in Seanchan hunting for her. Rumors of Seanchan with the show won't serve us any better. Either way, somebody will come to find out what's behind it sooner or later, and we'll all be in the pickling kettle. Don't flaunt yourselves. You need to stay low till we get closer to Lugard. That isn't so much to ask, now is it?" Lightning lit up the wagon's windows with a blue flash, and thunder crashed overhead, so close it rattled the wagon.

ɪt wɑz tu mʌtʃ tə æsk, əpɛɹənli, əz ðə deɪz wɔɹ ɑn. oʊ, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kɛp ðɛɹ hʊdz wɛl ʌp wən ðeɪ wɛn aʊtsaɪd - ðə ɹeɪn ɡeɪv ɪnʌf ɪkskjus fəɹ ðæt; ðə ɹeɪn ən ðə koʊld - bʌt wʌn əɹ ənʌðɝ ɹoʊɾ ɑn ðə wæɡən siɾ əz ɔfən əz nɑt, ən ðeɪ meɪd noʊ ɹil ɛfɝt tə pæs əz sɝvəns ɝaʊn ðə ʃoʊfoʊk. nɑt ðət ðeɪ ədmɪɾəd u ðeɪ wɝ, ʌv kɔɹs, əɹ ɔɹɾɝd ɛniwʌn əbaʊɾ əɹ ivən spoʊk tə ɛniwʌn mʌtʃ bɪsaɪdz itʃ ʌðɝ, bʌt wʌt sɝvən klɪɹli ɪkspɛktəd pipəl tə muv aʊɾ ə hɝ weɪ?

It was too much to ask, apparently, as the days wore on. Oh, the Aes Sedai kept their hoods well up when they went outside - the rain gave enough excuse for that; the rain and the cold - but one or another rode on the wagon seat as often as not, and they made no real effort to pass as servants around the showfolk. Not that they admitted who they were, of course, or ordered anyone about or even spoke to anyone much besides each other, but what servant clearly expected people to move out of her way?

ðeɪ wɛn ɪndə ðə vɪlədʒəz, tu, ən səmtaɪmz ðə taʊnz, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ʃʊɹ ðəɹ wɝ noʊ sintʃæn ðɛɹ. wən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz ʃʊɹ ə sʌmθɪŋ, ɪt hæd tə bi tʃɹu. twaɪs ðeɪ keɪm skɝiɪŋ bæk wən ðeɪ faʊn ə taʊn hæf-fʊl ə sɛtlɝz ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ nɔɹθ. ðeɪ toʊld ɪm wʌt ðeɪ lɝn ɑn ðɛɹ vɪzəts. hi θɔt ðeɪ dɪd. tɛslɪn dɪd sim ɡɹeɪtfəl, æftɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ fæʃən. ən idɛzinə. æftɝ ə fæʃən.

They went into the villages, too, and sometimes the towns, if they were sure there were no Seanchan there. When an Aes Sedai was sure of something, it had to be true. Twice they came scurrying back when they found a town half-full of settlers on their way north. They told him what they learned on their visits. He thought they did. Teslyn did seem grateful, after an Aes Sedai fashion. And Edesina. After a fashion.

dɪspaɪt ðɛɹ dɪfɝənsɪz, dʒoʊlin, tɛslɪn ən idɛzinə stʌk təɡɛðɝ laɪk hɝɾɪd ɡis. ɪf jə sɔ wʌn, jə sɔ ɔl θɹi. laɪkli ðət wɑz kəz wən jə sɔ ðɛm teɪkɪŋ ə stʃɹoʊl, ɔl nitli kloʊkt ən hɪɾən əz ðeɪ wɝ, ə mɪnət leɪɾɝ bɛθəmən ən ɹɛnə ən sɛɾə əpɪɹd tʃɹeɪlɪŋ æftɝ ðɛm. oʊ soʊ kæʒəwəli, bʌt nɛvɝ lɛɾɪŋ "ðə ɡɝlz" aʊɾ ə saɪt. ðə ɡus-hɝdz. ə blaɪn mæn kəd si ðəɹ wɑz tɛnʃən bɪtwin ðə tu ɡɹups ʌv wɪmən. ə blaɪn mæn kəd si nʌn ə ðɛm wɝ sɝvəns. ðə sʌldəm hæd hɛld ɹɪspɛktɪd pəzɪʃənz, pəzɪʃənz ʌv əθɔɹəɾi, ən ðeɪ muvd ɔlmoʊst əz ɛɹəɡənli əz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi wɑz stʌk wɪð ðə stɔɹi, ðoʊ.

Despite their differences, Joline, Teslyn and Edesina stuck together like herded geese. If you saw one, you saw all three. Likely that was because when you saw them taking a stroll, all neatly cloaked and hidden as they were, a minute later Bethamin and Renna and Seta appeared trailing after them. Oh so casually, but never letting "the girls" out of sight. The goose-herds. A blind man could see there was tension between the two groups of women. A blind man could see none of them were servants. The sul'dam had held respected positions, positions of authority, and they moved almost as arrogantly as the Aes Sedai. He was stuck with the story, though.

bɛθəmən ən ði ʌðɝ tu wɝ əz lɪɹi ʌv ʌðɝ sintʃæn əz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ, jɛt ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ fɑloʊd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wən ðeɪ wɛn ɪndə ə vɪlədʒ əɹ taʊn, ən bɛθəmən ɔlweɪz ɹipɔɹɾəd ðə tɪdbɪts ðeɪ hæd pɪkt ʌp baɪ ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ, wɪð ɹɛnə wɛɹɪŋ ən ɪnɡɹeɪʃieɪɾɪŋ smaɪl ən sɛɾə tʃɝpɪŋ ɪn ðət 'ðə ɡɝlz' hæd mɪs ðɪs əɹ ðæt, əɹ kleɪm nɑt tə hæv hɝd; jə kəd nɛvɝ bi ʃʊɹ wɪð sʌmwʌn u hæd ði ɑdæsəɾi tə kɔl hɝsɛlf ɛɛs sədaɪ; meɪbi hi ʃəd ɹikənsɪɾɝ hævɪŋ əm liʃt, dʒʌs tɪl ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz seɪf.

Bethamin and the other two were as leery of other Seanchan as the Aes Sedai were, yet they also followed the Aes Sedai when they went into a village or town, and Bethamin always reported the tidbits they had picked up by eavesdropping, with Renna wearing an ingratiating smile and Seta chirping in that 'the girls' had missed this or that, or claimed not to have heard; you could never be sure with someone who had the audacity to call herself Aes Sedai; maybe he should reconsider having them leashed, just till everything was safe.

ðɛɹ teɪlz ɹɪli wɝ nɑt ðət dɪfɹən fɹəm wʌt ðə sɪstɝz toʊl hɪm. taʊnzfoʊks tɔk ʌv wʌt ðeɪ hæɾ oʊvɝhɝd fɹəm sintʃæn pæsɪŋ θɹu. mɛni ʌv ðə sɛtlɝz wɝ nɝvəs, ðɛɹ hɛdz fʊl ə teɪlz əbaʊt sævədʒ il ɹævɪdʒɪŋ θɹu ɔltɑɹə, ðoʊ ðə loʊkəl pipəl ɔl sɛd ðət wɑz ʌp nɔɹθ sʌmwɛɹ. ɪt sim sʌmwʌn haɪɝ maɪt bi θɪŋkɪŋ ðə seɪm, ðoʊ, kəz mɛni sɛtlɝz hæd bɪn daɪvɝɾɪd ist, təwɔɹɾ ɪljən. ən əlaɪəns hæd bɪn kənkluɾəd wɪð sʌmwʌn paʊɝfəl u wɑz ɪkspɛktəd tə ɡɪv ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ æksɛs tə mɛni lænz. ðə wɪmən ɹəfjuz tə bi kənvɪns ðət ðeɪ nid nɑt lɪsən fəɹ ɹumɝz. ðeɪ nɛvɝ kwaɪt ɡɑɾ ɝaʊn tə hændɪŋ oʊvɝ ði æɾəm, iðɝ. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ðoʊz sɪlvɝi liʃɪz ən ðə θɹi sʌldəm wɝ ði oʊnli ɹil lɛvɝ i hæd wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɡɹæɾətud.

Their tales really were not that different from what the sisters told him. Townsfolk's talk of what they had overheard from Seanchan passing through. Many of the settlers were nervous, their heads full of tales about savage Aiel ravaging through Altara, though the local people all said that was up north somewhere. It seemed someone higher might be thinking the same, though, because many settlers had been diverted east, toward Illian. An alliance had been concluded with someone powerful who was expected to give the High Lady Suroth access to many lands. The women refused to be convinced that they need not listen for rumors. They never quite got around to handing over the a'dam, either. In truth, those silvery leashes and the three sul'dam were the only real lever he had with the Aes Sedai. Gratitude.

fɹəm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ! hɑ! nɑt ðəɾ i ɹɪli θɔɾ əbaʊt pʊɾɪŋ ðoʊz kɑlɝz ɑn ðə sɪstɝz əɡɛn. nɑɾ ɔfən, ɛniweɪ. hi wɑz wɛl ən tʃɹuli stʌk.

From an Aes Sedai! Ha! Not that he really thought about putting those collars on the sisters again. Not often, anyway. He was well and truly stuck.

hi tʃɹuli dɪɾ əv noʊ niɾ ʌv wʌt ðə sʌldəm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ lɝnd. hi hæd bɛɾɝ sɔɹsəz, pipəl i tʃɹʌstɪd. wɛl, hi tʃɹʌstɪd tɑm, wən ðə waɪt-hɛɹd ɡlimən kəd bi ɹuɾəd aʊt fɹəm pleɪɪŋ sneɪks ən fɑksəz wɪð oʊlvɝ əɹ munɪŋ oʊvɝ ə mʌkkɹis lɛɾɝ i kæɹid tʌkt ɪn ðə bɹɛst ə hɪz koʊt. tɑm kəd wɔk ɪndə ə kɑmən ɹum, tɛl ə stɔɹi, meɪbi dʒʌɡəl ə bɪt, ən wɔk aʊt noʊɪŋ wʌt wɑz ɪn ðə hɛɾ ʌv ɛvɹi mæn ðɛɹ.

He truly did have no need of what the sul'dam and Aes Sedai learned. He had better sources, people he trusted. Well, he trusted Thom, when the white-haired gleeman could be routed out from playing Snakes and Foxes with Olver or mooning over a muchcreased letter he carried tucked in the breast of his coat. Thom could walk into a common room, tell a story, maybe juggle a bit, and walk out knowing what was in the head of every man there.

mæt tʃɹʌstɪd dʒulɪn, tu - hi dɪɾ ɔlmoʊst əz wɛl əz tɑm, wɪθaʊt dʒʌɡəlɪŋ əɹ stɔɹitɛlɪŋ - bʌt dʒulɪn ɔlweɪz ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn teɪkɪŋ θɛɹə wɪð hɪm, dɪmjʊɹli klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz ɑɹm əz ðeɪ stʃɹoʊld ɪndə ə taʊn.

Mat trusted Juilin, too - he did almost as well as Thom, without juggling or storytelling - but Juilin always insisted on taking Thera with him, demurely clutching his arm as they strolled into a town.

tə ɡɛɾ əɹ juz tə fɹiɾəm əɡɛn, ðə mæn sɛd. ʃi smaɪld ʌp ət dʒulɪn, ðoʊz bɪɡ aɪz ʃaɪnɪŋ dɑɹkli, ðət fʊl lɪɾəl maʊθ æskɪŋ tə bi kɪst. meɪbi ʃi hæd bɪn pɑnɑɹtʃ ə tæɹɑbən, ðə weɪ dʒulɪn ən tɑm kleɪmd, bʌt mæt wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə daʊɾ ɪt. hi hæd hɝd səm ə ðə kəntɔɹʃənɪsts dʒoʊkɪŋ əbaʊt haʊ ðə tæɹɑbənɝ sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ðə tɛɹən θif-kætʃɝ aʊt tɪl i kəd bɛɹli wɔk.

To get her used to freedom again, the man said. She smiled up at Juilin, those big eyes shining darkly, that full little mouth asking to be kissed. Maybe she had been Panarch of Tarabon, the way Juilin and Thom claimed, but Mat was beginning to doubt it. He had heard some of the contortionists joking about how the Taraboner serving girl was wearing the Tairen thief-catcher out till he could barely walk.

pɑnɑɹtʃ əɹ sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl, ðoʊ, θɛɹə stɪl stɑɹɾəd tə nil ɛni taɪm ʃi hɝɾ ə dʒɹɔlɪŋ æksɛnt. mæt fɪɡjɝd ðəɾ ɛni sintʃæn u æskt əɹ ə kwɛstʃən wəd ɡɛɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi nu, bɪɡɪnɪŋ wɪð dʒulɪn sændɑɹ ən ɛndɪŋ wɪð wɪtʃ wæɡən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ɪn, ɔl ænsɝz dɪlɪvɝd fɹəm əɹ niz.

Panarch or serving girl, though, Thera still started to kneel any time she heard a drawling accent. Mat figured that any Seanchan who asked her a question would get everything she knew, beginning with Juilin Sandar and ending with which wagon the Aes Sedai were in, all answers delivered from her knees.

θɛɹə wɑz ə bɪɡɝ deɪnʒɝ ðən ɛɛs sədaɪ ən sʌldəm pʊt təɡɛðɝ, ɪn ɪz bʊk. dʒulɪn bɹaɪɾəld ət ðə slaɪɾəst sədʒɛstʃən ɪz wʊmən maɪt bi ʌnɹɪlaɪəbəl, ðoʊ, ən spʌn ɪz bæmbu stæf əz ɪf i wɑz kənsɪɾɝɪŋ kɹækɪŋ mæts hɛd fəɹ hɪm. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ səluʃən, bʌt mæt faʊn ə stɑpɡæp, ə weɪ tə ɡɛɾ ə lɪɾəl wɔɹnɪŋ ɪf ðə wɝst əkɝd.

Thera was a bigger danger than Aes Sedai and sul'dam put together, in his book. Juilin bridled at the slightest suggestion his woman might be unreliable, though, and spun his bamboo staff as if he was considering cracking Mat's head for him. There was no solution, but Mat found a stopgap, a way to get a little warning if the worst occurred.

"ʌv kɔɹs aɪ kən fɑloʊ ðɛm," noʊl sɛd, wɪð ə ɡæp-tuθt ɡɹɪn ðət sɛɾ ɪt wəd bi tʃaɪlz pleɪ. leɪɪŋ ə nɑɹl fɪŋɡɝ əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɪz bɛnt noʊz, hi slɪp ði ʌðɝ nɑbəli hæn bɪniθ ɪz koʊt, wɛɹ i kɛpt ɪz naɪvz. "ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ɪt wʊdn bi bɛɾɝ dʒʌs tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ʃi kæn tɔk tə ɛniwʌn? dʒʌst ə sədʒɛstʃən, læd. ɪf jə seɪ nɑt, ðən nɑt." mæt moʊst ɛmfæɾɪkli sɛd nɑt. hi hæd kɪld wʌn wʊmən ɪn ɪz laɪf, ən lɛft ənʌðɝ tə bi bʊtʃɝd. hi wɑz nɑt gɑnə æɾ ə θɝd tə hɪz soʊl. "ɪt simz sjuɹɔθ maɪɾ əv meɪɾ ən əlaɪəns wɪð səm kɪŋ," dʒulɪn ɹipɔɹɾəd wɪð ə smaɪl oʊvɝ ə kʌp ə mʌld waɪn. ət lis θɛɹə sim tə bi meɪkɪŋ ɪm smaɪl mɔɹ. ʃi hʌɾəld bɪsaɪd dʒulɪnz stul ɪn ðɛɹ kɹæmp tɛnt, hɝ hɛd laɪɪŋ ɑn ɪz læp, ən i stʃɹoʊkt əɹ hɛɹ sɔfli wɪð ɪz fɹi hænd. "æt list, ðɛɹz kənsɪɾɝəbəl tɔk ə səm paʊɝfəl nu ælaɪ. ən ðoʊz sɛtlɝz ɑɹ ɔl fɹaɪɾənd aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ wɪts baɪ il."

"Of course I can follow them," Noal said, with a gap-toothed grin that said it would be child's play. Laying a gnarled finger alongside his bent nose, he slipped the other knobbly hand beneath his coat, where he kept his knives. "Are you sure it wouldn't be better just to make sure she can't talk to anyone? Just a suggestion, lad. If you say not, then not." Mat most emphatically said not. He had killed one woman in his life, and left another to be butchered. He was not going to add a third to his soul. "It seems Suroth might have made an alliance with some king," Juilin reported with a smile over a cup of mulled wine. At least Thera seemed to be making him smile more. She huddled beside Juilin's stool in their cramped tent, her head lying on his lap, and he stroked her hair softly with his free hand. "At least, there's considerable talk of some powerful new ally. And those settlers are all frightened out of their wits by Aiel."

"moʊst ə ðə sɛtlɝz sim tə bi hæv bɪn sɛn ist," tɑm sɛd, piɹɪŋ sædli ɪndə hɪz kʌp. əz dʒulɪn ɡɹu hæpiɝ deɪ baɪ deɪ, hi sim tə ɡɹoʊ sæɾɝ. noʊl wɑz aʊt ʃæɾoʊɪŋ dʒulɪn ən θɛɹə, ən ləpɪn ən nɹɪm wɝ sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ət ðə bæk ə ðə tɛnt, bʌt ðə tu kɛɹhinɪn sɝvɪŋ mɛn hæd ðɛɹ mɛndɪŋ bæskəts aʊɾ ən wɝ ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ mæts ɡʊd koʊts fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ fəɹ ɛni ɹɪpɛɹz ðeɪ θɔt nɛsəsɛɹi, soʊ ðə smɔl tɛn stɪl sim kɹaʊɾəd. "æn ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni soʊlʒɝz, tu," tɑm wɛn ɑn. "ɛvɹiθɪŋ sɛz ðəɹ gɑnə fɔl ɑn ɪljən laɪk ə hæmɝ." wɛl, ət list i nu hi wɑz hɪɹɪŋ ði ənvɑɹnɪʃt tʃɹuθ wən i hɝɾ ɪt fɹəm ðɛm. noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ spɪnɪŋ wɝdz ɑn ðɛɹ hɛdz əɹ sʌldəm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə smɑɹm ðɛɹ weɪ ɪndə hɪz ɡʊd ɡɹeɪsɪz. bɛθəmən ən sɛɾə hæɾ ivən lɝn tə kɝtsi. sʌmhaʊ, hi fɛl mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl wɪð ɹɛnə bɛndɪŋ hɝsɛlf dʌbəl. ɪt simd ɑnəst.

"Most of the settlers seem to be have been sent east," Thom said, peering sadly into his cup. As Juilin grew happier day by day, he seemed to grow sadder. Noal was out shadowing Juilin and Thera, and Lopin and Nerim were sitting cross-legged at the back of the tent, but the two Cairhienin serving men had their mending baskets out and were examining Mat's good coats from Ebou Dar for any repairs they thought necessary, so the small tent still seemed crowded. "And a great many soldiers, too," Thom went on. "Everything says they're going to fall on Illian like a hammer." Well, at least he knew he was hearing the unvarnished truth when he heard it from them. No Aes Sedai spinning words on their heads or sul'dam trying to smarm their way into his good graces. Bethamin and Seta had even learned to curtsy. Somehow, he felt more comfortable with Renna bending herself double. It seemed honest.

stʃɹeɪnʒ, bʌɾ ɑnəst.

Strange, but honest.

fəɹ hɪmsɛlf, taʊn əɹ vɪlədʒ, mæt tʊk noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə kwɪk lʊk ɝaʊnd, wɪð ɪz kɑlɝ tɝn ʌp ən ɪz kæp pʊl daʊn, bɪfɔɹ hɛɾɪŋ bæk tə ðə ʃoʊ. hi sɛldəm wɔɹ ə kloʊk. ə kloʊk kəd meɪk ɪt dɪfəkəl tə juz ðə naɪvz i kæɹid tʌkt əbaʊɾ ɪz pɝsən. nɑt ðəɾ i ɪkspɛktəd tə nid ðɛm.

For himself, town or village, Mat took no more than a quick look around, with his collar turned up and his cap pulled down, before heading back to the show. He seldom wore a cloak. A cloak could make it difficult to use the knives he carried tucked about his person. Not that he expected to need them.

ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə pɹuɾənt pɹikɔʃən. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ, noʊ dænsɪŋ, ən noʊ ɡæmbəlɪŋ. ɪspɛʃli noʊ ɡæmbəlɪŋ. ðə saʊn ə daɪs ɹætlɪŋ ɑn ə teɪbəl ɪn ən ɪnz kɑmən ɹum pʊld ət hɪm, bʌɾ ɪz sɔɹɾ ə lʌk wɪð daɪs wɑz baʊn tə bi ɹɪmɑɹkt, ivən ɪf ɪt dɪd nɑt lɛd tə sʌmbɑɾi pʊlɪŋ ə naɪf, ən ɪn ðɪs pɑɹɾ ʌv ɔltɑɹə boʊθ mɛn ən wɪmən kæɹid naɪvz tʌk bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ bɛls ən wɝ ɹɛɾi tə juz ðɛm.

It was just a prudent precaution. There was no drinking, no dancing, and no gambling. Especially no gambling. The sound of dice rattling on a table in an inn's common room pulled at him, but his sort of luck with dice was bound to be remarked, even if it did not lead to somebody pulling a knife, and in this part of Altara both men and women carried knives tucked behind their belts and were ready to use them.

hi wɑntəd tə pæs θɹu ənnoʊɾɪst, soʊ hi wɔk baɪ ðə daɪs ɡeɪmz, nɑɾəd kuli tə ðə tævɝn meɪdz u smaɪld ət hɪm, ən nɛvɝ dʒɹæŋk mɔɹ ðən ə kʌp ʌv waɪn ən juʒəwəli nɑt ðæt. æftɝ ɔl, hi hæd wɝk tə də bæk ət ðə ʃoʊ. wɝk ʌv ə sɔɹt. hi hæd bɪɡʌn ɪt ðə vɛɹi fɝs naɪɾ æftɝ livɪŋ ɛbu dɑɹ, ən ə ɹʌf dʒɑb ɪt wɑz.

He wanted to pass through unnoticed, so he walked by the dice games, nodded coolly to the tavern maids who smiled at him, and never drank more than a cup of wine and usually not that. After all, he had work to do back at the show. Work of a sort. He had begun it the very first night after leaving Ebou Dar, and a rough job it was.

"aɪ nid jə tə ɡoʊ wɪð mi," hi hæd sɛd ðɛn, pʊlɪŋ oʊpən ðə kʌbɝd bɪlt ɪndə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə wæɡən bɪniθ ɪz bɛd. hi kɛpt ɪz tʃɛst ʌv ɡoʊld ɪn ðɛɹ, ɔl ɑnəsli kʌm baɪ θɹu ɡæmbəlɪŋ. əz ɑnəsli əz i kʊd, ɛniweɪ. ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ pɑɹt keɪm fɹəm wʌn hɔɹs ɹeɪs, ən ɪz lʌk wɑz noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ mænz wɪð hɔɹsəz. fəɹ ðə ɹɛst. . . . ɪf ə mæn wɑntəd tə tɔs daɪs əɹ pleɪ ət kɑɹdz əɹ pɪtʃ kɔɪnz, hi hæd tə bi ɹɛɾi tə luz. doʊmən, siɾəd ɑn ði ʌðɝ bɛd ɹʌbɪŋ ə hæn oʊvɝ ðə bɹɪsəl ɑn ɪz ʃeɪv skælp, hæd lɝn ðət lɛsən. ðə fɛloʊ ʃʊɾə bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə slip ɑn ðə flɔɹ laɪk ə ɡʊd sɔɪbən, bʌɾ ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ i hæɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn flɪpɪŋ ə kɔɪn wɪð mæt itʃ naɪt fəɹ ðə sɛkən bɛd. ɛdʒiənɪn ɡɑt ðə fɝst, ʌv kɔɹs. tɔsɪŋ kɔɪnz wɑz əz izi əz dɪk$.

"I need you to go with me," he had said then, pulling open the cupboard built into the side of the wagon beneath his bed. He kept his chest of gold in there, all honestly come by through gambling. As honestly as he could, anyway. The greater part came from one horse race, and his luck was no better than any other man's with horses. For the rest. . . . If a man wanted to toss dice or play at cards or pitch coins, he had to be ready to lose. Domon, seated on the other bed rubbing a hand over the bristle on his shaved scalp, had learned that lesson. The fellow should have been willing to sleep on the floor like a good so'jbin, but in the beginning he had insisted on flipping a coin with Mat each night for the second bed. Egeanin got the first, of course. Tossing coins was as easy as dic$.

əz lɔŋ əz ðə kɔɪn dɪd nɑt læn ɑn ɛdʒ, ðə weɪ ɪt səmtaɪmz dɪd fəɹ hɪm. bʌt doʊmən hæd meɪd ði ɔfɝ, nɑt hɪm. əntɪl mæt hæd wʌn fɔɹ taɪmz stʃɹeɪt, ən ðən ðə fɪfθ naɪt ðə kɔɪn dɪd læn ɑn ɛdʒ, θɹi taɪmz ɪn ə ɹoʊ. ðeɪ tʊk tɝn ən tɝn əbaʊt, naʊ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl dimənz tɝn fəɹ ðə flɔɹ, tənaɪt. faɪndɪŋ ðə smɔlɪʃ wɑʃlðɝ bæɡ hi wɑz æftɝ, hi stʌft ɪɾ ɪndə hɪz koʊt pɑkəɾ ən stʃɹeɪɾənd, pʊʃɪŋ ðə kʌbɝd ʃʌt wɪð ɪz fʊt. "ju hæv tə feɪs əɹ səm taɪm," hi sɛd. "æn aɪ nid jə tə smuð θɪŋz oʊvɝ." hi niɾəd sʌmwʌn tə ətʃɹæk tuɑnz aɪɹ, sʌmwʌn tə meɪk ɪm sim æksɛptəbəl baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt seɪ ðæt, kəd hi? "jɔɹ ə sintʃæn noʊbəl, ən jə kən kip mi fɹəm pʊɾɪŋ maɪ buɾ ɪn maɪ maʊθ." "waɪ dʒju nid tə smuð θɪŋz oʊvɝ?" ɛdʒiənɪnz dʒɹɔl wɑz hɑɹɾ əz ə sɔ. ʃi stʊɾ əɡɛns ðə wæɡənz dɔɹ wɪð əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps, blu aɪz ɔdʒɝɪŋ aʊt fɹəm bɪniθ əɹ lɔŋ blæk wɪɡ. "waɪ dʒju nid tə si hɝ? hævən jə dʌn ɪnʌf?" "doʊn tɛl mi jəɹ əfɹeɪɾ ə hɝ," mæt skɔft, dɑdʒɪŋ ðə kwɛstʃən. wʌɾ ænsɝ kəɾ i ɡɪv ðət dɪd nɑt saʊn ɪnseɪn? "ju kəd tʌk əɹ ʌndɝ jəɹ ɑɹm ɔlmoʊst əz izəli əz aɪ kʊd. bʌɾ aɪ pɹɑməs nɑt tə lɛɾ əɹ kʌt jəɹ hɛɾ ɔf əɹ bit jə ʌp." "ɛdʒiənɪn də noʊ bi əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ, bɔɪ," doʊmən ɡɹaʊl pɹoʊtɛktɪvli. "ɪf ʃi dʌz noʊ wɑnə ɡoʊ, ðən jə tʃɹɑɾ ɔf tə kɔɹt ðə ɡɝl baɪ jɝsɛlf.

As long as the coin did not land on edge, the way it sometimes did for him. But Domon had made the offer, not him. Until Mat had won four times straight, and then the fifth night the coin did land on edge, three times in a row. They took turn and turn about, now. But it was still Demon's turn for the floor, tonight. Finding the smallish washleather bag he was after, he stuffed it into his coat pocket and straightened, pushing the cupboard shut with his foot. "You have to face her some time," he said. "And I need you to smooth things over." He needed someone to attract Tuon's ire, someone to make him seem acceptable by comparison, but he could not say that, could he? "You're a Seanchan noble, and you can keep me from putting my boot in my mouth." "Why do you need to smooth things over?" Egeanin's drawl was hard as a saw. She stood against the wagon's door with her fists on her hips, blue eyes augering out from beneath her long black wig. "Why do you need to see her? Haven't you done enough?" "Don't tell me you're afraid of her," Mat scoffed, dodging the question. What answer could he give that did not sound insane? "You could tuck her under your arm almost as easily as I could. But I promise not to let her cut your head off or beat you up." "Egeanin do no be afraid of anything, boy," Domon growled protectively. "If she does no want to go, then you trot off to court the girl by yourself.

steɪ ðə naɪt, ɪf jə tʃuz." ɛdʒiənɪn kəntɪnjud tə ɡlɛɹ ət mæt. əɹ θɹu hɪm. ðən ʃi ɡlænst ət doʊmən, hɝ ʃoʊldɝz slʌmpt ə lɪɾəl, ən ʃi snætʃt əɹ kloʊk fɹəm ɪts pɛɡ ɑn ðə wɔl. "ɡɛɾ ə muv ɑn, kɔθən," ʃi ɡɹaʊld. "ɪf ɪts tə bi dʌn, bɛst ɪts dʌn ən oʊvɝ wɪð." ʃi wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə wæɡən ɪn ə flæʃ, ən mæt hæd tə hɝi tə kætʃ əɹ ʌp. jə kəɾ ɔlmoʊs θɪŋk ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi əloʊn wɪð doʊmən, əz lɪɾəl sɛns əz ðət meɪd.

Stay the night, if you choose." Egeanin continued to glare at Mat. Or through him. Then she glanced at Domon, her shoulders slumped a little, and she snatched her cloak from its peg on the wall. "Get a move on, Cauthon," she growled. "If it has to be done, best it's done and over with." She was out of the wagon in a flash, and Mat had to hurry to catch her up. You could almost think she did not want to be alone with Domon, as little sense as that made.

aʊtsaɪd ðə wɪndoʊləs pɝpəl wæɡən, blæk ɪn ðə naɪt, ə ʃædoʊ ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ðə dipɝ ʃædoʊz. ðə sɪkəl mun keɪm aʊt fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə klaʊdz lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ mæt tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɑɹnənz læntɝn dʒɔ.

Outside the windowless purple wagon, black in the night, a shadow shifted in the deeper shadows. The sickle moon came out from behind the clouds long enough for Mat to recognize Harnan's lantern jaw.

"ɔl kwaɪət, maɪ lɔɹd," ðə faɪl-liɾɝ sɛd. mæt nɑɾəd ən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, filɪŋ fəɹ ðə wɑʃlðɝ bæɡ ɪn ɪz pɑkət. ði ɛɹ wɑz klin, wɑʃt baɪ ðə ɹeɪn ən əweɪ fɹəm ðə hɔɹslaɪnz.

"All quiet, my Lord," the file-leader said. Mat nodded and took a deep breath, feeling for the washleather bag in his pocket. The air was clean, washed by the rain and away from the horselines.

tuɑn mʌs bi ɹɪliv tə bi əweɪ fɹəm ðə dʌŋ smɛl, ən ðə ɹæŋk oʊɾɝ ə ði ænəməl keɪdʒɪz. ðə pɝfɔɹmɝz' wæɡənz tə hɪz lɛft wɝ əz dɑɹk əz ðə kænvəs-tɑp stɔɹədʒ wæɡənz tə hɪz ɹaɪt. noʊ jus weɪɾɪŋ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. hi pʊʃt ɛdʒiənɪn ʌp ðə pɝpəl wæɡənz stɛps əhɛɾ ə hɪm.

Tuon must be relieved to be away from the dung smell, and the rank odor of the animal cages. The performers' wagons to his left were as dark as the canvas-topped storage wagons to his right. No use waiting any longer. He pushed Egeanin up the purple wagon's steps ahead of him.

ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ pipəl ɪnsaɪd ðən i ɪkspɛktəd. sɛɾəl wɑz siɾəd ɑn wʌn ə ðə bɛdz, wɝkɪŋ əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi hup əɡɛn, ən sɪlutʃə stʊɾ ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn skaʊlɪŋ bɪniθ əɹ hɛd skɑɹf, bʌt noʊl wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ bɛd, əpɛɹənli lɔst ɪn θɔt, ən tuɑn sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ pleɪɪŋ sneɪks ən fɑksəz wɪð oʊlvɝ.

There were more people inside than he expected. Setalle was seated on one of the beds, working her embroidery hoop again, and Selucia stood at the far end scowling beneath her head scarf, but Noal was sitting on the other bed, apparently lost in thought, and Tuon sat cross-legged on the floor playing Snakes and Foxes with Olver.

ðə bɔɪ twɪstəɾ ɝaʊnd wɪð ə waɪd-maʊðd ɡɹɪn ðəɾ ɔlmoʊst splɪɾ ɪz feɪs wən mæt keɪm ɪn.

The boy twisted around with a wide-mouthed grin that almost split his face when Mat came in.

"noʊl əz bɪn tɛlɪŋ əs əbaʊt koʊɾənsɪn, mæt," hi ɪkskleɪmd. "ðæts ənʌðɝ neɪm fəɹ ʃɑɹə. dɪd jə noʊ ði aɪɑd tætu ðɛɹ feɪsəz? ðæts wʌt ðeɪ kɔl wɪmən u kən tʃænəl, ɪn ʃɑɹə."

"Noal has been telling us about Co'dansin, Mat," he exclaimed. "That's another name for Shara. Did you know the Ayyad tattoo their faces? That's what they call women who can channel, in Shara."

"noʊ, aɪ dɪdnt," mæt sɛd, sɛɾəlɪŋ ə ɡɹɪm aɪ ɑn noʊl. ɪt wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf ðət veɪnɪn ən ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz wɝ titʃɪŋ ðə bɔɪ bæd hæbəts, nɑt tə mɛnʃən wʌɾ i wɑz pɪkɪŋ ʌp fɹəm dʒulɪn ən tɑm, wɪθaʊt noʊl fɪlɪŋ ɪz hɛd wɪð meɪd-ʌp nɑnsɛns. sʌɾənli noʊl slæpt ɪz θaɪ ən sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt. "aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ naʊ," hi sɛd, ən ðən ðə ful bɪɡæn tə ɹəsaɪt.

"No, I didn't," Mat said, settling a grim eye on Noal. It was bad enough that Vanin and the Redarms were teaching the boy bad habits, not to mention what he was picking up from Juilin and Thom, without Noal filling his head with made-up nonsense. Suddenly Noal slapped his thigh and sat up straight. "I remember now," he said, and then the fool began to recite.

"fɔɹtʃən ɹaɪdz laɪk ðə sʌn ɑn haɪ wɪð ðə fɑks ðət meɪks ðə ɹeɪvənz flaɪ.

"Fortune rides like the sun on high with the fox that makes the ravens fly.

lʌk ɪz soʊl, ðə laɪtnɪŋ ɪz aɪ, hi snætʃɪz ðə munz fɹəm aʊɾ ə ðə skaɪ."

Luck his soul, the lightning his eye, He snatches the moons from out of the sky."

ðə bɹoʊkən-noʊzd oʊl mæn lʊkt ɝaʊn əz ɪf dʒʌst ɹilaɪzɪŋ ɛniwʌn ɛls wɑz ðɛɹ. "aɪv bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt. ɪts fɹəm ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən."

The broken-nosed old man looked around as if just realizing anyone else was there. "I've been trying to remember that. It's from the Prophecies of the Dragon."

"vɛɹi ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ, noʊl," mæt mʌɾɝd. ðoʊz kʌlɝz wɝld ɪn ɪz hɛd dʒʌs ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd ðət mɔɹnɪŋ, wən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ pænɪkɪŋ. ðeɪ flæʃt əweɪ wɪθaʊt meɪkɪŋ ə pɪktʃɝ ðɪs taɪm, bʌɾ i fɛlt əz koʊld əz ɪf i hæd spɛn ə naɪt slipɪŋ ʌndɝ ə bʊʃ ɪn ɪz skɪn. ðə læs θɪŋ ɑn ɝθ i niɾəd wɑz ɛnibəɾi ɛls lɪŋkɪŋ ɪm tə ðə pɹɑfəsiz. "meɪbi səm taɪm jə kən ɹəsaɪt ðə hoʊl θɪŋ fəɹ ʌs. bʌt nɑt tənaɪt, ɛ?"

"Very interesting, Noal," Mat muttered. Those colors whirled in his head just the way they had that morning, when the Aes Sedai were panicking. They flashed away without making a picture this time, but he felt as cold as if he had spent a night sleeping under a bush in his skin. The last thing on earth he needed was anybody else linking him to the Prophecies. "Maybe some time you can recite the whole thing for us. But not tonight, eh?"

tuɑn lʊkt ʌp əɾ ɪm θɹu hɝ aɪlæʃɪz, ə blæk pɔɹsələn dɑl ɪn ə dʒɹɛs ðət wɑz tu bɪɡ fəɹ hɝ. laɪt, bʌt ʃi hæd lɔŋ læʃɪz. ʃi ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɛdʒiənɪn əz ɪf ði ʌðɝ wʊmən dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst, ən ɪn tʃɹuθ, ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz duɪŋ əɹ bɛs tə əpɪɹ pɑɹɾ ʌv ə kæbənət bɪlt ɪndə ðə wɔl. soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ hoʊpɪŋ fəɹ ə daɪvɝʒən. "tɔɪ dʌzn min tə bi ɹud," tuɑn mɝmɝɾ ɪn ðət sloʊ hʌni dʒɹɔl. "hi dʒʌst əz nɛvɝ bɪn tʃɹeɪn ɪn mænɝz. bʌɾ ɪts leɪt, mæstɝ tʃɛɝɪn; taɪm fəɹ oʊlvɝ tə bi ɪn bɛd. pɝhæps jəl ɛskɔɹɾ ɪm tə hɪz tɛnt? wɪl pleɪ əɡɛn ənʌðɝ taɪm, oʊlvɝ. wəd jə laɪk mi tə titʃ jə tə pleɪ stoʊnz?" oʊlvɝ moʊst ɛmfæɾɪkli wʊd. hi ɔlmoʊst ɹɪəld, seɪɪŋ soʊ. ðə bɔɪ laɪkt ɛniθɪŋ ðət ɡeɪv ɪm ə tʃæns tə smaɪl əɾ ə wʊmən, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ə tʃæns tə seɪ θɪŋz ðət ʃʊɾə ɡɑɾən ɪm slæp tɪl ɪz ɪɹz swɛld ʌp bɪɡɝ ðən ðeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi wɝ. ɪf mæt ɛvɝ faʊn aʊt wɪtʃ ə hɪz 'ʌŋkəlz' wɑz titʃɪŋ ɪm ðæt. . . . bʌt ðə læd ɡæðɝd ðə pisəz ə hɪz ɡeɪm ən kɛɹfəli ɹoʊld ʌp ðə laɪn-mɑɹkt klɔθ wɪθaʊɾ ə sɛkən ɝdʒɪŋ. hi ivən meɪɾ ə vɛɹi ɡʊd lɛɡ, θæŋkɪŋ ðə haɪ leɪɾi, bɪfɔɹ lɛɾɪŋ noʊl lɛɾ ɪm fɹəm ðə wæɡən. mæt nɑɾəd əpɹuvɪŋli. hi hæd tɔt ðə bɔɪ haʊ tə meɪk ə lɛɡ, bʌt ðə bɔɪ juʒəwəli æɾəd ə lɪɹ fəɹ ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən. ɪf i ɛvɝ faʊn aʊt hu. . . . "ju hæv ə ɹizən fəɹ ɪntɝʌptɪŋ mi, tɔɪ?" tuɑn sɛɾ ɪn kul toʊnz. "ɪɾ ɪz leɪt, ən aɪ wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ tə slip." hi meɪɾ ə lɛɡ ən ɡeɪv əɹ ɪz bɛst smaɪl. hi kəd bi pəlaɪɾ ivən ɪf ʃi wɑz nɑt. "aɪ dʒʌst wɑntəd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ jə wɝ ɔl ɹaɪt. ðiz wæɡənz ɑɹ ənkʌmftəɹbəl, ɑn ðə ɹoʊd. ən aɪ noʊ jə ɑɹən hæpi wɪð ðə kloʊðz aɪ kəd faɪn ju. aɪ θɔt ðɪs maɪt meɪk jə fil ə lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ." fɪʃɪŋ ðə lɛðɝ bæɡ fɹəm ɪz pɑkət, hi pɹizɛntəɾ ɪt wɪð ə flɝɪʃ. wɪmən ɔlweɪz laɪk ðət lɪɾəl ɛkstʃɹə flɝɪʃ.

Tuon looked up at him through her eyelashes, a black porcelain doll in a dress that was too big for her. Light, but she had long lashes. She ignored Egeanin as if the other woman did not exist, and in truth, Egeanin was doing her best to appear part of a cabinet built into the wall. So much for hoping for a diversion. "Toy doesn't mean to be rude," Tuon murmured in that slow honey drawl. "He just has never been trained in manners. But it is late, Master Charin; time for Olver to be in bed. Perhaps you will escort him to his tent? We'll play again another time, Olver. Would you like me to teach you to play stones?" Olver most emphatically would. He almost wriggled, saying so. The boy liked anything that gave him a chance to smile at a woman, not to mention a chance to say things that should have gotten him slapped till his ears swelled up bigger than they already were. If Mat ever found out which of his 'uncles' was teaching him that. . . . But the lad gathered the pieces of his game and carefully rolled up the line-marked cloth without a second urging. He even made a very good leg, thanking the High Lady, before letting Noal lead him from the wagon. Mat nodded approvingly. He had taught the boy how to make a leg, but the boy usually added a leer for a pretty woman. If he ever found out who. . . . "You have a reason for interrupting me, Toy?" Tuon said in cool tones. "It is late, and I was thinking of going to sleep." He made a leg and gave her his best smile. He could be polite even if she was not. "I just wanted to make sure you were all right. These wagons are uncomfortable, on the road. And I know you aren't happy with the clothes I could find you. I thought this might make you feel a little better." Fishing the leather bag from his pocket, he presented it with a flourish. Women always liked that little extra flourish.

sɪlutʃə tɛnst, blu aɪz ʃɑɹpənɪŋ, bʌt tuɑn wæɡəld əɹ slɪm fɪŋɡɝz ən ðə boʊsəmi meɪd səbsaɪɾɪd. ə lɪɾəl. mæt laɪk faɪsti wɪmən, baɪ ən lɑɹdʒ, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi ɹuən ðɪs, hi wɑz gɑnə pæɾəl əɹ bɑɾəm. hi hʌŋ ɑn tə hɪz smaɪl wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ən ivən mænədʒ tə ɹætʃəɾ ɪɾ ʌp ə nɑtʃ.

Selucia tensed, blue eyes sharpening, but Tuon waggled her slim fingers and the bosomy maid subsided. A little. Mat liked feisty women, by and large, but if she ruined this, he was going to paddle her bottom. He hung on to his smile with an effort, and even managed to ratchet it up a notch.

tuɑn tɝn ðə bæɡ oʊvɝ əɹ hænz sɛvɹəl taɪmz bɪfɔɹ əntiɪŋ ðə dʒɹɔstʃɹɪŋz ən spɪlɪŋ wʌɾ ɪt kənteɪn ɪndə hɝ læp, ə hɛvi nɛkləs ʌv ɡoʊld ən kɑɹvd æmbɝ. ən ɪkspɛnsɪv pis, ən sintʃæn wɝk tə but. hi wɑz pɹaʊɾ ə faɪndɪŋ ðə θɪŋ. ɪt hæd bɪn ðə pɹɑpɝɾi ʌv ən ækɹəbæt, hu hæɾ ɪt fɹəm ə sintʃæn ɔfəsɝ huz fænsi ʃi kɑt, bʌt ʃi hæd bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə sɛl naʊ ðəɾ əɹ ɔfəsɝ wɑz lɛf bɪhaɪnd. ɪt dɪd nɑt suɾ əɹ skɪn, wʌtɛvɝ ðət mɛnt. hi smaɪld ən weɪɾəd. dʒuəlz ɔlweɪz sɔfən ə wʊmənz hɑɹt.

Tuon turned the bag over her hands several times before untying the drawstrings and spilling what it contained into her lap, a heavy necklace of gold and carved amber. An expensive piece, and Seanchan work to boot. He was proud of finding the thing. It had been the property of an acrobat, who had it from a Seanchan officer whose fancy she caught, but she had been willing to sell now that her officer was left behind. It did not suit her skin, whatever that meant. He smiled and waited. Jewels always softened a woman's heart.

noʊ wʌnz ɹiækʃən wɑz kwaɪt wʌɾ i ɪkspɛktəd, ðoʊ. tuɑn lɪftəd ðə nɛkləs ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ feɪs wɪð boʊθ hænz, stʌɾiɪŋ ɪɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin sətʃ ə θɪŋ bɪfɔɹ. sɪlutʃəz lɪp kɝld ɪn ə snɪɹ. sɛɾəl sɛɾ əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi daʊn ɑn əɹ niz ən lʊkt ət hɪm, ðə lɑɹdʒ ɡoʊldən hups ɪn əɹ ɪɹz sweɪɪŋ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd.

No one's reaction was quite what he expected, though. Tuon lifted the necklace in front of her face with both hands, studying it as if she had never seen such a thing before. Selucia's lip curled in a sneer. Setalle set her embroidery down on her knees and looked at him, the large golden hoops in her ears swaying as she shook her head.

əbɹʌpli, tuɑn θɹʌs ðə nɛkləs bæk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ təwɔɹd sɪlutʃə. "ɪt dʌz nɑt sut mi," ʃi sɛd. "wʊd jə laɪk ɪt, sɪlutʃə?" mæts smaɪl slɪpt ə lɪɾəl.

Abruptly, Tuon thrust the necklace back over her shoulder toward Selucia. "It does not suit me," she said. "Would you like it, Selucia?" Mat's smile slipped a little.

ðə kɹim-skɪnd wʊmən tʊk ðə nɛkləs bɪtwin θʌm ən fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ, əz ɪf hoʊldɪŋ ə dɛd ɹæt baɪ ðə teɪl. "ə pis fəɹ ə ʃeɪ dænsɝ tə wɛɹ wɪð əɹ veɪl," ʃi sɛd ɹaɪli. wɪð ə twɪst ə hɝ ɹɪst, ʃi hɝl ðə nɛkləs əɾ ɛdʒiənɪn, snæpɪŋ, "pʊɾ ɪɾ ɑn!" ɛdʒiənɪn kɑt ðə θɪŋ dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ɪt hɪɾ əɹ feɪs. mæts smaɪl slɪd ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ ɔf hɪz.

The cream-skinned woman took the necklace between thumb and forefinger, as if holding a dead rat by the tail. "A piece for a shea dancer to wear with her veil," she said wryly. With a twist of her wrist, she hurled the necklace at Egeanin, snapping, "Put it on!" Egeanin caught the thing just before it hit her face. Mat's smile slid the rest of the way off his.

hi ɪkspɛktəɾ ən ɪksploʊʒən, bʌɾ ɛdʒiənɪn ɪmiɾiətli fʌmbəld oʊpən ðə klæsp ən pʊʃt əɹ hɛvi wɪɡ bæk tə fæsən ɪt bɪhaɪn əɹ nɛk. hɝ feɪs maɪɾ əv bɪn moʊldəd fɹəm snoʊ fəɹ ɔl ði ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn ɪt.

He expected an explosion, but Egeanin immediately fumbled open the clasp and pushed her heavy wig back to fasten it behind her neck. Her face might have been molded from snow for all the expression on it.

"tɝn," sɪlutʃə kəmændəd, ən ɪt wɑz ə kəmænd, wɪθaʊɾ ɛni daʊt. "lɛt mi si." ɛdʒiənɪn tɝnd. stɪf əz ə fɛns poʊst, bʌt ʃi tɝnd. sɛɾəl lʊkt əɾ əɹ ɪntɛnli, wɪð ə pʌzəld ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛd, ðən ɡeɪv mæt ə dɪfɹən hɛd ʃeɪk bɪfɔɹ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə hɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. wɪmən hæɾ əz mɛni weɪz ə ʃeɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛdz əz ðeɪ hæd lʊks. ðɪs wʌn sɛɾ i wɑz ə ful, ən ɪf i dɪd nɑt kætʃ ðə faɪnɝ nuɑnsɪz, hi wɑz dʒʌst əz ɡlæd. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i wʊɾə laɪk ðɛm. bɝn hɪm, hi bɑɾ ə nɛkləs fəɹ tuɑn, hu ɡeɪv ɪt tə sɪlutʃə ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, ən naʊ ɪt wɑz ɛdʒiənɪnz?

"Turn," Selucia commanded, and it was a command, without any doubt. "Let me see." Egeanin turned. Stiff as a fence post, but she turned. Setalle looked at her intently, with a puzzled shake of her head, then gave Mat a different head shake before returning to her embroidery. Women had as many ways of shaking their heads as they had looks. This one said he was a fool, and if he did not catch the finer nuances, he was just as glad. He did not think he would have liked them. Burn him, he bought a necklace for Tuon, who gave it to Selucia right in front of him, and now it was Egeanin's?

"ʃi keɪm fəɹ ə nu neɪm," tuɑn sɛd mjuzɪŋli. "wʌt dʌz ʃi kɔl hɝsɛlf?"

"She came for a new name," Tuon said musingly. "What does she call herself?"

"laɪlwɪn," sɪlutʃə ɹɪplaɪd. "ə fɪɾɪŋ neɪm fəɹ ə ʃeɪ dænsɝ. laɪlwɪn ʃɪpləs, pɝhæps?" tuɑn nɑɾəd. "laɪlwɪn ʃɪpləs."

"Leilwin," Selucia replied. "A fitting name for a shea dancer. Leilwin Shipless, perhaps?" Tuon nodded. "Leilwin Shipless."

ɛdʒiənɪn dʒɝkt əz ðoʊ ɛvɹi wɝd wɑz ə slæp. "meɪ aɪ wɪðdʒɹɔ?" ʃi æsk stɪfli, bɛndɪŋ ɪn ʃɑɹp baʊ.

Egeanin jerked as though every word was a slap. "May I withdraw?" she asked stiffly, bending in sharp bow.

"ɪf jə wɑnə ɡoʊ, ðən ɡoʊ," mæt ɡɹaʊld. bɹɪŋɪŋ əɹ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs hæd nɑt bɪn ðə bɛs noʊʃən i ɛvɝ hæd, bʌt meɪbi hi kəd ɹɪkʌvɝ ə lɪɾəl wɪθaʊt hɝ.

"If you want to go, then go," Mat growled. Bringing her in the first place had not been the best notion he ever had, but maybe he could recover a little without her.

aɪz lɑkt ɑn ðə flɔɹbɔɹdz, ɛdʒiənɪn sæŋk tə hɝ niz. "pliz, meɪ aɪ wɪðdʒɹɔ?" tuɑn sæt ðəɹ stʃɹeɪt-bækt ɑn ðə flɔɹ stɛɹɪŋ θɹu ðə tɔlɝ wʊmən, klɪɹli nɑt siɪŋ əɹ əɾ ɔl. sɪlutʃə aɪɾ ɛdʒiənɪn ʌp ən daʊn, pɝsɪŋ əɹ lɪps. sɛɾəl pʊʃt əɹ niɾəl θɹu ðə klɔθ stʃɹɛtʃt ɑn əɹ hup. noʊ wʌn soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst ət mæt. ɛdʒiənɪn dʒɹɑp tə hɝ feɪs, ən mæt bɪt bæk ə stɑɹɾəld oʊθ wən ʃi kɪs ðə flɔɹ. "pliz," ʃi sɛd hɔɹsli, "aɪ bɛɡ liv tə wɪðdʒɹɔ."

Eyes locked on the floorboards, Egeanin sank to her knees. "Please, may I withdraw?" Tuon sat there straight-backed on the floor staring through the taller woman, clearly not seeing her at all. Selucia eyed Egeanin up and down, pursing her lips. Setalle pushed her needle through the cloth stretched on her hoop. No one so much as glanced at Mat. Egeanin dropped to her face, and Mat bit back a startled oath when she kissed the floor. "Please," she said hoarsely, "I beg leave to withdraw."

"ju wɪl ɡoʊ, laɪlwɪn," sɪlutʃə sɛd, koʊld əz ə kwin spikɪŋ tə ə tʃɪkɪnθif, "æn jəl nɑt lemi si jəɹ feɪs əɡɛn ənlɛs ɪts kʌvɝd baɪ ə ʃeɪ dænsɝz veɪl." ɛdʒiənɪn skɹæmbəl bækwɝɾ ɑn hænz ən niz ən ɔl bʌt tʌmbəld aʊt ðə dɔɹ, soʊ fæs ðət mæt wɑz lɛft ɡeɪpɪŋ. wɪð ən ɛfɝt, hi mænədʒ tə ɹɪɡeɪn ɪz smaɪl. ðəɹ sim lɪɾəl pɔɪn ɪn steɪɪŋ, bʌɾ ə mæn kəd meɪk ə ɡɹeɪsfəl ɛɡzɪt.

"You will go, Leilwin," Selucia said, cold as a queen speaking to a chickenthief, "and you will not let me see your face again unless it is covered by a shea dancer's veil." Egeanin scrambled backward on hands and knees and all but tumbled out the door, so fast that Mat was left gaping. With an effort, he managed to regain his smile. There seemed little point in staying, but a man could make a graceful exit.

"wɛl, aɪ səpoʊz - "

"Well, I suppose - "

tuɑn ɹɪəld əɹ fɪŋɡɝz əɡɛn, stɪl nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ən sɪlutʃə kʌɾ ɪm ʃɔɹt. "ðə haɪ leɪɾi ɪz wɪɹi, tɔɪ. juv əɹ pɝmɪʃən tə ɡoʊ."

Tuon wriggled her fingers again, still not looking at him, and Selucia cut him short. "The High Lady is weary, Toy. You have her permission to go."

"lʊk, maɪ neɪm ɪz mæt," hi sɛd. "æn izi neɪm. ə sɪmpəl neɪm. mæt." tuɑn maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ə pɔɹsələn dɑl ɪn tʃɹuθ fəɹ ɔl ðə ɹɪspɑns ʃi meɪd.

"Look, my name is Mat," he said. "An easy name. A simple name. Mat." Tuon might as well have been a porcelain doll in truth for all the response she made.

sɛɾəl sɛt daʊn əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, ðoʊ, ən ɹoʊz wɪð wʌn hæn ɹɛstɪŋ laɪtli ɑn ðə hɪlt ə ðə kɝv dæɡɝ stʌk bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt. "jʌŋ mæn, ɪf jə θɪŋk jəɹ gɑnə laʊnʒ əbaʊt tɪl jə ɡɛt tə si əs ɹɛɾiɪŋ fəɹ bɛd, jəɹ sædli mɪsteɪkən." ʃi smaɪl seɪɪŋ ɪt, bʌt ʃi dɪɾ əv əɹ hæn ɑn əɹ naɪf, ən ʃi wɑz ɛbu dɑɹi ɪnʌf tə stɪk ə mæn ɑn ə wɪm. tuɑn ɹɪmeɪn ən ənmoʊvɪŋ dɑl, ə kwin ɑn əɹ θɹoʊn sʌmhaʊ mɪsteɪkənli dʒɹɛst ɪn ɪl-fɪɾɪŋ kloʊðz. mæt lɛft.

Setalle set down her embroidery, though, and rose with one hand resting lightly on the hilt of the curved dagger stuck behind her belt. "Young man, if you think you're going to lounge about till you get to see us readying for bed, you're sadly mistaken." She smiled saying it, but she did have her hand on her knife, and she was Ebou Dari enough to stick a man on a whim. Tuon remained an unmoving doll, a queen on her throne somehow mistakenly dressed in ill-fitting clothes. Mat left.

ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz linɪŋ ɑn wʌn hæn əɡɛns ðə saɪɾ ə ðə wæɡən, hɝ hɛd hæŋɪŋ. hɝ ʌðɝ hænd wɑz ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə nɛkləs ɝaʊn əɹ θɹoʊt. hɑɹnən muvd, ə lɪɾəl weɪ ɔf ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, dʒʌs tə ʃoʊ hi wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ. ə waɪz mæn, tə kip klɪɹ ʌv ɛdʒiənɪn dʒʌs ðɛn. mæt wɑz tu ɪɹəteɪɾəd fəɹ wɪzdəm. "wʌt wɑz ðəɾ əbaʊt?" hi dɪmændəd. "ju doʊn əv tə ɡoʊ ɑn jəɹ niz tə tuɑn ɛnimɔɹ.

Egeanin was leaning on one hand against the side of the wagon, her head hanging. Her other hand was gripping the necklace around her throat. Harnan moved, a little way off in the darkness, just to show he was still there. A wise man, to keep clear of Egeanin just then. Mat was too irritated for wisdom. "What was that about?" he demanded. "You don't have to go on your knees to Tuon anymore.

ən sɪlutʃə? ʃiz ə blʌɾi leɪɾiz meɪd! aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɛnibəɾi hud dʒʌmp fəɹ ɪz kwin ðə weɪ jə dʒʌmp fəɹ hɝ."

And Selucia? She's a bloody lady's maid! I don't know anybody who'd jump for his queen the way you jumped for her."

ɛdʒiənɪnz hɑɹd feɪs wɑz ʃæɾoʊd, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs wɑz hæɡɝd. "ðə haɪ leɪɾi ɪz . . . hu ʃi ɪz. sɪlutʃə ɪz əɹ sɔɪhɪn. noʊ wʌn ə ðə loʊ blʌd wəd dɛɹ miɾ əɹ sɔɪhɪnz aɪz, ən meɪbi nɑt ðə haɪ blʌd, iðɝ." ðə klæsp bɹoʊk wɪð ə mətælɪk snæp əz ʃi dʒɝk ðə nɛkləs fɹi. "bʌt ðɛn, aɪm nɑɾ ʌv ɛni blʌd, naʊ." ɹɪɹɪŋ bæk, ʃi pʊɾ əɹ hoʊl bɑɾi ɪndə θɹoʊɪŋ ðə nɛkləs əz fɑɹ ɪndə ðə naɪɾ əz ʃi kʊd.

Egeanin's hard face was shadowed, but her voice was haggard. "The High Lady is . . . who she is. Selucia is her so'jhin. No one of the low Blood would dare meet her so'jhin's eyes, and maybe not the High Blood, either." The clasp broke with a metallic snap as she jerked the necklace free. "But then, I'm not of any Blood, now." Rearing back, she put her whole body into throwing the necklace as far into the night as she could.

mæt oʊpən ɪz maʊθ. hi cʊɾə bɑɾ ə dʌzən pɹaɪm hɔɹsəz wɪð wʌɾ i peɪd fəɹ ðət θɪŋ ən hæd kɔɪn lɛft. hi kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ ə wɝd. hi maɪt nɑɾ ɔlweɪz bi waɪz, bʌɾ i wɑz waɪz ɪnʌf tə noʊ wən ə wʊmən ɹɪli maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə stɪk ə naɪf ɪn hɪm. hi nu ənʌðɝ θɪŋ, əz wɛl. ɪf ɛdʒiənɪn bɪheɪv ðɪs weɪ ɝaʊn tuɑn ən sɪlutʃə, ðən i hæd bɛɾɝ meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə sʌldəm wɝ kɛp klɪɹ. ðə laɪɾ oʊnli nu wʌt ðeɪ wəd də ɪf tuɑn stɑɹɾəd wɪɡəlɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ðət lɛft ɪm wɪð ə dʒɑb ʌv wɝk tə du. wɛl, hi heɪɾəd wɝk, bʌt ðoʊz oʊl mɛmɹiz hæɾ ɪz hɛd stʌft fʊl ə bæɾəlz. hi heɪɾəd bæɾəl, tu - ə mæn kəd ɡɛt kɪl dɛd! - bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən wɝk. stʃɹæɾədʒi ən tæktɪks. lɝn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, lɝn jəɹ ɛnəmi, ən ɪf jə kəd nɑt wɪn wʌn weɪ, jə faʊn ənʌðɝ. ðə nɛks naɪɾ i ɹɪtɝn tə ðə pɝpəl wæɡən, əloʊn, ən wʌns oʊlvɝ hæd fɪnɪʃt ɪz lɛsən ɪn stoʊnz fɹəm tuɑn, mæt ɪnveɪiɡəld ɪz weɪ ɪndə ə ɡeɪm. ət fɝst, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ əkɹɔs ðə bɔɹd fɹəm ðə dɑɹk lɪɾəl wʊmən, hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ tə wɪn əɹ luz. səm wɪmən laɪk tə wɪn ɛvɹi taɪm, bʌt ðə mæn hæd tə meɪk əɹ wɝk fəɹ ɪt. səm laɪk ðə mæn tə wɪn, əɹ ət lis mɔɹ ɔfən ðən i lɔst. niðɝ meɪɾ ɛni sɛns tə hɪm - hi laɪk tə wɪn, ən ði iziɝ, ðə bɛɾɝ - bʌt ðət wɑz haʊ ɪt wɑz. waɪl i wɑz dɪðɝɪŋ, tuɑn tʊk mæɾɝz aʊɾ ə hɪz hænz. hæfweɪ θɹu ðə ɡeɪm, hi ɹilaɪzd ʃi hæɾ ɪm ɪn ə tʃɹæp i kəd nɑt ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ʌv. hɝ waɪt stoʊnz wɝ kʌɾɪŋ ɔf ɪz blæk ɛvɹiwɛɹ. ɪt wɑz ə klin ən ɹisaʊndɪŋ wɪn fəɹ hɝ.

Mat opened his mouth. He could have bought a dozen prime horses with what he paid for that thing and had coin left. He closed it again without saying a word. He might not always be wise, but he was wise enough to know when a woman really might try to stick a knife in him. He knew another thing, as well. If Egeanin behaved this way around Tuon and Selucia, then he had better make sure the sul'dam were kept clear. The Light only knew what they would do if Tuon started wiggling her fingers. That left him with a job of work to do. Well, he hated work, but those old memories had his head stuffed full of battles. He hated battle, too - a man could get killed dead! - but it was better than work. Strategy and tactics. Learn the ground, learn your enemy, and if you could not win one way, you found another. The next night he returned to the purple wagon, alone, and once Olver had finished his lesson in stones from Tuon, Mat inveigled his way into a game. At first, sitting on the floor across the board from the dark little woman, he was not sure whether to win or lose. Some women liked to win every time, but the man had to make her work for it. Some liked the man to win, or at least more often than he lost. Neither made any sense to him - he liked to win, and the easier, the better - but that was how it was. While he was dithering, Tuon took matters out of his hands. Halfway through the game, he realized she had him in a trap he could not get out of. Her white stones were cutting off his black everywhere. It was a clean and resounding win for her.

"ju doʊn pleɪ vɛɹi wɛl, tɔɪ," ʃi sɛd mɑkəŋli. dɪspaɪt ðə toʊn, hɝ bɪɡ, lɪkwəɾ aɪz kənsɪɾɝd ɪm kuli, weɪɪŋ ən mɛʒɝɪŋ. ə mæn kəd dʒɹaʊn ɪn aɪz laɪk ðæt. hi smaɪld ən meɪɾ ɪz ɡʊdbaɪz bɪfɔɹ ðəɹ kəd bi ɛni θɔɾ ə kɪkɪŋ ɪm aʊt. stʃɹæɾədʒi. θɪŋk tə ðə fjutʃɝ.

"You don't play very well, Toy," she said mockingly. Despite the tone, her big, liquid eyes considered him coolly, weighing and measuring. A man could drown in eyes like that. He smiled and made his goodbyes before there could be any thought of kicking him out. Strategy. Think to the future.

də ði ʌnɪkspɛktɪd. ðə nɛks naɪt, hi bɹɔɾ ə smɔl ɹɛd peɪpɝ flaʊɝ meɪd baɪ wʌn ə ðə ʃoʊz simstʃɹəsəz. ən pɹizɛntəɾ ɪt tə ə stɑɹɾəld sɪlutʃə. sɛɾəlz aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz, ən ivən tuɑn sim teɪkən əbæk. tæktɪks. pʊt jəɹ əpoʊnən ɔf bæləns. kʌm tə θɪŋk, wɪmən ən bæɾəlz wɝ nɑt ðət dɪfɹənt. boʊθ ɹæpt ə mæn ɪn fɑɡ ən kəɾ ɪm kɪl ɪm wɪθaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ. ɪf i wɑz kɛɹləs. ɛvɹi naɪɾ i vɪzəɾəd ðə pɝpəl wæɡən fəɹ ə ɡeɪm ə stoʊnz ʌndɝ sɛɾəl ən sɪlutʃəz wɑtʃfəl aɪz, ən i kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn ðə kɹɔʃætʃt bɔɹd. tuɑn wɑz vɛɹi ɡʊd, ən ɪt wɑz ɔl tu izi tə faɪn hɪmsɛlf wɑtʃɪŋ ðə weɪ ʃi pleɪst əɹ stoʊnz, wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz bɛn bæk ɪn ə kjʊɹiəsli ɡɹeɪsfəl weɪ. ʃi wɑz juz tə hævɪŋ fɪŋɡɝneɪlz ən ɪntʃ lɔŋ ən teɪkɪŋ kɛɹ nɑt tə bɹeɪk ðɛm. hɝ aɪz wɝ ə deɪnʒɝ, tu.

Do the unexpected. The next night, he brought a small red paper flower made by one of the show's seamstresses. And presented it to a startled Selucia. Setalle's eyebrows rose, and even Tuon seemed taken aback. Tactics. Put your opponent off balance. Come to think, women and battles were not that different. Both wrapped a man in fog and could him kill him without trying. If he was careless. Every night he visited the purple wagon for a game of stones under Setalle and Selucia's watchful eyes, and he concentrated on the crosshatched board. Tuon was very good, and it was all too easy to find himself watching the way she placed her stones, with her fingers bent back in a curiously graceful way. She was used to having fingernails an inch long and taking care not to break them. Her eyes were a danger, too.

jə niɾəd ə klɪɹ hɛɾ ɪn stoʊnz əɹ bæɾəl, ən əɹ ɡeɪz sim tə ɹitʃ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz skʌl. hi bʌkəl daʊn tə ðə ɡeɪm, ðoʊ, ən mænədʒ tə wɪn fɔɹ ə ðə nɛkst sɛvən, wɪð wʌn dʒɹɔ. tuɑn wɑz sæɾəsfaɪd wən ʃi wʌn ən dɪtɝmənd wən ʃi lɔst, wɪð nʌn ə ðə tɛmpɝ tæntʃɹəmz i hæd fɪɹd, noʊ skeɪðɪŋ kɑmɛns əsaɪd fɹəm ɪnsɪstɪŋ ɑn kɔlɪŋ ɪm tɔɪ, nɑt vɛɹi mʌtʃ ə ðəɾ aɪsi ɹiɡəl hoʊtʊɹ, əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ wɝ pleɪɪŋ ɛniweɪ. ʃi pjʊɹli ɛndʒɔɪd ðə ɡeɪm, læfɪŋ ɪɡzʌltənli wən ʃi pʊld ɪm ɪndə ə tʃɹæp, læfɪŋ ɪn dɪlaɪt wən i mænədʒd ə klɛvɝ pleɪsmən tə ɪskeɪp. ʃi simd ə dɪfɹənt wʊmən wʌns ʃi lɔs hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə stoʊnz bɔɹd.

You needed a clear head in stones or battle, and her gaze seemed to reach inside his skull. He buckled down to the game, though, and managed to win four of the next seven, with one draw. Tuon was satisfied when she won and determined when she lost, with none of the temper tantrums he had feared, no scathing comments aside from insisting on calling him Toy, not very much of that icy regal hauteur, as long as they were playing anyway. She purely enjoyed the game, laughing exultantly when she pulled him into a trap, laughing in delight when he managed a clever placement to escape. She seemed a different woman once she lost herself in the stones board.

ə flaʊɝ soʊn fɹəm blu lɪnən fɑloʊd ðə peɪpɝ blɑsəm, ən tu deɪz leɪɾɝ, ə pɪŋk sɪlk blum ðət spɹɛɾ aʊɾ əz waɪɾ əz ə wʊmənz pɑm. boʊθ hændəd tə sɪlutʃə. hɝ blu aɪz ɪnkɹisɪŋli sɛɾ ɪn ə səspɪʃəs fɹaʊn wən ðeɪ ɹɛstəɾ ɑn hɪm, bʌt tuɑn toʊld əɹ ʃi kəd kip ðə flaʊɝz, ən ʃi stɔɹɾ əm əweɪ kɛɹfəli, foʊldəɾ ɪn ə lɪnən klɔθ. hi lɛt θɹi deɪz pæs wɪθaʊɾ ə pɹɛzənt, ðən bɹɔɾ ə lɪɾəl klʌstɝ ə ɹɛd sɪlk ɹoʊzbʊdz, kəmplit wɪð ʃɔɹt stɛmz ən ɡlɪsnɪŋ livz ðət lʊkt əz ɹil əz neɪtʃɝ, oʊnli mɔɹ pɝfəkt. hi hæɾ æsk ðə simstʃɹɪs tə meɪk ɪɾ ɑn ðə deɪ hi bɑt ðət fɝs peɪpɝ flaʊɝ.

A flower sewn from blue linen followed the paper blossom, and two days later, a pink silk bloom that spread out as wide as a woman's palm. Both handed to Selucia. Her blue eyes increasingly set in a suspicious frown when they rested on him, but Tuon told her she could keep the flowers, and she stored them away carefully, folded in a linen cloth. He let three days pass without a present, then brought a little cluster of red silk rosebuds, complete with short stems and glistening leaves that looked as real as nature, only more perfect. He had asked the seamstress to make it on the day he bought that first paper flower.

sɪlutʃə tʊk ə stɛp, ɹitʃɪŋ tə æksɛp ðə ɹoʊzbʊdz wɪð ə kɝl tə hɝ lɪp, bʌɾ i sæt daʊn ən pʊt ðə flaʊɝz bɪsaɪd ðə bɔɹd, ə lɪɾəl təwɔɹd tuɑn. hi sɛd nʌθɪŋ, dʒʌs lɛft ɪt laɪɪŋ ðɛɹ. ʃi nɛvɝ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst əɾ ɪt. dɪpɪŋ ɪndə ðə smɔl lɛðɝ bæɡz ðət hɛl ðə stoʊnz, hi plʌkt wʌn fɹəm itʃ ən ʃʌfəld əm bɪtwin ɪz hænz tɪl ivən i wɑz ənʃʊɹ wɪtʃ wɑz wɛɹ, ðən ɔfɝɾ ɪz kloʊz fɪsts. tuɑn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ə moʊmənt, stʌɾiɪŋ ɪz feɪs wɪð noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən, ðən tæpt ɪz lɛf hænd. hi oʊpən ɪt tə dɪspleɪ ðə ɡlɪsnɪŋ waɪt stoʊn.

Selucia took a step, reaching to accept the rosebuds with a curl to her lip, but he sat down and put the flowers beside the board, a little toward Tuon. He said nothing, just left it lying there. She never so much as glanced at it. Dipping into the small leather bags that held the stones, he plucked one from each and shuffled them between his hands till even he was unsure which was where, then offered his closed fists. Tuon hesitated a moment, studying his face with no expression, then tapped his left hand. He opened it to display the glistening white stone.

"aɪv tʃeɪnʒd maɪ maɪnd, tɔɪ," ʃi mɝmɝd, pleɪsɪŋ ðə waɪt stoʊn kɛɹfəli ɑn ði ɪntɝsɛkʃən ə tu laɪnz nɪɹ ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə bɔɹd. "ju pleɪ vɛɹi wɛl." mæt blɪŋkt. kəd ʃi noʊ wʌɾ i wɑz ʌp tə? sɪlutʃə wɑz stændɪŋ ət tuɑnz bæk, simɪŋli əbzɔɹbd ɪn ði ɔlmoʊst ɛmpti bɔɹd. səteɪl tɝn ə peɪdʒ ɪn əɹ bʊk ən ʃɪftəɾ ə lɪɾəl tə ɡɛɾ ə bɛɾɝ laɪt. ʌv kɔɹs nɑt. ʃi wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt stoʊnz. ɪf ʃi ivən səspɛktəɾ ɪz ɹil ɡeɪm, ʃi wəd tɔs ɪm aʊɾ ɑn ɪz ɪɹ. ɛni wʊmən wʊd. ɪt hæd tə bi ðə stoʊnz.

"I've changed my mind, Toy," she murmured, placing the white stone carefully on the intersection of two lines near the center of the board. "You play very well." Mat blinked. Could she know what he was up to? Selucia was standing at Tuon's back, seemingly absorbed in the almost empty board. Setaile turned a page in her book and shifted a little to get a better light. Of course not. She was talking about stones. If she even suspected his real game, she would toss him out on his ear. Any woman would. It had to be the stones.

ðət wɑz ðə naɪt ðeɪ pleɪd tə ə dʒɹɔ, wɪð itʃ ə ðɛm kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ hæf ðə bɔɹɾ ɪn ɪɹɛɡjəlɝ pulz ən pætʃəz. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ʃi wʌn ə vɪktɝi.

That was the night they played to a draw, with each of them controlling half the board in irregular pools and patches. In truth, she won a victory.

"aɪ hæv kɛp maɪ wɝd, tɔɪ," ʃi dʒɹɔld əz i wɑz ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ ðə stoʊnz ɪn ðə bæɡz. "noʊ ətɛmps tə ɪskeɪp, noʊ ətɛmps ət bɪtʃɹeɪəl. ðɪs ɪz kənfaɪnɪŋ." ʃi dʒɛstʃɝɾ ɝaʊn ət ði ɪntɪɹiɝ ə ðə wæɡən. "aɪ wɪʃ tə teɪk wɔks. æftɝ dɑɹk wɪl du. jə meɪ əkʌmpəni mi." hɝ aɪz tʌtʃt ðə klʌstɝ ə ɹoʊzbʊdz, ðən ɹoʊz tə hɪz feɪs. "tə meɪk ʃʊɹ aɪ doʊn ɹʌn əweɪ." səteɪl mɑɹkt əɹ pleɪs wɪð ə slɪm fɪŋɡɝ ən lʊkt ət hɪm.

"I have kept my word, Toy," she drawled as he was replacing the stones in the bags. "No attempts to escape, no attempts at betrayal. This is confining." She gestured around at the interior of the wagon. "I wish to take walks. After dark will do. You may accompany me." Her eyes touched the cluster of rosebuds, then rose to his face. "To make sure I don't run away." Setaile marked her place with a slim finger and looked at him.

sɪlutʃə stʊd bɪhaɪn tuɑn ən lʊkt ət hɪm. ðə wʊmən hæd kɛpt əɹ wɝd, mæɾ əz ðət simd. wɔks æftɝ dɑɹk, wɪð moʊst ə ðə ʃoʊfoʊk ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðɛɹ bɛdz, wəd də noʊ hɑɹm, nɑt wɪð ɪm ðəɹ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ. soʊ waɪ dɪɾ i fil ðəɾ i wɑz luzɪŋ kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən?

Selucia stood behind Tuon and looked at him. The woman had kept her word, mad as that seemed. Walks after dark, with most of the showfolk already in their beds, would do no harm, not with him there to make sure. So why did he feel that he was losing control of the situation?

tuɑn əɡɹid tə ɡoʊ kloʊkt ən hʊɾɪd, wɪtʃ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə ɹɪlif. ðə blæk hɛɹ wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ bæk ɪn ɑn əɹ ʃeɪv skælp, bʌt soʊ fɑɹ ɪt wɑz lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən lɔŋ fʌz, ən ənlaɪk sɪlutʃə, hu vɛɹi laɪkli slɛpt ɪn əɹ hɛd skɑɹf, tuɑn hæd ʃoʊn noʊ ɪnkləneɪʃən tə kʌvɝ əɹ hɛd. ə tʃaɪld-saɪzd wʊmən wɪð hɛɹ ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ɛni mæn nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ bɔld wʊɾə bɪn ɹɪmɑɹkt ivən ɪn ðə naɪt.

Tuon agreed to go cloaked and hooded, which was something of a relief. The black hair was growing back in on her shaved scalp, but so far it was little more than long fuzz, and unlike Selucia, who very likely slept in her head scarf, Tuon had shown no inclination to cover her head. A child-sized woman with hair shorter than any man not going bald would have been remarked even in the night.

sɛɾəl ən sɪlutʃə ɔlweɪz fɑloʊɾ əɾ ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, ðə leɪɾiz meɪd tə kip ə pɹətɛktɪv aɪ ɑn əɹ mɪstʃɹəs ən sɛɾəl tə kip ən aɪ ɑn ðə meɪd. ət list, hi θɔt ðət wɑz haʊ ɪt wɑz. səmtaɪmz ɪt sim ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm. ðə tu ʌv əm wɝ ɑfli fɹɛnli fəɹ ɡɑɹɾ ən pɹɪznɝ. hi hæɾ oʊvɝhɝd sɛɾəl kɔʃənɪŋ sɪlutʃə ðəɾ i wɑz ə ɹoʊɡ wɪð wɪmən, ə faɪn θɪŋ fəɹ əɹ tə bi seɪɪŋ! ən sɪlutʃə hæd kɑmli ɹɪplaɪd ðəɾ əɹ leɪɾi wəd bɹeɪk ɪz ɑɹmz ɪf i ʃoʊɾ ɛni dɪsɹɪspɛkt, dʒʌst əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑt pɹɪznɝz əɾ ɔl.

Setalle and Selucia always followed at a little distance in the darkness, the lady's maid to keep a protective eye on her mistress and Setalle to keep an eye on the maid. At least, he thought that was how it was. Sometimes it seemed they were both watching him. The two of them were awfully friendly for guard and prisoner. He had overheard Setalle cautioning Selucia that he was a rogue with women, a fine thing for her to be saying! And Selucia had calmly replied that her lady would break his arms if he showed any disrespect, just as if they were not prisoners at all.

hi θɔt tə juz ðiz wɔks tə lɝn ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ əbaʊt tuɑn - ʃi dɪd nɑt tɔk mʌtʃ oʊvɝ ə stoʊnz bɔɹd - bʌt ʃi hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ wʌɾ i æskt əɹ dɪflɛktɪŋ ðə sʌbʒɪkt, juʒəwəli tə hɪm.

He thought to use these walks to learn a little more about Tuon - she did not talk much over a stones board - but she had a way of ignoring what he asked or deflecting the subject, usually to him.

"ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪz ɔl fɔɹəsts ən fɑɹmz," hi sɛɾ əz ðeɪ stʃɹoʊld əlɔŋ ðə meɪn stʃɹiɾ ə ðə ʃoʊ. klaʊdz hɪd ðə mun, ən ðə kʌlɝfəl wæɡənz wɝ ɪndɪstɪŋɡwɪʃəbəl dɑɹk ʃeɪps, ðə pɝfɔɹmɝz' plætfɔɹmz laɪnɪŋ ðə stʃɹit mɪɹli ʃædoʊz. "ɛvɹibɑɾi ɡɹoʊz təbæk ən ɹeɪzəz ʃip. maɪ fɑðɝ bɹidz kaʊz, tu, ən tʃɹeɪdz hɔɹsəz, bʌt moʊsli, ɪts təbæk ən ʃip fɹəm wʌn ɛn tə ði ʌðɝ."

"The Two Rivers is all forests and farms," he said as they strolled along the main street of the show. Clouds hid the moon, and the colorful wagons were indistinguishable dark shapes, the performers' platforms lining the street merely shadows. "Everybody grows tabac and raises sheep. My father breeds cows, too, and trades horses, but mostly, it's tabac and sheep from one end to the other."

"jɔɹ fɑðɝ tʃɹeɪdz hɔɹsəz," tuɑn mɝmɝd. "ænd wʌt dʒju du, tɔɪ?" hi ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ət ðə tu wɪmən ɡoʊstɪŋ əlɔŋ tɛn peɪsɪz bæk. sɛɾəl maɪt nɑt bi kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ, ɪf i kɛpt ɪz vɔɪs daʊn, bʌɾ i dɪsaɪɾɪd tə bi ɑnəst. bɪsaɪdz, ðə ʃoʊ wɑz dɛd kwaɪəɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. ʃi maɪt hɪɹ, ən ʃi nu wʌɾ i hæd bɪn duɪŋ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. "ɪm ə ɡæmblɝ," hi sɛd. "maɪ fɑðɝ kɔl hɪmsɛlf ə ɡæmblɝ," tuɑn sɛd sɔfli. "hi daɪɾ ʌv ə bæd weɪdʒɝ." ən haʊ wɝ jə səpoʊz tə faɪn aʊt wʌt ðət mɛnt? ənʌðɝ naɪt, wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋ ə ɹoʊ ʌv ænəməl keɪdʒɪz, itʃ wʌn bɪl tə fɪl ən ɪntaɪɝ wæɡən, hi sɛd, "wʌt dʒju də fəɹ fʌn, tuɑn? dʒʌs kəz jə ɛndʒɔɪ ɪt. əsaɪd fɹəm pleɪɪŋ stoʊnz." hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil sɪlutʃə bɹɪsəlɪŋ əɾ ɪz jus ə hɝ neɪm fɹəm θɝɾi fiɾ əweɪ, bʌt tuɑn dɪd nɑt sim tə maɪnd. hi θɔt ʃi dɪd nɑt.

"Your father trades horses," Tuon murmured. "And what do you do, Toy?" He glanced over his shoulder at the two women ghosting along ten paces back. Setalle might not be close enough to hear, if he kept his voice down, but he decided to be honest. Besides, the show was dead quiet in the darkness. She might hear, and she knew what he had been doing in Ebou Dar. "I'm a gambler," he said. "My father called himself a gambler," Tuon said softly. "He died of a bad wager." And how were you supposed to find out what that meant? Another night, walking along a row of animal cages, each one built to fill an entire wagon, he said, "What do you do for fun, Tuon? Just because you enjoy it. Aside from playing stones." He could almost feel Selucia bristling at his use of her name from thirty feet away, but Tuon did not seem to mind. He thought she did not.

"aɪ tʃɹeɪn hɔɹsəz ən deɪmeɪn," ʃi sɛd, piɹɪŋ ɪndə ə keɪdʒ ðət hɛld ə slipɪŋ laɪən. ði ænəməl wɑz oʊnli ə lɑɹdʒ ʃædoʊ laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə stʃɹɔ bɪhaɪn ðə θɪk bɑɹz. "dʌz i ɹɪli hæv ə blæk meɪn?

"I train horses and damane," she said, peering into a cage that held a sleeping lion. The animal was only a large shadow lying on the straw behind the thick bars. "Does he really have a black mane?

ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ laɪənz wɪð blæk meɪnz ɪn ɔl ə sintʃæn." ʃi tʃɹeɪn deɪmeɪn? fəɹ fʌn? laɪt! "hɔɹsəz?

There are no lions with black manes in all of Seanchan." She trained damane? For fun? Light! "Horses?

wʌt kaɪndə hɔɹsəz?" ɪt maɪt bi wɔɹhɔɹsɪz, ɪf ʃi tʃɹeɪn blʌɾi deɪmeɪn. fəɹ fʌn.

What kind of horses?" It might be warhorses, if she trained bloody damane. For fun.

"mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən tɛlz mi jəɹ ə skaʊnʒɹəl, tɔɪ." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz kul, nɑt koʊld. kəmpoʊzd. ʃi tɝn təwɔɹd hɪm, feɪs hɪɾən ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz ə hɝ kaʊl. "haʊ mɛni wɪmən əv jə kɪst?" ðə laɪən woʊk ʌp ən kɔft, ə dip saʊnd ɡɛɹəntid tə ɹeɪz ðə hɛɹ ɑn ɛniwʌnz hɛd. tuɑn dɪd nɑɾ ivən flɪntʃ. "lʊks laɪk ɹeɪnz kʌmɪŋ əɡɛn," hi sɛd wikli. "sɪlutʃə wɪl əv maɪ haɪɾ ɪf aɪ ɡɛt jə bæk soʊkt." hi hɝɾ əɹ læf sɔfli. wʌt hæɾ i sɛd ðət wɑz fʌni?

"Mistress Anan tells me you're a scoundrel, Toy." Her voice was cool, not cold. Composed. She turned toward him, face hidden in the shadows of her cowl. "How many women have you kissed?" The lion woke up and coughed, a deep sound guaranteed to raise the hair on anyone's head. Tuon did not even flinch. "Looks like rain's coming again," he said weakly. "Selucia will have my hide if I get you back soaked." He heard her laugh softly. What had he said that was funny?

ðəɹ wɑz ə pɹaɪs tə peɪ, ʌv kɔɹs. meɪbi θɪŋz wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ ɪz weɪ ən meɪbi nɑt, bʌt wən jə θɔt ðeɪ wɝ, ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ə pɹaɪs.

There was a price to pay, of course. Maybe things were going his way and maybe not, but when you thought they were, there was always a price.

"bʌntʃ ə tʃæɾɝɪŋ mæɡpaɪz," hi kəmpleɪn tə ɛdʒiənɪn. ði æftɝnun sæɾ ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən, ə ɹɛd-ɡoʊl bɔl hæf hɪɾən baɪ klaʊdz, kæstɪŋ ðə ʃoʊ ɪn lɔŋ ʃædoʊz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹeɪn, fəɹ wʌns, ən ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə koʊl ðeɪ wɝ sɪɾɪŋ hʌntʃt bɪniθ ðə ɡɹin wæɡən ðeɪ ʃɛɹd, pleɪɪŋ stoʊnz ɪn pleɪn saɪɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn u wɔk baɪ. ə ɡʊd mɛni dɪd, mɛn hɝiɪŋ əbaʊt səm læst-mɪnət tʃɔɹ, tʃɪlʒɹən snætʃɪŋ ðə faɪnəl tʃæns tə ɹoʊl hups θɹu ðə mʌd pʌɾəlz ən tɔs bɔlz bɪfɔɹ naɪt fɛl. wɪmən hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ skɝts ʌp ɡlænst ət ðə wæɡən ɪn pæsɪŋ, ən ivən wən ðeɪ wɝ hʊɾɪd, mæt nu wʌt ðɛɹ ɪkspɹɛʃənz wɝ. hɑɹdli ə wʊmən ɪn ðə ʃoʊ wəd spik tə mæt kɔθən.

"Bunch of chattering magpies," he complained to Egeanin. The afternoon sat on the horizon, a red-gold ball half hidden by clouds, casting the show in long shadows. There was no rain, for once, and in spite of the cold they were sitting hunched beneath the green wagon they shared, playing stones in plain sight of anyone who walked by. A good many did, men hurrying about some last-minute chore, children snatching the final chance to roll hoops through the mud puddles and toss balls before night fell. Women holding their skirts up glanced at the wagon in passing, and even when they were hooded, Mat knew what their expressions were. Hardly a woman in the show would speak to Mat Cauthon.

ɪɹɪɾəbli, hi ɹæɾəld ðə blæk stoʊnz i hɛld ɡæðɝɾ ɪn ɪz lɛf hænd. "ðeɪl ɡɛt ðɛɹ ɡoʊld wən wi ɹitʃ luɡɹd. ðæts ɔl ðeɪ ɔt tə kɛɹ əbaʊt. ðeɪ ʃʊdn bi poʊkɪŋ ðɛɹ noʊzɪz ɪndə maɪ bɪznəs."

Irritably, he rattled the black stones he held gathered in his left hand. "They'll get their gold when we reach Lugard. That's all they ought to care about. They shouldn't be poking their noses into my business."

"ju kən hɑɹdli bleɪm ðɛm," ɛdʒiənɪn dʒɹɔld, stʌɾiɪŋ ðə bɔɹd. "ju ən aɪ ɑɹ səpoʊz tə bi fliɪŋ lʌvɝz, bʌt jə spɛn mɔɹ taɪm wɪð . . . hɝ . . . ðən wɪð mi." ʃi stɪl hæd tʃɹʌbəl nɑt kɔlɪŋ tuɑn haɪ leɪɾi. "ju bɪheɪv laɪk ə mæn kɔɹɾɪŋ." ʃi ɹitʃt tə pleɪs əɹ stoʊn, ðən stɑpt wɪð əɹ hæn əbʌv ðə bɔɹd. "ju kæn θɪŋk ʃɪl kəmplit ðə sɛɹəmoʊni, kən ju? jə kæn bi ðət bɪɡ ə ful."

"You can hardly blame them," Egeanin drawled, studying the board. "You and I are supposed to be fleeing lovers, but you spend more time with . . . her . . . than with me." She still had trouble not calling Tuon High Lady. "You behave like a man courting." She reached to place her stone, then stopped with her hand above the board. "You can't think she'll complete the ceremony, can you? You can't be that big a fool."

"wʌt sɛɹəmoʊni? wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?" "ju neɪmd əɹ jəɹ waɪf θɹi taɪmz ðət naɪɾ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ," ʃi sɛd sloʊli. "ju ɹɪli doʊnt noʊ? ə wʊmən sɛz θɹi taɪmz ðəɾ ə mæn ɪz əɹ hʌzbənd, ən i sɛz θɹi taɪmz ʃiz ɪz waɪf, ən ðəɹ mɛɹid. ðəɹ ɑɹ blɛsɪŋz ɪnvɑlvd, juʒəwəli, bʌɾ ɪts seɪɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv wɪtnəsəz ðət meɪks ɪɾ ə mɛɹɪdʒ. jə ɹɪli dɪdnt noʊ?" mæt læft, ən ʃɹʌɡd ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, filɪŋ ðə naɪf hæŋɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz nɛk. ə ɡʊd naɪf ɡeɪv ə mæn ə filɪŋ ə kʌmfɝt. bʌɾ ɪz læf wɑz hɔɹs. "bʌt ʃi dɪdn seɪ ɛniθɪŋ." hi hæd blʌɾi wɛl bɪn stʌfɪŋ ə ɡæɡ ɪn əɹ maʊθ ət ðə taɪm! "soʊ wʌtɛvɝ aɪ sɛd, ɪt dʌzn min ɛniθɪŋ." bʌɾ i nu wʌɾ ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə seɪ. ʃʊɹ əz wɔɾɝ wɑz wɛt, hi nu. hi hæd bɪn toʊld u hi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə mɛɹi.

"What ceremony? What are you talking about?" "You named her your wife three times that night in Ebou Dar," she said slowly. "You really don't know? A woman says three times that a man is her husband, and he says three times she's his wife, and they're married. There are blessings involved, usually, but it's saying it in front of witnesses that makes it a marriage. You really didn't know?" Mat laughed, and shrugged his shoulders, feeling the knife hanging behind his neck. A good knife gave a man a feeling of comfort. But his laugh was hoarse. "But she didn't say anything." He had bloody well been stuffing a gag in her mouth at the time! "So whatever I said, it doesn't mean anything." But he knew what Egeanin was going to say. Sure as water was wet, he knew. He had been told who he was going to marry.

"wɪð ðə blʌd, ɪts ə lɪɾəl dɪfɹənt. səmtaɪmz ə noʊbəl fɹəm wʌn ɛn ə ði ɛmpaɪɝ mɛɹiz ə noʊbəl fɹəm ði ʌðɝ. ən ɝeɪnʒd mɛɹɪdʒ. ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli nɛvɝ əz ɛni ʌðɝ kaɪnd. ðeɪ meɪ nɑt wɑnə weɪɾ əntɪl ðeɪ kən bi təɡɛðɝ, soʊ wʌn æknɑlɪdʒɪz ðə mɛɹɪdʒ wɛɹ ʃi ɪz, ən ði ʌðɝ wɛɹ i ɪz. əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ boʊθ spik ɪn fɹʌn ʌv wɪtnəsəz, ɪnsaɪɾ ə jɪɹ ən ə deɪ, ðə mɛɹɪdʒ ɪz liɡəl. jə tʃɹuli dɪdnt noʊ?"

"With the Blood, it's a little different. Sometimes a noble from one end of the Empire marries a noble from the other. An arranged marriage. The Imperial family never has any other kind. They may not want to wait until they can be together, so one acknowledges the marriage where she is, and the other where he is. As long as they both speak in front of witnesses, inside a year and a day, the marriage is legal. You truly didn't know?"

ʃʊɹ wɑz ʃʊɹ, bʌt ðə stoʊnz stɪl spɪl fɹəm ɪz hæn ɑntu ðə bɔɹd, baʊnsɪŋ ɛvɹiwɛɹ.

Sure was sure, but the stones still spilled from his hand onto the board, bouncing everywhere.

ðə blʌɾi ɡɝl nu. meɪbi ʃi θɔt ðɪs hoʊl θɪŋ wɑz ən ædvɛntʃɝ, əɹ ə ɡeɪm. meɪbi ʃi θɔt biɪŋ kɪdnæpt wɑz əz mʌtʃ fʌn əz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ hɔɹsəz əɹ blʌɾi deɪmeɪnbækslæʃ bʌɾ i nu hi wɑz ə tʃɹaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ əɹ tə sɛt ðə hʊk.

The bloody girl knew. Maybe she thought this whole thing was an adventure, or a game. Maybe she thought being kidnapped was as much fun as training horses or bloody damane\ But he knew he was a trout waiting for her to set the hook.

hi steɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə pɝpəl wæɡən fəɹ tu deɪz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ jus ɹʌnɪŋ - hi ɔlɹɛɾi hæd ðə blʌɾi hʊk ɪn ɪz maʊθ, ən i hæd pʊɾ ɪt ðəɹ hɪmsɛlf - bʌɾ i dɪd nɑɾ əv tə swɑloʊ ðə fleɪmɪŋ θɪŋ. oʊnli, hi nu ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə mæɾɝ ʌv wən ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə dʒɝk ðə laɪn taɪt.

He stayed away from the purple wagon for two days. There was no use running - he already had the bloody hook in his mouth, and he had put it there himself - but he did not have to swallow the flaming thing. Only, he knew it was just a matter of when she decided to jerk the line tight.

əz sloʊli əz ðə ʃoʊ muvd, ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə fɛɹi əkɹɔs ði ɪldɑɹ, ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ælkɪnʒɹ ɑn ðə wɛs bæŋk tə kɔɹəmən ɑn ði ist, taɪɾi lɪɾəl wɔl taʊnz ə taɪl-ɹuf stoʊn bɪldɪŋz wɪð hæf ə dʌzən stoʊn dɑks itʃ. ðə sʌn wɑz klaɪmɪŋ haɪ, hɑɹdli ə klaʊd kɹɔs ðə skaɪ, ən ðoʊz waɪɾ əz nuwɑʃt wʊl. noʊ ɹeɪn tədeɪ, meɪbi. ɪt wɑz ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt kɹɔsɪŋ, wɪð tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ʃɪps fɹəm ʌpɹɪvɝ taɪd tə səm ə ðə dɑks ən bɪɡ bɑɹdʒ-laɪk fɛɹiz kɹɔlɪŋ fɹəm wʌn taʊn tə ði ʌðɝ ɑn lɔŋ swips. ðə sintʃæn əpɛɹənli θɔt soʊ, tu. ðeɪ hæd mɪlətɛɹi kæmps aʊtsaɪd boʊθ taʊnz, ən fɹəm ðə stoʊn wɔlz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ɹaɪz ɝaʊn ðə kæmps ən ðə stoʊn stʃɹʌktʃɝz ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp ɪnsaɪd, ðeɪ hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə livɪŋ sun.

As slowly as the show moved, eventually they reached the ferry across the Eldar, running from Alkindar on the west bank to Coramen on the east, tidy little walled towns of tile-roofed stone buildings with half a dozen stone docks each. The sun was climbing high, hardly a cloud crossed the sky, and those white as newwashed wool. No rain today, maybe. It was an important crossing, with trading ships from upriver tied to some of the docks and big barge-like ferries crawling from one town to the other on long sweeps. The Seanchan apparently thought so, too. They had military camps outside both towns, and from the stone walls beginning to rise around the camps and the stone structures going up inside, they had no intention of leaving soon.

mæt kɹɔst oʊvɝ wɪð ðə fɝst wæɡənz, ɹaɪɾɪŋ pɪps. ðə bɹaʊn ɡɛldɪŋ lʊkt ɔɹɾənɛɹi ɪnʌf tə ən ʌndɪsɝnɪŋ aɪ; ɪt wəd nɑt sim aʊɾ ə pleɪs fəɹ ɪm tə bi ɹɪɾən baɪ ə fɛloʊ ɪn ə ɹʌf wʊlən koʊt wɪð ə wʊlən kæp pʊl daʊn oʊvɝ ɪz ɪɹz əɡɛns ðə koʊld. hi wɑz nɑɾ æktʃəli  kənsɪɾɝɪŋ meɪkɪŋ ə ɹʌn fəɹ ðə hɪli wʊɾɪd ɹɪdʒ kʌntʃɹi bɪhaɪn kɔɹəmən. θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt, bʌt nɑt ɹɪli kənsɪɾɝɪŋ. ʃi gɑnə tə sɛt ðə hʊk wɛðɝ i ɹæn əɹ nɑt. soʊ hi sæt pɪps ət ði ɛn ʌv wʌn ə ðə stoʊn fɛɹi lændɪŋz, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə ʃoʊ kɹɔs oʊvɝ ən tʃɹʌndəl əweɪ θɹu ðə taʊn. ðəɹ wɝ sintʃæn ɑn ðə lændɪŋz, ə skwɑɾ ə bifi mɛn ɪn sɛɡmɛntɪɾ ɑɹmɝ peɪntəd blu ən bɝnt ɡoʊld ʌndɝ ə lin jʌŋ ɔfəsɝ wɪð wʌn θɪn blu plum ɑn ɪz ɑd-lʊkɪŋ hɛlmət. ðeɪ sim tə bi ðəɹ dʒʌs tə kip ɔɹɾɝ, bʌt ði ɔfəsɝ tʃɛk lukəz hɔɹs wɔɹənt, ən lukə ɪnkwaɪɝd wɛðɝ ðə noʊbəl lɔɹd maɪt noʊ ʌv ɡɹaʊn aʊtsaɪd ðə taʊn suɾəbəl fəɹ ɪz ʃoʊ tə pɝfɔɹm. mæt kəɾ əv wɛpt. hi kəd si soʊlʒɝz wɛɹɪŋ stʃɹaɪpt ɑɹmɝ ɪn ðə stʃɹit bɪhaɪn hɪm, wɑndɝɪŋ ɪn ən aʊɾ ə ʃɑps ən tævɝnz. ə ɹeɪkən swup daʊn aʊɾ ə ðə skaɪ ɑn lɔŋ, ɹɪbd wɪŋz, əlaɪɾɪŋ aʊtsaɪd wʌn ə ðə kæmps əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ. θɹi əɹ fɔɹ ə ðə sneɪk-nɛkt kɹitʃɝz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðəɹ hæd tə bi hʌnʒɹədz ə soʊlʒɝz ɪn ðoʊz kæmps. meɪbi ə θaʊzənd. ən lukə gɑnə tə pʊɾ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊ. ðən wʌn ə ðə fɛɹiz hɪt ðə ɹoʊp-pæɾəd bʌmpɝz ət ði ɛn ə ðə lændɪŋ, ən ðə ɹæmp keɪm daʊn tə lɛt ðə wɪndoʊləs pɝpəl wæɡən ɹʌmbəl ɔf ɑntu ðə stoʊnz. sɛɾəl wɑz dʒɹaɪvɪŋ. sɪlutʃə sæɾ ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ə hɝ, piɹɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ðə hʊɾ ʌv ə feɪɾəd ɹɛd kloʊk. ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, swɑðd ɪn ə dɑɹk kloʊk soʊ nɑɾ ən ɪntʃ ə hɝ ʃoʊd, wɑz tuɑn.

Mat crossed over with the first wagons, riding Pips. The brown gelding looked ordinary enough to an undiscerning eye; it would not seem out of place for him to be ridden by a fellow in a rough woolen coat with a woolen cap pulled down over his ears against the cold. He was not actually considering making a run for the hilly wooded ridge country behind Coramen. Thinking about it, but not really considering. She was going to set the hook whether he ran or not. So he sat Pips at the end of one of the stone ferry landings, watching the show cross over and trundle away through the town. There were Seanchan on the landings, a squad of beefy men in segmented armor painted blue and burnt gold under a lean young officer with one thin blue plume on his odd-looking helmet. They seemed to be there just to keep order, but the officer checked Luca's horse warrant, and Luca inquired whether the noble lord might know of ground outside the town suitable for his show to perform. Mat could have wept. He could see soldiers wearing striped armor in the street behind him, wandering in and out of shops and taverns. A raken swooped down out of the sky on long, ribbed wings, alighting outside one of the camps across the river. Three or four of the snake-necked creatures were already on the ground. There had to be hundreds of soldiers in those camps. Maybe a thousand. And Luca was going to put on his show. Then one of the ferries hit the rope-padded bumpers at the end of the landing, and the ramp came down to let the windowless purple wagon rumble off onto the stones. Setalle was driving. Selucia sat on one side of her, peering out from the hood of a faded red cloak. On the other side, swathed in a dark cloak so not an inch of her showed, was Tuon.

mæt θɔɾ ɪz aɪz wɝ gɑnə fɔl aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd. ɪf ɪz hɑɹt dɪd nɑt paʊn ɪts weɪ aʊɾ ə hɪz tʃɛs fɝst. ðə daɪs hæd stɑɹɾəd ʌp ɪn ɪz hɛd, ðət ɹætlɪŋ fil ə daɪs ɹoʊlɪŋ əkɹɔs ə teɪbəl. ðeɪ wɝ gɑnə kʌm ʌp ðə dɑɹk wʌnz aɪz, ðɪs taɪm; hi dʒʌs nu ɪt.

Mat thought his eyes were going to fall out of his head. If his heart did not pound its way out of his chest first. The dice had started up in his head, that rattling feel of dice rolling across a table. They were going to come up the Dark One's eyes, this time; he just knew it.

ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə də ɪksɛp fɔl ɪn bɪsaɪd ðə pɝpəl wæɡən, ðoʊ, ɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ əz ðoʊ laɪf wɝ wʌndɝfəl, ɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə waɪd meɪn stʃɹit θɹu kɹɪɝz fəɹ ʃɑps ən hɔkɝz sɛlɪŋ θɪŋz fɹəm tʃɹeɪz. ən sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɪn fɔɹmeɪʃən naʊ, ən ðeɪ aɪd ðə bɹaɪtli peɪntəd wæɡənz wɪð ɪntʃɹəst. ɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ ən weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ tuɑn tə ʃaʊt. ʃi hæd ɡɪvən əɹ wɝd, bʌɾ ə pɹɪznɝ wəd seɪ ɛniθɪŋ tə ɡɛt ðə ʃækəlz lusənd. ɔl ʃi hæd tə də wɑz ɹeɪz əɹ vɔɪs, ən sʌmən ə θaʊzən sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz fəɹ ɹɛskju. ðə daɪs baʊnst ən spʌn ɪn mæts hɛd.

There was nothing to do except fall in beside the purple wagon, though, riding along as though life were wonderful, riding along the wide main street through criers for shops and hawkers selling things from trays. And Seanchan soldiers. They were not marching in formation now, and they eyed the brightly painted wagons with interest. Riding along and waiting for Tuon to shout. She had given her word, but a prisoner would say anything to get the shackles loosened. All she had to do was raise her voice, and summon a thousand Seanchan soldiers for rescue. The dice bounced and spun in Mat's head.

ɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz aɪz.

Riding along, waiting for the Dark One's eyes.

tuɑn nɛvɝ spoʊk ə wɝd. ʃi pikt kjʊɹiəsli pæs ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ dip kaʊl, kjʊɹiəsli ən kɔʃəsli, bʌt ʃi kɛpt əɹ feɪs hɪɾən, ən ivən əɹ hænz, ɔl ɹæpt ɪn ðət dɑɹk kloʊk ən ivən hʌɾəlɪŋ əɡɛnst sɛɾəl laɪk ə tʃaɪl sikɪŋ ðə pɹətɛkʃən ə hɝ mʌðɝ ɪn ə stʃɹeɪnʒ kɹaʊd. nɛvɝ ə wɝɾ əntɪl ðeɪ hæd pæs ðə ɡeɪts ə kɔɹəmən ən wɝ ɹʌmbəlɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə beɪs ə ðə ɹɪdʒ ðət ɹoʊz bɪhaɪn ðə taʊn, wɛɹ lukə wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɡæðɝɪŋ ðə ʃoʊz wæɡənz. ðət wɑz wən mæt ɹɪli nu ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɪskeɪp fəɹ hɪm. ʃi wɑz gɑnə sɛt ðə hʊk ɔl ɹaɪt. ʃi wɑz dʒʌs baɪɾɪŋ əɹ blʌɾi taɪm.

Tuon never spoke a word. She peeked curiously past the edge of her deep cowl, curiously and cautiously, but she kept her face hidden, and even her hands, all wrapped in that dark cloak and even huddling against Setalle like a child seeking the protection of her mother in a strange crowd. Never a word until they had passed the gates of Coramen and were rumbling toward the base of the ridge that rose behind the town, where Luca was already gathering the show's wagons. That was when Mat really knew there was no escape for him. She was going to set the hook all right. She was just biding her bloody time.

hi meɪd ʃʊɹ ɔl ðə sintʃæn steɪɾ ɪn ðɛɹ wæɡənz ðət naɪt, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, tu. noʊbɑdi hæd sin ɛni sʌldəm əɹ deɪmeɪn ðət mæt nu, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɑɹɡju fəɹ wʌns.

He made sure all the Seanchan stayed in their wagons that night, and the Aes Sedai, too. Nobody had seen any sul'dam or damane that Mat knew, but the Aes Sedai did not argue for once.

tuɑn dɪd nɑɾ ɑɹɡju, iðɝ. ʃi meɪɾ ə dɪmæn ðət sɛn sɛɾəlz aɪbɹaʊz ɔlmoʊs tə hɝ hɛɹlaɪn. ɪt wɑz fɹeɪzd əz ə ɹɪkwɛst, ɪn ə weɪ, ə ɹimaɪndɝ ʌv ə pɹɑməs i hæd meɪd, bʌɾ i nu ə dɪmænd wən ə wʊmən meɪd wʌn. wɛl, ə mæn hæd tə tʃɹʌs ðə wʊmən i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə mɛɹi. hi toʊld əɹ i hæd tə θɪŋk ɑn ɪt, dʒʌst soʊ ʃi wəd nɑt stɑɹɾ ɪmædʒənɪŋ ʃi kəɾ əv ɛniθɪŋ ʃi wɑntəɾ aʊɾ ə hɪm. hi θɔɾ ɑn ɪɾ ɔl ðə deɪ ðət lukə pʊɾ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊ, θɪŋkɪŋ ən swɛɾɪŋ waɪl əz mɛni sintʃæn əz nɑt keɪm tə ɡeɪp ət ðə pɝfɔɹmɝz. hi θɔɾ ɑn ɪt waɪl ðə wæɡənz waʊn istwɝd θɹu ðə hɪlz, muvɪŋ sloʊɝ ðən ɛvɝ, bʌɾ i nu wʌɾ ænsɝ i hæd tə ɡɪv.

Tuon did not argue, either. She made a demand that sent Setalle's eyebrows almost to her hairline. It was phrased as a request, in a way, a reminder of a promise he had made, but he knew a demand when a woman made one. Well, a man had to trust the woman he was going to marry. He told her he had to think on it, just so she would not start imagining she could have anything she wanted out of him. He thought on it all the day that Luca put on his show, thinking and sweating while as many Seanchan as not came to gape at the performers. He thought on it while the wagons wound eastward through the hills, moving slower than ever, but he knew what answer he had to give.

ɑn ðə θɝd deɪ æftɝ livɪŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ, ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə sɔl taʊn ə dʒʊɹədɔɹ, ən i toʊl tuɑn ðəɾ i wʊd. ʃi smaɪld ət hɪm, ən ðə daɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd stɑp dɛd. hi wəɾ ɔlweɪz ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt. ʃi smaɪld, ən ðən ðə daɪs stɑpt. ə mæn kəd wip!

On the third day after leaving the river, they reached the salt town of Jurador, and he told Tuon that he would. She smiled at him, and the dice in his head stopped dead. He would always remember that. She smiled, and then the dice stopped. A man could weep!


tʃæptɝ twɛntinaɪn


CHAPTER 29

sʌmθɪŋ flɪkɝz


Something Flickers

ðɪs də bi mædnəs," doʊmən ɹʌmbəl fɹəm wɛɹ i stʊd wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz foʊldəɾ əz ɪf blɑkɪŋ ðə weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə wæɡən. meɪbi hi wɑz. hɪz dʒɔ wɑz θɹʌs fɔɹwɝd bɛlɪdʒɝənli, stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ə bɪɹd ðət wɑz tʃɹɪmd ʃɔɹt bʌt stɪl lɔŋɡɝ ðən ðə hɛɹ ɑn ɪz hɛd, ən i wɑz wɝkɪŋ ɪz hænz laɪk ə mæn θɪŋkɪŋ ə meɪkɪŋ fɪsts, əɹ ɡɹæplɪŋ wɪð sʌmθɪŋ. ə waɪd mæn, doʊmən, ən nɑɾ əz fæɾ əz i lʊkt ɑn fɝst ɡlæns. mæt wɑntəd tə əvɔɪd fɪsts əɹ ɡɹæplɪŋ, ɪf i kʊd. hi fɪnɪʃt taɪɪŋ ðə blæk sɪlk skɑɹf ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk, haɪɾɪŋ ɪz skɑɹ, ən tʌk ðə lɔŋ ɛnz ɪndə hɪz koʊt. ðə tʃæns ðət ðəɹ wɑz ɛniwʌn ɪn dʒʊɹədɔɹ u nu əbaʊɾ ə mæn ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ wɛɹɪŋ ə blæk skɑɹf. . , . wɛl, ði ɑdz simd ɡʊɾ ivən dɪskaʊntɪŋ ɪz lʌk. ʌv kɔɹs, ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ɪz biɪŋ tɑvɝən tə bi fæktɝɾ ɪn, bʌɾ ɪf ðət wɑz gɑnə bɹɪŋ ɪm feɪs-tə-feɪs wɪð sjuɹɔθ əɹ ə fɪsfəl ə sɝvəns fɹəm ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, hi kəd steɪ ɪn bɛd wɪð ə blæŋkət ɹæpt ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd, ən ɪt stɪl wəd hæpən.

This do be madness," Domon rumbled from where he stood with his arms folded as if blocking the way out of the wagon. Maybe he was. His jaw was thrust forward belligerently, sticking out a beard that was trimmed short but still longer than the hair on his head, and he was working his hands like a man thinking of making fists, or grappling with something. A wide man, Domon, and not as fat as he looked on first glance. Mat wanted to avoid fists or grappling, if he could. He finished tying the black silk scarf around his neck, hiding his scar, and tucked the long ends into his coat. The chance that there was anyone in Jurador who knew about a man in Ebou Dar wearing a black scarf. . , . Well, the odds seemed good even discounting his luck. Of course, there was always his being ta'veren to be factored in, but if that was going to bring him face-to-face with Suroth or a fistful of servants from the Tarasin Palace, he could stay in bed with a blanket wrapped around his head, and it still would happen.

səmtaɪmz, jə dʒʌs hæd tə tʃɹʌs tə lʌk. ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɑz, wən i woʊk ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ðə daɪs hæɾ əɡɛn bɪn tʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd. ðeɪ wɝ baʊnsɪŋ ɔf ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪz skʌl stɪl. "aɪ pɹɑməst," hi sɛd. ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə bi bæk ɪn disən kloʊðz.

Sometimes, you just had to trust to luck. The trouble was, when he woke this morning, the dice had again been tumbling in his head. They were bouncing off the inside of his skull still. "I promised," he said. It was good to be back in decent clothes.

ðə koʊt wɑz ə faɪn ɡɹin wʊl, wɛl kʌɾ ən hæŋɪŋ ɔlmoʊs tə hɪz niz ən ðə tɝnd-daʊn tɑps ə hɪz buts. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi  - meɪbi ɪt kəd də wɪð ə lɪɾəl - bʌɾ i hæɾ ə tʌtʃ ə leɪs əɾ ɪz kʌfs. ən ə ɡʊd sɪlk ʃɝt. hi wɪʃt i hæɾ ə mɪɹɝ. ə mæn niɾəd tə lʊk ɪz bɛst ɑn ə deɪ laɪk ðɪs. pɪkɪŋ ʌp ɪz kloʊk fɹəm ðə bɛd, hi swʌŋ ɪɾ əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. nɑɾ ə ɡɔɾi θɪŋ laɪk lukəz. dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ, nɪɹli əz dɑɹk əz naɪt. oʊnli ðə laɪnɪŋ wɑz ɹɛd. hɪz kloʊk pɪn wɑz sɪmpəl sɪlvɝ nɑts noʊ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ɪz θʌmz.

The coat was a fine green wool, well cut and hanging almost to his knees and the turned-down tops of his boots. There was no embroidery  - maybe it could do with a little - but he had a touch of lace at his cuffs. And a good silk shirt. He wished he had a mirror. A man needed to look his best on a day like this. Picking up his cloak from the bed, he swung it across his shoulders. Not a gaudy thing like Luca's. Dark gray, nearly as dark as night. Only the lining was red. His cloak pin was simple silver knots no larger than his thumbs.

"ʃi ɡeɪv əɹ wɝd, beɪl," ɛdʒiənɪn sɛd. "hɝ wɝd. ʃɪl nɑt bɹeɪk ðæt, ɛvɝ." ɛdʒiənɪn saʊndəɾ æbsəlutli kənvɪnst. mɔɹ kənvɪns ðən mæt wɑz, ɛniweɪ. bʌt səmtaɪmz ə mæn hæd tə teɪk ə tʃæns. ivən ɪf i wɑz weɪdʒɝɪŋ ɪz nɛk. hi hæd pɹɑməst. ən i dɪɾ əv ɪz lʌk.

"She gave her word, Bayle," Egeanin said. "Her word. She will not break that, ever." Egeanin sounded absolutely convinced. More convinced than Mat was, anyway. But sometimes a man had to take a chance. Even if he was wagering his neck. He had promised. And he did have his luck.

"ɪt stɪl bi mædnəs," doʊmən ɡɹʌmbəld. bʌɾ i muvd ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli əweɪ fɹəm ðə dɔɹ wən mæt sɛɾəld ɪz bɹɔd-bɹɪm blæk hæɾ ɑn ɪz hɛd. wɛl, wən ɛdʒiənɪn moʊʃən ɪm əsaɪd wɪð ə kwɪk dʒɝk ə hɝ hɛd, ɛniweɪ. hi kɛpt ɪz ɡlaʊɝ, ðoʊ. ʃi fɑloʊd mæt aʊɾ ə ðə wæɡən, skaʊlɪŋ hɝsɛlf ən fɪdlɪŋ wɪð əɹ lɔŋ blæk wɪɡ. meɪbi ʃi stɪl fɛlt ənizi wɪð ɪt, əɹ meɪbi ɪt fɪt dɪfɹənli naʊ ðət ʃi hæd kloʊs tə ə mʌnθs ɡɹoʊθ ə hɝ oʊn hɛɹ ʌndɝniθ. nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə ɡoʊ əbaʊt bæɹhɛɾɪd jɛt, ɪn ɛni keɪs. nɑt tɪl ðəɹ wɑz ət list ənʌðɝ hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz bɪtwin əm ən ɛbu dɑɹ. meɪbi ɪt wəd nɑt bi seɪf əntɪl ðeɪ kɹɔs ðə deɪmoʊnə maʊntənz ɪndə mʊɹændi. ðə skaɪ wɑz klɪɹ, ðə sʌn dʒʌs kɹɛstɪŋ ðə hɝaɪzən, ɪnvɪzəbəl jɛt bɪhaɪn ðə ʃoʊz kænvəs wɔl, ən ðə mɔɹnɪŋ wɑz wɔɹm oʊnli kəmpɛɹd tə ə snoʊstɔɹm. nɑt ðə kɹɪspnəs ʌv ə leɪt-wɪntɝ mɔɹnɪŋ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, bʌɾ ə tʃɪl ðət sloʊli bɔɹd dip ən pʊɾ ə feɪn mɪst ɪn jəɹ bɹɛθ. ðə ʃoʊfoʊk wɝ skɝiɪŋ əbaʊt laɪk æns ɪn ə kɪkt æntɪl, fɪlɪŋ ði ɛɹ wɪð ʃaʊɾəd dɪmænz tə noʊ hu hæd muv ðoʊz dʒʌɡəlɪŋ ɹɪŋz əɹ bɑɹoʊd ðət pɛɹ ə ɹɛd-spæŋɡəl bɹitʃɪz əɹ ʃɪftəd ðɪs pɝfɔɹmɪŋ plætfɔɹm. ɪt lʊkt ən saʊndəd laɪk ðə stɑɹɾ ʌv ə ɹaɪət, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹil æŋɡɝ ɪn ɛni ʌv ðə vɔɪsəz. ðeɪ ʃaʊɾəd ən weɪvd ɑɹmz ɔl ðə taɪm, bʌɾ ɪt nɛvɝ keɪm tə bloʊz wən ðəɹ wɑz ə ʃoʊ ɪn ði ɔfɪŋ, ən sʌmhaʊ ɛvɹi pɝfɔɹmɝ wəd bi ɪn pleɪs ən ɹɛɾi bɪfɔɹ ðə fɝs peɪtʃɹənz wɝ lɛɾ ɪn. ðeɪ maɪt bi sloʊ pækɪŋ ʌp fəɹ ðə ɹoʊd, bʌt pɝfɔɹmɪŋ mɛn mʌni, ən ðeɪ kəd muv fæst ɪnʌf fəɹ ðæt.

"It still be madness," Domon grumbled. But he moved grudgingly away from the door when Mat settled his broad-brimmed black hat on his head. Well, when Egeanin motioned him aside with a quick jerk of her head, anyway. He kept his glower, though. She followed Mat out of the wagon, scowling herself and fiddling with her long black wig. Maybe she still felt uneasy with it, or maybe it fit differently now that she had close to a month's growth of her own hair underneath. Not enough to go about bareheaded yet, in any case. Not till there was at least another hundred miles between them and Ebou Dar. Maybe it would not be safe until they crossed the Damona Mountains into Murandy. The sky was clear, the sun just cresting the horizon, invisible yet behind the show's canvas wall, and the morning was warm only compared to a snowstorm. Not the crispness of a late-winter morning in the Two Rivers, but a chill that slowly bored deep and put a faint mist in your breath. The showfolk were scurrying about like ants in a kicked anthill, filling the air with shouted demands to know who had moved those juggling rings or borrowed that pair of red-spangled breeches or shifted this performing platform. It looked and sounded like the start of a riot, yet there was no real anger in any of the voices. They shouted and waved arms all the time, but it never came to blows when there was a show in the offing, and somehow every performer would be in place and ready before the first patrons were let in. They might be slow packing up for the road, but performing meant money, and they could move fast enough for that.

"ju ɹɪli də θɪŋk jə kən mɛɹi hɝ," ɛdʒiənɪn mʌɾɝd, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ əɾ ɪz saɪd, kɪkɪŋ əɹ wɔɹn bɹaʊn wʊlən skɝts. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ deɪnti əbaʊɾ ɛdʒiənɪn. ʃi hæɾ ə lɔŋ stʃɹaɪd, ən ʃi kɛpt ʌp izəli. dʒɹɛs əɹ noʊ dʒɹɛs, ʃi sim tə niɾ ə sɔɹɾ ɑn əɹ hɪp. "ðɛɹz noʊ ʌðɝ ɛkspləneɪʃən fəɹ ðɪs. beɪl ɪz ɹaɪt. jə ɑɹ mæd!"

"You really do think you can marry her," Egeanin muttered, striding along at his side, kicking her worn brown woolen skirts. There was nothing dainty about Egeanin. She had a long stride, and she kept up easily. Dress or no dress, she seemed to need a sword on her hip. "There's no other explanation for this. Bayle is right. You are mad!"

mæt ɡɹɪnd. "ðə kwɛstʃən ɪz, dʌz ʃi min tə mɛɹi mi? ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɪst pipəl mɛɹi, səmtaɪmz." wən jə nu jə wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæŋ, ði oʊnli θɪŋ tə də wɑz ɡɹɪn ət ðə nus. soʊ hi ɡɹɪn ən lɛft əɹ stændɪŋ ðəɹ wɪð ə skaʊl ɑn əɹ hɑɹd feɪs. hi θɔt ʃi wɑz ɡɹoʊlɪŋ kɝsɪz ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, ðoʊ hi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ. ʃi wɑz nɑt ðə wʌn u hæd tə mɛɹi ðə læs pɝsən ɑn ɝθ ʃi wɑntəd tə. ə noʊbəlwʊmən, ɔl kul ɹɪzɝv ən əɹ noʊz ɪn ði ɛɹ, wən i laɪk bɑɹmeɪdz wɪð ɹɛɾi smaɪlz ən wɪlɪŋ aɪz. ði ɛɹ tə ə θɹoʊn, ən nɑt dʒʌst ɛni θɹoʊn; ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn, ði ɪmpɪɹiəl θɹoʊn ə sintʃæn. ə wʊmən u spʌn ɪz hɛd laɪk ə tɑp ən lɛft ɪm wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ i hɛld əɹ kæptɪv əɹ ʃi hɛl hɪm. wən feɪt ɡɹɪp jə baɪ ðə θɹoʊt, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə də bʌt ɡɹɪn. hi kɛpt ə dʒɔnti peɪs tɪl i wɑz ɪn saɪɾ ə ðə wɪndoʊləs pɝpəl wæɡən, ən ðən i mɪst ə stɛp. ə klʌstɝ ʌv ækɹəbæts, fɔɹ lɪmbɝ mɛn u kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ðə tʃeɪvænə bɹʌðɝz ðoʊ ɪt wɑz pleɪn əz ðɛɹ noʊzɪz ðeɪ keɪm fɹəm dɪfɹən kʌntʃɹiz, nɑt dʒʌs dɪfɹən mʌðɝz, ɹʌʃt aʊɾ ʌv ə ɡɹin wæɡən nɪɹbaɪ, ʃaʊɾɪŋ ən dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ waɪldli ət wʌn ənʌðɝ. ðeɪ spɛɹɾ ə ɡlæns fəɹ ðə pɝpəl wæɡən ən ənʌðɝ fəɹ mæt, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ tu ɪnɡɹoʊst ɪn ðɛɹ ɑɹɡjəmənt, ən tʃɹɑɾɪŋ tu fæst, fəɹ mɔɹ. ɡɔɹɾɝən wɑz linɪŋ əɡɛnst wʌn ə ðə pɝpəl wilz, skɹætʃɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ən fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə tu wɪmən u stʊɾ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə wæɡənz wʊɾən stɛps. tu wɪmən. boʊθ swɑðd ɪn dɑɹk kloʊks, feɪsəz kənsild, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɪsteɪkɪŋ ðə flaʊɝd hɛd skɑɹf hæŋɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə tɔlɝ wʊmənz kaʊl. wɛl. hi ʃʊɾə noʊ tuɑn wəd wɑn əɹ meɪɾ əlɔŋ. noʊbəlwɪmən nɛvɝ wɛn ɛniwɛɹ wɪθaʊɾ ə meɪd. bɛɾ ə pɛni əɹ bɛɾ ə kɹaʊn, ɪn ði ɛn ɪɾ ɔl keɪm daʊn tə ə tɔs ə ðə daɪs dʒʌs ðə seɪm. ðeɪ hæd hæd ðɛɹ tʃæns tə bɪtʃɹeɪ hɪm. stɪl, hi wɑz bɛɾɪŋ ɑn ə wʊmən meɪkɪŋ ðə seɪm tʃɔɪs twaɪs ɹʌnɪŋ. ɑn tu wɪmən duɪŋ ɪt. wʌt ful wəd meɪk ɑdz ɑn ðæt?

Mat grinned. "The question is, does she mean to marry me? The strangest people marry, sometimes." When you knew you were going to hang, the only thing to do was grin at the noose. So he grinned and left her standing there with a scowl on her hard face. He thought she was growling curses under her breath, though he did not understand why. She was not the one who had to marry the last person on earth she wanted to. A noblewoman, all cool reserve and her nose in the air, when he liked barmaids with ready smiles and willing eyes. The heir to a throne, and not just any throne; the Crystal Throne, the Imperial Throne of Seanchan. A woman who spun his head like a top and left him wondering whether he held her captive or she held him. When fate gripped you by the throat, there was nothing to do but grin. He kept a jaunty pace till he was in sight of the windowless purple wagon, and then he missed a step. A cluster of acrobats, four limber men who called themselves the Chavana brothers though it was plain as their noses they came from different countries, not just different mothers, rushed out of a green wagon nearby, shouting and gesturing wildly at one another. They spared a glance for the purple wagon and another for Mat, but they were too engrossed in their argument, and trotting too fast, for more. Gorderan was leaning against one of the purple wheels, scratching his head and frowning at the two women who stood at the foot of the wagon's wooden steps. Two women. Both swathed in dark cloaks, faces concealed, yet there was no mistaking the flowered head scarf hanging out of the taller woman's cowl. Well. He should have know Tuon would want her maid along. Noblewomen never went anywhere without a maid. Bet a penny or bet a crown, in the end it all came down to a toss of the dice just the same. They had had their chance to betray him. Still, he was betting on a woman making the same choice twice running. On two women doing it. What fool would make odds on that?

bʌɾ i hæd tə tɔs ðə daɪs.

But he had to toss the dice.

ɪksɛpt, ðeɪ wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɹoʊlɪŋ.

Except, they were already rolling.

hi mɛt sɪlutʃəz koʊl blu stɛɹ wɪð ə smaɪl ən swɛpt ɔf ɪz hæt tə meɪk ən ɛləɡən lɛɡ tə tuɑn. nɑt tu ʃoʊi, wɪð dʒʌst ə smɔl flɝɪʃ ə hɪz kloʊk. "ɑɹ jə ɹɛɾi tə ɡoʊ ʃɑpɪŋ?" hi vɛɹi nɪɹli kɔld əɹ "maɪ leɪɾi," bʌɾ əntɪl ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə seɪ hɪz neɪm. . . .

He met Selucia's cold blue stare with a smile and swept off his hat to make an elegant leg to Tuon. Not too showy, with just a small flourish of his cloak. "Are you ready to go shopping?" He very nearly called her "my Lady," but until she was willing to say his name. . . .

"aɪ hæv bɪn ɹɛɾi fəɹ ən aʊɝ, tɔɪ," tuɑn dʒɹɔl kuli. kæʒəwəli lɪftɪŋ ən ɛdʒ ə hɪz kloʊk, ʃi ɡlænst ət ðə ɹɛd sɪlk laɪnɪŋ ən aɪɾ ɪz koʊt bɪfɔɹ lɛɾɪŋ ðə kloʊk fɔl. "leɪs suts ju. pɝhæps əl əv leɪs æɾəd tə jəɹ ɹoʊbz ɪf aɪ meɪk jə ə kʌbɛɹɝ." hɪz smaɪl slɪp fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. kəd ʃi stɪl meɪk ɪm dɑ'-koʊvæl ɪf ʃi mɛɹid hɪm? hi wəɾ əv tə æsk ɛdʒiənɪn. laɪt, waɪ dɪd wɪmən nɛvɝ meɪk ɪɾ izi?

"I have been ready for an hour, Toy," Tuon drawled coolly. Casually lifting an edge of his cloak, she glanced at the red silk lining and eyed his coat before letting the cloak fall. "Lace suits you. Perhaps I will have lace added to your robes if I make you a cupbearer." His smile slipped for an instant. Could she still make him da'-covale if she married him? He would have to ask Egeanin. Light, why did women never make it easy?

"du jə wɑn mi tə kʌm əlɔŋ, maɪ lɔɹd?" ɡɔɹɾɝən æsk sloʊli, nɑt kwaɪt lʊkɪŋ ət ðə wɪmən naʊ. hi tʌkt ɪz θʌmz bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛlt ən dɪd nɑt kwaɪt lʊk ət mæt, iðɝ. "dʒʌs tə kæɹi, meɪbi?"

"Do you want me to come along, my Lord?" Gorderan asked slowly, not quite looking at the women now. He tucked his thumbs behind his belt and did not quite look at Mat, either. "Just to carry, maybe?"

tuɑn dɪd nɑt seɪ ə wɝd. ʃi dʒʌst stʊd ðəɹ lʊkɪŋ ʌp ət mæt, weɪɾɪŋ, bɪɡ aɪz ɡɛɾɪŋ kulɝ baɪ ðə sɛkənd. ðə daɪs baʊnst ən ɹæɾəld ɪn ɪz hɛd. wɛl, hi oʊnli hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ə hɑɹtbit bɪfɔɹ dʒɝkɪŋ ɪz hɛd tə sɛn ðə ɹɛdɑɹm əweɪ. meɪbi tu hɑɹtbits. hi hæd tə tʃɹʌst ɪz lʌk. tʃɹʌst əɹ wɝd. tʃɹʌst ɪz ðə saʊn ə dɛθ. hi stɛpt ɑn ðət θɔt hɑɹd. ðɪs wɑz noʊ sɔŋ, ən noʊ oʊl mɛmɹi kəd ɡaɪd hɪm. ðə daɪs ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz skʌl kɛp spɪnɪŋ.

Tuon did not say a word. She just stood there looking up at Mat, waiting, big eyes getting cooler by the second. The dice bounced and rattled in his head. Well, he only hesitated a heartbeat before jerking his head to send the Redarm away. Maybe two heartbeats. He had to trust his luck. Trust her word. Trust is the sound of death. He stepped on that thought hard. This was no song, and no old memory could guide him. The dice inside his skull kept spinning.

wɪð ə slaɪt baʊ, hi ɔfɝɾ ɪz ɑɹm, wɪtʃ tuɑn ɪɡzæmən əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin ən ɑɹm bɪfɔɹ, pɝsɪŋ ðoʊz fʊl lɪps. ðən ʃi ɡæðɝɾ əɹ kloʊk ən sɛɾ ɔf wɪð sɪlutʃə ɡlaɪɾɪŋ əɾ əɹ hilz, livɪŋ ɪm tə hɝi æftɝ ðɛm. noʊ, wɪmən nɛvɝ dɪd meɪk ɪɾ izi.

With a slight bow, he offered his arm, which Tuon examined as if she had never seen an arm before, pursing those full lips. Then she gathered her cloak and set off with Selucia gliding at her heels, leaving him to hurry after them. No, women never did make it easy.

dɪspaɪt ði ɝli aʊɝ, tu bɝli fɛloʊz wɪð kʌdʒəlz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ði ɛntʃɹəns, ən ə θɝd wɪð ə klɪɹ ɡlæs pɪtʃɝ tə teɪk ðə kɔɪnz ən dʌmp əm θɹu ə slɑɾ ɪn ði aɪɝn-stʃɹæp bɑks ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. itʃ ə ðə θɹi lʊk tu klʌmzi tə pɑm ə kɑpɝ wɪθaʊt fɔlɪŋ ɑn ɪz feɪs, bʌt lukə tʊk noʊ tʃænsəz. twɛnti əɹ θɝɾi pipəl wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi weɪɾɪŋ ɪnsaɪd ðə hɛvi ɹoʊps ðət lɛd tə ðə bɪɡ blu bænɝ neɪmɪŋ lukəs ʃoʊ, ən ənfɔɹtʃənətli, lətɛl wɑz ðɛɹ, tu, stɝn-feɪst ɪn ə dʒɹɛs soʊn wɪð kɹɪmzən spæŋɡəlz ən ə kloʊk soʊn wɪð blu. lukəs waɪf tʃɹeɪn bɛɹz. mæt θɔt ðə bɛɹz dɪd ðɛɹ tʃɹɪks fəɹ fɪɹ ʃi maɪt baɪt ðɛm. "aɪ hæv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn hænd," hi toʊl hɝ. "bɪliv mi, ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ tə wɝi əbaʊt." hi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv spɛɹɾ ɪz bɹɛθ. lətɛl ɪɡnɔɹd hɪm, fɹaʊnɪŋ wɝidli ət tuɑn ən sɪlutʃə. ʃi ən əɹ hʌzbənd wɝ ði oʊnli tu ʃoʊfoʊk u nu hu ðeɪ wɝ. ðəɹ hæd sim noʊ ɹizən tə tɛl iðɝ əbaʊt ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋz dʒɔnt. lukə, ət list, wʊɾə hæd kɪɾənz. ðə stɛɹ lətɛl ʃɪftəd tə mæt wɑz nɑt wɝid, dʒʌst stoʊn hɑɹd. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli, "ɪf jə sɛn əs tə ðə ɡæloʊz, jə sɛn jɝsɛlf." ðən ʃi snɪft ən wɛn bæk tə stʌɾiɪŋ ðə pipəl weɪɾɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ɪn. lətɛl wɑz ivən bɛɾɝ ðən lukə ət dʒʌdʒɪŋ ðə weɪɾ ʌv ə pɝs bɪfɔɹ ðə dʒɹɔstʃɹɪŋz wɝ əndʌn. ʃi wɑz ɔlsoʊ tɛn taɪmz tʌfɝ ðən əɹ hʌzbənd. ðə daɪs tʌmbəld ɑn.

Despite the early hour, two burly fellows with cudgels were already guarding the entrance, and a third with a clear glass pitcher to take the coins and dump them through a slot in the iron-strapped box on the ground. Each of the three looked too clumsy to palm a copper without falling on his face, but Luca took no chances. Twenty or thirty people were already waiting inside the heavy ropes that led to the big blue banner naming Lucas show, and unfortunately, Latelle was there, too, stern-faced in a dress sewn with crimson spangles and a cloak sewn with blue. Lucas wife trained bears. Mat thought the bears did their tricks for fear she might bite them. "I have everything in hand," he told her. "Believe me, there's nothing to worry about." He might as well have spared his breath. Latelle ignored him, frowning worriedly at Tuon and Selucia. She and her husband were the only two showfolk who knew who they were. There had seemed no reason to tell either about this morning's jaunt. Luca, at least, would have had kittens. The stare Latelle shifted to Mat was not worried, just stone hard. "Remember," she said quietly, "if you send us to the gallows, you send yourself." Then she sniffed and went back to studying the people waiting to get in. Latelle was even better than Luca at judging the weight of a purse before the drawstrings were undone. She was also ten times tougher than her husband. The dice tumbled on.

wʌtɛvɝ hæd sɛɾ əm spɪnɪŋ, hi hæd nɑt jɛt ɹitʃt ðə feɪtfəl pɔɪnt. ðə dəsaɪɾɪŋ pɔɪnt.

Whatever had set them spinning, he had not yet reached the fateful point. The deciding point.

"ʃi ɪz ə ɡʊd waɪf fəɹ mæstɝ lukə," tuɑn mɝmɝd wən ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn ə lɪɾəl weɪ.

"She is a good wife for Master Luca," Tuon murmured when they had gone a little way.

mæt lʊkt əɾ əɹ saɪdweɪz, ən ɹisɛɾəld ɪz hæɾ ɑn ɪz hɛd. ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ mɑkɝi ɪn əɹ toʊn. dɪd ʃi heɪt lukə ðət mʌtʃ? əɹ wɑz ʃi seɪɪŋ wʌt sɔɹɾ ʌv waɪf ʃi wəd bi? əɹ . . . ? bɝn hɪm, hi kəd ɡoʊ əz kɹeɪzi əz doʊmən θɔɾ i wɑz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʌzəl ðɪs wʊmən aʊt. ʃi hæd tə bi ðə ɹizən fəɹ ðə fil ə daɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd. wʌt wɑz ʃi ɡoʊɪŋ tə du?

Mat looked at her sideways, and resettled his hat on his head. There had been no mockery in her tone. Did she hate Luca that much? Or was she saying what sort of wife she would be? Or . . . ? Burn him, he could go as crazy as Domon thought he was, trying to puzzle this woman out. She had to be the reason for the feel of dice in his head. What was she going to do?

ɪt wɑz ə ʃɔɹt wɔk əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn tə ðə taʊn, əlɔŋ ə hɑɹd-pækt ɹoʊd θɹu hɪlz ðət wɝ tʃɹiləs hɪɹ, bʌt pipəl dɑɾəd ðə ɹoʊd ðə weɪ wɪndmɪlz ən sɔl pænz dɑɾəd ðə hɪlz.

It was a short walk away from the rising sun to the town, along a hard-packed road through hills that were treeless here, but people dotted the road the way windmills and salt pans dotted the hills.

stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, ðeɪ muv soʊ pɝpəsfəli ðeɪ sim nɑt tə si ɛniwʌn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm. mæt dɑdʒd ə ɹaʊndfeɪs mæn u nɪɹli wɔkt ɹaɪɾ ɪndə hɪm, wɪtʃ meɪɾ ɪm əv tə dʒʌmp əweɪ fɹəm ə waɪt-hɛɹɾ oʊl fɛloʊ meɪkɪŋ ə ɡʊd spiɾ ɑn spɪnli lɛɡz. ðət pʊɾ ɪm ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə plʌmp ɡɝl u wʊɾə ɹʌn ʌp ðə fɹʌn ə hɪm ɪf i hæd nɑt dʒʌmpt əɡɛn.

Staring straight ahead, they moved so purposefully they seemed not to see anyone in front of them. Mat dodged a roundfaced man who nearly walked right into him, which made him have to jump away from a white-haired old fellow making a good speed on spindly legs. That put him in front of a plump girl who would have run up the front of him if he had not jumped again.

"ɑɹ jə pɹæktəsɪŋ ə dæns, tɔɪ?" tuɑn sɛd, piɹɪŋ ʌp əɾ ɪm oʊvɝ ə slɪm ʃoʊldɝ. hɝ bɹɛθ meɪɾ ə feɪnt waɪt mɪst ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ kaʊl. "ɪɾ ɪzən vɛɹi ɡɹeɪsfəl." hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, dʒʌs tə pɔɪn aʊt haʊ kɹaʊɾəd ðə ɹoʊd wɑz, ən sʌɾənli hi ɹilaɪzd i kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ si ɛniwʌn bɪɑn əɹ ən sɪlutʃə. ðə pipəl u hæd bɪn ðəɹ wɝ dʒʌst ɡɔn, ðə ɹoʊɾ ɛmpti əz fɑɹ əz i kəd si bɪfɔɹ ɪt meɪɾ ə bɛnd. sloʊli, hi tɝn ɪz hɛd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn bɪtwin ɪm ən ðə ʃoʊ, iðɝ, dʒʌs ðə foʊk weɪɾɪŋ ɪn laɪn, ən ðət lʊk noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ.

"Are you practicing a dance, Toy?" Tuon said, peering up at him over a slim shoulder. Her breath made a faint white mist in front of her cowl. "It isn't very graceful." He opened his mouth, just to point out how crowded the road was, and suddenly he realized he could no longer see anyone beyond her and Selucia. The people who had been there were just gone, the road empty as far as he could see before it made a bend. Slowly, he turned his head. There was no one between him and the show, either, just the folk waiting in line, and that looked no longer than before.

bɪɑn ðə ʃoʊ, ðə ɹoʊd waʊn ɪndə ðə hɪlz təwɔɹɾ ə dɪstən fɔɹəst, ɛmpti. nɑɾ ə soʊl ɪn saɪt. hi pɹɛs fɪŋɡɝz əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst, filɪŋ ðə fɑkshɛd mədæljən θɹu hɪz koʊt. dʒʌst ə pis ə sɪlvɝ ɑn ə ɹɔhaɪd kɔɹd. hi wɪʃt ɪt fɛl koʊld əz aɪs. tuɑn ɑɹtʃt ən aɪbɹaʊ. sɪlutʃəz stɛɹ neɪmd ɪm ful.

Beyond the show, the road wound into the hills toward a distant forest, empty. Not a soul in sight. He pressed fingers against his chest, feeling the foxhead medallion through his coat. Just a piece of silver on a rawhide cord. He wished it felt cold as ice. Tuon arched an eyebrow. Selucia's stare named him fool.

"aɪ kæn baɪ jə ə dʒɹɛs stændɪŋ hɪɹ," hi sɛd. ðət wɑz ðə pɔɪn ə ðɪs ɛkspədɪʃən, hɪz pɹɑməs tə faɪn tuɑn sʌmθɪŋ bɛɾɝ ðən dʒɹɛsəz ðət hʌŋ ɑn əɹ ən meɪɾ əɹ lʊk ə tʃaɪld ɪn ə ɡɹoʊnʌps kloʊðɪŋ. ət list, hi wɑz pɹɪɾi ʃʊɹ i hæd pɹɑməs ðæt, ən ʃi wɑz pɝfəkli sɝɾən. ðə niɾəlwɝk ə ðə ʃoʊz simstʃɹəsəz mɛt wɪð tuɑnz əpɹuvəl, bʌt nɑt ðə klɔθ ðeɪ hæɾ əveɪləbəl.

"I can't buy you a dress standing here," he said. That was the point of this expedition, his promise to find Tuon something better than dresses that hung on her and made her look a child in a grownup's clothing. At least, he was pretty sure he had promised that, and she was perfectly certain. The needlework of the show's seamstresses met with Tuon's approval, but not the cloth they had available.

pɝfɔɹmɝz' kɑstumz ɡlɪɾɝd wɪð spæŋɡəlz ən bidz ən bɹaɪt kʌlɝz, bʌt ðə klɔθ wɑz juʒəwəli wʌtɛvɝ kəd bi faʊn tʃipli. ðoʊz u hæd bɛɾɝ kɛpt ɪɾ ən juzd ɪt tɪl ɪt wɔɹ aʊt. dʒʊɹədɔɹ meɪɾ ɪts mʌni fɹəm sɔlt, ðoʊ, ən sɔl meɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə mʌni. ðə taʊnz ʃɑps ʃəɾ ɔfɝ ɛni sɔɹɾ ə mətɪɹiəl ə wʊmən kəd wɪʃ.

Performers' costumes glittered with spangles and beads and bright colors, but the cloth was usually whatever could be found cheaply. Those who had better kept it and used it till it wore out. Jurador made its money from salt, though, and salt made a great deal of money. The town's shops should offer any sort of material a woman could wish.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ fɪŋɡɝ-wɪɡəlɪŋ, ðɪs taɪm. tuɑn ʃɛɹɾ ə lʊk wɪð sɪlutʃə. ðə tɔlɝ wʊmən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ə ɹaɪ, ɹufəl twɪs tə hɝ maʊθ. tuɑn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. ən ðeɪ ɡæðɝd ðɛɹ kloʊks ən stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ðə taʊnz aɪɝn-stʌɾɪd ɡeɪts. wɪmən! hi hɝid tə kætʃ ʌp əɡɛn. ðeɪ wɝ ɪz pɹɪznɝz, æftɝ ɔl. ðeɪ wɝ. ðɛɹ ʃædoʊz stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt lɔŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm. hæɾ ɛni ʌv ðoʊz pipəl kæst ʃædoʊz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ vænɪʃt? hi kəd nɑt ɹikɔl ɛni ʌv əm bɹiðɪŋ ə mɪst, iðɝ. ɪt hɑɹdli sim tə mæɾɝ. ðeɪ wɝ ɡɔn, ən i wɑz nɑt gɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd kʌm fɹəm əɹ wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn. pɹɑbli sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð biɪŋ tɑvɝən. hi wɑz gɑnə pʊɾ ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd. hi wɑz. ðə daɪs ɹætlɪŋ əweɪ lɛft ɹum fəɹ nʌθɪŋ ɛls. ðə ɡeɪt ɡɑɹdz simd ɪnkjʊɹiəs əbaʊt stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, əɹ ət list əbaʊɾ ə mæn ən tu wɪmən əfʊt. hɑɹd-feɪs fɛloʊz ɪn waɪtpəntɪd bɹɛstpleɪts ən kɑnɪkəl hɛlməts wɪð wʌt lʊk laɪk hɔɹsteɪlz fəɹ kɹɛsts, ðeɪ ɹæn ɪmpæsɪv aɪz oʊvɝ ðə kloʊkt wɪmən, lɪŋɡɝɪŋ səspɪʃəsli ə moʊmən ɑn mæt fəɹ səm ɹizən, ən ðən ɹɪtɝn tə linɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ hælbɝdz ən stɛɹɪŋ blæŋkli ət ðə ɹoʊd. ðeɪ wɝ loʊkəl mɛn, moʊs laɪkli, ɪn ɛni keɪs nɑt sintʃæn. ðə sɔl mɝtʃəns ən ðə loʊkəl leɪɾi, æɛθɪleɪn, hu əpɛɹənli sɛd wʌtɛvɝ ðə sɔl mɝtʃəns toʊld əɹ tə, hæd swɔɹn ði oʊðz ə ɹɪtɝn wɪθaʊt hɛzəteɪʃən ən ɔfɝd tə peɪ ə sɔl tæks bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ æskt. noʊ daʊt ðə sintʃæn wəd ɡɛɾ ɝaʊn tə ɪnstɔlɪŋ səm sɔɹɾ ʌv əfɪʃəl hɪɹ ɪvɛntʃəwəli, dʒʌs tə kip ən aɪ ɑn ɛvɹiθɪŋ, bʌt fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, ðeɪ hæd mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt jusəz fəɹ ðɛɹ soʊlʒɝz. mæt hæd sɛn tɑm ən dʒulɪn boʊθ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðəɹ wɝ noʊ sintʃæn ɪn dʒʊɹədɔɹ bɪfɔɹ əɡɹiɪŋ tə ðɪs ɪkskɝʒən. ə ful kəd tʃɹɪp oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn lʌk ɪf i wɑz nɑt kɛɹfəl. ɪt wɑz ə pɹɑspɝəs, bɪzi taʊn, dʒʊɹədɔɹ, wɪð stoʊn-peɪv stʃɹits, moʊst ə ðɛm waɪɾ ən ɔl laɪnd wɪð stoʊn bɪldɪŋz ɹuft ɪn ɹɛɾɪʃ taɪlz. haʊsəz ən ɪnz ɹʌbd ʃoʊldɝz wɪð steɪbəlz ən tævɝnz, ɪn ə nɔɪzi dʒʌmbəl wɪð ə blæksmɪθs klæŋɪŋ hæmɝ ɑn ən ænvəl hɪɹ ən ðə ɹækəɾɪŋ ʌv ə ɹʌɡwivɝz lumz ðɛɹ, ən ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ɪt simd, kupɝz hæmɝɪŋ bænz ɑn taɪt bæɹəlz fəɹ tʃɹænspɔɹɾɪŋ sɔlt. hɔkɝz kɹaɪd pɪnz ən ɹɪbənz, mit paɪz ən ɹoʊstəd nʌts fɹəm tʃɹeɪz, əɹ wɪntɝ-ɹɪŋkəl tɝnəps ən sɑɹi plʌmz fɹəm bæɹoʊz. ɑn ɛvɹi stʃɹit mɛn ən wɪmən stʊd ɡɑɹɾ oʊvɝ ðə dɪspleɪ ɡʊdz ɑn nɛɹoʊ teɪbəlz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ ʃɑps ən bɛloʊd lɪsts ʌv wʌt wɑz ɔfɝd wɪðɪn. pɪkɪŋ aʊt ðə sɔl mɝtʃəns' haʊsəz wɑz izi, ðoʊ, θɹi stɔɹiz ə stoʊn ɹæðɝ ðən tu, kʌvɝɪŋ eɪt taɪmz əz mʌtʃ ɡɹaʊn əz ɛni ʌðɝz, itʃ wɪð ə kɑləmd wɔk oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ ðə stʃɹiɾ ən ʃildɪd baɪ waɪt ɹɔt-aɪɝn skɹinz bɪtwin ðə kɑləmz. ðə loʊɝ wɪndoʊz ɑn moʊs haʊsəz hæd ðoʊz skɹinz, ðoʊ nɑɾ ɔlweɪz peɪntəd. ðət mʌtʃ wɑz ɹɛmənɪsən ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ, bʌt lɪɾəl ɛls wɑz, bɪɑn ði ɑləv kəmpliksənz ə ðə pipəl. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ dip nɛklinz ɪkspoʊzɪŋ klivədʒ hɪɹ, noʊ skɝts soʊn ʌp tə dɪspleɪ kʌlɝd pɛɾikoʊts. ðə wɪmən wɔɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd dʒɹɛsəz wɪð haɪ nɛks ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ðɛɹ tʃɪnz, ə lɪɾəl ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi fəɹ ðə kɑmən foʊk, ə ɡɹeɪt dil fəɹ ðə ɹɪtʃɝ, hu wɔɹ kloʊks ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd tɑp tə bɑɾəm ən ʃɪɹ veɪlz hæŋɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ feɪsəz fɹəm koʊmz ʌv ɡoʊld-wɝk əɹ kɑɹvd aɪvɝi stʌk ɪndə dɑɹk, kɔɪl bɹeɪdz. ðə mɛnz ʃɔɹt koʊts wɝ wɝkt ɔlmoʊst əz θɪkli, ɪn kʌlɝz dʒʌst əz bɹaɪt, ən ɹɪtʃ əɹ pʊɹ, moʊs mɛn wɔɹ ə lɔŋ bɛl naɪf wɪð ə bleɪɾ ə lɪɾəl lɛs kɝv ðən ðoʊz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ.

There was no finger-wiggling, this time. Tuon shared a look with Selucia. The taller woman shook her head, a wry, rueful twist to her mouth. Tuon shook her head. And they gathered their cloaks and started toward the town's iron-studded gates. Women! He hurried to catch up again. They were his prisoners, after all. They were. Their shadows stretched out long in front of them. Had any of those people cast shadows before they vanished? He could not recall any of them breathing a mist, either. It hardly seemed to matter. They were gone, and he was not going to think about where they had come from or where they had gone. Probably something to do with being ta'veren. He was going to put it out of his head. He was. The dice rattling away left room for nothing else. The gate guards seemed incurious about strangers, or at least about a man and two women afoot. Hard-faced fellows in whitepainted breastplates and conical helmets with what looked like horsetails for crests, they ran impassive eyes over the cloaked women, lingering suspiciously a moment on Mat for some reason, and then returned to leaning on their halberds and staring blankly at the road. They were local men, most likely, in any case not Seanchan. The salt merchants and the local lady, Aethelaine, who apparently said whatever the salt merchants told her to, had sworn the Oaths of Return without hesitation and offered to pay a salt tax before they were asked. No doubt the Seanchan would get around to installing some sort of official here eventually, just to keep an eye on everything, but for the moment, they had more important uses for their soldiers. Mat had sent Thom and Juilin both to make sure there were no Seanchan in Jurador before agreeing to this excursion. A fool could trip over his own luck if he was not careful. It was a prosperous, busy town, Jurador, with stone-paved streets, most of them wide and all lined with stone buildings roofed in reddish tiles. Houses and inns rubbed shoulders with stables and taverns, in a noisy jumble with a blacksmith's clanging hammer on an anvil here and the racketing of a rugweaver's looms there, and everywhere, it seemed, coopers hammering bands on tight barrels for transporting salt. Hawkers cried pins and ribbons, meat pies and roasted nuts from trays, or winter-wrinkled turnips and sorry plums from barrows. On every street men and women stood guard over the display goods on narrow tables in front of their shops and bellowed lists of what was offered within. Picking out the salt merchants' houses was easy, though, three stories of stone rather than two, covering eight times as much ground as any others, each with a columned walk overlooking the street and shielded by white wrought-iron screens between the columns. The lower windows on most houses had those screens, though not always painted. That much was reminiscent of Ebou Dar, but little else was, beyond the olive complexions of the people. There were no deep necklines exposing cleavage here, no skirts sewn up to display colored petticoats. The women wore embroidered dresses with high necks right up to their chins, a little embroidery for the common folk, a great deal for the richer, who wore cloaks embroidered top to bottom and sheer veils hanging over their faces from combs of gold-work or carved ivory stuck into dark, coiled braids. The men's short coats were worked almost as thickly, in colors just as bright, and rich or poor, most men wore a long belt knife with a blade a little less curved than those in Ebou Dar.

ɹɪtʃ əɹ pʊɹ, ðə fɛloʊz dɪɾ əv ə tɛndənsi tə fɑndəl ðɛɹ naɪf hɪls əz ɪf ɪkspɛktɪŋ ə faɪt, soʊ meɪbi ðət wɑz ðə seɪm.

Rich or poor, the fellows did have a tendency to fondle their knife hilts as if expecting a fight, so maybe that was the same.

ðə leɪɾi æɛθɪleɪnz pæləs əpɪɹd noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ði aʊtsaɪd ðən ðə sɔl mɝtʃəns'

The Lady Aethelaine's palace appeared no different from the outside than the salt merchants'

mæntʃənz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz loʊkeɪɾəd ɑn ðə taʊnz meɪn skwɛɹ, ə waɪɾ ɪkspæns ə pɑlɪʃt stoʊn wɛɹ ə bɹɔd ɹaʊn mɑɹbəl faʊntən spɹeɪd wɔɾɝ ɪndə ði ɛɹ. pipəl fɪl ðɛɹ bʌkəts ən bɪɡ pɑɾɝi wɔɾɝ dʒɑɹz fɹəm paɪps spɪlɪŋ ɪndə stoʊn beɪsənz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz ʌv ʌðɝ skwɛɹz, ðoʊ. ðə bɪɡ faʊntən pʊɾ aʊɾ ə smɛl ə bɹaɪn. ɪt wɑz ə sɪmbəl ə dʒʊɹədɔɹz wɛlθ, pʌmp fɹəm ðə seɪm sɔɹs əz ðə sɔlt wɛlz ɪn ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ hɪlz. mæt ɡɑt tə si ə ɡʊd dil ə ðə taʊn bɪfɔɹ ðə sʌn klaɪmd ivən hæfweɪ tə ɪts nun pik. ɛvɹi taɪm tuɑn ən sɪlutʃə spɑɾəd ə ʃɑp wɪð sɪlks dɪspleɪɾ aʊt fɹʌnt, ðeɪ stɑpt ət ðə lɔŋ nɛɹoʊ teɪbəl tə fil boʊls ə klɔθ ən wɪspɝ wɪð ðɛɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ, weɪvɪŋ ɔf ði ətɛnʃənz ə ðə wɑtʃfəl ʃɑpkipɝ. ðoʊz kɛpt ə vɛɹi wɑtʃfəl aɪ, əntɪl ðeɪ ɹilaɪz mæt wɑz wɪð ðə tu wɪmən. ɪn ðɛɹ staʊt wʊlənz, wɛl wɔɹn ən bædli fɪɾɪŋ, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt lʊk kʌstəmɝz fəɹ sɪlk.

mansions, but it was located on the town's main square, a wide expanse of polished stone where a broad round marble fountain sprayed water into the air. People filled their buckets and big pottery water jars from pipes spilling into stone basins at the corners of other squares, though. The big fountain put out a smell of brine. It was a symbol of Jurador's wealth, pumped from the same source as the salt wells in the surrounding hills. Mat got to see a good deal of the town before the sun climbed even halfway to its noon peak. Every time Tuon and Selucia spotted a shop with silks displayed out front, they stopped at the long narrow table to feel bolts of cloth and whisper with their heads together, waving off the attentions of the watchful shopkeeper. Those kept a very watchful eye, until they realized Mat was with the two women. In their stout woolens, well worn and badly fitting, they did not look customers for silk.

mæt, wɪð wʌn saɪɾ ə hɪz kloʊk θɹoʊn bæk tə ɪkspoʊz ðə laɪnɪŋ, dɪd. wɛnɛvɝ i tʃɹaɪd tə ʃoʊ ən ɪntʃɹəst, ðoʊ - wɪmən sɛd ðeɪ wɑntəd jə tə ʃoʊ ən ɪntʃɹəst! - wɛnɛvɝ i ɡɑt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ seɪɪŋ, ðə wɪmən fɛl saɪlən ən lʊkt ət hɪm, kul dɑɹk aɪz ən kul blu stɛɹɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ dip kaʊlz, əntɪl i fɛl bæk ə stɛp əɹ tu. ðən sɪlutʃə wəd bɛn əɹ hɛd tə tuɑnz, ən ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ bæk tə mɝmɝɪŋ ən fɪŋɡɝɪŋ sɪlk, ɹɛd sɪlk, blu sɪlk, ɡɹin sɪlk, smuð ʃɪmɝɪŋ sɪlk ən bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd sɪlk. dʒʊɹədɔɹ wɑz ə vɛɹi wɛlθi taʊn. lʌkəli, hi hæd tʌkt ə fæt pɝs ʌv ɡoʊld ɪndə hɪz koʊt pɑkət. nʌn ʌv ɪt sim tə bi ɹaɪt, ðoʊ. ɪnɛvəɾəbli, tuɑn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ən ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm ɡlaɪɾɪd əweɪ ɪndə ðə kɹaʊd wɪð mæt hɝiɪŋ tə kip ʌp əz fɑɹ əz ðə nɛkst ʃɑp ʃoʊɪŋ sɪlks. ðə daɪs kəntɪnjud tə baʊns ɔf ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪz skʌl.

Mat, with one side of his cloak thrown back to expose the lining, did. Whenever he tried to show an interest, though - women said they wanted you to show an interest! - whenever he got close enough to hear what they were saying, the women fell silent and looked at him, cool dark eyes and cool blue staring out of their deep cowls, until he fell back a step or two. Then Selucia would bend her head to Tuon's, and they would go back to murmuring and fingering silk, red silk, blue silk, green silk, smooth shimmering silk and brocaded silk. Jurador was a very wealthy town. Luckily, he had tucked a fat purse of gold into his coat pocket. None of it seemed to be right, though. Inevitably, Tuon shook her head, and the pair of them glided away into the crowd with Mat hurrying to keep up as far as the next shop showing silks. The dice continued to bounce off the inside of his skull.

ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ði oʊnli wʌnz fɹəm ðə ʃoʊ hu hæd kʌm ɪndə ðə taʊn. hi spɑɾəd ɑlʌdʒɹə, hɝ feɪs fɹeɪm baɪ biɾɪd bɹeɪdz, wɔkɪŋ θɹu ðə kɹaʊd wɪð ə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn u hæd tə bi ə sɔl mɝtʃən fɹəm ði əmaʊn ə bɹaɪɾ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi kʌvɝɪŋ ɪz sɪlk koʊɾ ɪn flaʊɝz ən hʌmɪŋbɝdz.

They were not the only ones from the show who had come into the town. He spotted Aludra, her face framed by beaded braids, walking through the crowd with a gray-haired man who had to be a salt merchant from the amount of bright embroidery covering his silk coat in flowers and hummingbirds.

wʌt wəd ði ɪluməneɪɾɝ wɑnt wɪð ə sɔl mɝtʃənt? wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɑz seɪɪŋ tə hɪm, hɪz pliz smaɪl hæɾ æɾəd ə fju kɹisɪz tə hɪz feɪs, ən i wɑz nɑɾɪŋ.

What would the Illuminator want with a salt merchant? Whatever she was saying to him, his pleased smile had added a few creases to his face, and he was nodding.

tuɑn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ən ðə tu wɪmən ɡlaɪɾɪd təwɔɹd ðə nɛkst ʃɑp, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə ʃɑpkipɝz dip baʊz. wɛl, moʊst ə ðoʊz wɝ dɝɛktəɾ ət mæt. meɪbi ðə skɪni ful θɔɾ i wɑntəd tə baɪ sɪlk fəɹ hɪmsɛlf. nɑt ðəɾ i wʊɾə pæst ʌp ə nu sɪlk koʊɾ əɹ θɹi, bʌɾ u kəd θɪŋk əbaʊt koʊts wən i wɑz weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðoʊz blʌɾi daɪs tə stɑp? dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, ɑn ðə slivz ən ʃoʊldɝz.

Tuon shook her head, and the two women glided toward the next shop, ignoring the shopkeeper's deep bows. Well, most of those were directed at Mat. Maybe the skinny fool thought he wanted to buy silk for himself. Not that he would have passed up a new silk coat or three, but who could think about coats when he was waiting for those bloody dice to stop? Just a little embroidery, on the sleeves and shoulders.

tɑm wɛn baɪ klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz bɹɑnz-kʌlɝd kloʊk ɝaʊn hɪm, nʌklɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ waɪt mʌstæʃɪz ən jɔnɪŋ əz ɪf i hæd spɛn ðə naɪɾ əweɪk. hi maɪt hæv. ðə ɡlimən hæd nɑt teɪkən tə dʒɹɪŋk əɡɛn, bʌt ləpɪn ən nɹɪm kəmpleɪn əbaʊɾ ɪm ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ əweɪk tɪl ɔl aʊɝz, bɝnɪŋ ə læmp soʊ hi kəd ɹiɾ ən ɹeɪ-ɹɛɾ ɪz pɹɛʃəs lɛɾɝ. wʌt kəd bi soʊ fæsəneɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə lɛɾɝ fɹəm ə dɛd wʊmən? ə dɛd wʊmən. laɪt, meɪbi ðoʊz pipəl ɑn ðə ɹoʊd . . . ! noʊ; hi wɑz nɑt gɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðəɾ əɾ ɔl.

Thom went by clutching his bronze-colored cloak around him, knuckling his long white mustaches and yawning as if he had spent the night awake. He might have. The gleeman had not taken to drink again, but Lopin and Nerim complained about him remaining awake till all hours, burning a lamp so he could read and re-read his precious letter. What could be so fascinating in a letter from a dead woman? A dead woman. Light, maybe those people on the road . . . ! No; he was not going to think about that at all.

tuɑn plʌkt wʌn foʊld ə sɪlk ən lɛɾ ɪt dʒɹɑp əz ʃi tɝn əweɪ wɪθaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ ənʌðɝ. sɪlutʃə ɡeɪv ðə staʊt ʃɑpkipɝ sətʃ ə stɛɹ bɪfɔɹ fɑloʊɪŋ ðət ðə wʊmən stɑɹɾəd bæk ɪn əfɹʌnt. mæt ɔfɝɾ əɹ ə smaɪl. əfɹʌntɪd ʃɑpkipɝz kəd lid tə taʊn ɡɑɹdz æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz, ən u kəd seɪ wɛɹ ðət maɪt lɛd? hi nu hi kəd smaɪl moʊst wɪmən ɪndə filɪŋ suðd. ðə ɹaʊnd-feɪst wʊmən snɪft əɾ ɪm ən bɛn tə smuðɪŋ ðə boʊlt ə sɪlk əz tɛndɝli əz tʌkɪŋ ɪn ə beɪb. moʊst wɪmən, hi θɔt saʊɝli.

Tuon plucked one fold of silk and let it drop as she turned away without trying another. Selucia gave the stout shopkeeper such a stare before following that the woman started back in affront. Mat offered her a smile. Affronted shopkeepers could lead to town guards asking questions, and who could say where that might lead? He knew he could smile most women into feeling soothed. The round-faced woman sniffed at him and bent to smoothing the bolt of silk as tenderly as tucking in a babe. Most women, he thought sourly.

daʊn ðə stʃɹit, ə wʊmən ɪn ə pleɪn kloʊk lɛɾ əɹ hʊd fɔl, ən mæts bɹɛθ kɑɾ ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt.

Down the street, a woman in a plain cloak let her hood fall, and Mat's breath caught in his throat.

idɛzinə lɪftəɾ əɹ kaʊl əɡɛn, bʌt ʃi tʊk noʊ hɝi wɪð ɪt, ən ðə dæmədʒ wɑz dʌn ɛniweɪ, ən ɛɛs sədaɪz eɪdʒləs feɪs dɪspleɪd fəɹ ɛniwʌn u nu wʌt ðeɪ wɝ siɪŋ. noʊ wʌn ɪn ðə stʃɹit ɡeɪv ə saɪn ðət ðeɪ hæd noʊɾəst ɛniθɪŋ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt si ɛvɹi feɪs. wɑz ɛniwʌn θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ə ɹɪwɔɹd?

Edesina lifted her cowl again, but she took no hurry with it, and the damage was done anyway, an Aes Sedai's ageless face displayed for anyone who knew what they were seeing. No one in the street gave a sign that they had noticed anything, but he could not see every face. Was anyone thinking of a reward?

ðəɹ maɪt bi noʊ sintʃæn ɪn dʒʊɹədɔɹ ət ðə moʊmənt, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd pæs θɹu.

There might be no Seanchan in Jurador at the moment, but they did pass through.

idɛzinə ɡlaɪɾɪd ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ, ən tu dɑɹk-kloʊkt ʃeɪps fɑloʊd hɝ. tu. hæd ðə sʌldəm lɛft oʊnli wʌn ə ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ ɪn ðə kæmp tə wɑtʃ tu ɛɛs sədaɪ? əɹ meɪbi dʒoʊlin əɹ tɛslɪn wɑz sʌmwɛɹ kloʊz baɪ, ən i hæd mɪst siɪŋ hɝ. hi kɹeɪn ɪz nɛk, sɝtʃɪŋ ðə θɹɔŋ fəɹ ənʌðɝ pleɪn kloʊk, bʌɾ ɛvɹi wʌn i sɔ hæɾ ət list ə lɪɾəl ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi.

Edesina glided around a corner, and two dark-cloaked shapes followed her. Two. Had the sul'dam left only one of their number in the camp to watch two Aes Sedai? Or maybe Joline or Teslyn was somewhere close by, and he had missed seeing her. He craned his neck, searching the throng for another plain cloak, but every one he saw had at least a little embroidery.

əbɹʌpli, ɪt hɪɾ ɪm laɪk ə stoʊn bɪtwin ði aɪz. ɛvɹi kloʊk i kəd si hæɾ ət list ə lɪɾəl ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. wɛɹ wɝ blʌɾi tuɑn ən blʌɾi sɪlutʃə? wɝ ðə daɪs spɪnɪŋ fæstɝ? bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹd, hi wɛn ʌp ɑn ɪz toʊz, bʌt ðə stʃɹit wɑz ə ɹɪvɝ ʌv ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd kloʊks, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd koʊts ən dʒɹɛsəz. ɪt dɪd nɑt min ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪskeɪp. tuɑn hæd ɡɪvən əɹ wɝd; ʃi hæd pæst ʌp ə pɝfək tʃæns fəɹ bɪtʃɹeɪəl. bʌɾ ɔl iðɝ wʊmən hæd tə də wɑz seɪ θɹi wɝdz, ən ɛniwʌn u hɝɾ əm laɪkli wəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ə sintʃæn æksɛnt. ðət maɪt bi səfɪʃən tə sɛt ðə haʊnz ɑn ɪz tʃɹeɪl.

Abruptly, it hit him like a stone between the eyes. Every cloak he could see had at least a little embroidery. Where were bloody Tuon and bloody Selucia? Were the dice spinning faster? Breathing hard, he went up on his toes, but the street was a river of embroidered cloaks, embroidered coats and dresses. It did not mean they were trying to escape. Tuon had given her word; she had passed up a perfect chance for betrayal. But all either woman had to do was say three words, and anyone who heard them likely would recognize a Seanchan accent. That might be sufficient to set the hounds on his trail.

ðəɹ wɝ tu ʃɑps əhɛd ðət sim tə bi ɔfɝɪŋ klɔθ, wʌn ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹit. niðɝ wɪð ə pɛɹ ə dɑɹk-kloʊkt wɪmən ət ðə teɪbəlz aʊt fɹʌnt. ðeɪ cʊɾə tɝn ə kɔɹnɝ izəli ɪnʌf, bʌɾ i hæd tə tʃɹʌs tə lʌk. hɪz lʌk wɑz ɪspɛʃli ɡʊd wən ðə ɡeɪm wɑz ɹændəm. blʌɾi wɪmən pɹɑbli θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ə blʌɾi ɡeɪm. bɝn hɪm, lɛɾ ɪz lʌk ɹʌn ɡʊd.

There were two shops ahead that seemed to be offering cloth, one on either side of the street. Neither with a pair of dark-cloaked women at the tables out front. They could have turned a corner easily enough, but he had to trust to luck. His luck was especially good when the game was random. Bloody women probably thought it was a bloody game. Burn him, let his luck run good.

kloʊzɪŋ ɪz aɪz, hi spʌn ɪn ə sɝkəl ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə stʃɹiɾ ən tʊk ə stɛp. ət ɹændəm. hi bʌmpt ɪndə sʌmwʌn sɑləd, hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk əm boʊθ ɡɹʌnt. ə bʌlki fɛloʊ wɪð ə smɔl maʊθ ən ə lɪɾəl pʊɹli dʌn skɹɑlwɝk ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝz ə hɪz ɹʌf koʊt stʊd ɡlɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm wən i oʊpən ɪz aɪz, ɡlɛɹɪŋ ən fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə hɪlt ə hɪz kɝv naɪf. mæt dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. hi wɑz feɪsɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ət wʌn ə ðə tu ʃɑps. pʊlɪŋ ɪz hæt daʊn taɪt, hi ɹæn. ðə daɪs wɝ ɹoʊlɪŋ fæstɝ.

Closing his eyes, he spun in a circle in the middle of the street and took a step. At random. He bumped into someone solid, hard enough to make them both grunt. A bulky fellow with a small mouth and a little poorly done scrollwork on the shoulders of his rough coat stood glaring at him when he opened his eyes, glaring and fingering the hilt of his curved knife. Mat did not care. He was facing straight at one of the two shops. Pulling his hat down tight, he ran. The dice were rolling faster.

dɪvaɪɾəd ʃɛlvz stʌft wɪð boʊls ə klɔθ laɪn ðə wɔlz ə ðə ʃɑp fɹəm flɔɹ tə silɪŋ, ən mɔɹ stʊd stækt ɑn lɔŋ teɪbəlz aʊɾ ɪn ðə flɔɹ. ðə ʃɑpkipɝ wɑz ə skɹɔni wʊmən wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ moʊl ɑn əɹ tʃɪn, hɝ əsɪstən slɪm ən pɹɪɾi ən æŋɡɹjeɪd. hi dæʃt ɪnsaɪd dʒʌst ɪn taɪm tə hɪɹ ðə ʃɑpkipɝ seɪ, "fɔɹ ðə læs taɪm, ɪf jə woʊn tɛl mi wʌt jəɹ hɪɹ fɔɹ, aɪm gɑnə sɛnd nɛlsə fəɹ ðə ɡɑɹdz." tuɑn ən sɪlutʃə, feɪsəz stɪl hɪɾən ɪn ðɛɹ hʊdz, wɝ wɔkɪŋ sloʊli əlɔŋ wʌn wɔl fʊl ə klɔθ, stɑpɪŋ tə tʌtʃ ə boʊl bʌt niðɝ peɪɪŋ ðə ʃɑpkipɝ ɛni hid.

Divided shelves stuffed with bolts of cloth lined the walls of the shop from floor to ceiling, and more stood stacked on long tables out in the floor. The shopkeeper was a scrawny woman with a large mole on her chin, her assistant slim and pretty and angryeyed. He dashed inside just in time to hear the shopkeeper say, "For the last time, if you won't tell me what you're here for, I'm going to send Nelsa for the guards." Tuon and Selucia, faces still hidden in their hoods, were walking slowly along one wall full of cloth, stopping to touch a bolt but neither paying the shopkeeper any heed.

"ðeɪɹ wɪð mi," mæt sɛd bɹɛθləsli. tʌɡɪŋ ðə pɝs fɹəm ɪz pɑkət, hi tɔst ɪɾ ɑn ðə nɪɹəs klɪɹ teɪbəl. ðə hɛvi klɪŋk ɪt meɪd lændɪŋ pʊɾ ə waɪd smaɪl ɑn ðə ʃɑpkipɝz nɛɹoʊ feɪs.

"They're with me," Mat said breathlessly. Tugging the purse from his pocket, he tossed it on the nearest clear table. The heavy clink it made landing put a wide smile on the shopkeeper's narrow face.

"ɡɪv əm wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ wɑnt," hi toʊl hɝ. ən tə tuɑn, hi æɾəd fɝmli, "ɪf jəɹ gɑnə baɪ ɛniθɪŋ, ɪts gɑnə bi hɪɹ. aɪv hæɾ ɔl ði ɛksɝsaɪz aɪ kɛɹ fəɹ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ." hi wʊɾə hæd ðə wɝdz bæk əz sun əz ðeɪ lɛft ɪz maʊθ, ɪf i kʊd. spik tə ə wʊmən ðət weɪ, ən ʃi flɛɹɾ ɪn jəɹ feɪs laɪk wʌn ʌv ɑlʌdʒɹəz faɪɹstɪks, ɛvɹi taɪm. bʌt tuɑnz bɪɡ aɪz lʊkt ʌp əɾ ɪm fɹəm ðə ʃɛltɝ ə hɝ hʊd. ən əɹ fʊl maʊθ kɝv slaɪtli ɪn ə smaɪl. ɪt wɑz ə sikɹət smaɪl, fəɹ hɝsɛlf, nɑt hɪm. ðə laɪɾ oʊnli nu wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt. hi heɪɾəd ɪt wən wɪmən dɪd ðæt. ət lis ðə daɪs hæd nɑt stɑpt. ðət hæd tə bi ə ɡʊd saɪn, ɹaɪt?

"Give them whatever they want," he told her. And to Tuon, he added firmly, "If you're going to buy anything, it's going to be here. I've had all the exercise I care for this morning." He would have had the words back as soon as they left his mouth, if he could. Speak to a woman that way, and she flared in your face like one of Aludra's firesticks, every time. But Tuon's big eyes looked up at him from the shelter of her hood. And her full mouth curved slightly in a smile. It was a secret smile, for herself, not him. The Light only knew what it meant. He hated it when women did that. At least the dice had not stopped. That had to be a good sign, right?

tuɑn hæd noʊ niɾ ʌv wɝdz tə meɪk əɹ tʃɔɪsəz, saɪlənli pɔɪntɪŋ aʊt boʊlt æftɝ boʊlt ən mɛʒɝɪŋ wɪð əɹ smɔl dɑɹk hænz haʊ mʌtʃ ðə ʃɑpkipɝ wɑz tə kʌɾ ɔf wɪð əɹ ʃiɹz. ðə wʊmən dɪd ðə wɝk hɝsɛlf ɪnstɛɾ ə dɛləɡeɪɾɪŋ ɪt tə hɝ əsɪstənt, ən wɛl ʃi maɪt, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ.

Tuon had no need of words to make her choices, silently pointing out bolt after bolt and measuring with her small dark hands how much the shopkeeper was to cut off with her shears. The woman did the work herself instead of delegating it to her assistant, and well she might, considering.

ɹɛd sɪlk ɪn sɛvɹəl ʃeɪdz wɛn ʌndɝ ðoʊz lɔŋ ʃɑɹp sɪzɝz, ən ɡɹin sɪlk ɪn ə fju ʃeɪdz, ən mɔɹ vɝaɪəɾiz ə blu sɪlk ðən mæt nu ɪɡzɪstəd. tuɑn tʃoʊz aʊt səm faɪn lɪnən ɪn sɛvɹəl θɪknəsəz, ən lɛŋθs ə bɹaɪt wʊl - ʃi kənsʌltəd sɪlutʃə oʊvɝ ðoʊz ɪn mʌfəld wɪspɝz  - bʌt moʊsli ɪt wɑz sɪlk.

Red silk in several shades went under those long sharp scissors, and green silk in a few shades, and more varieties of blue silk than Mat knew existed. Tuon chose out some fine linen in several thicknesses, and lengths of bright wool - she consulted Selucia over those in muffled whispers  - but mostly it was silk.

hi ɡɑt bæk mʌtʃ lɛs ə hɪz pɝs ðən i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd.

He got back much less of his purse than he had expected.

wʌns ɔl ðət klɔθ hæd bɪn foʊldəɾ ən nitli taɪd, ðən bʌndəld ɪndə ə lɑɹdʒɝ lɛŋθ ə kɔɹs lɪnən - ət noʊ ɛkstʃɹə tʃɑɹdʒ, θæŋk jə vɛɹi mʌtʃ - ɪt meɪɾ ə maʊn əz fæɾ əz ə pɛdlɝz pæk. ɪt dɪd nɑt sɝpɹaɪz ɪm əɾ ɔl tə lɝn ðəɾ i wɑz ɪkspɛktəd tə kæɹi ðə θɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, wɪð ɪz hæt dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɪn wʌn hænd. dʒɹɛs jəɹ bɛst, baɪ ə wʊmən sɪlk, ən ʃi stɪl faʊn ə weɪ tə meɪk jə wɝk!

Once all that cloth had been folded and neatly tied, then bundled into a larger length of coarse linen - at no extra charge, thank you very much - it made a mound as fat as a peddler's pack. It did not surprise him at all to learn that he was expected to carry the thing across his shoulders, with his hat dangling in one hand. Dress your best, buy a woman silk, and she still found a way to make you work!

meɪbi ʃi wɑz meɪkɪŋ ɪm peɪ fəɹ spikɪŋ fɝmli.

Maybe she was making him pay for speaking firmly.

hi ɝn plɛnti ʌv stɛɹz fɹəm ɡeɪpɪŋ fulz əz i meɪɾ ɪz weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊn bɪhaɪn ðə tu wɪmən. ðeɪ ɡlaɪɾɪd əlɔŋ smʌɡ əz kæts fʊl ə kɹim. ivən kloʊkt ən hʊɾɪd, ðɛɹ bæks sɛɾ ɪɾ ɔl.

He earned plenty of stares from gaping fools as he made his way out of the town behind the two women. They glided along smug as cats full of cream. Even cloaked and hooded, their backs said it all.

ðə sʌn wɑz stɪl wɛl ʃɔɹɾ ə mɪddeɪ, bʌt ðə laɪn ə pipəl weɪɾɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ɪndə ðə ʃoʊ stʃɹɛtʃt daʊn ðə ɹoʊɾ ɔlmoʊs tə ðə taʊn. moʊst ɡeɪpt ən pɔɪntəɾ əz ɪf i wɝ ə peɪntəd ful. wʌn ə ðə bɪɡ hɔɹs hænlɝz ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə kɔɪn bɑks ɡeɪv ə ɡæp-tuθ smɝk ən oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, bʌt mæt ɹɪtɝn ɪm ə lɛvəl lʊk, ən ðə fɛloʊ dɪsaɪɾɪd tə pʊɾ ɪz aɪz bæk ɑn ðə kɔɪnz ɡoʊɪŋ fɹəm taʊnzfoʊk tə ɡlæs pɪtʃɝ tə bɑks. mæt θɔɾ i hæd nɛvɝ bɪn soʊ ɹɪliv tə bi ɪnsaɪd lukəz ʃoʊ. bɪfɔɹ i ən ðə tu wɪmən hæd ɡɑɾən θɹi stɛps ɪnsaɪd ði ɛntʃɹəns, dʒulɪn keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ ʌp, fəɹ ə wʌndɝ wɪθaʊt θɛɹə əɹ ɪz ɹɛd kæp. ðə θif-kætʃɝz feɪs cʊɾə bɪn kɑɹv fɹəm eɪntʃən oʊk. aɪɪŋ ðə pipəl floʊɪŋ pæst əm ɪndə ðə ʃoʊ, hi pɪtʃt ɪz vɔɪs loʊ. loʊ ən ɝdʒənt. "aɪ wɑz kʌmɪŋ tə faɪn ju. ɪts ɛdʒiənɪn; ʃiz bɪn . . . hɝt. kʌm kwɪkli."

The sun was still well short of midday, but the line of people waiting to get into the show stretched down the road almost to the town. Most gaped and pointed as if he were a painted fool. One of the big horse handlers guarding the coin box gave a gap-toothed smirk and opened his mouth, but Mat returned him a level look, and the fellow decided to put his eyes back on the coins going from townsfolk to glass pitcher to box. Mat thought he had never been so relieved to be inside Luca's show. Before he and the two women had gotten three steps inside the entrance, Juilin came running up, for a wonder without Thera or his red cap. The thief-catcher's face could have been carved from ancient oak. Eyeing the people flowing past them into the show, he pitched his voice low. Low and urgent. "I was coming to find you. It's Egeanin; she's been . . . hurt. Come quickly."

ðə mænz toʊn sɛɾ ɪnʌf, bʌt wɝs, mæt ɹilaɪz ðə daɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd wɝ dʒɹʌmɪŋ, naʊ.

The man's tone said enough, but worse, Mat realized the dice in his head were drumming, now.

hi flʌŋ ðə pæk ə klɔθ ət ðə hɔɹs hænlɝz wɪð ə heɪsti ɪndʒʌŋkʃən tə ɡɑɹɾ ɪɾ əz kloʊs əz ðə kɔɪn-bɑks əɹ i wəd sɛt ðə wɪmən ɑn ðɛm, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt weɪt tə si wɛðɝ ðeɪ tʊk ɪm sɪɹiəsli.

He flung the pack of cloth at the horse handlers with a hasty injunction to guard it as close as the coin-box or he would set the women on them, but he did not wait to see whether they took him seriously.

dʒulɪn dɑɹɾɪd bæk ðə weɪ hi hæd kʌm əɾ ə ɹʌn, ən mæt ɹæn æftɝ hɪm, əlɔŋ ðə waɪd meɪn stʃɹiɾ ə ðə ʃoʊ wɛɹ nɔɪzi ɡɔkɪŋ kɹaʊdz wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ðə fɔɹ bɛɹ-tʃɛstəd tʃeɪvænə bɹʌðɝz stæn ɑn wʌn ənʌðɝz ʃoʊldɝz, ən kəntɔɹʃənɪsts ɪn fɪlmi tʃɹaʊzɝz ən ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ vɛsts sɪɾ ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn hɛdz, ən ə slæk-ɹoʊp wɔkɝ ɪn spæŋɡəl blu bɹitʃɪz klaɪmɪŋ ə lɔŋ wʊɾən læɾɝ tə bɪɡɪn əɹ pɝfɔɹməns.

Juilin darted back the way he had come at a run, and Mat ran after him, along the wide main street of the show where noisy gawking crowds were watching the four bare-chested Chavana brothers stand on one another's shoulders, and contortionists in filmy trousers and glittering vests sit on their own heads, and a slack-rope walker in spangled blue breeches climbing a long wooden ladder to begin her performance.

ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə slæk-ɹoʊp wɔkɝ, dʒulɪn dɑdʒd ɪndə wʌn ə ðə nɛɹoʊɝ stʃɹits, wɛɹ lɔnʒɹi hʌŋ fɹəm laɪnz bɪtwin ðə tɛns ən wæɡənz, pɝfɔɹmɝz sæɾ ɑn stulz ən wæɡən stɛps weɪɾɪŋ tə ɡoʊ ɑn, ən haʊ tʃɪlʒɹən ɹæn pleɪɪŋ wɪð bɔlz ən hups. mæt nu wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ hɛɾəd, naʊ, bʌt ðə θif-kætʃɝ ɹæn tu fæs tə oʊvɝteɪk. əhɛd, hi sɔ hɪz ɡɹin wæɡən. lətɛl wɑz piɹɪŋ ʌndɝniθ, ən lukə, ɪn wʌn ə hɪz bɹaɪt ɹɛd kloʊks, wɑz weɪvɪŋ ə pɛɹ ə dʒʌɡəlɝz tə muv əlɔŋ. ðə tu wɪmən, ɪn bæɡi tʃɹaʊzɝz ən wɪð feɪsəz peɪntəd waɪt laɪk ə noʊbəlz fulz, tʊk ə ɡʊd lʊk ʌndɝ ðə wæɡən bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ oʊbeɪd. əz i keɪm kloʊsɝ, hi kəd si wʌt ðeɪ hæd ðeɪ bɪn stɛɹɪŋ æt. koʊtləs, doʊmən wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ʌndɝ ði ɛdʒ ə ðə wæɡən, kɹeɪɾəlɪŋ ə lɪmp ɛdʒiənɪn ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz. hɝ aɪz wɝ kloʊzd, ən ə tʃɹɪkəl ə blʌd ɹæn fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ əɹ maʊð. hɝ wɪɡ hʌŋ əskju. ðət stʊɾ aʊt, fəɹ səm ɹizən. ʃi ɔlweɪz fʌst soʊ tə kip ðət wɪɡ stʃɹeɪt. ðə daɪs bit laɪk θʌndɝ.

Short of the slack-rope walker, Juilin dodged into one of the narrower streets, where laundry hung from lines between the tents and wagons, performers sat on stools and wagon steps waiting to go on, and how children ran playing with balls and hoops. Mat knew where they were headed, now, but the thief-catcher ran too fast to overtake. Ahead, he saw his green wagon. Latelle was peering underneath, and Luca, in one of his bright red cloaks, was waving a pair of jugglers to move along. The two women, in baggy trousers and with faces painted white like a noble's fools, took a good look under the wagon before they obeyed. As he came closer, he could see what they had they been staring at. Coatless, Domon was sitting on the ground under the edge of the wagon, cradling a limp Egeanin in his arms. Her eyes were closed, and a trickle of blood ran from the corner her mouth. Her wig hung askew. That stood out, for some reason. She always fussed so to keep that wig straight. The dice beat like thunder.

"ðɪs kəd bi dɪzæstɝ," lukə ɡɹaʊld, splɪɾɪŋ ɪz ɡlaʊɝ bɪtwin mæt ən dʒulɪn. ɪt wɑz ən æŋɡɹi ɡlaʊɝ, ðoʊ, nɑt fɹaɪɾənd. "ju meɪ hæv bɹɔt mi tə dɪzæstɝ!" hi ʃuɾ əweɪ ə ɡæɡəl ʌv waɪd-aɪd tʃɪlʒɹən, ən ɡɹaʊld əɾ ə plʌmp wʊmən ɪn skɝts ðət ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ wɪð sɪlvɝi spæŋɡəlz.

"This could be disaster," Luca growled, splitting his glower between Mat and Juilin. It was an angry glower, though, not frightened. "You may have brought me to disaster!" He shooed away a gaggle of wide-eyed children, and growled at a plump woman in skirts that glittering with silvery spangles.

maɪaɪɔɹə meɪd lɛpɝdz də tʃɹɪks ðəɾ ivən lətɛl wəd nɑt tʃɹaɪ, bʌt ʃi mɪɹli tɔst əɹ hɛd bɪfɔɹ ɡlaɪɾɪŋ ɔf. noʊ wʌn tʊk lukə əz sɪɹiəsli əz i tʊk hɪmsɛlf.

Miyora made leopards do tricks that even Latelle would not try, but she merely tossed her head before gliding off. No one took Luca as seriously as he took himself.

ðə mæn ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt wən tuɑn ən sɪlutʃə hɝiɾ ʌp, ən lʊkt ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə tɛlɪŋ əm tə ɡoʊ, tu, bɪfɔɹ i θɔt bɛɾɝ ʌv ɪt. ɪn fækt, hi bɪɡæn tə fɹaʊn θɔtfəli. ən wɝidli. ɪt simd ɪz waɪf hæd nɑt toʊld ɪm əbaʊt mæt ən ðə wɪmən livɪŋ ðə ʃoʊ, ən ɪt wɑz klɪɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn sʌmwɛɹ. ðə blu-aɪd wʊmən hæd ðə hjudʒ bʌndəl ə klɔθ ɑn əɹ bæk naʊ, wɪð əɹ ɑɹmz dʌbəl bɪhaɪn hɝ, ðoʊ ʃi stʊd stʃɹeɪt dɪspaɪt ðə bʌlk. jə wəd θɪŋk ə leɪɾiz meɪd wɑz juz tə kæɹiɪŋ θɪŋz, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs wɑz ə pɪktʃɝ ə fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd ɪɹɪteɪʃən. lətɛl aɪɾ əɹ ʌp ən daʊn, ðən snɪɹɾ ət mæt əz ɪf i wɝ ðə ɹizən ðə wʊmən wɑz θɹʌstɪŋ əɹ kənsɪɾɝəbəl bʊzəm aʊt. lukəz waɪf wɑz vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ət snɪɹɪŋ, jɛt tuɑnz stɝn ɪkspɹɛʃən meɪd lətɛl nɪɹli lʊk maɪld. ə dʒʌdʒ pɪɹɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ kaʊl, ə dʒʌdʒ ɹɛɾi tə pæs sɛntəns.

The man gave a start when Tuon and Selucia hurried up, and looked on the point of telling them to go, too, before he thought better of it. In fact, he began to frown thoughtfully. And worriedly. It seemed his wife had not told him about Mat and the women leaving the show, and it was clear they had been somewhere. The blue-eyed woman had the huge bundle of cloth on her back now, with her arms doubled behind her, though she stood straight despite the bulk. You would think a lady's maid was used to carrying things, but her face was a picture of frustrated irritation. Latelle eyed her up and down, then sneered at Mat as if he were the reason the woman was thrusting her considerable bosom out. Luca's wife was very good at sneering, yet Tuon's stern expression made Latelle nearly look mild. A judge peered out of her cowl, a judge ready to pass sentence.

fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, mæt dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wʌt ðə wɪmən θɔt.

For the moment, Mat did not care what the women thought.

ðoʊz blʌɾi daɪs. tɔsɪŋ ɪz kloʊk bæk, hi wɛn tə wʌn ni ən tʌtʃt fɪŋɡɝz tə ɛdʒiənɪnz θɹoʊt. hɝ pʌls bit wikli, θɪn ən flʌɾɝɪŋ.

Those bloody dice. Tossing his cloak back, he went to one knee and touched fingers to Egeanin's throat. Her pulse beat weakly, thin and fluttering.

"wʌt hæpənd?" hi æskt. "hæv jə sɛn fəɹ wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz?" muvɪŋ ɛdʒiənɪn maɪt bi ɪnʌf tə kɪl hɝ, bʌt ðəɹ maɪt bi taɪm fəɹ hilɪŋ, ɪf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ kwɪk. hi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə seɪ ðət neɪm əlaʊd, ðoʊ, wɪð pipəl wɔkɪŋ baɪ, pɔzɪŋ fəɹ kjʊɹiəs stɛɹz bɪfɔɹ lukə əɹ lətɛl hɝiɾ əm ɑn. ɛvɹiwʌn muv kwɪkɝ fəɹ əɹ ðən fəɹ hɪm. lətɛl hɝsɛlf wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn u ɹɪli dʒʌmp fəɹ lukə.

"What happened?" he asked. "Have you sent for one of the sisters?" Moving Egeanin might be enough to kill her, but there might be time for Healing, if the Aes Sedai were quick. He was not about to say that name aloud, though, with people walking by, pausing for curious stares before Luca or Latelle hurried them on. Everyone moved quicker for her than for him. Latelle herself was the only one who really jumped for Luca.

"ɹɛnə!" doʊmən spæt ðə neɪm. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz ʃɔɹt kæp ə hɛɹ ən ðəɾ ɪliɑnɝ bɪɹd ðət lɛft ɪz ʌpɝ lɪp bɛɹ, hi dɪd nɑt lʊk ɹɪdɪkjələs, naʊ. hi lʊkt əfɹeɪɾ ən mɝɾɝəs, ə deɪnʒɝəs kɑmbəneɪʃən. "aɪ dɪd si hɝ stæb ɛdʒiənɪn ɪn ðə bæk ən ɹʌn. ɪf aɪ cʊɾə ɹitʃt hɝ, aɪ wʊɾə bɹoʊkən əɹ nɛk, bʌt maɪ hæn bi ɔl ðæts hoʊldɪŋ ɛdʒiənɪnz blʌɾ ɪn. wɛɹ bi ðət blʌɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ?" hi snɑɹəld. soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ biɪŋ kɛɹfəl wɪð ɪz tʌŋ.

"Renna!" Domon spat the name. Despite his short cap of hair and that Illianer beard that left his upper lip bare, he did not look ridiculous, now. He looked afraid and murderous, a dangerous combination. "I did see her stab Egeanin in the back and run. If I could have reached her, I would have broken her neck, but my hand be all that's holding Egeanin's blood in. Where be that bloody Aes Sedai?" he snarled. So much for being careful with his tongue.

"aɪ bi ɹaɪt hɪɹ, beɪl doʊmən," tɛslɪn ənaʊns koʊldli, ɹʌʃɪŋ ʌp wɪð θɛɹə, hu tʊk wʌn hɔɹəfaɪd lʊk ət tuɑn ən sɪlutʃə ən lætʃt ɑn tə dʒulɪnz ɑɹm wɪð ə skwik, aɪz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðə weɪ ʃi bɪɡæn tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, ʃi maɪt bi ðəɹ hɝsɛlf ɪn ə mɪnət.

"I be right here, Bayle Domon," Teslyn announced coldly, rushing up with Thera, who took one horrified look at Tuon and Selucia and latched on to Juilin's arm with a squeak, eyes on the ground. The way she began trembling, she might be there herself in a minute.

ðə hɑɹd-aɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪɾ ə feɪs əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ə maʊθfʊl ə bɹaɪɹz wən ʃi sɔ wʌt leɪ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, əɹ meɪbi wɛɹ ɪt leɪ, bʌt ʃi swɪfli kɹaʊtʃt ʌndɝniθ ðə wæɡən bɪsaɪd doʊmən ən klæspt ɛdʒiənɪnz hɛɾ ɪn əɹ boʊni hænz. "dʒoʊlin də bi bɛɾɝ ət ðɪs ðən aɪ," ʃi mʌɾɝd, hɔlt ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, "bʌɾ aɪ meɪ bi eɪbəl - " ðə sɪlvɝ fɑkshɛd wɛn koʊld əɡɛns mæts tʃɛst, ən ɛdʒiənɪn dʒɝk soʊ vaɪələnli ðəɾ əɹ wɪɡ fɛl ɔf, nɪɹli pʊlɪŋ hɝsɛlf aʊɾ ə doʊmənz ɡɹæsp əz əɹ aɪz pɑpt oʊpən waɪd. ðə kənvʌlʃən læstəɾ oʊnli lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ əɹ tə sɪt hæfweɪ ʌp wɪð ə fɹoʊzən ɡæsp; ðən ʃi slʌmp bæk əɡɛns doʊmənz tʃɛst, pæntɪŋ, ən ðə mədæljən bɪkeɪm dʒʌst ə pis ʌv wɝk sɪlvɝ əɡɛn. hi wɑz ɔlmoʊst əkʌstəm tə ðæt. hi heɪɾəd biɪŋ əkʌstəm tə ðæt. tɛslɪn slʌmpt, tu, ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə fɔlɪŋ oʊvɝ əntɪl doʊmən ʃɪftəɾ ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ɛdʒiənɪn tə stɛɾi ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð wʌn hænd.

The hard-eyed Aes Sedai made a face as if she had a mouthful of briars when she saw what lay in front of her, or maybe where it lay, but she swiftly crouched underneath the wagon beside Domon and clasped Egeanin's head in her bony hands. "Joline do be better at this than I," she muttered, halt under her breath, "but I may be able - " The silver foxhead went cold against Mat's chest, and Egeanin jerked so violently that her wig fell off, nearly pulling herself out of Domon's grasp as her eyes popped open wide. The convulsion lasted only long enough for her to sit halfway up with a frozen gasp; then she slumped back against Domon's chest, panting, and the medallion became just a piece of worked silver again. He was almost accustomed to that. He hated being accustomed to that. Teslyn slumped, too, on the point of falling over until Domon shifted his grip on Egeanin to steady the Aes Sedai with one hand.

"θæŋk ju," tɛslɪn sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ðə wɝdz saʊndɪŋ dʒɹæɡd fɹəm hɝ. "bʌɾ aɪ nid noʊ hɛlp." ʃi juz ðə saɪɾ ə ðə wæɡən tə hɛlp əɹ ɹaɪz, ðoʊ, hɝ koʊld ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪz dɛɹɪŋ ɛniwʌn tə kɑmɛnt. "ðə bleɪd dɪd slaɪɾ ɑn ə ɹɪb ən soʊ dɪd mɪs əɹ hɑɹt. ɔl ʃi dʌz nid naʊ bi ɹɛst ən fud." ʃi hæd nɑt dɪleɪd tə ɡɹæb ə kloʊk, mæt ɹilaɪzd. ɪn wʌn dɝɛkʃən əlɔŋ ðə nɛɹoʊ stʃɹit, ə klʌtʃ ʌv wɪmən ɪn spæŋɡəl kloʊks wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ fɹəm ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə ɡɹin-stʃɹaɪp tɛnt, ðɛɹ ɡeɪzəz ɪntɛn ən foʊkəst. ɪn ði ʌðɝ, hæf ə dʌzən mɛn ən wɪmən ɪn waɪt-stʃɹaɪp koʊts ən taɪt bɹitʃɪz, ækɹəbæts u pɝfɔɹmd ɑn hɔɹsbæk, dɑɹɾɪd lʊks təwɔɹd tɛslɪn bɪtwin pʊɾɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ tə wɪspɝ. tu leɪt tə wɝi əbaʊt sʌmwʌn ɹɛkəɡnaɪzɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪz feɪs. tu leɪt tə wɝi ðət wʌn ə ðɛm nu hilɪŋ wən i sɔ ɪt dʌn. ðə daɪs bæɾɝd ət ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə mæts hɛd. ðeɪ hæd nɑt stɑpt; ðə ɡeɪm wɑz nɑt pleɪɾ aʊt, jɛt. "huz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ hɝ, dʒulɪn?" hi æskt. "dʒulɪn?" ðə θif-kætʃɝ ɡeɪv oʊvɝ ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət tuɑn ən sɪlutʃə ən mɝmɝɪŋ tə θɛɹə, ðoʊ hi kəntɪnjud tə pæt ðə tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ wʊmən. "veɪnɪn ən ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz, ləpɪn ən nɹɪm. oʊlvɝ, tu. hi wɑz əweɪ bɪfɔɹ aɪ kəd kætʃ hɪm. bʌɾ ɪn ðɪs. . . ." hi stɑp suðɪŋ θɛɹə lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə dʒɛstʃɝ təwɔɹd ðə meɪn stʃɹit. ðə bæbəl ə vɔɪsəz wɑz klɪɹli ɑɾəbəl ivən ət ðɪs dɪstəns. "ɔl ʃi nidz ɪz tə leɪ hænz ɑn wʌn ə ðoʊz fænsi kloʊks, ən ʃi kən slɪp aʊt wɪð ðə fɝs foʊk tə liv. ɪf wi tʃɹaɪ stɑpɪŋ ɛvɹi wʊmən wɪð əɹ hʊɾ ʌp, əɹ ivən tʃɹaɪ lʊkɪŋ ɪnsaɪd, wɪl əv ə ɹaɪəɾ ɑn əɹ hænz. ðiz pipəl ɑɹ tʌtʃi." "dɪzæstɝ," lukə moʊnd, ɹæpɪŋ ɪz kloʊk ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf taɪtli. lətɛl pʊɾ ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn hɪm. ɪt mʌst əv bɪn laɪk biɪŋ kʌmfɝɾɪd baɪ ə lɛpɝd, bʌɾ ɪn ɛni keɪs, lukə dɪd nɑt lʊk mʌtʃ kʌmfɝɾɪd.

"Thank you," Teslyn said after a moment, the words sounding dragged from her. "But I need no help." She used the side of the wagon to help her rise, though, her cold Aes Sedai gaze daring anyone to comment. "The blade did slide on a rib and so did miss her heart. All she does need now be rest and food." She had not delayed to grab a cloak, Mat realized. In one direction along the narrow street, a clutch of women in spangled cloaks was watching from in front of a green-striped tent, their gazes intent and focused. In the other, half a dozen men and women in white-striped coats and tight breeches, acrobats who performed on horseback, darted looks toward Teslyn between putting their heads together to whisper. Too late to worry about someone recognizing an Aes Sedai's face. Too late to worry that one of them knew Healing when he saw it done. The dice battered at the inside of Mat's head. They had not stopped; the game was not played out, yet. "Who's looking for her, Juilin?" he asked. "Juilin?" The thief-catcher gave over glaring at Tuon and Selucia and murmuring to Thera, though he continued to pat the trembling woman. "Vanin and the Redarms, Lopin and Nerim. Olver, too. He was away before I could catch him. But in this. . . ." He stopped soothing Thera long enough to gesture toward the main street. The babble of voices was clearly audible even at this distance. "All she needs is to lay hands on one of those fancy cloaks, and she can slip out with the first folk to leave. If we try stopping every woman with her hood up, or even try looking inside, we'll have a riot on our hands. These people are touchy." "Disaster," Luca moaned, wrapping his cloak around himself tightly. Latelle put an arm around him. It must have been like being comforted by a leopard, but in any case, Luca did not look much comforted.

"bɝn mi, waɪ?" mæt ɡɹaʊld. "ɹɛnə wɑz ɔlweɪz ɹɛɾi tə lɪk maɪ blʌɾi ɹɪst! aɪ θɔɾ ɪf ɛnibəɾi wɛn oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ . . . !" hi dɪd nɑɾ ivən ɡlæns ət θɛɹə, bʌt dʒulɪn stɪl skaʊld əɾ ɪm dɑɹkli.

"Burn me, why?" Mat growled. "Renna was always ready to lick my bloody wrist! I thought if anybody went over the edge . . . !" He did not even glance at Thera, but Juilin still scowled at him darkly.

doʊmən hæd stʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɛdʒiənɪn ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz. ʃi stʃɹʌɡəl fibli ət fɝst - ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz nɑɾ ə wʊmən tə lɛt hɝsɛlf bi kæɹiɾ əbaʊt laɪk ə dɑl - bʌɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli ʃi sim tə ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪf ʃi dɪd meɪk əɹ oʊn fit, ʃi wəd fɔl oʊvɝ. ʃi sæɡd əɡɛns ði ɪliɑnɝz tʃɛst wɪð ə ɹɪzɛnfəl ɡlaʊɝ.

Domon had stood up with Egeanin in his arms. She struggled feebly at first - Egeanin was not a woman to let herself be carried about like a doll - but eventually she seemed to realize that if she did make her own feet, she would fall over. She sagged against the Illianer's chest with a resentful glower.

doʊmən wəd lɝn; ivən wən ə wʊmən niɾəd hɛlp, ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn ɪt, ʃi meɪd jə peɪ fəɹ ɡɪvɪŋ ɪt. "ɪm ði oʊnli wʌn u nu hɝ sikɹət," ʃi dʒɹɔld ɪn ə wik vɔɪs. "ði oʊnli wʌn u maɪt ɡɪv ɪɾ əweɪ, ət list. ʃi meɪ hæv θɔɾ ɪt wəd bi seɪf tə ɡoʊ hoʊm, wɪð mi dɛd."

Domon would learn; even when a woman needed help, if she did not want it, she made you pay for giving it. "I'm the only one who knew her secret," she drawled in a weak voice. "The only one who might give it away, at least. She may have thought it would be safe to go home, with me dead."

"wʌt sikɹət?" mæt æskt.

"What secret?" Mat asked.

ðə wʊmən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, fəɹ səm ɹizən, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət dimənz tʃɛst. faɪnəli ʃi saɪd. "ɹɛnə wɑz liʃt, wʌns. soʊ wɝ bɛθəmən ən sɛɾə. ðeɪ kən tʃænəl. əɹ meɪbi lɝn tə; aɪ doʊnt noʊ. bʌt ði æɾəm wɝkt ɑn ðoʊz θɹi. meɪbi ɪt wɝks ɑn ɛni sʌldəm." mæt wɪsəl θɹu hɪz tiθ.

The woman hesitated, for some reason, frowning at Demon's chest. Finally she sighed. "Renna was leashed, once. So were Bethamin and Seta. They can channel. Or maybe learn to; I don't know. But the a'dam worked on those three. Maybe it works on any sul'dam." Mat whistled through his teeth.

naʊ, ðət wəd bi ə kɪk ɪn ðə hɛd fəɹ ðə sintʃæn.

Now, that would be a kick in the head for the Seanchan.

lukə ən ɪz waɪf ɪkstʃeɪnʒd pʌzəld ɡlænsɪz, pleɪnli nɑɾ ʌndɝstændɪŋ ə wɝd. tɛslɪnz maʊθ hʌŋ oʊpən, ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi wɑʃt əweɪ ɪn ʃɑk. sɪlutʃə meɪɾ ən æŋɡɹi saʊnd, ðoʊ, blu aɪz bleɪzɪŋ, ən dʒɹɑp ðə bʌndəl ə klɔθ fɹəm əɹ bæk əz ʃi tʊk ə stɛp təwɔɹd doʊmən. ə kwɪk flæʃ ə tuɑnz fɪŋɡɝz stɑpt əɹ ɪn əɹ tʃɹæks, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz ə kwɪvɝɪŋ hɔlt. tuɑnz feɪs wɑz ə dɑɹk mæsk, ənɹiɾəbəl. ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk wʌt ʃi hæd hɝd, ðoʊ. kʌm tə θɪŋk, ʃi hæd sɛd ʃi tʃɹeɪn deɪmeɪn. oʊ, bɝn hɪm, ɑn tɑp ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls, hi wɑz gɑnə mɛɹi ə wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl?

Luca and his wife exchanged puzzled glances, plainly not understanding a word. Teslyn's mouth hung open, Aes Sedai serenity washed away in shock. Selucia made an angry sound, though, blue eyes blazing, and dropped the bundle of cloth from her back as she took a step toward Domon. A quick flash of Tuon's fingers stopped her in her tracks, though it was a quivering halt. Tuon's face was a dark mask, unreadable. She did not like what she had heard, though. Come to think, she had said she trained damane. Oh, burn him, on top of everything else, he was going to marry a woman who could channel?

ðə saʊn ə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz ənaʊns hɑɹnən ən ði ʌðɝ θɹi ɹɛdʒɹmz kʌmɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə nɛɹoʊ weɪ bɪtwin ðə tɛns ən wæɡənz əɾ ə kwɪk tʃɹɑt. ðɛɹ sɔɹdz wɝ bɛltəɾ ɑn ʌndɝ ðɛɹ kloʊks, mɛtwɪn wɪð ə dæɡɝ ɔlmoʊst əz lɔŋ əz ə ʃɔɹt-sɔɹd tə but, ən ɡɔɹɾɝən hæɾ ɪz hɛvi kɹɔsboʊ hæŋɪŋ əɾ ɪz sæɾəl, ɔlɹɛɾi dʒɹɔn ən lætʃt. ðə kɹæŋk əɾ ɪz bɛlt wəd teɪk ə fʊl mɪnət tə pʊl bæk ðə θɪk kɔɹd, bʌt ðɪs weɪ, ɔl i nid də wɑz pleɪs ə boʊlt. hɑɹnən kæɹiɾ ə dʌbəl-kɝv hɔɹsboʊ, wɪð ə bɹɪsəlɪŋ kwɪvɝ əɾ ɪz hɪp. fɝdʒɪn wɑz liɾɪŋ pɪps.

The sound of horses' hooves announced Harnan and the other three Redarms coming along the narrow way between the tents and wagons at a quick trot. Their swords were belted on under their cloaks, Metwyn with a dagger almost as long as a short-sword to boot, and Gorderan had his heavy crossbow hanging at his saddle, already drawn and latched. The crank at his belt would take a full minute to pull back the thick cord, but this way, all he need do was place a bolt. Harnan carried a double-curve horsebow, with a bristling quiver at his hip. Fergin was leading Pips.

hɑɹnən dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ dɪsmaʊntɪŋ. aɪɪŋ tuɑn ən sɪlutʃə səspɪʃəsli, ən lukə ən lətɛl wɪð ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ daʊt, hi lin daʊn fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl, ðə kɹud hɔk tætu ʃɑɹp ɑn ɪz tʃik.

Harnan did not bother dismounting. Eyeing Tuon and Selucia suspiciously, and Luca and Latelle with almost as much doubt, he leaned down from his saddle, the crude hawk tattoo sharp on his cheek.

"ɹɛnə stoʊl ə hɔɹs, maɪ lɔɹd," hi sɛd kwaɪətli. "ɹoʊd daʊn wʌn ə ðə hɔɹs hænlɝz ət ði ɛntʃɹəns ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊt. veɪnɪnz fɑloʊɪŋ hɝ. hi sɛz ʃi kəd ɹitʃ kɔɹəmən səm taɪm tənaɪt.

"Renna stole a horse, my Lord," he said quietly. "Rode down one of the horse handlers at the entrance getting out. Vanin's following her. He says she could reach Coramen some time tonight.

ðæts ðə weɪ ʃi hɛɾəd. ʃiz muvɪŋ ə lɑt fæstɝ ðən ðə wæɡənz dɪd. bʌt ʃiz ɹaɪɾɪŋ bæɹbæk; wi kən kætʃ hɝ, wɪð lʌk." hi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ðət lʌk wɝ ə mæɾɝ ə fækt. ðə mɛn ə ðə bæn tʃɹʌstɪd mæt kɔθənz lʌk mɔɹ ðən i dɪd hɪmsɛlf. ðəɹ dɪd nɑt sim tə bi ɛni tʃɔɪsəz, ɹɪli.

That's the way she headed. She's moving a lot faster than the wagons did. But she's riding bareback; we can catch her, with luck." He sounded as if that luck were a matter of fact. The men of the Band trusted Mat Cauthon's luck more than he did himself. There did not seem to be any choices, really.

ðə daɪs wɝ stɪl paʊndɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd. ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ə tʃæns ðeɪ maɪt fɔl ɪz weɪ. ə smɔl tʃæns. mæt kɔθənz lʌk. "ɡɛt jəɹ pipəl ɑn ðə ɹoʊɾ əz fæst əz ðeɪ kən pæk ʌp, lukə," hi sɛd, stɛpɪŋ ʌp ɑntu pɪps. "liv ðə wɔl ən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls jə kænt ɡɛɾ ɑntu ðə wæɡənz fæst. dʒʌst ɡoʊ."

The dice were still pounding in his head. There was still a chance they might fall his way. A small chance. Mat Cauthon's luck. "Get your people on the road as fast as they can pack up, Luca," he said, stepping up onto Pips. "Leave the wall and anything else you can't get onto the wagons fast. Just go."

"ɑɹ jə kɹeɪzi?" lukə spləɾɝd. "ɪf aɪ tʃɹaɪ tə tʃeɪs ðoʊz pipəl aʊt, əl əv ə ɹaɪət! ən ðəl wɑn ðɛɹ kɔɪn bæk!" laɪt, ðə mæn wəd θɪŋk ə mʌni wɪð ɪz nɛk stʃɹɛtʃt ɑn ðə hɛdzmənz blɑk.

"Are you crazy?" Luca spluttered. "If I try to chase those people out, I will have a riot! And they'll want their coin back!" Light, the man would think of money with his neck stretched on the headsman's block.

"θɪŋk wʌt jəl əv ɪf ə θaʊzən sintʃæn faɪn jə hɪɹ təmɑɹoʊ." mæts vɔɪs wɑz əz koʊld əz i kəd meɪk ɪt. ɪf i feɪld, ðə sintʃæn wəd ɹʌn lukəz ʃoʊ daʊn ɪn ʃɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ haʊɛvɝ fæs ðeɪ flɑɡd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. lukə nu ɪt, tu, fɹəm ðə twɪst ə hɪz maʊθ, əz ɪf i hæd dʒʌs bɪɾən ə ɹɑɾɪŋ plʌm. mæt meɪd hɪmsɛlf ɪɡnɔɹ ðə mæn. ðə daɪs wɝ dʒɹʌmɪŋ hɑɹd, bʌt ðeɪ hæd nɑt stɑp jɛt. "dʒulɪn, liv ɔl ðə ɡoʊl fəɹ lukə ɪksɛpt wʌn ɡʊd pɝs." meɪbi ðə mæn kəd bɹaɪb ɪz weɪ klɪɹ, wʌns ðə sintʃæn sɔ hi dɪd nɑɾ əv ðɛɹ dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn blʌɾi munz. "ɡæðɝ ɛvɹibɑɾi ən ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ əz sun əz jə kæn. wʌns jəɹ aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ə ðə taʊn, teɪk tə ðə fɔɹəst. əl faɪn ju."

"Think what you'll have if a thousand Seanchan find you here tomorrow." Mat's voice was as cold as he could make it. If he failed, the Seanchan would run Luca's show down in short order however fast they flogged their horses. Luca knew it, too, from the twist of his mouth, as if he had just bitten a rotting plum. Mat made himself ignore the man. The dice were drumming hard, but they had not stopped yet. "Juilin, leave all the gold for Luca except one good purse." Maybe the man could bribe his way clear, once the Seanchan saw he did not have their Daughter of the Nine bloody Moons. "Gather everybody and ride out as soon as you can. Once you're out of sight of the town, take to the forest. I'll find you."

"ɛvɹibɑɾi?" ʃɛltɝɪŋ θɛɹə wɪð ɪz bɑɾi, dʒulɪn dʒɝkt ɪz hɛd təwɔɹd tuɑn ən sɪlutʃə.

"Everybody?" Sheltering Thera with his body, Juilin jerked his head toward Tuon and Selucia.

"liv ðoʊz tu ɪn dʒʊɹədɔɹ, ən ðə sintʃæn maɪt stɑp wɪð ɡɛɾɪŋ əm bæk. ɪt maɪt sloʊ ðɛm daʊn, ət list. jə kip seɪɪŋ jəɹ gɑnə tɝn əm lus sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ." mæt mɛt tuɑnz aɪz. bɪɡ dɑɹk lɪkwəɾ aɪz, ɪn ə smuð ɪkspɹɛʃənləs feɪs. ʃi hæd pʊʃt əɹ hʊd bæk ə lɪɾəl, soʊ hi kəd si hɝ feɪs klɪɹli. ɪf i lɛft əɹ bɪhaɪnd, ðən ʃi kəd nɑt seɪ ðə wɝdz, əɹ ɪf ʃi dɪd, hi wəd bi tu fɑɹ weɪ fəɹ ðə wɝdz tə mæɾɝ. ɪf i lɛft əɹ bɪhaɪnd, hi wəd nɛvɝ lɝn waɪ ʃi smaɪl ðoʊz mɪstɪɹiəs smaɪlz, əɹ wʌt leɪ bɪhaɪn ðə mɪstɝi. laɪt, hi wɑz ə ful! pɪps dænst ə fju ɪmpeɪʃən stɛps.

"Leave those two in Jurador, and the Seanchan might stop with getting them back. It might slow them down, at least. You keep saying you're going to turn them loose sooner or later." Mat met Tuon's eyes. Big dark liquid eyes, in a smooth expressionless face. She had pushed her hood back a little, so he could see her face clearly. If he left her behind, then she could not say the words, or if she did, he would be too far way for the words to matter. If he left her behind, he would never learn why she smiled those mysterious smiles, or what lay behind the mystery. Light, he was a fool! Pips danced a few impatient steps.

"ɛvɹibɑɾi," hi sɛd. dɪd tuɑn nɑd slaɪtli, əz ɪf tə hɝsɛlf?

"Everybody," he said. Did Tuon nod slightly, as if to herself?

waɪ wəd ʃi nɑd? "lɛts ɹaɪd," hi toʊl hɑɹnən. ðeɪ hæd tə wɔk ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ʃoʊ, bʌɾ əz sun əz ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə ɹoʊd, mæt pʊt pɪps tə ə ɡæləp, kloʊk stʃɹimɪŋ bɪhaɪn ən hɛd daʊn tə kip ɪz hæt fɹəm bloʊɪŋ ɔf. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə peɪs jə kəd kip ə hɔɹs ət fəɹ lɔŋ. ðə ɹoʊd waʊn ɝaʊn hɪlz ən kɹɔst ɹɪdʒəz, əkeɪʒənəli kʌɾɪŋ θɹu wɛɹ ðə ɹaɪz wɑz nɑt tu haɪ. ðeɪ splæʃt əkɹɔs æŋkəl-dip stʃɹimz ən θʌndɝɾ oʊvɝ loʊ wʊɾən bɹɪdʒəz kɹɔsɪŋ dipɝ wɔɾɝ. tʃɹiz bɪɡæn tə əpɪɹ ɑn ðə sloʊps əɡɛn, paɪn ən lɛðɝlif ʃoʊɪŋ ɡɹin əmʌŋ ðə wɪntɝ-bɛɹ bɹæntʃəz ə ði ʌðɝz. fɑɹmz klʌŋ tə səm ə ðə hɪlz, loʊ taɪlɝuf stoʊn haʊsəz ən tɔlɝ bɑɹnz, ən naʊ ən ðən ə hæmləɾ ʌv eɪɾ əɹ tɛn haʊsəz.

Why would she nod? "Let's ride," he told Harnan. They had to walk their horses through the crowds to get out of the show, but as soon as they reached the road, Mat put Pips to a gallop, cloak streaming behind and head down to keep his hat from blowing off. It was not a pace you could keep a horse at for long. The road wound around hills and crossed ridges, occasionally cutting through where the rise was not too high. They splashed across ankle-deep streams and thundered over low wooden bridges crossing deeper water. Trees began to appear on the slopes again, pine and leatherleaf showing green among the winter-bare branches of the others. Farms clung to some of the hills, low tileroofed stone houses and taller barns, and now and then a hamlet of eight or ten houses.

ə fju maɪlz fɹəm ðə ʃoʊ, mæt spɑɾəd ə waɪd mæn əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, sɪɾɪŋ ɪz sæɾəl laɪk ə sæk ə sut. ðə hɔɹs wɑz ə lɛɡi dʌn, iɾɪŋ ɡɹaʊn əɾ ə stɛɾi tʃɹɑt. ɪt fɪɡjɝd ðəɾ ə hɔɹs θif hæɾ ən aɪ fəɹ ə ɡʊɾ ænəməl. kætʃɪŋ ðə saʊn ə ðɛɹ hʊvz, veɪnɪn lʊk bæk, bʌɾ i oʊnli sloʊd tə ə wɔk.

A few miles from the show, Mat spotted a wide man ahead of them, sitting his saddle like a sack of suet. The horse was a leggy dun, eating ground at a steady trot. It figured that a horse thief had an eye for a good animal. Catching the sound of their hooves, Vanin looked back, but he only slowed to a walk.

ðət wɑz bæd. wən mæt sloʊd pɪps bɪsaɪd ðə dʌn, veɪnɪn spæt. "bɛst weɪdʒɝ wi ɡɑɾ ɪz wi faɪn əɹ hɔɹs ɹʌn tə dɛθ, soʊ aɪ kən tʃɹæk əɹ əfʊt fɹəm ðɛɹ," hi mʌɾɝd. "ʃiz pʊʃɪŋ hɑɹɾɝ ðən aɪ fɪɡjɝd, wɪð əɹ bæɹbæk. ɪf wi pʊʃ, wi kən meɪbi kætʃ əɹ baɪ sʌnsɛt. ɪf əɹ hɔɹs doʊn faʊndɝ əɹ daɪ, ðæts əbaʊt ðə taɪm ʃɪl meɪk kɔɹəmən."

That was bad. When Mat slowed Pips beside the dun, Vanin spat. "Best wager we got is we find her horse run to death, so I can track her afoot from there," he muttered. "She's pushing harder than I figured, with her bareback. If we push, we can maybe catch her by sunset. If her horse don't founder or die, that's about the time she'll make Coramen."

mæt tɪp bæk ɪz hɛd tə ɡlæns ət ðə sʌn, ɔlmoʊst stʃɹeɪɾ oʊvɝhɛd. ɪt wɑz ə lɔŋ weɪ tə kʌvɝ ɪn lɛs ðən hæf ə deɪ. ɪf i tɝn bæk, hi kəd bi ə ɡʊd dɪstəns ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə dʒʊɹədɔɹ baɪ sʌnsɛt, ɪn kʌmpəni wɪð tɑm ən dʒulɪn ən ði ʌðɝz. wɪð tuɑn. wɪð ðə sintʃæn noʊɪŋ tə hʌn mæt kɔθən. ðə mæn u hæd kɪdnæp ðə dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz kəd nɑɾ oʊn ɪnʌf lʌk tə ɡɛɾ ɔf wɪð biɪŋ meɪd dækoʊvæl. ən sʌmtaɪm təmɑɹoʊ əɹ ðə nɛks deɪ, ðeɪ wəd plæn lukə ɑn ən ɪmpəlɪŋ steɪk. lukə ən lətɛl, pɛtʃɹə ən klɛɹin ən ðə ɹɛst. ə θɪkɪɾ ʌv ɪmpəlɪŋ steɪks. ðə daɪs ɹæɾəld ən baʊnst ɪn ɪz hɛd. "wi kən meɪk ɪt," hi sɛd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs.

Mat tipped back his head to glance at the sun, almost straight overhead. It was a long way to cover in less than half a day. If he turned back, he could be a good distance the other side of Jurador by sunset, in company with Thom and Juilin and the others. With Tuon. With the Seanchan knowing to hunt Mat Cauthon. The man who had kidnapped the Daughter of the Nine Moons could not own enough luck to get off with being made da'covale. And sometime tomorrow or the next day, they would plant Luca on an impaling stake. Luca and Latelle, Petra and Clarine and the rest. A thicket of impaling stakes. The dice rattled and bounced in his head. "We can make it," he said. There was no other choice.

veɪnɪn spæt.

Vanin spat.

ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn weɪ tə kʌvɝ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv ɡɹaʊn kwɪkli, ɑn ə hɔɹs, ɪf jə mɛn tə bi ɑn eɪ. laɪv hɔɹs ət ði ɛnd. ðeɪ wɔk ði ænəməlz fəɹ hæf ə maɪl, ðən tʃɹɑɾəd hæf ə maɪl. ðə seɪm əɾ ə kæntɝ, ðən ə ɹʌn, ən ɪt wɑz bæk tə ə wɔk. ðə sʌn bɪɡæn tə slaɪd daʊnwɝd, ən ðə daɪs spʌn.

There was only one way to cover a great deal of ground quickly, on a horse, if you meant to be on a. live horse at the end. They walked the animals for half a mile, then trotted half a mile. The same at a canter, then a run, and it was back to a walk. The sun began to slide downward, and the dice spun.

ɝaʊn spɑɹsli fɔɹəstəd hɪlz ən oʊvɝ tʃɹi-tɑpt ɹɪdʒəz. stʃɹimz ðət kəd bi kɹɔst ɪn θɹi stʃɹaɪdz, bɛɹli wɛɾɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz, ən stʃɹimz θɝɾi peɪsɪz əkɹɔs wɪð flæt bɹɪdʒəz ʌv wʊɾ əɹ səmtaɪmz stoʊn. ðə sʌn sæŋk loʊɝ ən loʊɝ, ən ðə daɪs spʌn fæstɝ ən fæstɝ. ɔlmoʊs bæk tə ði ɛlbɑɹ, ən noʊ saɪn ə ɹɛnə ɪksɛp skʌfs ɑn ðə hɑɹd dɝɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd ðət veɪnɪn pɔɪntəd tə əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ peɪntəd saɪnz.

Around sparsely forested hills and over tree-topped ridges. Streams that could be crossed in three strides, barely wetting the horses' hooves, and streams thirty paces across with flat bridges of wood or sometimes stone. The sun sank lower and lower, and the dice spun faster and faster. Almost back to the Elbar, and no sign of Renna except scuffs on the hard dirt of the road that Vanin pointed to as if they were painted signs.

"ɡɛɾɪŋ kloʊs, naʊ," ðə fæt mæn mʌɾɝd. hi dɪd nɑt saʊn hæpi, ðoʊ.

"Getting close, now," the fat man muttered. He did not sound happy, though.

ðən ðeɪ ɹaʊndəɾ ə hɪl, ən ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ loʊ bɹɪdʒ əhɛd. bɪɑnd, ðə ɹoʊd twɪstəd nɔɹθ tə kɹɔs ðə nɛkst ɹɪdʒ θɹu ə sæɾəl. ðə sʌn, sɪɾɪŋ ətɑp ðə ɹɪdʒ, bleɪzd ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz.

Then they rounded a hill, and there was another low bridge ahead. Beyond, the road twisted north to cross the next ridge through a saddle. The sun, sitting atop the ridge, blazed in their eyes.

kɔɹəmən leɪ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðət ɹɪdʒ. pʊlɪŋ ɪz hæt loʊ fəɹ ʃeɪd, mæt sɝtʃt ðə ɹoʊd fəɹ ə wʊmən, fəɹ ɛniwʌn, maʊntəɾ əɹ əfʊt, ən ɪz hɑɹt sæŋk.

Coramen lay on the other side of that ridge. Pulling his hat low for shade, Mat searched the road for a woman, for anyone, mounted or afoot, and his heart sank.

veɪnɪn kɝst ən pɔɪntəd.

Vanin cursed and pointed.

ə læðɝd beɪ wɑz leɪbɝɪŋ ɪts weɪ ʌp ðə sloʊp ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ, ə wʊmən fɹæntəkəli kɪkɪŋ ɪts flæŋks, ɝdʒɪŋ ɪt tə klaɪm. ɹɛnə hæd bɪn tu æŋkʃəs tə ɹitʃ ðə sintʃæn tə stɪk wɪð ðə ɹoʊd. ʃi wɑz meɪbi tu hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz fɹəm ðɛm, ən ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn maɪlz. hɝ maʊnt wɑz ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə kəlæpsɪŋ, bʌt ʃi kəd ɡɛt daʊn ən ɹʌn wɪðɪn saɪɾ ə ðə ɡæɹɪsənz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd ɹitʃ hɝ. ɔl ʃi hæd tə də wɑz ɹitʃ ðə kɹɛst, ənʌðɝ fɪfti fit.

A lathered bay was laboring its way up the slope on the other side of the river, a woman frantically kicking its flanks, urging it to climb. Renna had been too anxious to reach the Seanchan to stick with the road. She was maybe two hundred paces from them, and she might as well have been miles. Her mount was on the point of collapsing, but she could get down and run within sight of the garrisons before they could reach her. All she had to do was reach the crest, another fifty feet.

"maɪ lɔɹd?" hɑɹnən sɛd. hi hæɾ ən æɹoʊ nɑkt ən ɪz baʊ hæf ɹeɪzd. ɡɔɹɾɝən hɛl ðə hɛvi kɹɔsboʊ tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ə θɪk pɔɪntəd boʊlt ɪn pleɪs.

"My Lord?" Harnan said. He had an arrow nocked and his bow half raised. Gorderan held the heavy crossbow to his shoulder, a thick pointed bolt in place.

mæt fɛl sʌmθɪŋ flɪkɝ ən daɪ ɪnsaɪd hɪm. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt. sʌmθɪŋ. ðə daɪs ɹoʊld laɪk θʌndɝ. "ʃut," hi sɛd. hi wɑntəd tə kloʊz ɪz aɪz. ðə kɹɔsboʊ snæpt; ðə boʊl meɪɾ ə blæk stʃɹik θɹu ði ɛɹ. ɹɛnə slæm fɔɹwɝd wən ɪt hɪɾ əɹ bæk. ʃi hæɾ ɔlmoʊs mænədʒ tə pʊʃ hɝsɛlf ɪɹɛkt əɡɛns ðə beɪz nɛk wən hɑɹnənz æɹoʊ tʊk hɝ.

Mat felt something flicker and die inside him. He did not know what. Something. The dice rolled like thunder. "Shoot," he said. He wanted to close his eyes. The crossbow snapped; the bolt made a black streak through the air. Renna slammed forward when it hit her back. She had almost managed to push herself erect against the bay's neck when Harnan's arrow took her.

sloʊli, ʃi tɑpəl fɹəm ðə hɔɹs, slaɪɾɪŋ daʊn ðə sloʊp, ɹoʊlɪŋ, baʊnsɪŋ ɔf sæplɪŋz, tʌmbəlɪŋ fæstɝ ən fæstɝ əntɪl ʃi splæʃt ɪndə ðə stʃɹim. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ʃi floʊɾəd feɪsdaʊn əɡɛns ðə bæŋk, ən ðən ðə kɝən kɑɾ əɹ ən pʊld əɹ əweɪ, skɝts bɪloʊɪŋ ʌp ɑn ðə wɔɾɝ. sloʊli ʃi dʒɹɪftəd təwɔɹd ði ɛlbɑɹ. meɪbi, ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ʃi wəd ɹitʃ ðə si. ən ðət meɪd θɹi. ɪt hɑɹdli sim tə mæɾɝ ðət ðə daɪs hæd stɑpt. ðət meɪd θɹi. nɛvɝ əɡɛn, hi θɔɾ əz ɹɛnə floʊɾəd aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ɝaʊn ə bɛnd. aɪaɪaɪ daɪ fəɹ ɪt, nɛvɝ əɡɛn. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt pɹɛs, ɹaɪɾɪŋ bæk istwɝd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪnt, ən mæt fɛl tu boʊn-wɪɹi. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt stɑp, ðoʊ, ɪksɛp tə bɹið ən wɔɾɝ ðə hɔɹsəz. noʊ wʌn wɑntəd tə tɔk. ɪt wɑz ðə smɔl aʊɝz ə ðə naɪt wən ðeɪ ɹitʃt dʒʊɹədɔɹ, ðə taʊn ə dɑɹk mæs wɪð ðə ɡeɪts ʃʌt taɪt. klaʊdz kʌvɝd ðə mun. sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ðə kænvəs wɔlz ə lukəz ʃoʊ wɝ stɪl ɪn pleɪs dʒʌs bɪɑn ðə taʊn. wɪð ə pɛɹ ə bʌlki mɛn ɹæpt ɪn blæŋkəts snɔɹɪŋ əwɛɹ bɪniθ ðə bɪɡ bænɝ əz ðeɪ ɡɑɹɾəd ði ɛntʃɹəns. ivən fɹəm ðə ɹoʊd, ɪn ðə dɑɹk, ɪt wɑz pleɪn ðət wæɡənz ən tɛns fɪl ðə speɪs bɪhaɪn ðə wɔl.

Slowly, she toppled from the horse, sliding down the slope, rolling, bouncing off saplings, tumbling faster and faster until she splashed into the stream. For a moment, she floated facedown against the bank, and then the current caught her and pulled her away, skirts billowing up on the water. Slowly she drifted toward the Elbar. Maybe, eventually, she would reach the sea. And that made three. It hardly seemed to matter that the dice had stopped. That made three. Never again, he thought as Renna floated out of sight around a bend. III die for it, never again. They did not press, riding back eastward. There was no point, and Mat felt too bone-weary. They did not stop, though, except to breathe and water the horses. No one wanted to talk. It was the small hours of the night when they reached Jurador, the town a dark mass with the gates shut tight. Clouds covered the moon. Surprisingly, the canvas walls of Luca's show were still in place just beyond the town. With a pair of bulky men wrapped in blankets snoring aware beneath the big banner as they guarded the entrance. Even from the road, in the dark, it was plain that wagons and tents filled the space behind the wall.

"æt list aɪ kən tɛl lukə hi dʌzn əv tə ɹʌn æftɝ ɔl," mæt sɛd wɛɹəli, tɝnɪŋ pɪps təwɔɹd ðə bænɝ. "meɪbi hɪl ɡɪv əs ə pleɪs tə slip ə fju aʊɝz." fəɹ ɔl ðə ɡoʊld i hæd lɛft, lukə ʃəd ɡɪv əm ɪz oʊn wæɡən, bʌt noʊɪŋ ðə mæn, mæt hæd hoʊps fəɹ klin stʃɹɔ sʌmwɛɹ. təmɑɹoʊ, hi wəd sɛɾ aʊt tə faɪn tɑm ən ði ʌðɝz. ən tuɑn. təmɑɹoʊ, wən i hæd ɹɛstəd.

"At least I can tell Luca he doesn't have to run after all," Mat said wearily, turning Pips toward the banner. "Maybe he'll give us a place to sleep a few hours." For all the gold he had left, Luca should give them his own wagon, but knowing the man, Mat had hopes for clean straw somewhere. Tomorrow, he would set out to find Thom and the others. And Tuon. Tomorrow, when he had rested.

ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ ʃɑk weɪɾəd ɪnsaɪd lukəz hjudʒ wæɡən. ɪt tʃɹuli wɑz ɹumi ɪnsaɪd, ət lis fəɹ ə wæɡən, wɪð ə nɛɹoʊ teɪbəl sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ən speɪs tə wɔk ɝaʊn ɪt. teɪbəl, kʌbɝdz ən ʃɛlvz ɔl wɝ pɑlɪʃt tɪl ðeɪ ɡloʊd. tuɑn wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə ɡɪldɪd tʃɛɹ  -  lukə wəɾ əv ə tʃɛɹ, ən ɡɪldɪd, wən ɛvɹibɑɾi ɛls meɪd də wɪð stulz!  -  wɪð sɪlutʃə stændɪŋ əɾ əɹ bæk. ə bimɪŋ lukə wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ lətɛl ɔfɝ tuɑn ə pleɪɾ ə stimɪŋ peɪstʃɹiz, wɪtʃ ðə dɑɹk lɪɾəl wʊmən wɑz ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi wəɾ æktʃəli  it sʌmθɪŋ ðət lukəz waɪf hæd kʊkt. tuɑn ʃoʊd noʊ sɝpɹaɪz əɾ ɔl ət mæt wɔkɪŋ ɪndə ðə wæɡən. "ɪz ʃi kæptʃɝd, əɹ dɛd?" ʃi sɛd, pɪkɪŋ ʌp ə peɪstʃɹi wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz kɝvd ɪn ðət kjʊɹiəsli ɡɹeɪsfəl weɪ. "dɛd," hi sɛd flætli. "lukə, wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪt -  " "aɪ fɝbɪɾ ɪt, tɔɪ!" tuɑn snæpt, pɔɪntɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ əɾ ɪm ʃɑɹpli. "aɪ fɝbɪd jə tə mɔɹn ə tʃɹeɪɾɝ!" hɝ vɔɪs sɔfənd, slaɪtli, bʌɾ ɪt ɹɪmeɪn fɝm. "ʃi ɝn dɛθ baɪ bɪtʃɹeɪɪŋ ði ɛmpaɪɝ, ən wʊɾə əv bɪtʃɹeɪd jə əz izəli. ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɪtʃɹeɪ ju. wʌt jə dɪd wɑz dʒʌstəs, ən aɪ neɪm ɪt soʊ." hɝ toʊn sɛd ðəɾ ɪf ʃi neɪmd ə θɪŋ, ðən ɪt wɑz wɛl ən tʃɹuli neɪmd.

A greater shock waited inside Luca's huge wagon. It truly was roomy inside, at least for a wagon, with a narrow table sitting in the middle and space to walk around it. Table, cupboards and shelves all were polished till they glowed. Tuon was sitting in a gilded chair  -  Luca would have a chair, and gilded, when everybody else made do with stools!  -  with Selucia standing at her back. A beaming Luca was watching Latelle offer Tuon a plate of steaming pastries, which the dark little woman was examining as if she would actually eat something that Luca's wife had cooked. Tuon showed no surprise at all at Mat walking into the wagon. "Is she captured, or dead?" she said, picking up a pastry with her fingers curved in that curiously graceful way. "Dead," he said flatly. "Luca, what in the Light -  " "I forbid it, Toy!" Tuon snapped, pointing a finger at him sharply. "I forbid you to mourn a traitor!" Her voice softened, slightly, but it remained firm. "She earned death by betraying the Empire, and she would have betrayed you as easily. She was trying to betray you. What you did was justice, and I name it so." Her tone said that if she named a thing, then it was well and truly named.

mæt skwizd ɪz aɪz ʃʌt fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "ɪz ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls stɪl hɪɹ, tu?" hi dɪmændəd.

Mat squeezed his eyes shut for a moment. "Is everyone else still here, too?" he demanded.

"ʌv kɔɹs," lukə sɛd, stɪl smaɪlɪŋ laɪk ə bʊlɡus ful. "ðə leɪɾi - ðə haɪ leɪɾi; fɝɡɪv mi, haɪ leɪɾi." hi baʊd dipli. "ʃi tɔk tə mɛɹɪlɪn ən sændɑɹ, ænd. . . . wɛl, jə si haʊ ɪt wɑz. ə vɛɹi pɝsweɪsɪv wʊmən, ðə leɪɾi. ðə haɪ leɪɾi. kɔθən, əbaʊt maɪ ɡoʊld. jə sɛd ðeɪ wɝ tə hæn ɪɾ oʊvɝ, bʌt mɛɹɪlɪn sɛd hid slɪt maɪ θɹoʊt fɝst, ən sændɑɹ θɹɛɾənd tə kɹæk maɪ hɛd, ænd. .

"Of course," Luca said, still smiling like a bullgoose fool. "The Lady - the High Lady; forgive me, High Lady." He bowed deeply. "She talked to Merrilin and Sandar, and. . . . Well, you see how it was. A very persuasive woman, the Lady. The High Lady. Cauthon, about my gold. You said they were to hand it over, but Merrilin said he'd slit my throat first, and Sandar threatened to crack my head, and. .

. ." hi tʃɹeɪld ɔf ʌndɝ mæts stɛɹ, ðən sʌɾənli bɹaɪɾənd əɡɛn. "lʊk wʌt ðə leɪɾi ɡeɪv mi!" snætʃɪŋ oʊpən wʌn ə ðə kʌbɝdz, hi pʊld aʊɾ ə foʊldəd peɪpɝ ðəɾ i hɛld ɹɛvɝənli ɪn boʊθ hænz.

. ." He trailed off under Mat's stare, then suddenly brightened again. "Look what the Lady gave me!" Snatching open one of the cupboards, he pulled out a folded paper that he held reverently in both hands.

ɪt wɑz θɪk peɪpɝ, ən waɪɾ əz snoʊ; ɪkspɛnsɪv. "ə wɔɹənt. nɑt sild, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt saɪnd. vɑlən lukəz ɡɹæn tʃɹævlɪŋ ʃoʊ ən mæɡnɪfəsən dɪspleɪ ʌv mɑɹvəlz ən wʌndɝz ɪz naʊ ʌndɝ ðə pɝsənəl pɹətɛkʃən ə ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑn æθeɪɪm kɔɹ pɛndʒɹæɡ. ɛvɹiwʌn wɪl noʊ hu ðəɾ ɪz, ʌv kɔɹs. aɪ kəd ɡoʊ tə sintʃæn. aɪ kəd pʊɾ ɑn maɪ ʃoʊ fəɹ ði ɛmpɹɛs! meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ," hi æɾəd heɪstəli, wɪð ənʌðɝ baʊ tə tuɑn.

It was thick paper, and white as snow; expensive. "A warrant. Not sealed, of course, but signed. Valan Luca's Grand Traveling Show and Magnificent Display of Marvels and Wonders is now under the personal protection of the High Lady Tuon Athaem Kore Paendrag. Everyone will know who that is, of course. I could go to Seanchan. I could put on my show for the Empress! May she live forever," he added hastily, with another bow to Tuon.

fəɹ nʌθɪŋ, mæt θɔt blikli. hi sæŋk daʊn ɑn wʌn ə ðə bɛdz wɪð ɪz ɛlboʊz ɑn ɪz niz, ɝnɪŋ ə vɛɹi pɔɪntəd lʊk fɹəm lətɛl. laɪkli oʊnli tuɑnz pɹɛzəns kɛpt əɹ fɹəm klaʊɾɪŋ hɪm!

For nothing, Mat thought bleakly. He sank down on one of the beds with his elbows on his knees, earning a very pointed look from Latelle. Likely only Tuon's presence kept her from clouting him!

tuɑn ɹeɪzd ə pɝɛmptɝi hænd, ə blæk pɔɹsələn dɑl bʌɾ ɛvɹi ɪntʃ ə kwin dɪspaɪt ðə ʃæbi tu-lɑɹdʒ dʒɹɛs. "ju ɑɹ nɑt tə juz ðəɾ ɪksɛpt ət nid, mæstɝ lukə. ɡɹeɪt nid!" "ʌv kɔɹs, haɪ leɪɾi; ʌv kɔɹs." lukə bɑbd baʊz əz ɪf i maɪt bi kɪsɪŋ ðə flɔɹbɔɹdz ɛni mɪnət. ɔl fəɹ blʌɾi nʌθɪŋ!

Tuon raised a peremptory hand, a black porcelain doll but every inch a queen despite the shabby too-large dress. "You are not to use that except at need, Master Luca. Great need!" "Of course, High Lady; of course." Luca bobbed bows as if he might be kissing the floorboards any minute. All for bloody nothing!

"aɪ dɪd meɪk spəsɪfɪk mɛnʃən ə hu ɪz nɑɾ ʌndɝ maɪ pɹətɛkʃən, tɔɪ." tuɑn tʊk ə baɪɾ ə peɪstʃɹi ən dɛləkətli bɹʌʃt ə kɹʌm fɹəm əɹ lɪp wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ. "kæn jə ɡɛs huz neɪm hɛdz ðət lɪst?" ʃi smaɪld. nɑɾ ə məlɪʃəs smaɪl. ənʌðɝ ə ðoʊz smaɪlz fəɹ hɝsɛlf, əmjuzmən əɹ dɪlaɪɾ ɪn sʌmθɪŋ i kəd nɑt si. sʌɾənli, hi noʊɾəst sʌmθɪŋ. ðət lɪɾəl klʌstɝ ə sɪlk ɹoʊzbʊdz i hæd ɡɪvən əɹ wɑz pɪn tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝ. dɪspaɪt hɪmsɛlf, mæt bɪɡæn tə læf. hi θɹu hɪz hæt daʊn ɑn ðə flɔɹ ən læft. wɪð ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɔl ɪz ɛfɝts, hi dɪd nɑt noʊ ðɪs wʊmən əɾ ɔl! nɑɾ ə bɪt! hi læft əntɪl ɪz ɹɪbz hɝt.

"I did make specific mention of who is not under my protection, Toy." Tuon took a bite of pastry and delicately brushed a crumb from her lip with a finger. "Can you guess whose name heads that list?" She smiled. Not a malicious smile. Another of those smiles for herself, amusement or delight in something he could not see. Suddenly, he noticed something. That little cluster of silk rosebuds he had given her was pinned to her shoulder. Despite himself, Mat began to laugh. He threw his hat down on the floor and laughed. With everything, all his efforts, he did not know this woman at all! Not a bit! He laughed until his ribs hurt.

tʃæptɝ θɝɾi

CHAPTER 30

wʌt ði oʊθ ɹɑd kən də ðə sʌn sæɾ ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən, pɝfəkli sɪləuɛɾɪŋ ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪn ðə dɪstəns, bʌt ðə koʊld ə ðə pɹiviəs naɪt sim tə bi dipənɪŋ, ən dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ klaʊdz mɑɹtʃɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ θɹɛɾənd ə snoʊfɔl. wɪntɝ wɑz dɪmɪnɪʃɪŋ, jɛɾ ɪt hæd klʌŋ pæst wən spɹɪŋ ʃəɾ əv bɪɡʌn, lusənɪŋ ɪts hoʊl fɪtfəli. ðə nɔɪzɪz ə mɔɹnɪŋ pɛnətʃɹeɪɾəd ɛɡwinz tɛnt, aɪsəleɪɾəd əz ɪt wɑz fɹəm ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪt. ðə kæmp sim tə vaɪbɹeɪt. leɪbɝɝz wəd bi bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪn wɔɾɝ fɹəm ðə wɛlz, ən ɛkstʃɹə mɛʒɝz ə faɪɝwʊɾ ən tʃɑɹkoʊl ɪn kɑɹts. sɝvɪŋ wɪmən wəd bi fɛtʃɪŋ sɪstɝz' bɹɛkfəsts, ən nɑvəsɪz ɪn ðə sɛkən sɪɾɪŋ skɝiɪŋ tə ðɛɹz, ðoʊz ɪn ðə fɝst ən θɝd tə klæsəz. ɪt wɑz ə moʊmɛntəs deɪ, ðoʊ nʌn ə ðɛm nu ɪt. laɪkli, tədeɪ wəd si ən ɛn tə ðə spjʊɹiəs nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz ðət wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ɪn dɛɹn, əɾ ə teɪbəl ʌndɝ ə pəvɪljən ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə bɹɪdʒ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. spjʊɹiəs ɑn boʊθ saɪdz. ɪleɪɾəz ɹeɪɾɝz kəntɪnjud tə stʃɹaɪk wɪð ɪmpjunɪɾi ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ. ɪn ɛni keɪs, tədeɪ wəd bi ðə læs miɾɪŋ fəɹ səm taɪm.

What the Oath Rod Can Do The sun sat on the horizon, perfectly silhouetting the White Tower in the distance, but the cold of the previous night seemed to be deepening, and dark gray clouds marching across the sky threatened a snowfall. Winter was diminishing, yet it had clung past when spring should have begun, loosening its hold fitfully. The noises of morning penetrated Egwene's tent, isolated as it was from everything around it. The camp seemed to vibrate. Laborers would be bringing in water from the wells, and extra measures of firewood and charcoal in carts. Serving women would be fetching sisters' breakfasts, and novices in the second sitting scurrying to theirs, those in the first and third to classes. It was a momentous day, though none of them knew it. Likely, today would see an end to the spurious negotiations that were going on in Darein, at a table under a pavilion at the foot of the bridge to Tar Valon. Spurious on both sides. Elaida's raiders continued to strike with impunity on the other side of the river. In any case, today would be the last meeting for some time.

piɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ oʊn bɹɛkfəst, ɛɡwin saɪɾ ən pɪkt ə taɪni blæk flɛk aʊɾ ə ðə stimɪŋ pɔɹədʒ, waɪpɪŋ ɪt fɹəm əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ə lɪnən næpkɪn wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ kloʊsli ɪnʌf tə bi ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə wivəl. ɪf jə kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ, ðən jə wɝid lɛs əbaʊt wʌt ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə boʊl. ʃi pʊɾ ə spunfʊl ɪndə hɝ maʊθ ən tʃɹaɪd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ðə swit slɪvɝz ə dʒɹaɪɾ eɪpɹəkɑt ðət tʃɛsə hæd blɛndəɾ ɪn. dɪd sʌmθɪŋ kɹæk ʌndɝ əɹ tiθ? "ɪɾ ɔl fidz ðə bɛli, maɪ mʌðɝ juz tə seɪ, soʊ peɪ ɪt noʊ maɪnd," tʃɛsə mɝmɝɾ əz ɪf tɔkɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. ðət wɑz haʊ ʃi ɡeɪv ɛɡwin ædvaɪs, wɪθaʊt stʃɹeɪɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə laɪn bɪtwin mɪstʃɹəs ən meɪd. ət list, ʃi ɡeɪv ædvaɪs wən hɑlimə wɑz nɑt pɹɛzənt, ən ði ʌðɝ wʊmən hæd lɛft ɝli ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. tʃɛsə wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn wʌn ə ðə kloʊðɪŋ tʃɛsts, ɪn keɪs ɛɡwin wɑntəd sʌmθɪŋ əɹ niɾəd ən ɛɹən ɹʌn, bʌt naʊ ən ðən əɹ aɪz stʃɹeɪd tə ðə paɪl ʌv ɡɑɹməns ðət wɝ tə ɡoʊ ðə wɑʃwɪmən tədeɪ. ʃi nɛvɝ maɪndəd dɑɹnɪŋ əɹ mɛndɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛɡwin, bʌɾ ɪn əɹ bʊk, sɔɹɾɪŋ lɔnʒɹi wʊɾə bɪn stɛpɪŋ oʊvɝ ðət laɪn.

Peering at her own breakfast, Egwene sighed and picked a tiny black fleck out of the steaming porridge, wiping it from her fingers on a linen napkin without looking closely enough to be sure that it was a weevil. If you could not be sure, then you worried less about what remained in the bowl. She put a spoonful into her mouth and tried to concentrate on the sweet slivers of dried apricot that Chesa had blended in. Did something crack under her teeth? "It all feeds the belly, my mother used to say, so pay it no mind," Chesa murmured as if talking to herself. That was how she gave Egwene advice, without straying across the line between mistress and maid. At least, she gave advice when Halima was not present, and the other woman had left early this morning. Chesa was sitting on one of the clothing chests, in case Egwene wanted something or needed an errand run, but now and then her eyes strayed to the pile of garments that were to go the washwomen today. She never minded darning or mending in front of Egwene, but in her book, sorting laundry would have been stepping over that line.

smuðɪŋ ðə ɡɹɪmɑs fɹəm əɹ feɪs, ɛɡwin wɑz əbaʊt tə tɛl ðə wʊmən tə ɡoʊ ɡɛɾ əɹ oʊn bɹɛkfəst - tʃɛsə kənsɪɾɝd iɾɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwin fɪnɪʃt ənʌðɝ tʃɹænzɡɹɛʃən - bʌt bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəɾ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, naɪsaʊ pʊʃt ɪndə ðə tɛnt, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə ɡloʊ ɑfseɪaɪdɑɹ. əz ði ɛntʃɹi flæps fɛl, ɛɡwin kɑɾ ə ɡlɪmps ə sɑɹɪn, naɪsaʊz bɔld, blæk-bɪɹɾəd stʌmp ʌv ə wɔɹɾɝ, weɪɾɪŋ aʊtsaɪd.

Smoothing the grimace from her face, Egwene was about to tell the woman to go get her own breakfast - Chesa considered eating before Egwene finished another transgression - but before she could open her mouth, Nisao pushed into the tent, surrounded by the glow ofsaidar. As the entry flaps fell, Egwene caught a glimpse of Sarin, Nisao's bald, black-bearded stump of a Warder, waiting outside.

ðə smɔl sɪstɝz kaʊl wɑz daʊn, kɛɹfəli ɝeɪnʒd ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz soʊ ðə jɛloʊ vɛlvət laɪnɪŋ ʃoʊd, jɛt ʃi wɑz klʌtʃɪŋ əɹ kloʊk əz ðoʊ ʃi fɛl ðə koʊld ɪntɛnsli. ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ, dʒʌst ɡeɪv tʃɛsə ə ʃɑɹp lʊk. tʃɛsə weɪɾəd fəɹ ɛɡwinz nɑd, ɡæðɝɾ əɹ oʊn kloʊk ən skɝiɾ aʊt. ʃi maɪt nɑt bi eɪbəl tə si ðə laɪɾ ə ðə paʊɝ, bʌt ʃi nu wən ɛɡwin wɑntəd pɹaɪvəsi.

The small sister's cowl was down, carefully arranged on her shoulders so the yellow velvet lining showed, yet she was clutching her cloak as though she felt the cold intensely. She said nothing, just gave Chesa a sharp look. Chesa waited for Egwene's nod, gathered her own cloak and scurried out. She might not be able to see the light of the Power, but she knew when Egwene wanted privacy.

"kɛɹən stæŋ ɪz dɛd," naɪsaʊ sɛd wɪθaʊt pɹiæmbəl. hɝ feɪs wɑz smuð, hɝ vɔɪs stɛɾi, ən tʃɪl. ʃɔɹɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɛɡwin fil tɔl, ʃi stʊɾ əz ðoʊ stʃɹeɪnɪŋ fəɹ ən ɛkstʃɹə ɪntʃ. naɪsaʊ dɪd nɑt juʒəwəli də ðæt. "sɛvən sɪstɝz hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi tɛstəd fəɹ ɹɛzənəns bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɡɑt ðɛɹ. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ daʊt ʃi wɑz kɪl juzɪŋ seɪɾɪn. hɝ nɛk wɑz bɹoʊkən. ʃæɾɝd. əz ɪf əɹ hɛd hæd bɪn ɹɛntʃt ɝaʊn fʊl sɝkəl. ət list ɪt wɑz kwɪk." naɪsaʊ dʒɹu ə dip, ənstɛɾi bɹɛθ, ðən ɹilaɪzd wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn ən pʊl hɝsɛlf ʌp ivən stʃɹeɪɾɝ. "hɝ wɔɹɾɝ ɪz pɹaɪm fəɹ mɝɾɝ.

"Kairen Stang is dead," Nisao said without preamble. Her face was smooth, her voice steady, and chill. Short enough to make Egwene feel tall, she stood as though straining for an extra inch. Nisao did not usually do that. "Seven sisters had already tested for resonance before I got there. There is no doubt she was killed using saidin. Her neck was broken. Shattered. As if her head had been wrenched around full circle. At least it was quick." Nisao drew a deep, unsteady breath, then realized what she had done and pulled herself up even straighter. "Her Warder is primed for murder.

sʌmwʌn ɡeɪv ɪm ən ɝbəl kənkɑkʃən tə pʊɾ ɪm tə slip, bʌt hi, wɪl bi tʃɹʌbəl tə hændəl wʌns i weɪks." ʃi dɪd nɑt pʊt ðə juʒəwəl dɪsmɪsɪv jɛloʊ twɪst ɑn ðə mɛnʃən ə ɝbz, ə mɛʒɝ ə hɝ əpsɛt noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ kɑm əɹ feɪs wɑz.

Someone gave him an herbal concoction to put him to sleep, but he, will be trouble to handle once he wakes." She did not put the usual dismissive Yellow twist on the mention of herbs, a measure of her upset no matter how calm her face was.

ɛɡwin sɛɾ əɹ spun daʊn ɑn ðə taɪni teɪbəl ən lin bæk. sʌɾənli, hɝ tʃɛɹ dɪd nɑt fil kʌmftəɹbəl ɛnimɔɹ. naʊ ðə nɛks bɛst æftɝ lin wɑz boʊd kɔθən. ə nɑvəs. ʃi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk ʌv wʌɾ ɛls boʊd wɑz. wɪð ði ɛkstʃɹə deɪz ə pɹæktəs, boʊd kəd də ðə wɝk ɔlmoʊst əz wɛl əz kɛɹən kəd hæv. ɔlmoʊst. ʃi dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ðæt, ðoʊ. naɪsaʊ nu səm sikɹəts, bʌt nɑɾ ɔl. "æneɪjə, ən naʊ kɛɹən. boʊθ blu ədʒɑ. dʒju noʊ ʌv ɛni ʌðɝ lɪŋk bɪtwin ðɛm?" naɪsaʊ ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "æneɪjə hæd bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ fɪfti əɹ sɪksti jɪɹz wən kɛɹən keɪm tə ðə taʊɝ, əz aɪ ɹikɔl. pɝhæps ðeɪ hæd mjutʃəwəl əkweɪntənsɪz. aɪ dʒʌs doʊnt noʊ, mʌðɝ." naʊ ʃi saʊndəd taɪɝd, ən əɹ ʃoʊldɝz slʌmpt ə lɪɾəl. hɝ kwaɪəɾ ɪnvɛstəɡeɪʃən ɪndə æneɪjəz dɛθ hæd ɡɑɾən noʊwɛɹ, ən ʃi hæd tə bi əwɛɹ ɛɡwin wɑz gɑnə æd kɛɹən.

Egwene set her spoon down on the tiny table and leaned back. Suddenly, her chair did not feel comfortable anymore. Now the next best after Leane was Bode Cauthon. A novice. She tried not to think of what else Bode was. With the extra days of practice, Bode could do the work almost as well as Kairen could have. Almost. She did not mention that, though. Nisao knew some secrets, but not all. "Anaiya, and now Kairen. Both Blue Ajah. Do you know of any other link between them?" Nisao shook her head. "Anaiya had been Aes Sedai fifty or sixty years when Kairen came to the Tower, as I recall. Perhaps they had mutual acquaintances. I just don't know, Mother." Now she sounded tired, and her shoulders slumped a little. Her quiet investigation into Anaiya's death had gotten nowhere, and she had to be aware Egwene was going to add Kairen.

"faɪn aʊt," ɛɡwin ɔɹɾɝd. "dɪskɹitli." ðɪs sɛkən mɝɾɝ wəd kɑz ɪnʌf ɹʌkʃən wɪθaʊɾ əɹ æɾɪŋ tə ɪt. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ʃi stʌɾid ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. naɪsaʊ maɪt meɪk ɪkskjuzɪz æftɝ ðə fækt, əɹ kleɪm ʃi hæd bɪn daʊtfəl fɹəm ðə stɑɹt, bʌɾ əntɪl ðɛn, ʃi wɑz ɔlweɪz ə mɑɾəl ə jɛloʊ ədʒɑ sɛlf-əʃʊɹəns ən æbsəlut sɝɾənti. nɑt naʊ, haʊɛvɝ. "ɑɹ mɛni sɪstɝz wɔkɪŋ əbaʊt hoʊldɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ?"

"Find out," Egwene ordered. "Discreetly." This second murder would cause enough ruction without her adding to it. For a moment, she studied the other woman. Nisao might make excuses after the fact, or claim she had been doubtful from the start, but until then, she was always a model of Yellow Ajah self-assurance and absolute certainty. Not now, however. "Are many sisters walking about holding saidar?"

"aɪv noʊɾəst sɛvɹəl, mʌðɝ," naɪsaʊ sɛd stɪfli. hɝ tʃɪn ɹoʊz wɪðɪn ə fɹækʃən ə dɪfaɪəns.

"I've noticed several, Mother," Nisao said stiffly. Her chin rose within a fraction of defiance.

æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ðoʊ, ðə ɡloʊ ɝaʊn əɹ wɪŋkt aʊt. ʃi pʊld əɹ kloʊk taɪɾɝ, əz ɪf ʃi hæd sʌɾənli lɔst wɔɹmθ. "aɪ daʊɾ ɪt wʊɾə dʌn kɛɹən ɛni ɡʊd. hɝ dɛθ wɑz tu sʌɾən. bʌɾ ɪt meɪks ə pɝsən fil . . . seɪfɝ."

After a moment, though, the glow around her winked out. She pulled her cloak tighter, as if she had suddenly lost warmth. "I doubt it would have done Kairen any good. Her death was too sudden. But it makes a person feel . . . safer."

æftɝ ðə smɔl wʊmən lɛft, ɛɡwin sæt stɝɪŋ əɹ pɔɹədʒ wɪð əɹ spun. ʃi dɪd nɑt si ɛni mɔɹ dɑɹk flɛks, bʌɾ əɹ æpətaɪt wɑz ɡɔn. faɪnəli, ʃi ɹoʊz ən sɛɾəld ðə sɛvən-stʃɹaɪp stoʊl ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk, ðən swʌŋ əɹ kloʊk ɑntu hɝ ʃoʊldɝz. tədeɪ ʌv ɔl deɪz, ʃi wəd nɑt sɪt maɪɹɾ ɪn ɡlum.

After the small woman left, Egwene sat stirring her porridge with her spoon. She did not see any more dark flecks, but her appetite was gone. Finally, she rose and settled the seven-striped stole around her neck, then swung her cloak onto her shoulders. Today of all days, she would not sit mired in gloom.

tədeɪ ʌv ɔl deɪz, ʃi mʌs fɑloʊ hɝ ɹutin ɪɡzækli.

Today of all days, she must follow her routine exactly.

aʊtsaɪd, haɪ-wil kɑɹts tʃɹʌndəld əlɔŋ ðə fɹoʊzən ɹʌts ə ðə kæmp stʃɹits, fɪld wɪð bɪɡ wɔɾɝ bæɹəlz əɹ paɪlz ə splɪt faɪɝwʊɾ ən sæks ə tʃɑɹkoʊl, ðə dʒɹaɪvɝz ən ðə fɛloʊz ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn əlaɪk ɛnvɛləpt ɪn ðɛɹ kloʊks əɡɛns ðə koʊld. əz juʒəwəl, fæmliz ə nɑvəsɪz hɝiɾ əlɔŋ ðə wʊɾən wɔkweɪz, juʒəwəli mænɪdʒɪŋ tə meɪk ðɛɹ kɝɾəsiz tə pæsɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪθaʊt sloʊɪŋ. feɪljɝ ɪn ðə pɹɑpɝ ɹɪspɛks tə ə sɪstɝ kəɾ ɝn ə swɪtʃɪŋ, bʌt soʊ kəd tɑɹɾinəs, ən titʃɝz wɝ dʒɛnɝəli lɛs tɑlɝən ðən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪnkaʊntɝɾ ɪn pæsɪŋ, hu ət lis maɪt meɪk əlaʊənsɪz fəɹ waɪ ə nɑvəs wɛn ɹʌʃɪŋ baɪ. ðə waɪt-klæd wɪmən stɪl lɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ət saɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹaɪp stoʊl hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ɛɡwinz kaʊl, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ʃi ɹəfjuz tə lɛɾ əɹ mud bi saʊɝd, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi wɑz, baɪ nɑvəsɪz kɝtsiɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹit, slɪpɪŋ ən slaɪɾɪŋ ɑn ði aɪs-hɑɹd ɡɹaʊn ən səmtaɪmz ɔlmoʊs fɔlɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz bɪfɔɹ ðɛɹ kʌzənz kəd ɡɹæb ðɛm. "kʌzən" wɑz wʌt mɛmbɝz ə ðə seɪm fæmli hæd teɪkən tə kɔlɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ, ən sʌmhaʊ ðət sim tə taɪ ðɛm kloʊsɝ təɡɛðɝ, əz ɪf ðeɪ ɹɪli wɝ ɹɪleɪɾɪd, ən kloʊs kʌzənz ət ðæt. wʌd saʊɝ əɹ mud wɝ ðə fju ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃi sɔ aʊɾ ən əbaʊt, ɡlaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə wɔkweɪz θɹu ɹɪpəlz ə kɝtsiz. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə dʌzən əɹ soʊ bɪtwin əɹ tɛn ən ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi, bʌt θɹi aʊɾ ʌv ɛvɹi fɔɹ wɝ ɹæpt ɪn ðə laɪɾ ə ðə paʊɝ əz wɛl əz kloʊks. ðeɪ wɔkt ɪn pɛɹz mɔɹ ɔfən ðən nɑt, fɑloʊd baɪ ɛni wɔɹɾɝz ðeɪ hæd. ðeɪ simd wɑtʃfəl, tu, ɛnvɛləpt ɪn seɪaɪdɑɹ əɹ nɑt, kaʊlz swɪvəlɪŋ kɑnstənli əz ðeɪ skæn ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn saɪt. ɪt maɪndəɾ əɹ ə ðə taɪm spɑɾəd fivɝ hæd stʃɹʌk ɛmənz fild, ən ɛvɹiwʌn wɔkt ɝaʊn klʌtʃɪŋ bɹændi-soʊk hæŋkɝtʃəfs tə ðɛɹ noʊzɪz - dɔɹæl bæɹən, ðə wɪzdəm ðɛn, hæd sɛd ðət wəd hɛlp steɪv ɪɾ ɔf - klʌtʃɪŋ ðɛɹ hæŋkɝtʃəfs ən wɑtʃɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ tə si hu wəd bi ðə nɛks tə bɹeɪk aʊɾ ɪn spɑts ən fɔl oʊvɝ.

Outside, high-wheeled carts trundled along the frozen ruts of the camp streets, filled with big water barrels or piles of split firewood and sacks of charcoal, the drivers and the fellows riding behind alike enveloped in their cloaks against the cold. As usual, families of novices hurried along the wooden walkways, usually managing to make their courtesies to passing Aes Sedai without slowing. Failure in the proper respects to a sister could earn a switching, but so could tardiness, and teachers were generally less tolerant than Aes Sedai encountered in passing, who at least might make allowances for why a novice went rushing by. The white-clad women still leapt out of the way at sight of the striped stole hanging from Egwene's cowl, of course, but she refused to let her mood be soured, any more than it already was, by novices curtsying in the street, slipping and sliding on the ice-hard ground and sometimes almost falling on their faces before their cousins could grab them. "Cousin" was what members of the same family had taken to calling one another, and somehow that seemed to tie them closer together, as if they really were related, and close cousins at that. What did sour her mood were the few Aes Sedai she saw out and about, gliding along the walkways through ripples of curtsies. There were no more than a dozen or so between her tent and the Amyrlin's study, but three out of every four were wrapped in the light of the Power as well as cloaks. They walked in pairs more often than not, followed by any Warders they had. They seemed watchful, too, enveloped in saidar or not, cowls swiveling constantly as they scanned everyone in sight. It minded her of the time spotted fever had struck Emond's Field, and everyone walked around clutching brandy-soaked handkerchiefs to their noses - Doral Barran, the Wisdom then, had said that would help stave it off - clutching their handkerchiefs and watching one another to see who would be the next to break out in spots and fall over.

ɪlɛvən pipəl daɪd bɪfɔɹ ðə fivɝ ɹæn ɪts kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə mʌnθ æftɝ ðə læs pɝsən fɛl sɪk bɪfɔɹ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə pʊt ðoʊz hæŋkɝtʃəfs əweɪ. fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm, ʃi hæɾ əsoʊsieɪɾəd ðə smɛl ə bɹændi wɪð fɪɹ. ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊst smɛl ɪt naʊ. tu sɪstɝz hæd bɪn mɝɾɝd ɪn ðɛɹ mɪdst, baɪ ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl, nɑt tə mɛnʃən əpɛɹənli biɪŋ eɪbəl tə kʌm ən ɡoʊ əz i tʃoʊz. fɪɹ wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ði ɛɛs sədaɪ fæstɝ ðən spɑɾəd fivɝ ɛvɝ kʊd.

Eleven people died before the fever ran its course, but it was a month after the last person fell sick before everyone was willing to put those handkerchiefs away. For a long time, she had associated the smell of brandy with fear. She could almost smell it now. Two sisters had been murdered in their midst, by a man who could channel, not to mention apparently being able to come and go as he chose. Fear was running through the Aes Sedai faster than spotted fever ever could.

ðə tɛnt ʃi juzd əz ə stʌɾi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi wɔɹm wən ʃi, ɝaɪvd, ðə bɹeɪziɝ ɡɪvɪŋ ɔf ə sɛn ə ɹoʊzɪz. ðə mɪɹɝd stændlæmps ən teɪbəl-læmp wɝ lɪt. hɝ ɹutin wɑz wɛl noʊn. hæŋɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɑn ðə kloʊk ɹæk ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ, ʃi tʊk əɹ sit bɪhaɪn ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl, ɔɾəmætɪkli kætʃɪŋ ði ənstɛɾi tʃɛɹ lɛɡ ðəɾ ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪd tə foʊld. ɔl ʃi hæd tə də wɑz fɑloʊ ɹutin. təmɑɹoʊ, ʃi kəɾ ənaʊns wʌt hæd bɪn dʌn. hɝ fɝs vɪzəɾɝ wɑz ə ʃɑk, pɝhæps ðə læst wʊmən ʃi ɪkspɛktəd tə wɔk ɪndə ðə tɛnt. θiədʒɹɪn wɑz ə wɪləwi, æpəlɪtʃik bɹaʊn, ə kɑpɝ-skɪn dəmɑni wɪð ə stʌbɝn sɛt tə hɝ maʊθ. wʌns, ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə smaɪl. ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd əkɹɔs ðə wɔɹn kɑɹpəts, kloʊs ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə fɹɪnʒ ə hɝ ʃɔl tə bɹʌʃ ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl. əz ʃi meɪɾ ə vɛɹi fɔɹməl kɝtsi, ɛɡwin ɪkstɛndəɾ əɹ lɛf hæn soʊ ðə wʊmən kəd kɪs əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ. fɔɹmæləɾi mʌs bi mɛt wɪð fɔɹmæləɾi. "ɹoʊmændə wɪʃɪz tə noʊ ɪf ʃi kən mit wɪð jə tədeɪ, mʌðɝ," ðə slɛndɝ bɹaʊn sɛd. sɔfli, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə stʌbɝnnəs bɛɹiɾ ɪn əɹ toʊn, tu.

The tent she used as a study was already warm when she, arrived, the brazier giving off a scent of roses. The mirrored standlamps and table-lamp were lit. Her routine was well known. Hanging her cloak on the cloak rack in the corner, she took her seat behind the writing table, automatically catching the unsteady chair leg that always tried to fold. All she had to do was follow routine. Tomorrow, she could announce what had been done. Her first visitor was a shock, perhaps the last woman she expected to walk into the tent. Theodrin was a willowy, applecheeked Brown, a copper-skinned Domani with a stubborn set to her mouth. Once, she had always looked ready to smile. She glided across the worn carpets, close enough for the fringe of her shawl to brush the writing table. As she made a very formal curtsy, Egwene extended her left hand so the woman could kiss her Great Serpent ring. Formality must be met with formality. "Romanda wishes to know if she can meet with you today, Mother," the slender Brown said. Softly, but there was a stubbornness buried in her tone, too.

"tɛl hɝ, əɾ ɛni taɪm ʃi tʃuzəz, dɔɾɝ," ɛɡwin ɹɪplaɪd kɛɹfəli. θiədʒɹɪn ɔfɝɾ ənʌðɝ kɝtsi wɪθaʊt tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɪkspɹɛʃən.

"Tell her, at any time she chooses, Daughter," Egwene replied carefully. Theodrin offered another curtsy without changing expression.

əz ðə bɹaʊn muv tə liv, wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd bɹʌʃt baɪ hɝ ɪndə ðə tɛnt, pʊʃɪŋ bæk əɹ bændɪd waɪt hʊd. əmɑɹə wɑz ə θɪn wʊmən, ən əz smɔl əz naɪsaʊ. ɪt simd ə stʃɹɔŋ wɪn maɪt bloʊ hɝ əweɪ, jɛt ʃi hæɾ ə vɛɹi fɝm hænd wɪð ðə nɑvəsɪz ɡɪvən ɪndə hɝ kɛɹ, fɝmɝ ðən mɛni sɪstɝz. bʌt ðɛn, ʃi wɑz hɑɹɾ ɑn hɝsɛlf, ən ə nɑvəsəz laɪf wɑz səpoʊz tə bi hɑɹd. əmɑɹəz ɡɹeɪ aɪz ɹoʊl tə ðə fɹɪnʒ ɑn θiədʒɹɪnz ʃɔl, ən əɹ maʊθ twɪstəɾ ɪndə ə skɔɹnfəl ɡɹɪn bɪfɔɹ ʃi smuðd ɪɾ əweɪ tə spɹɛɾ əɹ snoʊi, bændɪd skɝts fəɹ ɛɡwin. bɹaɪt spɑts ə kʌlɝ fleɪmd ɑn θiədʒɹɪnz tʃiks.

As the Brown moved to leave, one of the Accepted brushed by her into the tent, pushing back her banded white hood. Emara was a thin woman, and as small as Nisao. It seemed a strong wind might blow her away, yet she had a very firm hand with the novices given into her care, firmer than many sisters. But then, she was hard on herself, and a novice's life was supposed to be hard. Emara's gray eyes rolled to the fringe on Theodrin's shawl, and her mouth twisted into a scornful grin before she smoothed it away to spread her snowy, banded skirts for Egwene. Bright spots of color flamed on Theodrin's cheeks.

ɛɡwin slæpt ə hæn daʊn ɑn ðə teɪbəl hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə ɹæɾəl ðə stoʊn ɪŋkwɛl ən ðə sæn dʒɑɹ. "hæv jəɹ fɝɡɑɾən haʊ tə bi kɝɾiəs tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, tʃaɪld?" ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli. əmɑɹə wɛn peɪl - ði æmɪɝlɪn dɪɾ əv ə ɹɛpjəteɪʃən, æftɝ ɔl - ən heɪstəli meɪɾ ən ivən dipɝ kɝtsi fəɹ θiədʒɹɪn, hu æknɑlɪdʒd ɪt wɪð ə wʊɾən nɑd bɪfɔɹ ɡlaɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə tɛn ə ɡʊd dil mɔɹ swɪfli ðən ʃi hæɾ ɛntɝd.

Egwene slapped a hand down on the table hard enough to rattle the stone inkwell and the sand jar. "Have your forgotten how to be courteous to an Aes Sedai, child?" she said sharply. Emara went pale - the Amyrlin did have a reputation, after all - and hastily made an even deeper curtsy for Theodrin, who acknowledged it with a wooden nod before gliding from the tent a good deal more swiftly than she had entered.

wʌɾ əmɑɹə stæmɝɾ aʊt, ɪn ən ɪliɑnɝ æksɛn meɪd θɪkɝ baɪ nɝvz, wɑz ə ɹɪkwɛs fɹəm ləleɪn tə mit wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn. ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn hæd bɪn mʌtʃ lɛs fɔɹməl, wʌns, əpɪɹɪŋ ʌnənaʊnst ən wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ wɪʃt, bʌt ðə dɛklɝeɪʃən ʌv wɔɹ ɑn ɪleɪɾə hæd tʃeɪnʒd ə ɡɹeɪt dil.

What Emara stammered out, in an Illianer accent made thicker by nerves, was a request from Lelaine to meet with the Amyrlin. Romanda and Lelaine had been much less formal, once, appearing unannounced and whenever they wished, but the declaration of war on Elaida had changed a great deal.

nɑɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪnʌf tə ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð. ɛɡwin ɹɪtɝn ðə seɪm ɹɪplaɪ tə ləleɪn ðət ʃi hæd tə ɹoʊmændə, ðoʊ ɪn ə mɔɹ klɪp toʊn, ən əmɑɹə ɔlmoʊs fɛl oʊvɝ meɪkɪŋ əɹ kɝtsi ən pɹæktəkli ɹæn aʊɾ ə ðə tɛnt. wʌn mɔɹ neɪl fæsənɪŋ təɡɛðɝ ðə lɛdʒən ʌv ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ, ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ u meɪd sɛɝl beɪɡən lʊk laɪk ə ɡus-daʊn pɪloʊ.

Not everything, but enough to go on with. Egwene returned the same reply to Lelaine that she had to Romanda, though in a more clipped tone, and Emara almost fell over making her curtsy and practically ran out of the tent. One more nail fastening together the legend of Egwene al'Vere, the Amyrlin Seat who made Sereille Bagand look like a goose-down pillow.

əz sun əz ði æksɛptɪd wɑz ɡɔn, ɛɡwin ɹeɪzd əɹ hæn ən fɹaʊn ət wʌɾ ɪt hæd kʌvɝd.

As soon as the Accepted was gone, Egwene raised her hand and frowned at what it had covered.

ðə foʊldəd skwɛɹ ə peɪpɝ ðət θiədʒɹɪn hæd dəpɑzɪɾɪd ɑn ðə teɪbəl waɪl kɪsɪŋ əɹ ɹɪŋ. hɝ fɹaʊn dipənd wən ʃi oʊpən ɪt. ðə skɹɪp ðət kʌvɝd ðə smɔl peɪdʒ mænədʒ tə floʊ waɪl biɪŋ pɹɪsaɪs, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ən ɪŋkblɑɾ ɑn wʌn ɛdʒ. θiədʒɹɪn wɑz vɛɹi nit. pɝhæps ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənfɔɹm tə ðə dʒɛnɝəl vju ʌv bɹaʊnz.

The folded square of paper that Theodrin had deposited on the table while kissing her ring. Her frown deepened when she opened it. The script that covered the small page managed to flow while being precise, but there was an inkblot on one edge. Theodrin was very neat. Perhaps she was trying to conform to the general view of Browns.

ɹoʊmændə hæz sɛn tu sɪstɝz tə tʃɹævəl tə kɛɹhin ən ɪnvɛstəɡeɪt səm teɪl ðəɾ əz ðə jɛloʊ sɪɾɝz bʌzɪŋ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt ðə ɹumɝ ɪz, mʌðɝ, bʌɾ əl faɪn aʊt. aɪ hɝd wʌn ə ðɛm mɛnʃən nɪneɪiv, nɑɾ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ɪn kɛɹhin, bʌɾ əz ɪf ðə ɹumɝ wɑz sʌmhaʊ kənɛktəd tə hɝ. ðə ful wʊmən hæɾ ivən saɪn əɹ neɪm!

Romanda has sent two sisters to Travel to Cairhien and investigate some tale that has the Yellow Sitters buzzing. I don't know what the rumor is, Mother, but I will find out. I heard one of them mention Nynaeve, not as if she were in Cairhien, but as if the rumor was somehow connected to her. The fool woman had even signed her name!

"wʌɾ ɪz ðæt, mʌðɝ?"

"What is that, Mother?"

ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ə sɝpɹaɪz, ən bɛɹli kɑt ðə foʊldɪŋ tʃɛɹ lɛɡ bɪfɔɹ ɪt dʒɹɑpt əɹ ɑntu ðə kɑɹpəts. ʃi ɹifoʊkəst əɹ skaʊl ɑn sɪuən, hu stʊd dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ði ɛntʃɹi flæps wɪð əɹ blufɹɪnd ʃɔl ɑn əɹ ɑɹmz ən əɹ lɛðɝ foʊldɝz pɹɛs tə hɝ bɹɛsts. ðə blu-aɪd wʊmənz aɪbɹaʊz ɹeɪz slaɪtli əɾ ɛɡwinz stɑɹɾəlmənt.

Egwene gave a start of surprise, and barely caught the folding chair leg before it dropped her onto the carpets. She refocused her scowl on Siuan, who stood just inside the entry flaps with her bluefringed shawl on her arms and her leather folders pressed to her breasts. The blue-eyed woman's eyebrows raised slightly at Egwene's startlement.

"hɪɹ," ɛɡwin sɛɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli, θɹʌstɪŋ ðə peɪpɝ ət hɝ. ðɪs wɑz noʊ taɪm tə bi dʒʌmpɪŋ ən twɪtʃɪŋ! "ju noʊ əbaʊt kɛɹən?" ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi mʌst, bʌɾ ɛɡwin stɪl sɛd, "hæv jə meɪd ðə nɛsəsɛɹi tʃeɪnʒəz?" nɛsəsɛɹi tʃeɪnʒəz. laɪt, ʃi saʊndəɾ əz pɑmpəs əz ɹoʊmændə. ʃi wɑz ɑn ɛdʒ.

"Here," Egwene said irritably, thrusting the paper at her. This was no time to be jumping and twitching! "You know about Kairen?" Of course, she must, but Egwene still said, "Have you made the necessary changes?" Necessary changes. Light, she sounded as pompous as Romanda. She was on edge.

oʊnli ət ðə læs dɪd ʃi θɪŋk tə ɛmbɹeɪs seɪaɪdɑɹ ən wiv ə wɔɹɾ əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ; oʊnli æftɝ ðə wɔɹd wɑz ɪn pleɪs dɪd ʃi θɪŋk ðət tədeɪ maɪt nɑt bi ðə bɛs taɪm fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə θɪŋk ʃi hæd pɹaɪvət mæɾɝz tə dɪskʌs wɪð sɪuən.

Only at the last did she think to embrace saidar and weave a ward against eavesdropping; only after the ward was in place did she think that today might not be the best time for anyone to think she had private matters to discuss with Siuan.

sɪuən wɑz nɑɾ ɑn ɛdʒ. ʃi hæd wɛðɝd stɔɹmz. ən mænədʒ tə ɹɪkʌvɝ fɹəm dʒɹaʊnɪŋ, səm maɪt seɪ. tədeɪ wɑz oʊnli ə lɪɾəl wɪndi, tə hɝ. "noʊ niɾ əntɪl wi noʊ fəɹ ʃʊɹ əbaʊt ðə boʊts, mʌðɝ," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli, sɛɾɪŋ əɹ foʊldɝz ɑn ðə teɪbəl ən nitli skwɛɹɪŋ əm bɪtwin ði ɪŋkwɛl ən ðə sæn dʒɑɹ. "ðə lɛs taɪm boʊɾ əz tə θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt, ðə lɛs tʃæns ʃɪl pænɪk." kɑm əz ə pɑnd. ivən tu mɝɾɝd sɪstɝz kəd nɑt ɹʌfəl sɪuən. əɹ sɛndɪŋ ə nɑvəs ʌv oʊnli ə fju mʌnθs tə ɹipleɪs wʌn ə ðɛm. ə fɹaʊn kɹist əɹ fɔɹhɛɾ əz ʃi ɹɛd ðə noʊt, ðoʊ. "fɝs fɑoʊleɪn ɡoʊz ɪndə haɪɾɪŋ," ʃi ɡɹaʊld ət ðə peɪpɝ, "ænd naʊ θiədʒɹɪn bɹɪŋz ðɪs tə jə ɪnstɛɾ ə tə mi. ðət ful ɡɝl əz lɛs bɹeɪnz ðən ə fɪʃɝ-bɝd! jud θɪŋk ʃi wɑns sʌmwʌn tə faɪn aʊt ʃiz kipɪŋ ən aɪ ɑn ɹoʊmændə fəɹ ju." kipɪŋ ən aɪ. ə pəlaɪt weɪ ʌv seɪɪŋ "spaɪ." ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ pɹæktəst ɪn jufəmɪzəmz. ðət wɛnt wɪð biɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. tədeɪ, jufəmɪzəmz ɡɹeɪɾɪd ɑn ɛɡwin.

Siuan was not on edge. She had weathered storms. And managed to recover from drowning, some might say. Today was only a little windy, to her. "No need until we know for sure about the boats, Mother," she replied calmly, setting her folders on the table and neatly squaring them between the inkwell and the sand jar. "The less time Bode has to think about it, the less chance she'll panic." Calm as a pond. Even two murdered sisters could not ruffle Siuan. Or sending a novice of only a few months to replace one of them. A frown creased her forehead as she read the note, though. "First Faolain goes into hiding," she growled at the paper, "and now Theodrin brings this to you instead of to me. That fool girl has less brains than a fisher-bird! You'd think she wants someone to find out she's keeping an eye on Romanda for you." Keeping an eye. A polite way of saying "spy." They were both practiced in euphemisms. That went with being Aes Sedai. Today, euphemisms grated on Egwene.

"pɝhæps ʃi dʌz wɑnə bi dɪskʌvɝd. pɝhæps ʃiz taɪɝɾ ə ɹoʊmændə tɛlɪŋ əɹ wʌt tə du, wʌt tə seɪ, wʌt tə θɪŋk. aɪ hæɾ ən æksɛptɪɾ ɪn hɪɹ u snɪɹɾ ət θiədʒɹɪnz ʃɔl, sɪuən." ði ʌðɝ wʊmən meɪɾ ə dɪsmɪsɪv dʒɛstʃɝ. "ɹoʊmændə tʃɹaɪz tə tɛl ɛvɹiwʌn wʌt tə du. ən wʌt tə θɪŋk.

"Perhaps she does want to be discovered. Perhaps she's tired of Romanda telling her what to do, what to say, what to think. I had an Accepted in here who sneered at Theodrin's shawl, Siuan." The other woman made a dismissive gesture. "Romanda tries to tell everyone what to do. And what to think.

əz fəɹ ðə ɹɛst, θɪŋz wɪl tʃeɪnʒ wʌns θiədʒɹɪn ən fɑoʊleɪn kən swɛɹ ɑn ði oʊθ ɹɑd. aɪ doʊn səpoʊz ɛniwʌn wɪl æktʃəli  ɪnsɪs ðeɪ bi tɛstəd fəɹ ðə ʃɔl naʊ. əntɪl ðɛn, ðeɪ mʌs teɪk wʌt kʌmz." "ðæɾ ɪzənt ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf, sɪuən." ɛɡwin mænədʒ tə kip əɹ toʊn lɛvəl, bʌɾ ɪt tʊk ən ɛfɝt.

As for the rest, things will change once Theodrin and Faolain can swear on the Oath Rod. I don't suppose anyone will actually insist they be tested for the shawl now. Until then, they must take what comes." "That isn't good enough, Siuan." Egwene managed to keep her tone level, but it took an effort.

ʃi hæɾ ət list səspɛktəd wʌt ʃi wɑz lɛɾɪŋ ðoʊz tu ɪn fəɹ wən ʃi toʊld əm tə ətætʃ ðɛmsɛlvz tə ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn. ʃi hæd niɾəd tə noʊ wʌt ðə sɪɾɝz wɝ skimɪŋ æt, ən stɪl niɾəd tə noʊ, jɛt ʃi hæɾ ə duɾi tə ðɛm. ðeɪ hæd bɪn ðə fɝs tə swɛɹ fiəlti tə hɝ, ən ə ðɛɹ oʊn fɹi wɪl. bɪsaɪdz wɪtʃ. . . . "mʌtʃ ʌv wʌts sɛɾ əbaʊt θiədʒɹɪn ən fɑoʊleɪn kən bi sɛɾ ə mi, tu. ɪf æksɛptɪd kən ʃoʊ ðɛm dɪsɹɪspɛkt. . . . " wɛl, ʃi hæd noʊ fɪɹ ə ðæt. ðə sɪstɝz wɝ ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ.

She had at least suspected what she was letting those two in for when she told them to attach themselves to Romanda and Lelaine. She had needed to know what the Sitters were scheming at, and still needed to know, yet she had a duty to them. They had been the first to swear fealty to her, and of their own free will. Besides which. . . . "Much of what's said about Theodrin and Faolain can be said of me, too. If Accepted can show them disrespect. . . . " Well, she had no fear of that. The sisters were another matter.

ɪspɛʃli ðə sɪɾɝz. "sɪuən, aɪ hæv noʊ hoʊp əɾ ɔl ə junaɪɾɪŋ ðə taʊɝ ɪf ɛɛs sədaɪ daʊt mi." sɪuən snɔɹɾɪd fɔɹsfəli. "mʌðɝ, baɪ naʊ ivən ləleɪn ən ɹoʊmændə noʊ jəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪn tʃɹuθ, wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ðəl ədmɪɾ ɪt. ðət pɛɹ wʊdn əv fɔlən ɪn laɪn wɪð din ɛɹəmən.

Especially the Sitters. "Siuan, I have no hope at all of uniting the Tower if Aes Sedai doubt me." Siuan snorted forcefully. "Mother, by now even Lelaine and Romanda know you're the Amyrlin Seat in truth, whether or not they'll admit it. That pair wouldn't have fallen in line with Deane Aryman.

aɪ θɪŋk ðəɹ bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə si jə əz ənʌðɝ ɛdʒɹnə nɔɹɛɡoʊvnə."

I think they're beginning to see you as another Edarna Noregovna."

"ðæts əz meɪ bi," ɛɡwin sɛd dʒɹaɪli. din wɑz kənsɪɾɝd ðə waɪt taʊɝz seɪvjɝ, æftɝ bɑnwɪnz dɪzæstɝ wɪð ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ. ɛdʒɹnə wɑz bɪliv tə hæv bɪn ðə moʊs pəlɪɾɪkəli skɪld wʊmən ɛvɝ tə hoʊl ðə stæf ən stoʊl. boʊθ hæd bɪn vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ æmɪɝlənz. "bʌɾ əz juv ɹimaɪndəd mi, aɪ hæv tə meɪk ʃʊɹ aɪ doʊn ɛn ʌp laɪk ʃaɪn tʃʌŋk." ʃaɪn hæd bɪɡʌn əz ə stʃɹɔŋ æmɪɝlɪn, fɝmli ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ ə ðə taʊɝ ən ðə hɔl, ən ɛndəɾ əz ə pʌpət duɪŋ ɪɡzækli əz ʃi wɑz toʊld.

"That's as may be," Egwene said dryly. Deane was considered the White Tower's savior, after Bonwhin's disaster with Artur Hawkwing. Edarna was believed to have been the most politically skilled woman ever to hold the staff and stole. Both had been very strong Amyrlins. "But as you've reminded me, I have to make sure I don't end up like Shein Chunk." Shein had begun as a strong Amyrlin, firmly in charge of the Tower and the Hall, and ended as a puppet doing exactly as she was told.

sɪuən nɑɾəd, ɪn əpɹuvəl ən əɡɹimənt. ʃi ɹɪli wɑz titʃɪŋ ɛɡwin ðə taʊɝz hɪstɝi, ən ʃi ɔfən bɹɔɾ ʌp æmɪɝlənz u hæd mɪsstɛp feɪɾəli. ɪnkluɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf. "ðɪs ɪz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ, ðoʊ," ʃi mʌɾɝd, tæpɪŋ ðə noʊɾ əɡɛnst əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. "wɛn aɪ leɪ maɪ hænz ɑn θiədʒɹɪn, əl meɪk əɹ wɪʃ ʃi wɑz ə nɑvəs. ən fɑoʊleɪn! ɪf ðeɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ kən ʃɝk ɔf naʊ, aɪ swɛɹ, əl ɡʌt ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm laɪk ɡɹʌntɝz ɑn ðə dɑk!" "jul ɡʌt hu?" ʃɛɹiəm æskt əz ʃi wɔkt ɪn θɹu ðə wɔɹɾ ɪn ə ɡʌst ə koʊld ɛɹ.

Siuan nodded, in approval and agreement. She really was teaching Egwene the Tower's history, and she often brought up Amyrlins who had misstepped fatally. Including herself. "This is another matter, though," she muttered, tapping the note against her fingers. "When I lay my hands on Theodrin, I'll make her wish she was a novice. And Faolain! If they think they can shirk off now, I swear, I'll gut the pair of them like grunters on the dock!" "You'll gut who?" Sheriam asked as she walked in through the ward in a gust of cold air.

ɛɡwinz tʃɛɹ ɔlmoʊs dʒɹɑpt əɹ ɑntu ðə kɑɹpəts əɡɛn. ʃi niɾəd tə ɡɛɾ ə tʃɛɹ ðət dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə foʊld ʌp ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi muvd. ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə bɛɾ ɛdʒɹnə nɛvɝ dʒʌmpt əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɪtʃhoʊk daʊn əɹ bæk.

Egwene's chair almost dropped her onto the carpets again. She needed to get a chair that did not try to fold up every time she moved. She was willing to bet Edarna never jumped as if she had itchoak down her back.

"noʊ wʌn u kənsɝnz ju," sɪuən sɛd kɑmli, pʊɾɪŋ ðə peɪpɝ tə wʌn ə ðə teɪbəl-læmps fleɪmz. ɪt bɝn kwɪkli, ɹaɪt tə hɝ fɪŋɡɝtɪps, ən ðən ʃi mæʃt ɪɾ aʊt bɪtwin əɹ hænz ən bɹʌʃt ði æʃ əweɪ. oʊnli ɛɡwin, sɪuən ən lin nu ðə tʃɹuθ ə fɑoʊleɪn ən θiədʒɹɪn. ən ðə tu sɪstɝz ðɛmsɛlvz, ʌv kɔɹs. ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt dil niðɝ ə ðɛm nu, iðɝ. ʃɛɹiəm æksɛptɪd ðə ɹɪbʌf wɪð ikwənɪmɪɾi. ðə faɪɝ-hɛɹd wʊmən sim tə hæv ɹəkʌvɝd kəmplitli fɹəm əɹ kəlæps ɪn ðə hɔl. ət list, ʃi hæd ɹəkʌvɝɾ əɹ aʊɾɝ dɪɡnəɾi, fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt. wɑtʃɪŋ sɪuən bɝn ðə noʊt, hɝ tɪltəd ɡɹin aɪz maɪɾ əv taɪɾənd ə lɪɾəl, ən ʃi dɪd tʌtʃ ðə nɛɹoʊ blu stoʊl hæŋɪŋ fɹəm əɹ ʃoʊldɝz əz ɪf tə ɹimaɪn hɝsɛlf ðəɾ ɪt wɑz.

"No one who concerns you," Siuan said calmly, putting the paper to one of the table-lamp's flames. It burned quickly, right to her fingertips, and then she mashed it out between her hands and brushed the ash away. Only Egwene, Siuan and Leane knew the truth of Faolain and Theodrin. And the two sisters themselves, of course. Though there was a great deal neither of them knew, either. Sheriam accepted the rebuff with equanimity. The fire-haired woman seemed to have recovered completely from her collapse in the Hall. At least, she had recovered her outer dignity, for the most part. Watching Siuan burn the note, her tilted green eyes might have tightened a little, and she did touch the narrow blue stole hanging from her shoulders as if to remind herself that it was.

ðɛɹ. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə æksɛp sɪuənz ɔɹɾɝz  -  pʊɾɪŋ əɹ kipɝ ɪn ðət pəzɪʃən hæd sim tu hɑɹʃ tə ɛɡwin, ɪn ði ɛnd  -  bʌt ʃɛɹiəm nu vɛɹi wɛl ðət sɪuən hæd noʊ nid tə æksɛpt əɹ ɔɹɾɝz iðɝ, wɪtʃ hæd tə ɡɔl əɹ naʊ ðət sɪuən stʊd soʊ fɑɹ bɪniθ əɹ ɪn ðə paʊɝ. noʊɪŋ ðəɹ wɝ sikɹəts ʃi wɑz nɑt pɹɪvi tə hæd tə ɡɔl hɝ, əz wɛl. ʃɛɹiəm wəɾ əv tə lɪv wɪð ɪt ðoʊ.

there. She did not have to accept Siuan's orders  -  putting her Keeper in that position had seemed too harsh to Egwene, in the end  -  but Sheriam knew very well that Siuan had no need to accept her orders either, which had to gall her now that Siuan stood so far beneath her in the Power. Knowing there were secrets she was not privy to had to gall her, as well. Sheriam would have to live with it though.

ʃi ɔlsoʊ hæd bɹɔɾ ə peɪpɝ, wɪtʃ ʃi leɪɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛɡwin. "aɪ mɛt tiɑnə ɑn ðə weɪ hɪɹ, mʌðɝ, ən toʊld əɹ aɪd ɡɪv ðɪs tə ju."

She also had brought a paper, which she laid on the table in front of Egwene. "I met Tiana on the way here, Mother, and told her I'd give this to you."

"ðɪs" wɑz ðə deɪz ɹipɔɹɾ ɑn ɹʌnəweɪz, ðoʊ ðoʊz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ keɪm ɛvɹi deɪ, əɹ ivən ɛvɹi wik, sɪns ðə nɑvəsɪz hæd bɪn ɔɹɡənaɪzd ɪndə fæmliz. kʌzənz səpɔɹɾəd wʌn ənʌðɝ θɹu fɹəstʃɹeɪʃənz ən tɪɹz, ən mænədʒ tə tɔk wʌn ənʌðɝ aʊɾ ə ðə wɝs mɪsteɪks, laɪk ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ.

"This" was the day's report on runaways, though those no longer came every day, or even every week, since the novices had been organized into families. Cousins supported one another through frustrations and tears, and managed to talk one another out of the worst mistakes, like running away.

ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn neɪm ɑn ðə peɪdʒ. nɪkoʊlə tʃɹihɪl.

There was only one name on the page. Nicola Treehill.

ɛɡwin saɪɾ ən sɛt ðə peɪpɝ daʊn. ʃi wʊɾə θɔt nɪkoʊləz ɡɹid fəɹ lɝnɪŋ wʊɾə kɛpt əɹ fit stɪl noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd ðə wʊmən ɡɹu. ən jɛt, ʃi kəd nɑt seɪ ʃi wɑz sɑɹi tə si ði ɛn ə hɝ. nɪkoʊlə wɑz kənaɪvɪŋ ən ənskɹupjələs, wɪlɪŋ tə tʃɹaɪ blækmeɪl əɹ wʌtɛvɝ ɛls ʃi θɔt wəɾ ədvæns hɝ. vɛɹi laɪkli ʃi hæd hæd hɛlp. ɑɹinə wəd nɑɾ əv bɔkt ət stilɪŋ hɔɹsəz fəɹ ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm tə fli.

Egwene sighed and set the paper down. She would have thought Nicola's greed for learning would have kept her feet still no matter how frustrated the woman grew. And yet, she could not say she was sorry to see the end of her. Nicola was conniving and unscrupulous, willing to try blackmail or whatever else she thought would advance her. Very likely she had had help. Areina would not have balked at stealing horses for the pair of them to flee.

əbɹʌpli, ðə deɪt bɪsaɪd ðə neɪm kɑɾ əɹ aɪ. tu deɪts, æktʃəli , mɑɹkt əz kwɛstʃənz.

Abruptly, the date beside the name caught her eye. Two dates, actually, marked as questions.

mʌnθs wɝ sɛldəm neɪmd, mʌtʃ lɛs deɪz nʌmbɝd, ɪksɛpt ɪn əfɪʃəl dɑkjəməns ən tʃɹiɾiz.

Months were seldom named, much less days numbered, except in official documents and treaties.

saɪnd, sild ən wɪtnəst ɪn ðə sɪɾi ʌv ɪljən ɑn ðə twɛlfθ deɪ ʌv sævən, ðɪs jɪɹ ʌv ɡɹeɪs. . . .

Signed, sealed and witnessed in the city of Illian on the twelfth day of Saven, this Year of Grace. . . .

ən fəɹ ɹɪpɔɹts ə ðɪs neɪtʃɝ, ən ɛntɝɪŋ ə wʊmənz neɪm ɪn ðə nɑvəs bʊk. fəɹ kɑmən jus, soʊ mɛni deɪz bɪfɔɹ ðɪs fistdeɪ əɹ æftɝ ðət səfaɪst. ɹɪɾən aʊt, deɪts ɔlweɪz lʊkt ə lɪɾəl stʃɹeɪnʒ tə hɝ. ʃi hæd tə kaʊn ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz tə bi ʃʊɹ ʌv wʌt ʃi sɔ.

And for reports of this nature, and entering a woman's name in the novice book. For common use, so many days before this feastday or after that sufficed. Written out, dates always looked a little strange to her. She had to count on her fingers to be sure of what she saw.

"nɪkoʊlə ɹæn əweɪ θɹi əɹ fɔɹ deɪz əɡoʊ, ʃɛɹiəm, ən tiɑnə ɪz dʒʌst ɹipɔɹɾɪŋ ɪt? ʃi ɪzən ivən ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz θɹi deɪz əɹ fɔɹ?"

"Nicola ran away three or four days ago, Sheriam, and Tiana is just reporting it? She isn't even sure whether it was three days or four?"

"nɪkoʊləz kʌzənz kʌvɝd fəɹ hɝ, mʌðɝ." ʃɛɹiəm ʃʊk əɹ hɛd ɹufəli. stʃɹeɪnʒli, hɝ smɔl smaɪl simd əmjuzd, ðoʊ.

"Nicola's cousins covered for her, Mother." Sheriam shook her head ruefully. Strangely, her small smile seemed amused, though.

əɹ ivən ædmaɪɹɪŋ. "nɑt fɹəm lʌv; əpɛɹənli, ðeɪ wɝ ɡlæd tə si ðə tʃaɪld ɡoʊ ən əfɹeɪd ʃid bi bɹɔt bæk. ʃi wɑz kwaɪɾ oʊvɝbɛɹɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ tælən ət fɔɹtɛlɪŋ. aɪm əfɹeɪd tiɑnə ɪz vɛɹi əpsɛt wɪð ðɛm. nʌn wɪl bi sɪɾɪŋ kʌmfɝɾəbli ɪn ðɛɹ klæsəz tədeɪ, əɹ fəɹ deɪz tə kʌm, aɪ fɪɹ.

Or even admiring. "Not from love; apparently, they were glad to see the child go and afraid she'd be brought back. She was quite overbearing about her Talent at Foretelling. I'm afraid Tiana is very upset with them. None will be sitting comfortably in their classes today, or for days to come, I fear.

tiɑnə sɛz ʃi ɪntɛnz tə ɡɪv əm itʃ ə doʊs ə ðə stʃɹæp ɪnstɛɾ ə bɹɛkfəst ɛvɹi deɪ tɪl nɪkoʊlə ɪz faʊnd. aɪ θɪŋk ʃi maɪt ɹɪlɛnt, ðoʊ. wɪð nɪkoʊlə ɡɔn soʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ əɹ flaɪt wɑz dɪskʌvɝd, ɪt meɪ bi səm taɪm bɪfɔɹ ʃiz loʊkeɪɾəd."

Tiana says she intends to give them each a dose of the strap instead of breakfast every day till Nicola is found. I think she might relent, though. With Nicola gone so long before her flight was discovered, it may be some time before she's located."

ɛɡwin wɪnst slaɪtli. ʃi kəd ɹikɔl əɹ oʊn vɪzəts tə ðə stʌɾi ʌv ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz, ðən ɑkjəpaɪd baɪ ðə vɛɹi wʊmən ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. ʃɛɹiəm hæɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ ɑɹm. ə deɪli doʊs wəd bi fɪɹs. bʌt haɪɾɪŋ ə ɹʌnəweɪz flaɪt wɑz mɔɹ sɪɹiəs ðən snikɪŋ aʊɾ æftɝ aʊɝz əɹ pʊlɪŋ ə pɹæŋk.

Egwene winced slightly. She could recall her own visits to the study of the Mistress of Novices, then occupied by the very woman in front of her. Sheriam had a strong arm. A daily dose would be fierce. But hiding a runaway's flight was more serious than sneaking out after hours or pulling a prank.

ʃi pʊʃt ðə ɹipɔɹt tə wʌn saɪd.

She pushed the report to one side.

"tiɑnə wɪl hændəl ɪɾ əz ʃi siz fɪt," ʃi sɛd. "ʃɛɹiəm, hæz ðəɹ bɪn ɛni tʃeɪnʒ ɪn haʊ ðə sɪstɝz tɔk əbaʊt maɪ dʒɹim?" ʃi hæd ɹɪvil ðə dʒɹim əbaʊɾ ə sintʃæn ətæk ðə vɛɹi mɔɹnɪŋ æftɝ dʒɹimɪŋ ɪt, ən ðə wɪmən ʃi toʊl stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ æpəθɛɾɪkli, əpɛɹənli kəz ə ðə fɹɛʃnəs ʌv æneɪjəz dɛθ. ðət hæd stʌn ɛvɹiwʌn.

"Tiana will handle it as she sees fit," she said. "Sheriam, has there been any change in how the sisters talk about my dream?" She had revealed the dream about a Seanchan attack the very morning after dreaming it, and the women she told stared at her apathetically, apparently because of the freshness of Anaiya's death. That had stunned everyone.

ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ænsɝɪŋ, ʃɛɹiəm klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊɾ ən smuðd əɹ blu-slæʃt skɝts. "ju meɪ nɑt bi əwɛɹ, mʌðɝ, bʌt wʌn ə nɪkoʊləz kʌzənz ɪz lɑɹini aɪɛlɪn. fɹəm ɛmənz fild," ʃi æɾəd, əz ɪf ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt noʊ ðæt. "noʊ wʌn wəd θɪŋk jə wɝ pleɪɪŋ feɪvɹɪts ɪf jə pɑɹɾənd ðə hoʊl fæmli. wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ʃi ɹɪləns, tiɑnə dʌz min tə bi vɛɹi ʃɑɹp wɪð əm ɪn ðə mintaɪm. ðəl sʌfɝ."

Instead of answering, Sheriam cleared her throat and smoothed her blue-slashed skirts. "You may not be aware, Mother, but one of Nicola's cousins is Larine Ayellin. From Emond's Field," she added, as if Egwene did not know that. "No one would think you were playing favorites if you pardoned the whole family. Whether or not she relents, Tiana does mean to be very sharp with them in the meantime. They will suffer."

linɪŋ bæk, kɛɹfəli kəz ə ðə wɑbəli tʃɛɹ lɛɡ, ɛɡwin fɹaʊn ʌp ət ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. lɑɹini wɑz ɔlmoʊs ðə seɪm eɪdʒ əz ʃi, ən ə kloʊs fɹɛnd ɡɹoʊɪŋ ʌp. ðeɪ hæd spɛn aʊɝz təɡɛðɝ, ɡɑsəpɪŋ ən pɹæktəsɪŋ pʊɾɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛɹ ɪn bɹeɪdz fəɹ wən ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl sɛd ðeɪ wɝ oʊld ɪnʌf.

Leaning back, carefully because of the wobbly chair leg, Egwene frowned up at the other woman. Larine was almost the same age as she, and a close friend growing up. They had spent hours together, gossiping and practicing putting their hair in braids for when the Women's Circle said they were old enough.

dɪspaɪt ðæt, lɑɹini hæd bɪn wʌn ə ðə fju ɛmənz fild ɡɝlz u sim tə æksɛp ðəɾ ɛɡwin maɪt ɹɪli bi ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ðoʊ ʃi ʃoʊɾ ɪt meɪnli baɪ kipɪŋ əɹ dɪstəns. bʌt dɪd ʃɛɹiəm θɪŋk ɛɡwin wəd pleɪ feɪvɹɪts? ivən sɪuən lʊk teɪkən əbæk. "ju ʃəd noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən ɛniwʌn, ʃɛɹiəm, nɑvəs dɪsəplən ɪz ðə pɹɑvəns ə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz. ənlɛs ə ɡɝl ɪz biɪŋ əbjuzd, ɛniweɪ, ən jə hævən sədʒɛstəd ðæt. bɪsaɪdz, ɪf lɑɹini θɪŋks ʃi kən ɡɛɾ əweɪ wɪð hɛlpɪŋ ə ɹʌnəweɪ tədeɪ - hɛlpɪŋ ə ɹʌnəweɪ, ʃɛɹiəm! - wʌt wɪl ʃi θɪŋk ʃi kən ɡɛɾ əweɪ wɪð təmɑɹoʊ?

Despite that, Larine had been one of the few Emond's Field girls who seemed to accept that Egwene might really be the Amyrlin Seat, though she showed it mainly by keeping her distance. But did Sheriam think Egwene would play favorites? Even Siuan looked taken aback. "You should know better than anyone, Sheriam, novice discipline is the province of the Mistress of Novices. Unless a girl is being abused, anyway, and you haven't suggested that. Besides, if Larine thinks she can get away with helping a runaway today - helping a runaway, Sheriam! - what will she think she can get away with tomorrow?

ʃi kən ɹitʃ ðə ʃɔl, ɪf ʃiz ðə ɡʌmpʃən tə stɪk wɪð ɪt. aɪ woʊn lɛɾ əɹ daʊn ə pæθ ðəɾ ɛnz wɪð əɹ biɪŋ sɛn əweɪ fəɹ mɪsbəheɪvjɝ. naʊ. wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ seɪɪŋ əbaʊt maɪ dʒɹim?" ʃɛɹiəmz tɪltəd ɡɹin aɪz blɪŋkt, ən ʃi ɡlænst ət sɪuən. laɪt, ðə wʊmən θɔɾ ɛɡwin wɑz biɪŋ hɑɹd kəz sɪuən wɑz pɹɛzənt? kəz sɪuən maɪt kæɹi teɪlz? ʃi ʃəd noʊ bɛɾɝ; ʃi aɪ bin ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz. "ði æɾətud əmʌŋ ðə sɪstɝz, mʌðɝ," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd faɪnəli, "ɪz stɪl ðət ðə sintʃæn ɑɹ ə θaʊzən maɪlz əweɪ, ðeɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ tə tʃɹævəl, ən ɪf ðeɪ stɑɹt mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɑn tɑɹ vəlɑn, wɪl lɝn ʌv ɪt bɪfɔɹ ðəɹ wɪðɪn tu hʌnʒɹəd liɡz." sɪuən mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ ðət saʊndəd vaɪl, bʌt nɑt sɝpɹaɪzd. ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə kɝs, tu. wɝiz oʊvɝ æneɪjəz mɝɾɝ hæd hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə sɪstɝz' æpəθi. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt bɪliv ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑz ə dʒɹimɝ. æneɪjə hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ, bʌɾ æneɪjə wɑz dɛd. sɪuən ən lin bɪlivd, jɛt niðɝ stʊd haɪ ɪnʌf naʊ tə bi lɪsən tə wɪð mɔɹ hɑn ɪmpeɪʃən pəlaɪtnəs, ɪf ðæt. ən ɪt wɑz kwaɪt klɪɹ ðət ʃɛɹiəm dɪd nɑt bɪliv. ʃi oʊbeɪɾ əɹ oʊθ ə fiəlti əz skɹupjələsli əz ɛɡwin cʊɾə wɪʃt fɔɹ, bʌt jə kəd nɑɾ ɔɹɾɝ sʌmwʌn tə bɪliv. ðeɪ oʊnli maʊðd wʌt jə toʊl ðɛm, ən nʌθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd. wən ʃɛɹiəm lɛft, ɛɡwin faʊn hɝsɛlf wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt hæd bɹɔt ðə wʊmən ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. kəɾ ɪɾ əv bɪn dʒʌs tə pɔɪn aʊt ðət lɑɹini wɑz gɑnə bi pʌnɪʃt? ʃʊɹli nɑt. bʌt ʃi hæd sɛd nʌθɪŋ ɛls, əpɑɹt fɹəm ænsɝɪŋ ɛɡwinz kwɛstʃənz. ʃɔɹtli, maɪɹɛl ɝaɪvd, fɑloʊd kloʊsli baɪ mɔɹvɹɪn. ɛɡwin kəd fil itʃ ə ðɛm ɹilis ðə sɔɹs bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɛntɝd ðə tɛnt, ən ðeɪ lɛf ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz weɪɾɪŋ aʊtsaɪd. ivən ɪn bɹif ɡlɪmpsɪz əz ði ɛntʃɹi flæps wɝ pʊʃt əsaɪd, ðə mɛn lʊkt wɛɹi, ivən fəɹ wɔɹɾɝz.

She can reach the shawl, if she has the gumption to stick with it. I won't lead her down a path that ends with her being sent away for misbehavior. Now. What are they saying about my dream?" Sheriam's tilted green eyes blinked, and she glanced at Siuan. Light, the woman thought Egwene was being hard because Siuan was present? Because Siuan might carry tales? She should know better; she I Wbeen the Mistress of Novices. "The attitude among the sisters, Mother," Sheriam said finally, "is still that the Seanchan are a thousand miles away, they don't know how to Travel, and if they start marching on Tar Valon, we'll learn of it before they're within two hundred leagues." Siuan muttered something under her breath that sounded vile, but not surprised. Egwene wanted to curse, too. Worries over Anaiya's murder had had nothing to do with the sisters' apathy. They did not believe that Egwene was a Dreamer. Anaiya had been sure, but Anaiya was dead. Siuan and Leane believed, yet neither stood high enough now to be listened to with more han impatient politeness, if that. And it was quite clear that Sheriam did not believe. She obeyed her oath of fealty as scrupulously as Egwene could have wished for, but you could not order someone to believe. They only mouthed what you told them, and nothing changed. When Sheriam left, Egwene found herself wondering what had brought the woman in the first place. Could it have been just to point out that Larine was going to be punished? Surely not. But she had said nothing else, apart from answering Egwene's questions. Shortly, Myrelle arrived, followed closely by Morvrin. Egwene could feel each of them release the Source before she entered the tent, and they left their Warders waiting outside. Even in brief glimpses as the entry flaps were pushed aside, the men looked wary, even for Warders.

maɪɹɛlz bɪɡ dɑɹk aɪz flæʃt ət ðə saɪɾ ə sɪuən, ən əɹ nɑstʃɹəlz flɛɹd. mɔɹvɹɪnz ɹaʊn feɪs ɹɪmeɪn smuð əz pɑlɪʃt stoʊn, bʌt ʃi bɹʌʃt əɹ dɑɹk bɹaʊn skɝts wɪð boʊθ hænz əz ɪf waɪpɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɔf. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ʌnkɑnʃəs. ənlaɪk ʃɛɹiəm, ðeɪ dɪɾ əv tə æksɛp sɪuənz ɔɹɾɝz, ən niðɝ laɪk ðəɾ əɾ ɔl. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə ɡɹaɪn ðɛɹ noʊzɪz, bʌt ʃi tʃɹʌstɪd sɪuən, ən oʊðz əɹ noʊ oʊðz, ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli tʃɹʌs ðɛm. nɑt tə ðə dɪɡɹi ʃi dɪd sɪuən. bɪsaɪdz, ðəɹ wɝ taɪmz ɪt wɑz ɪnkənvinjən ɪf nɑɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl fəɹ əɹ tə tɛl ðə sɪstɝz swɔɹn tə hɝ wʌt ʃi wɑntəd dʌn. sɪuən kəd kæɹi mɛsədʒəz, ən ðɪs weɪ, ɛɡwin kəd bi ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ oʊbeɪd. ʃi æskt əbaʊt tɔk ə hɝ dʒɹim stʃɹeɪɾəweɪ, bʌɾ ʌnsɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ðɛɹ stɔɹiz wɝ ðə seɪm əz ʃɛɹiəmz.

Myrelle's big dark eyes flashed at the sight of Siuan, and her nostrils flared. Morvrin's round face remained smooth as polished stone, but she brushed her dark brown skirts with both hands as if wiping something off. Perhaps it was unconscious. Unlike Sheriam, they did have to accept Siuan's orders, and neither liked that at all. It was not that Egwene wanted to grind their noses, but she trusted Siuan, and oaths or no oaths, she did not entirely trust them. Not to the degree she did Siuan. Besides, there were times it was inconvenient if not impossible for her to tell the sisters sworn to her what she wanted done. Siuan could carry messages, and this way, Egwene could be sure they were obeyed. She asked about talk of her dream straightaway, but unsurprisingly, their stories were the same as Sheriam's.

ðə sintʃæn wɝ fɑɹ ɔf. ðəɹ wəd bi plɛnti ʌv wɔɹnɪŋ ʃəd ðət tʃeɪnʒ. ðə stɔɹi hæd bɪn ðə seɪm fəɹ ə ɡʊd wik ən ə hæf. wɝs. . . . "ɪt maɪt bi dɪfɹən ɪf æneɪjə wɝ əlaɪv," mɔɹvɹɪn sɛd, bælənsɪŋ ətɑp wʌn ə ðə ɹɪkəɾi stulz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl. ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝ bʌlk, ʃi dɪɾ ɪɾ izəli ən ɡɹeɪsfəli. "æneɪjə hæɾ ə ɹɛpjəteɪʃən fəɹ ɑɹkeɪn nɑlədʒ. aɪ ɔlweɪz θɔt ʃi ʃʊɾə tʃoʊzən bɹaʊn, maɪsɛlf. ɪf ʃi sɛd jə wɝ ə dʒɹimɝ - " hɝ tiθ klɪkt ʃʌɾ əɾ ə ʃɑɹp lʊk fɹəm ɛɡwin. maɪɹɛl sʌɾənli tʊk ən ɪntʃɹəst ɪn wɔɹmɪŋ əɹ hænz ət ðə bɹeɪziɝ. niðɝ ə ðɛm bɪlivd, iðɝ. ɪksɛp fəɹ sɪuən ən lin, noʊ wʌn ɪn ðə hoʊl kæmp bɪliv ðəɾ ɛɡwin hæd hæɾ ə tʃɹu dʒɹim. vɛɹɪlɪn hæd teɪkən oʊvɝ ðə tɔks ɪn dɛɹn, dɛfli pʊʃɪŋ bioʊnɪn ɪndə ə lɛsɝ ɹoʊl, ən ʃi ɔfɝd kɑnstən ɪkskjusɪz əz tə waɪ ʃi kəd nɑt pæs ɑn ə wɔɹnɪŋ ət dʒʌs ðɪs moʊmənt. pɝhæps ɪn ə fju deɪz, wən ðə tɔks wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ mɔɹ smuðli. əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɛvɝ ɛniθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən sɪstɝz tɔkɪŋ ɪn sɝkəlz wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ ə wɝd ðət maɪt sɛn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ əweɪ əfɛndəd. noʊ wʌn əɾ ɔl bʌt sɪuən ən lin. ʃi θɔt ðeɪ bɪlivd. maɪɹɛl tɝn fɹəm ðə bɹeɪziɝ əz ɪf stilɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ðə koʊlz. "mʌðɝ, aɪ hæv bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə deɪ ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪd - " ʃi bɹoʊk ɔf ən tɝn bæk tə ðə bɹeɪziɝ əz ə lɔŋ-feɪst wʊmən ɪn dip blu ɛntɝd ðə tɛn kæɹiɪŋ ə θɹiləɡd stul peɪntəɾ ɪn bɹaɪt spaɪɹəlz. meɪɡɑn wɑz bjuɾəfəl, wɪð lɑɹdʒ aɪz ən fʊl lɪps, bʌt ʃi simd ɪlɔŋɡeɪɾəd sʌmhaʊ. ʃi wɑz nɑt ðət tɔl, bʌɾ ivən əɹ hænz sim lɔŋ. ʃi ɡeɪv mɔɹvɹɪn ə kul nɑd, ən pɔɪntɪdli ɪɡnɔɹd maɪɹɛl. "aɪ bɹɔt maɪ oʊn sit tədeɪ, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd, meɪkɪŋ əz mʌtʃ ʌv ə kɝtsi əz ʃi kəd wɪð ðə stul ɪn wʌn hænd.

The Seanchan were far off. There would be plenty of warning should that change. The story had been the same for a good week and a half. Worse. . . . "It might be different if Anaiya were alive," Morvrin said, balancing atop one of the rickety stools in front of the writing table. In spite of her bulk, she did it easily and gracefully. "Anaiya had a reputation for arcane knowledge. I always thought she should have chosen Brown, myself. If she said you were a Dreamer - " Her teeth clicked shut at a sharp look from Egwene. Myrelle suddenly took an interest in warming her hands at the brazier. Neither of them believed, either. Except for Siuan and Leane, no one in the whole camp believed that Egwene had had a true dream. Varilin had taken over the talks in Darein, deftly pushing Beonin into a lesser role, and she offered constant excuses as to why she could not pass on a warning at just this moment. Perhaps in a few days, when the talks were going more smoothly. As if they were ever anything other than sisters talking in circles without saying a word that might send the other side away offended. No one at all but Siuan and Leane. She thought they believed. Myrelle turned from the brazier as if steeling herself to put a hand on the coals. "Mother, I have been thinking about the day Shadar Logoth was destroyed - " She broke off and turned back to the brazier as a long-faced woman in deep blue entered the tent carrying a threelegged stool painted in bright spirals. Maigan was beautiful, with large eyes and full lips, but she seemed elongated somehow. She was not that tall, but even her hands seemed long. She gave Morvrin a cool nod, and pointedly ignored Myrelle. "I brought my own seat today, Mother," she said, making as much of a curtsy as she could with the stool in one hand.

"jʊɹz ɑɹ ɹæðɝ ənstɛɾi, ɪf aɪ meɪ seɪ soʊ."

"Yours are rather unsteady, if I may say so."

ɪt hæd kʌm əz noʊ sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ æneɪjəz dɛθ mɛn ðə blu ədʒɑ wəd neɪm sʌmwʌn ɛls tə ɛɡwinz "ædvaɪzɝi kaʊnsəl," bʌt ʃi hæd hoʊp fəɹ ðə bɛst wən ʃi lɝn u ɪt wɑz tə bi. meɪɡɑn hæd bɪn wʌn ə sɪuənz ælaɪz wən sɪuən wɑz æmɪɝlɪn. "du jə maɪn ɪf aɪ sɛn sɪuən fəɹ ti, mʌðɝ?" meɪɡɑn sɛɾ əz ʃi sɛɾəld ɑntu hɝ stul. "ju ɹɪli ʃəɾ əv ə nɑvəs əɹ æksɛptɪd tə ɹʌn ɛɹənz, bʌt sɪuən wɪl du."

It had come as no surprise that Anaiya's death meant the Blue Ajah would name someone else to Egwene's "advisory council," but she had hoped for the best when she learned who it was to be. Maigan had been one of Siuan's allies when Siuan was Amyrlin. "Do you mind if I send Siuan for tea, Mother?" Maigan said as she settled onto her stool. "You really should have a novice or Accepted to run errands, but Siuan will do."

"ðə nɑvəsɪz əv ðɛɹ klæsəz, dɔɾɝ," ɛɡwin ɹɪplaɪd, "æn ivən wɪð ði ɝeɪnʒmənt ə fæmliz, ði æksɛptɪd hɑɹdli hæv taɪm fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn stʌɾiz." bɪsaɪdz wɪtʃ, ʃi wəɾ əv tə sɛn ə nɑvəs əɹ æksɛptɪd tə stæn ɪn ðə koʊld ɛni taɪm ʃi wɑntəd tə spik tə sʌmwʌn ɪn pɹaɪvəsi. hɑɹɾ ɑn wʌn u wəd nɑt jɛɾ əv bɪn tɔt haʊ tə ɪɡnɔɹ hiɾ əɹ koʊld, ən ə flæɡ plæntəɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə tɛn tɛlɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn ðəɹ maɪt bi sʌmθɪŋ wɝθ ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ ɑn. "sɪuən, wɪl jə pliz bɹɪŋ əs səm ti? aɪm ʃʊɹ wi kəɾ ɔl də wɪð ə hɑt kʌp."

"The novices have their classes, Daughter," Egwene replied, "and even with the arrangement of families, the Accepted hardly have time for their own studies." Besides which, she would have to send a novice or Accepted to stand in the cold any time she wanted to speak to someone in privacy. Hard on one who would not yet have been taught how to ignore heat or cold, and a flag planted outside the tent telling everyone there might be something worth eavesdropping on. "Siuan, will you please bring us some tea? I'm sure we could all do with a hot cup."

meɪɡɑn ɹeɪzd ə lɔŋ-fɪŋɡɝd hæn əz sɪuən stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ði ɛntʃɹəns. "aɪ hæv ə dʒɑɹ ə mɪn hʌni ɪn maɪ tɛnt," ʃi sɛɾ ɪmpɪɹiəsli. "fɛtʃ ðæt. ən maɪn jə doʊn fɪltʃ ɛni. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ jə juz tə hæv ə swit tuθ. hɝi, naʊ." meɪɡɑn hæd bɪn ən ælaɪ. naʊ ʃi wɑz wʌn ə mɛni sɪstɝz u bleɪm sɪuən fəɹ bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

Maigan raised a long-fingered hand as Siuan started for the entrance. "I have a jar of mint honey in my tent," she said imperiously. "Fetch that. And mind you don't filch any. I remember you used to have a sweet tooth. Hurry, now." Maigan had been an ally. Now she was one of many sisters who blamed Siuan for breaking the White Tower.

"æz jə seɪ, meɪɡɑn," sɪuən ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪn ə mik vɔɪs, ən ivən bɛn əɹ ni slaɪtli bɪfɔɹ ʃi hɝiɾ aʊt. ən ʃi dɪd hɝi. meɪɡɑn stʊɾ əz haɪ əz maɪɹɛl əɹ mɔɹvɹɪn, ən ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɔɹɾɝz əɹ oʊðz ə fiəlti tə pɹətɛkt əɹ hɪɹ. ðə lɔŋ-feɪst wʊmən ɡeɪv ə smɔl, sæɾəsfaɪd nɑd. sɪuən hæd hæd tə bɛɡ tə bi æksɛptɪd bæk ɪndə ðə blu ədʒɑ, ən ɹumɝ hæɾ ɪt ðət meɪɡɑn hæd bɪn ðə moʊst ɪnsɪstən ɑn ðə bɛɡɪŋ.

"As you say, Maigan," Siuan replied in a meek voice, and even bent her knee slightly before she hurried out. And she did hurry. Maigan stood as high as Myrelle or Morvrin, and there were no orders or oaths of fealty to protect her here. The long-faced woman gave a small, satisfied nod. Siuan had had to beg to be accepted back into the Blue Ajah, and rumor had it that Maigan had been the most insistent on the begging.

mɔɹvɹɪn meɪɾ əɹ ɪkskjusɪz tə liv bɪhaɪn sɪuən, pɝhæps minɪŋ tə kætʃ əɹ ʌp fəɹ səm ɹizən, bʌt maɪɹɛl tʊk wʌn ə ðə stulz ən ɛnɡeɪdʒd ɪn ə kɑmpətɪʃən wɪð meɪɡɑn: hu kəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ ði ʌðɝ moʊs kəmplitli. ɛɡwin dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ði ænəmɑsəɾi bɪtwin ðə tu wɪmən.

Morvrin made her excuses to leave behind Siuan, perhaps meaning to catch her up for some reason, but Myrelle took one of the stools and engaged in a competition with Maigan: who could ignore the other most completely. Egwene did not understand the animosity between the two women.

səmtaɪmz, pipəl dʒʌs dɪslaɪkt wʌn ənʌðɝ. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ɪt dɪd nɑt meɪk fəɹ kɑnvɝseɪʃən.

Sometimes, people just disliked one another. In any case, it did not make for conversation.

ɛɡwin tʊk ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə lif θɹu ðə peɪdʒəz ɪn sɪuənz foʊldɝz, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ɹumɝz aʊɾ ʌv ɪljən ən ɪnjuɛndoʊz aʊɾ ə kɛɹhin. ðəɹ sim nʌθɪŋ tə əkaʊn fəɹ θiədʒɹɪnz kleɪm ʌv ə teɪl ðət hæd sɛt ðə jɛloʊ sɪɾɝz bʌzɪŋ. sɪuən wʊɾə sɛd sʌmθɪŋ, ɪf ʃi hæd noʊn. meɪɡɑn ən maɪɹɛl stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ əz ɪf wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ tɝn oʊvɝ ʃits ə peɪpɝ wɑz ðə moʊst ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ æktɪvəɾi ɪn ðə wɝld. ʃi wʊɾə sɛn əm boʊθ əweɪ, bʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə faɪn aʊt wʌt maɪɹɛl hæd bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə deɪ ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ hæd bɪn skupt aʊɾ ə ði ɝθ. ʃi kəd nɑt sɛnd wʌn əweɪ wɪθaʊt sɛndɪŋ boʊθ. dʒɹæt ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm!

Egwene took the opportunity to leaf through the pages in Siuan's folders, but she could not concentrate on rumors out of Illian and innuendoes out of Cairhien. There seemed nothing to account for Theodrin's claim of a tale that had set the Yellow Sitters buzzing. Siuan would have said something, if she had known. Maigan and Myrelle stared at her as if watching her turn over sheets of paper was the most interesting activity in the world. She would have sent them both away, but she wanted to find out what Myrelle had been thinking about the day Shadar Logoth had been scooped out of the earth. She could not send one away without sending both. Drat the pair of them!

wən sɪuən ɹɪtɝnd, wɪð ə wʊɾən tʃɹeɪ hoʊldɪŋ ə sɪlvɝ tipɑɾ ən pɔɹsələn kʌps - ən meɪɡɑnz waɪt-ɡleɪz hʌni dʒɑɹ - ʃi wɑz fɑloʊɾ ɪndə ðə tɛn baɪ ə soʊlʒɝ ɪn pleɪt-ænd-meɪl ɑɹmɝ, ə jʌŋ ʃaɪnɝən wɪð ɪz hɛɹ ʃeɪvd ɔf ɪksɛp fəɹ ə tɑpnɑt. jʌŋ, bʌt nɑt jʌŋ. ɹeɪɡənz dɑɹk tʃik kæɹiɾ ə pʌkɝd waɪt skɑɹ fɹəm ən æɹoʊ, ən ɪz feɪs wɑz hɑɹɾ ɪn ðə weɪ oʊnli ðə feɪs ʌv ə mæn u lɪvd wɪð dɛθ ɛvɹi aʊɝ kəd bi hɑɹd. əz sɪuən dɪstʃɹɪbjəɾəd tikəps, hi baʊd, wʌn hæn hoʊldɪŋ ə mun-kɹɛstəd hɛlməɾ ɑn ɪz hɪp, ði ʌðɝ ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt. nʌθɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən sɛɾ i hæɾ ɛvɝ mɛɾ əɹ bɪfɔɹ. "ɑnɝ tə sɝv, mʌðɝ," hi sɛd fɔɹməli. "lɔɹd bɹaɪn sɛn mi. hi sɛd tə tɛl jə ðəɾ ɪt simz ðə ɹeɪɾɝz meɪ hæv kɹɔs tə ðɪs saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ læs naɪt. wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ.

When Siuan returned, with a wooden tray holding a silver teapot and porcelain cups - and Maigan's white-glazed honey jar - she was followed into the tent by a soldier in plate-and-mail armor, a young Shienaran with his hair shaved off except for a topknot. Young, but not young. Ragan's dark cheek carried a puckered white scar from an arrow, and his face was hard in the way only the face of a man who lived with death every hour could be hard. As Siuan distributed teacups, he bowed, one hand holding a moon-crested helmet on his hip, the other on his sword hilt. Nothing in his expression said he had ever met her before. "Honor to serve, Mother," he said formally. "Lord Bryne sent me. He said to tell you that it seems the raiders may have crossed to this side of the river last night. With Aes Sedai.

lɔɹd bɹaɪn ɪz dʌbəlɪŋ ðə pətʃɹoʊlz. hi ædvaɪzɪz ðət sɪstɝz steɪ kloʊs tə ðə kæmp. tə əvɔɪɾ ɪnsəɾənts."

Lord Bryne is doubling the patrols. He advises that sisters stay close to the camp. To avoid incidents."

"meɪ aɪ bi ɪkskjuzd, mʌðɝ?" sɪuən sɛd sʌɾənli, wɪð ðə slaɪtli əbæʃt saʊn ʌv ə wʊmən u faʊn hɝsɛlf wɪð ən ɝdʒənt nid fəɹ ðə dʒeɪks.

"May I be excused, Mother?" Siuan said suddenly, with the slightly abashed sound of a woman who found herself with an urgent need for the Jakes.

"jɛs, jɛs," ɛɡwin sɛd, əz ɪmpeɪʃənli əz ʃi kəd mænədʒ, ən bɛɹli weɪɾəd fəɹ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən tə dæʃ aʊɾ ə ðə tɛn bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. "tɛl lɔɹd bɹaɪn ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡoʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ wɪʃ, wən ðeɪ wɪʃ." ʃi snæpt əɹ maʊθ ʃʌt bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd kɔl ɪm "ɹeɪɡən," bʌt ðəɾ oʊnli sɝv tə meɪk əɹ sim səvɪɹ. ʃi hoʊpt ɪt dɪd.

"Yes, yes," Egwene said, as impatiently as she could manage, and barely waited for the other woman to dash out of the tent before going on. "Tell Lord Bryne that Aes Sedai go where they wish, when they wish." She snapped her mouth shut before she could call him "Ragan," but that only served to make her seem severe. She hoped it did.

"aɪ wɪl tɛl hɪm, mʌðɝ," hi ɹɪplaɪd, meɪkɪŋ ənʌðɝ baʊ.

"I will tell him, Mother," he replied, making another bow.

"hɑɹɾ ən soʊl tə sɝv."

"Heart and soul to serve."

meɪɡɑn smaɪl feɪnli əz i dɪpɑɹɾəd. ʃi dɪpɹəkeɪɾɪd soʊlʒɝz  - wɔɹɾɝz wɝ ɡʊɾ ən nɛsəsɛɹi; soʊlʒɝz meɪd mɛsɪz fəɹ ʌðɝz tə klin ʌp, ɪn əɹ əpɪnjən - bʌt ʃi dɪd feɪvɝ ɛniθɪŋ ðət sim tə ɪndəkeɪɾ ə wɛdʒ bɪtwin ɛɡwin ən ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn. əɹ pɝhæps bɛɾɝ tə seɪ ðət ləleɪn feɪvɝd. ɪn ðɪs, meɪɡɑn wɑz ləleɪnz wʊmən tə hɝ toʊneɪlz. maɪɹɛl mɪɹli lʊk pʌzəld. ʃi nu ðəɾ ɛɡwin ɡɑɾ ɑn wɛl wɪð lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ. ɛɡwin ɡɑɾ ʌp ən pɔɹd hɝsɛlf ə kʌp ə ti. ən tʊk ə tʌtʃ ə meɪɡɑnz hʌni. hɝ hænz wɝ kwaɪt stɛɾi. ðə boʊts wɝ ɪn pleɪs. ɪn ə fju aʊɝz, lin wəd ɡæðɝ boʊɾ ən ɹaɪd wɛl əweɪ fɹəm ðə kæmp bɪfɔɹ ɪkspleɪnɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə du.

Maigan smiled faintly as he departed. She deprecated soldiers  - Warders were good and necessary; soldiers made messes for others to clean up, in her opinion - but she did favor anything that seemed to indicate a wedge between Egwene and Gareth Bryne. Or perhaps better to say that Lelaine favored. In this, Maigan was Lelaine's woman to her toenails. Myrelle merely looked puzzled. She knew that Egwene got on well with Lord Gareth. Egwene got up and poured herself a cup of tea. And took a touch of Maigan's honey. Her hands were quite steady. The boats were in place. In a few hours, Leane would gather Bode and ride well away from the camp before explaining what they were going to do.

lɑɹini mʌs teɪk ðə pʌnɪʃmənt ʃi hæɾ ɝnd, ən boʊd mʌs də wʌt niɾəd duɪŋ. ɛɡwin hæd bɪn jʌŋɡɝ ðən boʊd wən ʃi wɑz sɛt tə hʌn blæk sɪstɝz. ʃaɪnɝənz sɝv ðɛɹ wɔɹ əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ ɪn ðə blaɪt, hɑɹɾ ən soʊl. ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðoʊz u wəd bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ, sɝv ðə taʊɝ. ə stʃɹɔŋɝ wɛpən əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ ðən ɛni sɔɹd, ən noʊ lɛs ʃɑɹp tə ən ənwɛɹi hænd.

Larine must take the punishment she had earned, and Bode must do what needed doing. Egwene had been younger than Bode when she was set to hunt Black sisters. Shienarans served their war against the Shadow in the Blight, heart and soul. Aes Sedai, and those who would become Aes Sedai, served the Tower. A stronger weapon against the Shadow than any sword, and no less sharp to an unwary hand.

wən ɹoʊmændə ɝaɪvd, wɪð θiədʒɹɪn tə hoʊld oʊpən ði ɛntʃɹi flæp fəɹ hɝ, ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd jɛloʊ meɪɾ ə vɛɹi ɪɡzækt kɝtsi, niðɝ ə fɹækʃən mɔɹ nɔɹ lɛs ðən pɹəpɹaɪəɾi ɹikwaɪɝd fɹəm sɪɾɝ tə æmɪɝlɪn. ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɪn ðə hɔl, naʊ. ɪf ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz oʊnli fɝst əmʌŋ ikwəlz ðɛɹ, ʃi wɑz ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ɪn əɹ oʊn stʌɾi, ivən fəɹ ɹoʊmændə. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɔfɝ tə kɪs ɛɡwinz ɹɪŋ, ðoʊ. ðəɹ wɝ lɪməts. ʃi aɪd maɪɹɛl ən meɪɡɑn əz ɪf θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv æskɪŋ əm tə liv. əɹ pɝhæps tɛlɪŋ ðɛm. ɪt wɑz ə pɹɪkli pɔɪnt. sɪɾɝz ɪkspɛktəɾ oʊbiɾiəns, bʌt niðɝ wɑz ə hɝ ədʒɑ. ən ðɪs wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi.

When Romanda arrived, with Theodrin to hold open the entry flap for her, the gray-haired Yellow made a very exact curtsy, neither a fraction more nor less than propriety required from Sitter to Amyrlin. They were not in the Hall, now. If the Amyrlin was only first among equals there, she was a little more in her own study, even for Romanda. She did not offer to kiss Egwene's ring, though. There were limits. She eyed Myrelle and Maigan as if thinking of asking them to leave. Or perhaps telling them. It was a prickly point. Sitters expected obedience, but neither was of her Ajah. And this was the Amyrlin's study.

ɪn ði ɛnd, ʃi dɪd niðɝ, mɪɹli əlaʊd θiədʒɹɪn tə teɪk əɹ kloʊk, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð bɔɹɾɝz ə jɛloʊ flaʊɝz, ən pɔɹ əɹ ə kʌp ə ti. θiədʒɹɪn dɪd nɑɾ əv tə bi æsk tə də iðɝ, ən ʃi ɹitʃɹiɾəd tə ə kɔɹnɝ, twɪtʃɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl ən əɹ maʊθ sɛt sʌlənli, əz ɹoʊmændə tʊk ði ɛmpti stul.

In the end, she did neither, merely allowed Theodrin to take her cloak, embroidered with borders of yellow flowers, and pour her a cup of tea. Theodrin did not have to be asked to do either, and she retreated to a corner, twitching her shawl and her mouth set sullenly, as Romanda took the empty stool.

dɪspaɪt ðə stulz ənivən lɛɡz, ɹoʊmændə mænədʒ tə meɪk ɪt sim ə siɾ ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, əɹ meɪbi ə θɹoʊn, əz ʃi ədʒʌstəd ðə jɛloʊ-fɹɪnd ʃɔl ʃi hæd wɔɹn bɪniθ əɹ kloʊk.

Despite the stool's uneven legs, Romanda managed to make it seem a seat in the Hall of the Tower, or maybe a throne, as she adjusted the yellow-fringed shawl she had worn beneath her cloak.

"ðə tɔks ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ bædli," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ðət haɪ, mjuzɪkəl vɔɪs. ʃi stɪl meɪɾ ɪt saʊn ə pɹɑkləmeɪʃən. "vɛɹɪlɪn ɪz tʃuɪŋ əɹ lɪps ɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. mæɡlə ɪz fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd, tu, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ən ivən sɛɝɔɪjə. wən sɛɝɔɪjə stɑɹts ɡɹaɪndɪŋ əɹ tiθ, moʊst sɪstɝz wəd bi ʃaʊɾɪŋ." ɛksɛptɪŋ dʒɑnjə, ɛvɹi sɪɾɝ u hæd hɛld ə tʃɛɹ bɪfɔɹ ðə taʊɝ dɪvaɪɾəd hæɾ ɪnsɪnjueɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf ɪndə ðə nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz.

"The talks are going badly," she said in that high, musical voice. She still made it sound a proclamation. "Varilin is chewing her lips in frustration. Magla is frustrated, too, for that matter, and even Saroiya. When Saroiya starts grinding her teeth, most sisters would be shouting." Excepting Janya, every Sitter who had held a chair before the Tower divided had insinuated herself into the negotiations.

ðeɪ wɝ tɔkɪŋ wɪð wɪmən ðeɪ hæd noʊn ɪn ðə hɔl bæk ðɛn, æftɝ ɔl. bioʊnɪn wɑz nɪɹli ɹədus tə ɹʌnɪŋ ɛɹənz.

They were talking with women they had known in the Hall back then, after all. Beonin was nearly reduced to running errands.

ɹoʊmændə tʌtʃt ðə ti tə hɝ lɪps, ðən hɛl ðə kʌp aʊt tə wʌn saɪɾ ɑn ɪts dɪʃ wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ ə wɝd. θiədʒɹɪn dɑɹɾɪd fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ tə teɪk ðə kʌp oʊvɝ tə ðə tʃɹeɪ, æɾɪŋ hʌni bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹɪtɝn ðə kʌp tə ðə sɪɾɝ ən hɝsɛlf tə ðə kɔɹnɝ. ɹoʊmændə teɪstəd ðə ti əɡɛn ən nɑɾəd ɪn əpɹuvəl. θiədʒɹɪnz feɪs kʌlɝd. "ðə tɔks wɪl ɡoʊ əz ðeɪ ɡoʊ," ɛɡwin sɛd kɛɹfəli. ɹoʊmændə hæɾ əpoʊzd ɛni sɔɹɾ ə nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz, spjʊɹiəs əɹ nɑt. ən ʃi nu wʌt wɑz tə hæpən tənaɪt. kipɪŋ ðə hɔl ɪn ðə dɑɹk əbaʊt ðət hæd simd ə nidləs slæp ɪn ðə feɪs. ðə taɪt bʌn ɑn ðə bæk ə ɹoʊmændəz hɛd bɑbd əz ʃi nɑɾəd. "ðeɪ hæv ʃoʊn əs wʌn θɪŋ ɔlɹɛɾi. ɪleɪɾə woʊn əlaʊ ðə sɪɾɝz spikɪŋ fəɹ əɹ tə bʌdʒ ən ɪntʃ. ʃiz dʌɡ ɪndə ðə taʊɝ laɪk ə ɹæɾ ɪn ə wɔl. ði oʊnli weɪ tə flʌʃ əɹ ɪz tə sɛn fɛɹəts ɪn æftɝ hɝ." maɪɹɛl meɪɾ ə saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt, ɝnɪŋ ə sɝpɹaɪzd ɡlæns fɹəm meɪɡɑn. ɹoʊmændəz aɪz ɹɪmeɪn stɛɾi ɑn ɛɡwinz.

Romanda touched the tea to her lips, then held the cup out to one side on its dish without saying a word. Theodrin darted from the corner to take the cup over to the tray, adding honey before she returned the cup to the Sitter and herself to the corner. Romanda tasted the tea again and nodded in approval. Theodrin's face colored. "The talks will go as they go," Egwene said carefully. Romanda had opposed any sort of negotiations, spurious or not. And she knew what was to happen tonight. Keeping the Hall in the dark about that had seemed a needless slap in the face. The tight bun on the back of Romanda's head bobbed as she nodded. "They have shown us one thing already. Elaida won't allow the Sitters speaking for her to budge an inch. She is dug into the Tower like a rat in a wall. The only way to flush her is to send ferrets in after her." Myrelle made a sound in her throat, earning a surprised glance from Maigan. Romanda's eyes remained steady on Egwene's.

"ɪleɪɾə wɪl bi ɹimuvd wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd kɑmli, sɛɾɪŋ əɹ tikʌp daʊn ɑn ɪts dɪʃ. hɝ hæn dɪd nɑt ʃeɪk. wʌt hæd ðə wɪmən lɝnd? haʊ?

"Elaida will be removed one way or another," Egwene said calmly, setting her teacup down on its dish. Her hand did not shake. What had the women learned? How?

ɹoʊmændə ɡɹɪməs feɪnli əɾ əɹ ti əz ɪf æftɝ ɔl ɪt læk səfɪʃən hʌni. əɹ ɪn dɪsəpɔɪnmənt ðəɾ ɛɡwin hæd nɑt sɛd mɔɹ. ðə wʊmən ʃɪftəɾ ɑn əɹ stul wɪð ði ɛɹ ʌv ə sɔɝdzwʊmən sɛɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf fəɹ ənʌðɝ ətæk, bleɪd kʌmɪŋ ʌp. "ðə θɪŋz juv sɛɾ əbaʊt ðə kɪn, mʌðɝ. ðət ðəɹ ɑɹ oʊvɝ ə θaʊzən ə ðɛm ɹæðɝ ðən ə fju dʌzən. ðət səm ɑɹ faɪv əɹ sɪks hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz oʊld." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ oʊvɝ ði ɪmpɔsɪbɪlɪɾi. "haʊ kəɾ ɔl ə ðəɾ əv ɪskeɪp ðə taʊɝ?" ʃi wɑz tʃælənʒɪŋ, nɑɾ æskɪŋ ə kwɛstʃən.

Romanda grimaced faintly at her tea as if after all it lacked sufficient honey. Or in disappointment that Egwene had not said more. The woman shifted on her stool with the air of a swordswoman setting herself for another attack, blade coming up. "The things you've said about the Kin, Mother. That there are over a thousand of them rather than a few dozen. That some are five or six hundred years old." She shook her head over the impossibility. "How could all of that have escaped the Tower?" She was challenging, not asking a question.

"wi oʊnli ɹisənli lɝn haʊ mɛni waɪldɝz ðəɹ ɑɹ əmʌŋ ðə si foʊk," ɛɡwin ɹɪplaɪd dʒɛnli. "ænd wi stɪl ɑɹənt ʃʊɹ haʊ mɛni ðəɹ ɹɪli ɑɹ." ɹoʊmændəz ɡɹɪmɑs wɑz nɑt soʊ smɔl, ðɪs taɪm. ɪt hæd bɪn ðə jɛloʊ ðət fɝs kənfɝm hʌnʒɹədz ə si foʊk waɪldɝz ɪn ɪljən əloʊn. fɝs bloʊ tə ɛɡwin.

"We only recently learned how many wilders there are among the Sea Folk," Egwene replied gently. "And we still aren't sure how many there really are." Romanda's grimace was not so small, this time. It had been the Yellow that first confirmed hundreds of Sea Folk wilders in Illian alone. First blow to Egwene.

wʌn bloʊ wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə fɪnɪʃ ɹoʊmændə, ðoʊ. əɹ ivən tə waʊn əɹ vɛɹi bædli. "wi wɪl əv tə hʌn əm daʊn, wʌns əɹ bɪznəs ɪz dʌn hɪɹ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ɡɹɪm toʊnz. "lɛɾɪŋ ə fju dʌzən ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ ən tɑɹ vəlɑn, dʒʌs tə hɛlp əs tʃɹeɪs ɹʌnəweɪz, wɑz wʌn θɪŋ, bʌt wi kænɑɾ əlaʊ ə θaʊzənd waɪldɝz tə ɹɪmeɪn . . . ɔɹɡənaɪzd." ʃi pʊɾ ivən mɔɹ kəntɛmpt ɪndə ðə wɝd, ɪndə ði aɪdiə ʌv waɪldɝz ɔɹɡənaɪzɪŋ, ðən ʃi dɪɾ ɪndə ðə ɹɛst. maɪɹɛl ən meɪɡɑn wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ kloʊsli, lɪsnɪŋ. meɪɡɑn wɑz ivən linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, ʃi wɑz soʊ ɪntɛnt. niðɝ nu mɔɹ ðən ðə stɔɹiz ɛɡwin hæd spɹɛd, wɪtʃ ɛvɹiwʌn əsum keɪm θɹu sɪuənz aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz.

One blow was not enough to finish Romanda, though. Or even to wound her very badly. "We will have to hunt them down, once our business is done here," she said in grim tones. "Letting a few dozen remain in Ebou Dar and Tar Valon, just to help us trace runaways, was one thing, but we cannot allow a thousand wilders to remain . . . organized." She put even more contempt into the word, into the idea of wilders organizing, than she did into the rest. Myrelle and Maigan were watching closely, listening. Maigan was even leaning forward, she was so intent. Neither knew more than the stories Egwene had spread, which everyone assumed came through Siuan's eyes-and-ears.

"wɛl oʊvɝ ə θaʊzənd," ɛɡwin kɝɛktəd, "ænd nɑt wʌn ə waɪldɝ. ɔl wɪmən sɛn əweɪ fɹəm ðə taʊɝ, ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju ɹʌnəweɪz u ɪveɪɾɪd kæptʃɝ." ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹeɪz əɹ vɔɪs, bʌt ʃi meɪɾ itʃ pɔɪn fɝmli, miɾɪŋ ɹoʊmændəz ɡeɪz. "ɪn ɛni keɪs, haʊ dʒju pɹəpoʊz tə hʌn əm daʊn?

"Well over a thousand," Egwene corrected, "and not one a wilder. All women sent away from the Tower, except for a few runaways who evaded capture." She did not raise her voice, but she made each point firmly, meeting Romanda's gaze. "In any case, how do you propose to hunt them down?

ðeɪ ɑɹ spɹɛd θɹu ɛvɹi kʌntʃɹi, ɪn ɛvɹi sɔɹɾ ʌv ɑkjəpeɪʃən. ɛbu dɑɹ wɑz ði oʊnli pleɪs ðeɪ ɛvɝ ɡæðɝɾ əɹ mɛɾ ʌðɝ ðən baɪ tʃæns, ən ɔl ðoʊz flɛd wən ðə sintʃæn keɪm. sɪns ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, ðə kɪn əv əlaʊd ðə taʊɝ tə noʊ oʊnli wʌt ðeɪ wɑntəd noʊn. tu θaʊzən jɪɹz, haɪɾɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə waɪt taʊɝz noʊz. ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz əv ɡɹoʊn waɪl ðə taʊɝz nʌmbɝz dwɪndəld.

They are spread through every country, in every sort of occupation. Ebou Dar was the only place they ever gathered or met other than by chance, and all those fled when the Seanchan came. Since the Trolloc Wars, the Kin have allowed the Tower to know only what they wanted known. Two thousand years, hiding under the White Tower's nose. Their numbers have grown while the Tower's numbers dwindled.

haʊ dʒju pɹəpoʊz tə faɪn əm naʊ, əmʌŋ ɔl ðə waɪldɝz aʊt ðəɹ ðət ðə taʊɝ əz ɔlweɪz ɪɡnɔɹd kəz ðeɪ wɝ 'tu oʊld' tə bɪkʌm nɑvəsɪz? kɪnswɪmən doʊn stæn aʊɾ ɪn ɛni weɪ, ɹoʊmændə. ðeɪ juz ðə paʊɝ ɔlmoʊst əz ɔfən əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ðeɪ ʃoʊ eɪdʒ laɪk ɛniwʌn ɛls, ɪf mɔɹ sloʊli. ɪf ðeɪ wɑnə ɹɪmeɪn hɪɾən, wɪl nɛvɝ bi eɪbəl tə faɪn ðɛm." ən ðət wɑz sɛvɹəl mɔɹ bloʊz fəɹ ɛɡwin, wɪð nʌn teɪkən. ɹoʊmændə wɔɹ ə feɪnt ʃin ə swɛɾ ɑn əɹ fɔɹhɛd, ə ʃʊɹ saɪn ə dɛspɝeɪʃən ɪn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. maɪɹɛl wɑz sɪɾɪŋ vɛɹi stɪl, bʌt meɪɡɑn simd əbaʊt tə fɔl ɔf əɹ stul ɑntu hɝ noʊz noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ stɛɾi ɪt wɑz.

How do you propose to find them now, among all the wilders out there that the Tower has always ignored because they were 'too old' to become novices? Kinswomen don't stand out in any way, Romanda. They use the Power almost as often as Aes Sedai, but they show age like anyone else, if more slowly. If they want to remain hidden, we will never be able to find them." And that was several more blows for Egwene, with none taken. Romanda wore a faint sheen of sweat on her forehead, a sure sign of desperation in an Aes Sedai. Myrelle was sitting very still, but Maigan seemed about to fall off her stool onto her nose no matter how steady it was.

ɹoʊmændə lɪkt əɹ lɪps. "ɪf ðeɪ tʃænəl, ðeɪ wəɾ ətʃiv ðə lʊk. ɪf ðeɪ eɪdʒ, ðeɪ kænɑt bi tʃænəlɪŋ vɛɹi ɔfən ɪf əɾ ɔl. ən niðɝ weɪ kəd ðeɪ laɪv faɪv əɹ sɪks hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz!" noʊ mɔɹ dɪssɪmjəleɪʃən, ɪt simd.

Romanda licked her lips. "If they channel, they would achieve the look. If they age, they cannot be channeling very often if at all. And neither way could they live five or six hundred years!" No more dissimulation, it seemed.

"ðɛɹ ɪz oʊnli wʌn ɹil dɪfɝəns bɪtwin ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə kɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd kwaɪətli. ðə wɝdz stɪl sim laʊd. ivən ɹoʊmændə əpɪɹd tə bi hoʊldɪŋ əɹ bɹɛθ. "ðeɪ lɛf ðə waɪt taʊɝ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd swɛɹ ɑn ði oʊθ ɹɑd." ðɛɹ; ɪt wɑz ɪn ði oʊpən faɪnəli.

"There is only one real difference between Aes Sedai and the Kin," Egwene said quietly. The words still seemed loud. Even Romanda appeared to be holding her breath. "They left the White Tower before they could swear on the Oath Rod." There; it was in the open finally.

ɹoʊmændə dʒɝkt əz ɪf ʃi hæd teɪkən ə mɔɹɾəl bloʊ. "juv nɑt teɪkən ði oʊðz jɛt," ʃi sɛd hɔɹsli. "du jə min tə əbændən ðɛm? tə æsk sɪstɝz tə əbændən ðɛm?" maɪɹɛl əɹ meɪɡɑn ɡæspt.

Romanda jerked as if she had taken a mortal blow. "You've not taken the Oaths yet," she said hoarsely. "Do you mean to abandon them? To ask sisters to abandon them?" Myrelle or Maigan gasped.

pɝhæps boʊθ.

Perhaps both.

"noʊ!" ɛɡwin sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "ðə θɹi oʊðz ɑɹ wʌt meɪk əs ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən əl swɛɹ ɑn ði oʊθ ɹɑɾ əz sun əz ɪts aʊɝz!" dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ʃi mɑdʒəleɪɾɪd əɹ toʊn. bʌt ʃi lin təwɔɹd ði ʌðɝ wʊmən, tu, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dʒɹɔ hɝ ɪn, tə ɪnklud hɝ. tə kənvɪns hɝ. ʃi ɔlmoʊst stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ə hænd. "æz ɪɾ ɪz, sɪstɝz ɹɪtaɪɹ tə spɛn ðɛɹ læs jɪɹz ɪn kwaɪət, ɹoʊmændə. wʊdn ɪt bi bɛɾɝ ɪf ðoʊz wɝ nɑt ðɛɹ læs jɪɹz? ɪf sɪstɝz ɹɪtaɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə kɪn, ðeɪ kəd taɪ ðə kɪn tə ðə taʊɝ. ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ nid fəɹ ə fjuɾəl hʌnt, ðɛn." ʃi hæd ɡɔn ðɪs fɑɹ; ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl ɡoʊ ðə læst stɛp. "ði oʊθ ɹɑd kən ənbaɪn əz wɛl əz baɪnd." meɪɡɑn θʌddɪd tə ðə kɑɹpəts ɑn əɹ niz ən skɹæmbəld ʌp, bɹʌʃɪŋ əɾ əɹ skɝts əz ɪndɪɡnənli əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn pʊʃt. maɪɹɛlz ɑləv feɪs lʊkt ə lɪɾəl peɪl.

"No!" Egwene said sharply. "The Three Oaths are what make us Aes Sedai, and I will swear on the Oath Rod as soon as it is ours!" Drawing a deep breath, she modulated her tone. But she leaned toward the other woman, too, trying to draw her in, to include her. To convince her. She almost stretched out a hand. "As it is, sisters retire to spend their last years in quiet, Romanda. Wouldn't it be better if those were not their last years? If sisters retired into the Kin, they could tie the Kin to the Tower. There would be no need for a futile hunt, then." She had gone this far; she might as well go the last step. "The Oath Rod can unbind as well as bind." Maigan thudded to the carpets on her knees and scrambled up, brushing at her skirts as indignantly as if she had been pushed. Myrelle's olive face looked a little pale.

muvɪŋ sloʊli, ɹoʊmændə sɛɾ əɹ tikʌp ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl ən stʊd, dʒɹɔɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl ɝaʊn hɝ. ɪkspɹɛʃənləs, ʃi stʊd stɛɹɪŋ daʊn əɾ ɛɡwin waɪl θiədʒɹɪn sɛɾəld əɹ jɛloʊ-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd kloʊk ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, fæsən ðə ɡoʊldən pɪn ən ɝeɪnʒd ðə foʊlz əz kɛɹfəli əz ɛni leɪɾiz meɪd. oʊnli ðən dɪd ɹoʊmændə spik, ɪn ə vɔɪs laɪk stoʊn. "wɛn aɪ wɑz ə lɪɾəl ɡɝl, aɪ dʒɹimd ə bɪkʌmɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. fɹəm ðə deɪ aɪ ɹitʃt ðə waɪt taʊɝ, aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə lɪv əz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ hæv lɪvd əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən əl daɪ əz ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðɪs kænɑt bi əlaʊd!" ʃi tɝn smuðli tə ɡoʊ, bʌt ʃi nɑkt oʊvɝ ðə stul ʃi hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ ɑn, əpɛɹənli wɪθaʊt noʊɾɪsɪŋ. θiədʒɹɪn hɝiɾ aʊɾ æftɝ hɝ. wɪð kənsɝn ɑn əɹ feɪs, ɑdli ɪnʌf. "mʌðɝ?" maɪɹɛl dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, fɪŋɡɝz plʌkɪŋ əɾ əɹ dip ɡɹin skɝts. "mʌðɝ, ɑɹ jə ɹɪli sədʒɛstɪŋ . . . ?" ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf, əpɛɹənli əneɪbəl tə seɪ ɪt. meɪɡɑn sæɾ ɑn əɹ stul əz ðoʊ fɔɹsɪŋ hɝsɛlf nɑt tə lin fɔɹwɝɾ əɡɛn.

Moving slowly, Romanda set her teacup on the edge of the writing table and stood, drawing her shawl around her. Expressionless, she stood staring down at Egwene while Theodrin settled her yellow-embroidered cloak on her shoulders, fastened the golden pin and arranged the folds as carefully as any lady's maid. Only then did Romanda speak, in a voice like stone. "When I was a little girl, I dreamed of becoming Aes Sedai. From the day I reached the White Tower, I tried to live as an Aes Sedai. I have lived as Aes Sedai, and I will die as Aes Sedai. This cannot be allowed!" She turned smoothly to go, but she knocked over the stool she had been sitting on, apparently without noticing. Theodrin hurried out after her. With concern on her face, oddly enough. "Mother?" Myrelle drew a deep breath, fingers plucking at her deep green skirts. "Mother, are you really suggesting . . . ?" She trailed off, apparently unable to say it. Maigan sat on her stool as though forcing herself not to lean forward again.

"aɪ hæv leɪɾ aʊt ðə fæks," ɛɡwin sɛd kɑmli. "ɛni dɪsɪʒən wɪl bi ðə hɔlz. tɛl mi, dɔɾɝ. wəd jə tʃuz tə daɪ, wən jə kəd lɪv ən kəntɪnju tə sɝv ðə taʊɝ?" ðə ɡɹin sɪstɝ ən ðə blu ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz, ðən ɹilaɪzd wʌt ðeɪ hæd dʌn ən snæp bæk tə ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ. niðɝ ænsɝd, bʌɾ ɛɡwin kəɾ ɔlmoʊst si ðə θɔts tʃɝnɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ aɪz.

"I have laid out the facts," Egwene said calmly. "Any decision will be the Hall's. Tell me, Daughter. Would you choose to die, when you could live and continue to serve the Tower?" The Green sister and the Blue exchanged glances, then realized what they had done and snapped back to ignoring one another. Neither answered, but Egwene could almost see the thoughts churning behind their eyes.

æftɝ ə fju moʊməns, ʃi ɡɑɾ ʌp ən sɛt ðə stul bæk əpɹaɪt. ivən ðət feɪl tə ɹaʊs əm fɝðɝ ðən pɝfʌŋktɝi əpɑlədʒiz fəɹ meɪkɪŋ əɹ si tə ðət hɝsɛlf. ðən ðeɪ læpst ɪndə saɪlən ɹəflɛkʃən.

After a few moments, she got up and set the stool back upright. Even that failed to rouse them further than perfunctory apologies for making her see to that herself. Then they lapsed into silent reflection.

ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə peɪdʒəz ɪn sɪuənz foʊldɝz - ðə steɪlmeɪɾ ət ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ wɑz dʒɹæɡɪŋ ɑn, ən noʊ wʌn ədmɪɾəd tə ɛni aɪdiə ʌv haʊ ɪt wəɾ ɛnd - bʌt nɑt lɔŋ æftɝ ɹoʊmændəz dɪpɑɹtʃɝ, ləleɪn ɝaɪvd.

She tried to return to the pages in Siuan's folders - the stalemate at the Stone of Tear was dragging on, and no one admitted to any idea of how it would end - but not long after Romanda's departure, Lelaine arrived.

ənlaɪk ɹoʊmændə, ðə slɛndɝ blu sɪɾɝ wɑz əloʊn, ən pɔɹɾ əɹ oʊn ti. sɛɾəlɪŋ ɑntu ði ɛmpti stul, ʃi tɔst əɹ fɝ-laɪn kloʊk bæk oʊvɝ boʊθ ʃoʊldɝz ən lɛɾ ɪt hæŋ fɹəm ə sɪlvɝ kloʊk pɪn sɛt wɪð lɑɹdʒ sæfaɪɝz. ʃi wɔɹ əɹ ʃɔl, tu; sɪɾɝz juʒəwəli dɪd. ləleɪn wɑz mɔɹ dɝɛk ðən ɹoʊmændə. əɹ soʊ ɪt maɪɾ əv simd, ɑn ðə sɝfəs. hɝ aɪz hɛld ə ʃɑɹp ɡlɪɾɝ. "kɛɹənz dɛθ pʊɾ ənʌðɝ kɹɪmp ɪn ðə tʃænsəz ə meɪkɪŋ ɛni sɔɹɾ ʌv əɡɹimənt wɪð ðə blæk taʊɝ," ʃi mɝmɝɾ oʊvɝ əɹ tikʌp, ɪnheɪlɪŋ ðə fjumz. "æn ðɛɹz pʊɹ lɪw tə dil wɪð. pɝhæps maɪɹɛl wɪl teɪk hɪm. tu ʌv əɹ θɹi bɪlɔŋ tə sʌmwʌn ɛls fɝst. noʊ wʌn ɛls əz ɛvɝ seɪv tu wɔɹɾɝz huz ɛɛs sədaɪ daɪd."

Unlike Romanda, the slender Blue Sitter was alone, and poured her own tea. Settling onto the empty stool, she tossed her fur-lined cloak back over both shoulders and let it hang from a silver cloak pin set with large sapphires. She wore her shawl, too; Sitters usually did. Lelaine was more direct than Romanda. Or so it might have seemed, on the surface. Her eyes held a sharp glitter. "Kairen's death put another crimp in the chances of making any sort of agreement with the Black Tower," she murmured over her teacup, inhaling the fumes. "And there's poor Llyw to deal with. Perhaps Myrelle will take him. Two of her three belonged to someone else first. No one else has ever saved two Warders whose Aes Sedai died."

ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn tə hɪɹ spɛʃəl ɛmfəsəs ɪn ðæt. maɪɹɛlz feɪs dɛfənətli peɪld.

Egwene was not the only one to hear special emphasis in that. Myrelle's face definitely paled.

ʃi hæd tu sikɹəts tə haɪd, ən wʌn wɑz ðət ʃi hæd fɔɹ wɔɹɾɝz. ðə pæsɪŋ ə læn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹənz bɑn fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪn tə hɝ hæd bɪn sʌmθɪŋ nɑt dʌn ɪn hʌnʒɹədz ə jɪɹz. tədeɪ, ɪt wɑz lʊkt əpɑn laɪk bɑndɪŋ ə mæn əɡɛnst ɪz wɪl. sʌmθɪŋ nɑt dʌn ɪn ivən mɔɹ hʌnʒɹədz ə jɪɹz. "θɹi ɪz ɪnʌf fəɹ mi," ʃi sɛd bɹɛθləsli. "ɪf jəl ɪkskjuz mi, mʌðɝ?" meɪɡɑn læf sɔfli əz maɪɹɛl lɛf ðə tɛnt wɔkɪŋ fæst. nɑt soʊ fæs ðət ʃi feɪl tə ɛmbɹeɪs seɪaɪdɑɹ bɪfɔɹ ði ɛntʃɹi flæps fɛl, ðoʊ.

She had two secrets to hide, and one was that she had four Warders. The passing of Lan Mandragoran's bond from Moiraine to her had been something not done in hundreds of years. Today, it was looked upon like bonding a man against his will. Something not done in even more hundreds of years. "Three is enough for me," she said breathlessly. "If you will excuse me, Mother?" Maigan laughed softly as Myrelle left the tent walking fast. Not so fast that she failed to embrace saidar before the entry flaps fell, though.

"ʌv kɔɹs," ləleɪn sɛd, ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ əmjuz lʊks wɪð ði ʌðɝ blu, "ðeɪ seɪ ʃi mɛɹiz əɹ wɔɹɾɝz. ɔl ə ðɛm. pɝhæps pʊɹ lɪw woʊn də fəɹ ə hʌzbənd."

"Of course," Lelaine said, exchanging amused looks with the other Blue, "they say she marries her Warders. All of them. Perhaps poor Llyw won't do for a husband."

"hi ɪz əz waɪɾ əz ə hɔɹs," meɪɡɑn pʊɾ ɪn. dɪspaɪɾ əɹ əmjuzmən oʊvɝ maɪɹɛlz flaɪt, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mælɪʃəsnəs ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. ʃi wɑz sɪmpli steɪɾɪŋ ə fækt. lɪw wɑz ə vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ mæn. "aɪ θɪŋk aɪ noʊ ə jʌŋ blu hu maɪt teɪk hɪm. ʃi ɪzən ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn mɛn ðət weɪ." ləleɪn nɑɾəd ɪn ə weɪ ðət sɛd ðə jʌŋ blu hæd faʊn əɹ wɔɹɾɝ. "ɡɹinz kən bi vɛɹi ɑd. teɪk ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd, fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl. æktʃəli , aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ ɪleɪn wəd tʃuz ɡɹin. aɪ hæɾ əɹ mɑɹkt aʊt fəɹ ðə blu. ðə ɡɝl əz ə dɛft fil fəɹ ðə kɝəns ɪn pɑlətɪks. ðoʊ ʃi ɔlsoʊ hæz ə tɛndənsi tə wɑndɝ ɪndə dipɝ wɔɾɝ ðən maɪt bi seɪf. wʊdn jə seɪ soʊ, mʌðɝ?" smaɪlɪŋ, ʃi sɪpt əɾ əɹ ti.

"He is as wide as a horse," Maigan put in. Despite her amusement over Myrelle's flight, there was no maliciousness in her voice. She was simply stating a fact. Llyw was a very large man. "I think I know a young Blue who might take him. She isn't interested in men that way." Lelaine nodded in a way that said the young Blue had found her Warder. "Greens can be very odd. Take Elayne Trakand, for example. Actually, I never thought Elayne would choose Green. I had her marked out for the Blue. The girl has a deft feel for the currents in politics. Though she also has a tendency to wander into deeper water than might be safe. Wouldn't you say so, Mother?" Smiling, she sipped at her tea.

ðɪs wɑz nɑɾ əɾ ɔl laɪk ɹoʊmændəz sʌɾəl filɪŋ-aʊt. ðɪs wɑz slæʃ ən slæʃ, wɪð ðə bleɪɾ əpɪɹɪŋ aʊɾ ə noʊwɛɹ. dɪd ləleɪn noʊ əbaʊt maɪɹɛl ən læn? hæd ʃi sɛn sʌmwʌn tə keɪɛmlɪn, ən ɪf soʊ, haʊ mʌtʃ hæd ʃi lɝnd? ɛɡwin wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ɹoʊmændə hæɾ ɔlsoʊ fɛlt ɔf-bæləns ən deɪzd. "du jə θɪŋk kɛɹənz mɝɾɝ ɪz ɪnʌf tə stɑp ən əɡɹimənt?" ʃi sɛd. "fɔɹ ɔl ɛniwʌn noʊz, ðɪs kəd bi lɑɡən ɹɪtɝnɪŋ fəɹ səm mæd ɹivɛnʒ." waɪ ɪn ðə laɪt hæd ʃi sɛd ðæt? ʃi niɾəd tə pʊɾ ə ɹeɪn ɑn əɹ tʌŋ ən kip əɹ wɪts. "ɔɹ mɔɹ laɪkli, səm pʊɹ ful fɹəm ə fɑɹm ɝaʊn hɪɹ, əɹ wʌn ə ðə bɹɪdʒ taʊnz." ləleɪnz smaɪl dipənd, ən ɪt wɑz mɑkɪŋ, nɑɾ əmjuzd. laɪt, ðə wʊmən hæd nɑt ʃoʊn ðɪs mʌtʃ dɪsɹɪspɛkt ɪn mʌnθs.

This was not at all like Romanda's subtle feeling-out. This was slash and slash, with the blade appearing out of nowhere. Did Lelaine know about Myrelle and Lan? Had she sent someone to Caemlyn, and if so, how much had she learned? Egwene wondered whether Romanda had also felt off-balance and dazed. "Do you think Kairen's murder is enough to stop an agreement?" she said. "For all anyone knows, this could be Logain returning for some mad revenge." Why in the Light had she said that? She needed to put a rein on her tongue and keep her wits. "Or more likely, some poor fool from a farm around here, or one of the bridge towns." Lelaine's smile deepened, and it was mocking, not amused. Light, the woman had not shown this much disrespect in months.

"ɪf lɑɡən wɑntəd ɹivɛnʒ, mʌðɝ, aɪ səspɛkt i wəd bi ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl ɹɛdz." dɪspaɪɾ əɹ smaɪl, hɝ vɔɪs wɑz smuð ən lɛvəl. ə dɪstɝbɪŋ kɑntʃɹæst. pɝhæps ðət wɑz əɹ ɪntɛntʃən. "pɝhæps ɪts ə pɪɾi hi ɪzən duɪŋ ðæt. hi maɪt ɹimuv ɪleɪɾə. bʌt ðət wəd bi iziɝ ðən ʃi dɪzɝvz. noʊ, kɛɹən woʊn stɑp ən əɡɹimən ɛni mɔɹ ðən æneɪjə dɪd, bʌt ðə tu kəmbaɪnd wɪl meɪk sɪstɝz wɝi ivən hɑɹɾɝ əbaʊt seɪfɡɑɹdz ən stʃɹɪktʃɝz. wi meɪ nid ðiz mɛn, bʌt wi mʌs bi sɝɾən wəɹ ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl. kəmplit kəntʃɹoʊl."

"If Logain wanted revenge, Mother, I suspect he would be in the White Tower trying to kill Reds." Despite her smile, her voice was smooth and level. A disturbing contrast. Perhaps that was her intention. "Perhaps it's a pity he isn't doing that. He might remove Elaida. But that would be easier than she deserves. No, Kairen won't stop an agreement any more than Anaiya did, but the two combined will make sisters worry even harder about safeguards and strictures. We may need these men, but we must be certain we are in control. Complete control."

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd. ə smɔl nɑd. ʃi əɡɹid, bʌt. . . . "ðɛɹ, maɪt bi dɪfəkəltiz bɹɪŋɪŋ əm tə æksɛp ðæt," ʃi sɛd. dɪfəkəltiz. ʃi wɑz dɪspleɪɪŋ ə pɑzəɾɪv tælən fəɹ ʌndɝsteɪtmən tədeɪ.

Egwene nodded. A small nod. She agreed, but. . . . "There, might be difficulties bringing them to accept that," she said. Difficulties. She was displaying a positive talent for understatement today.

"ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn kəd bi mɑɾəfaɪd slaɪtli," meɪɡɑn sɛd. "æz ɪɾ ɪz, jə kən meɪk ðə mæn də əz jə wɪʃ wɪð ə lɪɾəl twikɪŋ, bʌt ðə nid tə twik kəd bi ɹimuv kwaɪɾ izəli." "ðæt saʊnz tu mʌtʃ laɪk kəmpʌlʃən," ɛɡwin sɛd fɝmli. ʃi hæd lɝn ðət wiv fɹəm mɑɡiɾin, bʌɾ oʊnli tə wɝk ɑn haʊ tə kaʊntɝ ɪt. ðə θɪŋ wɑz fɪlθ, ðə θɛft ʌv ənʌðɝ pɝsənz wɪl, ʌv ðɛɹ hoʊl biɪŋ.

"The Warder bond could be modified slightly," Maigan said. "As it is, you can make the man do as you wish with a little tweaking, but the need to tweak could be removed quite easily." "That sounds too much like Compulsion," Egwene said firmly. She had learned that weave from Moghedien, but only to work on how to counter it. The thing was filth, the theft of another person's will, of their whole being.

sʌmwʌn u wɑz kəmpɛl dɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ jə ɔɹɾɝd. ɛniθɪŋ. ən bɪlivd ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ oʊn tʃɔɪs. dʒʌs θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt meɪɾ əɹ fil dɝɾi. meɪɡɑn mɛɾ əɹ ɡeɪz ɔlmoʊst əz lɛvəli əz ləleɪn hæd, ðoʊ, ən əɹ vɔɪs wɑz əz smuð əz əɹ feɪs. ʃi hæd noʊ θɔts ə fɪlθ. "kəmpʌlʃən wɑz juzd ɑn sɪstɝz ɪn kɛɹhin. ðət simz sɝɾən, naʊ. bʌɾ aɪ wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə bɑnd, ə dɪfɹən θɪŋ ɪntaɪɝli."

Someone who was Compelled did anything you ordered. Anything. And believed it was their own choice. Just thinking about it made her feel dirty. Maigan met her gaze almost as levelly as Lelaine had, though, and her voice was as smooth as her face. She had no thoughts of filth. "Compulsion was used on sisters in Cairhien. That seems certain, now. But I was talking about the bond, a different thing entirely."

"ju θɪŋk jə kən tɔk ði æʃəmən ɪndə æksɛptɪŋ ðə bɑnd?" ɛɡwin kəd nɑt kip ði ɪnkɹədulɪɾi aʊɾ ə hɝ vɔɪs. "əsaɪd fɹəm ðæt, hu ɪz gɑnə də ðɪs bɑndɪŋ? ivən ɪf ɛvɹi sɪstɝ u dʌzn əv ə wɔɹɾɝ tʊk ən æʃəmən, ən ɛvɹi ɡɹin tʊk tu əɹ θɹi, ðəɹ ɑɹən ɪnʌf sɪstɝz. ðæts ɪf jə kən faɪnd wʌn u dʌzn maɪn biɪŋ bɑndəd tə ə mæn u ɪz gɑnə ɡoʊ mæd." meɪɡɑn nɑɾəd əɾ itʃ pɔɪn əz ɪf æksɛptɪŋ ɪt. ən ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ skɝts əz ɪf nɑt ɹɪli lɪsnɪŋ.

"You think you can talk the Asha'man into accepting the bond?" Egwene could not keep the incredulity out of her voice. "Aside from that, who is going to do this bonding? Even if every sister who doesn't have a Warder took an Asha'man, and every Green took two or three, there aren't enough sisters. That's if you can find one who doesn't mind being bonded to a man who is going to go mad." Maigan nodded at each point as if accepting it. And adjusted her skirts as if not really listening.

"ɪf ðə bɑn kən bi tʃeɪnʒd ɪn wʌn weɪ," ʃi sɛd wʌns ɛɡwin fɪnɪʃt, "ɪt ʃəd bi pɑsəbəl tə tʃeɪnʒ ɪɾ ɪn ʌðɝz. ðəɹ maɪt bi ə weɪ tə ɹimuv ðə ʃɛɹɪŋ, pɝhæps səm ə ði əwɛɹnəs. ðən pɝhæps ðə mædnəs wəd nɑt bi ə pɹɑbləm. ɪt wəd bi ə dɪfɹən sɔɹɾ ə bɑnd, nɑt laɪk ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn əɾ ɔl. aɪm sɝɾən ɛvɹiwʌn wɪl əɡɹi ɪt wʊdn bi laɪk hævɪŋ ə wɔɹɾɝ, ɹɪli. ɛni sɪstɝ kəd bɑnd wʌtɛvɝ nʌmbɝ ʌv æʃəmən wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi."

"If the bond can be changed in one way," she said once Egwene finished, "it should be possible to change it in others. There might be a way to remove the sharing, perhaps some of the awareness. Then perhaps the madness would not be a problem. It would be a different sort of bond, not like the Warder bond at all. I'm certain everyone will agree it wouldn't be like having a Warder, really. Any sister could bond whatever number of Asha'man was necessary."

əbɹʌpli, ɛɡwin ɹilaɪzd wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ. ləleɪn sæɾ əpɛɹənli piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɝ tikʌp, bʌt ʃi wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ ɛɡwin θɹu hɝ aɪlæʃɪz. ən juzɪŋ meɪɡɑn əz ə stɔkɪŋ hɔɹs. smʌðɝɪŋ æŋɡɝ, ɛɡwin dɪd nɑɾ əv tə meɪk əɹ vɔɪs koʊld. ɪt wɑz aɪs.

Abruptly, Egwene realized what was happening. Lelaine sat apparently peering into her teacup, but she was studying Egwene through her eyelashes. And using Maigan as a stalking horse. Smothering anger, Egwene did not have to make her voice cold. It was ice.

"ðæt saʊnz ɪɡzækli laɪk kəmpʌlʃən, ləleɪn. ɪts kəmpʌlʃən, ən noʊ twɪstɪŋ ʌv wɝdz wɪl meɪk ɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. əl pɔɪn ðəɾ aʊt tə ɛniwʌn ɛls u sədʒɛsts ðɪs. ən əl ɔɹɾɝ ðə bɝtʃ fəɹ ɛniwʌn u dʌz mɔɹ ðən sədʒɛst. kəmpʌlʃən ɪz bænd, ən ɪɾəl ɹɪmeɪn bænd."

"That sounds exactly like Compulsion, Lelaine. It is Compulsion, and no twisting of words will make it anything else. I will point that out to anyone else who suggests this. And I will order the birch for anyone who does more than suggest. Compulsion is banned, and it will remain banned."

"æz jə seɪ," ləleɪn ɹɪplaɪd, wɪtʃ maɪɾ əv mɛn ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl. wʌt keɪm nɛkst wɑz mɔɹ pɔɪntəd. "ðə waɪt taʊɝ meɪks mɪsteɪks əpɑn əkeɪʒən. ɪts ɪmpɑsəbəl tə lɪv əɹ muv wɪθaʊt meɪkɪŋ mɪsteɪks. bʌt wi lɪv, ən wi ɡoʊ ɑn. ən ɪf wi səmtaɪmz nid tə kənsil əɹ mɪsteɪks, wɛnɛvɝ pɑsəbəl, wi ɹɛktəfaɪ ðɛm. ivən wən ɪts peɪnfəl." pʊɾɪŋ əɹ kʌp bæk ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ, ʃi lɛft wɪð meɪɡɑn əɾ əɹ hilz. meɪɡɑn ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs bɪfɔɹ ʃi lɛf ðə tɛnt. ləleɪn dɪd nɑt.

"As you say," Lelaine replied, which might have meant anything at all. What came next was more pointed. "The White Tower makes mistakes upon occasion. It is impossible to live or move without making mistakes. But we live, and we go on. And if we sometimes need to conceal our mistakes, whenever possible, we rectify them. Even when it is painful." Putting her cup back on the tray, she left with Maigan at her heels. Maigan embraced the Source before she left the tent. Lelaine did not.

fəɹ ə taɪm, ɛɡwin kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn kipɪŋ əɹ bɹiðɪŋ stɛɾi. ʃi pɝfɔɹm ðə ɹɪvɝ kənteɪn baɪ ðə bæŋk. ləleɪn hæd nɑt kwaɪt sɛd ðəɾ ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ əz æmɪɝlɪn wɑz ə mɪsteɪk ðət maɪɾ əv tə bi ɹɛktəfaɪd, bʌt ʃi hæd kʌm vɛɹi kloʊs. ət mɪddeɪ, tʃɛsə bɹɔɾ ɛɡwinz mil ɑn ənʌðɝ wʊɾən tʃɹeɪ, wɔɹm kɹʌsti bɹɛd wɪð oʊnli wʌn əɹ tu səspɪʃəsli dɑɹk flɛks ən lɛntəl stu wɪð slɪvɝz ə tʌf tɝnəp ən wʊɾi kæɹəɾ ən bɪts ə sʌmθɪŋ ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn ɡoʊt. wʌn spunfʊl wɑz ɔl ɛɡwin kəd ɡɛt daʊn. ɪt wɑz nɑt ləleɪn ðət tʃɹʌbəl hɝ. ləleɪn hæd θɹɛɾənd əɹ bɪfɔɹ, ɪf nɑt sɪns ʃi meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ ðət ʃi wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn ən nɑɾ ə pʌpət. ɪnstɛɾ ʌv iɾɪŋ, ʃi stɛɹɾ ət tiɑnəz ɹipɔɹt laɪɪŋ tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə teɪbəl. nɪkoʊlə maɪt nɑɾ əv ɡeɪn ðə ʃɔl ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝ pətɛnʃəl, bʌt ðə taʊɝ hæd lɔŋ ɪkspɪɹiəns ɪn teɪkɪŋ mjulhɛɾɪd, fɔlt-ɹɪɾəld wɪmən ən tɝnɪŋ əm ɪndə kɑnfəɾənt ɛɛs sədaɪ. lɑɹini hæɾ ə bɹaɪt fjutʃɝ əhɛɾ ə hɝ, bʌt ʃi hæd tə lɝn tə oʊbeɪ ðə ɹulz bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd bɪɡɪn lɝnɪŋ wɪtʃ kəd bi bɹoʊkən ən wɛn. ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɑz ɡʊɾ ət titʃɪŋ boʊθ θɪŋz, bʌt ðə fɝst ɔlweɪz keɪm fɝst. boʊdz fjutʃɝ wəd bi bɹɪljənt. hɝ pətɛnʃəl ɔlmoʊst ikwəld ɛɡwinz. bʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, æksɛptɪɾ əɹ nɑvəs, ðə taʊɝ ɹikwaɪɝd jə tə də wʌt wɑz niɾəd fəɹ ðə taʊɝ. ɛɛs sədaɪ, æksɛptɪd, nɑvəs əɹ æmɪɝlɪn.

For a time, Egwene concentrated on keeping her breathing steady. She performed the river contained by the bank. Lelaine had not quite said that Egwene al'Vere as Amyrlin was a mistake that might have to be rectified, but she had come very close. At midday, Chesa brought Egwene's meal on another wooden tray, warm crusty bread with only one or two suspiciously dark flecks and lentil stew with slivers of tough turnip and woody carrot and bits of something that might have been goat. One spoonful was all Egwene could get down. It was not Lelaine that troubled her. Lelaine had threatened her before, if not since she made it clear that she was the Amyrlin and not a puppet. Instead of eating, she stared at Tiana's report lying to the side of the table. Nicola might not have gained the shawl in spite of her potential, but the Tower had long experience in taking muleheaded, fault-riddled women and turning them into confident Aes Sedai. Larine had a bright future ahead of her, but she had to learn to obey the rules before she could begin learning which could be broken and when. The White Tower was good at teaching both things, but the first always came first. Bode's future would be brilliant. Her potential almost equaled Egwene's. But Aes Sedai, Accepted or novice, the Tower required you to do what was needed for the Tower. Aes Sedai, Accepted, novice or Amyrlin.

tʃɛsə wɑz vɑljəbəl ɪn əɹ dɪsəpɔɪnmənt wən ʃi ɹɪtɝn tə faɪn ðə tʃɹeɪ ɔlmoʊst əntʌtʃt, ɪspɛʃli æftɝ ʃi hæd faʊn ə pɹæktəkli əntʌtʃt bɹɛkfəst. ɛɡwin kənsɪɾɝd kleɪmɪŋ ən ʌpsɛt stʌmək ən ɹɪdʒɛktɪɾ ɪt. æftɝ tʃɛsəz ti wɝkt ɑn əɹ hɛdeɪks - ət lis fəɹ ə fju deɪz, əntɪl ðeɪ ɹɪtɝn fɪɹsɝ ðən ɛvɝ ən ɛvɹi naɪt - ðə plʌmp wʊmən hæd tɝn aʊt tə hæv ə kəlɛkʃən ə ɝbəl ɹɛməɾiz fəɹ ɛvɹi ɪl, pɝtʃəs fɹəm ɛvɹi pɛdlɝ wɪð ə ɡlɪb tʌŋ ən itʃ vaɪlɝ-teɪstɪŋ ðən ðə læst. ʃi hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv lʊkɪŋ soʊ daʊnhɑɹɾɪd wən jə wəd nɑt dʒɹɪŋk ði ɑfəl mɪkstʃɝz ðət jə faʊn jɝsɛlf swɑloʊɪŋ əm dʒʌs tə kip əɹ fɹəm wɝiɪŋ. səmtaɪmz, sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ðeɪ wɝkt, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ nɛvɝ ɛniθɪŋ ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə pʊɾ ɪn əɹ maʊθ. ʃi sɛn tʃɛsə əweɪ wɪð ðə tʃɹeɪ ən ə pɹɑməs tə it leɪɾɝ. noʊ daʊt tʃɛsə wəd pɹizɛn ə sʌpɝ bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə stʌf ə ɡus.

Chesa was voluble in her disappointment when she returned to find the tray almost untouched, especially after she had found a practically untouched breakfast. Egwene considered claiming an upset stomach and rejected it. After Chesa's tea worked on her headaches - at least for a few days, until they returned fiercer than ever and every night - the plump woman had turned out to have a collection of herbal remedies for every ill, purchased from every peddler with a glib tongue and each viler-tasting than the last. She had a way of looking so downhearted when you would not drink the awful mixtures that you found yourself swallowing them just to keep her from worrying. Sometimes, surprisingly, they worked, but they were never anything Egwene wanted to put in her mouth. She sent Chesa away with the tray and a promise to eat later. No doubt Chesa would present a supper big enough to stuff a goose.

ʃi fɛlt laɪk smaɪlɪŋ ət ðə θɔt - tʃɛsə wəd stæn oʊvɝ hɝ, ɹɪŋɪŋ əɹ hænz, tɪl ʃi eɪɾ ɛvɹi baɪt - bʌɾ əɹ aɪz fɛl bæk ɑn tiɑnəz ɹipɔɹt. nɪkoʊlə, lɑɹini ən boʊd. ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɑz ə stʃɹɪk tæskməstʃɹəs. ənlɛs ðə taʊɝ ɪz ət wɔɹ baɪ kənsɛnsəs ə ðə hɔl, ði æmɪɝlɪn ʃæl nɑt. . . . bʌt ðə taʊɝ wɑz ət wɔɹ. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ lɔŋ ʃi sæt stɛɹɪŋ ət ðət pis ə peɪpɝ wɪð wʌn neɪm ɑn ɪt, bʌt wən sɪuən ɹɪtɝnd, ʃi hæd meɪɾ ʌp əɹ maɪnd. ə stʃɹɪk tæskməstʃɹəs u nɛvɝ pleɪd feɪvɹɪts.

She felt like smiling at the thought - Chesa would stand over her, wringing her hands, till she ate every bite - but her eyes fell back on Tiana's report. Nicola, Larine and Bode. The White Tower was a strict taskmistress. Unless the Tower is at war by consensus of the Hall, the Amyrlin shall not. . . . But the Tower was at war. She did not know how long she sat staring at that piece of paper with one name on it, but when Siuan returned, she had made up her mind. A strict taskmistress who never played favorites.

"hæv lin ən boʊd ɡɔn?" ʃi æskt.

"Have Leane and Bode gone?" she asked.

"æt lis tu aʊɝz əɡoʊ, mʌðɝ. lin hæd tə dɪlɪvɝ boʊd, ən ðən ɹaɪd daʊnɹɪvɝ." ɛɡwin nɑɾəd. "pliz əv deɪʃɝ sæɾəld. . . ." noʊ. səm pipəl ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ði æmɪɝlɪnz hɔɹs baɪ ðɪs taɪm. tu mɛni. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɑɹɡjəməns ən ɛkspləneɪʃənz. noʊ taɪm tə əsɝɾ əɹ əθɔɹəɾi ən meɪk ɪt stɪk. "sæɾəl bɛlə, ən mit mi ɑn ðə kɔɹnɝ tu stʃɹits nɔɹθ." ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn nu bɛlə, tu. sɪuənz hɔɹs, ɛvɹibɑɾi nu.

"At least two hours ago, Mother. Leane had to deliver Bode, and then ride downriver." Egwene nodded. "Please have Daishar saddled. . . ." No. Some people recognized the Amyrlin's horse by this time. Too many. There was no time for arguments and explanations. No time to assert her authority and make it stick. "Saddle Bela, and meet me on the corner two streets north." Almost everyone knew Bela, too. Siuan's horse, everybody knew.

"wʌt dʒju min tə du, mʌðɝ?" sɪuən æskt wɝidli. "aɪ min tə teɪk ə ɹaɪd. ən sɪuən, tɛl noʊ wʌn." ʃi kɑt ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz aɪz, hɛld əm wɪð əɹ oʊn. sɪuən hæd bɪn æmɪɝlɪn, ən eɪbəl tə stɛɹ daʊn ə stoʊn. ɛɡwin wɑz æmɪɝlɪn, naʊ. "nɑɾ ɛniwʌn, sɪuən. naʊ ɡoʊ ɑn. ɡoʊ. ən hɝi." fɔɹhɛd stɪl kɹist, sɪuən hɝid.

"What do you mean to do, Mother?" Siuan asked worriedly. "I mean to take a ride. And Siuan, tell no one." She caught the other woman's eyes, held them with her own. Siuan had been Amyrlin, and able to stare down a stone. Egwene was Amyrlin, now. "Not anyone, Siuan. Now go on. Go. And hurry." Forehead still creased, Siuan hurried.

əz sun əz ʃi wɑz əloʊn, ɛɡwin slɪd ðə stoʊl fɹəm əɹ nɛk, foʊldəɾ ɪt kɛɹfəli, ən tʌkt ɪɾ ɪndə hɝ bɛl paʊtʃ. hɝ kloʊk wɑz ɡʊd wʊl, ən staʊt, bʌt kwaɪt pleɪn. wɪθaʊt ðə stoʊl dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm əɹ kaʊl, ʃi cʊɾə bɪn ɛniwʌn.

As soon as she was alone, Egwene slid the stole from her neck, folded it carefully, and tucked it into her belt pouch. Her cloak was good wool, and stout, but quite plain. Without the stole dangling from her cowl, she could have been anyone.

ðə wɔkweɪ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ stʌɾi wɑz ɛmpti, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt wʌns ʃi kɹɔs ðə fɹoʊzən stʃɹit, ʃi meɪɾ əɹ weɪ θɹu ðə juʒəwəl waɪt ɹɪvɝ ə nɑvəsɪz spɛkəld wɪð æksɛptɪɾ ən ði əkeɪʒənəl ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə nɑvəsɪz bɛnt niz tə hɝ wɪθaʊt sloʊɪŋ, ði æksɛptɪɾ ɔfɝd kɝtsiz əz ʃi pæst, wʌns ðeɪ sɔ ðət ðə skɝts bɪniθ əɹ kloʊk wɝ nɑt bændɪd waɪt, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡlaɪɾɪd əlɔŋ wɪð ðɛɹ oʊn feɪsəz hɪɾən baɪ ðɛɹ kaʊlz. ɪf ɛni noʊɾəst ðət ʃi wɑz nɑt fɑloʊd baɪ ə wɔɹɾɝ, wɛl, ə nʌmbɝ ə sɪstɝz lækt wɔɹɾɝz. ən nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə ɡloʊɪŋ nɪmbəs ə seɪaɪdɑɹ.

The walkway in front of her study was empty, of course, but once she crossed the frozen street, she made her way through the usual white river of novices speckled with Accepted and the occasional Aes Sedai. The novices bent knees to her without slowing, the Accepted offered curtsies as she passed, once they saw that the skirts beneath her cloak were not banded white, and the Aes Sedai glided along with their own faces hidden by their cowls. If any noticed that she was not followed by a Warder, well, a number of sisters lacked Warders. And not everyone was surrounded by the glowing nimbus of saidar.

dʒʌs moʊst.

Just most.

tu stʃɹits fɹəm əɹ stʌɾi, ʃi stɑpt ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə wʊɾən wɔkweɪ feɪsɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə stʃɹim ə hɝiɪŋ wɪmən. ʃi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə fɹɛt. ðə sʌn sæt hæfweɪ daʊn təwɔɹd ðə hɝaɪzən ɪn ðə wɛst, ə ɡoʊldən bɔl stæbd baɪ ðə bɹoʊkən pik ə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt. ðə maʊntənz ʃædoʊ ɔlɹɛɾi stʃɹɛtʃt əkɹɔs ðə kæmp, kæstɪŋ ðə tɛns ɪn ivnɪŋ dɪmnəs.

Two streets from her study, she stopped at the edge of the wooden walkway facing away from the stream of hurrying women. She tried not to fret. The sun sat halfway down toward the horizon in the west, a golden ball stabbed by the broken peak of Dragonmount. The mountain's shadow already stretched across the camp, casting the tents in evening dimness.

ət læst sɪuən əpɪɹd, maʊntəɾ ɑn bɛlə. ðə ʃæɡi lɪɾəl mɛɹ wɔkt ʃʊɹfʊɾɪd ɑn ðə slɪk stʃɹit, bʌt sɪuən klʌŋ tə ɹeɪnz ən sæɾəl əz ɪf ʃi wɝ əfɹeɪɾ ə fɔlɪŋ ɔf. meɪbi ʃi wɑz. sɪuən wɑz wʌn ə ðə wɝst ɹaɪɾɝz ɛɡwin hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. wən ʃi skɹæmbəl daʊn fɹəm ðə sæɾəl ɪn ə flɝi ʌv skɝts ən mʌɾɝd kɝsɪz, ʃi lʊkt ɹɪliv tə hæv ɪskeɪpt wɪð əɹ laɪf. bɛlə wɪkɝɾ əɾ ɛɡwin ɪn ɹɛkəɡnɪʃən. tʌɡɪŋ əɹ dɪsɹeɪd kaʊl bæk ɪndə pleɪs, sɪuən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tu, bʌɾ ɛɡwin hɛld ʌp ə wɔɹnɪŋ hæn bɪfɔɹ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən kəd spik. ʃi kəd si ðə wɝd "mʌðɝ" fɔɹmɪŋ ɑn sɪuənz lɪps. ən laɪkli ɪt wʊɾə bɪn laʊɾ ɪnʌf tə bi hɝd fɪfti peɪsɪz ɔf. "tɛl noʊ wʌn," ɛɡwin sɛd sɔfli. "ænd noʊ noʊts əɹ hɪns, iðɝ." ðət ʃəd kʌvɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. "kip tʃɛsə kʌmpəni tɪl aɪ ɡɛt bæk. aɪ doʊnt wɑn əɹ wɝid."

At last Siuan appeared, mounted on Bela. The shaggy little mare walked surefooted on the slick street, but Siuan clung to reins and saddle as if she were afraid of falling off. Maybe she was. Siuan was one of the worst riders Egwene had ever seen. When she scrambled down from the saddle in a flurry of skirts and muttered curses, she looked relieved to have escaped with her life. Bela whickered at Egwene in recognition. Tugging her disarrayed cowl back into place, Siuan opened her mouth too, but Egwene held up a warning hand before the other woman could speak. She could see the word "Mother" forming on Siuan's lips. And likely it would have been loud enough to be heard fifty paces off. "Tell no one," Egwene said softly. "And no notes or hints, either." That should cover everything. "Keep Chesa company till I get back. I don't want her worried."

sɪuən ɡeɪv ə ɹɪlʌktənt nɑd. hɝ maʊθ ɔlmoʊs lʊk sʌlən.

Siuan gave a reluctant nod. Her mouth almost looked sullen.

ɛɡwin səspɛktəd ʃi hæd bɪn waɪz tə æd "noʊts" ən "hɪns." livɪŋ ðə wʌntaɪm æmɪɝlɪn sit lʊkɪŋ laɪk ə sʌlki ɡɝl, ʃi klaɪm smuðli ɪndə bɛləz sæɾəl.

Egwene suspected she had been wise to add "notes" and "hints." Leaving the onetime Amyrlin Seat looking like a sulky girl, she climbed smoothly into Bela's saddle.

ʃi hæd tə wɔk ðə staʊt mɛɹ, ət fɝst, kəz ə ðə fɹoʊzən ɹʌts ɪn ðə kæmps stʃɹits. ən kəz ɛvɹiwʌn wəd wʌndɝ ɪf ðeɪ sɔ sɪuən ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɛlə əɾ ɛniθɪŋ fæstɝ ðən ə wɔk. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹaɪd laɪk sɪuən, sweɪɪŋ ənsɝteɪnli, klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə sæɾəlz tɔl, pɑməl wɪð wʌn hæn ən səmtaɪmz boʊθ. ɪt meɪɾ əɹ fil əz ɪf ʃi wɝ əbaʊt tə fɔl ɔf, tu. bɛlə twɪstəɾ əɹ hɛɾ ɝaʊn tə lʊk ət hɝ. ʃi nu hu wɑz ɑn əɹ bæk, ən ʃi nu ɛɡwin ɹoʊd bɛɾɝ ðən ðɪs. ɛɡwin kəntɪnjud tə ɪməteɪt sɪuən ən tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk əbaʊt wɛɹ ðə sʌn stʊd. ɔl ðə weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə kæmp, bɪɑn ðə ɹoʊz ʌv wæɡənz, əntɪl ðə fɝs tʃɹiz hɪɾ əɹ fɹəm tɛns ən wæɡənz.

She had to walk the stout mare, at first, because of the frozen ruts in the camp's streets. And because everyone would wonder if they saw Siuan riding Bela at anything faster than a walk. She tried to ride like Siuan, swaying uncertainly, clinging to the saddle's tall, pommel with one hand and sometimes both. It made her feel as if she were about to fall off, too. Bela twisted her head around to look at her. She knew who was on her back, and she knew Egwene rode better than this. Egwene continued to imitate Siuan and tried not to think about where the sun stood. All the way out of the camp, beyond the rows of wagons, until the first trees hid her from tents and wagons.

ðən ʃi bɛn oʊvɝ ðə pɑməl tə pɹɛs əɹ feɪs ɪndə bɛləz meɪn. "ju kæɹid mi əweɪ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," ʃi wɪspɝd. "kæn jə ɹʌn əz fæs naʊ?" stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ, ʃi dʌɡ ɪn əɹ hilz. bɛlə kəd nɑt ɡæləp laɪk deɪʃɝ, bʌɾ əɹ stɝɾi lɛɡz tʃɝn θɹu ðə snoʊ. ʃi hæd bɪn ə kɑɹθɔɹs, wʌns, nɑɾ ə ɹeɪsɝ əɹ wɔɹhɔɹs, bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv wʌt ʃi hæd, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ aʊɾ əɹ nɛk əz bɹeɪvli əz deɪʃɝ ɛvɝ kʊd. bɛlə ɹeɪst, ən ðə sʌn slɪd loʊɝ əz ɪf ðə skaɪ hæd sʌɾənli bɪkʌm ɡɹist. ɛɡwin leɪ loʊ ɪn ðə sæɾəl ən ɝdʒ ðə mɛɹ ɑn. ə ɹeɪs wɪð ðə sʌn ðəɾ ɛɡwin nu ʃi kəd nɑt wɪn. bʌɾ ivən ɪf ʃi kəd nɑt bit ðə sʌn, ðəɹ wɑz stɪl taɪm. ʃi θʌmpt əɹ hilz ɪn taɪm wɪð bɛləz hʊvz, ən bɛlə ɹæn.

Then she bent over the pommel to press her face into Bela's mane. "You carried me away from the Two Rivers," she whispered. "Can you run as fast now?" Straightening, she dug in her heels. Bela could not gallop like Daishar, but her sturdy legs churned through the snow. She had been a carthorse, once, not a racer or warhorse, but she gave what she had, stretching out her neck as bravely as Daishar ever could. Bela raced, and the sun slid lower as if the sky had suddenly become greased. Egwene lay low in the saddle and urged the mare on. A race with the sun that Egwene knew she could not win. But even if she could not beat the sun, there was still time. She thumped her heels in time with Bela's hooves, and Bela ran.

twaɪlaɪt ɹoʊld oʊvɝ ðɛm, ən ðən dɑɹknəs, bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwin sɔ ðə mun ɡlɪntɪŋ ɑn ðə wɔɾɝ ə ði ɛɹɪnɪn. stɪl taɪm. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊs ðə spɑt wɛɹ ʃi hæd sæt deɪʃɝ wɪð ɡɛɹɪθ, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə ɹɪvɝʃɪps slaɪd təwɔɹd tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɹeɪnɪŋ bɛlə ɪn, ʃi lɪsənd. stɪlnəs. ən ðən ə mʌfəl kɝs.

Twilight rolled over them, and then darkness, before Egwene saw the moon glinting on the water of the Erinin. Still time. It was almost the spot where she had sat Daishar with Gareth, watching the riverships slide toward Tar Valon. Reining Bela in, she listened. Stillness. And then a muffled curse.

ðə kwaɪət ɡɹʌns ən skɹeɪps ə mɛn dʒɹæɡɪŋ ə hɛvi bɝɾən əkɹɔs ðə snoʊ ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ fəɹ saɪləns.

The quiet grunts and scrapes of men dragging a heavy burden across the snow and trying for silence.

ʃi tɝn bɛlə θɹu ðə tʃɹiz təwɔɹd ðə saʊnz. ʃædoʊz stɝd, ən ʃi hɝd ðə sɑft wɪspɝ ə stil slaɪɾɪŋ fɹəm skæbɝdz.

She turned Bela through the trees toward the sounds. Shadows stirred, and she heard the soft whisper of steel sliding from scabbards.

ðən ə mæn mʌɾɝd, nɑt fɑɹ ɪnʌf ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, "aɪ noʊ ðət poʊni. ɪts wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz.

Then a man muttered, not far enough under his breath, "I know that pony. It's one of the sisters.

ðə wʌn ðeɪ seɪ juz tə bi æmɪɝlɪn. ʃi dʌzn lʊk ɪt tə mi. noʊ oʊldɝn ðə wʌn ðeɪ seɪz æmɪɝlɪn naʊ."

The one they say used to be Amyrlin. She doesn't look it to me. No older'n the one they say's Amyrlin now."

"bɛlə ɪz nɑɾ ə poʊni," ɛɡwin sɛd kɹɪspli. "teɪk mi tə boʊd kɔθən." ə dʌzən mɛn koʊəlɛst aʊɾ ə ðə naɪt ʃædoʊz əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, sɝaʊndɪŋ əɹ ən bɛlə.

"Bela is not a pony," Egwene said crisply. "Take me to Bode Cauthon." A dozen men coalesced out of the night shadows among the trees, surrounding her and Bela.

ðeɪ ɔl sim tə θɪŋk ʃi wɑz sɪuən, bʌt ðət wɑz ɔl ɹaɪt. tə ðɛm, ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðeɪ ɡaɪɾəd əɹ tə wɛɹ boʊd wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ə hɔɹs nɑt mʌtʃ tɔlɝ ðən bɛlə ən hoʊldɪŋ ə dɑɹk kloʊk ɝaʊn hɝ. hɝ dʒɹɛs wɑz dɑɹk, tu. waɪt wʊɾə stʊɾ aʊt, tənaɪt. boʊd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz bɛlə, tu, ən ɹitʃt aʊt tə skɹætʃ ðə mɛɹz ɪɹ fɑnli wən ɛɡwin ɹoʊɾ ʌp bɪsaɪd hɝ. "jɔɹ steɪɪŋ əʃɔɹ," ɛɡwin sɛd kwaɪətli. "ju kən ɡoʊ bæk wɪð mi wən ɪts dʌn." boʊd dʒɝkt əɹ hæn bæk əz ɪf stʌŋ ət ðə saʊn ʌv ɛɡwinz vɔɪs. "waɪ?" ʃi sɛd, nɑt kwaɪɾ ə dɪmænd. ʃi hæd lɝn ðət mʌtʃ, ət list. "aɪ kən də ðɪs. lin sədaɪ ɪkspleɪn tə mi, ən aɪ kən də ɪt."

They all seemed to think she was Siuan, but that was all right. To them, Aes Sedai was Aes Sedai, and they guided her to where Bode was sitting a horse not much taller than Bela and holding a dark cloak around her. Her dress was dark, too. White would have stood out, tonight. Bode recognized Bela, too, and reached out to scratch the mare's ear fondly when Egwene rode up beside her. "You're staying ashore," Egwene said quietly. "You can go back with me when it's done." Bode jerked her hand back as if stung at the sound of Egwene's voice. "Why?" she said, not quite a demand. She had learned that much, at least. "I can do this. Leane Sedai explained to me, and I can do it."

"aɪ noʊ jə kæn. bʌt nɑɾ əz wɛl əz aɪ kæn. nɑt jɛt." ðət sim tu mʌtʃ laɪk ə kɹɪɾɪsɪzəm ðət ði ʌðɝ wʊmən hæd nɑɾ ɝnd. "aɪ æm ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, boʊd. səm dɪsɪʒənz, oʊnli aɪ kən meɪk. ən səm θɪŋz, aɪ ʃʊdn æsk ə nɑvəs tə də wən aɪ kən də ðɛm bɛɾɝ." pɝhæps ðət wɑz nɑɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil maɪldɝ, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪkspleɪn əbaʊt lɑɹini ən nɪkoʊlə, əɹ ðə pɹaɪs ðə waɪt taʊɝ dɪmændəɾ ʌv ɔl ɪts dɔɾɝz. ði æmɪɝlɪn kəd nɑɾ ɪkspleɪn ðə wʌn tə ə nɑvəs, ən ə nɑvəs wɑz nɑt ɹɛɾi tə lɝn əbaʊt ði ʌðɝ.

"I know you can. But not as well as I can. Not yet." That seemed too much like a criticism that the other woman had not earned. "I am the Amyrlin Seat, Bode. Some decisions, only I can make. And some things, I shouldn't ask a novice to do when I can do them better." Perhaps that was not a great deal milder, but she could not explain about Larine and Nicola, or the price the White Tower demanded of all its daughters. The Amyrlin could not explain the one to a novice, and a novice was not ready to learn about the other.

ivən ɪn ðə naɪt, ðə sɛɾ ə boʊdz ʃoʊldɝz sɛd ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, bʌt ʃi hæd lɝnd nɑt tə ɑɹɡju wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, tu. dʒʌst əz ʃi hæd lɝn ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə ɹɛst, ʃi wəd lɝn ɪvɛntʃəwəli. ðə taʊɝ kəd teɪk ɔl ðə taɪm ɪt niɾəd tə titʃ hɝ.

Even in the night, the set of Bode's shoulders said she did not understand, but she had learned not to argue with Aes Sedai, too. Just as she had learned that Egwene was Aes Sedai. The rest, she would learn eventually. The Tower could take all the time it needed to teach her.

dɪsmaʊntɪŋ, ɛɡwin hændəd bɛləz ɹeɪnz tə wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz ən ɹeɪzd əɹ skɝts tə tʃɹæmp θɹu ðə snoʊ təwɔɹd ðə leɪbɝd saʊnz ə dʒɹæɡɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ə lɑɹdʒ ɹoʊboʊt, biɪŋ pʊʃt ən pʊld əkɹɔs ðə snoʊ laɪk ə slɛd. ə bʌlki slɛd ðət hæd tə bi mənuvɝd bɪtwin tʃɹiz, ðoʊ wɪð fjuɝ kɝsɪz wʌns ðə mɛn duɪŋ ðə pʊʃɪŋ ən pʊlɪŋ ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi wɑz fɑloʊɪŋ əm kloʊsli.

Dismounting, Egwene handed Bela's reins to one of the soldiers and raised her skirts to tramp through the snow toward the labored sounds of dragging. It was a large rowboat, being pushed and pulled across the snow like a sled. A bulky sled that had to be maneuvered between trees, though with fewer curses once the men doing the pushing and pulling realized that she was following them closely.

moʊs mɛn ɡɑɹɾəd ðɛɹ tʌŋz ɝaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ɪf ðeɪ kəd nɑt si hɝ feɪs bɪtwin ðə dɑɹknəs ən əɹ kaʊl, hu ɛls wəd bi daʊn hɪɹ baɪ ðə ɹɪvɝ? ɪf ðeɪ nu ʃi wɑz nɑt ðə seɪm wʊmən ɪntɛndəɾ ət fɝs tə əkʌmpəni ðɛm, hu kwɛstʃən ɛɛs sədaɪ?

Most men guarded their tongues around Aes Sedai, and if they could not see her face between the darkness and her cowl, who else would be down here by the river? If they knew she was not the same woman intended at first to accompany them, who questioned Aes Sedai?

ðeɪ iz ðə boʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ, kɛɹfəl ə splæʃəz, ən sɪks mɛn skɹæmbəld əbɔɹd tə sɛɾ ɔɹz ɪn ɹæɡ-pæɾəd ɔɹlɑks. ðə mɛn wɝ bɛɹfʊt, tə əvɔɪd ðə nɔɪz ʌv ə but skɹeɪpɪŋ ɑn ðə hʌl, plæŋks.

They eased the boat into the river, careful of splashes, and six men scrambled aboard to set oars in rag-padded oarlocks. The men were barefoot, to avoid the noise of a boot scraping on the hull, planks.

smɔlɝ boʊts plaɪd ðiz wɔɾɝz, bʌt tənaɪt, ðeɪ hæd tə mæstɝ ðə kɝəns. wʌn ə ðə mɛn ɑn ðə bæŋk ɡeɪv əɹ ə hæn tə stɛɾi hɝsɛlf klaɪmɪŋ ɪn, ən ʃi sɛɾəld ɑn ə siɾ ɪn ðə baʊ, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ kloʊk kloʊz. ðə boʊt slɪd weɪ fɹəm ðə bæŋk, saɪlən ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə feɪn swɝl ə ði ɔɹz ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ.

Smaller boats plied these waters, but tonight, they had to master the currents. One of the men on the bank gave her a hand to steady herself climbing in, and she settled on a seat in the bow, holding her cloak close. The boat slid way from the bank, silent except for the faint swirl of the oars in the water.

ɛɡwin lʊkt əhɛd, saʊθ təwɔɹd tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðə waɪt wɔlz ɡlimd ɪn ðə laɪɾ ʌv ə fæt, weɪnɪŋ mun, ən læmp-lɪt wɪndoʊz ɡeɪv ðə sɪɾi ə mjuɾɪd ɡloʊ, ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ði aɪlənd wɑz ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ.

Egwene looked ahead, south toward Tar Valon. The white walls gleamed in the light of a fat, waning moon, and lamp-lit windows gave the city a muted glow, almost as if the island was embracing saidar.

ðə waɪt taʊɝ stʊɾ aʊɾ ivən ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, wɪndoʊz əlaɪt, ðə ɡɹeɪt mæs ʃaɪnɪŋ bɪniθ ðə mun. sʌmθɪŋ flæʃt əkɹɔs ðə mun, ən əɹ bɹɛθ kɑt. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ʃi θɔɾ ɪt hæd bɪn ə dʒɹæɡkɝ, ən ivəl saɪɾ ɑn ðɪs ʌv ɔl naɪts. oʊnli ə bæt, ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd. spɹɪŋ maɪt bi nɪɹ ɪnʌf fəɹ bæts tə bi vɛntʃɝɪŋ aʊt. pʊlɪŋ əɹ kloʊk taɪɾɝ, ʃi pɪɹd təwɔɹd ðə sɪɾi dʒɹɔɪŋ nɪɹɝ. nɪɹɝ.

The White Tower stood out even in the darkness, windows alight, the great mass shining beneath the moon. Something flashed across the moon, and her breath caught. For an instant, she thought it had been a Draghkar, an evil sight on this of all nights. Only a bat, she decided. Spring might be near enough for bats to be venturing out. Pulling her cloak tighter, she peered toward the city drawing nearer. Nearer.

əz ðə tɔl wɔl ə nɔɹθhɑɹbɝ lumd ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə boʊt, ði ɔɹsmɪn bækt wɔɾɝ soʊ ðə baʊ dʒʌs mɪs kɪsɪŋ ðə wɔl bɪsaɪd ðə hɑɹbɝ ɛntʃɹəns. ɛɡwin ɔlmoʊs pʊɾ aʊɾ ə hæn tə fɛn ɔf fɹəm ðə peɪl stoʊn bɪfɔɹ ðə boʊt kəd bʌmp ɪndə ðə wɔl. ðət θʌmp wəd ʃʊɹli hæv bɪn hɝd baɪ ðə soʊlʒɝz ɑn ɡɑɹd. ði ɔɹz meɪɾ oʊnli ə smɔl ɡɝɡəlɪŋ nɔɪz əz ðeɪ swɛp bæk, ðoʊ, ən ðə boʊt stɑpt wɛɹ ʃi cʊɾə tʌtʃt ðə mæsɪv aɪɝn tʃeɪn əkɹɔs ðə hɑɹbɝ, ɪts hjudʒ lɪŋks ɡɪvɪŋ ɔf ðɛɹ oʊn feɪnt ɡlim fɹəm ðə ɡɹis koʊɾɪŋ ðɛm. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ tʌtʃɪŋ, ðoʊ.

As the tall wall of Northharbor loomed in front of the boat, the oarsmen backed water so the bow just missed kissing the wall beside the harbor entrance. Egwene almost put out a hand to fend off from the pale stone before the boat could bump into the wall. That thump would surely have been heard by the soldiers on guard. The oars made only a small gurgling noise as they swept back, though, and the boat stopped where she could have touched the massive iron chain across the harbor, its huge links giving off their own faint gleam from the grease coating them. There was no need for touching, though.

noʊ nid fəɹ weɪɾɪŋ, iðɝ. ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ, ʃi wɑz bɛɹli əwɛɹ ə ðə θɹɪl ə laɪf fɪlɪŋ əɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd ðə wivz ɪn pleɪs. ɝθ, faɪɝ ən ɛɹ sɝaʊndɪŋ ðə tʃeɪn; ɝθ ən faɪɝ tʌtʃɪŋ ɪt. ðə blæk aɪɝn flæʃt tə waɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə hoʊl wɪdθ ə ðə hɑɹbɝ maʊθ. ʃi hæd dʒʌs taɪm tə ɹilaɪz ðət sʌmwʌn hæɾ ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs nɑt fɑɹ əweɪ, əbʌv əɹ ɑn ðə wɔl, ðən sʌmθɪŋ stʃɹʌk ðə boʊt, stʃɹʌk hɝ, ən ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ ə koʊld wɔɾɝ ɪnvɛləpɪŋ hɝ, fɪlɪŋ əɹ noʊz, hɝ maʊθ. dɑɹknəs.

No need for waiting, either. Embracing saidar, she was barely aware of the thrill of life filling her before she had the weaves in place. Earth, Fire and Air surrounding the chain; Earth and Fire touching it. The black iron flashed to white across the whole width of the harbor mouth. She had just time to realize that someone had embraced the Source not far away, above her on the wall, then something struck the boat, struck her, and she was aware of cold water enveloping her, filling her nose, her mouth. Darkness.

ɛɡwin fɛl hɑɹdnəs bɪniθ hɝ. ʃi hɝd wɪmənz vɔɪsəz. ɪksaɪɾəd vɔɪsəz. "du jə noʊ hu ðɪs ɪz?"

Egwene felt hardness beneath her. She heard women's voices. Excited voices. "Do you know who this is?"

"wɛl, wɛl. wi sɝɾənli ɡɑt bɛɾɝ ðən wi bɑɹɡən fəɹ tənaɪt." sʌmθɪŋ wɑz pɹɛs tə hɝ maʊθ, ən wɔɹmθ tʃɹɪkəld ɪn, teɪstɪŋ feɪnli ʌv mɪnt. ʃi swɑloʊd kənvʌlsɪvli, sʌɾənli əwɛɹ ə haʊ koʊld ʃi wɑz, ʃɪvɝɪŋ. hɝ aɪz flɪkɝɾ oʊpən. ən fæsən ɑn ðə feɪs ə ðə wʊmən hoʊldɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ən ðə kʌp. læntɝnz hɛl baɪ soʊlʒɝz kɹaʊɾɪŋ ɝaʊnd ɡeɪv laɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ əɹ tə meɪk aʊt ðə feɪs klɪɹli. ən eɪdʒləs feɪs. ʃi wɑz ɪnsaɪd nɔɹθhɑɹbɝ.

"Well, well. We certainly got better than we bargained for tonight." Something was pressed to her mouth, and warmth trickled in, tasting faintly of mint. She swallowed convulsively, suddenly aware of how cold she was, shivering. Her eyes flickered open. And fastened on the face of the woman holding her head and the cup. Lanterns held by soldiers crowding around gave light enough for her to make out the face clearly. An ageless face. She was inside Northharbor.

"ðæts ɪt, ɡɝl," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛɾ ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋli. "dʒɹɪŋk ɪɾ ɔl daʊn. ə stʃɹɔŋ doʊs, fəɹ naʊ." ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd tə pʊʃ ðə kʌp əweɪ, tʃɹaɪd tə ɛmbɹeɪs seɪaɪdɑɹ, bʌt ʃi kəd fil hɝsɛlf slaɪɾɪŋ bæk daʊn ɪndə dɑɹknəs. ðeɪ hæd bɪn weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ hɝ. ʃi hæd bɪn bɪtʃɹeɪd. bʌt baɪ hum?

"That's it, girl," the Aes Sedai said encouragingly. "Drink it all down. A strong dose, for now." Egwene tried to push the cup away, tried to embrace saidar, but she could feel herself sliding back down into darkness. They had been waiting for her. She had been betrayed. But by whom?

ɛpəlɔɡ ən ænsɝ ɹænd stɛɹɾ aʊɾ ə ðə wɪndoʊ ət ðə stɛɾi ɹeɪn fɔlɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə ɡɹeɪ skaɪ. ənʌðɝ stɔɹm daʊn aʊɾ ə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld. ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl. hi θɔt spɹɪŋ mʌs bi kʌmɪŋ sun. spɹɪŋ ɔlweɪz keɪm, ɪvɛntʃəwəli. ɝliɝ hɪɹ ɪn tɛɹ ðən bæk hoʊm, ɪt ʃəd bi, ðoʊ ðəɹ sim lɪɾəl saɪn ʌv ɪt.

Epilogue An Answer Rand stared out of the window at the steady rain falling out of a gray sky. Another storm down out of the Spine of the World. The Dragonwall. He thought spring must be coming soon. Spring always came, eventually. Earlier here in Tear than back home, it should be, though there seemed little sign of it.

laɪtnɪŋ fɔɹk sɪlvɝ-blu əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ, ən lɔŋ moʊməns pæs bɪfɔɹ ðə pil ə θʌndɝ. dɪstən laɪtnɪŋ. ðə wunz ɪn ɪz saɪɾ ætʃt. laɪt, ðə hɛɹənz bɹændɪɾ ɪndə hɪz pɑmz ætʃt, æftɝ ɔl ðɪs taɪm.

Lightning forked silver-blue across the sky, and long moments passed before the peal of thunder. Distant lightning. The wounds in his side ached. Light, the herons branded into his palms ached, after all this time.

səmtaɪmz, peɪn ɪz ɔl ðət lɛts jə noʊ jəɹ əlaɪv. luz θɝɪn wɪspɝd, bʌt ɹænd ɪɡnɔɹd ðə vɔɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd. ðə dɔɹ kɹikt oʊpən bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən i lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ət ðə mæn u keɪm ɪndə ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum. bæʃɪɹ wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ə ʃɔɹt, ɡɹeɪ sɪlk koʊt, ə ɹɪtʃ ʃɪmɝɪŋ koʊt, ən i hæd ðə bətɑn ə ðə mɑɹʃəl-dʒɛnɝəl ə sɑldɑiə, ən aɪvɝi ɹɑd tɪpt wɪð ə ɡoʊldən wʊlfs hɛd, tʌk bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛl nɛks tə hɪz skæbɑɹɾɪd sɔɹd. hɪz tɝnd-daʊn buts hæd bɪn wæks tɪl ðeɪ ʃoʊn. ɹænd tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lɛɾ ɪz ɹɪlif ʃoʊ. ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɡɔn lɔŋ ɪnʌf.

Sometimes, pain is all that lets you know you're alive. Lews Therin whispered, but Rand ignored the voice in his head. The door creaked open behind him, and he looked over his shoulder at the man who came into the sitting room. Bashere was wearing a short, gray silk coat, a rich shimmering coat, and he had the baton of the Marshal-General of Saldaea, an ivory rod tipped with a golden wolf's head, tucked behind his belt next to his scabbarded sword. His turned-down boots had been waxed till they shone. Rand tried not to let his relief show. They had been gone long enough.

"wɛl?" hi sɛd.

"Well?" he said.

"ðə sintʃæn ɑɹ əmɛnəbəl," bæʃɪɹ ɹɪplaɪd. "kɹeɪzi əz lunz, bʌɾ əmɛnəbəl. ðeɪ ɹikwaɪɝ ə miɾɪŋ wɪð jə ɪn pɝsən, ðoʊ. ðə mɑɹʃəl-dʒɛnɝəl ə sɑldɑiə ɪzən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

"The Seanchan are amenable," Bashere replied. "Crazy as loons, but amenable. They require a meeting with you in person, though. The Marshal-General of Saldaea isn't the Dragon Reborn."

"wɪð ðɪs leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ?"

"With this Lady Suroth?"

bæʃɪɹ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "əpɛɹənli ə mɛmbɝ ə ðɛɹ ɹɔɪəl fæmli hæz ɝaɪvd. sjuɹɔθ wɑns jə tə mit sʌmwʌn kɔl ðə dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz."

Bashere shook his head. "Apparently a member of their royal family has arrived. Suroth wants you to meet someone called the Daughter of the Nine Moons."

θʌndɝ ɹoʊld əɡɛn fəɹ dɪstən laɪtnɪŋ.

Thunder rolled again for distant lightning.

wi ɹoʊɾ ɑn ðə wɪnz ə ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ stɔɹm, wi ɹæn tə ðə saʊnz ə ðə θʌndɝ.

We rode on the winds of the rising storm, We ran to the sounds of the thunder.

wi dænst əmʌŋ ðə laɪtnɪŋ boʊls, ən tɔɹ ðə wɝld əsʌndɝ.

We danced among the lightning bolts, and tore the world asunder.

ənɑnəməs fɹæɡmən ʌv ə poʊəm bɪlivd ɹɪɾən nɪɹ ði ɛn ə ðə pɹiviəs eɪdʒ, noʊn baɪ səm əz ðə θɝɾ eɪdʒ.

Anonymous fragment of a poem believed written near the end of the previous Age, known by some as the Third Age.

səmtaɪmz ətʃɹɪbjəɾəd tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

Sometimes attributed to the Dragon Reborn.

ði ɛn ə ðə tɛnθ bʊk ə ðə wil ə taɪm ɡlɔsɝi eɪ noʊɾ ɑn deɪts ɪn ðɪs ɡlɔsɝi. ðə toʊmən kæləndɝ (dɪvaɪz baɪ toʊmə dɝ ɑməd) wɑz ədɑptəɾ əpɹɑksəmətli tu sɛntʃɝiz æftɝ ðə dɛθ ə ðə læs meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɹəkɔɹɾɪŋ jɪɹz æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld (æb). soʊ mɛni ɹɛkɝdz wɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz ðəɾ ət ðɛɹ ɛn ðəɹ wɑz ɑɹɡjəmən əbaʊt ði ɪɡzæk jɪɹ ʌndɝ ði oʊl sɪstəm. ə nu kæləndɝ, pɹəpoʊz baɪ tiəm ʌv ɡɑzɹ, sɛləbɹeɪɾəd fɹiɾəm fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑlɑk θɹɛɾ ən ɹəkɔɹɾəd itʃ jɪɹ əz ə fɹi jɪɹ (fi). ðə ɡɑzɝən kæləndɝ ɡeɪnd waɪɾ æksɛptəns wɪðɪn twɛnti jɪɹz æftɝ ðə wɔɹz' ɛnd. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ətɛmptəd tə ɪstæblɪʃ ə nu kæləndɝ beɪst ɑn ðə faʊndɪŋ ə hɪz ɛmpaɪɝ (, fɹəm ðə faʊndɪŋ), bʌɾ oʊnli hɪstɔɹiənz naʊ ɹəfɝ tə ɪt. æftɝ ðə dɛθ ən dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, ə θɝd kæləndɝ wɑz dɪvaɪz baɪ ɝɛn dɪn dʒubaɪ sɔɹɪŋ ɡʌl, ə skɑlɝ ə ðə si foʊk, ən pɹɑməlɡeɪɾəd baɪ ðə pɑnɑɹtʃ fɛɹiɾ ə tæɹɑbən. ðə fɛɹid kæləndɝ, deɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ði ɑɹbɪtʃɹɛɹəli dɪsaɪɾɪd ɛn ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ən ɹəkɔɹɾɪŋ jɪɹz ə ðə nu ɛɹə (nəbɹæskə), ɪz kɝənli ɪn jus.

The End of the Tenth Book of The Wheel of Time Glossary A Note on Dates in This Glossary. The Toman Calendar (devised by Toma dur Ahmid) was adopted approximately two centuries after the death of the last male Aes Sedai, recording years After the Breaking of the World (AB). So many records were destroyed in the Trolloc Wars that at their end there was argument about the exact year under the old system. A new calendar, proposed by Tiam of Gazar, celebrated freedom from the Trolloc threat and recorded each year as a Free Year (FY). The Gazaran Calendar gained wide acceptance within twenty years after the Wars' end. Artur Hawkwing attempted to establish a new calendar based on the founding of his empire (FF, From the Founding), but only historians now refer to it. After the death and destruction of the War of the Hundred Years, a third calendar was devised by Uren din Jubai Soaring Gull, a scholar of the Sea Folk, and promulgated by the Panarch Farede of Tarabon. The Farede Calendar, dating from the arbitrarily decided end of the War of the Hundred Years and recording years of the New Era (NE), is currently in use.

ɑɹæd dumən: ə neɪʃən ɑn ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, kɝənli ɹæk baɪ sɪvəl wɔɹ ən baɪ wɔɹz əɡɛns ðoʊz u hæv dɪklɛɹd fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ɪts kæpəɾəl ɪz bændɑɹ ɛbən. ɪn ɑɹæd dumən, ðə ɹulɝ (kɪŋ əɹ kwin) ɪz ɪlɛktəd baɪ ə kaʊnsəl ə ðə hɛdz ə mɝtʃənt ɡɪlz (ðə kaʊnsəl ə mɝtʃəns), hu ɑɹ ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz wɪmən i əɹ ʃi mʌs bi fɹəm ðə noʊbəl klæs, nɑt ðə mɝtʃənt, ən ɪz ɪlɛktəd fəɹ laɪf liɡəli ðə kɪŋ əɹ kwin əz æbsəluɾ əθɔɹəɾi, ɪksɛp ðəɾ i əɹ ʃi kən bi dɪpoʊz baɪ θɹi-kɔɹɾɝ voʊɾ ə ðə kaʊnsəl ðə kɝən ɹulɝ ɪz kɪŋ ælsələm sɑiɾ ælməɾɝ, lɔɹɾ ʌv ælməɾɝ, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs ælməɾɝ ɪz pɹɛzənt wɛɹəbaʊts ɑɹ mʌtʃ ʃɹaʊɾɪd ɪn mɪstɝi ɑɹmmɪn: soʊlʒɝz u oʊ əlidʒəns əɹ fiəlti tə ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ lɔɹɾ əɹ leɪɾi.

Arad Doman: A nation on the Aryth Ocean, currently racked by civil war and by wars against those who have declared for the Dragon Reborn. Its capital is Bandar Eban. In Arad Doman, the ruler (king or queen) is elected by a council of the heads of merchant guilds (the Council of Merchants), who are almost always women He or she must be from the noble class, not the merchant, and is elected for life Legally the king or queen has absolute authority, except that he or she can be deposed by three-quarter vote of the Council The current ruler is King Alsalam Saeed Almadar, Lord of Almadar, High Seat of House Almadar His present whereabouts are much shrouded in mystery armsmen: Soldiers who owe allegiance or fealty to a particular lord or lady.

æʃəmən: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ɡɑɹɾiən" əɹ "ɡɑɹɾiənz," bʌt ðə wɝɾ ɔlweɪz mɛn ə ɡɑɹɾiən ə dʒʌstəs ən tʃɹuθ (tu) ðə neɪm ɡɪvən, boʊθ kəlɛktɪvli ən əz ə ɹæŋk, tə ðə mɛn u hæv kʌm tə ðə blæk taʊɝ, nɪɹ keɪɛmlɪn ɪn ændɝ, ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə lɝn tə tʃænəl ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ kɑnsəntʃɹeɪts lɑɹdʒli ɑn ðə weɪz ɪn wɪtʃ ðə wʌn paʊɝ kən bi juzd əz ə wɛpən, ən ɪn ənʌðɝ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ fɹəm ðə jusədʒəz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, wʌns ðeɪ lɝn tə siz seɪɾɪn, ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə paʊɝ, ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹikwaɪɝd tə pɝfɔɹm ɔl tʃɔɹz ən leɪbɝz wɪð ðə paʊɝ wən nuli ɛnɹoʊld, ə mæn ɪz tɝmd ə soʊlʒɝ, hi wɛɹz ə pleɪn blæk koʊt wɪð ə haɪ kɑlɝ, ɪn ði ændɔɝən fæʃən biɪŋ ɹeɪz tə dɛɾəkeɪtəd bɹɪŋz ðə ɹaɪt tə wɛɹ ə sɪlvɝ pɪn, kɔl ðə sɔɹd, ɑn ðə kɑlɝ ə hɪz koʊt pɹəmoʊʃən tə æʃəmən bɹɪŋz ðə ɹaɪt tə wɛɹ ə dʒɹæɡən pɪn, ɪn ɡoʊld ən ɹɛɾ ɪnæməl, ɑn ðə kɑlɝ ɑpəzət ðə sɔɹɾ ɔlðoʊ mɛni wɪmən, ɪnkluɾɪŋ waɪvz, fli wən ðeɪ lɝn ðət ðɛɹ mɛn æktʃəli  kən tʃænəl, ə fɛɹ nʌmbɝ ə mɛn ət ðə blæk taʊɝ ɑɹ mɛɹid, ən ðeɪ juz ə vɝʒən ə ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn tə kɹieɪɾ ə lɪŋk wɪð ðɛɹ waɪvz ðɪs seɪm bɑnd, ɔltɝd tə kəmpɛl oʊbiɾiəns, hæz ɹisənli bɪn juz tə bɑn kæptʃɝɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ əz wɛl.

Asha'man: (1) In the Old Tongue, "Guardian" or "Guardians," but the word always meant a guardian of justice and truth (2) The name given, both collectively and as a rank, to the men who have come to the Black Tower, near Caemlyn in Andor, in order to learn to channel Their training concentrates largely on the ways in which the One Power can be used as a weapon, and in another departure from the usages of the White Tower, once they learn to seize saidin, the male half of the Power, they are required to perform all chores and labors with the Power When newly enrolled, a man is termed a Soldier, he wears a plain black coat with a high collar, in the Andoran fashion Being raised to Dedicated brings the right to wear a silver pin, called the Sword, on the collar of his coat Promotion to Asha'man brings the right to wear a Dragon pin, in gold and red enamel, on the collar opposite the Sword Although many women, including wives, flee when they learn that their men actually can channel, a fair number of men at the Black Tower are married, and they use a version of the Warder bond to create a link with their wives This same bond, altered to compel obedience, has recently been used to bond captured Aes Sedai as well.

beɪlwɝ, sɛbæn: fɔɹmɝli sɛkɹətɛɹi tə peɪdʒɹən naɪl (ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt) ɪn pʌblɪk, ən sikɹɪtli naɪlz spaɪmæstɝ æftɝ naɪlz dɛθ, beɪlwɝ eɪɾəd ði ɪskeɪp ə mɔɹɡeɪs (wʌns kwin ʌv ændɝ) fɹəm ðə sintʃæn ɪn æmədɔɹ fəɹ ɪz oʊn ɹizənz, ən naʊ ɪz ɛmplɔɪɾ əz sɛkɹətɛɹi tə ɹm tæʃɪɹ eɪbɑɹə ən feɪl næʃɪɹ teɪbɑɹə ɹm ɪz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə səspɛk ðət ðəɹ ɪz mɔɹ tə beɪlwɝ ðən ət fɝst əpɪɹd.

Balwer, Sebban: Formerly secretary to Pedron Niall (the Lord Captain Commander of the Children of the Light) in public, and secretly Niall's spymaster After Niall's death, Balwer aided the escape of Morgase (once Queen of Andor) from the Seanchan in Amador for his own reasons, and now is employed as secretary to Perrm t'Bashere Aybara and Faile n'Bashere t'Aybara Perrm is beginning to suspect that there is more to Balwer than at first appeared.

bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd: si ʃɛn ən kɑlhɑɹ blʌd, ðə: tɝm juz baɪ ðə sintʃæn tə dɛzəɡneɪt ðə noʊbɪləɾi ðəɹ ɑɹ dɪɡɹiz ə noʊbɪləɾi ðə haɪ blʌd ʃeɪv ðə saɪdz ə ðɛɹ hɛdz ən peɪn mʌltəpəl fɪŋɡɝneɪlz - ðə haɪɝ ðə ɹæŋk, ðə mɔɹ neɪlz peɪntəd - bʌɾ ə mɛmbɝ ə ðə lɛsɝ blʌd, ðə loʊ blʌd, meɪ hæv, oʊnli ðə neɪlz ə ðə lɪɾəl fɪŋɡɝz peɪntəd wʌn kən bi ɹeɪz tə ðə blʌɾ əz wɛl əz bɔɹn tə ɪt, ən ðɪs ɪz fɹikwənli ə ɹɪwɔɹd fəɹ aʊtstændɪŋ əkɑmplɪʃmən əɹ sɝvəs tə ði ɛmpaɪɝ.

Band of the Red Hand: see Shen an Calhar Blood, the: Term used by the Seanchan to designate the nobility There are degrees of nobility The High Blood shave the sides of their heads and paint multiple fingernails - the higher the rank, the more nails painted - but a member of the lesser Blood, the low Blood, may have, only the nails of the little fingers painted One can be raised to the Blood as well as born to it, and this is frequently a reward for outstanding accomplishment or service to the Empire.

kæləndɝ: ðəɹ ɑɹ tɛn deɪz tə ðə wik, twɛntieɪt deɪz tə ðə mʌnθ, ən θɝtin mʌnθs tə ðə jɪɹ sɛvɹəl fistdeɪz ɑɹ nɑt pɑɹɾ ʌv ɛni mʌnθ, ðiz ɪnklud sʌndeɪ (ðə lɔŋɡəs deɪ ʌv ðə jɪɹ), ðə fist ə θæŋksɡɪvɪŋ (wʌns ɛvɹi fɔɹ jɪɹz ət ðə spɹɪŋ ikwənɑks), ən ðə fist ʌv ɔl soʊlz sælveɪʃən, ɔlsoʊ kɔld ɔl soʊlz deɪ (wʌns ɛvɹi tɛn jɪɹz ət ði ɔɾəm ikwənɑks) waɪl ðə mʌnθs əv neɪmz -  teɪʃəm, dʒumɑɹə, seɪbən, eɪn, ədɑɹ, sævən, ɑmɑdɑm, tæməz, meɪaɪɡdəl, kɔɹən, ʃɔlm, nɛzæn, ən dænu - ðiz ɑɹ sɛldəm juzd ɪksɛpt ɪn əfɪʃəl dɑkjəməns ən baɪ əfɪʃəlz fəɹ moʊs pipəl, juzɪŋ ðə sizənz ɪz ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf.

Calendar: There are 10 days to the week, 28 days to the month, and 13 months to the year Several feastdays are not part of any month, these include Sunday (the longest day of the year), the Feast of Thanksgiving (once every four years at the spring equinox), and the Feast of All Souls Salvation, also called All Souls Day (once every ten years at the autumn equinox) While the months have names -  Taisham, Jumara, Saban, Aine, Adar, Saven, Amadame, Tammaz, Maigdhal, Choren, Shaldme, Nesan, and Danu - these are seldom used except in official documents and by officials For most people, using the seasons is good enough.

kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl: (wʌn) ðə mɪlətɛɹi ɹæŋk ə ðə liɾɝ ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹd, ɪn ændɝ ðɪs pəzɪʃən ɪz kɝənli hɛl baɪ leɪɾi bɝdʒɪt tʃɹɑilaɪən (tu) ðə taɪɾəl ɡɪvən tə ðə hɛɾ ə ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ, ðoʊ noʊn oʊnli tə mɛmbɝz ə ðə ɡɹin ðɪs pəzɪʃən ɪz kɝənli hɛl baɪ ædlɔɹnə bæstin ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ən maɪɹɛl bɛɹɛŋɡən əmʌŋ ðə ɹɛbəl ɛɛs sədaɪ kəntɪnʒənt ʌndɝ ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ tʃɑ feɪl: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə fælkənz tælən ' (tu) neɪm teɪkən baɪ ðə jʌŋ kɛɹhim ən tɛɹənz, ətɛmptəd fɑloʊɝz ə dʒtɛɾoʊ, hu hæv swɔɹn fiəlti tə feɪɾ ɛm bæʃɪɹ teɪbɑɹə ɪn sikɹət, ðeɪ ækt əz əɹ pɝsənəl skaʊts ən spaɪz sɪns əɹ kæptʃɝ baɪ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, ðeɪ kəntɪnju ðɛɹ æktɪvəɾiz ʌndɝ ðə ɡaɪɾəns ə sɛbæn beɪlwɝ tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt: səsaɪəɾi ʌv stʃɹɪkt əsɛɾɪk bɪlifs, oʊɪŋ əlidʒəns tə noʊ neɪʃən ən dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə ðə dɪfiɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ʌv ɔl dɑɹkfnɛnz faʊndəd dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz baɪ lɑthɛɹ mæntəlɝ tə pɹɑsələtaɪz əɡɛnst ən ɪnkɹis ɪn dɑɹkfnɛnz, ðeɪ ɪvɑlv dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ɪndə ə kəmplitli mɪlətɛɹi səsaɪəɾi ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪkstʃɹimli ɹɪdʒəɾ ɛm ðɛɹ bɪlifs, ən sɝɾən ðəɾ oʊnli ðeɪ noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ ən ðə ɹaɪt ðeɪ kənsɪɾɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɛni hu səpɔɹɾ əm tə bi dɑɹkfnɛnz noʊn dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋli əz waɪtkloʊks, ðeɪ wɝ fɔɹmɝli hɛdkɔɹɾɝd ɪn æmədɔɹ, ɑmɑdɪʃiə, bʌt wɝ fɔɹst aʊt wən ðə sintʃæn kɑŋkɝd ðə sɪɾi ðɛɹ saɪn ɪz ə ɡoʊldən sʌnbɝst ɑn ə fild ʌv waɪt si ɔlsoʊ kwɛstʃənɝz kəmpænjənz, ðə: ði ɪlit mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən ʌv ɪljən, kɝənli kəmændəd baɪ fɝs kæptən dɛmiɾɝ mɑɹkən ðə kəmpænjənz pɹəvaɪɾ ə bɑɾiɡɑɹd fəɹ ðə kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən ən ɡɑɹd ki pɔɪns ɝaʊn ðə neɪʃən ədɪʃənəli, ðə kəmpænjənz əv tʃɹədɪʃənəli bɪn juzd ɪn bæɾəl tə əsɔl ði ɛnəmiz stʃɹɔŋɡəs pəzɪʃənz, tə ɪksplɔɪt wiknəsəz, ænd, ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi, tə kʌvɝ ðə ɹitʃɹiɾ ə ðə kɪŋ ənlaɪk moʊst ʌðɝ sətʃ ɪlit fɔɹmeɪʃənz, fɔɹənɝz (ɛksɛptɪŋ tɛɹənz, ɔltɑɹənz ən mʊɹændiənz) ɑɹ nɑɾ oʊnli wɛlkəm, ðeɪ kən ɹaɪz ivən tə ðə haɪəst ɹæŋk, əz kən kɑmənɝz, wɪtʃ ɔlsoʊ ɪz ənjuʒəwəl ðə junəfɔɹm ə ðə kəmpænjənz kənsɪsts ʌv ə ɡɹin koʊt, ə bɹɛstpleɪt wɝkt wɪð ðə naɪn biz ʌv ɪljən, ən ə kɑnɪkəl hɛlmət wɪð ə feɪsɡɑɹɾ ə stil bɑɹz ðə fɝs kæptən wɛɹz fɔɹ ɹɪŋz ʌv ɡoʊldən bɹeɪɾ ɑn ðə kʌfs ə hɪz koʊt, ən θɹi θɪn ɡoʊldən plumz ɑn ɪz hɛlmət ðə sɛkən kæptən wɛɹz θɹi ɹɪŋz ʌv ɡoʊldən bɹeɪɾ ɑn itʃ kʌf, ən θɹi ɡoʊldən plumz tɪpt wɪð ɡɹin lutɛnəns wɛɹ tu jɛloʊ ɹɪŋz ɑn ðɛɹ kʌfs, ən tu θɪn ɡɹin plumz, ʌndɝ-lutɛnəns wʌn jɛloʊ ɹɪŋ ən ə sɪŋɡəl ɡɹin plum bænɝmɪn ɑɹ dɛzɪɡneɪɾɪd baɪ tu bɹoʊkən ɹɪŋz ə jɛloʊ ɑn ðə kʌfs ən ə sɪŋɡəl jɛloʊ plum, skwədmən baɪ ə sɪŋɡəl bɹoʊkən ɹɪŋ ə jɛloʊ.

Captain-General: (1) The military rank of the leader of the Queen's Guard, in Andor This position is currently held by Lady Birgitte Trahelion (2) The title given to the head of the Green Ajah, though known only to members of the Green This position is currently held by Adelorna Bastine in the Tower, and Myrelle Berengan among the rebel Aes Sedai contingent under Egwene al'Vere Cha Faile: (1) In the Old Tongue, "the Falcon's Talon ' (2) Name taken by the young Cairhiemn and Tairens, attempted followers of jt'e'toh, who have sworn fealty to Fade m Bashere t'Aybara In secret, they act as her personal scouts and spies Since her capture by the Shaido, they continue their activities under the guidance of Sebban Balwer Children of the Light: Society of strict ascetic beliefs, owing allegiance to no nation and dedicated to the defeat of the Dark One and the destruction of all Darkfnends Founded during the War of the Hundred Years by Lothair Mantelar to proselytize against an increase in Darkfnends, they evolved during the war into a completely military society They are extremely rigid m their beliefs, and certain that only they know the truth and the right They consider Aes Sedai and any who support them to be Darkfnends Known disparagingly as Whitecloaks, they were formerly headquartered in Amador, Amadicia, but were forced out when the Seanchan conquered the city Their sign is a golden sunburst on a field of white See also Questioners Companions, the: The elite military formation of Illian, currently commanded by First Captain Demetre Marcohn The Companions provide a bodyguard for the King of Illian and guard key points around the nation Additionally, the Companions have traditionally been used in battle to assault the enemy's strongest positions, to exploit weaknesses, and, if necessary, to cover the retreat of the King Unlike most other such elite formations, foreigners (excepting Tairens, Altarans and Murandians) are not only welcome, they can rise even to the highest rank, as can commoners, which also is unusual The uniform of the Companions consists of a green coat, a breastplate worked with the Nine Bees of Illian, and a conical helmet with a faceguard of steel bars The First Captain wears four rings of golden braid on the cuffs of his coat, and three thin golden plumes on his helmet The Second Captain wears three rings of golden braid on each cuff, and three golden plumes tipped with green Lieutenants wear two yellow rings on their cuffs, and two thin green plumes, under-lieutenants one yellow ring and a single green plume Bannermen are designated by two broken rings of yellow on the cuffs and a single yellow plume, squadmen by a single broken ring of yellow.

kənsɑlədeɪʃən, ðə: wən ði ɑɹmiz sɛn baɪ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz sʌn luthɛɹ lændəɾ ɪn sintʃæn, ðeɪ dɪskʌvɝɾ ə ʃɪftɪŋ kwɪlt ə neɪʃənz ɔfən ət wɔɹ wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ, wɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔfən ɹeɪnd wɪθaʊɾ ɛni ɪkwɪvələn ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝk fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl ɡoʊlz, juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ fɔɹmɪŋ smɔl ɡɹups, ðeɪ skimd əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ kɑnstənli ɪn lɑɹdʒ pɑɹɾ ɪt wɑz ðɪs kɑnstən skimɪŋ fəɹ pɝsənəl ædvæntɪdʒ ən ðə ɹɪzʌltɪŋ wɔɹz əmʌŋ ðə mɪɹiəd neɪʃənz ðəɾ əlaʊd ði ɑɹmiz fɹəm ist ə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən tə bɪɡɪn ðə kɑŋkwɛst ʌv ən ɪntaɪɝ kɑntənənt, ən fəɹ ðɛɹ dɪsɛndəns tə kəmpliɾ ɪt ðɪs kɑŋkwɛst, dʊɹɪŋ wɪtʃ ðə dɪsɛndəns ə ði ɝɪdʒənəl ɑɹmiz bɪkeɪm sintʃæn əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ kɑŋkɝd sintʃæn, tʊk mɔɹ ðən naɪn hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ən ɪz kɔl ðə kənsɑlədeɪʃən.

Consolidation, the: When the armies sent by Artur Hawkwing under his son Luthair landed in Seanchan, they discovered a shifting quilt of nations often at war with one another, where Aes Sedai often reigned Without any equivalent of the White Tower, Aes Sedai worked for their own individual goals, using the Power Forming small groups, they schemed against one another constantly In large part it was this constant scheming for personal advantage and the resulting wars among the myriad nations that allowed the armies from east of the Aryth Ocean to begin the conquest of an entire continent, and for their descendants to complete it This conquest, during which the descendants of the original armies became Seanchan as much as they conquered Seanchan, took more than nine hundred years and is called the Consolidation.

kɔɝɪn: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə ɹɪtɝn " ðə neɪm ɡɪvən baɪ ðə sintʃæn boʊθ tə ðə fliɾ ə θaʊzənz ə ʃɪps ən tə ðə hʌnʒɹədz ə θaʊzənz ə soʊlʒɝz, kɹæfsmən ən ʌðɝz kæɹid baɪ ðoʊz ʃɪps, hu wɪl kʌm bɪhaɪn ðə fɔɹʌnɝz tə ɹikleɪm ðə lænz stoʊlən fɹəm ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz dɪsɛndəns si ɔlsoʊ heɪlin.

Corenne: In the Old Tongue, "the Return " The name given by the Seanchan both to the fleet of thousands of ships and to the hundreds of thousands of soldiers, craftsmen and others carried by those ships, who will come behind the Forerunners to reclaim the lands stolen from Artur Hawkwing's descendants See also Hailene.

kwəndɪlɝ: ə səpoʊzədli ɪndəstʃɹʌktɪbəl sʌbstəns kɹieɪɾəd dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ɛni noʊn fɔɹs juzd ɪn ən ətɛmp tə bɹeɪk ɪts əbzɔɹbd, meɪkɪŋ kwəndɪlɝ stʃɹɔŋɝ ɔlðoʊ ðə meɪkɪŋ ə kwəndɪlɝ əz bɪn, θɔt lɔs fɝɛvɝ, ɹumɝz ə nu ɑbʒɛkts meɪd fɹəm ɪɾ əv sɝfɪst ɪts ɔlsoʊ noʊn əz hɑɹtstoʊn kɝənsi: æftɝ mɛni sɛntʃɝiz ə tʃɹeɪd, ðə stændɝd tɝmz fəɹ kɔɪnz ɑɹ ðə seɪm ɪn ɛvɹi læn kɹaʊnz (ðə lɑɹdʒəs kɑm ɪn saɪz), mɑɹks ən pɛniz kɹaʊnz ən mɑɹks kən bi mɪntɪɾ ʌv ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ, waɪl pɛniz kən bi sɪlvɝ əɹ kɑpɝ, ðə læst ɔfən kɔl sɪmpli ə kɑpɝ ɪn dɪfɹən lænz, haʊɛvɝ, ðiz kɔɪnz kən bi ʌv dɪfɹən saɪzəz ən weɪts ivən ɪn wʌn neɪʃən, kɔɪnz ə dɪfɹən saɪzəz ən weɪts əv bɪn mɪntɪd baɪ dɪfɹən ɹulɝz kəz ə tʃɹeɪd, ðə kɔɪnz ə mɛni neɪʃənz kən bi faʊn ɔlmoʊst ɛniwɛɹ fəɹ ðət ɹizən, bæŋkɝz, mʌnilɛndɝz ən mɝtʃəns ɔl jus skeɪlz tə dətɝmən ðə vælju ʌv ɛni ɡɪvən kɑm ivən lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝz ə kɔɪnz ɑɹ weɪd fəɹ ðɪs ɹizən ði oʊnli peɪpɝ kɝənsi ɪz "lɛɾɝz-ɑfɹaɪts," wɪtʃ ɑɹ ɪʃud baɪ bæŋkɝz, ɡɛɹəntiɪŋ tə pɹizɛn ə sɝɾən əmaʊn ʌv ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ wən ðə lɛɾɝ-ʌv-ts ɪz pɹizɛntəd kəz ə ðə lɔŋ dɪstənsəz bɪtwin sɪɾiz, ðə lɛŋθ ə taɪm niɾəd tə tʃɹævəl fɹəm wʌn tə ənʌðɝ, ən ðə dɪfəkəltiz ə tʃɹænzækʃənz ət lɔŋ dɪstəns, ə lɛɾɝ-ʌv-ts meɪ bi æksɛptɪɾ ət fʊl vælju ɪn ə sɪɾi nɪɹ tə ðə bæŋk ðəɾ ɪʃuɾ ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt meɪ bi æksɛptɪɾ oʊnli əɾ ə loʊɝ vælju ɪn ə sɪɾi fɑɹðɝ əweɪ dʒɛnɝəli, sʌmwʌn ə minz ɪntɛndɪŋ ə lɔŋ dʒɝni wɪl kæɹi wʌn əɹ mɔɹ lɛɾɝz-ʌv-ts tə ɪkstʃeɪnʒ fəɹ kɔɪn wən niɾəd lɛɾɝz-ʌv-ts ɑɹ juʒəwəli æksɛptɪɾ oʊnli baɪ bæŋkɝz əɹ mɝtʃəns, ən wəd nɛvɝ bi juzd ɪn ʃɑps dækoʊvæl: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, ðɪs wəd bi tʃɹænzleɪɾəd lɪɾɝəli əz 'wʌn u ɪz oʊnd," əɹ "pɝsən u ɪz pɹɑpɝɾi " (tu) əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, ðə tɝm ɔfən juzd, əlɔŋ wɪð "pɹɑpɝɾi," fəɹ sleɪvz sleɪvɝi hæz ə lɔŋ ən ənjuʒəwəl hɪstɝi əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, wɪð sleɪvz hævɪŋ ði əbɪləɾi tə ɹaɪz tə pəzɪʃənz ʌv ɡɹeɪt paʊɝ ən oʊpən əθɔɹəɾi, ɪnkluɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ðoʊz u ɑɹ fɹi si ɔlsoʊ sɔɪhɪn dɑɹkhaʊnz: ʃæɾoʊzpɔn kɹieɪɾəd fɹəm lupaɪn stɑk kɝʌptɪd baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn waɪl ðeɪ ɹɪzɛmbəl haʊnz ɪn ðɛɹ beɪsɪk ʃeɪp, ðeɪ ɑɹ blækɝ ðən naɪɾ ən ðə saɪz ə poʊniz, weɪɪŋ sɛvɹəl hʌnʒɹəd paʊnz itʃ ðeɪ juʒəwəli ɹʌn ɪn pæks ə tɛn əɹ twɛlv, ɔlðoʊ ðə tʃɹæks ʌv ə lɑɹdʒɝ pæk əv bɪn saɪɾəd. ðeɪ meɪk noʊ mɑɹk ɑn sɑft ɡɹaʊnd, bʌt liv pɹɪns ɪn stoʊn, ən ɑɹ fɹikwənli əkʌmpənid baɪ ðə smɛl ə bɝn sʌlfɝ ðəl nɑt juʒəwəli vɛntʃɝ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹæm, bʌt wʌns ɹʌnɪŋ ɹæm feɪlz tə stɑp ðɛm. wʌns ðeɪ ɑɹ ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪl, ðeɪ mʌs bi kənfɹʌntəɾ ən dɪfiɾəd əɹ ðə vɪktəmz dɛθ ɪz ɪnɛvəɾəbəl. ði oʊnli ɪksɛpʃən tə ðɪs ɪz wən ðə vɪktəm kən ɹitʃ ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ʌv ə ɹɪvɝ əɹ stʃɹim, sɪns dɑɹkhaʊnz wɪl nɑt kɹɔs floʊɪŋ wɔɾɝ. əɹ səpoʊzədli nɑt. ðɛɹ blʌɾ ən səlaɪvə ɑɹ pɔɪzən, ən ɪf iðɝ tʌtʃəz ðə skɪn, ðə vɪktəm wɪl daɪ sloʊli ən ɪn ɡɹeɪt peɪn. si ɔlsoʊ waɪl hʌnt.

Cuendillar: A supposedly indestructible substance created during the Age of Legends Any known force used in an attempt to break it is absorbed, making cuendillar stronger Although the making of cuendillar has been, thought lost forever, rumors of new objects made from it have surfaced It is also known as heartstone Currency: After many centuries of trade, the standard terms for coins are the same in every land crowns (the largest com in size), marks and pennies Crowns and marks can be minted of gold or silver, while pennies can be silver or copper, the last often called simply a copper In different lands, however, these coins can be of different sizes and weights Even in one nation, coins of different sizes and weights have been minted by different rulers Because of trade, the coins of many nations can be found almost anywhere For that reason, bankers, moneylenders and merchants all use scales to determine the value of any given com Even large numbers of coins are weighed for this reason The only paper currency is "letters-ofrights," which are issued by bankers, guaranteeing to present a certain amount of gold or silver when the letter-of-nghts is presented Because of the long distances between cities, the length of time needed to travel from one to another, and the difficulties of transactions at long distance, a letter-of-nghts may be accepted at full value in a city near to the bank that issued it, but it may be accepted only at a lower value in a city farther away Generally, someone of means intending a long journey will carry one or more letters-of-nghts to exchange for coin when needed Letters-of-nghts are usually accepted only by bankers or merchants, and would never be used in shops da'covale: (1) In the Old Tongue, this would be translated literally as 'one who is owned," or "person who is property " (2) Among the Seanchan, the term often used, along with "property," for slaves Slavery has a long and unusual history among the Seanchan, with slaves having the ability to rise to positions of great power and open authority, including over those who are free See also so'jhin Darkhounds: Shadowspawn created from lupine stock corrupted by the Dark One While they resemble hounds in their basic shape, they are blacker than night and the size of ponies, weighing several hundred pounds each They usually run in packs of ten or twelve, although the tracks of a larger pack have been sighted. They make no mark on soft ground, but leave prints in stone, and are frequently accompanied by the smell of burned sulphur They will not usually venture out into the ram, but once running ram fails to stop them. Once they are on the trail, they must be confronted and defeated or the victim's death is inevitable. The only exception to this is when the victim can reach the other side of a river or stream, since Darkhounds will not cross flowing water. Or supposedly not. Their blood and saliva are poison, and if either touches the skin, the victim will die slowly and in great pain. See also Wild Hunt.

dɔɾɝz ə saɪləns, ðə: dʊɹɪŋ ðə hɪstɝi ʌv ðə waɪt taʊɝ (oʊvɝ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz), vɛɹiəs wɪmən u hæv bɪn pʊɾ aʊɾ əv bɪn ənwɪlɪŋ tə æksɛp ðɛɹ feɪts ən əv tʃɹaɪd tə bæn təɡɛðɝ. sətʃ ɡɹups - moʊst ə ðɛm baɪ fɑɹ, ət list - hæv bɪn dɪspɝs baɪ ðə waɪt taʊɝ əz sun əz faʊn ən pʌnɪʃt səvɪɹli ən pʌblɪkli tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðət ðə lɛsən ɪz kæɹid tə ɛvɹiwʌn. ðə læst ɡɹup tə bi dɪspɝs kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ðə dɔɾɝz ə saɪləns (sɛvənnaɪnfɔɹ - sɛvənhʌnʒɹədnaɪntieɪt ni). ðə dɔɾɝz kənsɪstəɾ ə tu æksɛptɪɾ u hæd bɪn pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ən twɛnti-θɹi wɪmən ðeɪ hæd ɡæðɝɾ ən tʃɹeɪnd. ɔl wɝ kæɹid bæk tə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən pʌnɪʃt, ən ðə twɛnti-θɹi wɝ ɛnɹoʊld ɪn ðə nɑvəs bʊk. oʊnli wʌn ə ðoʊz, sɹɪn æsnoʊbɑɹ, mæn-, eɪdʒɪd tə ɹitʃ ðə ʃɔl. si ɔlsoʊ kɪn, ðə.

Daughters of Silence, the: During the history of the White Tower (over three thousand years), various women who have been put out have been unwilling to accept their fates and have tried to band together. Such groups - most of them by far, at least - have been dispersed by the White Tower as soon as found and punished severely and publicly to make sure that the lesson is carried to everyone. The last group to be dispersed called themselves the Daughters of Silence (794 - 798 NE). The Daughters consisted of two Accepted who had been put out of the Tower and twenty-three women they had gathered and trained. All were carried back to Tar Valon and punished, and the twenty-three were enrolled in the novice book. Only one of those, Saerin Asnobar, man-, aged to reach the shawl. See also Kin, the.

dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz, ðə: ði ɪlit mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən ə ðə sintʃæn ɛmpaɪɝ, ɪnkluɾɪŋ boʊθ hjumənz ən oʊɡiɝ. ðə hjumən mɛmbɝz ə ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹɾ ɑɹ ɔl dækoʊvæl, bɔɹn əz pɹɑpɝɾi ən tʃoʊzən waɪl jʌŋ tə sɝv ði ɛmpɹɛs, huz pɝsənəl pɹɑpɝɾi ðeɪ ɑɹ. fənæɾɪkəli lɔɪəl ən fɪɹsli pɹaʊd, ðeɪ ɔfən dɪspleɪ ðə ɹeɪvənz tætuɾ ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ðə mɑɹk ʌv ə dækoʊvæl ə ði ɛmpɹɛs. ði oʊɡiɝ mɛmbɝz ɑɹ noʊn əz ɡɑɹɾənɝz, ən ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt dækoʊvæl. ðə ɡɑɹɾənɝz ɑɹ əz fɪɹsli lɔɪəl əz ðə hjumən dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz, ðoʊ, ən ɑɹ ivən mɔɹ fɪɹd. hjumən əɹ oʊɡiɝ, ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz nɑɾ oʊnli ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə daɪ fəɹ ði ɛmpɹɛs ən ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli, bʌt bɪliv ðət ðɛɹ laɪvz ɑɹ ðə pɹɑpɝɾi ʌv ði ɛmpɹɛs, tə bi dɪspoʊzd ʌv əz ʃi wɪʃɪz. ðɛɹ hɛlməts ən ɑɹmɝ ɑɹ lækɝɾ ɪn dɑɹk ɡɹin ən blʌd-ɹɛd, ðɛɹ ʃilz ɑɹ lækɝd blæk, ən ðɛɹ spɪɹz ən sɔɹdz kæɹi blæk tæsəlz. si ɔlsoʊ dækoʊvæl.

Deathwatch Guards, the: The elite military formation of the Seanchan Empire, including both humans and Ogier. The human members of the Deathwatch Guard are all da'covale, born as property and chosen while young to serve the Empress, whose personal property they are. Fanatically loyal and fiercely proud, they often display the ravens tattooed on their shoulders, the mark of a da'covale of the Empress. The Ogier members are known as Gardeners, and they are not da'covale. The Gardeners are as fiercely loyal as the human Deathwatch Guards, though, and are even more feared. Human or Ogier, the Deathwatch Guards not only are ready to die for the Empress and the Imperial family, but believe that their lives are the property of the Empress, to be disposed of as she wishes. Their helmets and armor are lacquered in dark green and blood-red, their shields are lacquered black, and their spears and swords carry black tassels. See also da'covale.

dɪfɛndɝz ə ðə stoʊn, ðə: ði ɪlit mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən ə tɛɹ. ðə kɝən kæptən ə ðə stoʊn (kəmændɝ ə ðə dɪfɛndɝz) ɪz ɹɑdʒɹəvɑɹ taɪhɛɹə. oʊnli tɛɹənz ɑɹ æksɛptɪɾ ɪndə ðə dɪfɛndɝz, ən ɔfəsɝz ɑɹ juʒəwəli ʌv noʊbəl bɝθ, ðoʊ ɔfən fɹəm maɪnɝ haʊsəz əɹ maɪnɝ bɹæntʃəz ə stʃɹɔŋ haʊzɪz. ðə dɪfɛndɝz ɑɹ tæsk tə hoʊl ðə ɡɹeɪt fɔɹtʃɹəs kɔl ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ, ɪn ðə sɪɾi ʌv tiɹ, tə dɪfɛn ðə sɪɾi, ən tə pɹəvaɪd pəlis sɝvəsəz ɪn pleɪs ʌv ɛni sɪɾi wɑtʃ əɹ ðə laɪk. ɪksɛpt ɪn taɪmz ʌv wɔɹ, ðɛɹ duɾiz sɛldəm teɪk əm fɑɹ fɹəm ðə sɪɾi. ðɛn, əz wɪð ʌðɝ ɪlit fɔɹmeɪʃənz, ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə kɔɹ ɝaʊnd wɪtʃ ði ɑɹmi ɪz fɔɹmd. ðə junəfɔɹm ə ðə dɪfɛndɝz kənsɪsts ʌv ə blæk koʊt wɪð pæɾəd slivz stʃɹaɪp blæk-ænd-ɡoʊld wɪð blæk kʌfs, ə bɝnɪʃt bɹɛstpleɪt, ən ə ɹɪm hɛlmət wɪð ə feɪsɡɑɹɾ ə stil bɑɹz. ðə kæptən ə ðə stoʊn wɛɹz θɹi ʃɔɹt waɪt plumz ɑn ɪz hɛlmət, ən ɑn ðə kʌfs ə hɪz koʊt θɹi ɪntɝtwaɪnd ɡoʊldən bɹeɪdz ɑn ə waɪt bænd. kæptənz wɛɹ tu waɪt plumz ən ə sɪŋɡəl laɪn ʌv ɡoʊldən bɹeɪɾ ɑn waɪt kʌfs, lutɛnəns wʌn waɪt plum ən ə sɪŋɡəl laɪn ə blæk bɹeɪɾ ɑn waɪt kʌfs ən ʌndɝ-lutɛnəns wʌn ʃɔɹt blæk plum ən pleɪn waɪt kʌfs.

Defenders of the Stone, the: The elite military formation of Tear. The current Captain of the Stone (commander of the Defenders) is Rodrivar Tihera. Only Tairens are accepted into the Defenders, and officers are usually of noble birth, though often from minor Houses or minor branches of strong Houses. The Defenders are tasked to hold the great fortress called the Stone of Tear, in the city of Tear, to defend the city, and to provide police services in place of any City Watch or the like. Except in times of war, their duties seldom take them far from the city. Then, as with other elite formations, they are the core around which the army is formed. The uniform of the Defenders consists of a black coat with padded sleeves striped black-and-gold with black cuffs, a burnished breastplate, and a rimmed helmet with a faceguard of steel bars. The Captain of the Stone wears three short white plumes on his helmet, and on the cuffs of his coat three intertwined golden braids on a white band. Captains wear two white plumes and a single line of golden braid on white cuffs, lieutenants one white plume and a single line of black braid on white cuffs and under-lieutenants one short black plume and plain white cuffs.

bænɝmɪn əv ɡoʊld-kʌlɝd kʌfs ɑn ðɛɹ koʊts, ən skwədmən əv kʌfs stʃɹaɪp blæk ən ɡoʊld.

Bannermen have gold-colored cuffs on their coats, and squadmen have cuffs striped black and gold.

dɛlvɪŋ: (wʌn) juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə daɪəɡnoʊs fɪzɪkəl kəndɪʃən ən ɪlnəs. (tu) faɪndɪŋ dəpɑzɪts ə mɛɾəl ɔɹz wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ðət ðɪs əz lɔŋ bɪn ə lɔst əbɪləɾi əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ əkaʊn fəɹ ðə neɪm bɪkʌmɪŋ ətætʃt tə ənʌðɝ əbɪləɾi.

Delving: (1) Using the One Power to diagnose physical condition and illness. (2) Finding deposits of metal ores with the One Power. That this has long been a lost ability among Aes Sedai may account for the name becoming attached to another ability.

dɪpɑzətɔɹi: ə dɪvɪʒən ə ðə taʊɝ laɪbɹɛɹi. ðəɹ ɑɹ twɛlv pʌblɪkli noʊn dəpɑzətɔɹiz, itʃ hævɪŋ bʊks ən ɹɛkɝdz pɝteɪnɪŋ tə ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ sʌbʒɪkt, əɹ tə ɹɪleɪɾɪd sʌbʒɪkts. eɪ θɝtinθ dɪpɑzətɔɹi, noʊn oʊnli tə ɛɛs sədaɪ, kənteɪnz sikɹət dɑkjəməns, ɹɛkɝdz ən hɪstɝiz wɪtʃ meɪ bi æksɛst oʊnli baɪ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ðə kipɝ ə ðə kɹɑnəkəlz, ən ðə sɪɾɝz ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ. ænd, ʌv kɔɹs, baɪ ðə hændfʊl ə laɪbɹɛɹiənz u meɪnteɪn ðə dɪpɑzətɔɹi.

Depository: A division of the Tower Library. There are twelve publicly known Depositories, each having books and records pertaining to a particular subject, or to related subjects. A Thirteenth Depository, known only to Aes Sedai, contains secret documents, records and histories which may be accessed only by the Amyrlin Seat, the Keeper of the Chronicles, and the Sitters in the Hall of the Tower. And, of course, by the handful of librarians who maintain the Depository.

dɝmɝæt-: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "mæstɝ hænlɝ." (tu) əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, ðə pɹifɪks əplaɪd tə ɪndəkeɪɾ ə sinjɝ ən haɪli skɪl hænlɝ ʌv wʌn ə ði ɛɡzɑɾɪks, wʌn u tʃɹeɪnz ʌðɝz, əz ɪn dɝmɝətʃɹeɪkən. dɝ'-mɔɝæt kən əv ə fɛɹli haɪ soʊʃəl stæɾəs, ðə haɪəst ʌv ɔl hɛl baɪ dɝ'-sʌldəm, ðə tʃɹeɪnɝz ə sʌldəm, hu ɹæŋk wɪð fɛɹli haɪ mɪlətɛɹi ɔfəsɝz. si ɔlsoʊ mɔɝæt-.

der'morat-: (1) In the Old Tongue, "master handler." (2) Among the Seanchan, the prefix applied to indicate a senior and highly skilled handler of one of the exotics, one who trains others, as in der'morat'raken. Der'-morat can have a fairly high social status, the highest of all held by der'-sul'dam, the trainers of sul'dam, who rank with fairly high military officers. See also morat-.

ɛɹɪθ: dɔɾɝ ʌv ivə dɔɾɝ ʌv eɪlɑɹ. ən ətʃɹæktɪv jʌŋ oʊɡiɝ wʊmən hum lɔɪəl ɪntɛnz tə mɛɹi, ɔlðoʊ ət pɹɛzən hiz ɑn ðə ɹʌn fɹəm hɝ.

Erith: Daughter of Iva daughter of Alar. An attractive young Ogier woman whom Loial intends to marry, although at present he is on the run from her.

feɪn, pdən: fɔɹmɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnd, naʊ mɔɹ ən wɝs ðən ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ən ən ɛnəmi ʌv ðə fɔɹseɪkən əz mʌtʃ əz hiz ə ɹænd ælθɹ, hum i heɪts wɪð ə pæʃən. læst sin ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ wɪð tɔɹæm ɹieɪɾən.

Fain, Padan: Former Darkfriend, now more and worse than a Darkfriend, and an enemy of the Forsaken as much as he is of Rand al'Thor, whom he hates with a passion. Last seen in Far Madding with Toram Riatin.

fɛl, hɹɪd: ði ɔθɝ ə ɹizən ən ənɹisən ən ʌðɝ bʊks pɛl wɑz ə stuɾənt (æn titʃɝ) ʌv hɪstɝi ən fəlɑsəfi ət ði əkæɾəmi ʌv kɛɹhin i wɑz dɪskʌvɝɾ ɛm ɪz stʌɾi tɔɹn lɪm fɹəm lɪm fɝst ɹizənɝ: ðə taɪɾəl ɡɪvən tə ðə hɛɾ ə ðə waɪɾ ədʒɑ ðɪs pəzɪʃən ɪz kɝənli hɛl baɪ fɛɹən nhɝən ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ fɛɹən sədaɪ ɪz wʌn ʌv oʊnli tu ədʒɑ hɛdz tə sɪɾ ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ ət pɹɛzən fɝst wivɝ: ðə taɪɾəl ɡɪvən tə ðə hɛɾ ə ðə jɛloʊ ədʒɑ ðɪs pəzɪʃən ɪz kɝənli hɛl baɪ swænə dʒɹeɪɡən ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ swænə sədaɪ ɪz wʌn ʌv oʊnli tu ədʒɑ hɛdz tə sɪɾ ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ ət pɹɛzən fɪsts ə hɛvən, ðə: laɪtli ɑɹmd ən laɪtli ɑɹmɝd sintʃæn ɪnfəntʃɹi kæɹiɾ ɪndə bæɾəl ɑn ðə bæks ə ðə flaɪɪŋ kɹitʃɝz kɔl tɔɹeɪkən ɔl ɑɹ smɔl mɛn, əɹ wɪmən, lɑɹdʒli kəz ə lɪməts əz tə haʊ mʌtʃ weɪɾ ə tɔɹeɪkən kən kæɹi fəɹ ɛni dɪstəns kənsɪɾɝd tə bi əmʌŋ ðə tʌfəst ə soʊlʒɝz, ðeɪ ɑɹ juz pɹaɪmɛɹəli fəɹ ɹeɪdz, sɝpɹaɪz əsɔls ɑn pəzɪʃənz əɾ ən ɛnəmiz ɹɪɹ, ən wɛɹ spiɾ ɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ soʊlʒɝz ɪndə pleɪs ɪz ə ði ɛsəns fɔɹʌnɝz, ðə: si heɪlin fɔɹseɪkən, ðə: ðə neɪm ɡɪvən tə θɝtin paʊɝfəl ɛɛs sədaɪ, mɛn ən wɪmən boʊθ, hu wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðə ʃædoʊ dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ən wɝ tʃɹæpt ɪn ðə silɪŋ ə ðə bɔɹ ɪndə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən waɪl ɪts lɔŋ bɪn bɪliv ðət ðeɪ əloʊn əbændən ðə laɪt dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ, ɪn fækt ʌðɝz dɪɾ əz wɛl, ðiz θɝtin wɝ oʊnli ðə haɪəst-ɹæŋkɪŋ əmʌŋ əm ðə fɔɹseɪkən (hu kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ðə tʃoʊzən) ɑɹ sʌmwʌt ɹədust ɪn nʌmbɝ sɪns ðɛɹ əweɪkənɪŋ ɪn ðə pɹɛzən deɪ ðoʊz θɔt tə hæv sɝvaɪvd ɑɹ dɪmɑndɝd, sɛmɝhɪdʒ, ɡɹeɪndəl, mɛsænə, mɑɡiɾin, ən tu hu wɝ ɹiɪnkɑɹneɪɾɪd ɪn nu bɑɾiz ən ɡɪvən nu neɪmz, oʊsɑnɡɝ ən ɝæŋɡɝ, ɔlðoʊ ɪt simz pɑsəbəl ðəɾ oʊsɑnɡɝ meɪ ɔlsoʊ bi dɛd ðə laɪf ʌv ə fɔɹseɪkən ɪz ɔlweɪz ənsɝɾən ɹisənli, ə mæn kɔlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf mɑndɪn əz əpɪɹd, ən simz tə bi jɛɾ ənʌðɝ ə ðə dɛd fɔɹseɪkən bɹɔt bæk fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn ðə seɪm meɪ bi pɑsəbəl ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə wʊmən kɔlɪŋ hɝsɛlf sɪndeɪn, bʌt sɪns ɝæŋɡɝ wɑz ə mæn bɹɔt bæk əz ə wʊmən, spɛkjəleɪʃən əz tə ði ɝɪdʒənəl aɪdɛntɪɾiz ə mɔɹaɪɾɪn ən sɪndeɪn meɪ pɹuv fjuɾəl əntɪl mɔɹ ɪz lɝnd ɡɹɛɡɹɪn: fʊl neɪm ɡɹɛɡɹm pɑnɝ di lʌʃɪnoʊz ə mɛmbɝ ə ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn ɪn ɪljən u pɹɛzənli sɝvz əz ðə stuɝd fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪn ɪljən heɪlin: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, 'fɔɹʌnɝz, əɹ "ðoʊz u kʌm bɪfɔɹ ' ðə tɝm əplaɪd baɪ ðə sintʃæn tə ðə mæsɪv ɛkspədɪʃənɛɹi fɔɹs sɛn əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən tə skaʊɾ aʊt ðə lænz wɛɹ ɑɹɾɝ hɔk-wɪŋ wʌns ɹul naʊ ʌndɝ ðə kəmæn ə ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ, ɪts nʌmbɝz swoʊlən baɪ ɹəkɹuts fɹəm kɑŋkɝd lænz, ðə heɪlin əz ɡɔn fɑɹ bɪɑn ɪts ɝɪdʒənəl ɡoʊlz, ən əz ɪn fæk bɪn səksiɾəd baɪ ðə ɹɪtɝn si ɹɪtɝn hænlən, dɑvd: eɪ dɑɹkfnɛnd, fɔɹmɝli kəmændɝ ə ðə waɪt laɪənz ɪn sɝvəs tə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑvm waɪl i hɛl keɪɛmlɪn juzɪŋ ðə neɪm lɔɹɾ eɪbnəl fɹəm ðɛɹ, hænlən tʊk ðə waɪt laɪənz tə kɛɹhin ʌndɝ ɔɹɾɝz tə fɝðɝ ðə ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛns ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ðə waɪt laɪənz wɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪd baɪ ə "bʌbəl ʌv ivəl," ən hænlən əz bɪn ɔɹɾɝd bæk tə keɪɛmlɪn ænd, ʌndɝ ðə neɪm dɔɪlm mɛlɝ, hæz ɪnɡɹæʃieɪɾɪd hɪmsɛlf wɪð ɪleɪn, ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ɹumɝ, hiz dʌn kənsɪɾɝəbli mɔɹ ðən ɪnɡɹeɪʃieɪt hɪmsɛlf hɛd klɝk: ðə taɪɾəl ɡɪvən tə ðə hɛɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪ ədʒɑ ðɪs pəzɪʃən ɪz kɝənli hɛl baɪ sɹæntʃə kɔɹvaɪn, ə wʊmən ə ɹɪpjuɾɪdli fæstɪɾiəs bɪheɪvjɝ, ɪn ðə taʊɝ hɑɹt: ðə beɪsɪk junəɾ ʌv ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃən ɪn ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɪn ɪfɛkt, ə sɛl ə hɑɹt kənsɪsts ə θɹi sɪstɝz u noʊ itʃ ʌðɝ, itʃ mɛmbɝ ə ðə hɑɹt noʊz wʌn ədɪʃənəl sɪstɝ ə ðə blæk ɪluməneɪɾɝz, ɡɪld ʌv: ə səsaɪəɾi ðət hɛl ðə sikɹəɾ ə meɪkɪŋ faɪɹwɝks ɪt ɡɑɹɾəd ðɪs sikɹət vɛɹi kloʊsli, ivən tə ði ɪkstɛn ə mɝɾɝ ðə ɡɪld ɡeɪn ɪts neɪm fɹəm ðə ɡɹæn dɪspleɪz, kɔld ɪluməneɪʃənz, ðəɾ ɪt pɹəvaɪɾəd fəɹ ɹulɝz ən səmtaɪmz fəɹ ɡɹeɪɾɝ lɔɹdz lɛsɝ faɪɹwɝks wɝ soʊl fəɹ jus baɪ ʌðɝz, bʌt wɪð daɪɹ wɔɹnɪŋz ə ðə dɪzæstɝ ðət kəd ɹɪzʌl fɹəm ətɛmptɪŋ tə lɝn wʌt wɑz ɪnsaɪɾ əm ðə ɡɪld wʌns hæd tʃæptɝ haʊsəz ɪn kɛɹhin ən tæntʃəkoʊ, bʌt boʊθ ɑɹ naʊ dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪn ədɪʃən, ðə mɛmbɝz ə ðə ɡɪld ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ ɹɪzɪstɪd ði ɪnveɪʒən baɪ ðə sintʃæn ən ðə sɝvaɪvɝz wɝ meɪd dɑ-koʊvæl, ən ðə ɡɪld əz sətʃ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪɡzɪsts haʊɛvɝ, ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl ɪluməneɪɾɝz əv ɪskeɪp sintʃæn ɹul, ən pɝhæps mɔɹ ɡɹæn dɪspleɪz wɪl bi sin ɪn ðə nɑt tu- dɪstən fjutʃɝ si ɔlsoʊ dækoʊvæl ɪʃɑɹə: ðə fɝs kwin ʌv ændɝ (ɑnə fi naɪnnaɪnfɔɹ-wʌnzɪɹoʊɾuzɪɹoʊ) ət ðə dɛθ ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ, ɪʃɑɹə kənvɪnst əɹ hʌzbənd, wʌn ʌv ɔkwmɡz fɔɹmoʊs dʒɛnɝəlz, tə ɹeɪz ðə sidʒ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən əkʌmpəni hɝ tə keɪɛmlɪn wɪð əz mɛni soʊlʒɝz əz i kəd bɹeɪk əweɪ fɹəm ði ɑɹmi. wɛɹ ʌðɝz tʃɹaɪd tə siz ðə hoʊl ʌv ɔkwmɡ ɛs ɛmpaɪɝ ən feɪld, ɪʃɑɹə tʊk ə fɝm hoʊld ɑn ə smɔl pɑɹɾ ən səksiɾəd tədeɪ, nɪɹli ɛvɹi noʊbəl haʊs ɪn ændɝ kənteɪnz səm ʌv ɪʃɑɹə ɛs blʌd, ən ðə ɹaɪt tə kleɪm ðə laɪən θɹoʊn dɪpɛnz boʊθ ɑn dɝɛk dɪsɛn fɹəm əɹ ən ɑn ðə nʌmbɝ ə laɪnz ə kənɛkʃən tə hɝ ðət kən bi ɪstæblɪʃt kɛnsɑɾə: ən ɛɹiə ʌv sintʃæn ðəɾ ɪz pɑpjəleɪɾəd baɪ lɛs-ðæn-sɪvəlaɪz hɪl tʃɹaɪbz ðiz tʃɹaɪbz faɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, əz də ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl fæmliz wɪðɪn ðə tʃɹaɪbz itʃ tʃɹaɪb əz ɪts oʊn kʌstəmz ən tæbuz, ðə læɾɝ ʌv wɪtʃ ɔfən meɪk noʊ sɛns tə ɛniwʌn aʊtsaɪd ðət tʃɹaɪb moʊst ə ðə tʃɹaɪbzmɪn əvɔɪd ðə mɔɹ sɪvəlaɪzd ɹɛzəɾənts ə sintʃæn kɑɾɝ. ə sɪɾi ɪn ɑɹæd dumən noʊn fəɹ ɪts maɪnz ən fɔɹdʒɪz kɑɾɝ ɪz wɛlθi ɪnʌf ðəɾ ɪts lɔɹdz əkeɪʒənəli nid ɹimaɪndɪŋ ðət ðeɪ ɑɹ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɑɹæd dumən kɪn, ðə: ivən dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, mɔɹ ðən tu θaʊzən jɪɹz əɡoʊ (sɝkə wʌnθaʊzənd - wʌnθɹifaɪvzɪɹoʊ

Fel, Herid: The author of Reason and Unreason and other books Pel was a student (and teacher) of history and philosophy at the Academy of Cairhien He was discovered m his study torn limb from limb First Reasoner: The title given to the head of the White Ajah This position is currently held by Ferane Neheran in the White Tower Ferane Sedai is one of only two Ajah heads to sit in the Hall of the Tower at present First Weaver: The title given to the head of the Yellow Ajah This position is currently held by Suana Dragand in the White Tower Suana Sedai is one of only two Ajah heads to sit in the Hall of the Tower at present Fists of Heaven, the: Lightly armed and lightly armored Seanchan infantry carried into battle on the backs of the flying creatures called to'raken All are small men, or women, largely because of limits as to how much weight a to'raken can carry for any distance Considered to be among the toughest of soldiers, they are used primarily for raids, surprise assaults on positions at an enemy's rear, and where speed in getting soldiers into place is of the essence Forerunners, the: See Hailene Forsaken, the: The name given to thirteen powerful Aes Sedai, men and women both, who went over to the Shadow during the Age of Legends and were trapped in the sealing of the Bore into the Dark One's prison While it has long been believed that they alone abandoned the Light during the War of the Shadow, in fact others did as well, these thirteen were only the highest-ranking among them The Forsaken (who call themselves the Chosen) are somewhat reduced in number since their awakening in the present day Those thought to have survived are Demandred, Semirhage, Graendal, Mesaana, Moghedien, and two who were reincarnated in new bodies and given new names, Osan'gar and Aran'gar, although it seems possible that Osan'gar may also be dead The life of a Forsaken is always uncertain Recently, a man calling himself Mondin has appeared, and seems to be yet another of the dead Forsaken brought back from the grave by the Dark One The same may be possible regarding the woman calling herself Cyndane, but since Aran'gar was a man brought back as a woman, speculation as to the original identities of Moridin and Cyndane may prove futile until more is learned Gregorin: Full name Gregorm Panar de Lushenos A member of the Council of Nine in Illian who presently serves as the Steward for the Dragon Reborn in Illian Hailene: In the Old Tongue, 'Forerunners, or "Those Who Come Before ' The term applied by the Seanchan to the massive expeditionary force sent across the Aryth Ocean to scout out the lands where Artur Hawk-wing once ruled Now under the command of the High Lady Suroth, its numbers swollen by recruits from conquered lands, the Hailene has gone far beyond its original goals, and has in fact been succeeded by the Return See Return Hanlon, Daved: A Darkfnend, formerly commander of the White Lions in service to the Forsaken Rahvm while he held Caemlyn using the name Lord Gaebnl From there, Hanlon took the White Lions to Cairhien under orders to further the rebellion against the Dragon Reborn The White Lions were destroyed by a "bubble of evil," and Hanlon has been ordered back to Caemlyn and, under the name Doilm Mellar, has ingratiated himself with Elayne, the Daughter-Heir According to rumor, he has done considerably more than ingratiate himself Head Clerk: The title given to the head of the Gray Ajah This position is currently held by Serancha Corvine, a woman of reputedly fastidious behavior, in the Tower heart: The basic unit of organization in the Black Ajah In effect, a cell A heart consists of three sisters who know each other, each member of the heart knows one additional sister of the Black Illuminators, Guild of: A society that held the secret of making fireworks It guarded this secret very closely, even to the extent of murder The Guild gained its name from the grand displays, called Illuminations, that it provided for rulers and sometimes for greater lords Lesser fireworks were sold for use by others, but with dire warnings of the disaster that could result from attempting to learn what was inside them The Guild once had chapter houses in Cairhien and Tanchico, but both are now destroyed In addition, the members of the Guild in Tanchico resisted the invasion by the Seanchan and the survivors were made da-covale, and the Guild as such no longer exists However, individual Illuminators have escaped Seanchan rule, and perhaps more grand displays will be seen in the not too- distant future See also da'covale Ishara: The first Queen of Andor (ana FY 994-1020) At the death of Artur Hawkwing, Ishara convinced her husband, one of Hawkwmg's foremost generals, to raise the siege of Tar Valon and accompany her to Caemlyn with as many soldiers as he could break away from the army. Where others tried to seize the whole of Hawkwmg s empire and failed, Ishara took a firm hold on a small part and succeeded Today, nearly every noble House in Andor contains some of Ishara s blood, and the right to claim the Lion Throne depends both on direct descent from her and on the number of lines of connection to her that can be established Kaensada: An area of Seanchan that is populated by less-than-civilized hill tribes These tribes fight a great deal among themselves, as do individual families within the tribes Each tribe has its own customs and taboos, the latter of which often make no sense to anyone outside that tribe Most of the tribesmen avoid the more civilized residents of Seanchan Katar. A city in Arad Doman known for its mines and forges Katar is wealthy enough that its Lords occasionally need reminding that they are part of Arad Doman Kin, the: Even during the Trolloc Wars, more than two thousand years ago (circa 1000 - 1350

æb), ðə waɪt taʊɝ kəntɪnjud tə meɪnteɪn ɪts stændɝdz, pʊɾɪŋ aʊt wɪmən u feɪl tə mɛʒɝ ʌp wʌn ɡɹup ə ðiz wɪmən, fɪɹɪŋ tə ɹɪtɝn hoʊm ɪn ðə mɪdst ə ðə wɔɹz, flɛd tə bɑɹɑʃtə (nɪɹ ðə pɹɛzənt-deɪ saɪɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ), əz fɑɹ fɹəm ðə faɪɾɪŋ əz wɑz pɑsəbəl tə ɡoʊ ət ðət taɪm kɔlɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ðə kɪn, ən kɪnswɪmən, ðeɪ kɛpt ɪn haɪɾɪŋ ən ɔfɝɾ ə seɪf heɪvən fəɹ ʌðɝz u hæd bɪn pʊɾ aʊɾ ɪn taɪm, ðɛɹ əpɹoʊtʃɪz tə wɪmən toʊl tə liv ðə taʊɝ lɛd tə kɑntæks wɪð ɹʌnəweɪz, ən waɪl ði ɪɡzækt ɹizənz meɪ nɛvɝ bi noʊn, ðə kɪn bɪɡæn tə æksɛpt ɹʌnəweɪz, əz wɛl ðeɪ meɪd ɡɹeɪɾ ɛfɝts tə kip ðiz ɡɝlz fɹəm lɝnɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə kɪn əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd nɑt swup daʊn ən ɹiteɪk əm æftɝ ɔl, ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðət ɹʌnəweɪz wɝ ɔlweɪz kɑt sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ən ðə kɪn nu ðəɾ ənlɛs ðeɪ hɛl ðɛmsɛlvz sikɹət, ðeɪ ðɛmsɛlvz wəd bi pʌnɪʃt səvɪɹli ənnoʊn tə ðə kɪn, ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə taʊɝ wɝ əwɛɹ ə ðɛɹ ɛɡzɪstəns ɔlmoʊs fɹəm ðə vɛɹi fɝst, bʌt pɹɑsəkjuʃən ə ðə wɔɹz lɛf noʊ taɪm fəɹ dilɪŋ wɪð əm baɪ ði ɛn ə ðə wɔɹz, ðə taʊɝ ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪt maɪt nɑt bi ɪn ðɛɹ bɛst ɪntʃɹəsts tə snʌf aʊt ðə kɪn pɹaɪɝ tə ðət taɪm, ə mədʒɔɹəɾi ʌv ɹʌnəweɪz æktʃəli  hæd mænədʒ tə ɪskeɪp, wʌtɛvɝ ðə taʊɝz pɹɑpəɡændə, bʌt wʌns ðə kɪn bɪɡæn hɛlpɪŋ ðɛm, ðə taʊɝ nu ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ɛni ɹʌnəweɪ wɑz hɛɾɪŋ, ən ðeɪ bɪɡæn ɹəteɪkɪŋ naɪn aʊɾ ə tɛn sɪns kɪnswɪmən muvd ɛm ən aʊɾ ə bɑɹɑʃtə (æn leɪɾɝ ɛbu dɑɹ) ɛm ən ɛfɝt tə haɪd ðɛɹ ɛɡzɪstəns ən ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz, nɛvɝ steɪɪŋ mɔɹ ðən tɛn jɪɹz lɛst sʌmwʌn noʊɾəs ðət ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ eɪdʒ əɾ ə nɔɹməl spid, ðə taʊɝ bɪliv ðeɪ wɝ fju, ən ðeɪ sɝɾənli wɝ kipɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz loʊ ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə juz ðə kɪn əz ə tʃɹæp fəɹ ɹʌnəweɪz, ðə taʊɝ dɪsaɪɾɪd tə liv əm əloʊn, ənlaɪk ɛni ʌðɝ sɪməlɝ ɡɹup ɪn hɪstɝi, ən tə kip ðə vɛɹi ɛɡzɪstəns ə ðə kɪn ə sikɹət noʊn oʊnli tə fʊl ɛɛs sədaɪ ðə kɪn də nɑɾ əv lɔz, bʌt ɹæðɝ ɹulz (kɔl ðə ɹul ) beɪst ɪn pɑɹɾ ɑn ðə ɹulz fəɹ nɑvəsɪz ən æksɛptɪɾ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ɪn pɑɹɾ ɑn ðə nəsɛsəɾi ʌv meɪnteɪnɪŋ sikɹəsi əz maɪt bi ɪkspɛktəd ɡɪvən ði ɔɹədʒɪnz ə ðə kɪn, ðeɪ meɪnteɪn ðə ɹul vɛɹi fɝmli ɑn ɔl ə ðɛɹ mɛmbɝz ɹisən oʊpən kɑntæks bɪtwin ɛɛs sədaɪ ən kɪnswɪmən, waɪl noʊn oʊnli tə ə hændfʊl ə sɪstɝz, hæv pɹədust ə nʌmbɝ ə ʃɑks, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə fæks ðət ðəɹ ɑɹ twaɪs əz mɛni kɪnswɪmən əz ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðət səm əv lɪv mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz lɔŋɡɝ ðən ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæz lɪv sɪns bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz ði ɪfɛkt ə ðiz ɹɛvəleɪʃənz, boʊθ ɑn ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɑn kɪnswɪmən, ɪz əz jɛɾ ə mæɾɝ fəɹ spɛkjəleɪʃən si ɔlsoʊ dɔɾɝz ə saɪləns, ðə, nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl, ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl, ðə: ðə liɾɝz ə ðə kɪn sɪns noʊ mɛmbɝ ə ðə kɪn əz ɛvɝ noʊn haʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɝeɪnʒ ðɛɹ oʊn haɪɝɑɹki  -  nɑlədʒ pæst ɑn oʊnli wən ən æksɛptɪɾ əz pæst əɹ tɛs fəɹ ðə ʃɔl  -  ðeɪ pʊt noʊ stɔɹ ɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə paʊɝ bʌt ɡɪv ɡɹeɪt weɪt tə eɪdʒ, wɪð ði oʊldɝ wʊmən ɔlweɪz stændɪŋ əbʌv ðə jʌŋɡɝ ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl (ə taɪɾəl tʃoʊzən, laɪk ðə kɪn, ɪts ɪz ɪnɑkjuəs) ðʌs kənsɪsts ə ðə θɝtin oʊldəs kɪnswɪmən ɹɛzəɾənt ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, wɪð ði oʊldəst ɡɪvən ðə taɪɾəl ʌv ɛldəs baɪ ðə ɹulz, ɔl wɪl əv tə stɛp daʊn ɪts ɪz taɪm fəɹ əm tə muv ɑn, bʌt soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹɛzəɾənt ɪn ɛbu ðeɪv hæv səpɹim əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ðə kɪn, tə ə dɪɡɹi ðəɾ ɛni mɪɹlm sit wəɾ ɛnvi si ɔlsoʊ kɪn, ðə leɪɾi ʌv ðə ʃædoʊz: eɪ sintʃæn tɝm fəɹ dɛθ læns-kæptən' ɪn moʊs lænz, noʊbəlwɪmən də nɑt pɝsənəli lɛd ðɛɹ ɑɹmmɪn ɪndə bæɾəl ʌndɝ nɔɹməl sɝkəmstænsəz ɪnstɛd, ðeɪ haɪɝ ə pɹəfɛʃənəl soʊlʒɝ, ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz ə kɑmənɝ, hu ɪz ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ boʊθ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ən liɾɪŋ ðɛɹ ɑɹmmɪn dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn ðə lænd, ðɪs mæn kən bi kɔld ə læns-kæptən, sɔɹd-kæptən, mæstɝ ə ðə hɔɹs, əɹ mæstɝ ə ðə lænsɪz ɹumɝz ə kloʊsɝ ɹileɪʃənʃɪps ðən sɪkshʌnʒɹədnaɪntifɔɹ ɡlɔsɝi leɪɾi ən sɝvən ɔfən spɹɪŋ ʌp, pɝhæps ɪnɛvəɾəbli. səmtaɪmz ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹu.

AB), the White Tower continued to maintain its standards, putting out women who failed to measure up One group of these women, fearing to return home in the midst of the wars, fled to Barashta (near the present-day site of Ebou Dar), as far from the fighting as was possible to go at that time Calling themselves the Kin, and Kinswomen, they kept in hiding and offered a safe haven for others who had been put out In time, their approaches to women told to leave the Tower led to contacts with runaways, and while the exact reasons may never be known, the Kin began to accept runaways, as well They made great efforts to keep these girls from learning anything about the Kin until they were sure that Aes Sedai would not swoop down and retake them After all, everyone knew that runaways were always caught sooner or later, and the Kin knew that unless they held themselves secret, they themselves would be punished severely Unknown to the Kin, Aes Sedai in the Tower were aware of their existence almost from the very first, but prosecution of the wars left no time for dealing with them By the end of the wars, the Tower realized that it might not be in their best interests to snuff out the Kin Prior to that time, a majority of runaways actually had managed to escape, whatever the Towers propaganda, but once the Kin began helping them, the Tower knew exactly where any runaway was heading, and they began retaking nine out of ten Since Kinswomen moved m and out of Barashta (and later Ebou Dar) m an effort to hide their existence and their numbers, never staying more than ten years lest someone notice that they did not age at a normal speed, the Tower believed they were few, and they certainly were keeping themselves low In order to use the Kin as a trap for runaways, the Tower decided to leave them alone, unlike any other similar group in history, and to keep the very existence of the Kin a secret known only to full Aes Sedai The Kin do not have laws, but rather rules (called the Rule ) based in part on the rules for novices and Accepted in the White Tower, and in part on the necessity of maintaining secrecy As might be expected given the origins of the Kin, they maintain the Rule very firmly on all of their members Recent open contacts between Aes Sedai and Kinswomen, while known only to a handful of sisters, have produced a number of shocks, including the facts that there are twice as many Kinswomen as Aes Sedai and that some have lived more than a hundred years longer than any Aes Sedai who has lived since before the Trolloc Wars The effect of these revelations, both on Aes Sedai and on Kinswomen, is as yet a matter for speculation See also Daughters of Silence, the, Knitting Circle, the Knitting Circle, the: The leaders of the Kin Since no member of the Kin has ever known how Aes Sedai arrange their own hierarchy  -  knowledge passed on only when an Accepted has passed her test for the shawl  -  they put no store in strength in the Power but give great weight to age, with the older woman always standing above the younger The Knitting Circle (a title chosen, like the Kin, because it is innocuous) thus consists of the thirteen oldest Kinswomen resident in Ebou Dar, with the oldest given the title of Eldest By the rules, all will have to step down when it is time for them to move on, but so long as they are resident in Ebou Dar, they have supreme authority over the Kin, to a degree that any Amyrlm Seat would envy See also Kin, the Lady of the Shadows: A Seanchan term for death Lance-Captain' In most lands, noblewomen do not personally lead their armsmen into battle under normal circumstances Instead, they hire a professional soldier, almost always a commoner, who is responsible for both training and leading their armsmen Depending on the land, this man can be called a Lance-Captain, Sword-Captain, Master of the Horse, or Master of the Lances Rumors of closer relationships than 694 GLOSSARY lady and servant often spring up, perhaps inevitably. Sometimes they are true.

lidʒən ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, ðə: ə lɑɹdʒ mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən, ɔl ɪnfəntʃɹi, ɡɪvɪŋ əlidʒəns tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, tʃɹeɪn baɪ dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ əlɔŋ laɪnz wɝkt aʊt baɪ hɪmsɛlf ən mæt kɔθən, laɪnz wɪtʃ dɪpɑɹt ʃɑɹpli fɹəm ðə juʒəwəl ɛmplɔɪmən ə fʊt. waɪl mɛni mɛn sɪmpli wɔk ɪn tə vɑləntɪɹ, lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝz ə ðə lidʒən ɑɹ skupt ʌp baɪ ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ pɑɹɾiz fɹəm ðə blæk taʊɝ, hu fɝst ɡæðɝ ɔl ə ðə mɛn ɪn ən ɛɹiə hu ɑɹ wɪlɪŋ tə fɑloʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən oʊnli æftɝ teɪkɪŋ əm θɹu ɡeɪtweɪz nɪɹ keɪɛmlɪn wɪnoʊ aʊt ðoʊz u kən bi tɔt tə tʃænəl. ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ, baɪ fɑɹ ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ nʌmbɝ, ɑɹ sɛn tə bæʃɪɹz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ kæmps. lɛŋθ, junəts ʌv: tɛn ɪntʃəz ikwəlz wʌn fʊt; θɹi fiɾ ikwəlz wʌn

Legion of the Dragon, the: A large military formation, all infantry, giving allegiance to the Dragon Reborn, trained by Davram Bashere along lines worked out by himself and Mat Cauthon, lines which depart sharply from the usual employment of foot. While many men simply walk in to volunteer, large numbers of the Legion are scooped up by recruiting parties from the Black Tower, who first gather all of the men in an area who are willing to follow the Dragon Reborn, and only after taking them through gateways near Caemlyn winnow out those who can be taught to channel. The remainder, by far the greater number, are sent to Bashere's training camps. length, units of: 10 inches = 1 foot; 3 feet = 1

peɪs; tu peɪsɪz ikwəlz wʌn spæn; wʌnθaʊzən spænz ikwəlz wʌn maɪl; fɔɹ maɪlz ikwəlz wʌn liɡ. mɛɹəθdəmeɪn: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðoʊz u mʌs bi liʃt," ən ɔlsoʊ "wʌn u mʌs bi liʃt." ðə tɝm əplaɪd baɪ ðə sintʃæn tə ɛni wʊmən keɪpəbəl ə tʃænəlɪŋ u hæz nɑt bɪn kɑlɝɾ əz ə deɪmeɪn. mæstɝ ə ðə lænsɪz: si læns-kæptən.

pace; 2 paces = 1 span; 1000 spans = 1 mile; 4 miles = 1 league. marath'damane: In the Old Tongue, "those who must be leashed," and also "one who must be leashed." The term applied by the Seanchan to any woman capable of channeling who has not been collared as a damane. Master of the Lances: See Lance-Captain.

mæstɝ ə ðə hɔɹs: si læns-kæptən.

Master of the Horse: See Lance-Captain.

mɛɝeɪɾɪn: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə bɹʌðɝləs." ðə neɪm ədɑptəd, əz ə səsaɪəɾi, baɪ ðoʊz il u əbændən klæn ən sɛpt ən wɛn tə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kəz ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ æksɛpt ɹænd ælθɹ, ə wɛtləndɝ, əz ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn, əɹ kəz ðeɪ ɹəfjuz tə æksɛpt ɪz ɹɛvəleɪʃənz kənsɝnɪŋ ðə hɪstɝi ən ɔɹədʒɪnz ə ði il. dɛzɝɾɪŋ klæn ən sɛp fəɹ ɛni ɹizən ɪz ənæθəmə əmʌŋ ði il, ðɛɹfɔɹ ðɛɹ oʊn wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz əmʌŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ ənwɪlɪŋ tə teɪk əm ɪn, ən ðeɪ fɔɹm ðɪs səsaɪəɾi, ðə bɹʌðɝləs. mɔɝæt-: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "hænlɝ." əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, ɪts juz fəɹ ðoʊz u hændəl ɛɡzɑɾɪks, sətʃ əz mɔɹətʃɹeɪkən, ə ɹeɪkən hænlɝ əɹ ɹaɪɾɝ, ɔlsoʊ ɪnfɔɹməli kɔld ə flaɪɝ. si ɔlsoʊ dɝmɝæt-.

Mera'din: In the Old Tongue, "the Brotherless." The name adopted, as a society, by those Aiel who abandoned clan and sept and went to the Shaido because they could not accept Rand al'Thor, a wetlander, as the Car'a'carn, or because they refused to accept his revelations concerning the history and origins of the Aiel. Deserting clan and sept for any reason is anathema among the Aiel, therefore their own warrior societies among the Shaido were unwilling to take them in, and they formed this society, the Brotherless. morat-: In the Old Tongue, "handler." Among the Seanchan, it is used for those who handle exotics, such as morat'raken, a raken handler or rider, also informally called a flier. See also der'morat-.

pɹɑfət, ðə: mɔɹ fɔɹməli, ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. wʌns noʊn əz mæsimə dɑɡɝ, ə ʃaɪnɝən soʊlʒɝ, hi ʌndɝwɛn ə ɹɛvəleɪʃən ən dɪsaɪɾɪd ðəɾ i hæd bɪn kɔl tə spɹɛd ðə wɝɾ ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz ɹibɝθ. hi bɪlivz ðət nʌθɪŋ - nʌθɪŋ! - ɪz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əz ðə laɪt meɪd flɛʃ ən biɪŋ ɹɛɾi wən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn kɔlz, ən i ən ɪz fɑloʊɝz wɪl juz ɛni minz tə fɔɹs ʌðɝz tə sɪŋ ðə ɡlɔɹiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. fɔɹseɪkɪŋ ɛni neɪm bʌt "ðə pɹɑfət," hiz bɹɔt keɪɑs tə mʌtʃ ʌv ɡildən ən ɑmɑdɪʃiə, lɑɹdʒ pɑɹts ʌv wɪtʃ i kəntʃɹoʊlz. hi dʒɔɪnd wɪð pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə, hu wɑz sɛn tə bɹɪŋ ɪm tə ɹænd, ən hæz, fəɹ ɹizənz ənnoʊn, steɪd wɪð ɪm ivən ðoʊ ðɪs dɪleɪz ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

Prophet, the: More formally, the Prophet of the Lord Dragon. Once known as Masema Dagar, a Shienaran soldier, he underwent a revelation and decided that he had been called to spread the word of the Dragon's Rebirth. He believes that nothing - nothing! - is more important than acknowledging the Dragon Reborn as the Light made flesh and being ready when the Dragon Reborn calls, and he and his followers will use any means to force others to sing the glories of the Dragon Reborn. Forsaking any name but "the Prophet," he has brought chaos to much of Ghealdan and Amadicia, large parts of which he controls. He joined with Perrin Aybara, who was sent to bring him to Rand, and has, for reasons unknown, stayed with him even though this delays his going to the Dragon Reborn.

kwinz ɡɑɹdz, ðə: ði ɪlit mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən ɪn ændɝ. ɪn pistaɪm ðə ɡɑɹɾ ɪz ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ əphoʊldɪŋ ðə kwinz lɔ ən kipɪŋ ðə pis. ðə junəfɔɹm ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹɾ ɪnkludz ə ɹɛɾ ʌndɝkoʊt, ɡlimɪŋ meɪl ən pleɪɾ ɑɹmɝ, ə bɹɪljən ɹɛd kloʊk, ən ə kɑnɪkəl hɛlmət wɪð ə bɑɹd vaɪzɝ. haɪ-ɹæŋkɪŋ ɔfəsɝz wɛɹ nɑts ə ɹæŋk ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ən meɪ wɛɹ ɡoʊldən laɪən-hɛd spɝz. ə ɹisən ədɪʃən tə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹɾ ɪz ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹz pɝsənəl bɑɾiɡɑɹd, wɪtʃ ɪz kəmpoʊzd ɪntaɪɝli ʌv wɪmən wɪð ðə soʊl ɪksɛpʃən ʌv ɪts kæptən, dɔɪlɪn mɛlɝ.

Queen's Guards, the: The elite military formation in Andor. In peacetime the Guard is responsible for upholding the Queen's law and keeping the peace. The uniform of the Queen's Guard includes a red undercoat, gleaming mail and plate armor, a brilliant red cloak, and a conical helmet with a barred visor. High-ranking officers wear knots of rank on their shoulder, and may wear golden lion-head spurs. A recent addition to the Queen's Guard is the Daughter-Heir's personal bodyguard, which is composed entirely of women with the sole exception of its captain, Doilin Mellar.

kwɛstʃənɝz, ðə: ən ɔɹɾɝ wɪðɪn ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. ðeɪ ɹəfɝ tə ðɛmsɛlvz əz ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt, ən ðɛɹ əvaʊd pɝpəsəz ɑɹ tə dɪskʌvɝ ðə tʃɹuθ ɪn dɪspjəteɪʃənz ən ənkʌvɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ɪn ðə sɝtʃ fəɹ tʃɹuθ ən ðə laɪt, ðɛɹ nɔɹməl mɛθəɾ ʌv ɪnkwaɪɹi ɪz tɔɹtʃɝ, ðɛɹ nɔɹməl mænɝ ðət ðeɪ noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ ɔlɹɛɾi ən mʌst oʊnli meɪk ðɛɹ vɪktəm kənfɛs tə ɪt. ət taɪmz ðeɪ ækt əz ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪntaɪɝli sɛpɹət fɹəm ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ən ðə kaʊnsəl ə ði ənɔɪntəd, wɪtʃ kəmænz ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ðə hɛɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃənɝz ɪz ðə haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ, ət pɹɛzən ɹɑɾəm əsunɑwə, hu sɪts ɑn ðə kaʊnsəl ə ði ənɔɪntəd. ðɛɹ saɪn ɪz ə blʌd-ɹɛd ʃɛpɝdz kɹʊk.

Questioners, the: An order within the Children of the Light. They refer to themselves as the Hand of the Light, and their avowed purposes are to discover the truth in disputations and uncover Darkfriends. In the search for truth and the Light, their normal method of inquiry is torture, their normal manner that they know the truth already and must only make their victim confess to it. At times they act as if they are entirely separate from the Children and the Council of the Anointed, which commands the Children. The head of the Questioners is the High Inquisitor, at present Rhadam Asunawa, who sits on the Council of the Anointed. Their sign is a blood-red shepherd's crook.

ɹɛdʒɹmz: soʊlʒɝz ə ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd, hu hæv bɪn tʃoʊzən aʊt fəɹ tɛmpɹɔɝi pəlis duɾi tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ʌðɝ soʊlʒɝz ə ðə bæn kɑz noʊ tʃɹʌbəl əɹ dæmədʒ ɪn ə taʊn əɹ vɪlədʒ.

Redarms: Soldiers of the Band of the Red Hand, who have been chosen out for temproary police duty to make sure that other soldiers of the Band cause no trouble or damage in a town or village.

soʊ neɪm bɪkɔz, waɪl ɑn duɾi, ðeɪ wɛɹ vɛɹi bɹɔd ɹɛɾ ɑɹmbænz ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs kʌvɝ ðɛɹ ɪntaɪɝ slivz. juʒəwəli tʃoʊzən fɹəm əmʌŋ ðə moʊst ɪkspɪɹiənst ən ɹɪlaɪəbəl mɛn. sɪns ɛni dæmədʒəz mʌs bi peɪd fəɹ baɪ ðə mɛn sɝvɪŋ əz ɹɛdʒɹmz, ðeɪ wɝk hɑɹd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ɔl ɪz kwaɪəɾ ən pisfəl. ə nʌmbɝ ə fɔɹmɝ ɹɛdʒɹmz wɝ tʃoʊzən tə əkʌmpəni mæt kɔθən tə ɛbu dɑɹ. si ɔlsoʊ bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd.

So named because, while on duty, they wear very broad red armbands that almost cover their entire sleeves. Usually chosen from among the most experienced and reliable men. Since any damages must be paid for by the men serving as Redarms, they work hard to make sure all is quiet and peaceful. A number of former Redarms were chosen to accompany Mat Cauthon to Ebou Dar. See also Band of the Red Hand.

ɹɪtɝn, ðə: si kɔɝɪn.

Return, the: See Corenne.

si foʊk haɪɝɑɹki: ði æθɑn maɪɹ, ðə si foʊk, ɑɹ ɹul baɪ ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ. ʃiz əsɪstəd baɪ ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps, ən baɪ ðə mæstɝ ə ðə bleɪdz. bɪloʊ ðɪs kʌm ðə klæn weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz, itʃ əsɪstəd baɪ hɝ wɪndfɪndɝ ən əɹ sɔɹdmæstɝ. bɪloʊ hɝ ɑɹ ðə seɪlməstʃɹɛsəz (ʃɪp kæptənz) ʌv əɹ klæn, itʃ əsɪstəd baɪ hɝ wɪndfɪndɝ ən əɹ kɑɹɡəmæstɝ. ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps əz əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ɔl wɪndfɪndɝz tə klæn weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz, hu ɪn tɝn əv əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ɔl ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ə hɝ klæn.

Sea Folk hierarchy: The Atha'an Miere, the Sea Folk, are ruled by the Mistress of the Ships to the Atha'an Miere. She is assisted by the Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships, and by the Master of the Blades. Below this come the clan Wavemistresses, each assisted by her Windfinder and her Swordmaster. Below her are the Sailmistresses (ship captains) of her clan, each assisted by her Windfinder and her Cargomaster. The Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships has authority over all Windfinders to clan Wavemistresses, who in turn have authority over all the Windfinders of her clan.

laɪkwaɪz, ðə mæstɝ ə ðə bleɪdz əz əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ɔl sɔɹd-mæstɝz, ən ðeɪ ɪn tɝn oʊvɝ ðə kɑɹɡəmæstɝz ə ðɛɹ klænz. ɹæŋk ɪz nɑt hɝɛɾətɛɹi əmʌŋ ðə si foʊk. ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps ɪz tʃoʊzən, fəɹ laɪf, baɪ ðə fɝs twɛlv ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, ðə twɛlv moʊst sinjɝ klæn weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz.

Likewise, the Master of the Blades has authority over all Sword-masters, and they in turn over the Cargomasters of their clans. Rank is not hereditary among the Sea Folk. The Mistress of the Ships is chosen, for life, by the First Twelve of the Atha'an Miere, the twelve most senior clan Wavemistresses.

ə klæn weɪvməstʃɹəs ɪz ɪlɛktəd baɪ ðə twɛlv moʊst sinjɝ seɪlməstʃɹɛsəz ə hɝ klæn, kɔl sɪmpli ðə fɝs twɛlv, ə tɝm wɪtʃ ɪz ɔlsoʊ juz tə dɛzəɡneɪt ðə sinjɝ seɪlməstʃɹɛsəz pɹɛzən ɛniwɛɹ. ʃi kən ɔlsoʊ bi ɹimuv baɪ ə voʊɾ ə hɝ klænz fɝs twɛlv. ɪn fækt, ɛniwʌn ʌðɝ ðən ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps kən bi dɪmoʊɾɪd, ivən ɔl ðə weɪ daʊn tə dɛkhænd, fəɹ mælfizəns, kaʊɝɾəs əɹ ʌðɝ kɹaɪmz. ɔlsoʊ, ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ə weɪvməstʃɹəs əɹ mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪp u daɪz wʌn "  wɪl, ʌv nəsɛsəɾi, hæv tə sɝv ə loʊɝ ɹæŋkɪŋ wʊmən, ən əɹ oʊn ɹæŋk ðʌs dikɹisəz.

A clan Wavemistress is elected by the twelve most senior Sailmistresses of her clan, called simply the First Twelve, a term which is also used to designate the senior Sailmistresses present anywhere. She can also be removed by a vote of her clan's First Twelve. In fact, anyone other than the Mistress of the Ships can be demoted, even all the way down to deckhand, for malfeasance, cowardice or other crimes. Also, the Windfinder to a Wavemistress or Mistress of the Ship who dies 1 "  will, of necessity, have to serve a lower ranking woman, and her own rank thus decreases.

sindɑɹ: ði ɪmpɪɹiəl kæpəɾəl ə sintʃæn, loʊkeɪɾəd ɪn ðə nɔɹθist ə ðə " sintʃæn kɑntənənt.

Seandar: The Imperial capital of Seanchan, located in the northeast of the " Seanchan continent.

ɪts ɔlsoʊ ðə lɑɹdʒəst sɪɾi ɪn ði ɛmpaɪɝ. sikɝz: mɔɹ fɔɹməli, sikɝz fəɹ tʃɹuθ, ðeɪ ɑɹ ə pəlis aɪ spaɪ ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃən ə ðə sintʃæn ɪmpɪɹiəl θɹoʊn. ɔlðoʊ moʊst sikɝz ɑɹ dɑ'-koʊvæl ən ðə pɹɑpɝɾi ʌv ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli, ðeɪv waɪd-ɹeɪnʒɪŋ paʊɝz. ivən wʌn ə ðə blʌd kən bi ɝɛstəd fəɹ feɪljɝ tə ænsɝ ɛni  kwɛstʃən pʊt baɪ ə sikɝ, əɹ fəɹ feɪljɝ tə koʊɑpɝeɪt fʊli wɪð ə sikɝ,  ðɪs læs dɪfaɪn baɪ ðə sikɝz ðɛmsɛlvz, sʌbʒɪkt oʊnli tə ɹivju baɪ ði ɛmpɹɛs. ðoʊz sikɝz u ɑɹ dækoʊvæl ɑɹ mɑɹkt ɑn iðɝ ʃoʊldɝ wɪð ə ɹeɪvən ən ə taʊɝ. ənlaɪk ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz, sikɝz ɑɹ sɛldəm iɡɝ tə ʃoʊ ðɛɹ ɹeɪvənz, ɪn pɑɹt kəz ɪt nəsɛsəteɪts ɹɪvilɪŋ u ən wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ.

It is also the largest city in the Empire. Seekers: More formally, Seekers for Truth, they are a police I spy organization of the Seanchan Imperial Throne. Although most Seekers are da'-covale and the property of the Imperial family, they have wide-ranging powers. Even one of the Blood can be arrested for failure to answer any  question put by a Seeker, or for failure to cooperate fully with a Seeker, < this last defined by the Seekers themselves, subject only to review by the Empress. Those Seekers who are da'covale are marked on either shoulder with a raven and a tower. Unlike the Deathwatch Guards, Seekers are seldom eager to show their ravens, in part because it necessitates revealing who and what they are.

siməsiv: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "loʊɝɾ aɪz," əɹ "daʊnkæst aɪz." əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, tə seɪ ðət wʌn əz "bɪkʌm siməsiv" minz ðət wʌn əz "lɔs feɪs." si ɔlsoʊ seɪaɪtɑɹ.

Seimosiev: In the Old Tongue, "lowered eyes," or "downcast eyes." Among the Seanchan, to say that one has "become sei'mosiev" means that one has "lost face." See also sei'taer.

seɪaɪtɑɹ: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "stʃɹeɪɾ aɪz," əɹ "lɛvəl aɪz." əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, ɪt ɹəfɝz tə ɑnɝ əɹ feɪs, tə ði əbɪləɾi tə mit sʌmwʌnz aɪz. ɪts pɑsəbəl tə "bi" əɹ "hæv" seɪaɪtɑɹ, minɪŋ ðət wʌn əz ɑnɝ ən feɪs, ən ɔlsoʊ tə "ɡeɪn" əɹ "luz" seɪaɪtɑɹ. si ɔlsoʊ siməsiv.

sei'taer: In the Old Tongue, "straight eyes," or "level eyes." Among the Seanchan, it refers to honor or face, to the ability to meet someone's eyes. It is possible to "be" or "have" sei'taer, meaning that one has honor and face, and also to "gain" or "lose" sei'taer. See also sei'mosiev.

ʃɑɹə: ə mɪstɪɹiəs læn ðət laɪz tə ði ist ə ði il weɪst. ðə læn ɪz pɹətɛktəd boʊθ baɪ ɪnhɑspəɾəbəl nætʃɹəl fitʃɝz ən baɪ mæn-meɪd wɔlz. lɪɾəl ɪz noʊn əbaʊt ʃɑɹə, əz ðə pipəl ə ðət læn əpɪɹ tə wɝk tə kip ðɛɹ kʌltʃɝ sikɹət. ðə ʃɝɑnz dɪnaɪ ðət ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz tʌtʃt ðɛm, dɪspaɪɾ il steɪtməns tə ðə kɑntʃɹɛɹi. ðeɪ dɪnaɪ nɑlədʒ ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ətɛmptəɾ ɪnveɪʒən, dɪspaɪt ði əkaʊns ʌv aɪwɪtnəsɪz fɹəm ðə si foʊk. ðə lɪɾəl ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ðəɾ əz likt aʊt ɹɪvilz ðət ðə ʃɝɑnz ɑɹ ɹul baɪ ə sɪŋɡəl æbsəlut mɑnɑɹk, ə boʊn ɪf ə wʊmən ən ə boʊɾ ɪf ə mæn.

Shara: A mysterious land that lies to the east of the Aiel Waste. The land is protected both by inhospitable natural features and by man-made walls. Little is known about Shara, as the people of that land appear to work to keep their culture secret. The Sharans deny that the Trolloc Wars touched them, despite Aiel statements to the contrary. They deny knowledge of Artur Hawkwing's attempted invasion, despite the accounts of eyewitnesses from the Sea Folk. The little information that has leaked out reveals that the Sharans are ruled by a single absolute monarch, a Sh'boan if a woman and a Sh'botay if a man.

ðət mɑnɑɹk ɹulz fəɹ ɪɡzækli sɛvən jɪɹz, ðən daɪz. ðə ɹul ðən pæsəz tə ðə meɪɾ ə ðət ɹulɝ, hu ɹulz fəɹ sɛvən jɪɹz ən ðən daɪz. ðɪs pæɾɝn əz ɹɪpiɾɪd ɪtsɛlf sɪns ðə taɪm ə ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ðə ʃɝɑnz bɪliv ðət ðə dɛθs ɑɹ ðə "wɪl ə ðə pæɾɝn." ðəɹ ɑɹ tʃænlɝz ɪn ʃɑɹə, noʊn əz ði aɪɑd, hu ɑɹ tætuɾ ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz ət bɝθ. ðə wɪmən ə ði aɪɑɾ ɛnfɔɹs ðə lɔz ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ði aɪɑd stʃɹɪnʒəntli. ə sɛkʃuəl ɹileɪʃənʃɪp bɪtwin aɪɑɾ ən nɑn-aɪɑɾ ɪz pʌnɪʃəbəl baɪ dɛθ fəɹ ðə nɑn-aɪɑd, ən ði aɪɑɾ ɪz ɔlsoʊ ɛksəkjuɾəd ɪf fɔɹs ɑn ɪz əɹ əɹ pɑɹt kən bi pɹuvən. ɪf ə tʃaɪld ɪz bɔɹn ə ðə junjən, ɪts lɛft ɪkspoʊz tə ði ɛləməns, ən daɪz. meɪl aɪɑɾ ɑɹ juzd əz bɹiɾɪŋ stɑk oʊnli. wən ðeɪ ɹitʃ ðɛɹ twɛnti-fɝs jɪɹ əɹ bɪɡɪn tə tʃænəl, wɪtʃɛvɝ kʌmz fɝst, ðeɪ ɑɹ kɪl baɪ aɪɑd wɪmən ən ðə bɑɾi kɹimeɪɾɪd. səpoʊzədli, ði aɪɑd tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ oʊnli ət ðə kəmæn ə ðə boʊn əɹ boʊt, hu ɪz ɔlweɪz sɝaʊndəd baɪ aɪɑd wɪmən. ivən ðə neɪm ə ðə læn ɪz ɪn daʊt. ðə neɪɾɪvz əv bɪn noʊn tə kɔl ɪt mɛni dɪfɹənt neɪmz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ʃəmɑɹə, koʊɾənsɪn, toʊmɑkə, kiɡɑli, ən ʃɪbujə.

That monarch rules for exactly seven years, then dies. The rule then passes to the mate of that ruler, who rules for seven years and then dies. This pattern has repeated itself since the time of the Breaking of the World. The Sharans believe that the deaths are the "Will of the Pattern." There are channelers in Shara, known as the Ayyad, who are tattooed on their faces at birth. The women of the Ayyad enforce the laws regarding the Ayyad stringently. A sexual relationship between Ayyad and non-Ayyad is punishable by death for the non-Ayyad, and the Ayyad is also executed if force on his or her part can be proven. If a child is born of the union, it is left exposed to the elements, and dies. Male Ayyad are used as breeding stock only. When they reach their twenty-first year or begin to channel, whichever comes first, they are killed by Ayyad women and the body cremated. Supposedly, the Ayyad channel the One Power only at the command of the Sh'boan or Sh'botay, who is always surrounded by Ayyad women. Even the name of the land is in doubt. The natives have been known to call it many different names, including Shamara, Co'dansin, Tomaka, Kigali, and Shibouya.

bən ən kɑlhɑɹ: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd." (wʌn) ə lɛdʒəndɛɹi ɡɹup ə hɪɹoʊz u hæd mɛni ɛksplɔɪts, faɪnəli daɪɪŋ ɪn ðə dɪfɛns ə meɪnɛðɝən wən ðət lænd wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪd dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. (tu) ə mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən pʊt təɡɛðɝ ɔlmoʊs baɪ æksəɾənt baɪ mæt kɔθən ən ɔɹɡənaɪzd əlɔŋ ðə laɪnz ə mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹsɪz dʊɹɪŋ wʌɾ ɪz kənsɪɾɝd ðə haɪɾ ə ðə mɪlətɛɹi ɑɹts, ðə deɪz ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ən ðə sɛntʃɝiz ɪmiɾiətli pɹisiɾɪŋ. si ɔlsoʊ ɹɛdʒɹmz. sɪsnɛɹə, dɑɹlɪn: eɪ haɪ lɔɹɾ ɪn tɛɹ, hi wɑz fɔɹmɝli ɪn ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛns ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bʌt naʊ sɝvz əz stuɝd fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪn tiɹ.

Sben an Calhar: In the Old Tongue, "the Band of the Red Hand." (1) A legendary group of heroes who had many exploits, finally dying in the defense of Manetheren when that land was destroyed during the Trolloc Wars. (2) A military formation put together almost by accident by Mat Cauthon and organized along the lines of military forces during what is considered the height of the military arts, the days of Artur Hawkwing and the centuries immediately preceding. See also Redarms. Sisnera, Darlin: A High Lord in Tear, he was formerly in rebellion against the Dragon Reborn, but now serves as Steward for the Dragon Reborn in Tear.

sɔɪhɪn: ðə kloʊsəs tʃɹænzleɪʃən fɹəm ði oʊl tʌŋ wəd bi "ə haɪɾ əmʌŋ loʊnəs," ðoʊ səm tʃɹænzleɪɾ ɪɾ əz minɪŋ "boʊθ skaɪ ən væli" əmʌŋ sɛvɹəl ʌðɝ pɑsəbɪləɾiz sɔɪhɪn ɪz ðə tɝm əplaɪd baɪ ðə sintʃæn tə hɝɛɾətɛɹi ʌpɝ sɝvəns ðeɪ ɑɹ dækoʊvæl, pɹɑpɝɾi, jɛɾ ɑkjəpaɪ pəzɪʃənz ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl əθɔɹəɾi ən ɔfən paʊɝ ivən ðə blʌd stɛp kɛɹfəli ɝaʊn sɔɪhɪn ə ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli, ən spik tə sɔɪhɪn ə ði ɛmpɹɛs hɝsɛlf əz tə ikwəlz si ɔlsoʊ blʌd, ðə, dækoʊvæl stʌmp: ə pʌblɪk miɾɪŋ əmʌŋ ði oʊɡiɝ ðə miɾɪŋ kən bi wɪðɪn əɹ bɪtwin stɛdmɡ ɪts pɹɪzaɪɾɪd oʊvɝ baɪ ðə kaʊnsəl ʌv ɛldɝz ʌv ə stəɪŋ, bʌɾ ɛni ədʌlt oʊɡiɝ meɪ spik, əɹ meɪ tʃuz ən ædvəkət tə spik fəɹ ɪm eɪ stʌmp ɪz ɔfən hɛld ət ðə lɑɹdʒəs tʃɹi stʌmp ɪn ə stɛɾɪŋ, ən meɪ læs fəɹ sɛvɹəl jɪɹz wən ə kwɛstʃən ɝaɪzəz ðəɾ əfɛks ɔl oʊɡiɝ, ə ɡɹeɪt stʌmp ɪz hɛld, ən oʊɡiɝ fɹəm ɔl slɛɾɪŋ mit tə ædʒɹɛs ðə kwɛstʃən ðə vɛɹiəs stɛɾɪŋ teɪk tɝnz hoʊstɪŋ ə ɡɹeɪt stʌmp sɔɹd-kæptən: si læns-kæptən.

so'jhin: The closest translation from the Old Tongue would be "a height among lowness," though some translate it as meaning "both sky and valley" among several other possibilities So'jhin is the term applied by the Seanchan to hereditary upper servants They are da'covale, property, yet occupy positions of considerable authority and often power Even the Blood step carefully around so'jhin of the Imperial family, and speak to so'jhin of the Empress herself as to equals See also Blood, the, da'covale Stump: A public meeting among the Ogier The meeting can be within or between steddmg It is presided over by the Council of Elders of a studding, but any adult Ogier may speak, or may choose an advocate to speak for him A Stump is often held at the largest tree stump in a stedding, and may last for several years When a question arises that affects all Ogier, a Great Stump is held, and Ogier from all sledding meet to address the question The various stedding take turns hosting a Great Stump Sword-Captain: See Lance-Captain.

tæbɔɹwɪn, bɹin: wʌns ə bɔɹd noʊbəlwʊmən ɪn kɛɹhin, ʃi lɔst əɹ wɛlθ ən stæɾəs ən ɪz naʊ nɑɾ oʊnli ə sɝvənt, bʌɾ ɪn ə sɪɹiəs ɹoʊmæntɪk ɹileɪʃənʃɪp wɪð ə mæn hum ʃi wʌns wʊɾə skɔɹn tæbɔɹwɪn, dɑbɹeɪn: ə lɔɹɾ ɪn kɛɹhin i kɝənli sɝvz əz stuɝd fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪn kɛɹhin tæɹɑbən: ə neɪʃən ɑn ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən wʌns ə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ neɪʃən, ə sɔɹs ə ɹʌɡz, daɪz ən ðə ɡɪld ʌv ɪluməneɪɾɝz' faɪɹwɝks əmʌŋ ʌðɝ θɪŋz, tæɹɑbən əz fɔlən ɑn hɑɹd taɪmz ɹæk baɪ ænɝki ən sɪvəl wɔɹ kəmpaʊndəd baɪ saɪməlteɪniəs wɔɹz əɡɛnst ɑɹæd dumən ən ðə dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn, ɪt wɑz ɹaɪp fəɹ ðə pɪkɪŋ wən ðə sintʃæn ɝaɪvd. ɪts naʊ fɝmli ʌndɝ sintʃæn kəntʃɹoʊl, ðə tʃæptɝ haʊs ə ðə ɡɪld ʌv ɪluməneɪɾɝz əz bɪn dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ən moʊst ɪluməneɪɾɝz ðɛmsɛlvz meɪd dækoʊvæl moʊs tæɹɑbənɝz əpɪɹ ɡɹeɪtfəl ðət ðə sintʃæn əv ɹɪstɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ, ən sɪns ðə sintʃæn əlaʊ ðɛm tə kəntɪnju lɪvɪŋ ðɛɹ laɪvz wɪð mɪnəməl ɪntɝfɪɹəns, ðeɪv noʊ dɪzaɪɝ tə bɹɪŋ ɑn mɔɹ wɔɹfɛɹ baɪ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃeɪs ðə sintʃæn aʊt ðəɹ ɑɹ, haʊɛvɝ, səm lɔɹdz ən soʊlʒɝz u ɹɪmeɪn aʊtsaɪd ðə sintʃæn sfɪɹ ʌv ɪnfluəns ən hoʊp tə ɹikleɪm ðɛɹ lænd wɑsp-dʒɛli: ə smɔl əkwɑɾɪk kɹitʃɝ ðəɾ əpɪɹz tə bi meɪɾ ə dʒɛli bʌt stɪŋz səvɪɹli wən tʌtʃt.

Taborwin, Breane: Once a bored noblewoman in Cairhien, she lost her wealth and status and is now not only a servant, but in a serious romantic relationship with a man whom she once would have scorned Taborwin, Dobraine: A lord in Cairhien He currently serves as Steward for the Dragon Reborn in Cairhien Tarabon: A nation on the Aryth Ocean Once a great trading nation, a source of rugs, dyes and the Guild of Illuminators' fireworks among other things, Tarabon has fallen on hard times Racked by anarchy and civil war compounded by simultaneous wars against Arad Doman and the Dragonsworn, it was ripe for the picking when the Seanchan arrived. It is now firmly under Seanchan control, the chapter house of the Guild of Illuminators has been destroyed and most Illuminators themselves made da'covale Most Taraboners appear grateful that the Seanchan have restored order, and since the Seanchan allow them to continue living their lives with minimal interference, they have no desire to bring on more warfare by trying to chase the Seanchan out There are, however, some lords and soldiers who remain outside the Seanchan sphere of influence and hope to reclaim their land wasp-jelly: A small aquatic creature that appears to be made of jelly but stings severely when touched.

weɪt, junəts ʌv: tɛn aʊnsəz ikwəlz wʌn paʊnd, tɛn paʊnz ikwəlz wʌn stoʊn, tɛn stoʊn ikwəlz wʌn hʌnʒɹədweɪt, tɛn

weight, units of: 10 ounces = 1 pound, 10 pounds = 1 stone, 10 stone = 1 hundredweight, 10

hʌnʒɹədweɪt  wʌn tʌn waɪl hʌnt, ðə: ɪts bɪliv baɪ mɛni ðət ðə dɑɹk wʌn (ɔfən kɔld ɡɹɪm, əɹ oʊld ɡɹɪm, ɪn tɛɹ, ɪlhən, mʊɹændi, ɔltɑɹə ən ɡildən) ɹaɪdz aʊɾ ɪn ðə naɪt wɪð ðə "blæk dɑɡz," əɹ ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz, hʌntɪŋ soʊlz ðɪs ɪz ðə waɪl hʌn ɪts bɪliv baɪ mɛni ðət mɪɹli siɪŋ ðə waɪl hʌn pæs minz ɪmənən dɛθ, iðɝ fəɹ ðə vjuɝ əɹ fəɹ sʌmwʌn dɪɹ tə ðə vjuɝ ɪts hɛl tə bi ɪspɛʃli deɪnʒɝəs tə mit ðə waɪl hʌn əɾ ə kɹɔsɹoʊdz, dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ sʌnɹaɪz əɹ dʒʌst æftɝ sʌnsɛt si ɔlsoʊ dɑɹkhaʊnz wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz, ðə: ðə pɝsənəl bɑɾiɡɑɹdz ə ðə fɝst ə min, ən ði ɪlit mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən ə min mɛmbɝz ə ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz wɛɹ ɹɛd-peɪntəd bɹɛstpleɪts ən ɹɛd hɛlməts ʃeɪp laɪk ɹɪm pɑts ðət kʌm daʊn tə ðə neɪps ə ðɛɹ nɛks ɪn ðə bæk, ən kæɹi ɹɛdstʃɹimɝd lænsɪz ɔfəsɝz əv wɪŋz wɝkt ɑn ðə saɪdz ə ðɛɹ hɛlməts, ən ɹæŋk ɪz dɪnoʊɾəd baɪ slɛndɝ plumz waɪz wʊmən: ɑnɝɪfɪk juzd ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ fəɹ wɪmən feɪm fəɹ ðɛɹ ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl əbɪləɾiz ət hilɪŋ ɔlmoʊst ɛni ɪnʒɝi eɪ waɪz wʊmən ɪz tʃɹədɪʃənəli mɑɹk baɪ ə ɹɛd bɛlt waɪl səm əv noʊɾəd ðət mɛni, ɪndid moʊst, ɛbu dæn waɪz wɪmən wɝ nɑɾ ivən fɹəm ɔltɑɹə, mʌtʃ lɛs ɛbu dɑɹ, wʌt wɑz nɑt noʊn əntɪl ɹisənli, ən stɪl ɪz noʊn oʊnli tə ə fju, ɪz ðəɾ ɔl waɪz wɪmən ɑɹ ɪn fækt kɪnswɪmən ən juz vɛɹiəs vɝʒənz ə hilɪŋ, ɡɪvɪŋ aʊɾ ɝbz ən poʊltəsəz oʊnli əz ə kʌvɝ wɪð ðə flaɪɾ ə ðə kɪn fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ æftɝ ðə sintʃæn tʊk ðə sɪɾi, noʊ waɪz wɪmən ɹɪmeɪn ðəɹ si ɔlsoʊ kɪn, ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz, ðə: ðə fɝs jʌŋɡəlɪŋz wɝ jʌŋ mɛn stʌɾiɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə wɔɹɾɝz ət ðə waɪt taʊɝ ðeɪ fɔɾ əɡɛns ðɛɹ titʃɝz u ətɛmptəd tə fɹi sɪuən sɑntʃ æftɝ ʃi wɑz dɪpoʊz fɹəm ðə mɪɹlm sit lɛd baɪ ɡɔɪn tʃɹəkənd, ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz ɹɪmeɪn lɔɪəl tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən fɔt skɝmɪʃɪz əɡɛnst waɪtkloʊks ʌndɝ imən vɑldə ðeɪ əkʌmpəniɾ ɪleɪɾəz ɛmbəsi tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪn kɛɹhin ən sɔ ækʃən əɡɛns ði il ən æʃəmən ət dəməaɪz wɛlz ɑn ðɛɹ ɹɪtɝn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ðeɪ faʊn ðɛmsɛlvz bɑɹd fɹəm ðə sɪɾi ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz wɛɹ ɡɹin kloʊks wɪð ɡɔɪnz waɪt bɔɹ, ðoʊz u fɔɾ əɡɛns ðɛɹ titʃɝz ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn wɛɹ ə smɔl sɪlvɝ taʊɝ ɑn ðɛɹ kɑlɝz ðeɪ æksɛpt ɹəkɹuts wɛɹɛvɝ ðeɪ ɡoʊ, bʌt ðeɪ də nɑt teɪk vɛɾɝənz əɹ oʊldɝ mɛn. wʌn ɹɪkwaɪɹmən ɪz ðət ðə ɹəkɹut mʌs bi wɪlɪŋ tə pʊɾ əsaɪɾ ɔl lɔɪəltiz ɪksɛp tə ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz. oʊldɝ mɛmbɝz titʃ ðə nu ɹəkɹuts wɔɹɾɝ tɛkniks sɪns ðeɪv ɡɪvən oʊvɝ æksɛptɪŋ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃən fɹəm wɔɹɾɝz, ən sɛvɹəl əv ɹəfjuzd ɔfɝz ə bɑndɪŋ fɹəm ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪn mɛni weɪz ðeɪ hɑɹdli sim ətætʃt tə ðə taʊɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əɾ ɔl ðɪs ɪz ə ɹɪzʌlt ɪn pɑɹɾ ə ðɛɹ səspɪʃən ðət ðeɪ wɝ nɑt mɛn tə sɝvaɪv ði ɛkspədɪʃən tə kɛɹhin.

hundredweight = 1 ton Wild Hunt, the: It is believed by many that the Dark One (often called Grim, or Old Grim, in Tear, Ilhan, Murandy, Altara and Ghealdan) rides out in the night with the "black dogs," or the Darkhounds, hunting souls This is the Wild Hunt It is believed by many that merely seeing the Wild Hunt pass means imminent death, either for the viewer or for someone dear to the viewer It is held to be especially dangerous to meet the Wild Hunt at a crossroads, just before sunrise or just after sunset See also Darkhounds Winged Guards, the: The personal bodyguards of the First of Mayene, and the elite military formation of Mayene Members of the Winged Guards wear red-painted breastplates and red helmets shaped like rimmed pots that come down to the napes of their necks in the back, and carry redstreamered lances Officers have wings worked on the sides of their helmets, and rank is denoted by slender plumes Wise Woman: Honorific used in Ebou Dar for women famed for their incredible abilities at healing almost any injury A Wise Woman is traditionally marked by a red belt While some have noted that many, indeed most, Ebou Dan Wise Women were not even from Altara, much less Ebou Dar, what was not known until recently, and still is known only to a few, is that all Wise Women are in fact Kinswomen and use various versions of Healing, giving out herbs and poultices only as a cover With the flight of the Kin from Ebou Dar after the Seanchan took the city, no Wise Women remain there See also Kin, the Younglings, the: The first Younglings were young men studying under the Warders at the White Tower They fought against their teachers who attempted to free Siuan Sanche after she was deposed from the Amyrlm Seat Led by Gawyn Trakand, the Younglings remained loyal to the White Tower, and fought skirmishes against Whitecloaks under Eamon Valda They accompanied Elaida's embassy to the Dragon Reborn in Cairhien and saw action against the Aiel and Asha'man at Dumai's Wells On their return to Tar Valon, they found themselves barred from the city The Younglings wear green cloaks with Gawyn's White Boar, those who fought against their teachers in Tar Valon wear a small silver tower on their collars They accept recruits wherever they go, but they do not take veterans or older men. One requirement is that the recruit must be willing to put aside all loyalties except to the Younglings. Older members teach the new recruits Warder techniques since they have given over accepting instruction from Warders, and several have refused offers of bonding from Aes Sedai. In many ways they hardly seem attached to the Tower and Aes Sedai at all This is a result in part of their suspicion that they were not meant to survive the expedition to Cairhien.

dɑkjəmɛn aʊtlaɪn pɹoʊlɑɡ ɡlɪmɝz ə ðə pæɾɝn  wʌn taɪm tə bi ɡɔn  tu tu kæptənz  θɹi eɪ fæn ə kʌlɝz  fɔɹ ðə teɪl ʌv ə dɑl  faɪv ðə fɔɹdʒɪŋ ʌv ə hæmɝ  sɪks ðə sɛn ʌv ə dʒɹim  sɛvən blæksmɪθs pʌzəl  eɪt wɝlpulz ə kʌlɝ  naɪn tʃɹæps  tɛn eɪ bleɪzɪŋ bikən  ɪlɛvən tɔk ə dɛts  twɛlv eɪ bɑɹɡən  θɝtin haɪ sits  fɔɹtin wʌt waɪz wʌnz noʊ  fɪftin ɡæðɝɪŋ dɑɹknəs  sɪkstin ðə sʌbʒɪkt ə nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz  sɛvəntin sikɹəts  eɪtin eɪ tʃæt wɪð sɪuən  naɪntin sɝpɹaɪzəz  twɛnti ɪn ðə naɪt  twɛntiwʌn eɪ mɑɹk  twɛntiɾu wʌn ænsɝ  twɛntiθɹi ɔɹnəməns  twɛntifɔɹ eɪ stʃɹɛŋθənɪŋ stɔɹm  twɛntifaɪv wən tə wɛɹ dʒuəlz  twɛntisɪks ɪn soʊ hæbɝ  twɛntisɛvən wʌt mʌs bi dʌn  twɛntieɪɾ eɪ klʌstɝ ə ɹoʊzbʊdz  twɛntinaɪn sʌmθɪŋ flɪkɝz  θɝɾi wʌt ði oʊθ ɹɑd kən də ɛpəlɔɡ ən ænsɝ 
Document Outline Prologue Glimmers of the Pattern Ch 1 Time to Be Gone Ch 2 Two Captains Ch 3 A Fan of Colors Ch 4 The Tale of a Doll Ch 5 The Forging of a Hammer Ch 6 The Scent of a Dream Ch 7 Blacksmiths Puzzle Ch 8 Whirlpools of Color Ch 9 Traps Ch 10 A Blazing Beacon Ch 11 Talk of Debts Ch 12 A Bargain Ch 13 High Seats Ch 14 What Wise Ones Know Ch 15 Gathering Darkness Ch 16 The Subject of Negotiations Ch 17 Secrets Ch 18 A Chat with Siuan Ch 19 Surprises Ch 20 In the Night Ch 21 A Mark Ch 22 One Answer Ch 23 Ornaments Ch 24 A Strengthening Storm Ch 25 When to Wear Jewels Ch 26 In So Habor Ch 27 What Must Be Done Ch 28 A Cluster of Rosebuds Ch 29 Something Flickers Ch 30 What the Oath Rod Can Do Epilogue An Answer 